A Study in Consciousness (Annie Besant, 1904)
=============================================
Annie Besant — A Study in Consciousness: A Contribution to the Science of Psychology (London: Theosophical Publishing Society, 1904), public domain. The Theosophical psychology of consciousness, its field, mechanism, and unfoldment. Scan via Internet Archive.

A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS



A CONTRIBUTION TO THE SCIENCE

OF PSYCHOLOGY.



BY

ANNIE BESANT



Theofoptalcal Publishing Society

London and Ben arks

City Agency : Lund, IIumfhries Ltd., 3 Amen Curner

New York : John Lane
Chicago: Theosofhical Book Concern

1904



TJLiiv8.fc.4a



SW^'-"



FOREWORD.

Tins book is intended as an aid to students
in their study of the growth and develop-
ment of consciousness, offering hints and
suggestions which may prove serviceable
to them. It does not pretend to be a
complete exposition, but rather, as its
sub-title states, a contribution to the
science of Psychology. Far ampler ma-
terials than are within my reach are
nccessar)' for any complete exposition of
the far-reaching science which deals with
the unfolding of consciousness. These
materials are slowly accumulating in the
hands of earnest and painstaking students,
but no effort has yet been made to arrange
and systematise them into a co-ordinated
whole. In this little volume I have only
arranged a small part of this material, in
the hope that it may be useful now to



3V.



A Fnir zx cc'jcsaarsKss.



some cf dje iciiitrs r: iht greai field of
the Ey<>j jnccj of C-orLScioLSDess. and may
ser\-e. in liie f jtiire. as a stone in the
complete bLokiing. Ii wi]] need a great
architect to plan that temple of knowledge,
and skilful master masons to direct the
building : enough, for the moment to do
the apprentice task, and prepare the rough
stones for the use of the more expert
workmen.

AxME Besakt.



Part L

CONSCIOUSNESS.



CONTENTS.

rACB

Introduction.

^^rl Ij^AlUft «•• ••• ••• ••• ••• JL

Origination of Monads ... ... ... 13

Chapter I. The Preparation of the Field.

§ I. The Formation of the Atom ... 17

g 2. Spirit-Matter ... ... ... ... 21

§3. The Sub- Planes ... ... ... 24

§4. The Five Planes 29

Chapter II. Consciousness.

§ I. The Meaning of the Word ... 32

$ 2. The Monads 45

Chapter III. The Peopling of the Field.

S I. The Coming Forth of the Monads 58

§2. The Weaving 68

§3. The Seven Streams 75

$4. The Shining Ones 79



VllL CONTENTS.



Chapter IV. The Permaxekt Atom.

§ I. The Attaching of the Atoms

§2. The Web of Life

§ 3. The Choosing of the Pennanent
Atoms

§4. The Use of the Permanent Atoms..

§5. Monadic Action on the Permanent
Atoms



TACM

9«

93
96

108



Chapter V. Group-Souls.

§1. The Meaning of the Term ... 114

§2. The Division of the Group-Soul ... 120

Chapter VI. Unitv of Consciousness.

§1. Consciousness a Unit ... ... 134

§ 2. The Unity of Physical Consciousness 138
§ 3. The Meaning of Physical Conscious-

Ilwdw ••• ••• ••• ••• •■• K 4 S

Chapter VII. The Mechanism of Con-
sciousness.

§ I. The Development of the Mechanism 152

§2. The Astral or Desire Body ... 163

§3. Correspondence in Root- Races ... 168

Chapter VIII. First Human Steps.

§1. The Third Life-Wave 170

§2. Human Development 174

§3. Incongruous Souls and Bodies ... 180

§ 4. Dawn of Consciousness on the Astral

Plane ... ... ... ..• 183



CONTENTS. IX.

PACK

Chapter IX. Consciousness and Self-
Consciousness.

§1. Consciousness 194

§3. Self-Consciousness 301

53. Real and Unreal 205

Chakter X. Human States of Conscious-
ness.

S I. The Sub-Consciousness 210

§2. The Waking Consciousness ... 215

$3. The Super- Physical Consciousness... 221

Chapter XI. The Monad at Work.

^' I. Building his Vehicles 242

5 2. An Evolving Man 252

S 3. The Pituitary Body and Pineal Gland 256

54. The Paths of Consciousness ... 261

Chapter XII. The Nature of Memory.

8 I. The Great Self and the Little Selves 263
§ 2. Changes in the Vehicles and in


Consciousness


269


S3.


Memories


272


S4-


What is Memory


276


$5-


Remembering and Forgetting


. 281


56.


Attention


. 288


§7.


The One Consciousness


291



INTRODUCTION.

The subject of the unfolding of conscious-
ness in the beings whose field of evolution
is a solar system is one of considerable
difficulty ; none of us may at present hope
to do more than master a small portion of
its complexity, but it may be possible to
study it in such fashion as may fill up some
of the gaps in our thinking, and as may
yield us a fairly clear outline to guide our
future work.

We cannot, however, trace this outline
in any way satisfactory to the intelligence,
without considering first our solar system
as a whole, and endeavouring to grasp
some idea, however vague that idea may
be, of •• the beginnings " in such a system.

§ 1. Origins.

We have learned that the matter in a
solar system exists in seven great modifica-



2 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

tions. or planes ; on three of these, the
physical, emotional (astral), and mental —
often spoken of as "the three worlds,"
the well-known Triloki, or Tribhuvanam, of
the Hindu cosmogony— is proceeding the
normal evolution of humanity. On the
next two planes, the spiritual— those of
wisdom and power, the buddhic and the
atmic^goes on the specific evolution of
the Initiate, after the first of the Great
Initiations. These five' planes form the
field of the evolution of consciousness,
until the human merges in the divine.
The two planes beyond the five represent
the sphere of divine activity, encircling
and enveloping all. out of which pour forth
all the divine energies which vivify and
sustain the whole system. They are at
present entirely beyond our knowledge,
and the few hints that have been given
regarding them probably convey as much
information as our limited capacity is able
to grasp, We are taught that they are the
planes of divine Consciousness, wherein
the Logos, or the divine Trinity of Logoi,
is manifested, and wherefrom He shines
forth as the Creator, the Preserver, the


INTRODUCTION.



Dissolver, evolving a universe, maintaining
it during its life-period, withdrawing it into
Himself at its ending. We have been
given the names of these two planes : the
lower is the Anupidaka, that wherein ** no
vehicle has yet been formed ; " ' the higher
is the Adi, **the first," the foundation of a
universe, its support and the fount of its
life. We have thus the seven planes of a
universe, a solar system, which, as we see
by this brief description, may be regarded
as making up three groups : I. The field
of Logic manifestation only ; II. The field
of super-normal human evolution, that of
the Initiate; III. The field of elemental,
mineral, vegetable, animal and normal
human evolution. We may tabulate these
facts thus :

i. Adi 1 ^^ 1^

ii. Anupidakaj ^

... 4^ . ^ II. The field of

HI. Atmic I , ,

r> jjL- r super-normal human
IV. nuddhic * , .

j evolution.



The field of
manifestation



'From the Pra^ava-vdday an unpublished

Samskrit MS.



III. The field of
elementai, mineral,
vegetable, animal,
and normal human
J evolution.
The two highest planes may be con-
ceived of as existing before the solar
system is formed, and we may imagine
the highest, the Adi, as consisting of so
much of the matter of space — symbolised
by points — as the Logos has marked out
to form the material basis of the system
He is about to produce. As a workman
chooses out the material he is going to
shape into his product, so does the Logos
choose the material and the place for His
universe. Similarly we may imagine the
Anupadaka — symbolised by lines — as con-
sisting of this same matter, modified by
His individual life, coloured, to use a
significant metaphor, by His all-ensouling
Consciousness, and thus differing in some
way from the corresponding plane in
another solar system. We are told that
the supreme facts of this preparatory
work may be further imaged forth in
symbols ; of these we are given two



INTRODUCTION. 5

one of which images the triple
nifestation of the Logic Conscious-
ne% the other [he triple change in
mauer corresponding to the triple Life
— the life and form aspects of the three
Login. Wc may place them side by
side, as simultaneous happenings :
Life Form



Adi



it. Anup&daka



I K. Al



-©-



'e have here, under Life, the primeval
in the centre of the Circle, the
Logos as One within the self-imposed
cndrcling sphere of subtlest matter, in
which He has enclosed Himself for the
purpose of manifestation, of shining forth
ffom the Darkness. At once the question
arises : Why three Logoi ? Though we
touch here on the deepest question of
metaphysics, to expound which even
inadequately requires a volume, we must
indicate the answer, to be wrought out by
close thinking. In the analysis of all that
exists, we come to the great generalisation :



6 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

**A11 is separable into *I' and * Not 1/
the ' Self ' and the * Not-Self.* Every
separate thing is summed up under one
or other of the headings, Self or Not-
Self There is nothing which cannot be
placed under one of them. Self is Life,
Consciousness ; Not - Self is Matter,
Form." Here, then, we have a duality.
But the Twain are not two separate things
isolated and unrelated ; there is a con-
tinual Relation between them, a continual
approach and withdrawal, an identification
and a repudiation ; this inter-play shows
itself as the ever-changing universe. Thus
we have a Trinity, not a Duality — the
Self, the Not-Self, and the Relation
between them. All is here summed up,
all things and all relations, actual and
possible, and hence Three, neither more
nor less, is the foundation of all universes
in their totality, and of each universe in
particular.' This fundamental fact imposes
on a Logos a triplicity of manifestation in

' The student should carefully study Bhagavin
DAs* Science of Peace^ in which the metaphysical
questions involved are expounded with rare acumen
and felicity.


IWTBOPUCTION.

a M^ar system, and hence the One, the
Point, going forth in three directions to
tbe circumference of the Circle of Matter
aod returning on Itself, manifests a
difiicrcnt aspect at each place of contact
■ith the Circle — the three fundamental
expressions of Consciousness : or Will,
Wadom, and Activity — the divine Triad
or Trinity.' For the Universal Sklk, the
PnU>'^-4lni4. the "Inner-Self," thinking of
the Not-Self, identifies Himself with it.
Jwr eby sharing with it His Being ; this is
kdivine Activity, Sat. Existence lent to
I Non-existent, the Universal Mind.
Self, realising Himself, is Wisdom.
Chit, the principle of preservation. The
Saj, withdrawing Himself from the Not-
in His own pure nature, is Bliss,

iwa, n'ttdooi, and Love " is anulhei
■ «ny of Mprening thiit tripliciiy ; buE this
tnmo out .Activity, and duplicates Love, unless Lovi!
be taken u itt equivalent, since Love Is essentially
tarn. U'wdom and Lore soctn to mc to be the
MSK a»pecl of contciousneu ; iliat which manifests
aborK as Wtsdooi, the realisation ol Unity, manifests
in the world of form aa I.ovc, the attractive force
I about Unity in a world of scpanted


Ananda, free from form. Every Logos
of a universe repeats this universal Self-
Consciousness : in His Activity. He is the
creative Mind, KriyS— corresponding to
the universal Sat — the BrahmS of the
Hindu, the Holy Spirit of the Christian,
the Chochmah of the Kabbalist. In His
Wisdom, He is the preserving ordering
Reason. JnSna — corresponding to the
universal Chit — the Vishnu of the Hindu,
the Son of the Christian, the Binah of the
Kabbalist. In His Bliss, He is the
Dissolver of forms, the Will, Ichchhi —
corresponding to the universal Ananda —
the Shiva of the Hindu, the Father of the
Christian, the Kepher of the Kabbalist.
Thus appear in every universe the three
Logoi, the three Beings who create, pre-
serve, and destroy Their universe, each
showing forth predominantly in His
function in the universe one ruling Aspect,
to which the other two are subordinate,
though of course ever-present. Hence
every manifested God is spoken of as a
Trinity. The joining of these three
Aspects, or phases of manifestation, at
their outer j 'points of contact with the



INTRODUCTION. 9

circle, g^ves the basic Triangle of contact
with Matter, which, with the three
Triangles made with the lines traced by
the Point, thus yields the divine Tetractys,
sometimes called the Kosmic Quaternary,
the three divine Aspects in contact with
Matter, ready to create. These, in their
totality, are the OversouP of the kosmos
that is to be.

Under Form we may first glance at the
effects of these Aspects as responded to
from the side of Matter. These are not,
of course, due to the Locos of a
system, but are the correspondences in
universal Matter with the Aspects of
the universal Self. The Aspect of
Bliss, or Will, imposes on Matter the
quality of Inertia — Tamas, the power of
resistance, stability, quietude. The
Aspect of Activity gives to Matter its
responsiveness to action — Rajas, mobility.
The Aspect of Wisdom gives it Rhythm
— Satva. vibration, harmony. It is by
the aid of Matter thus prepared that the
Aspects of Logic Consciousness can
manifest themselves as Beings.

' Emerson.



lO STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

The Logos — not yet a first, since there
is yet no second — is seen as a Point
irradiating a sphere of Matter, drawn round
Him as the field of the future universe,
Bashing with unimaginable splendour, a
true Mountain of Light, as Manu has it,
but Light invisible save on the spiritual
planes. This great sphere has been
spoken of as primary Substance : it is
the SELF-conditioned Logos, inseparate
at every point with the Matter He has
appropriated for His universe, ere He
draws Himself a little apart from it in
the second manifestation ; it is the sphere
of SELF-conditioning Will, which is to lead
to the creative Activity : ** I am This,"
when the ** This," the Not-Self, is cognised.
The Point, speaking symbolically — in
order to make the suggestion of Form as
seen from the side of appearances —
vibrates between centre and circumference,
thus making the Line which marks the
drawing apart of Spirit and Matter,'

' It is well to remember here that this " drawing
apart " is in consciousness only ; the idea of Spirit is
separated from the idea of matter. In the universe
of phenomena, there is no Spirit unconditioned by



nmiODUCTioN. 1 1

ring cognition possible, and thus
■ating the Form for the second
le Being we call the Second
, symbolically the Line, or Diameter
of the Circle. It is said of this in mystic
l^irase : " Thou art My Son : this day
have I begotten Thee ; "' this relation
of Father and Son within the unity of the
Divine Existence, of the first and Second
Logoi. belongs, of course, to the Day of
Manifestation, the life-period of a universe.
It is this begetting of the Son. this
appearance of the Second Logos, the
Wisdom, which is marked in the world
of Form by the differentiation, the
drawing apart, of Spirit and Matter, the
two poles between which is spun the web
of a universe ; the separation, as it were.
of the neutral inactive Electricity^ which
may symbolise the First Logos — -into the
dual form of positive and negative —
symbolising the Second — thus making the
unmanifest manifest. This separation

BwUcr. no tniaUlc*! [witiclc ur nutlet uninrotmed
bf Sfiim. All Toniu are conscious ; xW L-onscious-

' FtaJmi. ii. 7.



12 STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

within the First Logos is vividly imaged
for us in the preparation for cell-multi-
plication that we may study on the
physical plane, wherein we see the pro-
cesses that lead up to the appearance of
a dividing wall, whereby the one cell
becomes two. For all that happens down
here is but the reflexion in gross matter
of the happenings on higher planes, and
we may often find a crutch for our
halting imagination in our studies of
physical development. **As above, so
below." The physical is the reflexion of
the spiritual.

Then the Point, with Line revolving
with it, vibrates at right angles to the
former vibration, and thus is formed the
Cross, still within the Circle, the Cross
which thus " proceedeth from the Father
and the Son," the symbol of the Third
Logos, the Creative Mind, the divine
Activity now ready to manifest as Creator.
Then He manifests Himself as the Active
Cross, or Svastika, the first of the Logoi
to manifest outside the two highest planes,
though the third stage of the divine
Unfolding.



introduction. 13^

Life Form



Adi



iL Anup&daka


e



ill. Atmic A^



§ 2. Origination of Monads.

But before considering the creative
Activity of the Third Logos, we must
note the origination of the Monads, or
Units of Consciousness, for whose evolu-
tion in matter the field of a universe is to
be prepared. We shall return to their
fuller consideration in Chapter H. The
myriads of such Units who are to be
developed in that coming universe are
generated within the divine Life, as germ-
cells in organisms, before the field for their
evolution is formed. Of this forthgiving
it is written : ** That willed : I shall
multiply and be born ; "' and the Many
arise in the One by that act of Will.

' ChkAmdogy^ni^hat VI. iL 3.



14 STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

Will has its two aspects of attraction
and repulsion, of inbreathing and out-
breathing, and when the repulsion-aspect
energises there is separation, driving
apart

This multiplication within the One by
the action of Will marks the place of
origin — the first Logos, the undivided
Lord, the Eternal Father. These are
the sparks of the Supreme Fire, the
** divine Fragments,"' named generally
" Monads." A Monad is a fragment of
the divine Life, separated off as an indi-
vidual entity by rarest film of matter,
matter so rare that, while it gives a
separate form to each, it offers no
obstacle to the free inter-communication
of a life thus incased with the surround-
ing similar lives. The life of the Monads
is thus of the First Logos, and is there-
fore of triple aspect. Consciousness exist-
ing as Will, Wisdom, and Activity ; this
life takes form on the plane of divine
Manifestation, the second, or AnupSdaka,
Sons of the Father even as is the
Second Logos, but younger Sons, with

' Light an the Path,



The
Log
fcsu

P



IKTRODUCTIOK. 1 5

none of their divine powers capxible of
acting in matter denser than that of
their own planes : while He, with ages
of evolution behind Him. stands ready
ID exercise His divine powers, "the
First-bom among many brethren."' Fitly
they dwell on the Anupadaka plane, the
roots of their life in the Adi, as yet
without vehicles in which they can
express themselves, awaiting the day of
"manifestation of the Sons of God."'
TTjcrc they remain while the Third
Logos begins the external work of mani-
festation, the shaping of the objective
rvcrse. He is going to put forth
life into matter, to fashion it into
materials fitted for the building of
ihc vehicles which the Monads need
for their evolution. But he will not be
merged in His work; for. vast as that
work iicemis to us, to Him it is but
a little thing ; " Having pervaded this
whole universe with a portion of Myself,
1 remain."' That marvellous Indi-
viduality is not lost, and only a portion



' BkagavadGifi. x. 41.



i6



STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



thereof suffices for the life of a kosmos.
The Logos, the Oversold, remains, the
God of His universe.



STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

Chapter I.

THE PREPARATION OF THE FIELD.
S 1. The Formation or the Atom.

The Third Logos, the Universal Mind,

begins His creative Activity by working

on the matter drawn in from the infinite

space on every side for the building of

our solar system. This matter exists in

space in forms incognisable by us, but is

apparently already shaped to the needs

of vaster systems. For we have been

told by H. P. Blavatsky that the atomic

subplanes of our planes make up the first,

or lowest, kosmic plane. If we think of the

atoms of that kosmic plane as symbolised

17



l8 STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

by a musical note, our atoms, as formed by
the Third Logos, may perhaps be sym-
bolised by the overtones in such a note.
What seems clear is that they are in
close relation to the ** atoms of space,"
correspond with them, but are not, in
their present form, identical with them.
But the seven types of matter, that
become our ** atoms," are indicated in
the matter drawn from space to form
the solar system, and are ultimately
reducible again to them. H. P. Blavatsky
hints at the repeated seven-fold division
into atoms of lower and lower grade, when
she writes : '* The One Kosmic Atom
becomes seven atoms on the plane of
matter, and each is transformed into a
centre of energy. That same atom
becomes seven rays on the plane of spirit
...separate till the end of the kalpa and
yet in close embrace." '

Outside the limits of a universe this
matter is in a very peculiar state ; the
three qualities of matter, inertia, mobility,
and rhythm,' are balanced against each

' The Secret Doctrine, i. 696.
" Tamas, Rajas, and Satva.



[PARATION OF TH



19



. othe
H is d



other, and are in a state of equilibrium,
ley might be thought of as existing
a closed circle, quiescent in fact, in
;c ancient books, matter in its totality-
is described in this state as inertia. It
is also spoken of as virgin : it is the
celestiaJ Virgin Mar)', the ocean of virgin
roatier, that is to become the Mother by
the action of the Third Logos. The
beginning of creative Activity is the
breaking of that closed circle, throwing
the quah'ties out of stable into unstable
equilibrium. Life is motion, and the life
of the Solar Logos — His Breath, as it is
poetically called — touching this quiescent
mailer, threw the qualities Into a condition
of unstable equilibrium, and therefore of
roniinual motion in relation to each other.
During the life-period of a universe matter
is ever in a condition of incessant internal
motion. H. P. Blavatsky says : " Fohat
hardens and scatters the seven Brothers
.... electn6c9 into life and separates
fMimordial stuff, or pregenetic matter,
into atoms." '
', The formation of the atom has three

• nU &ert/ Dtxtrine. i. lot.



20 STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

Stages. First, the fixing of the limit
within which the ensouling life — the Life
of the Logos in the atom — shall vibrate ;
this limiting and fixing of the wave-length
of the vibration is technically called ** the
divine measure" ;' this gives to the atoms
of a plane their distinctive peculiarity.
Secondly, the Logos marks out, according
to this divine measure, the lines which
determine the shape of the atom, the
fundamental axes of growth, the angular
relation of these, which determines the
form, being that of the corresponding
kosmic atom ' ; the nearest analogy to
these are the axes of crystals. Thirdly,
by the measure of the vibration and
the angular relation of the axes of
growth with each other, the size and
form of the surface, which we may call
the surface or wall of the atom, is
determined. Thus in every atom we
have the measure of its ensouling life,
its axes of growth, and its enclosing
surface or wall.

' Tanmatra, the measure of That—" That " being
the Divine Spirit.

• Collectively, a Tattva.



THE PREPARATION OF THE FIELD. 21

Of such atoms the Third Logos creates
different kinds, the five different
Imcasures" implying five different vibra-
and each kind forms the basic
maierial of a plane ; each plane, however
various the objects in it. has its own
fundamenial type of atom, into which any
of its objects may ultimately be reduced.



W



S 2. Spirit-Matter.



The epithet, spirit-matter, will perhaps
be better appreciated if we pause for
a macncnt on the method of the
foraution of the atoms of the suc-
cesuve planes. For each system the
matter of space around it is its Root
of Matter, Mulaprakpiti. as the Hindus
graphically call it The matter of
each system has that surrounding
matter for its root, or base, and its own
special matter grows out of. is developed
from, lIxaL The Logos, the Oversoul, of
the system, drawing round Himself the
iKCcssary matter from space. en.souls it
vith His own life, and this life within this



22 STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

subtle matter, this Mdlaprakriti, is the
Atm4, the Self, the Spirit, in every
particle. Fohat, the energy of the Logos,
says H. P. B., **digs holes in space," and
no description could be finer and truer.
That whirling energy forms innumerable
vortices, each shaped by the divine energy
and the axes of growth, and each shelled
with the matter of space, Atm4 in a shell of
Miilaprakriti, spirit in a shell of matter,
the ** atoms'' of the Adi, or highest plane,
the first. Some of these remain as
** atoms"; others join together and form
** molecules " ; *' molecules" join together
and make more complex molecular com-
binations ; and so on till six sub-planes
below the atomic are formed. [This by
analogy with what may be observed below,
since these highest planes are incognis-
able.] Now comes the forming of the
atoms of the second plane. Their measure
and axes of growth being fixed as above
described by the Third Logos, some of
the atoms of the ddi, or first, plane
draw round themselves a shell of the
combinations of their own lowest sub-
plane ; the Spirit plus its original shell of



THE niBPARATION OF THE FIELD. 23

kosmie maittr (MOlapralqiti), or the atom
of the first plane, is the spirit of the
second plane, and permeates the new shell,
formed out of the lowest-grade combina-
tions of itself. These shells, thus ensouled.
are the atoms of the anupddaka. or second,
plane. By the ever more complicated
aggregations of these the remaining six
sub-planes are brought into being. Some of
the atoms of the anupddaka plane, in like
manner, become clothed with the aggrega-
tions of their own lowest sub-plane, and
thus become the atmic atoms, the Spirit
now being clothed with two shells, inside
its atomic wall of aggregations of the
lowest sub-plane of the anupidaka, and
the original Spirit, or Life, plus its two
sbeUs, being called the spirit of the Atmic
pUne, while the wall of its atom is
regmrded as the matter. This atom,
ensheathed once more in the aggregations
of the lowest Atmic sub-plane, becomes
the atom of the buddhic plane, Spirit on the
buddhic plane having thus three enclosing
films within its atomic shell of lowe.st
Itmic aggregations. On the mental plane
the Spirit has a fourfold sheath within the



24 STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

atomic wall, on the astral plane a fivefold,
and on the physical a sixfold, with the
atomic wall in each case in addition. But
the Spirit plus all its sheaths save the
outermost is ever regarded as Spirit, and
the outermost sheath only as form or body.
It is this involution of Spirit which makes
evolution possible, and complicated as the
description may sound, the principle is
simple and can be easily grasped. Truly,
then, may we speak of "spirit-matter"
everywhere.



§3. The Sub-Planes.

Now the ultimate atoms of the physical
plane are not the ** atoms " of the modern
chemist ; the ultimate atoms are aggre-
gated into successive typical groups,
forming ** states of matter," and the
chemical atom may be in the fifth,
sixth, or seventh of these states, a gas,
a liquid, or a solid. Familiar are the
gaseous, the liquid, and the solid states
of matter, or, as they are often called,
the gaseous, liquid, and solid sub-planes ;



THE PREPARATION OF THE FIELD.



25



and above the gaseous are four less
^mUtar conditions, the three etheric
states of matter, or sub-planes, and the
true atomic. These true atoms are
aggregated into groups, which then act
as units, and these groups are called
molecules : the atoms in a molecule are
held together by magnetic attraction, and
the mc^ecules on each sub-plane are
amuiged geometrically in relation to
each other on axes identical with the
axes of growth of the atom of the
Qorresponding plane. By these successive
aggregations of atoms into molecules,
and of simpler into more complex
molecules, the sub-planes of each plane
are formed under the directive Activity
of the Third Logos, until the field of
ex'olution. consisting of five planes, each
showing seven sub-planes — the first and
second planes being beyond this field — is
comptetcd. But it must not be supposed
thai these seven sub-planes, as formed
by the Third Logos, are at all identical
with those which are now existing.
Taking the phj-sical plane as an illustra-
boo. they bear something of the same



26 STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

relation to the present sub-planes as that
which the chemist calls proto- hydrogen
bears to the chemical element said to be
built up out of it. The present conditions
were not brought about by the work of
the Third Logos only, in whom Activity
predominates ; the more strongly attractive
or cohesive energies of the Second
Logos, who is Wisdom and therefore
Love, were needed -for the further
integfrations.

It is important to remember that the
planes are interpenetrating, and that
corresponding sub - planes are directly
related to each other, and are not really
separated from each other by intervening
layers of denser matter. Thus we must
not think of the atomic sub-planes as
being separated from each other by six
sub-planes of generally increasing density,
but as being in immediate connexion with
each other. We may figure this in a
diagram as follows :



THE PREPARATION OF THE FIELD. 2^


Form


LlFE.


lAdi

•
}


r\


h


@


1

' Anupidaka

[


tj


\)


1 Atmi (iCther)


CO

CL
CO 1 ,

rt CO

G. .

•1'
.a ' E


Super- ether- ic sub- planes


Eth- er- ic sub- planes


1


So- lid sub- planes


' Buddhi (Air)


Gas- eous sub- planes


Li- quid sub- planes


Manas (Fire)

1


' Kima (Water)


SthfiU (Eanh)


1
<


Sub-



It must be understood that this is a
diagram, not a picture : i.e., it represents
relations, not material facts — the relations
existing between the planes by virtue of
their intermingling, and not forty-nine
separate bricks placed in seven rows, one
on the top of another.

Now this relation is a most important
one, for it implies that life can pass from



28 STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

plane to plane by the short road of the
communicating atomic sub - planes, and
need not necessarily circle round through
the six molecular sub-planes before it can
reach the next atomic sub-plane to con-
tinue its descent. As a matter of fact we
shall find presendy that life-streams from
the Monad do follow this atomic road in
their descent to the physical plane. If we
now consider a physical atom, looking at it
as a whole, we see a vortex of life, the life
of the Third Logos, whirling with incon-
ceivable rapidity. By the attraction
between these whirling vortices, molecules
are built up, and the plane with its sub-
planes formed. But at the limiting surface
of this whirling vortex are the spirillae,
whirling currents, each at right angles to
the one within it and the one without it.
These whirling currents are made by the
life of the Monad, not by the life of the
Third Logos, and are not present at the
early stage we are considering ; they
develope one after another into full
activity in the course of evolution,
normally one in each Round ; their rudi
ments are indeed completed by the Fourth


THE PREPARATION OF THE FIELD. 29

Round by the action of the Second Logos,
but the life-stream of the Monad circulates
in only four of them, the other three being
but faintly indicated. The atoms of the
higher planes are formed on the same
gcneml plan, as regards the Logic central
;ex and its enclosing currents, but all
are at present lacking to us. Many
the practices of yoga are directed to
ig about the more rapid evolution of
the atoms by quickening this spirillae-
vivifying work of the Monad upon it. As
these currents of the monadic life are
added to the Logic vortex, the note of life
grows richer and richer in its quality. We
may compare the central vorte-v to the
fundamental note, the whirling encircling
currents lo the overtones ; the addition of
each overtone means an added richness to
the note. New forces, new beauties, are
ihus ever added to the seven-fold chord
oflife.



^^ST»e



H- THt five PuiNEs.

different responses which the
Rianer of the planes will later give under



30


STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



the impulse of consciousness depend
the work of the Third Logos, on the
" measure " by which He limits the atom.
The atom of each plane has its own
measure, as we have seen, and this limits
its power of response, its vibratory action,
and gives it its specific character. As the
eye is so constituted that it is able to
respond to vibrations of ether within a
certain range, so is each type of atom,
by its constitution, able to respond to
vibrations within a certain range, One
plane is called the plane made of "mind-
stuff," because the "measure" of its atoms
makes their dominant response that which
answers to a certain range of the vibrations
of the Knowledge Aspect of the Locos,
as modified by the Creative Activity."
Another is called the plane of "desire-
stuff," because the " measure " of its atoms
makes their dominant response that which
answers to a certain range of the vibrations
of the Will' Aspect of the Logos. Each
type of atom has thus its own peculiar

' Chit working on Kriyi, i.e., Wisdom working on
Activity, yields Manas, mind,
' IcbchhL


THE PREPARATION OF THE FIELD. 3I

power of response, determined by its own
measure of vibration. In each atom lie
involved numberless possibilities of re-
sponse to the three aspects of conscious-
ness, and these possibilities within the
atom will be brought out of the atom as
powers in the course of evolution. But
the capacity of the matter to respond, and
the nature of the response, these are deter-
mined by the original action of the triple
Sell" on it. and by the measure imposed on
ihe aiom« by the Third Logos ; He, out of
the infinite capacity of His own multitude
* of vibratory powers, jjives a certain portion
to the matter of a particular system in a
particular cycle of evolution. This capacity
is stamped on matter by the Third Logos,
and is ever maintained in matter by His
Kfe infolded in the atom. Thus is formed
the fivefold field of evolution in which
consciousness is tu develope.

This work of the Third Loyos is usually
I of as the First Life Wave.



Chapter II.

CONSCIOUSNESS.
§ 1. The Meaning of the Word.

Let us now consider what we mean by
consciousness, and see if this considera-
tion will build for us the much longed-
for ** bridge," which is the despair of
modern thought, between consciousness
and matter, will span for us the **gulf"
alleged to exist for ever between them.

To begin with a definition of terms :
consciousness and life are identical, two
names for one thing as regarded from
within and from without. There is no
life without consciousness ; there is no
consciousness without life. When we
vaguely separate them in thought and
analyse what we have done, we find
that we have called consciousness turned

inward by the name of life, and life

32



CONSCIOUSNESS. 33

turned outwards by the name of con-
sciousness. When our attention is fixed
on unity we say life : when it is 6xed
upon multiplicity' we say consciousness ;
and we forget that the multiplicity is
due to, is the essence of. matter, the
reflecting surface in which the One
becomes the Many. When it is said
that life is "more or less conscious," it
is not the abstraction life that is
thought of. but "a living thing" more
or less aware of its surroundings. The
more or less awareness depends on the
thickness, the density, of the enwrapping
veil which makes it a living thing,
separate rn>m its fellows. Annihilate in
thought that veil and you annihilate in
thought also life, and arc in That
into which all opposices are resolved.
the All.

This leads us to our next point : the
existence of consciousness implies a scfiara*
lion into two aspects of the fundamental
all-undcriying Unity. The modem name
of consciousness. " awareness," equally
implies this. For you cannot hang up
awareness in the void : awareness


34 STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

implies somethings of which it is aware,
a duality at the least. Otherwise it
exists not. In the highest abstraction of
consciousness, of awareness, this duality
is implied : consciousness ceases if the
sense of limitation be withdrawn, is
dependent on limitation for existence.
Awareness is essentially awareness of
limitation, and only secondarily awareness
of others. Awareness of others conies
into bein^ with what we call Self-
consciousness, Self- awareness. This
abstract Twain-in-One, consciousness-
limitation, spirit - matter, life - form, are
ever inseparable, they appear and dis-
appear together ; they exist only in
relation to each other ; they resolve into
a necessarily unmanifest Unity, the
supreme synthesis.

"As above, so below." Again let the
■■ below" help us ; let us look at conscious-
ness as it appears when considered from
the side of form, as we see it in a
universe of conscious things. Electricity
manifests only as positive and negative ;
when these neutralise each other, electri-
city vanishes. In all^things electricity



COWSCIOUSNESS. 35

, neutral, unmanifest : from all things
it can appear, but not as positive only, or
as negative only ; always as balancing
amounts of both, over against each other,
,ind these ever tending to re-enter together
into apparent nothingness, which is not
nothingness but the source equally of
both.

But if this be so, what becomes of the
"gulf"? what need of the "bridge"?
Consciousness and matter afTect each
other because they are the two constit-
uents of one whole, both appearing as
they draw apart, both disappearing as
they unite, and as they draw apart a
relation exists ever between them.' There
is no such thing as a conscious unit
which does not consist of this inseparate
duality, a magnet with two poles ever
in relation to each other. We think of
a leparatc something we call conscious-
ness, and ask how it works on another

* Tbu rcUiion 'a nu^neiic, but of magneiism of
the rabdefl kind, called Fotut, or Daivlprakriti,
"The Light of the Logos." It is of SubuLuice,
and in ii (he eueact of consdoutness and «Mcnce
I but not drawn apafl.



^


36 STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

separate something we call matter There
are no such two separate somethings,
but only two drawn-apart but inseparaie
aspects of That which, without both, is
unmanifest, which cannot manifest in the
one or the other alone, and is equally in
both. There are no fronts without backs,
no aboves without belows, no outsides
without insides, no spirit without matter.
They affect each other because inseparable
parts of a unity, manifesting as a duality
in space and time, The "gulf" appears
when we think of a "spirit" wholly
immaterial, and a " body " wholly material
— i.e., of two things neither of which
exists. There is no spirit which is not
matter-enveloped : there is no matter
which is not spirit- ensouled. The
highest separated Self has its film of
matter, and though such a Self is called
" a spirit " because the consciousness-
aspect is so predominant, none the less
is it true that it has its vibrating sheath
of matter, and that from this sheath all
impulses come forth, which affect all other
denser material sheaths in succession. To
say this is not to materialise consciousni



Jsneii^^H



CONSCIOUSNESS.



37



muter
I the i;a



only to recognise the fact that the two
opposites, consciousness and
mauer. are siraltly bound together, are
never apart, not even in the highest
Being. Nfatter is limitation, and without
TunitAtion consciousness is not. So far
from materialising consciousness, it puts
h. as a ismtept in sharp antithesis to
but it recognises the fact that

mn entity the one is not found with-
the other. The densest matter, the
_ jcal, has its core of consciousness ;
the gas, the stone, the metal, is living.
ONiscious, aware. Thus oxygen becomes
amre of hydrogen at a certain tempera-
hirc, and rushes into conbination with it

Let us now look out of consciousness
from within, and see the meaning of the
phrase : " Matter is limitation." Conscious-
nas is the one Reality, In the fullest
lensc of that much-used phrase : it follows
CpOOi this that any reality found anywhere
t» drawn from consciousness. Hence,
everything which is thought, is, That
consciousness in which everything is.
nvfTthing literally. " possible " as well a^
"actual" — attuai being that which is


58 STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

thought of as existent by a separated
consciousness in time and space, and
possible all that which is not so being
thought of at any period in time and any
point in space — we call Absolute Con-
sciousness. It is the All, the Eternal.
the Infinite, the Changeless. Conscious-
ness, thinking time and space, and of all
forms as existing in them in succession
and in places. Is the Universal Conscious-
ness, the One, called by the Hindu the
Saguiia Brahman — the Eternal with
attributes — the Pratvag-atmA — the Inner
Self : by the Christian, God ; by the
Parst, HoRMUZD ; by the Mussulman,
Allah. Consciousness dealing with a
definite time, however long or short, with
a definite space, however vast or restricted,
is individual, that of a concrete Being, a
Lord of many universes, or some universes,
or a universe, or of any so-called portion
of a universe, his portion and to him
therefore a universe^these terms varying
as to extent with the power of the con-
sciousness ; so much of the universal
thought as a separate consciousness can
completely think, i.e., on which he can



oovsaousNess.



39



impose his own reality, can think of as
existing like himself, is Ais universe. To
each universe, the Being who is its Lord
gives a share of his own indefeasible
Reality: but is ever himself limited and
controlled by the thought of his superior,
the Lord of the universe in which kr
exists as a form. Thus we. who are
human betn^, existing in a solar system,
are surrounded by innumerable forms
which are the thought-forms of the Lord
of our system, our tsiiVARA. or Riler ;
the "divine measure" and the "axes of
IfTOWth." thought by the Third Logos.
govern the forms of our atoms, and tho
furface thought of by Him as the limit of
the atom and resistant, offers resistance to
all similar atoms. Thus we receive our
matter, and cannot alter it, save by the
employment of methods also made by His
thought : only so long as His thought
continues can the atoms, with all composed
of them, continue to exist, since they have
no Reality save that given by His thought.
So long as He retains them as His body
by declaring: "I am this; these atoms
are My body: they share My life;" so



40 A STCDT IS co3rsciorsxES&

long they will impose themselves as real
on all the beings in this solar system,
whose consciousnesses are clothed in
similar garments. Wlien at the end of
the Day of Manifestation He declares: " I
am not this : these atoms are no longer
My body ; they no longer share My life ; "
then shall they vanish as the dream they
are, and only that shall remain which is
the thought -form of the Monarch of a
vaster system.

Thus, as Spirits, we are inherently,
indefeasibly divine, with all the splendour
and freedom implied in that word. But
we are clothed in matter which is not ours,
which is the thought-forms of the Ruler
of our system — controlled again by the
Rulers of vaster systems in which ours is
included — and we are only slowly learning
to master and use it. When we realise
our oneness with our Ruler, then the
matter shall have no longer power over
us, and we shall see it as the unreality it
is, dependent on His will, which then we
shall know as also ours. Then we can
** play '' with it, as we cannot while it
blinds us with its borrowed Reality.



COKSaOVSMBSS.



41



Looking thus out of consciousness from
vithin. wc sec even more plainly than we
saw looking at it from the world of forms.
that there is no "Kulf." and no need for
a •' bridge." Consciousness changes, and
each change appears in the matter sur-
rounding it as a vibration, because the
Logos has thought vibrations of matter as
the invariable concomitant of changes in
consciousness ; and as the matter is but
the resultant of consciousness and its
attributes are imposed upon it by active
thought, any change in the Logic Con-
KiousnesH would change the attributes of
the matter of the system, and any change
in a consciousness derived from Him
shows itself in that matter as a. change ;
this change in matter is a vibration, a
rfaythmicaJ movement within the limits set
by Him for the mobility of masses of
mauer in that relation. " Change in con-
sciousness and vibration of the matter
limiting it" is a "pair." imposed by the
thought of the Logos on all emb(xiicd
consciousnesses in His universe. That
such a constant relation exists is shown by
ifae lact that a vibration in a material



42 A 5m>T

sheath acaxnpanyiiig a diangc in the
€TA.sc'jMng oT&sciousQess. and causing a
faimuitT vihrsnon in the sheath ensouled by
another consciousness, is found to be
accompanied by a chaise in that second
consciousness similar to the change in the
first.

la matter far subder than the physical —
as mind-stuflr — the creadve power of con-
sciousness is more readilv seen than in
the dense material of the physical plane.
Matter becomes dense or rare, and changes
its combinations and forms, according to
the thoughts of a consciousness active
therein. While the fundamental atoms —
due to the Logic thought — remain un-
changed, they can be combined or disso-
ciated at will. Such experiences open the
mind to the metaphysical conception of
matter, and enable it to realise at once
the borrowed reality and the nonentity of
matter.

A word of warning may be useful with
regard to the often repeated phrases of
"Consciousness in a body," "Conscious-
ness en.souling a body," and the like. The
student is a little apt to figure conscious-



OONSaOUSNESS.

oess as a kind of rarefied gas enclosed in
a material receptacle, a kind of bottle. If
be will think carefully he will realise that
ibe resistant surface of the body is but a
Logic thought-form, and it is there because
titmgkt there. Consciousness appears as
conscious entiues. because the Locos thinks
uich separations, thinks the enclosing walls,
makes such thought limitations. And these
thot^ts of the Lofjos are due to His unity
with the Universal Sklk. and are but a
lition within the area of a particular

e of the Will to multiply.
: careful dwelling in mind on the
iciions above traced between Absolute
iciousness, Universal Consciousness,
and Individual Consciousness, will prevent
the student from asking the question so
often heard : Why is there any universe ?
Why does AII<Consciousness limit itself?
Why should the Perfect become the
tnperfcci, All-Power become the power-
~ ^ become the mineral, the brute,


i man ? I n this form the



werable, for it



question
founded



faLse



:s. The Perfect is the All, the
tocality. the Sum of Being. Within



44 A STUDY IN COVSCIOCSXESS.

its infinity, as above said, b everything
contained, every potentialit)% as well as
actuality, of existence. All that has been,
is, will be. can be. ever is in that Fulness,
that Eternal. Only Itself knows Itself
in its infinite unimaginable wealth of
Being. Because it contains all pairs of
opposites, and each pair, in affirming itself,
to the eye of reason annihilates itself and
vanishes, It seems a Void. But endless
universes arising in It proclaim It a
Plenum. This Perfect never becomes
the imperfect ; it becomes nothing ; It w
all Spirit and Matter, Strength and
Weakness, Knowledge and Ignorance,
Peace and Strife, Bliss and Pain, Power
and Impotence ; the innumerable opposites
of manifestation merge into each other
and vanish in non-manifestation. The All
includes manifestation and non-manifes-
tation, the diastole and systole of the
Heart which is Being. The one no
more requires explanation than the other ;
the one cannot be without the other.
The puzzle arises because men assert
separately one of the inseparate pair of
opposites — Spirit, Strength, Knowledge,



CONSCIOUSNESS.



45



become their oppositesr
No attribuce exists without



Peace. Bliss, Power-
ibould these becoi
Tkrr do nol.
its opposite : a pair only can manifest ;
ever)p- front has a back, spirit and matter
arise together : it is not thai spirit
exists, and then miraculously produces
mauer to limit and blind itself, but that
^'rit and matter arise in the Eternai.
simultaneously as a mode of Its Being.
1 form of Self-expression of the All,
Prat>'ag4un& and Mfilaprakriti. express-
ing in time and spiace the Timeless and
Spaceless.



^^Ti



J 2. The Monads.

'e have seen that by the action of
the Third Logos a five-fold field has
been provided for the development of
Units of Consciousness, and that a Unit
of Consciousness is a fragment, a portion
of the Universal Consciousness, thought
into separation as an individual entity
veOed in matter, a Unit of the substance
of the First Logos, to be sent forth on
tbc secoiKl plane as a separate Being.



46 A STUDY Ur CONSCIOUSNESS.

Such Units are called technically Monads.
These are the Sons, abiding from ever-
lasting, from the beginning of a creative
age, in the Bosom of the Father, who
have not yet been " made perfect through
suflferings" ;' each of them is truly "equal
to the Father as touching his Godhead,
but inferior to the Father as touching his
manhood,"* and each of them is to go
forth into matter in order to render all
things subject to himself;^ he is to be
**sown in weakness" that he may be
** raised in power ";^ from a static Logos
enfolding all divine potentialities, he is to
become a dynamic Logos unfolding all
divine powers ; omniscient, omnipresent,
on his own second plane, but unconscious,
** senseless," on all the others,^ he is to veil
his glory in matter that blinds him, in order
that he may become omniscient, omni-
present, on all planes, able to answer to all
divine vibrations in the universe instead of
to those on the highest only.

^Hebrews, ii. lo. 'Athanasian Creed.
^ / Corinthians, xv. 28. * Ibid. 43.
5 H. P. Blavatsky. Key to Theosophy, See p. 53.
for the principle, though applied to a lower stage.



CONSCIOUSNESS.



47



The Rieantng of this feeble description
of a great truth may be glimpsed by the
student by a consideration of the facts of
cmbcyonic life and birth. When an Ego
ix re -incarnating, he broods over the
human mother in whom his future body is
a-building, the vehicle he will one day
inhabit That body is slowly built up of
the substance of the mother, and the Ego
can do little as to its shaping : it is an
embryo, unconscious of its future, dimly
cuosdous only of the flow of the maternal
life, impressed by maternal ho)>es and
fears, thoughts and desires ; nothing from
the Ego affects it. save a feeble influence
coming through the jwrmancnt physical
atom, and it does not share, because it
cannot answer to, the wide • reaching
thoughls, the aspiring emotions of the
Ego, as expressed by him in his causal
body. That embryo must develop, must
gradually assume a human form, must
enter on an independent life. sep.'Lrate from
that of his mother, must pass through seven
years — as men count time — of such inde-
pendent life, ere the Ego can fully ensoul
iL But during that slow evolution, with


40 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS. ^B

its infantile helplessness, its childish follies,
pleasures and pains, the Ego to whom it
belongs is carrying on his own wider,
richer, life, and is gradually coming into
nearer and nearer touch with this body, in
which alone he can work in the physical
world, his touch being manifested as the
growth of the ir<i(«-consciousness.

The condition of the Monad in relation
to the evolution of his consciousness in a
universe resembles that of the Ego in
relation to his new physical body. His
own world is that of the second, the
anupAdaka, plane, and there he is fully
conscious with the all-embracing Self-
consciousness of his world, but not at first
of selves, among whom he is separate, of
"others." Let us try to see the stages
through which he passes. He is first a
spark in a flame : " I sense one Flame.
O Gurudeva ; I see countless undetached
sparks shining in it."' The Flame is the
First Logos, the undetached sparks the
Monads. His Will to manifest is also
theirs, for they are the germ-cells in His

'Occult Catechism, quoted in The Secret Doctrine.
i. 145.



tha



CONSCIOUSNESS. 49

body, that will presently have a separate
life in His coming universe. Moved by
this WiU, the sparks share the change
called "the begetting of the Son," and
pass intu the Second Logos and dwell
in Him. Then, with the "proceeding"
of the Third, there conies to them
from Him the "spiritual individuality."
that H. P. Blavatsky speaks of. the
owning separateness. But still there is
sense of " others," needed to re-act
the sense of " I." The three aspects
id conscioasness, theirs as sharing the
Logic life, are still, lo use a figure of
speech, " turned inwards," playing on each
Other, asleep, unaware of a "without,"
sharing the all-SeLF-consciousness. The
great Beings, called the Creative Orders,'
arotise them lo '■ outer " life ; Will. Wis-
dom, Activity awake to awareness of the
" without"; a dim sense of " others" arises.
so far as "others" may be in a world
where all " ' forms ' intermingle and inter-
penetrate," and each becomes " an indivi-
dual Dhy&n Chohan, distinct from othen>."=

' See Tit Jidifrw of Man. Pp. 11, 11.
• TTm Sier*$ Doitrim. i. 183.



50 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

At the first stage, spoken of above, when
the Monads are, in the fullest sense' of the
term, undetached, as "germ-cells in His
body," the Will, Wisdom, and Activity in
them are latent, not patent His Will to
manifest is also their will, but theirs un-
consciously ; He, Self-conscious, knows
His object and His path ; they, not yet
Self-conscious, have in them, as parts of
His body, the moving energy of His Will,
which will presently be their own indivi-
dual Will to Live, and which impels them
into the conditions wherein a separate-
Self-conscious, instead of an all-Self-con-
scious, life is possible. This leads them
to the second stage in the life of the
Second Logos, and to the Third. Then,
comparatively separate, the awakening by
the Creative Orders brings with it the
**dim sense of 'others'" and of ** I," and
with this a thrill of longing for a more
clearly - defined sense of ** I " and of
*' others"; and this is the ** individual
Will to Live," and this leads them forth

' " The fullest sense," />., with no separate indivi-
duality ; undetached, in truth, they ever remain above,
ever shining in the Flame.



into the denser worlds, wherein such
iharpcr definition alone becomes possible.

h is important to understand that tht
evolution of the individual " I " is ii
Sdf - chosen activity. We are here
because we Will to Live : " none else'
compels." Thi.s aspect of consciousness.
the W^ill. \s dealt with in hiter chapters
of this book, and here we need only
; the fact that the Monads are
I- moved. Self-determined, in their
into the lower planes of matter.
field of manifestation, the fivefold
To their vehicles in it, they
lain as the Ego to his physical body,
with their radiant divine life In loftier
spheres, but brooding over their lower
vehicles and manifesting more and more
in them as they become more plastic.
P. Btavatslcy speaks of this, as the
is C)'c)in^ on downwards into

Everywhere in nature we see this same

ig after fuller manifestation of life,

constant Will to Live. The seed,

in the ground, pushes its growing;

• TAt SecrtI Dnttrimt. i. i6;.


4



52



STUDY TN CONSCIOUSNESS.



point upwards to the light The bud
fettered in its sheathing calyx bursts its
prison and expands in the sunshine. The
chick within the egg splits its confining
shell in twain. Everywhere life seeks
expression, powers press to exercise them-
selves. See the painter, the sculptor, the
poet, with creative genius struggling within
him : to create yields the subtlest pleasure,
the keenest savour of exquisite delight.
Therein is but another instance of the
omnipresent nature of life, whether in the
Locos, the genius, or in the ephemeral
creature of a day : all joy in the bliss of
living, and feel most alive when they
multiply themselves by creation. To feel
life expressing itself, flowing forth, expand-
ing, increasing, this is at once the result
of the Will to Live, and its fruition m
the Bliss of living.

Some of the Monads, willing to live
through the toils of the five-fold universe,
in order to master matter and in turn to
create a universe therein, enter into it to
become a developed God therein, a Tree
of Life, another Fount of Being. The
shaping of a universe is the Day of



CONSCIOUSNESS.



53



Forth-g(nng : living is becoming ; life
knoH-s itself by chanj^e. Those who will
not to become masters of matter, creators,
remain in their static bliss, excluded from
the five-fold universe, unconscious of its
activities. For it must be remembered
that all the seven planes are interpene-
trating, and that Consciousness on any
fhiac means the power of answering to
ihe vibrations of that particular plane.
Just as a man may be conscious on the
physical plane because his physical body
is organised to receive and transmit to him
ill vibrations, but be totally unconscious
of the higher planes though their vibra-
tions are playing on him. because he has
oot yci organised sufficiently his higher
ies to receive and transmit to him
vibrations ; so is the Monad, the
of Consciousness, able to be con-
sdou<i on the second plane, but totally
unconscious on the lower five.

He will evolve his consciousness on
these by taking from each plane some
of its matter, veiling himself in this
matter and forming it into a sheath by
which he can come into contact with



54 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

that plane, gradually organising this
sheath of matter into a body capable
of functioning on its own plane as an
expression of himself, receiving vibrations
from the plane and transmitting them to
him, receiving vibrations from him and
transmitting them to the plane. As
he veils himself in the matter of each
successive plane he shuts away some of
his consciousness, that of it which is
too subtle for receiving or setting up
vibrations in the matter of that plane.
He has within him seven typical vibratory
powers — each capable of producing an
indefinite number of sub-vibrations of its
own type — and these are shut off one
by one as he endues veil after veil of
grosser matter. The powers in con-
sciousness of expressing itself in certain
typical ways — using the word power in
the mathematical sense, consciousness
'*to the third,'' consciousness **to the
fourth," etc. — are seen in matter as what
we call dimensions. The physical power
of consciousness has its expression in
** three-dimensional matter," while the
astral, mental, and other powers of con-



CONSCIOUSN ESS.



55

need for their expression
other dimensions of matter.

Speaking thus of Monads, we may feel
as if wc were dealing with something far
away. Yet is the Monad ver>' near to
us, our Self, the very root of our being,
; innennost source of our life, the one
llity. Hidden, unmanifest, wrapt in
Dec and darkness is our Self, but our
dousncss is the limited manifestation
[ that Self, the manifested God in the
of our bodies, which are His
gmrments. As the Unmanifest is partially
manifest in the Logos, as Divine Con-
sciousness, and in the universe as the
Body of the Locos', so is our unmanifest
Self partially manifest in our conscious-
ness, as the Logos of our individual
sysiem, and in our body as the kosmos
which clothes the consciousness. As
above, so below.

Tliis hidden Seu' it is which is called
the Monad, being verily the One. It is
this which gives the subde sense of unity

D the fouing loom of 'I'irne I p]y,
d weave Cut God the garment ihou Kcst Him by.

GOKTHK.



56 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

that ever persists in us amid all changes ;
the sense of identity has here its source,
for this is the Eternal in us. The three
out-streaming rays which come from the
Monad — to be dealt with presendy — are
his three aspects, or modes of being, or
hypostases, reproducing the Logoi of a
universe, the Will, Wisdom, and Activity
which are the three essential expressions
of embodied consciousness, the familiar
AtmA-Buddhi-Manas of the Theosophist

This consciousness ever works as a unit
on the various planes, but shows out its
tripHcity on each. When we study con-
sciousness working on the mental plane,
we see Will appearing as choice, Wisdom
as discrimination, Activity as cognition.
On the astral plane we see Will appearing
as desire, Wisdom as love. Activity as sen-
sation. On the physical plane. Will has for
its instruments the motor organs (karmen-
driyas). Wisdom the cerebral hemispheres.
Activity the organs of sense (jMnen-
driyas).'

' This assignment is tentative only. As matter
is the feminine side, Sarasvati, belonging to Brahmi,
seems to indicate the jninendriyas, and Duigi the
karmendriyas.



CONSCIOUSNESS. 57

The full manifestation of these three
aspects of consciousness in their highest
forms takes place in man in the same
order as the manifestation of the triple
Locos in the universe. The third aspect,
Activity, revealed as the creative mind, as
the gatherer of knowledge, is the first to
perfect its vehicles, and show forth its full
energies The second aspect, Wisdom,
revealed as the Pure and Compassionate
Reason, is the second to shine forth, the
Krishna, the Buddha, the Christ, in man.
The third aspect, Will, is the last to reveal
itself, the divine Power of the Sfelf,
that which in its impregnable fulness is
Beatitude, is Peace.



THE PEOPLING OF THE FIELD.



§ 1. The Coming Forth of the Monads.

When the five-fold field is ready, when
the five planes, each with its seven sub-
planes, are completed, so far as their
primary constitution is concerned, then
begins the activity of the Second Logos,
the Builder and Preserver of forms. His
activity is spoken of as the Second Life-
Wave, the pouring out of Wisdom and
Love— the Wisdom, the directing force,
needed for the organisation and evolution
of forms, the Love, the attractive force,
needed for holding them together as stable
though complex wholes. When this great
stream of Logic life pours forth into the
five-fold field of manifestation, it brings
with it into activity the Monads, the Units
of Consciousness, ready to begin their



THE PEOPLING OF THE FIELD.



59



work of evolution, to clothe themselves in
matter.

Yet the phrase thai the Monads go
forth is somewhat inaccurate ; that they
ditne forth, send out their rays of life,
would be truer. For they remain ever
" in the bosom of the Father." while their
life-rays stream out into the ocean of
nutter, and therein appropriate the
outenals needed for their energising in
the universe. The matter must be appro-
priated, rendered plastic, shaped into
fitdng vehicles.

H. P. Blavatsky has described their
forthduning In graphic allegorical terms,
tsing a symbolism more expressive than
Kteral-meaning words : " The primordial
triangle, which — as soon as it has reflected
inclf in the ' Heavenly Man,' the highest
of the lower seven — disapjiears, returning
ioio ' Silence and Darkness ' ; and the
utral paradigmatic man. whose Monad
(Atmi) is also represented by a triangle,
as it has to become a ternary in conscious
devachanic interludes."' The primordial
Inangle, or the three-faced Monad of Will,
• 7TW Stent Dotlriit. iii. P. 444.



6o A STUDY IN

Wisdom, and Activity, '' reflects itself " in
the "Heavenly Man," as Atm^-Buddhi-
Manas, and then " returns into Silence and
Darkness." Atmi — often spoken of as the
Monad of the lower, or astral man — has to
become a ternary, a triple-faced unit, by
assimilating Buddhi and Manas. The word
'' reflexion " demands explanation here.
Speaking generally, the term reflexion is
used when a force manifested on a higher
plane shows itself again on a lower plane,
and IS conditioned by a grosser kind of
matter in that lower manifestation, so that
some of the effective energy of the force is
lost, and it shows itself in a feebler form.
As now used in a special instance, it means
that a stream of the life of the Monad
pours forth, taking as the vessel to contain
it an atom from each of the three higher
planes of the five-fold field — the third, the
fourth, and the fifth — thus producing the
** Heavenly Man," the ** Living Ruler,
Immortal," the Pilgrim who is to evolve,
for whose evolution the system was
brought into being.

**As the mighty vibrations of the Sun
throw matter into the vibrations we call



THE PEOI'LING OF THE FIELD.



6i



his rays(which express his heat, electricity,
and oiher energies), so does the Monad
cause the atomic matter of the atmic,
buddhic, and manasic planes — surrounding
him as the ether of space surrounds the
Sun — to vibrate, and thus makes to him-
self a Ray. triple like his own three-fold
nature. In this he is aided by Devas
from a previous universe who have passed
through a similar experience before ; these
guide the vibratory wave from the Will-
aspect to the Stmic atom, and the Stmic
atom, vibrating to the Will-aspect, is called
Atmd ; they guide the vibratory wave
from the Wisdom-aspect to the buddhic
uom, and the buddhic atom, vibratitig
to the Wisdom-aspect, is called Buddhi ;
also they guide the vibratory wave
from the Activity-aspect to the mAnasic
atom, and the mdnasic atom, vibra-
ting to the Activity - aspect, is called
Manas. Thus AtmS-Buddhi-Manas, the
Monad in the world of manifestation, is
formed, the Ray of the Monad, beyond the
five-fold universe. Here is the mystery
(rf" the Watcher, the Spectator, the aclion-
les* AtmA. who abides ever in his triple



62 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

nature on his own plane, and lives in the
world of men by his Ray, which animates
his shadows, the fleeting lives on earth.
. . . The shadows do the work on the
lower planes, and are moved by the Monad
through his Image or Ray, at first so
feebly that his influence is well-nigh im-
perceptible, later with ever - increasing
power."*

Atmd-Buddhi- Manas is the Heavenly
Man, the Spiritual Man, and he is the
expression of the Monad, whose reflected
aspect of Will is Atml, whose reflected
aspect of Wisdom is Buddhi, whose
reflected aspect of Activity is Manas.
Hence we may regard the human Atm4
as the Will-aspect of the Monad, ensouling
an aklshic atom ; the human Buddhi as
the Wisdom - aspect of the Monad,
ensouling an air (divine flame) atom ;
the human Manas as the Activity-aspect
of the Monad, ensouling a fiery
atom. Thus in Atm4 - Buddhi - Manas,
the spiritual Triad, or the Heavenly

' The Pedigree of Man, Pp. 25, 27 ; slightly
modified, as in the book the passage refers to the
fourth chain only.



THE PEOPLING OF THE FIELD. 63

Man. we have the three aspects, or
energies, of the Monad, embodied in
atomic matter, and this is the " Spirit "
in man. the JivSlmd or Life-Self, the
separated Self.' It is the germinal Spirit.
and in its third asjicct the "baby Ego."
It Ls identical in nature with the Monad,
is tkt Monad, but is lessened in force and
activity by the veils of matter round it.
This lessening of power must not blind us
to the identity of nature. We must ever
remember that the human consciousness is
a unit, and that though its manifestations
var)', these variations are only due to the
predominance of one or other of its
aq>ect.s and to the relative density of the
materials in which an aspect is working.
Its manifestations, thus conditioned, vary.
but it is itself ever one.

Such part, then, of the consciousness of
the Monad as can express itself in a five-
filld universe enters at 6rst thus into the
higher matter of this universe, embodying



itself



an atom of each of the three



'The tcnn JlrJttiai u or course equally applicable
lo the Morwd, but t» more often applied to its



64



A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



higher planes; having thus shone forth
and appropriated these atoms for his own
use, the Monad has beg^n his work ; in
his own subtle nature he cannot as yet
descend below the anupidaka plane, and
he is therefore said to be in " Silence and
Darkness," unmanifest ; but he lives and
works in and by means of these appro-
priated atoms, which form the garment of
his life on the planes nearest to his own.
We may figfure this action thus :



1.



Adi



ii. Anupfldaka


iii. Atm&


iv.


Buddhi


j ; yfiuddhi


V.


Manas


MancL^


vi.


KAma


VI 1.


Sthala


THE PEOPLrNG OF THE FIELD. 65

This Spiritual Triad, as it is often
oUled, Atmi-Ruddi-Manas. the Jivatma,
is described as a seed, a germ, of divine
Life, containing the potentialities of its
own heavenly Father, its Monad, to be
unfolded into powers in the course of
evolution. This is the "manhood'" of
the divine Son of the First Logos.
animated by the " Godhead." the Monad
— a mystery truly, but one which is
repeated in many forms around us.

And now the nature, which was free
in the subtle matter of his own plane,
becomes bound by the denser matter, and
hb powers of consciousness cannot as
yei function in this blindin;^ veil. He is
therein as a mere germ, an embryo,
powerless, senseless, helpless, while the
Monad oh his ovm plane is strong,
conscious, capable, so far as his internal
life is concerned ; the one is the Monad
in Eternity, the other is the Monad in
time and space ; the content of the
Monad eternal is to become the extent
of the Monad temporal and spatial. This
at present embryonic life will evolve into
a complex being, the expression of the



66 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

Monad on each plane of the universe.
All-powerful internally on his own subtle
plane, he is at first powerless, fettered,
helpless, when enwrapped externally in
denser matter, unable to receive through
it, or to give out through it, vibrations.
But he will gradually master the matter
that at first enslaves him ; slowly, surely,
he will mould it for Self-expression ; he
is aided and watched over by the all-
sustaining and preserving Second Logos,
until he can live in it fully as he lives
above, and become in his turn a creative
Logos and bring forth out of himself a
universe. The power of creating a
universe is only gained, according to The
Wisdom, by involving within the Self
all that is later to be put forth. A
Logos does not create out of nothing,
but evolves all from Himself; and from
the experiences we are now passing
through, we are gathering the materials
out of which we may build a system in
the future.

But this spiritual Triad, this Jivltma,
which is the Monad in the five-fold
universe, cannot himself commence at



nea

^^^ nc

of I
I subs



THE PEOPUNG OF THE FIELD. 67

once any separate self-directed activity.
He cannot gather round himself any
aggregations of matter a.s yet, but can
only abide in his atomic vesture. The life
of the Second Logos is to him as its
mother's womb to the embryo, and within
this the building begins. We may, in very
truth, regard this stage of evolution, in which
the Logos shapes, nourishes, and developes
the germinating life, as being, for the
Heavenly Man. or truly the Heavenly
Embryo, a period corresponding to the
-natal life of a human being, during
lich he is slowly obtaining a body, which
nourished meanwhile by the life-currents
of the mother and formed out of her
substance. Thus also with the Jiv&tmS,
losing the life uf the Monad ; he must
lit the building of his body on the
rer planes, and he cannot emerge from
this ante-natal life and be " born." until
there is a body builded on the lower
planes. The ■" birth " lakes place at the
formation of the causal body, when the
Heavenly Man is manifested as an infant
Ego, a true Individuality, dwelling in a
body on the physical plane. A tittle



68 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

careful thought will show how dose is
the analogy between the evolution of
the Pilgrim and that of each successive
rebirth ; in the latter case the Jivltrnft
awaits the formation of the physical body
which is building as his habitation ; in the
former the spiritual Triads* as a Collec-
tivity, await the building of the systemic
Quaternary. Until the vehicle on the
lowest plane is ready, all is a preparation
for evolution, rather than evolution itself
— it is often termed involution. The
evolution of the consciousness must
begin by contacts received by its outer-
most vehicle ; that is, it must begin on
the physical plane. It can only become
aware of an outside by impacts on its
own outside ; until then it dreams within
itself, as the faint inner thrillings ever
outwelling from the Monad cause slight
outward-tending pressures in the JiVcttmS,
like a spring of water beneath the earth,
seeking an outlet.

§ 2. The Weaving.

Meanwhile the preparation for the
awakening, the giving of qualities to



THB PeOI>tlHG OF THE FIELD. 69

that which may be likened to
formation of the tissues of the future
body, is done by the life-power of the
Second Logos — the second life -wave,
rolling through plane after plane, impart-
ing its own qualities to that seven-fold
proto-matter. The life-wave, as said
above, carries the Jivdtm&s with it as far
as the atomic sub-plane of the fifth
plane, the plane of Fire, of individualised
creative power, of mind. Here they each
have already an atom, the mSnasic, or
mental veil of the Monad, the Logos
Hooding these and the remaining atoms of
the plane with His life. All these atoms,
forming the whole atomic sub - plane,
whether free or attached to Jivatmis,
rightly be termed Monadic Essence :
as in the course of evolution, presently
be explained, differences arise between
the attached and the non-altachcd atoms,
the term Monadic Essence is usually
employed for the non - attached, while
the attached are called, for reasons which
wi ll appear. " permanent atoms." We
dc6ne Monadic Essence then as
matter ensouled by the life of the



larm
^whet



JO A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

Second Logos. It is His clothing for the
vivifying and holding together of forms;
He is clad in atomic matter. His own
life as Logos, separate from the life of
Atmd-Buddhi- Manas in the man, separate
from any lives on the plane — though He
supports, permeates, and includes them all
— is clothed only in atomic matter, and it
is this which is connoted by the term of
Monadic Essence. The matter of that
plane, already by the nature of its atoms'
capable of responding by vibrations to
active thought-changes, is thrown by the
second life-wave into combinations fit to
express thoughts — abstract thoughts in
the subtler matter, concrete thoughts in
the coarser. The combinations of the
second and third higher sub-planes
constitute the First Elemental Kingdom;
the combinations on the four lower sub-
planes constitute the Second Elemental
Kingdom. Matter held in such com-
binations is called Elemental Essence,
and is susceptible of being shaped into
thought- forms. The student must not
confuse this with Monadic Essence ; one

' By the Tanmitras, the divine Measures.



THE FBOPUNC OF THE FIELD.



7t



aiomic the other molecular, in con-
Lion.

ic Second life-wave then rolls on into
sixth plane, the plane of Water, of
individualised sensation, of desire. The
before- mentioned Devas link the Jivitni4-
ottached. or pennuneni. units of the fifth
plane to a corresponding number of atoms
on the sixth plane, and the Second
Lo^os Boods these and the remaining
atoms with His own life — these atoms
thus becoming Monadic Essence as
explained above. The life- wave passes
onwards, forming on each sub-plane the
combinations fit to express sensations.
These combinations constitute the i'hird
Elemenul Kingdom, and the matter held
in such combination is called Elemental
Essence, as before, and on this sixth
plane is susceptible uf being shaped into
desire-forms.

Elemental Essence is thus seen to
consist of aggregations of matter on each
iW the six non-atomic sub-piancs of the
mcoial and desire plaiies, aggregations
which do not themselves serve as form.s
lor any entity to inhabit, but as the



72



A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



materials out of which such forms may
be built.

The life- wave then rolls on into the
seventh plane, the plane of Earth, of indi-
vidualised activities, of actions. As
before the J ivatm^-attached, or permanent,
atoms of the sixth plane are linked to a
corresponding number on the seventh
plane, and the Second Logos floods these
and the remaining atoms with His own life
—all the.se atoms thus becoming Monadic
Essence. The life- wave again passes
onwards, forming on each sub-plane com-
binations fitted to constitute physical
bodies, the future chemical elements, as
they are called on the three lower sub-
planes.

Looking at this work of the second life
wave as a whole, we see that its down-
ward sweep is concerned with what may
fairly be called the making of primary
tissues, out of which hereafter subde and
dense bodies are to be formed. Well has
it been called in some ancient scriptures a
"weaving," for such it literally is. The
materials prepared by the Third Logos are
woven by the Second Logos into threads



THE PEOPLING OP THE FIELD.



73



and inio cloths of which future garments —
the subtle and dense bodies — will be
made. As a man may take separate
threads of flax, cotton, silk — themselves
combinations of a simpler kind — and
weave these into linens, into cotton or silk
doth, these cloths in turn to be shaped
into garments by cutting and stitching, so
does the second Logos weave the matter-
threads, weave these again into tissues,
and then .shape them into forms. He is the
Eternal Weaver, while we might think of
the Third Logos as the Eternal Chemist.
The latter works in nature as in a labora-
tory, the former as in a manufactory.
These similes, materialistic as they are,
are not to be despised, for they are
crutches to aid our limping attempts to
understand.

This " weaving " gives to matter its
characteristics, as the characteristics of the
thread differ from those of the raw material,
as the characteristics of the cloth differ
from those of the threads. The Logos
we aves the two kinds of cloth of mSnasic
■, of mind-stuff, and out of these will

I made later the causal and the mental



74 A STUDY IN C01ISCI0USlfES&

bodies. He weaves the doih of astral
matter, of desune-stuflf, and out of this will
be made later the desire body. That is to
say, that the combiiiadoiis of matter formed
and held together by the second life-wave
have the characteristics which will act on
the Monad when he comes into touch with
others, and will enable him to act <»i them.
So will he be able to receive all kinds
of vibrations, mental, sensory, etc The
characteristics depend on the nature of the
aggregations. There are seven great
types, fixed by the nature of the atom,
and within these innumerable sub-types.
All this goes to the making of the
materials of the mechanism of conscious-
ness, which will be conditioned by all
these textures, colourings, densities.

In this downward sweep of the life- wave
through the fifth, sixth, and seventh planes,
downward till the densest matter is
reached, and the wave turns at that point
to begin its sweep upwards, we must think,
then, of its work as that of forming combi-
nations which show qualities, and so we
sometimes speak of this work as the giving
of qualities. In the upward sweep we shall



THE PEOPLING OP T>IE FIELD. 75

lind that bodies arc built out of the matter
thus prepared. But before we study the
duping of these, we must consider the
leven-fold division of this hfe-wave in its
descent, and the coming forth of the
"Shining Ones." the " Devas," the
"Angels," the ■ Elementals." that belong
also to this downward sweep. These are
ibc " Minor Gods " t>f whom Plato speaks,
frnm whom man derives his perishable
bodies.


S3. The S>:ven ^TKt.\M.s.



question is constantly asked : Why
this continual play by Theostiphists upon
the number seven ? VVc speak of It as
the " root-number of our system," and
there is one obvious reason why this
number should play an active part in
the grouping of things, since wc arc
concerned with the iriplicilies previously
mentioned and explained. A triad

naturally produces a sepienate by its
own internal relations, since its three
fiactors can group themselves in seven
urays and no more. We have spoken of



76 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

matter, outside the limits of a universe,
as having the three qualities of matter —
inertia, mobility, and rhythm — in a state
of equilibrium. When the life of the
Logos causes motion, we have at once
the possibility of seven groups, for in
any given atom, or group of atoms,
one or other of these qualities may be
more strongly energised than the others,
and thus a predominant quality will be
shown forth. We may thus have three
groups, in one of which inertia will
predominate, in another mobility, in a
third rhythm. Each of these, again, sub-
divides, according to the predominance in
it of one or other of the remaining two
qualities : thus in one of the two inertia
groups, mobility may predominate over
rhythm, and in the other rhythm over
mobility, and so with the other two
groups of mobility and rhythm. Hence
arise the well-known types, classified
according to the predominant quality,
usually designated by their Sarpskrit
terms, sdtvic, rajasic, and tSmasic,
rhythmical, mobile, and inert, and
have s^tvic, rajasic, and tamasic



imasic I'ood^^^B



THE PEOPLING OF THE FIELD. ^^

animals, men, etc. And we obtain seven
groups in all : six subdivisions of the three,
and a seventh in which the three qualities
are equally active. [The varieties of type
are simply intended to mark in each
triad the relative energies of the qualities.]



Inkrtia. Mobility.

1


Rhythm.


1
Inehtia. Mobility, Rhythm.
Inertia. Mobility. Rhythm,


i

1

1

1


\
Mobility. Rhythm, Inertia.

Mobility. Rhythm. Inertia,


1



I
Rhythm. Inertia, Mobihty.

Rhythm. Inertia. Mobility.

The Life of the Logos, which is to
flow into this matter, itself manifests in
seven streams, or rays.

These ari.se similarly out of the three
Aspects of Consciousness present in Him,
as in all consciousnesse.s. since all are
manifestations of the Universal Self.
These are Bliss, or Ichchha, Will :
Cognition, or Jnanam, Wisdom; Exist-


78 A STUDY nr coMsaou8ires&

ence, or Kriyft, Activity. So we have At
seven streams, or ra.^ of- Logic fife :

Wtu. Wisdom. Acrnf i T V.

I



WiLi. JVisdMH. Activi^.
Will. Wiidoin. AetitHiy.



Wisdom. Activity. WU.
WiSDOH. Activity. Will.



AcriviTy. Will. Wisdom.
Activity, Will. Wisdom.

All things may be regarded as grouped
under these seven headings, the seven
streams of Logic life composing the
second life-wave, and we may think of it
as flowing through the planes, descending
through them ; so that, if we draw the
planes horizontally, the life-wave would
sweep vertically downwards through them.
Moreover in each stream there will be
seven primary sub-divisions, according to
the type of matter concerned, and within
these secondary sub-divisions, according
to the proportions of the qualities within
each type, and so on and on in



THE PEOPLING OF THE FIELD.



79



inoinncrablc variations. Into these we
need not enter. It is enough to notice
dtt seven types of matter and the seven
types of consciousnesses. The seven
streams of Logic life show out as the
seven types of consciousnesses, and
within each of these the seven types of
matter-combinations are found. There
are to be seen seven distinct types in each
of the three Elemental Kingdoms and on
the physical plane. Mnie. Biavatsky, in
Tkt Secret Doctrine, dealinfj with man.
quote-s from the stanzas of the Book of
Dsjfdn, the fact that there were : ■' Seven
of Them [Creators] each on His lot."
forming the seven types of men, and these
subdivided : " Seven times seven shadows
of future men were born."' Here is the
root of the differing temperaments of men.



^



i i. Thk :



1 Oke*.



We have now to consider another result

of the downward - sweeping Life -Wave.

have seen that it gives qualities to

- Im. tit, iL 18. 8i, 9S.



8o



A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



aggregHtions of matter on the fifth an?
sixth planes, and that we have in the
First Elemental Kingdom materials ready
to clothe abstract thoughts : in the Second
Elemental Kingdom materials rfeady to
clothe concrete thoughts ; in the Third
Elemental Kingdom materials ready to
clothe desires. But In addition to impart-
ing qualities to aggregations of matter, the
Second Logos gives forth, during this
stage of His descent, evolved beings, at
various stages of development, who fonn
the normal and typical inhabitants of these
three kingdoms. These beings have been
brought over by the Logos from a pre-
ceding evolution, and are sent forth from
the treasure-house of His life, to inhabit
the plane for which their development fits
them, and to coperate with Him. and later
with man, in the working-out of His
scheme of evolution. They have received
various names in the various religions,
but all religions recognise the fact of
their existence and of their work. The
Samskrit name Devas — the Shining Ones
— -is the most general, and aptly describes
the most marked characteristic



itic of thei^^J


THE PEOPUNG OF THE FIELD. 8l

ippearance, a brilliant luminous radiance.'
The Hebrew, Christian, and Muhammadan
fdigions call them Archangels and Angels.
The Theosophist — to avoid sectarian con-
notatiuns — names them, after their habitat.
Elemcntals ; and this title has the further
advantage that it reminds the student of
tb«r connection with the five ■' Elements "'
of the ancient world ; .•Either. Air. Fire.
Water, and Earth. For there are similar
beinjijrs of a higher type on the 4cmic and
buddhic planes, as well as the Fire and
Water Elemcntals of the mental and desire
plane&, and the ethereal Elemcntals of
the physical These beings have bodies
(ormed out of the elemental essence ol the
kingdom to which they belong. Hashing
many-hued bodies, chanj^ing form at the
will of the indwelling entity. They form a
vast host, ever actively at work, labouring
at the eletncntiU essence to improve its

* Tbc uuutaijon o( thia descriptive term as
"Ooda" hu led lu much miupprchuiuiun of Eaalcm
tbouiht The " ihiny-lhrec crorcs of Cods " are not
Godt in the Wotcm sense of the term, which is the
eqamknt of the Untverul Sklf, and secondarily of
tke Logo*, bm un Dcvu, Shining Ones.


82 A STUDY IM COMKMUSirasit

quality, taking it to fonn their oWA tedie^
throwing it off and taking other portions
of it, to render it more respon^ve; dusjr
are also constandy busied in the a^pitig
of forms, in aiding human Egos on' the
way to re-incamati(m in building dieirtiev
bodies, bringing materials a( die needed
kind and helping in its UTangemetttft
The less advwiced the Ego the gi«atei'
the directive work of the Dera; with
animals they do almost all the woric, and
practically all with vegetables and minerals.
They are the active agents in the work of
the Logos, carrying out all the details of
His world-plan, and aiding the countless
evolving lives to find the materials they
need for their clothing. All antiquity
recognised the indispensable work they do
in the worlds, and China, Egypt, India,
Persia. Greece, Rome, tell the same story.
The belief in the higher of them is not
only found in all religions, but memories
of those of the desire and of the ethereal
physical plane linger on in folklore, in
stories of " Nature -spirits," "Fairies."
"Gnomes," "Trolls," and under many other
names, memories of days when men were



THE PEOPLING

less deeply enwrapped in materia) interests.

ukI more jicnsitive to the influences thai

I pUyed upon them from [he subtler worlds.

This concentration on material interests.

necessary for evolution, has shut out the

working of the Elementals from human

waking consciousness : but this does not.

I of course, stop their working, though

» often rendering it less effective on the

physical plane.

At the stage we are considering, how-
ever, all this work, except that of the
■ intpravcnient of the elemental essence,
I lay in the far future, but the Shining Ones
llkboured diligently at that improvement.
There was thus a vast work of prepara-
accomplished before anything in the
Ivay of physical forms, such as we should
I'lecognise. could appciir : a vast labour at
Form side of things before embodied
iciousnesses. save that of the Logos
Old His Shining Ones, could do any-
l^ai all. That which was to be human
ciousncss at this point was a seed,
own on the higher planes, unconscious
of all without it. l-nder the impelling
warmth of the Logic life, it sends out a



84 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

tiny rootlet downwards, which pushes its
way into the lower planes, blindly, uncon-
sciously, and this rootlet must form our
next object of study.



Chapter IV.

THE PERMANENT ATOM.

§ I. The Attaching of thk Atoms.

Let us consider the spiritual Triad, the
tri - atomic Atm& - Buddhi - Manas, the
jivStma, the seed of consciousness,
within which the warmth of the stream
of Logic life, which surrounds it, is
causing faint thrillings of responsive life.
These are internal thrillings, preparatory
to external activities. After long prepara-
tion, a tinv thread, like a minute rootlet.
ap})ears, proceeding from the tri-atomic
molecule cnsheathing consciousness, a
golden-coloured thread of life sheathed
in buddhic matter ; countless such threads
appear from the countless JivAtm&s.
waving vaguely at first in the seven
great streams of life, and then becoming
anchored — if the expression may be

»5



86

pennitted — by attachment to a single
mcdecule or unit, on the fourth mental
5ub-[dane. This anchoring — like the
previous one to the three higher atoms,
and like the later ones to the astral and
physical atoms — is brought about by the
action of the Shining Ones. Round this
attached unit gather temporary aggrega-
tions of elemental essence of the Second
Kingdom, scattering and regathering, over
and over ^;aJn, ever with die attached
unit as centre. This stable centre, serving
for an endless succession of changing
complex forms, is gradually awakened by
the vibrations of these forms into faint
responses, these again thrilling feebly
upwards to the seed of Consciousness,
and producing therein vaguest internal
movements. It cannot be said that each
centre has always round it a form of its
own ; for one aggregation of elemental
essence may have several, or very many,
of these centres within it, or, again, may
have only one, or none. Thus, with
inconceivable slowness, these attached
units become possessors of certain quali-
ties ; that is, acquire the power of



THE PERMANENT ATOM.



87



«ing in



certain ways,



which .



ng and will hereafter
make thoughts possible. The Shining
Ones of the Second Elemental Kingdom
work upon them also, directing upon them
the vibrations to which they gradually
begin to respond, and surrounding them
with the elemental essence thrown oft"
from their own bodies.' Moreover, each
of ihe seven typical groups is separated
firom the others by a deUcate wall of
monadic essence (atomic matter ensouled
by the life of the Second Logos), the
beginning of the wall of the future
Group- Soul

This whole process is repeated, when
the Third Elemental Kingdom has been
fanned. The tiny thread of buddhic
ensheathed life, with its attached mental
unit, now pushes outwards 10 the desire-
plane, and attaches itself to a single astral
atom, adding this to itself, as its stable
centre on the desire-plane. Round this
now gather temporary aggregations of
elemental essence of the Third Kingdom,
scanering and regathering as before.

' Sec Ev^tion </ Lt/it and Form. Pp. \\t, 133.



65 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

Similar results follow, as the countless ■
succession of forms ensheathes this stable
centre, awaking it to similarly faint
responses, which in their turn thrill feebly
upwards to the seed of consciousness,
producing therein, once more, vaguest
internal movements. Thus, again, these
attached atoms become slowly possessed
of certain qualities ; that is, acquire the
power of vibrating in certain ways, which
are connected with sensation, and will
hereafter make sensations possible. Here
also the Shining Ones of the Third
Elemental Kingdom co-operate in the
work, using their more highly developed
powers of vibration to produce sympa-
thetically in these undeveloped atoms the
power of response, and, as before, giving
them of their own substance. The
separating wall of each of the seven
groups acquires a second layer, formed
of the monadic essence of the desire-plane,
thus approaching a stage nearer to the
wall of the future Group-Soul.

Once more is the process repeated, when
the great wave has travelled onwards into
the physical plane. The tiny thread of



i



THE PERMANENT ATOM. 89

buddhic-ensheathed life, with its attached
menuJ and desire units, pushes outwards
Qoce more, and annexes a physical atom.
adding this to itself as its stable centre on
the physical plane. Round this (gather
ethereal molecules, but the heavier physical
matter is more coherent than the subtler
maner of the higher planes, and a much
longer term of life may be observed. Then
— as are formed the ethereal types of the
proto-metals, and later proto-mctaLs. metals.
oon-metallic elements, and minerals — the
Shinin}; Ones of the Ethereal Physical
Kingdom submerge these attached atoms
in their iiheaths of ether into the one of
ibe seven ethereal types to which they
R^wctively belong, and they begin their
long physical evolution. Before we can
loUow this further we must consider
Croup-Souls, which on the atomic sub-
plane receive their third enveloping layer.
But it wilt be well to pause for a while on
the nature and the function of these
permanent atoms, the tri-units. or triads,
which are as a reHexion on the lower
pboes of the spiritual Triads on the
Uglier, and each of which U atuched to


A fpuiniai Xmd, its JftAunt. Emsi ttnd
ooostits oi a phyiKU atm^ sn sMrd ■Mni,
and a nmtal unit; pennmenof aliacliBd
by a thread of buddbic matter to a ifiMtnal
Triad. That duead has —iwiiiii** been
called the SfttrfttoiA, the Thread-StilC
because the pennaiieiit yaiikiei -tltt
direaded on it a* "beads on a striiig-.^
We m^ ^am nsort to a ^St^Hm,
sbomng the relation.



S



' This term is used to denote various things, but
always in the same sense, as the thread connecting
separate particles. It is applied to the re-incarnating
Ego, as the thread on which many separate lives are
strung ; to the Second Logos, as the Thread on which
the bangs in His universe are strung ; and so on. It
denotes a function, rather than a spedal enti^, or
class or entities,



THB rBKHAHENT ATOM.



§1. The Web of Life,.

It has been said that the connexion
wkh the spiritual Triad is through buddhic
muter, and this is indicated in the diagram
by the dotted line which connects the
alDms coming down from the line in the
buddhic plane, and nut from the manasic
atom. It is of buddhic matter that is spun
the marvellous web of life which supports
and vivifies all our bodies. If the bodies
be looked at with buddhic vision, they all
disappear, and in their places is seen a
shimmering golden web of inconceivable
fineness and delicate beauty, a tracery of
aU their parts, in a network with minute
mesbes. This is formed of buddhic matter.
and within these meshes the coarser atoms
arc built together. Closer inspection shows
that the whole network is formed of a
tingle thread, which is a prolongation of
the Suir^tmi. During the antenatal life
of the babe, this thread grows out from the
permanent physical atom and branches out
in every direction, this growth continuing
until the physical body is full grown ;
durit^ physical life the pr&pa, the life-


A STUDV TN CONSCIOUSNESS.



breath, plays ever along it, following all its
branches and meshes ; at death it is with-
drawn, leaving the particles of the body to
scatter ; it may be watched, slowly dis-
entangling itself from the dense physical
matter, the life- breath accompanying it,
and drawing itself together in the heart
round the permanent atom ; as it with-
draws, the deserted limbs grow cold — its
absence makes the "'death-chill"; the
golden- violet flame of the Ijfe-breaih is
seen shining around it in the heart, and
the flame, and the golden life-web, and the
permanent atom rise along the secondary
Sushumna-nadi' to the head, into the third
ventricle of the brain ; the eyes glaze, as
the life-web draws itself away, and the
whole of it is collected round the per-
manent atom in the third ventricle : then
the whole rises slowly to the point of
junction of the parietal and occipital
sutures, and leaves the physical body —

' There is no English name for this pass^e ; it is
a vessel, or canal, rur»ning from the heart to the third
ventricle, and will be familiar under the above name
to all students of yoga. The primary Sushumij* is
the spinal canal.



THE PERMANENT ATOM.

dead, ll thus surrounds the permanent
atom like a golden shell — recalling the
closely woven cocoon of the silk-worm— to
remain enshrouding it till the building of
a new physical body again demands its
unfolding. The same procedure is followed
with the astral and mental jKirticles. so
that, when these bodies have disintegrated,
the lower triad may be seen as a brilliantly
scintillating nucleus within the causal body,
an appearance which had been noted, long
closer observation revealed its signifi-



^^JTB cl<

w

I ti T



I



Ij. Th» Choosing or the Permanent Atoms.

Let us return to the original appropria-
tion by the Monad of the permanent
atoms of the three higher planes, and seek
ID understand someihinjj of their use, of
the object of their appropriation ; the
same principles apply to the permanent
atoms of each plane.

In the first place, it will be remembered
that the matter of each plane shows out
seven main types, varying according to
the dominance of one or other of the



i



94



> STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



three great attributes of matter: inertia,
mobility, and rhythm. Hence the perma-
nent atoms may be chosen out of any one
of these types, but it appears that, by a
single Monad, they are all chosen out of
the same type. It appears, further, that
while the actual attachment of the perma-
nent atoms to the life-thread on the
three higher planes is the work of the
Hierarchies before spoken of, the choice
which directs the appropriation is made by
the Monad himself. He himself belongs
to one or other of the seven groups of
Life already spoken of; at the head of
each of these groups stands a Planetary
Logos, who "colours" the whole, and the
Monads are grouped by these colourings,
each " being coloured by his ' Father-
Star.' "' This is the first great deter-
mining characteristic of each of us, our
fundamental "colour," or " key-note," or
"temperament." The Monad may choose
to use his new pilgrimage for the strength-
ening and increasing of this special
characteristic ; if so, the Hierarchies will
attach to his life-thread atoms belonging
■ Sec The Pedigrte of Man. P. 14.



I Willi

m



THE PERMANENT ATOM. 95

to the group in matter corresponding to
his life-group. This choice would result
in the secondary "coiour," or "key-
note," or " temperament." emphasising
and strengthen in;f the first, and. in the
later evolution, the powers and ihti weak-
nesses of that doubled temperament would
show themselves with great force. Or.
the Monad may choose to use his new
pilgrimage for the unfolding of another
aspect of his nature ; then the Hierarchies
will attach to his life-thread atoms belong-
to the material group corresponding
another life-group, that in which the
ret he wills to develop is predominant.
This choice would result in the secondar)'
■' colour," or " key-note," or " tempera-
ment," modifying the first, with corre-
sponding results in the later evolution.
This latter choice is obviously by far the
more frequent, and it tends to a greater
complexity of character, especially in the
final stages of human evolution, when the
influence of the Monad makes itself felt
more st;-ongty.

As said above, it appears that all the
permanent atoms are taken from the same


96 A STUDY IN

material group, so that those of die kiwer
triad correspond wtdi those of die h^rfaer ;
but on the loirar planes the influence of
these atoms in detennining the type of
materials used in the bodies of wludi diey
are the generating centres — the question
to which we must now turn our attentkm
— is very much limited and inte rfe red with
by other causes. On the hij^ier (Janes
the bodies are relatively permanent, yrben
once found, and reproduce definitely the
keynote of their permanent atoms, how-
ever enriched that note may be by
overtones, ever increasing in subtlety of
harmony. But on the lower planes, while
the keynote of the permanent atoms will
be the same, various other causes come
in to determine the choice of materials
for the bodies, as will be better seen
presently.



§4. The Use of the Permanent Atoms.

To put this use into a phrase : The use
of the permanent atoms is to preserve
within themselves, as vibratory powers,
the results of all the experiences through



i



THE PERMANENT ATOH. 97

which they have [>assed. It will f>erhaps
be hcst to take the physical atom as an
illustration, since this is susceptible of
caster cxplanaiion than those on higher
planes.

A physical impact of any kind will
cause vtlirations corresponding to its own
in (he physical body it contacts ; these
may be local or general, according to the
nature and force of the impact. But
whether local or general, they will reach
the pennaneni physical atom, transmitted
by the web of life in all cases, and in
violent impacts by mere concussion also.
This vibration, forced on the atom from
outside, becomes a vibrator)' power in the
atom — a tendency therein to repeat the
vibration. Through the whole life of the
body, innumerable impacts strike it ; not
one bui leaves its mark, on the permanent
atom ; not one but leaves it with a new
possibility of vibration. All the results
of physical experiences remain stored up
in this permanent atom, as powers of
vibrating. At the end of a physical life.
this permanent atom has thus stored up
innumerable vibratory powers ; that is, has


A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



98

learned to respond in countless ways to
the external world, to reproduce in itself
the vibrations imposed upon it by
rounding objects. The physical bi
disintegrates at death ; its particles scattt
all carrying with them the result of
experiences through which they have
passed — as indeed all particles of our
bodies are ever doing day by day. in
their ceaseless dyings out of one body and
ceaseless birthings into another. But the
physical permanent atom remains ; it is
the only atom thiit has passed through
all the experiences of the ever-changing
conglomerations we call our body, and it
has acquired all the results of all thoj
experiences. Wrapped in its goli
cocoon, it sleeps through the long y
during which the JivatmS that own:
living through other experiences in other
worlds. By these it remains unaffected,
being incapable of responding to th(
and it sleeps through its long night
undisturbed repose.

When the time for reincarnation comi

' H. P. BUvatsky throws out a hint as (o thd
"sleeping atoms." See T/u Secitt Dottriite. ii, ■



tself I

sui^^^

>od^^H
tte^^H
th^^



id It
hos^^^J



THE PERMANENT ATOM.



the



presence



of the



fenders possible the ferti
from which the



permanent atom
lisaiion of the



body



ovum

grow," its keynote sounds out, and is one
of the forces which guide the ethereal
builder, the elemental charged with the
building of the physical body, to choose
the materials suitable for his work, for he
can use none that cannot be to some
extent attuned to the permanent atom.
But it is only one of the forces ; the karma
of past lives, mental, emotional, and in
relation to others, demands materials
capable of the most varied expressions ;
out of that karma, the Lords of Karma
have chosen such as is congruous, i.e., such
as can be expressed through a body of a
particular material group : this congruous
mass of kanna determines the material
group, over-riding the permanent atom.
and out of that group are chosen by the
elemental such materials as can vibrate in



' H. P. Blavatsky calls the petmaneni nucleus of
the Iowa »J planes "the life-atoms;" she says; "The
lifc-aiomx of oui (pr^pa) life-principle arc never
entirely lost when a man dies ;" they are " transmitted
from bthn to son." TTfc Stcnrt Doctrine. \>. 709,


^_ lllct



A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

harmony with the permanent atom, or in
discords not disruptive in their violence.
Hence, as said, the permanent atom is
only one of the forces in determining the
third "colour," or "keynote," or "tem-
perament." which characterises each of us.
According to this temperament will be the
lime of the birth of the body ; it tnust be
born into the world at a time when the
physical planetary influences are suitable
to its third temperament, and it thus is
born " under lis " astrological " Star."
Needless to say. it is not the Star that
imposes the temperament, but the tempera-
ment that fixes the epoch of birth under
that Star. But herein lies the explanation
of the correspondences between Stars-
Star- Angels, that is to say — ^and characters.
and the usefulness for educational purposes
of a skilfully and carefully drawn horoscope,
as a guide to the personal temperament of
a child.

That such complicated results, capable
of impressing their peculiarities on sur-
rounding matter, can exist in such minute
space as an atom may. indeed, appear
inconceivable — yet so it is. And it



THE PERMANENT ATOM.



ithy notice that ordinary science
■"countenances a similar idea, since the
infinilesima! biophors in the germinal cell
of Weismann are supposed to thus carry
on to tht offspring the characteristics of
his Unc of progenitors. While the one
brings to the body its physical peculiarities
from its ancestors, the other supplies those
which have been acquired by the evolving
man during his own evolution. H. P.
Blavatsky has put this very clearly :

■' The German embryologist-philosopher
--stepping over the heads of the Greek
Hippocrates and Aristotle, right back into
the teachings of the old Aryans — shows
one infinitesimal cell, out of millions of
others at work in the formation of an
organism, alone and unaided determining,
by means of constant segmentation and
multiplication, the correct image of the
future man, or animal, in its physical,
mental, and psychic characteristics.
Complete the physical plasm, mentioned
above, the 'germinal cell' of man with
all its material potentialities, with the
' spiritual plasm ' so Co say, or the fluid
that contains the 6ve lower principles of



!02 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

the six-principled Dhyani — and you have
the secret, if you are spiritual enough to
understand it."'

A little study of physical heredity in the
light of Weismann's teachings will be
sufficient to convince the student of the
possibilities of such a body as the per-
manent atom. A man reproduces the
features of a long-past ancestor, shows out
a physical peculiarity that characterised a
forbear several centuries ago. We can
trace the Stuart nose through a long series
of portraits, and innumerable cases of such
resemblances can be found. Why then
should there be anything extraordinary in
the idea that an atom should gather within
itself not biophors. as in the germinal
cell, but tendencies to repeat innumerable
vibrations already practised. No spatial
difficulty arises, any more than in the case
of a string, from which numerous notes
can be drawn by bowing it at different
points, each note containing numerous
overtones. We must not think of the
minute space of an atom as crowded with
innumerable vibrating bodies, but of a
' Tke Secret Doctrine. \



^^^J



THE PERMANENT ATOM. IO3

Itmiied number of bodies, each capable of
setting up innumenible vibrations.

Truly, however, even the spatial diffi-
culty is illusory, for there are no limits to
ihc minute any more than to llie j«reat.
Modern science now sets in the atom a
system of revolving worlds, each world in
iu own orbit, the whole resembling a solar
system. The master of illusion. Space.
like his brother master. Time, cannot here
daunt us. There is no limit of the possi-
bilities of sub-division in thou^^ht, and
hence none in the thought-expression we
call matter.

The normal number of spirilla at work
in the permanent atoms in this Round is
(our. as in the ordinary unattached atoms
of matter in i»eneral at this stage of
evolution. Hut let us take the permanent
atom in the body of a very highly evolved
man. a man far in advance of his fellows.
In such a case we may lind the permanent
atom showing five spirillie at work, and
may seek to learn the bearing of this
fact on the general materials of his body.
In ante-natal life, the presence of this
five •spirilla - permanent - atom would have



104 A STLIDV IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

caused the building elemental to select
among his materials any simitar atoms
that were available. For the most part.
he would be reduced to the use of any
he could find, which had been in tempo-
rary connexion with any body the centre
of which was a five-spirills-permanent-
atom. Its presence would have tended to
arouse in them a corresponding activity,
especially — perhaps only — if they had
formed part of the brain or nerves of the
highly developed tenant of the body. The
fifth spirilla would have become more or
less active in them, and although it would
have dropped back into inactivity after
leaving such a body, its temporary activity
would have predisposed it to respond more
readily in the future to the current of
monadic life. Such atoms, then, would be
secured by the elemental for his work, as
far as possible. He would also, should
opportunity serve, appropriate from the
paternal or maternal bodies, if they were
of a high order, any such atoms as he
could secure, and build them into his
charge. After birth, and throughout life,
such a body would attract to itself any



UnTMANENf ATdli.

■ atoms which came within its mag-
netic field. Such a body, in the company
of hij»hly evolved persons, would profit
lo an exceptional degree by the pro-
pinquity, appropriating any five-spirillae-
atonvs which were present in the shower
of partides Hung off from their bodies.
and thus gaining physically, as well as
menially and morally, from their company.
The ijermanenl astral atom bears exactl)
ihc *amt; relation to the astra! body as that
borne by the physical permanent atom to
the physical body. At the end of the life
in k^matoka- purgatory— the golden life-
fcithdraws from the astral body.
ar!ng it to disintegrate, as its physical
nrade had previously done, and enwraps
Ac astral permanent atom for its long
sleep. A similar relation is borne to the
nta] body by the permanent mental
rticic during physical, astral, and mental
during ihe early stages of human
IVolution little improvement is made in
the menial permanent unit by the brief
devachonic lives, not only on account of
their brevity, but because the feeble
thoi^ht - forms produced by the un-



io6



A STUDY IK CONSCIOUSNESS.



developed intelligence affect very slightly
the permanent unit. But when thought-
power is more highly evolved, the
devachanic life is a time of great improve-
mt-'iu, and innumerable vibratory energies
are stored up. and show their value when
the time arrives for the building of a new
mental body for the next cycle of re-incar-
nation. At the close of the mental life in
devachan, the golden web withdraws from
the mental body, leaving it also to dis-
integrate, while it enwraps the mental
particle ; and the lower triad of permanent
atoms alone remains as the representative
of the three lower bodies. These are
stored up, as before said, as a radiant
nucleus-like particle within the causal
body. They are thus all that remains
to the Ego of his bodies in the lower
worlds, when thai cycle of experience is
completed, as they were his means of
communication with the lower planes
during the life of those bodies.

When comes the period for re-birth,
a thrill of life from the Ego arouses the
mental unit; the life-web begins to unfold
again, and the vibrating unit acts as a



THE PBRUANENT ATOM.



107



•t, drawing towards itself materials

vibratory powers resembling, or

accordant with, its own. The Shining

Ones of the Second Elemental Kingdom

bnng such materials within its reach ; in

the earlier stages of evolution they shape

the matter into a loose cloud around the

permanent unit, but as evolution goes on

the Ego exercises over the shaping an

ever - increasing influence. When the

mental body is partially formed, the life-

l^^^pl awakens the astral atom, and the

^^^be procedure is followed. Finally the

^^^HtDuch reaches the physical atom, and

^T^Wts in the way already described on

pp. 98-ioa

A questioner sometimes asks : How can
these permanent atoms be stored up
within the causal body, without losing
their physical, astral, and mental natures,
ancc the causal body e-KJsts on a higher
fjanc, where the physical, as physical,
cannot be ? Such a querent is forgetting,
tor a moment, that all the planes are inter-
penetrating, and that it is no more difficult
I for the causal body to encircle the triad of
the lower planes, than for it to encircle the



io8



STUDY IN CONSCIOt'SNESS.



hundreds of millions of atoms that form
the mental, astral, and physical bodies
belonging to it during a period of earlh-
life. The triad forms a minute particle
within the causal body ; each constituent
part of it belongs to its own plane, but, as
the planes have meeting points every-
where, no difficulty arises in the necessary'
juxtaposition. We are all on all planes at
all times.



;. Monadic Action on

Ato.ms.


We may here enquire : Is there any-
thing that can be properly termed monadic
action — the action of the Monad on
the anupddaka plane — on the permanent
atom. Of direct action there is none, nor
can there be until the germinal spiritual
Triad has reached a high stage of evolu-
tion ; indirect action, that is action on the
spiritual Triad, which in turn acts on the
lower, there is continually. But for all
practical purposes we may consider it as
the action of the spiritual Triad, which,
as we have seen, is the Monad veiled J



THE PERMANENT ATOM. IO9

denser than that of his native



' bathe
1 cvolu



ic spiritual Triad is drawing most of

_ enct^'. and all the directive capacity

of that energy, from the Second Logos,

bathed as he is in tliat stream of Life.

may be called his 'ivn special

ity does nut cuncern Itselt with all

shaping and building activity of the

md Life-Wave, but is directed to the

evolution of the atom itself, in association

with the Third Logos. This energy from

the spiritual Triad confines itself to the

atomic sub-planes, and, until the fourth

I, appears to spend itself chiefly on

permanent atoms. It is directed first

the shaping and then to the vivifying

ibe spirilla: which form the wall of the

The vortex, which is the atom, is

life of the Third Logos , but the wall

the spirilla: is gradually formed on the

l1 surface of this vortex during the

:ni of the Second Logus. not vivified

by Him, but faintly traced uut over the

surface of this revolving voriex of life.

They remain — so far as the Second

Logos is concerned — merely as these



NO A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

filmy unused channels, but presently, as
the life of the Monad flows down, it
plays into the first of these channels,
vivifying that channel and turning it into
a working fiart of the atom. This goes
on through the successive Rounds, and
by the time we reach the fourth Round
we have four distinct streams of life from
each Monad, circulating through four sets
of spirilla in his own permanent atoms.
Now as the Monad works in the per-
manent atom, and it is put forward as
the nucleus of a body, he begins to work
similarly in the atoms that are drawn
round that permanent atom, and vivifies
in turn their spirilla ; but thai is tem-
porary vivification, and not continuous
as in the case of the permanent atom.
He thus brings into activity these faint
shadowy films, formed by the Second
Life- Wave, and. when the life of the
body is broken up, the atoms thus stimu-
lated return to the great mass o) atomic
matter, improved and worked upon by
the life which, during their connexion
with the permanent atom, has been vivi-
fying them. The channels, being thus


THB ITRMANENT ATOM.

developed, are more capable of easily
receiving another such life-slream, as they
enter another body, .md therein come into
relation with a permanent atom belonging
lo some other Monad. Thus this work
continually goes on. on the physical and
astral planes, and in the particle of mental
mailer on the mental plane, improving
the materials with which the Monads are
permanently or temjxirarily connected.
and this evolution of atoms is constantly
going on under the influence of the
Monads. The permanent atoms evolve
more rapidly, because of their continuit)'
of connexion with the Monad, while the
others profit by their repeated temporary
association with the permanent atoms.

During the first Round of the terrene
Chain, the first set of spirillie of the
physical plane atoms becomes thus vivified
by the life of the Monad flowing through
the itpiritual Triad. This is the set of
spirilla; used by the prAijic. or life-
breath, currents affecting the dense part
of the physical body. Similarly in
the second Round the second set of
spirillae becomes active, and herein play



I



112 A STtlDV IN COMSCIOUSNESS.

the prAnic currents connected with the
etheric double. During these two Rounds
nothini; can be found, in connexion with
any form, that can be called sensations
of pleasure and pain. During the third
Round, the third set of spirilla: becomes
vivified, and here first appears what
is called sensibility ; for, through these
spirillae, kamic or desire energy can
affect the physical body, the kSniic pr^na
can play in them, and thus bring the
physical into direct communication with
the astral. During the fourth Round, the
fourth set of spirillae becomes vivified, and
the kSma-mSnasic prSna plays in them,
and makes them fit to be used for the
building of a brain which is to act as
the instrument for thought.

When a person passes out of the
normal, and takes up the abnormal
human evolution involved in preparing
for and entering the Path which lies
beyond normal evolution, he has then, in
connexion with his permanent atoms, a
task of exceeding difficulty. He must
vivify more sets of spirillae than are
vivified in the humanity of his time.



THE PERNfANENT ATOM. II3

Four sets are already at his service, as
a fourth Round man. He begins to
vivify a fifth, and thus to bring into
manifestation the fifth Round atom while
still working in a fourth Round body.
It is to this that allusion is made in
some early theosophical books, in which
'• Fifth Rounders " and ** Sixth Rounders *'
arc spoken of as appearing in our
present humanity. Those thus designated
have evolved the fifth and sixth set of
spirilke in their permanent atoms, thus
obtaining a better instrument for the use
of their highly developed consciousness.
The change is brought about by certain
yoga practices in the use of which great
caution is required, lest injury should be
inflicted on the brain in which this work
is being carried on, and further progress
along that particular line stopped during
the present incarnation.



N



Chapter V.



GROUP-SOULS.



The Meaning i



Speaking generally, a Group- Soul is
collection of permanent triads, in a triple
envelope of monadic essence. This
description is true of all Group-Souls
functioning on the physical plane, but
gives no idea of the extreme complexity
of the subject of Group-Souls. For they
divide and sub-divide constantly, the
contents of each division and sub-division
decreasing in number, as evolution goes
on, until at last a " Group-Soul " encloses
but a single triad, to which it may
continue for many birth? to discharge
the protective and nutrient functions of
a Group-Soul, while no longer technically
describable as one, the "Group" having
separated ofif into its constituent parts.



CROUP- SOULS.



"5



^ Seven Group-Souls are to be seen,
unctioning on the ph\*sical plane, before
any forms apjiear. They first show them-



selves as V



ague.



lilmv forms, one in each



.•itrcam of the Second Life-Wave, on the
mental plane, becoming more clearly out-

|ilio«<l on the astral plane, and yet more so

I the physical. They float in the great

»an of matter as balloons might Hoal in

the sea. Observing them more closely,

we see three separate layers of matter,

, forming an envelope, which contains innu-
■able triads. Before any inmlneralisa-
I has taken place, no golden life-wcb is,
of course, visible around these ; only the
radiant golden threads which connect them
with their parent JivltiriAs are to be seen,
shining with that strange lustre which
belongs to their birth-plane. The inner-
most of these three layers consists of
physical monadic e-sscnce ; that is, the
layer is composed of atoms of the physical
plane, ensouled with the life of the Second
Logos. At first sight, these innermost
layers appear to be identical in the seven
Group -Souls ; but closer observation
reveals that each layer is formed of atoms



Il6 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

from only one of the seven Matter-groups
before described. Each Group - Soul.
therefore, differs in material constitution
from all the rest, and the contained triads
in each belong to the same matter-group.
The secund layer ot the Group - Soul
envelope is composed of astral monadic
essence, belonging to the same matter-
group as the first ; and the third of units
of the fourth sub-plane of mental matter of
the same type. This triple envelope is
the protector and nourisher ol tht; triads
contained within it, veritable embryos,
incapable, as yel, of separate independent
activity.

The seven Group-Souls soon multiply,
division going on continually with the
multiplication of distinct sub -types, as
the immediate forerunners of the chemical
elements appear, to be followed by the
elements themselves, and the minerals
formed from them. The laws of space,
for instance— apart from the specialisation
of the contents of the Group-Soul, the
permanent triads — may lead to a division
of it.

Thus a vein of gold in Australia may



to ihe inmineralisation of many such
triads within a singlt; envelope, while the
laying down of another vein in a distant
plact'. say the Rocky Mountains, may
id to the division of this envelope.
ihe transfer of part of its contents
America in iheir own envelope. But
the more important causes which bring
aixjut sub-divisions will be explained in
the course of our study. The Group-
Soul and its contents divide by lisston.
like an ordinary cell — one becomes two.
four, and so on. All the triads have
pass through the mineral kingdom,
place in which matter reaches its
form, and the place where the
,t wave reaches the limit of its descent,
id turns to begin its upward climbing.
lere it is thai physical consciousness must
raken ; life must now turn definitely
.wards, and recognise contacts with
icr lives in an external world.
Now the evolution of each beinj; in
these early stages depends chiefly on the
cherishing life of the Logos, and partly
the co-operating guidance of the
lining Ones, and partly on its own


Il8 A STUDY IN COKSCIOUSNESS.

blind pressure against the limits of its
enclosing form. I have compared the
evolution through the mineral, vegetable,
and animal kingdoms to an ante-natai
period, and the resemblance is exact.
As the child is nourished by the life-
si reams of the mother, so does the
protective envelope of the Group-Soul
nourish the lives within it. receiving and
distributing the experiences gathered
The circulating life is the life of the
parent ; the young plants, the young
animals, the young human beings, are
not ready for independent life as yet,
but must draw nourishment from the
parent. And so these germinating lives
in the mineral kingdom are nourished by
the Group- Souls, by the envelo5>es of
monadic essence, thrilling with Logic life.
A very fair picture of this stage may be
seen in the carpel of a plant, in which the
ovules gradually appear, becoming more
and more independent.

For the sake of a clear conception, we
may glance rapidly forward over the
changes through which the Group-Soul
passes, as its contents evolve, before going



GROUP-SOULS. 1 19

into details. During the mineral evolution,
the habitat of the Group-Soul may be said
to be that of its densest envelope, the
physical ; its most active working is on the
physical plane. As its contents pass on-
wards into the vegetable kingdom, and
ascend through it, the physical envelope
slowly disappears — as though absorbed by
the contents for the strengthening of their
own ctheric bodies — and its activity is
transferred to the astral plane, to the
nourishing of the astral bodies of the
contained triads. As these develop yet
further and pass into the animal kingdom.
the a.'itral envelope is similarly absorbed.
and the activity of the Group-Soul is
mnsferred to the mental plane, and it
Tshes the inchoate mental bodies and
s them gradually into less vagueness
Outline. When the Group-Soul contains
but a single triad, and has nourished this
into readiness for the reception of the third
GOtpouring, what is left of it disintegrates
into matter of the third sub-plane, and
becomes a constituent part of the causal
body formed by the downpouring from
above meeting the upward-drawn column



and tt
I pa nsfe

K

^^Woutl



I20 A !^TUnV IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

from below — to use the graphic water-
spout simile. Then is the re-incarnating
Ego born into independent manifestations
the guarded ante-nata! life is over.



§2. Thf Division oi the Group-Soui..

It is on the physical plane that con^
sciousness must first evolve into Self-
consciousness, must become aware of an
externa! world that makes impacts upon
it, and must learn to refer those impacts
to an external world, and to realise as
its own the changes which it undergoes
in consequence of those impacts. By
prolonged experiences it will learn to
identify with itself the feeling of pleasure
or pain that follows the impact, and to
regard as not itself that which touches
its external surface. It will thus make
its first rough distinction of " Not-I "
and " I." As experience increases, the
■' 1 " will retreat ever inwards, and one
veil of matter after another will be
relegated outwards as belonging to the
" Not-I " ; but while its connotations
change. this fundamental distinctiqi


GROUP-SOtTLS. 12!

between subject and object will ever
remain. " I " is the willing, thinking,
acting consciousness ; while the " Not-I "
is all as to which it wills, about which it
thinks, and on which it acts. We shall
have to consider later the way in which
consciousness becomes Self - conscious-
Dcss, hut at present we are concerned
only with its expression in forms, and
the pan played by the forms.

This consciousness awakens on the

tysica! plane, and its expression is the
lancnt atom. In this it lies sleeping:

It sleeps in the mineral ; " and therein
awakening into lighter slumber must
take place, so that it may be roused out
of this deep dreamless sleep, and become
sufficiently active to pas.s on into the next
stage : '• It dreams in the vegetable."

Now the Second Logos, acting in the
envelope of the Group-Souls, energises
the permanent physical atoms and, by the
mediation of the Shini ng Ones, as we
have seen, plunges them into the various
conditions olTered by the mineral kingdom.
where each attaches to itself many mineral
panicles. At once here we sec a large



I n



122 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

variety of possible impacts. leading to a
variety of experiences, and so presently to
lines of cleavage in a Group-Soui. Some
will be whirled high in air, to fall in
torrents of burning lava ; some will be
exposed to arctic cold, others to tropic
heat ; some will be crushed and sheathed
in molten metal in the bowels of the earth ;
some will be in the sand tossed roughly by
rushing billows. Infinite variety of external
impacts will shake ^ind strike and burn and
freeze, and in vague answers of sympa-
thetic vibrations will the deep-slumbering
consciousness respond. When any per-
manent atom has reached a certain
responsiveness, or when a mineral form,
/,(•., the particles to which a permanent
atom has attached itself, is broken up, the
Group-Soul draws that atom from Its
encasement. All the experiences acquired
by that atom — and that means the
vibrations it has been forced to execute-
remain as powers of vibrating in particular
ways, or as "vibratory powers." That is
the outcome of its life in a form. The
permanent atom, losing its embodiment
and remaining for a while naked, as



CROOP-SOULS. 123

tre, in its Group-Soul, and continuing to
"repeat these vibrations, to go over within
tt5cir its tifc-expericnces, sets up pulses
»hich run through the envelope of the
jfoup-Soul and are thus conveyed to
lier permanent atoms ; thus each affects
ind helps all the others while remaining
elf. The permanent atoms which have
i experiences similar in character will be
more strongly affected by each other than
Drill be those whose experiences have been
different, and thus there will be a
ain segregation going on within the
Broup-Soul, and presently a filmy
larating wall will grow inwards from
: envelope, and divide these segregated
"oups from each other ; and so there will
an ever-increasing number of Group-
luU with conienls showing an ever-
increasing distinction of consciousness.
while sharing fundamental characteristics.
Now the responses of consciousness to
\ exicmal stimuli in ihe minerfil kingdom
far greater than many quite realise,
some III them art of a nature which
It thxit there is a dawning of cunscious-
atso in the astral permanent atom.



r24 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS,

For chemical elements exhibit distinct
mutual attractions, and chemical marital
relationships are continually disorganised
by the intrusion of couples, one or other
of which has a stronger affinity for one of
the partners in the earlier marriage than the
original mate. Thus a hitherto mutually
faithful couple, forming a silver salt, will
suddenly prove faithless to each other if
another couple, hydro-chloric acid, enters
their peaceful household ; and the silver
will pounce upon the chlorine and take her
to wife, preferring her to his former mate,
and set up a new household as silver
chloride, leaving the deserted hydrogen
to mate with his own forsaken partner.
Wherever these active interchanges go on
there is a slight stir in the astral atom, in
consequence of the violent physical vibra-
tions set up by the violent wrenching
apart, and formation, of intimate ties, and
vague internal thrillings appear. The
astral must be roused from the physical,
and consciousness on the physical plane
will long take the lead in evolution. Still,
a little cloud of astral matter is drawn
round the permanent astral atom by these



1



I



GRoup-sout.s. ii"^

si^ht thrilling, but it is very loosely held,
and seems to be quite unorganised.
There does not seem to be any vibration
in the menial atom at this sta}:;e.

After ages of experience in the mineral
kingdom, some of the [)ermanent atoms will
be ready to pass into the vegetable king-
dom, and will be distributed by the agency
of the Shining Ones over the vegetable
world. It is not to be supposed that every
Uade of g^rass, every plant, has a perma-
nent atom within it, evolving to humanity
during the life of this system. Just as
in the mineral kingdom, so here ; the
vegetable kingdom forms the field of
evolutton for these permanent atoms, and
the Shining Ones guide them to habitat
after habitat, so that they may experience
the vibrations that affect the vegetable
world, and again store up these as vibra-
tory powers in the same fashion as before.
The principles of interchange and of con-
sequent segregation work out as before.
and the Group-Souls in each stream of
evolution become more numerous, and
more different in their leading charac-
teristics.



r



126 A sTunv IX coxsaousNEss.

At our present stage of knowledge,
the laws siccording to which permanent
atoms in a Group-Soul are plunged into
the kingdoms of nature are by no means
clear. Many things seem to indicate that
the evolution of the mineral, vegetable, and
the lowest part of the animal kingdom
belong more to the evolution ol the earth
itself than to that of the jivAtmis repre-
senting the Monads who are evolving
within the Solar System, and who come,
in due course, to this earth to pursue their
own evolution by utilising the conditions
it affords. Grass and small plants of
every kind seem to be related to the
earth as a man's hairs are related to his
body, and not to be connected with the
Monads, represented by JivStm^s in our
five-fold universe. The life in them,
holding them together as forms, appears
to be that of the Second Logos, and
the life in the atoms and molecules com-
posing them to be that of the Third
Logos, appropriated and modified by
the Planetary Logos of our system of
Chains, and further appropriated and
modified by the Spirit of the Earth —



CROin'-SOCLS.

entity wrapped in great obscurity.

kingdoms offer a field for the

olution of the JivatmSs truly, but do

exist, apparently, wholly for this

purpose. We find jiermanent atoms

scattered through the mineral and vegc-

r tabic kingdoms, but are unable to pierce

I the reasons which govern their disiri-

A permanent atom may be found

I pearl, in a ruby, in a diamond ; many

may be found scattered through veins of

_pre. and so on. On the other hand much

ineral does not seem to contain any.

( with short-lived plams. But in plants

long continuance, such as trees, i>er-

jimt atoms arc constantly found. But

; again, the life of the tree seems to

more closely related to the Deva-

nrolution than to the evolution of the

nsctousncss to which the {>ermanent

tom is attached. It is rather as though

dvantage were taken of the evolution of

' 'fife and consciousness in the tree for the

benefit of the permanent atom ; it seem.s

to live there more as a parasite, profiling

by the more highly evolved life in which

it is bathed. The fact is that our know-


STL'DV IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

ledge on these points is extremely fragqi
mentary so far.

There is more activity perceptible in
the astral permanent atom during the
course of the accumulation of vegetable
experiences by the physical, and it attracts
round itself astral matter which is arranged
by the Shining Ones in a rather more
definite way. In the long life of a forest
tree, the growing aggregation of astral
matter developes itself in all directions
as the astral form of the tree, and the
consciousness attached to the permanent
atoms shares, to some extent, that of
its surroundings, experiencing through
that astral form ihe vibrations causing
massive pleasure and discomfort, these
vibrations being the result of those set up
in the physical tree by sunshine and storm,
wind and rain, cold and heat. With the
perishing of such a tree, the permanent
astral atom retreats to its Group- Soul,
now established on the astral plane, with a
rich store of experiences, shared \
manner before described.

Further, as the consciousness becom<J
more responsive in the astral, it sends litt



pcniu



thrills downwards Eo the physical plane,
and ihese give rise to feelings felt as
though in the physical, but really derived
from the iistral. Where there has been
a long separate life, as in a tree, the
pcnnanent mental unit will also begin to
ci round itself a little cloud of mental
;ter, and on this the recurrence of
ins will slowly impress itself as a faint
memory, which becomes inevitably a faint
antidpauon.'

At last some of the permanent physical

atoms arc ready to pass on into the animal

kingdom, and once more the agency of the

lining Ones guides them into animal

During the later stages of their

lution in the vegetable world, it appears

lo be the rule that each triad —physical

and astral atoms and mental unit — shall

ive a prolonged experience in a single

so that some thrills of mental life

ly be experienced, and the triad may

lus be prepared to profit by the wandering

life of the animal. But it also appears that

in some cases the passage into the animal

' See Thtfuht-Paiver, ill Control and Cultun. Pp.



130 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

kingdom is made at an earlier stage, and
that the first thrill in the mental unit
occurs in some of the stationary forms
of animal life, and in very lowly animal
organisms.

In the lowest types of animals conditions
similar to those described as existing in
the mineral and vegetable kingdoms also
appear to prevail. Microbes, amsbie,
hydrje, etc., etc., only show a permanent
atom as a visitor, now and again, and
obviously in no way depend upon it for
life and growth, nor do they break up
when the permanent atom is withdrawn.
They are hosts, not bodies formed around
a permanent atom. And it is noteworthy
that, at this stage, the golden Ufe-web
in no way represents the organisation of
the host's body, but merely acts as
rootlets act in the soil, attaching particles
of soil to themselves and sucking there-
from nourishment. The permanent atoms
in the animal kingdom have received and
stored up many experiences, before they
are used by the Shining Ones as centres
round which forms arc to be built.

Needless to say that in the


en'
I ani



GKOUr-SOULS.

kingdom, the pennanent atoms receive lar
inore varied vibraiions than in the lower
kingdoms, and consetjuently differentiate
more quickly, the number of triads in the
Group-Souls diminishing rapidly as this
difTcrentiaiion proceeds, and the muliipli-
catton of Group-Souls therefore jj^ing on
«rith increasing rapidity. As the period
of individuality approaches, each sejMiraic
triad becomes possessed of its own
envelope, obtained from the Group-Soul.
and takes on successive embodiments as

separate entity, though still within the

iveloping case of protecting and nourish-

ig monadic essence.

Lar^ numbers of the higher animals
in a stale of domestication have rcachetl
this stage, and have really become
separate re-incanialing entities, although
not as yet possessinjj a causal body—
the mark of what is usually called
individual isation. The envelope derived
from the Group-Soul serves the purpose
of a causal body, but consists only of
the third layer, as previously indicated.
and is therefore composed of molecules
derived from the fourth grade of mental



132 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

matter, that which corresponds to thi
coarsest ether of the physical plana
Following the analogy of human ante-
natal life, we see that this stage
corresponds with its last two months.
A seven-months' babe may be born and
may survive, but it will be stronger,
healthier, more vigorous, if it profits for
yet another two months by its niother'n
shielding and nourishing life. So is m
better for the normal development of the
Ego that it should not too hastily burst
the envelope of the Group-Soul, but
should still absorb life through il, ajid,
strengthen from its constituents the fine!
part of its own mental body. Whedl
that body has reached its limit of growtte
under these shielded conditions, th<ii
envelope disintegrates into the finer
molecules of the sub-plane above it. and
becomes, as above said, part of the
causal body.

It is the knowledge of these facta
that has sometimes caused occultists to ■
warn people who are very fond of
animals not to be exaggerated in their
affection, nor to show it in unwise ways^



GROUP-SOULS. 133

The growth of the animal may be
unhealthily forced, and its birth into
individuality be hastened out of due
lime. Man, in order to fill rightly his
place in the world, should seek to under-
stand nature and work with her laws,
quickening indeed their action by the
co-operation of his intelligence, but not
quickening it to the point whereat growth
is made unhealthy and its product frail
and "out of season." It is true that
the Lord of Life seeks human co-opera-
tion in the working out of evolution, but
the co-operation should follow the lines
which His Wisdom has laid down.



^



UNITY OF CONSCIOUSNESS.

Si. Consciousness a Unit.

In studying the very varied manifesta-
tions of consciousness, we are apt to
forget two important facts : first, that
the consciousness of each man is a Unit,
however separate and different from
each other its manifestations may appear
to be; secondly, that all these Units
themselves are parts of the consciousness
of the Logos, and therefore re-act similarly
under similar conditions. We cannot too
often remind ourselves that consciousness
is one ; that all apparently separate
consciousnesses are truly one, as one
sea might pour through many holes in
an embankment That sea-water might
issue from the holes differendy coloured,
if the embankment were composed of



UNITY OF CONSCIOUSNESS.



'35



differently coloured eanhs ; but ii would
all be ihe samt sea-water ; analysed, it
would all show the presence of the
same characteristic salts. So are all
consciousnesses from the same ocean of
consciousness, and have many essential
identities. Enveiled in the same kind
of matter, they will act in the same
kind of way, and reveal their fundamental
identity of nature.

The individual consciousness appears to
be .1 complexity instead of a unity, when
its manifestations are concerned, and
modem psychology speaks of dual and
treble and multiplex personality, losing
sight of the fundamental unity among the
confusion of the manifold. Yet truly is
our consciousness a Unit, and the variety
is due to the materials in which it is
working.

The ordinary waking-consciousness of
a man is the consciousness working
through the physical brain at a certain rate
imposed by it. conditioned by all the con-
ditions of that brain, limited by all its
limitations, baulked by the varying
obstructions it offers, checked by a dot


t36 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

of blood, silenced by the decay of tissue.
At every momeat the brain hinders its
manifestations, while at the same lime it
is, on the physical plane, its only enabling
instrument of manifestation.

When the consciousness, turning its
attention away from the external physical
world, ignores the denser part of the
physical brain, and uses only the etheric
portions thereof, its manifestations at once
change in character. The creative imagi-
nation disports itself in etheric matter, and
drawing on its accumulated contents,
obtained from the external world by its
denser servant, it arranges them, dis-
sociates, and recombines them after its
own fancies, and creates the lower worlds
of dream.

When it casts aside for a while its
ethereal garment, turning its attention
away completely from the physical world,
and shedding its fetters of physical matter,
it roams through the astral world at will, or
drifts through it unconsciously, turning* all
its attention to its own contents, receiving
many impacts from that astral world, which
it ignores or accepts according to its stage



y^



UNITV OF COWRCIOUSNESS.



t37



of evolution, or its humour of the moment.
If it should manifest itself to an outside
observer — as may happen in trance-con-
l^^^litions — it shows powers so superior to
^^^Bfaose it manifested when imprisoned in
^^^Bhc physical brain, that such an observer.
^^^Bbdging only by physical experiences,
^^^May well regard it as a dilferent con-
^^BS^ousness.

' Still more is this the case when, the

astral body being thrown into trance, the
^ird of Heaven shows itself soaring into
aftier regions, and its splendid flight so
Dchants the observer that he deems it a
' being, and no longer the same entity
crawled in the physical world. Yet
Illy is it ever one and the same ; the
ifferences arc in the materials with which
t is connected, and through which it works.
ind not in itself.

' As to the second important fact slated
ove. man is not yet sufficiently develofied
> appreciate any evidence as to the unity
r consciousness in its workings above the
liysical plane, but its unity on the physical
pkuie is being demonstrated.



L



13s a study in consciousness.

§ 2. Unity of Physical Consciousness.

Amid the immense varieties ol the
mineral, vegetable, animal, and human
kingdoms, the underlying unity of physical
consciousness has been lost sight of, and
broad lines of cleavage have been set
up which do not, in reality, exist. Life
has been wholly denied to the mineral,
grudged to the vegetable, and H. P.
Blavatsky was ridiculed when she declared
that one Life, one Consciousness vivified
and informed all.

"With every day, the identity between
the animal and the physical man, between
the plant and man, and even between the
reptile and its nest, the rock, and man, is
more and more clearly shown, the physical
and chemical constituents of all being
found to be identical. Chemical Science
may well say that there is no difference
between the matter which composes the
ox, and that which forms man. But the
occult doctrine is far more expliciL It
says : Not only the chemical compounds
are the same, but the same infinitesimal
invisible Lives compose the atoms of the



' OF CONSaOUSNESS.



1391



bodies of the mountain and the daisy, of

1 and the ant, of the elephant and of

be tree which shelters it from the sun.

Each particle— whether you call it organic

r inorganic — is a Life."'

If this be tnie, it should be possible

obtain from such living minerals,

J vegetables, animals, and men. evidence of

t.«n identity of life, of sentiency, of response

stimuli : and while we may freely

dmii that wc should expect to find

Vfpadations of sentiency, that as we ascend

the ladder of life we should expect the

manifestations to become fuller and more

■complex, yet sume definite manifestations

' sentiency should be found in all who

one life. The evidence for this

i lacking when H. 1'. Blavatsky wrote;

is available now ; and it is from an

astern scientist, whose rare ability has

ensured his welcome in the West, that

ihc evidence appropriately conies.

Professor Jagadish Chandra Bose,
I. A.. D.Sc, of Calcutta, has definitely
■oved that so-calle<l " inorganic matter "
responsive to stimulus, and that the

■ TV Serrtt DoeirtHt. 1. aSi.



A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



140

response is identical from metals, vege-
tables, animals, and — so far as experiment
can be made— man.

He arranged apparatus to mea.sure the
stimulus applied, and to show in curves,
traced on a revolving cylinder, the
response from the body receiving the
stimulus. He then compared the curves
obtained in tin and in other metals with
those obtained from muscle, and found
that the curves from tin were identical
with those from muscle, and that other
metals gave curves of like nature but
varied in the period of recovery.



I


{a) Sbries of elbctrcc respoksrs to !

MRCHAKICAL STIMULI AT INTERVALS OF HALF A MINUTB,

IN TIN. (i) Mechanical responses in uuscle.



UNITY OF CONSCIOUSNESS.



141



Tetanus, both complete and incom-
plete, due to repeated shocks, was caused,
and simular results accrued, in mineral as
in muscle.

A'


6'


EFFKiTS ANALCKIOI'S TO (a) INCOMFLK.TK AND {6)
•OMIIKTK TF-TANUs 1\ UN. (a) InCOMI'LKTK ANI» ( f>* )
COMI'IKTI. TF.1AMS IN MrsCI.K.

I^'atijrue was shown by metals, least of
all by tin. Chemical rc-a<^cnts, such as
dru;js, prcxluced simular results on metals
with those known to result with animals -



r42 A RTL'nV IN CONSCIOLISNESS.

exciting, depressing, and deadly. (By
deadly is meant resulting in the destruc-
tion of the power of response.)

A poison will kill a metal, inducing a
condition of immobility, so that no
response is obtainable. If the poisoned
metal be taken in time, an antidote may
save its life.



Bv^H



^/VAA



^>.aA/L.



i ^-»^



A stimulant will increase response, and
as large and small doses of a drug have
been found to kill and stimulate respec-
tively, so have they been found to act on
metals. " Among such phenomena," asks
Professor Bose, " how can we draw a line
of demarcation and say : ' Here the physical
process ends, and there the physiological
begins ' ? No such barriers exist." '

'These details are taken from a paper given by
Professor Bose at the Royal Institution, May loth,
1901, entitled: "The Response of Inorganic Matter
to Stimulus."



OMITV OK CONSCIOUSNESS.



Professor Bose has carried (



I similar
and has



If into



scncs ol experiments on plants,
obtained similar results. A fresh piece of
cabbage stalk, a fresh leaf, or other vege-
table body, can be stimulated and will
show similar curves ; it can be fatigued,
excited, depressed, poisoned. There is
something rather pathetic in seeing the
way in which the tiny spot of light, which
rds the pulses in the plant, travels, in
'Cr weaker and weaker cur\xs. when the

int is under the influence of poison, falls
into 3 final despairing straight line, and —
stops. The plant is dead. One feels as
though a murder had been committed —
as indeed it ha.s.'

These admirable series of experiments
have established, on a definite basis of
physical facts, the teaching nf occult
science on the universality of life.

Mr. Marcus Reed has made micro-
scopical • observations which show the

'The Prufessor hu not published this lecture, but
the 6»cts are in his book Rtiponse in tht /Jving and
Stn-tivtmg- 1 had Ihc good fortune to nee the
CTperimentK repealed at his own hou.ie, where one
could watch ihcm closely.



144 ■'' STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

presence of consciousness in the vegetable
kingdom. He has observed symptoms
as of fright when tissue Is injured, and
further he has seen that male and female
cells, floating in the sap. become aware
of each other's presence without contact ;
the circulation quickens, and they put out
processes towards each other.'

More than three years after the publica-
tion of Professor Bose's experiments, some
interesting confirmation of his observations
arose in the course of M. Jean Becquerel's
study of the N-rays, communicated by him
to the Paris Academy of Sciences. Animals
under chloroform cease to emit these rays,
and they are never emitted by a corpse.
Flowers normally emit them, but under
chloroform the emanation ceases. Metals
also emit them, and under chloroform the
emanation again ceases. Thus animals,
flowers, and metals alike give out these
rays, and alike cease to emanate them
under the action of chloroform.'

' " Consciousness in Vegetable Matter." Pa// A/a//
Magazine, June, 1902.

'The N-rays are due to vibrations in the etheric
double, causing waves In the surrounding ether.



1



UNITY OF CONSCIOUSNESS.



, TiiK Mbanimc. of Physical Consciousness.

' The term "physical consciousness" is
I in iwo distinct .senses, and it may be
useful to pause a moment, in order to
define these. It is often used to indicate
what is above termed "ordinary wakinfj;-
consciousness." i.e., the consciousness of
the man. of the JivStmS — or, if the phrase
be preferred, of the Monad working
through the JivSima and the lower triad
of permanent atonts. It is also used in
sense in which It is used here, as
tciousness working in physical matter.
aving and responding to physical
npacts, unconcerned with any transmis-
en of impulses onward to the higher
"planes, or with any impulses sent to the

physical body Irom those planes.
_ In this more restricted and accurate
msc, it would include : (a) any out-thrill-
Igs from the atoms and molecules ensouled
' the life of the Third Logos ; {&) any

Chlomfarm vxpclx the clhcric double, and hence the
mve» ctaat. At death, (he eiheric double lenven
the body, and the rays consMiuently can no longer
be observed



146 A STUDY IN CON'SrrOUSNESS.

similar out-thrillings from organised forms
ensouled by the life of the Second Logos ;
and (c) any similar out-thrillings from the
hfe of the Monad, proceeding from the
permanent atoms, in which the spirilla;
are not directly concerned. When the
spirilla are active, the "ordinary waking-
consciousness " is affected. For instance :
ammonia sniffed up by the nose shows
two results ; there is a rapid secretion :
///a/ is the response of the cells in the
olfactory tract ; there is also a " smell " :
/&a/ is the result of a vibration running
up to the sense-centres in the astral body,
and there recognised in consciousness ;
the change in consciousness affects the
first set of spirilla; in the atoms of the
olfactory tract, and thus reaches the
" waking - consciousness " — consciousness
working in the physical brain. It is
only through. the spirillae that changes in
consciousness on the higher planes bring
about changes in the " waking-conscious-
ness."

It must be remembered that as the
Solar System is a field for the evolution
of all the developing consciousnesses


UKITV OF CONSCIOUSNESS. 147'

within it, so are there smaller areas
within it. serving as smaller fields. Man
is the microcosm of the universe, and
his body serves as a field of evolution
fof myriads of consciousnesses less evol-
ved than his own. Thus the three
activities mentioned above under (a),
(b), and (c), are all present in his body.
and all enter into the physical conscious-
ness working therein ; that in which the
atomic spirilhc are concerned does not
enter it ; that belongs to the conscious-
ness of the JivAtmd. The workings of
physical consciousness do not now directly
~ the " waking - consciousness " in
higher animals or in man. They
it in the earlier part of the
embryonic life in the Group- .Soul, while
the consciousness of the Second Logos
was "mothering" the dawning conscious-
nesses derived from It. But physical
consciousness has now sunk below the
" threshold of consciousness," while
showing itself as " the memor)- of the
cell," as the selective action in glands
and papilla:, and generally in the carrying
on of functions nccessar>- for the support



pnysicai
I^^Sect I

HBLed



A STUDY IN COKSCIOUSNESS.



r



of bodies. It is the lowest activity of
consciousness, and as consciousness func-
tions more and more actively on the
higher plane, its lowest workings no
longer attract its attention, and they
become what we call automatic.

Now it is physical consciousness that
is appealed to in Professor Bose's ex-
periments, and it is the response of this
consciousness in the tin and in the animal
that is the same, and is shown in the pulse
indicated by the curves ; the animal will
feel the stimulus while the tin will not —
that is the result of the additional working
of the consciousness in astral matter.

We may thus allege that consciousness,
working in physical matter, responds to
various kinds of stimulation, and that the
response is the same, whether it be
obtained from mineral, vegetable, or
animal. The consciousness shows the
same characteristic workings, is the same.
The differences which, as already said, we
observe as we ascend, lie in the improve-
ment of the physical apparatus, an appa-
ratus which enables astral and mental —
not physical — activities of consciousness



I



l.'KIT\' or CONSCIOL'SNESS. 149

to manifest themselves on the physical
plane. Men and animals feel and think
l>ettcr than minerals and vegetables,
because their more highly evolved con-
sciousness has shaped for itself on the
physical plane this much improved appa-
ratus ; but even so. our bodies answer as
the lower bodies answer to the same
stimuli, and this purely physical con-
sciousness is the same in all.

Now in the mineral, the astral matter
connected with the permanent astral atom
is so little active, and consciousness is
sleeping so deeply therein, that there is
no perceptible working from the astral to
the physical. In the higher plants there
seems to be a son of forth shadowing
of a nervous system, but it is too little
developed and organised to serve any-
thing but the simplest purposes. The
added activity on the astral plane improves
the astral sheath in connexion with the
plant, and (he vibrations of the astral
sheath affect the elheric portion of the
plant, and thus its denser matter. Hence
the foithshadowing of a nervous system
above alluded to.



150 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

When we come to the animal stage, the
much greater activity of the consciousness
on the astral plane causes more powerful
vibrations, which pass to the etheric
double of the animal, and by the etheric
vibrations thus caused, the nervous system
is builded. The shaping of it is due to
the Logos through the Group-Soul, and
to the active assistance of the Shining
Ones of the Third Elemental Kingdom,
directing the work of the ethereal Nature-
Spirits. But the impulse comes from the
consciousness on the astral plane working
in the permanent atom and the sheath of
astral matter attracted by it, roused to
activity by the Group-Soul. As the first
very simple apparatus is formed, more
delicate impacts from without can be per-
ceived, and these impacts also help in the
evolution. Action and reaction succeed
each other, and the mechanism continually
improves in receptive and transmitting
ability.

Consciousness does not do much
building on the astral plane at this
stage, and works there in an unorganised
sheath ; the organising is done on the



%



UNITY OF CONSCIOUSNESS. I5I

physical plane by the efforts of conscious-
ness to express itself — dim and vaguely
groping as these efforts are — aided and
directed by the Group-Soul and the
Shining Ones. This work has to be
completed to a great extent before the
Third Life- Wave pours down, for animal
man has evolved, with his brain and
nervous systems, before that great out-
pouring comes which gives the Jiv&tmi
a working body, and makes possible the
higher evolution of man.



Chapter VII.


THE MECHANISM OF CONSCIOUSNESS.



The Development or tbk Mechakish.



r



In a very real sense the whole of the
bodies of man form the mechanism of
consciousness, as organs for willing,
thinking, and acting ; but the nervous
apparatus may be called its special
mechanism, as that whereby, in the
physical body, it controls and directs all.
Every cell in the body is composed of
myriads of tiny lives, each with its own
germinal consciousness;' each cell has its

■ The term " lives " signifies Units of Conscious-
ness, but does not denote the kind of consciousness
thus separated, nor necessarily imply the presence of
a Jiv4tml It means a cognisable " drop " from the
ocean of consciousness, an atom or collection of atoms
ensouled by consciousness, and acting as a unit. An
atom is a " life," the consciousness being that of the
Third Logos. A microbe is a " life," the conscious-



THE MBCHANI8U OP CONSCIOUSNESS. 1 53

own dawning consciousness, controlling
and organising ihese : but the central
rulin^I consciousness which uses the whole
body controls and organises it, in turn, and
the mechanism in which it functions for
this purpose is the nervous.

This nervous mechanism is the outcome
of astral impulses, and consciousness must
be active on the astral plane before it can
be constructed. Impulses set up by the
consciousness — willing to experience and
va^ely endeavouring to give effect to this
Will — cause vibrations in etheric matter,
and these vibrations, by the very nature
of the matter," become electric, magnetic,
heal, and other energies. These are the
masons which work under the impulse of
the master-builder. Consciousness. The
impulse is from him ; the execution is by
them. The directive intelligence, which
as yet he cannot furnish, is supplied by the
Logic life in the Group-Soul, and by the

noa being thai of the Second Logos, appropriated
and modified, as before said, by ihc Planciaiy Logoi,
and the Spirit of the Eaith.

' The lamnfttra and uiiva of the plane, with it& six
J and lub-tattvafl.



'54


STL'DV IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



Nature-Spirits working under the guidance,
as already said, of the Shining Ones of the
Third Elemental Kingdom.

We have then to understand that
nervous matter is built up on the physical
plane under impulses from the astral, the
directly constructive forces being indeed
physical, but the guidance and the setting
in motion of them being astral, i.e., pro-
ceeding from consciousness active on the
astral plane. The life-energy, the prAna,
which flows in rosy waves, pulsing along
the ctheric matter in all nerves, not in
their medullary sheaths but in their sub-
stance, comes down immediately from
the astral plane ; it is drawn from the
great reservoir of life, the Locos, and is
specialised on the astral plane and sent
down thence into the nervous system,
blending there with the magnetic, elec-
trical, and other currents which form the
purely physical prana, drawn from the
same reservoir, but through the Sun, His
physical body ; close examination shows
that the constituents of the prana of
the mineral kingdom are fewer and less
complex in arrangement than those of



less I



HANISM OF CONSCIOUSNESS.



IS. if



prt^a in the higher vegetable kingdom.



and this again less so than that



ihe



I culati

' ihf .

m
m



animal and human, and this difference is
due to the fact that the astral pr4na
mingles in the latter and not in the
former — to any perceptible degree, at
leasi. After the formation of the causal
body, this complexity of the prana cir-
culating in the nervous systems of the

ysical body much increases, and it
•ars to become yet more enriched in
Ute progress of human evolution. For as
the consciousness becomes active on the
mental plane, the prdna of that plane
mingles also with the lower, and so on as
the activity of consciousness is carried
on in higher regions.

We may pause a moment on this word

prana." that I have translated as " life-
.encrg)-." Prdn is a Saipskrii root,
meaning to breathe, to live, to blow,
made up of att, to breathe, move, live.
and hence the Spirit, joined with the
prefix pra. forth. Thus pra-an, prdn,
means to breathe forth, and life-breath,
or life-energy, is the nearest English
equivalent to the Saipskrit term. As


A KTUDV IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

according to Hindu thought there is but
one Life, one Consciousness, everywhere,
the word Prana has been used for the
Supreme Self, the all-sustaining Breath.
It is the forth-giving energy of the One ;
for us. the Life of the Lor.os. Hence
that Life on every plane may be spoken
of as the Prana of the plane ; it becomes
the life-breath in every creature. On the
physical plane it is energy, appearing in
in many forms, electricity, heal, light,
magnetism, etc., transmutable into each
other, because fundamentally one ; on
other planes we have no names whereby
to designate it, but the idea is definite
enough. Appropriated by a being, it is
prdna in the narrower sense in which it
is generally used in theosophical literature,
the individual's life-breath. It is the vital
energy, the vital force, of which all other
energies, chemical, electrical, and the rest,
are merely derivatives and fractional
parts ; and it is a little quaint for the
occultist when he hears scientific men
talking glibly of chemical or electrical
energy, and denouncing their parent,
vital energy, as an '" exploded su;



THE MECHANISM OF CONSCIOUSNESS. I57

lion." These partial manifestations of
vital



■ely dui



the



energ)' are merel>
arrangements of matter in which it
plays, cutting off one or another of its
characteristics, or perhaps all of them
save one, as blue glass will shut off all
ihe rays except the blue ones, and red
all except the red.

In The Secret Doctrine H. P. Blavatsky
speaks of the relation of prSna to the
nervous system. She quotes, and partly
endorses, partly corrects, the view of
■* nervous ether," put forward by Dr.
B. W, Richardson ; the Sun-force is " the
primal cause of all life on earth."' and
the Sun Is "the store-house of vital force,
which is the noumenon of electricity."*
The "'nervous ether' is the lowest prin-
ciple of the Primordial Essence which is
Life. It is animal vitality diffused in all
Nature, and acting according to the
conditions It finds for its activity. It Is
not an "animal product;' but the living
animal, the living Hower and plant, arc
its products."'

, On the physical plane this prSija. this
' Lat. ai. L 577. ' Uid. 579. ' ItiJ. 586.



A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



I



life-force, builds up all minerals, and
the controiling agent in the chemico-
physiological changes in protoplasm,
which lead to differentiation and the
building of the various tissues of the
bodies of plants, animals, and men.
They show its presence by the power of
responding to stimuli, but for a time this
power is not accompanied by distinct
sentiency; 'consciousness has not unfolded
enough to feel pleasure and pain.

When the current of prSna from the
astral plane, with its attribute of sentiency,
blends with that of the prapa of the
physical plane, it begins the building of
a new arrangement of matter — the
nervous. This nervous arrangement is
fundamentally a cell, details as to which
can be studied in any modern text-book
dealing with the subject, ' and the
development consists of internal changes
and of outgrowths of the matter of the
cell, these outgrowths becoming sheathed

'Such as Scharer's "Histology" in Quain's
Anatomy, tenth edition. HalUburton's Handbook of
Physiology. 1901. Wilson's The Cell in Develop-
ment and Inh$ritan£*.



THE MECHANISM OF CONSCIOUSNESS. 1 59

in medullary matter and then appearing
as threads or fibres. Every nervous
system, however elaborate, consists of cells
and their outgrowths, these outgrowths
becoming more numerous, and forming
ever multiplying connexions between the
cells, as consciousness demands, for its
expression, a more and more elaborated
nervous system. This fundamental sim-
plicity at the root of such complexity of
details is found even in man, the possessor
of the most highly evolved nervous
organisation. The many millions of
neural ganglia' in the brain and body
are all produced by the end of the third
month of ante-natal life, and their develop-
ment consists in expansion, and the
outgrovMh of their substance into Bbres.
This development in later life results
from the activity of thought ; as a man
thinks strenuously and continuously, the
thought-vibrations cause chemical activity,
and the dendrons' shoot out from the

'(iroups of nerv'o cells.

'Nerve processes, or prolongations, or outgrowths,
consisting of the nutter of the cell enclosed in a
iDcdulUry sheath.



r*



l6o A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



cells, making connexions and cross-
connexions in every direction, literal
pathways along which pr4na pulsates—
prSna which is now composed of factors
from the physical, astral and mental
pianes^and thought- vibrations travel.

Returning from this digression into the
human kingdom, let us see how the
building of the nervous system, by
vibratory impulses from the astral, begins
and is carried on. We find a minute group
of nerve cells and tiny processes connecting
them. This is formed by the action of a
centre which has previously appeared in
the astral body — of which something will
presently be said — an aggregation of astral
matter arranged to form a centre for
receiving and responding to impulses from
outside. From that astral centre vibrations
pass into the etheric body, causing little
etheric whirlpools which draw into them-
selves particles of denser physical matter,
forming at last a nerve cell, and groups
of nerve cells. These physical centres,
receiving vibrations from the outer world,
send impulses back to the astral centres,
increasing their vibrations ; thus the



4



THE MECHANISM OF CONSCIOUSNESS. l6l

physical and the astral centres act and
re-act on each other, and each becomes
more complicated and more effective. As
we pass up the animal kingdom, we find
che physical nervous system constantly
improving, and becoming a more and more
dominant factor in the body, and this first-
formed system becomes, in the vertebrates,
the sympathetic system, controlling and
energising the vital organs — the heart, the
lungs, the digestive tract ; beside it slowly
developes the cerebro - spinal system,
dosety connected in Its lower workings
with the sympathetic, and becoming
gradually more and more dominant, while
it also becomes in its most important
development the normal organ for the
expression of the " waking consciousness."
This cerebro-spinal system is built up by
impulses originating in the mental, not in
the astral plane, and is only indirectly
related to the astral through the sympa-
thetic system, built up from the astral.
We shall see later the bearing of this on
the astral sensitiveness of animals, and
lowly -developed human beings, the dis-
appearance of this sensitiveness with the



162 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

development of intellect, and its reappear-
ance in the higher human evolution.

The pennanent atoms form the imper-
fect but only direct channel between the
consciousness manifesting as the spiritual
Triad and the forms he is connected with,
in the case of the higher animals these
atoms are exceedingly active, and in the
brief time between the physical lives
considerable changes occur in these. As
evolution goes on the increasing flow of
life from the Group-Soul and through the
permanent atom, as well as the increasing
complexity of the physical apparatus,
rapidly augment the sensitiveness of the
animal. There is comparatively little
sensitiveness in the lower animal li
and little in fishes, despite their cerebi
spinal system. As evolution proceeds, the
sense-centres continue to develop in the
astral sheath, and in the higher animal
these are well organised and the senses
are acute. But with this acuteness there
is brevity of sensations, and except with
the highest animals little of the mental
element mingles to lend increased and
longer continued sensitiveness to sensatii



the

ttle J

M



THE MECHANISM OF CONSCIOUSNESS. 163



g 1. The Astral or Desire Bopv.

The evolution of the astral body must
be studied in relation to th*; physical, for
while it plays the part of a creator on the
physical plane, as we have seen, its own
further development larjrely depends on
the impulses received through the very
organism it has created. It does not, for
a long time, enjoy an independent life of
its own on its own plane, and the organisa-
tion of the astral body in relation to the
physical is quite a different matter, and
much earlier in time, than its organisation
in relation to the astral world. In the
East they speak of the astral and mental
vehicles of consciousness, when acting in
relittion to the physical, as koshas, or
sheaths, and use the term sharira, or body,
for a form capable of independent action
in the visible and invisible worlds. This
distinction may serve us here.

The astral sheath of the mineral is a
mere cloud of appropriated astral matter,
and does not show any perceptible signs
of organisation. The same is the case
with most vegetables, but in some there


164 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

seem to be certain indications of aggrega-
tions and lines, which, in the light of later
evolution, appear to be the dawn of
incipient organisation : and in some old
forest trees distinct aggregations of astral
matter arc visible at certain points. I n
animals these aggregations become clearly
marked and definite, forming centres in
the astral sheath of a permanent and
specialised kind.

These aggregations in the astral sheath
are the beginnings of the centres which
will build up the necessary organs in the
physical body, and are not the often-named
chakras, or wheels, which belong to the
organisation of the astral body itself, and
fit it for functioning on its own plane in
connexion with the mental sheath, as the
lower type of the eastern sijkshma sharira.
or subtle body. The astral chakras are
connected with the astral senses, so that
a person in whom they are developed can
see, hear, etc., on the astral plane ; they He
far ahead of the point in evolution that we
are considering, a point at which the per-
ceptive powers of consciousness have not
yet any organ, even on the physical pi;



]



THE MECHANISM OF CONSCIOUSNESS. 165

As these aggregations in the astral
sheath appear, the impulses of conscious-
ness on the astral plane, guided as
before explained, play on the etheric
double, forming the etheric whirlpools
already mentioned, ;iiid corresponding
centres thus arise in the astral sheath
and physical body, the sympathetic
system being thus built up. This system
always remains thus directly connected
with the astral centres, even after the
cerebro-spinal system is evolved. But
from the aggregations in the fore-part of
the astral sheath, ten important centres
are formed, which become connected with
the brain through the sympathetic sys-
tem, and gradually become the dominant
organs for the activities of the physical,
or waking-consciousness — that is, for that
part of the consciousness which func-
tions normally through the cerebro-spinal
system. Five out of the ten serve to
receive special impressions from the
outside world, and are the centres through
which consciousness uses its perceptive
powers : they are called in Saqiskrii,
Jfilnendriyas, literally "knowledge-senses"


BfllHH


i

1


N J


1 66


A STCDV IK CONSCIODSNESS. ^^|


ie.. senses, or sense-centres, by which


knowledge is obtained,
the way before explaii
etheric whi' i


These set up. in
ned, five distinct
I thus construct


five centres in


ical brain ; these,


in turn, seve


ipe and remain


connected wi
organs. Thus
the eyes. (


ppropriate sense-
five sense-organs:
[ue. nose, skin,


specialised to /cl impressions from
the outer world, corresponding to the



five perceptive powers of seeing, hearing,
tasting, smelling, feeling. These are
specialised ways in the lower worlds by
which part of the perceptive ability of
consciousness, its power of receiving
external contacts, is exercised. They
belong to the lower worlds and to the
grosser forms of matter which shut
consciousness in, and prevent it. thus
enwrapped, from knowing other lives ;
they are openings in this dense veil of
matter, permitting vibrations to enter in
and reach the shrouded consciousness.

The remaining five of these ten astral
centres serve to convey vibrations from
consciousness to the outer world ; they



hand
^^ gene

^pAieai
^^ re-ac



TBB UECBAMISH OT CONSCnmSNBSS. 1 67

arc the avenues outwards, as the
knowledge-senses are the avenues in-
wards ; they are named Karmeiidrij'as.
literally action-senses, senses or sense-
centres which cause action. These
develope like the others, forming etheric
whirlpools, which make the motor-cenlrcs
in the physical brain : these, again,
severally shape and remain connected
with their appropriate motor-organs.
hands, feet, larynx, and oi^ns of
generation and excretion.

We have now an organised astral
Lth, and the continual action and
re-action between this and the physical
body improve both, and these together act
on the consciousness and it re-acts on
them, both again gaining by this mutual
interaction. And as we have already seen,
these blind impulses of consciousness are
guided in their play upon matter by the
Logic life in the Group-Soul and by the
Nature -Spirits. Always it is life, con-
sciousness, seeking to realise itself in
matter, and matter res{X)nding in virtue of
its own inherent qualities, vitalised by the
action of the Third Logos.



A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



§3. Correspondence in Root-Races.



A similar succession in the



present,



the



fourth, Round marks the evolution of the
kingdoms of Nature, the main character-
istics of the previous Rounds being, as it
were, repeated in the Root-Races, just as
the history of evolution wrought out
during long ages is repeated during the
embryonic life of each new body. During
the existence of the first two human Races
there were conditions of temperature which
would render sensibility destructive of any
life-manifestation, and those Races show
no sensibility to pleasure and pain on the
physical plane. In the third Race there is
sensibility to violent impacts, causing
coarse pleasures and pains, but only some
of the senses are evolved, those of hearing,
touch, and sight, and these but to a low
stage, as we shall presently see.

Now in the first two Races there are
visible the beginnings of aggregations in
the astral matter of the sheaths, and if
these could connect themselves with
appropriate physical matter there would
be in the physical consciousness sensatioi



OIUI^J



THE MECHANISM OF CONSCIOUSNESS. 169 '

of pleasure and pain. But the appropriate
connexions are lacking. The first Race
shows a feeble sense of hearing, the
second a vague response to impacts, the
dawning sense of touch.

The spiritual Triad, at this stage of
evolution, is so insensitive to vibrations
from external matter that it is only when
he receives the tremendous vibrations
caused by impacts on the physical plane
that he begins slowly to respond. Every-
thing begins for him on the physical
plane. He does not respond directly, but
indirectly, through the mediation of the
Logic life, and only as the primary
physical apparatus is built up do the
subtler impulses come through with
t«ufficient force to cause pleasure and
The violent vibrations from the
physical plane cause corresponding vibra-
tion on the astral, and he becomes dimly
conscious of sensation.


Chapter VIII.



FIRST HUMAN STEPS.



Thk Third Life-Wave.



The middle of the Third Root-Race 1
been reached ; the nervous apparatus of
animal man had been built up to a point at
which it needed for its further improve-
ment the more direct flow of thoug^ht from
the spiritual Triad to which it was
attached ; the Group-Soul had completed
its work for these, the higher products of
evolution, as the medium by which the
life of the Second Lojros protected and
nourished His infant children ; it was now
to form the foundation of the causal body,
the vessel into which the down-pouring
life was to be received : the term of the
ante-natal life of the Monad was touched,
and the time was ripe for his birth into thi


FnsT nuM.o» s-rars.



' lower wocW. The mother-life of the
Logos had buDi for him the bodies in



which he codd



separate



now live as
entity in the world of forms, and he wns to
come into direct possession of his bodies
and take up his human evolutioit.

We have seen that the Monads derive
their being from the First Lojjos, and
dvirell on the anupadaka, the second, plane
during the ages over which wc have
glanced. We have also seen that they
appropriated to themselves with the help
of different agents the three permanent
atoms that represent them as JivAtmAs
on the third, fourth, and fifth planes, and
also those which form the lower triad
on the 6fth, sixth, and seventh. All the
communication of the Monad with the
planes below his own h;is been through
the SfitratmS, the life-thread, on which
the atoms are strung, that life-thread —
of second plane matter — .passing from
the Atmic atom to the buddhic. from the
buddhic to the m^nasic, and from the
mAna-sic re-entering the fllmic, thus
making the " Triangle of Light " on the
higher planes. We have seen further



172 A STUnv IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

that from the line of this Triangle on
the buddhic plane comes forth a thread,
the Siitratina of the lower planes, on
which the lower triad is strung.

The time has now come for a fuller
communication than is represented by this
delicate thread in its original form, and it,
as it were, widens out. This is but a
clumsy way of picturing the fact that the
Ray from the Monad glows and increases,
assuming more the form of a funnel :
" The thread between the Silent Watcher
and his shadow becomes more strong and
radiant."' This downflow of monadic life
is accompanied by much increased flow
between the buddhic and manasic perma-
nent atoms, and the latter seems to
awaken, sending out thrills in every direc-
tion. Other manasic atoms and molecules
gather round it, and a whirling vortex is
seen on the three upper sub-planes of the
mental plane. A similar whirling motion
is seen in the cloudy mass surrounding the
attached mental unit below, enveloped in
the remaining layer of the Group-Soul,
as already described. The layer is torn
' Tkt Seeref Doctrine, i. 185.



asunder, and caught up into the vortex
above, where it is disintegrated, and the
causal body is formed, a delicate filmy
envelope, as the whirlpool subsides. This
downflow of life, resulting in the formation
of the causal body, is called the Third
Life - Wave, and is properly ascribed to
the First Logos, since the Monads came
forth from Him and represent His triune
life.

The causal body once formed, the
spiritual Triad has a permanent vehicle for
further evolution, and when Consciousness
becomes able to function freely in this
vehicle, the Triad will be able to control
and direct, far more effectively than ever
before, the evolution of the lower vehicles.

The earlier efforts to control are not,
however, of a very intelligent description,
any more than the first movements of the
body of the infant show they are directed
by any intelligence, although we know that

tan intelligence is connected with it. The
Monad is now. in a very real sense, born
on the physical plane, but still he must be
regarded as a babe there, and must pass



174 ^ STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

his power over the physical body will
anything but infantile.



§2. Human Development.

And this is clearly seen if we look at
man as he was in his early days. Those
long-perished Lemurians — if we except
those entities who had already developed
consciousness to a considerable extent,
and who took birth in the clumsy
Lemurian bodies in order to lead human
evolution — were very poorly developed as
to their sense organs ; those of smell and
taste were not developed, but were only in
process of building. Their sensitiveness
to pleasure and pain was slight.

In the Atlanteans the senses were much
more active : sight was very keen and
hearing was acute ; taste was more
developed than among the Lemurians,
but was still not highly evolved ; coarse
and rank foods were found perfectly
tolerable and even agreeable, and very
highly- flavoured articles of diet, such as
decaying meat, were preferred to more
delicate viands, which were considered



FIRST HUMAN STEPS.



iTSi



tasteless. The body was not very sensitive
to injuries, and severe wounds did not
cause much pain, nor were fallowed by
prostration— even extensive lacerations
failing to incapacitate the sufferer — and
healing very quickly. The remnants of
the Lemurian Race now existing, as well
as the widely spread Atlantean, still show
a relative in sensitiveness to pain, and
undergo, with very partial disablement,
lacerations that would utterly prostrate
a fifth Race man. A North American
Indian has been reported as fighting on
after the side of the thigh had been slashed
away, and taking the field again after
twelve or fifteen hours. This characteristic
of the fourth Race body enables a savage
to bear with com[>osure, and to recover
from, tortures that would prostrate a fifth
Race man from nervous shock.

These differences derive largely from
the varying developments of the per-
manent atom, the nucleus of the physical
body. There is, in the fifth Root-Race,
a fuller stream of life pouring down,
causing the greater internal development
of the permanent atom, and increasing as


176 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

that development proceeds. As evolution
goe.s on, there is An increasinjj complexity
of vibratory powers in the physical per-
manent atom, a similar increase in the
astral atom, and again in the mental unit,
As birth follows birth, and these permanent
nuclei are put out on each plane to gather
round them the new mental, astral and
physical encasements, the more highly
developed permanent atoms draw round
them the more highly developed atoms on
the planes to which they belong, and thus
build up a better nervous apparatus through
which the ever-increasing stream of con-
sciousness can flow. In this way is built
up the delicately organised nervous
apparatus of the fifth Race man,

1 n the fifth Race man the inten
differentiation of the nervous cell;
much increased, and the intercommunica-
tions are much more numerous. Speaking
generally, the consciousness of the fifth
Race man is working on the astral plane,
and is withdrawn from the physical body
except so far as the cerebro- spinal nervous
system is concerned. The control of the
vital organs of the body is left to



0U8 -J


FIRST HUMAN STEPS. IJf

■sympathetic system, crained through long
ages to perform this work, and now kept
going by impulses from the astral centres
other than the ten. without deliberate
attention from the otherwise occupied
consciousness, although of course sus-
tained by it It is, however, as we shall
presently see, quite possible to draw the
attention of consciousness again to this
part of its mechanism, and to reassume
intelligent control of it In the more
highly evolved members of the fifth Race,
the main impulses of consciousness are
sent down from the lower mental world,
and work down through the astral to the
physical, and there stimulate the physical
nervous activity. This is the keen, subtle,
intelligent consciousness, moved by ideas
more than by sensations, ajid showing
itself more actively in the mental and
emotional brain -centres than in those
concerned with sensory and motor pheno-
mena.

The sense - organs of the fifth Race
body are less active and acute than those
of the highest fourth Race in responding
to purely physical impacts. The eye, the


178 A STUDY m CONSCIOUSNESS,

ear, the touch do not respond to vibra-
tions which would affect the fourth Race
se'nse-organs. It is significant, also, that
these organs are at their keenest in
early childhood, and diminish in sensitive-
ness from about the sixth year onward.
On the other hand, while less acute in
receiving pure sense- impacts, they become
more sensitive to sensations intermingled
with emotions, and delicacies of colour
and of sound, whether of nature or of
art, appeal to them more effectively. The
higher and more intricate organisation of
the sense-centres in the brain and in the
astral body seems to bring about increased
sensitiveness to beauty of colour, form,
and sound, but diminished response to
the sensations in which the emotions play
no part.

The fifth Race body is also far more
sensitive to shock than are the bodies of
the fourth and third Races, being more
dependent upon consciousness for its
upkeep. A nervous shock is far more
keenly felt, and entails far greater prostra-
tion. A severe mutilation is no longer a
question merely of lacerated muscle,



nRST HUMAN STEPS.



179



I torn tissues, but of dangerous nervous
I shock ; the highly organised nervous
system carries the message of distress to
I the brain centres, and it is sent on from
them to the astral body, disturbing and
upsetting the astral consciousness. This
is followed by disturbance on the mental
plane ; imagination is aroused, memory
stimulates anticipation, and the rush of
mental impulses intensifies and prolongs
sensiitions. These again sliniulate and
excite the nervous system, and its undue
excitation acts on the vital organs, causing
organic disturbance ; hence depression of
vhality and slow recovery.

So also in the highly evolved fifth Race
body, mental conditions largely rule the
physical, and intense anxiety, mental
suftering, and worry, producing nervous
tension, readily disturb organic processes
and bring about weakness or disease.
Hence mentnl strength and serenity
directly promote physical health, and
when the consciousness is definitely
established on the astral or the mental
plane, emotional and mental disturbance
arc far more [iroductive of ilMiealih than


i8o

any privations inflicted on the physical
body. The evolved fifth Race man lives_
physically literally in his nervous system.

§3. Incongruous Souls and Bodies.

But we should here notice a signiticai
fact, bearing on the all-important question
of the relation of the nervous organisation
to consciousness. When a human con-
sciousness has not yet grown beyond
the later Lemurian or earlier Atlantean
type, but is born into a fifth Race
body, it presents a curious and interest-
ing study. (The reasons for such
birth cannot here be enlarged upon
briefly, as the more advanced natioi
annex the lands occupied by little evolved
tribes, and kill them off either directly
or indirectly, the people thus summarily
evicted from their bodies have to find new
habitats ; the suitable savage conditions are
becoming rarer and rarer, under the ever-
expanding flood of higher races, and they
have to take birth under the lowest avail-
able conditions, such as the slums of large
cities, in families of criminal types. Th<



1



FIKST HCICAV STSr&

are drawn to the cooquenng natkm hf
kftnnic pcce ssi ty.) Sudi persons tacanate
in fifth Race bodfies ot the worst avmiUbfe
maieriaL They then show out ia diese
fifth Race bodies the qualities that bdu^
to the earlier fourth or the third ; and
though they have the ^ysical outer
nervous organisation, they have not the
internal difierentiation in the nervuus
matter that only con«es with the pUy on
physical matter of energies coming from
the astral and menial worlds. W'c observe
in ihem the non -responsiveness lo impres-
sions from outside, unless the impressions
are of a violent order, that marks the low
grade uf development of the individual
consciousness. We notice ihfc falling back
into inertia when a violent physical stimulus
is absent ; the recurrent craving for such
violent stimulus when roused by physical
necessities ; the stirring into faint mental
activity under vehement impact on the
sense-organs, and the blankncss when the
sense-organs are at rest ; the complete
absence of any response to a thought or a
high emotion — not a rejection but an un-
consciousness of it. Excitement or violence


|82



STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



in such a person Is caused as a rule by
something outside— by something coming
before him physically which his dawning
mind connects wi th the possibility of
gratifying some passion which he remem-
bers, and desires again to feel. Such
person may not be intent on robbery
murder at all. but may be stimulated into
either or both by the mere sight of a well
dressed passer-by who seems likely to have
money — money, that means gratification
by food, drink, or sex. The stimulus to
attack the passer-by is at once given, and
will be followed at once by action, unli
checked by a physical and obvious dangei
such as the sight of a policeman. It
the embodied physical temptation whi<
arouses the idea of committing the crime f
a man who plans a crime beforehand is
more highly developed ; the mere savage
commits a crime on the impulse of the
moment, unless faced by another physical
embodiment, that of a force which he
fears. And when the crime is committed,
he is impervious to all appeals to shame or
remorse ; he is susceptible only to terror.
These remarks do not, of course,



ot

M

I to ^


> ^pplMlfl



FIRST HUUAN STEPS.

I the intelligent criminal, but only to the
congenital brutal and obtuse type, the
third or fourth Race savage in a fifth
Race body.

As the truths of the Ancient Wisdom
[ more and more colour modern thought,
they will inevitably, among other things,
modify the treatment of the criminal.
Such criminals as are here spoken of will
not be punished brutally, but will be kept
permanently under strict discipline, and
will be, as far as is practicable, aided to
progress more quickly than would have
been possible under the conditions of
savage life. But the further consideration
of this would lead us too far from our main
study, and we must now return to the
workings of consciousness on the astral
plane, as they show themselves in the
higher animals and in the lower human
types.



{4. DaWM or CONSCtOUSNESS ON THK AsTRAL

Plame.

We have seen thai astral organisation
I {H-ecedes and shapes the physical nervous



184 A STUbV IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

system, and we have now to consider
how this must affect the workings of
consciousness. We should expect to
6nd that consciousness on the astral
plane will become aware of impacts
on its astral sheath in a vague and
unprecise way. just as, in the minerals
and the plants and the lowest animals, it
became aware of impacts on its physical
body. This awareness of astral impacts
will long precede any definite organisation
in the astral sheath, the bridge between
the mental and the physical, that will
gradually evolve it into an astral body, the
independent vehicle of consciousness on
the astral plane. And, as we have seen,
the first organisation in the astral sheath
is a response to impacts received through
the physical body, and is related to the
physical body in its evolution. This
organisation has nothing to do directly
with the reception, co-ordination, and
understanding of astral impacts, but is
engaged in being acted upon by. and
re-acting on, the physical nervous system.
Consciousness everywhere precedes Self-
consciousness, and the evolution of



is Self- J
of con- I



FIRST HUMAN STEPS. 185

sciousiiess on the astral plane proceeds
contemporaneously with the evolution of
Self-cunsciousnsss — to be dealt with pre-
sently — on the physical.

The impacts on the astral sheath from
the astral plane produce vibratory waves
over the whole astral sheath, and the
enshealhed consciousness gradually be-
comes dimly aware of these surgjngs,
without relating them to any external
cause. 1 1 is groping after the much more
violent physical impacts, and such power
of attention as it has evolved is turned on
them. The aggregations of astral mailer,
connected with the physical nervous
systems, naturally share in the general
surgings of the astral sheath, and the vib-
rations caused by these surgings mingle
with those coming from the physical body,
and affect also the vibrations sent down to
[ it by the consciousness through these aggre-
I gallons. Thus a connexion is established
between astral impacts and the sympa-
thetic system, and they play a considerable
part in its evolution. As the conscious-
ness working in the physical body begins
slowly 10 recognise aii external world,


r86 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

these impacts from the astral — gradual
classified under the five senses as are 1
impacts from the physical — -mingle with
those from the physical plane and are
not distinguished as being different from
them in origin. This recognition is the
lower clairvoyance, that which precedes
the great evolution of mind. So long as
the sympathetic system is acting as the
dominant apparatus of consciousness, so
long will the origin, astral or physical,
of impacts remain as the same to con-
sciousness. Even the higher animals — in
whom the cerebro-spinal system is well
developed, but in whom it is not yet, .save
in its sense-centres, the chief mechanism of
consciousness — fail to distinguish between
physical and astral sights, sounds, etc. A
horse will leap over an astral body as
though it were a physical one ; a cat will
rub herself against the legs of an astral
figure ; a dog will growl at a similar
appearance. In the dog and the horse
there is the dawning of an uneasy sense
of some difference, shown by the fear
of such appearances often manifested by
the dog, and by the timidity of the horse.



FIRST HUMAN STEPS. 187

The nervousness of the horse — despite
which he can be trained to face the
dangers of a battle -field, and even, as
with Arab mares, learn to pick up and
carry away his fallen rider through all the
alarming surroundings — seems chiefly due
to his confusion and bewilderment as
to his environment, and his inability to
distinguish between what later he will
learnedly call "objective realities," against
which he can injure his botly, and
"delusions," or "hallucinations," through
which his body can pass unscathed. To
him they are all "real." and the difference
of their behaviour alarms him ; in the
case of an exceptionally intelligent horse
the nervousness is often greater, as he
evolves a dawning sense of difference in
the phenomena themselves, and this at
first, not being understood, is yet more
disquieting.

The savage, living more in the cere-
bro-spinal system, distinguishes between
the physical and the astral phenomena,
though the latter to him are as "real"
as the physical : he relates them to
another world, to which he relegates



A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



all thi



ngs



that do not behave in



way he considers normal. He does
know that, with regard to these, he is
conscious through the sympathetic and not
through the cerebro-spinal system ; he is
conscious of them — that is all. The
Lemurians and early Atlanteans were
almost more conscious astrally than they
were physically. Astral impacts, throwing
the whole astral sheath into waves, came
through the sense-centres of the astral
to the sympathetic centres in the physical
body, and they were vividly aware of
them. Their lives were dominated by
sensations and passions more than by
intellect, and the special apparatus of the
astral sheath, the synipatlietic system,
was then the dominant mechanism of
consciousness.

As the cerebro-spina! system became
elaborated, and more and more assumed
its peculiar position as the chief apparatus
of consciousness on the physical plane,
the attention of consciousness was fixed
more and more on the external physical
world, and its aspect of activity, as the
concrete mind, was brought into greate



KIRST HUMAN STEPS. I

I and greater prominence. The sympathetic
system became subordinate, and its indica-
tions were less and less regarded, sub-
merged under the flood of the coarser
and heavier physical impacts from without.
Hence a lessening of astral consciousness
and an increase of intelligence, though
there still remains in almost every one a
vague sense of non- understood impressions
received from time to time.

At the present stage of evolution this
lower form of clairvoyance is still found
among human beings, but in persons of
very limited intellect ; they have little
Idea as to its rationale, and little control
over its exercise. Aiiempts to increase it
are apt to cause nervous disturbances of a
very refractory kind, and these attempts
are against the law of evolution, which
works ever forward towards a higher end,
and does not move backwards. As the
law cannot be changed, attcmjiLs to work
against it only cause disturbance and
disease. We cannot revert to the con-
dition in which the sympathetic system
was dominant, save at the cost of health,
and of tile higher intellectual evolution.



igo A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

Hence the serious danger of following
many of the directions now published
broadcast, to meditate on the solar plexus,
and other sympathetic centres.

The practices, a few of which havai
come over to the West, are systematisedl
into H^tha Yoga in India. Control over]
the involuntary muscles is regained, so
that a man can reverse peristaltic action,
inhibit the beating of the heart, vomit
at will, and so on. Much time and
trouble must be wasted ere the perform-
ance of such feats becomes possible, and
at the end the man has only brought
back to the control of the will muscles
which have long since been handed over
by it to the sympathetic system. As
that handing-over was done by a gradual
turning away of attention, so is it by a
concentration of attention on the parts
concerned that the earlier achievement
is reversed. As such performana
impose upon the ignorant, who regai
them as evidences of spiritual greatnesSjJ
they are often practised by men whod
desire power, and are unable to obtainj
it in a more legitimate way. MoreoverJ



FIRST HUMAN STEPS. I9I

they are the easiest form of HStha Yoga,
and are more easily cuhivated. and cost
far less suffering, than holding an arm
extended till it withers, or lying on a
bed of spikes.

When the cerebro - spinal system is
thrown temporarily into abeyance, the
impulses from the astral sheath through
the sympathetic system make themselves
fell in consciousness. Hence " lucidity" in
trance, self-induced or imposed, the power
of reading in the astral by the use of
crystals, and other similar devices. The
partial or complete suspension of the
action of consciousness in the higher
vehicle causes it to direct attention on the
lower.

It may be well to add here, to prevent
misconception, that the higher clairvoy-
ance follows, instead of preceding, the
growth of mind, and cannot appear until
the organisation of the- astral body, in con-
tradistinction to the astral sheath, has been
carried to a considerable height. When
this is effected by the play of intellect and
the perfecting of the physical iniellectual
apparatus, then the true astral senses



192


A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



before mentioned, called the chakras. or
wheels, from their whirling appearance,
are gradually evolved. These develop
on the astral plane, as astral senses and
organs, and are built and controlled from
the mental plane, as were the brain-centres
from the astral. Consciousness is then
working on the mental plane and building
its astral mechanism, as before it worked
on the astral plane, building its physical
mechanism. But now it works with far
greater power and greater understanding,
having unfolded so many of its powers.
Further, it shapes centres in the physical
body from the sympathetic and cerebro-
spinal systems, to act as physical plane
apparatus for bringing into the brain
consciousness the vibrations from
higher planes. As these centres
vivified, knowledge is "brought through,^!^^
i.e., is available for the use of conscious- ■
ness working in the physical nervous
system. This, as said, is the higher clair-
voyance, the intelligent and self-directed
exercise of the powers of consciousness in
the astral body.

in this upward - climbing, then,



FIRST HUMAN STEPS. 1 93

powers of consciousness are awakened on
the physical plane, and are then severally
awakened on the astral and the mental.
The astral and mental sheaths must be
highly evolved ere they can be farther
developed into the subtle body, acting
independently on the higher planes, and
then building for itself the necessary
apparatus for the exercise of these higher
powers in the physical world. And even
here, when the apparatus is ready, built by
pure thought and pure desire, it must be
vivified on the physical plane by the fire
of Kundalini, aroused and directed by the
consciousness working in the physical
brain.


CONSCIOUSNESS.



For an riod of time —

throughout the later vegetable and the
animal evolution, and throughout the
evolution of normal humanity up to the
present time — the astral, or desire, sheath
is, as we have seen, subordinate to the
physical, so far as the workings of con-
sciousness are concerned. We have now
to trace the unfolding of the conscious-
ness, of the life becoming aware of its
surroundings. While the nervous system
is truly said to be created from the astral
plane, it is none the less created for
the expression of consciousness on the
physical plane, and for its effective
working thereon. It is there that con-
sciousness is first to become Self-
consciousness.



CONSCIOUSNESS & SELF -CONSCIOUSNESS. I95

When the vibrations of the outer world
play on the physical sheath of the infolded
infant Self, the Jivdlma, the Ray of the
Monad, they at first cause responsive
thrills within that Self, a dawning con-
sciousness within itself, a feeling, unrelated
by that Self to anything outside, though
caused by impacts from outside. It is a
change outside the enveloping film of the
Self, clothed in sheaths of denser matter,
which outside chang'c causes a change
within that envelope, and this change
causes an act of consciousness — conscious-
ness of change, of a changed condition.
It may be an attraction, a drawing towards,
exerted by an external object over the
sheaths, reaching to the envelope of
the Self, causing a slight expansion in
the envelope, following an expansion in the
sheaths, towards the attractive object ; and
this expansion is a change of condition,
and causes a feeling, an act of conscious-
ness. Or it may be a repulsion, a driving
away, again everted by an external object
against the sheaths, reaching to the enve-
lope of the Self, causing a slight shrinking
in the envelope, following the shrinking


196 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

away of the sheaths from the repellei
object ; and this shrinking is also a change
of condition, and causes a corresponding
change in consciousness.

When we examine the conditions of the
enveloping sheaths under an attraction
and a repulsion, we find they are entirely
different. When the impact of an external
object causes a rhythmical vibration in
these envelopes — that is, when 'their
materials are made to arrange themselves
in undulating regular lines of rarefaction
and densification^this arrangement of the
enclosing matter permits an interchange of
life between the two objects that have
come into contact, and in proportion to the
correspondence of the rarefactions and
densifications in the two is the fulness of
the interchange. This interchange, this
partial union of two separated Lives
through the separating sheaths of matter,
is " pleasure," and the going out of the
Lives towards each other is " attraction " ;
however complicated pleasure may become-
herein lies its essence ; it is a sense i
"moreness," of increased, expanded Itf^
The more fully developed the Life,


CONSCIOUSNESS * SEI.F-CONSCIOUSNESS. I97

greater the pleasure in the realisation of
ihis moreness, in the expansion into the
other Life, and each of the Lives thus
uniting gains the moreness by union with
the other. As rhythmical vibrations and
corresponding rarefactions and densifica-
tions make this interchange of life possible,
it is truly said that " harmonious vibrations
are pleasurable." When, on the contrary,
the impact of an external object causes
a jangit! of vibrations in the envelopes of
the im|)acted object— that is, when the
materials are made to arrange themselves
irregularly, moving in conflicting directions,
striking themselves against each other —
the contained Life is shut in. isolated, its
normal outflowing rays are checked, inter-
cepted, even turned back on themselves.
This check to normal action is " pain,"
increasing with the energy of the in-
driving, and the result of the driving-in
process is " repulsion." Here, also, the
more fully developed the Life, the greater
the pain in this violent reversal of its
normal action, and in the sense of frustra-
tion that accompanies the reversal. Hence,
i^in, " inharmonious vibrations are pain-



198 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

ful." Be it observed that this is true of a
the sheaths, ahhough the astral sheati
becomes specialised as the recipient of the
class of sensations later called pleasurable
and painful. Constantly, in the course
of evolution, a general life-function thui
becomes specialised, and a particular orgi
is normally used for its exercise. Th^j
astral body being the vehicle of desires..!
the need for its special susceptibility toj
pleasure and pain is obvious.

To return from this brief digression int<
the state of the envelopes to the germ <
consciousness itself : we shall find
important to notice that there is herein no-^
" awareness " of an external object, no
such awareness as is ordinarily conveyed
by the use of the word. Consciousness,
as yet. knows nothing of an outer and an
inner, of an object and a subject ; the
divine germ is now becoming conscious.
It becomes consciousness with this chan^
of conditions, with this movement in 1
sheaths, this expanding and contracting,
for consciousness exists only in, and by,
change. Here, then, for the separated
divine germ is the birth of consciousness j


CONSCtOUSNESS & SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS. I99

it is born of change, of motion ; where and
when this first change occurs, there con-
sciousness, for that separated germ, is bom.
The mere clothing of this germ with
successive envelopes of matter on succes-
sive planes gives rise to these first vague
changes within the germ that are the
birthing of consciousness ; and none of us
may count the ages which roll on as these
changes become more defined, and as the
envelopes become mare definitely shaped
by the ceaseless impacts from without, and
the no less ceaseless responsive thrillings
from within. The state of consciousness
at this stage can only be described as one
of " feeling," feeling becoming slowly more
and more definite, and assuming two
phases, pleasure and pain— pleasure with
expansion, pain with contraction. And,
be it noted, this primary stale of con-
sciousness does not manifest the three
well-known aspects of Will, Wisdom, and
Activity, even in the most germinal stage ;
" feeling " precedes these, and belongs to
consciousness as a whole, though iji later
stages of evolution it shows itself so much
in connexion with the W'ill-Desire aspect


200 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

as to become almost identified with it ; in
the plural, as feelings, indeed, it belongs to
that aspect, which is the first to arise as
a differentiation within consciousness.

As the states of pleasure and pain
become more definitely established in
consciousness, they give rise to the three
aspects : with the fading away of pleasure
there is a continuance of the attraction in
consciousness, a memory, and this becomes
a dim groping after It, a vague following
of the vanishing feeling, a movement —
too indefinite to be called an effort — to
hold it, to retain it ; similarly with the
fading away of pain there is a continuance
of the repulsion in consciousness, again a
memory, and this becomes an equally vague
movement to push it away. These states
give birth to : Memory of past pleasure
and pain, indicating the germination of
the Thought-aspect ; longing to experi-
ence again pleasure, or avoid pain, the
germination of the Uesire-aspect ; this
stimulating a movement, the germination
of the Activity-aspect. Thus Conscious-
ness is differentiated into its three aspects
from its primary unity of Feeling, repeatingu


I CONSCIOUSNESS ft SELF- CONSCIOUSNESS. 20I

[in miniature the kosmic process in which
I the triple Divinity ever arises from the

One Existence. The Hermetic axiom is
' here, as always, exemplified : " As above,

so below."



§ 3. Sklf-Consciousness.

Desire, thus germinated, gropes after
pleasure, not, as yet. after the pleasure-
giving object ; for consciousness is as
yet limited within its own kingdom, is
conscious only in the within, is conscious
only of changes in that within. It has
not yet turned its attention outwards, is
not yet conscious even that there is an
outwards. Meanwhile that outwards of
which it is not aware is continually
hammering at its vehicles, and most
vehemently at its physical vehicle, the
vehicle most easily affected from outside,
and with most difficulty from within.
Gradually the persistent and violent
shocks from outside draw its attention in
their direction ; their irregularity, their un-
expectedness, their constant assaults, their
unrelatcdness to its slow, groping move-



202 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

ments, their unexplained appearances and
disappearances, are in opposition to its dim
sense of regularity, continuity, of being
always there, of slow surges of change
rising and falling within what is not yet
to it "himself"; there is a consciousness
of difference, and this grows into a sense
of a something that remains within a
changing hurly - burly, a sense of a
"within" and a "without." or, to speak
more accurately, of a " without " and
a " within," since it Is the hammering
outside that causes the difference of
"without" and "within" to arise in
consciousness. " Without " comes first,
if only by a fraction of time, because
its recognition alone makes possible and
inevitable the recognition of " within."
So long as there is nothing else, we
cannot speak of "within"; it is every-
thing. But when " without " forces Itself
on consciousness, " within " rises up as
its inevitable opposite. This sense of a
"without" arises necessarily at the points
of contact between the continuing con-
sciousness and the changing hurly-burly ;
that is, in its physical vehicle, its physical



CONSCIOUSNESS & SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS. 203

body. Herein is slowly established the
awareness of " others," and with the



of this



others



i the



estabhshment of
establishment also of "I," over against
them. He becomes conscious of things
outside instead of being conscious only
of changes, and then he comes to know
that the changes are in "himself," and
that the things are outside himself. Self-
consciousness is born.

This process of perceiving objects is a
complex one. It must be remembered
that objects contact the body in various
ways, and the body receive* some of
their vibrations by the parts differentiated
to receive such vibrations. The eye,
ihe ear, the skin, the tongue, the nose,
receive various vibratory waves, and
certain cells in the organs affected vibrate
similarly in response. The waves set up
pass to the sense-centres in the brain.
and thence to the knowledge -senses in
the astral sheath ; there the changes in
consciousness take place which corres-
pond with them, as explained in Chapter
II., and they are sent on as these
[i changes, the sensations of colour, out-


A STUDY IS CONSCIOUSNESS.

line, sound, form, taste, smell, etc., still
as separate sensations, to consciousness
working in the mental sheath, and are
there combined by it into a single image,
unified into a si ngle perception of an
object This blending of the various
streams into one, this synthesis of sensa-
tions, is a specialty of the mind. Hence,
in Indian psychology, the mind is often
called "the sixth sense," "the senses, of
which mind is the sixth."' When we
consider the five organs of action in
relation to the mind, we find a reverse
process going on ; the mind pictures a
certain act as a whole, and thereby brings
about a corresponding set of vibrations in
the mental sheath ; these vibrations are
reproduced in the motor senses in the
astral sheath ; they break it up, analyse
it into its constituent parts, and these are
accompanied with vibrations in the matter
of the motor centres ; these, in turn, are
repeated in the motor centres in the brain
as separate waves ; the motor centres
distribute these waves through the ner-
vous system to the various muscles thai
' J3Aagavaii-GUd. xv. 7.



CONSCIOUSNESS & SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS. 205

I must co-operate to produce the action.
Regarded in this double relation the
mind becomes the eleventh sense. " the
ten senses and the one."'



§3. Real and Unreal.

With the change of consciousness into
Self-consciousness comes the recognition
of a difference which later, in the more
evolved Self-consciousness, becomes the
difference between the objective or "re;d"
— in the ordinary western sense of the
word — and the subjective or "unreal." and
"imaginary." To the jelly-fish, the sea-
anemone, the hydra, waves and currents,
sunshine and blast, food and sand touching
the periphery or the tentacles, are not
"real," are registered only ;is changes in
consciousness, as in truth they are also
to the body of the human infant ; 1 say
registered, not recognised, since no mental
observation, analysis, and judgment are
possible in the lower stages of evolution.
These creatures are not yet sufficiently
conscious of "others," to be conscious of
' Ihii. »ii. s.


2o6 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

"themselves ;" and they only feel changes
as occurring within the circle of their own
ill -defined consciousness. The external
world grows into " reality " as the con
sciousness, separating itself from it. realises
its own separateness, changes from a vague.
"am" into a definite "'/ am."

As this self-conscious " 1 " graduallyi
gains in clearness of self-identification,
of separateness, and distinguishes between^
changes within himself and the impact
of external objects, he is ready to take
the next step of relating the changes
within himself to the varying impacts
from outside. Then follows the develop-
ment of Desire for pleasure into
definite desires for pleasure-giving objects,
followed by thoughts as to how to
obtain them : these lead to efforts
move after them when in sight,
search for them when absent, and
consequent slow evolution of the outer'
vehicle into a body well -organised for
movement, for pursuit, for capture. The
desire for the absent, the search, the
success or failure, all impress on the
developing consciousness the difference



i



CONSCIOUSNESS & SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS. 20?

between his desires and thoughts, of
which he is, or can be. always conscious,
and the external objects which come and
go without any reference to himself, and
with disconcerting irrelevance to his
feelings. He distinguishes these as
" real," as having an existence which he
does not control, and which affects him
without any regard to his likings or
objections. And this sense of "reality"
is first established in the physical world,
as being the one in which these contacts
between the "others" and the "I" are
first recognised by consciousness. Self-
consciousness begins its evolution in and
through the physicat body, and has its
earliest centre in the brain.

The normal man, at the present stage
of evolution, still identifies himself with
this bniin-centre of Self- consciousness,
and is hence restricted to the waking
consciousness, or consciousness working
in the cerebro-spinal system, knowing
himself as "I," distinctly and consecutively,
only on the physical plane, that is. in
the waking state. On this plane he is
definitely self-conscious, distinguishing



2o8 A STUnV IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

between himself and the outer world,
between his own thot^hts and outside
appearances, without hesitation ; hence
on this plane, and on this plane only,
external things are to him " real,"
"objective," "outside himself."

On other planes, the astral and
mental, he is, as yet, conscious but
self-conscious ; he recognises changes
within himself, but does not yet dis-
tinguish between the self-initiated changes
and those caused by impacts from
without on his astral and mental vehicles.'
To him they are all alike changes
within himself. Hence all phenomena of
consciousness occurring on super-physical
planes— planes on which Self-conscious-
ness is not yet definitely established — the
normal, average man calls " unreal," " sub-
jective," " inside himself," just as the jelly-
fish, if he were a philosopher, would
designate the phenomena of the physic
plane. He regards astral or mental phena
mena as the result of his " imagination/^
i.e., as forms of his own creating, and noi
as the results of impacts upon his astral c
mental vehicle from external worlds, subdei



CONSCIOUSNESS & SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS. 209

indeed, but as ** real " and ** objective " as
the external physical world. That is, he is
not yet sufficiently evolved to have reached
self-realisation on those planes, and thus
to have become capable of objectivising
there the external worlds. He is only
conscious there of the changes in himself,
the changes in consciousness, and the
external world is consequently to him
merely the play of his own desires and
thoughts. He is, in fact, an infant on the
astral and mental planes.


The Sub-Consciousness.



We have already noticed the fact that
many activities of consciousness, once
purposive, have become automatic, and
have gradually sunk below the "threshold
of consciousness." The processes which
maintain the life of the body — such as the
beating of the heart, the expansion and
contraction of the heart, the processes of
digestion, etc. — have all fallen into a
region of consciousness on which the
attention of consciousness is not fixed.
And there are innumerable phenomena,
not directly connected with the mainte-

' Much on these states will be found in the writer's
published lectures on Theosophy and tlu New Psytlio-
logy.



HUMAN STATES OP CONSCIOUSNESS. 211

nance of bodily life, which also inhabit this
dim region. The sympathetic system is
a storehouse of traces left by long-past
events — events not belonging to our
present hfc at all, but events that passed
hundreds of centuries ago. that occurred
in long-p;ist lives, when the JivaimS which
is our Self was abiding in savage human
bodies, and even in the bodies of animals.
Many a causeless terror, many a midnight
panic, many a surge of furious anger,
many an impulse of vindictive cruelty,
many a rush of passionate revenge, is
flung up from the depths of that dark sea
of the sub-conscious which rolls within us,
concealing many a wreck, many a skeleton
of our past. Handed down by the astral
consciousness of the time to its physical
instrument for putting into action, the
ever-sensitive plate of the permanent atom
has caught and photographed them, and
has registered them in the recesses of the
nervous system, life after life. The con-
sciousness is off guard ; or a strong vibra-
tion from anotlier strikes us ; or some
event reproduces circumstances that start
vibrations that arouse ; in one way or


2 12 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

another, the slumbering possibilities are
awakened, and hurling itself upwards into
the light of day comes the long-buried
passion. There too hide the instincts
which oft overpower reason, instincts that
were once life-preserving efforts, or thfl-
results of experiences in which our bodji*,
of the time perished, and the soul regis-
tered the result for future guidance.'
Instincts of love for the opposite sex, out-
come of innumerable unions. Instincts of
paternal and maternal love, poured out
in many generations. Instincts of self-
defence, developed in countless battles.
Instincts of taking undue advantage,
offspring of numberless cheatings and
intrigues. And yet again there lurk
there many vibrations that belong to
events, and feelings, and desires, and
thoughts of our present life, experienced
and forgotten, but lying near the surface,
ready for upcall. Time would fail to
enumerate the contents of this relic-
chamber of an immemorial past, con-
taining old bones fit only for the dust-bin,'
side by side with interesting fragments
earlier days, with tools still useful for our



I



F present needs. Over the door of the
relic-chamber is written : " Fragments of
the Past." For the sub - consciousness
belongs to the Past, as the waking - con-
Sciou!iness to the Present, as the super-
consciousness to the Future.

Another part of the sub-conscious in us
is composed of the contents of all the
consciousnesses that use our bodies as
fields of evolution — atoms, molecules, cells
of many grades. Some of the queer
spectres and dainty figures that arise from
the sub-conscious in us do not belong to
us at ail, but are the dim gropings, and
foolish fears, and pretty fancies, of the
Units of consciousness at a lower stage
of evolution than our own, that are our
giicsts, inhabiting our body as a lodging-
house.

In this part of the sub-conscious go on
the wars, waged by one set of creatures in
our blood against another set, which do
not enter our consciousness, save when
their results appear as diseases.

Human sub-consciousness, working on
ihc physical plane, is thus composed of
very varied elements, and it is necessary



214 A STUDV IN CONSCIOUSSESS.

thus to analyse and to understand it. in
order to distinguish its workings from
those of the true human super-conscious-
ness, which resembles the instincts in its
sudden irruptions into consciousness, but
differs entirely from them in its nature and
place in evolution, belonging to the future
while they belong to the past. These two
differ as atrophied vestigial organs, record-
ing the history of the past, differ from
germinal rudimentary organs, indicatji
the progress of the future.

We have also seen that consciousnesSf
working on the astral plane, built up and
is still building the nervous system for its
instrument on the physical plane ; but this
also does not form part of what is called the
normal waking consciousness at this stage
of evolution. In the average man, con-
sciousness, working on the mental plane,
is now building up and organising the
astral body as its instrument in the future
on the astral plane ; but this again does
not form part of the waking-conscious-
ness. What then is the human waking-
consciousness ?



31


2. The Waking Consciousness.



Wll

1 ins



The waking-consciousness is conscious-
less working on the menial plane and on
iJie astral, using mental and astral matter
as its vehicle, seated in the physical brain
as Self-consciousness," and using that brain
with its connected nervous system as its
instrument for willing, knowing, and
ting on the physical plane. In waking-
Consciousness the brain is always active,
always vibrating ; its activity may be
stimulated as a transmitting organ from
outside through the senses, or it may be
stimulated by the consciousness from
the inner planes ; but it is ceaselessly
active, responding to the without and
the within. In the average man, the
brain is the only part in which conscious-
ness has definitely become Self - con-
.sciousness, the only part in which he
feels himself as "1," and asserts himself

' See Cha)>tcr IX., ^ i, i, Tur the dilTeiiMict; between
consciousness and Self<on«:iousncss ; and Chapter
Vt-, S 5, foi the exposition of Ihc physical conscious-
nen, which muW not lie confused with waking-con-



2l6 A STUnV IM COVSCIOUSSESS.

as a separate individual uniL in all the
rest of him consciousness is still vaguely
groping about, answering to external
impacts but not yet defining them, con-
scious as to changes in its own con-
ditions, but not yet conscious of
"others" and "myself." In the more
advanced members of the human family,
consciousness, working on the astral
and mental planes, is very rich and active,
but its attention is not yet turned out-
wards to the astral and mental worlds
in which it is living, and its activities find
their outer expression in Self-conscious-
ness on the physical plane, to which all
the outer attention in consciousness is
turned, and into which is poured as much
of the higher workings as it is capable of
receiving. From time to lime, powerful
impacts on the astral or mental plane
create so violent a vibration in conscious-
ness, that a wave of thought or emotion
surges outwards into the waking con-
sciousness and throws it into such furious
motion, that its normal activities are swept
away, submerged, and the man is hurried
into action which is not directed <



cted or coiti^^f



HUMAN STATES OP CONSCIOUSNESS. H?

trolled by Self-consciousness. We shall
, consider this further when we come to the
super-physical consciousness.

Waking - consciousness may then be
defined as that part of the total conscious-
ness which is functioning in the brain and
nervous system, and which is definitely
Self-conscious. Wc may conceive of
consciousness as symbolised by a great
light, which shines through a glass globe
inserted in a ceiling, illuminating the room
below, while the light itself fills the room
above, and sheds its radiance freely in
every direction. Consciousness is as a
great egg of light, of which only one end
is inserted into the brain, and that end
is the waking - consciousness. As con-
sciousness becomes Self-consciousness on
the astral plane, and the brain dcvelopes
sufficiently to answer to its vibrations,
astral consciousness will become part of
' the waking -consciousness. Later still,
when consciousness becomes Self- con-
sciousness on the mental plane, and the
brain developes sufficiently to answer to
its vibrations, the waking - consciousness
will include mental consciousness. And


ai8 A STUDY III COSSCIOUSSESS.

so on, until all tbe consciousness on our
five planes has evolved to waking - con-
sciousness.

This enlarging of waking - conscious-
ness is accompanied with development in
the atoms of the brain, as well as with
the development of certain organs in the
brain, and of the connexions between
cells. For the inclusion of the astral Self-
consciousness, it is necessar)- that the
pituitary body should be evolved beyond
its present condition, and that the fourth
set of spirillae in the atoms should be
perfected. For the inclusion of the
mental, the pineal gland must be ren-
dered active, and the fifth set of spirillse
brought into thorough working order.
So long as these physical developments
remain unaccomplished, Self - conscious-
ness may be evolved on the astral and
mental planes, but it remains super-
consciousness and its workings do not
express themselves through the brain,
and thus become part of the waking-
consciousness.

Waking - consciousness is limited and
conditioned by the brain so long as a man



OF CONSCIOUSNESS. 219

possesses a physical body, and any injury
I to the brain, any lesion, any disturbance,
I at once interferes with its manifestation.
However highly developed may be a
man's consciousness, he is limited by his
brain so far as its manifestations on the
physical plane are concerned, and if that
brain be ill -formed or ill-developed, his
waking - consciousness will be poor and
restricted.

With the loss ol the physical body,
the connotation of waking-consciousness
changes, and that which is here said of
the physical conditions is transferred to
the astral. Wc may therefore enlarge
our original definition to the general state-
ment : waking-consciousness is that part
of the total consciousness which is work-
ing through its nutermost vehicle, that is.
which is manifesting on the lowest plane
ihen touched by that consciousness.

In the earlier stages of human evolution,
there is little activity in consciousness on
the inner planes except as stimulated from
ihc outer ; but as Self - consciousness
grows more vivid on the physical plane, it
enriches with ever-increasing rapidity the



220 A STUDY IK COXSCIOUSlfESS..

content of consciousness on the inner ;
consciousness, working upon its content,

rapidly evolves, until its internal powers
far outstrip the possibilities of their mani-
festation through the brain, and the latter
becomes a limitation and a hindrance
instead of a feeder and a stimulator.
Then the pressure of consciousness on
its physical instrument becomes at times
perilously great, causing a nervous tension
which endangers the equilibrium of the
brain, unable to adapt itself with sufficient
rapidity to the powerful waves beating
gpon it. Hence the truth of the saying :
"Great wits to madness near allied." Only
the highly and delicately organised brain
can enable the "great wits" to manifest
themselves on the physical plane ; but
such a brain is the one most easily thrown
off its balance by the strong waves of
these same " great wits," and this is
"madness." Madness— the incapacity of
the brain to respond regularly to vibra-
tions — may indeed be due to lack or
arrest of development, lack or arrest
of brain organisation, and such madness
is not allied to "great wits"; but it is a



HUMAN STATES OF CONSCIOUSNESS. 221

significant and pregnant fact that a brain in
advance of normal evolution, developing
new and delicately balanced combinations
for the enriched expression of conscious-
ness on the physical plane, is the brain of
all others that may most easily be disabled
by the throwing out of gear of some part
of its mechanism not yet sufficiently
established to resist a strain. To this
again we must return in considering the
super-physical consciousness.

jj, Thk SupsR-PHirsiCAi. Consciousness.

Psychologists in the West have lately
betaken themselves to the study of states
of consciousness other than the waking ;
these arc variously designated as " abnor-
mal," "sub-conscious." " inconscient." and
often as "dream-consciousness" — because
the dream is the most generally recognised
and universal form of other-consciousness.
At first there was a tendency to regard
these states as the result of disordered
brain conditions, and this view is still
largely held ; but the more advanced
psychologists are out-growing this narrow



I


222 A STUDY rN CONSCIOUSNESS.

idea, and are beginning to study such
states as definite manifestations of con-
sciousness under conditions not yet un
stood, but not necessarily disorderly ; som
definitely recognise a " larger consciouSJ^
ness," a part only of which can find
expression in the brain as at present
evolved. In the East, this state of other-
consciousness has for long ages been
regarded as higher than the waking state,
as that of the consciousness set free from
the narrow limits of the physical brain,
and acting in a subtler and more plastic
and congenial medium. Dream has been
regarded as one phase of this super-
physical activity, and as a touch with
higher worlds ; and means have been
taken to arouse Self-consciousness in the
dream-world, to set Self- consciousness,
clothed in its higher vestures, free from
the physical body at will ; so that, instead
of the vague and confused answers to im-
pacts from higher worlds in undeveloped
dream states, Self-consciousness may be
established therein with clear and definite
vision. To effect this, Self-consciousness
in its higher vehicles must be at first



HUMAN STATES OF CONSCIOUSNESS. 223

removed from the physical body and made
active on the astral plane ; for until it 1
knows itself out of the dense body,
cannot separate out in the "dream" the
extra-physical experiences from the chaotic
fragments of physical experiences mixed
up with them in the brain. As clear water
poured into a muddy bucket becomes
mixed up with the mud. so does an astral
experience, poured down into a brain full
of fragments of past physical happenings,
become blurred, confused, incongruous.'
Ea.stern psychology hence sought after
methods of separating the Self-conscious-
ness from its physical vehicle, and it is
interesting to observe that these methods,
wholly different as they are from those
used in the West, and directed to the
intensifying of consciousness, reduce the
body to the same state of quiescence as
that induced by physical methods in (he
West, when the western psychologist
betakes himself to the -study of other-
consciousness.

Super -consciousness includes the whole
''Vhc xludcnl will do well to read carefully Mr. C
W. Leadbeatct'i useful book on Vrtams.


224



A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



of the consciousness above the waking-
consciousness ; that is, all on the higher
planes that does not express itself on
the physical plane as Self-consciousness
working through the brain. It Is therefore
a great complexity, and covers a large
number of phenomena. Dream, as said,
is part of it ; so are all the workings of the
astral consciousness asserting themselvi
as premonitions, warnings, visions of hap^
penings distant in space or time, vague
touches from other worlds, sudden intui-
tions as regards character or events ; also
all the workings of the mental conscious-
ness, lower or higher, that appear as
intuitive grasp of truths, sudden insight
into causal connexions, inspirations —
mental or moral— flashes of genius, visions
of high artistic beauty, etc., etc. These
irruptions of the super-consciousness into
the physical plane have the character of
unexpectedness, of conviction, of imperious
authority, of lack of apparent cause. They
are unrelated, or only indirectly related, to
the contents of the waking-consciousness^;
and do not justify themselves to it, bi
simply impose themselves on it.


HUMAN STATES OK CONSCIOUSNESS. 225

To bring the super-consciousness into
manifestation on the physical plane, it
is necessary — in the early stages —
to reduce the brain to inactivity, to
render the sense-organs unresponsive to
physical impacts, and, by expelling the
conscious entity from the body, reduce
that body to the state called trance.
Trance is but the sleep-state, artificially
or abnormally induced ; whether produced
by mesmeric, hypnotic, medicinal, or other
means, the result is the same, so far as the
physical body is concerned. But the
result on the other planes will depend
entirely on the evolution of conscioustvcss
on those planes, and a highly evolved
consciousness would not permit the use of
h3rpnotic or medicinal means — unless,
peHnfH, of an anaesthetic for an operation
— though such a one might allow, under
exccptionaJ circumst«uu:cs, the use of roes-
merism in producing the trance state:
Trance may alio be produced by action
from the higher planes, as by intense
cooccntratioo uS thot^^ or by rapt
Gontcmplitiaa of an object of devocioa,
■ d uring CKUMf. These are the mcaai


used from time immemorial by the
R4ja Yogis of the East, and the exstasy
of the Saint in the West is produced by
this rapt contemplation ; the uance is
indistinguishable from that produced by
the means above referred to in the Sal-
petri^re and elsewhere. The H4tha Yogis
also reach this same trance condition, but
by means much resembling the last named
— by staring at a black spot on a white
ground, at the point of the nose, and other
similar practices.

But when other than physical vision and
physical tests are used, how great is the
difference between the super- physical con-
ditions of consciousness in the hypnotised
subject and in the Yogt. H. P. Blavatsky
has well described this difference : " In the
trance slate the Aura changes entirely, the
seven prismatic colours being no longer
discernible. In sleep also they are not all
■ at home.' For those which belong to the
spiritual elements in the man, vis., yellow,
Buddhi ; indigo, Higher Manas; and the
blue of the Auric Envelope, will be either 1
hardly discernible or altogether missing; ^
The Spiritual Man is free during sleep,.]


HUMAN STATES OF CONSCIOUSNESS. 2ZJSi

and though his physical memory may not i
become aware of U. lives, robed in his ]
highest essence, in realms on other planeSi '
in realms which are the land of reality,
called dreams on our plane of illusion. A
good clairvoyant, moreover, if he had an
opportunity of seeing a Yogi in the trance
state and a mesmerised subject side by
side would learn an inijjortant lesson in
Occultism. He would learn to know the
difference between self-induced trance and
a hypnotic state resulting from extraneous
influence. In the Yogi, the "principles'
of (he lower quaternary disappear entirely.
Neither red, green, red-violel. nor the
auric blue of the body are to be seen :
nothing but hardly perceptible vibrations
of the golden-hiied PrAna principle, and a
violet rtame streaked with gold rushing
upwards from the head, in the region
where the Third Eye rests, and culminat-
ing in a point. If the student remembers
that the true violet, or the extreme end of
the spectrum, is no compound colour of
red and blue, but a homogeneous colour
with vibrations seven times more rapid
than those of the red, and that the golden



3 2S


A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.'



hue is the essence of the three yellow lines
from orange-red to yellow - orange and
yellow, he will understand the reason why;
he [the Yogi] lives in his own Auric Body,
now become the vehicle of Buddhi-Manas.
On the other hand, in a subject in an ■
artificially produced hypnotic or mesmeric •
trance, an effect of unconscious when not
of conscious Black Magic, unless produced
by a high Adept, the whole set of the
principles will be present, with the Higher
Manas paralysed. Buddhi severed from it
through that paralysis, and the red-violet
Astral Body entirely subjected to the
Lower Manas and K^ma ROpa."'

This difference in the appearance of the
entranced person, as seen by the clear-
seeing eye, is connected with a difference
of immense importance in the after out-
come of the trance. The Yogi, who thus |
leaves the body, leaves it in full Self-
consciousness, visits the higher worlds in
full possession of his faculties, and, on
returning to the dense body, imprints on
the evolved brain the memory of his
experiences. The little evolved person,
'TS? Seertt Doetn'ne. iii. 479, 480.


HUMAN STATES OT CONSCIOUSNESS. 339

entranced, " loses consciousness " ; when
his Self-consciousness is not developed on
the higher planes, his awareness is not
there turned outwards ; he is practically
as much asleep there, in the astral and I
mental worlds, as he is in the physic^ I
plane, and on awaking from the trance I
he knows nothing of what has occurred '
during its continuance, either here
elsewhere.

If. however, the subject be sufficiently
evolved, as most people are at this stage
of evolution, to be Self-conscious on the
astral plane, then others may be profited
by questioning him while entranced. For
in the artificially induced trance state,
wherein the brain is cut off from the
normal action and reaction between itself
and its environment, it becomes an
instrument, however inadequate, of the
super - physical consciousness. Isolated
from its physical environment, rendered
incapable of rcs[x)nding to its accustomed
stimuli from outside, cut off from its lower
attachments while remaining united to its
higher, it continues to answer to the i
impacts from above, and can do this the J



230


A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



more effectively since none of its energi
are running out into the physical plai
This is the essence of the trance state.
In the forcible closure of the avenues of
the senses, through which its forces pour
out into the external world, these forces
remain available as servants of the super-
physical consciousness. In the silence
thus imposed on the physical plane, the
voices of the other planes can make them-
selves heard.

In the hypnotic trance, a quickening of
the mental faculties is observed : memory is
found to embrace a far larger area, for the
faint pulsings left by far-off events become
audible when the stronger pulsings from
the recent are temporarily stilled ; people
forgotten in the waking state are remem-
bered in the trance ; languages known in
childhood, but since lost, reappear; trivial
events re-arise. Sometimes the perceptive
powers range over a larger area ; distant
occurrences are seen, vision pierces
through physical barriers, far-off speech
becomes audible. Fragments of other
planes are also occasionally glimpsed,
much mi.xed up with the thought-forms



HUMAN STATES OF CONSCIOUSNESS. 23I

of waking hours. A whole literature
exists on this subject, and can be studied i
by the investigator.

It has also been found that the results i
of deeper trance are not identical with
those of the more superficial. As the
trance deepens, higher strata of tlie
super - physical consciousness manifest
themst-'Ives in the brain. The famous
case of Lconie 1., 11. and III. is well-
known ; and it should be observed that
L(5onic I. knew nothing of L^onic 1 1.
and III.; that L^onie II. knew Ldonie
1. but did not know L^onie HI.; that
L^onie III. knew both L^onie I. and It.
That is, the higher knows the lower,
while the lower does not know the
higher — a most pregnant fact.

In the mesmeric trance, the higher
phenomena are more ea.sily obtained
than in the hypnotic, and. in this, very
clear statements may be had of the
phenomena of the astral and even of
the mental plane— where the " subject " is
well -developed — and sometimes glimpses
are gained of past Itves.

When we see that the exclusion of

Q


232 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

the physical plane is the condition for
these manifestations of the super-physical
consciousness, we begin to understand
the rationale of the methods of Voga,
practised in the East. When the methods
are physical, as in Ha(ha Yoga, the
ordinary hypnotic trance is most often
obtained, and the subject, on re-awakening,
remembers nothing of his experiences.
The method of the R4ja Yoga, in which
the consciousness is withdrawn from the
brain by intense concentration, leads the
student to continuity of consciousness on
the successive planes, and he remembers
his super-physical experiences on his
return to the waking state. Both in the
West and in the East, the same cessation
of waking-consciousness is aimed at, in
order to obtain traces of the super-
physical consciousness, or as the western
psychologist would say, from the un-
conscious in man. The eastern method,
however, with thousands of years of
experience behind it. yields results in-
comparably greater in the realms of the
super- physical consciousness, and estab-
lishes, on the sure basis of reiterato


MESS. 233

expenences, ihe independence of con-
sciousness as regards iLs physical vehicle.
The exstiLsy and the visions of Saints,
In all ages and in all creeds, afford another

I example of the irruptions from the
"unconscious." In these, prolonged and

I absorbing prayer, or conttmplation, is
the means for producing the necessary
brain -condition. The avenues of the
senses become closed by the intensity of
the inner concentration, and the same
Slate is reached spasmodically and
involuntarily which the practiser of RSja
Yoga seeks deliberately lo attain. Hence
we find that devotees of all faiths ascribe
their visions to the lavour of the Deity
worshipped, and not lo the fact that
they have produced in themselves a
passive brain-condition, which enables the
super - physical consciousness to imprint
on that brain the sights and sounds of the
higher worlds.

Prof. William James, in his Variflits
of Religious Experience, points out that
some of the most striking of these
irruptions from the "unconscious" are
cases of "sudden conversions." in which



234 A STUDV IK COKSCIOUSNESS.

a sudden thought, or vision, or voice,
has changed at once and completely the
whole course of a man's waking life.
He rightly argues that a force, sufficiently
powerful to produce such effects, cannot
be lightly waved aside, or contemptuously
ij(nored, by any serious student of human
consciousness. This whole class of
psychical phenomena demands careful and
scientific study, and promises a rich
harvest of results, as to the super-physical
consciousness, to repay the serious investi-
gator.

As against this view, however, it is
urged that these facts are observed in
connexion with morbid nervous states,
and that the subjects are hysterical,
over-excited persons, whose experiences
are vitiated by their condition. In the
first place, this is not always true ; the
eastern Rdja Yogis are persons distin-
guished for their calmness and serenity,
and some of the cases of conversion
have been those of worldly and capable
men. Let it be granted, however, that
in the majority of cases the nervous
condition is morbid, and the brain ovi



vous I



HUMAN STATES OF CONSCIOUSNESS. 3^5

' Strained, what then ? The normal brain
is admittedly evolved to the point of
resp<jnding to the vibrations of the
physical world, and of transmitting these
upwards, and of transmitting downwards
mental and astral vibrations connected
with these, from the higher vehicles. It
not yet evolved to the point of
receiving without disturbance very violent
vibrations from the higher planes, nor
of rcs[x>tiding at ail to the- vibrations set
up in the subtler vehicles by the external
phenomena of their own planes. Very

' violent emotions of joy, pain, grief terror,
often prove too much for the normal brain,
causing severe headache, hysteria, and
even nervous collapse. It is, therefore, no
wonder that the very violent emotion
which causes what is called a conversion
should often be accom|)anicd by similar
nervous distress. The important point is,
that when the nervous upset has passed,
the effect — the changed attitude towards
life — remains. The nervous disturbance

I is due to the inade([uacy of the physical
brain to bear the violent and rapid vibra-
tions dashing down upon it ; the perma-


236 A STfDV IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

nently changed aicttude is due to the steady
pressure of the super- physical conscious-
ness, continuously exerted. Where the
super- physical consciousness is not suffi-
dently developed to exert this continuous
pressure, the converted person " falls
from grace " as the surge of emotion
ebbs away.

In cases of visions, and like phenomena,
we have already seen that they may
occur when a form of trance has been
produced. But without this, such pheno-
mena may occur, in cases where the brain
is in a state of tension, either from some
temporary cause, or from the fact that its
evolution has gone beyond the normal.
Strong emotion may increase the nervous
tension to the point where response to
direct astral vibrations becomes possible,
and thus an astral happen i ng becomes
visible or audible. The reaction from the
strain will probably show itself as nervous
disturbance. When the brain is more
highly evolved than the ordinary brain,
has become more complicated and more
sensitive, astral happenings may be felt
constantly, and this strain may well be


^ \



MAN STATES OF CONSCIOUSNESS. 237 '

somewhat greater than the nervous system
is quite fitted to bear, in addition to bear-
ing the ordinary wear and tear of modern
civilisation. Hence, again, hysteria and
other forms of nervous distress are likely
to accompany the visions.

But these facts do not take away from
the importance of the experiences, as facts
in conscioustuss. Rather, perhaps, do
they increase their importance, as showing
the way in which evolution works in the
action of the environment on an organism.
The reiterated impacts of external forces
stimulate the growing organism, and
ver)' often temporarily overstrain it ;
but the ver)' .strain forces forward Its
evolution. The crest of the evolu-
tionary wave must always consist of
abnormal organisms ; the steady, normal,
safe, average organisms follow on behind ;
they are most respectable, but per-
haps not so interesting as the pioneers,
and most certainly not so instructive as
regards the future. As a matter of fact,
the forces of the astral plane are constantly
playing vigorously on the human brain, in
order that it may dcvclopc as a fuller ,


A STUDY IN COMSCIOUSNESS.



vehicle of consciousness, and a sensitive
brain, in the transitional state, is apt to be
thereby thrown a little out of gear with
the world of its past. 1 1 is probable
that a good many activities to which
thought is at present directed will,
the future, be carried on automatically, J
and will gradually sink below the thres-
hold of the waking consciousness, as have
done various functions, once performed
purposively.

As these changes go on, the subtler
vibrations must inevitably show themselves
in an increasing number in the most deli-
cately equilibrated brains, those which are
noi normal, inasmuch as these — on the
crest of evolution — will be those most'J
capable of responding. Dr. Maudsleyi
writes : " What right have we to believej
Nature under any obligation to do herJ
work by means of complete minds only?
She may find an incomplete mind a more
suitable instrument for a particular pur-
pose."' And Prof James himself remarks :
" If there were such a thing as inspiration

' Quoted in Prof. James's book, mentioned above,
I), 19. For "mind" read '



HUMAN STATES OF CONSCIOUSN ESS. 2 39 -1

from a higher realm, it might well be that
the neurotic tempemment would fiirnish
the chief condition of the requisite recep- i
tivity.""

When we once recognise that forces
subtler than the physical must necessitate
for their expression a more refined vehicle
than the brain organised for the reception
of the physical, we shall cease to be
troubled or distressed when we find that
the super-physical forces often find their
readiest expression through brains that
are more nr less t»ut of gear with the
physical plane. And we shall understand
that the abnormal physical symptoms ac-
companying their manifestations in no way
derogate from the value of these energies,
nor from the importance of the part they
will play in the future of humanity. At
the same time the wish must naturally
arise to find out some methtxl whereby
these forces may be enabled to manifest
themselves without risking the destruction
r physical instrument.



This



way



has been found in the East <



in the practice of K&ja Yoga, whereby the
'IM. P. 15.



240 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

safe exercise of the higher consciousness
is sought by intense concentration. This
concentration, in itself, developes the
brain as an instrument for the subtler
forces, working in the brain-cells in the
manner already described in connexion^
with thought.' Moreover, it slowly opetij
up the set of spirillse of the atom, next
in order to those now in activity, and
thus adds a new organ for the higher
functioning. This process is necessarily
a slow one, but it is the only safe way
of development ; and, if its slowness be
resented, it may be suggested as a reason
for patience that the student is endea-
vouring to ante-date the atomic develop-
ment of the next Round, and he can
hardly expect to accomplish this with
rapidity. It is, however, this slowness of
the Raja Yogic practices which renders
them somewhat unacceptable to the
hurrying West ; and yet there i
other way to secure a balanced develop
menl. The choice lies between this and
the morbid nervous disturbances which
accompany the irruptions of the super-
'SeeChapter VII. Si.


HUMAN STATES OF CONSCIOUSNESS. 24 1

physical consciousness into an unpre-
pared vehicle. We cannot transcend the
laws of Nature ; we can only try to
understand, and then to utilise them.


Let us now consider tne work of the
Monad in the shaping of his vehicles,

when h(; has, as his representatives-- as
himself on the third, fourth, and fifth
planes — Atin4- Buddhi - Manas, with the
causal bcxiy as the receptacle, the treasure-
house, of the experiences of each incarna-
tion.

At the close of each period of life, that
is to say, at the end of each devachanic
existence, he must stimulate into renewed
activity the three successive nuclei of
the bodies he is to wear during his
next life-period. First, he arouses the
mental nucleus. This arousing consists
in increasinfj the flow of life through the
spirilla:. It will be remembered that
when the permanent units " went to



THB MONAD AT WORK.



life



243

the



sleep." the normal fl'
spirillx lessened, and, during the whole
period of repose, this flow is small and
slow.' When the time for reincarnation
arrives, this flow is Increased, the spirillae
thrill with life, and the permanent units,
one after another, behave as magnets,
attracting round themselves appropriate
matter. Thus when the mental unit is
stimulated, it begins to vibrate strongly,
according to the vibratory- powers^the
results of past experiences — stored up
therein, drawing towards and arranging
round itself appropriate matter from the
mental plane. Just as a bar of soft iron
becomes a magnet when a current is sent
through a wire encircling it, and as matter
within its magnetic field will at once
arrange itself round that magnet, so is it
with the permanent mental unit When
the life-current encircles it. it becomes a
magnet, and matter within the field of its
forces arranges itself round it and forms a
new menial body. The matter attracted
will be according to the complexity of the
permanent unit. Not



' Se<; Chapter i'



8 4. i.


244



, STUDY IN CONSCIOUSMESS.



coarser natter be attracted, but the matter
must also vary in the development of the
atoms which enter into the formation of
its ag^regalic lecules attracted

will be comf s the vibratory

energies of ' ^tical with, or

approach ne; e in tune with,

those of t unit Hence,

according of evolution

reached by the man, ■ be the develop-
ment of the matter of his new mental
vehicle. In this way, incarnation after
incarnation, a suitable mental body is
built up.

Exactly the same process is repeated on
the astra] plane in the building of the new
astral body. The a.stral nucleus — the
astral permanent atom — is similarly vivi-
fied, and acts in a similar way.

The man is thus clothed with new
mental and astral bodies which express
his stage of evolution, and enable what-
ever powers and faculties he possesses
to express themselves duly in their own
worlds.

But when we come to the shaping of
the body on the physical plane a new



RE MONAD AT WORK.

element appears. So far as the Monad is
concerned, the work is the same. He
vivifies the physical oucIl-us — the physical
permanent atom — ^nd it acts as a magnet
like its fellows. But now it is as though
a man interfered with the attraction and
arrangement of matter within a magnetic
field ; the Elemental, charged with the
duty uf shaping the etheric double after
the model given by the Lords of Karma,
steps in and takes contml of the work.
The materials, indeed, may be gathered
together, as a workman might carry bricks
for the building of a house, but the builder
takes the bricks, accepts or rejects, and
sets them according to the plan of the i
architect.

The question arises : Why this differ-
ence .' Why, on reaching the physical
plane, where we might expect a repetition
of the previous processes, should an alien
pf)wer take the control of the building out
of the hands of the owner of the house ?
The an-swer h'es in the working of the
law of karma. On the higher planes, the
sheaths express as much of the man as is
developed, and he is not there working


24"^ A STCDV IN C0NSC10USNES.S.

out tV '. results of his past relations with
others. Each centre of Consciousness, on
those )lanes. is workinir within its own
circle ; its directed towards

its own v( nly so much uf

them as is sed through the

physic ctly upon others.

These thers complicate

his lu i J plane, and the

particular physical it,, i that he wears
durint; a particular life-period must be
suitable for the working out of this com-
plicated karma. Hence the need for the
adjusting interference of the Lords of
Karma. Were he at a point of evolution
at which he entered into similarly direct
relations with others on other planes,
similar limitations of his power to shape
his vehicles on those planes would appear.
In the sphere of his external activities,
whatever it may be, these limitations must
present themselves.

Hence the shaping of the physical
body is done by an authority higher than
his own ; he must accept the conditions
of race, nation, family, circumstances,
demanded by his past activities. This



HE MONAD AT WORK.

limiting action of karma necessitates the
building of a vehicle which is but
f>artial expression of the working con-
sciousness — partial, not only because of ]
the shutting off of power by the coarse-
ness of the material itsdf. but also because
of the external limitations above referred
to. Much of his consciousness, even I
though ready for expression on the
physical plane, may thus be excluded, i
and only a sm;ill part of it may appear |
on the physical plane ;is waking - con-
sciousness.

The next point in connexion with this ,
building that we must consider is the
special work of organising the vehicles
as expressions of consciousness, leaving
' apart the general building by desire and
thought, with which we are so familiar.
We arc concerned here with details,
rather than with broad outlines.

We know that while qualities are
im[)arted to matter during the descent of
the Second Logos, the arrangement of
these specialised materials into relatively
permanent forms belongs to His ascenL
When the Monad, through his reflexion


24»



as t i Spiritual Mao. assumes some
direc 'e power over bis vehides. be
finds ^ "' "' ^ •" —— — *ioa of a form in
whidi tcT\'ous system ts

fAayh it, and in which

the c v sot yet assumed

predi have to work up

a nur g links between

this r i which he inherits

and the centres wnicn iie must organise
in his astra! body, for his future inde-
pendent functioning therein. But before
iiny in'I<:[H;ndent functioninjf in any higher
vehicle is [Kjssible, it is necessary to
carry it to a fairly high point as a
iransmilling vehicle, that is a vehicle
through which he works down to his
Iw)dy on the physical plane. We must
distinguish between the primary work of
the organisation of the mental and astral
vehicles that fits them to be transmitters
of part of ihe consciousness of the
Spiritual Man, and the later work of
developing these same vehicles into
independent bodies, in which the Spiritual
M an will be able to function on their
respective planes. Hence there are two



THE MONAD AT WORK.



249 I



tasks to be performed : first the organisa-
tion of the mental and astral vehicles as
transmitters of consciousness to the
physical body ; secondly, the organisation
of these vehicles into independent bodies,
in which consciousness can function
without the help of the physical body.

The astral and mental vehicles, then,
must be organised in order that the
Spiritual Man may use the physical
brain and nervous system as his organ
of consciousness on the physical plane.
The impulse to such use comes from
the physical world by imjjacts upon the
various nerve-ends, causing waves of
nervous energy to pass along the fibres
to the brain : these waves pass from the
dense brain to the ctheric, thence to the
astral, thence to the mental vehicle,
arousing a response from the conscious-
ness in the causal body on the mental
plane. That consciousness, thus roused
by impacts from without, gives rise to
vibrations, which How down in answer
from the causal body to the mental,
from the mental to the astral, from the
astral to the ethcric and dense physical ;



1



}



250 A STVDV m COKSCVXSXtSS^

the waves set up electric currents in the
etheric brain, and these act on the dense
matter of the nervous cells.

AI] these vibratory actions gradually
organise the first inchoate clouds of
astral and mental matter into vehicles
which serve as effective fields for these
constant actions and re-actions. This
process goes on during hundreds of
births, started, as we have seen, from
below, but gradually coming more and
more under the control of the Spiritual
Man ; he begins to direct his activities
by his memories of past sensations, and
.starts each activity under the impulse of
these memories stimulated by desire.
As the process continues, more and
more forcible direction comes from within,
and less and less directive power is
exercised by the attractions and repulsions
of external objects, and thus the control
of the buildin;; up of the vehicles is
largely withdrawn from the without and
is centred in the within.

As the vehicle becomes more organised,
certain aggregations of matter appear
within it, at first cloudy and vague, then



more and more definitely outlined. These "
are the future chakras, or wheels, the
sense-centres of t he astral body, as
distinguished from the astral sense-centres
connected with the sense-organs and
centres of the physical body.' But
nothing is done to vivify these slowly
growing centres for immense periods of
time, and the connexion of ihem with
the physical body is often delayed, even
after they are functioning on the astral
plane : for this connexion can only be
made from the physical vehicle, wherein
the fiery force of Kundalini resides. Before
Kun^alini can reach them, so that they
can pass their observations on to the
physical body, they must be linked to
the sympathetic nervous system, the large
ganglionic cells in that system lieing the
points of contact. When these links are
made, the fier)' current can How through,
and observations of astral events can be
transmitted fully to the physical brain.
While they can only be thus linked with
the physical vehicle, the building of them
as centres and the gradual organisation .
' S«c Chapter vii. 9 s.



252 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSMESS.

of them into wheels, can be begun from
any vehicle, and will be begun in any
individual from that vehicle which repre-
sents the special tj'pe of temperament to
which he belongs. According as a man
belongs to one typical temperament or
another, so will be the place of the
greatest activity in the building up of
all the vehicles, in the gradual making
of them into effective instruments of
consciousness to be expressed on the
physical plane. This centre of activity
may be in the physical, astral, lower, or
higher mental body. In any of these,
or even higher still, according to the
temperamental type, this centre will be
found in the principle which marks out
the temperamental type, and from tliat
it works " upwards " or " downwards,"
shaping the vehicles so as to make them
suitable for the expression of that tem-
perament.

g 2. An Evoi.vmc Man.

A special case may be taken to facili-
tate the understanding of this process — a



)



THE MONAD AT WORK.



aS3



temperament in which the concrete mind
predominates. We will trace the Spiritual
Man through the third, fourth, and fifth
Root Races. When we look at him at
work in the third Race, we find him very
infantile mentally, even though the mind
is the predominant note of his type.
The surging life around him, that he can
neither understand nor master, works
strongly upon him from outside, and
powerfully affects his astral vehicle. This
astral vehicle will be retentive of impres-
sions, in consequence of the temperament,
and the desires will stimulate the infantile
mind to efforts directed lo their satis-
faction. His physical constitution differs
from that of the fifth Race man : the
sympathetic system is stil! dominant, and
the cerebro ■ spinal system subordinate,
but parts of the sympathetic system are
beginning to lose much of their effective-
ness as instruments of consciousness,
belonging, as such instruments, to the
stage below the human. There are two
bodies in the brain especially connected
with the sympathetic system in their
inception, although now forming part of


254 A STOW SM

the c ebro-spinal — the pineal gbnd and
the I iitary- bodjr. They fflostiate the
way in ^fci*4i « •■— • «f the body may
functi K an early stage,

may use and function

little, if k later stage of

evolu RMtmiilated by a

hightr rfi win give it a

new use l a higher stage

of evolution.

The development of these bodies befongs
to the invf.-rtebrat*; rather than to the
vertebrate kin[(dom, and the "third eye"
is spoken of by bioiofjists as the
"invertebrate eye." It is, however, still
friiind, as an eye among vertebrates,
for a snake was lately found in Australia
which showi^d on the top of the head
a peculiar arrangement of semi-trans-
parent scales ; when these were cut
away a complete eye was found under-
neath --- an eye complete in its parts
although not functioning. That third eye
was functioning among the Lemurians in
the vague and general way characteristic
of the lower stages of evolution, and
specially characteristic of the sympathetic



system. As our man advanced from the
Lemurian into ihe Atlantean Race, the
third eye ceased to function, the brain
developed round it. ;ind it became
the appendage now called the pineal
gland. As a Lemurian, he had been
psychic, the sym])aiheiic system being
largely affected by the surgings of the
undeveloped astral body. As an Atlan-
tean. he gradually lost his psychic powers,
as the sympathetic system became sub-
ordinate and the cerebro- spinal grew!
stronger.

The growth of the cerebro-spinal system J
would be more rapid in this Atlantean
than in those of other temperaments,
because the main activity would be in
the concrete mind, and would thus stimu-
late and fjishion it ; the astral Ixjdy would
lose its predominance sooner, and would
become more rapidly a transmitter of |
mental impulses to the brain. Hence,
when our man piissed on into the fifth
Race, he would be peculiarly ready to
take advantage of its characteristics : he
would build a large and well-proportioned .
brain ; he would utilise his astral chiefly



256 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

as a transmitter, and would build his
chakras from the mental plane.



%$. The PrTUJTARV Body and Pineal GLAHSbl

To return to the second of the two
bodies mentioned above — the pituitary
body. This is regarded as developed
from a primeval mouth, in direct con-
tinuity with the alimentary canal of the
invertebrates. It ceased to function as a
mouth in the vertebrates, and became a
rudimentary organ ; but it has retained a
peculiar function in connexion with the
growth of the body. It is active during
the normal period of physical growth, and
the more actively it functions, the greater
the growth of the body, In giants it has
been found that this organ is peculiarly
active. Moreover, the pituitary body
sometimes again begins to function in
later life, when the bony framework of
the body is set. and then causes abnormal
and monstrous growth at the free points
of the body, hands, feet, nose, etc., giving
rise to disfigurement of a most distressing
kind.



THE MONAD AT WORK.



257



As the cerebro-spinal system became
dominant, the earlier function of these two
bodies disappeared ; but these organs have
a future as well as a past. The past was
connected with the sympathetic system ;
the future is connected with the cerebro-
spinal system. As evolution goes on. and
the chakras in the astral body are vivified,
the pituitary body becomes the physical
or)|;an for aslnU. and later, for mental
clairvoyance. Where too great a strain
is made upon the ;isirai faculty of sight,
while in the physical bo(Jy, inHammation
of the pituitary body sometimes results.
This organ is the one through which the
knowledge gained by astral vision is trans-
mitted to the brain ; and it is also used in
vivifying the points of contact between the
sympathetic system and the asiraJ body,
whereby a continuity of consciousness
is established between the astral and
physical planes.

The pineal gland becomes connected
with one of the chakras in the astral body,
and through that with the mental body,
and serves as a physical organ for the
transmission of thought from one brain '



258 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

to another. In thought transmission the
thought may be flashed from mind to
mind, mental matter being used as the
medium for transmission ; or it may be
sent down to the physical brain, and by
means of the pineal gland may be sent,
via the physical ether, to the pineal gland
in another brain, and thus to the receiving
consciousness.

While the centre of activity lies in the
dominant principle of the man, the con-
nexion of the chakras with the physical
body must be made, as said, from the
physical plane. The object of this con-
nexion is not to make the astral vehicle a
more efficient transmitter to the physical
body of the energies of the Spiritual Man.
but to enable the astral vehicle to be in
full touch with the physical. There may be
different centres of activity for the build-
ing up of transmitting vehicles, but it is
necessary to start from the physical plane
in order to bring the results of the
activities of bodies functioning on other
planes within the waking - consciousness.
Hence the high importance of physical
purity in diet and other matters.



icai J



THE MOKAO AT WOKK.



259



People often ask : How does knowledge
gained on higher planes reach ihe brain,
and why is it not accompanied by a
memory of the circumstances under which
it was acquired ? Anyone who practises
meditation regularly knows that much
knowlcdgtr that he has not gained by
study on the physical plane appears in
the brain. Whence comes it? It comes
from the astral or mental plane, where it
was acquired, and reaches the brain in the
ordinary way above described ; the con-
sciousness has assimilated it un the mental
plane directly, or it has reached it from the
astral, and sends down thought-waves as
usual. It may have been communicated by
some entity on the higher plane, who has
acted directly on the menuU body. Bui
the circumstances of the communication
may not be remembered, for one uf two
reasons, or for both. Most people arc not
what is technically called "awake" on the
astral and mental planes ; that is, their
faculties are turned inwards, are occupied
with mental processes and emotions, and
arc not engaged in the observation of the
externa] phenomena of those planes.



260



A STUDY IN CONSCIOOSHESS.



They may be very receptive, and their
astral and mental bodies may easily be
thrown into vibration, and the vibrations
convey the knowledge which is thus given,
but their attention is not turned to the ,
person making the communication,
evolution goes on, people become mart
and more receptive on the astral and
mental planes, but do not therefore
become aware of their surroundings.

The other reason for the lack of
memory is the absence of the connecting
links with the sympathetic system before
mentioned. A person may be "awake"
on the astral plane and functioning
actively thereon, and he may be vividly
conscious of his surroundings. But if the
connecting links between the astral and
physical systems have not been made, or
are not vivified, there is a break in con-
sciousness. However vivid may be the
consciousness on the astral plane, it can-
not, until these links are functioning, bring
through and impress on the physical brain
the memory of astral expriences. In
addition to these links, there must be the
active functioning of the pituitary body,



THE MONAD AT WORJ

which focusses the astral vibrations much
as a burning glass focusses the rays of the
sun. A number of the astral vibrations
are drawn together and made to fall on a
I)articular point, and vibrations being thus
set up in dense physical matter, the further
propagation of these is easy. All this is
necessary for "remembering."

§4. Thk Paths or Consciousness.

The question arises : Does conscious-
ness always travel along the same path
to reach its physical vehicle ? Transits,
we know, are sometimes made directly
through the atomic sub-planes from plane
to plane, and sometimes by passing
through each sub-plane from the seventh
to the first before reaching the atomic sub-
plane next below. Which of these [laths
does consciousness follow? In its normal
working, in the ordinar)' process of think-
ing, the wave comes steadily down through
each successive sub-plane, from the mental
through the seven astral sub-planes to the
physical etheric, and so to the dense ner-
vous matter. This wave sets up electrical



262


A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



curren s in the etheric matter, and these
affect Jie protoplasm of the grey cells.
But w den the peculiar flashes of con-
lashes of genius,
tive ideas which
a flash as comes
n out of a great
:nly springs forth
law — then the

puurs A'nward through

the atomic sub - planes only, and thus
reaches the brain. This is the illuminative
idea which justifies itself by its mere
appearance, like the sunli<fht, and does not
gain ill compelling power by any process
of reasoning. Thus reasoning comes to
the brain by the successive sub-planes ;
authoritative illumination by the atomic
sub-planes only.



SCIOUSI


1 c


or as


51


flash ..,


tl:


to the


mass (


the ui


'U


consciousness



Chapter XII.

THE NATURE OF MEMORY.

§1. The Great Self and the Little Selves.

What is memory ? and how does it work ?
by what means do we recover the past,
whether near or remote ? For, after all,
whether the past be near or remote,
belonging to this or to any anterior life,
the means which govern its recovery must
be similar, and we require a theory which
will include all cases of memory, and at
the same time will enable us to understand
each particular case.

The first step towards obtaining a
definite and intelligible theory is a com-
prehension of our own composition, of the
Self with its sheaths, and their inter-
relation ; and we may here briefly restate
the main facts in the foregoing chapters

S 263



264 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

which directly bear on the problem of
Memory. We must bear constantly in mind
the facts that our consciousness is a unit,
and that this unit of consciousness works
through various sheaths, which impose
upon it a false appearance of muhiplicity.
The innermost, or most tenuous, of these
sheaths is inseparable from the unit of
consciousness ; in fact, it is this sheath
which makes it a unit. This unit is the
Monad, dwelling; on the anupadaka plane ;
but for all practical purposes we may take
it as the familiar Inner Man, the Tri-
Atom, AtmS-Buddhi-Manas, thought of as
apart from the dtmic, buddhic, and mSnasic
sheaths. This unit of consciousness
manifests through, abides in, sheaths
belonging to the five planes of its activity,
and we call it the Self working in its
sheaths.

We must think, then, of a conscious
Self dwelling in vehicles that vibrate.
The vibrations of these vehicles corre-
spond, on the side of matter, with the
changes in consciousness on the side of
the Self We cannot accurately speak of
vibrations of consciousness, because vibra-



THB MATURE OF MEMORY. 365

tions can only belong to the material side
of thinjjs, the form side, and only loosely
can we speak of a vibrating consciousness.
We have changes in consciousness corre-
sponding with vibrations in sheaths.

The question of the vehicles, or bodies,
in which consciousness, the Self, is
working, is all - im portant as regards
Memory. The whole process of recover-
more or less remote events is a
ition of picturing them in the particular
'■heath — of shaping part of the matter of
the sheath into their likeness — in which
consciousness is working at the time. In
the Self, as a fragment of the Universal
Self — which for our purpose we can take
10 be the Lot;os, although in verity the
Logos is but a portion of the Universal
Self — is present everything ; for in the
Universal Self is present all which has
taken place, is taking place, and will
take place in the universe ; all this, and
an illimitable more, is present in the
Universal Consciousness. Let us think
only of a universe and its Logos. We
speak of Him as omnipresent and
omnisdent. Now, fundamentally, that



266


A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



omnipresence and omniscience are in the
individualised Self, as being one with the
Lodos, but — we must put in here a but —
with a difference ; the difference consisting
in this, that while in the separated Self as
Self, apart from all vehicles, that omni-
presence and omniscience reside by virtue
of his unity with the One Self, the vehicles
in which he dwells have not yet learned to
vibrate in answer to his changes of con-
sciousness, as he turns his attention to one
or another part of his contents. Hence
we say that all exists in him potentially,
aud not as in the Logos actually : all the
changes which go on in the consciousness
of the Logos are reproducible in this
separated Self, which is an indivisible part
of His life, but the vehicles are not yet
ready as media of manifestation. Because
of the separation of form, because of this
closing in of the separate, or individualised,
Self these po.ssibilities which are within it
as part of the Universal Self are latent, not
manifest, are possibilities, not actualities.
As in every atom which goes to the
making up of a vehicle, there are illimit-
able possibilities of vibration, so in every



THE NATURE OF MEMORY.



267



F separated Self there are illimitable possi-
bilities of changes of consciousness.

We do not find in the atom, at the
beginning of a solar system, an illimitable
■ Variety of vibrations ; but we learn that
possesses a capacity to acquire an
I illimitable variety of vibrations ; it acquires
I these in the course of its evolution, as it
F responds continually to vibrations playing
Upon its surface ; at the end of a solar
system, an immense number of the atoms
in it have reached the stage of evolution
in which they can vibrate in answer to any
vibration touching them that arises within
the system ; then, for that system, these
atoms are said to be perfected. The same
thing is true for the sejiarated, or individ-
ualised, Selves. All the changes taking
place in the consciousness of the Logos
which arc represented in that universe,
and take shape as forms in that universe,
all these are also within the perfected
consciousnesses tn that universe, and any
l©f these changes can be reproduced in any
IfHic of them. Here is Memory : the
^reappearance, the reincarnation in matter,
anything that has been within that



268



A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



universe, and therefore ever is, :
consciousness of its Logos, and in thi
consciousnesses which are parts of His
consciousness. Ahhough we think of the
Self as separate as regards all other
Selves, we must ever remember
inseparate as regards the One Self, the!
Logos. His life is not shut out from any
part of His universe, and in Him we live
and move and have our being, open ever
to Him, filled with His life.

As the self puts on vehicle after vehicle
of matter, its powers of gaining knowledge
become, with each additional vehicle, more
circumscribed but also more definite.
Arrived on the physical plane, conscious-
ness is narrowed down to the e.xperiences
which can be received through the
physical body, and chiefly through those
openings which we call the sense-organs ;
these are avenues through which know-
ledge can reach the imprisoned Self,
though we often speak of them as
shutting out knowledge when we think
of the capacities of the subtler vehicles.
The physical body renders perception
definitive and clear much as a screen



THE MATURE OF MEMORY.

> with a minute hole in it allows a picture
of the outside world tn appear on a wall
that would otherwise show a blank surface;
rays of light are truly shut off from the

I wall, but, by that very shutting off,

[ those allowed to enter form a clearly

I detincd picture.



^



§2. ClIANGtS IN THE VhHlCLKS AND IN

CowsciousN>:ss.

Let US now see what happens as
regards the physical vehicle in the
reception of an impression and in the
subsequent recall of that impression, Le.,
in the memor)' of it

A vibration from outside strikes on an
organ of sense, and is transmitted to the
appropriate centre in the brain. A group
of cells in the brain vibrates, and that
vibration leaves tlie cells in a state some-
what different from the one in which they
were previous to its reception. The trace
of that response is a possibility for the
group uf cells ; it has once vibrated in a
particular way, and it retains for the rest
of its existence as a group of cells the



2/0 A STUDV IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

possibility of again vibrating In that same
way without again receiving a stimulus
from the outside world. Each repetition
of an identical vibration strengthens this
possibility, each leaving its own trace, but
many such repetitions will be required to
establish a self-initiated repetition ; the
cells come nearer to this possibility of a
self-initiated vibration by each repetition
compelled from outside. But this vibra-
tion has not stopped with the physical
cells ; it has been transmitted inwards to
the corresponding cell, or group of cells,
in the subtler vehicles, and has ultimately
produced a change in consciousness. This
change, in its turn, re-acts on the cells,
and a repetition of the vibrations is
initiated from within by the change in
consciousness, and this repetition is a
memory of the object which started the
series of vibrations. The response of the
cells to the vibration from outside, a
response compelled by the laws of the
physical universe, gives to the cells the
power of responding to a similar impulse,
though feebler, coming from within, A
little power is exhausted in each moving



THK MATURE OF HEMORV.



a? I



*of matter in a new vehicle, and hence a
gradual diminution of the energy in the
vibration. Less and less is exhausted as
the cells repeat similar vibrations in
response to new impacts from without,
the cells answering more readily with
each repetition.

Therein lies the value of the "without";
it wakes up in the matter, more easily
than by any other way, the possibility of
response, being more cinsely akin to the
vehicles than the "within."

The change caused in consciousness,
also, leaves the consciousness more ready
to repeat that change than it was first
to yield it. and each such change brings
the consciousness nearer lo the power to
initiate a similar change. Looking back
into the dawnings of consciousness, we
see that the imprisoned Selves go through
innumerable experiences before a Self-
initiated change in consciousness occurs ;
but bearing this in mind, as a fact, we
can leave these early stages, and study
the workings of consciousness at a more
advanced point. We must also remember
that every impact, reaching the innermost



272


.STUDV IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



sheath, and giving rise to a change in
consciousness, is followed by a reaction,
the change in consciousness causing a
new series of vibrations from within out-
wards ; there is the going inwards to the
Self, followed by the rippling outwards
from the Self, the first due to the object,
and giving rise to what we call a percep-
tion, and the second due to the reaction
of the Self, causing what we call a
memory.

A number of sense-impressions, coming
through sight, hearing, touch, taste, and
smell run up from the physical vehicle
through the astral to the mental. There
they are co-ordinated into a complex unity,
as a musical chord is composed of many
notes. This is the special work of the
mental body : it receives many streams
and synthesises them into one ; it builds
many impressions into a perception, a
thought, a complex unity.

§3. Memories.
Let us try to catch this complex thing,
after it has gone inwards and has caused
a change in consciousness, an idea ; the



THE NATURE OF MEMORY.



273



inwa:



ige it has caused gives rise to new
vibrations in the vehicles, reproducing
those it had caused on its inward way,
and in each vehicle i t reappears in a
fainli^r form. It is not strong, vigorous,
and vivid, as when its component parts
flashed from the physical to the astral,
and from the astral to the mental ; it
reappears in the mental in a fainter form,
the copy of that which the mental sent
nwards. but the vibrations feebler ; as
le Self receives from it a reaction — for
impact of a vibration on touching
vehicle musi cause a reaction — that
Lclion is far feebler than the original
action, and will therefore seem less "real"
than that action ; it makes a lesser change
consciousness, and that lessening repre-
ils inevitably a less "reality."
So long as the consciousness is too little
>nsive to be aware of any impacts that
not come through with the impulsive
vigour of the physical, it is literally more
in touch with tlie physical than with
any other sheath, and there will be no
memories of ideas, but only memories
of perceptions, i.e., of pictures of out-



274


A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



side objects, caused by vibrations of the
nervous matter of the brain, reproducing
themselves in the related astral and mental
matter. These are literally pictures in the
mental matter, as are the pictures on the
retina of the eye. And the consciousness
perceives these pictures, "sees" them, as
we may truly say. since the seeing of the
eye is only a limited expression of its
perceptive power. As the consciousness
draws a little away from the physical,
turning attention more to the modifica-
tions in its inner sheaths, it sees these
pictures reproduced in the brain from the
astral sheath by its own reaction passing
outwards, and there is the memory of
sensations. The picture arises in the
brain by the reaction of the change in
consciousness, and is recognised there.
This recognition implies that the con-
sciousness has withdrawn largely from the
physical to the astral vehicle, and is
working therein. The human conscious-
ness is thus working at the present
time, and is, therefore, full of memories,
these memories being reproductions in
the physical brain of past pictures, caused



THE NATURE OF MEMORY. 275

by reactions from consciousness. In a
lowly evolved human type, these pictures
are pictures of past events in which the
physical body was concerned, memories
of hunger and thirst and of their gratifi-
cation, of se.icual pleasures, and so on,
things in which the physical body took an
active part. In a higher type, in which
the consciousness is working more in the
mental vehicle, the pictures in the astral
body will draw more of its attention ;
these pictures are shaped in the astral
body by the vibrations coming outwards
from the mental, and are percfived as
pictures by the consciousness as it with-
draws itself more into the mental body
as its immediate vehicle. As this process
goes on. and the more awakened con-
sciousness responds to vibrations initiated
from outside on the astral plane by astral
objects, these objects grow " real," and
become distinguishable from the memories,
the pictures in the astral body caused by
the reactions from consciousness.

Let us note, in passing, that with the
memory of an object goes hand in hand
a picture of the renewal of the keener



276 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

experience of the object by physical
contact, and this we call anticipation ;
and the more complete the memory of an
event the more complete is this anticipa-
tion. So that the memory will sometimes
even cause in the physical body the
reactions which normally accompany the
contact with the external object, and we
may savour in anticipation pleasures which
are not within present reach of the body.
Thus the anticipation of savoury food will
cause "the mouth to water." This fact
will again appear, when we reach the
completion of our theory of Memory. ■

§4- What is Memokv?

Now, having noted the changes in the
vehicles which arise from impacts from the
external world, the response to these as
changes of consciousness, the feebler
vibrations produced in the vehicles by
the reaction of consciousness, and the
recognition of these again by conscious-
ness as memories, let us come to the crux
of the question: What is Memory? The
breaking up of ihe bodies between death



tJRE OF memo:

and reincarnation puts an end to their
automatism, to their power of responding
to vibrations similar to those already
experienced ; the responsive groups are
disintegrated, and all chat remains as a
seed for future responses is stored within
the permanent atoms; how feeble this is.
as compared with the new automatisms
imposed on the mass of the bodies by new
experiences of the external, may be judged
by the absence of any memory of past
lives initiated in the vehicles themselves.
In fact, all the permanent atoms can do
is to answer more readily l(» vibrations of
a kind similar to those previously
experienced than to those that come to
them for the first time. The memory of
the cells, or of groups of cells, perishes at
death, and cannot be said to be recover-
able, as such. Where then is Memory
preserved ?

The brief answer is : Memory is not a
faculty, and is not preser\'ed : it does not
inhere in consciousness as a capacity, nor
is any memory of events stored up in the
individual consciousness Every event is
a present fact in the universe -conscious-



278 A STUDY m CONSCIOUSNESS.

ness, in the consciousness of the Logos ;
everything that occurs in His universe,
past, present, and future, is ever there in
His all-embracing consciousness, in His
"eternal now." From the beginning of
the universe to its ending, from its dawn
to its sunset, all is there, ever-present,
existent. In that ocean of ideas, all
IS ; we, wandering in the ocean,
touch fragments of its contents, and
our response to the contact is our
knowledge ; having known, we can
more readily again contact, and this
repetition— when falling short of the
contact of the outside sheath of the
moment with the fragments occupying its
own plane — is Memory. All "memories"
are recoverable, because all possibilities
of image-producing vibrations are within
the consciousness of the Locos, and we
can share in that consciousness the more
easily as we have previously shared
more often similar vibrations ; hence, the
vibrations which have formed parts of
our experience are more readily repeated
by us than those we have never known,
and here comes in the value of the



JORV. 279

permanent atoms ; they thrill out again,
on being stimulated, the vibrations
previously performed, and out of all the
possibilities of vibrations of the atoms
and molecules of our bodies those sound
out which answer to the note struck by
the permanent atoms. The fact that we
have been affected vibrationally and by
changes of consciousness during the
present life makes it easier for us to
take out of the universal consciousness
that of which we have already had
experience in our own. Whether it be
a memory in the present life, or one in
a life long past, the method of recovery
is the same. There is no memory save
the ever-present consciousness of the
Logos, in whom we literally live and
move and have our being ; and our
memory is merely putting ourselves into
touch with such parts of His conscious-
ness as we have previously shared.

Hence, according to Pythagoras, all
learning is remembrance, for it is the
drawing from the consciousness of the
Locos into that of the separated Self
that which in our essential unity with


aSo A STUDV IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

Him is eternally ours. On the
where the unity overpowers the sep.
ness, we share His consciousness of our
universe ; on the lower planes, where
the separateness veils the unity, we are
shut out therefrom by our unevolved
vehicles. It is the lack of responsiveness
in these which hinders us, for we can
only know the planes through them.
Therefore we cannot directly improve
our memory ; we can only improve
our general receptivity and power to
reproduce, by rendering our bodies more
sensitive, while being careful not to go
beyond their limit of elasticity. Also we
can "pay attention"; i.e., we can turn
the awareness of consciousness, we can
concentrate consciousness, on that special
part of the consciousness of the Logos
to which we desire to attune ourselves.
We need not thus distress ourselves with
calculations as to "how many angels can
stand on the point of a needle." how we
can preserve in a limited space the
illimitable number of vibrations experi-
enced in many lives ; for the whole of the
form -producing vibrations in the universe



THE NATURE OF MEMORY.

are ever-present, and aje available to be
drawn upon by any individual unit, and
can be reached as, by evolution, such a

I one experiences ever more and more.
■ §5. Remembering and Forgktiing.

Let us apply this to an event in our
past life : Some of the circumstances
" remain in our memory." others are
"forgotten." Really, the event exists
with all its surrounding circumstances,
■* remembered " and '" forgotten " alike, in
but one state, the memory of the Logos,
the Universal Memory. Anyone who is
able to place himself in touch with that
memory can recover the whole circum-
stance as much as we can ; the events
through which zue have pasied are not
ours, but form part of the contents of
His consciousncs ; and our sense of
property in them is only due to the fact
that we have previously vibrated to
them, and therefore vibrate again to them
more readily than if we contacted them
Jbr the first time.

Ve may. however, contact ihem with
ifferent sheaths at different times, living


A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

as we do under time and space conditions
which vary with each sheath. The part
of the consciousness of the Logos that
we move through in our physical bodies
is far more restricted than that we move
through in our astral and mental bodies,
and the contacts through a well -organised
body are far more vivid than those
through a less-organised one. Moreover,
it must be remembered that the restriction
of area is due to our vehicles only ; faced
by the complete event, physical, astral,
mental, spiritual, our consciousness of it
is limited within the range of the vehicles
able to respond to it. We feel ourselves
io be among the circumstances which
surround the grossest vehicle we are
acting in, and which thus touch it from
" outside " ; whereas we " remember " the
circumstances which we contact with the
finer vehicles, these transmitting the
vibrations to the grosser vehicle, which
is thus touched from "within."

The test of objectivity that we apply to
circumstances "present" or "remembered"
is that of the "common sense." If others
around us see as we see, hear as we hear,


THE NATURE OF MEMORY. 283

regard the circumstances as objective ;
if they do not, if they are unconscious of
that of which we are conscious, we regard
the circumstances as subjective. But this
test of objectivity is only valid for those
who are active in the same sheaths ; if one
person is working in the physical body and
another in the physical and the astral, the
things objective to the man in the astral
body cannot affect the man in the physical
boily, and he will declare them to be
subjective hallucinations. The " common
sense " can only work in similar bodies ;
it will give similar results when all are in
physical bodies, all in astral, or all in
mental For the *' common sense " is
merely the thought-forms of the Logos on
each plane, conditioning each embodied
consciousness, and enabling it to respond
by certain changes to certain vibrations in
jts vehicles. It is by no means confined

the physical plane , but the average
humanity at the present stage of evolution
has not sufficiently unfolded the indwelling
consciousness for them to exercise any
■* common sense " on the astral and mental
planes. " Common sense " is an eloquent



L



284 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

testimony to the oneness of our indwelling
lives ; we see all things around us on the
physical plane in the same way, because
our apparently separate consciousnesses are
all really part of the One Consciousness
ensouling all forms. We all respond inJ
the same general way, according to th
stage of our evolution, because we shared
the same consciousness ; and we are
affected similarly by the same things
because the action and reaction between
them and ourselves is the interplay of the
One Life in varied forms.

Recovery of anything by memory, then,
is due to the ever-existence of everything
in the consciousness of the Locos, and
He has Imposed upon us the limitations
of time and space in order that we may.
by practice, be able to respond swiftly by
changes of consciousness to the vibrations
caused in our vehicles by vibrations
coming from other vehicles similarly
ensouled by consciousness ; thus only can
we gradually learn to distinguish precisely
and clearly; contacting things successively
— that is, being in time- — and contacting
them in relative directions in regard to


Hature of memory. 285

rselves and to each other — that is, being
in space — we are gradually unfolded to the
stite in which we can recognise all simul-
taneously and each everywhere — that is.
tut of time and space.
As we pass through countless hap-
inings in life, we find that we do not
;p in touch with all through which we
there is a very limited
iwer of response iu our physical vehicle,
id hence numerous experiences drop out
'of its purview. In trance, we can recover
these, and they are said to emerge from
the sub ■ conscious. Truly they remain
ever unchanging in the Universal Con-
sciousness, and as we pass by them we
become aware of them, because the
very limited light of our consciousness,
shrouded in the physical vehicle, falls
upon them, and they disappear as we pass
on ; but as the area covered by that same
light shining through the astral vehicle is
larger, they again appear when we are in
trance— that is, in the astral vehicle, free
from the physical ; they have not come
and gone and come back again, but the
light of our consciousness in the physical



286



A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



vehicle had passed on, and so we saw
them not, and the more extended light in
the astral vehicle enables us to see them
again. As BhagavSn Dis has well
said : —

" If a spectator wandered unrestinglj
through the halls of a vast museum,
great art - gallery, at the dead of night,
with a single small lamp in one hand,
each of the natural objects, the pictured
scenes, the statues, the portraits, would be
illumined by that lamp, in succession, for
a single moment, white alt the rest were
in darkness, and after that single moment,
would itself fall into darkness again. Let
there now be not one but countless such
spectators, as many in endless number as
the objects of sight within the place, each
spectator meandering in and out inces-
santly through the great crowd of all the
others, each lamp bringing momentarily
into light one object and for only that
spectator who holds that lamp. This
immense and unmoving building is the
rock -bound ideation of the changeless
Absolute. Each lamp-carrying spectator
out of the countless crowd is one line of



THE NATURE OF~MEMORV. 287

consciousness out of the pseudo - infinite
lines of such, that make up the totality of
the one universal consciousness. Each
coming into hght of each object is its
patency, is an experience of the Jiva ;
each falling into darkness is its lapse into
the latenL From the standpoint of the
objects themselves, or of the universal
consciousness, there is no latency, nor
patency. From that of the lines of con-
sciousness, there is."'

As vehicle after vehicle comes into fuller

[ working, the area of light extends, and the

I ■ consciousness can turn its attention to any

one part of the area and observe closely

I the objects therein included. Thus, when

the consciousness can function freely on

the astral plane, and Is aware of its

surroundings there, it can see much that

on the physical plane is "past" — or

"future," if they be things to which in the

"past" it ha-s learned to respond. Things

I outside the area of Hght coming through

I the vehicle of the astral body will be within

[the area of that which streams from the

f subtler mental vehicle. When the causal

• 7*1- .'vtfmct of PtaM. (In ihe pnsa.)


L



265 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

body is the vehicle, the " memory of past
lives " is recoverable, the causal body
vibrating more readily to events to which
it has before vibrated, and the light shining
through it embracing a far larger area and
illuminating scenes long " past " — those
scenes being really no more past than the
scenes of the present, but occupying a
different spot in time and space. The
lower vehicles, which have not previously
vibrated to these events, cannot readily
directly contact them and answer to them ;
that belongs to the causal body, the
relatively permanent vehicle. But when
this body answers to them, the vibrations
from it readily run downwards, and may
be reproduced in the mental, astral, and
physical bodies.

§ 6. Attention.

The phrase is used above, as to con*
-sciousness, that " it can turn its attention
to any one part of the area, and observe
closely the objects therein included." This
" turning of the attention " corresponds
very closely in consciousness to what we
should call focussing the eye in the physical



THE NATURE OF MEMORY.



289



y. If we watch the action taking place
in the muscles of the eye when we look
first at a near and then at a distant object,
or vice versa, we shall be conscious of a
slight movement, and ihis constriction or
relaxation causes a slight compression or
the reverse in the lenses of the eye. It is
an automatic action now, quite instinctive,
but it has only become so by practice ; a
baby does not focus his eye. nor judge
distance. He grasps as readily at a candle
on the other side of the room as at one
within his reach, and only slowly learns to
know what is beyond his reach. The
, effort to see clearly leads to the focussing
\. of the eye, and presently it becomes auto-
! malic. The objects for which the eye is
focussed arc within the field of clear vision,
and the rest are vaguely seen. So, also,
ihe consciousness is clearly aware of that
to which its attention is turned ; other
things remain vague, "out of focus."

A man gradually learns to thus turn his

attention to things long past, as wc measure

lime. The causal body is put into touch

with them, and the vibrations are then

ktntnsi lower bodies. The



290



A STUDY m CONSCIOUSNESS.



presence of a more advanced student will
help a less advanced, because when the
astral body of the former has been made
to vibrate respoiisively to long past events,
thus creating an astral picture of them, the
astral body of the younger student can
more readily reproduce these vibrations
and thus also " see." But even when
a man has learned to put himself into
touch with his past, and through his own
with that of others connected with it, he
will find it more diflicult to turn his atten-
tion effectively to scenes with which he
has had no connexion ; and when that is
mastered, he will still find it difficult to put
himself into touch with scenes outside the
experiences of his recent past ; for instance,
if he wishes to visit the moon, and by his
accustomed methods launches himself in
that direction, he will find himself bom-
barded by a hail of unaccustomed vibrations
to which he cannot mstinctively respond,
and will need to fall back on his inherent
divine power to answer to anything which
can affect his vehicles. If he seeks to go
yet further, to another planetary system,
he will find a barrier he cannot overleap,



THE NATURE OF HEMORV. 29I

he Ring Pass-not of his own Planetary



§ 6. Thk One Consciousness.

We thus begin to understand what is
meant by the statements that people at a
n grade of evolution can reach this
or that part of the kosmos ; they can put
themselves into touch with the conscious-
ness of the Lcx;os outside the limitations
imposed by their material vehicles on the
less evolved. These vehicles, being com-
[X)sed of matter modified by the action of
the Planetary Logos of the Chain to which
they belong, cannot respond to the vibra-
tions of matter differently modified ; and
the student must be able to use his 4tmic
body before he can contact the Universal
Memory beyond the limits of his own

, Chain.

Such is the theory of Memory which
' present for the consideration of theo-

* sophical students. It applies equally to the
small memories and forgeltings of every-
day life as to the vast reaches alluded to
in the above paragraph. For there is
nothing small or great to the Logos, and



292



A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



when we are performing the smallest act of
memory, we are as much putting ourselves
into touch with the omnipresence iin<i«
omniscience of the Logos, as when
are recalling a far-off past. There is no
"far-off," and no "near." All are equally
present at all times and in all spaces ; the
difficulty is with our vehicles, and not with
that all-embracing changeless Life. All
becomes more and more intelligible and
more peace-giving as we think of that
Consciousness, In which is no " before "
and no "after," no " past " and no "future."
We begin to feel that these things are but
the illusions, the limitations, imposed upon
us by our own sheaths, necessary until our
powers are evolved and at our service.
We live unconsciously in this mighty Con-
sciousness in which everything is eternallyii
present, and we dimly feel that if we couldfl
live consciously in that Eternal there were
peace. I know of nothing that can more
give to the events of a life their true pro-
portion than this idea of a Consciousness
in which everything is present from the
beginning, in which Indeed there
beginning and no ending. We learn thal.^



THE NATURE OF MEMORY. 293

there is nothing terrible and nothing which
is more that relatively sorrowful ; and in
that lesson is the beginning of a true
peace, which in due course shall brighten
into joy.



Part n.



WILL, DESIRE, AND EMOTION,



CONTENTS.



PAGR

Chaptrr I. The Will to Live 299



Chapter II. Desire.

§ I. The Nature of Desire

§ 2. The Awakening of Desire ...

§ 3. The Relation of Desire to Thought

§ 4. Desire, Thought, Action

§ 5. The Binding Nature of Desire

§ 6. The Breaking of the Bonds



305
310

314

318

319
322



Chapter III. Desire (continued).

§ I. The Vehicle of Desire 327

§ 2. The Conflict of Desire and Thought 333

§ 3. The Value of an Ideal 338

§ 4. The Purification of Desire 342

Chapter IV. Emotion.

S I. The Birth of Emotion 348

% 2. The Play of Emotion in the Family 354

% 3. The Birth of Virtues 361

1 4. Right and Wrong 363



298


CONTENTS.


PAOfc


8 s-


Virtue and Bliss


36s


S6-


The Tnuismotation of the Emotions


into V


'ices


367


§7-


Applicatio


leory to Conduct


37'


§8-


The Uses


373


Chapteb


V. Emo-


lUflf).


§>■


The Trait


>tion


38 >


s>.


The Dist


of Emotion ...


3S7


§3-


Methods of Ruling
The Using of Emc


the Emotions ...


390


S4.


tion


399


is-


The Value of Emotion in Evolution...


40s



Chapter VI. The Will.

The Will winning its Freedom
Why so much Struggle
The Power of the Will
White and Black Magic
Entering into Peaci: ...



429
439



WILL, DESIRE, AND EMOTION.



•^^



Chapter I.

THE WILL TO LIVE.

In the brief study of Origins which forms
§§ I, 2, of the Introduction to this book, we
saw that the Monad, coming forth from
the First Logos, showed in his own nature
the tri-unity of his Source, the aspects
of Will, Wisdom, and Activity.

It is to the study of Will — showing
itself as Will on the higher plane and
as Desire on the lower — that we are now
to turn our attention ; and the study of
Desire leads us to the study of Emotion,
indissolubly attached to it. We have
already seen that we are here because
we have willed to live in the lower worlds,
that the Will determines our stay here.

n9


300 K STUDV IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

But the nature and power and work of
the Will are for the most part but little
realised, for "'- '^* — '' — stages of evolu-
tion it is not the lower planes
save as D" must be studied
as Desire be understood as
Will.

It is the of consciousness,

ever veiled wi ", hiding as it were

behind Wisdom and Activity, but prompt-
ing both to manifestation. So hidden is
its nature that many regard it as one with
Activity, and refuse to it the dignity of an
aspect of consciousness. Yet Activity is
the action of the Self on the Not-Self,
that which gives to the Not -Self its
temporary Reality, that which creates ;
but Will hides ever within, impelling to
Activity, attracting, repelling, the core of
the Heart of Being.

Will is the Power which stands behind
Cognition, and stimulates Activity ;
Thought is the creative activity, but Will
the motive power. Our bodies are as
they are, because the Self has for count-
less agea set his Will that matter should
be shaped into forms whereby he may



THE WILL TO UVE.



301



tand energise on all outside himself.
Tt is written in an ancient



I



Scripti

" Of a truth this body is mortal, O
Maghavan, it is subject to death. Yet
is it a resting-place of the immortal and
bodiless Atma. . . The eyes are
intended as organs of observation for
the Being who dwelleth within the eyes.
He who willeth. ' I shall smell." is the
Aima. wishing to experience fragrance.
I le who willeth, ' I shall speak,' is the
Atmd wishing to utter words. He who
willeth, ' I shall hear,' is the AtmS,
Wishing to listen to sounds. He who
willeth. ' I shall think,' is the Alnoa. The
mind is the celestial eye, observing all
desirable objects. By means of the
mental celestial eye, Atml enjoyeth all,"'
This is the secret, the motive power, of
evolution. True, the great Will traces
the high road of evolution. True,
spiritual Intelligences of many grades
guide the evolving entities along that
high road. But too little attention lias
been paid to the countless experiments,
failures, successes, the little bye-ways and

•CIMm4^vfa>afkai. Vllt. uL 1, 4, 5.



502 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

twists and curls, due to the gropings of
the separate Wills, each Will to Live
trying to find Self-expression. The
contacts from the outer world arouse in
each AtmS the Will to know what
touches. He knows but little in the
jelly-fish, but the Will to know shapes,
in form after form, an ever-improving eye,
that hinders less his power of perception.
As we study evolution, we become more
and more conscious of Wills which shape
matter, but shape it by groping experi-
ments, not by clear vision. The presence
of these many Wills makes the constant
branching of the evolutionary tree. There
is a real truth in Professor Clifford's
playful story to the children about the
great Saurians of an early age: "Some
chose to fly and became birds ; others
chose to crawl, and became reptiles."
Often we see an attempt foiled, and then
the attempt is made in another direction.
Often we sec the most clumsy contriv-
ances side by side with the most exquisite
adaptations. The latter are the results of
Intelligences knowing their aims and
constantly chiselling the matter into



tH6 WILL TO UVK.



303



forr



appropriate forms ; the others are the
outcome of the strivings from within, still
blind and groping, but steadfastly set to
Self-expression. If there were only
outside designers, seeing the end from
the beginning. Nature would present us
with insoluble puzzles in her building,
■SO many are the inade<iuate aiiempis, the
ineffettive designs. But when we realise
the presence of the Will to Live In each
form, seeking Self-expression, shaping his
vehicles for his own purpases. then we can
alike the creative plan which underlies
-the plan of the Logos ; the admirable
adaptations which work out Hts plan— the
labour of the building intelligences; and
the inapt contrivances and clumsy expe-
dients—due to the efforts of the Selves that
will, but have not yet the knowledge or
the power to perform perfectly.

It is this groping, striving, struggling
divine Self, which, as evolution goes on,
becomes in ever- Increasing measure the
true Ruler, the inner Ruler, the Immortal.
Anyone who grasps that he is himself that
Immortal Kuler. seated within his Self>
created vehicles of expression, gains



304 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

sense of dignity and power which grows
ever stronger, and more compelling on the
lower nature. The knowledge of the
truth make us inly free. The inner Ruler
may still be hampered by the very forms
he has shaped for self-expression, but
knowing himself as the Ruler, he can
work steadfastly to bring his realm into
complete subjection. He knows that he
has come into the world for a certain
purpose, to make himself fit to be a co-
worker with the Supreme Will, and he
can do and suffer all which is necessary to
that end. He knows himself divine, and
that his Self-realisation is only a question
of lime. Inwardly the divinity is felt,
though outwardly it is not yet expressed,
and there remains to become in manifesta-
tion what he is in essence. He is king
de Jure, not yet de facto.

As a Prince, born to a crown, patiently
submits to the discipline which is fitting
him to wear it, so the sovereign Will in
us is evolving to the age when royal
powers will pass into its grasp, and may
patiently submit to the necessary discipline
of life.



m



Si. The Nature of Desire

llF.N the Monad sends forth his rays

ito the matter of the third, fourth, and

planes, and appropriates tu himself

atom of each of these planes,' he

lies what is often called his " reflexion

matter," the human "Spirit," and the

ill-aspect of the Monad Is mirrored in

the human AtmS, whose home is on the

third or atmic plane. That first hypostasis

is indeed lessened in powers by the veils

matter thus endued, but it is in no

,y distorted ; as a well - made mirror

produces a perfect imajje of an object, so

is the human Spirit, AtmS-Buddhi-Manas,

a perfect image of the Monad, is. indeed,

S«e Port I. Chuptcr iv. fi S-



k



:o6



A STUDV IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



the Monad himself veiled in den!
matter. But as a concave or conv
mirror y ields a distorted image of an
object placed before it. so do the further
reflexions of the Spirit in, or involutions
into, yet denser matter show but distorted
images thereof.

Thus, when the Will, in its downward
progress, veiling itself farther on each plane,
reaches the world immediately above the
physical, the astral world, it appears
therein as Desire. Desire shows the
energy, the concentration, the impelling'
characteristics of Will, but matter has
wrenched away its control, its direction,
from the Spirit, and has usurped dominion
over it. Desire is Will discrowned, the
captive, the slave of matter. It is no
longer Self-determined, but is determined
by the attractions around it.

This is the distinction between Will and
Desire. The innermost nature of both is
the same, for they are verily but one
determination, the Self-determination of
the AtmS. the one motor-power of man,
that which impels to Activity, to action
on the external world, on the Not-


anc
^^B the

i



If. When the Self determines the

ilivity, uninfluenced by attractions or

ipulsions towards surrounding objects,

len Will is manifested. When outer

Mtractions and repulsions determine the

activity, and the man is drawn hither

and thither by these, deaf to the voice of

the Self, unconscious of the Inner Ruler,

len Desire is seen.

Desire is Will clothed in astral matter,
the matter which by the second life-
.ve was formed into combinations, the
reaction between which and consciousness
would cause sensations in the latter.
Clothed in this matter, the vibrations of
which are accompanied with sensations
in consciousness, Will is modified into
Desire. Its essential nature of giving
motor - impulses, surrounded by matter
which arouses sensations, answers by im-
pelling energy, and this energy, aroused
through and acting through astral matter,
is Desire,

As in the higher nature Will is the
impelling power, so in the lower nature
Desire is the impelling power. When it
is feeble the whole nature is feeble in its



3o8 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

reaction on the world. The effective force
of a nature is measured by its Will-power
or its Desire-power, according to the stage
of evolution. There is a truth underlying
the popular phrase. "The greater the
sinner the greater the saint." The
mediocre person can be neither greatly
good nor greatly bad ; there is not enough
of him for more than petty virtues or petty
vices. The strength of the Desire-nature
^^^1 in a man is the measure of his capacity for

^^^1 progress, the measure of the motor-energy
^^H whereby that man can press onwards along
^^H the way. The strength in a man that

^^H impels to reaction on his environment is

^^^ the measure of his power to modify, to

M change, to conquer it. In the struggle

I with the Desire-nature which marks the

I higher evolution, the motor-energy is not

I to be destroyed but transferred ; lower

^^^ Desires are to be transmuted into higher,

^^^B energy is to be refined while losing nought
^^B of its power ; and finally the Desire-nature
^^^ is to vanish into Will, ail the energies

being gathered up and merged into the
^ Will-aspect of the Spirit, the Power of the

t



J


trair



I



309

No aspirant, therefore, should be dis-
luraged by the storming and raging of
isires in him, any more than a horse-
raker is displeased with the rearings and
iungings of the unbroken colt. The
ildness of the young untrained creature,
id his rebellion against all efforts to
control and restrain, are the promise of
his future usefulness when disciplined and
trained. And even thus are the strainings
«f Desire against the curb imposed by
le Intelligence, the promise of the future
:ngth of Will, of the Power-aspect of
le Self.

Rather does difficulty arise where
desires are feeble, ere yet the Will has
freed itself from the trammels of astral
matter ; for in such case the Will to Live
is expressing itself but feebly, and there is
little effective force available for evolution.
There is some obstacle, some barrier, in
the vehicles, checking the forthgoing
energy of the Monad, and obstructing its
free passage, and until that barrier is
removed there is little progress to be
hoped for. In the storm the ship drives
iward, though there be peril of wreck.



3IO



A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



but in the dead calm she remains helpless
and unmoving, answering neither to sail nor
helm. And since, in this voyage, no final
wreck is possible, but only temporary
damage, and the storm works for progress
rather than the calm, those who find them-
selves storm-tossed may look forward with
sure conviction to the day when the storm-
gusts of Desire will be changed into the
steady wind of Will.



§j. The Awakening of Desire,

To the astral world we refer all our
sensations. The centres by which we feel
lie in the astral body, and the reactions of
these to contacts give rise to feelings of
pleasure and pain in consciousness. The
ordinary physiologist traces sensation of
pleasure and pain from the point of con-
tact to the brain-centre, recognising only
nervous vibrations between periphery and
centre, and in the centre the reaction of
consciousness as sensation. We follow the
vibrations further, finding only vibrations
n the brain -centre and in the ether
permeating it. and seeing in the astral



DESIRE. 311

the point at which the reaction of
""Consciousness takes place. When a dis-
location between the physical and astral
bodies occurs, whether by the action of
chloroform, ether, laughing -j^as, or other
drugs, the physical body, despite all its
nervous apparatus, feels no more than if
bereft of nerves. The links between the
physical body and the body of sensation
are thrown out of gear, and conscious-
ness does not respond to any stimulus
applied.

The awakening of Desire takes place
In this body of sensation, and follows the
first dim sensings of pleasure and pain.
As before pointed out' pleasure " is a sense
of ' moreness,' of increased, expanded life,"
while pain is a shutting in or lessening of
liff. and these belong to the whole con-
sciousness. " This primary sute of con-
sciousness does not manifest the three
well-known aspects of Will, Wisdom, and
Activity, even in the most germinal stage ;
* feeling ' precedes tliese, and belongs to
consciousness as a whole, though in later

iges of evolution It shows itself so much
■See Pan I. Ovaptet ix. 1 1.



3T2 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

in connexion with the Will-Desire aspect
as to become almost identified with it."
" As the states of pleasure and pain
become more definitely established in
consciousness, they give rise to another ;
with the fading away of pleasure there is
a continuation of the attraction in con-
sciousness, and this becomes a dim groping
after It " — a groping, be it noted, not after
any pleasure -giving object, but after a
continuance of the feeling; of pleasure — "a
vague following of the vanishing feeling, a
movement— too indefinite to be called an
effort — to hold it. to retain it ; similarly
with the fading away of pain there is a
continuation of the repulsion in conscious-
ness, and this becomes an equally vague
movement to push it away. These stages
give birth to Desire."

This arising of Desire is a feeble reach-
ing out of the life in search of pleasure, a
movement of the life, undirected, vague,
groping. Beyond this it cannot go, until
Thought has developed to a certain extent,
and has recognised an outer world, a Not-
Self, and has learned to relate various
objects in the Not-Self to the pleasure or



DESIRE.



3^



sun



in arising in consciousness on contacting
lem.

But the resulu of these contacts, long
ibefore the objects are recognised, have
caused, as above indicated, a division in, a
irking of. Desire. We may take as one
if the simplest illustrations the craving for
in a lowly organism ; as the physical
ly wastes, becomes less, a sense of pain
ises in the astral body, a want, a craving,
'ague and indeterminate ; the body, by its
^wasting, has become a less effective vehicle
the life pouring down through the
itral. and this check causes pain. A
irrent in the water that bathes the
;anism brings food up against the body ;
It is absorbed, the waste is repaired, the
life flows on unobstructed ; there is plea-
sure. At a little higher stage, when pain
arises, there is the desire to escape from
the sense of repulsion arises, the con-
iry to the sense o( attraction, caused
y pleasure. There results from this that
»csirc is cloven in twain. From the Will
Live arose the longing to experience,
and in the lower vehicle this longing,
appearing as Desire, becomes on the one



314 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

hand a longing for experiences that make
the feeling of life more vivid, and on the
other a shrinking from all that weakens
and depresses. This attraction and repul-
sion are equally of the nature of Desire.
Just as a magnet attracts or repels certain
metals, so does the embodied Self attract
and repel. Both attraction and repulsion
are Desire, and these are the two great
motor-energies in life, into which all
desires are ultimately resolvable. The
Self comes under the bondage of Desire,
of Attraction -Repulsion, and is attracted
hither and thither, repelled from this or
that, hurried about among pleasure- and
pain-giving objects, as a helmlcss ship
amid the currents of air and sea.



§ 3. The Relation of Desire to Thought.

We have now to consider the relation
that Desire bears to Thought, and see how
it first rules and then is ruled by the latter.

The Pure Reason is the reflexion of the
Wisdom-aspect of the Monad, and appears
in the human Spirit as Buddhi. But it is not
the relation of Desire to the Pure Reason



DESIRE. 3 1 5

irith which we are concerned, for it cannot,
fact, be said to be directly related to
ftWisdom, but to Love, the manifestation of
■Wisdom on the astral (jlanti. We are to
Jsrek rather its relation to the Activity-
ispeci of the Monad, showinj^ itself on the
istral plane as sensation and on the mental
i thought. Nor are we even concerned
rith the Higher Mind, which is creative
Activity, Manas, in its purity ; but with the
distorted reflexion of this, the lower mind.
bit is this lower mind which is immediately
related to Desire, and is inextricably inter-
mingled with it in human evolution ; so
loscly joined, indeed, are they, that we
jften speak of Kima-Manas. Desire-Mind,
of a single thing, so rare is it, in the
fflower consciousness, to find a single
thought which is uninfluenced by a desire.
" Manas verily is declared lo be twofold,
pure and Impure ; the impure is determined
by desire, the pure is desire-free."'

This lower mind is "thought" on the
mental plane ; its characteristic property is
that it asserts and denies ; it knoMs by
difference ; it perceives and remembers.


3l6 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

On the astral plane, as we have seen, the
same aspect that on the mental plane is
thought appears as sensation, and 1%,
aroused by contact with the externailj
world.

When a pleasure has been experienced,
and has passed away, Desire arises tO'
experience it again, as we have seen.
And this fact implies memory, which is
a function of the mind. Here, as ever, are
we reminded that consciousness is ever
acting in its threefold nature, though one
or other aspect may predominate, for even
the most germinal desire cannot arise
without memory being present. The
sensation caused by an external impact
must have been many times aroused,
before the mind will establish a relation
between the sensation of which it is
conscious, and the external object which
has caused the sensation. At last the
mind "perceives" the object. ;>., relates
it to one of its own changes, recognises
a modification in itself caused by the
external object. Repetitions of this per-
ception will establish a definite link in
memory between the object and the



\ I

I



■)



^^ Si

^Krhoi



DESIRE, 317

.uiable or painful sensation, and when
Desire presses for the repetition of
pleasure, the mind recalls the object which
supplied that pleasure. Thus the mingling
of Thought with Desire gives birth to a
particular desire, the desire to find and
appropriate the pleasure-giving object.

This desire impels the mind to exert its
iherent activity. Discomfort being caused
by the unsatisfied craving, effort is made
to escape the discomfort by supplying the
object wanted. The mind plans, schemes,
drives the body into action, in order to
satisfy the cravings of Desire. And
similarly, equally prompted by Desire, the
mind plans, schemes, drives the body into
action in order to avoid the recurrence of
pain from an object recognised as pain-
giving.

Such is the relation of Desire to

hought. It rouses, stimulates, urges on.

ntal efforts. The mind is, in its early
;es, the slave of Desire, and the rapidity
of its growth is in proportion to the tierce
urgings of Desire. We desire, and thus
forced 10 think.


A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



§ 4. Desirk, Thought, Action.

The third stap-e of the contact of the
Self '



I



mine
leads to.
Action is
but Desire
ment. or c
Desire is propmsi



is Action. The
le object of desire,
hapes the action,
arise from Desire,
only arouse move-
1. The force of
ii recti ve. Thought



it is that adds the element of direction, and
shapes the action purposively.

This is the ever- recurring cycle in
consciousness — Desire, Thought, Action.
The propulsive power of Desire arouses
Thought ; the directive power of Thought
guides Action. This sequence is invariable,
and the clear understanding thereof is of
the profoundest importance, for the effec-
tive control of conduct depends on this
understanding, and on its application in
practice. The shaping of karma can only
be achieved when this sequence is under-
stood, for evitable and inevitable action
can only thus be discriminated.

It is by Thought that we can change
Desire, and thereby change Action. When



319

the mind sees thai certain desires have
impelled to thoughts that have directed
actions which were productive of unhappi-
ness. it can resist the future promptings of
Desire in a similar direction, and refuse to
guide actions to a result already known as
disastrous. It can picture the painful
results, and thus arouse the repellent
energy of Desire, and can image the
blissful outcome uf desires of the opjwsite
kind. The creative activity of Thought
can be exerted in the moulding of Desire,
and its propulsive energy can be turned
into a belter direction. In this way
Thought can be used to master Desire,
and it may become the ruler instead of the
slave. And as it thus asserts control over
its unruly companion, it begins the trans-
mutation of Desire into Will, changing the
governance of the oulf^oing energy from
the outer to the inner, from the external
objects that attract or repel to the Spirit,
i inner Ruler.



S5. Thi; Bikolvc Nature of Desikr.

the Will to Live is the cause of
ling, of the Hie seeking cmbodi-


320 A STUl

ment and appropriating" to itself that
which is necessary for its manifestation
and persisteiT-p in frii-m. Desire, being



Will on a
character!
tiraw into
whereby it:
and stre'
object, we
;lves. part of trie



will show similar
to appropriate, to
part of itself that
nay be maintained
en we desire an
,e it part of our-
" so that it may



form part of the embodiment of the " 1."
Dtsire is the pLittin<f forth of the power
of attraction ; it draws the desired object
to itself Whatever we desire, we attach
to ourselves. By the desire to possess it,
a bond is established between the object
and the desirer. We tie to the Self this
portion of the Not-Self, and the bond
exists until the object is possessed, or until
the Self has broken off the bond and
repudiated the object. These are "the
bonds of the heart,"' and tie the Self to
the wheel of births and deaths.

These bonds between the desiror and
the objects of desire are like ropes that
draw the Self to the place where the
' Kathupaniihat. vi. 15.



DESIRE. 321

I objects of desire are found, and thus
determine its birth into one or another
rworld. " On this runs the verse : He also
■^who is attached ever obtains by action
tthat on which his mind has set its mark.
iHaving obtained the object of action
Ibe here performs, he comes again there-
llbre from that world to this world for
Ithe sake of action. Thus is it with the
lllesiring mind."' If a man desires the
jiobjects of another world more than the
'objects of this, then into that world will
he be born. There is a continuing
tension in the bond of Desire until the

PkSelf and the object are united.
r The one great determining energy, the
Will to Live, which holds the planets in
their path around ihe sun, which prevents
the matter of the globes from scaitering,
which holds our own bodies together, that
is the energy of Desire. That which
rules all is in us as Desire, and it must
draw to us, or draw us to, everything into
which it has fixed its hooks. The hook
of Desire fixc-s itself in an object, as a
harpoon in the whale at which it in Rung


322 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

by the harpooner. When Desire has
fixed its harpoon in an object, the Self is
attached to th?"- i^Ki*"-* has appropriated it
in Will, and pi



in action. H
-said : " If thj
it out and a
thy right hand
cast it from t
becomes part ot ii



UBt appropnate it
real Teacher has
offend thee, pluck
thee ... if
lee, cut it off and
"he thing desired
ody of the Self,



and, if it be evil, it should be torn out. at
whatever cost of anguish. Otherwise it
will only be worn away by the slow
attrition of time and of weariness, "Only
the slronjr can kill it out. The weak must
wait for its iirowth, it5i fruition, its death."'



§6. Th



: Bonds.



For the breaking of the bonds of
Desire, recourse must be had to the
mind. Therein lies the power which
shall first purify and then transmute
Desire.

The mind records the results which
follow the appropriation of each object of

•MaU. V. 2g, 3a. ' L(^/i/ on the Path. 4.



BE



sire, and marks whether happiness or
^jain has resuhed from the union of that
object with the embodied Self. And
when, after many appropriations of an
attractive object, it has found the result
to be jjain. it registers that object as one
which should be avoided in the future.
" The delights that are contact-born, they
are verily wombs of pain."'

Then arises strife. When that attractive
object again presents itself, Desire throws
out Its harpoon and seizes it, and begins
to draw it In. The mind, remembering
the painful results of previous similar
captures, endeavours to check Desire, to
cut, with the sword of knowledge, the
attaching bund. Fierce conflict rages
within the man : he is dragged forward by
Desire, held back by Thought ; many and
many a time Desire will triumph and the
>jecl will be appropriated ; but the
iulting pain is ever repeated, and
ich success of Desire arrays against it
another enemy in the forces of the mind.
inevitably, however slowly. Thought
proves stronger, until, at last, victory

' Bkagmiad-Gltd. v. 21.



324



A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



inclines to its side, and a day comes wheal
the desire is weaker than the mind, and |
the attractive object is loosed, the attach-



ing cord is c
is broken.

In this cor
against Dt
It selects
relatively las
utilise these a^
result in pain.



at object, the bond J

ght seeks to utilise J
rength of Desire, |
)esire that give a
ness, and seeks to
desires that swiftly
Thus it will set artistic



against sensual pleasure ; it will use fame

and political or social power against enjoy-
ments of the flesh ; it will stimulate the
desire to please the good, to strengthen
abstention from vicious delights ; it will
finally make the desire for eternal peace
conquer the desires for temporal joys. By
the one great attraction the lower attrac-
tions are slain, and cease to be any longer
the objects of desire : " Even taste (for
them) turneth away from him after the
Supreme is seen."' The very energy of
Desire can tear it away from that which
brings pain, and fix it on that which brings
bliss. The same force that bound is made
' Bhagavad-Gild. ii. 59.



to serve as an instrument of freedom.
Wrenching itself away from objects, it will
turn upwards and inwards, attaching the
man to the Life whence he came forth, and
in union with which consists his highest
bliss.

Herein h'es the value of devotion as a
liberator. Love, turning to the Supreme,
sees Him as eminently desirable, as an
Object for intense desire, and this burns
up attachments to objects that keep the
heart in bondage.

Only by the Self as Thought can be
mastered the Self as Desire ; the Self,
realising itself as the life, overcomes the
Self embodied and thinking itself to be the
form. The man must learn to separate
himself from the vehicles in which he
desires, thinks, and acts, to know them as
part of the Not-Self, as material external
to the life. Thus the energy that went
out to objects in the lower desires becomes
the higher desire guided by the mind, and
is prepared to be transmuted into Will.

As the lower mind merges itself in the
higher, and the higher into that which is
Wisdom, the aspect of pure Will emerges


326 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

as the Power of the Spirit, Self-deter-
mined, Self-ruled, in perfect harmony with



the Supreme Will,
Then only are
Spirit is uncc
himself. Thi
Will be said tc



and therefore free.
i broken, and the
by aught outside
en only, can the



Chapter III.

DESIRE (continued).
% 1. The Vehicle of Desire.

We shall have to return to the struggle in
the Desire-nature, in order to add some
useful details to that which has been
already said ; but it is first necessary to
study the Vehicle of Desire, the Desire-
Body or Astnil Body, as this study will
enable us to understand the precise method
in which we may work to subdue and get
rid of the lower desires.

The Vehicle of Desire is made up of
what is called astral matter, the matter
of the plane above the physical. This
matter, like the physical, exists in seven
modifications, which relatively to each
other are like the solid. li(|uid. gaseous,
etc., sub-states of matter on the physical
plane. ;\s ihr physic il bcnly contains


32S \ STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

within itself these various sub-states of
physical matter, so does the astral body
contain wirhin itself the various sub-states
of astral ma f these sub-states

has in it ( ler aggregations,

and the wu , as of physical

purificatic c le substitution of

the finer ir

Moreover, ib-states of astral

matter serve chiv...j ihe manifestation

of the lower desires, while the higher sub-
states vibrate in answer to the desires
which have changed, by the intermixture
of mind, into emotions. The lower desires,
grasping after objects of pleasure, find
that the lower sub-states serve as medium
for their attractive force, and the coarser
and baser the desires, the coarser are the
aggregations of matter that fitly express
them. As the desire causes the corre-
sponding material in the astral body to
vibrate, that matter becomes strongly
vitalised and attracts fresh similar matter
from outside to itself, and thus increases
the amount of such matter in the constitu-
tion of the astral body. When the desires
arc gradually refined into emotions, intel-



DESIRE. 339

^leclual elements entering into them, and
selfishness diminishing", the amount of finer
matter similarly increases in the astral
body, while the coarser matter, left un-
vitalised, loses ener^ and decreases in
amount

These facts, applied to practice, help us
I to weaken the civeniy which is enthroned
' within us, for we can deprive him of his
instruments. A traitor within the jjatcs is
more dangerous than a foe outside, and
the desire-body acts as such a traitor, so
Llong as it ts composed of elements that
■answer to the temptations from without
Desire, as it builds in the coarser
materials, must lie checked by the mind,
the mind refusing to picture the passing
pleasure which the possession of the object
would entail, and picturing to itself the
more lasting .sorrow it would cause. As
we get rid of the coarser matter which
vibrates in answer to the baser attractions,
those attractions lose all power to dis-
turb us.

This vehicle of desire, then, must be
taken in hand ; according to its building
will be the attractions that reach us from



330


. STUDV IN COKSCIOUSNESS.



without. We can work upon the form,
change the elements of which the form is
composed, and thu<j tiim the enemy into
a defender.

When an "g •" character,

he is, howev( with a difficulty

which often depresses him.

He finds h: by desires from

which he shu ti he is ashamed,

and despite his sin-n, efforts to shake
them offl they none the less cling to and
torment him. They are discordant with
his efforts, his hopes, his aspirations, and
yet, in some way, they seem to be his.
This painful experience is due to the fact
that the consciousness evolves more
rapidly than the form can chantje, and
the two are to some extent in conllict
with each other. There is a considerable
amount of the coarser aggregations still
present in the astral body ; but as the
desires have become more refined, they
no longer vivify these materials. Some of
the old vitality none the less persists
therein, and although these aggregations
are decaying they are not wholly gone.

Now although the man's Desire-nature



DBSfRB. 33 1

lo longer using these maierials for setf-

expression, they may yet be thrown into

temporary activity from outside, and thus

take on a semblance of vitaHty as a

galvanised corpse mij^hl do. The desires

of other people — desire-elemenlals of an

evil kind— may attach themselves to these

disused elements in his astral body, and

they may thus be stimulated and revivified,

and cause him to feel as his own the

* promptings of desires he abhors. Where

r such exiieriences are undergone, let the

r bewildered combatant take courage ; even

^ in the innish of these desires, let him

i repudiate them as none of his. and know

f thai the elements in him they utilise arc

f of the past, and are dying, and that the

kday of their death and of his freedom is

fBt hand.

We may take an example from dream,
I to show this working of effete matter in
y the astral body. A man. in a former
life, was a drunkard, and his after-death
experiences had im[)rcsscd deeply on him
a repulsion for drink ; on rebirth, the Ego
in the new physical and astral bodies
impressed on Uiem this repulsion, but


332 STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

there i s none the less in the astral body 1
some latter drawn thereinto by the
cpfl in the- permanent atom



vibrat

by th( n

is not vii

craving for

drink

wakii

dream, thi

stimulated into a



This matter
;sent. life by any '
r yielding to the
ontrary, in the [
sober. But
2 astral body is I
om without, and



the control of the E^o being weak over
the astral body," this matter responds to
the drink-craving vibrations that reach
it, and the man dreams that he drinks.
Moreover, if there still be in the man a
latent desire for drink, too weak to assert
itself durinir waking consciousness, it may
come up in the dream-state. For physical
matter being comparatively heavy and
hard to move, a weak desire has not
energy enough to cause vibrations therein ;
but that same desire may move the much
lighter astral matter, and so a man may
be carried away in a dream by a desire

' The Ego turns his .ittention inward during sleep,
until he is able to use his astral body indL-[>end(^ntly ;
hence his control over it is weak.



DESIRE. 333

which has no power over him In his
waking consciousness. Such dreams cause
much distress, because not understood.
The man should understand that the
dream shows that the temptation is con-
quered so far as he is concerned, and that
he is only troubled by the corpse of past
desires, vivified from outside on the astral
plane, or if from within, then by a dying
desire too weak to move him in his
waking moments. The dream is a sign
of a victory well-nigh complete. At the
same time it is a warning ; for it tells the
man that there is still in his astral body
some matter apt to be vivified by vibra-
tions of the drink-craving, and that there-
fore he should not place himself during
waking life under conditions where such
vibrations may abound. Until such dreams
have entirely ceased, the astral body is
not free from matter that is a source of



i 3. Thb CowrucT or DciiRit and Thouoht-

We must now return to the struggle
I in the Desire-nature, to which reference



334


A STUDV IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



has : iO/dy been made, in order to add
some necessary details.

This conflict belonffs to what may be
called the )( evolution, that

long stage ;nes between the

state of th< ruled by Desire,

grasping aii unchecked by

conscience, ! by remorse,

and the i highly evolved

spiritual man, n Will, Wisdom

and Activity work in co-ordinated har-
mony. The conflict arises between Desire
and Thought — Thought beginning to
understand the relation of itself to the
Not-Self and to other separated selves,
and Desire, influenced by the objects
around it, moving by attractions and
repulsions, drawn hither and thither by
objects that allure.

We must study the stage of evolution
ill which the accumulated memories of
past experiences, stored in the mind, set
themselves against the gratification of
desires which have been proved to lead
to pain ; or, to speak more accurately, in
which the conclusion drawn by the
Thinker from these accumulated expe-



k



DESIRE, 335

^riences asserts itself in face of a demand
from the Desire-nature for the object
which has been stamped as dangerous.

The habit of gasping and enjoying
has been established for hundreds of lives,
and is strong, while the habit of resisting
a present pleasure in order to avoid a
future pain is only in course of establish-
ment, and is consequently very weak.
Hence the conflicts between the Thinker
and the Desire-nature end for a long time
in a series of defeats. The young Mind
struggling with the mature Desire-body
5nds itself constantly vanquished. But
every victory of the De-sirc-nature, being
followed by a brief pleiisure and a long
pain, gives btrlh to a new force hostile
to itself, that recruits the strength of its
opponent. Each defeat of the Thinker
thus sows the seeds of his future victory,
and his strength daily grows while the
strength of the Desire-nature diminishes.
When this is clearly understood, we
grieve no longer over our own falls and
the falls of those we love ; for we know
that these falls are making sure the
secure footing of the future, and that in



I


33^ A STUDY IM CONSCIOUSMBSS.

the ?mb of pain is maturing^ the future
conqueror.

I ■ knnw\f'Aoe of right and wrong
fijrov ce, and is elabor-

ated c he sense of right

and wi e in the civilised

man, has ed b\' innumerable

exf: arly days of the

separate riences were useful

in his evolutiuii, brought him the

Ir-ssons needful for his growth. Gradually
Ik; learned that the yielding to desires
which, in the course of their gratification
injured others, brought him jjain out of
proportion to the temporary pleasure
derived from their satisfaction. He
began to attach the word ■' wrong " to
the desires the yielding to which brought
a predominance of pain, and this the
more quickly because the Teachers who
guided his early growth placed on the
objects which attracted such desires the
ban of Their disapproval. When he had
disobeyed Them and suffering followed,
the impression made on the Thinker was
the more powerful for the previous fore-
telling, and conscience — the Will to do



337

the right and abstain from the wrong —
was pro|K>nionately streiijjthened.

In this connexion we can readily see
the value of admonition, reproof, and
good counsel. All these are stored up
in the mind, and are forces added to the
accumulating memories which oppose the
gratification of wrong desire. Granted
that the person warned may again yield
when the temptation assails him ; that
only means thai the balance of strength
is still ill the wrong desire ; when the
foretold suffering arrives, the mind will
recall all the memories of warnings and
admonitions, and will engrave the more
deeply in its substance the decision: " This
desire is wrong." The doing of the wrong
act merely means that the memory uf past
pain is not yet sufficiently strong to over-
bear the attraction of eagerly anticijKtted
and immediate pleasure. The lesson needs
to be repeated yet a few times more, to
strengthen the memory of the past, and
when that is done, victory is sure. The
suffering is a necessary element in the
growth of the soul, and has the promise
of thai growth within it. Everywhere



A STUDY Dl



m



sh IS
habit J
overo^l

with 9



aroub I us. if we sec aright, is growing'
^ood ; nowhere is there hopeless evil.

This strue^le is exoressed in the sad
cry : " hat 1 do not ; what

I vrouU at " When I would

do good, f It with me." The

wrong thai vhen the wish is

against the done by the habit

of the [ »k Will

powered b> desire.

Now the Thinker in his conflict
ihc Desire-nature calls to his aid th;
very nature, and strives to awaken in it
a desire which shall be opposed to the
desires acjaiiist which he is waginjr war.
As the attraction of a weak magnet may
be overpowered by that of a stronger one,
so may one desire be strengthened for the
overcoming of another, a right desire may
be aroused to combat a wrong one. Hence
the value of an ideal.

g 3. Thk Value or an Idkai,.

An ideal is a fixed mental concept of an
inspiring character, framed for the guidance
of conduct, and the formation of an ideal



DESIRE. 339

is one of the most effective means of
influencing desire. The ideal may, or
may not, find embodiment in an individual,
according; to the temperament of the man
who frames it, and it must ever be remem-
bered that the value of an ideal depends
l.irgely on its attractiveness, and that that
which attracts one temperament by no
means necessarily attracts another. An
abstract ideal and a personal one are
equally good, regarded from a general
standfjoint, and that should be selected
which has. on the individual choosing it.
the most attractive influence. A person
of the intellectual temperament will usually
find an abstract itieal the more satis-
factory ; whereas one of the emotional
temperament will demand a concrete
embodiment of his thoughL The dis-
advantage of the abstract ideal is that it is
apt to fail in compelling inspiration : the
disadvantage of the concrete embodiment
is that the embodiment is apt to fall below
the ideal.

The mind, of course, creates the ideal,
and either retains it as an abstraction, or
embodies it in a person. The time chosen


340 A STUDY IN COKSCIOUSNESS.

for the creation of an ideal should be a
time when the mind is calm and steady
and luminou': whpn rh^ Desire-nature is
asleep. ; nker should con-

sider the pi » life, the goal at

which he ai i this to guide his

choice, he ect the qualities

necessary u m to reach that

^foal. Thes le should combine

into a single concept, igininjij as stronijly
;ls he can this integration of the qualities
he needs. Daily he should repeat this
integrating process, until his ideal stands
out clearly in the mind, dowered with
all beauty of high thought and noble
character, a figure of compelling attractive-
ness. The man of intellect will keep this
ideal as a pure concept. The man of
emotional nature will embody it in a
person, such as the Buddha, the Christ,
Shri Krishna, or some other divine
Teacher. In this latter case he will, If
possible, study His life. His teachings.
His actions, and the ideal will thus
become more and more strongly vivified,
more and more real to the Thinker.
Intense love will spring up in the heart



341

for this embodied ideal, and Desire will
slretch nut longing arms to embrace it.
And when temptation assails, and the
lower desires clamour for satisfaction, then
the attractive power of the ideal asserts
itself, the loftier desire combats the baser,
and the Thinker linds himself reinforced
by riKht desire, ihc negative strength nf
memory which says : " Abstain from the
b;ise." being fortified by the positive
strength of the ideal which says : "Achieve
the heroic"

The man who lives habitually in the
presence of a great ideal is armed against
wrong desires by love of his ideal, by
shame of being base in its presence, by the
longing to resemble that which he adores,
and also by the general set and trend of
his mind along lines of noble thinking.
Wrong desires become more and more
incongruous. They perish naturally, unable
to breathe in that pure dear air.

It may be worth while to remark here,
in view of the destructive results of
historidal criticism, in the minds of many,
that ihi: value of the ide^il Christ, the ideal
Buddha, the ideal Krishna, is in no way



342 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

injured by any lack of historical data, by
any defects in the proofs of the authenticity
of a manuscript. Many of the stories
related may not be historically true, but
they are ethically and vitally true.
Whether this incident happened in the
physical life of this Teacher or not is a
matter of small import ; the re-action of
such an ideal character on his environ-
ment is ever profoundly true. The world-
Scriptures represent spiritual facts, whether
the physical incidents be or be not histori-
cally true.

Thus Thought may shape and direct
Desire, and turn it from an enemy into an
ally. By chanjjing the direction of Desire,
it becomes a lifting and quickening instead
of a retarding force, and where desires for
objects held us fast in the mire of earth,
desire for the ideal lifts us on strong wings
to heaven.

§ 4. The Purification or Desire.

We have already seen how much maybe
done in the purification of the vehicle of
Desire, and the contemplation and worship



DRSIKE. 343

f the ideal, which has just been described.

I a mosl potent means for the purification

Desire. Evil desires die away, as good

tsirrs arc encouraged and fostered^-die

fcway merely from want of nourishment.

The effort to reject all wrong desires is

iccomijanied by the firm refusal of thought

> allow them to pass on into actions. Will

ll)cgins to restrain action, even when Uesire

damours for gratification. And this refusal

mto iiermit the action instigated by wrong

lesire gradually deprives of all attractive

owcr the objects which erstwhile aroused

"The objects of sense .... turn

fcway from an abstemious dweller in the

dy."' The desires fade away, starved

lack of satisfaction. Abstention from

"atification ts a potent means of pari-

lication.

There is another means of purification
in which the repulsive force of Desire is
utilised, as in the contemplation of the
ideal the attractive force was evok<rd. It
is useful in extreme cases, in which the
lowest desires are tumultuous and in-
surgent, sudi desires as lead to the vices
' SiagavaJ-UUJ, ti. $9.


j44 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

of } ittony, drunkenness and profligacy.
Sometimes a man finds it impossible to
get rid of ■' ' ■ - j^j despite all his
efforts his s to their strong

impulse, ar nations riot in his

brain. He juer by apparent

yielding, c; ; evil imaginations

to their ults. He pictures

himself y t temptations that

assail him, and sinKni^ more and more
into the grip of the evil that masters him.
llu loliows liimscif, as he falls deeper and
deepi^r, becoming the lielpless slave of his
passions. He traces with vivid imagina-
tion the stages of his descent, sees his
body beconiinij coarser and coarser, then
bloated and diseased. He contemplates
the shattered nerves, the loathsome sores,
the hideous decay and ruin of the once
strong and healthy frame. He fixes his
eyes on the dishonoured death, the sad
legacy of shanietu! memory left to relatives
and friends. He faces in thought the
other side of death, and sees the soil and
distortion of his vices pictured in the
siifliTing astral bot.ly. and the agony of the
craving of liesires that may no longer be



llfilled. Resolutely he forces his shrink-
* ing thoughts to dwell on this miserable
parioriima of the triumph of wrong desires,
until there rises within him a strong
rt-pulsiun against them, an intolerable fear
and loathing of the result of present
yielding.

Such a method of purification is like the
surgeon's knife, cutting out a cancer which
menaces the life, and, like iill surgical
operations, is to he avoided unless no other
means of cure remain. It is better lo
conquer wrong desire by the attractive
force of an ideal, than by the repulsive
force of a spectacle of ruin. But where
attraction fails to conquer, repulsion may
perhaps prevail.

There is also a danger in this latter
method, since the coarser matter in the
vehicle of Desire is increased by this
[welling in thought on evil, and the
iggic is thereby rendered longer than
when it is possible to throw the life into
good desires and high aspirations. There-
fore it is the worse method of the two,
only ID be accepted when the other
b unattainable.



veni
^Mlwe!


346 A STUnV IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

By higher attraction, by repulsion, or
by the slow teaching of suffering, Desire
must be purified. The "must " is not
so much a necessity imposed by an out-
side Deity, as the imperial command of
the Deity within, who will not be denied.
With this true Will of the Divinity, who
is our Self, all divine forces in nature
work, and that divine Self who wills the
highest must inevitably in the end sub-
due all things to himself.

With this triumph comes the ceasing
of Desire. For then external objects
no longer either attract or repel the
outgoing energies of AtmS, and these
energies are entirely directed by Self-
determined Wisdom ; that is, Will has
taken the place of Desire. Good and
evil are seen as the divine forces that
work for evolution, the one as necessary
as the other, the one the complement
of the other. The good is the force
that is to be worked with ; the evil is
the force that is to be worked against ;
by the right using of both the powers of
the Self are evolved into manifestion.

When the Self lias developed the aspect



DESIRE. 347

of Wisdom, he looks on the righteous and
the wicked, the saint and the sinner, with
equal eyes, and is therefore equally ready
to help both, to reach out strong hand to
either. Desire, which regarded them with
attraction and repulsion, as pleasure-giving
and pain-giving, has ceased, and Will,
which is energy directed by Wisdom,
brings fitting aid to both. Thus man
rises above the tyranny of the pairs of
opposites. and dwells in the Eternal Peace.


Emotion is not a simple or primary state
of consciousness, but is a compound made
up by the interaction of two of the aspects
of the Self — Desire and Intellect. The
play of Intellect on Desire gives birth to
Emotion ; it is the child of both, and
shows some of the characteristics of its
father, Intellect, as well as of its mother.
Desire,

In the developed condition Emotion
seems so different from Desire that their
fundamental identity is somewhat veiled ;
but we can see this identity either by
tracing the development of a desire into
an emotion, or by studying both side by
side, and finding that both have the same
characteristics, tlie same divisions, that the



EMOTION. 349

I one is, in fact, an elaborated form of the

' other, the elaboration being due to the

presence in the later of a number of

intellectual elements absent from, or less

markedly prominent in, the earlier.

Let us trace the development of a

I desire into an emotion in one of the

I commonest of human relations, the relation

I of sex. Here is desire in one of its

simplest forms ; desire for food, desire for

sexual union, are the two fundamental

I desires of all living things — desire for food

to maintain life, desire for sexual union to

increase life. In both the sense of

"moreness" is experienced, or, otherwise

I Mated, pleasure is felt. The desire for

f food remains a desire ; the food is appro-

I priated. assimilated, loses its separate

identity, becomes part of the " Mc."

I There is no continued relation between

I the cater and the food which gives scope

for the elaboration of an emotion. It is

otherwise in the sex-relation, which tends

to become more and more permanent with

the evolution of the individuality.

Two savages arc drawn towards each
other by the attniction of sex : a jtassion


350 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

to pc ess the other arises in each ; each
desires the other. The desire is as simple
as the desire for food. But it cannot be

satisfied to l itent, for neither

can wholly aj nd assimilate the

other ; each ent maintains his

or her sepai ', and each only

partially becoi le " of the other.

There is im iion of the "Me,"

but it is by ision and not by

way of self-identification. The presence
of this persisting" barrier is necessary for
the transformation of a desire into an
emotion. This makes possible the attach-
ment of Tncniory and anticipation to the
same object, and not to another object
similar in kind — as in the case of food,
A continuintj desire for union with the
.same object becomes an emotion, thoughts
thus minghng with the primary desire to
possess. The barrier which keeps the
mutually attracted objects as two not one,
which prevents their fusion, while it seems
to frustrate really immortalises ; were it
swept away, desire and emotion aHke
woukl vanish, and the Twain-become-
One must then seek another external



bject for the further self-expansion of



To return to our savages, desire-united.
The woman falls sick, and ceases, for ihe
time, tn Ik: an object of sex -gratification.
Hut the man remembers past, and antici-
[»ates future, delight, and a feeling of
sympathy with her suffering, of com-
[ussion for her weakness, arise?! within
him. The persisting attraction towards
her, due to memory and anticipation,
changes desire into emotion, passion into
love, and sympathy and compassion are
its earliest manifestations. These, in turn.

. wiil lead to his Kacriiicing himself to her,
aking to nurse her when he would sleep,
xerting himself for her when he would

' rest. These s[)onianeous moods of the
love-emotion in him will later solidify into
virtues, i.e.. will become permanent moods

■ in his character, showing themselves in

[response to the calls of human need to all
persons with whom he comes into contact,
whether they attract him or not. Wc
shall see later that virtues arc simply
permanent moods of right emotion.
Before, however, tlealing with the


352 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

rela i of ethics and emotion, we must
further realise the fundamental identity of
Desire and Emotion by noting their
characteristii iions. As this is

done, we sh emotions do not

form a mer it that ail spring

from one n y into two main

stems, ea' igain subdividing

into bram grow the leaves

of virtues and This fruitful idea.

making possible a science of the emotions,
and hence an intcJligibie and rational
system of ethics, is due to an I ndian
author, Rhagiwan l>as. who has for the
first time introduced order into this
hitherto confused region of consciousness.
Students of psychology will find in his
Science of the Eiitoiions a lucid treatise,
setting forth this scheme, which reduces
the chaos of the emotions into a cosmos,
and shapes therein an ordered morality.
The broad lines of exposition followed
here are drawn from that work, to which
readers arc referred for fuller details.

We have seen that Desire has two main
expressions : desire to attract, in order to
possess, iir aj^ain to cnnic liiln co[it:icL



353

liwith, any object which has previously
■afforded pleasure ; desire to repel, in order
I to drive far away, or to avoid contact
Iwith. any object which has previously
"inflicted pain. We have seen that
i Attraction and Repulsion are the two
■Jbrms of Desire, swaying the Self.

Emotion, being Desire infused with

llntellect, inevitably shows the same

Idivision into two. The Emotion which

Kb of the nature of Attraction, attracting

■objects to each other by pleasure, the

integrating energy in the universe, is

ailed Love. The Emotion which is of

nature of Repulsion, driving objects

from each other by pain, (he dis-

iniegniting energy in the universe, is

(called Hate. These are the two stems

xtm the root of Desire, and all the

(branches of the emotions may be traced

fbaclc to one of these twain.

Hence the identity of the characteristics

'Dnire and Emotion: Love .seeks to

^lo itself the attractive object, or to

F'iidfter it. in order to unite with it. to

. or be possessed by, iL It binds

I'by pleasure, by happincs.s, as L)t:sire binds.



354


V STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



its ties are indeed more lasting, more com-
plicated, are composed of more numerous
and more delicate threads interwoven into
greater comple the essence of

Desire-Attrac binding of two

objects logt he essence of

Emotion-Attrj Love. And so

also does H; drive away from

itself the n . or to flee from

it, in order to oe am it, to repulse,

or be repulsed by. it. It separates by
pain, by unhappiness. And thus the
essence of Desire-Repulsion, the driving
apart of two objects, is the essence of
Emotion- Repulsion, of Hate. Love and
Hate are the elaborated and thought-
infused forms of the simple Desires to
possess and to shun.



The Pi.AV OF Emotion in the Family.



Man has been described as "a social
animal —the biological way of saying that
he develops best in contact with, not in
i.solation from, his fellows. His dis-
tinctively intellectual characteristics need,
for tlu'ir cvolulion, a s{)cial mediutn, and



355

I his kctcnest plcHsures— and hence ncces-
[ larily his keenest pains — arise in his
I relations with others of his own species.
I They alone can evoke from him the
l-responses on which his further growth
Idcpcnds. All evolution, all the calling out
iof latent powers, is in response to stimuli
1 from wiihout. and. when the human stage
las reached, the most poignant and effective
Isttmuli call only come from contacts with
I human beings.

Sex-attraction is the Rrst social bond,

Land the children bom to the husband and

twife form, with them, the first social unit,

§i^e family. The prolonged helplessness

tend dependence of the human infant give

time for the physical passion of parentage

tto ri{>en into the emotion of maternal and

i^paiernal love, and thus give stability to

■^e family, while the family itself forms a

leld in which the various emotions tnevit-

i«bly play. Herein ,-irc first established

definite and permanent relations between

human beings, and on the harmony of

these relations, on the benefits bestowed

...fay these relations on each member of the

l-lbntly, docs the happiness of each depcncL


^2^ A STVDV M CCHtSCIOOSMBSS.

We can advantageou^ study the play
of Emotion in the family, since here we
have a comparativelv simple sociaJ unit.
which yet afii ure in miniature

of society at i can Bnd here the

origin and e -inues and vices,

and see the and object of

morality.

We have how sex-passion

evolves, under su^ Ircumstances. into

ihe emotion of love, and how this love
shows itself as tenderness and compassion
when the wife, instead of bein;j the equal
mate, becomes helpless and dependent, in
the temporary physical inferiority caused,
say. by child-bearing. Similarly, should
sickness or accident reduce the husband to
the temporary physical inferiority, tender-
ness and compassion will tlow out to him
from the wife. But these manifestations
of love cannot be shown by the stronger
without evoking from the weaker answer-
ing love-manifestations ; these in the
condition of weakness will have as
their natural characteristics trust, confi-
dence, gratitude, all equally love-emotions
coloured by weakness and dependence.



I In the relation of parents to children and
I of children to parents, where physical
I superiority and inferiority are far more
I strongly marked and persist for a con-
I liderable period of time, these love-
I emotions will be continually manifested
I on both sides. Tenderness, compassion.
] protection, will be constantly shown by
I the parents to the children, and trust,
I confidence, jjratitudc, will be the constant
L answer of the children. Variations in the
I expression of the love-emotion will be
I Caused by variety of circumstances, which
rill call out generosity, forgiveness,
I patience, etc, on the part of the piircnts,
land obedience, dutifulness, servlceableness.
letc. on the part of the children. Taking
f these two classes of love-cmotions, we see
I that the common essence in the one class
I is benevolence, and in the other reverence ;
I tiie first is love looking downwards on
I those weaker, inferior to itself ; the other
F love looking upwards on those stronger,
t superior to itself. And we can then
' generalise and say : Love looking down-
wards is Benevolence ; Love looking
tipwards is Reverence ; and these arc the


358 A STUPY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

several common characteristics of Love
from superiors to Enferiors, and Love from
inferiors to superiors universally.

The normal relations between husband
and wife, and those between brothers and
sisters, afford us the field for studying the
manifestations of love between equals.
We see love showing itself as mutual
tenderness and mutual trustfulness, as con-
sideration, respect, and desire to please, as
quick insight into and endeavour to fulfil
the wishes of the other, as magnanimity,
forbearance. The elements present in the
love-emotions of superior to inferior are
found here, but mutuality is impressed on
all of them. So we may say that the
common characteristic of Love between
equals is Desire for Mutual Help.

Thus we have Benevolence, Desire for
Mutual Help, and Reverence as the three
main divisions of the Love-Emotion, and
under these all love emotions may be
classified. For all human relations are
summed up under the three classes : the
relations of superiors to inferiors, of equals
to equals, of inferiors to superiors.

A similar study of the Hate-Emotion in



EMOTION. 359

family will yield us similar fruits.
I Where ihere is hate between husband and
L wife, the temporary superior will show
[harshness, cruelty, oppression to the
^temporary inferior, and these will be
nswered by the inferior with hate-
Knanirestations characteristic of weakness,
ich as vindictivencss, fear, and treachery.
■These will be even more apparent in the
iRlations between parents and children,
Ivhen both are dominated by the Mate-
Emotion, since the disparity is here
reater, and tyranny breeds a whole
of evil emotions — deceit, servility,
lowardice, while (he child is helpless, and
■idisobedience, revolt and revenge as it
■grows older. Here again we seek a
■ common characteristic, and find that Hate
K looking downwards is Scorn, and looking
r upwards is Fear.

Similarly, Hate between equals will
' show itself in anger, combat iveness, dis-
respect, violence, aggressiveness, jealousy,
insolence, etc — all the emotions which
repel man from man when they stand as
rivals, face to face, not hand in hand. Tlie
common characteristic of Hate between



360 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

equals will thus be Mutual Injury,
the three main characteristics of the Ha
Emotion are Scorn, Desire for Mutt
Injury, and Fear.

Love is characterised in all its :
festations by sympathy, self-sacrifice, the
desire to give ; these are its essential
factors, whether as Benevolence, as Desire
for Mutual Help, as Reverence. For all
these directly serve Attraction, bring
about union, are of the very nature of
Love. Hence Love is of the Spirit ; for
sympathy is the feeling for another as one
would feel for oneself: self-sacrifice is the
recognition of the claim of the other, as
oneself; giving is the condition of spiritual
life. Thus Love is .seen to belong to the
Spirit, to the life-side of the universe.

Hate, on the other hand, is characterised
in all its manifestations by antipathy, self-
aggrandisement, the desire to take ; these
are its essential factors, whether as Scorn,
Desire for Mutual Injury, or Fear. AH
these directly serve Repulsion, driving one
apart from another. Hence, Hate is of
Matter, emphasises manlfoldness and
differences, is essentially separateness.



belongs to the form-stde of the universe.

We have thus far dealt with the play

[ of Emotion in the ramily. because the

family serves as a miniature of society.
r Society is only the integration of numerous
I family units, but the absence of the blood-
I tie between these units, the absence of
I recojjnised common interests and common
I objects, makes it necessary to 6nd some
I bond which will supply the place of the
I natural bonds in the family. The family
1 units in a Society appear on the surface as
I rivals, rather than as brothers and sisters ;
I hence the Hatc-Kmotion is more likely to
: than the Love- Emotion, and it is
I necessary to fmd some way of maintaining
I harmony ; this is done by the transmuta-
I lion of Lovc-Emotions into virtues.

S S. Thk Birth of Vibti;**.

We have seen that when members of

a family pass beyond the small circle of
relatives, and meet p«-ople whose interests
are either indifferent or opposed to them.
there is not between them and the others
the mutual interplay of Love. Rather does



362 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

Hate show itself, ranging from the watch-
ful attitude of suspicion to the destroying
fury of war. How then is a society to be
composed of the separate family units ?

It can only be done by making per-
manent all the emotional moods which
spring from Love, and by eradicating
those which spring from Hate. A per-
manent mood of a love-emotion directed
towards a living being is a Virtue ; a
permanent mood of a hate-emotion
directed against a living being is a Vice.
This change is wrought by the Intellect,
which bestows on the emotion a permanent
character, seeking harmony in all relations
in order that happiness may result. That
which conduces to harmony and therefore
to happiness in the family, springing
spontaneously from Love, is Virtue when
practised towards all in every relation of
life. Virtue springs from Love and its
result is happiness. So also that which
conduces to disharmony and therefore to
misery in the family, springing spon-
taneously from Hate, is Vice when
practised towards all in all relations
of life.


w



363

An objection is raised to this theory,
that ihc permanent mood of a love-
emotion is a virtue, by pointing out that
adultery, theft, and other vices may spring
from the love-emotion. Here analysis of
the elements entering into the mental
attitude is necessary. It is complex, not
nmple. The act of adultery is motived
by love, but not by love alone. There
enter into it also contempt of the honour
of another, indifference to the happiness
of another, the selfish grasping at personal

leasure at the cost of social stability,

laocial honour, social decency. All these

■ing from hate-emotions. The love is

le one redeeming feature in the whole
isaction. the one virtue in the bundle
sordid vices. Siitiilar analysis will
always show that when the exercise of a
love-emotion is wrong, the wrongness lies
in the vices bound up with its exercise,
and not in the love-emotion itself.



9 i. RlCffT AND Wkokg.



Let us now turn, for a moment, to the
question of Right and Wrong, and see the


364 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

relation they bear to bliss and misery.
For there is an idea widely current that
there is sop"**'^'"" '"'" and materialistic
in the view is the means to

bliss. Many his idea degrades

virtue, giving nd place where it

should hold .nd making it a

means inst d. Let us then

see why vir the path to bliss,

and how this inner 11 the nature of
things.

When the' Intellect studies the world.
and sees the inimnierabic relations estab-
lished therein, and observes that har-
monious relations brinsr about ha[)piness,
and that jarring relations Ijriii^i;' about
misery, it sets to work to find out the
way of establishing universal harmony and
hence universal bliss. Further, it dis-
covers that the- world is moving along a
path which it is compelled to tread— the
path of evolution, and it tinds out tlie law
of evolution. For a part, a unit, to set
itself with the law of the whole to which it
belongs means peace, harmony, and there-
fore happiness, while for it to set itself
against that law means friction, dis-



365

Ttony, and therefore misery. Hence

he Right is thiit which, being in harmony

irith the great law, brings bliss, and the

■Wrong is that which, being in conflict

rith the great law, brings misery. When

[he intellect, illuminated by the Spirit, sees

Uure as an expression of divine Thought,

he law of evolution as an expression of

fae divine Will, the goal as an expression

Bf divine Bliss, then for harmony with

he law of evolution we may substitute

armony with the divine Will, and the

|1 Right becomes that which is in harmony

twith the Will of God. and morality

nmes permeated with religion.



k



g S. ViRTUi AND Bliss.

Perfection, harmony with the divine
Will, cannot be separated from bliss.
Virtue is the road to bliss, and if anything
does not lead there it is not virtue. The
perfection of the divine nature expresses
itself in harmony, and when the scattered
"divine fragments" come into harmony
they taste bliss.

This fact is sometimes veiled by



366 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

another, i.e., that the practice of a virt
under certain circumstances brings aboil
misery. Thai is true, but the misery is
temporary and superficial, and the balance
between that outer misery and the Inner
bliss arising from the virtuous conduct, is
in favour of the latter ; and further, the
misery is not due to the virtue but to the
circumstances which oppose its practice, to
the friction between the good organism
and the evil environment. So when you
strike a harmonious chord amid a mass of
discords, for a moment it increases the
discord. Tlie virtuous man is thrown into
conflict with evil, but this should not blind
us to the fact that bliss is ever wedded
indissolubly to Right and misery to
Wrong. Even though the righteous may
suffer temporarily, nothing but righteous-
ness can lead to bliss. And if we examine
the consciousness of the righteous, we find
that he is happier in doing the right
though superficial pain may result, than
in doing the wrong which would ruffle the
inner peace. The commission of a wrong
act would cause him inner anguish out-
weighing the external pleasure. Even in



moK. 367

Ethc case where righteousness leads to
fextemal suffering, the suffering is less
I than would be caused by unrighteousness.
[Miss Helen Taylor has well said that for
l.the man who dies for the sake of truth.
I^ieaih is easier than life with falsehood
lit is easier and pleasanter for the righteous
Ittian to die as a martyr, than to live as a
hypocrite.

Since the nature of the Self is bliss, and
lat bliss is only hindered in manifestation
resisting circumstances, that which
moves the friction between itself and
iicsc circumstances and opens its onward
'ay must lead to its Self-realisation, i.e.. to
realisation of bliss. Virtue does this,
"and therefore virtue is a means to bliss.
Where the inner nature of things is peace
and joy. the harmony which permits thai
nature to unveil itself must bring peace
and joy, and to bring about this harmony
is the work of virtue.



I



11



Thk Tramsmutation or Emotions into

ViKTUKS ANP ViCKS.



We have now to sec more fully the
truth of what was said above, that virtue



368



A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



; of .



emotion, and how far it I's
true that a virtue or a vice is merely a
permanent mood of an emotion. Our
definition is that virtue Is a permanent
mood of the love-eniotlon, and vice a
permanent mood of the hate-emotion.

The emotions belonging to love are
the constructive energies which, drawing
people together, build up the family, the
tribe, the nation. Love is a manifestation
of attraction, and hence holds objects
together. This process of integration
begins with the family, and the relations
established between its members in the
common life of the family entail, if there
is to be happiness, the acting towards
each other in a helpful and kindly way.
The obligations necessary for the estab-
lishment of happiness in these relations
are called duties, that which is due from
one to the other. If these duties are not
discharged the family relations become a
source of misery, since the close contacts
of the family make the happiness of each
dependent on the treatment of him by the
others. No relation can be entered into
between human beings which does not



RMOTION. 369

establish an obligation between them, a
duty of each towards the other. The
husband loves the wife, the wife the
husband, and nothin;^ more is needed to
lead each to seek the other's happiness
than the intense spontaneous wish to
make the beloved happy. This leads the
line who can give to supply what the other
needs. In the fullest sense, "love is the
fulliiling of the law " ; ' there is no need
for the feelinj; of an obligation, for love
seeks ever to help and to bless, and there
is no need for " ihou shall," or " thou
shall not."

Hut when a person, moved by love to
discharge all the duties of his relation
with another, comes into relation with
those he does not love, how is a
harmonious relation with them to be
csublished ? By recognising the obliga-
tions of the relation into which he has
entered, and discharging them. The
doings which grew out of love in the
one case present themselves as obliga-
tions, as duties, in the other, where love
is not present. Right reason works the
' Xcm, mi. to.


370 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

spontaneous actions of love into per-l
manent obligations, or duties, and thei
love-emotion, m^flp a "ermanent element |
of conduct, i virtue. This i

the justificati statement that

virtue is th' mood of a love^J

emotion. state of emotion.!

is establi I show itself when

;i relation ; man discharges

the duties of that r^i> i ; he is a virtuous
num. He is moved by emotions made per-
manent by the intellect, which recognises
that happiness depends on the establish-
ment of harmony in all relations. Love.
rationalised and fixed by the intellect, is
virtue.

In this way may be built up a science
of ethics, of which the laws are as much
an inevitable sequence as those on which
any other science is built.

So also between the hate-emotion and
vices there is a similar relation. The
permanent mood of a hate-emotion is a
vice. One person injures another, and
the second returns the injury ; the relation
between these two is inharmonious, pro-
ductive of misery. And as each expects



EMOTIOK. 371

otn the other, each tries to weaken
r"s [xjwer to inflict injury, and this
is the spontaneous action of hate. When
this inood becomes permanent, and a man
shows it in any relation into which he
enters wherein the opportunity for its
manifestation arises, then it is called a
vice. A man of uncontrolled passions and
undeveloped nature strikes a blow, a
spontaneous expression of hate. He
repeats this often, and it becomes habitual
when he is anj^ry. He inllicts pain and
takes pleasure in the infliction. The vice
of cruelty is developed, and if he meets
a child or a person weaker than himself,
he will show cruelty merely because he
comes into relation with them. As the
love-emolion. guided and fixed by right
reason, is virtue, so the hale-emotion.
guided and fixed by distorted and blinded
reason, is vice.

I 7. Ai-rucATioi* or the Throvy to Comddct.

When the nature of virtue and vice is
thus seen, it is clear that the shortest
way of strengthening the virtues and



elimir



A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



the



to work directly



1 mating
on the emotional side of the character.
We can strive to develop the love-
emotion, thus affording the material which
the reason will elaborate into its charac-
teristic virtues. The development of the
love-emotion is the most effective way of
evolving the moral character, virtues being
but the blossoms and the fruits which
spring from the root of love.

The value of this clear view of the
transmutation of emotions into virtues and
vices lies in the fact that it gives us a
definite theory on which we can work ; it
is as though we were seeking a distant
place, and a map were placed before our
eyes ; we trace thereon the road which
leads from our present position to our
goal. So many really good and earnest
people spend years in vague aspirations
after goodness, and yet make but little
progress ; they are good in purpose
but weak in attainment ; this is chiefly
because they do not understand the
nature in which they are working,
and the best methods for its culture.
They are like a child in a garden, a



EMOTION. 373

child eager to see his garden brilliant
with flowers, but without the knowledge
to plant and cultivate them, and to
exterminate the weeds which overgrow
his plot Like the child, they long for
the sweetness of the virtue-flowers, and
Bnd their garden overrun with the rank
growth of the weeds of vice.

>!t 8. The Uses or EiioTiON.
The uses of the love-emotion are so
obvious that it seems scarcely necessary
to dwell upon them, and yet too much
stress cannot be laid on the fact that love
is the constructive force in the universe.
Having drawn together the family units,
it welds these into larger tribal and
national units, and these it will build in
the future into the Brotherhood of Man.
Nor must we omit to note the fact that the
smaller units draw out the love-power and
prepare it for fuller expression. Their use
is to call into manifestation the hidden
divine power of love within the Spirit, by
giving to it objects close at hand that
attract it The love is not to be confined



374



A STUDY IN- CONSCIOUSNESS.



within these narrow limits, but, as it gains
strength by practice, it is to Spread out-
wards until it embraces all sentient beings.
We may formulate the law of love: Regard
every aged person as your father or
mother ; regard every person of similar
age as your brother or sister; regard every
younger person as your child. This sums
up human relations. The fulfilment of this
law would render earth a paradise, and it
is in order that the earth may become
such a paradise that the family exists.

A man who would widen his love-rela-
tions should begin to regard the welfare of
his community as he regards the welfare
of his own family. He should try to work
for the public good of his community with
the energy and interest with which he
works for his family. Later, he will
extend his loving interest and labour to
his nation. Then appears the great virtue
of public spirit, the sure precursor of
national prosperity. Later still, he will
love and labour for humanity, and finally
he will embrace within his loving care all
sentient beings, and will become " the
friend of every creature."



EMOTION. 375

Few. at the present stage of evolution,
' are really able to love humanity, and too
many speak of loving humanity who are
not ready to make any sacrifice to help
a suffering brother or sister close at hand.
The servant of humanity must not over-
look the human beings at his door, nor in
imagination water with sentimental sym-
pathy the distant garden, while the plants
round his doorway are dying from drought.

The uses of hate are not at first so
obvious, but arc none the less important
^t first, when we study hate and see that
B essence is dmntegration, destruction, it
"may seem all evil ; ■■ He who hateth his
brother is a murderer." saith a great
Teacher.' bcciiusc murder is but an
expression of hate ; and even when hate
does not go so far as murder, it is still
a destroying force ; it breaks up the family,
the nation, and wherever it goes it tears
people apart Of what use. then, is hate ?

First, it drives apart incongruous
elements, unfit to combine together, and
thus prevents continuing friction. Where

ongruous undeveloped people arc con-
* S/oim. I. ii. I J.



376 A STUDV IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

cerned, it is better for them to be driven
far apart to pursue their several paths in
evolution, than to be kept within reach
of one another, stimulating each other to
increased bad emotions. Secondly, the
repulsion felt by the average soul for an
evil person is beneficial, so long as that
evil person has the power of leading him
astray ; for that repulsion, although it be
hate, guards him from an influence under
which he might otherwise succumb.
Contempt for the Har, the hypocrite, the
worker of cruelty on the weak, is an
emotion useful to the one who feels it,
and also to the one against whom it is
directed ; for it tends to preserve the one
from falling into similar vices, and it tends
to arouse in the despised person a feeling
of shame that may lift him from the mire
in which he is plunged. So long as a
person has any tendency to a sin. so long
is hatred against those who practise the
sin protective and useful. Presently, as he
evolves, he will distinguish between the evil-
doer and the evil, and will pity the evil-doer
and confine his hatred to the evil. Later
still, secure in virtue, he will hate neither the



BHOTION. 377

ril-doer nor his evil, but will see tranquilly
alow stage of evolution, out of which he
will strive to lift his younger brother by
fitting means. " Righteous indignation."
"noble scorn." "just wrath." all are
phrases which recognise the usefulness of
these emotions, while seeking to veil the
fact that they are essentially forms of
hate — a veiling which is due to the feeling
that hate is an evil thing. None the less
are they essentially forms of hate, whatever
they may be called, though ihey play a
useful part in evolution, and their storms
purify the social atmosphere. Intolerance
of evil is far better than indifference to it,
and until a man is beyond the reach of
temptation t<i any given sin, intolerance
of those who practise it is for him a
necessary safeguard.

Let us take the case of a man little
evolved ; he desires to avoid gross sins,
but yet feels tempted to them. The
desire to avoid them will show itself as
hatred of those in whom he sees them ;
to check this hatred would be to plunge him
Into temptations he is not yet strong enm^
to resist As he evolves further and huther



378 A sTunv in consciousness.

from the danger of yielding to temptation,
he will hate the sins, but will pityingly
sympathise with the sinner. Not till he
has become a saint can he afford not to hate
the evil.

When ill ourselves we feel repulsion from
a person we may be sure that we have in us
some lingering traces of that which we dis-
like in him. The Ego, seeing a danger,
drags his vehicles away. A man, perfectly
temperate, feels less repulsion towards the
drunkard than a temperate man who occa-
sionally exceeds. A woman, utterly pure,
feels no repulsion from a fallen sister, from
whose contact the less pure would withdraw
their skirts. When we reach perfection, we
shall love the sinner as well as the saint,
and perchance may show the love more to
the sinner, since the saint can stand alone,
but the sinner will fall if he be not loved.

When the man has risen to the point
where he hates neither sinner nor sin, then
the disintegrating force^which is hate
among human beings— becomes simply aa
energy to be used for destroying the
obstacles which embarrass the path of
evolution. When perfected wisdom guides



MOTION. 379

the constructive and destructive energies,
and perfected love is the motive power,
then only can the destructive force be used
without incurring the root-sin of the feeling
of separateness. To feel ourselves different
from others is the " great heresy," for
separateness, when the whole Is evolving
towards unity, is opposition to the Law.
The feeling of separateness is definitely
wrong, whether it leads to one's thinking
oneself more righteous or more sinful.
The perfect saint identifies himself with the
criminal as much as with another saint, for
the criminal and the saint are alike divine,
although in different stages of evolution.
When a man can feel thus, he touches the
life of the Christ in man. He does not
think of himself as .separate, but as one
with all. To him his own holiness is the
holiness of humanity, and the sin of any Is
his sin. He builds no barrier between
himself and the sinner, but pulls down any
barrier made by the sinner, and shares the
-sinner's evil while sharing with him his
good.

Those who can feel the truth of this
" counsel of perfection " should, in their


3S0 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

daily lives, seek to practise it, however
imperfectly. In dealing with the less
advanced, they ';hnn1H ever seek to level
or the sense of
d endures till we
t by this effort we
and to strive to
the lowest is to
/e energy which
T, and to become



the dividing

separateness is

achieve ChristI

may gradually

identify ourse

exercise the

holds the worlds togt

channels for the divine love.



Chapter V.

EMOTION (continued).
§ 1. The Training of Emotion.

Emotion is, we have seen, the motive
power in man : it stimulates thought ; it
impels to action ; it is as steam to the
engine ; without it man would be inert,
passive. But there are many who are the
continual prey of their emotions ; who are
hurried hither and thither by emotions, as
a rudderless ship by stormy winds upon the
ocean ; who are tossed high and dragged
low by surges of joyous and painful feelings;
who alternate between exaltation and
despair. Such a person is swayed, subju-
gated by emotions, continually harassed by
their conflict He is more or less a chaos
within, and is erratic in his outward actions,
moved by the impulse of the moment,
without due consideration for surrounding

3»i


382 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

circumstances, such consideration as would
make his actions well-directed. He
often what is called a good person, inspin



by generous 1
actions, full of
eager to bring
action intendeo
have not here
the cruel, but
hurry him intu



irred into kindlyl
vith suffering and
ging quickly intol
he sufferer. Wefl
the indifferent 1
whose emotionj
before he has'



considered the conditions or forecast the
results of his activity, beyond the immediate
relief of the pain before his view. Such a
person — though moved by a desire to help,
though the stimulating emotion is sympathy
and desire to relieve suffering — often does
more harm than good in consequence of
the inconsiderateness of his action. The
emotion which impels him springs from the
love-side of his nature, from the side which
draws people together, and which is the
root of the constructive and preserving
virtues ; and in this very fact lies the
danger of such a person. If the emotion
had its root in evil, he would be the first to
eradicate it ; but just because it is rooted
in that love-emotion whence spring all the



BMOTIOH. 383

virtues, he does not suspect it, he

does not endeavour to control it. " I am

so sym[)Hthctic ; I am so much moved by

suffering ; I cannot bear the sight of

I misery." In all such phrases, a certain

laelf-praise is implied, though the tone may

|-be one of deprecation. Truly, sympathy is

L admirable, ftui sympathy, but its ill-

I directed exercise Is often provocative of

l^nischief. Sometimes it injures the vcty

I object of sympathy, and leaves him finally

worse case than at first Too often

I'Unwise forms of relief are adopted, more to

Ijremovc the pain of the sympathiser than to

ure the ill of the sufferer, and a momentary

l<pang is stopped at the cost of a Easting

injury, really, though not avowedly, to

■■Felicvc the pain of the onl(X)kcr. The

Trc-action of symjjathy on the sympathetic

■person is good, deepening the love-

Kcmotion : but the action on others is too

loften bad. owing to the lack of balanced

thought It is cas)-, at the sight of pain,

to fill earth and sky with our shrieks, till

all the air is throbbing ; it is hard 10 pause,

to measure the cause of pain and the cure.

and then to apply a remedy which heals


384 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

instead of perpetuating. Right Reason 1

must govern and direct emotion, if good is ;

to result from its exercise. Emotion should

be the impulse

director ; dire

gence, and its

never be wrei

the consciousi

emotion as tl

a^ director, there



on, but not its

gs to the intelii-

rerogative should |

from it. Where (

rks, having strong J

and right reasoO-f

sympathetic and

wise man who is useful to his generation.

Desires have been well compared to
horses harnessed to the chariot of the body,
and desires are rooted in emotions. Where
the emotions are uncontrolled they are like
plunging, unbroken horses that imperil the
safety of the chariot and threaten the life of
the charioteer. The reins have been
compared to the mind, the reins that guide
the horses, restraining or loosening as is
needed. There is well imaged the relation-
ship between emotion, intelligence, and
action. Emotion gives the movement,
intelligence controls and guides, and then
the Self will use activity to the best
advantage, as becomes the ruler of the
emotions, not their victim.



385

With the development of that aspect of

onsciousness which will show itself as

the sixth sub-race, and more

ompletely in the sixth Root-Race, the

notional nature rapidly evolves in some

he advanced fifth Race, and often, for a

[ne, offers many troublesome and even

btressin^' symptoms. As evolution pro-

«ds, these will be outjjrown, and the

laturc will become balanced as well as

ong, wise as well as generous ; mcan-

liie the rapidly developing nature will be

my and often distressful, and will suffer

and long. Yet in those very

ifcrings lies its future strength as its

lent purification, and in proportion to

5 of the sufferings will be the

greatness of the result. It is in these

powerful natures that Buddhi is struggling

. to birth, and the anguish of the travail is

on them. Presently Buddhi. the Christ.

" litde child." will be bom. Wisdom and

ovc in one, and this, united to high intelli-

{encc. is the spiritual Ego, the true Inner

Man. the Ruler Immortal.

The student, who is studying his own

uure in order to take his own evolution



386 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

in hand and direct its future course, must
carefully observe his own strength and his
own weakness, in order to regulate the one
and correct the other. In unevenly
developed persons intellect and emotion
are apt to vary in inverse ratio to each
other ; strong emotions go with weak
intelligence, and strong intelligence with
weak emotions ; in one case the directing
power is weak, in the other the motive.
The .student, then, in his self-analysis,
must see whether his intelligence is well-
developed, if he finds his emotions to be
strong ; he must test himself to discover
whether he is unwilling to look at things
in "the clear dry light of intellect"; if he
feels repelled when a subject is presented
to him in this light, he may rest assured
that the emotional side of his nature is
over-developed in proportion to the intel-
lectual side. For the well-balanced man
would resent neither the clear light of the
directive intelligence, nor the strong force
of the motive emotion. If, in the past,
one side has been over- cultivated, if the
emotions have been fostered to the detri-
ment of the intelligence, then the efforts



3«7

hould be turned to the strengthening
r the intellect, and the resentmfnt which
fftrisesi again-st a coldly intellectual presenta-
tion should l)c sternly curbed, the difference
between intelligence and sympathy being
recognised.



COKl

^^— shoi

M

^Kani



S 3. The Distorting Fouck of Emotion.

One of the things most apt to be over-
looked by the emotional person is the
way in which emotion fills his surrounding
atmosphere with its vibrations, and thereby
biasses the intelligence : everything is seen
through this atmoHphere, and is coloured
and distorted by it. so that things do not
reach the intelligence in their true form
and colour, but arrive twisted and dis-
coloured. Our aura surrounds us, and
should be a pellucid medium through
lich alt in the outer world should reach
in its own form and colour ; but when
aura is vibrating with emotion it
mot act as such a medium, and all is
liefractcd that passes into it. and reaches
us quite other than it is. If a person is
under water and a stick is put near htm


388 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

in the air. and he tries to touch it, his
hand will be wrongly directed, for he will
put his hand to the place at which he sees
the slick, and as the rays coming from
it are refracted on entering the water,
the slick will be, for him, displaced.
Similarly when an impression from the
outer world reaches us through an aura
over-charged with emotion, its proportions
are distorted, and its position misjudged ;
hence the data supplied to the intelligence
are erroneous, and the judgment founded
upon them will therefore necessarily be
wrong, however accurately the intelligence
may work.

Even the most careful self- analysis
will not entirely protect us against this
emotional disturbance. The intellect ever
tends to judge favourably that which we
like, unfavourably that which we dislike,
owing to the "refraction" above-named.
The arguments in favour of a certain
course are thrown into a strong light by
our desire to follow it, and the arguments
against it are thrown into the shade.
The one seems so clear and forcible, the
other so dubious and feeble. And to our



EMOTION. 389

seeing through the emotion, it is
so sure thai we arc right, and that anyone,
who does not see as wc do, is biassed by
prejudice or is wilfully perverse. Against
this ever-present danger, we can only
guard by care and persistent effort, but
we cannot finally escape it until we
transcend the emotions, and become abso-
lutely their ruler.

One way remains in which we can aid
ourselves to a right judgment, and that
is by studying the workings of conscious-
ness in others, and in weighing their
decisions under circumstances similar to
our own. The judgments which most
repel us are those most likely to be
useful to us, because made through an
emotional medium very different from our
own. We can com[Mire their decisions
with ours, and by noting the points that
affect them most and ourselves least, and
that weigh most heavily with us and most
lightly with them, we may disentangle the
emotional from the intellectual elements in
the judgments. And even where our con*
elusions are mistaken, the effort to arrive
at them is corrective and illuminative ; it



.190



A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



aids ill the mastery of the emotions, and
strengthens the intellectual element. Such
studies should of course be made when
there is no emotional disturbance, and its
fruits should be stored up for use at the.-*
times when the emotions are strong.

g 3. Methods of Ruling the Emotioks.

The first and most powerful method
for obtaining mastery of the emotions
is— as in all that touches consciousness —
Meditation. Before contact with the
world has disturbed the emotions, medita-
tion should be resorted to. Coming back
into the body after the period of physical
sleep, from a world subtler than the
physical, the Ego will find his tenement
quiet, and can take possession calmly of
the rested brain and nerves. Meditation
later in the day, when the emotions have
been disturbed, and when they are in
full activity, is not as efficacious. The
quiet time which is available after sleep is
the right season for effective meditation,
the desire-body, the emotional nature,
being more tranquil than after it has



k



euonoH. 39t

tinged into the bustle of the world.

r From that peaceful morning hour will

! stream out the inHuence which will guard

during the day, and the emotions, soothed

sdUed, will be more amenable to

Where it is possible, it is well to forecast
f the ([ucstions which may arise during the
1 day, and to come to conclusions as to the
I view to be taken, the conduct to be
[ pursueti. If we know that we shall be
I placed under certain conditions that will
I arouse our emotions, we can decide before-
I'hand on our mental attitude, and even
I come to a decision on our action,
i Supposing such a decision has been
■ reached, then when the circumstances
I arise, that decision should be recalled and
I acted upon, even though the swell of the
emotions may impel towards a different
course. For instance, we are k*^''^? ^^
meet a person for whom wc have a strong
affection, and we decide in our meditation
on the course that it is wisest to pursue,
deciding in the clear light of calm intel-
ligence what is best for alt concerned. To
this decision wc should adhere, even



:



392 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

though there is the inclination to feel :
" I had not given the proper weight to
that view." As a matter of fact, under
these conditions, overweight is given, the
proper weight having been g^iven in the
calmer thought ; and it is the wisest plan
to follow the path previously chalked out
despite the emotional promptings of the
moment. There may be a blunder of
judgment, but if the blunder be not seen
during meditation it is not likely to be
seen during a swirl of emotions.

Another method of curbing the emotions
is to think over what is going to be said,
before speaking, to put a bridle on the
tongue. The man who has learned to
control his speech has conquered every-
thing, says an ancient eastern law-giver.
The person who never speaks a sharp or
ill-considered word is well on the way to
control emotion. To rule speech is to rule
the whole nature. It is a good plan not to
speak — to deliberately check speech — until
one is clear as to what one is going to say,
is sure that the speech is true, that it is
adapted to the person to whom it is to be
addressed, and that it is such as ought to



E»IOTtOK. 393

mite spoken. Truth comes first and foremost,
land nothing can excuse falsity of speech ;
imany a speech uttered under stress of
I'Cmotion is false, either from exaggeration

■ or distortion. Then, the appropriateness
fof the speech to the person addressed is too
■^ten forgotten, in the hurry of emotion, or

he eagerness of strong feeling. A quite
ong idea of a great truth may be
IpTcsentcd. if the point of view of the
iperson addressed is not borne in mind :
laympaihy is needed, the seeing as he sees,
tfor only then can the truth be useful and
■liclprul. One is not trying to help oneself.
Bbut to help another, in putting the truth
Ibefore him. Perhaps the conception of
■Iftw as changeless, inviolable, absolutely
npanial, may, to the speaker, be inspiring,
tngthening, uplifting ; whereas that con-
ption is ruthless and crushing to an
fttoideveloped person, and injures instead of
Klidps. Truth is not meant to crush, but to
I elevate, and wc misuse truth when we give
L{t to one that is not ready. There is plenty

■ to suit the needs of each, but discretion is
[ needed to choose wisely, and enthusiasm

nutt not force a premature enlightenment



394



A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



I



L



Many a young Theosophist does more harm
than good by his over-eager pressing on
others of the treasures he prizes so highly.
Lastly, the form of the speech, the necessity
or the usefulness of its utterance, should be
considered. A truth that might help may
be changed into a truth that hinders by the,
way in which it is put. " Never speak y
is untrue, never speak what is unpleasanl
is a golden rule of speech. All speech
should be truthful, sweet and agreeable.
This agreeableness of speech is too often
forgotten by well-meaning people, who
even pride themselves on their candour,
when they are merely rude and indifferent
to the feelings of those whom they address.
But that is neither good breeding nor
religion, for the unmannerly is not the
religious. Religion combines perfect truth
with perfect courtesy. Moreover, the
superfluous, the useless, is mischievous, and
there is much injury done by the continual
bubbling over of frivolous emotions in
chatter and small talk. People who cannot
bear silence, and are ever chattering, fritter
away their intellectual and moral forces, as
well as give utterance to a hundred follies,



1 '



BMonon. 395

belter left unsaid. To be afraid of silence
is a sign of mental weakness, and calm
silence is better than foolish speech. In
silence the emotions grow and strengthen,
while remaining controlled, and thus the
motive power of the nature increases and
is also brought into -subjection. The power
of being silent is great, and often exercises
a most soothing effect ; on the other hand,
he who has learned to be silent must be
careful that his silence does not trench on
his courtesy, that he does not, by inappro-
priate silence among others, make them
feel chilled and uncomfonable.

Some may fear that such a consideration
before speech as is outlined may so hinder
exchange of thought as lo paralyse conver-
sation : but all who have practised such
control will bear witness that, alter a brief
practice, no noticeable interval is caused
before the reply is uttered. Swifter than
lightning is the movement of the intel-
ligence, and it will Hash over the points to
be considered while a breath is being
drawn. It is true, that at 5rst there will be
slight hesitation, but in a few weeks no
pause will be required, and the review of



:



396 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

the proposed utterance will be made t
swiftly to cause any obstruction. Many a
orator can testify that, in the rapid torrenl
of a declamatory period, the mind will sit
at ease, turning about alternative sentences
and weighing their respective merits ere
one is chosen and the rest are cast aside ;
and yet none in the rapt audience will knony
aught of this by-play, or dream that behin'
the swift utterance there is any such selo
tive action going on.

A third method of mastering emotion is
by refraining from acting on impulse. The
hurry to act is characteristic of the modern
mind, and is the excess of the promptitude
which is its virtue. When we consider lifi^
calmly we realise that there is
any need for hurry ; there is
time enough, and action, however swift,
should be well considered and unhur-
ried. When an impulse comes from some
strong emotion, and wc spring forward
in obedience, without consideration, we
act unwisely. If we train ourselves to
think, before we act in all ordinary affairs,
then if an accident or anything else should
happen in which prompt action is necei



ry, the swift mind will balance up the
' demands of the moment and direct swift



action, but there will be



hurry.



[ inconsiderate unwise blundering.

" But should I not follow my intuition ?"
I some one may ask. Impulse and intuition
I arc loo often confused, though r<idically
1 different in origin and characteristics.
Impulse springs from the desire- nature,
f from the consciousness working through
the astral body, and is an energy Hung out-
wards in response to a stimulus from
[ outside, an energy undirected by the
I intelligence, hasty, unconsidered, headlong.
I Intuition springs from the spiritual Ego,
and is an energy (lowing outwards to meet
I a demand from outside, an energy directed
[ by the spiritual Ego, strong, calm, pur-
I poseful. For distinguishing between the
I two, until the nature is thoroughly
I balanced, calm consideration is necessary,
j and delay is essential ; an impulse dies
I away under such consideration and delay ;
I an intuition grows clearer and stronger
under such conditions ; calmness enables
the lower mind to hear it, and to feel its
serene iniperiousncss. Moreover, if what



398 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

seems to be an intuition is really 3
suggestion from some higher Being, that
suggestion will sound the louder for our
quiet meditation, and will lose nothing of
force by such calm delay.

It is true that there is a certain pleasure
in the abandonment to the headlong
impulse, and that the imposed restraint is
painful for a time. But the effort to lead
the higher life is full of these renounceals
of pleasure and acceptances of pain, and
gradually we come to feel that there is a
higher joy in the quiet considerate action
than in the yielding to the tumultuous
impulse, and that we have eliminated a
constant source of regret. For constantly
does such yielding prove a source of
sorrow, and the impulse is found to be a
mistake. If the proposed action be good,
the purpose to perform it will be made
stronger, not weaker, by careful thought.
And if the purpose grows weaker with the
thinking, then is it sure that it comes from
the lower source, not from the higher.

Daily meditation, careful consideration
before speech, the refusal to yield to
impulse, these are the chief methods of



SHonoN. 399

irning the emotions into useful servants
istead of dangerous masters.



S 4. Thk Usiho or Euotion.

Only he can use an emotion who has

tl)ecome its master, and who knows that

I'^e emotions are not himself but are

Iplaying in the vehicles in which he dwells,

nd are due to the interaction between

he Self and the Not-Self. Their ever-

Kchanging nature marks them as belonging

the vehicles ; they are stirred into

ictivity by things without, answered to by

lie consciousness within. The attribute of

onsciousncss that gives rise to emotions

Bliss, and pleasure and pain are the

lotions in the desire -vehicle caused by

: contacts of the outer world, and by the

sponse through it to these of the Self as

; just as thoughts are the motions

: to similar contacts and to the response

1 them of the Self as Knowledge. As

Self knows itself, and distinguishes

f Itself from its vehicles, it becomes ruler

of the emotions, and pleasure and pain

become equally modes of Bliss.



400



A STUDY m CONSCIOUSNESS.



As progress is made, it will be found
that greater equilibrium is attained under
stress of pleasure and pain, and that the
emotions no longer upset the balance of
the mind. So long as pleasure elates, and
pain paralyses, so that the performance of
duty is hindered and hampered, so long
is a man the slave, and not the ruler, of his
emotions. When he has learned to rule
them, the greatest wave of pleasure, the
keenest sting of pain, can be felt, and yet
the mind will remain steady and address
itself calmly to the work in hand. Then
whatever comes is turned into use. Out
of pain is gained power, as out of pleasure
are gained vitality and courage. All
become forces to help, instead of obstacles
to hinder.

Of these uses oratory may serve as an
illustration. You hear a man fired by
passion, his words tumbling over each
other, his gestures violent ; he is possessed
by, carried away by, emotion, but he does
not sway his audience. The orator who
sways is the master of his emotions and
uses them to affect liis audience ; his words
are deliberate and well-chosen even in the



BMOTION. 401

*rush of his speech, his gestures appropriate
aad dignified. He is not feeling the
emotions, but he kas felt Ihrni, and he
now uses his jast to shape the present.
In proportion as a speaker has felt and
has risen above his emoiions will be his
power to use them. No one without
strong emotions can be a great speaker ;
but the greatness gr,ows as the emotions
are brought under control, A more
cfteclivc explosion results from a careful
arrangement of the explosives and a
deliberate application of the match, than
by HingTng them down anyhow, and the

, match after them, in the hope that some-

Idung may catch.

So long as anyone is stirred by the
emotions, the clear vision needed for
helpful service is blurred. The valuable
helper is the man who is calm and
balanced, while full of sympathy. What
sort of a doctor would he be who, in the
midst of performing an operation, should
burst into tears ? Yet many people are so
distressed by the sight of suffering that
their whole being is shaken by it, and
they thus increase the suffering instead



402



A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



of relieving it All emotion causes strong
vibrations, and these pass from one to
another. The pffertive helper must be



I



calm and ste^
radiating pea
rock above ti
to gain that
he were



if
waves.

Another use oi



ing unshaken and
who stands on a
can help another
round better than
rattling with the



notions when they
are thoroughly in hand is to call up and
use the appropriate one to rouse in another
person an emotion beneficial to him. If a
person be angry, the natural answer to his
vibrations is anger in the one he meets,
for all vibrations tend to be sympathetically
reproduced. As we all have emotion -
bodies, any body vibrating near us in a
particular way tends to cause similar
vibrations in us, if we have in our bodies
the appropriate matter, Anger awakens
auger, love aw.-ikens love, gentleness
awakens gentleness. When we are
masters of our emotions, and feel the
surge of anj^cr rising in response to the
vibrations of anger in another, we shall
at once check this answer, and shall let


waves of anger dash up against us,
while wc remain unmoved. The man
who can hold his own emotion-body quiet,
while those of others are vibrating strongly
around him, has learned well the lesson
of self-control. When this is done, he is
ready to take the next step, to meet the
vibration of an evil emotion with the
vibration of the corresponding good
emotion, and thus he not only withholds
himself from anger, but sends out vibra-
,tions that tend to quiet the anger-
itions of the other. He answers
T by love, wrath by gentleness.
At first, this answer must be deliberate,
set purpose, and anj^ry people can be
;en to practise on. When one comes in
our way, wc utilise him. The attempt will
be. doubtless, cold and dry in the begin-
ning, with only the will to love in it and
none of the emotion ; but after a while, the
will to love will produce a little emotion.
and at last a habit will be irstablished. and
kindness will be the spontaneous answer to
unkindness. The steady, deliberate prac-
tice of answering thus the vibrations
wrong emotions reaching us from outside


4



prac- ^J
tutside ^^^H



404



A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



will establish a habit in the emotioi
body, and it will respond rightly auto-
matically.

The teaching of all the great Masters of
Ethics is the same: "Return good for
evil." And the teaching is based on this
interchange of vibrations, caused by love-
and hate- emotions. The return of evil
intensifies it, while the return of good
neutralises the evil. To stir love-emotions
in others by sending to them a stream of
such emotions, so as to stimulate all that is
good in them and to weaken all that is
bad, is the highest use to which we can
put our emotions in daily human service.
It is a good plan to bear in mind a list
of correspondences in emotions, and to
practise accordingly, answering pride by
humility, discourtesy by compassion, arro-
gance by submission, harshness by gentle-
ness, irritability by calmness. Thus is a
nature built up which answers all evil
emotions by the corresponding good ones,
and which acts as a benediction on all
around, lessening the evil in them and
strengthening the good.



|6. The Value or Emotiom in Evolittion.

Wc have seen that emotion is the
motive power in man, and to turn it into
a helper in evolution we must utilise it to
lift and not allow it to degrade. The Ego,
in his evolution, needs " points to draw
him " upwards, as says the Voice of tkt
Siiente, for the upward way is steep, and
an attractive object above us, towards
which we can strive, is an aid impossible
to over-estimate. Only too often we lag
on the way, and feel no desire to proceed ;
aspiration is inert, the longing to rise has
rted. Then may we summon emotion lo
our aid, by twining it around some object
of devotion, and thus gain the impetus we
need, the lifting force we crave.

This form of emotion is what is often
called hero-worship, the power to admire
and love greatly one who is nobler than
oneself, and to be able thus to love and
admire is to have at disposal one of the
great lifting forces in human evolution.
Hero-worship is often decried because a
perfect ideal is not possible to Bnd among
men living in the world, but a partial ideal



406 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

that can be loved and emulated is a help In
quickening evolution. It is true that there
will be weaknesses in such a partial ideal,
and it is necessary to distinguish between
the heroic qualities and the weaknesses
found in conjunction with them ; but the
attention should be fixed on the heroic
qualities that stimulate, and not on the
blemishes that mar everyone who has not
as yet transcended humanity. To recog-
nise that the weaknesses are of the Not-
Self and are passing, while the nobility is
of the Self that endures, to love what is
great, and to be able to pass over what is
small, that is the spirit that leads to
discipleship of the Great Ones, Only
good is gained by the hero- worshipper
from his ideal, if he honour the greatness
and disregard the weakness, and on the
hero himself will fall the karma of his own
shortcomings.

But it is said: if we thus recognise the
nobility of the Self in the midst of human
weaknesses, we are only doing what we
should do with all. and why make a hero
out of anyone in whom there is still any
human weakness? Because of the help



he

m



EMOTION. f6f

r hero gives us as an inspiration and a

asure of our own achievement. No
ordinary person can be turned into a hero ;
it is only when the Self shines out with
more than ordinary lustre that the inclina-
tion to hero-worship arises. The man is a
hero, though not yet super-human, and his
weaknesses are but as spots in the sun.
There is a proverb which says : " No man
is a hero lo his valet-dc-chambre." and the
cynic reads this as meaning that the most
heroic man owes his greatness to distance.
But is not the meaning rather that the
ivalct-soul, intent on the shine of a btxit and
ic set of a necktie, cannot appreciate that
■which makes the hero, having naught in
lim that can sound sympathetically with
the notes the hero strikes ? For to be able
to admire means to be able to achieve, and
love and reverence for the great is a sign
chat a man is growing like them.

When emotion is [hu.s aroused, we should
judge ourselves by our ideal, and be

ihamed to do or think aught that would
'bring a shade of sorrow nvcr the eyes of
him wc revere. His presence should be
with us, as an uplifter, until, judgitig



408 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

ourselves in the light of the greater achieve-
ment, we find ourselves also beginning to
achieve.

That the pure light of the Self shines
through none who walk the miry paths
of earth is true, but there are some
through whom enough light shines to
lighten the darkness, and to help us to
see where to plant our feet. It is better
to thank and honour these, to rejoice
and be glad in them, than to belittle
them because they are not wholly of
heaven, because some touches of human
weakness still entangle their feet. Blessed
indeed are they who have in themselves
the hero-nature and hence recognise their
elder kin ; for them waits the open gate to
the upper reaches, and the more they love,
the more they honour, the swifter will be
their approach to that gateway. No better
karma comes to a man than to find the
hero who may bear him company to the
entering ; no sadder karma than to have
seen him, in an illuminated moment, and
then to have cast him aside, blinded by an
imperfection he is out-growing.



Chapter VI.



THE WILL.



§1. The Will Winning its Freedom.

We return now to the consideration of
that power in man with which we started
— the Will. The student will remember
that It was stated that it was the Will of
the Self, of the individualised Self — indi-
vidualised though as yet unconscious of its
individualisation —which drew him into
manifestation. Not by compulsion, not
by external necessity, not by anything
opposed to him from outside, but by the
great Will of which his own Will is part —
his Will individualised as a centre but not
yet cut off by circumference of matter —
pulsing in him as the life-blood of the
mother pulses in the yet unborn child, he
reaches forth towards manifestation, dimly

longing for the rich thrill of life enveiled in

409



410



A STUDV IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



matter, for the exercise of powers yearning
for activity, for the experience of worlds
tumultuously full of movenieni. That
which consciously the Lixjos wills^the
Logos willing to become incarnate in a
universe— all the centres of individualised
life within Him also will, though as it were
blindly and groping towards a fuller life-
It is the Will to live, to know, and that
forth-going Will sets to manifestation.

We have seen that this Will, the Power
of the Self, becomes what we call Desire on
the denser planes of matter, and that,
blinded by matter and unable to see its
way, its direction is determined by the
attractions and repulsions playing upon it
from external objects. Hence we cannot
say of the Self at this period that he is
Self-directed ; he is directed by attractions
and repulsions that touch him at his
periphery. We have further seen that as
Desire came into touch with Intelligence,
and these two aspects of the Self played
upon each other, emotions evolved, showing
traces of their parentage, of their Desire-
mother and of their Intelligence-father.
And we have studied the methods by



which emotion may be controlled, put to
its true uses, and thus rendered serviceable
instead of dangerous in human evolution.

Wc have now to consider how this Will,
ihe hidden Power which has ever moved
lo activity though not yet controlling
activity, slowly wins to frvedum. that is to
I Self-determination. In a moment we shall
[ consider what is meant by thin word
• freedom."

Essentially and fundamentally free, in its

Oritfin as the Power of the Self, Will has

become bound and limited in its attempts

1 lo master the matter into which the Self

has entered. We need not shrink from

L aayin}; that matter masters the Self, not

the Self matter, and this it does by virtue

of the Self rcgardinf; matter as himself,

identifying; himself with it ; as he wills

, throuj^h it. thinks through it. acts through

I U, it becomes to him verily himself, and

[ deluded he cries : " I am this !" and while it

limits him and binds him. he. feeling it to

be himself, cries : " I am free." Yet is this

mastering of the Self by matter but r

temporary thing, for the matter is ever

changing, coming and going, impermanent,



412


A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



and is ever being shaped and unconsciously
drawn round and rejected by the unfolding
forces of the SeJf, oerinanent amid the
impermanent.

Let us con
evolution in
stronger than
the pleasant



painful; in whit

and reason has



stage in human
mory has grown
ctive outgoing to
rawing from the
ence mies Desire,
ed over impulse.



The result of the age-long evolution is to

be reaped, and part of that result is
freedom.

While the Will is expressing itself as
Desire, determined in its direction by out-
side attractions, it is obviously not free, but
very distinctly bound, just as any living
creature might be dragged by a force
greater than its own force in a direction
tinchoscn by it, so is the Will dragged
away by the attraction of objects, pulled
along the path which promises pleasure,
which is agreeable to pursue ; it is not
active as a Self-determined force, but on
the contrary the Self is being dragged
away by an external and compelling
attraction.



Tm wiu.



♦13



No more vivid picture of the Self,
r these conditions, can be given than
i before quoted from an ancient Hindu
re. in which the Self is limned as
the rider in a chariot, and the senses,
attracted by pleasure-giving objects, are
the ungovernable horses that carry away
the chariot of the body and the helpless
rider within it. Althoujjh the Will be the
very Power of the Self, so long as the Self
b being carried away by theiie unruly
horses, he is emphatically bound and not
' free. It is idle to speak of a free Will in a
I man who is the slave of the objects around
I him. He is ever in bondage, he can
I exercise no choice ; for though we may
I think of such a one as choosing to follow
' the path along which attractions draw him,
there is, in truth, no choice nor thought
I of choice. So long as attractions and
repulsions determine the path, all talk of
f freedom is empty and foolish. Even though
man feels himself as choosing the
I desirable object, the feeling of freedom is
illusory, for he is dragged by the attractive-
ness of the object and the longing for
pleasure in himself. He is as much, or as



A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



little, free as the iron is free to move to the
magnet. The movement is determined by
the strength of the mag^net and the nature
of the iron answering to its attraction.

To understand what we mean by freedom
of the Will, we must clear away a
prehminary difficulty which faces us in the
word "choice." When we appear to be
free to choose, does that so-called freedom
of choice mean freedom of Will ? Or is it
not true to say that freedom of choice only
means that no externa! force compels us to
elect one or another of alternatives.^ But
the important question that lies behind this
is : ■■ What makes us choose ? " Whether
we are free to act when we have chosen is
a very different thing from whether we are
" free " to choose, or whether the choice is
determined by something that lies behind.

How often we hear it said as a proof of
the freedom of the Will : " I am free to
choose whether I will leave the room or
not ; I am free to choose whether 1 will
drop this weight or not." But such
argument is beside the question. No one
denies the power of a person, physically
unconstrained, to leave a room or to stay



THK WILL. 415

in it, to drop a wcijjht or to uphold it. The

' ioteresting question is: "Why do I

When we analyse the choice,

t that it is determined by motive, and

the deterniinisi argues : " Your muscles

can uphold or drop the weight, but if there

is a valuable and fragile article underneath,

you will not choose lo drop ii. That which

determines your choice not to drop it is

the presence of that fragile object Your

choice is determined by motives, and the

I strongest motive directs it" The question

I not : " Am I free to act ?" but : " Am I

I Irce to will ? " And we see clearly that

I die Will is determined by the strongest

I motive, and that, so far as that goes, the

i dctcrminist is right.

In truth, this fact that the Will is deter-

[ mined by the strongest motive is the

I basis of all organised Society, of all law.

I of all penalty, of all responsibility, of all

education. The man whose will is not

I thus determined is irresponsible, insane.

H e is a creature who cannot be appealed

I to. cannot be reasoned with, cannot be

relied on, a person without reason, logic,

or memory, without the attributes



amenable to leo-
* <^

IS an energy j

pushing- to actio

reason, without

called "free,"bij

by " freedom of

determined by tl

be taken for grai

of the freedom i

What then is

the Will ? It cc

a relative, freedo

rated Self is a p

whole must be gr

all its parts. Am

Self and of the

ensheathed. No

bodies are in a r

within law, can m(



41?

[ and in this variety and endlessness offer
! possibilities and thus a free-
. of movemeni within a rigidity of
And the Self also is in a realm
[ «rf" law, nay is himself the very law, as
I being part of that nature which is the
' Being of all beings. No separated Self
' may escape from the Self which is all, and,

however freely he may move with regard
1 to other separated Selves, he may not.
' cannot, move outside the life which informs
[ him, which is his nature and his law. in
I which he lives and moves. The parts
I constrain not the parts, the separated
1 Selves constrain not the separated Selves ;
I but the whole constrains and controls the
' parts, the Self constrains and controls the

Selves. Yet even here, since the Selves
E«re the Self, freedom startH up from
i amid apparent bondage, and " none else
I compels."

I'his freedom of a part as regards other
' parts while in bondage to the whole may
f be seen clearly in physical nature. We arc
I parts of a world whirling through space

and revolving also on its own axis, turning

eastwards ever. Of this we know naught.



4l8 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

since its motion carries us with it. and all
moves together and at once, and in one
direction. Eastwards we turn with our
world, and naught we can do will change
our direction. Vet with regard to each
other and to the places about us, we can
move freely and change our relative
positions. I may go to the west of a
person or a place, though we are both
whirling eastwards ceaselessly. And of
the motion of a part with regard to a
part 1 shall be conscious, small and slow
as it is, while of the vast swift whirling
that carries all parts eastwards and on-
wards ever, 1 shall be utterly unconscious,
and shall say in my ignorance : '" Behold,
1 have moved westwards." And the high
Gods might laugh contemptuously at the
ignorance of the fragment that speaks of
the direction of its motion, were it not that
They, being wise, know of the movements
within the motion, and of the truth which
is false and yet true.

And yet again may we see how the
great Will works onwards undeviatingly
along the path of evolution, and compels
all to travel along that path, and still leaves



to each to choose his method of going, and

the fashion of his unconscious working.

' For the carrying,' out of that Will needs

L every fashion of working and every method

I of going, and takes up and utilises all.

I A man shapes himself to a noble character.

I and nourishes lofty aspirations, and seeks

lever to do loyal and faithful service to his

Ifelluws; then shall he be brought to birth

I where great opportunities cry aloud for

I workers, and the Will shall be wrought out

iby him in a nation that needs such helping,

land he shall fill a hero's part. The part is

■Written by the great Author : the ability to

■fill it is of the man's own making. Or a

ftnan yields to every temptation and

■becomes apt to evil, and he uses ill such

ower as he has, and disregards mercy,

ce and truth in petty ways and in

lily life ; then shall he be brought to

where oppression is needed, and

tielty. and 111 ways, and the Will shall be

Wrought out by him also in a nation that is

working out the results of an evil past, and

II be of the weaklings that tyrannise

and meanly and shame the nation

at bears them. Again is the part written ,



^>^^^iiig, men, ini
by motive, conditic
matter that enveils
by the Self whereo
Will is part — wh.
freedom of the Wi
that freedom is tc
within, bondage is
without ; the Will i
willing to act, dra\^
volition from source:
self, and has not th
him from sources out

And truly this

greater Self in whi(

with him : ** I am T

Self in which move:

one with that vaster,

That " ; and so oi

and huger sweeps, i
univer<r'-<--i'.*^' -



THE WILL. 421

Pratyagitmi, the One, and therefore truly
free. Looking outwards he is ever bound,
though the limits of his bondage recede
endlessly, unlimitedly ; looking inwards he
b ever free, for he is Brahman, the
Etkknau

When a man is Self-determined, then,
we may say that the man is free, in every
sense in which the word freedom is
' valuable, and his Self-determination is
I not bondage, in any harassing sense of
1 that word. That which in my innermost
[ Self I will to do, that to which none other
I forces me, that bears the mark which
[ distinguishes between the free and the
r bound. How far in us, in this sense of
[ the word freedom, can we say that our
I Will is free ? For the most part, but few
[ of us can claim this freedom in any more
L than a small portion. Apart from the
[previously-mentioned bondage to atirac-
l.tions and repulsions, we are bound within
Ithe channels made by our past thinkings.
Thy our habits — most of all by our habits
lof thought — by the qualities and the
labsence of qualities brought over f"
Ipast lives, by the strengths and the 1



422



A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



that



born with



by



were

education and our surroundings, by the
imperious compulsions of our stage in
evolution, our physical heredity, and our
national and racial traditions. Hence
only a narrow path is left to us in which
our Will can run ; it strikes itself ever
against the past, which appears as walls in
the present.

To all intents and purposes the Will of
us is not free. It is only in process of
becoming free, and it will only be free
when the Self has utterly mastered his
vehicles and uses them for his own pur-
poses, when every vehicle is only a
vehicle, completely responsive to his every
impulse, and not a struggling animal,
ill-broken, with desires of its own.' When
the Self has transcended ignorance, van-
quishing the habits that are the marks of
past ignorance, then is the Self free, and
then will be realised the meaning of the



' This is only accomplished when the life of the
Self informs the matter of his vehicles, instead of the
down ward -striving elemental essence, i.e., when the
law of the Spirit of Life replaces ihe law of sin and
death.



THE wnx. 433

paradox, " in whose service Is perfect
freedom." For ihen will ic be realised
that separation is not, that the separated
Will is not, that, by virtue of our inherent
Divinity, our Will is part of the Divine
Will, and that it is which has given us
throughout our long evolution the strength
to carry on that evolution, and that the
realisation of the unity of Will is the
realisation of freedom.

Along these lines of thought it is that
some have found the ending of the age-
long controversy between the " freedom "
of the Will and determinism, and, while
recognising the truth battled for fay
determinism, have also preserved and
justified the inherent feeling : '■ 1 am free,
1 am not bound." That idea of spon-
taneous energy, of forth-going power from
the inner recesses of our being, is based
on the very essence of consciousness, on
the " I " which is the Self, thai Self which,

:atue divine, is free.



I 1 WUY so MUCH StHUCCLI t

IS we survey the long course of cvolu-
, the slow process of the development



424 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

of the Will, the question inevitably rises in
the mind : " Why should there be all this
struggle and difficulty ? Why should there
be so many mistakes and so many falls ?
Why this long bondage before freedom
can be attained ? " Before replying to
this, a general position murt be laid down.
In answering any question, the limits of
that question must be borne in mind, and
the answer must not be judged to be
inadequate, because it does not answer
another question that is all the time
present in the background. An answer
to a question may be adequate, without
being a final answer to all questions : and
its adequacy is not rightly gauged if it be
thrown aside as not answering a further
question which may be propounded. Half
the dissatisfaction oJ many students arises
from a restless impatience that will not
deal in any kind of order with the questions
thai come thronging to the mind, but
demands that they should all be answered
at once, and that the answer to one ques-
tion should cover all the others. The
adequacy of means must be judged in
relation to the end which those means are



TUB WILL. 435

designed to bring about. I n alt cases the
answer must be judged by its relevancy
10 the question asked, and not by its not
replying to some other allied question lying
at the back of the mind. Thus, the rele-
vancy of any means found to exist in a
universe must be decided by an end found
to be aimed at in that universe, and they
must not be judged as though offered as
an answer to the further question : " Why
should there be any universe at all ? "
That question may indeed be asked and
answered, but the proof of the adequacy
of a means in a universe to an end, seen
K9D be aimed at in that universe, will not be
; '■nswer. And it is no evidence that
! iuuwcr to the original question is
' Inadequate, if the questioner replies: "Ves,
but why should there be a universe ? " In
I replying to the question : " Why should
' there be all these mistakes and falls in
' treading the path of evolution ? " we must
take the universe as existing, as a fact to
start with, and must study it in order to
discover the end. or. at least, one of
ends, towards which it is tending,
it should tend thitherward is, as said.


426 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

further question, ;ind one of profoundest
interest ; but it Is by the discovered end
that we must judge the means employed
to reach it.

Even a cursory study of the part of the
universe in which we find ourselves shows
us that one at least of its ends — if not its
end^is to produce living beings of high
intelligence and strong will, capable of
taking an active pari in carrying on and
guiding the activities of nature and of
co-operating in the general scheme of
evolution. Further study, carried on by
the unfolding of the inner qualities and
endorsed by ancient writings, shows us
that this world is not alone, but forms one
of a series, that it has been aided in the
evolution of its humanity by men of elder
growth, and is to yield men of its own
growing for the aiding of younger worlds
in ages yet unborn. Moreover, it shows
also a vast hierarchy of superhuman beings,
directing and guiding evolution, and as the
centre of the universe the threefold Locos,
Ruler and Lord of His system ; and it
tells that the fruitage of a system is not
only a great hierarchy of mighty IntelH-



genccs, with ranks of ever- lessening

splendour stretching below them, but also

this supremo perfection of a Locos, as the

crown of all. And it unveils vista after

vista of increasing splendour, universes

where each system is but as a world, and

on and on, in ever-widening range of

I illimitable glorious fulness of life unending.

' And then the question rises : " By what

means shall be evolved these mighty Ones.

who climb irom the dust to the stars, and

from those stars that are the dust of va.ster

I systems to the stars chat are to them as

[ our mire to our sun ?"

Thus studied, imagination fails to Bnd
path by which these self-poised, self-
L-determined Beings can reach that perfect
I equilibrium and steadfast inerrancy of
Iwisdom that fits them to be the " nature "
I of a system, save just chat path of struggle
\ and of experience along which we strive
L to-day. For could there be an extra-kosmic
God. with nature other than that of the
Self wc sec unfolding around us in
harmonious certainty fif linked scc|uence. ,
with nature irregular and fitful, changing J
and arbitrary, incalculable, then it might [



428 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

be that out of thai chaos might be flung
up a being called " perfect," but truly most
imperfect, since most limited, who, having
no experience behind him, and therefore
without reason and without judgment,
might, as a machine, act " rightly " in,
i.e., in accordance with, any given scheme
of things, and grind out, as does a machine,
the sequence of movements arranged for
it. But such a being would only fit his
scheme, and outside it would be useless,
incompetent. Nor would there here be
life, which is the changing self-adaptation
to changing conditions, without the loss,
the disintegration of its centre. By the
troublous path along which we are
climbing, we are being prepared for all
emergencies in the universes in the future
with which we may have to do, and that is
a result well worth the trials to which we
are exposed,

Nor must we forget thai we are here
because we have willed to unfold our
powers through the experiences of life on
the lower planes ; that our lot is self-
chosen, not imposed ; that we are in the
world as the result of our own "Will to



4*9

Live" ; that if that Will changed — though

I truly it is not so changeful — we should

I cease to live here and return to the Peace,

without gathering the harvest for which

we came. " None else compels."

§3. The Powek of the Will.

This power — which has ever been

irecogniscd in Occultism as the spiritual

t«nergy in man, one in kind with that

■ which sends forth, supports and calls in

be worlds — is now being groped after in

outer world, and is being almost

lunconsciously used by many as a means

bringing about results otherwise un-

ViKtainable. The schools of Christian

^Science, Mental Science, Mind-Cure, etc,

: all dependent for their results on the

outflowing power of the Will. Diseases

yield to that How of energy, and not

only nervous disorders, as some imagine.

Nervous disorders yield the most readily.

because the nervous system has been

shaped for the expression of spiritual

powers on the physical plane. The results

are the most rapid where the syrppathctic



430 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

system is first worked upon, for that is the
more directly related to the aspect of Will,
in the form of Desire, as the cerebro-spinal
is more directly related to the aspects
of Cognition and of pure Will. The
dispersion of tumours, cancers, etc, and the
destruction of their causes, the curing of
lesions and bone-fractures, imply for the
most part considerable knowledge on the
part of the healer. I say " for the most
part," because it is possible that the Will
may be guided from the higher plane even
where physical plane knowledge is lacking,
in the case of an operator at an advanced
stage of evolution. The method of cure,
where knowledge is present, would be as
follows : the operator would form a mentaJ
picture of the affected organ in a state of
perfect health, creating that part in mental
stuff by the imagination : he would then
build into it astral matter, thus densifying
the image, and would then use the force of
magnetism to densify it further by etheric
matter, building the denser materials of
gases, liquids and solids into this mould,
utilising the materials available in the body
and supplying from outside any deficiencies.



w



In all this the Will is the guiding energy,
and such manipulation of matter is merely
a question of knowledge, whether on this
Or on the higher planes. There is not the
danger in cures wrou}i;ht by this method,
that .-iccompanies those wrought by an
easier, and therefore commoner, system, by
the working on the sympathetic system
alluded to above.

People are advised, in some of the
methods now popularised, to concentrate
their thoughts on [he solar plexus, and lo
"live under its control." The sympathetic
system governs the vital processes — the
functioning of the heart. Iung.s, digestive
apparatus — and the solar plexus forms its
most important centre. Now the carrj'ing
on of these vital processes has, as before
explained." passed under the control of
the sympathetic system in the course of
evolution, as the cerebro- spinal system has
become more and more dominant And
the reviving of the control of this system
b)' the Will, by a process of concentration
of thought, is a retrograde and not a
forward step, even though it often b

> See Put I. Ch^ter X. J I.



432



A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



about a. certain degree of clairvoyance.
This method, as already said, is much
followed in India in the system called
H&(ha Yoga, and the student learns to
control the action of the heart, lungs, and
digestive apparatus ; he can thus inhibit
the beating of the heart, can stop the lungs,
can reverse peristaltic action, and so on.
And when it is done, the question arises :
What have you gained by your success?
You have brought again under the control
of the Will a system which, in course of
evolution, had been rendered automatic, to
the great convenience of the owner of these
lower functions, and have thus taken a step
backward in evolution. To do this means
failure in the long run, even though there
may be, for the moment, a palpable result
to show.

Moreover, the concentration of thought
on a centre of the sympathetic system, and.
most of all, on the solar plexus, means a
serious physical danger, unless the learner
be under the physical observation of his
teacher, or be able to receive and bring
through to the physical brain the instruc-
tions that may be given to him on a higher



THE WIU. 433

i]danc. Concentration on the solar plexus

'l apt to bring on disease of a peculiarly

I intractable kind, (t issues in a profound

J melancholy, almost impossible to remove,

I in lits of terrible depression, and sometimes

form of paralysis. Not along these

[lines should travel the serious student,

I intent on the knowledge of the Self.

I When that knowled};e is obtained, the body

I becomes the instrument on which the Self

I can play, and all that is needed meanwhile

1 is to purify and refine it. so that it may

I come into harmony with the higher bodies.

I and be prc[iare<J to vibrate rhythmically

■fith them. The lir.iin will thus be ren-

I dered more responsive, and by industrious

f thinking and the action of meditation — not

on the brain, but on lofty ideas — it will be

gradually improved. The brain becomes a

better organ as it is exercised, and this is

Lon the road of evolution. But to work

Itlirectly on the symi^athetic plexuses is on

|,dic road of retrogression. Many a one

l.comes. asking for deliverance from the

f results of these practices, and one can only

ladly answer : " To undo the mischief will

take years." Results may be gained <|uickly



434 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

by going backwards, but it is better to face
the upward climbing, and then utilise the
physical instrument from above, not from
below.

There is another matter to be considered
in healing diseases by Will — the danger of
driving the disease into a higher vehicle,
in driving it out of the physical body.
Disease is often the final working out of
evil that existed previously on the higher
planes, and it is then far better to let it
thus work out than to forcibly check it, and
throw it back into the subtler vehicle. It
is the last working out of an evil desire or
an evil thought, and in such a case the use
of physical means of cure is safer than the
use of mental means, for the former cannot
cast it back into the higher planes, whereas
the latter may do so. Curative mesmerism
does not run this danger, belonging as it
does to the physical plane ; that may be
used by any one whose life, thoughts and
desires are pure. But the moment Will
forces are poured down into the physical,
there is a danger of reaction, and of the
driving of the disease back into the subtler
vehicles from which it came forth.



THE WILL. 435

If mental curing is done by the purifica-
tion of thought and desire, and the natural
quiet working of the purified thoughts and
desires on the physical body, no harm can
' result ; to restore pliysical harmony by
I making harmonious the mental and astral
vehicles is a true method of mental healing,
but it is not as rapid as the Will-cure and
I is far harder. Purity of mind means health
I of body ; and it is this idea — that where
I the mind is pure the body should be
I healthy — that has led many to adopt these
I mental methods of healing.

A person whose mind is perfectly pure
I and balanced will not generate fresh bodily
, disease, though he may have some un-
exhausted karma to work off. or he may
take on himself some of the disharmonies
caused by others. Purity and health truly
go together. When, as is and has been
the case, some saint is found to be suffer-
ing physically, then such a one is either
working out the effect of bad thinking in
the past, or is bearing in himself some-
thing of the world's disharmony, turning
on to himself the forces of disharmony,
harmonising them within his own vehicles



436 A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

and sending them forth again as currents
of peace and goodwill. Many have been
puzzled by seeing that the greatest and
the purest suffer, both mentally and
physically. They suffer for others, not for
themselves, and they are truly White
Magicians, transmuting by spiritual
alchemy, in the crucible of their own
suffering bodies, the base metals of
human passions into the pure gold of
love and peace.

Apart from the question of the ways of
working on the body by the Will, another
question arises in the thoughtful mind : Is
it well to use the Will in this fashion for
our own helping ? Is there not a certain
degradation in using the highest power of
the Divine within us in the service of our
body, to bring about merely a good con-
dition of physical health? Is it well that
the Divine should thus turn stones into
bread, and so fall under the very temptation
resisted by the Christ ? The story may be
taken historically or mythically, it matters
not ; it contains a profound spiritual truth,
and an instance of obedience to an occult
law. Still remains true the answer of the



THE WILL. 437

I tempted : " Man does not live by bread
I ■lone, but by every word that proceedeth
[ out of the mouth of God." This ethic
I seems to be on a higher plane than that
I which yokes the Divine to the service of
I rile physical body. One of the dangers of
I rfie present is the worship of the body, the
I putting of the body on too high a pinnacle —
reaction from exaggerated asceticism.
I By using the Will to serve the body, we
I make the Will iu> slave, and the practice
I of continually removing little aches and
I pains by willing them to go saps the higher
f quality of endurance. A person thus acting
is apt to be irritable under small physical
discomforts which the Will cannot remove,
and the higher power of the Will, which
can control the body and support it in its
work, even though it be suffering, is
undermined. Hesitancy to use the power
of the Will for relief of one's body need
not arise from any doubt as to the sound*
ncss of the thought, the reality of the law,
on which such action is based : but from a
fear that men may fall under the tempta-
tion of u.sing that which should lift them
to realms spiritual as the minister of the



43t> A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.

physical, and may thus became slaves of
the body, and be helpless when the body
fails them in the hour of need.

It is an occult law, binding on every
Initiate, that he may not use an occult
power for his own helping ; if he do, he
loses the power to help others, and it is
not worth while to forfeit the great for the
small. That already referred-to story of
the temptation of the Christ has a further-
reaching significance than most under-
stand. Had He used His occult power to
turn stones into bread for the relief of
His hunger, instead of waiting in patient
strength for the food brought by the
Shining Ones, He would not later have
been able to endure the mystic sacrifice of
the Cross. The taunt then flung at Him
contained an occult truth : " He saved
others; Himself He cannot save." He
could not use, to spare Himself one pang,
the powers that had opened the eyes of the
blind and made the leper clean. Those
who would save themselves must give up
the divine mission of being Saviours of the
world. They must choose between the one
and the other as they evolve. If in their



THE WILL. 439

|)«voIu[ion they choose the lower, and use

■ the great powers they have won for the
\ service of themselves and of the body, then
kmust they give up the higher mission of
I using them for the redemption of the race.
■There is such an immense activity of mind

■ at the present time that the need is all the
Vgreater for the employment of its powers to
I'lfae highest ends.



94. Wkitx AMD Black Magic.

Ma^c is the use of the Will to guide
I the powers of external nature, and is truly,
as its name implias. the great science.
The human Will, being the power of the
Divine in man. can subjugate and control
the inferior energies, and thus bring about
the results desired. The difference between
White and Black Magic lies in the motive
which determines the Will ; when that
Will is set to benefit others, to help and
bless all who come within its scope, then
is the man a White Magician, and the
results which he brings about by the
exercise of his trained Will are beneficiaJ.
and aid the course of human evolution.



440


A STUDY IN CONSCIOUSNESS.



He ever expanding by such exercise,
becoming less and less separate from his
kind, and is a centre of far-reaching help.
But when exercised for the

advantage self, when it is

employed ds and aims, then

is the m; jician. a danger to

the rai obstruct and delay

human c 5 ever contracting

by such exti ig more and more

separate from his kinu, shutting himself
within a shell which isolates him, and
which grows ever thicker and denser witli
the exercise of his trained powers. The
Will of the Magician is ever strong,
but the Will of the White Magician is
strong with the strength of life, flexible at
need, rigid at need, e\'cr assimilating to the
great Will, the Law of the universe. The
\\'i!l of the Black Magician has the
strength of iron, pointing ever to the
personal end, and it strikes against the
great Will, and sooner or later must shiver
itself into pieces against it. It is the peril
of Black Magic against wliich the student
of occultism is guarded by the law which
forbids him to use his occult powers for


I^msclf; for though no man is a Black
Magician who docs not deliberately erect
his personal Will against the great Law, it
is well to recognise the essence of Black
Magic, and tn check the very beginnings
of evil. J ust as it was said above that the
saint harmonising the forces of disharmony
rithin himself is truly the White Magician,
Pao is he the Black Magician who uses for
his own gain all the forces he has acquired
by knowledge, turns them to the service of
his own separaieness. and increases the
disharmony of the world by his selfish
graspings, while seeking to preserve

IJiarmony in his own vehicles.
I W
^er
"whcr



3 &. Entuinc ihto Pbacs.



When the Self has grown so indifferent
' [he vehicles in which he dwells that
icir vibrations can no longer affect him ;
fien he can use them for any purpose ;
"when his vision has become perfectly
clear ; when the vehicles offer no opposi-
tion, since the elemental life h;Ls left them.
and only the life (lowing from himself
animates them ; then the Peace enfolds



44-


A STUDY IN COHSaOUSHESS.



him id the object of the long struggle is
attj id. Such a one. Self-centred, no
longer confuses himself with his vehicles.
They are ,o work with, tools

to mani rill. He has then

realised t le Master, the one

who is u f his vehicles, and

thei ind death. Capable

of rea the tumult of the

world ana oi j it to harmony ;

capable of feeling through them the suffer-
ings of others, but not sutTerinL^s of his
own ; lit -Stands apart from, lieyond. all
stornLs. \'et is he able ever t(j beiul down
into the storm to Hft another above it.
without losino' his own foothold on the
rock of the Divine, consciously recot^nised
as himself Such are truly Masters, and
Their peace may now and then be felt, for
a time at least, by those who are striving
to tread the same path, but who have not
yet reached that same rock of the Self-
conscious Uivine.

That union of the separate Will with the
one Will for the helping of the world is the
goal which seems to be more worthy of
reaching after than aught the world can



THE WILL. 443

offer. Not to be separate from men, but
one with them ; not to win peace and bliss
alone, but to say with the Chinese Blessed
One : ** Never will I enter into final peace
alone, but always and everywhere will I
suffer and strive until all enter with me *' —
that is the crown of humanity. In pro-
portion as we can realise that the suffering
and the striving are the more efficacious as
we suffer only in the sufferings of others
and feci not suffering for ourselves, we
shall rise into the Divine, shall tread the
** razor path " that the Great Ones have
trodden, and shall find that the Will, which
has guided us along that path, and which
has realised itself in the treading of that
path, is strong enough still to suffer and
to strive, until the suffering and the strife
for iUl are over, and all together enter into
Peace.



Pl-IACK TO ALL HkINOS.



THE BORROWER WILL BE CHARGED
AN OVE RDUE FEE IF THIS BfXJK IS NOT
