THE  GOLDEN   BOUGH


\


THE

GOLDEN    BOUGH

A   STUDY
IN    MAGIC    AND    RELIGION


BY


J.  G.   FRAZER,   D.C.L.,   LL.D.,   Litt.D.

FELLOW   OF   TRINITY    COLLEGE,    CAMBRIDGE


SECOND  EDITION,  REVISED  AND  ENLARGED


IN  THREE  VOLUMES
VOL.   II


y/ol


MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  Limited

NEW  YORK  :    THE  INIACMILLAN  COMPANY
1900

All  rights  reserved


CONTENTS

CHAPTER   III

KILLING    THE    GOD,    pp.     I-448

§  I.  Killing  the  Divine  King,  pp.  1-59. — The  high  gods  mortal,  pp.  1-5  ;
human  gods  also  mortal  and  therefore  put  to  death  in  their  prime,  before
decay  sets  in,  p.  5  sq. ;  common  men  for  the  same  reason  prefer  a  violent
death,  pp.  6-S  ;  the  Chitome,  the  Ethiopian  kings  of  Meroe,  and  other
African  kings  and  chiefs  put  to  death,  especially  on  any  symptom  of  bodily
decay,  pp.  8-13  ;  in  South  India  kings  kill  themselves  after  reign  of  twelve
years,  p.  14  sq.  ;  mitigation  of  this  rule  in  case  of  king  of  Calicut,  p.  15  ;
kings  regularly  succeeded  by  their  murderers  in  Bengal,  Passier  in
Sumatra,  and  among  the  old  Slavs,  pp.  15-17  ;  substitutes  put  to  death
for  Sultan  of  Java,  p.  1 7  sq.  ;  Dorian  kings  liable  to  be  deposed  every  eight
years,  on  sign  of  falling  star,  p.  18  sq.  ;  falling  stars  feared,  pp.  19-21,
regarded  as  souls  of  dead,  pp.  21-23  ;  mock  king  put  to  death  every  year
at  Babylonian  festival  of  the  Sacaea,  probably  as  a  substitute  for  the  real
king,  pp.  24-26  ;  king  of  Ngoio  killed  after  reign  of  one  day,  p.  26  ;  in
Cambodia  and  Siam  king  abdicates  annually  and  is  replaced  for  a  short
time  by  a  temporary  king,  pp.  26-30  ;  temporary  king  at  the  beginning  of
each  reign,  p.  30  sq.  ;  these  temporary  kings  perform  magical  functions  and
sometimes  belong  to  the  royal  stock,  pp.  31-34  ;  members  of  royal  families
liable  to  be  sacrificed  at  Alus  and  Orchomenus  in  Greece,  pp.  34-38  ;
kings  and  also  common  people  sacrifice  their  children  among  the  Semites,
pp.  38-40 ;  references  to  the  custom  in  Scripture,  pp.  40-43  ;  probably
the  victims  were  the  firstborn,  pp.  43-47  ;  this  confirmed  by  tradition  of
origin  of  Passover,  pp.  47-50  ;  children,  especially  the  firstborn,  sacrificed
by  other  peoples  besides  the  Semites,  pp.  51-55;  thus  king  probably
allowed  to  sacrifice  first  his  son  and  afterwards  a  criminal  instead  of  him-
self, p.  55  sq.  ;  soul  of  deceased  transmitted  to  successor,  pp.  56-59.

§  2.  Killing  the  Tree-spirit,  pp.  59-70. — King  of  the  Wood  probably  killed
formerly  at  end  of  set  term,  p.  59  sq. ;  pretence  of  killing  leaf-clad  repre-
sentatives of  tree-spirit  (the  Pfingstl,  the  Wild  Man,  the  King)  every  year


vi  THE  GOLDEN  BOUGH

at  Whitsuntide  in  Germany  and  Austria,  pp.  60-65  !  tree-spirit  killed
annually  lest  he  should  grow  old  and  feeble,  p.  65  sq. ;  resemblance  of
these  modern  mummers  to  the  King  of  the  Wood,  p.  66  sq. ;  a  mock
human  sacrifice  often  substituted  for  a  real  one,  pp.  67-70.

§  3.  Carrying  out  Death,  pp.  70- 1 1 5. — Death  and  burial  of  the  Carnival  repre-
sented in  effigy  or  by  living  person  in  Italy,  Spain,  France,  Austria,  and
Germany,  pp.  71-81  ;  ceremonies  of  the  same  sort  in  Greece  and  Esthonia,
p.  81  sq. ;  pretence  of  resurrection,  p.  82  ;  effigy  of  Death  carried  out
and  thrown  away  or  destroyed  in  Lent,  pp.  82-86;  "Sawing  the
Old  Woman "  at  Mid-Lent,  pp.  86-89,  practised  by  gypsies  on  Palm
Sunday,  p.  89  sq. ;  effigies  of  Lent  with  seven  legs  rent  in  pieces,  p.  90  sq. ;
carrying  out  of  Death  followed  by  a  pretence  of  bringing  in  Summer,  which
is  represented  by  a  tree,  branches,  a  puppet,  or  a  living  person,  pp.  91-94  ;
in  these  customs  the  effigies  of  Death  and  the  Carnival  probably  repre-
sented originally  the  dying  or  dead  tree-spirit  or  spirit  of  vegetation,
pp.  94-99  ;  contrast  between  vegetation  in  winter  and  spring  represented
by  dramatic  contest  between  actors  who  play  the  parts  of  Winter  and
Summer,  pp.  99-103;  struggle  between  representatives  of  summer  and
winter  among  the  Esquimaux,  p.  103  sq.  ;  funeral  of  Kostrubonko,  Kupalo,
Kostroma,  Yarilo,  and  other  vegetation -spirits  in  Russia,  pp.  105-107  ;
in  these  ceremonies  sorrow  mixed  with  joy,  affection  with  fear,  p.  107  ;
Albanian  ceremony  of  throwing  Kore  into  a  river,  p.  108  ;  the  fair  of
Rail  in  India,  p.  108  sq. ;  the  foregoing  ceremonies  magic  rites  intended
by  means  of  sympathetic  magic  to  secure  the  revival  of  vegetation  in
spring,  pp.  110-113;  analogous  ceremonies  performed  by  the  Central
Australian  savages  at  the  approach  of  the  rainy  season,  pp.  11 3- 115.

§4.  Adorns,  pp.  1 15-130. — Rites  representing  the  death  and  resurrection  of
vegetation  prevalent  in  ancient  Egypt  and  Western  Asia  under  the  names
of  Osiris,  Adonis,  Tammuz,  Attis,  and  Dionysus,  p.  1 15;  worship  of
Adonis  borrowed  by  Greeks  from  Syria,  p.  1153'^.;  his  marriage,  death,
and  resurrection  annually  acted,  p.  116;  the  red  anemone  his  blood,
p.  116  sq. ;  his  rites  a  dramatic  representation  of  the  yearly  decay  and
revival  of  plant  life,  pp.  11 7- 119;  legend  that  the  bones  of  the  slain
Tammuz  were  ground  in  a  mill,  p.  119;  the  Gardens  of  Adonis  charms  to
promote  the  growth  of  the  crops,  pp.  1 19- 12 1 ;  the  throwing  of  them  into
water  a  rain-charm  like  the  custom  of  throwing  water  on  persons  at  harvest
and  sowing,  pp.  121-123  ;  Babylonian  festival  at  which  water  was  thrown
on  effigy  of  dead  Tammuz,  p.  123  sq.  ;  analogies  to  the  Gardens  of  Adonis
in  India  and  Sardinia,  pp.  124-127  ;  the  Sardinian  custom  observed  at
midsummer  and  associated  with  bonfires,  p.  127  sq.;  modes  of  divination
at  midsummer  resembling  the  Gardens  of  Adonis,  p.  129  sq. ;  gardens  of
Adonis  still  planted  by  Sicilian  women,  p.   130.

§  5.  Attis,  pp.  130-137. — Attis  a  Phrygian  deity  of  vegetation,  his  death  and
resurrection  annually  celebrated,  pp.  130-132  ;  originally  a  tree-spirit,  but
also  identified  with  the  corn,  pp.  132-134;    his  priests  probably  slain  in


CONTENTS  vH

the    character    of    the    god,    pp.     134-136;    Hyacinth    perhaps   another,
embodiment    of   the    flowery    spring,    his    death    annually    mourned    at
Amyclae,  p.   136  sq.

§  6.  Osiris,  pp.  137-160. — Myth  of  Osiris,  pp.  1 37-1 39  ;  his  death  and  burial
celebrated  with  annual  rites,  p.  140  sq.  :  Osiris  as  a  corn-spirit,  pp.  141-143,
as  a  tree-spirit,  pp.  143-145  ;  Isis  as  a  corn-goddess,  p.  145  sq.;  Osiris
sometimes  interpreted  as  the  sun,  p.  146  sq. ;  position  of  the  sun-god  Ra
in  Egyptian  religion,  pp.  147-150;  Osiris  represents  not  the  sun  but  the
annual  growth  and  decay  of  vegetation,  pp.  150-152;  Osiris  identified  by
some  ancient  authorities  with  the  moon,  pp.  152-154;  moon  popularly
regarded  as  the  cause  of  growth  and  the  source  of  moisture,  pp.  154-159  ;
hence  moon  especially  worshipped  by  agricultural  peoples,  p.  1 59  sq. ;  this
explains  association  of  corn-god  Osiris  with  the  moon,  p.  160.

§  7.  Dionysus,  pp.  160-168. — Dionysus  a  tree-god,  p.  160  sq.;  legend  of  his
violent  death  and  resurrection,  pp.  161-163  ;  his  sufferings,  death,  and
resurrection  enacted  in  his  rites,  p.  163  sq. ;  Dionysus  as  a  bull,  p.  164  sq. ;
a  live  bull  torn  to  pieces  at  his  rites,  p.  165  ;  Dionysus  as  a  goat,  p.  165  sq.;
,  a  live  goat  torn  and  devoured  raw  by  his  worshippers,  p.  166  ;  gods
killed  in  the  form  of  their  sacred  animals,  p.  1 66  sq. ;  at  rites  of  Dionysus
a  man  sometimes  torn  in  pieces  instead  of  an  animal,  p.  168.

§  8.  Dciiicter  ami  Proserpine,  pp.  168-222. — Myth  of  Demeter  and  Proserpine,
p.  168  sq.  ;  annual  death  and  resurrection  of  Proserpine  represented  in  her
rites,  p.  169;  Demeter  interpreted  by  Mannhardt  as  the  Barley-mother  or
Corn-mother,  p.  1 69  sq. ;  the  Corn  -  mother  in  modern  superstition,
p.  1 70  sq. ;  the  Corn-mother  present  in  the  last  corn  cut  at  harvest,
pp.  171-173;  the  last  sheaf  also  called  the  Harvest-mother,  the  Great
Mother,  the  Grandmother,  the  Old  Man,  the  Old  Woman,  pp.  173-176;
in  Scotland  the  last  sheaf  sometimes  called  the  Cailleach  or  Old  Wife,
pp.  176-178,  in  Wales  the  Hag  {IVrach),  p.  178  sq.,  and  among  the
Slavs  the  Baba  or  Boba  (Old  Woman),  p.  179  sq. ;  the  Harvest  Queen  in
England,  p.  181  ;  the  spirit  of  the  corn  as  Mother-corn  or  Old  Woman
present  in  last  corn  threshed,  p.  181  sq.;  pretence  of  birth  on  harvest-
field,  p.  182  sq.;  Harvest-Child,  Kern-Baby,  the  Mell,  p.  183;  last  sheaf
called  the  Maiden  in  some  parts  of  Scotland,  pp.  184-186  ;  the  Oats-bride,
the  Wheat-bride,  p.  186  sq. ;  corn-spirit  sometimes  represented  in  Scotland
simultaneously  as  an  old  and  a  young  woman  {Cailleach  and  Maiden),
pp.  187-190  ;  analogy  of  these  harvest  customs  to  spring  customs  previously
described,  p.  190  sq.  ;  marks  of  a  primitive  ritual,  p.  19 1  sq.  ;  the  spring
and  harvest  customs  in  question  bear  these  marks,  p.  192  ;  this  supported
by  analogy  of  harvest  customs  in  other  parts  of  the  world,  p.  192  sqq. ;
Peruvian  Mother  of  the  Maize,  p.  193  sq.;  Mexican  harvest  customs,
p.  194 -f^.;  the  Mother-cotton  in  the  Punjaub,  p.  195;  harvest  custom
among  the  Berbers,  p.  195  sq. ;  securing  the  "soul  of  the  rice"  in  Borneo
and  Burma,  pp.  196-198;  the  Rice-mother  and  Rice-child  among  the
Malays,  pp.  198-201  ;  marriage  of  Rice-bride  and  Rice  -  bridegroom  in
Java,  p.  201  sq. ;  among  the  Mandan  and  Minnitaree  Indians  the  goddess


viii  THE  GOLDEN  BOUGH

of  the  corn  personated  by  old  women,  p.  203  sq.  ;  the  spirit  of  the  corn
sometimes  represented  simultaneously  in  male  and  female  form  by  a  man
and  woman,  p.  204  ;  this  representation  based  on  idea  that  plants  are
propagated  by  the  intercourse  of  the  sexes,  p.  204  ;  intercourse  of  the
human  sexes  resorted  to  or  mimicked  as  a  sympathetic  charm  to  promote
the  growth  of  the  crops,  pp.  204-209  ;  continence  sometimes  practised  for
the  same  purpose,  pp.  209-211  ;  illicit  love  supposed  to  blight  the  crops,
pp.  211-214  ;  suggested  origin  of  Lent,  p.  214  ;  why  profligacy  and  con-
tinence should  both  be  supposed  to  aflect  the  crops,  pp.  214-216  ;  Demeter
and  Proserpine  originally  the  Corn-mother  and  the  Corn-maiden,  pp.  216-
218  ;  why  the  Greeks  represented  the  corn  in  duplicate  as  mother  and
daughter,  pp.  218-222.

§  9.  Lityerses,  pp.  222-261. — Death  and  resurrection  of  Adonis,  Attis,  Osiris,
and  Dionysus  probably  originated  in  simple  rustic  rites  at  harvest  and
vintage,  p.  222  ;  some  of  these  rites  known  to  us,  p.  223  ;  Maneros,
Linus,  and  Bormus  plaintive  songs  or  cries  uttered  by  reapers  and
vintagers  in  Egypt,  Phoenicia,  and  Bithynia,  p.  223  sq.  ;  similar  song
called  Lityerses  sung  at  reaping  and  threshing  in  Phrygia,  p.  224  ;  story
how  Lityerses  wrapped  strangers  in  sheaves  on  the  harvest-field  and  cut  off
their  heads,  p.  224  sq. ;  parallels  to  the  legend  in  modern  harvest  customs,
p.  225  $qq. ;  reaper,  binder,  or  thresher  of  last  corn,  as  representing  the
corn-spirit,  wrapt  in  corn,  beaten,  drenched  with  water,  etc.,  pp.  225-229;
corn-spirit  killed  at  reaping  or  threshing,  p.  230  sq.  ;  corn-spirit  repre-
sented by  passing  stranger  who  is  seized  and  wrapt  in  corn,  p.  232  .r^'. ;
pretence  made  of  killing  a  stranger  or  the  master  himself  on  the  harvest -
field  or  at  threshing,  pp.  233-235  ;  passing  stranger  treated  at  the  madder-
harvest  as  the  spirit  of  the  madder,  pp.  235-237  ;  human  beings  killed  to
promote  the  fertility  of  the  fields  in  America,  Africa,  India,  etc.,  pp.  237-
241  ;  human  sacrifices  for  this  purpose  among  the  Khonds,  pp.  241-246  ;
analogy  of  these  savage  rites  to  harvest  customs  of  Europe,  p.  247  sq.  ;
both  in  Europe  and  in  Phrygia  human  beings  formerly  slain  at  harvest  as
representatives  of  the  corn-spirit,  pp.  250-252  ;  in  Phrygia  the  victims  may
have  been  priestly  kings,  p.  250  ;  relation  of  Lityerses  to  Attis,  p.  250  sq. ;
the  Bormus  song  probably  a  lamentation  of  reapers  over  slain  corn-spirit,
p.  252  ;  the  Linus  song  probably  sung  by  vintagers  and  reapers  over  the
dead  spirit  of  the  vines  and  the  corn,  p.  252  sq.  ;  Linus  perhaps  the
rustic  prototype  of  Adonis,  p.  253  ;  Adonis  or  Tammuz  perhaps  once
represented  by  a  human  victim,  possibly  by  the  mock  king  of  the  Sacaea
at  Babylon,  p.  253  sq.  ;  Osiris  as  the  slain  corn-spirit  represented  by  red-
haired  men  whose  ashes  were  winnowed,  pp.  254-257  ;  ancient  harvest
cries  (Maneros,  Linus,  Lityerses,  Bormus)  announced  the  death  of  the
corn-spirit,  p.  257  sq.  ;  modern  harvest  cries  (Devonshire  "  crying  the
Neck,"  etc.),  pp.  258-261.

§  10.  The  Corn-spirit  as  an  Ani/Jial,  pp.  261-318. — Corn-spirit  conceived  as  an
animal  which  is  present  in  the  corn  and  is  caught  or  killed  in  the  last
sheaf,  pp.  261-263  ;  corn-spirit  as  wolf  or  dog,  pp.  263-266,  as  cock,
pp.  266-269,  'IS  hare,  p.  269  sq.,  as  cat,  p.  270  sq.,  as  goat,  pp.  271-277,


CONTENTS  ix

as  bull  or  cow,  pp.  277-281,  as  horse,  pp.  281-283,  ^s  pig,  pp.  284-288  ;
sacramental  character  of  harvest  supper,  divine  animal  slain  and  eaten  by
harvesters  as  embodiment  of  corn-spirit,  p.  288 ;  parallelism  between
conceptions  of  corn-spirit  in  human  and  in  animal  form,  p.  288  sq.  ;  why
•  corn-spirit  is  conceived  as  an  animal,  p.  289  sq.  ;  Dionysus  as  goat  and
bull  probably  still  a  deity  of  vegetation,  pp.  291-294  ;  ox  as  representative
of  spirit  of  vegetation  in  the  Athenian  boiiphoiiia,  in  an  African  sacrifice,
and  a  ceremony  observed  by  the  Chinese  in  spring,  pp.  294-298  ;  the  corn-
goddesses  Demeter  and  Proserpine  conceived  as  pigs,  pp.  299-303  ;  the
horse-headed  Demeter,  p.  303 ;  Attis  and  Adonis  embodied  in  pigs,
p.  304  sq. ;  the  pig  originally  a  sacred  animal  of  the  Jews  and  Egyptians,
pp.  305-310;  the  pig  perhaps  formerly  an  embodiment  of  the  corn-god
Osiris,  p.  310  sq.;  red  oxen  as  embodiments  of  Osiris,  p.  31 1  sq.;  the
sacred  Egyptian  bulls  Apis  and  Mnevis,  origin  of  their  worship  uncertain,
p.  312  sq.;  the  horse  perhaps  an  embodiment  of  Virbius  as  a  deity  of
vegetation,  pp.  313-315  ;  sacrifice  of  the  October  horse,  as  embodiment  of
the  corn-spirit,  at  Rome,  pp.  315-318.

§11.  Eating  the  God,  pp.  318-366. — New  corn  eaten  sacramentally  in  Europe,
pp.  318-321  ;  new  rice  eaten  sacramentally  in  East  Indies,  India,  and
Indo-China,  pp.  321-325  ;  eating  new  yams  on  the  Niger,  p.  325  ;  CaftVe
festival  of  new  fruits,  pp.  325-328  ;  festival  of  new  corn  among  the
Creek,  Seminole,  and  Natchez  Indians,  pp.  329-335  ;  preparation  for
eating  sacred  food  by  purgatives,  fasting,  etc.,  pp.  335-337  ;  sacrifice  of
first-fruits,  p.  337  ;  dough  images  of  gods  eaten  sacramentally  by  the
Mexicans,  pp.  337-342  ;  flesh  of  a  man  who  represented  a  god  also  eaten
sacramentally  by  the  Mexicans,  p.  342  sq. ;  at  Aricia  loaves  perhaps  baked
in  the  image  of  the  slain  King  of  the  Wood  and  eaten  by  the  worshippers,
P-  343  ^1-  '1  the  Compitalia,  p.  343  sq.  ;  effigies  offered  to  ghosts  and
demons  as  substitutes  for  living  people,  pp.  344-352  ;  belief  of  the  savage
that  he  acquires  the  qualities  of  animals  and  men  by  eating  their  flesh,
inoculating  himself  with  their  ashes,  or  anointing  himself  with  their  fat,
pp.  353-365  ;  hence  his  reason  for  eating  a  god  is  to  imbue  himself  with
the  divine  qualities,  p.  365  sq.

§  12.  Killing  the  Divine  Animal,  pp.  366-448. — Hunters  and  shepherds  as  well
as  farmers  kill  their  gods,  p.  366  ;  Californian  sacrifice  of  the  great
buzzard,  p.  366  sq.  ;  Egyptian  sacrifice  of  the  ram  of  Amnion,  p.  368  sq.  ;
use  of  skin  of  divine  animal,  p.  369  sq.  ;  annual  sacrifice  of  the  cobra-
capella  in  Fernando  Po,  p.  370  sq.  ;  Zuni  sacrifice  of  the  turtle,  pp.  371-
374 ;  worship  and  slaughter  of  bears  by  the  Ainos,  pp.  374-380,  the
Gilyaks,  pp.  380-386,  the  Goldi,  p.  386,  and  the  Orotchis,  p.  386  ;  the
respect  of  these  peoples  for  the  bear  apparently  inconsistent  with  their
custom  of  killing  and  eating  them,  p.  387,  but  this  inconsistency  not  felt
by  the  savage,  who  draws  no  sharp  distinction  between  himself  and  the
animals,  pp.  3S7-389  ;  the  savage  hunter  dreads  the  vengeance  of  the
animals  he  has  killed  or  of  the  other  creatures  of  the  species,  p.  389  ;
hence  he  spares  dangerous  and  useless  animals,  p.  389,  such  as  crocodiles,
PP-  389-393>  tigers,  pp.  393-395>  snakes,  etc.,  p.  395  sq.  ;  and  in  killing


THE  GOLDEN  BOUGH

animals  he  tries  to  appease  them  and  their  fellows,  p.  396 ;  thus
bear-hunters  flatter  and  cajole  the  slain  bears,  pp.  396-400  ;  elephant-
hunters  beg  pardon  of  the  elephants,  p.  400  sq. ;  marks  of  respect
shown  to  dead  lions  and  leopards,  p.  401  ;  eagle-hunters  feed  the  dead
eagles,  p.  401  sq. ;  respect  shown  for  animals  varies  according  to  the
strength  and  utility  of  the  beast,  p.  402  sq. ;  propitiation  of  sables  and
beavers  by  the  hunters,  pp.  403-406  ;  propitiation  of  deer,  elan,  and  elk
by  American  Indians,  pp.  406-408 ;  respect  shown  by  Esquimaux  and
Greenlanders  for  the  reindeer  and  seal  they  have  killed,  pp.  408-410  ;
propitiation  of  fish,  especially  the  first  fish  of  the  season,  by  fishing  people,
pp.  410-415  ;  bones  of  game  respected,  .sometimes  from  a  belief  in  the
resurrection  of  animals,  pp.  415-417  ;  bones  of  men  sometimes  preserved
or  destroyed  to  facilitate  or  prevent  their  resurrection,  p.  417  sq.  ;
resurrection  of  animals  and  men  in  folk-tales,  p.  418  sq.;  sinew  of
the  thigh  of  slain  animals  preserved,  perhaps  as  necessary  for  the  repro-
duction of  the  species,  pp.  419-421  ;  vermin,  such  as  weevils,  leaf-flies,
caterpillars,  locusts,  mice  and  rats,  propitiated  by  farmers  to  induce  them
to  spare  the  crops,  pp.  422-426  ;  images  of  the  noxious  creatures  made  as
talismans  against  them,  p.  426  sq. ;  Greek  gods  worshipped  under  the
title  of  the  pests  they  exterminated,  hence  Mouse  Apollo,  Locust  Apollo,
Mildew  Apollo,  Locust  Hercules,  etc.,  p.  427  ;  the  worship  originally
paid  not  to  the  gods  but  to  the  pests  themselves  (mice,  locusts,  mildew,
etc.),  p.  427  sq. ;  Wolfish  Apollo  and  the  wolves,  p.  428  sq.;  certain
animals  or  species  of  animals  spared  because  they  contain  the  souls  of
dead  people,  pp.  430-435  ;  attitude  of  Ainos  and  Gilyaks  to  the  bear
explained,  p.  435  sq. ;  two  types  of  animal  worship,  p.  436  sq.,  and
corresponding  to  them  two  types  of  animal  sacrament,  the  Egyptian  and
the  Aino  types,  p.  437  ;  sacraments  of  pastoral  tribes,  pp.  438-441  ;
procession  with  image  of  sacred  snake  as  a  form  of  communion,  p.  441  sq. ;
"hunting  the  wren"  and  processions  with  the  dead  bird  on  Christmas
Day  or  St.  Stephen's  Day,  pp.  442-446  ;  procession  with  man  in  cow-
hide on  last  day  of  the  year,  p.  446  sq. ;  such  customs  probably  were  once
modes  of  communion  with  a  divine  animal,  p.  447  sq.


NOTE    A

Swinging  as  a  Magical  Rite     ....     449-456

NOTE   B
The  Doctrine  of  Lunar  Sympathy     .  .  .     457,  458

NOTE   C
Offerings  of  First-fruits         ....     459-471


CHAPTER    III

KILLING    THE    GOD

■•  Sed  adhuc  supersunt  aliae  superstitiones,  quaruin  secreta  pandenda  sunt,
.  .  .  ut  et  in  istis  profanis  religionibus  sciatis  moites  esse  hominum  consecratas."
— FiRMICUS  Maternus,  De  errore profaiiaritm  religionum,  c.  6.

^  I .   Killing  tJie  Divine  King

Lacking  the  idea  of  eternal  duration  primitive  man  naturally
supposes  the  gods  to  be  mortal  like  himself.  The  Green-
landers  believed  that  a  wind  could  kill  their  most  powerful
god,  and  that  he  would  certainly  die  if  he  touched  a  dog.
When  the\-  heard  of  the  Christian  God,  they  kept  asking  if
he  never  died,  and  being  informed  that  he  did  not,  they  were
much  surprised,  and  said  that  he  must  be  a  very  great  god
indeed.^  In  answer  to  to  the  inquiries  of  Colonel  Dodge,  a
North  American  Indian  stated  that  the  world  was  made  by
the  Great  Spirit.  Being  asked  which  Great  Spirit  he  meant,
the  good  one  or  the  bad  one,  "  Oh,  neither  of  them"  replied
he,  "  the  Great  Spirit  that  made  the  world  is  dead  long  ago.
He  could  not  possibly  have  lived  as  long  as  this." "  A  tribe
in  the  Philippine  Islands  told  the  Spanish  conquerors  that
the  grave  of  the  Creator  was  upon  the  top  of  ]\Iount
Cabunian.^  Heitsi-eibib,  a  god  or  divine  hero  of  the
Hottentots,  died  several  times  and  came  to  life  again.  His
graves  are  generally  to  be  met  with  in  narrow  defiles  between
mountains.      When  the  Hottentots  pass  one  of  them,  they

1  Meiners,  Geschichte  der  Religionen  ^  F.  Blumentritt,  "Der  Ahnencultus

(Hanover,  1S06-1S07),  i.  48.  und  die  religiosen  Anschauungen  der

Malaien    des    Philippinen-Archipels,"
-  R,  I.  Dodge,  Our  Wild  Indians,       Mittkeihtiigen  d.   ll'/e/ier  ^-eogr.  Gesell-
p.  112.  schaft,  1S82,  p.   198.

VOL.  II  B


DEA  TH  OF  THE  GODS


CHAP.


throw  a  stone  on  it  for  good  luck,  sometimes  muttering  "  Give
us  plenty  of  cattle."  ^  The  grave  of  Zeus,  the  great  god  of
Greece,  was  shown  to  visitors  in  Crete  as  late  as  about  the
beginning  of  our  era."  The  body  of  Dionysus  was  buried  at
Delphi  beside  the  golden  statue  of  Apollo,  and  his  tomb  bore
the  inscription,  "  Here  lies  Dionysus  dead,  the  son  of  Semele."  ^
According  to  one  account,  Apollo  himself  was  buried  at
Delphi  ;  for  Pythagoras  is  said  to  have  carved  an  inscription
on  his  tomb,  setting  forth  how  the  god  had  been  killed  b)'
the  python  and  buried  under  the  tripod.''  Cronus  was  buried
in  Sicily,^  and  the  graves  of  Hermes,  Aphrodite,  and  Ares
were  shown  in  Hermopolis,  Cyprus,  and  Thrace."

The  great  gods  of  Egypt  themselves  were  not  exempt
from  the  common  lot.  They  too  grew  old  and  died.  For
like  men  they  were  composed  of  body  and  soul,  and  like
men  were  subject  to  all  the  passions  and  infirmities  of  the
flesh.  Their  bodies,  it  is  true,  were  fashioned  of  more  ethereal
mould,  and  lasted  longer  than  ours,  but  they  could  not  hold
out  for  ever  against  the  siege  of  time.  Age  converted  their
bones  into  silver,  their  flesh  into  gold,  and  their  azure  locks
into  lapis  lazuli.  When  their  time  came  they  passed  awa\'
from  the  cheerful  world  of  the  living  to  reign  as  dead  gods
over  dead  men  in  the  melancholy  world  beyond  the  grave.
Even  their  souls,  like  those  of  mankind,  could  only  endure
after  death  so  long  as  their  bodies  held  together  ;  and  hence
it  was  as  needful  to  preserve  the  corpses  of  the  gods  as  the
corpses  of  common  folk,  lest  with  the  divine  body  the  divine
spirit  should  also  come  to  an  untimely  end.  At  first  their
remains  were    laid    to   rest   under    the    desert    sands   of  the


^  Sir  James  E.  Alexander,  Expedi-
tion of  Discovery  into  the  interior  of
Africa,  i.  i66;  Lichtenstein,  Reisen  ini
Siidlichen  Africa,  i.  349  stj.  ;  W.  H.  I.
Bleek,  Reynard  the  Fox  in  South  Africa,
p.  75  sq.  ;  Theophilus  Hahn,  Tsimi-
II  Goam,  the  Supreme  Bciiigof  the  Khoi-
Khoi,  pp.  56,  6g.

^  Callimachus,  Hymn  to  Zeus,  9  sq. ;
Diodorus,  iii.  61  ;  Lucian,  Philopseudes,
3  ;  id.,  Jupiter  Tragoedus,  45  ;  id.,
Philopatris,  10;  Porphyry,  Vita  Pytha-
gorae,  17  ;  Cicero,  De  natura  dcoru?n,
iii.    21.    53  ;   Pomponius    ]\Iela,    ii.    7.


112  ;  Minucius  Felix,  Octavius,  21.

^  Plutarch,  Isis  ct  Osiris,  35  ;
Philochorus,  Fragm.  22,  in  Midler's
Fi-agm.  Hist.  Graec.  i.  p.  378  ;  Tatian,
Oratio  ad  Graecos,  8,  ed.  Otto  ;  Tzetzes,
Schol.  on  Lycophron,  208.  Cp.  Ch.
Petersen,  "  Uas  Grab  und  die  Tod-
tenfeier  des  Dionysos,"  Philologus,  xv.
(i860),  pp.  77-91.

■*  Porphyry,   Vit.  Pythag.  16.

■''  Philochorus,  Fr.  1S4,  in  Fragiu.
Hist.  Graec.  ii.  p.  414.

''  Lobeck,  Aglaophamus,  p.  574  sq.


Ill  DEA  TH  OF  THE  GODS  3

mountains,  that  the  dryness  of  the  soil  and  the  purity  of  the
air  might  protect  them  from  putrefaction  and  decay.  Hence
one  of  the  oldest  titles  of  the  Egyptian  gods  is  "  they  who
are  under  the  sands."  But  when  at  a  later  time  the  discovery
of  the  art  of  embalming  gave  a  new  lease  of  life  to  the  souls
of  the  dead  by  preserving  their  bodies  for  an  indefinite  time
from  corruption,  the  deities  were  permitted  to  share  the
benefit  of  an  invention  which  held  out  to  gods  as  well  as  to
men  a  reasonable  hope  of  immortality.  Every  province  then
had  the  tomb  and  mummy  of  its  dead  god.  The  mummy
of  Osiris  was  to  be  seen  at  Mendes  ;  Thinis  boasted  of  the
mummy  of  Anhouri  ;  and  Heliopolis  rejoiced  in  the  posses-
sion of  that  of  Toumou.^  But  while  their  bodies  lay  swathed
and  bandaged  here  on  earth  in  the  tomb,  their  souls,  if  we
may  trust  the  Egyptian  priests,  shone  as  bright  stars  in  the
firmament.  The  soul  of  Isis  sparkled  in  Sirius,  the  soul  of
Horus  in  Orion,  and  the  soul  of  Typhon  in  the  Great  Bear."^
But  the  death  of  the  god  did  not  involve  the  extinction  of
his  sacred  stock  ;  for  he  commonly  had  by  his  wife  a  son  and
heir,  who  on  the  demise  of  his  divine  parent  succeeded  to  the
full  rank,  power,  and  honours  of  the  godhead.^    The  high  gods

*   G.  Maspero,  Histoire  ancienne  des  to    the    great     Mount    Tabor."       Cp.

peuples  de  fOrietti   classiqiie :    les  ori-  Origen,    hi  Jeremiafn    Horn.   XV.   4,

gines,  pp.  108-111,  1 16-118.  vol.  iii.  col.  433,  ed.  Migne.      In  the

2  Plutarch,  Isis  et  Osiris,  21.  reign  of  Trajan  a  certain  Alcibiades,

3  A.  Wiedemann,  Die  Religion  der  from  Apamea  in  Syria,  appeared  at
alteti  Aegypler,  p.  59  sq.  ;  G.  Maspero,  Rome  with  a  volume  in  which  the  Holy
Histoire  ancienne  des  pettples  de  r Orient  Ghost  was  described  as  a  female  about
classique :  les  origines,  pp.  104- 108,  ninety-six  miles  high  and  broad  in  pro-
150.  Hence  the  Egyptian  deities  were  portion.  See  Hippolytus,  Refut.  om-
commonly  arranged  in  trinities  of  a  nitim  Haeresium,  ix.  13,  p.  462,  ed.
simple  and  natural  type,  each  com-  Duncker  and  Schneidewin.  The  Oph-
prising  a  father,  a  mother,  and  a  son.  ites  represented  the  Holy  Spirit  as  "  the
If  the  Christian  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  first  woman,"  "mother  of  all  living,"
took  shape  under  Egyptian  influence,  who  was  beloved  by  "  the  first  man  "
the  function  originally  assigned  to  the  and  likewise  by  "the  second  man,"
Holy  Spirit  may  have  been  that  of  the  and  who  conceived  by  one  or  both  of
divine  mother.  In  the  apocryphal  them  "the  light,  which  they  call
Gospel  to  the  Hebrews,  as  Mr.  F.  C.  Christ."  See  H.  Usener,  Das  Weih-
Conybeare  was  kind  enough  to  point  «(7r///j/'t'.f/,  p.  1 16  5^.,  quoting  Irenaeus,
out  to  me,  Christ  spoke  of  the  tloly  i.  28.  Mr.  Conybeare  tells  me  that  Philo
Ghost  as  his  mother.  The  passage  is  Judaeus,  who  lived  in  the  first  half  of  the
quoted  by  Origen  [Coiinnent.  in  Joan.  first  century  of  our  era,  constantly  defines
//.  vol.  iv.  col.  132,  ed.  Migne),  and  God  as  a  Trinity  in  Unity,  or  a  Unity
runs  as  follows  :  "  My  mother  the  in  Trinity,  and  that  the  speculations  of
Holy  Spirit  took  me  a  moment  ago  by  this  Alexandrian  Jew  deeply  influenced
one  of  my  hairs  and  carried  me  away  the  course  of  Christian  thought  on  the


4  DEA  TH  OF  THE  GODS  chap.

of  Babylon  also,  though  they  appeared  to  their  worshippers
only  in  dreams  and  visions,  were  conceived  to  be  human  in
their  bodily  shape,  human  in  their  passions,  and  human  in
their  fate  ;  for  like  men  they  were  born  into  the  world,  and
like  men  they  loved  and  fought  and  even  died/

One  of  the  most  famous  stories  of  the  death  of  a  god  is
told  by  Plutarch.  It  runs  thus.  In  the  reign  of  the  emperor
Tiberius  a  certain  schoolmaster  named  Epitherses  was  sailing
from  Greece  to  Italy.  The  ship  in  which  he  had  taken  his
passage  was  a  merchantman  and  there  were  many  other
passengers  on  board.  At  evening,  when  they  were  off  the
Echinadian  Islands,  the  wind  died  away,  and  the  vessel  drifted
close  in  to  the  island  of  Paxae.  Most  of  the  passengers  were
awake  and  many  were  still  drinking  wine  after  dinner,  when
suddenly  a  voice  hailed  the  ship  from  the  island,  calling  upon
Thamus.  The  crew  and  passengers  were  taken  by  surprise,
for  though  there  was  an  Egyptian  pilot  named  Thamus  on
board,  'i^w  knew  him  even  by  name.  Twice  the  cry  was
repeated,  but  Thamus  kept  silence.  However  at  the  third
call  he  answered,  and  the  voice  from  the  shore,  now  louder
than  ever,  said,  "  When  you  are  come  to  Palodes,  announce
that  the  Great  Pan  is  dead."  Astonishment  fell  upon  all,  and
they  consulted  whether  it  would  be  better  to  do  the  bidding
of  the  voice  or  not.  At  last  Thamus  resolved  that,  if  the
wind  held,  he  would  pass  the  place  in  silence,  but  if  it  dropped
when  they  were  off  Palodes  he  would  give  the  message.  Well,
when  they  were  come  to  Palodes,  there  was  a  great  calm  ;  so
Thamus  standing  in  the  stern  and  looking  towards  the  land
cried  out,  as  he  had  been  bidden,  "  The  Great  Pan  is  dead."
The  words  had  hardly  passed  his  lips  when  a  great  sound  of
lamentation  broke  on  their  ears,  as  if  a  multitude  were
mourning.  This  strange  story,  vouched  for  by  many  on
board,  soon  got  wind  at  Rome,  and  Thamus  was  sent  for  and
questioned  by  the  emperor  Tiberius  himself,  who  caused
inquiries  to  be  made  about  the  dead  god."  It  has  been
plausibly  conjectured   that   the  god   thus   lamented  was  not

mystical  nature  of  the  deity.      Tims  it  into  Chri.stianity.

seems  not   impossible  that  the  ancient  '    L.  W.  King,  Babylniiian  KeUgion

Egyptian  doctrine  of  the  divine  Trinity  and  Mythology  (London,  1899),  p.  8.
may  have  been  distilled  through  P'hilo  -  V\\\\.:\.\ch, Dedefecitc oraciilortitn,  Ay .


III  DEATH  OF  THE  GODS  5

Pan  but  Adonis,  whose  death,  as  we  shall  see,  was  annually
bewailed  in  Greece  and  in  the  East,  and  whose  Semitic  name
of  Thammuz  or  Tammuz  may  have  been  transferred  by  mis-
take to  the  pilot  in  Plutarch's  narrative.^  However  this  may
be,  stories  of  the  same  kind  found  currency  in  Western  Asia
down  to  the  Middle  Ages,  An  Arab  writer  relates  that  in
the  year  1063  or  1064  A.D.,  in  the  reign  of  the  caliph  Caiem,
a  rumour  went  abroad  through  Bagdad,  which  soon  spread
all  over  the  province  of  Irac,  that  some  Turks  out  hunting  in
the  desert  had  seen  a  black  tent,  where  many  men  and
women  were  beating  their  faces  and  uttering  loud  cries,  as  it
is  the  custom  to  do  in  the  East  when  some  one  is  dead.
And  among  the  cries  they  distinguished  these  words,  "The
great  King  of  the  Jinn  is  dead,  woe  to  this  country !  "  In
consequence  of  this  a  mysterious  threat  was  circulated  from
Armenia  to  Chuzistan  that  every  town  which  did  not  lament
the  dead  King  of  the  Jinn  should  utterly  perish.  Again,  in
the  year  1203  or  1204  A.D,  a  fatal  disease,  which  attacked
the  throat,  raged  in  parts  of  Mosul  and  Irac,  and  it  was
divulged  that  a  woman  of  the  Jinn  called  Umm  'Uncud  or
"  Mother  of  the  Grape-cluster  "  had  lost  her  son,  and  that  all
who  did  not  lament  for  him  would  fall  victims  to  the  epidemic.
So  men  and  women  sought  to  save  themselves  from  death  by
assembling  and  beating  their  faces,  while  they  cried  out  in  a
lamentable  voice,  "  O  mother  of  the  Grape-cluster,  excuse  us  ;
the  Grape-cluster  is  dead  ;  we  knew  it  not." "

If  the  high  gods,  who  dwell  remote  from  the  fret  and  fever
of  this  earthly  life,  are  yet  believed  to  die  at  last,  it  is  not  to  be
expected  that  a  god  who  lodges  in  a  frail  tabernacle  of  flesh
should  escape  the  same  fate.  Now  primitive  peoples,  as  we
have  seen,  sometimes  believe  that  their  safety  and  even  that  of
the  world  is  bound  up  with  the  life  of  one  of  these  god-men  or
human  incarnations  of  the  divinity.  Naturally,  therefore,  they
take  the  utmost  care  of  his  life,  out  of  a  regard  for  their  own.

1  F.  Liebrecht,  Gei~;'asii(S  von   TH-  an    old    vintage    piaculum."        "The

bury,  p.  180.  dread    of  the  worshippers,"  he  adds,

2'  F.  Liebrecht,  op.  cit.   p.    180  sq.;  "that  the  neglect  of  the  usual  ritual

W.  Robertson   Smith,   Religion  of  the  would  be  followed  by  disaster,  is  par-

Sefnitcs,"    pp.   412,   414.     The    latter  ticularly  intelligible  if  they  regarded  the

writer  observes  with  justice  that  "  the  necessary  operations  of  agriculture  as

wailing  for  'Uncud,  the  divine  Grape-  involving   the  violent  extinction   of  a

cluster,  seems  to  be  the  last  survival  of  particle  of  divine  life."


6  KILLING  THE  MAN-GOD  chap.

But  no  amount  of  care  and  precaution  will  prevent  the  man-god
from  growing  old  and  feeble  and  at  last  dying.  His  worship-
pers have  to  lay  their  account  with  this  sad  necessity  and  to
meet  it  as  best  they  can.  The  danger  is  a  formidable  one  ;
for  if  the  course  of  nature  is  dependent  on  the  man-god's
life,  what  catastrophes  may  not  be  expected  from  the  gradual
enfeeblement  of  his  powers  and  their  final  extinction  in
death  ?  There  is  only  one  way  of  averting  these  dangers.
The  man-god  must  be  killed  as  soon  as  he  shows  symptoms
that  his  powers  are  beginning  to  fail,  and  his  soul  must  be
transferred  to  a  vigorous  successor  before  it  has  been  seriously
impaired  by  the  threatened  decay.  The  advantages  of  thus
putting  the  man-god  to  death  instead  of  allowing  him  to  die
of  old  age  and  disease  are,  to  the  savage,  obvious  enough.
For  if  the  man-god  dies  what  we  call  a  natural  death,  it
means,  according  to  the  savage,  that  his  soul  has  either
voluntarily  departed  from  his  body  and  refuses  to  return,  or
more  commonly  that  it  has  been  extracted  or  at  least
detained  in  its  wanderings  by  a  demon  or  sorcerer.-^  In
any  of  these  cases  the  soul  of  the  man-god  is  lost  to  his
worshippers  ;  and  with  it  their  prosperity  is  gone  and  their
very  existence  endangered.  Even  if  they  could  arrange  to
catch  the  soul  of  the  dying  god  as  it  left  his  lips  or  his
nostrils  and  so  transfer  it  to  a  successor,  this  would  not
effect  their  purpose  ;  for,  thus  dying  of  disease,  his  soul
would  necessarily  leave  his  body  in  the  last  stage  of  weak-
ness and  exhaustion,  and  as  such  it  would  continue  to  drag
out  a  feeble  existence  in  the  body  to  which  it  might  be
transferred.  Whereas  by  killing  him  his  worshippers  could,
in  the  first  place,  make  sure  of  catching  his  soul  as  it  escaped
and  transferring  it  to  a  suitable  successor  ;  and,  in  the  second
place,  by  killing  him  before  his  natural  force  was  abated,
they  would  secure  that  the  world  should  not  fall  into  decay
with  the  decay  of  the  man-god.  Every  purpose,  therefore,
was  answered,  and  all  dangers  averted  by  thus  killing  the
man-god  and  transferring  his  soul,  while  yet  at  its  prime,  to
a  vigorous  successor.

Some  of  the  reasons  for  preferring  a  violent  death  to  the
slow  death  of  old  age  or  disease  are  obviously  as  applicable

1  See  above,  vol.  i.  p.  247  sqq.


Ill  PREFERENCE  FOR  VIOLENT  DEATH  7

to  common  men  as  to  the  man-god.      Thus  the  Mangaians
think  that  "  the  spirits  of  those  who  die  a  natural  death  are
excessively  feeble  and  weak,  as  their  bodies  were  at  dissolu-
tion ;  whereas  the  spirits  of  those  who  are  slain  in  battle  are
strong  and  vigorous,  their  bodies  not  having  been  reduced  by
disease."  ^      The   Barongo  believe  that  in  the  world  beyond
the  grave  the  spirits  of  their  dead  ancestors  appear  with  the
exact  form  and  lineaments  which  their  bodies  exhibited  at  the
moment  of  dissolution.      The  spirits  are  young  or  old  accord-
ing as  their  bodies  were  young  or  old  when  they  died.     There
are   baby  spirits  who  crawl   about   on   all   fours,  and  whose
traces,  according  to  legend,  may  be  seen  on  the  ground  in
the  sacred  grove  of  Matolo."      Hence,  men  sometimes  prefer
to  kill  themselves  or  to  be  killed  before  they  grow  feeble,  in
order  that  in  the  future  life  their  souls   may  start  fresh  and
vigorous  as  they  left  their  bodies,  instead  of  decrepit  and  worn
out  with  age  and  disease.      Thus  in  Fiji,  "  self-immolation  is
by  no  means  rare,  and  they  believe  that  as  they  leave  this
life,  so  they  will  remain  ever  after.      This  forms  a  powerful
motive    to    escape    from    decrepitude,    or    from    a    crippled
condition,  by  a  voluntary  death."  ^      Or,  as  another  observer
of  the  Fijians  puts   it  more  fully,  "the  custom  of  voluntary
suicide  on   the  part  of  the   old   men,  which  is  among  their
most    extraordinary    usages,    is    also    connected    with    their
superstitions    respecting   a   future    life.       They   believe  that
persons  enter  upon   the  delights  of  their  elysium  with  the
same  faculties,  mental  and  physical,  that  they  possess  at  the
hour  of  death,  in   short,  that   the   spiritual   life  commences
where  the  corporeal  existence  terminates.     With  these  views,
it    is   natural    that   they  should    desire   to   pass  through   this
change  before  their  mental  and  bodily  powers  are  so  enfeebled
by  age  as  to  deprive  them  of  their  capacity  for  enjoyment.
To  this  motive  must  be  added  the  contempt  which  attaches
to  physical  weakness  among  a  nation  of  warriors,  and   the
wrongs  and    insults  which   await  those  who  are  no  longer
able  to  protect  themselves.      When  therefore  a  man  finds  his

1  VV.  W.   Gill,  Myths  and  Songs  of  ^  Ch.  Wilkes,  N'an-ative  of  the  U.S.
the  South  Pacific,  p.   163.  Exploring  Expedition  (London,  1845),

2  H.     A.    Junod,     Les    Ba  -  ronga  iii.  96.
(Neuchatel,  1898),  p.  38 1  sq.


8  KINGS  KILLED  chap.

strength  declining  with  the  advance  of  age,  and  feels  that  he
will  soon  be  unequal  to  discharge  the  duties  of  this  life,  and
to  partake  in  the  pleasures  of  that  which  is  to  come,  he  calls
together  his  relations,  and  tells  them  that  he  is  now  worn
out  and  useless,  that  he  sees  they  are  all  ashamed  of  him,
and  that  he  has  determined  to  be  buried."  So  on  a  day-
appointed  they  meet  and  bury  him  alive/  In  Vate,  one  of
the  New  Hebrides,  the  aged  were  buried  alive  at  their  own
request.  It  was  considered  a  disgrace  to  the  family  of  an
old  chief  if  he  was  not  buried  alive.""^  Of  the  Kamants,  a
Jewish  tribe  in  Abyssinia,  it  is  reported  that  "  they  never  let
a  person  die  a  natural  death,  but  that  if  any  of  their  relatives
is  nearly  expiring,  the  priest  of  the  village  is  called  to  cut
his  throat  ;  if  this  be  omitted,  they  believe  that  the  departed
soul  has  not  entered  the  mansions  of  the  blessed." "

But  it  is  with  the  death  of  the  god-man — the  divine  king
or  priest  —  that  we  are  here  especially  concerned.  The
people  of  Congo  believed,  as  we  have  seen,  that  if  their
pontiff  the  Chitome  were  to  die  a  natural  death,  the  world
would  perish,  and  the  earth,  which  he  alone  sustained  by  his
power  and  merit,  would  immediately  be  annihilated.  Accord-
ingly when  he  fell  ill  and  seemed  likely  to  die,  the  man  who
was  destined  to  be  his  successor  entered  the  pontiff's  house
with  a  rope  or  a  club  and  strangled  or  clubbed  him  to
death.'*  The  Ethiopian  kings  of  i\Ieroe  were  worshipped  as
gods  ;  but  whenever  the  priests  chose,  they  sent  a  messenger
to  the  king,  ordering  him  to  die,  and  alleging  an  oracle  of
the  gods  as  their  authority  for  the  command.  This  com-
mand the  kings  always  obeyed  down  to  the  reign  of
Ergamenes,  a  contemporary  of  Ptolemy  II.,  King  of  Egypt.
Having  received  a  Greek  education  which  emancipated  him
from  the  superstitions  of  his  countrymen,  Ergamenes  ventured
to  disregard  the  command  of  the  priests,  and,  entering  the
Golden  Temple  with   a   body  of  soldiers,  put   the   priests   to

^    U.S.  Explori]!;^-  E.v/>ediiioii,  Eth-  '•'  Martin   Flad,  A  Short  Description

nology    and    Philology,    by    H.     Hale  of  the  Falasha  and  Kamants  in  Abys-

( Philadelphia,   1846),  p.  65.      Cp.  Th.  sinia,  p.   19.
Williams,  Fiji  and  the  lijians,  i.  183  :

J.  E.  Erskine,_/o//r«a/(5/"rt  Cruise  among  *  J.  B.  Labat,  delation  liistoriqiie  dc

the    Islands    of   the     Western     Paeific  l' Ethiofic  oceidentale,   i.    260  sq.  ;   W.

(London,   1S53),  p.  248.  Winwood    Reade,    Savage    Africa,    p.

^  Turner,  Samoa,  p.  335.  362.


Ill  KINGS  KILLED  9

the  sword.'  In  the  kingdom  of  Unyoro  in  Central  Africa,
custom  still  requires  that  as  soon  as  the  king  falls  seriously
ill  or  begins  to  break  up  from  age,  he  shall  be  killed  by  his
own  wives  ;  for,  according  to  an  old  prophecy,  the  throne
will  pass  away  from  the  dynasty  if  ever  the  king  should
die  a  natural  death.-  When  the  king  of  Kibanga,  on  the
Upper  Congo,  seems  near  his  end,  the  sorcerers  put  a  rope
round  his  neck,  which  they  draw  gradually  tighter  till  he
dies/'  If  the  king  of  Gingero  happens  to  be  wounded  in
war,  he  is  put  to  death  by  his  comrades,  or  if  they  fail  to
kill  him,  by  his  kinsfolk,  however  hard  he  may  beg  for  mercy.
They  say  they  do  it  that  he  may  not  die  by  the  hands  of  his
enemies."*  It  appears  to  have  been  a  Zulu  custom  to  put  the
king  to  death  as  soon  as  he  began  to  have  wrinkles  or  gray
hairs.  At  least  this  seems  implied  in  the  following  passage,
written  by  one  who  resided  for  some  time  at  the  court  of  the
notorious  Zulu  tyrant  Chaka,  in  the  early  part  of  the  nineteenth
century:  "The  extraordinary  violence  of  the  king's  rage  with
me  was  mainly  occasioned  by  that  absurd  nostrum,  the  hair
oil,  with  the  notion  of  which  Mr.  Farewell  had  impressed  him
as  being  a  specific  for  removing  all  indications  of  age.  From
the  first  moment  of  his  having  heard  that  such  a  prepara-
tion was  attainable,  he  evinced  a  solicitude  to  procure  it,  and
on  every  occasion  never  forgot  to  remind  us  of  his  anxiety
respecting  it  ;  more  especially  on  our  departure  on  the
mission  his  injunctions  were  particularK-  directed  to  this
object.  It  will  be  seen  that  it  is  one  of  the  barbarous
customs  of  the  Zoolas  in  their  choice  or  election  of  their
kings  that  he  must  neither  have  wrinkles  nor  gray  hairs,  as
they  are  both  distinguishing  marks  of  disqualification  for
becoming  a  monarch  of  a  warlike  people.  It  is  also  equally
indispensable  that  their  king  should  never  exhibit  those
proofs  of  having  become  unfit  and  incompetent  to  reign  ;  it
is  therefore  important  that  they  should  conceal  these  indica-

^  Diodorus    Siculus,   iii.   6;   Strabo,  Arclih'io  per  lo  studio  delle  tradizioni

xvii.  2.  3.  popolari,  vii.  (18SS),  p.  231.

-  Einin   Pasha  in    Central  Africa,  ^    The     I'ravds    of    the   Jesuits     in

being  a   Collection  of  his   Letters  and  Ethiopia,     collected     and     historically

Journals  (London,  1888),  p.  91.  digested  by  F.  Balthazar  Tellez,  of  the

3  P.  Guilleme,  "Credenze  religiose  Society   of  Jesus    (London,    17 10),   p.

dei  Negri  di  Kibanga  nelF  Alto  Congo,"  197.


lo  KINGS  KILLED


CHAP.


tions  so  long  as  they  possibly  can.  Chaka  had  become
greatly  apprehensive  of  the  approach  of  gray  hairs ;  which
would  at  once  be  the  signal  for  him  to  prepare  to  make  his
exit  from  this  sublunary  world,  it  being  always  followed  by
the  death  of  the  monarch."  ^

The  custom  of  putting  kings  to  death  as  soon  as  they
suffered  from  any  personal  defect  prevailed  two  centuries
ago  in  the  Caffre  kingdoms  of  Sofala,  to  the  north  of  the
present  Zululand,  These  kings  of  Sofala,  as  we  have  seen,^
were  regarded  as  gods  by  their  people,  being  entreated  to
give  rain  or  sunshine,  according  as  each  might  be  wanted.
Nevertheless  a  slight  bodily  blemish,  such  as  the  loss  of  a
tooth,  was  considered  a  sufficient  cause  for  putting  one  of  these
god-men  to  death,  as  we  learn  from  the  following  passage  of  an
old  historian.  "  Contiguous  to  the  domains  of  the  Ouiteva  [the
king  of  Sofala]  are  those  of  another  prince  called  Sedanda.
This  prince  becoming  afflicted  with  leprosy,  resolved  on  follow-
ing implicitly  the  laws  of  the  country,  and  poisoning  himself,
conceiving  his  malady  to  be  incurable,  or  at  least  that  it
would  render  him  so  loathsome  in  the  eyes  of  his  people
that  they  would  with  difficulty  recognise  him.  In  conse-
quence he  nominated  his  successor,  holding  as  his  opinion
that  sovereigns  who  should  serve  in  all  things  as  an  example
to  their  people  ought  to  have  no  defect  whatever,  even  in
their  persons  ;  that  when  any  defects  may  chance  to  befall
them  they  cease  to  be  worthy  of  life  and  of  governing  their
dominions  ;  and  preferring  death  in  compliance  with  this  law
to  life,  with  the  reproach  of  having  been  its  violator.  But
this  law  was  not  observed  with  equal  scrupulosity  by  one  of  the
Quitevas,  who,  having  lost  a  tooth  and  feeling  no  disposition
to  follow  the  practice  of  his  predecessors,  published  to  the
people  that  he  had  lost  a  front  tooth,  in  order  that  when
they  might  behold,  they  yet  might  be  able  to  recognise  him  ;
declaring  at  the  same  time  that  he  was  resolved  on  living
and  reigning  as  long  as  he  could,  esteeming  his  existence
requisite  for  the  welfare  of  his  subjects.  He  at  the  same
time  loudly  condemned  the  practice  of  his  predecessors,
whom  he  taxed  with  imprudence,  nay,  even  with  madness,

^  Nathaniel     Isaacs,     Travels    aud       1836),  i.  295  sq.,  cp.  pp.  232,  290  sq.
Adventures  in  Eastern  Africa  (Londion,  -  Above,  vol.  i.  p.  155  s(j.


HI


KINGS  KILLED


II


for  having  condemned  themselves  to  death  for  casual
accidents  to  their  persons,  confessing  plainly  that  it  would
be  with  much  regret,  even  when  the  course  of  nature  should
bring  him  to  his  end,  that  he  should  submit  to  die.  He
observed,  moreover,  that  no  reasonable  being,  much  less  a
monarch,  ought  to  anticipate  the  scythe  of  time ;  and,
abrogating  this  mortal  law,  he  ordained  that  all  his
successors,  if  sane,  should  follow  the  precedent  he  gave,  and
the  new  law  established  by  him."  ^

This  King  of  Sofala  was,  therefore,  a  bold  reformer  like
Ergamenes,  King  of  Ethiopia.  We  may  conjecture  that  the
ground  for  putting  the  Ethiopian  kings  to  death  was,  as  in
the  case  of  the  Zulu  and  Sofala  kings,  the  appearance  on
their  person  of  any  bodil}-  defect  or  sign  of  decay  ;  and  that
the  oracle  which  the  priests  alleged  as  the  authority  for  the
royal  execution  was  to  the  effect  that  great  calamities  would
result  from  the  reign  of  a  king  who  had  any  blemish  on  his
body  ;  just  as  an  oracle  warned  Sparta  against  a  "  lame
reign,"  that  is,  the  reign  of  a  lame  king."  It  is  some
confirmation  of  this  conjecture  that  the  kings  of  Ethiopia
were  chosen  for  their  size,  strength,  and  beauty  long
before  the  custom  of  killing  them  was  abolished.^  To
this  day  the  Sultan  of  Wadai  must  have  no  obvious  bodily
defect,  and  a  king  of  Angoy  cannot  be  crowned  if  he  has  a
single  blemish,  such  as  a  broken  or  a  filed  tooth  or  the  scar
of  an  old  wound.*  It  is  only  natural,  therefore,  to  suppose,
especially  with  the  other  African  examples  before  us,  that
any  bodily  defect  or  symptom  of  old  age  appearing  on  the


^  Dos  Santos,    "  History  of  Eastern       sisters.       But    this    limitation     is    not


Ethiopia"  (pubHshed  at  Paris  in  1684),
in  Pinkerton's  Voyages  and  Travels,
xvi.  684.

-  Xenophon,  Hellenica,  iii.  3.  3  ;
Plutarch,  Agesilaus,  3  ;  id.,  Lysander,
22  ;   Pausanias,  iii.  8.  9.

'^  Herodotus,  iii.  20  ;  Aristotle,  Poli-
tics, iv.  4.  4  ;  Athenaeus,  xiii.  p.  566.
According  to  Nicolaus  Damascenus
(/^r.  142,  in  Fragm.  Historic.  Graecor.
ed.  C.  Miiller,  iii.  p.  463),  the  hand-
somest and  bravest  man  was  only  raised
to  the  throne  when  the  king  had  no
heirs,  the  heirs  being  the  sons  of  his


mentioned  by  the  other  authorities.
The  Alitemnian  Libyans  chose  the
fleetest  runner  to  be  their  king.
See  Nicolaus  Damascenus,  Alirab.  38
{Paradoxographi  Graeci,  ed.  Wester-
mann,  p.  175)  ;  Stohaeus,  F/oj-i/egizew,
xliv.  41  (vol.  ii.  p.  187,  ed.  Meineke).
Among  the  Gordioi  the  fattest  man
was  chosen  king  ;  among  the  Syrakoi,
the  tallest,  or  the  man  with  the  longest
head  (Zenobius,  v.  25).

'  G.  Nachtigal,  Sahara  iind  Silddn
(Leipsic,  1889),  iii.  225  ;  Bastian,  Die
deiitscJie  Expedition  an  der  Loango-
Kiiste,  i.  220.


12


KINGS  KILLED


CHAP.


person  of  the  Ethiopian  monarch  was  the  signal  for  his
execution.  At  a  later  time  it  is  recorded  that  if  the  King
of  Ethiopia  became  maimed  in  any  part  of  his  body  all  his
courtiers  had  to  suffer  the  same  mutilation.^  But  this  rule
may  perhaps  have  been  instituted  at  the  time  when  the
custom  of  killing  the  king  for  any  personal  defect  was
abolished  ;  instead  of  compelling  the  king  to  die  because,
for  example,  he  had  lost  a  tooth,  all  his  subjects  would  be
obliged  to  lose  a  tooth,  and  thus  the  invidious  superiority
of  the  subjects  over  the  king  would  be  cancelled.  A  rule  of
this  sort  is  still  observed  in  the  same  region  at  the  court  of
the  Sultans  of  Darfur.  When  the  Sultan  coughs,  every  one
makes  the  sound  ts  ts  by  striking  the  tongue  against  the
root  of  the  upper  teeth  ;  when  he  sneezes,  the  whole  assembly
utters  a  sound  like  the  cry  of  the  jeko  ;  when  he  falls  off  his
horse,  all  his  followers  must  fall  off  likewise  ;  if  any  one  of
them  remains  in  the  saddle,  no  matter  how  high  his  rank,  he
is  laid  on  the  ground  and  beaten."  At  the  court  of  the
king  of  Uganda  in  Central  Africa,  when  the  king  laughs,
every  one  laughs  ;  when  he  sneezes,  every  one  sneezes  ;
when  he  has  a  cold,  every  one  pretends  to  have  a  cold  ;  when
he  has  his  hair  cut,  so  has  everybody.^  At  the  court  of
Boni  in  Celebes  it  is  a  rule  that  whatever  the  king  does  all  the
courtiers  must  do.  If  he  stands,  they  stand  ;  if  he  sits,  they
sit  ;  if  he  falls  off  his  horse,  they  fall  off  their  horses  ;  if  he
bathes,  they  bathe,  and  passers-by  must  go  into  the  water  in
the  dress,  good  or  bad,  which  they  happen  to  have  on.'*  But
to  return  to  the  death  of  the  divine  king.  Many  days'
journey  to  the  north-east  of  Abomey,  the  old  capital  of
Dahomey,  lies  the  kingdom  of  Eyeo,  "  The  Eyeos  are
governed    by   a    king,    no    less    absolute    than    the    king    of


1  Strabo,  xvii.  2.  3  ;  Diodorus,  iii.  7.

2  Mohammed  Ebn-OmarEl-Tounsy,
Voyag^c  ail  Darfoiir  (Paris,  1S45),  p.
162  sq.  ;  Travels  of  an  Arab  Merchaiit
ill  Soudan,  abridged  from  the  French
by  Bayle  St  John  (London,  1S54),  p.
78  ;  Bulletin  de  la  S'^cii-tt'  dc  Geographic
(Paris)  IVnie  Serie,  iv.  (1852),  p.  539  J-/.

^  R.  W.  Felkin,  "Notes  on  the
Waganda  Tribe  of  Central  Africa,"  in
Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society  of  luiin-


Inirg/i,  .xiii.  (18S4-1886).  p.   711.

■•  Narrative  of  Events  in  Borneo  and
Celebes,  from  the  Journal  of  James
Brooke,  Esq.,  Rajah  of  Sarawak,  by
Captain  R.  Mundy,  i.  134.  My  friend
Mr.  Lorimer  Fison,  in  a  letter  of
August  26th,  1898,  tells  me  that  the
custom  of  falling  down  whenever  a
chief  fell  was  observed  also  in  Fiji,
where  it  had  a  special  name,  bale  muri,
"fall -follow."


in  KINGS  KILLED  13

Dahomy,  yet  subject  to  a  regulation  of  state,  at  once
humiliating  and  extraordinary.  When  the  people  have  con-
ceived an  opinion  of  his  ill-government,  which  is  sometimes
insidiously  infused  into  them  by  the  artifice  of  his  discon-
tented ministers,  they  send  a  deputation  to  him  with  a
present  of  parrots'  eggs,  as  a  mark  of  its  authenticity,  to
represent  to  him  that  the  burden  of  government  must  have
so  far  fatigued  him  that  they  consider  it  full  time  for  him  to
repose  from  his  cares  and  indulge  himself  with  a  little  sleep.
He  thanks  his  subjects  for  their  attention  to  his  ease,  retires
to  his  own  apartment  as  if  to  sleep,  and  there  gives  directions
to  his  women  to  strangle  him.  This  is  immediately  executed,
and  his  son  quietly  ascends  the  throne  upon  the  usual  terms
of  holding  the  reins  of  government  no  longer  than  whilst
he  merits  the  approbation  of  the  people."  About  the  year
1774,  a  king  of  Eyeo,  whom  his  ministers  attempted  to
remove  in  the  customary  manner,  positively  refused  to
accept  the  proffered  parrots'  eggs  at  their  hands,  telling  them
that  he  had  no  mind  to  take  a  nap,  but  on  the  contrary  was
resolved  to  watch  for  the  benefit  of  his  subjects.  The
ministers,  surprised  and  indignant  at  his  recalcitrancy,  raised
a  rebellion,  but  were  defeated  with  great  slaughter,  and  thus
by  his  spirited  conduct  the  king  freed  himself  from  the
tyranny  of  his  councillors  and  established  a  new  precedent
for  the  guidance  of  his  successors.^  The  old  Prussians
acknowledged  as  their  supreme  lord  a  ruler  who  governed
them  in  the  name  of  the  gods,  and  was  known  as  God's
Mouth  {Kirwaido).  When  he  felt  himself  weak  and  ill,  if
he  wished  to  leave  a  good  name  behind  him,  he  had  a  great
heap  made  of  thorn-bushes  and  straw,  on  which  he  mounted
and  delivered  a  long  sermon  to  the  people,  exhorting  them  to
serve  the  gods  and  promising  to  go  to  the  gods  and  speak
for  the  people.  Then  he  took  some  of  the  perpetual  fire
which  burned  in  front  of  the  holy  oak-tree,  and  lighting  the
pile  with  it  burned  himself  to  death.-

In  the  cases  hitherto  described,  the  divine  king  or  priest
is  suffered  by  his  people  to  retain  office  until  some  outward

^  A.     Dalzel,    History   of   Dahomy  -  Simon  Grunau,  PreussiscJie  Chro-

(London,  1793),  pp.  12  sq,,  156  sq'.  uik,  herausgegeben  von  Dr.  M.    Perl-

bach  (Leipsic,  1876),  i.  p.  97.


14


KINGS  KILLED  chap,


defect,  some  visible  symptom  of  failing  health  or  advancing
age,  warns  them  that  he  is  no  longer  equal  to  the  discharge
of  his  divine  duties  ;  but  not  until  such  symptoms  have  made
their  appearance   is   he   put   to  death.      Some   peoples,  how-
ever, appear  to  have   thought   it   unsafe   to  wait  for  even  the
slightest  symptom   of  decay  and   have   preferred  to  kill  the
king  while  he  was  still  in  the  full  vigour  of  life.      Accordingly,
they  have    fixed    a  term   beyond  which  he  might  not   reign,
and  at  the  close  of  which  he  must  die,  the  term  fixed   upon
being   short   enough   to   exclude   the   probability  of  his   de-
generating physically   in    the    interval.      In    some    parts    of
Southern    India  the   period   fixed  was   twelve  years.      Thus,
according  to  an  old   traveller,  in   the   province   of  Ouilacare
"  there   is   a   Gentile  house   of  prayer,  in  which   there   is  an
idol  which    they   hold    in    great    account,   and    every   twelve
years    they    celebrate    a    great    feast    to   it,    whither   all  the
Gentiles  go   as   to   a  jubilee.      This   temple   possesses   many
lands   and    much   revenue  ;   it   is    a   very  great   affair.      This
province  has  a  king  over  it  ;   who  has  not  more  than  twelve
years  to  reign  from  jubilee  to  jubilee.      His  manner  of  living  is
in  this  wise,  that  is   to  say,  when   the  twelve  years  are  com-
pleted, on  the  day  of  this  feast  there  assemble  together  innum-
erable people,  and  much    money  is  spent  in  giving  food  to
Bramans.      The  king  has  a  wooden  scaffolding  made,  spread
over  with  silken  hangings  ;   and  on  that  day  he  goes  to  bathe
at  a  tank  with  great  ceremonies  and  sound  of  music,   after  that
he  comes  to  the  idol  and  prays  to  it,  and  mounts  on  to  the
scaffolding,  and   there   before  all   the   people  he  takes  some
very  sharp  knives  and  begins  to  cut  off  his  nose,  and  then  his
ears  and  his  lips  and  all  his  members  and  as  much  flesh  of
himself  as  he  can  ;   and   he   throws   it  away  very  hurriedly
until  so  much  of  his  blood  is  spilled  that  he  begins  to  faint,
and  then  he  cuts  his  throat  himself.      And  he  performs  this
sacrifice  to   the   idol  ;    and   whoever    desires    to  reign   other
twelve  years,  and  undertake  this  martyrdom  for  love  of  the
idol,  has  to  be  present  looking  on   at   this  ;   and   from  that
place  they  raise  him  up  as  king."  ^

Formerly    the    Samorin    or     king    of    Calicut,    on    the

1  Barbosa,     A    Description    of   the      the  beginning  of  the  Sixteenth  Century
Coasts  of  East  Africa  and  Malabar  in       (Hakluyt  Society,  1 866),  p.  172  sq.


Ill  KINGS  KILLED  15

Malabar  coast,  had  also  to  cut  his  throat  in  public  at  the
end  of  a  twelve  years'  reign.  But  towards  the  end  of  the
seventeenth  century  the  rule  had  been  modified  as  follows  :
"  A  new  custom  is  followed  by  the  modern  Samorins,  that
jubilee  is  proclaimed  throughout  his  dominions,  at  the  end
of  twelve  years,  and  a  tent  is  pitched  for  him  in  a  spacious
plain,  and  a  great  feast  is  celebrated  for  ten  or  twelve  days,
with  mirth  and  jollity,  guns  firing  night  and  day,  so  at  the
end  of  the  feast  any  four  of  the  guests  that  have  a  mind  to
gain  a  crown  by  a  desperate  action,  in  fighting  their  way
through  30  or  40,000  of  his  guards,  and  kill  the  Samorin
in  his  tent,  he  that  kills  him  succeeds  him  in  his  empire.
In  anno  1695,  one  of  those  jubilees  happened,  and  the  tent
pitched  near  Pennany,  a  seaport  of  his,  about  fifteen  leagues
to  the  southward  of  Calicut.  There  were  but  three  men
that  would  venture  on  that  desperate  action,  who  fell  in
with  sword  and  target  among  the  guard,  and,  after  they  had
killed  and  wounded  many,  were  themselves  killed.  One  of
the  desperados  had  a  nephew  of  fifteen  or  sixteen  years  of
age,  that  kept  close  by  his  uncle  in  the  attack  on  the  guards,
and,  when  he  saw  him  fall,  the  youth  got  through  the  guards
into  the  tent,  and  made  a  stroke  at  his  Majesty's  head,  and
had  certainly  despatched  him  if  a  large  brass  lamp  which  was
burning  over  his  head  had  not  marred  the  blow  ;  but,  before
he  could  make  another,  he  was  killed  by  the  guards  ;  and,
I  believe,  the  same  Samorin  reigns  yet.  I  chanced  to  come
that  time  along  the  coast  and  heard  the  guns  for  two  or
three  days  and  nights  successively."  ^

"  It  is  a  singular  custom  in  Bengal,"  says  an  old  native
historian  of  India,  "  that  there  is  little  of  hereditary  descent
in  succession  to  the  sovereignty.  There  is  a  throne  allotted
for  the  king  ;  there  is,  in  like  manner,  a  seat  or  station
assigned  for  each  of  the  amirs,  wazirs,  and  viansabdars.
It  is  that  throne  and  these  stations  alone  which  engage
the  reverence  of  the  people  of  Bengal.  A  set  of  de-
pendents, servants,  and  attendants  are  annexed  to  each  of
these  situations.  When  the  king  wishes  to  dismiss  or
appoint    any   person,    whosoever   is    placed    in    the   seat    of

1  Alex.   Hamilton,   "  A  New  Account   of    the    East    Indies,"   in    Pinkerton's
Voyages  and  Travels,  viii.  374.


1 6  KINGS  KILLED  chap.

the  one  dismissed  is  immediately  attended  and  obeyed
by  the  whole  establishment  of  dependents,  servants,  and
retainers  annexed  to  the  seat  which  he  occupies.  Nay,
this  rule  obtains  even  as  to  the  royal  throne  itself.  Who-
ever kills  the  king,  and  succeeds  in  placing  himself  on  that
throne,  is  immediately  acknowledged  as  king  ;  all  the  amirs,
zvazirs,  soldiers  and  peasants,  instantly  obey  and  submit  to
him,  and  consider  him  as  being  as  much  their  sovereign  as
they  did  their  former  prince,  and  obey  his  orders  implicitly.
The  people  of  Bengal  sa}-,  '  We  are  faithful  to  the  throne  ;
whoever  fills  the  throne  we  are  obedient  and  true  to  it.' "  ^
A  custom  of  the  same  sort  formerly  prevailed  in  the  little
kingdom  of  Passier,  on  the  northern  coast  of  Sumatra.
The  old  Portuguese  historian  De  Barros,  who  informs  us
of  it,  remarks  with  surprise  that  no  wise  man  would  wish
to  be  king  of  Passier,  since  the  monarch  was  not  allowed  by
his  subjects  to  live  long.  P'rom  time  to  time  a  sort  of  fur>'
seized  the  people,  and  they  marched  through  the  streets  of
the  city  chanting  with  loud  voices  the  fatal  words,  "  The
king  must  die  !  "  When  the  king  heard  that  song  of  death
he  knew  that  his  hour  had  come.  The  man  who  struck
the  fatal  blow  was  of  the  royal  lineage,  and  as  soon  as
he  had  done  the  deed  of  blood  and  seated  himself  on
the  throne  he  was  regarded  as  the  legitimate  king,  provided
that  he  contrived  to  maintain  his  seat  peaceably  for  a  single
day.  This,  however,  the  regicide  did  not  always  succeed  in
doing.  When  Pernao  Peres  d'Andrade,  on  a  voyage  to
China,  put  in  at  Passier  for  a  cargo  of  spices,  two  kings
were  massacred,  and  that  in  the  most  peaceable  and  orderl}-
manner,  without  the  smallest  sign  of  tumult  or  sedition  in
the  city,  where  everything  went  on  in  its  usual  course
as  if  the  murder  or  execution  of  a  king  were  a  matter
of  everyday  occurrence.  Indeed,  on  one  occasion  three
kings  were  raised  to  the  dangerous  elevation  and  followed
each  other  on  the  dusty  road  of  death  in  a  single  day.  The
people  defended  the  custom,  which  they  esteemed  very  laud-

1  Sir  H.   M.   Elliot,  The  Histo)y  of  mill,    Surrey,    for    kindly    calling    my

India  as  told  by  its  own  Historians,  iv.  attention    to    this    and    the     following

260.       I  have    to    thank    Mr.    R.    S.  instance  of  the  custom  of  regicide.
Whiteway,  of  Brownscombe,   Shotter-


Ill  KINGS  KILLED  17

able  and  even  of  divine  institution,  by  saying  that  God  would
never  allow  so  high  and  mighty  a  being  as  a  king,  who
reigned  as  his  vicegerent  on  earth,  to  perish  by  violence
unless  for  his  sins  he  thoroughly  deserved  it.^  Far  away
from  the  tropical  island  of  Sumatra  a  rule  of  the  same  sort
appears  to  have  obtained  among  the  old  Slavs.  When  the
captives  Gunn  and  Jarmerik  contrived  to  slay  the  king  and
queen  of  the  Slavs  and  made  their  escape,  they  were  pursued
by  the  barbarians,  who  shouted  after  them  that  if  they  would
only  come  back  they  would  reign  instead  of  the  murdered
monarch,  since  by  a  public  statute  of  the  ancients  the
succession  to  the  throne  fell  to  the  king's  assassin.  But
the  flying  regicides  turned  a  deaf  ear  to  promises  which
they  regarded  as  mere  baits  to  lure  them  back  to  destruc-
tion ;  they  continued  their  flight,  and  the  shouts  and  clamour
of  the  barbarians  gradually  died  away  in  the  distance.^

The  famous  traveller  Ibn  Batuta,  a  native  of  Tangier,
who  visited  the  East  Indies  in  the  first  half  of  the  fourteenth
century,  witnessed  at  the  court  of  the  heathen  Sultan  of  Java
an  occurrence  which  filled  him  with  astonishment.  He  says  :
"  During  my  audience  with  the  Sultan  I  saw  a  man  who  held
in  his  hand  a  knife  like  that  used  by  a  grape-gleaner.  He
placed  it  on  his  own  neck  and  spoke  for  a  long  time  in  a
language  which  I  did  not  understand.  After  that  he  seized
the  knife  with  both  hands  at  once  and  cut  his  throat.  His
head  fell  to  the  ground,  so  sharp  was  the  blade  and  so  great
the  force  with  which  he  used  it.  I  remained  dumbfoundered
at  his  behaviour,  but  the  Sultan  said  to  me,  '  Does  any  one
do  like  that  in  your  country  ? '  I  answered,  '  Never  did  I
see  such  a  thing.'  He  smiled  and  replied,  '  These  people
are  our  slaves,  and  they  kill  themselves  for  love  of  us.'  Then
he  commanded  that  they  should  take  away  him  who  had  slain
himself  and  should  burn  him.  The  Sultan's  officers,  the
grandees,  the  troops,  and  the  common  people  attended  the
cremation.  The  sovereign  assigned  a  liberal  pension  to  the
children  of  the  deceased,  to  his  wife,  and  to  his  brothers  ;   and

^  De    Barros,    Da  Asia,   dos  feitos,  "^  Saxo        Grammaticus,        Historia

que  OS  PorUtguezes  fzerain  no  descttbri-  Danica,   viii.    p.    410    sq.,   ed.     P.    E.

ine7ito  e  conquista  dos  7nares  e  ie}'ras  do  Miiller  (p.  334  of  Mr.  Elton's  English

07-iente,  Decada  Terceira,  Liv.  V.  cap.  translation).
i.  p.  512  sq.  (Lisbon,  1/77).

VOL.  II  C


l8  SPARTAN  KINGS  DEPOSED  chap.

they  were  highly  honoured  because  of  his  conduct.  A  person,
who  was  present  at  the  audience  when  the  event  I  have
described  took  place,  informed  me  that  the  speech  made  by
the  man  who  sacrificed  himself  set  forth  his  devotion  to  the
monarch.  He  said  that  he  wished  to  immolate  himself  out
of  affection  for  the  sovereign,  as  his  father  had  done  for
love  of  the  prince's  father,  and  as  his  grandfather  had  done
out  of  regard  for  the  prince's  grandfather."  ^  We  may
conjecture  that  formerly  the  sultans  of  Java,  like  the  kings  of
Quilacare  and  Calicut,  were  bound  to  cut  their  own  throats
at  the  end  of  a  fixed  term  of  years,  but  that  at  a  later  time
they  deputed  the  painful,  though  glorious,  duty  of  dying  for
their  country  to  the  members  of  a  certain  family,  who  received
by  way  of  recompense  ample  provision  during  their  life  and
a  handsome  funeral  at  death.

There  are  some  grounds  for  believing  that  the  reign  of  the
ancient  Dorian  kings  was  limited  to  eight  years,  or  at  least
that  at  the  end  of  every  period  of  eight  years  a  new  consecra-
tion, a  fresh  outpouring  of  the  divine  grace,  was  regarded  as
necessary  in  order  to  enable  them  to  discharge  their  civil  and
religious  duties.  For  it  was  a  rule  of  the  Spartan  constitution
that  every  eighth  year  the  ephors  should  choose  a  clear  and
moonless  night  and  sitting  down  observe  the  sky  in  silence.  If
during  their  vigil  they  saw  a  meteor  or  shooting  star,  they
inferred  that  the  king  had  sinned  against  the  deity,  and  sus-
pended him  from  his  functions  until  the  Delphic  or  Olympic
oracle  should  reinstate  him  in  them.  This  custom,  which  has
all  the  air  of  great  antiquity,  was  not  suffered  to  remain  a  dead
letter  even  in  the  last  period  of  the  Spartan  monarchy  ;  for  in
the  third  century  before  our  era  a  king,  who  had  rendered  him-
self obnoxious  to  the  reforming  party,  was  actually  deposed
on  various  trumped-up  charges,  among  which  the  allegation
that  the  ominous  sign  had  been  seen  in  the  sky  took  a
prominent  place. -^  When  we  compare  this  custom,  as  K.  O.
Miiller  suggested,^  with  the  importance  of  the  eight-years'
cycle  in  early  Greece,  and  with  the  Homeric  reference  to
King  Minos  who  reigned  at  Cnosus  for  periods  of  nine  years

^    Voyage   cPIbn  Batotitah,   texte    Arabe,   accompagne    d'une    traduction  par
C.  Deffremery  et  B.  R.  Sanguinetti  (Paris,  1853-58),  iv.  246  sq.
2  Plutarch,  Agis,  ii.  ^  Die  Dorier^  ii.  96.


Ill  DREAD  OF  METEORS  19

as  the  friend  of  Zeus/  we  shall  be  disposed  to  concur  in  the
opinion  of  the  illustrious  German  scholar,  whom  I  have  just
cited,  that  the  quaint  Spartan  practice  is  much  more  than  a
mere  antiquarian  curiosity  ;  it  is  the  attenuated  survival  of  an
institution  which  may  once  have  had  great  significance,  and
it  throws  an  important  light  on  the  restrictions  and  limita-
tions anciently  imposed  by  religion  on  the  Dorian  kingship.
What  exactly  was  the  import  of  a  meteor  in  the  opinion  of
the  old  Dorians  we  can  hardly  hope  to  determine  ;  one
thing  only  is  clear,  they  regarded  it  as  a  portent  of  so
ominous  and  threatening  a  kind  that  its  appearance  under
certain  circumstances  justified  and  even  required  the  depo-
sition of  their  king.  This  exaggerated  dread  of  so  simple
a  natural  phenomenon  is  shared  by  many  savages  at  the
present  day  ;  and  we  shall  hardly  err  in  supposing  that  the
Spartans  inherited  it  from  their  barbarous  ancestors,  who
may  have  watched  with  consternation,  on  many  a  starry
night  among  the  woods  of  Germany,  the  flashing  of  a
meteor  through  the  sky.  Shooting  stars  and  meteors  are
viewed  with  apprehension  by  the  natives  of  the  Andaman
Islands,  who  suppose  them  to  be  lighted  faggots  hurled  into
the  air  by  the  malignant  spirit  of  the  woods  in  order  to
ascertain  the  whereabouts  of  any  unhappy  wight  in  his
vicinity.  Hence  if  they  happen  to  be  away  from  their
camp  when  the  meteor  is  seen,  they  hide  themselves  and
remain  silent  for  a  little  before  they  venture  to  resume  the
work  they  were  at  ;  for  example,  if  they  are  out  fishing
they  will  crouch  at  the  bottom  of  the  boat."  When  the
Baronga  of  South  Africa  see  a  shooting  star  they  spit  on
the  ground  to  avert  the  evil  omen,  and  cry,  "  Go  away !
go  away  all  alone  !  "  By  this  they  mean  that  the  light,
which  is  so  soon  to  disappear,  is  not  to  take  them  with  it,
but  to  go  and  die  by  itself.^  The  Namaquas  "  are  greatly
afraid  of  the  meteor  which  is  vulgarly  called  a  falling   star,

1  T^crt   S'   ivl  Ki/wtros,  fxeydXr)  TroXts,  in     this     passage.       I    accept     K.    O.

Ivda  re  MtVcos  Miiller's    interpretation,    which    agrees

evvewfios     ^acriXeve     Atbs     fieydXov  with  that  of  the  author  of  the  dialogue

oapLffTi'is.  Mi7ios  (p.  319  D  k)  attributed  to  Plato.

Homer,  Odyssey,  xix.   178  sq.       There  ^  £_    Man,    Aboriginal   Inhabitants

is  some  difference  of  opinion  as  to  the  of  the  Andaman  Islands,  p.  84  sq.

exact  meaning  to  be  given  to  ipv^upos  ^  H.  A.  Junod,  Les  Ba-ronga,  p.  470.


20


DREAD  OF  METEORS


CHAP.


for  they  consider  it  a  sign  that  sickness  is  coming  upon  the
cattle,  and  to  escape  it  they  will  immediately  drive  them  to
some  other  parts  of  the  country.  They  call  out  to  the  star
how  many  cattle  they  have,  and  beg  of  it  not  to  send  sick-
ness." ^  The  Bechuanas  are  also  much  alarmed  at  the  appear-
ance of  a  meteor.  If  they  happen  to  be  dancing  in  the
open  air  at  the  time,  they  will  instantly  desist  and  retire
hastily  to  their  huts."  When  the  Laughlan  Islanders  see
a  shooting  star  they  make  a  great  noise,  for  they  think  it  is
the  old  woman  who  lives  in  the  moon  coming  down  to  earth
to  catch  somebody  who  may  relieve  her  of  her  duties  in  the
moon  while  she  goes  away  to  the  happy  spirit-land.^  In  Vedic
India  a  meteor  was  believed  to  be  the  incarnation  of  a  demon,
and  on  its  appearance  certain  hymns  or  incantations,  supposed
to  possess  the  power  of  killing  demons,  were  recited  for  the  pur-
pose of  expiating  the  prodigy."*  The  aborigines  of  New  South
Wales  attributed  great  importance  to  the  falling  of  a  star.*"
Some  of  the  Esthonians  at  the  present  day  regard  shooting
stars  as  evil  spirits.*^  By  some  Indians  of  California  meteors
were  called  "  children  of  the  moon,"  and  whenever  young
women  saw  one  of  them  they  fell  to  the  ground  and  covered
their  heads,  fearing  that,  if  the  meteor  saw  them,  their  faces
would  become  ugly  and  diseased.^  When  a  German  traveller
was  living  with  the  Bororos  of  Central  Brazil,  a  splendid
meteor  fell,  spreading  dismay  through  the  Indian  village.
It  was  believed  to  be  the  soul  of  a  dead  medicine-man,  who
suddenly  appeared  in  this  form  to  announce  that  he  wanted
meat,  and  that,  as  a  preliminary  measure,  he  proposed  to
visit  somebody  with  an  attack  of  dysentery.  Its  appearance
was  greeted  with  yells  from  a  hundred  throats  ;  men,  women,
and  children  swarmed  out  of  their  huts  like  ants  whose  nest
has    been    disturbed  ;    and    soon    watch-fires    blazed,   round


1  J.  Campbell,  Travels  in  South
Africa  (London,  1S15),  p.  428  sq.

2  /(£,  Travels  iti  South  Afrit  a,
Second  Journey  (London,  1822),  ii.
204.

»  W.  Tetzlaff,  "  Notes  on  the
Laughlan  Islands,"  in  Annual  Report
on  British  New  Guinea,  1 890- 1 891
(Brisbane,  1892),  p.  105.

^  H.  Oldenberg,  Die  Religion  des
Veda,  p.  267.


•'  D.  Collins,  Account  of  the  English
Colony  in  A-eio  South  Wales  (London,
1804),  p.  383.

"  Holzmayer,  "  Osiliana,''  Vcrhand-
htJigen  der  gelehrten  Estnischen  Gesell-
schaft  zu  Dorpat,  vii.  (1872),  p.  48.

"'  Boscana,  "Chinigchinich,  a  histori-
cal account  of  the  origin,  etc.,  of  the
Indians  of  St.  Juan  Capistrano,"  in
A.  Robinson's  Life  in  California  (New-
York,  1846),  p.  299.


Ill


DREAD  OF  METEORS


21


which  at  a  Httle  distance  groups  of  dusky  figures  gathered,
while  in  the  middle,  thrown  into  strong  relief  by  the  flicker-
ing light  of  the  fire,  two  red-painted  sorcerers  reeled  and
staggered  in  a  state  of  frantic  excitement,  snorting  and
spitting  towards  the  quarter  of  the  sky  where  the  meteor
had  run  its  brief  but  brilliant  course.  Pressing  his  right
hand  to  his  yelling  mouth,  each  of  them  held  aloft  in  his
extended  left,  by  way  of  propitiating  the  angry  star,  a
bundle  of  cigarettes!  "There!"  they  seemed  to  say,  "all
that  tobacco  will  we  give  to  ward  off  the  impending  visita-
tion.     Woe  to  you,  if  you  do  not  leave  us  in  peace."  ^

A  widespread  superstition  associates  meteors  or  falling
stars  with  the  souls  of  the  dead.  Often  they  are  believed  to
be  the  spirits  of  the  departed  on  their  way  to  the  other
world.  The  Maoris  imagine  that  at  death  the  soul  leaves
the  body  and  goes  to  the  nether  world  in  the  form  of  a
falling  star.^  One  evening  when  Mr.  Howitt  was  talking
with  an  Australian  black,  a  bright  meteor  was  seen  shooting
through  the  sky.  The  native  watched  it  and  remarked,
"An  old  blackfellow  has  fallen  down  there."  ^  Among
the  Yerrunthally  tribe  of  Queensland  the  ideas  on  this
subject  were  even  more  definite.  They  thought  that  after
death  they  went  to  a  place  away  among  the  stars,  and  that
to  reach  it  they  had  to  climb  up  a  rope  ;  when  they  had
clambered  up  they  let  go  the  rope,  which,  as  it  fell  from
heaven,  appeared  to  people  on  earth  as  a  falling  star.'*  The
Wambugwe  of  Eastern  Africa  fancy  that  the  stars  are  men,
of  whom  one  dies  whenever  a  star  is  seen  to  fall.^  The
Tinneh  Indians  and  the  Tchiglit  Esquimaux  of  North-
western America  believe  that  human  life  on  earth  is
influenced    by    the    stars,    and    they    take    a    shooting    star


1  K.  von  den  Steinen,  Untcr  den
Natiu-volkern  Zcntral-  Brasiliens,  p.
514  sq._

^  Dieffenbach,  Travels  in  New
Zealand,  ii.  66.  According  to  another
account,  meteors  are  regarded  by  the
Maoris  as  betokening  the  presence  of  a
god  (R.  Taylor,  Te  Ika  a  Maui,  or
New  Zealand  and  its  Inhabitants,   p.

147)-

'^  A.  W.  Howitt,  in  Brough  Smyth's
Aborigines  of  Victoria,  ii.  309.


■*  E.  Palmer,  "  Notes  on  some
Australian  Tribes,"  Journal  of  the
Anthropological  Institute,  xiii.  (1884),
p.  292.  Sometimes  apparently  the  Aus-
tralian natives  regard  crystals  or  broken
glass  as  fallen  stars,  and  treasure  them
as  powerful  instruments  of  magic.  See
E.  M.  Curr,  The  Australian  Race,  iii.
29.

■'■  ().  Baumann,  Durch  Jllassailand
zur  Nilquellc  (Berlin,  1S94),  p.  188.


22  FALLING  STARS  chap.

to  be  a  sign  that  some  one  has  died.^  In  classical
antiquity  there  was  a  popular  notion  that  every  human
being  had  his  own  star  in  the  sky,  which  shone  bright  or
dim  according  to  his  good  or  evil  fortune,  and  fell  in  the
form  of  a  meteor  when  he  died."  Ideas  of  the  same  sort
are  still  commonly  to  be  met  with  in  Europe.  Thus  in
some  parts  of  Germany  they  say  that  at  the  birth  of  a
man  a  new  star  is  set  in  the  sky,  and  that  as  it  burns
brilliantly  or  faintly  he  grows  rich  or  poor ;  finally  when  he
dies  it  drops  from  the  sky  in  the  likeness  of  a  shooting
star.^  Similarly  in  Brittany,  Transylvania,  Bohemia,  the
Abruzzi,  and  the  Esthonian  island  of  Oesel  it  is  thought
by  some  that  every  man  has  his  own  particular  star  in  the
sky,  and  that  when  it  falls  in  the  shape  of  a  meteor  he
expires.*^  In  Styria  they  say  that  when  a  shooting  star  is
seen  a  man  has  just  died,  or  a  poor  soul  been  released  from
purgatory.''  The  Esthonians  believe  that  if  any  one  sees
a  falling  star  on  New  Year's  night  he  will  die  or  be
visited  by  a  serious  illness  that  year.''  In  Belgium  and
many  parts  of  France  the  people  suppose  that  a  meteor
is  a  soul  which  has  just  quitted  the  body,  sometimes
that  it  is  specially  the  soul  of  an  unbaptized  infant
or  of  some  one  who  has  died  without  absolution.  At
sight   of    it    they   say    that    you    should   cross  yourself  and

^   E.  Petitot,  Monographic  des  Dene-  ien  zur  Vorgescliichte  und  Volkskunde

Dindji    (Paris,     1876),    p.     60;     id.,  Hbhmens"  A/itthcilimgen  deraiithropo-

Monograpkie  des  Esqidmaiix    Tcliiglit  logischen    Gesellschaft    in     Wien,    xxi.

(Paris,  1876),  p.  24.  (1891),  p.  25  ;  G.  Finamore,  Crcdenze,

"  Pliny,  N'at.  Hist.  ii.  28.  Usi  e   Costiimi  Abnizzesi,   p.    47  sq.  ;

•*  Panzer,      Beitrag    zur     detitschen  Holzmayer,  "  Osiliana,"  Verhandl.  der

Mythologie,      ii.      293 ;      Kuhn      unci  gelehrten     Estnischen     Gesellschaft    zu

Schvinriz,  N'orddeutsche  SageJi,  Mdrche?i  Dorpat,  vii.  (1872),  p.  48.      The  same

7«?^/6'^/;;w/(/;t',  p. 457,  §422;  E.  Meier,  belief  is   said    to   prevail  in  Armenia.

Deutsche  Sagen,  Sitten  und  Gebraiuhe  See    Minas    Tcheraz,    "Notes    sur    la

aus  Schwaben,  p.  506,  §§  379,  380.  Mythologie  Armenienne,"  Transactions

*  Sebillot,      Traditions     et     Super-  of  tlie  Ninth  International  Congress  of

stitions     de     la     Haute- Bretagne,     ii.  Orientalists   (London,    1893),   ii.    824.

353  '■>  J-  Haltrich,  Zur  Volkskunde  der  Bret  Harte  has  employed  the  idea  in

Siebenbiirger  Sachsen  (Vienna,  1885),  p.  his  little  poem,  "  Relieving  Guard."

300;  W.  Schmidt,  Das  Jahr  und  seine  ''  A.  Schlossar,  "  Volksmeinung  und

Tage    hi    ]\Ieinung    tind  Branch    der  Volksaberglaube     aus    der    deutschen

Romdnen    Siebenbiirgens,    p.    38  ;     E.  Steierniark,"    Germania,    N.R. ,    xxiv.

Gerard,   The  Land  beyond  the  Forest,  (1891),  p.  389.

i.    31 1;    Grohmann,   Aberglauben  und  •'  Boeder  -  Kreutzwald,   Der  Ehsten

Gebrduche   aus  Bohuicn  und  Mdhren,  abergliiubische   Gebrauche,   fVeisen  und

p.  31,  §  164;   Br.  Jeli'nek,  "Material-  Gewohnheiten,  p.  73.


Ill  FALLING  STARS  23

pray,    or    that    if  you    wish    for    something    while    the    star
is  falling  you  will  be  sure  to  get  it.^      Among   the  Vosges
Mountains  in  the  warm  nights  of  July  it  is  not  uncommon
to    see   whole   showers   of    shooting   stars.       It   is  generally
agreed    that   these   stars   are  souls,   but    some    difference    of
opinion  exists  as  to  whether  they  are  souls  just  taking  leave
of  earth,  or  tortured   by  the  fires  of  purgatory,  or  on   their
passage  from   purgatory  to   heaven."      The  downward  direc-
tion of  their  flight  might  naturally  suggest  a  different  goal  ;
and   accordingly  other   people    have    seen    in    the    transient
flame   of  a   meteor   the   descent  of  a   soul    from    heaven    to
be   born   on   earth.      In   the   Punjaub,  for  example,  Hindoos
believe  that  the  length  of  a  soul's  residence  in  the  realms  of
bliss  is  exactly  proportioned  to  the  sums  the  man  distributed
in    charity   during    his    life  ;    and   that   when   these   are  ex-
hausted  his  time  in  heaven  is  up,  and  down  he  comes.^      In
Polynesia   a   shooting   star   was   held    to    be   the   flight  of  a
spirit,   and   to   presage  the   birth   of    a  great   prince."*       The
Mandans  of  North  America  fancied  that  the  stars  were  dead
people,  and  that  when  a  woman  was   brought  to  bed  a  star
fell  from  heaven,  and  entering  into  her  was  born  as  a  child.^
On  the  Biloch  frontier  of  the  Punjaub  each  man  is  held   to
have  his  star,  and  he  may  not  journey  in  particular  directions
when  his  star  is  in  certain  positions.      If  duty  compels  him
to  travel   in   the   forbidden   direction,   he    takes   care    before
setting  out  to  bury  his  star,  or  rather  a  figure  of  it  cut  out
of  cloth,  so  that  it  may  not  see  what  he  is  doing.*"

Which,  if  any,  of  these  superstitions  moved  the  barbarous

1  E.  Monseur,  Le  Folklore  IValloii,       Credeiize,    Usi   e    Cosiumi  Abruzzesi,
p.  61  ;  A.  de  Nore,  Coutumes,  Mytkes       p.  48.

et  Traditions  des  Provinces  de  France,  ^  North  Indiaft  Notes  and  Queries,

pp.  loi,  160,  223,267,  284;  B.  Souche,  i.  p.  102,  §  673.      Compare  id.  p.  47,

Croyances^presa^eset traditio7is diverses,  §  356;   Indian  Notes  and  Queries,  iv.

p.  23  ;  P.  Sebillot,  Traditions  et  Super-  p.   184,  §  674.

stiticns  de  la  Haute-Bretagne,  ii.  352;  *  W.    Ellis,   Polynesian    Researches,

J.  Lecoeur,   Esqnisses  du  Bocagc  Nor-  iii.   171.

rnand,    ii.     13  ;    L.    Pineau,     Folk-lore  ^  Maximilian   Prinz  zu  Wied,  Reise

du  Poitoii  (Paris,  1892),  p.  525  sq.  in  das  Innere  Nord- America,  ii.    152.

2  L.  F.  Sauve,  Le  Folk-lore  des  It  does  not,  however,  appear  from  the
Halites-  Vosges,  p.  196  sq.  In  the  writer's  statement  whether  the  descent
Abruzzi  also  some  people  think  that  of  the  soul  was  identified  with  the
falling  stars  are  souls  on  their  way  from  flight  of  a  meteor  or  not.
purgatory,  and  on  seeing  one  they  say,  ^  D.  C.  J-  Ibbetson,  Outlines  of
"  God  be  with  you."   See  G.  Finamore,  Panjab  Ethnography,  p.   118,  §231.


24  TEMPO RAR  V  KINGS  chai'.

Dorians  of  old  to  depose  their  kings  whenever  at  a  certain
season  a  meteor  flamed  in  the  sky,  we  cannot  say.  Perhaps
they  had  a  vague  general  notion  that  its  appearance  signified
the  dissatisfaction  of  the  higher  powers  with  the  state  of  the
commonwealth  ;  and  since  in  primitive  society  the  king  is
commonly  held  responsible  for  all  untoward  events,  what-
ever their  origin,  the  natural  course  was  to  relieve  him  of
duties  which  he  had  proved  himself  incapable  of  discharging*
But  it  may  be  that  the  idea  in  the  minds  of  these  rude
barbarians  was  more  definite.  Possibly,  like  some  people  in
Europe  at  the  present  day,  they  thought  that  every  man  had
his  star  in  the  sky,  and  that  he  must  die  when  it  fell.  The
king  would  be  no  exception  to  the  rule,  and  on  a  certain  night
of  a  certain  year,  at  the  end  of  a  cycle,  it  might  be  customary
to  watch  the  sky  in  order  to  mark  whether  the  king's  star
was  still  in  the  ascendant  or  near  its  setting.  The  appear-
ance of  a  meteor  on  such  a  night — of  a  star  precipitated  from
the  celestial  vault — might  prove  for  the  king  not  merely  a
symbol  but  a  sentence  of  death.  It  might  be  the  warrant
for  his  execution.

In  some  places  it  appears  that  the  people  could  not
trust  the  king  to  remain  in  full  bodily  and  mental  vigour  for
more  than  a  year  ;  hence  at  the  end  of  a  year's  reign  he  was
put  to  death,  and  a  new  king  appointed  to  reign  in  his  turn
a  year,  and  suffer  death  at  the  end  of  it.  At  least  this  is  the
conclusion  to  which  the  following  evidence  points.  Accord-
ing to  the  historian  Berosus,  who  as  a  Babylonian  priest
spoke  with  ample  knowledge,  there  was  annually  celebrated
in  Babylon  a  festival  called  the  Sacaea.  It  began  on  the
sixteenth  day  of  the  month  Lous,  and  lasted  for  five  days.
During  these  five  days  masters  and  servants  changed  places,
the  servants  giving  orders  and  the  masters  obeying  them,
A  prisoner  condemned  to  death  was  dressed  in  the  king's
robes,  seated  on  the  king's  throne,  allowed  to  issue  whatever
commands  he  pleased,  to  eat,  drink,  and  enjoy  himself,  and
to  lie  with  the  king's  concubines.  But  at  the  end  of  the
five  days  he  was  stripped  of  his  royal  robes,  scourged,  and
hanged  or  crucified.^      This  custom  might  perhaps  have  been

^  Athenaeus,    xiv.    p.    639  c ;    Dio       p.  76,  ed.  Dindorf).      Dio  Chrysostom
Chrysostom,  Orat.  iv.  p.  69  sq.  (vol.  i.       does  not  mention  his  authority,  but  it


Ill


TN  BABYLON


25


explained  as  merely  a  grim  jest  perpetrated  in  a  season  of
jollity  at  the  expense  of  an  unhappy  criminal.  But  one
circumstance — the  leave  given  to  the  mock  king  to  enjoy
the  king's  concubines — is  decisive  against  this  interpretation.
Considering  the  jealous  seclusion  of  an  oriental  despot's
harem  we  may  be  quite  certain  that  permission  to  invade  it
would  never  have  been  granted  by  the  despot,  least  of  all  to  a
condemned  criminal,  except  for  the  very  gravest  cause.  This
cause  could  hardly  be  other  than  that  the  condemned  man
was  about  to  die  in  the  king's  stead,  and  that  to  make  the
substitution  perfect  it  was  necessary  he  should  enjoy  the  full
rights  of  royalty  during  his  brief  reign.  There  is  nothing
surprising  in  this  substitution.  The  rule  that  the  king  must
be  put  to  death  either  on  the  appearance  of  any  symptom
of  bodily  decay  or  at  the  end  of  a  fixed  period  is  certainly  one
which,  sooner  or  later,  the  kings  would  seek  to  abolish  or
modify.  We  have  seen  that  in  Ethiopia,  Sofala,  and  Eyeo  the
rule  was  boldly  set  aside  by  enlightened  monarchs  ;  and  that
in  Calicut  the  old  custom  of  killing  the  king  at  the  end  of
twelve  years  was  changed  into  a  permission  granted  to  any
one  at  the  end  of  the  twelve  years'  period  to  attack  the
king,  and,  in  the  event  of  killing  him,  to  reign  in  his  stead  ;
though,  as  the  king  took  care  at  these  times  to  be  surrounded
by  his  guards,  the  permission  was  little  more  than  a  form.
Another  way  of  modifying  the  stern  old  rule  is  seen  in   the


was  probably  either  Berosus  or  Ctesias.
The  execution  of  the  mock  king  is  not
noticed  in  the  passage  of  Berosus  cited
by  Athenaeus,  probably  because  the
mention  of  it  was  not  germane  to
Athenaeus's  purpose,  which  was  simply
to  give  a  list  of  festivals  at  which  mas-
ters waited  on  their  servants.  That  the
i'bjydp-qs  was  put  to  death  is  further
shown  by  Macrobius,  Saf.  iii.  7.  6,
"  Animas  vero  sacratorum  hoDiinuni
qtios  t  zanas  Graeci  vacant,  dis  dehitas
aestimabant,^''  where  for  zanas  we  should
probably  read  fw7di'as  with  Liebrecht,
in  Philologus,  xxii.  710,  and  Bachofen,
Die  Sage  von  Tanaqnil,  p.  52,  note
16.  The  reading  zanas  is,  however,
defended  by  J.  Bernays  {Hermes,  ix.
(1875)  127  sq.),  who  suggests  that
Macrobius  may  have  misunderstood  the


meaning  of  the  Zanes  at  Olympia,  as
to  which  see  Pausanias,  v.  21.  2.  The
Babylonian  custom,  so  far  as  appears
from  our  authorities,  does  not  date
from  before  the  Persian  conquest  of
Babylon  ;  but  probably  it  was  much
older.  In  the  passage  of  Dio  Chry-
sostom  (KpiiJ^aaav  should  perhaps  be
translated  "  crucified  "  (or  "  impaled  ")
rather  than  "hanged";  at  least  the
former  seems  to  have  been  the  regular
sense  of  Kpe/j-avvvfiL  as  applied  to
executions.  See  Plutarch,  Caesar,  2.
But  while  crucifixion  was  a  Roman
mode  of  execution,  it  may  be  doubted
whether  it  was  also  an  Oriental  one.
Hanging  was  certainly  an  Oriental
punishment.  See  Esther  v.  14,  vii.  9
sq.  ;  Deuteronomy  xxi.  22  sq.  ;  Joshua
viii.  29,  X.  26.


26  TEMPORARY  KINGS  chap.

Babylonian  custom  just  described.  When  the  time  drew
near  for  the  king  to  be  put  to  death  (in  Babylon  this
appears  to  have  been  at  the  end  of  a  single  year's  reign)  he
abdicated  for  a  few  days,  during  which  a  temporary  king
reigned  and  suffered  in  his  stead.  At  first  the  temporary
king  may  have  been  an  innocent  person,  possibly  a  member
of  the  king's  own  family  ;  but  with  the  growth  of  civilisation
the  sacrifice  of  an  innocent  person  would  be  revolting  to  the
public  sentiment,  and  accordingly  a  condemned  criminal
would  be  invested  with  the  brief  and  fatal  sovereignty.  In
the  sequel  we  shall  find  other  examples  of  a  dying  criminal
representing  a  dying  god.  For  we  must  not  forget  that  the
king  is  slain  in  his  character  of  a  god,  his  death  and  resur-
rection, as  the  only  means  of  perpetuating  the  divine  life
unimpaired,  being  deemed  necessary  for  the  salvation  of  his
people  and  the  world.

The  conclusion  to  which  the  Babylonian  evidence  seems
to  point  will  hardly  appear  extravagant  or  improbable  when
we  learn  that  at  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century  there  is
still  a  kingdom  in  which  the  reign  and  the  life  of  the
sovereign  are  limited  to  a  single  day.  In  Ngoio,  a  province
of  the  ancient  kingdom  of  Congo  in  West  Africa,  the  rule
obtains  that  the  chief  who  assumes  the  cap  of  sovereignty
one  day  shall  be  put  to  death  on  the  next.  The  right  of
succession  lies  with  the  chief  of  the  Musurongo  ;  but  we
need  not  wonder  that  he  does  not  exercise  it,  and  that  the
throne  stands  vacant.  "  No  one  likes  to  lose  his  life  for  a
few  hours'  glory  on  the  Ngoio  throne."  ^

In  some  places  the  modified  form  of  the  old  custom
which  appears  to  have  prevailed  at  Babylon  has  been  further
softened  down.  The  king  still  abdicates  annually  for  a
short  time  and  his  place  is  filled  by  a  more  or  less  nominal
sovereign  ;  but  at  the  close  of  his  short  reign  the  latter  is
no  longer  killed,  though  sometimes  a  mock  execution  still
survives  as  a  memorial  of  the  time  when  he  was  actually
put  to  death.      To  take  examples.      In  the  month  of  Meac

1   R.  E.  Dennett,  Notes  o)i  the  Folk-  cular  custom,  and  informed  me  that  she

lore  of  the  FJort,  with  an  introduction  was  personally  acquainted  with  the  chief

by  Mary  H.  Kini^sley  (London,  1898),  who  possesses  but  declines  to  exercise

p.  xxxii.      Miss  Kingsley  in  conversa-  the  right  of  succession,
tion  called  my  attention   to  this  parti-


HI  IN  CAMBODIA  27

(February)  the  King  of  Cambodia  annually  abdicated  for
three  days.  During  this  time  he  performed  no  act  of
authority,  he  did  not  touch  the  seals,  he  did  not  even  receive
the  revenues  which  fell  due.  In  his  stead  there  reigned  a
temporary  king  called  Sdach  Meac,  that  is,  King  February.
The  office  of  temporary  king  was  hereditary  in  a  family
distantly  connected  with  the  royal  house,  the  sons  succeed-
ing the  fathers  and  the  younger  brothers  the  elder  brothers,
just  as  in  the  succession  to  the  real  sovereignty.  On  a
favourable  day  fixed  by  the  astrologers  the  temporary  king
was  conducted  by  the  mandarins  in  triumphal  procession.
He  rode  one  of  the  royal  elephants,  seated  in  the  royal
palanquin,  and  escorted  by  soldiers  who,  dressed  in
appropriate  costumes,  represented  the  neighbouring  peoples
of  Siam,  Annam,  Laos,  and  so  on.  In  place  of  the  golden
crown  he  wore  a  peaked  white  cap,  and  his  regalia,  instead
of  being  of  gold  encrusted  with  diamonds,  were  of  rough
wood.  After  paying  homage  to  the  real  king,  from  whom
he  received  the  sovereignty  for  three  days,  together  with  all
the  revenues  accruing  during  that  time  (though  this  last
custom  has  been  omitted  for  some  time),  he  moved  in
procession  round  the  palace  and  through  the  streets  of  the
capital.  On  the  third  day,  after  the  usual  procession,  the
temporary  king  gave  orders  that  the  elephants  should
trample  under  foot  the  "  mountain  of  rice,"  which  was  a
scaffold  of  bamboo  surrounded  by  sheaves  of  rice.  The
people  gathered  up  the  rice,  each  man  taking  home  a  little
with  him  to  secure  a  good  harvest.  Some  of  it  was  also
taken  to  the  king,  who  had  it  cooked  and  presented  to  the
monks.^

In  Siam  on  the  sixth  day  of  the  moon  in  the  sixth
month  (the  end  of  April)  a  temporary  king  is  appointed,
who  for  three  days  enjoys  the  royal  prerogatives,  the  real
king  remaining  shut  up  in  his  palace.  This  temporary  king
sends  his  numerous  satellites  in  all  directions  to  seize  and
confiscate  whatever  they  can  find  in  the  bazaar  and  open
shops  ;  even   the   ships   and   junks   which   arrive   in  harbour

^  E.  Aymonier,  Notice  sitr  le  Cam-  of  the  temporary  king's  family  with  the
bodge,  p.  61  ;  J.  Moura,  Le  Koyaume  du  royal  house,  see  Aymonier,  op.  eit.  p.
Ca/nbodge,  i.  327  S(j.    For  the  connection       36  sq.


28


TEMPORARY  KINGS


CHAP.


during  the  three  days  are  forfeited  to  him  and  must  be
redeemed.  He  goes  to  a  field  in  the  middle  of  the  city,
whither  they  bring  a  gilded  plough  drawn  by  gaily-decked
oxen.  After  the  plough  has  been  anointed  and  the  oxen
rubbed  with  incense,  the  mock  king  traces  nine  furrows  with
the  plough,  followed  by  aged  dames  of  the  palace  scattering
the  first  seed  of  the  season.  As  soon  as  the  nine  furrows
are  drawn,  the  crowd  of  spectators  rushes  in  and  scrambles
for  the  seed  which  has  just  been  sown,  believing  that,  mixed
with  the  seed-rice,  it  will  ensure  a  plentiful  crop.  Then  the
oxen  are  unyoked,  and  rice,  maize,  sesame,  sago,  bananas,
sugar-cane,  melons,  and  so  on,  are  set  before  them  ;  whatever
they  eat  first  will,  it  is  thought,  be  dear  in  the  year  following,
though  some  people  interpret  the  omen  in  the  opposite  sense.
During  this  time  the  temporary  king  stands  leaning  against
a  tree  with  his  right  foot  resting  on  his  left  knee.  From
standing  thus  on  one  foot  he  is  popularly  known  as  King
Hop  ;  but  his  official  title  is  Phaya  Phollathep,  "  Lord  of
the  Heavenly  Hosts."  ^  He  is  a  sort  of  Minister  of  Agri-
culture ;  all  disputes  about  fields,  rice,  and  so  forth,  are  referred
to  him.  There  is  moreover  another  ceremony  in  which  he
personates  the  king.  It  takes  place  in  the  second  month
(which  falls  in  the  cold  season)  and  lasts  three  days.  He  is
conducted  in  procession  to  an  open  place  opposite  the
Temple  of  the  Brahmans,  where  there  are  a  number  of
poles  dressed  like  May-poles,  upon  which  the  Brahmans
swing.  All  the  while  that  they  swing  and  dance,  the  Lord
of  the  Heavenly  Hosts  has  to  stand  on  one  foot  upon  a  seat
which  is  made  of  bricks  plastered  over,  covered  with  a  white
cloth,  and  hung  with  tapestry.  He  is  supported  by  a
wooden  frame  with  a  gilt  canopy,  and  two  Brahmans  stand
one  on   each   side  of   him.      The  dancing    Brahmans    carry


'  Pallegoix,  Destriplioii  dii  Royauinc
Thai  on  S/am,  i.  250 ;  Bastian,  B/e
Volker  dcs  dstlicheii  Asieii,  iii.  305-309,
526-528  ;  Turpin,  History  of  Siain,  in
Pinkerton's  Voyages  and  Travels,  i.\.
581  S(j.  Bowling  (Siain,  i.  158  sq.)
copies,  as  usual,  from  Pallegoix.  For  a
description  of  the  ceremony  as  observed
at  the  present  day,  see  E.  Young,  T/ie
Kingdom  of  the    Yellozv    Robe   (West-


minster, i8g8),  p.  210  sq.  The  repre-
sentative of  the  king  no  longer  enjoys
his  old  privilege  of  seizing  any  goods
that  are  exposed  for  sale  along  the  line
of  the  procession.  According  to  Mr.
Young,  the  ceremony  is  generally  held
about  the  middle  of  May,  and  no  one
is  supposed  to  plough  or  sow  till  it  is
over.


Ill  IN  SI  AM  29

buffalo  horns  with  which  they  draw  water  from  a  large
copper  caldron  and  sprinkle  it  on  the  spectators  ;  this  is
supposed  to  bring  good  luck,  causing  the  people  to  dwell  in
peace  and  quiet,  health  and  prosperity.  The  time  during
which  the  Lord  of  the  Heavenly  Hosts  has  to  stand  on  one
foot  is  about  three  hours.  This  is  thought  "  to  prove  the
dispositions  of  the  Devattas  and  spirits."  If  he  lets  his  foot
down  "  he  is  liable  to  forfeit  his  property  and  have  his  family
enslaved  by  the  king  ;  as  it  is  believed  to  be  a  bad  omen,
portending  destruction  to  the  state,  and  instability  to  the
throne.  But  if  he  stand  firm  he  is  believed  to  have  gained
a  victory  over  evil  spirits,  and  he  has  moreover  the  privilege,
ostensibly  at  least,  of  seizing  any  ship  which  may  enter  the
harbour  during  these  three  days,  and  taking  its  contents,  and
also  of  entering  any  open  shop  in  the  town  and  carrying
away  what  he  chooses."  ^

Such  were  the  duties  and  privileges  of  the  Siamese  King
Hop  some  forty  or  fifty  years  ago.  Under  the  reign  of  the
present  enlightened  monarch  this  quaint  personage  has  been
to  some  extent  both  shorn  of  the  glories  and  relieved  of  the
burden  of  his  office.  He  still  watches,  as  of  old,  the
Brahmans  rushing  through  the  air  in  a  swing  suspended
between  two  tall  masts,  each  some  ninety  feet  high  ;  but  he
is  allowed  to  sit  instead  of  stand,  and,  although  public
opinion  still  expects  him  to  keep  his  right  foot  on  his  left
knee  during  the  whole  of  the  ceremony,  he  would  incur  no
legal  penalty  were  he,  to  the  great  chagrin  of  the  people,  to
put  his  weary  foot  to  the  ground.  Other  signs,  too,  tell
of  the  invasion  of  the  East  by  the  ideas  and  civilisation  of
the  West.  The  thoroughfares  that  lead  to  the  scene  of  the
performance  are  blocked  with  carriages  ;  lamp-posts  and
telegraph  posts,  to  which  eager  spectators  cling  like
monkeys,  rise  above  the  dense  crowd  ;  and,  while  a  tatter-
demalion band  of  the  old  style,  in  gaudy  garb  of  vermilion
and  yellow,  bangs  and  tootles  away  on  drums  and  trumpets
of  an  antique  pattern,  the  procession  of  barefooted  soldiers
in  brilliant  uniforms  steps  briskly  along  to  the  lively  strains

1  Lieut. -Col.  James  Low,  "On  the  pore,  1847), p.  339;  Bastian,  ZJzV  Fc'7/rr
Laws  of  Muung  Thai  or  Siam,"y(7?/r-  des  dstlichen  Asien,  iii.  98,  314,  526
nal  of  the  Indian  Archipelago,  i.  (Singa-       sq.


30  TEMPORARY  KINGS  chai-.

of    a    modern    military    band    playing    "  Marching    through

G))  1
eorgia.

In  Upper  Egypt  on  the  first  day  of  the  solar  year  by
Coptic  reckoning,  that  is,  on  the  tenth  of  September,  when
the  Nile  has  generally  reached  its  highest  point,  the  regular
government  is  suspended  for  three  days  and  every  town
chooses  its  own  ruler.  This  temporary  lord  wears  a  sort  of
tall  fool's  cap  and  a  long  flaxen  beard,  and  is  enveloped  in  a
strange  mantle.  With  a  wand  of  office  in  his  hand  and
attended  by  men  disguised  as  scribes,  executioners,  and  so
forth,  he  proceeds  to  the  Governor's  house.  The  latter
allows  himself  to  be  deposed  ;  and  the  mock  king,  mounting
the  throne,  holds  a  tribunal,  to  the  decisions  of  which  even
the  governor  and  his  officials  must  bow.  After  three  days
the  mock  king  is  condemned  to  death  ;  the  envelope  or
shell  in  which  he  was  encased  is  committed  to  the  flames,
and  from  its  ashes  the  Fellah  creeps  forth."

Sometimes  the  temporary  king  occupies  the  throne,  not
annually,  but  once  for  all  at  the  beginning  of  each  reign.
Thus  in  the  kingdom  of  Jambi,  in  Sumatra,  it  is  the  custom
that  at  the  beginning  of  a  new  reign  a  man  of  the  people
should  occupy  the  throne  and  exercise  the  royal  prerogatives
for  a  single  day.  The  origin  of  the  custom  is  explained  by
a  tradition  that  there  were  once  five  royal  brothers,  the  four
elder  of  whom  all  declined  the  throne  on  the  ground  of
various  bodily  defects,  leaving  it  to  their  youngest  brother.
But  the  eldest  occupied  the  throne  for  one  day,  and  reserved
for  his  descendants  a  similar  privilege  at  the  beginning  of
every  reign.  Thus  the  office  of  temporary  king  is  hereditary
in  a  family  akin  to  the  royal  house.-'  In  Bilaspur  it  seems
to  be  the  custom,  after  the  death  of  a  Rajah,  for  a  Brahman
to  eat  rice  out  of  the  dead  Rajah's  hand,  and  then  to
occupy  the  throne  for  a  year.  At  the  end  of  the  year  the
Brahman     receives     presents    and     is    dismissed     from    the

1   E.    Young,    Tlie  Kingdom   of  the  ^  C.     B.     Klunzinger,     Bilder    aus

Yelloia  Hobe,  Y)\>.  212-21'j .     The  writer  Oberdgypten,     der    Wiiste      imd    dent

tells  us  that  though    the    Minister  for  Rothen  Meere^  p.   i8o  sq.
Agriculture  still  officiates  at  the  Plough-
ing Festival,   he  no  longer  presides  at  •*  J-  W.  Boers,    "  Oud   volksgebruik

the     Swinging     Festival;     a    different  in  het  Rijk  van  Jambi,"  Ty/i^/^r/^r?/'?  j't7(?;'

nobleman     is     chosen    every    year    to  Neerlands  Indie,    1840,   dl.    i.    p.   372

superintend  the  latter.  sqq.


Ill  TEMPORARY  KINGS  31

territory,  being  forbidden  apparently  to  return.  "  The  idea
seems  to  be  that  the  spirit  of  the  Raja  enters  into  the
Brahnnan  who  eats  the  khir  (rice  and  milk)  out  of  his  hand
when  he  is  dead,  as  the  Brahman  is  apparently  carefully
watched  during  the  whole  year,  and  not  allowed  to  go
away."  The  same  or  a  similar  custom  is  believed  to  obtain
among-  the  hill  states  about  Kangra.^  At  the  installation
of  a  prince  of  Carinthia  a  peasant,  in  whose  family  the
office  was  hereditary,  ascended  a  marble  stone  which  stood
surrounded  by  meadows  in  a  spacious  valley  ;  on  his  right
stood  a  black  mother-cow,  on  his  left  a  lean  ugly  mare.  A
rustic  crowd  gathered  about  him.  Then  the  future  prince,
dressed  as  a  peasant  and  carrying  a  shepherd's  staff,  drew
near,  attended  by  courtiers  and  magistrates.  On  perceiving
him  the  peasant  called  out,  "  Who  is  this  whom  I  see
coming  so  proudly  along  }  "  The  people  answered,  "  The
prince  of  the  land."  The  peasant  was  then  prevailed  on  to
surrender  the  marble  seat  to  the  prince  on  condition  of
receiving  sixty  pence,  the  cow  and  mare,  and  exemption
from  taxes.  But  before  yielding  his  place  he  gave  the
prince  a  light  blow  on  the  cheek.^

Some  points  about  these  temporary  kings  deserve  to
be  specially  noticed  before  we  pass  to  the  next  branch  of
the  evidence.  In  the  first  place,  the  Cambodian  and
Siamese  examples  show  clearly  that  it  is  especially  the
divine  or  magical  functions  of  the  king  which  are  trans-
ferred to  his  temporary  substitute.  This  appears  from  the
4  belief  that  by  keeping  up  his  foot  the  temporary  king  of
Siam  gained  a  victory  over  the  evil  spirits  ;  whereas  by
letting  it  down  he  imperilled  the  existence  of  the  state.
Again,  the  Cambodian  ceremony  of  trampling  down  the
"  mountain  of  rice,"  and  the  Siamese  ceremony  of  opening
the  ploughing  and  sowing,  are  charms  to  produce  a  plentiful
harvest,  as  appears  from  the  belief  that  those  who  carry
home  some  of  the  trampled  rice  or  of  the  seed  sown  will
thereby  secure   a  good   crop.      Moreover,  when  the  Siamese

^  Panjab  Notes  and  Queries,  i.  p.  86,  leges,  et  ritus  oinniuni  gentiuDi  (Lyons,
§  674.  1541)1  P-    244   sq.  ;  Grimm,    Deutsche

Rechtsalterthiimer,  p.  253.     According

2  Aeneas  Sylvius,  Opera  (Bale,  toGrimm,  thecowand  mare  stood  beside
1 571),  p.   409  sq.  ;  J.  Boemus,  Mores,       the  prince,  not  the  peasant.


32


TEMPORAR  V  R'INGS


CHAP.


representative  of  the  king  is  guiding  the  plough,  the  people
watch  him  anxiously,  not  to  see  whether  he  drives  a  straight
furrow,  but  to  mark  the  exact  point  on  his  leg  to  which  the
skirt  of  his  silken  robe  reaches  ;  for  on  that  is  supposed  to
hang  the  state  of  the  weather  and  the  crops  during  the
ensuing  season.  If  the  Lord  of  the  Heavenly  Hosts  hitches
up  his  garment  above  his  knee,  the  weather  will  be  wet  and
the  heavy  rains  will  spoil  the  harvest.  If  he  lets  it  trail
to  his  ankle  a  drought  will  be  the  consequence.  But  fine
weather  and  heavy  crops  will  follow  if  the  hem  of  his  robe
hangs  exactly  half-way  down  the  calf  of  his  leg.^  So  closely
is  the  course  of  nature,  and  with  it  the  weal  or  woe  of  the
people,  dependent  on  the  minutest  act  or  gesture  of  the
king's  representative.  But  the  task  of  making  the  crops
grow,  thus  deputed  to  the  temporary  kings,  is  one  of  the
magical  functions  regularly  supposed  to  be  discharged  by
kings  in  primitive  society.  The  rule  that  the  mock  king
must  stand  on  one  foot  upon  a  raised  seat  in  the  rice-field
was  perhaps  originally  meant  as  a  charm  to  make  the  crop
grow  high  ;  at  least  this  was  the  object  of  a  similar
ceremony  observed  by  the  old  Prussians.  The  tallest  girl,
standing  on  one  foot  upon  a  seat,  with  her  lap  full  of  cakes,
a  cup  of  brandy  in  her  right  hand  and  a  piece  of  elm-bark
or  linden-bark  in  her  left,  prayed  to  the  god  Waizganthos
that  the  flax  might  grow  as  high  as  she  was  standing.
Then,  after  draining  the  cup,  she  had  it  refilled,  and
poured  the  brandy  on  the  ground  as  an  offering  to  Waiz-
ganthos, and  threw  down  the  cakes  for  his  attendant  sprites.
If  she  remained  steady  on  one  foot  throughout  the  cere-
mony, it  was  an  omen  that  the  flax  crop  would  be  good  ;
but  if  she  let  her  foot  down,  it  was  feared  that  the  crop
might  fail."'      The  same  significance  perhaps   attaches  to  the


1  E.    Young,    The  Kingdom    of  the
Yellow  Robe,  p.  211.

^  Lasicius,  "  De  diis  Samagitarum
caeterorumque  Sarmatarum,"  in  lies-
piiblica  sive  Statics  Regni  Poloiiiae,
Litiianiae,  Prztssiae,  Livoniae,  etc.
(Elzevir,  1627),  p.  306  sq.  ;  id.,  edited
by  W.  Mannhardt  in  Alagazin  heratis-
gegeben  von  der  Lettisch-Literdrischen


Gesellschaft,  xiv.  91  sq.;  J.  G.  Kohl,
Die  deutsch-riissisihen  Ostseeprovinzen,
ii.  27.  There  are,  however,  other
occasions  when  superstition  requires  a
person  to  stand  on  one  foot.  At  Toku-
toku,  in  Fiji,  the  grave-digger  who
turns  the  first  sod  has  to  stand  on  one
leg,  leaning  on  his  digging  stick  (Rev.
Lorimer  Fison,  in  a  letter  to  the  author,
dated  August  26th,  1898).


Ill  TEMPORARY  KINGS  33

swinging  of  the  Brahn:ians,  which  the  Lord  of  the  Heavenly
Hosts  had  formerly  to  witness  standing  on  one  foot.  On
the  principles  of  sympathetic  or  imitative  magic  it  might
be  thought  that  the  higher  the  priests  swing  the  higher  will
grow  the  rice.  For  the  ceremony  is  described  as  a  harvest
festival/  and  swinging  is  practised  by  the  Letts  of  Russia
with  the  avowed  intention  of  influencing  the  growth  of  the
crops.  In  the  spring  and  early  summer,  between  Easter
and  St.  John's  Day  (the  summer  solstice),  every  Lettish
peasant  is  said  to  devote  his  leisure  hours  to  swinging
diligently  ;  for  the  higher  he  rises  in  the  air  the  higher  will
his  flax  grow  that  season."^  The  gilded  plough  with  which
the  Siamese  mock  king  opens  the  ploughing  may  be  com-
pared with  the  bronze  ploughs  which  the  Etruscans  em-
ployed at  the  ceremony  of  founding  cities  ;  ^  in  both  cases
the  use  of  iron  was  probably  forbidden  on  superstitious
grounds.'^

Another  point  to  notice  about  these  temporary  kings  is
that  in  two  places  (Cambodia  and  Jambi)  they  come  of  a
stock  which  is  believed  to  be  akin  to  the  royal  family.  If
the  view  here  taken  of  the  origin  of  these  temporary
kingships  is  correct,  we  can  easily  understand  why  the
king's  substitute  should  sometimes  be  of  the  same  race  as
the  king.  When  the  king  first  succeeded  in  getting  the
life  of  another  accepted  as  a  sacrifice  instead  of  his  own,  he
would  have  to  show  that  the  death  of  that  other  would
serve  the  purpose  quite  as  well  as  his  own  would  have  done.
Now  it  was  as  a  god  that  the  king  had  to  die  ;  therefore
the  substitute  who  died  for  him  had  to  be  invested,  at  least
for  the  occasion,  with  the  divine  attributes  of  the  king.
This,  as  we  have  just  seen,  was  certainly  the  case  with  the
temporary  kings  of  Siam  and  Cambodia  ;  they  were  in-
vested with  the  supernatural  functions,  which  in  an  earlier
stage  of  society  were  the  special  attributes  of  the  king.
But  no  one  could  so  well   represent   the   king   in    his   divine

1   E.    Young,    The  KingJom    of  the  For  other  charms    to   make   the  crops

Yello-(V  Robe,  p.  212.  grow  tall  by  leaping,  letting    the  hair

^  J.  G.  Kohl,  Die  deutscli-russischeii  hang   loose,   and    so   forth,   see  above,

Ostseeprovinzen,  ii.  25.     With  regard  to  vol.  i.  p.  35  sqq.
swinging  as  a  magical  or  religious   rite  ^  Macrobius,  Satiii-u.  v.   19.  13.

see  Note  A  at  the  end  of  the  volume.  *  See  above,  vol.  i.  p.  344  sqq.

VOL.  II  D


34  KING  ATM  A  MAS  chap.

character  as  his  son,  who  might  be  supposed  to  share  the
divine  afflatus  of  his  father.  No  one,  therefore,  could  so
appropriately  die  for  the  king  and,  through  him,  for  the
whole  people,  as  the  king's  son.

In  ancient  Greece  there  seems  to  have  been  at  least
one  kingly  house  of  great  antiquity  of  which  the  eldest  sons
were  always  liable  to  be  sacrificed  in  room  of  their  royal
sires.  When  Xerxes  was  marching  through  Thessaly  at
the  head  of  his  mighty  host  to  attack  the  Spartans  at
Thermopylae,  he  came  to  the  town  of  Alus.  Here  he  was
shown  the  sanctuary  of  Laphystian  Zeus,  about  which  his
guides  told  him  a  strange  tale.  It  ran  somewhat  as  follows.
Once  upon  a  time  the  king  of  the  country,  by  name
Athamas,  married  a  wife  Nephele,  and  had  by  her  a  son
called  Phrixus  and  a  daughter  named  Helle.  Afterwards
he  took  to  himself  a  second  wife  called  Ino,  by  whom  he
had  two  sons,  Learchus  and  Melicertes.  But  his  second
wife  was  jealous  of  her  step-children,  Phrixus  and  Helle,  and
plotted  their  death.  She  went  about  very  cunningly  to
compass  her  bad  end.  First  of  all  she  persuaded  the  women
of  the  country  to  roast  the  seed  corn  secretly  before  it  was
committed  to  the  ground.  So  next  year  no  crops  came
up  and  the  people  died  of  famine.  Then  the  king  sent
messengers  to  the  oracle  at  Delphi  to  inquire  the  cause
of  the  dearth.  But  the  wicked  step -mother  bribed  the
messenger  to  give  out  as  the  answer  of  the  god  that  the
dearth  would  never  cease  till  the  children  of  Athamas
by  his  first  wife  had  been  sacrificed  to  Zeus.  When
Athamas  heard  that,  he  sent  for  the  children,  who  were
with  the  sheep.  But  a  ram  with  a  fleece  of  gold  opened  his
lips,  and  speaking  with  the  voice  of  a  man  warned  the
children  of  their  danger.  So  they  mounted  the  ram  and
fled  with  him  over  land  and  sea.  As  they  flew  over  the
sea,  the  girl  slipped  from  the  animal's  back,  and  falling  into
water  was  drowned.  But  her  brother  Phrixus  was  brought
safe  to  the  land  of  Colchis,  where  reigned  a  child  of  the
Sun.  Phrixus  married  the  king's  daughter,  and  she  bore
him  a  son  Cytisorus.  And  there  he  sacrificed  the  ram  with
the  golden  fleece  to  Zeus  the  God  of  Flight  ;  but  some  will
have  it  that   he   sacrificed   the   animal  to   Laphystian    Zeus.


Ill  KING  ATHAMAS  .       35

The  golden  fleece  itself  he  gave  to  his  wife's  father,  who
nailed  it  to  an  oak  tree,  guarded  by  a  sleepless  dragon  in
a  sacred  grove  of  Ares.  Meanwhile  at  home  an  oracle  had
commanded  that  King  Athamas  himself  should  be  sacrificed
as  an  expiatory  ofiTering  for  the  whole  country.  So  the
people  decked  him  with  garlands  like  a  victim  and  led  him
to  the  altar,  where  they  were  just  about  to  sacrifice  him
when  he  was  rescued  either  by  his  grandson  Cytisorus,  who
arrived  in  the  nick  of  time  from  Colchis,  or  by  Hercules,
who  brought  tidings  that  the  king's  son  Phrixus  was  yet
alive.  Thus  Athamas  was  saved,  but  afterwards  he  went
mad,  and  mistaking  his  son  Learchus  for  a  wild  beast  shot
him  dead.  Next  he  attempted  the  life  of  his  remaining  son
Melicertes,  but  the  child  was  rescued  by  his  mother  Ino,
who  ran  and  threw  herself  and  him  from  a  high  rock  into
the  sea.  Mother  and  son  were  changed  into  marine
divinities,  and  the  son  received  special  homage  in  the  isle
of  Tenedos,  where  babes  were  sacrificed  to  him.  Thus
bereft  of  wife  and  children  the  unhappy  Athamas  quitted  his
country,  and  on  inquiring  of  the  oracle  where  he  should
dwell  was  told  to  take  up  his  abode  wherever  he  should  be
entertained  by  wild  beasts.  He  fell  in  with  a  pack  of
wolves  devouring  sheep,  and  when  they  saw  him  they  fled
and  left  him  the  bleeding  remnants  of  their  prey.  In  this
way  the  oracle  was  fulfilled.  But  because  King  Athamas
had  not  been  sacrificed  as  a  sin-offering  for  the  whole
country,  it  was  divinely  decreed  that  the  eldest  male  scion
of  his  family  in  each  generation  should  be  sacrificed  without
fail,  if  ever  he  set  foot  in  the  town-hall,  where  the  offerings
were  made  to  Laphystian  Zeus  by  one  of  the  house  of
Athamas.  Many  of  the  family,  Xerxes  was  informed,  had
fled  to  foreign  lands  to  escape  this  doom  ;  but  some  of  them
had  returned  long  afterwards,  and  being  caught  by  the
sentinels  in  the  act  of  entering  the  town-hall  were  wreathed
as  victims,  led    forth    in    procession,  and    sacrificed.^      These

'    Herodotus,  vii.  197  ;  Apollodorus,  Odyssey,  v.  339,  p.  1543  ;  Pausanias,  i.

i.  9.  1-3;  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Clouds,  44.  7,  ix.  34.  7  ;   Zenobius,  iv.  38  ;  Pki-

257;    Tzetzes,    Schol.    on    Lycophron,  larch, -De SuJ>£rsl/lio/!e,^;'ilyginus,Fal'.

21,  229;  Schol.  on  Apollonius  Rhodius,  I -5;  id.,  Astro7ioinica,  ii.  20;  Servius,

Argonautica,    ii.    653  ;    Eustathius,   on  on   Virgil,  Aen.  v.  241.      The  story  is

Homer,  Iliad,  vii.  86,  p.   667  ;  id.,  on  told    or    alluded    to    by    these   writers


36  OLEAE  AND  PSOLOEIS  chap.

instances  appear  to  have  been  notorious,  if  not  frequent  ;
for  the  writer  of  a  dialogue  attributed  to  Plato,  after  speaking
of  the  immolation  of  human  victims  by  the  Carthaginians,
adds  that  such  practices  were  not  unknown  among  the
Greeks,  and  he  refers  with  horror  to  the  sacrifices  offered  on
Mount  Lycaeus  and  by  the  descendants  of  Athamas.^

The  suspicion  that  this  barbarous  custom  by  no  means
fell  into  disuse  even  in  later  days  is  strengthened  by  a  case
of  human  sacrifice  which  occurred  in  Plutarch's  time  at
Orchomenus,  a  very  ancient  city  of  Boeotia,  distant  only  a
few  miles  across  the  plain  from  the  historian's  birthplace.
Here  dwelt  a  family  of  which  the  men  went  by  the  name  of
Psoloeis  or  "  sooty,"  and  the  women  by  the  name  of  Oleae
or  "  destructive."  Every  year  at  the  festival  of  the  Agrionia
the  priest  of  Dionysus  pursued  these  women  with  a  drawn
sword,  and  if  he  overtook  one  of  them  he  had  the  right  to
slay  her.  In  Plutarch's  lifetime  the  right  was  actually
exercised  by  a  priest  Zoilus.  Now  the  family  thus  liable
to  furnish  at  least  one  human  victim  every  year  was  of
royal  descent,  for  they  traced  their  lineage  to  Minyas,  the
fam®us  old  king  of  Orchomenus,  the  monarch  of  fabulous
wealth,  whose  stately  treasury,  as  it  is  called,  still  stands  in
ruins  at  the  point  where  the  long  rocky  hill  of  Orchomenus
melts  into  the  vast  level  expanse  of  the  Copaic  plain.
Tradition  ran  that  the  king's  three  daughters  long  despised
the  other  women  of  the  country  for  yielding  to  the  Bacchic
frenzy,  and  sat  at  home  in  the  king's  house  scornfully  plying
the  distaff  and  the  loom,  while  the  rest,  wreathed  with
flowers,  their  dishevelled  locks  streaming  to  the  wind,  roamed
in  ecstasy  the  barren  mountains  that  rise  above  Orchomenus,
making  the  solitudes  of  the  hills  to  echo  to  the  wild  music
of  cymbals  and  tambourines.  But  in  time  the  divine  fury
infected  even  the  royal  damsels  in  their  quiet  chamber  ;
they  were  seized  with  a  fierce  longing  to   partake   of  human

with    some    variations    of    detail.      In  wlien  the  crops  were  perishing  (Schol.

piecing  their  accounts  together  I  iiave  on    Pindar,    Pyth.   iv.    288).      On    the

chosen   the   features    which   seemed   to  whole    subject     see     K.     O.     Muller,

be    the    most    archaic.      According    to  Otrhometttis  und  die  Mittyer,^  p^.  156,

Pherecydes,  one  of  the    oldest    writers  171.

on    Greek    legendary   history,    Phrixus

offered    himself  as   a  voluntary   victim  '    Plato,  Minos,  p.  315  c.


Ill  ROYAL  CHILDREN  SACRIFICED  37

flesh,  and  cast  lots  among  themselves  which  should  give  up
her  child  to  furnish  a  cannibal  feast.  The  lot  fell  on
Leucippe,  and  she  surrendered  her  son  Hippasus,  who  was
torn  limb  from  limb  by  the  three.  From  these  misguided
women  sprang  the  Oleae  and  the  Psoloeis,  of  whom  the
men  were  said  to  be  so  called  because  they  wore  sad-
coloured  raiment  in  token  of  their  mourning  and  grief.^

Now  this  practice  of  taking  human  victims  from  a
family  of  royal  descent  at  Orchomenus  is  all  the  more
significant  because  Athamas  himself  is  said  to  have
reigned  in  the  land  of  Orchomenus  even  before  the  time  of
Minyas,  and  because  over  against  the  city  there  rises
Mount  Laphystius,  on  which,  as  at  Alus  in  Thessaly,  there
was  a  sanctuary  of  Laphystian  Zeus,  where,  according  to
tradition,  Athamas  purposed  to  sacrifice  his  two  children
Phrixus  and  Helle.^  On  the  whole,  comparing  the  tradi-
tions about  Athamas  with  the  custom  that  obtained  with
regard  to  his  descendants  in  historical  times,  we  may  fairly
infer  that  in  Thessaly  and  probably  in  Boeotia  there
reigned  of  old  a  dynasty  of  which  the  kings  were  liable
to  be  sacrificed  for  the  good  of  the  country  to  the  god
called  Laphystian  Zeus,  but  that  they  contrived  to  shift  the
fatal  responsibility  to  their  offspring,  of  whom  the  eldest
son  was  regularly  destined  to  the  altar.  As  time  went
on,  the  cruel  custom  was  so  far  mitigated  that  a  ram
was  accepted  as  a  vicarious  sacrifice  in  room  of  the  royal
victim,  provided  always  that  the  prince  abstained  from
setting  foot  in  the  town-hall  where  the  sacrifices  were  offered
to   Laphystian    Zeus   by    one    of    his    kinsmen.^      But   if  he

1   Plutarch,      Qtiacst.      Graec.      38  ;  enter    the    town-hall    and    sacrifice    to

Antoninus  Liberalis,    Transfo>-//i.    10;  Laphystian  Zeus.    K.  O.  Miiller  sees  in

Ovid,  Metai?t.  iv.  i  sqq.  this  custom  a  mitigation  of  the  ancient

'•^   Pausanias,    ix.    34.  5  sqq.  ;  Apol-  rule — instead  of  being  themselves  sacri-

lonius   Rhodius,   Argoiiaii/ica,   iii.   265  ficed,   the  scions  of  royalty  were  now

sq.;  Hellanicus,  cited  by  the  Scholiast  permitted  to  offer  sacrifice  (Orchomenus

on  Apollonius, /.c.     Apollodorus  speaks  imd  die  Aliiiyer,'^  p.    IS^)-      But  this

of  Athamas  as  reigning  over   Boeotia  need  not  have  been  so.    The  obligation

{Bibliotheca,\.  ().  l);  Tzetzes  calls  him  to  serve  as  victims  in  certain  circum-

king  of  Thebes   {Schol.  on  Lycophron,  stances  lay  only  on  the  eldest  male  of

21).  each    generation    in    the    direct    line  ;

3  The   old   Scholiast  on    Apollonius  the  sacrificers   may  have  been  younger

Rhodius   [Argon,  ii.  653)  tells  us  that  brothers   or   more    remote  relations    of

down  to  his  time  it  was  customary  for  the     destined     victims.        It     may     be

one  of  the  descendants  of  Athamas  to  observed  that  in  a  dynasty  of  which  the


38  ATHAMAS  AND  SALMONEUS  chap.

were  rash  enough  to  enter  the  place  of  doom,  to  thrust
himself  wilfully,  as  it  were,  on  the  notice  of  the  god  who
had  good-naturedly  winked  at  the  substitution  of  a  ram,
the  ancient  obligation  which  had  been  suffered  to  lie  in
abeyance  recovered  all  its  force,  and  there  was  no  help  for  it
but  he  must  die.  The  tradition  which  associated  the
sacrifice  of  the  king  or  his  children  with  a  great  dearth
points  clearly  to  the  belief,  so  common  among  primitive
folk,  that  the  king  is  responsible  for  the  weather  and  the
crops,  and  that  he  may  justly  pay  with  his  life  for  the  in-
clemency of  the  one  or  the  failure  of  the  other.  Athamas  and
his  line,  in  short,  appear  to  have  united  divine  or  magical
with  royal  functions  ;  and  this  view  is  strongly  supported
by  the  claims  to  divinity  which  Salmoneus,  the  brother  of
Athamas,  is  said  to  have  set  up.  We  have  seen  that  this
presumptuous  mortal  professed  to  be  no  other  than  Zeus
himself,  and  to  wield  the  thunder  and  lightning,  of  which  he
made  a  trumpery  imitation  by  the  help  of  tinkling  kettles
and  blazing  torches.^  If  we  may  judge  from  analogy,  his
mock  thunder  and  lightning  were  no  mere  scenic  exhibition
designed  to  deceive  and  impress  the  beholders  ;  they  were
enchantments  practised  by  the  royal  magician  for  the
purpose  of  bringing  about  the  celestial  phenomena  which
they  feebly  mimicked.^

Among  the  Semites  of  Western  Asia  the  king,,  in  a  time

eldest  males  were  regularly  sacrificed,  substituted  as  victims  instead  of  boys

the  kings,  if  they  were  not  themselves  in    the  sacrifices   offered    to    Dionysus

the    victims,    must   always    have    been  (Pausanias,  ix.  8.  2).      Once   when  an

younger  sons.  oracle   commanded    that  a  girl  should

,    e  1    ■  be    sacrificed    to    Munychian    Artemis

^   See  vol.  1.  p.   11^  Sii.  .         .  ,  r      ■

in  order  to  stay  a  plague  or  lamme,  a

-  I    have    followed    K.    O.    Miiller  goat  dressed  up  as  a  girl  was  sacrificed

(Orchoviejius  iiud  die  Miiiycj;'' 'pY>-  i(iO,  instead    (F.ustathius   on    Homtr,  Iliad,

166  S(].)   in  regarding   the   ram   which  ii.    732,   p.    331  ;  Apostolius,   vii.   10  ;

saved  Phrixus  as  a  mythical  expression  Paroeniioi^r.     Gracci,    ed.     Leutsch    et

foi  the  substitution  of  a  ram  for  a  human  Schneidewin,    ii.     402;     Suidas,    s.v.

victim.       He    points    out    that    a    ram  "E^/3apos).       At    Salamis    in    Cyprus  a

was  the   proper    victim   to   sacrifice  to  man  was  annually  sacrificeil  to  Aphro-

I'rophonius  (Pausanias,  ix.  39.  6),  whose  dite  and   afterwards    to  Diomede,  but

very  ancient  worship  was   practised  at  in    later   times   an    ox  was  substituted

Lebadea     not    far    ("rom    Oichomenus.  (Porphyry,     De    ahslinoitia,     ii.     54).

The  principle  of  vicarious  sacrifices  was  At   Laodicea  in   Syria  a  deer  took  the

familiar   enough   to   the   Greeks,  as  K.  place  of  a  maiden  as  the  victim   yearly

O.    Miiller   does   not    fail   to    indicate.  offered   to  Athena  (Porphyry,    op.   cit.

At    Potniae,  near   Thebes,   goats   were  ii.  56).


Ill  SACRIFICE  OF  CHILDREN  39

of  national  danger,  sometimes  gave  his  own  son  to  die  as  a
sacrifice  for  the  people.  Thus  Philo  of  Byblus,  in  his  work
on  the  Jews,  says  :  "  It  was  an  ancient  custom  in  a  crisis  of
great  danger  that  the  ruler  of  a  city  or  nation  should  give
his  beloved  son  to  die  for  the  whole  people,  as  a  ransom
offered  to  the  avenging  demons  ;  and  the  children  thus
offered  were  slain  with  mystic  rites.  So  Cronus,  whom  the
Phoenicians  call  Israel,  being  king  of  the  land  and  having
an  only-begotten  son  called  Jeoud  (for  in  the  Phoenician
tongue  Jeoud  signifies  '  only-begotten  '),  dressed  him  in  royal
robes  and  sacrificed  him  upon  an  altar  in  a  time  of  war,
when  the  country  was  in  great  danger  from  the  enemy."  ^
When  the  king  of  Moab  was  besieged  by  the  Israelites  and
hard  beset,  he  took  his  eldest  son,  who  should  have  reigned
in  his  stead,  and  offered  him  for  a  burnt  offering  on  the
wall.2

But  amongst  the  Semites  the  practice  of  sacrificing  their
children  was  not  confined  to  kings.  In  times  of  great
calamity,  such  as  pestilence,  drought,  or  defeat  in  war,  the
Phoenicians  used  to  sacrifice  one  of  their  dearest  to  Baal.
"  Phoenician  history,"  says  an  ancient  writer,  "  is  full  of  such
sacrifices."  ^  The  writer  of  a  dialogue  ascribed  to  Plato
observes  that  the  Carthaginians  immolated  human  beings  as
if  it  were  right  and  lawful  to  do  so,  and  some  of  them,  he
adds,  even  sacrificed  their  own  sons  to  Baal.^  When  Gelo,
tyrant  of  Syracuse,  defeated  the  Carthaginians  in  the  great
battle  of  Himera  he  required  as  a  condition  of  peace  that
they  should  sacrifice  their  children  to  Baal  no  longer.^  But
the  barbarous  custom  was  too  inveterate  and  too  agreeable
to  Semitic  modes  of  thought  to  be  so  easily  eradicated,  and
the  humane  stipulation  of  the  Greek  despot  probably  remained
a  dead  letter.  At  all  events  the  history  of  this  remarkable
people,  who  combined  in  so  high  a  degree  the  spirit  of  com-
mercial enterprise  with  a  blind  attachment  to  a  stern  and
gloomy  religion,  is  stained  in  later  times  with  instances  of
the  same  cruel  superstition.      When  the  Carthaginians  were

1  Philo  of  Byblus,  quoted  by  Euse-  *   Plato,  Aliiios,  p.  315  C.
bins,  Praepar.  Evang.  i.   10.  29  sq.

2  2  Kings  iii.  27.  ^   Plutarch,    Regiim  et    imperatOTum
^  Porphyry,  De  ahstinentia,  ii.  56.          apophtliegtnata,  Geloti.  /.


40  SACRIFICE  OF  CHILDREN  chap.

defeated  and  besieged  by  Agathocles,  they  ascribed  their
disasters  to  the  wrath  of  Baal  ;  for  whereas  in  former  times
they  had  been  wont  to  sacrifice  to  him  their  own  offspring,
they  had  latterly  fallen  into  the  habit  of  buying  children  and
rearing  them  to  be  victims.  So,  to  appease  the  angry  god,
two  hundred  children  of  the  noblest  families  were  picked  out
for  sacrifice,  and  the  tale  of  victims  was  swelled  by  not  less
than  three  hundred  more  who  volunteered  to  die  for  the
fatherland.  They  were  sacrificed  by  being  placed,  one  by
one,  on  the  sloping  hands  of  the  brazen  image,  from  which
they  rolled  into  a  pit  of  fire.^  Childless  people  among
the  Carthaginians  bought  children  from  poor  parents  and
slaughtered  them,  says  Plutarch,  as  if  they  were  lambs  or
chickens  ;  and  the  mother  had  to  stand  by  and  see  it  done
without  a  tear  or  a  groan,  for  if  she  wept  or  moaned  she
lost  all  the  credit  and  the  child  was  sacrificed  none  the  less.
But  all  the  place  in  front  of  the  image  was  filled  with  a
tumultuous  music  of  fifes  and  drums  to  drown  the  shrieks
of  the  victims.^  Infants  were  publicly  sacrificed  by  the
Carthaginians  down  to  the  proconsulate  of  Tiberius,  who
crucified  the  priests  on  the  trees  beside  their  temples.
Yet  the  practice  still  went  on  secretly  in  the  lifetime  of
Tertullian.^

Among  the  Canaanites  or  aboriginal  inhabitants  of
Palestine,  whom  the  invading  Israelites  conquered  but  did
not  exterminate,  the  grisly  custom  of  burning  their  children
in  honour  of  Baal  or  Moloch  seems  to  have  been  regularly
practised.*  To  the  best  representatives  of  the  Hebrew
people,  the  authors  of  their  noble  literature,  such  rites  were
abhorrent,  and  they  warned  their  fellow-countrymen  against
participating  in  them.  "  When  thou  art  come  into  the  land
which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee,  thou  shalt  not  learn  to
do  after  the  abominations  of  those  nations.  There  shall  not
be  found  with  thee  any  one  that  maketh  his  son  or  his
daughter  to  pass  through  the  fire,  one  that  useth  divination,

^   Uiodorus,  xx.   14.  which  he  hateth,  have  they  done  unto

2  Plutarch,  De  siiperstitionc,  13.               their    gods;    for   even    their   sons  and

3  Tertullian,  Apolo^eticus  6.  Com-       '^^^f,  daughters  do  they  burn  in  the  fire
pare  Justin,  xviii.  6.   12.  '°  '^^"'  f?^'^'  ,   I>euteronomy  xn.    31.

Here  and  m  what   follows   1  (juote  the
^    "  Every  abomination  to  the  Lord,        Revised  English  Version.


Ill  AMONG  THE  SEMITES  41

one  that  practiseth  augury,  or  an  enchanter,  or  a  sorcerer,  or
a  charmer,  or  a  consulter  with  a  famihar  spirit,  or  a  wizard,
or  a  necromancer.  For  whosoever  doeth  these  things  is  an
abomination  unto  the  Lord  :  and  because  of  these  abomina-
tions the  Lord  thy  God  doth  drive  them  out  from  before
thee."  ^  Again  we  read  :  "  And  thou  shalt  not  give  any  of
thy  seed  to  pass  through  the  fire  to  Molech."  -  Whatever
effect  these  warnings  may  have  had  in  the  earher  days  of
IsraeHtish  history,  there  is  abundant  evidence  that  in  later
times  the  Hebrews  lapsed,  or  rather  perhaps  relapsed,  into
that  congenial  mire  of  superstition  from  which  the  higher
spirits  of  the  nation  were  ever  struggling — too  often  in  vain —
to  rescue  them.  The  Psalmist  laments  that  his  erring  country-
men "  mingled  themselves  with  the  nations,  and  learned  their
works  :  and  they  served  their  idols  ;  which  became  a  snare
unto  them  :  yea,  they  sacrificed  their  sons  and  their  daughters
unto  demons,  and  shed  innocent  blood,  even  the  blood  of
their  sons  and  of  their  daughters,  whom  they  sacrificed  unto
the  idols  of  Canaan  ;  and  the  land  was  polluted  with  blood." ^
When  the  Hebrew  annalist  has  recorded  how  Shalmaneser,
king  of  Assyria,  besieged  Samaria  for  three  years  and  took
it  and  carried  Israel  away  into  captivity,  he  explains  that
this  was  a  divine  punishment  inflicted  on  his  people  for
having  fallen  in  with  the  evil  ways  of  the  Canaanites.  They
had  built  high  places  in  all  their  cities,  and  set  up  pillars  and
sacred  poles  {asherivi)  upon  every  high  hill  and  under  every
green  tree  ;  and  there  they  burnt  incense  after  the  manner
of  the  heathen.  "  And  they  forsook  all  the  commandments
of  the  Lord  their  God,  and  made  them  molten  images,  even
two  calves,  and  made  an  Asherah,  and  worshipped  all  the
host  of  heaven,  and  served  Baal.  And  they  caused  their
sons  and  their  daughters  to  pass  through  the  fire,  and  used
divination  and  enchantments."  *  At  Jerusalem  in  these
days  there  was  a  regularly  appointed  place  where  parents
burned  their  children,  both  boys  and  girls,  in  honour  of  Baal
or  Moloch.  It  was  in  the  valley  of  Hinnom,  just  outside
the  walls  of  the  city,  and  bore  the  name,  infamous  ever
since,  of   Tophet.      The   practice    is    referred    to    again    and

*   Deuteronomy  xviii.  9-12.  •'  Psalms  cvi.  35-38.

2   Leviticus  xviii.  21.  ^  z  Kings  ii.  5- 1 7.


42  SACRIFICE  OF  CHILDREN  chap.

again  with  sorrowful  indignation  by  the  prophets/  The
kings  of  Judah  set  an  example  to  their  people  by  burning
their  own  children  at  the  usual  place.  Thus  of  Ahaz,  who
reigned  sixteen  years  at  Jerusalem,  we  are  told  that  "  he
burnt  incense  in  the  valley  of  Hinnom,  and  burnt  his  children
in  the  fire."  ^  Again,  King  Manasseh,  whose  long  reign
covered  fifty-five  years,  "  made  his  children  to  pass  through
the  fire  in  the  valley  of  Hinnom."^  Afterwards  in  the  reign
of  the  good  king  Josiah  the  idolatrous  excesses  of  the  people
were  repressed,  at  least  for  a  time,  and  among  other  measures
of  reform  Tophet  was  defiled  by  the  King's  orders,  "  that  no
man  might  make  his  son  or  his  daughter  to  pass  through
the  fire  to  Molech." ""  Whether  the  place  was  ever  used
again  for  the  same  dark  purpose  as  before  does  not  appear.
Long  afterwards,  under  the  sway  of  a  milder  faith,  there  was
little  in  the  valley  to  recall  the  tragic  scenes  which  it  had  so
often  witnessed.  Jerome  describes  it  as  a  pleasant  and
shady  spot,  watered  by  the  rills  of  Siloam  and  laid  out  in
delightful  gardens.^

It  would  be  interesting,  though  it  might  be  fruitless,  to
inquire  how  far  the  Hebrew  prophets  and  psalmists  were
right  in  their  opinion  that  the  Israelites  learned  these  and
other  gloomy  superstitions  only  through  contact  with  the  old
inhabitants  of  the  land,  that  the  primitive  purity  of  faith  and
morals  which   they  brought  with  them   from  the   free   air  of

1   "And    they   have   built    the    high  fire  unto  them?"   Ezekiel   xvi.  zo  sq.  ;

places    of   Topheth,    which    is    in    the  compare  xx.  26,  31.      A  comparison  of

valley  of  the  son  of  Hinnom,  to  burn  these  passages  shows  that  the  expression

their  sons  and   their   daughters  in  the  "  to  cause  to  pass  through  the  fire,"  so

fire,"  Jeremiah    vii.    31  ;    "And    have  often  employed    in    this  connection  in

built  the   high   places  of  Baal,  to  burn  Scripture,  meant  to  burn  the  children

their  sons  in  the  fire  for  burnt  offerings  in  the   fire.      Some  have  attempted  to

unto   Baal,"   id.,    xix.    5;    "And  they  interpret  the  words  in  a  milder  sense.

built  the  high  places  of  Baal,  which  are  See  J.  Spencer,  De  legibtis  Hsbraeortwi,

.in  the  valley  of  the  son  of  Hinnom,  to  p.  288  sqq.

cause  their  sons  and  their  daughters  to  '^  2   Chronicles   xxviii.    3.        In   the

pass    through    the    fire  unto    Molech,"  corresponding  passage  of  2  Kings  (xvi.

id.,   xxxii.    35  ;    "Moreover  thou  hast  3)  it  is  said  that  Ahaz  "made  his  son

taken     thy    sons    and     tliy    daughters,  to  pass  through  the  fire."

whom   thou  hast  borne  unto  me,   and  '*   2    Chronicles   xxxiii.   6  ;    compare

these  hast  thou  sacrificed  unto  them  to  2  Kings  xxi.  6.

be    devoured.       Were  thy  whoredoms  *  2  Kings  xxiii.  10.

a  small    matter,    that    thou    hast    slain  •''  Jerome     on     Jeremiah     vii.      31,

my  children,   and   delivered    them  up,  quoted     in    Winer's     Biblisches    Real-

in  causing    them    to   pass  through   the  7vorlcrhuch,'^  s.v.  "Tliopeth."


Ill  AMONG  THE  SEMITES  43

the  desert  was  tainted  and  polluted  by  the  grossness  and
corruption  of  the  heathen  in  the  fat  land  of  Canaan.
When  we  remember,  however,  that  the  Israelites  were  of
the  same  Semitic  stock  as  the  population  they  conquered
and  professed  to  despise,^  and  that  the  practice  of  human
sacrifice  is  attested  for  many  branches  of  the  Semitic  race,
we  shall,  perhaps,  incline  to  surmise  that  the  chosen  people
may  have  brought  with  them  into  Palestine  the  seeds
which  afterwards  sprang  up  and  bore  such  ghastly  fruit  in
the  valley  of  Hinnom.  It  is  at  least  significant  of  the
prevalence  of  such  customs  among  the  Semites  that  no
sooner  were  the  child -burning  Israelites  carried  off  by
King  Shalmaneser  to  Assyria  than  their  place  was  taken
by  Babylonian  colonists  who  practised  precisely  the  same
rites  in  honour  of  deities  who  probably  differed  in  little
but  name  from  those  revered  by  the  idolatrous  Hebrews.
"The  Sepharvites,"  we  are  told,  "burnt  their  children  in
the  fire  to  Adrammelech  and  Anammelech,  the  gods  of
Sepharvaim."  ^  The  pious  Jewish  historian,  who  saw  in
Israel's  exile  God's  punishment  for  sin,  has  suggested  no
explanation  of  that  mystery  in  the  divine  economy  which
suffered  the  Sepharvites  to  continue  on  the  same  spot  the
very  same  abominations  for  which  the  erring  Hebrews  had
just  been  so  signally  chastised.

We  have  still  to  ask  which  of  their  children  the  Semites
picked  out  for  sacrifice  ;  for  that  a  choice  was  made  and
some  principle  of  selection  followed,  may  be  taken  for  granted.
A  people  who  burned  all  their  children  indiscriminately  would
soon  extinguish  themselves,  and  such  an  excess  of  piety  is
probably  rare,  if  not  unknown.  In  point  of  fact  it  seems,  at
least  among  the  Hebrews,  to  have  been  only  the  firstborn
child  that  was  doomed  to  the  flames.  The  prophet  Micah
asks,  in  a  familiar  passage,  "  Wherewith  shall  I  come  before
the  Lord,  and  bow  myself  before  the  high  God  ?  shall  I  come
before  him  with  burnt  offerings,  with  calves  of  a  year  old  ?
Will   the  Lord   be   pleased  with   thousands   of  rams,  or  with

1  The  Tel  El-Amarna  tablets  prove  Driver,  in  Authority  and  Archaeology,

that    "the    prae-Israelitish  inhabitants  Sacred  and  Profane,  edited   by  1).    G.

of  Canaan   weie    closely   akin    to    tlie  Hogarth  (London,   1899),  p.  76).
Hebrews,   and    that    they    spoke    sul)-
stantially  the  same   language"   (S.    K.  -   2  Kings  xvii.  31.


44  SACRIFICE  OF  CHILDREN  chap.

ten  thousands  of  rivers  of  oil  ?  shall  I  give  my  firstborn  for
my  transgression,  the  fruit  of  my  body  for  the  sin  of  my
soul  ?  "  These  were  the  questions  which  pious  and  doubting
hearts  were  putting  to  themselves  in  the  days  of  the  prophet.
The  prophet's  own  answer  is  not  doubtful.  "  He  hath  shewed
thee,  O  man,  what  is  good  ;  and  what  doth  the  Lord  require
of  thee,  but  to  do  justly  and  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk
humbly  with  thy  God  ?  "  ^  It  is  a  noble  answer  and  one
which  only  elect  spirits  in  that  or,  perhaps,  in  any  age  have
given.  In  Israel  the  vulgar  answer  was  given  on  bloody
altars  and  in  the  smoke  and  flames  of  Tophet,  and  the  form
in  which  the  prophet's  question  is  cast — "  Shall  I  give  my
firstborn  for  my  transgression  ?  " — shows  plainly  on  which
of  the  children  the  duty  of  atoning  for  the  sins  of  their
father  was  supposed  to  fall.  A  passage  in  Ezekiel  points
no  less  clearly  to  the  same  conclusion.  The  prophet
represents  God  as  saying,  "  I  gave  them  statutes  that  were
not  good,  and  judgements  wherein  they  should  not  live  ;  and
I  polluted  them  in  their  own  gifts,  in  that  they  caused  to
pass  through  the  fire  all  that  openeth  the  womb,  that  I  might
make  them  desolate,"  That  the  writer  was  here  thinking
specially  of  the  sacrifice  of  children  is  proved  by  his  own
words  a  little  later  on.  "  When  ye  offer  your  gifts,  when  ye
make  your  sons  to  pass  through  the  fire,  do  ye  pollute  your-
selves with  all  your  idols,  unto  this  day  ?  "  '■''  Further,  that
by  the  words  "  to  pass  through  the  fire  all  that  openeth  the
womb  "  he  referred  only  to  the  firstborn  can  easily  be  shown
by  the  language  of  Scripture  in  reference  to  that  law  of  the
consecration  of  firstlings  which  Ezekiel  undoubtedly  had  in
his  mind  when  he  wrote  this  passage.  Thus  we  find  that
law  enunciated  in  the  following  terms  :  "  And  the  Lord  spake
unto  Moses,  saying,  Sanctify  unto  me  all  the  firstborn,  what-
soever openeth  the  womb  among  the  children  of  Israel,  both
of  man  and  of  beast :  it  is  mine."  ^  Again,  it  is  written  :
"  Thou  shalt  set  apart  unto  the  Lord  all  that  openeth  the
womb,  and  every  firstling  which  thou  hast  that  cometh  of  a
beast  ;  the  males  shall  be  the  Lord's."  ''  Once  more  :  "  All
that  openeth   the  womb  is   mine  ;  and   all   thy  cattle   that   is

1  Micah  vi.  6-8.  •'   ICxocius  xiii.   i  sq.

2  Ezekiel  xx.  25,  26,  31.  ■*  Exodus  xiii.   12.


Ill


CONSECRATION  OF  FIRSTLINGS  45


male,  the  firstlings  of  ox  and  sheep."  ^  This  ancient  Hebrew
custom  of  the  consecration  to  God  of  all  male  firstlings,
whether  of  man  or  beast,  was  merely  the  application  to  the
animal  kingdom  of  the  law  that  all  first  fruits  whatsoever
belong  to  the  deity  and  must  be  made  over  to  him  or  his
representatives.  That  general  law  is  thus  stated  by  the
Hebrew  legislator :  "  Thou  shalt  not  delay  to  offer  of  the
abundance  of  thy  fruits,  and  of  thy  liquors.  The  firstborn
of  thy  sons  shalt  thou  give  unto  me.  Likewise  shalt  thou
do  with  thine  oxen,  and  with  thy  sheep  :  seven  days  it  shall
be  with  its  dam  ;  and  on  the  eighth  day  thou  shalt  give  it
me.

Thus  the  god  of  the  Hebrews  plainly  regarded  the  first-
born of  men  and  the  firstlings  of  animals  as  his  own,  and
required  that  they  should  be  made  over  to  him.  But  how  ?
Here  a  distinction  was  drawn  between  sheep,  oxen,  and
CToats  on  the  one  hand  and  men  and  asses  on  the  other  ;  the
firstlings  of  the  former  were  always  sacrificed,  the  firstlings
of  the  latter  were  generally  redeemed.  "  The  firstling  of  an
ox,  or  the  firstling  of  a  sheep,  or  the  firstling  of  a  goat,  thou
shalt  not  redeem  ;  they  are  holy  :  thou  shalt  sprinkle  their
blood  upon  the  altar,  and  shalt  burn  their  fat  for  an  offering
made  by  fire  for  a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord."  The  flesh
went  to  the  Levites,^  who  consumed  it,  no  doubt,  instead  of
the  deity  whom  they  represented.  On  the  other  hand,  the
ass  was  not  sacrificed  by  the  Israelites,  probably  because
thev  did  not  eat  the  animal  themselves,  and  hence  concluded
that  God  did  not  do  so  either.  In  the  matter  of  diet  the
taste   of  gods   generally  presents   a   striking   resemblance  to

'   Exodus  xxxiv.  19.     In  the  Author-  with  the  firstling  of  thine  ox,  nor  shear

ised  Version  the  passage  runs  thus  :  "All  the  firstling  of  thy  flock.      Thou  shalt

that  openeth  the   matrix  is  mine  ;  and  eat  it  before  the  Lord  thy  God  year  by

every  firstling  among  thy  cattle,  whether  year  in  the  place  which  the  Lord  shall

ox  or  sheep,  that  is  male."  choose,      thou     and     thy    household,"

■•^  Exodus  xxii.  29  sq.      The  Author-  Deuteronomy    xv.     19    sq.        Compare

ised  Version  has  "  the  first  of  thy  ripe  Deuteronomy   xii.    6    sq.,    17    sq.      To

fruits"  instead  of  "the  abundance  of  reconcile  this  ordinance  with  the  other

thy  fruits."  we  must   suppose    that    the    flesh  was

•'•  Numbers  xviii.  17  sq.     Elsewhere,  divided    between    the    Levite    and    the

however,    we  read  :   "  All  the   firstling  owner  of  the  animal.      But  perhaps  the

males  that  are  born  of  thy  herd  and  of  rule    in    Deuteronomy    may    represent

thv  flock   thou   shalt   sanctify  unto   the  the  old  custom  which   obtained  before

Lord  thy  God  :  thou  shalt  do  no  work  the  rise  of  the  priestly  caste.


46  SACRIFICE  OF  CHILDREN  chap.

that  of  their  worshippers.  Still  the  firstling  ass,  like  all
other  firstlings,  was  sacred  to  the  deity,  and  since  it  was  not
sacrificed  to  him,  he  had  to  receive  an  equivalent  for  it.  In
other  words,  the  ass  had  to  be  redeemed,  and  the  price  of
the  redemption  was  a  lamb  which  was  burnt  as  a  vicarious
sacrifice  instead  of  the  ass,  on  the  hypothesis,  apparently,
that  roast  lamb  is  likely  to  be  more  palatable  to  the  Supreme
Being  than  roast  donkey.  If  the  ass  was  not  redeemed,  it
had  to  be  killed  by  having  its  neck  broken.^  The  firstlings
of  other  unclean  animals  and  of  men  were  redeemed  for  five
shekels  a  head,  which  were  paid  to  the  Levites.^

We  can  now  readily  understand  why  so  many  of  the
Hebrews,  at  least  in  the  later  days  of  their  history,  sacrificed
their  firstborn  children,  and  why  tender-hearted  parents,
whose  affection  for  their  offspring  exceeded  their  devotion  to
the  deity,  may  often  have  been  visited  with  compunction,
and  even  tormented  with  feelings  of  bitter  self-reproach  and
shame  at  their  carnal  weakness  in  suffering  the  beloved  son
to  live,  when  they  saw  others,  with  an  heroic  piety  which
they  could  not  emulate,  calmly  resigning  their  dear  ones  to
the  fire,  through  which,  as  they  firmly  believed,  they  passed
to  God,  to  reap,  perhaps,  in  endless  bliss  in  heaven  the
reward  of  their  sharp  but  transient  sufferings  on  earth.
From  infancy  they  had  been  bred  up  in  the  belief  that  the
firstborn  was  sacred  to  God,  and  though  they  knew  that  he
had  waived  his  right  to  them  in  consideration  of  the  receipt
of  five  shekels  a  head,  they  could  hardly  view  this  as  any-
thing but  an  act  of  gracious  condescension,  of  generous
liberality  on  the  part  of  the  divinity  who  had  stooped  to
accept  so  trifling  a  sum  instead  of  the  life  which  really
belonged  to  him.  "  Surely,"  they  might  argue,  "  God  would
be  better  pleased  if  we  were  to  give  him  not  the  money  but
the  life,  not  the  poor  paltry  shekels,  but  what  we  value  most,
our  first  and  best-loved  child.  If  we  hold  that  life  so  dear,
will  not  he  also  ?  It  is  his.  Why  should  we  not  give  him
his  own  ?  "  It  was  in  answer  to  anxious  questions  such  as
these,  and  to  quiet  truly  conscientious  scruples  of  this  sort
that  the   prophet  Micah  declared  that  what  God   required   of

^   Exodus  xiii.   13,  xxxiv.  20.
^  Numbers  xviii.   15  sq.      Cp.  Numbers  iii.  46-51  ;  Exodus  xiii.  13,  xxxiv.  20.


Ill  AMONG  THE  SEMITES  47

his  true  worshippers  was  not  sacrifice  but  justice  and  mercy
and  humihty.  It  is  the  answer  of  morality  to  reHgion — of
the  growing  consciousness  that  man's  duty  is  not  to  pro-
pitiate with  vain  oblations  those  mysterious  powers  of  the
universe  of  which  he  can  know  little  or  nothing,  but  to  be
just  and  merciful  in  his  dealings  with  his  fellows  and  to
humbly  trust,  though  he  cannot  know,  that  by  acting  thus
he  will  best  please  the  higher  powers,  whatever  they  may  be.
But  while  morality  ranges  itself  on  the  side  of  the
prophet,  it  may  be  questioned  whether  history  and  pre-
cedent were  not  on  the  side  of  his  adversaries.  If  the
firstborn  of  men  and  cattle  were  alike  sacred  to  God,
and  the  firstborn  of  cattle  were  regularly  sacrificed,  while
the  firstborn  of  men  were  ransomed  by  a  money  pay-
ment, has  not  this  last  provision  the  appearance  of  being
a  later  mitigation  of  an  older  and  harsher  custom  which
doomed  firstborn  children,  like  firstling  lambs  and  calves
and  goats,  to  the  altar  or  the  fire  ?  The  suspicion  is
greatly  strengthened  by  the  remarkable  tradition  told  to
account  for  the  sanctity  of  the  firstborn.  When  Israel
was  in  bondage  in  Egypt,  so  runs  the  tradition,  God  resolved
to  deliver  them  from  captivity,  and  to  lead  them  to  the
Promised  Land.  But  the  Egyptians  were  loth  to  part  with
their  bondmen  and  thwarted  the  divine  purpose  by  refusing
to  let  the  Israelites  go.  Accordingly  God  afflicted  these
cruel  taskmasters  with  one  plague  after  another,  but  all  in
vain,  until  at  last  he  made  up  his  mind  to  resort  to  a  strong
measure,  which  would  surely  have  the  desired  effect.  At
dead  of  night  he  would  pass  through  the  land  killing  all  the
firstborn  of  the  Egyptians,  both  man  and  beast ;  not  one  of
them  would  be  left  alive  in  the  morning.  But  the  Israelites
were  warned  of  what  was  about  to  happen  and  told  to  keep
indoors  that  night,  and  to  put  a  mark  on  their  houses,  so
that  when  he  passed  down  the  street  on  his  errand  of
slaughter,  God  might  know  them  at  sight  from  the  houses  of
the  Egyptians  and  not  turn  in  and  massacre  the  wrong
children  and  animals.  The  mark  was  to  be  the  blood  of  a
lamb  smeared  on  the  lintel  and  side  posts  of  the  door.  In
every  house  the  lamb,  whose  red  blood  was  to  be  the  badge
of  Israel  that  night,  as  the  white  scarves  were  the  badge  of


48  THE  PASSOVER  chap.

the  Catholics  on  the  night  of  St.  Bartholomew,  was  to  be
killed  at  evening"  and  eaten  by  the  household,  with  very-
peculiar  rites,  during  the  hours  of  darkness  while  the
butchery  was  proceeding  ;  none  of  the  flesh  was  to  see  the
morning  light ;  whatever  the  family  could  not  eat  was  to  be
burned  with  fire.  All  this  was  done.  The  massacre  of
Egyptian  children  and  animals  was  successfully  perpetrated
and  had  the  desired  effect  ;  and  to  commemorate  this  great
triumph  God  ordained  that  all  the  firstborn  of  man  and
beast  among  the  Israelites  should  be  sacred  to  him  ever
afterwards  in  the  manner  already  described,  the  edible
animals  to  be  sacrificed,  and  the  uneatable,  especially  men
and  asses,  to  be  ransomed  by  a  substitute  or  by  a  pecuniary
payment  of  so  much  a  head.  And  a  festival  was  to  be
celebrated  every  spring  with  rites  exactly  like  those  which
were  observed  on  the  night  of  the  great  slaughter.  The
divine  command  was  obeyed,  and  the  festival  thus  instituted
was  the  Passover.^

The  one  thing  that  looms  clear  through  the  haze  of  this
weird  tradition  is  the  memory  of  a  great  massacre  of  first-
born. This  was  the  origin,  we  are  told,  both  of  the  sanctity
of  the  firstborn  and  the  feast  of  the  Passover.  But  when
we  are  further  told  that  the  people  whose  firstborn  were
slaughtered  on  that  occasion  were  not  the  Hebrews  but  their
enemies,  we  are  at  once  met  by  serious  difficulties.  Why,
we  may  ask,  should  the  Israelites  kill  the  firstlings  of  their
cattle  for  ever  because  God  once  killed  those  of  the  Egyptians  ?
and  why  should  every  Hebrew  father  have  to  pay  God  a
ransom  for  his  firstborn  child  because  God  once  slew  all  the
firstborn  children  of  the  Egyptians  ?  In  this  form  the
tradition  offers  no  intelligible  explanation  of  the  custom.
But  it  at  once  becomes  clear  and  intelligible  when  we
assume  that  in  the  original  version  of  the  story  it  was  the
Hebrew  firstborn  that  were  slain  ;  that  in  fact  the  slaughter
of  the  firstborn  children  v/as  formerly,  what  the  slaughter  of
the  firstborn   cattle  always  continued  to  be,  not   an   isolated

1   Exodus     xi.-xiii.      i6  ;     Numbers  their    blood    on    tlie    gateways   of    the
iii.    13,    viii.    17.      In  Western  Africa,  village     (Miss     Mary     H.      Kingsley,
when    a    pestilence    or    an    attack    of  Travels  in  West  Africa,  p.  454,  corn-
enemies  is  expected,  it   is  customary  to  pare  p.  451).
sacrifice   sheep    and    goats    and    smear


Ill  THE  PASSOVER  49

butchery  but  a  regular  custom,  which  with  the  growth  of
more  humane  sentiments  was  afterwards  softened  into  the
vicarious  sacrifice  of  a  lamb  and  the  payment  of  a  ransom
for  each  child.  Here  the  reader  may  be  reminded  of  another
Hebrew  tradition  in  which  the  sacrifice  of  the  firstborn  child
is  indicated  still  more  clearly.  Abraham,  we  are  informed,
was  commanded  by  God  to  offer  up  his  firstborn  son  Isaac
as  a  burnt  sacrifice,  and  was  on  the  point  of  obeying  the
divine  command,  v/hen  God,  content  with  this  proof  of  his
faith  and  obedience,  substituted  for  the  human  victim  a  ram,
which  Abraham  accordingly  sacrificed  instead  of  his  son.^
Putting  the  two  traditions  together  and  observing  how
exactly  they  dovetail  into  each  other  and  into  the  later
Hebrew  practice  of  actually  sacrificing  the  firstborn  children
by  fire  to  Baal  or  Moloch,  we  can  hardly  resist  the  conclusion
that,  before  the  practice  of  redeeming  them  was  introduced,
the  Hebrews,  like  the  other  branches  of  the  Semitic  race,
regularly  sacrificed  their  firstborn  children  by  the  fire  or  the
knife.  The  Passover,  if  this  view  is  right,  was  the  occasion
when  the  awful  sacrifice  was  offered  ;  and  the  tradition  of
its  origin  has  preserved  in  its  main  outlines  a  vivid  memory
of  the  horrors  of  these  fearful  nights.  They  must  have  been
like  the  nights  called  Evil  on  the  west  coast  of  Africa,  in
Dahomey  and  Ashantee,  when  the  people  keep  indoors,
because  the  executioners  are  going  about  the  streets  and  the
heads  of  the  human  victims  are  falling  in  the  king's  palace.
But  seen  in  the  lurid  light  of  superstition  or  of  legend  they
were  no  common  mortals,  no  vulgar  executioners,  who  did
the  dreadful  work  at  the  first  Passover.  The  Angel  of
Death  was  abroad  that  night  ;  into  every  house  he  entered,
and  a  sound  of  lamentation  followed  him  as  he  came  forth
with  his  dripping  sword.  The  blood  that  bespattered  the
lintel  and  door-posts  would  at  first  be  the  blood  of  the
firstborn  child  of  the  house  ;  and  when  the  blood  of  a  lamb
was  afterwards  substituted,  we  may  suppose  that  it  was
intended  not  so  much  to  appease  as  to  cheat  the  ghastly
visitant.  Seeing  the  red  drops  in  the  doorway  he  would
say  to  himself,  "  That  is  the  blood  of  their  child.  I  need
not  turn    in    there.       I    have   many   yet   to   slay   before   the

1  Genesis  xxii.   1-13.
VOL.  II  E


so  SACRIFICE  OF  THE  FIRSTBORN  chap.

morning  breaks  gray  in  the  east."  And  he  would  pass  on
in  haste.  And  the  trembling  parents,  as  they  clasped  their
little  one  to  their  breast,  might  fancy  that  they  heard  his
footfalls  growing  fainter  and  fainter  down  the  street.  In
plain  words,  we  may  surmise  that  the  slaughter  was
originally  done  by  masked  men,  like  the  Mumbo  Jumbos
and  similar  figures  of  West  Africa,  who  went  from  house  to
house  and  were  believed  by  the  uninitiated  to  be  the  deity
or  his  divine  messengers  come  in  person  to  carry  off  the
victims.  When  the  leaders  had  decided  to  allow  the  sacri-
fice of  animals  instead  of  children,  they  would  give  the
people  a  hint  that  if  they  only  killed  a  lamb  and  smeared
its  blood  on  the  door-posts,  the  bloodthirsty  but  near-sighted
deity  would  never  know  the  difference.

If  this  be  indeed  the  origin  of  the   Passover  and  of  the
sanctity  bf  the   firstborn   among  the  Hebrews,  the  whole  of
the  Semitic  evidence  on  the  subject  is  seen   to  fall  into  line
at  once.     The  children  whom  the  Carthaginians,  Phoenicians,
Canaanites,     Moabites,     Sepharvites,     and     probably     other
branches   of  the    Semitic   race    burnt   in    the  fire  would  be
their    firstborn    only,   although    in    general    ancient   writers
have  failed  to  indicate  this  limitation  of  the  custom.      For
the   Moabites,  indeed,  the  limitation   is  clearly  indicated,  if
not  expressly  stated,  when  we  read  that  the  king  of  Moab
offered  his  eldest  son,  who  should  have  reigned  after  him,  as  a
burnt  sacrifice  on  the  wall.^     For  the  Phoenicians  it  comes  out
less  distinctly  in  the  statement  of  Porphyry  that  the  Phoe-
nicians used  to  sacrifice  one  of  their  dearest  to  Baal,  and  in
the  legend  recorded  by  Philo  of  Byblus  that  Cronus  sacrificed
his   only-begotten   son.^      We  may  suppose  that  the  custom
of  sacrificing  the   firstborn   both  of  men  and  animals  was  a
very  ancient  Semitic  institution,  which  many  branches  of  the
race  kept  up  within  historical   times  ;   but  that  the  Hebrews,
while   they    maintained    the   custom    in    regard   to  domestic
cattle,  were   led    by  their   loftier   morality  to   discard    it   in
respect  of  children,  and  to  replace  it  by  a  merciful  law  that
firstborn  children  should  be  ransomed  instead  of  sacrificed.^

1   2  Kings  iii.  27.  born  among  modern  Jews,  see  L.  Low,

-  See  above,  p.  39.  Die  Lebensalter  in  der  jildischen  Lifer-

3  As  to  the  redemption  of  the  first-       atiir  (Szegedin,  1875),  pp.  iio-n8.


in  SACRIFICE  OF  THE  FIRSTBORN  51

The  conclusion  that  the  Hebrew  custom  of  redeeming
the  firstborn  is  a  modification  of  an  older  custom  of  sacrific-
ing them  has  been  mentioned  by  some  very  distinguished
scholars  only  to  be  rejected  on  the  ground,  apparently,  of  its
extreme  improbability.^  To  me  the  converging  lines  of
evidence  which  point  to  this  conclusion  seem  too  numerous
and  too  distinct  to  be  thus  lightly  brushed  aside.  And  the
argument  from  improbability  can  easily  be  rebutted  by
pointing  to  other  peoples  who  are  known  to  have  practised
or  to  be  still  practising  a  custom  of  the  same  sort.  In  some
tribes  of  New  South  Wales  the  firstborn  child  of  every
woman  was  eaten  by  the  tribe  as  part  of  a  religious  cere-
mony.-'' Amongst  the  people  of  Senjero  in  Eastern  Africa
we  are  told  that  many  families  must  offer  up  their  firstborn
sons  as  sacrifices,  because  once  upon  a  time,  when  summer
and  winter  were  jumbled  together  in  a  bad  season,  and  the
fruits  of  the  earth  would  not  ripen,  the  soothsayers  enjoined
it.  At  that  time  a  great  pillar  of  iron  is  said  to  have  stood
at  the  entrance  of  the  capital,  which  in  accordance  with
the  advice  of  the  soothsayers  was  broken  down  by  order
of  the  king,  whereupon  the  seasons  became  regular  again.
To  avert  the  recurrence  of  such  a  calamity  the  wizards
commanded  the  king  to  pour  human  blood  once  a  year  on
the  base  of  the  broken  shaft  of  the  pillar,  and  also  upon  the
throne.  Since  then  certain  families  have  been  obliged  to  de-
liver up  their  firstborn  sons,  who  are  sacrificed  at  an  appointed
time.^  Among  some  tribes  of  South-Eastern  Africa  it  is  a  rule
that  when  a  woman's  husband  has  been  killed  in  battle  and
she  marries  again,  the  first  child  she  gives  birth  to  after  her
second  marriage  must  be  put  to  death,  whether  she  has  it  by

1  J.    Wellhausen,     Prolegomena    zitr  the  idea  being  that  this  will  give  the

Geschichle  Israels,''^  p.  90  ;   \V.  Robert-  weak  child  the  strength  of  the  stronger

son  Smith,   Religion   of   (he   Semites^^  one "    (Spencer    and    Gillen,     Native

p.  464.  IVibes  of  Central  Australia,  p.  475).

^  J.    L.   Krapf,   Travels,  Researches,

-  Brougli      Smyth,     Aborigines      of  and   Missionary    Labours    during    an

Victoria,    ii.     311.       In    the    Luritcha  eighteen   years'   Residence  in    Eastern

tribe     of    Central     Australia     "young  ^nZ/ma;  (London,  i860),  p.  69  J(/.      Dr.

children     are    sometimes     killed     and  Krapf,    who    reports     the     custom     at

eaten,    and    it    is    not    an    infrequent  second  hand,  thinks  that  the  existence

custom,  when  a  child  is  in  weak  health,  of  the  pillar  may  be  doubted,  but  that

to  kill  a  younger  and  healthy  one  and  the    rest  of  the  story  harmonises  well

then  to  feed  the  weakling  on  its  flesh,  enough  with  African  superstition.


SACRIFICE  OF  THE  FIRSTBORN


CHAP.


her   first   or   her  second   husband.      Such   a   child  is  called
"  the  child  of  the  assegai,"  and  if  it  were  not  killed,  death  or
an  accident  would  be  sure   to   befall   the   second   spouse,  and
the  woman  herself  would  be  barren.      The  notion  is  that  the
woman   must   have  had   some   share  in   the  misfortune   that
overtook  her  first  husband,  and  that  the  only  way  of  removing
the  malign  influence   is   to  slay  "the   child   of  the  assegai."^
The  heathen  Russians  often  sacrificed  their  firstborn  to  the
god   Perun.^      The   Kutonaqa   Indians  of  British  Columbia
worship  the  sun  and  sacrifice  their  firstborn  children  to  him.
When  a  woman  is  with  child  she   prays  to  the  sun,  saying,
"  I  am  with  child.      When  it  is  born   I   shall  offer  it  to  you.
Have  pity  upon   us."      Thus   they  expect   to   secure  health
and    good   fortune   for    their    families.^       Among    the   Coast
Salish    Indians  of  the   same   region   the  first  child   is  often
sacrificed   to   the  sun    in    order   to   ensure  the    health    and
prosperity   of  the  whole   family.*      The   Indians   of  Florida
sacrificed  their  firstborn  male  children.^     Among  the  Indians
of  North  Carolina  down  to  the  early  part  of  the   eighteenth
century  a  remarkable  ceremony  was   performed,  which  seems
to   be   most    naturally   interpreted   as   a  modification    of  an
older  custom   of  putting  the  king's  son  to  death,  perhaps  as
a    substitute    for    his    father.       It    is    thus    described     by    a
writer   of  that    period :    "  They   have   a    strange    custom    or
ceremony  amongst    them,  to   call   to  mind   the  persecutions
and  death  of  the  kings  their  ancestors  slain  by  their  enemies
at  certain   seasons,  and   particularly  when   the   savages   have
been  at  war  with  any  nation,  and   return  from   their  country
without  bringing  home  some  prisoners  of  war,  or  the   heads


1  J.  Macdonald,  Light  in  Africa,
p.  156.  In  the  text  I  have  embodied
some  fuller  explanations  and  parti-
culars which  my  friend  the  Rev.  Mr.
Macdonald  wras  good  enough  to  send
me  in  a  letter  dated  September  i6th,
1899.  Among  the  tribes  with  which
Mr.  Macdonald  is  best  acquainted  the
cvistom  is  obsolete  and  lives  only  in
tradition  ;  formerly  it  was  universally
practised.

2  F.  J.  Mone,  Gcschichte  des  Heiden-
thums  im  nordlichen  Europa,  i.  119.

3  Fr.    Boas,     in     "  Fourth    Annual


Report  on  the  North -Western  tribes
of  Canada,"  Report  of  the  British
Association  for  1888,  p.  242;  id.,  in
Fifth  Report  on  the  North  -  Western
Tribes  of  Canada,  p.  52  (separate  re-
print from  the  Report  of  the  British
Association  for  1889).

*  Fr.  Boas,  in  Fifth  Report  on  the
North-  Western  Tribes  of  Catiada,  p.
46  (separate  reprint  from  the  Report
of  the  British  Association  fo?-  1889).

^'  Strachey,  Historic  of  travaille  into
Virginia  Britannia  (Hakluyt  Society),
p.  84.


ni  SACRIFICE  OF  CHILDREN  53

of  their  enemies.  The  king  causes  as  a  perpetual  remem-
brance of  all  his  predecessors  to  beat  and  wound  the  best
beloved  of  all  his  children  with  the  same  weapons  wherewith
they  had  been  kill'd  in  former  times,  to  the  end  that
by  renewing  the  wound,  their  death  should  be  lamented
afresh.  The  king  and  his  nation  being  assembled  on
these  occasions,  a  feast  is  prepared,  and  the  Indian  who
is  authorised  to  wound  the  king's  son,  runs  about  the
house  like  a  distracted  person  crying  and  making  a  most
hideous  noise  all  the  time  with  the  weapon  in  his  hand,
wherewith  he  wounds  the  king's  son  ;  this  he  performs
three  several  times,  during  which  interval  he  presents  the
king  with  victuals  or  cassena^  and  it  is  very  strange  to
see  the  Indian  that  is  thus  struck  never  offers  to  stir  till
he  is  wounded  the  third  time,  after  which  he  falls  down  back-
wards stretching  out  his  arms  and  legs  as  if  he  had  been
ready  to  expire  ;  then  the  rest  of  the  king's  sons  and  daughters,
together  with  the  mother  and  vast  numbers  of  women  and
girls  fall  at  his  feet  and  lament  and  cry  most  bitterly.
During  this  time  the  king  and  his  retinue  are  feasting,  yet
with  such  profound  silence  for  some  hours,  that  not  one
word  or  even  a  whisper  is  to  be  heard  amongst  them.  After
this  manner  they  continue  till  night,  which  ends  in  singing,
dancing,  and  the  greatest  joy  imaginable."^  In  this  account
the  description  of  the  frantic  manner  assumed  by  the  person
whose  duty  it  was  to  wound  the  king's  son  reminds  us  of
the  frenzy  of  King  Athamas  when  he  took  or  attempted  the
lives  of  his  children."  The  same  feature  is  said  to  have
characterised  the  sacrifice  of  children  in  Peru.  "  When  any
person  of  note  was  sick  and  the  priest  said  he  must  die,  they
sacrificed  his  son,  desiring  the  idol  to  be  satisfied  with  him
and  not  to  take  away  his  father's  life.  The  ceremonies
used  at  these  sacrifices  were  strange,  for  they  behaved  them-
selves like  mad  men.  They  believed  that  all  calamities
were  occasioned  by  sin,  and  that  sacrifices  were  the  remedy."^
An   early   Spanish   historian    of    the   conquest   of   Peru,    in

^  J.  Bricknell,  Tlie  Natural  History  -  See  above,  p.  35.

of   NortJi     Carolina    (Dublin,     1737),

p.  342  sq.     I   have  taken  the  liberty  ^  Herrera,  The  general  history  of  the

of  altering  slightly  the  writer's  some-  vast  continent  and  islands  of  America

what  eccentric  punctuation.  (translated  by  Stevens),  iv.  347  sq.


54  THE  SACRED  SPRING  chap.

describing  the  Indians  of  the  Peruvian  valleys  between
San -Miguel  and  Caxamalca,  records  that  "they  have  dis-
gusting sacrifices  and  temples  of  idols  which  they  hold  in
great  veneration  ;  they  offer  them  their  most  precious  pos-
sessions. Every  month  they  sacrifice  their  own  children
and  smear  with  the  blood  of  the  victims  the  face  of  the
idols  and  the  doors  of  the  temples."^  Among  the  ancient
Italian  peoples,  especially  of  the  Sabine  stock,  it  was
customary  in  seasons  of  great  peril  or  public  calamity,  as
when  the  crops  had  failed  or  a  pestilence  was  raging,  to  vow
that  they  would  sacrifice  to  the  gods  every  creature,  whether
man  or  beast,  that  should  be  born  in  the  following  spring.
To  the  creatures  thus  devoted  to  sacrifice  the  name  of  "  the
sacred  spring  "  was  applied.  "  But  since,"  says  Festus,  "  it
seemed  cruel  to  slay  innocent  boys  and  girls,  they  were  kept
till  they  had  grown  up,  then  veiled  and  driven  beyond  the
boundaries.""  Several  Italian  peoples,  for  example  the  Piceni,
Samnites,  and  Hirpini,  traced  their  origin  to  a  "  sacred
spring,"  that  is,  to  the  consecrated  youth  who  had  swarmed
off  from  the  parent  stock  in  consequence  of  such  a  vow.^
When  the  Romans  were  engaged  in  a  life-and-death  struggle
with  Hannibal  after  their  great  defeat  at  the  Trasimene
Lake,  they  vowed  to  offer  a  "  sacred  spring  "  if  victory  should
attend  their  arms  and  the  commonwealth  should  retrieve  its
shattered  fortunes.  But  the  vow  extended  only  to  all  the
offspring  of  sheep,  goats,  oxen,  and  swine  that  should  be
brought  forth  on  Italian  mountains,  plains,  and  meadows
the    following    spring.^       On     a     later    occasion,    when    the

1  Fr.  Xeres,  Relation  vc'ridiijue  de  Hist.  \\\.  no;  Yezins,  De  sii^nif.  verb.,
la  conqucle  dii  Peroii  et  de  la  Frovinc€  ed.  Miiller,  p.  io6.  It  is  worthy  of
de  Cuzco  nomvu'e  Notivelle-Castille  (in  note  that  the  three  swarms  which  after-
Ternaux-Compans's  Voyage:^,  Relatioiis  wards  developed  into  the  Piceni,  the
et  Memoircs,  etc.,  Paris,   1837),  p.  53.  Samnites,  and  the  Hirpini  were  said  to

2  Festus,  De  vcrborum  significa-  J'^y,^  ^^f  S"ided  by  a  woodpecker,  a
tione,  ed.  Miiller,  p.  379,  compare  ^"11,  and  a  wolf  respectively  of  which
p.  158;  Servius  on  Virgil,  Aeu.  the  woodpecker  (/..v/.c)  and  the  wolf
vii.  796;  Nonius  Marcellus,  s.v.  (/"('A'-O  gave  their  immes  to  the  P.ceni
"ver  sacrum,"  p.  522  (p.  610,  ed.  ^nd  the  Hirpui..  The  tradition  may
Quicherat) ;  Dionysius  Halicarnasensis.  f  ^'"''."P^  P'"^f  "^  ^  ^/^f  ^^  totemism,
Avtiquit.  Ron.  i.  16.  Dionysius  says  ''"^  '"  '}]''  ,^^^^"^,^  °^  ^^^^'^'  ^^'^^nce
.u  I  /^  1  \  \  \  ■  1  It  would  be  rash  to  assume  that  it
that  many  Greek  and  barbarian  peoples  ,

floes  so
had  practised  the  same  custom.  j   V  • '  ••  ^,

*  Livy,  xxii.  9  sq. ;   Plutarch,  Fabius

3  Strabo,  V.  4.  2  and  12  ;  Pliny,  Nat.       Maximus,  4.


in  SACRIFICE  OF  ROYAL  CHILDREN  55

Romans  pledged  themselves  again  by  a  similar  vow,  it  was
decided  that  by  the  "  sacred  spring  "  should  be  meant  all  the
cattle  born  between  the  first  day  of  March  and  the  last  day
of  April.^  Although  within  historical  memory  the  Italian
peoples  appear  to  have  resorted  to  measures  of  this  sort  only
in  special  emergencies,  it  seems  not  impossible  that  at  an
earlier  time  they  may,  like  the  Hebrews  and  perhaps  the
Semites  in  general,  have  been  in  the  habit  of  dedicating  all
the  firstborn,  whether  of  man  or  beast,  and  sacrificing  them
at  a  great  festival  in  spring."

With  the  preceding  evidence  before  us  we  may  safely
infer  that  a  custom  of  allowing  a  king  to  kill  his  son,  as  a
substitute  or  vicarious  sacrifice  for  himself,  would  be  in  no
way  exceptional  or  surprising,  at  least  in  Semitic  lands,  where
indeed  religion  seems  at  one  time  to  have  recommended  or
enjoined  every  man,  as  a  duty  that  he  owed  to  his  god,  to
take  the  life  of  his  eldest  son.  And  it  would  be  entirely  in
accordance  with  analogy  if,  long  after  the  barbarous  custom
had  been  dropped  by  others,  it  continued  to  be  observed
by  kings,  who  remain  in  many  respects  the  representatives
of  a  vanished  world,  solitary  pinnacles  that  topple  over  the
rising  waste  of  waters  under  which  the  past  lies  buried.  We
have  seen  that  in  Greece  two  families  of  royal  descent
remained  liable  to  furnish  human  victims  from  their  number
down  to  a  time  when  the  rest  of  their  fellow-countrymen
and  countrywomen  ran  hardly  more  risk  of  being  sacrificed
than  passengers  in  Cheapsidc  at  present  run  of  being  hurried
into  St.  Paul's  or  Bow  Church  and  immolated  on  the  altar.
A  final  mitigation  of  the  custom  would  be  to  substitute  con-
demned criminals  for  innocent  victims.  Such  a  substitution
is  known  to  have  taken  place  in  the  human  sacrifices  annually
offered  in  Rhodes  to  Baal,^  and  we  have  seen  good  grounds
for  believing  that  the  criminal,  who  perished  on  the  cross  or
the  gallows  at   Babylon,  died  instead  of  the  king  in  whose

1  Livy,  xxxiv.  44.  with   gold,  about   which  stood  twelve

other  rough  stones.      The  passage  in

2  In  Vallancey's  CoUeclanea  de  Rebus  which  this  statement  occurs  purports
Hibernicis,  vol.  iii.  (Dublin,  1786),  p.  to  be  quoted  from  an  ancient  MS.
457,  it  is  said  that  the  Irish  "sacrificed  entitled  Dun  - seancas,  or  the  Topo-
the  first  born  of  every  species"  to  a  deity       graphy  of  Ireland.

called  Crom-Cruaith,   a  stone    capped  ^  Porphyry,  De  abstimntia,  ii.  54.


56  SUCCESSION  TO  THE  SOUL  chap.

royal  robes  he  had   been  allowed  to  masquerade  for  a  few
days.

The  condemnation  and  pretended  death  by  fire  of  the
mock  king  in  Egypt  ^  is  probably  a  reminiscence  of  a  real
custom  of  burning  him.  Evidence  of  a  practice  of  burning
divine  personages  will  be  forthcoming  later  on.  In  Bilaspur
the  expulsion  of  the  Brahman  who  had  occupied  the  king's
throne  for  a  year""  is  perhaps  a  substitute  for  putting  him  to
death.

The  explanation  here  given  of  the  custom  of  killing
divine  persons  assumes,  or  at  least  is  readily  combined  with,
the  idea  that  the  soul  of  the  slain  divinity  is  transmitted  to
his  successor.  Of  this  transmission  I  have  no  direct  proof;
and  so  far  a  link  in  the  chain  of  evidence  is  wanting.  But
if  I  cannot  prove  by  actual  examples  this  succession  to  the
soul  of  the  slain  god,  it  can  at  least  be  made  probable  that
such  a  succession  was  supposed  to  take  place.  For  it  has
been  already  shown  that  the  soul  of  the  incarnate  deity  is
often  supposed  to  transmigrate  at  death  into  another  incar-
nation ;  ^  and  if  this  takes  place  when  the  death  is  a  natural
one,  there  seems  no  reason  why  it  should  not  take  place  when
the  death  has  been  brought  about  by  violence.  Certainly  the
idea  that  the  soul  of  a  dying  person  may  be  transmitted  to  his
successor  is  perfectly  familiar  to  primitive  peoples.  In  Nias
the  eldest  son  usually  succeeds  his  father  in  the  chieftainship.
But  if  from  any  bodily  or  mental  defect  the  eldest  son  is
disqualified  for  ruling,  the  father  determines  in  his  life-
time which  of  his  sons  shall  succeed  him.  In  order,  however,
to  establish  his  right  of  succession  it  is  necessary  that  the
son  upon  whom  his  father's  choice  falls  shall  catch  in  his
mouth  or  in  a  bag  the  last  breath,  and  with  it  the  soul,  of
the  dying  chief.  For  whoever  catches  his  last  breath  is
chief  equally  with  the  appointed  successor.  Hence  the
other  brothers,  and  sometimes  also  strangers,  crowd  round
the  dying  man  to  catch  his  soul  as  it  passes.  The  houses
in  Nias  are  raised  above  the  ground  on  posts,  and  it  has
happened  that  when  the  dying  man  lay  with  his  face  on
the  floor,  one  of  the  candidates  has  bored  a  hole  in  the  floor

'  See  above,  p.  30.  -  See  above,  p.  30  s<].

■'  See  above,  vol.  i.  p.  151  sijq.


Ill


SUCCESSION  TO  THE  SOUL


57


and  sucked  in  the  chiefs  last  breath  through  a  bamboo
tube.  When  the  chief  has  no  son,  his  soul  is  caught  in  a
bag,  which  is  fastened  to  an  image  made  to  represent  the
deceased  ;  the  soul  is  then  believed  to  pass  into  the  image.^
Amongst  the  Takilis  or  Carrier  Indians  of  North- West
America,  when  a  corpse  is  burned  the  priest  pretends  to
catch  the  soul  of  the  deceased  in  his  hands,  which  he  closes
with  many  gesticulations.  He  then  communicates  the
captured  soul  to  the  dead  man's  successor  by  throwing  his
hands  towards  and  blowing  upon  him.  The  person  to  whom
the  soul  is  thus  communicated  takes  the  name  and  rank  of
the  deceased.  On  the  death  of  a  chief  the  priest  thus  fills
a  responsible  and  influential  position,  for  he  may  transmit
the  soul  to  whom  he  will,  though  doubtless  he  generally
follows  the  regular  line  of  succession.-  In  Guatemala,  when
a  great  man  lay  at  the  point  of  death,  they  put  a  precious
stone  between  his  lips  to  receive  the  parting  soul,  and  this
was  afterwards  kept  as  a  precious  memorial  by  his  nearest
kinsman  or  most  intimate  friend.^  Algonquin  women  who
wished  to  become  mothers  flocked  to  the  side  of  a  dying
person  in  the  hope  of  receiving  and  being  impregnated  by
the  passing  soul.  Amongst  the  Seminoles  of  Florida  when
a  woman  died  in  childbed  the  infant  was  held  over  her  face
to  receive  her  parting  spirit."*  The  Romans  caught  the
breath  of  dying  friends  in  their  mouths,  and  so  received  into
themselves  the  soul  of  the  departed.^  The  same  custom  is
said  to  be  still  practised  in  Lancashire.*^  On  the  seventh
day  after  the  death  of  a  king  of  Gingiro  the  sorcerers  bring


1  Nieuwenhuisen  en  Rosenberg,
"Verslag  omtrent  het  eiland  Nias,"
I'erhandelingen  van.  het  Batav.  Genoot-
schap  van  KiDisten  en  IVetenscIiappen,
XXX.  (1863),  p.  85  ;  Rosenberg,  Der
Malayisehc  ArchipeL  p.  160;  Chatelin,
"  Godsdienst  en  bijgeloof  der  Niassers,"
Tijdschriff  voorlndische  Taal-  Land-  en
Volkcnkunde,  xxvi.  142  sq.;  Sunder-
mann,  "  Die  Insel  Nias  und  die  Mission
daselbst,"  Allgemeitie  Missions -Zeit-
schrift,  xi.  445  ;  E.  IModigliani,  Un
viaggio  a  Nias,  pp.  277,  479  sq.  ;  id.,
L'Tsola  dellc  Donne  (Milan,  1894),  p.

195.

-  Ch.  \\'ilkes,  Narrative  of  t/ie  U.S.


Exploring  Expedition  (London,  1845),
iv.  453  ;  U.S.  Exploring  Expedition,
Ethnography  and  Philology,  by  H.
Hale,  p.  203.

^  Brasseur  de  Bourbourg,  Histoire
des  Nations  civilisi!es  dit  Mexique  et  de
r Amcriqiie-Centrale,  ii.  574.

*  D.  G.  Brinton,  Myths  of  the  New
IVorld-  (New  York,  1876),  p.  270  sq.

•'  Servius  on  Virgil,  Aen.  iv.  685  ;
Cicero,  In  J 'err.  ii.  5.  45  ;  K.  F.
Hermann,  Griech.  Privatalterthiimer,
ed.  Blumner,  p.  362,  note  i.

''  Harland  and  Wilkinson,  Lanca-
shire Folk-lore,  p.  7  sq.


58  SUCCESSION  TO  THE  SOUL  chap.

to  his  successor,  wrapt  in  a  piece  of  silk,  a  worm  which  they
say  comes  from  the  nose  of  the  dead  king  ;  and  they  make
the  new  king  kill  the  worm  by  squeezing  its  head  between
his  teeth,^  The  ceremony  seems  to  be  intended  to  convey
the  spirit  of  the  deceased  monarch  to  his  successor.  The
Danakil  or  Afars  of  Eastern  Africa  believe  that  the  soul  of
a  magician  will  be  born  again  in  the  first  male  descendant
of  the  man  who  was  most  active  in  attending  on  the  dying
magician  in  his  last  hours.  Hence  when  a  magician  is  ill
he  receives  many  attentions."  In  Uganda  the  spirit  of  the
king  who  had  been  the  last  to  die  manifested  itself  from
time  to  time  in  the  person  of  a  priest,  who  was  prepared  for
the  discharge  of  this  exalted  function  by  a  peculiar  ceremony.
When  the  body  of  the  king  had  been  embalmed  and  had
lain  for  five  months  in  the  tomb,  which  was  a  house  built
specially  for  it,  the  head  was  severed  from  the  body  and  laid
in  an  ant-hill.  Having  been  stript  of  flesh  by  the  insects,
the  skull  was  washed  in  a  particular  river  (the  Ndyabuworu)
and  filled  with  wine.  One  of  the  late  king's  priests  then
drank  the  wine  out  of  the  skull,  and  thus  became  himself  a
vessel  meet  to  receive  the  spirit  of  the  deceased  monarch.
The  skull  was  afterwards  replaced  in  the  tomb,  but  the  lower
jaw  was  separated  from  it  and  deposited  in  a  jar  ;  and  this
jar,  being  swathed  in  bark-cloth  and  decorated  with  beads
so  as  to  look  like  a  man,  henceforth  represented  the  late
king.  A  house  was  built  for  its  reception  in  the  shape  of  a
beehive  and  divided  into  two  rooms,  an  inner  and  an  outer.
Any  person  might  enter  the  outer  room,  but  in  the  inner
room  the  spirit  of  the  dead  king  was  supposed  to  dwell.  In
front  of  the  partition  was  set  a  throne  covered  with  Hon  and
leopard  skins,  and  fenced  off  from  the  rest  of  the  chamber
by  a  rail  of  spears,  shields,  and  knives,  most  of  them  made  of
copper  and  brass  and  beautifully  worked.  When  the  priest,
who  had  fitted  himself  to  receive  the  king's  spirit,  desired  to
converse  with  the  people  in  the  king's  name,  he  went  to  the
throne,  and  addressing  the  spirit  in  the  inner  room  informed

1    The     Travels    of    the  Jesuits    in  -   Ph.       Paulitschke,      Ethnographic

Ethiopia,     collected     and     historically  Nordost-Afrikas,  die geistige  Cultur  der

digested  by  F.  Balthazar  Tellez  (Lon-  Dauakil,     Galla    mid    So/inll    (Berlin,

don,  1710),  p.   198.  1896),  p,  28.


Ill  SUCCESSION  TO  THE  SOUL  59

him  of  the  business  in  hand.  Then  he  smoked  one  or  two
pipes  of  tobacco,  and  in  a  few  minutes  began  to  rave,  which
was  a  sign  that  the  spirit  had  entered  into  him.  In  this
condition  he  spoke  with  the  voice  and  made  known  the
wishes  of  the  late  king.  When  he  had  done  so,  the  spirit
left  him  and  returned  into  the  inner  room,  and  he  himself
departed  a  mere  man  as  before.^  These  examples  at  least
show  that  provision  is  often  made  for  the  spiritual  succession
of  kings  and  chiefs.  On  the  whole  we  may  therefore  fairly
suppose  that  when  the  divine  king  or  priest  is  put  to  death
his  spirit  is  believed  to  pass  into  his  successor.

^  2.   Killing  the  Tree-spirit

It  remains  to  ask  what  light  the  custom  of  killing  the
divine  king  or  priest  sheds  upon  the  subject  of  our  inquiry.
In  the  first  chapter  we  saw  reason  to  suppose  that  the  King
of  the  Wood  was  regarded  as  an  incarnation  of  the  tree-
spirit  or  of  the  spirit  of  vegetation,  and  that  as  such  he
would  be  endowed,  in  the  belief  of  his  worshippers,  with  a
magical  power  of  making  the  trees  to  bear  fruit,  the  crops
to  grow,  and  so  on.  His  life  must  therefore  have  been  held
very  precious  by  his  worshippers,  and  was  probably  hedged
in  by  a  system  of  elaborate  precautions  or  taboos  like  those
by  which,  in  so  many  places,  the  life  of  the  man-god  has
been  guarded  against  the  malignant  influence  of  demons
and  sorcerers.  But  we  have  seen  that  the  very  value
attached  to  the  life  of  the  man-god  necessitates  his  violent
death  as  the  only  means  of  preserving  it  from  the  inevitable
decay  of  age.  The  same  reasoning  would  apply  to  the
King  of  the  Wood  ;  he  too  had  to  be  killed  in  order  that
the  divine  spirit,  incarnate  in  him,  might  be  transferred  in
unabated  vigour  to  his  successor.  The  rule  that  he  held
office  till  a  stronger  should  slay  him  might  be  supposed  to
secure  both  the  preservation  of  his  divine  life  in  full  vigour
and  its  transference  to  a  suitable  successor  as  soon  as  that
vigour  began  to  be  impaired.  For  so  long  as  he  could
maintain   his   position   by  the  strong  hand,  it   might   be   in-

^  This  account  I  received  from  my       dated     Mengo,    Uganda,    27th    April
friend   the  Rev.  J.  Roscoe  in  a  letter        1900.


6o  KILLING   THE  TREE-SPIRIT  chap.

ferred  that  his  natural  force  was  not  abated  ;  whereas  his
defeat  and  death  at  the  hands  of  another  proved  that  his
strength  was  beginning  to  fail  and  that  it  was  time  his
divine  life  should  be  lodged  in  a  less  dilapidated  tabernacle.
This  explanation  of  the  rule  that  the  King  of  the  Wood  had
to  be  slain  by  his  successor  at  least  renders  that  rule  per-
fectly intelligible.  Moreover  it  is  countenanced  by  the
analogy  of  the  Chitombe,  upon  whose  life  the  existence  of
the  world  was  supposed  to  hang,  and  who  was  therefore
slain  by  his  successor  as  soon  as  he  showed  signs  of  break-
ing up.  Again,  the  terms  on  which  in  later  times  the  King
of  Calicut  held  office  are  identical  with  those  attached  to  the
office  of  King  of  the  Wood,  except  that  whereas  the  former
might  be  assailed  by  a  candidate  at  any  time,  the  King  of
Calicut  might  only  be  attacked  once  every  twelve  years.
But  as  the  leave  granted  to  the  King  of  Calicut  to  reign  so
long  as  he  could  defend  himself  against  all  comers  was  a
mitigation  of  the  old  rule  which  set  a  fixed  term  to  his  life,
so  we  may  conjecture  that  the  similar  permission  granted
to  the  King  of  the  Wood  was  a  mitigation  of  an  older
custom  of  putting  him  to  death  at  the  end  of  a  set  period.
In  both  cases  the  new  rule  gave  to  the  god-man  at  least  a
chance  for  his  life,  which  under  the  old  rule  was  denied  him  ;
and  people  probably  reconciled  themselves  to  the  change  by
reflecting  that  so  long  as  the  god-man  could  maintain  him-
self by  the  sword  against  all  assaults,  there  was  no  reason
to  apprehend  that  the  fatal  decay  had  set  in.

The  conjecture  that  the  King  of  the  Wood  was  formerly
put  to  death  at  the  expiry  of  a  set  term,  without  being
allowed  a  chance  for  his  life,  will  be  confirmed  if  evidence
can  be  adduced  of  a  custom  of  periodically  killing  his
counterparts,  the  human  representatives  of  the  tree-spirit,  in
Northern  Europe.  Now  in  point  of  fact  such  a  custom  has
left  unmistakable  traces  of  itself  in  the  rural  festivals  of  the
peasantry.      To  take  examples.

At  Niederporing,  in  Lower  Bavaria,  the  Whitsuntide
representative  of  the  tree -spirit — the  Pfingstl  as  he  was
called — was  clad  from  top  to  toe  in  leaves  and  flowers.
On  his  head  he  wore  a  high  pointed  cap,  the  ends  of  which
rested  on   his  shoulders,  only  two  holes  being  left  in   it  for


Ill  KILLING  THE  TREE-SPIRIT  6i

his  eyes.  The  cap  was  covered  with  water -flowers  and
surmounted  with  a  nosegay  of  peonies.  The  sleeves  of  his
coat  were  also  made  of  water-plants,  and  the  rest  of  his
body  was  enveloped  in  alder  and  hazel  leaves.  On  each
side  of  him  marched  a  boy  holding  up  one  of  the  Pfiiigstl's
arms.  These  two  boys  carried  drawn  swords,  and  so  did
most  of  the  others  who  formed  the  procession.  They  stopped
at  every  house  where  they  hoped  to  receive  a  present ;  and
the  people,  in  hiding,  soused  the  leaf-clad  boy  with  water.
All  rejoiced  when  he  was  well  drenched.  Finally  he  waded
into  the  brook  up  to  his  middle  ;  whereupon  one  of  the
boys,  standing  on  the  bridge,  pretended  to  cut  off  his  head.^
At  Wurmlingen,  in  Swabia,  a  score  of  young  fellows  dress
themselves  on  Whit- Monday  in  white  shirts  and  white
trousers,  with  red  scarves  round  their  waists  and  swords
hanging  from  the  scarves.  They  ride  on  horseback  into
the  wood,  led  by  two  trumpeters  blowing  their  trumpets.
In  the  wood  they  cut  down  leafy  oak  branches,  in  which
they  envelop  from  head  to  foot  him  who  was  the  last  of
their  number  to  ride  out  of  the  village.  His  legs,  however,
are  encased  separately,  so  that  he  may  be  able  to  mount
his  horse  again.  Further,  they  give  him  a  long  artificial
neck,  with  an  artificial  head  and  a  false  face  on  the  top  of
it.  Then  a  May-tree  is  cut,  generally  an  aspen  or  beech
about  ten  feet  high  ;  and  being  decked  with  coloured  hand-
kerchiefs and  ribbons  it  is  entrusted  to  a  special  "  May-
bearer."  The  cavalcade  then  returns  with  music  and  song
to  the  village.  Amongst  the  personages  who  figure  in  the
procession  are  a  Moorish  king  with  a  sooty  face  and  a
crown  on  his  head,  a  Dr.  Iron-Beard,  a  corporal,  and  an
executioner.  They  halt  on  the  village-green,  and  each  of
the  characters  makes  a  speech  in   rhyme.      The  executioner

1   Fr.  Panzer,  Beitrag  zitr  dcittscheii  a  monstrous  bird  with  a  long  neck  and

Mythologie,  i.  235  sq. ;   W.  Mannhardt,  a  wooden  beak,  which  is  thrown  into

Baunihiltus,    p.    320    sq.      In     some  the  water  instead  of  the  bearer.     The

villages  of  Lower  Bavaria  one  of  the  wooden  beak    is  afterwards   nailed   to

/)?M^jy/'j- comrades  carries  "the  May,"  the  ridge  of  a  barn,  which  it  is  sup-

which  is  a  young  birch-tree  wreathed  posed  to  protect  against  lightning  and

and  decorated.     Another  name  for  this  fire    for    a   whole   year,    till    the    next

Whitsuntide    masker,    both    in    Lower  Pfingstl  makes    his    appearance.      See

and  Upper  Bavaria,  is  the  Water-bird.  Bavaria,  Landcs-  und    Volkskunde  des

Sometimes  he  carries  a  straw  effigy  of  Kdnigreuhs  Bayern,\.  375  jYo  1003  j-^.


62  KILLING  THE  TREE-SPIRn  chap.

announces  that  the  leaf-clad  man  has  been  condemned  to
death,  and  cuts  off  his  false  head.  Then  the  riders  race
to  the  May-tree,  which  has  been  set  up  a  little  way  off.
The  first  man  who  succeeds  in  wrenching  it  from  the
ground  as  he  gallops  past  keeps  it  with  all  its  decora-
tions. The  ceremony  is  observed  every  second  or  third
year.^

In  Saxony  and  Thiiringen  there  is  a  Whitsuntide  cere-
mony called  "  chasing  the  Wild  Man  out  of  the  bush,"  or
"  fetching  the  Wild  Man  out  of  the  wood."  A  young  fellow
is  enveloped  in  leaves  or  moss  and  called  the  Wild  Man.
He  hides  in  the  wood  and  the  other  lads  of  the  village  go
out  to  seek  him.  They  find  him,  lead  him  captive  out  of
the  wood,  and  fire  at  him  with  blank  muskets.  He  falls
like  dead  to  the  ground,  but  a  lad  dressed  as  a  doctor  bleeds
him,  and  he  comes  to  life  again.  At  this  they  rejoice,  and,
binding  him  fast  on  a  waggon,  take  him  to  the  village,
where  they  tell  all  the  people  how  they  have  caught  the
Wild  Man.  At  every  house  they  receive  a  gift."  In  the
Erzgebirge  the  following  custom  was  annually  observed  at
Shrovetide  about  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century.
Two  men  disguised  as  Wild  Men,  the  one  in  brushwood  and
moss,  the  other  in  straw,  were  led  about  the  streets,  and  at
last  taken  to  the  market-place,  where  they  were  chased  up
and  down,  shot  and  stabbed.  Before  falling  they  reeled
about  with  strange  gestures  and  spirted  blood  on  the  people
from  bladders  which  they  carried.  When  they  were  down,
the  huntsmen  placed  them  on  boards  and  carried  them  to
the  ale-house,  the  miners  marching  beside  them  and  winding
blasts  on  their  mining  tools  as  if  they  had  taken  a  noble
head  of  game.^  A  very  similar  Shrovetide  custom  is  still
observed  near  Schluckenau  in  Bohemia.  A  man  dressed
up  as  a  Wild  Man  is  chased  through  several  streets  till
he  comes  to  a  narrow  lane  across  which  a  cord  is
stretched.  He  stumbles  over  the  cord  and,  falling  to  the
ground,    is    overtaken    and    caught    by    his    pursuers.       The

1   E.    Meier,  Deutsche  Sagoi,  Sitteii  Gt-braucJie  aiis  Sacksen  itnd  Thiiruigen.^

und  Gebriiiiche  aiis  Schivabeu.,  pp.  409-  p.   154  sq.  ;  W.  Rlannhardt,  Baumkiil-

419;  W.  Mannhardt,  Baiimkiiltics,  p.  /its,  p.  335  S(j.
349  sq.  "'  W.    Mannhardt,   Baiimkiillits,    p.

-  E.  Sommer,  Sagen,  Miirchen  und  336.


Ill  KILLING  THE  TREE-SPIRIT  63

executioner  runs  up  and  stabs  with  his  sword  a  bladder
filled  with  blood  which  the  Wild  Man  wears  round  his  body  ;
so  the  Wild  Man  dies,  while  a  stream  of  blood  reddens  the
ground.  Next  day  a  straw-man,  made  up  to  look  like  the
Wild  Man,  is  placed  on  a  litter,  and,  accompanied  by  a  great
crowd,  is  taken  to  a  pool  into  which  it  is  thrown  by  the  execu-
tioner.     The  ceremony  is  called  "  burying  the  Carnival."  ^

In  Semic  (Bohemia)  the  custom  of  beheading  the  King
is  observed  on  Whit-Monday.  A  troop  of  young  people
disguise  themselves  ;  each  is  girt  with  a  girdle  of  bark  and
carries  a  wooden  sword  and  a  trumpet  of  willow-bark.  The
King  wears  a  robe  of  tree-bark  adorned  with  flowers,  on  his
head  is  a  crown  of  bark  decked  with  flowers  and  branches,
his  feet  are  wound  about  with  ferns,  a  mask  hides  his  face,
and  for  a  sceptre  he  has  a  hawthorn  switch  in  his  hand.  A
lad  leads  him  through  the  village  by  a  rope  fastened  to  his
foot,  while  the  rest  dance  about,  blov/  their  trumpets,  and
whistle.  In  every  farmhouse  the  King  is  chased  round  the
room,  and  one  of  the  troop,  amid  much  noise  and  outcry,,
strikes  with  his  sword  a  blow  on  the  King's  robe  of  bark
till  it  rings  again.  Then  a  gratuity  is  demanded."  The
ceremony  of  decapitation,  which  is  here  somewhat  slurred
over,  is  carried  out  with  a  greater  semblance  of  reality  in  other
parts  of  Bohemia.  Thus  in  some  villages  of  the  Koniggratz
district  on  Whit-Monday  the  girls  assemble  under  one  lime-
tree  and  the  young  men  under  another,  all  dressed  in  their
best  and  tricked  out  with  ribbons.  The  young  men  twine
a  garland  for  the  Queen,  and  the  girls  another  for  the  King.
When  they  have  chosen  the  King  and  Queen  they  all  go  in
procession,  two  and  two,  to  the  ale-house,  from  the  balcony
of  which  the  crier  proclaims  the  names  of  the  King  and
Queen.  Both  are  then  invested  with  the  insignia  of  their
dignity  and  are  crowned  with  the  garlands,  while  the  music
plays  up.  Then  some  one  gets  on  a  bench  and  accuses  the
King  of  various  offences,  such  as  ill-treating  the  cattle.
The  King  appeals  to  witnesses  and  a  trial  ensues,  at  the
close  of  which  the  judge,  who  carries  a  white  wand  as  his

1   Reinsberg-Duringsfeld,  Fcst-h'al-  -   Reinsberg-Diiringsfeld,  Fest-Kal-

endcr  aus  Bdhmen,  p.  61  ;   \V.  Mann-       ciider  aiis  Bohmen,  p.  263  ;   \V.  Mann-
hardt,  Baumkulttis,  p.  336  sq.  hardt,  Bamnktcltus,  p.  343.


64  KILLING  THE  TREE-SPIRIT  chaf.

badge  of  office,  pronounces  a  verdict  of  "  guilty  "  or  "  not
guilty."  If  the  verdict  is  "  guilty,"  the  judge  breaks  his
wand,  the  King  kneels  on  a  white  cloth,  all  heads  are  bared,
and  a  soldier  sets  three  or  four  hats,  one  above  the  other,  on
his  Majesty's  head.  The  judge  then  pronounces  the  word
"  guilty "  thrice  in  a  loud  voice,  and  orders  the  crier  to
behead  the  King.  The  crier  obeys  by  striking  off  the  King's
hats  with  his  wooden  sword. ^

But  perhaps,  for  our  purpose,  the  most  instructive  of
these  mimic  executions  is  the  following  Bohemian  one,
which  has  been  in  part  described  already."  In  some  places
of  the  Pilsen  district  (Bohemia)  on  Whit-Monday  the  King
is  dressed  in  bark,  ornamented  with  flowers  and  ribbons  ;  he
wears  a  crown  of  gilt  paper  and  rides  a  horse,  which  is
also  decked  with  flowers.  Attended  by  a  judge,  an  exe-
cutioner, and  other  characters,  and  followed  by  a  train  of
soldiers,  all  mounted,  he  rides  to  the  village  square,  where  a
hut  or  arbour  of  green  boughs  has  been  erected  under  the
May-trees,  which  are  firs,  freshly  cut,  peeled  to  the  top,  and
dressed  with  flowers  and  ribbons.  After  the  dames  and
maidens  of  the  village  have  been  criticised  and  a  frog
beheaded,  in  the  way  already  described,  the  cavalcade  rides
to  a  place  previously  determined  upon,  in  a  straight,  broad
street.  Here  they  draw  up  in  two  lines  and  the  King  takes
to  flight.  He  is  given  a  short  start  and  rides  off  at  full
speed,  pursued  by  the  whole  troop.  If  they  fail  to  catch
him  he  remains  King  for  another  year,  and  his  companions
must  pay  his  score  at  the  ale-house  in  the  evening.  But  if
they  overtake  and  catch  him  he  is  scourged  with  hazel  rods
or  beaten  with  the  wooden  swords  and  compelled  to  dis-
mount. Then  the  executioner  asks,  "  Shall  I  behead  this
King?"  The  answer  is  given,  "  Behead  him";  the  execu-
tioner brandishes  his  axe,  and  with  the  words,  "  One,  two,
three,  let  the  King  headless  be  !  "  he  strikes  off  the  King's
crown.  Amid  the  loud  cries  of  the  bystanders  the  King
sinks  to  the  ground  ;  then  he  is  laid  on  a  bier  and  carried
to  the  nearest  farmhouse.^

1  Reinsberg-Duringsfeld,  Fest-Kal-  ^  Reinsberg-Diiringsfekl,  Fest-Kal'
ender  aus  B'ohnien,  p.  269  sq.                       ender  aiis  Bdhmeit,    p.    264   si/.  •   A\'.

2  Vol.  i.  p.  218  sq.  Mannhaidt,  Baiiinkultus,  p.  353  sq.


Ill  KILLING  THE  TREE-SPIRIT  65

In  most  of  the  personages  who  are  thus  slain  in  mimicry
it  is  impossible  not  to  recognise  representatives  of  the  tree-
spirit  or  spirit  of  vegetation,  as  he  is  supposed  to  manifest
himself  in  spring.  The  bark,  leaves,  and  flowers  in  which
the  actors  are  dressed,  and  the  season  of  the  year  at  which
they  appear,  show  that  they  belong  to  the  same  class  as  the
Grass  King,  King  of  the  May,  Jack-in-the-Green,  and  other
representatives  of  the  vernal  spirit  of  vegetation  which  we
examined  in  the  first  chapter.  As  if  to  remove  any  possible
doubt  on  this  head,  we  find  that  in  two  cases  ^  these  slain
men  are  brought  into  direct  connection  with  May -trees,
which  are  (as  we  have  seen)  the  impersonal,  as  the  May
King,  Grass  King,  and  so  forth,  are  the  personal  representa-
tives of  the  tree-spirit.  The  drenching  of  the  Pfingstl  with
water  and  his  wading  up  to  the  middle  into  the  brook  are,
therefore,  no  doubt  rain-charms  like  those  which  have  been
already  described.^

But  if  these  personages  represent,  as  they  certainly  do,
the  spirit  of  vegetation  in  spring,  the  question  arises,  Why
kill  them  ?  What  is  the  object  of  slaying  the  spirit  of
vegetation  at  any  time  and  above  all  in  spring,  when  his
services  are  most  wanted  ?  The  only  answer  to  this  ques-
tion seems  to  be  given  in  the  explanation  already  proposed
of  the  custom  of  killing  the  divine  king  or  priest.  The
divine  life,  incarnate  in  a  material  and  mortal  body,  is  liable
to  be  tainted  and  corrupted  by  the  weakness  of  the  frail
medium  in  which  it  is  for  a  time  enshrined  ;  and  if  it  is  to
be  saved  from  the  increasing  enfeeblement  which  it  must
necessarily  share  with  its  human  incarnation  as  he  advances
in  years,  it  must  be  detached  from  him  before,  or  at  least  as
soon  as,  he  exhibits  signs  of  decay,  in  order  to  be  transferred
to  a  vigorous  successor.  This  is  done  by  killing  the  old
representative  of  the  god  and  conveying  the  divine  spirit
from  him  to  a  new  incarnation.  The  killing  of  the  god,  that
is,  of  his  human  incarnation,  is,  therefore,  merely  a  necessary
step  to  his  revival  or  resurrection  in  a  better  form.  Far
from  being  an  extinction  of  the  divine  spirit,  it  is  only  the
beginning  of  a  purer  and  stronger  manifestation  of  it.  If
this  explanation  holds  good  of  the  custom  of  killing  divine

^  See  pp.  61,  64.  -  See  p.  94  sqq.

VOL.  II  F


66  KILLING  THE  TREE-SPIRIT  chap.

kings  and  priests  in  general,  it  is  still  more  obviously
applicable  to  the  custom  of  annually  killing  the  representa-
tive of  the  tree-spirit  or  spirit  of  vegetation  in  spring.  For
the  decay  of  plant  life  in  winter  is  readily  interpreted  by
primitive  man  as  an  enfeeblement  of  the  spirit  of  vegetation ;
the  spirit  has  (he  thinks)  grown  old  and  weak  and  must
therefore  be  renovated  by  being  slain  and  brought  to  life  in
a  younger  and  fresher  form.  Thus  the  killing  of  the  repre-
sentative of  the  tree-spirit  in  spring  is  regarded  as  a  means
to  promote  and  quicken  the  growth  of  vegetation.  For  the
killing  of  the  tree-spirit  is  associated  always  (we  must
suppose)  implicitly,  and  sometimes  explicitly  also,  with  a
revival  or  resurrection  of  him  in  a  more  youthful  and
vigorous  form.  Thus  in  the  Saxon  and  Thiiringen  custom,
after  the  Wild  Man  has  been  shot  he  is  brought  to  life
again  by  a  doctor  ;^  and  in  the  Wurmlingen  ceremony  there
figures  a  Dr.  Iron -Beard,  who  probably  once  played  a
similar  part  ;  certainly  in  another  spring  ceremony  (to  be
described  presently)  Dr.  Iron-Beard  pretends  to  restore  a
dead  man  to  life.  But  of  this  revival  or  resurrection  of
the  god  we  shall  have  more  to  say  anon.

The  points  of  similarity  between  these  North  European
personages  and  the  subject  of  our  inquiry — the  King  of
the  Wood  or  priest  of  Nemi — are  sufficiently  striking.  In
these  northern  maskers  we  see  kings,  whose  dress  of  bark
and  leaves,  along  with  the  hut  of  green  boughs  and  the
fir-trees  under  which  they  hold  their  court,  proclaim  them
unmistakably  as,  like  their  Italian  counterpart,  Kings  of
the  Wood.  Like  him  they  die  a  violent  death  ;  but  like
him  they  may  escape  from  it  for  a  time  by  their  bodily
strength  and  agility  ;  for  in  several  of  these  northern  customs
the  flight  and  pursuit  of  the  king  is  a  prominent  part  of  the
ceremony,  and  in  one  case  at  least  if  the  king  can  outrun
his  pursuers  he  retains  his  life  and  his  office  for  another
year.  In  this  last  case,  in  fact,  the  king  holds  office  on
condition  of  running  for  his  life  once  a  year,  just  as  the
King  of  Calicut  in  later  times  held  office  on  condition  of
defending  his  life  against  all  comers  once  every  twelve
years,  and  just  as  the  priest  of  Nemi  held  office  on  condition

1  See  above,  p.  62.


Ill


FLIGHT  OF  THE  KING  67


of  defending  himself  against  any  assault  at  any  time.  In
all  these  cases  the  life  of  the  god -man  is  prolonged  on
condition  of  showing,  in  a  severe  physical  contest  of  fight  or
flight,  that  his  bodily  strength  is  not  decayed,  and  that,
therefore,  the  violent  death,  which  sooner  or  later  is  inevit-
able, may  for  the  present  be  postponed.  With  regard  to
flight  it  is  noticeable  that  flight  figured  conspicuously  both
in  the  legend  and  in  the  practice  of  the  King  of  the  Wood.
He  had  to  be  a  runaway  slave  in  memory  of  the  flight
of  Orestes,  the  traditional  founder  of  the  worship  ;  hence
the  Kings  of  the  Wood  are  described  by  an  ancient  writer
as  "  both  strong  of  hand  and  fleet  of  foot,"^  Perhaps  if  we
knew  the  ritual  of  the  Arician  grove  fully  we  might  find  that
the  king  was  allowed  a  chance  for  his  life  by  flight,  like  his
Bohemian  brother.  We  may  conjecture  that  the  annual
flight  of  the  priestly  king  at  Rome  [t-egifugiunif  was  at  first
a  flight  of  the  same  kind  ;  in  other  words,  that  he  was
originally  one  of  those  divine  kings  who  are  either  put  to
death  after  a  fixed  period  or  allowed  to  prove  by  the  strong
hand  or  the  fleet  foot  that  their  divinity  is  vigorous  and
unimpaired.  One  more  point  of  resemblance  may  be  noted
between  the  Italian  King  of  the  Wood  and  his  northern
counterparts.  In  Saxony  and  Thliringen  the  representative
of  the  tree-spirit,  after  being  killed,  is  brought  to  life  again
by  a  doctor.  This  is  exactly  what  legend  affirmed  to  have
happened  to  the  first  King  of  the  Wood  at  Nemi,  Hippolytus
or  Virbius,  who  after  he  had  been  killed  by  his  horses  was
restored  to  life  by  the  physician  Aesculapius.^  Such  a
legend  tallies  well  with  the  theory  that  the  slaying  of  the
King  of  the  Wood  was  only  a  step  to  his  revival  or  resurrec-
tion in  his  successor.

It  has  been  assumed  that  the  mock  killino-  of  the  Wild
Man  and  of  the  King  in  North  European  folk-custom  is
a  modern  substitute  for  an  ancient  custom  of  killing  them
in  earnest.  Those  who  best  know  the  tenacity  of  life
possessed  by  folk-custom  and  its  tendency,  with  the  growth
of  civilisation,  to  dwindle  from  solemn  ritual  into  mere
pageant   and    pastime,  will   be  least   likely  to  question  the

1  Ovid,  Fasti,  iii.  271.
-   Maiquardt,  Romische  Staatsverwaltitng,  iii.-  323  sq.  ^   See  above,  p.  6.


68  MOCK  HUMAN  SACRIFICES  chap.

truth  of  this  assumption.  That  human  sacrifices  were
commonly  offered  by  the  ancestors  of  the  civiHsed  races  of
North  Europe  (Celts,  Teutons,  and  Slavs)  is  certain.^  It
is  not,  therefore,  surprising  that  the  modern  peasant  should
do  in  mimicry  what  his  forefathers  did  in  reality.  We  know
as  a  matter  of  fact  that  in  other  parts  of  the  world  mock
human  sacrifices  have  been  substituted  for  real  ones.  Thus
in  Minahassa,  a  district  of  Celebes,  human  victims  used  to
be  regularly  sacrificed  at  certain  festivals,  but  through  Dutch
influence  the  custom  was  abolished  and  a  sham  sacrifice
substituted  for  it.  The  victim  was  seated  in  a  chair  and  all
the  usual  preparations  were  made  for  sacrificing  him,  but  at
the  critical  moment,  when  the  chief  priest  had  heaved  up  his
flashing  swords  (for  he  wielded  two  of  them)  to  deal  the
fatal  stroke,  his  assistants  sprang  forward,  their  hands  wrapt
in  cloths,  to  grasp  and  arrest  the  descending  blades.  The
precaution  was  necessary,  for  the  priest  was  wound  up  to
such  a  pitch  of  excitement  that  if  left  alone  he  might  have
consummated  the  sacrifice.  Afterwards  an  effigy,  made  out
of  the  stem  of  a  banana-tree,  was  substituted  for  the  human
victim  ;  and  the  blood,  which  might  not  be  wanting,  was
supplied  by  fowls."  Captain  Bourke  was  informed  by  an  old
chief  that  the  Indians  of  Arizona  used  to  offer  human  sacrifices
at  the  Feast  of  Fire  when  the  days  are  shortest.  The  victim
had  his  throat  cut,  his  breast  opened,  and  his  heart  taken
out  by  one  of  the  priests.  This  custom  was  abolished  by
the  Mexicans,  but  for  a  long  time  afterwards  a  modified  form
of  it  was  secretly  observed  as  follows.  The  victim,  generally
a  young  man,  had  his  throat  cut,  and  blood  was  allowed  to
flow  freely  ;  but  the  medicine-men  sprinkled  "  medicine  "  on
the  gash,  which  soon  healed  up,  and  the  man  recovered.^
So  in  the  ritual  of  Artemis  at  Halac  in  Attica,  a  man's
throat  was  cut  and  the  blood  allowed  to  gush  out,  but  he
was   not   killed.'*      At  the   funeral  of  a  chief  in  Nias   slaves

^  Caesar,  Bell.   Gall.  vi.   i6  ;   Adam  schrift, "   Mededeelingen   van   wege  het

of  Bremen,  Descript.  [nsul.  Aqnil.  c.  27;  Nederlandsche       Zendelinggenootsckap,

Olaus  Mas^nus,  iii.  6;  Grimm,  Deutsche  xxxvi.  (1892),  p.  338  S(j.

Mytbologie^  i.  35  -W-  =  Mone,  Geschichte  3              ^^            ^^^^^.^  ^^^^^^       ^^^^

des  nordrschen  Heidenthums,  1.  69,  1 19,  ^.,^    "^  •,  ^f  j^                     g

120,  149,  187  5^.  ^        -^                 '  f      7      -/

-   H.J.  Tendeloo,  "  Verklaring  van  *  Euripides,   Iphig.   in    Taiir.    1458

het  zoogenaamd  Oud-AlfoerschTeeken-  sqq.


in  MOCK  HUMAN  SACRIFICES  69

are  sacrificed  ;  a  little  of  their  hair  is  cut  off,  and  then  they
are  beheaded.  The  victims  are  generally  purchased  for  the
purpose,  and  their  number  is  proportioned  to  the  wealth  and
power  of  the  deceased.  But  if  the  number  required  is
excessively  great  or  cannot  be  procured,  some  of  the  chiefs
own  slaves  undergo  a  sham  sacrifice.  They  are  told,  and
believe,  that  they  are  about  to  be  decapitated  ;  their  heads
are  placed  on  a  log  and  their  necks  struck  with  the  back  of
a  sword.  The  fright  drives  some  of  them  crazy.^  When  a
Hindoo  has  killed  or  ill-treated  an  ape,  a  bird  of  prey  of  a
certain  kind,  or  a  cobra  capella,  in  the  presence  of  the
worshippers  of  Vishnu,  he  must  expiate  his  offence  by  the
pretended  sacrifice  and  resurrection  of  a  human  being.  An
incision  is  made  in  the  victim's  arm,  the  blood  flows,  he
grows  faint,  falls,  and  feigns  to  die.  Afterwards  he  is
brought  to  life  by  being  sprinkled  with  blood  drawn  from
the  thigh  of  a  worshipper  of  Vishnu.  The  crowd  of  spec-
tators is  fully  convinced  of  the  reality  of  this  simulated
death  and  resurrection.^  In  Samoa,  where  every  family  had
its  god  incarnate  in  one  or  more  species  of  animals,  any
disrespect  shown  to  the  worshipful  animal,  either  by  members
of  the  kin  or  by  a  stranger  in  their  presence,  had  to  be
atoned  for  by  pretending  to  bake  one  of  the  family  in  a  cold
oven  as  a  burnt  sacrifice  to  appease  the  wrath  of  the  offended
god.  For  example,  if  a  stranger  staying  in  a  household
whose  god  was  incarnate  in  cuttle-fish  were  to  catch  and
cook  one  of  these  creatures,  or  if  a  member  of  the  family
had  been  present  where  a  cuttle-fish  was  eaten,  the  family
would  meet  in  solemn  conclave  and  choose  a  man  or  woman
to  go  and  lie  down  in  a  cold  oven,  where  he  would  be  covered
over  with  leaves,  just  as  if  he  were  really  being  baked.
While  this  mock  sacrifice  was  being  carried  out  the  family
prayed  :  "  O  bald-headed  Cuttle-fish  !  forgive  what  has  been
done,  it  was  all  the  work  of  a  stranger."  If  they  had  not
thus  abased  themselves  before  the  divine  cuttle-fish,  he  would
undoubtedly  have  come  and  been  the  death  of  somebody  by

1  Nieuwenhuisen    '  en     Rosenberg,  Nias,  p.  282  sq.
'■Verslag    omtrent    het   eiland    Nias,"

Verkandeltngen  van  het  Bat av.  Gemot-  ^  J.  A.  Dubois,  Miturs,  Instittdions

schap  van  Ktinsten  en  Wetenschappen,  et  Cirimonies  des  Peuples  de  I'lttde,  1.

xxx.   43  ;   E.  Modigliani,  Unviaggio  a  1 51  sq.


^o  MOCK  HUMAN  SACRIFICES  chap.

making  a  cuttle-fish  to  grow  in  his  inside.^  Sometimes,  as  in
Minahassa,  the  pretended  sacrifice  is  carried  out,  not  on  a  living
person,  but  on  an  effigy.  At  the  City  of  the  Sun  in  ancient
Egypt  three  men  used  to.  be  sacrificed  every  day,  after  the
priests  had  stripped  and  examined  them,  like  calves,  to  see
whether  they  were  without  blemish  and  fit  for  the  altar.  But
King  Amasis  ordered  waxen  images  to  be  substituted  for  the
human  victims.'-^  An  Indian  law-book,  the  Calica  Puran,
prescribes  that  when  the  sacrifice  of  lions,  tigers,  or  human
beings  is  required,  an  image  of  a  lion,  tiger,  or  man  shall  be
made  with  butter,  paste,  or  barley  meal,  and  sacrificed
instead.^  Some  of  the  Gonds  of  India  formerly  offered
human  sacrifices  ;  they  now  sacrifice  straw-men,  which  are
found  to  answer  the  purpose  just  as  well.*  Colonel  Dalton
was  told  that  in  some  of  their  villages  the  Bhagats  "  annually
make  an  image  of  a  man  in  wood,  put  clothes  and  ornaments
on  it,  and  present  it  before  the  altar  of  a  Mahadeo.  The
person  who  officiates  as  priest  on  the  occasion  says  :  '  O
Mahadeo,  we  sacrifice  this  man  to  you  according  to  ancient
customs.  Give  us  rain  in  due  season,  and  a  plentiful  harvest.'
Then  with  one  stroke  of  the  axe  the  head  of  the  image  is
struck  off,  and  the  body  is  removed  and  buried."  ^


8  3.    Carrying  out  Death

Thus  far  I  have  offered  an  explanation  of  the  rule  which
required  that  the  priest  of  Nemi  should  be  slain  by  his
successor.  The  explanation  claims  to  be  no  more  than
probable  ;  our  scanty  knowledge  of  the  custom  and  of  its
history  forbids  it  to  be  more.  But  its  probability  will  be
augmented  in  proportion  to  the  extent  to  which  the  motives
and  modes  of  thought  which  it  assumes  can  be  proved  to
have  operated  in  primitive  society.  Hitherto  the  god  with
whose  death  and  resurrection  we  have  been  chiefly  concerned
has    been    the    tree-god.       Tree-worship    may   perhaps    be

'   G.    Turner,    Samoa,    p.     31    sq.  ;  Calica  Ptiraii  by  W.   C.  Blaquiere,  in

compare  pp.  38,  58,  59,  69  .?./.,  72.  Asiatick  Reseaiches,   v.   376  (8vo  ed.,

2  Porphyry,   De  abstineniia,   ii.  55,  London,  1807).

citing  Manetho  as  his  authority.  *   Dalton,   Ethnology  of  Bengal,   p.

^   "The     Rudhiradhyaya,     or    san-  281.

guinary  chapter,"   translated   from   the  ^  Dalton,  op.  fit.  p.  258  sq.


Ill  DEATH  OF  THE  CARNIVAL  71

regarded  (though  this  is  a  conjecture)  as  occupying  an  inter-
mediate place  in  the  history  of  reHgion,  between  the  religion
of  the  hunter  and  shepherd  on  the  one  side,  whose  gods
are  mostly  animals,  and  the  religion  of  the  husbandman
on  the  other  hand,  in  whose  worship  the  cultivated  plants
play  an  important  part.  If  then  I  can  show  that  the
custom  of  killing  the  god  and  the  belief  in  his  resurrection
originated,  or  at  least  existed,  in  the  hunting  and  pastoral
stage  of  society,  when  the  slain  god  was  an  animal,  and  that
it  survived  into  the  agricultural  stage,  when  the  slain  god
was  the  corn  or  a  human  being  representing  the  corn,  the
probability  of  my  explanation  will  have  been  considerably
increased.  This  I  shall  attempt  to  do  in  the  remainder
of  this  chapter,  in  the  course  of  which  I  hope  to  clear
up  some  obscurities  which  still  remain,  and  to  answer
some  objections  which  may  have  suggested  themselves  to
the  reader.

We  start  from  the  point  at  which  we  left  off — the  spring
customs  of  European  peasantry.  Besides  the  ceremonies
already  described  there  are  two  kindred  sets  of  observances
in  which  the  simulated  death  of  a  divine  or  supernatural
being  is  a  conspicuous  feature.  In  one  of  them  the  being
whose  death  is  dramatically  represented  is  a  personification
of  the  Carnival  ;  in  the  other  it  is  Death  himself  The
former  ceremony  falls  naturally  at  the  end  of  the  Carnival,
either  on  the  last  day  of  that  merry  season,  namely
Shrove  Tuesday,  or  on  the  first  day  of  Lent,  namely
Ash  Wednesday.  The  date  of  the  other  ceremony  —  the
Carrying  or  Driving  out  of  Death,  as  it  is  commonly  called
— is  not  so  uniformly  fixed.  Generally  it  is  the  fourth
Sunday  in  Lent,  which  hence  goes  by  the  name  of  Dead
Sunday  ;  but  in  some  places  the  celebration  falls  a  week
earlier,  in  others,  as  among  the  Czechs  of  Bohemia,  a  week
later,  while  in  certain  German  villages  of  Moravia  it  is  held
on  the  first  Sunday  after  Easter.  Perhaps,  as  has  been
suggested,  the  date  may  originally  have  been  variable,
depending  on  the  appearance  of  the  first  swallow  or  some
other  herald  of  the  spring.  Some  writers  regard  the
ceremony  as  Slavonic  in  its  origin.  Grimm  thought  it  was
a  festival  of  the  New  Year  with  the  old   Slavs,  who  began


72  DEATH  OF  THE  CARNIVAL  chap.

their  year  in  March/  We  shall  first  take  examples  of  the
mimic  death  of  the  Carnival,  which  always  falls  before  the
other  in  the  calendar.

At  Frosinone,  in  Latium,  about  half-way  between  Rome
and  Naples,  the  dull  monotony  of  life  in  a  provincial  Italian
town  is  agreeably  broken  on  the  last  day  of  the  Carnival  by
the  ancient  festival  known  as  the  Radica.  About  four
o'clock  in  the  afternoon  the  town  band,  playing  lively  tunes
and  followed  by  a  great  crowd,  proceeds  to  the  Piazza  del
Plebiscito,  where  is  the  Sub- Prefecture  as  well  as  the  rest  of
the  Government  buildings.  Here,  in  the  middle  of  the
square,  the  eyes  of  the  expectant  multitude  are  greeted  by
the  sight  of  an  immense  car  decked  with  many-coloured
festoons  and  drawn  by  four  horses.  Mounted  on  the  car
is  a  huge  chair,  on  which  sits  enthroned  the  majestic  figure
of  the  Carnival,  a  man  of  stucco  about  nine  feet  high  with  a
rubicund  and  smiling  countenance.  Enormous  boots,  a  tin
helmet  like  those  which  grace  the  heads  of  officers  of  the
Italian  marine,  and  a  coat  of  many  colours  embellished  with
strange  devices,  adorn  the  outward  man  of  this  stately
personage.  His  left  hand  rests  on  the  arm  of  the  chair,
while  with  his  right  he  gracefully  salutes  the  crowd,  being
moved  to  this  act  of  civility  by  a  string  which  is  pulled  by
a  man  who  modestly  shrinks  from  publicity  under  the  mercy-
seat.  And  now  the  crowd,  surging  excitedly  round  the
car,  gives  vent  to  its  feelings  in  wild  cries  of  joy,  gentle
and  simple  being  mixed  up  together  and  all  dancing  furiously
the  Saltarello.  A  special  feature  of  the  festival  is  that
every  one  must '  carry  in  his  hand  what  is  called  a  radica
("  root "),  by  which  is  meant  a  huge  leaf  of  the  aloe  or  rather
the  agave.      Any  one  who  ventured  into  the  crowd  without

1   Grimm,   Deutsche  Mythologie,^  ii.  Lent     is    also     known    as    Mid -Lent,

645;   K.  \\-A.\x\>\.,  Sagenhitch  dc7-  Laiisitz,  because  it  falls  in  the  middle  of  Lent,

ii.    58;     Reinsberg-Dliringsfeld,   Fcst-  or  as  Za^/ar^  from  the  first  word  of  the

Kalender  atis  Bohmeii,  p.  86  sq.  ;   id.,  liturgy  for  that  day.      In    the   Roman

Das  fcstliche JaJir,  p.  77  sq.  ;   Bavaria,  calendar  it  is  the  Sunday  of  the  Rose

Landes-  imd  Volkskuiide  des Konigreichs  [Dovieiiica  jvsae),  because  on  that  day

Bayern,     iii.      958     sq.  ;      Sepp,    Die  the    Pope  consecrates   a   golden    rose.

Religion  der  alien  Deutschcn  (Munich,  which   he  presents  to  some  royal   lady.

1890),  p.  67  sq.;  W.  Miiller,  Beitrdge  In  one  German  village  of  Transylvania

zur     Volkskunde     der     Dciitsclicn     in  the  Carrying  out  of  Death  takes  place

A  fain-en   (Vienna  and   Olmutz,    1893),  on  Ascension   Day.     See  below,  p.  93

jip.  258,  353.      The  fourth  Sunday  in  sq.


Ill  IN  ITALY  73

such  a  leaf  would  be  unceremoniously  hustled  out  of  it,
unless  indeed  he  bore  as  a  substitute  a  large  cabbage  at  the
end  of  a  long  stick  or  a  bunch  of  grass  curiously  plaited.
When  the  multitude,  after  a  short  turn,  has  escorted  the  slow-
moving  car  to  the  gate  of  the  Sub-Prefecture,  they  halt,  and
the  car,  jolting  over  the  uneven  ground,  rumbles  into  the
courtyard.  A  hush  now  falls  on  the  crowd,  their  subdued
voices  sounding,  according  to  the  description  of  one  who  has
heard  them,  like  the  murmur  of  a  troubled  sea.  All  eyes
are  turned  anxiously  to  the  door  from  which  the  Sub-Prefect
himself  and  the  other  representatives  of  the  majesty  of  the
law  are  expected  to  issue  and  pay  their  homage  to  the  hero
of  the  hour.  A  few  moments  of  suspense  and  then  a  storm
of  cheers  and  hand-clapping  salutes  the  appearance  of  the
dignitaries,  as  they  file  out  and,  descending  the  staircase,
take  their  place  in  the  procession.  The  hymn  of  the
Carnival  is  now  thundered  out,  after  which,  amid  a  deafening
roar,  aloe  leaves  and  cabbages  are  whirled  aloft  and  descend
impartially  on  the  heads  of  the  just  and  the  unjust,  who
lend  fresh  zest  to  the  proceedings  by  engaging  in  a  free
fight.  When  these  preliminaries  have  been  concluded  to  the
satisfaction  of  all  concerned,  the  procession  gets  under  weigh.
The  rear  is  brought  up  by  a  cart  laden  with  barrels  of  wine
and  policemen,  the  latter  engaged  in  the  congenial  task  of
serving  out  wine  to  all  who  ask  for  it,  while  a  most  inter-
necine struggle,  accompanied  by  a  copious  discharge  of  yells,
blows,  and  blasphemy,  goes  on  among  the  surging  crowd
at  the  cart's  tail  in  their  anxiety  not  to  miss  the  glorious
opportunity  of  intoxicating  themselves  at  the  public  expense.
Finally,  after  the  procession  has  paraded  the  principal  streets
in  this  majestic  manner,  the  effigy  of  Carnival  is  taken  to
the  middle  of  a  public  square,  stripped  of  his  finery,  laid
on  a  pile  of  wood,  and  burnt  amid  the  cries  of  the  multitude,
who  thundering  out  once  more  the  song  of  the  Carnival
fling  their  so-called  "  roots  "  on  the  pyre  and  give  themselves
up  without  restraint  to  the  pleasures  of  the  dance.^

1  G.    Targioni-Tozzetti,    Saggio   di  night  on  Shro%'e  Tuesday   1878.      See

Novelline,    Canti   ed    D'satize  popolari  G.    Pitre,    Usi  e    Costiimi,    Credenze  e

della    Ciociaria   (Palermo,    1891),    pp.  Prejudizi,    i.      117-  119;      G.    Trede,

89-95.      At    Palermo  an   effigy  of  the  Das     Hddentinn     in     der     romisclien

Carnival   [Nanmi)  was  burnt   at   mid-  Kirche,  iii.   11,  note*.


74  DEATH  OF  THE  CARNIVAL  chai'.

In  the  Abruzzi  a  pasteboard  figure  of  the  Carnival  is
carried  by  four  grave-diggers  with  pipes  in  their  mouths  and
bottles  of  wine  slung  at  their  shoulder-belts.  In  front  walks
the  wife  of  the  Carnival,  dressed  in  mourning  and  dissolved
in  tears.  From  time  to  time  the  company  halts,  and  while
the  wife  addresses  the  sympathising  public,  the  grave-diggers
refresh  the  inner  man  with  a  pull  at  the  bottle.  In  the  open
square  the  mimic  corpse  is  laid  on  a  pyre,  and  to  the  roll  of
drums,  the  shrill  screams  of  the  women,  and  the  gruffer
cries  of  the  men  a  light  is  set  to  it.  While  the  figure  burns,
chestnuts  are  thrown  about  among  the  crowd.  Sometimes
the  Carnival   is   represented   by  a  straw-man  at   the  top  of  a  1

pole    which    is    borne    through    the    town    by    a    troop    of  ^

mummers  in  the  course  of  the  afternoon.  When  evening
comes  on,  four  of  the  mummers  hold  out  a  quilt  or  sheet
by  the  corners,  and  the  figure  of  the  Carnival  is  made  to
tumble  into  it.  The  procession  is  then  resumed,  the
performers  weeping  crocodile  tears  and  emphasising  the
poignancy  of  their  grief  by  the  help  of  saucepans  and  dinner
bells.  Sometimes,  again,  in  the  Abruzzi  the  dead  Carnival
is  personified  by  a  living  man  who  lies  in  a  coffin,  attended
by  another  who  acts  the  priest  and  dispenses  holy  water  in
great  profusion  from  a  bathing-tub.^

At  Lerida,  in  Catalonia,  the  funeral  of  the  Carnival  was
witnessed  by  an  English  traveller  in  1877.  On  the
last  Sunday  of  the  Carnival  a  grand  procession  of  infantry,
cavalry,  and  maskers  of  many  sorts,  some  on  horseback  and
some  in  carriages,  escorted  the  grand  car  of  His  Grace  Pau
Pi,  as  the  effigy  was  called,  in  triumph  through  the  principal
streets.  For  three  days  the  revelry  ran  high,  and  then  at
midnight  on  the  last  day  of  the  Carnival  the  same  procession
again  wound  through  the  streets,  but  under  a  different  aspect
and  for  a  different  end.  The  triumphal  car  was  exchanged
for  a  hearse,  in  which  reposed  the  effigy  of  his  dead  Grace  ;

1  A.  de  Nino,  Usi  e  Costumi  Abruz-  which,    stript    of    their    branches    and

zesi,  ii.   198-200.      The  writer  omits  to  surmounted   by  banners,  have  been  set

mention  the  date  of  these  celebrations.  up   the   day   before    in    public    places.

No  doubt  it   is  either  Shrove  Tuesday  These  trees  go  by  the  name  of  Scarli.

or  Ash  Wednesday.      In  some  parts  of  See  G.    di    Giovanni,    Usi,    Credcnze  e

Piedmont  an  effigy  of  Carnival  is  burnt  Pngiiidizi     del     Canavcse     (Palermo,

on  the  evening  of  Shrove  Tuesday  ;  in  1889),  pp.   161,  164  sq.
others  they  set  fire  to  tall  poplar  trees,


\


Ill  IN  SPAIN  AND  FRANCE  75

a  troop  of  maskers,  who  in  the  first  procession  had  played
the  part  of  Students  of  Folly  with  many  a  merry  quip  and
jest,  now,  robed  as  priests  and  bishops,  paced  slowly  along
holding  aloft  huge  lighted  tapers  and  singing  a  dirge.  All
the  mummers  wore  crape,  and  all  the  horsemen  carried
blazing  flambeaux.  Down  the  high  street,  between  the
lofty,  many-storeyed  and  balconied  houses,  where  every
window,  every  balcony,  every  housetop  was  crammed  with
a  dense  mass  of  spectators,  all  dressed  and  masked  in
fantastic  gorgeousness,  the  procession  took  its  melancholy
way.  Over  the  scene  flashed  and  played  the  shifting  cross-
lights  and  shadows  from  the  moving  torches  ;  red  and  blue
Bengal  lights  flared  up  and  died  out  again  ;  and  above  the
trampling  of  the  horses  and  the  measured  tread  of  the
marching  multitude  rose  the  voices  of  the  priests  chanting
the  requiem,  whSle  the  military  bands  struck  in  with  the
solemn  roll  of  the  muffled  drums.  On  reaching  the
principal  square  the  procession  halted,  a  burlesque
funeral  oration  was  pronounced  over  the  defunct  Pau  Pi,
and  the  lights  were  extinguished.  Immediately  the  devil
and  his  angels  darted  from  the  crowd,  seized  the  body  and
fled  away  with  it,  hotly  pursued  by  the  whole  multitude,
yelling,  screaming,  and  cheering.  Naturally  the  fiends  were
overtaken  and  dispersed  ;  and  the  sham  corpse,  rescued
from  their  clutches,  was  laid  in  a  grave  that  had  been  made
ready  for  its  reception.  Thus  the  Carnival  of  1877  at
Lerida  died  and  was  buried.^

A  ceremony  of  the  same  sort  is  observed  in  Provence  on
Ash  Wednesday.  An  elifigy  called  Caramantran,  whimsically
attired,  is  drawn  in  a  chariot  or  borne  on  a  litter,  accom-
panied by  the  populace  in  grotesque  costumes,  who  carry
gourds  full  of  wine  and  drain  them  with  all  the  marks,  real
or  affected,  of  intoxication.  At  the  head  of  the  procession
are  some  men  disguised  as  judges  and  barristers,  and  a  tall
gaunt  personage  who  masquerades  as  Lent  ;  behind  them
follow  young  people  mounted  on  miserable  hacks  and  attired
as  mourners,  who  pretend  to  bewail  the  fate  that  is  in  store
for  Caramantran.  In  the  principal  square  the  procession
halts,   the   tribunal   is   constituted,  and   Caramantran   placed

'  J.  S.  Campion,  On  Foot  in  Spain  (London,  1879),  pp.  291-295.


76  DEATH  OF  THE  CARNIVAL  chap.

at  the  bar.  After  a  formal  trial  he  is  sentenced  to  death
amid  the  groans  of  the  mob  ;  the  barrister  who  defended
him  embraces  his  client  for  the  last  time  ;  the  officers  of
justice  do  their  duty  ;  the  condemned  is  set  with  his  back  to
a  wall  and  hurried  into  eternity  under  a  shower  of  stones.
The  sea  or  a  river  receives  his  mangled  remains.^  At  Lussac
in  the  department  of  Vienne  young  people,  attired  in  long
mourning  robes  and  with  woebegone  countenances,  carry  an
effigy  down  to  the  river  on  Ash  Wednesday  and  throw  it
into  the  river,  crying,  "Carnival  is  dead  !  Carnival  is  dead!"^
Throughout  nearly  the  whole  of  the  Ardennes  it  was  and
still  is  customary  on  Ash  Wednesday  to  burn  an  effigy  which
is  supposed  to  represent  the  Carnival,  while  appropriate  verses
are  sung  round  about  the  blazing  figure.  Very  often  an
attempt  is  made  to  fashion  the  effigy  in  the  likeness  of  the
husband  who  is  supposed  to  be  least  faithful  to  his  wife  of
any  in  the  village.  As  might  perhaps  have  been  anticipated,
the  distinction  of  being  selected  for  portraiture  under  these
circumstances  has  a  slight  tendency  to  breed  domestic  jars,
especially  when  the  portrait  is  burnt  in  front  of  the  house
of  the  gay  deceiver  whom  it  represents,  while  a  powerful
chorus  of  caterwauls,  groans,  and  other  melodious  sounds
bears  public  testimony  to  the  opinion  which  his  friends  and
neighbours  entertain  of  his  private  virtues.  In  some  villages
of  the  Ardennes  a  young  man  of  flesh  and  blood,  dressed  up
in  hay  and  straw,  used  to  act  the  part  of  Shrove  Tuesday
{Mardi  Gras),  as  the  personification  of  the  Carnival  is  often
called  in  France  after  the  last  day  of  the  period  which  he
represents.  He  was  brought  before  a  mock  tribunal,  and
being  condemned  to  death  was  placed  with  his  back  to
a  wall,  like  a  soldier  at  a  military  execution,  and  fired  at
with  blank  cartridges.  At  Vrigne-aux-Bois  one  of  these
harmless  buffoons,  named  Thierry,  was  accidentally  killed
by  a  wad  that  had  been  left  in  a  musket  of  the  firing-party.
When  poor  Shrove  Tuesday  dropped  under  the  fire,  the
applause   was   loud   and    long,   he   did   it   so   naturally  ;    but

'   A.  de  Nore,    Coutitmes,  Mythes  et  tliat  the  effigy  of  Caramantran  is  some-

Traditioiis    dcs    Frovi/ius    de    France,  times  burnt  (Cortet,  Essai  snr  hs  fetes

p.  37  sq.      The   name   Caramantran   is  reli^^imses,  p.  107).

thought  to  be  compounded  of  care  me  -   L.    Pineau,    Folk-lore    dn    Poitou

entrant,  "Lent  entering."      It  is  said  (Paris,   1892),  p.  493.


Ill  IN  FRANCE  77

when  he  did  not  get  up  again,  they  ran  to  him  and  found
him  a  corpse.  Since  then  there  have  been  no  more  of  these
mock  executions  in  the  Ardennes.^

In  Normandy  on  the  evening  of  Ash  Wednesday  it  used
to  be  the  custom  to  hold  a  celebration  called  the  Burial  of
Shrove  Tuesday.  A  squalid  effigy  scantily  clothed  in  rags,
a  battered  old  hat  crushed  down  on  his  dirty  face,  his  great
round  paunch  stuffed  with  straw,  represented  the  disreputable
old  rake  who  after  a  long  course  of  dissipation  was  now  about
to  suffer  for  his  sins.  Hoisted  on  the  shoulders  of  a  sturdy
fellow,  who  pretended  to  stagger  under  the  burden,  this
popular  personification  of  the  Carnival  promenaded  the
streets  for  the  last  time  in  a  manner  the  reverse  of  triumphal.
Preceded  by  a  drummer  and  accompanied  by  a  jeering  rabble,
among  whom  the  urchins  and  all  the  tag-rag  and  bobtail  of
the  town  mustered  in  great  force,  the  figure  was  carried  about
by  the  flickering  light  of  torches  to  the  discordant  din  of
shovels  and  tongs,  pots  and  pans,  horns  and  kettles,
mingled  with  hootings,  groans,  and  hisses.  From  time  to
time  the  procession  halted,  and  a  champion  of  morality
accused  the  broken-down  old  sinner  of  all  the  excesses  he
had  committed  and  for  which  he  was  now  about  to  be  burned
alive.  The  culprit,  having  nothing  to  urge  in  his  own  defence,
was  thrown  on  a  heap  of  straw,  a  torch  was  put  to  it,  and
a  great  blaze  shot  up,  to  the  delight  of  the  children  who
frisked  round  it  screaming  out  some  old  popular  verses  about
the  death  of  the  Carnival.  Sometimes  the  effigy  was  rolled
down  the  slope  of  a  hill  before  being  burnt.^  At  Saint-L6
the  ragged  effigy  of  Shrove  Tuesday  was  followed  by  his
widow,  a  big  burly  lout  dressed  as  a  woman  with  a  crape
veil,  who  emitted  sounds  of  lamentation  and  woe  in  a  sten-
torian voice.  After  being  carried  about  the  streets  on  a  litter
attended  by  a  crowd  of  maskers,  the  figure  was  thrown  into
the  River  Vire.  The  final  scene  has  been  graphically  described
by  Madame  Octave  Feuillet  as  she  witnessed  it  in  her  child-
hood some  fifty  years  ago.      "  My  parents   invited   friends   to

1   A.  Meyrac,  Tradiiions,  Legeiides  et  general  in  France.
Contes  des  Ardeimes  (Charleville,  1 890),

p.    63.      According  to   the   writer,  the  ^    J.    Lecceur,   Esqtiisses    dzc   Socage

custom  of  burning  an  effigy  of  Shrove  Normand    (Conde-sur-Noireau,     1883-

Tuesday    or    the     Carnival    is     pretty  1887),  ii.   14S-150.


78  DEATH  OF  THE  CARNIVAL  chap.

see,  from  the  top  of  the  tower  of  Jeanne  Couillard,  the  funeral
procession  passing.  It  was  there  that,  quaffing  lemonade — •
the  only  refreshment  allowed  because  of  the  fast — we  wit-
nessed at  nightfall  a  spectacle  of  which  I  shall  always
preserve  a  lively  recollection.  At  our  feet  flowed  the  Vire
under  its  old  stone  bridge.  On  the  middle  of  the  bridge  lay
the  figure  of  Shrove  Tuesday  on  a  litter  of  leaves,  surrounded
by  scores  of  maskers  dancing,  singing,  and  carrying  torches.
Some  of  them  in  their  motley  costumes  ran  along  the  parapet
like  fiends.  The  rest,  worn  out  with  their  revels,  sat  on  the
posts  and  dozed.  Soon  the  dancing  stopped,  and  some  of
the  troop,  seizing  a  torch,  set  fire  to  the  effigy,  after  which
they  flung  it  into  the  river  with  redoubled  shouts  and  clamour.
The  man  of  straw,  soaked  with  resin,  floated  away  burning
down  the  stream  of  the  Vire,  lighting  up  with  its  funeral  fires
the  woods  on  the  bank  and  the  battlements  of  the  old  castle
in  which  Louis  XI.  and  Francis  I.  had  slept.  When  the  last
glimmer  of  the  blazing  phantom  had  vanished,  like  a  falling
star,  at  the  end  of  the  valley,  every  one  withdrew,  crowd  and
maskers  alike,  and  we  quitted  the  ramparts  with  our  guests.
As  we  returned  home  my  father  sang  gaily  the  old  popular


song  :-


'  Shrove  Tuesday  is  dead  and  his  wife  has  got
His  shabby  pocket-handkerchief  and  his  cracked  old  pot.
Sing  high,  sing  low,
Shrove  Tuesday  will  come  back  no  more.'

'  He  will  come  back  !  He  will  come  back  ! '  we  cried  warmly,
clapping  our  hands  ;  and  he  did  come  back  next  year,  and  I
think  I  should  see  him  still  if,  after  the  lapse  of  half  a  century,
I  returned  to  the  land  of  my  birth."  ^

In  Upper  Brittany  the  burial  of  Shrove  Tuesday  or  the
Carnival  is  sometimes  performed  in  a  ceremonious  manner.
Four  young  fellows  carry  a  straw-man  or  one  of  their  com-
panions, and  are  followed  by  a  funeral  procession.  A  show
is  made  of  depositing  the  pretended  corpse  in  the  grave,
after  which  the  bystanders  make  believe  to  mourn,  crying  out
in  melancholy  tones,  "  Ah  !  my  poor  little  Shrove  Tuesday  !  "
The  boy  who  played   the  part  of  Shrove  Tuesday  bears   the

1   Madame  Octave  Feuillet,  Qitelques  amides  de  ma   Vie^  (Paris,  1895),  PP-
59-61.


Ill  IN  FRANCE  AND  AUSTRIA  79

name  for  the  whole  year/  At  Lesneven  in  Lower  Brittany-
it  was  formerly  the  custom  on  Ash  Wednesday  to  burn  a
straw-man,  covered  with  rags,  after  he  had  been  promenaded
about  the  town.  He  was  followed  by  a  representative  of
Shrove  Tuesday  clothed  with  sardines  and  cods'  tails,^  In
Saintonge  and  Aunis,  which  correspond  roughly  to  the
modern  departments  of  Charente,  children  used  to  drown  or
burn  a  figure  of  the  Carnival  on  the  morning  of  Ash
Wednesday.^  The  beginning  of  Lent  in  England  was
formerly  marked  by  a  custom  which  has  now  fallen  into
disuse.  A  figure,  made  up  of  straw  and  cast-off  clothes,
was  drawn  or  carried  through  the  streets  amid  much  noise
and  merriment ;  after  which  it  was  either  burnt,  shot  at,  or
thrown  down  a  chimney.  This  image  went  by  the  name  of
Jack  o*  Lent,  and  was  by  some  supposed  to  represent  Judas
Iscariot.*

A  Bohemian  form  of  the  custom  of  "  Burying  the  Car-
nival "  has  been  already  described.''  The  following  Swabian
form  is  obviously  similar.  In  the  neighbourhood  of  Tubingen
on  Shrove  Tuesday  a  straw-man,  called  the  Shrovetide  Bear,
is  made  up  ;  he  is  dressed  in  a  pair  of  old  trousers,  and  a
fresh  black -pudding  or  two  squirts  filled  with  blood  are
inserted  in  his  neck.  After  a  formal  condemnation  he  is
beheaded,  laid  in  a  coffin,  and  on  Ash  Wednesday  is  buried
in  the  churchyard.  This  is  called  "  Burying  the  Carnival."  ^
Amongst  some  of  the  Saxons  of  Transylvania  the  Carnival
is  hung.  Thus  at  Braller  on  Ash  Wednesday  or  Shrove
Tuesday  two  white  and  two  chestnut  horses  draw  a  sledge
on  which  is  placed  a  straw-man  swathed  in  a  white  cloth  ;
beside  him  is  a  cart-wheel  which  is  kept  turning  round.
Two  lads  disguised  as  old  men  follow  the  sledge  lamenting.
The  rest  of  the  village  lads,  mounted  on  horseback  and
decked    with    ribbons,  accompany    the    procession,  which    is

1    Sebillot,    Coiitumes  popidaires  de  .\sh  Wednesday  in   France,  see  further

la  Haute-Bretagne,  p.  227  sq.  Berenger-Feraud,  Siiperstiiions  et  Siir-

■  ^  A.  de  Nore,  Coiitumes,  Mylhes  el  vivances,  iv.  52  sq.
Traditions  des  Provinces  de  France,  p.  4    y.    F.    Thiselton    Dyer,    British


206.

3    T.    L.    M.    Nogues,    Les    Mceurs
d''autrefois  en  Saintonge  et  en  Aunis  ^^^  P-  "^  ■^^•

(Saintes,  1891),  p.  60.      As  to  the  trial  •*  E.  Meier,  Deutsche  Sagen,  Sitten


Popular  Customs,  p.  93.
^  See  p.  62  sq.
•'  E.  Meier,  Deutsche
and  condemnation  of  the  Carnival  on       uiul  Gebraiiche  aus  Schwaben,  p.  371.


8o  DEATH  OF  THE  CARNIVAL  chap.

headed  by  two  girls  crowned  with  evergreen  and  drawn  in  a
waggon  or  sledge.  A  trial  is  held  under  a  tree,  at  which
lads  disguised  as  soldiers  pronounce  sentence  of  death.  The
two  old  men  try  to  rescue  the  straw-man  and  to  fly  with
him,  but  to  no  purpose  ;  he  is  caught  by  the  two  girls  and
handed  over  to  the  executioner,  who  hangs  him  on  a  tree.
In  vain  the  old  men  try  to  climb  up  the  tree  and  take  him
down  ;  they  always  tumble  down,  and  at  last  in  despair  they
throw  themselves  on  the  ground  and  weep  and  howl  for  the
hanged  man.  An  official  then  makes  a  speech  in  which  he
declares  that  the  Carnival  was  condemned  to  death  because
he  had  done  them  harm,  by  wearing  out  their  shoes  and
making  them  tired  and  sleepy.^  At  the  "  Burial  of  Carnival "
in  Lechrain,  a  man  dressed  as  a  woman  in  black  clothes  is
carried  on  a  litter  or  bier  by  four  men  ;  he  is  lamented  over
by  men  disguised  as  women  in  black  clothes,  then  thrown
down  before  the  village  dung-heap,  drenched  with  water,
buried  in  the  dung-heap,  and  covered  with  straw.-  Similarly
in  Schorzingen,  near  Schomberg,  the  "  Carnival  (Shrovetide)
Fool "  was  carried  all  about  the  village  on  a  bier,  preceded
by  a  man  dressed  in  white,  and  followed  by  a  devil  who  was
dressed  in  black  and  carried  chains,  which  he  clanked.  One
of  the  train  collected  gifts.  After  the  procession  the  Fool
was  buried  under  straw  and  dung.^  In  Rottweil  the  "  Car-
nival Fool  "  is  made  drunk  on  Ash  Wednesday  and  buried
under  straw  amid  loud  lamentation.*  In  Wurmlingen  the
Fool  is  represented  by  a  young  fellow  enveloped  in  straw,
who  is  led  about  the  village  by  a  rope  as  a  "  Bear  "  on  Shrove
Tuesday  and  the  preceding  day.  He  dances  to  the  flute.
Then  on  Ash  Wednesday  a  straw-man  is  made,  placed  on  a
trough,  carried  out  of  the  village  to  the  sound  of  drums  and
mournful  music,  and  buried  in  a  field.^  In  Altdorf  and
Weingarten  on  Ash  Wednesday  the  Fool,  represented  by  a
straw-man,  is  carried  about  and  then  thrown  into  the  w  iter
to    the    accompaniment    of    melancholy    music.        In    other

'  J.    Haltrich,   Zitr    Volkskunde  der  ^  E.   Meier,  Deittsche  Sagen,  Sitten

Siebei! burger  Sachsen  (Vienna,    1885),  und  Gebrduche  aiis  Schwaben,  p.  374;

p.  284  sq.  cp.      Birlinger,      Volksthiimlickes     mis

-  Leoprechting,  Aus  dein  Lechrain,  Schwaben,  ii.  p.  54  j^.,  §  71.
p.   162  sqq.  ;   Mannhardt,  Ramnkultus,  ■*   E.  Meier,  op.  cit.  p.  372.

p.  411.  ■''  E.  .Meier,  op.  cit.  p.  373.


Ill  IN  GERMANY  AND  FRANCE  8i

villages  of  Svvabia  the  part  of  fool  is  played  by  a  live  person,
who  is  thrown  into  the  water  after  being  carried  about  in
procession.^  At  Balwe,  in  Westphalia,  a  straw-man  is  made
on  Shrove  Tuesday  and  thrown  into  the  river  amid  rejoicings.
This  is  called,  as  usual,  "  Burying  the  Carnival."  "  At  Burge-
brach,  in  Bavaria,  it  used  to  be  customary,  as  a  public  pastime,
to  hold  a  sort  of  court  of  justice  on  Ash  Wednesday.  The
accused  was  a  straw-man,  on  whom  was  laid  the  burden  of
all  the  notorious  transgressions  that  had  been  committed  in
the  course  of  the  year.  Twelve  chosen  maidens  sat  in
judgment  and  pronounced  sentence,  and  a  single  advocate
pleaded  the  cause  of  the  public  scapegoat.  Finally  the
^'^%y  was  burnt,  and  thus  all  the  offences  that  had  created  a
scandal  in  the  community  during  the  year  were  symbolically
atoned  for.^  We  can  hardly  doubt  that  this  custom  of
burning  a  straw-man  on  Ash  Wednesday  for  the  sins  of  a
whole  year  is  only  another  form  of  the  custom,  observed  on
the  same  day  in  so  many  other  places,  of  burning  an  effigy
which  is  supposed  to  embody  and  to  be  responsible  for  all
the  excesses  committed  during  the  license  of  the  Carnival.

In  Greece  a  ceremony  of  the  same  sort  was  witnessed  at
Pylos  by  Mr.  Tilton  in  1895.  On  the  evening  of  the  last  day
of  the  Greek  Lent,  which  fell  that  year  on  the  twenty-fifth
of  February,  an  effigy  with  a  grotesque  mask  for  a  face  was
borne  about  the  streets  on  a  bier,  preceded  by  a  mock  priest
with  long  white  beard.  Other  functionaries  surrounded  the
bier  and  two  torch-bearers  walked  in  advance.  The  pro-
cession moved  slowly  to  melancholy  music  played  by  a  pipe
and  drum.  A  final  halt  was  made  in  the  public  square,
where  a  circular  space  was  kept  clear  of  the  surging  crowd.
Here  a  bonfire  was  kindled,  and  round  it  the  priest  led  a  wild
dance  to  the  same  droning  music.  When  the  frenzy  was  at
its  height,  the  chief  performer  put  tow  on  the  effigy  and  set
fire  to  it,  and  while  it  blazed  he  resumed  his  mad  career,
brandishing  torches  and  tearing  off  his  venerable  beard  to
add  fuel  to  the  flames.'*  On  the  evening  of  Shrove  Tuesday,
the  Esthonians  make  a   straw  figure  called  metsik  or  "  wood-


^t>'


^    E.  Meier,  op.  cit.  pp.  373,  374.  ^  Bavaria,  Landes-  und  Volkskundc

^   A.  Kuhn,   Sagen,    Gebrimche  iind  des  Konigreichs  Bayern,  iii.  958,  note.

Mdrchen    aits     IVestfaleii,    ii.    p.    130,

§  393-  *  Folk-lore,  vi.  (1895),  P-  206.

VOL.  II  G


82  CARRYING  OUT  DEATH  chap.

spirit "  ;  one  year  it  is  dressed  with  a  man's  coat  and  hat,  next
year  with  a  hood  and  a  petticoat.  This  figure  is  stuck  on  a
long  pole,  carried  across  the  boundary  of  the  village  with  loud
cries  of  joy,  and  fastened  to  the  top  of  a  tree  in  the  wood.
The  ceremony  is  believed  to  be  a  protection  against  all  kinds
of  misfortune.^

Sometimes  at  these  Shrovetide  or  Lenten  ceremonies  the
resurrection  of  the  pretended  dead  person  is  enacted.  Thus,
in  some  parts  of  Swabia  on  Shrove  Tuesday  Dr.  Iron-Beard
professes  to  bleed  a  sick  man,  who  thereupon  falls  as  dead  to
the  ground  ;  but  the  doctor  at  last  restores  him  to  life  by
blowing  air  into  him  through  a  tube."  In  the  Harz  Moun-
tains, when  Carnival  is  over,  a  man  is  laid  on  a  baking-trough
and  carried  with  dirges  to  a  grave  ;  but  in  the  grave  a  glass
of  brandy  is  buried  instead  of  the  man.  A  speech  is  delivered
and  then  the  people  return  to  the  village-green  or  meeting-
place,  where  they  smoke  the  long  clay  pipes  which  are
distributed  at  funerals.  On  the  morning  of  Shrove  Tuesday
in  the  following  year  the  brandy  is  dug  up  and  the  festival
begins  by  every  one  tasting  the  spirit  which,  as  the  phrase
goes,  has  come  to  life  again.^

The  ceremony  of  "  Carrying  out  Death  "  presents  much
the  same  features  as  "  Burying  the  Carnival  "  ;  except  that
the  carrying  out  of  Death  is  generally  followed  by  a  cere-
mony, or  at  least  accompanied  by  a  profession,  of  bringing
in  Summer,  Spring,  or  Life.  Thus  in  Middle  Franken,  a
province  of  Bavaria,  on  the  fourth  Sunday  in  Lent,  the
village  urchins  used  to  make  a  straw  effigy  of  Death,  which
they  carried  about  with  burlesque  pomp  through  the  streets,
and  afterwards  burned  with  loud  cries  beyond  the  bounds,'*
In  the  villages  near  Erlangen,  when  the  fourth  Sunday  in
Lent  came  round,  the  peasant  girls  used  to  dress  themselves
in  all  their  finery  with  flowers  in  their  hair.  Thus  attired
they  repaired  to  the  neighbouring  town,  carrying  puppets
which  were  adorned  with  leaves  and  covered  with  white
cloths.  These  they  took  from  house  to  house  in  pairs,
stopping    at    every    door   where    they    expected    to    receive

'  F.  J.  Wiedemann,  Atis  dem  inneren  "^  H.    Prohle,    Harzbilder    (Leipsic,

und  aiisseren  Leben  der  Ehstcn,  p.  353.        1855),  p.  54.

*  Bavaria,  Laiides-  und  Volkshiinde
2  E.  Meier,  op.  cit.  p.  374.  des  Konigreichs  Bayern,  iii.  958.


Ill  CARRYING  OUT  DEATH  83

something,  and  singing  a  few  lines  in  which  they  announced
that  it  was  Mid-Lent  and  that  they  were  about  to  throw
Death  into  the  water.  When  they  had  collected  some
trifling  gratuities  they  went  to  the  River  Regnitz  and  flung
the  puppets  representing  Death  into  the  stream.  This  was
done  to  ensure  a  fruitful  and  prosperous  year  ;  further,  it  was
considered  a  safeguard  against  pestilence  and  sudden  death.^
At  Nuremberg  girls  of  seven  to  eighteen  years  of  age  go
through  the  streets  bearing  a  little  open  coffin,  in  which  is  a
doll  hidden  under  a  shroud.  Others  carry  a  beech  branch,
with  an  apple  fastened  to  it  for  a  head,  in  an  open  box.
They  sing,  "  We  carry  Death  into  the  water,  it  is  well,"  or
"  We  carry  Death  into  the  water,  carry  him  in  and  out
again."  ^  In  other  parts  of  Bavaria  the  ceremony  took
place  on  the  Saturday  before  the  fifth  Sunday  in  Lent,  and
the  performers  were  boys  or  girls,  according  to  the  sex  of
the  last  person  who  died  in  the  village.  The  figure  was
thrown  into  water  or  buried  in  a  secret  place,  for  example
under  moss  in  the  forest,  that  no  one  might  find  Death
again.  Then  early  on  Sunday  morning  the  children
went  from  house  to  house  singing  a  song  in  which  they
announced  the  glad  tidings  that  Death  was  gone.^  In
some  villages  of  Thuringen  on  the  fourth  Sunday  of
Lent,  the  children  used  to  carry  a  puppet  of  birchen  twigs
through  the  village,  and  then  threw  it  into  a  pool,  while  they
sang,  "  We  carry  the  old  Death  out  behind  the  herdsman's
old  house  ;  we  have  got  Summer,  and  Kroden's  (?)  power  is
destroyed.""*  In  one  village  of  Thuringen  (Dobschwitz  near
Gera),  the  ceremony  of  "  Driving  out  Death  "  is  still  annually
observed  on  the  first  of  March.  The  young  people  make  up
a  figure  of  straw  or  the  like  materials,  dress  it  in  old  clothes,
which  they  have  begged  from  houses  in  the  village,  and
carry  it  out  and  throw  it  into  the  river.  On  returning
to  the  village  they  break  the  good  news  to  the  people,
and  receive  eggs  and  other  victuals  as  a  reward.  In
other   villages   of  Thuringen,   in   which   the   population   was

1  Bavaria,  Landes-  mid  Volkskunde  ^  Sepp,     Die     Religion     der     alien

des  Kijnigreiclis  Bayern,  iii.  958.  Detitschen,  p.  67.

^  Grimm,  DeiitscJie  MytJiologie,^  ii.  •*  Aug.     Witzschel,      Sagen,     Sitten

639  sq.;  Mannhardt,  Bau/nkultus,  tiiid  Gebrciicc/ie  aus  T/iiiringen,  ]).  i<)2i-
p.  412.


84  CARRYING  OUT  DEATH  chap.

originally  Slavonic,  the  carrying  out  of  the  puppet  is  accom-
panied with  the  singing  of  a  song,  which  begins,  "  Now  we
carry  Death  out  of  the  village  and  Spring  into  the  village." '
In  Bohemia  the  children  go  out  with  a  straw-man,  represent-
ing Death,  to  the  end  of  the  village,  where  they  burn  it,
singing —

"  Now  carry  we  Death  out  of  the  village.

The  new  Summer  into  the  village,

Welcome,  dear  Summer,

Green  little  corn."  -

At  Tabor  in  Bohemia  the  figure  of  Death  is  carried  out
of  the  town  and  flung  from  a  high  rock  into  the  water,
while  they  sing —

"  Death  swims  on  the  water,
Summer  will  soon  be  here.
We  carried  Death  away  for  you.
We  brought  the  Summer.
And  do  thou,  O  holy  Marketa,
Give  us  a  good  year
,  For  wheat  and  for  rye."  ^

In  other  parts  of  Bohemia  they  carry  Death  to  the  end  of
the  village,  singing —

"  We  carry  Death  out  of  the  village.
And  the  New  Year  into  the  village.
Dear  Spring,  we  bid  you  welcome.
Green  grass,  we  bid  you  welcome."

Behind  the  village  they  erect  a  pyre,  on  which  they  burn  the
straw  figure,  reviling  and  scoffing  at  it  the  while.  Then
they  return,  singing —

"  We  have  carried  away  Death,
And  brought  Life  back.
He  has  taken  up  his  quarters  in  the  village,
Therefore  sing  joyous  songs."  ^

In  some  German  villages  of  Moravia,  as  in  Jassnitz  and
Seitendorf,  the  young  folk  assemble  on  the  third  Sunday  in
Lent   and   fashion    a   straw-man,   who   is   generally  adorned

1  Witzschel,  op.  cit.  p.   199.  ^  Reinsberg-Dtiringsfeld,    Fest-Kal-

^  Grimm,  Deutsche  Alyihologie,^  ii.       ender  aiis  Bo/ti/ien,  p.  90  si^.
642.  ■*  Ibid.  p.  91.


Ill  CARRYING  OUT  DEATH  85

with  a  fur  cap  and  a  pair  of  old  leathern  hose,  if  such  are
to  be  had.  The  effigy  is  then  hoisted  on  a  pole  and  carried
by  the  lads  and  lasses  out  into  the  open  fields.  On  the
way  they  sing  a  song,  in  which  it  is  said  that  they  are
carrying  Death  away  and  bringing  dear  Summer  into  the
house,  and  with  Summer  the  May  and  the  flowers.  On
reaching  an  appointed  place  they  dance  in  a  circle  round
the  Q^'i^^y  with  loud  shouts  and  screams,  then  suddenly  rush
at  it  and  tear  it  to  pieces  with  their  hands.  Lastly,  the
pieces  are  thrown  together  in  a  heap,  the  pole  is  broken,  and
fire  is  set  to  the  whole.  While  it  burns  the  troop  dances
merrily  round  it,  rejoicing  at  the  victory  won  by  Spring  ;
and  when  the  fire  has  nearly  died  out  they  go  to  the  house-
holders to  beg  for  a  present  of  eggs  wherewith  to  hold  a
feast,  taking  care  to  give  as  a  reason  for  the  request  that
they  have  carried  Death  out  and  away.^

The  &^%y  of  Death  is  often  regarded  with  fear  and
treated  with  marks  of  hatred  and  contempt.  In  Lusatia
the  figure  is  sometimes  made  to  look  in  at  the  window  of  a
house,  and  it  is  believed  that  some  one  in  the  house  will  die
within  the  year  unless  his  life  is  redeemed  by  the  payment
of  money."  Again,  after  throwing  the  effigy  away,  the
bearers  sometimes  run  home  lest  Death  should  follow  them,
and  if  one  of  them  falls  in  running,  it  is  believed  that  he
will  die  within  the  year.^  At  Chrudim,  in  Bohemia,  the
figure  of  Death  is  made  out  of  a  cross,  with  a  head  and
mask  stuck  at  the  top,  and  a  shirt  stretched  out  on  it.  On
the  fifth  Sunday  in  Lent  the  boys  take  this  effigy  to  the
nearest  brook  or  pool,  and  standing  in  a  line  throw  it  into
the  water.  Then  they  all  plunge  in  after  it  ;  but  as  soon  as
it  is  caught  no  one  more  may  enter  the  water.  The  boy
who  did  not  enter  the  water  or  entered  it  last  will  die  within
the  year,  and  he  is  obliged  to  carry  the  Death  back  to  the
village.  The  effigy  is  then  burned.^  On  the  other  hand  it
is  believed  that  no  one  will   die  within  the  year  in  the  house

^  W.    Mliller,    Beitvlige    znr    Volks-  ■'  Grimm,  op.  cit.  ii.  640,  643.

kunde  der  Deutschen  in  Mahroi,   pp.
353-355-  ^  Vernaleken,  Jlfythen  tind  Brduche

'^  Grimm,     op.     cit.     ii.     644  ;      K.  des  Volkes  in   Oestcrreick,   p.  294  scj.  ;

Haupt,     Sagenbiuh     der    Lausitz,     ii.  Reinsberg-Duringsfeld,  Fcst- Kalender

55.  aics  Boh  men,  p.  90.


86  CARRYING  OUT  DEATH  chap.

out  of  which  the  figure  of  Death  has  been  carried  ;  ^  and  the
village  out  of  which  Death  has  been  driven  is  sometimes
supposed  to  be  protected  against  sickness  and  plague.^  In
some  villages  of  Austrian  Silesia  on  the  Saturday  before
Dead  Sunday  an  efhgy  is  made  of  old  clothes,  hay,  and
straw,  for  the  purpose  of  driving  Death  out  of  the  village.
On  Sunday  the  people,  armed  with  sticks  and  straps,
assemble  before  the  house  where  the  figure  is  lodged.  Four
lads  then  draw  the  effigy  by  cords  through  the  village  amid
exultant  shouts,  while  all  the  others  beat  it  with  their  sticks
and  straps.  On  reaching  a  field  which  belongs  to  a  neigh-
bouring village  they  lay  down  the  figure,  cudgel  it  soundly,
and  scatter  the  fragments  over  the  field.  The  people  believe
that  the  village  from  which  Death  has  been  thus  carried  out
will  be  safe  from  any  infectious  disease  for  the  whole  year.^
In  villages  of  the  Wagstadt  district,  Austrian  Silesia,  girls
and  boys  together  dress  up  a  man  of  straw  called  Death  on
the  fifth  Sunday  of  Lent,  which  hence  goes  by  the  name  of
Dead  or  Black  Sunday.  After  arraying  the  effigy  in  their
best  clothes  they  carry  it  in  procession  on  a  pole  to  the
boundary  of  the  village,  w^here  they  strip  it,  tear  it  in  pieces,
and  burn  it.'*  In  Slavonia  the  figure  of  Death  is  cudgelled
and  then  rent  in  two.^  In  Poland  the  effigy,  made  of  hemp
and  straw,  is  fiung  into  a  pool  or  swamp  with  the  words
"  The  devil  take  thee."  «

The  custom  of  "  sawing  the  Old  Woman,"  which  is  or
used  to  be  observed  in  Italy,  France,  and  Spain  on  the  fourth
Sunday  in  Lent,  is  doubtless,  as  Grimm  supposes,  merely
another  form  of  the  custom  of  "  Carrying  out  Death."  A
great  hideous  figure  representing  the  oldest  woman  of  the
village  was  dragged  out  and  sawn  in  two,  amid  a  prodigious
noise  made  with  cow-bells,  pots  and  pans,  and  so  forth."  In
Palermo  the  representation  used  to  be  still  more  lifelike.
At  Mid-Lent  an  old  woman  was  drawn  through  the  streets

1  Grimm,   Deittsche  Mytholo^e,'^  ii.  *  A.  Peter,    VdlksthuinUches  aiis  Os-

640.  terreichisch-SchUsieii,  ii.  281.

^   J.    A.    E.    Kohler,     Volksbraiic/i,  ^  Ralston,     Songs    of   the   Russian

Aberglaiiben,    Sctgen    imd    audre    altc  People,  p.  211.                  ^  Ibid.  p.  210.

UebL-rlieferiiiigeit     iiii      Voig/lande,     p.  "  Grimm,   Dejitsche  Mytliologie,'^  ii.

171-  652;  H.  Usener,  "Italische  Mythen,"

•'  Reinsberg-DLiringsfeld,    Das  fest-  Kheinisches     Mttsetini,       N.P\,      xxx.

lichejaltr,  p.  80.  (1875),  p.   191  sq.


Ill  SA  WING  THE  OLD   WOMAN  87

on  a  cart,  attended  by  two  men  dressed  in  the  costume  of
the  Cornpagnia  de'  BiancJii,  a  society  or  reHgious  order  whose
function  it  was  to  attend  and  console  prisoners  condemned
to  death.  A  scaffold  was  erected  in  a  public  square  ;  the
old  woman  mounted  it,  and  two  mock  executioners  proceeded,
amid  a  storm  of  huzzas  and  hand-clapping,  to  saw  through
her  neck  or  rather  through  a  bladder  of  blood  which  had
been  previously  fitted  to  her  neck.  The  blood  gushed  out
and  the  old  woman  pretended  to  swoon  and  die.  The  last
of  these  mock  executions  took  place  in  1737.^  In  Florence,
during  the  fifteenth  and  sixteenth  centuries,  the  Old  Woman
was  represented  by  a  figure  stuffed  with  walnuts  and  dried
figs  and  fastened  to  the  top  of  a  ladder.  At  Mid-Lent  this
^^%y  was  sawn  through  the  middle  under  the  Loggie  of  the
Mercato  Nuovo,  and  as  the  dried  fruits  tumbled  out  they
were  scrambled  for  by  the  crowd.  A  trace  of  the  custom  is
still  to  be  seen  in  the  practice,  observed  by  urchins,  of
secretly  pinning  paper  ladders  to  the  shoulders  of  women  of
the  lower  classes  who  happen  to  show  themselves  in  the
streets  on  the  morning  of  Mid-Lent.'^  A  similar  custom  is
observed  by  urchins  in  Rome  ;  and  at  Naples  on  the  first  of
April  boys  cut  strips  of  cloth  into  the  shape  of  saws,  smear
them  with  gypsum,  and  strike  passers-by  with  their  "  saws  "
on  the  back,  thus  imprinting  the  figure  of  a  saw  upon  their
clothes.^  At  Montalto,  in  Calabria,  boys  go  about  at  Mid-
Lent  with  little  saws  made  of  cane  and  jeer  at  old  people,
who  therefore  generally  stay  indoors  on  that  day.  The
Calabrian  women  meet  together  at  this  time  and  feast  on
figs,  chestnuts,  honey,  and  so  forth  ;  this  they  call  "  sawing
the  Old  Woman " — a  reminiscence  probably  of  a  custom
like  the  old  Florentine  one.^  In  Lombardy  the  Thursday
of  Mid-Lent  is  known  as  the  Day  of  the  Old  Wives  {il
giorno  delle  Vecchie).  The  children  run  about  crying  out  for
the  oldest  woman,  whom  they  wish  to  burn  ;  and  failing  to
possess  themselves  of  the  original,  they  make  a  puppet
representing   her,  which,  in  the  evening,  is    consumed  on  a

^  G.  Y\\.xh,  Spettacoli  e  feste  popolari  ^  H.  Usener,  op.  cit.  p.  193.

siciliane  (Palermo,   1881),   p.  207  sq.  ;  *  Vincenzo     Dorsa,     La     tradizione

id.,  Usi  e  Cosiumi,  \.  loj  sq.  greco-latina  negli  usi  e  nelle   credenze

2  Archivio  per  lo  studio  delle  tradi-  popolari  della    Calabria    citeriore   (Co-

ziotii  popolari,  iv.  (1885),  p.  294  sq.  senza,  1884),  p.  43  sq.


88  SAWING  THE  OLD  WOaMAN  chap.

bonfire.  On  the  Lake  of  Garda,  the  blaze  of  light  flaring  at
different  points  on  the  hills  produces  a  picturesque  effect.^

In  Berry,  a  region  of  Central  France,  the  custom  of  "  saw-
ing the  Old  Woman  "  at  Mid-Lent  used  to  be  popular,  and
has  probably  not  wholly  died  out  even  now.  Here  the  name
of  "  Fairs  of  the  old  Wives  "  was  given  to  certain  fairs  held
in  Lent,  at  which  children  were  made  to  believe  that  they
would  see  the  Old  Woman  of  Mid-Lent  split  or  sawn  asunder.
At  Argenton  and  Cluis-Dessus,  when  Mid-Lent  has  come,
children  of  ten  or  twelve  years  of  age  scour  the  streets  with
wooden  swords,  pursue  the  old  crones  whom  they  meet,
and  even  try  to  break  into  the  houses  where  ancient  dames
are  known  to  live.  Passers-by,  who  see  the  children  thus
engaged,  say,  "  They  are  going  to  cut  or  sabre  the  Old
Woman."  Meantime,  the  old  wives  take  care  to  keep  out  of
sight  as  much  as  possible.  When  the  children  of  Cluis-
Dessus  have  gone  their  rounds,  and  the  day  draws  towards
evening,  they  repair  to  Cluis-Dessous,  where  they  mould  a
rude  figure  of  an  old  woman  out  of  clay,  hew  it  in  pieces
with  their  wooden  swords,  and  throw  the  bits  into  the  river.
At  Bourges  on  the  same  day,  an  effigy  representing  an  old
woman  was  formerly  sawn  in  two  on  the  crier's  stone  in  a
public  square.  About  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century,
in  the  same  town  and  on  the  same  day,  hundreds  of  children
assembled  at  the  Hospital  "  to  see  the  old  woman  split  or
divided  in  two."  A  religious  service  was  held  in  the  build-
ing on  this  occasion,  which  attracted  many  idlers.  In  the
streets  it  was  not  uncommon  to  hear  cries  of  "  Let  us  cleave
the  Old  Wife  !  let  us  cleave  the  oldest  woman  of  the  ward  !  "
At  Tulle,  on  the  day  of  Mid-Lent,  the  people  used  to  inquire
after  the  oldest  woman  in  the  town,  and  to  tell  the  children
that  at  mid-day  punctually  she  was  to  be  sawn  in  two  at
Puy-Saint-Clair.^

In  Barcelona  on  the  fourth  Sunday  in  Lent  boys  run
about  the  streets,  some  with  saws,  others  with  billets  of  wood,
others  again  with  cloths  in  which  they  collect  gratuities.
They  sing  a  song   in  which  it  is  said   that   they  are  looking

^  E.    Martinengo-Cesaresco,   in   The  '^  Laisnel   de    la  Salle,   Croyances  et

Academy,  No.  671,  March  14th,  1885,  Legendes  du  Centre  de  la  France,  i.  43
p.   188.  sq.


Ill  SAWING  THE  OLD   IVOA/AN  89

for  the  oldest  woman  of  the  city  for  the  purpose  of  sawing
her  in  two  in  honour  of  Mid-Lent  ;  at  last,  pretending  to
have  found  her,  they  saw  something  in  two  and  burn  it.  A
like  custom  is  found  amongst  the  South  Slavs.  In  Lent  the
Croats  tell  their  children  that  at  noon  an  old  woman  is  being
sawn  in  two  outside  the  gates  ;  and  in  Carniola  also  the  say-
ing is  current  that  at  Mid-Lent  an  old  v/oman  is  taken  out
of  the  village  and  sawn  in  two.  The  North  Slavonian  ex-
pression for  keeping  Mid-Lent  is  ddl?u  resa^t,  that  is,  "  sawing
the  Old  Wife." '

Among  the  gypsies  of  South-Eastern  Europe  the  custom
of    "  sawing  the  Old    Woman    in    two "    is    observed    in    a
very   graphic   form,  not,   however,  at    Mid-Lent,   but  on   the
afternoon  of  Palm    Sunday.      The   Old  Woman,  represented
by  a    puppet  of  straw  dressed    in   women's   clothes,  is   laid
across   a   beam   in   some   open   place  and   beaten  with   clubs
by   the   assembled   gypsies,   after   which    it   is   sawn    in    two
by    a    young    man    and    a    maiden,  both   of  whom    wear    a
disguise.      While  the  effigy  is  being  sawn  through,  the  rest  of
the  company  dance   round   it  singing  songs  of  various  sorts.
The  remains   of  the   figure   are   finally  burnt,  and   the  ashes
thrown   into   a   stream.      The  ceremony  is   supposed   by  the
gypsies   themselves   to   be  observed   in   honour  of  a   certain
Shadow    Queen  ;    hence    Palm    Sunday  goes    by  the    name
Shadow  Day  among  all   the  strolling  gypsies  of  Eastern  and
Southern    Europe.      According    to    the    popular    belief,    this
Shadow  Queen,  of  whom   the  gypsies  of  to-day  have  only  a
very  vague   and   confused   conception,  vanishes   underground
at   the  appearance  of  spring,  but  comes  forth  again   at  the
beginning    of  winter    to    plague    mankind    during    that    in-
clement  season   with   sickness,  hunger,  and   death.      Among
the    vagrant    gypsies    of    Southern    Hungary  the    effigy    is
regarded   as   an   expiatory  and   thank   offering   made  to   the
Shadow   Queen   for  having    spared    the   people   during    the
winter.      In  Transylvania  the  gypsies  who  live  in  tents  clothe
the  puppet  in  the  cast-off  garments   of  the  woman  who   has
last  become  a  widow.      The  widow  herself  gives  the   clothes
gladly  for  this  purpose,  because  she  thinks  that   being   burnt

^   Grimm,   Detitsche  Mythologie,''  ii.        J'^/ieinisches  Mtcseiiiii,'i:i.¥.x\x.{iS'j^),
652  ;   H.  Usener,  "  Italische  Mythen,"       p.  191  sq.


90  EFFIGY  OF  OLD   WOMAN  chap.

they  will  pass  into  the  possession  of  her  departed  husband,
who  will  thus  have  no  excuse  for  returning  from  the  spirit-land
to  visit  her.  The  ashes  are  thrown  by  the  Transylvanian
gypsies  on  the  first  graveyard  that  they  pass  on  their  journey.^
In  this  gypsy  custom  the  equivalence  of  the  effigy  of  the  Old
Woman  to  the  effigy  of  Death  in  the  customs  we  have  just
been  considering  comes  out  very  clearly,  thus  strongly  con-
firming the  opinion  of  Grimm  that  the  practice  of  "  sawing
the  Old  Woman "  is  only  another  form  of  the  practice  of
"  carrying  out  Death."

The  same  perhaps  may  be  said  of  a  somewhat  different
form  which  the  custom  assumes  in  parts  of  Spain  and  Italy.
In  Spain  it  is  sometimes  usual  on  Ash  Wednesday  to
fashion  an  effigy  of  stucco  or  pasteboard  representing  a
hideous  old  woman  with  seven  legs,  wearing  a  crown  of  sorrel
and  spinach,  and  holding  a  sceptre  in  her  hand.  The  seven
skinny  legs  stand  for  the  seven  weeks  of  the  Lenten  fast
which  begins  on  Ash  Wednesday.  This  monster,  proclaimed
queen  of  Lent  amid  the  chanting  of  lugubrious  songs,  is
carried  in  triumph  through  the  crowded  streets  and  public
places.  On  reaching  the  principal  square  the  people  put  out
their  torches,  cease  shouting,  and  disperse.  Their  revels  are
now  ended,  and  they  take  a  vow  to  hold  no  more  merry
meetings  until  all  the  legs  of  the  old  woman  have  fallen  one
by  one  and  she  has  been  beheaded.  The  effigy  is  then
deposited  in  some  place  appointed  for  the  purpose,  where
the  public  is  admitted  to  see  it  during  the  whole  of  Lent.
Every  week,  on  Saturday  evening,  one  of  the  queen's  legs  is
pulled  off;  and  on  Holy  Saturday,  when  from  every  church
tower  the  joyous  clangour  of  the  bells  proclaims  the  glad
tidings  that  Christ  is  risen,  the  mutilated  body  of  the  fallen
queen  is  carried  with  great  solemnity  to  the  principal  square
and  publicly  beheaded.-

A  custom  of  the  same  sort  prevails  in  various  parts  of
Italy.  Thus  in  the  Abruzzi  they  hang  a  puppet  of  tow,
representing  Lent,  to  a  cord,  which  stretches  across  the  street

1   H.  von  Wlislocki,  Volksi^lanbe  ttnd  "  E.    Cortet,     Essai    siir    les   fi'tes

relzgtosi'!' Braifc/i  der  Zi^eufwr  {Munster       reh'giei/ses,  p.  107   S(/.  ;    Laisnel  de  la
i.  W.,   1 89 1),  p.   145  s(/.  Salle,  Croyances  et  L^gendes  dii  Ceiitre

de  la  France,  i.  45  sq.


Ill  DESTROYED  AT  LENT  91

from  one  window  to  another.  Seven  feathers  are  attached
to  the  figure,  and  in  its  hand  it  grasps  a  distaff  and  spindle.
Every  Saturday  in  Lent  one  of  the  seven  feathers  is  plucked
out,  and  on  Holy  Saturday,  while  the  bells  are  ringing,  a
string  of  chestnuts  is  burnt  for  the  purpose  of  sending  Lent
and  its  meagre  fare  to  the  devil.  In  houses,  too,  it  is  usual  to
amuse  children  by  cutting  the  figure  of  an  old  woman  with
seven  legs  out  of  pasteboard  and  sticking  it  beside  the
chimney.  •  The  old  woman  represents  Lent,  and  her  seven  legs
are  the  seven  weeks  of  the  fast  ;  every  Saturday  one  of  the
legs  is  amputated.^  At  Castellamare,  to  the  south  of  Naples,
an  English  lady  observed  a  rude  puppet  dangling  from  a  string
which  spanned  one  of  the  narrow  streets  of  the  old  town,  being
fastened  at  either  end,  high  overhead,  to  the  upper  part  of  the
many-storied  houses.  The  puppet,  about  a  foot  long,  was
dressed  all  in  black,  rather  like  a  nun,  and  from  the  skirts
projected  five  or  six  feathers  which  bore  a  certain  resemblance
to  legs.  A  peasant  being  asked  what  these  things  meant,
replied  with  Italian  vagueness,  "  It  is  only  Lent."  Further
inquiries,  however,  elicited  the  information  that  at  the  end  of
every  week  in  Lent  one  of  the  feather  legs  was  pulled  off  the
puppet,  and  that  the  puppet  was  finally  destroyed  on  the  last
day  of  Lent.'

In  the  preceding  ceremonies  the  return  of  Spring,
Summer,  or  Life,  as  a  sequel  to  the  expulsion  of  Death,  is
only  implied  or  at  most  announced.  In  the  following
ceremonies  it  is  plainly  enacted.  Thus  in  some  parts  of
Bohemia  the  Q^'gy  of  Death  is  buried  at  sunset  ;  then  the
girls  go  out  into  the  wood  and  cut  down  a  young  tree  with
a  green  crown,  hang  a  doll  dressed  as  a  woman  on  it,  deck
the  whole  with  green,  red,  and  white  ribbons,  and  march  in
procession  with  their  Lito  (Summer)  into  the  village,  collect-
ing gifts  and  singing —

"  We  carried  Death  out  of  the  village.
We  are  carrying  Summer  into  the  village."  •"

^  A.  de  Nino,  Usi  e  Costumi  Ahniz-  -^  Reinsberg-Duringsfeld,  Fest-Kalen-

zesi,  ii.  203-205  (Florence,  1881).  deraus  Boknien,  p.  89  sq.  ;  W.  Mann-

hardt,    Bauinkultiis,    p.     156.         This

'■^  Lucy  E.  Broadwood,  in  Folk-lore,  custom  has  been  already  referred  to.
iv.  (1893),  P-  390.  See  vol.  i.  p.  208.


92  BRINGING  BACK  SUMMER  chap.

In  many  Silesian  villages  the  figure  of  Death,  after  being
treated  with  respect,  is  stript  of  its  clothes  and  flung  with
curses  into  the  water,  or  torn  to  pieces  in  a  field.  Then  a
fir-tree  adorned  with  ribbons,  coloured  egg-shells,  and  motley
bits  of  cloth,  is  carried  through  the  streets  by  boys  who
collect  pennies  and  sing —

"  We  have  carried  Death  out,
We  are  bringing  the  dear  Summer  back,
The  Summer  and  the  May
And  all  the  flowers  gay.''  ^

At  Eisenach  on  the  fourth  Sunday  in  Lent  young
people  used  to  fasten  a  straw-man,  representing  Death,  to  a
wheel,  which  they  trundled  to  the  top  of  a  hill.  Then  setting
fire  to  the  figure  they  allowed  it  and  the  wheel  to  roll  down
the  slope.  Next  they  cut  a  tall  fir-tree,  tricked  it  out  with
ribbons,  and  set  it  up  in  the  plain.  The  men  then  climbed
the  tree  to  fetch  down  the  ribbons.'-^  In  Upper  Lusatia  the
figure  of  Death,  made  of  straw  and  rags,  is  dressed  in  a  veil
furnished  by  the  last  bride  and  a  shirt  provided  by  the  house
in  which  the  last  death  took  place.  Thus  arrayed  the  figure
is  stuck  on  the  end  of  a  long  pole  and  carried  at  full  speed
by  the  tallest  and  strongest  girl,  while  the  rest  pelt  the  effigy
with  sticks  and  stones.  Whoever  hits  it  will  be  sure  to  live
through  the  year.  In  this  way  Death  is  carried  out  of  the
village  and  thrown  into  the  water  or  over  the  boundary  of
the  next  village.  On  their  way  home  each  one  breaks  a
green  branch  and  carries  it  gaily  with  him  till  he  reaches  the
village,  when  he  throws  it  away.  Sometimes  the  young
people  of  the  next  village,  upon  whose  land  ■  the  figure  has
been  thrown,  run  after  them  and  hurl  it  back,  not  wishing  to
have  Death  among  them.  Hence  the  two  parties  occasionally
come  to  blows.^

In  these  cases  Death  is  represented  by  the  puppet  which
is  thrown  away.  Summer  or  Life  by  the  branches  or  trees
which  are  brought  back.      But   sometimes   a   new  potency  of

^   Reinsberg-Diirinyjsfekl,    Das    fcst-  compare  p.  297  sqq.
Uche  Jahr,  p.  82  ;    Philo  vom  Walde,  ^  (irimm,    Deiilsfhe  Mytholoi^ic,^  ii.

Schlesien  in  Sage  und  Branch  (X.D.,  643    sq.  ;    K.    liaupt,    Sagcnbiich    der

preface  dated  1883),  p.   122.  Lausitz,\\.  54  .w/.  ;   Mannliardt, /j'flww-

-  Witzschel,      Sai^^cn,      Sitteu      und  kicliits,  p.  412   sq.  ;    Ralston,  Songs  of

GebrdncJie  ans  Thiiringcn,  p.   192   sq.,  the  Russian  Pcopk,  p.  211.


Ill  CA RR  YING  O  UT  DBA  TH


93


life  seems  to  be  attributed  to  the  image  of  Death  itself,  and
by  a  kind  of  resurrection  it  becomes  the  instrument  of  the
general  revival.  Thus  in  some  parts  of  Lusatia  women  alone
are  concerned  in  carrying  out  Death,  and  suffer  no  male  to
meddle  with  it.  Attired  in  mourning,  which  they  wear  the
whole  day,  they  make  a  puppet  of  straw,  clothe  it  in  a  white
shirt,  and  give  it  a  broom  in  one  hand  and  a  scythe  in
the  other.  Singing  songs  and  pursued  by  urchins  throwing
stones,  they  carry  the  puppet  to  the  village  boundary,  where
they  tear  it  in  pieces.  Then  they  cut  down  a  fine  tree,  hang
the  shirt  on  it,  and  carry  it  home  singing.-^

On  the  Feast  of  Ascension  the  Saxons  of  Braller,  a
village  of  Transylvania  not  far  from  Hermanstadt,  observe
the  ceremony  of  "  carrying  out  Death "  in  the  following
manner.  After  morning  service  all  the  school  girls  repair
to  the  house  of  one  of  their  number,  and  there  dress
up  the  Death.  This  is  done  by  tying  a  threshed -out
sheaf  of  corn  into  a  rough  semblance  of  a  head  and
body,  while  the  arms  are  simulated  by  a  broomstick  thrust
through  it  horizontally.  The  figure  is  dressed  in  the  holiday
attire  of  a  young  peasant  woman,  with  a  red  hood,  silver
brooches,  and  a  profusion  of  ribbons  at  the  arms  and  breast.
The  girls  bustle  at  their  work,  for  soon  the  bells  will  be  ring-
ing to  vespers,  and  the  Death  must  be  ready  in  time  to  be
placed  at  the  open  window,  that  all  the  people  may  see  it  on
their  way  to  church.  When  vespers  are  over,  the  longed-for
moment  has  come  for  the  first  procession  with  the  Death  to
begin  ;  it  is  a  privilege  that  belongs  to  the  school-girls  alone.
Two  of  the  older  girls  seize  the  figure  by  the  arms  and  walk
in  front ;  all  the  rest  follow  two  and  two.  Boys  may  take
no  part  in  the  procession,  but  they  troop  after  it  gazing  with
open-mouthed  admiration  at  the  "  beautiful  Death."  So  the
procession  goes  through  all  the  streets  of  the  village,  the  girls
singing  in  their  sweet  young  voices  the  old  hymn  that
begins  : —

"  Gott  nieitt  Vater,  deine  Liebe
Reicht  so  weit  der  Himnicl  ist"

to   a   tune   that   differs   from    the   ordinary  one.      When  the
1  Grimm,  op.  cit.  ii.  644;  K.  Haupt,  op.  cit.  ii.  55.


94  CARRYING  OUT  DEATH  chap.

procession  has  wound  its  way  through  every  street,  the  girls
go  to  another  house,  and  having  shut  the  door  against  the
eager  prying  crowd  of  boys  who  follow  at  their  heels,  they
strip  the  Death  and  pass  the  naked  truss  of  straw  out  of  the
window  to  the  boys,  who  pounce  on  it,  run  out  of  the  village
with  it  without  singing,  and  fling  the  dilapidated  ^^%y  into
the  neighbouring  brook.  When  this  is  done,  the  second  scene
of  the  little  drama  begins.  While  the  boys  were  carrying
away  the  Death  out  of  the  village,  the  girls  remained  in  the
house,  and  one  of  them  is  now  dressed  in  all  the  finery  which
had  been  worn  by  the  effigy.  Thus  arrayed  she  is  led  in
procession  through  all  the  streets  to  the  singing  of  the  same
hymn  as  before.  When  the  procession  is  over  they  all  be-
take themselves  to  the  house  of  the  girl  who  played  the
leading  part.  Here  a  feast  awaits  them  from  which  also  the
boys  are  excluded.  It  is  a  popular  belief  that  the  children  may
safely  begin  to  eat  gooseberries  and  other  fruit  after  the  day
on  which  Death  has  thus  been  carried  out ;  for  Death,  which
up  to  that  time  lurked  especially  in  gooseberries,  is  now
destroyed.  Further,  they  may  now  bathe  with  impunity  out
of  doors.^  Very  similar  is  the  ceremony  which  down  to
recent  years  was  observed  in  some  of  the  German  villages  of
Moravia.  Boys  and  girls  met  on  the  afternoon  of  the  first
Sunday  after  Easter  and  together  fashioned  a  puppet  of  straw
to  represent  Death.  Decked  with  bright-coloured  ribbons
and  cloths  and  fastened  to  the  top  of  a  long  pole,  the  effigy
was  then  borne  with  singing  and  clamour  to  the  nearest
height,  where  it  was  stript  of  its  gay  attire  and  thrown  or
rolled  down  the  slope.  One  of  the  girls  was  next  dressed  in
the  gauds  taken  from  the  effigy  of  Death,  and  with  her  at  its
head  the  procession  moved  back  to  the  village.  In  some
villages  the  practice  is  to  bury  the  effigy  in  the  place  that  has
the  most  evil  reputation  of  all  the  country-side  ;  others  throw
it  into  running  water. -

In  the  Lusatian  ceremony  described  above,^  the  tree  which

1  J.  K.  Schuller,  Das    Todaiistragen  Forest,   ii.    47-49)  is  plainly  borrowed

zind  der  Muorlef,ein  Bcitragzur  Kiinde  from  Mr.  Schuller's  little  work.

sdchsischer  Sitte  und  Sage  in   Sieben-  -  ^.  M\\\\tix,Beitrdge  zur  Volksktmde

/;//r_o-t'«  (Hermannstadt,   1861),  p.  4  sq.  der  Deittschen  in  Mdhten  (Vienna  and

The    description   of   this   ceremony  by  Olmdtz,  1893),  p.  258  sq.

Miss  E.  Gerard  ( llie  Land  beyond  the  ^  P.  93.


Ill  CARRYING  OUT  DEATH  95

is  brought  home  after  the  destruction  of  the  figure  of  Death
is   plainly  equivalent  to  the   trees  or   branches  which,  in   the
preceding  customs,  were   brought  back  as  representatives   of
Summer  or  Life,  after  Death  had   been   thrown  away  or  de-
stroyed.     But  the  transference  of  the  shirt  worn  by  the  effigy
of  Death  to  the  tree  clearly  indicates  that  the  tree  is  a  kind  of
revivification,  in  a  new  form,  of  the  destroyed  effigy/      This
comes  out  also  in  the  Transylvanian  and  Moravian  customs  ;
the  dressing  of  a  girl  in  the  clothes  worn  by  the  Death,  and  the
leading  her  about  the  village  to   the   same   song  which   had
been  sung  when   the   Death  was   being  carried   about,   show
that   she   is   intended    to   be   a   kind   of  resuscitation   of  the
being  whose  effigy  has  just  been  destroyed.      These  examples
therefore  suggest  that  the   Death  whose   demolition  is   repre-
sented in  these  ceremonies  cannot  be  regarded   as  the  purely
destructive   agent  which   we  understand    by  Death.      If  the
tree  which  is  brought  back  as  an  embodiment  of  the  reviving
vegetation  of  spring  is  clothed  in  the  shirt  worn  by  the  Death
which  has  been  just  destroyed,  the  object  certainly  cannot  be
to  check  and  counteract  the  revival  of  vegetation  ;   it  can  only
be  to  foster  and  promote  it.      Therefore  the  being  which  has
just  been  destroyed — the  so-called  Death — must  be  supposed
to    be   endowed   with   a  vivifying  and   quickening   influence,
which   it   can    communicate  to   the   vegetable  and   even    the
animal  world.      This   ascription  of  a   life-giving  virtue  to  the
figure  of  Death  is  put   beyond   a  doubt  by  the  custom,  ob-
served in  some  places,  of  taking  pieces  of  the  straw  effigy  of
Death   and    placing  them    in   the   fields   to   make   the   crops
grow,  or  in  the   manger  to  make  the  cattle  thrive.      Thus  in
Spachendorf,  a  village  of  Austrian  Silesia,  the  figure  of  Death,
made   of   straw,   brushwood,   and  rags,    is   carried   with   wild
songs  to  an  open  place  outside  the  village  and  there  burned,
and  while  it  is  burning  a  general  struggle  takes  place  for  the
pieces,  which  are   pulled  out  of  the   flames  with  bare   hands.
Each   one  who   secures   a  fragment  of  the  effigy  ties  it  to   a
branch  of  the   largest  tree  in   his   garden,  or  buries   it   in  his
field,  in  the  belief  that  this  causes  the  crops  to  grow  better.^

1   This  is  also  the  view  taken  of  the  -  Vernaleken,  My  then  tmd  Brduche

custom  by  Mannhardt,  Bauiitkultus,  p.        des  Volkes  in  Oesterreich,  p.  293  sq.
419.


96  CARRYING  OUT  DEATH  chap.

In  the  Troppau  district  of  Austrian  Silesia  the  straw  figure
which  the  boys  make  on  the  fourth  Sunday  in  Lent  is  dressed
by  the  girls  in  woman's  clothes  and  hung  with  ribbons,  neck-
lace, and  garlands.  Attached  to  a  long  pole  it  is  carried  out
of  the  village,  followed  by  a  troop  of  young  people  of
both  sexes,  who  alternately  frolic,  lament,  and  sing  songs.
Arrived  at  its  destination — a  field  outside  the  village — the
figure  is  stripped  of  its  clothes  and  ornaments  ;  then  the
crowd  rushes  at  it  and  tears  it  to  bits,  scuffling  for  the  frag-
ments. Every  one  tries  to  get  a  wisp  of  the  straw  of  which
the  effigy  was  made,  because  such  a  wisp,  placed  in  the
manger,  is  believed  to  make  the  cattle  thrive.^  Or  the  straw
is  put  in  the  hens'  nest,  it  being  supposed  that  this  prevents
the  hens  from  carrying  away  their  eggs,  and  makes  them
brood  much  better."  The  same  attribution  of  a  fertilising
power  to  the  figure  of  Death  appears  in  the  belief  that  if  the
bearers  of  the  figure,  after  throwing  it  away,  meet  cattle  and
strike  them  with  their  sticks,  this  will  render  the  cattle  pro-
lific.^ Perhaps  the  sticks  had  been  previously  used  to  beat
the  Death,*  and  so  had  acquired  the  fertilising  power  ascribed
to  the  effigy.  In  Leipsic  at  Mid-Lent  men  and  women  of
the  lowest  class  used  to  carry  through  all  the  streets  a  straw
effigy  of  Death,  which  they  exhibited  to  young  wives,  and
finally  threw  into  the  river,  alleging  that  this  made  young
wives  fruitful,  cleansed  the  city,  and  averted  the  plague  and
other  sickness  from  the  inhabitants  for  that  year."

It  seems  hardly  possible  to  separate  from  the  May-trees
the  trees  or  branches  which  are  brought  into  the  village  after
the  destruction  of  the  Death.  The  bearers  who  bring  them
in  profess  to  be  bringing  in  the  Summer ;  *"  therefore  the
trees  obviously  represent  the  Summer  ;  and  the  doll  which  is
sometimes  attached  to  the  Summer-tree  is  a  duplicate  repre-
sentative of  the  Summer,  just  as  the  May  is  sometimes
represented  at  the  same  time  by  a  May-tree  and  a  May
Lady.^      Further,   the   Summer-trees  are  adorned  like   May-

1  Reinsberg-Diiringsfeld,    Das  fest-  *  See  above,  p.  86.

lichejahr,  p.  82.  5  k,    Schwenk,   Die  Myihologie  der

2  Philo  vom  Walde,  Scklesien  in  Sage  Slaiven,  p.  2 1 7  sq.
tmd  Branch,  p    122  G  Above,  p.  91  sg.

3  Gnmm,  Deutsche  Mythologie,^  11.  '  f    ^      y

640  sq.  '    See  vol.  i.  p.  207  sqq.


Ill  CARR  YING  O  UT  DEA  TH  97

trees  with  ribbons  and  so  on  ;  like  May-trees,  when  large,
they  are  planted  in  the  ground  and  climbed  up  ;  and  like
May-trees,  when  small,  they  are  carried  from  door  to  door
by  boys  or  girls  singing  songs  and  collecting  money .^  And
as  if  to  demonstrate  the  identity  of  the  two  sets  of  customs
the  bearers  of  the  Summer-tree  sometimes  announce  that
they  are  bringing  in  the  Summer  and  the  May."  The
customs,  therefore,  of  bringing  in  the  May  and  bringing  in
the  Summer  are  essentially  the  same  ;  and  the  Summer-tree
is  merely  another  form  of  the  May-tree,  the  only  distinction
(besides  that  of  name)  being  in  the  time  at  which  they  are
respectively  brought  in  ;  for  while  the  May-tree  is  usually
fetched  in  on  the  first  of  May  or  at  Whitsuntide,  the  Summer-
tree  is  fetched  in  on  the  fourth  Sunday  in  Lent.  There-
fore, if  the  explanation  here  adopted  of  the  May-tree  (namely,
that  it  is  an  embodiment  of  the  tree-spirit  or  spirit  of  vege-
tation) is  correct,  the  Summer-tree  must  likewise  be  an  em-
bodiment of  the  tree-spirit  or  spirit  of  vegetation.  But  we
have  seen  that  the  Summer-tree  is  in  some  cases  a  revivifi-
cation of  the  effigy  of  Death.  It  follows,  therefore,  that  in
these  cases  the  effigy  called  Death  must  be  an  embodiment
of  the  tree-spirit  or  spirit  of  vegetation.  This  inference  is
confirmed,  first,  by  the  vivifying  and  fertilising  influence
which  the  fragments  of  the  effigy  of  Death  are  believed  to
exercise  both  on  vegetable  and  on  animal  life  ;  ^  for  this  in-
fluence, as  we  saw  in  the  first  chapter,  is  supposed  to  be  a
special  attribute  of  the  tree-spirit.  It  is  confirmed,  secondly,
by  observing  that  the  effigy  of  Death  is  sometimes  decked
with  leaves  or  made  of  twigs,  branches,  hemp,  or  a  threshed-
out  sheaf  of  corn  ;  *  and  that  sometimes  it  is  hung  on  a
little  tree  and  so  carried  about  by  girls  collecting  money ,^
just  as  is  done  with  the  May-tree  and  the  May  Lady,  and
with  the  Summer-tree  and  the  doll  attached  to  it.  In
short  we  are  driven   to  regard   the  expulsion  of  Death  and

1  Above,      p.      91,      and     Grimm,  *  Above,  pp.  82,  83,  86,  93  ;    and
DetUsche  Mythologie,^  ii.   644  ;   Reins-  Grimm,  D.M.^  ii.  643.
berg-Dliringsfeld,    Fest -  Kalender    aus  ^  Reinsberg-Diiringsfeld, /<?^AA'a/(;«-
Bdhmen,  p.  87  sq.  der  aus  Bbhinen,    p.    88.      Sometimes

2  • ,  the  effigy  of  Death   (without  a  tree)  is

'  "  carried     round     by    boys    who    collect

3  See  above,  p.  95  sq.  gratuities  (Grimm,  D.M.^  ii.  644).

VOL.  II  H


98  CARR YING  OUT  DEA TH


CHAP.


the  bringing  in  of  Summer  as,  in  some  cases  at  least,  merely
another  form  of  that  death  and  revival  of  the  spirit  of
vegetation  in  spring  which  we  saw  enacted  in  the  killing  and
resurrection  of  the  Wild  Man/  The  burial  and  resurrection
of  the  Carnival  is  probably  another  way  of  expressing  the
same  idea.  The  interment  of  the  representative  of  the
Carnival  under  a  dung-heap  is  natural,  if  he  is  supposed  to
possess  a  quickening  and  fertilising  influence  like  that
ascribed  to  the  effigy  of  Death.  By  the  Esthonians,  indeed,
the  straw  figure  which  is  carried  out  of  the  village  in  the
usual  way  on  Shrove  Tuesday  is  not  called  the  Carnival,  but
the  Wood-spirit  {Aletsik),  and  the  identity  of  it  with  the
wood-spirit  is  further  shown  by  fixing  it  to  the  top  of  a  tree
in  the  wood,  where  it  remains  for  a  year,  and  is  besought
almost  daily  with  prayers  and  offerings  to  protect  the  herds  ;
for  like  a  true  wood-spirit  the  Metsik  is  a  patron  of  cattle.
Sometimes  the  Metsik  is  made  of  sheaves  of  corn.-

Thus  we  may  fairly  conjecture  that  the  names  Carnival,
Death,  and  Summer  are  comparatively  late  and  inadequate
expressions  for  the  beings  personified  or  embodied  in  the
customs  with  which  we  have  been  dealing.  The  very  ab-
stractness  of  the  names  bespeaks  a  modern  origin  ;  the  per-
sonification of  times  and  seasons  like  the  Carnival  and  Summer,
or  of  an  abstract  notion  like  death,  is  hardly  primitive.  But
the  ceremonies  themselves  bear  the  stamp  of  a  dateless
antiquity  ;  therefore  we  can  hardly  help  supposing  that  in
their  origin  the  ideas  which  they  embodied  were  of  a  more
simple  and  concrete  order.  The  notion  of  a  tree,  perhaps
of  a  particular  kind  of  tree  (for  some  savages  have  no  word
for  tree  in  general),  or  even  of  an  individual  tree,  is  suffi-
ciently concrete  to  supply  a  basis  from  which  by  a  gradual
process  of  generalisation  the  wider  idea  of  a  spirit  of  vege-
tation might  be  reached.  But  this  general  idea  of  vegetation
would  readily  be  confounded  with  the  season  in  which  it
manifests  itself ;  hence  the  substitution  of  Spring,  Summer,  or
May  for  the  tree-spirit  or  spirit  of  vegetation  would  be  easy

1  Above,  p.  62.  liingeii  ihr  gelehrten  Estnischen  Gesell-

^  ^\&Aitxazxi\\,  Aus  dein  inneren  iind  schaft  zit  Dorpat,    vii.    Heft   2,    p.    10

nusseren   Leben   der   Ehslcn,   p.    353  ;  sq.  ;    W.    Mannhardt,    Baumkidtiis,  p.

Holzmayej,    "  Osiliana,"'  in    Verhaiid-  40"/ s</.


Ill  SUMMER  AND   WINTER  99

and  natural.  Again  the  concrete  notion  of  the  dying  tree  or
dying  vegetation  would  by  a  similar  process  of  generalisation
glide  into  a  notion  of  death  in  general  ;  so  that  the  practice
of  carrying  out  the  dying  or  dead  vegetation  in  spring,  as  a
preliminary  to  its  revival,  would  in  time  widen  out  into  an
attempt  to  banish  Death  in  general  from  the  village  or  dis-
trict. The  view  that  in  these  spring  ceremonies  Death  meant
originally  the  dying  or  dead  vegetation  of  winter  has  the
high  support  of  W.  Mannhardt ;  and  he  confirms  it  by  the
analogy  of  the  name  Death  as  applied  to  the  spirit  of  the
ripe  corn.  Commonly  the  spirit  of  the  ripe  corn  is  conceived,
not  as  dead,  but  as  old,  and  hence  it  goes  by  the  name  of  the
Old  Man  or  the  Old  Woman.  But  in  some  places  the  last
sheaf  cut  at  harvest,  which  is  generally  believed  to  be  the
seat  of  the  corn  spirit,  is  called  "  the  Dead  One  "  ;  children
are  warned  against  entering  the  corn-fields  because  Death
sits  in  the  corn  ;  and,  in  a  game  played  by  Saxon  children
in  Transylvania  at  the  maize  harvest.  Death  is  represented
by  a  child  completely  covered  with  maize  leaves.^

Sometimes  in  the  popular  customs  of  the  peasantry  the
contrast  between  the  dormant  powers  of  vegetation  in  winter
and  their  awakening  vitality  in  spring  takes  the  form  of  a
dramatic  contest  between  actors  who  play  the  parts  respec-
tively of  Winter  and  Summer.  Thus  in  the  region  of  the
middle  Rhine,  a  representative  of  Summer  clad  in  ivy  combats
a  representative  of  Winter  clad  in  straw  or  moss  and  finally
gains  a  victory  over  him.  The  vanquished  foe  is  thrown  to
the  ground  and  stripped  of  his  casing  of  straw,  which  is  torn
to  pieces  and  scattered  about,  while  the  youthful  comrades  of
the  two  champions  sing  a  song  to  commemorate  the  defeat  of
Winter  by  Summer.  Afterwards  they  carry  about  a  summer
garland  or  branch  and  collect  gifts  of  eggs  and  bacon  from
house  to  house.  Sometimes  the  champion  who  acts  the  part
of  Summer  is  dressed  in  leaves  and  flowers  and  wears  a
chaplet  of  flowers  on  his  head.  In  the  Palatinate  this  mimic
conflict  takes  place  on  the  fourth  Sunday  in  Lent.^  All  over
Bavaria  the  same  drama  used  to  be  acted  on  the  same  day,

1  W.   Mannhardt,  Baumkultiis,   pp.       637-639  ;  Bavaria,  Landes-  mid  Volks-
417-421.  kttnde  des  Kdnigreichs  Baycru,   iv.    2,

-  Grimm,  Deutsche  Mythologie,^  ii.       p.  357  sq.


loo  ^CONTEST  BETWEEN  chap.

and  it  was  still  kept  up  in  some  places  about  forty  years
ago.  While  Summer  appeared  clad  all  in  green,  decked  with
fluttering  ribbons,  and  carrying  a  branch  in  blossom  or  a
little  tree  hung  with  apples  and  pears,  Winter  was  muffled  up
in  cap  and  mantle  of  fur  and  bore  in  his  hand  a  snow-shovel
or  a  flail.  Accompanied  by  their  respective  retinues  dressed
in  corresponding  attire,  they  went  through  all  the  streets  of
the  village,  halting  before  the  houses  and  singing  staves  of
old  songs,  for  which  they  received  presents  of  bread,  eggs,
and  fruit.  Finally,  after  a  short  struggle.  Winter  was  beaten
by  Summer  and  ducked  in  the  village  well  or  driven  out
of  the  village  with  shouts  and  laughter  into  the  forest.^  In
some  parts  of  Bavaria  the  boys  who  play  the  parts  of
Winter  and  Summer  act  their  little  drama  in  every  house
that  they  vijit,  and  engage  in  a  war  of  words  before  they  come
to  blows,  each  of  them  vaunting  the  pleasures  and  benefits  of
the  season  he  represents  and  disparaging  those  of  the  other.
The  dialogue  is  in  verse.  A  few  couplets  may  serve  as
specimens  : —

Summer.

"  Green,  green  are  meadows  wherever  I  pass
And  the  mowers  are  busy  among  the  grass."

Winter.  ,

"  White,  white  are  the  meadows  wherever  I  go,
And  the  sledges  glide  hissing  across  the  snow."

Summer.

"  I'll  climb  up  the  tree  where  the  red  cherries  glow,
And  Winter  can  stand  by  himself  down  below."

Winter.

"  With  you  I  will  climb  the  cherry-tree  tall.
Its  branches  will  kindle  the  fire  in  the  hall."

Summer.

"  O  Winter,  you  are  most  uncivil
To  send  old  women  to  the  devil."

Winter.

"  By  that  I  make  'em  warm  and  mellow,
So  let  them  bawl  and  let  'em  bellow."

^  Bavaria,  etc.,  i.  369  sq.


Ill  SUMMER  AND   WINTER  loi

Summer.

"  I  am  the  Summer  in  white  array,
I'm  chasing  the  Winter  far,  far  away."

Winter.

"  I  am  the  Winter  in  mantle  of  furs,
I'm  chasing  the  Summer  o'er  bushes'and  burs."

Summer.

"Just  say  a  word  more,  and  I'll  have  you  bann'd
At  once  and  for  ever  from  Summer  land."

Winter.

"  O  Summer,  for  all  your  bluster  and  brag.
You'd  not  dare  to  carry  a  hen  in  a  bag."

Summer.

"  O  Winter,  your  chatter  no  more  can  I  stay,
I'll  kick  and  I'll  cuff  you  without  delay."

Here  ensues  a  scuffle  between  the  two  Httle  boys,  in  which
Summer  gets  the  best  of  it,  and  turns  Winter  out  of  the
house.  But  soon  the  beaten  champion  of  Winter  peeps  in
at  the  door  and  says  with  a  humbled  and  crestfallen  air  : —

"O  Summer,  dear  Summer,  I'm  under  your  ban,
For  you  are  the  master  and  I  am  the  man."

To  which  Summer  replies  :—

"  'Tis  a  capital  notion,  an  excellent  plan,
If  I  am  the  master  and  you  are  the  man.
So  come,  my  dear  Winter,  and  give  me  your  hand,
We'll  travel  together  to  Summer  Land."  ^

At  Goepfritz  in  Lower  Austria,  two  men  personating  Summer
and  Winter  used  to  go  from  house  to  house  on  Shrove
Tuesday,  and  were  everywhere  welcomed  by  the  children
with  great  delight.  The  representative  of  Summer  was  clad
in  white  and  bore  a  sickle  ;  his  comrade,  who  played  the  part
of  Winter,  had  a  fur-cap  on  his  head,  his  arms  and  legs  were
swathed   in   straw,   and   he  carried  a   flail.      In   every   house

1  Bavaria,  Landes-  itiid  Volkskiiude  dialogue   in   verse   between    represent-

des   Konigreichs  Bayeni,    ii.    259    sq.  ;  atives  of  Winter  and  Summer  is  spoken

I'anzer,   Beitrag  ziir  dcutschen  Mytho-  at    Hartlieb   in    Silesia,    near    Bieslau.

logie,   i.    pp.   253-256  ;    Leoprechting,  See  Zeitschrift  des  Vereins  fiir  I'olks-

Jits    dein    LecJirain,    p.     167    sq.       A  kiciide,  ill.  (1893),  pp.  226-228.


I02  CONTEST  BETWEEN  chap.

they  sang  verses  alternately/  At  Dromling  in  Brunswick,
down  to  the  present  time,  the  contest  between  Summer
and  Winter  is  acted  every  year  by  a  troop  of  boys  and  a
troop  of  girls.  The  boys  rush  singing,  shouting,  and  ring-
ing bells  from  house  to  house  to  drive  Winter  away  ;  after
them  come  the  girls  singing  softly  and  led  by  a  May  Bride,
all  in  bright  dresses  and  decked  with  flowers  and  garlands
to  represent  the  genial  advent  of  spring.  Formerly  the
part  of  Winter  was  played  by  a  straw-man  which  the  boys
carried  with  them  ;  now  it  is  acted  by  a  real  man  in  disguise.'
In  Wachtl  and  Brodek,  a  German  village  and  a  little  German
town  of  Moravia,  encompassed  by  Slavonic  people  on  every
side,  the  great  change  that  comes  over  the  earth  in  spring  is
still  annually  mimicked.  The  long  village  of  Wachtl,  with  its
trim  houses  and  farmyards,  nestles  in  a  valley  surrounded  by
pretty  pine-woods.  Here,  on  a  day  in  spring,  about  the  time
of  the  vernal  equinox,  an  elderly  man  with  a  long  flaxen
beard  may  be  seen  going  from  door  to  door.  He  is  muffled
in  furs,  with  warm  gloves  on  his  hands  and  a  bearskin  cap
on  his  head,  and  he  carries  a  threshing  flail.  This  is  the
personification  of  Winter.  With  him  goes  a  younger  beard-
less man  dressed  in  white,  wearing  a  straw  hat  trimmed  with
gay  ribbons  on  his  head,  and  carrying  a  decorated  May-tree
in  his  hands.  This  is  Summer.  At  every  house  they  receive
a  friendly  greeting  and  recite  a  long  dialogue  in  verse.  Winter
punctuating  his  discourse  with  his  flail,  which  he  brings
down  with  rude  vigour  on  the  backs  of  all  within  reach.'''
Amongst  the  Slavonic  population  near  Ungarisch  Brod,  in
Moravia,  the  ceremony  took  a  somewhat  different  form.
Girls  dressed  in  green  marched  in  procession  round  a  May-
tree.  Then  two  others,  one  in  white  and  one  in  green,  stepped
up  to  the  tree  and  engaged  in  a  dialogue.  Finally,  the  girl
in  white  was  driven  away,  but  returned  afterwards  clothed  in
green,  and  the  festival  ended  with  a  dance.^  On  May  Day
it  used  to  be  customary  in  almost  all  the  large  parishes  of
the  Isle  of  Man  to  choose  from  among  the  daughters  of  the

1  Vernaleken,  Alythen  mid Brihiihc  ^  \\'.    Miiller,  Beitriige   ztir    Folks-
des  Volkes  in  Oesterreich,  p.  297  sg.            kundc  der  Deutschen  in  Miihren,  pp.

2  R.  Andree,  Brannschwciger  J'olks-       430-436.

hmde  (Brunswick,  1896),  p.  250.  ^  W.  Miiller,  op.  at.  p.  259.


Ill  smLUER  AND   WINTER  103

wealthiest  farmers  a  young  maiden  to  be  Queen  of  May.
She  was  dressed  in  the  gayest  attire  and  attended  by  about
twenty  others,  who  were  called  maids  of  honour.  She  had
also  a  young  man  for  her  captain  with  a  number  of  inferior
officers  under  him.  In  opposition  to  her  was  the  Queen  of
Winter,  a  man  attired  as  a  woman,  with  woollen  hoods,  fur
tippets,  and  loaded  with  the  warmest  and  heaviest  clothes,
one  upon  another.  Her  attendants  were  habited  in  like
manner,  and  she  too  had  a  captain  and  troop  for  her
defence.  Thus  representing  respectively  the  beauty  of  spring
and  the  deformity  of  winter  they  set  forth  from  their  different
quarters,  the  one  preceded  by  the  dulcet  music  of  flutes  and
violins,  the  other  by  the  harsh  clatter  of  cleavers  and  tongs.
Thus  they  marched  till  they  met  on  a  common,  where
the  trains  of  the  two  mimic  sovereigns  engaged  in  a  mock
battle.  If  the  Queen  of  Winter's  forces  got  the  better  of  their
adversaries  and  took  her  rival  prisoner,  the  captive  Queen  of
Summer  was  ransomed  for  as  much  as  would  pay  the  expenses
of  the  festival.  After  this  ceremony,  Winter  and  her  company
retired  and  diverted  themselves  in  a  barn,  while  the  partisans
of  Summer  danced  on  the  green,  concluding  the  evening  with
a  feast,  at  which  the  Queen  and  her  maids  sat  at  one  table
and  the  captain  and  his  troop  at  another.  In  later  times  the
person  of  the  Queen  of  May  was  exempt  from  capture,  but
one  of  her  slippers  was  substituted  and,  if  captured,  had  to
be  ransomed  to  defray  the  expenses  of  the  pageant.  The
procession  of  the  Summer,  which  was  subsequently  composed
of  little  girls  and  called  the  Maceboard,  outlived  that  of  its
rival  the  Winter  for  some  years  ;  but  both  have  now  long
been  things  of  the  past.^

Among  the  central  Esquimaux  of  North  America  the
contest  between  representatives  of  summer  and  winter,
which  in  Europe  has  long  degenerated  into  a  mere  dramatic
performance,  is  still  kept  up  as  a  magical  ceremony  of  which
the  avowed  intention  is  to  influence  the  weather.  In  autumn,
when  storms  announce  the  approach  of  the  dismal  Arctic
winter,  the  Esquimaux  divide   themselves  into  two  parties

1  J.  Train,  Histoi-ical  and  Statistical       name   IVIaceboard  may  be  a  corruption
Account  of  the  Isle  of  Ma7i,   ii.    118-       of  May-sports.
120.      It  has  been  suggested  that  the


I04  SUMMER  AND   WINTER  chap.

called  respectively  the  ptarmigans  and  the  ducks,  the  ptarmi-
gans comprising  all  persons  born  in  winter,  and  the  ducks
all  persons  born  in  summer.  A  long  rope  of  sealskin  is  then
stretched  out,  and  each  party  laying  hold  of  one  end  of  it
seeks  by  tugging  with  might  and  main  to  drag  the  other
party  over  to  its  side.  If  the  ptarmigans  get  the  worst  of
it,  then  summer  has  won  the  game  and  fine  weather  may  be
expected  to  prevail  through  the  winter.^  In  this  ceremony  it
is  clearly  assumed  that  persons  born  in  summer  have  a
natural  affinity  with  warm  weather,  and  therefore  possess  a
power  of  mitigating  the  rigour  of  winter,  whereas  persons
born  in  winter  are,  so  to  say,  of  a  cold  and  frosty  disposition
and  can  thereby  exert  a  refrigerating  influence  on  the  tem-
perature of  the  air.  In  spite  of  this  natural  antipathy
between  the  representatives  of  summer  and  winter,  we  may
be  allowed  to  conjecture  that  in  the  grand  tug  of  war  the
ptarmigans  do  not  pull  at  the  rope  with  the  same  hearty
goodwill  as  the  ducks,  and  that  thus  the  genial  influence  of
summer  commonly  prevails  over  the  harsh  austerity  of  winter.
The  Indians  of  Canada  seem  also  to  have  imagined  that
persons  are  endowed  with  distinct  natural  capacities  accord-
ing as  they  are  born  in  summer  or  winter,  and  they  turned
the  distinction  to  account  in  much  the  same  fashion  as  the
Esquimaux.  When  they  wearied  of  the  long  frosts  and  the
deep  snow  which  kept  them  prisoners  in  their  huts  and  pre-
vented them  from  hunting,  all  of  them  who  were  born  in
summer  rushed  out  of  their  houses  armed  with  burning
brands  and  torches  which  they  hurled  against  the  One  who
makes  Winter  ;  and  this  was  supposed  to  produce  the  desired
effect  of  mitigating  the  cold.  But  those  Indians  who  were
born  in  winter  abstained  from  taking  part  in  the  ceremony,
for  they  believed  that  if  they  meddled  with  it  the  cold  would
increase  instead  of  diminishing.'-'  We  may  surmise  that  in
the  corresponding  European  ceremonies,  which  have  just  been
described,  it  was  formerly  deemed  necessary  that  the  actors,
who  played  the  parts  of  Winter  and  Summer,  should  have
been  born  in  the  seasons  which  they  personated.

'  Fr.  Boas,  "The  Central  Eskimo,"  -  Relations  des  Jhuites,  1636,  p.  38

Sixth  Annual  Report  of  the  Bureau  of      (Canadian  reprint).
^//2«^/i5>^^/ (Washington,  1888),  p.  605.


Ill  FUNERAL  OF  KOSTRUBONKO  105

In  Russia  funeral  ceremonies  like  those  of  "  Burying  the
Carnival "  and  "  Carrying  out  Death "  are  celebrated  under
the  names,  not  of  death  or  the  Carnival,  but  of  certain
mythic  figures,  Kostrubonko,  Kostroma,  Kupalo,  Lada,  and
Yarilo.  These  Russian  ceremonies  are  observed  both  in
spring  and  at  midsummer.  Thus  "  in  Little  Russia  it  used
to  be  the  custom  at  Eastertide  to  celebrate  the  funeral  of  a
being  called  Kostrubonko,  the  deity  of  the  spring.  A  circle
was  formed  of  singers  who  moved  slowly  around  a  girl  who
lay  on  the  ground  as  if  dead,  and  as  they  went  they  sang —

'  Dead,  dead  is  our  Kostrubonko  !
Dead,  dead  is  our  dear  one  ! '

until  the  girl  suddenly  sprang  up,  on  which  the  chorus  joy-
fully exclaimed —

'  Come  to  life,  come  to  life  has  our  Kostrubonko  !
Come  to  life,  come  to  life  has  our  dear  one  ! ' "  1

On  the  Eve  of  St.  John  (Midsummer  Eve)  a  figure  of  Kupalo
is  made  of  straw  and  "  is  dressed  in  woman's  clothes,  with  a
necklace  and  a  floral  crown.  Then  a  tree  is  felled,  and,  after
being  decked  with  ribbons,  is  set  up  on  some  chosen  spot.
Near  this  tree,  to  which  they  give  the  name  of  Marena
[Winter  or  Death],  the  straw  figure  is  placed,  together  with  a
table,  on  which  stand  spirits  and  viands.  Afterwards  a  bon-
fire is  lit,  and  the  young  men  and  maidens  jump  over  it  in
couples,  carrying  the  figure  with  them.  On  the  next  day
they  strip  the  tree  and  the  figure  of  their  ornaments,  and
throw  them  both  into  a  stream."  •^  On  St.  Peter's  Day,  the
twenty-ninth  of  June,  or  on  the  following  Sunday,  "the  Funeral
of  Kostroma  "  or  of  Lada  or  of  Yarilo  is  celebrated  in  Russia.
In  the  Governments  of  Penza  and  Simbirsk  the  funeral  used
to  be  represented  as  follows.  A  bonfire  was  kindled  on  the
twenty -eighth  of  June,  and  on  the  next  day  the  maidens  chose
one  of  their  number  to  play  the  part  of  Kostroma.  Her
companions  saluted  her  with  deep  obeisances,  placed  her  on
a  board,  and  carried  her  to  the  bank  of  a  stream.  There  they
bathed  her  in  the  water,  while  the  oldest  girl  made  a  basket

^   Ralston,  Songs  of  the  7\ussian  People ,  p.  221.
-   Ralston,  op.  cii.  p.  241.


io6  BURIAL  OF  YARILO  chap.

of  lime-tree  bark  and  beat  it  like  a  drum.  Then  they  re-
turned to  the  village  and  ended  the  day  with  processions,
games,  and  dances.^  In  the  Murom  district,  Kostroma  was
represented  by  a  straw  figure  dressed  in  woman's  clothes
and  flowers.  This  was  laid  in  a  trough  and  carried  with
songs  to  the  bank  of  a  lake  or  river.  Here  the  crowd  divided
into  two  sides  of  which  the  one  attacked  and  the  other
defended  the  figure.  At  last  the  assailants  gained  the  day,
stripped  the  figure  of  its  dress  and  ornaments,  tore  it  in
pieces,  trod  the  straw  of  which  it  was  made  under  foot,  and
flung  it  into  the  stream  ;  while  the  defenders  of  the  figure
hid  their  faces  in  their  hands  and  pretended  to  bewail  the
death  of  Kostroma."  In  the  district  of  Kostroma  the  burial  of
Yarilo  was  celebrated  on  the  twenty-ninth  or  thirtieth  of  June.
The  people  chose  an  old  man  and  gave  him  a  small  coffin
containing  a  Priapus-like  figure  representing  Yarilo.  This  he
carried  out  of  the  town,  followed  by  women  chanting  dirges
and  expressing  by  their  gestures  grief  and  despair.  In  the
open  fields  a  grave  was  dug,  and  into  it  the  figure  was  lowered
amid  weeping  and  wailing,  after  which  games  and  dances
were  begun,  "  calling  to  mind  the  funeral  games  celebrated
in  old  times  by  the  pagan  Slavonians."^'  In  Little  Russia
the  figure  of  Yarilo  was  laid  in  a  coffin  and  carried  through
the  streets  after  sunset  surrounded  by  drunken  women,  who
kept  repeating  mournfully,  "  He  is  dead  !  he  is  dead  !  "  The
men  lifted  and  shook  the  figure  as  if  they  were  trying  to
recall  the  dead  man  to  life.  Then  they  said  to  the  women,
"  Women,  weep  not.  I  know  what  is  sweeter  than  honey."
But  the  women  continued  to  lament  and  chant,  as  they  do  at
funerals.  "  Of  what  was  he  guilty  ?  He  was  so  good.  He
will  arise  no  more.  O  how  shall  we  part  from  thee  ?  What
is  life  without  thee  ?  Arise,  if  only  for  a  brief  hour.  But
he  rises  not,  he  rises  not."  At  last  the  Yarilo  was  buried  in
a  grave.'^

These  Russian  customs  are  plainly  of  the  same  nature  as
those  which  in  Austria  and  Germany  are  known  as  "  Carrying

1  Ralston,  op.   cit.   p.    243  sq. ;   W.  ■'  Ralston,     op.    cit.    p.    245  ;     W,
Mannhardt,  Banntkultiis,  p.  414.                 Mannliardt,  Baiimhdtns,  p.  416.

2  V^.    Mannhardt,    Baiiinkttlttis,    p.

414  j7/.;  Ralston,  t?/.  ciL  p.  244.  '  W.  Mannhardt, /.r.;   Ralston, /.f.


Ill


DEATH  OF  VEGETATION  107


out  Death."  Therefore  if  the  interpretation  here  adopted  of
the  latter  is  right,  the  Russian  Kostroma,  Yarilo,  and  the  rest
must  also  have  been  originally  embodiments  of  the  spirit  of
vegetation,  and  their  death  must  have  been  regarded  as  a
necessary  preliminary  to  their  revival.  The  revival  as  a  sequel
to  the  death  is  enacted  in  the  first  of  the  ceremonies  described,
the  death  and  resurrection  of  Kostrubonko.  The  reason  why
in  some  of  these  Russian  ceremonies  the  death  of  the  spirit
of  vegetation  is  celebrated  at  midsummer  may  be  that  the
decline  of  summer  is  dated  from  Midsummer  Day,  after
which  the  days  begin  to  shorten,  and  the  sun  sets  out  on  his
downward  journey —

"  To  the  darksome  hollows
Where  the  frosts  of  winter  lie."

Such  a  turning-point  of  the  year,  when  vegetation  might  be
thought  to  share  the  incipient  though  still  almost  impercep-
tible decay  of  summer,  might  very  well  be  chosen  by  primi-
tive man  as  a  fit  moment  for  resorting  to  those  magic  cere-
monies by  which  he  hopes  to  stay  the  decline,  or  at  least  to
ensure  the  revival,  of  plant  life.

But  while  the  death  of  vegetation  appears  to  have
been  represented  in  all,  and  its  revival  in  some,  of  these
spring  and  midsummer  ceremonies,  there  are  features  in
some  of  them  which  can  hardly  be  explained  on  this
hypothesis  alone.  The  solemn  funeral,  the  lamentations,
and  the  mourning  attire,  which  often  characterise  these
ceremonies,  are  indeed  appropriate  at  the  death  of  the
beneficent  spirit  of  vegetation.  But  what  shall  we  say  of
the  glee  with  which  the  effigy  is  often  carried  out,  of  the
sticks  and  stones  with  which  it  is  assailed,  and  the  taunts
and  curses  which  are  hurled  at  it  ?  What  shall  we  say  of
the  dread  of  the  effigy  evinced  by  the  haste  with  which  the
bearers  scamper  home  as  soon  as  they  have  thrown  it  away,
and  by  the  belief  that  some  one  must  soon  die  in  any  house
into  which  it  has  looked  ?  This  dread  might  perhaps  be
explained  by  a  belief  that  there  is  a  certain  infectiousness  in
the  dead  spirit  of  vegetation  which  renders  its  approach
dangerous.  But  this  explanation,  besides  being  rather
strained,  does   not   cover   the   rejoicings  which   often   attend


io8  THE  FAIR  OF  RALI  chap.

the  carrying  out  of  Death.  We  must  therefore  recognise
two  distinct  and  seemingly  opposite  features  in  these  cere-
monies :  on  the  one  hand,  sorrow  for  the  death,  and  affection
and  respect  for  the  dead  ;  on  the  other  hand,  fear  and  hatred
of  the  dead,  and  rejoicings  at  his  death.  How  the  former  of
these  features  is  to  be  explained  I  have  attempted  to  show  ;
how  the  latter  came  to  be  so  closely  associated  with  the
former  is  a  question  which  I  shall  try  to  answer  in  the  sequel.

Before  we  quit  these  European  customs  to  go  farther
afield,  it  will  be  well  to  notice  that  occasionally  the  expulsion
of  Death  or  of  a  mythic  being  is  conducted  without  any
visible  representative  of  the  personage  expelled.  Thus  at
Konigshain,  near  Gorlitz  in  Silesia,  all  the  villagers,  young
and  old,  used  to  go  out  with  straw  torches  to  the  top  of  a
neighbouring  hill,  called  Todtenstein  (Death-stone),  where
they  lit  their  torches,  and  so  returned  home  singing,  "  We
have  driven  out  Death,  we  are  bringing  back  Summer."  ^
In  Albania  young  people  light  torches  of  resinous  wood  on
Easter  Eve,  and  march  in  procession  through  the  village
brandishing  them.  At  last  they  throw  the  torches  into  the
river,  saying,  "  Ha,  Kore,  we  fling  you  into  the  river,  like
these  torches,  that  you  may  return  no  more."  Some  say
that  the  intention  of  the  ceremony  is  to  drive  out  winter  ;
but  Kore  is  conceived  as  a  malignant  being  who  devours
children."

In  the  Kanagra  district  of  India  there  is  a  custom
observed  by  young  girls  in  spring  which  closely  resembles
some  of  the  European  spring  ceremonies  just  described.  It
is  called  the  Rait  Ka  meld,  or  fair  of  Rali,  the  Rali  being  a
small  painted  earthen  image  of  Siva  or  Parvati.  The  custom
is  in  vogue  all  over  the  Kanagra  district,  and  its  celebration,
which  is  entirely  confined  to  young  girls,  lasts  through  most
of  Chet  (March-April)  up  to  the  Sankrant  of  Baisakh  (April).
On  a  morning  in  March  all  the  young  girls  of  the  village
take  small  baskets  of  di'ib  grass  and  flowers  to  an  appointed
place,  where  they  throw  them  in  a  heap.  Round  this
heap  they  stand  in  a  circle  and  sing.  This  goes  on  ever)-'
day   for  ten   days,   till   the   heap  of  grass   and   flowers   has

^  Grimm,  Deulsche  Mythologie,^  ii.  -  J-     G.     von    Hahn,    Albanesische

644.  Stiii/ieii,  i.  160.


Ill  THE  FAIR  OF  RAU  109

reached  a  fair  height.  Then  they  cut  in  the  jungle  two
branches,  each  with  three  prongs  at  one  end,  and  place  them,
prongs  downwards,  over  the  heap  of  flowers,  so  as  to  make
two  tripods  or  pyramids.  On  the  single  uppermost  points
of  these  branches  they  get  an  image-maker  to  construct  two
clay  images,  one  to  represent  Siva,  and  the  other  Parvati.
The  girls  then  divide  themselves  into  two  parties,  one  for
Siva  and  one  for  Parvati,  and  marry  the  images  in  the  usual
way,  leaving  out  no  part  of  the  ceremony.  After  the  mar-
riage they  have  a  feast,  the  cost  of  which  is  defrayed  by
contributions  solicited  from  their  parents.  Then  at  the  next
Sankrant  (Baisakh)  they  all  go  together  to  the  riverside,
throw  the  images  into  a  deep  pool,  and  weep  over  the  place,
as  though  they  were  performing  funeral  obsequies.  The
boys  of  the  neighbourhood  often  tease  them  by  diving  after
the  images,  bringing  them  up,  and  waving  them  about  while
the  girls  are  crying  over  them.  The  object  of  the  fair  is
said  to  be  to  secure  a  good  husband.^

That  in  this  Indian  ceremony  the  deities  Siva  and
Parvati  are  conceived  as  spirits  of  vegetation  seems  to  be
proved  by  the  placing  of  their  images  on  branches  over  a
heap  of  grass  and  flowers.  Here,  as  often  in  European  folk-
custom,  the  divinities  of  vegetation  are  represented  in
duplicate,  by  plants  and  by  puppets.  The  marriage  of
these  Indian  deities  in  spring  corresponds  to  the  European
ceremonies  in  which  the  marriage  of  the  vernal  spirits  of
vegetation  is  represented  by  the  King  and  Queen  of  May,
the  May  Bride,  Bridegroom  of  the  May,  and  so  forth.^  The
throwing  of  the  images  into  the  water,  and  the  mourning  for
them,  are  the  equivalents  of  the  European  customs  of  throw-
ing the  dead  spirit  of  vegetation  under  the  name  of  Death,
Yarilo,  Kostroma,  and  the  rest,  into  the  water  and  lamenting
over  it.  Again,  in  India,  as  often  in  Europe,  the  rite  is  per-
formed exclusively  by  females.  The  notion  that  the  ceremony
helps  to  procure  husbands  for  the  girls  can  be  explained
by  the  quickening  and  fertilising  influence  which  the  spirit  of
vegetation  is  believed  to  exert  upon  the  life  of  man  as  well
as  of  plants.^

1  R.  C.  Temple,  in  Indian  Antiquary,  xi.  (1882),  p.  297  sq.
^  See  vol.  i.  p.  220  si/ij.  ^  See  vol.  i.  p.   192  si/q.


I  lO


MAGICAL  RITES  chap.


The  general  explanation  which  we  have  been  led  to
adopt  of  these  and  many  similar  ceremonies  is  that  they  are,
or  were  in  their  origin,  magical  rites  intended  to  ensure  the
revival  of  nature  in  spring.  The  means  by  which  they  were
supposed  to  effect  this  end  were  imitation  and  sympathy.
Led  astray  by  his  ignorance  of  the  true  causes  of  things,
primitive  man  believed  that  in  order  to  produce  the  great
phenomena  of  nature  on  which  his  life  depended  he  had
only  to  imitate  them,  and  that  immediately  by  a  secret
sympathy  or  mystic  influence  the  little  drama  which  he
acted  in  forest  glade  or  mountain  dell,  on  desert  plain  or
wind-swept  shore,  would  be  taken  up  and  repeated  by
mightier  actors  on  a  vaster  stage.  He  fancied  that  by
masquerading  in  leaves  and  flowers,  he  helped  the  bare
earth  to  clothe  herself  with  verdure,  and  that  by  playing  the
death  and  burial  of  winter  he  drove  that  gloomy  season
away,  and  made  smooth  the  path  for  the  footsteps  of  return-
ing spring.  If  we  find  it  hard  to  throw  ourselves  even
in  fancy  into  a  mental  condition  in  which  such  things
seem  possible,  we  can  more  easily  picture  to  ourselves  the
anxiety  which  the  savage,  when  he  first  began  to  lift  his
thoughts  above  the  satisfaction  of  his  merely  animal  wants,
and  to  meditate  on  the  causes  of  things,  may  have  felt  as  to
the  continued  operation  of  what  we  now  call  the  laws  of
nature.  To  us,  familiarised  with  the  conception  of  the
uniformity  and  regularity  with  which  the  great  cosmic
phenomena  succeed  each  other,  there  seems  little  ground  for
apprehension  that  the  causes  which  produce  these  effects
will  cease  to  operate,  at  least  within  the  near  future.  But
this  confidence  in  the  stability  of  nature  is  bred  only  by  the
experience  which  comes  of  wide  observation  and  long
tradition  ;  and  the  savage,  with  his  narrow  sphere  of  obser-
vation and  his  short-lived  tradition,  lacks  the  very  elements
of  that  experience  which  alone  could  set  his  mind  at  rest  in
face  of  the  ever-changing  and  often  menacing  aspects  of
nature.  No  wonder,  therefore,  that  he  is  thrown  into  a
panic  by  an  eclipse,  and  thinks  that  the  sun  or  the  moon
would  surely  perish,  if  he  did  not  raise  a  clamour  and  shoot
his  puny  shafts  into  the  air  to  defend  the  luminaries
from    the    monster    who    threatens    to    devour    them.      No


JII


TO  A  SSIS  T  NA  TURK  1 1 1


wonder    he  is  terrified    when   in    the  darkness    of  night    a
streak    of   sky    is    suddenly    illumined    by    the   flash   of    a
meteor,  or  the   whole  expanse  of  the   celestial   arch   glows
with    the    fitful    light    of  the    Northern    Streamers.-^       Even
phenomena  which  recur  at  fixed  and  uniform  intervals  may
be  viewed  by  him  with  apprehension,  before  he  has  come  to
recognise  the  orderliness  of  their  recurrence.      The  speed  or
slowness  of  his  recognition  of  such  periodic  or  cyclic  changes
in  nature  will  depend  largely  on  the  length  of  the  particular
cycle.      The  cycle,  for  example,  of  day  and  night  is  every-
where, except  in   the   polar  regions,  so   short  and   hence  so
frequent  that  men  probably  soon  ceased  to  discompose  them-
selves   seriously   as    to    the   chance    of  its   failing   to   recur,
though    the    ancient    Egyptians,    as    we    have    seen,    daily
wrought   enchantments   to    bring    back    to   the   east    in   the
morning   the   fiery  orb  which   had    sunk    at   evening   in    the
crimson    west.      But    it   was   far   otherwise    with   the  annual .
cycle  of  the  seasons.      To  any  man  a  year  is  a  considerable
period,  seeing  that  the  number  of  our  years  is  but  few  at  the
best.      To  the  primitive  savage,  with  his  short  memory  and
imperfect   means  of  marking  the  flight  of  time,  a  year  may
well   have   been   so   long  that  he   failed   to   recognise  it  as  a
cycle  at  all,  and  watched  the   changing  aspects  of  earth   and
heaven   with   a   perpetual   wonder,  alternately  delighted   and
alarmed,  elated  and   cast  down  according  as  the  vicissitudes
of  light  and  heat,  of  plant  and  animal  life,  ministered   to   his
comfort  or  threatened  his   existence.      In  autumn  when  the
yellow  leaves  were  whirled  about  the  forest  by  the  nipping
blast,  and   he   looked   up   at  the   bare   boughs,  could   he  feel
sure  that  they  would  ever  be  green  again  ?      As  day  by  day
the  sun  sank  lower  and  lower  in  the  sky,  could  he  be  certain
that   the   luminary  would   ever   retrace   his    heavenly    road  ?
Even  the  waning  moon,  whose  pale  sickle  rose  thinner  and
thinner  every  night  over  the  rim  of  the  eastern  horizon,  may
have   excited   in   his   mind   a   fear   lest,  when  it   had  wholly
vanished,  there   should   be    moons   no    more.      These   and   a

^  When  the  Kurnai  of  Victoria  saw  "  Send    it    away  !  send    it    away  !    do

the     Aurora    Australis,    which    corre-  not  let  it  burn  us  up  ! "      See  A.  W.

sponds   to   the  Northern  Streamers   of  Hewitt,    "On     some     Australian    be-

Europe,  they  swung  the  severed  hand  liefs,"  Journal  of  the  Anthropological

of   a  dead   man    towards  it,   shouting,  Institute,  xiii.  {1884),  p.   189.


112  MAGICAL  RITES  chai-

thousand  such  misgivings  may  have  thronged  the  fancy  and
troubled  the  peace  of  the  man  who  first  began  to  reflect  on
the  mysteries  of  the  world  he  lived  in,  and  to  take  thought
for  a  more  distant  future  than  the  morrow.  It  was  natural,
therefore,  that  with  such  thoughts  and  fears  he  should  have
done  all  that  in  him  lay  to  bring  back  the  faded  blossom  to
the  bough,  to  swing  the  low  sun  of  winter  up  to  his  old
place  in  the  summer  sky,  and  to  restore  its  orbed  fulness  to
the  silver  lamp  of  the  waning  moon.  We  may  smile  at  his
vain  endeavours  if  we  please,  but  it  was  only  by  making  a
long  series  of  experiments,  of  which  some  were  almost
inevitably  doomed  to  failure,  that  man  learned  from  ex-
perience the  futility  of  some  of  his  attempted  methods  and
the  fruitfulness  of  others.  After  all,  magical  ceremonies  are
nothing  but  experiments  which  have  failed  and  which  con-
tinue to  be  repeated  merely  because,  for  reasons  which  have
already  been  indicated,^  the  operator  is  unaware  of  their
failure.  With  the  advance  of  knowledge  these  ceremonies
either  cease  to  be  performed  altogether  or  are  kept  up  from
force  of  habit  long  after  the  intention  with  which  they  were
instituted  has  been  forgotten.  Thus  fallen  from  their  high
estate,  no  longer  regarded  as  solemn  rites  on  the  punctual
performance  of  which  the  welfare  and  even  the  life  of  the
community  depended,  they  sink  gradually  to  the  level  of
simple  pageants,  mummeries,  and  pastimes,  till  in  the  final
stage  of  degeneration  they  are  wholly  abandoned  by  older
people,  and,  from  having  once  been  the  most  serious  occupa-
tion of  the  sage,  become  at  last  the  idle  sport  of  children.
It  is  in  this  final  stage  of  decay  that  most  of  the  old  magical
rites  of  our  European  forefathers  linger  on  at  the  present
day,  and  even  from  this  their  last  retreat  they  are  fast  being
swept  away  by  the  rising  tide  of  those  multitudinous  forces,
moral,  intellectual,  and  social,  which  are  bearing  mankind
onward  to  a  new  and  unknown  goal.  We  may  feel  some
natural  regret  at  the  disappearance  of  quaint  customs  and
picturesque  ceremonies,  which  have  preserved  to  an  age
often  deemed  dull  and  prosaic  something  of  the  flavour  and
freshness  of  the  olden  time,  some  breath  of  the  springtime  of
the  world  ;  yet  our  regret  will  be  lessened  when  we  remember

^  See  vol.  i.  p.  78  sqq.


Ill  TO  ASSIST  NATURE  113

that  these  pretty  pageants,  these  now  innocent  diversions
had  their  origin  in  ignorance  and  superstition  ;  that  if  they
are  a  record  of  human  endeavour,  they  are  also  a  monument
of  fruitless  ingenuity,  of  wasted  labour,  and  of  blighted
hopes  ;  and  that  for  all  their  gay  trappings — their  flowers,
their  ribbons,  and  their  music — they  partake  far  more  of
tragedv  than  of  farce.

The  interpretation  which,  following  in  the  footsteps  of*
W.  ]Mannhardt,  I  have  attempted  to  give  of  these  ceremonies
has  been  not  a  little  confirmed  by  the  discovery,  made  since
this  book  was  first  written,  that  the  natives  of  Central  Aus-
tralia regularly  practise  magical  ceremonies  for  the  purpose
of  awakening  the  dormant  energies  of  nature  at  the  approach
of  what  may  be  called  the  Australian  spring.  In  the  hot
and  arid  region  which  is  the  home  of  these  rude  savages  the
seasons  are  limited,  so  far  as  concerns  the  flowering  of
plants  and  the  breeding  of  animals,  to  two,  namely,  a  dry .
one  of  uncertain  and  often  great  length,  and  a  rainy  one  of
short  duration  and  often  irregular  occurrence.  The  latter  is
followed  by  an  increase  in  animal  life  and  an  exuberance  of
vegetable  growth  which,  almost  suddenly,  transforms  what
may  have  been  a  sterile  waste  into  a  land  rich  in  a  variety
of  animal  species,  none  of  which  have  been  seen  for  perhaps
many  months  before,  and  gay  with  the  blossoms  of  endless
flowering  plants.  It  is  difficult,  we  are  told,  to  realise  the
contrast  between  the  steppes  of  Australia  in  the  dry  and  in
the  rainy  season.  In  the  dry  season  the  landscape  presents
a  scene  of  desolation.  The  sun  shines  down  hotly  on  stony
plains  or  yellow  sandy  ground,  on  which  grow  wiry  shrubs
and  small  tussocks  of  grass,  not  set  closely  together,  as  in
moister  lands,  but  straggling  separately,  so  that  in  any
patch  the  number  of  plants  can  be  counted.  The  sharp,
thin  shadows  of  the  wiry  scrub  fall  on  the  yellow  ground,
which  betrays  no  sign  of  animal  life  save  for  the  little  ant-
hills, thousands  of  whose  inmates  are  seen  rushing  about  in
apparently  hopeless  confusion,  or  piling  leaves  and  seeds  in
regular  order  around  the  entrance  to  their  burrows.  A  desert
oak,  as  it  is  called,  or  an  acacia  tree  may  here  and  there  afford  a
scanty  shade,  but  for  weeks  together  there  are  no  clouds  to  hide
the  brightness  of  the  sun  by  day  or  of  the  stars  by  night.

VOL.  II  I


114  MAGICAL  RITES  chap.

All  this  is  changed  when  heavy  rains  have  fallen  and
torrents  rush  down  the  lately  dry  beds  of  the  rivers,  sweep-
ing along  uprooted  trees  and  great  masses  of  tangled  wrack
on  their  impetuous  current,  and  flooding  far  and  wide  the
flat  lands  on  either  bank.  Then  what  has  been  for  months
an  arid  wilderness  is  suddenly  changed  into  a  vast  sheet  of
water.  Soon,  however,  the  rain  ceases  to  fall  and  the  flood
'subsides  rapidly.  For  a  few  days  the  streams  run,  then  dry
up,  and  only  the  deeper  holes  here  and  there  retain  the
water.  The  sun  once  more  shines  down  hotly,  and  in  the
damp  ground  seeds  which  have  lain  dormant  for  months
sprout,  and,  as  if  by  magic,  the  desert  becomes  covered  with
luxuriant  herbage.  Birds,  frogs,  lizards,  and  insects  of  all
sorts  may  be  seen  and  heard  where  lately  everything  was
parched  and  silent.  Plants  and  animals  alike  make  the
most  of  the  brief  time  in  which  they  can  grow  and  multiply  ;
the  struggle  for  existence  is  all  the  keener  because  it  is  so
short.  If  a  young  plant  can  strike  its  roots  deep  enough  to
reach  the  cool  soil  below  the  heated  surface,  it  may  live  ;  if
not,  it  must  perish.  If  a  young  animal  grows  fast  enough  to
be  able  to  burrow  while  the  banks  of  the  water-hole  in  which
it  lives  are  still  damp,  it,  too,  stands  a  chance  of  surviving.^

Now  it  is  just  when  there  is  promise  of  the  approach  of
a  good  season  that  the  natives  of  Central  Australia  are  wont
especially  to  perform  those  magical  ceremonies  of  which  the
avowed  intention  is  to  multiply  the  plants  and  animals  which
they  use  as  food."  These  ceremonies,  therefore,  present  a
close  analogy  to  the  spring  customs  of  our  European
peasantry  not  only  in  the  time  of  their  celebration,  but  also
in  their  aim  ;  for  we  can  hardly  doubt  that  in  instituting
rites  designed  to  assist  the  revival  of  plant  life  in  spring  our
primitive  forefathers  were  moved,  not  by  any  sentimental
wish  to  smell  at  early  violets,  or  pluck  the  rathe  primrose,  or
watch  yellow  daffodils  dancing  in  the  breeze,  but  by  the  very

1   Spencer  and  Gillen,  Native  Tribes  been  discussing  in   their  general  inten-

of  Central  Australia,  pp.    4  sq.,  170.  tion  and   the   principle  on  which  they

I  have  reproduced  the  graphic  descrip-  proceed,  which  is  that  of  imitation  and

tion  of  the  writers  almost  verbally.  sympathy,  they  differ  too  widely  from

-  Spencer    and    Gillen,  op.  cit.  ch.  them  in  details  for  a  comparison  to  be

vi.  "  Intichiuma  Ceremonies,"  pp.   167-  instructive.      Some  of  them  have  been

211.     Although  these  ceremonies  agree  briefly  described  already  (vol.   i.   p.  23

with   the   European   customs   we   have  sq.).


Ill  TO  ASSIST  NATURE  115

practical  consideration,  certainly  not  formulated  in  abstract
terms,  that  the  life  of  man  is  inextricably  bound  up  with
that  of  plants,  and  that  if  they  were  to  perish  he  could  not
survive.  And  as  the  faith  of  the  Australian  savage  in  the
efficacy  of  his  magic  rites  is  confirmed  by  observing  that
their  performance  is  invariably  followed,  sooner  or  later,  by
that  increase  of  vegetable  and  animal  life  which  it  is  their
object  to  produce,  so,  we  may  suppose,  it  was  with  European
savages  in  the  olden  time.  The  sight  of  the  fresh  green  in
brake  and  thicket,  of  vernal  flowers  blowing  on  mossy  banks,
of  swallows  arriving  from  the  south,  and  of  the  sun  mounting
daily  higher  in  the  sky,  would  be  welcomed  by  them  as  so
many  visible  signs  that  their  enchantments  were  indeed
taking  effect,  and  would  inspire  them  with  a  cheerful  con-
fidence that  all  was  well  with  a  world  which  they  could  thus
mould  to  suit  their  wishes.  Only  in  autumn  days,  as
summer  slowly  faded,  would  their  confidence  again  be
dashed  by  doubts  and  misgivings  at  sight  of  symptoms  of
decay,  which  told  how  vain  were  all  their  efforts  to  stave  off
for  ever  the  approach  of  winter  and  of  death.

§  4.  Adonis

But  it  is  in  Egypt  and  Western  Asia  that  the  death  and
resurrection  of  vegetation  appear  to  have  been  most  widely
celebrated  with  ceremonies  like  those  of  modern  Europe.
Under  the  names  of  Osiris,  Adonis,  Tammuz,  Attis,  and
Dionysus,  the  Egyptians,  Syrians,  Babylonians,  Phrygians,
and  Greeks  represented  the  decay  and  revival  of  vegetation
with  rites  which,  as  the  ancients  themselves  recognised,  were
substantially  the  same,  and  which  find  their  parallels  in  the
spring  and  midsummer  customs  of  our  European  peasantry.
The  nature  and  worship  of  these  deities  have  been  discussed
at  length  by  many  learned  writers  ;  all  that  I  propose  to  do
is  to  sketch  those  salient  features  in  their  ritual  and  legends
which  seem  to  establish  the  view  here  taken  of  their  nature.
We  begin  with  Adonis  or  Tammuz.

The  worship  of  Adonis  was  practised  by  the  Semitic
peoples  of  Syria,  from  whom  it  was  borrowed  by  the  Greeks
as   early  at   least   as  the   fifth   century   before   Christ.      The


Ii6  ADONIS  CHAP.

name   Adonis   is   the   Phoenician   Adon,   "  lord."  ^      He  was
said  to  have  been  a  fair  youth,  beloved   by  Aphrodite  (the
Semitic  Astarte),  but  slain  by  a  boar  in  his  youthful  prime.
His   death    was    annually    lamented    with    a   bitter    wailing,
chiefly    by    women  ;     images    of   him,   dressed    to   resemble
corpses,  were  carried  out  as  to  burial  and  then  thrown  into
the  sea  or  into  springs  ; "   and  in  some  places  his  revival  was
celebrated  on  the  following  day.^     But  the  ceremonies  varied
somewhat  both  in   the  manner  and  the  season  of  their  cele-
bration in  different  places.     At  Alexandria  images  of  Adonis
and  Aphrodite  were  displayed  on  two  couches  ;  beside  them
were  set   ripe  fruits   of  all   kinds,   cakes,   plants   growing  in
flower-pots,    and    green    bowers    twined    with    anise.       The
marriage  of  the  lovers  was  celebrated  one  day,  and  on  the
next  the  image  of  Adonis  was  borne  by  women  attired  as
mourners,  with  streaming  hair  and  bared  breasts,  to  the  sea-
shore and  committed  to  the  waves."^      The  date  at  which  this
Alexandrian  ceremony  was  observed  is  not  expressly  stated  ;
but  from  the  mention  of  the  ripe  fruits  it  has  been  inferred
that  it  took  place  in  late  summer.'^      At  Byblus  the  death  of
Adonis   was   annually   mourned   with  weeping,  wailing,   and
beating  of  the  breast  ;   but  next  day  he  was  believed  to  come
to  life  again  and  ascend  up  to  heaven  in  the  presence  of  his
worshippers.'^      This  celebration  appears  to  have  taken  place
in  spring  ;  for  its  date  was  determined  by  the  discoloration
of  the  River  Adonis,  and  this  has  been  observed  by  modern
travellers  to  occur  in  spring.      At  that  season  the  red  earth
washed    down   from   the   mountains   by   the   rain   tinges   the
water  of  the  river  and  even  the  sea  for  a  great  way  with  a
blood-red  hue,  and  the  crimson  stain  was  believed  to  be  the
blood  of  Adonis,  annually  wounded  to  death  by  the  boar  on
Mount    Lebanon.'^       Again,   the    red    anemone  was   said   to

1   Baudissin,  Stiidien  zur  seinitischen  laii/tiir  atque  laiidatiir  .    .    .    interfec-

ReHi^iottsgeschichte,  i.  299  ;  W.  Mann-  fionem      et     7-esttrrectioneni     Adoiiidis

harclt,  Anlikc  JVald-  mid  Feldkulfe,  j).  planet u  et  gaudio  prosequens.^''

274.  ■*  Theocritus,  xv.

-   V'\M.\.zxc\i,Alcibiades,  i8;Zenobius,  •''  W.  Mannhardt,  op.  cit.  p.  277.

Ceniiir.  i.  49  ;  Theocritus,  xv.  1 32  sq.  ■  ^  Lucian,   De   dea    Syria,    6.      The

Eustathius  on  Homer,  Od.  xi.  590.  words  es  rov  r\€pa  irefnrovffi  imply  that

3  Besides   Lucian   (cited  below)  see  the  ascension  was  supposed  to  take  place

Jerome,    Comment,    in   Ezechiel.    viii.  in  the  presence,  if  not  before  the  eyes,

14:     '■'■in  qua  {solemnitate)  plangitiir  of  the  worshipping  crowds.

quasi   niortuiis,   et  postea   reviviscens,  ''   Lucian,   op.    cit.    8.      The   discol-


Ill


ADONIS


117


have  sprung  from  the  blood  of  Adonis;^  and  as  the  anemone
blooms  in  Syria  about  Easter,  this  is  a  fresh  proof  that  the
festival  of  Adonis,  or  at  least  one  of  his  festivals,  was
celebrated  in  spring.  The  name  of  the  flower  is  probably
derived  from  Naaman  ("  darling "),  which  seems  to  have
been  an  epithet  of  Adonis.  The  Arabs  still  call  the  ane-
mone "  wounds  of  the  Naaman."  "

The  resemblance  of  these  ceremonies  to  the  Indian  and
European  ceremonies  previously  described  is  obvious.  In
particular,  apart  from  the  somewhat  doubtful  date  of  its
celebration,  the  Alexandrian  ceremony  is  almost  identical
with  the  Indian.  In  both  of  them  the  marriage  of  two
divine  beings,  whose  affinity  with  vegetation  seems  indicated
by  the  fresh  plants  with  which  they  are  surrounded,  is
celebrated  in  effigy,  and  the  effigies  are  afterwards  mourned
over  and  thrown  into  the  water.^  From  the  similarity  of
these  customs  to  each  other  and  to  the  spring  and  mid-
summer customs  of  modern  Europe  we  should  naturally
expect  that  they  all  admit  of  a  common  explanation.
Hence,  if  the  explanation  here  adopted  of  the  latter  is
correct,  the  ceremony  of  the  death  and  resurrection  of
Adonis  must  also  have  been  a  representation  of  the  decay
and  revival  of  plant  life.  The  inference  thus  based  on  the
similarity  of  the  customs  is  confirmed  by  the  following
features  in  the  legend  and  ritual  of  Adonis.  His  affinity
with  vegetation  comes  out  at  once  in  the  common  story  of  his
birth.  He  was  said  to  have  been  born  from  a  myrrh-tree,  the
bark  of  which  bursting,  after  a  ten  months'  gestation,  allowed
the  lovely  infant  to  come  forth.  According  to  some,  a  boar
rent  the  bark  with  his  tusk  and  so  opened  a  passage  for  the
babe.      A  faint  rationalistic  colour  was  given   to  the  legend


oration  of  the  river  and  the  sea  was
observed  by  Maundrell  on  iftli  March
ioiif-  See  his  "  Journey  from  Aleppo
to  Jerusalem,"  in  Bohn's  Early  Travels
in  Palestine,  edited  by  Thomas  Wright,
p.  41 1.  Renan  observed  the  discolora-
tion at  the  beginning  of  February  ;
Baudissin,  Studien,  i.  298  (referring  to
Kenan,  Alission  de  Phenicie,  p.  283).
Rlilton's  lines  will  occur  to  most  readers.
1  Ovid,  Metaui.  x.  735,  compared
with  Bion  i.  66.      The  latter,  however,


makes  the  anemone  spring  from  the
tears,  as  the  rose  from  the  blood  of
Adonis.

^  W.  Robertson  Smith,  "Ctesiasand
the  Semiramis  legend,"  in  English
Histo7-ical  Review,  April  1887,  fol-
lowing Lagarde.

•^  In  the  Alexandrian  ceremony,  how-
ever, it  appears  to  have  been  the  image
of  Adonis  only  which  was  thrown  into
the  sea.


ii8  ADONIS  NOT  THE  SUN  chap.

by  saying  that  his  mother  was  a  woman  named  Myrrh,  who
had  been  turned  into  a  myrrh-tree  soon  after  she  had  con-
ceived the  child/  Again  the  story  that  Adonis  spent  half,
or  according  to  others  a  third,  of  the  year  in  the  lower  world
and  the  rest  of  it  in  the  upper  world,"  is  explained  most
simply  and  naturally  by  supposing  that  he  represented
vegetation,  especially  the  corn,  which  lies  buried  in  the  earth
half  the  year  and  reappears  above  ground  the  other  half.
Certainly  of  the  annual  phenomena  of  nature  there  is  none
which  suggests  so  obviously  the  idea  of  a  yearly  death  and
resurrection  as  the  disappearance  and  reappearance  of  vege-
tation in  autumn  and  spring.  Adonis  has  been  taken  for
the  sun  ;  but  there  is  nothing  in  the  sun's  annual  course
within  the  temperate  and  tropical  zones  to  suggest  that  he
is  dead  for  half  or  a  third  of  the  year  and  alive  for  the  other
half  or  two -thirds.  He  might,  indeed,  be  conceived  as
weakened  in  winter,  but  dead  he  could  not  be  thought  to
be  ;  his  daily  reappearance  contradicts  the  supposition.
Within  the  Arctic  Circle,  where  the  sun  annually  disappears
for  a  continuous  period  which  varies  from  twenty-four  hours
to  six  months  according  to  the  latitude,  his  annual  death
and  resurrection  would  certainly  be  an  obvious  idea  ;  but
no  one  has  suggested  that  the  Adonis  worship  came  from
the  Arctic  regions.  On  the  other  hand,  the  annual  death
and  revival  of  vegetation  is  a  conception  which  readily
presents  itself  to  men  in  every  stage  of  savagery  and
civilisation  ;  and  the  vastness  of  the  scale  on  which  this
yearly  decay  and  regeneration  takes  place,  together  with
man's  intimate  dependence  on  it  for  subsistence,  combine
to  render  it  the  most  striking  annual  phenomenon  in  nature,
at  least  within  the  temperate  zones.  It  is  no  wonder  that
a  phenomenon  so  important,  so  striking,  and  so  universal
should,  by  suggesting  similar  ideas,  have  given  rise  to  similar

1  Apollodorus,  Biblioth.  iii.    14.   4 ;  Lexiion,    s.v.     (Tfji.ijpva).       Hence    the

Schol.  on  Theocritus,  i.  109;  Antoninus  mother's   name,   as  well  as   the   son's,

Liheralis,  7;-fl;/.r/»rw.34;  Tzetzes,  Sc/io/.  was  taken  directly  from  the  Semites.
o/i  Lycophron,  829  ;    Ovid,  Aletain.   x.

489  j^^.;  Servius  on  Virgil, -n/^/z.  V.  72,  -Schol.     on    Theocritus,    iii.     4S  ;

and   on   Bucol.   x.    18;   Hyginus,  ^«/;.  Hyginus,    Astrottoiii.     ii.     7;     Lucian,

58,  164;  Fulgentius,  iii.  8.      The  word  Dialo'^.    dear.     xi.     i;     Cornutus,    De

RIyrrha  or  Smyrna  is  borrowed  from  the  natiira    dcoruin,    28,    p.    163    sq.    ed.

Phoenician   (Liddell   and  Scott,    Greek  Osannus  ;   Apollodorus,  iii.   14.  4.


Ill


TAMMUZ


119


rites  in  many  lands.  We  may,  therefore,  accept  as  probable
an  explanation  of  the  Adonis  worship  which  accords  so  well
with  the  facts  of  nature  and  with  the  analogy  of  similar  rites
in  other  lands,  and  which  besides  is  countenanced  by  a  con-
siderable body  of  opinion  amongst  the  ancients  themselves.-^
The  character  of  Tammuz  or  Adonis  as  a  corn-spirit
comes  out  plainly  in  an  account  of  his  festival  given  by  an
Arabic  writer  of  the  tenth  century.  In  describing  the  rites
and  sacrifices  observed  at  the  different  seasons  of  the  year
by  the  heathen  Syrians  of  Harran,  he  says  : — "  Tammuz
(July).  In  the  middle  of  this  month  is  the  festival  of
el-Bugat,  that  is,  of  the  weeping  women,  and  this  is  the
Ta-uz  festival,  which  is  celebrated  in  honour  of  the  god
Ta-uz.  The  women  bewail  him,  because  his  lord  slew  him
so  cruelly,  ground  his  bones  in  a  mill,  and  then  scattered
them  to  the  wind.  The  women  (during  this  festival)  eat
nothing  which  has  been  ground  in  a  mill,  but  limit  their  diet
to  steeped  wheat,  sweet  vetches,  dates,  raisins,  and  the  like."  ^
Ta-uz,  who  is  no  other  than  Tammuz,  is  here  like  Burns's
John  Barleycorn—

"They  wasted  o'er  a  scorching"  flame
The  marrow  of  his  bones  ;
But  a  miller  us'd  him  worst  of  all —

For  he  crush'd  him  between  two  stones."  ^

But  perhaps  the  best  proof  that  Adonis  was  a  deity  of
vegetation   is  furnished  by  the  gardens  of  Adonis,  as  they


^  Schol.  on  Theocritus,  iii.  48,
6  "ASw^is,  ijyovu  6  crtros  6  cnr€ip6fji,€vos,
?^  /jirjvas  iv  tyj  yrj  TroieT  dird  ttjs  cnropas
Kal  e|  ixrjvas  f'x^'  avrbv  77  'ArppoOLTi],
TOVTeffTiv  i]  evKpacria  tov  depos.  Kai
eKTOTe  XafjL^dvovcrii'  avrbv  01  dvOpcowoi.
Jerome  on  Ezech.  c.  viii.  14  :  "  Eadcnt
goitilitas  hitjusceniodi fabulas poetaritin,
quae  habciit  turpitudinein,  interprctatitr
sub  til  iter  interfectionem  et  resiirrectionein
Adonidis  planctu  et  gaiidio  prosequens  :
quoritin  altenim  i)i  seiniiiibus,  quae
moriuntur  in  terra,  altertuii  in  segeti-
biis,  qiiibus  niortita  semina  renasamtiir,
ostendi piitat.''''  Ammianus  ^larcellinus,
xix.  I.  II  :  " /«  solleinnibus  Adonidis
sacris,  quod  simidacnim  aliqiiod  esse
frugutn  adiiltariini  religiones  mysticae
docent.''''  Id. ,  xxii.  9. 1 5 :  '■'  aiiiato  Veneris,


tit  fabulae  Jingunt,  apri  dente  ferali
deleto,  quod  in  adtilto  flore  sectariun  est
indiciu/nfrugii/n."  Clemens  Alexandr.
Horn.  6.  II  (quoted  by  W.  Mann-
hard  t,  Antike  IVald-  itnd  Feldkulte,  p.
281):  Xafj.pdi'ovcri.  5e  /cat  "ASwfLv  eis
djpaiovs  Kapirovs.  Etymolog.  Magn.  s.z\
"ASojj'is  Kvpiov  diivarai  Kal  6  Kapwbs
elvai  dSwvis "  olov  dSuveios  Kapwos,
dpifXKwv.  Eusebius,  Pracpar.  Evang.
lii.  II.  9-  Aoojj'is  T?7S  Thiv  TeXeliov
KapTTwv  cKTOfjiris  av/ix.j3o\ov.

-  D.  Chwolsohn,  Die  Ssabier  tmd
der  Ssabisntus,  ii.  27  ;  id.,  Ueber
TaniinHz  ttnd  die  Alenschenverehrttng
bei  den  alten  Babyloniern,  p.  38.

■'  The  comparison  is  due  to  Felix
Liebrecht  (Zur  VolkskiDidc,  p.  259).


I20


GARDENS  OF  ADONIS


CHAP.


were  called.  These  were  baskets  or  pots  filled  with  earth,
in  which  wheat,  barley,  lettuces,  fennel,  and  various  kinds  of
flowers  were  sown  and  tended  for  eight  days,  chiefly  or
exclusively  by  women.  Fostered  by  the  sun's  heat,  the
plants  shot  up  rapidly,  but  having  no  root  withered  as
rapidly  away,  and  at  the  end  of  eight  days  were  carried  out
with  the  images  of  the  dead  Adonis,  and  flung  with  them
into  the  sea  or  into  springs.^  At  Athens  these  ceremonies
were  observed  at  midsummer.  For  we  know  that  the  fleet
which  Athens  fitted  out  against  Syracuse,  and  by  the
destruction  of  which  her  power  was  permanently  crippled,
sailed  at  midsummer,  and  by  an  ominous  coincidence  the
sombre  rites  of  Adonis  were  being  celebrated  at  the  very
time.  As  the  troops  marched  down  to  the  harbour  to
embark,  the  streets  through  which  they  passed  were  lined
with  coffins  and  corpse-like  effigies,  and  the  air  was  rent
with  the  noise  of  women  wailing  for  the  dead  Adonis.  The
circumstance  cast  a  gloom  over  the  sailing  of  the  most
splendid  armament  that  Athens  ever  sent  to  sea."^

These  gardens  of  Adonis  are  most  naturally  interpreted
as  representatives  of  Adonis  or  manifestations  of  his  power  ;
they  represented  him,  true  to  his  original  nature,  in  vegetable
form,  while  the  images  of  him,  with  which  they  were  carried
out  and  cast  into  the  water,  represented  him  in  his  later
human  form.  All  these  Adonis  ceremonies,  if  I  am  right,
were  originally  intended  as  charms  to  promote  the  growth
and  revival  of  vegetation  ;  and  the  principle  by  which  they
were  supposed  to  produce  this  effect  was  imitative  or
sympathetic  magic.  As  I  explained  in  the  first  chapter,
primitive  people  suppose  that  by  representing  or  mimicking


1  For  the  authorities  see  Raoul
Rochette,  "  Memoire  sur  les  jardins
d'Adonis,"  Revue  Archeologiqiie,  viii.
(1851),  pp.  97-123  ;  W.  Mannhardt,
Antike  IVald-  und  Feldkulte,  p.  279,
note  2,  and  p.  280,  note  2.  To  the
authorities  cited  by  Mannhardt  add
Theophrastus,  Hist.  Phuit.  vi.  7.  3  ;
id.,  De  Cattsis  Pla)it.  i.  12.  2  ;  Gre-
gorius  Cyprius,  i.  7  ;  Macarius,  i.  63  ;
Apostolius,  i.  34  ;  Diogenianus,  i.  14  ;
PUUarch,  Dc  sera  num.  vind.  17.
Women  only  are  mentioned  as  plant-
ing the  gardens  of  Adonis  by  Plutarch,


/.(■.;  Julian,  Conviviii/ii,  p.  329  ed.
Spanheim  (p.  423  ed.  Hertlein)  ;  Eu-
stathius  on  Homer,  Od.  xi.  590.  On  the
other  hand,  Apostolius  and  Diogenianus
(//.cc.)  say  (pi'Tevovrei  7)  (pvTevovaai.  The
procession  at  the  festival  of  Adonis  is
mentioned  in  an  Attic  description  of
302  or  301  B.C.  (Dittenberger,  Sylloge
Inscriptioniiin  Graecaritin,  No.  427).

-  Plutarch,  Alcibiades,  18  ;  id.,
Nicias,  1 3.  The  date  of  the  sailing  of
the  fleet  is  given  by  Thucydides,  vi.  30,
depovs  fxeaovvTos  ijSri.


Ill


GARDENS  OF  ADONIS


121


the  effect  which  they  desire  to  produce  they  actually  help  to
produce  it  ;  thus  by  sprinkling  water  they  make  rain,  by
lighting  a  fire  they  make  sunshine,  and  so  on.  Similarly,
by  mimicking  the  growth  of  crops  they  hope  to  ensure  a
good  harvest.  The  rapid  growth  of  the  wheat  and  barley
in  the  gardens  of  Adonis  was  intended  to  make  the  corn
shoot  up  ;  and  the  throwing  of  the  gardens  and  of  the
images  into  the  water  was  a  charm  to  secure  a  due  supply
of  fertilising  rain.^  The  same,  I  take  it,  was  the  object  of
throwing  the  effigies  of  Death  and  the  Carnival  into  water
in  the  corresponding  ceremonies  of  modern  Europe.  We
have  seen  that  the  custom  of  drenching  with  water  a  leaf-
clad  person,  who  undoubtedly  personifies  vegetation,  is  still
resorted  to  in  Europe  for  the  express  purpose  of  producing
rain."  Similarly  the  custom  of  throwing  water  on  the  last
corn  cut  at  harvest,  or  on  the  person  who  brings  it  home  (a
custom  observed  in  Germany  and  France,  and  till  quite,
lately  in  England  and  Scotland),  is  in  some  places  practised
with  the  avowed  intent  to  procure  rain  for  the  next  year's
crops.  Thus  in  Wallachia  and  amongst  the  Roumanians
of  Transylvania,  when  a  girl  is  bringing  home  a  crown  made
of  the  last  ears  of  corn  cut  at  harvest,  all  who  meet  her
hasten  to  throw  water  on  her,  and  two  farm-servants .  are
placed  at  the  door  for  the  purpose  ;  for  they  believe  that  if
this  were  not  done,  the  crops  next  year  would  perish  from
drought.^  So  amongst  the  Saxons  of  Transylvania,  the
person  who  wears  the  wreath  made  of  the  last  corn  cut  (some-
times the  reaper  who  cut  the  last  corn  also  wears  the  wreath)
is  drenched  with  water  to  the  skin  ;   for  the  wetter  he  is  the


1  In  hot  southern  countries  like
Egypt  and  the  Semitic  regions  of
Western  Asia,  where  vegetation  de-
pends chiefly  or  entirely  upon  irriga-
tion, the  purpose  of  the  charm  is
doubtless  to  secure  a  plentiful  flow
of  water  in  the  streams.  But  as  the
ultimate  object  and  the  charms  for
securing  it  are  the  same  in  both  cases,
it  has  not  been  thought  necessary
always  to  point  out  the  distinction.

-   See  vol.  i.  p.  94  sqq.

'■'•  W.  Mannhardt,  Baiin/kul/us,  p.
214  ;  W.  Schmidt,  Das  JaliJ-  iiud  seine


Tage  in  Aleinung  und  Branch  der
Romd)icn  Siebenbiirgens,  p.  18  sq.
The  custom  of  throwing  water  on  the
last  waggon-load  of  corn  returning  from
the  harvest-field  has  been  practised
within  living  memory  in  Wigtownshire,
and  at  Orwell  in  Cambridgeshire.  See
Folk-lore  Journal,  vii.  (1889),  pp.  50,
51.  (In  the  first  of  these  passages  the
Orwell  at  which  the  custom  used  to  be
observed  is  said  to  be  in  Kent  ;  this
was  a  mistake  of  mine,  which  my
informant,  the  Rev.  E.  B.  Birks,
formerly  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,
Cambridge,  afterwards  corrected.)


122  PEOPLE  DRENCHED


CHAP.


better  will  be  next  year's  harvest,  and  the  more  grain  there
will  be  threshed  out/  In  Northern  Euboea,  when  the  corn-
sheaves  have  been  piled  in  a  stack,  the  farmer's  wife  brings  a
pitcher  of  water  and  offers  it  to  each  of  the  labourers  that
he  may  wash  his  hands.  Every  man,  after  he  has  washed
his  hands,  sprinkles  water  on  the  corn  and  on  the  threshing-
floor,  expressing  at  the  same  time  a  wish  that  the  corn  may
last  long.  Lastly,  the  farmer's  wife  holds  the  pitcher  slant-
ingly and  runs  at  full  speed  round  the  stack  without  spilling
a  drop,  while  she  utters  a  wish  that  the  stack  may  endure  as
long  as  the  circle  she  has  just  described."  At  the  spring
ploughing  in  Prussia,  when  the  ploughmen  and  sowers
returned  in  the  evening  from  their  work  in  the  fields,  the
farmer's  wife  and  the  servants  used  to  splash  water  over
them.  The  ploughmen  and  sowers  retorted  by  seizing  every
one,  throwing  them  into  the  pond,  and  ducking  them  under
the  water.  The  farmer's  wife  might  claim  exemption  on
payment  of  a  forfeit  ;  but  every  one  else  had  to  be  ducked.
By  observing  this  custom  they  hoped  to  ensure  a  due
supply  of  rain  for  the  seed.^  Also  after  harvest  in  Prussia,
the  person  who  wore  a  wreath  made  of  the  last  corn  cut
was  drenched  with  water,  while  a  prayer  was  uttered  that
"  as  the  corn  had  sprung  up  and  multiplied  through  the
water,  so  it  might  spring  up  and  multiply  in  the  barn  and
granary."  "^  At  Schlanow,  in  Brandenburg,  when  the  sowers
return  home  from  the  first  sowing  they  are  drenched
with  water  "in  order  that  the  corn  may  grow."^  In
Anhalt  on  the  same  occasion  the  farmer  is  still  often
sprinkled  with  water  by  his  family ;  and  his  men  and
horses  and  even  the  plough  receive  the  same  treatment.
The  object  of  the  custom,  as  people  at  Arensdorf  explained
it,   is   "to  wish   fertility   to   the  fields  for  the  whole  year.""

1  G.  A.  Heinrich,  Agrarische  Sitten       kulfns,  p.  214  .v,/.,  note.

iind    Gebrciiiche     iinter    den     Sachscn  ^  Praetorius,  op.  cit.  p.  60 ;  W.  Mann-

Siebenbih-ffeiis     (liermanstadt,     1880),  bardt,  Batiinktiltits,  p.  215,  note,
p.    24;  Wlislocki,  Sitten  iind  Branch  ■'  H.    Prahn,    "  Glaube  und   Branch

der   Siebenhiirger    Sachsen   (Hamburg,  in  der  Mark  Brandenburg,"  Zcitschrift

1888),  p.  32.  des  Vereins  fi'ir  Volksknnde,  i.  (1891),

2  G.   Drosinis,   Land  und  Leiite  in  p.  186.

iVtfnf-£///wa  (Leipsic,   1884),  p.  53.  «  O.    Hartung,     "  Zur    Volkskunde

3  Ma.\.ih'i.w%Vraetorm?,,DeliciaePrtis-       aus    Anhalt,"    Zeitschrift    des    Ve^rins
sicae,    p.    55;    W.    Mannhardt,  Batim-      fiir  Volkskunde,  vii.  (1897),  p.   150.


Ill  AS  A  RAIN-CHARM  123

So  in  Hesse,  when  the  ploughmen  return  with  the  plough
from  the  field  for  the  first  time,  the  women  and  girls
lie  in  wait  for  them  and  slyly  drench  them  with  water.-^
Near  Naaburg,  in  Bavaria,  the  man  who  first  comes  back
from  sowing  or  ploughing  has  a  vessel  of  water  thrown
over  him  by  some  one  in  hiding."  Before  the  Tusayan
Indians  of  North  America  go  out  to  plant  their  fields,
the  women  sometimes  pour  water  on  them  ;  the  reason
for  doing  so  is  that  "  as  the  water  is  poured  on  the
men,  so  may  water  fall  on  the  planted  fields."  ^  A
Babylonian  legend,  preserved  in  a  cuneiform  inscription,
relates  how  the  goddess  Ishtar  (Astarte,  Aphrodite)  went
down  "  to  the  land  from  which  there  is  no  returning,  to
the  house  of  darkness,  where  dust  lies  on  door  and  bolt,"
to  fetch  the  water  of  life  wherewith  to  restore  to  life  the
dead  Tammuz,  and  it  appears  that  the  water  was  thrown
over  him  at  a  great  mourning  ceremony,  at  which  men  and .
women  stood  round  the  funeral  pyre  of  Tammuz  lamenting."^
This  legend,  as  Mannhardt  points  out,  is  probably  a  mythi-
cal explanation  of  a  Babylonian  festival  resembling  the
Syrian  festival  of  Adonis.  At  the  festival,  which  doubtless
took  place  in  the  month  Tammuz  (June-July) ''  and  there-

1  W.    Kolbe,   Hcssischc  Volks-Sitteu        563  sqq.

iind  Gebriiiiche,  p.  51.  -^  According  to  Jerome  (on  Ezechiel,

2  Bavaria,  Landcs-  unci  Volksktinde  viii.  14),  Tammuz  was  June  ;  but
des  Kdnigreiclis  Bayern,  ii.  297.  according     to     modern     scholars     the

3  J.  Walter  Fewkes,  "  The  Tusayan  month  corresponded  rather  to  July,
New  Fire  Ceremony,"  Proceedings  of  or  to  part  of  June  and  part  of  July.
the  Boston  Society  of  Natural  History,  See  Movers,  Die  Phoenizier,  i.  210;
xxvi.  (1895),  p.  446.  F.    Lenormant,    op.    cit.    p.     144   sq.\

*  F.  Lenormant,  "  II  mito  di  Adone-  Mannhardt,  A.W.F.  p.  275.  My
Tammuz  nei  documenti  cuneiformi,"  friend  W.  Robertson  Smith  informed
Atti  del  IV.    Conzresso  Internazionale       me    that    owing    to    the  variations    of


'0)


degli  Orienfalisti  (Florence,  1880),    i.  the   local   Syrian  calendars  the  month

157  sqj.  ;  A.  H.  Sayce,  Pclii^ion  of  t/ic  Tammuz    fell    in     different    places    at

ancient  Babylonians  [YWhhQxi'Leci'are^?,,  ditilerent     times,    from    midsummer    to

1887),    p.    221    .fr/(/^ ;    W.    Mannhardt,  autumn,   or  from  June   to   September.

An  tike  Wald-  nnd  Feldkiilte,   p.  275  ;  It  is  mentioned  in  a  letter  of  a  king  of

A.    Jeremias,     Die     Bahyloniscli-Assy-  Babylon   to    Amenophis    IV.,  king    of

rischen  Vorstellungen  voni  Leben  nach  Egyjat,  which  forms  part  of  the   cele-

dem  Tbfl'e  (Leipsic,    1887),   p.   4    sqq.;  brated  correspondence  found  at  Tell-el-

id.,   in  Roscher's   Lexikon  der  griec/i.  Amarna    in     Egypt    some    years    ago.

nnd  rdni.  Mythol.,  s.v.  "  Nergal,"  iii.  '^&^^\.].\\':AQ\y,\w  Journal  Asiatiqiie,

2'^'j  sqq.;  Maspero,  Histoire  Ancienne  8me  Serie,   xvi.    (1890),  p.  311  ;    The

des  peuples   de   V Orient  classique  :    Ics  Tell  El-A  mama  Tablets  in  the  British

origines,    pp.    693-696;    M.    Jastrow,  J/«.9^?/w  (London,  1892),  p.  xxix.     Ac-

Religion  of  Babylonia  and  Assyria,  p.  cording  to  Mr.  M.  Jastrow,  the  annual


124  GARDENS  OF  ADONIS  chap.

fore  about  midsummer,  the  dead  Tammuz  was  probably  re-
presented in  &^%Y^  water  was  poured  over  him,  and  he  came
to  Hfe  again.  This  Babylonian  legend  is,  therefore,  of
importance,  since  it  confirms  the  view  that  the  purpose  for
which  the  images  and  gardens  of  Adonis  were  thrown  into  the
water  was  to  effect  the  resurrection  of  the  god,  that  is,  to  secure
the  revival  of  vegetation.  The  connection  of  Tammuz  with
vegetation  is  proved  by  a  fragment  of  a  Babylonian  hymn,
in  which  Tammuz  is  described  as  dwelling  in  the  midst  of  a
great  tree  at  the  centre  of  the  earth.^

The  opinion  that  the  gardens  of  Adonis  are  essentially
charms  to  promote  the  growth  of  vegetation,  especially  of  the
crops,  and  that  they  belong  to  the  same  class  of  customs  as
those  spring  and  midsummer  folk-customs  of  modern  Europe
which  have  been  described,  does  not  rest  for  its  evidence
merely  on  the  intrinsic  probability  of  the  case.  Fortunately,
we  are  able  to  show  that  gardens  of  Adonis  (if  we  may  use
the  expression  in  a  general  sense)  are  still  planted,  first,  by
a  primitive  race  at  their  sowing  season,  and,  second,  by
European  peasants  at  midsummer.  Amongst  the  Oraons
and  Mundas  of  Bengal,  when  the  time  comes  for  planting
out  the  rice  which  has  been  grown  in  seed-beds,  a  party  of
young  people  of  both  sexes  go  to  the  forest  and  cut  a  young
Karma-tree,  or  the  branch  of  one.  Bearing  it  in  triumph
they  return  dancing,  singing,  and  beating  drums,  and  plant
it  in  the  middle  of  the  village  dancing-ground.  A  sacrifice
is  offered  to  the  tree  ;  and  next  morning  the  youth  of  both
sexes,  linked  arm-in-arm,  dance  in  a  great  circle  round  the
Karma-tree,  which  is  decked  with  strips  of  coloured  cloth
and  sham  bracelets  and  necklets  of  plaited  straw.  As  a
preparation  for  the  festival,  the  daughters  of  the  head-man
of  the  village  cultivate  blades  of  barley  in  a  peculiar  way.
The  seed  is  sown  in  moist,  sandy  soil,  mixed  with  turmeric,
and  the  blades  sprout  and  unfold  of  a  pale  yellow  or  prim-

mourning  for  Tammuz  at  Babylon  was  be  no  doubt  that  he  is  originally  the

maintained  to  a  very  late  period,  and  spring   vegetation,    which    dies    in   his

regularly  fell  just  before    the   summer  month  Tammuz  or  Du'uzu"  (A'Afwo^^i?

solstice    [Religion    of    Babylonia    and  der   Babylonier   (Strasburg,    1890),   p.

Assyria,  p.  547).  480).      Similarly  Jastrow  affirms   that

1   A.     H.    Sayce,    op.    cit.    p.    23S.  Tammuz  is  "  the  god  of  spring  vegeta-

Jensen     remarks    of     the     Babylonian  Kiow"  (The  Religion  of  Babylonia  and

Du'uzu   or   Tammuz    that    "there    can  Assyria,  p.  588).


lii  IN  INDIA


125


rose  colour.  On  the  day  of  the  festival  the  girls  take  up
these  blades  and  carry  them  in  baskets  to  the  dancing-
ground,  where,  prostrating  themselves  reverentially,  they
place  some  of  the  plants  before  the  Karma-tree.  Finally,
the  Karma-tree  is  taken  away  and  thrown  into  a  stream  or
tank.^  The  meaning  of  planting  these  barley  blades  and
then  presenting  them  to  the  Karma-tree  is  hardly  open  to
question.  We  have  seen  that  trees  are  supposed  to  exercise
a  quickening  influence  upon  the  growth  of  crops,  and  that
amongst  the  very  people  in  question — the  Mundas  or  Mun-
daris — "  the  grove  deities  are  held  responsible  for  the
crops."  ■  Therefore,  when  at  the  season  for  planting  out
the  rice  the  Mundas  bring  in  a  tree  and  treat  it  with
so  much  respect,  their  object  can  only  be  to  foster  thereby
the  growth  of  the  rice  which  is  about  to  be  planted  out  ;
and  the  custom  of  causing  barley  blades  to  sprout  rapidly
and  then  presenting  them  to  the  tree  must  be  intended  to-
subserve  the  same  purpose,  perhaps  by  reminding  the  tree-
spirit  of  his  duty  towards  the  crops,  and  stimulating  his
activity  by  this  visible  example  of  rapid  vegetable  growth.
The  throwing  of  the  Karma-tree  into  the  water  is  to  be
interpreted  as  a  rain-charm.  Whether  the  barley  blades  are
also  thrown  into  the  water  is  not  said  ;  but  if  my  interpre-
tation of  the  custom  is  right,  probably  they  are  so.  A
distinction  between  this  Bengal  custom  and  the  Greek  rites
of  Adonis  is  that  in  the  former  the  tree-spirit  appears  in  his
original  form  as  a  tree  ;  whereas  in  the  Adonis  worship  he
appears  in  human  form,  represented  as  a  dead  man,  though
his  vegetable  nature  is  indicated  by  the  gardens  of  Adonis,
which  are,  so  to  say,  a  secondary  manifestation  of  his
original  power  as  a  tree-spirit.  Gardens  of  Adonis  are  also
cultivated  by  the  Hindoos  of  Northern  India,  though  their
motive  for  doing  so  appears  to  be  unknown.  A  few  days
before  the  festival  of  Salonan,  which  falls  in  August,  women
and  girls  plant  some  grains  of  barley  in  a  basket  or  other
vessel  which  contains  a  little  earth  ;  and  the  grain  sprouts
to  the  height  of  a  few  inches  by  the  time  of  the  festival.  On
that  day  the  women  and  girls  carry  these  young  barley-
plants,  or  bhoojarias,  as  they  are  called,  to  a  river  or  tank
1  Dalton,  Etluiology  of  Bengal,  p.  259.  -  Vol.  i.  p.  189.


126  GARDENS  OF  ADONIS  chap.

and  throw  them  into  the  water/  In  some  parts  of  Bavaria
it  is  customary  to  sow  flax  in  a  pot  on  the  three  last  days
of  the  Carnival  ;  from  the  seed  which  grows  best  an  omen  is
drawn  as  to  whether  the  early,  the  middle,  or  the  late  sowing
will  produce  the  best  crop."

In    Sardinia   the  gardens  of  Adonis   are  still  planted  in
connection  with   the   great   midsummer  festival  which   bears
the  name  of  St.  John.      At  the  end  of  March  or  on  the  first
of  April  a  young  man  of  the  village  presents  himself  to  a  girl
and  asks  her  to  be  his  comare  (gossip  or  sweetheart),  offering
to  be  her  conipm-e.     The  invitation  is  considered  as  an  honour
by  the  girl's  family,  and  is  gladly  accepted.      At  the  end   of
May  the  girl  makes  a  pot  of  the  bark  of  the   cork-tree,  fills
it  with  earth,  and  sows  a  handful  of  wheat  and  barley  in   it.
The  pot  being  placed  in  the  sun  and  often  watered,  the  corn
sprouts  rapidly  and  has  a  good  head  by  Midsummer  Eve  (St.
John's  Eve,  the  twenty-third  of  June).     The  pot  is  then  called
Erme  or  Nenneri.      On  St.  John's  Day  the  young   man   and
the  girl,  dressed  in  their  best,  accompanied  by  a  long  retinue
and   preceded   by  children   gambolling  and   frolicking,  move
in   procession   to   a   church   outside   the  village.      Here   they
break  the  pot  by  throwing  it  against  the  door  of  the  church.
Then  they  sit  down  in  a  ring  on  the  grass  and  eat  eggs  and
herbs   to   the   music  of  flutes.      Wine  is  mixed  in  a  cup  and^
passed  round,  each   one   drinking   as   it   passes.      Then   they
join  hands  and  sing  "Sweethearts  of  St.  John"  {^Compare  e
comare   di   San    Giovanni)    over    and   over  again,   the   flutes
playing  the  while.      When   they  tire  of  singing  they  stand
up    and    dance    gaily    in    a    ring    till    evening.      This   is   the
general    Sardinian   custom.     As    practised    at    Ozieri    it    has
some  special  features.      In  May  the  pots  are  made  of  cork-
bark  and  planted  with  corn,  as  already  described.      Then  on
the  Eve  of  St.  John   the  window-sills   are   draped  with   rich
cloths,  on  which  the   pots   are   placed,  adorned  with  crimson
and   blue  silk   and   ribbons  of  various   colours.      On  each  of
the  pots  they  used  formerly  to  place  a  statuette  or  cloth  doll
dressed  as  a  woman,  or  a  Priapus-like  figure  made  of  paste  ;

1  Baboo     Ishuree     Dass,     Domestic       1 1 1  sq.
Mamters  and  Customs  of  the  Hindoos  of  ^  Bavaria,  Landes-  itnd  Volksktinde

Northern    India    (Benares,    i860),    p.       dcs  Konigreichs  Bayern,  ii.  298.


Ill  IN  SARDINIA  127

but  this  custom,  rigorously  forbidden  by  the  Church,  has
fallen  into  disuse.  The  village  swains  go  about  in  a  troop
to  look  at  the  pots  and  their  decorations  and  to  wait  for  the
girls,  who  assemble  on  the  public  square  to  celebrate  the
festival.  Here  a  great  bonfire  is  kindled,  round  which  they
dance  and  make  merry.  Those  who  \vish  to  be  "  Sweet-
hearts of  St.  John  "  act  as  follows.  The  young  man  stands
on  one  side  of  the  bonfire  and  the  girl  on  the  other,  and
they,  in  a  manner,  join  hands  by  each  grasping  one  end  of  a
long  stick,  which  they  pass  three  times  backwards  and  for-
wards across  the  fire,  thus  thrusting  their  hands  thrice  rapidly
into  the  flames.  This  seals  their  relationship  to  each  other.
Dancing  and  music  go  on  till  late  at  night.^  The  corre-
spondence of  these  Sardinian  pots  of  grain  to  the  gardens  of
Adonis  seems  complete,  and  the  images  formerly  placed  in
them  answer  to  the  images  of  Adonis  which  accompanied
his  gardens.

This  Sardinian  usage  is  one  of  those  midsummer
customs,  once  celebrated  in  many  parts  of  Europe,  a  chief
feature  of  which  is  the  great  bonfire  round  which  people
dance  and  over  which  they  leap.  Examples  of  these  cus-
toms have  already  been  cited  from  Sweden  and  Bohemia.^
These  examples  sufficiently  prove  the  connection  of  the  mid-
summer bonfire  with  vegetation ;  for  both  in  Sweden  and
Bohemia  an  essential  part  of  the  festival  is  the  raising  of  a
May-pole  or  Midsummer-tree,  which  in  Bohemia  is  burned  in
the  bonfire.  Again,  in  the  Russian  midsummer  ceremony
cited  above,^  the  straw  figure  of  Kupalo,  the  representative
of  vegetation,  is  placed  beside  a  May-pole  or  Midsummer-
tree  and  then  carried  to  and  fro  across  a  bonfire.  Kupalo  is
here  represented  in  duplicate,  in  tree-form  by  the  Midsummer-
tree,  and  in  human  form  by  the  straw  Q^gy,  just  as  Adonis
was  represented  both  by  an  image  and  a  garden  of  Adonis  ;
and   the   duplicate   representatives   of  Kupalo,   like   those   of

1  Antonio     Bresciani,    Dei    costiimi  Sardegna,"  Archivio  per  lo  sttidio  delle

delV  isola  di  Sardegna  coniparati  cogli  tradizioiii popolari,  vii.  (1888),  p.  469

antichissivii    popoli    orientali    (Rome  sq.     Tennant  says  that  the  pots  are  kept

and     Turin,     1866),    p.    427    sq.-,    R.  in   a   dark   warm   place,    and   that   the

Tennant,    Sardinia  and  its  Resources  children  leap  across  the  fire.
(Rome  and  London,  1885),  p.  187  ;  S.  2  Vol.  i.  p.  202  sq.

Gabriele,     "  Usi    dei     contadini     della  ^  P.   105.


128  MIDSUMMER  PAIRS  chap.

Adonis,  are  finally  cast  into  water.  In  the  Sardinian  custom
the  Gossips  or  Sweethearts  of  St.  John  probably  correspond
to  the  Lord  and  Lady  or  King  and  Queen  of  May.  In  the
Swedish  province  of  Blekinge  part  of  the  midsummer  festival
is  the  election  of  a  Midsummer  Bride,  who  chooses  her  bride-
groom ;  a  collection  is  made  for  the  pair,  who  for  the  time
being  are  looked  upon  as  man  and  wife.^  Such  Midsummer
pairs  are  probably,  like  the  May  pairs,  representatives  of  the
spirit  of  vegetation  in  its  reproductive  capacity  ;  they  re-
present in  flesh  and  blood  what  the  images  of  Siva  and
Parvati  in  the  Indian  ceremony,  and  the  images  of  Adonis
and  Aphrodite  in  the  Alexandrian  ceremony,  represented  in
effigy.

The  reason  why  ceremonies  whose  aim  is  to  foster  the
growth  of  vegetation  should  thus  be  associated  with  bonfires  ;
why  in  particular  the  representative  of  vegetation  should  be
burned  in  tree  form  or  passed  across  the  fire  in  effigy  or  in
the  form  of  a  living  couple,  will  be  explained  later  on.
Here  it  is  enough  to  have  proved  the  fact  of  such  association
and  therefore  to  have  obviated  the  objection  which  might  have
been  raised  to  my  interpretation  of  the  Sardinian  custom,  on
the  ground  that  the  bonfires  have  nothing  to  do  with  vegeta-
tion. One  more  piece  of  evidence  may  here  be  given  to
prove  the  contrary.  In  some  parts  of  Germany  young  men
and  girls  leap  over  midsummer  bonfires  for  the  express
purpose  of  making  the  hemp  or  flax  grow  tall.^  We  may,
therefore,  assume  that  in  the  Sardinian  custom  the  blades  of
wheat  and  barley  which  are  forced  on  in  pots  for  the  mid-
summer festival,  and  which  correspond  so  closely  to  the
gardens  of  Adonis,  form  one  of  those  widely-spread  mid-
summer ceremonies,  the  original  object  of  which  was  to
promote  the  growth  of  vegetation,  and  especially  of  the  crops.
But  as,  by  an  easy  extension  of  ideas,  the  spirit  of  vegetation
was  believed  to  exercise  a  beneficent  and  fertilising  influence  on
human  as  well  as  animal  life,  the  gardens  of  Adonis  would  be
supposed,  like  the  May-trees  or  May-boughs,  to  bring  good
luck   to   the  family    or    to    the   person    who   planted    them  ;

'   L.  Lloyd,  Peasant  Life  in  Sweden,       464  ;  Leopiechting,  Aus  dem  Lechrain,
p.  257.  p.    183.       More   evidence   of   customs

and  beliefs  of  this  sort  will  be  adduced
-  W.    Mannhardt,    Baitmkultiis,    \>.        in  the  last  chapter  of  this  work.


Ill  MIDSUMMER  DIVINATION  129

and  even  after  the  idea  had  been  abandoned  that  they
operated  actively  to  bring  prosperity,  omens  might  still  be
drawn  from  them  as  to  the  good  or  bad  fortune  of  families
or  individuals.  It  is  thus  that  magic  dwindles  into
divination.  Accordingly  we  find  modes  of  divination
practised  at  midsummer  which  resemble  more  or  less
closely  the  gardens  of  Adonis.  Thus  an  anonymous
Italian  writer  of  the  sixteenth  century  has  recorded  that  it
was  customary  to  sow  barley  and  wheat  a  few  days  before
the  festival  of  St.  John  (Midsummer  Day)  and  also  before
that  of  St.  Vitus  ;  and  it  was  believed  that  the  person  for
whom  they  were  sown  would  be  fortunate  and  get  a  good
husband  or  a  good  wife,  if  the  grain  sprouted  well  ;  but  if
it  sprouted  ill,  he  or  she  would  be  unlucky.^  In  various
parts  of  Italy  and  all  over  Sicily  it  is  still  customary  to  put
plants  in  water  or  in  earth  on  the  Eve  of  St.  John,  and  from
the  manner  in  which  they  are  found  to  be  blooming  or
fading  on  St.  John's  Day  omens  are  drawn,  especially  as  to
fortune  in  love.  Amongst  the  plants  used  for  this  purpose
are  Ciuri  di  S.  Giiivanni  (St.  John's  wort?)  and  nettles.^  In
Prussia  two  hundred  years  ago  the  farmers  used  to  send  out
their  servants,  especially  their  maids,  to  gather  St.  John's
wort  on  Midsum.mer  Eve  or  Midsummer  Day  (St.  John's
Day).  When  they  had  fetched  it,  the  farmer  took  as  many
plants  as  there  were  persons  and  stuck  them  in  the  wall  or
between  the  beams  ;  and  it  was  thought  that  the  person
whose  plant  did  not  bloom  would  soon  fall  sick  or  die.  The
rest  of  the  plants  were  tied  in  a  bundle,  fastened  to  the  end
of  a  pole,  and  set  up  at  the  gate  or  wherever  the  corn  would
be  brought  in  at  the  next  harvest.  This  bundle  was  called
Kupole  ;  the  ceremony  was  known  as  Kupole's  festival  ;  and
at  it  the  farmer  prayed  for  a  good  crop  of  hay,  and  so  forth.^
This  Prussian  custom  is  particularly  notable,  inasmuch  as  it
strongly  confirms  the  opinion  expressed  above  that  Kupalo

^  G.  Pitre,  Spettacoli  e  feste  popolari  St.  John's  Day  for  a   similar  purpose,

siciliane,  p.  296  sq.  but  the  mode  in  which  the  omens  are

^  G.    Pitre,    op.    cit.    p.    302     sq.  ;  drawn  is  somewliat  different  [Archivio

Antonio  de  Nino,  Usi  Abntzzesi,  i.  55  per  lo  studio  delle   tradizioiii  popolari,

sq.;  Gubernatis,   Usi  Nuziali,  p. 39  sq.  vii.  (iSSS),  p.  128  sq.).
Cp.  Archivio  per  lo  studio  delle  tradi-  ^   Matthaus      Praetorius,        Deliciae

zioni  popolari,   \.    135.      At  Smyrna  a  Prussicae,  herausgegeben  von   Dr.  W.

blossom  of  the  Agmis  castus  is  used  on  Pierson  (Berlin,  1871),  p.  56.

VOL,   II  K


I30  GARDENS  OF  ADONIS  chap.

(doubtless  identical  with  Kupole)  was  originally  a  deity  of
vegetation/  For  here  Kupalo  is  represented  by  a  bundle  of
plants  specially  associated  with  midsummer  in  folk-custom  ;
and  her  influence  over  vegetation  is  plainly  signified  by
placing  her  vegetable  emblem  over  the  place  where  the
harvest  is  brought  in,  as  well  as  by  the  prayers  for  a  good
crop  which  are  uttered  on  the  occasion.  This  furnishes  a
fresh  argument  in  support  of  the  view  that  the  Death,  whose
analogy  to  Kupalo,  Yarilo,  and  the  rest  has  been  shown,
originally  personified  vegetation,  more  especially  the  dying  or
dead  vegetation  of  winter.  Further,  my  interpretation  of
the  gardens  of  Adonis  is  confirmed  by  finding  that  in  this
Prussian  custom  the  very  same  kind  of  plants  is  used  to
form  the  gardens  of  Adonis  (as  we  may  call  them)  and  the
image  of  the  deity.  Nothing  could  set  in  a  stronger  light
the  truth  of  the  theory  that  the  gardens  of  Adonis  are  merely
another  manifestation  of  the  god  himself

The  last  example  of  the  gardens  of  Adonis  which  I  shall
cite  is  reported  from  Sicily.  At  the  approach  of  Easter,
Sicilian  women  sow  wheat,  lentils,  and  canary-seed  in  plates,
which  are  kept  in  the  dark  and  watered  every  two  days.  The
plants  soon  shoot  up  ;  the  stalks  are  tied  together  with  red
ribbons,  and  the  plates  containing  them  are  placed  on  the
sepulchres  which,  with  effigies  of  the  dead  Christ,  are  made
up  in  Roman  Catholic  and  Greek  churches  on  Good  Friday,^
just  as  the  gardens  of  Adonis  were  placed  on  the  grave  of
the  dead  Adonis.^  The  whole  custom — sepulchres  as  well
as  plates  of  sprouting  grain — is  probably  nothing  but  a  con-
tinuation, under  a  different  name,  of  the  Adonis  worship.

§  5.  At  lis

The  next  of  those  gods,  whose  supposed  death  and
resurrection  struck  such  deep  roots  into  the  religious  faith
and  ritual  of  Western  Asia,  is  Attis.  He  was  to  Phrygia
what    Adonis  was   to    Syria.      Like   Adonis,   he   appears   to

1  See  p.  107  sq.  ceremonies  in  the  Greek  Church,  see

-  G.  Pitre,  Spettacoli  e  feste  popolari  R.     A.     Arnold,     From    the     Levant

sici/iaiw,    p.    2 1 1.      A   similar   custom  (London,  1868),  i.  251  sqq.

is    observed    at    Cosenza    in    Calabria

(Vincenzo  Dorsa,  La  tradizione  greco-  ■'  Ki\-Kovs  Ccaiovv  iinTacpiovi   'AdilivLdi,

latina,   etc.,  p.  50).       For  the   Easter  Eustathius  on  Homer,  Od.  xi.  590.


m


A  TTIS


131


have  been  a  god  of  vegetation,  and  his  death  and  resurrection
were  annually  mourned  and  rejoiced  over  at  a  festival  in
spring.  The  legends  and  rites  of  the  two  gods  were  so  much
alike  that  the  ancients  themselves  sometimes  identified  them.^
Attis  was  said  to  have  been  a  fair  youth  who  was  beloved
by  the  great  Phrygian  goddess  Cybele.  Two  different
accounts  of  his  death  were  current.  According  to  the  one,
he  was  killed  by  a  boar,  like  Adonis.  According  to  the
other,  he  mutilated  himself  under  a  pine-tree,  and  died  from
the  effusion  of  blood.  The  latter  is  said  to  have  been  the
local  story  told  by  the  people  of  Pessinus,  a  great  centre  of
Cybele  worship,  and  the  whole  legend  of  which  it  forms  a
part  is  stamped  with  a  character  of  rudeness  and  savagery
that  speaks  strongly  for  its  antiquity."  But  the  other  story
seems  also  to  have  been  firmly  believed,  for  his  worshippers,
especially  the  people  of  Pessinus,  abstained  from  eating
swine.^  After  his  death  Attis  is  said  to  have  been  changed
into  a  pine-tree.'*  The  ceremonies  observed  at  his  festival
are  not  very  fully  known,  but  their  general  order  appears  to
have  been  as  follows;^  At  the  spring  equinox  (the  twenty-
second  of  March)  a  pine-tree  was  cut  in  the  woods  and
brought  into  the  sanctuary  of  Cybele,  where  it  was  treated
as  a  divinity.  It  was  adorned  with  woollen  bands  and
wreaths  of  violets,  for  violets  were  said  to  have  sprung  from
the  blood  of  Attis,  as  anemones  from  the  blood  of  Adonis  ;
and  the  o-^gy  of  a  young  man  was  attached  to  the  middle
of  the  tree.*^      On  the  second  day  of  the  festival  (the  twenty-


1  Hippolytus,  Reftit.  omu.  haeres.
V.  9,  p.  168,  ed.  Diincker  and
Schneidewin ;  Socrates,  Hist.  Eccles.
iii.  23,  §§  51  sqq.  p.  204.

-  That  Attis  was  killed  by  a  boar
was  stated  by  Hermesianax,  an  elegiac
poet  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.  (Pau-
sanias,  vii.  17);  cp.  Schol.  on  Nicander,
Alex.  8.  The  other  story  is  told  by
Arnpbius  {Adversiis  nationes,  v.  5  sqq.),
on  the  authority  of  Timotheus,  an  other-
wise unknown  writer,  who  professed  to
derive  it  "  ex  reconditis  autiqiiitatttiii
libris- et  ex  intimis  viysteriis."  It  is
obviously  identical  with  the  account
which  Pausanias  mentions  {I.e.)  as  tiie
story  current  in  Pessinus.


^  Pausanias,  vii.  17  ;  Julian,  Oraf.
V.  177  B,  p.  229,  ed.  Hertlein.

''   Ovid,  Met  am.  x.   103  sqq.

''  On  the  festival  see  especially  Mar-
Cjuardt,  Roniische  Staatsvei-waltimg,
iii.-  370  sqq.  ;  Daremberg  et  Saglio,
Dictionuaire  des  Antiqiiitc's  grecqnes
ct  roniaines,  i.  col.  1685  s,7.  (article
"Cybele");  W.  Mannhardt,  Antike
IVald-  itnd  Feldkitlte,  p.  291  sqq.  ;
id.,  Baimikitltus,  p.   t^jzsqq.

'"'  Julian,  Orat.  v.  168  C  ;  Joannes
Lydus,  De  inensibtis,  iv.  41  ;  Arnobius,
Advers.  iiationes,  v.  7  and  16  sq.  ;
Firmicus  Maternus,  De  errore  profan.
relig.  27.


132


FESTIVAL  OF  ATTIS


CHAP.


third  of  March)  the  chief  ceremony  seems  to  have  been  a
blowing  of  trumpets.^  The  third  day  (the  twenty-fourth  of
March)  was  known  as  the  Day  of  Blood  :  the  high  priest  drew
blood  from  his  arms  and  presented  it  as  an  offering."  It  was
perhaps  on  this  day  or  night  that  the  mourning  for  Attis
took  place  over  an  ^^%y,  which  was  afterwards  solemnly
buried.^  The  fourth  day  (the  twenty-fifth  of  March)  was
the  Festival  of  Joy  {Htlana),  at  which  the  resurrection  of
Attis  was  probably  celebrated — at  least  the  celebration  of  his
resurrection  seems  to  have  followed  closely  upon  that  of  his
death.^  The  Roman  festival  closed  on  the  twenty-seventh
of  March  with  a  procession  to  the  brook  Almo,  in  which
the  bullock-cart  of  the  goddess,  her  image,  and  other  sacred
objects  were  bathed.  But  this  bath  of  the  goddess  is  known
to  have  also  formed  part  of  the  festival  in  her  Asiatic  home.
On  returning  from  the  water  the  cart  and  oxen  were  strewn
with  fresh  spring  flowers.^

The  original  character  of  Attis  as  a  tree-spirit  is  brought
out  plainly  by  the  part  which  the  pine-tree  plays  in  his
legend  and  ritual.  The  story  that  he  was  a  human
being  transformed   into    a    pine-tree    is    only   one    of    those


1  Julian,  I.e.  and  169  C.

^  Trebellius  Pollio,  Claudius,  4  ;
Tertullian,  Apologet.  25.  For  other
authorities  see-Marquardt,  I.e.

•*  Diodorus,  iii.  59  ;  Firmicus
Maternus,  De  err.  profa>i.  7-elig.  3  ;
Arnobius,  Advers.  7iat.  v.  16  ;  Schol.
on  Nicander,  Alex.  8  ;  Servius  on
Virgil,  Aen.  ix.  116;  Arrian,  Taefiea,
33.  The  ceremony  described  in  Fir-
micus Maternus,  ch.  22  {'■'■  iioete  qitadani
simulacrum  in  lectiea  supintun  poiiitur
et  per  numeros  digestis  fletibtis  plaii-
gitur.  .  .  .  Idolum  sepelis.  Idolum
plangis,''^  etc.),  may  very  well  be  the
mourning  and  funeral  rites  of  Att's,  to
which  he  had  more  briefly  referred  in
ch.  3.

■*  On  the  Hilaria  see  Macroliius,
.Saturn,  i.  21.  lo ;  Julian,  Oral.  v.
168  D,  169  D  ;  Damascius,  Vita
Isidori,  in  Photius,  Bibliotheca,  p.
345  A  5  sqq.  ed.  Bel'clcer.  On  the
resurrection,  see  Firmicus  Maternus,
De  crroreprofan,  relig.  3 :  '■^reginae  suae
amorem  \_rhryges'\  cum  luetibus  annuls


eonseerarunf,  et  ut  satis  iratae  tmtlieri
facerent  aut  ut  paenitenti  solacium
quaererent,  quetji  paulo  ante  sepelierant
revixissejactartmt.  .  .  .  Mortem  ipsius
[i.e.  of  Attis]  dieunt,  quod  se?nina
collecta  conduntor,  vitam  riirsiis  quod
facta  semina  annuls  vicibus  f  recon-
duntur"  \renascuntur,  C.  Halm].
Again  compare  id.,  22:  '  'Idolum  sepelis.
Idolum  plangis,  idolum  de  sepulturapro-
feris,  et  miser  cum  haec  feccris  gaudes''' ;
and  Damascius,  I.e.  Tr\v  tCiv  iXaplwv
KoKovfx^VT^v  eopr-qv  oirep  eSrjXov  ttjv  d^
g.8ov  yeyovvlav  tj/jlQv  acoTijplav.  This  last
passage,  compared  with  the  formula  in
Firmicus  Maternus,  op.  c/t.  22.

dappdre  /.ivcTTaL  rod  deov  creffufj-fvov
'dcrrai  yap  rj/uiv  ck  ttovwv  aiOTrjpla,

makes  it  probable  that  the  ceremony
described  by  Firmicus  in  this  passage  is
tlie  resurrection  of  Attis.

"  Ovid,  last.  iv.  337  sqq.  ;  Am-
mianus  Marcellinus,  xxiii.  3.  For
other  references  see  Marquardt  and
Mannhardt,  ll.ce.


Ill  ATTIS  A   TREE-SPIRIT  133

transparent  attempts  at  rationalising  old  beliefs  which
meet  us  so  frequently  in  mythology.  His  tree  origin  is
further  attested  by  the  story  that  he  was  born  of  a  virgin,
who  conceived  by  putting  in  her  bosom  a  ripe  almond  or
pomegranate/  The  bringing  in  of  the  pine-tree  from  the
wood,  decked  with  violets  and  woollen  bands,  is  like  bringing
in  the  May-tree  or  Summer-tree  in  modern  folk-custom  ;  and
the  effigy  which  was  attached  to  the  pine-tree  was  only  a
duplicate  representative  of  the  tree-spirit  or  Attis.  At  what
point  of  the  ceremonies  the  violets  and  the  effigy  were
attached  to  the  tree  is  not  said,  but  we  should  assume  this
to  be  done  after  the  mimic  death  and  burial  of  Attis.  The
fastening  of  his  effigy  to  the  tree  would  then  be  a  repre-
sentation of  his  coming  to  life  again  in  tree-form,  just  as  the
placing  of  the  shirt  worn  by  the  effigy  of  Death  upon  a  tree
represents  the  revival  of  the  spirit  of  vegetation  in  a  new
form."^  After  being  attached  to  the  tree,  the  effigy  was  kept
for  a  year  and  then  burned.^  We  have  seen  that  this  was
apparently  sometimes  done  with  the  May-pole;'*  and  we
shall  see  presently  that  the  effigy  of  the  corn-spirit,  made  at
harvest,  is  often  preserved  till  it  is  replaced  by  a  new  effigy
at  next  year's  harvest.  The  original  intention  of  thus
keeping  the  effigy  for  a  year  and  then  replacing  it  by  a  new
one  was  doubtless  to  maintain  the  spirit  of  vegetation  in
fresh  and  vigorous  life.  The  bathing  of  the  image  of  Cybele
was  probably  a  rain-charm,  like  the  throwing  of  the  effigies
of  Death  and  of  Adonis  into  the  water.  Like  tree-spirits  in
general,  Attis  appears  to  have  been  conceived  as  exercising
power  over  the  growth  of  corn,  or  even  to  have  been  identified
with  the  corn.  One  of  his  epithets  was  "very  fruitful";  he
was  addressed  as  the  "  reaped  green  (or  yellow)  ear  of  corn,"
and  the  story  of  his  sufferings,  death,  and  resurrection  was
interpreted  as  the  ripe  grain  wounded  by  the  reaper,  buried
in  the  granary,  and  coming  to  life  again  when  sown  in  the
ground.^  His  worshippers  abstained  from  eating  seeds  and
the  roots  of  vegetables,"  just  as  at  the  Adonis  ceremonies

1  Pausanias,  vii.  17  ;  Arnobius,  ^a'r'.  relig.  27.  *  Vol.  i.  ji.  205  sq.
natioitfs^  v.    6  ;    compare    Hippolytus,            '*  Hippolytus,  Kef.   omiJ.  hacres.    v.
Refill,  oi/m.  haeres.  v.  9,  pp.  166,  168.  8    and    9,    pp.     162,     168;     Firmicus

2  See  above,  p.  93.  Materniis,  Deerrorefrof.  relig.  3.

3  Firmicus  Mateinus, />£  f;-;w-if /;-(?/;  "  Julian,  Orat.  v.   174  A  n.


134  PRIESTS  OF  ATTIS  chap.

women  abstained  from  eating  corn  ground  in  a  mill.  Such
acts  would  probably  have  been  deemed  a  sacrilegious
partaking  of  the  life  or  of  the  bruised  and  broken  body
of  the  god.

From  inscriptions  it  appears  that  both  at  Pessinus  and
Rome  the  high  priest  of  Cybele  was  regularly  called  Attis.^
It  is  therefore  a  reasonable  conjecture  that  the  high  priest
played  the  part  of  the  legendary  Attis  at  the  annual  festival."
We  have  seen  that  on  the  Day  of  Blood  he  drew  blood  from
his  arms,  and  this  may  have  been  an  imitation  of  the  self-
inflicted  death  of  Attis  under  the  pine-tree.  It  is  not  incon-
sistent with  this  supposition  that  Attis  was  also  represented
at  these  ceremonies  by  an  o-^^y  ;  for  we  have  already  met
with  instances  in  which  the  divine  being  is  first  represented
by  a  living  person  and  afterwards  by  an  effigy,  which  is
then  burned  or  otherwise  destroyed.^  Perhaps  we  may
go  a  step  farther  and  conjecture  that  this  mimic  killing
of  the  priest,  accompanied  by  a  real  effusion  of  his  blood,
was  in  Phrygia,  as  it  has  been  elsewhere,  a  substitute  for
a  human  sacrifice  which  in  earlier  times  was  actually  offered.
Professor  W.  M.  Ramsay,  whose  authority  on  all  questions
relating  to  Phrygia  no  one  will  dispute,  is  of  opinion  that  at
these  Phrygian  ceremonies  "  the  representative  of  the  god
was  probably  slain  each  year  by  a  cruel  death,  just  as  the
god  himself  died."*  We  know  from  Strabo  ^  that  the  priests
of  Pessinus  were  at  one  time  potentates  as  well  as  priests  ;
they  may,  therefore,  have  belonged  to  that  class  of  divine
kings  or  popes  whose  duty  it  was  to  die  each  year  for  their
people  and  the  world.  The  name  of  Attis,  it  is  true,  does
not  occur  among  the  names  of  the  old  kings  of  Phrygia,  who
seem  to  have  borne  the  names  of  Midas  and  Gordias  in
alternate  generations  ;   but  a  very  ancient   inscription   carved

1   Duncker,     Ccschichtc    des    Alter-  Archaeologische-epigraphischc   Mitthei-
tkuins,^    i.    4^6,     note    4;     Roscher,  hinf;eii    aiis   Oesterreich- Uugani,   viii.
Atisfiihrliches    Lexikon    d.    griech.    u.  (1884),  pp.  96,  98.
rom.    Mythologie,    i.    col.    724.       Cp.  ^  The  conjecture  is  that  of  Henzen
Polybius,  xxii.  20  (18).      In  two  letters  in  Auiial.   d.    Inst.    1856,    p.    iio,  re-
ef Eumenes  and   Attains,  preserved  in  ferred  to  in  Roscher,  I.e.
inscriptions  at  Sivrihissar,  the  priest  at  ^  Vol.  i.  p.  209,  vol.  ii.  pp.  30,  62  sq.
Pessinus   is   addressed    as    Attis.      See            •*  Article    "Phrygia"    in     Eucyclo-
A.  von  Domaskewski,  "  Briefe  der  Atta-  picdia  Britannica,  9th  ed.  xviii.  853.
liden   an   den    Priester  von    Pessinus,"  '  xii.  5.  3.


ITI


PRIESTS  OF  A  TTIS


135


in  the  rock  above  a  famous  Phrygian  monument,  which  is
known  as  the  Tomb  of  Midas,  records  that  the  monument
was  made  for,  or  dedicated  to,  King  Midas  by  a  certain  Ates,
whose  name  is  doubtless  identical  with  Attis,  and  who,  if  not
a  king  himself,  may  have  been  one  of  the  royal  family.^  It
is  worthy  of  note  also  that  the  name  Atys,  which  again
appears  to  be  only  another  form  of  Attis,  is  recorded  as  that
of  an  early  king  of  Lydia  ;""  and  that  a  son  of  Croesus,  king
of  Lydia,  not  only  bore  the  name  Atys  but  was  said  to  have
been  killed,  while  he  was  hunting  a  boar,  by  a  member  of  the
royal  Phrygian  family,  who  traced  his  lineage  to  King  Midas
and  had  fled  to  the  court  of  Croesus  because  he  had  unwit-
tingly slain  his  own  brother.^  Scholars  have  recognised  in
this  story  of  the  death  of  Atys,  son  of  Croesus,  a  mere  double
of  the  myth  of  Attis  ;  ^  but  in  view  of  the  facts  which  have
come  before  us  in  the  present  inquiry"  it  is  a  curious  co-
incidence, if  it  is  nothing  more,  that  the  myth  of  a  slain  god
should  be  told  of  a  king's  son.  May  we  conjecture  that  the
Phrygian  priests  who  bore  the  name  of  Attis  and  represented
the  god  of  that  name  were  themselves  members,  perhaps  the
eldest  sons,  of  the  royal  house,  to  whom  their  fathers,  uncles,
brothers,  or  other  kinsmen  deputed  the  honour  of  dying  a
violent  death  in  the  <:haracter  of  gods,  while  they  reserved  to
themselves  the  duty  of  living,  as  long  as  nature  allowed
them,  in  the  humbler  character  of  kings  ?  If  this  were  so,
the  Phrygian  dynasty  of  Midas  may  have  presented  a  close
parallel  to  the  Greek  dynasty  of  Athamas,  in  which  the  eldest
sons  seem  to  have  been  regularly  destined  to  the  altar."  But
it  is  also  possible  that  the  divine  priests  who  bore  the  name
of  Attis  may  have  belonged  to  that  indigenous  race  which
the    Phrygians,  on    their   irruption   into   Asia   from    Europe,


^  W.  M.  Ramsay,  in  Journal  of
Hellenic  Studies,  ix.  (1888),  p.  379  J'/'/.;
id.,  vaJoitrn.Hellen.  Sftid.  x.  (1889),  p.
1^6  sqq.;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Histoire
de  r Art  dans  r Antiqnit^,  v.  82  sqq.

^  Herodotus,  i.  94.  According  to
Prof.  W.  M.  Ramsay,  the  conquering
and  ruling  caste  in  Lydia  belonged  to
the  Phrygian  stock  (Journ.  of  Hellen.
Stud.  ix.  (1888),  p.  351).

■*  Herodotus,  i.  34-45.  The  tradi-
tion  tliat   Croesus  would  allow  no  iron


weapon  to  come  near  Atys  suggests
that  a  similar  taboo  may  have  been
imposed  on  the  Phrygian  priests  named
.Attis.  For  taboos  of  this  sort,  see
vol.  i.  p.  344  sqq.

*  Stein  on  Herodotus,  i.  43  ;  VA.
Meyer,  s.v.  "Atys,"  in  Paiily  s  Real-
Eneyclopiidie  der  classischen  Alter-
tuinswissenschaft,  herausgeg.  von  G.
Wissowa,  ii.  2,  col.  2262.

•''   See  above,  p.  33  sqq.

•'  See  above,  p.  34  sqq.


136  HYACINTH  chap.

appear  to  have  found  and  conquered  in  the  land  afterwards
known  as  Phrygia.^  On  the  latter  hypothesis  the  priests
may  have  represented  an  older  and  higher  civilisation  than
that  of  their  barbarous  conquerors.  However  this  may  be,
the  god  they  personated  was  a  deity  of  vegetation  whose
divine  life  manifested  itself  especially  in  the  pine-tree  and
the  violets  of  spring  ;  and  when  they  died  in  the  character
of  that  divinity  they  corresponded  to  the  mummers  who  are
still  slain  in  mimicry  by  European  peasants  in  spring,  and
to  the  priest  who  was  slain  long  ago  in  grim  earnest  on  the
wooded  shore  of  the  Lake  of  Nemi.

Another  of  these  embodiments  of  the  flowery  spring  may
have  been  the  fair  youth  Hyacinth,  who  was  said  to  have
been  slain  unwittingly  by  Apollo,  and  whose  annual  festival
was  celebrated  on  a  great  scale  by  the  Spartans  at  Amyclae.
The  festival  fell  in  spring,  and  the  mourning  for  the  death  of
Hyacinth  was  followed  by  rejoicings,  probably  at  the  sup-
posed resurrection  of  the  god.  Dancing,  singing,  and  feasting
went  on  throughout  the  day  ;  and  the  capital  was  almost
emptied  of  its  inhabitants,  who  poured  out  in  their  thousands
to  witness  and  share  the  festivities  of  the  happy  day.  The
hyacinth — "  that  sanguine  flower  inscrib'd  with  woe  " —
sprang  from  the  blood  of  the  slain  divinity,  as  the  scarlet
anemone  grevv  from  the  blood  of  Adonis  and  the  purple  violet
from  the  blood  of  Attis  ;  like  these  vernal  flowers  it  heralded
the  advent  of  another  spring  and  gladdened  the  hearts  of
men  with. the  promise  of  a  joyful  resurrection."  One  spring,
when  the  hyacinths  were  in  bloom,  it  happened  that  the
red-coated  Spartan  regiments  lay  encamped  under  the  walls
of  Corinth.  Their  commander  gave  the  Amyclaean  battalion
leave  to  go  home  and  celebrate  as  usual  the  festival  of
Hyacinth  in  their  native  town.  But  the  sad  flower  was  to
be  to  these  men  an  omen  of  death  ;  for  they  had   not  gone

1  SeeW.  M.  Ramsay,  J-.57.  "Phrygia"  Metani.  x.  161-219  ;   Pliny,  Nat.  Hist.

in  EncyclopiEiUa    Britannica,    9th    ed.  xxi.  66  ;  Schoniann,  Griechisclie  Alter-

xviii.  849  .v^/.  ;  id.,  \nJoitru.  of  HcUcn.  thiinier,'^\\.  0,^,']  sq.;'i.\<!\A<i,Lakonische

Stud.  ix.  (1888),  p.  350i-ry.  A'lilte    (Leipsic,    1893),    PP-    285-293.

As  to  the  date  of  the  festival,  see  G.

-  Herodotus,    ix.     7;     Lucian,     De  ¥.  \Jngtr,'m  Phitolo^^its,  xxxvn.  (i^yj),

saltatione,     45;      Pausanias,     iii.     19.  pp.  13-33,  according  to  whom  the  cele-

3,    4,    5  ;     Hesychius,     s.%'.     'EuaroiJ.-  bration  took  place  at   the  beginning  of

jiivs;  Athenaeus,  iv.  p.  139,  d-F;  Ovid,  May.


Ill  OSIRIS  137

far  before  they  were  enveloped  by  clouds  of  light-armed  foes
and  cut  to  pieces.^

^  6.    Osiris

There  seem  to  be  some  grounds  for  believing  that  Osiris,
the  great  god  of  ancient  Egypt,  was  one  of  those  personifi-
cations of  vegetation,  whose  annual  death  and  resurrection
have  been  celebrated  in  so  many  lands.  But  as  the  chief  of
the  gods  he  appears  to  have  absorbed  the  attributes  of  other
deities,  so  that  his  character  and  rites  present  a  complex  of
heterogeneous  elements  which,  with  the  scanty  evidence  at
our  disposal,  it  is  hardly  possible  to  sort  out.  It  may  be
worth  while,  however,  to  put  together  some  of  the  facts  which
lend  support  to  the  view  that  Osiris,  or  at  least  one  of  the
deities  out  of  whom  he  was  compounded,  was  a  god  of  vege-
tation, analogous  to  Adonis  and  Attis.

The  outline  of  his  myth  is  as  follows.^  Osiris  was  the
son  of  the  earth-god  Qeb  (or  Seb,  as  the  name  is  sometimes
transliterated).^  Reigning  as  a  king  on  earth,  he  reclaimed
the  Egyptians  from  savagery,  gave  them  laws,  and  taught
them  to  worship  the  gods.  Before  his  time  the  Egyptians
had  been  cannibals.  But  Isis,  the  sister  and  wife  of  Osiris,
discovered  wheat  and  barley  growing  wild,  and  Osiris  intro-
duced the  cultivation  of  these  grains  amongst  his  people,
who  forthwith  abandoned  cannibalism  and  took  kindly  to  a
corn  diet.*  Afterwards  Osiris  travelled  over  the  world
diffusing  the  blessings  of  civilisation  wherever  he  went.  But
on  his  return  his  brother  Set  (whom  the  Greeks  called
Typhon)  with  seventy-two  others  plotted  against  him.
Having  taken  the  measure  of  his  good  brother's  body  by
stealth,  the  bad  brother  Typhon  fashioned  a  beautiful  and
highly   decorated    coffer  of  the    same    size,  and   once    when

^  Xenophon,  Hellenica,  iv.  5.  7-17;  Aegypter,   p.    112   sqq.  ;    G.    Maspero,

Pausanias,  iii.   10.   i.  Histoire  ancieiiiie  des peuples  de  P Orient

-  The  myth,  in  a  connected  form,  is  f/assii/ue :  Ics  origines,  p.   172  sqq.

only    known     from     Plutarch,    Isis   et  ^  Le  Page  Renouf,  Hibhert  Lectures,

Osiris,    13-19.       Some   additional    de-  1879,  p.    no;   Brugsch,  Religion  iind

tails,  recovered  from  Egyptian  sources,  RlytJiologie     der    alten     Aegypter,     p.

will   be   found   in   the    work    of   Adolf  614  ;    Ad.    Erman,    I.e.  ;   Ed.    Meyer,

Y.xxi\2.n,AegyptenundaegyptisekesLeben  Geschichte  des  Altertiims,  i.  §  56  iv/.

iin  Altertuin,^.  Z^^sqq.      Compare  A.  ■*  Plutarch,  Isis  et  Osiris,  13;   Uio-

Wiedemann,    Die   Religion    der   alten  dorus,  i.   14  ;   TibuUus,  i.  7.  21)  sqq.


138  LEGEND  OF  OSIRIS  chap.

they  were  all  drinking  and  making  merry  he  brought  in  the
coffer  and  promised  jestingly  to  give  it  to  the  one  whom  it
should  fit  exactly.  Well,  they  all  tried  one  after  the  other,
but  it  fitted  none  of  them.  Last  of  all  Osiris  stepped  into  it
and  lay  down.  On  that  the  conspirators  ran  and  slammed  the
lid  down  on  him,  nailed  it  fast,  soldered  it  with  molten  lead,
and  flung  the  coffer  into  the  Nile.  This  happened  on  the
seventeenth  day  of  the  month  Athyr,  when  the  sun  is  in  the
sign  of  the  Scorpion,  and  in  the  eight-and-twentieth  year  of
the  reign  or  the  life  of  Osiris.  When  Isis  heard  of  it  she
sheared  off  one  of  the  locks  of  her  hair,  put  on  mourning
attire  and  wandered  disconsolately  up  and  down,  seeking  the
body.  Meantime  the  coffer  had  floated  down  the  river
and  away  out  to  sea,  till  at  last  it  drifted  ashore  at  Byblus
on  the  coast  of  Syria.  Here  a  fine  erica-tree  shot  up
suddenly  and  enclosed  the  chest  in  its  trunk.  The  king  of
the  country,  admiring  the  growth  of  the  tree,  had  it  cut  down
and  made  into  a  pillar  of  his  house  ;  but  he  did  not  know
that  the  coffer  with  the  dead  Osiris  was  in  it.  Word  of
this  came  to  Isis  and  she  journeyed  to  Byblus,  and  sat  down
by  the  well,  in  humble  guise,  her  face  wet  with  tears.  To
none  would  she  speak  till  the  king's  handmaidens  came,  and
them  she  greeted  kindly  and  braided  their  hair  and  breathed
on  them  from  her  own  divine  body  a  wondrous  perfume.
But  when  the  queen  beheld  the  braids  of  her  handmaidens'
hair  and  smelt  the  sweet  smell  that  emanated  from  them,  she
sent  for  the  stranger  woman  and  took  her  into  her  house  and
made  her  the  nurse  of  her  child.  But  Isis  gave  the  babe  her
finger  instead  of  her  breast  to  suck,  and  at  night  she  began
to  burn  all  that  was  mortal  of  him  away,  while  she  herself
in  the  likeness  of  a  swallow  fluttered  round  the  pillar  that
contained  her  dead  brother,  twittering  mournfully.  But  the
queen  spied  what  she  was  doing  and  shrieked  out  when  she
saw  her  child  in  flames,  and  thereby  she  hindered  him  from
becoming  immortal.  Then  the  goddess  revealed  herself  and
begged  for  the  pillar  of  the  roof,  and  they  gave  it  her,
and  she  cut  the  coffer  out  of  it,  and  fell  upon  it  and  em-
braced it  and  lamented  so  loud  that  the  younger  of  the  king's
children  died  of  fright  on  the  spot.  But  the  trunk  of  the  tree
she  wrapped  in  fine  linen  and  poured  ointment  on  it  and  gave  it


Ill  LEGEND  OF  OSIRIS  139

to  the  king  and  queen,  and  the  wood  stands  in  a  temple  of
Isis  and  is  worshipped  by  the  people  of  Byblus  to  this  day.
And  Isis  put  the  coffer  in  a  boat  and  took  the  eldest  of
the  king's  children  with  her  and  sailed  away.  As  soon  as
they  were  alone,  she  opened  the  chest,  and  laying  her  face
on  the  face  of  her  brother  she  kissed  him  and  wept.  But  the
child  came  behind  her  softly  and  saw  what  she  was  about,
and  she  turned  and  looked  at  him  in  anger,  and  the  child
could  not  bear  her  look  and  died  ;  but  some  say  that  it  was
not  so,  but  that  he  fell  into  the  sea  and  was  drowned.  It
is  he  whom  the  Egyptians  sing  of  at  their  banquets  under
the  name  of  Maneros.  But  Isis  put  the  coffer  by  and  went
to  see  her  son  Horus  at  Butus,  and  Typhon  found  it  as  he
was  hunting  a  boar  one  night  by  the  light  of  a  full  moon.^
And  he  knew  the  body,  and  rent  it  into  fourteen  pieces,  and
scattered  them  abroad.  But  Isis  sailed  up  and  down  the
marshes  in  a  shallop  made  of  papyrus,  looking  for  the  pieces  ;
and  that  is  why  when  people  sail  in  shallops  made  of
papyrus,  the  crocodiles  do  not  hurt  them,  for  they  fear  or
respect  the  goddess.  And  that  is  the  reason,  too,  why  there
are  many  graves  of  Osiris  in  Egypt,  for  she  buried  each  limb  as
she  found  it.  But  others  will  have  it  that  she  buried  an  image
of  him  in  every  city  pretending  it  was  his  body,  in  order  that
Osiris  might  be  worshipped  in  many  places,  and  that  if  Typhon
searched  for  the  real  grave  he  might  not  be  able  to  find
it.  However,  one  of  the  members  of  Osiris  had  been  eaten
by  the  fishes,  so  Isis  made  an  image  of  it  instead,  and  the
image  is  used  by  the  Egyptians  at  their  festivals  to  this  day.
Such  is  the  myth  of  Osiris  as  told  by  Plutarch.  A  long
inscription  in  the  temple  at  Denderah  has  preserved  a  list  of
the  graves  of  Osiris,  and  other  texts  mention  the  parts  of
his  body  which  were  treasured  as  holy  relics  in  each  of  the
sanctuaries.  Thus  his  heart  was  at  Athribis,  his  neck  at
Letopolis,  and  his  head  at  Memphis.  As  often  happens  in
such  cases,  some  of  his  divine  limbs  were  miraculously
multiplied.  His  head,  for  instance,  was  at  Abydos  as  well
as  at  Memphis,  and  his  legs,  which  were  remarkably  numer-
ous, would  have  sufficed  for  several  ordinary  mortals."

^    Plutarch,  Isis  et  Osifis,  8,  18.
'^  A.  Wiedemann,  Die  I\eIi,i^noii  der  alien  Aei^yptei-,  p.   115.


I40  RITES  OF  OSIRIS  chap.

Of  the  annual  rites  with  which  his  death  and  burial  were
celebrated  in  the  month  Athyr^  we  unfortunately  know  very
little.  The  mourning  lasted  five  days,^  from  the  eighth  to  the
twelfth  of  the  month  Athyr.^  The  ceremonies  began  with  the
"  earth-ploughing,"  that  is,  with  the  opening  of  the  field
labours,  when  the  waters  of  the  Nile  are  sinking.  The  other
rites  included  the  search  for  the  mangled  body  of  Osiris,  the
rejoicings  at  its  discovery,  and  its  solemn  burial.  The  burial
took  place  on  the  eleventh  of  November,  and  was  accom-
panied by  the  recitation  of  laments  from  the  liturgical  books.
These  laments,  of  which  several  copies  have  been  discovered
in  modern  times,  were  put  in  the  mouth  of  Isis  and  Nephthys,
sisters  of  Osiris.  "  In  form  and  substance,"  says  Brugsch,
"  they  vividly  recall  the  dirges  chanted  at  the  Adonis'  rites
over  the  dead  god."  "*  Next  day  was  the  joyous  festival  of
Sokari,  that  being  the  name  under  which  the  hawk-headed
Osiris  of  Memphis  was  invoked.  The  solemn  processions
of  priests  which  on  this  day  wound  round  the  temples  with
all  the  pomp  of  banners,  images,  and  sacred  emblems,  were
amongst  the  most  stately  pageants  that  ancient  Egypt  could
show.  The  whole  festival  ended  on  the  sixteenth  of  November
with   a   special   rite  called   the  erection  of  the  Tatu,  Tat,  or

^  Most  Egyptian  texts  place  the  vague,  that  is,  made  no  use  of  intercal-
death  of  the  god  and  the  mourning  for  ation,  the  astronomical  date  of  each
him  at  the  end  of  the  month  Choiak,  festival  varied  from  year  to  year,  till  it
about  the  time  of  the  winter  solstice,  had  passed  through  the  whole  cycle  of
when  the  days  are  shortest  ;  and  of  the  the  astronomical  year.  From  the  fact,
ceremony  which  represented  his  death  therefore,  that  when  the  calendar  be-
and  resurrection  at  this  time  we  possess  came  fixed,  Athyr  fell  in  November,
a  full  and  detailed  account  in  the  no  inference  can  be  drawn  as  to  the
inscription  at  Denderah.  But  appa-  date  at  which  the  death  of  Osiris  was
rently  this  transference  of  the  date  is  originally  celebrated.  It  is  thus  per-
due to  a  later  identification  of  Osiris  fectly  possible  that  it  may  have  been
with  the  sun.  See  A.  Wiedemann,  originally  a  harvest  festival,  though  the
Die  Religion  der  alten  Aegyptier,  pp.  Egyptian  harvest  falls,  not  in  November,
1 12  j(/.,  115.  According  to  Pausanias  but  in  April.  Compare  Selden,  Z?6' rfm
(x.  32.  18),  Isis  mourned  for  Osiris  at  Syris,  p.  335  J^.  ;  Parthey  on  Plutarch,
the   time  that  the   Nile  begins  to  rise,  Isis  et  Osiris,  39.

and   the  Egyptians  attributed  the  rise  *   lirugsch.  I.e.      For  a  specimen  of

of  the  water  to  the  tears  of  the  goddess.  these  lamentations  see  Brugsch,  op.  cit.

2  So  Brugsch,  op.  cit.  p.  617.      Plu-  p.  631  sq.  ;  Reco7-ds  of  the  Past,  ii.  119

tarch,  op.  cit.  39,  says  four  days  begin-  sqq.      For    the    annual    ceremonies    of

ning  with  the  17th  of  the  month  Athyr.  finding   and    burying   Osiris,    see    also

^   In  the  Alexandrian  year  the  month  Firmicus     Maternus,    De    errore    pro-

Athyr     corresponded     to     November.  fatjaniin  religiomtm,  2,    §   3  ;    Servius

But    as    the    old    Egyptian     year    was  on  Virgil,  Acii.  iv.  609.


Ill  RITES  OF  OSIRIS  141

Ded  pillar,^  This  pillar  appears  from  the  monuments  to
have  been  a  column  with  cross  bars  at  the  top,  like  the
yards  of  a  mast,  or  more  exactly  like  the  superposed  capitals
of  a  pillar.^  On  a  Theban  tomb  the  king  himself,  assisted
by  his  relations  and  a  priest,  is  represented  hauling  at  the
ropes  by  which  the  pillar  is  being  raised.  The  pillar  was
interpreted,  at  least  in  later  Egyptian  theology,  as  the  back-
bone of  Osiris.  It  might  very  well  be  a  conventional  way
of  representing  a  tree  stripped  of  its  leaves  ;  and  if  Osiris
was  a  tree-spirit,  the  bare  trunk  and  branches  of  a  tree  might
naturally  be  described  as  his  backbone.  The  setting  up  of
the  column  would  thus,  as  Erman  supposes,  shadow  forth
the  resurrection  of  the  god,  which,  as  we  learn  from  Plutarch,
appears  to  have  been  celebrated  at  his  mysteries.^  Perhaps
a  ceremony  which,  according  to  Plutarch,  took  place  on
the  third  day  of  the  festival  (the  nineteenth  day  of  the
month  Athyr)  may  also  have  referred  to  the  resurrection.
He  says  that  on  that  day  the  priests  carried  the  sacred  ark
down  to  the  sea.  Within  the  ark  was  a  golden  casket,  into
which  drinking-water  was  poured.  A  shout  then  went  up
that  Osiris  was  found.  Next  the  priests  took  some  vegetable
mould  and  having  kneaded  it  with  water  into  a  paste  they
fashioned  therewith  a  crescent -shaped  figure,  which  they
afterwards  dressed  in  robes  and  adorned.'*

The  general  similarity  of  the  myth  and  ritual  of  Osiris
to  those  of  Adonis  and  Attis  is  obvious.  In  all  three  cases
we  see  a  god  whose  untimely  and  violent  death  is  mourned
by  a  loving  goddess  and  annually  celebrated  by  his
worshippers.  The  character  of  Osiris  as  a  deity  of  vege-
tation is  brought  out  by  the  legend  that  he  was  the  first  to
teach  men  the  use  of  corn,  and  by  the  custom  of  beginning
his  annual  festival  with  the  tillage  of  the  ground.  He  is  said
also  to  have  introduced  the  cultivation  of  the  vine.°      In  one

^  Brugsch,    Religion  iiiid  JMytJiologie  Wd>s<\iQ.XQ,Histoireanciennedcs peitplesde

deralten  Aegvpter,  p.  6iJ  sc/.  ;  Erman,  F  Orient  classiqiie  :  les  origines,  p.  130.

Aegypten    und  aegyptisches    Lchen    iin  ^  Plutarch,  Isis  et  Osiris,  35  :    bixo-

Altertzint,  p.  277  ^'I-  \oyu,  5e  koI  to.  TiTavLKo.  /cat  vvS,  reXfia

Tois  \eyofJt,4vois  'Ocripioos  Biaairaainoh  Kai

-  Erman,  I.e.;  Wilkinson,  Jl/a/i/ters  rah     avcLJiLiliaecn      koI     TroKLyyeveaiaLs,

and  Customs  of  the  Ancient  Egyptians  6,u.0iais  M  koX  to.  irepl  ras  Ta(pds.

(London,    1878),    iii.    68,    82;    Tiele,  •*   Vlutmch,  Isis  et  Osiris,  ;2g.

Plistoiy  of  the  Egyptian  Religion,^.  \6;  ^  Tibullus,  i.  7.  2,2)  sqq.


142  OSIRIS  A  CORN-SPIRIT


CHAP.


of  the   chambers   dedicated  to  Osiris   in   the  great  temple  of
Isis   at   Philae  the   dead   body  of  Osiris    is  represented  with
stalks   of  corn    springing    from    it,  and   a   priest  is  depicted
watering   the   stalks   from   a   pitcher  which   he  holds  in   his
hand.      The  accompanying    legend   sets   forth   that   "  this   is
the   form   of  him    whom   one   may  not    name,  Osiris   of  the
mysteries,    who    springs    from    the    returning    waters."  ^      It
would    seem    impossible    to    devise   a    more  graphic   way  of
depicting  Osiris  as  a  personification  of  the  corn  ;  while  the
inscription   attached  to  the  picture  proves  that  this  personi-
fication  was    the    kernel   of  the    mysteries   of  the    god,   the
innermost  secret  that  was  only  revealed  to  the  initiated.      In
estimating  the  mythical  character  of  Osiris  very  great  weight
must  be  given  to  this  monument.    The  story  that  his  mangled
remains   were    scattered    up   and   down    the    land   may  be   a
mythical  way  of  expressing  either  the  sowing  or  the  winnow-
ing of  the  grain.      The   latter  interpretation  is  supported  by
the   tale   that    Isis   placed   the   severed   limbs  of  Osiris  on  a
corn-sieve."      Or  the  legend   may   be  a   reminiscence  of  the
custom  of  slaying  a  human  victim  as  a  representative  of  the
corn-spirit   and   distributing   his   flesh  or  scattering  his  ashes
over  the  fields  to  fertilise  them.      We  have  already  seen  that
in   modern    Europe   the   figure  of  Death   is   sometimes   torn
in    pieces,   and    that    the  fragments   are   then   buried   in   the
fields  to  make  the  crops  grow  well.^      Later  on  we  shall  meet
with  examples  of  human   victims   treated   in  the  same  way.
With    regard   to  the   ancient    Egyptians,  we  have   it  on  the
authority  of  Manetho  that  they  used  to  burn  red-haired  men
and  scatter  their  ashes  with  winnowing-fans.^      This  custom
was    not,    as    might    perhaps    be   supposed,  a    mere   way   of
wreaking   their  spite  on   foreigners,  amongst  whom  red  hair
would    probably    be    commoner    than    amongst    the    native
Egyptians  ;   for  the   oxen   which  were  sacrificed   had  also  to
be  red,  a  single   black  or  white  hair  found  on  a  beast  would
have  disqualified   it   for  the  sacrifice,^      The  red  hair  of  the
human  victims  was  thus  probably  essential  ;   the  circumstance

1  Biugsch,  Religion  mid  Mythologie  ■•   Plutarch,    his  et    Osiris,    "j^,  cp.
dcr  alten  Aegypter,  p.  621.  33  ;   Diodorus,  i.  88.

2  Seivius  on  Virgil,  Georg,  i.   166.  ■'  Plutarch,   op.  cit.  31  ;   Herodotus,

3  Above,  p.  95.  ii.  38.


Ill  OS/R/S  A  CORN-SPIRIT  143

that  they  were  generally  foreigners  may  have  been  only
accidental.  If,  as  I  conjecture,  these  human  sacrifices  were
intended  to  promote  the  growth  of  the  crops — and  the
winnowing  of  their  ashes  seems  to  support  this  view — red-
haired  victims  were  perhaps  selected  as  best  fitted  to
personate  the  spirit  of  the  golden  grain.  For  when  a  god  is
represented  by  a  living  person,  it  is  natural  that  the  human
representative  should  be  chosen  on  the  ground  of  his  sup-
posed resemblance  to  the  god.  Hence  the  ancient  Mexicans,
conceiving  the  maize  as  a  personal  being  who  went  through
the  whole  course  of  life  between  seed-time  and  harvest,  sacri-
ficed new-born  babes  when  the  maize  was  sown,  older
children  when  it  had  sprouted,  and  so  on  till  it  was  fully
ripe,  when  they  sacrificed  old  men.^  A  name  for  Osiris  was
the  "  crop  "  or  "  harvest  "  ; "  and  the  ancients  sometimes
explained  him  as  a  personification  of  the  corn."

But  Osiris  was  more  than  a  spirit  of  the  corn  ;  he  was
also  a  tree-spirit,  and  this  may  well  have  been  his  original
character,  since  the  worship  of  trees  is  naturally  older  in  the
history  of  religion  than  the  worship  of  the  cereals.  His
character  as  a  tree-spirit  was  represented  very  graphically  in
a  ceremony  described  by  Firmicus  Maternus.^  A  pine-tree
having  been  cut  down,  the  centre  was  hollowed  out,  and  with
the  wood  thus  excavated  an  image  of  Osiris  was  made,  which

1   Herrera,   quoted  by  Bastian,  Cnl-  et  divisae  a  terrae  consortia  separantur

titrldnder  des  alten  Anierika,  ii.  639;  etrursusadpropinqiiante  hieme  seininmt'

id..  General  History  of  the  vast  Con-  tur,  hanc  vohtnt  esse  mortem   Osiridis,

tinent  and  Islands  of  America,  ii.  379  ctimfruges  recondiint,  inventionenivero,

.?(/.,  trans,  by  Stevens  (whose  version  of  cum    fritges    genitali    terrae   foinento

the  passage  is  inadequate).      Compare  conceptae  annua  rursits  coeperint  pro-

Brasseur    de    Bourbourg,    Histoire    des  creationegenerari.''   Eusebius, /"raty^ar.

Nations    civilisc'es    dn    Mcxique    et  de  Evang.   iii.    Ii,    31  :   6  5e   "Ocrtpis  Trap'

r Amirique-Ceiitralc,   i.    327,   iii.    535.  Kh/vwrioi's     tj]v     Kdpirip.ov      TrapicTTijaL

For  more  instances  of  the  assimilation  duva/j-Lu,    t)i'   dp-ijvois  air ofxuXiff a ovrai   ety

of  the  human   victim   to   the  corn,  see  -yrjv  a<pavi^ofxevr)v  ev  rqj  airopw,  Kal  v(p'

below,  pp.  247  sq.,  255-  TZ/xtDf  KaravaXLaKo/j.ei'Tjv  et's  rds  Tpo(j>ds.

-   Lefebure,  le  niythc  Osirien  (Paris,  Athenagoras,    Siipflicatio   pro     Chris-

1874-75),  p.  188.  tianis,  22,  pp.  1 12,  1 14,  ed.  Otto:  ra.  5e

3  Firmicus     Maternus,     De     crrore  <^T0Lxe1a  Kal  to.  /xopia  avrCiv  deoiroiodcnv,

profanarum   religiomim,  2,  §  6  :    '' de-  o-Wore   aXXa  6v6fx.aTa    avroh   ridefievot,

fensores  eorum  volunt  addere  physicam  ^V"  /^f"  rod  airov  (Xiropav  'Offipiv   {bdev

rationem,  frugum    semina    Osirim   di-  •/'Cio-iv    i^hxttlkQ^    iirl    ry    avevpeafi    rQu^

centes     esse;     Tsim     terram,     Tyfo7tem  fxeXQv    t)    tGiv    KapirCov    eTrcXexOrimL    ry

calorem :     et    quia     maturatae   frtiges  IirtSf  'Eivpi]Kanev ,  avyxaipo^iev  !).

colore  ad  vitam   hominiim   colliguntur  ^   Op.  cit.  27,  §  i.


144


OSIRIS  A   TREE-SPIRIT  chap.


was  then  "  buried  "  in  the  hollow  of  the  tree.      Here,  again,  it
is  hard  to  imagine  how  the  conception  of  a  tree  as  tenanted
by  a  personal  being  could  be  more   plainly  expressed.      The
image  of   Osiris  thus    made   was   kept   for  a  year  and  then
burned,  exactly  as   was   done  with   the  image  of  Attis  which
was  attached  to  the  pine-tree.      The  ceremony  of  cutting  the
tree,    as    described    by    Firmicus    Maternus,    appears    to    be
alluded  to  by  Plutarch.^      It  was  probably  the  ritual  counter-
part of  the  mythical  discovery  of  the  body  of  Osiris  enclosed
in  the  erica-tree.      We   may  conjecture   that   the  erection  of
the  Tatu  pillar  at  the  close  of  the   annual  festival  of  Osiris  "
was  identical  with  the   ceremony  described   by  Firmicus  ;  it
is  to  be  noted  that  in  the  myth  the  erica-tree  formed  a  pillar
in  the  king's   house.      Like   the   similar  custom  of  cutting  a
pine-tree   and   fastening   an   image  to  it  in  the  rites  of  Attis,
the  ceremony  perhaps   belonged   to   that  class  of  customs  of
which    the    bringing    in    the    May-pole    is   among   the    most
familiar.      As  to  the  pine-tree  in  particular,  at  Denderah  the
tree   of  Osiris    is    a    conifer,   and    the   coffer    containing    the
body  of  Osiris  is  here  depicted  as  enclosed  within  the  tree.^
A  pine-cone  often  appears  on  the  monuments  as  an  offering
presented  to  Osiris,  and   a   manuscript  of  the  Louvre  speaks
of  the  cedar  as  sprung  from   him.'*      The  sycamore  and  the
tamarisk  are  also  his  trees.      In   inscriptions  he  is  spoken  of
as    residing    in    them  ; "     and   his   mother   Nut  is  frequently
portrayed  in  a  sycamore.*^      In  a  sepulchre  at  How  (Diospolis
Parva)  a  tamarisk   is   depicted   overshadowing   the  coffer  of
Osiris  ;  and   in   the   series  of  sculptures   which   illustrate  the
mystic  history  of  Osiris  in  the  great  temple  of  Isis  at  Philae,
a   tamarisk    is    figured    with    two   men   pouring   water  on  it.
The  inscription  on  this  last  monument  leaves  no  doubt,  says
Bruesch,  that  the  verdure  of  the   earth  was   believed   to   be
connected  with  the  verdure  of  the  tree,  and  that  the  sculpture

1  Isis  et  Osiris,   21,    o-lvCi   Se  toijl7ji>        194,  igS,  referring  to  Marietta,   Deji-
^v\oii  Kai  crxi-ci-i'  Xivov  Kai  xo^is  X^"!^^""-^!        derah,  iv.  66  and  72.

hia.  TO  TToWa  tQv  fivaTLKuiv  a.fa/ji.efuxdo.t-  *   Lefebure,  oJ>.  cit.  pp.   195,   197-

TOL'TOis.     Again,  ibid.  42,  to  5e  i,i>\ov  iv  "  Birch,  in  Wilkinson's  Manners  and

Tah\eyo/j.ivaLs'0(ripi.5osTa(pais  rifxvovTes        Customs    of    the     Ancient     Egyptians
KaTaffK€vd^ov(Xi  XdpvaKa  fj,T]vo€i57J.  (London,   1878),  iii.  84.

*'  Wilkinson,  o/>.  cit.  iii.  63  sij.  ;  Ed.
■"  ^ee  above,  p.  140  s,j.  j^^y^^.^  Geschichte  des  Alterthums,  i.  §§

2  Lefebure,   Le  luytJie    Osiricn,  pp.        56,  60.


Ill  IS/S  A  CORN-GODDESS  I45

refers  to  the  grave  of  Osiris  at  Philae,  of  which  Plutarch  tells  us
that  it  was  overshadowed  by  a  methide  plant,  taller  than  any
olive-tree.  This  sculpture,  it  may  be  observed,  occurs  in  the
same  chamber  in  which  the  god  is  depicted  as  a  corpse  with
ears  of  corn  sprouting  from  him.^  In  inscriptions  he  is
referred  to  as  "  the  one  in  the  tree,"  "  the  solitary  one  in  the
acacia,"  and  so  forth."  On  the  monuments  he  sometimes
appears  as  a  mummy  covered  with  a  tree  or  with  plants.^  It
accords  with  the  character  of  Osiris  as  a  tree-spirit  that  his
worshippers  were  forbidden  to  injure  fruit-trees,  and  with  his
character  as  a  god  of  vegetation  in  general  that  they  were
not  allowed  to  stop  up  wells  of  water,  which  are  so  important
for  the  irrigation  of  hot  southern  lands.'^

The  original  meaning  of  the  goddess  Isis  is  still  more
difficult  to  determine  than  that  of  her  brother  and  husband
Osiris.  Her  attributes  and  epithets  were  so  numerous  that
in  the  hieroglyphics  she  is  called  "  the  many-named,"  "  the
thousand-named,"  and  in  Greek  inscriptions  "  the  myriad-
named."  ^  Professor  Tiele  confesses  candidly  that  "  it  is
now  impossible  to  tell  precisely  to  what  natural  phenomena
the  character  of  Isis  at  first  referred."  ^'  There  are  at  least
some  grounds  for  seeing  in  her  a  goddess  of  corn.  If  we  may
trust  Diodorus,  whose  authority  appears  to  have  been  the
Egyptian  historian  Manetho,  the  discovery  of  wheat  and
barley  was  attributed  to  Isis,  and  at  her  festivals  stalks  of
these  grains  were  carried  in  procession  to  commemorate  the
boon  she  had  conferred  on  men.  Further,'  at  harvest-time,
when  the  Egyptian  reapers  had  cut  the  first  stalks,  they  laid
them  down  and   beat    their  breasts,  lamenting   and    calling

1  Wilkinson,    op.    cit.   iii.    349   sq.  ;  and  lost  one  are  said  to  have  sat  down,

Brugsch,  Religion  mid  JMythologie  dcr  sad  at  heart  and  weary,  on   the  edge  of

alteJi  Aegypter,  p.  621  ;   Phitarch,  Isis  a  well.      Hence   those   who    had    been

et  Osiris,  20.      In  this  passage  of  Plut-  initiated  at   Eleusis  were  forbidden  to

.arch  it  has  been  proposed  by  Parthey  sit   on   a  well      See   Plutarch,  Isis  et

to   read   pLvpiK7]s    for    ixrididrji,  and    the  Osiris,!^;   Wova&x,  Hymn  to  Demeter,

conjecture    appears  to  be  accepted  by  98  j^.;  Pausanias,  i.  39.  i ;  Apollodorus,

Wilkinson,  loc.  cit.  i.    5.     I  ;    Nicander,     Theriaca,    486 ;

-  'L^iihwct,  Le mythe  Osirien,y^.  191.  Clemens  Alex.,  Protrept.  ii.  20.

3  Lefebure,  op   «V.  p.  188.  5  Brugsch,  Religion  imd  Mythologii

4  Plutarch,  Az5  f/  (9^?nj,  35.      One         ,     „/...,   j.l,/,y.J^  ^    ^^r
.    ,  .         .        ,  .  ,      ,  1         r       der  alien  Aes;ypier,  p.  045.

of  the    points  in  which  the   myths   ot

Isis  and   Demeter  agree,  is   that  both  ^  c.  P.  Tielc,   History  of  Egyptian

goddesses  in  tlieir  search  for  the  loved        Religion,  p.  57.

VOL.  II  L


146  IS/S  A  CO/^A'-GODDESS  chap.

upon  Isis}  Amongst  the  epithets  by  which  she  is  desig-
nated in  the  inscriptions  are  "  creatress  of  the  green  crop,"
"  the  green  one,  whose  greenness  is  like  the  greenness  of  the
earth,"  and  "  mistress  of  bread."  ""  According  to  Brugsch
she  is  "  not  only  the  creatress  of  the  fresh  verdure  of
vegetation  which  covers  the  earth,  but  is  actually  the  green
corn-field  itself,  which  is  personified  as  a  goddess."  ^  This
is  confirmed  by  her  epithet  Sodiit  or  Socket,  meaning  "  a
corn-field,"  a  sense  wiiich  the  word  still  retains  in  Coptic*
It  is  in  this  character  of  a  corn-goddess  that  the  Greeks
conceived  Isis,  for  they  identified  her  v/ith  Demeter.'^  In  a
Greek  epigram  she  is  described  as  "  she  who  has  given
birth  to  the  fruits  of  the  earth,"  and  "the  mother  of  the
ears  of  corn,""  and  in  a  hymn  composed  in  her  honour  she
speaks  of  herself  as  "  queen  of  the  wheat-field,"  and  is
described  as  "  charged  with  the  care  of  the  fruitful  furrow's
wheat-rich  path."  '

Osiris  has  been  sometimes  interpreted  as  the  sun-god  ;
and  in  modern  times  this  view  has  been  held  by  so  many
distinguished  writers  that  it  deserves  a  brief  examination.
If  we  inquire  on  ,what  evidence  Osiris  has  been  identified
with  the  sun  or  the  sun-god,  it  will  be  found  on  analysis
to  be  minute  in  quantity  and  dubious,  where  it  is  not
absolutely  worthless,  in  quality.  The  diligent  Jablonski,  the
first  modern  scholar  to  collect  and  sift  the  testimony  of
classical  writers  on  Egyptian  religion,  says  that  it  can  be
shown  in  many  ways  that  Osiris  is  the  sun,  and  that  he
could  produce  a  cloud  of  witnesses  to  prove  it,  but  that  it  is
needless  to  do  so,  since  no  learned  man  is  ignorant  of  the
fact.^  Of  the  writers  whom  he  condescends  to  quote,  the
only  two  who  expressly  identify  Osiris  with  the  sun  are
Diodorus   and   Macrobius.      The   passage   in    Diodorus   runs

1   Diodorus,  i.   14.      Eusebius  {Frae-  3  Brugsch,  op.  cit.  p.  649.

parat.     Evaiv^.     iii.     3)    quotes     from  ^   Brugsch,  I.e.

Diodorus  (i.   Ii-I3)a  long  passage  on  5   Herodotus,     ii.     59,     156;     Dio-

the  early  religion  of  Egypt,   prefacing  dorus,   i.   13,  25,  96  ;  Apollodorus,   ii.

the  quotation  (ch.  2)  with  the   remark  1.    3  ;    Tzetzes,  Schol.   on   Lycopliron.

ypd(p€L  oe  i<al  to,  Trepi  tovtuv  TrXarvTepov  2 1 2.

jxkv     6    Maz/^^ws,    f7reTeT/.i.7]pLevws    de    6  ''  Aniholog.  Planiid.  cclxiv.  I.

At65a;/)os,  which   seems    to    imply  that  "   Orphica,  ed.  Abel,  p.  295  sqq.

Diodorus  epitomised  Manetho.  ^  Jablonski,  Pantheon  Aegjpfiorum

''  Brugsch,  op.  cit.  p.  647.  (Frankfort,  1750),  i.   125  sq.


Ill  OSIRIS  AND  THE  SUN  1^7

thus  :  ^  "  It  is  said  that  the  aboriginal  inhabitants  of  Egypt,
looking  up  to  the  sky,  and  smitten  with  awe  and  wonder  at
the  nature  of  the  universe,  supposed  that  there  were  two
gods,  eternal  and  primeval,  the  sun  and  the  moon,  of  whom
they  named  the  sun  Osiris  and  the  moon  Isis."  Even  if
Diodorus's  authority  for  this  statement  is  Manetho,  as  there
is  some  ground  for  believing,"  little  or  no  weight  can  be
attached  to  it.  For  it  is  plainly  a  philosophical,  and  there-
fore a  late,  explanation  of  the  first  beginnings  of  Egyptian
religion,  reminding  us  of  Kant's  familiar  saying  about
the  starry  heavens  and  the  moral  law  rather  than  of  the
rude  traditions  of  a  primitive  people.  Jablonski's  second
authority,  Macrobius,  is  no  better  but  rather  worse.  For
Macrobius  was  the  father  of  that  large  family  of  mytho-
logists  who  resolve  all  or  most  gods  into  the  sun.  Accord-
ing to  him  Mercury  was  the  sun.  Mars  was  thelsun,  Janus
was  the  sun,  Saturn  was  the  sun,  so  was  Jupiter,  also
Nemesis,  likewise  Pan,  and  so  on  through  a  great  part  of
the  pantheon."*  It  was  natural,  therefore,  that  he  should
identify  Osiris  with  the  sun,^  but  his  reasons  for  doing  so
are  exceedingly  slight.  He  refers  to  the  ceremonies  of
alternate  lamentation  and  joy  as  if  they  reflected  the
vicissitudes  of  the  great  luminary  in  his  course  through  the
sky.  Further,  he  argues  that  Osiris  must  be  the  sun
because  an  eye  was  one  of  his  symbols.  The  premise  is
correct,^  but  what  exactly  it  has  to  do  with  the  conclusion
is  not  clear.  The  opinion  that  Osiris  was  the  sun  is  also
mentioned,  but  not  accepted,  by  Plutarch,"  and  it  is  referred
to  by  Firmicus  Maternus."

Amongst  modern  scholars,  Lepsius,  in  identifying  Osiris
with  the  sun,  appears  to  rely  mainly  on  the  passage  of
Diodorus  already  quoted.  But  the  monuments,  he  adds,
also  show  "  that  down  to  a  late  time  Osiris  was  sometimes
conceived  as  Ra.  In  this  quality  he  is  named  Osiris-Ra
even  in  the  '  Book  of  the  Dead,'  and  Isis  is  often  called  '  the
royal  consort  of  Ra.'  "  '^      That  Ra  was  both  the  physical  sun

1  Bibl.  Hist.  i.   II.  of  the    Ancient    Egyptians    (London,

^  See  p.   146,  note  i.  1878),  iii.  353.

•^  See  Macrobius,  Saturnalia,  bk.  i.  •'  Isis  et  Osiris,  52.

*  Saturn,  i.  21.   il.  '^   De  errore profaii.  religionum,  8.

"  Wilkinson,  Manners  and  Customs  ^  Lepsius,       "  Ueber      den     ersten


148  EGYPTIAN  RELIGION


CHAP.


and  the  sun-god  is  undisputed  ;  but  with  every  deference
for  the  authority  of  so  great  a  scholar  as  Lepsius,  it  may
be  doubted  whether  the  identification  of  Osiris  with  Ra
can  be  accepted  as  proof  that  Osiris  was  originally  the  sun.
For  the  religion  of  ancient  Egypt  ^  may  be  described  as
a  confederacy  of  local  cults  which,  while  maintaining  against
each  other  a  certain  measure  of  jealous  and  even  hostile
independence,  were  yet  constantly  subjected  to  the  fusing
and  amalgamating  influence  of  political  centralisation  and
philosophic  thought.  The  history  of  the  religion  appears
to  have  largely  consisted  of  a  struggle  between  these
opposite  forces  or  tendencies.  On  the  one  side  there  was
the  conservative  tendency  to  preserve  the  local  cults  with  all
their  distinctive  features,  fresh,  sharp,  and  crisp  as  they  had
been  handed  down  from  an  immemorial  past.  On  the  other
side  there  was  the  progressive  tendency,  favoured  by  the
gradual  fusion  of  the  people  under  a  powerful  central
government,  first  to  dull  the  edge  of  these  provincial  dis-
tinctions, and  finally  to  break  them  down  completely  and
merge  them  in  a  single  national  religion.  The  conservative
party  probably  mustered  in  its  ranks  the  great  bulk  of  the
people,  their  prejudices  and  affections  being  warmly  enlisted
in  favour  of  the  local  deity,  with  whose  temple  and  rites
they  had  been  familiar  from  childhood  ;  and  the  popular
dislike  of  change,  based  on  the  endearing  effect  of  old
association,  must  have  been  strongly  reinforced  by  the  less
disinterested  opposition  of  the  local  clergy,  whose  material
interests  would  necessarily  suffer  with  any  decay  of  their
shrines.  On  the  other  hand  the  kings,  whose  power  and
glory  rose  with  the  political  and  ecclesiastical  consolidation
of  the  realm,  were  the  natural  champions  of  religious  unity  ;
and  their  efforts  would  be  seconded  by  the  refined  and
thoughtful  minority,  who  could  hardly  fail  to  be  shocked  by
the  many  barbarous  and  revolting  elements  in  the  local
rites.  As  usually  happens  in  such  cases,  the  process  of
religious  unification   appears   to    have    been   largely  effected

aegyptischen     Gotterkreis     und     seine  l  The  view  here  taken  of  the  history

geschichtlich  -  mythologische      Entste-  of  Egyptian  religion   is  based    on  the

hung,"    in    Ahhaiidhuigen   der  koriig-  sketch   in  Ad.    Erman's  Aegypten  und

lichen  Akademie  der  Wissenschaften  zu  aegyptisches  Leben  im  Al^eftut?!,  p.  351

Berlin,  1851,  p.   194  sq.  sqq.


Ill  THE  SUN-GOD  RA  149

by  discovering  points  of  similarity,  real  or  imaginary,  between
various  local  gods,  which  were  thereupon  declared  to  be
only  different  names  or  manifestations  of  the  same  god.

Of  the  deities  who  thus  acted  as  centres  of  attraction,
absorbing  in  themselves  a  multitude  of  minor  divinities,  by
far  the  most  important  was  the  sun-god  Ra.  There  appear
to  have  been  few  gods  in  Egypt  who  were  not  at  one  time
or  other  identified  with  him.  Ammon  of  Thebes,  Horus  of
the  East,  Horus  of  Edfu,  Chnum  of  Elephantine,  Atum  of
Heliopolis,  all  were  regarded  as  one  god,  the  sun.  Even
the  water-god  Sobk,  in  spite  of  his  crocodile  shape,  did  not
escape  the  same  fate.  Indeed  one  king,  Amenophis  IV.,
undertook  to  sweep  away  all  the  old  gods  at  a  stroke  and
replace  them  by  a  single  god,  the  "  great  living  disc  of  the
sun."  ^  In  the  hymns  composed  in  his  honour,  this  deity  is
referred  to  as  "  the  living  disc  of  the  sun,  besides  whom  there
is  none  other."  He  is  said  to  have  made  "the  far  heaven"
and  "  men,  beasts,  and  birds  ;  he  strengtheneth  the  eyes
with  his  beams,  and  when  he  showeth  himself,  all  flowers
live  and  grow,  the  meadows  flourish  at  his  upgoing  and
are  drunken  at  his  sight,  all  cattle  skip  on  their  feet,
and  the  birds  that  are  in  the  marsh  flutter  for  joy."  It  is
he  "  who  bringeth  the  years,  createth  the  months,  maketh
the  days,  calculateth  the  hours,  the  lord  of  time,  by  whom
men  reckon."  In  his  zeal  for  the  unity  of  god,  the  king
commanded  to  erase  the  names  of  all  other  gods  from  the
monuments,  and  to  destroy  their  images.  His  rage  was
particularly  directed  against  the  god  Ammpn,  whose  name
and  likeness  were  effaced  wherever  they  were  found  ;  even
the  sanctity  of  the  tomb  was  violated  in  order  to  destroy
the  memorials  of  the  hated  deity.  In  some  of  the  halls  of
the  great  temples  at  Carnac,  Luxor,  and  other  places,  all  the
names  of  the  gods,  with  a  few  chance  exceptions,  were
scratched  out.  In  no  inscription  cut  in  this  king's  reign  was
any  god  mentioned  save  the  sun.  The  monarch  even  changed
his  own   name,  Amenophis,  because  it   was  compounded  of

1  On   this    attempted    revolution    in  dei-  alien  Aegyplicr,  pp.  20-22.      The

religion  see   Lepsius   in    Verhandl.   d.  tomb  and  mummy  of  the  heretic  king

k'onigl.  Akad.  d.  IVisseitsch.  zu  Berlin,  were  found  at  Tell-el-Amarna  in  1890.

1851,    pp.    196-201  ;    Erman,    op.  cit.  See  A.  H.  Sayce,  in  American  Journal

p.  355 -f;/'/-  ;  Wiedemann,  Die  Religion  of  Archaeology,  vi.  (1890),  p.  163.


ISO  OS/R/S  AND  THE  SUN


CHAP.


Ammon,  and  took  instead  the  name  of  Chuen-'eten,  "  gleam
of  the  sun's  disc."  His  death  was  followed  by  a  violent
reaction.  The  old  gods  were  reinstated  in  their  rank  and
privileges  ;  their  names  and  images  were  restored  ;  and  new
temples  were  built.  But  all  the  shrines  and  palaces  reared
by  the  late  king  were  thrown  down  ;  even  the  sculptures
that  referred  to  him  and  to  his  god  in  rock-tombs  and  on
the  sides  of  hills  were  erased  or  filled  up  with  stucco  ;  his
name  appears  on  no  later  monument,  and  was  carefully
omitted  from  all  official  lists.

This  attempt  of  King  Amenophis  IV.  is  only  an  ex-
treme example  of  a  tendency  which  appears  to  have  been
at  work  on  the  religion  of  Egypt  as  far  back  as  we  can
trace  it.  Therefore,  to  come  back  to  our  point,  in  attempt-
ing to  discover  the  original  character  of  any  Egyptian  god,
no  weight  can  be  given  to  the  identification  of  him  with
other  gods,  least  of  all  with  the  sun-god  Ra.  Far  from
helping  to  follow  up  the  trail,  these  identifications  only  cross
and  confuse  it.  The  best  evidence  for  the  original  character
of  the  Egyptian  gods  is  to  be  found  in  their  ritual  and
myths,  so  far  as  these  are  known,  and  in  the  m.anner  in
which  they  arc  portrayed  on  the  monuments.  It  is  mainly
on  evidence  drawn  from  these  sources  that  I  rest  my
interpretation  of  Osiris  as  a  deity  of  the  fruits  of  the  earth.

The  ground  upon  which  some  recent  writers  seem  chiefly
to  rely  for  the  identification  of  Osiris  with  the  sun  is  that
the  story  of  his  death  fits  better  with  the  solar  phenomena
than  with  any  other  in  nature.  It  may  readily  be  admitted
that  the  daily  appearance  and  disappearance  of  the  sun
might  very  naturally  be  expressed  by  a  myth  of  his  death
and  resurrection  ;  and  writers  who  regard  Osiris  as  the  sun
are  careful  to  indicate  that  it  is  the  diurnal,  and  not  the
annual,  course  of  the  sun  to  which  they  ynderstand  the
myth  to  apply.  Thus  Renouf,  who  identified  Osiris  with
the  sun,  admitted  that  the  Egyptian  sun  could  not  with  any
show  of  reason  be  described  as  dead  in  winter.^  But  if  his
daily  death  was  the  theme  of  the  legend,  why  was  it  celebrated
by  an  annual  ceremony  ?      This  fact  alone  seems  fatal  to  the

1  Hibhert   Lecturer,    1S79,    p.     113.    Compare    Ed.    Meyer,    Gcschichtc   dcs
Allcrfhitms,  i.  §§  55,  57.


Ill  ANCIENT  VIEW  OF  OSIRIS  151

interpretation  of  the  myth  as  descriptive  of  sunset  and  sunrise.
Again,  though  the  sun  may  be  said  to  die  daily,  in  what
sense  can  he  be  said  to  be  torn  in  pieces  ?  ^

In  the  course  of  our  inquiry,  it  has,  I  trust,  been  made
clear  that  there  is  another  natural  phenomenon  to  which  the
conception  of  death  and  resurrection  is  as  applicable  as  to
sunset  and  sunrise,  and  which,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  has  been
so  conceived  and  represented  in  folk-custom.  This  pheno-
menon is  the  annual  growth  and  decay  of  vegetation.  A
strong  reason  for  interpreting  the  death  of  Osiris  as  the
decay  of  vegetation  rather  than  as  the  sunset  is  to  be  found
in  the  general,  though  not  unanimous,  voice  of  antiquity,
which  classed  together  the  worship  and  myths  of  Osiris,
Adonis,  Attis,  Dionysus,  and  Demeter,  as  religions  of
essentially  the  same  type."  The  consensus  of  ancient
opinion  on  this  subject  seems  too  great  to  be  rejected  as  a
mere  fancy.  So  closely  did  the  rites  of  Osiris  resemble
those  of  Adonis  at  Byblus  that  some  of  the  people  of
Byblus  themselves  maintained  that  it  was  Osiris  and  not
Adonis  whose  death  was  mourned  by  them.^  Such  a  view
could  certainly  not  have  been  held  if  the  rituals  of  the  two
gods  had  not  been  so  alike  as  to  be  almost  indistinguishable.
Again,  Herodotus  found  the  similarity  between  the  rites  of
Osiris  and  Dionysus  so  great,  that  he  thought  it  impossible
,the  latter  could  have  arisen  independently  ;  they  must,  he
thought,  have  been  recently  borrowed,  with  slight  alterations,
by  the  Greeks  from  the  Egyptians.'*      Again,  Plutarch,  a  very

1  I  am  pleased  to  observe  that  Pro-  156  ;   Plutarch,  hjs  et  Osiris,  13,  35  ;

fessor  C.  P.  Tiele,  who  formerly  inter-  id.,    Quaest.    Coiiviv.   iv.    5.    3  ;    Dio-

preted  Osiris  as  a  sun-god  {History  of  dorus,  i.    13,   25,  96,  iv.    i  ;   Orphica,

Egyptian    Religion,    p.    43    sqq.),   has  Hymn  42  ;   Eusebius,  Praepar.  Evang.

now  adopted  a  view  of  his  nature  which  iii.  11.  31  ;  Servius  on  Virgil,  Aen.  xi.

approaches    more    nearly    to    the    one  287  ;  id.,  on   Georg.  i.  166  ;   Hippoly-

advocated    in     this    book.        See    his  tus,  Refiit.  omit,   haeres.  v.  9,  p.  168  ;

Geschiedenis  van  den  Godsdienst  zn  de  Socrates,  Eccles.  Hist.  iii.   23,  p.  204  ;

Oudheid,  i.  33  sq.  (Amsterdam,  1893).  Tzetzes,    Schol.     on    Lycophrou,    212;

Professor  Maspero  has  also  abandoned  Ai777^/Ltara,    xxii.     2,    in    Alythographi

the  theory  that  Osiris  was  the  sun  ;  he  Graeci,    ed.    Westermann,     p.      368  ;

now  supposes  that  the  deity  originally  Nonnus,  Dionys.  iv.  269  sq.  ;  Cornutus,

personified  the  Nile.      See  his  Histoire  De     natiira    deoriim,     28 ;      Clemens

a«t7£V/;;(T*  (Paris,  1886),  p.  35  ;  and  his  Alexandr.    Protrept.   ii.    19;    Firmicus

Histoire  aticienne  des peiiples  dc  r Orient  Maternus,  De  errore  profan.  relig.  7.

classique:   les   engines    (Paris,    1895),  3  Be  dea  Syria,  7.

p.  130.  »  ^       )  /

-  Herodotus,    ii.    42,   49,    59,    144,  ^  Herodotus,  ii.  49.


152  ANCIENT  VIEW  OF  OSIRIS  chap.

keen  student  of  comparative  religion,  insists  upon  the
detailed  resemblance  of  the  rites  of  Osiris  to  those  of  Diony-
sus,-^ We  cannot  reject  the  evidence  of  such  intelligent  and
trustworthy  witnesses  on  plain  matters  of  fact  which  fell
under  their  own  cognisance.  Their  explanations  of  the
worships  it  is  indeed  possible  to  reject,  for  the  meaning  of
religious  cults  is  often  open  to  question  ;  but  resemblances
of  ritual  are  matters  of  observation.  Therefore,  those  who
explain  Osiris  as  the  sun  are  driven  to  the  alternative  of
either  dismissing  as  mistaken  the  testimony  of  antiquity  to
the  similarity  of  the  rites  of  Osiris,  Adonis,  Attis,  Dionysus,
and  Demeter,  or  of  interpreting  all  these  rites  as  sun-worship.
No  modern  scholar  has  fairly  faced  and  accepted  either  side
of  this  alternative.  To  accept  the  former  would  be  to  affirm
that  we  know  the  rites  of  these  deities  better  than  the  men
who  practised,  or  at  least  who  witnessed  them.  To  accept
the  latter  would  involve  a  wrenching,  clipping,  mangling,  and
distorting  of  myth  and  ritual  from  which  even  Macrobius
shrank."  On  the  other  hand,  the  view  that  the  essence  of  all
these  rites  was  the  mimic  death  and  revival  of  vegetation,
explains  them  separately  and  collectively  in  an  easy  and
natural  way,  and  harmonises  with  the  general  testimony
borne  by  antiquity  to  their  substantial  similarity.  The
evidence  for  thus  explaining  Adonis,  Attis,  and  Osiris  has
now  been  laid  before  the  reader  ;  it  remains  to  do  the  same
for  Dionysus  and  Demeter.

Before,  however,  we  pass  from  Egyptian  to  Greek
mythology  it  will  be  worth  while  to  consider  an  ancient
explanation  of  Osiris,  which  deserves  more  attention  than  it
has  received  in  modern  times.  We  are  told  by  Plutarch  that
among  the  philosophers  who  saw  in  the  gods  of  Egypt  per-
sonifications of  natural  objects  and  forces,  there  were  some
who  interpreted  Osiris  as  the  moon  and  his  enemy  Typhon
as  the  sun,  "  because  the  moon,  with  her  humid  and  generative
light,  is  favourable  to  the  propagation  of  animals  and  the
growth  of  plants  ;  while  the  sun  with  his  fierce  fire  scorches
and  burns  up  all  growing  things,  renders  the  greater  part  of

^  Plutarch,  Isis  ef  Osiris,  35.  but  he  spared  Demeter  (Ceres),  whom,

^  Osiris,  Attis,  Adonis,  and  Dionysus       however,  lie  interpreted  as  the  moon,
were  all  resolved  by  him  into  the  sun  ;       See  the  Saturnalia,  bk.  i.


Ill  OS/J^/S  AND  THE  MOON  i'53

the  earth  uninhabitable  by  reason  of  his  blaze,  and  often
overpowers  the  moon  herself."  ^  Whatever  may  be  thought
of  the  physical  qualities  here  attributed  to  the  moon,  the
arguments  adduced  by  the  ancients  to  prove  the  identity  of
Osiris  with  that  luminary  carry  with  them  a  weight  which
has  at  least  not  been  lightened  by  the  results  of  modern
research.  An  examination  of  them  and  of  other  evidence
pointing  in  the  same  direction  will,  perhaps,  help  to  set  the
original  character  of  the  Egyptian  deity  in  a  clearer  light.

1.  Osiris  was  said  to  have  lived  or  reigned  twenty-eight
years.  This  might  fairly  be  taken  as  a  mythical  expression
for  a  lunar  month."

2.  His  body  was  reported  to  have  been  rent  into  fourteen
pieces.  This  might  be  interpreted  of  the  waning  moon,
which  appears  to  lose  a  portion  of  itself  on  each  of  the  fourteen
days  that  make  up  the  second  half  of  a  lunar  month.^  It  is
expressly  said  that  his  enemy  Typhon  found  the  body  of
Osiris  at  the  full  moon  ;  *  thus  the  dismemberment  of  the
god  would  begin  with  the  waning  of  the  moon.  To  primitive
man  it  seems  manifest  that  the  waning  moon  is  actually
dwindling,  and  he  naturally  enough  explains  its  diminution
by  supposing  that  the  planet  is  being  rent  or  broken  in
pieces  or  eaten  away.  The  Klamath  Indians  of  Oregon
speak  of  the  moon  as  "  the  one  broken  to  pieces "  with
reference  to  its  changing  aspect ;  they  never  apply  such  a
term  to  the  sun,^  whose  apparent  change  of  bulk  at  different
seasons  of  the  year  is  far  too  insignificant  to  attract  the
attention  of  the  savage,  or  at  least  to  be  described  by  him  in
such  forcible  language.  The  Dacotas  believe  that  when  the
moon  is  full,  a  great  many  little  mice  begin  to  nibble  at  one
side  of  it  and  do  not  cease  till  they  have  eaten  it  all  up,
after  which  a  new  moon  is  born  and  grows  to  maturity,  only
to  share  the  fate  of  all  its  countless  predecessors.^

3.  At  the  new  moon  of  the  month  Phanemoth,  which
was  the  beginning  of  spring,  the  Egyptians  celebrated  what
they  called  "  the  entry  of  Osiris  into  the  moon." ''

1   Plutarch,  his  et  Osiiis,  41.  (Washington,  1890),  p.  Ixxxix.

'^  Ibid.   13,42.  <5  S.    R.    Riggs,    Dakota    Grammar,

^  Ibid.  18,  42.                   ••  Ibid.  8.  Texts,  and  Ethnography  (Washington,

•*  A.     S.     Gatschet,     The    Klamath  1893),  p.   165.

Indians     of     South-  JFestern      Oregon  ^   I'lutarch,  Isis  et  Osiris,  43.


154  OSIRIS  AND  THE  MOON  chap.

4.  At  the  ceremony  called  "  the  burial  of  Osiris "  the
Egyptians  made  a  crescent-shaped  chest  "  because  the  moon,
when  it  approaches  the  sun,  assumes  the  form  of  a  crescent
and  vanishes."  ^

5.  The  bull  Apis,  held  to  be  an  image  of  the  soul  of
Osiris,^  was  born  of  a  cow  which  was  believed  to  have  been
impregnated,  not  in  the  vulgar  way  by  a  bull,  but  by  a  divine
influence  emanating  from  the  moon.^

6.  Once  a  year,  at  the  full  moon,  pigs  were  sacrificed
simultaneously  to  the  moon  and  Osiris/  The  relation  of
pigs  to  the  god  will  be  considered  later  on.

7.  In  a  hymn  supposed  to  be  addressed  by  Isis  to  Osiris,
it  is  said  that  Thoth —

Placeth  thy  soul  in  the  bark  Ma-at,
In  that  name  which  is  thine,  of  GOD  MoON.

And  again  : —

Thou  who  co)nest  to  us  as  a  child  each  month,
We  do  not  cease  to  contemplate  thee
Thine  emanation  heightens  the  brilliancy
Of  the  stars  of  Orion  in  the  firmament,  etc.^'

Here  then  Osiris  is  identified  with  the  moon  in  set  terms.
If  in  the  same  hymn  he  is  said  to  "  illuminate  us  like  Ra  "■
(the  sun),  this  is  obviously  no  reason  for  identifying  him  with
the  sun,  but  quite  the  contrary.  For  though  the  moon  may
reasonably  be  compared  to  the  sun,  neither  the  sun  nor
anything  else  can  reasonably  be  compared  to  itself.

Now  if  Osiris  was  originally,  as  I  suppose,  a  deity  of
vegetation,  we  can  easily  enough  understand  why  in  a  later
and  more  philosophic  age  he  should  come  to  be  thus  identified
or  confounded  with  the  moon.  For  as  soon  as  he  begins  to
meditate  upon  the  causes  of  things,  the  early  philosopher  is
led  by  certain  obvious,  though  fallacious,  appearances  to
regard  the  moon  as  the  ultimate  cause  of  the  growth  of
plants.  In  the  first  place  he  associates  its  apparent  growth
and   decay  with  the  growth  and  decay  of  sublunary  things,

1  Plutarcli,  Isis  et  Osiris,  43.  ef  Osiris,  8.

2  /6iii.  20,  29.  5  Records  of  the  Past,  i.  12 1  sq.  ;
^  Ibid.  43.  Brugsch,  Religion  zmd  Alythologie  dev
*  Herodotus,    ii.   47  ;    Plutarch,  /sis       altcii  Aegypter,  p.  629  .fry.


m


INFLUENCE  OF  THE  MOON


155


and  imagines  that  in  virtue  of  a  secret  sympathy  the  celestial
phenomena  really  produce  those  terrestrial  changes  which  in
point  of  fact  they  merely  resemble.  Thus  Pliny  says  that
the  moon  may  fairly  be  considered  the  planet  of  breath,
"  because  it  saturates  the  earth  and  by  its  approach  fills
bodies,  while  by  its  departure  it  empties  them.  Hence  it
is,"  he  goes  on,  "  that  shellfish  increase  with  the  increase  of
the  moon  and  that  bloodless  creatures  especially  feel  breath
at  that  time  ;  even  the  blood  of  men  grows  and  diminishes
with  the  light  of  the  moon,  and  leaves  and  herbage  also  feel
the  same  influence,  since  the  lunar  energy  penetrates  all
things."  ^  "  There  is  no  doubt,"  writes  Macrobius,  "  that  the
moon  is  the  author  and  framer  of  mortal  bodies,  so  much  so
that  some  things  expand  or  shrink  as  it  waxes  or  wanes."  ^
Again  Aulus  GelHus  puts  in  the  mouth  of  a  friend  the  remark
that  "  the  same  things  which  grow  with  the  waxing,  do
dwindle  with  the  waning  moon,"  and  he  quotes  from  a
commentary  of  Plutarch's  on  Hesiod  a  statement,  that  the
onion  is  the  only  vegetable  which  violates  this  great  law  of
nature  by  sprouting  in  the  wane  and  withering  in  the  increase
of  the  moon.^  Scottish  Highlanders  allege  that  in  the
increase  of  the  moon  everything  has  a  tendency  to  grow  or
stick  together.*

From  this  supposed  influence  of  the  moon  on  the  life  of
plants  and  animals,  men  in  ancient  and  modern  times  have
deduced  a  whole  code  of  rules  for  the  guidance  of  the
husbandman,  the  shepherd,  and  others  in  the  conduct  of
their  affairs.  Thus,  an  ancient  writer  on  agriculture  lays  it
down  as  a  maxim,  that  whatever  is  to  be  sown  should  be
sown  while  the  moon  is  waxing,  and  that  whatever  is  to  be
cut  or  gathered  should  be  cut  or  gathered  while  it  is  waning.''
A  modern  treatise  on  superstition   describes  how  the  super-


^  Pliny,  Nat.  Hist.  ii.  221.

2  Macrobius,  Comment,  in  somninm
Scipionis,  i.  1 1.  7.

^  Aulus  Gellius,  xx.  8.  For  the
opinions  of  the  ancients  on  this  subject,
see  further,  W.  *H.  Roscher,  tJbe)'  Selene
unci  Vei~Mandtcs  (Leipsic,  1 890),  p.  61
sqq.

*  John  Ramsay  of  Ochtertyre,  Scot-
land  and  Scotsmen   in  the  Eighteenth


Century,   edited   by   A.    Aliardyce,   ii.

449-

■^  Palladius,  Dc  re  riistica,  i.  34.  8.
Cp.  id.,  i.  6.  12;  Pliny,  Nat.  Hist.
xviii.  321  :  '■'■omnia  quae  caeduntur,
carptintw,  tondentiir  innocentiiis  de-
crescente  liina  quam  crcscente  fiunt.''^
Geoponica,  i.  6.  8  :  rivH  5oKifid^ovat
fi-qdev  (pdi.vova7]i  t^s  aeXrjvrjs  dXXd  avta-
VOfl^VTJS  (pvTevuv.


156


INFLUENCE  OF  THE  MOON


CHAP.


stitious  man  regulates  all  his  conduct  by  the  moon  :  "  What-
ever he  would  have  to  grow,  he  sets  about  it  when  she  is  in
her  increase  ;  but  for  what  he  would  have  less  he  chooses
her  wane."  ^  In  Germany  the  phases  of  the  moon  are
observed  by  superstitious  people  at  all  the  more  or  even  less
important  actions  of  life,  such  as  tilling  the  fields,  building
or  changing  houses,  marriages,  hair-cutting,  bleeding,  cupping,
and  so  forth.  The  particular  rules  vary  in  different  places,
but  the  principle  generally  followed  is  that  whatever  is  done
to  increase  anything  should  be  done  while  the  moon  is
waxing  ;  whatever  is  done  to  diminish  anything  should  be
done  while  the  moon  is  waning.  For  example,  sowing,
planting,  and  grafting  should  be  done  in  the  first  half
of  the  moon,  but  the  felling  of  timber  and  mowing  should
be  done  in  the  second  half"  In  various  parts  of  Europe  it
is  believed  that  plants,  nails,  hair,  and  corns,  cut  while  the
moon  is  on  the  increase  will  grow  again  fast,  but  that  if  cut
while  it  is  on  the  decrease  they  will  grow  slowly  or  waste
away.^  Hence  persons  who  wish  their  hair  to  grow  thick
and  long  should  cut  it  in  the  first  half  of  the  moon  ;  *  those
who  wish  to  be  spared  the  trouble  of  cutting  it  often  should


^  Brand,  Popular  Antiquities,  iii.
144,  quoting  Werenfels,  Dissertation
upon  Superstition  (London,  1748),  p.  6.

-  Wuttke,  Der  deiitsche  Volksaber-
glaiibe,'^  §  65.  Cp.  Grimm,  Deutsche
Mytkologie,^  ii.  595  ;  Montanus,  Die
deutsche  Volksfeste,  Volksbrduche  und
deutscher  Volksglaiibe,  p.  128  ;  Prae-
torius,  Deliciae  Friissicae,  p.  18;  Arn
Urquell,  v.  (1894),  p.  173.  The  rule
that  the  grafting  of  trees  should  be
done  at  the  waxing  of  the  moon  is  laid
down  by  Pliny  {N'at.  Hist.  xvii.  108).
At  Deutsch-Zepling  in  Transylvania,
by  an  inversion  of  the  usual  custom,
seed  is  generally  sown  at  the  waning  of
the  moon  (A.  Heinrich,  Agrarische
Sitten  und  Gebrduche  unter  den  Sachsen
Siebenbiirgens,  p.  7).  In  the  Abruzzi
also  sowing  and  grafting  are  commonly
done  when  the  moon  is  on  the  wane  ;
timber  that  is  to  be  durable  must  be
cut  in  January  during  the  moon's  de-
crease (G.  Finamore,  Credenze,  Usi  e
Costiani  Abriizzesi,  p.  43).

•'  Sebillot,  Traditions  et  Superstitions


de  la  Haute-Bretagne,  ii.  355  ;  Sauve,
Folk-lore  des  Hautes-  Vosgcs,  p.  5  ;
Brand,  Popular  Antiquities,  iii.  150;
Holzmayer,  "  Osiliana,"  Verhand-
Itingcn  der  gelehrten  Estnichen  Gesell-
schaft  zu  Dorpat,  vii.  (1872),  p.  47.

■*  The  rule  is  mentioned  by  Varro,
Reruin  Knsticaruni,  i.  37  (where  we
should  probably  read  "  ne  decrescente
tondens  calvos  Jiani,"  and  refer  istacrto
the  former  member  of  the  preceding
sentence)  ;  Montanus,  op.  cit.  p.  128  ;
Sebillot,  I.e.;  E.  Isieltx,  Deutsche  Sagen,
Sitten  und  Gebrduche  aus  Schzuaben,  p.
5 1 1,  §  421 ;  Tettau  und  Temme,  Volks-
sagen  Ostpreussens,  Litthauens  und
IVestpreussens,  p.  283  ;  A.  Kuhn,
Mdrkische  Sagen  ujid  Aldrchen,  p.  386,
§  92  ;  L.  Schandein,  in  Bavaria,
Landes-  und  Volkskunde  des  Konigreichs
Bayern,  iv.  2,  p.  402  ;  F.  S.  Krauss,
J'olksglaube  und  religioser  Branch  der
.Siidslaven,  ^.  15.  The  reason  assigned
in  the  text  was  probably  the  original
one  in  all  cases,  though  it  is  not  always
the  one  alleged  now.


Ill  ON  VEGETATION  157

cut  it  in  the  second  half/  On  the  same  principle  sheep  are
shorn  when  the  moon  is  waxing,  because  it  is  supposed  that
the  wool  will  then  be  longest  and  most  enduring.-  The
Highlanders  of  Scotland  used  to  expect  better  crops  of  grain
by  sowing  their  seed  in  the  moon's  increase.^  But  in  this
matter  of  sowing  and  planting  a  refined  distinction  is  some-
times drawn  by  French,  German,  and  Esthonian  peasants  ;
plants  which  bear  fruit  above  ground  are  sown  by  them
when  the  moon  is  waxing,  but  plants  which  are  cultivated
for  the  sake  of  their  roots,  such  as  potatoes  and  turnips,  are
sown  when  the  moon  is  waning/  The  reason  for  this  dis-
tinction seems  to  be  a  vague  idea  that  the  waxing  moon
is  coming  up  and  the  waning  moon  going  down,  and  that
accordingly  fruits  which  grow  upwards  should  be  sown  in
the  former  period,  and  fruits  which  grow  downwards  in  the
latter.  Before  beginning  to  plant  their  cacao  the  Pipiles  of
Central  America  exposed  the  finest  seeds  for  four  nights  to
the  moonlight,^  but  whether  they  did  so  at  the  waxing  or
waning  of  the  moon  is  not  said.

Again,  the  waning  of  the  moon  has  been  commonly
recommended  both  in  ancient  and  modern  times  as  the
proper    time    for    felling    trees,*^  apparently  because    it  was

^   The  rule  is  mentioned  by  Wuttke  278  ;   Holzmayer,  op.  cit.  p.  47.

and  Sauve,  II. cc.     The  reason  assigned  ^  Bancroft,     Native    Races    of   the

in  the  text  is  conjectural.  Pacific  States,  ii.  719  sq.

^  Krauss,  op.  cit.  p.   16  ;  Montanus,  ^  Cato,    De    agri   cultura,    37.    4  ;

I.e.  ;  Varro,  Re7-um  Riisticaritm,  i.  37  Varro,    Rcrum     Riisticariivi,     i.      37 ;

(see  above,  p.  156,  note  4).     However,  Pliny,  Nat.  Hist.  xvi.  190;  Pailadius,

the    opposite    rule    is  observed   in   the  De  re  rustica,  u.  22,  xii.  15;   Plutarch,

Upper  Vosges,  where  it  is  thought  that  Qitaest.  Conviv.  iii.   10.  3  ;   Macrobius,

if  the  sheep  are  shorn  at  the  new  moon  Saturn,  vii.  16 ;  Wuttke,  I.e.  ;  Bavaria,

the  quantity  of  wool  will  be  much  less  Landes-und  Volkskunde des Konigreichs

than  if  they  were  shorn  in  the  waning  of  Bayern,    iv.    2,    p.    402;    W.    Kolbe,

the  moon  (Sauve, /.c).      In  Normandy,  Hessische  Volks-Sitten  und  Gebraitche,

also,  wool  is  clipped  during  the  waning  p.    58  ;    Sauve,   Folk-lore  des   Hautes-

of  the  moon  ;  otherwise  moths  would  Vosges,    p.     5  ;    Martin,    "  Description

get    into    it    (Lecoeur,    Esqiiisses    du  of  the  Western   Islands  of  Scotland,"

Socage  Normand,  ii.   12).  in    Pinkerton's     Voyages    and    Travels,

^  S.  '^o\msox\,Jour}iey  to  the  Western  iii.    630.       Pliny,    while  he  says  that

Islands  of  Scotland  (Baltimore,  1810),  the  period  from  the   twentieth  to  the

p.  183.  thirtieth  day  of  the  lunar  month  was

*  Wuttke,    Der  deutsche    Volksaber-  the  season  generally  recommended,  adds

glaubej^  §  65  ;  J.  Lecoeur,  loc.  cit.  ;  E.  that  the  best  time  of  all,  according  to

Meier,  Deutsche  Sagen,  Sitten  tmd  Ge-  universal    opinion,   was   the   interlunar

brduche  aiis  Schwaben,  p.  511,  §  422;  day,  between  the  old  and  the  new  moon,

Th.     Siebs,     "  Das    Saterland,"    Zeit-  when    the   planet   is   invisible    through

schrift  fiir  Volkskunde ,  \\\.  (1893),   p.  being  in  conjunction  with  the  sun.


158  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  MOON  chai'.

thought  fit  and  natural  that  the  operation  of  cutting  down
should  be  performed  on  earth  at  the  time  when  the  lunar  orb
was,  so  to  say,  being  cut  down  in  the  sky.  In  France
before  the  Revolution  the  forestry  laws  enjoined  that  trees
should  only  be  felled  after  the  moon  had  passed  the  full  ;
and  in  French  bills  announcing  the  sale  of  timber  you  may
still  read  a  notice  that  the  wood  was  cut  in  the  waning
of  the  moon/  But  sometimes  the  opposite  rule  is  adopted,
and  equally  forcible  arguments  are  urged  in  its  defence.
Thus,  when  the  Wabondei  of  Eastern  Africa  are  about
to  build  a  house,  they  take  care  to  cut  the  posts  for  it
when  the  moon  is  on  the  increase ;  for  they  say  that
posts  cut  when  the  moon  is  wasting  away  would  soon
rot,  whereas  posts  cut  while  the  moon  is  waxing  are
very  durable.^  The  same  rule  is  observed  for  the  same
reason  in  some  parts  of  Germany.^  But  the  partisans  of  the
ordinarily  received  opinion  have  sometimes  supported  it  by
another  reason,  which  introduces  us  to  the  second  of  those
fallacious  appearances  by  which  men  have  been  led  to  regard
the  moon  as  the  cause  of  growth  in  plants.  From  observing
rightly  that  dew  falls  most  thickly  on  cloudless  nights,  they
inferred  wrongly  that  it  was  caused  by  the  moon,  a  theory
which  the  poet  Alcman  expressed  in  mythical  form  by  saying
that  dew  was  a  daughter  of  Zeus  and  the  moon.'*  Hence
the  ancients  concluded  that  the  moon  is  the  great  source  of
moisture,  as  the  sun  is  the  great  source  of  heat.'^  And  as
the  humid  power  of  the  moon  was  assumed  to  be  greater
when  the  planet  was  waxing  than  when  it  was  waning,  they
thought  that  timber  cut  during  the  increase  of  the  luminary
would  be  saturated  with  moisture,  whereas  timber  cut  in  the
wane  would  be  comparatively  dry.  Hence  we  are  told  that
in  antiquity  carpenters  would  reject  timber  felled  when  the
moon  was  growing  or  full,  because  they  believed  that  such
timber  teemed  with  sap  ;  •"  and  in  the  Vosges  at  the  present

1  J.    Lecaeur,   Esqiiisscs  du   Bocagc  3;  JMacrobius,   Saiiirii.   \'u.    16.      See

Normand,\\.  \\  sq.  iurlher,W.  H.  Koscher,  l/der Selene und

-  O.  Baumann,  Usainhara  und  seine  ?'>;-w«;/ci''to  (Leipsic,   1890),  p.  49  jy*/.
Nachbargcbiete  (Berlin,  1891),  p.   125.  •''   Plutarch    and     Macrobius,    11. ci.  :

■*  Montanus,  Die  deutsche  Volksfeste,  Pliny,    Nat.     Hist.     ii.     223,    xx.     i  ;

]'olksbrdticheunddeutscherVolksglanl>e,  Aristotle,  Fi-oblemata,  xx\\.  14,  p.  937

p.   128.  B,  3  ^<I-

t  Plutarch,  Qiiacst.   Coiiviv.   iii.    10.  "  Macrobius  and  Plutarch,  i/.cc.


in


WORSHIP  OF  THE  MOON


159


day  people  allege  that  wood  cut  at  the  new  moon  does
not  dry/  In  the  Hebrides  peasants  give  the  same  reason
for  cutting  their  peats  when  the  moon  is  on  the  wane ;
"  for  they  observe  that  if  they  are  cut  in  the  increase,  they
continue  still  moist  and  never  burn  clear,  nor  are  they
without  smoke,  but  the  contrary  is  daily  observed  of  peats
cut  in  the  decrease."  ^

Thus    misled  by  a  double  fallacy  primitive  philosophy
comes  to  view  the    moon  as  the  great  cause  of  vegetable
growth,  first,  because  the  planet  seems  itself  to  grow,  and
second,  because   it   is    supposed    to    be   the   source   of  dew
and   moisture.      It  is  no  wonder,  therefore,  that  agricultural
peoples  should  adore  the  planet  which  they  believe  to  in-
fluence   so    profoundly    the    crops    on    which    they   depend
for  subsistence.       Accordingly  we    find    that   in    the  hotter
regions  of  America,  where  maize  is  cultivated  and  manioc  is
the  staple  food,  the  moon  was  recognised  as  the  principal
object  of  worship,  and  plantations  of  manioc  were  assigned
to  it  as  a  return  for  the  service  it  rendered  in  the  production
of  the  crops.      The  worship  of  the  moon  in  preference  to  the
sun  was  general  among  the  Caribs,  and,  perhaps,  also  among
most  of  the  other  Indian  tribes  who  cultivated  maize  in  the
tropical    forests   to   the    east  of  the  Andes ;  and    the  same
thing  has  been  observed,  under  the  same  physical  conditions,
among   the  aborigines    of  the   hottest  region    of   Peru,   the
northern  valleys  of  Yuncapata.      Here  the  Indians  of  Pacas-
mayu  and    the    neighbouring  valleys  revered    the   moon   as
their  principal  divinity.      The  "  house  of  the  moon  "  at  Pacas-
mayu   was  the  chief  temple  of  the  district ;  and  the  same
sacrifices  of  maize-flour,  of  wine,  and  of  children  which  were
offered  by  the  mountaineers  of  the  Andes  to  the  Sun-god,
were  offered  by  the  lowlanders   to  the   Moon-god   in   order
that    he    might    cause    their    crops    to    thrive.^       In    ancient


1  Sauve,  Folk-lore  des  Haiites-  Vosges,

P-  S-.

-  Martin,  "  Description  of  the  West-
ern Islands  of  Scotland, "  in  Pinkerton's
Voyages  and  Travels,  xvi.  630.

^  E.  J.  Payne,  History  of  the  New
World  callea  America,  i.  495.  In
his  remarks  on  the  origin  of  moon-
worship  (p.  493  sqq.)  this  learned  and


philosophical  historian  has  indicated
the  true  causes  which  lead  primitive
man  to  trace  the  growth  of  plants  to
the  influence  of  the  moon.  Compare
E.  B.  Tylor,  Primitive  Citltiire,'^\.  130.
Mr.  Payne  suggests  that  the  custom
of  naming  the  months  after  the
principal  natural  products  that  ripen
in  them  may  have  contributed  to  the


i6o  OSIRIS  AND  THE  MOON  chap.

Babylonia,  where  the  population  was  essentially  agricultural,
the  moon-god  took  precedence  of  the  sun-god  and  was
indeed  reckoned  his  father.^

Thus  it  would  be  no  matter  for  surprise  if,  after
worshipping  the  crops  which  furnished  them  with  the  means
of  subsistence,  the  ancient  Egyptians  should  in  later  times
have  identified  the  spirit  of  the  corn  with  the  moon,  which
a  pseudo- philosophy  had  taught  them  to  regard  as  the
ultimate  cause  of  the  growth  of  vegetation.  In  this  way
we  can  understand  why  in  their  more  recent  forms  the  myth
and  ritual  of  Osiris,  the  old  god  of  trees  and  corn,  should
bear  many  traces  of  efforts  made  to  bring  them  into  a
superficial  conformity  with  the  new  doctrine  of  his  lunar
affinity.^

^  7.  Dionysus

The  Greek  god  Dionysus  or  Bacchus^  is  best  known  as
the  god  of  the  vine,  but  he  was  also  a  god  of  trees  in  general.
Thus  we  are  told  that  almost  all  the  Greeks  sacrificed  to
"  Dionysus  of  the  tree,"^  In  Boeotia  one  of  his  titles  was
"Dionysus  in  the  tree.'"'  His  image  was  often  merely  an
upright  post,  without  arms,  but  draped  in  a  mantle,  with  a
bearded  mask  to  represent  the  head,  and  with  leafy  boughs
projecting  from  the  head  or  body  to  show  the  nature  of  the
deity .*^     On  a  vase  his  rude  effigy  is  depicted  appearing  out

same  result.     The  custom  is  ceitainly  influence  of  the  moon  on  human  affairs

very  common  among  savages,  as  I  hope  see   Note  B,    "The  doctrine  of  lunar

to  show  elsewhere,  but  whether  it  has  sympathy,"  at  the  end  of  the  volume,
contributed    to     foster    the     fallacy    in  ^  On  Dionysus  in  general  see  Preller,

question  seems  doubtful.  Griechische   Mythologit','^  i.    544  sqq.  ;

1  E.  A.  Budge,  Nebuchadnezzar,  Fr.  Lenormant,  article  "  Bacchus "  in
King  of  Babylon,  on  recently-discovered  Daremberg  et  Saglio,  Dictionnaire
inscriptions  of  this  King,  p.  5  sq.  ;  des  Antiquitt's  grecques  et  romaines,
A.  H.  Sayce,  Religion  of  the  Ancient  i.  591  sqq.  ;  Voigt  and  Thraemer's
Babylonians,  p.  155  ;  M.  Jastrow,  article  "  Dionysus "  in  Roscher's  ^«j--
Religion  of  Babylonia  and  Assyria  fiihrliches  Lexikon  der  griech.  tind  rdm.
(Boston,  U.S.,  189S),  pp.  68  sq.,y^  sq. ;  Mythologic,  i.  col.   1029  sqq.

L.  W.  King,  Babylonian  Religion  and  *  Phitarch,    Qnaest.    Conviv.    v.    3  :

Mythology  (London,   1899),   p.    17   sq.  Atovwy    5^    Sevdpirrj    wavres,    ws    ^ttoj

The    Ahts    of    Vancouver's    Island,    a  e'nrdv,  '"EiKK-qves  dvovaiv.

tribe  of  fishers  and  hunters,   view   the  '■   Hesychius,  s.v.''^v5(v5pos.

moon  as  the  husband  of  the  sun  and  as  ^  ggg   tj^g    pictures    of   his    images,

a  more  powerful  deity  than  her  (Sproat,  taken  from  ancient  vases,  in  Botticher,

Scenes  and  Studies  of  Savage  Life,  p.  Baumkultiis  der  Bellenen,   plates  42,

206).  43»    43   A,    43    B,  44  ;    Daremberg  et

2  For  more  examples  of  the  supposed  Saglio,  op.  cit.  i.  361,  626,


Ill


DIONYSUS


i6i


of  a  low  tree  or  bush.^  He  was  the  patron  of  cultivated
trees  ;'~  prayers  were  offered  to  him  that  he  would  make  the
trees  grow  f  and  he  was  especially  honoured  by  husband-
men, chiefly  fruit-growers,  who  set  up  an  image  of  him,  in
the  shape  of  a  natural  tree-stump,  in  their  orchards/  He
was  said  to  have  discovered  all  tree-fruits,  amongst  which
apples  and  figs  are  particularly  mentioned  ;^  and  he  was
himself  spoken  of  as  doing  a  husbandman's  work.*"  He  was
referred  to  as  "  well-fruited,"  "  he  of  the  green  fruit,"  and
"  making  the  fruit  to  grow."^  One  of  his  titles  was  "teem-
ing" or  "  bursting"  (as  of  sap  or  blossoms)  i*^  and  there  was
a  Flowery  Dionysus  in  Attica  and  at  Patrae  in  Achaia/'*
The  Athenians  sacrificed  to  him  for  the  prosperity  of  the
fruits  of  the  earth.^^  Amongst  the  trees  particularly  sacred  to
him,  in  addition  to  the  vine,  was  the  pine-tree/^  The  Delphic
oracle  commanded  the  Corinthians  to  worship  a  particular
pine-tree  "  equally  with  the  god,"  so  they  made  two  images
of  Dionysus  out  of  it,  v/ith  red  faces  and  gilt  bodies.^^  In  art
a  wand,  tipped  with  a  pine-cone,  is  commonly  carried  by  the
god  or  his  worshippers.^^  Again,  the  ivy  and  the  fig-tree
were  especially  associated  with  him.  In  the  Attic  township
of  Acharnae  there  was  a  Dionysus  Ivy  ;^^  at  Lacedaemon
there  was  a  Fig  Dionysus  ;  and  in  Naxos,  where  figs  were
called  nieilicha,  there  was  a  Dionysus  Meilichios,  the  face  of
whose  image  was  made  of  fig-wood.^ '

Like  the  other  gods  of  vegetation  whom  we  have  been  con-
sidering, Dionysus  was  believed  to  have  died  a  violent  death,


^  Daremberg  et  Saglio,  op.  cit.  i.
626.

-  Coniutus,  De  natm-a  deonun,  30.

■^  Pindar,  quoted  by  Plutarch,  /sis
et  Osiris,  35.

*  Maximus  Tyrius,  Dissertat.  viii.  i.

*'  Athenaeus,  iii.  pp.  78  c,  82  D.

^  Himerius,    Orat.    i.     10,    Aioj'iktos

~'    Orphica,  Hymn  1.  4,  liii.  8.

*'  Aelian,  ~1"ar.  Hist.  iii.  41  ;
Hesychius,  s.v.  <^\iui\z\  Cp.  Plutarch,
Quaes t.  Conviv.  v.  8.  3.

®  Pausanias,  i.  31.  4;  id.  vii.  21.
6.

1^  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscrip-
iionttm  Graciantm,  No.  382.

VOL.  II


11   Plutarch,  Qiiaest.  Conviv.  v.  3.

^2  Pausanias,  ii.  2.  6  sq.  Pausanias
does  not  mention  the  kind  of  tree  ;
but  from  Euripides,  Bacchae,  1064
sqq.,  and  Philostratus,  Iinag.  i.  17
(18),  we  may  infer  that  it  v\as  a  pine,
though  Theocritus  (xxvi.  11)  speaks
of  it  as  a  mastich-tree.

1-'^  Miiller-Wieseler,  Denkmiiler  dcr
alien  A'linst,  ii.  pi.  xxxii.  sqq.  ;
Baumeister,  Dcnkmdler  des  klassischen
Altertuins,  i.  figures  489,  491,  492,
495-  Cp.  Lenormant  in  Daremberg  et
Saglio,  Did.  des  Antiqititds,  i.  623  ;
Lobeck,  Aglaophamiis,  p.  700.

^^  Pausanias,  i.  31.  6.

1^  Athenaeus,  iii.  p.  78  c.

M


l62


DEATH  OF  DIONYSUS


CHAl'.


but   to  have   been  brought  to  life  again  ;  and  his  sufferings,
death,    and    resurrection    were    enacted    in    his    sacred    rites.
The    Cretan    myth,  as   related   by   Firmicus,  ran   thus.      He
was   said   to   have  been  the  bastard  son  of  Jupiter,  a  Cretan
king.       Going    abroad,    Jupiter    transferred    the    throne   and
sceptre  to  the  youthful   Dionysus,  but,  knowing  that  his  wife
Juno  cherished   a  jealous   dislike  of  the  child,  he  entrusted
Dionysus    to    the    care    of    guards    upon    whose    fidelity    he
believed   he  could   rely.      Juno,  however,  bribed  the  guards,
and   amusing  the  child  with  toys  and  a  cunningly-wrought
looking-glass  lured  him  into  an  ambush,  where  her  satellites,
the  Titans,  rushed  upon  him,  cut  him  limb  from  limb,  boiled
his    body    with    various   herbs    and    ate    it.       But    his   sister
Minerva,  who   had   shared   in   the   deed,  kept   his   heart   and
gave  it  to  Jupiter  on  his  return,  revealing  to  him   the  whole
history  of  the  crime.      In  his  rage,  Jupiter  put  the  Titans  to
death  by  torture,  and,  to  soothe  his  grief  for  the  loss  of  his
son,  made   an   image  in  which  he  enclosed  the  child's  heart,
and   then   built  a  temple   in   his  honour.^      In  this  version  a
Euhemeristic    turn   has    been   given   to   the   myth   by  repre-
senting Jupiter  and   Juno  (Zeus  and    Hera)   as  a  king  and
queen   of  Crete.      The  guards  referred  to  are  the  mythical
Curetes  who  danced  a  war-dance  round  the  infant  Dionysus,
as  they  are  said  to  have  done  round  the  infant  Zeus."    Pome-
granates  were   supposed   to   have   sprung   from  the  blood  of
Dionysus,^  as  anemones  from  the  blood  of  Adonis  and  violets
from   the   blood   of  Attis.      According   to  some,  the  severed
limbs  of  Dionysus  were  pieced  together,  at  the  command  of
Zeus,  by    Apollo,  who    buried    them    on    Parnassus."^      The
grave  of  Dionysus  was  shown  in  the  Delphic  temple  beside
a   golden   statue   of  Apollo.''      Thus   far   the   resurrection    of


1  Firmicus  Mateinus,  De  errore pro-
faiiaruni  religion  it  in,  6.

'^  Clemens  Alexandr.  Protrept.
17.  Cp.  Loheck,  AglaophaiHHs,
1 1 1  I  sqq.

^  Clemens    Alexandr.    Pivtrepf.

19-

■*  Clemens  Alexandr.  Protrept.  ii.
18  ;  Proclus  on  Plato's  Timaeus,  iii.  p.
200  D,  quoted  by  Lobeck,  Aglaophatnns,
p.  562,  and  by  Abel,  Orphica,  p.  234.
Others  said  that  the  mangled  body  was


pieced   together,  not  by  Apollo  but  by
Rhea  (Cornutus,    Dc.    natiira   deoriiin,

30)-

■'  Lobeck,  Aglaophamns,  p.  572  sqq^
For  a  conjectural  restoration  of  the
temple,  based  on  ancient  authorities
and  an  examination  of  the  scanty
remains,  see  an  article  by  J.  H.
Middleton,  in  Journal  of  Hellenic
Studies,  vol.  ix.  p.  282  sqq.  The
ruins  of  the  temple  have  now  been
completely  excavated  by  the  French.


Ill  RESURRECTION  OF  DIONYSUS  163

the  slain  god  is  not  mentioned,  but  in  other  versions  of  the
myth  it  is  variously  related.  According  to  one  version,  which
represented  Dionysus  as  a  son  of  Demeter,  his  mother
pieced  together  his  mangled  limbs  and  made  him  young
again.^  In  others  it  is  simply  said  that  shortly  after  his
burial  he  rose  from  the  dead  and  ascended  up  to  heaven  f
or  that  Zeus  raised  him  up  as  he  lay  mortally  wounded  ;^  or
that  Zeus  swallowed  the  heart  of  Dionysus  and  then  begat
him  afresh  by  Semele,'^  who  in  the  common  legend  figures
as  mother  of  Dionysus.  Or,  again,  the  heart  was  pounded
up  and  given  in  a  potion  to  Semele,  who  thereby  conceived
him."

Turning  from  the  myth  to  the  ritual,  we  find  that  the
Cretans  celebrated  a  biennial''  festival  at  which  the  sufferings
and  death  of  Dionysus  were  represented  in  every  detail.^
Where  the  resurrection  formed  part  of  the  myth,  it  also  was
acted  at  the  rites,^  and  it  even  appears  that  a  general
doctrine  of  resurrection,  or  at  least  of  immortality,  was
inculcated  on  the  worshippers  ;  for  Plutarch,  writing  to
console  his  wife  on  the  death  of  their  infant  daughter,
comforts  her  with  the  thought  of  the  immortality  of  the
soul  as  taught  by  tradition  and  revealed  in  the  mysteries  of
Dionysus."^  A  different  form  of  the  myth  of  the  death  and
resurrection  of  Dionysus  is  that  he  descended  into  Hades  to
bring  up  his  mother  Semele  from  the  dead.^*'  The  local
Argive  tradition  was  that  he  went  down  through  the  Alcyonian

1  Diodorus,  iii.  62.  the  series  being  included  in  the  numera-

■"^  Macrobius,    Comment,    in    Soinn.  tion,in  accordancewiththeancientmode

Scip.     i.     12.     12  ;     ScriptoTes    reriini  of  reckoning.)      Probably  the  festivals

mythicariim  Latini  (res  Romae  nuper  were   formerly    annual  and   the  period

reperti     (commonly     referred      to     as  was     afterwards     lengthened,     as     has

Mythographi     Vaticani),    ed.     G.     H.  happened    with    other    festivals.       See

Bode  (Cellis,  1834),  iii.  12.  5,  p.  246  ;  W.  Mannhardt,  Baiimkultits,  pp.  172,

Origen,    c.    Cels.    iv.    171,    quoted    by  175,  491,  533  j>Y.,  598.      Some  of  the

Lobeck,  Aglaophamtts,  p.  713.  festivals   of   Dionysus,    however,    were

^   Himerius,  Orat.  ix.  4.  annual.

^  Proclus,    Hymn    to    Minerva,    in  '   Firmicus    Maternus,  De  err.  prof.

Lobeck,  Aglaophamits,  p.  56 1 ;  Orphica,  relig.  6.
ed.  Abel,  p.  235.  *  Mythogr.    Vatic,  ed.  Bode,  I.e.

■'  Hyginus,  Fab.   167.  ^  Plutarch,    Consol.    ad    uxor.     10.

■^  The    festivals    of    Dionysus    were  Compare  ?</., /.v/j^/"  Cw'rzV,  35  ;  id.,Df

biennial   in    many  places.      See  Schb-  E  Delphico,   9  ;   id.,  De  esti  carnium,

mann,     Griechische    Alterthiimerj^    ii.  i.  7.

500  sqq.      (The  terms  for  the  festival  ^^  Pausanias,    ii.    31.   2  and   37.    5  ;

were  TpieTTjpis,  rpierripiKos,  Iwth  terms  of  ApoUodorus,  iii.  5.  3.


1 64  DIONYSUS  AS  A  BULL  chap.

lake  ;  and  his  return  from  the  lower  world,  in  other  words
his  resurrection,  was  annually  celebrated  on  the  spot  by  the
Arrives,  who  summoned  him  from  the  water  by  trumpet
blasts,  while  they  threw  a  lamb  into  the  lake  as  an  offering
to  the  warder  of  the  dead/  Whether  this  was  a  spring
festival  does  not  appear,  but  the  Lydians  certainly  celebrated
the  advent  of  Dionysus  in  spring  ;  the  god  was  supposed  to
brine  the  season  with  him.-  Deities  of  vegetation,  who  are
supposed  to  pass  a  certain  portion  of  each  year  under-
ground, naturally  come  to  be  regarded  as  gods  of  the  lower
world  or  of  the  dead.  Both  Dionysus  and  Osiris  were  so
conceived.^

A  feature  in  the  mythical  character  of  Dionysus,  which
at  first  sight  appears  inconsistent  with  his  nature  as  a  deity
of  vegetation,  is  that  he  was  often  conceived  and  represented
in  animal  shape,  especially  in  the  form,  or  at  least  with
the  horns,  of  a  bull.  Thus  he  is  spoken  of  as  "  cow-born,"
"bull,"  "bull -shaped,"  "bull-faced,"  "  bull -browed,"  "bull-
horned,"  "  horn-bearing,"  "  two-horned,"  "  horned."*  He  was
believed  to  appear,  at  least  occasionally,  as  a  bull.'  His
images  were  often,  as  at  Cyzicus,  made  in  bull  shape,"  or
with  bull  horns  ;^  and  he  was  painted  with  horns.^  Types
of  the  horned  Dionysus  are  found  amongst  the  surviving
monuments  of  antiquity.^  On  one  statuette  he  appears  clad
in   a   bull's   hide,  the   head,  horns,  and   hoofs   hanging  down

1  Pausanias,  ii.  37.  5  s,].;  riutarch,  abstinentia,  iii.  17  ;  Dionysius,  Perieg.
his  et  Osiris,  35;  id.,  Quaest.  Conviv.  576;  Etymolog.  Magnum,  p.  371.  57)
iv.  6.  2.  is    etymologically    equivalent     to     the

2  Himerius,  Orat.  iii.  6,  xiv.  7.  Sanscrit  varsahha  "  a    bull,"  as   I  am

3  For  Dionysus,  see  Lenormant  in  informed  by  my  friend  Mr.  R.  A.  Neil.
Daremberg  et  Saglio,  Did.  des  An-  r,  Euripides,  Bacckae,  920  sqq.,
tiqiiith,     i.     632.        For    Osiris,     see  1017.

Wilkinson,   Manners   and  Customs  of  6   Plutarch,     Isis    et      Osiris,     35  ;

the  Ancie7it  Egyptians  (LowiXon,  1S78),        Alhenaeus,  I.e.

"^•, ^5;   ,      ,      r  ■      ,   n  ■   ■     .-      -^  ^  Diodorus,    iii.    64.    2,    iv.    4.    2;

^   Plutarch,   Is^s  et   Oszr.s,  s,;ul,  ^ornutus,  De  natura  deorum,  30.

Quaest.  Graec.   36  ;  Athenaeus,    xi.   p.  «  -r^.    ,            ,         r^    ^          ..  ;   /   .„

476  a;    Clemens    Alexandr.    Protrept.  '  Diodorus,  /.r. ;   Tzetzes,    Scho/.  on

ii.   16  ;    Orp/iica,  Hymn  xxx.  vv.  3,  4,  Lycophron,  209  ;   Philostratns,   Imagi-

xlv.  I,  Iii.  2,  liii.  8;  Euripides,  Bacchae,  "^^'  ^-  H  (i5)-

99;    Schol.    on    Aristophanes,    Frogs,  ^  Miiller-Wieseler,    Denkmdler   der

357;    Nicander,    Alexip/iarmaca,  2,1  ;  «//<?«  A1r//w/,  ii.  pi.  xxxiii. ;  Daremberg

Lucian,   Bacchus,  2.      The    title  Et'pa-  et  Saglio,  Z>z'rf.   des  AntiguitJs,  '\.   6i()

(pLuiTTjs  applied    to  Dionysus  {Homeric  sq.,(ili;  Woschex,  Ausfiihrl.  Lexikon,

Hymns,     xxxiv.      2;      Porphyry,     De  i.  col.   ii:\()  sqq.


Ill


DIONYSUS  AS  A  BULL


165


behind.^  Again,  he  is  represented  as  a  child  with  clusters
of  grapes  round  his  brow,  and  a  calfs  head,  with  sprouting
horns,  attached  to  the  back  of  his  head."  On  a  red-figured
vase  the  god  is  portrayed  as  a  calf-headed  child  seated  on  a
woman's  lap.^  At  his  festivals  Dionysus  was  believed  to
appear  in  bull  form.  The  women  of  Elis  hailed  him  as  a
bull,  and  prayed  him  to  come  with  his  bull's  foot.  They
sang,  "  Come  hither,  Dionysus,  to  thy  holy  temple  by  the
sea  ;  come  with  the  Graces  to  thy  temple,  rushing  with  thy
bull's  foot,  O  goodly  bull,  O  goodly  bull  !"^  According  to
the  myth,  it  was  in  the  shape  of  a  bull  that  he  was  torn  to
pieces  by  the  Titans  f  and  the  Cretans,  when  they  acted
the  sufferings  and  death  of  Dionysus,  tore  a  live  bull  to
pieces  with  their  teeth.*"  Indeed,  the  rending  and  devouring
of  live  bulls  and  calves  appear  to  have  been  a  regular  feature
of  the  Dionysiac  rites.'^  When  we  consider  the  practice  of
portraying  the  god  as  a  bull  or  with  some  of  the  features  of
the  animal,  the  belief  that  he  appeared  in  bull  form  to  his
worshippers  at  the  sacred  rites,  and  the  legend  that  it  was
in  bull  form  that  he  had  been  torn  in  pieces,  we  cannot
doubt  that  in  rending  and  devouring  a  live  bull  at  his
festival  the  worshippers  of  Dionysus  believed  that  they  were
killing  the  god,  eating  his  flesh,  and  drinking  his  blood.

Another  animal  whose  form  Dionysus  assumed  was  the
goat.  One  of  his  names  was  "  Kid."^  At  Athens  and  at
Hermion  he  was  worshipped  under  the  title  of  "  the  one  of
the  Black  Goatskin,"  and  a  legend  ran  that  on  a  certain
occasion  he  had  appeared  clad  in  the  skin  from  which  he
took  the  title.^  In  the  wine-growing  district  of  Phlius,  where
in  autumn  the  plain  is  still  thickly  mantled  with  the  red  and


1  Welcker,  Alte  Denkiniiler,  v.  taf.  2.

^  Archaeologische  Zeitttng,  ix.
(1851),  pi.  xxxiii.,  with  Gerhard's
remarks,  pp.  371-373.

•*   Gazette  Archdoiogitjiic-,   v.    (1879),

Pl-  3-

^  Plutarch,  Qitaest.  Graec.  36  ;
id.,  /sis  et  Osiris,  35.

■^  Nonnus,  Dioiiys.  vi.  205.

**  Firmicus  Maternus,  De  errore  pro-
fan,  religioitiini,  6.

"  Euripides,  Bacchae,  735  sqq.  ;
Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Frogs,  357.


*  Hesychius,  s.v.  "EpLcpos  6  Aiowaos,
on  which  there  is  a  marginal  gloss
6  fJLiKpbs  ai'f,  6  eV  tw  ^apt  (paifOfMevot,
-fiyovv   6   TrpwL/jLos ;    Stephanus    Byzant.

S.7'.    'AKpdbpfta.

^  Pausanias,  ii.  35.  i  ;  Schol.  on
Aristophanes,  Acharn.  146  ;  Etymolog.
A/agn.  s.z'.  'A-rraTovpia,  p.  118.  S4  ^'7f-  >
Suidas,  s.Z'v.  'ATrarovpia  and  /J.e\a-
valyiSa  Atovt'eroy  ;  Nonnus,  Dionys.
xxvii.  302.  Compare  Conon,  Narrat.
39,  where  for  MeAai/^iSr;  we  should
perhaps  read  MeXafat^iSi.


i66  DIONYSUS  AS  A   GOAT  chap.

golden  foliage  of  the  fading  vines,  there  stood  of  old  a  bronze
image  of  a  goat,  which  the  husbandmen  plastered  with  gold-
leaf  as  a  means  of  protecting  their  vines  against  blight.^
The  image  probably  represented  the  vine-god  himself.  To
save  him  from  the  wrath  of  Hera,  his  father  Zeus  changed
the  youthful  Dionysus  into  a  kid  ;-  and  when  the  gods  fled
to  Egypt  to  escape  the  fury  of  Typhon,  Dionysus  was  turned
into  a  goat.^  Hence  when  his  worshippers  rent  in  pieces  a
live  goat  and  devoured  it  raw,^  they  must  have  believed  that
they  were  eating  the  body  and  blood  of  the  god.

This  custom  of  killing  a  god  in  animal  form,  which  we
shall  examine  more  in  detail  presently,  belongs  to  a  very
early  stage  of  human  culture,  and  is  apt  in  later  times  to  be
misunderstood.  The  advance  of  thought  tends  to  strip  the
old  animal  and  plant  gods  of  their  bestial  and  vegetable
husk,  and  to  leave  their  human  attributes  (which  are  always
the  kernel  of  the  conception)  as  the  final  and  sole  residuum.
In  other  words,  animal  and  plant  gods  tend  to  become
purely  anthropomorphic.  When  they  have  become  wholly
or  nearly  so,  the  animals  and  plants  which  were  at  first  the
deities  themselves,  still  retain  a  vague  and  ill-understood
connection  with  the  anthropomorphic  gods  which  have  been
developed  out  of  them.  The  origin  of  the  relationship
between  the  deity  and  the  animal  or  plant  having  been
forgotten,  various  stories  are  invented  to  explain  it.  These
explanations  may  follow  one  of  two  lines  according  as  they
are  based  on  the  habitual  or  on  the  exceptional  treatment
of  the  sacred  animal  or  plant.  The  sacred  animal  was
habitually  spared,  and  only  exceptionally  slain  ;  and  accord-
ingly the  myth  might  be  devised  to  explain  either  why  it
was   spared   or  why  it   was   killed.      Devised   for  the   former

1  Pausanias,    ii.    1 3.    6.      On    their  appear  to  have  been  also  torn  in  pieces

return  from  Troy  the  Greeks  are  said  at    the    rites    of    Dionysus    (Photius,

to  have  found  goats  and  an  image  of  Lexicon,   s.v.  ve^pi^eiv  ;   llarpocration,

Dionysus  ina  cave  of  Euboea  (Pausanias,  s.v.    ve^pi^iiiv),  it  is  probable  that  the

i.  23.   I).  fawn  was  another  of  the  god's  embodi-

'^  ApoUodorus,  iii.  4.  3.  ments.    But  of  this  there  seems  no  direct

•^  Ovid,  Metam.  v.  329  ;    Antoninus  evidence.     Fawn-skins  were  worn  botli

T.iberaHs,    28  ;     Mythogr.     J'a/ic.    ed.  by  the  god  and  his  worshippers  (Cor-

Bode,  i.  86,  p.  29.  nutus,  De  nattira  deonuii,  30).      Simi-

''  Arnol3ius,   Adv.    uationes,    v.     19.  larly  the  female  Bacchanals  wore  goat-

Cp.    Suitlas,   S.7'.   aiyi^eiv.      As    fawns  skins  (Hesychius,  s.v.  Tpay7i<p6poi).


Ill


DIONYSUS  AS  A  GOAT


167


purpose,  the  myth  would  tell  of  some  service  rendered  to  the
deity  by  the  animal  ;  devised  for  the  latter  purpose,  the
myth  would  tell  of  some  injury  inflicted  by  the  animal  on
the  god.  The  reason  given  for  sacrificing  goats  to  Dionysus
is.  an  example  of  a  myth  of  the  latter  sort.  They  were
sacrificed  to  him,  it  was  said,  because  they  injured  the  vine/
Now  the  goat,  as  we  have  seen,  was  originally  an  embodi-
ment of  the  god  himself.  But  when  the  god  had  divested
himself  of  his  animal  character  and  had  become  essentially
anthropomorphic,  the  killing  of  the  goat  in  his  worship  came
to  be  regarded  no  longer  as  a  slaying  of  the  god  himself,  but
as  a  sacrifice  offered  to  him  ;  and  since  some  reason  had  to
be  assigned  why  the  goat  in  particular  should  be  sacrificed,
it  was  alleged  that  this  was  a  punishment  inflicted  on  the
goat  for  injuring  the  vine,  the  object  of  the  god's  especial
care.  Thus  we  have  the  strange  spectacle  of  a  god  sacrificed
to  himself  on  the  ground  that  he  is  his  own  enemy.  And
as  the  god  is  supposed  to  partake  of  the  victim  offered  to
him,  it  follows  that,  when  the  victim  is  the  god's  old  self,  the
god  eats  of  his  own  flesh.  Hence  the  goat-god  Dionysus  is
represented  as  eating  raw  goat's  blood  ;"'  and  the  bull-god
Dionysus  is  called  "eater  of  bulls."^  On  the  analogy  of
these  instances  we  may  conjecture  that  wherever  a  god  is
described  as  the  eater  of  a  particular  animal,  the  animal  in
question  was  originally  nothing  but  the  god  himself*

All    this,    however,    does    not    explain    why    a    deity    of
vegetation    should    appear    in    animal    form.      But    the    con-


^  Varro,  De  re  i-iistica,  i.  2.  19  ;
Virgil,  Georg.  ii.  380,  and  Servius,
ad.  1. ,  and  on  .4e)i.  iii.  1 1 8  ;  Ovid,  Fasti,
i.  353  sqq.  ;  id.,  Aktam.  xv.  114  sq.  ;
Cornutus,  De  natiira  deoniin.,  30.

-  Euripides, />'(7u7/rtt',  138.^17. :  a.-ypavbiv
alfxa  TpayoKTOi'ov,  u)fj.o(pdyov  X'^P"'-

^  Schol.    on    Aristophanes,     FroL^s,

357-

■  *  Hera  aiyotpdyos  at  Sparta,  Pau-
sanias,  iii.  15.  9;  Hesychius,  s.v.
aiyo<pdyos  (cp.  the  representation  of
Hera  clad  in  a  goat's  skin,  with  the
animal's  head  and  horns  over  her  head,
Muller-Wieseler,  Dcnkindkr  der  alien
Kunst,  i.  No.  299  b)  ;  Zens  aiyo(pdyos,
Etymolog.     Magnttm,    s.v.    alyo<pdyos,


p.  27.  52  (cp.  Schol.  on  Oppianus,
Halieitt.  iii.  10;  L.  Stephani,  in
Cottipte  -  Rendu  de  la  Commission
Impdriale  Archhlogiqiie  pour  Panfu'e
1869  (St.  Petersburg,  1870),  pp.  16-
18)  ;  Apollo  o^ocpdyos  at  Elis,  Athen-
aeus,  viii.  p.  346  li ;  Artemis  Kawpocpdyos
in  Samos,  Hesychius,  s.v.  Kawpo<pdyos;
cp.  idem,  s.z'.  Kpiocpdyos.  Divine  titles
derived  from  killing  animals  are  prob-
ably to  be  similarly  explained,  as
Dionysus  alyo^oXos  (Pausanias,  ix.  8.
2)  ;  ]\hea  or  Hecate  Kvvo<x<payris
(Tzetzes,  Schol.  on  I.ycophron,  77) ;
Apollo  \vkokt6vos  (Sophocles,  Electra,
6)  ;  Apollo  cravpOKTOvos  (Pliny,  Ala/.
Hist,  xxxiv.  70).


i68  DEMETER  AND  PROSERPINE  chap.

sideration  of  this  point  had  better  be  deferred  till  we  have
discussed  the  character  and  attributes  of  Demeter.  Mean-
time it  remains  to  point  out  that  in  some  places,  instead  of
an  animal,  a  human  being  was  torn  in  pieces  at  the  rites  of
Dionysus.  This  was  the  custom  in  Chios  and  Tenedos  ;^
and  at  Potniae  in  Boeotia  the  tradition  ran  that  it  had  been
formerly  the  custom  to  sacrifice  to  the  goat-smiting  Dionysus
a  child,  for  whom  a  goat  was  afterwards  substituted."  At
Orchomenus,  as  we  have  seen,  the  human  victim  was  taken
from  the  women  of  an  old  royal  family.^  As  the  slain  bull
or  goat  represented  the  slain  god,  so,  we  may  suppose,  the
human  victim  also  represented  him.  It  is  possible,  however,
that  a  legend  of  human  sacrifice  may  sometimes  have  been
a  mere  misinterpretation  of  a  sacrificial  ritual  in  which  an
animal  victim  was  treated  as  a  human  being.  For  example,
at  Tenedos  the  new-born  calf  sacrificed  to  Dionysus  was
shod  in  buskins,  and  the  mother  cow  was  tended  like  a
woman  in  child-bed.^  At  Rome  a  she-goat  was  sacrificed  to
Vedijovis  as  if  it  were  a  human  victim.""

§  8.   Demeter  and  Proserpine

The  Greek  myth  of  Demeter  and  Proserpine  is  sub-
stantially identical  with  the  Syrian  myth  of  Aphrodite
(Astarte)  and  Adonis,  the  Phrygian  myth  of  Cybele  and
Attis,  and  the  Egyptian  myth  of  Isis  and  Osiris.  In  the
Greek  myth,  as  in  its  Asiatic  and  Egyptian  counterparts,
a  goddess — Demeter — mourns  the  loss  of  a  loved  one —
Proserpine — who  personifies  the  vegetation,  more  especially
the  corn,  which  dies  in  summer  to  revive  in  spring.  But
in  the  Greek  myth  the  loved  and  lost  one  is  the  daughter
instead  of  the  husband  or  lover  of  the  goddess  ;  and  the
mother  as   well   as   the  daughter  is  a  goddess  of  the  corn.''

1   Porphyry,  De  ahstiii.  ii.  55.  p.  224  sqq.;  on  Proserpine  in  the  same

^  Pausanias,  ix.  8.  2.  character  see  Cornutus,  De  nat.   dear.

3  See  above,  p.  36^^.  28;     Varro    in    Augustine,    Civ.   Del,

■*  Aelian,   A'at.   An.   xii.    34.       Cp.  vii.    20;   Hesychius,   s.7j.   ^€p(;e<j}bveia. ;

W.    Robertson  Smith,  Keli^non  of  the  Firmicus    Maternus,    De    errore  prof.

Semites,^  ^.  2,00  sijij.  relig.    17.       In   his  careful  account  of

'"  Auhis  GeUius,  v.   12.   12.  Demeter  as  a  corn-goddess  Mannhardt

^  On  Demeter  as  a  corn-goddess  see  appears  to  have    overlooked    the  very

^l':i.xv!x\izxdi.t,MythoIogischeForschunge!i,  important     statement     of     Hippolytus


Ill  DEMETER  AND  PROSERPINE  169

Thus,  as  modern  scholars  have  recognised,^  Demeter  and
Proserpine  are  merely  a  mythical  reduplication  of  the  same
natural  phenomenon.  Proserpine,  so  ran  the  Greek  myth,^
was  gathering  flowers  when  the  earth  gaped,  and  Pluto,
lord  of  the  Dead,  issuing  from  the  abyss,  carried  her  off  on
his  golden  car  to  be  his  bride  in  the  gloomy  subterranean
world.  Her  sorrowing  mother  Demeter  sought  her  over
land  and  sea,  and  learning  from  the  Sun  her  daughter's
fate,  she  suffered  not  the  seed  to  grow,  but  kept  it  hidden
in  the  ground,  so  that  the  whole  race  of  men  would  have
died  of  hunger  if  Zeus  had  not  sent  and  fetched  Proserpine
from  the  nether  world.  Finally  it  was  agreed  that  Proserpine
should  spend  a  third,  or  according  to  others  a  half,^  of  each
year  with  Pluto  underground,  but  should  come  forth  ;^in
spring  to  dwell  with  her  mother  and  the  gods  in  the  upper
v/orld.  Her  annual  death  and  resurrection,  that  is,  her
annual  descent  into  the  under  world  and  her  ascension  from
it,  appear  to  have  been  represented  in  her  rites.'*

With  regard  to  the  name  Demeter,  it  has  been  plausibly
argued  by  Mannhardt  ^  that  the  first  part  of  the  word  is
derived  from  deai,  a  Cretan  word  for  "  barley "  \^  and  that
thus  Demeter  means  the  Barley-mother  or  the  Corn-mother  ;

(Refiif.  oinn.  Jiaercs.  v.  8,  p.  162,  ed.  ■*  Schomann,  Griech.  Alterthiimer ,^
Duncker  and  Schneidewin)  that  at  the  ii.  393  ;  Preller,  Griech.  Mythologies
initiation  into  the  Eleusinian  mysteries  i.  628  sq.,  644  sq.,  650  sq.  The
(tlie  most  famous  of  all  the  rites  of  evidence  of  the  ancients  on  this  head,
Demeter)  tlie  central  mystery  revealed  though  not  full  and  definite,  seems
to  the  initiated  was  a  reaped  ear  of  sufficient.  See  Diodorus,  v.  4  ;  Fir-
corn,  micus  Maternus,  De  en:  prof,  relig.  7,

1  Welcker,  Griechische  Gotterlehre,  2~  ;  Plutarch,  Isis  et  Osiris,  69  ;  Apu-
ii.  532;  Prelier,  in  Pauly's  Real-  leius,  iMef.  vi.  2;  Clemens  Alex.  P}'o-
Eiicyclopiidiefiir  class.  Altei-thiimswiss.  trept.  ii.  §§  12,  17;  Hesychius,  s.v.
vi.  107  ;  Lenormant  in  Daremberg  Kopayelv  ;  S.  Reinach,  Traitc'  cfEpi-
et  Saglio,  Dictionnaire  des  Aiifiquifc's  graphic  Grecqtte  (Paris,  18S5),  p.  141
grecqiies  et  roniaiius,  i.  pt.  ii.  1047  sqq.  ;  W.  Immerwahr,  Die  Ktiltc  itnd
sqq.  Compare  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  JMythen  Arkadieus  (Leipsic,  1891),  p.
Insc7-iptioniiiH  Graecartim,  No.  370,  100  sqq.  (inscriptions  found  at  Man-
note  13.  tinea).      In   a   Greek  calendar  of  Asia

"^  Homer,  Hymn  to  Devieter ;  Apol-  Minor  "the  ascent  of  the  goddess"  is

lodorus,    i.    5;    Ovid,    Fasti,    iv.    425  dated  the  seventh  day  of  the  month  Dius,

sqq.;  id.,  Metain.  v.  385  sqq.  and  the  "descent  of  the  goddess"  the

3  A  third,  according  to  Homer,  H.  fourth  day  of  the  month   Hephaestius

to  Demeter,    399,   and  Apollodorus,  i.  \y^ .Yxo(t\\n^x,Les  Inscriptions  Grecqnes

5.  3  ;  a  half,  according  to  Ovid,  Fasti,  dit  Louvre,  No.  33,  p.  50  sq.).
iv.  614  ;  id.,  Metam.x.  ^6"] ;   Hyginus,  '^  Alythol.  Forschiingen,  ]«.  zqz  sqq.

Fab.   146.  •'  Etymol.  Magnum,  p.  264.   12  sq.


I70  THE  CORN-MOTHER  chap.

for  the  root  of  the  word  seems  to  have  been  applied  to
different  kinds  of  grain  by  different  branches  of  the  Aryans,
and  even  of  the  Greeks  themselves.^  As  Crete  appears  to
have  been  one  of  the  most  ancient  seats  of  the  worship  of
Demeter,"  it  is  not  surprising  that  her  name  should  be  of
Cretan  origin.  This  explanation  of  the  name  Demeter  is
supported  by  a  host  of-  analogies  which  the  diligence  of
Mannhardt  has  collected  from  modern  European  folk-lore,
and  of  which  the  following  are  specimens.  In  Germany  the
corn  is  very  commonly  personified  under  the  name  of  the
Corn-mother.  Thus  in  spring,  when  the  corn  waves  in  the
wind,  the  peasants  say,  "  There  comes  the  Corn-mother,"  or
"  The  Corn-mother  is  running  over  the  field,"  or  "  The
Corn-mother  is  going  through  the  corn."^  When  children
wish  to  go  into  the  fields  to  pull  the  blue  corn-flowers
or  the  red  poppies,  they  are  told  not  to  do  so,  because
the  Corn-mother  is  sitting  in  the  corn  and  will  catch  them.'*
Or  again  she  is  called,  according  to  the  crop,  the  Rye-
mother  or  the  Pea-mother,  and  children  are  warned  against
straying  in  the  rye  or  among  the  peas  by  threats  of  the
Rye-mother  or  the  Pea-mother.  In  Norway  also  the  Pea-
mother  is  said  to  sit  among  the  peas.^  Similar  expressions
are  current  among  the  Slavs.  The  Poles  and  Czechs  warn
children  against  the  Corn-mother  who  sits  in  the  corn.  Or
they  call  her  the  old  Corn-woman,  and  say  that  she  sits  in
the  corn  and  strangles  the  children  who  tread  it  down.*^^
The  Lithuanians  say,  "  The  Old  Rye-woman  sits  in  the
corn."''  Again  the  Corn-mother  is  believed  to  make  the
crop  grow.  Thus  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Magdeburg  it  is
sometimes  said,  "  It  will  be  a  good  year  for  flax  ;  the  Flax-
mother  has   been   seen."      At   Dinkelsblihl,  in  Bavaria,  down

1   O.    Schrader,    Sprachverglcichityig  p.    296.        Cp.     O.     Hartung,     "  Zur

und   Urgeschiclite'^   (Jena,    1890),    pp.  \'olkskunde    aus    Anhalt,"    Zeitschrift

409,   422;    V.    Helm,    Kulttirpjlanzen  des  J'ereuis  fi'ir  VoIkskinidc,\n.  {i?,g-]),

und  Haiisthiere   in    ihrein    Uebergang  p.   150.

ausAsien,^  p.    65.      ^■r)o.[  is  doubtless  4  w.    Mannhardt,    MythoL    Forsch.

equivalent       etymologically     to     ffiai,  „    207

which  is  often  taken  to  be  siielt,  lait  •    ,,  ■  ,

.,•  ^  •  •'  Ihid.  p.  207  so.

this  seems  uncertain.  r      yi     1

-   Hesiod,    Theog.    971;   Lenormant  "  /(^/fl'.  p.  299.    Compare  R.  Andree,

in     Daremberg    et     Saglio,    /)/</.    dcs  Braimschiveiger  Volkskunde,  p.  281.
Antic] ttith,  i.  pt.  ii.  p.   1029.  *■  W.    Mannhardt,    MythoL    Forsih.

3  W.    Mannhardt,    MythoL    Forsch.  p.  300.


Ill  THE  CORN-MOTHER  171

to  twenty-five  or  thirty  years  ago,  people  believed  that  when
the  crops  on  a  particular  farm  compared  unfavourably  with
those  of  the  neighbourhood,  the  reason  was  that  the  Corn-
mother  had  punished  the  farmer  for  his  sins/  In  a  village
of  Styria  it  is  said  that  the  Corn-mother,  in  the  shape  of  a
female  puppet  made  out  of  the  last  sheaf  of  corn  and  dressed
in  white,  may  be  seen  at  midnight  in  the  corn-fields,  which
she  fertilises  by  passing  through  them  ;  but  if  she  is  angry
with  a  farmer,  she  withers  up  all  his  corn."

Further,  the  Corn-mother  plays  an  important  part  in
harvest  customs.  She  is  believed  to  be  present  in  the
handful  of  corn  which  is  left  standing  last  on  the  field  ;  and
with  the  cutting  of  this  last  handful  she  is  caught,  or  driven
away,  or  killed.  In  the  first  of  these  cases,  the  last  sheaf
is  carried  joyfully  home  and  honoured  as  a  divine  being.
It  is  placed  in  the  barn,  and  at  threshing  the  corn-spirit
appears  again.^  In  the  Hanoverian  district  of  Hadeln  the
reapers  stand  round  the  last  sheaf  and  beat  it  with  sticks
in  order  to  drive  the  Corn-mother  out  of  it.  They  call  to
each  other,  "  There  she  is  !  hit  her  !  Take  care  she  doesn't
catch  you  ! "  The  beating  goes  on  till  the  grain  is  com-
pletely threshed  out  ;  then  the  Corn-mother  is  believed  to
be  driven  away.'*  In  the  neighbourhood  of  Danzig  the
person  who  cuts  the  last  ears  of  corn  makes  them  into  a
doll,  which  is  called  the  Corn-mother  or  the  Old  Woman
and  is  brought  home  on  the  last  waggon.^  In  some  parts
of  Holstein  the  last  sheaf  is  dressed  in  woman's  clothes  and
called  the  Corn-mother.  It  is  carried  home  on  the  last
waggon,  and  then  thoroughly  drenched  with  water.  The
drenching  with  water  is  doubtless  a  rain-charm.*"  In  the
district  of  Bruck  in  Styria  the  last  sheaf,  called  the  Corn-
mother,  is  made  up  into  the  shape  of  a  woman  by  the
oldest  married  woman  in  the  village,  of  an  age  from  fifty  to
fifty-five  years.  The  finest  ears  are  plucked  out  of  it  and
made  into  a  wreath,  which,  twined  with  flowers,  is  carried  on
her  head  by  the  prettiest  girl   of  the  village  to  the  farmer  or

1  W.    Mannhardt,    Mythol.    Forsih.  ^  Ibid.  p.  316.

P-  310-  -    7/  ■  7  ^

■>    r,  ■,  r-  ^  ■'   Ibid.  p.  316  sq.

"  Ibid.    p.     310  sq.        Compare    O.  1     j         y

Hartung,  I.e.  ''  Ibid.    p.    317.      As    to   sucli    rain-

•*   W.  Mannhardt,  op.  cit.  p.  316.  charms,  see  above,  p.   121  sqq.


172  THE  CORN-MOTHER  chap.

squire,  while  the  Corn-mother  is  laid  down  in  the  barn  to
keep  ofT  the  mice.^  In  other  villages  of  the  same  district
the  Corn-mother,  at  the  close  of  harvest,  is  carried  by  two
lads  at  the  top  of  a  pole.  They  march  behind  the  girl  who
wears  the  wreath  to  the  squire's  house,  and  while  he  receives
the  wreath  and  hangs  it  up  in  the  hall,  the  Corn-mother  is
placed  on  the  top  of  a  pile  of  wood,  where  she  is  the  centre
of  the  harvest  supper  and  dance.  Afterwards  she  is  hung
up  in  the  barn  and  remains  there  till  the  threshing  is  over.
The  man  who  gives  the  last  stroke  at  threshing  is  called  the
son  of  the  Corn-mother  ;  he  is  tied  up  in  the  Corn-mother,
beaten,  and  carried  through  the  village.  The  wreath  is
dedicated  in  church  on  the  following  Sunday ;  and  on
Easter  Eve  the  grain  is  rubbed  out  of  it  by  a  seven  years'
old  girl  and  scattered  amongst  the  young  corn.  At  Christ-
mas the  straw  of  the  wreath  is  placed  in  the  manger  to
make  the  cattle  thrive.^  Here  the  fertilising  power  of  the
Corn-mother  is  plainly  brought  out  by  scattering  the  seed
taken  from  her  body  (for  the  wreath  is  made  out  of  the
Corn-mother)  among  the  new  corn  ;  and  her  influence  over
animal  life  is  indicated  by  placing  the  straw  in  the  manger.
At  Westerhiisen,  in  Saxony,  the  last  corn  cut  is  made  in  the
shape  of  a  woman  decked  with  ribbons  and  cloth.  It  is
fastened  to  a  pole  and  brought  home  on  the  last  waggon.
One  of  the  people  in  the  waggon  keeps  waving  the  pole,
so  that  the  figure  moves  as  if  alive.  It  is  placed  on  the
threshing-floor,  and  stays  there  till  the  threshing  is  done.^
Amongst  the  Slavs  also  the  last  sheaf  is  known  as  the
Rye  -  mother,  the  Wheat  -  mother,  the  Oats  -  mother,  the
Barley-mother,  and  so  on,  according  to  the  crop.  In  the
district  of  Tarnow,  Galicia,  the  wreath  made  out  of  the  last
stalks  is  called  the  Wheat -mother,  Rye -mother,  or  Pea-
mother.  It  is  placed  on  a  girl's  head  and  kept  till  spring,
when  some  of  the  grain  is  mixed  with  the  seed-corn.*  Here
again  the  fertilising  power  of  the  Corn-mother  is  indicated.
In  France,  also,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Auxerre,  the  last
sheaf  goes  by  the  name  of  the  Mother  of  the  Wheat,  Mother
of  the   Barley,  Mother  of  the   Rye,  or   Mother  of   the  Oats.

1  W.  Mannliardt,  Mytho'ogisihe  Forschuiigeu,  p.  317.
-   Ibid.  p.  317  sq.  '^Ibid.  p.  318.  +   Ibid.


J


Ill  THE  HARVEST-MOTHER  173

They  leave  it  standing  in  the  field  till  the  last  waggon  is
about  to  wend  homewards.  Then  they  make  a  puppet  out
of  it,  dress  it  with  clothes  belonging  to  the  farmer,  and  adorn
it  with  a  crown  and  a  blue  or  white  scarf.  A  branch  of  a  tree
is  stuck  in  the  breast  of  the  puppet,  which  is  now  called  the
Ceres.  At  the  dance  in  the  evening  the  Ceres  is  set  in  the
middle  of  the  floor,  and  the  reaper  who  reaped  fastest  dances
round  it  with  the  prettiest  girl  for  his  partner.  After  the
dance  a  pyre  is  made.  All  the  girls,  each  wearing  a  wreath,
strip  the  puppet,  pull  it  to  pieces,  and  place  it  on  the  pyre,
along  with  the  flowers  with  which  it  was  adorned.  Then
the  girl  who  was  the  first  to  finish  reaping  sets  fire  to  the
pile,  and  all  pray  that  Ceres  may  give  a  fruitful  year.  Here,
as  Mannhardt  observes,  the  old  custom  has  remained  intact,
though  the  name  Ceres  is  a  bit  of  schoolmaster's  learning.^
In  Upper  Brittany  the  last  sheaf  is  always  made  into  human
shape  ;  but  if  the  farmer  is  a  married  man,  it  is  made  double
and  consists  of  a  little  corn-puppet  placed  inside  of  a  large
one.  This  is  called  the  Mother-sheaf.  It  is  delivered  to  the
farmer's  wife,  who  unties  it  and  gives  drink-money  in  return."

Sometimes  the  last  sheaf  is  called,  not  the  Corn-mother,
but  the  Harvest  -  mother  or  the  Great  Mother.  In  the
province  of  Osnabriick,  Hanover,  it  is  called  the  Harvest-
mother  ;  it  is  made  up  in  female  form,  and  then  the  reapers
dance  about  with  it.  In  some  part  of  Westphalia  the  last
sheaf  at  the  rye-harvest  is  made  especially  heavy  by  fasten-
ing stones  in  it.  They  bring  it  home  on  the  last  waggon
and  call  it  the  Great  Mother,  though  they  do  not  fashion
it  into  any  special  shape.  In  the  district  of  Erfurt  a  very
heavy  sheaf,  not  necessarily  the  last,  is  called  the  Great
Mother,  and  is  carried  on  the  last  waggon  to  the  barn,
where  all  hands  lift  it  down  amid  a  fire  of  jokes.^

Sometimes  again  the  last  sheaf  is  called  the  Grand-
mother, and  is  adorned  with  flowers,  ribbons,  and  a  woman's
apron.  In  East  Prussia,  at  the  rye  or  wheat  harvest,  the
reapers  call  out  to  the  woman  who  binds  the  last  sheaf,
"  You    are   getting   the   Old  Grandmother."      In    the   neigh-

1   W.  Mannhardt,  op.  cit.  p.  318  sq.

^  Sebillot,  Contmnes  popidaires  de  la  Haitte- B retagtic ,  p.  306.

3  W.  Mannhardt,  M.F.  p.  319.


174  THE  OLD   WOMAN  chap.

bourhood  of  Magdeburg  the  men  and  women  servants  strive
who  shall  get  the  last  sheaf,  called  the  Grandmother.  Who-
ever gets  it  will  be  married  in  the  next  year,  but  his  or
her  spouse  will  be  old  ;  if  a  girl  gets  it,  she  will  marry  a
widower  ;  if  a  man  gets  it,  he  will  marry  an  old  crone.  In
Silesia  the  Grandmother — a  huge  bundle  made  up  of  three
or  four  sheaves  by  the  person  who  tied  the  last  sheaf— was
formerly  fashioned  into  a  rude  likeness  of  the  human  form.^
In  the  neighbourhood  of  Belfast  the  last  sheaf  sometimes
goes  by  the  name  of  the  Granny.  It  is  not  cut  in  the  usual
way,  but  all  the  reapers  throw  their  sickles  at  it  and  try  to
bring  it  down.  It  is  plaited  and  kept  till  the  (next  ?)  autumn.
Whoever  gets  it  will  marry  in  the  course  of  the  year."

Oftener  the  last  sheaf  is  called  the  Old  Woman  or  the
Old  Man.  In  Germany  it  is  frequently  shaped  and  dressed
as  a  woman,  and  the  person  who  cuts  it  or  binds  it  is  said  to
"get  the  Old  Woman."^  At  Altisheim,  in  Swabia,  when  all
the  corn  of  a  farm  has  been  cut  except  a  single  strip,  all
the  reapers  stand  in  a  row  before  the  strip  ;  each  cuts  his
share  rapidly,  and  he  who  gives  the  last  cut  "  has  the  Old
Woman.""^  When  the  sheaves  are  being  set  up  in  heaps,
the  person  who  gets  hold  of  the  Old  Woman,  which  is  the
largest  and  thickest  of  all  the  sheaves,  is  jeered  at  by  the
rest,  who  sing  out  to  him,  "  He  has  the  Old  Woman  and
must  keep  her."^  The  woman  who  binds  the  last  sheaf  is
sometimes  herself  called  the  Old  Woman,  and  it  is  said
that  she  will  be  married  in  the  next  year.'^  In  Neusaass,
West  Prussia,  both  the  last  sheaf — which  is  dressed  up  in
jacket,  hat,  and  ribbons — and  the  woman  who  binds  it  are
called  the  Old  Woman.  Together  they  are  brought  home
on  the  last  waggon  and  are  drenched  with  water."  At
Hornkampe,  near  Tiegenhof  (West  Prussia),  when  a  man  or
woman  lags  behind  the  rest  in  binding  the  corn,  the  other
reapers  dress  up  the  last  sheaf  in  the  form  of  a  man  or
woman,  and  this  figure  goes  by  the  laggard's  name,  as  "  the
old  Michael,"  "  the  idle  Trine."      It  is  brought  home  on  the

1  W.  Mannhardt,  ]M.1\  p.  320.  *   Ibid.  p.  323;   V&nztx,  Beiirag  ztir

^  JInd  p    -''I  deittschen  Mythologie,  ii.  p.  219,  §403.

'  ^'  •'"'   ■  "  W.  Mannhardt,  op.  cit.  p.  325.

3  Ibid.  pp.  321,  323,  325  sq.  C   Jl,i^l  p_  223.              !■   Ibid.


Ill  THE  OLD   WOMAN  175

last  waggon,  and,  as  it  nears  the  house,  the  bystanders  call
out  to  the  laggard,  "  You  have  got  the  Old  Woman  and
must  keep  her."  ^  In  Brandenburg  the  young  folks  on
the  harvest  -  field  race  towards  a  sheaf  and  jump  over  it.
The  last  to  jump  over  it  has  to  carry  a  straw  puppet,
adorned  with  ribbons,  to  the  farmer  and  deliver  it  to
him  while  he  recites  some  verses.  Of  the  person  who  thus
carries  the  puppet  it  is  said  that  "  he  has  the  Old  Man."
Probably  the  puppet  is  or  used  to  be  made  out  of  the  last
corn  cut."  In  many  districts  of  Saxony  the  last  sheaf  used
to  be  adorned  with  ribbons  and  set  upright  so  as  to  look
like  a  man.  It  was  then  known  as  "  the  Old  Man,"
and  the  young  women  brought  it  back  in  procession  to
the  farm,  singing  as  they  went,  "  Now  we  are  bringing  the
Old  Man."'

In  these  customs,  as  Mannhardt  has  remarked,  the
person  who  is  called  by  the  same  name  as  the  last  sheaf
and  sits  beside  it  on  the  last  waggon  is  obviously  identified
with  it ;  he  or  she  represents  the  corn-spirit  which  has  been
caught  in  the  last  sheaf ;  in  other  words,  the  corn-spirit  is
represented  in  duplicate,  by  a  human  being  and  by  a  sheaf.*
The  identification  of  the  person  with  the  sheaf  is  made  still
clearer  by  the  custom  of  wrapping  up  in  the  last  sheaf  the
person  who  cuts  or  binds  it.  Thus  at  Hermsdorf  in  Silesia
it  used  to  be  the  regular  custom  to  tie  up  in  the  last  sheaf
the  wom.an  who  had  bound  it.'^  At  Weiden,  in  Bavaria,  it
is  the  cutter,  not  the  binder,  of  the  last  sheaf  who  is  tied
up  in  it.'^  Here  the  person  wrapt  up  in  the  corn  repre-
sents the  corn-spirit,  exactly  as  a  person  wrapt  in  branches
or  leaves  represents  the  tree-spirit.'

The  last  sheaf,  designated  as  the  Old  Woman,  is  often
distinguished  from  the  other  sheaves  by  its  size  and  weight.
Thus  in  some  villages  of  West  Prussia  the  Old  Woman  is
made  twice  as  long  and  thick  as  a  common  sheaf,  and  a
stone  is  fastened  in  the  middle  of  it.      Sometimes  it  is  made

1  W.  Mannhardt,  op.  cit.  p.  323  sq.  ■'   K.  Haiipt,  Sageiilntc/i  der  LausitZy

i.  p.  233,  No.  277  note.

-  H.  Prahn,   "  Glaube    unci    Brauch  *  W.  Mannhardt,  <?/.  c/L  p.  324.

in  der  Mark  Brandenburg,"  Zeitschrift  ^  Ibid.  p.  320.

des  Vereins  fur  Volkskiiiide,  i.    (1891),  "  Ibid.  p.  325.

p.   186  sq.  ^   See  vol.  i.  p.  209  sqq.


176  THE  OLD   WOMAN  chap.

so  heavy  that  a  man  can  barely  hft  it.^  At  Alt-Pillau,
in  Samland,  eight  or  nine  sheaves  are  often  tied  together
to  make  the  Old  Woman,  and  the  man  who  sets  it  up
grumbles  at  its  weight."^  At  Itzgrund,  in  Saxe  -  Coburg,
the  last  sheaf,  called  the  Old  Woman,  is  made  large  with
the  express  intention  of  thereby  securing  a  good  crop  next
year.^  Thus  the  custom  of  making  the  last  sheaf  un-
usually large  or  heavy  is  a  charm,  working  by  sym-
pathetic magic,  to  ensure  a  large  and  heavy  crop  at  the
following  harvest.

In  Denmark  also  the  last  sheaf  is  made  larger  than  the
others,  and  is  called  the  Old  Rye-woman  or  the  Old  Barley-
woman.  No  one  likes  to  bind  it,  because  whoever  does  so
will  be  sure,  they  think,  to  marry  an  old  man  or  an  old
woman.  Sometimes  the  last  wheat-sheaf,  called  the  Old
Wheat-woman,  is  made  up  in  human  shape,  with  head,
arms,  and  legs,  and  being  dressed  in  clothes  is  carried
home  on  the  last  waggon,  while  the  harvesters  sit  beside
it  drinking  and  huzzaing.'*  Of  the  person  who  binds  the
last  sheaf  it  is  said,  "  She  or  he  is  the  Old  Rye-woman."  ^

In  Scotland,  when  the  last  corn  was  cut  after  Hallowmas,
the  female  figure  made  out  of  it  was  sometimes  called  the
Carlin  or  Carline,  that  is,  the  Old  Woman.  But  if  cut
before  Hallowmas,  it  was  called  the  Maiden  ;  if  cut  after
sunset,  it  was  called  the  Witch,  being  supposed  to  bring  bad
luck.^  Among  the  Highlanders  of  Scotland  the  last  corn
cut  at  harvest  is  known  either  as  the  Old  Wife  {CailleacJi)
or  as  the  Maiden  ;  on  the  whole  the  former  name  seems  to
prevail  in  the  western  and  the  latter  in  the  central  and
eastern  districts.  Of  the  Maiden  we  shall  speak  presently  ;
here  we  are  dealing  with  the  Old  Wife.  In  Bernera,  on  the
west  of  Lewis,  the  harvest  rejoicing  goes  by  the  name  of  the
Old  Wife  (^CailleacJi)  from  the  last  sheaf  cut,  whether  in  a
township,    farm,    or    croft.      Where    there    are   a   number    of

1  W.  Mannhardt,  op.  cit.  p.  324.  nothing  as  to  the  shape  or  name  of  the

-  Ibid.  p.  324  sq.  sheaf.

3  Ibid.  p.  325.     The  author  of  Die  4  Mannhardt,  op.  cit.  p.  327.

ircstricoclte  Rockeii philosophic  mentions  -     t,  ■  1  n

(p.  091)  the  German  superstition  that  '     ^

the  last  sheaf  should  be  made  large  in  "^  Jamieson,  Dictionary  of  the  Scottish
order  that  all  the  sheaves  next  year  Language,  s.v.  "  JMaiden" ;  W.  Mann-
may  be  of  the  same  size  ;  but  he  says  hardt,  Mythol.  Forschungeii,  p.  326.


Ill  THE  CAILLEACH  177

ci'ofts  beside  each  other,  there  is  always  great  rivahy  as  to
who  shall  first  finish  reaping,  and  so  have  the  Old  Wife
before  his  neighbours.  Some  people  even  go  out  on  a  clear
night  to  reap  their  fields  after  their  neighbours  have  retired
to  rest,  in  order  that  they  may  have  the  Old  Wife  first.
More  neighbourly  habits,  however,  usually  prevail,  and  as
each  finishes  his  own  fields  he  goes  to  the  help  of  another,
till  the  whole  crop  is  cut.  The  reaping  is  still  done  with  the
sickle.  When  the  corn  has  been  cut  on  all  the  crofts,  the  last
sheaf  is  dressed  up  to  look  as  like  an  old  woman  as  possible.
She  wears  a  white  cap,  a  dress,  an  apron,  and  a  little  shawl
over  the  shoulders  fastened  with  a  sprig  of  heather.  The
apron  is  tucked  up  to  form  a  pocket,  which  is  stuffed  with
bread  and  cheese.  A  sickle,  stuck  in  the  string  of  the  apron
at  the  back,  completes  her  equipment.  This  costume  and
outfit  mean  that  the  Old  Wife  is  ready  to  bear  a  hand
in  the  work  of  harvesting.  At  the  feast  which  follows,  the
Old  Wife  is  placed  at  the  Jhead  of  the  table,  and  as  the
whisky  goes  round  each  of  the  company  drinks  to  her,
saying,  "  Here's  to  the  one  that  has  helped  us  with  the
harvest."  When  the  table  has  been  cleared  away  and
dancing  begins,  one  of  the  lads  leads  out  the  Old  Wife  and
dances  with  her ;  and  if  the  night  is  fine  the  party  will
sometimes  go  out  and  march  in  a  body  to  a  considerable
distance,  singing  harvest-songs,  while  one  of  them  carries  the
Old  Wife  on  his  back.  When  the  Harvest-Home  is  over,
the  Old  Wife  is  shorn  of  her  gear  and  used  for  ordinary
purposes.^  In  the  island  of  Islay  the  last  corn  cut  also  goes
by  the  name  of  the  Old  Wife  {Cailleach),  and  when  she  has
done  her  duty  at  harvest  she  is  hung  up  on  the  wall  and
stays  there  till  the  time  comes  to  plough  the  fields  for  the
next  year's  crop.  Then  she  is  taken  down,  and  on  the  first
day  the  men  go  to  plough  she  is  divided  among  them  by  the
mistress  of  the  house.  They  take  her  in  their  pockets  and
give  her  to  the  horses  to  eat  when  they  reach  the  field.  This
is  supposed  to  secure  good  luck  for  the  next  harvest,  and  is
understood  to  be  the  proper  end  of  the  Old  Wife.^  In
Kintyre  also  the  name  of  the  Old  Wife   is   given  to  the  last

^  R.  C.  Maclagan,  "Notes  on  folk-       Folk-lore,  vi.  (1895),  P-  '49  ^'I-
lore  objects  collected   in   Argyleshire,"  ^  j^_  q    Maclagan,  op.  tit.  p.   151.

VOL.  II  N


178  THE  WRACH  chap.

corn  cut.^  On  the  shores  of  the  beautiful  Loch  Awe,  a  long
sheet  of  water,  winding  among  soft  green  hills,  above  which
the  giant  Ben  Cruachan  towers  bold  and  rugged  on  the
north,  the  harvest  custom  is  somewhat  different.  The  name
of  the  Old  Wife  {CailleacJi)  is  here  bestowed,  not  on  the  last
corn  cut,  but  on  the  reaper  who  is  the  last  to  finish.  He
bears  it  as  a  term  of  reproach,  and  is  not  privileged  to  reap
the  last  ears  left  standing.  On  the  contrary  these  are  cut
by  the  reaper  who  was  the  first  to  finish  his  spagh  or  strip
(literally  '*  claw  "),  and  out  of  them  is  fashioned  the  Maiden,
which  is  afterwards  hung  up,  according  to  one  statement,
"  for  the  purpose  of  preventing  the  death  of  horses  in
spring."  '^  In  Caithness  the  person  who  cuts  the  last  sheaf
is  called  Winter  and  retains  the  name  till  the  next  harvest.^
In  North  Pembrokeshire  a  tuft  of  the  last  corn  cut,  from  six
to  twelve  inches  long,  is  plaited  and  goes  by  the  name  of  the
Hag  {wracJi)  ;  and  quaint  old  customs  used  to  be  practised
with  it  within  the  memory  of  many  persons  still  alive.
Great  was  the  excitement  among  the  reapers  when  the  last
patch  of  standing  corn  was  reached.  All  in  turn  threw
their  sickles  at  it,  and  the  one  who  succeeded  in  cutting  it
received  a  jug  of  home-brewed  ale.  The  Hag  (wrack)  was
then  hurriedly  made  and  taken  to  a  neighbouring  farm,
where  the  reapers  were  still  busy  at  their  work.  This  was
generally  done  by  the  ploughman  ;  but  he  had  to  be  very
careful  not  to  be  observed  by  his  neighbours,  for  if  they  saw
him  coming  and  had  the  least  suspicion  of  his  errand  they
would  soon  make  him  retrace  his  steps.  Creeping  stealthily
up  behind  a  fence  he  waited  till  the  foreman  of  his  neigh-
bour's reapers  was  just  opposite  him  and  within  easy  reach.
Then  he  suddenly  threw  the  Hag  over  the  fence  and,  if
possible,  upon  the  foreman's  sickle,  crying  out

"  Boren  y  coHais  /,
Hwyr  y  delynais  /,
Ar  ei  gwar  hi."

On    that  he  took    to   his   heels  and  made   off  as   fast   as   he
could   run,   and  he  was   a   lucky  man    if  he   escaped  without

1  R.  C.  Maclagan,  op.  cif.  p.   149.  ■*  J.  '^\z.Q.^OTi?\'\,  Religion  and  Afyth,

2  Ibid.  p.   151  scj.  p.   141.


I


Ill  THE   WRACH


179


being  caught  or  cut  by  the  flying  sickles  which  the  infuriated
reapers  hurled  after  him.  In  other  cases  the  Hag  was
brought  home  to  the  farm-house  by  one  of  the  reapers.  He
did  his  best  to  bring  it  home  dry  and  without  being  observed  ;
but  he  was  apt  to  be  roughly  handled  by  the  people  of
the  house,  if  they  suspected  his  errand.  Sometimes  they
stripped  him  of  most  of  his  clothes,  sometimes  they  would
drench  him  with  water  which  had  been  carefully  stored
in  buckets  and  pans  for  the  purpose.  If,  however,  he
succeeded  in  bringing  the  Hag  in  dry  and  unobserved,  the
master  of  the  house  had  to  pay  him  a  small  fine  ;  or  some-
times a  jug  of  beer  "  from  the  cask  next  to  the  wall,"  which
seems  to  have  commonly  held  the  best  beer,  would  be
demanded  by  the  bearer.  The  Hag  was  then  carefully
hung  on  a  nail  in  the  hall  or  elsewhere  and  kept  there  all
the  year.  The  custom  of  bringing  in  the  Hag  {wrack)  into
the  house  and  hanging  it  up  still  exists  at  some  farms  in
North  Pembrokeshire,  but  the  ancient  ceremonies  which  have
just  been  described  are  now  discontinued.^  In  County
Antrim,  down  to  a  few  years  ago,  when  the  sickle  was  finally
expelled  by  the  reaping  machine,  the  few  stalks  of  corn  left
standing  last  on  the  field  were  plaited  together  ;  then  the
reapers,  blindfolded,  threw  their  sickles  at  the  plaited  corn,
and  whoever  happened  to  cut  it  through  took  it  home  with
him  and  put  it  over  his  door.  This  bunch  of  corn  was
called  the  Carley  ^ — probably  the  same  word  as  Carlin.

Similar  customs  are  observed  by  Slavonic  peoples.  Thus
in  Poland  the  last  sheaf  is  commonly  called  the  Baba,  that
is,  the  Old  Woman.  "  In  the  last  sheaf,"  it  is  said,  "  sits  the
Baba."  The  sheaf  itself  is  also  called  the  Baba,  and  is
sometimes  composed  of  twelve  smaller  sheaves  lashed  to-
gether.^ In  some  parts  of  Bohemia  the  Baba,  made  out  of
the  last  sheaf,  has  the  figure  of  a  woman  with  a  great  straw
hat.  It  is  carried  home  on  the  last  harvest -wacfson  and
delivered,  along  with  a  garland,  to  the  farmer  by  two  girls.
In  binding  the  sheaves   the  women   strive   not  to  be  last,  for

1   D.    Jeiikyn    Evans,    \\\    an    article  -  Communicated  by  my  friend  Prof,

entitled     "The     Harvest    Customs    of  W.  Ridgeway.

Pembrokeshire,"      Peinbroke       County  '•'■  W.       Mannhardt,       Mythologische

Guardian,  yih  December  1895.  Forsc/mnq-eii,  p.  32S.


i8o  THE  BAB  A  chap.

she  who   binds   the   last  sheaf  will   have  a  child   next  year.^
The  last  sheaf  is  tied  up  with  others  into  a  large  bundle,  and
a  green  branch    is   stuck   on    the  top  of  it."      Sometimes   the
harvesters  call  out   to   the  woman  who  binds   the  last   sheaf,
"  She  has  the   Baba,"   or  "  She  is   the  Baba."      She  has  then
to   make   a   puppet,  sometimes  in  female,  sometimes  in  male
form,  out   of  the  corn  ;    the   puppet   is   occasionally  dressed
with    clothes,    often    with    flowers    and    ribbons    only.       The
cutter  of   the   last   stalks,   as  well  as   the   binder  of  the   last
sheaf,  was  also  called  Baba  ;  and  a  doll,   called   the  Harvest-
woman,  was  made   out   of   the   last    sheaf  and    adorned  with
ribbons.      The  oldest  reaper  had  to  dance,  first  with  this  doll,
and  then  with  the  farmer's  wife.^      In  the  district   of  Cracow,
when  a  man  binds  the  last  sheaf,  they  say,  "  The  Grandfather'
is  sitting  in  it  "  ;  when  a  woman  binds  it,  they  say,  "  The  Baba
is   sitting   in   it,"   and  the  woman  herself  is   wrapt  up   in  the
sheaf,   so   that   only  her  head   projects  out  of  it.      Thus   en-
cased in  the  sheaf,  she  is  carried   on   the  last  harvest-waggon
to  the  house,  where  she  is  drenched  with  water   by  the  whole
family.      She   remains  in  the   sheaf  till  the  dance  is  over,  and
for  a  year  she  retains  the  name  of  Baba.''

In  Lithuania  the  name  for  the  last  sheaf  is  Boba  (Old
Woman),  answering  to  the  Polish  name  Baba.  The  Boba  is
said  to  sit  in  the  corn  which  is  left  standing  last.^  The
person  who  binds  the  last  sheaf  or  digs  the  last  potato  is  the
subject  of  much  banter,  and  receives  and  long  retains  the
name  of  the  Old  Rye-woman  or  the  Old  Potato-woman.*'
The  last  sheaf — the  Boba — is  made  into  the  form  of  a
woman,  carried  solemnly  through  the  village  on  the  last
harvest-waggon,  and  drenched  with  water  at  the  farmer's
house  ;  then  every  one  dances  with  it."

In  Russia  also  the  last  sheaf  is  often  shaped  and  dressed
as  a  woman,  and  carried  with  dance  and  song  to  the  farm-
house. Out  of  the  last  sheaf  the  Bulgarians  make  a  doll
which  they  call  the  Corn-queen  or  Corn-mother  ;  it  is  dressed
in  a  woman's  shirt,  carried  round  the  village,  and  then  thrown
into  the  river   in  order  to   secure  plenty  of  rain  and  dew  for

1   W.  Mannhardt,  op.  cil.  p.  328.  ^  Ibid.  p.  328  sq.  •'  //,/,/_  p_  ^29.

•*  Ibid.  p.  330.  5  /^^-^^  G  /^,-^_  p.  331.  "  J  bid.


in  THE  HARVEST  QUEEN  i8i

the  next  year's  crop.  Or  it  is  burned  and  the  ashes  strewn
on  the  fields,  doubtless  to  fertilise  them/  The  name  Queen,
as  applied  to  the  last  sheaf,  has  its  analogies  in  Northern
Europe.  Thus  Brand  quotes  from  Hutchinson's  History  of
Northumberland  the  following  :  "  I  have  seen,  in  some  places,
an  image  apparelled  in  great  finery,  crowned  with  flowers,  a
sheaf  of  corn  placed  under  her  arm,  and  a  scycle  in  her  hand,
carried  out  of  the  village  in  the  morning  of  the  conclusive
reaping  day,  with  music  and  much  clamour  of  the  reapers,
into  the  field,  where  it  stands  fixed  on  a  pole  all  day,  and
when  the  reaping  is  done,  is  brought  home  in  like  manner.
This  they  call  the  Harvest  Queen,  and  it  represents  the
Roman  Ceres."  "  From  Cambridge  also  Dr.  E.  D.  Clarke
reported  that  "  at  the  Hawkie  [harvest-home],  as  it  is  called,
I  have  seen  a  clown  dressed  in  woman's  clothes,  having  his
face  painted,  his  head  decorated  with  ears  of  corn,  and  bear-
ing about  him  other  symbols  of  Ceres,  carried  in  a  waggon,
with  great  pomp  and  loud  shouts,  through  the  streets,  the
horses  being  covered  with  white  sheets  :  and  when  I  inquired
the  meaning  of  the  ceremony,  was  answered  by  the  people,
that  they  were  drawing  the  Harvest  Queen."  ^

Often  customs  of  this  sort  are  practised,  not  on  the
harvest -field,  but  on  the  threshing-floor.  The  spirit  of  the
corn,  fleeing  before  the  reapers  as  they  cut  down  the  ripe
grain,  quits  the  reaped  corn  and  takes  refuge  in  the  barn,
where  it  appears  in  the  last  sheaf  threshed,  either  to  perish
under  the  blows  of  the  flail  or  to  flee  thence  to  the  still  un-
threshed  corn  of  a  neighbouring  farm."*  Thus  the  last  corn
to  be  threshed  is  called  the  Mother-Corn  or  the  Old  Woman.
Sometimes  the  person  who  gives  the  last  stroke  with  the
flail  is  called  the  Old  Woman,  and  is  wrapt  in  the  straw  of
the  last  sheaf,  or  has  a  bundle  of  straw  fastened  on  his  back.
Whether  wrapt  in  the  straw  or  carrying  it  on  his  back,  he  is
carted  through  the  village  amid  general  laughter.  In  some
districts  of  Bavaria,  Thuringen,  etc.,  the  man  who  threshes
the   last   sheaf  is   said   to   have   the   Old  Woman  or  the  Old

^  W.  Mannhardt,  op.  cit.  p.  332.  Bohn's  ed.

2  Hutchinson,  History  of  Northiitn-  '^  Quoted  by  Brand,  op.  cit.  ii.  22.

berland,    ii.    ad  finem,    17,   quoted  by  *  W.    Mannhardt,    Mythol.    Forsch.

Brand,    Popular    Antiquities,    ii.    20,  p.  333  sq.


1 82  CUSTOMS  AT  THRESHING  chap.

Corn-woman  ;  he  is  tied  up  in  straw,  carried  or  carted  about
the  village,  and  set  down  at  last  on  the  dunghill,  or  taken  to
the  threshing-floor  of  a  neighbouring  farmer  who  has  not
finished  his  threshing.^  Sometimes  in  Upper  and  Middle
Franken  a  dumpling,  baked  in  the  shape  of  an  old  woman,
is  set  before  him  ;  he  is  thus  said  to  get  the  Old  Woman."
In  Poland  the  man  who  gives  the  last  stroke  at  threshing  is
called  Baba  (Old  Woman)  ;  he  is  wrapt  in  corn  and  wheeled
through  the  village.^  Sometimes  in  Lithuania  the  last  sheaf
is  not  threshed,  but  is  fashioned  into  female  shape  and
carried  to  the  barn  of  a  neighbour  who  has  not  finished  his
threshing/  In  some  parts  of  Sweden,  when  a  stranger
woman  appears  on  the  threshing-floor,  a  flail  is  put  round
her  body,  stalks  of  corn  are  wound  round  her  neck,  a  crown
of  ears  is  placed  on  her  head,  and  the  threshers  call  out,
"  Behold  the  Corn-woman."  Here  the  stranger  woman,  thus
suddenly  appearing,  is  taken  to  be  the  corn-spirit  who  has
just  been  expelled  by  the  flails  from  the  corn-stalks.^  In
other  cases  the  farmer's  wife  represents  the  corn-spirit.
Thus  in  the  Commune  of  Saligne,  Canton  de  Poiret  (Vendee),
the  farmer's  wife,  along  with  the  last  sheaf,  is  tied  up  in  a
sheet,  placed  on  a  litter,  and  carried  to  the  threshing  machine,
under  which  she  is  shoved.  Then  the  woman  is  drawn  out
and  the  sheaf  is  threshed  by  itself,  but  the  woman  is  tossed
in  the  sheet,  as  if  she  were  being  winnowed.''  It  would  be
impossible  to  express  more  clearly  the  identification  of  the
woman  with  the  corn  than  by  this  graphic  imitation  of
threshing  and  winnowing  her.

In  these  customs  the  spirit  of  the  ripe  corn  is  regarded
as  old,  or  at  least  as  of  mature  age.  Hence  the  names  of
Mother,  Grandmother,  Old  Woman,  and  so  forth.  But  in
other  cases  the  corn-spirit  is  conceived  as  young,  sometimes
as  a  child  who  is  separated  from  its  mother  by  the  stroke  of
the  sickle.  This  last  view  appears  in  the  Polish  custom  of
calling  out  to  the  man  who  cuts  the  last  handful  of  corn,
"  You  have  cut  the  navel-string."^      In  some  districts  of  West

1   W.  Mannhardt,  op.  cit.  p.  334.  ■•   Ihid.  p.  336.             ^  Ibid.  p.  336.

-  Bavaria,  Landes-  uiid  Volkskunde  •>   Ihid.  p.  336  ;  Baumkultus,  p.  612.

des  K'onisrreichs  Bayern,   iii.  344,  969.  "  W.  Mannhardt,  Die  A'ornddmojten,

^  VV.  Mannhardt,  op.  cit.  p.  334.  p.  28.


Ill


THE  HARVEST  CHILD


183


Prussia  the  figure  made  out  of  the  last  sheaf  is  called  the
Bastard,  and  a  boy  is  wrapt  up  in  it.  The  woman  who
binds  the  last  sheaf  and  represents  the  Corn-mother  is  told
that  she  is  about  to  be  brought  to  bed  ;  she  cries  like  a
woman  in  travail,  and  an  old  woman  in  the  character  of
grandmother  acts  as  midwife.  At  last  a  cry  is  raised  that
the  child  is  born  ;  whereupon  the  boy  who  is  tied  up  in  the
sheaf  whimpers  and  squalls  like  an  infant.  The  grand-
mother wraps  a  sack,  in  imitation  of  swaddling  bands,  round
the  pretended  baby,  who  is  carried  joyfully  to  the  barn,  lest  he
catch  cold  in  the  open  air.^  In  other  parts  of  North  Ger-
many the  last  sheaf,  or  the  puppet  made  out  of  it,  is  called
the  Child,  the  Harvest-Child,  and  so  on.  In  the  North  of
England  the  last  handful  of  corn  was  cut  by  the  prettiest
girl  and  dressed  up  as  the  Kern-Baby  or  Harvest-Doll  ;  it
was  brought  home  to  music,  set  up  in  a  conspicuous  place  at
the  harvest-supper,  and  generally  kept  in  the  parlour  for  the
rest  of  the  year.  The  girl  who  cut  it  was  the  Harvest-
Queen."  In  the  North  Riding  of  Yorkshire  the  last  sheaf
gathered  in  is  called  the  Mell- sheaf,  and  the  expression
"  We've  gotten  wer  mell  "  is  as  much  as  to  say  "  The  harvest  is
finished."  Formerly  a  Mell-doll  was  made  out  of  a  sheaf  of
corn,  decked  with  flowers,  arrayed  in  the  costume  of  a  reaper,
and  carried  with  music  and  dancing  to  the  scene  of  the
harvest-supper,  which   also  went   by   the  name   of  the  Mell.^


1  W.  Mannhardt,  I.e.

2  Ibid.  ;  Ylendievson,  Folk-lore  of  the
Northern  Counties,  p.  87  ;  Brand,
Popular  Antiquities,  ii.  20,  Bohn's
ed.  ;  Chambers's  Book  of  Days,  ii.
2,77  sq.  Cp.  "Notes  on  Harvest  Cus-
toms," Folk-lore  Journal,  \i\.  (1889),
p.  50.  Dr.  Murray  of  the  Neic  English
Dictionary  kindly  informs  me  that  the
popular  etymology  which  identifies
"kern"  or  "kirn"  in  this  sense  with
"corn"  is  entirely  mistaken  ;  and  that
"baby"  or  "babbie"  in  the  same
phrase  means  only  "doll,"  not  "in-
fant." He  writes  :  "  Kirn-habbie
does  not  mean  'corn -baby,'  but
merely  Kirn-doll,  hamest-hoine  doll.
Bab,  babbie  was  even  in  my  youth  the
regular  name  for  'doll'  in  the  district,
as   it    was   formerly    in    England  ;    the


only  woman  who  sold  dolls  in  Hawick
early  in  the  century,  and  whose  toy-
shop all  bairns  knew,  was  known  as
'  Betty  o'  the  Babs,'  Betty  of  the  dolls."
3  M.  C.  F.  Morris,  Yorkshire  Folk-
talk,  pp.  212-214;  W.  Henderson,
Folk-lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of
England,  p.  88  sq.  ;  Brand,  Popular
Antiquities,  ii.  27  sqq.  The  sheaf
out  of  which  the  Mell-doll  was  made
was  no  doubt  the  Mell-sheaf,  though
this  is  not  expressly  said.  Dr.  Joseph
Wright,  editor  of  the  English  Dialect
Dictionary,  kindly  informs  me  that  the
word  mell  is  well  known  in  these  senses
in  all  the  northern  counties  of  England
down  to  Cheshire.  He  tells  me  that
the  proposals  to  connect  mell  with
"meal"  or  with  "maiden"  (through
a   form   like    the    German    Madel)   are


1 84  THE  MAIDEN  chap.

Ill  Kent  the  Ivy  Girl  is,  or  used  to  be,  "  a  figure  composed
of  some  of  the  best  corn  the  field  produces,  and  made  as  well
as  they  can  into  a  human  shape  ;  this  is  afterwards  curiously
dressed  by  the  women,  and  adorned  with  paper  trimmings,
cut  to  resemble  a  cap,  ruffles,  handkerchief,  etc.,  of  the  finest
lace.  It  is  brought  home  with  the  last  load  of  corn  from  the
field  upon  the  waggon,  and  they  suppose  entitles  them  to  a
supper  at  the  expense  of  the  employer."  ^  In  the  neighbour-
hood of  Balquhidder,  Perthshire,  the  last  handful  of  corn  is
cut  by  the  youngest  girl  on  the  field,  and  is  made  into  the
rude  form  of  a  female  doll,  clad  in  a  paper  dress,  and  decked
with  ribbons.  It  is  called  the  Maiden,  and  is  kept  in  the
farmhouse,  generally  above  the  chimney,  for  a  good  while,
sometimes  till  the  Maiden  of  the  next  year  is  brought  in.
The  writer  of  this  book  witnessed  the  ceremony  of  cutting
the  Maiden  at  Balquhidder  in  September  1888.^  A  lady
friend  ^  informs  me  that  as  a  young  girl  she  cut  the  Maiden
several  times  at  the  request  of  the  reapers  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  Perth.  The  name  of  the  Maiden  was  given  to  the
last  handful  of  standing  corn  ;  a  reaper  held  the  top  of  the
bunch  while  she  cut  it.  Afterwards  the  bunch  was  plaited,
decked  with  ribbons,  and  hung  up  in  a  conspicuous  place  on
the  wall  of  the  kitchen  till  the  next  Maiden  was  brought  in.
The  harvest-supper  in  this  neighbourhood  was  also  called
the  Maiden  ;  the  reapers  danced  at  it.  In  the  Highland
district  of  Lochaber  dancing  and  merry-making  on  the  last
night  of  harvest  used  to  be  universal  and  are  still  generally
observed.  Here,  we  are  told,  the  festivity  without  the
Maiden  would  be  like  a  wedding  without  the  bride.  The
Maiden  is  carried  home  with  tumultuous  rejoicing,  and  after
being  suitably  decorated  is  hung  up  in  the  barn,  where  the
dancing    usually    takes    place.      When    supper    is    over,    one

inadmissible.      When   he  wrote  to  me       mallet  is  always  called  a  mell."

(7th  November  1S99)  his  materials  on  i  Brand,  op.  cit.  ii.  21  sq.

this  subject  were  not  yet  sifted,  but  he  'i    p  11,  /   .,    r  j      ,■     1    coc\


added  :   "  When  I  come  to  weigh  all
the   evidence    connected   with   mell,    I


268  sq.


shall  probably  find  that  the  first  mean-  ■*   Mrs.  Macalister,  wife  of  Professor

ing  of  the  word   is    '  the  last  sheaf  cut  Alexander       Macalister,       Cambridge,

at  harvest,'  and  that   it  was  put  up  in  Her    recollections    refer    especially    to

the  form  of  a  »tell  to  be  thrown  at  for  the  neighbourhood  of  Glen  Farg,  some

a  prize,  and  that  mell  orij^inally  means  ten    or    twelve   miles    to   the   south    of

a  mallet ;    throughout  all   the  north  a  Perth.


Ill  THE  MAIDEN  185

of  the  company,  generally  the  oldest  man  present,  drinks
a  glass  of  whisky,  after  turning  to  the  suspended  sheaf
and  saying,  "  Here's  to  the  Maiden."  The  company  follow
his  example,  each  in  turn  drinking  to  the  Maiden.  Then
the  dancing  begins.^  On  some  farms  on  the  Gareloch,  in
Dumbartonshire,  about  seventy  years  ago  the  last  handful  of
standing  corn  was  called  the  Maiden.  It  was  divided  in  two,
plaited,  and  then  cut  with  the  sickle  by  a  girl,  who,  it  was
thought,  would  be  lucky  and  would  soon  be  married.  When
it  was  cut  the  reapers  gathered  together  and  threw  their
sickles  in  the  air.  The  Maiden  was  dressed  with  ribbons
and  hung  in  the  kitchen  near  the  roof,  where  it  was  kept  for
several  years  with  the  date  attached.  Sometimes  five  or  six
Maidens  might  be  seen  hanging  at  once  on  hooks.  The
harvest-supper  was  called  the  Kirn.^  In  other  farms  on  the
Gareloch  the  last  handful  of  corn  was  called  the  Maidenhead
or  the  Head  ;  it  was  neatly  plaited,  sometimes  decked  with
ribbons,  and  hung  in  the  kitchen  for  a  year,  when  the  grain
was  given  to  the  poultry.^  In  the  island  of  Mull  and  some
parts  of  the  mainland  of  Argyleshire  the  last  handful  of  corn
cut  is  called  the  Maiden  {Alaighdean-Bhuand).  Near  Ardri-
shaig,  in  Argyleshire,  the  Maiden  is  made  up  in  a  fanciful
three-cornered  shape,  decorated  with  ribbons,  and  hung  from
a  nail  on  the  wall.^  In  the  North  of  Scotland  the  Maiden
is  kept  till  Christmas  morning,  and  then  divided  among  the
cattle  "  to  make  them  thrive  all  the  year  round."  ^  In
Aberdeenshire  also  the  last  sheaf  (called  the  clyack  sheaf)
was  formerly  cut,  as  it  is  still  cut  at  Balquhidder,  by  the
youngest  girl  on  the  field  ;  then  it  was  dressed  in  woman's
clothes,  carried  home  in  triumph,  and  kept  till  Christmas  or
New  Year's  morning,  when  it  was  given  to  a  mare  in  foal,  or,
failing  such,  to  the  oldest  cow.*"  According  to  another
account  of  the  Aberdeenshire  custom  the  sheaf  in  question  is

^  J.  Macdonald,  Religion  and  JMyih ,  Norton,  ii.  325  sq.
p.  141  sq.  '-^  Communicated  by  Mr.  Macfarlane

^     From     information    supplied     by  of  Faslane,  Gareloch.
Archie   Leitch,  late  gardener  at   Row-  *  R.   C.  Maclagan,   in   Folk-lore,  vi.

more,   Garelochhead.      The   Kirn    was  (1895),  pp.   149,  151.
the  nam.e  of  the  harvest  festivity  in  the  •''  Jamieson,  Dictionary  of  the  Scottish

south  of  Scotland  also.     See  Lockhart's  Language,  s. v.  "Maiden."
Life  of  Scott,   ii.    184    (first    edition);  ^ '^ .  G\t^ox,m  Keznie  des  Traditions

Early  Letters  of  lliomas  Carlyle,  ed.  populaires,\\\.  (1 888),  p.  533  (485  B) ;


i86


THE   WHEAT-BRIDE


CHAP.


kept  in  the  house  until  the  first  mare  foals.  It  is  then  taken
down  and  presented  to  the  mare  as  its  first  food.  "  The
neglect  of  this  would  have  untoward  effects  upon  the  foal,
and  disastrous  consequences  upon  farm  operations  generally
for  the  season."  ^  In  Fifeshire  the  last  handful  of  corn,
known  as  the  Maiden,  is  cut  by  a  young  girl  and  made  into
the  rude  figure  of  a  doll,  tied  with  ribbons,  by  which  it  is
hung  on  the  wall  of  the  farm-kitchen  till  the  next  spring.^

A  somewhat  maturer  but  still  youthful  age  is  assigned  to
the  corn-spirit  by  the  appellations  of  Bride,  Oats-bride,  and
Wheat-bride,  which  in  Germany  and  Scotland  are  sometimes
bestowed  both  on  the  last  sheaf  and  on  the  woman  who  binds
it.^  At  wheat-harvest  near  Miiglitz,  in  Moravia,  a  small
portion  of  the  wheat  is  left  standing  after  all  the  rest  has
been  cut.  This  remnant  is  then  cut,  amid  the  rejoicing  of
the  reapers,  by  a  young  girl  who  wears  a  wreath  of  wheaten
ears  on  her  head  and  goes  by  the  name  of  the  Wheat-bride,
It  is  supposed  that  she  will  be  a  real  bride  that  same  year.*
In  the  upland  valley  of  Alpach,  in  North  Tyrol,  the  person
who  brings  the  last  sheaf  into  the  granary  is  said  to  have
the  Wheat-bride  or  the  Rye-bride  according  to  the  crop,
and  is  received  with  great  demonstrations  of  respect  and
rejoicing.  The  people  of  the  farm  go  out  to  meet  him,  bells
are  rung,  and  refreshments  offered  to  him  on  a  tray.^  Some-
times the  idea  implied  in  these  names  is  worked  out  more
fully  by  representing  the  productive  powers  of  vegetation  as
bride  and  bridegroom.  Thus  in  some  parts  of  Germany  a
man  and  woman  dressed  in  straw  and  called  the  Oats-wife
and  the  Oats-man,  or  the  Oats-bride  and  the  Oats-bridegroom,
dance  at  the  harvest  festival  ;  then  the  corn-stalks  are  plucked
from   their  bodies   till   they  stand  as  bare  as  a  stubble  field.


id. ,  Folk-lore  of  the  North-East  of  Scot-
land, p.  182.  An  old  Scottish  name  for
the  Maiden  {aiitunuialis  nyniphiila)  was
Rapci;yr)u'.  See  Fordun,  Scotichron.
\\.  4 1 8,  quoted  in  Jamieson's  Diet.
of  the  Scottish  Language,  s.v.  "  Rape-
gyrne."

1  J.  Macdonald,  Religion  and  Myth,
p.   140  sq.

-  Folk-lore  Journal,  vii.  (1889),  p.
51  ;  The  Quarterly  Reviezv,  clxxii.
(1891),  p.   195.


•^  W.  Mannhardt,  Die  Kornddmonen,
p.  30;  Folk-lore  Journal,  vii.  (1889),
p.  SO.

•*  W.  Mil  Her,  Be  it  rage  zur  Volks-
kunde  der  Deutschen  in  Mdhren,  p.
327-

■'  J.  E.  Waldfreund,  "  Volksge-
briiuche  und  Aberglaube  in  Tirol  und
dem  Salzburger  Gebirg,"  Zeitschrift
fiir  deutsche  HJythologie  und  Sitten-
kunde,  iii.  (1855),  p.  340.


Ill  CAILLEACH  AND  MAIDEN  187

In  Silesia,  the  woman  who  binds  the  last  sheaf  is  called  the
Wheat-bride  or  the  Oats-bride.  With  the  harvest  crown  on
her  head,  a  bridegroom  by  her  side,  and  attended  by  brides-
maids, she  is  brought  to  the  farmhouse  with  all  the  solemnity
of  a  wedding  procession.^

In  these  last  instances  the  corn-spirit  is  personified  in
double  form  as  male  and  female.  But  sometimes  the  spirit
appears  in  a  double  female  form  as  both  old  and  young,
corresponding  exactly  to  the  Greek  Demeter  and  Proserpine,
if  my  interpretation  of  these  goddesses  is  right.  We  have
seen  that  in  Scotland,  especially  among  the  Gaelic-speaking
population,  the  last  corn  cut  is  sometimes  called  the  Old
Wife  and  sometimes  the  Maiden.  Now  there  are  parts  of
Scotland  in  which  both  an  Old  Wife  {Cailleach)  and  a  Maiden
are  cut  at  harvest.  As  the  accounts  of  this  custom  are  not
quite  clear  and  consistent,  it  may  be  well  to  give  them  first
in  the  words  of  Dr.  R.  C.  Maclagan,  who  has  collected  them.
"Nicholson  in  his  Gaelic  Proverbs,  p.  415,  says  that  one
account  he  got  made  it  a  competition  between  the  reapers  of
two  rigs,  the  first  done  getting  the  Maiden,  the  last  the  Old
Wife.  The  better  version,  he  says,  made  it  a  competition
between  neighbouring  crofters,  and  the  man  who  had  his
harvest  done  first  sent  a  handful  of  corn,  called  the  Cailleach,
to  his  neighbour,  who  passed  it  on  till  it  landed  with  him
who  was  last.  That  man's  penalty  was  to  provide  for  the
dearth  of  the  township,  gort  a  bJiaile,  in  the  ensuing  season.
Nicholson  then  describes  the  Maiden  as  the  last  handful  cut
on  a  farm  or  croft,  and  says  it  was  given  as  a  '  Saiunseal
(Hansel)  to  the  horses  first  day  of  ploughing.'  It  was  meant
as  a  symbol  that  the  harvest  had  been  secured,  and  to  ward
off  the  fairies,  representatives  of  the  ethereal  and  unsubstantial,
till  the  time  came  to  provide  for  a  new  crop."  ^  Again,  the
Rev.  Mr.  Campbell  of  Kilchrenan,  on  Loch  Awe,  furnished
Dr.  Maclagan  with  the  following  account  of  the  Highland
customs  at  harvest.  The  recollections  of  Mrs.  MacCorquodale,
who  now  resides  at  Kilchrenan,  refer  to  the  customs  practised

'   \^  .ls\2>x\Vin'\xAi,  Die  Kornddmonen,  '^  R.  C.  Maclagan,  "Notes  on  folk -

p.  30  ;   Sommer,  Sagen,  Mdrchen  und  lore  objects  collected  in  Argyleshire,'

Gebrduche  aiis  Sachsen  iind  Thiiringcn,  Folk-lore,  vi.  (1895),  p.    152.
p.   160  sq.


1 88  CAILLEACH  AND  MAIDEN  chap.

more  than  fifty  years  ago  in  the  wild  and  gloomy  valley  of
Glencoe,  infamous  in  history  for  the  treacherous  massacre
perpetrated  there  by  the  Government  troops  in  1692.  "  Mrs,
MacCorquodale  says  that  the  rivalry  was  for  the  Maiden,  and
for  the  privilege  she  gave  of  sending  the  Cailleach  to  the
next  neighbour.  The  Maiden  was  represented  by  the  last
stalks  reaped  ;  the  Cailleach  by  a  handful  taken  at  random
from  the  field,  perhaps  the  last  rig  of  the  reaper  last  to  finish.
The  Cailleach  was  not  dressed  but  carried  after  binding  to
the  neighbour's  field.  The  Maiden  was  cut  in  the  following
manner.  All  the  reapers  gathered  round  her  and  kept  a
short  distance  from  her.  They  then  threw  their  hooks
[sickles]  at  her.  The  person  successful  in  cutting  her  down
in  this  manner  was  the  man  whose  possession  she  became.
Mrs.  MacCorquodale  understood  that  the  man  of  a  township
who  got  the  Cailleach  finally  was  supposed  to  be  doomed  to
poverty  for  his  want  of  energy.  (Gaelic  :  treubJiantas—
valour.)

"  A  sample  of  the  toast  to  the  Cailleach  at  the  harvest
entertainment  was  as  follows  :  '  The  Cailleach  is  with  .  .  .
and  is  now  with  (me)  since  I  was  the  last.  I  drink  to  her
health.  Since  she  assisted  me  in  harvest,  it  is  likely  that  it
is  with  me  she  will  abide  during  the  winter.'  In  explaining
the  above  toast  Mr.  Campbell  says  that  it  signifies  that  the
Cailleach  is  always  with  agriculturists.  '  She  has  been  with
others  before  and  is  now  with  me  (the  proposer  of  the  toast).
Though  I  did  my  best  to  avoid  her  I  welcome  her  as  my
assistant,  and  am  prepared  to  entertain  her  during  the  winter.'
Another  form  of  the  toast  was  as  follows  :  '  To  your  health,
good  wife,  who  for  harvest  has  come  to  help  us,  and  if  I  live
I'll  try  to  support  you  when  winter  comes.'

"  John  MacCorquodale,  Kilchrenan,  says  that  at  Crian-
larich  in  Strath  Fillan  they  make  a  Cailleach  of  sticks  and
a  turnip,  old  clothes  and  a  pipe.  In  this  case  the  effigy
passed  in  succession  to  seven  farms,  which  he  mentioned,  and
finally  settled  with  an  innkeeper.  The  list  suggested  that
the  upper  farms  stood  a  bad  chance,  and  perhaps  that  a
prosperous  innkeeper  could  more  easily  bear  up  against  the
reproach  and  loss  (?)  of  supporting  the  Cailleach.  Duncan
Maclntyre,  Kilchrenan,  says  that  in  one  case  where  the  last


Ill  CAILLEACH  AND  MAIDEN  189

field  to  be  reaped  was  the  most  fertile  land  on  the  farm,  the
corn  first  cut  on  it,  which  was  taken  near  the  edge,  was
reserved  to  make  a  Cailleach,  should  the  owner  be  so  happy
as  to  be  able  to  pass  her  on  to  his  neighbour.  The  last
blades  cut  were  generally  in  the  middle  or  best  part  of  the
field.  These  in  any  event  became  the  Maiden."  Lastly,
Dr.  Maclagan  observes  that  "  having  directed  the  attention  of
Miss  Kerr,  Port  Charlotte,  Islay,  to  the  practice  of  having
two  different  bunches  on  the  mainland  of  Argyle,  she  informs
me  that  in  Islay  and  Kintyre  the  last  handful  is  the  Cailleach,
and  they  have  no  Maiden.  The  same  is  the  custom  in  Ber-
nara  and  other  parts  of  the  Western  Isles,  while  in  Mull  the
last  handful  is  the  Maiden,  and  they  have  no  Cailleach.  In
North  Uist  the  habit  still  prevails  of  putting  the  Cailleach
over-night  among  the  standing  corn  of  lazy  crofters."  ^

The  general   rule   to  which   these  various  accounts  point

seems  to  be  that,  where  both  a  Maiden  and  an  Old  Wife  are

fashioned   out  of  the  reaped   corn    at   harvest,  the  Maiden   is

always  made  out  of  the  last  stalks  left  standing  and  is  kept

by  the  farmer  on  whose  land  it  was  cut ;   while  the  Old  Wife

is  made  out  of  other  stalks,  sometimes  out  of  the  first  stalks

cut,  and    is    regularly  passed    on   to   a    laggard    farmer  who

happens   to  be   still   reaping  after  his  brisker  neighbour  has

cut   all    his   corn.      Thus  while   each    farmer  keeps   his   own

Maiden,  as   the  embodiment  of  the  young  and  fruitful  spirit

of  the  corn,  he  passes  on  the  Old  Wife  as  soon  as  he  can  to

a  neighbour,  and  so  the  old  lady  may  make  the  round  of  all

the   farms   in  the  district   before  she  finds  a  place  to  lay  her

venerable   head.      The   farmer  with  whom    she   finally   takes

up  her  abode  is  of  course  the  one  who  has  been  the  last  of

all   the  countryside  to  finish  reaping  his  crops,  and  thus   the

distinction   of  entertaining  her    is   rather    an    invidious   one.

Similarly  we  saw  that  in  Pembrokeshire,  where  the  last  corn

cut   is  called  not  the  Maiden  but  the  Hag,  she   is  passed  on

hastily  to  a  neighbour  who   is  still   at  work   in  his  fields  and

who  receives  his  aged  visitor  with  anything  but   a   transport

of  joy.      If  the   Old  Wife   represents   the   corn-spirit  of  the

past  year,  as   she  probably  does  wherever  she   is   contrasted

^  R.    C.    Maclagan,     "Corn-maiden   in    Avgyleshire,"   Folk-lore,   vii.    (1S96),
p.  78  sq.


igo  SPRING  AND  HARVEST  CUSTOMS  chap.

with  and  opposed  to  a  Maiden,  it  is  natural  enough  that
her  faded  charms  should  have  less  attractions  for  the  husband-
man than  the  buxom  form  of  her  daughter,  who  may  be  ex-
pected to  become  in  her  turn  the  mother  of  the  golden  grain
when  the  revolving  year  has  brought  round  another  autumn.
The  harvest  customs  just  described  are  strikingly  analo-
gous to  the  spring  customs  which  we  reviewed  in  the  first
chapter,  (i)  As  in  the  spring  customs  the  tree-spirit  is
represented  both  by  a  tree  and  by  a  person,^  so  in  the  harvest
customs  the  corn-spirit  is  represented  both  by  the  last  sheaf
and  by  the  person  who  cuts  or  binds  or  threshes  it.  The
equivalence  of  the  person  to  the  sheaf  is  shown  by  giving  him
or  her  the  same  name  as  the  sheaf ;  by  wrapping  him  or  her
in  it  ;  and  by  the  rule  observed  in  some  places,  that  when  the
sheaf  is  called  the  Mother,  it  must  be  made  up  into  human  shape
by  the  oldest  married  woman,  but  that  when  it  is  called  the
Maiden,  it  must  be  cut  by  the  youngest  girl."  Here  the  age  of
the  personal  representative  of  the  corn-spirit  corresponds  with
that  of  the  supposed  age  of  the  corn-spirit,  just  as  the  human
victims  offered  by  the  Mexicans  to  promote  the  growth  of
the  maize  varied  with  the  age  of  the  maize.^  For  in  the
Mexican,  as  in  the  European,  custom  the  human  beings  were
probably  representatives  of  the  corn-spirit  rather  than  victims
offered  to  it.  (2)  Again,  the  same  fertilising  influence
which  the  tree-spirit  is  supposed  to  exert  over  vegetation,
cattle,  and  even  women  *  is  ascribed  to  the  corn-spirit.  Thus,
its  supposed  influence  on  vegetation  is  shown  by  the  practice
of  taking  some  of  the  grain  of  the  last  sheaf  (in  which  the
corn-spirit  is  regularly  supposed  to  be  present),  and  scattering
it  among  the  young  corn  in  spring.'''  Its  influence  on  animals
is  shown  by  giving  the  last  sheaf  to  the  first  mare  that  foals,
to  horses  at  the  first  ploughing,  or  to  cattle  at  Christmas
to  make  them  thrive.*"  Lastly,  its  influence  on  women  is
indicated  by  the  custom  of  delivering  the  Mother-sheaf,
made  into  the  likeness  of  a  pregnant  woman,  to  the  farmer's
wife  ; "'  by  the  belief  that  the  woman  who  binds  the  last  sheaf

^   See  vol.  i.  p.  207  sqq.  *  See  vol.  i.  p.   i88  sqq.

2  Above,   pp.    171,    174,    175,  176,  \  t^""'  P-  '72-

iSo,  181,  1S2,  1S4,  185    186  ;  ^^°^'^'   PP-    '72,    177   (cp.    178),

'  '  '        ^  ■^'  185  sq.

3  Above,  p.   143.  "   See  above,  p.   173.


HI  PRIMITIVE  RITUAL  191

will  have  a  child   next  year ;  ^   perhaps,  too,  by  the  idea  that
the  person  who  gets  it  will  soon  be  married.^

Plainly,  therefore,  these  spring  and  harvest  customs  are
based  on  the  same  ancient  modes  of  thought,  and  form  parts
of  the  same  primitive  heathendom,  which  was  doubtless  prac-
tised by  our  forefathers  long  before  the  dawn  of  history,  as  it  is
practised  to  this  day  by  many  of  their  descendants.  Amongst
the  marks  of  a  primitive  ritual  we  may  note  the  following  : —

1.  No  special  class  of  persons  is  set  apart  for  the  per-
formance of  the  rites  ;  in  other  words,  there  are  no  priests.
The  rites  may  be  performed  by  any  one,  as  occasion  demands.

2.  No  special  places  are  set  apart  for  the  performance
of  the  rites  ;  in  other  words,  there  are  no  temples.  The
rites  may  be  performed  anywhere,  as  occasion  demands.

3.  Spirits,  not  gods,  are  recognised.  [a)  As  distin-
guished from  gods,  spirits  are  restricted  in  their  operations
to  definite  departments  of  nature.  Their  names  are  general,
not  proper.  Their  attributes  are  generic,  rather  than  indi-
vidual ;  in  other  words,  there  is  an  indefinite  number  of
spirits  of  each  class,  and  the  individuals  of  a  class  are  all
much  alike  ;  they  have  no  definitely  marked  individuality  ;
no  accepted  traditions  are  current  as  to  their  origin,  life,  ad-
ventures, and  character,  {b)  On  the  other  hand  gods,  as
distinguished  from  spirits,  are  not  restricted  to  definite  de-
partments of  nature.  It  is  true  that  there  is  generally  some
one  department  over  which  they  preside  as  their  special
province  ;  but  they  are  not  rigorously  confined  to  it ;  they
can  exert  their  power  for  good  or  evil  in  many  other  spheres
of  nature  and  life.  Again,  they  bear  individual  or  proper
names,  such  as  Ceres,  Proserpine,  Bacchus  ;  and  their  in-
dividual characters  and  histories  are  fixed  by  current  myths
and  the  representations  of  art.

4.  The  rites  are  magical  rather  than  propitiatory.
In  other  words,  the  desired  objects  are  attained,  not  by
propitiating  the  favour  of  divine  beings  through  sacrifice,
prayer,  and  praise,  but  by  ceremonies  which,  as  has  been
explained,^  are   believed   to    influence   the    course    of   nature

i  Above,  p.  1795^.;  cp.  Kuhn, /•^j'/-  ^  Above,  pp.   174,  176,  185,  186.

fdlische  Sagen,  GehniucJie  loid  JMiirchen,
ii.  p.   185,  §  516.  3  Vol.  i.  p.  9  sqq.


192  PRIMITIVE  RITUAL  chap.

directly  through  a  physical  sympathy  or  resemblance  between
the  rite  and  the  effect  which  it  is  the  intention  of  the  rite  to
produce.

Judged  by  these  tests,  the  spring  and  harvest  customs  of
our  European  peasantry  deserve  to  rank  as  primitive.  For
no  special  class  of  persons  and  no  special  places  are  set  ex-
clusively apart  for  their  performance  ;  they  may  be  performed
by  any  one,  master  or  man,  mistress  or  maid,  boy  or  girl  ;
they  are  practised,  not  in  temples  or  churches,  but  in  the
woods  and  meadows,  beside  brooks,  in  barns,  on  harvest
fields  and  cottage  floors.  The  supernatural  beings  whose
existence  is  taken  for  granted  in  them  are  spirits  rather  than
deities  ;  their  functions  are  limited  to  certain  well-defined
departments  of  nature  ;  their  names  are  general,  like  the
Barley-mother,  the  Old  Woman,  the  Maiden,  not  proper
names  like  Ceres,  Proserpine,  Bacchus.  Their  generic  attri-
butes are  known,  but  their  individual  histories  and  characters
are  not  the  subject  of  myths.  For  they  exist  in  classes
rather  than  as  individuals,  and  the  members  of  each  class  are
indistinguishable.  For  example,  every  farm  has  its  Corn-
mother,  or  its  Old  Woman,  or  its  Maiden  ;  but  every  Corn-
mother  is  much  like  every  other  Corn-mother,  and  so  with
the  Old  Women  and  Maidens.  Lastly,  in  these  harvest,  as
in  the  spring,  customs,  the  ritual  is  magical  rather  than  pro-
pitiatory. This  is  shown  by  throwing  the  Corn-mother  into
the  river  in  order  to  secure  rain  and  dew  for  the  crops  ;^
by  making  the  Old  Woman  heavy  in  order  to  get  a  heavy
crop  next  year ; "  by  strewing  grain  from  the  last  sheaf
amongst  the  young  crops  in  spring  ;  ^  and  giving  the  last
sheaf  to  the  cattle  to  make  them  thrive."*

Further,  the  custom  of  keeping  the  puppet — the  repre-
sentative of  the  corn-spirit — till  next  harvest,  is  a  charm  to
maintain  the  corn-spirit  in  life  and  activity  throughout  the
year.^      This  is  proved  by  a  similar  custom  observed  by  the

1  Above,  p.  1 80  sq.  185  ;    W.    Mannhardt,    Korndamoncn,

9.1  ,„^  PP-    7>   26.      Amongst  the  Wends  the

-  Aoove,  p.  175  sq.  r^.      u     f  1     •   .

^         -'    ^  last    sheaf,    made    into   a   puppet    and

3  Above,  p.  172.  called    the    Old   Man,  is  hung  in  the

4  »,  ,_^    ,0-  hall  till  next  year's  Old  Man  is  broueht
*  Above,  pp.   172,  165  sq.  .      ,„,  c  V    ,     T  Tjr      7-    ,

^'  -^    ^  in   (W.   von    Schulenburg,    VVendisches

'•^  Above,   pp.    174,    179,    I  S3,   1 84,        Volkstlmm,  p.  147).


Ill  MOTHER  OF  THE  MAIZE  193

ancient  Peruvians,  and  thus  described  by  the  old  Spanish
historian  Acosta.  "  They  take  a  certain  portion  of  the  most
fruitefull  of  the  Mays  \i.e.  maize]  that  grovves  in  their  farmes,
the  which  they  put  in  a  certaine  granary  which  they  doe  call
Pima,  with  certaine  ceremonies,  watching  three  nightes  ;  they
put  this  Mays  in  the  richest  garments  they  have,  and  beeing
thus  wrapped  and  dressed,  they  worship  this  Pirua,  and  hold
it  in  great  veneration,  saying  it  is  the  mother  of  the  mays  of
their  inheritances,  and  that  by  this  means  the  mays  augments
and  is  preserved.  In  this  moneth  [the  sixth  month,  answer-
ing to  May]  they  make  a  particular  sacrifice,  and  the  witches
demaund  of  this  Pima,  if  it  hath  strength  sufficient  to  con-
tinue untill  the  next  yeare  ;  and  if  it  answers  no,  then  they
carry  this  Mays  to  the  farme  to  burne,  whence  they  brought
it,  according  to  every  man's  power  ;  then  they  make  another
Pima,  with  the  same  ceremonies,  saying  that  they  renue  it,
to  the  end  the  seede  of  Mays  may  not  perish,  and  if  it
answers  that  it  hath  force  sufficient  to  last  longer,  they  leave
it  untill  the  next  yeare.  This  foolish  vanity  continueth  to
this  day,  and  it  is  very  common  amongest  the  Indians  to
have  these  Pimas."  ^  There  seems  to  be  some  error  in  this
description  of  the  custom.  Probably  it  was  the  dressed-up
bunch  of  maize,  not  the  granary  {Pima),  which  was  wor-
shipped by  the  Peruvians  and  regarded  as  the  Mother  of  the
Maize.  This  is  confirmed  by  what  we  know  of  the  Peruvian
custom  from  another  source.  The  Peruvians,  we  are  told,
believed  all  useful  plants  to  be  animated  by  a  divine  being
who  causes  their  growth.  According  to  the  particular  plant,
these  divine  beings  were  called  the  Maize-mother  {Zara-
matna),  the  Quinoa-mother  {Quinoa-mama),  the  Cocoa-mother
{Coca-mama),  and  the  Potato-mother  {Axo-mama).  Figures
of  these  divine  mothers  were  made  respectively  of  ears  of
maize  and  leaves  of  the  quinoa  and  cocoa  plants  ;  they  were
dressed    in    women's    clothes   and    worshipped.       Thus    the

In     Inverness     and     Sutherland     the  ^  Acosta,  Natural  and  Moral  His-

Maiden   is  kept   till   the   next   harvest  tory  of  the  J7idies,\i\i.  v.  ch.  28,  vol.  ii.

{Folk-lore  Journal,  vii.  {1889),  pp.  50,  p.  374  (Hakluyt  Society,  1880).      The

53  jY.).     Q.^.Y.\3}L\w,lVestfdlischeSagt'n,  original  Spanish  text  of  Acosta's  work

Gebrduche  und  Mdrchen,  ii.   pp.    18 1,  was  reprinted  in  a  convenient  form  at

185,  §§  501,  517.  Madrid  in    1894.      '''^e  vol.  ii.    p.   117

of  that  edition.
VOL.   II  0


194  MOTHER  OF  THE  MAIZE  chap.

Maize-mother  was  represented  by  a  puppet  made  of  stalks  of
maize,  dressed  in  full  female  attire  ;  and  the  Indians  believed
that  "  as  mother,  it  had  the  power  of  producing  and  giving
birth  to  much  maize."  ^  Probably,  therefore,  Acosta  mis-
understood his  informant,  and  the  Mother  of  the  Maize  which
he  describes  was  not  the  granary  {Pirua)  but  the  bunch  of
maize  dressed  in  rich  vestments.  The  Peruvian  Mother  of
the  Maize,  like  the  harvest-Maiden  at  Balquhidder,  was  kept
for  a  year  in  order  that  by  her  means  the  corn  might  grow
and  multiply.  But  lest  her  strength  might  not  suffice  to  last
till  the  next  harvest,  she  was  asked  in  the  course  of  the
year  how  she  felt,  and  if  she  answered  that  she  felt  weak,  she
was  burned  and  a  fresh  Mother  of  the  Maize  made,  "  to  the
end  the  scede  of  Mays  may  not  perish."  Here,  it  may  be
observed,  we  have  a  strong  confirmation  of  the  explanation
already  given  of  the  custom  of  killing  the  god,  both  periodic-
ally and  occasionally.  The  Mother  of  the  Maize  was
allowed,  as  a  rule,  to  live  through  a  year,  that  being  the
period  during  which  her  strength  might  reasonably  be  sup-
posed to  last  unimpaired  ;  but  on  any  symptom  of  her
strength  failing  she  was  put  to  death  and  a  fresh  and  vigorous
Mother  of  the  Maize  took  her  place,  lest  the  maize  which
depended  on  her  for  its  existence  should  languish  and  decay.
Hardly  less  clearly  does  the  same  train  of  thought  come
out  in  the  harvest  customs  formerly  observed  by  the  Zapotecs
of  Mexico.  At  harvest  the  priests,  attended  by  the  nobles
and  people,  went  in  procession  to  the  maize  fields,  where  they
picked  out  the  largest  and  finest  sheaf.  This  they  took
with  great  ceremony  to  the  town  or  village,  and  placed  it  in
the  temple  upon  an  altar  adorned  with  wild  flowers.  After
sacrificing  to  the  harvest  god,  the  priests  carefully  wrapped
up  the  sheaf  in  fine  linen  and  kept  it  till  seed-time.  Then
the  priests  and  nobles  met  again  at  the  temple,  one  of  them
bringing  the  skin  of  a  wild  beast,  elaborately  ornamented,  in
which  the  linen  cloth  containing  the  sheaf  was  enveloped.

1  \V.    Mannhardt,   Mytliol.    Forsch.  Lima,  published  in  Lima  in  1649,  and

p.  342  sq.      Mannhardt's  authority  is  a  communicated  to   Mannhardt  by  J.  J.

Spanish  tract  {Carta  pastoral  de  exorta-  v.  Tschudi.     Compare  E.  J.  Payne,  His-

cion  e  instruccion  contra  las  idolatrias  de  tory  of  the  New  World  called  Afiierica,

loi  Indios  del  arcobi spado  de  Lima)   by  i.  414  sq.
Pedro  de  Villagomez,    Archbishop   of


Ill  THE  MOTHER-COTTON  195

The  sheaf  was  then  carried  once  more  in  procession  to  the
field  from  which  it  had  been  taken.  Here  a  small  cavity  or
subterranean  chamber  had  been  prepared,  in  which  the
precious  sheaf  was  deposited,  wrapt  in  its  various  envelopes.
After  sacrifice  had  been  offered  to  the  gods  of  the  fields  for
an  abundant  crop  the  chamber  was  closed  and  covered  over
with  earth.  Immediately  thereafter  the  sowing  began.
Finally,  when  the  time  of  harvest  drew  near,  the  buried  sheaf
was  solemnly  disinterred  by  the  priests,  who  distributed  the
grain  to  all  who  asked  for  it.  The  packets  of  grain  so  dis-
tributed were  carefully  preserved  as  talismans  till  the  harvest.^
In  these  ceremonies,  which  continued  to  be  annually  cele-
brated long  after  the  Spanish  conquest,  the  intention  of  keep-
ing the  finest  sheaf  buried  in  the  maize  field  from  seed-time
to  harvest  was  undoubtedly  to  quicken  the  growth  of  the
maize.

In  the  Punjaub,  to  the  east  of  the  Jumna,  when  the
cotton  boles  begin  to  burst,  it  is  usual  to  select  the  largest
plant  in  the  field,  sprinkle  it  with  butter-milk  and  rice-water,
and  then  bind  to  it  pieces  of  cotton  taken  from  the  other
plants  of  the  field.  This  selected  plant  is  called  Sirdar  or
Bhogaldat,  that  is  "  mother-cotton,"  from  bhogla,  a  name
sometimes  given  to  a  large  cotton-pod,  and  dai  (for  daiya),
"  a  mother,"  and  after  it  has  been  saluted,  prayers  are
offered  that  the  other  plants  may  resemble  it  in  the  richness
of  their  produce."  The  conception  of  the  corn-spirit  as  a
bride  seems  to  come  out  clearly  in  a  ceremony  still  practised
by  the  Berbers  near  Tangier,  in  Morocco.  When  the  women
assemble  in  the  fields  to  weed  the  green  barley  or  reap  the
crops,  they  take  with  them  a  straw  figure  dressed  like  a
woman,  and  set  it  up  among  the  corn.  Suddenly  a  group
of  horsemen  from  a  neighbouring  village  gallop  up  and  carry
off  the  straw  puppet  amid  the  screams  and  cries  of  the  women.
However,  the  ravished  effigy  is  rescued  by  another  band  of
mounted  men,  and  after  a  struggle  remains,  more  or  less
dishevelled,  in  the  hands  of  the  women.      That  this  pretended

^  Brasseur  de    Bourbourg,    Histoire  America,  i.  419  sq.

des  Nations  civilisi!e:  du  Mexique  ct  dt  '^  H.  M.    Elliot,  Suppkmeiital  GIos-

r Auu'rique  Cenlrale,  iii.  40  sqq.     Com-  sary  of  Tei'ins  used  in  the  North-West-

pare    id..,  iii.  505  sq.;    E.  J.    Payne,  em    Provinces,   edited  by  J.   Beames,

History    of    the     New     IVorld    called  i,  254.


196  SOUL  OF  THE  RICE  chap.

abduction  is  a  mimic  marriage  appears  from  a  Berber
custom  in  accordance  with  which,  at  a  real  wedding,  the
bridegroom  carries  off  his  seemingly  unwilling  bride  on  horse-
back, while  she  screams  and  pretends  to  summon  her  friends
to  her  rescue.  No  fixed  date  is  appointed  for  the  simulated
abduction  of  the  straw  woman  from  the  barley-field,  the  time
depends  upon  the  state  of  the  crops,  but  the  day  and  hour
are  made  public  before  the  event.  Each  village  used  to  prac-
tise this  mimic  contest  for  possession  of  the  straw  woman,
who  probably  represents  the  Barley  Bride,  but  nowadays  the
custom  is  growing  obsolete.^

If  the  reader  still  feels  any  doubts  as  to  the  original
meaning  of  the  harvest  customs  practised  by  our  peasantry,
these  doubts  may  be  dispelled  by  comparing  the  customs
observed  at  the  rice-harvest  by  the  Malays  and  Dyaks  of
the  East  Indies.  At  harvest  the  Dyaks  of  Northern  Borneo
have  a  special  feast,  the  object  of  which  is  "  to  secure  the
soul  of  the  rice,  which  if  not  so  detained,  the  produce  of
their  farms  would  speedily  rot  and  decay."  The  mode  of
securing  the  soul  of  the  rice  varies  in  different  tribes.  In
the  Quop  district  the  ceremony  is  performed  by  the  chief
priest  alone,  first  in  the  long  broad  verandah  of  the  common
house  and  afterwards  in  each  separate  family  apartment.  As
a  preparation  for  the  ceremony  a  bamboo  altar,  decorated
with  green  boughs  and  red  and  white  streamers,  is  erected
in  the  verandah,  and  presents  a  very  gay  appearance.  Here
the  people,  old  and  young,  assemble,  the  priestesses  dressed
in  gorgeous  array  and  the  elder  men  wearing  bright-coloured
jackets  and  trousers  of  purple,  yellow,  or  scarlet  hue,  while
the  young  men  and  lads  beat  gongs  and  drums.  When  the
priest,  with  a  bundle  of  charms  in  either  hand,  is  observed
to  be  gazing  earnestly  in  the  air  at  something  invisible  to
common  eyes,  the  band  strikes  up  with  redoubled  energy,  and
the  elderly  men  in  the  gay  breeches  begin  to  shriek  and  re-
volve round  the  altar  in  the  dance.  Suddenly  the  priest  starts
up  and  makes  a  rush  at  the  invisible  object  ;  men  run  to
him  with  white  cloths,  and  as  he  shakes  his  charms  over  the
cloths  a  few  grains  of  rice  fall  into  them.      These  grains  are

1  W.  B.  Harris,  "  The  Berbers  of  Morocco,"  Journal  of  the  Anthropological
Institute,  xxvii.  (1898),  p.  68.


Ill  SOUL  OF  THE  RICE  197

the  soul  of  the  rice  ;  they  are  carefully  folded  up  in  the
cloths  and  laid  at  the  foot  of  the  altar.  The  same  perform-
ance is  afterwards  repeated  in  every  family  apartment.  In
some  tribes  the  soul  of  the  rice  is  secured  at  midnight.  Out-
side the  village  a  lofty  altar  is  erected  in  an  open  space
surrounded  by  the  stately  forms  of  the  tropical  palms.
Huge  bonfires  cast  a  ruddy  glow  over  the  scene  and  light
up  the  dusky  but  picturesque  forms  of  the  Dyaks  as  they
move  in  slow  and  solemn  dance  round  the  altar,  some
bearing  lighted  tapers  in  their  hands,  others  brass  salvers
with  offerings  of  rice,  others  covered  baskets,  of  which  the
contents  are  hidden  from  all  but  the  initiated.  The  corner-
posts  of  the  altar  are  lofty  bamboos,  whose  leafy  tops  are
yet  green  and  rustle  in  the  wind  ;  and  from  one  of  them
a  long  narrow  streamer  of  white  cloth  hangs  down.  Suddenly
elders  and  priests  rush  at  this  streamer,  seize  the  end  of  it,
and  amid  the  crashing  music  of  drums  and  gongs  and  the
yells  of  the  spectators  begin  dancing  and  swaying  themselves
backwards  and  forwards,  and  to  and  fro.  A  priest  or  elder
leaps  on  the  altar  and  shakes  the  tall  bamboos  violently
with  shouts  of  triumph,  which  are  responded  to  by  the
swaying  bodies  of  the  men  below  ;  and  in  the  midst  of  this
excitement  small  stones,  bunches  of  hair,  and  grains  of  rice
fall  at  the  feet  of  the  dancers,  and  are  carefully  picked  up
by  watchful  attendants.  These  grains  of  rice  are  the  soul
of  the  crop.  At  sowing-time  some  of  this  soul  of  the  rice  is
planted  with  the  other  seeds,  "  and  is  thus  propagated  and
communicated."  -^

The  same  need  of  securing  the  soul  of  the  rice,  if  the
crop  is  to  thrive,  is  keenly  felt  by  the  Karens  of  Burma.
When  a  rice-field  does  not  flourish,  they  suppose  that  the
soul  {kelaJi)  of  the  rice  is  in  some  way  detained  from  the  rice.
If  the  soul  cannot  be  called  back,  the  crop  will  fail.  The
following  formula  is  used  in  recalling  the  kelaJi  (soul)  of  the
rice  :  "  O  come,  x'lce-kelah,  come  !  Come  to  the  field.  Come
to  the  rice.  With  seed  of  each  gender,  come.  Come  from
the  river  Kho,  come  from   the  river   Kaw;  from   the  place

^   Spenser    St.     John,    Life'    in     the       Ling  Roth's  Natives  of  Sarawak  and
Forests  of  the  Fai-  East,-  i.    187,  192       British  North  Borneo,  i.  412-414.
sqq.  i    W.    Chahners,    quoted    in    H.


198  MOTHER  OF  THE  RICE  chap.

where  they  meet,  come.  Come  from  the  West,  come  from
the  East.  From  the  throat  of  the  bird,  from  the  maw  of
the  ape,  from  the  throat  of  the  elephant.  Come  from  the
sources  of  rivers  and  their  mouths.  Come  from  the  country
of  the  Shan  and  Burman.  From  the  distant  kingdoms  come.
From  all  granaries  come.      O  ncQ-kelah,  come  to  the  rice."  ^

The  Corn -mother  of  our  European  peasants  has  her
match  in  the  Rice  -  mother  of  the  Minangkabauers  of
Sumatra.  The  Minangkabauers  definitely  attribute  a  soul
to  rice,  and  will  sometimes  assert  that  rice  pounded  in  the
usual  way  tastes  better  than  rice  ground  in  a  mill,  because
in  the  mill  the  body  of  the  rice  was  so  bruised  and  battered
that  the  soul  has  fled  from  it.  Like  the  Javanese  they
think  that  the  rice  is  under  the  special  guardianship  of  a
female  spirit  called  Saning  Sari,  who  is  conceived  as  so
closely  knit  up  with  the  plant  that  the  rice  often  goes  by
her  name,  as  with  the  Romans  the  corn  might  be  called
Ceres.  In  particular  Saning  Sari  is  represented  by  certain
stalks  or  grains  called  indoea  padi,  that  is,  literally,  "  Mother
of  Rice,"  a  name  that  is  often  given  to  the  guardian  spirit
herself.  This  so-called  Mother  of  Rice  is  the  occasion  of  a
number  of  ceremonies  observed  at  the  planting  and  harvesting
of  the  rice  as  well  as  during  its  preservation  in  the  barn.
When  the  seed  of  the  rice  is  about  to  be  sown  in  the
nursery  or  bedding-out  ground,  where  under  the  wet  system
of  cultivation  it  is  regularly  allowed  to  sprout  before  being
transplanted  to  the  fields,  the  best  grains  are  picked  out  to
form  the  Rice-mother.  These  are  then  sown  in  the  middle
of  the  bed,  and  the  common  seed  is  planted  round  about
them.  The  state  of  the  Rice-mother  is  supposed  to  exert
the  greatest  influence  on  the  growth  of  the  rice  ;  if  she
droops  or  pines  away,  the  harvest  will  be  bad  in  consequence.
The  woman  who  sows  the  Rice-mother  in  the  nursery  lets
her  hair  hang  loose  and  afterwards  bathes,  as  a  means  of
ensuring  an  abundant  harvest.  When  the  time  comes  to
transplant  the  rice  from  the  nursery  to  the  field,  the  Rice-
mother  receives  a  special  place  either  in  the  middle  or  in  a
corner    of  the   field,   and   a   prayer  or  charm    is   uttered    as

1  E.  B.  Cross,  "On  the  Kzxen?,,'^  Joziiiial  of  t/ic  American  Oriental  Society^
iv.  (1854),  p.  309.


Ill


MOTHER  OF  THE  RICE


199


follows  :  "  Sailing  Sari,  may  a  measure  of  rice  come  from  a
stalk  of  rice  and  a  basketful  from  a  root ;  may  you  be
frightened  neither  by  lightning  nor  by  passers-by  !  Sunshine
make  you  glad  ;  with  the  storm  may  you  be  at  peace  ;  and
may  rain  serve  to  wash  your  face  ! "  While  the  rice  is
growing,  the  particular  plant  which  was  thus  treated  as  the
Rice-mother  is  lost  sight  of ;  but  before  harvest  another
Rice-mother  is  found.  When  the  crop  is  ripe  for  cutting,
the  oldest  woman  of  the  family  or  a  sorcerer  goes  out  to
look  for  her.  The  first  stalks  seen  to  bend  under  a  passing
breeze  are  the  Rice-mother,  and  they  are  tied  together  but
not  cut  until  the  first-fruits  of  the  field  have  been  carried
home  to  serve  as  a  festal  meal  for  the  family  and  their
friends,  nay  even  for  the  domestic  animals  ;  since  it  is  Saning
Sari's  pleasure  that  the  beasts  also  should  partake  of  her
good  gifts.  After  the  meal  has  been  eaten,  the  Rice-mother
is  fetched  home  by  persons  in  gay  attire,  who  carry  her  very
carefully  under  an  umbrella  in  a  neatly  worked  bag  to  the
barn,  where  a  place  in  the  middle  is  assigned  to  her.  Every
one  believes  that  she  takes  care  of  the  rice  in  the  barn  and
even  multiplies  it  not  uncommonly.^

Again,  just  as  in  Scotland  the  old  and  the  young  spirit
of  the  corn  are  represented  as  an  Old  Wife  or  Carline  and
a  Maiden  respectively,  so  in  the  Malay  Peninsula  we  find
both  the  Rice-mother  and  her  child  represented  by  different
sheaves  or  bundles  of  ears  on  the  harvest-field.  The  follow-
ing directions  for  obtaining  both  are  translated  from  a  native
Malay  work  on  the  cultivation  of  rice  :  *'  When  the  rice  is
ripe   all  over,  one  must  first   take   the  '  soul '  out  of  all   the


1  T.  L-  van  der  Toorn,  "  Het
animisme  bij  den  Minangkabauer  der
Padagnsche  Bovenlanden,"  Bijdrageii
tot  de  Taal-  Land-  en  Volkenktmde  van
Nederlandsch  Indie,  xxxix.  (iSgo),  pp.
63-65.  In  the  charm  recited  at  sowing
the  Rice-mother  in  the  bed,  I  have
translated  the  Dutch  word  stoel  as
"root,"  but  I  am  not  sure  of  its  precise
meaning  in  this  connection.  For  har-
vest-rites of  the  same  general  character
observed  in  the  Mandeling  and  Batang-
natal  districts  of  Sumatva,  on  the
north  coast  of  Ceram,  and  among  the
Alfoors  of  Central  Celebes,  see  Th.  A.


L.  Heyting,  "  Beschrijving  der  onder-
afdeeling  Groot-mandeling  en  Batang-
natal,"  Tijdschrift  van  het  Nederlandsth
Aardrijkskiindig  Genootsckap,  Tweede
vSerie,  xiv.  (1897),  p.  2^0 sg.  ;  J.  Boot,
"  Korte  schets  der  noordkust  van
Ceram,"  Tijdschrift  van  het  Nederl.
Aardrijks.  Genootschap,  Tweede  Serie,
X.  (1893),  p.  671  sq.  ;  A.  C.  Kruijt,
"  Een  en  ander  aangaande  het  gees-
telijk  en  maatschappelijlv  leven  van
den  Poso-Alfoer,"  JMededeelingen  van
loege  het  Nederlandsche  Zendeling-
genootschap,  xxxix.  (1S95),  p.  145
sq.


200  THE  RICE-CHILD  chap.

plots  of  one's  field.  You  choose  the  spot  where  the  rice  is
best  and  where  it  is  '  female '  (that  is  to  say,  where  the
bunch  of  stalks  is  big)  and  where  there  are  seven  joints  in
the  stalk.  You  begin  with  a  bunch  of  this  kind  and  clip
seven  stems  to  be  the  '  soul  of  the  rice '  ;  and  then  you  clip
yet  another  handful  to  be  the  '  mother-seed '  for  the  following
year.  The  '  soul '  is  wrapped  in  a  white  cloth  tied  with  a
cord  of  terap  bark,  and  made  into  the  shape  of  a  little  child
in  swaddling  clothes,  and  put  into  the  small  basket.  The
*  mother-seed '  is  put  into  another  basket,  and  both  are
fumigated  with  benzoin,  and  then  the  two  baskets  are
piled  the  one  on  the  other  and  taken  home,  and  put  into
the  kepuk  (the  receptacle  in  which  rice  is  stored)."  ^  The
ceremony  of  cutting  and  bringing  home  the  Soul  of  the  Rice
was  witnessed  by  Mr.  W.  W.  Skeat  at  Chodoi  in  Selangor
on  the  twenty-eighth  of  January  1897.  The  particular
bunch  or  sheaf  which  was  to  serve  as  the  Mother  of  the
Rice-soul  had  previously  been  sought  and  identified  by
means  of  the  markings  or  shape  of  the  ears.  From  this
sheaf  an  aged  sorceress,  with  much  solemnity,  cut  a  little
bundle  of  seven  ears,  anointed  them  with  oil,  tied  them
round  with  parti -coloured  thread,  fumigated  them  with
incense,  and  having  wrapt  them  in  a  white  cloth  deposited
them  in  a  little  oval-shaped  basket.  These  seven  ears  were
the  infant  Soul  of  the  Rice  and  the  little  basket  was  its
cradle.  It  was  carried  home  to  the  farmer's  house  by
another  woman,  who  held  up  an  umbrella  to  screen  the
tender  infant  from  the  hot  rays  of  the  sun.  Arrived  at  the
house  the  Rice-child  was  welcomed  by  the  women  of  the
family,  and  laid,  cradle  and  all,  on  a  new  sleeping-mat  with
pillows  at  the  head.  After  that  the  farmer's  wife  was
instructed  to  observe  certain  rules  of  taboo  for  three  days,
the  rules  being  in  many  respects  identical  with  those  which
have  to  be  observed  for  three  days  after  the  birth  of  a  real
child.  For  example,  perfect  quiet  must  be  observed,  as  in
a  house  where  a  baby  has  just  been  born  ;  a  light  was
placed  near  the  head  of  the  Rice-child's  bed  and  might  not
go  out  at  night,  while  the  fire  on  the  hearth  had  to  be  kept
up  both  day  and  night  till  the  three  days  were  over  ;  hair

1   W.  W.  Skeat,  Malay  I\Iagic,  p.  225  sq.


Jii  THE  RICE-CHILD  201

might  not  be  cut  ;  and  money,  rice,  salt,  oil,  and  so  forth
were  forbidden  to  go  out  of  the  house,  though  of  course
these  valuable  articles  were  quite  free  to  come  in.  Some-
thing of  the  same  tender  care  which  is  thus  bestowed  on
the  newly-born  Rice-child  is  naturally  extended  also  to  its
parent,  the  sheaf  from  whose  body  it  was  taken.  This
sheaf,  which  remains  standing  in  the  field  after  the  Rice-soul
has  been  carried  home  and  put  to  bed,  is  treated  as  a  newly-
made  mother ;  that  is  to  say,  young  shoots  of  trees  are
pounded  together  and  scattered  broadcast  every  evening  for
three  successive  days,  and  when  the  three  days  are  up  you
take  the  pulp  of  a  cocoa-nut  and  what  are  called  "  goat-
flowers,"  mix  them  up,  eat  them  with  a  little  sugar,  and  spit
some  of  the  mixture  out  among  the  rice.  So  after  a  real
birth  the  young  shoots  of  the  jack-fruit,  the  rose-apple,  certain
kinds  of  banana,  and  the  thin  pulp  of  young  cocoa-nuts  are
mixed  with  dried  fish,  salt,  acid,  prawn-condiment,  and  the
like  dainties  to  form  a  sort  of  salad,  which  is  administered
to  mother  and  child  for  three  successive  days.  The  last
sheaf  is  reaped  by  the  farmer's  wife,  who  carries  it  back  to
the  house,  where  it  is  threshed  and  mixed  with  the  Rice-
soul.  The  farmer  then  takes  the  Rice-soul  and  its  basket  and
deposits  it,  together  with  the  product  of  the  last  sheaf,  in  the
big  circular  rice-bin  used  by  the  Malays.  Some  of  the  grain
from  the  Rice-soul  are  mixed  with  the  seed  which  is  to  be
sown  in  the  following  year.^  In  this  Rice-mother  and  Rice-
child  of  the  Malay  Peninsula  we  may  see  the  counterpart
and  in  a  sense  the  prototype  of  the  Demeter  and  Proserpine
of  ancient  Greece,

Once  more,  the  European  custom  of  representing  the
corn-spirit  in  the  double  form  of  bride  and  bridegroom  ^  has
its  parallel  in  a  ceremony  observed  at  the  rice-harvest  in
Java.  Before  the  reapers  begin  to  cut  the  rice,  the  priest  or
sorcerer  picks  out  a  number  of  ears  of  rice,  which  are  tied
together,  smeared  with  ointment,  and  adorned  with  flowers.
Thus  decked  out,  the  ears  are  called  the  padi-penganthi,  that
is,  the  Rice-bride  and  the  Rice-bridegroom  ;  their  wedding
feast   is   celebrated,  and    the   cutting  of  the   rice   begins   im-

^   W.  W.  Skeat,  Malay  Magic,  pp.  235-249.
-   See  above,  p.   1S6  sq.


302


RICE  BRIDE  AND  BRIDEGROOM


CHAP.


mediately  afterwards.  Later  on,  when  the  rice  is  being  got
in,  a  bridal  chamber  is  partitioned  off  in  the  barn,  and
furnished  with  a  new  mat,  a  lamp,  and  all  kinds  of  toilet
articles.  Sheaves  of  rice,  to  represent  the  wedding  guests,
are  placed  beside  the  Rice-bride  and  the  Rice-bridegroom.
Not  till  this  has  been  done  may  the  whole  harvest  be  housed
in  the  barn.  And  for  the  first  forty  days  after  the  rice  has
been  housed,  no  one  may  enter  the  barn,  for  fear  of  disturb-
ing the  newly-wedded  pair.^

Thus  the  theory  which  recognises  in  the  European  Corn-
mother,  Corn-maiden,  and  so  forth,  the  embodiment  in
vegetable  form  of  the  animating  spirit  of  the  crops  is  amply
confirmed  by  the  evidence  of  peoples  in  other  parts  of  the
world,  who,  because  they  have  lagged  behind  the  European  races
in  mental  development,  retain  for  that  very  reason  a  keener
sense  of  the  original  motives  for  observing  those  rustic  rites
which  among  ourselves  have  sunk  to  the  level  of  meaningless
survivals.  The  reader  may,  however,  remember  that  accord-
ing to  Mannhardt,  whose  theory  I  am  expounding,  the  spirit
of  the  corn  manifests  itself  not  merely  in  vegetable  but  also
in  human  form  ;  the  person  who  cuts  the  last  sheaf  or  gives
the  last  stroke  at  threshing  passes  for  a  temporary  embodi-
ment of  the  corn-spirit,  just  as  much  as  the  bunch  of  corn
which  he  reaps  or  threshes.  Now  in  the  parallels  which  have
been  hitherto  adduced  from  the  customs  of  peoples  outside
Europe  the  spirit  of  the  crops  appears  only  in  vegetable  form.
It  remains,  therefore,  to  prove  that /Other  races  besides  our
European  peasantry  have  conceived  the  spirit  of  the  crops
as  incorporate  in  or  represented  by  living  men  and  women.


1  Vethj/ar'a,  i.  524-526.  The  cere-
mony has  also  been  described  by  Miss
Augusta  de  Wit  (Facts  and  Fancies  about
Java,  Singapore,  1898,  pp.  229-241),
who  lays  stress  on  the  extreme  import-
ance of  the  rice-harvest  for  the  Javanese.
The  whole  island  of  Java,  she  tells  us,
"is  one  vast  rice-field.  Rice  on  the
swampyplains,  riceon  the  rising  ground,
rice  on  the  slopes,  rice  on  the  very
summits  of  the  hills.  From  the  sod
under  one's  feet  to  the  verge  of  the
horizon,  everything  has  one  and  the
same  colour,   the   l;luish- green  of  the


young,  or  the  gold  of  the  ripened  rice.
The  natives  are  all,  without  exception,
tillers  of  the  soil,  who  reckon  their  lives
by  seasons  of  planting  and  reaping,
whose  happiness  or  misery  is  synony-
mous with  the  abundance  or  the  dearth
of  the  precious  grain.  And  the  great
national  feast  is  the  harvest  home,  with
its  crowning  ceremony  of  the  Wedding
of  the  Rice  "  (op.  cit.  p.  229  sc/.).  I  have
to  thank  my  friend  Prof.  A.  C.  Haddon
for  directing  my  attention  to  Miss  de
Wit's  book.     •


Ill  OLD   WOMAN  WHO  NEVER  DIES  203

Such  a  proof,  I  may  remind  the  reader,  is  germane  to  the
theme  of  this  book  ;  for  the  more  instances  we  discover  of
human  beings  representing  in  themselves  the  life  or  animat-
ing spirit  of  plants,  the  less  difficulty  will  be  felt  at  classing
amongst  them  the  King  of  the  Wood  at  Aricia.

The  Mandans  and  Minnitarees  of  North  America  used
to  hold  a  festival  in  spring  which  they  called  the  corn-
medicine  festival  of  the  women.  They  thought  that  a
certain  Old  Woman  who  Never  Dies  made  the  crops  to  grow,
and  that,  living  somewhere  in  the  south,  she  sent  the  migra-
tory waterfowl  in  spring  as  her  tokens  and  representatives.
Each  sort  of  bird  represented  a  special  kind  of  crop  cultivated
by  the  Indians  :  the  wild  goose  stood  for  the  maize,  the  wild
swan  for  the  gourds,  and  the  wild  duck  for  the  beans.  So
when  the  feathered  messengers  of  the  Old  Woman  began  to
arrive  in  spring  the  Indians  celebrated  the  corn-medicine
festival  of  the  women.  Scaffolds  were  set  up,  on  which  the
people  hung  dried  meat  and  other  things  by  way  of  offerings
to  the  Old  Woman  ;  and  on  a  certain  day  the  old  women
of  the  tribe,  as  representatives  of  the  Old  Woman  who  Never
Dies,  assembled  at  the  scaffolds  each  bearing  in  her  hand  an
ear  of  maize  fastened  to  a  stick.  They  first  planted  these
sticks  in  the  ground,  then  danced  round  the  scaffolds,  and
finally  took  up  the  sticks  again  in  their  arms.  Meanwhile
old  men  beat  drums  and  shook  rattles  as  a  musical  accom-
paniment to  the  performance  of  the  old  women.  Further,
young  women  came  and  put  dried  flesh  into  the  mouths  of
the  old  women,  for  which  they  received  in  return  a  grain  of
the  consecrated  maize  to  eat.  Three  or  four  grains  of  the
holy  corn  were  also  placed  in  the  dishes  of  the  young  women,
to  be  afterwards  carefully  mixed  with  the  seed-corn,  which
they  were  supposed  to  fertilise.  The  dried  flesh  hung  on
the  scaffold  belonged  to  the  old  women,  because  they  re-
presented the  Old  Woman  who  Never  Dies.  A  similar  corn-
medicine  festival  was  held  in  autumn  for  the  purpose  of
attracting  the  herds  of  buffaloes  and  securing  a  supply  of
meat.  At  that  time  every  woman  carried  in  her  arms  an
uprooted  plant  of  maize.  They  gave  the  name  of  the  Old
Woman  who  Never  Dies  both  to  the  maize  and  to  those
birds  which  they  regarded   as   symbols   of  the   fruits   of  the


204  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  SEXES  chap.

earth,  and  they  prayed  to  them  in  autumn  saying,  "  Mother,
have  pity  on  us  !  send  us  not  the  bitter  cold  too  soon,  lest  we
have  not  meat  enough  !  let  not  all  the  game  depart,  that  we
may  have  something  for  the  winter  !  "  In  autumn,  when  the
birds  were  flying  south,  the  Indians  thought  that  they  were
going  home  to  the  Old  Woman  and  taking  to  her  the  offer-
ings that  had  been  hung  up  on  the  scaffolds,  especially  the
dried  meat,  which  she  ate.^  Here  then  we  have  the  spirit  or
divinity  of  the  corn  conceived  as  an  Old  Woman  and  re-
presented in  bodily  form  by  old  women,  who  in  their  capacity
of  representatives  receive  some  at  least  of  the  offerings  which
are  intended  for  her.

Again,  we  have  seen  that  in  some  parts  of  Germany  the
spirit  of  the  crops  is  represented  simultaneously  in  male  and
female  form  by  a  man  and  a  woman  cased  in  straw  at  harvest,
just  as  the  spirit  of  trees  or  of  vegetation  in  general  is
represented  by  a  Lord  and  Lady  of  the  May  dressed  in
leaves  and  flowers  in  spring.  Such  personifications  of  the
powers  of  vegetation  occur  naturally  to  primitive  man,  who
is  apt  to  conceive  that  plants,  like  animals,  propagate  their
kind  through  the  intercourse  of  the  sexes.  The  conception
is  far  from  being  wholly  erroneous,  but  an  entirely  false
extension  is  given  to  it  by  the  savage  who  fancies  that  the
process  of  procreation  is  not  merely  similar  but  identical  in
plants  and  animals,  so  that,  on  the  one  hand,  men  and
animals  can  be  fertilised  by  trees,  and  on  the  other  hand
the  earth  can  be  quickened  and  drops  made  to  grow  by  the
intercourse  of  the  human  sexes.  In  the  first  chapter
examples  were  given  of  the  fertilising  influence  supposed  to
be  exerted  by  trees  on  women  and  cattle  ;  here  I  propose  to
illustrate  the  converse  process,  by  which  men  think  they  can
promote  or  retard  the  growth  of  plants.  How  far  in  acting
thus  they  consciously  personate  the  powers  of  vegetation  is
a  question  which  we  can  hardly  in  every  case  decide  ;  a
belief  in  the  efficacy  of  sympathetic  magic,  which  is  the
base  of  all  these  ceremonies,  seems  sufficient  to  account  for
some  at  least  of  the  following  customs  without  resorting  to
the  hypothesis  that  the  persons  who  practise  them  deliberately
masquerade  as  spirits  of  vegetation.

^  Maximilian,  Piinz  zu  Wied,  Rcisc  in  das  iiinere  Nord-Anierica,  ii.  \%2sq.


Ill  UPON  THE  CROPS  205

For  four  days  before  they  committed  the  seed  to  the  earth
the  Pipiles  of  Central  America  kept  apart  from  their  wives
"  in  order  that  on  the  night  before  planting  they  might  indulge
their  passions  to  the  fullest  extent  ;  certain  persons  are  even
said  to  have  been  appointed  to  perform  the  sexual  act  at  the
very  moment  when  the  first  seeds  were  deposited  in  the
ground."  The  use  of  their  wives  at  that  time  was  indeed
enjoined  upon  the  people  by  the  priests  as  a  religious  duty,
in  default  of  which  it  was  not  lawful  to  sow  the  seed.^  The
only  possible  explanation  of  this  custom  seems  to  be  that  the
Indians  confused  the  process  by  which  human  beings  re-
produce their  kind  with  the  process  by  which  plants  discharge
the  same  function,  and  fancied  that  by  resorting  to  the  former
they  were  simultaneously  forwarding  the  latter.  The  same
confusion  has  been  made  by  other  races  of  men.  In  some
parts  of  Java,  at  the  season  when  the  bloom  will  soon  be  on
the  rice,  the  husbandman  and  his  wife  visit  their  fields  by
night  and  there  engage  in  sexual  intercourse  for  the  purpose
of  promoting  the  growth  of  the  crop.^  In  the  Leti,  Sarmata,
and  some  other  groups  of  islands  which  lie  between  the
western  end  of  New  Guinea  and  the  northern  part  of
Australia,  the  heathen  population  regard  the  sun  as  the
male  principle  by  whom  the  earth  or  female  principle  is
fertilised.  They  call  him  Upu-lera  or  Mr.  Sun,  and  represent
him  under  the  form  of  a  lamp  made  of  cocoa-nut  leaves,
which  may  be  seen  hanging  everywhere  in  their  houses
and  in  the  sacred  fig-tree.  Once  a  year,  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  rainy  season,  Mr.  Sun  comes  down  into  the
holy  fig-tree  to  fertilise  the  earth,  and  to  facilitate  his  de-
scent a  ladder  with  seven  rungs  is  considerately  placed  at
his  disposal.  It  is  set  up  under  the  tree  and  is  adorned
with  carved  figures  of  the  birds  whose  shrill  clarion  heralds
the  approach  of  the  sun  in  the  East.  On  this  occasion
pigs  and  dogs  are  sacrificed  in  profusion  ;  men  and  women
alike  indulge  in  a  saturnalia ;  and  the  mystic  union  of
the   sun  and   the  earth  is  dramatically  represented  in  public,

^  Brasseur    de    Bourbourg,   Histoire  logie  der  Indianerstiinime  von    Gttate-

des  Nations  civilisies  du  Alexique  et  de  ma/a,  p.  47.

rAm^rique  Cetitrale,  ii.  565  ;  Bancroft,  ^  G.  A.  Wilken,  "  Het  animisme  bij

Native    Races  of  the  Pacific  States,  ii.  de  vollcen  van  den  Indischen  Archipel,"

719  sq.,  iii.  507  ;  O.  Stoll,  Die  Ethno-  De  Indische  Gids,  June  1884,  p.  958.


2o6


INFLUENCE  OF  THE  SEXES


CHAP.


amid  song  and  dance,  by  the  real  union  of  the  sexes  under
the  tree.  In  the  Babar  Islands  a  special  flag  is  hoisted  at
this  festival  as  a  symbol  of  the  creative  energy  of  the  sun  ;
it  is  of  white  cotton,  about  nine  feet  high,  and  consists  of  the
figure  of  a  man  in  an  appropriate  attitude.^  It  would  be
unjust  to  treat  these  orgies  as  a  mere  outburst  of  unbridled
passion  ;  no  doubt  they  are  deliberately  and  solemnly
organised  as  essential  to  the  fertility  of  the  earth  and  the
welfare  of  man.  The  same  means  which  are  thus  adopted
to  stimulate  the  growth  of  the  crops  are  naturally  employed
to  ensure  the  fruitfulness  of  trees.  The  ancient  work  which
bore  the  title  of  TJie  Agriculture  of  the  Nabataeans,  but  which
seems  to  have  been  written  at  Babylon  and  to  describe
Babylonian  usages,  contained  apparently  a  direction  that  the
grafting  of  a  tree  upon  another  tree  of  a  different  sort  should
be  done  by  a  damsel,  who  at  the  very  moment  of  inserting
the  graft  in  the  bough  should  herself  be  subjected  to  treat-
ment which  can  only  be  regarded  as  a  direct  copy  of  the
operation  she  was  performing  on  the  tree."  In  some  parts
of  Amboyna,  when  the  state  of  the  clove  plantation  indicates
that  the  crop  is  likely  to  be  scanty,  the  men  go  naked  to  the
plantations  by  night,  and  there  seek  to  fertilise  the  trees
precisely  as  they  would  women,  while  at  the  same  time  they
call  out  for  "  More  cloves  !  "  This  is  supposed  to  make  the
trees  bear  fruit  more  abundantly.^  In  Java  when  a  palm
tree  is  to  be  tapped  for  wine,'  the  man  who  proposes  to
relieve  the  tree  of  its  superfluous  juices  deems   it  necessary


1  G.  W.  W.  C.  Baron  van  Hoe  veil,
in  Tijdschrift  voor  ludisclic  Taal-  Laiid-
en  Volkenkundc,  xxxiii.  (1898),  pp.  204
sq.,  206  sq.  ;  id.,  in  Internationales
Archiv  fiir  Ethnographie,  viii.  (1895),
p.  134.  In  the  island  of  Timor  the
marriage  of  the  Sun-god  with  Mother
Earth  is  deemed  the  source  of  all  fer-
tility and  growth.  See  J.  S.  G.  Gram-
berg,  "  Eene  niaand  in  de  Binnenlanden
van  Timor,"  Verhandelingen  van  hel
Bataviaasch  Genootschap  van  Knnsten
en  Wetenschappcn,  xxxvi.  206  sq.  ;
H.  Sondervan,  "Timor  en  de  Timor-
eezen,"  Tijdschriflvan  het Nederlandsch
Aardrijliskundig  GeJiootsc/iap,  Tweede
Serie,  dl.  v.   (1888),  Afdeeling,   meer


uitgebreide  artikelen,  p.  397.

-  Maimonides,  translated  by  Chwol-
sohn,  Die  Ssabier  tend  dej'  Ssabismus,
ii.  475.  It  is  not  quite  clear  whether
the  direction,  which  Maimonides  here
attributes  to  the  Sabaeans,  is  taken
by  him  from  the  beginning  of  The
Agriculture  of  the  Nabataeans,  which  he
had  referred  to  a  few  lines  before.  The
first  part  of  that  work  appears  to  be  lost,
though  other  parts  of  it  exi£t  in
manuscript  at  Paris,  Oxford,  and  else-
where. See  Chwolsohn,  op.  cit.  i.  697
sqq.

^  G.  W.  W.  C.  Baron  van  Hoevell,
Ambon  en  meer  bepaaldelijk  de  Oeliasers
(Dordrecht,  1S75),  p.  62  sq.


J II  UPON  FRUIT-TREES  207

to  approach  the  palm  in  the  character  of  a  lover  and  a
husband,  as  well  as  of  a  son.  When  he  comes  upon  a
palm  which  he  thinks  suitable,  he  will  not  begin  cutting  at
the  trunk  until  he  has  intimated  as  delicately  as  he  can  the
reasons  which  lead  him  to  perform  that  surgical  operation,  and
the  ardent  affection  which  he  cherishes  for  the  tree.  For
this  purpose  he  holds  a  dialogue  with  the  palm,  in  which  he
naturally  speaks  in  the  character  of  the  tree  as  well  as  in  his
own.  "  O  mother  endang-reni  I  "  he  begins,  "  for  the  sake  of
you  I  have  let  myself  be  drenched  by  the  rain  and  scorched
by  the  sun  ;  long  have  I  sought  you  !  Now  at  last  have  I
found  you.  How  ardently  have  I  longed  for  you  !  Often
before  have  you  given  me  the  breast.  Yet  I  still  thirst.
Therefore  now  I  ask  for  four  potfuls  more."  "  Well,  fair
youth,"  replies  the  tree,  "  I  have  always  been  here.  What
is  the  reason  that  you  have  sought  me  ? "  "  The  reason  I
have  sought  you  is  that  I  have  heard  you  suffer  from  z'n-
co)itinentia  urinae."  "  So  I  do,"  says  the  tree.  "  Will  you  marry
me  ?  "  says  the  man.  "  That  I  will,"  says  the  tree,  "  but  first
you  must  plight  your  troth  and  recite  the  usual  confession  of
faith."  On  that  the  man  takes  a  rattan  leaf  and  wraps  it
round  the  palm  as  a  pledge  of  betrothal,  after  which  he  says
the  creed  :  "  There  is  no  God  but  Allah,  and  Mohammed  is
his  prophet."  The  maidenly  and  orthodox  scruples  of  the
tree  having  thus  been  satisfied,  he  embraces  it  as  his  bride.
At  first  he  attaches  only  a  small  dish  to  the  trunk  to  receive
the  juices  which  exude  from  the  cut  in  the  bark  ;  a  large  dish
might  frighten  the  tree.  In  fastening  the  dish  to  the  palm
he  says,  "  Bok-endang-reni !  your  child  is  languishing  away
for  thirst.  He  asks  you  for  a  drink."  The  tree  replies,
"  Let  him  slake  his  thirst !  Mother's  breasts  are  full  to  over-
flowing." ^  We  have  already  seen  that  in  some  parts  of
Northern  India  a  mock  marriage  between  two  actors  is
performed  in  honour  of  a  newly-planted  orchard,"  no  doubt
for  the  purpose  of  making   it    bear   fruit.      In  the  Nicobar

1  J.  Kreemer,  "Tiang-deies,"  J/£if6'-  volken  van  den  Indischen  Archipel,"

deelingen  va/t  ivege  het  Nederlandschc  De  Iiniische  Gids,  June    1884,  p.  962

Zendelinggenootschap,  ::xvi.  (1882),  pp.  sq.  ;  and  Handkiding  voor  de  votgelij-

128-132.       This    and    the    preceding  kende  I'olkenkiinde  (Leyden,   1893),  p.

custom   have   been   already  quoted    by  550).

G.  A.  Wilken  ("  Het  animisme  bij  de  -  Vol.  i.  p.  177.


2o8  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  SEXES  chap.

Islands  a  pregnant  woman  is  taken  into  the  gardens  in
order  to  impart  the  blessing  of  fertility  to  the  plants.^  In
various  parts  of  Europe  customs  have  prevailed  both  at
spring  and  harvest  which  are  clearly  based  on  the  same
primitive  notion  that  the  relation  of  the  human  sexes  to
each  other  can  be  so  used  as  to  quicken  the  growth  of
plants.  For  example,  in  the  Ukraine  on  St.  George's  Day
(the  twenty-third  of  April)  the  priest  in  his  robes,  attended
by  his  acolytes,  goes  out  to  the  fields  of  the  village,
where  the  crops  are  beginning  to  show  green  above  the
ground,  and  blesses  them.  After  that  the  young  married
people  lie  down  in  couples  on  the  sown  fields  and  roll  several
times  over  on  them,  in  the  belief  that  this  will  promote  the
growth  of  the  crops.  In  some  parts  of  Russia  the  priest
himself  is  rolled  by  women  over  the  sprouting  crop,  and  that
without  regard  to  the  mud  and  holes  which  he  may  encounter
in  his  beneficent  progress.  If  the  shepherd  resists  or  re-
monstrates, his  flock  murmurs,  "  Little  Father,  you  do  not
really  wish  us  well,  you  do  not  wish  us  to  have  corn,  although
you  do  wish  to  live  on  our  corn."  '^  In  England  it  used  to
be  customary  for  young  couples  to  roll  down  a  slope  to-
gether on  May  Day ;  on  Greenwich-hill  the  custom  was
practised  at  Easter  and  Whitsuntide,  as  it  still  is,  or  was
within  the  present  generation,  practised  near  Dublin  at  Whit-
suntide. When  we  conside/  how  closely  these  seasons,
especially  May  Day  and  Whitsuntide,  are  associated  with
ceremonies  for  the  revival  of  plant  life  in  spring,  we  shall
scarcely  doubt  that  the  custom  of  rolling  in  couples  at  such
times  had  originally  the  same  significance  which  it  still  has
in  Russia ;  and  when  further  we  compare  this  particular
custom  with  the  practice  of  representing  the  vernal  powers  of
vegetation  by  a  bridal  pair,  and  remember  the  traditions
which  even  in  our  own  country  attach  to  May-Day,^  we  shall
probably  do  no  injustice  to  our  forefathers  if  we  conclude
that   they  once  celebrated   the  return  of  spring  with  grosser

1  W.  Svoboda,  "  Die  Bewohner  des  -  Mannhardt,    Bauinkultus,    p.    4S0

Nikobaren- Archipels," /«/'<?/v/rt/'/(j;/i7/('j'  sq.  ;    id.,    Mythologische    Forschiingen,

Archivfiir  Ethnographic,  v.  (1892),  p.  p.  341.

193  j-^.      For  other  examples  of  a  fruit-  -^   Brand,    Popular     Antiquities,     i.

ful    woman   making   trees   fruitful,   see  213,     quoting     Stubbs,     Anatomie    of

vol.  i.  p.  38  sq.  Abuses  (1585),  p.  94.


Ill  UPON  THE  CROPS  209

rites,  of  which  the  customs  I  have  referred  to  are  only  a
stunted  survival.  Indeed,  these  rites  in  their  grossest  form
are  said  to  be  still  observed  in  various  parts  of  Holland  at
Whitsuntide/  In  some  parts  of  Germany  at  harvest  the  men
and  women,  who  have  reaped  the  corn,  roll  together  on  the
field.''  This  again  is  probably  a  mitigation  of  an  older  and
ruder  custom  designed  to  impart  fertility  to  the  fields  by
methods  like  those  resorted  to  by  the  Pipiles  of  Central
America  long  ago,  and  by  the  cultivators  of  rice  in  Java  at
the  present  time.  In  Poso,  when  the  rice-crop  is  not
thriving,  the  farmer's  wife  sets  bowls  of  rice  and  betel  in
various  parts  of  the  field  ;  then  she  lies  down,  draws  her
petticoat  over  her  head,  and  pretends  to  fall  asleep.  But  one
of  her  children  thereupon  mimics  the  crowing  of  a  cock,
and  at  the  sound  she  gets  up,  "  because  a  new  day  has
dawned."  The  intention  of  this  ceremony,  which  the  natives
could  not  or  would  not  explain  to  the  Dutch  missionary
who  reports  it,  may  be  to  place  the  woman  at  the  disposal
of  the  god  of  the  field.  We  are  expressly  told  that
there  is  a  special  god  of  the  rice -fields  named  Puwe-wai,
and  tjiat  the  ceremony  in  question  is  performed  in  his
honour.^

To  the  student  who  cares  to  track  the  devious  course  of
the  human  mind  in  its  gropings  after  truth,  it  is  of  some
interest  to  observe  that  the  same  theoretical  belief  in  the
sympathetic  influence  of  the  sexes  on  vegetation,  which  has
led  some  peoples  to  indulge  their  passions  as  a  means  of
fertilising  the  earth,  has  led  others  to  seek  the  same  end  by
directly  opposite  means.  From  the  moment  that  they  sowed
the  maize  till  the  time  that  they  reaped  it,  the  Indians  of
Nicaragua  lived  chastely,  keeping  apart  from  their  wives  and

'   G.  W.  W.  C.  Baron  van  Hoevell,  Mannhardt,     BmtmkultKs,     p.     481  ;

in    Internationales  Archil'  fiir  Ethno-  id.,    Mytholog.    Forschnngcn,    p.    340.

graphic,  viii.  (1895),  p.  134  note.     The  Compare  Th.  Siebs,  "  Das  Saterland,"

custom   seems  to  go  by  the   name   of  Zeitschrift  fiir  Volksktmde,  iii.  (1893),

dauwtroppen   or   "dew-treading."     As  p.  277.

districts  or  places  in  which  the  practice  •^  A.    C.    Kruijt,     "  Een    en     ander

is  still  kept  up  the  writer  names  South  aangaande  het  geestelijk  en  maatschap-

Holland,  Dordrecht,  and  Rotterdam.  pelijk    leven    van    den    Poso-Alfoer,"

^  L.    Strackerjan,    Aberglaube    und  Mededee/ingen    van    wege    het   Neder-

Sagen  aus  dem  Herzogthnin  Oldenburg  landsche    Zendelinggenootschap,    xxxix.

(Oldenburg,  1867),   ii.    p.    78,  §   361;  (1895),  p.  138,  zi^z'fl'.  xl.  (1896),  p.  16  i-^f.
VOL.  II  P


2IO  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  SEXES  chap.

sleeping  in  a  separate  place.  They  ate  no  salt,  and  drank
neither  cocoa  nor  chicha,  the  fermented  liquor  made  from
maize  ;  in  short  the  season  was  for  them,  as  the  Spanish
historian  observes,  a  time  of  abstinence.^  To  this  day  some
of  the  Indian  tribes  of  Central  America  practise  continence
for  the  purpose  of  thereby  promoting  the  growth  of  the  crops.
Thus  we  are  told  that  before  sowing  the  maize  the  Kekchi
Indians  sleep  apart  from  their  wives,  and  eat  no  flesh  for  five
days,  while  among  the  Lanquineros  and  Cajaboneros  the
period  of  abstinence  from  these  carnal  pleasures  extends  to
thirteen  days."  So  amongst  some  of  the  Germans  of  Tran-
sylvania it  is  a  rule  that  no  man  may  sleep  with  his  wife
during  the  whole  of  the  time  that  he  is  engaged  in  sowing
his  fields.^  In  some  of  the  Melanesian  islands,  when  the
yam  vines  are  being  trained,  the  men  sleep  near  the  gardens
and  never  approach  their  wives  ;  should  they  enter  the
garden  after  breaking  this  rule  of  continence  the  fruits  of  the
garden  would  be  spoilt.'*  In  the  Motu  tribe  of  New  Guinea,
when  rain  has  fallen  plentifully  and  there  is  promise  of  a
good  crop  of  bananas,  one  of  the  chief  men  becomes  holy  or
taboo,  and  must  live  apart  from  his  wife  and  eat  only  certain
kinds  of  food.  He  bids  the  young  men  beat  the  drum  and
dance,  "  in  order  that  by  so  doing  there  may  be  a  large
harvest.  If  the  dancing  is  not  given,  there  will  be  an  end
to  the  good  growth  ;  but  if  it  is  continued,  all  will  go  well.
People  come  in  from  other  villages  to  assist,  and  will  dance
all  night.'""  In  the  incense-growing  region  of  Arabia  in
antiquity  there  were  three  families  charged  with  the  special
care  of  the  incense-trees.  They  were  called  sacred,  and  at
the  time  when  they  cut   the   trees   or  gathered   the   incense

1  G.  F.  Oviedo  y  Valdes,  Histoire  of  beans  and  of  chilis,  but  only  by
du  Nicaragua  (published  in  Ternaux-  Indians  who  do  a  large  business  in
Compans'  Voyages,  Relations  et  these  commodities  {ibid.  p.  205).
Memoires  originaux,  etc.),  Paris,  1840,  ^  a_  Heinrich,  Agrarische Sittemind
p.  228  sq.  ;  Herrera,  General  History  Gebrdiic/ie  iinter  den  Sachsen  Siebeji-
of  the  vast  continent  and  islands  called  biirgens  (Hermannstadt,  1880),  p.  7.
America  (Stevens'  trans.),  iii.  298.                   "^  'Sk.W.Q.o^xm^\.o'n,TheMelanesians,

2  C.  Sapper,  "Die  Gebrauche    und  p.  134.

religiosen    Anschauungen  der  Kekchi-  ^  j_    Chalmers,  Pioneering   in    Neiv

lnA\z.nQX,''^  Internationales  Airhiv  fiir  Guinea,  y>-   181.      The    word   which    I

Ethnographie,    viii.    (1895),     p.    203.  have  taken  to  mean  "  holy  or  taboo "

Abstinence    from    women     for    several  is    helaga.       Mr.    Chalmers    does    not

days  is  also  practised  before  the  sowing  translate  or  explain  it.


Ill  ON  PLANTS  AND  ANIMALS  211

they  were  forbidden  to  pollute  themselves  with  women  or
with  the  contact  of  the  dead  ;  the  observance  of  these  rules
of  ceremonial  purity  was  believed  to  increase  the  supply  of
incense.^  With  ancient  Greek  husbandmen  it  was  a  maxim
that  olives  should  always  be  planted  and  gathered  by  pure
boys  and  virgins  ;  the  uncommon  fruitfulness  of  the  olive
trees  at  Anazarbus  in  Cilicia  was  attributed  to  their  being
tended  by  young  and  innocent  children.  In  default  of  such
workers,  the  olive-gatherer  had  to  swear  that  he  had  been
faithful  to  his  own  wife  ;  for  his  fidelity  was  believed  to  ensure
an  abundant  crop  of  fruit  the  following  year."  The  same  rule
of  chastity  which  is  thus  believed  to  contribute  to  the  fertility
of  the  earth  and  of  trees  is  also  applied,  oddly  enough,  for  the
purpose  of  multiplying  the  animals  which  the  savage  uses  as
food.  At  Mowat,  in  New  Guinea,  the  men  are  reported  to
have  no  relations  with  women  during  the  season  when  the
turtles  are  coupling,  although  considerable  laxity  of  morals
prevails  at  other  times.^  The  reason  for  this  sudden  access
of  virtue  is  no  doubt  nothing  more  than  a  fear  on  the  part  of
the  untutored  savage  that  the  commerce  of  the  sexes  would
in  some  way  interfere  with  the  coupling  of  the  turtles  and  so
diminish  his  supply  of  food.  The  same  rule  of  continence  is
observed  by  unmarried  people  in  Mabuiag  at  the  same
season,  which  lasts  during  parts  of  October  and  November  ;
for  they  believe  that  if  the  rule  were  broken  they  would  catch
no  turtle  ;  whenever  the  canoe  approached  the  pair,  the  male
would  separate  from  the  female,  and  the  two  would  dive
down  into  deep  water  in  different  directions.^

Again,  the  sympathetic  relation  supposed  to  exist
between  the  commerce  of  the  sexes  and  the  fertility  of  the
earth  manifests  itself  in  the  belief  that  illicit  love  tends,
directly  or  indirectly,  to  mar  that  fertility  and  to  blight  the
crops.  Such  a  belief  prevails,  for  example,  among  the
Karens  of  Burma.  They  imagine  that  adultery  or  forni-
cation has  a  powerful  influence  to  injure  the  harvest.  Hence
if  the  crops  have  been  bad   for  a  year   or   two,  and  no   rain

^  VYmy,  Nat.  Hist.  xii.  54;   Solinus,  ^  A.  C.  Haddon,  in  Journal  of  the

xxxiii.  6  sq.,  p.  166  ed.  Mommsen  (first  Anthropological  htstitute,  xix.  (1890),

edition).  p.  467.

^  Palladius,  De  re  rustic  a,  i.  6.   14;  *  /(/.,  in  Journ.  Anthrop.  Inst.  xix.

Geoponica,  ix.  3.  5  sq.  (1890),  p.  397.


212  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  SEXES  chap.

falls,  the  villagers  set  down  the  dearth  to  secret  sins  of  this
kind,  and  say  that  the  God  of  heaven  and  earth  is  angry
with  them  on  that  account  ;  and  they  all  unite  in  making
an  offering  to  appease  him.  Further,  whenever  adultery  or
fornication  is  detected,  the  elders  decide  that  the  sinners
must  buy  a  hog  and  kill  it.  Then  the  woman  takes  one
foot  of  the  hog,  and  the  man  takes  another,  and  they  scrape
out  furrows  in  the  ground  with  each  foot,  and  fill  the
furrows  with  the  blood  of  the  hog.  Next  they  scratch  the
ground  with  their  hands  and  pray  :  "  God  of  heaven  and
earth,  God  of  the  mountains  and  hills,  I  have  destroyed  the
productiveness  of  the  country.  Do  not  be  angry  with  me,
do  not  hate  me  ;  but  have  mercy  on  me,  and  compassionate
me.  Now  I  repair  the  mountains,  now  I  heal  the  hills,  and
the  streams  and  the  lands.  May  there  be  no  failure  of
crops,  may  there  be  no  unsuccessful  labours,  or  unfortunate
efforts  in  my  country.  Let  them  be  dissipated  to  the  foot
of  the  horizon.  Make  thy  paddy  fruitful,  thy  rice  abundant.
Make  the  vegetables  to  flourish.  If  we  cultivate  but  little,
still  grant  that  we  may  obtain  a  little."  After  each  has
prayed  thus,  they  return  to  the  house  and  say  they  have
repaired  the  earth.^  The  Battas  of  Sumatra  think  that  if
an  unmarried  woman  is  big  with  child,  it  is  necessary  to  give
her  in  marriage  at  once,  e^en  to  a  man  of  lower  rank  ;  for
otherwise  the  people  will  be  infested  by  tigers,  and  the
crops  in  the  field  will  not  yield  an  abundant  return.  The
crime  of  incest,  in  their  opinion,  would  blast  the  whole
harvest  if  the  wrong  were  not  speedily  repaired.^  When
the  rain  pours  down  steadily  day  after  day  and  week  after
week,  and  the  crops  are  rotting  in  the  fields,  the  Dyaks  of
Borneo  come  to  the  conclusion  that  some  one  has  been
indulging  in  fleshly  lusts  ;  so  the  elders  lay  their  heads
together  and  adjudicate  on  all  cases  of  incest  and  bigamy,
and  purify  the  earth  with  the  blood  of  pigs,  which  appears
to  possess  in  a  high  degree  the  valuable  property  of  atoning

1   P'.   Mason,  "On  dwellings,  works  Bila  -  stroomgebied     op      het      eiland

of    art,    laws,    etc.,    of    the   Karens,"  Sumatra,"   Tijdschrift  van  het  N'eder-

Journal    of    the     Asiatic     Society    of  laiidsch  Aai-drijkskundis;   Genootschap,

Bengal^    xxxvii.    (1868),     Part     ii.    p.  Tweede  Serie,  dl.  iii.  Afdeeling,  meer

147  sq.  uitgebreide   artikelen,    No.    3    (1886),

'■^  J.    B.   Neumann,   "  Ilet   Pane-  en  p.  514  sq.


HI  ON  CROPS  AND  THE  WEATHER  213

for  moral  guilt.  For  three  days  the  villages  are  tabooed  and
all  labour  discontinued  ;  the  inhabitants  remain  at  home,  and
no  strangers  are  admitted.  Not  long  ago  the  offenders,
whose  lewdness  had  thus  brought  the  whole  country  into
danger,  would  have  been  punished  with  death  or  at  least
slavery.  A  Dyak  may  not  marry  his  first  cousin  unless  he
first  performs  a  special  ceremony  called  bergaput  to  avert
evil  consequences  from  the  land.  The  couple  repair  to
the  water-side,  fill  a  small  pitcher  with  their  personal
ornaments,  and  sink  it  in  the  river  ;  or  instead  of  a  jar  they
fling  a  chopper  and  a  plate  into  the  water.  A  pig  is  then
sacrificed  on  the  bank,  and  its  carcass,  drained  of  blood,  is
thrown  in  after  the  jar.  Next  the  pair  are  pushed  into  the
water  by  their  friends  and  ordered  to  bathe  together.
Lastly,  a  joint  of  bamboo  is  filled  with  pig's  blood,  and  the
couple  perambulate  the  country  and  the  villages  round
about,  sprinkling  the  blood  on  the  ground.  After  that  they
are  free  to  marry.  This  is  done,  we  are  told,  for  the  sake
of  the  whole  country,  in  order  that  the  rice  may  not  be
blasted.^  When  it  rains  in  torrents,  the  Galelareese  say  that
brother  and  sister,  or  father  and  daughter,  or  in  short  some
near  relations  are  having  illicit  relations  with  each  other,
and  that  every  human  being  must  be  informed  of  it,  for  then
only  will  the  rain  cease  to  descend.  The  superstition  has
repeatedly  caused  blood  relations  to  be  accused,  rightfully  or
wrongfully,  of  incest.  The  people  also  regard  other  alarming
natural  phenomena,  for  instance  a  violent  earthquake  or  the
eruption  of  a  volcano,  as  consequences  of  crimes  of  the
same  sort.  Persons  accused  of  the  crime  are  brought  to
Ternate  ;   it  is  said  that   formerly  they  were  often   drowned


1   H.  Ling   Roth,  "  Low's  natives  of  to  be    accursed   of  the  gods  until   the

'^oxn&o,^'  Journal  of  the  Anthropological  proper    sacrifice    has    been     offered."

/iistittite,  xxi.  {i^g2),  pp.  ii},  sq.,  133,  In  respectable  Dyak  families,  when  an

xxii.    (1893),   p.    24  ;     id..    Natives  of  unmarried  girl  is  found  with  child  and

Sarawak  and  British  North  Borneo,  i.  the  father  is  unknown,  they  sacrifice  a

401.       Compare   J.   Perham,    "  Petara  pig   and   sprinkle    the    doors    with    its

or    Sea   Dyak    Go<\s,"  Journal  of  the  blood  to  wash  away  the  sin  (Spenser  St.

Straits  Branch   of  the    Koyal   Asiatic  John,   Life   in  the  Forests  of  the  Far

Society,    No.    8,    December    1881,    p.  East,'^   i.    64).       In    Ceram    a    person

150  ;      H.     Ling     Roth,     Natives    of  convicted   of  unchastity  has  to  expiate

Sarawak,   etc.,   i.    180.      According  to  his  guilt  by  smearing  every  house  in  the

Archdeacon   Perham,    "  Every  district  village  with  the  blood  of  a  pig  and  a

traversed    by  an   adulterer   is   believed  fowl  (A.  Bastian,  Indonesicn,  i.  144).


214  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  SEXES  chap.

on  the  way  or,  on  being  haled  thither,  were  condemned  to
be  thrown  into  the  volcano,^  In  Loango  the  negroes  think
that  drought  and  dearth  result  from  the  intercourse  of  a
man  with  an  immature  girl,  unless  the  offender  repairs  to
court,  and  there  in  the  presence  of  the  king  and  a  large
audience  expiates  his  guilt  by  dances  and  other  cere-
monies, in  return  for  which  he  receives  absolution  from  the
king.^

When  we  observe  how  widely  diffused  is  the  belief  in
the  sympathetic  influence  of  human  conduct,  and  especially
of  the  relations  of  the  sexes,  on  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  we
may  perhaps  be  allowed  to  conjecture  that  the  Lenten  fast,
with  the  rule  of  continence  which  is  still,  I  understand,
enjoined  on  strict  Catholics  during  that  season,  was  in  its
origin  intended,  not  so  much  to  commemorate  the  sufferings
of  a  dying  God,  as  to  foster  the  growth  of  the  seed,  which
in  the  bleak  days  of  early  spring  the  husbandman  commits,
with  anxious  care  and  misgiving,  to  the  bosom  of  the  naked
earth.      But  to  this  topic  we  shall  recur  later  on.

If  we  ask  why  it  is  that  similar  beliefs  should  logically
lead,  among  different  peoples,  to  such  opposite  modes  of
conduct  as  strict  chastity  and  more  or  less  open  debauchery,
the  reason,  as  it  presents  itself  to  the  primitive  mind,  is
perhaps  not  very  far  to  seek.  If  rude  man  identifies  him-
self, in  a  manner,  with  nature  ;  if  he  fails  to  distinguish  the
impulses  and  processes  in  himself  from  the  methods  which
nature  adopts  to  ensure  the  reproduction  of  plants  and
animals,  he  may  jump  to  one  of  two  conclusions.  Either
he  may  infer  that  by  yielding  to  his  appetites  he  will  thereby
assist  in  the  multiplication  of  plants  and  animals  ;  or  he  may
imagine  that  the  vigour  which  he  refuses  to  expend  in  repro-
ducing his  own  kind,  will  form  as  it  were  a  store  of  energy
whereby  other  creatures,  whether  vegetable  or  animal,  will
somehow  benefit  in  propagating  their  species.     Thus  from  the

^   M.    J.     van     Baarda,     "  Fabelen,  plained    as     punishments    inflicted    by

Verhalen       en       Oveileveringen       der  evil  spirits  for  indulgence  in  illicit  love

Galelareezen,"  Bljdrai^en   tot  de  Taal-  (F.  S.  A.  de  Clercq,  Bijdrageri  tot  dc

Land-     en     I'olkenktinde    van    Nedei--  A'cnnis  de>J\esidentie  Ternate{htydLe.x\,

landsch  Indie,    xlv.    (1895),    p.     514.  1890),  p.   132).

In   the    Banggai    Archipelago,    to    the  -  Dapper,  Description  de  rAfrique,

east   of  Celebes,   earthquakes    are    ex-  p.  326.


in


ON  THE  FOOD  SUPPL  V


215


same  crude  philosophy,  the  same  primitive  notions  of  nature
and  Hfe,  the  savage  may  derive  by  different  channels  a  rule
either  of  profligacy  or  of  asceticism.

To  readers  bred  in  a  religion  which  is  saturated  with
the  ascetic  idealism  of  the  East,  the  explanation  which  I
have  given  of  the  rule  of  continence  observed  under  certain
circumstances  by  rude  or  savage  peoples  may  seem  far-
fetched and  improbable.  They  may  think  that  the  idea  of
moral  purity,  which  is  so  intimately  associated  in  their
minds  with  the  observance  of  such  a  rule,  furnishes  a
sufficient  explanation  of  it  ;  they  may  hold  with  Milton  ^
that  chastity  in  itself  is  a  noble  virtue,  and  that  the  restraint
which  it  imposes  on  one  of  the  strongest  impulses  of  our
animal  nature  marks  out  those  who  can  submit  to  it  as  men
raised  above  the  common  herd,  and  therefore  worthy  to.
receive  the  seal  of  the  divine  approbation.  However  natural
this  mode  of  thought  may  seem  to  us,  it  is  utterly  foreign
and  indeed  incomprehensible  to  the  savage.  If  he  resists
on  occasion  the  sexual  instinct,  it  is  from  no  high  idealism,
no  ethereal  aspiration  after  moral  purity,  but  for  the  sake  of
some  ulterior  yet  perfectly  definite  and  concrete  object,  to
gain  which  he  is  prepared  to  sacrifice  the  immediate  gratifi-
cation of  his  senses.  That  this  is  or  may  be  so,  the  ex-
amples I  have  cited  are  amply  sufficient  to  establish.  They
show  that  where  the  instinct  of  self-preservation,  which
manifests  itself  chiefly  in  the  search  for  food,  conflicts  or
appears  to  conflict  with  the  instinct  which  conduces  to  the
propagation  of  the  species,  the  former  instinct,  as  the  primary
and  more  fundamental,  is  capable  of  overmastering  the  latter.
In  other  words,  primitive  man  is  willing  to  restrain  his  sexual
propensity  for  the  sake  of  food.  Another  object  for  the  sake
of  which  the  savage  consents  to  exercise  the  same  self-restraint


1  "Next  (for  hear  me  out  now,
readers)  that  I  may  tell  ye  whither  my
younger  feet  wandered  ;  I  betook  me
among  those  lofty  fables  and  romances
which  recount  in  solemn  cantos  the
deeds  of  knighthood  founded  by  our
victorious  kings,  and  from  hence  had
in  renown  over  all  Christendom.
There  I  read  it  in  the  oath  of  every
knight,  that    he  should  defend  to   the


expense  of  his  best  blood,  or  of  his
life,  if  it  so  befell  him,  the  honour  and
chastity  of  virgin  or  matron  ;  from
whence  even  then  I  learned  what  a
noble  virtue  chastity  sure  must  be,  to
the  defence  of  which  so  many  worthies,
by  such  a  dear  adventure  of  themselves,
had  sworn  "  (Milton,  Apology  for  Smec-
lyvDuiiis).


2i6  THE  PROTOTYPES  OF  chap.

is  victory  in  war.  In  an  earlier  part  of  this  work  ^  we  saw
that  not  only  the  warrior  in  the  field  but  his  friends  at
home  will  often  bridle  their  sensual  appetites  from  a  belief
that  by  so  doing  they  will  the  more  easily  overcome  their
enemies.  The  fallacy  of  such  a  belief,  like  the  belief
that  the  chastity  of  the  sower  conduces  to  the  growth
of  the  seed,  is  plain  enough  to  us  ;  yet  perhaps  the
self-restraint  which  these  and  the  like  beliefs,  vain  and
false  as  they  are,  have  imposed  on  mankind,  has  not
been  without  its  utility  in  bracing  and  strengthening  the
breed.  For  strength  of  character  in  the  race  as  in  the
individual  consists  mainly  in  the  power  of  sacrificing  the
present  to  the  future,  of  disregarding  the  immediate  tempta-
tions of  ephemeral  pleasure  for  more  distant  and  lasting
sources  of  satisfaction.  The  more  the  power  is  exercised
the  higher  and  stronger  becomes  the  character ;  till  the
heieht  of  heroism  is  reached  in  men  who  sacrifice  the
pleasures  of  life  and  even  life  itself  for  the  sake  of  keeping
or  winning  for  others,  perhaps  in  distant  ages,  the  blessings
of  freedom  and  truth.

Compared  with  the  Corn-mother  of  Germany  and  the
harvest -Maiden  of  Scotland,  the  Demeter  and  Proserpine
of  Greece  are  late  products  of  religious  growth.  But,  as
Aryans,  the  Greeks  must  at  one  time  or  another  have
observed  harvest  customs  like  those  which  are  still  practised
by  Celts,  Teutons,  and  Slavs,  and  which,  far  beyond  the
limits  of  the  Aryan  world,  have  been  practised  by  the
Incas  of  Peru,  the  Dyaks  of  Borneo,  and  the  Malays  of
Java,  of  Sumatra,  and  of  the  Peninsula — a  sufficient  proof
that  the  ideas  on  which  these  customs  rest  are  not  confined
to  any  one  race,  but  naturally  suggest  themselves  to  all
untutored  peoples  engaged  in  agriculture.  It  is  probable,
therefore,  that  Demeter  and  Proserpine,  those  stately  and
beautiful  figures  of  Greek  mythology,  grew  out  of  the  same
simple  beliefs  and  practices  which  still  prevail  among  our
modern  peasantry,  and  that  they  were  represented  by  rude
dolls  made  out  of  the  yellow  sheaves  on  many  a  harvest-
field  long  before  their  breathing  images  were  wrought  in
bronze   and   marble    by   the    master    hands    of   Phidias    and

1  Vol.  i.  pp.  29,  31  sq.,  328.


Ill  DE METER  AND  PROSERPINE  217

Praxiteles.  A  reminiscence  of  that  olden  time — a  scent,  so
to  say,  of  the  harvest-field — lingered  to  the  last  in  the  title
of  the  Maiden  {Kore)  by  which  Proserpine  was  commonly
known.  Thus  if  the  prototype  of  Demeter  is  the  Corn-
mother  of  Germany,  the  prototype  of  Proserpine  is  the  harvest-
Maiden,  which,  autumn  after  autumn,  is  still  made  from  the
last  sheaf  on  the  Braes  of  Balquhidder.  Indeed  if  we  knew
more  about  the  peasant-farmers  of  ancient  Greece  we  should
probably  find  that  even  in  classical  times  they  continued
annually  to  fashion  their  Corn -mothers  (Demeters)  and
Maidens  (Proserpines)  out  of  the  ripe  corn  on  the  harvest-
fields.^  But  unfortunately  the  Demeter  and  Proserpine
whom  we  know  are  the  denizens  of  towns,  the  majestic
inhabitants  of  lordly  temples  ;  it  was  for  such  divinities
alone  that  the  refined  writers  of  antiquity  had  eyes  ;  the
uncouth  rites  performed  by  rustics  amongst  the  corn  were
beneath  their  notice.  Even  if  they  noticed  them,  they
probably  never  dreamed  of  any  connection  between  the
puppet  of  corn-stalks  on  the  sunny  stubble-field  and  the
marble  divinity  in  the  shady  coolness  of  the  temple.  Still
the  writings  even  of  these  town-bred  and  cultured  persons
afford  us  an  occasional  glimpse  of  a  Demeter  as  rude  as  the
rudest  that  a  remote  German  village  can  show.  Thus
the  story  that  lasion  begat  a  child  Plutus  ("  wealth,"
"  abundance")  by  Demeter  on  a  thrice-ploughed  field,^  may
be  compared  with  the  West  Prussian  custom  of  the  mock
birth  of  a  child  on  the  harvest-field.^  In  this  Prussian
custom  the  pretended  mother  represents  the  Corn-mother
{Zytjtiainatka)  ;  the  pretended  child  represents  the  Corn-
baby,  and  the  whole  ceremony  is  a  charm  to  ensure  a  crop
next  year.*      The  custom   and  the   legend  alike   point  to  an

1  In  Theocritus  (vii.  155  sqq.)  it  stood  in  the  middle  of  a  threshing-
mention  is  made  of  a  Demeter  of  the  floor,  and  after  it  had  been  removed
Threshing-floor  with  a  heap  of  corn  by  Dr.  Clarke  in  1802  the  people
beside  her  and  sheaves  and  poppies  in  lamented  that  their  abundant  harvests
her  hands.  Mr.  W.  H.  D.  Rouse  had  disappeared  with  it.  See  E.
suggested  to  me  that  this  description  Dodwell,  Tour  through  Greece,  i.  583:
perhaps  applied  to  a  Corn-mother  or  compare  R.  Chandler,  Z>'rt:<:'^/j?7/ 6';-^ifff,
Corn-maiden  of  the  kind  referred  to  in  p.    191.

the  text.      In  modern  times  an  image  of  ^  Homer,  Od.  v.   125  si/q.  ;  Hesiod,

Demeter  at  her  old  sanctuary  of  Eleusis  Theog.  969  sqq.

was     regarded     by     the     peasants     as  ^  See  above,  p.    \%2  sq.

essential  to  the  prosperity  of  the  crops  ;  *   It  is  possible  that  a  ceremony  per-


2l8


DO  UBLE  PERSONIFICA  TIOM


CHAP.


older  practice  of  performing,  among  the  sprouting  crops  in
spring  or  the  stubble  in  autumn,  one  of  those  real  or  mimic
acts  of  procreation  by  which,  as  we  have  seen,  primitive
man  often  seeks  to  infuse  his  own  vigorous  life  into  the
languid  or  decaying  energies  of  nature.  Another  glimpse
of  the  savage  under  the  civilised  Demeter  will  be  afforded
farther  on,  when  we  come  to  deal  with  another  aspect  of
these  agricultural  divinities.

The  reader  may  have  observed  that  in  modern  folk-
customs  the  corn-spirit  is  generally  represented  either  by  a
Corn-mother  (Old  Woman,  etc.)  or  by  a  Maiden  (Harvest-
child,  etc.),  not  both  by  a  Corn-mother  and  by  a  Maiden.
Why  then  did  the  Greeks  represent  the  corn  both  as  a  mother
and  a  daughter  }

In  the  Breton  custom  the  mother-sheaf — a  large  figure
made  out  of  the  last  sheaf  with  a  small  corn-doll  inside  of
it — -clearly  represents  both  the  Corn-mother  and  the  Corn-
daughter,  the  latter  still  unborn.^  Again,  in  the  Prussian
custom  just  referred  to,  the  woman  who  plays  the  part  of
Corn-mother  represents  the  ripe  grain  ;  the  child  appears  to
represent  next  year's  corn,  which  may  be  regarded,  naturally
enough,  as  the  child  of  this  year's  corn,  since  it  is  from  the
seed  of  this  year's  harvest  that  next  year's  crop  will  spring.
Further,  we  have  seen  that  among  the  Malays  of  the  Peninsula
and  sometimes  among  the  Highlanders  of  Scotland  the  spirit
of  the  grain  is  represented  in  double  female  form,  both  as  old
and  young,  by  means  of  ears  taken  alike  from  the  ripe  crop  :
in  Scotland  the  old  spirit  of  the  corn  appears  as  the  Carline
or  Cailleach,  the  young  spirit  as  the  Maiden  ;  while  among
the  Malays  of  the  Peninsula  the  two  spirits  of  the  rice  are


formed  in  a  Cyprian  worship  of  Ariadne
may  have  been  of  this  nature.  See  Plut-
arch, Theseus,  20:  iv  dr]  rfj  dvcrlq.  tov
VopwLaiov  /XTji'ds  IcrTafievov  Bevrepa  Kara-
K\iv6n.ev6v  TLva.  tGiv  veavicTKiov  (pO^yyecrOai
Kal  iroLeiv  direp  tiSij/oOtra:  yvvalKes.  We
have  already  seen  grounds  for  regarding
Ariadne  as  a  goddess  or  spirit  of  vegeta-
tion (vol.  i.  p.  229).  If,  however,  the
reference  is  to  the  Syro-Macedonian
calendar,  in  which  Gorpiaeus  corre-
sponds to  September  (Daremberg  et
Saglio,  Dkt.des  Aiitiijiiih's,  i.  831),  the


ceremony  could  not  have  been  a  harvest
celebration,  but  may  have  been  a  vin-
tage one.  Amongst  the  Minnitarees  in
North  America,  the  Prince  of  Neuwied
saw  a  tall  strong  woman  pretend  to
bring  up  a  stalk  of  maize  out  of  her
stomach  ;  the  object  of  the  ceremony
was  to  secure  a  good  crop  of  maize  in
the  following  year.  See  Maximilian,
Prinz  zu  Wied,  J^eise  in  das  iunere
Nord-A7uerica,  ii.  269.

1   See  above,  p.   173.


Ill  OF  THE  CORN  219

definitely  related  to  each  other  as  mother  and  child.^  Judged
by  these  analogies  Demeter  would  be  the  ripe  crop  of  this
year  ;  Proserpine  would  be  the  seed-corn  taken  from  it  and
sown  in  autumn,  to  reappear  in  spring.  The  descent  of  Pro-
serpine into  the  lower  world  '^  would  thus  be  a  mythical
expression  for  the  sowing  of  the  seed  ;  her  reappearance  in
spring  ^  would  signify  the  sprouting  of  the  young  corn.
In  this  way  the  Proserpine  of  one  year  becomes  the  Demeter
of  the  next,  and  this  may  very  well  have  been  the  original
form  of  the  myth.  But  when  with  the  advance  of  religious
thought  the  corn  came  to  be  personified,  no  longer  as  a
being  that  went  through  the  whole  cycle  of  birth,  growth,
reproduction,  and  death  within  a  year,  but  as  an  immortal
goddess,  consistency  requires  that  one  of  the  two  personifi-
cations, the  mother  or  the  daughter,  should  be  sacrificed.
However,  the  double  conception  of  the  corn  as  mother  and
daughter  may  have  been  too  old  and  too  deeply  rooted  in
the  popular  mind  to  be  eradicated  by  logic,  and  so  room
had  to  be  found  in  the  reformed  myth  both  for  mother
and  daughter.  This  was  done  by  assigning  to  Proserpine
the  character  of  the  corn  sown  in  autumn  and  sprouting  in
spring,  while  Demeter  was  left  to  play  the  somewhat  vague
part  of  the  heavy  mother  of  the  corn,  who  laments  its  annual
disappearance  underground,  and  rejoices  over  its  reappear-
ance in  spring.  Thus  instead  of  a  regular  succession  of
divine  beings,  each  living  a  year  and  then  giving  birth  to  her
successor,  the  reformed  myth  exhibits  the  conception  of  two
divine  and  immortal  beings,  one  of  whom  annually  disappears
into  and  reappears  from  the  ground,  while  the  other  has  little
to  do  but  to  weep  and  rejoice  at  the  appropriate  seasons.

This  theory  of  the  double  personification  of  the  corn
in  Greek  myth  assumes  that  both  personifications  (Demeter
and  Proserpine)  are  original.  But  if  we  suppose  that  the
Greek  myth  started  with  a  single  personification,  the  after-

^  See  above,  pp.  \%']  sqq.,  i()<)sc/q.  sowing.       But    in    Sicily    her    descent

^  Cp.    Preller,    Griech.    Myfhol.^  i.  seems   to  have   been  celebrated  when

763,    nole   3.      In   Greece    the   annual  the  corn  was  fully  ripe  (Diodorus,  v.  4),

descent  of  Proserpine  appears  to  have  that  is,  in  summer.

taken    place   at    the    Great    Eleusinian

Mysteries   and    at    the   Thesmophoria,  ^   Homer,    IJyiim    to   Demeter,   401

that  is,  about  the  time  of  the  autumn  sqq.  ;   Preller,  /.r.


220  DOUBLE  PERSONIFICATION  chap.

growth  of  a  second  personification  may  perhaps  be  explained
as  follows.  On  looking  over  the  harvest  customs  which  have
been  passed  under  review,  it  may  be  noticed  that  they  involve
two  distinct  conceptions  of  the  corn-spirit.  For  whereas  in
some  of  the  customs  the  corn-spirit  is  treated  as  immanent  in
the  corn,  in  others  it  is  regarded  as  external  to  it.  Thus
when  a  particular  sheaf  is  called  by  the  name  of  the  corn-
spirit,  and  is  dressed  in  clothes  and  handled  with  reverence,^
the  spirit  is  clearly  regarded  as  immanent  in  the  corn.  But
when  the  spirit  is  said  to  make  the  crops  grow  by  passing
through  them,  or  to  blight  the  grain  of  those  against  whom
she  has  a  grudge,"  she  is  apparently  conceived  as  distinct
from,  though  exercising  power  over,  the  corn.  Conceived  in
the  latter  way  the  corn-spirit  is  in  a  fair  way  to  become  a
deity  of  the  corn,  if  she  has  not  become  so  already.  Of
these  two  conceptions,  that  of  the  corn-spirit  as  immanent  in
the  corn  is  doubtless  the  older,  since  the  view  of  nature  as
animated  by  indwelling  spirits  appears  to  have  generally  pre-
ceded the  view  of  it  as  controlled  by  external  deities  ;  to
put  it  shortly,  animism  precedes  deism.  In  the  harvest  cus-
toms of  our  European  peasantry  the  corn-spirit  appears  to
be  conceived  now  as  immanent  in  the  corn  and  now  as
external  to  it.  In  Greek  mythology,  on  the  other  hand,
Demeter  is  viewed  rather  as  the  deity  of  the  corn  than  as  the
spirit  immanent  in  it.^  The  process  of  thought  which  leads
to  the  change  from  the  one  mode  of  conception  to  the  other
is  anthropomorphism,  or  the  gradual  investment  of  the  im-
manent spirits  with  more  and  more  of  the  attributes  of
humanity.  As  men  emerge  from  savagery  the  tendency  to
humanise  their  divinities  gains  strength  ;  and  the  more
human  these  become  the  wider  is  the  breach  which  severs
them  from  the  natural  objects  of  which  they  were  at  first
merely  the   animating   spirits  or  souls.      But  in  the  progress

1  In  some  places  it  was  customary  The  Malay  sorceress  who  cut  the  seven
to  kneel  down  before  the  last  sheaf,  in  ears  of  rice  to  form  the  Rice-child  kissed
others  to  kiss  it.  See  W.  Mannhardt,  the  ears  after  she  had  cut  them  (W.  W.
Kornddmonen,  p.  26;  id.,  Mytholog.  Skeat,  Alalay  Magic,  p.  241).
Forschungen,  p.  339.  The  custom  of  ^  Above,  p.  170  sq.
kneeling  and  bowing  before  the  last  ■''  In  the  Homeric  Hymn  to  De-
corn  is  said  to  have  been  observed,  at  meter,  slie  is  represented  as  controlling
least  occasionally,  in  England.  See  the  growth  of  the  corn.  See  above,
Folk-lore  Journal,  vii.  (18SS),  p.  270.  p.  169.


Ill  OF  THE  CORN  221

upwards  from  savagery,  men  of  the  same  generation  do
not  march  abreast ;  and  though  the  new  anthropomorphic
gods  may  satisfy  the  religious  wants  of  the  more  developed
intelligences,  the  backward  members  of  the  community  will
cling  by  preference  to  the  old  animistic  notions.  Now  when
the  spirit  of  any  natural  object  such  as  the  corn  has  been
invested  with  human  qualities,  detached  from  the  object,  and
converted  into  a  deity  controlling  it,  the  object  itself  is,  by
the  withdrawal  of  its  spirit,  left  inanimate  ;  it  becomes,  so  to
say,  a  spiritual  vacuum.  But  the  popular  fancy,  intolerant
of  such  a  vacuum,  in  other  words,  unable  to  conceive  any-
thing as  inanimate,  immediately  creates  a  fresh  mythical
being,  with  which  it  peoples  the  vacant  object.  Thus  the
same  natural  object  comes  to  be  represented  in  mythology
by  two  distinct  beings  ;  first,  by  the  old  spirit  now  separated
from  it  and  raised  to  the  rank  of  a  deity  ;  second,  by  the
new  spirit,  freshly  created  by  the  popular  fancy  to  supply
the  place  vacated  by  the  old  spirit  on  its  elevation  to  a
higher  sphere.  The  problem  for  mythology  now  is,  having
got  two  distinct  personifications  of  the  same  object,  what
to  do  with  them  ?  How  are  their  relations  to  each  other
to  be  adjusted,  and  room  found  for  both  in  the  mythological
system  ?  When  the  old  spirit  or  new  deity  is  conceived  as
creating  or  producing  the  object  in  question,  the  problem  is
easily  solved.  Since  the  object  is  believed  to  be  produced
by  the  old  spirit,  and  animated  by  the  new  one,  the  latter,  as
the  soul  of  the  object,  must  also  owe  its  existence  to  the
former  ;  thus  the  old  spirit  will  stand  to  the  new  one  as  pro-
ducer to  produced,  that  is,  in  mythology,  as  parent  to  child,
and  if  both  spirits  are  conceived  as  female,  their  relation  will
be  that  of  mother  and  daughter.  In  this  way,  starting  from
a  single  personification  of  the  corn  as  female,  mythic  fancy
might  in  time  reach  a  double  personification  of  it  as  mother
and  daughter.  It  would  be  very  rash  to  affirm  that  this  was
the  way  in  which  the  myth  of  Demeter  and  Proserpine
actually  took  shape  ;  but  it  seems  a  legitimate  conjecture
that  the  reduplication  of  deities,  of  which  Demeter  and  Pro-
serpine furnish  an  example,  may  sometimes  have  arisen  in  the
way  indicated.  For  example,  among  the  pairs  of  deities
whom  we  have  been  considering,  it  has  been  shown  that  there


222  DUPLICATE  DEITIES  chap.

are  grounds  for  regarding  both  Isis  and  her  companion  god
Osiris  as  personifications  of  the  corn/  On  the  hypothesis  just
suggested,  Isis  would  be  the  old  corn-spirit,  and  Osiris  would
be  the  newer  one,  whose  relationship  to  the  old  spirit  was  vari-
ously explained  as  that  of  brother,  husband,  and  son  ;  '^  for  of
course  mythology  would  always  be  free  to  account  for  the
coexistence  of  the  two  divinities  in  more  ways  than  one.
Further,  this  hypothesis  offers  at  least  a  possible  explanation
of  the  relation  of  Virbius  to  the  Arician  Diana.  The  latter,
as  we  have  seen,^  was  a  tree-goddess  ;  and  if,  as  I  have  con-
jectured, the  Flamen  Virbialis  was  no  other  than  the  priest  of
Nemi  himself,  that  is,  the  King  of  the  Wood,  Virbius  must
also  have  been  a  tree-spirit.  On  the  present  hypothesis  he
was  the  newer  tree-spirit,  whose  relation  to  the  old  tree-spirit
(Diana)  was  explained  by  representing  him  as  her  favourite
or  lover.  It  must  not,  however,  be  forgotten  that  this  pro-
posed explanation  of  such  pairs  of  deities  as  Demeter  and
Proserpine,  Isis  and  Osiris,  Diana  and  Virbius,  is  purely  con-
jectural, and  is  only  given  for  what  it  is  worth.


^   9.   Lityerses

In  the  preceding  pages  an  attempt  has  been  made  to
show  that  in  the  Corn-mother  and  harvest-Maiden  of  Nor-
thern Europe  we  have  the  prototypes  of  Demeter  and
Proserpine.  But  an  essential  feature  is  still  wanting  to  com-
plete the  resemblance.  A  leading  incident  in  the  Greek
myth  is  the  death  and  resurrection  of  Proserpine  ;  it  is  this
incident  which,  coupled  with  the  nature  of  the  goddess  as  a
deity  of  vegetation,  links  the  myth  with  the  cults  of  Adonis,
Attis,  Osiris,  and  Dionysus  ;  and  it  is  in  virtue  of  this
incident  that  the  myth  is  considered  in  this  chapter.  It
remains,  therefore,  to  see  whether  the  conception  of  the
annual  death  and  resurrection  of  a  god,  which  figures  so  pro-
minently in  these  great  Greek  and  Oriental  worships,  has  not
also  its  origin  in  the  rustic  rites  observed  by  reapers  and
vine-dressers  amongst  the  corn-shocks  and  the  vines.

1   See  above,  pp.   141  sqq.,   145  sq.
-  VMx\y,RcaI-Eiicychpiidie  der  class.  Alterthumswissenschaft ,  v.   ion.

^  Vol.  i.  p.  230  sq.


Ill


MANEROS


223


Our  general  ignorance  of  the  popular  superstitions  and
customs  of  the  ancients  has  already  been  confessed.  But
the  obscurity  which  thus  hangs  over  the  first  beginnings  of
ancient  religion  is  fortunately  dissipated  to  some  extent  in
the  present  case.  The  worships  of  Osiris,  Adonis,  and  Attis
had  their  respective  seats,  as  we  have  seen,  in  Egypt,  Syria,
and  Phrygia  ;  and  in  each  of  these  countries  certain  harvest
and  vintage  customs  are  known  to  have  been  observed,  the
resemblance  of  which  to  each  other  and  to  the  national  rites
struck  the  ancients  themselves,  and,  compared  with  the  har-
vest customs  of  modern  peasants  and  barbarians,  seems  to
throw  some  light  on  the  origin  of  the  rites  in  question.

It  has  been  already  mentioned,  on  the  authority  of  Diodorus,
that  in  ancient  Egypt  the  reapers  were  wont  to  lament  over
the  first  sheaf  cut,  invoking  Isis  as  the  goddess  to  whom  they
owed  the  discovery  of  corn.^  To  the  plaintive  song  or  cry
sung  or  uttered  by  Egyptian  reapers  the  Greeks  gave  the
name  of  Maneros,  and  explained  the  name  by  a  story  that
Maneros,  the  only  son  of  the  first  Egyptian  king,  invented
agriculture,  and,  dying  an  untimely  death,  was  thus  lamented
by  the  people."  It  appears,  however,  that  the  name  Maneros
is  due  to  the  misunderstanding  of  the  formula  indd-ne-Jira,
"  come  thou  back,"  which  has  been  discovered  in  various
Egyptian  writings,  for  example  in  the  dirge  of  Isis  in  the
Book  of  the  Dead.^  Hence  we  may  suppose  that  the  cry
indd-ne-hra  was  chanted  by  the  reapers  over  the  cut  corn  as
a  dirge  for  the  death  of  the  corn-spirit  (Isis  or  Osiris)  and  a
prayer  for  its  return.  As  the  cry  was  raised  over  the  first
ears  reaped,  it  would  seem  that  the  corn-spirit  was  believed
by  the  Egyptians  to  be  present  in  the  first  corn  cut  and  to
die  under  the  sickle.  We  have  seen  that  in  the  Malay
Peninsula  and  Java  the  first  ears  of  rice  are  taken  to  repre-
sent either  the  Soul  of  the  Rice  or  the  Rice-bride  and  the


^  Diodorus,  i.  14,  ^rt  "yap  koX  vvv
Kararbv  depicp-ov  tous  irpurovs  afx-qdevTas
trrdxi'S  dlvras  Totis  avdpbiirovs  KdirreaOai
^r\^](riov  rod  8pdyfxaTos  Kal  TTjv'Jcriv  dva-
KaXeiadaL  k.t.X.  For  defras  we  should
perhaps  read  avi'dei'Ta';,  which  is  sup-
ported by  the  following  opdyixaros.

^  Herodotus,  ii.  79;  Pollux,  iv.  54;
Pausanias,  ix.  29.  7  ;  Athenaeus,  xiv.  p.


620  A.

•^  Brugsch,  Adonisklage  iind  Linos-
lied,  p.  24.  According  to  another
interpretation,  however,  Maneros  is  the
Egyptian  iiiannrosh,  "Let  us  be  merry. "
See  Lauth,  "  Ueber  den  agyptischen
Maneros,"  Sitzungsberichte  der  konigl.
hayer.  Akademie  der  Wissenschaften  zu
Miinchen,  1869,  ii.   163-194.


224  LINUS,  BORMUS,  LITYERSES  chai>.

Rice-bridegroom/  In  parts  of  Russia  the  first  sheaf  is
treated  much  in  the  same  way  that  the  last  sheaf  is  treated
elsewhere.  It  is  reaped  by  the  mistress  herself,  taken  home
and  set  in  the  place  of  honour  near  the  holy  pictures  ;  after-
wards it  is  threshed  separately,  and  some  of  its  grain  is
mixed  with  the  next  year's  seed-corn.^

In  Phoenicia  and  Western  Asia  a  plaintive  song,  like
that  chanted  by  the  Egyptian  corn-reapers,  was  sung  at  the
vintage  and  probably  (to  judge  by  analogy)  also  at  harvest.
This  Phoenician  song  was  called  by  the  Greeks  Linus  or
Ailinus  and  explained,  like  Maneros,  as  a  lament  for  the  death
of  a  youth  named  Linus.^  According  to  one  story  Linus
was  brought  up  by  a  shepherd,  but  torn  to  pieces  by  his
dogs.*  But,  like  Maneros,  the  name  Linus  or  Ailinus  ap-
pears to  have  originated  in  a  verbal  misunderstanding,  and
to  be  nothing  more  than  the  cry  ai  lanu,  that  is  "  woe  to  us,"
which  the  Phoenicians  probably  uttered  in  mourning  for
Adonis  ;  ^  at  least  Sappho  seems  to  have  regarded  Adonis
and  Linus  as  equivalent.*'

In  Bithynia  a  like  mournful  ditty,  called  Bormus  or
Borimus,  was  chanted  by  Mariandynian  reapers.  Bormus
was  said  to  have  been  a  handsome  youth,  the  son  of  King
Upias  or  of  a  wealthy  and  distinguished  man.  One  summer
day,  watching  the  reapers  at  work  in  his  fields,  he  went  to
fetch  them  a  drink  of  water  and  was  never  heard  of  more.
So  the  reapers  sought  for  him,  calling  him  in  plaintive  strains,
which  they  continued  to  chant  at  harvest  ever  afterwards.'

In  Phrygia  the  corresponding  song,  sung  by  harvesters
both  at  reaping  and  at  threshing,  was  called  Lityerses.  Ac-
cording to  one  story,  Lityerses  was  a  bastard  son  of  Midas,
King  of  Phrygia.  He  used  to  reap  the  corn,  and  had  an
enormous  appetite.  When  a  stranger  happened  to  enter  the
corn-field  or  to  pass  by  it,  Lityerses  gave  him  plenty  to  eat
and  drink,  then  took  him  to  the  corn-fields  on  the  banks  of

1  Above,  pp.   199  Si].,  201  sq.  Idyl.    iii.    i  ;    Callimachus,    Hymn    to

2  Ralston,    Songs    of    the    Russian  Apollo,  20.
People,  p.  249  Si].  *  Conon,  I.e.

3  Homer,    //.    xviii.    570;    Herodo-  •'  W.  Mannhardt,  A.IV.F.  p.  2S1.
tus,  ii.  79  ;   Pausanias,  ix.  29  ;  Conon,  ''   Pausanias,  I.e.

Narrat.  19.      For  the  form  Ailinus  see  "   Pollux,  iv.  54  ;  Athenaeus,  xiv.  pp.

Suidas,  s.v.',  Euripides,  Orestes,  1395  ;  619  F-620  A  ;  Hesychius,  svv.  BcDp/tov
Sophocles,  Ajax,  627.      Cp.    Moschus,       and  Mapiaj'^wo?  dprjvos.


Ill  LITYERSES  225

the  Maeander  and  compelled  him  to  reap  along  with  him.
Lastly,  he  used  to  wrap  the  stranger  in  a  sheaf,  cut  off  his
head  with  a  sickle,  and  carry  away  his  body,  wrapt  in  the
corn  stalks.  But  at  last  he  was  himself  slain  by  Hercules,
who  threw  his  body  into  the  river.^  As  Hercules  was  prob-
ably reported  to  have  slain  Lityerses  in  the  same  way  that
Lityerses  slew  others  (as  Theseus  treated  Sinis  and  Sciron),
we  may  infer  that  Lityerses  used  to  throw  the  bodies  of  his
victims  into  the  river.  According  to  another  version  of  the
story,  Lityerses,  a  son  of  Midas,  used  to  challenge  people  to  a
reaping  match  with  him,  and  if  he  vanquished  them  he  used
to  thrash  them  ;  but  one  day  he  met  with  a  stronger  reaper,
who  slew  him.^

There  are  some  grounds  for  supposing  that  in  these
stories  of  Lityerses  we  have  the  description  of  a  Phrygian
harvest  custom  in  accordance  with  which  certain  persons,
especially  strangers  passing  the  harvest  field,  were  regularly
regarded  as  embodiments  of  the  corn-spirit  and  as  such  were
seized  by  the  reapers,  wrapt  in  sheaves,  and  beheaded,  their
bodies,  bound  up  in  the  corn-stalks,  being  afterwards  thrown
into  water  as  a  rain-charm.  The  grounds  for  this  sup-
position are,  first,  the  resemblance  of  the  Lityerses  story  to
the  harvest  customs  of  European  peasantry,  and,  second,  the
frequency  of  human  sacrifices  offered  by  savage  races  to  pro-
mote the  fertility  of  the  fields.  We  will  examine  these
grounds  successively,  beginning  with  the  former.

In  comparing  the  story  with  the  harvest  customs  of
Europe,^  three  points  deserve  special  attention,  namely  :  I.
the  reaping  match  and  the  binding  of  persons  in  the  sheaves  ;
n.  the  killing  of  the  corn-spirit  or  his  representatives  ;  HI.
the  treatment  of  visiters  to  the  harvest-field  or  of  strangers
passing  it.

I.  In  regard  to  the  first  head,  we  have  seen  that  in
modern  Europe  the  person  who  cuts  or  binds  or  threshes  the

^  The  story  was  told  by  Sositheus  in  Lityerses  ;  Apostolius,  x.  74.      Photius

his  play  of  Dapluiis.      His  verses  have  mentions  the  sicl<le.      Lityerses  is  the

been  preserved  in  the  tract  of  an  anony-  subject  of  a  special  study  by  Mannhardt

mous    writer.       See    Scriptores    reruni  {Mythologische  Forschiingen,  p.  i  sqq.),

inirahiliiivi    Graeci,    ed.    Westermann,  whom  I  follow,
p.  220;  also  Athenaeus,  x.  p.  415  B;  ^   Pollux,  iv.  54.

Schol.  on   Theocritus,  x.  41  ;   Photius,  ^  In  this  comparison  I  closely  follow

Lexicon,   Suidas,    and    Hesychius,   s.v.  Mannhardt,  Myth.  Forsch.  p.   18  sqq.

VOL.   II  Q


226  REAPER,  BINDER,  OR  THRESHER  chap.

last  sheaf  is  often  exposed  to  rough   treatment  at  the   hands
of  his  fellow-labourers.      For  example,  he  is  bound  up  in  the
last    sheaf,   and,    thus   encased,   is    carried    or    carted    about,
beaten,  drenched   with  water,  thrown   on   a   dunghill,  and   so
forth.       Or,  if  he   is   spared   this  horseplay,   he    is    at    least
the  subject  of  ridicule  or  is  thought  to  be  destined  to  suffer
some   misfortune    in    the    course    of    the    year.      Hence    the
harvesters   are    naturally    reluctant   to   give   the   last   cut   at
reaping    or    the    last    stroke    at    threshing    or    to    bind    the
last   sheaf,   and   towards   the   close   of    the   work   this   reluc-
tance   produces    an    emulation    among   the    labourers,   each
striving  to  finish  his  task   as   fast   as   possible,  in  order  that
he  may  escape  the  invidious  distinction  of  being  last.^      For
example,  in  the  neighbourhood   of  Danzig,  when  the  winter
corn    is   cut   and    mostly   bound   up   in    sheaves,  the   portion
which   still    remains    to    be    bound    is    divided    amongst  the
women    binders,   each   of  whom    receives   a  swath    of  equal
length    to    bind.       A  crowd   of  reapers,   children,  and   idlers
gathers   round    to    witness    the    contest,    and    at    the    word,
"  Seize  the   Old    Man,"  the  women   fall   to  work,  all   binding
their  allotted   swaths   as   hard  as  they  can.      The   spectators
watch  them  narrowly,  and  the  woman  who  cannot  keep  pace
with   the  rest   and  consequently  binds  the  last  sheaf  has  to
carry  the  Old  Man  (that  is,  the  last  sheaf  made  up  in  the  form
of  a  man)  to  the  farmhouse  and  deliver  it  to  the  farmer  with
the  words,  "  Here  I  bring  you  the  Old  Man."      At  the  supper
which  follows,  the  Old  Man  is  placed  at  the  table  and  receives
an  abundant  portion  of  food,  which,  as  he  cannot  eat  it,  falls
to  the  share  of  the  woman  who  carried  him.      Afterwards  the
Old   Man  is   placed   in    the   yard   and  all  the  people   dance
round  him.      Or  the  woman  who  bound  the  last  sheaf  dances
for  a  good  while  with  the  Old   Man,  while  the  rest  form  a
ring  round   them  ;  afterwards   they  all,  one  after  the   other,
dance   a   single   round  with   him.      Further,  the  woman  who
bound   the   last   sheaf  goes  herself  by  the   name  of  the   Old

1  Cp.  above,  pp.  172,  179  J^f.,  l8i  Jr;.  tion   for  the  honour  of  cuttmg  it,  and

On  the  other  hand,  the  last  sheaf  is  some-  handfuls  of  standing  corn  used  to  be

times  an  object  of  desire  and  emulation.  hidden  under  sheaves  in  order  that  the

Seep.  173  sq.     It  is  so  at  Balquhidder  last  to  be  uncovered  should  form  the

oXio  [Folk-lore  Journal,  \\.  26());  a.nA\i  Maiden.  —  (From    the    information    of

was  formerly  so  on  the  Gareloch,  Dum-  Archie  Leitch.      See  p.  1S5,  note  2.)
bartonshire,  where  there  was  a  competi-


Ill  WRAPT  UP  IN  CORN  227

Man  till  the  next  harvest,  and  is  often  mocked  with  the  cry,
"  Here  comes  the  Old  Man."  ^  At  Aschbach  in  Bavaria,
when  the  reaping  is  nearly  finished,  the  reapers  say,  "  Now,
we  will  drive  out  the  Old  Man."  Each  of  them  sets  himself
to  reap  a  patch  of  corn  as  fast  as  he  can  ;  he  who  cuts
the  last  handful  or  the  last  stalk  is  greeted  by  the  rest
with  an  exulting  cry,  "  You  have  the  Old  Man."  Some-
times a  black  mask  is  fastened  on  the  reaper's  face  and  he
is  dressed  in  woman's  clothes  ;  or  if  the  reaper  is  a  woman,
she  is  dressed  in  man's  clothes.  A  dance  follows.  At  the
supper  the  Old  Man  gets  twice  as  large  a  portion  of  food  as
the  others.  At  threshing,  the  proceedings  are  the  same  ;
the  person  who  gives  the  last  stroke  is  said  to  have  the
Old  Man.-'

These  examples  illustrate  the  contests  in  reaping,  thresh-
ing, and  binding  which  take  place  amongst  the  harvesters,
from  their  unwillingness  to  suffer  the  ridicule  and  discomfort
incurred  by  the  one  who  happens  to  finish  his  work  last.  It
will  be  remembered  that  the  person  who  is  last  at  reaping,
binding,  or  threshing,  is  regarded  as  the  representative
of  the  corn-spirit,^  and  this  idea  is  more  fully  expressed  by
binding  him  or  her  in  corn-stalks.  The  latter  custom  has
been  already  illustrated,  but  a  few  more  instances  may  be
added.  At  Kloxin,  near  Stettin,  the  harvesters  call  out  to
the  woman  who  binds  the  last  sheaf,  "  You  have  the  Old
Man,  and  must  keep  him."  The  Old  Man  is  a  great  bundle
of  corn  decked  with  flowers  and  ribbons,  and  fashioned  into
a  rude  semblance  of  the  human  form.  It  is  fastened  on  a
rake  or  strapped  on  a  horse,  and  brought  with  music  to  the
village.  In  delivering  the  Old  Man  to  the  farmer,  the
woman  says —

"  Here,  dear  Sir,  is  the  Old  Man.
He  can  stay  no  longer  on  the  field,
He  can  hide  himself  no  longer,
He  must  come  into  the  village.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  pray  be  so  kind
As  to  give  the  Old  Man  a  present.''


'    W.  Mannhardt,  Jllyth.   Forsch.  p.        dciitschen    Mythologie,    ii.    p.    217,    §

19//-  397-

^  Ibid.  p.   20;   Panzer,  Beitrag  ztir  ^  Above,  p.   190.


228  REAPER,  BINDER,  OR  THRESHER  chap.

Fifty  or  sixty  years   ago   the   custom  was   to   tie  up  the
woman   herself  in  pease-straw,  and   bring  her  with  music  to
the  farmhouse,  where  the  harvesters  danced  with  her  till  the
pease-straw  fell   off/      In   other  villages  round  Stettin,  when
the  last  harvest-waggon    is   being   loaded,  there   is  a  regular
race  amongst  the  women,  each  striving  not  to  be  last.      For
she  who   places   the  last  sheaf  on    the  waggon  is  called  the
Old  Man,  and   is  completely  swathed  in  corn-stalks  ;    she   is
also  decked  with  flowers,  and  flowers  and  a   helmet  of  straw
are  placed  on  her   head.      In  solemn   procession   she   carries
the  harvest-crown  to  the  squire,  over  whose  head  she  holds  it
while  she  utters  a  string  of  good  wishes.      At  the  dance  which
follows,  the  Old   Man  has  the  right  to  choose   his,  or  rather
her,    partner ;    it   is   an    honour    to    dance   with    him."      At
Blankenfelde,   in   the   district   of  Potsdam,   the   woman    who
binds   the   last  sheaf  at  the   rye-harvest   is  saluted   with   the
cry,  "  You  have  the  Old   Man."      A  woman   is   then  tied   up
in  the   last   sheaf  in   such  a  way  that   only  her  head   is   left
free ;    her    hair   also    is   covered   with    a   cap   made  of    rye-
stalks,   adorned   with    ribbons   and    flowers.      She    is   called
the   Harvest-man,   and   must   keep   dancing   in   front   of   the
last  harvest-waggon   till  it  reaches   the  squire's  house,  where
she   receives   a   present   and    is   released    from   her   envelope
of  corn.^      At   Gommern,   near   Magdeburg,  the   reaper  who
cuts   the   last  ears  of  corn   is  often  wrapt   up   in   corn-stalks
so   completely    that    it    is    hard    to    see   whether    there  is   a
man   in    the   bundle   or  not.      Thus   wrapt    up    he   is   taken
by  another  stalwart   reaper  on   his   back,  and  carried  round
the    field   amidst    the   joyous    cries    of   the    harvesters.*      At
Neuhausen,    near    Merseburg,    the    person    who    binds    the
last   sheaf    is    wrapt    in    ears    of    oats   and   saluted    as    the
Oats-man,    whereupon    the   others    dance    round    him."      At
Brie,  Isle  de  France,  the  farmer  himself  is  tied  up  in  th&  first
sheaf.*^      At  the  harvest-home  at  Udvarhely,  Transylvania,  a
person   is   encased   in   corn-stalks,  and  wears   on   his  head  a
crown    made   out   of  the   last   ears   cut.       On    reaching   the
village  he  is  soused  with  water  over  and  over."    At  Dingelstedt,
in   the   district   of  Erfurt,  about   sixty  years   ago   it  was   the

1  W.  Mannhavdt,  Myth.  Forsch.  p.  22.  '^  Ibid.  p.  22.  ^  /^/,/_  p_  22  sq.

•*  Ibid.  p.  23.  ^  Ibid.  p.  23  sq.         "^  Ibid.  p.  24.         '  Ibid.  p.  24.


Ill  IVRAPT  UP  IN  CORN  229

custom  to  tie  up  a  man  in  the  last  sheaf.  He  was  called  the
Old  Man,  and  was  brought  home  on  the  last  waggon,  amid
huzzas  and  music.  On  reaching  the  farmyard  he  was  rolled
round  the  barn  and  drenched  with  water.^  At  Nordlingen  in
Bavaria  the  man  who  gives  the  last  stroke  at  threshing  is
wrapt  in  straw  and  rolled  on  the  threshing-floor."'  In  some
parts  of  Oberpfalz,  Bavaria,  he  is  said  to  "  get  the  Old  Man,"
is  wrapt  in  straw,  and  carried  to  a  neighbour  who  has  not  yet
finished  his  threshing."  In  Thiiringen  a  sausage  is  stuck  in
the  last  sheaf  at  threshing,  and  thrown,  with  the  sheaf,  on  the
threshing-floor.  It  is  called  the  Barremuurst  or  Bazenwurst^
and  is  eaten  by  all  the  threshers.  After  they  have  eaten  it  a
man  is  encased  in  pease-straw,  and  thus  attired  is  led  through
the  village."*

"In  all  these  cases  the  idea  is  that  the  spirit  of  the
corn — the  Old  Man  of  vegetation — is  driven  out  of  the  corn
last  cut  or  last  threshed,  and  lives  in  the  barn  during  the
winter.  At  sowing-time  he  goes  out  again  to  the  fields  to
resume  his  activity  as  animating  force  among  the  sprouting
corn."  '^

Ideas  of  the  same  sort  appear  to  attach  to  the  last  corn
in  India.  At  Hoshangabad,  in  Central  India,  when  the  reaping
is  nearly  done,  a  patch  of  corn,  about  a  rood  in  extent,  is  left
standing  in  the  cultivator's  last  field, and  the  reapers  rest  a  little.
Then  they  rush  at  this  remnant,  tear  it  up,  and  cast  it  into  the
air,  shouting  victory  to  one  or  other  of  the  local  gods,  according
to  their  religious  persuasion.  A  sheaf  is  made  out  of  this
corn,  tied  to  a  bamboo,  set  up  in  the  last  harvest  cart,  and
carried  home  in  triumph.  Here  it  is  fastened  up  in  the
threshing-floor  or  attached  to  a  tree  or  to  the  cattle-shed,
where  its  services  are  held  to  be  essential  for  the  purpose  of
averting  the  evil-eye.*'  A  like  custom  prevails  in  the  eastern
districts  of  the  North- Western  Provinces  of  India.  Sometimes
a  little  patch  is  left  untilled  as  a  refuge  for  the  field-spirit  ;
sometimes  it  is  sown,  and  when  the   corn   of  this   patch   has

1  W.  Mannhardt,^]/)///;. /w-.sy//.  p.  24.  ^  C.  A.  YAMot,  Hoshangabad  Seitle-

'^  Ibid.  p.  24  sq.  ment  Report,  p.  178,  quoted  in  Panjah

^  Ibid.  p.  25.  Notes  and  Queries,  iii.  §§  8,  168;   W.

*  Witzschel,  Sagen,   Sitten  tmd  Ge-  Crooke,    Introduction    to    the   Popular

briiuche  aus  Thiiringen,  p.  223.  Religion    and    Folklore    of  Northern

^  W.  Mannhardt,  op>.  cit.  p.  25  sq.  India,  p.  382  sq.


230  CORN-SPIRIT  KILLED  chap.

been  reaped  with  a  rush  and  a  shout,  it  is  presented  to  the
priest,  who  offers  it  to  the  local  gods  or  bestows  it  on  a
beggar.^

II.  Passing  to  the  second  point  of  comparison  between
the  Lityerses  story  and  European  harvest  customs,  we  have
now  to  see  that  in  the  latter  the  corn-spirit  is  often  believed
to  be  killed  at  reaping  or  threshing.  In  the  Romsdal  and
other  parts  of  Norway,  when  the  haymaking  is  over,  the
people  say  that  "  the  Old  Hay-man  has  been  killed."  In
some  parts  of  Bavaria  the  man  who  gives  the  last  stroke
at  threshing  is  said  to  have  killed  the  Corn-man,  the  Oats-
man,  or  the  Wheat-man,  according  to  the  crop.^  In  the
Canton  of  Tillot,  in  Lothringen,  at  threshing  the  last  corn
the  men  keep  time  with  their  flails,  calling  out  as  they
thresh,  "  We  are  killing  the  Old  Woman  !  We  are  killing
the  Old  Woman  !  "  If  there  is  an  old  woman  in  the  house
she  is  warned  to  save  herself,  or  she  will  be  struck  dead.^
Near  Ragnit,  in  Lithuania,  the  last  handful  of  corn  is  left
standing  by  itself,  with  the  words,  "  The  Old  Woman  {Boba)
is  sitting  in  there."  Then  a  young  reaper  whets  his  scythe,
and,  with  a  strong  sweep,  cuts  down  the  handful.  It  is  now
said  of  him  that  "  he  has  cut  off  the  Boba's  head  "  ;  and  he
receives  a  gratuity  from  the  farmer  and  a  jugful  of  water  over
his  head  from  the  farmer's  wife.*  According  to  another
account,  every  Lithuanian  reaper  makes  haste  to  finish  his
task  ;  for  the  Old  Rye-woman  lives  in  the  last  stalks,  and
whoever  cuts  the  last  stalks  kills  the  Old  Rye-woman,  and
by  killing  her  he  brings  trouble  on  himself.'  In  Wilkischken
(district  of  Tilsit)  the  man  who  cuts  the  last  corn  goes  by
the  name  of  "  The  killer  of  the  Rye-woman.'"^  In  Lithuania,
again,  the  corn-spirit  is  believed  to  be  killed  at  threshing  as
well  as  at  reaping.  When  only  a  single  pile  of  corn  remains
to  be  threshed,  all  the  threshers  suddenly  step  back  a  few
paces,  as  if  at  the  word  of  command.  Then  they  fall  to  work,
plying  their  flails  with  the  utmost  rapidity  and  vehemence,
till  they  come  to  the  last  bundle.  Upon  this  they  fling
themselves  with  almost  frantic  fury,  straining  every  nerve,
and    raining    blows   on   it   till   the  word   "  Halt  ! "   rings   out

1   W.  Crooke,  op.  cit.  p.  383.  2  -yv.  Mannhardt,  Myth.  Forsch.  p.  31.

•'  Ibid.  p.  334.  *   Ibid.  p.  330.  '•>  Ibid.  "^  Ibid.  p.  331.


Ill  AT  REAPING  AND  THRESHING  231

sharply  from  the  leader.  The  man  whose  flail  is  the  last  to
fall  after  the  command  to  stop  has  been  given  is  immediately
surrounded  by  all  the  rest,  crying  out  that  "  he  has  struck
the  Old  Rye-woman  dead."  He  has  to  expiate  the  deed  by
treating  them  to  brandy  ;  and,  like  the  man  who  cuts  the
last  corn,  he  is  known  as  "  the  killer  of  the  Old  Rye-
woman."  ^  Sometimes  in  Lithuania  the  slain  corn-spirit  was
represented  by  a  puppet.  Thus  a  female  figure  was  made
out  of  corn-stalks,  dressed  in  clothes,  and  placed  on  the
threshing-floor,  under  the  heap  of  corn  which  was  to  be
threshed   last.      Whoever   thereafter  p;ave   the   last  stroke  at


fc)*^


threshing  "  struck  the  Old  Woman  dead."  ''  We  have  already
met  with  examples  of  burning  the  figure  which  represents
the  corn-spirit.^  Sometimes,  again,  the  corn-spirit  is  repre-
sented by  a  man,  who  lies  down  under  the  last  corn  ;  it  is
threshed  upon  his  body,  and  the  people  say  that  "  the  Old
Man  is  being  beaten  to  death."  ^  We  have  already  seen  that
sometimes  the  farmer's  wife  is  thrust,  together  with  the  last
sheaf,  under  the  threshing-machine,  as  if  to  thresh  her,  and
that  afterwards  a  pretence  is  made  of  winnowing  her.^  At
Volders,  in  the  Tyrol,  husks  of  corn  are  stuck  behind  the
neck  of  the  man  who  gives  the  last  stroke  at  threshing,  and
he  is  throttled  with  a  straw  garland.  If  he  is  tall,  it  is
believed  that  the  corn  will  be  tall  next  year.  Then  he
is  tied  on  a  bundle  and  flung  into  the  river.^  In  Carinthia,
the  thresher  who  gave  the  last  stroke,  and  the  person  who
untied  the  last  sheaf  on  the  threshing-floor,  are  bound  hand
and  foot  with  straw  bands,  and  crowns  of  straw  are  placed
on  their  heads.  Then  they  are  tied,  face  to  face,  on  a
sledge,  dragged  through  the  village,  and  flung  into  a  brook.'^
The  custom  of  throwing  the  representative  of  the  corn-spirit
into  a  stream,  like  that  of  drenching  him  with  water,  is,
as  usual,  a  rain-charm.^

III.   Thus  far  the  representatives  of  the  corn-spirit  have
generally    been    the    man    or    woman    who    cuts,    binds,   or

'  W.   Mannhardt,  Myth.  Forsch.  p.  ^  Above,  p.   182.

335-  0  w.  Mannhardt,  jM.F.  p.  50.

'■  Ibtd.  p.  335.

^  Above,  pp.  173,  181,  193.  '   ^l'''^-  P-  50  ^1-

'  W.  Mannhardt,  Kormiamonen,  p.  *  See  above,  pp.  121  sqq.,  171,  174,

26.  179,  180.


232  CORN-SPIRIT  REPRESENTED  chap.

threshes  the  last  corn.  We  now  come  to  the  cases  in  which
the  corn-spirit  is  represented  either  by  a  stranger  passing
the  harvest-field  (as  in  the  Lityerses  tale),  or  by  a  visiter
entering  it  for  the  first  time.  All  over  Germany  it  is
customary  for  the  reapers  or  threshers  to  lay  hold  of
passing  strangers  and  bind  them  with  a  rope  made  of
corn-stalks,  till  they  pay  a  forfeit  ;  and  when  the  farmer
himself  or  one  of  his  guests  enters  the  field  or  the  threshing-
floor  for  the  first  time,  he  is  treated  in  the  same  way.
Sometimes  the  rope  is  only  tied  round  his  arm  or  his  feet
or  his  neck.^  But  sometimes  he  is  regularly  swathed  in
corn.  Thus  at  Solor  in  Norway,  whoever  enters  the  field,
be  he  the  master  or  a  stranger,  is  tied  up  in  a  sheaf  and
must  pay  a  ransom.  In  the  neighbourhood  of  Soest,  when
the  farmer  visits  the  flax-pullers  for  the  first  time,  he  is
completely  enveloped  in  flax.  Passers-by  are  also  sur-
rounded by  the  women,  tied  up  in  flax,  and  compelled  to
stand  brandy.^'  At  Nordlingen  strangers  are  caught  with
straw  ropes  and  tied  up  in  a  sheaf  till  they  pay  a  forfeit.^
In  Anhalt,  when  the  proprietor  or  one  of  his  family,  the
steward,  or  even  a  stranger  enters  the  harvest-field  for  the
first  time  after  the  reaping  has  begun,  the  wife  of  the  chief
reaper  ties  a  rope  twisted  of  corn-ears,  or  a  nosegay  made
of  corn-ears  and  flowers,  to  his  arm,  and  he  is  obliged  to
ransom  himself  by  the  payment  of  a  fine.'*  In  the  canton  of
Putanges,  in  Normandy,  the  custom  of  tying  up  the  owner
of  the  land  in  the  last  sheaf  of  wheat  is  still  practised,  or  at
least  was  still  practised  some  thirteen  or  fourteen  years  ago.
The  task  falls  to  the  women  alone.  They  throw  themselves
on  the  proprietor,  seize  him  by  the  arms,  the  legs,  and  the
body,  throw  him  to  the  ground,  and  stretch  him  on  the  last
sheaf.  Then  a  pretence  is  made  of  binding  him,  and  the
conditions  to  be  observed  at  the  harvest-supper  are  dictated
to  him.  When  he  has  accepted  them,  he  is  released  and
allowed  to  get  up.''      At  Brie,  Isle  de  France,  when  any  one

1   W.     Mannhardt,    cp.    cit.    p.    32  ■*  O.  Hartung,  "Ziir  Volkskunde  aiis

sqq.      Compare   Revue  des    T?-adiiioiis  Anhalt,"    Zeitschrift   des    Vereins  fiir

populaires,  iii.  (1888),  p.  598.  Volkskunde,  vii.  (1897),  p.   153.

-  W.  Mannhardt,  Alythol.  ForscJi.  p.  ^  J.    Lecoeur,    Esqiiisses  dti    Socage

35  i^.  Norinaiid,     ii.     240    sq.    (Conde-sur-

3  Ibid.  p.  36.  Noireau,  1887).


Ill  BVA  STRANGER  233

who  does  not  belong  to  the  farm  passes  by  the  harvest-field,
the  reapers  give  chase.  If  they  catch  him,  they  bind  him  in
a  sheaf  and  bite  him,  one  after  the  other,  in  the  forehead,
crying,  "  You  shall  carry  the  key  of  the  field."  ^  "  To  have
the  key "  is  an  expression  used  by  harvesters  elsewhere  in
the  sense  of  to  cut  or  bind  or  thresh  the  last  sheaf;-  hence,
it  is  equivalent  to  the  phrases  "  You  have  the  Old  Man,"
"  You  are  the  Old  Man,"  which  are  addressed  to  the  cutter,
binder,  or  thresher  of  the  last  sheaf.  Therefore,  when  a
stranger,  as  at  Brie,  is  tied  up  in  a  sheaf  and  told  that
he  will  "  carry  the  key  of  the  field,"  it  is  as  much  as  to  say
that  he  is  the  Old  Man,  that  is,  an  embodiment  of  the  corn-
spirit.

Thus,  like  Lityerses,  modern  reapers  lay  hold  of  a  passing
stranger  and  tie  him  up  in  a  sheaf.  It  is  not  to  be  expected
that  they  should  complete  the  parallel  by  cutting  off  his  head  ;
but  if  they  do  not  take  such  a  strong  step,  their  language
and  gestures  are  at  least  indicative  of  a  desire  to  do  so.  For
instance,  in  Mecklenburg  on  the  first  day  of  reaping,  if  the
master  or  mistress  or  a  stranger  enters  the  field,  or  merely
passes  -by  it,  all  the  mowers  face  towards  him  and  sharpen
their  scythes,  clashing  their  whet-stones  against  them  in
unison,  as  if  they  were  making  ready  to  mow.  Then  the
woman  who  leads  the  mowers  steps  up  to  him  and  ties
a  band  round  his  left  arm.  He  must  ransom  himself  by
payment  of  a  forfeit.^  Near  Ratzeburg,  when  the  master
or  other  person  of  mark  enters  the  field  or  passes  by  it,
all  the  harvesters  stop  work  and  march  towards  him  in  a
body,  the  men  with  their  scythes  in  front.  On  meeting  him
they  form  up  in  line,  men  and  women.  The  men  stick  the
poles  of  their  scythes  in  the  ground,  as  they  do  in  whetting
them  ;  then  they  take  off  their  caps  and  hang  them  on  the
scythes,  while  their  leader  stands  forward  and  makes  a
speech.  When  he  has  done,  they  all  whet  their  scythes  in
measured  time  very  loudly,  after  which  they  put  on  their
caps.  Two  of  the  women  binders  then  come  forward  ;  one
of  them  ties  the   master  or  stranger  (as   the   case   may   be)

1  Mannhardt,  Afy(/io/.  Forsc/i.  p.  26.  the   same    purpose    as   the    "knot"  in

-  For  the  evidence,  see  I'iut  p.  36,  the  Cingalese  custom,  as  to  which  see

note  2.      The  "key"  in  the  European  vol.  i.  p.  400  sc/.

custom   is  probably  intended    to   serve  ■'  W.  Mannhardt,  0/.  cit.  p.  39.


234  CORN-SPIRIT  REPRESENTED  chap.

with  corn-ears  or  with  a  silken  band  ;  the  other  delivers
a  rhyming  address.  The  following  are  specimens  of  the
speeches  made  by  the  reaper  on  these  occasions.  In  some
parts  of  Pomerania  every  passer-by  is  stopped,  his  way  being
barred  with  a  corn-rope.  The  reapers  form  a  circle  round
him  and  sharpen  their  scythes,  while  their  leader  says —

"  The  men  are  ready.
The  scythes  are  bent,
The  corn  is  great  and  small.
The  gentleman  must  be  mowed.''

Then  the  process  of  whetting  the  scythes  is  repeated.^  At
Ramin,  in  the  district  of  Stettin,  the  stranger,  standing
encircled  by  the  reapers,  is  thus  addressed —

"  We'll  stroke  the  gentleman
With  our  naked  sword.
Wherewith  we  shear  meadows  and  fields.
We  shear  princes  and  lords.
Labourers  are  often  athirst  ;
If  the  gentleman  will  stand  beer  and  brandy
The  joke  will  soon  be  over.
But,  if  our  prayer  he  does  not  like.
The  sword  has  a  right  to  strike."  -

That  in  these  customs  the  whetting  of  the  scythes  is
really  meant  as  a  preliminary  to  mowing  appears  from  the
following  variation  of  the  preceding  customs.  In  the  district
of  Ltineburg  when  any  one  enters  the  harvest-field,  he  is
asked  whether  he  will  engage  a  good  fellow.  If  he  says
yes,  the  harvesters  mow  some  swaths,  yelling  and  screaming,
and  then  ask  him  for  drink-money.^

On  the  threshing-floor  strangers  are  also  regarded  as
embodiments  of  the  corn-spirit,  and  are  treated  accordingly.
At  Wiedingharde  in  Schleswig  when  a  stranger  comes  to
the  threshing-floor  he  is  asked,  "  Shall  I  teach  you  the  flail-
dance  ?  "  If  he  says  yes,  they  put  the  arms  of  the  threshing-
flail  round  his  neck  as  if  he  were  a  sheaf  of  corn,  and  press
them    together    so    tight    that    he   is   nearly   chocked.""      In

1  W.   MannliarcU,  Myth.   Forsch.  p.        or  the  master,  see  ibid.  p.  41  ;   Lemke,
39  ^'h  ]'olksthin!iliches  in  Ostpreiissen, i.  23  Si].

^  W.    Mannhardt,  Myth.  Forsch.  p.

-  //'/(/.  p.  40.    For  the  speeches  made       4 1  sq.
by  the  woman  who  binds  the  stranger  ■*   W.  Mannhardt,  op.  cil.  p.  42.


Ill


BY  A  STRANGER


235


some  parishes  of  Wermland  (Sweden),  when  a  stranger  enters
the  threshing-floor  where  the  threshers  are  at  work,  they  say-
that  "  they  will  teach  him  the  threshing-song."  Then  they
put  a  flail  round  his  neck  and  a  straw  rope  about  his  body.
Also,  as  we  have  seen,  if  a  stranger  woman  enters  the
threshing-floor,  the  threshers  put  a  flail  round  her  body  and
a  wreath  of  corn-stalks  round  her  neck,  and  call  out,  "  See
the  Corn -woman  !  See!  that  is  how  the  Corn-maiden
looks  !  "  ^

In  these  customs,  observed  both  on  the  harvest-field  and
on  the  threshing-floor,  a  passing  stranger  is  regarded  as  a
personification  of  the  corn,  in  other  words,  as  the  corn-spirit ;
and  a  show  is  made  of  treating  him  like  the  corn  by  mow-
ing, binding,  and  threshing  him.  If  the  reader  still  doubts
whether  European  peasants  can  really  regard  a  passing
stranger  in  this  light,  the  following  custom  should  set  their
doubts  at  rest.  During  the  madder-harvest  in  the  Dutch
province  of  Zealand  a  stranger  passing  by  a  field  where  the
people  are  digging  the  madder-roots  will  sometimes  call  out
to  them  Koortspillers  (a  term  of  reproach).  Upon  this,  two
of  the  fleetest  runners  make  after  him,  and,  if  they  catch
him,  they  bring  him  back  to  the  madder-field  and  bury  him
in  the  earth  up  to  his  middle  at  least,  jeering  at  him  the
while  ;  then  they  ease  nature  before  his  face.^  This  last  act
is  to  be  explained  as  follows.  The  spirit  of  the  corn  and
of  other  cultivated  plants  is  sometimes  conceived,  not  as
immanent  in  the  plant,  but  as  its  owner  ;  hence  the  cutting  of
the  corn  at  harvest,  the  digging  of  the  roots,  and  the  gather-
ing of  fruit  from  the  fruit-trees  are  each  and  all  of  them  acts
of  spoliation,  which  strip  him  of  his  property  and  reduce  him
to  poverty.  Hence  he  is  often  known  as  "  the  Poor  Man  "
or    "  the    Poor    Woman."      Thus    in    the    neighbourhood    of


1  W.  Mannhardt,  op.  cit.  p.  42.  See
above,  p.  182.  In  Thiiringen  a  being
called  the  Rush-cutter  used  to  be  much
dreaded.  On  the  morning  of  St.  John's
Day  he  was  wont  to  walk  through  the
fields  with  sickles  tied  to  his  ankles
cutting  avenues  in  thecomas  he  walked.
To  detect  him,  seven  l)undles  of  brush-
wood were  silently  threshed  with  the  flail
on  the  threshing-floor,  and  the  stranger


who  appeared  at  the  door  of  the  barn  dur-
ing the  threshing  was  the  Rush-cutter.
See  Witzschel,  Sagen,  Sitten  uud  Ge-
brdiiche  atts  Thiiringen,  p.  221.  With
the  Binseiischneider  compare  the  Bil-
schneider  and  Biberschneider  (Panzer,
Beitrag  ziir  deuiscJiet?  Mythologie,  ii.
p.  1\0  sq.  §§  372-378.)

-  W.  Mannhardt,  op.  cit.  p.  47  sq.


236


SPIRIT  OF  VEGETATION


CHAP,


Eisenach  a  small  sheaf  is  sometimes  left  standing  on  the
field  for  "the  Poor  Old  Woman."  ^  At  Marksuhl,  near
Eisenach,  the  puppet  formed  out  of  the  last  sheaf  is  itself
called  "  the  Poor  Woman."  At  Alt  Lest  in  Silesia  the  man
who  binds  the  last  sheaf  is  called  the  Beggar-man.^  In  a
village  near  Roeskilde,  in  Zealand  (Denmark),  old-fashioned
peasants  sometimes  make  up  the  last  sheaf  into  a  rude
puppet,  which  is  called  the  Rye-beggar.^  In  Southern
Schonen  the  sheaf  which  is  bound  last  is  called  the  Bes-ear  :
it  is  made  bigger  than  the  rest  and  is  sometimes  dressed
in  clothes.  In  the  district  of  Olmtitz  the  last  sheaf  is  called
the  Beggar  ;  it  is  given  to  an  old  woman,  who  must  carry  it
home,  limping  on  one  foot.^  Thus  when  the  spirit  of  vege-
tation is  conceived  as  a  being  who  is  robbed  of  his  store  and


1  W.  Mannhardt,  op.  cit.  p.  48.  To
prevent  a  rationalistic  explanation  of
this  custom,  which,  like  most  rational-
istic explanations  of  folk-custom,  would
be  wrong,  it  may  be  pointed  out  that  a
little  of  the  crop  is  sometimes  left  on  the
field  forthespirit  under othernames  than
"  the  Poor  Old  Woman,"  Thus  in  a  vil-
lage of  the  Tilsit  district,  the  last  sheaf
was  left  standing  on  the  field  "  for  the
Old  Rye-woman"  {M.F.  p.  337).  In
Neftenbach  (Canton  of  Zurich)  the  first
three  ears  of  corn  reaped  are  thrown
away  on  the  field  "  to  satisfy  the  Corn-
mother  and  to  make  the  next  year's
crop  abundant  "  {ibid. ).  In  Thiiringen
when  the  after-grass  {Griinmut)  is
being  got  in,  a  little  heap  is  left  lying
on  the  field  ;  it  belongs  to  "the  Little
Wood-woman  "  in  return  for  the  bless-
ing she  has  bestowed  (Witzschel,
Sagen,  Sitten  nnd  Gebriiiiche  aiis
Thiiringen,  p.  224).  At  Kupferberg,
Bavaria,  some  corn  is  left  standing  on
the  field  when  the  rest  has  been  cut.
Of  this  corn  left  standing,  they  say
that  "it  belongs  to  the  Old  Woman,"
to  whom  it  is  dedicated  in  the  follow-
ing words —

"  We  give  it  to  the  Old  Woman  ;
She  shall  keep  it.
Next  year  may  she  be  to  us
As  kind  as  this  time  she  has  been."

M.F.  p.  337.s'(7.  These  last  expressions
are  quite  conclusive.  See  also  Mann-
hardt,   Koi-ndHnwncn,    p.    7    sq.       In


Russia  a  patch  of  unreaped  corn  is
left  in  the  field  and  the  ears  are  knotted
together;  this  is  called  "the  plaiting
of  the  beard  of  Volos."  "The  un-
reaped patch  is  looked  upon  as  ta-
booed ;  and  it  is  believed  that  if  any
one  meddles  with  it  he  will  shrivel  up,
and  become  twisted  like  the  inter-
woven ears"  (Ralston,  Songs  of  the
Russian  People,  p.  251).  In  the  north-
east of  Scotland  a  few  stalks  vvere
sometimes  left  unreaped  for  the  bene-
fit of  "the  aul'  man"  (W,  Gregor,
Folk-lore  of  the  North -East  of  Scotland,
p.  182).  Here  "the  aul'  man"  is
probably  the  equivalent  of  the  Old  Man
(der  Alte)  of  Germany.  At  Lindau  in
Anhalt  the  reapers  used  to  leave  some
stalks  standing  in  the  last  corner  of  the
last  field  for  the  "Corn-woman  (A'orn-
inu/ne)  to  eat  "  {Zeitschrift  des  Vereins
fiir  Volkskiinde,  vii.  (1897),  p.  154).  In
some  parts  of  Bavaria  three  handfuls
of  flax  were  left  on  the  field  "  for  the
Wood-woman  "  (Bavaria,  Landes  nnd
Volkskiinde  des  Konigreichs  Bayem,
iii.  343  sq. ).  In  the  island  of  Nias,  to
prevent  the  depredations  of  wandering
spirits  among  the  rice  at  harvest,  a
miniature  field  is  dedicated  to  them  in
which  are  sown  all  the  plants  that  grow
in  the  real  fields  (E.  Modigliani,  Un
Viaggio  a  Nias,  p.  593).

2  M.F.  p.  48.

3  Ibid.  p.  48  sq.
■*  Ibid.  p.  49.


Ill  ROBBED  OF  HIS  STORE  237

impoverished  by  the  harvesters,  it  is  natural  that  his  repre-
sentative— the  passing  stranger — should  upbraid  them  ;  and
it  is  equally  natural  that  they  should  seek  to  disable  him
from  pursuing  them  and  recapturing  the  stolen  property.
Now,  it  is  an  old  superstition  that  by  easing  nature  on  the
spot  where  a  robbery  is  committed,  the  robbers  secure
themselves,  for  a  certain  time,  against  interruption.^  Hence
when  madder-diggers  resort  to  this  proceeding  in  presence
of  the  stranger  whom  they  have  caught  and  buried  in  the
field,  we  may  infer  that  they  consider  themselves  robbers
and  him  as  the  person  robbed.  Regarded  as  such,  he  must
be  the  natural  owner  of  the  madder -roots,  that  is,  their
spirit  or  demon  ;  and  this  conception  is  carried  out  by
burying  him,  like  the  madder-roots,  in  the  ground.'  The
Greeks,  it  may  be  observed,  were  quite  familiar  with  the
idea  that  a  passing  stranger  may  be  a  god.  Homer  says
that  the  gods  in  the  likeness  of  foreigners  roam  up  and
down  cities.^  Once  in  Poso,  a  district  of  Celebes,  when  a  new
missionary  entered  a  house  where  a  number  of  people  were
gathered  round  a  sick  man,  one  of  them  addressed  the  new-
comer in  these  words  :  "  Well,  sir,  as  we  had  never  seen
you  before,  and  you  came  suddenly  in,  while  we  sat  here  by
ourselves,  we  thought  it  was  a  spirit."  ^

Thus  in  these  harvest-customs  of  modern  Europe  the
person  who  cuts,  binds,  or  threshes  the  last  corn  is  treated  as
an  embodiment  of  the  corn-spirit  by  being  wrapt  up  in
sheaves,  killed  in  mimicry  by  agricultural  implements,  and
thrown  into  the  water.''  These  coincidences  with  the
Lityerses  story  seem  to  prove  that  the  latter  is  a  genuine
description  of  an  old  Phrygian  harvest-custom.  But  since  in
the  modern  parallels  the  killing  of  the  personal  representative
of  the  corn-spirit  is  necessarily  omitted  or  at  most  enacted
only  in  mimicry,  it  is  desirable  to  show  that  in  rude  society
human  beings  have  been  commonly  killed  as  an  agricultural

1   W.  Mannhardt,  op.  cit.  p.  49  sq.  ;  Sophist,  p.  216  A.
W\iii\itt,  Dd)- (ieutsche  Volksaberglaiibe,'^  •*  A.     C.      Kruijt,      "  Mijne      eerste

§400;  T'6\i^tn,  Aberglatibe  atis Masu-  ervaiingen     te     Poso,"    Mededeelingen

ren,-  p.  57.  van  luege  het  Nederlandsche  Zetidding-

'^  The  explanation  of  the  custom  is  genootschap,  xxxvi.  (1892),  p.  402.
Mannhardt's.      M.F.  p.  49.  ^   For  throwing  him   into  the  water,


3


Odyssey,  xvii.  485  sqq.     Cp.  Plato,       see  p.  231.


238  HUMAN  SACRIFICES  chap.

ceremony  to  promote  the  fertility  of  the  fields.      The  following
examples  will  make  this  plain.

The  Indians  of  Guayaquil,  in  Ecuador,  used  to  sacrifice
human  blood  and  the  hearts  of  men  when  they  sowed  their
fields.^  At  a  Mexican  harvest-festival,  when  the  first-fruits
of  the  season  were  offered  to  the  sun,  a  criminal  was  placed
between  two  immense  stones,  balanced  opposite  each  other,
and  was  crushed  by  them  as  they  fell  together.  His  remains
were  buried,  and  a  feast  and  dance  followed.  This  sacrifice
was  known  as  "  the  meeting  of  the  stones."  ^  Another  series
of  human  sacrifices  offered  in  Mexico  to  make  the  maize  thrive
has  been  already  referred  to."  The  Pawnees  annually  sacrificed
a  human  victim  in  spring  when  they  sowed  their  fields.  The
sacrifice  was  believed  to  have  been  enjoined  on  them  by  the
Morning  Star,  or  by  a  certain  bird  which  the  Morning  Star
had  sent  to  them  as  its  messenger.  The  bird  was  stuffed
and  preserved  as  a  powerful  talisman.  They  thought  that
an  omission  of  this  sacrifice  would  be  followed  by  the  total
failure  of  the  crops  of  maize,  beans,  and  pumpkins.  The
victim  was  a  captive  of  either  sex.  He  was  clad  in  the
gayest  and  most  costly  attire,  was  fattened  on  the  choicest
food,  and  carefully  kept  in  ignorance  of  his  doom.  When
he  was  fat  enough,  they  bound  him  to  a  cross  in  the  presence
of  the  multitude,  danced  a  solemn  dance,  then  cleft  his  head
with  a  tomahawk  and  shot  him  with  arrows.  According  to
one  trader,  the  squaws  then  cut  pieces  of  flesh  from  the
victim's  body,  with  which  they  greased  their  hoes  ;  but  this
was  denied  by  another  trader  who  had  been  present  at  the
ceremony.  Immediately  after  the  sacrifice  the  people  pro-
ceeded to  plant  their  fields.  A  particular  account  has  been
preserved  of  the  sacrifice  of  a  Sioux  girl  by  the  Pawnees  in
April  1837  or  1838.  The  girl  had  been  kept  for  six
months  and  well  treated.  Two  days  before  the  sacrifice  she
was  led  from  wigwam  to  wigwam,  accompanied  by  the  whole
council  of  chiefs  and  warriors.  At  each  lodge  she  received  a
small  billet  of  wood  and  a  little  paint,  which  she  handed  to

1  Cieza  de  Leon,  Travels,  trans-  PA/iu'rique  Centra/e,  i.  274 ;  Bancroft,
lated  by  Markham,  p.  203  (Hakluyt  Native  Races  of  the  Pacific  States,  ii.
Society,  1864).  340.

2  Brasseur    de    Bourbourg,    Histoire

des  Nations  civilisdes  dii  Mexiqtie  et  de  ^  See  above,  p.   143.


Ill  FOR  THE  CROPS  239

the  warrior  next  to  her.  In  this  way  she  called  at  every
wigwam,  receiving  at  each  the  same  present  of  wood  and
paint.  On  the  twenty-second  of  April  she  was  taken  out  to
be  sacrificed,  attended  by  the  warriors,  each  of  whom  carried
two  pieces  of  wood  which  he  had  received  from  her  hands.
She  was  burned  for  some  time  over  a  slow  fire,  and  then
shot  to  death  with  arrows.  The  chief  sacrificer  next  tore
out  her  heart  and  devoured  it.  While  her  flesh  was  still
warm  it  was  cut  in  small  pieces  from  the  bones,  put  in  little
baskets,  and  taken  to  a  neighbouring  corn-field.  Here  the
head  chief  took  a  piece  of  the  flesh  from  a  basket  and
squeezed  a  drop  of  blood  upon  the  newly-deposited  grains  of
corn.  His  example  was  followed  by  the  rest,  till  all  the  seed
had  been  sprinkled  with  the  blood  ;  it  was  then  covered  up
with  earth.-^

A  West  African  queen  used  to  sacrifice  a  man  and
woman  in  the  month  of  March.  They  were  killed  with
spades  and  hoes,  and  their  bodies  buried  in  the  middle  of  a
field  which  had  just  been  tilled.'^  At  Lagos  in  Guinea  it
was  the  custom  annually  to  impale  a  young  girl  alive  soon
after  the  spring  equinox  in  order  to  secure  good  crops.
Along  with  her  were  sacrificed  sheep  and  goats,  which,  with
yams,  heads  of  maize,  and  plantains,  were  hung  on  stakes  on
each  side  of  her.  The  victims  were  bred  up  for  the  purpose
in  the  king's  seraglio,  and  their  minds  had  been  so  powerfully
wrought  upon  by  the  fetish  men  that  they  went  cheerfully  to
their  fate.^  A  similar  sacrifice  used  to  be  annually  offered
at  Benin,  in  Guinea.'*  The  Marimos,  a  Bechuana  tribe,
sacrifice  a  human  being  for  the  crops.  The  victim  chosen
is  generally  a  short,  stout  man.      He  is  seized  by  violence  or

^  E.  James,  Account  of  an  Expedition  shot  with  arrows  and  afterwards  burnt.

from  Pittsburgh  to  the  Rocky  Mountains,  Before  the  body  was  consumed  in  the

ii.  80  sq.  ;   Schoolcraft,  Indian  Tribes,  fire  a  man  pulled  out  the  arrows,  cut

V.    77    sijq.  ;    De   Smet,    Voyages  aux  open    the    breast    of   the    victim,    and

Montagnes     Rocheuses,     nouvelle     ed.  having  smeared  his  face  with  the  blood

187.3,  P-    ^21    sqq.      The   accounts  by  ran  away  as  fast  as  he  could.

Schoolcraft  and  De  Smet  of  the  sacrifice  2  Labat,      Relation     historique     de

of  the  Sioux  girl  are  independent  and  PEthiopie  accident  ale,  i.  380.

supiilement  each  other.      Another  de-  o  -r  1           a  1                c^i      ,              ,

scription  of  the  sacrifice  is  given  by  Mr.  ^      1°^"      ^^^'"S,       Skeches  _   taken

G.  B.  Grinnell  from  the  recollection  of  ^'"''"S  Ten  Voyages  in  Af-ica  oetween

IV  ^    u,.     <;t„,.^..       the  years  l7bo  and  iboo,  p.  2^.

an   eye-witness    [Eaianee  Hero  Stories  j/  i  >  f       3

and  Folk-tales,  pp.  362-369).      Accord-  ^  P.  Bouche,  La    Cote  des  Esclaves,

ing  to  this  last  account  the  victim  was       p.   132.


240  HUMAN  SACRIFICES  chap.

intoxicated  and  taken  to  the  fields,  where  he  is  killed
amongst  the  wheat  to  serve  as  "  seed  "  (so  they  phrase  it).
After  his  blood  has  coagulated  in  the  sun,  it  is  burned  along
with  the  frontal  bone,  the  flesh  attached  to  it,  and  the  brain  ;
the  ashes  are  then  scattered  over  the  ground  to  fertilise  it.
The  rest  of  the  body  is  eaten.^  The  Rev.  John  Roscoe,  for
many  years  a  missionary  in  Central  Africa,  informed  me
in  conversation  that  an  agricultural  tribe,  among  whom  he
resided  for  some  time,  used  to  offer  human  sacrifices  of  a
peculiar  kind  once  a  year,  about  the  time  of  harvest.  The
victims,  who  were  young  women,  were  taken  away  to  the
hills,  where  their  heads  were  crushed  between  two  branches.
The  sacrifices  were  not  performed  in  the  fields,  and  Mr.  Roscoe
could  not  ascertain  their  object,  but  we  may  conjecture  that
they  were  offered  to  ensure  good  crops  in  the  following  year.^
The  Bagobos  of  Mindanao,  one  of  the  Philippine  Islands,
offer  a  human  sacrifice  before  they  sow  their  rice.  The  victim
is  a  slave,  who  is  hewn  to  pieces  in  the  forest.^  The  Shans  of
Indo-China  still  believe  in  the  efficacy  of  human  sacrifice  to
procure  a  good  harvest,  though  they  act  on  the  belief  less
than  some  other  tribes  of  this  region.  Their  practice  now  is  to
poison  somebody  at  the  state  festival,  which  is  generally  held
at  some  time  between  March  and  May.*  Among  the  Lhota
Naga,  one  of  the  tribes  of  North-Eastern  India,  it  used  to  be
a  common  custom  to  chop  off"  the  heads,  hands,  and  feet  of
people  they  met  with,  and  then  to  stick  up  the  severed
extremities  in  their  fields  to  ensure  a  good  crop  of  grain.
They  bore  no  ill-will  whatever  to  the  persons  whom  they
treated  in  this  unceremonious  fashion.  Once  they  flayed  a
boy  alive,  carved  him  in  pieces,  and  distributed  the  flesh
among  all  the  villagers,  who  put  it  into  their  corn-bins  to
avert   bad   luck   and   ensure    plentiful    crops  of  grain.      The

1  Arbousset  et  Daumas,  Voyage  ^  F.  Blumentritt,  "  Das  Stromgebiet
d' exploration  an  Nord-est  de  la  Colonie  des  Rio  Grande  de  Mindanao,"  Peter-
du  Cap  de  Bonne-Espera}ice,^.  W]  sq.  inaiins    Mitteilungen,    xxxvii.    (1891),

2  Unfortunately    I    omitted    to    take  p.   no.
down  the  name  of  the  tribe.      It  was

not  the  Waganda.      I   have  written   to  ^   R.      G.       Woodthorpe,      "Some

Mr.  Roscoe  to  ascertain   the  name  of  Account  of  the  Shans  and  Hill  Tribes

the  tribe,  but  have  not  yet  received  his  of  the  States  on  the  M.&Vo'ng"  Journal

answer.      He  is  at  present  stationed  at  of  the  Anthropological  Institute,  xxvi.

Mengo  in  Uganda.  (1S97),  p.  24.


Ill  FOR  THE  CROPS  241

Angami,  another  tribe  of  the  same  region,  used  also  to  reHeve
casual  passers-by  of  their  heads,  hands,  and  feet  with  the
same  excellent  intention.^  The  hill  tribe  Kudulu,  near
Vizagapatam  in  the  Bombay  Presidency,  offered  human
sacrifices  to  the  god  Jankari  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining
good  crops.  The  ceremony  was  generally  performed  on  the
Sunday  before  or  after  the  Pongal  feast.  For  the  most  part
the  victim  was  purchased,  and  until  the  time  for  the  sacrifice
came  he  was  free  to  wander  about  the  village,  to  eat  and
drink  what  he  liked,  and  even  to  lie  with  any  woman  he
met.  On  the  appointed  day  he  was  carried  before  the
idol  drunk  ;  and  when  one  of  the  villagers  had  cut  a  hole
in  his  stomach  and  smeared  the  blood  on  the  idol,  the
crowds  from  the  neighbouring  villages  rushed  upon  him
and  cut  him  to  pieces.  All  who  were  fortunate  enough
to  secure  morsels  of  his  flesh  carried  them  away  and  pre-
sented them  to  their  village  idols."  The  Gonds  of  India,  a
Dravidian  race,  kidnapped  Brahman  boys,  and  kept  them  as
victims  to  be  sacrificed  on  various  occasions.  At  sowing  and
reaping,  after  a  triumphal  procession,  one  of  the  lads  was
slain  by  being  punctured  with  a  poisoned  arrow.  His  blood
was  then  sprinkled  over  the  ploughed  field  or  the  ripe  crop,
and  his  flesh  was  devoured.^

But  the  best  known  case  of  human  sacrifices,  systematic-
ally offered  to  ensure  good  crops,  is  supplied  by  the
Khonds  or  Kandhs,  another  Dravidian  race  in  Bengal.  Our
knowledge  of  them  is  derived  from  the  accounts  written  by
British  officers  who,  fifty  or  sixty  years  ago,  were  engaged  in
putting  them  down.^  The  sacrifices  were  offered  to  the
Earth  Goddess,  Tari  Pennu  or  Bera  Pennu,  and  were  believed
to  ensure  good  crops  and  immunity  from  all  disease  and
accidents.  In  particular,  they  were  considered  necessary  in
the  cultivation  of  turmeric,  the  Khonds  arguing  that  the
turmeric  could  not  have  a  deep  red  colour  without  the
shedding  of  blood.^      The  victim   or   Meriah  was  acceptable

1   Miss  G.  M.  Godden,  "  Naga  and  ^  Panjab  Notes  and  Queries,   ii.  p.

other  Frontier  Tribes  of  North-Eastern  127  sq.,  §  721.

\\\^\-x"  Journal  of  the  Anthropological  ^  Major     S.     C.    Macpherson,    Me-

Institiite,  xxvii.  (1898),  pp.  ^sq.,  ^S  sq.  niorials  of  Service  in  India,  p.  w},sq.;

Major-General  John    Campbell,    Wild

-  North  Indian  Notes  and  Queries,  Tribes  of  Khondistan,  pp.  52-58,  etc.

i.  p.  4,  §  15.  5  J.  Campbell,  op.  cit.  p.  56.

VOL.  II  R


242  HUMAN  SACRIFICES  chap.

to   the  goddess  only  if  he   had  been  purchased,  or  had  been
born  a  victim — that  is,  the  son   of  a  victim  father — or  had
been  devoted  as  a  child  by  his  father  or  guardian.      Khonds
in  distress  often  sold  their  children   for  victims,  "  considering
the   beatification   of  their   souls   certain,  and   their  death,  for
the  benefit  of  mankind,  the  most  honourable  possible."      A
man  of  the  Panua  tribe  was  once  seen  to  load  a  Khond  with
curses,  and  finally  to  spit  in  his  face,  because  the  Khond  had
sold  for  a  victim  his  own  child,  whom  the  Panua  had  wished
to   marry.      A   party  of  Khonds,  who  saw  this,  immediately
pressed   forward   to   comfort   the   seller   of  his  child,   saying,
"  Your  child   has   died   that  all   the  world  may  live,  and  the
Earth  Goddess  herself  will  wipe  that  spittle  from  your  face."  ^
The    victims   were    often    kept    for   years    before    they   were
sacrificed.      Being  regarded  as  consecrated  beings,  they  were
treated  with  extreme  affection,  mingled  with  deference,  and
were  welcomed  wherever  they  went.      A   Meriah  youth,  on
attaining  maturity,  was  generally  given  a  wife,  who  was  her-
self usually  a   Meriah  or  victim  ;   and   with   her  he  received
a   portion   of    land    and    farm -stock.      Their  offspring  were
also  victims.      Human   sacrifices  were  offered   to   the   Earth
Goddess   by   tribes,  branches   of  tribes,  or   villages,   both   at
periodical    festivals   and   on    extraordinary   occasions.       The
periodical  sacrifices  were  generally  so  arranged  by  tribes  and
divisions  of  tribes  that  each  head  of  a  family  was  enabled,  at
least  once  a  year,  to   procure  a   shred   of  flesh  for  his  fields,
generally   about    the    time    when    his    chief    crop    was    laid
down.^

The  mode  of  performing  these  tribal  sacrifices  was  as
follows.  Ten  or  twelve  days  before  the  sacrifice,  the  victim
was  devoted  by  cutting  off  his  hair,  which,  until  then,  had
been  kept  unshorn.  Crowds  of  men  and  women  assembled
to  witness  the  sacrifice  ;  none  might  be  excluded,  since  the
sacrifice  was  declared  to  be  for  all  mankind.  It  was  pre-
ceded by  several  days  of  wild  revelry  and  gross  debauchery.^
On  the  day  before  the  sacrifice  the  victim,  dressed  in  a  new
garment,  was  led  forth  from  the  village  in  solemn  procession,
with   music   and   dancing,  to   the   Meriah  grove,  a  clump  of

^  S.  C.  Macpherson,  op.  cit.  p.   1 1 5  sq.
•  Ibid.  Y).  117  sij.  ;  J.  Campbell,  p.  112.  ^  /^/^.  p.  113.


Ill  AMONG  THE  KHONDS  243

high  forest  trees  standing  a  little  way  from  the  village  and
untouched  by  the  axe.  Here  they  tied  him  to  a  post,  which
was  sometimes  placed  between  two  plants  of  the  sankissar
shrub.  He  was  then  anointed  with  oil,  ghee,  and  turmeric,
and  adorned  with  flowers  ;  and  "  a  species  of  reverence,
which  it  is  not  easy  to  distinguish  from  adoration,"  was  paid
to  him  throughout  the  day.^  A  great  struggle  now  arose  to
obtain  the  smallest  relic  from  his  person  ;  a  particle  of  the
turmeric  paste  with  which  he  was  smeared,  or  a  drop  of  his
spittle,  was  esteemed  of  sovereign  virtue,  especially  by  the
women.  The  crowd  danced  round  the  post  to  music,  and,
addressing  the  earth,  said,  "  O  God,  we  offer  this  sacrifice  to
you  ;  give  us  good  crops,  seasons,  and  health."  "^

On  the  last  morning  the  orgies,  which  had  been  scarcely
interrupted  during  the  night,  were  resumed,  and  continued
till  noon,  when  they  ceased,  and  the  assembly  proceeded  to
consummate  the  sacrifice.  The  victim  was  again  anointed
with  oil,  and  each  person  touched  the  anointed  part,  and
wiped  the  oil  on  his  own  head.  In  some  places  they  took
the  victim  in  procession  round  the  village,  from  door  to  door,
where  some  plucked  hair  from  his  head,  and  others  begged
for  a  drop  of  his  spittle,  with  which  they  anointed  their
heads.^  As  the  victim  might  not  be  bound  nor  make  any
show  of  resistance,  the  bones  of  his  arms  and,  if  necessary,
his  legs  were  broken  ;  but  often  this  precaution  was  rendered
unnecessary  by  stupefying  him  with  opium.'*  The  mode  of
putting  him  to  death  varied  in  different  places.  One  of  the
commonest  modes  seems  to  have  been  strangulation,  or
squeezing  to  death.  The  branch  of  a  green  tree  was  cleft
several  feet  down  the  middle  ;  the  victim's  neck  (in  other
places,  his  chest)  was  inserted  in  the  cleft,  which  the  priest,
aided  by  his  assistants,  strove  with  all  his  force  to  close.^
Then  he  wounded  the  victim  slightly  with  his  axe,  whereupon
the  crowd  rushed  at  the  wretch  and  cut  the  flesh  from  the
bones,  leaving  the  head  and  bowels  untouched.  Sometimes
he  was  cut   up  alive.''      In  Chinna  Kimedy  he  was  dragged

-  S.  C.  Macpherson,  p.  118.  ^  S.  C.  Macpherson,  p.  127.    Instead

^  J.  Campbell,  p.  54.  of  the  branch  of  a  green  tree,  Campbell

?  Ibid.  pp.  55,  112.  mentions  two  strong  planks  or  bamboos

*  S.    C.    Macpherson,    p.    1 19  ;  J.        (p.  57)  or  a  slit  bamboo  (p.   1S2).

Campbell,  p.  113.  6  j_  Campbell,  pp.  56,  58,  120.


244


HUMAN  SACRIFICES


CHAP.


along  the  fields,  surrounded  by  the  crowd,  who,  avoiding  his
head  and  intestines,  hacked  the  flesh  from  his  body  with
their  knives  till  he  died/  Another  very  common  mode  of
sacrifice  in  the  same  district  was  to  fasten  the  victim  to  the
proboscis  of  a  wooden  elephant,  which  revolved  on  a  stout
post,  and,  as  it  whirled  round,  the  crowd  cut  the  flesh  from
the  victim  while  life  remained.  In  some  villages  Major
Campbell  found  as  many  as  fourteen  of  these  wooden
elephants,  which  had  been  used  at  sacrifices."  In  one  dis-
trict the  victim  was  put  to  death  slowly  by  fire.  A  low
stage  was  formed,  sloping  on  either  side  like  a  roof;  upon  it
they  laid  the  victim,  his  limbs  wound  round  with  cords  to
confine  his  struggles.  Fires  were  then  lighted  and  hot
brands  applied,  to  make  him  roll  up  and  down  the  slopes  of
the  stage  as  long  as  possible  ;  for  the  more  tears  he  shed  the
more  abundant  would  be  the  supply  of  rain.  Next  day  the
body  was  cut  to  pieces.^

The  flesh  cut  from  the  victim  was  instantly  taken  home
by  the  persons  who  had  been  deputed  by  each  village  to
bring  it.  To  secure  its  rapid  arrival,  it  was  sometimes
forwarded  by  relays  of  men,  and  conveyed  with  postal  fleet-
ness  fifty  or  sixty  miles.^  In  each  village  all  who  stayed  at
home  fasted  rigidly  until  the  flesh  arrived.  The  bearer
deposited  it  in  the  place  of  public  assembly,  where  it  was
received  by  the  priest  and  the  heads  of  families.  The  priest
divided  it  into  two  portions,  one  of  which  he  offered  to  the
Earth  Goddess  by  burying  it  in  a  hole  in  the  ground  with
his  back  turned,  and  without  looking.  Then  each  man
added  a  little  earth  to  bury  it,  and  the  priest  poured  water
on  the  spot  from  a  hill  gourd.  The  other  portion  of  flesh
he  divided  into  as  many  shares  as  there  were  heads  of
houses  present.      Each  head  of  a  house  rolled  his  shred  of


1  Dalton,  Ethnology  of  Beitgal,  p.
288,  quoting  Colonel  Campbell's  Re-
port.

-  J.  Campbell,  p.  126.  The  elephant
represented  the  Earth  Goddess  herself,
who  was  here  conceived  in  elephant-
form  (Campbell,  pp.  51,  126).  In  the
hill  tracts  of  Goomsur  she  was  repre-
sented in  peacock-form,  and  the  post
to  which  the  victim  was  boimd  bore  the


effigy  of  a  peacock  (Campbell,  p.  54).

^  S.  C.  Macpherson,  p.  130.  In
Mexico  also  the  tears  of  the  human
victims  were  sometimes  regarded  as  an
omen  of  rain  (Sahagun,  Histoire  gt^iu'ra/c
des  Chases  de  la  Nouvelle  Espagne,  ii.
ch.  20,  p.  86).

^  Dalton,  Ethnology  of  Bengal,  p.
288,  referring  to  Colonel  Campbell's
Report.


Ill  AMONG  THE  KHONDS  245

flesh  in  leaves,  and  buried  it  in  his  favourite  field,  placing  it
in  the  earth  behind  his  back  without  looking.^  In  some
places  each  man  carried  his  portion  of  flesh  to  the  stream
which  watered  his  fields,  and  there  hung  it  on  a  pole."  For
three  days  thereafter  no  house  was  swept ;  and,  in  one
district,  strict  silence  was  observed,  no  fire  might  be  given
out,  no  wood  cut,  and  no  strangers  received.  The  remains
of  the  human  victim  (namely,  the  head,  bowels,  and  bones)
were  watched  by  strong  parties  the  night  after  the  sacrifice  ;
and  next  morning  they  were  burned,  along  with  a  whole
sheep,  on  a  funeral  pile.  The  ashes  were  scattered  over
the  fields,  laid  as  paste  over  the  houses  and  granaries,  or
mixed  with  the  new  corn  to  preserve  it  from  insects.^
Sometimes,  however,  the  head  and  bones  were  buried,  not
burnt.^  After  the  suppression  of  the  human  sacrifices,  in-
ferior victims  were  substituted  in  some  places  ;  for  instance,
in  the  capital  of  Chinna  Kimedy  a  goat  took  the  place  of
a  human  victim.^

In  these  Khond  sacrifices  the  Meriahs  are  represented
by  our  authorities  as  victims  offered  to  propitiate  the  Earth
Goddess.  But  from  the  treatment  of  the  victims  both  before
and  after  death  it  appears  that  the  custom  cannot  be  ex-
plained as  merely  a  propitiatory  sacrifice.  A  part  of  the
flesh  certainly  was  offered  to  the  Earth  Goddess,  but  the
rest  of  the  flesh  was  buried  by  each  householder  in  his  fields,
and  the  ashes  of  the  other  parts  of  the  body  were  scattered
over  the  fields,  laid  as  paste  on  the  granaries,  or  mixed  with
the  new  corn.  These  latter  customs  imply  that  to  the  body
of  the  Meriah  there  was  ascribed  a  direct  or  intrinsic  power
of  making  the  crops  to  grow,  quite  independent  of  the  in-
direct efficacy  which  it  might  have  as  an  offering  to  secure  the
good-will  of  the  deity.  In  other  words,  the  flesh  and  ashes
of  the  victim  were  believed  to  be  endowed  with  a  magical  or
physical  power  of  fertilising  the  land.  The  same  intrinsic
power  was  ascribed  to  the  blood  and  tears  of  the  Meriah,
his  blood  causing  the  redness  of  the  turmeric  and   his   tears

^  S.  C.  Macpherson,  p.  129.     Com-  ''  S.  C.  IMacpherson,  p.  12S;    Dal-

pare   J.   Campbell,    pp.    55,    58,     1 1 3,  ton,  I.e.

121,  187.  *  J.  Campbell,  pp.  55,  182.

2  J.  Campbell,  p.  1S2.  ^  Ibid.  p.  187.


246  HUMAN  SACRIFICES  chap.

producing  rain  ;  for  it  can  hardly  be  doubted  that,  originally
at  least,  the  tears  were  supposed  to  bring  down  the  rain,  not
merely  to  prognosticate  it.  Similarly  the  custom  of  pouring
water  on  the  buried  flesh  of  the  Meriah  was  no  doubt  a  rain-
charm.  Again,  magical  power  as  an  attribute  of  the  Meriah
appears  in  the  sovereign  virtue  believed  to  reside  in  any-
thing that  came  from  his  person,  as  his  hair  or  spittle.  The
ascription  of  such  power  to  the  Meriah  indicates  that  he  was
much  more  than  a  mere  man  sacrificed  to  propitiate  a  deity.
Once  more,  the  extreme  reverence  paid  him  points  to  the
same  conclusion.  Major  Campbell  speaks  of  the  Meriah  as
"  being  regarded  as  something  more  than  mortal,"  ^  and
Major  Macpherson  says,  "  A  species  of  reverence,  which  it  is
not  easy  to  distinguish  from  adoration,  is  paid  to  him."  ^  In
short,  the  Meriah  appears  to  have  been  regarded  as  divine.
As  such,  he  may  originally  have  represented  the  Earth
goddess  or  perhaps  a  deity  of  vegetation  ;  though  in  later
times  he  came  to  be  regarded  rather  as  a  victim  offered  to  a
deity  than  as  himself  an  incarnate  god.  This  later  view  of
the  Meriah  as  a  victim  rather  than  a  divinity  may  perhaps
have  received  undue  emphasis  from  the  European  writers
who  have  described  the  Khond  religion.  Habituated  to  the
later  idea  of  sacrifice  as  an  offering  made  to  a  god  for  the
purpose  of  conciliating  his  favour,  European  observers  are
apt  to  interpret  all  religious  slaughter  in  this  sense,  and  to
suppose  that  wherever  such  slaughter  takes  place,  there  must
necessarily  be  a  deity  to  whom  the  carnage  is  believed  by
the  slayers  to  be  acceptable.  Thus  their  preconceived  ideas
may    unconsciously    colour    and   warp    their    descriptions  of


savage  rites.


The  same  custom  of  killing  the  representative  of  a  god,
of  which  strong  traces  appear  in  the  Khond  sacrifices,  may
perhaps  be  detected  in  some  of  the  other  human  sacrifices
described  above.  Thus  the  ashes  of  the  slaughtered  Marimo
were  scattered  over  the  fields  ;  the  blood  of  the  Brahman
lad  was  put  on  !he  crop  and  field  ;  the  flesh  of  the  slain
Naga  was  stowed  in  the  corn-bin  ;  and  the  blood  of  the
Sioux  girl  was  allowed   to   trickle  on  the   seed.^      Again,  the

1   J.  Campbell,  p.  112.  -  S.  C.  Macpherson,  p.  118.

^  Above,  pp.  239,  240,  241.


Ill  FOR  THE  CROPS  247

identification  of  the  victim  with  the  corn,  in  other  words,
the  view  that  he  is  an  embodiment  or  spirit  of  the  corn,  is
brought  out  in  the  pains  which  seem  to  be  taken  to  secure
a  physical  correspondence  between  him  and  the  natural
object  which  he  embodies  or  represents.  Thus  the  Mexicans
killed  young  victims  for  the  young  corn  and  old  ones  for  the
ripe  corn  ;  the  Marimos  sacrifice,  as  "  seed,"  a  short,  fat  man,
the  shortness  of  his  stature  corresponding  to  that  of  the
young  corn,  his  fatness  to  the  condition  which  it  is  desired
that  the  crops  may  attain  ;  and  the  Pawnees  fattened  their
victims  probably  with  the  same  view.  Again,  the  identi-
fication of  the  victim  with  the  corn  comes  out  in  the  African
custom  of  killing  him  with  spades  and  hoes,  and  the  Mexican
custom  of  grinding  him,  like  corn,  between  two  stones.

One  more  point  in  these  savage  customs  deserves  to  be
noted.  The  Pawnee  chief  devoured  the  heart  of  the  Sioux
girl,  and  the  Marimos  and  Gonds  ate  the  victim's  flesh.  If,
as  we  suppose,  the  victim  was  regarded  as  divine,  it  follows
that  in  eating  his  flesh  his  worshippers  were  partaking  of  the
body  of  their  god.      To  this  point  we  shall  return  later  on.

The  savage  rites  just  described  offer  analogies  to  the
harvest  -  customs  of  Europe.  Thus  the  fertilising  virtue
ascribed  to  the  corn-spirit  is  shown  equally  in  the  savage
custom  of  mixing  the  victim's  blood  or  ashes  with  the  seed-
corn  and  the  European  custom  of  mixing  the  grain  from  the
last  sheaf  with  the  young  corn  in  spring.^  Again,  the
identification  of  the  person  with  the  corn  appears  alike  in
the  savage  custom  of  adapting  the  age  and  stature  of  the
victim  to  the  age  and  stature,  whether  actual  or  expected,  of
the  crop  ;  in  the  Scotch  and  Styrian  rules  that  when  the  corn-
spirit  is  conceived  as  the  Maiden  the  last  corn  shall  be  cut
by  a  young  maiden,  but  when  it  is  conceived  as  the  Corn-
mother  it  shall  be  cut  by  an  old  woman  ;''  in  the  Lothringian
warning  given  to  old  women  to  save  themselves  when  the
Old  Woman  is  being  killed,  that  is,  when  the  last  corn
is  bring  threshed  ;^  and  in  the  Tyrolese  expectation  that  if
the  man  who  gives  the  last  stroke  at  threshing  is  tall,
the   next  year's   corn   will   be  tall   also.'*      Further,  the  same

1  Above,  p.  172.         2  Above,  pp.  171,  184,  185,  186.
3  Above,  p.  230.  *  Above,  p.  231.


248  THE  HUMAN  VICTIM


CHAP.


identification  is  implied  in  the  savage  custom  of  killing  the
representative  of  the  corn-spirit  with  hoes  or  spades  or  by
grinding  him  between  stones,  and  in  the  European  custom  of
pretending  to  kill  him  with  the  scythe  or  the  flail.  Once
more  the  Khond  custom  of  pouring  water  on  the  buried  flesh
of  the  victim  is  parallel  to  the  European  customs  of  pouring
water  on  the  personal  representative  of  the  corn-spirit  or
plunging  him  into  a  stream.^  Both  the  Khond  and  the
European  customs  are  rain-charms.

To  return  now  to  the  Lityerses  story.  It  has  been
shown  that  in  rude  society  human  beings  have  been  com-
monly killed  to  promote  the  growth  of  the  crops.  There  is
therefore  no  improbability  in  the  supposition  that  they  may
once  have  been  killed  for  a  like  purpose  in  Phrygia  and
Europe  ;  and  when  Phrygian  legend  and  European  folk-
custom,  closely  agreeing  with  each  other,  point  to  the  con-
clusion that  men  were  so  slain,  we  are  bound,  provisionally
at  least,  to  accept  the  conclusion.  Further,  both  the  Lityerses
story  and  European  harvest-customs  agree  in  indicating  that
the  person  slain  was  slain  as  a  representative  of  the  corn-
spirit,  and  this  indication  is  in  harmony  with  the  view  which
savages  appear  to  take  of  the  victim  slain  to  make  the
crops  flourish.  On  the  whole,  then,  we  may  fairly  suppose
that  both  in  Phrygia  and  in  Europe  the  representative  of
the  corn-spirit  was  annually  killed  upon  the  harvest-field.
Grounds  have  been  already  shown  for  believing  that  similarly
in  Europe  the  representative  of  the  tree-spirit  was  annually
slain.  The  proofs  of  these  two  remarkable  and  closely
analogous  customs  are  entirely  independent  of  each  other.
Their  coincidence  seems  to  furnish  fresh  presumption  in
favour  of  both.

To  the  question,  how  was  the  representative  of  the  corn-
spirit  chosen  ?  one  answer  has  been  already  given.  Both
the  Lityerses  story  and  European  folk-custom  show  that
passing  strangers  were  regarded  as  manifestations  of  the
corn-spirit  escaping  from  the  cut  or  threshed  corn,  and  as
such  were  seized  and  slain.  But  this  is  not  the  only  answer
which  the  evidence  suggests.  According  to  one  version  of
the  Phrygian  legend  the  victims  of  Lityerses  were  not  pass-

1  Above,  pp.   121  sqq.,  174,   179,  180,  231.


Ill  REPRESENTS  THE  CORN- SPIRIT  249

ing  strangers  but  persons  whom  he  had  vanquished  in  a
reaping  contest  ;  and  though  it  is  not  said  that  he  killed,
but  only  that  he  thrashed  them,  we  can  hardly  help  suppos-
ing that  in  one  version  of  the  story  the  vanquished  reapers,
like  the  strangers  in  the  other  version,  were  said  to  have
been  wrapt  up  by  Lityerses  in  corn-sheaves  and  so  beheaded.
The  supposition  is  countenanced  by  European  harvest-
customs.  We  have  seen  that  in  Europe  there  is  sometimes
a  contest  amongst  the  reapers  to  avoid  being  last,  and  that
the  person  who  is  vanquished  in  this  competition,  that  is,
who  cuts  the  last  corn,  is  often  roughly  handled.  It  is  true
we  have  not  found  that  a  pretence  is  made  of  killing  him  ;
but  on  the  other  hand  we  have  found  that  a  pretence  is
made  of  killing  the  man  who  gives  the  last  stroke  at  thresh-
ing, that  is,  who  is  vanquished  in  the  threshing  contest.^
Now,  since  it  is  in  the  character  of  representative  of  the
corn  -  spirit  that  the  thresher  of  the  last  corn  is  slain  in
mimicry,  and  since  the  same  representative  character  attaches
(as  we  have  seen)  to  the  cutter  and  binder  as  well  as  to  the
thresher  of  the  last  corn,  and  since  the  same  repugnance  is
evinced  by  harvesters  to  be  last  in  any  one  of  these  labours,  we
may  conjecture  that  a  pretence  has  been  commonly  made  of
killing  the  reaper  and  binder  as  well  as  the  thresher  of  the  last
corn,  and  that  in  ancient  times  this  killing  was  actually
carried  out.  This  conjecture  is  corroborated  by  the  common
superstition  that  whoever  cuts  the  last  corn  must  die  soon.^
Sometimes  it  is  thought  that  the  person  who  binds  the  last
sheaf  on  the  field  will  die  in  the  course  of  next  year.^  The
reason  for  fixing  on  the  reaper,  binder,  or  thresher  of  the
last  corn  as  the  representative  of  the  corn-spirit  may  be  this.
The  corn-spirit  is  supposed  to  lurk  as  long  as  he  can  in  the
corn,  retreating  before  the  reapers,  the  binders,  and  the
threshers  at  their  work.  But  when  he  is  forcibly  expelled
from  his  refuge  in  the  last  corn  cut  or  the  last  sheaf  bound  or
the  last  grain  threshed,  he  necessarily  assumes  some  other
form  than  that  of  the  corn-stalks  which  had  hitherto  been  his
garments  or  body.  And  what  form  can  the  expelled  corn-
spirit   assume   more   naturally   than  that   of  the  person  who

'   Above,  p.  231.  3  pfannenschmid,  Gernianischc  Em-

'^  W.  Mannhardt,  A'b;-«^^i?/«(?;;6';/,p.  5.        tefeste,  p.  98.


250


VICTIM  AS  CORN-SPIRIT  chap.


stands  nearest  to  the  corn  from  which  he  (the  corn-spirit)
has  just  been  expelled?  But  the  person  in  question  is
necessarily  the  reaper,  binder,  or  thresher  of  the  last  corn.
He  or  she,  therefore,  is  seized  and  treated  as  the  corn-spirit

himself.

Thus  the   person  who  was   killed  on  the  harvest-field  as
the  representative  of  the   corn-spirit   may  have   been    either
a  passing  stranger  or  the  harvester  who  was  last  at   reaping,
binding,  or  threshing.      But  there   is   a   third   possibility,  to
which  ancient   legend   and   modern  folk-custom  alike   point.
Lityerses  not  only  put   strangers  to  death  ;    he  was  himself
slain,  and  probably  in  the  same  way  as  he   had  slain  others,
namely,  by  being  wrapt  in  a  corn-sheaf,  beheaded,  and   cast
into    the   river  ;    and    it    is    implied    that    this   happened   to
Lityerses   on  his  own   land.       Similarly  in   modern   harvest-
customs   the    pretence  of   killing  appears   to   be   carried  out
quite  as  often  on  the  person  of  the  master  (farmer  or  squire)
as    on  that   of  strangers.^       Now  when   we    remember    that
Lityerses   was    said   to    have    been   the   son   of  the  King   of
Phrygia,  and   combine  with   this   the   tradition   that   he  was
put   to   death,  apparently   as    a  representative   of   the    corn-
spirit,  we  are  led  to  conjecture  that  we  have  here  another
trace  of  the  custom  of  annually  slaying  one   of  those  divine
or  priestly  kings  who  are  known  to  have  held   ghostly  sway
in  many  parts  of  Western  Asia  and   particularly  in    Phrygia.
The  custom  appears,  as   we  have  seen,''  to  have   been   so  far
modified  in  places  that  the  king's  son  was  slain  in  the  king's
stead.      Of  the  custom  thus  modified  the   story  of  Lityerses
would  therefore  be  a  reminiscence.

Turning  now  to  the  relation  of  the  Phrygian  Lityerses
to  the  Phrygian  Attis,  it  may  be  remembered  that  at  Pessinus
— the  seat  of  a  priestly  kingship — the  high-priest  appears
to  have  been  annually  slain  in  the  character  of  Attis,  a  god
of  vegetation,  and  that  Attis  was  described  by  an  ancient
authority  as  "a  reaped  ear  of  corn."^  Thus  xA-ttis,  as  an
embodiment  of  the  corn-spirit,  annually  slain  in  the  person
of  his  representative,  might  be  thought  to  be  ultimately
identical  with    Lityerses,   the   latter  being   simply  the    rustic

1  Above,  p.  233  sq.  -   Above,  p.  38  s^.

3  Above,  p.  133.


Ill  LITYERSES  AND  ATTIS  251

prototype  out  of  which  the  state  rehgion  of  Attis  was
developed.  It  may  have  been  so  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,
the  analogy  of  European  folk-custom  warns  us  that  amongst
the  same  people  two  distinct  deities  of  vegetation  may  have
their  separate  personal  representatives,  both  of  whom  are
slain  in  the  character  of  gods  at  different  times  of  the  year.
For  in  Europe,  as  we  have  seen,  it  appears  that  one  man
was  commonly  slain  in  the  character  of  the  tree-spirit  in
spring,  and  another  in  the  character  of  the  corn-spirit  in
autumn.  It  may  have  been  so  in  Phrygia  also.  Attis  was
especially  a  tree-god,  and  his  connection  with  corn  may  have
been  only  such  an  extension  of  the  power  of  a  tree-spirit  as
is  indicated  in  customs  like  the  Harvest-May.^  Again,  the
representative  of  Attis  appears  to  have  been  slain  in  spring  ;
whereas  Lityerses  must  have  been  slain  in  summer  or
autumn,  according  to  the  time  of  the  harvest  in  Phrygia."
On  the  whole,  then,  while  we  are  not  justified  in  regarding
Lityerses  as  the  prototype  of  Attis,  the  two  may  be  regarded
as  parallel  products  of  the  same  religious  idea,  and  may  have
stood  to  each  other  as  in  Europe  the  Old  Man  of  harvest
stands  to  the  Wild  Man,  the  Leaf  Man,  and  so  forth,  of
spring.  Both  were  spirits  or  deities  of  vegetation,  and  the
personal  representatives  of  both  were  annually  slain.  But
whereas  the  Attis  worship  became  elevated  into  the  dignity
of  a  state  religion  and  spread  to  Italy,  the  rites  of  Lityerses
seem  never  to  have  passed  the  limits  of  their  native  Phrygia,
and  always  retained  their  character  of  rustic  ceremonies  per-
formed by  peasants  on  the  harvest-field.  At  most  a  few
villages  may  have  clubbed  together,  as  amongst  the  Khonds,
to  procure  a  human  victim  to  be  slain  as  representative  of
the  corn-spirit  for  their  common  benefit.  Such  victims  may
have  been  drawn  from  the  families  of  priestly  kings  or
kinglets,  which  would  account  for  the  legendary  character  of
Lityerses  as  the  son  of  a  Phrygian  king.  When  villages  did
not  so  club  together,  each  village  or  farm  may  have  procured
its  own  representative  of  the  corn-spirit  by  dooming  to  death
either  a  passing  stranger  or  the  harvester  who  cut,  bound,  or

1  Above,  p.  233  sq.  character  of  the  country  makes  it  likely

2  I   do  not  know  when  the  corn  is       that  harvest  is  later  there  than  on  the
reaped  in  Phrygia  ;   but  the  high  upland       coasts  of  the  Mediterranean.


252


BORMUS


CHAP.


threshed  the  last  sheaf.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  add  that
in  Phrygia,  as  in  Europe,  the  old  barbarous  custom  of  killing
a  man  on  the  harvest-field  or  the  threshing-floor  had  doubt-
less passed  into  a  mere  pretence  long  before  the  classical
era,  and  was  probably  regarded  by  the  reapers  and  threshers
themselves  as  no  more  than  a  rough  jest  which  the  license
of  a  harvest-home  permitted  them  to  play  off  on  a  passing
stranger,  a  comrade,  or  even  on  their  master  himself.^

I  have  dwelt  on  the  Lityerses  song  at  length  because  it
affords  so  many  points  of  comparison  with  European  and
savage  folk-custom.  The  other  harvest  songs  of  Western
Asia  and  Egypt,  to  which  attention  has  been  called  above,"
may  now  be  dismissed  much  more  briefly.  The  similarity
of  the  Bithynian  Bormus  ^  to  the  Phrygian  Lityerses  helps  to
bear  out  the  interpretation  which  has  been  given  of  the
latter.  Bormus,  whose  death  or  rather  disappearance  was
annually  mourned  by  the  reapers  in  a  plaintive  song,  was,
like  Lityerses,  a  king's  son  or  at  least  the  son  of  a  wealthy
and  distinguished  man.  The  reapers  whom  he  watched
were  at  work  on  his  own  fields,  and  he  disappeared  in  going
to  fetch  water  for  them  ;  according  to  one  version  of  the
story  he  was  carried  off  by  the  nymphs,  doubtless  the
nymphs  of  the  spring  or  pool  or  river  whither  he  went  to
draw  water.'*  Viewed  in  the  light  of  the  Lityerses  story
and  of  European  folk-custom,  this  disappearance  of  Bormus
may  be  a  reminiscence  of  the  custom  of  binding  the
farmer  himself  in  a  corn-sheaf  and  throwing  him  into  the
water.  The  mournful  strain  w^iich  the  reapers  sang  was
probably  a  lamentation  over  the  death  of  the  corn-spirit,
slain  either  in  the  cut  corn  or  in  the  person  of  a  human
representative ;  and  the  call  which  they  addressed  to  him
may  have  been  a  prayer  that  he  might  return  in  fresh  vigour
next  year.

The  Phoenician  Linus  song  was  sung  at  the  vintage,  at
least  in  the  west  of  Asia  Minor,  as  we  learn  from    Homer  ;


1  There  are  traces  in  Greece  itself  of
an  old  custom  of  sacrificing  human
victims  to  promote  the  fertility  of  the
earth.  See  Pausanias,  vii.  19.  3  sq.
compared  with  vii.  20.  I  ;  id.,  viii.
53.  3  ;  L.  R.  P'arnell,  The  Cults  of  t lie


Greek   States,   ii.    455  ;   and   above,  p.

34  -^gg-

-  Above,  p.  223  S(j.

'•'■  Above,  p.  224.

■♦  liesychius,  s.v.  Buip/iov^


Ill  LINUS  AND  ADONIS  253

and  this,  combined  with  the  legend  of  Syleus,  suggests  that
in  ancient  times  passing  strangers  were  handled  by  vintagers
and  vine-diggers  in  much  the  same  w^ay  as  they  are  said  to
have  been  handled  by  the  reaper  Lityerses.  The  Lydian
Syleus,  so  ran  the  legend,  compelled  passers-by  to  dig  for
him  in  his  vineyard,  till  Hercules  came  and  killed  him  and
dug  up  his  vines  by  the  roots. ^  This  seems  to  be  the  outline
of  a  legend  like  that  of  Lityerses  ;  but  neither  ancient  writers
nor  modern  folk-custom  enable  us  to  fill  in  the  details."^
But,  further,  the  Linus  song  was  probably  sung  also  by
Phoenician  reapers,  for  Herodotus  compares  it  to  the
Maneros  song,  which,  as  we  have  seen,  was  a  lament  raised
by  Egyptian  reapers  over  the  cut  corn.  Further,  Linus  was
identified  with  Adonis,  and  Adonis  has  some  claims  to  be
regarded  as  especially  a  corn- deity .^  Thus  the  Linus
lament,  as  sung  at  harvest,  would  be  identical  with  the
Adonis  lament  ;  each  would  be  the  lamentation  raised  by
reapers  over  the  dead  spirit  of  the  corn.  But  whereas  Adonis,
like  Attis,  grew  into  a  stately  figure  of  mythology,  adored
and  mourned  in  splendid  cities  far  beyond  the  limits  of  his
Phoenician  home,  Linus  appears  to  have  remained  a  simple
ditty  sung  by  reapers  and  vintagers  among  the  corn-sheaves
and  the  vines.  The  analogy  of  Lityerses  and  of  folk-custom,
both  European  and  savage,  suggests  that  in  Phoenicia  the
slain  corn-spirit  —  the  dead  Adonis  —  may  formerly  have
been  represented  by  a  human  victim  ;  and  this  suggestion
is  possibly  supported  by  the  Harran  legend  that  Tammuz
(Adonis)  was  slain  by  his  cruel  lord,  who  ground  his  bones
in  a  mill  and  scattered  them  to  the  wind.^  For  in  Mexico,
as  we  have  seen,  the  human  victim  at  harvest  was  crushed
between  two  stones  ;  and  both  in  Lidia  and  Africa  the
ashes  of  the  victim  were  scattered  over  the  fields.^  But
the  Harran  legend  may  be  only  a  mythical  way  of  express-
ing the  grinding  of  corn  in  the  mill  and  the  scattering  of  the
seed.  It  seems  worth  suggesting  that  the  mock  king  who  was
annually  killed  at  the  Babylonian   festival  of  the   Sacaea  on


1  Apollodorus,  ii.  6.  3.  See  W.  Mannhardt,  My(h.   Forsch.   p.

-  The  scurrilities  exclianged  both  in  53  sq.
ancient    and    modern    times    between  ^  Above,  p.  w'i  sq.

vine-dressers,  vintagers,  and  passers-by  *  Above,  p.  119.

seem  to  belong  to  a  different  category.  ^  Above,  pp.  23S,  240,  245.


2  54  OSIRIS  REPRESENTED  chap.

the  sixteenth  day  of  the  month  Lous  may  have  represented
Tammuz  himself.  For  the  historian  Berosus,  who  records
the  festival  and  its  date,  probably  used  the  Macedonian
calendar,  since  he  dedicated  his  history  to  Antiochus  Soter  ;
and  in  his  day  the  Macedonian  month  Lous  appears  to  have
corresponded  to  the  Babylonian  month  Tammuz.^  If  this
conjecture  is  right,  the  view  that  the  mock  king  at  the  Sacaea
was  slain  in  the  character  of  a  god  would  be  established.
But  to  this  point  we  shall  return  later  on.

There  is  a  good  deal  more  evidence  that  in  Egypt  the
slain  corn-spirit — the  dead  Osiris — was  represented  by  a
human  victim,  whom  the  reapers  slew  on  the  harvest-field,
mourning  his  death  in  a  dirge,  to  which  the  Greeks,  through
a  verbal  misunderstanding,  gave  the  name  of  Maneros.^  For
the  legend  of  Busiris  seems  to  preserve  a  reminiscence  of
human  sacrifices  once  offered  by  the  Egyptians  in  connection
with  the  worship  of  Osiris.  Busiris  was  said  to  have  been
an  Egyptian  king  who  sacrificed  all  strangers  on  the  altar
of  Zeus.  The  origin  of  the  custom  was  traced  to  a  dearth
which  afflicted  the  land  of  Egypt  for  nine  years.  A  Cyprian
seer  informed  Busiris  that  the  dearth  would  cease  if  a  man
were  annually  sacrificed  to  Zeus.  So  Busiris  instituted  the
sacrifice.  But  when  Hercules  came  to  Egypt,  and  was  being
draeeed  to  the  altar  to  "be  sacrificed,  he  burst  his  bonds
and  slew  Busiris  and  his  son.^  Here  then  is  a  legend  that
in  Egypt  a  human  victim  was  annually  sacrificed  to  prevent
the  failure  of  the  crops,  and  a  belief  is  implied  that  an
omission  of  the  sacrifice  would  have  entailed  a  recurrence  of
that    infertility  which   it  was  the  object  of  the   sacrifice   to

1  The    probable    correspondence   of  B.C.  Xanthicus  began  on  February  26.

the  months,  which  supplies  so  welcome  It  was  therefore   the  month   before  the

a  confirmation  of  the  conjecture  in  the  equinoctial  moon,  not  Nisan  but  Adar,

text,    was   pointed    out    to   me    by    my  and  consequently  Lous  answered  to  the

friend  W.  Robertson   Smith,  who  fur-  lunar  month  Tammuz."

nished   me   with    the    following    note  :  -  Above,  p.  223.

"In    the    Syro  -  Macedonian    calendar  ^  Apollodorus,   ii.   5.  Ii;   Schol.  on

Lous    represents     Ab,    not    Tammuz.  Apollonius  Rhodius,  Argon,   iv.  1396  ;

Was  it  different  in  Babylon  ?     I   think  Plutarch,   Parall.    38.      Herodotus  (ii.

it    was,    and   one    month    different,    at  45)discredits  the  ideathat  the  Egyptians

least   in   the  early  times  of  the  Greek  ever  offered  human  sacrifices.      But  his

monarchy    in    Asia.       For    we    know  authority  is  not   to  be  weighed  against

from  a  Babylonian   observation  in    the  that  of  Manetho  (Plutarch,  Is.   ct  Os.

Almagest   [Idcler,  i.   396)   that    in   229  73),  who  affirms  that  they  did.


Ill  BY  A  HUMAN  VICTIM  255

prevent.  So  the  Pawnees,  as  we  have  seen,  believed  that  an
omission  of  the  human  sacrifice  at  planting  would  have  been
followed  by  a  total  failure  of  their  crops.  The  name  Busiris
was  in  reality  the  name  of  a  city,  pe-Asar,  "  the  house  of
Osiris,"  ^  the  city  being  so  called  because  it  contained  the
grave  of  Osiris.  The  human  sacrifices  were  said  to  have
been  offered  at  his  grave,  and  the  victims  were  red-haired
men,  whose  ashes  were  scattered  abroad  by  means  of
winnowing-fans.^  In  the  light  of  the  foregoing  discussion,
this  Egyptian  tradition  admits  of  a  consistent  and  fairly
probable  explanation.  Osiris,  the  corn-spirit,  was  annually
represented  at  harvest  by  a  stranger,  whose  red  hair  made
him  a  suitable  representative  of  the  ripe  corn.  This  man,
in  his  representative  character,  was  slain  on  the  harvest-field,
and  mourned  by  the  reapers,  who  prayed  at  the  same  time
that  the  corn-spirit  might  revive  and  return  {inad-ne-rJia,
Maneros)  with  renewed  vigour  in  the  following  year.
Finally,  the  victim,  or  some  part  of  him,  was  burned,  and
the  ashes  scattered  by  winnowing-fans  over  the  fields  to
fertilise  them.  Here  the  choice  of  the  victim  on  the  ground
of  his  resemblance  to  the  corn  which  he  was  to  represent
agrees  with  the  Mexican  and  African  customs  already  'de-
scribed.^ Similarly  the  woman  who  died  in  the  character
of  the  Corn-mother  at  the  Mexican  midsummer  sacrifice  had
her  face  painted  red  and  yellow  in  token  of  the  colours  of
the  corn,  and  she  wore  a  pasteboard  mitre  surmounted  by
waving  plumes  in  imitation  of  the  tassel  of  the  maize.'*  On
the  other  hand,  at  the  festival  of  the  Goddess  of  the  White
Maize  the  Mexicans  sacrificed  lepers.^  The  Romans  sacri-
ficed red-haired  puppies  in  spring,  believing  that  the  crops
would  thus  grow  ripe  and  ruddy .•"  The  Sabaeans  offered  to
the  sun,  moon,  and  planets  human  victims  who  were  chosen
on  the  ground  of  their  supposed  resemblance  to  the  heavenly
bodies  to  which  they  were  sacrificed ;  for  example,  the  priests,

1  E.    Meyer,    Ge'schicJite   des   Alter-  ^  Brasseur    de    Bourbourg,  Histoire
thums,  i.  §  57.                                                   des  Nations  civilisies  du  Mexiqite  et  de

2  Diodorus,    i.    88  ;   Plutarch,  Is.  et       l' Atuh-ique  Centrale,  iii.  535.

Os.  73,  compare  30,  33.  ^  Festus,   s.v.    Catularia.      Cp.   id.,

2  Above,  pp.   143,  2395^.,  247.  s.i>.   Riitilae  canes;   Columella,  De  re

*  E.  J.   Payne,  History  of  the  New  rustica,  x.    342  sq.  ;   Ovid,   Fasti,  iv.

World  called  America,  i.  422.  905  sqq.  ;   Pliny,  Nat.  Hist,  xviii.   14.


256  OSJRIS  REPRESENTED  chap.

clothed  in  red  and  smeared  with  blood,  offered  a  red-haired,
red-cheeked  man  to  "  the  red  planet  Mars "  in  a  temple
which  was  painted  red  and  draped  with  red  hangings/
These  and  the  like  cases  of  assimilating  the  victim  to  the
god,  or  to  the  natural  phenomenon  which  he  represents,
are  based  ultimately  on  the  principle  of  sympathetic  or
imitative  magic,  the  notion  being  that  the  object  aimed
at  will  be  most  readily  attained  by  means  of  a  sacrifice
which  resembles  the  effect  that  it  is  designed  to  bring  about.
Again,  the  scattering  of  the  Egyptian  victim's  ashes  over
the  fields  resembles  the  Marimo  and  Khond  custom,"^  and  the
use  of  winnowing-fans  for  the  purpose  is  another  hint  of  his
identification  with  the  corn.  So  in  Vendee  a  pretence  is
made  of  threshing  and  winnowing  the  farmer's  wife,  regarded
as  an  embodiment  of  the  corn-spirit  ;  in  Mexico  the  victim
was  ground  between  stones  ;  and  in  Africa  he  was  slain  with
spades  and  hoes.^  The  story  that  the  fragments  of  Osiris's
body  were  scattered  up  and  down  the  land,  and  buried  by
Tsis  on  the  spots  where  they  lay,"*  may  very  well  be  a
reminiscence  of  a  custom,  like  that  observed  by  the  Khonds,
of  dividing  the  human  victim  in  pieces  and  burying  the
pieces,  often  at  intervals  of  many  miles  from  each  other,  in
the  fields.  However,  it,  is  possible  that  the  story  of  the  dis-
memberment of  Osiris,  like  the  similar  story  told  of  Tammuz,
may  have  been  simply  a  mythical  expression  for  the  scatter-
ing of  the  seed.  Once  more,  the  legend  that  the  body  of
Osiris  enclosed  in  a  coffer  was  thrown  by  Typhon  into  the
Nile  perhaps  points  to  a  custom  of  casting  the  body  of  the
victim,  or  at  least  a  portion  of  it,  into  the  Nile  as  a  rain-
charm,  or  rather  to  make  the  Nile  rise.  For  a  similar
purpose  Phrygian  reapers  seem  to  have  flung  the  headless
bodies  of  their  victims,  wrapt  in  corn-sheaves,  into  a  river,
and  the  Khonds  poured  water  on  the  buried  flesh  of  the
human  victim.  Probably  when  Osiris  ceased  to  be  repre-
sented by  a  human  victim,  an  image  of  him  was  annually
thrown  into  the  Nile,  just  as  the  effigy  of  his  Syrian  counter-

1  Chwolsohn,   Die  Ssabier  nnd  der  H.  Oldenberg,  Die  Religion  des  Veda,

Ssabismits,  ii.  388  sq.      Compare  ibid.,  pp.  77  sq.,  357-359.
pp.  384  sq.,   386  sq.,  391,   393,    395,  2  Above,  pp.  240,  245.

397.      For  other  instances  of  the  as-  ^  Above,  pp.  182,  238,  239.

similation  of  the  victim  to  the  god,  see  *  Plutarch,  Is.  et  Os.  18.


Ill  '  BY  A  HUMAN  VICTIM  257

part,  Adonis,  used  to  be  cast  into  the  sea  at  Alexandria.
Or  water  may  have  been  simply  poured  over  it,  as  on  the
monument  already  mentioned  a  priest  is  seen  pouring  water
over  the  body  of  Osiris,  from  which  corn  stalks  are  sprout-
ing. The  accompanying  legend,  "  This  is  Osiris  of  the
mysteries,  who  springs  from  the  returning  waters,"  bears  out
the  view  that  at  the  mysteries  of  Osiris  a  charm  to  make  rain
fall  or  the  river  rise  was  regularly  wrought  by  pouring  water
on  his  e^gy  or  flinging  it  into  the  Nile.

It  may  be  objected  that  the  red-haired  victims  were
slain  as  representatives  not  of  Osiris,  but  of  his  enemy
Typhon  ;  for  the  victims  were  called  Typhonian,  and  red
was  the  colour  of  Typhon,  black  the  colour  of  Osiris.^  The
answer  to  this  objection  must  be  reserved  for  the  present.
Meantime  it  may  be  pointed  out  that  if  Osiris  is  often
represented  on  the  monuments  as  black,  he  is  still  more
commonly  depicted  as  green,^  appropriately  enough  for  a
corn-god,  who  may  be  conceived  as  black  while  the  seed  is
under  ground,  but  as  green  after  it  has  sprouted.  So  the
Greeks  recognised  both  a  green  and  a  black  Demeter,^  and
sacrificed  to  the  green  Demeter  in  spring  with  mirth  and
gladness.^

Thus,  if  I  am  right,  the  key  to  the  mysteries  of  Osiris  is
furnished  by  the  melancholy  cry  of  the  Egyptian  reapers,
which  down  to  Roman  times  could  be  heard  year  after  year
sounding  across  the  fields,  announcing  the  death  of  the  corn-
spirit,  the  rustic  prototype  of  Osiris.  Similar  cries,  as  we
have  seen,  were  also  heard  on  all  the  harvest-fields  of  West-
ern Asia.  By  the  ancients  they  are  spoken  of  as  songs  ;
but  to  judge  from  the  analysis  of  the  names  Linus  and
Maneros,  they  probably  consisted  only  of  a  few  words
uttered  in  a  prolonged  musical  note  which  could  be  heard
for  a  great  distance.  Such  sonorous  and  long-drawn  cries,
raised  by  a  number  of  strong  voices  in   concert,  must  have

^  Plutarch,  Is.  et  Os.  22,  30,  31,  23>  *  Cornutus,  De  naiura  deorutn,  28.

73.  Green     Demeter    was    worshipped    at

2  Wilkinson,  Manners  and  Customs  Athens  and  in  the  island  of  Myconos.

of  the  Ancient   Egyptians  (ed.    1878),  See  Pausanias,  i.  22.  3,  with  my  note  ;

iii.  81.  Dittenberger,     Sylloge     Inscriptionuni

^  Pausanias,  i.  22.  3,  viii.  5.  8,  viii.  Graecarian,  No.  373.
42.   I.

VOL.  11  S


258  HARVEST  CRIES  chap.

had  a  striking  effect,  and  could  hardly  fail  to  arrest  the
attention  of  any  traveller  who  happened  to  be  within  hear-
ing. The  sounds,  repeated  again  and  again,  could  probably
be  distinguished  with  tolerable  ease  even  at  a  distance  ;  but
to  a  Greek  traveller  in  Asia  or  Egypt  the  foreign  words  would
commonly  convey  no  meaning,  and  he  might  take  them,  not
unnaturally,  for  the  name  of  some  one  (Maneros,  Linus,
Lityerses,  Bormus)  upon  whom  the  reapers  were  calling.
And  if  his  journey  led  him  through  more  countries  than
one,  as  Bithynia  and  Phrygia,  or  Phoenicia  and  Egypt,
while  the  corn  was  being  reaped,  he  would  have  an  oppor-
tunity of  comparing  the  various  harvest  cries  of  the  different
peoples.  Thus  we  can  readily  understand  why  these  harvest
cries  were  so  often  noted  and  compared  with  each  other  by
the  Greeks.  Whereas,  if  they  had  been  regular  songs,  they
could  not  have  been  heard  at  such  distances,  and  therefore
could  not  have  attracted  the  attention  of  so  many  travellers  ;
and,  moreover,  even  if  the  traveller  were  within  hearing  of
them,  he  could  not  so  easily  have  picked  out  the  words.

To  this  day  Devonshire  reapers  utter  cries  of  the  same
sort,  and  perform  on  the  field  a  ceremony  exactly  analogous
to  that  in  which,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  the  rites  of  Osiris
originated.  The  cry  and  the  ceremony  are  thus  described
by  an  observer  who  wrote  in  the  first  half  of  the  nineteenth
century.  "  After  the  wheat  is  all  cut,  on  most  farms  in  the
north  of  Devon,  the  harvest  people  have  a  custom  of  '  crying
the  neck.'  I  believe  that  this  practice  is  seldom  omitted  on
any  large  farm  in  that  part  of  the  country.  It  is  done  in  this
way.  An  old  man,  or  some  one  else  well  acquainted  with
the  ceremonies  used  on  the  occasion  (when  the  labourers  are
reaping  the  last  field  of  wheat),  goes  round  to  the  shocks  and
sheaves,  and  picks  out  a  little  bundle  of  all  the  best  ears  he
can  find  ;  this  bundle  he  ties  up  very  neat  and  trim,  and
plats  and  arranges  the  straws  very  tastefully.  This  is  called
'  the  neck  '  of  wheat,  or  wheaten-ears.  After  the  field  is  cut
out,  and  the  pitcher  once  more  circulated,  the  reapers,  binders,
and  the  women  stand  round  in  a  circle.  The  person  with
'  the  neck '  stands  in  the  centre,  grasping  it  with  both  his
hands.  He  first  stoops  and  holds  it  near  the  ground,  and
all  the  men   forming  the  ring  take  off  their  hats,  stooping


Ill  CRYING  THE  NECK  259

and  holding  them  with  both  hands  towards  the  ground.
They  then  all  begin  at  once  in  a  very  prolonged  and  har-
monious tone  to  cry  '  The  neck  ! '  at  the  same  time  slowly
raising  themselves  upright,  and  elevating  their  arms  and  hats
above  their  heads  ;  the  person  with  '  the  neck '  also  raising
it  on  high.  This  is  done  three  times.  They  then  change
their  cry  to  '  Wee  yen  ! ' — '  Way  yen  ! ' — which  they  sound  in
the  same  prolonged  and  slow  manner  as  before,  with  singular
harmony  and  effect,  three  times.  This  last  cry  is  accompanied
by  the  same  movements  of  the  body  and  arms  as  in  crying
'  the  neck.'  .  .  .  After  having  thus  repeated  '  the  neck '  three
times,  and  '  wee  yen,'  or  '  way  yen,'  as  often,  they  all  burst
out  into  a  kind  of  loud  and  joyous  laugh,  flinging  up  their
hats  and  caps  into  the  air,  capering  about  and  perhaps
kissing  the  girls.  One  of  them  then  gets  '  the  neck '  and
runs  as  hard  as  he  can  down  to  the  farmhouse,  where  the
dairymaid  or  one  of  the  young  female  domestics  stands  at
the  door  prepared  with  a  pail  of  water.  If  he  who  holds
^  the  neck '  can  manage  to  get  into  the  house,  in  any  way
unseen,  or  openly,  by  any  other  way  than  the  door  at  which
the  girl  stands  with  the  pail  of  water,  then  he  may  lawfully
kiss  her  ;  but,  if  otherwise,  he  is  regularly  soused  with  the
contents  of  the  bucket.  On  a  fine  still  autumn  evening,  the
'  crying  of  the  neck '  has  a  wonderful  effect  at  a  distance,  far
finer  than  that  of  the  Turkish  muezzin,  which  Lord  Byron
eulogises  so  much,  and  which  he  says  is  preferable  to  all  the
bells  in  Christendom.  I  have  once  or  twice  heard  upwards
of  twenty  men  cry  it,  and  sometimes  joined  by  an  equal
number  of  female  voices.  About  three  years  back,  on  some
high  grounds,  where  our  people  were  harvesting,  I  heard  six
or  seven  '  necks '  cried  in  one  night,  although  I  know  that
some  of  them  were  four  miles  off.  They  are  heard  through
the  quiet  evening  air,  at  a  considerable  distance  sometimes."^
Again,  Mrs.  Bray  tells  how,  travelling  in  Devonshire,  "  she
saw  a  party  of  reapers  standing  in  a  circle  on  a  rising
ground,  holding  their  sickles  aloft.  One  in  the  middle  held
up  some  ears  of  corn  tied  together  with  flowers,  and  the
party  shouted  three  times  (what  she  writes  as)  '  Arnack,
arnack,    arnack,    we    haven,    we    haven,    we    havenJ       They

^  Hone,  Every -day  Book,  ii.  col.  11 70  sq.


26o  CRYING  THE  NECK  chap.

went  home,  accompanied  by  women  and  children  carry-
ing boughs  of  flowers,  shouting  and  singing.  The  man-
servant who  attended  Mrs.  Bray  said  '  it  was  only  the  people
making  their  games,  as  they  always  did,  to  the  spirit  of
harvest!  "  '  Here,  as  Miss  Burne  remarks,  "  '  arnack,  we
haven  ! '  is  obviously  in  the  Devon  dialect,  '  a  neck  (or  nack)  !
we  have  un  ! ' "  "  The  neck  "  is  generally  hung  up  in  the
farmhouse,  where  it  sometimes  remains  for  two  or  three
years."  A  similar  custom  is  still  observed  in  some  parts
of  Cornwall,  as  I  was  told  by  my  lamented  friend  J.  H.
Middleton.  "  The  last  sheaf  is  decked  with  ribbons.  Two
strong-voiced  men  are  chosen  and  placed  (one  with  the
sheaf)  on  opposite  sides  of  a  valley.  One  shouts,  '  I've
gotten  it.'  The  other  shouts,  '  What  hast  gotten  ? '  The
first  answers,  '  I'se  gotten  the  neck.' "  ^

In  these  Devonshire  and  Cornish  customs  a  particular
bunch  of  ears,  generally  the  last  left  standing,^  is  conceived
as  the  neck  of  the  corn-spirit,  who  is  consequently  beheaded
when  the  bunch  is  cut  down.  Similarly  in  Shropshire  the
name  "  neck,"  or  "  the  gander's  neck,"  used  to  be  commonly
given  to  the  last  handful  of  ears  left  standing  in  the  middle
of  the  field,  when  all  the  rest  of  the  corn  was  cut.  It  was
plaited  together,  and  the  reapers,  standing  ten  or  twenty
paces  off,  threw  their  sickles  at  it.  Whoever  cut  it  through
was  said  to  have  cut  off  the  gander's  neck.  The  "  neck "
was  taken  to  the  farmer's  wife,  who  was  supposed  to  keep
it  in  the  house  for  good  luck  till  the  next  harvest  came
round.^  Near  Treves,  the  man  who  reaps  the  last  standing
corn  "  cuts  the  goat's  neck  off."  ^  At  Faslane,  on  the
Gareloch  (Dumbartonshire),  the  last  handful  of  standing
corn  was  sometimes  called  the  "  head."  "^  At  Aurich,  in
East  Friesland,  the  man  who  reaps  the  last  corn   "  cuts   the

^   Miss  C.  S.  Burne  and  Miss  G.  F.  Cornish  farmhouse  ;  it  generally  stayed

Jackson,   Shropshire  Folk-lore,    p.    372  there  throughout  the  year.

sq.,  referring  to  Mrs.  Bray's  Traditions  4  Brand,   Poptdar  Antiquities,  ii.  20

of  Devon,  i.  330.  (Bohn's  ed.);   Burne  and  Jackson,  op.

-  Hone,  op.  at.  ii.   1172.  ^it.  p.  371.

3  The  Rev.   Sydney  Cooper,   of  80  5  Burne  and  Jackson,  I.e.

Gloucester   Street,    Cirencester,  writes  <;  T,r    »<•       ^     j.     nr  ^r     7-       ?

,   ^,     „      '  o      1   tu  *   u-  ''  W.  Mannhardt,  Myth.   Forsch.   p.

to   me    (4th    February    1893)    that   his  „  '      -^  ^

wife  remembers  the  "neck"  being  kept  ■'"

on  the  mantelpiece  of  the  parlour  in  a  ''  See  above,  p.  185.


I


Ill  HARVEST  CRIES  261

hare's  tail  off."  ^  In  mowing  down  the  last  corner  of  a  field
French  reapers  sometimes  call  out,  "  We  have  the  cat  by  the
tail."  "  In  Bresse  (Bourgogne)  the  last  sheaf  represented  the
fox.  Beside  it  a  score  of  ears  were  left  standing  to  form
the  tail,  and  each  reaper,  going  back  some  paces,  threw  his
sickle  at  it.  He  who  succeeded  in  severing  it  "  cut  off  the
fox's  tail,"  and  a  cry  of  "  You  con  cou  I "  w^as  raised  in  his
honour.^  These  examples  leave  no  room  to  doubt  the
meaning  of  the  Devonshire  and  Cornish  expression  "  the
neck,"  as  applied  to  the  last  sheaf  The  corn-spirit  is  con-
ceived in  human  or  animal  form,  and  the  last  standing  corn
is  part  of  its  body — its  neck,  its  head,  or  its  tail.  Some-
times, as  we  have  seen,  the  last  corn  is  regarded  as  the
navel-string.^  Lastly,  the  Devonshire  custom  of  drenching
with  water  the  person  who  brings  in  "  the  neck  "  is  a  rain-
charm,  such  as  we  have  had  many  examples  of  Its  parallel
in  the  mysteries  of  Osiris  was  the  custom  of  pouring  water  on
the  image  of  Osiris  or  on  the  person  who  represented  him.

In  Germany  cries  of  Wau/ !  or  Wo/ !  or  Wold !  are
sometimes  raised  by  the  reapers  at  cutting  the  last  corn.
Thus  in  some  places  the  last  patch  of  standing  rye  was
called  the  Wau/-rye  ;  a  stick  decked  with  flowers  was  in-
serted in  it,  and  the  ears  were  fastened  to  the  stick.  Then
all  the  reapers  took  off  their  hats  and  cried  thrice,  "  Waul !
Waul !  Waul  !  "  Sometimes  they  accompanied  the  cry  by
clashing  with  their  whetstones  on  their  scythes.^


S  10.    T/ie  Corn-sph'it  as  an  Animal

In  some  of  the  examples  which  I  have  cited  to  establish
the  meaning  of  the  term  "  neck  "  as  applied  to  the  last  sheaf,
the  corn-spirit  appears  in  animal  form  as  a  gander,  a  goat,  a

^  W.  Mannhardt,  Myth.   Foisch.  p.        Opfergebrdnche  bei  Ackerbau  und  Vieh-

185.    .  zitcht,  pp.    166-169  ;    Pfannenschmid,

^  Ibid.  Gertnanische    Erntefeste,   p.    104    sq.  ;

■1    r,  ,      m      7 -^  •  X   z    ;    ■  Kuhn,    Westfiilische   Sa<jen,    Gebriiuche

■^  Kevue   aes   I raditions   popidaires,  .   ....    .  ■'      ..  oc

^  -^  tind  Marchen,   11.  p.   177  sq.,  §§   491,


ii    (1887)    n    coo  ^.^«/<.«t.»,   II.  p.   x//    o^.,  »s   ^y.,

^  ^  ■  -'      ■  492  ;  Kuhn  und  Schwartz,  A'(?;-fl'i:/«;/j'^/%e

Above,  p.   182.  Sageji,  Mdrche)i  and  Gebrditche,  p.  395,

•^  'E..y[.e\eT,mZeitsck7-ift fiirdciifsche  §    97;    Lynker,    Deutsche    Sagen   und

Mythologie  und  Sittenkiinde,  \.  (1853),  Sitten    in    hessischen    Gauen,    p.    256,

pp.    170-173;   U.  ]ahr\.  Die  detctsihen  §340.


262  THE  CORN-SPIRIT  chap.

hare,  a  cat,  and  a  fox.  This  introduces  us  to  a  new  aspect
of  the  corn-spirit,  which  we  must  now  examine.  By  doing
so  we  shall  not  only  have  fresh  examples  of  killing  the  god,
but  may  hope  also  to  clear  up  some  points  which  remain
obscure  in  the  myths  and  worship  of  Attis,  Adonis,  Osiris,
Dionysus,  Demeter,  and  Virbius.

Amongst  the  many  animals  whose  forms  the  corn-spirit  is

supposed   to   take  are  the  wolf,  dog,  hare,  cock,  goose,  cat,

goat,  cow  (ox,  bull),  pig,  and  horse.      In  one  or  other  of  these

shapes  the  corn-spirit  is  believed  to  be  present  in  the  corn,

and  to  be  caught  or  killed  in  the  last  sheaf.      As  the  corn  is

being  cut  the  animal  flees  before  the  reapers,  and  if  a  reaper

is  taken  ill  on  the  field,  he  is  supposed  to  have  stumbled

unwittingly  on  the  corn-spirit,  who  has  thus  punished  the

profane  intruder.      It  is  said  "  the  Rye-wolf  has  got  hold  of

him,"  "  the  Harvest-goat  has  given  him  a  push."      The  person

who  cuts  the  last  corn  or  binds  the  last  sheaf  gets  the  name

of  the  animal,  as  the  Rye-wolf,  the  Rye-sow,  the  Oats-goat,

and   so  forth,  and    retains   the   name  sometimes  for  a  year.

Also  the  animal  is  frequently  represented  by  a  puppet  made

out  of  the  last  sheaf  or  of  wood,  flowers,  and  so  on,  which  is

carried   home  amid   rejoicings   on   the   last   harvest-waggon.

Even  where  the  last  sheaf  is  not  made  up  in  animal  shape,  it

is  often  called  the  Rye-wolf,  the   Hare,  Goat,  and   so  forth.

Generally  each  kind  of  crop  is  supposed  to  have  its  special

animal,  which    is   caught   in    the   last  sheaf,  and   called  the

Rye-wolf,  the  Barley-wolf,  the  Oats-wolf,  the  Pea-wolf,  or  the

Potato-wolf,  according  to  the  crop  ;  but  sometimes  the  figure

of  the  animal  is  only  made  up  once  for  all  at  getting  in  the

last  crop  of  the  whole  harvest.      Sometimes  the  creature  is

believed  to  be  killed  by  the  last  stroke  of  the  sickle  or  scythe.

But  oftener  it  is  thought  to  live  so  long  as  there  is  corn  still

unthreshed,  and   to    be   caught   in    the  last  sheaf  threshed.

Hence  the  man  who  gives  the  last  stroke  with  the  flail  is  told

that  he  has  got  the  Corn-sow,  the  Threshing-dog,  or  the  like.

When    the   threshing   is  finished,  a  puppet  is   made  in   the

form  of  the  animal,  and  this  is  carried  by  the  thresher  of  the

last  sheaf  to  a  neighbouring  farm,  where  the  threshing  is  still

going  on.      This  again  shows  that  the  corn-spirit  is  believed

to  live  wherever  the  corn  is  still  being  threshed.      Sometimes


in  AS   WOLF  AND  DOG  263

the  thresher  of  the  last  sheaf  himself  represents  the  animal  ;
and  if  the  people  of  the  next  farm,  who  are  still  threshing,
catch  him,  they  treat  him  like  the  animal  he  represents,  by
shutting  him  up  in  the  pig-sty,  calling  him  with  the  cries
commonly  addressed  to  pigs  and  so  forth.^

These  general  statements  will  now  be  illustrated  by
examples.  We  begin  with  the  corn -spirit  conceived  as  a
wolf  or  a  dog.  This  conception  is  common  in  France,
Germany,  and  Slavonic  countries.  Thus,  when  the  wind
sets  the  corn  in  wave-like  motion,  the  peasants  often  say,
"  The  Wolf  is  going  over,  or  through,  the  corn,"  "  the  Rye-
wolf  is  rushing  over  the  field,"  "  the  Wolf  is  in  the  corn,"
"  the  mad  Dog  is  in  the  corn,"  "  the  big  Dog  is  there."  -^
When  children  wish  to  go  into  the  corn-fields  to  pluck  ears
or  gather  the  blue  corn-flowers,  they  are  warned  not  to  do  so,
for  "  the  big  Dog  sits  in  the  corn,"  or  "  the  Wolf  sits  in  the
corn,  and  will  tear  you  in  pieces,"  "  the  Wolf  will  eat  you."
The  wolf  against  whom  the  children  are  warned  is  not  a
common  wolf,  for  he  is  often  spoken  of  as  the  Corn-wolf,
Rye-wolf,  or  the  like  ;  thus  they  say,  "  The  Rye-wolf  will
come  and  eat  you  up,  children,"  "  the  Rye-wolf  will  carry
you  off,"  and  so  forth.^  Still  he  has  all  the  outward  appear-
ance of  a  wolf.  For  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Feilenhof  (East
Prussia),  when  a  wolf  was  seen  running  through  a  field,  the
peasants  used  to  watch  whether  he  carried  his  tail  in  the  air
or  dragged  it  on  the  ground.  If  he  dragged  it  on  the
ground,  they  went  after  him,  and  thanked  him  for  bringing
them  a  blessing,  and  even  set  tit-bits  before  him.  But  if  he
carried  his  tail  high,  they  cursed  him  and  tried  to  kill  him.
Here  the  wolf  is  the  corn-spirit,  whose  fertilising  power  is  in
his  tail.^

Both  dog  and  wolf  appear  as  embodiments  of  the  corn-
spirit  in  harvest-customs.      Thus  in  some  parts  of  Silesia  the

^  W.  Mannhardt,  Die  K'ornddmonefi,  schrift   des    Vereins  fiir    Volkskunde,

pp.  1-6.  vii.  {1897),  p.  150 ;  W.  Miiller,  Beitrdge

2  W.    Mannhardt,   Roggenwolf  mid  ziir     Volkskunde     der     Deutschen    in

RoggenJmnd   (Danzig,     1865),    p.     5  ;  Mahren,  p.  327.

id.,   Antike   Wald-  und  Feldkulte,   p.  i  ttt     -.«■       1       j,      r,                ,r         r

318  sq.  ;   /./.,  Mythol.  Forsch.  p.  103  ;  ^     ^\  ^^^^nhardt,  Roggenwolf  und

WMzsch^\,Sagen,SittenundGebrduche       ^^-^  '"     '   ^^    ''  "^'^-'       "

alls   Thin-ingen,  p.  213  ;   O.  Ilartiing,       ^'  ^   ^'

"Zur  Volkskunde  aus  Anhalt,"  Zeit-  ■*  W.  lAzxivA\:^iAl,  Roggenwolf ,  p.  10.


264  THE  CORN-SPIRIT


CHAP,


person  who  binds  the  last  sheaf  is  called  the  Wbeat-dog  or
the  Peas-pug.^  But  it  is  in  the  harvest-customs  of  the  north-
east of  France  that  the  idea  of  the  Corn-dog  comes  out  most
clearly.  Thus  when  a  harvester,  through  sickness,  weariness,
or  laziness,  cannot  or  will  not  keep  up  with  the  reaper  in
front  of  him,  they  say,  "  The  White  Dog  passed  near  him,"
"  he  has  the  White  Bitch,"  or  "  the  White  Bitch  has  bitten
him," "  In  the  Vosges  the  Harvest-May  is  called  the  "  Dog
of  the  harvest,"  ^  and  the  person  who  cuts  the  last  handful  of
hay  or  wheat  is  said  to  "  kill  the  Dog,"  ^  About  Lons-le-
Saulnier,  in  the  Jura,  the  last  sheaf  is  called  the  Bitch,  In
the  neighbourhood  of  Verdun  the  regular  expression  for
finishing  the  reaping  is,  "  They  are  going  to  kill  the  Dog  "  ;
and  at  Epinal  they  say,  according  to  the  crop,  "  We  will  kill
the  Wheat-dog,  or  the  Rye-dog,  or  the  Potato-dog."  ^  In
Lorraine  it  is  said  of  the  man  who  cuts  the  last  corn,  "  He
is  killing  the  Dog  of  the  harvest."''  At  Dux,  in  the  Tyrol,
the  man  who  gives  the  last  stroke  at  threshing  is  said  to
"  strike  down  the  Dog  "  ;  ^  and  at  Ahnebergen,  near  Stade,
he  is  called,  according  to  the  crop,  Corn -pug.  Rye-pug,
Wheat-pug.*

So  with  the  wolf.  In  Germany  it  is  said  that  "  the
Wolf  sits  in  the  last  sheaf,"  ^  In  some  places  they  call  out
to  the  reaper,  "Beware  of  the  Wolf"  ;  or  they  say,  "  He  is
chasing  the  Wolf  out  of  the  corn."  ^°  The  last  bunch  of
standing  corn  is  called  the  Wolf,  and  the  man  who  cuts  it
"has  the  Wolf."  The  last  sheaf  is  also  called  the  Wolf;
and  of  the  woman  who  binds  it  they  say,  "  The  Wolf  is
biting  her,"  "she  has  the  Wolf,"  "she  must  fetch  the  Wolf"
(out  of  the  corn).^^  Moreover,  she  is  herself  called  Wolf  and
has  to  bear  the  name  for  a  whole  year  ;  sometimes,  according
to  the  crop,  she  is  called  the  Rye-wolf  or  the  Potato-wolf.  ^^
In  the  island  of  Riigen  they  call  out  to  the  woman  who  binds
the  last  sheaf,  "You're  Wolf";  and  when  she  comes  home

1  W.  Mannhardt,  M.F.  p.  104.  <"'  Ibid.  p.  30.

2  Ibid.  '  Ibid.  pp.  30,  105.
•'  Ibid.  p.  104  si].      On  the  Harvest-  ^  Ibid.  p.  105  sg.

May,  see  above,  vol.  i.  p.  190.  ^  A.  W.F.  p.  320;  Roggenwolf,  p.  24.

■•  Sauve,  Folk-lore  des  Hautes-  Vosges,  '"  Koggcmvolf,  p.  24.

p.   191.  '^  Ibid.

■>  W.  Mannhardt,  M.F.  p.  105.  '-  Ibid.  p.  25.


Jii  AS  A    WOLF  265

she  bites  the  lady  of  the  house  and  the  stewardess,  for  which
she  receives  a  large  piece  of  meat.  The  same  woman  may
be  Rye-wolf,  Wheat-wolf,  and  Oats-wolf,  if  she  happens  to
bind  the  last  sheaf  of  rye,  wheat,  and  oats.^  At  Buir,  in  the
district  of  Cologne,  it  was  formerly  the  custom  to  give  to  the
last  sheaf  the  shape  of  a  wolf.  It  was  kept  in  the  barn  till
all  the  corn  was  threshed.  Then  it  was  brought  to  the
farmer,  and  he  had  to  sprinkle  it  with  beer  or  brandy.'  In
many  places  the  sheaf  called  the  Wolf  is  made  up  in  human
form  and  dressed  in  clothes.  This  indicates  a  confusion  of
ideas  between  the  corn-spirit  conceived  in  human  and  in
animal  form.^  Generally  the  Wolf  is  brought  home  on  the
last  waggon,  with  joyful  cries.'*

Again,  the  Wolf  is  supposed  to  hide  himself  amongst  the
cut  corn  in  the  granary,  until  he  is  driven  out  of  the  last
bundle  by  the  strokes  of  the  flail.  Hence  at  Wanzleben,
near  Magdeburg,  after  the  threshing  the  peasants  go  in  pro-
cession, leading  by  a  chain  a  man  who  is  enveloped  in  the
threshed-out  straw  and  is  called  the  Wolf.  ^  He  represents
the  corn-spirit  who  has  been  caught  escaping  from  the
threshed  corn.  In  Trier  it  is  believed  that  the  Corn-wolf  is
killed  at  threshing.  The  men  thresh  the  last  sheaf  till  jt  is
reduced  to  chopped  straw.  In  this  way  they  think  that  the
Corn-wolf,  who  was  lurking  in  the  last  sheaf,  has  been
<:ertainly  killed.*^

In  France  also  the  Corn -wolf  appears  at  harvest.
Thus  they  call  out  to  the  reaper  of  the  last  corn,  "  You  will
catch  the  Wolf."  Near  Chambery  they  form  a  ring  round
the  last  standing  corn,  and  cry,  "  The  Wolf  is  in  there."
In  Finisterre,  when  the  reaping  draws  near  an  end,  the
harvesters  cry,  "  There  is  the  Wolf ;  we  will  catch  him."
Each  takes  a  swath  to  reap,  and  he  who  finishes  first  calls
out,  "  I've  caught  the  Wolf."  "^  In  Guyenne,  when  the  last
corn  has  been  reaped,  they  lead  a  wether  all  round  the  field.
It  is  called  "  the  Wolf  of  the  field."  Its  horns  are  decked
with  a  wreath  of  flowers   and    corn-ears,  and   its   neck  and

^  Roggemvolf,  p.    28;    A.IV.F.    p.            ^  Ibid.  p.  26;  A.IV.F.  p.  320.

320.  '>  A.IV.F.  p.  321.

2  /did.  p.  25.  ''  A.IV.F.  p.  ^21  sq.

^  Ibid.  p.  26.  ""  Ibid.  p.  320.


266  THE  CORN-SPIRIT  chap.

body  are  also  encircled  with  garlands  and  ribbons.  All  the
reapers  march,  singing,  behind  it.  Then  it  is  killed  on  the
field.  In  this  part  of  France  the  last  sheaf  is  called  the
coujoulage,  which,  in  the  patois,  means  a  wether.  Hence
the  killing  of  the  wether  represents  the  death  of  the  corn-
spirit,  considered  as  present  in  the  last  sheaf;  but  two
different  conceptions  of  the  corn-spirit— as  a  wolf  and  as  a
wether — are  mixed  up  together.^

Sometimes  it  appears  to  be  thought  that  the  Wolf,
caught  in  the  last  corn,  lives  during  the  winter  in  the  farm-
house, ready  to  renew  his  activity  as  corn-spirit  in  the  spring.
Hence  at  midwinter,  when  the  lengthening  days  begin  to
herald  the  approach  of  spring,  the  Wolf  makes  his  appear-
ance once  more.  In  Poland  a  man,  with  a  wolf's  skin
thrown  over  his  head,  is  led  about  at  Christmas  ;  or  a
stuffed  wolf  is  carried  about  by  persons  who  collect  money.'"'
There  are  facts  which  point  to  an  old  custom  of  leading
about  a  man  enveloped  in  leaves  and  called  the  Wolf,  while
his  conductors  collected  money .^

Another  form  which  the  corn-spirit  often  assumes  is  that
of  a  cock.  In  Austria  children  are  warned  against  straying
in  the  corn-fields,  because  the  Corn-cock  sits  there,  and  will
peck  their  eyes  out*  In  North  Germany  they  say  that  "the
Cock  sits  in  the  last  sheaf";  and  at  cutting  the  last  corn  the
reapers  cry,  "  Now  we  will  chase  out  the  Cock."  When  it  is
cut  they  say,  "  We  have  caught  the  Cock."  Then  a  cock  is
made  of  flowers,  fastened  on  a  pole,  and  carried  home  by  the
reapers,  singing  as  they  go.^  At  Braller,  in  Transylvania,
when  the  reapers  come  to  the  last  patch  of  corn,  they  cry,
"  Here  we  shall  catch  the  Cock."  '^  At  Ftirstenwalde,  when
the  last  sheaf  is  about  to  be  bound,  the  master  releases
a  cock,  which  he  has  brought  in  a  basket,  and  lets  it  run
over  the  field.  All  the  harvesters  chase  it  till  they  catch  it.
Elsewhere  the  harvesters  all  try  to  seize  the  last  corn  cut  ;

^  A.  W.F.  p.  320  sq.  fdlische     Sagen,     Miirchen     iind    Ge-

2  Hid,  p.  ^22.  briiuche,  ii.  181  ;  Kuhn  und  Schwartz,

3  Ibid.  p.  32-5.  ^  i   ■      7  o

i^    -^   ■'  Geb7-ancne,  p.  390.

4  Die  Kornddinoncn,  p.  13.  6  g.  A.  Heinrich,  Agrarische  Sit  ten
^  Ibid.  ;   Schmitz,  Sitten  tend  Sagen       und    Gebi-diiche    unter     den     SachseH

des  Eiflcr  Volkes,  i.  95  ;    Kvihn,    West-       Siebcnbiirgens,  p.  21.


Ill  AS  A  COCA'  267

he  who  succeeds  in  grasping  it  must  crow,  and  is  called
Cock.^  Among  the  Wends  it  is  or  used  to  be  customary
for  the  farmer  to  hide  a  live  cock  under  the  last  sheaf  as
it  lay  on  the  field  ;  and  when  the  corn  was  being  gathered
up,  the  harvester  who  lighted  upon  this  sheaf  had  a
right  to  keep  the  cock,  provided  he  could  catch  it.  This
formed  the  close  of  the  harvest-festival  and  was  known  as
"  the  Cock-catching,"  and  the  beer  which  was  served  out
to  the  reapers  at  this  time  went  by  the  name  of  "  Cock-
beer."'  The  last  sheaf  is  called  Cock,  Cock-sheaf,  Harvest-
cock,  Harvest-hen,  Autumn-hen.  A  distinction  is  made
between  a  Wheat-cock,  Bean-cock,  and  so  on,  according  to
the  crop.^  At  Wiinschensuhl,  in  Thiiringen,  the  last  sheaf
is  made  into  the  shape  of  a  cock,  and  called  Harvest-cock.*
A  figure  of  a  cock,  made  of  wood,  pasteboard,  or  ears  of
corn,  is  borne  in  front  of  the  harvest- waggon,  especially  in
Westphalia,  where  the  cock  carries  in  his  beak  fruits  of  the
earth  of  all  kinds.  Sometimes  the  image  of  the  cock  is
fastened  to  the  top  of  a  May-tree  on  the  last  harvest-waggon.
Elsewhere  a  live  cock,  or  a  figure  of  one,  is  attached  to  a
harvest-crown  and  carried  on  a  pole.  In  Galicia  and  else-
where this  live  cock  is  fastened  to  the  garland  of  corn-ears
or  flowers,  which  the  leader  of  the  women-reapers  carries  on
her  head  as  she  marches  in  front  of  the  harvest  procession.^
In  Silesia  a  live  cock  is  presented  to  the  master  on  a  plate.
The  harvest-supper  is  called  Harvest-cock,  Stubble-cock,  etc.,
and  a  chief  dish  at  it,  at  least  in  some  places,  is  a  cock.^  If
a  waggoner  upsets  a  harvest-waggon,  it  is  said  that  "  he  has
spilt  the  Harvest-cock,"  and  he  loses  the  cock,  that  is,  the
harvest -supper.*^      The   harvest -waggon,  with  the  figure  of

^  D/e   Komddmoneii,    p.     13.      Cp.  ^  Die   Kornddtnouen,  p.  15-      So  in

Kuhn  and  Schwartz,  I.e.  Shropshire,    where    the    corn-spirit    is

-  K.  Haupt,  Sagenbitch  der  Laiisiiz,  conceived    in    the    form    of  a    gander

i.  p.  232,  No.  277  note.  (see    above,    p.    260),    the    expression

•^  Die  Kornddnwnen,  p.   13.  for  overthrowing  a  load  at  harvest  is

^  Witzschel,     Sagen,     Siiten      itnd  "  to  lose  the  goose,"  and  the  penalty

Gehrduche  aus  Thiiringen,  p.  220.  used  to  be  the  loss  of  the  goose  at  the

^  Die    JCornddmonen,    p.     13    sq.  ;  harvest-supper    (Burne    and    Jackson,

Kuhn,     Westfdlische    Sageii,    Mdrchen  Shropshire  Folk-lore,    p.   375)  ;  and  in

iind  Gebrduche,  ii,    180  sq.  ;   Pfannen-  some    parts    of    England    the   harvest-

schmid,  Germanische  Erntefeste,  p.  no.  supper  was  called  the  Harvest  Gosling,

"  Die  Kornddmonen,   p.  14  ;   Pfan-  or  the  Inning  Goose  (Brand,  Popular

nenschmid,  op.  cit.  pp.  in,  419  sq.  Antiquities,  ii.  23,  26,  Bohn's  ed.).


268  THE  CORN-SPIRIT  chap.

the  cock  on  it,  is  driven  round  the  farmhouse  before  it  is
taken  to  the  barn.  Then  the  cock  is  nailed  over,  or  at
the  side  of  the  house-door,  or  on  the  gable,  and  remains  there
till  next  harvest.-'  In  East  Friesland  the  person  who  gives
the  last  stroke  at  threshing  is  called  the  Clucking-hen,  and
grain  is  strewed  before  him  as  if  he  were  a  hen."

Again,  the  corn-spirit  is  killed  in  the  form  of  a  cock.
In  parts  of  Germany,  Hungary,  Poland,  and  Picardy  the
reapers  place  a  live  cock  in  the  corn  which  is  to  be  cut  last,
and  chase  it  over  the  field,  or  bury  it  up  to  the  neck  in  the
ground  ;  afterwards  they  strike  off  its  head  with  a  sickle  or
scythe.^  In  many  parts  of  Westphalia,  when  the  harvesters
bring  the  wooden  cock  to  the  farmer,  he  gives  them  a  live
cock,  which  they  kill  with  whips  or  sticks,  or  behead  with
an  old  sword,  or  throw  into  the  barn  to  the  girls,  or  give
to  the  mistress  to  cook.  If  the  harvest -cock  has  not
been  spilt — that  is,  if  no  waggon  has  been  upset — the
harvesters  have  the  right  to  kill  the  farmyard  cock  by
throwing  stones  at  it  or  beheading  it.  Where  this  custom
has  fallen  into  Hisuse,  it  is  still  common  for  the  farmer's  wife
to  make  cockie-leekie  for  the  harvesters,  and  to  show  them
the  head  of  the  cock  which  has  been  killed  for  the  soup.'*  In
the  neighbourhood  of  Klausenburg,  Transylvania,  a  cock  is
buried  on  the  harvest-field  in  the  earth,  so  that  only  its  head
appears.  A  young  man  then  takes  a  scythe  and  cuts  off  the
cock's  head  at  a  single  sweep.  If  he  fails  to  do  this,  he
is  called  the  Red  Cock  for  a  whole  year,  and  people  fear
that  next  year's  crop  will  be  bad.^  Near  Udvarhely,
in  Transylvania,  a  live  cock  is  bound  up  in  the  last  sheaf
and  killed  with  a  spit.  It  is  then  skinned.  The  flesh
is  thrown  away,  but  the  skin  and  feathers  are  kept  till  next
year  ;  and  in  spring  the  grain  from  the  last  sheaf  is  mixed
with  the  feathers  of  the  cock  and  scattered  on  the  field  which
is  to  be  tilled.''  Nothing  could  set  in  a  clearer  light  the
identification  of  the  cock  with  the  spirit  of  the  corn.  By
being  tied  up  in  the  last  sheaf  and  killed,  the  cock  is  identi-
fied with  the  corn,  and  its  death  with  the  cutting  of  the  corn.

1  Die  Korndamo)ien,  p.   14.  ■•  Die  Korndiimoneji,  p.   15.

2  Ibid.  p.   15.  '"  Ibid.  p.   15  sq.

3  M.F.  p.  30.  6  Ibid.  p.  15  ;  MF.  p.  30.


Ill  AS  COCA'  AND  HARE  269

By  keeping  its  feathers  till  spring,  then  mixing  them  with
the  seed-corn  taken  from  the  very  sheaf  in  which  the  bird
had  been  bound,  and  scattering  the  feathers  together  with
the  seed  over  the  field,  the  identity  of  the  bird  with  the  corn
is  again  emphasised,  and  its  quickening  and  fertilising  power,
as  the  corn-spirit,  is  intimated  in  the  plainest  manner.  Thus
the  corn-spirit,  in  the  form  of  a  cock,  is  killed  at  harvest,  but
rises  to  fresh  life  and  activity  in  spring.  Again,  the  equiva-
lence of  the  cock  to  the  corn  is  expressed,  hardly  less  plainly,
in  the  custom  of  burying  the  bird  in  the  ground,  and  cutting
off"  its  head  (like  the  ears  of  corn)  with  the  scythe.

Another  common  embodiment  of  the  corn-spirit  is  the
hare.^  In  Galloway  the  reaping  of  the  last  standing  corn
is  called  "  cutting  the  Hare."  The  mode  of  cutting  it  is  as
follows.  When  the  rest  of  the  corn  has  been  reaped,  a
handful  is  left  standing  to  form  the  Hare.  It  is  divided
into  three  parts  and  plaited,  and  the  ears  are  tied  in  a  knot.
The  reapers  then  retire  a  few  yards  and  each  throws  his  or
her  sickle  in  turn  at  the  Hare  to  cut  it  down.  It  must  be
cut  below  the  knot,  and  the  reapers  continue  to  throw  their
sickles  at  it,  one  after  the  other,  until  one  of  them  succeeds
in  severing  the  stalks  below  the  knot.  The  Hare  is  then
carried  home  and  given  to  a  maidservant  in  the  kitchen,  who
places  it  over  the  kitchen-door  on  the  inside.  Sometimes
the  Hare  used  to  be  thus  kept  till  the  next  harvest.  In  the
parish  of  Minnigaff,  when  the  Hare  was  cut,  the  unmarried
reapers  ran  home  with  all  speed,  and  the  one  who  arrived
first  was  the  first  to  be  married.^  In  Southern  Ayrshire  the
last  corn  cut  is  also  called  the  Hare,  and  the  mode  of  cutting
it  seems  to  be  the  same  as  in  Galloway ;  at  least  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Kilmarnock  the  last  corn  left  standing  in
the  middle  of  the  field  is  plaited,  and  the  reapers  used  to
try  to  cut  it  by  throwing  their  sickles  at  it.  When  cut,  it
was  carried  home  and  hung  up  over  the  door.^  In  the
Vosges  the  person  who  cuts  the  last  handful  of  hay  or  wheat
is  said  to  have  caught  the  Hare  ;  he  is  congratulated  by  his

^  Die  Kornddmonen,  p.   I.  Report  of  the  B7-itish  Association  for

1896,  p.  623.
^  W.  Gregor,   "Preliminary  Report  '^  Folk-lore  Journal,  y'ix.  {\Z%0)),-^.  £,"]

on   Folklore  in   Galloway,    Scotland,"       sq.


270  THE  CORN-SPIRIT  chap.

comrades  and  has  the  honour  of  carrying  the  nosegay  or  the
small  fir-tree  decorated  with  ribbons  which  marks  the  con-
clusion of  the  harvest.^  In  Germany  also  one  of  the  names
for  the  last  sheaf  is  the  Hare.^  Thus  in  some  parts  of
Anhalt,  when  the  corn  has  been  reaped  and  only  a  few  stalks
are  left  standing,  they  say,  "  The  Hare  will  soon  come,"  or
the  reapers  cry  to  each  other,  "  Look  how  the  Hare  comes
jumping  out."  ^  In  East  Prussia  they  say  that  the  Hare  sits  in
the  last  patch  of  standing  corn,  and  must  be  chased  out  by  the
last  reaper.  The  reapers  hurry  with  their  work,  each  being
anxious  not  to  have  "  to  chase  out  the  Hare  "  ;  for  the  man
who  does  so,  that  is,  who  cuts  the  last  corn,  is  much  laughed
at.^  At  Birk,  in  Transylvania,  when  the  reapers  come  to  the
last  patch,  they  cry  out,  "  We  have  the  Hare."  ^  At  Aurich,
as  we  have  seen,''  an  expression  for  cutting  the  last  corn  is
"  to  cut  off  the  Hare's  tail."  "  He  is  killing  the  Hare "  is
commonly  said  of  the  man  who  cuts  the  last  corn  in  Ger-
many, Sweden,  Holland,  France,  and  Italy.'  In  Norway
the  man  who  is  thus  said  to  "  kill  the  Hare "  must  give
"  hare's  blood,"  in  the  form  of  brandy,  to  his  fellows  to
drink."  '^  In  Lesbos  when  the  reapers  are  at  work  in  two
neighbouring  fields,  each  party  tries  to  finish  first  in  order
to  drive  the  Hare  into  their  neighbour's  field  ;  the  reapers
who  succeed  in  doing  so  believe  that  next  year  the  crop
will  be  better.  A  small  sheaf  of  corn  is  made  up  and  kept
beside  the  holy  picture  till  next  harvest.''*

Again,  the  corn-spirit  sometimes  takes  the  form  of  a  cat.^°
Near  Kiel  children  are  warned  not  to  go  into  the  corn-fields
because  "  the  Cat  sits  there."  In  the  Eisenach  Oberland  they
are  told  "  the  Corn-cat  will  come  and  fetch  you,"  "  the  Corn-
cat  goes  in  the  corn."      In  some  parts  of  Silesia  at  mowing

1   Sauve,  Folk-lore  des  Hautes-  Vosges,  iind  Gebriiucke  unter  den  Sachsen  Sie-

p.   191.  benbiirgens,  p.  21.

■^  W.  Mannhardt,  Die  Koniddmonen,  *^  Above,  p.  260  sg.

p.  3.  '   ^^■^-  P-  29.

3  O.    Hartung,    "  Zur    Volkskunde  '  ^'"'^-     P"    ^9    -^Y- 5    ^^e   Korndii-

A     1      1.  I.    -7    ^      7      -rj.    J       rr        ■        r-  DlOHeil,   n.    C.

aiis  Anhalt,  Z67/jvAr/// rfw  I  ereins  fur  0   ^-  i  •      .  n-  r-  n  1        j

,.,,,      J       ■■    ,   o     K  Georgeakis  et  Fineau,  polk-lore  de

I  olkskunde,  vu.  (1097),  p.   I S4'  t     l      ,-r,     •        o      x

.  \      vin  1        jt  Lesbos  {V3.ns,   1894),  p.  310.

*  Lemke,    Volksthiimliches    in    Ost-  10  A.IV.F.   pp.    172-174  •  M.F.   p.

preussen,  i.  24.  -jo  ;  Sauve,  Folk-lore  des  HatUes-  Vosges,

^  G.  A.  Heinrich,  Agrarische  Sitten       p.   191.


Ill  AS  CAT  AND  GOAT  271

the  last  corn  they  say,  "  The  Cat  is  caught  " ;  and  at  threshing,
the  man  who  gives  the  last  stroke  is  called  the  Cat.  In
the  neighbourhood  of  Lyons  the  last  sheaf  and  the  harvest-
supper  are  both  called  the  Cat.  About  Vesoul  when  they
cut  the  last  corn  they  say,  "  We  have  the  Cat  by  the  tail."
At  Briangon,  in  Dauphine,  at  the  beginning  of  reaping,  a
cat  is  decked  out  with  ribbons,  flowers,  and  ears  of  corn.  It
is  called  the  Cat  of  the  ball-skin  {le  chat  de  peau  de  balle).
If  a  reaper  is  wounded  at  his  work,  they  make  the  cat  lick
the  wound.  At  the  close  of  the  reaping  the  cat  is  again
decked  out  with  ribbons  and  ears  of  corn  ;  then  they  dance
and  make  merry.  When  the  dance  is  over  the  girls  solemnly
strip  the  cat  of  its  finery.  At  Griineberg,  in  Silesia,  the
reaper  who  cuts  the  last  corn  goes  by  the  name  of  the
Tom-cat.  He  is  enveloped  in  rye-stalks  and  green  withes,
and  is  furnished  with  a  long  plaited  fail.  Sometimes  as  a
companion  he  has  a  man  similarly  dressed,  who  is  called  the
(female)  Cat.  Their  duty  is  to  run  after  people  whom  they
see  and  beat  them  with  a  long  stick.  Near  Amiens  the
expression  for  finishing  the  harvest  is,  "  They  are  going  to
kill  the  Cat";  and  when  the  last  corn  is  cut  they  kill  a  cat
in  the  farmyard.  At  threshing,  in  some  parts  of  France,  a
live  cat  is  placed  under  the  last  bundle  of  corn  to  be  threshed,
and  is  struck  dead  with  the  flails.  Then  on  Sunday  it  is
roasted  and  eaten  as  a  holiday  dish.

Further,  the  corn-spirit  often  appears  in  the  form  of  a
goat.  In  some  parts  of  Prussia,  when  the  corn  bends  before
the  wind,  they  say,  "  The  Goats  are  chasing  each  other,"
"  the  wind  is  driving  the  Goats  through  the  corn,"  "  the
Goats  are  browsing  there,"  and  they  expect  a  very  good
harvest.  Again  they  say,  "  The  Oats-goat  is  sitting  in  the
oats-field,"  "  the  Corn-goat  is  sitting  in  the  rye-field."  ^
Children  are  warned  not  to  go  into  the  corn-fields  to  pluck
the  blue  corn-flowers,  or  amongst  the  beans  to  pluck  pods,
because  the  Rye-goat,  the  Corn-goat,  the  Oats-goat,  or  the
Bean-goat  is  sitting  or  lying  there,  and  will  carry  them  away
or  kill  them.^  When  a  harvester  is  taken  sick  or  lags
behind  his  fellows  at  their  work,  they  call  out,  "  The  Harvest-

^  W.  Mannhardt,  A.W.F.  p.  155  sq.
-  Ibid.  p.  157  sq.


272  THE  CORN-SPIRIT  chai>,

goat  has  pushed  him,"  "  he  has  been  pushed  by  the  Corn-
goat."  ^      In  the  neighbourhood  of  Braunsberg  (East  Prussia)
at  binding  the  oats  every  harvester  makes  haste   "  lest  the
Corn-goat  push  him."      At  Oefoten,  in  Norway,  each  harvester
has  his  allotted  patch  to  reap.    When  a  harvester  in  the  middle
has  not  finished  reaping  his  piece  after  his   neighbours  have
finished  theirs,  they  say  of  him,  "  He  remains  on  the  island."
And  if  the  laggard  is  a  man,  they  imitate  the  cry  with  which
they  call  a   he-goat  ;  if  a   woman,  the   cry  with  which   they
call  a  she-goat.^      Near  Straubing,  in  Lower  Bavaria,  it  is  said
of  the  man  who  cuts  the  last  corn  that  "  he  has  the  Corn-
goat  or   the   Wheat-goat,  or  the    Oats-goat,"   according   to
the  crop.      Moreover,  two  horns  are  set   up  on  the  last  heap
of  corn,  and  it  is  called  "  the  horned  Goat."      At  Kreutzburg^
East  Prussia,  they  call  out  to  the  woman  who  is  binding  the
last  sheaf,  "  The   Goat   is   sitting   in   the   sheaf."  ^      At  Gab-
lingen,  in  Swabia,  when  the  last  field  of  oats  upon  a  farm  is
being  reaped,  the   reapers   carve   a   goat  out  of  wood.      Ears
of  oats    are    inserted    in   its    nostrils    and   mouth,   and    it   is
adorned  with  garlands  of  flowers.      It  is  set  upon   the  field
and  called  the  Oats-goat.      When  the  reaping  approaches  an
end,  each  reaper  hastens   to   finish  his  piece  first ;  he  who  is
the  last  to  finish  gets   the   Oats-goat."*      Again,  the  last  sheaf
is  itself  called  the  Goat.      Thus,  in  the  valley  of  the  Wiesent,
Bavaria,  the  last  sheaf  bound  on  the  field  is  called  the  Goat,
and  they  have  a  proverb,  "  The  field  must  bear  a  goat."  ^      At
Spachbriicken,  in    Hesse,   the   last   handful   of  corn  which  is
cut  is  called  the  Goat,  and  the  man    who  cuts   it   is   much
ridiculed.''      Sometimes    the    last  sheaf  is    made    up    in    the
form  of  a  goat,  and  they  say,  "  The  Goat   is  sitting   in   it."  "^
Again,   the    person    who    cuts    or    binds    the    last   sheaf    is
called   the  Goat.      Thus,  in  parts  of  Mecklenburg  they  call
out    to    the    woman    who    binds    the    last  sheaf,  "  You   are
the   Harvest-goat."      Near  Uelzen,  in   Hanover,  the  harvest
festival  begins  with  "  the  bringing  of  the  Harvest-goat "  ;  that

^  W.   Mannhardt,  A.IV.F.   p.    159.  ^  Panzer,  (7/.«V.  ii.  p.  228  j^.,  §  422;

2  Ibid.  p.   161  sq.  A.IV.F.    p.     163;    Bavaria,    Lattdes-

2  3id.  p.   162.  u)td  Volkskunde  des Kdnigreicks Bayern,

■*   Panzer,     Beitrag     zur     dt-utschen  iii.  344.

Mythologie,    ii.    p.    232    sq.,     §    426;  "  A.W.F.  p.   163.

A.IV.F.  p.  162.  ^  fh'd.  p.   164.


Ill  AS  A  GOAT  273

is,  the  woman  who  bound  the  last  sheaf  is  wrapt  in  straw,
crowned  with  a  harvest -wreath,  and  brought  in  a  wheel-
barrow to  the  village,  where  a  round  dance  takes  place.
About  Luneburg,  also,  the  woman  who  binds  the  last  corn  is
decked  with  a  crown  of  corn-ears  and  is  called  the  Corn-
goat.^  In  the  Canton  St.  Gall,  Switzerland,  the  person  who
cuts  the  last  handful  of  corn  on  the  field,  or  drives  the  last
harvest-waggon  to  the  barn,  is  called  the  Corn-goat  or  the
Rye-goat,  or  simply  the  Goat."  In  the  Canton  Thurgau  he
is  called  Corn-goat ;  like  a  goat  he  has  a  bell  hung  round  his
neck,  is  led  in  triumph,  and  drenched  with  liquor.  In  parts
of  Styria,  also,  the  man  who  cuts  the  last  corn  is  called
Corn-goat,  Oats-goat,  or  the  like.  As  a  rule,  the  man  who
thus  gets  the  name  of  Corn-goat  has  to  bear  it  a  whole  year
till  the  next  harvest.^

According  to  one  view,  the  corn-spirit,  who  has  been
caught  in  the  form  of  a  goat  or  otherwise,  lives  in  the  farm-
house or  barn  over  winter.  Thus,  each  farm  has  its  own
embodiment  of  the  corn-spirit.  But,  according  to  another
view,  the  corn-spirit  is  the  genius  or  deity,  not  of  the  corn
of  one  farm  only,  but  of  all  the  corn.  Hence  when  the  corn
on  one  farm  is  all  cut,  he  flees  to  another  where  there  is  still
corn  left  standing.  This  idea  is  brought  out  in  a  harv^est-
custom  which  was  formerly  observed  in  Skye.  The  farmer
who  first  finished  reaping  sent  a  man  or  woman  with  a
sheaf  to  a  neighbouring  farmer  who  had  not  finished  ;  the
latter  in  his  turn,  when  he  had  finished,  sent  on  the  sheaf  to
his  neighbour  who  was  still  reaping  ;  and  so  the  sheaf  made
the  round  of  the  farms  till  all  the  corn  was  cut.  The  sheaf
was  called  the  goabbir  bhacagh,  that  is,  the  Cripple  Goat.'*
The  custom  appears  not  to  be  extinct  at  the  present  day,
for  it  was  reported  from  Skye  only  a  few  years  ago.  We
are  told  that  when  the  crofters  and  small  farmers  are  cutting
down  their  corn,  each  tries  his  best  to  finish  before  his
neighbour.  The  first  to  finish  goes  to  his  neighbour's  field
and  makes  up  at  one  end  of  it  a  bundle  of  sheaves  in  a
fanciful  shape  which  goes  by  the  name  of  the  gobJiar  bhacach
or  Lame  Goat.      As  each  man  in  succession  finishes  reaping

1  A.  W.F.  p.  164.  -  Ibid.   p.  164  sg.  3  /^/^_  p^  i(^^^

*  Brand,  Popular  Antiquities,  ii.  24,  Bohn's  ed.  ;  A.  W.F.  p.  165.

VOL.  II  T


274  THE  CORN-SPIRIT  chap.

his  field,  he  proceeds  to  set  up  a  lame  goat  of  this  sort  in
his  neighbour's  field  where  there  is  still  corn  standing.  No
one  likes  to  have  the  Lame  Goat  put  in  his  field,  "  not  from
any  ill-luck  it  brings,  but  because  it  is  humiliating  to  have  it
standing  there  visible  to  all  neighbours  and  passers-by,  and
of  course  he  cannot  retaliate."  ^  The  corn-spirit  was  prob-
ably thus  represented  as  lame  because  he  had  been  crippled
by  the  cutting  of  the  corn.  We  have  seen  that  sometimes
the  old  woman  who  brings  home  the  last  sheaf  must  limp
on  one  foot.^  In  the  Bohmer  Wald  mountains,  between
Bohemia  and  Bavaria,  when  two  peasants  are  driving  home
their  corn  together,  they  race  against  each  other  to  see  who
shall  get  home  first.  The  village  boys  mark  the  loser  in  the
race,  and  at  night  they  come  and  erect  on  the  roof  of  his
house  the  Oats-goat,  which  is  a  colossal  figure  of  a  goat  made
of  straw.^

But  sometimes  the  corn-spirit,  in   the   form  of  a  goat,  is
believed    to   be   slain   on   the   harvest-field   by   the   sickle    or
scythe.      Thus,  in   the   neighbourhood   of  Bernkastel,  on  the
Moselle,  the  reapers  determine  by  lot  the  order  in  which  they
shall  follow  each  other.      The  first  is  called  the  fore-reaper,
the  last  the  tail-bearer.      If  a   reaper  overtakes   the   man   in
front  he  reaps   past  him,  bending   round   so   as  to  leave  the
slower  reaper  in   a  patch  by  himself.      This  patch  is  called
the  Goat ;  and  the  man  for  whom  "  the  Goat  is  cut "  in  this
way,  is  laughed  and   jeered   at  by  his   fellows   for  the  rest  of
the  day.     When  the  tail-bearer  cuts   the   last  ears  of  corn,  it
is  said,  "  He  is  cutting  the  Goat's  neck  off."  '^      In  the  neigh-
bourhood of  Grenoble,  before   the  end  of  the  reaping,  a  live
goat  is  adorned  with  flowers  and  ribbons  and  allowed  to  run
about   the  field.      The   reapers  chase   it  and   try  to  catch  it.
When  it  is  caught,  the   farmer's   wife  holds   it  fast  while  the
farmer  cuts  off  its  head.      The   goat's   flesh   serves  to  furnish
the  harvest-supper.      A  piece  of  the  flesh  is  pickled  and  kept
till  the  next  harvest,  when  another  goat  is  killed.      Then   all
the  harvesters  eat  of  the  flesh.      On  the  same  day  the  skin  of

1  R.  C.  Maclagan,  "Notes  on  folk-  2  Above,  p.  236.

lore  objects  collected  in  Argyleshire,"  ^  A  W F.  -a    16;
/'o/zC'-^ri?,  vi.  {1895),  p.  151,  frominfor-  .      .    .  p.        5.

mation  given  by  Mrs.  C.  Nicholson.  *  Ibid.  p.  166;  M.F.  p.  185.


Ill  AS  A  GOAT  275

the  goat  is  made  into  a  cloak,  which  the  farmer,  who  works
with  his  men,  must  always  wear  at  harvest-time  if  rain  or
bad  weather  sets  in.  But  if  a  reaper  gets  pains  in  his  back,
the  farmer  gives  him  the  goat-skin  to  wear.^  The  reason
for  this  seems  to  be  that  the  pains  in  the  back,  being  inflicted
by  the  corn-spirit,  can  also  be  healed  by  it.  Similarly,  we
saw  that  elsewhere,  when  a  reaper  is  wounded  at  reaping,  a
cat,  as  the  representative  of  the  corn-spirit,  is  made  to  lick
the  wound.^  Esthonian  reapers  in  the  island  of  Mon  think
that  the  man  who  cuts  the  first  ears  of  corn  at  harvest  will
get  pains  in  his  back,^  probably  because  the  corn-spirit  is
believed  to  resent  especially  the  first  wound  ;  and,  in  order  to
escape  pains  in  the  back,  Saxon  reapers  in  Transylvania  gird
their  loins  with  the  first  handful  of  ears  which  they  cut.**
Here,  again,  the  corn-spirit  is  applied  to  for  healing  or  pro-
tection, but  in  his  original  vegetable  form,  not  in  the  form  of
a  goat  or  a  cat.

Further,  the  corn-spirit  under  the  form  of  a  goat  is  some-
times conceived  as  lurking  among  the  cut  corn  in  the
barn,  till  he  is  driven  from  it  by  the  threshing-flail.  For
example,  near  Marktl,  in  Upper  Bavaria,  the  sheaves  are
called  Straw-goats  or  simply  Goats.  They  are  laid  in  a
great  heap  on  the  open  field  and  threshed  by  two  rows  of
men  standing  opposite  each  other,  who,  as  they  ply  their
flails,  sing  a  song  in  which  they  say  that  they  see  the  Straw-
goat  amongst  the  corn-stalks.  The  last  Goat,  that  is,  the
last  sheaf,  is  adorned  with  a  wreath  of  violets  and  other
flowers  and  with  cakes  strung  together.  It  is  placed  right
in  the  middle  of  the  heap.  Some  of  the  threshers  rush  at
it  and  tear  the  best  of  it  out  ;  others  lay  on  with  their  flails
so  recklessly  that  heads  are  sometimes  broken.  In  thresh-
ing this  last  sheaf,  each  man  casts  up  to  the  man  opposite
him  the  misdeeds  of  which  he  has  been  guilty  throughout
the  year.^  At  Oberinntal,  in  Tyrol,  the  last  thresher  is
called  Goat."      At  Tettnang,  in  Wiirtemberg,  the  thresher  who

^  A.IV.F.  p.   166.  ti.  Gebrdtiche  tinter  den  Sachsen  Sieben-

2  Above,  p.  271.  biirgens,  p.  19.      Cp.  B.K.  p.  482  sqq.

^   Holzmayer,  "  Osiliana,"  Verhand-  ^  Panzer,      Beitrag     zur    deiitschen

hingen  der  gelehrte7i  Estnischen  Gesell-  Mythologie,    ii.    p.    225    sqq.,   §421;

schaft  zti  Dorpai,  vii.  Heft  2,  p.  107.  A.  W.F.  p.   167  sq.

*  G.  A.  Heinrich,  Agrarische  Sitten  ^  A.  W.F.  p.  168.


276  THE  CORN-SPIRIT  chap.

gives  the  last  stroke   to  the  last   bundle  of  corn   before  it  is
turned  goes  by  the  name  of  the   He-goat,  and   it  is  said  "  he
has  driven  the   He-goat  away."      The   person   who,  after  the
bundle  has  been  turned,  gives  the  last  stroke  of  all,  is  called
the  She-goat.^      In  this  custom  it  is   implied  that  the  corn  is
inhabited  by  a  pair  of  corn-spirits,  male  and  female.     Further,
the  corn-spirit,  captured  in  the  form   of  a   goat  at  threshing,
is    passed    on   to    a    neighbour  whose   threshing    is    not   yet
finished.      In   Franche   Comte,   as  soon   as   the   threshing   is
over,  the  young  people  set  up  a  straw  figure  of  a  goat  on  the
farmyard  of  a  neighbour  who  is   still  threshing.      He   must
give    them    wine    or    money    in    return.       At   Ellwangen,   in
Wurtemberg,  the  effigy   of  a  goat    is  made  out  of  the   last
bundle  of  corn  at   threshing  ;  four   sticks   form   its   legs,  and
two    its    horns.      The   man   who   gives   the   last    stroke    with
the  flail  must   carry  the   Goat  to   the    barn    of  a   neighbour
who  is  still  threshing  and  throw  it  down  on  the  floor  ;   if  he
is  caught   in  the   act,  they   tie   the   Goat   on   his   back.'"^      A
similar  custom  is  observed   at  Indersdorf,  in  Upper  Bavaria  ;
the  man   who  throws  the  straw  Goat   into   the   neighbour's
barn  imitates  the  bleating  of  a  goat ;   if  they  catch  him,  they
blacken  his  face  and  tie  the  Goat  on  his  back.^      At  Zabern,
in  Elsace,  when  a  farmer  is  a  week  or  more  behind  his  neigh-
bours with  his  threshing,  they  set  a   real   stuffed  goat  or  fox
before  his  door.*      Sometimes   the  spirit   of  the  corn  in  goat
form  is  believed  to  be  killed  at  threshing.      In  the  district  of
Traunstein,  Upper  Bavaria,  they  think  that  the  Oats-goat  is
in  the  last  sheaf  of  oats.      He  is  represented  by  an  old  rake  set
up  on  end,  with  an  old  pot  for  a  head.      The  children  are  then
told  to  kill  the  Oats-goat.^      A  stranger  passing  a  harvest-field
is   sometimes   taken   for   the  Corn-goat    escaping   in    human
shape  from  the  cut  or  threshed  grain.      Thus,  when  a  stranger
passes  a  harvest-field,  all  the  labourers  stop  and  shout  as  with
one  voice,  "  He-goat !  He-goat !  "     At  rape-seed  threshing  in
Schleswig,  which  is  generally  done  on  the  field,  the  same  cry
is  raised  if  the  stranger  does  not  take  off  his  hat."

^  E.  Meier,  Deutsche  Sai^en,   Sitten  ^   Panzer,   op.    cit.    ii.    p.   224  sq.,  §

und  Gebrdiiche  aiis  Schwaben,  p.  445,       420  ;   A.  IV. F.  p.   169.
§  162;  A.IV.F.  p.  168.  *  A.W.F.  p.   169.

^  Ibid.  p.   170.

2  A.W.F.  p.   169.  6  /^^-^/^  p_  170.


Ill  AS  GOAT  AND  BULL  277

At  sowing  their  winter  corn  the  old  Prussians  used  to
kill  a  goat,  consume  its  flesh  with  many  superstitious  cere-
monies, and  hang  the  skin  on  a  high  pole  near  an  oak  and
a  large  stone.  Here  it  remained  till  harvest,  when  a  great
bunch  of  corn  and  herbs  was  fastened  to  the  pole  above  the
goat-skin.  Then,  after  a  prayer  had  been  offered  by  a  peasant
who  acted  as  priest  ( VVeidului),  the  young  folks  joined  hands
and  danced  round  the  oak  and  the  pole.  Afterwards  they
scrambled  for  the  bunch  of  corn,  and  the  priest  distributed
the  herbs  with  a  sparing  hand.  Then  he  placed  the  goat-
skin on  the  large  stone,  sat  down  on  it  and  preached  to  the
people  about  the  history  of  their  forefathers  and  their  old
heathen  customs  and  beliefs.^  The  goat-skin  thus  suspended
on  the  field  from  sowing  time  to  harvest  represents  the  corn-
spirit  superintending  the  growth  of  the  corn.

Another  form  which  the  corn -spirit  often  assumes  is  that
of  a  bull,  cow,  or  ox.  When  the  wind  sweeps  over  the  corn
they  say  at  Conitz,  in  West  Prussia,  "  The  Steer  is  running
in  the  corn  "  f  when  the  corn  is  thick  and  strong  in  one
spot,  they  say  in  some  parts  of  East  Prussia,  "  The  Bull  is
lying  in  the  corn."  When  a  harvester  has  overstrained  and
lamed  himself,  they  say  in  the  Graudenz  district  (West
Prussia),  "  The  Bull  pushed  him  "  ;  in  Lothringen  they  say,
"  He  has  the  Bull."  The  meaning  of  both  expressions  is
that  he  has  unwittingly  lighted  upon  the  divine  corn-spirit,
who  has  punished  the  profane  intruder  with  lameness.^  So
near  Chambery  when  a  reaper  wounds  himself  with  his
sickle,  it  is  said  that  he  has  "  the  wound  of  the  Ox."'*  In
the  district  of  Bunzlau  the  last  sheaf  is  sometimes  made  into
the  shape  of  a  horned  ox,  stuffed  with  tow  and  wrapt  in
corn-ears.  This  figure  is  called  the  Old  Man  {der  Alte).
In  some  parts  of  Bohemia  the  last  sheaf  is  made  up  in
human  form  and  called  the  Buffalo-bull.^  These  cases  show
a  confusion  of  the  human  with  the  animal  shape  of  the  corn-
spirit.  The  confusion  is  like  that  of  killing  a  wether  under
the  name  of  a  wolf*"      In  the  Canton  of  Thurgau,  Switzer-


^   Praetorius,  Deliciae  Prtissicae,  p.  23  sq.  ;  B.K.  p.  394  sq.
2  ALF.  p.  58.  3  jhid,

4  Ihid.  p.  62.  5  Ibid.  p.  59.

"  Above,  p.  265  sq.


278  THE  CORN-SPIRIT  chap.

land,  the  last  sheaf,  if  it  is  a  large  one,  is  called  the  Cow.^
All  over  Swabia  the  last  bundle  of  corn  on  the  field  is  called
the  Cow  ;  the  man  who  cuts  the  last  ears  "  has  the  Cow,"
and  is  himself  called  Cow  or  Barley-cow  or  Oats-cow,  accord-
ing to  the  crop  ;  at  the  harvest-supper  he  gets  a  nosegay  of
flowers  and  corn-ears  and  a  more  liberal  allowance  of  drink
than  the  rest.  But  he  is  teased  and  laughed  at  ;  so  no  one
likes  to  be  the  Cow.^  The  Cow  was  sometimes  represented
by  the  figure  of  a  woman  made  out  of  ears  of  corn  and  corn-
flowers. It  was  carried  to  the  farmhouse  by  the  man  who
had  cut  the  last  handful  of  corn.  The  children  ran  after
him  and  the  neighbours  turned  out  to  laugh  at  him,  till  the
farmer  took  the  Cow  from  him.^  Here  again  the  confusion
between  the  human  and  the  animal  form  of  the  corn-spirit  is
apparent.  In  various  parts  of  Switzerland  the  reaper  who
cuts  the  last  ears  of  corn  is  called  Wheat-cow,  Corn -cow,
Oats-cow,  or  Corn-steer,  and  is  the  butt  of  many  a  joke.**
In  some  parts  of  East  Prussia,  when  a  few  ears  of  corn  have
been  left  standing  by  inadvertence  on  the  last  swath,  the
foremost  reaper  seizes  them  and  cries,  "  Bull  !  Bull  !  "^  On
the  other  hand,  in  the  district  of  Rosenheim,  Upper  Bavaria,
when  a  farmer  is  later  of  getting  in  his  harvest  than  his
neighbours,  they  set  up  on  his  land  a  Straw-bull,  as  it  is
called.  This  is  a  gigantic  figure  of  a  bull  made  of  stubble
on  a  framework  of  wood  and  adorned  with  flowers  and
leaves.  Attached  to  it  is  a  label  on  which  are  scrawled
doggerel  verses  in  ridicule  of  the  man  on  whose  land  the
Straw-bull  is  set  up.''

Again,  the  corn -spirit  in  the  form  of  a  bull  or  ox  is
killed  on  the  harvest-field  at  the  close  of  the  reaping.  At
Pouilly,  near  Dijon,  when  the  last  ears  of  corn  are  about  to
be  cut,  an  ox  adorned  with  ribbons,  flowers,  and  ears  of  corn
is  led  all  round  the  field,  followed  by  the  whole  troop  of
reapers  dancing.  Then  a  man  disguised  as  the  Devil  cuts
the    last    ears    of  corn   and   immediately   slaughters   the   ox.

1  M.F.  p.  59.  •*  Panzer,  op.  cit.  ii.  p.  233,  §  427  ;

^  E.    Meier,    Deutsche  Sagen,  Sitten  M.F.  p.  59.
unci  Gebrduche  aus  Schwaheit,  p.  440  i    M  F

sq.,  §§  151,  152,  153  ;   Panzer,  Beifrag  ^  ^    '    '  P'  ^^  ■^'Z-

ziir  deutschen   Myihologie,   ii.    p.    234,  "  -'''^"-  P-  S^-

§  428  ;   M.F.  p.  59.  '■'  Ibid.  p.  58  sq.


in  AS  CO  IV  OR  BULL  279

Part  of  the  flesh  of  the  animal  is  eaten  at  the  harvest-
supper  ;  part  is  pickled  and  kept  till  the  first  day  of  sowing
in  spring.  At  Pont  a  Mousson  and  elsewhere  on  the  evening
of  the  last  day  of  reaping,  a  calf  adorned  with  flowers  and
ears  of  corn  is  led  thrice  round  the  farmyard,  being  allured
by  a  bait  or  driven  by  men  with  sticks,  or  conducted  by  the
farmer's  wife  with  a  rope.  The  calf  chosen  for  this  ceremony
is  the  calf  which  was  born  first  on  the  farm  in  the  spring  of
the  year.  It  is  followed  by  all  the  reapers  with  their  tools.
Then  it  is  allowed  to  run  free  ;  the  reapers  chase  it,  and
whoever  catches  it  is  called  King  of  the  Calf.  Lastly,  it  is
solemnly  killed  ;  at  Luneville  the  man  who  acts  as  butcher
is  the  Jewish  merchant  of  the  village.^

Sometimes  again  the  corn-spirit  hides  himself  amongst
the  cut  corn  in  the  barn  to  reappear  in  bull  or  cow  form  at
threshing.  Thus  at  Wurmlingen,  in  Thuringen,  the  man  who
gives  the  last  stroke  at  threshing  is  called  the  Cow,  or  rather
the  Barley-cow,  Oats-cow,  Peas-cow,  or  the  like,  according
to  the  crop.  He  is  entirely  enveloped  in  straw  ;  his  head
is  surmounted  by  sticks  in  imitation  of  horns,  and  two  lads
lead  him  by  ropes  to  the  well  to  drink.  On  the  way  thither
he  must  low  like  a  cow,  and  for  a  long  time  afterwards  he
goes  by  the  name  of  the  Cow.''  At  Obermedlingen,  in
Swabia,  when  the  threshing  draws  near  an  end,  each  man
is  careful  to  avoid  giving  the  last  stroke.  He  who  does  give
it  "  gets  the  Cow,"  which  is  a  straw  figure  dressed  in  an
old  ragged  petticoat,  hood,  and  stockings.  It  is  tied  on  his
back  with  a  straw-rope  ;  his  face  is  blackened,  and  being  tied
with  straw -ropes  to  a  wheelbarrow  he  is  wheeled  round
the  village.^  Here,  again,  we  meet  with  that  confusion
between  the  human  and  animal  shape  of  the  corn -spirit
which  we  have  noted  in  other  customs.  In  Canton  Schaff-
hausen  the  man  who  threshes  the  last  corn  is  called  the
Cow  ;  in  Canton  Thurgau,  the  Corn-bull  ;  in  Canton  Zurich,
the  Thresher-cow.  In  the  last -mentioned  district  he  is
wrapt  in  straw  and  bound  to  one  of  the  trees  in  the  orchard.'*

^  M.F.  p.  60.  3  Panzer,     Beitrag     ztir     dcittschen

^  E.    Meier,  Deutsche  Sagen,  Sitten  Mythologie,  ii.  p.  233,  §  427.

mtd  Gebrduche  aus  Schivaben,  p.    444

sq.,  §  162  ;   M.F.  p.  61.  4  j/.^r.  p.  gj  ^q.


2  8o  THE  CORN-SPIRIT  chap.

At  Arad  in  Hungary  the  man  who  gives  the  last  stroke  at
threshing  is  enveloped  in  straw  and  a  cow's  hide  with  the
horns  attached  to  it.^  At  Pessnitz,  in  the  district  of  Dresden,
the  man  who  gives  the  last  stroke  with  the  flail  is  called
Bull.  He  must  make  a  straw-man  and  set  it  up  before  a
neighbour's  window.^  Here,  apparently,  as  in  so  many
cases,  the  corn-spirit  is  passed  on  to  a  neighbour  who  has
not  finished  threshing.  So  at  Herbrechtingen,  in  Thiiringen,
the  effigy  of  a  ragged  old  woman  is  flung  into  the  barn  of
the  farmer  who  is  last  with  his  threshing.  The  man  who
throws  it  in  cries,  "  There  is  the  Cow  for  you."  If  the
threshers  catch  him  they  detain  him  over  night  and  punish
him  by  keeping  him  from  the  harvest -supper.^  In  these
latter  customs  the  confusion  between  the  human  and  the
animal  shape  of  the  corn-spirit  meets  us  again.  Further,
the  corn -spirit  in  bull  form  is  sometimes  believed  to  be
killed  at  threshing.  At  Auxerre  in  threshing  the  last
bundle  of  corn  they  call  out  twelve  times,  "  We  are  killing
the  Bull."  In  the  neighbourhood  of  Bordeaux,  where  a
butcher  kills  an  ox  on  the  field  immediately  after  the  close
of  the  reaping,  it  is  said  of  the  man  who  gives  the  last
stroke  at  threshing  that  "he  has  killed  the  Bull."^  At
Chambery  the  last  sheaf  is  called  the  sheaf  of  the  Young
Ox  and  a  race  takes  place  to  it,  in  which  all  the  reapers
join.  When  the  last  stroke  is  given  at  threshing  they
say  that  "the  Ox  is  killed";  and  immediately  thereupon
a  real  ox  is  slaughtered  by  the  reaper  who  cut  the  last
corn.  The  flesh  of  the  ox  is  eaten  by  the  threshers  at
supper.''

We  have  seen  that  sometimes  the  young  corn -spirit,
whose  task  it  is  to  quicken  the  corn  of  the  coming  year,  is
believed  to  be  born  as  a  Corn -baby  on  the  harvest -field.''
Similarly  in  Berry  the  young  corn -spirit  is  sometimes
supposed  to  be  born  on  the  field  in  calf  form.  For  when  a
binder  has  not  rope  enough  to  bind  all  the  corn  in  sheaves,
he  puts  aside  the  wheat  that  remains  over  and  imitates  the
lowing  of  a  cow.     The  meaning  is  that  "  the  sheaf  has  given

1  M.F.  p.  62.  4  M.F.  p.  60.

2  Ibid.  p.  62.  "  Ibid.  p.  62.

3  E.  Meier,  op.  cit.  p.  445  sq.,  §  163.  "  Above,  p.   182  sq.


Ill  AS  CALF  AND  HORSE  281

birth  to  a  calf."^  In  Puy-de-D6me  when  a  binder  cannot
keep  up  with  the  reaper  whom  he  or  she  follows,  they  say
"  He  or  she  is  giving  birth  to  the  Calf."'  In  some  parts  of
Prussia,  in  similar  circumstances,  they  call  out  to  the  woman,
"  The  Bull  is  coming,"  and  imitate  the  bellowing  of  a  bull.^
In  these  cases  the  woman  is  conceived  as  the  Corn-cow  or
old  corn-spirit,  while  the  supposed  calf  is  the  Corn-calf  or
young  corn-spirit.  In  some  parts  of  Austria  a  mythical  calf
{Mtihkdlbchen)  is  believed  to  be  seen  amongst  the  sprouting
corn  in  spring  and  to  push  the  children  ;  when  the  corn  waves
in  the  wind  they  say,  "  The  Calf  is  going  about."  Clearly,  as
Mannhardt  observes,  this  calf  of  the  spring-time  is  the  same
animal  which  is  afterwards  believed  to  be  killed  at  reaping.*
Sometimes  the  corn -spirit  appears  in  the  shape  of  a
horse  or  mare.  Between  Kalw  and  Stuttgart,  when  the  corn
bends  before  the  wind,  they  say,  "  There  runs  the  Horse." ^
In  Hertfordshire,  at  the  end  of  the  reaping,  there  is  or  used  to
be  observed  a  ceremony  called  "  crying  the  Mare."  The  last
blades  of  corn  left  standing  on  the  field  are  tied  together
and  called  the  Mare.  The  reapers  stand  at  a  distance  and
throw  their  sickles  at  it  ;  he  who  cuts  it  through  "  has  the
prize,  with  acclamations  and  good  cheer."  After  it  is  cut
the  reapers  cry  thrice  with  a  loud  voice,  "  I  have  her ! "
Others  answer  thrice,  "  What  have  you  ?  "- — "  A  Mare  !  a
Mare  !  a  Mare  !  " — "  Whose  is  she  ?  "  is  next  asked  thrice.
"  A.  B.'s,"  naming  the  owner  thrice.  "  Whither  will  you
send  her?"- — -"To  C.  D.,"  naming  some  neighbour  who  has
not  all  his  corn  reaped.*"  In  this  custom  the  corn-spirit  in
the  form  of  a  mare  is  passed  on  from  a  farm  where  the  corn
is  all  cut  to  another  farm  where  it  is  still  standing,  and
where  therefore  the  corn-spirit  may  be  supposed  naturally
to  take  refuge.  In  Shropshire  the  custom  is  similar.
"  Crying,  calling,  or  shouting  the  mare  is  a  ceremony  per-
formed by  the  men  of  that  farm  which  is  the  first  in  any
parish  or  district  to  finish  the  harvest.  The  object  of  it  is
to  make  known  their  own  prowess,  and  to  taunt  the  laggards

1  Laisnel  de  la  Salle,  Croyances  et  "•  Ibid.  p.  63.

L^Siendes  du   Centre  de  la    France,    ii.  .-    j, .  .  ,

'^  '  ■>  Ibid.  p.   167.

135-  '

2  M.F.  p.  62  :   "■  II  fait  le  vcauy  "   Bi:a.m\,  PoJ^ii/ar  Antiquities,  ii.  24,

3  Ibid.  Bohn's  ed.


282  THE  CORN-SPIRIT  chap.

by  a  pretended  offer  of  the  '  owd  mar' '  [old  mare]  to  help
out  their  'chem'  [team].  All  the  men  assemble  (the  wooden
harvest-bottle  being  of  course  one  of  the  company)  in  the
stackyard,  or,  better,  on  the  highest  ground  on  the  farm,  and
there  shout  the  following  dialogue,  preceding  it  by  a  grand
'  Hip,  hip,  hip,  hurrah  ! '

"  '  I  'ave  'er,  I  'ave  'er,  I  'ave  'er  ! '

"  '  Whad  'ast  thee,  whad  'ast  thee,  whad  'ast  thee  ? '

"  '  A  mar' !   a  mar' !   a  mar' ! '

" '  Whose  is  'er,  whose  is  'er,  whose  is  'er  ? '

"  Maister   A.'s,  Maister   A.'s,  Maister   A.'s  ! '  (naming   the
farmer  whose  harvest  is  finished).

" '  W'eer  sha't  the'  send   'er  ?  w'eer  sha't   the'   send   'er  ?
w'eer  sha't  the'  send  'er  ? '

'"To    Maister    B.'s,    to    Maister    B.'s,   to    Maister    B.'s '
(naming  one  whose  harvest  is  not  finished)."

The  farmer  who  finishes  his  harvest  last,  and  who
therefore  cannot  send  the  Mare  to  any  one  else,  is  said
"  to  keep  her  all  winter."  The  mocking  offer  of  the  Mare
was  sometimes  responded  to  by  a  mocking  acceptance  of
her  help.  Thus  an  old  man  told  an  inquirer,  "  While  we
wun  at  supper,  a  mon  cumm'd  wi'  a  autar  [halter]  to  fatch
her  away."  But  at  one  place  (Longnor,  near  Leebotwood),
down  to  about  1850,  the  Mare  used  really  to  be  sent.
"  The  head  man  of  the  farmer  who  had  finished  harvest
first  was  mounted  on  the  best  horse  of  the  team  —  the
leader — both  horse  and  man  being  adorned  with  ribbons,
streamers,  etc.  Thus  arrayed,  a  boy  on  foot  led  the  pair  in
triumph  to  the  neighbouring  farmhouses.  Sometimes  the
man  who  took  the  '  mare '  received,  as  well  as  plenty  of
harvest-ale,  some  rather  rough,  though  good-humoured,  treat-
ment, coming  back  minus  his  decorations,  and  so  on."^  In
the  neighbourhood  of  Lille  the  idea  of  the  corn-spirit  in  horse
form  is  clearly  preserved.  When  a  harvester  grows  weary
at  his  work,  it  is  said,  "  He  has  the  fatigue  of  the  Horse."
The  first  sheaf,  called  the  "  Cross  of  the  Horse,"  is  placed  on
a  cross  of  boxwood  in  the  barn,  and  the  youngest  horse  on
the  farm  must  tread  on  it.  The  reapers  dance  round  the
last  blades  of  corn,  crying,  "  See  the  remains  of  the  Horse."
1  Burne  and  Jackson,  Shropshire  Folk-lore,  p.  373  sq.


I


HI


AS  HORSE,  QUAIL,  AND  FOX


2«3


The  sheaf  made  out  of  these  last  blades  is  given  to  the
youngest  horse  of  the  parish  {commune)  to  eat.  This
youngest  horse  of  the  parish  clearly  represents,  as  Mannhardt
says,  the  corn -spirit  of  the  following  year,  the  Corn -foal,
which  absorbs  the  spirit  of  the  old  Corn-horse  by  eating  the
last  corn  cut;  for,  as  usual,  the  old  corn -spirit  takes  his
final  refuge  in  the  last  sheaf  The  thresher  of  the  last
sheaf  is  said  to  "  beat  the  Horse."^  Again,  a  trace  of  the
horse  -  shaped  corn  -  spirit  is  reported  from  Berry.  The
harvesters  there  are  accustomed  to  take  a  noon-day  sleep
in  the  field.  This  is  called  "  seeing  the  Horse."  The  leader
or  "  King "  of  the  harvesters  gives  the  signal  for  going  to
sleep.  If  he  delays  giving  the  signal,  one  of  the  harvesters
will  begin  to  neigh  like  a  horse,  the  rest  imitate  him,  and
then  they  all  go  "  to  see  the  Horse."^

In  some  parts  of  Normandy  there  are  traces  of  a  belief
that  the  spirit  of  the  corn  may  assume  the  form  of  a  quail.
When  the  reapers  have  come  to  the  last  ears  of  the  last  rig
they  surround  them  for  the  purpose  of  catching  the  quail
which  is  supposed  to  have  taken  refuge  there.  They  run
round  about  the  corn  crying,  "Mind  the  Quail!"  and  pretend
to  grab  at  the  bird  amid  shouts  and  laughter.^  In  Poitou,  on
the  other  hand,  the  spirit  of  the  corn  appears  to  be  conceived
in  the  shape  of  a  fox.  When  the  corn  is  being  reaped  in  a
district,  all  the  reapers  strive  to  finish  as  quickly  as  possible,
in  order  that  they  may  send  "  the  fox  "  to  the  fields  of  a
farmer  who  has  not  yet  got  in  his  harvest.  The  man  who
cuts  the  last  handful  of  standing  corn  is  said  to  "  have  the
Fox."  This  last  handful  is  carried  to  the  farmer's  house  and
occupies  a  place  on  the  table  during  the  harvest-supper  ;  and
it  is  customary  to  drench  it  with  water.  After  that  it  is  set
up  on  the  chimney-piece  and  remains  there  the  whole  year.^


1  M.F.  p.  167.  We  may  compare
the  Scotch  custom  of  giving  the  last
sheaf  to  a  horse  or  mare  to  eat.  See
above,  pp.   177,  185  sq.,  187.

2  Laisnel  de  la  Salle,  Croyaiices  et
Ldgendes  du  Centre  de  la  France,  ii.  133  ;
M.F.  p.  167  sq.  I  am  informed  by
Mrs.  Hoggan,  M.D.,  of  37  Fitzroy
Square,  London,  that  in  South  Wales
the  man  who  cut  the  "  Neck  "  used   to


be  roughly  handled  if  he  was  caught.
One  way  of  punishing  him  was  to  shoe
him,  that  is,  to  beat  the  soles  of  his
feet  severely  with  sods.  Perhaps  he
was  thus  treated  as  representing  the
corn-spirit  in  the  form  of  a  horse.

■^  J.  Lecoeur,  Esquisses  dii  Socage
Normaiid,  ii.  240.

"*  L.  Pineau,  F^olk-Iore  du  Poitou
(Paris,   1892),  p.  500  sq.


284  THE  CORN-SPIRIT  chap.

The  last  animal  embodiment  of  the  corn-spirit  which  we
shall  notice  is  the  pig  (boar  or  sow).  In  Thliringen,  when
the  wind  sets  the  young  corn  in  motion,  they  sometimes  say,
"The  Boar  is  rushing  through  the  corn."^  Amongst  the
Esthonians  of  the  island  of  Oesel  the  last  sheaf  is  called  the
Rye-boar,  and  the  man  w^ho  gets  it  is  saluted  with  a  cry  of,
"You  have  the  Rye-boar  on  your  back!"  In  reply  he
strikes  up  a  song,  in  which  he  prays  for  plenty.'"^  At
Kohlerwinkel,  near  Augsburg,  at  the  close  of  the  harvest,
the  last  bunch  of  standing  corn  is  cut  down,  stalk  by  stalk,
by  all  the  reapers  in  turn.  He  who  cuts  the  last  stalk  "  gets
the  Sow,"  and  is  laughed  at.^  In  other  Swabian  villages
also  the  man  who  cuts  the  last  corn  "  has  the  Sow,"  or  "  has
the  Rye-sow.""*  In  the  Traunstein  district.  Upper  Bavaria,
the  man  who  cuts  the  last  handful  of  rye  or  wheat  "  has  the
Sow,"  and  is  called  Sow-driver.'^  At  Friedingen,  in  Swabia,
the  thresher  who  gives  the  last  stroke  is  called  Sow —
,  Barley-sow,  Corn -sow,  or  the  like,  according  to  the  crop.
At  Onstmettingen  the  man  who  gives  the  last  stroke  at
threshing  "has  the  Sow";  he  is  often  bound  up  in  a  sheaf
and  dragged  by  a  rope  along  the  ground.*'  And,  generally,
in  Swabia  the  man  who  gives  the  last  stroke  with  the  flail  is
called  Sow.  He  may,  however,  rid  himself  of  this  invidious
distinction  by  passing  on  to  a  neighbour  the  straw-rope,
which  is  the  badge  of  his  position  as  Sow.  So  he  goes  to  a
house  and  throws  the  straw-rope  into  it,  crying,  "  There,  I
bring  you  the  Sow."  All  the  inmates  give  chase  ;  and  if
they  catch  him  they  beat  him,  shut  him  up  for  several  hours
in  the  pig-sty,  and  oblige  him  to  take  the  "Sow"  away
again."  In  various  parts  of  Upper  Bavaria  the  man  who
gives  the  last  stroke  at  threshing  must  "  carry  the  Pig  " — that
is,  either  a  straw  effigy  of  a  pig  or  merely  a  bundle  of  straw-

1  Witzscliel,  Sagen,  Sitte>t  nnd  ■*  Panzer,  Beitrag  zur  detitschen
Gebnitirhe  aits  Thib-jngen,  p.  213,  g  4.  Mythologie,  ii.  pp.  223,  224,  §§  417,
So  at   Klepzig,   in  Aiihalt   (Zei/srhriff       419.

des  Vereins  fu7-  Volkskuiidc,  vii.  (1897),  5  j/. /•;  p_   112.

^'^   Holzmayer,  "  Osiliana,"  Verhand-  "  E.    Meier,  Deutsche  Sagen,  Sitten

lungen  der  gelehrten  Estnischen  Gesell-  'f"^  Gebrauche  aus  Schwahev,  p.  445-

schaft  zu  Dorpat,  vii.  Heft  2,  p.   107  ;  ^  ^^'^•

M.F.  p.  187.  "   Birlinger,       Volksthiiinliches       aus

2  Birlinger,  Aus  Schwahen,  ii.  328.  Schwaben,  ii.  p.  425,  §  379.


Ill  AS  A  PIG  285

ropes.  This  he  carries  to  a  neighbouring  farm  where  the
threshing  is  not  finished,  and  throws  it  into  the  barn.  If  the
threshers  catch  him  they  handle  him  roughly,  beating  him,
blackening  or  dirtying  his  face,  throwing  him  into  filth,
binding  the  Sow  on  his  back,  and  so  on  ;  if  the  bearer  of
the  Sow  is  a  woman  they  cut  off  her  hair.  At  the  harvest
supper  or  dinner  the  man  who  "  carried  the  Pig  "  gets  one
or  more  dumplings  made  in  the  form  of  pigs  ;  sometimes  he
gets  a  large  dumpling  and  a  number  of  small  ones,  all  in
pig  form,  the  large  one  being  called  the  sow  and  the  small
ones  the  sucking-pigs.  Sometimes  he  has  the  right  to  be
the  first  to  put  his  hand  into  the  dish  and  take  out  as  many
small  dumplings  ("  sucking-pigs  ")  as  he  can,  while  the  other
threshers  strike  at  his  hand  with  spoons  or  sticks.  When
the  dumplings  are  served  up  by  the  maid-servant,  all  the
people  at  table  cry,  "  Suz,  siiz,  siiz  !  "  being  the  cry  used  in
calling  pigs.  Sometimes  after  dinner  the  man  who  "  carried
the  Pig"  has  his  face  blackened,  and  is  set  on  a  cart  and
drawn  round  the  village  by  his  fellows,  followed  by  a  crowd
crying,  "  Suz,  suz,  suz ! "  as  if  they  were  calling  swine.
Sometimes,  after  being  wheeled  round  the  village,  he  is
flung  on  the  dunghill.^

Again,  the  corn-spirit  in  the  form  of  a  pig  plays  his  part
at  sowing  -  time  as  well  as  at  harvest.  At  Neuautz,  in
Courland,  when  barley  is  sown  for  the  first  time  in  the  year,
the  farmer's  wife  boils  the  chine  of  a  pig  along  with  the  tail,
and  brings  it  to  the  sower  on  the  field.  He  eats  of  it,  but
cuts  off  the  tail  and  sticks  it  in  the  field  ;  it  is  believed  that
the  ears  of  corn  will  then  grow  as  long  as  the  tail."  Here
the  pig  is  the  corn-spirit,  whose  fertilising  power  is  some-
times supposed  to  lie  especially  in  his  tail.^  As  a  pig  he  is
put  in  the  ground  at  sowing-time,  and  as  a  pig  he  reappears
amongst  the  ripe  corn  at  harvest.  For  amongst  the  neigh-
bouring Esthonians,  as  we  have  seen,'^  the  last  sheaf  is  called
the  Rye-boar.  Somewhat  similar  customs  are  observed  in
Germany.  In  the  Salza  district,  near  Meiningen,  a  certain
bone   in   the   pig   is  called  "  the  Jew  on   the  winnowing-fan."

1  Panzer,     Beiirag     zur     deutschcn  -  iM.F.  p.   186^9.

Mythologie,   ii.    pp.   221-224,  §§   409)  '^  Above,  p.  260  sq.,  263.

410,  411,  412,  413,  414,  415,  418.  4  Above,  p.  2S4.


286  THE  CORN-SPIRIT  chap.

The  flesh  of  this  bone  is  boiled  on  Shrove  Tuesday,  but  the
bone  is  put  amongst  the  ashes  which  the  neighbours  exchange
as  presents  on  St.  Peter's  Day  (the  twenty-second  of  February),
and  then  mix  with  the  seed-corn.^  In  the  whole  of  Hesse,
Meiningen,  etc.,  people  eat  pea-soup  with  dried  pig-ribs  on
Ash  Wednesday  or  Candlemas.  The  ribs  are  then  collected
and  hung  in  the  room  till  sowing-time,  when  they  are  inserted
in  the  sown  field  or  in  the  seed-bag  amongst  the  flax  seed.
This  is  thought  to  be  an  infallible  specific  against  earth-fleas
and  moles,  and  to  cause  the  flax  to  grow  well  and  tall."  In
many  parts  of  White  Russia  people  eat  a  roast  lamb  or
sucking-pig  at  Easter,  and  then  throw  the  bones  backwards
upon  the  fields,  to  preserve  the  corn  from  hail.^

But  the  idea  of  the  corn-spirit  as  embodied  in  pig  form
is  nowhere  more  clearly  expressed  than  in  the  Scandinavian
custom  of  the  Yule  Boar.  In  Sweden  and  Denmark  at
Yule  (Christmas)  it  is  the  custom  to  bake  a  loaf  in  the  form
of  a  boar-pig.  This  is  called  the  Yule  Boar.  The  corn  of
the  last  sheaf  is  often  used  to  make  it.  All  through  Yule
the  Yule  Boar  stands  on  the  table.  Often  it  is  kept  till  the
sowing-time  in  spring,  when  part  of  it  is  mixed  with  the
seed-corn  and  part  given  to  the  ploughmen  and  plough-
horses  or  plough-oxen  to  eat,  in  the  expectation  of  a  good
harvest."^  In  this  custom  the  corn-spirit,  immanent  in  the
last  sheaf,  appears  at  midwinter  in  the  form  of  a  boar  made
from  the  corn  of  the  last  sheaf;  and  his  quickening  influence
on  the  corn  is  shown  by  mixing  part  of  the  Yule  Boar  with
the  seed-corn,  and  giving  part  of  it  to  the  ploughman  and
his  cattle  to  eat.  Similarly  we  saw  that  the  Corn -wolf
makes  his  appearance  at  midwinter,  the  time  when  the  year
begins  to  verge  towards  spring.^  We  may  conjecture  that
the  Yule  straw,  which  Swedish  peasants  turn  to  various
superstitious  uses,  comes,  in  part  at  least,  from  the  sheaf  out
of  which   the   Yule   Boar  is  made.      The  Yule  straw  is   long

1  M.F.  p.   187.  •)  A.VV.F.     p.      197    sq.  ;      Panzer,

2  31. F.  p.  187  sq.  ;  Witzschel,  Bcitrag  zur  deutschett  Mythologie,  ii.
Sagen,  Sittemind  Gebriitiche  aus  Thiir-  491;  Jamieson,  Dictionary  of  the
tii^en,  pp.  189,  218;  W.  Kolbe,  Scottish  Language-,  s.v.  "Maiden";
Hessische  Volks-  Sitten  imd  GcbriUiche  Afzelius,  Volkssagen  und  Volkslieder
(Marburg,   188S),  p.  35-  «'«    Schwedens    dlterer    uttd    netierer

•^  M.F.   p.    188  ;    Ralston,   Songs  of      Z,eit,  ubersetzt  von  Ungewitter,  i.  9.
the  Russian  People,  p.  220.  ^  Above,  p.  266.


Ill  AS  THE   YULE  BOAR  287

rye-straw,  a  portion  of  which  is  ahvays  set  apart  for  this
season.  It  is  strewn  over  the  floor  at  Christmas,  and  the
peasants  attribute  many  virtues  to  it.  For  example,  they
think  that  some  of  it  scattered  on  the  ground  will  make  a
barren  field  productive.  Again,  the  peasant  at  Christmas
seats  himself  on  a  log  ;  and  his  eldest  son  or  daughter,  or  the
mother  herself,  if  the  children  are  not  old  enough,  places  a
wisp  of  the  Yule  straw  on  his  knee.  From  this  he  draws
out  single  straws,  and  throws  them,  one  by  one,  up  to  the
ceiling  ;  and  as  many  as  lodge  in  the  rafters,  so  many  will
be  the  sheaves  of  rye  he  will  have  to  thresh  at  harvest,^
Again,  it  is  only  the  Yule  straw  which  may  be  used  in  bind-
ing the  fruit-trees  as  a  charm  to  fertilise  them,"  These  uses
of  the  Yule  straw  show  that  it  is  believed  to  possess  fertilis-
ing virtues  analogous  to  those  ascribed  to  the  Yule  Boar  ;
we  may  therefore  fairly  conjecture  that  the  Yule  straw  is
made  from  the  same  sheaf  as  the  Yule  Boar,  Formerly  a
real  boar  was  sacrificed  at  Christmas,^  and  apparently  also
a  man  in  the  character  of  the  Yule  Boar.  This,  at  least,
may  perhaps  be  inferred  from  a  Christmas  custom  still
observed  in  Sweden,  A  man  is  wrapt  up  in  a  skin,  and
carries  a  wisp  of  straw  in  his  mouth,  so  that  the  projecting
straws  look  like  the  bristles  of  a  boar.  A  knife  is  brought,
and  an  old  woman,  with  her  face  blackened,  pretends  to
sacrifice  him,"*  On  Christmas  Eve  in  some  parts  of  the
Esthonian  island  of  Oesel  they  bake  a  long  cake  with  the
two  ends  turned  up.  It  is  called  the  Christmas  Boar,  and
stands  on  the  table  till  the  morning  of  New  Year's  Day,
when  it  is  distributed  among  the  cattle.  In  other  parts  of
the  island  the  Christmas  Boar  is  not  a  cake  but  a  little  pig
born  in  March,  which  the  housewife  fattens  secretly,  often
without  the  knowledge  of  the  other  members  of  the  family.
On  Christmas  Eve  the  little  pig  is  secretly  killed,  then
roasted  in  the  oven,  and  set  on  the  table  standing  on  all
fours,  where  it  remains  in  this  posture  for  several  days.  In
other  parts  of  the   island,  again,  though   the   Christmas  cake

1  L.  Lloyd,  Peasant  Life  in  Sweden,  -  Jahn,  Deutsche  Opfergebrduche,  p.

pp.   169  sq.,  182.      On  Christmas  niglit       215.      Cp.  above,  vol.  i.  p.   177.
children  sleep  on   a  bed  of  the  Yule  ^  Afzelius,  op.  cit.  i.  31.

straw  {ibid.  p.  177)-  *   Afzelius,    op.     cit.    i.    9  ;     Lloyd,

Peasant  Life  in  Sweden,  pp.  181,  185.


288  THE   YULE  BOAR  chap.

has  neither  the  name  nor  the  shape  of  a  boar,  it  is  kept  till
the  New  Year,  when  half  of  it  is  divided  among  all  the
members  and  all  the  quadrupeds  of  the  family.  The  other
half  of  the  cake  is  kept  till  sowing-time  comes  round,  when
it  is  similarly  distributed  in  the  morning  among  human
beings  and  beasts/  In  other  parts  of  Esthonia,  again,  the
Christmas  Boar,  as  it  is  called,  is  baked  of  the  first  rye  cut
at  harvest ;  it  has  a  conical  shape  and  a  cross  is  impressed
on  it  with  a  pig's  bone  or  a  key,  or  three  dints  are  made  in
it  with  a  buckle  or  a  piece  of  charcoal.  It  stands  with  a
light  beside  it  on  the  table  all  through  the  festal  season.
On  New  Year's  Day  and  Epiphany,  before  sunrise,  a  little
of  the  cake  is  crumbled  with  salt  and  given  to  the  cattle.  The
rest  is  kept  till  the  day  when  the  cattle  are  driven  out  to  pasture
for  the  first  time  in  spring.  It  is  then  put  in  the  herdsman's
bag,  and  at  evening  is  divided  among  the  cattle  to  guard
them  from  magic  and  harm.  In  some  places  the  Christmas
Boar  is  partaken  of  by  farm-servants  and  cattle  at  the  time
of  the  barley  sowing  for  the  purpose  of  thereby  producing  a
heavier  crop."

So  much  for  the  animal  embodiments  of  the  corn-spirit
as  they  are  presented  to  us  in  the  folk-customs  of  Northern
Europe.  These  customs  bring  out  clearly  the  sacramental
character  of  the  harvest-supper.  The  corn-spirit  is  conceived
as  embodied  in  an  animal  ;  this  divine  animal  is  slain,  and
its  flesh  and  blood  are  partaken  of  by  the  harvesters.  Thus,
the  cock,  the  goose,  the  hare,  the  cat,  the  goat,  and  the  ox
are  eaten  sacramentally  by  the  harvesters,  and  the  pig
is  eaten  sacramentally  by  ploughmen  in  spring.^  Again,
as  a  substitute  for  the  real  flesh  of  the  divine  being,  bread
or  dumplings  are  made  in  his  image  and  eaten  sacramentally  ;
thus,  pig-shaped  dumplings  are  eaten  by  the  harvesters,  and
loaves  made  in  boar-shape  (the  Yule  Boar)  are  eaten  in
spring  by  the  ploughman  and  his  cattle.

The  reader  has  probably  remarked  the  complete  parallel-

1  Holzmayer,  ' '  Osiliana, "  Verhand-       und  dusseni    Leben   der   Ehsten,   pp.
hingeii  der  gelehrten  Estnischen  Gesell-       344,  485.

schaft  zu  Dorpat,  vii.    Heft  2   (1872),  ^  Above,  pp.    267,   268,    270,    271,

p.  55  sq.  274,  279,  280,  285.      In  regard  to  the

hare,    the    substitution    of   brandy    for

2  F.J.  yN\tAit\w^nx\,  Alls  dcm  innercn       hare's  blood  is  probably  modern.


Ill  CORN-SPIRIT  IN  ANIMAL  SHAPE  289

ism  between  the  conceptions  of  the  corn-spirit  in  human
and  in  animal  form.  The  parallel  may  be  here  briefly-
resumed.  When  the  corn  waves  in  the  wind  it  is  said
either  that  the  Corn-mother  or  that  the  Corn-wolf,  etc.,
is  passing  through  the  corn.  Children  are  warned  against
straying  in  corn-fields  either  because  the  Corn-mother  or
because  the  Corn-wolf,  etc.,  is  there.  In  the  last  corn  cut  or
the  last  sheaf  threshed  either  the  Corn-mother  or  the  Corn-
wolf,  etc.,  is  supposed  to  be  present.  The  last  sheaf  is  itself
called  either  the  Corn-mother  or  the  Corn-wolf,  etc.,  and  is
made  up  in  the  shape  either  of  a  woman  or  of  a  wolf,  etc.
The  person  who  cuts,  binds,  or  threshes  the  last  sheaf  is
called  either  the  Old  Woman  or  the  Wolf,  etc.,  according  to
the  name  bestowed  on  the  sheaf  itself.  As  in  some  places  a
sheaf  made  in  human  form  and  called  the  Maiden,  the
Mother  of  the  Maize,  etc.,  is  kept  from  one  harvest  to  the
next  in  order  to  secure  a  continuance  of  the  corn-spirit's
blessing  ;  so  in  some  places  the  Harvest-cock  and  in  others
the  flesh  of  the  goat  is  kept  for  a  similar  purpose  from  one
harvest  to  the  next.  As  in  some  places  the  grain  taken
from  the  Corn-mother  is  mixed  with  the  seed-corn  in  spring
to  make  the  crop  abundant ;  so  in  some  places  the  feathers
of  the  cock,  and  in  Sweden  the  Yule  Boar,  are  kept  till  spring
and  mixed  with  the  seed-corn  for  a  like  purpose.  As  part  of
the  Corn-mother  or  Maiden  is  given  to  the  cattle  at  Christ-
mas or  to  the  horses  at  the  first  ploughing,  so  part  of  the
Yule  Boar  is  given  to  the  ploughing  horses  or  oxen  in
spring.  Lastly,  the  death  of  the  corn-spirit  is  represented  by
killing  or  pretending  to  kill  either  his  human  or  his  animal
representative  ;  and  the  worshippers  partake  sacramentally
either  of  the  actual  body  and  blood  of  the  representative
of  the  divinity,  or  of  bread  made  in  his  likeness.

Other  animal  forms  assumed  by  the  corn-spirit  are  the
stag,  roe,  sheep,  bear,  ass,  mouse,  stork,  swan,  and  kite.^
If  it  is  asked  why  the  corn-spirit  should  be  thought  to
appear  in  the  form  of  an  animal  and  of  so  many  different
animals,  we  may  reply  that  to  primitive  man  the  simple
appearance  of  an  animal  or  bird  among  the  corn  is  probably
enough  to   suggest   a   mysterious   link   between   the  creature

^  Die  Kornddmonen,  p.   i.
VOL.  II  U


290  CORN-SPIRIT  IN  ANIMAL  SHAPE  chap.

and  the  corn  ;  and  when  we  rennember  that  in  the  old  days,
before  fields  were  fenced  in,  all  kinds  of  animals  must  have
been  free  to  roam  over  them,  we  need  not  wonder  that  the
corn -spirit  should  have  been  identified  even  with  large
animals  like  the  horse  and  cow,  which  nowadays  could  not,
except  by  a  rare  accident,  be  found  straying  in  an  English
corn-field.  This  explanation  applies  with  peculiar  force  to
the  very  common  case  in  which  the  animal  embodiment  of
the  corn-spirit  is  believed  to  lurk  in  the  last  standing  corn.
For  at  harvest  a  number  of  wild  animals,  such  as  hares,
rabbits,  and  partridges,  are  commonly  driven  by  the  progress
of  the  reaping  into  the  last  patch  of  standing  corn,  and
make  their  escape  from  it  as  it  is  being  cut  down.  So
regularly  does  this  happen  that  reapers  and  others  often
stand  round  the  last  patch  of  corn  armed  with  sticks  or
guns,  with  which  they  kill  the  animals  as  they  dart  out  of
their  last  refuge  among  the  stalks.  Now,  primitive  man,  to
whom  magical  changes  of  shape  seem  perfectly  credible,
finds  it  most  natural  that  the  spirit  of  the  corn,  driven  from
his  home  in  the  ripe  grain,  should  make  his  escape  in  the
form  of  the  anirhal  which  is  seen  to  rush  out  of  the  last
patch  of  corn  as  it  falls  under  the  scythe  of  the  reaper.
Thus  the  identification  of  the  corn-spirit  with  an  animal
is  analogous  to  the  identification  of  him  with  a  passing
stranger.  As  the  sudden  appearance  of  a  stranger  near  the
harvest-field  or  threshing-floor  is,  to  the  primitive  mind,
enough  to  identify  him  as  the  spirit  of  the  corn  escaping
from  the  cut  or  threshed  corn,  so  the  sudden  appearance  of
an  animal  issuing  from  the  cut  corn  is  enough  to  identify
it  with  the  corn-spirit  escaping  from  his  ruined  home.  The
two  identifications  are  so  analogous  that  they  can  hardly  be
dissociated  in  any  attempt  to  explain  them.  Those  who
look  to  some  other  principle  than  the  one  here  suggested
for  the  explanation  of  the  latter  identification  are  bound  to
show  that  their  theory  covers  the  former  identification
also.

But  however  we  may  explain  it,  the  fact  remains  that
in  peasant  folk-lore  the  corn-spirit  is  very  commonly  con-
ceived and  represented  in  animal  form.  May  not  this  fact
explain   the   relation   in  which  certain   animals  stood   to   the


I


Ill  DIONYSUS  AS  A  GOAT  29:1

ancient  deities    of  vegetation,    Dionysus,    Demeter,    Adonis,
Attis,  and  Osiris  ?

To  begin  with  Dionysus.  We  have  seen  that  he  was
represented  sometimes  as  a  goat  and  sometimes  as  a  bull.
As  a  goat  he  can  hardly  be  separated  from  the  minor
divinities,  the  Pans,  Satyrs,  and  Silenuses,  all  of  whom  are
closely  associated  with  him  and  are  represented  more  or
less  completely  in  the  form  of  goats.  Thus,  Pan  was
regularly  portrayed  in  sculpture  and  painting  with  the  face
and  legs  of  a  goat,^  The  Satyrs  were  depicted  with  pointed
goat-ears,  and  sometimes  with  sprouting  horns  and  short
tails."  They  were  sometimes  spoken  off  simply  as  goats  ;^
and  in  the  drama  their  parts  were  played  by  men  dressed  in
goat-skins.'*  Silenus  is  represented  in  art  clad  in  a  goat-
skin." Further,  the  Fauns,  the  Italian  counterpart  of  the
Greek  Pans  and  Satyrs,  are  described  as  being  half  goats,
with  goat-feet  and  goat-horns.''  Again,  all  these  minor
goat-formed  divinities  partake  more  or  less  clearly  of  the
character  of  woodland  deities.  Thus,  Pan  was  called  by  the
Arcadians  the  Lord  of  the  Wood.'  The  Silenuses  associated
with  the  tree-nymphs.^  The  Fauns  are  expressly  designated
as  woodland  deities  ;  '■*  and  their  character  as  such  is  still
further  brought  out  by  their  association,  or  even  identifica-
tion, with  Silvanus  and  the  Silvanuses,  who,  as  their  name
of  itself  indicates,  are  spirits  of  the  woods.^*^  Lastly,  the
association  of  the  Satyrs  with  the  Silenuses,  Fauns,  and
Silvanuses,^^  proves  that  the  Satyrs  also  were  woodland
deities.  These  goat-formed  spirits  of  the  woods  have  their
counterparts  in  the  folk-lore  of  Northern  Europe.  Thus,
the  Russian  wood-spirits,  called  Ljeschie  (from  Ijes,  "  wood  ")
are  believed  to  appear  partly  in  human   shape,  but  with  the

1  Herodotus,  ii.  46.  "  Pliny,  N.H.  xii.  3;  Ovid,  Metam.

-   Preller,  Griechische  Mythologie,^  i.  vi.    392  ;      id..   Fasti,    iii.     303,    309  ;

600;  A.IV.F.  p.  138.  Gloss.    Isid.    Mart.    Cap.  ii.   167,  cited

^  A.iV.F.  p.   139.  by  Mannhardt,  A.IV.F.  p.   113.

■*  Pollux,  iv.   118.  10  Pliny,    N.H.    xii.    3;    Martianus

■'  A.IV.F.  p.   142  sq.  Capella,  ii.   167;  Augustine,  Civ.  Dei,

"  0\\d,  Fasti,   ii.    361,    iii.    312,    v.  xv.    23;  Aurelius  Victor,    Origo  gentis

10 1  ;   id.,  Heroides,  iv.  49.  Komanae,  iv.  6.

"'    Macrobius,  Sat.  i.  22.  3.  ^^  Servius   on    Virgil,    Eel.    vi.    14  ;

*  Homer,  Hymn  to  Aphrodite,  262  Ovid,  Metam.  vi.  392  sq.  ;   Martianus

sqq.  Capella,  ii.   167.


292  WOOD-SPIRITS  AS  GOATS  chap.

horns,  ears,  and  legs  of  goats.  The  Ljeschi  can  alter  his
stature  at  pleasure  ;  when  he  walks  in  the  wood  he  is  as  tall
as  the  trees  ;  when  he  walks  in  the  meadows  he  is  no  higher
than  the  grass.  Some  of  the  Ljeschie  are  spirits  of  the  corn
as  well  as  of  the  wood  ;  before  harvest  they  are  as  tall  as
the  corn-stalks,  but  after  it  they  shrink  to  the  height  of
the  stubble.^  This  brings  out — what  we  have  remarked
before — the  close  connection  between  tree-spirits  and  corn-
spirits,  and  shows  how  easily  the  former  may  melt  into  the
latter.  Similarly  the  Fauns,  though  wood-spirits,  were  be-
lieved to  foster  the  growth  of  the  crops.^  We  have  already
seen  how  often  the  corn-spirit  is  represented  in  folk-custom
as  a  goat."  On  the  whole,  then,  as  Mannhardt  argues,*  the
Pans,  Satyrs,  and  Fauns  appear  to  belong  to  a  widely
diffused  class  of  wood-spirits  conceived  in  goat-form.  The
fondness  of  goats  for  straying  in  woods  and  nibbling  the
bark  of  trees — to  which  it  is  well  known  that  they  are  most
destructive — is  an  obvious  and  perhaps  sufficient  reason  why
wood-spirits  should  so  often  be  supposed  to  take  the  form
of  goats.  The  inconsistency  of  a  god  of  vegetation  subsist-
ing upon  the  vegetation  which  he  personifies  is  not  one  to
strike  the  primitive  mind.  Such  inconsistencies  arise  when
the  deity,  ceasing  to  be  immanent  in  the  vegetation,  comes
to  be  regarded  as  its  owner  or  lord  ;  for  the  idea  of  owning
the  vegetation  naturally  leads  to  that  of  subsisting  on  it.
We  have  already  seen  that  the  corn-spirit,  originally  con-
ceived as  immanent  in  the  corn,  afterwards  comes  to  be
regarded  as  its  owner,  who  lives  on  it  and  is  reduced  to
poverty  and  want  by  being  deprived  of  it.^

Thus  the  representation  of  wood-spirits  in  the  form  of
goats  appears  to  be  both  widespread  and,  to  the  primitive
mind,  natural.  Therefore  when  we  find,  as  we  have  done,
that  Dionysus — a  tree-god  —  is  sometimes  represented  in
goat  form,''  we  can  hardly  avoid  concluding  that  this  repre-
sentation is  simply  a  part  of  his  proper  character  as  a  tree-
god  and  is  not  to  be  explained  by  the  fusion  of  two  distinct
and    independent   worships,   in    one    of  which   he  originally

1  B.K.  p.   138  sq.;  J.JI'.F.  p.  145.  -t  A.  W.F.  ch.  iii.

2  Servius  on  Virgil,  Gcorg.  i.   10.  ^  Above,  p.  235  sqq.

3  Above,  p.  271  sqq.  "  Above,  p.    1 65  sq.


HI  DIONYSUS  AS  A  BULL  293

appeared  as  a  tree-god  and  in  the  other  as  a  goat.  If  such
a  fusion  took  place  in  the  case  of  Dionysus,  it  must  equally
have  taken  place  in  the  case  of  the  Pans  and  Satyrs  of
Greece,  the  Fauns  of  Italy,  and  the  Ljeschie  of  Russia.
That  such  a  fusion  of  two  wholly  disconnected  worships
should  have  occurred  once  is  possible  ;  that  it  should  have
occurred  twice  independently  is  improbable  ;  that  it  should
have  occurred  thrice  independently  is  so  unlikely  as  to  be
practically  incredible.

Dionysus  was  also  figured,  as  we  have  seen,^  in  the  shape
of  a  bull.  After  what  has  gone  before  we  are  naturally  led
to  expect  that  his  bull  form  must  have  been  only  another
expression  for  his  character  as  a  deity  of  vegetation,  especially
as  the  bull  is  a  common  embodiment  of  the  corn-spirit  in
Northern  Europe  ;  ^  and  the  close  association  of  Dionysus
with  Demeter  and  Proserpine  in  the  mysteries  of  Eleusis
shows  that  he  had  at  least  strong  agricultural  affinities.
The  other  possible  explanation  of  the  bull-shaped  Dionysus
would  be  that  the  conception  of  him  as  a  bull  was  originally
entirely  distinct  from  the  conception  of  him  as  a  deity  of
vegetation,  and  that  the  fusion  of  the  two  conceptions  was
due  to  some  such  circumstance  as  the  union  of  two  tribes,
one  of  which  had  previously  worshipped  a  bull-god  and  the
other  a  tree-god.  This  appears  to  be  the  view  taken  by
Mr.  Andrew  Lang,  who  suggests  that  the  bull-formed
Dionysus  "  had  either  been  developed  out  of,  or  had  suc-
ceeded to,  the  worship  of  a  bull-totem."  ^  Of  course  this  is
possible.  But  it  is  not  yet  certain  that  the  Aryans  ever  had
totemism.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  quite  certain  that  many
Aryan  peoples  have  conceived  deities  of  vegetation  as
embodied  in  animal  forms.  Therefore  when  we  find
amongst  an  Aryan  people  like  the  Greeks  a  deity  of
vegetation  represented  as  an  animal,  the  presumption  must
be  in  favour  of  explaining  this  by  a  principle  which  is
certainly  known  to  have  influenced  the  Aryan  race  rather
than  by  one  which  is  not  certainly  known  to  have  done  so.
In  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge,  therefore,  it  is  safer
to  regard  the  bull   form  of  Dionysus   as  being,  like  his  goat

1  Above,  p.  164  sq.  2  Above,  p.  277  sqq.

3  A.  Lang,  Myth,  Ritual,  and  Religion^''  ii.  252.


I


294  THE  BOUPHONIA  chap.

form,  an    expression  of  his   proper   character  as   a   deity  of
vegetation.

The  probabiHty  of  this  view  will  be  somewhat  increased
if  it  can  be  shown  that  in  other  rites  than  those  of  Dionysus
the  ancients  slew  an  ox  as  a  representative  of  the  spirit  of
vegetation.  This  they  appear  to  have  done  in  the  Athenian
sacrifice  known  as  "  the  murder  of  the  ox  "  {boupJionia).  It
took  place  about  the  end  of  June  or  beginning  of  July,  that
is,  about  the  time  when  the  threshing  is  nearly  over  in
Attica.  According  to  tradition  the  sacrifice  was  instituted
to  procure  a  cessation  of  drought  and  dearth  which  had
afflicted  the  land.  The  ritual  was  as  follows.  Barley  mixed
with  wheat,  or  cakes  made  of  them,  were  laid  upon  the  bronze
altar  of  Zeus  Polieus  on  the  Acropolis.  Oxen  were  driven
round  the  altar,  and  the  ox  which  went  up  to  the  altar  and
ate  the  offering  on  it  was  sacrificed.  The  axe  and  knife
with  which  the  beast  was  slain  had  been  previously  wetted
with  water  brought  by  maidens  called  "water-carriers."  The
weapons  were  then  sharpened  and  handed  to  the  butchers,
one  of  whom  felled  the  ox  with  the  axe  and  another  cut  its
throat  with  the  knife.  As  soon  as  he  had  felled  the  ox,  the
former  threw  the  axe  from  him  and  fled  ;  and  the  man  who
cut  the  beast's  throat  apparently  imitated  his  example.
Meantime  the  ox  was  skinned  and  all  present  partook  of
its  flesh.  Then  the  hide  was  stuffed  wdth  straw  and  sewed
up  ;  next  the  stuffed  animal  was  set  on  its  feet  and  yoked
to  a  plough  as  if  it  were  ploughing.  A  trial  then  took  place
in  an  ancient  law-court  presided  over  by  the  King  (as  he
was  called)  to  determine  who  had  murdered  the  ox.  The
maidens  who  had  brought  the  water  accused  the  men  who
had  sharpened  the  axe  and  knife  ;  the  men  who  had  sharp-
ened the  axe  and  knife  blamed  the  men  who  had  handed
these  implements  to  the  butchers  ;  the  men  who  had  handed
the  implements  to  the  butchers  blamed  the  butchers  ;  and  the
butchers  laid  the  blame  on  the  axe  and  knife,  which  were
accordingly  found  guilty,  condemned  and  cast  into  the  sea.^

1    Pausanias,  i.  24.  4  ;  id.,  i.  28.  10  ;  Magnum,  s.v.   ^oixpovia  ;    Suidas,   s.v.

Porphyry,   De  abstinoitia,   ii.    29  sq.  ;  Qa.v\wv ;     Bekker's    Anecdota    Graeca,

Aelian,   Vai-.   Hist.   viii.  3  ;   Schol.   on  p.  238,  s.71.  AmroXia.      The  date  of  the

Aristophanes,  Peace,  419,  and   Clouds,  sacrifice   (14th   Skiropliorion)    is  given

985  ;   Hesychius,  Suidas,  and  Etymol.  by    the    Schol.    on    Aristophanes    and


Ill  THE  BOUPHONIA  295

The  name  of  this  sacrifice, — "  the  murder  of  the  ox,"  ^- —
the  pains  taken  by  each  person  who  had  a  hand  in  the
slaughter  to  lay  the  blame  on  some  one  else,  together  with
the  formal  trial  and  punishment  of  the  axe  or  knife  or  both,
prove  that  the  ox  was  here  regarded  not  merely  as  a  victim
offered  to  a  god,  but  as  itself  a  sacred  creature,  the  slaughter
of  which  was  sacrilege  or  murder.  This  is  borne  out  by  a
statement  of  Varro  that  to  kill  an  ox  was  formerly  a  capital
crime  in  Attica."  The  mode  of  selecting  the  victim  suggests
that  the  ox  which  tasted  the  corn  was  viewed  as  the  corn-
deity  taking  possession  of  his  own.  This  interpretation  is
supported  by  the  following  custom.  In  Beauce,  in  the  district
of  Orleans,  on  the  twenty-fourth  or  twenty-fifth  of  April  they
make  a  straw-man  called  "  the  great  uwndard."  For  they  say
that  the  old  mondard  is  now  dead  and  it  is  necessary  to  make
a  new  one.  The  straw-man  is  carried  in  solemn  procession
up  and  down  the  village  and  at  last  is  placed  upon  the
oldest  apple-tree.  There  he  remains  till  the  apples  are
gathered,  when  he  is  taken  down  and  thrown  into  the  water,
or  he  is  burned  and  his  ashes  cast  into  water.  But  the
person  who  plucks  the  first  fruit  from  the  tree  succeeds  to
the  title  of  "  the  great  mondard^  ^  Here  the  straw  figure,
called  "the  great  mondard^'  and  placed  on  the  apple-tree  in
spring,  represents  the  spirit  of  the  tree,  who,  dead  in  winter,
revives  when  the  apple-blossoms  appear  on  the  boughs.
Thus  the  person  who  plucks  the  first  fruit  from  the  tree
and  thereby  receives  the  name  of  "  the  great  mondard "
must  be  regarded  as  a  representative  of  the  tree -spirit.
Primitive  peoples   are  usually  reluctant  to   taste   the   annual

the    Etytn.    Magn.  ;      and     this     date  7)   presided  at  the  trial  of  all    lifeless
corresponds,   according    to  Mannhardt  objects,  is  mentioned  by  Ariptotle  (C^«-
{M.F.   p.    68),   with   the  close   of    the  stitution   of  Athens,    57)    and    Pollux
threshing  in   Attica.      No  writer  men-  (viii.  90,  cp.  viii.   120).
tions  the  trial  of  both  the  axe  and  the  1  The    real    import     of    the    name
knife.       Pausanias   speaks   of  the   trial  J>ouphouia  was   first    perceived    by  W.
of    the    axe,   Porphyry  and    Aelian    of  Robertson  Smith.     See  his  Religion  of
the' trial  of  the  knife.      But  from  Por-  the  Semites,'^  p.  304  sqq.
phyry's  description  it  is  clear  that  the            -  Varro,    De    re    ntstica,    ii.    5.    4.
slaughter  was  carried  out  by  two  men,  Cp.  Columella,  De  re  ritstica,  vi.  praef.
one  wielding  an  axe  and  the  other  a  §  7.    Perhaps,  however,  Varro's  state-
knife,    and    that    the    former    laid    the  ment     may    be     merely    an    inference
blame  on  the  latter-.      Perhaps  the  knife  drawn  from  the  ritual  of  the  botiphonia
alone    was    condemned.        That    the  and  the  legend  told  to  explain  it.
King  (as  to  whom  see  above,  vol.  i.  p.            ^  ^    Mannhardt,  B.K.  p.  409.


296  THE  CORN-SPIRIT  REPRESENTED  chap.

first-fruits  of  any  crop,  until  some  ceremony  has  been  per-
formed which  makes  it  safe  and  pious  for  them  to  do  so.
The  reason  of  this  reluctance  appears  to  be  a  belief  that  the
first-fruits  either  belong  to  or  actually  contain  a  divinity.
Therefore  when  a  man  or  animal  is  seen  boldly  to  appro-
priate the  sacred  first-fruits,  he  or  it  is  naturally  regarded
as  the  divinity  himself  in  human  or  animal  form  taking
possession  of  his  own.  The  time  of  the  Athenian  sacrifice,
which  fell  about  the  close  of  the  threshing,  suggests  that  the
wheat  and  barley  laid  upon  the  altar  were  a  harvest  offer-
ing ;  and  the  sacramental  character  of  the  subsequent  repast
— all  partaking  of  the  flesh  of  the  divine  animal — would
make  it  parallel  to  the  harvest-suppers  of  modern  Europe,
in  which,  as  we  have  seen,  the  flesh  of  the  animal  who  stands
for  the  corn-spirit  is  eaten  by  the  harvesters.  Again,  the
tradition  that  the  sacrifice  was  instituted  in  order  to  put  an
end  to  drought  and  famine  is  in  favour  of  taking  it  as  a
harvest  festival.  The  resurrection  of  the  corn-spirit,  enacted
by  setting  up  the  stuffed  ox  and  yoking  it  to  the  plough,
may  be  compared  with  the  resurrection  of  the  tree-spirit  in
the  person  of  his  representative,  the  Wild  Man.^

The  ox  appears  as  a  representative  of  the  corn-spirit  in
other  parts  of  the  world.  At  Great  Bassam,  in  Guinea,  two
oxen  are  slain  annually  to  procure  a  good  harvest.  If  the
sacrifice  is  to  be  effectual,  it  is  necessary  that  the  oxen
should  weep.  So  all  the  women  of  the  village  sit  in  front
of  the  beasts,  chanting,  "  The  ox  will  weep  ;  yes,  he  will
weep  !  "  From  time  to  time  one  of  the  women  walks  round
the  beasts,  throwing  manioc  meal  or  palm  wine  upon  them,
especially  into  their  eyes.  When  tears  roll  down  from  the
eyes  of  the  oxen,  the  people  dance,  singing,  "  The  ox  weeps!
the  ox  weeps  ! "  Then  two  men  seize  the  tails  of  the  beasts
and  cut  them  off  at  one  blow.  It  is  believed  that  a  great
misfortune  will  happen  in  the  course  of  the  year  if  the  tails
are  not  severed  at  one  blow.  The  oxen  are  afterwards
killed,  and  their  flesh  is  eaten  by  the  chiefs.^  Here  the
tears  of  the  oxen,  like  those  of  the  human  victims  amongst
the  Khonds,  are  probably  a   rain-charm.      We  have   already

^   See  above,  p.  62.  ;';;    Jas    Iiuiere    voii  West-Afrika,   pp.

^  Hecquaid,  Reise  an  die  Kiiste  und      41-43.


Ill  BY  AN  OX  IN  CHINA  297

seen  that  the  virtue  of  the  corn-spirit,  embodied  in  animal
form,  is  sometimes  supposed  to  reside  in  the  tail,  and  that
the  last  handful  of  corn  is  sometimes  conceived  as  the  tail
of  the  corn-spirit.^  Still  more  clearly  does  the  ox  appear  as
a  personification  of  the  corn-spirit  in  a  ceremony  which  is
observed  in  all  the  provinces  and  districts  of  China  to
welcome  the  approach  of  spring.  On  the  first  day  of
spring  the  governor  or  prefect  of  the  city  goes  in  procession
to  the  east  gate  of  the  city,  and  sacrifices  to  the  Divine
Husbandman,  who  is  represented  with  a  bull's  head  on  the
body  of  a  man.  A  large  effigy  of  an  ox,  cow,  or  buffalo  has
been  prepared  for  the  occasion,  and  stands  outside  of  the
east  gate,  with  agricultural  implements  beside  it.  The
figure  is  made  of  differently-coloured  pieces  of  paper  pasted
on  a  framework  either  by  a  blind  man  or  according  to  the
directions  of  a  necromancer.  The  colours  of  the  paper
prognosticate  the  character  of  the  coming  year ;  if  red
prevails,  there  will  be  many  fires  ;  if  white,  there  will  be
floods  and  rain  ;  and  so  with  the  other  colours.  The
mandarins  walk  slowly  round  the  ox,  beating  it  severely  at
each  step  with  rods  of  various  hues.  It  is  filled  with  five
kinds  of  grain,  which  pour  forth  when  the  effigy  is  broken
by  the  blows  of  the  rods.  The  paper  fragments  are  then
set  on  fire,  and  a  scramble  takes  place  for  the  burning
fragments,  as  the  people  believe  that  whoever  gets  one  of
them  is  sure  to  be  fortunate  throughout  the  year.  A  live
buffalo  is  next  killed,  and  its  flesh  is  divided  among  the
mandarins.  According  to  one  account,  the  effigy  of  the  ox
is  made  of  clay,  and,  after  being  beaten  by  the  governor,  is
stoned  by  the  people  till  they  break  it  in  pieces,  "from
which  they  expect  an  abundant  year."  ^  But  the  ceremony
varies  somewhat  in  the  different  provinces.  According  to
another  account  the  effigy  of  the  cow,  made  of  earthenware,
with  gilded  horns,  is  borne  in  procession,  and  is  of  such
colossal  dimensions  that  forty  or  fifty  men  can  hardly  carry
it.  Behind  this  monstrous  cow  walks  a  boy  with  one  foot
shod  and  the  other  bare,  personifying  the  Genius  of  Industry.

1  Above,  pp.  260  sq.,  263.  203   sij.  ;   Doolittle,  Social  Life  of  the

Chinese,  p.  375  sq.,  ed.  Paxton  Hood;

2  China  Keview,   i.    62,    154,    162,        Gray,  China,  ii.   115  sq.


298  BULL-GOD  OF  VEGETATLON  chap.

He  beats  the  effigy  with  a  rod,  as  if  to  drive  it  forward.  A
great  many  little  clay  cows  are  afterwards  taken  out  of  the
large  one  and  distributed  among  the  people.  Both  the  big
cow  and  the  little  ones  are  then  broken  in  pieces,  and  the
people  take  the  sherds  home  with  them  in  order  to  grind
them  to  powder  and  strew  the  powder  on  their  fields,  for
they  think  thus  to  secure  a  plentiful  harvest.^  In  one  form
of  this  Chinese  custom  the  corn-spirit  appears  to  be  plainly
represented  by  the  corn-filled  ox,  whose  fragments  may
therefore  be  supposed  to  bring  fertility  with  them.  We
may  compare  the  Silesian  custom  of  burning  the  effigy  of
Death,  scrambling  for  the  burning  fragments,  and  burying
them  in  the  fields  to  secure  a  good  crop,  and  the  Florentine
custom  of  sawing  the  Old  Woman  and  scrambling  for  the
dried  fruits  with  which  she  was  filled."  Both  these  customs,
like  their  Chinese  counterpart,  are  observed  in  spring.

On  the  whole,  then,  we  may  perhaps  conclude  that  both
as  a  goat  and  as  a  bull  Dionysus  was  essentially  a  god  of
vegetation.  The  Chinese  and  European  customs  just  re-
ferred to  may  perhaps  shed  light  on  the  custom  of  rending
a  live  bull  or  goat  at  the  rites  of  Dionysus.  The  animal
was  torn  in  fragments,  as  the  Khond  victim  was  cut  in
pieces,  in  order  that  the  worshippers  might  each  secure  a
portion  of  the  life-giving  and  fertilising  influence  of  the  god.
The  flesh  was  eaten   raw  as  a  sacrament,  and  we  may  con-

1   Ostasiatischer   Lloyd,    March    14,  logiqtie,    ix.    (1884),   pi.    44,    45,   46;

1890,   quoted   by  J.   D.    E.    Schmeltz,  Hesychius,  s.v.  Aios  kwSiov  ;    Polemo,

"Das     Pfiugfest     in     China,"     7/i/er-  ed.    I'reller,   p.    140  stjij.      Pelias    was

nationales    Archiv  fiir   Ethnographic,  warned    by  an    oracle    that    his    death

xi.  (1898),  p.  79.      With  this  account  would    be    brought    about    by    a   man

the  one  given  by  S.  W.  Williams  {The  with    one    shoe,    and    the    oracle    w^as

Middle     Kingdom     (New     York     and  fulfilled  by  Jason.      See  Pindar,  Pyth.

London,    184S),   ii.    109)   substantially  iv.     75     (135)     with      the     scholium;

agrees.      In    many  districts,    according  Apollonius    Rhodius,    Aigonaiitica,    i.

to  the  Ostasiatischer  Lloyd,  the  Genius  5   sqq.       The    Plataeans  who    escaped

of  Spring  is  represented  at  this  festival  from  their  besieged  city  had  only  the

by  a  boy  of  Ijjameless  character,  clad  left    foot    shod    (Thucydides,    iii.    22).

in  green.     The  custom  of  going  with  The    historian    who    records    this    last

one  foot  bare  and  the  other  shod  has  circumstance  thought  it  was  a  measure

some    mystic    meaning    which     I     am  of   precaution    to    prevent     the    men's

unable  to  explain.      Persons  who  were  feet    from   slipping    in   the    mud  ;    but

being  purified  by  means  of  the  skin  of  more   probably  it   was  an   old    super-

the  ram  sacrificed  to  Zeus  (Atos  kuiolov)  stition.
seem  to  have  had   one  foot  bare  and

the  other  shod.      See   Gazette  Arch^o-  ^  Above,  pp.  87,  95.


JII


DE METER  AS  A  PIG


299


jecture  that  some  of  it  was  taken  home  to  be  buried  in  the
fields,  or  otherwise  employed  so  as  to  convey  to  the  fruits  of
the  earth  the  quickening  influence  of  the  god  of  vegetation.
The  resurrection  of  Dionysus,  related  in  his  myth,  may  have
been  enacted  in  his  rites  by  stuffing  and  setting  up  the  slain
ox,  as  was  done  at  the  Athenian  boiiplionia.

Passing  next  to  the  corn-goddess  Demeter,  and  remem-
bering that  in  European  folk-lore  the  pig  is  a  common
embodiment  of  the  corn-spirit,^  we  may  now  ask  whether
the  pig,  which  was  so  closely  associated  with  Demeter,  may
not  have  been  originally  the  goddess  herself  in  animal  form  ?
The  pig  was  sacred  to  her ; "  in  art  she  was  portrayed
carrying  or  accompanied  by  a  pig ;  ^  and  the  pig  was
regularly  sacrificed  in  her  mysteries,  the  reason  assigned
being  that  the  pig  injures  the  corn  and  is  therefore  an
enemy  of  the  goddess.'*  But  after  an  animal  has  been
conceived  as  a  god,  or  a  god  as  an  animal,  it  sometimes
happens,  as  we  have  seen,  that  the  god  sloughs  off  his
animal  form  and  becomes  purely  anthropomorphic ;  and
that  then  the  animal,  which  at  first  had  been  slain  in  the
character  of  the  god,  comes  to  be  viewed  as  a  victim  offered
to  the  god  on  the  ground  of  its  hostility  to  the  deity  ;  in
short,  that  the  god  is  sacrificed  to  himself  on  the  ground
that  he  is  his  own  enemy.  This  happened  to  Dionysus,  and
it  may  have  happened  to  Demeter  also.  And  in  fact  the
rites  of  one  of  her  festivals,  the  Thesmophoria,  bear  out  the
view  that  originally  the  pig  was  an  embodiment  of  the
corn-goddess  herself,  either  Demeter  or  her  daughter  and
double  Proserpine.  The  Thesmophoria  was  an  autumn
festival,  celebrated  by  women  alone  in  October,^  and  appears
to  have  represented  with  mourning  rites  the  descent  of
Proserpine    (or    Demeter)  ^    into    the    lower  world,  and  with


^   See  above,  p.  284  sqq.

^   Schol.    on  Aristophanes,   Aiha7'ii.

747-

•'*  Overbeck,  Griechische  Kn7ist-
inythologie,  ii.  493  ;  Miiller-Wieseler,
Denkmdler  d.  alt.  Kiinst,  ii.  pi.  viii.  94.

■*  Hyginus,  Fab.  277  ;  Cornutus,
De  nat.  dear.  28  ;  Macrobius,  Sat.  i.  12.
23  ;  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Acham.
747  ;  id.,  on  Frogs,  338  ;   id.,  on  Peace,


374  ;  Servius  on  Virgil,  Georg.  ii.  380  ;
Aelian,  Nat.  Aniin.  x.   16.

^  For  the  authorities  on  the  Thes-
mophoria and  a  discussion  of  some
doubtful  points  in  the  festival,  I  may
be  permitted  to  refer  to  my  article
"  Thesmophoria"  in  the  Encyclopaedia
B>-itarmica,  ninth  ed.

•*  Photius,  Lexicon,  s.v.  (XTrjvia,  speaks
of  the  ascent  oi Demeter  ^vom  the  lower


300


DE METER  AS  A  PIG


CHAP.


joy  her  return  from  the  dead.^  Hence  the  name  Descent
or  Ascent  variously  applied  to  the  first,  and  the  name
Kalligeneia  (fair- born)  applied  to  the  third  day  of  the
festival.  Now  from  an  old  scholium  on  Lucian  ^  we  learn
some  details  about  the  mode  of  celebrating  the  Thes-
mophoria,  which  shed  important  light  on  the  part  of  the
festival  called  the  Descent  or  the  Ascent.  The  scholiast
tells  us  that  it  was  customary  at  the  Thesmophoria  to  throw
pigs,  cakes  of  dough,  and  branches  of  pine-trees  into  "  the
chasms  of  Demeter  and  Proserpine,"  which  appear  to  have
been  sacred  caverns  or  vaults.^  In  these  caverns  or  vaults
there  were  said  to  be  serpents,  which  guarded  the  caverns
and  consumed  most  of  the  flesh  of  the  pigs  and  dough-cakes
which  were  thrown  in.  Afterwards — apparently  at  the  next
annual  festival  * — the  decayed  remains  of  the  pigs,  the  cakes,
and  the  pine  -  branches  were  fetched  by  women  called
"  drawers,"  who,  after  observing  rules  of  ceremonial  purity  for
three  days,  descended  into  the  caverns,  and,  frightening
away  the  serpents  by  clapping  their  hands,  brought  up  the
remains  and  placed  them  on  the  altar.  Whoever  got  a
piece  of  the  decayed  flesh  and  cakes,  and  sowed  it  with  the
seed-corn  in  his  field,  was  believed  to  be  sure  of  a  good  crop.
To    explain    this    rude    and    ancient    rite    the    following


world  ;  and  Clement  of  Alexandria
speaks  of  both  Demeter  and  Proserpine
as  having  been  engulfed  in  the  chasm
{Proirept.  ii.  17).  The  original  equi-
valence of  Demeter  and  Proserpine
must  be  borne  steadily  in  mind.

^  V\\\\.a.\-c\\,  Isis et  Osi>-is,6();  Piiotius,
Lexicon,  s.v.  crrrjvia.

-  E.  Rohde,  "  Unedirte  Lucians-
scholien,  die  attischen  Thesmophorien
und  Haloen  betrefiend,"  Rheinisches
Museum,  N.F.,  xxv.  (1870),  p.  548.
Two  passages  of  classical  writers
(Clemens  Alex.  Profrepi.  ii.  17,  and
Pausanias,  ix.  8.  i)  refer  to  the  rites
described  by  the  scholiast  on  Lucian,
and  had  been  rightly  interpreted  by
Lobeck  {Aglaophaiims,  p.  827  sqij.).

2  The  scholiast  speaks  of  them  as
megara  and  adyta.  Megara  (from  a
Phoenician  word  meaning  "cavern,"
"subterranean    chasm,"    Movers,    Die


Phoeuizier,  i.  220)  were  properly  sub-
terranean vaults  or  chasms  sacred  to
the  gods.  See  Hesychius,  quoted  by
Movers,  I.e.  (the  passage  does  not
appear  in  M.  Schmidt's  minor  edition
of  Hesychius)  ;  Porphyry,  De  antra
nymph,  6  ;  and  my  note  on  Pausanias,
ii.  2.   I.

*  We  infer  this  from  Pausanias,  ix.
8.  I,  though  the  passage  is  incomplete
and  apparently  corrupt.  For  iv  Awdu)V7j
Lobeck  {Aglaophainus,  p.  829  sq.)  pro-
posed to  read  di'aSOj'at  or  a.vahod7]aL.  At
the  spring  and  autumn  festivals  of  Isis
at  Tithorea  geese  and  goats  were  thrown
into  the  adyton  and  left  there  till  the
following  festival,  when  the  remains
were  removed  and  buried  at  a  certain
spot  a  little  way  from  the  temple.  See
Pausanias,  x.  32.  14.  This  analogy
supports  the  view  that  the  pigs  thrown
into  the  caverns  at  the  Thesmophoria
were  left  there  till  the  next  festival.


Ill  PROSERPINE  AS  A  PIG  301

legend  was  told.  At  the  moment  when  Pluto  carried  off
Proserpine,  a  swineherd  called  Eubuleus  chanced  to  be  herd-
ing his  swine  on  the  spot,  and  his  herd  was  engulfed  in  the
chasm  down  which  Pluto  vanished  with  Proserpine.  Accord-
ingly at  the  Thesmophoria  pigs  were  annually  thrown  into
caverns  to  commemorate  the  disappearance  of  the  swine  of
Eubuleus.  It  follows  from  this  that  the  casting  of  the  pigs
into  the  vaults  at  the  Thesmophoria  formed  part  of  the
dramatic  representation  of  Proserpine's  descent  into  the
lower  world  ;  and  as  no  image  of  Proserpine  appears  to
have  been  thrown  in,  we  may  infer  that  the  descent  of  the
pigs  was  not  so  much  an  accompaniment  of  her  descent  as
the  descent  itself,  in  short,  that  the  pigs  were  Proserpine.
Afterwards  when  Proserpine  or  Demeter  (for  the  two  are
equivalent)  became  anthropomorphic,  a  reason  had  to  be
found  for  the  custom  of  throwing  pigs  into  caverns  at  her
festival  ;  and  this  was  done  by  saying  that  when  Pluto  carried
off  Proserpine,  there  happened  to  be  some  swine  browsing
near,  which  were  swallowed  up  along  with  her.  The  story
is  obviously  a  forced  and  awkward  attempt  to  bridge  over
the  gulf  between  the  old  conception  of  the  corn-spirit  as  a
pig  and  the  new  conception  of  her  as  an  anthropomorphic
goddess.  A  trace  of  the  older  conception  survived  in  the
legend  that  when  the  sad  mother  was  searching  for  traces  of
the  vanished  Proserpine,  the  footprints  of  the  lost  one  were
obliterated  by  the  footprints  of  a  pig  ;  ^  originally,  we  may
conjecture,  the  footprints  of  the  pig  were  the  footprints  of
Proserpine  and  of  Demeter  herself.  A  consciousness  of  the
intimate  connection  of  the  pig  with  the  corn  lurks  in  the
legend  that  the  swineherd  Eubuleus  was  a  brother  of
Triptolemus,  to  whom  Demeter  first  imparted  the  secret  of
the  corn.  Indeed,  according  to  one  version  of  the  story,
Eubuleus  himself  received,  jointly  with  his  brother  Triptole-
mus, the  gift  of  the  corn  from  Demeter  as  a  reward  for
revealing  to  her  the  fate  of  Proserpine.^  Further,  it  is  to  be
noted  that  at  the  Thesmophoria  the  women  appear  to  have
eaten    swine's    flesh.^      The  meal,  if  I   am  right,  must   have

1  Ovid,    Fasti,    iv'.    461-466,    upon  -  Pausanias,  i.  14.  3.

which    Gierig  remarks,    '■^  Sites  ineliits

poetaomisissetinhacnarratione.''^  Such  ^  Schol.     on     Aristophanes,    Frogs,

is  the  wisdom  of  the  commentator.  338-


302  CORN-SPIRIT  AS  ANIMAL  chap.

been    a    solemn    sacrament  or  communion,   the   worshippers
partaking  of  the  body  of  the  god.

As  thus  explained,  the  Thesmophoria  has  its  analogies
in  the  folk-customs  of  Northern  Europe  which  have  been
already  described.  Just  as  at  the  Thesmophoria — an  autumn
festival  in  honour  of  the  corn-goddess — swine's  flesh  was
partly  eaten,  partly  kept  in  caverns  till  the  following  year,
when  it  was  taken  up  to  be  sown  with  the  seed-corn  in  the
fields  for  the  purpose  of  securing  a  good  crop  ;  so  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Grenoble  the  goat  killed  on  the  harvest-
field  is  partly  eaten  at  the  harvest-supper,  partly  pickled
and  kept  till  the  next  harvest  ;  ^  so  at  Pouilly  the  ox  killed
on  the  harvest-field  is  partly  eaten  by  the  harvesters,  partly
pickled  and  kept  till  the  first  day  of  sowing  in  spring,^
probably  to  be  then  mixed  with  the  seed,  or  eaten  by  the
ploughmen,  or  both  ;  so  at  Udvarhely  the  feathers  of  the
cock  which  is  killed  in  the  last  sheaf  at  harvest  are  kept
till  spring,  and  then  sown  with  the  seed  on  the  field  ;  ^  so  in
Hesse  and  Meiningen  the  flesh  of  pigs  is  eaten  on  Ash
Wednesday  or  Candlemas,  and  the  bones  are  kept  till
sowing-time,  when  they  are  put  into  the  field  sown  or  mixed
with  the  seed  in  the  bag  ;  *  so,  lastly,  the  corn  from  the  last
sheaf  is  kept  till  Christmas,  made  into  Yule  Boar,  and
afterwards  broken  and  mixed  with  the  seed-corn  at  sowing
in  spring.''  Thus,  to  put  it  generally,  the  corn-spirit  is
killed  in  animal  form  in  autumn  ;  part  of  his  flesh  is  eaten
as  a  sacrament  by  his  worshippers  ;  and  part  of  it  is  kept
till  next  sowing-time  or  harvest  as  a  pledge  and  security  for
the  continuance  or  renewal  of  the  corn-spirit's  energies.
Whether  in  the  interval  between  autumn  and  spring  he  is
conceived  as  dead,  or  whether,  like  the  ox  in  the  bouphonia,
he  is  supposed  to  come  to  life  again  immediately  after  being
killed,  is  not  clear.  At  the  Thesmophoria,  according  to
Clement  and  Pausanias,  as  emended  by  Lobeck,*"  the  pigs
were  thrown  in  alive,  and  were  supposed  to  reappear  at  the

'   Above,  p.  274.  ^  In  Clemens  Alex.,  Protrept,  ii.  17,

-  Above    p    270.  f'^'^     fJ.eyapi^ovTes     X'O'-povs     iK^aWovai.

0    .,  ^o  Lobeck  (Asilaophainiis,  p.   S^i)  would

3  Above,  p.  268.  ,        \   *    .i  ',  ^     rj...

'^  read  fieyapocs  fUij'raj  xwpoi/s  e/xpaWovat..

Above,  p.  2c>o.  Yov  his  emendation  of  Pausanias,  see

•''  /d/cf.  above,  p.  300,  note  4.


Ill  HORSE-HEADED  DE METER


j'-':>


festival  of  the  following  year.  Here,  therefore,  if  we  accept
Lobeck's  emendations,  the  corn-spirit  is  conceived  as  alive
throughout  the  year  ;  he  lives  and  works  under  ground,  but
is  brought  up  each  autumn  to  be  renewed  and  then  replaced
in  his  subterranean  abode.^

If  it  is  objected  that  the  Greeks  never  could  have
conceived  Demeter  and  Proserpine  to  be  embodied  in  the
form  of  pigs,  it  may  be  answered  that  in  the  cave  of  Phigalia
in  Arcadia  the  Black  Demeter  was  portrayed  with  the  head
and  mane  of  a  horse  on  the  body  of  a  woman.'^  Between
the  portrait  of  a  goddess  as  a  pig,  and  the  portrait  of  her  as
a  woman  with  a  horse's  head,  there  is  little  to  choose  in
respect  of  barbarism.  The  legend  told  of  the  Phigalian
Demeter  indicates  that  the  horse  was  one  of  the  animal
forms  assumed  in  ancient  Greece,  as  in  modern  Europe,"  by
the  corn-spirit.  It  was  said  that  in  her  search  for  her
daughter,  Demeter  assumed  the  form  of  a  mare  to  escape
the  addresses  of  Poseidon,  and  that,  offended  at  his  impor-
tunity, she  withdrew  in  dudgeon  to  a  cave  not  far  from
Phigalia  in  the  highlands  of  Western  Arcadia.  The  very
cavern,  now  turned  into  a  little  Christian  chapel  with  its
holy  pictures,  is  still  shown  to  the  curious  traveller  far  down
the  side  of  that  profound  ravine  through  which  the  brawling
Neda  winds  under  overhanging  woods  to  the  sea.  There,
robed  in  black,  she  tarried  so  long  that  the  fruits  of  the  earth
were  perishing,  and  mankind  would  have  died  of  famine  if
Pan  had  not  soothed  the  angry  goddess  and  persuaded  her  to
quit  the  cave.  In  memory  of  this  event,  the  Phigalians  set
up  an  image  of  the  Black  Demeter  in  the  cave  ;  it  represented
a  woman  dressed  in  a  long  robe,  with  the  head  and  mane  of
a  horse.'*  The  Black  Demeter,  in  whose  absence  the  fruits
of  the  earth  perish,  is  plainly  a  mythical  expression  for  the
bare  wintry  earth  stripped  of  its  summer  mantle  of  green.

1  It  is  worth  nothing  that  in  Crete,  ^  Above,  p.  281  S(/tj.

which  was  an  ancient  seat  of  Demeter  *  Pausanias,  viii.  25  and  42.    On  the

worship  (see  above,    p.    170),    the  pig  Phigalian  Demeter,  see  W.  Mannhardt,

was  esteemed  very  sacred  and  was  not  J/./^.   p.    244  scjij.      I   well    remember

eaten  (Athenaeus,  ix.  pp.  375  F-376  a).  how  on  a  summer  afternoon  I  sat  at  the

This  would  not  exclude  the  possibility  mouth  of  the  shallow  cave,  watching  the

of  its  being  eaten  sacramentally,  as  at  play  of  sunshine   on   the  lofty  wooded

the  Thesmophoria.  sides    of  the  ravine    and    listening    to

-   Pausanias,  viii.  42.  the  murmur  of  the  stream.


304  ATTIS  AND  ADONIS  chap.

Passing  now  to  Attis  and  Adonis,  we  may  note  a  few
facts  which  seem  to  show  that  these  deities  of  vegetation
had  also,  hke  other  deities  of  the  same  class,  their  animal
embodiments.  The  worshippers  of  Attis  abstained  from
eating  the  flesh  of  swine/  This  appears  to  indicate  that  the
pig  was  regarded  as  an  embodiment  of  Attis.  And  the
legend  that  Attis  was  killed  by  a  boar "  points  in  the  same
direction.  For  after  the  examples  of  the  goat  Dionysus  and
the  pig  Demeter  it  may  almost  be  laid  down  as  a  rule  that
an  animal  which  is  said  to  have  injured  a  god  was  originally
the  god  himself.  Perhaps  the  cry  of  "  Hyes  Attes  !  Hyes
Attes  !  "  ^  which  was  raised  by  the  worshippers  of  Attis,  may
be  neither  more  nor  less  than  "  Pig  Attis!  Pig  Attis!" — hyes
being  possibly  a  Phrygian  form  of  the  Greek  Jiys,  "  a  pig."  '^

In  regard  to  Adonis,  his  connection  with  the  boar  was
not  always  explained  by  the  story  that  he  had  been  killed  by
a  boar.  According  to  another  story,  a  boar  rent  with  his
tusk  the  bark  of  the  tree  in  which  the  infant  Adonis  was
born.^  According  to  another  story,  he  perished  at  the  hands
of  Hephaestus  on  Mount  Lebanon  while  he  was  hunting
wild  boars.*"  These  variations  in  the  legend  serve  to  show
that,  while  the  connection  of  the  boar  with  Adonis  was
certain,  the  reason  of  the  connection  was  not  understood,
and  that  consequently  different  stories  were  devised  to
explain  it.  Certainly  the  pig  ranked  as  a  sacred  animal
among  the  Syrians.  At  the  great  religious  metropolis  of
Hierapolis  pigs  were  neither  sacrificed  nor  eaten,  and  if  a
man  touched  a  pig  he  was  unclean  for  the  rest  of  the  day.
Some  people  said  this  was  because  the  pigs  were  unclean  ;
others  said  it  was  because  the  pigs  were  sacred.'  This
difference  of  opinion  points  to  a  hazy  state  of  religious
thought  in  which  the  ideas  of  sanctity  and  uncleanness  are
not  yet  sharply  distinguished,  both  being  blent  in  a  sort  of
vaporous  solution  to  which  we  give  the  name  of  taboo.  It
is  quite  consistent  with  this  that  the  pig  should  have  been
held   to   be   an   embodiment  of  the   divine   Adonis,  and   the

1  Above,  p.   131.  Neil  of  Pembroke  College.

2  Ibid.               .  •''  Above,  p.   117.

3  Demosthenes,  De  corona,  p.  313.  ''  Cuieton,  Spicilegium  Syriaaim,  p.
*  The  suggestion  was  made  lo  me  in  44.

conversation  by  my  friend  Mr.  R.  A.  '   Lucian,  De  dea  Syria,  54.


Ill  AS  PIGS  305

analogies  of  Dionysus  and  Demeter  make  it  probable  that
the  story  of  the  hostility  of  the  animal  to  the  god  was
only  a  late  misapprehension  of  the  old  view  of  the  god  as
embodied  in  a  pig.  The  rule  that  pigs  were  not  sacrificed
or  eaten  by  worshippers  of  Attis  and  presumably  of  Adonis,
does  not  exclude  the  possibility  that  in  these  rituals  the
pig  was  slain  on  solemn  occasions  as  a  representative  of
the  god  and  consumed  sacramentally  by  the  worshippers.
Indeed,  the  sacramental  killing  and  eating  of  an  animal
implies  that  the  animal  is  sacred,  and  that,  as  a  general
rule,  it  is  spared.^

The  attitude  of  the  Jews  to  the  pig  was  as  ambiguous  as
that  of  the  heathen  Syrians  towards  the  same  animal.  The
Greeks  could  not  decide  whether  the  Jews  worshipped  swine
or  abominated  them.  On  the  one  hand  they  might  not  eat
swine  ;  but  on  the  other  hand  they  might  not  kill  them.
And  if  the  former  rule  speaks  for  the  uncleanness,  the  latter
speaks  still  more  strongly  for  the  sanctity  of  the  animal.
For  whereas  both  rules  may,  and  one  rule  must,  be  explained
on  the  supposition  that  the  pig  was  sacred  ;  neither  rule
must,  and  one  rule  cannot,  be  explained  on  the  supposition
that  the  pig  was  unclean.  If,  therefore,  we  prefer  the
former  supposition,  we  must  conclude  that,  originally  at
least,  the  pig  was  revered  rather  than  abhorred  by  the
Israelites.  We  are  confirmed  in  this  opinion  by  observing
that  down  to  the  time  of  Isaiah  some  of  the  Jews  used  to
meet  secretly  in  gardens  to  eat  the  flesh  of  swine  and  mice
as  a  religious  rite.^  Doubtless  this  was  a  very  ancient  rite,
dating  from  a  time  when  both  the  pig  and  the  mouse  were
venerated  as  divine,  and  when  their  flesh  was  partaken  of
sacramentally  on  rare  and  solemn  occasions  as  the  body  and
blood  of  gods.  And  in  general  it  may  be  said  that  all  so-
called  unclean  animals  were  originally  sacred  ;  the  reason
for  not  eating  them  was  that  they  were  divine.

In    ancient     Egypt,    within     historical    times,    the     pig

1  The  heathen  Harranians  sacrificed  Cyprus  on  2nd   April  (Joannes   Lydus,

swine  once  a  year  and  ate   the   flesh  /?e    mensibus,     iv.     45)     represented

(En-Nedim,  in  Chvvolsohn'sZ?zV  6'5ai5/£r  Adonis   himself.      See  his   Religion  of

und  der  Ssabisinus,  ii.  42).      My  friend  the  Scr?iiies,"  y>Y>-  290  j^.,  411.
W.  Robertson  Smith  conjectured  that  2  pjutarch,  Quaest.  Conviv.  iv.  5.

the  wild   boars   annually  sacrificed   in  ^  Isaiah  Ixv.  3,  Ixvi.  3,  17.

VOL.  II  ■  X


3o6


THE  PIG  IN  EGYPT


CHAP.


occupied  the  same  dubious  position  as  in  Syria  and
Palestine,  though  at  first  sight  its  uncleanness  is  more
prominent  than  its  sanctity.  The  Egyptians  are  generally
said  by  Greek  writers  to  have  abhorred  the  pig  as  a  foul  and
loathsome  animal.^  If  a  man  so  much  as  touched  a  pig  in
passing,  he  stepped  into  the  river  with  all  his  clothes  on,  to
wash  off  the  taint."  To  drink  pig's  milk  was  believed  to
cause  leprosy  to  the  drinker.^  Swineherds,  though  natives
of  Egypt,  were  forbidden  to  enter  any  temple,  and  they  were
the  only  men  who  were  thus  excluded.  No  one  would  give
his  daughter  in  marriage  to  a  swineherd,  or  marry  a  swine-
herd's daughter ;  the  swineherds  married  among  themselves,^
Yet  once  a  year  the  Egyptians  sacrificed  pigs  to  the  moon
and  to  Osiris,  and  not  only  sacrificed  them,  but  ate  of  their
flesh,  though  on  any  other  day  of  the  year  they  would
neither  sacrifice  them  nor  taste  of  their  flesh.  Those  who
were  too  poor  to  offer  a  pig  on  this  day  baked  cakes  of
dough,  and  offered  them  instead.^  This  can  hardly  be
explained  except  by  the  supposition  that  the  pig  was  a
sacred  animal  which  was  eaten  sacramentally  by  his
worshippers  once  a  year.  The  view  that  in  Egypt  the  pig
was  sacred  is  borne  out  by  the  very  facts  which,  to  moderns,
might  seem  to  prove  the  contrary.  Thus  the  Egyptians
thought,  as  we  have  seen,  that  to  drink  pig's  milk  produced
leprosy.  But  exactly  analogous  views  are  held  by  savages
about  the  animals  and  plants  which  they  deem  most  sacred.
Thus  in  the  island  of  Wetar  (between  New  Guinea  and
Celebes)  people  believe  themselves  to  be  variously  descended
from  wild  pigs,  serpents,  crocodiles,  turtles,  dogs,  and  eels  ;  a
man  may  not  eat  an  animal  of  the  kind  from  which  he  is
descended  ;  if  he   does   so,  he   will   become   a   leper,  and   go


1  Herodotus,  ii.  47  ;  Plutarch,  his
el  Osiris,  8  ;  Aelian,  Nai.  Aniin.  x.
16.  Josephus  merely  says  that  the
Egyptian  priests  abstained  from  the
flesh  of  swine  (Contra  Apione/n,  ii.  13).

2  Herodotus,  I.e.

^  Plutarch  and  Aelian,  ll.cc.

*  Herodotus,  I.e.

°  Herodotus,  ii.  47  sg. ;  Aelian  and
Plutarch,  ll.cc.  Herodotus  distinguishes
the  sacrifice  to  the  moon  from  that  to


Osiris.  According  to  him,  at  the
sacrifice  to  the  moon,  the  extremity  of
the  pig's  tail,  together  with  the  spleen
and  the  caul,  was  covered  with  fat
and  burned  ;  the  rest  of  the  flesh  was
eaten.  On  the  evening  (not  the  eve,
see  Stein's  note  on  the  passage)  of  the
festival  the  sacrifice  to  Osiris  took
place.  Each  man  slew  a  pig  before
his  door,  then  gave  it  to  the  swineherd,
from  whom  he  had  bouglit  it,  to  take
away.


Ill  SACRED  CONTAGION  307

mad/  Amongst  the  Omaha  Indians  of  North  America  men
whose  totem  is  the  elk,  believe  that  if  they  ate  the  flesh
of  the  male  elk  they  would  break  out  in  boils  and  white
spots  in  different  parts  of  their  bodies.^  In  the  same
tribe  men  whose  totem  is  the  red  maize,  think  that  if
they  ate  red  maize  they  would  have  running  sores  all  round
their  mouths.^  The  Bush  negroes  of  Surinam,  who  practise
totemism,  believe  that  if  they  ate  the  capiat  (an  animal  like
a  pig)  it  would  give  them  leprosy ;  ^  perhaps  the  capiat
is  one  of  their  totems.  In  Samoa  each  man  had  generally
his  god  in  the  shape  of  some  species  of  animal  ;  and  if
he  ate  one  of  these  divine  animals,  it  was  supposed  that
the  god  avenged  himself  by  taking  up  his  abode  in  the
eater's  body,  and  there  generating  an  animal  of  the  kind
he  had  eaten  till  it  caused  his  death.  For  example,  if  a
man  whose  god  was  the  prickly  sea-urchin  ate  one  of
these  creatures,  a  prickly  sea-urchin  grew  in  his  stomach
and  killed  him.  If  his  god  was  an  eel,  and  he  ate  an  eel,
he  became  very  ill,  and  before  he  died  the  voice  of  the  god
was  heard  from  his  stomach  saying,  "  I  am  killing  this
man  ;  he  ate  my  incarnation."  ^  The  Syrians,  in  antiquity,
who  esteemed  fish  sacred,  thought  that  if  they  ate  fish
their  bodies  would  break  out  in  ulcers,  and  their  feet  and
stomach  would  swell  up.^  These  examples  prove  that  the
eating  of  a  sacred  animal  is  often  believed  to  produce  skin-
disease  or  even  death  ;  so  far,  therefore,  they  support  the
view  that  the  pig  must  have  been  sacred  in  Egypt,  since  the
effect  of  drinking  its  milk  was  believed  to  be  leprosy.

Again,  the  rule  that,  after  touching  a  pig,  a  man  had  to
wash  himself  and  his  clothes,  also  favours  the  view  of  the
sanctity  of  the  pig.  For  it  is  a  common  belief  that  the
effect  of  contact  with  a  sacred  object  must  be  removed,  by
washing  or  otherwise,  before  a  man  is  free  to  mingle  with
his  fellows.      Thus  the  Jews  wash  their  hands  after  reading

^   Riedel,   De    sluik-  en    kroes'tarige  *  J.    Crevaux,   Voyages  dans  VAmd-

rassen  tusschen  Selebes  en  Papua,  pp.        riqiie  du  Slid,  p.  59.

432,  452.  ^  Turner,  Samoa,  pp.   17  sg.,  50  sg.

2    -T-zL  •  J  -<  1  D  J.     ^  j-^j     n  *   Plutarch,    De    superstitione,     10  ;

^   1  nird  Annual  Report  of  the  Bureau  „      1  j^       i.  ^-       .■     ■  a

^   E-J7      7         iwj    I.-      .  00    1  Porphyry,  De  abstinentia,  iv.  15.      As

of  Ethnology  (Washington,    1884),   p.  ,      ^J  •''        .^         r    c  u  ..i.

'^■^  fa      '  t/>   r  jQ    jjjg    sanctity    of    fish    among  the

Syrians,  see  also  Ovid,  Fasti,  ii.  473  sq. ;


3  Ibid.  p.  231.  Diodorus,  ii.  4.


3o8  SACKED  CONTAGION  chav.

the  sacred   scriptures.      Before  coming  forth  from  the  taber-
nacle  after    the   sin-offering,   the   high   priest    had    to    wash
himself,  and  put  off  the  garments  which  he  had  worn  in  the
holy  place.^      It  was  a  rule  of  Greek  ritual  that,  in  offering
an   expiatory   sacrifice,  the    sacrificer    should   not  touch  the
sacrifice,  and  that,  after  the  offering  was  made,  he  must  wash
his  body  and  his  clothes  in  a  river  or  spring  before  he  could
enter  a  city  or  his  own  house.^     The  Polynesians  felt  strongly
the  need  of  ridding  themselves  of  the  sacred  contagion,  if  it
may   be   so    called,  which   they   caught   by   touching  sacred
objects.      Various  ceremonies  were  performed  for  the  purpose
of  removing  this  contagion.       We  have  seen,  for  example,
how  in  Tonga  a  man  who  happened  to  touch  a  sacred  chief,
or  anything  personally  belonging  to  him,  had   to  perform  a
certain   ceremony   before    he    could    feed    himself   with    his
hands  ;   otherwise  it  was  believed    that  he  would  swell  up
and  die,  or  at  least  be  afflicted  with  scrofula  or  some  other
disease.^      We  have  seen,  too,  what  fatal  effects  are  supposed
to  follow,  and  do  actually  follow,  from  contact  with  a  sacred
object  in   New  Zealand."^      In  short,  primitive  man   believes
that  what  is  sacred  is  dangerous  ;  it  is  pervaded  by  a  sort  of
electrical  sanctity  which  communicates  a  shock  to,  even  if  it
does  not   kill,  whatever  comes   in   contact  with   it.      Hence
the  savage  is  unwilling  to  touch  or  even   to  see  that  which
he  deems  peculiarly  holy.      Thus   Bechuanas,  of  the  Croco-
dile clan,  think   it  "  hateful  and  unlucky "  to  meet  or  see  a
crocodile  ;  the  sight  is  thought  to  cause  inflammation  of  the
eyes.     Yet  the  crocodile  is  their  most  sacred  object ;  they
call    it   their   father,  swear   by   it,  and   celebrate    it   in    their
festivals.^      The  goat  is  the  sacred  animal  of  the  Madenassana
Bushmen  ;  yet  "  to  look  upon  it  would  be  to  render  the  man
for  the  time  impure,  as  well  as  to  cause  him  undefined  un-
easiness." ^       The    Elk    clan,   among   the    Omaha    Indians,
believe  that  even  to  touch   the   male  elk  would  be  followed

1  Leviticus  xvi.  23  sq.  *  Above,  vol.  i.  p.  321  sq.

2  Porpliyry,  De  abstin.  ii.  44.  For  ^  Casalis,  The  Bastttos,  p.  211;
this  and  the  Jewish  examples  I  am  Livingstone,  Missionary  Travels  and
indebted  to  my  friend  W.  Robertson  Researches  in  South  Africa,  p.  255  ;
Smith.  Compare  his  Religion  of  the  John  Maclvenzie,  Ten  Years  north  of
Semites,"-  pp.  351,  426,  450  sq.  -  the  Orange  River,  p.   135  7ioie.

3  Vol.  i.  p.  319  sq.  ^  J.  Mackenzie,  I.e.


m  THE  PIG  IN  EGYPT  309

by  an  eruption  of  boils  and  white  spots  on  the  body.^
Members  of  the  Reptile  clan  in  the  same  tribe  think  that  if
one  of  them  touches  or  smells  a  snake,  it  will  make  his  hair
white."  In  Samoa  people  whose  god  was  a  butterfly  be-
lieved that  if  they  caught  a  butterfly  it  would  strike  them
dead.^  Again,  in  Samoa  the  reddish-seared  leaves  of  the
banana-tree  were  commonly  used  as  plates  for  handing  food  ;
but  if  any  member  of  the  Wild  Pigeon  family  had  used
banana  leaves  for  this  purpose,  it  was  supposed  that  he  would
suffer  from  rheumatic  swellings  or  an  eruption  all  over  the
body  like  chicken-pox.*

In  the  light  of  these  parallels  the  beliefs  and  customs  of
the  Egyptians  touching  the  pig  are  probably  to  be  explained
as  based  upon  an  opinion  of  the  extreme  sanctity  rather
than  of  the  extreme  uncleanness  of  the  animal  ;  or  rather,  to
put  it  more  correctly,  they  imply  that  the  animal  was  looked
on,  not  simply  as  a  filthy  and  disgusting  creature,  but  as  a
being  endowed  with  high  supernatural  powers,  and  that  as
such  it  vv^as  regarded  with  that  primitive  sentiment  of
religious  awe  and  fear  in  which  the  feelings  of  reverence  and
abhorrence  are  almost  equally  blended.  The  ancients  them-
selves seem  to  have  been  aware  that  there  was  another  side
to  the  horror  with  which  swine  seemed  to  inspire  the
Egyptians.  For  the  Greek  astronomer  and  mathematician
Eudoxus,  who  resided  fourteen  months  in  Egypt  and  con-
versed with  the  priests,""  was  of  opinion  that  the  Egyptians
spared  the  pig,  not  out  of  abhorrence,  but  from  a  regard  to
its  utility  in  agriculture  ;  for,  according  to  him,  when  the
Nile  had  subsided,  herds  of  swine  were  turned  loose  over  the
fields  to  tread  the  seed  down  into  the  moist  earth.*^  But
when  a  being  is  thus  the  object  of  mixed  and  implicitly  con-
tradictory feelings,  he  may  be  said  to  occupy  a  position  of
unstable  equilibrium.  In  course  of  time  one  of  the  con-
tradictory feelings  is  likely  to  prevail  over  the  other,  and
according  as  the  feeling  which  finally  predominates  is  that

'    Third    Annual     Report     of    the  ^  Diogenes   Laertius,    I'ita^   Philos.

Bureau    of    Ethnology    (Washington,  viii.  8.
18S4),  p.  225.

"  Ibid.  p.  275.  6  Aelian,  Nat.   Anim.  x.  16.      Tlie

^  Turner,  Samoa,  p.  76.  story  is  repeated  by  Pliny,  Nat.  Hist.

^  Ibid.  p.  70.  xviii.    168.


3IO  OSIRIS  AS  A  PIG  chap.

of  reverence  or  abhorrence,  the  being  who  is  the  object  of  it
will  rise  into  a  god  or  sink  into  a  devil.  The  latter,  on  the
whole,  was  the  fate  of  the  pig  in  Egypt.  For  in  historical
times  the  fear  and  horror  of  the  pig  seem  certainly  to  have
outweighed  the  reverence  and  worship  of  which  he  must
once  have  been  the  object,  and  of  which,  even  in  his  fallen
state,  he  never  quite  lost  trace.  He  came  to  be  looked  on
as  an  embodiment  of  Set  or  Typhon,  the  Egyptian  devil
and  enemy  of  Osiris.  For  it  was  in  the  shape  of  a  boar
that  Typhon  menaced  the  eye  of  the  god  Horus,  who  burned
him  and  instituted  the  sacrifice  of  the  pig,  the  sun-god  Ra
having  declared  the  pig  abominable.^  Again,  the  story  that
Typhon  was  hunting  a  boar  when  he  discovered  and  mangled
the  body  of  Osiris,  and  that  this  was  the  reason  why  pigs
were  sacrificed  once  a  year,^  is  clearly  a  modernised  version
of  an  older  story  that  Osiris,  like  Adonis  and  Attis,  was  slain
or  mangled  by  a  boar,  or  by  Typhon  in  the  form  of  a  boar.
Thus,  the  annual  sacrifice  of  a  pig  to  Osiris  might  naturally
be  interpreted  as  vengeance  inflicted  on  the  hostile  animal  that
had  slain  or  mangled  the  god.  But,  in  the  first  place,  when
an  animal  is  thus  killed  as  a  solemn  sacrifice  once  and  once
only  in  the  year,it  generally  or  always  means  that  the  animal
is  divine,  that  he  is  spared  and  respected  the  rest  of  the  year
as  a  god  and  slain,  when  he  is  slain,  also  in  the  character  of
a  god.^  In  the  second  place,  the  examples  of  Dionysus  and
Demeter,  if  not  of  Attis  and  Adonis,  have  taught  us  that  the
animal  which  is  sacrificed  to  a  god  on  the  ground  that  he  is
the  god's  enemy  may  have  been,  and  probably  was,  originally
the  god  himself.  Therefore,  the  annual  sacrifice  of  a  pig  to
Osiris,  coupled  with  the  alleged  hostility  of  the  animal  to  the
god,  tends  to  show,  first,  that  originally  the  pig  was  a  god,
and,  second,  that  he  was  Osiris.  At  a  later  age,  when  Osiris
became  anthropomorphic  and  his  original  relation  to  the
pig  had  been  forgotten,  the  animal  was  first  distinguished
from  him,  and  afterwards  opposed  as  an  enemy  to  him  by
mythologists   who    could    think    of  no    reason    for   killing   a

1  Lefebure,  Le  viythe  Osirien,  p.  44.  recognised    by  W.    Robertson    Smith.

-  Plutarch,  his  et  Osiris,  S.      Lefe-  See    his    article    "  Sacrifice,"    Eneyd.

bure  {op.  cit.  p.  46)  recognises  that  in  Britann.   gth  ed.    xxi.    137  sq.       Cp.

this  story  the  hozx  is  Typhon  himself.  his  Religio77  of  the  Semites^-  pp.  373,

'•'   This  important  principle  was  first  410  sq.


Ill


OSIRIS  AS  A  PIG


311


beast  in  connection  with  the  worship  of  a  god  except  that
the  beast  was  the  god's  enemy  ;  or,  as  Plutarch  puts  it,  not
that  which  is  dear  to  the  gods,  but  that  which  is  the  con-
trary, is  lit  to  be  sacrificed.^  At  this  later  stage  the  havoc
which  a  wild  boar  notoriously  makes  amongst  the  corn^  would
supply  a  plausible  reason  for  regarding  him  as  an  enemy
of  the  corn-spirit,  though  originally,  if  I  am  right,  the  very
freedom  with  which  the  boar  ranged  at  will  through  the
corn  led  people  to  identify  him  with  the  corn -spirit,  to
whom  he  was  afterwards  opposed  as  an  enemy.  The  view
which  identifies  the  pig  with  Osiris  derives  not  a  little
support  from  the  sacrifice  of  pigs  to  him  on  the  very  day  on
which,  according  to  tradition,  Osiris  himself  was  killed  ;  ^  for
thus  the  killing  of  the  pig  was  the  annual  representation  of
the  killing  of  Osiris,  just  as  the  throwing  of  the  pigs  into  the
caverns  at  the  Thesmophoria  was  an  annual  representation
of  the  descent  of  Proserpine  into  the  lower  world  ;  and  both
customs  are  parallel  to  the  European  practice  of  killing  a
goat,  cock,  and  so  forth,  at  harvest  as  a  representative  of  the
corn-spirit.

Again,  the  view  that  the  pig,  originally  Osiris  himself,
afterwards  came  to  be  regarded  as  an  embodiment  of  his
enemy  Typhon,  is  supported  by  the  similar  relation  of  red-
haired  men  and  red  oxen  to  Typhon.  For  in  regard  to  the
red-haired  men  who  were  burned  and  whose  ashes  were
scattered  with  winnowing-fans,  we  have  seen  fair  grounds  for
believing  that  originally,  like  the  red-haired  puppies  killed
at  Rome  in  spring,  they  were  representatives  of  the  corn-
spirit  himself,  that  is,  of  Osiris,  and  were  slain  for  the  express
purpose  of  making  the  corn  turn  red  or  golden.  Yet  at
a  later  time  these  men  were  explained  to  be  representatives,


1  Plutarch,  Isis  et  Osiris,  31.

2  Wild  pigs  are  the  special  enemies
of  the  crops  in  South  Africa ;  the
fences  erected  by  the  Zulus  round  their
gardens  are  principally  intended  to
serve  as  a  protection  against  the  de-
vastating incursions  of  these  animals.
See  J.  Shooter,  The  Kafirs  of  Natal,
p.  19.  In  Nias  also  whole  fields  are
sometimes  trampled  down  by  these
pests   in   a  single   night.       Often    the


stillness  of  the  serene  equatorial  nights
is  broken  by  the  strident  cries  of  the
watchers  of  the  fields,  who  are  trying
to  frighten  away  the  swine  ;  the  sound
goes  echoing  through  the  wooded
valleys  for  a  long  time,  and  here  and
there  a  dull  grunting  tells  that  the
efforts  of  the  sentinels  have  not  been  in
vain.  See  E.  Modigliani,  Un  viaggio
a  Nias,  pp.  525  S(j.,  601.

^  Lefebure,  Le  iiiythe  Osiricn,  p.  48 sq.


312


SACRED  EGYPTIAN  BULLS


CHAP,


not  of  Osiris,  but  of  his  enemy  Typhon/  and  the  kiUing  of
them  was  regarded  as  an  act  of  vengeance  inflicted  on  the
enemy  of  the  god.  Similarly,  the  red  oxen  sacrificed  by  the
Egyptians  were  said  to  be  offered  on  the  ground  of  their
resemblance  to  Typhon  ;~  though  it  is  more  likely  that
originally  they  were  slain  on  the  ground  of  their  resemblance
to  the  corn-spirit  Osiris.  We  have  seen  that  the  ox  is  a
common  representative  of  the  corn-spirit  and  is  slain  as  such
on  the  harvest-field.

Osiris  was  regularly  identified  with  the  bull  Apis  of
Memphis  and  the  bull  Mnevis  of  Heliopolis.^  But  it  is  hard
to  say  whether  these  bulls  were  embodiments  of  him  as  the
corn-spirit,  as  the  red  oxen  appear  to  have  been,  or  whether
they  were  not  rather  entirely  distinct  deities  which  came  to
be  fused  with  Osiris  by  syncretism.  The  universality  of  the
worship  of  these  two  bulls  *  seems  to  put  them  on  a  different
footing  from  the  ordinary  sacred  animals  whose  worships  were
purely  local.  Hence  if  the  latter  were  evolved  from  totems,
as  they  may  have  been,  some  other  origin  would  have  to  be
found  for  the  worship  of  Apis  and  Mnevis.  If  these  bulls
were  not  originally  embodiments  of  the  corn-god  Osiris,  they
may  possibly  be  descendants  of  the  sacred  cattle  worshipped
by  a  pastoral  people.^  If  this  were  so,  ancient  Egypt  would
exhibit  a  stratification  of  three  great  types  of  religion  corre-
sponding to  three  great  stages  of  society.  Totemism,  which
from  one  point  of  view  may  be  described  as  a  species  of
worship  of  wild  animals  practised  by  many  tribes  in  the
hunting  stage  of  society,  would  be  represented  by  the  worship
of  the  local  sacred   animals  ;    the  worship  of  cattle,  which


^  Plutarch,  Isis  et  Osiris,  33,  73  ;
Diodorus,  i.  88.

2  Plutarch,  Isis  et  Osiris,  31  ;  Dio-
dorus, i.  88.      Cp.  Herodotus,  ii.  38.

•*  Plutarch,  Isis  et  Osiris,  20,  29,
^T„  43  ;  Strabo,  xvii.  I.  31  ;  Diodorus,
i.  21,  85  ;  Duncker,  Geschichte  des
Alterthians,^  i-  55  ^'H-  Oil  Apis  and
Mnevis,  see  also  Herodotus,  ii.  153,
with  Wiedemann's  comment,  iii.  27
sq.  ;  Ammianus  Marcellinus,  xxii.  14.
7  ;  Pliny,  Nat.  Hist.  viii.  184  sqq.  ;
Solinus,  xxxii.  17-21  ;  Cicero,  De  nat.
dear.  i.  29  ;  Aelian,  Nat.  Anim.  xi.  10
sq.;  Plutarch, (^//rtt'.f/.  Conviv.y'm.  i.  3;


id.,  Isis  et  Osiris,  5,  35  ;  Eusebius,
Praepar.  Evang.  iii.  13.  i  sq.  ;  Pau-
sanias,  i.  18.  4,  vii.  22.  3  sq.  Both
Apis  and  Mnevis  were  black  bulls,  but
Apis  had  certain  white  spots.  See
Wiedemann,  Die  Religion  der  alien
Aegypter,  pp.  95,  99-101.

■*   Diodorus,  i.  21.

"  On  the  religious  reverence  of  pas-
toral peoples  for  their  cattle,  and  the
possible  derivation  of  the  Apis  and  Isis-
Hathor  worship  from  the  pastoral  stage
of  society,  see  W.  Robertson  Smith,
Religion  of  the  Semites,'^  p.  296
sqq.


Ill


SACRED  EGYPTIAN  BULLS


J' J


belongs  to  society  in  the  pastoral  stage,  would  be  represented
by  the  cults  of  Apis  and  Mnevis  ;  and  the  worship  of
cultivated  plants,  which  is  peculiar  to  society  in  the  agricul-
tural stage,  would  be  represented  by  the  religion  of  Osiris
and  Isis.^  The  Egyptian  reverence  for  cows,  which  were
never  killed,"  might  belong  either  to  the  second  or  third  of
these  stages.  The  consecration  of  cows  to  I  sis,  who  was
portrayed  with  cow's  horns  and  may  have  been  supposed  to
be  incarnate  in  the  animals,  would  indicate  that  they,  like
the  red  oxen,  were  embodiments  of  the  corn-spirit.  How-
ever, this  identification  of  Isis  with  the  cow,  like  that  of  Osiris
with  the  bulls  Apis  and  Mnevis,  may  be  only  an  effect  of
syncretism.  But  whatever  the  original  relation  of  Apis  to
Osiris  may  have  been,  there  is  one  fact  about  the  former  which
ought  not  to  be  passed  over  in  a  chapter  dealing  with  the
custom  of  killing  the  god.  Although  the  bull  Apis  was
worshipped  as  a  god  with  much  pomp  and  profound  reverence,
he  was  not  suffered  to  live  beyond  a  certain  length  of
time  which  was  prescribed  by  the  sacred  books,  and  on  the
expiry  of  which  he  was  drowned  in  a  holy  spring.^  The
limit,  according  to  Plutarch,  was  twenty-five  years  ;'^  but  it
cannot  always  have  been  enforced,  for  the  tombs  of  the  Apis
bulls  have  been  discovered  in  modern  times,  and  from  the
inscriptions  on  them  it  appears  that  in  the  twenty-second
dynasty  two  bulls  lived  more  than  twenty-six  years.^

We  are  now  in  a  position  to  hazard  a  conjecture — for
it  can  be  little  more — as  to  the  meaning  of  the  tradition
that  Virbius,  the  first  of  the  divine  Kings  of  the  Wood  at
Aricia,  was  killed  by  horses.  Having  found,  first,  that
spirits  of  vegetation  are  not  infrequently  represented  in  the
form  of  horses  ;  '^  and,  second,  that  the  animal  which  in  later
legends    is    said    to  have    injured    the    god    was   sometimes


^  I  have  allowed  this  passage  to  stand
substantially  as  I  wrote  it,  though  in  the
light  of  the  Central  Australian  evidence,
so  admirably  collected  and  presented  by
Messrs.  Spencer  and  Gillen,  totemism
would  seem  to  have  been  in  its  origin  a
system  of  magic  rather  than  of  religion.
(Note  to  Second  Edition.)

^  Herodotus,  ii.  41.

^  Pliny,  Nat.  Hist.  viii.  184;
Solinus,    xxxii.     iS  ;    Aniniianus    Mar-


cellinus,  xxii.  14.  7.  The  spring  or
well  in  which  he  was  drowned  was
perhaps  the  one  from  which  his  drink-
ing-water was  procured  ;  he  might  not
drink  the  water  of  the  Nile  (Plutarch,
his  et  Osiris,  5).

^  Plutarch,  Isis  et  Osiris,  56.

^  Maspero,  Histoire  ancienne,'^  P-  3 1  •
Cp.  Duncker,  Geschichte  des  Alter-
tluims.;'  i.  56.

"  .See  above,  p.  28 1  sqq.


i


314


HORSES  AND  VIRBIUS  chap.


originally    the    god    himself,   we    may    conjecture    that    the
horses  by  which  Virbius  was  said  to  have  been   slain   were
really  embodiments  of  him  as  a  deity   of  vegetation.      The
myth  that  Virbius  had  been  killed  by  horses  was  probably
invented  to  explain  certain  features  in  his  worship,  amongst
others  the  custom  of  excluding  horses  from  his  sacred  grove-
For   myth   changes   while   custom    remains   constant  ;    men
continue  to  do   what  their   fathers   did    before   them,  though
the  reasons   on   which    their   fathers   acted    have   been   long
forgotten.      The  history   of  religion    is   a    long   attempt  to
reconcile  old  custom  with  new  reason,  to  find  a  sound  theory
for  an   absurd  practice.      In   the  case   before  us  we  may  be
sure  that  the  myth  is  more  modern  than  the  custom  and  by
no  means  represents  the  original  reason  for  excluding  horses
from  the  grove.      From  their  exclusion  it  might  be  inferred
that  horses  could  not  be  the  sacred  animals  or  embodiments
of  the  eod  of  the  grove.      But  the  inference  would  be  rash.
The  goat  was  at  one  time  a   sacred   animal    or   embodiment
of  Athena,  as  may  be  inferred  from  the  practice  of  represent-
ing   her    clad    in    a   goat -skin    {aegis).      Yet    the    goat    was
neither  sacrificed  to  her  as  a  rule,  nor  allowed  to  enter  her
great    sanctuary,    the    Acropolis    at    Athens.       The    reason
alleged    for  this    was    that   the    goat    injured   the  olive,  the
sacred    tree    of  Athena.^      So   far,  therefore,  the   relation   of
the  goat  to  Athena  is  parallel  to  the  relation   of  the  horse
to  Virbius,  both  animals  being  excluded   from  the  sanctuary
on  the  ground   of  injury   done   by   them    to    the   god.      But
from  Varro   we   learn   that   there   was   an   exception   to   the
rule  which  excluded  the  goat  from   the   Acropolis.      Once  a
year,  he  says,  the   goat  was  driven  on  to  the  Acropolis  for  a
necessary   sacrifice."      Now,   as    has    been    remarked    before,
when  an  animal  is  sacrificed  once  and  once  only  in  the  year,
it  is  probably  slain,  not  as   a  victim   offered  to  the  god,  but
as  a  representative  of  the  god  himself.     Therefore  we   may
infer  that  if  a  goat   was   sacrificed   on    the  Acropolis  once  a
year,  it  was  sacrificed  in  the  character  of  Athena   herself ;

1  Athenaeus,  xiii.  p.  587  a  ;  Pliny,  "  hoc  nomine  etiam  Athenis  in   arcem

Nat.    Hist.    viii.    204.       Cp.    Encycl.  non  inigi,  praetcrqiiain  semel  ad  neces-

Britann.  9th  ed.  art.  "  Sacrifice,"  xxi.  sariiim  sacrificium.'"     By  semcl  Varro

j-ie  probably  means  once  a  year.

-'Varro,  De  agri  cult.   i.  2.   19  sq.  :  ^  The    force    of    this    inference    is


HI


HORSES  AND   VIRBIUS


315


and  it  may  be  conjectured  that  the  skin  of  the  sacrificed
animal  was  placed  on  the  statue  of  the  goddess  and  formed
the  aegis,  which  would  thus  be  renewed  annually.  Similarly
at  Thebes  in  Egypt  rams  were  sacred  and  were  not  sacri-
ficed. But  on  one  day  in  the  year  a  ram  was  killed,  and
its  skin  was  placed  on  the  statue  of  the  god  Ammon.^  Now,
if  we  knew  the  ritual  of  the  Arician  grove  better,  we  might
find  that  the  rule  of  excluding  horses  from  it,  like  the  rule
of  excluding  goats  from  the  Acropolis  at  Athens,  was
subject  to  an  annual  exception,  a  horse  being  once  a  year
taken  into  the  grove  and  sacrificed  as  an  embodiment  of  the
god  Virbius."  By  the  usual  misunderstanding  the  horse
thus  killed  would  come  in  time  to  be  regarded  as  an  enemy
offered  up  in  sacrifice  to  the  god  whom  he  had  injured,  like
the  pig  which  was  sacrificed  to  Demeter  and  Osiris  or  the
goat  which  was  sacrificed  to  Athena  and  Dionysus.  It  is
so  easy  for  a  writer  to  record  a  rule  without  noticing  an
exception  that  we  need  not  wonder  at  finding  the  rule  of
the  Arician  grove  recorded  without  any  mention  of  an  ex-
ception such  as  I  suppose.  If  we  had  had  only  the  state-
ments of  Athenaeus  and  Pliny,  we  should  have  known  onh-
the  rule  which  forbade  the  sacrifice  of  goats  to  Athena  and
excluded  them  from  the  Acropolis,  without  being  aware  of
the  important  exception  which  the  fortunate  preservation  of
Varro's  work  has  revealed  to  us.

The  conjecture  that  once  a  year  a  horse  may  have  been
sacrificed  in  the  Arician  grove  as  a  representative  of  the
deity  of  the  grove  derives  some  support  from  the  similar
sacrifice  of  a  horse  which  took  place  once  a  year  at  Rome.
On  the  fifteenth  of  October  in  each  year  a  chariot-race  was
run  on  the  Field  of  Mars.  Stabbed  with  a  spear,  the  right-
hand  horse  of  the  victorious  team    was    then  sacrificed    to


greatly  weakened,  if  not  destroyed,  by
a  fact  whicli  I  had  overlooked  when  I
wrote  this  book  originally.  A  goat  was
sacrificed  to  Brauronian  Artemis  at  her
festival  called  the  Brauronia(Hesychius,
s.v.  BpavpuvLois  ;  compare  Bekker's
Anecdota  Grace  a,  p.  445,  line  6  sqq. ).  As
the  Brauronian  Artemis  had  a  sanctuary
on  the  Acropolis  of  Athens  (Pausanias,
i.  23.  7),  it  seems  probable  that  the  goat


sacrificed  once  a  year  on  the  Acropolis
was  sacrificed  to  her  and  not  to  Athena.
(Note  to  Second  Edition.)

1  Herodotus,  ii.  42.

-  It  is  worth  noting  that  Hippolytus,
with  whom  Virbius  was  identified,  and
who  was  also  reported  to  have  been  killed
by  horses,  is  said  to  have  dedicated
horses  to  Aesculapius,  who  had  raised
him  from  the  dead  (Pausanias,  ii.  27.  4).


3i6  THE  OCTOBER  HORSE  chap.

Mars  for  the  purpose  of  ensuring  good  crops,  and  its  head
was  cut  off  and  adorned  with  a  string  of  loaves.  Thereupon
the  inhabitants  of  two  wards — the  Sacred  Way  and  the
Subura  —  contended  with  each  other  who  should  get  the
head.  If  the  people  of  the  Sacred  Way  got  it,  they  fastened
it  to  a  wall  of  the  king's  house  ;  if  the  people  of  the  Subura
got  it,  they  fastened  it  to  the  Mamilian  tower.  The
horse's  tail  was  cut  off  and  carried  to  the  king's  house  with
such  speed  that  the  blood  dripped  on  the  hearth  of  the
house.^  Further,  it  appears  that  the  blood  of  the  horse  was
caught  and  preserved  till  the  twenty-first  of  April,  when  the
Vestal  virgins  mixed  it  with  the  blood  of  the  unborn  calves
which  had  been  sacrificed  six  days  before.  The  mixture
was  then  distributed  to  shepherds,  and  used  by  them  for
fumigating  their  flocks,"

In  this  ceremony  the  decoration  of  the  horse's  head
with  a  string  of  loaves,  and  the  alleged  object  of  the  sacri-
fice, namely,  to  procure  a  good  harvest,  clearly  indicate  that
the  horse  was  killed  as  one  of  those  animal  representatives
of  the  corn-spirit  of  which  we  have  seen  so  many  examples.
The  custom  of  cutting  off  the  horse's  tail  is  like  the  African
custom  of  cutting  off  the  tails  of  the  oxen  and  sacrificing  them
to  obtain  a  good  crop.^  In  both  the  Roman  and  the  African
custom  the  animal  stands  for  the  corn-spirit,  and  its  fructify-
ing power  is  supposed  to  reside  especially  in  its  tail.  The
latter  idea  occurs,  as  we  have  seen,  in  European  folk-lore.*
Again,  the  custom  of  fumigating  the  cattle  in  spring  with
the  blood  of  the  horse  may  be  compared  with  the  custom
of  giving  the  Maiden  as  fodder  to  the  horses  in  spring  or
the  cattle  at  Christmas,  and  giving  the  Yule  Boar  to  the
ploughing  oxen  or  horses  to  eat  in  spring.^  All  these
customs  aim  at  ensuring  the  blessing  of  the  corn-spirit  on  the
homestead  and  its  inmates  and  storing  it  up  for  another  year.

The  Roman  sacrifice  of  the  October  horse,  as  it  was
called,  carries  us  back  to  the  early  days  when  the  Subura,
afterwards  a  low  and  squalid  quarter  of  the   great  metro-

1  Festus,  ed.  Miiller,  pp.  178,  179,  '•^  Ovid,  Fasti,  iv.  731  sqij.,  cp.  629

220;     Plutarch,     Quaest.     Rom.     97  ;  sqq.;  Piopertius,  v.  i.   i<^  sq.

Polybius,    xii.    4   B.      The    sacrifice    is  ^  Above,  p.  296.

referred  to  by  Julian,  Orai.  v.  p.  176  D  ^  Above,  pp.  260  sq.,  263.

(p.  228  ed.  Hertlein).  ■''  Above,  p.    286.


Ill  THE  OCTOBER  HORSE  317

polis,  was  still  a  separate  village,  whose  inhabitants  engaged
in  a  friendly  contest  on  the  harvest-field  with  their  neigh-
bours of  Rome,  then  a  little  rural  town.  The  Field  of
Mars  on  which  the  ceremony  took  place  lay  beside  the
Tiber,  and  formed  part  of  the  king's  domain  down  to  the
abolition  of  the  monarchy.  For  tradition  ran  that  at  the
time  when  the  last  of  the  kings  was  driven  from  Rome,  the
corn  stood  ripe  for  the  sickle  on  the  crown  lands  beside  the
river  ;  but  no  one  would  eat  the  accursed  grain  and  it  was
flung  into  the  river  in  such  heaps  that,  the  water  being  low
with  the  summer  heat,  it  formed  the  nucleus  of  an  island.^
The  horse  sacrifice  was  thus  an  old  autumn  custom  observed
upon  the  king's  corn-fields  at  the  end  of  the  harvest.  The
tail  and  blood  of  the  horse,  as  the  chief  parts  of  the  corn-
spirit's  representative,  were  taken  to  the  king's  house  and
kept  there  ;  just  as  in  Germany  the  harvest-cock  is  nailed
on  the  gable  or  over  the  door  of  the  farmhouse  ;  and  as  the
last  sheaf,  in  the  form  of  the  Maiden,  is  carried  home  and
kept  over  the  fireplace  in  the  Highlands  of  Scotland.  Thus
the  blessing  of  the  corn-spirit  was  brought  to  the  king's
house  and  hearth  and,  through  them,  to  the  community  of
which  he  was  the  head.  Similarly  in  the  spring  and
autumn  customs  of  Northern  Europe  the  Maypole  is  some-
times set  up  in  front  of  the  house  of  the  mayor  or  burgo-
master, and  the  last  sheaf  at  harvest  is  brought  to  him  as
the  head  of  the  village.  But  while  the  tail  and  blood  fell  to
the  king,  the  neighbouring  village  of  the  Subura,  which  no
doubt  once  had  a  similar  ceremony  of  its  own,  was  gratified
by  being  allowed  to  compete  for  the  prize  of  the  horse's
head.  The  Mamilian  tower  to  which  the  Suburans  nailed
the  horse's  head  when  they  succeeded  in  carrying  it  off,
appears  to  have  been  a  peel-tower  or  keep  of  the  old
Mamilian  family,  the  magnates  of  the  village.^  The
ceremony  thus  performed  on  the  king's  fields  and  at  his
house  on  behalf  of  the  whole  town  and  of  the  neighbouring
village  presupposes  a  time  when  each  township  performed  a
similar  ceremony  on  its  own  fields.  In  the  rural  districts
of  Latium  the  villages  may  have  continued  to  observe  the
custom,  each  on  its  own  land,  long  after  the  Roman  hamlets

1  Livy,  ii.  5.  ^  Festus,  ed.  Mliller,  pp.  130,  131.


31 S  SACRAMENTAL  EATING  chap.

had  merged  their  separate  harvest-homes  in  the  common
celebration  on  the  king's  lands.^  There  is  no  intrinsic
improbabiHty  in  the  supposition  that  the  sacred  grove  of
Aricia,  like  the  Field  of  Mars  at  Rome,  may  have  been  the
scene  of  a  common  harvest  celebration,  at  which  a  horse  was
sacrificed  with  the  same  rude  rites  on  behalf  of  the  neigh-
bouring villages.  The  horse  would  represent  the  fructifying
spirit  both  of  the  tree  and  of  the  corn,  for  the  two  ideas
melt  into  each  other,  as  we  see  in  customs  like  the  Harvest-
May.

§11.  Eating  the  God

We  have   now   seen   that  the   corn-spirit   is   represented
sometimes  in  human,  sometimes  in  animal  form,  and  that  in
both  cases  he  is  killed   in   the  person  of  his  representative
and   eaten    sacramentally.       To    find    examples    of   actually
killing  the  human   representative  of  the  corn-spirit  we  had
of  course  to  go  to  savage  races  ;  but  the  harvest-suppers  of
our    European    peasants    have    furnished    unmistakable    ex-
amples of  the  sacramental  eating  of  animals  as  representa-
tives of  the   corn-spirit.      But    further,  as    might   have    been
anticipated,  the  new  corn   is   itself  eaten   sacramentally,  that
is,  as  the  body  of  the   corn-spirit.      In    Wermland,  Sweden,
the  farmer's  wife  uses  the  grain  of  the  last  sheaf  to   bake  a
loaf  in  the  shape  of  a  little  girl  ;  this  loaf  is  divided  amongst
the   whole  household   and   eaten   by  them.^'      Here    the   loaf
represents  the  corn-spirit  conceived  as  a  maiden  ;  just  as  in
Scotland    the  corn-spirit   is   similarly    conceived    and    repre-
sented by  the  last  sheaf  made  up  in    the   form   of  a   woman
and  bearing  the  name  of  the    Maiden.      As  usual,  the  corn-
spirit  is  believed  to  reside  in   the   last    sheaf;  and    to  eat  a
loaf  made  from   the   last  sheaf  is,  therefore,  to  eat  the  corn-
spirit  itself.      Similarly  at  La  Palisse,  in  France,  a  man  made
of  dough  is  hung  upon   the   fir-tree   which   is   carried   on  the
last    harvest-waggon.      The    tree    and    the    doueh-man    are
taken  to  the  mayor's  house  and   kept   there   till  the  vintage
is  over.      Then  the  close  of  the  harvest    is   celebrated   by  a

^   The  October  horse    is   the  subject       above  account  is  a  summary,
of  an  essay  by  Mannhardt  [Myfhohi^.  -   Mannhardt,     Mp/i.     Forsch.     p

Forsch.    pp.    156-201),    of   which    the        179.


jii  OF  NEW  CROPS  319

feast  at  which  the   mayor  breaks  the   dough-man    in   pieces
and  gives  the  pieces  to  the  people  to  eat.^

In  these  examples  the  corn-spirit  is  represented  and
eaten  in  human  shape.  In  other  cases,  though  the  new
corn  is  not  baked  in  loaves  of  human  shape,  still  the  solemn
ceremonies  with  which  it  is  eaten  suffice  to  indicate  that  it
is  partaken  of  sacramentally,  that  is,  as  the  body  of  the
corn-spirit.  For  example,  the  following  ceremonies  used  to
be  observed  by  Lithuanian  peasants  at  eating  the  new  corn.
When  the  harvest  and  the  sowing  of  the  new  corn  were
over,  each  farmer  held  a  festival  called  Sabarios,  that  is,
"  the  mixing  or  throwing  together."  He  took  nine  good
handfuls  of  each  kind  of  crop — wheat,  barley,  oats,  flax,
beans,  lentils,  and  the  rest  ;  and  each  handful  he  divided  into
three  parts.  The  twenty-seven  portions  of  each  grain  were
then  thrown  on  a  heap  and  all  mixed  up  together.  The  grain
used  had  to  be  that  which  was  first  threshed  and  winnowed
and  which  had  been  set  aside  and  kept  for  this  purpose.  A
part  of  the  grain  thus  mixed  was  employed  to  bake  little
loaves,  one  for  each  of  the  household  ;  the  rest  was  mixed
with  more  barley  or  oats  and  made  into  beer.  The  first  beer
brewed  from  this  mixture  was  for  the  drinking  of  the  farmer,
his  wife,  and  children  ;  the  second  brew  was  for  the  servants.
The  beer  being  ready,  the  farmer  chose  an  evening  when
no  stranger  was  expected.  Then  he  knelt  down  before  the
barrel  of  beer,  drew  a  jugful  of  the  liquor  and  poured  it  on
the  bung  of  the  barrel,  saying,  "  O  fruitful  earth,  make  rye
and  barley  and  all  kinds  of  corn  to  flourish."  Next  he  took
the  jug  to  the  parlour,  where  his  wife  and  children  awaited
him.  On  the  floor  of  the  parlour  lay  bound  a  black  or  white
or  speckled  (not  a  red)  cock  and  a  hen  of  the  same  colour  and
of  the  same  brood,  which  must  have  been  hatched  within  the
year.  Then  the  farmer  knelt  down,  with  the  jug  in  his  hand,
and  thanked  God  for  the  harvest  and  prayed  for  a  good  crop
next  year.  Next  all  lifted  up  their  hands  and  said,  "  O
God,  and  thou,  O  earth,  we  give  you  this  cock  and  hen  as
a  free-will  offering."  With  that  the  farmer  killed  the  fowls
with   the  blows  of  a   wooden   spoon,  for  he   might    not    cut

1   Mannhardt,'  B.uintkii'tiis,   p.  205.        made  of  the   new  corn  ;  but  probably
It  is  not  said  that    the  dough-man  is       this  is,  or  once  was,  the  case.


330  SACRAMENTAL  EATING  chap.

their  heads  off.  After  the  first  prayer  and  after  killing  each
of  the  birds  he  poured  out  a  third  of  the  beer.  Then  his
wife  boiled  the  fowls  in  a  new  pot  which  had  never  been
used  before.  After  that,  a  bushel  was  set,  bottom  upwards,
on  the  floor,  and  on  it  were  placed  the  little  loaves  mentioned
above  and  the  boiled  fowls.  Next  the  new  beer  was  fetched,
together  with  a  ladle  and  three  mugs,  none  of  which  was
used  except  on  this  occasion.  When  the  farmer  had  ladled
the  beer  into  the  mugs,  the  family  knelt  down  round  the
bushel.  The  father  then  uttered  a  prayer  and  drank  off  the
three  mugs  of  beer.  The  rest  followed  his  example.  Then
the  loaves  and  the  flesh  of  the  fowls  were  eaten,  after  which
the  beer  went  round  again,  till  every  one  had  emptied  each
of  the  three  mugs  nine  times.  None  of  the  food  should
remain  over  ;  but  if  anything  did  happen  to  be  left,  it  was
consumed  next  morning  with  the  same  ceremonies.  The
bones  were  given  to  the  dog  to  eat  ;  if  he  did  not  eat
them  all  up,  the  remains  were  buried  under  the  dung  in  the
cattle-stall.  This  ceremony  was  observed  at  the  beginning
of  December.  On  the  day  on  which  it  took  place  no  bad
word  might  be  spoken.^

Such  was  the  custom  about  two  hundred  years  ago.  At
the  present  day  in  Lithuania,  when  new  potatoes  or  loaves
made  from  the  new  corn  are  being  eaten,  all  the  people  at
table  pull  each  other's  hair.^  The  meaning  of  this  last
custom  is  obscure,  but  a  similar  custom  was  certainly
observed  by  the  heathen  Lithuanians  at  their  solemn  sacri-
fices.^ Many  of  the  Esthonians  of  the  island  of  Oesel  will
not  eat  bread  baked  of  the  new  corn  till  they  have  first
taken  a  bite  at  a  piece  of  iron.**  The  iron  is  here  plainly  a
charm,  intended  to  render  harmless  the  spirit  that  is  in  the
corn.^  In  Sutherlandshire  at  the  present  day,  when  the
new  potatoes  are  dug  all  the  family  must  taste  them,  other-
wise "  the  spirits  in  them  [the  potatoes]  take  offence,  and  the
potatoes  would  not  keep."  *"      In  one  part  of  Yorkshire   it  is

1   Praetorius,  Deliciae  Prussuae,  pp.  ■*   Holzmayer,  •' Osiliana,"  Verhand-

60-64  ;  Mannhardt,  A.  W.F.  p.  249  sqq.  htngen  der  gelehrten  Estnischen  Gesell-

"  Bezzenberger,       Litauiscke      For-  sckaft  zii  Dorpat,  vii.  Heft  2,  p.  108.
schungen  (Gottingen,  1882),  p.  89.  •''   On  iron  as  a  charm  against  spirits,

'^^\vi\oviQxwn'!iVi,PrenssischeCIironik,  see  above,  vol.  i.  p.  t^^^  sqq.
ed.  Perlbach,  i.  91.  "  Folk-lore  Journal, \\\.{\%'i<)),'^.^s,-


in  OF  NEW  CROPS  2)'^i

still  customary  for  the  clergyman  to  cut  the  first  corn  ;  and
my  informant  believes  that  the  corn  so  cut  is  used  to  make
the  communion  bread/  If  the  latter  part  of  the  custom  is
correctly  reported  (and  analogy  is  all  in  its  favour),  it  shows
how  the  Christian  communion  has  absorbed  within  itself  a
sacrament  which  is  doubtless  far  older  than  Christianity.

Among  the  heathen  Cheremiss  on  the  left  bank  of  the
Volga,  when  the  first  bread  baked  from  the  new  corn  is  to
be  eaten,  the  villagers  assemble  in  the  house  of  the  oldest
inhabitant,  the  eastern  door  is  opened,  and  all  pray  with
their  faces  towards  it.  Then  the  sorcerer  or  priest  gives  to
each  of  them  a  mug  of  beer,  which  they  drain  ;  next  h©'  cuts
and  hands  to  every  person  a  morsel  of  the  loaf,  which  they
partake  of.  Finally,  the  young  people  go  to  the  elders  and
bowing  down  to  the  earth  before  them  say,  "  We  pray  God
that  you  may  live,  and  that  God  may  let  us  pray  next  year
for  new  corn."  The  rest  of  the  day  is  passed  in  mirth  and
dancing.  The  whole  ceremony,  observes  the  writer  who  has
described  it,  looks  almost  like  a  caricature  of  the  Eucharist.^
According  to  another  account,  each  Cheremiss  householder
on  this  occasion,  after  bathing,  places  some  of  each  kind  of
grain,  together  with  malt,  cakes,  and  drink,  in  a  vessel,  which
he  holds  up  to  the  sun,  at  the  same  time  thanking  the  gods
for  the  good  things  which  they  have  bestowed  upon  him.^
But  this  part  of  the  ceremony  is  a  sacrifice  rather  than  a
sacrament  of  the  new  corn.

At  the  close  of  the  rice  harvest  in  the  East  Indian  island
of  Buro,  each  clan  {fennd)  meets  at  a  common  sacramental
meal,  to  which  every  member  of  the  clan  is  bound  to  contribute
a  little  of  the  new  rice.  This  meal  is  called  "  eating  the  soul
of  the  rice,"  a  name  which  clearly  indicates  the  sacramental
character  of  the  repast.  Some  of  the  rice  is  also  set  apart
and  offered  to  the  spirits.^  Amongst  the  Alfoors  of  Minahassa
the   priest   sows  the  first  rice-seed   and   plucks   the   first   ripe

1  Communicated  by  the  Rev.  J.  J.  ^  Geoxg\,  Beschreibuno  aller  Natioii-
C.   Yarborough,   of  Chislehurst,  Kent.  en  des  Riissischen  Reichs,  p.  37.
See/'(7//t-/^rgyi?//r«rt;/,  vii.  (1889),  p.  50.  •*  G.  A.  Wilken,  "  Bijdragen  tot  de

2  Von  Haxthausen,  Studien  iiher  die  kennis  der  Alfoeren  van  het  eiland
innern  Zustdnde,  das  Volksleben  tind  Boeroe,"  p.  26  {Verhandelingen  van
insbesondei-e  die  Idndliche  Einricht-  lict  Bataviaascli  GciiootscJiap  van  Kitn-
ungcn  Russlands,  i.  448  sq.  sten  en  Wetenschappen,  vol.  xxxvi.).

VOL.  II  Y


322  SACRAMENTAL  EATING  chap.

rice  in  each  field.  This  rice  he  roasts  and  grinds  into  meal,
and  gives  some  of  it  to  each  of  the  household.^  Shortly
before  the  rice -harvest  in  Bolang  Mongondo,  Celebes,  an
offering  is  made  of  a  small  pig  or  a  fowl.  Then  the  priest
plucks  a  little  rice,  first  on  his  own  field  and  then  on  those
of  his  neighbours.  All  the  rice  thus  plucked  by  him  he
dries  along  with  his  own,  and  then  gives  it  back  to  the
respective  owners,  who  have  it  ground  and  boiled.  When  it
is  boiled  the  women  take  it  back,  with  an  egg,  to  the  priest,
who  offers  the  egg  in  sacrifice  and  returns  the  rice  to  the
women.  Of  this  rice  every  member  of  the  family,  down  to
the  youngest  child,  must  partake.  After  this  ceremony
every  one  is  free  to  get  in  his  rice.^  Amongst  the  Burghers,
a  tribe  of  the  Neilgherry  Hills  in  Southern  India,  the  first
handful  of  seed  is  sown  and  the  first  sheaf  reaped  by  a
Curumbar — a  man  of  a  different  tribe,  whom  the  Burghers
reeard  as  sorcerers.  The  grain  contained  in  the  first  sheaf
"  is  that  day  reduced  to  meal,  made  into  cakes,  and,  being
offered  as  a  first-fruit  oblation,  is,  together  with  the  remainder
of  the  sacrificed  animal,  partaken  of  by  the  Burgher  and  the
whole  of  his  family  as  the  meat  of  a  federal  offering  and
sacrifice."  ^

Amongst  the  Coorgs  of  Southern  India  the  man  who  is
to  cut  the  first  sheaf  of  rice  at  harvest  is  chosen  by  an
astrologer.  At  sunset  the  whole  household  takes  a  hot
bath  and  then  goes  to  the  rice-field,  where  the  chosen
reaper  cuts  an  armful  of  rice  with  a  new  sickle,  and  distri-
butes two  or  more  stalks  to  all  present.  Then  all  return  to
the  threshing-floor.  A  bundle  of  leaves  is  adorned  with  a
stalk  of  rice  and  fastened  to  the  post  in  the  centre  of  the
threshing-floor.  Enough  of  the  new  rice  is  now  threshed,
cleaned,  and  ground  to  provide  flour  for  the  dough -cakes
which  each  member  of  the  household  is  to  eat.  Then  they
go   to   the   door    of  the    house,   where    the    mistress   washes

1  P.  N.  Wilken,  "  Bijdragen  tot  de  Bolaang  Mongondou,"  i^/^if^afe^/.  v.  %i>.

l<ennis  van  de  zeden  en  gewoonten  der  h.     Nederl.    Zendelinggenoolscliap,    xi.

Alfoeren  in  de  Minahassa,"  yJAv/^f/d't'/w-  (1867),  p.  369  sq.

gen  va7i  luege  het  Nederlandsche  Zen-  ^  H.    Ilarkness,    Description    of   a

delinggenootschap,  vii.  (1863),  p.   197.  Singular   Aboriginal  Race   inhabiting

-  N.  P.  Wilken  en  J.   A.    Schwarz,  the    Sitnunit  of  the    Neilgherry  Hills

"  Allerlei  over  het  land  en  volk  van  (London,  1832),  p.  56  sq.


Ill  OF  NEW  CROPS  .  323

the  feet  of  the  sheaf- cutter,  and  presents  to  him,  and
after  him  to  all  the  rest,  a  brass  vessel  full  of  milk,
honey,  and  sugar,  from  which  each  person  takes  a  draught.
Next  the  man  who  cut  the  sheaf  kneads  a  cake  of  rice-
meal,  plantains,  milk,  honey,  seven  new  rice  corns,  seven
pieces  of  cocoa-nut,  and  so  on.  Every  one  receives  a  little
of  this  cake  on  an  Ashvatha  leaf,  and  eats  it.  The  cere-
mony is  then  over  and  the  sheaf-cutter  mixes  with  the
company.  When  he  was  engaged  in  cutting  the  rice  no  one
might  touch  him.^  Among  the  Hindoos  of  Southern  India
the  eating  of  the  new  rice  is  the  occasion  of  a  family  festival
called  Pongol.  The  new  rice  is  boiled  in  a  new  pot  on  a
fire  which  is  kindled  at  noon  on  the  day  when,  according  to
Hindoo  astrologers,  the  sun  enters  the  tropic  of  Capricorn.
The  boiling  of  the  pot  is  watched  with  great  anxiety  by  the
whole  family,  for  as  the  milk  boils,  so  will  the  coming  year
be.  If  the  milk  boils  rapidly,  the  year  will  be  prosperous  ;
but  it  will  be  the  reverse  if  the  milk  boils  slowly.  Some  of
the  new  boiled  rice  is  offered  to  the  image  of  Ganesa  ;  then
every  one  partakes  of  it."  At  Gilgit,  in  the  Hindoo  Koosh,
before  wheat-harvest  begins,  a  member  of  every  household
gathers  a  handful  of  ears  of  corn  secretly  at  dusk.  A  few
of  the  ears  are  hung  up  over  the  door  of  the  house,  and  the
rest  are  roasted  next  morning,  and  eaten  steeped  in  milk.
The  day  is  spent  in  rejoicings,  and  next  morning  the  harvest
begins.^

The  Chams  of  Binh-Thuan,  in  Indo-China,  may  not
reap  the  rice-harvest  until  they  have  offered  the  first-fruits
to  Po-Nagar,  the  goddess  of  agriculture,  and  have  consumed
them  sacramentally.  These  first-fruits  are  gathered  from
certain  sacred  fields  called  Haniou-Klek-Laoa  or  "  fields  of
secret  tillage,"  which  are  both  sown  and  reaped  with  peculiar
ceremonies.  Apparently  the  tilling  of  the  earth  is  con-
sidered a  crime  which  must  be  perpetrated  secretly  and
afterwards  atoned  for.  On  a  lucky  day  in  June,  at  the  first
cock-crow,   two   men    lead   the   buffaloes   and   the   plough  to

1  Gover,     Folk-songs    of    Southern  Southern    India,"  Joiirn.    R.    Asiatic

India,  p.    105  sqq.;   Folk-lore  Journal,  Society,  N.S.,  v.  (1871),  p.  91  sqq.

vii    (1889),  p.  302  sqq.  •'  Biddulph,    Tribes    of  the    Hindoo

-  ("lOver,    "  The   Pongol  Festival  in  K'oosh,  p.   103.


324  SACRAMENTAL  EATING  chap.

the    sacred    field,   round   which   they   draw   three   furrows   in
profound  silence  and  then   retire.      Afterwards   at  dawn   the
owner   of  the   land  comes  lounging  by,  as   if  by   the   merest
chance.      At   sight  of  the   furrows  he   stops,  pretends   to   be
much    surprised,    and   cries    out,    "  Who    has    been    secretly
ploughing  my  field  this  night  ?  "      Hastening   home,  he   kills
a   kid   or   some   fowls,  cooks   the  victuals,  and   prepares   five
quids  of  betel,  some  candles,  a  flask  of  oil,  and  lustral  water
of    three    different    sorts.       With    these    offerings    and    the
plough   drawn    by   the    buffaloes,   he    returns    to    the    field,
where  he   lights  the  candles  and  spreading  out   the  victuals
worships   Po-Nagar  and  the  other  deities,  saying  :   "  I  know
not  who  has  secretly  ploughed  my  field  this  night.      Pardon,
ye   gods,  those  who   have   done   this   wrong.      Accept   these
offerings.      Bless  us.      Suffer  us  to  proceed  with  this  work."
Then,  speaking    in    the    name   of  the   deities,  he    gives    the
reassuring  answer,  "  All   right.      Plough  away  !  "      With  the
lustral  water  he  washes   or  sprinkles  the  buffaloes,  the  yoke,
and   the   plough.      The  oil  serves  to  anoint  the   plough   and
to   pour   libations   on   the   ground.      The  five  quids  of  betel
are  buried  in  the  field.      Thereupon  the  owner  sows  a  hand-
ful  of  rice  on   the   three  furrows  that  have  been  traced,  and
eats  the  victuals  with  his  people.      After  all   these  rites  have
been  duly  performed,  he  may  plough  and  sow  his  land  as  he
likes.      When   the  rice  has  grown   high  enough   in  this   field
"  of  secret   tillage  "   to  hide  pigeons,  offerings  of  ducks,  eggs,
and  fowls  are  made  to  the  deities  ;  and  fresh  offerings,  which
generally   consist   of  five   plates  of  rice,  two   boiled   fowls,  a
bottle   of  spirits,  and    five   quids   of  betel,  are  made   to    Po-
Nasfar   and   the   rest  at  the  time  when  the  rice   is   in  bloom.
Finally,  when   the   rice   in   "  the   field   of    secret    tillage "    is
ripe,  it   has   to   be  reaped  before  any  of  the  rest.      Offerings
of  food,  such  as   boiled   fowls,  plates  of  rice,   cakes,   and   so
forth,   are    spread    out   on    the   field  ;    a   candle   is   lit,  and   a
priest   or,  in    his   absence,  the   owner  prays  to   the  guardian
deities   to   come   and    partake  of  the   food   set   before  them.
After  that   the   owner   of  the  land  cuts   three  stalks  of  rice
with   a   sickle   in   the  middle  of  the  field,  then   he   cuts   three
handfuls    at    the    side,   and    places   the    whole    in    a   napkin.
These  are  the  first-fruits  offered  to  Po-Nagar,  the  goddess  of


Ill  OF  NEW  CROPS  325

agriculture.  On  being  taken  home  the  rice  from  the  three
handfuls  is  husked,  pounded  in  a  mortar,  and  presented  to
the  goddess  with  these  words :  "  Taste,  O  goddess,  these
first-fruits  which  have  just  been  reaped."  This  rice  is  after-
wards eaten,  while  the  straw  and  husks  are  burned.  Having
eaten  the  first-fruits  of  the  rice,  the  owner  takes  the  three
stalks  cut  in  the  middle  of  the  field,  passes  them  through
the  smoke  of  the  precious  eagle-wood,  and  hangs  them  up
in  his  house,  where  they  remain  till  the  next  sowing-time
comes  round.  The  grain  from  these  three  stalks  will  form
the  seed  of  the  three  furrows  in  "  the  field  of  secret
tillage."  Not  till  these  ceremonies  have  been  performed  is
the  proprietor  at  liberty  to  reap  the  rest  of  that  field  and  all
the  others.^

The  ceremony  of  eating  the  new  yams  at  Onitsha,  on
the  Niger,  is  thus  described  :  "  Each  headman  brought  out
six  yams,  and  cut  down  young  branches  of  palm-leaves  and
placed  them  before  his  gate,  roasted  three  of  the  yams,
and  got  some  kola-nuts  and  fish.  After  the  yam  is  roasted,
the  Libia,  or  country  doctor,  takes  the  yam,  scrapes  it
into  a  sort  of  meal,  and  divides  it  into  halves  ;  he  then
takes  one  piece,  and  places  it  on  the  lips  of  the  person  who
is  going  to  eat  the  new  yam.  The  eater  then  blows  up
the  steam  from  the  hot  yam,  and  afterwards  pokes  the
whole  into  his  mouth,  and  says,  '  I  thank  God  for  being
permitted  to  eat  the  new  yam  '  ;  he  then  begins  to  chew  it
heartily,  with  fish  likewise." "  Amongst  the  Caffres  of  Natal
and  Zululand,  no  one  may  eat  of  the  new  fruits  till  after  a
festival  which  marks  the  beginning  of  the  Caffre  year  and
falls  at  the  end  of  December  or  the  beginning  of  January.
All  the  people  assemble  at  the  king's  kraal,  where  they
feast  and  dance.  Before  they  separate  the  "  dedication  of
the  people "  takes  place.  Various  fruits  of  the  earth,  as
corn,  mealies,  and  pumpkins,  mixed  with  the  flesh  of  a
sacrificed  animal  and  with  "  medicine,"  are  boiled  in  great
pots,  and  a  little  of  this  food  is  placed  in  each  man's  mouth

1  E.  Aynionier,  "  Les  Tchames  et  on  the  Banks  of  the  Niger,  p.  287  sq.
leurs  religions,"  Revue  de  Phistoire  des  Mr.  Taylor's  information  is  repeated  in
Religions,  xxiv.  (1891),  pp.  272-  West  Africait  Countries  and  Peoples,  hy
274.  J.  Africanus  B.  Horton  (London,  1868),

2  Crowther  and   Taylor,  The  Gospel  p.   180  sq.


326  FESTIVAL  OF  NEW  FRUITS  chap.

by  the   king  himself.      After  thus  partaking  of  the  sanctified
fruits,  a   man    is   himself  sanctified   for   the  whole   year,  and
may  immediately  get  in  his  crops.^      It  is  believed  that  if  any
man  were  to  partake  of  the  new  fruits  before  the  festival,  he
would  die  ;  '^  if  he  were  detected,  he  would  be  put  to  death,  or
at  least  all  his  cattle  would  be  taken  from  him.^      The  holiness
of  the  new  fruits  is  well  marked  by  the  rule  that  they  must  be
cooked  in  a  special  pot  which  is  used   only  for  this  purpose,
and  on  a  new  fire  kindled  by  a  magician  through  the  friction
of  two  sticks  which   are  called   "  husband  and  wife."      These
sticks  are   prepared   by  the  sorcerers   from  the   wood  of  the
Uzwati  tree  and  belong  exclusively  to  the  chief.      The  "  wife  "
is  the  shorter  of  the  two.      When  the  magician  has  kindled  the
new  fire  on  which  the  new  fruits  are  to  be  cooked,  he  hands
the  fire-sticks  back  to  the  chief,  for  no  other  hand  may  touch
them  ;  and   they  are   then   put   away  till    they   are   required
next    season.      The    sticks    are    regarded    as    in    a    measure
sacred,  and   no  one,  except  the  chiefs  personal  servant,  may
go  to  the  side  of  the  hut  where  they  are  kept.      No  pot  but
the  one  used  for  the  preparation  of  this  feast  may  be  set   on
a    fire    made    by    the    friction    of  the    "  husband    and    wife."
When   the   feast    is    over,  the  fire   is   carefully  extinguished,
and    the    pot    is    put    away    with    the    fire-sticks,    where    it
remains  untouched  for  another  year.'*      A  remarkable  feature
of  the   festival,  as   it    is   observed   at   the  court   of  the   Zulu
king,  is   a   dance  performed  by  the  king  himself  in  a  mantle
of  grass  or,  according  to  another  account,  of  herbs  and  corn-
leaves.      This   mantle  is  afterwards   burnt   and   its   ashes   are
scattered   and  trodden   into  the  ground  by  cattle."      Further,
it    is    worthy   of   notice   that  the    festival   is   described   as  a
saturnalia,  and  we   are  told  that  "  a  great  deal   of  noise  and
dancing     goes     on,    and    people    are    not    supposed    to    be
responsible  for  what  they  say  or   do."*"      Thus,  for  example,
among   the  Pondos  the   festival  includes  a  period  of  license,

1  F.    Speckniann,    Die    Hennaiins-  System  of  the  Aiiiazulii,  p.  389  note
burger  Mission  in  Afrika  (Hermanns-  *  J.  Macdonald,  Light  in  Africa,  p.
burg,  1876),  p.   150  jv/.  216  S(/.

2  L.  Grout,  Z/^^/-/rt'W( Philadelphia,  ■'  J.   Shooter,    The  Kafirs  of  Natal,
N.D.),  p.   161.  p.  27  ;   N.  Isaacs,  Travels  and  Adveti-

■'  South  African  Folk-lore  Journal,        tures  in  Eastern  Africa,  ii.  293.
i.  (1879),  p.   135  ;  Callaway,  Teligious  "  J.  Macdonald,  of.  cit.  p.  189.


Ill  AMONG  THE  CAFFRES  327

during  the  continuance  of  which  the  chief  abdicates  his
functions  and  any  crime  may  be  committed  with  impunity.
The  description  of  the  Pondo  festival  comprises  so
many  interesting  features  that  I  will  reproduce  it  entire.
"  When  a  Pondo  chief  is  to  hold  the  feast  of  first-fruits,
some  of  his  people  procure  a  ripe  plant  of  the  gourd
family,  pumpkin  or  calabash,  from  another  tribe.  This  is
cooked  ;  the  inside  cleaned  out,  and  the  rind  made  ready  for
use  as  a  vessel.  It  is  then  presented  to  the  chief  with
much  ceremony.  The  first-fruits  are  now  brought  forward,
and  a  sacrifice,  generally  a  young  bull,  is  offered,  after  which
the  feast  commences.  The  chief  issues  certain  orders  for
the  conduct  of  the  proceedings,  tastes  the  fruits  which  are
served  in  the  gourd-dish  with  which  he  has  been  presented,
and  then  abdicates  all  his  functions  while  the  festival  lasts.
The  cattle  from  all  the  neighbouring  villages  are  collected
in  the  vicinity,  and  now  they  are  brought  together,  and  the
bulls  incited  to  fight  to  determine  which  is  to  be  king
among  them  for  the  next  year.  The  young  people  engage
in  games  and  dances,  feats  of  strength  and  running.  After
these  are  over  the  whole  community  give  themselves  over  to
disorder,  debauchery,  and  riot.  In  their  bull -fights  and
games  they  but  did  honour  to  the  powers  of  nature,  and  now,
as  they  eat  and  drink,  the  same  powers  are  honoured  in
another  form  and  by  other  rites.  There  is  no  one  in  author-
ity to  keep  order,  and  every  man  does  what  seems  good  in
his  own  eyes.  Should  a  man  stab  his  neighbour  he  escapes
all  punishment,  and  so  too  with  all  other  crimes  against  the
person,  property,  and  morality.  People  are  even  permitted
to  abuse  the  chief  to  his  face,  an  offence  which  at  any  other
time  would  meet  with  summary  vengeance  and  an  uncere-
monious dispatch  to  join  the  ancestors.  While  the  feast
continues,  a  deafening  noise  is  kept  up  by  drumming,  shout-
ing, hand-clapping,  and  every  kind  of  instrument  that  can  be
made  to  emit  sound.  Men  advance  to  the  chief  and  ex-
plain their  origin,  and  also  the  object  they  hold  sacred,  by
imitating  the  sounds  and  movements  of  their  most  sacred
animal.  This  is  the  person's  totem.  Others  imitate  the
gurgling  made  by  an  enemy  when  stabbed  in  the  throat.
Those  who  adopt  this  latter  emblem  are  known  as  '  children


FESTIVAL  OF  NEW  FRUITS


CHAP.


of  the  spear.'  When  the  ceremonies,  revels,  and  mummeries
are  ended,  the  chief  repairs  to  his  accustomed  place,  and
sitting  down  there,  by  that  act  resumes  his  kingly  functions.
He  calls  the  bravest  of  his  braves  before  him,  who  is
immediately  clothed  and  decorated  with  skins  of  animals
suggestive  of  courage  and  strategy.  He  performs  a  dance
amid  the  frenzied  shouting  of  the  multitude,  after  which  the
chief  declares  the  festival  at  an  end  and  harvest  com-
menced." ^  Another  writer,  speaking  of  the  Zulu  festival  of
first-fruits  as  it  was  celebrated  in  the  time  of  the  ferocious
despot  Chaka,  says  that  "  at  this  period  the  chiefs  are  allowed
to  converse  unreservedly  with  the  king,  speaking  with  great
freedom,  and  in  some  measure  to  be  dictatorial."^  Such
liberties  taken  with  the  despotic  Zulu  king  seem  to  point  to
a  time  when  he  too,  like  the  Pondo  chiefs,  abdicated  or  was
deposed  during  the  festival.  Perhaps  we  may  even  go  a
step  further.  We  have  seen  that  on  this  occasion  the  Zulu
king  dances  in  a  mantle  of  grass  or  of  herbs  and  corn-
leaves,  which  is  afterwards  burnt  and  the  ashes  scattered
and  trodden  into  the  ground.  This  custom  seems  clearly
intended  to  promote  the  fertility  of  the  earth,  and  in  earlier
times  the  same  end  may  have  been  compassed  by  burning
the  king  himself  and  dispersing  his  ashes  ;  for  we  have  seen
that  a  Bechuana  tribe,  of  the  same  Bantu  stock  as  the
Zulus,  were  wont  to  sacrifice  a  human  victim  for  the  good
of  the  crops  and  to  scatter  his  ashes  over  the  ground.^
In  this  connection  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  we  have
found  independent  evidence  of  a  custom  of  putting  the
Zulu  king  to  death  whenever  his  bodily  strength  began  to
fail.^


1  J.  Macdonald,  Religion  and  Myth,
pp.  136-138,  from  manuscript  notes
furnished  by  J.  Sutton.  Mr.  Mac-
donald has  described  the  custom  more
briefly  in  his  Light  in  Africa,  p.   189.

2  N.  Isaacs,  Travels  and  Adventures
in  Eastern  Africa,  ii.  292.

3  Above,  p.  239  sq.

*  Above,  p.  9  sq.  On  the  Zuhi
festival  of  first-fruits  see  also  Arbousset
et  Daumas,  Voyage  d'' Exploration,  p.
308  sq. ;  G.  Fritsch,  Die  Eingeborenen
Siid-Afrikas,^.  143.     Fritsch  mentions


that  after  executing  a  grotesque  dance
in  the  presence  of  the  assembled  multi-
tude tlie  king  gives  formal  permission
to  eat  of  the  new  fruits  by  dashing  a
gourd  or  calabash  to  the  ground.  This
ceremony  of  breaking  the  calabash  is
mentioned  also  by  Shooter  {Kafirs  of
Natal,  p.  27)  and  Grout  [Ziilu-land,  p.
162).  According  to  this  last  writer,
a  bull  is  killed  and  its  gall  drunk  by
the  king  and  the  people.  In  killing
it  the  warriors  must  use  nothing  but
their  naked  hands.     The  flesh  of  the


Ill


FESTIVAL  OF  NEW  FRUITS


329


Amongst  the  Creek  Indians  of  North  America,  the  busk
or  festival  of  first-fruits  was  the  chief  ceremony  of  the  year.^
It  was  held  in  July  or  August,  when  the  corn  was  ripe,  and
marked  the  end  of  the  old  year  and  the  beginning  of  the
new  one.  Before  it  took  place,  none  of  the  Indians  would
eat  or  even  handle  any  part  of  the  new  harvest.  Some-
times each  town  had  its  own  busk  ;  sometimes  several  towns
united  to  hold  one  in  common.  Before  celebrating  the
busk,  the  people  provided  themselves  with  new  clothes  and
new  household  utensils  and  furniture  ;  they  collected  their
old  clothes  and  rubbish,  together  with  all  the  remaining
grain  and  other  old  provisions,  cast  them  together  in  one
common  heap,  and  consumed  them  with  fire."^  As  a  prepara-
tion for  the  ceremony,  all  the  fires  in  the  village  were  extin-
guished, and  the  ashes  swept  clean  away.  In  particular,
the  hearth  or  altar  of  the  temple  was  dug  up  and  the  ashes
carried   out.      Then  the  chief  priest   put  some   roots   of  the


hwW  is  given  to  the  boys  to  eat  what
they  like  and  burn  the  rest ;  the  men
may  not  taste  it.  See  Grout,  op.  cit.
p.  161.  According  to  Shooter,  two
bulls  are  killed  ;  the  first  is  black,  the
second  of  another  colour.  The  l)oys
who  eat  the  beef  of  the  black  bull  may
not  drink  till  the  next  morning,  else
the  king  would  be  defeated  in  war  or
visited  with  some  personal  misfortune.
See  Shooter,  op  cit.  p.  26  sq.  Accord-
ing to  another  account  tlie  sacrifice  of
the  bull,  performed  by  the  warriors  of
a  particular  regiment  with  their  bare
hands,  takes  place  several  weeks  before
the  festival  of  first-fruits,  and  "the
strength  of  tlie  bull  is  supposed  to
enter  into  the  king,  thereby  prolong-
ing his  health  and  strength."  See
D.  Leslie,  Among  the  Zulus  and
Amatongas,'^  p.  91.  As  to  the  fes-
tival of  first-fruits  among  the  Mata-
beles,  a  Zulu  people,  see  L.  Decle,
Three  Years  in  Savage  Africa,  p.  157
sq.

1  The  ceremony  is  described  inde-
pendently by  James  Adair,  History  of
the  Ajuerican  Indians  (London,  1775),
pp.  96  -  1 1 1  ;  W.  Bartram,  Travels
through  N'orih  and  South  Carolina,
Georgia,  East  and  IVest  Florida  (Lon-


don, 1792),  p.  507  sq.;  B.  Hawkins,
"Sketch  of  the  Creek  country,"  in
Collections  of  the  Georgia  Historical
Society,  iii.  (Savannah,  1848),  pp.  75-
78  ;  A.  A.  M'Gillivray,  in  School-
craft's Indian  Tribes,  v.  267  sq.
Adair's  description  is  the  fullest  and
has  been  chiefly  followed  in  the  text.
In  Observatiojis  on  the  Ci-eek  and
Cherokee  Indians,  by  William  Bartram
(1789),  7uith  prefatory  and  supplement-
ary notes,  by  E.  G.  Squier,  p.  75,
there  is  a  description — extracted  from
an  MS.  of  J.  H.  Payne  (author  of
Home,  Sweet  Home)  —  of  the  similar
ceremony  observed  by  the  Cherokees.
I  possess  a  copy  of  this  work  in
pamphlet  form,  but  it  appears  to  be
an  extract  from  the  transactions  or
proceedings  of  a  society,  probably  an
American  one.  Mr.  Squier's  preface
is  dated  New  York,  185 1.  The  Indians
of  Alabama  also  held  a  great  festival  at
their  harvest  in  July.  They  passed
the  day  fasting,  lit  a  new  fire,  purged
themselves,  and  offered  the  first-fruits
to  their  Jl/anitoo  :  the  ceremony  ended
with  a  religious  dance.  See  Bossu,
Nouveaitx  Voyages  aiix  Indes  occiden-
tales  (Paris,  1768),  ii.  54.

-  W.  Bartram,  Travels,  p.  507.


330  FESTIVAL  OF  NEW  FRUITS  chap.

button-snake  plant,  with  some  green  tobacco  leaves  and  a
little  of  the  new  fruits,  at  the  bottom  of  the  fireplace,  which
he  afterwards  commanded  to  be  covered  up  with  white  clay,
and  wetted  over  with  clean  water,  A  thick  arbour  of  green
branches  of  young  trees  was  then  made  over  the  altar.^
Meanwhile  the  women  at  home  were  cleaning  out  their
houses,  renewing  the  old  hearths,  and  scouring  all  the  cook-
ing vessels  that  they  might  be  ready  to  receive  the  new  fire
and  the  new  fruits.'^  The  public  or  sacred  square  was  care-
fully swept  of  even  the  smallest  crumbs  of  previous  feasts,
"  for  fear  of  polluting  the  first-fruit  offerings."  Also  every
vessel  that  had  contained  or  had  been  used  about  any  food
during  the  expiring  year  was  removed  from  the  temple
before  sunset.  Then  all  the  men  who  were  not  known  to
have  violated  the  law  of  the  first-fruit  offering  and  that  of
marriage  during  the  year  were  summoned  by  a  crier  to
enter  the  holy  square  and  observe  a  solemn  fast.  But  the
women  (except  six  old  ones),  the  children,  and  all  who  had
not  attained  the  rank  of  warriors  were  forbidden  to  enter
the  square.  Sentinels  were  also  posted  at  the  corners  of  the
square  to  keep  out  all  persons  deemed  impure  and  all
animals.  A  strict  fast  was  then  observed  for  two  nights
and  a  day,  the  devotees  drinking  a  bitter  decoction  of
button-snake  root  "  in  order  to  vomit  and  purge  their  sinful
bodies."  That  the  people  outside  the  square  might  also  be
purified,  one  of  the  old  men  laid  down  a  quantity  of  green
tobacco  at  a  corner  of  the  square  ;  this  was  carried  off  by
an  old  woman  and  distributed  to  the  people  without,  who
chewed  and  swallowed  it  "  in  order  to  afflict  their  souls."
During  this  general  fast,  the  women,  children,  and  men  of
weak  constitution  were  allowed  to  eat  after  mid-day,  but  not
before.  On  the  morning  when  the  fast  ended,  the  women
brought  a  quantity  of  the  old  year's  food  to  the  outside  of
the  sacred  square.  These  provisions  were  then  brought  in
and  set  before  the  famished  multitude,  but  all  traces  of  them

1   So  amongst  the  Cherokees,  accord-  sacred  square.      Every  man  then  pro-

ing  to  J.  H.  Payne,  an  arbour  of  green  vided  himself  with  a  green  bough."

boughs  was  made  in  the  sacred  scjuare  ;  -  So  Adair.      Bartram,  on  the  other

then  "a  beautiful  bushy-topped  shade-  hand,  as  we  have  seen,  says  that  the

tree  was  cut   down  close  to  the  roots,  old   vessels  were  burned  and  new  ones

and  planted  in  the  very  centre  of  the  prepared  for  the  festival.


Ill  AMONG  THE  CREEK  INDIANS


jj'


had  to  be  removed  before  noon.      When  the  sun  was  decHn-
ing  from   the   meridian,  all   the   people  were  commanded  by
the  voice   of  a   crier  to  stay  within  doors,  to  do  no  bad  act,
and  to  be  sure  to  extinguish  and  throw  away  every  spark  of
the    old    fire.      Universal    silence    now   reigned.      Then    the
high  priest  made  the  new  fire  by  the  friction  of  two  pieces  of
wood,  and    placed    it    on    the   altar   under  the  green  arbour.
This    new   fire   was    believed    to   atone    for   all    past  crimes
except   murder.      Next   a   basket  of  new  fruits  was  brought  ;
the  high  priest  took  out  a  little  of  each  sort  of  fruit,  rubbed
it  with   bear's   oil,  and   offered   it,  together  with   some   flesh,
"  to   the   bountiful   holy  spirit  of  fire,  as  a  first-fruit  offering,
and   an   annual   oblation   for  sin."      He  also  consecrated   the
sacred   emetics   (the   button-snake    root   and    the   cassina  or
black-drink)   by   pouring  a  little  of  them  into  the  fire.      The
persons  who   had  remained  outside  now  approached,  without
entering,  the   sacred   square  ;  and  the  chief  priest   thereupon
made   a   speech,  exhorting  the  people  to   observe    their  old
rites  and  customis,  announcing  that  the  new  divine  fire  had
purged  away  the  sins  of  the  past  year,  and  earnestly  warn-
ing  the  women   that,  if  any  of  them   had    not    extinguished
the    old    fire,   or   had    contracted   any    impurity,    they    must
forthwith  depart,  "  lest  the  divine  fire  should  spoil  both  them
and  the  people."      Some  of  the  new  fire  was  then  set  down
outside  the   holy  square  ;    the  women   carried   it  home  joy-
fully, and  laid  it  on  their  unpolluted  hearths.      When   several
towns    had    united    to    celebrate    the   festival,   the    new   fire
might    thus   be    carried   for   several    miles.      The   new    fruits
were  then  dressed  on  the  new  fires  and  eaten  with  bear's  oil,
which    was    deemed    indispensable.       At    one    point    of    the
festival   the   men   rubbed   the  new  corn  between  their  hands,
then   on   their  faces  and  breasts.^      During  the  festival  which
followed,  the   warriors,  dressed   in   their  wild   martial   array,
their    heads    covered  with  white  down  and    carrvine    white
feathers   in   their  hands,  danced    round    the    sacred    arbour,
under  which   burned   the   new   fire.      The  ceremonies   lasted
eight   days,  during  which   the  strictest   continence  was   prac-
tised.     Towards   the   conclusion   of  the   festival  the  warriors
fought   a   mock   battle  ;  then  the  men   and  women   together,
'  B.    Hawkins,  "Sketch,"  etc.,  p.  76.


332  FESTIVAL  OF  NEW  FRUITS  chap.

in  three  circles,  danced  round  the  sacred  fire.  Lastly,  all
the  people  smeared  themselves  with  white  clay  and  bathed
in  running  water.  They  came  out  of  the  water  believing
that  no  evil  could  now  befall  them  for  what  they  had  done
amiss  in  the  past.      So  they  departed  in  joy  and  peace.

To  this  day  the  remnant  of  the  Seminole  Indians  of
Florida,  a  people  of  the  same  stock  as  the  Creeks,^  hold  an
annual  purification  and  festival  called  the  Green  Corn  Dance,
at  which  the  new  corn  is  eaten.  On  the  evening  of  the  first
day  of  the  festival  they  quaff  a  nauseous  "  Black  Drink,"  as
it  is  called,  which  acts  both  as  an  emetic  and  a  purgative  ;
they  believe  that  he  who  does  not  drink  of  this  liquor  cannot
safely  eat  the  new  green  corn,  and  besides  that  he  will  be
sick  at  some  time  in  the  year.  While  the  liquor  is  being
drunk,  the  dancing  begins,  and  the  medicine-men  join  in  it.
Next  day  they  eat  of  the  green  corn  ;  the  following  day
they  fast,  probably  from  fear  of  polluting  the  sacred  food  in
their  stomachs  by  contact  with  common  food  ;  but  the  third
day  they  hold  a  great  feast."  Further,  the  Natchez  Indians,
another  tribe  of  the  same  stock,  who  used  to  inhabit  a  dis-
trict on  the  low^er  course  and  eastern  bank  of  the  Mississippi,
ate  the  new  corn  sacramentally  at  a  great  festival  which  has
been  fully  described  by  Du  Pratz,  the  French  historian  of
Louisiana.  As  his  work  is  probably  not  easily  accessible  to
many  of  my  readers,  I  shall  perhaps  consult  their  conveni-
ence by  extracting  his  description  entire.  The  Natchez,  he
tells  us,  began  their  year  in  March  and  divided  it  into
thirteen  moons.  Their  sixth  moon,  which  answered  to  our
August,  was  the  Mulberry  Moon,  and  the  seventh  was  the
moon  of  Maize  or  Great  Corn.  "  This  feast  is  beyond  dis-
pute the  most  solemn  of  all.  It  principally  consists  in
eating  in  common,  and  in  a  religious  manner,  of  new  corn,
which  had  been  sown  expressly  with  that  design,  with  suit-
able ceremonies.  This  corn  is  sown  upon  a  spot  of  ground
never  before  cultivated  ;  which  ground  is  dressed  and  pre-
pared by  the  warriors  alone,  who  also  are  the  only  persons
that   sow  the  corn,  weed   it,  reap   it,  and  gather  it.      When

^  Waitz,    Anthropologic   d^r  N'atitr-       of  Florida,"   Fiflh   Annual  Report  of
vdlker,  iii.  42.  the  Burcan  of  Ethnology  (Washington,

2  C.  MacCauley,  "  Seminole  Indians       1887),  p.  522  sq.


Ill  AMONG  THE  NATCHEZ  333

this  corn  is  near  ripe,  the  warriors   fix   on  a  place  proper  for
the   general   feast,  and   close   adjoining  to  that   they  form  a
round  granary,  the  bottom  and  sides   of  which   are  of  cane  ;
this  they  fill  with  the  corn,  and  when  they  have  finished   the
harvest,   and   covered   the   granary,  they  acquaint  the  Great
Sun,^  who  appoints  the  day  for   the   general    feast.      Some
days  before  the  feast,  they  build  huts  for  the  Great   Sun,  and
for  all   the   other  families,   round   the    granary,   that    of    the
Great  Sun  being  raised  upon   a   mound  of  earth   about   two
feet  high.      On   the   feast-day  the  whole  nation  set  out  from
their  village  at   sun-rising,  leaving  behind  only  the  aged  and
infirm   that  are   not   able   to   travel,  and  a  few  warriors,  who
are  to  carry  the   Great   Sun  on  a  litter  upon  their  shoulders.
The  seat  of  this  litter  is  covered  with  several   deer-skins,  and
to  its  four  sides  are  fastened  four  bars  which  cross  each  other,
and  are  supported  by  eight  men,  who  at  every  hundred  paces
transfer  their  burden  to  eight  other  men,  and  thus  successively
transport  it  to  the  place  where  the  feast  is  celebrated,  which
may  be  near  two  miles  from  the  village.      About  nine  o'clock
the  Great  Sun  comes  out  of  his  hut  dressed  in  the  ornaments
of  his   dignity,  and   being   placed   in   his   litter,  which   has  a
canopy  at  the  head  formed  of  flowers,  he  is  carried  in  a  few
minutes  to  the   sacred   granary,  shouts   of  joy  re-echoing  on
all  sides.      Before  he  alights  he  makes  the  tour  of  the  whole
place   deliberately,  and   when   he   comes   before   the  corn,  he
salutes  it  thrice  with  the  words,  Jwo,  hoo,  hoo,  lengthened  and
pronounced  respectfully.      The  salutation   is   repeated  by  the
whole  nation,  who   pronounce   the  word   hoo  nine   times  dis-
tinctly, and   at   the   ninth  time  he  alights  and  places  himself
on  his  throne.

"  Immediately  after  they  light  a  fire  by  rubbing  two
pieces  of  wood  violently  against  each  other,  and  when  every-
thing is  prepared  for  dressing  the  corn,  the  chief  of  war,
accompanied  by  the  warriors  belonging  to  each  family,  pre-
sents himself  before  the  throne,  and  addresses  the  Sun  in
these  words,  '  Speak,  for  I  hear  thee.'  The  sovereign  then
rises  up,  bows  towards   the  four  quarters   of   the  world,  and

1  That    is,   the   grand    chief   of   the  bore   on    liis    breast  an   image    of    the

nation.      All  the  chiefs  of  the  Natchez  sun  and  claimed  to  be  descended  from

were  called  Suns  and  were  connected  the  luminary.     See   Bossu,  Nouveaiix

with  the  head  chief  or  Great  Sun,  who  Voyages  aux  Indes  occidentaks,  i.  42.


334  FESTIVAL  OF  NEW  FRUITS  chap.

advancing  to  the  granary,  lifts  his  eyes  and  hands  to  heaven,
and  says,  '  Give  us  corn  ' :  upon  which  the  great  chief  of
war,  the  princes  and  princesses,  and  all  the  men,  thank  him
separately  by  pronoimcing  the  word  hoo.  The  corn  is  then
distributed,  first  to  the  female  Suns,  and  then  to  all  the
women,  who  run  with  it  to  their  huts,  and  dress  it  with  the
utmost  dispatch.  When  the  corn  is  dressed  in  all  the  huts,
a  plate  of  it  is  put  into  the  hands  of  the  Great  Sun,  who
presents  it  to  the  four  quarters  of  the  world,  and  then  says
to  the  chief  of  war,  '  Eat '  ;  upon  this  signal  all  the  warriors
begin  to  eat  in  all  the  huts  ;  after  them  the  boys  of  whatever
age,  excepting  those  who  are  on  the  breast  ;  and  last  of  all
the  women.  When  the  warriors  have  finished  their  repast,
they  form  themselves  into  two  choirs  before  the  huts,  and
sing  war-songs  for  half  an  hour  ;  after  which  the  chief  of
war,  and  all  the  warriors  in  succession,  recount  their  brave
exploits,  and  mention,  in  a  boasting  manner,  the  number  of
enemies  they  have  slain.  The  youths  are  next  allowed  to
harangue,  and  each  tells  in  the  best  manner  he  can,  not  what
he  has  done,  but  what  he  intends  to  do  ;  and  if  his  discourse
merits  approbation,  he  is  answered  by  a  general  hoo  ;  if  not,
the  warriors  hang  down  their  heads  and  are  silent.

"  This  great  solemnity  is  concluded  with  a  general  dance
by  torch-light.  Upwards  of  two  hundred  torches  of  dried
canes,  each  of  the  thickness  of  a  child,  are  lighted  round  the
place,  where  the  men  and  women  often  continue  dancing  till
day-light  ;  and  the  following  is  the  disposition  of  their  dance.
A  man  places  himself  on  the  ground  with  a  pot  covered  with
a  deer-skin,  in  the  manner  of  a  drum,  to  beat  time  to  the
dancers  ;  round  him  the  women  form  themselves  into  a  circle,
not  joining  hands,  but  at  some  distance  from  each  other  ;
and  they  are  inclosed  by  the  men  in  another  circle,  who
have  in  each  hand  a  chichicois,  or  calabash,  with  a  stick
thrust  through  it  to  serve  for  a  handle.  When  the  dance
begins,  the  women  move  round  the  men  in  the  centre,  from
left  to  right,  and  the  men  contrariwise  from  right  to  left,  and
they  sometimes  narrow  and  sometimes  widen  their  circles.
In  this  manner  the  dance  continues  without  intermission  the
whole  night,  new  performers  successively  taking  the  place  of
those  who  are  wearied  and  fatigued.


Ill  AMONG  THE  NATCHEZ  335

"  Next  morning  no  person  is  seen  abroad  before  the
Great  Sun  comes  out  of  his  hut,  which  is  generally  about
nine  o'clock,  and  then  upon  a  signal  made  by  the  drum,  the
warriors  make  their  appearance  distinguished  into  two  troops,
by  the  feathers  which  they  wear  on  their  heads.  One  of
these  troops  is  headed  by  the  Great  Sun,  and  the  other  by
the  chief  of  war,  who  begin  a  new  diversion  by  tossing  a
ball  of  deer-skin  stuffed  with  Spanish  beard  from  the  one  to
the  other.  The  warriors  quickly  take  part  in  the  sport,  and
a  violent  contest  ensues  which  of  the  two  parties  shall  drive
the  ball  to  the  hut  of  the  opposite  chief.  The  diversion
generally  lasts  two  hours,  and  the  victors  are  allowed  to
wear  the  feathers  of  superiority  till  the  following  year,  or  till
the  next  time  they  play  at  the  ball.  After  this  the  warriors
perform  the  war  dance  ;  and  last  of  all  they  go  and  bathe  ;
an  exercise  which  they  are  very  fond  of  when  they  are
heated  or  fatigued.

"  The  rest  of  that  day  is  employed  as  the  preceding  ;  for
the  feast  holds  as  long  as  any  of  the  corn  remains.  When
it  is  all  eat  up,  the  Great  Sun  is  carried  back  in  his  litter,
and  they  all  return  to  the  village,  after  which  he  sends  the
warriors  to  hunt  both  for  themselves  and  him."  ^

In  the  foregoing  customs  the  solemn  preparation  for
eating  of  the  new  fruits,  taken  together  with  the  danger
supposed  to  be  incurred  by  persons  who  partake  of  them
without  observing  the  prescribed  ritual,  suffices  to  prove  that
the  new  fruits  are  regarded  as  instinct  with  a  divine  virtue,
and  consequently  that  the  eating  of  them  is  a  sacrament  or
communion.  Nothing,  perhaps,  brings  this  out  so  clearly
as  the  Creek  and  Seminole  practice  of  taking  a  purgative
before  swallowing  the  new  corn.  The  intention  is  thereby
to  prevent   the   sacred   food   from   being  polluted  by  contact

1   Du    Pratz,    History  of  Louisiana,  edition);      Le      Petit,    "Relation    des

or  of  the  western  parts  of  Virginia  and  Natchez,"  ?'(^/(/.    ix.    13   sq.   (reprint    of

Carolina,  translated   from  the  French,  the    account   in    the    Lettres   Mifiantes

New  Edition  (London,  1784),  pp.  338-  cited  above) ;  V>oi.^\x,  Noiiveaux  Voyages

341.       On    the    festival    of   first-fruits  aiix  Iiides  occidentales,  i.  43.     Accord-

among   the    Natchez    see    also  Lettres  ing  to  Charlevoix,  Le  Petit,  and  Bossu

c'difiahtes  et  curieitses,  vii.   19  ;   Charle-  the  festival  fell  in  July.     For  Chateau-

voix,   Llistoire  de  la  iVouvelle  Frame,  briand's  description  of  the  custom,  see

vi.   183;   De   Tonti,    "Relation   de  la  Note  C,  "  Offerings  of  First-fruits,"  at

Louisiane  et  du  Mississippi,"  Kecueil  the  end  of  this  volume.
de  Voyages  ail  Nord,v.  122  (Amsterdam


336


FOODS  NOT  MIXED


CHAP,


with  common  food  in  the  stomach  of  the  eater.  For  the
same  reason  CathoHcs  partake  of  the  Eucharist  fasting  ;  and
among  the  pastoral  Masai  of  Eastern  Africa  the  young
warriors,  who  hve  on  meat  and  milk  exclusively,  are  obliged
to  eat  nothing  but  milk  for  so  many  days  and  then  nothing
but  meat  for  so  many  more,  and  before  they  pass  from  the
one  food  to  the  other  they  must  make  sure  that  none  of  the
old  food  remains  in  their  stomachs  ;  this  they  do  by
swallowing  a  very  powerful  purgative  and  emetic.^  Among
the  Wataturu,  another  people  of  Eastern  Africa  akin  to
the  Masai,  a  warrior  who  had  eaten  antilope's  flesh  might
not  drink  of  milk  on  the  same  day."  Similarly  among  the
Central  Esquimaux  the  rules  prohibiting  contact  between
venison  and  the  flesh  of  marine  animals  are  very  strict.
The  Esquimaux  themselves  say  that  the  goddess  Sedna
dislikes  the  deer,  and  therefore  they  may  not  bring  that
animal  into  contact  with  her  favourites,  the  sea  beasts.
Hence  the  meat  of  the  whale,  the  seal,  or  the  walrus  may
not  be  eaten  on  the  same  day  with  venison.  Both  sorts  of
meat  may  not  even  lie  on  the  floor  of  the  hut  or  behind  the
lamps  at  the  same  time.  If  a  man  who  has  eaten  venison
in  the  morning  happens  to  enter  a  hut  in  which  the  flesh  of
seal  is  being  cooked,  he  is  allowed  to  eat  venison  on  the
bed,  but  it  must  be  wrapt  up  before  being  carried  into  the
hut,  and  he  must  take  care  to  keep  clear  of  the  floor.  Before
changing  from  one  food  to  the  other  the  Esquimaux  must
wash  themselves.^  Again,  just  as  the  Esquimaux  think  that
their  goddess  would  be  offended  if  venison  met  seal  or  whale
or  walrus  meat  in  the  eater's  stomach,  so  the  Melanesians  of
Florida,  one  of  the  Solomon  Islands,  believe  that  if  a  man
who  has  eaten  pork  or  fish  or  shell-fish  or  the  flesh  of  a
certain   sort  of  cuscus  were   to   enter  a   garden  immediately


1  Joseph  Thomson,  Through  Masai
Land,  p.  430  ;  P.  Reichard,  DctitsiJi-
Ostafrika  (Leipsic,  1892),  p.  288  ;
O.  Baumann,  Diirch  JMassailand  ziir
Nilqitellc  (Berlin,  1894),  p.  162.  Ac-
cording to  Reichard  the  warriors  may
partake  of  honey  both  with  meat  and
with  milk.  Thomson  does  not  men-
tion honey  and  speaks  of  a  ]MU-£;ative
only.  The  periods  during  which  meat
and     milk     are    alternately    consumed


vary,  according  to  Reichard,  from
twelve  to  fifteen  days.  We  may  con-
jecture, therefore,  that  two  of  them,
making  up  a  complete  cycle,  correspond
to  a  lunar  month,  with  reference  to
which  the  diet  is  perhaps  determined.

-  O.  Baumann,^/.  cit.  p.  171.

3  Fr.  Boas,  "The  Central  Eskimo,"
Sixth  Anmtal  Report  of  the  Biireati
of  Ethnology  (Washington,  1888),  p.
595-


Ill  SACRAMENT  OF  FIRST-FRUITS  337

afterwards,  the  ghosts  who  preside  over  the  garden  and
cause  the  fruits  to  grow  would  be  angry  and  the  crop  would
consequently  suffer  ;  but  three  or  four  days  after  partaking
of  such  victuals,  when  the  food  has  quite  left  his  stomach,
he  may  enter  the  garden  without  offence  to  the  ghosts  or
injury  to  the  crop.^  In  like  manner  the  ancient  Greeks,  of
whose  intellectual  kinship  with  savages  like  the  Esquimaux
and  the  Melanesians  we  have  already  met  with  many  proofs,
laid  it  down  as  a  rule  that  a  man  who  had  partaken  of  the
flesh  offered  to  Pelops  at  Olympia  might  not  enter  into  the
temple  of  Zeus,  and  that  persons  who  had  sacrificed  to
Telephus  at  Pergamus  might  not  go  up  to  the  temple  of
Aesculapius  until  they  had  washed  themselves,^  just  as  the
Esquimaux  who  have  eaten  venison  must  wash  before  they
may  partake  of  seal  or  whale  or  walrus  meat.

In  some  of  the  festivals  which  we  have  examined,  as
in  the  Euro,  Cheremiss,  Cham,  and  Creek  ceremonies,  the
sacrament  of  first-fruits  is  combined  with  a  sacrifice,  and  in
course  of  time  the  sacrifice  of  first-fruits  tends  to  throw  the
sacrament  into  the  shade,  if  not  to  supersede  it.  The  mere
fact  of  offering  the  first-fruits  to  the  gods  or  ancestral  spirits
comes  now  to  be  thought  a  sufficient  preparation  for  eating  the
new  corn  ;  the  gods  having  received  their  share,  man  is  free
to  enjoy  the  rest.  This  mode  of  viewing  the  new  fruits
implies  that  they  are  regarded  no  longer  as  themselves
instinct  with  divine  life,  but  merely  as  a  gift  bestowed  by
the  gods  upon  man,  who  is  bound  to  express  his  gratitude
and  homage  to  his  divine  benefactors  by  returning  to  them
a  portion  of  their  bounty.  But  with  sacrifice,  as  distinct  from
sacrament,  we  are  not  here  concerned.^

The  custom  of  eating  bread  sacramentally  as  the  body
of  a  god  was  practised  by  the  Aztecs  before  the  discovery
and  conquest  of  Mexico  by  the  Spaniards.  Twice  a  year,
in  May  and  December,  an  image  of  the  great  Mexican  god
Huitzilopochtli  or  Vitzilipuztli  was  made  of  dough,  then
broken   in   pieces,  and   solemnly  eaten   by   his   worshippers.

1  R.    H.    Codrington,    The    Melan-       sacrificed    to    Pelops    partook    of    the
esians,  p.  134.  sacrifice.

2  Pausanias,    v.    13.    3.      We    may

assume,    though    Pausanias    does    not  ^  See  Note  C,    "  Offerings  of  First-

expressly   say   so,    that    persons    who       fruits,"  at  the  end  of  the  volume.
VOL.  II  z


33^  MEXICAN  SACRAMENTS  chap.

The  May  ceremony  is  thus  described  by  the  historian  Acosta.
"  Two  days  before  this  feast,  the  virgins  whereof  I  have
spoken  (the  which  were  shut  up  and  seckided  in  the  same
temple  and  were  as  it  were  reHgious  women)  did  mingle  a
quantity  of  the  seed  of  beets  with  roasted  maize,  and  then
they  did  mould  it  with  honey,  making  an  idol  of  that  paste
in  bigness  like  to  that  of  wood,  putting  instead  of  eyes
grains  of  green  glass,  of  blue  or  white  ;  and  for  teeth  grains
of  maize  set  forth  with  all  the  ornament  and  furniture  that
I  have  said.  This  being  finished,  all  the  noblemen  came
and  brought  it  an  exquisite  and  rich  garment,  like  unto
that  of  the  idol,  wherewith  they  did  attire  it.  Being  thus
clad  and  deckt,  they  did  set  it  in  an  azure  chair  and  in  a
litter  to  carry  it  on  their  shoulders.  The  morning  of  this
feast  being  come,  an  hour  before  day  all  the  maidens  came
forth  attired  in  white,  with  new  ornaments,  the  which  that
day  were  called  the  Sisters  of  their  god  Vitzilipuztli,  they
came  crowned  with  garlands  of  maize  roasted  and  parched,
being  like  unto  azahar  or  the  flower  of  orange  ;  and  about
their  necks  they  had  great  chains  of  the  same,  which  went
bauldrickwise  under  their  left  arm.  Their  cheeks  were  dyed
with  vermilion,  their  arms  from  the  elbow  to  the  wrist  were
covered  with  red  parrots'  feathers."  Young  men,  dressed  in
red  robes  and  crowned  like  the  virgins  with  maize,  then
carried  the  idol  in  its  litter  to  the  foot  of  the  great  pyramid-
shaped  temple,  up  the  steep  and  narrow  steps  of  which  it
was  drawn  to  the  music  of  flutes,  trumpets,  cornets,  and
drums.  "  While  they  mounted  up  the  idol  all  the  people
stood  in  the  court  with  much  reverence  and  fear.  Being
mounted  to  the  top,  and  that  they  had  placed  it  in  a  little
lodge  of  roses  which  they  held  ready,  presently  came  the
young  men,  which  strewed  many  flowers  of  sundry  kinds,
wherewith  they  filled  the  temple  both  within  and  without.
This  done,  all  the  virgins  came  out  of  their  convent,  bringing
pieces  of  paste  compounded  of  beets  and  roasted  maize,
which  was  of  the  same  paste  whereof  their  idol  was  made
and  compounded,  and  they  were  of  the  fashion  of  great
bones.  They  delivered  them  to  the  young  men,  who  carried
them  up  and  laid  them  at  the  idol's  feet,  wherewith  they
filled  the  whole  place  that   it   could  receive  no  more.      They


Ill  MEXICAN  SACRAMENTS  339

called  these  morsels  of  paste  the  flesh  and  bones  of  Vitzili-
puztH.  Having  laid  abroad  these  bones,  presently  came  all
the  ancients  of  the  temple,  priests,  Levites,  and  all  the  rest
of  the  ministers,  according  to  their  dignities  and  antiquities
(for  herein  there  was  a  strict  order  amongst  them)  one  after
another,  with  their  veils  of  diverse  colours  and  works,  every
one  according  to  his  dignity  and  office,  having  garlands
upon  their  heads  and  chains  of  flowers  about  their  necks  ;
after  them  came  their  gods  and  goddesses  whom  they
worshipt,  of  diverse  figures,  attired  in  the  same  livery  ;  then
putting  themselves  in  order  about  those  morsels  and  pieces
of  paste,  they  used  certain  ceremonies  with  singing  and
dancing.  By  means  whereof  they  were  blessed  and  conse-
crated for  the  flesh  and  bones  of  this  idol.  This  ceremony
and  blessing  (whereby  they  were  taken  for  the  flesh  and
bones  of  the  idol)  being  ended,  they  honoured  those  pieces  in
the  same  sort  as  their  god.

"  Then  came  forth  the  sacrificers,  who  began  the  sacrifice
of  men   in   the   manner  as   hath   been   spoken,  and  that  day
they  did  sacrifice  a  greater  number  than   at   any  other  time,
for  that  it  was   the   most   solemn   feast  they  observed.      The
sacrifices   being  ended,  all   the  young   men  and  maids  came
out   of  the  temple    attired   as    before,   and    being   placed   in
order  and   rank,  one  directly   against   another,   they  danced
by  drums,  the  which   sounded   in    praise   of  the  feast,  and  of
the   idol  which  they  did   celebrate.      To  which  song  all   the
most   ancient  and    greatest   noblemen   did   answer   dancing
about  them,  making  a  great  circle,  as  their  use  is,  the  young
men    and    maids   remaining   always   in   the   midst.      All   the
city  came  to  this  goodly  spectacle,  and   there  was  a  com-
mandment very  strictly  observed  throughout  all  the  land,  that
the  day  of  the  feast  of  the   idol  of  Vitzilipuztli   they  should
eat   no   other  meat  but  this   paste,  with  honey,  whereof  the
idol  was  made.      And  this  should   be  eaten  at  the  point  of
day,  and   they  should  drink  no   water  nor   any  other  thing
till  after  noon  :   they  held  it  for  an  ill   sign,  yea,  for  sacrilege
to  do  the  contrary  :   but  after  the  ceremonies   ended,  it  was
lawful  for  them  to  eat  anything.      During  the   time    of  this
ceremony    they    hid    the    water    from    their    little    children,
admonishing  all  such  as  had  the  use  of  reason   not  to  drink


340  MEXICAN  SACRAMENTS  chap.

any  water  ;  which,  if  they  did,  the  anger  of  God  would  come
upon  them,  and  they  should  die,  which  they  did  observe
very  carefully  and  strictly.  The  ceremonies,  dancing,
and  sacrifice  ended,  they  went  to  unclothe  themselves,  and
the  priests  and  superiors  of  the  temple  took  the  idol  of
paste,  which  they  spoiled  of  all  the  ornaments  it  had,  and
made  many  pieces,  as  well  of  the  idol  itself  as  of  the
truncheons  which  were  consecrated,  and  then  they  gave
them  to  the  people  in  manner  of  a  communion,  beginning
with  the  greater,  and  continuing  unto  the  rest,  both  men,
women,  and  little  children,  who  received  it  with  such
tears,  fear,  and  reverence  as  it  was  an  admirable  thing,  say-
ing that  they  did  eat  the  flesh  and  bones  of  God,  wherewith
they  were  grieved.  Such  as  had  any  sick  folks  demanded
thereof  for  them,  and  carried  it  with  great  reverence  and
veneration."  ^

After  the  explanation  which  has  been  given  of  the
reason  why  the  Creek  and  Seminole  Indians  cleanse  their
bodies  with  a  purgative  before  they  partake  of  the  sacra-
ment of  first  -  fruits,  the  reader  will  have  no  difficulty  in
understanding  why  on  the  day  of  their  solemn  communion
with  the  deity  the  Mexicans  refused  to  eat  any  other  food
than  the  consecrated  bread  which  they  revered  as  the  very
flesh  and  bones  of  their  God,  and  why  up  till  noon  they
might  drink  nothing  at  all,  not  even  water.  They  feared  to
defile  the  portion  of  God  in  their  stomachs  by  contact  with
common  things.  We  can  now  also  conjecture  the  reason
why  Zulu  boys,  after  eating  the  flesh  of  the  black  bull  at  the
feast  of  first-fruits,  are  forbidden  to  drink  anything  till  the
next  day.^

At  the  festival  of  the  winter  solstice  in  December  the
Aztecs  killed  their  god  Huitzilopochtli  in  effigy  first  and
ate  him  afterwards.  As  a  preparation  for  this  solemn
ceremony  an  image  of  the  deity  in  the  likeness  of  a  man  was
fashioned  out  of  seeds  of  various  sorts,  which  were  kneaded
into  a  doucrh  with  the  blood  of  children.      The  bones  of  the


*t3*


1  Acosta,  Natural  atid  Moral  His-  lowed     by   Herrera    {General   History

tory  of  the  Indies,  bk.  v.  ch.  24,  vol.  ii.  of  the  vast   Continent  and  Islatids    of

pp.  356-360  (Hakluyt   Society,   1880).  America,   trans,    by   Stevens,   iii.   213-

I  have  modernised  the  old   translator's  215).
spelling.      Acosta's  description  is  fol-  ^  Above,  p.  329  note.


Ill  MEXICAN  SACRAMENTS  341

god  were  represented  by  pieces  of  acacia  wood.  This  image
was  placed  on  the  chief  altar  of  the  temple,  and  on  the  day
^  the  festival  the  king  offered  incense  to  it.  Early  next  day
it  was  taken  down  and  set  on  its  feet  in  a  great  hall.  Then
a  priest,  who  bore  the  name  and  acted  the  part  of  the  god
Quetzalcoatl,  took  a  flint-tipped  dart  and  hurled  it  into  the
breast  of  the  dough-image,  piercing  it  through  and  through.
This  was  called  "  killing  the  god  Huitzilopochtli  so  that  his
body  might  be  eaten."  One  of  the  priests  cut  out  the  heart
of  the  image  and  gave  it  to  the  king  to  eat.  The  rest  of
the  image  was  divided  into  minute  pieces,  of  which  every  man
great  and  small,  down  to  the  male  children  in  the  cradle,
received  one  to  eat.  But  no  woman  might  taste  a  morsel.
The  ceremony  was  called  teoqualo,  that  is,  "  god  is  eaten."  ^

At  another  festival  the  Mexicans  made  little  images  like
men,  which  stood  for  the  cloud-capped  mountains.  These
images  were  moulded  of  a  paste  of  various  seeds  and  were
dressed  in  paper  ornaments.  Some  people  fashioned  five,
others  ten,  others  as  many  as  fifteen  of  them.  Having  been
made,  they  were  placed  in  the  oratory  of  each  house  and
worshipped.  Four  times  in  the  course  of  the  night  offerings
of  food  were  brought  to  them  in  tiny  vessels  ;  and  people
sang  and  played  the  flute  before  them  through  all  the
hours  of  darkness.  At  break  of  day  the  priests  stabbed
the  images  with  a  weaver's  instrument,  cut  off  their  heads,
and  tore  out  their  hearts,  which  they  presented  to  the
master  of  the  house  on  a  green  saucer.  The  bodies  of  the
images  were  then  eaten  by  all  the  family,  especially  by  the
servants,  "  in  order  that  by  eating  them  they  might  be  pre-
served from  certain  distempers,  to  which  those  persons  who
were  negligent  of  worship  to  those  deities  conceived  them-
selves to  be  subject."^       In    some  cities   of   Mexico,    as    in

1  Bancroft,     Native     Races    of    the  Bourbourg,       Histoire      des      Nations

Pacific  States,  iii.    297-300  (after  Tor-  civilis^es  du  Mexiqice  et  de  VAmerique

quemada)  ;      Clavigero,      History      of  Ccw/za/c,  iii.  531-534.
Mexico,   trans,   by  Cullen,  i.  309  sqq.;  ^  Clavigero,  i.    311  ;    Sahagun,   pp.

Sahagun,    Histoire  genirale  des  choses  74,  1565^.;  MUller,  p.  606;  Bancroft,

de   la    Nouvelle-Espagne,    traduite    et  iii.     316;     Brasseur    de     Bourbourg,

annotee     par    Jourdanet     et      Simeon  iii.  535.      This  festival   took   place  on

(Paris,  1880),  p.  203  sq.  ;  J.  G.  Miiller,  the  last  day  of  the  i6th  month  (which

Geschichte     der     amcrikanischen     Ur-  extended  from  23rd  December  to  lith

religionen,     p.      605  ;      Brasseur     de  January).       At    another    festival     the


342  MEXICAN  SACRAMENTS  chap.

Tlacopan  and  Coyohuacan,  an  idol  was  fashioned  out  of
grains  of  various  kinds,  and  the  warriors  ate  it  in  the  beUef
that  the  sacred  food  would  increase  their  forces  fourfold
when  they  marched  to  the  fight.^  At  certain  festivals  held
thrice  a  year  in  Nicaragua  all  the  men,  beginning  with  the
priests  and  chiefs,  drew  blood  from  their  tongues  and  genital
organs  with  sharp  knives  of  flint,  allowed  it  to  drip  on  some
sheaves  of  maize,  and  then  ate  the  bloody  grain  as  a  blessed
food.^

But  the  Mexicans  did  not  always  content  themselves
with  eating  their  gods  in  the  outward  and  visible  shape  of
bread  or  grain  ;  it  was  not  even  enough  that  this  material
vehicle  of  the  divine  life  should  be  kneaded  and  fortified
with  human  blood.  They  craved,  as  it  seems,  after  a  closer
union  with  the  living  god,  and  attained  it  by  devouring  the
flesh  of  a  real  man,  who,  after  he  had  paraded  for  a  time  in
the  trappings  and  received  the  honours  of  a  god,  was
slaughtered  and  eaten  by  his  cannibal  worshippers.  The
deity  thus  consumed  in  &^%Y  was  Tetzcatlipoca,  and  the
man  chosen  to  represent  him  and  die  in  his  stead  was  a
young  captive  of  handsome  person  and  illustrious  birth.
During  his  captivity  the  youth  thus  doomed  to  play  the
fatal  part  of  divinity  was  allowed  to  range  the  streets  of
Mexico  freely,  escorted  by  a  distinguished  train,  who  paid
him  as  much  respect  as  if  he  had  been  indeed  the  god  him-
self instead  of  only  his  living  image.  Twenty  days  before
the  festival  at  which  the  tragic  mockery  was  to  end,  that  he
might  taste  all  the  joys  of  this  transient  world  to  which  he
must  soon  bid  farewell,  he  received  in  marriage  four  women,
from  whom  he  parted  only  when  he  took  his  place  in  the  last
solemn  procession.  Arrived  at  the  foot  of  the  sacred  pyramid
on  the  top  of  which  he  was  to  die,  the  sacrificers  saluted
him  and  led  him  up  the  long  staircase.  On  the  summit
five  of  them  seized  him  and  held  him  down  on  his  back
upon  the  sacrificial  stone,  while  the  high  priest,  after  bowing

Mexicans  made  the    semblance    of    a  -  Oviedo,    Histoire    dtc    Nicaragua

bone    out   of   paste   and   ate    it   sacra-  (Paris,  1840),  p.  219.    Oviedo's  account

mentally    as    the    bone    of    the    god.  is  borrowed  by   Herrera  {General  His-

See  Sahagun,  op.  cit.  p.  33.  toiy  of  the  vast  Continent  and  Islands

1   Brasseur   de    Bourbourg,    op.    cit.  <7/"^wc;7Va,  trans,  by  Stevens,  iii.  301).
iii-  539-


Ill


ARICIAN  SACRAMENT  343


to  the  god  he  was  about  to  kill,  cut  open  his  breast  and  tore
out  the  throbbing  heart  with  the  accustomed  rites.  But
instead  of  being  kicked  down  the  staircase  and  sent  rolling
from  step  to  step  like  the  corpses  of  common  victims,  the
body  of  the  dead  god  was  carried  respectfully  down,  and  his
flesh,  chopped  up  small,  was  distributed  among  the  priests
and  nobles  as  a  blessed  food.  The  head,  being  severed  from
the  trunk,  was  preserved  in  a  sacred  place  along  with  the
white  and  grinning  skulls  of  all  the  other  victims  who  had
lived  and  died  in  the  character  of  the  god  Tetzcatlipoca.^

We  are  now  able  to  suggest  an  explanation  of  the  pro-
verb "There  are  many  Manii  at  Aricia."^  Certain  loaves
made  in  the  shape  of  men  were  called  by  the  Romans
maniac,  and  it  appears  that  this  kind  of  loaf  was  especially
made  at  Aricia.^  Now,  Mania,  the  name  of  one  of  these
loaves,  was  also  the  name  of  the  Mother  or  Grandmother  of
Ghosts,*  to  whom  woollen  effigies  of  men  and  women  were
dedicated  at  the  festival  of  the  Compitalia.  These  effigies
were  hunsf  at  the  doors  of  all  the  houses  in  Rome  ;  one
effigy  was  hung  up  for  every  free  person  in  the  house,  and
one  effigy,  of  a  different  kind,  for  every  slave.  The  reason
was  that  on  this  day  the  ghosts  of  the  dead  were  believed
to  be  going  about,  and  it  was  hoped  that  they  would  carry
off  the  effigies  at  the  door  instead  of  the  living  people  in  the
house.  According  to  tradition,  these  woollen  figures  were
substitutes  for  a  former  custom  of  sacrificing  human  beings.^
Upon  data  so  fragmentary  and  uncertain,  it  is  of  course
impossible  to  build  with  confidence ;  but  it  seems  worth
suggesting  that  the  loaves  in  human  form,  which  appear  to
have  been  baked  at  Aricia,  were  sacramental  bread,  and
that   in    the   old   days,  when    the  divine    King  of  the  Wood

1  Brasseur  de    Bourbourg,    op.    cit.  the    mother    or    grandmother    of    the

iii.  510-512.  lar-vae  ;   the  other  writers  speak  of  tlie

'-  See  above,  vol.  i.  p.  5  sq.  mother  of  the  lares.

■>  Festus,   ed.  Miiller,  pp.  128,  129,  ''  Macrobius,   I.e.;  Festiis,  pp.  121,

14-5.      The  reading  of  the  last  passage  239,    ed.    Miiller.      The   effigies    hung

is,    however,    uncertain    ("f/    Ariciae  up    for   the   slaves   were    called  pilae,

genus  paiini fieri  ;  quod  hiaiiici\ appel-  not  niaiiiae.      /V/rt6' was  also  the  name

letter").  given    to    the    straw-men   which    weie

■*  Varro,      De     ling.     lat.     ix.     61  ;  thrown    to   the    bulls    to    gore    in    the

Arnobius,     Adv.      nationes,     iii.     41  ;  arena.    See  Martial,  ^/4'';'.  ii.  43.  5  i;/. ;

Macrobius,   Saturn,  i.    7.   35  ;   Festus,  Asconius,  In  Cornel,  p.  55,  ed.  Kiess-

p.   128,  ed.  Miiller.      Festus  speaks  of  ling  and  Schoell.


344


EFFIGIES  AS  SUBSTITUTES


CHAP.


was  annually  slain,  loaves  were  made  in  his  image,  like  the
paste  figures  of  the  gods  in  Mexico,  and  were  eaten  sacra-
mentally  by  his  worshippers,^  The  Mexican  sacraments  in
honour  of  Huitzilopochtli  were  also  accompanied  by  the
sacrifice  of  human  victims.  The  tradition  that  the  founder
of  the  sacred  grove  at  Aricia  was  a  man  named  Manius,
from  whom  many  Manii  were  descended,  would  thus  be  an
etymological  myth  invented  to  explain  the  name  nianiae  as
applied  to  these  sacramental  loaves.  A  dim  recollection  of
the  original  connection  of  these  loaves  with  human  sacrifices
may  perhaps  be  traced  in  the  story  that  the  effigies  dedicated
to  Mania  at  the  Compitalia  were  substitutes  for  human
victims.  The  story  itself,  however,  is  probably  devoid  of
foundation,  since  the  practice  of  putting  up  dummies  to
divert  the  attention  of  ghosts  or  demons  from  living  people
is  not  uncommon.  As  the  practice  is  both  widely  spread
and  very  characteristic  of  the  manner  of  thought  of  primitive
man,  who  tries  in  a  thousand  ways  to  outwit  the  malice  of
spiritual  beings,  I  may  be  pardoned  for  devoting  a  few  pages
to  its  illustration,  even  though  in  doing  so  I  diverge  some-
what  from   the   strict    line   of  argument.      I    would   ask   the


1  The  ancients  were  at  least  familiar
with  the  practice  of  sacrificing  images
made  of  dough  or  other  materials  as
substitutes  for  the  animals  themselves.
It  was  a  recognised  principle  that
when  an  animal  could  not  be  easily
obtained  for  sacrifice,  it  was  lawful
to  offer  an  image  of  it  made  of  bread
or  wax  (Servius  on  Virgil,  Aen.  ii.
ii6;  cp.  Pausanias,  x.  i8.  5).
(Similarly  a  North -American  Indian
dreamed  that  a  sacrifice  of  twenty
elans  was  necessary  for  the  recovery
of  a  sick  girl  ;  but  the  elans  could  not
be  procured,  and  the  girl's  parents
were  allowed  to  sacrifice  twenty  loaves
instead.  Relations  dcs  Jesitites,  1636,
p.  II,  ed.  1858.)  Poor  people  who
could  not  afford  to  sacrifice  real
animals  offered  dough  images  of  them
(Suidas,  s.  v.  j3ovs  e/35o/xos  ;  cp.
Hesychius,  s.z'z'.  jSoOs,  ejioo/xos  (Bovs).
Hence  bakers  made  a  regular  business
of  baking  cakes  in  the  likeness  of  all
the  animals  which  were  sacrificed  to  the
gods   (Proculus,   quoted   and   emended


by  Lobeck,  Aglaopliauius,  p.  1079).
When  Cyzicus  was  besieged  by  Mithri-
dates  and  the  people  could  not  procure
a  black  cow  to  sacrifice  at  the  rites  of
Proserpine,  they  made  a  cow  of  dough
and  placed  it  at  the  altar  (Plutarch,
Lucii/hts,  10).  In  a  Boeotian  sacrifice
to  Hercules,  in  place  of  the  ram  which
was  the  proper  victim,  an  apple  was
regularly  substituted,  four  chips  being
stuck  in  it  to  represent  legs  and  two
to  represent  horns  (Pollux,  i.  30  sq.).
The  Athenians  are  said  to  have  once
offered  to  Hercules  a  similar  substitute
for  an  ox  (Zenobius,  Cent.  v.  22).  And
the  Locrians,  being  at  a  loss  for  an  ox
to  sacrifice,  made  one  out  of  figs  and
sticks,  and  offered  it  instead  of  the
animal  (Zenobius,  Cent.  v.  5).  At
the  Athenian  festival  of  the  Diasia
cakes  shaped  like  animals  were  sacri-
ficed (Schol.  on  Thucydides,  i.  126,
p.  36  ed.  Didot).  We  have  seen  above
(p.  306)  that  the  poorer  Egyptians
offered  cakes  of  dough  instead  of
pigs.


Ill  EFFIGIES  AS  SUBSTITUTES  345

reader  to  observe  that  the  vicarious  use  of  images,  with
which  we  are  here  concerned,  differs  wholly  in  principle  from
the  sympathetic  use  of  them  which  we  examined  before  ;  ^
and  that  while  the  sympathetic  use  belongs  purely  to  magic,
the  vicarious  use  falls  within  the  domain  of  religion.

It  is  well  known  that  the  spirits  of  persons  who  have
recently  departed  this  life  are  apt  to  carry  off  with  them  to
the  world  of  the  dead  the  souls  of  their  surviving  relations.
Hence  the  savage  resorts  to  the  device  of  making  up
dummies  or  effigies  which  he  puts  in  the  way  of  the  ghost,
hoping  that  the  dull-witted  spirit  will  mistake  them  for
real  people  and  so  leave  the  survivors  in  peace.  Hence  in
Tahiti  the  priest  who  performed  the  funeral  rites  used  to  lay
some  slips  of  plantain  leaf-stalk  on  the  breast  and  under  the
arms  of  the  corpse,  saying,  "  There  are  your  family,  there  is
your  child,  there  is  your  wife,  there  is  your  father,  and  there
is  your  mother.  Be  satisfied  yonder  (that  is,  in  the  world  of
spirits).  Look  not  towards  those  who  are  left  in  the  world."
This  ceremony,  we  are  told,  was  designed  "  to  impart  con-
tentment to  the  departed,  and  to  prevent  the  spirit  from
repairing  to  the  places  of  his  former  resort,  and  so  distressing
the  survivors."  ^  When  the  Galelareese  bury  a  corpse,  they
bury  with  it  the  stem  of  a  banana-tree  for  company,  in  order
that  the  dead  person  may  not  seek  a  companion  among  the
living.  Just  as  the  coffin  is  being  lowered  into  the  earth,
one  of  the  bystanders  steps  up  and  throws  a  young  banana-
tree  into  the  grave,  saying,  "  Friend,  you  must  miss  your
companions  of  this  earth  ;  here,  take  this  as  a  comrade."  ^
In  the  Banks  Islands,  Melanesia,  the  ghost  of  a  woman  who
has  died  in  childbed  cannot  go  away  to  Panoi  or  ghost-land
if  her  child  lives,  for  she  cannot  leave  the  baby  behind.
Hence  to  bilk  her  ghost  they  tie  up  a  piece  of  banana-
trunk  loosely  in  leaves  and  lay  it  on  her  bosom  in  the  grave.
So  away  she  goes,  thinking  she  has  her  baby  with  her,  and
as  she  goes  the  banana-stalk  keeps  slipping  about  in  the
leaves,  and   she   fancies   it  is  the  child  stirring  at  her  breast.

1  See  vol.  i.  p.  10  sqq.  Verhalen  en  Overleveringen  der  Galela-

^  W.    Ellis,    Polynesian  Researches,        reezer\,"  B/Jdragen  tot de  Taal- Land- en

i.  402.  Volkenkunde  vaii   Nederlandsch- Indie,

^  M.    J.    van     Baarda,  "  Fabelen,       xlv.  (1895),  p.  539.


346  EFFIGIES  AS  SUBSTITUTES  chap.

Thus  she  is  happy  till  she  comes  to  ghost-land  and  finds  she
has  been  deceived  ;  for  a  baby  of  banana-stalk  cannot  pass
muster  among  the  ghosts.  So  back  she  comes  tearing  in
grief  and  rage  to  look  for  the  child  ;  but  meantime  the  infant
has  been  artfully  removed  to  another  house,  where  the  dead
mother  cannot  find  it,  though  she  looks  for  it  everywhere  for
ever.^  In  the  Pelew  Islands,  when  a  woman  has  died  in
childbed,  her  spirit  comes  and  cries,  "  Give  me  the  child  !  "
So  to  beguile  her  they  bury  the  stem  of  a  young  banana-tree
with  her  body,  cutting  it  short  and  laying  it  between  her
right  arm  and  her  breast."^  The  same  device  is  adopted  for
the  same  purpose  in  the  island  of  Timor.^  In  like  circum-
stances negroes  of  the  Niger  Delta  force  a  piece  of  the  stem
of  a  plantain  into  the  womb  of  the  dead  mother,  in  order  to
make  her  think  that  she  has  her  babe  with  her  and  so  to
prevent  her  spirit  from  coming  back  to  claim  the  living  child.'*
Among  the  Yorubas  of  West  Africa,  when  one  of  twins  dies,
the  mother  carries  about,  along  with  the  surviving  child,  a
small  wooden  figure  roughly  fashioned  in  human  shape  and  of
the  sex  of  the  dead  twin.  This  figure  is  intended  not  merely
to  keep  the  live  child  from  pining  for  its  lost  comrade,  but
also  to  give  the  spirit  of  the  dead  child  something  into  which
it  can  enter  without  disturbing  its  little  brother  or  sister.''
Among  the  Tschwi  of  West  Africa  a  lady  observed  a  sickly
child  with  an  image  beside  it  which  she  took  for  a  doll.
But  it  was  no  doll,  it  was  an  image  of  the  child's  dead  twin
which  was  being  kept  near  the  survivor  as  a  habitation  for
the  dead  twin's  soul,  lest  it  should  wander  homeless  and,  feel-
ing lonely,  call  its  companion  away  after  it  along  the  darkling
road  of  death."  At  Onitsha,  a  village  on  the  left  bank  of  the
Niger,  a  missionary  once  met  a  funeral  procession  which  he
describes  as  very  singular.  The  real  body  had  already  been
buried   in   the  house,  but  a  piece  of  wood   in   the   form   of  a

^  K.'R.Cod.x'mgioUfTheMelantsians,  ■*  Le   Comte   C.  N.  de  Cardi,  "Ju-

p-  275.  ju    laws    and    customs    in    the    Niger

-J.     Kubary,    "Die     Religion     der  Y'>t\\^,''' Journal  of  the  Anthropological

Pelauer,"     in     Bastian's    Allerlei    aiis  Institute,  xxix.  (1899),  P-  5^-
Volks-  unci  Menschenhtinde,  i.  9.  -    .     t.    t^h-       t.t     t/       ,  ,  •

3  W.  M.  Donselaar,  "  Aanteekenin-  „  "  ^  ^l  f '?!    ^^t  ^'''-«^'«-'/^«^'".°-

,    .     •,      1  c  1   ••      '!   1/  J  J    7  J  copies  of  the  Slave  Least,  p.  00.
gen  over  net  eiland  baleijer,    Mededeel-  ■'        ■'  '  ^

ingen  van  ivege  het  Nederlandsche  Zen-  "  Miss    Mary    H.  Kingsley,   Travels

delinggenootschap,  i.  (1857),  p.  290.  ///  West  Africa,  p.  473.


Ill  EFFIGIES  AS  SUBSTITUTES  347

sofa  and  covered  up  was  being  borne  by  two  persons  on
their  heads,  attended  by  a  procession  of  six  men  and  six
women.  The  men  carried  cutlasses  and  the  women  clapped
their  hands  as  they  passed  along  each  street,  crying,  "  This
is  the  dead  body  of  him  that  is  dead,  and  is  gone  into  the
world  of  spirits."  Meantime  the  rest  of  the  villagers  had  to
keep  indoors.-*  The  sham  corpse  was  probably  intended  as
a  lure  to  draw  away  prowling  demons  from  the  real  body.
So  among  the  Angoni,  who  inhabit  the  western  bank  of
Lake  Nyassa,  there  is  a  common  belief  that  demons  hover
about  the  dying  and  dead  before  burial  in  order  to  snatch
away  their  souls  to  join  their  own  evil  order.  Guns  are
fired  and  drums  are  beaten  to  repel  these  spiritual  foes,
but  a  surer  way  of  baulking  their  machinations  is  to  have  a
mock  funeral  and  so  mislead  and  confound  them.  A  sham
corpse  is  made  up  out  of  anything  that  comes  to  hand,  and
it  is  treated  exactly  as  if  it  were  what  it  pretends  to  be.
This  lay  figure  is  then  carried  some  distance  to  a  grave,
followed  by  a  great  crowd  weeping  and  wailing  as  if  their
hearts  would  break,  while  the  rub-a-dub  of  drums  and  the
discharge  of  guns  add  to  the  uproar.  Meantime  the  real
corpse  is  being  interred  as  quietly  and  stealthily  as  possible
near  the  house.  Thus  the  demons  are  baffled  ;  for  when
the  dummy  corpse  has  been  laid  in  the  earth  with  every  mark
of  respect,  and  the  noisy  crowd  has  dispersed,  the  fiends  swoop
down  on  the  mock  grave  only  to  find  a  bundle  of  rushes  or
some  such  trash  in  it ;  but  the  true  grave  they  do  not  know
and  cannot  find."  Similarly  among  the  Bakundu  of  the
Cameroons  two  graves  are  always  made,  one  in  the  hut  of
the  deceased  and  another  somewhere  else,  and  no  one  knows
where  the  corpse  is  really  buried.  The  custom  is  apparently
intended  to  guard  the  knowledge  of  the  real  grave  from
demons,  who  might  make  an  ill  use  of  the  body,  if  not  of
the  soul,  of  the  departed.^  In  like  manner  the  Kamilaroi
tribe   of  Australia   are   reported   to   make  two  graves,  a  real

1   S.    Crowther    and    J.    C.    Taylor,  p.   114   sq.  ;    id.,  Myth  and  Keligion,

The  Gospel  on  the  banks  of  the  Niger,  p.     155    sq.   (from   MS.    notes    of   Dr.

p.  250  sq.  Elmslie).

^  J.     Macdonakl,     "  East      Central  •'  B.    Schwarz,    Kamertm    (Leipsic,

African     Customs,"    Journal    of     the  1886),  p.  256  j-^/.  ;   E.  Reclus,  A^(?«/6'e//e

Anthropological  Institute,  xxii.  (1893),  Geographie  Universelle,  xiii.  b%  sq.


348  EFFIGIES  AS  SUBSTITUTES  chap.

one  and  an  empty  one,  for  the  purpose  of  cheating  a  malevo-
lent spirit  called  Krooben.^  In  Bombay,  if  a  person  dies  on
an  unlucky  day,  a  dough  figure  of  a  man  is  carried  on  the
bier  with  him  and  burnt  with  his  corpse.  This  is  supposed
to  hinder  a  second  death  from  occurring  in  the  family,^
probably  because  the  demons  are  thought  to  take  the  dough
figure  instead  of  a  real  person.

Again,  effigies  are  often  employed  as  a  means  of  prevent-
ing or  curing  sickness  ;  the  demons  of  disease  either  mistake
the  effigies  for  living  people  or  are  persuaded  or  compelled
to  enter  them,  leaving  the  real  men  and  women  well  and
whole.  Thus  the  Alfoors  of  Minahassa,  in  Celebes,  will
sometimes  transport  a  sick  man  to  another  house,  while  they
leave  on  his  bed  a  dummy  made  up  of  a  pillow  and  clothes.
This  dummy  the  demon  is  supposed  to  mistake  for  the  sick
man,  who  consequently  recovers.^  Cure  or  prevention  of
this  sort  seems  to  find  especial  favour  with  the  Dyaks  of
Borneo.  Thus,  when  an  epidemic  is  raging  among  them,
the  Dyaks  of  the  Katoengouw  river  set  up  wooden  images
at  their  doors  in  the  hope  that  the  demons  of  the  plague
may  be  deluded  into  carrying  off"  the  effigies  instead  of  the
people.^  Among  the  Oloh  Ngadju  of  Borneo,  when  a  sick
man  is  supposed  to  be  suffering  from  the  assaults  of  a  ghost,
puppets  of  dough  or  rice-meal  are  made  and  thrown  under
the  house  as  substitutes  for  the  patient,  who  thus  rids  himself
of  the  ghost.  So  if  a  man  has  been  attacked  by  a  crocodile
and  has  contrived  to  escape,  he  makes  a  puppet  of  dough  or
meal  and  casts  it  into  the  water  as  a  vicarious  offering ;
otherwise  the  water  god,  who  is  conceived  in  the  shape  of  a
crocodile,  might  be  angry.'^  In  certain  of  the  western  dis-
tricts of  Borneo  if  a  man  is  taken  suddenly  and  violently
sick,  the  physician,  who  in  this  part  of  the  world  is  generally
an  old  woman,  fashions  a  wooden  image  and  brings  it  seven
times   into   contact  with  the  sufferer's  head,  while  she   says  :

^  J.  Fraser,  "  The  aborigines  of  New  *  P.  J.  Nq.\\\,  Borneo^ s  Wester- Af deel-

S,o\i\.\\V^a\Gs"/oui:aiidProc.R.Soc.of  /;/^  (Zaltbomniel,  1854-56),  ii.  309.

New  South  Wa/es,  xv\.  (1882),  p.  229.  ^  F.  Grabowsky,  "  Ueber    verschie-

^  Panjab  Notes  and  Queries,  ii.   p.  dene  weniger  bekannte   opfer  bei  den

39,  §  240.  Oloh     Ngadju     in      Borneo,"     Inter-

2  N.    Graafiand,    De  I\linahassa,    i.  nationales  Archiv  fiir  Ethiiographie,  i.

326.  (1888),  p.  132  sq.


in  EFFIGIES  AS  SUBSTITUTES  349

"  This  image  serves  to  take  the  place  of  the  sick  man  ;  sick-
ness, pass  over  into  the  image."  Then,  with  some  rice,  salt,
and  tobacco  in  a  little  basket,  the  substitute  is  carried  to  the
spot  where  the  evil  spirit  is  supposed  to  have  entered  into
the  man.  There  it  is  set  upright  on  the  ground,  after  the
physician  has  invoked  the  spirit  as  follows  :  "  O  devil,  here
is  an  image  which  stands  instead  of  the  sick  man.  Release
the  soul  of  the  sick  man  and  plague  the  image,  for  it  is
indeed  prettier  and  better  than  he."  Similar  substitutes  are
used  almost  daily  by  these  Dyaks  for  the  purpose  of  draw-
ing off  evil  influences  from  anybody's  person.  Thus  when
an  Ot  Danom  baby  will  not  stop  squalling,  its  maternal
grandmother  takes  a  large  leaf,  fashions  it  into  a  puppet  to
represent  the  child,  and  presses  it  against  the  infant's  body.
Having  thus  decanted  the  spirit,  so  to  speak,  from  the  baby
into  the  puppet,  she  pierces  the  effigy  with  little  arrows  from
a  blow-gun,  thereby  killing  the  spirit  that  had  vexed  her
child.^  Similarly  in  the  island  of  Dama,  between  New
Guinea  and  Celebes,  where  sickness  is  ascribed  to  the  agency
of  demons,  the  doctor  makes  a  doll  of  palm-leaf  and  lays  it,
together  with  some  betel,  rice,  and  half  of  an  empty  egg-
shell, on  the  patient's  head.  Lured  by  this  bait  the  demon
quits  the  sufferer's  body  and  enters  the  palm-leaf  doll,  which
the  wily  doctor  thereupon  promptly  decapitates.  This  may
be  supposed  to  make  an  end  of  the  demon  and  of  the  sickness
together.^  A  Dyak  sorcerer,  being  called  in  to  prescribe  for
a  little  boy  who  suffered  from  a  disorder  of  the  stomach,
constructed  two  effigies  of  the  boy  and  his  mother  out  of
bundles  of  clothes  and  offered  them,  together  with  some  of
the  parents'  finery,  to  the  devil  who  was  plaguing  the  child  ;
it  was  hoped  that  the  demon  would  take  the  effigies  and
leave  the  boy.^  Batta  magicians  can  conjure  the  demon  of
disease  out  of  the  patient's  body  into  an  image  made  out  of
a  banana-tree  with  a  human   face  and  wrapt  up  in  magic

1  E.    L.    M.    Kiihr,    "  Schetsen    uit  i.  p.  267  sg.
Borneo's  Westerafdeeling,"  Bijdragen  2  j_    q_    jr_    Riedel,    De   slink-  en-
tot   de     Taal-    Laftd-   en     Volkenkunde  kroesharige  rassen  tusschen  Selebes  en
van  Nederlandsch-hidie,  xlvii.   (1897),  Papua,  p.  465.

p.  60  sq.      For  another  mode  in  which  ^  w    Ling  Roth,  "  Low's  Natives  of

these  same  Dyaks  seek  to  heal  sickness  ^oxmo,'''  Journal  of  the  Anthropological

by  means  of  an  image,  see  above,  vol.  Institute,  xxi.  (1892),  p.  117.


350  EFFIGIES  AS  SUBSTEfUTES  chap.

herbs  ;  the    image    is    then    hurriedly   removed    and    thrown
away  or  buried  beyond  the  boundaries  of  the  village.^

In  the  island  of  Nias  people  fear  that  the  spirits  of
murdered  infants  may  come  and  cause  women  with  child  to
miscarry.  To  divert  the  unwelcome  attention  of  these  sprites
from  a  pregnant  woman  an  elaborate  mechanism  has  been  con-
trived. A  potent  idol  called  Fangola  is  set  up  beside  her  bed
to  guard  her  slumbers  during  the  hours  of  darkness  from  the
evil  things  that  might  harm  her  ;  another  idol,  connected
with  the  first  by  a  chain  of  palm-leaves,  is  erected  in  the  large
room  of  the  house  ;  and  lastly  a  small  banana-tree  is  planted
in  front  of  the  second  idol.  The  notion  is  that  the  sprites,
scared  away  by  the  watchful  Fangola  from  the  sleeping
woman,  will  scramble  along  the  chain  of  palm-leaves  to  the
other  idol,  and  then,  beholding  the  banana-tree,  will  mistake
it  for  the  woman  they  were  looking  for,  and  so  pounce  upon
it  instead  of  her."-^  In  Bhutan,  when  the  Lamas  make  noisy
music  to  drive  away  the  demon  who  is  causing  disease,  little
models  of  animals  are  fashioned  of  flour  and  butter  and  the
evil  spirit  is  implored  to  enter  these  models,  which  are  then
burnt.^  A  Burmese  mode  of  curing  a  sick  man  is  to  bury  a
small  effigy  of  him  in  a  tiny  coffin,  after  which  he  ought
certainly  to  recover.^  In  Siam,  when  a  person  is  dangerously
ill,  the  magician  models  a  small  image  of  him  in  clay  and
carrying  it  away  to  a  solitary  place  recites  charms  over  it
which  compel  the  malady  to  pass  from  the  sick  man  into  the
image.  The  sorcerer  then  buries  the  image,  and  the  sufferer
is  made  whole.''  So,  too,  in  Cambodia  the  doctor  fashions
a  rude  effigy  of  his  patient  in  clay  and  deposits  it  in  some
lonely  spot,  where  the  ghost  or  demon  takes  it  instead  of  the
man.*^  The  same  ideas  and  the  same  practices  prevail  much
further  to  the  north  among  the  tribes  on  the  lower  course  of
the  River  Amoor.      When   a  Goldi  or   a  Gilyak  shaman  has

1  B.  Hagen,  "  Beitragezur  Kenntniss  Brahinapiitra  (Berlin,  1883),  p.  73.
der     Battareligion,"     Tijdschrift    voor  *  Shway  Yoe,  The  Bnrma7i/\\.  138.
Indische  Taal-  Land-  en  Volkenkiinde,  ^  Pallegoix,  Description  du  Royauine
xxviii.  (1883),  p.  531.  Thai  071  Siam,  ii.  48  j^.      Compare  A.

2  Fr.    Kramer,    "Der   Gotzendienst  Bastian,  Z>/<;  Volker  des  ostlichen  Asieti,
der  Niasser,"  Tijdschrift  voor  Indische  iii.  293,486;  E.  Young,  The  Kingdom
Taal-  Land-    en    Volkenkunde,    xxxiii.  of  the  Yellow  Robe,  p.   12 1.
(1890),  p.  489.  ''  J.    Moura,  Le  Royaume  du  Cam-


3


A.  Bastian,  Die  Vblkerstdmme  am       bodge,  i.  176.


Ill  EFFIGIES  AS  SUBSTITUTES  351

cast  out  the  devil  that  caused  disease,  an  abode  has  to  be
provided  for  the  homeless  devil,  and  this  is  done  by  making
a  wooden  idol  in  human  form  of  which  the  ejected  demon
takes  possession/  In  Corea  effigies  are  employed  on  much
the  same  principle  for  the  purpose  of  prolonging  life.  On
the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  day  of  the  first  month  all  men
and  women  born  under  the  Jen  or  "  Man"  star  make  certain
straw  imaees  dressed  in  clothes  and  containing  a  number  of
the  copper  "  cash  "  which  form  the  currency  of  the  country.
Strictly  speaking,  there  should  be  as  many  "  cash  "  in  the
image  as  the  person  whom  it  represents  has  lived  years  ;  but
the  rule  is  not  strictly  observed.  These  images  are  placed
on  the  path  outside  the  house,  and  the  poor  people  seize
them  and  tear  them  up  in  order  to  get  the  "  cash  "  which  they
contain.  The  destruction  of  the  image  is  supposed  to  save
the  person  represented  from  death  for  ten  years.  Accord-
ingly the  ceremony  need  only  be  performed  once  in  ten
years,  though  some  people  from  excess  of  caution  appear  to
observe  it  annually."  Among  the  Nishga  Indians  of  British
Columbia  when  a  medicine -man  dreams  a  dream  which
portends  death  to  somebody,  he  informs  the  person  whose
life  is  threatened,  and  together  they  concert  measures  to
avert  the  evil  omen.  The  man  whose  life  is  at  stake  has
a  small  wooden  figure  called  a  sJiigigiadsqu  made  as  like
himself  as  the  skill  of  the  wood-carver  will  allow,  and  this
he  hangs  round  his  neck  by  a  string  so  that  the  figure  lies
exactly  over  his  heart.  In  this  position  he  wears  it  long
enough  to  allow  the  heat  of  his  body  to  be  imparted  to
it,  generally  for  about  four  days.  On  the  fourth  day  the
medicine-man  comes  to  the  house,  arrayed  in  his  bearskin
and  other  insignia,  of  office  and  bringing  with  him  a  wisp  of
teased  bark  and  a  toy  canoe  made  of  cedar-bark.  Thus
equipped,  he  sings  a  doleful  ditty,  the  death-song  of  the
tribe.  Then  he  washes  the  man  over  the  region  of  the
heart  with  the  wisp  of  bark  dipped  in  water,  places  the  wisp,
together  with  the  wooden  image,  in  the  canoe,  and  after  again

1  A.    Woldt,    "Die   Kultus-gegen-  "-  T.      WaUers,      "Some      Corean

stiinde    der    Golden    und    Giljaken,"  Customs  and  Notions,"  Folk-lore,   vi.

Internationales    Archiv    fiir     Ethno-  (1895),  p.  825^7.
g7-ap/ne,  i.  (1888),  p.  102  sg.


352


EFFIGIES  AS  SUBSTITUTES


CHAP.


singing  the  death-chant,  commits  image,  wisp,  and  canoe  to
the  flames,  where  they  are  all  consumed.  The  death-chant
is  now  changed  to  a  song  of  joy,  and  the  man  who  was
lately  in  fear  of  his  life  joins  in.  He  may  well  be  gay,
for  has  he  not  given  death  the  slip  by  devoting  to  destruc-
tion, not  merely  a  wisp  saturated  with  the  dangerous  defile-
ment of  his  body,  but  also  a  substitute  made  in  his  own
likeness  and  impregnated  with  his  very  heart's  warmth  ?  ^

With  these  examples  before  us  we  may  fairly  conclude
that  the  woollen  effigies,  which  at  the  festival  of  the
Compitalia  might  be  seen  hanging  at  the  doors  of  all  the
houses  in  ancient  Rome,  were  not  substitutes  for  human
victims  who  had  formerly  been  sacrificed  at  this  season,  but
rather  vicarious  offerings  presented  to  the  Mother  or  Grand-
mother of  Ghosts,  in  the  hope  that  on  her  rounds  through
the  city  she  would  accept  or  mistake  the  effigies  for  the
inmates  of  the  house  and  so  spare  the  living  for  another
year.  It  is  possible  that  the  puppets  made  of  rushes,  which
were  annually  thrown  into  the  Tiber  from  the  old  Sublician
bridge  at  Rome,  had  originally  the  same  significance,  though
other  and  perhaps  more  probable  explanations  of  the  custom
have  been  put  forward."  But  it  is  time  to  return  from  this
digression  to  the  custom  of  eating  a  god.

The  practice  of  killing  the  god  has  now  been  traced
amongst  peoples  who  have  reached  the  agricultural  stage  of
society.  We  have  seen  that  the  spirit  of  the  corn,  or  of
other  cultivated  plants,  is  commonly  represented  either  in
human  or  in  animal  form,  and  that  a  custom  has  prevailed  of
killing  annually  either  the  human  or  the  animal  representative
of  the  god.  The  reason  for  thus  killing  the  corn-spirit  in
the  person  of  his  representative  has  been  given  implicitly  in
the  earlier  part  of  this  chapter.  But,  further,  we  have  found
a  widespread  custom  of  eating  the  god  sacramentally,  either
in  the  shape  of  the   man  or  animal  who  represents  the  god,


1  The  Illustrated  Missionary  News,
April  1st,  1 89 1,  p.  59  sq.

2  As  to  the  custom  see  Varro,  De
lingua  latina,  v.  44  ;  Ovid,  Fasti,  v.
621  sqq.  ;  Dionysius  Halicainasensis,
Antiquit.  Rom.  i.  38.  For  various
explanations  which  have  been  proposed,
see  L.   Preller,  Romische  Alythologie,^


ii.  134  sqq.  ;  W.  Mannhardt,  Antike
Wald-  tend  Feldkulte,  p.  265  sqq.  ;
Journal  of  Philology,  xiv.  (1885),
p.  156  note;  W.  Warde  Fovi^ler,  The
Roman  Festivals  of  the  period  of  the
Republic  (London,  1899),  p.  111  sqq.
The  ceremony  was  observed  on  thp
fifteenth  of  May.


Ill  STRONG  FOOD  353

or  in  the  shape  of  bread  made  in  human  or  animal  form.
The  reasons  for  thus  partaking  of  the  body  of  the  god  are,
from  the  primitive  standpoint,  simple  enough.  The  savage
commonly  believes  that  by  eating  the  flesh  of  an  animal  or
man  he  acquires  not  only  the  physical,  but  even  the  moral
and  intellectual  qualities  which  were  characteristic  of  that
animal  or  man.  To  take  examples.  The  Creeks,  Cherokees,
and  kindred  tribes  of  North  American  Indians  "  believe  that
nature  is  possessed  of  such  a  property,  as  to  transfuse  into
men  and  animals  the  qualities,  either  of  the  food  they  use,
or  of  those  objects  that  are  presented  to  their  senses  ;  he
who  feeds  on  venison  is,  according  to  their  physical  system,
swifter  and  more  sagacious  than  the  man  who  lives  on  the
flesh  of  the  clumsy  bear,  or  helpless  dunghill  fowls,  the  slow-
footed  tame  cattle,  or  the  heavy  wallowing  swine.  This  is
the  reason  that  several  of  their  old  men  recommend,  and  say,
that  formerly  their  greatest  chieftains  observed  a  constant
rule  in  their  diet,  and  seldom  ate  of  any  animal  of  a  gross
quality,  or  heavy  motion  of  body,  fancying  it  conveyed  a
dulness  through  the  whole  system,  and  disabled  them  from
exerting  themselves  with  proper  vigour  in  their  martial,  civil,
and  religious  duties."  ^  The  Zaparo  Indians  of  South
America  "  will,  unless  from  necessity,  in  most  cases  not  eat
any  heavy  meats,  such  as  tapir  and  peccary,  but  confine
themselves  to  birds,  monkeys,  deer,  fish,  etc.,  principally
because  they  argue  that  the  heavier  meats  make  them
unwieldy,  like  the  animals  who  supply  the  flesh,  impeding
their  agility,  and  unfitting  them  for  the  chase."  '^

Certain  tribes  on  the  Upper  Zambesi  believe  in  trans-
migration, and  every  man  in  his  lifetime  chooses  the  kind  of
animal  wh6se  body  he  wishes  to  enter.  He  then  performs
an  initiatory  rite,  which  consists  in  swallowing  the  maggots
bred  in  the  putrid  carcass  of  the  animal  of  his  choice  ;
thenceforth  he  partakes  of  that  animal's  nature.  And  on
the  occasion  of  a  calamity,  while  the  women  are  giving  them-
selves up  to  lamentation,  you  will  see  one  man  writhing  on
the   ground    like  a    boa   constrictor  or  a  crocodile,  another

1  James     Adair,     History     of    the       WilJs  of  Ecuador  (London,  1887),  p.
American  Indians,  p.   133.  168  ;  id.,   in  Journal  of  the  Anthrop.

2  Alfred    Simson,     Travels    in    the       Institute,  vii.  (1878),  p.  503.

VOL.   II  2  A


354  EATING  ANIMALS  chap.

howling  and  leaping  like  a  panther,  a  third  baying  like  a
jackal,  roaring  like  a  lion,  or  grunting  like  a  hippopotamus,
all  of  them  imitating  the  characters  of  the  various  animals  to
perfection.-^  Clearly  these  people  imagine  that  the  soul  or
vital  essence  of  the  animal  is  manifested  in  the  maggots  bred
in  its  decaying  carcass  ;  hence  they  imagine  that  by  swallow-
ing the  maggots  they  imbue  themselves  with  the  very  life
and  spirit  of  the  creature  which  they  desire  to  become.  The
Namaquas  abstain  from  eating  the  flesh  of  hares,  because
they  think  it  would  make  them  faint-hearted  as  a  hare.
But  they  eat  the  flesh  of  the  lion,  or  drink  the  blood  of  the
leopard  or  lion,  to  get  the  courage  and  strength  of  these
beasts.^  The  flesh  of  the  lion  and  also  that  of  the  spotted
leopard  are  sometimes  cooked  and  eaten  by  native  warriors
in  South-Eastern  Africa,  who  hope  thereby  to  become  as
brave  as  lions.^  When  a  Zulu  army  assembles  to  go  forth
to  battle,  the  warriors  eat  slices  of  meat  which  is  smeared
with  a  powder  made  of  the  dried  flesh  of  various  animals,
such  as  the  leopard,  lion,  elephant,  snakes,  and  so  on  ;  for
thus  it  is  thought  that  the  soldiers  will  acquire  the  bravery
and  other  warlike  qualities  of  these  animals.  Sometimes  if
a  Zulu  has  killed  a  wild  beast,  for  instance  a  leopard,  he
will  give  his  children  the  blood  to  drink,  and  will  roast  the
heart  for  them  to  eat,  expecting  that  they  will  thus  grow
up  brave  and  daring  men.  But  others  say  that  this  is
dangerous,  because  it  is  apt  to  produce  courage  without
prudence,  and  to  make  a  man  rush  heedlessly  on  his  death.*
Among  the  Wabondei  of  Eastern  Africa  the  heart  of  a  lion
or  leopard  is  eaten  with  the  intention  of  making  the  eater
strong  and  brave.^  In  British  Central  Africa  aspirants  after
courage  consume  the  flesh  and  especially  the  hearts  of  lions,
while   lecherous    persons  eat   the  testicles  of  goats.''      Arab

1  A.  Bertrand,   The  Kingdom  of  the  174;    id,,    m.  Journal  of  the  Anthro-
Barotsi,     Upper    Zambezia    (London,  pological Institute,  xix.  (1890),  p.  282.
1899),  p.  277,  quoting  the  description  *  Callaway,  Religions  System  of  the
given    by   the    French    missionary    M.  Amazidu,  p.  438,  note  16.
Coillard.  ^  O.  Baumann,  Usamhara  u)id  seine

9  ™,        ,.,       „  ,        rj.       .  ,,  ^  Nachhargebiete  (Berlin,   1891),  p.   128.

2  Theophilus  Hahn   J..O.HI  (7^^'«,  6  sir     H.     H.     Johnston,     British
the  Supreme  Being  of  the  Rhot-Khot,       ^^^^^^^^    ^^^.^^    (London,    1897),    P-

^'  '°   ■  438  ;   J.    Buchanan,  The  Shire  High-

3  J.  Macdonald,  Light  in  Africa,  p.       lands,  p.  138.


Ill  TO  GET  THEIR  QUALITIES  355

women  in  North  Africa  give  their  male  children  a  piece  of
a  lion's  heart  to  eat  to  make  them  fearless.^  The  flesh  of  an
elephant  is  thought  by  the  Ewe-speaking  peoples  of  West
Africa  to  make  the  eater  strong.^  When  a  serious  disease
has  attacked  a  Zulu  kraal,  the  medicine-man  takes  the  bone
of  a  very  old  dog,  or  the  bone  of  an  old  cow,  bull,  or  other
very  old  animal,  and  administers  it  to  the  healthy  as  well  as
to  the  sick  people,  in  order  that  they  may  live  to  be  as  old
as  the  animal  of  whose  bone  they  have  partaken.^  So  to
restore  the  aged  Aeson  to  youth,  the  witch  Medea  infused
into  his  veins  a  decoction  of  the  liver  of  the  long-lived  deer
and  the  head  of  a  crow  that  had  outlived  nine  generations
of  men.'*  In  antiquity  the  flesh  of  deer  and  crows  was
eaten  for  other  purposes  than  that  of  prolonging  life.  As
deer  were  supposed  not  to  suffer  from  fever,  some  women
used  to  taste  venison  every  morning,  and  it  is  said  that  in
consequence  they  lived  to  a  great  age  without  ever  being
attacked  by  a  fever  ;  only  the  venison  lost  all  its  virtue  if
the  animal  had  been  killed  by  more  blows  than  one.^  Again,
ancient  diviners  sought  to  imbue  themselves  with  the  spirit
df^)rophecy  by  swallowing  vital  portions  of  birds  and  beasts
of  omen  ;  for  example,  they  thought  that  by  eating  the  hearts
of  crows  or  moles  or  hawks  they  took  into  their  bodies,
along  with  the  flesh,  the  prophetic  soul  of  the  creature.*^

Amongst  the  Dyaks  of  North-West  Borneo  young  men
and  warriors  may  not  eat  venison,  because  it  would  make
them  as  timid  as  deer  ;  but  the  women  and  very  old  men
are  free  to  eat  it.''  When  the  Kansas  Indians  were  eoinsf  to
war,  a  feast  used  to  be   held    in    the   chief's  hut,  and    the

^  J.    Shooter,    The  Kafirs  of  Natal  ^  Pliny,  Nat.  Hist.  viii.  119.

and  the  Zulu  Coimtry,  p.  399.  «  Porphyry,  De  Abstineutia,  v.  48  :

2   A.    B.    Ellis,    The    Ewe -speaking  °'  X^"   '^^^^l^'^^J^x^^^    V^'X^   Sr^aadat

Peoples    of  the    Slave    Coast   of    West  Z^""^''/^^'""    ^f    '<^^^^^h    ™,   /c.-pccrara

^/...v^    ^    ^r^  l^^pi-o.  KaTawLOvTes,  olov  KapOLas  KopaKuv

jijrica,  p.  99.  ,,   ,  ,         ,1  .      /  ,;

rj  a.(siya.KaK(jiv  y)  if.paKijiv,ixovanrafi!.ov(jav

Callaway,   Nursery   Tales,    Tradi-  rrjv   ^vxw    Kal    xpV/^ari^ovaau    Jjs    debv

tions,    and  Histories   of  the  Zulus,  p.  ^.^x  daiovaav  eh  avrovs  dfxa  rrj  evdiaec

175  note.  ^yj  ^oj}   ffjjfiaros.      Pliny  also  mentions

*  Ovid,    Melatn.    vii.    271   sqq.      As  the    custom    of   eating  the    heart  of  a

to  the  supposed  longevity  of  deer  and  mole,  raw  and  palpitating,  as  a  means

crows,    see    L.    Stephani,    in     Compte  of  acquiring  skill   in   divination   {Nat.

Rendu  de  la  Commission  Archiologique  Hist.  xxx.  19).

(St.    Petersburg),    1863,    p.    140   sq.,  '^  St.  ]o\m,  Life  in  the  Forests  of  the

and  my  note  on  Pausanias,  viii.   10.  lO.  Far  East,'^\.  186,206.

('
I


356  EATING  ANIMALS  chap.

principal  dish  was  dog's  flesh,  because,  said  the  Indians,  the
animal  who  is  so  brave  that  he  will  let  himself  be  cut  in
pieces  in  defence  of  his  master,  must  needs  inspire  valour.^
Men  of  the  Buro  and  Aru  Islands,  East  Indies,  eat  the  flesh
of  dogs  in  order  to  be  bold  and  nimble  in  war.-^  Amongst
the  Papuans  of  the  Port  Moresby  and  Motumotu  districts,
New  Guinea,  young  lads  eat  strong  pig,  wallaby,  and  large
fish,  in  order  to  acquire  the  strength  of  the  animal  or  fish.^
Some  of  the  natives  of  Northern  Australia  fancy  that  by
eating  the  flesh  of  the  kangaroo  or  emu  they  are  enabled
to  jump  or  run  faster  than  before.'*  The  Miris  of  Northern
India  prize  tiger's  flesh  as  food  for  men  ;  it  gives  them
strength  and  courage.  But  "  it  is  not  suited  for  women  ;  it
would  make  them  too  strong-minded."'^  In  Corea  the
bones  of  tigers  fetch  a  higher  price  than  those  of  leopards
as  a  means  of  inspiring  courage.  A  Chinaman  in  Soul
bought  and  ate  a  whole  tiger  to  make  himself  brave  and
fierce.*"  The  special  seat  of  courage,  according  to  the
Chinese,  is  the  gall-bladder ;  so  they  sometimes  procure
the  gall-bladders  of  tigers  and  bears,  and  eat  the  bile  in
the  belief  that  it  will  give  them  courage.'^  In  Norse  history,
Ingiald,  son  of  King  Aunund,  was  timid  in  his  youth,  but
after  eating  the  heart  of  a  wolf  he  became  very  bold  ;  and
Hialto  gained  strength  and  courage  by  eating  the  heart  of
a  bear  and  drinking  its  blood.^  So  the  Similkameen
Indians  of  British  Columbia  imagine  that  to  eat  the  heart  of
a  bear  inspires  courage.'*  In  Morocco  lethargic  patients  are
given  ants  to  swallow  ;  and  to  eat  lion's  flesh  will  make  a
coward  brave.-^*^      When  a  child  is  late  in  learning  to   speak,

^  Bossu,     Nouveaux     Voyages    aiix  ^  J.  Henderson,  "The  Medicine  and

Indes    occidentales    (Paris,     1768),     i.  Medical  Practice  of  the  Chinese,  "/"<?«<>-».

112.  North  China  Branch  R.  Asiatic  Society,

-  Riedel,   De   sluilz-  en   kroesharige  New  Series,  i.  (Shanghai,  1865),  p.  35

rassen  tiisschen  Selebes  en  Papua,  pp.  sq.      Compare  Mrs.  Bishop,  Korea  and

10,  262.  her  Neighbours  (London,  1898),  i.  79.

3  James    Chalmers,    Pioneering    in  *  Miiller    on     Saxo     Grammaticus,

Neiv  Guinea,  p.   166.  vol.  ii.  p.  60.

^Journal    of    tlie     Anthropological  '^    Mrs.    S.    S.    Allison,    "Account

Institute,  xxiv.  (1895),  p.   179.  of  the  Similkameen  Indians  of  British

"'  Dalton,    EtJinology  of  Bengal,    p.  Q.o\\i.vci}a\z.,''''  Jouriml  of  the   Anthropo-

33.  logical  Institttte,yix\.  (1892),  p.  313.

^  Proceedings  Royal   Geogr.  Society,  ^^  Leared,   Morocco   and   the   Moors

N.S.,  viii.  (1886),  p.  307.  (London,  1876),  p.  28 1.


Ill  TO  GET  THEIR  QUALITIES  357

the  Turks  of  Central  Asia  will  give  it  the  tongues  of  certain
birds  to  eat.^  A  North  American  Indian  thought  that
brandy  must  be  a  decoction  of  hearts  and  tongues,  "  because,"
said  he,  "  after  drinking  it  I  fear  nothing,  and  I  talk  wonder-
fully." ^  In  Java  there  is  a  tiny  earthworm  which  now  and
then  utters  a  shrill  sound  like  that  of  the  alarum  of  a  small
clock.  Hence  when  a  public  dancing  girl  has  screamed
herself  hoarse  in  the  exercise  of  her  calling,  the  leader  of
the  troop  makes  her  eat  some  of  these  worms,  in  the  belief
that  thus  she  will  regain  her  voice  and  will,  after  swallowing
them,  be  able  to  scream  as  shrilly  as  ever.^  The  people  of
Darfur,  in  Central  Africa,  think  that  the  liver  is  the  seat  of
the  soul,  and  that  a  man  may  enlarge  his  soul  by  eating
the  liver  of  an  animal.  "  Whenever  an  animal  is  killed  its
liver  is  taken  out  and  eaten,  but  the  people  are  most  careful
not  to  touch  it  with  their  hands,  as  it  is  considered  sacred  ;
it  is  cut  up  in  small  pieces  and  eaten  raw,  the  bits  being
conveyed  to  the  mouth  on  the  point  of  a  knife,  or  the  sharp
point  of  a  stick.  Any  one  who  may  accidentally  touch  the
liver  is  strictly  forbidden  to  partake  of  it,  which  prohibition
is  regarded  as  a  great  misfortune  for  him."  Women  are  not
allowed  to  eat  liver,  because  they  have  no  soul.^

Again,  the  flesh  and  blood  of  men  are  commonly  eaten
and  drunk  to  inspire  bravery,  wisdom,  or  other  qualities
for  which  the  men  themselves  were  remarkable,  or  which
are  supposed  to  have  their  special  seat  in  the  particular  part
eaten.  Thus  among  the  mountain  tribes  of  South-Eastern
Africa  there  are  ceremonies  by  which  the  youths  are  formed
into  guilds  or  lodges,  and  among  the  rites  of  initiation  there
is  one  which  is  intended  to  infuse  courage,  intelligence,  and
other  qualities  into  the  novices.  Whenever  an  enemy  who
has  behaved  with  conspicuous  bravery  is  killed,  his  liver,
which  is  considered  the  seat  of  valour  ;  his  ears,  which  are
supposed  to  be  the  seat  of  intelligence  ;  the  skin  of  his
forehead,  which  is  regarded  as  the  seat  of  perseverance  ;  his

1  Vambery.  Z?(7j  7'«;-/fY;/T'i)//t  (Leipsic,       natuur,"    Internationales    Archiv   fur
1885),  p.  218.  Ethnographic,  vii.  (1894),  p.   140  .f^.

2  ^,     ,.„.,.,,     ,.        ,,  *  Felkin,  "  Notes  on  the  For  tribe
'■  (^hanevnw, /Jistotri  ae  la  ISIonvclle         r  r-     ,     1    Ar  •      ?>    d  j-  ,„^  „f  ti,^

.    „     '  of  Central  Africa,     Proceedings  of  the

J^rance,  vi.  8.  ^^.^^,^^  ^^^_.^^_^^  of  Edinburgh,  xiii.  ( 1 884-

3  P.    J.   Veth,  "De    leer    der    Sig-        1886),  p.  218.


358  EATING  MEN  chap.

testicles,  which  are  held  to  be  the  seat  of  strength  ;  and
other  members,  which  are  viewed  as  the  seat  of  other  virtues,
are  cut  from  his  body  and  baked  to  cinders.  The  ashes
are  carefully  kept  in  the  horn  of  a  bull,  and,  during  the
ceremonies  observed  at  circumcision,  are  mixed  with  other
ingredients  into  a  kind  of  paste,  which  is  administered  by  the
tribal  priest  to  the  youths.  By  this  means  the  strength,
valour,  intelligence,  and  other  virtues  of  the  slain  are  believed
to  be  imparted  to  the  eaters.'^  When  Basutos  of  the  moun-
tains have  killed  a  very  brave  foe,  they  immediately  cut  out
his  heart  and  eat  it,  because  this  is  supposed  to  give  them  his
courage  and  strength  in  battle.  At  the  close  of  the  war  the
man  who  has  slain  such  a  foe  is  called  before  the  chief  and
gets  from  the  doctor  a  medicine  which  he  chews  with  his  food.
The  third  day  after  this  he  must  wash  his  body  in  running
water,  and  at  the  expiry  of  ten  days  he  may  return  to  his
wives  and  children.'^  So  an  Ovambo  warrior  in  battle  will
tear  out  the  heart  of  his  slain  foe  in  the  belief  that  by  eating
it  he  can  acquire  the  bravery  of  the  dead  man.^  A  similar
belief  and  practice  prevail  among  some  of  the  tribes  of
British  Central  Africa,  notably  among  the  Angoni.  These
tribes  also  mutilate  the  dead  and  reduce  the  severed  parts  to
ashes.  Afterwards  the  ashes  are  stirred  into  a  broth  or  gruel,
"  which  must  be  '  lapped '  up  with  the  hand  and  thrown
into  the  mouth,  but  not  eaten  as  ordinary  food  is  taken,
to  give  the  soldiers  courage,  perseverance,  fortitude,  strategy,
patience  and  wisdom."  *  It  is  said  that  the  Amazons  of
Dahomey  still  eat  the  hearts  of  foes  remarkable  for  their
bravery,  in  order  that  some  of  the  intrepidity  which
animated  them  may  be  transfused  into  the  eaters.  In
former  days,  if  report  may  be  trusted,  the  hearts  of  enemies
who  enjoyed  a  reputation  for  sagacity  were  also  eaten,  for
the    Ewe-speaking    negro    of  these    regions    holds    that    the

^  J.  Macdonald,  "Manners,  customs,  ^  H.     Schinz,     Deutsch-     Siidwesi-

etc,    of    the    South     African    tribes,"  Afrika,  p.  320.
Jotirnal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute,

XX.    (1 89 1),    p.     116;     id.,    light    in  *  J.      Macdonald,      "East     Central

Africa, -p.  212.      Compare  Casalis,  77;^?  African  Customs,"  foi/rna/ of  the  A n-

Bastitos,  p.  257  sq.  thropological  Institute,  xxii.   (1893),  p.

^  J.  Macdonald,  m  Joiirn.  Anthrop.  ill.     Compare  J.  Buchanan,  The  Shire

Inst.  XX.  (1 891),  p.  138  ;  id.,  Light  in  Highlands,-^.  138;  Sir  H.  H.  Johnston,

Africa,  p.  220.  British  Central  Africa,  p.  438.


Ill


TO  GET  THEIR  QUALITIES


359


heart  Is  the  seat  of  the  intellect  as  well  as  of  courage,^
Among  the  Yoruba-speaking  negroes  of  the  Slave  Coast
the  priests  of  Ogun,  the  war-god,  usually  take  out  the
hearts  of  human  victims,  which  are  then  dried,  crumbled  to
powder,  mixed  with  rum,  and  sold  to  aspirants  after  courage,
who  swallow  the  mixture  in  the  belief  that  they  thereby
absorb  the  manly  virtue  of  which  the  heart  is  supposed  to
be  the  seat.^  Similarly  Indians  of  the  Orinoco  region  used
to  toast  the  hearts  of  their  enemies,  grind  them  to  powder,
and  then  drink  the  powder  in  a  liquid  in  order  to  be  brave
and  valiant  the  next  time  they  went  forth  to  fight.^  The
Nauras  Indians  of  New  Granada  ate  the  hearts  of  Spaniards
when  they  had  the  opportunity,  hoping  thereby  to  make
themselves  as  dauntless  as  the  dreaded  Castilian  chivalry.^

But  while  the  human  heart  is  thus  commonly  eaten
for  the  sake  of  imbuing  the  eater  with  the  qualities  of
its  original  owner,  it  is  not,  as  we  have  already  seen,
the  only  part  of  the  body  which  is  consumed  for  this
purpose.  The  Australian  Kamilaroi  eat  the  liver  as  well  as
the  heart  of  a  brave  man  to  get  his  courage.^  With  the
like  intent  the  Chinese  swallow  the  bile  of  notorious  bandits
who  have  been  executed.*'  The  Italones  of  the  Philippine
Islands  drink  the  blood  of  their  slain  enemies,  and  eat
part  of  the  back  of  their  heads  and  of  their  entrails  raw  to
acquire  their  courage.  For  the  same  reason  the  Efugaos,
another  tribe  of  the  Philippines,  suck  the  brains  of  their
foes.'  Among  the  Dieri  tribe  of  Central  Australia,  when  a
man  has  been  condemned  and  killed  by  a  properly  con-
stituted party  of  executioners,  the  weapons  with  which  the
deed  was  done  are  washed  in  a  small  wooden  vessel,  and
the   bloody  mixture  is  administered  to  all   the    slayers   in    a


^  A.  B.  Ellis,  The  Ewe-speaking
Peoples  of  the  Slave  Coast,  p.  99  sq.

^  Id.,  The  Yoruba-speaking  Peoples
of  the  Slave  Coast,  p.  69.

^  A.  Caulin,  Historia  Coro-graphica
natural  y  evangelica  dela  Nueva  Anda-
hicia  (1779),  p.  98.

*  Herrera,  General  History  of  the
vast  Continent  and  Islands  of  America,
trans,  by  Stevens,  vi.   187.


^  W.  Ridley,  Kamilaroi,  p.  160.

®  J.  Henderson,  "  The  Medicine
and  Medical  Practice  of  the  Chinese,"
Journal  of  the  North  China  Branch  of
the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  New  Series,
i.  (Shanghai,   1865),  p.  35  sq.

^  Blumentritt,  "  Der  Ahnencultus
und  die  religiosen  Anschauungen  der
Malaien  des  Philippinen-Archipels,"
Mittheilungen  der  Wiener  Geograph.
Gesellschaft,  1882,  p.  154.


36o  EATING  MEN  chap.

prescribed  manner,  while  they  lie  down  on  their  backs
and  the  elders  pour  it  into  their  mouths.  This  is  believed
to  give  them  double  strength,  courage,  and  great  nerve  for
any  future  enterprise.^  Among  the  Kimbunda  of  Western
Africa,  when  a  new  king  succeeds  to  the  throne,  a  brave
prisoner  of  war  is  killed  in  order  that  the  king  and  nobles
may  eat  his  flesh,  and  so  acquire  his  strength  and  courage."
The  notorious  Zulu  chief  Matuana  drank  the  gall  of  thirty
chiefs,  whose  people  he  had  destroyed,  in  the  belief  that  it
would  make  him  strong.^  It  is  a  Zulu  fancy  that  by  eating
the  centre  of  the  forehead  and  the  eyebrow  of  an  enemy
they  acquire  the  power  of  looking  steadfastly  at  a  foe.^  In
Tud  or  Warrior  Island,  Torres  Straits,  men  would  drink  the
sweat  of  renowned  warriors,  and  eat  the  scrapings  from
their  finger-nails  which  had  become  coated  and  sodden  with
human  blood.  This  was  done  "  to  make  strong  and  like
stone;  no  afraid'."^  In  Nagir,  another  island  of  Torres
Straits,  in  order  to  infuse  courage  into  boys  a  warrior  used
to  take  the  eye  and  tongue  of  a  dead  man  (probably  of  a
slain  enemy),  and  after  mincing  them  and  mixing  them
with  his  urine  he  administered  the  compound  to  the  boy,
who  received  it  with  shut  eyes  and  open  mouth  seated
between  the  warrior's  legs.^  Before  every  warlike  ex-
pedition the  people  of  Minahassa  in  Celebes  used  to  take
the  locks  of  hair  of  a  slain  foe  and  dabble  them  in  boiling
water  to  extract  the  courage  ;  this  infusion  of  bravery  was
then  drunk  by  the  warriors."  In  New  Zealand  "the  chief
was  an  atua  [god],  but  there  were  powerful  and  powerless
gods  ;  each  naturally  sought  to  make  himself  one  of  the
former ;  the  plan  therefore  adopted  was  to  incorporate  the
spirits  of  others  with  their  own  ;  thus,  when  a  warrior  slew
a  chief  he  immediately  gouged  out  his  eyes  and  swallowed
them,  the  atua  tonga,  or   divinity,  being  supposed   to   reside

1  S.     Gason,     in    Journ.    Anthrop.  ^  A.     C.     Haddon,     "  The    Ethno-

7nsf.,  xxiv.  (1895),  p.   172.  graphy  of  the  Western  Tribe  of  Torres

-  Magyar,  Reisen  in  Siid-Afrika  in  Sixaiis,"  Journal  of  the  Anthropological

denjahren  1849-1857,  pp.  2'jy2-j6.  Institute,   xix.    (1890),   p.    414,  cp.  p.

^  J.  Shooter,    The  Kafirs  of  Natal,  ■i,\2..

4  /^  n  »r  T-.  ,       ^     J-  "  A.  C.  Haddon,  op.  cit.  p.  420.

'  Callaway,  Nursery   Tales,    Tradi-  '    -^  v    ^     •

tions  and  Histories  of  the   Zulus,    p.  "'    S.  J.    Hickson,   A   Naturalist    in

163  note.  N'orth  Celebes  (London,  1889),  p.  216.


Ill  TO  GET  THEIR  QUALITIES  361

in  that  organ  ;  thus  he  not  only  killed  the  body,  but  also
possessed  himself  of  the  soul  of  his  enemy,  and  con-
sequently the  more  chiefs  he  slew  the  greater  did  his
divinity  become."  ^  A  peculiar  form  of  communion  with
the  dead  is  practised  by  the  Gallas  of  Eastern  Africa.
They  think  that  food  from  the  house  of  a  dead  man,
especially  food  that  he  liked,  or  that  he  cooked  for  himself,
contains  a  portion  of  his  life  or  soul.  If  at  the  funeral  feast
a  man  eats  some  of  that  food,  he  fancies  that  he  has  thereby
absorbed  some  of  the  life  or  soul  of  the  departed,  a  portion
of  his  spirit,  intelligence,  or  courage."

Just  as  the  savage  thinks  that  he  can  swallow  the
moral  and  other  virtues  in  the  shape  of  food,  so  he
fondly  imagines  that  he  can  inoculate  himself  with  them.
Here  in  Europe  we  as  yet  inoculate  only  against  disease  ;
in  Basutoland  they  have  learned  the  art  of  inoculating
not  merely  against  disease  but  against  moral  evil  and
public  calamity,  against  wild  beasts  and  winter  cold.  For
example,  if  an  epidemic  is  raging,  if  public  affairs  go  ill,
or  war  threatens  to  break  out,  the  chief,  with  paternal  solici-
tude, seeks  to  guard  his  people  against  the  evils  that  menace
them  by  inoculating  them  with  his  own  hand.  Armed
with  a  lancet,  he  makes  a  slight  incision  in  the  temples  of
each  one,  and  rubs  into  the  wound  a  pinch  of  magic  powder
which  has  been  carefully  compounded  of  the  ashes  of  certain
plants  and  animals.  The  plants  and  animals  whose  ashes
compose  this  sovereign  medicine  are  always  symbolical  ;  in
other  words,  they  are  supposed  to  be  imbued  with  the  virtues
which  the  chief  desires  to  impart  to  his  people.  They  consist,
for  example,  of  plants  whose  foliage  withstands  the  rigours
of  winter  ;  mimosas,  whose  thorns  present  an  impenetrable
barrier  to  all  animals  of  the  deer  kind  ;  the  claws  or  a
few  hairs  from  the  mane  of  a  lion,  the  bravest  of  beasts  ;
the  tuft  of  hair  round  the  root  of  the  horns  of  a  bull,  which

^   R.    Taylor,    Te    Ika   a    Maui,   or  Maoris  of  New  Zealand,"  Journal  of

Nc'iV     Zealand     and    its    Inhabitanls  the    Anthropological      Institute,      xix.

(London,    1870),    p.    352.      Compare  (1890),  p.  108.

ibid.  Y>-  iTi ',  '^ .YAWs,  Polynesiaji  He-  "    Ph.      Paulitschke,     Ethnographie

searches,  \.  358  ;  J.  Dumont  D'Urville,  Nordost  -  Afrikas:    die  geistige   Ciiltiir

Voyage  autojir  du  Monde  sur  la  corvette  der  Danakil,  Galla  nnd  Somal  (Berlin,

Astrolabe,  ii.  547;    E.  Tregear,  "The  1896),  p.  56.


362  MORAL  INOCULATION  chap.

is  the  emblem  of  strength  and  fecundity  ;  the  skin  of  a
serpent ;  the  feathers  of  a  kite  or  a  hawk.^  So  when  the
Barotsi  wish  to  be  swift  of  foot,  to  cripple  the  fleeing  game,
and  to  ensure  an  abundant  catch,  they  scarify  their  arms  and
legs  and  rub  into  the  wounds  a  powder  made  of  the  burnt
bones  of  various  beasts  and  birds.'"^  Among  some  tribes  of
South-Eastern  Africa  the  same  magic  powder  which  is  made
from  various  parts  of  slain  foes,  and  is  eaten  by  boys  at
circumcision,^  is  used  to  inoculate  the  fighting-men  in  time  of
war.  The  medicine-man  makes  an  incision  in  the  forehead
of  each  warrior,  and  puts  the  powder  into  the  cut,  thus
infusing  strength  and  courage  for  the  battle."*  Among  some
Caffre  tribes  the  powdered  charcoal  with  which  the  warriors
are  thus  inoculated  in  various  parts  of  their  bodies  is  procured
by  burning  the  flesh  of  a  live  ox  with  a  certain  kind  of  wood
or  roots,  to  which  magic  virtue  is  attributed.^  Again,  the
Zulus  know  how  to  inoculate  themselves  not  merely  with
moral  virtue,  but  even  with  celestial  power.  For  you  must
know  that  the  Zulus  have  heaven-herds  or  sky-herds,  who
drive  away  clouds  big  with  hail  and  lightning,  just  as
herdsmen  drive  cattle  before  them.  These  heaven -herds
are  in  sympathy  with  the  heaven.  For  when  the  heaven
is  about  to  be  darkened,  and  before  the  clouds  appear  or
the  thunder  mutters,  the  heart  of  the  heaven -herd  feels  it
coming,  for  it  is  hot  within  him  and  he  is  excited  by  anger.
When  the  sky  begins  to  be  overcast,  he  too  grows  dark  like
it ;  when  it  thunders,  he  frowns,  that  his  f^ce  may  be  black
as  the  scowl  of  the  angry  heaven.  Now  the  way  in  which
he  thus  becomes  sympathetic  with  all  the  changing  moods
of  the  inconstant  heaven  is  this  :  he  eats  the  heaven  and
scarifies  himself  with  it.  And  the  way  in  which  he  eats  the
heaven  and  scarifies  himself  with  it  is  as  follows.  When  a
bullock  is  struck  by  lightning,  the  wizard  takes  its  flesh  and
puts   it  in   a   sherd   and  eats   it  while  it  is  hot,  mixed  with

1  Casalis,  T/ie  Basutos,  p.  256^^7.  tute,  xx.    (1891),  p.  133.      The  Baro-

2  E_    Holub,  Sieben  Jahre  in  Si'id-       long,  a  Bechuana  tribe,  observe  a  cus-
Afrika,  ii.  361.  torn  of  this  sort.      See  W.  Joest,  "  Bei

3  See  above,  p.  357  sq.  den     Barolong,"    Das    Ansland,     i6th
"*  T-    Macdonald,    "Manners,    Cus-       June  1884,  p.  464.

toms,   etc.,  of  South  African  Tribes,"  '•'  MdicX^din,  A'a/ir  Laws  and  Cusiof/is,

Journal  of  the   Anthropological  Insti-       p.  82.


Ill  INOCULATING  AGAINST  LIGHTNING  363

medicine  ;  and  thus  he  eats  the  heaven  by  eating  the  flesh,
which  came  from  the  beast,  which  was  struck  by  the  Hghtning,
which  came  down  from  the  heaven.  And  in  Hke  manner  he
scarifies  himself  with  the  heaven,  for  he  makes  cuts  in  his
body  and  rubs  in  medicine  mixed  with  the  flesh  of  a  bullock
that  was  struck  by  lightning.^  In  some  Caffre  tribes,  when
an  animal  or  a  man  has  been  struck  by  lightning,  the  priest
comes  straightway  and  vaccinates  every  person  in  the  kraal,
apparently  as  a  sort  of  insurance  against  lightning.  He  sets
to  work  by  tying  a  number  of  charms  round  the  neck  of
every  man  and  woman  in  the  village,  in  order  that  they  may
have  power  to  dig  the  dead  man's  grave  ;  for  in  these  tribes
beasts  and  men  alike  that  have  been  struck  by  lightning  are
always  buried,  and  the  flesh  is  never  eaten.  Next  a  sacrificial
beast  is  killed  and  a  fire  kindled,  in  which  certain  magic  woods.
or  roots  are  burned  to  charcoal,  and  then  ground  to  powder.
The  priest  thereupon  makes  incisions  in  various  parts  of  the
bodies  of  each  inmate  of  the  kraal,  and  rubs  a  portion  of  the
powdered  charcoal  into  the  cuts  ;  the  rest  of  the  powder  he
mixes  with  sour  milk,  and  gives  to  them  all  to  drink.  From
the  time  the  lightning  strikes  the  kraal  until  this  ceremony
has  been  performed,  the  people  are  obliged  to  abstain
entirely  from  the  use  of  milk.  Their  heads  are  then  shaved.
Should  a  house  have  been  struck  by  lightning  it  must  be
abandoned,  with  everything  in  it.  Until  all  these  rites  have
been  performed,  none  of  the  people  may  leave  the  kraal  or
have  any  intercourse  whatever  with  others;  but  when  the  cere-
monies have  been  duly  performed,  the  people  are  pronounced
clean,  and  may  again  associate  with  their  neighbours.
However,  for  some  months  afterwards  none  of  the  live  stock
of  the  kraal  and  few  other  things  belonging  to  it  are  allowed
to  pass  into  other  hands,  whether  by  way  of  sale  or  of  gift.^'
Hence  it  would  appear  that  all  persons  in  a  village  which
has  been  struck  by  lightning  are  supposed  to  be  infected
with  a  dangerous  virus,  which  they  might  communicate  to
their  neighbours  ;  and  the  vaccination  is  intended  to  disinfect
them  as  well  as  to  protect  them  against  the  recurrence  of  a
like  calamity.      Young  Carib  warriors  used  to  be  inoculated

1  Callaway,  Religions  System  of  the  2  Maclean,  Kafir  Laws  and  Customs,

Amazulu,  pp.  380-382.  p.  %i  sq.


364  VIRTUES  IMPARTED  chap.

for  the  purpose  of  making  them  brave  and  hardy.  Some
time  before  the  ceremony  the  lad  who  was  to  be  operated
on  caught  a  bird  of  prey  of  a  particular  sort  and  kept  it  in
captivity  till  the  day  appointed.  When  the  time  was  come
and  friends  had  assembled  to  witness  the  ceremony,  the  father
of  the  boy  seized  the  bird  by  its  legs  and  crushed  its  head  by
beating  it  on  the  head  of  his  son,  who  dared  not  wince  under
the  rain  of  blows  that  nearly  stunned  him.  Next  the  father
bruised  and  pounded  the  bird's  flesh,  and  steeped  it  in  water
together  with  a  certain  spice  ;  after  which  he  scored  and
slashed  his  son's  body  in  all  directions,  washed  his  wounds
with  the  decoction,  and  gave  him  the  bird's  heart  to  eat,  in
order,  as  it  was  said,  that  he  might  be  the  braver  for  it.^

It  is  not  always  deemed  necessary  either  that  the
mystical  substance  should  be  swallowed  by  the  communi-
cant, or  that  he  should  receive  it  by  the  more  painful
process  of  scarification  and  inoculation.  Sometimes  it  is
thought  enough  merely  to  anoint  him  with  it.  Among  some
of  the  Australian  blacks  it  used  to  be  a  common  practice  to
kill  a  man,  cut  out  his  caul-fat,  and  rub  themselves  with  it,
in  the  belief  that  all  the  qualities,  both  physical  and  mental,
which  had  distinguished  the  original  owner  of  the  fat,  were
thus  communicated  by  its  means  to  the  person  who  greased
himself  with  it.^  The  negroes  of  Southern  Guinea  regard
the  brain  as  the  seat  of  wisdom,  and  think  it  a  pity  that,
when  a  wise  man  dies,  his  brain  and  his  wisdom  should  go
to  waste  together.  So  they  sever  his  head  from  his  body
and  hang  it  up  over  a  mass  of  chalk,  which,  as  the  head
decays,  receives  the  drippings  of  brain  and  wisdom.  Any
one  who  applies  this  precious  mixture  to  his  forehead  is
supposed  to  absorb  thereby  the  intelligence  of  the  dead.^
At  a  certain  stage  of  the  ceremonies  by  which,  in  the
Andaman  Islands,  a  boy  is  initiated  into  manhood,  the  chief
takes  the  carcass  of  a  boar  and  presses  it  heavily  down  on
the  shoulders,  back,  and  limbs  of  the  young  man  as  he  sits,

1   Du  Tertre,   Hisioire  generale  des  MoTale  dcs  lies  Antilles-  (Rotterdam,

Isles  de   S.    Ckris/ophe,    de   la   Guade-  1665),  p.  556.

lottpe,  de  la  Martinique  et  atitres  dans  2  Broiigh  Smith,  Aborig-ines  of  Vic-

lAmerique  (Paris,  1654),   p.  417  sg.;  toria,  ii.  313.

id.,   Histoire  generale  des  Antilles,  ii.  ^  j_     l_    Wilson,    Western    Africa,

377  ;   Rochefort,  Histoire  Natu7-elle  et  p.  394.


Ill


B  V  EXTERNAL  AP PLICA  TION  365


silent  and  motionless,  on  the  ground.      This  is  done  to  make
him   brave   and   strong.      Afterwards   the   animal   is   cut   up,
and  its  melted  fat  is  poured  over  the  novice,  and  rubbed  into
his  body.^      The   Arabs  of  Eastern   Africa   believe   that   an
unguent    of    lion's    fat    inspires   a   man    with    boldness,   and
makes  the  wild   beasts  flee  in   terror  before  him.^      Most  of
the    Baperis,   or    Malekootoos,  a   Bechuana    tribe   of   South
Africa,  revere  or,  as    they  say,   sing   the    porcupine,  which
seems  to  be  their  totem,  as  the  sun  is  the  totem  of  some
members    of   the   tribe,   and   a   species   of  ape  the  totem   of
others.      Those  of   them   who   have  the  porcupine   for  their
totem  swear  by  the  animal,  and  lament  if  any  one  injures  it.
When  a  porcupine  has  been  killed,  they  religiously  gather  up
its  bristles,  spit  on  them,  and  rub  their  eyebrows  with  them,
saying,  "  They  have   slain   our  brother,  our   master,  one   of
ourselves,  him   whom   we   sing."      They   would  fear  to  die  if
they  ate  of  its  flesh.     Nevertheless  they  esteem  it  wholesome
for    an    infant    of   the    clan    to    rub    into   his  joints   certain
portions  of  the  paunch  of  the  animal   mixed  with  the  sap  of
some  plants  to  which  they  ascribe  an  occult  virtue.^      So  at
the    solemn    ceremony  which    is    observed    by    the    Central
Australian  tribes  for  the  purpose  of  multiplying  kangaroos,
men  of  the   kangaroo   totem  not  only  eat  a  little  kangaroo
flesh  as  a  sacrament,  but  also  have  their  bodies  anointed  with
kangaroo   fat.      Doubtless  the  intention  alike  of  the  eating
and  of  the  anointing  is  to  impart  to  the  man  the  qualities  of
his  totem  animal,  and   thus   to   enable  him  to   perform   the
ceremonies  for  the  multiplication  of  the  breed."*

It  is  now  easy  to  understand  why  a  savage  should  desire

1  E.  H.  Man,  Aboriginal  Inhabit-  Gillen,  op.  cit.  pp.  202  -  206).  As
ants  of  the  Andaman  Islands,  p.  66.  to     the     Intichiiima     ceremonies,    see

2  Jerome  Becker,  La  Vie  en  Af-  above,  p.  113  sqq.  Another  Central
rique  (Paris  and  Brussels,  1887),  ii.  Australian  mode  of  communicating
266.  qualities    by     external     application    is

3  Arbousset  at  Daumas,  Voyage  seen  in  the  custom  of  beating  boys  on
d'Exploratiott  an  Nord  -  est  de  la  the  calves  of  their  legs  with  the  leg-
Colonie  du  Cap  de  Bomte-Espt'rance  bone  of  an  eagle-hawk ;  strength  is
(Paris,  1842),  p.  349  sq.  supposed    to    pass    thereby    from    the

*  Spencer  and  Gillen,  Native  Tribes  bone  into  the  boy's  leg.      See  Spencer

of  Ce7itral  Australia,  p.  204  sq.      Men  and   Gillen,    op.    cit.    p.    472  ;    Report

of  other   totem   clans   also   partake   of  on    the    Work  of  the   Horn   Scientific

their     totems    sacramentally    at    these  Expedition  to   Cejitral  Australia,  part

Intichiuma    ceremonies    (Spencer  and  iv.  p.  180.


366


CALIFORNIAN  SACRIFICE


CHAP.


to  partake  of  the  flesh  of  an  animal  or  man  whom  he  regards
as  divine.  By  eating  the  body  of  the  god  he  shares  in  the
god's  attributes  and  powers.  And  when  the  god  is  a  corn-
god,  the  corn  is  his  proper  body  ;  when  he  is  a  vine-god,  the
juice  of  the  grape  is  his  blood  ;  and  so  by  eating  the  bread
and  drinking  the  wine  the  worshipper  partakes  of  the  real
body  and  blood  of  his  god.  Thus  the  drinking  of  wine  in
the  rites  of  a  vine-god  like  Dionysus  is  not  an  act  of  revelry,
it  is  a  solemn  sacrament.^  Yet  a  time  comes  when  reasonable
men  find  it  hard  to  understand  how  any  one  in  his  senses
can  suppose  that  by  eating  bread  or  drinking  wine  he
consumes  the  body  or  blood  of  a  deity.  "  When  we  call
corn  Ceres  and  wine  Bacchus,"  says  Cicero,  "  we  use  a  com-
mon figure  of  speech  ;  but  do  you  imagine  that  anybody  is
so  insane  as  to  believe  that  the  thing  he  feeds  upon  is  a
god  ?  "  ^


^  12.   Killing  the  Divine  A  nimal

It  remains  to  show  that  hunting  and  pastoral  tribes,  as
well  as  agricultural  peoples,  have  been  in  the  habit  of  killing
their  gods.  Among  the  gods  whom  hunters  and  shepherds
adore  and  kill  are  animals  pure  and  simple,  not  animals
regarded  as  embodiments  of  other  supernatural  beings.  Our
first  example  is  drawn  from  the  Indians  of  California,  who
living  in  a  fertile  country  ^  under  a  serene  and  temperate
sky,  nevertheless  rank  near  the  bottom  of  the  savage  scale.
Where  a  stretch  of  iron-bound  coast  breaks  the  long  line  of
level  sands  that  receive  the  rollers  of  the  Pacific,  there  stood
in  former  days,  not  far  from  the  brink  of  the  great  cliffs,  the
white  mission-house  of  San  Juan  Capistrano.  Among  the
monks  who  here  exercised  over  a  handful  of  wretched
Indians  the  austere  discipline  of  Catholic  Spain,  there
was  a  certain  Father  Boscana  who  has  bequeathed  to
us  a  precious  record  of  the  customs  and  superstitions  of  his

1  On  the  custom  of  eating  a  god,  see       vol.  i.  p.  358  sq^.


also  a  paper  by  Felix  Liebrecht,  "  Der
aufgegesseneGott,"  in  Z//r  Volkskiinde,
pp.  436-439 ;  and  especially  W.  R.
Smith,  art.  "Sacrifice,"  Encycl.  Bri-
tain. 9th  ed.  vol.  xxi.  p.  137  sq.  On
wine  as  the  blood  of  a  god,  see  above,


-  Cicero,  De  natura  deorum,  iii.  16.
41.

3  This  does  not  refer  to  the  Cali-
fornian  peninsula,  which  is  an  arid  and
treeless  wilderness  of  rock  and  sand.


in  OF  THE  GREAT  BUZZARD  367

savage  flock.  Thus  he  tells  us  that  the  Acagchemen
tribe  adored  the  great  buzzard.  Once  a  year,  at  a  great
festival  called  Panes  or  bird-feast,  they  carried  one  of  these
birds  in  procession  to  their  chief  temple,  which  seems  to
have  been  merely  an  unroofed  enclosure  of  stakes.  Here
they  killed  the  bird  without  losing  a  drop  of  its  blood.  The
skin  was  removed  entire  and  preserved  with  the  feathers  as
a  relic  or  for  the  purpose  of  making  the  festal  garment  or
paelt.  The  carcass  was  buried  in  a  hole  in  the  temple,  and
the  old  women  gathered  round  the  grave  weeping  and
moaning  bitterly,  while  they  threw  various  kinds  of  seeds  or
pieces  of  food  on  it,  crying  out,  "  Why  did  you  run  away  ?
Would  you  not  have  been  better  with  us  ?  you  would
have  made  pinole  as  we  do,  and  if  you  had  not  run
away  you  would  not  have  become  a  Panes,"  and  so  on.
They  said  that  the  Panes  was  a  woman  who  had  run  off  to
the  mountains  and  there  been  changed  into  a  bird  by  the
god  Chinigchinich.  They  believed  that  though  they  sacrificed
the  bird  annually,  she  came  to  life  again  and  returned  to  her
home  in  the  mountains.  Moreover  they  thought  that  "  as
often  as  the  bird  was  killed,  it  became  multiplied  ;  because
every  year  all  the  different  Capitanes  celebrated  the  same
feast  of  the  Panes,  and  were  firm  in  the  opinion  that  the
birds  sacrificed  were  but  one  and  the  same  female."  -^


'   Boscana,  in  Alfred  Robinson's  Life  ' '  Six  horses  sprang  across   the  level

in    California   (New   York,    1846),  p.  ground

291  sq.  ;   Bancroft,  Native  Races  of  the  As     six     dragoons     in     open    order

Pacific  States,  iii.    168.      The   mission  dashed  ;

station     of    San    Juan    Capistrano    is  Above    their    heads  the  lassos   circled

described  by  Dana  ( Two  Years  before  round,

the  Mast,  chaps,  xviii.  and  xxiv.).      A  In     every     eye     a     pious     fervour

favourable   picture  of  the   missions  is  flashed  ;

drawn    by    Langsdorff   {Reise   tan  die  They  charged  the  camp,   and    in    one

Welt,   ii.   p.   1345^^.),   but  the  severe  moment  more

discipline    of   the    Spanish     monks    is  They    lassoed     six     and     reconverted

noticed  by  other  travellers.      See  Kot-  four."

zebue,    Reise   um  die   Welt   (Weimar,  {^x&\.Yi.zxi&,  Friar  Pedro's  Ride.')

1830),   ii.    42   sqq.  ;  F.   W.   Beechey,  j^  the  verses  inscribed   The  Angelus,

Narrative  of  a  Voyage  to  the  Pacific  and  /^^^,.,/   „^    fj^^  Mission   Dolores,    1868,

Peering' s    Strait    (London,    1831),   11.  ^^^  beginning
chap.   i.      A  poet    has    described    the

pastoral    crook,    the    carnal    arm,    by  "  Bells  of  the  Past,  whose  long-forgotten

which    these   good    shepherds   brought  music

back  their  strayed  lambs  to  the  spiritual  Still  fills  the  wide  expanse,  '

fold —  the   same   poet   shows   that   he   is  not


368  THE  CALIFORNIAN  BUZZARD  chap.

The  unity  in  multiplicity  thus  postulated  by  the  Cali-
fornians  is  very  noticeable  and  helps  to  explain  their  motive
for  killing  the  divine  bird.  The  notion  of  the  life  of  a  species
as  distinct  from  that  of  an  individual,  easy  and  obvious  as  it
seems  to  us,  appears  to  be  one  which  the  Californian  savage
cannot  grasp.  He  is  unable  to  conceive  the  life  of  the
species  otherwise  than  as  an  individual  life,  and  therefore  as
exposed  to  the  same  dangers  and  calamities  which  menace
and  finally  destroy  the  life  of  the  individual.  Apparently
he  thinks  that  a  species  left  to  itself  will  grow  old  and  die
like  an  individual,  and  that  therefore  some  step  must  be
be  taken  to  save  from  extinction  the  particular  species  which
he  regards  as  divine.  The  only  means  he  can  think  of  to
avert  the  catastrophe  is  to  kill  a  member  of  the  species  in
whose  veins  the  tide  of  life  is  still  running  strong,  and  has
not  yet  stagnated  among  the  fens  of  old  age.  The  life  thus
diverted  from  one  channel  will  flow,  he  fancies,  more  freshly
and  freely  in  a  new  one  ;  in  other  words,  the  slain  animal
will  revive  and  enter  on  a  new  term  of  life  with  all  the  spring
and  energy  of  youth.  To  us  this  reasoning  is  transparently
absurd,  but  so  too  is  the  custom.  If  a  better  explanation,
that  is,  one  more  consonant  with  the  facts  and  with  the
principles  of  savage  thought,  can  be  given  of  the  custom,  I
will  willingly  withdraw  the  one  here  proposed.  A  similar
confusion,  it  may  be  noted,  between  the  individual  life  and
the  life  of  the  species  was  made  by  the  Samoans.  Each
family  had  for  its  god  a  particular  species  of  animal  ;  yet
the  death  of  one  of  these  animals,  for  example  an  owl,  was
not  the  death  of  the  god,  "  he  was  supposed  to  be  yet  alive,
and  incarnate  in  all  the  owls  in  existence."  ^

The  rude  Californian  rite  which  we  have  just  considered
has  a  close  parallel  in  the  religion  of  ancient  Egypt.  The
Thebans  and  all  other  Egyptians  who  worshipped  the  Theban
god  Ammon  held  rams  to  be  sacred,  and  would  not  sacrifice
them.  But  once  a  year  at  the  festival  of  Ammon  they  killed
a  ram,  skinned  it,  and  clothed  the  image  of  the  god  in  the
skin.      Then  they  mourned  over  the  ram  and  buried  it  in  a

insensible  to  tlie  poetical  side  of  those  ^  Turner,  Samoa,  p.  21,  cp.  pp.  26,

old  Spanish  missions,  which  have  long       61.
passed  away.


in  THE  RAM  OF  AMMON  369

sacred  tomb.  The  custom  was  explained  by  a  story  that
Zeus  had  once  exhibited  himself  to  Hercules  clad  in  the
fleece  and  wearing  the  head  of  a  ram.^  Of  course  the
ram  in  this  case  was  simply  the  beast-god  of  Thebes,  as  the
wolf  was  the  beast  -  god  of  Lycopolis,  and  the  goat  was
the  beast-god  of  Mendes.  In  other  words,  the  ram  was
Ammon  himself.  On  the  monuments,  it  is  true,  Ammon
appears  in  semi-human  form  with  the  body  of  a  man  and
the  head  of  a  ram.^  But  this  only  shows  that  he  was  in  the
usual  chrysalis  state  through  which  beast-gods  regularly  pass
before  they  emerge  as  full-fledged  anthropomorphic  gods.
The  ram,  therefore,  was  killed,  not  as  a  sacrifice  to  Ammon,
but  as  the  god  himself,  whose  identity  with  the  beast  is
plainly  shown  by  the  custom  of  clothing  his  image  in  the
skin  of  the  slain  ram.  The  reason  for  thus  killing  the  ram-
god  annually  may  have  been  that  which  I  have  assigned  for
the  general  custom  of  killing  the  god  and  for  the  special
Californian  custom  of  killing  the  divine  buzzard.  As  applied
to  Egypt,  this  explanation  is  supported  by  the  analogy  of
the  bull-god  Apis,  who  was  not  suffered  to  outlive  a  certain
term  of  years.^  The  intention  of  thus  putting  a  limit  to  the
life  of  the  god  was,  as  I  have  argued,  to  secure  him  from  the
'weakness  and  frailty  of  age.  The  same  reasoning  would
explain  the  custom — probably  an  older  one — of  putting  the
beast-god  to  death  annually,  as  was  done  with  the  ram  of
Thebes.

One  point  in  the  Theban  ritual — the  application  of  the
skin  to  the  image  of  the  god — deserves  special  attention.  If
the  god  was  at  first  the  living  ram,  his  representation  by  an
image  must  have  originated  later.  But  how  did  it  originate  ?
The  answer  to  this  question  is  perhaps  furnished  by  the
practice  of  preserving  the  skin  of  the  animal  which  is  slain
as  divine.  The  Californians,  as  we  have  seen,  preserved  the
skin  of  the  buzzard  ;  and  the  skin  of  the  goat,  which  is  killed
on  the  harvest-field  as  a  representative  of  the  corn-spirit,  is
kept  for  various  superstitious  purposes.'*      The  skin  in   fact

^  Herodotus,  ii.  42.     The  custom  has  and  Customs  of  the  Ancient  Egyptians,

been  already  referred  to  above,  p.  315.  iii.  i  sqq.  (ed.  1878).

-  Ed.    Meyer,    Geschichte  des  Alter-  ^  Above,  p.  313.

//;«/«5,  i.  §  58.    Cp.  Wilkinson,  iT/aM»^rj  *  Above,  pp.  2'j^sq.,  277.

VOL.  II  2  B


370  THE  SERPENT  OF  FERNANDO  PO  chap.

was  kept  as  a  token  or  memorial  of  the  god,  or  rather  as
containing  in  it  a  part  of  the  divine  Hfe,  and  it  had  only  to
be  stuffed  or  stretched  upon  a  frame  to  become  a  regular
imaee  of  him.  At  first  an  image  of  this  kind  would  be
renewed  annually/  the  new  image  being  provided  by  the
skin  of  the  slain  animal.  But  from  annual  images  to  per-
manent images  the  transition  is  easy.  We  have  seen  that
the  older  custom  of  cutting  a  new  May-tree  every  year  was
superseded  by  the  practice  of  maintaining  a  permanent  May-
pole, which  was,  however,  annually  decked  with  fresh  leaves
and  flowers,  and  even  surmounted  each  year  by  a  fresh  young
tree.^  Similarly  when  the  stuffed  skin,  as  a  representative
of  the  god,  was  replaced  by  a  permanent  image  of  him  in
wood,  stone,  or  metal,  the  permanent  image  was  annually
clad  in  the  fresh  skin  of  the  slain  animal.  When  this  stage
had  been  reached,  the  custom  of  killing  the  ram  came
naturally  to  be  interpreted  as  a  sacrifice  offered  to  the  image,
and  was  explained  by  a  story  like  that  of  Ammon  and
Hercules.

West  Africa  furnishes  another  example  of  the  annual
killing  of  a  sacred  animal  and  the  preservation  of  its  skin.
The  negroes  of  Issapoo,  in  the  island  of  Fernando  Po,  regard
the  cobra-capella  as  their  guardian  deity,  who  can  do  them
good  or  ill,  bestow  riches  or  inflict  disease  and  death.  The
skin  of  one  of  these  reptiles  is  hung  tail  downwards  from  a
branch  of  the  highest  tree  in  the  public  square,  and  the
placing  of  it  on  the  tree  is  an  annual  ceremony.  As  soon
as  the  ceremony  is  over,  all  children  born  within  the  past
year  are  carried  out  and  their  hands  made  to  touch  the  tail
of  the  serpent's  skin.^  The  latter  custom  is  clearly  a  way  of
placing  the  infants  under  the  protection  of  the  tribal  god.
Similarly  in  Senegambia  a  python  is  expected  to  visit  every

1  The    Italmens   of  Kamlchatka,  at  variis    rebus    Prussicis,   p.    163  ;   Alt-

the  close  of  the  fishing  season,  used  to  preussen,  p.   161)  the  image  of  the  old

make  the  figure  of  a  wolf  out  of  grass.  Prussian     god     Curcho    was    annually

This    figure    they    carefully    kept    the  renewed.       But    see    Mannhavdt,   Die

whole  year,   believing   that   it  wedded  Korndamoncn,  p.  27.

with  their  maidens  and  prevented  them  -  Above,  vol.  i.  p.  204  sq.

from  giving  birth  to  twins  ;  for  twins  ^  x.  J.    Hutchinson,   Impressions  of

were  esteemed  a  great  misfortune.     See  Western    Africa    (London,    1858),    p.

Steller,    Beschreilmng  von   dem   Lattde  \()(>  sq.      The  writer  does  not  expressly

Kaintschatka,   p.    327    sq.       According  state  that  a  serpent   is  killed  annually,

to     Hartknoch     {Dissertat.    histor.    de  but  his  statement  implies  it.


Ill


ZUNI  CEREMONY


371


child  of  the  Python  clan  within  eight  days  after  birth  ;  ^  and
the  Psylli,  a  Snake  clan  of  ancient  Africa,  used  to  expose
their  infants  to  snakes  in  the  belief  that  the  snakes  would
not  harm  true-born  children  of  the  clan.^

In  the  Californian,  Egyptian,  and  Fernando  Po  customs
the  animal  slain  may  perhaps  have  been  at  some  time  or  other
a  totem,  but  this  is  very  doubtful.^  At  all  events,  in  all  three
cases  the  worship  of  the  animal  seems  to  have  no  relation  to
agriculture,  and  may  therefore  be  presumed  to  date  from  the
hunting  or  pastoral  stage  of  society.  The  same  may  be  said
of  the  following  custom,  though  the  people  who  practise  it —
the  Zuni  Indians  of  New  Mexico — are  now  settled  in  walled
villages  or  towns  of  a  peculiar  type,  and  practise  agriculture
and  the  arts  of  pottery  and  weaving.  But  the  Zuni  custom
is  marked  by  certain  features  which  appear  to  place  it  in  a
somewhat  different  category  from  the  preceding  cases.  It
may  be  well  therefore  to  describe  it  at  full  length  in  the
words  of  an  eye-witness.

"  With  midsummer  the  heat  became  intense.  My  brother
\i.e.  adopted  Indian  brother]  and  I  sat,  day  after  day,  in  the
cool  under-rooms  of  our  house, — the  latter  \sic\  busy  with
his  quaint  forge  and  crude  appliances,  working  Mexican
coins  over  into  bangles,  girdles,  ear-rings,  buttons,  and  what
not  for  savage  ornament."  "  One  day  as  I  sat  watching
him,  a  procession  of  fifty  men  went  hastily  down  the  hill,
and  off  westward  over  the  plain.  They  were  solemnly  led
by  a  painted  and  shell-bedecked  priest,  and  followed  by  the
torch-bearing  Shu-lu-wit-si,  or  God  of  Fire.  After  they  had
vanished,  I  asked  old  brother  what  it  all  meant.


^  Revue  cT Ethnographie,  iii.  397.

2  Varro  in  Priscian,  x.  32,  vol.  i.
p.  524,  ed.  Keil  ;  Pliny,  Nat.  Hist.
vii.  14.  Pliny's  statement  is  to  be
corrected  by  Varro's.

^  When  I  wrote  this  book  originally
I  said  that  in  these  three  cases  "the
animal  slain  probably  is,  or  once  was,  a
totem."  But  this  seems  to  me  less  prob-
able now  than  it  did  then.  In  regard
to  the  Californian  custom  in  particular,
there  appears  to  be  no  good  evidence
that  within  the  area  now  occupied  by
the  United  States  totemism  was  prac-
tised Vjy  any  tribes  to  the  west  of  the


Rocky  Mountains.  See  H.  Hale,
United  States  Exploring  Expedition,
Ethnography  and  Philology,  p.  199  ;
George  Gibbs,  in  Contribtitions  to
North  A7nerican  Ethnology,  i.  184  ;  S.
Powers,  Tribes  of  California,  p.  5  ;  A.
S.  Gatschet,  The  Klamath  Indians  of
South -westerit  Oregon,  vol.  i.  p.  cvi.
"  California  and  Oregon  seem  never  to
have  had  any  gentes  or  phratries  "  (A.
S.  Gatschet  in  a  letter  to  me,  dated
November  5th,  1888).  Beyond  the
very  doubtful  case  cited  in  the  text,  I
know  of  no  evidence  that  totemism
exists  in  Fernando  Po.


372  ZUNI  SACRIFICE  chai>.

"  '  They  are  going,'  said  he,  '  to  the  city  of  the  Ka-ka
and  the  home  of  our  others.'

"  Four  days  after,  toward  sunset,  costumed  and  masked
in  the  beautiful  paraphernalia  of  the  Ka-k'ok-shi,  or  '  Good
Dance,'  they  returned  in  file  up  the  same  pathway,  each
bearing  in  his  arms  a  basket  filled  with  living,  squirming
turtles,  which  he  regarded  and  carried  as  tenderly  as  a
mother  would  her  infant.  Some  of  the  wretched  reptiles
were  carefully  wrapped  in  soft  blankets,  their  heads  and  fore-
feet protruding, — and,  mounted  on  the  backs  of  the  plume-
bedecked  pilgrims,  made  ludicrous  but  solemn  caricatures  of
little  children  in  the  same  position.  While  I  was  at  supper
upstairs  that  evening,  the  governor's  brother-in-law  came  in.
He  was  welcomed  by  the  family  as  if  a  messenger  from
heaven.  He  bore  in  his  tremulous  fingers  one  of  the  much
abused  and  rebellious  turtles.  Paint  still  adhered  to  his
hands  and  bare  feet,  which  led  me  to  infer  that  he  had
formed  one  of  the  sacred  embassy.

"  '  So  you  went  to  Ka-thlu-el-lon,  did  you  ? '    I  asked.

" '  E'e,'  replied  the  weary  man,  in  a  voice  husky  with
long  chanting,  as  he  sank,  almost  exhausted,  on  a  roll  of
skins  which  had  been  placed  for  him,  and  tenderly  laid  the
turtle  on  the  floor.  No  sooner  did  the  creature  find  itself  at
liberty  than  it  made  off  as  fast  as  its  lame  legs  would  take
it.  Of  one  accord  the  family  forsook  dish,  spoon,  and
drinking-cup,  and  grabbing  from  a  sacred  meal-bowl  whole
handfuls  of  the  contents,  hurriedly  followed  the  turtle  about
the  room,  into  dark  corners,  around  water-jars,  behind  the
grinding-troughs,  and  out  into  the  middle  of  the  floor  again,
praying  and  scattering  meal  on  its  back  as  they  went.  At
last,  strange  to  say,  it  approached  the  foot-sore  man  who
had  brought  it.

"  '  Ha  ! '  he  exclaimed,  with  emotion  ;  '  see,  it  comes  to
me  again  ;  ah,  what  great  favours  the  fathers  of  all  grant  me
this  day,'  and,  passing  his  hand  gently  over  the  sprawling
animal,  he  inhaled  from  his  palm  deeply  and  long,  at  the
same  time  invoking  the  favour  of  the  gods.  Then  he  leaned
his  chin  upon  his  hand,  and  with  large  wistful  eyes  regarded
his  ugly  captive  as  it  sprawled  about,  blinking  its  meal-
bedimmed   eyes,  and  clawing  the  smooth  floor  in   memory


Ill  OF  THE  TURTLE  373

of  its  native   element.      At  this  juncture    I    ventured  a  ques-
tion :

"  '  Why  do  you  not  let  him  go,  or  give  him  some  water  ? '
"  Slowly  the    man    turned  his   eyes   toward    me,  an   odd
mixture  of  pain,  indignation,  and   pity  on  his  face,  while  the
worshipful  family  stared  at  me  with  holy  horror,

" '  Poor  younger  brother  ! '  he  said  at  last,  '  know  you  not
how  precious  it  is?  It  die  ?  It  will  not  die  ;  I  tell  you,  it
cannot  die.'

" '  But  it  will  die  if  you  don't  feed  it  and  give  it  water.'
"  '  I  tell  you  it  cannot  die  ;  it  will  only  change  houses  to-
morrow, and  go  back  to  the  home  of  its  brothers.  Ah,
well  !  How  should  you  know  ?  '  he  mused.  Turning  to  the
blinded  turtle  again  :  '  Ah !  my  poor  dear  lost  child  or
parent,  my  sister  or  brother  to  have  been  !  Who  knows
which?  Maybe  my  own  great-grandfather  or  mother!'
And  with  this  he  fell  to  weeping  most  pathetically,  and,
tremulous  with  sobs,  which  were  echoed  by  the  women  and
children,  he  buried  his  face  in  his  hands.  Filled  with
sympathy  for  his  grief,  however  mistaken,  I  raised  the  turtle
to  my  lips  and  kissed  its  cold  shell  ;  then  depositing  it  on
the  floor,  hastily  left  the  grief- stricken  family  to  their
sorrows.  Next  day,  with  prayers  and  tender  beseechings,
plumes,  and  offerings,  the  poor  turtle  was  killed,  and  its  flesh
and  bones  were  removed  and  deposited  in  the  little  river,
that  it  might  '  return  once  more  to  eternal  life  among  its
comrades  in  the  dark  waters  of  the  lake  of  the  dead.'  The
shell,  carefully  scraped  and  dried,  was  made  into  a  dance-
rattle,  and,  covered  by  a  piece  of  buckskin,  it  still  hangs
from  the  smoke-stained  rafters  of  my  brother's  house.  Once
a  Navajo  tried  to  buy  it  for  a  ladle  ;  loaded  with  indignant
reproaches,  he  was  turned  out  of  the  house.  Were  any  one
to  venture  the  suggestion  that  the  turtle  no  longer  lived,  his
remark  would  cause  a  flood  of  tears,  and  he  would  be  re-
minded that  it  had  only  '  changed  houses  and  gone  to  live
for  ever  in  the  home  of  "  our  lost  others."  '  "  ^

In  this  custom  we  find  expressed  in  the  clearest  way  a
belief  in  the  transmigration  of  human   souls   into   the   bodies

1   Frank   H.  Gushing,    "  My  Adven-       trated  Monthly  Magazine,    May  1883,
tares    in    Zuijii,"     The    Century    Illus-       p.  45  sq.


374


ZUNI  SACRIFICE


CHAP.


of  turtles.^  The  theory  of  transmigration  is  held  by  the
Moqui  Indians,  who  belong  to  the  same  race  as  the  Zunis,
The  Moquis  are  divided  into  totem  clans — the  Bear  clan,
Deer  clan,  Wolf  clan.  Hare  clan,  and  so  on  ;  they  believe  that
the  ancestors  of  the  clans  were  bears,  deer,  wolves,  hares,  and
so  forth  ;  and  that  at  death  the  members  of  each  clan  become
bears,  deer,  and  so  on  according  to  the  particular  clan  to  which
they  belonged.^  The  Zuni  are  also  divided  into  clans,  the
totems  of  which  agree  closely  with  those  of  the  Moquis,  and  one
of  their  totems  is  the  turtle.^  Thus  their  belief  in  transmigra-
tion into  the  turtle  is  probably  one  of  the  regular  articles  of
their  totem  faith.'*  What  then  is  the  meaning  of  killing  a
turtle  in  which  the  soul  of  a  kinsman  is  believed  to  be
present  ?  Apparently  the  object  is  to  keep  up  a  communi-
cation with  the  other  world  in  which  the  souls  of  the
departed  are  believed  to  be  assembled  in  the  form  of
turtles.  It  is  a  common  belief  that  the  spirits  of  the  dead
return  occasionally  to  their  old  homes  ;  and  accordingly  the
unseen  visitors  are  welcomed  and  feasted  by  the  living,  and
then  sent  upon  their  way.°  In  the  Zuni  ceremony  the  dead
are  fetched  home  in  the  form  of  turtles,  and  the  killing  of  the
turtles  is  the  way  of  sending  back  the  souls  to  the  spirit-
land.  Thus  the  general  explanation  given  above  of  the
custom  of  killing  a  god  seems  inapplicable  to  the  Zuni
custom,  the  true  meaning  of  which  is  somewhat  obscure.

Doubt  also  hangs  at  first  sight  over  the   meaning  of  the
bear-sacrifice   offered   by   the  x'\inos,  a   primitive   people  who


1  Mr.  Gushing,  indeed,  while  he
admits  that  the  ancestors  of  the  Zuni
may  have  believed  in  transmigration,
says,  "Their  belief,  to-day,  however,
relative  to  the  future  life  is  spiritual-
istic." But  the  expressions  in  the  text
seem  to  leave  no  room  for  doubting
that  the  transmigration  into  turtles  is  a
living  article  of  Zuni  faith.

2  Schoolcraft,  Indian  Tribes,  iv.  86.
On  the  totem  clans  of  the  Moquis,  see
T.  G.  Bourke,  Snake  -  Dance  of  the
Moqnis  of  Arizona,  pp.  Ii6  sq.,  334
sqq.

3  For  this  information  I  am  indebted
to  the  kindness  of  the  late  Gaptain  J.
G.  Bourke,  3rd  Cavalry,  U.S.  Army,
author  of  the  work  mentioned  in   the


preceding  note.  In  his  letter  Gaptain
Bourke  gave  a  list  of  fourteen  totem
clans  of  Zuni,  which  he  received  on  the
20th  of  May  1 88 1  from  Fedro  Dino  (?),
Governor  of  Zuni.

^  It  should  be  observed,  however,
that  Mr.  Gushing  omits  to  say  whether
or  not  the  persons  who  performed  the
ceremony  described  by  him  had  the
turtle  for  their  totem.  If  they  had  not,
the  ceremony  need  not  have  had  any-
thing to  do  with  totemism.

■'•  The  old  Prussian  and  Japanese
customs  are  typical.  For  the  former,
see  above,  vol.  i.  p.  351.  For  the
latter,  see  below,  vol.  iii.  p.  86  sq.  A
general  account  of  such  customs  must
be  reserved  for  another  work.


_


in  AINO  BEAR-WORSHIP  375

are  found  in  the  Japanese  islands  of  Yesso  and  Saghalien,
and  also  in  the  southern  of  the  Kurile  Islands.  It  is  not
quite  easy  to  make  out  the  attitude  of  the  Ainos  towards  the
bear.  On  the  one  hand  they  give  it  the  name  of  kaimti  or
"  god  "  ;  but  as  they  apply  the  same  word  to  strangers/  it
probably  means  no  more  than  a  being  supposed  to  be
endowed  with  superhuman,  or  at  all  events  extraordinary,
powers.^  Again,  it  is  said  "  the  bear  is  their  chief  divinity  "  ;  ^
"  in  the  religion  of  the  Ainos  the  bear  plays  a  chief  part "  ;  *
"  amongst  the  animals  it  is  especially  the  bear  which  receives
an  idolatrous  veneration "  ;  ^  "  they  worship  it  after  their
fashion  "  ;  "  there  is  no  doubt  that  this  wild  beast  inspires
more  of  the  feeling  which  prompts  worship  than  the  inani-
mate forces  of  nature,  and  the  Ainos  may  be  distinguished
as  bear-worshippers."  ^  Yet,  on  the  other  hand,  they  kill  the
bear  whenever  they  can  ; '  "  the  men  spend  the  autumn,
winter,  and  spring  in  hunting  deer  and  bears.  Part  of  their
tribute  or  taxes  is  paid  in  skins,  and  they  subsist  on  the
dried  meat "  ;  ^  bear's  flesh  is  indeed  one  of  their  staple
foods  ;  they  eat  it  both  fresh  and  salted  ;  ^  and  the  skins  of
bears  furnish  them  with  clothing.^*^  In  fact,  the  "  worship  "
of  which  writers   on  this   subject  speak   appears   to   be   paid

1  B.  Scheube,  "DerBaerencultus  und  but  more  often  is  a  mere  title  of  respect

die  Baerenfeste  der   Ainos,"  Mittheil-  and  reverence."     SeeJ.  Batchelor,  T^^i?

ttngenderdcutscheuGeseUschaftb.S.und  Ainu  of  Japan,   pp.    245-251.      Thus

S.  Ostasiens  (Yokama),  Heft  xxii.  p.  45.  the  Aino  X-awz^' appears  to  mean  nearly

■^  V^^'e  are  told  that  the  Aino  has  gods  the  same  as  the  Dacotan  ivakan,  as  to

for  almost  every  conceivable  object,  and  which  see  vol.  i.  p.  343,  note  2.

that    the    word     kamtii    "has    various  ^  w.    Martin    Wood,    "The    Hairy

shades  of  meaning,  which  vary  if  used  Men    of  Yesso,"    Transactions    of  the

before     or    after     another    word,    and  Ethnological  Society  of  London,  N.S.,

according  to  the  object  to  which  it  is  iv.  (1866),  p.  36.

applied."      "When  the  t^txm.  kamui  \%  *  Rein,  Japan,  i.  446.

applied  to  good  objects,  it  expresses  the  ^  H.  von  ':~,\&ho\di.,Et]mologische  Siu-

quality  of  usefulness,  beneficence,  or  of  die7i  i'lber  die  Aino  attf  der  Insel  Yesso

being  exalted  or  divine.     When  applied  (Berlin,  1 881),  p.  26.

to  supposed  evil  gods,  it  indicates  that  ^  Miss    Bird,    Unbeaten    Tracks    in

which  is  most  to  be  feared  and  dreaded.  Japan  (new  ed.   1885),  p.  275.

When  applied   to  devils,   reptiles,   and  ^    7'rans.  Ethnol.  Soc.  I.e.

evil  diseases,  it  signifies  what  is  most  *  Miss  Bird,  op.  cit.  p.  269.

hateful,     abominable,     and     repulsive.  ^  Scheube,  Z?/^^/«^5-,  p.  4  (reprinted

When  applied  as  a  prefix  to  animals,  from  Mittheilungen  d.  deiitsch.  Gesell.

fish  or  fowl,  it  represents  the  greatest  b.  S.  tmd  S.  Ostasiens,  Yokama).

or  fiercest,  or  the  most  useful  for  food  i"  Scheube,  "  Baerencultus,"  etc.,  p.

or  clothing.      When  applied  to  persons,  45  ;  Joest,  in  Verhandlungen  d.  Berliner

it  is  sometimes  expressive  of  goodness,  Gesell.  f.  A^ithropologie,  1882,  p.  188.


376


A I  NO  SACRIFICE


CHAP.


only  to  the  dead  animal.  Thus,  although  they  kill  a  bear
whenever  they  can,  "  in  the  process  of  dissecting  the  carcass
they  endeavour  to  conciliate  the  deity,  whose  representative
they  have  slain,  by  making  elaborate  obeisances  and  depre-
catory salutations " ;  ^  "  when  a  bear  has  been  killed  the
Ainu  sit  down  and  admire  it,  and  make  their  salaams  to
it"  ;^  "when  a  bear  is  trapped  or  wounded  by  an  arrow,  the
hunters  go  through  an  apologetic  or  propitiatory  ceremony."  ^
The  skulls  of  slain  bears  receive  a  place  of  honour  in  their
huts,  or  are  set  up  on  sacred  posts  outside  the  huts,  and  are
treated  with  much  respect  ;  libations  of  sake,  an  intoxicating
liquor,  are  offered  to  them.^  The  skulls  of  foxes  are  also
fastened  to  the  sacred  posts  outside  the  huts  ;  they  are  re-
garded as  charms  against  evil  spirits,  and  are  consulted  as
oracles.'^  Yet  it  is  expressly  said,  "  The  live  fox  is  revered
just  as  little  as  the  bear  ;  rather  they  avoid  it  as  much  as
possible,  considering  it  a  wily  animal."  ^  The  bear  cannot,
therefore,  be  described  as  a  sacred  animal  of  the  Ainos,  and
it  certainly  is  not  a  totem  ;  for  they  do  not  call  themselves
bears,  they  appear  to  have  no  legend  of  their  descent  from  a
bear,'  and  they  kill  and  eat  the  animal  freely.

But  it  is  the  bear-festival  of  the  Ainos  which  concerns
us  here.  Towards  the  end  of  winter  a  young  bear  is  caught
and  brought  into  the  village.  At  first  he  is  suckled  by  an
Aino  woman  ;  afterwards  he  is  fed  on  fish.  When  he
grows  so  strong  that  he  threatens  to  break  out  of  the  wooden
cage  in  which  he  is  confined,  the  feast  is  held.  But  "  it  is  a
peculiarly  striking  fact  that  the  young  bear  is  not  kept
merely  to  furnish  a  good  meal  ;  rather  he  is  regarded  and
honoured    as   a   fetish,  or  even   as   a  sort  of  higher  being.


>>  8


1    Trans.  Ethnol.  Soc.  I.e.

^  J.  Batchelor,  The  Ainu  of  Japan
(London,   1892),  p.   162.

•■^  Miss  Bird,  op.  cit.  p.  277.

*  Scheube,  Die  Ainos,  p.  15  ;  Sie-
bold,  op.  cit.  p.  26 ;  Trans.  Ethnol.
Soc.  I.e.  ;  Rein,  Japan,  i.  447  ;  Von
Brandt,  "  The  Ainos  and  Japanese,"
Journ.  Anthrop.  Inst.  iii.  (1874),  p.
134  ;  Miss  Bird,  op.  cit.  pp.  275,  276.

^  Scheube,  Die  Ainos,  pp.  15,  16;
Journ.  Anthrop.  Inst.  iii.  (1874),  p.  134.

"  Scheube,  Die  Ai7ios,  p.   16.


''  Reclus  {Noiivelle  Geographic  Uni-
verselle,  vii.  755)  mentions  a  (Japanese?)
legend  which  attributes  the  hairiness  of
the  Ainos  to  the  suckhng  of  their  first
ancestor  by  a  bear.  But  in  the  absence
of  other  evidence  this  is  no  proof  of
totemisin.

*  Rein,  ya/ff«,  i.  447.  Mr.  Batchelor
denies  that  the  bear-cubs  are  suckled
by  the  women.  He  says:  "During
five  years'  sojourn  amongst,  and  almost
daily  intercourse  with,  them  —  living
witli  them   in  their  own  huts — I  have


Ill  OF  THE  BEAR  377

The  festival  is  generally  celebrated  in  September  or  October.
Before  it  takes  place  the  Ainos  apologise  to  their  gods,
alleging  that  they  have  treated  the  bear  kindly  as  long  as
they  could,  now  they  can  feed  him  no  longer,  and  are
obliged  to  kill  him.  A  man  who  gives  a  bear-feast  invites
his  relations  and  friends  ;  in  a  small  village  nearly  the  whole
community  takes  part  in  the  feast.  One  of  these  festivals
has  been  described  by  an  eye-witness,  Dr.  Scheube.^  On
entering  the  hut  he  found  about  thirty  Ainos  present,  men,
women,  and  children,  all  dressed  in  their  best.  The  master
of  the  house  first  offered  a  libation  on  the  fireplace  to  the
god  of  the  fire,  and  the  guests  followed  his  example.  Then
a  libation  was  offered  to  the  house-god  in  his  sacred  corner
of  the  hut.  Meanwhile  the  housewife,  who  had  nursed  the
bear,  sat  by  herself,  silent  and  sad,  bursting  now  and  then
into  tears.  Her  grief  was  obviously  unaffected,  and  it
deepened  as  the  festival  went  on.  Next,  the  master  of  the
house  and  some  of  the  guests  went  out  of  the  hut  and
offered  libations  before  the  bear's  cage.  A  few  drops  were
presented  to  the  bear  in  a  saucer,  which  he  at  once  upset.
Then  the  women  and  girls  danced  round  the  cage,  their
faces  turned  towards  it,  their  knees  slightly  bent,  rising  and
hopping  on  their  toes.  As  they  danced  they  clapped  their
hands  and  sang  a  monotonous  song.  The  housewife  and  a
few  old  women,  who  might  have  nursed  many  bears,  danced
tearfully,  stretching  out  their  arms  to  the  bear,  and  address-
ing it  in  terms  of  endearment.  The  young  folks  were  less
affected  ;  they  laughed  as  well  as  sang.  Disturbed  by  the
noise,  the  bear  began  to  rush  about  his  cage  and  howl
lamentably.  Next  libations  were  offered  at  the  inabos  or
sacred  wands  which  stand  outside  of  an  Aino  hut.  These
wands  are  about  a  couple  of  feet  high,  and  are  whittled  at
the  top  into  spiral  shavings.^      Five  new  wands  with  bamboo

never   once  witnessed  anything  of  the  p.  375,  note  i.

sort,  nor  can  I  find  a  single  Ainu  man  ^  Scheube,  "  Baerencultus,"  etc.,  p.

or  woman  who  has  seen  it  done"  {The  46;    id..  Die  Ainos,  p.  15;   Miss   Bird,

Ainu   of  Japan,    p.    173).       But  as  a  op.    cit.    p.    273  sq.      These    inabos  or

Christian  missionary  Mr.  Batchelor  was  inao  are  not  gods  but  sacred  offerings  to

perhaps   not   hkely   to   hear  of  such  a  gods  ;  they  are  made  on  almost  every

custom,  if  it  existed.  occasion  when  prayer  is  offered.      See

^   "Der     Baerencultus,"    etc.;      for  J-  Batchelor,  The  Ainu  of  Japan,  pp.

the  full   title  of  the  work   see  above,  86-98.


378  AINO  SACRIFICE  chap.

leaves    attached  to  them   had  been   set  up  for  the  festival.
This    is   regularly   done   when    a   bear   is    killed  ;  the   leaves
mean  that  the  animal  may  come  to  life  again.      Then  the  bear
was  let  out  of  his  cage,  a   rope  was   thrown   round   his   neck,
and    he    was    led   about    in   the    neighbourhood    of  the   hut.
While  this  was  being  done  the  men,  headed   by  a  chief,  shot
at   the  beast  with  arrows  tipped  with  wooden  buttons.      Dr.
Scheube  had  to  do  so  also.      Then  the  bear  was  taken  before
the   sacred  wands,  a   stick  was   put   in   his   mouth,  nine   men
knelt   on    him   and    pressed   his   neck   against  a   beam.      In
five  minutes  the  animal  had  expired  without  uttering  a  sound.
Meantime  the  women  and  girls  had   taken   post   behind   the
men,   where   they  danced,   lamenting,   and   beating   the   men
who   were    killing    the    bear.      The   bear's   carcass   was   next
placed  on  a  mat  before  the  sacred  wands  ;   and  a  sword   and
quiver,  taken  from   the  wands,  were   hung  round   the   beast's
neck.      Being  a  she-bear,  it  was  also  adorned  with  a  necklace
and  ear-rings.      Then   food   and   drink  were  offered   to   it,  in
the   shape  of  millet-broth,   millet-cakes,   and    a   pot  of  sake.
The    men    now    sat    down  on    mats    before    the    dead    bear,
offered    libations    to    it,    and    drank    deep.      Meanwhile    the
women   and   girls   had   laid  aside  all    marks   of  sorrow,  and
danced    merrily,   none    more   merrily   than    the    old    women.
When   the   mirth   was   at   its  height   two   young  Ainos,  who
had  let  the  bear  out  of  his  cage,  mounted  the  roof  of  the
hut  and  threw  cakes  of  millet  among  the   company,  who   all
scrambled  for  them  without  distinction  of  age  or  sex.      The
bear   was   next   skinned    and   disembowelled,   and   the  trunk
severed  from  the   head,  to  which   the   skin  was   left   hanging.
The   blood,   caught   in   cups,  was   eagerly  swallowed   by   the
men.      None  of  the  women  or  children  appeared  to  drink  the
blood,  though  custom   did   not   forbid   them   to  do   so.      The
liver  was   cut   in   small   pieces   and   eaten   raw,  with  salt,  the
women  and  children  getting  their  share.      The   flesh  and  the
rest  of  the  vitals  were  taken   into   the   house   to   be   kept   till
the   next  day  but   one,  and   then   to   be   divided   among  the
persons  who  had  been  present  at  the  feast.      Blood  and  liver
were  offered  to  Dr.  Scheube.      While  the  bear  was  being  dis-
embowelled,  the   women   and   girls   danced   the   same   dance
which    they  had    danced    at    the    beginning — not,   however.


Ill


OF  THE  BEAR


379


round  the  cage,  but  in  front  of  the  sacred  wands.  At  this
dance  the  old  women,  who  had  been  merry  a  moment  before,
again  shed  tears  freely.  After  the  brain  had  been  extracted
from  the  bear's  head  and  swallowed  with  salt,  the  skull,
detached  from  the  skin,  was  hung  on  a  pole  beside  the
sacred  wands.  The  stick  with  which  the  bear  had  been
gagged  was  also  fastened  to  the  pole,  and  so  were  the  sword
and  quiver  which  had  been  hung  on  the  carcass.  The  latter
were  removed  in  about  an  hour,  but  the  rest  remained  stand-
ing. The  whole  company,  men  and  women,  danced  noisily
before  the  pole  ;  and  another  drinking-bout,  in  which  the
women  joined,  closed  the  festival.

The  mode  of  killing  the  bear  is  described  somewhat
differently  by  Miss  Bird,  who,  however,  did  not  witness  the
ceremony.  She  says  :  "  Yells  and  shouts  are  used  to  excite
the  bear ;  and  when  he  becomes  much  agitated  a  chief
shoots  him  with  an  arrow,  inflicting  a  slight  wound  which
maddens  him,  on  which  the  bars  of  the  cage  are  raised,  and
he  springs  forth,  very  furious.  At  this  stage  the  Ainos  run
upon  him  with  various  weapons,  each  one  striving  to  inflict
a  wound,  as  it  brings  good  luck  to  draw  his  blood.  As
soon  as  he  falls  down  exhausted  his  head  is  cut  off,  and  the
weapons  with  which  he  has  been  wounded  are  offered  to  it,
and  he  is  asked  to  avenge  himself  upon  them."  At  Usu,
on  Volcano  Bay,  when  the  bear  is  being  killed,  the  Ainos
shout,  "  We  kill  you,  O  bear !  come  back  soon  into  an
Aino."  ^  A  very  respectable  authority.  Dr.  Siebold,  states
that  the  bear's  own  heart  is  frequently  offered  to  the  dead
animal,  in  order  to  assure  him  that  he  is  still  in  life."'  This,
however,  is  denied  by  Dr.  Scheube,  who  says  the  heart  is
eaten.^  The  custom  may  be  observed  in  some  places,
though  not  in  others.


1  Miss  Bird,  op.  cit.  p.  276  sq.  Miss
Bird's  information  must  be  received  with
caution,  as  there  are  grounds  for  be-
lieving that  her  informant  deceived  her.
Mr.  Batchelor,  a  much  better  authority,
agrees  with  Dr.  Scheube  in  saying  that
after  the  bear  has  been  maddened  by
being  shot  at  with  blunt  arrows  he  is
choked  to  death  by  men  who  squeeze
his  neck  between  two  poles.  See  J.
Batchelor,  The  Ainu  of  Japan,  p.    176


sq.  Before  the  bear  is  let  out  of  his
cage  a  man  tells  the  beast  that  it  is
about  to  be  sent  to  its  forefathers,  craves
pardon  for  what  is  about  to  be  done,
hopes  that  the  animal  will  not  be  angry,
and  consoles  it  by  saying  that  plenty
of  wine  and  of  whittled  sticks  will  be
sent  with  it  {op.  cit.  p.  175  sq.).

^  Siebold,  EtJuiolog.  Studien  iiber
die  Aino.,  p.  26.

^  "  Baerencultus,"  etc.,  p.  50,  note.


38o  AINO  AND  GILYAK  chap.

Perhaps  the  first  pubHshed  account  of  the  bear-feast  of
the  Ainos  is  one  which  was  given  to  the  world  by  a  Japanese
writer  in  1652.  It  has  been  translated  into  French  and  runs
thus  :  "  When  they  find  a  young  bear,  they  bring  it  home,
and  the  wife  suckles  it.  When  it  is  grown  they  feed  it  with
fish  and  fowl  and  kill  it  in  winter  for  the  sake  of  the  liver,
which  they  esteem  an  antidote  to  poison,  the  worms,  colic,
and  disorders  of  the  stomach.  It  is  of  a  very  bitter  taste,
and  is  good  for  nothing  if  the  bear  has  been  killed  in
summer.  This  butchery  begins  in  the  first  Japanese  month.
For  this  purpose  they  put  the  animal's  head  between  two
long  poles,  which  are  squeezed  together  by  fifty  or  sixty
people,  both  men  and  women.  When  the  bear  is  dead
they  eat  his  flesh,  keep  the  liver  as  a  medicine,  and  sell  the
skin,  which  is  black  and  commonly  six  feet  long,  but  the
longest  measure  twelve  feet.  As  soon  as  he  is  skinned,  the
persons  who  nourished  the  beast  begin  to  bewail  him  ;
afterwards  they  make  little  cakes  to  regale  those  who
helped  them."  ^

The  Gilyaks,  a  Tunguzian  people  of  Eastern  Siberia,^
hold  a  bear-festival  of  the  same  sort.  "  The  bear  is  the
object  of  the  most  refined  solicitude  of  an  entire  village  and
plays  the  chief  part  in  their  religious  ceremonies."^  An  old
she-bear  is  shot  and  her  cub  is  reared,  but  not  suckled,  in
the  village.  When  the  bear  is  big  enough  he  is  taken  from
his  cage  and  dragged  through  the  village.  But  first  they
lead  him  to  the  bank  of  the  river,  for  this  is  believed  to  ensure
abundance  of  fish  to  each  family.  He  is  then  taken  into
every  house  in  the  village,  where  fish,  brandy,  and  so  forth
are  offered  to  him.  Some  people  prostrate  themselves
before  the  beast.  His  entrance  into  a  house  is  supposed  to
bring  a  blessing  ;  and  if  he  snuffs  at  the  food  offered  to
him,  this  also  is  a  blessing.  Nevertheless  they  tease  and
worry,  poke   and   tickle  the  animal  continually,  so  that  he  is

'    "leso-Ki,   oil   description  de   I'lle  lower    Amoor    and    the   north    of   Sa-

d"Iesso,  avec  une  notice  sur  la  revolte  ghalien.      See   E.  G.   Ravenstein,   The

de    Samsay-in,    composee    par    I'inter-  Russians  on  the  Amur,  p.  389.
prete  Kannemon,"   printed    in    Malte-  ■'   "Notes  on  the   Rivei*  Amur   and

Bxms  Annales  des  Voyages, \\\\\  (Paris,  the  adjacent  districts,"  translated  from

1814),  p.   154.  ihe  Russian, /ouma/ off  he  A'oya/ Geop:

"  They    inhabit    the    banks    of    the  Society,  xxviii.  (1858),  p.  396.


Ill  SACRIFICE  OF  THE  BEAR  381

surly  and  snappish.^  After  being  thus  taken  to  every
house,  he  is  tied  to  a  peg  and  shot  dead  with  arrows.  His
head  is  then  cut  off,  decked  with  shavings,  and  placed  on
the  table  where  the  feast  is  set  out.  Here  they  beg  pardon
of  the  beast  and  worship  him.  Then  his  flesh  is  roasted
and  eaten  in  special  vessels  of  wood  finely  carved.  They
do  not  eat  the  flesh  raw  nor  drink  the  blood,  as  the  Ainos
do.  The  brain  and  entrails  are  eaten  last  ;  and  the  skull,
still  decked  with  shavings,  is  placed  on  a  tree  near  the
house.  Then  the  people  sing  and  both  sexes  dance  in
ranks,  as  bears.^

One  of  these  bear-festivals  was  witnessed  by  the  Russian
traveller  L.  von  Schrenck  and  his  companions  at  the  Gilyak
village  of  Tebach  in  January  1856.  From  his  detailed
report  of  the  ceremony  we  may  gather  some  particulars
which  are  not  noticed  in  the  briefer  accounts  which  I  have
just  summarised.  The  bear,  he  tells  us,  plays  a  great  part
in  the  life  of  all  the  peoples  inhabiting  the  region  of  the
Amoor  and  Siberia  as  far  as  Kamtchatka,  but  among  none
of  them  is  his  importance  greater  than  among  the  Gilyaks.
The  immense  size  which  the  animal  attains  in  the  valley  of
the  Amoor,  his  ferocity  whetted  by  hunger,  and  the  fre-
quency of  his  appearance  all  combine  to  make  him  the  most
dreaded  beast  of  prey  in  the  country.  No  wonder,  therefore,
that  the  fancy  of  the  Gilyaks  is  busied  with  him  and  sur-
rounds him,  both  in  life  and  in  death,  with  a  sort  of  halo  of
superstitious  fear.  Thus,  for  example,  it  is  thought  that  if
a  Gilyak  falls  in  combat  with  a  bear,  his   soul   transmigrates

1  Compare  the  custom   of  pinching  op  het  eiland  Sumatra,"  in  Tijdschrift

thefrogbeforecuttingoffhishead, above,  van  het  Nederl.  Aardrijks.    Genootsch.

vol.    i.    p.    219.      In  Japan  sorceresses  Tweede  Serie,  dl.  iii.  (1886),  Afdeeling,

bury   a   dog  in  the   earth,    tease    him,  meer   uitgebreide  artikelen,  No.   2,   p.

then  cut  off  his  head   and   put    it   in   a  306  ;    Van    Dijk,   in    Tijdschrift   voor

box  to  be  used  in  magic.     See  Bastian,  Indische  Taal-  Land-  en   Volkenkunde,

Die  Cnltitrldnder  dcs  alien  Amerilm,  i.  xxxviii.  (1S95),  p.  307  sq.
475    note,   who  adds   "wzV    im   ostin-  ^  W.  Joest,  in  Scheube,  Die  Ainos,

dischen     Archipelago    die     Schiitzseele  p.    17  ;  Revue  d^Ethnographie,  ii.    307

gereizt    wird."       He    probably    refers  sq.  (on  the  authority  of  Mr.  Seeland)  ;

to    the    Batta    Panghnlii-balang.      See  Internatio7iales  Archiv  fiir  Ethnologie,

Rosenberg,    Der  Malayische  Archipel,  i.    102    (on    the   authority    of   Captain

p.  59  sq.  ;  W.  Kodding,  "  Die  Batak-  Jacobsen).     What  exactly  is  meant  by

schen    Gotter,"    Allgetneine    Missions-  "dancing    as    bears"    {'■'■  tanzen    beide

Zeitschrift,x\\.{\'i?>^),-^.i,']Zsq.;  Neu-  Geschlechter  Reigentiinze,  wie  Bdren,^'

mann,  "HetPane-enBila-stroomgebied  Joest,  I.e.)  does  not  appear.


382  GILYAK  SACRIFICE  chap.

into  the  body  of  the  beast.  Nevertheless  his  flesh  has  an
irresistible  attraction  for  the  Gilyak  palate,  especially  when
the  animal  has  been  kept  in  captivity  for  some  time  and
fattened  on  fish,  which  gives  the  flesh,  in  the  opinion  of  the
Gilyaks,  a  peculiarly  delicious  flavour.  But  in  order  to
enjoy  this  dainty  with  impunity  they  deem  it  needful  to
perform  a  long  series  of  ceremonies,  of  which  the  intention
is  to  delude  the  living  bear  by  a  show  of  respect,  and  to
appease  the  anger  of  the  dead  animal  by  the  homage  paid
to  his  departed  spirit.  The  marks  of  respect  begin  as  soon
as  the  beast  is  captured.  He  is  brought  home  in  triumph
and  kept  in  a  cage,  where  all  the  villagers  take  it  in  turns
to  feed  him.  For  although  he  may  have  been  captured  or
purchased  by  one  man,  he  belongs  in  a  manner  to  the
whole  village.  His  flesh  will  furnish  a  common  feast,  and
hence  all  must  contribute  to  support  him  in  his  life.  His
diet  consists  exclusively  of  raw  or  dried  fish,  water,  and  a
sort  of  porridge  compounded  of  powdered  fish-skins,  train-
oil,  and  whortle-berries.  The  length  of  time  he  is  kept  in
captivity  depends  on  his  age.  Old  bears  are  kept  only  a
few  months  ;  cubs  are  kept  till  they  are  full-grown.  A
thick  layer  of  fat  on  the  captive  bear  gives  the  signal  for
the  festival,  which  is  always  held  in  winter,  generally  in
December  but  sometimes  in  January  or  February.  At  the
festival  witnessed  by  the  Russian  travellers,  which  lasted  a
good  many  days,  three  bears  were  killed  and  eaten.  More
than  once  the  animals  were  led  about  in  procession  and
compelled  to  enter  every  house  in  the  village,  where  they
were  fed  as  a  mark  of  honour,  and  to  show  that  they  were
welcome  guests.  But  before  the  beasts  set  out  on  this
round  of  visits,  the  Gilyaks  played  at  skipping-rope  in
presence,  and  perhaps,  as  L.  von  Schrenck  inclined  to
believe,  in  honour  of  the  animals.  The  night  before  they
were  killed,  the  three  bears  were  led  by  moonlight  a  long
way  on  the  ice  of  the  frozen  river.  That  night  no  one  in  the
village  might  sleep.  Next  day,  after  the  animals  had  been
again  led  down  the  steep  bank  to  the  river,  and  conducted
thrice  round  the  hole  in  the  ice  from  which  the  women  of
the  village  drew  their  water,  they  were  taken  to  an  ap-
pointed place   not   far   from   the   village,  and   shot   to    death


Ill  OF  THE  BEAR  383

with  arrows.  The  place  of  sacrifice  or  execution  was
marked  as  holy  by  being  surrounded  with  whittled  sticks,
from  the  tops  of  which  shavings  hung  in  curls.  Such  sticks
are  with  the  Gilyaks,  as  with  the  Ainos,  the  regular  symbols
that  accompany  all  religious  ceremonies.  Before  the  bears
received  the  fatal  shafts  from  two  young  men  chosen  for  the
purpose,  the  boys  were  allowed  to  discharge  their  small  but
not  always  harmless  arrows  at  the  beasts.  As  soon  as  the
carcasses  had  been  cut  up,  the  skins  with  the  heads  attached
to  them  were  set  up  in  a  wooden  cage  in  such  a  way  as  to
make  it  appear  that  the  animals  had  entered  the  cage  and
were  looking  out  of  it.  The  blood  which  flowed  from  the
bears  on  the  spot  where  they  were  killed  was  immediately
covered  up  with  snow,  to  prevent  any  one  from  accidentally
treading  on  it,  a  thing  which  was  strictly  tabooed.

When  the  house  has  been  arranged  and  decorated  for
their  reception,  the  skins  of  the  bears,  with  their  heads
attached  to  them,  are  brought  into  it,  not  however  by  the
door,  but  through  a  window,  and  then  hung  on  a  sort  of
scaffold  opposite  the  hearth  on  which  the  flesh  is  to  be
cooked.  This  ceremony  of  bringing  the  bears'  skins  into
the  house  by  the  window  was  not  witnessed  by  the  Russian
travellers,  who  only  learned  of  it  at  second  hand.  They
were  told  that  when  the  thin  disc  of  fish-skin,  which  is  the
substitute  for  a  pane  of  glass  in  the  window,  has  been  re-
placed after  the  passage  of  the  bear-skins,  a  figure  of  a
toad  made  of  birch  bark  is  affixed  to  it  on  the  outside,
while  inside  the  house  a  figure  of  a  bear  dressed  in  Gilyak
costume  is  set  on  the  bench  of  honour.  The  meanine  of  this
part  of  the  ceremony,  as  it  is  conjecturally  interpreted  by
Von  Schrenck,  may  be  as  follows.  The  toad  is  a  creature
that  has  a  very  evil  reputation  with  the  Gilyaks,  and
accordingly  they  attempt  to  lay  upon  it,  as  on  a  scapegoat,
the  guilt  of  the  slaughter  of  the  worshipful  bear.  Hence
its  effigy  is  excluded  from  the  house  and  has  to  remain
outside  at  the  window,  a  witness  of  its  own  misdeeds  ;
whereas  the  bear  is  brought  into  the  house  and  treated  as
an  honoured  guest,  for  fish  and  flesh  are  laid  before  it,  and
its  effigy,  dressed  in  Gilyak  costume,  is  seated  on  the  bench
of  honour.


384  GILYAK  SACRIFICE


CHAT.


The  boiling  of  the  bear's  flesh  among  the  Gilyaks  is
done  only  by  the  oldest  men,  whose  high  privilege  it  is  ;
women  and  children,  young  men  and  boys  have  no  part  in
it.  The  task  is  performed  slowly  and  deliberately,  with  a
certain  solemnity.  On  the  occasion  described  by  the
Russian  travellers  the  kettle  was  first  of  all  surrounded  with
a  thick  wreath  of  shavings,  and  then  filled  with  snow,  for
the  use  of  water  to  cook  bear's  flesh  is  tabooed.  Meanwhile
a  large  wooden  trough,  richly  adorned  with  arabesques  and
carvings  of  all  sorts,  was  hung  immediately  under  the  snouts
of  the  bears  ;  on  one  side  of  the  trough  was  carved  in  relief
a  bear,  on  the  other  side  a  toad.  When  the  carcasses  were
being  cut  up,  each  leg  was  laid  on  the  ground  in  front  of
the  bears,  as  if  to  ask  their  leave,  before  being  placed  in  the
kettle  ;  and  the  boiled  flesh  was  fished  out  of  the  kettle
with  an  iron  hook,  and  placed  in  the  trough  before  the
bears,  in  order  that  they  might  be  the  first  to  taste  of  their
own  flesh.  As  fast,  too,  as  the  fat  was  cut  in  strips  it  was
hung  up  in  front  of  the  bears,  and  afterwards  placed  in  a
small  wooden  trough  on  the  ground  before  them.  Last  of
all  the  inner  organs  of  the  beasts  were  cut  up  and  placed
in  small  vessels.  At  the  same  time  the  women  made
bandages  out  of  parti-coloured  rags,  and  after  sunset  these
bandages  were  tied  round  the  bears'  snouts  just  below  the
eyes  "  in  order  to  dry  the  tears  that  flowed  from  them."
To  each  bandage,  just  below  the  eyes,  was  attached  a  figure
of  a  toad  cut  out  of  birch  bark.  The  meaning  of  this
appears  to  be,  as  Von  Schrenck  conjectured,  as  follows.
With  the  carving  of  his  inner  organs,  the  heart,  liver,  and
so  forth,  the  bear  sees  that  his  fate  is  sealed,  and  sheds
some  natural  tears  at  his  hard  lot.  These  tears  trickle
down  his  snout  over  the  figure  of  the  toad,  which  the  poor
deluded  bear  accordingly  regards  as  the  author  of  ail  the
mischief.  For  he  cannot  blame  the  Gilyaks,  who  have
treated  him  so  kindly.  Have  they  not  received  him  as  a
guest  in  their  house,  set  him  on  the  seat  of  honour,  given
him  of  their  best,  and  done  nothing  but  with  his  knowledge
and  permission  ?  Finally,  have  not  their  women  shown
him  the  last  delicate  mark  of  attention  by  drying  the  tears
that  flow  from  his  eyes  and  trickle  down  his  nose  ?      Surely


Ill  OF  THE  BEAR  385

then   he  cannot  think  that  these  kindly  folk  have  done  him
any  harm  ;  it  was  all  the  fault  of  the  unprincipled  toad.

Whatever  may  be  thought  of  this  explanation,  as  soon
as  the  ceremony  of  wiping  away  poor  bruin's  tears  had  been
performed,  the  assembled  Gilyaks  set  to  work  in  earnest
to  devour  his  flesh.  The  broth  obtained  by  boiling  the
meat  had  already  been  partaken  of  The  wooden  bowls,
platters,  and  spoons  out  of  which  the  Gilyaks  eat  the  broth
and  flesh  of  the  bears  on  these  occasions  are  always  made
specially  for  the  purpose  at  the  festival  and  only  then  ;  they
are  elaborately  ornamented  with  carved  figures  of  bears  and
other  devices  that  refer  to  the  animal  or  the  festival,  and
the  people  have  a  strong  superstitious  scruple  against  parting
with  them.  While  the  festival  lasts,  no  salt  may  be  used
in  cooking  the  bear's  flesh  or  indeed  any  other  food  ;  and
no  flesh  of  any  kind  may  be  roasted,  for  the  bear  would
hear  the  hissing  and  sputtering  of  the  roasting  flesh,  and
would  be  very  angry.  After  the  bones  had  been  picked
clean  they  were  put  back  in  the  kettle  in  which  the  flesh
had  been  boiled.  And  when  the  festal  meal  was  over,  an
old  man  took  his  stand  at  the  door  of  the  house  with  a
branch  of  fir  in  his  hand,  with  which,  as  the  people  passed
out,  he  gave  a  light  blow  to  every  one  who  had  eaten  of  the
bear's  flesh  or  fat,  perhaps  as  a  punishment  for  their  treat-
ment of  the  worshipful  animal.  In  the  afternoon  of  the
same  day  the  women  performed  a  strange  dance.  Only  one
woman  danced  at  a  time,  throwing  the  upper  part  of  her
body  into  the  oddest  postures,  while  she  held  in  her  hands
a  branch  of  fir  or  a  kind  of  wooden  castanets.  The  other
women  meanwhile  played  an  accompaniment  in  a  peculiar
rhythm  by  drumming  on  the  beams  of  the  house  with  clubs.
The  dance  reminded  one  of  the  Russian  travellers  of  the  bear-
dance  which  he  had  seen  danced  by  the  women  of  Kamt-
chatka.  Von  Schrenck  believes,  though  he  has  not  positive
evidence,  that  after  the  fat  and  flesh  of  the  bear  have  been
consumed,  his  skull  is  cleft  with  an  axe,  and  the  brain  taken
out  and  eaten.  Then  the  bones  and  the  skull  are  solemnly
carried  out  by  the  oldest  people  to  a  place  in  the  forest
not  far  from  the  village.  There  all  the  bones  except  the
skull  are  buried.    After  that  a  young  tree  is  felled  a  few  inches

VOL.  II  2  0


386  BEAR-FESTIVALS  chap.

above  the  ground,  its  stump  cleft,  and  the  skull  wedged  into
the  cleft.  When  the  grass  grows  over  the  spot,  the  skull
disappears  from  view,  and  that  is  the  end  of  the  bear.^

The  Goldi,  neighbours  of  the  Gilyaks,  treat  the  bear  in
much  the  same  way.  They  hunt  and  kill  it ;  but  sometimes
they  capture  a  live  bear  and  keep  him  in  a  cage,  feeding  him
well  and  calling  him  their  son  and  brother.  Then  at  a  great
festival  he  is  taken  from  his  cage,  paraded  about  with
marked  consideration,  and  afterwards  killed  and  eaten.
"  The  skull,  jaw-bones,  and  ears  are  then  suspended  on  a
tree,  as  an  antidote  against  evil  spirits  ;  but  the  flesh  is  eaten
and  much  relished,  for  they  believe  that  all  who  partake  of
it  acquire  a  zest  for  the  chase,  and  become  courageous."  ^'

The  Orotchis,  another  Tunguzian  people  of  the  region
of  the  Amoor,  hold  bear  festivals  of  the  same  general
character.  Any  one  who  catches  a  bear  cub  considers  it  his
bounden  duty  to  rear  it  in  a  cage  for  about  three  years,  in
order  at  the  end  of  that  time  to  kill  it  publicly  and  eat  the
flesh  with  his  friends.  The  feasts  being  public,  though
organised  by  individuals,  the  people  try  to  have  one  in
each  Orotchi  village  every  year  in  turn.  When  the  bear
is  taken  out  of  his  cage,  he  is  led  about  by  means  of
ropes  to  all  the  huts,  accompanied  by  people  armed  with
lances,  bows,  and  arrows.  At  each  hut  the  bear  and
bear-leaders  are  treated  to  something  good  to  eat  and
drink.  This  goes  on  for  several  days  until  all  the  huts,  not
only  in  that  village  but  also  in  the  next,  have  been  visited.
The  days  are  given  up  to  sport  and  noisy  jollity.  Then  the
bear  is  tied  to  a  tree  or  wooden  pillar  and  shot  to  death  by
the  arrows  of  the  crowd,  after  which  its  flesh  is  roasted  and
eaten.  Among  the  Orotchis  of  the  Tundja  River  women
take  part  in  the  bear-feasts,  while  among  the  Orotchis  of
the  River  Vi  the  women  will  not  even  touch  bear's  flesh.^

1  L.  von  Schrenck,  Keisen  and  Ts.x\.a.\s,^^  Journal  of  ike  China  B?anck
Forschungen  im  Amur-land  .,  iii.  696-  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  for  the  year
731.  1891  -  1892,    New     Series,    xxvi.    36-

2  Ravenstein,  The  Kussians  on  the  39.  L.  von  Schrenck  describes  a
Amur,  p.  379  sq.  ;  T.  W.  Atkinson,  bear-feast  which  he  witnessed  in  1855
Travels  in  the  Regions  of  the  Upper  among  the  Oltscha  {Reisen  und  For-
and  Lower  Amoor  (London,  i860),  p.  schungen  im  Amiir-lande,\\\.']2y']2.'?>).
482  sq.  The  Oltscha   are   proljably  the  same  ns

2  E.    H.    Fraser,    "The     fish-skin       the  Orotchis.


Ill  BEAR-FESTIVALS  387

In  the  treatment  of  the  captive  bear  by  these  tribes  there
are  features  which  can  hardly  be  distinguished  from  worship.
Such  in  particular  is  the  Gilyak  custom  of  leading  him  from
house  to  house,  that  every  family  may  receive  his  blessing —
a  custom  parallel  to  the  European  one  of  taking  a  May-tree
or  a  personal  representative  of  the  tree-spirit  from  door  to
door  in  spring,  in  order  that  all  may  share  the  fresh  energies
of  reviving  nature.  Again  the  expected  resurrection  of  the
bear  is  avowedly  indicated  by  the  bamboo  leaves  and  by  the
prayer  addressed  to  him  to  "  come  back  soon  into  an  Aino."
And  that  the  eating  of  his  flesh  is  regarded  as  a  sacrament
is  made  probable  by  the  Gilyak  custom  of  reserving  special
vessels  to  hold  the  bear's  flesh  on  this  solemn  occasion.

How  is  the  reverence  thus  paid  to  particular  bears  to  be
reconciled  with  the  fact  that  bears  in  general  are  habitually
hunted  and  killed  by  these  tribes  for  the  sake  of  their  flesh
and  skins  ?  On  the  one  hand,  the  bear  is  treated  as  a  god  ;
on  the  other  hand,  as  a  creature  wholly  subservient  to  human
needs.  The  apparent  contradiction  vanishes  when  we  place
ourselves  at  the  savage  point  of  view.  The  savage,  we  must
remember,  believes  that  animals  are  endowed  with  feelings  and
intelligence  like  those  of  men,  and  that,  like  men,  they  possess
souls  which  survive  the  death  of  their  bodies  either  to  wander
about  as  disembodied  spirits  or  to  be  born  again  in  animal  form.
Thus,  for  example,  we  are  told  that  the  Indian  of  Guiana
does  not  see  "  any  sharp  line  of  distinction,  such  as  we  see,
between  man  and  other  animals,  between  one  kind  of  animal
and  other,  or  between  animals — man  included — and  inanimate
objects.  On  the  contrary,  to  the  Indian,  all  objects,  animate
and  inanimate,  seem  exactly  of  the  same  nature  except  that
they  differ  in  the  accident  of  bodily  form.  Every  object  in
the  whole  world  is  a  being,  consisting  of  a  body  and  spirit,
and  differs  from  every  other  object  in  no  respect  except  that
of  bodily  form,  and  in  the  greater,  or  less  degree  of  brute
power  and  brute  cunning  consequent  on  the  difference  of
bodily  form  and  bodily  habits."  ^  Even  the  distinction  of
bodily  form  seems  almost  to  elude  the  dull  intellect  of  some
savages.  An  unusually  intelligent  Bushman  questioned  by  a
missionary  "could  not  state  any  difference  between  a  man  and

1  E.  F.  im  Thuni,  Among  the  Indians  of  Guiana,  p.  350.


388  MAN  AND  BEAST  chap.

a  brute — he  did  not  know  but  a  buffalo  might  shoot  with  bows
and  arrows  as  well  as  a  man,  if  it  had  them."  ^  Nor  is  it  merely
that  in  the  mental  fog  the  savage  takes  beasts  for  men  ;  he
seems  to  be  nearly  as  ready  to  take  himself  and  his  fellows
for  beasts.  When  the  Russians  first  landed  on  one  of  the
Alaskan  islands  the  people  took  them  for  cuttle-fish,  "  on
account  of  the  buttons  on  their  clothes."  ^  We  have  seen
how  some  savages  identify  themselves  with  animals  of  various
sorts  by  eating  the  maggots  bred  in  the  rotting  carcasses  of
the  beasts,  and  how  thereafter,  when  occasion  serves,  they
behave  in  their  adopted  characters  by  wriggling,  roaring,
barking,  or  grunting,  according  as  they  happen  to  be  boa-
constrictors,  lions,  jackals,  or  hippopotamuses.^  In  the
island  of  Mabuiag  men  of  the  Sam,  that  is,  the  Cassowary,
totem  think  that  cassowaries  are  men  or  nearly  so.  "  Sam
he  all  same  as  relation,  he  belong  same  family,"  is  the  account
they  give  of  their  kinship  with  the  creature.  Conversely  they
hold  that  they  themselves  are  cassowaries,  or  at  all  events
that  they  possess  some  of  the  qualities  of  the  long-legged
bird.  When  a  Cassowary  man  went  forth  to  reap  laurels  on
the  field  of  battle,  he  used  to  reflect  with  satisfaction  on  the
length  of  his  lower  limbs  :  "  My  leg  is  long  and  thin,  I  can
run  and  not  feel  tired  ;  my  legs  will  go  quickly  and  the  grass
will  not  entangle  them."  ^  Omaha  Indians  believe  that
between  a  man  and  the  creature  which  is  his  personal  totem
there  subsists  so  close  a  bond  that  the  man  acquires  the
powers  and  qualities,  the  virtues  and  defects  of  the  animal.
Thus  if  a  man  has  seen  a  bear  in  that  vision  at  puberty
which  determines  an  Indian's  personal  totem,  he  will  be  apt
to  be  wounded  in  battle,  because  the  bear  is  a  slow  and
clumsy  animal  and  easily  trapped.  If  he  has  dreamed  of  an
eagle,  he  will  be  able  to  see  into  the  future  and  foretell
coming  events,  because  the  eagle's  vision  is  keen  and
piercing.*       The    Bororos,  a  tribe  of    Indians  in  the  heart

•  John  Campbell,   T7-avek  in  South       graphy  of  the  Western  Tribe  of  Torres
Africa,  being  a  Narrative  of  a  Second       S^iXMis,,'"  Joiir7tal  of  the  Anthropological

Journey  in  the  Interior  of  that  Country,  Institute,  xix.  (1890),  p.  393.
ii.  34.  '  Miss  Alice  C.  Fletcher,  The  import

'^  X.Vt.X.XQ'^,  Report  on  the  Population,  of  the  totem,  a  study  from  the  Omaha

Industries,  and   Resources  of  Alaska,  tribe,    p.    6    (paper    read    before    the

p.  145.  ^  Above,  p.  353  s/^.  American  Association  for  the  Advance-

*  A.     C.     Haddon,    "The    Ethno-  ment  of  Science,  August  1897).


Ill


NOT  CLEARL  Y  DISTINGUISHED  389


of  Brazil,  will  have  it  that  they  are  birds  of  a  gorgeous  red
plumage  which  live  in  the  Brazilian  forest.  It  is  not  merely
that  their  souls  will  pass  into  these  birds  at  death,  but  they
are  actually  identical  with  them  in  their  life,  and  accordingly
they  treat  the  birds  as  they  might  treat  their  fellow-tribes-
men, keeping  them  in  captivity,  refusing  to  eat  their  flesh,
and  mourning  for  them  when  they  die.  However,  they  kill
the  wild  birds  for  their  feathers,  and,  though  they  will  not
kill,  they  pluck  the  tame  ones  to  deck  their  own  naked  brown
bodies  with  the  gaudy  plumage  of  their  feathered  brethren.^
Thus  to  the  savage,  who  regards  all  living  creatures  as
practically  on  a  footing  of  equality  with  man,  the  act  of
killing  and  eating  an  animal  must  wear  a  very  different
aspect  from  that  which  the  same  act  presents  to  us,  who
regard  the  intelligence  of  animals  as  far  inferior  to  our  own
and  deny  them  the  possession  of  immortal  souls.  Hence  on
the  principles  of  his  rude  philosophy  the  primitive  hunter
who  slays  an  animal  believes  himself  exposed  to  the
vengeance  either  of  its  disembodied  spirit  or  of  all  the  other
animals  of  the  same  species,  whom  he  considers  as  knit
together,  like  men,  by  the  ties  of  kin  and  the  obligations  of
the  blood  feud,  and  therefore  as  bound  to  resent  the  injury
done  to  one  of  their  number.  Accordingly  the  savage  makes
it  a  rule  to  spare  the  life  of  those  animals  which  he  has  no
pressing  motive  for  killing,  at  least  such  fierce  and  dangerous
animals  as  are  likely  to  exact  a  bloody  vengeance  for  the
slaughter  of  one  of  their  kind.  Crocodiles  are  animals  of
this  sort.  They  are  only  found  in  hot  countries,  where,  as  a
rule,  food  is  abundant  and  primitive  man  has  therefore  no
reason  to  kill  them  for  the  sake  of  their  tough  and  un-
palatable flesh.  Hence  it  is  a  general  rule  among  savages
to  spare  crocodiles,  or  rather  only  to  kill  them  in  obedience
to  the  law  of  blood  feud,  that  is,  as  a  retaliation  for  the
slaughter  of  men  by  crocodiles.  For  example,  the  Dyaks  of
Borneo  will  not  kill  a  crocodile  unless  a  crocodile  has  first
killed  a  man.  "  For  why,  say  they,  should  they  commit  an
act  of  aggression,  when  he  and  his  kindred  can  so  easily  re-
pay them  ?      But   should    the  alligator  take    a    human    life,

'    K.    von    den    Steinen,  Utttdr   den    Natttrvolkern    Zetitral-Brasilicns,    pp.
352,  512.


390  CROCODILES  PROPITIA  TED  chap.

revenge  becomes  a  sacred  duty  of  the  living  relatives,  who
will  trap  the  man-eater  in  the  spirit  of  an  officer  of  justice
pursuing  a  criminal.  Others,  even  then,  hang  back,  reluctant
to  embroil  themselves  in  a  quarrel  which  does  not  concern
them.  The  man-eating  alligator  is  supposed  to  be  pursued
by  a  righteous  Nemesis  ;  and  whenever  one  is  caught  they
have  a  profound  conviction  that  it  must  be  the  guilty  one,
or  his  accomplice."  ^  When  a  Dyak  has  miade  up  his  mind
to  take  vengeance  on  the  crocodiles  for  the  death  of  a  kins-
man, he  calls  in  the  help  of  a  Pangareran,  a  man  whose
business  it  is  to  charm  and  catch  crocodiles  and  to  make
them  do  his  will.  While  he  is  engaged  in  the  discharge  of
his  professional  duties  the  crocodile-catcher  has  to  observe  a
number  of  odd  rules.  He  may  not  go  to  anybody  and  may
not  even  pass  in  front  of  a  window,  because  he  is  unclean.
He  may  not  himself  cook  anything  nor  come  near  a  fire.
If  he  would  eat  fruit,  he  may  not  peel  or  husk  it  himself,
but  must  get  others  to  do  it  for  him.  He  may  not  even
chew  his  food,  but  is  obliged  to  swallow  it  unchewed.  A
little  hut  is  made  for  him  on  the  bank  of  the  river,  where  he
uses  divination  by  means  of  the  figure  of  a  crocodile  drawn
on  a  piece  of  bamboo  for  the  purpose  of  determxining  whether
his  undertaking  will  prosper.  The  boat  in  which  he  em-
barks to  catch  the  wicked  man-eating  crocodile  must  be
painted  yellow  and  red,  and  in  the  middle  of  it  lances  are
erected  with  the  points  upward.  Then  the  man  of  skill
casts  lots  to  discover  whether  the  hook  is  to  be  baited  with
pork,  or  venison,  or  the  flesh  of  a  dog  or  an  ass.  In  throw-
ing the  baited  hook  into  the  water  he  calls  out :  "  Ye
crocodiles  who  are  up  stream,  come  down  ;  and  ye  crocodiles
who  are  down  stream,  come  up  ;  for  I  will  give  you  all  good
food,  as  sweet  as  sugar  and  as  fat  as  cocoa-nut.  I  will  give
you  a  pretty  and  beautiful  necklace.  When  you  have  got
it,  keep  it  in  your  neck  and  body,  for  this  food  is  very
paJiuni','  which  means  that  it  would   be  sinful   not  to  eat  it.

1   Rev.     J.     Peiham,     "Sea     Dyak  Nccrlands   Indie,    1846,    dl.    iii.    160;

\<eY\g\ox\,''^  Journal  of  the  Straits  Branch  S.    Muller,   Reize7i    en    onderzoekingen

of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  No.   10,  in    den    Indischcn   Archipel,    i.    238  ;

p.  221.      Compare  C.    Hupe,    "  Korte  Perelaer,     Ethnographische     Beschrij-

verhandeling  over  de  godsdienst  zeden,  I'ing  der  Dajaks,  p.  7.
enz.   der  Dajakkers,"   Tijdschrift  voor


Ill  CROCODILES  PROPITIATED  391

If  a  crocodile  bites  at  the  hook,  the  crocodile -catcher
bawls  out,  "  Choose  a  place  for  yourself  where  you  will  lie  ;
for  many  men  are  come  to  see  you.  They  are  come  joy-
fully and  exultingly,  and  they  give  you  a  knife,  a  lance,  and
a  shroud."  If  the  crocodile  is  a  female,  he  addresses  her  as
"  Princess  "  ;  if  it  is  a  male,  he  calls  it  "  Prince."  The  en-
chanter, who  is  generally  a  cunning  Malay,  must  continue  his
operations  till  he  catches  a  crocodile  in  which  traces  are  to  be
found  showing  that  he  has  indeed  devoured  a  human  being.
Then  the  death  of  the  man  is  atoned  for,  and  in  order  not  to
offend  the  water-spirits  a  cat  is  sacrificed  to  the  crocodiles.
The  heads  of  the  dead  crocodiles  are  fastened  on  stakes
beside  the  river,  where  in  time  they  bleach  white  and  stand  out
sharply  against  the  green  background  of  the  forest.^  While
the  captured  crocodile  is  being  hauled  in  to  the  bank,  the
subtle  Dyaks  speak  softly  to  him  and  beguile  him  into  offering
no  resistance  ;  but  once  they  have  him  fast,  with  arms  and
legs  securely  pinioned,  they  howl  at  him  and  deride  him  for
his  credulity,  while  they  rip  up  the  belly  of  the  infuriated
and  struggling  brute  to  find  the  evidence  of  his  guilt  in  the
shape  of  human  remains.  On  one  occasion  Rajah  Brooke
of  Sarawak  was  present  at  a  discussion  among  a  party  of
Dyaks  as  to  how  they  ought  to  treat  a  captured  crocodile.
One  side  maintained  that  it  was  proper  to  bestow  all  praise
and  honour  on  the  kingly  beast,  since  he  was  himself  a  rajah
among  animals  and  was  now  brought  there  to  meet  the  rajah  ;
in  short,  they  held  that  praise  and  flattery  were  agreeable  to
him  and  would  put  him  on  his  best  behaviour.  The  other  side
fully  admitted  that  on  this  occasion  rajah  met  rajah  ;  yet  with
prudent  foresight  they  pointed  to  the  dangerous  consequences
which  might  flow  from  establishing  a  precedent  such  as
their  adversaries  contended  for.  If  once  a  captured  crocodile,
said  they,  were  praised  and  honoured,  the  other  crocodiles,
on  hearing  of  it,  would  be  puffed  up  with  pride  and  ambition,
and  being  seized  with  a  desire  to  emulate  the  glory  of  their
fellow  would  enter  on  a  career  of  man-eating  as  the  road
likely  to  lead  them  by  the  shortest  cut  to  the  temple  of  fame."

^  F.    Grabowsky,    "Die   Theogonie  ^  \\     Ling     Roth,    The   Natives   of

der     Dajaken     auf     Borneo,"     Inter-  Sarawak  and  British  North  Borneo,  i.

nationales    Archiv  fUr   Ethnographic,  447  sij.
ii.  (1892),  p.   119  Sij.


392  CROCODILES  PROPITIATED  chap.

The  Minangkabauers  of  Sumatra  have  also  a  great
respect  for  crocodiles.  Their  celebrated  law-giver  Katoe-
manggoengan  was  indeed  born  again  in  the  form  of  a
crocodile  ;  and  thus  his  descendants,  including  the  rajah  of
Indrapoera  and  his  family,  arc  more  or  less  distant  cousins
of  the  crocodiles,  and  enjoy  the  help  and  protection  of  the
creatures  in  many  ways,  for  example  when  they  go  on  a  jour-
ney. The  respect  entertained  for  the  animals  is  also  attested
by  the  ceremonies  observed  in  some  places  when  a  crocodile
has  been  caught.  A  crowd  of  women  then  performs  certain
dances  which  closely  resemble  the  dances  performed  when
somebody  has  died.  Moreover,  it  is  a  rule  with  the
Minangkabauers  that  no  cooking-pot  may  be  washed  in  a
river  ;  to  do  so  would  be  like  offering  the  crocodiles  the
leavings  of  your  food,  and  they  would  very  naturally  resent
it.  For  the  same  reason  in  washing  up  the  dinner  or  supper
plates  you  must  be  careful  not  to  make  a  splashing,  or  the
crocodiles  would  hear  it  and  take  umbrage.^  Like  the
Dyaks,  the  natives  of  Madagascar  never  kill  a  crocodile
"  except  in  retaliation  for  one  of  their  friends  who  has  been
destroyed  by  a  crocodile.  They  believe  that  the  wanton
destruction  of  one'of  these  reptiles  will  be  followed  by  the  loss
of  human  life,  in  accordance  with  the  principle  oi  lex  talionis."
The  people  who  live  near  the  lake  Itasy  in  Madagascar  make
a  yearly  proclamation  to  the  crocodiles,  announcing  that  they
will  revenge  the  death  of  some  of  their  friends  by  killing  as
many  crocodiles  in  return,  and  warning  all  well-disposed  croco-
diles to  keep  out  of  the  way,  as  they  have  no  quarrel  with
them,  but  only  with  their  evil-minded  relations  who  have  taken
human  life.'"^  The  Malagasy,  indeed,  regard  the  crocodile  with
•superstitious  veneration  as  the  king  of  the  waters  and  supreme
in  his  own  element.  When  they  are  about  to  cross  a  river
they  pronounce  a  solemn  oath,  or  enter  into  an  engagement
to  acknowledge  his  sovereignty  over  the  waters.  An  aged
native  has  been  known  to  covenant  with  the  crocodiles  for
nearly  half  an  hour  before  plunging  into  the  stream.      After

1  J.     L.     van     der    Toorn,     "I let  Nederlandsch  Indie,  xxxix.  (1890),  p.

animisme  bij   den  Minangkabauer  der  75  sq.

Padagnsclie    Bovenlanden,"  Bijdragtii  2  sibree,  The  Great  African  Island,

tot  de  Taal-  Land-  en  Volkenkundc  van  p.  269.


Ill  TIGERS  PROPITIATED  393

that  he  lifted  up  his  voice  and  addressed  the  animal,  urging
him  to  do  him  no  harm,  since  he  had  never  hurt  the  croco-
dile ;  assuring  him  that  he  had  never  made  war  on  any  of
his  fellows,  but  on  the  contrary  had  always  entertained  the
highest  veneration  for  him  ;  and  adding  that  if  he  wantonly
attacked  him,  vengeance  would  follow  sooner  or  later  ;  while
if  the  crocodile  devoured  him,  his  relations  and  all  his  race
would  declare  war  against  the  beast.  This  harangue  occupied
another  quarter  of  an  hour,  after  which  the  orator  dashed
fearlessly  into  the  stream/  Crocodiles  abound  in  the  Albert
Nyanza  Lake  and  its  tributaries.  In  many  places  they  are
extremely  dangerous,  but  the  Alur  tribe  of  that  region  only
hunt  them  when  they  have  dragged  away  a  man  ;  and  they
think  that  any  one  who  has  taken  away  a  crocodile's  eggs
must  be  on  his  guard  when  he  walks  near  the  bank  of  the
river,  for  the  crocodiles  will  try  to  avenge  the  injury  by
seizing  him.^  In  general  the  Foulahs  of  Senegambia  dare  not
kill  a  crocodile  from  fear  of  provoking  the  vengeance  of  the
relations  and  friends  of  the  murdered  reptile ;  but  if  the
sorcerer  gives  his  consent  and  passes  his  word  that  he  will
guarantee  them  against  the  vengeance  of  the  family  of  the
deceased,  they  will  pluck  up  courage  to  attack  one  of  the
brutes.^

Again,  the  tiger  is  another  of  those  dangerous  beasts
whom  the  savage  prefers  to  leave  alone  lest  by  killing  one  of
the  species  he  should  exite  the  hostility  of  the  rest.  No
consideration  will  induce  a  Sumatran  to  catch  or  wound
a  tiger  except  in  self-defence  or  immediately  after  a  tiger
has  destroyed  a  friend  or  relation.  When  a  European  has
set  traps  for  tigers,  the  people  of  the  neighbourhood  have
been  known  to  go  by  night  to  the  place  and  explain  to  the
animals  that  the  traps  are  not  set  by  them  nor  with  their
consent.*  If  it  is  necessary  to  kill  a  tiger  which  has  wrought
much  harm  in  the  village,  the  Minangkabauers  of  Sumatra
try  to  catch  him  alive  in  order  to  beg  for  his  forgiveness
before  despatching  him,  and   in  ordinary  life  they  will  not

^  W.  Ellis,  History  of  Madagascar,  ^  A.  Raffenel,  Voyage  dans  PAfrique

i.  57  sq.  oicidetitale  (Paris,  1846),  p.  84  sq.

^  Fr.  Stuhlmann,  Mit  Emin  Pasi  ha  *  Marsden,  History  of  Sumatra,  p.

ins  Herz  von  Afrika,  p.  510  sq.  292.


394  TIGERS  PROPITIATED  chap.

speak  evil  of  him  or  do  anything  that  might  displease  him.
For  example,  the)^  will  not  use  a  path  that  has  been  un-
trodden for  more  than  a  year,  because  the  tiger  has  chosen
that  path  for  himself,  and  would  deem  it  a  mark  of  dis-
respect were  any  one  else  to  use  it.  Again,  persons  journey-
ing by  night  will  not  walk  one  behind  the  other,  or  keep
looking  about  them,  for  the  tiger  would  think  that  this
betrayed  fear  of  him,  and  his  feelings  would  be  hurt  by  the
suspicion.  Neither  will  they  travel  bareheaded,  for  that  also
would  be  disrespectful  to  the  tiger  ;  nor  will  they  knock  off
the  glowing  end  of  a  firebrand,  for  the  flying  sparks  are  like
the  tiger's  glistering  eyes,  and  he  would  treat  this  as  an
attempt  to  mimic  him.^  The  population  of  Mandeling,
a  district  on  the  west  coast  of  Sumatra,  is  divided  into  clans,
one  of  which  claims  to  be  descended  from  a  tiger.  It  is
believed  that  the  animal  will  not  attack  or  rend  the  members
of  this  clan,  because  they  are  his  kinsmen.  When  members
of  the  clan  come  upon  the  tracks  of  a  tiger,  they  enclose
them  with  three  little  sticks  as  a  mark  of  homage  ;  and  when
a  tiger  has  been  shot,  the  women  of  the  clan  are  bound
to  offer  betel  to  the  dead  beast."  The  Battas  of  Sumatra
seldom  kill  a  tiger  except  from  motives  of  revenge,  observing
the  rule  an  eye  for  an  eye  and  a  tooth  for  a  tooth,  or,  as
they  express  it,  *'  He  who  owes  gold  must  pay  in  gold  ;
he  who  owes  breath  (that  is,  life)  must  pay  with  breath."
Nor  can  the  beast  be  attacked  without  some  ceremony ;
only  weapons  that  have  proved  themselves  able  to  kill  may
be  used  for  the  purpose.  When  the  tiger  has  been  killed,
they  bring  the  carcass  to  the  village,  set  offerings  before
it,  and  burn  incense  over  it,  praying  the  spirit  of  the  tiger  to
quit  its  material  envelope  and  enter  the  incense  pot.  As
soon  as  the  soul  may  be  supposed  to  have  complied  with
this  request,  a  speaker  explains  to  the  spirits  in  general
the  reasons  for  killing  the  tiger,  and  begs  them  to  set  forth
these  reasons  to  the  departed  soul  of  the  beast,  lest  the  latter

1  J.    L.   van  der  Tooni,  "  Het  ani-  ^  H.  Ris,  "De  onderafdeeling  Man-

misme    bij     den     Minangkabauer    der  dailing    Oeloe    en    Pahantan    en    hare

Padangsche   Bovenlanden,"   BijJragen  Bevolking,"    Bijdrage7i    tot    de    Taal-

tot  de  Taal-  Land-  en  Volkcnkunde  van  Land-    en    Volkenkitnde     van     Neder-

Ncderlandsch  Indii\  xxxix.  (1890),  pp.  landsch    Indie,    xlvi.    (1896),    p.    472

74,  75  -f'/-  ^9-


Ill  SERPENTS  PROPITIA  TED  395

should  be  angry  and  the  people  should  suffer  in  consequence.
Then  they  dance  round  the  dead  body  of  the  tiger  till  they
can  dance  no  longer,  after  which  they  skin  the  carcass  and
bury  it.^  The  inhabitants  of  the  hills  near  Rajamahall,  in
Bengal,  believe  that  if  any  man  kills  a  tiger  without  divine
orders,  either  he  or  one  of  his  relations  will  be  devoured  by
a  tiger.  Hence  they  are  very  averse  to  killing  a  tiger,
unless  one  of  their  kinsfolk  has  been  carried  off  by  one  of
the  beasts.  In  that  case  they  go  out  for  the  purpose  of
hunting  and  slaying  a  tiger  ;  and  when  they  have  succeeded
they  lay  their  bows  and  arrows  on  the  carcass  and  invoke
God,  declaring  that  they  slew  the  animal  in  retaliation  for
the  loss  of  a  kinsman.  Vengeance  having  been  thus  taken
they  swear  not  to  attack  another  tiger  except  under  similar
provocation."

'  The  Indians  of  Carolina  would  not  molest  snakes  when
they  came  upon  them,  but  would  pass  by  on  the  other  side
of  the  path,  believing  that  if  they  were  to  kill  a  serpent,  the
reptile's  kindred  would  destroy  some  of  their  brethren,  friends,
or  relations  in  return.^  So  the  Seminole  Indians  spared
the  rattlesnake,  because  they  feared  that  the  soul  of  the  dead
rattlesnake  would  incite  its  kinsfolk  to  take  vengeance.
Once  when  a  rattlesnake  appeared  in  their  camp  they  en-
treated an  English  traveller  to  rid  them  of  the  creature.
When  he  had  killed  it,  they  were  glad  but  tried  to  scratch
him  as  a  means  of  appeasing  the  spirit  of  the  dead  snake.*
Soon  after  the  lowas  began  to  build  their  village  near  the
mouth  of  Wolf  River,  a  lad  came  into  the  village  and
reported  that  he  had  seen  a  rattlesnake  on  a  hill  not  far  off.
A  medicine-man  immediately  repaired  to  the  spot,  and  find-
ing the  snake  made  it  presents  of  tobacco  and  other  things
which  he  had  brought  with  him  for  the  purpose.  He  also
had  a  long  talk  with  the  animal,  and  on  returning  to  his
people  told  them  that  now  they  might  travel  about  in  safety,
for  peace   had   been   made  with   the   snakes.^      The   Kekchi

^   G.     G.    Batten,     Glimpses    of  the  of  North    Carolina  (Dublin,  1737),  p.

Eastern  Archipelago  {^\-ngz.-^<:,i&,  1S94),  36S.
P-  86.  4  W.      Bartram,     Travels     through

2  Th.    Shaw,    "  On   the    inhabitants  North   and  South    Carolina,    Georgia,

of  the  hills  near  Rajamahall,"  Asiatic  East  and  West  Florida,  etc.  (London,

Researches,  iv.  37  (8vo  ed.).  1792),  pp.  258-261.

2  J.  Bricknell,   The  Natural  History  ^  kchoo\QX3XX.,India7i  Tribes,  \\\.Z'J'^.


396  PROPITIATION  chap.

Indians  of  Guatemala  will  not  throw  serpents  or  scorpions
into  the  fire,  lest  the  other  creatures  of  the  same  species  should
punish  them  for  the  outrage/  When  the  Kwakiutl  Indians
of  British  Columbia  have  slain  a  wolf  they  lay  the  carcass  on
a  blanket  and  take  out  the  heart,  of  which  every  person  who
helped  to  kill  the  beast  must  eat  four  morsels.  Then  they
wail  over  the  body,  saying,  "  Woe  !  our  great  friend  !  "  After
that  they  cover  the  carcass  with  a  blanket  and  bury  it.  A
bow  or  gun  that  killed  a  wolf  is  regarded  as  unlucky,  and
the  owner  gives  it  away.  These  Indians  believe  that  the
slaying  of  a  wolf  produces  a  scarcity  of  game.""^  In  ancient
Athens  any  man  who  killed  a  wolf  had  to  bury  it  by  sub-
scription.' The  Palenques  of  South  America  are  very  careful
to  spare  harmless  animals  which  are  not  good  for  food  ;
because  they  believe  that  any  injury  inflicted  on  such  creatures
would  entail  the  sickness  or  death  of  their  own  children.*

But  the  savage  clearly  cannot  afford  to  spare  all  animals.
He  must  either  eat  some  of  them  or  starve,  and  when  the
question  thus  comes  to  be  whether  he  or  the  animal  must
perish,  he  is  forced  to  overcome  his  superstitious  scruples
and  take  the  life  of  the  beast.  At  the  same  time  he  does
all  he  can  to  appease  his  victims  and  their  kinsfolk.  Even
in  the  act  of  killing  them  he  testifies  his  respect  for  them,
endeavours  to  excuse  or  even  conceal  his  share  in  procuring
their  death,  and  promises  that  their  remains  will  be  honour-
ably treated.  By  thus  robbing  death  of  its  terrors  he  hopes
to  reconcile  his  victims  to  their  fate  and  to  induce  their
fellows  to  come  and  be  killed  also.  For  example,  it  was  a
principle  with  the  Kamtchatkans  never  to  kill  a  land  or  sea
animal  without  first  making  excuses  to  it  and  begging  that
the  animal  would  not  take  it  ill.  Also  they  offered  it  cedar-
nuts  and  so  forth,  to  make  it  think  that  it  was  not  a  victim
but  a  guest  at  a  feast.  They  believed  that  this  hindered
other  animals  of  the  same  species  from  growing  shy.      For

^  C.  Sapper,  "  Die  Gebrauche  und  3  Scholiast  on  ApoIIonius  Rhodius,

religiosen  Anschauiingen  der    Kekchi-  Argonaut,  ii.   124.

ln(\\a.x\ex"  /iiterna/ionn/es  Arckiv  fiir  *    Caulin,    Historia     Cora  - graphiia

Ethnographie,  viii.  (1895),  p.  204.  natural  y  evanf^elica  dela  Nueva  An-

2  Fr.    Boas,    in  Ele-i'i-uth  Report  on  dalua'a,  p.  96  :    "  Reusan  tnucho  matar

the  North- Western  Tribes  of  Canada,  p.  qualqtder  animal  no  comestibile  que  no

9   sq.  (separate  reprint  from  the  Kcf-ort  sea  nocibo"  etc.      Here  reusan  appears

of  the  British  Association  for  1896).  to  be  a  misprint  for  recusan.


Ill  OF  SLAUGHTERED  BEASTS  397

instance,  after  they  had  killed  a  bear  and  feasted  on  its  flesh,
the  host  would  bring  the  bear's  head  before  the  company,
wrap  it  in  grass,  and  present  it  with  a  variety  of  trifles.
Then  he  would  lay  the  blame  of  the  bear's  death  on  the
Russians,  and  bid  the  beast  wreak  his  wrath  upon  them.
Also  he  would  ask  the  bear  to  inform  the  other  bears  how
well  he  had  been  treated,  that  they  too  might  come  without
fear.  Seals,  sea-lions,  and  other  animals  were  treated  by  the
Kamtchatkans  with  the  same  ceremonious  respect.  More-
over, they  used  to  insert  sprigs  of  a  plant  resembling  bear's
wort  in  the  mouths  of  the  animals  they  killed  ;  after  which
they  would  exhort  the  grinning  skulls  to  have  no  fear  but
to  go  and  tell  it  to  their  fellows,  that  they  also  might  come
and  be  caught  and  so  partake  of  this  splendid  hospitality.-^
When  the  Ostiaks  have  hunted  and  killed  a  bear,  they  cut
off  its  head  and  hang  it  on  a  tree.  Then  they  gather  round
in  a  circle  and  pay  it  divine  honours.  Next  they  run  towards
the  carcass  uttering  lamentations  and  saying,  "  Who  killed
you?  It  was  the  Russians.  Who  cut  off  your  head?  It
was  a  Russian  axe.  Who  skinned  you  ?  It  was  a  knife
made  by  a  Russian."  They  explain,  too,  that  the  feathers
which  sped  the  arrow  on  its  flight  came  from  the  wing  of  a
strange  bird,  and  that  they  did  nothing  but  let  the  arrow  go.
They  do  all  this  because  they  believe  that  the  wandering  ghost
of  the  slain  bear  would  attack  them  on  the  first  opportunity,  if
they  did  not  thus  appease  it.^  Or  they  stuff  the  skin  of  the
slain  bear  with  hay  ;  and  after  celebrating  their  victory  with
songs  of  mockery  and  insult,  after  spitting  on  and  kicking  it,
they  set  it  up  on  its  hind  legs,  "  and  then,  for  a  considerable
time,  they  bestow  on  it  all  the  veneration  due  to  a  guardian
god."^  When  a  party  of  Koriaks  have  killed  a  bear  or  a
wolf,  they  skin  the  beast  and  dress  one  of  thertiselves  in  the
skin.  Then  they  dance  round  the  skin-clad  man,  saying
that  it  was  not  they  who  killed  the  animal,  but  some  one
else,  generally  a  Russian.      When  they  kill  a  fox  they  skin

*  Steller,     Beschreibung    von     dem  Beschreibiing  aller  JVationen  des  riissi-

LaJide  Kamtschatka,  pp.  85,  280,  331.  schen  Reichs,  p.  83.

2   Voyages    au    Nord    (Amsterdam,  ^  Erman,  Travels  in  Siberia,  ii.  43.

1727),    viii.    41,    41G  ;    Pallas,    Reise  For  the  veneration  of  the  polar  bear  by

ditrch      verschiedene     Provinzen      des  the  Samoyedes,  who  nevertheless  kill

russischen     Reichs,    iii.    64 ;    Georgi,  and  eat  it,  see  ibid.  54  sg.


398  PROPITIATION  OF       .  chap.

it,  wrap  the  body  in  grass,  and  bid  him  go  tell  his  com-
panions how  hospitably  he  has  been  received,  and  how  he
has  received  a  new  cloak  instead  of  his  old  one.^  The  Finns
used  to  try  to  persuade  a  slain  bear  that  he  had  not  been
killed  by  them,  but  had  fallen  from  a  tree,  or  met  his  death
in  some  other  way  ; "  moreover,  they  held  a  funeral  festival
in  his  honour,  at  the  close  of  which  bards  expatiated  on  the
homage  that  had  been  paid  to  him,  urging  him  to  report  to
the  other  bears  the  high  consideration  with  which  he  had
been  treated,  in  order  that  they  also,  following  his  example,
might  come  and  be  slain.^  When  the  Lapps  had  succeeded
in  killing  a  bear  with  impunity,  they  thanked  him  for  not
hurting  them  and  for  not  breaking  the  clubs  and  spears  which
had  given  him  his  death  wounds  ;  and  they  prayed  that  he
would  not  visit  his  death  upon  them  by  sending  storms  or
in  any  other  way.      His  flesh  then  furnished  a  feast.*

The  reverence  of  hunters  for  the  bear  whom  they
regularly  kill  and  eat  may  thus  be  traced  all  along  the
northern  region  of  the  Old  World,  from  Bering's  Straits
to  Lappland.  It  reappears  in  similar  forms  in  North
America.  With  the  American  Indians  a  bear  hunt  was
an  important  event  for  which  they  prepared  by  long  fasts
and  purgations.  Before  setting  out  they  offered  expiatory
sacrifices  to  the  souls  of  bears  slain  in  previous  hunts,  and
besought  them  to  be  favourable  to  the  hunters.  When  a
bear  was  killed  the  hunter  lit  his  pipe,  and  putting  the
mouth  of  it  between  the  bear's  lips,  blew  into  the  bowl,
filling  the  beast's  mouth  with  smoke.  Then  he  begged  the
bear  not  to  be  angry  at  having  been  killed,  and  not  to
thwart  him  afterwards  in  the  chase.  The  carcass  was
roasted  whole  and  eaten  ;  not  a  morsel  of  the  flesh  might  be
left  over.  The  head,  painted  red  and  blue,  was  hung  on
a  post  and  addressed  by  orators,  who  heaped  praise  on
the  dead  beast.'"      When  men  of  the  Bear  clan  in  the  Otawa

1  Bastian,  Der  Meiuch  in  der  Ge-  still  an  elaborate  ceremony  in  hunting
schichte,  iii.  26.  the  bear.      They  pray  and  chant  to  his

2  Max  Buch,  Die  Wotjdkcn,  p.  139.  carcase,  and  for  several  days  worship

3  A.  Featherman,  Social  History  of  before  eating  it"  (E.  Rae,  The  White
the  Races  of  Maiikind,  Fourth  Division,  Sea  Peninstda  (London,  1881),  p.
Draz'ido-Turaniatis,  etc.,  p.  422.  276).

*  vScheffer,      Lafponia      (Frankfort,  ^  Charlevoix,  Ilistoire  de  la  Nouvelle

i673)>  P-  233  sq.      The  Lapps  "have       France,    v.    173    sq.  ;     Chateaubriand,


Ill  SLAUGHTERED  BEARS  399

tribe  killed  a  bear,  they  made  him  a  feast  of  his  own  flesh,
and  addressed  him  thus :  "  Cherish  us  no  grudge  because  we
have  killed  you.  You  have  sense  ;  you  see  that  our  children
are  hungry.  They  love  you  and  wish  to  take  you  into  their
bodies.  Is  it  not  glorious  to  be  eaten  by  the  children
of  a  chief?"  ^  Amongst  the  Nootka  Indians  of  British
Columbia,  when  a  bear  had  been  killed,  it  was  brought  in
and  seated  before  the  head  chief  in  an  upright  posture,  with
a  chief's  bonnet,  wrought  in  figures,  on  its  head,  and  its  fur
powdered  over  with  white  down,  A  tray  of  provisions  was
then  set  before  it,  and  it  was  invited  by  words  and  gestures
to  eat.  After  that  the  animal  was  skinned,  boiled,  and
eaten,^  The  Assiniboins  pray  to  the  bear  and  offer  sacrifices
to  it  of  tobacco,  belts,  and  other  valuable  objects.  Moreover,
they  hold  feasts  in  its  honour,  that  they  may  win  the  beast's
favour  and  live  safe  and  sound.  The  bear's  head  is  often  kept
in  camp  for  several  days  mounted  in  some  suitable  position
and  decked  with  scraps  of  scarlet  cloth,  necklaces,  collars,
and  coloured  feathers.  They  offer  the  pipe  to  it,  and  pray
that  they  may  be  able  to  kill  all  the  bears  they  meet,  with-
out harm  to  themselves,  for  the  purpose  of  anointing  them-
selves with  his  fine  grease  and  banqueting  on  his  tender
flesh.^  The  Ojebways  will  not  suffer  dogs  to  eat  the  flesh
or  gnaw  the  bones  of  a  bear,  and  they  throw  all  the  waste
portions  into  the  fire.  They  think  that  if  the  flesh  were
desecrated,  they  would  have  no  luck  in  hunting  bears  there-
after."* Some  of  the  Indians  of  the  Queen  Charlotte  Islands,
off  the  north-western  coast  of  America,  used  to  mark  the
skins  of  bears,  otters,  and  other  animals  with  four  red  crosses
in  a  line,  by  way  of  propitiating  the  spirit  of  the  beast  they

Voyage    eii    Amirique,    pp.    172- 181  September  1884,  p.  203.
(Paris    Michel  Levy,  1870).    _               _  2  ^  Narrative  of  the  Adventures  and

1  Lettres  Mjzantcs  et  curteuses,  vi  St.fferin^s  of  John  R.  Jewitt,  p.    117

171.      Morean  states  that  the  names  of  /a,-j  ,,  "  ,c„„i  ,    /i,- r

/     „  *=•  ,         ,     ,  ,  (Middletown,    1020),    p.    i^^     Ldm-

the  Otawa   totem   clans  had  not  been  -  /     ^        ^^    v

obtained    {Ancient    Society,    p.     167)


burgh,   1824).


From    the  Lettres  edif antes,   vi.    168-  ^  ^e   Smet,    Western  Missions  and

171,  he  might  have  learned  the  names  Missionaries    (New    York,     1863),    p.

of  the  Hare,  Carp,  and  Bear  clans,  to  '39-

which  may  be  added  the  Gull  clan,  as  ^  A.   P.   Reid,    "Religious  belief  of

I    learn    from    an    extract    from    The  the   Ojibois    Indians,"  Journal  of  the

Canadian  Journal  {Toronto)  iox  M&Ych  Anthropological  Instittcte,   iii.    (1S74),

1858,    quoted   in    the   Academy,    27th  ]).  iii.


400  PROPITIA  TION  OF  chap.

had  killed.^  When  the  Thompson  River  Indians  of  British
Columbia  were  about  to  hunt  bears,  they  would  sometimes
address  the  animal  and  ask  it  to  come  and  be  shot.  They
prayed  the  grisly  bear  not  to  be  angry  with  the  hunter,  nor
to  fight  him,  but  rather  to  have  pity  on  him  and  to  deliver
himself  up  to  his  mercies.  The  man  who  intended  to  hunt
the  grisly  bear  had  to  be  chaste  for  some  time  before  he  set
out  on  his  dangerous  adventure.  When  he  had  killed  a  bear,
he  and  his  companions  painted  their  faces  in  alternate  per-
pendicular stripes  of  black  and  red,  and  sang  the  bear  song.
Sometimes  the  hunter  also  prayed,  thanking  the  beast  for
letting  itself  be  killed  so  easily,  and  begging  that  its  mate
might  share  the  same  fate.  After  they  had  eaten  the  flesh
of  the  bear's  head,  they  tied  the  skull  to  the  top  of  a  small
tree,  as  high  as  they  could  reach,  and  left  it  there.  Having
done  so,  they  painted  their  faces  with  alternate  stripes  of  red
and  black  as  before;  for  if  they  failed  to  observe  this  ceremony,
the  bears  would  be  offended,  and  the  hunters  would  not  be
able  to  kill  any  more.  To  place  the  heads  of  bears  or  any
large  beasts  on  trees  or  stones  was  a  mark  of  respect  to  the
animals.^

A  like  respect  is  testified  for  other  dangerous  creatures
by  the  hunters  who  regularly  trap  and  kill  them.  When
CaftVe  hunters  are  in  the  act  of  showering  spears  on  an
elephant,  they  call  out,  "  Don't  kill  us,  great  captain  ;  don't
strike  or  tread  upon  us,  mighty  chief."  ^  When  he  is  dead
they  make  their  excuses  to  him,  pretending  that  his  death
was  a  pure  accident.  As  a  mark  of  respect  they  bury  his
trunk  with  much  solemn  ceremony ;  for  they  say  that
"  the  elephant  is  a  great  lord  ;  his  trunk  is  his  hand."  *
Before  the  Anaxosa   Caffres  attack  an    elephant   they  shout

1  A.  Mackenzie,  "  Descriptive  notes  3  Stephen  Kay,  Travels  and  Re-
on  certain  implements,  weapons,  etc.,  searches  in  Caffraria  (London,  1833),
from  Graliam  Island,  Queen  Charlotte       p.   138.

Islands,    B.C.,"    Trans.    Roy.    Soc.    of

Canada,  ix.  (1891)  section  ii.  p.  58.  *  Alberti,  De  Kaffers  aan  de  Zuid-

2  James  Teit,  "The  Thompson  ktist  van  Afrika  (Amsterdam,  1810),
Indians  of  British  Columbia,"  Memoirs  p.  95.  Alberti's  information  is  repeated
of  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  by  Lichtenstein  (Reisen  im  siidlichen
History,  vol.  ii.  part  iv.  (April  1900),  Afrika,  i.  412)  and  by  Rose  {Four
p.  347.  The  Thompson  Indians  used  Years  in  Southern  Africa,  y>.  l^S)-  '^he
to  be  known  as  the  Couteau  or  Knife  burial  of  the  trunk  is  also  mentioned  by
Indians.  Kay,  I.e.


Ill  SLAUGHTERED  ANIMALS  401

to  the  animal  and  beg  him  to  pardon  them  for  the  slaughter
they  are  about  to  perpetrate,  professing  great  submission  to
his  person  and  explaining  clearly  the  need  they  have  of  his
tusks  to  enable  them  to  procure  beads  and  supply  their
wants.  When  they  have  killed  him  they  bury  in  the  ground,
along  with  the  end  of  his  trunk,  a  few  of  the  articles  they
have  obtained  for  the  ivory,  thus  hoping  to  avert  some
mishap  that  would  otherwise  befall  them.^  Among  the
Wanyamwezi  of  Central  Africa,  when  hunters  have  killed
an  elephant,  they  bury  his  legs  on  the  spot  where  he  fell,
and  then  cover  the  place  with  stones.  This  burial  is  sup-
posed to  appease  the  spirit  of  the  dead  elephant  and  to
ensure  the  success  of  the  hunters  in  future  undertakings.^
Amongst  some  tribes  of  Eastern  Africa,  when  a  lion  is
killed,  the  carcass  is  brought  before  the  king,  who  does
homage  to  it  by  prostrating  himself  on  the  ground  and
rubbing  his  face  on  the  muzzle  of  the  beast.^  In  some  parts
of  Western  Africa  if  a  negro  kills  a  leopard  he  is  bound
fast  and  brought  before  the  chiefs  for  having  killed  one  of
their  peers.  The  man  defends  himself  on  the  plea  that  the
leopard  is  chief  of  the  forest  and  therefore  a  stranger.  He
is  then  set  at  liberty  and  rewarded.  But  the  dead  leopard,
adorned  with  a  chief's  bonnet,  is  set  up  in  the  village,  where
nightly  dances  are  held  in  its  honour."*  Before  they  leave  a
temporary  camp  in  the  forest,  where  they  have  killed  a
tapir  and  dried  the  meat  on  a  babracot,  the  Indians  of
Guiana  invariably  destroy  this  babracot,  saying  that  should
a  tapir  passing  that  way  find  traces  of  the  slaughter  of  one
of  his  kind,  he  would  come  by  night  on  the  next  occasion
when  Indians  slept  at  that  place,  and,  taking  a  man,  would
babracot  him  in  revenge.^

When  a  Blackfoot  Indian  has  caught  eagles  in  a  trap
and  killed  them,  he  takes  them  home  to  a  special  lodge,
called  the  eagles'  lodge,  which  has  been  prepared  for  their
reception  outside  of  the  camp.  Here  he  sets  the  birds  in
a  row   on   the   ground,  and   propping   up   their    heads   on   a

1  J-   Shooter,   The  Kafirs  of  Natal,       and  Brussels,  1887),  ii.  298  sq.,  305.
p.  215.  *  Bastian,   Die   deiitsche  Expedition

2  Fr.  Stuhlmann,  Mit  Emin  Pascha       ati  der  Loango-Kiiste,  ii.  243.

ins  Herz  von  Afrika,  p.  87.  ^  Im  Thurn,  Among  the  Indians  of

3  J.  Becker,  La  Fie  en  Afriqt/e  (Paris        Gtdana,  p.  352.

VOL.  II  2D


402  PROPITIA  TION  OF  chap.

stick,  puts  a  piece  of  dried  meat  in  each  of  their  mouths
in  order  that  the  spirits  of  the  dead  eagles  may  go  and  tell
the  other  eagles  how  well  they  are  being  treated  by  the
Indians.^  So  when  Indian  hunters  of  the  Orinoco  region
have  killed  an  animal,  they  open  its  mouth  and  pour  into
it  a  few  drops  of  the  liquor  they  generally  carry  with  them,
in  order  that  the  soul  of  the  dead  beast  may  inform  its
fellows  of  the  welcome  it  has  met  with,  and  that  they  too,
cheered  by  the  prospect  of  the  same  kind  reception,  may
come  with  alacrity  to  be  killed.^  When  a  Teton  Indian  is
on  a  journey  and  he  meets  a  grey  spider  or  a  spider  with
yellow  legs,  he  kills  it,  because  some  evil  would  befall  him
if  he  did  not.  But  he  is  very  careful  not  to  let  the  spider
know  that  he  kills  it,  for  if  the  spider  knew,  his  soul  would
go  and  tell  the  other  spiders,  and  one  of  them  would  be
sure  to  avenge  the  death  of  his  relation.  So  in  crushing
the  insect,  the  Indian  says,  "  O  Grandfather  Spider,  the
Thunder-beings  kill  you."  And  the  spider  is  crushed  at
once  and  believes  what  is  told  him.  His  soul  probably  runs
and  tells  the  other  spiders  that  the  Thunder-beings  have
killed  him  ;  but  no  harm  comes  of  that.  For  what  can  grey
or  yellow-legged  spiders  do  to  the  Thunder-beings  ?  ^

But  it  is  not  merely  dangerous  creatures  with  whom  the
savage  desires  to  keep  on  good  terms.  It  is  true  that  the
respect  which  he  pays  to  wild  beasts  is  in  some  measure
proportioned  to  their  strength  and  ferocity.  Thus  the
savage  Stiens  of  Cambodia,  believing  that  all  animals  have
souls  which  roam  about  after  their  death,  beg  an  animal's
pardon  when  they  kill  it,  lest  its  soul  should  come  and
torment  them.  Also  they  offer  it  sacrifices,  but  these
sacrifices  are  proportioned  to  the  size  and  strength  of  the
animal.  The  ceremonies  observed  at  the  death  of  an
elephant  are  conducted  with  much  pomp  and  last  seven
days.'*      Similar  distinctions  are  drawn   by   North  American

1  G.    B.    Grinnell,   Blackfoot    Lodge  lore,  ii.  (1889),  p.  134  ;   id.,  "  A  Study

Tales,  p.  240.  of    Siouan    cults,"    Eleventh    Annual

-  Caulin,     Historia     Coro  -grafhica  Report    of  the   Bureau    of  Ethnology

natural  J  ez'angelica  dela  Nueva  Anda-  (Washington,  1894),  p.  479.
lucia,  p.  97.  ^   Mouhot,    Travels    in  the   Central

^  J.   Owen  Dorsey,    "Teton   Folk-  Parts  of  Indo- China,  i.   252;  Moura,

Xoxc'iioits,"  Journal  of  American  Folk-  Le  Royaume  du  Cambodge,  i.  422.


HI  SLAUGHTERED  ANIMALS  *  403

Indians.  ".The  bear,  the  buffalo,  and  the  beaver  are
manidos  [divinities]  which  furnish  food.  The  bear  is  for-
midable, and  good  to  eat.  They  render  ceremonies  to  him,
begging  him  to  allow  himself  to  be  eaten,  although  they
know  he  has  no  fancy  for  it.  We  kill  you,  but  you  are  not
annihilated.  His  head  and  paws  are  objects  of  homage.  .  .  .
Other  animals  are  treated  similarly  from  similar  reasons.
.  .  .  Many  of  the  animal  manidos,  not  being  dangerous,
are  often  treated  with  contempt — the  terrapin,  the  weasel,
polecat,  etc."  ^  The  distinction  is  instructive.  Animals
which  are  feared,  or  are  good  to  eat,  or  both,  are  treated
with  ceremonious  respect  ;  those  which  are  neither  formid-
able nor  good  to  eat  are  despised.  We  have  had  examples
of  reverence  paid  to  animals  which  are  both  feared  and
eaten.  It  remains  to  prove  that  similar  respect  is  shown
for  animals  which,  without  being  feared,  are  either  eaten  or
valued  for  their  skins.

When  Siberian  sable-hunters  have  caught  a  sable,  no
one  is  allowed  to  see  it,  and  they  think  that  if  good  or  evil
be  spoken  of  the  captured  sable,  no  more  sables  will  be
caught,  A  hunter  has  been  known  to  express  his  belief
that  the  sables  could  hear  what  was  said  of  them  as  far  off
as  Moscow.  He  said  that  the  chief  reason  why  the  sable
hunt  was  now  so  unproductive  was  that  some  live  sables  had
been  sent  to  Moscow.  There  they  had  been  viewed  with
astonishment  as  strange  animals,  and  the  sables  cannot  abide
that.  Another,  though  minor,  cause  of  the  diminished  take
of  sable  was,  he  alleged,  that  the  world  is  now  much  worse
than  it  used  to  be,  so  that  nowadays  a  hunter  will  sometimes
hide  the  sable  which  he  has  got  instead  of  putting  it  into
the  common  stock.  This  also,  said  he,  the  sables  cannot
abide.^  A  Russian  traveller  happening  once  to  enter  a
Gilyak  hut  in  the  absence  of  the  owner,  observed  a  freshly
killed  sable  hanging  on  the  wall.  Seeing  him  look  at  it,  the
housewife  in  consternation  hastened  to  muffle  the  animal  in
a  fur  cap,  after  which  it  was  taken  down,  wrapt  in  birch
bark,  and  put  away  out  of  sight.  Despite  the  high  price  he
offered   for   it,  the   traveller's   efforts   to  buy  the  animal  were

1  Schoolcraft,     Indian     Tribes,     v.  '^  ].G.Qxm&\\xi,  Reise  durch  Sibirien,

420.  ii.  278.


404  PROPITIA  TION  OF  chap.

unavailing.      It  was  bad  enough,  they  told  him,  that  he,  a
stranger,  had  seen  the  dead  sable   in   its   skin,  but   far  worse
consequences  for  the  future  catch  of  sables   would   follow   if
they  were  to  sell  him  the  animal  entire.^      Alaskan  hunters
preserve  the  bones  of  sables  and  beavers  out  of  reach  of  the
dogs  for  a  year  and  then  bury  them  carefully,  "  lest  the  spirits
who  look  after  the  beavers  and  sables  should  consider  that
they  are  regarded  with  contempt,  and  hence  no  more  should
be  killed  or  trapped."  -      The   Shush wap  Indians   of  British
Columbia  think  that  if  they  did  not  throw  beaver-bones  into
the  river,  the  beavers  would  not  go  into  the  traps  any  more,
and  that  the  same  thing  would  happen   were  a  dog  to  eat
the  flesh  or  gnaw  the  bone  of  a   beaver.^     Carrier   Indians
who   have  trapped  martens  or   beavers   take   care  to   keep
them    from   the    dogs  ;    for   if  a   dog   were   to   touch   these
animals    the    Indians    believe    that    the    other    martens    or
beavers    would    not    suffer    themselves   to    be   caught."^       A
missionary  who  fell  in  with   an   old    Carrier    Indian   asked
him  what  luck  he  had  in  the  chase.     "  Oh,  don't  speak  to  me
about  it,"  replied  the   Indian,  "  there  are  beavers   in  plenty.
I  caught  one  myself  immediately  after  my  arrival  here,  but
unluckily  a  dog  got  hold   of  it.      You  know   that  after  that
it  has  been  impossible  for   me   to   catch  another."     "  Non-
sense,"  said   the   missionary,  "  set   your   traps   as   if  nothing
had  happened,  and  you  will  see."      "  That  would  be  useless,"
answered   the   Indian   in    a  tone  of  despair,  "  quite   useless.
You  don't  know  the  ways  of  the   beaver.      If  a  dog  merely
touches   a  beaver,  all  the   other  beavers    are   angry  at  the
owner  of  the  dog  and  always  keep   away  from   his  traps."
It  was  in  vain  that  the   missionary   tried   to   laugh  or  argue
him  out  of  his  persuasion  ;  the  man  persisted  in  abandoning
his  snares  and  giving  up  the  hunt,  because,  as  he   asserted,
the   beavers   were   angry   with   him.^      A    French    traveller,

1  L.  von  Schienck,  Reisen  tind  ^  A.  G.  Morice,  "Notes,  archoso-
Forschuugen  im  Amiir-lande,  iii.  564.  logical,  industrial,  and  sociological,  on

2  W.  ball,  Alaska  and  its  Resources,  the  Western  Denes,"  Transactions  of
p.  89;  id.,  in  The  Yukon  Territory  the  Ca7tadian  Instiitite,  \w.  (1892-93),
(London,  1898),  p.  89.  p.  108.

3  Fr.  Boas,  in  Sixth  Report  on  the  "'  A.  G.  Morice,  Au  pays  de  POurs
North  -  Western  Tribes  of  Canada,  p.  Noir,  chez  les  saiivages  de  la  Colombie
92  (separate  reprint  from  the  Report  of  Britaitniqne  (Paris  and  Lyons,  1897),
the  British  Association  for  1890).  p.  71.


Ill  SLA  UGHTERED  BE  A  VERS  405

observing  that  the  Indians  of  Louisiana  did  not  give  the
bones  of  beavers  and  otters  to  their  dogs,  inquired  the
reason.  They  told  him  there  was  a  spirit  in  the  woods  who
would  tell  the  other  beavers  and  otters,  and  that  after  that
they  would  catch  no  more  animals  of  these  species.^  The
Canadian  Indians  were  equally  particular  not  to  let  their
dogs  gnaw  the  bones,  or  at  least  certain  of  the  bones,  of
beavers.  They  took  the  greatest  pains  to  collect  and
preserve  these  bones,  and,  when  the  beaver  had  been  caught
in  a  net,  they  threw  them  into  the  river.  To  a  Jesuit  who
argued  that  the  beavers  could  not  possibly  know  what
became  of  their  bones,  the  Indians  replied,  "  You  know
nothing  about  catching  beavers  and  yet  you  will  be  talk-
ing about  it.  Before  the  beaver  is  stone  dead,  his  soul
takes  a  turn  in  the  hut  of  the  man  who  is  killing  him  and
makes  a  careful  note  of  what  is  done  with  his  bones.  If
the  bones  are  given  to  the  dogs,  the  other  beavers  would
get  word  of  it  and  would  not  let  themselves  be  caught.
Whereas,  if  their  bones  are  thrown  into  the  fire  or  a
river,  they  are  quite  satisfied  ;  and  it  is  particularly  grati-
fying to  the  net  which  caught  them."  ^  Before  hunting
the  beaver  they  offered  a  solemn  prayer  to  the  Great
Beaver,  and  presented  him  with  tobacco  ;  and  when  the
chase  was  over,  an  orator  pronounced  a  funeral  oration
over  the  dead  beavers.  He  praised  their  spirit  and
wisdom.  "  You  will  hear  no  more,"  said  he,  "  the  voice
of  the  chieftains  who  commanded  you  and  whom  you
chose  from  among  all  the  warrior  beavers  to  give  you
laws.  Your  language,  which  the  medicine  -  men  under-
stand perfectly,  will  be  heard  no  more  at  the  bottom  of
the  lake.  You  will  fight  no  more  battles  with  the  otters,
your  cruel  foes.  No,  beavers  !  But  your  skins  shall  serve
to   buy   arms  ;    we   will    carry    your    smoked    hams   to    our

^  L.  Hennepin,  Description  de  la  Tross,  1865)  ;  S.  Hearne,  Journey  to
Lotiisiane  (Paris,  1683),  p.  97  sq.  the  Northern  Ocean,  p.  329  sq.;  Re-
2  Relations  desjhuites,  1634,  p.  24,  lations  des  Jdsitites,  1636,  p.  109;  ibid.
ed.  1858.  Nets  are  regarded  by  the  1639,  p.  95  ;  Charlevoix,  Histoire  de
Indians  as  living  creatures  who  not  only  la  Noiivelle  France,  v.  225  ;  Chateau-
think  and  feel  but  also  eat,  speak,  and  briand,  Vovage  en  Amerique,  p.  140
marry  wives.  See  Sagard,  Le  Grand  sqq.  The  Hebrews  sacrificed  and
Vovage  du  Pays  des  Hurons,  p.  256  Inirned  incense  to  their  nets  (Habakkuk
(p.  178  5(/.  of  the  Paris  reprint,  Librairie  i.  16).


4o6  PROPITIATION  OF  chap.

children  ;  we  will   keep   the   dogs   from  eating    your    bones,
which  are  so  hard."  ^

The  elan,  deer,  and  elk  were  treated  by  the  American
Indians  with  the  same  punctilious  respect,  and  for  the  same
reason.  Their  bones  might  not  be  given  to  the  dogs  nor
thrown  into  the  fire,  nor  might  their  fat  be  dropped  upon
the  fire,  because  the  souls  of  the  dead  animals  were  believed
to  see  what  was  done  to  their  bodies  and  to  tell  it  to  the
other  beasts,  living  and  dead.  Hence,  if  their  bodies  were
ill  used,  the  animals  of  that  species  would  not  allow  them-
selves to  be  taken,  neither  in  this  world  nor  in  the  world  to
come."  The  houses  of  the  Indians  of  Honduras  were
encumbered  with  the  bones  of  deer,  the  Indians  believing
that  if  they  threw  the  bones  away,  the  other  deer  could  not
be  taken.^  Among  the  Chiquites  of  Paraguay  a  sick  man
would  be  asked  by  the  medicine-man  whether  he  had  not
thrown  away  some  of  the  flesh  of  the  deer  or  turtle,  and  if
he  answered  yes,  the  medicine-man  would  say,  "  That  is
what  is  killing  you.  The  soul  of  the  deer  or  turtle  has
entered  into  your  body  to  avenge  the  wrong  you  did  it."  ^
Before  the  Tzentales  of  Southern  Mexico  and  the  Kekchis
of  Guatemala  venture  to  skin  a  deer  which  they  have  killed,
they  lift  up  its  head  and  burn  copal  before  it  as  an  offering  ;
otherwise  a  certain  being  named  Tzultacca  would  be  angry
and  send  them  no  more  game.^  Cherokee  hunters  ask
pardon  of  the  deer  they  kill.  If  they  failed  to  do  so,  they
think  that  the  Little  Deer,  the  chief  of  the  deer  tribe,  who
can  never  die  or  be  wounded,  would  track  the  hunter  to  his
home  by  the  blood-drops  on  the  ground   and   would   put  the

1  Chateaubriand,     Voyage   en  Anu'-  sistently  the  Canadian  Indians  used  to

rigac,  pp.  175,  178.     They  will  not  let  kill  every  elan  they  could  overtake  in

the  blood  of  beavers  fall  on  the  ground,  the   chase,   lest   any  should   escape   to

or  their  luck  in  hunting  them  would  be  warn  their  fellows  (Sagard,  Lc).
gone  {Relations  des  Ji'suites,  1633,  P-  ^  Herrera,    General   History  of  the

21).      Compare    the    rule   about    not  vast  Continent  and  Islands  of  America,

allowing  the  blood  of  kings  to  fall  on  trans,  by  Stevens,  iv.  142.
the  ground  (above,  vol.  i.  p.  354  sq.).  ^  Lettres  Mif  antes  et  ciiriei/^es,  viii,

-  Hennepin,  Nouveati  voyage  d'lai  339.
pais  plus  grand  que  P  Europe  {\3\xt<:\\t,  ">  C.  Sapper,  "Die  Gebriiuche  und
l6()8),  T[i.  10,1  sq.;  Relations  des  Jt'suites,  religiosen  Anschauungen  der  Kekchi-
1636,  p.  log  ■,Ss.g?LX(}i.,Le  Grattd  Vovage  Indianer,"  Internationales  Arckiv  fio-
du  Pays  des  Ifurons,  y>-  '^SS  (V-  178  of  Ethnographie,  viii.  (1895),  p.  195
the    Paris    reprint).       Not    quite    con-  sq.


Ill  DEER  AND  BUFFALOES  407

spirit  of  rheumatism  into  him.  Sometimes  the  hunter,  on
starting  for  home,  Hghts  a  fire  in  the  trail  behind  him  to
prevent  the  Little  Deer  from  pursuing  him/  Before  they
went  out  to  hunt  for  deer,  antelope,  or  elk  the  Apaches  used
to  resort  to  sacred  caves,  where  the  medicine-men  propitiated
with  prayer  and  sacrifice  the  animal  gods  whose  progeny
they  intended  to  destroy."  The  Indians  of  Louisiana  be-
wailed bitterly  the  death  of  the  buffaloes  which  they  were
about  to  kill.  More  than  two  hundred  of  them  at  a  time
have  been  seen  shedding  crocodile  tears  over  the  approach-
ing slaughter  of  the  animals,  while  they  marched  in  solemn
procession,  headed  by  an  old  man  who  waved  a  pocket-
handkerchief  at  the  end  of  a  stick  as  an  oriflamme,  and  by  a
woman  who  strutted  proudly  along,  bearing  on  her  back  a
large  kettle  which  had  been  recently  abstracted  from  the
baggage  of  some  French  explorers.^  The  Thompson  River
Indians  of  British  Columbia  cherished  many  superstitious
beliefs  and  observed  many  superstitious  practices  in  regard
to  deer.  When  a  deer  was  killed,  they  said  that  the  rest  of
the  deer  would  be  well  pleased  if  the  hunters  butchered  the
animal  nicely  and  cleanly.  To  waste  venison  displeased  the
animals,  who  after  that  would  not  allow  themselves  to  be
shot  by  the  hunter.  If  a  hunter  was  overburdened  and  had
to  leave  some  of  the  venison  behind,  the  other  deer  were
better  pleased  if  he  hung  it  up  on  a  tree  than  if  he  let  it
lie  on  the  ground.  The  guts  were  gathered  and  put  where
the  blood  had  been  spilt  in  butchering  the  beast,  and  the
whole  was  covered  up  with  a  few  fir-boughs.  In  laying  the
boughs  on  the  blood  and  guts  the  man  told  the  deer  not  to
grieve  for  the  death  of  their  friend  and  not  to  take  it  ill  that
he  had  left  some  of  the  body  behind,  for  he  had  done  his
best  to  cover  it.  If  he  did  not  cover  it,  they  thought  the
deer  would  be  sorry  or  angry  and  would  spoil  his  luck  in  the
chase.  When  the  head  of  a  deer  had  to  be  left  behind,  they
commonly  placed  it  on  the  branch  of  a  tree,  that  it  might
not  be  contaminated  by  dogs  and  women.      For  the  same

1  J.     Mooney,     "Cherokee     theory  Apache  Indians,"  v^i^/i-Zs'.'v,  ii.  (1S91),

and    practice   of  medicine,"  American  p.  438.
Joitrnal  of  Folk-lore, m.  {i^()o),]).  /Sf^  sq.  '^  Hennepin,  Description  de  V  Loui'

^  J.   G.   Bourke,    "Religion  of  the  siane  {Yzx\%,  1683),  p.  80^^.


4o8  PROPITIATION  OF  chap.

reason  they  burned  the  bones  of  the  slain  deer,  lest  they
should  be  touched  by  women  or  gnawed  by  dogs.  And
venison  was  never  brought  into  a  hut  by  the  common  door,
because  that  door  was  used  by  women  ;  it  was  taken  in
through  a  hole  made  in  the  back  of  the  hut.  No  hunter
would  give  a  deer's  head  to  a  man  who  was  the  first  or
second  of  a  family,  for  that  would  make  the  rest  of  the  deer
very  shy  and  hard  to  shoot.  And  in  telling  his  friends  of
his  bag  he  would  generally  call  a  buck  a  doe,  and  a  doe  he
would  call  a  fawn,  and  a  fawn  he  would  call  a  hare.  This
he  did  that  he  might  not  seem  to  the  deer  to  brag.^

Indians  of  the  Lower  Fraser  River  regard  the  porcupine
as  their  elder  brother.  Hence  when  a  hunter  kills  one  of  these
creatures  he  asks  his  elder  brother's  pardon,  and  does  not  eat
of  the  flesh  till  the  next  day.''^  The  Sioux  will  not  stick  an
awl  or  needle  into  a  turtle,  for  they  are  sure  that,  if  they  were
to  do  so,  the  turtle  w^ould  punish  them  at  some  future  time.^
The  Canadian  Indians  would  not  eat  the  embryos  of  the
elk,  unless  at  the  close  of  the  hunting  season  ;  otherwise  the
mother-elks  would  be  shy  and  refuse  to  be  caught.'*  Some
of  the  Indians  believed  that  each  sort  of  animal  had  its
patron  or  genius  who  watched  over  and  preserved  it.  An
Indian  girl  having  once  picked  up  a  dead  mouse,  her  father
snatched  the  little  creature  from  her  and  tenderly  caressed
and  fondled  it.  Being  asked  why  he  did  so,  he  said  that  it
was  to  appease  the  genius  of  mice,  in  order  that  he  might
not  torment  his  daughter  for  eating  the  mouse.  With  that
he  handed  the  mouse  to  the  girl  and  she  ate  it.'^

The  Esquimaux  of  the  Hudson  Bay  region  believe  that
the  reindeer  are  controlled  by  a  great  spirit  who  resides  in  a
large  cave  near  the  end  of  Cape  Chidley.  The  outward  form
of  the  spirit  is  that  of  a  huge  white  bear.  He  obtains  and
controls  the  spirit  of  every  reindeer  that  is  slain  or  dies,  and
it  depends  on  his  good  will  whether  the  people  shall  have  a

.    1  James     Teit,     "The     Thompson  Report  of  the  British  Association  for

Indians  of  British  Columbia,"  Jl/e»ioirs  1894,  p.  459  sq,

of  the  American  Ahiseiiin  of  N'atiiral  ■*  Sclioolcraft,    Indian     Tribes,     iii.

History,  vol.  ii.  part  iv.  (April  1900),  230.

p.  346  sq.  *  Relations  des  Jhiiites,  1634,  p.  26.

-  Fr.  Boas,  in   "Ninth   Report   on  ^  Chzvltvoix,  Histoire  de  la  Nonvelle

the  North-Western  Tribes  of  Canada,"  France,  v.  443.


Ill  SLAUGHTERED  ANIMALS  409

supply  of  reindeer  or  not.  The  sorcerer  intercedes  with
this  great  spirit  and  prevails  on  him  to  send  the  deer  to  the
hungry  Esquimaux.  He  informs  the  spirit  that  the  people
have  in  no  way  offended  him,  since  he,  the  sorcerer,  has
taken  great  care  that  the  whole  of  the  meat  was  eaten  up,
and  that  last  spring  when  the  does  were  returning  to  him  to
drop  their  young,  none  of  the  little  or  embryo  fawns  were
devoured  by  the  dogs.  After  long  incantations  the  magician
announces  that  the  patron  of  the  deer  condescends  to  supply
the  people  with  the  spirits  of  the  animals  in  a  material  form,
and  that  soon  there  will  be  plenty  in  the  land.  He  charges
the  people  to  fall  on  and  slay  and  thereby  win  the  approval
of  the  spirit,  who  loves  to  see  good  people  enjoying  them-
selves, knowing  that  so  long  as  the  Esquimaux  refrain  from
feeding  their  dogs  with  the  unborn  young,  the  spirits  of  the
dead  reindeer  will  return  again  to  his  watchful  care.  The
dogs  are  not  allowed  to  taste  the  flesh,  and  until  the  supply
is  plentiful  they  may  not  gnaw  the  leg -bones,  lest  the
guardian  of  the  deer  should  take  offence  and  send  no  more
of  the  animals.  If,  unfortunately,  a  dog  should  get  at  the
meat,  a  piece  of  his  tail  is  cut  off  or  his  ear  is  cropped  to  let
the  blood  flow.^  Again,  the  Central  Esquimaux  hold  that
all  marine  creatures  sprang  from  the  fingers  of  the  goddess
Sedna,  and'  that  therefore  an  Esquimaux  must  make  atone-
ment for  every  such  animal  that  he  kills.  When  a  seal  is
brought  into  the  hut,  the  woman  must  stop  working  till  it
has  been  cut  up.  After  the  capture  of  a  ground  seal,  walrus,
or  whale  they  must  rest  for  three  days.  Not  all  sorts  of
work,  however,  are  forbidden,  for  they  may  mend  articles
made  of  sealskin,  but  they  may  not  make  anything  new.
For  example,  an  old  tent  cover  may  be  enlarged  in  order  to
build  a  larger  hut,  but  it  is  not  allowed  to  make  a  new  one.
Working  on  new  deerskins  is  strictly  forbidden.  No  skins
of  this  kind  obtained  in  summer  may  be  prepared  before  the
ice  has  formed  and  the  first  seal  has  been  caught  with  the
harpoon.  Later  on,  as  soon  as  the  first  walrus  has  been
taken,  the  work  must  again  stop  until  autumn  comes  round.

^  L.  M.  Turner,  "  Ethnology  of  the       Btcreau    of    Ethnology    (Washington,
Ungava    district,    Hudson    Bay   Terri-        1894),  p.  200  sq.
toxy,"  Eleventh  Annual  Report  of  the


4IO


PROP  I TI A  TION  OF  FISH  chap.


Hence  all  families  are  eager  to  finish  the  work  on  deerskins
as  fast  as  possible,  for  until  that  is  done  the  walrus  season
may  not  begin.^  The  Greenlanders  are  careful  not  to
fracture  the  heads  of  seals  or  throw  them  into  the  sea,  but
pile  them  in  a  heap  before  the  door,  that  the  souls  of  the
seals  may  not  be  enraged  and  scare  their  brethren  from  the

coast.^

For  like  reasons,  a  tribe  which  depends  for  its   subsist-
ence, chiefly  or   in  part,  upon   fishing  is  careful   to  treat  the
fish  with  every  mark  of  honour  and   respect.      The    Indians
of   Peru    "adored    the    fish    that    they    caught    in    greatest
abundance  ;  for  they  said  that  the  first  fish  that  was  made
in  the  world  above  (for  so  they   named    Heaven)   gave   birth
to  all  other  fish  of  that  species,  and  took  care  to  send  them
plenty  of  its  children  to  sustain  their  tribe.      For  this  reason
they  worshipped  sardines   in   one   region,  where  they  killed
more  of  them  than  of  any  other  fish  ;  in  others,  the  skate  ;
in    others,   the    dogfish  ;    in    others,  the   golden    fish    for  its
beauty  ;    in    others,    the    crawfish  ;    in    others,    for    want    of
larger    gods,   the    crabs,   where    they    had    no    other   fish,  or
where  they  knew  not  how  to  catch  and  kill  them.      In  short,
they  had  whatever  fish  was  most  serviceable  to  them  as  their
gods."  ^      The  Kwakiutl   Indians  of  British  Columbia  think
that  when  a  salmon  is  killed   its   soul   returns  to  the  salmon
country.      Hence  they  take  care  to  throw  the  bones  into  the
sea,  in    order    that    the   soul    may   reanimate   them    at   the
resurrection  of  the    salmon.     Whereas    if  they  burned  the
bones    the    soul   would   be    lost,  and   so    it    would    be  quite
impossible  for  that  salmon  to  rise  from  the  dead.'*      In   like
manner  the  Otawa  Indians  of  Canada,  believing  that  the  souls
of  dead  fish  passed  into  other  bodies  of  fish,  never  burned  fish
bones,  for  fear  of  displeasing  the  souls  of  the  fish,  who  would
come  no  more  to  the  nets;^      The  Hurons  also  refrained  from

1  Fr.  Boas,  "  The  Central  Eskimo,"  ^  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  Royal  Corn-
Sixth  An7iJial  Report  of  the  Bureau  of  mentaries  of  the  Yncas,  First  Part,  bk.
£th}to/oj;y  (Washington,  lS88),  p.  SgS-  i.  cli.  lO,  vol.  i.  p.  49^^.,  Hakluyt
As  to  the  antagonism  which  these  Society.  Cp.  ?'(/.,  vol.  ii.  p.  148.
Esquimaux  suppose  to  exist  between  *  Fr.  Boas,  in  Stxth  Report  on  the
marine  and  terrestrial  r.nimals,  see  North-lVesterii  Tribes  of  Canada,  p.  6l
above,  p.  336.  sq.  (separate  reprint  from  the  Report  of

-  Crantz,    History  of  Greenland,    i.  the  British  Association  for  I'&fjO).
216.  ^  Relations  des  Jhuites,  1667,  p.  12.


Ill  PROPITIATION  OF  FISH  411

throwing  fish  bones  into  the  fire,  lest  the  souls  of  the  fish
should  go  and  warn  the  other  fish  not  to  let  themselves  be
caught,  since  the  Hurons  would  burn  their  bones.  Moreover,
they  had  men  who  preached  to  the  fish  and  persuaded  them
to  come  and  be  caught.  A  good  preacher  was  much  sought
after,  for  they  thought  that  the  exhortations  of  a  clever  man
had  a  great  effect  in  drawing  the  fish  to  the  nets.  In  the
Huron  fishing  village  where  the  French  missionary  Sagard
stayed,  the  preacher  to  the  fish  prided  himself  very  much
on  his  eloquence,  which  was  of  a  florid  order.  Every  evening
after  supper,  having  seen  that  all  the  people  were  in  their
places  and  that  a  strict  silence  was  observed,  he  preached  to
the  fish.  His  text  was  that  the  Hurons  did  not  burn  fish
bones.  "  Then  enlarging  on  this  theme  with  extraordinary
unction,  he  exhorted  and  conjured  and  invited  and  implored
the  fish  to  come  and  be  caught  and  to  be  of  good  courage
and  to  fear  nothing,  for  it  was  all  to  serve  their  friends  who
honoured  them  and  did  not  burn  their  bones."  ^  The  dis-
appearance of  herring  from  the  sea  about  Heligoland  in
1530  was  attributed  by  the  fishermen  to  the  misconduct  of
two  lads  who  had  whipped  a  freshly-caught  herring  and  then
flung  it  back  into  the  sea.^  A  similar  disappearance  of  the
herrings  from  the  Moray  Firth,  in  the  reign  of  Queen  Anne,
was  set  down  by  some  people  to  a  breach  of  the  Sabbath
which  had  been  committed  by  the  fishermen,  while  others
opined  that  it  was  due  to  a  quarrel  in  which  blood  had  been
spilt  in  the  sea.^  For  Scotch  fishermen  are  persuaded
that  if  blood  be  drawn  in  a  quarrel  on  the  coast  where
herring  are  being  caught,  the  shoal  will  at  once  take  its
departure  and  not  return  for  that  season  at  least.
West  Highland  fishermen  believe  that  every  shoal  of
herring  has  its  leader  which  it  follows  wherever  he  goes.
This  leader  is  twice  as  big  as  an  ordinary  herring,  and  the
fishermen  call  it  the  king  of  herring.  When  they  chance
to  catch  it  in  their  nets  they  put  it  back  carefully  into  the
sea  ;  for  they  would   esteem   it   petty  treason  to  destroy  the

^  Sagard,  Le  Grand  Voyage  du  Pays       this   reference    I   am    indebted   to  my
dcs  Hwons,  p.   255  sqq.  (p.    178  sqq.       friend  W.  Robertson  Smitii.
of  the  Paris  reprint).  ^  Hugh  Miller,  Scenes  and  Legends

of  the  North    of  Scotland,  ch.  xvii.  p.

"  Schleiden,  Das  Salz,  p.  47.      For       256  sq.  (Edinburgh,  1S89).


412  PROPITIATION  OF  FISH  chap.

royal  fish.^  The  natives  of  the  Duke  of  York  Island
annually  decorate  a  canoe  with  flowers  and  ferns,  lade  it,
or  are  supposed  to  lade  it,  with  shell-money,  and  set  it
adrift  to  compensate  the  fish  for  their  fellows  who  have  been
caught  and  eaten.^  It  is.  especially  necessary  to  treat  the
first  fish  caught  with  consideration  in  order  to  conciliate  the
rest  of  the  fish,  whose  conduct  may  be  supposed  to  be
influenced  by  the  reception  given  to  those  of  their  kind
which  were  the  first  to  be  taken.  Accordingly  the  Maoris
always  put  back  into  the  sea  the  first  fish  caught,  "  with  a
prayer  that  it  may  tempt  other  fish  to  come  and  be  caught."  "^
Still  more  stringent  are  the  precautions  taken  when  the
fish  are  the  first  of  the  season.  On  salmon  rivers,  when  the
fish  begin  to  run  up  the  stream  in  spring,  they  are  received
with  much  deference  by  tribes  who,  like  the  Indians  of  the
Pacific  Coast  of  North  America,  subsist  largely  upon  a  fish
diet.  To  some  of  these  tribes  the  salmon  is  what  corn  is  to
the  European,  rice  to  the  Chinese,  and  seals  to  the  Esquimaux.
Plenty  of  salmon  means  abundance  in  the  camp  and  joy  at
the  domestic  hearth  ;  failure  of  the  salmon  for  a  single  season
means  famine  and  desolation,  silence  in  the  village,  and  sad
hearts  about  the  fire.'*  Accordingly  in  British  Columbia
the  Indians  used  to  go  out  to  meet  the  first  fish  as  they
came  up  the  river.  "  They  paid  court  to  them,  and  would
address  them  thus  :  '  You  fish,  you  fish  ;  you  are  all  chiefs,
you  are  ;  you  are  all  chiefs.' "  ^  Amongst  the  Thlinkeet  of
Alaska  the  first  halibut  of  the  season  is  carefully  handled  and
addressed  as  a  chief,  and  a  festival  is  given  in  his  honour,
after  which  the  fishing  goes  on.*"  Among  the  tribes  of  the
Lower  Eraser  River  when  the  first  sockeye-salmon  of  the
season  has  been  caught,  the  fisherman  carries  it  to  the  chief
of  his  tribe,  who  delivers  it  to  his  wife.  She  prays,  saying
to    the   salmon,    "  Who    has   brought   you   here  to   make   us

1  Martin's  "  Description  of  the  New  Zealand,  i.  202  ;  E.  Tregeav,
Western  Islands  of  Scotland,"  in  "  The  Maoris  of  New  Zealand," /^w;--
Pinkerton's  Voyages  and  Travels,  iii.  nal  AntJirop.  Inst.  xix.  (1890),  p.  109.
620.  *  A.  G.  Morice,  An  pays  de  POitrs

2  W.  I'owell,  Wanderings  in  a  JVi/d  Noir,  p.  28.

Counti-y,  p.  66  sq.  ^  Lubbock,  Origin  of  Ciijilisation,^

■*    R.    Taylor,    Te   Ika    a   Maui,  or  p.  277,  cjuoting  I\letlahkatlah,  p.  96.

New  Zealand  and  its  Inhabitants,  p.  ''  W.  Yi?W,  Alaska  and  its  Resources,

200  ;    A.    S.    Thomson,  The   Story  of  p.  413.


Ill  PROPITIATION  OF  FISH  413

happy  ?  We  are  thankful  to  your  chief  for  sending  you."
When  she  has  cut  and  roasted  the  salmon  according  to
certain  prescribed  rules,  the  whole  tribe  is  invited  and  par-
takes of  the  fish,  after  they  have  purified  themselves  by
drinking  a  decoction  of  certain  plants  which  is  regarded  as
a  medicine  for  cleansing  the  people.  But  widowers,  widows,
menstruous  women,  and  youths  may  not  eat  of  this  particular
salmon.  Even  later,  when  the  fish  have  become  plentiful
and  these  ceremonies  are  dispensed  with,  the  same  classes  of
persons  are  not  allowed  to  eat  fresh  salmon,  though  they
may  partake  of  the  dried  fish.  The  sockeye-salmon  must
always  be  looked  after  carefully.  Its  bones  have  to  be
thrown  into  the  river,  after  which  the  fish  will  revive  and
return  to  its  chief  in  the  west.  Whereas  if  the  fish  are  not
treated  with  consideration,  they  will  take  their  revenge,  and
the  careless  fisherman  will  be  unlucky.^  Among  the  Songish
or  Lkungen  tribe  of  Vancouver  Island  it  is  a  rule  that  on
the  day  when  the  first  salmon  have  been  caught,  the  children
must  stand  on  the  beach  waiting  for  the  boats  to  return.
They  stretch  out  their  little  arms  and  the  salmon  are  heaped  on
them,  the  heads  of  the  fish  being  always  kept  in  the  direction
in  which  the  salmon  are  swimming,  else  they  would  cease  to
run  up  the  river.  So  the  children  carry  them  and  lay  them
on  a  grassy  place,  carefully  keeping  the  heads  of  the  salmon
turned  in  the  same  direction.  Round  the  fish  are  placed
four  flat  stones,  on  which  the  plant  hog's  wort  {Pezicedamiin
leiocarpum,  Nutt.),  red  paint,  and  bulrushes  are  burnt  as  an
offering  to  the  salmon.  When  the  salmon  have  been  roasted
each  of  the  children  receives  one,  which  he  or  she  is  obliged
to  eat,  leaving  nothing  over.  But  grown  people  are  not
allowed  to  eat  the  fish  for  several  days.  The  bones  of  the
salmon  that  the  children  have  eaten  may  not  touch  the
ground.  They  are  kept  in  dishes,  and  on  the  fourth  day  an
old  woman,  who  pretends  to  be  lame,  gathers  them  in  a
huge  basket  and  throws  them  into  the  sea.^  The  Tsimshian
Indians  of  British  Columbia  observe  certain  ceremonies  when


^  Fr.    Boas,   in   "  Ninth  Report  on  ^  Yx.  Boas,  in  Sixth  Report  on  the

the  North-Western  Tribes  of  Canada,"  North- Western  Tribes  of  Canada,  p.  16

Report  of  the   British    Association  for  sq.  (separate  reprint  from  the  Report  of

1894,  p.  461.  the  British  Association  for  1890).


414  PROPITIATION  OF  FISH  chap.

the  first  olachen  fish  of  the  season  are  caught.  The  fish  are
roasted  on  an  instrument  of  elder-berry  wood,  and  the  man
who  roasts  them  must  wear  his  travelHng  dress,  mittens,  cape,
and  so  forth.  While  this  is  being  done  the  Indians  pray
that  plenty  of  olachen  may  come  to  their  fishing-ground.
The  fire  may  not  be  blown  up,  and  in  eating  the  fish  they
may  not  cool  it  by  blowing  nor  break  a  single  bone.  Every-
thine  must  be  neat  and  clean,  and  the  rakes  used  for  catch-
ing  the  fish  must  be  kept  hidden  in  the  house.^  In  spring,
when  the  winds  blow  soft  from  the  south  and  the  salmon
begin  to  run  up  the  Klamath  river,  the  Karoks  of  California
dance  for  salmon,  to  ensure  ,a  good  catch.  One  of  the
Indians,  called  the  Kareya  or  God -man,  retires  to  the
mountains  and  fasts  for  ten  days.  On  his  return  the  people
flee,  while  he  goes  to  the  river,  takes  the  first  salmon  of  the
catch,  eats  some  of  it,  and  with  the  rest  kindles  the  sacred
fire  in  the  sweating-house.  "  No  Indian  may  take  a  salmon
before  this  dance  is  held,  nor  for  ten  days  after  it,  even  if  his
family  are  starving."  The  Karoks  also  believe  that  a  fisher-
man will  take  no  salmon  if  the  poles  of  which  his  spearing-
booth  is  made  were  gathered  on  the  river-side,  where  the
salmon  might  have  seen  them.  The  poles  must  be  brought
from  the  top  of  the  highest  mountain.  The  fisherman  will
also  labour  in  vain  if  he  uses  the  same  poles  a  second  year
in  booths  or  weirs,  "  because  the  old  salmon  will  have  told
the  young  ones  about  them."  ~  Among  the  Indians  of  the
Columbia  River,  "  when  the  salmon  make  their  first  appear-
ance in  the  river,  they  are  never  allowed  to  be  cut  crosswise,
nor  boiled,  but  roasted  ;  nor  are  they  allowed  to  be  sold
without  the  heart  being  first  taken  out,  nor  to  be  kept  over
night,  but  must  be  all  consumed  or  eaten  the  day  they  are
taken  out  of  the  water.  All  these  rules  are  observed  for
about  ten  days."  ^  They  think  that  if  the  heart  of  a  fish  were
eaten  by  a  stranger  at  the  beginning  of  the  season,  they
would  catch  no  more  fish.  Hence,  they  roast  and  eat  the
hearts  themselves.'*     There  is  a  favourite  fish  of  the   Ainos

1  Id.,  in  Fifth  Report  on  the  North-       foniia,  p.  31  sq.

JVesta-Ji  T>-i7>eso/ Canada,  p.  ^1  {separate  ■*  Alex.  Koss,  Adventures  0/ the  First

reprint  from  the  Report  of  the  British  Settlers    on    the    Oregon    or    Columbia

Association  for  1889).  River,  p.  97.

2  Stephen   Powers,    Tribes  of  Cali-  ^  Q\i.'^\\ke%,  Narrative  of  the  U.S.


Ill  RESURRECTION  OF  ANIMALS  415

which  appears  in  their  rivers  about  May  and  June.  They
prepare  for  the  fishing  by  observing  rules  of  ceremonial
purity,  and  when  they  have  gone  out  to  fish,  the  women  at
home  must  keep  strict  silence  or  the  fish  would  hear  them
and  disappear.  When  the  first  fish  is  caught  he  is  brought
home  and  passed  through  a  small  opening  at  the  end  of  the
hut,  but  not  through  the  door  ;  for  if  he  were  passed  through
the  door,  "  the  other  fish  would  certainly  see  him  and  dis-
appear." ^  This  may  partly  explain  the  custom  observed  by
other  savages  of  bringing  game  in  certain  cases  into  their
huts,  not  by  the  door,  but  by  the  window,  the  smoke-hole,
or  by  a  special  opening  at  the  back  of  the  hut."

With  some  savages  a  special  reason  for  respecting  the
bones  of  game,  and  generally  of  the  animals  which  they  eat,
is  a  belief  that,  if  the  bones  are  preserved,  they  will  in
course  of  time  be  reclothed  with  flesh,  and  thus  the  animal
will  come  to  life  again.  It  is,  therefore,  clearly  for  the
interest  of  the  hunter  to  leave  the  bones  intact,  since  to
destroy  them  would  be  to  diminish  the  future  supply  of
game.  Many  of  the  Minnetaree  Indians  "  believe  that  the
bones  of  those  bisons  which  they  have  slain  and  divested  of
flesh  rise  again  clothed  with  renewed  flesh,  and  quickened
with  life,  and  become  fat,  and  fit  for  slaughter  the  succeeding
June."  ^  Hence  on  the  western  prairies  of  America,  the
skulls  of  buffaloes  may  be  seen  arranged  in  circles  and  sym-
metrical piles,  awaiting  the  resurrection.''  After  feasting  on
a  dog,  the  Dacotas  carefully  collect  the  bones,  scrape,  wash,
and  bury  them,  "  partly,  as  it  is  said,  to  testify  to  the  dog-
species,  that  in  feasting  upon  one  of  their  number  no  dis-
respect was  meant  to  the  species  itself,  and  partly  also  from

Exploring  Expedition,  IV.  324,  v.   119,  tina  cowmi'/i/atio  (Copenhagen,  1767),

where  it  is  said,  "a  dog  must  never  be  p.  503  ;   Revue  dEthnographie,  ii.  308

permitted  to  eat  the  heart  of  a  sahiion ;  sq.  ;    Jouriial    of  the    Anthropological

and  in  order  to  prevent   this,  they  cut  Institute,  v\\.  (1878),  p.  207;  Fr.  Boas,

the  heart   of  the   fish    out  before  they  "The  Central  Eskimo,"  in6'/jf/'/iy:/«;/«a/

sell  it."  Report    of    the  Bureau    of  Ethnology

1  H.    C.    St.   John,   "The    Ainos,"  (Washington,    1888),    p.  595;    A.   G.
Journ.  Anthrop.  Inst.  ii.  (1873),  p.  253  ;  Morice,  in  Transactions  of  the  Canadian

id..  Notes  and  Sketches  from  the  Wild  Institute,  iv.  (1892-93),  p.  108.
Coasts  of  Nipon,  p.  27  sq.  ^  James,  Expedition  from  Pittsburgh

2  Scheffer,    Lapponia,    p.    242   sq.  ;  to  the  Rocky  Alountains,  i.  257.
'Leemins,  De  Lapponibus  Einmajxhiae  *  'hxinion,  Myths  of  the  Netu  IVorld,'^
eorumque  lingua,vita,et  religione  pris-  p.  278.


4i6  RESURRECTION  OF  ANIMALS  chap,

a  belief  that  the  bones  of  the  animal  will  rise  and  reproduce
another."^       In   sacrificing   an    animal    the    Lapps   regularly
put  aside  the  bones,  eyes,  ears,  heart,  lungs,  sexual  parts  (if
the  animal   was  a  male),  and   a   morsel  of  flesh  from  each
limb.      Then,  after  eating  the  rest  of  the  flesh,  they  laid  the
bones  and  the  rest  in  anatomical  order  in  a  coffin  and  buried
them  with  the  usual   rites,  believing  that   the  god  to  whom
the  animal  was  sacrificed  would  reclothe  the  bones  with  flesh
and    restore   the    animal    to    life    in    Jabme-Aimo,   the   sub-
terranean  world  of  the  dead.      Sometimes,  as   after  feasting
on  a  bear,  they  seem  to  have  contented  themselves  with  thus
burying  the  bones."      Thus  the  Lapps  expected  the  resurrec-
tion  of   the   slain   animal    to   take    place   in   another   world,
resembling  in  this  respect  the   Kamtchatkans,  who  believed
that  every  creature,  down  to  the  smallest  fly,  would  rise  from
the  dead   and   live   underground.^      On   the  other  hand,  the
North  American  Indians  looked  for  the  resurrection  of  the
animals  in  the  present  world.      The  habit,  observed  especially
by   Mongolian   peoples,  of  stuffing   the    skin   of  a   sacrificed
animal,  or  stretching  it  on  a  framework,"^  points  rather  to  a
belief  in    a   resurrection    of  the   latter   sort.      The   objection
commonly   entertained   by   primitive    peoples   to   break   the
bones  of  the  animals  which  they  have  eaten   or  sacrificed

1  Keating,  Expedition  to  the  Source  White  Dog,  tlie  Iroquois  were  careful
of  St.  Peters  River,  i.  452.  to  strangle  the  animal  without  shedding

2  E.  T-  Jessen,  De  Fimionim  Lap-  its  blood  or  breaking  its  bones  ;  the
pomimqite  Norweigicorum  religione  dog  was  afterwards  burned  (L.  H.
pagana  tractatus  singidaris,"^^.  a,(isq.,  Morgan,    League    of  the   Iroquois,    p.

52  j-^.,  65   (bound  with  C.  Leem's  Z)t'  210).      It   is  a  rule  with  some  of  the

Lapponibns    Finmarchiae).       Compare  Australian   blacks   that  in   killing   the

Leem's  work,   pp.   418-420,   428  sq.;  native   bear   they  must    not   break   his

Acerbi,  Travels  through  Sweden,  Finn-  bones.      They  say  that  the  native  bear

land,  and  Lapland,  ii.  302.  once  stole  all  the  water  of  the  river,  and

^  Steller,     Beschreibung    von     dem  that  if  they  were  to  break  his  bones  or

Lande  Kamtsc hatha,  p.  269  ;  Kraschen-  take  off  his  skin  before  roasting  him,  he

innikow,  Kavitschatka,  p.  246.  would  do  so  again  (Brough  Smyth,  Ah-

*  See  Erman,  referred  to  above,  p.  origines  of  Victoria,  i. /^OrT sqq.).     \Vhen

397  ;    Gmelin,    Reise    durch    Sibirien,  the  Tartars  whom  Carpini  visited  killed

i.  274,  ii.  182  sq.,  214  ;  Vambery,  Das  animals  for  eating,  they  might  not  break

Tiirkenvolk,  p.   1 18  sq.      When  a  fox,  their  bones  but  burned  them  with  fire

the  sacred  animal  of  the  Conchucos  in  (Carpini,  Historia  Mongalorum  (Paris,

Peru,   had   been    killed,    its   skin   was  1838),  cap.  iii.  §  i.  2,  p.  620).      North

stuffed  and  set  up   (Bastian,  Die  Cul-  American  Indians  might  not  break  the

turldndcr  des  alten  Amerika,  i.   443).  bones  of  the  animals  which  they  ate  at

Cp.  the  bouphonia,  above,  p.  294  sqq.  feasts  (Charlevoi.x,  Histoire  de  la  Nou-

5  At    the    annual    sacrifice    of    the  velle  France, ^\.T  2).   In  the  war  feast  held


Ill


RESURRECTION  OF  ANIMALS


417

may  be  based  either  on  a  belief  in  the  resurrection  of  the
animals,  or  on  a  fear  of  intimidating  other  creatures  of
the  same  species  and  offending  the  ghosts  of  the  slain
animals.  The  reluctance  of  North  American  Indians  to  let
dogs  gnaw  the  bones  of  animals  ^  is  perhaps  only  a  precaution
to  prevent  the  bones  from  being  broken.

We  have  already  seen  that  some   rude  races   believe   in
a  resurrection  of  men  ^  as  well  as  of  beasts,  and  it  is  quite


by  Indian  warriors  after  leaving  home,
a  whole  animal  was  cooked  and  had  to
be  all  eaten.      No  bone  of  it  might  be
broken.      After  being   stripped   of  the
flesh  the   bones  were   hung  on  a  tree
{Narrative  of  the  Captivity  and  Adven-
tures of  John    Tanner,   p.   287).      On
St.  Olafs  Day  (29th  July)   the  Karels
of  Finland  kill  a  iamb,  without  using  a
knife,    and   roast   it    whole.      None   of
its  bones  may  be  broken.      The  lamb
has  not  been  shorn  since  spring.    Some
of  the  flesh  is  placed  in  a  corner  of  the
room   for  the   house-spirits,    some    is
deposited  on  the  tield  and  beside  the
birch-trees  which   are   destined   to   be
used  as  May-trees  next  year  (W.  Mann-
hardt,  A.  W.F.  p.  160  sq.,  note).   Some
of  the  Esquimaux  in  skinning  a  deer  are
careful  not  to  break  a  single  bone,  and
they  will  not  break  the  bones  of  deer
while   walrus    are    being    hunted   (Fr.
Boas,    "The  Central  Eskimo,"  Sixth
Annual  Report  of  the  Bureau  of  Ethno-
logy {y^^%\).mg\.0'a,  1888),  p.    595   sq.).
The    Innuit     (Esquimaux)     of     Point
Barrow,  Alaska,  carefully  preserve  un-
broken the  bones  of  the  seals  which  they
have  caught  and  return  them  to  the  sea,
either  leaving  them  in  an  ice-crack  far
out   from   the  land   or  dropping   them
through  a  hole  in  the  ice.      By  doing
so  they  think  they  secure  good  fortune
in  the  pursuit   of  seals  {Report  of  the
International  Expedition  to  Point  Bar-
row,  Alaska   (Washington,     1885),    p.
40).    In  this  last  custom  the  idea  prolD-
ably  is  that  the  bones  will  be  reclothed
with  flesh  and  the  seals  come  to  life
again.    The  Mosquito  Indians  of  Central
America  carefully  preserved  the  bones
of  deer  and  the  shells  of  eggs,  lest  the
deer  or  chickens  should  die  or  disappear
(Bancroft,  Native  Races  of  the  Pacific
VOL.  n


States,  i.  741).  The  Yurucares  of
Bolivia  "carefully  put  by  even  small
fish  bones,  saying  that  unless  this  is
done  the  fish  and  game  will  disappear
from  the  country"  (Brinton,  Alyths  of
the  New  World,"-  p.  278).

1  Relations    des  /^suites,     1634,    p.
25,  ed.  1858  ;  A.  Mackenzie,   Voyages
through  the  Continent  of  America,  p,
civ.  ;    J.  Dunn,  History  of  the  Oregon
Territory,  p.  99  ;  Whymper,  mjourn.
Royal  Geogr.   Soc.  xxxviii.   (1868),    p.
228;    id.,  in   Transact.  Ethnolog.  Soc.
N.S.,    vii.    (1869),    p.     174;    A.    P.
Reid,  "  Religious  Belief  of  the  Ojibois
Indians,"  Journ.    Anthrop.    Inst.    iii.
(1874),  p.  Ill;  Fr.Boas,  "The  Central
Eskimo,"  Sixth  Annual  Report  of  the
Bureau    of    Ethnology     (Washington,
1888),  p.  596.      For  more  examples  see
above,  pp.  404-408.      After  a  meal  the
Indians  of  Costa  Rica  gather  all  the
bones  carefully  and   either   burn  them
or  put  them  out  of  reach  of  the  dogs.
See  W.  M.  Gabb,  On  the  Indian  Tribes
a7id  languages   of  Costa    Rica    (read
before     the     American     Philosophical
Society,     20th    Aug.     1875),    p.    520
(Philadelphia,    1875).      The  custom  of
burning  the  bones  to  prevent  the  dogs
getting   them   does   not   contradict    the
view  suggested   in   the   text.      It  may
be   a   way   of   transmitting    the   bones
to  the  spirit-land.      The  aborigines  of
Australia  burn  the  bones  of  the  animals
which    they    eat,    but    for    a    different
reason  ;  they  think    that    if  an   enemy
got  hold  of  the  bones  and  burned  them
with  charms,  it  would  cause  the  death
of  the  person  who  had  eaten  the  animal
{Native  Tribes  of  South  Australia,  pp.
24,   196).

2  See  vol.  i.  p.  384  sq.

2  E


41 8  STORIES  OF  RESURRECTION  chap.

natural  that  people  who  entertain  such  a  belief  should  take
care  of  the  bones  of  their  dead  in  order  that  the  original
owners  of  the  bones  may  have  them  to  hand  at  the  critical
moment.  Hence  in  the  Mexican  territories  of  Guazacualco
and  Yluta,  where  the  Indians  thought  that  the  dead  would
rise  again,  the  bones  of  the  departed  were  deposited  in
baskets  and  hung  up  on  trees,  that  their  spirits  might  not
be  obliged  to  grub  in  the  earth  for  them  at  the  resurrection.^
On  the  other  hand,  the  Luritcha  tribe  of  Central  Australia,
who  eat  their  enemies,  take  steps  to  prevent  their  coming  to
life  again,  which  might  prove  very  inconvenient,  by  destroy-
ing the  bones  and  especially  the  skulls  of  the  bodies  on
which  they  have  banqueted.^

There  are  traces  in  folk-tales  of  the  same  primitive
notion  that  animals  or  men  may  rise  from  the  dead,  if  only
their  bones  are  preserved  ;  not  uncommonly  the  animal  or
man  in  the  story  comes  to  life  lame  of  a  limb,  because  one
of  his  bones  has  been  eaten,  broken,  or  lost.^  In  a  Magyar
tale,  the  hero  is  cut  in  pieces,  but  the  serpent-king  lays
the  bones  together  in  their  proper  order,  and  washes  them
with  water,  whereupon  the  hero  revives.  His  shoulder-
blade,  however,  had  been  lost,  so  the  serpent-king  supplied
its  place  with  one  of  gold  and  ivory.*  Such  stories,  as
Mannhardt  has  seen,  explain  why  Pythagoras,  who  claimed
to  have  lived  many  lives,  one  after  the  other,  was  said  to
have  exhibited  his  golden  leg  as  a  proof  of  his  supernatural
pretensions.^  Doubtless  he  explained  that  at  one  of  his
resurrections  a  leg  had  been  broken  or  mislaid,  and  that
he  had  been  forced  to  replace  it  with  one  of  gold.  Similarly,
when  the  murdered  Pelops  was  restored  to  life,  the  shoulder
which  Demeter  had  eaten  was  made  good  with  one  of  ivory.*'

1  Herrera,    General  History   of  the  Myddfai,"    Archaeological   Reviezv,    i.

vast  Continent  and  Isla72ds  of  America,  30  sq.      In   folk-tales,  as  in  primitive

trans,  by  Stevens,  iv.   126.  custom,    the    blood    is   sometimes   not

'^  Spencer  and  Gillen,  Native  Tribes  allowed    to   fall   on  the   ground.      See

of  Central  Australia,  p.  475.  Cosquin,  I.e.

3   Mannhardt,  Germanische  Alythen,  ^  W.    Mannhardt,    Germ.    Myth.  p.

PP-      57-74;      i'i-1     B.K.     p.     116;  66.

Rnchholz,       Deiitscher      Glaiibe      nnd  ^  Jamblichus,       Vita     Pythag.     92,

Branch,  i.  2i<)  sqq.  ;  J.  Curlin,  Myths  135,     140;     Porphyry,     Vit.    Pythag.

and  Folk-lore  of  Ireland,    p.    45   sij.  ;  28.

Cosc\\\\n,  Contes  pof-itlaires  de  Lorraine,  ^  Pindar,    Olymp.    i.    37   sqq.,   with

ii.  25;  riartland,    "The  piiysicians  of  the  Scholiast.


in  THE  SINEW  OF  THE  THIGH  419

The  story  that  one  of  the  members  of  the  mangled  Osiris  was
eaten  by  fish,  and  that,  when  Isis  collected  his  scattered  limbs,
she  replaced  the  missing  member  with  one  of  wood,^  may
perhaps  belong  to  the  same  circle  of  beliefs.

There  is  a  certain  rule  observed  by  savage  hunters  and
fishers  which,  enigmatical  at  first  sight,  may  be  explained  by
this  savage  belief  in  resurrection,  A  traveller  in  America
in  the  early  part  of  this  century  was  told  by  a  half-breed
Choctaw  that  the  Indians  "had  an  obscure  story,  somewhat
resembling  that  of  Jacob  wrestling  with  an  angel  ;  and  that
the  full-blooded  Indians  always  separate  the  sinew  which
shrank,  and  that  it  is  never  seen  in  the  venison  exposed  for
sale  ;  he  did  not  know  what  they  did  with  it.  His  elder
brother,  whom  I  afterwards  met,  told  me  that  they  eat  it  as
a  rarity  ;  but  I  have  also  heard,  though  on  less  respectable
authority,  that  they  refrain  from  it,  like  the  ancient  Jews.
A  gentleman,  who  had  lived  on  the  Indian  frontier,  or  in  the
nation,  for  ten  or  fifteen  years,  told  me  that  he  had  often
been  surprised  that  the  Indians  always  detached  the  sinew  ;
but  it  had  never  occurred  to  him  to  inquire  the  reason."  ^
James  Adair,  who  knew  the  Indians  of  the  South-Eastern
States  intimately,  and  whose  theories  appear  not  to  have
distorted  his  view  of  the  facts,  observes  that  "  when  in  the
woods,  the  Indians  cut  a  small  piece  out  of  the  lower  part  of
the  thighs  of  the  deer  they  kill,  lengthways  and  pretty  deep.
Among  the  great  number  of  venison-hams  they  bring  to  our
trading  houses,  I  do  not  remember  to  have  observed  one
without  it,  .  .  .  And  I  have  been  assured  by  a  gentleman  of
character,  who  is  now  an  inhabitant  of  South  Carolina,  and
well  acquainted  with  the  customs  of  the  Northern  Indians,
that  they  also  cut  a  piece  out  of  the  thigh  of  every  deer
they  kill,  and  throw  it  away  ;  and  reckon  it  such  a  dangerous
pollution  to  eat  it  as  to  occasion  sickness  and  other  mis-
fortunes of  sundry  kinds,  especially  by  spoiling  their  guns
from  shooting  with  proper  force  and  direction."  ^  In  recent
years  the  statement  of  Adair's  informant  has  been  confirmed

'    Vlxxi-xxch,  his  et  Osiris,  18.      This  -  A.Aa.mYlodig%on,  Letters  from  North

is  one  of  the  sacred  stories  which  the  America  (London,  1824),  i.  244.
pious  Herodotus  (ii.  48)  concealed  and  ^  Adair,    History    of  the    American

the  pious  Plutarch  divulged.  Indians,  p.   137  sq.


420


THE  SINEW  OF  THE  THIGH  chap.


by   the   French   inissioiuuy    Petitot,  who   has   also   pubhshed
the    "  obscure     story "    to     which     Hodgson     refers.        The
Loucheux    and    Hare-skin     Indians    who    roam    the    bleak
steppes  and  forests  that  stretch   from   Hudson's   Bay   to  the
Rocky    Mountains,   and    northward    to   the    frozen    sea,    are
forbidden  by  custom  to  eat  the  sinew  of  the  legs  of  animals.
To  explain  this  custom  they  tell  the  following  "  sacred  story."
Once  upon  a  time  a  man  found  a  burrow  of  porcupines,  and
going  down  into   it  after  the  porcupines   he   lost  his  way  in
the  darkness,  till  a  kind   giant  called  "  He  who   sees   before
and  behind  "  released  him   by  cleaving  open  the  earth.      So
the  man,  whose  name  was   "  Fireless   and    Homeless,"   lived
with  the  kind  giant,  and  the  giant  hunted  elans  and   beavers
for  him,  and   carried    him   about   in    the   sheath  of  his  flint
knife.     "  But  know,  my  son,"  said  the  giant,  "  that  he  who
uses  the  sky  as  his   head   is  angry  with   me,  and   has  sworn
my  destruction.      If  he  slays  me  the  clouds  will   be  tinged
with  my  blood  ;  they  will  be  red  with  it,  probably."      Then
he   eave   the  man   an  axe  made  of  the  tooth  of  a   gigantic
beaver,  and  went  forth  to  meet  his  foe.      But  from  under  the
ice   the  man  heard   a  dull   muffled   sound.      It  was  a  whale
which  was  making  this  noise  because  it  was  naked  and  cold.
Warned  by  the  man,  the  giant  went  toward  the  whale,  which
took  human  shape,  and  rushed  upon  the  giant.      It  was  the
wicked  giant,  the   kind   giant's   enemy.      The  two   struggled
together  for  a  long  time,  till  the  kind  giant  cried,  "  Oh,  my
son  !  cut,  cut  the  sinew  of  the  leg."      The  man  cut  the  sinew,
and  the  wicked  giant  fell  down  and  was  slain.      That  is  why
the  Indians  do  not  eat   the  sinew   of  the   leg.      Afterwards,
one  day  the  sky  suddenly  flushed  a  fiery  red,  so  Fireless  and
Homeless  knew  that  the  kind  giant  was   no  more,  and  he
wept.^      This  myth,  it  is  almost  needless  to  observe,  does  not
really  explain  the  custom.      People  do  not  usually  observe  a
custom  because  on  a  particular  occasion  a  mythical  being  is
said  to  have  acted  in  a  certain  way.      But,  on  the  contrary,
they  very  often  invent  myths  to  explain  why  they  practise
certain  customs.      Dismissing,  therefore,  the  story  of  Fireless

1  Petitot,    Monographic    des    Dhil-       Nord-oiiest  (Paris,  i8S6),  p.  132  sqq.,
Dindjie  (Paris,  1867),  pp.  77,  81  sq.  ;       cp.  pp.  41,  76,  213,  264.
id..    Traditions   indiennes  dit   Canada


in


THE  SINEW  OF  THE  THIGH


421


and  Homeless  as  a  myth  invented  to  explain  why  the  Indians
abstain  from  eating  a  particular  sinew,  it  may  be  suggested  ^
that  the  original  reason  for  observing  the  custom  was  a
belief  that  the  sinew  in  question  was  necessary  to  reproduc-
tion, and  that  deprived  of  it  the  slain  animals  could  not  come
to  life  again  and  stock  the  steppes  and  prairies  either  of  the
present  world  or  of  the  spirit  land.  We  have  seen  that  the
resurrection  of  animals  is  a  common  article  of  savage  faith,
and  that  when  the  Lapps  bury  the  skeleton  of  the  male
bear  in  the  hope  of  its  resurrection  they  are  careful  to  bury
the  genital  parts  along  with  it.""'


^  The  first  part  of  this  suggestion
is  due  to  my  friend  W.  Roliertson
Smith.  See  his  Lectures  on  the  Religion
of  the  Semites,'^  ]).  380,  note  I.  The
Faleshas,  a  Jewish  sect  of  Abyssinia,
after  kilHng  an  animal  for  food,  "  care-
fully remove  the  vein  from  the  thiglis
with  its  surrounding  flesh  "  (Halevy,
"Travels  in  Abyssinia,"  in  Publications
of  the  Society  of  Hebrew  Literature,
second  series,  vol.  ii.  p.  220).  Caffre
men  will  not  eat  the  sinew  of  the
thigh  ;  "  it  is  carefully  cut  out  and  sent
to  the  principal  boy  at  the  kraal,  who
with  his  companions  consider  it  as
their  right"  (Maclean,  Kafir  Laws  and
Customs,  p.  151).  Gallas  who  pride
themselves  on  their  descent  will  not
eat  the  flesh  of  the  biceps  ;  the  reasons
assigned  for  the  custom  are  inconsistent
and  unsatisfactory  (Paulitschke,  Ethno-
graphie  Nordost  Afrikas :  die  mater ie/te
cultiir  der  Dandkil,  Galla  7ind  Somdl,

P-   154)-

^  It  seems  to  be  a  common  custom
with  hunters  to  cut  out  the  tongues  of
the  animals  which  they  kill.  Omaha
hunters  remove  the  tongue  of  a  slain
buffalo  through  an  opening  made  in  the
animal's  throat.  The  tongues  thus  re-
moved are  sacred  and  may  not  touch
any  tool  or  metal  except  when  they  are
boiling  in  the  kettles  at  the  sacred  tent.
They  are  eaten  as  sacred  food  (Third
keportof  the  Bureau  of  Ethnology  ly^di^-
ington,  1884),  p.  289  sq.).  Indian  bear-
hunters  cut  out  what  they  call  the  bear's
little  tongue  (a  fleshy  mass  under  the
real  tongue)  and  keep  it  for  good  luck
in  hunting  or  burn  it  to  determine  from


its  crackling,  etc.,  whether  the  soul  of
the  slain  bear  is  angry  with  them  or
not    (Kohl,  Kitschi-Gaini,    ii.  251  sq.;
Charlevoix,    Historie    de    la    Nouvelle
France,  v.  173  ;  Chateaubriand,  Voyage
en  Amdriqiie,  pp.  179  sq.,  184).    In  folk-
tales the  hero  commonlj'  cuts  out  the
tongue  of  the  wild  beast  which  he  has
slain  and  preserves  it  as  a  token.     The
incident  serves  to  show  that  the  custom
was    a    common    one,    since    folk-tales
reflect  with   accuracy  the  customs  and
beliefs  of  a  primitive  age.   For  examples
of    the    incident,    see     Blade,     Conies
populaires  recucillis  en  Agetiais,  pp.  1 2,
14  ;   Dasent,  Tales  from  the  N'orse,  p.
1335^.  ( "Shortshanks");   Schleicher,
Litauische    Miirchen,    p.     58  5      Sepp,
Altbaycrischer    Sagenschatz,     p.     1 14;
Kohler  on    Gonzenbach's  Sicilianischc
Miirchen,  ii.  230  ;  Apollodorus,  iii.  13.
3  ;  Schol.onAj)ononius  Rhodius,i.  517  ?
Mannhardt,  A.  IV. F.  p.  53  ;   Poestion,
Lappldndische    Miirchen,    p.    231   sq.;
A.  F.  Chamberlain,  in  Eighth   Report
on     the     North  -]Vestern      Tribes     of
Canada,   p.    35   (separate  reprint  from
ilie  Report   of  the  British  Association
for  1892)  ;  Zingerle,  Kinder  und Haus-
miirchen  aus   l^irol.   No.   25,   p.    127  ;
Kuhn  und  ^(!}[\\s'MK.7^,N'orddeutscheSagen,
Mdrche>i     und     Gebriiuche,    p.     342  ;
Grundtvig,     Dcinische      Volksindrcheti,
First  Collection(Leipsic,  1 878),ubersetzt
von  Leo,  p. 289;  Leskienund  Brugmann,
Litauische    Volkslieder  und  Miirchen,
pp.  405   sq.,  409  sq.;     Schott,    Wala-
I  hische    Maerchen,    No.    10,    p.     142  ;
Schneller,    Miirchen     und    .Sagen    aus
IViilschtirol,  No.  39,  p.  1 16  sq.;  Basile,


422


VERMIN  PROPITIA  TED


CHAP.


Besides  the  animals  which  primitive  man  dreads  for  their
strength  and  ferocity,  and  those  which  he  reveres  on  account
of  the  benefits  which  he  expects  from  them,  there  is  another
class  of  creatures  which  he  sometimes  deems  it  necessary  to


Penta??ierone,  Liebrecht's German  trans-
lation, i.  99;  Sebillot,  Contes  Popii-
laires  de  la  Haute-Bretagne,  No.  1 1 ,
p.  80  ;  Cosquin,  Contes  Populaires  de
Lorraine,  i.  p.  61  ;  \i-^U\z\\,  Deutsche
Volksmiirchen  aus  det/t  Sachse^ilande
in  Siebenbiirgen,  No.  24.  p.  104  sqq. ;
Grimm,  Household  Tales,  No.  60.  The
incident  often  occurs  in  the  type  of
tale  analysed  by  Mr.  E.  S.  Hartland
in  his  Legend  of  Perseus  (vol.  i.  pp.  12,
17,  18,  etc. ;  vol.  iii.  pp.  6,  7,  8,  etc.).
Perhaps  the  cutting  out  of  the  tongues  is
a  precaution  to  prevent  the  slain  animals
from  telling  their  fate  to  the  live  animals,
and  thus  frightening  the  latter  away.
The  Gilyaks  put  out  the  eyes  of  the
seals  they  have  killed  in  order  to
prevent  the  animals  from  knowing  and
avenging  themselves  upon  their  mur-
derers (L.  von  Schrenck,  Reisen  und
Forschitngen  im  Amur  -  lande,  iii.
546).  Tribes  of  South-Eastern  Africa
pluck  out  the  right  eye  of  any  game
they  have  killed  and  pour  medicine,
which  has  been  charmed  by  magicians,
into  the  socket  (J.  Macdonald,  Light
in  Africa,  p.  171).  In  Laos,  hunters
cut  the  tendons  of  the  dead  game  lest
the  animals  should  come  to  life  again
and  run  away  (E.  Aymonier,  Notes  sur
le  Laos,  p.  23).  On  the  other  hand,
the  tongues  of  certain  animals,  as  the
otter  and  the  eagle,  are  torn  out  and
sometimes  worn  round  their  necks  by
Thlinkeet  and  Haida  shamans  as  a  means
of  conferring  superhuman  knowledge  and
power  on  their  possessors  (Fr.  Boas,  in
Fifth  Report  on  the  North  -  Western
Tribes  of  Canada,  p.  58,  separate
reprint  from  the  Report  of  the  British
Association  for  1889  ;  id.,  in  Journal
of  American  Folk-lore,  i.  (1888),  p.
218).  In  particular,  an  otter's  tongue  is
supposed  to  convey  a  knowledge  of
"  the  language  of  all  inanimate  objects,
of  birds,  animals,  and  other  living
creatures "  to  the  shaman,  who  wears
it  in  a  little  bag  hung  round  his  neck.
See  VV.  H.  Dalf,  "Masks and  Labrets,"


Third  Annual  Report  of  the  Bureau  of
Ethnology  (Washington,  1884),  p.  1 1 1
sq.  Compare  id.,  Alaska  and  its  Re-
sources, p.  425  ;  Petroff,  Rep07-t  on  the
Population,  Industries,  and  Resources  of
Alaska,  p.  176.  When  a  Galla  priest
sacrifices  an  animal  and  decides  that
the  omens  are  favourable,  he  cuts  out
the  tongue,  sticks  his  thumb  through  it,
and  so  Hays  the  animal  (Paulitschke,
Ethnographie  Nordost  -  Afrikas  :  die
Geistige  Cultur  der  Dandkil  Galla  und
Soiiidl,  p.  47).  In  certain  cases  Gallas
cut  out  the  tongues  of  oxen  and  wear
them  on  their  heads  as  tokens  (Paulit-
schke, op.  cit.  p.  156  ;  id.,  Ethno-
graphie Nordost- Afrikas :  die  mater ielle
Cultur,  etc.,  p.  226).  In  Bohemia  a
fox's  tongue  is  worn  as  an  amulet  to
make  a  timid  person  bold  (Grohmann,
Aberglauben  und  Gebriiuchc  aus Bohmen
und  Miihrcn,  p.  54,  §  354);  in  Olden-
burg and  Belgium  it  is  a  remedy  for
erysipelas  (Strackerjan,  Aberglaube  und
Sagen  aus  dem  Ilerzogthuin  Oldeiibu7g,
ii.  94,  §  381;  E.  Monseur,  in  Revue
de  r Histoire  des  Religions,  xxxi.  (1895),
p.  297  sq.).  In  Bohemia  the  tongue
of  a  male  snake,  if  cut  from  the  living
animal  on  St.  George's  Eve  and  placed
under  a  person's  tongue,  will  confer
the  gift  of  eloquence  (Grohmann,
op.  cit.  p.  81,  §  576).  The  Homeric
Greeks  cut  out.  the  tongues  of  sacrificial
victims  and  burned  them  (Homer,  Od.
iii.  332,  341).  According  to  some
accounts,  the  tongues  of  the  victims
were  assigned  by  the  Greeks  to  Hermes,
as  the  god  of  speech,  or  to  his  human
representatives  the  heralds  (Schol.  on
Aristophanes,  Plutus,  IIIO;  Athen-
aeus,  i.  p.  16  B;  Paroemiograplii  Grace i,
ed.  Leutsch  et  Schneidewin,  i.  415,
No.  100).  On  the  principles  of  sym-
pathetic magic  we  might  expect  that
heralds  should  taste  the  tongues  ot
sacrificial  victims  to  strengthen  their
voices.  See  further  H.  Gaidoz,  "  Les
langues  coupees,"  AL'iusine,  iii.  (1886-
87),  col.  303-307 ;  E.  Monseur,  loc.  cit.


I"  VERMIN  PROPITIATED  423

conciliate  by  worship   and   sacrifice.      These  are  the  vermin

that  infest  the  crops.      To  rid  himself  of  these  deadly  foes  the

farmer   has  recourse  to  a   thousand   superstitious   devices,  of

which,  though   many  are  meant  to  destroy  or  intimidate  the

vermin,    others    aim    at    propitiating    them    and    persuading

them  by  fair  means   to  spare  the  fruits  of  the  earth.      Thus

Esthonian  peasants,  in  the   Island  of  Oesel,  stand   in  great

awe  of  the  weevil,  an  insect  which  is  exceedingly  destructive

to  the  grain.      They  give  it    a  fine  name,  and  if  a  child  is

about  to  kill  a  weevil  they  say,  "  Don't  do   it ;  the  more  we

hurt  him,  the  more  he  hurts  us."      If  they  find  a  weevil  they

bury  it  in   the  earth   instead   of  killing   it.      Some  even   put

the  weevil  under  a  stone   in   the  field  and  offer  corn   to   it.

They  think  that  thus  it  is  appeased  and  does  less  harm.^

Amongst   the    Saxons   of  Transylvania,    in    order   to    keep

sparrows  from   the  corn,  the  sower  begins  by  throwing  the

first  handful  of  seed  backwards  over  his  head,  saying,  "  That

is    for    you,    sparrows."       To    guard    the    corn    against    the

attacks  of  leaf-flies  {Erdfiohe)  he  shuts  his  eyes  and  scatters

three  handfuls  of  oats  in  different  directions.      Having  made

this    offering    to    the    leaf-flies   he   feels   sure   that  they  will

spare  the  corn.      A  Transylvanian  way  of  securing  the  crops

against   all   birds,  beasts,  and   insects,  is  this  :   After  he  has

finished  sowing,  the  sower  goes  once  more  from   end   to   end

of  the    field    imitating    the    gesture  of   sowing,  but   with  an

empty  hand.      As  he  does  so  he  says,  "  I    sow   this  for  the

animals  ;   I  sow  it  for  everything   that    flies  and   creeps,  that

walks   and   stands,  that   sings    and    springs,  in   the   name  of

God  the  Father,  etc."  ^     The  following  is  a  German  way  of

freeing   a    garden    from    caterpillars.       After    sunset    or    at

midnight    the    mistress    of    the    house,    or    another    female

member  of  the  family,  walks  all  round  the  garden  dragging  a

broom  after  her.      She  must  not  look  behind   her,  and   must

keep    murmuring,   "  Good   evening,   Mother  Caterpillar,  you

shall  come  with  your  husband  to  church."      The  garden  gate

is  left  open  till  the  following  morning."     When  the  Matabele

1   Holzmayer,  "  Osiliana,"  Verhand-  biiri^ens,  p.   15  sq.
lungen  der  gelehrten  Estnischen  Gesell-  •*  E.  Krause,  "Aberglaubische  Kuren

5f^a/?s?<Z)or/a/,  vii.  Heft  2,  p.  105  note.  und  sonstiger  Aberglaube    in    Berlin,"

^   Heinrich,    Agrarische    Sitten    und  Zeitschiift  fiir  Ethtiologie,  w.  (1SS3),

Gebrduche  unter  den    Sachsen  Sieben-  p.  93.


424  VERMIN  PROPITIA  TED  chap.

find  caterpillars  in  their  fields  they  put  an  car  of  corn  in  a
calabash,  fill  the  vessel  up  with  caterpillars,  and  set  it  down
on  a  path  leading  to  another  village,  hoping  thus  to  induce
the  insects  to  migrate  thither/  There  is  a  certain  ant
whose  destructive  ravages  are  dreaded  by  the  people  of  Nias.
Generally  they  wage  war  on  it  by  means  of  traps  and  other
devices  ;  but  at  the  time  of  the  rice-harvest  they  cease  to
call  the  insect  by  its  common  name,  and  refer  to  it  under  the
title  of  Sibaia,  a  good  spirit  who  is  supposed  to  protect  the
crop  from  harm.^  In  South  Mirzapur,  when  locusts  threaten
to  eat  up  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  the  people  catch  one,
decorate  his  head  with  a  spot  of  red  lead,  salaam  to  him,  and
let  him  go.  After  these  civilities  he  immediately  departs
along  with  his  fellows.^

Sometimes  in  dealing  with  vermin  the  farmer  aims  at
hitting  a  happy  mean  between  excessive  rigour  on  the  one
hand  and  weak  indulgence  on  the  other ;  kind  but  firm,  he
tempers  severity  with  mercy.  An  ancient  Greek  treatise  on
farming  advises  the  husbandman  who  would  rid  his  lands  of
mice  to  act  thus  :  "  Take  a  sheet  of  paper  and  write  on  it  as
follows  :  '  I  adjure  you,  ye  mice  here  present,  that  ye  neither
injure  me  nor  suffer  another  mouse  to  do  so.  I  give  you
yonder  field '  (here  you  specify  the  field)  ;  '  but  if  ever  I
catch  you  here  again,  by  the  Mother  of  the  Gods  I  will  rend
you  in  seven  pieces.'  Write  this,  and  stick  the  paper  on  an
unhewn  stone  in  the  field  before  sunrise,  taking  care  to  keep
the  written  side  up.'"^  In  the  Ardennes  they  say  that  to
get  rid  of  rats  you  should  repeat  the  following  words  :  "  Erat
verbnin,  apud  Deuni  vestrum.  Male  rats  and  female  rats,  I
conjure  you,  by  the  great  God,  to  go  out  of  my  house,  out  of
all  my  habitations,  and  to  betake  yourselves  to  such  and  such
a  place,  there  to  end  your  days.  Decretis,  reversis  et  desem-
barassis  virgo  potens,  clemens,  justitiae."  Then  write  the
same  words  on  pieces  of  paper,  fold  them  up,  and  place  one

*   L.    Decle,   Three  Years  in  Savag^e  the  commentator,  the  field  assigned  to

Africa,  p.  i6o.  the  mice  is  a  neighbour's,  but  it  may

^  E.    Modigliani,  Uii    Viai^g'io  A'ias,  be  a   patch    of   waste   ground    on    the

p.  626.  flirmer's  own  land.      Tlie  charm  is  said

^  W.    Crooke,    Introduction    to    the  to  have  been  employed  formerly  in  the

Popular  Religion  and  Folklore  of  North-  neighbourhood     of    Paris     (De    Nore,

em  India,  p.  380.  Couiumcs,    Alythes    et    Traditions    des

^   Geofionica,   xiii.    5.      According  to  Provinces  de  France,  p.  383).


HI  VERMIN  PROPITIA  TED  425

of  them  under  the  door  by  which  the  rats  are  to  go  forth,
and  the  other  on  the  road  which  they  are  to  take.  This
exorcism  should  be  performed  at  sunrise/  About  two  years
ago  an  American  farmer  was  reported  to  have  written  a
civil  letter  to  the  rats,  telling  them  that  his  crops  were  short,
that  he  could  not  afford  to  keep  them  through  the  winter,
that  he  had  been  very  kind  to  them,  and  that  for  their  own
good  he  thought  they  had  better  leave  him  and  go  to  some
of  his  neighbours  who  had  more  grain.  This  document  he
pinned  to  a  post  in  his  barn  for  the  rats  to  read.^  Some-
times the  desired  object  is  supposed  to  be  attained  by
treating  with  high  distinction  one  or  two  chosen  individuals
of  the  obnoxious  species,  while  the  rest  are  pursued  with
relentless  rigour.  In  the  East  Indian  island  of  Bali,  the
mice  which  ravage  the  rice-fields  are  caught  in  great  numbers,
and  burned  in  the  same  way  that  corpses  are  burned.  But
two  of  the  captured  mice  are  allowed  to  live,  and  receive  a
little  packet  of  white  linen.  Then  the  people  bow  down
before  them,  as  before  gods,  and  let  them  go.^  In  the
Kangean  archipelago.  East  Indies,  when  the  mice  prove
very  destructful  to  the  rice-crop,  the  people  rid  themselves
of  the  pest  in  the  following  manner.  On  a  Friday,  v/hen
the  usual  service  in  the  mosque  is  over,  four  pairs  of  mice
are  solemnly  united  in  marriage  by  the  priest.  Each  pair  is
then  shut  up  in  a  miniature  canoe  about  a  foot  long.  These
canoes  are  filled  with  rice  and  other  fruits  of  the  earth,  and
the  four  pairs  of  mice  are  then  escorted  to  the  sea-shore
just  as  if  it  were  a  real  wedding.  Wherever  the  procession
passes  the  people  beat  with  all  their  might  on  their  rice-
blocks.  On  reaching  the  shore,  the  canoes,  with  their  little
inmates,  are  launched  and  left  to  the  mercy  of  the  winds  and
waves.*  In  some  parts  of  Bohemia  the  peasant,  though  he
kills  field  mice  and  grey  mice  without  scruple,  always  spares
white    mice.      If  he   finds    a   white    mouse   he   takes    it   up

^  Meyrac,      Traditions,      Coiitumcs,       eiland    Bali,"    Tijdschri/t  voor  Neder-

JJgendcs  et    Contcs    des    Ardennds,    p.        /(rw^Jr/j-Zw^iV,  N. S.,  viii.  (1879),  p.  125.

176.  ^   |.  L.  van  Gennep,    "  Bijdrage  tot

o     .        .         r  J    r  T-  TL  J  •         de  Kciinis  van  den  Kangean- Archipel,"

-  Afuertcan  /on ma/  of  Polk-lore,  xi.         „..,  .  ,  ,   ^     ,    t       j         t^  ,,

,   o   ox  a  hiniraren  tot  de  /  aa/- Land- en  yolken-

(1898),     p.       161.  L  J  l^T     J         ,  J        1       T        1-  1-

^  tmnde    van    Nederlandsch-I ndie ,    xlvi.

3  R.   van  Eck,    "  Schetsen  van   het       (1896),  p.  10 1.


426  VERMIN  PROPITIA  TED  chap.

carefully,  and  makes  a  comfortable  bed  for  it  in  the  window  ;
for  if  it  died  the  luck  of  the  house  would  be  gone,  and  the
grey  mice  would  multiply  fearfully  in  the  house.^  When
caterpillars  invaded  a  vineyard  or  field  in  Syria,  the  virgins
were  gathered,  and  one  of  the  caterpillars  was  taken  and  a
girl  made  its  mother.  Then  they  bewailed  and  buried  it.
Thereafter  they  conducted  the  "  mother  "  to  the  place  where
the  caterpillars  were,  consoling  her,  in  order  that  all  the
caterpillars  might  leave  the  garden.'-^  On  the  first  of
September,  Russian  girls  "  make  small  coffins  of  turnips  and
other  vegetables,  enclose  flies  and  other  insects  in  them,  and
then  bury  them  with  a  great  show  of  mourning."  ^

On  the  shore  of  Delagoa  Bay  there  thrives  a  small  brown
beetle  which  is  very  destructive  to  the  beans  and  maize.
The  Baronga  call  it  noonoo.  In  December  or  January,
when  the  insects  begin  to  swarm,  women  are  sent  to  collect
them  from  the  bean-stalks  in  shells.  When  they  have  done
so,  a  twin  girl  is  charged  with  the  duty  of  throwing  the
insects  into  a  neighbouring  lake.  Accompanied  by  a  woman
of  mature  years  and  carrying  the  beetles  in  a  calabash,  the
girl  goes  on  her  mission  without  saying  a  word  to  any  one.
At  her  back  marches  the  whole  troop  of  women,  their  arms,
waists,  and  heads  covered  with  grass  and  holding  in  their
hands  branches  of  manioc  with  large  leaves  which  they  wave
to  and  fro,  while  they  chant  the  words,  "  Noonoo,  go  away  !
Leave  our  fields  !  Noonoo,  go  away  !  leave  our  fields  ! "
The  little  girl  throws  her  calabash  with  the  beetles  into  the
water  without  looking  behind  her,  and  thereupon  the  women
bellow  out  obscene  songs,  which  they  never  dare  to  utter
except  on   this  occasion   and  at  the  ceremony  for  making


rain.^


Another  mode  of  getting  rid  of  vermin  and  other  noxious

'   Grohmann,  Aberglaiibcn  und    Gc-  by  C.  Kayser  {Die  C au ones  Jacob' s  von

brdiiche     aus    Bdhmen    und    Mdhren,  Edessa  iibersetzt  und  erldutert,  Leipsic,

p.  60,  §  405.  1886;  see  p.  25  sq.).

2  'L.^^AxAQ.Reliqiiiaejurisecclesiastici  •.  ,,  ,  r-  ,-      ,        „       •

....  „,     TT      ^u-  Ralston,     Sonsis    of    the     KT.ssicn

antiquissimae,y^.  135.    r  or  this  passage  p,  f,/,  ^      J

I  am  indebted  to  my  friend    Prof.  W.  '/''>  P-     55-

Robertson  Smith,  who  kindly  translated  *   H.  A.  Junod,  Les  Ba-ronga  (Neu-

it  for  me  from  the  Syriac.      It  occurs  in  chatel,    1898),    p.  419  sq.      As'to   the

the  Ca«w/i-of  Jacob  of  Edessa,  of  which  rain-makinsj  ceremony  among  the  Ba-

aGerman  translation  has  been  published  ronga,  see  vol.  i.  p. -91  sq.


Ill


VERMIN  PROPITIA  TED


427


creatures  without  hurting  their  feehngs  or  showing  them
disrespect  is  to  make  images  of  them.  Apollonius  of  Tyana
is  said  to  have  freed  Antioch  from  scorpions  by  making  a
bronze  image  of  a  scorpion  and  burying  it  under  a  small
pillar  in  the  middle  of  the  city.^  Gregory  of  Tours  tells  us
that  the  city  of  Paris  used  to  be  free  of  dormice  and  serpents,
but  that  in  his  lifetime,  while  they  were  cleaning  a  sewer,
they  found  a  bronze  serpent  and  a  bronze  dormouse  and
removed  them.  "  Since  then,"  adds  the  good  bishop,  "  dor-
mice and  serpents  without  number  have  been  seen  in  Paris." "
When  their  land  was  overrun  with  mice,  the  Philistines  made
golden  images  of  the  vermin  and  sent  them  out  of  the
country  in  a  new  cart  drawn  by  two  cows,  hoping  that  the
real  mice  would  simultaneously  depart.^  So  when  a  plague
of  serpents  afflicted  the  Israelites  in  the  desert,  they  made  a
serpent  of  brass  and  set  it  on  a  pole  as  a  mode  of  staying
the  plague.^

Some  of  the  Greek  gods  were  worshipped  under  titles
derived  from  the  vermin  or  other  pests  which  they  were
supposed  to  avert  or  exterminate.  Thus  we  hear  of  Mouse
Apollo,''  Locust  Apollo,''  and  Mildew  Apollo  ;  ^  of  Locust
Hercules  and  Worm-killing  Hercules  ;^  of  Foxy  Dionysus  ;^
and  of  Zeus  the  Fly-catcher  or  Averter  of  Flies.^'^  If  we
could  trace  all  these  and  similar  worships  to  their  origin,  we
should  probably  find  that  they  were  originally  addressed,  not


1  Malalas,  Chronographia,  p.  264,
ed.   Dindorf.

^  Gregoire  de  Tours,  Histoire
EccUsiastiqiie  des  Francs,  viii.  33,
Guizot's  translation.  For  more  stories
of  the  same  sort,  see  Thiers,  Traitd  des
Superstitions  (Paris,  1679),  pp.  306-
308.

■*  I  Samuel  vi.  4- 18.  The  passage
in  which  the  plague  of  mice  is  definitely
described  has  been  omitted  in  the
existing  Hebrew  text,  but  is  preserved
in  the  Septuagint  (l  Samuel  v.  6,  /cat
ixiffov  TrjS  xwpas  ai^TT^y  dvexpvrjcrav  /j-ves).
See  Prof.  A.  F.  Kirkpatrick  on  i
Samuel  v.  6.

*  Numbers  xxi.  6-9.

^  Homer,  I/iad,  i.  39,  with  the
Scholia  and  the  comment  of  Eustathius  ;
Strabo,    xiii.    i.    48   and  63  ;   Aelian,


N'at.  Anim.  xii.  5  ;  Clement  of
Alexandria,  Protrept.  ii.  39,  p.  34,
ed.  Potter;  Pausanias,  x.  12.  5.

®  Strabo,  xiii.  I.  64  ;  Pausanias,  i.
24.  8.

^  Strabo,  xiii.  i.  64  ;  Eustathius,  on
Homer,  Iliad,  i.  39,  p.  34.

*  Strabo  and  Eustathius,  ll.cc.

"  My  friend  W.  Kidgeway  has
pointed  out  that  the  epithet  Bassareus
applied  to  Dionysus  (Cornutus,  De
natttra  dcorum,  30)  appears  to  be  de-
rived from  bassara,  "  a  fox."  See
Tzetzes,  Schol.  on  Lycophro7i,  771  ;
W.  Ridgeway,  in  Classical  Review,  x.
(1896),  p.  21  sqq.

10  Pliny,  Nat.  Hist.  x.  75  ;
Pausanias,  v.  14.  i,  viii.  26.  7  ;
Clement  of  Alexandria,  Protrept.  ii.
38,  p.  33,  ed.  Potter.


428


MOUSE  APOLLO


CHAP.


to  the  high  gods  as  the  protectors  of  mankind,  but  to  the
baleful  things  themselves,  the  mice,  locusts,  mildew,  and  so
forth,  with  the  intention  of  flattering  and  soothing  them,  of
disarming  their  malignity,  and  of  persuading  them  to  spare
their  worshippers.  We  know  that  the  Romans  worshipped  the
mildew,  the  farmer's  plague,  under  its  own  proper  name,-^
The  ravages  committed  by  mice  among  the  crops  both  in
ancient  and  modern  times  are  notorious,"  and  accordine  to
a  tradition  which  may  be  substantially  correct  the  worship
of  the  Mouse  Apollo  was  instituted  to  avert  them.^  The
image  of  a  mouse  which  stood  beside  Apollo's  tripod  in  the
god's  temple  *  may  be  compared  with  the  golden  mice  which
the  Philistines  made  for  the  purpose  of  ridding  themselves  of
the  vermin  ;  and  the  tame  mice  kept  in  his  sanctuary,
together  with  the  white  mice  which  lived  under  the  altar,^
would  on  this  hypothesis  be  parallel  to  the  white  mice  which
the  Bohemian  peasant  still  cherishes  as  the  best  way  of
keeping  down  the  numbers  of  their  grey-coated  brethren.
An  Oriental  counterpart  of  the  Mouse  Apollo  is  the  ancient
pillar  or  rude  idol  which  the  Chams  of  Indo-China  call
yang-tikuJi  or  "god  rat,"  and  to  which  they  offer  sacrifices
whenever  rats  infest  their  fields  in  excessive  numbers.^
Another  epithet  applied  to  Apollo  which  probably  admits  of
a  similar  explanation  is  Wolfish.^  Various  legends  set  forth
how  the  god  received  the  title  of  Wolfish  because  he  ex-
terminated wolves  ;  '^  indeed  this  function  was  definitely
attributed  to  him  by  the  epithet  Wolf-slayer.^  Arguing
from  the  analogy  of  the  preceding  cases,  we  may  suppose  that


1  Robigo  or  personified  as  Robigus.
See  Varro,  Rerum  7-ustuarum,  i.  i.  6  ;
id.,  De  lingua  laiina,  vi.  i6  ;  Ovid,
Fasti,  iv.  905  sqq.  ;  Tertullian,  D,'
spectaculis,  5 ;  Augustine,  De  civitatc
dei,  iv.  21  ;  Lactantius,  Divin.  Insfit.
i.  20  ;  Preller,  RUmisclie  Mythologie,^
ii.  43  sqq.  ;  \V.  Warde  Prowler,  77ie
Roman  Festivals  of  t/ie  Period  of  thr
Republic,  p.  88  sqq.

-  Aristotle,  Hist.  Anii/t.  vi.  37,  ]..
580  B.  15  sqq.  :  Aelian,  Nat.  Auim.
xvii.  41  ;  \V.  Warde  F'owler  in  '/'//,■
Classical  Rer'iezv,  vi.  (1892),  p.  413.

^  Polemo,  cited  by  a  scholiast  on
Homer,     Piad,     i.    39    (ed.    Ikkker).


Compare      Eustathius      on      Homer,
Piad,  i.  39.

*  Aelian,  Nat.  A/tim.  xii.  5.

■''  Aelian,  I.e.

"  E.  Aymonier,  "  Les  Tchames  et
leurs  religions,"  Revue  de  Fhistoire  des
7-eligions,  xxiv.  (1891),  p.  236.

'■  A('/cetos  or  Mklos,  Pausanias,  i.
19-  3  (with  my  note),  ii.  9.  7,  ii.  19.  3,
viii.  40.  5  ;  Lucian,  Anacharsis,  7  ;
IJekker's  Anecdota  Graeca,  i.  277,  line
I  o  sq.

^  Pausanias,  ii.  9.  7  ;  Schol.  on
Demosthenes,  xxiv.  114,  p.  736.

"  Sophocles,  Electra,  6.


Ill  WOLF  APOLLO  429

at  first  the  wolves  themselves  were  propitiated  by  fair  words
and  sacrifices  to  induce  them  to  spare  man  and  beast;  and  that
at  a  later  time,  when  the  Greeks,  or  rather  the  enlightened
portion  of  them,  had  outgrown  this  rude  form  of  worship,  they
transferred  the  duty  of  keeping  off  the  wolves  to  a  beneficent
deity  who  discharged  the  same  useful  office  for  other  pests,
such  as  mice,  locusts,  and  mildew.  A  reminiscence  of  the
direct  propitiation  of  the  fierce  and  dangerous  beasts  them-
selves is  preserved  in  the  legends  told  to  explain  the  origin
of  the  Lyceum  or  Place  of  Wolves  at  Athens  and  of  the
sanctuary  of  Wolfish  Apollo  at  Sicyon.  It  is  said  that
once  when  Athens  was  infested  by  wolves,  Apollo  commanded
sacrifices  to  be  offered  on  the  Place  of  Wolves  and  the  smell
proved  fatal  to  the  animals/  Similarly  at  Sicyon,  when  the
flocks  suffered  heavily  from  the  ravages  of  wolves,  the  same
god  directed  the  shepherds  to  set  forth  meat  mixed  with
a  certain  bark,  and  the  wolves  devoured  the  tainted  meat
and  perished.^  These  legends  probably  reflect  in  a  distorted
form  an  old  custom  of  sacrificing  to  the  wolves,  in  other
words  of  feeding  them  to  mollify  their  ferocity  and  win  their
favour.  We  know  that  such  a  custom  prevailed  among  the
Letts  down  to  comparatively  recent  times.  In  the  month  of
December,  about  Christmas  time,  they  sacrificed  a  goat  to
the  wolves,  with  strange  idolatrous  rites,  at  a  cross-road,  for
the  purpose  of  inducing  the  wolves  to  spare  the  flocks  and
herds.  After  offering  the  sacrifice  they  used  to  brag  that
no  beast  of  theirs  would  fall  a  victim  to  the  ravening  maw
of  a  wolf  for  all  the  rest  of  that  year,  no,  not  though  the
pack  were  to  run  right  through  the  herd.  Sacrifices  of  this
sort  are  reported  to  have  been  secretly  offered  by  the  Letts
as  late  as  the  seventeenth  century  ;^  and  if  we  knew  more  of
peasant  life  in  ancient  Greece  we  might  find  that  on  winter
days,  while  Aristotle  was  expounding  his  philosophy  in  the
Lyceum  or  Place  of  Wolves  at  Athens,  the  Attic  peasant
was  still  carrying  forth,  in  the  crisp  frosty  air,  his  offering  to
the  wolves,  which  all  night  long  had  been  howling  round  his
sheepfold  in  a  snowy  glen  of  Parnes  or  Pentelicus.

^  Schol.  on  Demos';henes,  xxiv.   114,  printed     in    Scriptores    renim   Lirotii-

p.  736.  '^  Pausanias,  ii.  9.  7.  (rar«<w,  vol.  ii.  (Riga  and  Leipsic,  1848),

3  P.     Einhorn,      Reformatio    gentis  p.  621.     The  preface  of  Einhorn's  work

Lelticae    in    Ducat  11    Ciirlandiae,    re-  is  dated  17th  July  1636.


430


SOULS  OF  DEAD  chap.


With  some  savages  a  reason  for  respecting  and  sparing
certain  species  of  animals  is  a  belief  that  the  souls  of  their  dead
kinsfolk  are  lodged  in  these  creatures.      Thus  the  Indians  of
Cayenne   refuse   to   eat  certain   large   fish,  because   they  say
that  the  soul  of  some  one  of  their  relations  might  be  in  the
fish,  and  that  hence  in  eating  the  fish  they  might  swallow
the   soul/      Once   when   a   Spaniard   was  out  hunting  with
two   Piros   Indians  of  Peru,  they  passed  a  deserted  house  in
which    they    saw    a    fine    jaguar.      The    Indians    drew    the
Spaniard  away,  and  when  he  asked  why  they  did  not  attack
the  animal,  they  said  :   "  It  was  our  sister.      She   died  at  the
last  rains.      We  abandoned  the  hut  and  on  the  second  night
she  came  back.      It  was   the   beautiful  jaguar." ''      Similarly
a  missionary  remarked  of  the  Chiriguanos  Indians  of  Bolivia
that  they  must  have  some  idea  of  the  transmigration  of  souls  ;
for  one  day,  while  he  was  talking  with  a  woman  of  the  tribe
who  had   left   her  daughter  in  a  neighbouring  village,  she
started  at  sight  of  a  fox  passing  near  and  exclaimed,  "  May
it  not  be  the  soul  of  my  daughter  who  has  died  ?  "  ^      The
Colombian  Indians   in   the   district  of  Popayan  will   not  kill
the   deer  of  their  forests,  and   entertain   such  a  respect  for
these  animals   that  they  view  with   horror    and   indignation
any  one  who  dares  to  eat  venison   in   their  presence.      They
say  that  the  souls  of  persons  who  have  led  a  good  life  are  in
the  deer."*      In  like  manner  the  Indians  of  California  formerly
refused   to   eat   the    flesh  of  large  game,  because  they  held
that   the   bodies  of  all   large  animals  contained  the  souls  of
past  generations  of  men  and  women.      However,  the  Indians
who  were  maintained   at  the   Spanish  missions  and  received
their   rations    in    the    form    of    beef,   had  to  overcome  their
conscientious  scruples  in  regard  to  cattle.      Once  a  half-caste,
wishing    to    amuse    himself  at    the    expense  of  the   devout,
cooked  a  dish  of  bear's  flesh  for  them  and  told  them  it  was
beef.      They  ate  heartily  of   it,   but  when   they  learned  the
trick  that  had  been   played  on  them,  they  were  seized  with
retchings,  which   only   ended   with  the   reappearance  of  the

1  A.     Biet,     Voyage    de    la    France  ^  Leth-es  idifiantes  et  curieuses,  viii.

Equinoxiale  en  PIsU  de  C<r)v;/;/c  (Paris,  335  sqq.

1664),  p.  361.  *  Fr.    Coreal,     Voyages    atix   Indes

'^  Ch.     Wiener,     Peiou    et    Bolivie  occideittales    (Amsterdam,     1722),     ii.

(Paris,  1880),  p.  369.  132.


Ill  LODGED  IN  ANIMALS  43 1

obnoxious  meat.  A  reproach  hurled  by  the  wild  tribes  at
their  brethren  who  had  fallen  under  European  influence  was
"  They  eat  venison  !  "  ^  Californian  Indians  have  been
known  to  plead  for  the  life  of  an  old  grizzly  she-bear,
because  they  thought  it  housed  the  soul  of  a  dead  grandam,
whose  withered  features  had  borne  some  likeness  to  the
wrinkled  face  of  the  bear."

The  doctrine  of  the  transmigration  of  souls  is  viewed  with
great  favour  by  the  negroes  of  northern  Guinea.  In  different
parts  of  the  coast  different  species  of  animals  are  accounted
sacred,  because  they  are  supposed  to  be  animated  by  the
spirits  of  the  dead.  Hence  monkeys  near  Fishtown,  snakes
at  Whydah,  and  crocodiles  near  Dix  Cove  live  in  the  odour
of  sanctity.^  In  the  lagoon  of  Tcndo,  on  the  Ivory  Coast  of
West  Africa,  there  is  a  certain  sacred  islet  covered  with  im-
penetrable scrub,  on  which  no  native  dare  set  foot.  It  is
peopled  only  by  countless  huge  bats,  which  at  evening  quit
the  island  by  hundreds  of  thousands  to  fly  towards  the  River
Tanoe,  which  flows  into  the  lagoon.  The  natives  say  that
these  bats  are  the  souls  of  the  dead,  who  retire  during  the  day
to  the  holy  isle  and  are  bound  to  present  themselves  every
night  at  the  abode  of  Tano,  the  great  and  good  fetish  who
dwells  by  the  river  of  his  name.  Paddling  past  the  island  the
negroes  will  not  look  at  it,  but  turn  away  their  heads.  A
European  in  crossing  the  lagoon  wished  to  shoot  one  of  the
bats,  but  his  boatmen  implored  him  to  refrain,  lest  he  should
kill  the  soul  of  one  of  their  kinsfolk.^  Some  of  the  Chams  of
Indo-China  ^believe  that  the  souls  of  the  dead  inhabit  the
bodies  of  certain  animals,  such  as  serpents,  crocodiles,  and  so
forth,  the  kind  of  animal  varying  with  the  family.  The  species
of  animals  most  commonly  regarded  as  tenanted  by  the  spirits
of  the  departed  are  the  rodents  and  active  climbing  creatures
which  abound  in  the  country,  such  as  squirrels.  According
to  some  people,  these  small  animals  are  especially  the  abode
of  still-born  infants  or  of  children  who  died  young.  The
souls  of  these  little  ones  appear  in  dreams  to  their  mourning

1  Schoolcraft,     Indian      Tribes,     v.  <  J.  C.  Reichenbach,  "Etude  sur  le
215^^.                                                                  royaume    d'Assinie,"    Bulletin    de    la

2  Schoolcraft,  op.  cit.  iii.   113.  Society  de  G^ographie  {^zx'vs,),  vii.  Serie,
^  J.    L.    Wilson,     Western    Africa,       xi.  (1S90),  p.  322  i-^.

p.  210.


432  SOULS  OF  DEAD  chap.

parents  and  say  :  "  I  inhabit  the  body  of  a  squirrel.  Honour
me  as  such.  Make  me  a  present  of  a  flower,  a  cocoa-nut,
a  cup  of  roasted  rice,"  and  so  on.  The  parents  discharge
this  pious  duty,  respect  these  famiHar  spirits,  ascribe  ilhiesses
to  their  displeasure,  pray  to  them  for  heahng,  and  on  their
deathbed  commend  to  their  descendants  the  care  of  such  and
such  a  spirit,  as  a  member  of  the  family.^

The  Igorrots  of  Cabugatan,  in  the  PhiHppines,  regard  the
eels  in  their  stream  as  the  souls  of  their  forefathers.  Hence
instead  of  catching  and  eating  them  they  feed  them,  till  the
eels  become  as  tame  as  carp  in  a  pond."  In  the  Sandwich
Islands  various  people  worshipped  diverse  kinds  of  animals,
such  as  fowls,  lizards,  owls,  rats,  and  so  forth.  If  a  man
who  adored  sharks  happened  to  have  a  child  still-born,  he
would  endeavour  to  lodge  the  soul  of  the  dead  infant  in  the
body  of  a  shark.  For  this  purpose  he  laid  the  tiny  body,
together  with  a  couple  of  roots  of  taro,  some  kava,  and  a
piece  of  sugar-cane,  on  a  mat,  recited  prayers  over  it,  and
then  flung  the  whole  into  the  sea,  believing  that  by  virtue  of
this  offering  the  transmigration  of  the  child's  soul  into  the
shark's  body  would  be  eflected,  and  that  henceforth  the  vora-
cious monsters  would  spare  all  members  of  the  family  who
might  otherwise  be  exposed  to  their  attacks.  In  the  temples
dedicated  to  sharks  there  were  priests  who,  morning  and
evening,  addressed  prayers  to  the  shark-idol,  and  rubbed
their  bodies  with  water  and  salt,  which,  drying  on  their  skin,
imparted  to  it  an  appearance  of  being  covered  with  scales.
They  also  wore  red  stuffs,  uttered  shrill  cries,  leaped  over
the  sacred  enclosure,  and  persuaded  the  credulous  islanders
that  they  knew  the  exact  moment  when  the  children  thrown
into  the  sea  were  turned  into  sharks.  For  this  blissful
revelation  they  were  naturally  rewarded  by  the  happy
parents  with  a  plentiful  supply  of  little  pigs,  cocoa-nuts,
kava,  and  so  on,^  The  Pelew  Islanders  believed  that  the
souls  of  their  forefathers  lived  in  certain  species  of  animals,
which   accordingly  they  held   sacred   and   would  not  injure.

1  E.   Aymonier,    "  Les  Tchames  et  Malaien    des    Philippinen  -  Archipels,"

leurs  religions,"  Kcvue  de  Phistoire  des  Alittheilungen     der      Wiener      Geogr.

Religions,  xxiv.  (1891),  p.  267.  Gesellschaft,  1882,  p.   164.

^  F.  lilumentrltt,  '"Der  Ahnencultus  ^  L.  de  F"reycinet,  Voyage autonr  dii

und  die  religiosen  Anschauungen   der  Monde,  ii.  595  j^/.  (Paris,  1829).


Ill  LODGED  IN  ANIMALS  433

For  this  reason  one  man  would  not  kill  snakes,  another
would  not  harm  pigeons,  and  so  on  ;  but  every  one  was
quite  ready  to  kill  and  eat  the  sacred  animals  of  his
neighbours.^  The  Kayans  of  Borneo  think  that  when  the
human  soul  departs  from  the  body  at  death  it  may  take
the  form  of  an  animal  or  bird.  For  example,  if  a  deer  were
seen  browsing  near  a  man's  grave,  his  relations  would
probably  conclude  that  his  soul  had  assumed  the  shape  of  a
deer,  and  the  whole  family  would  abstain  from  eating  venison
lest  they  should  annoy  the  deceased.^

Some  of  the  Papuans  on  the  northern  coast  of  New
Guinea  also  believe  in  the  transmigration  of  souls.  They
hold  that  at  death  the  souls  of  human  beings  sometimes
pass  into  animals,  such  as  cassowaries,  fish,  or  pigs,  and  they
abstain  from  eating  the  animals  of  the  sort  in  which  the  spirits
of  the  dead  are  supposed  to  have  taken  up  their  abode.^  In
the  Solomon  Islands  a  man  at  the  point  of  death  would  gather
the  members  of  his  family  about  him  and  inform  them  of  the
particular  sort  of  creature,  say  a  bird  or  a  butterfly,  into
which  he  proposed  to  transmigrate.  Henceforth  the  family
would  regard  that  species  of  animal  as  sacred  and  would
neither  kill  nor  injure  it.  If  they  fell  in  with  a  creature  of
the  kind,  it  might  be  a  bird  or  a  butterfly,  they  would  say,
"  That  is  papa,"  and  offer  him  a  cocoa-nut."*  In  these  islands
sharks  are  very  often  supposed  to  be  ghosts,  for  dying
people  frequently  announce  their  intention  of  being  sharks
when  they  have  shuffled  off  their  human  shape.  After  that,
if  any  shark  remarkable  for  its  size  or  colour  is  seen  to
haunt  a  certain  shore  or  rock,  it  is  taken  to  be  somebody's
ghost,  and  the  name  of  the  deceased  is  given  to  it.  For
example,  at  Ulavva  a  dreaded  man-eating  shark  received  the
name  of  a  dead   man   and  was  propitiated  with  offerings  of

^  K.  Semper,  Die  Palaii-Inseln  im  xxiii.  (1894),  p.  165.
Stillen  Ocean,  pp.  87  j-^.,  193.  These  ^  F.  S.  A.  de  Clercq,  "  De  West-
sacred  animals  were  called  kalids.  A  en  Noordkust  van  Nederlandsch  Nieuw-
somewhat  different  account  of  the  Guinea,"  Tijdschrift  van  het  Koft.
kalids  of  the  Pelew  Islanders  is  given  Nederlandsch  Aardrijkskiindig  Genoot-
by  Kubary  ("Die  Religion  der  ^C/^a/,  Tweede  Serie,  x.  (1893),  p.  635.
Pelauer,"  in  Bastian's  Allerlei  aus  •*  Mr.  Sleigh  of  Lifu,  quoted  by  Prof.
Vplks-  mid  Mensihenkunde,  i.   '^  sqq.).  E.  B.  Tylor,  \vi  Journal  of  the  Anthro-

2  C.  Hose,  "The  Natives  of  Borneo,"  pological  Institute,    xxviii.    (1898),    p.

Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute,  147.

VOL    II  2  F


434  SOULS  OF  DEAD  IN  ANIMALS  chap.

porpoise  teeth.     At  Saa,  certain  food,  for  example  cocoa-nuts
from   particular  trees,  is  reserved  to  feed  such  a  ghost-shark,
but   men   of  whom   it   is   positively  known   that  after  death
they  will  be  in  sharks  are  allowed  by  anticipation  to  partake
of  the  shark-food  in  the  sacred  place.     Other  men  will  some-
times join  themselves   to   their  company,  and   speaking  with
the  voice  of  a  shark-ghost  will  say,  "  Give  me  to  eat  of  that
food."      If  such    a    man    happens  to  be  really  possessed   of
supernatural   power,   he   will    in   due   time   become   a  shark-
ghost  himself;  but  it  is  perfectly  possible  that  he  may  fail.
In  Savo  not  very  long  ago  a  certain   man   had  a  shark   that
he  used  to  feed  and  to  which  he  offered  sacrifice.      He  swam
out  to  it  with  food,  called   it   by  name,  and  it  came  to  him.
Of  course   it   was   not   a   common    shark,   but   a   ghost,  the
knowledge  of  which  had  been  handed  down  to  him  from  his
ancestors.      Alligators    also    may  lodge    the    souls    of    dead
Solomon   Islanders.      In  the  island  of  Florida  a   story  was
told  of  an  alligator  that  used  to  come  up  out  of  the  sea  and
make   itself  quite   at  home  in  the  village   in   which  the  man
whose  ghost  it  was  had  lived.      It  went   by  the   name  of  the
deceased,  and   though   there  was   one   man  in  particular  who
had  a  special  connection  with   it  and  was  said  to  own  it,  the
animal   was   on   friendly  terms  with  everybody  in   the   place
and    would    even    let    children    ride    on    its    back.      But   the
village  where  this  happened  has  not  yet  been  identified.^      In
the  same  island   the   appearance  of  anything  wonderful  is
taken  as  proof  of  a  ghostly  presence  and  stamps  the  place  as
sacred.      For  example,  a  man  planted  some  cocoa-nut  palms
and  almond  trees  in  the  bush  and  died   not  long  afterwards.
After    his   death   there   appeared   among    the   trees    a    great
rarity    in    the    shape  of  a    white   cuscus.      The    animal  was
accordingly  assumed  to  be  the  ghost  of  the  departed  planter
and  went  by  his  name.      The   place   became  sacred,  and   no
one    would   gather   the   fruits   of  the    trees  there,   until    two
young    men,    who    had    been    trained    in    the    principles    of
Christianity,  boldly   invaded  the  sanctuary  and   appropriated
the    almonds   and    cocoa-nuts.'-''      It    must   not    be    supposed,
however,    that    the    choice    of    transmigration     open    to    a

1  R.  H.  Codrington,  The  Melanesians,  p.   I'jg  sq.
-  Codrington,  op.  cit.  p.  177.


Ill  WORSHIP  OF  ANIMALS  435

Solomon  Islander  is  restricted  to  the  animal  kingdom  ;  he
is  free  after  death  to  become  a  vegetable,  if  he  feels  so
disposed.  When  a  mission-school  was  established  in  the
island  of  Ulawa  it  was  observed  with  surprise  that  the
natives  would  not  eat  bananas  and  had  ceased  to  plant  the
tree.  Inquiry  elicited  the  origin  of  the  restriction,  which
was  recent  and  well  remembered,  A  man  of  great  influence,
dying  not  long  before,  had  forbidden  the  eating  of  bananas
after  his  death,  saying  that  he  would  be  in  the  banana.
The  older  natives  would  still  mention  his  name  and  say,
"  We  cannot  eat  So-and-so."  ^

We  are  now  perhaps  in  a  position  to  understand  the
ambiguous  behaviour  of  the  Ainos  and  Gilyaks  towards  the
bear.  It  has  been  shown  that  the  sharp  line  of  demarcation
which  we  draw  between  mankind  and  the  lower  animals  does
not  exist  for  the  savage.  To  him  many  of  the  other  animals
appear  as  his  equals  or  even  his  superiors,  not  merely  in
brute  force  but  in  intelligence  ;  and  if  choice  or  necessity
leads  him  to  take  their  lives,  he  feels  bound,  out  of  regard  to
his  own  safety,  to  do  it  in  a  way  which  will  be  as  inoffensive
as  possible  not  merely  to  the  living  animal,  but  to  its
departed  spirit  and  to  all  the  other  animals  of  the  same
species,  which  would  resent  an  affront  put  upon  one  of  their
kind  much  as  a  tribe  of  savages  would  revenge  an  injury  or
insult  offered  to  a  tribesman.  We  have  seen  that  among  the
many  devices  by  which  the  savage  seeks  to  atone  for  the
wrong  done  by  him  to  his  animal  victims  one  is  to  show
marked  deference  to  a  few  chosen  individuals  of  the  species,
for  such  behaviour  is  apparently  regarded  as  entitling  him
to  exterminate  with  impunity  all  the  rest  of  the  species  upon
which  he  can  lay  hands.  This  principle  perhaps  explains
the  attitude,  at  first  sight  puzzling  and  contradictory,  of  the
Ainos   towards   the    bear.      The    flesh   and   skin  of  the  bear

1  Codrington,  op.   cii.  p.  Ty'ii-      East  same    writer's    article    "lets    over    de

Indian  evidence  of  the   belief  in  trans-  Papoewas   van    de    Geelvinksbaai,"   p.

migration  into  animals  is  collected  by  24  j^^.  (separate  reprint  from  j5?)V/rrt^£«

G.  A.  Wilken  ("  Het  animisme  bij  de  tot  de  Taal-  Land-  en  Volkenkunde  van

volken   van    den    Indischen  Archipel,"  A^i?^.  ///(//t,  5e  Volgreeks  ii. ).    Wilken's

De     Indische     Gids,     June     1884,     p.  view    on    this    subject    is   favoured   by

g?,?>  sqq.),  who  argues  that   this   belief  Professor   E.   B.    Ty\or  [Journal  of  the

supplies    the    link    between    ancestor-  Anthropological Institi(/e,x\\n\.{^l^'^2>),

worship  and  totemism.      Compare  the  p.  1^6 sq.).


436  TYPES  OF  ANIMAL   WORSHIP  chap.

regularly  afford  them  food  and  clothing  ;  but  since  the  bear
is  an  intelligent  and  powerful  animal,  it  is  necessary  to  offer
some  satisfaction  or  atonement  to  the  bear  species  for  the
loss  which  it  sustains  in  the  death  of  so  many  of  its  members.
This  satisfaction  or  atonement  is  made  by  rearing  young
bears,  treating  them,  so  long  as  they  live,  with  respect,  and
killing  them  with  extraordinary  marks  of  sorrow  and  devotion.
So  the  other  bears  are  appeased,  and  do  not  resent  the
slaughter  of  their  kind  by  attacking  the  slayers  or  deserting
the  country,  which  would  deprive  the  Ainos  of  one  of  their
means  of  subsistence.

Thus  the  primitive  worship  of  animals  assumes  two  forms,
which  are  in  some  respects  the  converse  of  each  other.      On
the  one  hand,  animals  are  respected,  and  are  therefore  neither
killed  nor  eaten.     On  the  other  hand,  animals  are  worshipped
because  they  are  habitually  killed  and  eaten.      In  both  forms
of  worship  the  animal  is  revered  on  account  of  some  benefit,
positive  or  negative,  which  the  savage  hopes  to  receive  from
it.      In  the  former  worship  the  benefit  comes  either  in  the
positive   form    of   protection,   advice,   and    help   which    the
animal  affords  the  man,  or  in  the  negative  one  of  abstinence
from  injuries  which  it  is  in  the  power  of  the  animal  to  inflict.
In  the  latter  worship  the  benefit  takes  the  material  form  of
the  animal's  flesh  and  skin.      The  two  forms  of  worship  are
in  some  measure  antithetical :   in  the  one,  the  animal  is  not
eaten  because  it  is  revered  ;  in  the  other,  it  is  revered  be-
cause it  is  eaten.      But  both  may  be  practised  by  the  same
people,  as  we  see  in  the  case  of  the  North  American  Indians,
who,  while  they  revere  and  spare  their  totem  animals,  also
revere  the  animals  and   fish  upon  which  they  subsist.      The
aborigines  of  Australia  have  totemism  in  the  most  primitive
form  known  to   us,  but,   so   far  as    I   am  aware,  there  is  no
clear  evidence  that  they  attempt,  like  the   North  American
Indians,  to   conciliate  the   animals   which   they  kill   and  eat.
The  means  which  the  Australians  adopt  to  secure  a  plentiful
supply  of  game   appear  to   be   primarily  based   not  on  con-
ciliation, but  on   sympathetic   magic,'   a   principle   to   which

1  SpencerandGillen,  A^<a://t'«  Z^rZ/wo/"  above,  p.  113  .V(/.,and  vol.  i.  p.  23  Sij.
Central  Australia,^.  16"]  scjq.  ;  Native  However,  Collinsreports  that  among  the
Tribes  of  South  Australia,  p.  280.      See       natives  of  New  South  Wales  the  women


Ill  TYPES  OF  SACRAMENT  437

the  North  American  Indians  also  resort  for  the  same  pur-
pose.^ Hence,  as  the  AustraHans  undoubtedly  represent  a
ruder  and  earlier  stage  of  human  progress  than  the  American
Indians,  it  would  seem  that  before  hunters  think  of  worship-
ping the  game  as  a  means  of  ensuring  an  abundant  supply
of  it,  they  seek  to  attain  the  same  end  by  sympathetic  magic.
This,  again,  would  show — what  there  is  good  reason  for
believing — that  sympathetic  magic  is  one  of  the  earliest
means  by  which  man  endeavours  to  adapt  the  agencies  of
nature  to  his  needs.

Corresponding  to  the  two  distinct  types  of  animal  wor-
ship, there  are  two  distinct  types  of  the  custom  of  killing
the  animal  god.  On  the  one  hand,  when  the  revered  animal
is  habitually  spared,  it  is  nevertheless  killed — and  sometimes
eaten — on  rare  and  solemn  occasions.  Examples  of  this
custom  have  been  already  given  and  an  explanation  of  them
offered.  On  the  other  hand,  when  the  revered  animal  is
habitually  killed,  the  slaughter  of  any  one  of  the  species
involves  the  killing  of  the  god,  and  is  atoned  for  on  the  spot
by  apologies  and  sacrifices,  especially  when  the  animal  is  a
powerful  and  dangerous  one  ;  and,  in  addition  to  this  ordinary
and  everyday  atonement,  there  is  a  special  annual  atone-
ment, at  which  a  select  individual  of  the  species  is  slain  with
extraordinary  marks  of  respect  and  devotion.  Clearly  the
tv/o  types  of  sacramental  killing — the  Egyptian  and  the
Aino  types,  as  we  may  call  them  for  distinction — are  liable
to  be  confounded  by  an  observer  ;  and,  before  we  can  say
to  which  type  any  particular  example  belongs,  it  is  necessary
to  ascertain  whether  the  animal  sacramentally  slain  belongs
to  a  species  which  is  habitually  spared,  or  to  one  which  is
habitually  killed  by  the  tribe.  In  the  former  case  the
example  belongs  to  the  Egyptian  type  of  sacrament,  in  the
latter  to  the  Aino  type.

were  "compelled  to  sit  in  their  canoe,  American  Indians  towards  the  fish  and
exposed  to  the  fervour  of  the  mid-day  game.     But  the  account  is  not  precise
sun,  liour  after  hour,  chaunting   their  enough  to  allow  us  to  speak  with  con-
little  song,  and  inviting  the  fish  beneath  fidence.
them  to  take  their  bait "  (D.   Collins,

An  account  of  the  English   Colony  in  1  Catlin,    0-Kee-pa,    Folium    reser-

Neiu  South   IVales,  London,    1804,  p.  vatum  ;     Lewis    and    Clarke,    Travels

387).     This  may  have  been  a  form  of  to  the   Source   of  the  Missouri  River

conciliation  like  that  employed  by  the  (London,  181 5),  i.  205  sq.


438  PASTORAL  SACRAMENTS  chap.

The  practice  of  pastoral  tribes  appears  to  furnish  examples
of  both  types  of  sacrament.  "  Pastoral  tribes,"  says  the
most  learned  ethnologist  of  the  day,  "  being  sometimes
obliged  to  sell  their  herds  to  strangers  who  may  handle  the
bones  disrespectfully,  seek  to  avert  the  danger  which  such  a
sacrilege  would  entail  by  consecrating  one  of  the  herd  as
an  object  of  worship,  eating  it  sacramentally  in  the  family
circle  with  closed  doors,  and  afterwards  treating  the  bones
with  all  the  ceremonious  respect  which,  strictly  speaking,
should  be  accorded  to  every  head  of  cattle,  but  which,
being  punctually  paid  to  the  representative  animal,  is  deemed
to  be  paid  to  all.  Such  family  meals  are  found  among
various  peoples,  especially  those  of  the  Caucasus.  When
amongst  the  Abchases  the  shepherds  in  spring  eat  their
common  meal  with  their  loins  girt  and  their  staffs  in  their
hands,  this  may  be  looked  upon  both  as  a  sacrament  and  as
an  oath  of  mutual  help  and  support.  For  the  strongest  of
all  oaths  is  that  which  is  accompanied  with  the  eating  of
a  sacred  substance,  since  the  perjured  person  cannot  possibly
escape  the  avenging  god  whom  he  has  taken  into  his  body
and  assimilated."^  This  kind  of  sacrament  is  of  the  Aino
or  expiatory  type,  since  it  is  meant  to  atone  to  the  species
for  the  possible  ill  -  usage  of  individuals.  An  expiation,
similar  in  principle  but  different  in  details,  is  offered  by  the
Kalmucks  to  the  sheep,  whose  flesh  is  one  of  their  staple
foods.  Rich  Kalmucks  are  in  the  habit  of  consecrating  a
white  ram  under  the  title  of  "  the  ram  of  heaven  "  or  "  the
ram  of  the  spirit."  The  animal  is  never  shorn  and  never
sold  ;  but  when  it  grows  old  and  its  owner  wishes  to  con-
secrate a  new  one,  the  old  ram  must  be  killed  and  eaten  at
a  feast  to  which  the  neighbours  are  invited.  On  a  lucky
^^Yi  generally  in  autumn  when  the  sheep  are  fat,  a  sorcerer

1  A.  Bastian,  in  Vcrhaiidlungen  der  cave,  which  is  also  called  Ogginn.      It

Berlitier  Gesellschaft  fiir  Anthropologic,  is   caught   and  led  about  amongst  the

Ethnologie,tind  Urgeschichte,  1870-71,  assembled  men  (women  are  excluded)

p.    59.     J.   Reinegg  {Beschreibung  des  amid   joyful    cries.      Then    it   is   killed

Kaukastis,   Gotha,  St.  Petersburg,  and  and   eaten.       Any   man    who   did   not

Hildesheim,    1796-97,   ii.    12  sq.)  de-  get  at  least  a  scrap  of  the  sacred  flesh

scribes  what  seems  to  be  a  sacrament  of  would  deem  himself  most  unfortunate,

the  Abghazses   (Abchases).       It   takes  The  bones  are  then  carefully  collected,

place  in  the  middle  of  autumn.     A  white  burned  in  a  great   hole,  and   the  ashes

ox  called   Ogginn  appears  from  a  holy  buried  there.


HI


PASTORAL  SACRAMENTS


439


kills  the  old  ram,  after  sprinkling  it  with  milk.  Its  flesh  is
eaten  ;  the  skeleton,  with  a  portion  of  the  fat,  is  burned
on  a  turf  altar  ;  and  the  skin,  with  the  head  and  feet,  is
hung  up.^

An  example  of  a  sacrament  of  the  Egyptian  type  is
furnished  by  the  Todas,  a  pastoral  people  of  Southern
India,  who  subsist  largely  upon  the  milk  of  their  buffaloes.
Amongst  them  "  the  buffalo  is  to  a  certain  degree  held
sacred "  and  "  is  treated  with  great  kindness,  even  with  a
degree  of  adoration,  by  the  people."'^  They  never  eat  the
flesh  of  the  cow  buffalo,  and  as  a  rule  abstain  from  the  flesh
of  the  male.  But  to  the  latter  rule  there  is  a  single  exception.
Once  a  year  all  the  adult  males  of  the  village  join  in  the
ceremony  of  killing  and  eating  a  very  young  male  calf, —
seemingly  under  a  month  old.  They  take  the  animal  into
the  dark  recesses  of  the  village  wood,  where  it  is  killed  with
a  club  made  from  the  sacred  tree  of  the  Todas  (the  tiide  or
Millingto7tid).  A  sacred  fire  having  been  made  by  the
rubbing  of  sticks,  the  flesh  of  the  calf  is  roasted  on  the
embers  of  certain  trees,  and  is  eaten  by  the  men  alone,
women  being  excluded  from  the  assembly.  This  is  the
only  occasion  on  which  the  Todas  eat  buffalo  flesh.^  The
Madi  or  Moru  tribe  of  Central  Africa,  whose  chief  wealth
is  their  cattle,  though  they  also  practise  agriculture,  appear
to  kill  a  lamb  sacramentally  on  certain  solemn  occasions.
The  custom  is  thus  described  by  Dr.  Felkin  :  "  A  re-
markable custom  is  observed  at  stated  times — once  a  year,
I  am  led  to  believe.  I  have  not  been  able  to  ascertain
what  exact  meaning  is  attached  to  it.  It  appears,  however,
to  relieve  the  people's  minds,  for  beforehand  they  evince
much   sadness,   and   seem   very   joyful   when    the   ceremony


^  Bastian,  Die  Volker  des  ost lichen
Asien,  vi.  632,  note.  On  the  Kal-
mucks as  a  people  of  shepherds  and
on  their  diet  of  mutton,  see  Georgi,
Beschre.ibung  aller  Nationen  des
russischen  Reichs,  p.  406  sq.,  cp.  207  ;
B.  Bergmann,  Nomadische  Streifereien
unter  den  Kalmiicken  (Riga,  1804-5),
ii.  80  sqq.,  122  ;  Pallas,  Reise  durch
verschiedene  Provinzen  des  russischen
Reichs,  \.  319,325.   According  to  Pallas,


it  is  only  rich  Kalmucks  who  commonly
kill  their  sheep  or  cattle  for  eating  ;
ordinary  Kalmucks  do  not  usually  kill
them  except  in  case  of  necessity  or  at
great  merry  -  makings.  It  is,  there-
fore, especially  the  rich  who  need  to
make  expiation.

-  W.  E.  Marshall,  Travels  amongst
the  Todas,  p.  129  sq.  On  the  Todas,
see  also  above,  vol.  i.  p.  147-

^  Marshall,  op.  cit.  pp.  80  sq.,  130.


440  PASTORAL  SACRAMENTS  chap.

is  duly  accomplished.  The  following  is  what  takes  place  :
A  large  concourse  of  people  of  all  ages  assemble,  and  sit
down  round  a  circle  of  stones,  which  is  erected  by  the  side
of  a  road  (really  a  narrow  path).  A  very  choice  lamb  is
then  fetched  by  a  boy,  who  leads  it  four  times  round  the
assembled  people.  As  it  passes  they  pluck  off  little  bits  of
its  fleece  and  place  them  in  their  hair,  or  on  to  some  other
part  of  their  body.  The  lamb  is  then  led  up  to  the  stones,
and  there  killed  by  a  man  belonging  to  a  kind  of  priestly
order,  who  takes  some  of  the  blood  and  sprinkles  it  four
times  over  the  people.  He  then  applies  it  individually.
On  the  children  he  makes  a  small  ring  of  blood  over  the
lower  end  of  the  breast  bone,  on  women  and  girls  he  makes
a  mark  above  the  breasts,  and  the  men  he  touches  on  each
shoulder.  He  then  proceeds  to  explain  the  ceremony,  and
to  exhort  the  people  to  show  kindness.  .  .  .  When  this
discourse,  which  is  at  times  of  great  length,  is  over,  the
people  rise,  each  places  a  leaf  on  or  by  the  circle  of  stones,
and  then  they  depart  with  signs  of  great  joy.  The  lamb's
skull  is  hung  on  a  tree  near  the  stones,  and  its  flesh  is  eaten
by  the  poor.  This  ceremony  is  observed  on  a  small  scale
at  other  times.  If  a  family  is  in  any  great  trouble,  through
illness  or  bereavement,  their  friends  and  neighbours  come
together  and  a  lamb  is  killed :  this  is  thought  to  avert
further  evil.  The  same  custom  prevails  at  the  grave  of
departed  friends,  and  also  on  joyful  occasions,  such  as  the
return  of  a  son  home  after  a  very  prolonged  absence."^  The
sorrow  thus  manifested  by  the  people  at  the  annual  slaughter
of  the  lamb  clearly  indicates  that  the  lamb  slain  is  a  divine
animal,  whose  death  is  mourned  by  his  worshippers,"  just
as  the  death  of  the  sacred  buzzard  was  mourned  by  the
Californians  and  the  death  of  the  Theban  ram  by  the
Egyptians.  The  smearing  each  of  the  worshippers  with  the
blood  of  the  lamb  is  a  form  of  communion  with  the  divinity;^

1   R.    W.    Felkin,    "Notes    on    the  not     inconsistent     with    the    original

Madi  or  Moru  tribe  of  Central  Africa,"  sanctity  of  the  sheep.
Proceedings    of  the    Royal   Society    of
Edinburgh,  xii.  (1882-84),  p.  336  sq .  3  ggg  ^^   r_  Smith,  Religion  of  the

-  Mutton  appears  to  be  now  eaten  Semites,'^    p.    344   sqq.       As    to    coni-

by  the  tribe  as  a  regular  article  of  food  munion     by    means    of    an    external

(Felkin,   op.   cit.    p.    307),   but  this  is  application,  see  above,  p.  361  sqq.


Ill  COMMUNION  WITH  SNAKE  441

the  vehicle  of  the  divine  Hfe  is  applied  externally  instead
of  being  taken  internally,  as  when  the  blood  is  drunk  or  the
flesh  eaten.

The  form  of  communion  in  which  the  sacred  animal  is
taken  from  house  to  house,  that  all  may  enjoy  a  share  of
its  divine  influence,  has  been  exemplified  by  the  Gilyak
custom  of  promenading  the  bear  through  the  village  before
it  is  slain.  A  similar  form  of  communion  with  the  sacred
snake  is  observed  by  a  Snake  tribe  in  the  Punjaub.  Once
a  year  in  the  month  of  September  the  snake  is  worshipped
by  all  castes  and  religions  for  nine  days  only.  At  the  end
of  August  the  Mirasans,  especially  those  of  the  snake  tribe,
make  a  snake  of  dough  which  they  paint  black  and  red,  and
place  on  a  winnowing  basket.  This  basket  they  carry  round
the  village,  and  on  entering  any  house  they  say —

"  God  be  with  you  all !
May  every  ill  be  far  !
May  our  patron's  (Gugga's)  word  thrive  !"

Then  they  present  the  basket  with  the  snake,  saying —

"  A  small  cake  of  flour  :
A  little  bit  of  butter  :
If  you  obey  the  snake,
You  and  yours  shall  thrive  !"

Strictly  speaking,  a  cake  and  butter  should  be  given,  but  it
is  seldom  done.  Every  one,  however,  gives  something,
generally  a  handful  of  dough  or  some  corn.  In  houses
where  there  is  a  new  bride  or  whence  a  bride  has  gone,  or
where  a  son  has  been  born,  it  is  usual  to  give  a  rupee  and
a  quarter,  or  some  cloth.  Sometimes  the  bearers  of  the
snake  also  sing —

"  Give  the  snake  a  piece  of  cloth,
And  he  will  send  a  lively  bride  !"

When  every  house  has  been  thus  visited,  the  dough  snake
is  buried  and  a  small  grave  is  erected  over  it.  Hither
during  the  nine  days  of  September  the  women  come  to
worship.  They  bring  a  basin  of  curds,  a  small  portion  of
which  they  offer  at  the  snake's  grave,  kneeling  on  the  ground
and  touching  the  earth  with  their  foreheads.      Then  they  go


442  HUNTING  THE   WREN  chap.

home  and  divide  the  rest  of  the  curds  among  the  children.
Here  the  dough  snake  is  clearly  a  substitute  for  a  real
snake.  Indeed,  in  districts  where  snakes  abound  the  worship
is  offered,  not  at  the  grave  of  the  dough  snake,  but  in  the
jungles  where  snakes  are  known  to  be.  Besides  this  yearly-
worship  performed  by  all  the  people,  the  members  of  the
Snake  tribe  worship  in  the  same  way  every  morning  after  a
new  moon.  The  Snake  tribe  is  not  uncommon  in  the  Pun-
jaub.  Members  of  it  will  not  kill  a  snake  and  they  say  that
its  bite  does  not  hurt  them.  If  they  find  a  dead  snake,  they
put  clothes  on  it  and  give  it  a  regular  funeral.^

Ceremonies  closely  analogous  to  this  Indian  worship  of
the  snake  have  survived  in  Europe  into  recent  times,  and
doubtless  date  from  a  very  primitive  paganism.  The  best-
known  example  is  the  "  hunting  of  the  wren."  By  many
European  peoples — the  ancient  Greeks  and  Romans,  the
modern  Italians,  Spaniards,  French,  Germans,  Dutch,  Danes,
Swedes,  English,  and  Welsh — the  wren  has  been  designated
the  king,  the  little  king,  the  king  of  birds,  the  hedge  king,
and  so  forth,^  and  has  been  reckoned  amongst  those  birds
which  it  is  extremely  unlucky  to  kill.  In  England  it  is
supposed  that  if  any  one  kills  a  wren  or  harries  its  nest,  he
will  infallibly  break  a  bone  or  meet  with  some  dreadful
misfortune  within  the  year  ;^  sometimes  it  is  thought  that
the  cows  will  give  bloody  milk.*  In  Scotland  the  wren  is
called  "the  Lady  of  Heaven's  hen,"  and  boys  say —

"  Malisons,  malisons,  mair  than  ten,
That  harry  the  Ladye  of  Heaven's  hen  !"  ^

At  Saint  Donan,  in  Brittany,  people  believe  that  if  children
touch  the  young  wrens  in  the  nest,  they  will  suffer  from  the
fire  of  St.  Lawrence,  that  is,  from  pimples   on   the  face,  legs,

1  Panjab  Notes  and  Queries,   ii.    p.  j3affL\laKos,   regitlus,  rex  avium  (Pliny,
91,  §  555.  Nat.   Hist.    viii.    90,    x.    203),    re    di

2  See  Ch.  Vallancey,   Collectanea  de  siepe.  r^yezuelo,  roitelet,  rot  des  oiseattx,
rebus  Hibernicis,  iv.    (Dublin,    1786),  Zaiinklviig,  etc.

p.    97  ;      Brand,    Popular  Antiquities,  ^  Brand,    Popular    Antiquities,    iii.

iii.    195    sq.,    Bohn's    ed.';    Swainson,  194.

Folk-lore  of  British  Birds,  p.  36  ;   E.  *  Chambers,    Popular     Rhymes    of

Rolland,  Paune  populaire  de  la  France,  Scotland,  p.   188.

ii.    288   sqq.       The   names   for    it    are  '^  Ibid.  p.   186.


HI  HUNTING  THE   WREN  443

and  so  on.^  In  other  parts  of  France  it  is  believed  that
if  a  person  kills  a  wren  or  harries  its  nest,  his  house  will  be
struck  by  lightning,  or  that  the  fingers  with  which  he  did
the  deed  will  shrivel  up  and  drop  off,  or  at  least  be  maimed,
or  that  his  cattle  will  suffer  in  their  feet."  Notwithstanding
such  beliefs,  the  custom  of  annually  killing  the  wren  has
prevailed  widely  both  in  this  country  and  in  France.  In
the  Isle  of  Man  last  century  the  custom  was  observed  on
Christmas  Eve  or  rather  Christmas  morning.  On  the  twenty-
fourth  of  December,  towards  evening,  all  the  servants  got  a
holiday  ;  they  did  not  go  to  bed  all  night,  but  rambled  about
till  the  bells  rang  in  all  the  churches  at  midnight.  When
prayers  were  over,  they  went  to  hunt  the  wren,  and  having
found  one  of  these  birds  they  killed  it  and  fastened  it  to
the  top  of  a  long  pole  with  its  wings  extended.  Thus  they
carried  it  in  procession  to  every  house  chanting  the  following
rhyme —

"  We  hunted  the  wren  for  Robin  the  Bobbin,
We  hunted  the  wren  for  Jack  of  the  Can,
We  hunted  the  wren  for  Robin  the  Bobbin,
We  hunted  the  wren  for  every  one."

When  they  had  gone  from  house  to  house  and  collected  all
the  money  they  could,  they  laid  the  wren  on  a  bier  and
carried  it  in  procession  to  the  parish  churchyard,  where  they
made  a  grave  and  buried  it  "  with  the  utmost  solemnity,
singing  dirges  over  her  in  the  Manks  language,  v/hich
they  call  her  knell  ;  after  which  Christmas  begins."  The
burial  over,  the  company  outside  the  church-yard  formed  a
circle  and  danced  to  music.  About  the  middle  of  the  nine-
teenth century  the  burial  of  the  wren  took  place  in  the  Isle
of  Man  on  St.  Stephen's  Day  (the  twenty-sixth  of  Decem-
ber). Boys  went  from  door  to  door  with  a  wren  suspended
by  the  legs  in  the  centre  of  two  hoops  which  crossed  each
other  at  right  angles  and  were  decorated  with  evergreens
and  ribbons.  The  bearers  sang  certain  lines  in  which  refer-
ence was  made  to  boiling  and  eating  the  bird.  If  at  the
close  of  the  song  they  received   a   small   coin,  they  gave  in

^   P.    Sebillot,   Traditions   et  Super-       Romanesque  et  Merveilleuse,    p.   221  ;
stitions  de  la  Haute-Bretagne,  ii.  214.  RoUand,  op.   cit.  ii.  294  sq. ;    Sebillot,

2  A.       Bosquet,       La      Normandie       I.e.;  Swainson,  op.  cit.  p.  42.


444


HUNTING  THE  WREN


CHAP.


return  a  feather  of  the  wren  ;  so  that  before  the  end  of  the
day  the  bird  often  hung  almost  featherless.  The  wren  was
then  buried,  no  longer  in  the  churchyard,  but  on  the  sea-
shore or  in  some  waste  place.  The  feathers  distributed
were  preserved  with  religious  care,  it  being  believed  that
every  feather  was  an  effectual  preservative  from  shipwreck
for  a  year,  and  a  fisherman  would  have  been  thought  very
foolhardy  who  had  not  one  of  them.^

A  writer  of  the  eighteenth  century  says  that  in  Ireland
the  wren  "  is  still  hunted  and  killed  by  the  peasants  on
Christmas  Day,  and  on  the  following  (St.  Stephen's  Day)  he
is  carried  about,  hung  by  the  leg,  in  the  centre  of  two  hoops,
crossing  each  other  at  right  angles,  and  a  procession  made  in
every  village,  of  men,  women,  and  children,  singing  an  Irish
catch,  importing  him  to  be  the  king  of  all  birds."  '  Down  to
the  present  time  the  "hunting  of  the  wren"  still  takes  place  in
parts  of  Leinster  and  Connaught.  On  Christmas  Day  or  St.
Stephen's  Day  the  boys  hunt  and  kill  the  wren,  fasten  it  in
the  middle  of  a  mass  of  holly  and  ivy  on  the  top  of  a  broom-
stick, and  on  St.  Stephen's  Day  go  about  with  it  from  house
to  house,  singing —

"The  wren,  the  wren,  the  king  of  all  birds,
St.  Stephen's  Day  was  caught  in  the  furze  ;
Although  he  is  little,  his  family  's  great,
I  pray  you,  good  landlady,  give  us  a  treat."

Money  or  food  (bread,  butter,  eggs,  etc.)  were  given  them,
upon  which  they  feasted  in  the  evening.^  In  Essex  a
similar  custom  used  to  be  observed  at  Christmas,  and
the  verses  sung  by  the  boys  were  almost  identical  with
those  sung  in   Ireland,"*       In  Pembrokeshire   a  wren,  called


1  G.  Waldron,  Description  of  the
Isle  of  Man  (reprinted  for  the  Manx
Society,  Douglas,  1865),  p.  49  sqq.;
J.  Train,  Account  of  the  Isle  of  Man,
ii.   124  sqq.,  141.

2  Ch.  Vallancey,  Collectanea  de  rehns
Hibernicis,  iv.  (Dublin,  1786),  p.  97;
Brand,  Popular  Antiquities,  iii.   195.

^  G.  H.  Kinahan,  "  Notes  on  Irish
Folk-lore,"    Folk-lore    Record,     iv.


(1881),  p.  108  ;  Swainson,  Folk-lore  of
British  Birds,  p.  36  sq.  ;  Rolland,
Faiine  populaire  de  la  France,  ii.  297  ;
Professor  W.  Ridgeway  in  Academy,
loth  May  1884,  p.  332  ;  Dyer,
British  Popular  Customs,  p.  497  ;
L.  L.  Duncan,  "Further  Notes  from
County  Leitrim,"  Folk-lore,  v.  (1S94),
p.   197.

*   Henderson,      Folk-lore      of     the
Northern  Counties,  p.  125.


Ill  HUNTING  THE  WREN  445

the  King,  used  to  be  carried  about  on  Twelfth  Day  in  a
box  with  glass  windows  surmounted  by  a  wheel,  from
which  hung  various  coloured  ribbons.  The  men  and
boys  who  carried  it  from  house  to  house  sang  songs,  in  one
of  which  they  wished  "  joy,  health,  love,  and  peace  "  to  the
inmates  of  the  house.^

In  the  first  half  of  the  nineteenth  century  similar  customs
were  still  observed  in  various  parts  of  the  south  of  France.
Thus  at  Carcassone,  every  year  on  the  first  Sunday  of
December  the  young  people  of  the  street  Saint  Jean  used  to
go  out  of  the  town  armed  with  sticks,  with  which  they  beat
the  bushes,  looking  for  wrens.  The  first  to  strike  down  one
of  these  birds  was  proclaimed  King.  Then  they  returned  to
the  town  in  procession,  headed  by  the  King,  who  carried  the
wren  on  a  pole.  On  the  evening  of  the  last  day  of  the  year
the  King  and  all  who  had  hunted  the  wren  marched  through
the  streets  of  the  town  to  the  light  of  torches,  with  drums
beating  and  fifes  playing  in  front  of  them.  At  the  door
of  every  house  they  stopped,  and  one  of  them  wrote  with
chalk  on  the  door  vive  le  roi  I  with  the  number  of  the  year
which  was  about  to  begin.  On  the  morning  of  Twelfth  Day
the  King  again  marched  in  procession  with  great  pomp,
wearing  a  crown  and  a  blue  mantle  and  carrying  a  sceptre.
In  front  of  him  was  borne  the  wren  fastened  to  the  top  of  a
pole,  which  was  adorned  with  a  verdant  wreath  of  olive,  of  oak,
and  sometimes  of  mistletoe  grown  on  an  oak.  After  hearing
high  mass  in  the  parish  church  of  St.  Vincent,  surrounded  by
his  officers  and  guards,  the  King  visited  the  bishop,  the  mayor,
the  magistrates,  and  the  chief  inhabitants,  collecting  money  to
defray  the  expenses  of  the  royal  banquet  which  took  place
in  the  evening  and  wound  up  with  a  dance.^  At  Entraigues
men  and  boys  used  to  hunt  the  wren  on  Christmas  Eve.
When  they  caught  one  alive  they  presented  it  to  the  priest,
who,  after  the  midnight  mass,  set  the  bird  free  in  the  church.
hx  Mirabeau  the  priest  blessed  the  bird.      If  the  men  failed

1  Swainson,  op.  cit.  p.  40  sq.  Frajue,  p.  77  sqq.  ;   Rolland,  op.  cit.  ii.

2  Madame  Clement,  Histoire  des  295  sq. ;  J.  W.  Wolf,  Beitrdge  zur
Fites  civiles  et  religieiises,  etc.,  de  la  deidscheii  Mythologie,  ii.  437  sq.  The
BeJgiqjte  AL'ridionale  (Avesnes,  1846),  ceremony  was  abolished  at  the  revolution
pp.  466-468;  De  Nore,  Coiitiimes,  of  1789,  revived  after  the  restoration,
Mythes  et  Traditions  des  provinces  de  and  suppressed  again  after  1830.


446  HUNTING  THE  WREN  chap.

to  catch  a  wren  and  the  women  succeeded  in  doing  so,  the
women  had  the  right  to  mock  and  insult  the  men,  and  to
blacken  their  faces  with  mud  and  soot,  when  they  caught  them.^
At  La  Ciotat,  near  Marseilles,  a  large  body  of  men  armed
with  swords  and  pistols  used  to  hunt  the  wren  every  year
about  the  end  of  December.  When  a  wren  was  caught  it
was  hung  on  the  middle  of  a  pole,  which  two  men  carried,  as
if  it  were  a  heavy  burden.  Thus  they  paraded  round  the
town  ;  the  bird  was  weighed  in  a  great  pair  of  scales  ;  and
then  the  company  sat  down  to  table  and  made  merry."

The  parallelism  between  this  custom  of  "hunting  the
wren  "  and  some  of  those  we  have  considered,  especially  the
Gilyak  procession  with  the  bear,  and  the  Indian  one  with
the  snake,  seems  too  close  to  allow  us  to  doubt  that  they  all
belong  to  the  same  circle  of  ideas.  The  worshipful  animal  is
killed  with  special  solemnity  once  a  year  ;  and  before  or
immediately  after  death,  he  is  promenaded  from  door  to  door,
that  each  of  his  worshippers  may  receive  a  portion  of  the
divine  virtues  that  are  supposed  to  emanate  from  the  dead  or
dying  god.  Religious  processions  of  this  sort  must  have  had
a  great  place  in  the  ritual  of  European  peoples  in  prehistoric
times,  if  we  may  judge  from  the  numerous  traces  of  them
which  have  survived  in  folk-custom.  A  well-preserved
specimen  is  the  following,  which  survived  in  the  Highlands
of  Scotland  and  in  St.  Kilda  down  to  the  latter  half  of  the

1  Rolland,  op.  cit.  ii.  2()6  sij.  customs  to   the    "swallow  song"  and

2  C.  S.  Sonnini,  Travels  in  Upper  "crow  song"  of  the  ancient  Greeks
and  Lower  Egypt,  translated  from  the  (on  which  see  Athenaeus,  viii.  pp.  359,
French  (London,  1800),  p.  11  sq.  ;  360)  is  obvious  and  has  been  remarked
Brand's  Popular  Antiquities,  iii.  198.  before  now.  Probably  the  Greek
The  "hunting  of  the  wren"  may  be  swallow -singers  and  crow -singers
compared  with  a  Swedish  custom.  carried  about  dead  swallows  and  crows
On  the  1st  of  May  children  rob  the  or  effigies  of  them.  The  "  crow
magpies'  nest  of  both  eggs  and  young.  song"  is  referred  to  in  a  Greek  inscrip-
These  they  carry  in  a  basket  from  tion  found  in  the  south  of  Russia  (i^
house  to  house  in  the  village  and  show  5e/cd5as  XvKa^as  KeKopuii/iKa).  See
them  to  the  housewives,  while  one  of  Compte  Rendu  of  the  Imperial  Archse-
the  children  sings  some  doggerel  lines  ological  Commission,  St.  Petersburg,
containing  a  threat  that,  if  a  present  is  1877,  p.  276  sqq.  In  modern  Greece
not  given,  the  hens,  chickens,  and  eggs  it  is  said  to  be  still  customary  for
will  fall  a  prey  to  the  magpie.  They  children  on  1st  March  to  go  about  the
receive  bacon,  eggs,  milk,  etc.,  upon  streets  singing  spring  songs  and  carrying
which  they  afterwards  feast.  See  L.  a  wooden  swallow,  which  is  kept
Lloyd,  Peasant  Life  in  Szveden,  p.  turning  on  a  cylinder.  See  Grimm,
237    sq.       The     resemblance    of    such  Deutsche  Mythologie,'^  ii.  636.


Ill  •  MAN  IN  COW-SKhy  ^  447

eighteenth  century.  "  On  the  evening  before  New  Year's
Day,  it  is  usual  for  the  cowherd  and  the  young  people  to
meet  together,  and  one  of  them  is  covered  with  a  cow's  hide.
The  rest  of  the  company  are  provided  with  staves,  to  the  end
of  which  bits  of  raw  hide  are  tied.  The  person  covered  with
the  hide  runs  thrice  round  the  dwelHng-house,  deiseil — i.e.
according  to  the  course  of  the  sun  ;  the  rest  pursue,  beating
the  hide  with  their  staves,  and  crying  [here  follows  the
Gaelic],  '  Let  us  raise  the  noise  louder  and  louder ;  let  us
beat  the  hide.'  They  then  come  to  the  door  of  each
dv/elling-house,  and  one  of  them  repeats  some  verses  com-
posed for  the  purpose.  When  admission  is.  granted,  one  of
them  pronounces  within  the  threshold  the  beannachadthurlair,
or  verses  by  which  he  pretends  to  draw  down  a  blessing  upon
the  whole  family  [here  follows  the  Gaelic],  '  May  God  bless
this  house  and  all  that  belongs  to  it,  cattle,  stones,  and
timber!  In  plenty  of  meat,  of  bed  and  body-clothes,  and
health  of  men,  may  it  ever  abound  ! '  Then  each  burns  in
the  fire  a  little  bit  of  hide  which  is  tied  to  the  end  of  the
staff.  It  is  applied  to  the  nose  of  every  person  and  domestic
animal  that  belongs  to  the  house.  This,  they  imagine,  will
tend  much  to  secure  them  from  diseases  and  other  mis-
fortunes during  the  ensuing  )/ear.  The  whole  of  the
ceremony  is  called  colluinn,  from  the  great  noise  which  the
hide  makes."  ^  From  another  authority,"  we  learn  that  the
hide  of  which  pieces  were  burned  in  each  house  and  applied
to  the  inmates  was  the  breast  part  of  a  sheep-skin.  Formerly,
perhaps,  pieces  of  the  cow-hide  in  which  the  man  was  clad
were  detached  for  this  purpose,  just  as  in  the  Isle  of  Man  a
feather  of  the  wren  used  to  be  given  to  each  household.
Similarly,  as  we  have  seen,  the  hum.an  victim  whom  the
Khonds  slew  as  a  divinity  was  taken  from  house  to  house,
and  every  one  strove  to  obtain  a  relic  of  his  sacred  person.
Such  customs  are  only  another  form  of  that  communion  with

1  John   Ramsay,  Scotland  and  Scots-  quoted  by  Kemble,  Saxons  in  Englaiidy

men  in  the  Eighteenth  Century,  ii.  438  i.    525  ;     Elton,     Origins    of  English

sq.;  c^.  Ch3.mhQxs,  Popular  Rhymes  of  History,   p.    411:    "  Si  quis   in    Kal.

Scotland,  p.  166  sq.  ;  Samuel  Johnson,  Januar.  in  ccrvulo  vel  vitula  vadit,  id

Jom-ney  to  the  Western  Islands  of  Scot-  est  in  ferarnm  habitus  se  communicant,

land,  p.  228  sq.  (first  American  edition,  et  vestiimtur  pellibus  pecudum  et  assu-

iSio).      The  custom  is  clearly  referred  immt  capita  bestiarum,"  etc.
to  in  the   "  Penitential  of  Theodore,"  2  Chambers,  I.e.


448


ANIMALS  LED  ABOUT


CHAP.   Ill


the  deity  which  is  attained  most  completely  by  eating  the
body  and  drinking  the  blood  of  the  god.

In  the  "  hunting  of  the  wren,"  and  the  procession  with
the  man  clad  in  a  cow-skin,  there  is  nothing  to  show  that
the  customs  in  question  have  any  relation  to  agriculture.
So  far  as  appears,  they  may  date  from  a  time  before  the
invention  of  husbandry  when  animals  were  revered  as  divine
in  themselves,  not  merely  as  divine  because  they  embodied
the  corn-spirit ;  and  the  analogy  of  the  Gilyak  procession  of
the  bear  and  the  Indian  procession  of  the  snake  is  in  favour
of  assigning  the  corresponding  European  customs  to  this
very  early  date.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  certain
European  processions  of  animals,  or  of  men  disguised  as
animals,  which  may  perhaps  be  purely  agricultural  in  their
origin  ;  ^  in  other  words,  the  animals  which  figure  in  them
may  have  been  from  the  first  nothing  but  representatives  of
the  corn-spirit  conceived  in  animal  shape.  But  it  is  at  least
equally  possible  that  these  processions  took  their  rise  before
men  began  to  till  the  ground,  and  that  they  only  received
an  agricultural  tinge  from  the  environment  in  which  they
have  so  long  survived.  But  the  question  is  an  obscure  and
difificult  one,  and  cannot  be  here  discussed.


1  Such  are  the  Bohemian  and
Moravian  processions  at  the  Carnival
when  a  man  called  the  Shrovetide
Bear,  swathed  from  head  to  foot  in
peas-straw  and  sometimes  wearing  a
bear's  mask,  is  led  from  house  to
house.  He  dances  with  the  women  of
the  house,  and  collects  money  and
food.  Then  they  go  to  the  ale-house,
where  all  the  peasants  assemble  with
their  wives.  For  at  the  Carnival,
especially  on  Shrove  Tuesday,  it  is
necessary  that  every  one  should  dance,
if  the  flax,  the  corn,  and  the  vegetables
are  to  grow  well.  The  higher  the
people  leap  the  better  will  be  the
crops  (see  vol.  i.  p.  36  sij.).  Some-
limes  the  women  pull  out  some  of
the  straw  in  which  the  Shrovetide  Bear
is  swathed,  and  put  it  in  the  nests
of  the  geese  and  fowls,  believing  that
this  will   make   them   lay   well.       See


Keinsberg  -  DUringsfeld,  Fest-Kalender
aiis  Bohmen,  pp.  49-52  ;  Cortet,  Essai
siir  les  fetes  reHgieuses,  p.  83  ;  W.
M  tiller,  Beitrdge  zur  Volkskiinde  der
Dent  Si  ken  in  Miihrcn,  p.  431.  At
Altstadt,  in  Moravia,  a  he-goat  is  led  in
procession  once  a  year  through  the
town,  preceded  by  a  band  of  music,
and  is  then  thrown  down  from  the
church  tower.  Its  flesh  furnishes  a
common  meal.  See  W.  Miiller,  op.
fit.  p.  329  s(].  Bears  and  certain  other
animals  were  formerly  promenaded
about  both  town  and  country  with  bits
of  coloured  cloth  attached  to  them.
Whoever  got  one  of  these  bits  of  cloth
or  some  of  the  animal's  hair  was  sup-
posed to  be  thereby  protected  against
sickness  and  the  evil  eye.  See  Thiers ,
Traiti  des  Stiperstitions  (Paris,  1679),
p.  315.  On  similar  customs,  see  W.
Mannhardt,  A.IV.F.  pp.  1S3-200.


NOTE    A

SWINGING    AS    A    MAGICAL    RITE

The  custom  of  swinging  has  been  practised  as  a  religious  or  rather
magical  rite  in  various  parts  of  the  world,  but  it  does  not  seem  pos-
sible to  explain  all  the  instances  of  it  in  the  same  way.  People
appear  to  have  resorted  to  the  practice  from  different  motives  and
with  different  ideas  of  the  benefit  to  be  derived  from  it.  In  the
text  we  have  seen  that  the  Letts,  and  perhaps  the  Siamese,  swing  to
make  the  crops  grow  tall.^  The  same  may  be  the  intention  of  the
ceremony  whenever  it  is  specially  observed  at  harvest  festivals.
Among  the  Buginese  and  Macassars  of  Celebes,  for  example,  it  used
to  be  the  custom  for  young  girls  to  swing  one  after  the  other  on
these  occasions.^  At  the  great  Dassera  festival  of  Nepaul,  which
immediately  precedes  the  cutting  of  the  rice,  swings  and  kites  come
into  fashion  among  the  young  people  of  both  sexes.  The  swings
are  sometimes  hung  from  boughs  of  trees,  but  generally  from  a
cross-beam  supported  on  a  framework  of  tall  bamboos.^  Among
the  Dyaks  of  Sarawak  a  feast  is  held  at  the  end  of  harvest,  when  the
soul  of  the  rice  is  secured  to  prevent  the  crops  from  rotting  away.
On  this  occasion  a  number  of  old  women  rock  to  and  fro  on  a  rude
swing  suspended  from  the  rafters.*  A  traveller  in  Sarawak  has
described  how  he  saw  many  tall  swings  erected  and  Dyaks  swinging
to  and  fro  on  them,  sometimes  ten  or  twelve  men  together  on  one
swing,  while  they  chanted  in  monotonous,  dirge  -  like  tones  an
invocation  to  the  spirits  that  they  would  be  pleased  to  grant  a
plentiful  harvest  of  sago  and  fruit  and  a  good  fishing  season.^

In  the  East  Indian  island  of  Bengkalis  elaborate  and  costly
ceremonies  are  performed  to  ensure  a  good  catch  of  fish.  Among
the  rest  an  hereditary  priestess,  who  bears  the  royal  title  of  Djind-

1  Above,  p.  32  sq.  ^  H.    A.     Oldfield,     Sketches  front

Nipal  {London,  1880),  ii.  351.

2  B.  F.  Matthes,  Einige  Eigenthiim-  ^  Spenser    St.    John,    Life    in    the
lichkeiten  in  den  Festen  und  Geivohn-       Forests  of  the  Far  East ^^  \.   \()\  sq.
keiteii  der  Makassar e7i  tmd  Bugi^iesen            ^  Ch.  Brooke,  Ten  Years  in  Sarawak,
(Leyden,  1884),  p.   i.                                       ii.  226  sg.

vol..  11  2  G


450  SWINGING  NOTE  a

jang  Rajah,  works  herself  up  by  means  of  the  fumes  of  incense  and
so  forth  into  that  state  of  mental  disorder  which  commonly  passes
for  a  symptom  of  divine  inspiration.      In  this  pious  frame  of  mind
.she  is  led  by  her  four  handmaids  to  a  swing  all  covered  with  yellow
and  hung  with  golden  bells,  on  which  she  takes  her  seat  amid  the
jingle  of  the  bells.     As  she  rocks  gently  to  and  fro  in  the  swing,  she
speaks  in  an  unknown  tongue  to  each  of  the  sixteen  spirits  who
have    to    do   with   the   fishing.^     In    order    to  procure  a   plentiful
supply  of  game  the  Tinneh  Indians  of  North- West  America  perform
a   magical   ceremony   which   they  call    "the  young  man   bounding
or  tied."     They  pinion   a  man   tightly,  and   having   hung  him  by
the  head  and  heels  from  the  roof  of  the  hut,  rock  him  backwards
^    and  forwards."     Thus  we  see  that  people  swing  in  order  to  pro-
'  cure  a  plentiful  supply  of  fish  and  game  as  well  as  good  crops.      In
such  cases   the   notion   seems  to  be  that  the   ceremony  promotes
fertility,  whether  in  the  vegetable  or  the  animal  kingdom  ;  though
why  it   should   be  supposed   to  do  so  I  confess  myself  unable  to
explain.     There   seem  to   be   some   reasons  for   thinking   that   the
Indian   rite   of  swinging   on   hooks   run   through   the   flesh  of  the
performer  is  also  resorted  to,  at  least  in  some  cases,  from  a  belief
in  its  fertilising  virtue.     Thus  Hamilton  tells  us  that  at  Karwar,  on
the  west  coast  of  India,  a  feast  is  held  at  the  end  of  May  or  begin-
ning of  June  in  honour  of  the  infernal  gods,  "  with  a  divination  or
conjuration  to  know  the  fate  of  the  ensuing  crop  of  corn."     Men
were  hung  from  a  pole  by  means  of  tenter-hooks  inserted  in  the
flesh  of  their  backs ;  and  the  pole  with  the  men  dangling  from  it
was   then   dragged   for   more   than   a   mile   over   ploughed    ground
from  one  sacred  grove  to  another,  preceded  by  a  young  girl  who
carried  a  pot  of  fire  on  her  head.      When  the  second  grove  was
reached,  the  men  were  let  down  and  taken  off  the  hooks,  and  the
girl  fell  into  the  usual  prophetic  frenzy,  after  which  she  unfolded  to
the  priests  the  revelation  with  which  she  had  just  been  favoured  by
the  terrestrial  gods.      In  each  of  the  groves  a  shapeless  black  stone,
daubed  with  red  lead  to  stand  for  a  mouth,  eyes,  and  ears,  appears
to  have  represented  the  indwelling  divinity.^    Sometimes  this  custom

1  J.  S.  G.  Gramberc;,  "DeTroeboek-  devotees  swing  on  hooks  in   fulfilment

yisscherij,"    Tijdschrift    voor   Indische  of  a  vow  or  to  obtain  some  favour  of  a

Taal-    Land-    en    Volkenkunde,     xxiv.  deity.      See  Barbosa,  Description  of  the

(1887),  p.  314  sq.  Coasts  of  East  Africa  and  Ma/a  bar  in

^  E.  Petitot,  Rlonographie  der  Dene-  the  beginning  of  the  Sixteenth  Century,

Dindjii    (Paris,    1876),    p.    38.     The  translated    by    the    Hon.    H.    E.    J.

same    ceremony    is    performed,    oddly  Stanley    (Hakluyt    Society,    1866),    p.

enough,    to   procure   the    death   of  an  95    sq.  ;    Gaspar    Balbi's    "  Voyage    to

enemy.  Pegu,"    in     Pinkerton's     Voyages    and

3  Hamilton's  "  Account  of  the  East  Travels,    ix.     398;    Sonnerat,    Voyage

Indies,"    in    Pinkerton's    Voyages    and  aux   Indes   orientates   et  h   la    Chine,

Travels,    viii.     360    sq.       In    general  i.    244  ;     S.     Mateer,     The     Land    of

we  are  merely  told  that  these  Indian  Charity,     p.    220 ;     W.    W.    Hunter,


NOTE  A  AS  A  MAGICAL  RITE  451

of  swinging  on  hooks,  which  is  known  among  the  Hindoos  as  Churuk
Fiij'a,  appears  to  be  intended  to  propitiate  demons.  Some  Santals
asked  Mr.  V.  Ball  to  be  allowed  to  perform  it  because  their  women
and  children  were  dying  of  sickness,  and  their  cattle  were  being
killed  by  wild  beasts ;  they  believed  that  these  misfortunes  befell
them  because  the  evil  spirits  had  not  been  appeased.^  These
same  Santals  celebrate  a  swinging  festival  of  a  less  barbarous
sort  about  the  month  of  February.  Eight  men  sit  in  chairs
and  rotate  round  posts  in  a  sort  of  revolving  swing,  like  the  merry-
go-rounds  which  are  so  dear  to  children  at  English  fairs.^  At
the  Nauroz  and  Eed  festivals  in  Dardistan  the  women  swing  on
ropes  suspended  from  trees. ^  During  the  rainy  season  in  Behar
young  women  swing  in  their  houses,  while  they  sing  songs  appro-
priate to  the  season.  The  period  during  which  they  indulge
in  this  pastime,  if  a  mere  pastime  it  be,  is  strictly  limited ;  it
begins  with  a  festival  which  usually  falls  on  the  twenty-fifth  of  the
month  Jeyt  and  ends  with  another  festival  which  commonly  takes
place  on  the  twenty-fifth  of  the  month  Asin.  No  one  would  think
of  swinging  at  any  other  time  of  the  year.*  It  is  possible  that  this
last  custom  may  be  nothing  more  than  a  pastime  meant  to  while
away  some  of  the  tedious  hours  of  the  inclement  season  ;  but  its
limitation  to  a  certain  clearly-defined  portion  of  the  year  seems
rather  to  point  to  a  religious  or  magical  origin.  Possibly  the  intention
may  once  have  been  to  drive  away  the  rain.  We  shall  see  immedi-
ately that  swinging  is  sometimes  resorted  to  for  the  purpose  of  ex-
pelling the  powers  of  evil.  About  the  middle  of  March  the  Hindoos
observe  a  swinging  festival  of  a  different  sort  in  honour  of  the  god
Krishna,  whose  image  is  placed  in  the  seat  or  cradle  of  a  swing  and
then,  just  when  the  dawn  is  breaking,  rocked  gently  to  and  fro  several
times.  The  same  ceremony  is  repeated  at  noon  and  at  sunset.^  In
the  Rigveda  the  sun  is  called,  by  a  natural  metaphor,  "  the  golden
swing  in  the  sky,"  and  the  expression  helps  us  to  understand  a  cere-
mony of  Vedic  India.  A  priest  sat  in  a  swing  and  touched  with  the
span  of  his  right  hand  at  once  the  seat  of  the  swing  and  the  ground.
In  doing  so  he  said,  "  The  great  lord  has  united  himself  with  the  great
lady,  the  god  has  united  himself  with  the  goddess."     Perhaps  he

Annals  of  Rural  Bengal,^  p.  463  ;  two  Behari  pastimes,"  Journal  of  the
N'orth  Indian  Notes  and  Queries,  i.  p.        A jtt /topological  Society  of  Bombay,  iii.

Tt'.  §  511-  95  ^^■

1  V.    Ball,  Jungle    Life    in    India  ^  H.    H.    Wilson,    "The    religious

(London,  1880),  p.  232.  festivals  of  the  \:lindviS,'^  Journal  of  the

^  W.  W.  Hunter,  Annals  of  Rural  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  ix.  (1848),  p.  98.

Bengal,^  p.  463.  Compare  Dalton,  Ethnology  of  Bengal,

^  G.  W.  Leimer,  The  Languages  and  p.    314;    Monier    Williams,    Religious

Races    of  Dardistan    (Lahore,     1878),  Life  attd  I'hought  in  India,   p.    137  ;

p.  12.  W.  Crooke,  "The  Legends  of  Krishna,"

*  Sarat  Chandra  Mitra,  "Notes  on  Folk-lore,  xi.  (1900),  p.  21  sqq.


452  SWINGING  note  a

meant  to  indicate  in  a  graphic  way  that  the  sun  had  reached  that
lowest  point  of  its  course  where  it  was  nearest  to  the  earth. ^  In
this  connection  it  is  of  interest  to  note  that  in  the  Esthonian  cele-
bration of  St.  John's  Day  or  the  summer  solstice  swings  play,  along
with  bonfires,  the  most  prominent  part.  Girls  sit  and  swing  the
whole  night  through,  singing  old  songs  to  explain  why  they  do  so.
For  legend  tells  of  an  Esthonian  prince  who  wooed  and  won  an
Islandic  princess.  But  a  wicked  enchanter  spirited  away  the  lover
to  a  desert  island,  where  he  languished  in  captivity,  till  his  lady-love
contrived  to  break  the  magic  spell  that  bound  him.  Together  they
sailed  home  to  Esthonia,  which  they  reached  on  St.  John's  Day,  and
burnt  their  ship,  resolved  to  stray  no  longer  in  far  foreign  lands.
The  swings  in  which  the  Esthonian  maidens  still  rock  themselves
on  St.  John's  Day  are  said  to  recall  the  ship  in  which  the  lovers
tossed  upon  the  stormy  sea,  and  the  bonfires  commemorate  the
burning  of  it.  When  the  fires  have  died  out  the  swings  are  laid
aside  and  never  used  again  either  in  the  village  or  at  the  solitary
alehouse  until  spring  comes  round  once  more.-  Here  it  is  natural
to  connect  both  swings  and  bonfires  with  the  apparent  course  of  the
sun,  who  reaches  the  highest  and  turning  point  of  his  orbit  on  St.
John's  Day.  Bonfires  and  swings  perhaps  were  originally  charms
intended  to  kindle  and  speed  afresh  on  its  heavenly  road  "the
golden  swing  in  the  sky."

At  Tengaroeng,  in  Eastern  Borneo,  the  priests  and  priestesses
receive  the  inspiration  of  the  spirits  seated  in  swings  and  rocking
themselves  to  and  fro.  Thus  suspended  in  the  air  they  appear  to
be  in  a  peculiarly  favourable  position  for  catching  the  divine  afflatus.
One  end  of  the  plank  which  forms  the  seat  of  the  priest's  swing  is
carved  in  the  rude  likeness  of  a  crocodile's  head  ;  the  swing  of  the
priestess  is  similarly  ornamented  with  a  serpent's  head.^

Again,  swings  are  used  for  the  cure  of  sickness,  but  it  is  the
doctor  who  rocks  himself  in  them,  not  the  patient.  In  North
Borneo  the  Dyak  medicine  man  will  sometimes  erect  a  swing  in
front  of  the  sick  man's  house  and  sway  backwards  and  forwards  on
it  for  the  purpose  of  knocking,  or  driving,  or  kicking  away  the
disease.*  Clearly  in  his  passage  through  the  air  the  physician  is
likely  to  collide  with  the  disease,  which  is  quite  sure  to  be  loitering
about  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  patient,  and  the  rude  shock  thus
given  to  the  malady  may  reasonably  be  expected  to  push  or  hustle
it  away.  At  Tengaroeng,  in  Eastern  Borneo,  a  traveller  witnessed  a
ceremony  for  the  expulsion  of  an  evil  spirit  in  which  swinging  played

1   H.    Oldenberg,    Die  Kelision  des  Land- enV^olkenkimde  van  Ncderlandsch

Veda,  p.  444  sq.  Indii;  xxxvii.  (i888),  pp.  87-89.

^  J.  G.  Kohl,  Die  deulSih-russischen
Osiseeprovinzen,  ii.  268  s(pj.  4  H.    Ling    Roth,    The  Natives    of

3  S.  W.   Tromp,    "  Uit  de  Salasila  Sarawak  and  British  Nortk  Borneo,  i.

van    Koetei,"   Bijdragen  tot   de   Taal-  279.


NOTE  A  AS  A  MAGICAL  RITE  453

a  part.  After  four  men  in  blue  shirts  bespangled  with  stars,  and
wearing  coronets  of  red  cloth  decorated  with  beads  and  bells,  had
sought  diligently  for  the  devil,  grabbing  about  on  the  floor  on  their
hands  and  feet  and  grunting  withal,  three  hideous  hags  dressed  in
faded  red  petticoats  were  brought  in  with  great  pomp,  carried  on
the  shoulders  of  Malays,  and  took  their  seats,  amid  solemn  silence,
on  the  cradle  of  a  swing,  the  ends  of  which  were  carved  to  represent
the  head  and  tail  of  a  crocodile.  Not  a  sound  escaped  from  the
crowd  of  spectators  during  this  awe  -  inspiring  ceremony ;  they
regarded  the  business  as  most  serious.  The  venerable  dames  then
rocked  to  and  fro  on  the  swing,  fanning  themselves  languidly  with
Chinese  paper  fans.  At  a  later  stage  of  the  performance  they  and  three
girls  discharged  burning  arrows  at  a  sort  of  altar  of  banana  leaves,
maize,  and  grass.     This  completed  the  discomfiture  of  the  devil.^

The  Athenians  in  antiquity  celebrate  an  annual  festival  of
swinging.  Boards  were  hung  from  trees  by  ropes,  and  people
sitting  on  them  swung  to  and  fro,  while  they  sang  songs  of  a  loose
or  voluptuous  character.  The  swinging  went  on  both  in  public  and
private.  Various  explanations  were  given  of  the  custom  ;  the  most
generally  received  was  as  follows.  When  Bacchus  came  among
men  to  make  known  to  them  the  pleasures  of  wine,  he  lodged  with
a  certain  Icarus  or  Icarius,  to  whom  he  revealed  the  precious  secret
and  bade  him  go  forth  and  carry  the  glad  tidings  to  all  the  world.
So  Icarus  loaded  a  waggon  with  wine-skins,  and  set  out  on  his
travels,  the  dog  Maera  running  beside  him.  He  came  to  Attica,
and  there  fell  in  with  shepherds  tending  their  sheep,  to  whom  he
gave  of  the  wine.  They  drank  greedily,  but  when  some  of  them
fell  down  dead  drunk,  their  companions  thought  the  stranger  had
poisoned  them  with  intent  to  steal  the  sheep ;  so  they  knocked  him
on  the  head.  The  faithful  dog  ran  home  and  guided  his  master's
daughter  Erigone  to  the  body.  At  sight  of  it  she  was  smitten  with
despair  and  hanged  herself  on  a  tree  beside  her  dead  father,  but  not
until  she  had  prayed  that,  unless  the  Athenians  should  aveng6  her
sire's  murder,  their  daughters  might  die  the  same  death  as  she.
Her  curse  was  fulfilled,  for  soon  many  Athenian  damsels  hanged
themselves  for  no  obvious  reason.  An  oracle  informed  the
Athenians  of  the  true  cause  of  this  epidemic  of  suicide  ;  so  they
sought  out  the  bodies  of  the  unhappy  pair  and  instituted  the
swinging  festival  to  appease  Erigone ;  and  at  the  vintage  they
offered  the  first  of  the  grapes  to  her  and  her  father.^

Thus    the    swinging    festival    at    Athens   was   regarded    by   the

1  C.    Eock,     TJir    Head-hunters    of  194,   ed.    Miiller ;    Athenaeus,   xiv.    p.

Borneo  (London,  1881),  pp.   IIO-112.  618  E  K  ;    Pollux,  iv.  55;    Hesychius,

'^  Hyginus,  Astronoviica,  ii.  4,  p.  34  s.  vik  'AX^rts  and  AZtjpa ;  Etyniologicum

sqq.,   ed.    Bunte  ;    id.,   Fabulae,    130;  iMai^num,  s.z'.  Aluipa,  p.  42.  3;    Schol.

Servius  and  Probus  on  Virgil,    Georg.  (in  Homer,  Iliad  xxii.  29.      The  story

ii.  389;   Festus,  s.v.  "  Oscillantes,"  p.  of  the  murder  of  Icarius  is  told  by  a


454


SWINGING


NOTE  A


ancients  as  an  expiation  for  a  suicide  or  suicides  by  hanging.  This
opinion  is  strongly  confirmed  by  a  statement  of  Varro,  that  it  was
unlawful  to  perform  funeral  rites  in  honour  of  persons  who  had  died
by  hanging,  but  that  in  their  case  such  rites  were  replaced  by  a
custom  of  swinging  images,  as  if  in  imitation  of  the  death  they  had
died.i  Servius  says  that  the  Athenians,  failing  to  find  the  bodies
of  Icarius  and  Erigone  on  earth,  made  a  pretence  of  seeking  them
in  the  air  by  swinging  on  ropes  hung  from  trees ;  and  he  seems  to
have  regarded  the  custom  of  swinging  as  a  purification  by  means  of
air.2  This  explanation  probably  comes  very  near  the  truth ;  indeed
if  we  substitute  "  souls  "  for  "  bodies  "  in  the  wording  of  it  we  may
almost  accept  it  as  exact.  It  might  be  thought  that  the  souls  of
persons  who  had  died  by  hanging  were,  more  than  the  souls  of  the
other  dead,  hovering  in  the  air,  since  their  bodies  were  suspended
in  air  at  the  moment  of  death.  Hence  it  would  be  considered
needful  to  purge  the  air  of  these  vagrant  spirits,  and  this  might  be
done  by  swinging  persons  or  things  to  and  fro,  in  order  that  by
their  impact  they  might  disperse  and  drive  away  the  baleful  ghosts.
Thus  the  custom  would  be  exactly  analogous,  on  the  one  hand,  to
the  practice  of  the  Malay  medicine-man,  who  swings  to  and  fro  in
front  of  the  patient's  house  in  order  to  chase  away  the  disease,  and,
on  the  other  hand,  to  the  practice  of  the  Central  Australian
aborigines  who  beat  the  air  with  their  weapons  and  hands  in  order
to  drive  the  lingering  ghost  away  to  the  grave.^  At  Rome  swinging
seems  to  have  formed  part  of  the  great  Latin  festival  {Feriae
Latinae),  and  its  origin  was  traced  to  a  search  in  the  air  for  the
body  or  even  the  soul  of  King  Latinus,  who  had  disappeared  from
earth  after  the  battle  with  Mezentius,  King  of  Caere.^

Yet  on  the  other  hand  there  are  circumstances  which  point  to
an  intimate  association,  both  at  Athens  and  Rome,  of  these  swinging
festivals  with  an  intention  of  promoting  the  growth  of  cultivated


scholiast  on  Lucian  (Dial.  Meretr.  vii.
4)  lo  explain  the  origin  of  a  different
festival  [Rheinisches  Museum,  N.F.,
XXV.  (1S70),  p.  557  sqq.).  As  to  the
swinging  festival  at  Athens  see  O.  Jahn,
Archdologische  Beitrdge,  p.  324  sq.  ;
Daremberg  et  Saglio,  Diciionnaire  des
Antiquites  Grecques  et  Romahtes,  s.v.
"Aiora";  Miss  J.  E.  Harrison,  in
Mythology  and  Monuments  of  Ancient
Athens,  by  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Miss  J.  E.
Harrison,  p.  xxxix.  sqq.

1  Servius  on  Virgil,   Aen,  xii.  603  :
"  Et   Varro   ait:    Siispcndiosis  qiiibus

justa  fieri  jus  non  sit,  sjispensis  oscillis
veluti  peiimitaiionejn  mortis  parentari.^''

2  Servius  on   Virgil,  Georg:  ii.  389  ;
id.,  on  Aen.  vi.  741.


■'  See  above,  vol.  i.  p.  435.

*  Festus,  j-.zA  "  Oscillantes,"  p.  194,
ed.  Miiller.  This  festival  and  its
origin  are  also  alluded  to  in  a  passage
of  one  of  the  manuscripts  of  Servius
(on  Virgil,  Georg.  ii.  389),  which  is
printed  by  Lion  in  his  edition  of
Servius  (vol.  ii.  254,  note),  but  not
by  Thilo  and  Hagen  in  their  large
critical  edition  of  the  old  Virgilian
commentator.  "  In  Schol.  Bob.  p.  256
we  are  told  that  there  was  a  reminis-
cence of  the  fact  that,  the  bodies  of
Latinus  and  Aeneas  being  undiscover-
able,  their  animae  were  sought  in  the
air"  (G.  E.  M.  Marindin,  s.v.
"  Oscilla,"  Smith's  Dictionary  of  Greek
and  Roman  Antiquities,^  ii.  304).


NOTE  A  AS  A  MAGICAL  RITE       ■  455

plants.  Such  circumstances  are  the  legendary  connection  of  the
Athenian  festival  with  Bacchus,  the  custom  of  offering  the  first-
fruits  of  the  vintage  to  Erigone  and  Icarius/  and  at  Rome  the
practice  of  hanging  masks  on  trees  at  the  time  of  sowing  -  and  in
order  to  make  the  grapes  grow  better.^  Perhaps  we  can  reconcile
the  two  apparently  discrepant  effects  attributed  to  swinging  as  a
means  of  expiation  on  the  one  side  and  of  fertilisation  on  the  other,
by  supposing  that  in  both  cases  the  intention  is  to  clear  the  air  of
dangerous  influences,  whether  these  are  ghosts  of  the  unburied  dead
or  spiritual  powers  inimical  to  the  growth  of  plants.  Independent
of  both  appears  to  be  the  notion  that  the  higher  you  swing  the
higher  will  grow  the  crops."*  This  last  is  sympathetic  magic  pure
and  simple,  without  any  admixture  of  the  ideas  of  purification  or
expiation.

In  modern  Greece  and  Italy  the  custom  of  swinging  as  a  festal
rite,  whatever  its  origin  may  be,  is  still  observed  in  some  places.
At  the  small  village  of  Koukoura  in  Elis  an  English  traveller
observed  peasants  swinging  from  a  tree  in  honour  of  St.  George,
whose  festival  it  was.^  On  the  Tuesday  after  Easter  the  maidens
of  Seriphos  play  their  favourite  game  of  the  swing.  They  hang  a
rope  from  one  wall  to  another  of  the  steep,  narrow,  filthy  street,
and  putting  some  clothes  on  it  swing  one  after  the  other,  singing  as
they  swing.  Young  men  who  try  to  pass  are  called  upon  to  pay
toll  in  the  shape  of  a  penny,  a  song,  and  a  swing.  The  words
which  the  youth  sings  are  generally  these  :  "  The  gold  is  swung,  the
silver  is  swung,  and  swung  too  is  my  love  with  the  golden  hair  "  ;  to
which  the  girl  replies,  "  Who  is  it  that  swings  me  that  I  may  gild
him  with  my  favour,  that  I  may  work  him  a  fez  all  covered  with
pearls  ?  "  ^  In  the  Greek  island  of  Karpathos  the  villagers  assemble
at  a  given  place  on  each  of  the  four  Sundays  before  Easter,  a  swing
is  erected,  and  the  women  swing  one  after  the  other,  singing  death
wails  such  as  they  chant  round  the  mimic  tombs  in  church  on  the
night  of  Good  Friday."  On  Christmas  Day  peasant  girls  in  some
villages  of  Calabria  fasten  ropes  to  iron  rings  in  the  ceiling  and
swing  on  them,  while  they  sing  certain  songs  prescribed  by  custom
for  the  occasion.  The  practice  is  regarded  not  merely  as  an  amuse-
ment but  also  as  an  act  of  devotion.^  The  observance  of  the  custom  at
Christmas,  that  is,  at  the  winter  solstice,  suggests  that  in  Calabria  as  in
Esthonia  the  pastime  may  originally  have  been  a  magical  rite  designed

^  Hyginus,  I^ad.  130.  Mythology  and  Monutnents  of  Ande?it

'^  Probus  on  Virgil,  Georg.  ii.  385.  Athens,  p.  xliii.

•'  Virgil,  Georg.  ii.  388  sqq.  *  Vincenzo     Dorsa,     La     tradizione

*  See  above,  p.  33.  Greco-Latina  negli  tisi  e  nelle  credenze

^  W.       G.       Clark,       Peloponnesus  popolare      della      Calabria       Citeriore

(London,  1858),  p.  274.  (Cosenza,  1884),  p.  36.     In  one  village

^  J.  T.  Bent,  The  Cyclades,  p.  5.  the  custom  is   observed  on  Ascension

^  7(5?. ,  quoted  by  Miss  J.  E.  Harrison,  Day  instead  of  at  Christmas.


456  SWINGING  AS  A  MAGICAL  RITE  note  A

to  assist  the  sun  in  climbing  the  steep  ascent  to  the  top  of  the
summer  sky.  If  this  were  so,  we  might  surmise  that  the  gold  and
the  golden  hair  mentioned  by  youths  and  maidens  of  Seriphos  as
they  swing  refer  to  "the  golden  swing  in  the  sky,"  in  other  words
to  the  sun  whose  golden  lamp  swings  daily  across  the  blue  vault
of  heaven.


NOTE  B

THE    DOCTRINE    OF    LUNAR    SYMPATHY

In  the  text  some  evidence  has  been  adduced  of  the  sympathetic
influence  which  the  waxing  or  waning  moon  is  popularly  supposed
to  exert  on  growth,  especially  on  the  growth  of  vegetation.  But  the
doctrine  of  lunar  sympathy  does  not  stop  here ;  it  is  applied  also  to
the  affairs  of  man,  and  various  practical  rules  have  been  deduced
from  it  which  aim  at  the  amelioration  and  even  the  indefinite
extension  of  human  life.  To  illustrate  this  application  of  the
popular  theory  at  length  would  be  out  of  place  here,  but  a  few  cases
may  be  mentioned  by  way  of  specimen.  Thus  in  some  parts  of
Germany  it  is  commonly  believed  that  whatever  is  undertaken  when
the  moon  is  on  the  increase  succeeds  well,  and  that  the  full  moon
brings  everything  to  perfection  ;  whereas  business  undertaken  in  the
waning  of  the  moon  is  doomed  to  failure.^  Again,  in  Brittany  they
think  that  warts  vary  with  the  phases  of  the  moon,  growing  as  it
waxes  and  vanishing  away  as  it  wanes."  Accordingly  we  need  not
be  surprised  to  find  a  German  superstition,  that  if  you  would  rid
yourself  of  warts,  you  should  treat  them  when  the  moon  is  on  the
decrease.^  And  a  German  cure  for  toothache,  earache,  headache,
and  so  forth,  is  to  look  towards  the  waning  moon  and  say,  "As  the
moon  decreases,  so  may  my  pains  decrease  also."^  Again,  the  periodic
restoration  of  the  moon,  after  its  apparent  decay,  has  suggested  to
some  peoples  that  the  orb  possesses  a  recuperative  and  revivifying
energy  which  may  be  so  directed  by  men  as  to  stay  or  even  reverse
the  motion  of  the  wheel  of  time,  and  so  keep  the  young  for  ever
young  and  bring  back  to  the  old  their  lost  youth.  It  is  especially
the  appearance  of  the  new  moon,  with  its  promise  of  fresh  life,  that
has  been  greeted  by  ceremonies  in  which  this  vain  hope  finds  a

'   Kuhn  una  Schwartz,  Norddeiitschc  ^  A.    Kuhn,    Mdrkische   Sagen    und

Sngen,    Mdrchen    und    Gebrdtiche,    ]>.        Jlldrcken,  p.  387,  §  93.

4.57,  §419-

2  '^ihWXoi,  Traditions  et  Superstitions  ''   Die  i^estriegelte  Rockenphilosophie^

de  la  Haute- Bretagne,  ii.  355.  p.  447.


458  DOCTRINE  OF  LUNAR  SYMPATHY  note  h

pathetic  expression.  The  Esthonians  think  that  all  the  misfortune
which  might  befall  a  man  in  the  course  of  a  month  may  be  fore-
stalled and  shifted  to  the  moon,  if  the  man  vvill  only  say  to  the  new
moon,  "  Good  morrow,  new  moon.  I  must  grow  young,  you  must
grow  old.  My  eyes  must  grow  bright,  yours  must  grow  dark.  I
must  grow  light  as  a  bird,  you  must  grow  heavy  as  iron."  ^  An  old
traveller  tells  us  that  at  the  appearance  of  every  new  moon  the
negroes  of  the  Congo  clapped  their  hands  and  cried  out,  sometimes
falling  on  their  knees,  "  So  may  I  renew  my  life  as  thou  art  renewed."
But  if  the  sky  happened  to  be  cloudy,  they  did  nothing,  alleging
that  the  planet  had  lost  its  virtue.-  On  the  day  when  the  new
moon  first  appeared,  it  was  a  custom  with  the  Indians  of  San  Juan
Capistrano,  in  California,  to  call  together  all  the  young  men  for  the
purpose  of  its  celebration.  "  Correr  la  lima  I "  shouted  one  of  the
old  men,  "  Come,  my  boys,  the  moon  !  the  moon  !  "  Immediately
the  young  men  began  to  run  about  in  a  disorderly  fashion  as  if  they
were  distracted,  while  the  old  men  danced  in  a  circle,  saying,  "As
the  moon  dieth  and  cometh  to  life  again,  so  we  also,  having  to  die,
will  again  live."^  A  similar  custom  prevails  among  the  Ovambo  of
South-Western  Africa.  On  the  first  moonlight  night  of  the  new
moon  young  and  old,  their  bodies  smeared  with  white  earth,  doubt-
less in  imitation  of  the  planet's  silvery  light,  dance  to  the  moon  and
address  to  it  wishes  which  they  feel  sure  will  be  granted.**  What
the  wishes  are,  the  writer  who  reports  the  custom  has  omitted  to
say,  but  we  may  conjecture  that  among  them  is  a  prayer  for  life  and
youth.

1  J.  G.  Kohl,  Die  detitsch-7-nssischf}j  Pinkerton's  Voyages  and  Travels,  xvi.

Ostseeprovinzen,     ii.    279.       Compare  273.

Boecler-Kreutzwald,  Der  Ehsten  aber-  ^  Boscana,  "  Chinigchinich,"  in  A.

gldnhische      Gebrduchc,     Weisen      mid  Robinson's    Life   in    California   (New

Gewohnheiten,    p.     142    sq.;     Grimm,  York,   1846),  p.  298  j-^.

Deutsche  AIytkolo°ie,^  u.  ^()e^,  note  I.  ^   \l.      Schinz,       Deutsch  •  Sitdwest-

-  Merolla,  "Voyage  to  Congo,"  in  Afrika,  p.  319.


NOTE    C


OFFERINGS    OF    FIRST-FRUITS


It  has  been  shown  ^  that  primitive  peoples  often  partake  of  the  new
corn  sacramentally,  because  they  suppose  it  to  be  instinct  with  a
divine  spirit  or  Hfe.  At  a  later  age,  when  the  fruits  of  the  earth  are
conceived  as  created  rather  than  as  animated  by  a  divinity,  the  new
fruits  are  no  longer  partaken  of  sacramentally  as  the  body  and
blood  of  a  god ;  but  a  portion  of  them  is  presented  as  a  thank-
offering  to  the  divine  beings  who  are  believed  to  have  produced
them.  Sometimes  the  first-fruits  are  presented  to  the  king,  prob-
ably in  his  character  of  a  god.  Till  the  first-fruits  have  been
offered  to  the  deity  or  the  king,  people  are  not  at  liberty  to  eat  of
the  new  crops.  But,  as  it  is  not  always  possible  to  draw  a  sharp
line  between  the  sacrament  and  the  sacrifice  of  first-fruits,  it  may
be  well  to  round  off  this  part  of  the  subject  by  appending  some
miscellaneous  examples  of  the  latter.

Among  the  Basutos,  when  the  corn  has  been  threshed  and
winnowed,  it  is  left  in  a  heap  on  the  threshing-floor.  Before  it  can
be  touched  a  religious  ceremony  must  be  performed.  The  persons
to  whom  the  corn  belongs  bring  a  new  vessel  to  the  spot,  in
which  they  boil  some  of  the  grain.  When  it  is  boiled  they  throw
a  few  handfuls  of  it  on  the  heap  of  corn,  saying,  "  Thank  you,  gods  ;
give  us  bread  to-morrow  also  !  "  When  this  is  done  the  rest  is  eaten,
and  the  provision  for  the  year  is  considered  pure  and  fit  to  eat.^
Here  the  sacrifice  of  the  first-fruits  to  the  gods  is  the  prominent
idea,  which  comes  out  again  in  the  custom  of  leaving  in  the  thresh-
ing-floor a  little  hollow  filled  with  grain,  as  a  thank-offering  to  these
powerful  beings.^  Still  the  Basutos  retain  a  lively  sense  of  the
sanctity  of  the  corn  in  itself;  for,  so  long  as  it  is  exposed  to  view,
all  defiled  persons  are  carefully  kept  from  it.  If  it  is  necessary  to
employ  a  defiled  person  in  carrying  home  the  harvest,  he  remains  at
some  distance  while  the  sacks  are  being  filled,  and  only  approaches

'   Above,  p.  318  sqq.  ^  Casalis,  The  Basutos,  p.  251  S(}.

'•^  Ibid.  p.  252.


46o  OFFERINGS  OF  FIRST-FRUITS  note  c

to  place  them  upon  the  draught  oxen.  As  soon  as  the  load  is
deposited  at  the  dwelUng  he  retires,  and  under  no  pretext  may  he
help  to  pour  the  corn  into  the  baskets  in  which  it  is  kept.^  Among
the  Matabele  the  ceremony  of  the  first-fruits  was  very  important,
for  until  it  had  been  performed,  no  one  might  eat  the  vegetables  of
the  new  season.  In  the  morning  all  the  inhabitants  of  each  town
went  to  the  river  to  wash,  and  when  they  returned,  a  witch-doctor
prepared  a  dish  of  vegetables  mixed  with  medicine,  which  he
scattered  by  handfuls  among  the  people.  They  seized  the  food
and  ate  it,  and  after  that  they  were  free  to  partake  of  the  growing
crops.^  However,  the  aim  of  this  ceremony,  if  we  may  judge  from
the  description,  appears  to  have  been,  not  so  much  to  present  the
first-fruits  to  the  higher  powers,  as  to  purge  the  new  crops  from  the
dangerous  taint  of  .sanctity  or  taboo.  The  Makalaka  worship  a
god  called  Shumpaoli,  whose  image  is  to  be  found  in  the  enclosure
outside  of  their  huts.  The  image  consists  of  the  head  of  an  axe,
a  stone  from  the  river,  and  a  twig  or  long  stalk  of  grass  planted
between  them  in  the  ground.  About  this  god  they  scatter  the  first-
fruits  of  their  harvest,  and  when  they  brew  beer  they  pour  some  of  it
on  him.^  In  Ashantee  a  harvest  festival  is  held  in  September  when
the  yams  are  ripe.  During  the  festival  the  king  eats  the  new  yams,
but  none  of  the  people  may  eat  them  till  the  close  of  the  festival,
which  lasts  a  fortnight.  During  its  continuance  the  grossest  liberty
prevails ;  theft,  intrigue,  and  assault  go  unpunished,  and  both  sexes
abandon  themselves  to  their  passions.'*  Before  the  Adeli  of  the
Slave  Coast  may  eat  of  the  new  yams,  the  owner  of  each  farm  must
bring  the  first  yams  of  his  field  to  the  fetish  priest,  who  ofi'ers  them
to  the  fetish,  after  which  he  declares  that  the  harvest  may  take
place.  The  festival,  accompanied  by  shooting  and  dancing,  lasts
several  days  ;  it  generally  falls  in  August.^  The  Hovas  of  Mada-
gascar present  the  first  sheaves  of  the  new  grain  to  the  sovereign.
The  sheaves  are  carried  in  procession  to  the  palace  from  time  to
time  as  the  grain  ripens.^  So  in  Burma,  when  the  pangati  fruits
ripen,  some  of  them  used  to  be  taken  to  the  king's  palace  that  he
might  eat  of  them ;  no  one  might  partake  of  them  before  the  king.^
Every  year,  when  they  gather  their  first  crops,  the  Kochs  of
Assam  offer  some  of  the  first-fruits  to  their  ancestors,  calling  to
them  by  name  and  clapping  their  hands.^     In  August,  when  the

^  Casalis,  The  Basutos,  p.  252  sq.  deutschen  Kolonie  Togo,"  I'etermanns

2  L.  Decle,  Three   Years  in  Savage  Mittheilimgen,  xlii.  (1896),  p.  18.
Africa,  p.   157  sq.  "  J.   Cameron,    "  On  the   Early  In-

3  L.  Decle,  op.  cit.  p.   173.  habitants    of    Madagascar,"    Aniana-

*  A.    B.    Ellis,     The     Tshi- speaking       narivo  Annual  and  Madagascar  Maga-
Peoples  of  the   Gold  Coast,  p.  229  sq.  ;       zine,  iii.  263.

T.  E.    Bowdich,    Mission  to  Ashantee,  '  Bastian,   Die   Volher  des  ostlichen

p.  226  sq.  (ed.   1873).  Asien,  ii.   105.

*  I..  Conradt,  "  Das  Hinterland  der  ^  DaXion,  Ethnology  of  Bengal, -p.  ^i.


NOTE  c  OFFERINGS  OF  FIRS 7^- FRUITS  461

rice  ripens,  the  Hos  offer  the  first-fruits  of  the  harvest  to  Sing
Bonga,  who  dwells  in  the  sun.  Along  with  the  new  rice  a  white
cock  is  sacrificed ;  and  till  the  sacrifice  has  been  offered  no  one
may  eat  the  new  rice.^  In  Ladakh  the  peasants  offer  the  first  two
or  three  handfuls  of  the  wheat-crop  to  the  spirit  who  presides  over
agriculture.  These  offerings  they  attach  to  the  tops  of  the  pillars
which  support  the  roofs  of  their  houses ;  and  thus  the  bands  of
straw  and  ears  of  wheat  form  a  primitive  sort  of  capital.  Rams'
horns  are  sometimes  added  to  this  decoration.'^  Among  the  hill
tribes  near  Rajamahall,  in  India,  when  the  kosarane  grain  is  being
reaped  in  November  or  early  in  December,  a  festival  is  held  as  a
thanksgiving  before  the  new  grain  is  eaten.  On  a  day  appointed
by  the  chief  a  goat  is  sacrificed  by  two  men  to  a  god  called  Chi-
tariah  Gossaih,  after  which  the  chief  himself  sacrifices  a  fowl.  Then
the  vassals  repair  to  their  fields,  offer  thanksgiving,  make  an
oblation  to  KuU  Gossaih  (who  is  described  as  the  Ceres  of  these
mountaineers),  and  then  return  to  their  houses  to  eat  of  the  new
kosarane.  As  soon  as  the  inhabitants  have  assembled  at  the  chief's
house — -the  men  sitting  on  one  side  and  the  women  on  the  other —
a  hog,  a  measure  of  kosarane^  and  a  pot  of  spirits  are  presented  to
the  chief,  who  in  return  blesses  his  vassals,  and  exhorts  them  to
industry  and  good  behaviour ;  "  after  which,  making  a  libation  in
the  names  of  all  their  gods,  and  of  their  dead,  he  drinks,  and  also
throws  a  little  of  the  kosarane  away,  repeating  the  same  pious  ex-
clamations." Drinking  and  festivity  then  begin,  and  are  kept  up
for  several  days.  The  same  tribes  have  another  festival  at  reaping
the  Indian  corn  in  August  or  September.  Every  man  repairs  to
his  fields  with  a  hog,  a  goat,  or  a  fowl,  which  he  sacrifices  to  Kull
Gossaih.  Then,  having  feasted,  he  returns  home,  where  another
repast  is  prepared.  On  this  day  it  is  customary  for  every  family  in
the  village  to  distribute  to  every  house  a  little  of  what  they  have
prepared  for  their  feast.  Should  any  person  eat  of  the  new  kosarane
or  the  new  Indian  corn  before  the  festival  and  public  thanksgiving
at  the  reaping  of  these  crops,  the  chief  fines  him  a  white  cock,
which  is  sacrificed  to  Chitariah.^  In  the  Central  Provinces  of
India  the  first  grain  of  the  season  is  always  offered  to  the  god
Bhi'msen  or  Bhi'm  Deo.'*  In  the  Punjaub,  when  sugar-cane  is
planted,  a  woman  puts  on  a  necklace  and  walks  round  the  field,
winding   thread  on   a  spindle;^  and  when  the  sugar-cane   is  cut

1  Dalton,   op.   cit.    p.    198;  H.    H.  of  the  Hills  near  Rajamahall,"  ^■^j/a/Zc-
Risley,    Tribes  and  Castes  of  Bengal,  Researches,  iv.  56  sq.
Ethnographic  Glossary,  ii.  104.  *  Panjab  Notes  and  Queries,  i.  p.  60,

2  North  Indian  Notes  and  Queries,  §  502.

i.  57,  No.  428,  quoting  Moorcroft  and  ^  The  practice  is  curiously  unlike  the

Trebeck,     Travels    in    the   Himalayan  custom  of  ancient  Italy,  in   most  parts

Provinces,  i.  317  sq.  of  which  women  were  forbidden  by  law

2  Thomas  Shaw,  "The  Inhabitants  to  walk   on  the   highroads   twirling  a


462  OFFERINGS  OF  FIRST-FRUITS  note  c

the  first-fruits  are  offered  on  an  altar,  which  is  built  close  to  the
press  and  is  sacred  to  the  sugar-cane  god.  Afterwards  the  first-
fruits  are  given  to  Brahmans.  Also,  when  the  women  begin  to  pick
the  cotton,  they  go  round  the  field  eating  rice-milk,  the  first  mouth-
ful of  which  they  spit  upon  the  field  toward  the  west ;  and  the  first
cotton  picked  is  exchanged  at  the  village  shop  for  its  weight  in  salt,
which  is  prayed  over  and  kept  in  the  house  till  the  picking  is
finished.^

In  the  island  of  Tjumba,  East  Indies,  a  festival  is  held  after
harvest.  Vessels  filled  with  rice  are  presented  as  a  thank-offering
to  the  gods.  Then  the  sacred  stone  at  the  foot  of  a  palm-tree  is
sprinkled  with  the  blood  of  a  sacrificed  animal ;  and  rice,  with  some
of  the  flesh,  is  laid  on  the  stone  for  the  gods.  The  palm-tree  is
hung  with  lances  and  shields.^  The  Dyaks  of  Borneo  hold  a  feast
of  first-fruits  when  the  paddy  or  unhusked  rice  is  ripe.  The
priestesses,  accompanied  by  a  gong  and  drum,  go  in  procession  to
the  farms  and  gather  several  bunches  of  the  ripe  paddy.  These
are  brought  back  to  the  village,  washed  in  cocoa-nut  water,  and
laid  round  a  bamboo  altar,  which  at  the  harvest  festivals  is  erected
in  the  common  room  of  the  largest  house.  The  altar  is  gaily
decorated  with  white  and  red  streamers,  and  is  hung  with  the  sweet-
smelling  blossom  of  the  areca  palm.  The  feast  lasts  two  days,
during  which  the  village  is  tabooed ;  no  one  may  leave  it.  Only
fowls  are  killed,  and  dancing  and  gong-beating  go  on  day  and
night.  When  the  festival  is  over  the  people  are  free  to  get  in  their
crops.^  The  pounding  of  the  new  paddy  is  the  occasion  of  a  harvest
festival  which  is  celebrated  all  over  Celebes.  The  religious  cere-
monies which  accompany  the  feast  were  witnessed  by  Dr.  B.  F.
Matthes  in  July  1857.  Two  mats  were  spread  on  the  ground,  each
with  a  pillow  on  it.  On  one  of  the  pillows  were  placed  a  man's
clothes  and  a  sword,  on  the  other  a  woman's  clothes.  These  were
seemingly  intended  to  represent  the  deceased  ancestors.  Rice  and
water  were  placed  before  the  two  dummy  figures,  which  were  also
sprinkled  with  the  new  paddy.  Moreover,  dishes  of  rice  were  set
down   for  the  rest  of  the  family  and  the  slaves  of  the  deceased.

spindle,  because  this  was  supposed  to  Forests  of  the  Far  East,-  i.  191.  On
injure  the  crops  (Pliny,  Nat.  Hist.  taboos  observed  at  agricultural  opera-
xxviii.  28).  The  purpose  of  the  Indian  tions,  see  id.,  i.  185;  R.  G.  Wood-
custom  may  be  to  ward  off  evil  in-  thorpe,  "Wild  Tribes  inhabiting  the
fluences  from  the  field.  Compare  vol.  so-called  Naga  Hills," _Iourn.  Anthrop.
i.  p.  400  sq.  hist.  xi.  (1S82),  p.  71  ;   Old  New  Zea-

1  D.  C.  J.  Ibbetson,  Outlines  of  /a;/^,  byaPakeha  Maori  (London,  1884),
Panjab  Ethnography  (Calcutta,  1S83),  p.  103  sq.  ;  R.  Taylor,  Te  Ika  a  Maui,
p.   119.  or  New  Zealafid  and  its  Inhabitants,^

2  Fr.  Junghuhn,  Die  Battaldrtder  p.  165  sq.  ;  E.  Tregear,  "The  Maoris
aif  Sumatra  {"Q^xXxn,  1847),  ii.  312.  oi'bitiwZts.lo.n(\," Journ.  Afithrop.  Inst.

2  Spenser    St.    John,    Life    in   the       xix.  (1890),  p.  no.


NOTEC  OFFERINGS  OF  FIRST-FRUITS  463

This  was  the  end  of  the  ceremony.^  In  Minahassa,  a  district  of
Celebes,  the  people  have  a  festival  of  "  eating  the  new  rice."  Fowls
or  pigs  are  killed ;  some  of  the  flesh,  with  rice  and  palm-wine,  is
set  apart  for  the  gods,  and  then  the  eating  and  drinking  begin. ^
The  people  of  Kobi  and  Sariputi,  two  villages  on  the  north-east
coast  of  Ceram,  offer  the  first-fruits  of  the  paddy,  in  the  form  of
cooked  rice,  with  tobacco  and  other  things,  to  their  ancestors  as  a
token  of  gratitude.  The  ceremony  is  called  "feeding  the  dead."^
In  the  Tenimber  and  Timor-laut  Islands,  East  Indies,  the  first-fruits
of  the  paddy,  along  with  live  fowls  and  pigs,  are  offered  to  the
matmate.  The  mafmate  are  the  spirits  of  their  ancestors,  which  are
worshipped  as  guardian-spirits  or  household  gods.  They  are  sup-
posed to  enter  the  house  through  an  opening  in  the  roof,  and  to
take  up  their  abode  temporarily  in  their  skulls,  or  in  images  of
wood  or  ivory,  in  order  to  partake  of  the  offerings  and  to  help  the
family.  They  also  assume  the  form  of  birds,  pigs,  crocodiles,  turtles,
sharks,  and  so  forth.'*  In  Amboyna,  after  the  rice  or  other  harvest
has  been  gathered  in,  some  of  the  new  fruits  are  offered  to  the
gods,  and  till  this  is  done,  the  priests  may  not  eat  of  them.  A
portion  of  the  new  rice,  or  whatever  it  may  be,  is  boiled,  and  milk
of  the  cocoa-nut  is  poured  on  it,  mixed  with  Indian  saffron.  It  is
then  taken  to  the  place  of  sacrifice  and  offered  to  the  god.  Some
people  also  pour  out  oil  before  the  deity ;  and  if  any  of  the  oil  is
left  over,  they  take  it  home  as  a  holy  and  priceless  treasure,  where-
with they  smear  the  forehead  and  breast  of  sick  people  and  whole
people,  in  the  firm  conviction  that  the  oil  confers  all  kinds  of  bless-
ings.^ In  the  Kei  Islands,  to  the  south-west  of  New  Guinea,  the
first-fruits  are  offered  to  Lir  majoran,  the  god  of  husbandry,  when
the  harvest  is  ripe.^  After  the  rice  has  been  reaped,  the  people  of
Nias  deck  the  images  of  their  ancestors  with  wreaths,  and  offer  to
them  the  first  dishful  of  boiled  rice,  while  they  thank  them  for
the  blessings  they  have  bestowed  on  the  family.''  The  Irayas  and
Catalangans  of  Luzon,  tribes  of  the  Malay  stock,  but  of  mixed
blood,  worship  chiefly  the  souls  of  their  ancestors  under  the  name
of  a?iiios,  to  whom  they  offer  the  first-fruits  of  the  harvest.  The
anitos  are  household  deities  ;  some  of  them  reside  in  pots  in  the
corners  of  the  houses ;  and  miniature  houses,  standing  near  the

^  B.    F.    Matthes,    Beknopt    Verslag  Indicn,  iii.   10.
mijner  reizen  in  de  Bmftmlanden  van  **  C.    M.    Pleyte,    "  Ethnogiaphische

Celebes,  in  de  jaren  1857  f«  1861,  p.  5.  Beschrijving  der  Kei-Eilanden,"  Tijd-

2  N.    Graafland,    De  Minahassa,    i.  schrift  van  het  Nederlandsch  Aardrijks-
165.  kundig  Genootschap,   Tweede- Serie,  x.

3  J.    G.    F.    Riedel,    De    shiik-    en  (1893),  P-  80 1.

kroesharige  rasseti  tusschen   Selebes  en  ^   Fr.    Kramer,    "  Der  Gotzendienst

Papua,  p.   107.  der  Niasser,"  Tijdschrift  voor  Indiscke

*   Riedel,  op.  cit.  pp.  281,  296  sq.  Taal-   Land-  en    Volkenkimde,    xxxiii.

"''  Fr.  Valentyn,  Oud  en  nieuw  Oost-  (1890),  p.  482.


464  OFFERINGS  OF  FIRST-FRUITS  note  c

family  dwelling,  are  especially  sacred  to  them.^  When  the  Bagobos
of  the  Philippines  have  got  in  their  harvest  of  rice  or  maize,  they
will  neither  eat  of  it  nor  sell  so  much  as  a  grain  till  they  have  made
a  pretence  of  feeding  all  their  agricultural  implements.^

In  certain  tribes  of  Fiji   "the  first-fruits  of  the  yam   harvest
are  presented  to  the  ancestors   in   the   Nanga  [sacred  enclosure]
with  great  ceremony,  before  the  bulk  of  the  crop  is  dug  for  the
people's  use,  and  no  man  may  taste  of  the  new  yams  until  the  pre-
sentation has  been  made.     The  yams  thus  offered  are  piled  in  the
Great  Nanga,  and  are  allowed  to  rot  there.     If  any  one  were  im-
piously bold  enough  to  appropriate  them  to  his  own  use,  he  would
be  smitten  with  madness.     The  mission  teacher  before  mentioned
told  me  that  when  he  visited  the  Nanga  he  saw  among  the  weeds
with  which  it  was  overgrown  numerous  yam  vines  which  had  sprung
up  out  of  the  piles  of  decayed  offerings.     Great  feasts  are  made  at
the  presentations  of  the  fir^t-fruits,  which  are  times  of  public  re-
joicing, and  the  Nanga  itself  is  frequently  spoken  of  as  the  Mdaki,
or  Harvest."  ^     In  other  parts  of  Fiji  the  practice  with  regard  to  the
first-fruits  seems  to  have  been  different,  for  we  are  told  by  another
observer  that  "the  first-fruits  of  the  yams,  which  are  always  pre-
sented at  the  principal  temple  of  the  district,  become  the  property
of  the  priests,  and  form  their  revenue,  although  the  pretence   of
their  being  required  for  the  use  of  the  god  is  generally  kept  up."'^
In  Tana,   one  of  the  New  Hebrides,   the  general  name  for  gods
appeared  to  be  aremha,  which  meant   "a  dead  man."     The  spirits
of  departed  ancestors  were  among  the  gods  of  the  people.     Chiefs
who    reached    an    advanced    age   were    deified    after    their   death,
addressed  by  name,    and  prayed  to   on  various   occasions.     They
were  supposed  to  preside  especially  over  the  growth  of  the  yams
and  fruit-trees.     The  first-fruits  were  presented  to  them.     A  little
of  the  new  fruit  was  laid  on  a  stone,  or  on  a  shelving  branch  of  the
tree,   or  on  a  rude  temporary  altar,  made  of  a  few  sticks  lashed
together  with  strips  of  bark,  in  the  form  of  a  table,  with  its  four  feet
stuck  in  the  ground.    All  being  quiet,  the  chief  acted  as  high  priest,
and  prayed  aloud  as  follows  :   "  Compassionate  father  !  here  is  some
food  for  you ;  eat  it ;  be  kind  to  us  on  account  of  it."     Then  all
the  people  shouted.     This  took  place  about  noon,  and  afterwards
the  assembled  people  feasted  and  danced  till  midnight  or  morning.-'*
In  Florida,  one  of  the  Solomon  Islands,  the  canarium  nut  is
much  used  in  the  native  cookery,  but  formerly  none  could  be  eaten

^  C.  Semper,  Die  Philzppi?ien  imd  or  sacred  stone  enclosure,    of  Waini-

ihre  Br.vohner,  p.  56.  mala,  Yxix,"  Journ.  Anthrop.  Inst.  xiv.

^  F.  Blumentritt,  "  Das  Stromgebiet  (1885),  p.  27.

des  Rio  Grande  de  Mindano," /fe/gr-  ^  J.  E.  Erskine, /^^^v/a/ ^ a  Cruise

7nanns  Miitkeihmgen,  xxxvii.   (1891),  among  the  Islands  of  the  Western  PaciJiCy

p.   III.  p.  252.

3  Rev.  Lorimer  Fison,  "The Nanga,  »  Turner,  Samoa,  p.  318  sq.


NOTE  c  OFFERINGS  OF  FIRST-FRUITS  465

till  the  sacrifice  of  the  first-fruits  had  been  offered  to  the  ghosts  of
the  dead.  This  was  done  on  behalf  of  a  whole  village  by  a  man
who  inherited  a  knowledge  of  the  way  in  which  the  sacrifice  should
be  offered,  and  who  accordingly  had  authority  to  open  the  season.
When  he  saw  that  the  time  had  come,  he  raised  a  shout  early  in
the  morning,  then  climbed  a  tree,  cracked  the  nuts,  ate  some  him-
self, and  put  some  on  the  stones  in  his  sacred  place  for  the  particular
ghost  whom  he  worshipped.  Then  all  the  people  might  gather  the
nuts  for  themselves.  The  chief  offered  food,  in  which  the  new  nuts
were  mixed,  on  the  stones  of  the  village  sanctuary ;  and  every  man
who  revered  a  ghost  of  his  own  did  the  same  in  his  private  sanctu-
ary. ^  This  sacrifice  of  first-fruits  was  witnessed  by  Mr.  Woodford
at  the  village  of  Aola,  in  the  neighbouring  island  of  Guadalcanal
The  canarium  nuts,  or  Solomon  Island  almonds,  had  been  ripe  for
a  week,  aad  Mr.  Woodford  had  expressed  a  wish  to  taste  them,
but  he  was  told  that  this  was  quite  impossible  till  the  offering
to  the  ghost  had  been  made.  As  a  native  put  it,  "  Devil  he  eat
first ;  all  man  he  eat  behind."  All  the  inhabitants  of  the  village
adjourned  to  the  sea-shore  in  groups  of  ten  or  twelve  to  perform  the
sacrifice.  The  party  to  which  Mr.  Woodford  attached  himself  swept
a  space  clean  beneath  the  spreading  branches  of  a  Barringtonia,  and
there  constructed  half-a-dozen  tiny  altars,  each  about  six  inches
square,  out  of  dry  sticks.  On  these  altars  they  laid  offerings  of  yams,
taros,  bananas,  and  a  little  flesh  ;  and  a  few  of  the  nuts  were  skinned
and  set  up  on  sticks  round  about  the  altars.  Fire  was  then  made
by  the  friction  of  wood,  for  matches  might  not  be  used  for  this
purpose,  though  probably  every  man  had  a  box  of  them  in  his  bag.
With  the  sacred  flame  thus  produced  the  altars  were  kindled  and
the  offerings  consumed.  When  this  was  done,  the  women  produced
large  flat  cakes  baked  of  a  paste  of  pounded  nuts,  and  these  were
eaten  by  all.^  In  Saa,  another  of  the  Solomon  Islands,  when  the
yams  are  ripe,  the  people  fetch  some  from  each  garden  to  offer  to
the  ghosts.  Early  in  the  morning  all  the  male  members  of  a  family
assemble  at  the  sanctuary  of  the  particular  ancestral  ghosts  whom
they  revere.  One  of  them  goes  with  a  yam  into  the  holy  place  and
cries  with  a  loud  voice  to  the  ghosts,  "  This  is  yours  to  eat,"  and
with  that  he  sets  the  yam  beside  the  skull  which  is  in  the  sanctuary.
The  others  call  quietly  upon  all  the  ancestors  and  present  their  yams,
which  are  many  in  number,  because  one  from  each  garden  is  given
to  each  of  the  ghosts.  Moreover,  if  any  man  has  a  relic  of  the  dead
at  home,  such  as  a  head,  or  bones,  or  hair,  he  takes  back  a  yam  to
his  house  and  places  it  beside  the  head  or  whatever  it  may  be.  In
the  same  island,  as  in  Florida,  the  new  canarium  nuts  may  not  be

1  R.    H.    Codrington,     The    Melan-       among    the    Head-hunters,    being   an
esians,  p.   132  sq.  Account  of  Three  Visits  to  the  Solomon

2  C.    M.    Woodford,    A    Naturalist       A/rtWj  (London,   1890),  pp.  26-28.

VOL.  II  2  H


466  OFFERINGS  OF  FIRST-FRUITS  note  c

eaten  until  the  first-fruits  have  been  offered  to  the  ghosts.  More-
over, the  first  flying-fish  of  the  season  must  be  sacrificed  to  these
spirits  of  the  dead  before  the  living  are  allowed  to  partake  of  the
fish.  The  ghosts  to  whom  the  flying-fish  are  offered  have  the  form
of  sharks.  Some  of  them  have  sanctuaries  ashore,  where  images  of
sharks  are  set  up ;  and  the  flying-fish  are  laid  before  these  images.
Other  shark-ghosts  have  no  place  on  shore ;  so  the  fish  offered  to
them  are  taken  out  to  sea  and  shredded  into  the  water,  while  the
names  of  the  ghosts  are  called  out.^

In  some  of  the  Kingsmill  Islands  the  god  most  commonly  wor-
shipped was  called  Tubueriki.  He  was  represented  by  a  flat  coral
stone,  of  irregular  shape,  about  three  feet  long  by  eighteen  inches
wide,  set  up  on  end  in  the  open  air.  Leaves  of  the  cocoa-nut
palm  were  tied  about  it,  considerably  increasing  its  size  and  height.
The  leaves  were  changed  every  month,  that  they  might  be  always
fresh.  The  worship  paid  to  the  god  consisted  in  repeating  prayers
before  the  stone,  and  laying  beside  it  a  portion  of  the  food  prepared
by  the  people  for  their  own  use.  This  they  did  at  their  daily  meals,
at  festivals,  and  whenever  they  specially  wished  to  propitiate  the
deity.  The  first-fruits  of  the  season  were  always  offered  to  him.
Every  family  of  distinction  had  one  of  these  stones  which  was  con-
sidered rather  in  the  light  of  a  family  altar  than  as  an  idol.^

The  following  is  a  description  of  the  festival  of  first-fruits  as  it
was  celebrated  in  Tonga  in  the  days  when  a  European  flag  rarely
floated  among  the  islands  of  the  Pacific.  "  Inachi.  This  word  means
literally  a  share  or  portion  of  anything  that  is  to  be,  or  has  been,
distributed  out :  but  in  the  sense  here  mentioned  it  means  that  por-
tion of  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  and  other  eatables,  which  is  offered  to
the  gods  in  the  person  of  the  divine  chief  Tooitonga,  which  allot-
ment is  made  once  a  year,  just  before  the  yams  in  general  are  arrived
at  a  state  of  maturity ;  those  which  are  used  in  this  ceremony  being
planted  sooner  than  others,  and,  consequently,  they  are  the  first-
fruits  of  the  yam  season.  The  object  of  this  offering  is  to  ensure
the  protection  of  the  gods,  that  their  favour  may  be  extended  to
the  welfare  of  the  nation  generally,  and  in  particular  to  the  pro-
ductions of  the  earth,  of  which  yams  are  the  most  important.
The  time  for  planting  most  kinds  of  yams  is  about  the  latter
end  of  July,  but  the  species  called  cako-cako,  which  is  always  used
in  this  ceremony,  is  put  in  the  ground  about  a  month  before,  when,
on  each  plantation,  there  is  a  small  piece  of  land  chosen  and  fenced
in,  for  the  purpose  of  growing  a  couple  of  yams  of  the  above  de-
scription. As  soon  as  they  have  arrived  at  a  state  of  maturity,  the
How  [King]  sends  a  messenger  to  Tooitonga,  stating  that  the  yams

1  R.    H.    Codrington,     The   Melan-  '-  Horatio  Hale,  United  States  Ex-

esians,  p.  138.  ploring     Expedition,     Ethnology     and

Philology,  p.  97.


NOTE  c  OFFERINGS  OF  FIRST-FRUITS  467

for  the  tuachi  are  fit  to  be  taken  up,  and  requesting  that  he  would
appoint  a  day  for  the  ceremony  ;  he  generally  fixes  on  the  tenth
day  afterwards,  reckoning  the  following  day  for  the  first.  There
are  no  particular  preparations  made  till  the  day  before  the  cere-
mony ;  at  night,  however,  the  sound  of  the  conch  is  heard  occa-
sionally in  different  parts  of  the  islands,  and  as  the  day  of  the
ceremony  approaches,  it  becomes  more  frequent,  so  that  the  people
of  almost  every  plantation  sound  the  conch  three  or  four  times,
which,  breaking  in  upon  the  silence  of  the  night,  has  a  pleasing
effect,  particularly  at  Vavaoo,  where  the  number  of  woods  and  hills
send  back  repeated  echoes,  adding  greatly  to  the  effect.  The  day
before  the  ceremony  the  yams  are  dug  up,  and  ornamented  with  a
kind  of  ribbon  prepared  from  the  inner  membrane  of  the  leaf  of  a
species  of  pandanus,  and  dyed  red.  .  .  .  The  sun  has  scarcely
set  when  the  sound  of  the  conch  begins  again  to  echo  through  the
island,  increasing  as  the  night  advances.  At  the  Mooa  [capital]
and  all  the  plantations  the  voices  of  men  and  women  are  heard
singing  Mofo  boa  tegger  gnaobe,  600a  gnaobe,  Rest  thou,  doing  no
work;  thou  shalt  not  work.  This  increases  till  midnight,  men
generally  singing  the  first  part  of  the  sentence,  and  the  women
the  last :  it  then  subsides  for  three  or  four  hours,  and  again  in-
creases as  the  sun  rises.  Nobody,  however,  is  seen  ^stirring  out  in
the  public  roads  till  about  eight  o'clock,  when  the  people  from  all
quarters  of  the  island  are  seen  advancing  towards  the  Mooa,  and
canoes  from  all  the  other  islands  are  landing  their  men  ;  so  that  all
the  inhabitants  of  Tonga  seem  approaching  by  sea  and  land,  singing
and  sounding  the  conch.  At  the  Mooa  itself  the  universal  bustle  of
preparation  is  seen  and  heard  ;  and  the  different  processions  enter-
ing from  various  quarters  of  men  and  women,  all  dressed  up  in  new
gnatoos,  ornamented  with  red  ribbons  and  wreaths  of  flowers,  and
the  men  armed  with  spears  and  clubs,  betoken  the  importance  of
the  ceremony  about  to  be  performed.  Each  party  brings  in  its
yams  in  a  basket,  which  is  carried  in  the  arms  with  great  care  by
the  principal  vassal  of  the  chief  to  whom  the  plantation  may  belong.
The  baskets  are  deposited  in  the  inaldi'^  (in  the  Mooa),  and  some
of  them  begin  to  employ  themselves  in  slinging  the  yams,  each  upon
the  centre  of  a  pole  about  eight  or  nine  feet  long,  and  four  inches
diameter.  The  proceedings  are  regulated  by  attending  matabooles.-
The  yams  being  all  slung,  each  pole  is  carried  by  two  men  upon
their  shoulders,  one  walking  before  the  other,  and  the  yam  hang-
ing between  them,  ornamented  with  red  ribbons.  The  procession
begins  to  move  towards  the  grave  of  the  last  Tooitonga  (which  is

^  The  maldi\s  "a  piece  of  ground,  Islands,  Vocabulary).
generally    before    a     large     house,    or

chief's  grave,  where  public  ceremonies  ^  The    mataboole    is    "a   rank   next

are  principally  held"  (Mariner,  Tonga  below  chiefs  or  nobles"  (ibid.).

VOL.  II  2  H  2


468  OFFERINGS  OF  FIRST-FRUITS  note  c

generally  in  the  neighbourhood,  or  the  grave  of  one  of  his  family
will  do),  the  men  advancing  in  a  single  line,  every  two  bearing  a
yam,  with  a  slow  and  measured  pace,  sinking  at  every  step,  as  if
their  burden  were  of  immense  weight.  In  the  meantime  the  chiefs
and  matabooles  are  seated  in  a  semicircle  before  the  grave,  with
their  heads  bowed  down,  and  their  hands  clasped  before  them."
The  procession  then  marched  round  the  grave  twice  or  thrice  in  a
great  circle,  the  conchs  blowing  and  the  men  singing.  Next  the
yams,  still  suspended  from  the  poles,  were  deposited  before  the
grave,  and  their,  bearers  sat  down  beside  them.  One  of  the  viata-
books  of  Tooitonga  now  addressed  the  gods  generally,  and  afterwards
particularly,  mentioning  the  late  Tooitonga,  and  the  names  of  several
others.  He  thanked  them  for  their  divine  bounty  in  favouring  the
land  with  the  prospect  of  so  good  a  harvest,  and  prayed  that  their
beneficence  might  be  continued  in  future.  When  he  had  finished,
the  men  rose  and  resumed  their  loads,  and  after  parading  two  or
three  times  round  the  grave,  marched  back  to  the  jnaldi,  singing
and  blowing  the  conchs  as  before.  The  chiefs  and  matabooles  soon
followed  to  the  same  place,  where  the  yams  had  been  again  de-
posited. Here  the  company  sat  down  in  a  great  circle,  presided
over  by  Tooitonga.  Then  the  other  articles  that  formed  part  of
the  Inachi  were  brought  forward,  consisting  of  dried  fish,  mats,  etc.,
which,  Avith  the  yams,  were  divided  into  shares.  About  a  fourth
was  allotted  to  the  gods,  and  appropriated  by  the  priests  ;  about  a
half  fell  to  the  king ;  and  the  remainder  belonged  to  Tooitonga.
The  materials  of  the  Inachi  having  been  carried  away,  the  company
set  themselves  to  drink  cava,  and  a  mataboole  addressed  them,  saying
that  the  gods  would  protect  them,  and  grant  them  long  lives,  if  they
continued  to  observe  the  religious  ceremonies  and  to  pay  respect  to
the  chiefs.^

The  Samoans  used  to  present  the  first-fruits  to  the  spirits  {aitus)
and  chiefs.-  For  example,  a  family  whose  god  was  in  the  form  of
an  eel  presented  the  first-fruits  of  their  taro  plantations  to  the  eel.^
In  Tahiti  "  the  first  fish  taken  periodically  on  their  shores,  together
with  a  number  of  kinds  regarded  as  sacred,  were  conveyed  to  the
altar.  The  first-fruits  of  their  orchards  and  gardens  were  also
taumaha,  or  offered,  with  a  portion  of  their  five  stock,  which  con-
sisted of  pigs,  dogs,  and  fowls,  as  it  was  supposed  death  would  be
inflicted  on  the  owner  or  the  occupant  of  the  land  from  which  the
god  should  not  receive  such  acknowledgment."'^  In  Huahine,  one
of  the  Society  Islands,  the  first-fruits  were  presented  to  the  god
Tani.     A  poor  person  was  expected  to  bring  two  of  the  earliest

1  V^.'Ms.x'inQX,  Account  of  the  Natives       States  Exploring  Expedition,  n.  133.
of  the  Tonga  Islands  (London,   1818),  ^  Turner,  Samoa,  p.  70  s</.

ii.  196-203.  *  W.  Ellis,  Polynesian  Researches,  i.

2  Ch.'^Wkts, Narrative  of  the  United       350.


NOTEc  OFFERINGS  OF  FIRST-FRUITS  469

fruits  gathered,  of  whatever  kind ;  a  raatira  had  to  bring  ten,  and
chiefs  and  princes  had  to  bring  more,  according  to  their  rank  and
riches.  They  carried  the  fruits  to  the  temple,  where  they  threw
them  down  on  the  ground,  with  the  words,  "  Here,  Tani,  I  have
brought  you  something  to  eat."  ^  The  chief  gods  of  the  Easter
Islanders  were  Make-Make  and  Haua.  To  these  they  offered  the
first  of  all  the  produce  of  the  ground.^  Amongst  the  Maoris  the
offering  of  the  first-fruits  of  the  sweet  potatoes  to  Pani,  son  of
Rongo,  the  god  of  sweet  potatoes,  was  a  solemn  religious  ceremony.^

It  has  been  affirmed  that  the  old  Prussians  offered  the  first-fruits
of  their  crops  and  of  their  fishing  to  the  god  Curcho,  but  doubt
rests  on  the  statement.*  In  Attica  the  first-fruits  of  the  vintage
were  presented  to  Icarius  and  Erigone.^  The  Romans  sacrificed  the
first  ears  of  corn  to  Ceres,  and  the  first  of  the  new  wine  to  Liber ;
and  until  the  priests  had  offered  these  sacrifices,  the  people  might
not  eat  the  new  corn  nor  drink  the  new  wine.**

The  Thompson  River  Indians  of  British  Columbia  used  to  offer
the  first  berries  of  the  season  to  the  earth,  or  more  generally  to  the
mountains.  The  offering  was  made  by  an  old  grey-haired  person,
who  danced  and  held  out  the  fruit  towards  the  mountain-tops.
The  rest  of  the  people  painted  their  faces  red  and  danced  for  some
time.'^  When  the  ears  of  maize  were  formed,  the  Quiches  of  Central
America  gathered  the  first-fruits  and  carried  them  to  the  priests  ;
moreover,  they  baked  loaves  or  cakes,  which  they  offered  to  the
idol  who  guarded  their  fields,  but  afterwards  these  cakes  were  given
to  the  poor  or  the  infirm  to  eat.^  The  chief  solemnity  of  the
Natchez,  an  Indian  tribe  on  the  Lower  Mississippi,  was  the  Harvest
Festival  or  the  Festival  of  New  Fire.  An  early  account  of  this  cere-
mony has  been  already  submitted  to  the  reader,^  but  it  may  not  be
amiss  to  add  here  for  comparison  the  later  description  by  Chateau-
briand, which  differs  from  the  other  in  some  particulars,  and  lays
stress  on  the  sacrifice  rather  than  on  the  sacrament  of  first-fruits.
According  to  Chateaubriand,  then,  when  the  time  for  the  festival
drew  near,  a  crier  went  through  the  villages  calling  upon  the  people
to  prepare  new  vessels  and  new  garments,  to  wash  their  houses,  and
to  burn  the  old  grain,  the  old  garments,  and  the  old  utensils  in  a

1  Tyerman   and   Bennet,  Journal  of  hardt,  Die  Korndanioneii,  p.  27.

Voyages  and  Travels,  i.  284.  ■'  Hyginus,  Fabiilae,  130.

^  Geiseler,  Z*?'^  Oester-Insel  i^^vYvd,  ^  Festus,    s.v.    "  Sacrima,"   p.   319,

1883),  p.  31.  ed.  Miiller  ;   Pliny,  Nat.  Hist,  xviii.  8.

^  E.  Tregear,  "The  Maoris  of  New  ""  James     Teit,     "The     Thompson

Zealand,"  yc?«r;;.   Anthrop.  Inst.    xix.  Indians  of  British  Columbia,"  J/^w^i/rj-

(1890),  p.   no.  of  the  American  Aluseiiin  of  Natural

^   Hariknoch,  Alt  unilneuesTreussen,  History,,  vol.  ii.  part  iv.  p.  345.

p.    161  ;    id.,    Disscrtationes    historicae  ^  Brasseur   de    Bourbourg,    Histoire

de  variis  rebus  Frussicis,   p.  163   (ap-  des  Nations  civilisdes  du  JMexique  et  de

pended    to    his    edition    of    Dusburg's  P Amdrique-Centrale,  ii.  566.

Chronicon  Prussiac).      Cp.   W.  Mann-  **  Above,  p.  332  sqq.


470  OFFERINGS  OF  FIRST-FRUITS  note  c

common  fire.  He  also  proclaimed  an  amnesty  to  criminals.  Next
day  he  appeared  again,  commanding  the  people  to  fast  for  three
days,  to  abstain  from  all  pleasures,  and  to  make  use  of  the  medicine
of  purification.  Thereupon  all  the  people  took  some  drops  ex-
tracted from  a  root  which  they  called  the  "root  of  blood."  It  was
a  kind  of  plantain  and  distilled  a  red  Uquor  which  acted  as  a  violent
emetic.  During  their  three  days'  fast  the  people  kept  silence.  At
the  end  of  it  the  crier  proclaimed  that  the  festival  would  begin  on
the  following  day.  So  next  morning,  as  soon  as  it  began  to  grow
light  in  the  sky,  the  people  streamed  from  all  quarters  towards  the
temple  of  the  Sun.  The  temple  was  a  large  building  with  two  doors,
one  opening  to  the  east,  the  other  to  the  west.  On  this  morning
the  eastern  door  of  the  temple  stood  open.  Facing  the  eastern  door
was  an  altar,  placed  so  as  to  catch  the  first  beams  of  the  rising  sun.
An  image  of  a  chouchouacha  (a-  small  marsupial)  stood  upon  the
altar ;  on  its  right  was  an  image  of  a  rattlesnake,  on  its  left  an  image
of  a  marmoset.  Before  these  images  a  fire  of  oak-bark  burned  per-
petually. Once  a  year  only,  on  the  eve  of  the  Harvest  Festival,  was
the  sacred  flame  suffered  to  die  out.  To  the  right  of  the  altar,  on  the
morning  of  this  holy  day,  stood  the  great  chief,  who  took  his  title
and  traced  his  descent  from  the  Sun.  To  the  left  of  the  altar  stood
his  wife.  Round  them  were  grouped,  according  to  their  ranks,  the
war  chiefs,  the  sachems,  the  heralds,  and  the  young  braves.  In
front  of  the  altar  were  piled  bundles  of  dry  reeds,  stacked  in  con-
centric rings.

The  high  priest,  standing  on  the  threshold  of  the  temple,  kept  his
eyes  fixed  on  the  eastern  horizon.  Before  presiding  at  the  festival
he  had  to  plunge  thrice  into  the  Mississippi.  In  his  hands  he  held
two  pieces  of  dry  wood  which  he  kept  rubbing  slowly  against  each
other,  muttering  magic  words.  At  his  side  two  acolytes  held  two
cups  filled  with  a  kind  of  black  sherbet.  All  the  women,  their
backs  turned  to  the  east,  each  leaning  with  one  hand  on  her  rude
mattock  and  supporting  her  infant  with  the  other,  stood  in  a  great
semicircle  at  the  gate  of  the  temple.  Profound  silence  reigned
throughout  the  multitude  while  the  priest  watched  attentively  the
growing  light  in  the  east.  As  soon  as  the  diffused  light  of  dawn
began  to  be  shot  with  beams  of  fire,  he  quickened  the  motion  of
the  two  pieces  of  wood  which  he  held  in  his  hands ;  and  at  the
moment  when  the  upper  edge  of  the  sun's  disc  appeared  above  the
horizon,  fire  flashed  from  the  wood  and  was  caught  in  tinder.  At
the  same  instant  the  women  outside  the  temple  faced  round  and
held  up  their  infants  and  their  mattocks  to  the  rising  sun.

The  great  chief  and  his  wife  now  drank  the  black  liquor.  The
priests  kindled  the  circle  of  dried  reeds ;  fire  was  set  to  the  heap
of  oak-bark  on  the  altar,  and  from  this  sacred  flame  all  the  hearths
of  the  village  were  rekindled.      No  sooner  were  the  circles  of  reeds


NOTEC  OFFERINGS  OF  FIRST-FRUITS  471

consumed  than  the  chief's  wife  came  forth  from  the  temple  and  '
placing  herself  at  the  head  of  the  women  marched  in  procession
to  the  harvest-fields,  whither  the  men  were  not  allowed  to  follow
them.  They  went  to  gather  the  first  sheaves  of  maize  and  returned
to  the  temple  bearing  them  on  their  heads.  Some  of  the  sheaves
they  presented  to  the  high  priest,  who  laid  them  on  the  altar.
Others  they  used  to  bake  the  unleavened  bread  which  was  to  be
eaten  in  the  evening.  The  eastern  door  of  the  sanctuary  was  now
closed,  and  the  western  door  was  opened.

When  day  began  to  decline,  the  multitude  assembled  once
more  at  the  temple,  this  time  at  its  western  gate,  where  they  formed
a  great  crescent,  with  the  horns  turned  towards  the  west.  The
unleavened  bread  was  held  up  and  presented  to  the  setting  sun,
and  a  priest  struck  up  a  hymn  in  praise  of  his  descending  light.
When  darkness  had  fallen  the  whole  plain  twinkled  with  fires,  round
which  the  people  feasted  ;  and  the  sounds  of  music  and  revelry
broke  the  silence  of  night.^

1  Chateaubriand,    Voyage  en  Amerique,   pp.    130- 136   (Michel   Levy,  Paris^
1870).


END    OF    VOL.    II


'  "\


Printed  by  R.  &  K.  Clark,  Limitkd,  Edinburgh


.-■>


BINDING  LIST    OCT  15


1^40


PBI


to

o

to


o


0)    rC


o

0)


o


S  p
u

g


V


University  of  Toronto
Library


DO  NOT

REMOVE

THE

CARD

FROM

THIS

POCKET
