# The White Goddess

*Extracted from The-White-Goddess.pdf*

---

R O B E RT  G R A V ES

T HE

W H I TE

G O D D E SS

IN  DEDICATION

A ll  saints  revile her, and  all sober men 
Ruled  by  the  G od  A p o l l o 's  golden  mean— 
In scorn  of which  I  sailed  to  find  her 
In  distant  regions  likeliest  to  hold  her 
W h om  I  desired  above  all  things  to  k n o w, 
Sister  of the  mirage  and  echo.

It was  a  virtue  not  to  stay, 
To  go  my  headstrong  and  heroic  w ay 
Seeking  her  out  at  the  volcano's  head, 
A m o ng  pack  ice,  or where  the  track had  faded 
B e y o nd  the  cavern  of the  seven  sleepers: 
W h o se broad  high  brow was  white  as  any  leper's, 
W h o se eyes were blue,  with  rowan-berry  lips, 
With  hair  curled  honey-coloured  to  white  hips.

Green sap  of Spring  in  the  y o u ng w o od  a-stir 
Will  celebrate  the  Mountain  Mother, 
A nd  every  song-bird  shout  awhile  for  her; 
But I  am gifted,  even  in  N o v e m b er 
R a w e st of seasons,  with  so  huge  a  sense 
Of her  nakedly  w o rn  magnificence 
I  forget  cruelty  and  past  betrayal, 
Careless  of  where  the  next  bright  bolt  may  fall.

F O R E W O RD

Iam  grateful  to  Philip  and  Sally  Graves,  Christopher  Hawkes,  J o hnF O R E W O RD

Iam  grateful  to  Philip  and  Sally  Graves,  Christopher  Hawkes,  J o hn

Knittel,  Valentin  Iremonger,  Max  Mallowan,  E.  M.  Parr,  Joshua 
P o d r o,  Lynette  Roberts,  Martin  Seymour-Smith,  J o hn  Heath-Stubbs 
and  numerous  correspondents,  w ho  have  supplied  me  with  source-
material  for  this  book:  and  to  Kenneth  G ay w ho  has  helped  me  to  arrange 
it.  Y et  since  the  first  edition  appeared  in  1946,  no  expert  in  ancient 
Irish  or  W e l sh  has  offered  me  the  least  help  in  refining  my  argument,  or 
pointed  out  any  of the  errors  which  are  bound  to  have  crept  into  the  text, 
or  even  acknowledged  my  letters.  I  am  disappointed,  though  not  really 
surprised.  T he  book  does  read  very  queerly:  but  then  of course  a  histori 
cal  grammar  of  the  language  of poetic  myth  has  never  previously  been 
attempted,  and to  write it conscientiously I have had  to face such  'puzzling 
questions,  though  not  beyond  all  conjecture',  as  Sir  T h o m as  B r o w ne 
instances  in  his  Hydriotaphia:  'what  song  the  Sirens  sang,  or  what  name 
Achilles  assumed  when  he hid  himself among  the  women.'  I  found  practi 
cal  and  unevasive  answers  to  these  and  many  other  questions  of the  same 
sort, such as:

W ho  cleft the D e v i l 's foot? 
When did the Fifty Danaids come with  their sieves to Britain? 
What secret was w o v en  into  the  Gordian  K n o t? 
W hy  did  Jehovah  create  trees  and  grass  before  he  created  the  Sun,

Moon and  stars?

Where shall  W i s d om be found?Moon and  stars?

Where shall  W i s d om be found?

But  it  is only fair to warn  readers  that this remains a very difficult book,  as 
well  as  a  very  queer  one,  to  be  avoided  by anyone with  a  distracted,  tired 
or  rigidly  scientific  mind.  I  have  not  cared  to  leave  out  any  step  in  the 
laborious  argument,  if only because  readers  of my  recent historical  novels 
have  g r o wn  a  little  suspicious  of unorthodox  conclusions  for  which  the 
authorities  are  not  always  quoted.  Perhaps  they will  now  be  satisfied,  for 
example,  that  the  mystical  Bull-calf formula  and  the  two  Tree-alphabets 
which  I  introduced  into  King  Jesus  are  not  'wanton  figments'  of  my 
imagination  but  logically deduced  from  reputable ancient documents.

My  thesis  is  that  the  language  of poetic  myth  anciently  current  in  the 
Mediterranean  and  Northern  E u r o pe  was  a  magical  language  bound  up 
with  popular  religious  ceremonies  in  honour  of  the  Moon-goddess,  or

99

Muse,  some  of them  dating  from  the  Old  Stone A g e,  and  that  this  remains 
die  language  of true  poetry—'true'  in  the  nostalgic  modern  sense  of  'the 
unimprovable  original,  not a  synthetic substitute'.  T he  language was  tam 
pered  with  in  late  Minoan  times  when  invaders  from  Central  Asia  began 
to  substitute  patrilinear  for  matrilinear institutions  and  remodel  or  falsify 
the  myths  to  justify  the  social  changes.  Then  came  the  early  Greek  philo 
sophers  w ho  were  strongly  opposed  to  magical  poetry as  threatening  their 
new  religion  of logic,  and  under  their  influence  a  rational  poetic  language 
(now  called  the  Classical)  was elaborated  in honour  of their  patron A p o l lo 
and  imposed  on  the world  as  the  last w o rd  in  spiritual  illumination:  a v i ew 
that has  prevailed  practically  ever since  in  European  schools  and  universi 
ties,  where  myths  are  n ow  studied  only  as  quaint  relics  of the  nursery  age 
of  mankind.

One  of the  most  uncompromising  rejections  of early  Greek  m y t h o l o gy 
was  made  by  Socrates.  Myths  frightened  or  offended  him;  he  preferred  to 
turn  his  back  on  them  and  discipline  his  mind  to  think  scientifically:  'to 
investigate  the  reason  of the  being  of everything—of everything  as  it  is, 
not  as  it  appears,  and  to  reject  all  opinions  of which  no  account  can  be 
given.'

Here is a typical passage from  Plato's Phaedrus,  ( C a r y 's  translation):

Phae.  Tell  me,  Socrates,  is  not  Boreas  reported  to  have  carried  off

Orithya  from  somewhere  about  this  part  of the  Hissus?

Socr.  So it is said.

Phae.  Must  it  not  have  been  from  this  spot?  for  the  water  here 
abouts  appears  beautiful,  clear  and  transparent,  and  well  suited  for 
damsels  to  sport  about.Phae.  Must  it  not  have  been  from  this  spot?  for  the  water  here 
abouts  appears  beautiful,  clear  and  transparent,  and  well  suited  for 
damsels  to  sport  about.

Socr.  N o,  but  lower  down,  as  much  as  two  or  three  stadia,  where  we 
cross  over  to  the  temple  of  the  Huntress,  and  where  there  is,  on  the 
v e ry spot, a kind  of altar sacred  to  Boreas.

Phae.  I  never  noticed  it.  But  tell  me,  by  Jupiter,  Socrates,  do  y ou

believe  that this  fabulous  account is  true?

Socr.  If I  disbelieved  it,  as  the  wise  do,  I  should  not  be  guilty  of any 
absurdity:  then  having  recourse  to  subtleties,  I  should  say  that  a  blast 
of  Boreas  threw  her  down  from  the  neighbouring  cliffs,  as  she  was 
sporting  with  Pharmacea,  and  that  having  thus  met  her  death  she  was 
said  to  have  been  carried  off by  Boreas,  or  from  Mars'  hill;  for  there  is 
also  another  report  that  she  was  carried  off  from  thence  and  not  from 
this  spot.  But  I,  for  my  part,  Phaedrus,  consider  such  things  as  pretty 
enough,  but  as  the  province  of  a  v e ry  curious,  painstaking,  and  not 
v e ry  happy  man,  and  for  no  other  reason  than  that  after  this  he  must 
set  us  right  as  to  the  form  of the  Hippocentaurs,  and  then  as  to  that  of 
the  Chimaera;  besides,  there  pours  in  upon  him  a  crowd  of  similar

1010

monsters,  G o r g o ns  and  Pegasuses,  and  other  monstrous  creatures, 
incredible  in  number  and  absurdity,  which  if  anyone  were  to  dis 
believe  and  endeavour  to  reconcile  each  with  probability,  employing 
for  this  purpose  a  kind  of  vulgar  cleverness,  he  will  stand  in  need  of 
abundant  leisure.  B ut  I  have  no  leisure  at  all  for  such  matters;  and  the 
cause  of  it,  my  friend,  is  this:  I  am  not  yet  able,  according  to  the 
Delphic  precept,  to  k n ow myself.  B ut it appears  to  me  to  be  ridiculous, 
while  I  am  still  ignorant  of  this,  to  busy  myself  about  matters  that  do 
not  concern  me.

T he  fact  was,  that  by  Socrates'  time  the  sense  of most  myths  belonging 
to  the  previous  epoch  was  either  forgotten  or  kept  a  close  religious 
secret,  though  they  were  still  preserved  pictorially  in  religious  art  and 
still  current  as  fairy-tales  from  which  the  poets  quoted.  W h en  invited  to 
believe  in  the  Chimaera,  the  horse-centaurs,  or  the  winged  horse  Pegasus, 
all  of  them  straight-forward  Pelasgian  cult-symbols,  a  philosopher  felt 
bound  to  reject  them  as  a-zoological  improbabilities;  and  because  he 
had  no  notion  of the  true  identity  of 'the  nymph  Orithya'  or  of the  history 
of  the  ancient  Athenian  cult  of  Boreas,  he  could  g i ve  only  an  inept 
naturalistic  explanation  of  her  rape  at  Mount  Ilissus:  'doubtless  she  was 
blown  off one  of the  cliffs  hereabouts  and  met  her  death  at  the  foot.'A ll  the  problems  that  Socrates  mentions  have  been  faced  in  this  book 
and  solved  to  my  o wn  satisfaction  at  least;  but  though  'a  v e ry  curious  and 
painstaking  person'  I  cannot  agree  that  I  am  any  less  happy  than  Socrates 
was,  or  that  I  have  more  leisure  than  he  had,  or  that  an  understanding  of 
the  language  of  myth  is  irrelevant  to  self-knowledge.  I  deduce  from  the 
petulant  tone  of  his  phrase  'vulgar  cleverness'  that  he  had  spent  a  long  time 
w o r r y i ng  about  the  Chimaera,  the  horse-centaurs  and  the  rest,  but  that 
the  'reasons  of  their  being'  had  eluded  him  because  he  was  no  poet  and 
mistrusted  poets,  and  because,  as  he  admitted  to  Phaedrus,  he  was  a  con 
firmed  townsman  w ho  seldom  visited  the  countryside:  'fields  and  trees 
will  not  teach  me  anything,  but  men  do.'  T he  study  of m y t h o l o g y,  as  I 
shall  show,  is  based  squarely  on  tree-lore  and  seasonal  observation  of life 
in  the  fields.

Socrates,  in  turning  his  back  on  poetic  myths,  was  really  turning  his 
back  on  the  Moon-goddess  w ho  inspired  them  and  w ho  demanded  that 
man  should  p ay  w o m an  spiritual  and  sexual  homage:  what  is  called 
Platonic  love,  the  philosopher's  escape  from  the  p o w er  of  the  Goddess 
into  intellectual  homosexuality,  was  really  Socratic  love.  He  could  not 
plead 
the  Arcadian  prophetess  w ho 
magically  arrested  the  plague  at  Athens,  had  reminded  him  once  that 
that  Moira, 
man's 
triad  of 
Hithyia  and  Callone—Death,  Birth  and  Beauty—formed  a

ignorance:  Diotima  Mantinice,

love  was  properly  directed

towards  w o m en  andignorance:  Diotima  Mantinice,

love  was  properly  directed

towards  w o m en  and

Goddesses  w ho  presided  o v er  all  acts  of generation  whatsoever:  physical, 
spiritual  or  intellectual.  In  the  passage  of  the  Symposium  where  Plato 
reports  Socrates'  account  of Diotima's  wise  w o r d s,  the  banquet  is  inter 
rupted  by  Alcibiades,  w ho  comes  in  v e ry  drunk  in  search  of  a  beautiful 
b oy  called  Agathon  and  finds  him  reclining  next  to  Socrates.  Presently 
he  tells  everyone  that  he  himself once  encouraged  Socrates,  w ho  was  in 
love  with  him,  to  an  act  of  sodomy  from  which,  however,  he  philo 
sophically  abstained,  remaining  perfectly  satisfied  with  night-long  chaste 
embraces  of  his  beloved's.beautiful  body.  Had  Diotima  been  present  to 
hear  this  she  would  have  made  a  w ry  face  and  spat  three  times  into  her 
bosom:  for  though  the  Goddess  as  Cybele  and  Ishtar  tolerated  s o d o my 
even  in  her own  temple-courts,  ideal  homosexuality was a  far more serious 
moral  aberrancy—it  was  the  male  intellect  trying  to  make  itself spiritually 
self-sufficient.  Her  revenge  on  Socrates—if  I  may  put  it  this  w a y — f or 
trying  to  k n ow  himself in  the  Apollonian  style  instead  of leaving  the  task 
to  a  wife  or  mistress,  was  characteristic:  she  found  him  a  shrew  for a  wife 
and  made  him  fix  his  idealistic  affections  on  this  same  Alcibiades,  w ho 
disgraced  him  by  growing  up  vicious,  godless,  treacherous  and  selfish— 
the  ruin  of  Athens.  She  ended  his  life  with  a  draught  of  the  white-
flowered,  mousey-smelling  hemlock,  a  plant  sacred  to  herself as  Hecate,
prescribed  him  by  his  fellow-citizens  in  punishment  for  his  corruption  of 
youth.  After  his  death  his  disciples  made  a  martyr  of him  and  under  their 
influence  myths  fell  into  still  greater  disrepute,  becoming  at  last  the  sub 
ject  of street-corner  witticisms  or  being  'explained  a w a y'  by  Euhemerus 
of Messenia  and  his  successors  as  corruptions  of history.  T he  Euhemerist 
account  of  the  Actaeon  myth,  for  instance,  is  that  he  was  an  Arcadian 
gentleman  w ho  was  so  addicted  to  hunting  that  the  expense  of  keeping  a 
pack  of hounds  ate  him  up.1

But  even  after  Alexander  the  Great  had  cut  the  Gordian  K n o t— an  act 
of  far  greater  moral  significance  than  is  generally  realized—the  ancient 
language  survived  purely  enough'in  the  secret  Mystery-cults  of Eleusis, 
Corinth,  Samothrace  and  elsewhere;  and  when  these  were  suppressed  by 
the  early  Christian  Emperors  it  was  still  taught  in  the  poetic  colleges  of 
Ireland  and  Wales,  and  in  the witch-covens  of Western  Europe.  As  a  p o p 
ular  religious  tradition  it  all  but  flickered  out  at  the  close  of  the  seven 
teenth  century:  and  though  poetry  of a  magical  quality  is  still  occasionally 
written,  even  in  industrialized  Europe,  this  always  results  from  an  in 
spired,  almost  pathological,  reversion  to  the  original  language—a  wild 
Pentecostal  'speaking  with  tongues'—rather  than  from  a  conscientious 
study  of its  grammar and  vocabulary.

English  poetic  education  should,  really,  begin  not  with  the  Canterbury 
Tales,  not  with  the  Odyssey,  not  even  with  Genesis,  but  with  the  Song  of

1  As  Shakespeare  knew.  See  Macbeth,  IV,

i,  25.

12

Amergin,  an  ancient  Celtic  calendar-alphabet,  found  in  several  purposely 
garbled  Irish  and  Welsh  variants,  which  briefly  summarizes  the  prime 
poetic myth. I have tentatively restored  the text as follows:

I  am  a  stag:  ofseven  tines, 
I  am  a  flood:  across  a  plain, 
I am a wind: on a deep lake, 
I am a tean the Sun lets fall, 
I am a hawk: above the cliff, 
I am a thorn: beneath the nail, 
I  am  a  wonder:  among  flowers, 
I am a wizard:  who but I 
Sets  the  cool head aflame  with  smoke?I am a spear: that roars for blood, 
I am a salmon: in a pool, 
I  am  a  lure: from paradise, 
I am a hill: where poets walk, 
I  am  a  boar:  ruthless  and red, 
I  am  a  breaker:  threatening doom, 
I am a tide: that drags to death, 
I am an infant:  who but I 
Peeps from the unhewn dolmen arch ?

I am the w o m b: of every holt, 
I  am  the  blaze:  on every hill, 
I  am  the  queen:  of  every  hire, 
I am the shield: for every head, 
I am the tomb: of every hope.

It  is  unfortunate  that,  despite  the  strong  mythical  element  in  Christian 
ity,  'mythical'  has  come  to  mean  'fanciful,  absurd,  unhistorical';  for  fancy 
piayed  a  negligible  part  in  the  development  of  the  Greek,  Latin  and 
Palestinian  myths,  or  of  the  Celtic  myths  until  the  Norman-French 
trovires  worked  them  up  into  irresponsible  romances  of  chivalry.  T h ey 
are  all  grave  records  of ancient  religious  customs  or  events,  and  reliable 
enough  as  history  once  their  language  is  understood  and  allowance  has 
been  made  for  errors  in  transcription,  misunderstandings  of  obsolete 
ritual,  and  deliberate  changes  introduced  for  moral  or  political  reasons. 
S o me  myths  of course  have  survived  in  a  far  purer  form  than  others;  for 
example,  the  Fables  of  H y g i n u s,  the  Library  of  Apollodorus  and  the 
earlier  tales  of the  Welsh  Mabinogion  make  easy  reading  compared  with 
the  deceptively  simple  chronicles  of  Genesis,  Exodus, Judges  and  Samuel. 
Perhaps  the  greatest  difficulty in solving  complex mythological  problems 
is that:

*3

Conquering  gods  their  titles  take 
F r om  the  foes  they captive  make,*3

Conquering  gods  their  titles  take 
F r om  the  foes  they captive  make,

and  that  to  k n ow  the  name  of a  deity  at  any  given  place  or  period,  is  far 
less  important  than  to  k n ow  the  nature  of the  sacrifices  that  he  or  she  was 
then  offered.  T he  powers  of the gods  were  continuously  being  redefined. 
T he  Greek  god  A p o l l o,  for  instance,  seems  to  have  begun  as  the  D e m on 
of a  Mouse-fraternity  in  pre-Aryan  totemistic  Europe:  he  gradually  rose 
in  divine  rank  by  force  of arms,  blackmail  and  fraud  until  he  became  the 
patron  of Music,  Poetry  and  the  Arts  and finally, in  some  regions  at  least, 
ousted  his  'father'  Zeus  from  the  Sovereignty  of the  Universe  by  identify 
ing himself with Belinus the intellectual G od of Light. J e h o v a h, the G od of 
the J e w s, has a still more complex history.' W h at  is  the  use  or  function  of poetry  nowadays?'  is  a  question  not  the 
less  poignant  for  being  defiandy  asked  by  so  many  stupid  people  or 
apologetically  answered  by  so  many  silly  people.  T he  function  of poetry 
is  religious  invocation  of  the  Muse;  its  use  is  the  experience  of  mixed 
exaltation  and  horror  that her  presence  excites.  But  'nowadays'?  Function 
and  use  remain  the  same;  only  the  application  has  changed.  T h is  was  once 
a  warning  to  man  that  he  must  keep  in  harmony  with  the  family  of living 
creatures  among  which  he  was  born,  by  obedience  to  the  wishes  of  the 
lady  of the  house;  it  is  n ow  a  reminder  that  he  has  disregarded  the  w a r n 
ing,  turned  the  house  upside  down  by  capricious  experiments  in  philo 
sophy,  science  and  industry,  and  brought  ruin  on  himself and  his  family. 
' N o w a d a y s'  is a civilization in  which  the prime emblems of poetry are dis 
honoured.  In  which  serpent,  lion  and  eagle  belong  to  the  circus-tent;  o x, 
salmon  and  boar  to  the  cannery;  racehorse  and  greyhound  to  the  betting 
ring;  and  the sacred  g r o ve  to  die saw-mill.  In which  the  Moon  is  despised 
as  a  burned-out  satellite  of  the Earth  and  woman  reckoned  as  'auxiliary 
State  personnel'.  In  which  money  will  b uy almost  anything  but  truth,  and 
almost  anyone  but  the  truth-possessed  poet.Call  me,  if  y ou  like,  the  fox  w ho  has  lost  his  brush;  I  am  n o b o d y 's 
servant  and  have  chosen  to  live  on  the  outskirts  of a  Majorcan  mountain-
village,  Catholic  but  anti-ecclesiastical,  where  life  is  still  ruled  by  the  old 
agricultural  cycle.  Without  my  brush,  namely  my  contact  with  urban 
civilization,  all  that  I  write  must  read  perversely  and  irrelevantly  to  such 
of  y ou  as  are  still  geared  to  the  industrial  machine,  whether  direcdy  as 
workers,  managers,  traders  or  advertisers  or  indirecdy  as  civil  servants, 
publishers,  journalists,  schoolmasters  or  employees  of  a  radio  corpora 
tion.  If  y ou  are  poets,  y ou  will  realize  that  acceptance  of  my  historical 
thesis  commits  y ou  to  a  confession  of disloyalty which  y ou  will  be  loth  to 
make;  y ou  chose  y o ur  jobs  because  they  promised  to  provide  y ou  with  a 
steady  income  and  leisure  to  render  the  Goddess  w h om  y ou  adore

M

valuable  part-time  service.  W ho  am  I,  y ou  will  ask,  to  warn  y ou  that  she 
demands  either  whole-time  service  or  none  at  all?  A nd  do  I  suggest  that 
y ou  should  resign  y o ur  jobs  and  for  want  of sufficient  capital  to  set  up  as 
small-holders,  turn  romantic  shepherds—as  D on  Quixote  did  after  his 
failure  to  come  to  terms  with  the modern w o r l d— in  remote  unmechanized 
farms?  N o,  my  brushlessness  debars  me  from  offering  any  practical 
suggestion.  I  dare  attempt  only  a  historical  statement  of  the  problem; 
h ow  y ou  come  to  terms  with  the  Goddess  is  no  concern  of mine.  I  do  not 
even k n ow  that y ou  are  serious  in  y o ur poetic profession.

R.  G.

Deya,

Mallorca, 
Spain.

Chapter  One

POETS  A ND  G L E E M EN

Since  the  age  of fifteen  poetry  has  been  my  ruling  passion  and  I  haveR.  G.

Deya,

Mallorca, 
Spain.

Chapter  One

POETS  A ND  G L E E M EN

Since  the  age  of fifteen  poetry  has  been  my  ruling  passion  and  I  have

never  intentionally  undertaken  any  task  or  formed  any  relationship 
that  seemed  inconsistent with  poetic  principles;  which  has  sometimes 
w on  me  the  reputation  of an  eccentric.  Prose  has  been  my  livelihood,  but 
I  have  used  it  as  a  means  of sharpening  my sense  of the  altogether  different 
nature  of  poetry,  and  the  themes  that  I  choose  are  always  linked  in  my 
mind  with  outstanding  poetic  problems.  At  the  age  of sixty-five  I  am  still 
amused  at  the  paradox  of  poetry's  obstinate  continuance  in  the  present 
phase  of civilization.  T h o u gh  recognized  as  a  learned  profession  it  is  the 
only  one  for  the  study  of which  no  academies  are  open  and  in  which  there 
is  no  yard-stick,  however  crude,  by  which  technical  proficiency  is  con 
sidered  measurable.  'Poets  are  born,  not  made.'  T he  deduction  that  one  is 
expected  to  draw  from  this  is  that  the  nature  of poetry  is  too  mysterious 
to  bear examination:  is,  indeed,  a  greater mystery  even  than  royalty,  since 
kings  can be made  as  well  as  born  and  the  quoted  utterances  of a dead  king 
carry  little weight  either  in  the  pulpit  or  the  public  bar.T he  paradox  can  be  explained  by  the  great  official  prestige  that  still 
somehow  clings  to  the  name  of poet,  as  it  does  to  the  name  of king,  and  by 
the  feeling  that  poetry,  since  it  defies  scientific  analysis,  must  be  rooted  in 
some  sort  of magic,  and  that  magic  is  disreputable.  European  poetic  lore 
is,  indeed,  ultimately  based  on  magical  principles,  the  rudiments  of which 
formed  a  close  religious  secret  for  centuries but which  were  at last garbled, 
discredited  and  forgotten.  N ow  it  is  only  by  rare  accidents  of  spiritual 
regression  that  poets  make  their lines  magically  potent in  the ancient sense. 
Otherwise,  the  contemporary  practice  of  poem-writing  recalls  the  medi-
aevalalchemist's fantastic and  foredoomed experiments in  transmuting base 
metal  into  gold;  except  that the  alchemist  did  at  least  recognize  pure  gold 
when he saw and  handled  it. T he  truth is that only gold ore can be turned into 
gold;  only poetry into poems.  This book is about the rediscovery of the lost 
rudiments, and about the active principles  of poetic magic that govern them.

My  argument  will  be  based  on  a  detailed  examination  of  two  extra 
ordinary  Welsh  minstrel  poems  of  the  thirteenth  century,  in  which  the 
clues  to  this ancient secret are ingeniously concealed.

1717

By  w ay  of  historical  introduction,  a  clear  distinction  must  first  be 
drawn  between  the  court-bards  and  the  wandering  minstrels  of  ancient 
Wales.  T he Welsh  bards,  or master-poets,  like the Irish, had  a  professional 
tradition,  embodied  in  a  corpus  of poems  which,  literally  memorized  and 
carefully  weighed,  they  passed  on  to  the  pupils  w ho  came  to  study  under 
them.  T he  English  poets  of to-day,  whose  language  began  as  a  despised 
late-mediaeval  vernacular  when  Welsh  poetry  was  already  a  hoary 
institution,  may  e n vy  them  in  retrospect:  the  y o u ng  poet  was  spared  the 
curse  of having  doubtfully  to  build  up  his  poetic  lore  for  himself by  hap 
hazard  reading,  consultation  with  equally  doubtful  friends,  and  experi 
mental  writing.  Latterly,  h o w e v e r,  it  was  only  in  Ireland  that  a  master-
poet  was  expected,  or  even  permitted,  to  write  in  an  original  style.  W h en 
the  Welsh  poets  were  converted  to  orthodox  Christianity  and  subjected 
to  ecclesiastical  discipline—a  process  completed  by  the  tenth  century,  as 
the  contemporary  Welsh  L a ws  show—their  tradition  gradually  ossified. 
T h o u gh  a  high  degree  of technical  skill  was  still  required  of master-poets 
and  the  Chair  of Poetry  was  h o dy  contested  in  the  various  Courts,  they 
were  pledged  to  avoid  what  the  Church  called  'untruth',  meaning  the 
dangerous  exercise  of poetic  imagination  in  myth  or allegory.  O n ly certain 
epithets  and  metaphors  were  authorized;  themes  were  similarly  restricted, 
metres  fixed,  and  Cynghanedd,  the  repetitive  use  of consonantal  sequences 
with  variation  of v o w e l s1,  became  a  burdensome  obsession.  T he  master-
poets  had  become  court-officials,  their  first  obligation  being  to  praise 
G o d,  their  second  to  praise  the  king  or  prince  w ho  had  provided  a  Chair 
for  them  at  his  royal  table.  E v en  after  the  fall  of the  Welsh  princes  in  the 
late  thirteenth  century  this  barren  poetic  code  was  maintained  by  the 
family bards  in  noble  houses.T.  G w y nn  Jones  writes  in  The  Transactions  of  the  Honourable  Society  of

Cymmrodorion (1913—1914):

T he  few  indications  which  m ay  be  gathered  from  the  w o r ks  of  the 
bards,  d o wn  to  the  fall  of  the  Welsh  princes,  imply  that  the  system 
detailed  in  the  L a ws  was  preserved,  but  probably  with  progressive 
modification.  T he  Llyfr  Coch  Hergest  metrical  C o de  shows  a  still 
further  development,  which  in  the  fifteenth  century  resulted  in  the 
T he subject  tradition  recorded  in  this  C o d e, 
Carmarthen Eisteddfod

1  Cynghanedd may  be  illustrated  in  English  thus:

Billet spied, 
Bolt  sped. 
Across  field 
C r o ws f l e d, 
Aloft,  wounded, 
Left  one  dead.

But  the  corresponden ce  of  the  ss  in  'across'  and  the  J  of  'crows',  which  has  a  V  sound 
would  offend  the  purist.

18But  the  corresponden ce  of  the  ss  in  'across'  and  the  J  of  'crows',  which  has  a  V  sound 
would  offend  the  purist.

18

practically  restricting  the  bards  to  the  writing  of eulogies  and  elegies, 
and  excluding  the  narrative,  is  proved  to  have  been  observed  by  the 
Gogynfeirdd  [court-bards].  Their  adherence  to  what  they  conceived 
to  be  historical  truth  was  probably  due  to  the  early  capture  of  their 
organization  by  ecclesiastics.  T h ey  made  practically  no  use  of  the 
traditional  material  contained  in  the  popular  Romances,  and  their 
knowledge  of  the  names  of  mythical  and  quasi-historical  characters 
was  principally  derived  from  the  Triads.  .  .  .  Nature  poetry  and  love 
poetry  are  only  incidental  in  their  w o r k s,  and  they  show  practically  no 
development  during  the  p e r i o d . ..  .  References  to  nature  in  the  poems 
of the  court-bards  are  brief and  casual,  and  mostly  limited  to  its  more 
rugged  aspects—the  conflict  of sea  and  strand,  the  violence  of winter 
storms,  the  burning  of  spring  growths  on  the  mountains.  T he  char 
acters  of their  heroes  are  only  indicated  in  epithets;  no  incident  is  com 
pletely  described;  battles  are  dismissed  in  a  line  or  two  at  most.  T h e ir 
theory  of poetry,  particularly  in  the  eulogy,  seems  to  have  been  that  it 
should  consist  of  epithets  and  allusions,  resuming  the  bare  facts  of 
history,  presumably  k n o wn  to  their  hearers.  T h ey  never  tell  a  story; 
they  rarely  even  g i ve  anything  approaching  a  coherent  description  of a 
single  episode.  Such,  indeed,  has  been  the  character  of  most  Welsh 
verse,  outside  the  popular  ballads,  practically  d o wn  to  the  present  day.T he  tales  and  Romances,  on  the  other  hand,  are  full  of  colour  and 
incident;  even  characterization  is  not  absent  from  them.  In  them,  fancy, 
not  affected  by  restrictions  applying  both  to  subject  and  form,  develops 
into  imagination.

T h e se  tales  were  told  by  a  guild  of Welsh  minstrels  whose  status  was 
not  regularized  by  the  L a w s,  w ho  counted  no  bishops  or  ministers  of 
State  among  their  associates,  and  w ho  were  at  liberty  to  use  whatever 
diction,  themes  and  metres  they  pleased.  V e ry  little  is  k n o wn  about  their 
organization  or  history,  but  since  they  were  popularly  credited  with 
divinatory and  prophetic  gifts  and  the  power  of injurious  satire  it  is  likely 
that  they  were  descended  from  the  original  Welsh  master-poets  w ho 
either  refused  or  were  refused  court-patronage  after  the  C y m r ic  conquest 
of  Wales.  T he  C y m r y,  w h om  we  think  of as  the  real  Welsh,  and  from 
whom  the  proud  court-bards  were  recruited,  were  a  tribal  aristocracy  of 
Brythonic  origin  holding  d o wn  a serf-class  that  was  a  mixture  of Goidels, 
Brythons,  Bronze  A ge  and  N ew  Stone  A ge  peoples  and  Aboriginals; 
they  had  invaded  Wales  from  the  North  of England  in  the  fifth  century 
A . D.  T he  n o n - C y m r ic  minstrels  went  from  village  to  village,  or  farm 
house  to  farm-house,  entertaining  under  the  trees  or  in  the  chimney 
corner according to  the season. It was they w ho kept alive an astonishingly 
ancient  literary  tradition,  mainly  in  the  form  of popular  tales  which  pre-

19

served  fragments  not  only  of  pre-Cymric,  but  of  pre-Goidelic  myth, 
some  of which  goes  back as  far  as  the  Stone  A g e.  Their  poetic  principles 
are  summed  up  in  a  Triad  in  the  Llyfi  Coch  Hergest  ( ' T he  R ed  B o ok  of 
Hergest'):Three things that enrich the poet: 
Myths, poetic power,  a  store ofancient verse.

T he  two  poetic schools  did  not at first come  in  contact,  the  'big-bellied' 
well-dressed  court-bards  being  forbidden  to  compose  in  the  minstrel 
style  and  penalized  if they  visited  any  but  the  houses  of princes  or  nobles; 
the  lean  and  ragged  minstrels  not  being  privileged  to  perform  at  any  court, 
nor  trained  to  use  the  complicated  verse-forms  required  of  the  court-
bards.  H o w e v e r,  in  the  thirteenth  century  the  minstrels  were  taken  up  by 
the  Norman-French  invaders,  apparently  through  the  influence  of Breton 
knights  w ho  could  understand  Welsh  and  w ho  recognized  some  of  the 
tales  as  better  versions  of  those  which  they  had  heard  at  home.  T he 
trovires,  or  finders, 
into  contemporary  French  and 
them 
adapted  them  to  the  Provencal  code  of  chivalry,  and  in  their  new  dress 
they  conquered  Europe.

translated

Welsh  and  N o r m an  families  n ow  intermarried  and  it  was  no  longer easy 
to  keep  the  minstrel  out  of  the  courts.  In  an  early  thirteenth-century 
poem  one  Phylip  B r y d y dd  records  a  contention  between  himself  and 
certain  'vulgar  rhymesters'  as  to  w ho  should  first  present  a  song  on 
Christmas  D ay  to  his  patron,  Prince  R h ys  Ieuanc  at  Llanbadarn  F a wr  in 
South  Wales.  Prince  R h ys  was  a  close  ally  of  the  Normans.  T he  two 
thirteenth-century  poems  which  will  be  here  examined  are  the  w o rk  of a 
'vulgar  rhymester'—vulgar  at  least  by  Phylip's  aristocratic  canon  of what 
a  poet  should  be.  T h ey  are  called  the  Cad  Goddeu  and  the Hanes  Taliesin.

By  the  fourteenth  century  the  literary  influence  of  the  minstrels  began

love-poems,

from  satires,By  the  fourteenth  century  the  literary  influence  of  the  minstrels  began

love-poems,

from  satires,

to  show  even  in  court  poetry,  and  according  to  fourteenth-century  v e r 
sions  of  the  bardic  statute,  Trioedd  Kerdd,  the  Prydydd,  or  court-bard, 
lampoons, 
though  debarred 
might  write 
charms,  divination,  or  lays  of magic.  It  was  not  until  the  fifteenth  century 
that  the  poet  D a v y dd  ap  G w i l ym  w on  approval  for  a  new  form,  the 
Kywydd,  in  which  court  poetry  and  minstrel  poetry  are  united.  F or  the 
most  part  the  court-poets  would  not  modify  their  obsolescent  practice; 
remaining  scornful  and  jealous  of  the  favour  shown  to  'tellers  of  un 
truth'.  Their  position  declined  with 
their 
authority  finally  collapsed  as  a  result  of the  Civil  Wars,  in  which  Wales 
favoured  the  losing  side,  shortly  before  the  Cromwellian  conquest  of 
Ireland  also  broke  the  power  of  the  ollaves,  or  master-poets,  there.  Its 
revival  in  the  bardic  Gorsedd  of the  National  Eisteddfod  is  somewhat  of a 
mock-antique,  coloured  by  early  nineteenth-century  misconceptions  of

that  of  their  patrons  and

20

Druidic  practice;  yet  the  Eisteddfod  has  served  to  keep  alive  a  public 
sense  of the  honour  due  to  poets,  and  contests  for  the  bardic  Chair are  as 
keen as ever.20

Druidic  practice;  yet  the  Eisteddfod  has  served  to  keep  alive  a  public 
sense  of the  honour  due  to  poets,  and  contests  for  the  bardic  Chair are  as 
keen as ever.

English  poetry  has  had  only  a  short  experience  of  similar  bardic 
discipline:  the  Classicism  of the  eighteenth  century,  when  highly  stylized 
diction  and  metre  and  'decorum'  of  theme  were  insisted  upon  by  the 
admirers  and  imitators  of Alexander  P o p e.  A  violent  reaction  followed, 
the  'Romantic  R e v i v a l ';  then  another  partial  return  to  discipline,  V i c 
torian  Classicism;  then  a  still  more  violent  reaction,  the  'modernistic' 
anarchy  of the  1920's  and  1930's.  English  poets  now  appear  to  be  con 
sidering  a  voluntary  return  to  discipline:  not  to  the  eighteenth-century 
strait-jacket,  nor  to  the  Victorian  frock-coat,  but  to  that  logic  of  poetic 
thought  which  gives  a  poem  strength  and  grace.  But  where  can  they 
study  metre,  diction,  and  theme?  Where  can  they find any  poetic  govern 
ment  to  which  they  may  yield  a  willing  loyalty?  Metre,  they  would  all 
probably  agree,  is  the  norm  to  which  a  poet  relates  his  personal  rhythm, 
the  original  copybook  copper-plate  from  which  he  gradually  develops  a 
unique personal  handwriting;  unless  such  a  norm  is  assumed,  his  rhythmic 
idiosyncrasies  are  meaningless.  T h ey  would  also  probably  agree  about 
diction,  that  it  should  be  neither  over-stylized  nor  vulgar.  But  what  of 
theme?  W ho  has  ever  been  able  to  explain  what  theme  is  poetic  and  what 
is unpoetic,  except by the effect that it has on  the  reader?T he  rediscovery  of the  lost  rudiments  of poetry  may  help  to  solve  the 
question  of theme:  if they  still  have  validity  they  confirm  the  intuition  of 
the  Welsh  poet A l un  L e w is  w ho  wrote  just  before  his  death  in  Burma,  in

March  1944,  o f ' t he single  poetic theme  of Life  and  Death 
the  question 
of  what  survives  of  the  beloved.'  Granted  that  there  are  many  themes 
for  the  journalist  of verse,  yet  for  the  poet,  as  A l un  L e w is  understood  the 
w o r d,  there  is  no  choice.  T he  elements  of  the  single  infinitely  variable 
Theme  are  to  be  found  in  certain  ancient  poetic  myths  which  though 
manipulated  to  conform  with  each  epoch  of  religious  change—I  use  the 
word  'myth'  in  its  strict  sense  of 'verbal  iconograph'  without  the  deroga 
tory  sense  of 'absurd  fiction'  that  it  has  acquired—yet  remain  constant  in 
general  outline.  Perfect  faithfulness  to  the  T h e me  affects  the  reader  of a 
poem  with  a  strange  feeling,  between  delight  and  horror,  of  which  the 
purely  physical  effect  is  that  the  hair  literally  stands  on  end.  A.  E.  Hous-
man's  test  of a  true  poem  was  simple  and  practical:  does  it  make  the  hairs 
of one's  chin  bristle if one repeats  it silently while shaving?  But  he  did  not 
explain  why the hairs should  bristle.

T he  ancient  Celts  carefully  distinguished  the  poet,  w ho  was  originally 
a  priest  and  judge  as  well  and  whose  person  was  sacrosanct,  from  the 
mere gleeman.  He was in Irish called fili, a seer;  in Welsh derwydd,  or oak-
seer,  which  is  the  probable  derivation  of ' D r u i d '.  E v en  kings  came  under

2121

his  moral  tutelage.  W h en  t wo  armies  engaged  in  battle,  the  poets  of both 
sides  would  withdraw  together  to  a  hill  and  there  judiciously  discuss  the 
fighting.  In  a  sixth-century  Welsh  poem,  the  Gododin,  it  is  remarked  that 
'the  poets  of the  world  assess  the  men  of  valour';  and  the  combatants— 
w h om  they  often  parted  by  a  sudden  intervention—would  afterwards 
accept  their  version  of  the  fight,  if  worth  commemorating  in  a  poem, 
with  reverence  as well  as  pleasure.  T he  gleeman,  on  the  other hand,  was  a 
Joculator,  or  entertainer,  not  a  priest:  a  mere  client  of the  military  oligarchs 
and  without  the  poet's  arduous  professional  training.  He  would  often 
make  a  variety  turn  of  his  performance,  with  mime  and  tumbling.  In 
W a l es  he  was  styled  an  eirchiad,  or  suppliant,  one  w ho  does  not  belong 
to  an endowed  profession  but is  dependent  for his  living  on  the  occasional 
generosity  of  chieftains.  As  early  as  the  first  century  B.C.  we  hear  from 
Poseidonius  the  Stoic  of a  bag  of gold  flung  to  a  Celtic  gleeman  in  G a u l, 
and  this  at  a  time  when  the  Druidic  system  was  at  its  strongest  there.  If 
the  gleeman's  flattery  of his  patrons  were  handsome  enough  and  his  song 
sweetly  enough  attuned  to  their  mead-sodden  minds,  they  would  load 
him  with  gold  torques  and  honey  cakes;  if not,  they  would  pelt  him  with 
beef bones.  But  let  a  man  offer  the  least  indignity  to  an  Irish  poet,  even 
centuries  after  he  had  forfeited  his  priestly  functions  to  the  Christian 
cleric,  and  he  would  compose  a  satire  on  his  assailant  which  would  bring 
out  black  blotches  on  his  face  and  turn  his  bowels  to  water,  or  throw  a 
'madman's  w i s p'  in  his  face  and  drive  him  insane;  and  surviving  examples 
of the  cursing  poems  of the  Welsh  minstrels  show  that  they  were  also  to 
be  reckoned  with.  T he  court-poets  of  Wales,  on  the  other  hand,  were 
forbidden  to  use  curses  or  satires,  and  had  to  depend  on  legal  redress  for 
any  insult  to  their  dignity:  according  to  a  tenth-century  digest  of  laws 
affecting  the  Welsh  'household  bard'  they  could  demand  an  eric  of  'nine 
cows,  and  nine-score  pence  of  money  besides*.  T he  figure  nine  recalls 
the  nine-fold  Muse,  their  former  patroness.In  ancient  Ireland  the  ollave,  or  master-poet,  sat  next  to  the  king  at 
table  and  was  privileged,  as  none  else  but  the  queen  was,  to  wear  six 
different  colours  in  his  clothes.  T he  w o rd  'bard',  which  in  mediaeval 
Wales  stood  for  a  master-poet,  had  a  different  sense  in  Ireland,  where  it 
meant  an  inferior  poet  w ho  had  not  passed  through  the  'seven  degrees  of 
wisdom'  which  made  him  an  ollave  after  a  v e ry  difficult  twelve-year 
course.  T he  position  of  the  Irish  bard  is  defined  in  the  seventh-century 
Sequel  to  the  Crith  Gabhlach  Law:  'A  bard  is  one  without  lawful  learning 
but  his  own  intellect';  but  in  the  later  Book  of Ollaves  (bound  up  in  the 
fourteenth-century  Book  of  Ballymote)  it  is  made  clear  that  to  have  got  as 
far  as  the  seventh  year  of  his  poetic  education  entitled  a  student  to  the 
'failed  B . A .'  dignity  of  bardism.  He  had  memorized  only  half  the  pre 
scribed  tales  and  poems,  had  not  studied  advanced  prosody  and  metrical

22

composition,  and  was  deficient  in  knowledge  of O ld  G o i d e l ic  H o w e v e r, 
the  seven  years'  course  that  he  had  taken  was  a  great  deal  more  severe 
than  that  insisted  upon  in  the  poetic  schools  of  Wales,  where  the  bards 
had  a  proportionately  lower  status.  According  to  the  Welsh  L a w s,  the 
Penkerdd,  or  Chief Bard,  was  only  the  tenth  dignitary  at  C o u rt  and  sat  on 
the  left  of  the  Heir  Apparent,  being  reckoned  equal  in  honour  with  the 
Chief Smith.T he  Irish  ollave's  chief interest  was  the  refinement  of complex  poetic 
truth  to  exact  statement.  He  k n ew  the  history  and  mythic  value  of e v e ry 
w o rd  he used  and  can  have  cared  nothing  for  the  ordinary  man's  apprecia 
tion  of his  w o r k;  he  valued  only  the  judgement  of his  colleagues,  w h om 
he  seldom  met without a  lively exchange  of poetic wit in extempore  verse. 
Y et  it  cannot  be  pretended  that  he  was  always  true  to  the  T h e m e.  His 
education,  which  was  a  v e ry  general  one,  including  history,  music,  law, 
science  and  divination,  encouraged  him  to  versify  in  all  these  depart 
ments  of knowledge;  so  that  often  O g ma  the  G od  of Eloquence  seemed 
more  important  than  Brigit,  the  Three-fold  Muse.  A nd  it  is  a  paradox 
that  in  mediaeval  Wales  the  admired  court-poet  had  become  a  client  of the 
prince  to  w h om  he  addressed  formal  begging  odes  and  forgotten  the 
T h e me  almost  entirely;  while  the  despised  and  unendowed  minstrel  w ho 
seemed  to  be  a  mere  gleeman  showed  the  greater  poetic  integrity,  even 
though his verse was not so highly polished.T he  A n g l o - S a x o ns  had  no  sacrosanct  master-poets,  but  only  gleemen; 
and  English  poetic  lore  is  borrowed  at  third  hand,  by  w ay  of the  Norman 
French  romances,  from  ancient  British,  Gallic  and  Irish  sources.  T h is 
explains  w hy  there  is  not  the  same  instinctive  reverence  for  the  name  of 
poet  in  the  English  countryside  as  there  is  in  the  remotest  parts  of Wales, 
Ireland and  the Highlands. English  poets feel  obliged to apologize  for their 
calling  except  when  m o v i ng  in  literary  circles;  they  describe  themselves 
to  the  registrar,  or  when  giving  evidence  in  a  law-court,  as  civil  ser 
vants,  journalists,  schoolmasters,  novelists,  or  whatever  else  they  happen 
to  be  besides  poets.  E v en  the  English  poet-laureateship  was  not  instituted 
until  the  reign  of Charles  I.  (John  Skelton's  laurel-crown  was  a  university 
award  for  Latin  eloquence  unconnected  with  Henry  VILI's  patronage  of 
him  as  a  poet.)  It  does  not  carry  with  it  any  authority  over  national 
poetic  practice  or  any  obligation  to  preserve  the  decencies  of poetry,  and 
is  awarded,  without  a  contest,  by  the  First  L o rd  of the  Treasury,  not  by 
any  learned  society.  Nevertheless  many  English  poets  have  written 
with  exquisite  technical  skill,  and  since  the  twelfth  century  no  genera 
tion  has  been  entirely  faithless  to  the  Theme.  T he  fact  is  that  though 
the  A n g l o - S a x o ns  broke  the  power  of  the  ancient  British  chieftains  and 
poets  they  did  not  exterminate  the  peasants,  so  that  the  continuity  of 
the 
the  ancient  British  festal  system  remained  unaffected  even  when

2323

A n g l o - S a x o ns  professed  Christianity.  English  social  life  was  based  on 
agriculture,  grazing,  and  hunting,  not  on  industry,  and  the  T h e me  was 
still  everywhere  implicit  in  the  popular  celebration  of  the  festivals  now 
k n o wn  as  Candlemas,  L a dy D a y,  M ay  D a y,  Midsummer  D a y,  Lammas, 
Michaelmas, A l l - H a l l o w e ' e n, and  Christmas; it was also secretly preserved 
as  religious  doctrine  in  the  covens  of the  anti-Christian  witch-cult.  T h us 
the  English,  though  with  no  traditional  respect  for  the  poet,  have  a  tradi 
tional  awareness  of the T h e m e.T he  T h e m e,  briefly,  is  the  antique  story,  which  falls  into  thirteen 
chapters  and  an  epilogue,  of the  birth,  life,  death  and  resurrection  of  the 
G od  of the  W a x i ng  Y e a r;  the  central  chapters  concern  the  G o d 's  losing 
battle  with  the  G od  of the  Waning  Y e ar  for  love  of the  capricious  and  all-
powerful  Threefold  Goddess,  their  mother,  bride  and  layer-out.  T he  poet 
identifies  himself with  the  G od  of the  W a x i ng  Y e ar  and  his  Muse  with  the 
Goddess;  the  rival  is  his  blood-brother,  his  other  self,  his  weird.  A ll  true 
poetry—true  by  Housman's  practical  test—celebrates  some  incident  or 
scene  in  this  v e ry  ancient  story,  and  the  three  main  characters  are  so  much 
a  part  of  our  racial  inheritance  that  they  not  only  assert  themselves  in 
poetry  but  recur  on  occasions  of  emotional  stress  in  the  form  of  dreams, 
paranoiac  visions  and  delusions.  T he  weird,  or  rival,  often  appears  in 
nightmare  as  the  tall,  lean,  dark-faced  bed-side  spectre,  or  Prince  of  the 
A i r,  w ho  tries  to  drag  the  dreamer  out  through  the  window,  so  that  he 
looks  back and  sees his  b o dy still  lying  rigid  in  bed;  but he  takes  countless 
other  malevolent  or  diabolic  or  serpent-like  forms.T he  Goddess  is  a  lovely,  slender  woman  with  a  hooked  nose,  deathly 
pale  face,  lips  red  as  rowan-berries,  startlingly  blue  eyes  and  long  fair 
hair;  she  will  suddenly  transform  herself  into  sow,  mare,  bitch,  vixen, 
she-ass,  weasel,  serpent,  o w l,  she-wolf,  tigress,  mermaid  or  loathsome 
hag.  Her  names  and  titles  are  innumerable.  In  ghost  stories  she  often 
figures  as  ' T he  White  L a d y ',  and  in  ancient  religions,  from  the  British 
Isles  to  the  Caucasus,  as  the  'White  Goddess'.  I  cannot  think  of any  true 
poet  from  Homer  onwards  w ho  has  not  independently  recorded  his 
experience  of  her.  T he  test  of  a  poet's  vision,  one  might  say,  is  the 
accuracy  of  his  portrayal  of  the  White  Goddess  and  of  the  island  over 
which  she  rules.  T he  reason  w hy  the  hairs  stand  on  end,  the  eyes  water, 
the  throat  is  constricted,  the  skin  crawls  and  a  shiver  runs  down  the  spine 
when  one writes  or  reads  a  true  poem  is  that  a  true  poem  is  necessarily  an 
invocation  of the  White  Goddess,  or  Muse,  the  Mother  of A ll  L i v i n g,  the 
ancient  power  of  fright  and  lust—the  female  spider  or  the  queen-bee 
whose  embrace  is  death.  Housman  offered  a  secondary  test  of true  poetry: 
whether  it  matches  a  phrase  of  Keats's,  'everything  that  reminds  me  of 
her goes  through  me  like  a  spear'.  T h is  is  equally  pertinent  to  the  Theme. 
Keats  was  writing  under  the  shadow  of  death  about  his  Muse,  F a n ny

24

Brawne;  and  the  'spear  that  roars  for  blood'  is  the  traditional  weapon  of 
the  dark  executioner  and  supplanter.24

Brawne;  and  the  'spear  that  roars  for  blood'  is  the  traditional  weapon  of 
the  dark  executioner  and  supplanter.

Sometimes,  in  reading  a  poem,  the  hairs  will  bristle  at  an  apparently 
unpeopled  and  eventless  scene  described  in  it,  if the  elements  bespeak  her 
unseen  presence  clearly  enough:  for  example,  when  owls  hoot,  the  moon 
rides  like  a ship  through scudding cloud,  trees  s w ay slowly together above 
a  rushing  waterfall,  and  a  distant  barking  of dogs  is  heard;  or  when  a  peal 
of bells  in  frosty  weather  suddenly  announces  the  birth  of the  N ew  Y e a r. 
Despite  the  deep  sensory  satisfaction  to  be  derived  from  Classical 
poetry,  it  never  makes  the  hair  rise  and  the  heart  leap,  except  where  it 
fails  to  maintain  decorous  composure;  and  this  is  because  of the  difference 
between  the  attitudes  of  the  Classical  poet,  and  of  the  true  poet,  to  the 
White  Goddess.  This  is  not  to  identify  the  true  poet  with  the  Romantic 
poet.  'Romantic',  a  useful  word  while  it  covered  the  reintroduction  into 
Western Europe, by  the writers  of verse-romances,  of a  mystical  reverence 
for woman, has  become  tainted  by indiscriminate use.  T he  typical  R o m a n 
tic  poet  of  the  nineteenth  century  was  physically  degenerate,  or  ailing, 
addicted  to  drugs  and  melancholia,  critically  unbalanced  and  a  true  poet 
only  in  his  fatalistic  regard  for  the  Goddess  as  the  mistress  w ho  com 
manded  his  destiny.  T he  Classical  poet,  however  gifted  and  industrious, 
fails  to  pass  the  test  because  he  claims  to  be  the  Goddess's  master—she  is 
his  mistress  only  in  the  derogatory  sense  of  one  w ho  lives  in  coquettish 
ease  under  his  protection.  Sometimes,  indeed,  he  is  her  bawdmaster:  he 
attempts 
to  heighten  the  appeal  of  his  lines  by  studding  them  with 
'beauties'  borrowed  from  true  poems.  In  Classical  Arabic  poetry  there  is 
a  device  known  as  'kindling'  in  which  the  poet  induces  the  poetic  atmos 
phere  with  a  luscious  prologue  about  groves,  streams  and  nightingales, 
and  then  quickly,  before  it  disperses,  turns  to  the  real  business  in  hand— 
a  flattering  account,  say,  of  the  courage,  piety  and  magnanimity  of  his 
patron  or  sage  reflexions  on  the  shortness  and  uncertainty  of human  life. 
In  Classical  English  poetry  the  artificial  kindling  process  is  often  pro 
tracted  to  the  full  length  of the  piece.T he  following chapters  will  rediscover a set of sacred  charms  of varying 
antiquity  in  which  successive  versions  of  the  T h e me  are  summarized. 
Literary  critics  whose  function  it  is  to  judge  all  literature  by  gleeman 
standards—its  entertainment  value  to  the  masses—can  be  counted  upon 
to  make  merry  with  what  they  can  only  v i ew  as  my  preposterous  group 
of mares'  nests.  A nd  the  scholars  can  be  counted  upon  to  refrain  from  any 
comment  whatsoever.  But,  after  all,  what  is  a  scholar?  One  w ho  may  not 
break  bounds  under  pain  of expulsion  from  the  academy  of which  he  is  a 
member.

A nd  what  is  a  mare's  nest?  Shakespeare  hints  at  the  answer,  though  he

substitutes  St.  Swithold  for  Odin,  the  original  hero  of the  ballad:

Switholdfooted thrice  the  wold 
He  met  the  Night-Mare  and her  nine-fold, 
Bid her alight and her troth plight, 
And aroynt thee, witch, aroynt thee!

A  fuller  account  of  Odin's  feat  is  given  in  the  North  Country  Charm 
against 
the  fourteenth 
century:

the  Night  Mare,  which  probably  dates  from

Tha mon o' micht, he rade o' nicht 
Wi'neider  swerd  neferdne  licht. 
He  socht  tha  Mare,  he  fond  tha  Mare, 
He  bond tha  Mare  wi' her  ain  hare, 
Ond  gared  her  swar  by  midder-micht 
She  wolde  nae mair rido'  nicht 
Whar aince he rade, thot mon o' micht.

T he  Night  Mare  is  one  of the  cruellest  aspects  of the  White  Goddess. 
Her  nests,  when  one  comes  across  them  in  dreams,  lodged  in  rock-clefts 
or  the  branches  of enormous  hollow  y e w s,  are  built  of carefully  chosen 
twigs,  lined  with  white  horse-hair  and  the  plumage  of prophetic  birds  and 
littered  with  the  jaw-bones  and  entrails  of poets.  T he  prophet  J ob  said  of 
her:  'She  dwelleth  and  abideth  upon  the  rock.  Her  y ou ng  ones  also  suck 
up  blood.'

26

Chapter  Two26

Chapter  Two

THE  B A T T LE  OF  THE  T R E ES

It  seems  that  the  Welsh  minstrels,  like  the  Irish  poets,  recited  their

traditional  romances  in  prose,  breaking  into  dramatic  verse,  with  harp 
accompaniment,  only  at  points  of  emotional  stress.  Some  of  these 
romances  survive  complete  with  the  incidental  verses;  others  have  lost 
them;  in  some  cases,  such  as  the  romance  of  L l y w a r ch  Hen,  only  the 
verses  survive.  T he  most  famous  Welsh  collection  is  the  Mabinogion, 
which  is  usually  explained  as  'Juvenile  Romances',  that  is  to  say  those 
that every apprentice to the minstrel profession was expected  to  know;  it is 
contained 
thirteenth-century  Red  Book  of  Hergest.  Almost  all 
the  incidental  verses  are  lost.  These  romances  are  the  stock-in-trade  of a 
minstrel  and  some  of them  have  been  brought  more up-to-date  than  others 
in  their  language and  description  of manners  and  morals.

the

inthe

in

The  Red  Book  of Hergest  also  contains  a  jumble  of  fifty-eight  poems, 
called  The  Book  of Taliesin,  among  which  occur  the  incidental  verses  of a 
Romance  of Taliesin  which  is  not  included  in  the  Mabinogion.  H o w e v e r, 
the  first  part  of the  romance  is  preserved  in  a  late  sixteenth-century manu 
script,  called  the  'Peniardd  M . S . ',  first  printed  in  the  early  nineteenth-
century  Myvyrian  Archaiology,  complete  with  many  of the  same  incidental 
verses,  though  with  textual  variations.  L a dy  Charlotte  Guest  translated 
this  fragment,  completing  it  with  material  from  two  other  manuscripts, 
and  included  it  in  her  well-known  edition  of  the  Mabinogion  (1848). 
Unfortunately,  one  of the  two  manuscripts  came  from  the  library  of I o lo 
Morganwg,  a  celebrated  eighteenth-century  'improver'  of  Welsh  docu 
ments,  so  that  her  version  cannot  be  read  with  confidence,  though  it  has 
not been  proved  that  this particular manuscript was  forged.

T he  gist  of  the  romance  is  as  follows.  A  nobleman  of  Penllyn  named 
T e g id V o el  had  a  wife  named  Caridwen,  or  Cerridwen,  and  two  children, 
C r e i r w y,  the  most  beautiful  girl  in  the  world,  and  Afagddu,  the  ugliest 
boy.  T h ey lived  on  an  island  in  the middle  of L a ke  T e g i d.  To  compensate 
for  Afagddu's  ugliness,  Cerridwen  decided  to  make  him  highly  intelli 
gent.  S o,  according  to a recipe  contained  in  the  books  of Vergil  of T o l e do 
the magician (hero of a twelfth-century romance), she boiled Up a cauldron 
of inspiration  and  knowledge,  which  had  to  be  kept  on  the  simmer  for  a

2727

year  and  a  day.  Season  by  season,  she  added  to  the  brew  magical  herbs 
gathered  in  their  correct  planetary  hours.  While  she  gathered  the  herbs 
she  put  litde  G w i o n,  the  son  of  G w r e a n g,  of  the  parish  of  Llanfair  in 
Caereinion,  to  stir  the  cauldron.  T o w a r ds  the  end  of the  year  three  burn 
ing  drops  flew  out  and  fell  on  little  G w i o n 's  finger.  He  thrust  it  into  his 
mouth  and  at  once  understood  the  nature  and  meaning  of all  things  past, 
present  and  future,  and  thus  saw  the  need  of guarding  against  the  wiles  of 
Cerridwen w ho was determined on killing him as soon as he had completed 
his work.  He  fled  away, and  she  pursued  him  like  a  black  screaming  hag. 
By  use  of  the  powers  that  he  had  drawn  from  the  cauldron  he  changed 
himself into a  hare;  she  changed  herself into  a  greyhound.  He  plunged  into 
a  river  and  became  a  fish;  she  changed  herself into  an  otter.  He  flew  up 
into  the  air  like  a  bird;  she  changed  herself  into  a  hawk.  He  became  a 
grain  of winnowed  wheat  on  the  floor  of a  barn;  she  changed  herself into 
a  black  hen,  scratched  the  wheat  over  with  her  feet,  found  him  and 
swallowed  him.  When  she  returned  to  her  own  shape  she  found  herself 
pregnant  of G w i on  and  nine  months  later  bore  him  as  a  child.  She  could 
not  find  it  in  her  heart  to  kill  him,  because  he  was  very  beautiful,  so  tied 
him  in  a leather bag and  threw him  into  the sea  two  days  before M ay D a y. 
He  was  carried  into  the  weir  of  G w y d d no  Garanhair  near  D o v ey  and 
A b e r y s t w y t h, in  Cardigan  B a y,  and  rescued  from  it  by  Prince Elphin,  the 
son  of  G w y d d no  and  nephew  of  K i ng  Maelgwyn  of  G w y n e dd  (North 
Wales),  w ho  had  come  there  to  net fish. Elphin,  though  he  caught no  fish, 
considered  himself  well  rewarded  for  his  labour  and  renamed  G w i on 
'Taliesin',  meaning  either  'fine  value',  or  'beautiful  b r o w ' —a  subject  for 
punning  by  the  author  of the  romance.When  Elphin  was  imprisoned  by  his  royal  uncle  at  D y g a n wy  (near 
Llandudno),  the  capital  of  "Gwynedd,  the  child  Taliesin  went  there  to 
rescue  him  and  by  a  display  of  wisdom,  in  which  he  confounded  all  the 
twenty-four  court-bards  of  Maelgwyn—the  eighth-century  British  his 
torian  Nennius  mentions  Maelgwyn's  sycophantic  bards—and  their leader 
the  chief  bard  Heinin,  secured  the  prince's  release.  First  he  put  a  magic 
spell  on  the  bards  so  that  they  could  only  play  blerwm  blerwm  with  their 
fingers  on  their lips  like  children, and then he recited a long riddling poem, 
the Hones  Taliesin,  which  they  were  unable  to  understand,  and  which  will 
be  found  in  Chapter  V.  Since  the  Peniardd  version  of  the  romance  is 
not  complete,  it  is  just  possible  that  the  solution  of  the  riddle  was 
eventually  given,  as  in  the  similar  romances  of  Rumpelstiltskin,  T om 
T it  T o t,  Oedipus,  and  Samson.  But  the  other  incidental  poems  suggest 
that  Taliesin  continued  to  ridicule  the  ignorance  and  stupidity  of Heinin 
and  the  other  bards  to  the  end  and  never  revealed  his  secret.

T he  climax  of the story in L a dy  Charlotte's version  comes with  another

riddle, proposed by the child  Taliesin, beginning:

28

Discover  what  it  is: 
The strong creature from before the Flood 
Withoutflesh, without bone, 
Without vein, without blood, 
Without  head,  without  feet... 
In  field,  in forest... 
Without hand, without foot. 
It is  also  as  wide 
As  the  surface  of  the  earth, 
And it  was  not  born, 
Nor  was  it  seen...T he  solution,  namely  ' T he  W i n d ',  is  given  practically  with  a  violent 
storm  of  wind  which  frightens  the  K i ng  into  fetching  Elphin  from  the 
dungeon, whereupon  Taliesin  unchains him with  an  incantation.  Probably 
in  an  earlier version  the wind  was  released  from  the  mantle  of his  comrade 
Afagddu  or Morvran,  as  it was  by  Morvran's  Irish  counterpart  Marvan  in 
the  early  mediaeval  Proceedings  of  the  Grand  Bardic  Academy,  with 
which  The  Romance  of Taliesin  has  much  in  common.  'A  part  of it  blew 
into  the  bosom  of every  bard  present,  so  that  they  all  rose  to  their  feet.'  A 
condensed  form  of  this  riddle  appears  in  the  Flores  of  Bede,  an  author 
commended  in  one  of the  Book  of Taliesin  poems:

Die mihi quae est ilia res quae caelum,  totamque  terram replevit, silvas 
et sirculos  confringit  .  .  .  omnia-que  fundamenta  concutit,  sed nec oculis 
videri aut [sic] manibus tangipotest.

[Answer]  Ventus.

There can  be  no  mistake here.  But since  the Hanes  Taliesin  is  not  preceded 
by  any  formal  Dychymig  Dychymig  ('riddle  me  this  riddle')  or  Dechymic 
pwy  yw  ('Discover  what  it  i s ' ) 1  commentators  excuse  themselves  from 
reading  it  as  a  riddle  at  all.  Some  consider  it  to  be  solemn-sounding  non 
sense,  an  early  anticipation  of E d w a rd  Lear  and  L e w is  Carroll,  intended 
to  raise  a  laugh;  others  consider  that  it  has  some  sort  of  mystical  sense 
connected  with  the  Druidical  doctrine  of the  transmigration  of souls,  but 
do  not claim to be able to elucidate  this.Here  I  must  apologize  for  my  temerity  in  writing  on  a  subject  which  is 
not really my  o w n.  I  am  not a Welshman,  except an honorary one  through 
eating  the  leek  on  St.  D a v i d 's  D ay  while  serving  with  the  R o y al  Welch 
Fusiliers  and,  though  I  have  lived  in  Wales  for  some  years,  off and  on,

1  Another  form  is  dychymig  damtg  ('a  riddle,  a  riddle'),  which  seems  to  explain  the  mysteri 
ous  ducdame  ducdame  in  As  You  Like  It,  which  Jaques  describes  as  'a  Greek  invocation  to  call 
fools  into  a  circle'—perhaps  a  favourite  joke  of  Shakespeare's  Welsh  schoolmaster,  re 
membered  for  its  oddity.

*9

have  no  command  even  of  modern  Welsh;  and  I  am  not  a  mediaeval 
historian.  But  my  profession  is  poetry,  and  I  agree  with  the  Welsh 
minstrels  that  the  poet's  first  enrichment  is  a  knowledge  and  understand 
ing  of  myths.  One  day  while  I  was  puzzling  out  the  meaning  of  the 
ancient  Welsh  myth  of  Cdd  Goddeu  ( ' T he  Battle  of  the  T r e e s ' ),  fought 
between  A r a wn  K i ng  of A n n wm  ( ' T he  Bottomless  Place'),  and  the  t wo 
sons  of  D o n,  G w y d i on  and  Amathaon,  I  had  much  the  same  experience 
as  G w i on  of Llanfair.  A  drop  or  t wo  of the  brew  of Inspiration  flew  out 
of  the  cauldron  and  I  suddenly  felt  confident  that  if  I  turned  again  to 
G w i o n 's  riddle,  which  I  had  not  read  since  I  was  a  schoolboy,  I  could 
make  sense  of it.T h is  Batde  of the  Trees  was  'occasioned  by  a  L a p w i n g,  a  White  R o e 
buck  and  a  Whelp  from  A n n w m .'  In  the  ancient  Welsh  Triads,  which are 
a  collection  of  sententious  or  historical  observations  arranged  epigram-
matically  in threes,  it is reckoned  as one of the ' T h r ee Frivolous  Batdes  of 
Britain'.  A nd  the  Romance  of Taliesin  contains  a  long  poem,  or  group  of 
poems  run  together,  called  Cdd Goddeu,  the  verses  of which  seem  as  non 
sensical  as  the  Hanes  Taliesin  because  they  have  been  deliberately  'pied'. 
Here  is  the .poem  in  D.  W.  Nash's  mid-Victorian  translation,  said  to  be 
unreliable  but  the best at  present available.  T he original  is  written  in short 
rhyming  lines,  the  same  r h y me  often  being  sustained  for  ten  or  fifteen 
lines.  Less  than  half of them  belong  to  the  poem  which  gives  its  name  to 
the  whole  medley,  and  these  must  be  laboriously  sorted  before  their 
relevance to G w i o n 's riddle can be explained. Patience!

C AD  G O D D EU

( T he  Battle  of the  T r e e s)

/ have  been  in  many shapes, 
Before  I  attained  a  congenial  form. 
J have been a narrow blade of a sword. 
(I will believe  it  when  it  appears.)

5  / have been a  drop in the air.

I have been a shining star. 
I have been a word in a book. 
I have  been a  book originally. 
I have been a light in a lantern.

10 A year and a half.

I have been a bridge for passing over 
Three-score  rivers.

I have journeyed as an eagle. 
I have been a boat on the sea. 
15 I have been a director in battle.

30

I have been the string of a child's swaddling clout. 
I have been a sword in the hand. 
I have been a shield in the fight. 
I have been the string of a harp,

20  Enchanted  for  ayear 
In  the  foam  ofwater. 
I have been a poker in the fire. 
I have been a tree in a covert. 
There is nothing in which I have not been.20  Enchanted  for  ayear 
In  the  foam  ofwater. 
I have been a poker in the fire. 
I have been a tree in a covert. 
There is nothing in which I have not been.

25  I  have  fought,  though  small,

In  the  Battle  of  Goddeu  Brig, 
Before the Ruler of Britain, 
Abounding in fleets. 
Indifferent  bards pretend,

30  They  pretend  a  monstrous  beast,

With a hundred heads, 
And a grievous  combat 
At the root of the tongue. 
And another fight there is

35 At the back of the head.

A toad having on his thighs 
A  hundred claws, 
A  spotted crested snake, 
For punishing in their flesh

40 A hundred souls on account of their sins.

I was in  Caer Fefynedd, 
Thither were hastening grasses and trees. 
Wayfarers perceive  them, 
Wirriors  are  astonished 
45  At a renewal ofthe conflicts 
Such as  Gwydion made. 
There is calling on Heaven, 
And on Christ that he would effect 
Their deliverance, 
50  The  all-powerful Lord.

If  the  Lord  had  answered, 
Through  charms and magic skill, 
Assume the forms of the principal trees, 
With you  in  array 
5 5 Restrain the people

Inexperienced in battle. 
When the trees were enchanted 
There was hope for the tressj

31

That they should frustrate the intention

60  Of  the  surroundingfires.... 
Better are three in unison, 
And enjoying themselves in a circle, 
And one of them relating 
The story of the deluge, 
65  And  ofthe  cross  of  Christ,

And ofthe  Day ofJudgement  near  at  hand. 
The alder-trees in the first line, 
They made the commencement. 
Willow and quicken tree, 
70  They were slow in their array.

The plum is a tree 
Not beloved of men; 
The medlar of a like nature, 
Overcoming severe toil. 
75 The bean bearing in its shade

An army of phantoms. 
The raspberry makes 
Not the best of food. 
In shelter  live,

80  The privet and the woodbine, 
And the  ivy in  its season. 
Great is the gorse in battle. 
The cherry-tree had been reproached. 
The birch, though very magnanimous,80  The privet and the woodbine, 
And the  ivy in  its season. 
Great is the gorse in battle. 
The cherry-tree had been reproached. 
The birch, though very magnanimous,

8 5 Was late in arraying himself; 
It was not through cowardice, 
But on account of his great sqe. 
The appearance of the . .. 
Is that ofa foreigner and a savage.

90 The pine-tree in the court,

Strong in  battle, 
By  me  greatly  exalted 
In the presence of kings, 
The elm-trees are his subjects.

95 He turns not aside the measure of a foot,

But strikes right in  the middle, 
And at the farthest end. 
The ha^elis the judge, 
His berries are  thy dowry.

100 The privet is blessed. 
Strong chiefs in war

3*

Are the . .. and the mulberry. 
Prosperous the beech-tree. 
The holly dark green, 
105 He was very courageous:

Defended with spikes on every side, 
Wioundxng the hands. 
The long-enduring poplars 
Very much broken in fight.

no  The  plundered  fern;

The brooms with their offspring: 
Thefuije  was not well behaved 
Until he was tamed. 
The heath was giving consolation,

1 15 Comforting the people.

The black cherry-tree was pursuing. 
The oak- tree swiftly moving, 
Before him tremble heaven and earth, 
Stout doorkeeper against the foe

120 Is his name in all lands.

The corn-cockle bound together, 
Wiis given to be burnt. 
Others were rejected 
On account of the holes made

125 By great violence

In the field of battle. 
Very wrathful the  . .. 
Cruel the gloomy ash. 
Bashful the chestnut-tree, 
1 30 Retreating from happiness.

There shall be a black darkness, 
There shall be a shaking of the mountain, 
There shall be a purifying furnace, 
There shallfirst be a great wave, 
135 And when the shout shall be heard—

Putting forth new leaves are the tops ofthe beech, 
Changing form and being renewed from a witheredst 
Entangled are the tops of the oak. 
From the Gorchan of Maelderw.

140 Smiling at the side of the rock140 Smiling at the side of the rock

{Was) the pear-tree not ofan ardent nature. 
Neither ofmother or father, 
When I was made, 
Was my blood or body;

33

145 Of rune kinds of faculties,

Of fruit of fruits, 
Of fruit  God made me, 
Of the blossom ofthe mountain primrose, 
Ofthe buds of trees and shrubs,

150 Of earth of earthly kind. 
When I was made 
Of the blossoms of the nettle, 
Of the water of the ninth wave, 
I was spell-bound by Math 
155 Before I became immortal.

I was spell-bound by Gwydion, 
Great enchanter of the Britons, 
OfEurys, 
Of  Euron,  of  Medron,

ofEurwn,

160 In myriads of secrets,

I  am  as  learned  as  Math.... 
I know about the Emperor 
'When he was half burnt. 
I know the star-knowledge

165 Of stars before the earth (was made),

Whence I was born, 
How many worlds there are. 
It is the custom of accomplished bards 
To recite the praise of their country.

170 I have played in Lloughor,

I have slept in purple. 
Was I not in the enclosure 
With  Dylan  Ail MOT, 
On a couch in the centre

175 Between the two knees of the prince

Upon two blunt spears? 
When from heaven came 
The torrents into the deep, 
Rushing with violent impulse.

180 (/ know) four-score songs,

For administering to their pleasure. 
There is neither old nor young, 
Except me as to their poems, 
Any other singer who knows the whole of the nine hundred

185  Which are known to me,

Concerning the blood-spotted sword. 
Honour is my guide.

34

Profitable learning is from the Lord. 
(I know) of the slaying of the boar,

190  Its appearing,  its  disappearing, 
Its knowledge of languages. 
(I know) the light whose name is Splendour, 
And the number of the ruling lights 
That scatter rays of  fire

195  High above the deep.

I have been a spotted snake upon a hill; 
I have been a viper in a lake; 
I have been an evil star formerly. 
I have been a weight in a mill.  (?)

200  My cassock  is  red all over.I have been a spotted snake upon a hill; 
I have been a viper in a lake; 
I have been an evil star formerly. 
I have been a weight in a mill.  (?)

200  My cassock  is  red all over.

I prophesy no evil. 
Four score puffs of smoke 
To everyone  who  will carry them  away: 
And a million of angels, 
205 On the point of my knife.

Handsome is the yellow horse, 
But a hundred times better 
Is my cream-coloured one, 
Swift as  the  sea-mew, 
2 10 Which cannot pass me

Between the sea and the shore. 
Am I not pre-eminent in the field of blood? 
I have a hundred shares of the spoil. 
My  wreath  is  ofred  jewels, 
215 Of gold is the border of my shield.

There has not been born one so good as I, 
Or ever known, 
Except  Goronwy, 
From the dales of Edrywy. 
220  Long and white are my  fingers,

It is long since I was a herdsman. 
I travelled over  the earth 
Before I became a learned person. 
I have  travelled, I have made  a circuit,

225  / have slept in a hundred islands;

I have dwelt in a hundred cities. 
Learned  Druids, 
Prophesy  ye  ofArthur? 
Or is it me they celebrate, 
230 And the Crucifixion of Christ,

35

And the  Day of  Judgement  near  at  hand, 
And one  relating 
The history of the Deluge f 
With a golden jewel set in gold

235 I am enriched;

And I am indulging in pleasure 
Out of the oppressive toil of the goldsmith.

W i th  a  little  patience  most  of the  lines  that  belong  to  the  poem  about 
the  Battle  of  the  Trees  can  be  separated  from  the  four  or  five  other 
poems  with  which  they  are  mixed.  Here  is  a  tentative  restoration  of the 
easier  parts,  with  gaps  left  for  the  more  difficult.  T he  reasons  that  have 
led  me  to  this  solution  will  appear  in  due  course  as  I  discuss  the  meaning 
of the  allusions  contained  in  the  poem.  I  use  the  ballad  metre  as  the  most 
suitable English equivalent of the original.

T HE  B A T T LE  OF  T HE  T R E ES

From my seat at Fefynedd,T HE  B A T T LE  OF  T HE  T R E ES

From my seat at Fefynedd,

A city that is strong,

I watched the trees and green things

Hastening  along.

Wayfarers  wondered,

Warriors  were  dismayed

At renewal of conflicts

Such  as  Gwydion made,

Under the tongue-root

A  fight  most  dread,

And another  raging

Behind, in the head.

(lines 4 1 - 4 2)

(lines 43—46)

(lines 3 2 - 3 5)

The

alders

in

the

front

line

(lines 6 7 - 7 0)

Began  the  affray. 
Willow  and rowan-tree

Were  tardy in  array.

The holly,  dark green,

(lines 1 0 4 - 1 0 7)

Made  a  resolute  stand;

He  is  armed with  many spear-points

Wounding the hand.

36

With

foot-beat

ofthe

swift

oak

(lines  1 1 7 - 1 2 0)

Heaven and earth  rung; 
'Stout Guardian of the Door

His name in every tongue.

Great was thegorse in battle,

(lines 82, S i, 98, 57)

And the ivy at his prime;

The ha%el was arbiter

At  this  charmed time.

Uncouth  and  savage  was  the[fir?\  (lines  88,  89,  1 2 8,  95,  96)

Cruel the  ash-tree— 
Turns  not  aside  afoot-breadth,

Straight at  the heart runs he.

The birch, though very noble, 
Armed himself but late:

A sign not of cowardice

But of high estate.

(lines 8 4 - 8 7)

The heath gave consolation

(lines 1 1 4, 1 1 5, 108, 109)

To  the  tod-spent  folk, 
The long-enduring poplars 
In battle much broke.

Some

of

them  were

cast

away

(lines  123—126)

On the field of fight 
Because of holes torn in them 
By the  enemy's  might.

Very wrathful was the [vine ?]

(lines 1 2 7, 94, 92, 93)

Whose henchmen are the elms;

I exalt  him  mightily

To rulers of realms.

In shelter linger

Privet  and woodbine 
Inexperienced in  warfare; 
And the courtly pine.

(lines 79, 80, 56, 90)

Little  G w i on has  made it  clear  that he  does  not  offer  this  encounter as

the original Cdd Goddeu but as:

A renewal of conflicts

Such as  Gwydion made.

37(lines 79, 80, 56, 90)

Little  G w i on has  made it  clear  that he  does  not  offer  this  encounter as

the original Cdd Goddeu but as:

A renewal of conflicts

Such as  Gwydion made.

37

Commentators,  confused  by  the  pied  verses,  have  for  the  most  part 
been  content  to  remark  that  in  Celtic  tradition  the  Druids  were  credited 
with  the  magical  p o w er  of  transforming  trees  into  warriors  and  sending 
them  into  battle.  But,  as  the  R e v.  E d w a rd  D a v i e s,  a  brilliant  but  hope 
lessly  erratic  Welsh  scholar  of the  early  nineteenth  century,  first  noted  in 
his  Celtic  Researches  (1809),  the  battle  described  by  G w i on  is  not  a  frivo 
lous  battle,  or  a  battle  physically  fought,  but  a  battle  fought  intellectually 
in  the  heads  and  with  the  tongues  of  the  learned.  D a v i es  also  noted  that 
in  all  Celtic  languages  trees  means  letters;  that  the  Druidic  colleges  were 
founded  in  w o o ds  or  groves;  that  a  great  part  of  the  Druidic  mysteries 
was  concerned  with  twigs  of  different  sorts;  and  that  the  most  ancient 
Irish  alphabet,  the  Beth-Luis-Nion  ( ' B i r c h - R o w a n - A s h ')  takes  its  name 
from  the  first  three  of a  series  of trees  whose  initials  form  the  sequence  of 
its  letters.  D a v i es  was  on  the  right  track  and  though  he  soon  went 
astray  because,  not  realizing  that  the  poems  were  pied,  he  mistranslated 
them  into  what  he  thought  was  good  sense,  his  observations  help  us  to 
restore  the  text  of the  passage  referring  to  the  hastening  green  things  and 
trees:

Retreating

from

happiness,

(lines  130 and  53)

They would fain be set 
Informs of the chief letters 
Of the alphabet.

T he  following  lines  seem  to  form  an  introduction  to  his  account  of the

battle:

The

tops

the 
Have sprouted of late,

of

beech-tree

(lines  1 3 6 - 1 3 7)T he  following  lines  seem  to  form  an  introduction  to  his  account  of the

battle:

The

tops

the 
Have sprouted of late,

of

beech-tree

(lines  1 3 6 - 1 3 7)

Are  changed and renewed

From their withered state.

When the beech prospers,

(lines 1 0 3, 52, 1 3 8, 58)

Though  spells  and litanies

The oak-tops entangle,

There is hope for  trees.

T h is  means,  if anything,  that  there  had  been  a  recent  revival  of letters 
in  Wales.  'Beech'  is  a  common  s y n o n ym  for  'literature'.  T he  English 
w o rd  'book',  for  example,  comes  from  a  Gothic  w o rd  meaning  letters 
and,  like  the  German  buchstabe,  is  etymologically  connected  with  the 
w o rd  'beech'—the  reason  being  that  writing  tablets  were  made  of beech. 
As  Venantius  Fortunatus,  the  sixth-century  bishop-poet,  wrote:  Barbara 
fraxineis  pingatur  runa  tabellis—'Let  the  barbarian  rune  be  marked  on 
beechwood  tablets.'  T he  'tangled  oak-tops'  must  refer  to  the  ancient

38

poetic  mysteries:  as  has  already  been  mentioned,  the  derwydd,  or  D r u i d, 
or  poet,  was  an  'oak-seer'.  An  early  Cornish  poem  describes  h ow  the 
D r u id  Merddin,  or  Merlin,  went  early  in  the  morning  with  his  black  dog 
to  seek  the glain,  or  magical  snake's-egg  (probably  a  fossiled  sea-urchin 
of the  sort  found  in  Iron  A ge  burials),  cull  cresses  and  samolus  (herbe  d'or), 
and  cut  the  highest  twig  from  the  top  of the  oak.  G w i o n,  w ho  in  line  225 
addresses  his  fellow-poets  as  Druids,  is  saying  here:  ' T he  ancient  poetic 
mysteries  have  been  reduced  to  a  tangle  by  the  Church's  prolonged 
hostility,  but  they  have  a  hopeful  future,  now  that  literature  is  prospering 
outside  the  monasteries.'

He  mentions  other  participants  in  the  battle:

Strong chiefs  in  war

Are  the  [  i  ]  and  mulberry....

The  cherry had been  slighted....He  mentions  other  participants  in  the  battle:

Strong chiefs  in  war

Are  the  [  i  ]  and  mulberry....

The  cherry had been  slighted....

The  black  cherry  was  pursuing....

The pear  that  is  not ardent....

The raspberry that makes

Not  the  best  of  foods....

The plum is a tree

Unbeloved  of  men....

The  medlar  of  like  nature  .

N o ne  of these  mentions  makes  g o od  poetic  sense.  Raspberry  is  excel 
lent  food;  the  plum  is  a  popular  tree;  pear-wood  is  so  ardent  that  in  the 
Balkans  it is  often  used  as  a  substitute  for  cornel  to  kindle  the  ritual  need-
fire;  the  mulberry  is  not  used  as  a  weapon-tree;  the  cherry  was  never 
slighted  and  in  G w i o n 's  day  was  connected  with  the  Nativity  story  in  a 
popular  version  of the  Gospel  of Pseudo-Matthew;  and  the  black  cherry 
does  not  'pursue'.  It  is  pretty  clear  that  these  eight  names  of  orchard 
fruits,  and  another  which  occupied  the  place  that  I  have  filled  with  'fir', 
have  been  mischievously  robbed  from  the  next  riddling  passage  in  the 
poem:

Ofnine  kinds of  faculty,

O[fruits  of  fruit, 
Of  fruit  Godm  ide  me....

and  have  been  substituted  for  the  names  of  nine  forest  trees  that  did 
engage in the  fight.

It  is  hard  to  decide  whether  the  story  of the  fruit  man  belongs  to  the 
Battle  of  the  Trees  poem,  or  whether  it  is  a  'Here  come  F  speech  like  the

39

four  others  muddled  up  in  the  Cdd  Goddeu,  of  w h om  the  speakers  are 
evidently  Taliesin,  the  Flower-goddess  Blodeuwedd,  Hu  Gadarn  the 
ancestor  of  the  C y m r y,  and  the  G od  A p o l l o.  On  the  whole,  I  think  it 
does  belong  to  the  Battle  of  the  Trees:

With nine sorts of faculty

God has gifted me:

1 am fruit of fruits gathered

From nine sorts of tree—

(lines  1 4 5 - 1 4 7)

Plum,  quince,  whortle,  mulberry,

(lines 7 1, 7 3, 7 7, 83,With nine sorts of faculty

God has gifted me:

1 am fruit of fruits gathered

From nine sorts of tree—

(lines  1 4 5 - 1 4 7)

Plum,  quince,  whortle,  mulberry,

(lines 7 1, 7 3, 7 7, 83,

Raspberry,  pear, 
Black  cherry  and white

With the sorb in me share.

102,  1 1 6,   1 4 1)

By  a  study  of the  trees  of the  Irish  Beth-Luis-Nion  tree-alphabet,  with 
which  the  author  of the  poem  was  clearly  familiar,  it  is  easy  to  restore  the 
original  nine  trees which  have  been  replaced  with  the  fruit  names.  We  can 
be  sure  that  it  is  the  sloe  that  'makes  not  the  best  of foods';  the  elder,  a 
notoriously  bad  w o od  for  fuel  and  a  famous  country  remedy  for  fevers, 
scalds  and  burns,  that  is  'not  ardent';  the  unlucky  whitethorn,  and  the 
blackthorn  ' of  like  nature',  that  are  'unbeloved  of  men'  and,  with  the 
archer's y e w,  are  the  'strong chiefs  in w a r '.  A nd  on the  analogy of the  oak 
from  which  reverberating  clubs  were  made,  the  y ew  from  which  deadly 
b o ws  and  dagger-handles  were  made,  the  ash  from  which  sure-thrusting 
spears  were  made,  and  the  poplar  from  which  long-enduring  shields 
were  made,  I  suggest  that  the  original  of 'the  black  cherry  was  pursuing' 
was  the  restless  reed  from  which  swift-flying  arrow-shafts  were  made. 
T he reed was reckoned  a  'tree'  by the Irish  poets.T he  T  w ho  was  slighted  because  he  was  not  big  is  G w i on  himself, 
w h om  Heinin  and  his  fellow-bards  scoffed  at  for  his  childish  appearance; 
but  he  is  perhaps  speaking  in  the  character  of  still  another  tree—the 
mistletoe,  which  in  the  N o r se  legend  killed  Balder  the  Sun-god  after 
having  been  slighted  as  too  y o u ng  to  take  the  oath  not  to  harm  him. 
Although  in  ancient  Irish  religion  there  is  no  trace  of  a  misdetoe  cult, 
and  the  mistletoe  does  not  figure  in  the  B e t h - L u i s - N i o n,  to  the  Gallic 
D r u i ds w ho  relied  on  Britain  for  their  doctrine  it  was  the  most  important 
of all  trees,  and  remains  of mistletoe  have  been  found  in  conjunction  with 
oak-branches  in  a  Bronze  A ge  tree-coffin  burial  at  Gristhorpe  near  Scar 
borough in  Y o r k s h i r e.  G w i on  m ay therefore  be  relying  here  on  a  British 
tradition of the  original  Cdd Goddeu  rather  than  on  his  Irish  learning.

T he remaining  tree-references  in  the  poem  are  these:

The  broom  with  its  children.... 
40

Thejur^e  not  well behaved

Until he  was  tamed....

Bashful  the  chestnut-tree....

T he  furze  is  tamed  by  the  Spring-fires  which  make  its  y o u ng  shoots 
edible  for sheep.

T he  bashful  chestnut  does  not  belong  to  the  same  category  of  letter 
trees  as  those  that  took  part  in  the  batde;  probably  the  line  in  which  it 
occurs  is  part  of  another  of  the  poems  included  in  Cad  Goddeu,  which 
describes  how  the  lovely  Blodeuwedd  ('Flower-aspect')  was  conjured  by 
the  wizard  G w y d i o n,  from  buds  and  blossoms.  T h is  poem  is  not difficult 
to  separate  from  the  rest  of Cad Goddeu,  though  one  or  two  lines  seem  to 
be missing.  T h ey can  be supplied  from  the  parallel  lines:

Ofnine kinds of faculties,

Of fruits of fruit, 
Of fruit God made me.

(lines 1 4 5 - 1 4 7)Ofnine kinds of faculties,

Of fruits of fruit, 
Of fruit God made me.

(lines 1 4 5 - 1 4 7)

T he  fruit  man  is  created  from  nine  kinds  of fruit;  the  flower  woman  must 
have  been  created  from  nine  kinds  of  flower.  F i ve  are  given  in  Cad 
Goddeu;  three  more—broom,  meadow-sweet  and  oak-blossom—in  the 
account  of  the  same  event  in  the  Romance  of  Math  the  Son  of  Mathonwy, 
and  the  ninth  is  likely  to  have  been  the  hawthorn,  because  Blodeuwedd  is 
another  name  for  Olwen,  the  May-queen,  daughter  (according  to  the 
Romance  of Kilhwych  and  Olwen)  of  the  Hawthorn,  or  Whitethorn,  or 
May  Tree;  but  it  may have been  the white-flowering trefoil.

H A N ES  B L O D E U W E DD

Not of father nor ofmother 
Was my blood, was my body. 
I  was  spellbound by  Gwydion, 
Prime enchanter of the Britons, 
When he formed me from nine blossoms,

Nine buds of various kind: 
From  primrose  of  the  mountain, 
Broom, meadow-sweet and cockle, 
Together intertwined, 
From  the bean in its shade bearing 
A white spectral army

Of earth, of earthly kind,

From blossoms of the nettle, 
Oak, thorn and bashful chestnut— 
Nine  powers  of  nine  flowers,

Nine powers  in  me  combined,

4i

line 142 
144

156

157

M3 
149

148 
121

75 
76 
150

129 
[146

Nine buds of plant and tree.

Long  and white  are  myfingers

As the ninth wave of the sea.

149

' 534i

line 142 
144

156

157

M3 
149

148 
121

75 
76 
150

129 
[146

Nine buds of plant and tree.

Long  and white  are  myfingers

As the ninth wave of the sea.

149

' 53

In  Wales and  Ireland  primroses  are reckoned  fairy  flowers  and  in  E n g 
lish  folk  tradition  represent  wantonness  (cf.  'the  primrose  path  of  dalliance' 
—Hamlet;  the  'primrose  of her  wantonness'—Brathwait's  Golden  Fleece). 
So  Milton's  'yellow-skirted  fayes'  w o re primrose.  ' C o c k l e s'  are  the  'tares' 
of  the  Parable  that  the  D e v il  sowed  in  the  wheat;  and  the  bean  is  tradi 
tionally  associated  with  ghosts—the  Greek  and  R o m an  homoeopathic 
remedy  against ghosts  was  to  spit  beans at  them—and  Pliny in  his  Natural 
History  records  the  belief  that  the  souls  of  the  dead  reside  in  beans. 
According  to  the  Scottish  poet  Montgomerie  (1605),  witches  rode  on 
bean-stalks  to  their  sabbaths.To  return  to  the  Battle  of the  Trees.  T h o u gh  the  fern  was  reckoned  a 
'tree'  by  the  Irish  poets,  the  'plundered  fern'  is  probably  a  reference  to 
fern-seed  which  makes  invisible  and  confers  other  magical  powers.  T he 
twice-repeated  'privet'  is  suspicious.  T he  privet  figures  unimportandy 
in  Irish  poetic  tree-lore;  it  is  never  regarded  as  'blessed'.  Probably  its 
second  occurrence  in  line  100  is  a  disguise  of the  wild-apple,  which  is  the 
tree  most  likely  to  smile  from  beside  the  rock,  emblem  of security:  for 
Olwen,  the  laughing  Aphrodite  of  Welsh  legend,  is  always  connected 
with  the  wild-apple.  In  line  99  'his  berries  are  thy  d o w r y'  is  absurdly 
juxtaposed  to  the  hazel.  O n ly  two  fruit-trees  could  be  said  to  dower  a 
bride  in  G w i o n 's  day:  the  churchyard  y ew  whose  berries  fell  at  the 
church  porch  where  marriages  were  always  celebrated,  and  the  church 
yard  rowan,  often  substituted  for  the  y ew  in  Wales.  I  think  the  y ew  is 
here  intended;  yew-berries  were  prized  for  their  sticky  sweetness.  In  the 
tenth-century  Irish  poem,  King  and Hermit,  Marvan  the  brother  of  K i ng 
Guare  of Connaught  commends  them highly  as  food.

T he  remaining  stanzas  of the  poem  may  n ow  be  tentatively restored:

I  have  plundered  the fern,

(lines  n o,  160, and  1 6 1)

Through all secrets I spy,

Old Math  ap  Mathonwy

Knew no more than I.

Strong chieftains were the blackthorn 
his

With

ill

fruit,

(lines  1 0 1,   7 1 - 7 3,   77

and 78)

The unbeloved whitethorn

Who wears the same suit.

The swift-pursuing reed,

(lines 1 1 6,   1 1 1 - 1 1 3)

The broom with his brood,

42

And thefuije  but  ill-behaved

Until he  is  subdued.

The

dower-scattering

yew

(lines 97, 99, 1 2 8, 1 4 1, 60)

Stood glum at the fight's fringe,

With the elder slow to burn 
Amidfires  that singe,

And

theUntil he  is  subdued.

The

dower-scattering

yew

(lines 97, 99, 1 2 8, 1 4 1, 60)

Stood glum at the fight's fringe,

With the elder slow to burn 
Amidfires  that singe,

And

the

blessed  wild

apple

(lines  100,  139, and 140)

Laughing for  pride

From  the  Gorchan  of  Maelderw,

By the rock side.

But I, although  slighted

Because  I was  not  big, 
Fought, trees, in your array

On  the  field  of  Goddeu  Brig.

(lines 83,  54, 25, 26)

T he  broom  may  not  seem  a  warlike  tree,  but  in  Gratius's  Genistae 
Altinates  the  tall  white  broom  is  said  to  have  been  much  used  in  ancient 
times  for  the  staves  of  spears  and  darts:  these  are  probably  the  'brood*. 
Goddeu  Brig  means  Tree-tops,  which  has  puzzled  critics  w ho  hold  that 
the  Cad  Goddeu  was  a  battle  fought  in  Goddeu,  ' T r e e s ',  the  Welsh  name 
for  Shropshire.  T he  Gorchan  of Maelderw  ('the  incantation  of Maelderw') 
was  a  long  poem  attributed  to  the  sixth-century  poet  Taliesin,  w ho  is 
said  to  have  particularly prescribed  it as a  classic  to  his  bardic  colleagues. 
T he  apple-tree  was  a  symbol  of  poetic  immortality,  which  is  w hy  it  is 
here  presented  as  g r o w i ng  out  of this  incantation  of Taliesin's.

Here,  to  anticipate  my  argument  by  several  chapters,  is  the  Order  of

Battle  in  the  Cad  Goddeu:

Birch 
Whitethorn

R o w an  A l d er  W i l l ow 
O ak

H o l ly

Hazel

A sh 
Wild-apple

Vine

I vy

J  Reed  Blackthorn  Elder

[ B r o om

Palm

F ir

Poplar

Y ew  Mistletoe

J G o r se  Heath 
[ F u r ze 
Privet

Woodbine

Pine

It  should  be  added  that  in  the  original,  between  the  lines  numbered 
60  and  6 1,  occur  eight  lines  unintelligible  to  D.  W.  Nash:  beginning  with 
'the  chieftains  are  falling'  and  ending  with  'blood  of  men  up  to  the 
buttocks'.  T h ey  may  or  may  not  belong  to  the  Battle  of  the  Trees.I  leave  the  other  pieces  included  in  this  medley  to  be  sorted  out  by 
someone  else.  Besides  the  monologues  of Blodeuwedd,  Hu  Gadarn  and

A p o l l o, there is a satire on monkish theologians, w ho sit in a circle gloomily 
enjoying  themselves  with  prophecies  of the  imminent  D ay  of Judgement 
the 
(lines  62-66),  the  black  darkness, 
purifying  furnace  (lines   1 3 1 - 1 3 4 ),   damning  men's  souls  by  the  hundred 
(lines 3 9 - 4 0)  and  pondering  the  absurd  problems  of the  Schoolmen:

the  shaking  of  the  mountain,

Room

for

a

million

angels

(lines 204,  205)

On my knife-point,  it appears.

Then

room

for  how  many  worlds

(lines 167 and  176)

A-top  of  two  blunt  spears?

T h is  introduces  a  boast  of G w i o n 's  o wn  learning:

But I prophesy no evil,

(lines 201, 200)

My cassock is wholly red. 
'He knows  the Nine Hundred Tales'— 
Of  whom  but  me  is  it  said?

(line 184)

R ed  was  the most  honourable  colour for dressamong the ancient W e l s h, 
according  to  the  twelfth-century  poet  Cynddelw;  G w i on  is  contrasting  it 
with  the  dismal  dress  of the  monks.  Of the  Nine  Hundred  Tales  he  men 
tions  only  t w o,  both  of  which  are  included  in  the  Red  Book  of  Hergest: 
the  Hunting  of the  Twrch  Trwyth  (line  189)  and  the  Dream  of Maxen 
Wkdig (lines  1 6 2 - 3 ).

Lines  206  to  2 11  belong,  it  seems,  to  Can y  Meirch,  ' T he  S o ng  of the 
Horses',  another  of the  G w i on  poems,  which  refers  to  a  race  between  the 
horses of Elphin and  M a e l g w yn which  is an  incident  in  the  Romance.

O ne most  interesting  sequence  can  be built up  from  lines  2 9 - 3 2,  3 6 - 37

and  2 3 4 - 2 3 7:

Indifferent bards pretend, 
They pretend a monstrous beast, 
With  a  hundred heads, 
A spotted crested snake,

A toad having on his thighs 
A  hundred claws,and  2 3 4 - 2 3 7:

Indifferent bards pretend, 
They pretend a monstrous beast, 
With  a  hundred heads, 
A spotted crested snake,

A toad having on his thighs 
A  hundred claws,

With a golden jewel set in gold 
I am  enriched; 
And  indulged  in  pleasure 
By the oppressive toil of the goldsmith.

Since  G w i on  identifies  himself  with  these  bards,  they  are,  I  think,  de 
scribed  as 
'indifferent'  by  w ay  of  irony.  T he  hundred-headed  serpent 
watching  o v er  the  jewelled  Garden  of  the  Hesperides,  and  the  hundred-

44

clawed  toad  wearing  a  precious  jewel  in  his  head  (mentioned  by  Shake 
speare's  D u ke  Senior)  both  belonged  to  the  ancient  toadstool  mysteries, 
of which  G w i on  seems  to  have  been  an  adept.  T he  European  mysteries 
are  less  fully  explored  than  their  Mexican  counterpart;  but  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
G o r d on  Wasson  and  Professor  Heim  show  that  the  pre-Columbian 
Toadstool-god  T l a l 6 c,  represented  as  a  toad  with  a  serpent  head-dress, 
has  for  thousands  of  years  presided  at  the  communal  eating  of  the  hal-
lucigenic  toadstool  psilocybe:  a  feast  that  gives  visions  of  transcendental 
beauty.  Tlaloc's  European  counterpart,  D i o n y s u s,  shares  too  many  of 
his  mythical  attributes  for  coincidence:  they  must  be  versions  of the  same 
deity;  though  at  what  period  cultural  contact  took  place  between  the 
Old  W o r ld  and  the  N ew  is  debatable.In  my  foreword  to  a  revised  edition  of  The  Greek  Myths,  I  suggest 
that  a  secret  Dionysiac  mushroom  cult  was  borrowed  from  the  native 
Pelasgians  by  the  Achaeans  of A r g o s.  Dionysus's  Centaurs,  Satyrs  and 
Maenads,  it  seems,  ritually  ate  a  spotted  toadstool  called  'flycap'  (amanita 
muscaria),  which  gave  them  enormous  muscular  strength,  erotic  power, 
delirious  visions,  and  the  gift  of  prophecy.  Partakers  in  the  Eleusinian, 
Orphic  and  other  mysteries  may  also  have  k n o wn  the  panaeolus  papi-
lionaceus,  a  small  dung-mushroom  still  used  by  Portuguese  witches,  and 
similar in effect to  mescalin.  In lines  234—237,  G w i on implies  that a single 
gem  can  enlarge  itself  under  the  influence  of  'the  toad'  or  'the  serpent' 
into  a  whole  treasury  of jewels.  His  claim  to  be  as  learned  as  Math  and  to 
k n ow  myriads  of  secrets  m ay  also  belong  to  the  toad-serpent  sequence; 
at  any  rate, psilocybe  gives  a  sense  of universal  illumination,  as  I  can  attest 
from  my  own  experience  of it.  ' T he  light  whose  name  is  Splendour'  may 
refer  to  this  brilliance  of  vision,  rather  than  to  the  Sun.

T he  Book  of Taliesin  contains  several  similar  medleys  or  poems  await 
ing  resurrection:  a  most  interesting  task,  but  one  that  must  wait  until  the 
texts  are  established  and  properly  translated.  T he  w o rk  that  I  have  done 
here is not offered  as in any sense  final.

C AD  G O D D EU

' T he  Batde  of the  T r e e s '.

T he  tops  of the  beech  tree

H a ve  sprouted  of late,

A re changed  and  renewed

F r om  their  withered  state.

W h en  the  beech  prospers,

T h o u gh spells  and  litanies

T he  oak  tops  entangle,

T h e re is hope  for trees.

45

I have plundered the fern,

Through  all secrets  I spy,

Old Math  ap  Mathonwy

Knew no more  than I.T h o u gh spells  and  litanies

T he  oak  tops  entangle,

T h e re is hope  for trees.

45

I have plundered the fern,

Through  all secrets  I spy,

Old Math  ap  Mathonwy

Knew no more  than I.

For with nine sorts of faculty 
God has  gifted me:

I am fruit of fruits gathered

From nine sorts of tree—

Plum,  quince,  whortle,  mulberry,

Raspberry,  pear, 
Black  cherry and white

With the sorb in me share.

From  my seat  at  Fefynedd, 
A city that is strong,

/watched  the  trees  and  green  things

Hastening  along.

Retreating  from  happiness

They would fain be set 
Informs  ofthe  chief  letters 
Of  the  alphabet.

Wayfarers  wondered,

Warriors  were  dismayed

At renewal of conflicts

Such  as  Gwydion made;

Under the tongue root

A  fight  most  dread,

And another  raging

Behind,  in the head.

The alders in the front line 
Began  the  affray. 
Willow  and rowan-tree

Were  tardy in  array.

The  holly,  dark green,

Made  a  resolute  stand; 
He  is  armed with  many spear points

Wounding the hand.

46

With foot-beat of the swift oak

Heaven and earth rung; 
'Stout Guardian of the Door',

His name in every tongue.

Great was the gorse in battle,

And the  ivy at  his prime;

The ha^el was arbiter

At  this  charmed time.

Uncouth and savage was the fir, 
Cruel the ash tree— 
Turns not aside a foot-breadth,

Straight at the heart runs he.

The birch, though very noble, 
Armed himself but late:

A sign not of cowardice 
But of high estate.

The heath gave consolation 
To the toil-spent folk, 
The long-enduring poplars 
In battle much broke.

Some of them were cast away 
On the field of fight 
Because of holes torn in them 
By the  enemy's might.

Vtry wrathful was  the  vine

Whose henchmen are the elms;

I exalt  him  mightily

To rulers of realms.

Strong chieftains were the blackthorn

With his ill fruit,

The unbeloved whitethorn

Who wears the same suit,

The swift-pursuing reed,

The broom with his brood,To rulers of realms.

Strong chieftains were the blackthorn

With his ill fruit,

The unbeloved whitethorn

Who wears the same suit,

The swift-pursuing reed,

The broom with his brood,

And thefurje  but  ill-behaved

Until he is subdued.

47

The dower-scattering yew

Stood glum at the fight's fringe,

With the elder slow to burn 
Amidfires  that  singe,

And the blessed wild apple

Laughing in pride

From the Gorchan of Maeldrew,

By the rock side.

In shelter linger

Privet  and woodbine, 
Inexperienced in warfare, 
And the courtly pine.

But I,  although  slighted

Because I was not big, 
Fought,  trees,  inyour  array

On the field of Goddeu Brig.

48

Chapter  Three

D O G,  R O E B U CK  A ND  L A P W I NG

The  fullest  account  of the  original  Battle  of  the  Trees,  though  the

L a p w i ng  is  not  mentioned  in  it,  is  published  in  the  Myvyrian 
Archaiology.  T h is  is  a  perfect  example  of  mythographic  short 
hand  and  records  what  seems  to  have  been  the  most  important  religious 
event in  pre-Christian  Britain:

'These  are  the  E n g l y ns  [epigrammatic  verses]  that  were  sung  at  the 
Cad  Goddeu,  or,  as  others  call  it,  the  Battle  of Achren,  which  was  on 
account  of a  white  roebuck,  and  a  whelp;  and  they  came  from  A n n wm 
[the  Underworld],  and  Amathaon  ap  D on  brought  them.  A nd  therefore 
Amathaon  ap  D o n,  and  A r a w n,  K i ng  of A n n w m,  fought.  A nd  there 
was  a man  in  that  battle, w ho  unless  his  name  were  known  could  not be 
overcome  and  there  was  on  the  other  side  a  woman  called  Achren 
['Trees'],  and  unless  her  name  were  known  her  party  could  not  be 
overcome.  A nd  G w y d i on  ap  D on  guessed  the  name  of  the  man,  and 
sang the two E n g l y ns following:

'Sure-hoofed is my steed impelled by the spur; 
The high sprigs of alder are on thy shield; 
Bran  art  thou  called,  of  the  glittering  branches.'Sure-hoofed is my steed impelled by the spur; 
The high sprigs of alder are on thy shield; 
Bran  art  thou  called,  of  the  glittering  branches.

Sure-hoofed is my steed in the day of battle: 
The high sprigs of alder are in thy hand: 
Bran thou art, by the branch thou bearest— 
Amathaon  the  Good has prevailed'

T he  story  of the  guessing  of Bran's  name  is  a  familiar  one  to  anthro 
pologists.  In  ancient  times,  once  a  god's  secret name  had  been  discovered, 
the  enemies  of his  people  could  do  destructive  magic  against  them  with  it. 
T he  Romans  made  a  regular  practice  of discovering  the  secret  names  of 
enemy  gods  and  summoning  them  to  R o me  with  seductive  promises,  a 
process technically k n o wn as  elicio.  Josephus in his  Contra Apionem  quotes 
an  account  of a  magic  ceremony  of this  sort  carried  out  at  Jerusalem  in 
the  second  century  B.C.  at  the  instance  of K i ng  Alexander  Jannaeus  the 
Maccabee;  the  g od  summoned  was  the  Edomite  A s s - g od  of  D o r a,  near

4949

Hebron.  L i vy  (v.  2 1)  gives  the  formula  used  to  summon  the  J u no  of 
Veii  to  R o m e,  and  Diodorus  Siculus  (xvii,  4 1)  writes  that  the  T y r i a ns 
used  to  chain  up  their  statues  as  a  precaution.  Naturally  the  Romans,  like 
the  J e w s,  hid  the  secret  name  of  their  own  guardian-deity  with  extra 
ordinary  care;  nevertheless  one  Quintus  Valerius  Soranus,  a  Sabine,  was 
put  to  death  in  late  Republican  times  for  divulging  it  irresponsibly.  T he 
tribes  of Amathaon and  G w y d i on  in  the  Cdd  Goddeu  encounter  were  as 
intent  on  keeping  the  secret  of Achren—presumably  the  trees,  or  letters, 
that  spelt  out  the  secret  name  of their  own  deity—as  on  discovering  that 
of  their  opponents.  T he  subject  of this  myth,  then,  is  a  batde  for  religious 
mastery  between  the  armies  of D o n,  the  people w ho appear in  Irish  legend 
as  the  Tuatha  d6  Danaan,  'the  folk  of  the  G od  whose  mother  is  D a n u ', 
and  the  armies  of  A r a wn  ('Eloquence'), 
the  K i ng  of  A n n w f n,  or 
A n n w m,  which  was  the  British  Underworld  or  national  necropolis.  In 
the  Romance  of Pwyll,  Prince  of  Dyved  A r a wn  appears  as  a  huntsman 
on  a  large  pale  horse,  pursuing  a  stag  with  the  help  of  a  pack  of white 
dogs  with  red  ears—the  Hounds  of  Hell  familiar  in  Irish,  Welsh,  Highland 
and  British folklore.T he  Tuatha  de  Danaan  were  a  confederacy  of tribes  in  which  the  king 
ship  went  by  matrilinear  succession,  some  of w h om  invaded  Ireland  from 
Britain  in  the  middle  Bronze  A g e.  T he  Goddess  D a nu  was  eventually 
masculinized  into  D o n,  or  Donnus,  and  regarded  as  the  eponymous 
ancestor  of  the  confederacy.  But  in  the  primitive  Romance  of  Math  the  Son 
of  Mathonwy  she  appears  as  sister  to  K i ng  Math  of  G w y n e d d,  and 
G w y d i on  and  Amathaon  are  reckoned  as  her  sons—that  is  to  say,  as 
tribal  gods  of the  Danaan  confederacy.  According  to  an  archaeologically 
plausible  Irish  tradition  in  the  Book  of  Invasions,  the  Tuatha  de  Danaan 
had  been  driven  northward  from  Greece  as  a  result  of  an  invasion  from 
Syria  and  eventually  reached  Ireland  by  w ay  of Denmark,  to  which  they 
gave  their  own  name  ('The  K i n g d om  of the  Danaans'),  and  North  Britain. 
T he date of their arrival  in  Britain  is  recorded as  1 4 72 B . C .— f or what that 
is  worth.  T he  Syrian  invasion  of Greece  which  set  them  moving  north  is 
perhaps  the  one  hinted  at  by  Herodotus  in  the  first  paragraph  of  his 
History:  the  capture  by  'Phoenicians'  of  the  Danaan  shrine  of  the  White 
Goddess  Io  at  A r g o s,  then  the  religious  capital  of  the  Peloponnese;  the 
Cretans  had  colonized  it  about  the  year  1 7 50  B.C.  Herodotus  does  not 
date  the  event  except  by  making  it  happen  before  the  Argo  expedition  to 
Colchis,  which  the  Greeks  dated  1225  B.C.  and  before  'Europa'  went 
from  Phoenicia  to  Crete,  a  tribal  emigration  which  probably  took  place 
some centuries earlier, prior to the sack of Cnossos in  1400 B.C. In the Book 
of  Invasions  there  is  a  record,  confirmed  in  Bede's  Ecclesiastical  History, 
of another  invasion  of Ireland,  which  took  place  two  hundred  years  after 
the  arrival  of  the  Tuatha  de  Danaan.  T h e se  people,  sailing  westwards5°

from  Thrace  through  the  Mediterranean  and  out  into  the  Atlantic,  landed 
in  Wexford  B ay  where  they  came  in  conflict  with  the  Danaans;  but  were 
persuaded  to  pass  on  into  Northern  Britain,  then  called  Albany.  T h ey 
w e re  known  as  the  Picts,  or  tattooed  men,  and  had  the  same  odd  social 
habits—exogamy,  totemism,  public  coition,  cannibalism,  tattooing,  the 
participation  of  women  in  battle—that  obtained  in  Thessaly  before  the 
coming  of  the  Achaeans,  and  in  Classical  times  among  the  primitive 
tribes  of the Southern  Black  Sea coast,  the  G u lf of Sirte  in  L i b y a,  Majorca 
(populated  by  Bronze  A ge  L i b y a n s)  and  North-West  Galicia.  Their 
descendants still  kept their non-Celtic language in  Bede's  day.Amathaon,  or Amaethon,  is  said  to  take his  name from  the  Welsh  w o rd 
amaeth, a  ploughman, but it m ay be the other w ay about: that ploughmen 
w e re  under  the  patronage  of  the  god  Amathaon.  Perhaps  the  tribe  was 
originally mothered by Amathaounta,  a well-known Aegean  Sea-goddess; 
another  tribe  of  the  same  name,  whose  ancestral  hero  was  Hercules, 
migrated  from  Crete  to  Amathus  in  C y p r us  towards  the  end  of the  second 
millennium  B.C..  Amathaon  is  credited  with  having  taught  G w y d i on  the 
wizardry  for  which  he  was  afterwards  famous;  and  this  suggests  that 
G w y d i on  was  a  late-comer  to  Britain,  perhaps  a  g od  of the  Belgic  tribes 
that  invaded  Britain  about  400  B.C.,  and  was  given  honorary  sonship  of 
Danu  some  centuries  after  the  first  Danaan  invasion.  Amathaon  was 
maternal  nephew  to  Math  Hen  ('Old  Math'),  alias  Math  the  son  of 
Mathonwy.  'Math'  means  'treasure';  but  since  Math  is  also  credited  with 
having  taught  G w y d i on  his  magic,  'Math  son  of  Mathonwy'  may  be  a 
truncated  version  of  'Amathus  son  of  Amathaounta'.  Part  of  the  tribe 
seems  to  have  emigrated  to  Syria  where  it  founded  the  city  of Amathus 
(Hamath)  on  the  Orontes,  and  another  part  to  Palestine  where  it  founded 
Amathus  in  the  angle  between  the  Jordan  and  the  J a b b o k.  In  the  T a b le  of 
Nations  in  Genesis  X  the  Amathites  are  reckoned  late  among  the  Sons  of 
Canaan,  along  with  Hivites,  Gergasites  and  other  non-Semitic  tribes. 
According  to  //  Chronicles,  XVII, 30,  some  of the  Amathites  were  planted 
as  a  colony  in  Samaria,  where  they  continued  to  worship  their  Goddess 
under  the  name  of Ashima.Bran's  name  was  guessed  by  G w y d i on  from  the  sprigs  of alder  in  his 
hand,  because  though  'Bran'  and  Gwern,  the  w o rd  for  'alder'  used  in  the 
poem,  do  not  sound  similar,  G w y d i on  knew  that  Bran,  which  meant 
' C r o w'  or  ' R a v e n ',  also  meant  'alder'—the  Irish  is  fearn,  with  the  ' {' 
pronounced  as  V — a nd  that  the  alder  w as  a  sacred  tree.  T he  third  of the 
four  sons  of K i ng  Partholan  the  Milesian,  a  legendary  ruler  of Ireland  in 
the Bronze A g e,  had  been called  Fearn;  there had  also  been y o u ng G w e r n, 
K i ng  of  Ireland,  the  son  of  Bran's  sister,  Branwen  ('White  C r o w ' ). 
Various  confirmations  of  G w y d i o n 's  guess  appear  in  the  Romance  of 
Branwen,  as  will  be  shown  later.  But  the  name  spelt  out  by  die  trees,

5*

for  the  letters,  ranged  on  the  side  of  Amathaon  and  G w y d i on  remained 
unguessed.

T he  Bran  cult  seems  also  to  have  been  imported  from  the  A e g e a n. 
T h e re  are  remarkable  resemblances  between  him  and  the  Pelasgian  hero 
Aesculapius  w h o,  like  the  chieftain  Coronus  ('crow')  killed  by  Hercules, 
was  a king of the Thessalian  crow-totem  tribe  of Lapiths.  Aesculapius was 
a  C r ow  on  both  sides  of  the  family:  his  mother  was  Coronis  ( ' c r o w ' ), 
probably  a  tide  of  the  Goddess  Athene  to  w h om  the  crow  was  sacred. 
Tatian,  the  Church  Father,  in  his  Address  to  the  Greeks,  suggests  a  mother 
and  son  relationship  between  Athene and  Aesculapius:

After  the  decapitation  of  the  G o r g on  . ..  Athene  and  Aesculapius 
divided  the  blood  between  them,  and  while  he  saved  lives  by  means  of 
them,  she  by  the  same  blood  became  a  murderess  and  instigator  of  wars.Aesculapius's  father  was  A p o l lo  whose  famous  shrine  of T e m pe  stood 
in  Lapith  territory  and  to  w h om  the  crow  was  also  sacred;  and  A p o l lo  is 
described  as  the  father  of  another  Coronus,  K i ng  of  S i c y on  in  Sicily. 
T he  legend  of Aesculapius  is  that  after  a  life  devoted  to  healing,  he  raised 
Glaucus,  son  of Sisyphus  the  Corinthian,  from  the  dead,  and  was  burned 
to cinders by Zeus in a fit of jealousy; he had been rescued as a child from a 
bonfire  in  which  his  mother  and  her  paramour  Ischys  ('Strength')  per 
ished.  Bran  was  likewise  destroyed  by  his  jealous  enemy  Evnissyen,  a 
comrade  of Matholwch  K i ng  of Ireland  to  w h om  he  had  given  a  magical 
cauldron for raising dead soldiers to life; but in  the Welsh legend it is Bran's 
nephew  and  namesake,  the  b oy  G w e r n,  w ho  after  being  crowned  K i ng  is 
immediately  thrown  into  a  bonfire  and  burned  to  death;  Bran  himself is 
wounded  in  the  heel  by  a  poisoned  dart—like  Achilles  the  Minyan,  the 
Centaur  Cheiron's  pupil,  and  Cheiron  himself—then  beheaded;  his  head 
continues  to  sing  and  prophesy.  (In  Irish  legend  Aesculapius  figures  as 
Midach, killed  after  the  Second  Batde  of Moytura by his  father  Diancecht, 
the  A p o l lo  of  Healing,  w ho  was  jealous  of  his  cures.)  Aesculapius  and 
Bran  were  both  demi-gods  with  numerous  shrines,  and  both  were  patrons 
of healing  and  resurrection.  Another  point  of resemblance  between  them 
is  their  love-adventures:  Aesculapius  lay  with  fifty  amorous  girls  in  a 
night,  and  Bran  had  a  similar  jaunt  in  the  Isle  of  W o m e n,  one  of  three 
times  fifty  that  he  visited  on  a  famous  v o y a g e.  Aesculapius  is  represented 
in  Greek  art  with  a  dog  beside  him  and  a  staff in  his  hand  around  which 
twine  oracular snakes.T he  theft  of  the  D og  and  the  Roebuck  from  the  Underworld  by 
Amathaon  supports  the  Irish  v i ew  that  the  Children  of D a nu  came  from 
Greece in the middle of the second  millennium  B.C.,  since  there  are  several 
analogous  Greek  legends  of  Bronze  A ge  origin.  F or  example,  that  of 
task-master  K i ng 
Hercules,  the  oak-hero,  w ho  was  ordered  by  his

5 25 2

Eurystheus  of  Mycenae  to  steal  the  d og  Cerberus  from  the  K i ng  of  the 
Underworld,  and  the  brass-shod  white  roebuck  from  the  G r o ve  of  the 
Goddess  Artemis  at  Ceryneia  in  Arcadia.  In  another  of  his  adventures 
Hercules  snatched  from  Herophile—the  priestess  of  Delphi  whose  father 
(according  to  Clement  of Alexandria)  was  Zeus  disguised  as  a  lapwing, 
and  whose  mother  w as  Lamia,  the  Serpent-goddess—the  oracular  tripod 
on  which  she  was  sitting,  but  was  forced  to  restore  it.  A m o ng  the  favour 
ite  subjects  of  Greek  and  Etruscan  art  are  Hercules  carrying  off  the  D og 
and  his  struggles  with  the  guardian  of the  Lamian  oracle  at  Delphi  for  the 
possession  of the  roebuck  and  of the  tripod.  To  call  this  guardian  A p o l lo 
is  misleading  because  A p o l lo  was  not  at  that  time  a  S u n - g o d,  but  an 
Underworld  oracular  hero.  T he  sense  of these  myths  seems  to  be  that  an 
attempt  to  substitute  the  cult  of  the  oracular  oak  for  that  of  the  oracular 
laurel  at  Delphi  failed,  but  that  the  shrines  at  Ceryneia  in  Arcadia  and 
Cape  Taenarum 
the 
entrance  to  the  Underworld  visited  by  Hercules,  were  captured.  Other 
mythographers  say  that  the  entrance  was  at  Mariandynian  Acherusia 
(now  Heracli  in  Anatolia)  and  that  where  the  saliva  of  Cerberus  fell  on 
the  ground,  up  sprang  the  witch-flower  aconite—which  is  a  poison, 
a  paralysant  and  a  febrifuge;  but  this  account  refers  to  another  historical 
event,  the  capture  of a  famous  Bithynian  shrine  by  the  Henetians.

in  Laconia,  where  most  mythographers  place

But w hy D o g? W hy  Roebuck? W hy L a p w i n g?in  Laconia,  where  most  mythographers  place

But w hy D o g? W hy  Roebuck? W hy L a p w i n g?

T he  D og with which  Aesculapius  is  pictured,  like  the  d og  Anubis,  the 
companion  of  Egyptian  T h o t h,  and  the  d og  which  always  attended 
Melkarth  the  Phoenician  Hercules,  is  a  symbol  of  the  Underworld;  also 
of  the  dog-priests,  called  Enariae,  w ho  attended  the  Great  Goddess  of 
the  Eastern  Mediterranean  and  indulged  in  sodomitic  frenzies  in  the  D og 
days  at  the  rising  of the  Dog-star,  Sirius.  But  the  poetic  meaning  of  the 
D og  in  the  Cad  Goddeu  legend,  as  in  all  similar  legends,  is  'Guard  the 
Secret',  the  prime  secret  on  which  the  sovereignty  of  a  sacred  king 
depended.  Evidently  Amathaon  had  seduced  some  priest  of  B r a n— 
whether  it  was  a  homosexual  priesthood  I  do  not  pretend  to  know—and 
won  from  him  a  secret  which  enabled  G w y d i on  to  guess  Bran's  name 
correctly.  Hercules  overcame  the  D og  Cerberus  by  a  narcotic  cake  which 
relaxed  its vigilance;  what means Amathaon  used  is not recorded.

T he  L a p w i n g,  as  Cornelius  Agrippa,  the  early sixteenth-century  occult 
philosopher,  reminds  us  in  his  Vanity  and  Uncertainty  of the  Arts  and 
Sciences  (translated  by  James  Sanford  in  1569):  'seemeth  to  have  some 
royal  thing  and  weareth  a  crown.'  I  do  not  k n ow  whether  A g r i p pa 
seriously  meant  to  include  the  lapwing among  royal  birds,  but  if he  did  his 
best  authority  was  Leviticus  XI,  19.  T he  lapwing  is  there  mentioned  as  an 
unclean,  that  is  to  say  tabooed,  bird  in  the  distinguished  company  of the 
eagle,  the  griffon-vulture,  the  ibis,  the  cuckoo,  the  swan,  the  kite,  theraven,  o wl  and  litde  o w l,  the  solan-goose  (here  not  gannet  but  barnacle 
g o o s e1),  the  stork,  the  heron  and  the  pious  pelican.  T h at  these  taboos 
were  of non-Semitic  origin  is  proved  by  their  geographical  distribution: 
several  of  the  birds  do  not  belong  to  the  heat-belt  which  is  the  Semitic 
homeland,  and  every  one  of them  was  sacred  in  Greece  or Italy,  or  both, 
to  a  major  deity.  Biblical  scholars  have  been  puzzled  by  the  'uncleanness' 
of  the  lapwing—and  doubt  whether  the  bird  is  a  lapwing  and  not  a 
hoopoe  or  a  hedgehog—but  whenever  uncleanness  means  sanctity  the 
clue must  be looked  for  in  natural  history.  T he  Greeks  called  the  lapwing 
polyplagktos,  'luring  on  deceitfully',  and  had  a  proverbial  phrase  'more 
beseechful  than  a  lapwing'  which  they  used  for  artful  beggars.  In  Wales 
as  a  b oy I  learned  to  respect  the  lapwing  for  the  wonderful  w ay  in  which 
she  camouflages  and  conceals  her  e g gs  in  an  open  field  from  any  casual 
passer-by.  At first I  was  fooled  every  time  by  her  agonized peewit, peewit, 
screamed  from  the  contrary  direction  to  the  one  in  which  her  eggs  lay, 
and  sometimes  when  she  realized  that I  was  a  nest-robber,  she would  flap 
about  along  the  ground,  pretending  to  have  a  broken  w i ng  and  inviting 
capture.  But  as  soon  as  I  had  found  one  nest  I  could  find  many.  T he  lap 
w i n g 's  poetic  meaning is  'Disguise  the  Secret'  and  it  is  her  extraordinary 
discretion  which  gives  her  the  claim  to  sanctity.  According  to  the  Koran 
she was  the  repository  of K i ng  Solomon's  secrets  and  the  most  intelligent 
of the flock of prophetic  birds  that  attended  him.As  for  the  White  Roebuck,  h ow  many  kings  in  h ow  many  fairy  tales 
have  not  chased  this  beast  through  enchanted  forests  and  been  cheated 
of their  quarry?  T he  R o e b u c k 's  poetic meaning is  'Hide the  Secret'.

So  it  seems  that  in  the  Cad  Goddeu  story  elements  of a  Hercules  myth, 
which  in  Greek  legend  describes  h ow  the  Achaeans  of Mycenae  captured 
the  most  important  tribal  shrines  in  the  Peloponnese  from  some  other 
Greek  tribe,  probably  the  Danaans,  are  used  to  describe  a  similar  capture 
in  Britain  many  centuries  later.  A ny  attempt  to  date  this  event  involves  a 
brief summary  of British  pre-history.  T he  generally  accepted  scheme  of 
approximate dates derived from archaeological evidence is as follows:

6000-3000

B.C.

O ld  Stone A ge hunters,  not  numerous,  maintained  a  few  setdements  in

scattered  places.

3000-2500

B.C.

Occasional  and  gradual  immigration  of N ew  Stone  A ge  hunters  w ho

brought  polished stone  axes with  them  and  the  art of making  rough  pots.

1  As  barnacles  turn  Soland-geese, 
V  th'  Islands  of the  Orcades.

54

(Butler's  Hudibras)

2500—2000  B.C.brought  polished stone  axes with  them  and  the  art of making  rough  pots.

1  As  barnacles  turn  Soland-geese, 
V  th'  Islands  of the  Orcades.

54

(Butler's  Hudibras)

2500—2000  B.C.

R e g u l ar  traffic  across  the  English  Channel  and  invasion  by  N ew  Stone 
A ge  long-headed  agriculturists,  w ho  domesticated  animals,  practised 
flint-mining  on  a  large  scale  and  made  crude  ornamented  pottery  which 
has  affinities  with  the  ware  found  in  burials  in  the  Baltic  islands  of B o r n-
holm  and  Aland.  T h ey  came  from  L i b y a,  by w ay  of Spain,  Southern  and 
Northern  France,  or  by  w ay  of  Spain,  Portugal  and  Brittany;  some  of 
them  went  on  from  France  to  the  Baltic,  and  then  crossed  o v er  into 
Eastern  England  after  trade  contact  with  the  Black  Sea  area.  T h ey  intro 
duced  megalithic  burials  of  the  long-barrow  style  found  in  the  Paris 
area,  with  inhumation  but  with  little  funeral  furniture  except  the  leaf-
shaped  arrow-head,  the  manufacture  of  which  goes  back  to  the  O ld 
Stone  A g e;  the  leaves  copied  are  apparently  the  crack-willow,  or  purple 
osier,  and  the  elder.  Sometimes  a  leaf-shaped  'port-hole*  is  knocked 
out  between  two  contiguous  slabs  of  the  burial  chamber,  the  leaf copied 
being apparendy  the  elder.

2000—  iSoo  B.C.

Invasion  by  a  bronze-weaponed,  broad-headed,  beaker-making, 
avenue-building  people  from  Spain  by  w ay  of  Southern  France  and  the 
Rhine.  Further  immigration  of  long-heads  from  the  Baltic,  and  from 
South-Eastern  E u r o pe  by  w ay  of  the  Rhine.  Cremation  and  the  less 
ostentatious  though  better  furnished  round  barrows  were  introduced. 
T he  leaf-shaped  arrow-heads  persisted,  as  they  did  in  burials  in  France 
until  early  Imperial  times;  but  the  characteristic  type  was  barbed  and 
tanged  in  the  shape  of  a  fir-tree.i5oo-6oo

B.C.

Uninterrupted  development  of  Bronze  A ge  culture.  Cross-channel 
traffic  without  large-scale  invasion,  though  settlements  of iron-weaponed 
visitors  dating  from  about  800  B.C.  are  found  in  the  South.  Invasion  of 
North  Britain  by  the  Picts.  Small  segmented  blue  faience  beads  manufac 
tured  in E g y pt between  1380 and  1 3 50 B.C.  were imported  into Wiltshire 
in  large  quantities.  T he  language  spoken  in  Britain  except  by  the  Picts 
and  Old  Stone A ge Aboriginals is  thought to have been 'proto-Celtic'.

600  B.C.

Invasion  by  a  Goidelic  people,  identified  by  their  'frill-comb-smear' 
pottery,  w ho  migrated  from  the  Baltic  coast  of  Germany,  entered  the 
Rhineland  where  they  adopted  the  'Hallstadt'  Iron  A ge  culture,  then 
invaded  Britain; but were  forced  to remain in  the South-Eastern counties.

400  B.C.

First  Belgic  invasion  of  B r i t a i n— ' La  T e n e'  Iron  A ge  culture;  and  of

55

Ireland between  350 and  300 B.C.  T h e se people were a mixture of Teutons 
and  Brythons  ('P-Celts')  and  overran  the  greater  part  of  the  country: 
they  were  the  ancient  British  w h om  the  Romans  knew.  T he  Druidic 
culture of Gaul was  ' La T e n e '.

So

B.C.-45A.D.

Second  Belgic  invasion.  T he  principal  tribesmen  were  the  Atrebates 
w ho  came  from  Artois,  their  setdements  being  identified  by  their  bead-
rimmed  bowls.  T h ey  had  their  capital  at  Calleva  Atrebatum  (Silchester) 
in  North  Hampshire,  and  their  area  of conquest  extended  from  Western 
Surrey to  the V a le of T r o w b r i d ge in Wiltshire,  including Salisbury Plain.If  the  story  of  Cdd  Goddeu  concerns  the  capture  of the  national  necro 
polis  on Salisbury  Plain from  its former holders,  this  is most likely  to  have 
happened  during  either  the first or  the  second  Belgic  invasion.  Neither  the 
coming  of  the  round-barrow  men,  nor  the  Goidelic  seizure  of  South-
Eastern  Britain,  nor  the  Claudian  conquest,  which  was  the  last  before  the 
coming  of  the  Saxons,  corresponds  with  the  story.  But  according  to 
Geoffrey  of  Monmouth's  mediaeval  History  of the  Britons  two  brothers 
named  Belinus  and  Brennius  fought  for  the  mastery  of  Britain  in  the 
fourth  century  B.C.;  Brennius  was  beaten  and  forced  north  of the  Humber. 
Brennius  and  Belinus  are  generally acknowledged  to  be  the gods  Bran  and 
Beli;  and  Beli  in  the  Welsh  Triads  is  described  as  the  father of Arianrhod 
(Silver  W h e e l ' ),  the  sister  of  G w y d i on  and  Amathaon.  Amathaon  e v i 
dently  entered  the  Batde  of the  T r e es  as  champion  of his  father  Beli,  the 
Supreme  G od  of Light.So  the  Cdd Goddeu  can  perhaps  be  explained  as  the  expulsion  of a  long-
established  Bronze  A ge  priesthood  from  the  national  necropolis  by  an 
alliance  of agricultural  tribesmen,  long  settled  in  Britain  and  worshippers 
of the  Danaan god  Bel,  Beli,  Belus  or Belinus, with an invading  Brythonic 
tribe.  T he  Amathaonians  communicated  to  their  Brythonic  allies—Pro 
fessor  Sir  J o hn  R h ys  takes  G w y d i on  for  a  mixed  T e u t o n - C e lt  deity  and 
equates  him  with  W o d e n —a  religious  secret  which  enabled  Amathaon  to 
usurp the place of Bran, the G od of Resurrection, a sort of Aesculapius, and 
G w y d i on  to  usurp  that  of A r a wn  K i ng  of A n n w m,  a  g od  of divination 
and  prophecy,  and  both  together  to  institute  a  new  religious  system  in  the 
place  of  the  old.  T h at  it  was  G w y d i on  w ho  usurped  A r a w n 's  place 
the  Son  of 
is  suggested  by  the  cognate  myth  in  the  Romance  of Math 
Mathonwy  where  G w y d i on  stole 
the  sacred  swine  from  Pryderi,  the 
K i ng  of the  Pembrokeshire  A n n w m.  T h us  the  high  sprigs  of Bran's  alder 
were  humbled,  and  the  D o g,  Roebuck  and  L a p w i ng  stolen  from  A r a wn 
were installed  as  guardians  of the new religious  secret.  T he Amathaonians' 
motive  for  betraying  their  kinsmen  to  the  foreign  invaders  will  be  dis 
cussed  in  Chapter Eight

s'

It  appears  that  Bran's  people  did  not  retire,  after  their  spiritual  defeat, 
without  offering  armed  resistance;  for  the  tradition  is  that  71,000  men 
fell  in  battle after  the  secret was  lost.What  sort  of  a  secret?  Caesar  records  that  the  Gallic  Celts  claimed 
descent  from  'Dis'—that  is  to  say,  from  a  god  of the  dead  corresponding 
to  D is  in  the  Latin  pantheon—and  also  worshipped  deities  corresponding 
with  Minerva,  A p o l l o,  Mars,  Juppiter and  Mercury.  Since he also  records 
that  the  Gallic  Druids  came  to  Britain  for  instruction  in  religion,  the 
principal  seat  of the  D is  cult  was  evidently  in  Britain.  T he  capture  of this 
shrine  by  a  continental  tribe  was  an  epoch-making  event,  for  it  is  clear 
from  Caesar's  account  that  the  Druidic  ' D i s'  was  a  transcendent  god  w ho 
took  precedence  of Minerva,  A p o l l o,  Mars,  Mercury,  (to  w h om  we  may 
add  Venus  and  Saturn,  the  Latin  C r o w - g o d,  cognate  with  Aesculapius) 
and-  even  of  Juppiter.  A nd  Lucan,  a  contemporary  of  Nero's,  in  his 
poem  Pharsalia  expressly  states  that  souls,  according  to  the  Druids,  do 
not  go  down  to  the  g l o o my  Underworld  of  the  Latin  D i s,  but  proceed 
elsewhere  and  that  death  'is  but  the  mid-point  of a  long  life'.T he  British  D i s,  in  fact,  was  no  mere  Pluto  but  a  universal  god  corres 
ponding  closely  with  the  Jehovah  of  the  Hebrew  prophets.  Similarly,  it 
can  be  argued  that  since  the  prime  religious  ritual  of  the  Druids  'in  the 
service  of G od  Himself,  as  Pliny  records,  was  bound  up  with  the  mistle 
toe,  'which  they  call  all-heal  in  their  language'  and  'which  falls  from 
Heaven  upon  the  oak',  the  name  of  ' D i s'  could  not  have  been  Bran,  there 
being  no  mythic  or  botanical  connexion  between  the  alder  and  the  mistle 
toe.  T h us  it  is  likely  that  the  guessing  of Bran's  name  was  merely  a  clue 
towards  guessing  that of the  Supreme  G o d:  G w y d i on  did  not become  D i s, 
nor  did  Amathaon;  but  they  together  displaced  Bran  (Saturn)  and  A r a wn 
(Mercury)  in  their  service  of D i s,  and  redefined  his  godhead  as  Beli.  But 
if so, was Dis originally D o n n u s, in fact Danu?

It  happens  that  we  k n ow  the  Norse  name  of  G w y d i o n 's  horse,  if 
G w y d i on  was  indeed  Woden,  or  Odin.  It  was  Askr  Yggr-drasill,  or 
Ygdrasill,  'the  ash-tree  that  is  the  horse  of  Y g g r ',  Y g gr  being  one  of 
Woden's  titles.  Ygdrasill  was  the  enchanted  ash,  sacred  to  W o d e n,  whose 
roots  and  branches  in  Scandinavian  mythology  extended  through  the 
Universe.  If  Bran  had  been  clever  enough  at  the  Cad  Goddeu  he  would 
have  pronounced  his  englyn  first,  with:

Sure-hoofed is my steed in the day of battle. 
The high sprigs of ash are in thy hand— 
Woden thou art, by the branch thou bearest.

T he  Battle  of  the  Trees  thus  ended  in  a  victory  of the  A s h - g od  and  his 
ally over the A l d e r - g od and his  ally.

T he pre-Celtic A n n wm  from which  G w y d i on  is  said  to  have stolen  theT he pre-Celtic A n n wm  from which  G w y d i on  is  said  to  have stolen  the

sacred  swine  of  K i ng  Pryderi,  and  over  which  A r a wn  reigned  in  the 
Romance  of Pwyll  Prince  of Dyred,  was  in  the  Prescelly  Mountains  of 
Pembrokeshire.  But  it  is  likely  that  there  were  at  least  two  A n n w m s,  and 
that  the  'Battle  of the  T r e e s'  took  place  at  the  A n n wm  in  Wiltshire  before 
G w y d i o n 's  people  invaded  South  Wales.  It  would  be  fallacious  to  regard 
Stonehenge  as  Bran's  shrine,  because  it  is  an  unsuitable  site  for  the  w o r 
ship  of  an  A l d e r - g o d.  T he  older,  larger,  grander  A v e b u ry  ring  thirty 
miles  to  the  north  at  the  junction  of  the  Kennet  and  a  tributary,  is  the 
more  likely  site;  and  is  proved  by  the  debris  removed  from  the  ditch 
about  it  to  have  been  in  continuous  use  from  the  early  Bronze  A ge  to 
R o m an times. A ll the available evidence points to Stonehenge as Beli's seat, 
not  Bran's;  it  is  laid  out  as  a  sun-temple  in  cultured  Apollonian  style 
which  contrasts  strangely  with  the  archaic  roughness  of A v e b u r y.Geoffrey  records  that  Bran  and  Beli  (who,  he  says,  g a ve  his  name  to 
Billingsgate)  were  later  reconciled,  and  together  fought  battles  on  the 
Continent.  It  is  possible  that  troops  from  Britain  served  in  the  successful 
expedition  of the  Gauls  against  R o me  in  390  B . C.  T he  Gaulish  leader  was 
Brennus—Celtic  kings  habitually  took  the  name  of  their  tribal  g o d s— 
and  Geoffrey's  confused  account  of  subsequent  Continental  wars  under 
taken  by  Bran  and  Belin  evidently  refers  to  the  Gaulish  invasion  of Thrace 
and  Greece  in  279  B . C.  when  Delphi  was  plundered,  the  chief  c o m 
mander  of  the  Gauls  being  another  Brennus.  At  any  rate,  the  alder 
remained  a  sacred  tree  in  Britain  for  long  after  this  Cdd Goddeu;  a  K i ng  of 
Kent  as  late  as  the  fifth  century  A . D.  was  named  Gwerngen,  'son  of  the 
Alder'.  T he  answer  to  one  of  the  riddles  in  the  'Taliesin'  poem-medley 
called  Angar  Cyvyndawd  ('Hostile  Confederacy'),  ' W hy  is  the  alder  of 
purplish colour?', is doubtless:  'Because Bran w o re royal  purple.'T he  ultimate  origin  of the  g od  Beli  is  uncertain,  but  if we  identify  the 
British  Belin  or  Beli  with  Belus  the  father  of Danaus  (as  Nennius  does), 
then  we  can  further  identify  him  with  Bel,  the  Babylonian  Earth-god,  one 
of a  male  trinity,  w ho  succeeded  to  the  titles  of a  far  more  ancient  Meso-
potamian  deity,  the  mother  of Danae  as  opposed  to  the  father  of Danaus. 
T h is  was  Belili,  the  Sumerian  White  Goddess,  Ishtar's  predecessor,  w ho 
was  a  goddess  of  trees  as  well  as  a  Moon-goddess,  Love-goddess  and 
Underworld-goddess.  She  was  sister  and  lover  to  D u ' u z u,  or  T a m m u z, 
the  C o r n - g od  and  Pomegranate-god.  F r om  her  name  derives  the  familiar 
Biblical  expression  'Sons  of  Belial'—the  J e ws  having  characteristically 
altered  the  non-Semitic  name  Belili  into  the  Semitic  B e l iy  ya'al  ('from 
which  one  comes  not  up  again',  i.e.  the  Underworld)—meaning  'Sons  of 
Destruction'.  T he  Slavonic  w o rd  beli  meaning  'white'  and  the  Latin 
bellus  meaning  'beautiful'  are  also  ultimately  connected  with  her  name. 
Originally  every  tree  was  hers,  and  the  Goidelic  bile,  'sacred  tree',  the 
mediaeval  Latin  billa  and  billus,  'branch,  trunk  of  tree',  and  the  English

billet  are  all  recollections  of  her  name.  A b o ve  all,  she  was  a  W i l l o w-
goddess  and  goddess  of wells  and  springs.billet  are  all  recollections  of  her  name.  A b o ve  all,  she  was  a  W i l l o w-
goddess  and  goddess  of wells  and  springs.

T he  willow  was  of  great  importance  in  the  worship  of  Jehovah  at 
Jerusalem,  and  the  Great  D ay  of the  Feast  of Tabernacles,  a fire and  water 
ceremony,  was  called  the  D ay  of  W i l l o w s.  T h o u gh  alder  and  willow  are 
not  differentiated  in  Hebrew—they  are  of  the  same  family—Tanaitic 
tradition,  dating  from  before  the  destruction  of  the  Temple,  prescribed 
that  the  red-twigged  willow  with  lanceolate  leaves,  i.e.  the  purple  osier, 
should  be  the  sort  used  in  the  thyrsus  of palm,  quince  and  willow  carried 
during  the  Feast;  if  none  were  obtainable,  then  the  round-leaved  willow, 
i.e.  the  sallow  or  'palm',  might  be  used,  but  the  variety  with  toothed 
leaves,  i.e.  the  alder,  was  forbidden—presumably  because  it  was  used  in 
idolatrous  rites  in  honour  of Astarte  and  her  son  the  Fire-god.  Although 
the  use  of  the  thyrsus  was  obligatory,  the  Israelites  having  taken  it  o v er 
with 
in 
the  Mosaic  L a w,  the  w i l l ow  (or  osier)  was  mistrusted  by  the  more 
intelligent  J e ws  in  later  days.  According  to  one  Ha.ga.dah,  the  w i l l ow  in 
the  thyrsus  symbolized  the  'inferior  and  ignorant  of  Israel  w ho  have 
neither  righteousness  nor  knowledge,  as  the  willow  has  neither  taste  nor 
smell':  in  fact, even,  the indifferent would  be  provided  for by Jehovah.

the  Canaanites'  Tabernacle  ceremonies  and

incorporated

it

By  his

triumphant  supersession  of  Queen  Belili,  Bel  becamethe  Canaanites'  Tabernacle  ceremonies  and

incorporated

it

By  his

triumphant  supersession  of  Queen  Belili,  Bel  became

the 
Supreme  Lord  of the  Universe,  father  of the  S u n - g od  and  the  M o o n - g o d, 
and  claimed  to  be  the  Creator:  a  claim  later  advanced  by  the  upstart  B a b y 
lonian  g od  Marduk.  Bel  and  Marduk  were  finally  identified,  and  since 
Marduk  had  been  a  god  of  the  Spring  Sun  and  of  thunder,  Bel  had 
similarly  become  a  sort  of  Solar  Zeus  before  his  emigration  to  Europe 
from  Phoenicia.

It seems  then  that  Beli was  originally a  W i l l o w - g o d,  a divinatory son  of

Belili,  but  became  the  G od  of Light,  and  that  in  fourth-century  B . C.  B r i 
tain,  at  the  Cad Goddeu,  his  power  was  invoked  by  his  son  Amathaon  as  a 
means  of  supplanting  Bran  of  the  alder,  whose  counterpart  had  perhaps 
been  similarly  supplanted  in  Palestine.  At  the  same  time  G w y d i on  of 
the  ash  supplanted  A r a w n,  another  divinatory  g od  whose  tree  is  not 
interchanges  of  divine 
known.  T he 
function  will  be  discussed  in  a  later chapter.

implications  of

these  peculiar

T he  author  of  the  Romance  of  Taliesin  evidently  knew  Amathaon  as 
'Llew  L l a w ',  a  Brythonic  title  of  Hercules,  since  he  says  in  the  Cerdd am 
Viib Llyr  ('Song  Concerning  the  Sons  of   L l y r ' ):

/ was at the Cad G o d d eu with Llew and Gwydion, 
He who trans formed timber, earth andplants.

T he  case  is  complicated  by  occasional  bardic  references  to  Beli  and  the 
sea  which  at  first  sight  suggest  that  he  is  a  Sea-god:  the  waves  are  hisT he  case  is  complicated  by  occasional  bardic  references  to  Beli  and  the 
sea  which  at  first  sight  suggest  that  he  is  a  Sea-god:  the  waves  are  his

horses,  the  brine  is  his  liquor.  But  this  probably  honours  him  as  the 
tutelary  deity  of Britain,  his  'honey  isle'  as  it  is  called  in  a  Triad—no  g od 
can  rule  over  an  island  unless  he  also  commands  the  adjacent  waters— 
with  a  hint  also  that  as  the  Sun-god  he  'drinks  the  waters  of  the  West* 
every  evening  at  sunset,  and  that  white  horses  are  traditionally  sacred  to 
the  sun.T he  last  form  in  which  the  famous  conflict  between  Beli  and  Bran 
occurs  is  the  story  of  the  brothers  Balin  and  Balan  in  Malory's  Morte 
iyArthur,  w ho  killed  each  other  by  mistake.  But,  as  Charles  Squire 
points  out  in  his  Celtic  Myth  and  Legend,  Bran  appears  in  various  other 
disguises  in  the  same  jumbled  romance.  As  K i ng  Brandegore  (Bran  of 
G o w e r)  he  brings  five  thousand  men  to  oppose  K i ng  Arthur;  but  as  Sir 
Brandel  or  Brandiles  (Bran  of  Gwales)  he  fights  valiandy  on  Arthur's 
side.  As  K i ng  Ban  of  B e n w yk  ('the  square  enclosure',  called  'Caer 
P e d r y v a n'  in  the  poem  Preiddeu  Annwm  which  will  be  examined  in 
Chapter  Six)  he  is  a  foreign  ally  of  Arthur's;  as  Leodegrance—in  the 
Welsh,  O g yr  V r a n— he  is  Arthur's  father-in-law;  and  as  Uther  Ben  ('the 
wonderful  head'),  which  is  a  reference  to  the  story  of  the  singing  head 
buried  on  T o w er  Hill,  he  is  Arthur's  father.  T he  Norman-French 
trovires  and  Malory  w ho  collected  and  collated  their  Arthurian  romances 
had  no  knowledge  of,  or  interest  in,  the  historical  and  religious  meaning 
of the  myths  that  they  handled.  T h ey  felt  themselves  free  to  improve  the 
narrative  in  accordance  with  their  new  gospel  of  chivalry  fetched  from 
Provence—breaking  up  the  old  mythic  patterns  and  taking  liberties  of 
every  sort  that  the  W e l sh  minstrels  had  never  dared  to  take.T he  modern  licence  claimed  by  novelists  and  short-story  writers  to  use 
their  imaginations  as  freely  as  they  please  prevents  students  of m y t h o l o gy 
from  realizing  that  in  North-Western  Europe,  where  the  post-Classical 
Greek  novel  was  not  in  circulation,  story-tellers  did  not  invent  their  plots 
and  characters  but  continually  retold  the  same  traditional  tales,  extempor 
izing  only  when  their  memory  was  at  fault.  Unless  religious  or  social 
change  forced  a  modification  of  the  plot  or  a  modernization  of  incident, 
the  audience  expected  to  hear  the  tales  told  in  the  accustomed  w a y. 
Almost  all  were  explanations  of  ritual  or  religious  theory,  overlaid  with 
history:  a  b o dy  of instruction  corresponding  with  the  Hebrew  Scriptures 
and  having  many  elements  in  common with  them.

60

Chapter  Four

T HE  WHITE  G O D D E SS

Since  the  close  connexion  here  suggested  between  ancient  British,60

Chapter  Four

T HE  WHITE  G O D D E SS

Since  the  close  connexion  here  suggested  between  ancient  British,

Greek,  and  Hebrew  religion  will  not  be  easily  accepted,  I  wish  to 
make  it  immediately  clear  that  I  am  not  a  British  Israelite  or  any 
thing  of that  sort.  My  reading  of the  case  is  that  at  different  periods  in  the 
second  millennium  B . C.  a  confederacy of mercantile tribes,  called  in  E g y pt 
'the  People  of the  Sea',  were  displaced  from  the  Aegean  area  by  invaders 
from  the  north-east  and  south-east;  that  some  of  these  wandered  north, 
along  already  established  trade-routes,  and  eventually  reached  Britain  and 
Ireland;  and  that  others  wandered  west,  also  along  established  trade-
routes,  some  elements  reaching  Ireland  by  w ay  of North  Africa  and  Spain. 
Still  others  invaded  Syria  and  Canaan,  among  them  the  Philistines,  w ho 
captured  the  shrine  of Hebron  in  southern  Judaea  from  the  Edomite  clan 
of  Caleb;  but  the  Calebites  ( ' D o g - m e n ' ),  allies  of  the  Israelite  tribe  of 
Judah,  recovered  it  about  two  hundred  years  later  and  took  over  a  great 
part  of  the  Philistine  religion  at  the  same  time.  These  borrowings  were 
eventually  harmonized  in  the  Pentateuch  with  a  b o dy  of  Semitic,  Indo-
European  and  Asianic  myth  which  composed  the  religious  traditions  of 
the  mixed  Israelite  confederacy.  T he  connexion,  then,  between  the  early 
myths  of  the  Hebrews,  the  Greeks  and  the  Celts  is  that  all  three  races 
were  civilized  by  the  same  Aegean  people  w h om  they  conquered  and 
absroved.  A nd  this  is  not  of merely  antiquarian  interest,  for  the  popular 
appeal  of modern  Catholicism,  is,  despite  the  patriarchal  Trinity  and  the 
all-male  priesthood,  based  rather  on  the Aegean  Mother-and-Son  religious 
tradition,  to  which  it  has  s l o w ly  reverted,  than  on  its  Aramaean  or  I n d o-
European  'warrior-god'  elements.To  write  in  greater historical  detail  about the  Danaans.  D a n u,  Danae,  or 
D o n,  appears  in  R o m an  records  as  Donnus,  divine  father  of  Cottius,  the 
sacred  king  of the  Cottians,  a  Ligurian  confederacy  that  g a ve  its  name  to 
the  Cottian A l p s.  C o t t y s,  C o t y s,  or  Cottius  is  a widely distributed  name. 
Cotys appears as a  dynastic  tide  in Thrace between the  fourth century B . C. 
and  the  first  century  A . D.,  and  the  Cattini  and  Attacoti  of  North  Britain 
and  many  intervening  Cart-  and  Cott-  tribes  between  there  and  Thrace 
are  held  to  be  of  Cottian  stock.  There  was  also  a  C o t ys  dynasty  in 
61

Paphlagonia  on  the  southern  shore  of  the  Black  Sea.  All  seem  to  take 
their  name  from  the  great  Goddess  Cotytto,  or  C o t y s,  w ho  was  w o r 
shipped  orgiastically  in  Thrace,  Corinth  and  Sicily.  Her  nocturnal  orgies, 
the  Cotyttia,  were  according  to  Strabo  celebrated  in  much  the  same  w ay 
as  those  of  Demeter,  the  Barley-goddess  of  primitive  Greece,  and  of 
C y b e l e,  the  Lion-and-Bee  goddess  of  Phrygia  in  whose  honour  y o u ng 
men  castrated  themselves;  in  Sicily  a  feature  of the  Cotyttia  was  the  carry 
ing  of boughs  hung  with  fruit  and  barley-cakes.  In  Classical  legend  Cottys 
was 
the  hundred-handed  monsters 
Briareus  and  G y e s,  allies  of the  G od  Zeus  in  his  w ar against  the  Titans  on 
the  borders  of  Thrace  and  Thessaly.  These  monsters  were  called 
Hecatontocheiroi  ('the  hundred-handed  ones').

the  hundred-handed  brother  ofthe  hundred-handed  brother  of

T he  story  of this  war  against  the  Titans  is  intelligible  only  in  the  light 
of  early  Greek  history.  T he  first  Greeks  to  invade  Greece  were  the 
Achaeans  w ho  broke  into Thessaly  about  1900 B.C.;  they were patriarchal 
herdsmen  and  worshipped  an  Indo-European  male 
trinity  of  gods, 
originally  perhaps  Mitra,  Varuna  and  Indra  w h om  the  Mitanni  of  Asia 
Minor  still  remembered  in  1400  B.C.,  subsequently  called  Zeus,  Poseidon 
and  Hades*  Little  by  little  they  conquered  the  whole  of  Greece  and  tried 
to  destroy  the  semi-matriarchal  Bronze  A ge  civilization  that  they  found 
there,  but  later  compromised  with  it,  accepted  matrilinear  succession  and 
enrolled 
themselves  as  sons  of  the  variously  named  Great  Goddess. 
T h ey  became  allies  of  the  v e ry  mixed  population  of  the  mainland  and 
islands,  some  of  them 
they 
named  'Pelasgians',  or  seafarers.  T he  Pelasgians  claimed  to  be  born  from 
the  teeth  of  the  cosmic  snake  Ophion  w h om  the  Great  Goddess  in  her 
character  of  E u r y n o me  ('wide  rule')  had  taken  as  her  lover,  thereby 
initiating  the  material  Creation;  but  Ophion  and  E u r y n o me  are  Greek 
renderings  of  the  original  names.  T h ey  may  have  called  themselves 
Danaans  after  the  same  goddess  in  her  character  of  Danae,  w ho  presided 
over  agriculture.  At  any  rate  the Achaeans  w ho  had  occupied  A r g o l is  now 
also  took  the  name  of  Danaans,  and  also  became  seafarers;  while  those 
w ho  remained  north  of  the  isthmus  of  Corinth  were  known  as  Ionians, 
children  of the  Cow-goddess  I o.  Of the  Pelasgians  driven  out  of Argolis 
some  founded  cities  in  Lesbos,  Chios  and  Cnidos;  others  escaped  to 
Thrace,  the  T r o ad  and  the  North  Aegean  islands.  A  few  clans  remained 
in  Attica,  Magn  sia and  elsewhere.long-headed,  some  broad-headed,  w h om

T he  most  warlike  of  the  remaining  Pelasgians  were  the  Centaurs  of 
Magnesia,  whose  clan  totems  included  the  wryneck  and  mountain  lion. 
T h ey  also  worshipped  the  horse,  probably  not  the  Asiatic  horse  brought 
from  the  Caspian  at  the  beginning  of  the  second  millennium  B.C.,  but 
an  earlier,  and  inferior,  European  variety,  a  sort  of  Dartmoor  pony. 
T he  Centaurs  under  their  sacred  king  Cheiron  welcomed  Achaean  aid

62

against 
their  enemies  the  Lapiths,  of  Northern  Thessaly.  T he  w o rd 
'Cheiron'  is  apparently  connected  with  the  Greek  cheir,  a  hand,  and  ' C e n 
taurs'  with  centron,  a  goat.  In  my  essay  What  Food  the  Centaurs  Ate,  I 
that  they  intoxicated  themselves  by  eating  'fly-cap'  (amanita 
suggest 
muscaria),  the  hundred-clawed  toad,  an  example  of which  appears,  carved 
on  an  Etruscan  mirror,  at  the  feet  of their  ancestor Ixion.  W e re  the  Heca-
tontocheiroi  the  Centaurs  of mountainous  Magnesia,  whose  friendship  was 
strategically  necessary 
the  Achaean  pastoralists  of  Thessaly  and 
Boeotia?  T he  Centaurs'  mother  goddess  was  called,  in  Greek,  Leucothea, 
'the  White  Goddess',  but  the  Centaurs  themselves  called  her  Ino  or 
Plastene,  and  her  rock-cut  image  is  still  shown  near  the  ancient  pinnacle-
town  of  Tantalus;  she  had  also  become  the  'mother'  of  Melicertes,  or 
Hercules  Melkarth,  the  g od  of earlier  semi-Semitic  invaders.

to

1to

1

T he  Greeks  claimed  to  remember  the  date  of Zeus's  victory  in  alliance 
with  the  Hecatontocheiroi  over  the  Titans of Thessaly:  the well-informed 
Tatian  quotes  a  calculation  by  the  first-century  A . D.  historian  Thallus,
that  it  took  place  322  years  before  the  ten-year  siege  of  T r o y.  Since  the 
fall of T r oy was then confidently dated at 1 1 83 B . C ., the answer is 1505 B . C. 
If this  date  is  more  or  less  accurate 2  the  legend  probably  refers  to  an  exten 
sion  of Achaean  power  in  Thessaly  at  the  expense  of Pelasgian  tribes,  w ho 
were  driven  off to  the  north.  T he  story  of the  Gigantomachia,  the  fight  of 
the  Olympian  gods  with  the  giants,  probably  refers  to  a  similar  but  much 
later  occasion,  when  the  Greeks  found  it  necessary  to  subdue  the  warlike 
Magnesians  in  their  fastnesses  of Pelion  and  Ossa—apparently  because  of 
trouble  caused  by  their  exogamic  practices  which  conflicted  with  the 
Olympian  patriarchal  theory  and  gave 
them  an  undeserved  reputation 
as sexual  maniacs;  it also  records  Hercules's  charm  against  the nightmare.

T he Achaeans  became  Cretanized  between  the seventeenth  and  fifteenth 
centuries in the Late Minoan A g e, which in  Greece is called the Mycenaean, 
after  Mycenae,  the  capital  city  of the Atreus  dynasty.  T he Aeolian  Greeks 
invaded  Thessaly  from 
the  north  and  were  further  able  to  occupy 
Boeotia  and  the  Western  Peloponnese.  T h ey  settled  down  amicably  with 
the  Achaean  Danaans  and  became  k n o wn  as  the  Minyans.  It  is  likely  that 
both  nations  took  part  in  the  sack  of  Cnossos  about  the  year  1400,  which 
ended  Cretan  sea-power.  T he  reduction  of  Crete,  by  now  become  largely 
in  a  great  expansion  of  Mycenaean  power: 
Greek-speaking,  resulted

1  Thallus  gives  the  earliest  historical  record  of the  Crucifixion.1  Thallus  gives  the  earliest  historical  record  of the  Crucifixion.

' A.  R.  Burn  in  his  Minoans,  Philistines  and  Greeks  suggests  that  all  traditional  dates 
before  500  B . C.  should  be  reduced  to  five-sixths  of  their  distance  from  that  date,  since  the 
Greeks  reckoned  three  generations  to  a  century,  when  four  would  be  nearer  the  mark.  H o w 
ever,  Walter  Leaf approves  of  1 1 83  B . C.  as  the  date  of  the  Fall  of T r o y,  because  the  curse  of 
one  thousand  years  that  had  fallen  on  the  city  of  Ajax  in  punishment  for  his  rape  of  the 
Trojan priestess Cassandra was lifted about 1 83  B . C. T he date now favoured by most archaeo 
logists is  1 2 30 B .C

conquests  in  Asia  Minor,  Phoenicia,  L i b ya and  the Aegean  islands.  A b o ut 
the  year  1250  B.C.  a  distinction  arose  between the  Achaean  Danaans  and 
other  less  civilized  Achaeans  from  North-western  Greece  w ho  invaded 
the  Peloponnese,  founded  a  new  patriarchal  dynasty,  repudiated  the 
sovereignty  of  the  Great  Goddess,  and  instituted  the  familiar  Olympian 
pantheon,  ruled  over  by  Zeus,  in  which  gods  and  goddesses  were  equally 
represented.  Myths  of  Zeus's  quarrels  with  his  wife  Hera  (a  name  of the 
Great  Goddess),  with  his  brother  Poseidon,  and  with  A p o l lo  of  Delphi, 
suggest  that  the  religious  revolution  was  at  first  strongly  resisted  by  the 
Danaans  and  Pelasgians.  But  a  united  Greece  captured  T r o y,  at  the 
entrance  to  the  Dardanelles,  a  city  which  had  taken  toll  of their  commerce 
with  the  Black  Sea  and  the  East.  A  generation  after  the  fall  of  T r o y, 
another  Indo-European  horde  pressed  down  into  Asia  Minor  and  Europe 
— a m o ng  them  the  Dorians  w ho  invaded  Greece,  killing,  sacking  and 
burning—and  a  great  tide  of fugitives  was  let  loose  in  all  directions.T h us  we  may,  without  historical  qualms,  identify  D a nu  of  the  Tuatha

d€  Danaan,  w ho  were  Bronze  A ge  Pelasgians  expelled  from  Greece  in  the 
middle  of the  second  millennium,  with  the  pre-Achaean  Goddess  Danae 
of A r g o s.  Her  power  extended  to  Thessaly,  and  she  mothered  the  early 
Achaean  dynasty  called  the  House  of  Perseus  (more  correctly  Pterseus, 
time  Danae  was  masculinized  into 
'the  destroyer');  but  by  Homer's 
'Danaus,  son  of Belus',  w ho  was  said  to  have  brought  his  'daughters'  to 
Greece  from  L i b ya  by  w ay  of E g y p t,  Syria  and  Rhodes.  T he  names  of 
the  three  daughters,  Linda,  Cameira  and  Ialysa,  are  evidendy  tides  of the 
Goddess, w ho also figures as  'Lamia,  daughter of Belus, a L i b y an  Queen'. 
In  the  well-known  legend  of  the  massacre  of  the  sons  of  A e g y p t us  on 
their  wedding  night  the  number  of these  daughters  of Danaus,  or  Danaids, 
is  enlarged  from  three  to  fifty,  probably  because  that  was  the  regular 
number  of  priestesses  in  the  A r g i ve  and  Elian  colleges  of  the  Mother-
goddess  cult.  T he  original  Danaans  may well  have  come  up  to  the Aegean 
from  L a ke  Tritonis  in  L i b ya  (now a  salt  marsh),  by the  route  given  in  the 
legend,  though  it  is  unlikely  that  they  were  so  called  until  they  reached 
Syria.  That  the  Cottians,  w ho  came  to  Northern  Greece  from  the  Black 
Sea  by  w ay  of  P h r y g ia  and  Thrace,  were  also  reckoned  as  Danaans, 
proves  that  they  arrived  there  before  the  Aeolians,  w ho  were  not  so 
reckoned.  A.  B.  C o ok  in  his  Zeus  gives  strong  reasons  for  believing  that 
the  Graeco-Libyans  and  the  Thraco-Phrygians  were  related,  and  that 
both  tribal  groups  had  relatives  among  the  early  Cretans.We  may  further  identify  D a nu  with  the  Mother-goddess  of the  Aegean 
'Danuna',  a  people  w ho  about  the  year  1200  B.C.,  according  to  con 
temporary  E g y p t i an  inscriptions,  invaded  Northern  Syria  in  company 
with  the  Sherdina  and  Zakkala  of  L y d i a,  the  Shakalsha  of  P h r y g i a,  the 
the  Akaiwasha  of  Pamphylia,  and  other  Eastern 
Pulesati  of  L y c i a,

64

Mediterranean  peoples.  To  the  Egyptians  these  were  all  'Peoples  of the 
Sea'—the  Akaiwasha  are  Achaeans—forced  by  the  pressure  of  the  new 
Indo-European  horde  to  emigrate  from  the  coastal  parts  of  Asia  Minor 
as  well  as  from  Greece  and  the  Aegean  islands.  T he  Pulesati  became  the 
Philistines  of  Southern  Phoenicia; 
they  were  mixed  with  Cherethites 
(Cretans),  some  of w h om  served  in  K i ng  D a v i d 's  bodyguard  at  Jerusalem 
—possibly  Greek-speaking  Cretans,  Sir  Arthur  Evans  suggests.  O ne 
emigrant  people,  the  conquerors  of the  Hittites,  known  to  the  Assyrians 
as  the  Muski  and  to  the  Greeks  as  the  Moschians,  established  themselves 
on  the  Upper  Euphrates  at  Hierapolis.  Lucian's  account  in  his  De  Dea 
Syria  of  the  antique  rites  still  practised  in  the  second  century A . D.  at  their 
temple  of the  Great  Goddess  gives  the  clearest  picture  of Aegean  Bronze 
A ge  religion  that  has  been  preserved.  Tribes  or  clans  of  the  same  con 
federacy  drifted  westward  to  Sicily,  Italy,  North  Africa,  Spain.  T he 
Zakkala  became  the  Sicels  of  Sicily;  the  Sherdina  gave  their  name  to 
Sardinia;  the  Tursha  are  the  Tursenians  (or  Tyrrhenians)  of Etruria.Some  Danaans  seem  to  have  travelled  west,  since  Silius Italicus,  a  first-
century  Latin  poet,  said  to  have  been  a  Spaniard,  records  a  tradition  that 
the  Balearic  islands—a  centre  of megalithic  culture  and  one  of  the  chief 
sources  of  tin  in  the  ancient  world—were  first  made  into  a  kingdom  by 
the  Danaans  Tleptolemus  and  Lindus.  Lindus  is  a  masculization  of  the 
Danaan  Linda.  At  least  one  part  of  the  people  remained  in  Asia  Minor. 
Recently  a  Danaan  city  has  been  discovered  in  the  foothills  of the  Taurus 
Mountains  near  Alexandretta  and  the  inscriptions  (not  yet  deciphered) 
are  in  Hittite  hieroglyphs  of the  ninth  century  B.C.  and  in  Aramaic  script. 
T he  language  is  thought  to  be  Canaanitish  and  the sculptures  are a  mixture 
of  Assyrio-Hittite,  Egyptian  and  Aegean  styles;  which  bears  out  the 
Greek  account  of  Danaus  as  a  son  of  A g e n or  (Canaan)  w ho  came  up 
north  from  L i b ya  by  w ay  of E g y pt and  Syria.T he  myth  of  the  emasculation  of  Uranus  by  his  son  Cronos  and  the 
vengeance  subsequently  taken  on  Cronos  by  his  son  Zeus,  w ho  banished 
him  to  the  Western  Underworld  under  charge  of  the  'hundred-handed 
ones',  is  not  an  easy  one  to  disentangle.  In  its  original  sense  it  records  the 
annual  supplanting  of the  old  oak-king  by  his  successor.  Zeus  was  at  one 
time  the  name  of a  herdsmen's  oracular  hero,  connected  with  the  oak-tree 
cult  of  Dodona  in  Epirus,  which  was  presided  over  by  the  d o v e-
priestesses  of  Dione,  a  woodland  Great  Goddess,  otherwise  known  as 
Diana.  T he  theory  of  Frazer's  Golden  Bough  is  familiar  enough  to  make 
this  point  unnecessary  to  elaborate  at  length,  though  Frazer  does  not 
clearly  explain  that  the  cutting  of the  mistletoe  from  the  oak  by  the  Druids 
typified  the  emasculation  of the  old  king  by  his  successor—the  misdetoe 
being  a  prime  phallic  emblem.  T he  king  himself was  eucharistically  eaten 
after  castration,  as  several  legends  of  the  Pelopian  dynasty  testify;  but

6565

in  the  Peloponnese  at  least  this  oak-tree  cult  had  been  superimposed  on  a 
barley-cult  of which  Cronos  was  the  hero,  and  in  which  human  sacrifice 
was  also  the  rule.  In  the  barley-cult,  as  in  the  oak-cult,  the  successor  to 
the  kingship  inherited  the  favours  of  the  priestesses  of  his  Goddess 
mother.  In  both  cults  the  victim  became  an  immortal,  and  his  oracular 
remains  were  removed  for  burial  to  some  sacred  island—such  as  S a m o-
thrace,  Lemnos,  Pharos  near Alexandria,  O r t y g ia the  islet near  Delos,  the 
other  O r t y g i a1  off  S i c i l y,  Leuce  off  the  mouth  of  the  Danube,  where 
Achilles  had  a  shrine,  Circe's  Aeaea  (now  Lussin  in  the  Adriatic),  the 
Atlantic  Elysium  where  Menelaus  went  after  death,  and 
the  distant 
O g y g i a,  perhaps  T o r r ey  Island  off  the  west  coast  of  Ireland—under  the 
charge of magic-making and  orgiastic priestesses.T h at  Cronos  the emasculator was  deposed  by  his  son  Zeus  is  an  econo 
mical  statement:  the  Achaean  herdsmen  w ho  on  their  arrival  in  Northern 
Greece  had  identified 
their  S k y - g od  with  the  local  oak-hero  gained 
ascendancy  over  the  Pelasgian  agriculturalists.  But  there  was  a  com 
promise  between  the  t wo  cults.  Dione,  or  Diana,  of  the  woodland 
was  identified  with  Danae  of the  barley;  and  that  an  inconvenient  golden 
sickle,  not  a  bill-hook  of  flint  or  obsidian,  was  later  used  by  the  Gallic 
Druids  for  lopping  the  mistletoe,  proves  that  the  oak-ritual  had  been 
combined  with  that  of  the  barley-king  w h om  the  Goddess  Danae,  or 
Alphito,  or  Demeter,  or  Ceres,  reaped  with  her  moon-shaped  sickle. 
Reaping meant castration;  similarly,  the  Galla  warriors  of Abyssinia  carry 
a  miniature  sickle  into  battle  for  castrating  their  enemies.  T he  Latin 
Cronos  was  called  Saturn  and  in  his  statues  he  was  armed  with  a  pruning-
knife  crooked  like  a  crow's  bill:  probably  a  rebus  on  his  name.  F or 
though  the  later  Greeks  liked  to  think  that  the  name  meant  chronos, 
'time',  because  any  v e ry  old  man  was  humorously  called  ' C r o n o s ',  the 
more  likely  derivation  is  from  the  same  root  cron  or  corn  that  gives  the 
Greek  and  Latin  words  for  crow—corone  and  comix.  T he  crow  was  a 
bird  much  consulted  by  augurs  and  symbolic,  in  Italy  as  in  Greece,  of 
long  life.  T h us  it  is  possible  that  another  name  for  Cronos,  the  sleeping 
Titan,  guarded  by  the  hundred-headed  Briareus,  was  Bran,  the  C r o w-
g o d.  T he  Cronos  myth,  at  any  rate,  is  ambivalent:  it  records  the  super 
session  and  ritual  murder,  in  both  oak  and  barley  cults,  of the  Sacred  K i ng 
at  the  close  of  his  term  of  office;  and  it  records  the  conquest  by  the 
Achaean  herdsmen  of  the  pre-Achaean  husbandmen  of  Greece.  At  the 
R o m an  Saturnalia  in  Republican  times,  a  festival  corresponding  with  the1  There  was  a  third  Ortygia  ('quail  place").  According  to  Tacitus,  the  Ephesians in  their  plea 
before  the  Emperor  Tiberius  for  the  right  of  asylum  in  the  Artemisian  precinct,  stated  that 
the  cult  of  their  Great  Goddess  Artemis  (whom  the  Romans  called  Diana)  was  derived  from 
Ortygia,  where her name was  then  Leto.  D r.  D.  G.  Hogarth  places  this  Ortygia  in  the  Arvalian 
Valley  to  the  north  of  Mount  Solmissos,  but  the  suggestion  is  not  plausible  unless,  like  the 
islets  of  the  same  name,  it  was  a  resting  place  for  quail  in  the  Spring  migration  from  A H c a. 
66

old  English  Y u l e,  all  social  restraints  were  temporarily  abandoned  in 
memory  of the  golden  reign  of Cronos.

I  call  Bran  a  C r o w - g o d,  but  crow,  raven,  scald-crow  and  other  large 
black  carrion  birds  are  not  always  differentiated  in  early  times.  Corone  in 
Greek  also  included  the  corax,  or  raven;  and  the  Latin  corvus,  raven, 
comes  from  the  same  root  as  comix,  crow.  T he  crows  of  Bran,  Cronos, 
Saturn, Aesculapius and A p o l lo are, equally, ravens.T he  fifty  Danaids  appear  in  early  British  history.  J o hn  Milton  in  his 
Early  Britain  scoffs  ponderously  at  die  legend  preserved  by  Nennius  that 
Britain  derives  its  earliest  name,  A l b i o n,  by which  it was k n o wn  to  Pliny, 
from  Albina  ('the  White  Goddess'),  the  eldest  of the  Danaids.  T he  name 
Albina,  a  form  of which  was  also  given  to  the  R i v er Elbe  (Albis  in  Latin); 
and  which  accounts  for  the  Germanic  words  elven,  an  elf-woman,  alb,  elf 
and  alpdrucken,  the  nightmare  or  incubus,  is  connected  with  the  Greek 
words  alphos,  meaning  'dull-white  leprosy'1  (Latin  albus),  alphiton,  'pearl-
barley',  and  Alphito,  'the  White  Goddess',  w ho  in  Classical  times  had 
degenerated  into  a  nursery  bugbear  but  w ho  seems  originally  to  have 
been  the  Danaan  Barley-goddess  of  A r g o s.  Sir  James  Frazer  regards 
her  as  'either  Demeter  or  her  double,  Persephone'.  T he  w o rd  ' A r g o s' 
itself  means  'shimmering  white',  and  is  the  conventional  adjective  to 
describe  white  priestly  vestments.  It  also  means  'quick  as  a  flash'.  That 
we  are  justified  in  connecting  the  hundred-armed  men  with  the  White 
Goddess  of A r g os  is  proved  by  the  myth  of l o,  the  same  goddess,  nurse 
to  the  infant  D i o n y s u s,  w ho  was  guarded  by  A r g us  Panoptes  ('all-eyes'), 
the  hundred-eyed  monster,  probably  represented  as  a  white  dog;  A r go 
was  the  name  of  Odysseus's  famous  d o g.  Io  was  the  white  cow  aspect 
of  the  Goddess  as  Barley-goddess.  She  was  also  worshipped  as  a  white 
mare,  Leucippe,  and  as  a  white  s o w,  Choere  or  Phorcis,  whose  more 
polite  title was  Marpessa,  'the  snatcher'.N o w,  in  the  Romance  of Taliesin,  G w i o n 's  enemy  Caridwen,  or  Cerri-
Jwen,  was  a  white  Sow-goddess too, according  to  D r.  MacCulloch  w h o, 
in  his  well-documented  Religion  of the  Ancient  Celts,  quotes  Geoffrey  of 
Monmouth  and  the  French  Celtologist  T h o m as  in  evidence  and  records 
that she was also described  by Welsh bards  as a  Grain-goddess;  he equates 
her  with  the  S ow  Demeter  mentioned  above.  Her  name  is  composed  of 
the  words  cerdd and  wen.  Wen  means  'white',  and  cerdd in  Irish  and  Welsh

1  T he  White  Hill,  or  T o w er  Hill,  at  London  preserves  Albina's  memory,  the  Keep  built  in 
1078  by  Bishop  Gundulf  being  still  called  the  White  T o w e r.  Herman  Melville  in  his  Moby 
Dick  devotes  an  eloquent  chapter  to  a  consideration  of  the  contradictory  emotions  aroused 
hy  the  word  'white'—the  grace,  splendour  and  purity  of  milk-white  steeds,  white  sacrificial 
bulls,  snowy  bridal  veils  and  white  priestly  vestments,  as  opposed  to  the  nameless  horror 
aroused  by albinos,  lepers,  visitants  in  white  hoods and  so  forth—and  records that the blood 
of American  visitors  to  T o w er  Hill  is  far  more  readily  chilled  by  'This  is  the  White  T o w e r ', 
•ban  by  'This  is  the  Bloody  T o w e r .'  M o by  Dick  was  an  albino  whale.

<57<57

means  'gain'  and  also  'the  inspired  arts,  especially  poetry',  like  the  Greek 
words  cerdos  and  cerdeia,  from  which  derives  the  Latin  cerdo,  a  craftsman. 
In  Greek, the weasel, a favourite disguise of Thessalian  witches, was  called 
cedro,  usually  translated  'the  artful  one';  and  cerdo,  an  ancient  w o rd  of 
uncertain  origin,  is  the  Spanish  for  ' p i g '1.  Pausanias  makes  Cerdo  the 
wife  of  the  A r g i ve  cult-hero  Phoroneus,  the  inventor  of fire  and  brother 
of  both  Io  and  A r g us  Panoptes,  w ho  will  be  identified  in  Chapter  T en 
with  Bran.  T he  famous  cerdaha  harvest-dance  of the  Spanish  Pyrenees  was 
perhaps  first  performed  in  honour  of  this  Goddess,  w ho  has  given  her 
name  to  the  best  corn-land  in  the  region,  the  valley  of Cerdafla,  dominated 
by  the  town  of  Puigcerda,  or  Cerdo's  Hill.  T he  syllable  Cerd  figures  in 
Iberian  royal  names,  the  best  k n o wn  of which  is  L i v y 's  Cerdubelus,  the 
aged  chieftain  w ho  intervened  in  a  dispute  between  the  Romans  and  the 
Iberian  city  of Castulo.  Cerridwen  is  clearly  the  White  S o w,  the  B a r l e y-
goddess,  the  White  L a dy  of Death  and  Inspiration;  is,  in  fact,  Albina,  or 
Alphito,  the  Barley-goddess  w ho  g a ve  her  name 
to  Britain.  Little 
G w i on  had  every  reason  to  fear  her;  it  was  a  great  mistake  on  his  part 
to  try  to  conceal  himself in  a  heap  of grain  on  her  own  threshing  floor.

that  her  principal  prophylacticthat  her  principal  prophylactic

T he  Latins  worshipped  the  White  Goddess  as  Cardea,  and  O v id  tells 
a  muddled  story  about  her  in  his  Fasti,  connecting  her  with  the  word 
cardo,  a  hinge.  He  says  that  she  was  the  mistress  of  Janus,  the  t w o-
headed  god  of  doors  and  of  the  first  month  of  the  year,  and  had  charge 
over  door-hinges.  She  also  protected  infants  against  witches  disguised  as 
formidable  night-birds  w ho  snatched  children  from 
their  cradles  and 
sucked  their  blood.  He  says  that  she  exercised  this  power  first  at  A l ba 
('the  white city'),  which  was  colonized  by emigrants  from  the  Peloponnese 
at  the  time  of  the  great  dispersal,  and  from  which  R o me  was  colonized, 
and 
the  hawthorn. 
O v i d 's  story  is  inside  out:  Cardea  was  Alphito,  the  White  Goddess  who 
destroyed  children  after  disguising  herself  in  bird  or  beast  form,  and  the 
hawthorn  which  was  sacred  to  her  might  not  be  introduced  into  a  house 
lest  she  destroyed  the  children  inside.  It  was  Janus,  'the  stout  guardian  of 
the  oak  door',  w ho  kept  out  Cardea  and  her  witches,  for  Janus  was  really 
the  oak-god  Dianus  w ho  was  incarnate  in  the  K i ng  of  R o me  and  after 
wards  in  the  Flamen  Dialis,  his  spiritual  successor;  and  his  wife  Jana  was 
Diana  (Dione)  the  goddess  of  the  woods  and  of  the  moon.  Janus  and 
Jana  were  in  fact  a  rustic  form  of  Juppiter  and  J u n o.  T he  reduplicated p 
in  Juppiter  represents  an  elided  n:  he  was  Jun-pater—father  Dianus.  But 
before  Janus,  or  Dianus,  or  Juppiter,  married  Jana  or  Diana  or  J u n o,  and 
put  her under  subjection,  he  was  her  son,  and  she  was  the  White  Goddess

instrument  wasinstrument  was

1  Cerdo  is  said  to  be  derived  from  Setula,  'a  little  sow',  but  the  violent  metathesis  of con 
sonants that has to be assumed  to make this derivation  good  cannot be  paralleled in the  names 
of other domestic animals.

68

Cardea.  A nd  though  he  became  the  D o o r,  the  national  guardian,  she 
became  the  hinge  which  connected  him  with  the  door-post;  the  impor 
tance of this relationship will be explained in Chapter T e n. Car do, the hinge, 
is  the  same  word  as  cerdo,  craftsman—in  Irish  myth  the  g od  of craftsmen 
w ho  specialized  in  hinges,  locks  and  rivets  was  called  Credne—the  crafts 
man w ho originally claimed the goddess  Cerdo  or  Cardea as his patroness. 
T h us  as  Janus's  mistress,  Cardea  was  given  the  task  of keeping  from  the 
door the nursery bogey w ho  in  matriarchal  times  was her  o wn  august  self 
and  w ho  was  propitiated  at  Roman  weddings  with  torches  of  hawthorn. 
O v id  says  of Cardea,  apparently  quoting  a  religious  formula:  ' H er  power 
is to open what is shut;  to shut what is open.'O v id  identifies  Cardea  with  the  goddess  Carnea  w ho  had  a  feast  at 
R o me  on  June  i,  when  pig's flesh and  beans  were  offered  to  her.  T h is  is 
helpful  in  so  far  as  it  connects  the  White  Goddess  with  pigs,  though  the 
R o m an  explanation  that  Carnea  was  so  called  quod  carnem  offerunt 
('because they offer her  flesh')  is  nonsense.  Moreover,  as has  already  been 
noted  in  the  Cdd  Goddeu  context,  beans  were  used  in  Classical  times  as  a 
homoeopathic  charm  against  witches  and  spectres:  one  put  a  bean  in 
one's  mouth  and  spat  it  at  the  visitant;  and  at  the  R o m an  feast  of  the 
Lemuria  each  householder  threw  black  beans  behind  his  back  for  the 
Lemures,  or  ghosts,  saying:  'With  these  I  redeem  myself and  my  family.' 
T he  Pythagorean  mystics,  w ho  derived  their  doctrine  from  Pelasgian 
sources,1  were  bound  by  a  strong  taboo  against  the  eating  of  beans  and 
quoted  a  verse  attributed  to  Orpheus,  to  the  effect  that  to  eat  beans  was  to 
eat  one's  parents'  heads. 2  T he  flower  of the  bean  is white,  and  it  blooms  at 
the  same  season  as  the  hawthorn.  T he  bean  is  the  White  G o d d e s s ' s— 
hence  its  connexion  with  the  Scottish  witch  cult;  in  primitive  times  only 
her  priestesses  might  either  plant  or  cook  it.  T he  men  of  Pheneus  in 
Arcadia  had  a  tradition  that  the  Goddess  Demeter,  coming  there  in  her 
wanderings,  gave  them  permission  to  plant  all  grains  and  pulses  except 
only  beans.  It  seems,  then,  that  the  reason  for  the  Orphic  taboo  was  that 
the  bean  grows  spirally  up  its  prop,  portending  resurrection,  and  that 
ghosts  contrived  to  be  reborn  as  humans  by  entering  into  beans—Pliny 
mentions  this—and  being  eaten  by  women;  thus,  for  a  man  to  eat  a  bean 
might  be  an  impious  frustration  of his  dead  parents'  designs.  Beans  were1  Pythagoras  is  said  to  have  been  a  Tyrrhenian  Pelasgian  from  Samos  in  the  Northern 
Aegean.  This  would  account  for  the  close  connection  of  his  philosophy  with  the  Orphic  and 
Druidic.  He  is  credited  with  having  refrained  not  only  from  beans  but  from  fish,  and  seems  to 
have  developed  an  inherited  Pelasgian  cult  by  travel  among  other  nations.  His  theory  of  the 
transmigration  of souls  is  Indian  rather  than  Pelasgian.  At  Crotona  he  was  accepted,  like  his 
successor  Empedocles,  as  a  reincarnation  of Apollo.

*  T he  Platonists  excused  their  abstention  from  beans  on  the  rationalistic  ground  that  they 
caused  flatulence;  but  this  came  to  much  the  same  thing.  Life  was  breath,  and  to  break  wind 
after  eating  beans  was  a  proof  that  one  had  eaten  a  living  soul—in  Greek  and  Latin  the  same 
words,  anima  andpneuma,  stand  equally  for  gust  of wind,  breath  and  soul  or  spirit.

69

tossed  to  ghosts  by  R o m an  householders  at  the  Lemuria  to  g i ve  them  a 
chance  of rebirth;  and  offered  to  the  Goddess  Carnea  at  her  festival  be 
cause  she held  the  keys  of the  Underworld.

Carnea is generally  identified  with  the  R o m an  goddess  Cranae, w ho  was 
really  Cranaea,  'the  harsh  or  stony  one',  a  Greek  surname  of the  Goddess 
Artemis  whose  hostility 
to  children  had  constandy  to  be  appeased. 
Cranaea  owned  a  hill-temple  near  Delphi  in  which  the  office  of priest  was 
always  held  by  a  b o y,  for  a  five-year  term;  and  a  cypress-grove,  the 
Cranaeum,  just  outside  Corinth,  where  Bellerophon  had  a  hero-shrine. 
Cranae means 'rock'  and is etymologically connected with the Gaelic 'cairn' 
—which  has  come  to  mean  a  pile  of stones  erected  on  a  mountain-top.I  write  of  her  as  the  White  Goddess  because  white  is  her  principal 
colour,  the  colour  of  the  first  member  of  her  moon-trinity,  but  when 
Suidas  the  Byzantine  records  that  Io  was  a  c ow  that  changed  her  colour 
from  white  to  rose  and  then  to  black  he  means  that  the  N ew  Moon  is  the 
white  goddess  of  birth  and  growth;  the  Full  Moon,  the  red  goddess  of 
love  and  battle;  the  Old  Moon,  the  black  goddess  of death  and  divination. 
Suidas's  myth  is  supported  by  Hyginus's  fable  of  a  heifer-calf  born  to 
Minos  and  Pasiphae  which  changed  its  colours  thrice  daily  in  the  same 
w a y.  In  response  to  a  challenge  from  an  oracle  one  Polyidus  son  of 
Coeranus  correctly  compared  it  to  a  mulberry—a  fruit  sacred  to  the 
Triple  Goddess.  T he  three  standing  stones  thrown  d o wn  from  Moeltre 
Hill  near  D w y g y f y l c hi  in  Wales  in  the  iconoclastic  seventeenth  century 
may  well  have  represented  the  Io  trinity.  O ne  was  white,  one  red,  one 
dark  blue,  and  they  were  known  as  the  three  women.  T he  local  monkish 
legend  was  that  three  women  dressed  in  those  colours  were  petrified  as  a 
punishment  for winnowing  corn  on  a  Sunday.

T he  most  comprehensive  and  inspired  account  of  the  Goddess  in  all 
ancient  literature  is  contained  in  Apuleius's  Golden  Ass,  where  Lucius  in 
vokes  her  from  the  depth  of  misery  and  spiritual  degradation  and  she 
appears  in  answer  to  his  plea;  incidentally  it  suggests  that  the  Goddess 
was  once  worshipped  at  Moeltre  in  her  triple  capacity  of white  raiser,  red 
reaper  and  dark  winnower  of grain.  T he  translation  is  by  William  A d l i n g-
ton  (1566):A b o ut  the first watch  of the  night  when  as  I  had  slept  my  first  sleep,  I 
awaked  with  sudden  fear  and  saw  the  moon  shining  bright  as  when  she 
is  at  the  full  and  seeming  as  though  she  leaped  out  of  the  sea.  T h en  I 
thought  with  myself that  this  was  the  most  secret  time,  when  that  g o d 
dess  had  most  puissance  and  force,  considering  that  all  human  things  be 
governed  by  her  providence;  and  that  not  only  all  beasts  private  and 
tame,  wild  and  savage,  be  made  strong  by  the  governance  of her  light 
and  godhead,  but  also  things  inanimate  and  without  life;  and  I  conr 
sidered  that  all  bodies  in  the  heavens,  the  earth,  and  the  seas  be  by  her

increasing  motions  increased,  and  by  her  diminishing  motions  dimin 
ished:  then  as  weary  of all  my  cruel  fortune  and  calamity,  I  found  g o od 
hope  and  sovereign  remedy,  though  it  were  v e ry  late,  to  be  delivered 
from  my  misery,  by  invocation  and  prayer  to  the  excellent  beauty  of 
this  powerful  goddess.  Wherefore,  shaking  off my  d r o w sy  sleep  I  arose 
with  a  joyful  face,  and  moved  by  a  great  affection  to  purify  myself,  I 
plunged  my  head  seven  times  into  the  water  of the  sea;  which  number 
seven  is  convenable  and  agreeable  to  holy  and  divine  things,  as  the 
w o r t hy  and  sage  philosopher  Pythagoras  hath  declared.  T h en  v e ry 
lively  and  joyfully,  though  with  a  weeping  countenance,  I  made  this 
oration  to  the  puissant  goddess.'O  blessed  Queen  of  Heaven,  whether  thou  be  the  D a me  Ceres 
which  art  the  original  and  motherly  source  of all  fruitful  things  on  the 
earth,  w ho  after  the  finding  of  thy  daughter  Proserpine,  through  the 
great  j oy  which  thou  didst  presently  conceive,  didst  utterly  take  a w ay 
and  abolish  the  food  of  them  of  old  time,  the  acorn,  and  madest  the 
barren  and  unfruitful  ground  of Eleusis  to  be  ploughed  and  sown,  and 
n ow  givest  men  a  more  better  and  milder  food;  or  whether  thou  be  the 
celestial  Venus,  w h o,  at  the  beginning  of  the  world,  didst  couple  to 
gether  male  and  female  with  an  engendered  love,  and  didst  so  make  an 
eternal  propagation  of human  kind,  being  now  worshipped  within  the 
temples  of  the  Isle  Paphos;  or  whether  thou  be  the  sister  of  the  G od 
Phoebus,  w ho  hast  saved  so  many  people  by  lightening  and  lessening 
with  thy  medicines  the  pangs  of travail  and  art  n ow  adored  at  the  sacred 
places  of  Ephesus;  or  whether  thou  be  called  terrible  Proserpine  by 
reason  of  the  deadly  howlings  which  thou  yieldest,  that  hast  power 
with  triple  face  to  stop  and  put  a w ay  the  invasion  of hags  and  ghosts 
which  appear  unto  men,  and  to  keep  them  down  in  the  closures  of the 
Earth,  which  dost  wander  in  sundry  groves  and  art  worshipped  in 
divers  manners;  thou,  which  dost  illuminate  all  the  cities  of the  earth  by 
thy  feminine  light;  thou,  which  nourishest  all  the  seeds  of the  world  by 
thy  damp  heat,  g i v i ng  thy  changing  light  according  to  the  wanderings, 
near  or  far,  of  the  sun:  by  whatsoever  name  or  fashion  or  shape  it  is 
lawful  to  call  upon  thee,  I  pray  thee  to  end  my  great  travail  and  misery 
and  raise  up  my  fallen  hopes,  and  deliver  me  from  the  wretched  fortune 
which  so  long  time  pursued  me.  Grant  peace  and  rest,  if it  please  thee, 
to  my adversities,  for I  have  endured  enough  labour and  p e r i l . . . .'When  I  had  ended  this  oration,  discovering  my  plaints  to  the  g o d 
dess,  I  fortuned  to  fall  again  asleep  upon  that  same  bed;  and  by  and  by 
(for  mine eyes  were  but  newly  closed)  appeared  to  me  from  the  midst  of 
the  sea  a  divine  and  venerable  face,  worshipped  even  of the  gods  them 
selves. Then, little by little, I seemed to see the whole figure of her body, 
bright  and  mounting  out  of the  sea  and  standing  before  me:  wherefore

7i7i

I  purpose  to  describe  her  divine  semblance,  if the  poverty  of my  human 
speech will suffer me, or the divine power g i ve me a power of eloquence 
rich  enough  to  express  it.  First,  she  had  a  great abundance  of hair,  flow 
ing  and  curling,  dispersed  and  scattered  about  her  divine  neck;  on  the 
crown  of her  head  she  bare  many  garlands  interlaced  with  flowers,  and 
in  the  middle  of her  forehead  was  a  plain  circlet  in  fashion  of a  mirror, 
or  rather  resembling  the  moon  by  the  light  it  gave  forth;  and  this  was 
borne  up  on  either  side  by  serpents  that  seemed  to  rise  from  the  furrows 
of the  earth,  and  above  it  were  blades  of corn  set  out.  Her vestment  was 
of finest linen  yielding  diverse  colours,  somewhere  white  and  shining, 
somewhere  yellow  like  the  crocus  flower,  somewhere  rosy  red,  some 
where  flaming;  and  (which  troubled  my  sight  and  spirit  sore)  her  cloak 
was  utterly  dark  and  obscure  covered  with  shining  black,  and  being 
wrapped  round  her  from  under  her  left  arm  to  her  right  shoulder  in 
manner  of a  shield,  part  of it  fell  down,  pleated  in  most  subtle  fashion, 
to  the  skirts  of her garment  so  that  the welts  appeared  comely.  Here  and 
there  upon 
the  stars 
glimpsed,,  and  in  the  middle  of  them  was  placed  the  moon  in  mid-
month,  which  shone  like  a  flame  of  fire;  and  round  about  the  whole 
length  of the  border  of that  g o o d ly  robe  was  a crown  or garland  wreath 
ing unbroken,  made  with  all  flowers  and  all  fruits.  T h i n gs  quite diverse 
did  she  bear:  for  in  her  right  hand  she  had  a  timbrel  of brass  [sistrum],  a 
flat  piece  of  metal  carved  in  manner  of  a  girdle,  wherein  passed  not 
many  rods  through  the  periphery  of  it;  and  when  with  her  arm  she 
moved  these  triple  chords,  they  gave  forth  a  shrill  and  clear  sound.  In 
her  left  hand  she  bare  a  cup  of  gold  like  unto  a  boat,  upon  the  handle 
whereof,  in  the  upper  part  which  is  best  seen,  an  asp  lifted  up  his  head 
with  a  wide-swelling  throat.  Her  odoriferous  feet  were  covered  with 
shoes  interlaced  and  wrought  with  victorious  palm.  T h us  the  divine 
shape,  breathing  out  the  pleasant  spice  of fertile  Arabia,  disdained  not 
with her holy voice  to  utter  these words  to  me:thereof  and

its  surface

throughout

the  edge

'Behold,  Lucius,  I  am  come;  thy weeping  and  prayer hath  moved  me 
to  succour  thee.  I  am  she  that  is  the  natural  mother  of  all  things,  mistress 
and  governess  of all  the  elements,  the  initial  progeny  of worlds,  chief of 
the  powers  divine,  queen  of  all  that  are  in  Hell,  the  principal  of  them 
that  dwell  in  Heaven,  manifested  alone  and  under  one  form  of  all  the 
gods  and  goddesses  [deorum  dearum-que  facies  uniformis].  At  my  will  the 
planets  of the  sky,  the  wholesome  winds  of the  seas,  and  the  lamentable 
silences  of hell  be  disposed;  my  name,  my  divinity  is  adored  through 
out  the  world,  in  divers  manners,  in  variable  customs,  and  by  many 
names.  F or  the  Phrygians  that  are  the  first  of  all  men  call  me  T he 
Mother  of the  G o ds  at  Pessinus;  the  Athenians,  which  are  spring  from 
their  own  soil,  Cecropian  Minerva;  the  Cyprians,  which  are  girt  about

7*

by  the  sea,  Paphian  Venus;  the  Cretans  which  bear  arrows,  Dictynnian 
Diana;  the  Sicilians,  which  speak  three  tongues,  Infernal  Proserpine; 
the  Eleusinians,  their ancient  goddess  Ceres;  some J u n o,  other  Bellona, 
other  Hecate,  other  Rhamnusia,  and  principally  both  sort  of  the  Ethi 
opians  which  dwell  in  the  Orient  and  are  enlightened  by  the  morning 
rays  of the  sun,  and  the  Egyptians,  which  are  excellent  in  all  kind  of 
ancient  doctrine  and  by  their  proper  ceremonies  accustom  to  worship 
me,  do call me by my true name,  Queen Isis.  Behold,  I am  come  to  take 
pity  of thy  fortune  and  turbuladon;  behold  I  am  present  to  favour  and 
aid  thee;  leave  off thy  weeping  and  lamentation,  put  a w ay  all  diy  sor 
row,  for  behold  the healthful  day  which  is  ordained  by my  providence.'Much  the  same  prayer  is  found  in  Latin  in  a  twelfth-century  English

herbal  (Brit.  Mus.  MS.  Harley,  1 5 8 5 , ^ I 2 v - i 3 r ):

Earth,  divine  goddess,  Mother  Nature,  w ho  dost  generate  all  things 
and  bringest  forth  ever  anew  the  sun  which  thou  hast  given  to  the 
nations;  Guardian  of s ky  and  sea  and  of all  G o ds  and  powers;  through 
thy  influence all  nature is  hushed  and  sinks  to  s l e e p . . ..  A g a i n,  when  it 
pleases  thee,  thou  sendest  forth  the  glad  daylight  and  nurturest  life 
with  thine  eternal  surety;  and  when  the  spirit  of man  passes,  to  thee  it 
returns.  T h ou  indeed  art  righdy  named  Great  Mother  of  the  G o d s; 
Victory  is  in  thy  divine  name.  T h ou  art  the  source  of  the  strength  of 
peoples  and  gods;  without  thee  nothing  can  either  be  born  or  made 
perfect;  thou  art  mighty,  Queen  of the  G o d s.  Goddess,  I  adore  thee  as 
divine,  I  invoke  thy  name;  vouchsafe  to  grant  that  which  I  ask  of thee, 
so shall I  return  thanks  to  thy  godhead,  with  the  faith  that is  thy due

N ow  also  I  make  intercession  to  y o u,  all  ye  powers  and  herbs,  and 
to  y o ur  majesty:  I  beseech  you,  w h om  Earth  the  universal  parent  hath 
borne  and  given  as  a  medicine  of  health  to  all  peoples  and  hath  put 
majesty  upon,  be  now  of  the  most  benefit  to  humankind.  This  I  pray 
and  beseech  y o u:  be  present  here  with  y o ur  virtues,  for  she  w ho 
created  you  hath  herself undertaken  that  I  may  call  you  with  the  good 
will  of  him  on  w h om  the  art  of  medicine  was  bestowed;  therefore 
grant  for  health's  sake  good  medicine  by  grace  of these  powers  afore 
said.  . ..H ow  the  g od  of medicine  was  named  in  twelfth-century  pagan  England 
is  difficult  to  determine;  but  he  clearly  stood  in  the  same  relation  to  the 
Goddess invoked in the prayers as Aesculapius originally stood  to Athene, 
Thoth  to  Isis,  Esmun  to  Ishtar,  Diancecht  to  Brigit,  Odin  to  Freya,  and 
Bran  to  Danu.

Chapter  Five

G W I O N 'S  R I D D LE

When  with

forming  in  my  mind,  I 
( ' T he  Tale  of  Taliesin'),

this  complicated  mythological  argument  slowly 
turned  again  to  the  Hanes  Taliesin 
the  riddling  poem  with  which 
Taliesin  first  addresses  K i ng  Maelgwyn  in  the  Romance,  I  already  sus 
pected  that  G w i on  was  using  the  D o g,  the  L a p w i ng  and  the  Roebuck  to 
help  him  conceal  in  his  riddle  the  new  Gwydionian  secret  of  the  T r e e s, 
which  he  had  somehow  contrived  to  learn,  and  which  had  invested  him 
with  poetic  power.  Reading  the  poem  with  care,  I  soon  realized  that 
here  again,  as  in  the  Cad Goddeu,  G w i on  was  no  irresponsible  rhapsodist, 
but  a  true  poet;  and  that  whereas  Heinin  and  his  fellow-bards,  as  stated  in 
the  Romance,  knew only 'Latin,  French,  Welsh and E n g l i s h ', he was well 
read  also  in  the  Irish  classics—and in  Greek  and  Hebrew literature too, as 
he  himself claims:

Tracthator  fyngofeg 
Yn  Efrai,yn  Efroeg, 
Yn  Efroeg, yn  EfraL

I  realized  too,  that  he  was  hiding  an  ancient  religious  mystery—a  blas 
phemous  one  from  the  Church's  point  of  view—under  the  cloak  of 
buffoonery,  but  had  not  made  this  secret  altogether  impossible  for  a  well-
educated  fellow-poet  to  guess.I  here  use  the  name  ' G w i o n'  for  'Taliesin',  to  make  it  quite  clear  that I 
the  miraculous  child  Taliesin  of  the  Romance  of 
am  not  confusing 
Taliesin  with  the  historic  Taliesin  of  the  late  sixth  century,  a  group  of 
whose  authentic  poems  is  contained  in  the  Red  Book  of  Hergest,  and  w ho 
is  noticed  by  Nennius,  in  a  quotation  from  a  seventh-century  genealogy 
of  the  Saxon  K i n g s,  as  'renowned  in  British  poetry'.  T he  first  Taliesin 
spent  much  of  his  time  during  the  last  third  of  the  sixth  century  as <a 
guest  of  various  chiefs  and  princes  to  w h om  he  wrote  complimentary 
poems  (Urien ap  C y a v a r c h,  Owein ap  Urien  Gwallag ap  Laenaug,  C y n an 
G a r w yn  ap  Brochfael  Y s g y t h r o g,  K i ng  of  P o w y s,  and  the  High  K i ng 
R h un  ap  Maelgwn  until  he  was  killed  by 
in  a  drunken 
quarrel).  He  went  with  R h un  in  the  first  campaign  against  the  men  of the

the  C o d i ng

74

North,  the  occasion  of  which  was  the  killing  of  Elidir  (Heliodorus) 
Mwynfawr,  and  the  avenging  raid  of  C l y d no  Eiddin,  R h y d d e r ch  Hael 
(or  Hen)  and  others,  to  which  R h un  retaliated  with  a  full-scale  invasion. 
This  Taliesin  calls  the  English  ' E i n g l'  or  ' D e i f y r'  (Deirans)  as  often  as 
he  calls 
' C y m r y '. 
' G w i o n'  wrote  about  six  centuries  later,  at  the  close  of the  Period  of the 
Princes.

'Brython'  not

'Saxons',  and

the  Welsh

them'Brython'  not

'Saxons',  and

the  Welsh

them

In  his  Lectures  on  Early  Welsh  Poetry,  D r.  Ifor  Williams,  the  greatest 
living  authority  on  the  text  of the  Taliesin  poems,  postulates  from  internal 
literary  evidence  that  parts  of  the  Romance  existed  in  a  ninth-century 
original.  I  do  not  dispute  this,  or  his  conclusion  that  the  author  was 
a  paganistic  cleric  with  Irish  connexions;  but  must  dispute  his  denial 
that  there  is  'any  mysticism,  semi-mysticism,  or  demi-semi-mysticism, 
in  the  poems  and  that  the  whole  rigmarole  can  be  easily  explained  as 
follows:

Taliesin  is  just  showing  off;  like  the  Kangaroo  in  Kipling's  story—

he had  to!  T h at was  the  role  he had  to  play.

tookTaliesin  is  just  showing  off;  like  the  Kangaroo  in  Kipling's  story—

he had  to!  T h at was  the  role  he had  to  play.

took

As  a  scholar,  D r.  Williams  naturally  feels  more  at  home  with  the 
earlier  Taliesin,  w ho  was  a  straight-forward  court  bard  of the  skaldic  sort. 
But  the  point  of the  Romance  to  me  is  not  that  a  pseudo-Taliesin  humor 
ously  boasted  himself  omniscient,  but  that  someone  w ho  styled  himself 
Litde  G w i o n,  son  of  G w r e a ng  of Llanfair  in  Caereinion,  a  person  of no 
importance,  accidentally  lighted  on  certain  ancient  mysteries  and,  be 
coming  an  adept,  began  to  despise  the  professional  bards  of  his  time 
because  they  did  not  understand  the  rudiments  of their  traditional  poetic 
lore.  Proclaiming  himself  a  master-poet,  G w i on 
the  name  of 
Taliesin,  as  an  ambitious  Hellenistic  Greek  poet  might  have  taken  the 
name  of Homer.  ' G w i on  son  of G w r e a n g'  is  itself probably  a  pseudonym, 
not  the  baptismal  name  of the  author  of the  Romance.  G w i on  is  the  equi 
valent  (gw  for  f)  of  Fionn,  or  Finn,  the  Irish  hero  of  a  similar  tale.  Fionn 
son  of  Mairne,  a  Chief  D r u i d 's  daughter,  was  instructed  by  a  Druid  of 
the  same  name  as  himself to  cook  for  him  a  salmon  fished  from  a  deep  pool 
of the  R i v er  B o y n e,  and  forbidden  to  taste  it;  but  as  Fionn  was  turning 
the  fish  over  in  the  pan  he  burned  his  thumb,  which  he  put  into  his  mouth 
and  so  received  the  gift  of  inspiration.  F or  the  salmon  was  a  salmon  of 
knowledge,  that  had  fed  on  nuts  fallen  from  the  nine  hazels  of poetic  art. 
T he  equivalent  of G w r e a ng  is  Freann,  an  established  variant  of Fearn,  the 
alder.  G w i on  is  thus  claiming  oracular  powers  as  a  spiritual  son  of  the 
Alder-god  Bran.  His  adoption  of a  pseudonym  was  justified  by  tradition. 
T he  hero  Cuchulain  ('hound  of Culain')  was  first  named  Setanta  and  was 
a  reincarnation  of the  g od  L u g h;  and  Fionn  ('fair')  himself was first named 
Deimne.  Bran  was  a  most  suitable  father  for  G w i o n,  for  by  this  time  he75

was known as the  Giant  O g yr Vran,  Guinevere's  father—his  name, which 
means  'Bran  the  Malign'  (ocur  vran),1  has  apparently  given  English  the 
w o rd  'ogre'  through  Perrault's  Fairy  Tales—and  was  credited  by  the 
bards  with  the  invention  of  their  art  and  with  the  ownership  of  the 
Cauldron  of  Cerridwen  from  which  they  said  that  the  Triple  Muse  had 
been born.  A nd  G w i o n 's mother was  Cerridwen herself.

It  is  a  pity  that  one  cannot  be  sure  whether  the  ascription  of the  romance 
in  an  Iolo  manuscript  printed  by  the  Welsh  MSS.  Society,  to  one  ' T h o m as 
ap  Einion  Offeiriad,  a  descendant  of  Gruffydd  G w y r ',  is  to  be  trusted. 
T h is  manuscript,  called  'Anthony  Powel  of  Llwydarth's  M S . ',  reads 
authentically  enough—unlike  the  other  notices  of  Taliesin  printed  by 
L a dy  Guest,  on  Iolo  M o r g a n w g 's  authority,  in  her  notes  to  the  Romance 
of  Taliesin:Taliesin,  Chief  of the  Bards,  the  son  of  Saint  H e n wg  of  Caerlleon 
upon  Usk,  was  invited  to  the  court  of Urien  Rheged,  at  A b e r l l y c h w r. 
He,  with  Elffin,  the  son  of  Urien,  being  once  fishing  at  sea  in  a  skin 
coracle,  an  Irish  pirate  ship  seized  him  and  his  coracle,  and  bore  him 
away  towards  Ireland;  but  while  the  pirates  were  at  the  height  of their 
drunken  mirth,  Taliesin  pushed  his  coracle  to  the  sea,  and  got  into  it 
himself,  with  a  shield  in  his  hand  which  he  found  in  the  ship,  and  with 
which  he  rowed  the  coracle  until  it  verged  the  land;  but,  the  waves 
breaking then  in  wild  foam,  he  lost  his  hold  on the shield,  so that he  had 
no  alternative  but  to  be  driven  at  the  mercy  of the  sea,  in  which  state  he 
continued  for  a  short  time,  when  the  coracle  stuck  to  the  point  of  a 
pole in  the weir of G w y d d n o, L o rd  of Ceredigion, in A b e r d y v i;  and in 
that  position  he  was  found,  at  the  ebb,  by  G w y d d n o 's  fishermen,  by 
whom  he  was  interrogated;  and  when  it  was  ascertained  that  he  was  a 
bard,  and  the  tutor  of  Elffin,  the  son  of  Urien  Rheged,  the  son  of 
Cynvarch:  ' I, too, have  a son named Elffin,'  said  G w y d d n o,  'be thou a 
bard  and  teacher  to  him,  also,  and  I  will  g i ve  thee  lands  in  free  tenure.' 
T he  terms  were  accepted,  and  for several  successive  years  he  spent  his 
time  between  the  courts  of  Urien  R h e g ed  and  G w y d d n o,  called 
G w y d d no  Garanhir,  L o rd  of  the  L o w l a nd  Cantred;  but  after  the 
territory  of  G w y d d no  had  become  overwhelmed  by  the  sea,  Taliesin 
was invited  by the  Emperor Arthur  to  his  court  at  Caerlleon upon  U s k, 
where  he  became  highly  celebrated  for  poetic  genius  and  useful, 
meritorious  sciences.  After  Arthur's  death  he  retired  to  the  estate  given 
to  him  by  G w y d d n o,  taking  Elffin,  the  son  of  that  prince,  under  his 
protection.  It  was  from  this  account  that  T h o m a s,  the  son  of  Einion 
Offeiriad,  descended  from  Gruffyd  G w y r,  formed  his  romance  of1  T he  syllable  ocur,  like  the  Old  Spanish  word  for  a  man-eating  demon,  Huergo  or  Uergo, 
is  probably  cognate  with  Orcus,  the  Latin  G od  of  the  Dead,  originally  a  masculinization  of 
Phorcis,  the  Greek  Sow-Demeter.

Taliesin,  the  son  of  CariadVen—Elffin,  the  son  of  G o d d n o u — R h u n, 
the  son  of  Maelgwn  G w y n e d d,  and  the  operations  of  the  Cauldron  of 
Ceridwen.

If  this  is  a  genuine  mediaeval  document,  not  an  eighteenth-century 
forgery,  it  refers  to  a  muddled  tradition  about  the  sixth-century  poet 
Taliesin  and  accounts  for  the  finding  of the  D i v i ne  Child  in  the  weir  near 
A b e r d o v ey  rather  than  anywhere  else.  But  probably  ' G w i o n'  was  more 
than  one  person,  for  the  poem  Yr  Awdyl  Vraith,  which  is  given  in  full  in 
Chapter  Nine,  is  ascribed  in  the  Peniardd  MS. 
to  Jonas  Athraw,  the 
' D o c t o r'  of Menevia  (St.  D a v i d ' s ),  w ho  lived  in  the  thirteenth  century.  A 
complimentary  reference  to  the  See  of St.  D a v i d 's  concealed  in  the  Hones 
Taliesin  supports  this  ascription. 
the  Latin  form  of  the 
original  name  of the  place,  Hen  Meneu,  'the  old  bush';  which  suggests  the 
cult  of a  Hawthorn-goddess.)

(Menevia

is

D r.  Williams  explains  the  confused  state  of the  texts  of the  poems  con 
tained  in  the  Romance  by  suggesting  that  they  are  the  s u r v i v i ng  w o rk  of 
the  Awenyddion  of the  twelfth  century,  described  by  Giraldus  Cambrensis:

incoherent

though  ornamented  speeches,incoherent

though  ornamented  speeches,

There  are  certain  persons  in  Cambria,  w h om  y ou  will  find  nowhere 
else,  called  Awenyddion,  or  people  inspired;  when  consulted  upon  any 
doubtful  event,  they  roar  out  violendy,  are  rendered  beside  themselves, 
and  become,  as  it  were,  possessed  by  a  spirit.  T h ey  do  not  deliver  the 
answer  to  what  is  required  in  a  connected  manner;  but  the  person  w ho 
skilfully  observes  them  will  find,  after  many  preambles,  and  many 
nugatory  and 
the  desired 
explanation  conveyed  in  some  turn  of word;  they  are  then  roused  from 
their  ecstasy,  as  from  a  deep  sleep,  and,  as  it  were,  by  violence  com 
pelled  to  return  to  their  proper  senses.  After  having  answered  the 
question  they  do  not  recover  until  violently  shaken  by  other  people; 
nor can they remember  the  replies  they  have  given.  If consulted  a  second 
or  third  time  upon  the  same  point,  they  will  make  use  of  expressions 
totally  different;  perhaps  they  speak  by  means  of  fanatic  and  ignorant 
spirits.  These  gifts  are  usually  conferred  upon  them  in  dreams;  some 
seem  to  have  sweet  milk  and  honey  poured  on  their  lips;  others  fancy 
that  a  written  schedule  is  applied  to  their  mouths,  and  on  awakening 
they  publicly declare  that  they have  received  this  g i f t . . ..  T h ey  invoke, 
the  H o ly 
true  and 
during  their  prophecies, 
Trinity,  and  pray  that  they  may  not  by  their  sins  be  prevented  from 
finding  the  truth.  These  prophets  are  found  only  among  those  Britons 
w ho  are  descended  from  the  Trojans.

living  G o d,  and

the

T he  Awenyddion,  the  popular  minstrels,  may  indeed  have  disguised 
their  secrets  by  a  pretence  of being  possessed  by  spirits,  as  the  Irish  poets

77living  G o d,  and

the

T he  Awenyddion,  the  popular  minstrels,  may  indeed  have  disguised 
their  secrets  by  a  pretence  of being  possessed  by  spirits,  as  the  Irish  poets

77

are  recorded  to  have  done  by  buffoonery,  and  they  m ay  have  induced 
these  ecstasies  by  toadstool  eating;  but  Cad  Goddeu,  Angar  Cyvyndawd 
and  all  the  other  strange  poems  of the  Book  of Taliesin  medley  read  like 
nonsense  only  because  the  texts  have  been  deliberately  confused,  doubt 
less  as  a  precaution  against  their  being  denounced  as  heretical  by  some 
Church  officer.  T h is  explanation  would  also  account  for  the  presence  of 
simple,  dull  religious  pieces  in  the  medley—plausible  guarantees  of 
orthodoxy.  Unfortunately  a  large  part  of the  original  material  seems  to 
be  lost,  which  makes  a  confident  restoration  of  the  remainder  difficult. 
W h en  an  authoritative  version  of  the  text  and  an  authoritative  English 
translation  has  been  published—none  is  so  far  available,  else  I  should 
have  used  it—the  problem  will  be  simpler.  B ut  that  the  A w e n y d d i on 
were  descended  from  the  Trojans  is  an  important  statement  of Gerald's; 
he  means  that  they  inherited  their  traditions  not  from  the  C y m ry  but 
from  the earlier inhabitants of Wales w h om  the  C y m ry dispossessed.

T he  context  of  the  thirteenth-century  version  of  the  Romance  can  be 
reconstructed  from what  G w y nn Jones  has  written  of Phylip  B r y d y dd  of 
Llanbadarn  F a wr and  the  poem  in  which  he  mentions  his  contention  with 
the  beirddyspyddeid,  vulgar  rhymesters,  as  to  w ho  should  first  present  a 
song to  Prince R h ys Ieuanc on Christmas D a y.' T he evidence of this poem is extremely valuable, as it shows us con 
clusively  that,  by  this  time,  at  any  rate,  the  lower  order  of bards  had 
w on  for  themselves  the  privilege  of appearing  at  a  Welsh  court,  and  of 
being  allowed  to  compete  with  the  members  of the  closer  corporation. 
It  is  exceedingly  difficult  to  make  out  with  certainty  the  meaning  of the 
poem,  but  the  bard  seems  to  lament  the  relaxation  or  abandonment  of 
the  ancient  custom  of  the  court  of  the  house  of  T e w d wr  [afterwards 
the English House of T u d o r ],  where  formerly,  after a battle,  none were 
without  recompense,  and  where  frequently  he  had  himself  been  pre 
sented  with  gifts.  If praise  were  the  pledge  of bravery,  then  his  desert 
should  have  been  to  receive  liquor,  rather  than  to  become  an  'ermid'. 
T he bard  also  mentions a  certain  Bleiddriw, w ho  would  not have given 
him his due, and seems to imply that this person was guilty of versifying 
untruth,  as  well  as  to  apply  to  him  the  epithet  twyll  i  gwndid  [sc. 
perverter  of poetic  practice].  T he suggestion  in  this  poem,  therefore,  is 
that  the  person  referred  to  was  the  author  of a  broken  or  irregular  song. 
We are  further told  by  Phylip  that  the  Chair  of Maelgwn  Hir was  meant 
for  bards,  not  for  the  irregular  rhymesters,  and  that  if that  chair  in  his 
day  were  deserved,  it  should  be  contended  for  by  the  consent  of saints 
and  in  accordance  with  truth  and  privilege.  A  Penkerdd  [privileged 
bard]  could  not  be  made  of a  man  without  art.  In  a  second  poem,  the 
poet's  patron,  probably  also  of the  house  of T e w d w r,  is  asked  to  p ay

7878

heed  to  the  contention  of the  bards  and  the  rhymesters,  and  the  appear 
ance  of  Elffin  in  the  contentions  of  Maelgwn  is  referred  to.  T he  bard 
says  that,  since  then,  mere  chattering  had  caused  long  unpleasantness, 
and  the  speech  of strangers,  the  vices  of women  and  many  a  foolish  tale 
had  come  to  G w y n e dd  [North  Wales],  through  the  songs  of  false 
bards  whose  grammar  was  bad  and  w ho  had  no  honour.  Phylip 
solemnly  states  that  it  is  not  for  man  to  destroy  the  privilege  of the  gift 
of G o d.  He  laments  the  fall  of the  office  of the  bards,  and  describes  his 
own  song  as  "the  ancient  song  of Taliesin"  which,  he  says—and  this  is 
significant—"was itself new for nine times seven  years".  " A n d ", he adds 
finally,  "though  I  be  placed  in  a  foul  grave  in  the  earth,  before  the 
violent  upheaval  of judgement,  the  muse  shall  not  cease  from  deserving 
recognition  while  the  sun  and  moon  remain  in  their  circles;  and  unless 
untruth  shall  overcome  truth,  or  the  gift  of  G od  shall  cease  in  the 
end,  it  is  they  w ho  shall  be  disgraced  in  the  contention:  He  will  remove 
from  the vulgar  bards  their  vain  delight."'It  will  be  observed  that  these  poems  supply  a  v e ry  interesting 
account  of  the  points  of  contention.  We  see  that  the  song  of  Taliesin 
and  the  contentions  of Maelgwn  Hir  are  set  up  as  standards;  that  those 
standards  were  believed  to  have  been  regulated  in  agreement  with  the 
will  of saints  and  in  accordance  with  truth  and  privilege;  that  the  con 
tentions  were  not  open  to  the  lower  order  of  bards;  and  that  a  man 
without  art  could  not  become  a  Penkerdd.  It  is  alleged  that  the  speech 
of strangers,  the  vices  of women,  and  numerous  foolish  tales  had  come 
to  G w y n e d d — e v en  to  G w y n e d d,  where  the  contentions  of  Maelgwn 
had  been  held—by  means  of  the  songs  of  false  bards  whose  grammar 
was  faulty.  We  see  that  the  song  of  the  official  or  traditional  bards  is 
claimed to be the gift of G o d; that its essence was truth, compared with the 
untruth  of the  newer song;  and  that  Phylip  B r y d y dd  was  prepared,  as  it 
were,  to  die in  the last  ditch,  fighting  for  the  privilege  of the  true  gift  of 
poesy.  We  observe  that,  in  spite  of all  this,  the  rhymesters  were  allowed 
to  tender  a  song  on  Christmas  D ay  at  the  court  of  R h ys  Ieuanc.'It  will  have  been  observed  that  the  first  poem  of  Phylip  B r y d y dd 
mentions  a  Bleiddriw  w ho  refused  to  acknowledge  him,  and  whose 
own  song,  as  I  interpret  the  extremely  compressed  syntax  of the  poem, 
Phylip  describes  as  broken  and  irregular.  It  is  not  improbable  that  we 
have  here  a  reference  to  the  much  discussed  Bledri  of  Giraldus  C a m-
brensis, "that  famous dealer  in  fables,  w ho  lived a little before our time". 
T he  probability  is  that,  in  this  Bledri,  we  have  one  of the  men  who  re 
cited  Welsh  stories  in  French,  and  so  assisted  their  passage  into  other 
languages.  Gaston  Paris,  so  long  ago  as  1879,  identified  him  with  the 
Breri,  to  w h om  T h o m a s,  the  author  of  the  French  poem  of  Tristan, 
acknowledges  his  debt,  describing  him  as  having  known  "les  his  wires  et

79

les contes  de tous  les  wis et comtes qui avaient vicu en  Bretagne".  P h y l ip 
B r y d y dd  is  said  to  have  flourished  between  1200  and  1250.  As  R h ys 
Ieuanc,  his  patron,  died  about  1220,  probably  Phylip  was  born  before 
1200.  Giraldus  himself died  in  1220.  T h is  brings  them  sufficiently  near 
to  allow  of  the  possibility  of  their  both  referring  to  the  same  Bledri. 
At  any  rate,  this  is  the  only  case  known  to  me  in  Welsh  of a  contempor 
ary  reference  to  a  Bledri  corresponding  to  the  person  mentioned  by 
Giraldus.  But  I  w o u ld  base  no  argument  upon  this  possible  identity. 
If  the  Bleiddri  of  Phylip's  poem  be  another  Bleiddri,  the  fact  still 
remains  that  he  was  regarded  as  being  of the  lower  order  of bards,  and 
that  Phylip,  the  traditional  bard,  charged  his  class,  at  any  rate,  with 
debasing  the  poetic  diction  of  the  bards  and  with  making  untruth  the 
subject  of poetry.'What  then  could  be  the  meaning  of  untruth  as  the  subject  of song? 
Considering  the  w o rd  in  the  light  of the  Codes,  and  of the  contents  of 
the  poems  of the  court-bards  themselves,  I  submit  that  it  simply  means 
tales  of  imagination.  T he  official  bards  were  prohibited  from  writing 
imaginative  narrative  and  material 
they  were 
enjoined  to  celebrate  the  praise  of  G od  and  of  brave  or  g o od  men. 
T h is  they  did,  as  we  have  seen,  in  epithetical  verse  of which  the  style is 
remarkably and  intentionally archaic*

for  representation;

Phylip's  complaint  that  his  opponent  Bleiddri  had  no  'honour'  means 
that  he  did  not  belong  to  the  privileged  class  of  C y m r ic  freemen  from 
which  the  court-bards  were  chosen.  In  the  Romance  0f Taliesin  we  have 
the  story  from  the  side  of  the  minstrel,  but  an  extraordinarily  gifted 
minstrel,  w ho  had  studied  abroad  among  men  of  greater  learning  than 
were  to  be  found  anywhere  in  Wales  and  w ho  insisted  that  the  court-
the  meaning  of  the  poetry 
bards  haH  forgotten 
Throughout  the  poems  the  same  scornful  theme  is  pressed:

they  practised.

that

Am  I  not  a  candidate  for  fame,  to  be  heard  in  song?... 
Avaunt,you  boastful  bards....they  practised.

that

Am  I  not  a  candidate  for  fame,  to  be  heard  in  song?... 
Avaunt,you  boastful  bards....

This  unprivileged  minstrel  boasts  that  the  Chair is  rightly  his:  he,  not  any 
poet  of Phylip  B r y d y d d 's  merely  academic  attainment,  is  the  true  heir  of 
Taliesin.  H o w e v e r,  for  courtesy's  sake,  the  tale  of G w i on  and  Cerridwen 
is  told  in  terms  of  sixth-century,  not  thirteenth-century,  history.  ' T he 
speech  of strangers'  which,  P h y l ip  complains,  has  corrupted  G w y n e dd  is 
likely  to have been Irish:  for Prince  Gruffudd  ap  K y n a n,  a gifted and  pro 
gressive  prince  educated  in  Ireland,  had  introduced  Irish  bards  and 
minstrels  into  his  principality  in  the  early  twelfth  century.  It  may  have 
been  from  this  Irish  literary  colony,  not  from  Ireland  itself,  that  G w i on 
first  derived  his  superior  knowledge.  Gruffudd  also  had  Norsemen  in  his

80

entourage.  His  careful  regulations  for  the  government  of  bards  and 
musicians were revived at the  C a e r w ys Eisteddfod  in  15 23.

Here, finally, is  the  Hemes  Taliesin  riddle  in  L a dy  Charlotte  Guest's 
translation.  In  it,  Litde  G w i on  answers  K i ng  Maelgwyn's  questions  as  to 
w ho  he was and  whence he  came:

Primary chief bard am  I  to  Elphin, 
And my original country is the region of the summer stars; 
Idno  and Heinin  called me  Merddin, 
At length  every king will call me  Taliesin, 
5  / was with my Lord in  the highest sphere, 
On the fall ofLucifer into the depth of hell 
I have borne a banner before Alexander; 
I know the names ofthe stars from north to south; 
I have been on the Galaxy at the throne of the Distributor;

10  I was in Canaan when Absalom was slain;

I conveyed A w en [the Divine Spirit] to the level of the

vale of Hebron;10  I was in Canaan when Absalom was slain;

I conveyed A w en [the Divine Spirit] to the level of the

vale of Hebron;

I was in the court of Don before the birth of Gwydion. 
I was instructor to Eli and Enoch; 
I have been winged by the genius of the splendid crosier; 
IJ I have been loquacious prior to being gifted with speech;

I was at the place of the crucifixion of the merciful son of God; 
I have been three periods in the prison of Arianrhod; 
I have been the chief director of the work of the tower of

Nimrod.

I am a wonder whose origin is not known.

20  / have been in Asia with Noah in the Ark,

I have witnessed the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah; 
I have been in India when Roma was built; 
I am now come here to  the remnant ofTroia. 
I have been with my Lord in the manger of the ass; 
25  / strengthened Moses through the water of Jordan;

I have been in  the firmament with Mary Magdalene; 
I have obtained the muse from the Cauldron ofCaridwen; 
I have been bard of the harp to Lleon of Lochlin. 
I have been on the White Hill, in the court of Cynvelyn,

30 For a day and a year in stocks andfetters,

I have suffered hunger for the Son ofthe Virgin, 
I have been fostered in the land ofthe Deity, 
I have been teacher to all intelligences, 
I am able to instruct the whole universe.

3 5/ shall be until the day ofdoom on the face ofthe earth;

81

And it is not known whether my body isflesh or  fish.

Then I was for nine months 
In the womb of the hag Caridwenj 
I was originally little  Gwion, 
And at length I am  Taliesin.

4081

And it is not known whether my body isflesh or  fish.

Then I was for nine months 
In the womb of the hag Caridwenj 
I was originally little  Gwion, 
And at length I am  Taliesin.

40

T he  deceitful  cry  of the  L a p w i n g!  G w i on  was  not  so  ignorant  of sacred 
history  as  he  pretended:  he  must  have  known  perfectly  well  that  Moses 
never  crossed  the  Jordan,  that  Mary  Magdalene  was  never  in  the  Firma 
ment,  that  Lucifer's  fall  had  been  recorded  by  the  prophet  Isaiah  centuries 
before  the  time  of Alexander  the  Great.  Refusing  to  be  lured  away  from 
the  secret  by  his  apparently  nonsensical  utterances,  I  began  my  unravelling 
of the  puzzle  by  answering  the  following  questions:

Line  1 1.  W ho did convey the D i v i ne Spirit to Hebron?

„ 
„

„

1 3.  W ho did instruct Enoch? 
1 6.  W ho  did  attend  the  Crucifixion?

2 5.  W ho  did  pass  through  Jordan  water when  Moses  was  forbid

den  to  do  so?

I  felt  confident  that  I  would  presently  catch  a  gleam  of white  through  the 
tangled  thicket  where  the  Roebuck  was  harboured.den  to  do  so?

I  felt  confident  that  I  would  presently  catch  a  gleam  of white  through  the 
tangled  thicket  where  the  Roebuck  was  harboured.

N o w,  according  to  the  Pentateuch,  Moses  died  on  Pisgah  on  the  other 
side  of Jordan  and  'no  man  knoweth  his  sepulchre  to  this  day';  and  of all 
the  Children  of Israel  w ho  had  come  with  him  into  the  wilderness  out  of 
the  house  of  bondage,  only  two,  Caleb  and  Joshua,  crossed  into  the 
Promised  Land.  As  spies  they  had  already  been  bold  enough  to  cross  and 
recross  the  river.  It  was  Caleb  w ho  seized  Hebron  from  the  Anakim  on 
behalf of the  G od  of Israel  and  was  granted  it  by  Joshua  as  his  inheritance. 
So  I  realized  that  the  D og  had  torn  the  whole  poem  into  shreds  with  his 
teeth  and  that  the  witty  L a p w i ng  had  mixed  them  up  misleadingly,  as  she 
did  with  the  torn  shreds  of  the  fruit  passage  in  the  Cdd  Goddeu.  T he 
original  statement  was:  'I  conveyed  the  D i v i ne  Spirit  through  the  water 
of Jordan  to  the  level  of the  vale  of Hebron.'  A nd  the  T  must  be  Caleb.

If the  same  trick  had  been  played  with  every  line  of the  Hanes  Taliesin, 
I  could  advance  a  little  further  into  the  thicket.  I  could  regard  the  poem 
as  a  sort  of  acrostic  composed  of  twenty  or  thirty  riddles,  each  of  them 
requiring  separate  solution;  what  the  combined  answers  spelt  out  prom 
ised  to  be  a  secret  worth  discovering.  But  first  I  had  to  sort  out  and  re 
assemble  the individual  riddles.After  the  misleading  'through  the  water  of  Jordan'  had  been  removed 
from  line  25,  'I  strengthened  Moses'  remained.  Well,  w ho  ^ s t r e n g t h en 
Moses?  A nd  where  was  this  strengthening  done?  I  remembered  that 
Moses  was  strengthened  at  the  close  of his  battle  with  the  Amalekites,  by 
having  his  hands  held  up  by  two  companions.  Where  did  this  batde  take

82

place  and  w ho  were  the  strengthened?  It  took  place  at  Jehovah-Nissi, 
close  to  the  Mount  of  G o d,  and  the  strengthened  were  A a r on  and  Hur. 
So  I  could  recompose  the  riddle  as:  'I  strengthened  Moses  in  the  land  of 
the  D e i t y '.  A nd  the  answer  was:  'Aaron  and  Hur'.  If only  one  name  was 
needed,  it  would  probably  be  Hur  because  this  is  the  only  action  recorded 
of him  in  the  Pentateuch.

Similarly,  in  line  25,  'I  have  been  with  Mary  Magdalene'  had  to  be 
separated  from  the  misleading  'in  the  firmament'  and  the  other  part  of the 
riddle  looked  for  in  another  verse.  I  had  already  found  it  by  studying  the 
list  of  people  present  at  the  Crucifixion:  St.  Simon  of  Cyrene,  St.  J o hn 
the A p o s d e,  St.  Veronica,  D y s m as  the  good  thief,  Gestas the  bad  thief,  the 
Centurion,  the  Virgin  Mary,  Mary  Cleopas,  Mary  Magdalene.  .  .  .  But  I 
had  not  overlooked  the  woman  w ho  (according  to  the  Proto-evangelium 
of St.  James)  was  the  first  person  ever  to  adore  the  child  Jesus,  the  prime 
witness  of his  parthenogenesis,  and  his  most  faithful  follower.  She  is  men 
tioned  in  Mark  XV,  as  standing  beside  Mary  Magdalene.  S o:  'I  was  with 
Mary Magdalene at the place of the Crucifixion of the merciful Son of G o d .' 
T he answer was:  'Salome'.W ho  instructed  Enoch?  (Eli  does  not,  apparently,  belong  to  this 
riddle.)  I  agree  with  Charles,  Burkitt,  Oesterley,  B ox  and  other  Biblical 
scholars  that  nobody  can  hope  to  understand  the  Sayings  of  Jesus  w ho 
has  not  read  the  Book  of  Enoch,  omitted  from  the  canon  of  the  Apocrypha 
but  closely  studied  by  the  primitive  Christians.  I  happened  to  have  been 
reading  the  book  and  knew  that  the  answer  was  ' U r i e l ',  and  that  Uriel 
instructed  Enoch  'on  the  fall  of Lucifer  into  the  depth  of hell'.  A  curious 
historical  point  is  that  the  verse  about  Uriel's  instruction  of Enoch  is  not 
included  in  the  fragments  of  the  Greek  Book  of Enoch  quoted  by  the 
ninth-century  Byzantine  historian  Syncellus,  nor  in  the  Vatican  M S. 
(1809),  nor  in  the  quotations  from  the  Book  of  Enoch  in  the  Epistle  of  St. 
Jude.  It  occurs  only in  the  text dug up  at  A k h m im  in E g y pt  in  1886,  and  in 
the  Ethiopian  translation  of  an  earlier  Greek  text,  which  is  the  only 
version  which  we  k n ow  to  have  been  extant  in  the  thirteenth  century. 
Where  did  G w i on  find  the  story?  Was  a  knowledge  of Ethiopian  among 
this  atainments?  Or  did  he  find  a  complete  Greek  manuscript  in  the 
library  of some  Irish  abbey  that  had  escaped  the  fury  of the  Vikings'  war 
against  books?  T he  passage  in  the  First  Book  of Enoch,  XVIII,  zi,  and 
XIX,  1,  2,3,  runs:

A nd  I  s aw  a  deep  abyss  and  columns  of  heavenly  fire,  and  among 
them  I  saw  columns  of  fire  falling,  which  were  beyond  measure  alike 
upwards  and  downwards.  .  .  .  A nd  Uriel  said  to  me:  'Here  shall  stand 
the  angels  w ho  have  lain  with  women  and  whose  spirits,  assuming 
into 
many  different  forms,  defile  mankind  and

them  astray

lead

83them  astray

lead

83

demonolatry  and  sacrificing  to  demons:  here  shall  they  stand  until  the 
D ay  of  Judgement.  .  .  .  A nd  the  women  w h om  they  seduced  shall 
become  Sirens.'  I,  Enoch,  alone  saw  this  vision  of the  end  of all  things; 
no  other  shall  see as  far  as  I.

T h is  discovery  took  me  a  stage  further,  to  line  7:  'I  have  borne  a 
banner  before  Alexander.'  A m o ng  the  poems  attributed  to  Taliesin  in  the 
Red  Book  of  Hergest  is  a  fragment  called  Y  Gofeisws  Byd  ( 'A  Sketch  of  the 
W o r l d ')  which  contains  a  short  panegyric  of the  historical  Alexander,  and 
another  Anrhyfeddonau  Alexander, 
' T he  Not-wonders  of  Alexander'—a 
joke  at  the  expense  of a  thirteenth-century  Spanish  romance  ascribing  to 
Alexander  adventures  properly  belonging  to  the  myth  of  Merlin—which 
'creatures  of 
tells  mockingly  h ow  he  went  beneath  the  sea  and  met

distinguished  lineage  among  the 
'  But  neither  of these  poems  gave 
fish 
me  a  clue  to  the  riddle.  If it  must  be  taken  literally  I  should  perhaps  have 
guessed  the  answer  to  be  'Neoptolemus',  w ho  was  one  of  Alexander's 
bodyguard  and  the  first  man  to  scale  the  walls  of Gaza  at  the  assault.  But 
more  probably the  reference was to  Alexander as  a  re-incarnation of Moses.According  to  Josephus,  when  Alexander  came  to  Jerusalem  at  the  out 
set  of  his  Eastern  conquests,  he  refrained  from  sacking  the  Temple  but 
bowed  down  and  adored 
the  Tetragrammaton  on  the  High  Priest's 
golden  frontlet.  His  astonished  companion  Parmenio  asked  w hy  in  the 
world  he  had  behaved  in  this  unkingly  w a y.  Alexander  answered:  'I  did 
not  adore  the  High  Priest  himself  but  the  G od  w ho  has  honoured  him 
with  office.  T he  case  is  this:  that  I  saw  this  v e ry  person  in  a  dream,  dressed 
exactly  as  now,  while  I  was  at  D i os  in  Macedonia.  In  my  dream  I  was 
debating  with  myself  h ow  I  might  conquer  A s i a,  and  this  man  exhorted 
me  not  to  delay.  I  was  to  pass  boldly with  my  army  across  the  narrow sea, 
for  his  G od  would  march  before  me  and  help  me  to  defeat  the  Persians. 
So  I  am  now  convinced  that  Jehovah  is  with  me  and  will  lead  my  armies 
to  victory.'  T he  H i gh  Priest  then  further  encouraged  Alexander  by  show 
ing  him  the  prophecy  in  the  Book  of Daniel  which  promised  him  the 
dominion  of the  East;  and  he  went  up  to  the  Temple,  sacrificed  to  Jehovah 
and  made  a  generous  peace-treaty  with  the  Jewish  nation.  T he  prophecy 
referred  to  Alexander  as  the  'two-horned  K i n g'  and  he  subsequently  pic 
tured  himself  on  his  coins  with  two  horns.  He  appears  in  the  Koran  as 
D h ul  Karnain,  'the  two-horned'.  Moses  was  also  'two-horned',  and  in 
Arabian  legend  ' El  Hidr,  the  ever-young  prophet',  a  former  Sun-hero  of 
Sinai,  befriended  both  Moses  and  Alexander  'at  the  meeting  place  of  two 
seas'.  To  the  learned  G w i o n,  therefore,  a  banner  borne  before  Alexander 
was  equally  a  banner  borne  before  Moses;  and  St.  Jerome,  or  his  Jewish 
mentors,  had  already  made  a  poetic  identification  of  Alexander's  horns 
with  those  of Moses.84

T he  banner  of  Moses  was  'Nehushtan',  the  Brazen  Serpent,  which  he 
raised  up  to  avert  the  plague  in  the  wilderness.  When  he  did  so  he  became 
an  'Alexander',  i.e.  a  'warder-off-of-evil-from-man'.  So  the  answer  of this 
riddle  is  'Nehushtan'  or,  in  the  G r e ek  Septuagint  spelling,  in  which  I 
imagine  G w i on  had  read  the  story,  'Ne-Esthan'.  It  should  be  remem 
bered  that  this  Brazen  Serpent  in  the  Gospel  According  to  John,  III,  14 
and  the  apocryphal  Epistle  of  Barnabas,  XII,  y  is  a  type  of  Jesus  Christ. 
Barnabas  emphasizes  that  the  Serpent  'hung  on  a  wooden  thing',  i.e.  the 
Cross,  and  had  the  power  of  making  alive.  In  Numbers,  XXI,  9  it  is  de 
scribed  as  a  'seraph',  a  name  given  by  Isaiah  to  the  flying  serpents  that 
appeared  in  his  vision  as  the  attendants  of the  L i v i ng  G od  and  flew  to  him 
with  a  live  coal  from  the  altar.T he  next  riddle  I  had  to  solve,  a  combination  of lines  9  and  26,  was:  'I 
have  been  in  the  firmament,  on  the  G a l a x y .'  T he  Galaxy,  or  Milky  W a y, 
is  said  to  have  been  formed  when  the  milk  of the  Great  Goddess  Rhea  of 
Crete  spouted  abundantly  into  the  s ky  after  the  birth  of  the  infant  Zeus. 
But  since  the  Great  Goddess's  name  varies  from  mythographer  to  mytho-
grapher—Hyginus,  for  example,  debates  whether  to  call  her  J u no  or 
Ops  ( W e a l t h )— G w i on  has  considerately  given  us  another  clue:  ' W h en 
R o ma  was  built'.  He  is  correctly  identifying  a  Cretan  with  a  Roman  g o d 
dess,  and  what  is  more  surprising,  recognizes  Romulus  as  a  Latin  deity  of 
the  same  religious  system  as  Cretan  Zeus.  Romulus's  mother  was  also 
named  Rhea,  and  if she  had  trouble  with  her  milk  when  she  was  forced  to 
wean  her  twins  in  order  to  conceal  their  birth,  so  had  Cretan  Rhea  in  the 
same  circumstances.  T he  main  difference  was  that  Romulus  and  Remus 
had  a  she-wolf  for  their  foster-mother,  whereas  Zeus  (and  some  say  his 
foster-brother  G o at  Pan,  too),  was  suckled  by  the  she-goat  Amalthea, 
whose  hide  he  afterwards  wore  as  a  coat;  or,  as  still  others  say,  by  a  white 
sow.  Both  Romulus  and  Zeus  were  brought  up  by  shepherds.  S o:  'I  have 
been  in  the  firmament,  on  the  Galaxy,  when  R o ma  was  built.'  T he 
answer  is  Rhea,  though  it  was  not  Rhea  herself  but  the  spurt  of her  milk, 
rhea  in  Greek,  that  was  on  the  Galaxy.  G w i on  had  been  anticipated  by 
Nennius  in  giving more  importance  to  Rhea,  mother of Romulus,  than  the 
Classical  mythologists  had  done:  Nennius  called her  'the most  holy  queen'.This  riddle  is  purposely  misleading.  T he  only  legend  about  the  Galaxy 
that  Heinin  and  the  other  bards  at  Maelgwyn's  court  would  have  known 
concerns  Blodeuwedd,  conjured  by  G w y d i on  to  be  the  bride  of  L l ew 
L l aw  Gyffes.  L l e w 's  other  name  was  Huan  and  Blodeuwedd  was  trans 
formed  into  an  o wl  and  called  T w y ll  Huan  ('the  deceiving  of Huan')  for 
having  caused  L l e w 's  death:  the  Welsh  for  owl  being  tylluan.  T he  legend 
of Blodeuwedd  and  the  G a l a xy  occurs  in  the  Peniardd MSS.:

T he  wife  of Huan  ap  D on  was  a  party  to  the  killing  of her  husband

and  said  that he had  gone  to  hunt  a w ay  from  home.  His  father  G w y d i o n, 
the  K i ng  of  G w y n e d d,  traversed  all  countries  in  search  of him,  and  at 
last  made  Caer  G w y d i o n,  that  is  the  Milky  W a y,  as  a  track  by which  to 
seek  his  soul  in  the  heavens;  where  he  found  it.  In  requital  for  the 
injury  that  she  had  done  he  turned  the  y o u ng  wife  into  a  bird,  and  she 
fled  from  her  father-in-law  and  is  called  to  this  day  T w y ll  Huan.  T h us 
the  Britons  formerly  treated  their  stories  and  tales  after  the  manner  of 
the  Greeks,  in  order  to  keep  them  in memory.

It  should  be  added  that  the  form  ' C a er  G w y d i o n ',  instead  of  ' C a er 
W y d i o n ',  proves  the  myth  to  be  a  late  one.  Blodeuwedd  (as  shown  in 
Chapter  T w o)  was  Olwen,  'She  of  the  White  T r a c k ',  so  G w y d i on  was 
right  to  search  for  her  in  the  G a l a x y:  Rhea  with  her  white  track  of stars 
was  the  celestial  counterpart  of  Olwen-Blodeuwedd  with  her  white  track 
of  trefoil.

W h o,  in  line  21,  witnessed  the  destruction  of  S o d om  and  Gomorrah?

L o t,  or  perhaps  the  unnamed  'wife  of L o t '.W h o,  in  line  21,  witnessed  the  destruction  of  S o d om  and  Gomorrah?

L o t,  or  perhaps  the  unnamed  'wife  of L o t '.

W h o,  in  line  18,  was  'the  chief  director  of  the  w o rk  of  the  tower  of 
Nimrod'?  I  s aw  that  the  L a p w i ng  was  at  her  tricks  again.  T he  question 
really  ran:  ' Of the  w o rk  on  what  tower  was  Nimrod  the  chief director?' 
T he  answer  was  'Babel'.  G o w e r 's  lines  on  the  inconvenience  caused  to 
Nimrod  and  his  masons  when  the  confusion  of  tongues  began,  had  run 
in  my head  for years:

One called for stones, they brought him tyld [tiles] 
And Nimrod,  that great  Champioun, 
He  raged like  ayoung  Lioun.

W h o,  in  line  24,  was  'with  my  L o rd  in  the  manger  of  the  A s s '?  W as 
the  answer  'swaddling  clothes'?  Then  someone  called  my  attention  to  the 
text  of Luke  II,  16:  ' A nd  they  came  with  haste  and  found  Mary and  Joseph 
and  the  babe  lying  in  a  manger.'  G w i on  was  being  mischievous:  literally, 
the  sentence  reads  as  though  Joseph,  Mary  and  the  child  were  all  together 
in  the  manger.  T he  answer  was  evidently  'Joseph',  since  that  was  St. 
Joseph's  most  glorious  moment.W ho  was  it  that  said,  in  line  23:  'I  am  n ow  come  here  to  the  remnant  of 
Troia.'  According  to  Nennius,  Sigebertus  Gemblasensis,  Geoffrey  of 
Monmouth  and  others,  Brutus  the  grandson  of  Aeneas  landed  with  the 
remnants  of  the  Trojans  at  Totnes  in  D e v on  in  the  year  1074  B . C . — 1 09 
years  after  the  accepted  date  of the  F a ll  of T r o y.  A  people  w ho  came  over 
the  Mor  T a w ch  (the  North  Sea)  some  seven  centuries  later  to  join  them 
were  the  C y m r y.  T h ey  cherished  the  notion  that  they  were  descended 
from  Gomer,  son  of  Japhet,  and  had  wandered  all  the  w ay  from  T a p r o-
bane  (Ceylon—see  Triad 54)  by  w ay  of Asia  Minor  before finally settling

86

at  L l y d aw  in  North  Britain.  S o:  1  have  been  in  India  and  A s ia  (line  20) 
and  am  n ow come  here  to  the  remnant  of Troia.'  T he  answer was  ' G o m e r '. 
'I  k n ow  the  names  of  the  stars  from  north  to  south'  in  line  8,  sug 
gested  one  of  the  Three  H a p py  Astronomers  of  Britain  mentioned  in 
the  Triads,  and  I  judged  from  the  sentence  ' my  original  country  is  the 
region  of the  summer  stars'  (i.e.  the  West)  which  seemed  to  belong  to  this 
riddle,  that  no  Greek,  Egyptian,  A r a b i c,  or  Babylonian  astronomer  was 
intended.  Idris  being  the  first  named  of the  three  astronomers,  the  answer 
was  probably  'Idris*.'I  have  been  on  the  White Hill,  in  the  Court  of C y n v e l yn  ( C y m b e l i n e )' 
in  line  29,  evidendy  belonged  with  'I  was  in  the  Court  of D on  before  the 
birth  of G w y d i o n ',  in  line  1 2.  T he  answer  was  ' V r o n'  or  ' B r a n ',  whose 
head,  after  his  death,  was  according  to  the  Romance  of  Branwen  buried  on 
the  White  Hill  ( T o w er  Hill)  at  L o n d on  as  a  protection  against  invasion— 
as  the  head  of  K i ng  Eurystheus  of  Mycenae  was  buried  in  a  pass  that 
commanded  the  approach  to  Athens,  and  the  alleged  head  of  A d am  was 
buried  at  the  northern  approach  to  Jerusalem—until  K i ng  Arthur  ex 
humed  it.  F or  Bran  was  a  son  of D on  (Danu)  long  before  the  coming  of 
the  Belgic  G w y d i o n . 1T he  answer  to  'I  was  in  Canaan  when  Absalom  was  slain'  (line  1 0 ), 
was clearly  ' D a v i d '.  K i ng  D a v id  had  crossed  over Jordan  to  the  Canaanite 
refuge-city  of  Mahanaim,  while  J o ab  fought  the  Battle  of  the  W o od  of 
Ephraim.  There  in  the  gateway  he  heard  the  news  of  Absalom's  death. 
In  compliment  to  the  See  of St.  D a v i d ' s,  G w i on  has  combined  this  state 
ment  with  'I  have  been  winged  by  the  genius  of  the  splendid  crozier.' 
('And  St.  D a v i d !'  as  we  R o y al  Welch  Fusiliers  loyally  add  to  all  our 
toasts  on  March  1st.)  One  of  the  chief  aims  of  Prince  Llewelyn  and  the 
other  Welsh  patriots  of  G w i o n 's  day  was  to  free  their  Church  from 
English  domination.  Giraldus  Cambrensis  had  spent  the  best  part  of  his 
quarrelsome  ecclesiastical  life  ( 1 1 4 5 - 1 2 1 3)   in  campaigns  to  make  the  See 
of  St.  D a v i d 's  independent  of  Canterbury  and  to  fill  it  with  a  Welsh 
Archbishop.  But  K i ng  Henry  II  and  his  two  sons  saw  to  it  that  only 
to  the 
politically  reliable  Norman-French  churchmen  were  appointed 
Welsh  sees,  and  appeals  by  the  Welsh  to  the  P o pe  were  disregarded 
because  the  power  of  the  A n g e v in  kings  weighed  more  at  the  Vatican 
than  the  possible  gratification  of a  poor,  divided  and  distant  principality.

W h o,  in  line  20,  when  the  misleading  'in  Asia'  has  been  removed,  was 
'with  Noah  in  the  A r k '?  I  guessed  ' Hu  Gadarn',  w ho  according  to  the 
Triads  led  the  C y m ry  from  the  East.  With  his  plough-oxen  he  also  drew1  Bran's  connexion  with  the  White  Hill  may  account  for  the  curious  persistence  at  the 
Tower  of  London  of  tame  ravens,  which  are  regarded  by  the  garrison  with  superstitious 
reverence.  There  is even  a  legend  that  the  security of the  C r o wn  depends  on  their continuance 
there:  a  variant  of the  legend  about  Bran's  head.  T he  raven,  or  crow,  was  Bran's  oracular  bird.

up  from  the magic  lake  the  monster avanc which  caused  it  to  overflow in  a 
universal  flood.  He  had  been  'fostered  between  the  knees  of D y l an  in  the 
D e l u g e '.  But  the  L a p w i n g,  I  found  later,  was  deliberately  confusing 
D y l an  with  Noah;  Noah  really  belongs  to  the  Enoch  riddle  in  line  1 3. 
T he  present  riddle  must  run:  'I  have  been  fostered  in  the  A r k .'  But  it 
could  be  enlarged  with  the  statement  in  line  33:  'I  have  been  teacher  to  all 
intelligences',  for  Hu  Gadarn,  ' Hu  the  Mighty',  w ho  has  been  identified 
with  the  ancient  Channel  Island  god  Hou,  was  the  Menes,  or  Palamedes, 
of  the  C y m ry  and  taught  them  ploughing—'in  the  region  where  C o n 
stantinople  now  stands'—music  and  song.W h o,  in  line  27,  'obtained  the  Muse  from  the  cauldron  of  Caridwen'? 
G w i on  himself.  H o w e v e r,  the  cauldron  of Caridwen  was  no  mere  witch's 
cauldron.  It  would  not  be  unreasonable  to  identify  it  with  the  cauldron 
depicted  on  Greek  vases,  the  name  written  above  Caridwen  being 
'Medea',  the  Corinthian  G o d d e ss  w ho  killed  her  children,  as  the  Goddess 
Thetis  also  did.  In  this  cauldron  she  boiled  up  old  Aeson  and  restored  him 
to  youth;  it  was  the  cauldron  of rebirth  and  re-illumination.  Y et  when  the 
other Medea,  Jason's wife,  played  her  famous  trick  (recorded  by  Diodorus 
Siculus)  on "old  Pelias  of Iolcos,  persuading  his  daughters  to  cut  him  up 
and  stew  him  back  to  youth  and  then  calmly  denouncing  them  as  parri 
cides,  she  disguised  her  Corinthian  nationality  and  pretended  to  be  a 
Hyperborean  Goddess.  Evidently  Pelias  had  heard  of  the  Hyperborean 
cauldron  and  had  greater  faith  in  it  than  in  the  Corinthian  one.

(I  handled(I  handled

'It  is  not  known  whether  my  body  is  flesh  or  fish.'  T h is  riddle,  in  line 
36,  was  not  hard  to  answer.  I  remembered  the  long-standing  dispute  in 
the  mediaeval  Church  whether  or  not  it  was  right  to  eat  barnacle  goose  on 
Fridays  and  other  fast-days.  T he  barnacle  goose  does  not  nest  in  the 
British  Isles. 
the  first  clutch  of  its  eggs  ever  brought 
there;  they  were  found  at  Spitzbergen  in  the  Arctic.)  It  was  universally 
believed  to  be  hatched  out  of  the  goose  barnacle—to  quote  the  Oxford 
English  Dictionary,  'a  white  sea-shell  of  the  pedunculate  genus  of  Cirri-
pedes.'  T he  long  feathery  cirri  protruding  from  the  valves  suggested 
plumage.  Giraldus  Cambrensis  once  saw  more  than  a  thousand  embryo 
barnacle  geese  hanging  from  one  piece  of  drift  w o od  on  the  shore. 
Campion  wrote  in  his  Elizabethan  History  of Ireland:  'Barnacles,  thou 
sands  at  once,  are  noted  along  the  shoares  to  hang  by  the  beakes  about  the 
edges  of putrified  timber  .  .  .  which  in  processe  taking  lively  heate  of the 
Sunne,  become  water-foules.'  Barnacle  geese  were  therefore  held  by  some 
to  be  fish,  not  fowl,  and  legitimate  Friday  eating  for  monks.  T he  word 
'barnacle',  the  same  dictionary  suggests,  is  formed  from  the  Welsh  brenig, 
or  Irish  bairneach,  meaning  a  limpet  or  barnacle-shell.  Moreover,  the 
other  name  for  the  barnacle  goose,  the  'brent'  or  the  'brant',  is  apparently 
formed  from  the  same  w o r d.  Caius,  the  Elizabethan  naturalist,  called  it

8888

Anser  Brendinus  and  wrote  of  it:  '  "Bernded"  seu  "Brended"  id  animal 
dicitur.'  This  suggests  a  connexion  between  bren,  bairn,  brent,  brant,  bem 
and  Bran  w h o,  as  the  original  Cad  Goddeu  makes  plain,  was  an  Under 
world-god.  F or  the  northward  migration  of  wild  geese  is  connected  in 
British  legend  with  the  conducting  to  the  icy  Northern  Hell  of the  souls 
of the  damned,  or  of unbaptized  infants.  In  Wales  the  sound  of the  geese 
passing  unseen  overhead  at  night  is  supposed  to  be  made  by  the  Cwm 
Annwm  ('Hounds  of Hell'  with  white  bodies  and  red  ears),  in  England  by 
Yell  Hounds,  Y e th  Hounds,  Wish  Hounds,  Gabriel  Hounds,  or  Gabriel 
Ratchets.  T he  Hunter  is  called  variously  Gwyn  ('the  white  one')—there 
was  a  G w yn  cult  in  pre-Christian  G l a s t o n b u r y— H e me  the  Hunter,  and 
Gabriel.  In  Scotland  he  is  Arthur.  'Arthur'  here  may  stand  for  Arddu 
('the  dark  one')...Satan's  name  in  the  Welsh  Bible.  But  his  original  name 
in  Britain seems  to have been  Bran, which in Welsh is V r o n. T he  fish-or-
flesh  riddle must therefore belong with the other two  V r on  riddles already 
answered.

T he  alternative  text  of  the  Hanes  Taliesin  published  in  the  Myvyrian

Archaiology is  translated  by D.  W.  Nash as  follows:

1  An  impartial  Chief Bard

Am  I  to  Elphin. 
My accustomed country 
Is the land of the Cherubim.

2  Johannes  the  Diviner

I  was  called by  Merddin, 
At  length  every  King 
Will call me  Taliesin.

3  / was nine months almost

In the belly of the hag Caridwen; 
I was atfirst little  Gwion, 
At  length  I am  Taliesin.

4  I  was  with  my  Lord

In  the highest sphere, 
When  Lucifer  fell 
Into the depths of Hell.

5  I carried the  banner 
Before  Alexander.

I know the names of the stars 
From  the North to the South,In  the highest sphere, 
When  Lucifer  fell 
Into the depths of Hell.

5  I carried the  banner 
Before  Alexander.

I know the names of the stars 
From  the North to the South,

6  / was  in  Caer  Bedion 
Tetragrammaton; 
I conveyed Heon  [the  Divine  Spirit] 
Down to the vale of Ebron.

7  I was in  Canaan

When Absalom  was slain; 
I was in the Hall of Don 
Before  Gwydion  was born.

8  I was on the horse's crupper

Of  Eli  and  Enoch; 
I was on the high cross 
Of the merciful Son of God.

9  I was the chief overseer

At the building of the tower of Nimm 
I have been three times resident 
In the castle of Arianrhod.

10  I was in the Ark

With  Noah  and Alpha; 
I saw  the  destruction 
Of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah.

11  I was  in  Africa  [Asia?]

Before the building of Rome; 
I am now come here 
To  the  remnants  ofTroia.

12  I was  with  my  King

In the manger of the ass; 
I  supported  Moses 
Through  the waters of Jordan.

13  I was in  the  Firmament

With  Mary  Magdalene; 
I obtained my inspiration 
From the cauldron of Caridwen.

14  I was Bard of the harp 
To  Deon  ofLlychlyn; 
I have suffered hunger 
With the son of the Virgin.

15  I was in  the  White Hill

In  the  Hall  of  Cynvelyn, 
In stocks and fetters 
Ayear  and a  half.

16  I have been in the buttery 
In the land of the Trinity;

9°

It is not known what is the nature 
Of its meat and its fish.

17 / have been instructed

In the whole system of the universe; 
1 shall be till the day of judgement 
On the face ofthe earth.

1 8/ have been in an uneasy chair

Above  Caer  Sidin, 
And the whirling round without motion 
Between three elements.

19 Is it not the wonder of the world 
That cannot be  discovered?1 8/ have been in an uneasy chair

Above  Caer  Sidin, 
And the whirling round without motion 
Between three elements.

19 Is it not the wonder of the world 
That cannot be  discovered?

T he  sequence  is  different  and  the  L a p w i ng  has  been  as  busy  as  ever. 
But  I  learned  a  g o od  deal  from  the  variants.  In  place  of  'the  land  of  the 
Summer  Stars',  'the  land  of the  Cherubim'  is  mentioned.  Both  mean  the 
same  thing.  T he  Eighteenth  Psalm  (verse  10)  makes  it  clear  that  the 
Cherubim  are  storm-cloud  angels;  and  therefore,  for  Welshmen,  they  are 
resident  in  the  West,  from  which  quarter  nine  storms  out  of  every  ten 
blow.  T he  Summer  Stars  are  those  which  lie  in  the  western  part  of  the 
firmament.

T he  first  two  lines  in  stanza  18,  'I  have  been  in  an  uneasy  chair  above 
Caer  Sidin'  helped  me.  T h e re  is  a  stone seat  at  the  top  of Cader  Idris,  'the 
Chair  of Idris'  where,  according  to  the  local  legend,  whoever  spends  the 
night  is  found  in  the  morning  either  dead,  mad,  or  a  poet.  T he  first  part 
of  this  sentence  evidently  belongs  to  the  Idris  riddle,  though  G w i o n,  in 
his  Kerddam  Veib  Llyr  mentions  a  'perfect  chair'  in  Caer  Sidi  ( ' R e v o l v i ng 
Castle'),  the  Elysian  fortress  where  the  Cauldron  of  Caridwen  was 
housed.T he  text  of stanza  2,  'Johannes  the  Diviner  I  was  called  by  Merddin', 
seems  to  be  purposely  corrupt,  since  in  the  Mabinogion  version  the  sense 
is:  'Idno  and  Heinin  called  me  Merddin.'  I  thought  at first that  die  original 
line  ran:  'Johannes  I  was called,  and  Merddin  the  Diviner',  and  I  was  right 
so  far  as  I  went.  Merddin,  w ho  in  mediaeval  romances  is  styled  Merlin, 
was  the  most  famous  ancient  prophet  in  British  tradition.  T he  manifest 
sense  of the  stanza  is  that  G w i on  had  been  called  Merddin,  'dweller  in  the 
sea',  by  Heinin,  Maelgwyn's  chief bard,  because  like  the  original  Merddin 
he  was  of mysterious  birth  and,  though  a  child,  had  confounded  the  bardic 
college  at  D y g a n wy  exactly  as  Merddin  (according  to  Nennius  and 
Geoffrey  of  Monmouth)  had  confounded  Vortigern's  sages;  that  he  had

9i9i

also  been  called  ' J o hn  the  Baptist'  ('But  thou,  child,  shalt  be  called  the 
prophet  of  the  Most  Highest');  but  that  eventually  everyone  would  call 
him  Taliesin  ('radiant  b r o w ')  the  chief of poets.  D r.  MacCulloch  suggests 
that  there  was  an  earlier  Taliesin  than  the  sixth-century  bard,  and  that  he 
was  a  Celtic  Apollo;  which  would  account  for  the  'radiant  b r o w'  and  for 
his  appearance  among  other  faded  gods  and  heroes  at  K i ng  Arthur's 
Court  in  the  Romance  of  Kilhwch  and  Olwen.  (Apollo  himself  had  once 
been  a  dweller  in  the  sea—the  dolphin  was  sacred  to  him—and  oddly 
enough  John  the  Baptist  seems  to  have  been  identified  by  early  Christian 
syncretists  in  E g y pt  with  the  Chaldean  god  Oannes  w ho  according  to 
Berossus  used  to  appear  at  long  intervals  in  the  Persian  Gulf,  disguised  as 
the  merman  Odacon,  and  renew  his  original  revelation  to  the  faithful. 
T he  case  is  further  complicated  by  the  myth  of Huan,  the  Flower-goddess 
Blodeuwedd's  victim,  w ho  was  really  the  g od  L l ew  L l a w,  another  'sea-
dweller'.)

It  took  me  a  long  time  to  realize  that  the  concealed  sense  of stanza  2, 
which  made  the  textual  corruption  necessary,  was  a  heretical  paraphrase 
of  the  passage  in  the  three  synoptic  Gospels  (Matt.  XVI,  14,  Mark  VI, 
i5,  Luke  IX,  j,  8):

Some  say  thou  art  J o hn  the  Baptist,  and  some  Elias;  and  some,  one 
of the  ancient  prophets  risen  from  the  dead.  .  .  .'  But  Peter  answered: 
' T h ou  art  the  Christ.'Some  say  thou  art  J o hn  the  Baptist,  and  some  Elias;  and  some,  one 
of the  ancient  prophets  risen  from  the  dead.  .  .  .'  But  Peter  answered: 
' T h ou  art  the  Christ.'

T he  completing  phrase  'and  Elias'  occurs  in  stanza  8.  T he  D i v i ne  Child 
is  speaking  as  Jesus  Christ,  as  I  believe  he  also  is  in  stanza  14:  'I  have 
suffered  hunger  with  the  Son  of  the  Virgin.'  Jesus  was  alone  then  except 
for  the  Devil  and  the  'wild  beasts'.  But  the  D e v il  did  not  go  hungry;  and 
the  'wild  beasts'  in  the  Temptation  context,  according  to  the  acutest 
scriptural  critics—e.g.  Professor  A.  A.  Bevan  and  D r.  T.  K.  C h e y n e— 
were also  of the  Devil's  party.  T he Mabinogion version,  line  3 1,  is:  'I  have 
suffered  hunger  for  the  Son  of  the  Virgin,'  which  comes  to  the  same 
thing:  Jesus  suffered  hunger  on  his  own  account.  T he  answer  to  this 
riddle  was  simply  'Jesus',  as  'Taliesin'  was  the  answer  to  'Joannes,  and 
Merddin  the Diviner,  and Elias I was  called'.

'I  was  in  the  A rk  with  Noah  and  Alpha',  in  stanza  10,  and  'I  was  in 
Caer  Bedion,  Tetragrammaton',  stanza  6,  must  together  refer  to  the 
' H o ly  Unspeakable  Name  of G o d '.  'Alpha  and  Omega'  was  a  divine  peri 
phrasis  which  it  was  permitted  to  utter  publicly;  and  the  'tetragrammaton' 
was  the  cryptogrammic  Hebrew  w ay  of  spelling  the  secret  Name  in  four 
letters  as  J H W H.  I  thought  at first that  'I was  in  Caer  Bedion'  belonged  to 
the  L ot  riddle:  because  ' L o t'  is  the  Norman-French  name  for  L l u d d,  the 
king  w ho  built  London,  and  Caer  Bedion  is  Caer  Badus,  or  Bath,  which 
according  to  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth  was  built  by  Lludd's  father  Bladud.

92

But  to  G w i on  the  Welshman  Lludd  was  not  ' L o t ',  nor  is  there  any  record 
of Lludd's  having lived  at  Bath.92

But  to  G w i on  the  Welshman  Lludd  was  not  ' L o t ',  nor  is  there  any  record 
of Lludd's  having lived  at  Bath.

I  let  the  'Caer  Bedion'  riddle  stand  over  for  a while,  and  also  the  riddle 
'I  was  Alpha  Tetragrammaton'—if this  conjunction  composed  the  riddle 
—the  answer  to  which  was  evidently  a  four-lettered  Divine  Name 
beginning  with  A.  Meanwhile,  w ho  was  'bard  of  the  harp  to  Deon,  or 
Lleon,  of Lochlin,  or  L l y c h l y n'  (line  28;  and  stanza  14)?  ' D e on  K i ng  of 
Lochlin  and  Dublin',  is  an  oddly  composite  character.  Deon  is  a  variant 
spelling  of D o n,  w h o,  as  already  pointed  out,  was  really  Danu  the  Goddess 
of  the  Tuatha  de  Danaan,  the  invaders  of  Ireland,  patriarchized  into  a 
K i ng  of  Lochlin,  or  Lochlann,  and  Dublin.  Lochlann  was  the  mythical 
undersea  home  of  the  later  Fomorian  invaders  of  Ireland,  against  w h om 
the  Tuatha  de  Danaan  fought  a  bloody  war.  T he  g od  Tethra  ruled  it.  It 
seems  that  legends  of the  war  between  these  two  nations  were  worked  by 
later  poets  into  ballad  cycles  celebrating  the  ninth-century  wars  between 
the  Irish  and  the  Danish  and  Norse  pirates.  T h us  the  Scandinavians  came 
to  be  called  'the  Lochlannach'  and  the  Danish  K i ng  of  Dublin  was  also 
styled  ' K i ng  of  Lochlin'.  When  the  cult  of  the  Scandinavian  god  Odin, 
the  rune-maker  and  magician,  was  brought  to  Ireland  he  was  identified 
with  his  counterpart  G w y d i on  w ho  in  the  fourth  century B.C.  had  brought 
a  new  system  of letters  with  him  to  Britain,  and  had  been  enrolled  as  a  son 
of  D a nu  or  D o n.  Moreover,  according  to  the  legend,  the  Danaans  had 
come  to  Britain  from  Greece  by w ay  of Denmark  to  which  they  had  given 
the  name  of  their  goddess,  and  in  mediaeval  Ireland  Danaan  and  Dane 
became  confused,  the  Danes  of  the  ninth  century  A . D.  getting  credit  for 
Bronze  A ge  monuments.  So  ' D e on  of Lochlin'  must  stand  for  'the  Danes 
of  Dublin'.  These  pirates  with  their  sea-raven  flag  were  the  terror  of  the 
Welsh,  and  the  minstrel  to  the  Danes  of  Dublin  was  probably  the  sea-
raven,  sacred  to  Odin,  w ho  croaked  over  their  victims.  If so,  the  answer 
to  the  riddle  was  'Morvran'  (sea-raven),  w ho  was  the  son  of  Caridwen 
and,  according  to  the  Romance  of  Kilhwch  and  Olwen,  the  ugliest  man  in 
the  world.  In  the  Triads  he  is  said  to  have  escaped  alive  from  the  Battle  of 
Camlan—another  of  the  'Three  Frivolous  Battles  of  Britain'—because 
everyone  shrank  from  him.  He  must  be  identified  with  Afagddu,  son  of 
Caridwen,  for  w h om  the  same  supreme  ugliness  is  claimed  in  the  Romance 
of Taliesin,  and  w h om  she  determined  to  make  as  intelligent  as  he  was 
ugly.I  wondered  whether  'Lleon  of Lochlin',  in  the  Myvyrian  version,  was 
a  possible  reading.  Arthur  had  his  Court  at  Caerlleon-upon-Usk  and  the 
word  Caerlleon  is  generally  taken  to  mean  ' T he  C a mp  of  the  Legion'; 
and  certainly  the  two  Caerlleons  mentioned  in  the  seventh-century  Welsh 
Catalogue  of  Cities,  Caerlleon-upon-Usk  and  Caerlleon-upon-Dee,  are 
both  there  explained  as  Castra  Legionis.  If G w i on  accepted  this  derivation

93

of the  word  the  riddle  would  read:  'I  was  bard  of the  harp  to  the  legions  of 
Lochlin',  and  the  answer  would  be  the  same.  T he  name  L e on  occurs  in 
G w i o n 's  Kadeir  Teyrnon  ( ' T he  R o y al  Chair'):  'the  lacerated  form  of  the 
corsleted  L e o n '.  But  the  context  is  corrupt  and  ' L e o n'  may  be  a  descrip 
tive  title  of some  lion-hearted  prince,  not  a  proper  name.

Then  there  was  the  riddle  in  stanza  8  to  consider:  'I  was  on  the  horse's 
crupper  of  Eli  and  Enoch'—an  alternative  to  the  misleading  Book  of 
Enoch  riddle  in  the  Mabinogion  version:

I  was  instructor  to  Eli  and  Enoch

of  which  the  answer  is  'Uriel'.  In  both  texts  Elias  is  really  a  part  of  the 
heretical  J o hn  the  Baptist  riddle,  from  which  the  L a p w i ng  has  done  her 
best  to  distract  attention;  her  false  connexion  of Elias  and  Enoch  has  been 
most  subtly  made.  F or  these  two  prophets  are  paired  in  various  A p o 
cryphal  Gospels—the  History  ofJoseph  the  Carpenter,  the  Acts  of  Pilate, 
the  Apocalypse  of  Peter  and  the  Apocalypse  of  Paul.  In  the  Acts  of  Pilate, 
for  instance,  which  was  current  in  Wales  in  Latin  translation,  occurs  the 
verse:

I  am  Enoch  w ho  was  translated  hither  by  the  w o rd  of the  L o r d,  and

here with me  is Elias  the  Tishbite w ho  was  taken  up  in a chariot  of fire.I  am  Enoch  w ho  was  translated  hither  by  the  w o rd  of the  L o r d,  and

here with me  is Elias  the  Tishbite w ho  was  taken  up  in a chariot  of fire.

But  the  real  riddle  in  the Mabinogion  version  proves  to  be:  'I was  instructor 
to  Enoch  and  Noah'.  In  this  other  version,  'I  was  on  the  horse's  crupper 
of Eli  and  Enoch',  the  mention  of Elias  is  otiose:  for Enoch,  like Elias,  was 
caught  up  alive  into  Heaven  on  a  chariot  drawn  by  fiery  horses.  So  the 
answer  again  is  Uriel,  since  'Uriel'  means  'Flame  of G o d '.  N ow  perhaps  I 
could also answer 'Uriel'  to the riddle 'I was in  Caer Bedion'.  F o r,  accord 
ing  to  Geoffrey  of Monmouth,  a  sacred  fire  was  kept  continually  burning 
in  a  temple  at  Caer  Bedion,  or  Bath,  like  that  which  burned  in  the  House 
of G od  at  Jerusalem.

There  is  a  variation  between  the  texts:  'a  day  and  a  year  in  stocks  and 
fetters'  (line  30)  and  'a  year  and  a  half in  stocks  and  fetters'  (stanza  1 5 ). 
'A  year  and  a  h a lf  makes  no  obvious  sense,  but  'a  day  and  a  year'  can  be 
equated  with  the  Thirteen  Prison  L o c ks  that  guarded  Elphin,  if each  lock 
was  a  28-day  month  and  he  was  released  on  the  extra  day  of  the  365. 
T he  ancient  common-law  month  in  Britain,  according  to  Blackstone's 
Commentaries  (2,  IX,  142)  is  28  days  long,  unless  otherwise  stated,  and  a 
lunar  month  is  still  popularly  so  reckoned,  although  a  true  lunar  month, 
or  lunation,  from  new  moon  to  new  moon,  is  roughly  29^  days  long,  and 
though  thirteen  is  supposed  to  be  an  unlucky  number.  T he  pre-Christian 
calendar  of  thirteen  four-week  months,  with  one  day  over,  was  super 
seded  by  the  Julian  calendar  (which  had  no  weeks)  based  eventually  on 
the  year  of twelve  thirty-day  Egyptian  months  with  five  days  over.  T he

9494

author  of  the  Book  of  Enoch  in  his  treatise  on  astronomy  and  the  calendar 
also  reckoned  a  year  to  be  364  days,  though  he  pronounced  a  curse  on  all 
w ho  did  not  reckon  a  month  to  be  30  days  long.  Ancient  calendar-
makers  seem  to  have  interposed  the  day  which  had  no  month,  and  was 
not  therefore  counted  as  part  of  the  year,  between  the  first  and  last  of 
their  artificial  28-day  months:  so  that  the  farmer's  year  lasted,  from  the 
calendar-maker's  point  of v i e w,  literally  a  year and  a  day.

'Thirteen  Wonders  of  Britain',

In  the  Welsh  Romances  the  number  thirteen  is  of  constant  occurrence: 
'Thirteen  Precious  T h i n g s ', 
'Thirteen 
K i n g ly  J e w e l s '.  T he  Thirteen  Prison  L o c k s,  then,  were  thirteen  months 
and  on  the  extra  day,  the  D ay  of Liberation,  the  D ay  of the  Divine  Child, 
Elphin  was  set  free.  T h is  day  will  naturally  have  fallen  just  after  the 
winter  solsdce—two  days  before  Christmas,  when  the  Romans  had  their 
mid-winter  festival.  I  saw  that  if the  true  reading  is  'in  stocks  and  fetters 
a  year  and  a  day',  then  this  clause  should  be  attached  to  'Primary  chief 
bard  am I to Elphin', in line  1:  for it was Elphin w ho was fettered.N o w,  G w y nn  Jones  dissents  from  the  usual  v i ew  that  the  w o rd  Mabino 
gion  means  'juvenile  romances';  he  suggests,  by  analogy  with  the  Irish 
title  Mac-ind-oic,  applied  to  A n g us  of  the  Brugh,  that  it  means  'tales  of 
the  son  of a  virgin  mother'  and  shows  that  it  was  originally  applied  only 
to  the  four  romances  in  which  Pryderi  son  of  Rhiannon  appears.  This 
'son  of a  virgin  mother'  is  always  born  at  the  winter  solstice;  which  gives 
point  to  the  story  of  Phylip  B r y d y d d 's  contention  with  the  minstrels  for 
the  privilege  of first presenting  Prince  R h ys  Ieuanc  with  a  song  on  Christ 
mas  D a y,  and  also  his  mention  of M a e l g w yn  and  Elphin  in  that  context.

T he  riddle  in  stanza  16,  'I  have  been  in  the  buttery',  must  refer  to  K a i, 
w ho  was  in  charge  of K i ng  Arthur's  Buttery.  T he  line,  cleverly  muddled 
up  with  the  Barnacle  riddle,  should  probably  be  attached  to  'I  was  with 
my  L o rd  in  the  highest  sphere'  (line  5  and  stanza  5 ),  K ai  appearing  in  the 
'one  of  the  three  diademed  chiefs  of  battle',  possessed  of 
Triads  as 
magical  powers.  In  the  Romance  of  Olwen  and  Kilhwch 
there  is  this 
description  of him:

He  could  hold  his  breath  under  water  for  nine  days  and  nights,  and 
sleep  for  the  same  period.  No  physician  could  heal  a  wound  inflicted  by 
his  sword.  He  could  make  himself at  will  as  tall  as  the  tallest  tree  in  the 
w o o d.  His  natural  heat  was  so  great  that  in  a  deluge  of rain  whatever  he 
carried  in  his  hand  remained  dry  a  hand's-breadth  above  and  below. 
On  the  coldest  day he  was  like  a  g l o w i ng fuel  to  his  comrades.This  is  close  to  the  account  given  of the  Sun-hero  Cuchulain  i 
rage.  But  in the later Arthurian legends K ai had  degenerated ini 
and  Chief of the  C o o k s.

is  battle 
buffoon

95

T he  memory  of  the  thirteen-month  year  was  kept  alive  in  the  pagan 
English  countryside  until  at  least  the  fourteenth  century.  The  Ballad  of 
Robin  Hood and the  Curtal Friar  begins:

But how many merry monthes be in theyeare?

There  are  thirteen,  I say;

The mid-summer moon is the merryest of all,

Next  to  the  merry  month  of  May.

T h is has been altered in  manifestly later ballad:

There  are  twelve  months  in  all  the year

As  I  hear  many  men  say.

But the merriest month in all the year

Is  the  merry  month  of  May.

Chapter  Six

A  VISIT  TO  S P I R AL  C A S T LE

M y  suggested  answers  to  the  riddles  of  the  Hones  Taliesin  were

as follows:

Babel 
L ot  or  L o ta 
Vran 
Salome 
Ne-esthan 
Hur 
D a v id 
Taliesin 
Kai 
Caleb

Hu  Gadarn 
Morvran 
G o m er

Rhea 
Idris 
Joseph

Jesus 
Uriel

T h is  w as  as  far  as  I  could  go  without  adopting  the  method  of the  cross 
word  puzzler,  which  is  to  use  the  answers  already  secured  as  clues  to  the 
solution  of  the  more  difficult  riddles  that  remain,  but  I  made  some 
progress  with  the  riddle:  'I  have  been  three  periods  in  the  C a s de  of 
Arianrhod.'Arianrhod  ('Silver  wheel')  appears  in  the  107th  Triad  as  the  'Silver-
circled  daughter  of  D o n ',  and  is  a  leading  character  in  the  Romance  of 
Math  the  Son  of  Mathonwy.  No  one  familiar  with  the  profuse  variants  of 
the  same  legend  in  every  b o dy  of European  myth  can  have  doubts  about 
her  identity.  She  is  the  mother  of the  usual  D i v i ne  F i s h - C h i ld  D y l an  w h o, 
after  killing  the  usual  W r en  (as  the  N ew  Y e ar  R o b in  does  on  St.  Stephen's 
day)  becomes  L l ew  L l aw  Gyffes  ('the  L i on  with  the  Steady  H a n d ' ),  the

97

usual  handsome  and  accomplished  Sun-hero  with  the  usual  Heavenly 
T w in  at  his  side.  Arianrhod  then  adopts  the  form  of  Blodeuwedd,  the 
usual  Love-goddess,  treacherously  (as  usual)  destroys  L l ew  L l a w — t he 
story  is  at  least  as  old  as  the  Babylonian  Gilgamesh  epic—and  is  then 
transformed  first  into  the  usual  O wl  of  Wisdom  and  then  into  the  usual 
Old-Sow-who-eats-her-farrow;  so  feeds  on  L l e w 's  dead  flesh.  But  L l e w, 
whose  soul  has  taken  the  form  of the  usual  eagle,  is  then,  as  usual,  restored 
to life.  T he story is  given in  full in  Chapter Seventeen.

In  other  words  Arianrhod  is  one  more  aspect  of  Caridwen,  or  Cerrid 
wen,  the  White  Goddess  of Life-in-Death  and  Death-in-Life;  and  to  be  in 
the  Castle  of Arianrhod  is  to  be  in  a  royal  purgatory  awaiting  resurrec 
tion.  F or  in  primitive  European  belief  it  was  only  kings,  chieftains  and 
poets,  or  magicians,  w ho  were  privileged  to  be  reborn.  Countless  other 
less  distinguished  souls  wandered  disconsolately  in  the  icy  grounds  of the 
Castle,  as  yet  uncheered  by  the  Christian  hope  of universal  resurrection. 
G w i on  makes 
the 
Thousand  Children').

in  his  Marwnad  y  Milveib

( ' E l e gy  on

this  clearin  his  Marwnad  y  Milveib

( ' E l e gy  on

this  clear

Incomprehensible numbers there were 
Maintained in  a  chilly  hell 
Until  the  Fifth  Age  of  the  world, 
Until Christ should release the captives.

Where  was  this  purgatory  situated?  It  must  be  distinguished  from  the 
Celtic  Heaven,  which  was  the  Sun  itself—a  blaze  of  light  (as  we  k n ow 
from  Armorican  tradition)  caused  by  the  shining  together  of  myriads  of 
pure  souls.  Well,  where  should  one  expect  to  find  it?  In  a  quarter  from 
which  the  Sun  never  shines.  Where  is  that?  In  the  cold  North.  H ow  far 
to  the  North?  Beyond  the  source  of  Boreas,  the  North  W i n d;  for  'at  the 
back  of  the  North  W i n d ' —a  phrase  used  by  Pindar  to  locate  the  land  of 
the  Hyperboreans—is  still  a  popular  Gaelic  synonym  for  the  Land  of 
Death.  But  precisely  where  beyond  the  source  of the  North  wind?  O n ly  a 
poet  would  be  persistent  enough  to  ask  this  last  question.  T he  poet  is  the 
unsatisfied  child  w ho  dares  to  ask  the  difficult  question  which  arises  from 
the  schoolmaster's  answer  to  his  simple  question,  and  then  the  still  more 
difficult  question  which  arises  from  that.  Surprisingly  enough  there  is,  on 
this  occasion,  a  ready  answer.  Caer  Arianrhod  (not  the  submerged  twon 
off the  coast  of  Caernarvon,  but  the  real  Caer  Arianrhod)  is,  according  to 
'Corona 
D r.  Owen  of  the  Welsh  Dictionary,  the  constellation  called 
Borealis'.  N ot  Corona  Septentrionalis,  'the  Northern  C r o w n ',  but  Corona 
Borealis,  'the  C r o wn  of  the  North  W i n d '.  Perhaps  we  have  the  answer 
here  to  the  question  which  puzzled  Herodotus: 
' W ho  are  the  H y p e r 
boreans?'  Were  the  Hyperboreans,  the  'back-of-the-North-Wind-men', 
members  of  a  N o r th  W i nd  cult,  as  the  Thracians  of  the  Sea  of  Marmara

9898

were?  D id  they  believe  that  when-they  died  their  souls  were  taken  off 
by  Hermes,  conductor  of  souls,  to  the  calm  silver-circled  castle  at  the 
back  of  the  North  W i n d,  of  which  the  bright  star  Alpheta  was  the 
guardian?

the  mention  of  Oenopion  and  Tauropolus  byI  should  not  venture  to  make  such  a  fanciful  suggestion  if  it  were  not 
for 
the  Scholiast  on 
Apollonius  Rhodius's  Argonautica. T h is  Corona  Borealis,  which  is  also 
'the  Cretan  C r o w n ',  was  in  ancient  times  sacred  to  a  Cretan 
called 
Goddess,  wife  to  the  G od  Dionysus,  and  according  to  this  Scholiast  the 
mother  of—that 
is,  worshipped  by—Staphylus,  T h o a s,  Oenopion, 
Tauropolus  and  others. These  men  were  the  eponymous  ancestors  of 
Pelasgo-Thracian  clans  or  tribes  settled  in  the  Aegean  islands  of  Chios 
and  Lemnos,  on  the  Thracian  Chersonese,  and  in  the  Crimea,  and  cultur 
ally  connected  with  North-Western  Europe. T he  Goddess  was  Ariadne, 
('Most  H o l y ' ,)  alias  Alpheta—alpha  and  eta  being  the  first  and  last  letters 
of her  name. She  was  the  daughter,  or  younger  self,  of the  ancient  Cretan 
Moon-Goddess  Pasiphae,  'She  w ho  shines  for  all',  and  the  Greeks  made 
her  a  sister  of their  ancient  vine-hero  Deucalion,  w ho  survived  the  Great 
F l o o d. Ariadne,  on  w h om  'Arianrhod'  seems  to  be  modelled,  was  an 
orgiastic  goddess,  and  it is evident  from  the  legends  of Lemnos,  Chios,  the 
Chersonese  and  the  Crimea,  that  male  human  sacrifice  was  an  integral 
part  of  her  worship,  as  it  was  among  the  pre-Roman  devotees  of  the 
White  Goddess  of Britain. Orpheus  himself,  w ho  lived  'among  the  savage 
Cauconians'  close  to  Oenopion's  home,  was  a  sacred  victim  of  her  fury. He  was  torn  in  pieces  by  a  pack  of  delirious  women  intoxicated  by  i vy 
and  also,  it  seems,  by  the  toadstool  sacred  to  Dionysus. Eratosthenes  of 
Alexandria,  quoting  Aeschylus's  Bassarides, 
that  Orpheus 
refused  to  conform  to  local  religion  but  'believed  the  sun,  w h om  he  named 
A p o l l o,  to  be  the  greatest  of the  gods.the  mention  of  Oenopion  and  Tauropolus  by

He  was  torn  in  pieces  by  a  pack  of  delirious  women  intoxicated  by  i vy 
and  also,  it  seems,  by  the  toadstool  sacred  to  Dionysus. Eratosthenes  of 
Alexandria,  quoting  Aeschylus's  Bassarides, 
that  Orpheus 
refused  to  conform  to  local  religion  but  'believed  the  sun,  w h om  he  named 
A p o l l o,  to  be  the  greatest  of the  gods. Rising  up  in  the  night  he  ascended 
before  dawn  to  the  mountain  called  Pangaeum  that  he  might  see  the  sun 
first. At  which  Dionysus,  being  enraged,  sent  against  him  the  Bassarids, 
w ho  tore  him  in  p i e c e s . . . .'  T h at  is  a  dishonest  w ay  of telling  the  story. Proclus  in  his  commentary  on  Plato  is  more  to  the  point: 
'Orpheus, 
because  he  was  the  leader  in  the  Dionysian  rites,  is  said  to  have  suffered 
the  same  fate  as  the  god.'  But  the  head  of  Orpheus  continued  to  sing  and 
prophesy,  like  that  of  the  G od  Bran. Orpheus,  according  to  Pausanias, 
was  worshipped  by  the  Pelasgians,  and  the  termination  eus  is  always  a 
proof of antiquity  in  a  Greek  name. 'Orpheus',  like  'Erebus',  the  name  of 
the  Underworld  o v er  which  the  White  Goddess  ruled,  is  derived  by 
grammarians  from  the  root  ereph,  which  means  'to  cover  or  conceal'. It  was  the  Moon-goddess,  not  the  Sun-god,  w ho  originally  inspired 
Orpheus.

records

T he  clearest  sign  that  in  Arianrhod  we  have  the  old  matriarchal

99

Triple  Goddess,  or White  Goddess,  lies  in  her  giving her son  L l ew  L l aw 
a  name  and  a  set  of arms.  In  patriarchal  society  it  is  always  the  father  w ho 
gives  both.  L l ew  L l aw  has  no  father  at  all,  in  the  Romance,  and  must 
remain  anonymous  until  his  mother  is  tricked  into  making  a  man  of him.I  thought  at  first  that  G w i o n 's  riddle  about  Caer  Arianrhod  was  to  be 
completed  with  'and  the  whirling  round  without  motion  between  three 
elements'.  T he  three  elements  are  clearly  fire,  air  and  water,  and  the 
Corona  Borealis revolves  in  a v e ry small  space  compared  with  the southern 
constellations.  But  G w i on  must  have  been  taught  that  Arianrhod's  Castle 
does  not  lie  within  'the  Arctic  Circle',  which  includes  the  two  Bears  and 
the  Bear-Warden,  and  that  when  the  Sun  rises  in  the  House  of  the 
Crab,  it  begins  to  dip  over  the  Northern  horizon  and  does  not  free  itself 
until  the  summer  is  over.  To  describe  it  as  whirling  round  without 
motion  would  have  been 
the  Little  Bear  does  so, 
inaccurate;  only 
pivoted  on  the  Pole-star.  (As  I  s h ow  in  Chapter  T e n,  the  whirling-
round  is  part  of  the  riddle  to  which  the  answer  is  Rhea;  but  I  will  not 
anticipate  the  argument  at  this  point.)

Y e t, even if I knew the meaning o f 'a period in the Castle of Arianrhod',

could  I  answer  the  riddle?  W ho  spent  three  periods  there?Y e t, even if I knew the meaning o f 'a period in the Castle of Arianrhod',

could  I  answer  the  riddle?  W ho  spent  three  periods  there?

T he  sequences  of 'I  have  been'  or  'I  am'—the  earliest  of them  indisput 
ably  pre-Christian—which  occur  in  so  many  bardic  poems  of Wales  and 
Ireland  seem  to  have  several  different  though  related  senses.  T he  primi 
tive  belief  is  plainly  not  in  individual  metempsychosis  of  the  vulgar 
Indian  sort—at  one  time  a  bluebottle,  at  the  next  a  flower,  at  the  next 
perhaps  a  Brahmini  bull  or  a  woman,  according  to  one's  merit.  T he  T  is 
the  Apollo-like  god  on  whose  behalf the  inspired  poet  sings,  not  the  poet 
himself.  Sometimes  the g od  may  be  referring  mythically  to  his  daily cycle 
as  the  Sun  from  dawn  to  dawn;  sometimes  to  his  yearly  cycle  from  winter 
solstice  to  winter  solstice  with  the  months  as  stations  of  his  progress; 
perhaps  sometimes  even  to  his  grand  cycle  of  25,800  years  around  the 
Z o d i ac  A ll  these  cycles  are  types  of one  anodier;  as  we  still  speak  either 
of the  'evening'  or  'autumn'  of our  lives  when  we  mean  old  age.

T he  commonest  'I  have  been'  reference  is  to  the  yearly  cycle,  and  to 
examine  these  seasonal  'I  have  been's  (though  for  reasons  of  discretion 
the order has  always been deliberately confused)  is usually to find that  they 
contain  a  complete  series  of round-the-year  symbols.

/ am  water, I am a wren, 
I am a workman, I am a star, 
I am a serpent; 
I am  a  cell,  I am  a  chink, 
I am a depository of song, 
I  am  a  learned  person,  e tc

100/ am  water, I am a wren, 
I am a workman, I am a star, 
I am a serpent; 
I am  a  cell,  I am  a  chink, 
I am a depository of song, 
I  am  a  learned  person,  e tc

100

T h o u gh  the  Pythagorean  theory  of  metempsychosis,  imported  from 
the  Greek  colonies  in  Southern  France,  has  been  suspected  in  the  Irish 
legend  of T u an  MacCairill,  one  of the  royal  immigrants  from  Spain,  w ho 
went  through  the  successive  metamorphoses  of  stag,  boar,  hawk  and 
salmon  before  being  born  as  a  man,  this  is  unlikely:  the  four  beasts  are  all 
seasonal symbols, as will be shown.

T he  poetic  language  of myth  and  symbol  used  in  ancient  Europe  was 
not,  in  principle,  a  difficult  one  but  became  confused,  with  the  passage  of 
time,  by  frequent  modifications  due  to  religious,  social  and  linguistic 
change,  and  by  the  tendency  of  history  to  taint  the  purity  of  myth—that 
is  to  say,  the accidental  events  in  the  life  of a  king  w ho  bore a  divine  name 
were  often  incorporated  in  the  seasonal  myth  which  gave  him  the  title  to 
royalty.  A  further  complication  was  that  anciently  a  large  part  of  poetic 
education,  to  judge  from  the  Irish  Book  of Ballymote,  which  contains  a 
manual  of  cryptography,  was  concerned  with  making  the  language  as 
difficult  as  possible  in  order to  keep  the secret  close;  in  the  first  three  years 
of  his  educational  course,  the  Irish  student  for  the  OUaveship  had  to 
master  one  hundred  and  fifty  cypher-alphabets. 1What  is  the  relation  of  Caer  Sidi  to  Caer  Arianrhod?  Were  they  the 
same  place?  I  think  not,  because  Caer  Sidi  has  been  identified  with  Puffin 
Island  off  the  coast  of  Anglesey  and  with  L u n dy  Island  in  the  Severn: 
both  of  them  island  Elysiums  of  the  usual  type.  A  clue  to  the  problem  is 
that though  Caer  Sidi,  or  Caer  Sidin,  means  ' R e v o l v i ng  Castle'  in  Welsh, 
and  though  revolving  islands  are  common  in  Welsh  and  Irish  legend,  the 
w o rd  'Sidi'  is  apparently  a  translation  of  the  Goidelic  w o rd  Sidhe,  a 
round  barrow  fortress  belonging  to  the  A es  Sidhe  (Sidhe  for  short),  the 
prime  magicians  of Ireland.  There  are  several  'Fortresses  of the  Sidhe'  in 
Ireland,  the  most  remarkable  ones  being  Brugh-na-Boyne  (now  called 
' N ew  G r a n g e ' ),  K n o w th  and  D o w t h,  on  the  northern  banks  of the  R i v er 
B o y n e.  Their date and  religious  use must be considered in  detail.

N ew  Grange  is  the  largest,  and  is  said  to  have  been  originally  occupied 
by  T he  D a g da  himself,  the  Tuatha  de  Danaan  Father-god  w ho  corres 
ponds  with  the  R o m an  Saturn,  but  afterwards  by  his  Apollo-like  son 
A n g us  w ho  w on  it  from  him  by  a  legal  quibble.  T he  D a g da  on  his  first 
arrival  in  Ireland  was  evidendy  a  son  of the  Triple  Goddess  Brigit  ('the 
High  O n e ' );  but  the  myth  has  been  tampered  with  by  successive  editors. 
First,  he  is  said  to  have  married  the  Triple  Goddess.  T h en  he  is  said  to 
have  had  only  one  wife  with  three  names,  Breg,  Meng  and  Meabel  ( ' L i e, 
Guile  and  Disgrace'),  w ho  bore  him  three  daughters  all  called  Brigit. 
T h en  it  is  said  that  not  he  but  three  of his  descendants,  Brian,  Iuchar  and1  ' T he  Thirteen  Precious  Things',  'The  Thirteen  Kingly  Jewels',  'The  Thirteen  Wonders  of 
Britain',  e t c,  mentioned  in  the  Mabinogion  are  likely  to  represent  sets  of cypher  equivalents 
for the thirteen consonants of the British  Beth-Luis-Nion alphabet

I OI

three  princesses  w ho

Iuchurba  married 
together  owned  Ireland—Eire, 
Fodhla  and  Banbha.  He  was  the  son  of 'Eladu'  which  the  Irish  glossarists 
explain  as  'Science  or  K n o w l e d g e'  but  which  may  be  a  form  of the  Greek 
Elate  ('fir-tree');  Elatos  ('fir-man')  was  an  early Achaean  K i ng  of Cyllene, 
a  mountain  in  Arcadia  sacred  to  Demeter  and  later  renowned  for  its 
college  of learned  and  sacrosanct  heralds.  T he  D a g da  and  Elatos  may  thus 
both  be  equated  with  Osiris,  or  A d o n i s,  or  Dionysus,  w ho  was  born 
from  a  fir  and  mothered  by  the  horned  Moon-goddess  Isis,  or  I o,  or 
Hathor.N ew  Grange  is  a  flat-topped  round  barrow,  about  a  quarter  of a  mile  in 
circumference  and  fifty  feet  high.  But  it  is  built  of  heaped  stones,  some 
50,000  tons  of  them,  not  of earth,  and  was  originally  covered  with  white 
quartz  pebbles:  a  Bronze  A ge  sepulchral  practice  in  honour  of  the  White 
Goddess  which  may  account  in  part  for  the  legends  of K i n gs  housed  after 
death  in  glass  castles.  T en  enormous  stone  herms,  weighing  eight  or  ten 
tons  apiece  stand  in  a  semi-circle  around  the  southern  base  of the  barrow, 
and  one  formerly  stood  at  the  summit.  It  is  not  k n o wn  h ow  many  more 
have  been  removed  from  the  semi-circle  but  the  gaps  suggest  an  original 
set  of  twelve.'  A  hedge  of  about  a  hundred  long  flat  stones,  set  edge 
to  edge,  rings  the  base  around.  D e ep  inside  the  barrow  is  a  pre-Celtic 
passage-burial  cave  built  with  great  slabs  of  stone,  several  of  them 
measuring  as  much  as  seven  feet by  four.

the  sides  engraved  with  stripes;the  sides  engraved  with  stripes;

T he  ground  plan  is  the  shape  of  a  Celtic  cross;  one  enters  by  a  dolmen 
door  at  the  base  of the  shaft.  T he  shaft  consists  of a  narrow  passage,  sixty 
feet  long,  through  which  one  has  to  crawl  on  hands  and  knees.  It  leads  to  a 
small  circular  chamber,  with  a  bee-hive  corbelled  vault  twenty  feet  high; 
and  there  are  three  recesses  which  make  the  arms  of  the  cross.  W h en  this 
cave  was  re-discovered  in  1699 
lt  contained  three  large  empty  boat-
two  complete 
shaped  stone  basins, 
skeletons  lying  beside  a  central  altar,  stags'  antlers,  bones,  and  nothing 
else.  R o m an  gold  coins  of  the  fourth  century  A . D.,  gold  torques  and 
remains  of iron  weapons  were  later  found  on  the  site  of the  fort,  not  in  the 
cave.  T he  fort  was  sacked  by  the  Danes  but  there  is  nothing  to  s h ow 
whether  they,  or  earlier  invaders,  rifled  the  chamber  of its  other  funerary 
furniture.  Slabs  of  the  d o o r w ay  and  of  the  interior  are  decorated  with 
spiral  patterns  and  there  is  forked  lightning  carved  on  one  lintel.  Since  the 
old  poets  record  that  each  rath  was  presided  over  by  an  enchantress  and 
since,  as  will  be  shown,  the  Sidhe  were  such  skilful  poets  that  even  the 
Druids  were  obliged  to  go  to  them  for  the  spells  that  they  needed,  it 
seems  likely  that  the  original  Caer  Sidi,  where  the  Cauldron  of Inspiration 
was  housed,  was  a  barrow  of  the  N ew  Grange  sort.  F or  these  barrows 
were  fortresses  above  and  tombs  below.  T he  Irish  'Banshee'  fairy  is  a 
Bean-Sidhe  ('Woman  of the  Hill');  as  priestess  of  the  great  dead  she  wails

102102

in  prophetic  anticipation  whenever  anyone  of royal  blood  is  about  to  die. 
F r om  an  incident  in  the  Irish  romance  of Fiona's  Boyhood,  it  appears  that 
the  entrances  to  these  burial  caves  were  left  open  at  Samhain,  A ll  Souls' 
E v e, which was also celebrated  as a feast of the D e ad in Ancient  Greece,  to 
allow  the  spirits  of  the  heroes  to  come  out  for  an  airing;  and  that  the 
interiors  were  illuminated  until  cock-crow  the  next  morning.On  the  east  side  of  the  mound,  diametrically  opposite  the  entrance,  a 
stone  was  discovered  in  1901  which  has  three  suns  carved  on  it,  two  of 
them  with  their  rays  enclosed  in  a  circle  as  if  in  prison,  the  other  free. 
A b o ve  them  is  a  much  rougher,  unenclosed  sun  and  above  that,  notched 
across  a  straight  line,  the  O g h am  letters  B  and  I— w h i c h,  as  will  be 
explained  presently,  are  the  first  and  last  letters  of  the  ancient  Irish 
alphabet,  dedicated  respectively  to  Inception  and  Death.  T he  case  is 
pretty  plain:  the  sacred  kings  of  Bronze  A ge  Ireland,  w ho  were  solar 
kings  of a  most  primitive  type,  to  judge  by  the  taboos  which  bound  them 
and  by  the  reputed  effect  of  their  behaviour  on  crops  and  hunting,  were 
buried  beneath  these  barrows;  but  their  spirits  went  to  ' C a er  Sidi',  the 
Castle  of  Ariadne,  namely  Corona  Borealis.  T h us  the  pagan  Irish  could 
call  N ew  Grange  'Spiral  Castle'  and,  revolving  a  fore-finger  in  explana 
tion,  could  say,  ' O ur  king  has  gone  to  Spiral  Castle':  in  other  words,  'he 
is  dead'.  A  revolving  wheel  before  the  door  of  a  castle  is  common  in 
Goidelic  legend.  According  to  Keating,  the  magic  fortress  of the  enchan 
tress  Blanaid,  in  the  Isle  of  Man,  was  protected  by  o n e— n o b o dy  could 
enter  until  it  was  still.  In  front  of the  doorway  of N ew  Grange  there  is  a 
broad  slab  carved  with  spirals,  which  forms  part  of the  stone  hedge.  T he 
spirals  are  double  ones:  follow  the  lines  with  y o ur  finger  from  outside  to 
inside  and  when  y ou  reach  the  centre,  there  is  the  head  of another  spiral 
coiled  in  the  reverse  direction  to  take  y ou  out  of the  maze  again.  So  the 
pattern  typifies  death  and  rebirth;  though,  according  to  G w i o n 's  poem 
Preiddeu  Annwm,  'only  seven  ever  returned  from  Caer  Sidi'.  It  may  well 
be  that  oracular  serpents  were  once  kept  in  these  sepulchral  caves,  and 
that  these  were  the  serpents  which  St.  Patrick  expelled,  though  perhaps 
only  metaphorically.  Delphi,  the  home  of A p o l l o,  was  once  an  oracular 
tomb  of this  same  sort,  with  a  spiralled  python  and  a  prophetic  priestess 
of  the  Earth  Goddess,  and  the  'omphalos'  or  'navel  shrine'  where  the 
python  was  originally  housed,  was  built  underground  in  the  same  bee 
hive  style,  which  derives  originally  from  the  African  masabo,  or  ghost-
house.  T he  antlers  at  N ew  Grange  were  probably  part  of the  sacred  king's 
head-dress,  like  the  antlers  w o rn  by  the  Gaulish  god  Cernunnos,  and  the 
horns  of  Moses,  and  those  of  Dionysus  and  K i ng  Alexander  shown  on 
coins.T he  provenience  of  the  bee-hive  tomb  with  a  passage  entrance  and 
lateral  niches  is  no  mystery.  It  came  to  Ireland  from  the  Eastern  Mediter-

103

ranean  by  w ay  of Spain  and  Portugal  at  the  close  of the  third  millennium 
B . C .:  the corbelled roof of N ew G r a n ge occurs also at Tirbradden,  D o w th 
and  Seefin.  But  the eight  double-spirals  at the  entrance,  which  are  merely 
juxtaposed,  not  cunningly  wreathed  together  in  the  Cretan  style,  are 
paralleled  in  Mycenaean  Greece;  and  this  suggests  that  the  carvings  were 
made  by  the  Danaans  when  they  took  over  the  shrine  from  the  previous 
occupants,  w ho  in  Irish  history  appear  as  the  tribes  of  Partholan  and 
Nemed  that  invaded  the country in  the years  2048  and  1 7 18  B . C .,  coming 
from  Greece  by  w ay  of Spain.  If so,  this  would  account  for  the  legend  of 
the  usurpation  of  the  shrine  by  the  god  A n g us  from  his  father  T he  D a g d a. 
T he  arrival  of the  Danaans  in  Ireland,  as  was  mentioned  in  Chapter  I I I,  is 
dated  in  the  Book  of  Invasions  at  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  century  B . C. 
T h is  is  plausible:  they  will  have  been  late-comers  of  the  round-barrow 
tribes  that  first  reached  Ireland  from  Britain  about  1700  B . C.  That  they 
propitiated  the  heroes  of the  previous  cult  is  well  established:  their  food-
vessels are found in passage-grave burials.D r.  R.  S.  Macalister  in  his  Ancient  Ireland  ( 1 9 3 5)  takes  an  original 
v i ew of N ew  G r a n g e.  He holds  that it was  built by  the  Milesians,  w h om he 
dates  about  1000 B . C.  and  supposes  to  have come from  Britain,  not  Spain, 
on  the  ground  that  it  incorporates  a  number  of  ornamental  stones  in  the 
passage  and  chamber,  one  of  them  with  its  pattern  broken,  apparently 
arranged  haphazard,  and 
that  on  some  of  these  the  carving  has  been 
defaced  by  pick-surfacing  like  that  found  on  the  trilithons  of Stonehenge. 
T h is  is  to  suggest  that  it  is  a  mock-antique in  the  style  of several  hundred 
years  before;  a  theory  to  which  no  other  archaeologist  of repute  seems  to 
have  subscribed.  But  his  observations  do  suggest  that  the  Milesians  took 
over  the  oracular  shrine  from  the  Danaans  and  patched  it,  where  it  showed 
signs  of  decay,  with  ornamental  stones  borrowed  from  other  burials. 
Another  suggestion  of his  carries  greater  conviction:  that  A n g u s'  B r u gh 
('palace')  was  not  N ew  Grange  but  a  huge  circular  enclosure  not  far  off 
in a  bend  of the  B o y n e,  which  may  have  been  an  amphitheatre  for funerary 
games  in  connexion with  all  the  many  burials  of the  neighbourhood.Most Irish  archaeologists  are  n o w,  I  find,  agreed  that  N ew  Grange  was 
built  by  a  matriarchal  passage-grave-making  people  that  first  reached 
Ireland  about  the  year  2100  B . C .,  but  not  until  they  had  become  w e l l-
established  some  five  hundred  years  later  and  were  able  to  command  the 
enormous  labour  necessary  for  the  task.  T he  spirals,  though  paralleled 
in  Mycenean  shaft-burials  of  1600 B . C ., may be far earlier since examples 
of unknown  date  occur  also  at  Malta.  On  one  of the  outer  stones  a  symbol 
is  carved  which  suggests  a  Cretan  ideogram  and  apparently  represents  a 
ship with a high p r ow and  stern  and  a  single  large  sail;  beside  it  are vertical 
scratches  and  a  small  circle.  Christopher  Hawkes,  my  principal  informant 
on  this  subject,  has  written  to  me  that  not  only  are  the  skeletons  and

104

antlers  unlikely  to  be  co-eval  with  the  building  but  that  there  may  have 
been  many  successive  despoilments  of  the  burial  before  they  were  put 
there.  T he  original  funerary  furniture  cannot  be  guessed  at,  since  no 
virgin  passage-grave of this  type has been  opened  in  recent years;  we must 
wait  until  the  Cairn  of  Queen  Maeve  is  opened.  This  overlooks  Sligo 
Bay;  it  is  built  of some  40,000  tons  of  stone  and  the  entrance  is  lost.  We 
may  have  to  wait  a  long  time,  because  the  Sligo  people  are  superstitious 
and  would  consider  a  desecration  of the  tomb  unlucky:  Maeve  is  Mab,  the 
Queen  of Faery.

What

the  basins  contained  may  be  inferredWhat

the  basins  contained  may  be  inferred

from  Exodus,  XXIV 
(verses  4 - 8 ).  Moses,  having  set  up  twelve  stone  herms,  or  posts,  at  the 
foot of a sacred hill, offered bull-sacrifices and sprinkled half the blood on a 
thirteenth  herm  in  the  middle  of the  circle,  or  semi-circle;  the  rest  of the 
blood" he  put  into  basins,  which  must  have  been  of  considerable  size. 
Then  he  and  his  colleague A a r o n,  with  seventy-two  companions,  went  up 
to  feast  on  the  roasted  flesh.  On  this  occasion,  the  blood  in  the  basins  was 
sprinkled  on  the  people  as  a  charm  of  sanctification;  but  its  use  in  the 
oracular  shrine  was  always  to  feed  the  ghost  of  the  dead  hero  and  to 
encourage  him  to  return  from  Caer  Sidi  or  Caer  Arianrhod  to  answer 
questions  of importance.T he  visit  of Aeneas,  mistletoe-bough  in  hand,  to  the  Underworld  to 
cross-examine  his  father  Anchises  must  be  read  in  this  sense.  Aeneas 
sacrificed  a  bull  and  let  the  blood  gush  into  a  trough,  and  the  ghost  of 
Anchises  (who  had  married  the  Love-goddess  Venus  Erycina,  and  been 
killed  by  lightning  and  was,  in  fact,  a  sacred  king  of  the  usual  Herculean 
type),  drank  the  blood  and  obligingly  prophesied  about  the  glories  of 
R o m e.  Of  course,  the  ghost  did  not  really  lap  the  blood,  but  a  lapping 
sound  was  heard  in  the  dark;  what  happened  was  that  the  S i b y l,  w ho  con 
ducted  Aeneas  below,  drank  the  blood  and  it  produced  in  her  the  desired 
prophetic  ecstasy.  That  Sibyls  acted  so  is  known  from  the  case  of  the 
Priestess of Mother Earth at Aegira  ('Black  Poplar', a tree sacred to heroes) 
in  Achaea.  T he  peeping  and  muttering  of  ghosts  on  such  occasions  is 
understandable:  two  or  three  Biblical  texts  refer  to  the  queer  bat-like 
voices  in  which  demons,  or  familiars,  speak  through  the  mouths  of p r o 
phets  or  prophetesses.  Bull's  blood  was  most  potent  magic  and  was  used, 
diluted  with  enormous  quantities  of water,  to  fertilize  fruit-trees  in  Crete 
and  Greece.  T a k en neat it was  regarded as  a  poison  deadly to  anyone but a 
Sibyl  or  a  priest  of Mother  Earth;  Jason's  father  and  mother  died  from  a 
draught  of it.  So  did ass-eared  K i ng Midas of Gordium.

T h at  bull's  blood  was  used  for  divination  in  ancient Ireland  is  not  mere 
supposition.  A  rite  called  ' T he  Bull  Feast'  is  mentioned  in  the  Book  of  the 
Dun  Cow.

I OJT h at  bull's  blood  was  used  for  divination  in  ancient Ireland  is  not  mere 
supposition.  A  rite  called  ' T he  Bull  Feast'  is  mentioned  in  the  Book  of  the 
Dun  Cow.

I OJ

A  white bull  was  killed  and  a  man  ate  his  fill  of the  flesh  and  drank  of 
the  broth;  and  a  spell  of  truth  was  chanted  over  him  as  he  slept  off  the 
meal.  He  would  see  in  a  dream  the  shape  and  appearance  of  the  man 
w ho  should  be  made  king,  and  the  sort  of w o rk  in  which  he  was  at  that 
time  engaged.

T he  white  bull  recalls  the  sacred  white  bulls  of the  Gaulish  mistletoe  rite; 
the  white  bull  on  which  the  Thracian  Dionysus  rode;  the  white  bulls 
sacrificed  on  the  Alban  Mount  and  at  the  R o m an  Capitol;  and  the  white 
bull  representing  the  true  seed  of  Israel  in  the  apocalyptic  Book  of  Enoch.

ignorance  of  Heinin  andignorance  of  Heinin  and

N ow  we  begin  to  understand  the  mysterious  Preiddeu  Annwm  ('the 
Spoils  of  A n n w m ')  in  which—between  G w i o n 's  interpolative  taunts  at 
the 
the  other  court-bards—one  G w a ir  ap 
Geirion  laments  that  he  cannot  escape  from  Caer  Sidi.  T he  refrain  is: 
'Except  seven  none  returned  from  Caer  Sidi.'  We  know  at  least  two  w ho 
did  return:  Theseus  and  Daedalus,  both  Attic  Sun-heroes.  T he  stories  of 
Theseus's  expedition  to  the  Underworld  and  of  his  adventure  in  the 
Cretan  labyrinth  of  Cnossos  are  really  two  parts  of  a  single  confused 
myth.  Theseus  ('he  w ho  disposes')  goes  naked,  except  for  his  lion-skin, 
to  the  centre  of  the  maze,  there  kills  the  bull-headed  monster  of  the 
double-axe—the  labris  from  which  the  word  'labyrinth'  is  derived—and 
returns  safely:  and  the  goddess  w ho  enables  him  to  do  so  is  the  Goddess 
Ariadne  w h om  the  Welsh  called  Arianrhod.  In  the  second  part  of  the 
myth  he  fails  in  his  Underworld  expedition:  he  has  to  be  rescued  by 
Hercules,  and  his  companion  Peirithous  remains  behind  like  G w a i r, 
perpetually  sighing  for  deliverance.  T he  myth  of  the  hero  w ho  defeats 
Death  was  combined  by  the  Greek  mythographers  with  a  historical 
event:  the  sack  of  the  labyrinthine  palace  of  Cnossos  by  Danaan  raiders 
from  Greece  about  1400  B.C.  and  the  defeat  of K i ng  Minos,  the  Bull-king. 
Daedalus  ('the  bright  one')  similarly  escapes  from  the  Cretan  labyrinth, 
guided  by  the  Moon-goddess  Pasiphae,  but  without  using  violence;  he 
was  a  Sun-hero  of the  Aegean  colonists  of  Cumae,  and  of  the  Sardinians, 
as well  as  of the Athenians.Caer  Sidi  in  the  Preiddeu  Annwm  is  given  a  new  s y n o n ym  in  each  of the 
seven  stanzas.  It  appears  as  Caer  R i g or  ('the  royal  castle')  with  a  pun 
maybe  on  the  Latin  rigor  moras;  Caer  Colur  ('the  g l o o my  casde');  Caer 
Pedryvan  ('four-cornered  castle'),  four  times  revolving;  Caer  Vediwid 
('the  castle  of the  perfect  ones');  Caer  Ochren  ('the  castle  of the  shelving 
side'—i.e.  entered  from  the  side  of a  slope);  Caer  V a n d wy  ('the  casde  on 
high').

I  do  not  k n ow  w ho  the  canonical  seven  were,  but  among  those  eligible 
for  the  honour  were  Theseus,  Hercules,  Amathaon,  Arthur,  G w y d i o n, 
Harpocrates,  K a y,  Owain,  Daedalus,  Orpheus  and  Cuchulain.  ( W h en

106106

Cuchulain,  mentioned  by  G w i on  in  a  poem,  harrowed  Hell,  he  brought 
back  three  cows  and  a  magic  cauldron.)  Aeneas  is  unlikely  to  have  been 
one  of the  seven.  He  did  not  die  as  the  others  did;  he  merely  visited  an 
oracular cave, just as  K i ng  Saul  had  done at Endor,  or  Caleb  at  Machpelah. 
T he  casde  that  they  entered—revolving,  remote,  royal,  gloomy,  lofty, 
cold,  the  abode  of the  Perfect  Ones,  with  four  corners,  entered  by  a  dark 
door  on  the  shelving  side  of a  hill—was  the  castle  of death  or  the  T o m b, 
the  D a rk  T o w er  to  which  Childe  Roland  came in  the ballad.  This  descrip 
tion  fits  the  N ew  Grange  burial  cave,  but  'four-cornered'  refers,  I  think, 
to  the  kist-vaen  method  of  burial  which  was  invented  by  the  pre-Greek 
inhabitants  of  Northern  Greece  and  the  islands  about  Delos  and  thence 
conveyed  to  Western  Europe  by  Bronze  A ge  immigrants,  the  round-
barrow  men:  the  kist  being a  small  rectangular  stone  box in  which  the  dead 
b o dy  was  laid  in  a  crouched  position.  Odysseus  may  be  said  to  have  been 
'three  periods  in  the  castle  of Arianrhod'  because  he  entered  with  twelve 
the  C y c l o p s'  cave,  but  escaped;  was  detained  by 
companions 
C a l y p so  on  O g y g i a,  but  escaped;  and  by  the  enchantress  Circe  on  Aeaea 
—another  sepulchral 
that 
island—but  escaped.  Y et 
Odysseus  is  intended:  I  think  that  G w i on  is  referring  to  Jesus  Christ, 
whom  the  twelfth-century  poet  Dafydd  Benfras  makes  visit  a  Celtic 
A n n w m,  and  w ho  escaped  from  the  g l o o my  cave  in  the  hillside  in  which 
he  had  been  laid  by  Joseph  of  Arimathea.  But  h ow  was  Jesus  'three  periods 
in  the  Castle  of Arianrhod'?  I  take  this  for  a  heresy  making  Jesus,  as  the 
Second  A d a m,  a  reincarnation  of  A d a m,  and,  as  the  Davidic  Messiah,  a 
reincarnation  also  of D a v i d.  T he  A ge  of A d am  and  the  A ge  of D a v id  are 
particularized  in  G w i o n 's  Divregwawd  Taliesin.  Jesus  is  pictured  there  at 
still  waiting  in  the  heavens  for  the  dawn  of the  Seventh  A g e:  ' W as  it  nos 
to  Heaven  he  went  when  he  departed  hence?  A nd  at  the  D ay  of  J u d g e 
ment  he  will  come  to  us  here.  F or  the  fifth  age  was  the  blessed  one  of 
D a v id  the  Prophet.  T he  sixth  age  is  the  age  of Jesus,  which  shalll  last  till 
the D ay of Judgement.' In the Seventh A ge he would be called Taiesin.is  unlikely

into

it

P R E I D D EU  A N N WM

( T he  Spoils  of A n n w m)

Praise  to  the  Lord,  Supreme  Ruler  of  the  Heavens, 
Who hath extended his dominion to the shore of the world. 
Complete  was  the  prison  of  Gwair  in  Caer  Sidi 
Through  the  spite  of  Pwyll  and  Pryderi. 
No one before him went into it; 
A heavy blue chain firmly held the youth, 
And for the spoils ofAnnwm gloomily he sings, 
And till doom shall he continue his lay.

107

Thrice the fullness of Prydwen we went into it; 
Except seven, none returned from  Caer Sidi.

Am I not a candidate for fame, to be heard in the song? 
In  Caer  Pedryvanfour  times  revolving, 
The first word from the cauldron, when was it spoken? 
By the breath of rune damsels it is gently warmed. 
Is it not the cauldron ofthe chiefofAnnwm, in its fashion 
JVith a ridge around its edge of pearls? 
It will not boil the food ofa coward or one forsworn, 
A sword brightflashing to him  will be  brought, 
And left in the hand of Lleminawg, 
And before the portals ofthe coldplace the horns of light shall be

burning.

And when we went with Arthur in his splendid labours, 
Except seven, none returned from Caer Vediwid.

Am I not a candidate for fame, to be heard in the song? 
In the four-cornered enclosure, in the island of the strong door, 
Where the twilight and the black of night move together, 
Bright wine was the beverage of the host. 
Three times the fulness ofPrydwen, we went on sea, 
Except seven, none returned from Caer Rigor.

I will not allow praise to the lords of literature. 
Beyond Caer  Wydr  they behold not  the prowess  of Arthur. 
Three times twenty-hundred men stood on the wall. 
It was difficult to converse with their sentinel. 
Three times the fulness of Prydwen, we went with Arthur. 
Except seven, none returned from Caer Colur.I will not allow praise to the men with trailing shields. 
They know not on what day, or who caused it, 
Or at what hour of the splendid day Cwy was born, 
Or who prevented him from going to the dales ofDevwy. 
They know not the brindled ox, with his thick head band, 
And seven-score knobs in his collar. 
And when we went with Arthur of mournful memory, 
Except  seven,  none  returned  from  Caer  Vindwy.

I will not allow praise to men ofdrooping courage, 
They know not on what day the chief arose, 
Or at what hour in the splendid day the owner was born; 
Or what animal they keep of silver head. 
When we went with Arthur of mournful contention, 
Except seven, none returned from Caer Ochren.

108108

P w y ll  and  Pryderi  were  successive  rulers  of  the  'Africans'  of A n n wm 
in  Pembroke,  the  earliest  invaders  of  Wales;  at  their  death,  like  Minos 
and  Rhadamanthus  of  Crete,  they  became  Lords  of the  Dead.  It  was  from 
Pryderi,  son  of Rhiannon,  that  G w y d i on  stole  the  sacred  swine  and  G w a ir 
seems  to  have  gone  on  a  similar  marauding  expedition  in  the  company  of 
Arthur;  for  his  prison  called,  in  Triad  Si,  the  Castle  of  Oeth  and  Anoeth 
is  also  the  prison  from  which,  according  to  Triad  So,  Arthur  was  rescued 
by  his  page  Goreu,  son  of  Custennin;  G w a ir  is  thus  to  Arthur  as 
Peirithous  was  to  Theseus,  and  Goreu  is  to  Arthur  as  Hercules  was  to 
Theseus.  Possibly  G w i on  in  the  Romance  is  counting  on  the  court-
bards  to  guess  'Arthur',  not  'Jesus',  as  the  answer  to  'I  was  three  periods 
in  the  Castle  of Arianrhod',  since  in  Triad 5o  Arthur  is  said  to  have  been 
rescued  by  this  same  Goreu  from  three  prisons—the  Castle  of  Oeth 
and  Anoeth;  the  Castle  of  Pendragon  ( ' L o rd  of  Serpents');  the  D a rk 
Prison  under  the  Stone—all  of  them  death-prisons.  Or  is  he  covertly 
presenting  Jesus  as  an  incarnation  of Arthur?P r y d w en  was  K i ng  Arthur's  magic  ship;  Llaminawg,  in  whose  hands 
Arthur  left  the  flashing  s w o r d,  appears  in  the  Morte  D'Arthur  as 
'Sir 
Bedivere'.  Caer  W y dr  is  Glastonbury,  or  Inis  Gutrin,  thought  of  as  the 
glass  castle1  in which Arthur's  soul was  housed after  death;  Glastonbury is 
also  the  Isle  of  A v a l on  (Appletrees)  to  which  his  dead  b o dy  was  con 
veyed  by  Morgan  le  F a y e.  T he  heavy  blue  chain  is  the  water  around  the 
Island  of Death.  T he  myth  of  C w y,  like  that  of G w a ir  and  Arthur,  is  no 
longer  extant,  but  the  'animal  with  the  silver  head'  is  perhaps  the  White 
R o e b u ck  of which  we  are  in  search,  and  the  name  of  the  O x 's  headband 
is  one  of  the  prime  bardic  secrets  which  G w i on  in  his  Cyst  JVy'r  Beirdd 
( ' R e p r o of of the  Bards')  taunts  Heinin  with  not  possessing:

The name ofthe firmament, 
The name of the elements, 
And the name of the language, 
And the name of the Head-band. 
Avaunt,ye  bards—

A b o ut  a  hundred  years  before  G w i on  wrote  this,  the  Glastonbury 
monks  had  dug  up  an  oak  coffin,  from  sixteen  feet  underground,  which 
they  claimed  to  be  Arthur's,  and  faked  a  Gothic  inscription  on  a  leaden 
1  Caer  W y dr  (Glass  Casde)  is  a  learned  pun  of  Gwion's.  T he  town  of  Glastonbury  is  said

by  William  of Malmesbury  to  have been  named  after its  secular founder  Glasteing,  w ho  came

there from  the north with  his twelve  brothers  at some  time  before 600.  T he Latin  equivalent

of Gutrin was vitrinus; and the Saxon was glas. T h is colour w o rd covered any shade between deep

blue  and  light-green—it  could  be  applied  equally  to  Celtic  blue  enamel  and  Roman  bottle-

glass.  T he  'glass'  castles  of Irish,  Manx  and  Welsh  legend  are  thus  seen  to  be  either  islandglass.  T he  'glass'  castles  of Irish,  Manx  and  Welsh  legend  are  thus  seen  to  be  either  island

shrines,  surrounded  by  glassy-green  water,  or  star-prisons  islanded  in  the  dark-blue  night

sky;  but  in  mediaeval  legend  they  were  made  of glass,  and  their  connexion  with  death  and

with  the  Moon-goddess  has  been  preserved  in  the  popular  superstition  that  it  is  unlucky  to

see the Moon  through  glass.

109

cross  a  foot  long,  said  to  have  been  found  inside,  which  Giraldus  C a m-
brensis  saw  and  believed  authentic.  I  think  G w i on  is  here  saying:  ' Y ou 
bards  think  that  Arthur's  end  was  in  that  oak  coffin  at  Glastonbury.  I 
k n ow  better.'  T he  inscription  ran:  'Here  lies  buried  the  renowned  K i ng 
Arthur with Guenevere his second wife in the Isle of A v a l o n .'

It  will  be  objected  that  man  has  as  valid  a  claim  to  divinity  as  w o m a n. 
T h at  is  true  only  in  a  sense;  he is  divine  not  in  his  single  person,  but  only 
in  his  twinhood.  As  Osiris,  the  Spirit  of  the  W a x i ng  Y e ar  he  is  always 
jealous of his wierd, Set, the Spirit of the Waning Y e a r, and vice-versa; he 
cannot  be  both  of  them  at  once  except  by  an  intellectual  effort  that 
destroys  his  humanity,  and  this  is  the  fundamental  defect  of  the  A p o l 
lonian  or  Jehovistic  cult.  Man  is  a  demi-god:  he  always  has  either  one 
foot  or  the  other  in  the  grave;  woman  is  divine  because  she  can  keep  both 
her  feet  always  in  the  same  place,  whether  in  the  sky,  in  the  underworld, 
or  on  this  earth.  Man  envies  her  and  tells  himself lies  about  his  own  com 
pleteness,  and  thereby  makes  himself miserable;  because  if he  is  divine  she 
is  not  even  a  demi-goddess—she  is  a  mere  nymph  and  his  love  for  her 
turns  to  scorn  and  hate.W o m an  worships  the  male  infant,  not  the  g r o wn  man:  it  is  evidence  of 
her  deity,  of  man's  dependence  on  her  for  life.  She  is  passionately  in 
terested  in  g r o wn  men,  however,  because  the  love-hate  that  Osiris  and 
Set  feel  for  each  other  on  her  account  is  a  tribute  to  her  divinity.  She  tries 
to  satisfy  both,  but  can  only  do  so  by  alternate  murder,  and  man  tries  to 
regard  this  as  evidence  of her  fundamental  falsity,  not  of his  o wn  irrecon 
cilable  demands  on  her.

T he  joke  is  that  the  monks  had  really,  it  seems,  discovered  the  b o dy  of 
Arthur,  or  G w y n,  or  whatever  the  original  name  of the  A v a l on  hero  was. 
Christopher  Hawkes  describes  in  his  Prehistoric  Foundations  of  Europe  this 
form  of burial:

Inhumation  (and  more  rarely  burial  after  cremation  in  tree-trunk 
coffins  covered  by  a  barrow)  was  already  practised  in  Schleswig-
Holstein  in  the  beginning  of its  Bronze  A g e . . ..  It  is  probable  that  the 
coffin  originally  represented  a  dug-out  boat,  and  that  the  idea  of  a 
v o y a ge  by  water  to  the  next  w o r l d,  well  attested  in  Scandinavia  in  the 
later  Bronze  A ge  and  again  in  the  Iron  A ge  d o wn  to  its  famous  cul 
mination  in  V i k i ng  times,  is  here  to  be  recognized  at  its  first  beginning, 
inspired,  it  may  well  be,  ultimately  from E g y pt  through  the  Baltic  con 
nexions  with  the  South  n ow  passing along  the A m b er  R o u t e.  T he same 
rite  of  boat-  or  coffin-burial  appears  simultaneously  in  Britain  in  the 
middle  centuries  of  the  second  millennium,  when  the  N o r th  Sea  trade-
route  was  flourishing,  and  penetrates  the  Wessex  culture  along  the 
south  coast  where  the  burial  at  H o ve  noted  for  its  Scandinavian

nono

affinities  [it  contained  a  handled  cup  of Baltic  amber]  was  of this  type, 
but  more  prominent  on  the  east  coast,  especially  in  Yorkshire  where 
the  Irish  route  over  the  Pennines  [barter  of  Irish  gold  against  Baldc 
amber]  reached  the  sea.  T he  classic  example  is  the  Gristhorpe  coffin-
burial  near  Scarborough  [an  oak  coffin  containing  the  skeleton  of  an 
old  man,  with  oak-branches  and  what  appeared  to  be  mistletoe  over  it], 
but  the  recent  discovery  in  the  great  barrow  of  L o o se  H o we  on  the 
Cleveland  Moors  of a  primary  burial  with  no  less  than  three boat  dug 
outs  must  henceforward  stand  at  the  head  of  the  series  and  serve  to 
show  h ow  the  same  rite  took  hold  among  the  seafarers  on  both  sides 
of the North Sea between about 1600 and  1400 B . C.

T he  nine  damsels  of  the  cauldron  recall  the  nine  virgins  of the  Isle  of 
Sein  in  Western  Brittany  in  the  early  fifth  century  A . D.,  described  by 
Pomponius  Mela.  T h ey  were  possessed  of magical  powers  and  might  be 
approached  by  those w ho  sailed  to  consult  them.

11

T he  sacred  king,  then,  is  a  Sun-king  and  returns  at  death  to  the 
Universal  Mother,  the  White  Moon  Goddess,  w ho  imprisons  him  in  the 
extreme  north.  W hy  the  north?  Because  that  is  the  quarter  from  which 
the  Sun  never  shines,  from  which  the  wind  brings  snow;  only  dead 
suns  are  to  be  found  in  the  cold  polar  north.  T he  Sun-god  is  born  at  mid 
winter  when  the  Sun  is  weakest  and  has  attained  his  most  southerly 
station;  therefore  his  representative,  the  Sun-king,  is  killed  at  the  summer 
solstice  when  the  Sun  attains  his  most  northerly  station.  T he  relation 
between  Caer  Sidi  and  Caer  Arianrhod  seems  to  be  that  the  burial  place 
of the  dead  king  was  a  barrow  on  an  island,  either  in  the  river  or  the  sea, 
where  his  spirit  lived  under  charge  of  oracular  and  orgiastic  priestesses; 
but  his  soul  went  to  the  stars  and  there  hopefully  awaited  rebirth  in  an 
other  king.  A nd  the evidence  of the  oak  coffin  at  the  Isle  of A v a l on  points 
plainly  to  the  derivation  of  the  Arthur  cult  from  the  Eastern  Mediter 
ranean  by  w ay  of  the  A m b er  Route,  the  Baltic  and  Denmark,  between 
1600 and  1400  B.C.;  though  the  cult  of other  oracular heroes  in  Britain  and 
Ireland  is  likely  to  be seven  or eight  centuries  older.

In  Britain  the  tradition  of  Spiral  Castle  survives  in  the  Easter  Maze 
dance of country villages,  the mazes  being called  ' T r oy T o w n'  in England 
and  in  Wales  'Caer-droia'.  T he  Romans  probably  named  them  after  the 
T r oy  Game,  a  labyrinthine  dance  of  A s ia  Minor,  performed  by  y o u ng1  T he  Island  of  Sein,  which  is  not  far  from  the  great  religious  centre  of  C a m ac  and  must 
have  had  a  ritual  connexion  with  it,  retained  its  magical  reputation  very  late.  It  was  the  last 
place  in  Europe  to  be  Christianized:  by  seventeenth-century  Jesuits.  T he  island  women  wear 
the  highest  head-dresses  in  Brittany—the  nine  priestesses  must  have  worn  the  same—and 
until  recendy  had  a  reputation  for  enticing  sailors  to  destruction  on  the  rocks  by  witchcraft. 
There  are  two  megalithic  menhirs  on  the  island,  which  is  completely  treeless,  but  no  archaeo 
logical excavations have yet been made  there.

I ll

noblemen  at  R o me  under  the  E a r ly  Empire  in  memory  of  their  Trojan 
origin;  but  Pliny  records  that  Latin  children  performed  it  too.  In  Delos  it 
was  called  the  Crane  Dance  and  was  said  to  record  the  escape  of Theseus 
from  the  Labyrinth.  T he  maze  dance  seems  to  have  come  to  Britain  from 
the  Eastern  Mediterranean  with  the  N ew  Stone  A ge  invaders  of the  third 
millennium  B.C.,  since  ancient  rough  stone mazes  of the  same  pattern  as  the 
English  are  found  in  Scandinavia  and  North-eastern  Russia.  On  a  rock 
slab  near  Bosinney  in  Cornwall  two  mazes  are  carved;  and  another  is 
carved  on  a  massive  granite  block  from  the  W i c k l ow  Hills,  now  in  the 
Dublin  National  Museum.  These  mazes  have  the  same  pattern,  too: 
the  Labyrinth  of Daedalus  shown  on  Cretan  coins.

112

Chapter  Seven

G W I O N 'S  R I D D LE  S O L V ED112

Chapter  Seven

G W I O N 'S  R I D D LE  S O L V ED

/m Goidelic  alphabet,  called  Ogham,  was  used  in  Britain  and  Ireland 
f—\  some  centuries  before  the  introduction  of  the  Latin  A  B  G  Its 
J.  \.  invention  is  credited  in  the  mediaeval  Irish  Book  of  Ballymote  to 
' O g ma Sun-face son of Breas'—one of the early gods of the Goidels. O g m a, 
according to Lucian,  w ho  wrote  in  the  second  century  A . D.,  was  pictured 
as  a veteran Hercules, with club and  lion-skin,  drawing crowds of prisoners 
along  with  golden  chains  connected  by  their  ears  to  the  tip  of his  tongue. 
T he  alphabet  consisted  of  twenty 
letters—fifteen  consonants  and  five 
vowels—apparendy  corresponding  to  a  deaf-and-dumb  finger-language.

Numerous  examples  of this  alphabet  occur  in  ancient  stone  inscriptions 
in  Ireland,  the  Isle  of  Man,  North  and  South  Wales,  and  Scotland;  with 
one  at  Silchester  in  Hampshire,  the  capital  of  the  Atrebates  w ho  took 
part  in  the  Second  Belgic  Invasion  of Britain  between  Julius  Caesar's  raid 
and  the  Claudian  conquest.  Here  are  two  versions:  the  first  quoted  from 
Brynmor-Jones  and  R h y s 's  History  of the  Welsh  People,  and  the  second 
from  D r.  Macalister's  Secret Languages  of Ireland:

B.

H. 
M.

L. 
D. 
G.

F *. 
T. 
N G.

N. 
S. 
c.  Q. 
F F f.  R.

B. 
H. 
M.

L. 
D. 
G.

F. 
T. 
N G.

S. 
C. 
Z.

N. 
Q. 
R.

[* pronounced V]

[f  pronounced  F]B.

H. 
M.

L. 
D. 
G.

F *. 
T. 
N G.

N. 
S. 
c.  Q. 
F F f.  R.

B. 
H. 
M.

L. 
D. 
G.

F. 
T. 
N G.

S. 
C. 
Z.

N. 
Q. 
R.

[* pronounced V]

[f  pronounced  F]

It  will  be  seen  that  both  these  alphabets  are  ' Q - C e l t ',  or  Goidelic,  because 
they  contain  a  Q  but  no  P;  Goidels  from  the  Continent  were  established 
in  South-Eastern  Britain  two  hundred  years  before  the  Belgic  ( P - C e l t) 
invasions  from  Gaul  in  the  early  fourth  century  B.C.;  and  it  is  thought 
that  the  common  language  of  Bronze  A ge  Britain  was  an  early  form  of 
Goidelic,  as  it  was  in  Ireland.  T he  O g h am  alphabet  quoted  in  the  Oxford 
English  Dictionary  (as  if  it  were  the  only  one  in  existence)  differs  from 
both  the  R h ys  and  Macalister  Oghams  by  having  M . G . Y . Z . R.  as  its  last 
line  of consonants:  but  the  Y  is  doubtless  an  error  for  N Y,  another  w ay 
of  spelling  the  Gn  as  in  Catalogne.  In  still  another  version,  quoted  in 
Charles  Squire's  Mythology  of  the  British  Isles,  the  fourteenth  letter  is 
given  as  ST and  an  X sign  is  offered  for P.D r.  Macalister  proves  that  in  Ireland  Oghams  were  not  used  in  public 
inscriptions  until  Druidism  began  to  decline:  they  had  been  kept  a  dark 
secret  and  when  used  for  written  messages  between  one  Druid  and  an 
other,  nicked  on  wooden  billets,  were  usually  cyphered.  T he  four  sets, 
each  of  five  characters,  he  suggests,  represented  fingers  used  in  a  sign 
language:  to  form  any  one  of the  letters  of the  alphabet,  one  needed  only 
to  extend  the  appropriate  amount  of  fingers  of  one  hand,  pointing  them 
in  one  of  four  different  directions.  But  this  would  have  been  a  clumsy 
method  of signalling.  A  much  quicker,  less  conspicuous  and  less  fatiguing 
method  would  have  been  to  regard  the  left  hand  as  a  key-board,  like  that 
of a  typewriter,  with  the  letters  marked  by  the  tips,  the  two  middle  joints, 
and  the  bases  of  the  fingers  and  thumb,  and  to  touch  the  required  spots 
with  the  forefinger  of the  right  hand.  Each  letter  in  the  inscriptions  con 
sists  of nicks,  from  one  to  five  in  number,  cut with  a  chisel  along  the  edge 
of a  squared  stone;  there  are  four  different  varieties  of nick,  which  makes 
twenty  letters.  I  assume  that  the  number  of  nicks  in  a  letter  indicated  the 
number  of  the  digit,  counting  from  left  to  right,  on  which  the  letter 
occurred  in  the  finger  language,  while  the  variety  of  nick  indicated  the 
position  of the  letter  on  the  digit.  There  were  other  methods  of using  the 
alphabet  for  secret  signalling  purposes.  T he  Book  of  BaUymou  refers  to 
Cos-ogham  ('leg-ogham')  in  which  the  signaller,  while  seated,  used  his 
fingers  to  imitate  inscriptional  O g h am  with  his  shin  bone  serving  as  the 
edge  against  which  the  nicks  were  cut.  In  Sron-ogham  ('nose-ogham')  the 
nose  was  used  in  much  the  same  w a y.  T h e se  alternative  methods  were 
useful  for  signalling  across  a  room;  the  key-board  method  for  closer 
work.  G w i on  is  evidently  referring  to  Sron-ogham  when  he  mentions, 
among  all  the  other  things  he  knows,  ' w hy  the  nose  is  ridged';  the  answer 
is 'to make ogham-signalling easier'.T h is  is  the  inscriptional  form  of the  alphabet  as  given  by  Macalisten

• 
B

.1 
L

• 
FS

Illl

1  "  111  ""  ""'  / / / # #!  II  1  II  I

N

H OT

C

Q M G N GZ

R

A O UE

I

Besides  these  twenty  letters, five combinations  of vowels  were  used  in  the 
deaf-and-dumb  language  to  represent five foreign  sounds.  T h e se  were:

Ea

Oi

la

Ui

Ae

which  represented  respectively:

Kh

Th

P

Ph

X

In  inscriptions  these  letters  were  given  elaborate  characters  entirely 
different  from  the  other  letters.  Kh  had  a  St.  A n d r e w 's  cross,  Th  had  a 
lozenge,  P  a piece of lattice  w o r k,  Ph a  spiral, and  X a portcullis.

1 14

I

this

take

to 
have been the  finger 
key-board,  with  the 
v o w e ls  convenient 
ly  grouped  in 
the 
centre:

Julius  Caesar  records  in  his  Gallic  War  that  the  Druids  of  Gaul  used 
' G r e ek  letters'  for  their  public  records  and  private  correspondence  but  did 
not  consign  their  sacred  doctrine  to  writing 
'lest  it  should  become 
vulgarized  and  lest,  also,  the  memory  of  scholars  should  become  im 
paired.'  D r.  Macalister  suggests  that  the  Ogham  alphabet,  when  complete 
with  the extra  letters,  corresponds  fairly  closely with  an  early,  still  some 
what  Semitic,  form  of  the  Greek  alphabet,  known  as  the  Formello-
Cervetri  which  is  scratched  on  two  vases,  one  from  Caere  and  the  other 
from  Veii  in  Italy,  dated  about  the  fifth  century  B.C.  T he  letters  are 
written  Semitically  from  right  to  left  and  begin  with  A . B . G . D . E.  He 
assumes  that  the  ' G r e ek  letters'  used  by  the  Druids  were  this  alphabet  of 
twenty-six  letters,  four  more  than  the  Classical  Greek,  though  they  dis 
carded  one as unnecessary;  and I  think that he has proved  his case.But did  the  Druids  invent  their  finger-language  before  they  learned  this 
Greek  alphabet?  D r.  Macalister  thinks  that  they  did  not,  and  I  should 
agree  with  him  but  for  two  main  considerations,  ( i)  T he  order  of letters 
in  the  O g h am  is  altogether  different  from  the  Greek:  one  would  have 
expected  the  Druids  to  follow  the  original  order  closely  if this  was  their 
first  experience  of alphabetic  spelling.  (2)  If the  five  foreign  letters  were 
an  original  part  of  the  Ogham  alphabet  w hy  were  they  not  integrated 
with  the  rest  in  its  inscriptional  form?  It  would  have  been  simple  to  allot 
them nicks as follows:

A nd  w hy  in  the  finger-alphabet  were  they  not  spelt  out  with  the  nearest 
equivalent  combinations  of consonants—CH  for  K h,  CS  for  X,  and  so  on 
—instead  of being expressed  allusively  in  vowel  combinations?T h at  the  v o w el  combinations  are  allusive  is  easily  understood  from  the 
finger  diagram  above.  In  order  to  express  the  Kh  sound  of  the  Greek 
letter  chi,  the  Druids  used  the  Latin  combination  of  C  and  H,  but  ex 
pressed  this  allusively  as  E a,  by  reference  to  the  fourth  finger,  the  E  digit, 
on  which  the  letter  C  occurs,  and  to  the  thumb,  the  A  digit,  on  which  the 
letter  H  occurs.  Similarly  for  X,  pronounced  ' C S ',  they  used  the  E  digit, 
on  which  both  C  and  S  occur,  but  introduced  this  with  the  A  digit  on 
which  H  occurs;  H  being  a  silent  and  merely  ancillary  letter  in  Celtic 
languages,  and  its  use  here  being  merely  to  form  a  t w o - v o w el  combina 
tion  of A  and  E.  Th  is  written  Oi  and  Ph  is  written  Ui  because  Th  is  a 
shrill  variety  of  D  (as  theos  in  Greek  corresponds  with  the  Latin  deus 
' g o d ' ),  and  because  Ph  is  a  shrill  variety  of F  (as phegos  in  Greek  corres 
ponds  with  the  Latin fagus  'beech-tree').  D  occurs  on  the  O  digit  and  F 
on  the  U  digit;  so  to  differentiate  Th  from  D  and  Ph  from  F,  the  I  is  made 
the  combination  v o w el  of  O  in  one  case  and  U  in  the  other—I  in  Irish 
being  used  as  an  indication  of shrillness  of sound.  Finally  P  is  written  l a, 
because  B  which was  originally  pronounced  P  in  the  Celtic  languages  (the 
Welsh  still  habitually  confound  the  t wo  sounds),  occurs  on  the  A  digit; 
the  I  is  an  indication  that  P  is  distinguished  from  B  in  foreign  languages.I  conclude  that  the  twenty  letters  of  the  Ogham  alphabet  were  in 
existence  long  before  the  Formello-Cervetri  alphabet  was  brought  to 
Italy  from  Greece  and  that  the  Gallic  Druids  added  the  five  foreign  letters 
to  them  with  such  disdain  as  virtually  to  deny  them  any  part in  the system. 
What  complicates  the  case  is  that  the  ancient  Irish  w o rd  for  'alphabet'  is 
'Beth-Luis-Nion'  which  suggests  that  the  order  of  letters  in  the  O g h am 
alphabet  was  originally  B . L . N .,  though  it  had  become  B . L . F.  before  the 
ban  on  inscriptions was  lifted.  Besides,  the accepted  Irish  tradition  was  that 
the  alphabet  originated  in  Greece,  not  Phoenicia,  and  was  brought  to 
Ireland  by  w ay  of  Spain,  not  Gaul.  Spenser  records  this  in  his  View  of  the 
Present  State  of  Ireland  (1596):  'it  seemeth  that  they  had  them  [the  letters] 
from  the  nation  that  came  out  of Spaine.'

T he  names  of the  letters  of the  B . L . F.  alphabet  are  given  by  Roderick 
O'Flaherty  in  his  seventeenth-century  Ogygia,  on  the  authority  of  D u a ld 
Mac  Firbis,  a  family  bard  of  the  O'Briens  w ho  had  access  to  the  o il 
records, as follows:

B O I B EL 
L O TH

B 
L 
F [ V]  F O R A NN 
N

N E I A G A D ON

M 
G 
Ng 
Y

M O I R IA 
G A TH 
N G O I M AR 
I D RA

1 16

s 
H 
D 
T 
C 
CC

S A L IA 
U I R IA 
D A I B H A I TH  ( D A V I D) 
T E I L M ON 
C A OI 
C A I L EP

R 
A 
O 
U 
E 
I

R I U B EN 
A C AB 
O SE 
U RA 
E SU 
J A I C f f lM1 16

s 
H 
D 
T 
C 
CC

S A L IA 
U I R IA 
D A I B H A I TH  ( D A V I D) 
T E I L M ON 
C A OI 
C A I L EP

R 
A 
O 
U 
E 
I

R I U B EN 
A C AB 
O SE 
U RA 
E SU 
J A I C f f lM

When  recently  I  wrote  on  this  subject  to  D r.  Macalister,  as  the  best  living 
authority  on  Oghams,  he  replied  that  I  must  not  take  O'Flaherty's  alpha 
bets  seriously:  ' T h ey  all  seem  to  me  to  be  late  artificialities,  or  rather 
pedantries,  of  little  more  importance  than  the  affectations  of  Sir  Piercie 
Shafton  and  his  kind.'  I  pass  on  this  caution  in  all  fairness,  for  my  argu 
ment  depends  on  O'Flaherty's  alphabet,  and  D r.  Macalister's  is  a  v e ry 
broad  back  for  anyone  to  shelter  behind  w ho  thinks  that  I  am  writing 
nonsense.  But  the  argument  of this  book  began  with  the  assumption  that 
G w i on  was  concealing  an  alphabetic  secret  in  his  riddling  poem.  A nd  the 
answers  to  the  riddles  if I  have  not  got  them  wrong—though  'Morvran' 
and  'Moiria',  'Ne-esthan'  and  'Neiagadon',  ' R h e a'  and  'Riuben'  do  not 
seem  to  match  v e ry  well—approximate  so  closely  to  the  'Boibel  L o t h' 
that  I  feel  justified  in  supposing  that  O'Flaherty  was  recording  a  genuine 
tradition  at  least  as  old  as  the  thirteenth  century  A . D.  and  that  the  answers 
to  the  so-far  unsolved  riddles  will  be  found  in  the  Boibel-Loth  letter-
names  not  yet  accounted  for.We  can  begin  our  secondary  process  of unravelling  G w i o n 's  riddles  by 
putting  Idris  at  place  14  as  an  equivalent  of Idra;  and  removing  the  J  from 
Jose  (Joseph)  and  Jesu  (Jesus),  neither  of which  names—as  G w i on  the 
Hebrew  scholar  may  have  known—originally  began  with  J;  and  trans 
posing  Uriel  and  Hur—for 
the  mediaeval  Irish  had  long  lost  their 
aspirated  H,  so  that  H ur  and  Uria  easily  got  confused.  Then  if  the 
answers  to  our  unsolved  riddles  are  to  be  found  in  the  unused  letters  of 
the  Boibel-Loth, this leaves us with A C AB and J A I C H I M; and with  five 
unsolved  riddles:

I  have  been  at  the  throne  of the  Distributor,

I  was  loquacious  before  I  was  gifted  with  speech;

I  am  Alpha  Tetragrammaton.

I  am  a wonder whose  origin  is  not k n o w n—

I  shall  be  until  the  day  of doom  upon  the  earth.

'Moiria',  the  Boibel-Loth  equivalent o f ' M o r v r a n ',  suggests  'Moreh',  or 
"Moriah',  at  both  of which  places  Jehovah,  in  Genesis,  makes  a  covenant 
with  Abraham  and  allots  a  dominion  to  him  and  to  his  seed  for  ever. 
Another  name  for  Moriah  is  Mount  Zion,  and  in  Isaiah,  XVIII  Mount 
1 17Zion  is  mentioned  as  the  T h r o ne  of  the  L o rd  of  Hosts  w ho  'scatters, 
distributes  and  treads  underfoot*.  'Moiria'  also  suggests  the  Greek  w o rd 
moira,  a  share,  lot  or  distribution.  If  'Moriah'  is  the  answer  to  the  first  of 
these five unsolved  riddles,  it  must  be  linked  with  'I  have  been  bard  of the 
harp  to  Deon  of L o c h l y n ';  and  we  must  credit  the  scholarly  G w i on  with 
interpreting  the  word  as  meaning  Mor-Iah,  or  M o r - J a h,  'the  god  of  the 
sea',  the  w o rd  ' M o r'  being  the  Welsh  equivalent  of  the  Hebrew  'Marah' 
(the  salt  sea).  He  is  in  fact  identifying  J a h,  the  Hebrew  G o d,  with  Bran 
w ho  was  a  grain-god  as  well  as  a  g od  of  the  alder.  T he  identification  is 
justified.  One  of  the  early  gods  worshipped  at  Jerusalem  and  later  in 
cluded  in  the  synthetic  cult  of J e h o v ah  was  the  harvest  g od  T a m m uz  for 
w h om  first-fruits  of  grain  were  yearly  brought  from  Bethlehem  ('the 
house  of  bread').  T he  natives  of  Jerusalem  were  stili  wailing  for  him  at 
the  Feast  of Unleavened  Bread  in  Isaiah's  day  and  according  to  Jerome  he 
had  a  sacred  g r o ve  at  Bethlehem.  It  will  be  remembered  that  the  Temple 
was  built  on  the  'threshing  floor  of  Araunah',  which  sounds  uncannily 
like  A r a w n.  Moreover,  Bran's  crow  was  equally  sacred  to  Jehovah.  Still 
more  conclusive  is  Jehovah's  claim  to  the  seventh  day as  sacred  to  himself. 
In  the  contemporary  astrological  system  the  week  was  divided  between 
the  sun,  moon  and  seven  planets,  and  the  Sabians  of  Harran  in  Meso 
potamia,  w ho  were  of Aegean  origin,  put  the  days  under  the  rule  of seven 
deities,  in  the  order  still  current  in  Europe:  Sun,  Moon,  Nergal  (Mars), 
Nabu  (Mercury),  Bel  (Juppiter),  Beltis  (Venus),  Cronos  (Saturn).  T h us 
Jehovah,  the  g od  whose  holiest  day  is  Saturday,  must  be  identified  with 
Cronos  or  Saturn,  w ho  is  Bran.  We  should  credit  G w i on  with  under 
standing  this,  and  also  with  knowing  that  Uriel  and  Uriah  are  the  same 
w o r d,  El  and  J ah  being  interchangeable  names  of the  H e b r ew  G o d.T he  divine  name  of Alpha  written  in  four  letters  turns  out  to  be  ' A c a b' 
in  O'Flaherty's  list  of letter-names;  which  suggests  A c h ab  (Ahab)  K i ng 
of  Israel,  a  name  borne  also  by  the  prophet  w ho  appears  in  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles as  'Agabus*.  It is  the name  ' A g a b u s'  which explains  the secondary 
riddle  'I  have  been  loquacious  before  I  was  gifted  with  speech',  for 
A g a b us  (who  according  to  the  pseudo-Dorotheus  was  one  of the  Seventy 
Disciples)  is  mentioned  twice  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  In  the  first  men 
tion  (Acts  XI)  he  signified  by  the  Spirit  that  there  would  be  a  famine. 
G w i on  pretends  to  understand  from  signified  that  A g a b us  made  signs, 
prophesied  in  dumb  show,  on  that  occasion,  whereas  in  Acts  XXI  he 
spoke  aloud  with:  ' T h us  saith  the  H o ly  Ghost.'  But  Achab  is  not  a  divine 
name:  in  Hebrew  it  means  merely  'Father's  brother'.  H o w e v e r,  Acab  is  the 
Hebrew w o rd  for  'locust',  and  the  golden  locust  was  among  the  Greeks  of 
Asia Minor a divine emblem of A p o l l o, the S u n - g o d .1 G w i on in another of

1  Perhaps originally an emblem  of  destruction  borrowed from the Moon-goddess to  whom,

as  we  know  from  the  Biblical  stories  of  Rahab  and  T a m a r,  the  scarlet  thread  was  sacred;  for 
1 18

the  poems  in  the  Romance,  called  Divregwawd  Taliesin,  styles  Jesus  ' S on 
of  A l p h a '.  Since  Acab  is  the  equivalent  in  this  alphabet  of  Alpha  in  the 
Greek,  this  is  to  make Jesus  the son  of A c a b;  and,  since  Jesus  was  the  Son 
of G o d,  to  make A c ab  a  synonym  of G o d.

taught

it  strength',

that  Boaz  meanttaught

it  strength',

that  Boaz  meant

As  for  'Jaichim',  or  'Jachin',  that  was  the  name  of  one  of  the  two 
mysterious  pillars  of  Solomon's  T e m p l e,  the  other  being  ' B o a z '.  ( T he 
rabbis 
that  Jachim  (yikkori) 
'In 
meant  ' He  shall  establish',  and  that  they  represented  respectively  the  sun 
and  the  moon.  T he  Freemasons  seem  to  have  borrowed  this  tradition.) 
H ow  it  happened  that  Solomon  raised  two  pillars,  one  on  each  side  of the 
facade  of the  Temple,  called  ' B o a z'  (a  w o rd  which  is  supposed  by  Hebrew 
scholars  to  have  once  had  an  L  in  the  middle  of  it)  and  'Jachin'—is  a 
question  that  need  not  concern  us  yet.  A ll  we  must  notice  is  that  Jaichim 
is  the  last  letter  of  this  alphabet,  and  that  I  in  Celtic  mythology  is  the 
letter of death  and  associated  with  the y ew  tree.  T h us  Jaichim  is  a  synonym 
the  same  w o r d, 
for  Death—Euripides 
iachema,  to  mean  the  deadly  hissing  of a  serpent—and  h ow  Death  came 
into  the  world,  and  what  comes  after  Death,  have  always  been  the  grand 
subjects  of religious  and  philosophical  dispute.  Death  will  always  remain 
upon  the Earth,  according  to  Christian  dogma,  until  the  D ay  of D o o m.

in  his  Frantic  Hercules  used

Here,  then,  is  Taliesin's  grand  conundrum,  taken  to  pieces  and  re

assembled  in  orderly  form,  with  the  answer attached  to  each  riddle:

I  was  the  tower of the w o rk  of which  Nimrod  was  overseer. 
I  saw the destruction  of Sodom  and  Gomorrah. 
I  was  at  the  Court  of  D on  before  the  birth  of  G w y d i o n;  my  head 
was  at  the  White  Hill  in  the  Hall  of  Cymbeline;  and  it  is  not  k n o wn 
whether my b o dy is flesh or

Babel. 
Lota.

Vran.

fish.

I  stood  with  Mary  Magdalene  at  the  place  of  Crucifixion  of  the 
Salome.

Merciful Son of G o d.Babel. 
Lota.

Vran.

fish.

I  stood  with  Mary  Magdalene  at  the  place  of  Crucifixion  of  the 
Salome.

Merciful Son of G o d.

Ne-esthan. 
I was  the banner  carried before Alexander. 
HUT. 
I strengthened  Moses  in  the land of the Deity. 
I  was  in  Canaan  when  Absalom  was  slain;  I  am  winged  with  the

genius of the splendid crozier.

David.

A  primary  chief bard  am  I  to  Elphin  w ho  was  in  stocks  and  fetters  for 
a  year and  a  day.  At first I  was  little  G w i on  and  obtained  my  inspiration 
from  the  cauldron  of the  hag  Cerridwen.  T h en  for  nine  months  almost I 
was  in  Cerridwen's  belly.  At length  I  became  Taliesin.  'Joannes'  I was

three  locusts  and  a  scarlet  thread  are  mentioned  in  the  Ethiopian  Kebra  Nagast  as  the  magical 
properties  with  which  the  Daughter  of  Pharoah  seduced  King  Solomon.  T he  myth  of 
Tithonus  and  Aurora  is  likely  to  be  derived  from  a  mistaken  reading  of  a  sacred  picture  in 
which  the  Moon-goddess  is  shown  hand  in  hand with  Adonis,  beside  a  rising sun  as  emblem 
o f h i s y o u t h, and a locust as emblem of the destruction  that awaits him.

1 19

called, and Merlin the D i v i n e r, and Elias, but at length every K i ng shall 
Taliesin. 
call me Taliesin. I am able  to  instruct  the whole  Universe. 
First I  was with  my L o rd  in  the  Highest  Sphere  and  then  I  was  in  his

buttery.

Kai.

I  conveyed  the  D i v i ne  Spirit  across  Jordan  to  the  level  of the  Vale

of Hebron.

Caleb.

I  was  the  T h r o ne  of the  Distributor;  I  was  minstrel  to  the  Danes  of

Lochlin.

Moriah.

I was fostered in the A rk and have been teacher to all  intelligences.

Once I  was  in  India  and  Asia.  I  have  n ow  come  here  to  the  remnant

of T r o y.

Gomer.

Hu  Gadarn.Moriah.

I was fostered in the A rk and have been teacher to all  intelligences.

Once I  was  in  India  and  Asia.  I  have  n ow  come  here  to  the  remnant

of T r o y.

Gomer.

Hu  Gadarn.

I  have  sat  in  an  uneasy  chair;  I  k n ow  the  names  of  the  stars  from 
N o r th  to  South;  my  original  country  is  the  land  of the  Cherubim,  the 
region

summer

stars.

the

of

Idris.

I  was  in  the  firmament  on  the  G a l a xy  when  R o me  was  built,  and

whirled around motionless between three elements.

Rhea.

I was  loquacious  before  I  was given  speech;  I  am A l p ha  Tetragram-

maton.

Acab.

the  A s s.  Jose. 
I  was  with  my  K i ng 
On  the  fall  of Lucifer  to  the  lowest  depth  of Hell,  I  was  instructor  to 
Enoch  and  Noah;  I  was  on  the  horse's  crupper  of E n o ch  and  Elias.  I 
w as also at Caer Bedion.

the  manger  of

in

Uriel.

I  suffered  hunger  with  the  Son  of  the  Virgin;  I  was  on  the  H i gh 
Cross  in  the  land  of the  Trinity;  I  was  three  periods  in  the  Castle  of 
Jesus. 
Castle 
Arianrhod,

Sidhe.

above

the

the

of

I  am  a  wonder  whose  origin  is  not  known.  I  shall  remain  until  the 
Jachin.

D ay of D o om upon the face of the earth.

So  it  seems  that  the  answer  to  the  conundrum  is  a  bardic  alphabet, 
closely  resembling  O'Flaherty's,  but  with  Morvran  for  Moiria,  Ne-esthan 
for  Neiagadon,  Rhea  for  Riuben,  Salome  for  Salia,1  Gadam  for  Gath,  Uriel 
for  Uria,  and  Taliesin  for  Teilmon.

T h is  may  seem  an  anticlimax.  B e y o nd  establishing  that  the  Boibel-
Loth  is  at  any  rate  as  old  as 
thirteenth-century  Red  Book  of 
the 
Hergest  in  which  the  Hanes  Taliesin  occurs,  and  not  a  mere  pedantry  or 
artificiality of O'Flaherty's,  what has been learned?Well:  by  the  time  that  O ' F l a h e r ty  published  the  alphabet,  the  secret  of 
its  meaning  had  evidendy  been  lost  and  there  seemed  to  be  no  reason  for 
further concealment  of the  letter-names.  It  had  indeed  been  published  long 
before  in  a  tenth-century  bardic  primer.  B ut  we  may  be  sure  that  G w i on 
with  his  D o g,  R o e b u ck  and  L a p w i ng  would  never  have  gone  to  such

11  find  that  the  manuscript  version  of  the  Hearings  of  the  Scholars  in  the  Advocates'

Library,  Edinburgh,  gives  Salamon  as  the  name  of this  letter.

120

extravagant  lengths  in  confusing  the  elements  of  their  conundrum  unless 
the  answer  had  been  something  really  secret,  something  of  immensely 
greater  importance  than  a  mere  A . B . C.  But  the  only  hope  of getting  any 
further  in  the  chase  lies  in  discovering  what  meaning  the  letters  of  the 
alphabet  have  apart  from  the  proper  names  which  are  attached  to  them  in 
the riddle.  Do  they perhaps spell  out a secret religious formula? 
*

*

*

Since  solving  this  grand  conundrum  I  realize  that  I  misread  the  riddle:

'I  was  chief overseer  of the  w o rk  of the  T o w er  of N i m r o d ',  though  I  gave 
the  correct  answer.  It  refers  to  a  passage  in  The  Hearings  of  the  Scholars, 
where'  T he  W o rk  of the  T o w er  of N i m r o d'  is  explained  as  the  linguistic 
researches  carried  on  there  (see  Chapter  Thirteen)  by  Feniusa  Farsa  and 
his  seventy-two  assistants.  T he  tower  is  said  to  have  been  built  of nine 
different  materials:

Clay, water, wool and blood 
Wood,  lime,  andflax-thread a full twist, 
Acacia, bitumen with virtue— 
The  nine  materials  of  Nimrod's  Tower.

and  these nine materials  are poetically explained  as:

Noun, pronoun,  [adjective], verb, 
A d v e r b, participle, [preposition], 
Conjunction,  interjection.and  these nine materials  are poetically explained  as:

Noun, pronoun,  [adjective], verb, 
A d v e r b, participle, [preposition], 
Conjunction,  interjection.

T he  twenty-five  noblest  of the  seventy-two  assistants  w ho  worked  on 
the  language  are  said  to  have  given  their  names  to  the  Ogham  letters. 
T he names are as follows:

B A B EL 
L O TH 
F O R A I ND 
S A L I A TH

N A B G A D ON 
H I R U AD 
D A B H ID 
T A L A M ON 
C AE 
K A L I AP

M U R I A TH 
G O T LI

G O M E RS 
S T RU 
R U B EN 
A C H AB 
O I SE 
U R I TH

E S SU 
I A C H IM

E T H R O C I U S,  U I M E L I C U S,  I U D O N I U S,  A F F R I M,  O R D I N E S.

It  will  be  noticed  that  the  list  is  a  somewhat  degenerate  one,  with  Hiruad 
(Herod)  for  Hur,  and  Nabgadon  (Nebuchadnezzar)  for  Ne-esthan.  T he 
five  last  names  represent  the  'foreign  letters'  absent  from  the  original 
canon.  T he  'chief  overseer'  of  the  riddle  is  not,  as  one  would  suspect, 
Feniusa  Farsa,  nor  either  of his  two  leading  assistants,  Gadel  and  Caoith, 
121

but  Babel;  for  it  is  explained  in  the  same  section  of the  book  that  Babel 
is  the  letter  B,  that  the  Birch  is  its  tree  and  that  'on  a  switch  of Birch  was 
written  the  first  Ogham  inscription  made  in  Ireland,  namely  seven  B ' s,  as 
a  warning  to  L ug  son  of  Ethliu,  to  wit,  " T hy  wife  will  be  seven  times 
carried  away  from  thee  into  fairyland,  or  elsewhere,  unless  birch  be  her 
overseer.'"  L ug  realized  that  the  seven  B's  represented  birch  seven  times 
repeated  but,  to  make  sense  of the  message,  he  had  to  convert  the  seven 
B ' s,  represented  by  single  nicks,  into  two  other  letters  of the  same  flight, 
namely  S  and  F  (four  nicks  and  three  nicks)  the  initials  of  the  operative 
Irish  words  sid and feraruL

This  riddle  is  conclusive  proof,  if  any  doubt  remains,  of  G w i o n 'sThis  riddle  is  conclusive  proof,  if  any  doubt  remains,  of  G w i o n 's

acquaintance with  contemporary  Irish bardic  lore.

122

Chapter  Eight

H E R C U L ES  ON  T HE  L O T US

To  sum  up  the  historical  argument.

' G w i o n ',  a  North  Welsh  cleric  of  the  late  thirteenth  century, 
whose  true  name  is  not  known  but  w ho  championed  the  popular 
minstrels  against  the  Court  bards,  wrote  (or  rewrote)  a  romance  about  a 
miraculous  Child  w ho  possessed  a  secret  doctrine  that  nobody  could 
guess;  this  doctrine  is  incorporated  in  a  series  of  mystical  poems  which 
belong  to  the  romance.  T he  romance is  based  on  a  more  primitive  original, 
of the  ninth  century  A . D.,  in  which  C r e i r wy  and  Afagddu,  the  children  of 
Tegid  V o el  and  Caridwen,  probably  played  a  more  important  part  than  in 
G w i o n 's  version.  (This  original  has  been  lost  though,  strangely  enough, 
the  same  dramatis  personae  occur  in  Shakespeare's  Tempest:  Prospero, 
who  like  Tegid  V o el  lived  on  a  magic  island;  the  black  screaming  hag 
Sycorax.  ' P ig  R a v e n ',  mother  of Caliban  the ugliest  man  alive;  Prospero's 
daughter  Miranda  the  most  beautiful  woman,  w h om  Caliban  tries  to  rape; 
Ariel  the  miraculous  Child  w h om  Sycorax  imprisons.  Perhaps  Shake 
speare  heard  the  story  from  his  Welsh  schoolmaster  at  Stratford, 
the 
original  of Sir  H u gh  Evans  in  The  Merry  Wives  of Windsor.)T he  miraculous  Child  set  a  riddle,  based  on  a  knowledge  not  only  of 
British  and  Irish  mythology,  but  of  the  Greek  N ew  Testament  and 
Septuagint,  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  and  Apocrypha,  and  Latin  and  Greek 
mythology.  T he  answer  to  the  riddle  is  a  list  of names  which  correspond 
closely  with  a  list  that  Roderick  O'Flaherty,  the  seventeenth-century 
confidant  of  the  learned  Irish  antiquary  Duald  Mac  Firbis,  claimed  to  be 
the  original  letter-names  of  the  O g h am  alphabet,  whicn  is  found 
in 
numerous  inscriptions  in  Ireland,  Scotland,  Wales,  England  and  the  Isle 
of  Man,  some  of  them  pre-Christian.  Its  invention  is  ascribed  by  Irish 
tradition  to  the  Goidelic  god  O g ma  Sun-Face,  w ho  according  to  the 
account  given  by  Lucian  of  Samosata,  w ho  wrote  in  the  second  century 
A . D.,  was  representee,  in  Celtic  art  as  a  mixture  of  the  gods  Cronos, 
Hercules  and  A p o l l o.  A  connexion  between  the  O g h am  found  in  inscrip 
tions  and  a  fifth-century  B.C.  Greek  alphabet  from  Etruria,  the  Formello-
Cervetri,  has  been  proved;  nevertheless  there  is  evidence  that  an  earlier 
form  of  Ogham,  with  a  slightly  different  order  of  letters,  was  current  in

Ireland  before  the  Druids  of Gaul  came  into  contact  with  the  Formello-
Cervetri  alphabet.  It  may  also  have  been  current  in  Britain  where,  accord 
ing  to  Julius  Caesar,  the  Druids  of Gaul  went  for  their  university  training 
in  secret  doctrine.I  first  suspected  that  an  alphabet  was  contained  in  G w i o n 's  conundrum 
when  I  began  to  restore  the  purposely  jumbled  text  of  his  Battle  of the 
Trees,  which  refers  to  a  primitive  British  tradition  of  the  capture  of  an 
oracular  shrine  by  the  guessing  of  a  god's  name.  This  capture  seems  to 
have taken place early in the fourth century B.C. when the Belgic Brythons, 
worshippers  of  the  A s h - g od  G w y d i o n,  with  the  help  of  an  agricultural 
tribe  already  settled  in  Britain,  seized  the  national  shrine,  perhaps  A v e-
bury,  from  the  reigning  priesthood,  two  of whose  gods  were  A r a wn  and 
Bran.  Bran is  the  Celtic name  for the ancient  C r o w - g o d,  variously k n o wn 
as A p o l l o,  Saturn,  Cronos and Aesculapius, w ho was also a g od of healing 
and  whose  worship  had  been  combined  with  that  of  a  Thunder-god, 
pictured  as  a  ram  or  bull,  known  variously  as  Zeus,  Tantalus,  Juppiter, 
Telamon  and  Hercules.  T he  letter  names  of G w i o n 's  alphabet  apparently 
conceal  the  Name  of  the  transcendent  G o d,  w h om  Caesar  calls  D i s, 
worshipped in  Britain  and  Gaul.  It  may  be  inferred  that  the  earlier  alpha 
bet,  containing a pre-Belgic  religious  secret,  had a  different series  of letter-
names  from  those  contained  in  G w i o n 's  conundrum,  that  the  alphabetical 
order  began  with  B . L . N .,  not  B . L . F .,  and  that  after  the  capture  of  the 
shrine the D i v i ne Name was altered.

It now remains  to  be discovered:

( 1)  What  the  letter-names  in  G w i o n 's  alphabet,

the  Boibel-Loth,

meant.

(2)  What D i v i ne Name was concealed in them. 
( 3)  What  were  the  original  names  of  the  letters  in  the  tree-alphabet,

the Beth-Luis-Nion.

(4)  What  they  meant. 
(5)  What D i v i ne Name was  concealed  in them.the Beth-Luis-Nion.

(4)  What  they  meant. 
(5)  What D i v i ne Name was  concealed  in them.

G w i on  gives  us  the first point  in  our  renewed  chase  of the  R o e b u ck  by 
introducing  into  his  Romance  an  Elegy  on  Hercules,  which  I  will  quote 
presendy;  but  'Hercules'  is  a  w o rd  of  v e ry  many  meanings.  Cicero 
distinguishes  six  different  legendary  figures  named  Hercules;  V a r r o, 
forty-four.  His  name,  in  Greek  Heracles,  means  ' G l o ry  of  Hera',  and 
Hera  was  an  early  Greek  name  for  the  Death-goddess  w ho  had  charge  of 
the  souls  of sacred  kings  and  made  oracular  heroes  of them.  He  is,  in  fact, 
a  composite  deity  consisting  of a  great  many  oracular  heroes  of different 
nations  at  different  stages  of  religious  development;  some  of  whom  be 
came real  gods while some  remained  heroes.  T h is makes him the most per 
plexing  character  in  Classical  mythology;  for  the  semi-historical  Pelopid

124

prince  of the  generation  before  the  Trojan  W ar  has  been  confused  with 
various heroes  and  deities  called  Hercules, and  these with  one another.124

prince  of the  generation  before  the  Trojan  W ar  has  been  confused  with 
various heroes  and  deities  called  Hercules, and  these with  one another.

Hercules  first  appears  in  legend  as  a  pastoral  sacred  king  and,  perhaps 
because  shepherds  welcome  the  birth  of twin  lambs,  is  a  twin  himself.  His 
characteristics  and  history  can  be  deduced  from  a  mass  of  legends,  folk-
customs  and  megalithic  monuments.  He  is  the  rain-maker  of his  tribe  and 
a  sort  of human  thunder-storm.  Legends  connect  him  with  L i b ya  and  the 
Atlas  Mountains;  he  may well  have  originated  thereabouts  in  Palaeolithic 
times.  T he  priests  of Egyptian  Thebes,  w ho  called  him  ' S h u ',  dated  his 
origin as '17,000 years before the reign of K i ng Amasis'. He carries an oak-
club,  because  the  oak  provides  his  beasts  and  his  people  with  mast  and 
because  it  attracts  lightning  more  than  any  other  tree.  His  symbols  are 
the  acorn;  the  rock-dove,  which  nests  in  oaks  as  well  as  in  clefts  of rock; 
the  mistletoe,  or loranthus:  and  the  serpent.  All  these are  sexual  emblems. 
T he dove was sacred to the Love-goddess of Greece and  Syria; the serpent 
was the most ancient of phallic totem-beasts; the cupped acorn stood for the 
glans penis  in  both  Greek  and  Latin;  the  mistletoe  was  an  all-heal  and  its 
names  viscus  (Latin)  and  ixias  (Greek)  are  connected  with  vis  and  ischus 
(strength)—probably  because  of  the  spermal  viscosity  of  its  berries, 
sperm  being  the  vehicle  of life.  T h is  Hercules  is  male  leader  of all  o r g i 
astic  rites  and  has  twelve  archer  companions,  including  his  spear-armed 
twin,  w ho  is  his  tanist  or  deputy.  He  performs  an  annual  green-wood 
marriage with a queen of the w o o d s, a sort of Maid Marian.  He is a mighty 
hunter and  makes  rain,  when  it  is needed,  by rattling an  oak-club  thunder 
ously  in  a  hollow  oak  and  stirring  a  pool  with  an  oak  branch—alterna 
tively,  by  rattling  pebbles  inside  a  sacred  colocinth-gourd  or,  later,  by 
rolling  black  meteoric  stones  inside  a  wooden  chest—and  so  attracting 
thunderstorms  by  sympathetic  magic.T he  manner  of his  death  can  be  reconstructed  from  a  variety  of legends, 
folk customs and other religious survivals. At mid-summer, at the end of a 
half-year reign,  Hercules  is  made  drunk  with mead and  led  into  the middle 
of a circle of twelve stones arranged around an oak, in front of which stands 
an  altar-stone;  the  oak  has  been  lopped  until  it  is  T-shaped.  He  is  bound 
to  it  with  willow  thongs  in  the  'five-fold  bond'  which  joins  wrists,  neck 
and  ankles  together,  beaten  by  his  comrades  till  he  faints,  then  flayed, 
blinded,  castrated,  impaled  with  a  mistletoe  stake,  and  finally  hacked  into 
joints  on  the  altar-stone.1  His  blood  is  caught  in  a  basin  and  used  for 
sprinkling  the  whole  tribe  to  make  them  vigorous  and  fruitful.  T he  joints 
are  roasted  at  twin  fires  of  oak-loppings,  kindled  with  sacred  fire  pre-

1  T he  five-fold  bond  was  reported  from  China by the  A r ab  merchant  Suleyman  in  8 51  A . D. 
He  writes  that  'when  the  man  condemned  to  death  has  been  trussed  up  in  this  fashion,  and 
beaten  with  a  fixed  number  of blows,  his  body,  still  faintly  breathing,  is  given  over  to  those 
who  must  devour  it*.

"5"5

served  from  a  lightning-blasted  oak  or  made  by  twirling  an  alder-  or 
cornel-wood  fire-drill  in  an  oak  log.  T he  trunk  is  then  uprooted  and  split 
into  faggots  which  are  added  to  the  flames.  T he  twelve  merry-men  rush 
in  a  wild  figure-of-eight  dance  around  the  fires,  singing  ecstatically  and 
tearing  at  the  flesh  with  their  teeth.  T he  bloody  remains  are  burnt  in  the 
fire,  all  except  the  genitals  and  the head.  These  are  put  into  an  alder-wood 
boat  and  floated  down  a  river  to  an  islet;  though  the  head  is  sometimes 
cured  with  smoke  and  preserved  for  oracular  use.  His  tanist  succeeds  him 
and  reigns  for  the  remainder  of  the  year,  when  he  is  sacrificially  killed 
by  a  new  Hercules.

To  this  type  of Hercules  belong  such  diverse  characters  as  Hercules  of 
Oeta,  Orion  the  Hunter  of  Crete,  Polyphemus  the  C y c l o p s,  Samson  the 
Danite,  Cuchulain  of Muirthemne  the  Irish  Sun-hero,  Ixion  the  L a p i t h— 
who  is  always  depicted  stretched  in  a  'five-fold  bond*  around  a  Sun-
w h e e l — A g ag  the  Amalekite,  Romulus  of R o m e,  Zeus,  Janus,  Anchises, 
T he  D a g da  and  Hermes.  This  Hercules  is  the  leader  of his  people  in  war 
and  hunting  and  his  twelve  chieftains  are  pledged  to  respect  his  authority; 
but  his  name  commemorates  his  subservience  to  the  Goddess,  the  Queen 
of  the  W o o d s,  whose  priestess  is  the  tribal  law-giver  and  disposer  of all 
the  amenities  of life.  T he  health  of the  people  is  bound  up  with  his  and  he 
is  burdened  with  numerous  royal  taboos.In  the  Classical  myth  which  authorizes  his  sovereignty  he  is  a  mira 
culous  child  born  in  a  shower  of  gold;  strangles  a  serpent  in  his  cradle, 
which  is  also  a  boat,  and  is  credited  (like  Zeus)  with  causing  the  spurt  of 
milk  that  made  the  Milky  W a y;  as  a  y o u ng  man  he  is  the  undefeated 
monster-slayer  of his  age;  kills  and  dismembers  a  monstrous  boar;  begets 
countless  sons  but  no  daughters—title  is  still,  in  fact,  matrilinearly  con 
veyed;  willingly  undertakes  the  world-burden  of  the  giant  Atlas;  does 
wonderful  feats  with  his  oak-club  and  his  arrows;  masters  the  wild  horse 
Arion  and  brings  up  the  D og  Cerberus  from  the  Underworld;  is  betrayed 
by  his  lovely  bride;  flays  himself by  tearing  off his  poisoned  shirt;  climbs 
in  agony  to  the  top  of Mount  Oeta;  fells  and  splits  an  oak  for  his  o wn  pyre; 
is  consumed; flies up  to  heaven  on  the  smoke  of the  pyre  in  the  form  of an 
eagle,  and  is  introduced  by  the  Goddess  of W i s d om  into  the  company  of 
the  Immortals.

T he  divine  names  Bran,  Saturn,  Cronos  must  also  be  referred  to  this 
primitive  religious  system.  T h ey  are  applied  to  the  ghost  of Hercules  that 
floats  off in  the  alder-wood  boat  after  his  midsummer  sacrifice.  His  tanist, 
or  other  self,  appearing  in  Greek  legend  as  Poeas  w ho  lighted  Hercules' 
pyre  and  inherited  his  arrows,  succeeds  him  for  the  second  half  of  the 
year;  having  acquired  royal  virtue  by  marriage  with  the  queen,  the  repre 
sentative  of the  White  Goddess,  and  by  eating  some  royal  part  of the  dead 
man's  body—heart,  shoulder  or  thigh-flesh.  He  is  in  turn  succeeded  by

126126

the  N ew  Y e ar  Hercules,  a  reincarnation  of  the  murdered  man,  w ho  be 
heads  him  and,  apparently,  eats  his  head.  This  alternate  eucharistic  sacri 
fice  made royalty continuous, each king being in  turn the Sun-god  beloved 
of the  reigning  Moon-goddess.

But  when  these  cannibalistic  rites  were  abandoned  and  the  system  was 
gradually  modified  until  a  single  king  reigned  for  a  term  of years,  Saturn-
Cronos-Bran  became a mere  Old  Y e ar ghost,  permanently overthrown  by 
Juppiter-Zeus-Belin  though  yearly conjured  up  for  placation  at  the  Satur 
nalia  or  Y u le  feast.  Here  at  last  we  can  guess  the  political  motive  behind 
Amathaon's  betrayal  of his  cousin  Bran's  name  at  the  Battle  of the  T r e es 
for  the  benefit  of his  friend  G w y d i o n:  did  the  Bronze A ge  Amathaonians, 
w ho  worshipped  the  Immortal  Beli  in  his  Stonehenge  temple,  find  that 
they  had  less  in  common  with  their  White-Goddess-worshipping  over 
lords  than  with  the  invading  Iron  A ge  Belgic  tribes  whose  g od  Odin 
( G w y d i o n)  had  emancipated  himself from  the  tutelage  of the  White  G o d 
dess  F r e y a?  Once  the  Bran  priesthood  was  banished  from  Salisbury  Plain 
and  driven  up  North,  they  would  be  free  to  institute  a  permanent  kingship 
over  all  Southern  Britain  under  the  patronage  of Belin;  and  this  is  exactly 
what  they  seem  to  have  done,  after  an  amicable  arrangement  with  the 
priesthood  of Odin,  to  whom  they  gave  the  control  of the  national  oracle 
as a reward  for their help  in  the battle.T he  next  type  of Hercules  is  an  agricultural  as  well  as  a  pastoral  king 
and specializes in  the cultivation  of barley, so  that he is sometimes confused 
with  Eleusinian  Triptolemus,  Syrian  Tammuz  or  Egyptian  Maneros. 
E a r ly  portraits  of him,  with  lion  skin,  club  and  grain  sprouting  from  his 
shoulders,  have  been  found  in  Mesopotamian  cities  of the  third  millennium 
B.C.  In  the  Eastern  Mediterranean  he  reigns  alternatively with  his  twin,  as 
in  the  double  kingdoms  of  A r g o s,  Lacedaemon,  Corinth,  A l ba  L o n g a, 
and  R o m e.  C o - k i n gs  of  this  type  are  Iphiclus,  twin  to  Tirynthian 
Hercules;  Pollux,  twin  to  Castor;  Lynceus,  twin  to  Idas;  Calais,  twin  to 
Zetes;  Remus,  twin  to  Romulus;  Demophoon,  twin  to  Triptolemus;  the 
Edomite  Perez,  twin  to  Zarah;  A b e l,  twin  to  Cain;  and  many  more. 
Hercules  is  now  lover  to  fifty  water-priestesses  of the  Mountain-goddess 
in  whose  honour  he  wears  a  lion's  skin.  T he  twins'  joint  reign  is  fixed  at 
eight  years,  apparently  because  at  every  hundredth  lunar  month  occurs  a 
rough  approximation  of  lunar  and  solar  times.  L l ew  L l aw  Gyffes  ('the 
Lion  with  the  Steady  Hand')  is  true  to  type  when  in  the  Romance  of  Math 
the  Son  of  Mathonwy  he  takes  G w y d i on  as  his  twin  to  visit  his  mother 
Arianrhod.  F or  each  year  that  the  reign  of  this  agricultural  Hercules  is 
prolonged  he  offers  a  child-victim  in  his  stead;  which  explains  the  Greek 
legends  of Hercules  killing  children  by  accident  or  in  a  fit  of madness,  and 
the  destruction  by fire, after  a  temporary  investiture  as  king,  of various  un 
fortunate  y o u ng  princes,  among  them  G w e r n,  nephew  of Bran;  Phaethon,

127127

son  of  Helios;  Icarus,  son  of  Daedalus,  w ho  flew  too  near  the  sun; 
Demophoon,  son  of  Celeus  of Eleusis,  w h om  Demeter  was  trying  to  im 
mortalize;  and  Dionysus  son  of  Cretan  Zeus.  It  also  explains  the  child-
sacrifices  of  Phoenicia,  including  those  offered  to  J e h o v ah  Melkarth  in 
the  Valley  of  Hinnom  (or  Gehenna)  the  home  of  the  undying  serpent, 
where  the  sacrificial fire was  never  quenched.

T he  custom  of burning  a  child  to  death  as  an  annual  surrogate  for  the 
sacred  king  is  well  illustrated  in  the  myth  of T h e d s,  Peleus  and  Achilles. 
Peleus was an Achaean  fratricide  in  exile  from Aegina and  became  K i ng  of 
Iolcus  with  a  co-king  Acastus,  in  succession  to  the  co-kings  Pelias  and 
Neleus.  Thetis,  a  Thessalian  Sea  goddess  is  described  by  the  m y t h o 
graphers  either  as  a  daughter  of  Cheiron  the  Centaur,  or  as  one  of  the 
fifty  Nereids,  from  w h om  she  was  chosen  to  be  a  wife  to  Zeus.  Zeus 
changed  his  mind  because  of an  oracle  and  g a ve  her  in  marriage  to  Peleus, 
to  w h om  she  bore  seven  children,  six  of w h om  she  burned  to  death.  T he 
seventh,  Achilles,  was  rescued  by  Peleus  in  the  nick  of  time—like  the  in 
fant  Aesculapius.  T he  first  six  had  been  given  immortality  by  the  burning 
process;  with  Achilles  the  process  had  not  yet  been  completed—his  heel 
was  still  vulnerable.  Thetis fled and  Peleus  g a ve  Achilles  into  the  custody 
of  Cheiron  w ho  tutored  him;  later  Achilles  ruled  over  the  Myrmidons  of 
Pthiotis  and  brought  a  contingent  of them  to  fight  at  T r o y.  When  offered 
the  choice  of a  brief but  glorious  life  or  a  long  and  undistinguished  one,  he 
chose  the  brief one.T he  myth  has  kept  its  main  oudines  pretty  well  despite  the  inability  of 
later  editors  to  understand  the  system  of  matrilinear  succession.  There 
was  a  shrine  of  the  Moon-goddess  Artemis,  alias  Nereis,  or  Thetis,  at 
Iolcus,  the  chief  port  of Southern  Thessaly,  with  an  attached  college  of 
fifty  priestesses.  T h is  Artemis  was  a  patroness  of  fishermen  and  sailors. 
One  of the  priestesses  was  chosen  every fiftieth month  as  representative  of 
the  Goddess;  perhaps  she  was  the  winner  of a  race.  She  took  a  yearly  con 
sort  w ho  became  the  Oak-king,  or  Zeus,  of the  region  and  was  sacrificed 
at  the  close  of his  term  of office.  By  the  time  that  the  Achaeans  had  estab 
lished  the  Olympian  religion  in  Thessaly  (it  is  recorded  that  all  the  gods 
and  goddesses  attended  Peleus's  marriage  to  Thetis)  the  term  had  been ex 
tended  to  eight,  or  perhaps  seven,  years,  and  a  child  sacrificed  every 
winter  solstice  until  the  term  was  complete.  (Seven  years  instead  of the 
Great  Y e ar  of eight  seems  to  be  a  blunder  of the  mythographers;  but  from 
the  Scottish  witch-ballad  of  True  Thomas  it  appears  that  seven  years  was 
the  normal  term  for  the  Queen  of  Elphame's  consort  to  reign,  and  the 
Scottish  witch  cult  had  close  affinities  with  primitive  Thessalian  reli 
gion.)

Achilles,  the  lucky  seventh  (or  perhaps  eighth)  child  w ho  was  saved 
because  Peleus  himself had  to  die,  was  apparendy  one  of the  Centaurs  of

1 28Achilles,  the  lucky  seventh  (or  perhaps  eighth)  child  w ho  was  saved 
because  Peleus  himself had  to  die,  was  apparendy  one  of the  Centaurs  of

1 28

near-by  Pelion  with  whom  the  Nereids  of Iolcus  had  ancient  exogamic 
ties  and  from  w h om  Peleus  would  naturally  choose  his  child  victims— 
they  would  not  be  his  o wn  sons  by  Thetis.  W h en  Achilles  g r ew up  he  be 
came  king  of the  Myrmidons  of Pthiotis:  presumably  by  marriage with  the 
tribal  representative  of the  Goddess.  He  can  hardly  have  inherited  the  title 
from  Peleus.  (Myrmidon  means  'ant',  so  it  is  likely  that  the  wryneck, 
which  feeds  on  ants  and  nests  in  willow-trees,  sacred  to  the  Goddess,  was 
the  local  totem-bird;  Philyra,  Cheiron's  mother,  is  traditionally  associated 
with  the  w r y n e c k .)  It  is  established  that  there  was  an  Achilles  cult  in 
Greece  before  the  Trojan  W ar  was  fought,  so  the  brief but  glorious  life 
was  probably  that  of  a  stay-at-home  king  with  a  sacred  heel  w ho  w on 
immortality  at  death  by  becoming  an  oracular  hero.  Thetis  was  credited 
with  the  power  to  change  her  appearance;  she  was,  in  fact,  served  by 
various  colleges  oi  priestesses  each  with  a  different  totem  beast  or  bird— 
mare,  she-bear,  crane, fish, wryneck  and  so  on.T he  same myth  has  been  twisted  in  a  variety  of w a y s.  In  some  versions 
the  emphasis  is  on  the  mock-marriage,  which  was  an  integral  part  of the 
coronation.  T he  A r g i ve  myth  of  the  fifty  Danaids  w ho  were  married  to 
the fifty sons of A e g y p t us and killed all but one on their common wedding 
night,  and  the  P e r s o - E g y p t o - G r e ek  myth  of T o b it and  Raguel's  daughter 
whose  seven  previous  husbands  had  all  been  killed  by  the  demon  A s m o-
deus—in  Persian,  Aeshma  D a e v a — on  their  wedding  night,  are  originally 
identical.T he  various  contradictory  versions  of  the  Danaid  myth  help  us  to 
understand  the  ritual  from  which  it  originated.  Pindar  in  his  Fourth 
Pythian  Ode  says  that  the  brides  were  pardoned,  purified  by  Hermes  and 
Athene  and  offered  as  prizes  to  the  victors  of public  games.  Later authori 
ties,  such  as  O v id  and  Horace,  say  that  they  were  not  pardoned  but  con 
demned  everlastingly  to  pour  water  into  a  vessel  full  of holes.  Herodotus 
says  that  they  brought  the  mysteries  of  Demeter  to  A r g os  and  taught 
them  to  the  Pelasgian  women.  Others  say  that  four  of  them  were  w o r 
shipped  at  A r g os  because  they  provided  the  city  with  water.  T he  real 
story  seems  to  be  that  the  Danaids  were  an  A r g i ve  college  of fifty priest 
esses  of the  Barley-goddess  Danae,  w ho  was  interested  in  giving  rain  to 
the  crops  and  was  worshipped  under  four  different  divine  titles;  pouring 
water  through  a vessel  with  holes  so  that  it  looked  like  rain  was  their usual 
rain-bringing  charm.  E v e ry  four years  at  the fiftieth lunar month  a  contest 
was  held  as  to  w ho  should  become  the  Hercules,  or  Zeus,  of the  next  four 
years  and  the  lover of these fifty priestesses.  This  term  was afterwards pro 
longed  to  eight  years,  with  the  usual  yearly  sacrifice  of a  child.  Danaan 
A r g os  was  captured  by  the  Sons  of A e g y p t us  w ho  invaded  the  Pelopon-
nese  from  Syria,  and  many  of the  Danaans  w ho  resisted  them  were  driven 
northward  out  of Greece;  as  has  already  been  mentioned.

129129

In  the  Book  of Tobit,  Tobit  is  the  lucky  eighth,  the  new  Zeus  bride 
groom,  who escapes his  fate when  the  reigning  Zeus  has  to  die  at  the  end 
of his  term.  Asmodeus  is  the  Persian  counterpart  of Set,  the  yearly  mur 
derer  of Osiris,  but  he  is  charmed  away  with  the  fish  of immortality  and 
flees  to  his  southern  deserts.  Tobit's  dog  is  a  helpful  clue;  he  always 
accompanied  Hercules  Melkarth,  or  his  Persian  counterpart  Sraosha,  or 
the Greek Aesculapius, wherever he went.

A  typical  set  of taboos  binding  this  Hercules  is  quoted  by  Sir  James 
Frazer  in his  Golden  Bough:  they  were  applied  to  the  Flamen  Dialis,  the 
successor of the Sacred  King of Rome whose war-leadership  passed  to  the 
twin  Consuls at the foundation of the  Republic.

The Flamen  Dialis  might not ride or even  touch  a horse,  nor see  an 
army  under  arms,  nor  wear  a  ring  which  was  not  broken,  nor  have  a 
knot  in  any  part  of his  garments;  no fire except  a  sacred  one  might  be 
taken  out  of his  house;  he  might  not  touch  wheaten  flour  or  leavened 
bread; he might not touch or even name a goat, a dog, raw meat, beans 
and  ivy;  he  might  not  walk  under  a  vine;  the  feet  of his  bed  had  to  be 
daubed with  mud;  his  hair  could  be  cut  only  by a  free man  and  with a 
bronze knife;  and his hair and  nails when  cut had  to  be buried  under a 
lucky tree; he might not touch a dead  body nor enter a place where one 
was buried;  he  might not  see work being done  on holy days;  he might 
not be uncovered  in  the open  air;  if a man  in bonds were  taken  into  his 
house,  the  captive  had  to  be  unbound  and  the  cords  had  to  be  drawn 
up through a hole in the roof and so let down into the street.Frazer should have added  that the Flamen owed his position to a sacred 
marriage with the Flaminica: Plutarch records in his Roman Questions (50) 
that he could not divorce her, and had to resign his office if she died.

In  Ireland  this  Hercules  was  named  Cenn  Cruaich,  'the  Lord  of  the 
Mound',  but  after  his  supersession  by  a  more  benignant  sacred  king  was 
remembered  as  Cromm  Cruaich  ('the  Bowed  One  of the  Mound').  In  a 
Christian  poem  occurring  in  the  eleventh-century  Book  of Leinster  he  is 
thus  described:

Here once dwelt 
A high idol of many fights, 
The  Cromm  Cruaich  byname, 
And deprived every tribe  of peace.

Without glory in  his honour, 
They would sacrifice their wretched children 
With much  lamentation and danger, 
Pouring their blood around Cromm Cruaich. 
1 30

Milk  and corn 
They would urgently desire of him, 
In barter for one-third oftheir healthy offspring— 
Their horror of him was great.

To him the noble Goidels 
Wouldprostrate  themselves; 
From the bloody sacrifices offered him 
The plain  is  called'The  Plain  ofAdoration  .

They  did  evilly, 
Beat on their palms, thumped their bodies, 
Wailing to the monster who enslaved them, 
Their tears falling in showers.

In a rank stand 
Twelve idols of stone; 
Bitterly to enchant  the people 
The figure of the Cromm was of gold.

From the reign of Heremon, 
The noble and graceful, 
Such worshipping of stones there was 
Until  the  coming  of  good  Patrick  ofMacha.

It  is  likely  enough  that  this  cult  was  introduced  into  Ireland  in  the 
reign  of Heremon,  the  nineteenth  King  of All  Ireland,  the  date  of whose 
accession is traditionally given as  1267 B.C., though D r. Joyce, a reliable 
modern  authority,  makes  it  1015  B.C.  Heremon,  one  of  the  invading 
Milesians from Spain, became sole monarch of Ireland by his victory over 
the armies of the North and put his enemies under heavy tribute.(The  Milesians  of Irish  legend  are  said  to  have  originated  in  Greece 
early in the second millennium B.C. and to have taken many generations to 
reach Ireland, after wandering about the Mediterranean. The Milesians of 
Greek  legend  claimed  descent  from  Miletus,  a  son  of Apollo,  who  emi 
grated  from  Crete  to  Caria  in  very  early  times,  and  built  the  city  of 
Miletus;  there  was  another  city  of  the  same  name  in  Crete.  The  Irish 
Milesians similarly  claimed  to  have  visited  Crete  and  to  have  gone  thence 
to Syria, and thence by way of Carenia in Asia Minor to Gaetulia in North 
Africa, Baelduno or Baelo, a port near Cadiz, and Breagdun or Brigantium 
(now Compostella), in North-western Spain. Among their ancestors were 
Gadel—perhaps a deity of the  river Gadylum on the southern coast of the 
Black Sea near Trebizond; 'Niulus or Neolus of Argos'; Cecrops of Athens; 
and 'Scota daughter of the king of Egypt'.

If this  account has any  sense it refers  to a westward  migration from the

1 31

Aegean to Spain in the late thirteenth century B.C. when, as we have seen, 
a  wave  of  Indo-Europeans  from  the  north,  among  them  the  Dorian 
Greeks,  was  slowly  displacing  the  Mycenaean  'Peoples  of  the  Sea'  from 
Greece, the Aegean Islands, and Asia Minor.Neleus  (if  this  is  the  'Niulus  or  Neolus'  of  the  Irish  legend)  was  a 
Minyan,  an  Aeolian  Greek,  who  reigned  over  Pylos,  a  Peloponnese 
kingdom  that  traded  extensively  with  the  western  Mediterranean.  The 
Achaeans  subdued  him  in  a  battle  from  which  only  his  son  Nestor  (a 
garrulous  old  man  at  the  time  of the  Trojan  War)  escaped.  Neleus  was 
reckoned  a  son  of the  Goddess  T y r o,  and  she  was  mother  also  of Aeson 
the  Minyan,  who  was  rejuvenated  in  the  Cauldron,  and  Amythaon— 
Amathaon  again?  T y ro  was  probably  the  Goddess  of  the  Tyrrhenians 
who  were  expelled  from  Asia  Minor  a  century  or  two  later  and  sailed  to 
Italy.  These  Tyrrhenians,  usually  known  as  Etruscans,  dated  their 
national existence from 967 B.C.  Cecrops appears  in  Greek  legend  as the 
first  Greek  king  of  Attica  and  the  reputed  originator  of  barley-cake 
offerings  to  Zeus.  Scota,  who  has  been  confused  in  Irish  legend  with  the 
ancestor of the  Cottians,  is  apparently  Scotia  ('The  Dark  One'),  a  well-
known  Greek  title  of the  Sea-goddess  of  Cyprus.  T he  Milesians  would 
naturally have brought the cult of the Sea-goddess and of her son Hercules 
with  them  to  Ireland,  and  would  have  found  the  necessary  stone-altars 
already in position.)In  the  Peloponnese  the  Olympic  Games  were  the  occasion  of  this 
agricultural  Hercules's  death  and  of  the  election  of  his  successor.  The 
legend  is  that  they  were  founded  in  celebration  of Zeus's  emasculation  of 
Cronos;  since  the  tomb  of  the  early  Achaean  Oak-king  Pelops  was  at 
Olympia,  this  means  that  the  oak-cult  was  there  superimposed  on  the 
Pelasgian  barley-cult.  The  most  ancient  event  in  the  Games  was  a  race 
between  fifty  young  priestesses  of  the  Goddess  Hera  for  the  privilege 
of  becoming  the  new  Chief  Priestess.  Hercules  was  cut  into  pieces  and 
eucharistically  eaten  as  before,  until  perhaps  the  later  Achaeans  put  an 
end  to  the  practice,  and  for  centuries  after  retained  some  of  his  oak-tree 
characteristics:  he  was  known  as  the  'green  Zeus'.  The  sacrifice  of the 
agricultural  Hercules,  or  the  victim  offered  in  his  stead,  continued  to 
take  place  within  a  stone-circle  dedicated  to  the  Barley  Mother.  At 
Hermion, near  Corinth,  the  stone-circle  was  in  ritual  use until  Christian 
times.

Hercules  of Canopus,  or  Celestial  Hercules,  is  a  fusion  of the first two 
types  of  Hercules  with  Asclepius,  or  Aesculapius,  the  God  of  Healing, 
himself a  fusion  of  the  Barley-god  with  a  Fire-god.  Aesculapius  is  de 
scribed  by  mythographers  as  a  son  of Apollo,  partly  because  Apollo  in 
Classical  times was  identified  with the  Sun-god  Helios;  partly because  the 
priesthood of the Aesculapian cult, which was derived  from that of Thoth,

1 321 32

the Egyptian  god  of healing and  inventor of letters,  had  been  driven  from 
Phoenicia  (about  the  year  1400   B.C.?)  and  taken  refuge  in  the  islands  of 
Cos,  Thasos  and  Delos,  where  Apollo  was  by  then  the  ruling  deity. 
When  in  the  fifth  century  B . C.  Herodotus  tried  to  extract  information 
about  Canopic  Hercules  from  the  Egyptian  priests,  they  referred  him  to 
Phoenicia as the land of his origin. We know that the Phoenician Hercules, 
Melkarth ('King of the  City'),  died yearly and  that the quail was his bird 
of  resurrection;  which  means  that  when  the  migrant  quail  arrives  in 
Phoenicia  early  in  March  from  the  South,  the  oak  begins  to  leaf and  the 
new  King  celebrates  his  royal  marriage.  Melkarth  was  revived  when 
Esmun  ('He  whom we  invoke'), the local Aesculapius,  held  a  quail  to  his 
nose.  The  quail  is  notorious  for  its  pugnacity  and  lechery.  But  at 
Canopus, in the Nile Delta, the cults of Melkarth and Esmun, or Hercules 
and  Aesculapius,  appear  to  have  been  fused  by  Egyptian  philosophers: 
Hercules  was  worshipped  both  as  the  healer  and  as  the  healed.  Apollo 
himself  had  reputedly  been  born  on  Ortygia  ('Quail  Island'),  the  islet 
off  Delos;  so  Canopic  Hercules  is  Apollo,  too,  in  a  sense—is  Apollo, 
Aesculapius  (alias  Cronos,  Saturn  or  Bran), Thoth, Hermes  (whom  the 
Greeks  identified  with  Thoth),  Dionysus  (who in  the  early  legends  is  an 
alias of Hermes), and Melkarth, to whom King Solomon, as son-in-law to 
King Hiram, was priest, and who immolated himself on a pyre, like Hercules 
of Oeta. Hercules Melkarth was also worshipped at Corinth under the name 
of Melicertes,  the son  of the  Pelasgian White  Goddess Ino  of Pelion.Hercules becomes more glorious still, as  Celestial Hercules. The myth 
ographers record  that he borrowed  the golden cup  of the Sun, shaped  like 
a water lily  or  lotus,  for  the  homeward  journey  from  one  of his  Labours. 
This  was  the  cup  in  which  the  Sun,  after  sinking  in  the  West,  nightly 
floated  round  again  to  the  East  along  the  world-girdling  Ocean  stream. 
The lotus, which  grows as the Nile rises,  typified  fertility, and so attached 
itself  to  the  Egyptian  sun-cult.  'Hercules'  in  Classical  Greece  became 
in fact another name for the Sun.  Celestial Hercules was worshipped both 
as the undying Sun, and as the continually dying and continually renewed 
Spirit  of the  Year—that  is,  both  as  a  god  and  as  a  demi-god.  This  is  the 
type  of Hercules  whom  the  Druids  worshipped  as  Ogma  Sun-face,  the 
lion-skinned  inventor of Letters,1  god  of eloquence,  god  of healing,  god  of 
fertility, god  of prophecy; and whom the  Greeks worshipped as  'assigner 
of  titles',  as  ruler  of the  Zodiac,  as  president  of festivals,  as  founder  of 
cities, as healer of the sick, as patron of archers and athletes.

Hercules  is  represented  in  Greek  art  as  a  bull-necked  champion,  and

1  T he  ape,  the  sacred  animal  which  identified  this  Hercules  with  T h o th  the  inventor  of

Letters,  does  not  seem  to  have  become  acclimatized  in Western  Europe.  In  E g y p t,  Thoth  was

sometimes  portrayed  as  an  ape,  in  Asia  Minor  he  merely  led  one;  the  tradition  apparendy

originates in  India.

1 33

may  for  all  practical  purposes  be  identified  with  the  demi-god  Dionysus 
of Delphi,  whose  totem  was  a  white  bull.  Plutarch  of Delphi,  a  priest  of 
Apollo,  in  his  essay  On  Isis  and  Osiris  compares  the  rites  of Osiris  with 
those of Dionysus.  He writes:The  affair  about  the  Titans  and  the  Night  of  Accomplishment 
corresponds  with  what  are  called  'Tearings  to  pieces',  'Resurrections' 
and  'Regenerations'  in  the  rites  of Osiris.  The  same  applies  to  burial 
rites. There are burial chests of Osiris in many Egyptian cities; similarly 
we  claim  at  Delphi  that  the  remains  of Dionysus  are  buried  near  the 
place of the  Oracle.  And  our consecrated  priests  perform a secret sacri 
fice  in  Apollo's  sanctuary  at  the  time  of the  awakening  of the  Divine 
Child by the Thyiades.

Thus  'Hercules'  is  seen  to  be  also  another  name  for  Osiris  whose  yearly 
death  is  still  celebrated  in  Egypt,  even  after  thirteen  centuries  of 
Mohammedanism.  Rubber is now used for the traditional fertility symbol; 
prodigiously  inflated,  it  still  excites  the  same  cries  of laughter  and  grief as 
in the days of Joseph the Patriarch and Joseph the Carpenter.

Plutarch  carefully  distinguishes  Apollo  (Hercules  as  god)  from 
Dionysus (Hercules as demi-god).  This Apollo never dies, never changes 
his  shape;  he  is  eternally  young,  strong  and  beautiful.  Dionysus  perpetu 
ally changes, like Proteus the Pelasgian god, or Periclymenus the Minyan, 
son  of Neleus,  or  die  ancient  Irish  Uath  Mac  Immomuin  ('Horror  son  of 
Terror'),  into  an  infinity  of shapes.  So  Pentheus  in  the  Bacckae  of Euri 
pides charges him to appear 'as a wild bull, as a many-headed snake, or as 
a fire-breathing lion'—whichever  he  pleases:  almost  exactly  in  the  words 
of the  Welsh  bard  Cynddelw,  a  contemporary  of Gruffudd  ap  Kynan's: 
Yn  rith  llew rac llyw goradein,yn rith  dreic rac dragon prydein.

Thus  in  Britain,  Amathaon  was  Hercules  as  Dionysus;  his  father  Beli

was Hercules as Apollo.

Plutarch  writes,  in  his  essay  On  the  Ei  at  Delphi,  revealing  as  much

Orphic secret doctrine as he dares:was Hercules as Apollo.

Plutarch  writes,  in  his  essay  On  the  Ei  at  Delphi,  revealing  as  much

Orphic secret doctrine as he dares:

In  describing  the  manifold  changes  of Dionysus  into  winds,  water, 
earth,  stars  and  growing  plants  and  animals,  they  use  the  riddling 
expressions  'render  asunder'  and  'tearing  limb  from  limb'.  A nd  they 
call  the  god  'Dionysus'  or  'Zagreus'  ('the  torn')  or  'The  Night  Sun' 
or  'The  Impartial  Giver',  and  record  various  Destructions,  Dis 
appearances, Resurrections and Rebirths, which are their mythographic 
account  of how those changes came about.

That  Gwion  knew  Hercules  to  be  another  name  for  Ogma  Sun-face, 
the  inventor  of the  Ogham  alphabet,  is  made  perfectly  clear  in  his  Elegy 
on  'Ercwlf  where  the  alphabet  figures  as  the  four  pillars,  of  five  letters 
each, that support  the whole edifice  of literature:

1 34

M A R W N AD  E R C W LF

The earth turns, 
So  night  follows  day. 
When lived the renowned 
Ercwlf,  chiefofbaptism  f 
Ercwlfsaid 
He  did not  take  account  ofdeath. 
The shield of Mordei 
By him  was broken. 
Ercwlf placed in  order, 
Impetuous,  frantic, 
Four columns of equal height, 
Red gold upon them, 
A work not easily to be believed, 
Easily believed it  will not  be. 
The heat ofthe sun did not vex him; 
None went nearer heaven 
Than he went. 
Ercwlf  the  wall-breaker, 
Thou art beneath the sand; 
May  the  Trinity give  thee 
A merciful day of  judgement.

'The  shield  of Mordei'  is  a  reference  to  the  famous  Batde  of Catterick

Bridge in the late sixth century A . D .:

Ym  Mordeiystyngeo  dyledawr. 
'In  Mordei he laid low  the  mighty.''The  shield  of Mordei'  is  a  reference  to  the  famous  Batde  of Catterick

Bridge in the late sixth century A . D .:

Ym  Mordeiystyngeo  dyledawr. 
'In  Mordei he laid low  the  mighty.'

The  'he' is a British hero named Erthgi, presumably a reincarnation of 
Ercwlf, who  'went to  Catterick in the dawn with the aspect of a prince in 
the  shield-guarded  battle-field'.  The  reference  to  Hercules  as  'Chief  of 
Baptism'  identifies  him  with  St.  John  the  Baptist,  in  whose  honour 
Hercules's  midsummer fires were  lighted  in  Gwion's  day.  As  Sir  James 
Frazer  points  out,  Midsummer  D ay  was  always  a  water  as  well  as  a fire 
festival. 'May the Trinity give thee a merciful day of judgement' is Gwion's 
view  of  Hercules  as  resident  'in  limbo  patrum—in  the  abode  of  the  just 
who  had  died  before  Jesus  Christ's  advent.  Baptism  was  not,  of course, 
invented by the Christians. They had it from St. John, and he had it from 
the  Hemero-baptists,  a  mysterious  Hebrew  sect  usually  regarded  as  a 
branch of the Pythagorean Essenes, who worshipped Jehovah in his  Sun-
god  aspect.  It  should  be  observed  that  the  devotees  of the  Thracian  god 
dess  Cotytto,  the  mother  of  the  Cottians,  had  employed  mystagogues

1 35

called  'Baptists'—-whether  this  was  because  they  baptized  the  devotee 
before  the  orgies,  or  because  they  were  charged  with  the  ritual  dipping 
(dyeing)  of clothes  or  hair,  is  disputed—and  that  both  the  ancient  Irish 
and  ancient  British  used  baptism  before  the  Christians  came.  This  is 
recorded  in  the  Irish  tales  of  Conall  Derg  and  Conall  Kernach,  and  the 
Welsh tale of Gwri of the Golden Hair.Taliesin's  name  in  Welsh  means  'radiant  brow',  a  characteristic  of 
Apollo's,  but  the  'TaF  syllable  is  often  present  in  the  primitive  names  of 
Hercules. In  Crete he was Talus, the man of bronze, whom Medea killed. 
In  Pelasgia  he  was  the  tortured  Tan-talus,  from  whose  name  the  word 
'tantalize'  derives.  The  Irish  Tailltean  Games  are  probably  called  after 
an agricultural Hercules the first syllable of whose name was Tal. In Syria 
he  was  Telmen.  In  Greece  he  was  Atlas  Telamon,  and  'Atlas',  like 
'Telamon',  was  derived  from  the  root  Tla  or  Tal  which  contains  the 
senses  'take  upon  oneself,  'dare',  and  'suffer'.  D r.  MacCulloch  suggests 
that  'Taliesin'  is  also  a  divine  name  and  that  the  swallowing  of the  grain 
of  corn  by  the  black  hen  in  the  Romance  of  Taliesin  proves  Taliesin  to 
have been a Barley-god.

The  time  has  now  come  to  draw  closely  around  the  thicket  where  the 
Roebuck  is  known  to  be  harboured.  And  here  is  a  hunting  song  from 
Gwion's  poem,  Angar  Cyvyndawd:

Bum  Twrchym  Mynydd 
Bum cyff mewn rhaw 
Bum  bwallyn  Haw.

I have been a roebuck on the mountain, 
I have been a tree stump in a shovel, 
I have been an axe in the hand.

But  we  must  transpose  the  lines  of the  couplet,  because  logically  the  axe 
comes  first,  then  the  tree  is  cut  down,  and  one  cannot  put  the  oak-stump 
into  one's  shovel  unless  it  has  been  reduced  to  ashes—which  are  after 
wards used to fertilize the fields. So:

I have been a roebuck on the mountain, 
I have been an axe in the hand, 
I have been a tree stump in a shovel.I have been a roebuck on the mountain, 
I have been an axe in the hand, 
I have been a tree stump in a shovel.

If one  looks  carefully  again  at  the  names  of the  fifteen  consonants  of 
the  Boibel-Loth,  or  the  Babel-Lota,  one  notices  clear  correspondences 
with  Greek  legend.  Not  only  'Taliesin'  with  'Talus',  and  'Teilmon'  with 
'Telamon',  but  'Moiria'  with  the  'Moirae',  the Three  Fates;  and  'Cailep' 
with  'Calypso',  daughter  of Atlas,  whose  island  of  Ogygia—placed  by 
Plutarch  in  the  Irish  Seas—was  protected  by  the  very  same  enchantment 
as  Morgan  le  Faye's  Avalon,  Cerridwen's  Caer  Sidi,  or  Niamh  of  the 
1 36

Golden  Hair's  'Land  of Youth'.  Put  the  whole  series  of letter-names  into 
the  nearest  Greek  words  that  make  any  sort  of sense,  using  Latin  char 
acters  and  allowing  for  the  difference  between  Greek  and  Irish  vowels 
(the ancillary I  in  Irish is  used  as  a  sign  of a long  vowel)  and  for trans 
position  of letters.  Retain  the  digamma(ForV)inwords  in which it origi 
nally  occurred,  such  as  ACHAIVA  and  DAVIZO,  and  use  the  Aeolic A  for

long  E,  in   F O R E M E N O S,   N E - E G A T O S,   G E T H E O.

The  consonants  spell  out  the  familiar  story  of  Hercules  in  three

chapters of five words each:

B O I B EL

B

B O I B A L I ON

I,  the  Roebuck  fawn 
(or  Antelope-bull  calf)

L

F

S

N

H

D

T

C

CC

L O T O-

F O R A M E N ON

SALOOMAI

On the Lotus 
Ferried 
Lurch  to  and  fro

N E - A G A T ON

New-born

URIOS

I,  the  Guardian  of  Boundaries

D A V I ZO

(or the Benignant One) 
Cleave wood.

T E L A M ON

I,  the  suffering one

Or  TLAMON

CAIOMAI

Am consumed by fire,

C A L Y P T O M AI  Vanish.

L O TH

F O R A NN

S A L IA

N E I A G A D ON

U I R IA

D A I B H A I TH

T E I L M ON

CAOI

C A I L EP

MOIRIA

G A TH

M  MOIRAO

G

GATHEO

I  distribute,

I rejoice, 
I, the famous  one,

NGOIMAR

NG  GNORIMOS

IDRAN E I A G A D ON

U I R IA

D A I B H A I TH

T E I L M ON

CAOI

C A I L EP

MOIRIA

G A TH

M  MOIRAO

G

GATHEO

I  distribute,

I rejoice, 
I, the famous  one,

NGOIMAR

NG  GNORIMOS

IDRA

RHEA

Y

R

I D R Y O M AI

Establish,

RHEO

I flow away.1

1  As  an  alphabetic  invocation  it  goes  readily  into  English  rhyme,  with  Kn  standing  for  Ng

and  J

for  Y:

B  ull-calfin 
L  otus-cup 
F  erried,  or 
S  waying 
N  ew-dressed,

H  elpful 
D 
ivider,  in 
T  orment, 
C  onsumed  beyond 
Q  uest,

M ete us out 
G  aiety, 
Knightliest

J  udge, 
R  unning west.

1 37

The vowels  do  not  spell  out  a  story but  they  characterize  the  progress 
of Hercules  through the five stations  of the year,  typified  by the five petals 
of  the  Lotus-cup—Birth,  Initiation,  Marriage,  Rest  from  Labour,  and 
Death:

A C H A I VA

O S SA

U R A N IA

The  Spinner—a   title  of Demeter,  the  White  Goddess. 
(Compare  also  Acca  in  the  Roman  Hercules  myth,  and 
Acco  the  Greek  bug-bear  who  devoured  new-born 
children.) 
Fame. (Also the name of a sacred mountain in Magnesia, 
and a sacred hill at Olympia.) 
The  Queen  of  Heaven.  The  word  is  perhaps  derived 
from ouros, a mountain, and ana, queen.  But  Ura  (oura) 
means the  tail of a lion (sacred to Anatha, the Mountain-
goddess,  Queen  of Heaven)  and  since  the  lion expresses 
anger with its tail the word may mean 'The  Queen with 
the  Lion  Tail';  certainly  the  Greek  name  for  the  A s p-
Crown  of Egypt  which  the  Pharaohs  wore  by  mother-
right was  'Uraeus', meaning 'of the  Lion  Tail', the  Asp 
being sacred to the same Goddess.

•

( H ) E S U C H IA   Repose.  The  word  is  probably  shortened  in  honour  of 
the  Celtic  God  Esus,  who  is  shown  in  a  Gaulish  bas-
relief plucking  festal  branches,  with  a  left  hand  where 
his right should be.

I A C H E MA

Shrieking, or Hissing.I A C H E MA

Shrieking, or Hissing.

The  boibalis  or  boibalus  (also  boubalis  or  boubalus)  is  the  ferocious 
Libyan white antelope-ox or leucoryx, from which according to Herodotus 
the  Phoenicians  made  the  curved  sides  of their  lyres—with  which  they 
celebrated Hercules Melkarth.

Gwion's  version  of the  alphabet,  with  Rhea  for  Riuben,  is  older  than 
O'Flaherty's  if  O'Flaherty's  'Riuben'  stands  for  Rymbonao,  'I  swing 
about again'—a word first used in the second century A . D .; the difference 
between  Gwion's  'Salome',  and  O'Flaherty's  'Salia'  also  suggests  that 
Gwion had an  older version.  That he has altered  'Telamon'  to  'Taliesin' 
suggests  that  he  is  offering  Talasinods,  'he  that  dares  to  suffer',  as  an 
alternative  to  'Telamon',  which  has  the  same  meaning.  Ne-esthan,  the 
Greek  Septuagint  transliteration  of 'Nehushtan'  (2  Kings,  XVIII,  4)  as 
an equivalent of ne-agaton is puzzling.  But since Nehushtan was a name of 
contempt,  meaning  'a  piece  of brass',  said  to  have  been  given  by  King 
Hezekiah  to  the  therapeutic  Serpent  or  Seraph  when  idolatrously  wor 
shipped  by  his  subjects,  it  is  possible  that  Gwion  read  the  original  holy 
name as  the  Greek Neo-sthenios,  or Neo-sthenaros,  'with new strength',  of 
which  'Nehushtan'  was  a Hebrew  parody.  This  would  imply  that a  J ew

138

of Hellenistic  times,  not  Hezekiah,  invented  the  parody  name;  which  is 
historically  more  plausible  than  the  Biblical  account.  For  it  is  incredible 
that  Hezekiah  took  exception  to  idolatry:  the  Jews  attempted  to  dispense 
with idols  only in post-Exilic times.But  though  we  have  learned  the  secret  story  of the  Spirit  of the  Year, 
the Name of the transcendent God still remains hidden. The obvious place 
to  look for it is among the vowels, which are separated  from  the Hercules 
story told by the consonants; but Dog, Lapwing, and  Roebuck must have 
learned  wisdom  after  the  Battle  of the  Trees  and  hidden  their secret  more 
deeply even than before.

Gwion evidently knew the  Name,  and  it  was  this knowledge that gave 
him  his  authority  at  Maelgwn's  Court.  He  says  in  the  Cyst  Wy'r  Beirdd 
('Reproof of the Bards'):

Unless you are acquainted with the powerful Name, 
Be  silent,  Heinin! 
As  to  the  lofty Name 
And  the powerful  Name

The best  hope  of guessing  it  lies  in  finding  out first what  the  Name  was 
that  Gwydion  succeeded  in  discovering  with  Amathaon's  aid,  and  then 
what refinement he made on his discovery.

1 39

Chapter  Nine

G W I O N 'S  H E R E SY

The  concentrated  essence  of  Druidic,  as  of  Orphic  Greek,  philo1 39

Chapter  Nine

G W I O N 'S  H E R E SY

The  concentrated  essence  of  Druidic,  as  of  Orphic  Greek,  philo

sophy  was  Rheo,  'I  flow  away',  Gwion's  letter-name  for  R :— 
'Panta  Rhei',  'all  things  flow'.  The  main  problem  of paganism  is 
contained  in  Riuben,  the  alternative  name  for  R,  if  this  stands  for 
Rymbonao:—'Must  all  things  swing  round  again  for  ever?  Or  how  can 
one  escape  from  the  Wheel?'  This  was  the  problem  of the  blinded  Sun-
hero  Samson  when  he  was  harnessed  to  the  corn-mill  of  Gaza;  and  it 
should be noted that the term 'corn-mill'  was applied in  Greek philosophy 
to  the  revolving  heavens.  Samson  resolved  the  problem  magnificently  by 
pulling  down  both  posts  of  the  temple  so  that  the  roof  collapsed  upon 
everyone.  The  Orphics  had  another,  quieter  solution  and  engraved  it  in 
cypher  on  gold  tablets  tied  around  the necks  of their beloved  dead.  It was: 
not  to  forget,  to  refuse  to  drink  the  water  of  cypress-shaded  Lethe  how 
ever  thirsty  one  might  be,  to  accept  water  only  from  the  sacred  (hazel-
shaded?)  pool  of Persephone,  and  thus  to  become  immortal  Lords  of the 
Dead,  excused  further  Tearings-to-Pieces,  Destructions,  Resurrections 
and  Rebirths.  The  cypress  was  sacred  to  Hercules,  who  had  himself 
planted the famous cypress grove at Daphne, and typified rebirth;  and  the 
word  'cypress'  is  derived  from  Cyprus,  which  was  called  after  Cyprian 
Aphrodite,  his  mother.  The cult of the  sacred  cypress is  Minoan in origin 
and must have been brought to Cyprus from Crete.The  Hercules-god  of  the  Orphic  mystics  was  Apollo  the  Hyper 
borean; and in the first century A . D. Aelian, the Roman historian, records 
that  Hyperborean  priests visited  Tempe  in  Northern  Greece regularly to 
worship Apollo.  Diodorus  Siculus in his  quotation  from  Hecataeus makes 
it clear that in the sixth century B.C. the 'land of the Hyperboreans', where 
Apollo's mother Latona was born, and where Apollo was honoured above 
all  other gods, was  Britain.  This  does not contradict  Herodotus's account 
of  an  altogether  different  Hyperborean  priesthood,  probably  Albanian, 
living  near  the  Caspian  Sea;  or  the  view  that  in  Aelian's  time,  Ireland, 
which  lay  outside  the  Roman  Empire,  may  have  been  'the  Land  of the 
Hyperboreans';  or  the  view,  which  I  propose  later  in  this  book,  that  the 
original Hyperboreans were Libyans.

140

Edward  Davies  was  justified  in  regarding  these  British  priests  as 
a  sort  of Orphics:  dress,  dogma,  ritual  and  diet  correspond  closely.  And 
since  Cad  Goddeu  proves  to  have  been  a  battle  of  letters  rather  than  a 
battle  of trees, his suggestion that the  fabulous dance of trees  to  Orpheus's 
lyre  was,  rather,  a  dance  of  letters,  makes  good  historical  and  poetic 
sense.1  Orpheus  is  recorded  by  Diodorus  to  have  used  the  Pelasgian 
alphabet.  That  Gwion  identified  the  Celestial  Hercules  of  the  Boibel-
Loth  with  the  Orphic  Apollo  is  plain  from  this  perfectly  clear  passage 
embedded in the riddling mazes of Cad Goddeu:

It is long since I was a herdsman. 
I travelled over  the  earth 
Before I became  a learnedperson. 
I have  travelled, I have  made  a  circuit, 
I have slept in a hundred islands, 
I have  dwelt in a hundred cities. 
Learned  Druids, 
Prophesy  ye  ofArthur? 
Or is it me  they celebrate?Only  Apollo  can  be  the  T  of  this  passage.  He  was  herdsman  to 
Admetus, the Minyan king of Pherae in Thessaly, several centuries before 
he set up at Delphi as the Leader of the Muses. And as a pre-Greek oracular 
hero he had been laid to rest in a hundred sacred islands.  Once the Greeks 
had  found  it  convenient  to  adopt  him  as  their  god  of healing  and  music, 
hundreds  of  cities  came  to  honour  him  and  by  Classical  times  he  was 
making  his  daily  and  yearly  circuit  as  the  visible  sun.  Gwion  is  hinting 
to  Heinin  and  the  other  court-bards  that  the  true  identity  of  the  hero 
whom  they thoughtlessly eulogize  as  King  Arthur is  Hercules-Dionysus, 
rex  quondam,  rex-que futurus  ('King  once  and  King  again  to  be'),  who 
at  his  second  coming  will  be  the  immortal  Hercules-Apollo.  But  they 
will  not  understand.  'It  is  long  since  I  was  a  herdsman'  will  convey 
nothing to  them but a memory of Triad 85  where the  Three Tribe Herds 
men  of Britain  are  given  as  Gwydion  who  kept  the  herd  of the  tribe  of 
Gwynedd,  Bennren  who kept the herd  of Caradoc son  of Bran consisting1  But  there  may  also  have  been  a  plainer  meaning  for  the  dance  of  trees.  According  to 
Apollonius  Rhodius,  the  wild  oak  trees  which  Orpheus  had  led  down  from  the  Pierian 
mountain  were  still  standing  in  ordered  ranks  in  his  day  at  Zone  in  Thrace.  If  they  were 
arranged  as  if for  dancing  that  would  mean  not in  a  stiff geometrical  pattern,  such  as  a  square, 
triangle  or  avenue,  but  in  a  curved  one.  Zone  ('a  woman's  girdle')  suggests  a  round  dance  in 
honour  of  the  Goddess.  Y et  a  circle  of  oaks,  like  a  fastened  girdle,  would  not  seem  to  be 
dancing:  the  oaks  would  seem  to  be  standing  as  sentinels  around  a  dancing  floor.  T he  dance 
at  Zone  was  probably  an  orgiastic  one  of the  'loosened  girdle':  for  7one  in  Greek  also  means 
marriage,  or the  sexual  act,  the  disrobing  of a  woman.  It is likely  therefore  that a  broad  girdle 
of oaks  planted  in  a  double  rank  was  coiled  in  on  itself  so  that  they  seemed  to  be  dancing 
spirally to  the  centre  and  then out  again.

1 411 41

of 2 1 , 0 00  milch  kine,  and  Llawnrodded  Varvawc  who  kept  the  equally 
numerous  herd  of  Nudd  Hael.  Gwion  had  fetched  his  learning  from 
Ireland,  and  perhaps  from  Egypt,  but  re-grafted  it  on  a  British  stock. 
For though Druidism as an organized religion had been dead in Wales for 
hundreds  of years,  reliques  of Druidic  lore  were  contained  in  the  tradi 
tional  corpus  of  minstrel  poetry,  and  in  popular  religious  ritual.  The 
primitive Druidic cult, which involved  ritual cannibalism after omens  had 
been  taken  from  the  victim's  death  struggle,  had  been  suppressed  by  the 
Roman general Paulinus in 61  A . D. when he conquered Anglesey and cut 
down  the sacred groves;  the continental  Druidism already adopted  by the 
rest of Britain south of the  Clyde was respectable Belin, or Apollo, worship 
of Celto-Thracian type.From  the  Imperial  Roman  point  of  view  Belin-worship  constituted 
no political danger once its central authority, the Druidic Synod at Dreux, 
had  been  broken  by  Caesar's  defeat  of  Vercingetorix  and  animal  victims 
had  been  substituted  for  human  ones.  The  British  priests  were  not  con 
verted  to  Roman  religion,  for the  Roman  Pantheon  was  already  allied  to 
theirs  and  the  Mithras-worship  of the  Roman  legionaries  was  merely  an 
Oriental  version  of  their  own  Hercules  cult.  That  they  should  honour 
the  Emperor  as  the  temporal  incarnation  of  their  variously  named  Sun-
god  was  the  only  religious  obligation  put  upon  them,  and  they  cannot 
have  found  it  a  difficult  one.  When  Christianity  became  the  official 
Roman religion, no attempt was made to coerce the natives into uniformity 
of worship  and  even  in  the  towns  the churches were small  and  poor;  most 
of the  large  pagan  temples  remained  in  operation,  it seems.  There was  no 
religious  problem  in  Britain,  as  there  was  in  Judaea,  until  the  Romans 
withdrew  their  garrisons  and  the  barbarous  Jutes,  Angles  and  Saxons 
poured in from the East, and the civilized  Roman Britons fled before them 
into  Wales  or  across  the  Channel.  But  the  presence  in  England  of these 
barbarians at least protected the Welsh and Irish churches from any effective 
intervention in  their  religious  affairs  by  continental  Catholicism,  and  the 
Archiepiscopal  See  of St.  David's  remained  wholly  independent until  the 
twelfth century, when  the Normans pressed  the right of the Archbishop of 
Canterbury to control it; which was the occasion of the Anglo-Welsh wars.What,  for  the  early  Church  Councils,  seemed  the  most  diabolical  and 
unpardonable  heresy  of  all  was  the 
identification  of  the  Hercules-
Dionysus-Mithras  bulk  whose  living  flesh  the  Orphic  ascetics  tore  and 
ate  in  their  initiation  ceremony,  with  Jesus  Christ  whose  living flesh was 
symbolically  torn  and  eaten  in  the  Holy  Communion.  With  this  heresy, 
which  was  second-century  Egyptian,  went  another,  the  identification  of 
the  Virgin  Mary  with  the  Triple  Goddess.  The  Copts  even  ventured  to 
combine 'the Three Maries'  who  were spectators  of the  Crucifixion into a 
single character, with Mary Cleopas as a type of 'Blodeuwedd', the Virgin

1 42

of  'Arianrhod',  and  Mary  Magdalen  as  the  third  person  of  this  ancient 
trinity,  who  appears  in  Celtic  legend  as  Morgan  le  Faye,  King Arthur's 
sister.  Morgan  in  Irish legend  is  'the  Morrigan',  meaning 'Great  Queen', 
a  Death-goddess  who  assumed  the  form  of a  raven;  and  'le  Faye'  means 
'the Fate'. According to  Cormac's  Glossary the Morrigan was invoked in 
battle by an imitadon on war-horns of a raven's croaking.  She was  by no 
means  the  gentle  character  familiar  to  readers  of the  Morte  D'Arthur  but 
like  the  'black  screaming  hag  Cerridwen'  in  the  Romance  of Taliesin  was 
'big-mouthed, swarthy, swift, sooty, lame, with a cast in her left eye'.Wherever  these  heresies  survived  in  mediaeval  Europe  the  Church 
visited  them  with  such  terrible  penalties  that  British  or  Irish  poets  who 
played  with  them  must  have  derived  a  dangerous  joy  from  wrapping 
them  up,  as  Gwion  has  done  here,  in  riddling  disguises.  One  can  sym 
pathize  with  the  poets,  in  so  far  as  their  predecessors  had  accepted  Jesus 
Christ  without  compulsion  and  had  reserved  the  right  to  interpret 
Christianity  in  the  light  of  their  literary  tradition,  without  interference. 
They  saw  Jesus  as  the  latest  theophany  of the  same  suffering  sacred  king 
whom  they had  worshipped  under various names  from time immemorial. 
As  soon as  the  big stick of Orthodoxy was waved at them  from  Rome or 
Canterbury they felt a pardonable resentment. The first Christian mission 
aries  had  conducted  themselves  with  scrupulous  courtesy  towards  the 
devotees  of  the  pagan  Sun-cult,  with  whom  they  had  much  mystical 
doctrine  in  common.  Celtic  and  pre-Celtic  gods  and  goddesses  became 
Christian saints—for instance, St.  Brigit, whose perpetual sacred fire was 
kept  alight  in  a  monastery  at  Kildare  until  the time of Henry  VIII—and 
heathen  festivals  became  Christianized with  only a slight change of  ritual. 
St  Brigit  according  to  The  Calendar  of  Oengus  retained  her  original  fire-
feast, Feile Brighde,  on  the evening of February  ist.  She was so important 
that bishops were her Master-craftsmen;  one of these,  Connlaed,  is said  to 
have  disobeyed  her and  to have been  thrown  to  the wolves at her  orders. 
She was greeted in the Hymn of Broccan as 'Mother of my Sovereign', and 
in  the  Hymn  of  Ultan  as  'Mother  of  Jesus'.  (She  had  once  been  mother  of 
The  Dagda).  In  The  Book  of  Lismore  she  is  named:  'The  Prophetess  of 
Christ,  the  Queen  of the  South,  the  Mary  of the  Goidels'.  Exactly  the 
same thing had  happened in  Greece  and  Italy, where the  Goddess  Venus 
became  St.  Venere;  the  Goddess  Artemis,  St.  Artemidos;  the  Gods 
Mercury  and  Dionysus,  S S.  Mercourios  and  Dionysius;  the  Sun-god 
Helios,  St.  Elias.  In Ireland,  when  St.  Columcille  founded  his  church 
at  D e ny  ('Oak-wood')  he was  'so  loth  to  fell  certain  sacred  trees  that  he 
turned  his  oratory  to  face  north  rather  than  east'—north,  towards  Caer 
Arianrhod.  A nd  when  he  was  in  Scotland  he  declared  that  'though  he 
feared  Death  and  Hell,  the  sound  of an  axe  in  the  grove  of D e ny  fright 
ened him still more'.  But the  age  of toleration did not last long;  once Irish1 43

princes  lost  the  privilege  of appointing  bishops  from  their  own  sept,  and 
iconoclasts  were  politically  strong  enough  to  begin  their  righteous  work, 
the axes rose and fell on every sacred hill.

It  would  be  unfair  to  call  the  heretical  poets  'apostates'.  They  were 
interested  in  poetic  values  and  relations  rather  than  in  prose  dogma.  It 
must  have  been  irksome  for  them  to  be  restricted  in  their  poem-making 
by ecclesiastical conventions.  'Is it reasonable?'  they may have exclaimed. 
'The Pope, though he permits our typifying Jesus as a Fish, as the Sun, as 
Bread, as the Vine, as a Lamb, as a Shepherd, as a Rock, as a Conquering 
Hero, even as a Winged Serpent, yet threatens us with Hell Fire if we ever 
dare  to  celebrate him in  terms  of the venerable  gods whom He has super 
seded and  from whose ritual every  one of these symbols has been derived. 
Or  if we  trip  over  a  simple  article  of this  extraordinarily  difficult  Athan-
asian  Creed.  We need  no reminder from Rome or  Canterbury that Jesus 
was  the  greatest  of all  Sacred  Kings  who  suffered  death  on  a  tree  for  the 
good  of  the  people,  who  harrowed  Hell  and  who  rose  again  from  the 
Dead  and  that  in  Him  all  prophecies  are  fulfilled.  But  to  pretend  that  he 
was  the first whom  poets  have  ever  celebrated  as having  performed  these 
wonderful  feats  is,  despite  St.  Paul,  to  show oneself either hypocritical or 
illiterate.  So at  his prophesied  Second  Coming we reserve  the right to call 
him Belin or Apollo or even King Arthur.'The  most  virtuous  and  enlightened  of  the  early  Roman  Emperors, 
Alexander  Severus  ( 2 2 2 - 2 35  A . D .)  had  held  almost  precisely  the  same 
view.  He  considered  himself a  reincarnation  of Alexander  the  Great  and, 
according  to  his  biographer  Lampridius,  worshipped  among  his  house-
gods  Abraham,  Orpheus,  Alexander  and  Jesus  Christ.  This  mention 
of Alexander  Severus  suggests  a  reconsideration  of the  discredited  word 
'Helio-Arkite',  which  was  used  at  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth 
century  to  describe  a  hypothetic  heathen  cult  revived  by  the  bards  as  a 
Christian  heresy,  in  which  the  Sun  and  Noah's  A rk  were  the  principal 
objects  of worship.  'Arkite'  without  the  'Helio-',  was  first  used  by  the 
antiquary  J^cob  Bryant  in  1774  in  his Analysis  of Ancient Mythology; but 
the  word  is  incorrecdy  formed  if it  is  to  mean  'Arcian',  or  'Arcensian', 
'concerned with the Ark',  as  Bryant intended,  since  '-ite'  is  a  termination 
which denotes  tribal  or civic origin,  not religious  opinion.  It seems indeed 
as if Bryant had borrowed  the word  'Arkite'  from some ancient work on 
religion and had misunderstood it.

There  is  only  one  famous  Arkite  in  religious  history—this  same 
Alexander Severus, who was called 'the Arkite' because he was born in the 
temple of Alexander the Great at Arka in the Lebanon, where his Roman 
parents  were  attending  a  festival.  His  mother,  Mamea,  was  some  sort  of 
Christian. The Arkites who are mentioned in  Genesis, X, 7, and also in the 
Tell Amarna tablets of 1400 B . C ., were an ancient Canaanite people we 11-
144known for their worship of the Moon-goddess Astarte, or Ishtar, to whom 
the  acacia-wood  ark  was  sacred;  but  Arka,  which  in  the  Tell  Amarna 
tablets  appears  as  'Irkata',  was  not  necessarily  connected  with  the  Indo-
European  root  arc—meaning  'protection',  from  which  we  derive  such 
Latin  words  as  arceo,  'I  ward  off',  area,  'an  ark',  and  arcana,  'religious 
secrets'.  The  Arkites  are  listed  in  Genesis  X  with  the  Amathites,  the 
Lebanon  Hivites  (probably  Achaifites,  or  Achaeans) and  the Gergasites 
of Lower  Galilee,  who  seem  to  have  originated  in  Gergithion  near  T r oy 
and  to  be  the people whom  Herodotus  names  'the remnants of the ancient 
Teucrians'.  The  Arkite  cult,  later  the  Arkite  heresy,  was  Alexander 
Severus's  own  syncretic  religion  and  in  this  sense  of the  word,  Gwion 
may  be  styled  an  Arkite.  The  Sun  and  the  A rk  are,  indeed,  the  most 
important  elements  of  the  Hercules  myth,  and  Ishtar  in  the  Gilgamesh 
Deluge  romance  of  Babylonia,  plays  the  same  false  part  towards  Gil 
gamesh as Blodeuwedd plays to Llew Llaw in the Mabinogion, or Delilah 
to  Samson  in Judges,  or Deianeira  to  Hercules  in  Classical  legend.  It  is 
a  great  pity  that  Bryant's  enthusiastic  followers  tried  to  substantiate  a 
sound  thesis  by  irresponsible  and  even  fraudulent arguments.The complimentary reference to  the See of St.  David in Gwion's riddle 
—it  is  important  to  notice  that  St.  David  himself was a miraculous  child, 
born  from  a  chaste  nun—and  the  anti-English  vaticinations  of a  tenth-
century  poet,  who  also  called  himself Taliesin,  which  are  bound  up  with 
the  Gwion  poems  in  the  Red  Book  oj  Hergest,  suggest  that  Gwion  was 
hopefully  trying to  revive  the Arkite  heresy  and  elevate  it into  a  popular 
pan-Celtic  religion  which  should  also  include  the  Celticized  Danes  of the 
Dublin region and  unite the Bretons, Irish, Welsh, and Scots in a political 
confederacy against the Anglo-Norman-French. If so, nis hopes were dis 
appointed.  The Angevins  were  too  strong:  by  1282  Wales  had  become 
a province of England, the Normans were firmly established at Dublin and 
the head  of Llewellyn Prince of North Wales,  the leader of the nation, had 
been  brought  to  London  and  exhibited  on  Tower  Hill,  crowned with an 
ivy wreath:  in mocking allusion  to  the Welsh prophecy that he should  be 
crowned there. Nevertheless, Gwion's romance continued to be recited, and 
Welsh  nationalism was revived  towards  the end  of the  fourteenth  century 
under Prince Owen Glendower, who had a doubtful claim to descent from 
this  same  Prince  Llewellyn,  the  last  prince  of the royal  line  that had been 
ruling Wales since  the  third  century A . D.  Glendower,  whose  cause  was 
supported  by  a  new  self-styled  'Taliesin',  kept  up  a  desultory  war,  with 
French help, until his death in 1 4 1 6.

It  was  about  that  time  that  D r.  Sion  Kent,  the  parish  priest  of Ken-
church,  complained  of what  seems  to  have  been  the  same  Arkite  heresy, 
since Hu Gadarn, the hero who led the C y m ry into Britain from Taprobane 
(Ceylon), was invoked in it as an allegorical champion of Welsh liberty:

M5M5

Two kinds of inspiration in good truth 
Exist and manifest their course on earth: 
Inspiration  from  sweet-spoken  Christ, 
Orthodox and gladdening the soul, 
And that most unwise other Inspiration, 
Concerned with false andfilthy prophecy 
Received by the devotees of Hu (Gadarn), 
The  unjustly usurping  bards  of IVlies.

The  'false  and  filthy  prophecies'  probably  concerned  the  expulsion  of the 
English from Wales and  the restored independence of the Welsh  Church. 
D r.  Kent,  whose  name  suggests  that  he  was  not  of  Welsh  blood,  was 
naturally  anxious  for  the  future,  especially  since  nationalism  implied  an 
open  return  of the  people  of Kenchurch  to  a  great  many  pagan  supersti 
tions which he spent much of his time trying to suppress; and perhaps, as a 
poet, was also jealous of the influence of the minstrels over his  flock.

That  the  minstrels  continued  to  stir  up  popular  feeling  by  their  anti-
English  vaticinations even  after the  fall  of Owen  Glendower  is  suggested 
by  the  repressive  law  of  Henry  IV  enacted  in  1402:  ' To  eschew  many 
diseases  and  mischiefs  which  have  happened  before  this  time  in  the  Land 
of Wales by many wasters,  rhymers,  minstrels and  other vagabonds. It is 
ordained and stablished that no waster, rhymer, minstrel nor vagabond be 
in  any  wise  sustained  in  the  Land  of Wales  to  make  commorthies'  [i.e. 
kymhorthau,  'neighbourly  gatherings']  'or  gatherings  upon  the  common 
people  there.'  Pennant  in  his  Tours  comments  that  the  object  of  these 
commorthies  was  to  'collect  a  sufficient  number  of  able-bodied  men  to 
make an insurrection'.It is possible that the original  Gwion who  revived Druidism in  Wales, 
as a pan-Celtic political weapon against the English, lived as early as in the 
reign  of Prince  Owain  Gwynedd,  son  of the  gifted  Prince  Grufudd  ap 
Kynan  who first brought  Irish  bards  into  North  Wales;  Owain  reigned 
from  1 1 37  to  1 1 69  and  resisted  the  armies  of King  Henry  II  with  far 
greater  success  than  either  the  Scots,  Bretons  or  Irish.  Cynddelw,  in 
whose poems the word Druid first occurs, addressed  Owain as 'The Door 
of the Druids',  'door'  being mentioned  as a synonym for the princely oak 
in  the  Cad Goddeu.  Owain  may  also  be  the  he"">  celebrated  in  the  badly 
garbled  Song  ofDaronwy,  from  the  Book  of  Taliesin:

In driving back the oppressor across the sea 
What tree has been greater than he, Daronwy?

Daronwy  means  'thunderer',  another  synonym  for  oak,  and  Owain  had 
driven  off  with  heavy  loss  the  sea-borne  expedition  which  Henry  sent 
against Anglesey in 1 1 5 7.

If anyone  should  doubt  that  Gwion  could  have  picked  up  the  Greek 
146

and  Hebrew  knowledge  necessary  to  the  construction  of  this  riddle  in 
Ireland,  here  is  a  passage  from  C.  S.  Boswell's  edition  of  the  tenth-
century Irish Fis Adamnain, "The Vision of St. Adamnain:While the Christian Church of Teutonic England owed its existence, 
in  the  main,  to  the  missionary  enterprise  of  Rome,  the  much  older 
Celtic Churches, and notably the Church of Ireland, were more closely 
connected  with  Gaul  and  the  East.  It  was  to  Gaul  that  Ireland  was 
mainly  indebted  for  its  original  conversion,  and  the  intercourse  be 
tween the two countries remained close and unbroken.  But the  Church 
in  the  south  of  Gaul—and  it  was  the  south  alone  that  preserved  any 
considerable  culture,  or displayed  any missionary activity,  in  the early 
Middle  Ages—had  from  the  very  first  been  closely  in  touch  with  the 
Churches  in  the  East.  The  great  monastery  of  Lerins,  in  which  St. 
Patrick is said to have studied, was founded from Egypt, and for many 
centuries  the  Egyptian  Church  continued  to  manifest  a  lively  interest 
in  Gallic  matters.  Indeed,  not  only Lerins,  but Marseilles,  Lyons,  and 
other  parts  of Southern  Gaul  maintained  a  constant  intercourse  with 
both Egypt and  Syria,  with  the  natural  result that many institutions  of 
the  Gallic  Church,  despite  its  increasing  subjection  to  Rome,  dating 
from  the  year  244,  bore  the  impress  of Oriental  influences.  Hence  the 
close  relations  with  Gaul  maintained  by  the  Irish  churchmen  and 
scholars necessarily brought them into contact with their Egyptian and 
Syrian  brethren,  and  with  the  ideas  and  practices  which  prevailed  in 
their respective Churches.Nor  was  Ireland's  connection  with  the  East  confined  to  the  inter 
mediary of Gaul.  Irish  pilgrimages to Egypt continued  until  the end  of 
the  eighth  century,  and  Dicuil  records  a  topographical  exploration  of 
that  country  made  by  two  Irishmen,  Fidelis  and  his  companion. 
Documentary  evidence  is  yet  extant,  proving  that  even  home-keeping 
Irishmen  were  not  debarred  from  all  acquaintance  with  the  East.  The 
Saltair  na  Rann  contains  an  Irish  version  of  the  Book  of  Adam  and  Eve, 
a work written  in Egypt in  the fifth or sixth  century, of which no men 
tion  outside  of Ireland  is  known.  Adamnain's  work,  De  Locis  Sanctis, 
contains  an  account  of the  monastery  on  Mount  Tabor,  which  might 
stand  for  the  description  of an  Irish  monastic  community  of his  day. 
Indeed,  the  whole  system  both  of the  anchoretic  and  coenobitic  life  in 
Ireland corresponds closely to that which prevailed in Egypt and Syria; 
the  monastic  communities,  consisting  of  groups  of  detached  huts  or 
beehive  cells,  and  of the  other  earliest  examples  of Irish  ecclesiastical 
architecture, all suggest Syrian  origin;  and  D r.  G.  T.  Stokes holds that 
'the  Irish  schools  were  most  probably  modelled  after  the  forms  and 
rules of the Egyptian Lauras'.

147147

But it was not only Syrian and Egyptian influences to which Ireland 
was  subjected  by  its  intercourse  with  South  Gaul.  The  civilization  of 
that country was essentially Greek, and so remained for many centuries 
after  the  Christian  era;  and  this  circumstance  no  doubt  contributed  to 
the  well-known  survival  of  Greek  learning  in  the  Irish  schools,  long 
after  it  had  almost  perished  in  the  rest  of Western  Europe.  It  is  not  to 
be  supposed  that  this  learning  was  characterized  by  accuracy  of 
scholarship,  or  by  a  wide  acquaintance  with  Classical  literature;  but 
neither was it always restricted  to a mere smattering of the language or, 
to passages and quotations  picked  up  at second-hand. Johannes  Scotus 
Erigena  translated  the  works  of  the  pseudo-Areopagite;  Dicuil  and 
Firghil  (Virgilius,  Bishop  of  Salzburg),  studied  the  Greek  books  of 
Science;  Homer,  Aristotle, and  other  Classical  authors  were known  to 
some  of the  Irish  writers;  several  of the  Irish  divines  were  acquainted 
with  the  Greek  Fathers  and  other  theological  works.  Nor  were  the 
Greeks  in  person  unknown  to  Ireland.  Many  Greek  clerics  had  taken 
refuge  there  during  the  Iconoclast  persecution,  and  left  traces  which 
were  recognizable  in  Archbishop  Ussher's  day;  and  the  old  poem  on 
the  Fair  of  Carman  makes  mention  of  the  Greek  merchants  who 
resorted thither.It  is  thus  apparent  that  the  Irish  writer  possessed  ample  means  of 
becoming  acquainted  with  the  traditions,  both  oral  and  written,  of the 
Greek  and  Eastern  Churches.  The  knowledge  thus  acquired  extended 
to the Apocalyptic Visions, as  is  proved by internal evidence furnished 
by the Irish Visions,  both  by  way of direct  reference,  and  by the  nature 
of their  contents.  It  remains  to  see  how  far  the  predilection  which  the 
Irish  writers  manifested  for  this  class  of  literature,  and  the  special 
characteristics  which  it  assumes  in  their  hands,  may  have  been  deter 
mined by their familiarity with analogous ideas already existing in their 
national literature.

At  the  period  in  question,  the  traditional  literature  of Ireland  would 
appear to  have  entered  into  the  national  life  to  no  less  a  degree  than  in 
Greece itself.  Indeed,  in  certain  respects,  it  was  still  more  closely  inter 
woven with  the  habits  of the  people  and  the  framework  of society  than 
in  Greece,  for  the  literary  profession  was  provided  for  by  a  public 
endowment,  something  like  that  of  an  established  National  Church, 
and  its  professors  constituted  a  body  organized  by  law,  and  occupying 
a recognized position in the State.

The  reiterated  'I  have  been'  and  'I  was'  of  Gwion's  Hemes  Taliesin 
riddle  suggests  that  the  Boibel-Loth  alphabet,  which  is  the  solution, 
originally  consisted  of  twenty  mystical  titles  of  a  single  Protean  male 
deity,  corresponding with his  seasonal  changes;  and  that  these  titles  were

148148

kept  secret,  at  first  because  of their invocatory  power,  later  because  they 
were  regarded  as  heretical  by  the  Christian  Church.  But  why  does  the 
Boibel-Loth  contain  so  many  approximations  to  Biblical  names,  taken 
from  Genesis and Exodus, which in Christian times had lost their religious 
importance: Lot, Telmen, Jachin, Hur, Caleb, Ne-esthan—all names con 
cerned with Sinai, Southern Judaea and the Edomite Dead Sea region?

This  is  the  region  in  which  the  Essene  communities  were  settled  from

about 1 50 B . C. to 1 32 A . D. The Essenes appear to have been an offshoot of 
the  Therapeutae,  or  Healers,  an  ascetic  Jewish  sect  setded  by  Lake 
Mareotis  in Egypt;  Pliny  described  them  as  the  strangest  religious  body 
in  the world.  Though Jews,  and a sort of Pharisees at that,  they believed 
in  the  Western  Paradise—of which  precisely  the  same  account  is  given 
by  Josephus  when  describing  Essene  beliefs  as  by  Homer,  Hesiod  and 
Pindar—and, like the later Druids, in the return of pure souls to  the Sun, 
whose  rising  they  invoked  every  day.  They  also  avoided  animal  sacri 
fices,  wore  linen  garments,  practised  divination,  meditated  within  magic 
circles,  were  expert  in  the  virtues  of plants  and  precious  stones  and  are 
therefore  generally supposed  to  have  been under the  philosophic  influence 
of  Pythagoras,  the  ascetic  pupil  of  Abaris  the  Hyperborean.  They  re 
frained  from worshipping  at  the  Jerusalem  Temple,  perhaps  because  the 
custom  of bowing  to  the  East  at  dawn  had  been  discontinued  there,  and 
exacted the penalty of death from anyone who blasphemed  God  or Moses.Since  among  the  Jerusalem  Pharisees,  Moses  as  a  man  could  not  be 
blasphemed,  it  follows  that  for  the Essenes  he  had  a  sort  of divinity.  T he 
story of Moses in the Pentateuch was the familiar one of Canopic Hercules 
—the  God who was  cradled in an ark  on  the river Nile,  performed  great 
feats, died mysteriously on a mountain-top, and afterwards became a hero 
and  judge.  But  it  is  plain  that  the  Essenes  distinguished  the  historic 
Moses,  who  led  the  Israelites  out  of Egypt,  from  the  demi-god  Moses; 
just  as  the  Greeks  distinguished  the  historic  Hercules,  Prince  of Tiryns, 
from Celestial Hercules. In  Chapter Twenty-Five I shall give reasons for 
supposing that though the Essenes adapted  the Greek formula of Celestial 
Hercules to their cult of Moses as demi-god, and though they seem to have 
been  disciples  of  Pythagoras,  it  was  from  a  sixth-century  B.C.  Jewish 
source  that  the  Pythagoreans  derived  the  new  sacred  name  of God  that 
the  tribes  of Amathaon  and  Gwydion  established  in  Britain  about  the 
year 400 B.C.

The Essene initiates, according to Josephus, were sworn to keep secret 
the names of the Powers who ruled  their universe under  God. Were these 
Powers  the  letters  of the  Boibel-Loth  which,  together,  composed  the  life 
and  death story of their demi-god  Moses?  'David'  may seem  to belong to 
a later context than the others,  but it is  found as a royal title in a sixteenth-
century B.C. inscription; and the Pentateuch was not composed until long

149

after  King  David's  day.  Moreover,  David  for  the  Essenes  was  the  name 
of the promised Messiah.149

after  King  David's  day.  Moreover,  David  for  the  Essenes  was  the  name 
of the promised Messiah.

If all  the  vowel  names  of the  Boibel-Loth,  not  merely  Jaichin,  are  pre 
ceded  by  a  J,  they  become  Jacab,  Jose,  Jura,  Jesu,  Jaichin—which  are 
Jacob, Joseph, Jerah, Joshua and Jachin, all names of tribes mentioned in 
Genesis.  The  Essene  series  of  letter-names,  before  Gwion  in  his  riddle 
altered  some  of them  to  names  taken  from  the  N ew  Testament,  the  Book 
of Enoch,  and  Welsh  and  Latin  mythology,  may  be  reconstructed  as 
follows:

Jacob 
Joseph 
Jerah 
Joshua 
Jachin

Babel 
Lot 
Ephron 
Salem 
Ne-esthan

Hur 
David 
Telmen 
Kohath 
Caleb

Moriah 
Gad 
Gomer 
Jethro

Reu

Of these,  only  four  names  are  not  those  of clans  or  tribes,  namely:  Babel, 
the  home  of wisdom;  Moriah,  Jehovah's  holy  mountain;  Salem,  his  holy 
city;  Ne-esthan, his sacred  serpent.  It seems possible,  then,  that the Essene 
version  of the  Boibel-Loth  letter-names  was  brought  to  Ireland  in  early 
Christian  times,  by  Alexandrian  Gnostics  who  were  the  spiritual  heirs  of 
the  Essenes  after  Hadrian  had  suppressed  the  Order  in  1 32  A . D.  D r. 
Joyce  in  his  Social  History  of Ancient  Ireland  records  that  in  times  of 
persecution  Egyptian  monks  often  fled  to  Ireland;  and  that  one  Palladius 
was  sent  from  Rome  to  become  a  bishop  of  the  Irish  Christians  long 
before the arrival of St. Patrick.The  alphabet  itself was plainly not  of Hebrew  origin:  it was a  Canopic 
Greek  calendar-formula  taken  over  by  Greek-speaking  Jews  in  Egypt, 
who  disguised  it with  the  names  of Scriptural  characters  and  places.  As  I 
suggest  in  my  King Jesus,  it  is  likely  that  in  Essene  usage  each  letter  be 
came  a  Power attendant  on  the  Son  of Man—Moses as  Celestial  Hercules 
—who  was  subservient  to  the  Ancient  of Days,  Jehovah  as  the  Trans 
cendent  God.  It  is  recorded  that  the  Essene  novice  wore  a  blue  robe,  the 
adept  a  white  one.  Was  this  because  the  novice  was  still  'lotus-borne', 
that is to say, not yet initiated? The Egyptian lotus was blue. I also suggest 
in  King  Jesus  that  the  two  mysterious  Orders  of  the  Essenes,  Samp-
sonians  and  Helicaeans,  were  adepts  in  the  calendar  mysteries  and  were 
named  after  Samson  (the  second  s  is  a ps  in  some  Greek  texts)  the  sun-
hero  and  the Helix,  or cosmic  circle.  (An  Essene  who  wished  to  meditate 
would  insulate  himself from  the  world  within  a  circle  drawn  around  him 
on  the sand.)  The  twenty  Powers  of the  Babel-Lot  will  have  been  among 
those  distastefully  mentioned  by  St.  Paul  in  Galatians  IV,  8-10  as  'weak 
and  cringing  Elements  (stoicheia)'.  The  back-sliding  Galatian  Jews  were 
now  again  worshipping  such  Powers  as gods,  with  careful  observation  of

1 50

the  calendar.  In  I  Corinthians,  XV,  24-25  he  claims  that  they  have  been 
vanquished  by  Jesus  Christ  who  alone  mediates  with  the  Father.  Paul's 
influence was decisive:  to the orthodox Church they soon became demons, 
not agents  of the Divine Will.The Essenes invoked  angels  in their mysteries.  Here is something odd: 
that  the  'Hounds  of Heme  the  Hunter',  or  the  'Dogs  of Annwm',  which 
hunt  souls  across  the  sky  are,  in  British  folklore,  also  called  'Gabriel 
ratches'  or  'Gabriel  hounds'.  W hy  Gabriel?  W as  it  because  Gabriel, 
whose  day  was  Monday,  ran  errands  for  Sheol  (the  Hebrew  Hecate) 
and  was  sent  to  summon  souls  to  Judgement?  This  was  Hermes's  task, 
and Heme, a British oak-god whose memory survived in Windsor Forest 
until  the eighteenth  century,  is  generally  identified  with  Hermes.  Gabriel 
and Heme are equated in the early thirteenth-century carvings around the 
church  door  at  Stoke  Gabriel  in  South  Devon.  The  angel  Gabriel  looks 
down  from  above,  but  on  the  right  as  one  enters  are  carved  the  wild 
hunter,  his  teeth  bared  in  a  grin  and  a  wisp  of hair  over  his  face,  and  a 
brace  of his  hounds  close  by.  But  Hermes  in  Egypt,  though  Thoth  in 
one  aspect,  in  another  was  the  dog-headed  god  Anubis,  son  of Nepthys 
the Egyptian Hecate; so Apuleius pictures him in the pageant at the end of 
The  Golden  Ass as  'his  face sometimes  black,  sometimes  fair,  lifting up  the 
head  of  the  D og  Anubis'.  This  makes  the  equation  Gabriel = Heme = 
Hermes = Anubis.  But  was  Gabriel  ever  equated  with  Anubis  in  ancient 
times?  By a piece  of good  luck an Egyptian  gem  has  been  found  showing 
Anubis with palm  and  pouch  on the obverse,  and  on  the  reverse an arch 
angel  described  as  GABRIER  SABAO,   which  means  'Gabriel  Sabaoth',  the 
Egyptians  having,  as  usual,  converted  the  L  into  an  R.  (This  gem  is 
described  in  de  Haas's  Bilderatlas.)  Then  is  'Annwm',  which  is  a  con 
tracted form of 'Annwfn', a Celtic version of'Anubis'? The B of Anubis 
would naturally turn into an F in Welsh.So  much  nonsense  has  been  written  about  the  Essenes  by  people  who 
have  not  troubled  to  find  out  from  Josephus,  Pliny  the  Elder,  Philo  the 
Byblian  and  others,  who  they were  and  what  they believed,  that  I should 
not bring  them  into  this  story if it were  not  for a  poem  of Gwion's called 
Yr  Awdil  Vraith,  ('Diversified  Song').  The  text  in  the  Peniardd  MSS  is 
incomplete,  but  in  some  stanzas  preferable  to  that  of  the  Red  Book  of 
Hergest:

1  The  All-Being made,

Down  the Hebron  Vale, 
With  his plastic  hands, 
Adam  s  fair  form:

Andfive  hundred years, 
Void of any help,

There he lingered and lay 
Without  a  soul.

He  again  did  form, 
In  calm paradise, 
From a left-side rib,

Bliss-throbbing  Eve.

Seven hours they were 
The orchard keeping, 
Till Satan  brought  strife,

The  Lord of Hell.

5  Thence were they driven,

Cold and shivering, 
To gain  their living, 
Into  this  world.

To bring forth with pain 
Their sons  and daughters, 
To have possession

Of  Asia's  land.

Twice five, ten and eight, 
She  was self-bearing, 
The mixed burden

Ofman-woman.

And once,  not hidden, 
She brought forth Abel, 
And Cain  the  solitary 
Homicide.

To him and his mate 
Was given  a  spade, 
To break up the soil,

Thus  to get bread.

IO The wheat pure and white,

In tilth to sow, 
Every  man  to feed,

Till  great yule  feast.

An angelic hand 
From the high Father, 
Brought seed for growing

That  Eve  might  sow;

' 5*

But she then did hide 
Of the gift a tenth, 
And all did not sow

In what was dug.

Black rye then was found, 
And not pure  wheat grain, 
To show the mischief, 
Thus of thieving.

For this thievish act, 
It is  requisite, 
That  all men  shouldpay

Tithe unto God.

15 Of the ruddy wine,

Planted on  sunny days, 
And the white wheat planted

On new-moon nights;

The wheat rich in grain, 
And red flowing wine 
Christ's pure body make, 
Son of Alpha.15 Of the ruddy wine,

Planted on  sunny days, 
And the white wheat planted

On new-moon nights;

The wheat rich in grain, 
And red flowing wine 
Christ's pure body make, 
Son of Alpha.

The wafer is flesh, 
The wine, spilt blood, 
The words of the Trinity

Consecrate them.

The concealed books 
From Emmanuel's hands 
Were brought by Raphael 
As  Adam's  gift.

When in his old age, 
To his chin immersed 
In Jordan's  water,

He  kept  a  fast.

20  Twelve  young  men,

Four of them angels, 
Sent forth branches

From  the flower Eve.

To give  assistance,

In every trouble,

*53

In  all oppression,

While  they wandered.

Very great  care 
Possessed  mankind, 
Until  they  obtained

The tokens of grace.

Moses  obtained 
In great necessity 
The aid of the three

Dominical  rods.

Solomon obtained 
In  Babel's  tower, 
All the sciences

Of Asia's  land.

25 So did I obtain

In my bardic  books, 
Asia's  sciences,

Europe's  too.

I know  their  arts, 
Their course  and destiny, 
Their going and coming 
Until the  end.

Oh!  what  misery, 
Through extreme of woe, 
Prophecy  will show

On  Troia's  race!

A chain-wearing  serpent, 
The pitiless  hawk 
With  winged weapons, 
From  Germany.

Loegria  and Britain 
She  will overrun, 
From  Lychlyn sea-shore 
To the Severn.

30  Then will the Britons

As prisoners be

By  strangers  swayed

From  Saxony.

154

Their  Lord  they  will  praise, 
Their speech  they will keep, 
Their  land they will lose,

Except  Wild  Wales.

Till some change shall come, 
After long penance, 
When shall be made equal

The pride of birth.

Britons  then shall have 
Their land and their crown, 
And the  stranger  swarm 
Shall vanish  away.

All the  angel's  words, 
As  to peace  and war, 
Will thus be fulfilled

To  Britain's  race.Britons  then shall have 
Their land and their crown, 
And the  stranger  swarm 
Shall vanish  away.

All the  angel's  words, 
As  to peace  and war, 
Will thus be fulfilled

To  Britain's  race.

The  creation  of Adam  in  Hebron  rather  than  in  Lower  Mesopotamia 
is  startling:  for  many  Biblical  scholars  now  regard  the  first  three  chapters 
of Genesis as a Jerahmeelite  legend  from  the Negeb  of Judaea, which  was 
taken  over  by  the  Israelites  and  became  Babylonianized  during  the 
Captivity.  Jerahmeel  ('beloved  of  the  moon')  is  yet  another  name  for 
Canopic  Hercules.  D r.  Cheyne  restores  the  text  of  Genesis,  II,  8,  as 
'Yahweh planted a garden in Eden of Jerahmeel.' He writes:

T he  Jerahmeelites,  from  whom  the  Israelites  took  the  story,  prob 
ably located Paradise on a vastly high mountain, sometimes in a garden, 
in  some  part  of  Jerahmeelite  territory.  The  mountain  with  a  sacred 
grove  on  its  summit  has  dropped  out  of the  story  in  Genesis,  II but  is 
attested  in  Eiekiel;  and  in  the  Ethiopian  Enoch,  XXIV the  tree  of life  is 
placed  in  a  mountain  range  to  the  south.  As  to  the  locality,  if  it  be 
correct that by the Hebrew phrase 'a land  flowing  with milk and honey' 
a  part  of the  Negeb  was  originally  meant  (Numbers,  XIII,  23,  23),  we 
might  infer  that  this  fruitful  land  with  its  vines,  pomegrante  trees  and 
fig  trees  (see  Genesis,  III,  y)  had  once  upon  a  time  been  the  Jerah 
meelite  Paradise.The Hebron  valley in Soudiern Judaea is four thousand feet above sea-
level  and  before  agriculture  started  the  process  of  soil-erosion  (which, 
according  to  Walter  Clay  Lowdermilk's  recent  survey  of Palestine,  has 
taken  an  average  of three  feet  of soil  from  the  whole  country),  must  have 
been  wonderfully  fertile.  D r.  Cheyne  was  apparendy  unaware  of  this 
poem  of  Gwion's,  the  substance  of  which  can  have  come  only  from  a 
Hebrew  source  uncontaminated  by  the  Babylonian  epic  which  the  Jews

picked  up  in  their  Captivity,  and  it  is  difficult  to  see  from  whom,  other 
than  the Essenes; especially as  Gwion explains  that the books  from  which 
he  derives  his  wisdom  were  originally  brought  to  Adam  of  Hebron  by 
the angel Raphael. In Tobit and The Book of Enoch Raphael is described as 
the  angel  of healing  and  must  therefore  have  been  the  chief patron  of the 
therapeutic  Essenes.  'Emmanuel'  refers  to  Isaiah's  prophecy  of the  birth 
of the Divine Child from a virgin: Jesus as Hercules.

The story of Adam  fasting in Jordan with water to his  chin is  found  in 
the  tenth-century  Irish  Saltair na  Rann,  and  in  the  early  mediaeval  Life of 
Adam  and Eve,  on  which  the  Saltair  is  based;  when  Adam  fasted,  accord 
ing  to  the  Saltair,  God  rewarded  him  with  pardon.  But  no  source  is 
known  for  the  dispensation  of  wisdom  to  Moses  by  means  of  three 
Dominical  rods  (i.e.  the  rods  of Sunday).  It may  be Essene  tradition,  for 
Sunday was  the Essenes'  great day, and recalls a reference to three  rowan 
sods  in  one  of the  Iolo  manuscripts.  Sir  John  Rhys  regards  this  manu 
script as genuine:

Then Menw ap  Teirgwaedd took the  three rowan-rods growing out 
of the  mouth  of Einigan  Gawr,  and  learned  all  the  kinds  of knowledge 
and  science written  on  them,  and  taught  them  all,  EXCEPT  THE  NAME  OFG OD   WHICH  H AS   O R I G I N A T ED   THE  B A R D IC   S E C R E T,   and  blessed  is  he  who 
possesses it.

T he end  of the  poem,  from  stanza  27  onwards,  is  a  separate  piece,  not 
Gwion's work,  dating  perhaps  from  the year  1 2 10 when,  in  the  reign  of 
King Llewelyn  ap  Iowerth,  King John  of England  invaded  North Wales 
and temporarily conquered it.

D r.  Ifor Williams has expressed surprise that in  the middle of Gwion's

Cad Goddeu occurs  the  Triad:

The three greatest tumults of the world— 
The  Deluge,  the  Crucifixion,  the Day of Judgement.

This  seems  to  be  a  variant  text  of  the  lines  I  have  printed  from  Nash's 
translation, and which occur twice in the poem:

One of them relating 
The story of the Deluge 
And of the Cross of Christ 
And ofthe  Day of  Judgement  near  at  hand.

D r.  Williams's  version  makes  perfect sense  also  in  the  Boibel-Loth  story 
of Hercules  riding on  the flood  in his  golden cup—sacrificed  on  the moun 
tain—judging and  establishing.  The Aposdes'  Creed,  indeed,  is  the same 
old  story—'conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  born  of  the  Virgin  M a r y— 
suffered, was crucified—shall come to judge the quick and the dead.'

156156

It  is  possible  that  the  Apostles'  Creed,  the  earliest  Latin  version  of 
which 
is  quoted  by  the  second-century  Tertullian,  was  originally 
composed by some Gnostic Christian in Egypt and syncretically modelled 
on  the  Hercules  formula.  For  'conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost',  when  read 
in the Gnostic light, has a direct reference to the Flood. In Gnostic theory 
—the  Gnostics first appear as a sect  in  the first century B.C.—Jesus was 
conceived  in  the  mind  of God's  Holy  Spirit,  who  was  female  in  Hebrew 
and,  according  to  Genesis  I,  2,  'moved  on  the  face  of  the  waters'.  The 
Virgin  Mary  was  the  physical  vessel  in which  this  concept was  incarnate 
and 'Mary'  to the Gnostics meant 'Of the Sea'.  The male Holy Ghost is  a 
product  of Latin  grammar—spiritus  is  masculine—and  of early  Christian 
mistrust  of female  deities  or  quasi-deities.  Conception  by  a  male  principle 
is  illogical  and  this  is  the  only  instance  of  its  occurrence  in  all  Latin 
literature.  The masculinization of the Holy Spirit was assisted by a remark 
in  the  First  Epistle  of St.  John,  that  Jesus  would  act  as  a  paraclete  or 
advocate for man with God the Father; in the Gospel of St. John the same 
figure  is  put in Jesus's own mouth in  a promise that God will send  them a 
paraclete  (usually  translated  'comforter')  after  he  has  gone;  and  this 
paraclete,  a masculine noun, understood  as  a mystical emanation of Jesus, 
was  wrongly  identified  with  the  archaic  Spirit  that  moved  on  the  face  of 
the waters.  The Gnostics, whose  language was  Greek, identified  the Holy 
Spirit  with  Sophia,  Wisdom;  and  Wisdom  was  female.  In  the  early 
Christian  Church  the  Creed  was  uttered  only  at  baptism,  which  was  a 
ceremony  of  initiation  into  the  Christian  mystery  and  at  first  reserved 
for  adults;  baptism  was  likewise  a  preliminary  to  participation  in  the 
Greek  mysteries  on which  the  Christian were modelled, as in  the Druidic 
mysteries.T he town of Eleusis, where the most famous mysteries of all took place, 
was said to be named after the Attic King Eleusis. Eleusis means 'Advent' 
and the word was adopted in the  Christian mysteries to signify the arrival 
of the Divine Child; in English usage it comprises  Christmas and the four 
preceding  weeks.  The  mother  of  Eleusis  was  'Daeira,  daughter  of 
Oceanus',  'the  Wise  One  of the  Sea',  and  was  identified  with  Aphrodite, 
the  Minoan  Dove-goddess  who  rose  from  the  sea  at  Paphos  in  Cyprus 
every  year  with  her  virginity  renewed.  King  Eleusis  was  another  name 
for  the  Corn-Dionysus,  whose  life-story  was  celebrated  at  the  Great 
Mysteries,  a  Harvest  Thanksgiving  festival  in  late  September;  and  his 
father was sometimes said  to  be  Ogygus,  or Ogyges,  the Theban king in 
whose  reign  the  great  flood  took  place  which  engulfed  the  corn-lands  of 
Boeotia.  At  an  early  stage  of the  yearly  Eleusinian  Mysteries  the  Divine 
Child,  son  of the  Wise  One  who  came  from  the  Sea,  was  produced  by 
mystagogues,  dressed  as  shepherds,  for  the  adoration  of  the  celebrants. 
He  was  seated  in  a  liknos,  or  osier  harvest-basket.  To  judge  from  the

I J7I J7

corresponding  myths  of Moses,  Taliesin,  Llew  Llaw,  and  Romulus,  the 
mystagogues declared  that diey found him on the river bank where he had 
landed  after  sailing  over  the  flood  in  this  same  harvest-basket,  caulked 
with  sedge.  It  will  shortly  be  mentioned  that  the  liknos  was  used  not 
only  as  harvest-basket,  manger  and  cradle,  but  also  as  winnowing  sieve; 
the  method  was  to  shovel  up  the  corn  and  chaff together  while  the  wind 
was  blowing  strong  and  sieve  them  through  the  osiers;  the  chaff  was 
blown away and the corn fell in a heap. The Mysteries probably originated 
as  a  winnowing  feast,  for  they  took  place  some  weeks  after  the  wheat-
harvest, and at  the time of the equinoctial winds.An  interesting  survival  of  these  winnowing-feast  mysteries  is  the 
Majorcan  xiurell,  or  white  clay  whistle,  decorated  in  red  and  green,  and 
hand-made  in  the  traditional  shapes  of  mermaid,  coiled  serpent,  bull-
headed  man,  full-skirted  woman  with  a  round  hat  rocking  a  baby  in  her 
arms,  or with  a flower instead  of a baby,  the same with  a moon-disk sur 
mounted by cow's horns, man  with a tall peaked hat and arms upraised in 
adoration,  and  litde  man  riding  on  a  hornless,  prick-eared,  long-legged 
animal with a very short muzzle. It figures, with quince-boughs and boughs 
of the  sorb-apple,  in  an  ecclesiastical  festival  held  at  the  village  of Bona-
nova near Palma when the villagers perambulate a hill at night on  the first 
Sunday after the  12th  of September (the Feast of the Blessed  Name of the 
Virgin  Mary)  which  corresponds with  the  23rd  of September  Old  Style. 
The  object of the  whistle  must originally have  been  to  induce  the North-
East  winnowing  winds  which,  according  to  the  local  almanack,  begin  to 
blow  at  this  season  and  which  at  the  end  of  the  month  summon  rain 
clouds  from  the  Atlantic  Ocean  to  soak  the  winter wheat  planted  earlier 
in  the  month.  But  this  is  forgotten:  winnowing  in  Majorca  is  now  done 
at  any  time  after  the  harvest  and  not  celebrated  with  any  festivities.  The 
mermaid,  locally called  a  'siren',  evidently represents  Daeira  (Aphrodite) 
the  moon-mother  of Eleusis  (the  Corn-Dionysus  who  is  shown  with  her 
in  the woman-and-baby xiurell);  the bull-headed man is Dionysus himself 
grown  to  manhood;  the  man  in  the  hat  is  a  Tutor,  or gran  mascara;  the 
little  rider is  likely  to  be  Dionysus  again  but  the  species  of his  tall  mount 
is  indeterminate.  The  quince-boughs,  sorb-boughs,  and  the  white  clay 
are also in honour of the Goddess—now invoked as the Virgin Mary. The 
Serpent is  the wind itself.  Since this is the only time of the year when wind 
is  welcomed by the Majorcans who,  being largely arboricultural,  fear the 
sirocco  as  they  fear  the  Devil—the  farmer's  purse,  as  they say,  hangs  on 
the  bough  of  a  tree—the  sound  of  whisding  is  not  heard  in  the  island 
except  in  the  xiurell season.  The  ploughman  sings  as  he  drives  his  mule 
and  the  schoolboy  as  he  runs  home  from  school;  for  the  rest  furbis,flabis, 
flebis—'whistle  shrill,  weep  long'.  More  about  the  White  Goddess  and 
whisding for wind will be found in Chapter Twenty-Four.1 58

'King  Ogygus'  is  a  name  invented  to  explain  w hy  Eleusis  was  called 
'Ogygiades'.  There  was  really  no  such  king  as  Eleusis:  Eleusis  signified 
the  Advent  of the  Divine  Child.  And  the  Child  was  not  really  a  son  of 
Ogygus:  he  was  the  son  of the  Queen  of the  Island  of Ogygia,  namely 
Calypso.  And  Calypso was Daeira, or Aphrodite, again—the Wise One 
of the Sea,  the spirit who moved upon  the face of the waters.  The fact was 
that, like Taliesin and Merlin and Llew Llaw and probably in the original 
version  Moses1 too, Eleusis  had no  father, only a  virgin mother; he origi 
nated before  the institution  of fatherhood.  To  the  patriarchal  Greeks this 
seemed  shameful  and  they  therefore  fathered  him  on  either  'Ogygus'  or 
Hermes—but  more  generally  on  Hermes  because  of the  sacred  phalluses 
displayed  at  the  festival,  heaped  in  the  same  useful  liknos.  T he  Vine-
Dionysus  once  had  no  father,  either.  His  nativity  appears  to  have  been 
that  of an  earlier  Dionysus,  the  Toadstool-god;  for  the  Greeks  believed 
that  mushrooms  and  toadstools  were  engendered  by  lightning—not 
sprung  from  seed  like  all  other  plants.  When  the  tyrants  of  Athens, 
Corinth  and  Sicyon  legalized  Dionysus-worship  in  their  cities,  they 
limited  the  orgies,  it  seems,  by  substituting  wine  for  toadstools;  thus  the 
myth  of the  Toadstool-Dionysus  became  attached  to  the Vine-Dionysus, 
who  now  figured  as  a  son  of  Semele  the  Theban  and  Zeus,  Lord  of 
Lightning.  Yet  Semele  was  sister  of  Agave,  who  tore  off  her son  Pen-
theus's  head  in  a  Dionysiac  frenzy.  To  the  learned  Gwion  the  Vine-
Dionysus  and  the  Corn-Dionysus  were  both  recognizably  Christ,  Son 
of Alpha—that is, son of the letter A:

The wheat rich in grain, 
And red flowing wine 
Christ's pure  body make, 
Son of Alpha.The wheat rich in grain, 
And red flowing wine 
Christ's pure  body make, 
Son of Alpha.

According  to  the  Talmudic  Targum  Yerushalmi  on  Genesis  II,  y, 
Jehovah took dust from the centre of the earth and from all quarters of the 
earth and mingled it with waters of all the seas to create Adam. The angel 
Michael  collected  the  dust.  Since  the  Jewish  rabbis  preferred  to  alter 
rather  than  destroy  ancient  traditions  which  seemed  damaging  to  their 
new  cult of transcendent Jehovah,  an  original  story may be  postulated  in 
which  Michal  (not  Michael)  of Hebron,  the  goddess  from  whom  David 
derived  his  tide  of  King  by  marriage  with  her  priestess,  was  Adam's 
creatrix. David married Michal at Hebron, and Hebron may be called the 
centre of the earth,  from  its  position  near  the junction  of two  seas  and  the 
three ancient continents.  This identification of Michal with Michael would 
seem  forced, were  it not that  the  name  Michael occurs  only  in  post-exilic

1 Sir  Flinders  Petrie  holds  that  Moses  is  an  Egyptian  word  meaning  'unfathered  son  of a

princess'.

1 59

writings,  and  is  not  therefore a  part  of ancient  Jewish  tradition,  and  that 
in  A  Discourse  on  Mary  by  Cyril  of Jerusalem,  printed  by  Budge  in  his 
Miscellaneous  Coptic  Texts,  this  passage occurs:

It is written  in  the  Gospel to  the Hebrews  [a  lost gospel  of the Ebion-
ites,  supposedly  the  original  of St.  Matthew]  that when  Christ  wished 
to  come upon  earth  to  men,  the  Good  Father  called  a mighty power in 
the  Heavens which was  called  Michael and committed Christ to its care 
A nd  the  power  descended  on  earth  and  was  called  Mary,  and  Christ 
was in her womb seven months, after which she gave birth to h i m . . ..T he  mystical  Essene  Ebionites  of the  first  century  A . D.  believed  in  a 
female  Holy  Spirit;  and  those  members  of  the  sect  who  embraced 
Christianity  and  developed  into  the  second-century  Clementine  Gnostics 
made  the  Virgin  Mary  the  vessel  of this  Holy  Spirit—whom  they  named 
Michael  ('Who  is  like  God?').  According  to  the  Clementines,  whose 
religious  theory  is  popularized  in  a  novel  called  The  Recognitions, 1  the 
identity  of true  religion  in  all  ages  depends  on  a  series  of incarnations  of 
the  Wisdom  of God,  of which  Adam  was  the  first  and  Jesus  the  last.  In 
this  poem  pf  Gwion's,  Adam  has  no  soul  after  his  creation  until  E ve 
animates him.

z j)  and

(Genesis  XXIII,  19;  XXV,  9;  L,z j)  and

(Genesis  XXIII,  19;  XXV,  9;  L,

But  Caleb,  according  to  the  Hanes  Taliesin  riddle,  conveyed  the  Holy 
Spirit to Hebron when,  in the time of Joshua, he ousted the Anakim from 
the  shrine  of Machpelah.  Machpelah,  an  oracular  cave  cut from  the  rock, 
was the sepulchre of Abraham, and  Caleb went there to consult his shade. 
T he  priestly  editor  of Genesis  describes  it  as  the  sepulchre  also  of Sarah 
and  Jacob 
in  XXXV,  29 
implies  that  Isaac  was  buried  there  too.  The  statement  about  Jacob  is 
contradicted  in  Genesis L,  11,  where  it  is  said  that he was  buried  in Abel-
Mizraim.  Moreover,  Isaac  originally  lived  at  Beer-Lahai-Roi  (Genesis 
XXIV,  62;  XXV,  11)  where  he  probably  had  an  oracular  shrine  at  one 
time, for Beer-Lahai-Roi means 'the Well of the Antelope's Jawbone' and 
if Isaac  was  a  Boibalos,  or  Antelope-king,  his  prophetic  jawbone—jaw 
bones were the rule in oracular shrines, usually stored there, it seems, with 
the  hero's  navel-string—would  naturally  give  its  name  to  the well;  there 
was  a  sacred  cave  near  by,  which  eventually  became  a  Christian  chapel. 
Thus it is likely that neither Isaac nor Jacob nor their 'wives' were at first 
associated  with  the  cave.  The  story  of  its  purchase  from  Ephron  (a 
'Power',  as  I  suggest,  of  the  Boibel-Loth)  and  the  Children  of  Heth, 
usually  regarded  as  Hittites,  is  told  in  Genesis  XXIII.  Though  late  and 
much edited,  this chapter seems to  record a friendly arrangement between

1  Voltaire  modelled  his  Candide  on  it;  and  it  has  the  distinction  of  appearing  in  the  select 
list  of  books  in  Milton's  Areopagitiea,  along  with  John  Skelton's  Poems,  as  deserving  of 
permanent  suppression.

1 601 60

the  devotees  of the  Goddess  Sarah,  the  Goddess  of the  tribe  of Isaac,  and 
their  allies  the  devotees  of  the  Goddess  Heth  (Hathor?  Tethys?)  who 
owned  the  shrine:  Sarah  was  forced  out  of Beer-Lahai-Roi  by  another 
tribe  and  came  to  seek  an  asylum  at  near-by Hebron.  Since  Sarah  was  a 
Laughing  Goddess  and  her  progeny  was  destined  to  be  'like  the  sand  of 
the  sea  shore'  she  was  evidently  a  Sea-goddess  of  the  Aphrodite  type. 
All  that is  needed to clinch  this argument in poetic logic is for Caleb in 
Jewish  tradition  to  have  married  someone  called  Michal  who  was  a 
representative  of  the  local  Sea-goddess.  He  did  even  better:  he  married 
Miriam.1  (The Talmudic tradition is that  'she was neither beautiful nor in 
good  health').  T he  equation  that  follows  is:  Miriam  I = Holy  Spirit = 
Michal = Michael == Miriam  II.  Michael,  then, was  regarded  as the instru 
ment  chosen  for  the  creation  of the  First  Adam,  and  used  Hebron  dust 
and  sea water;  and  Jesus was  the Second  Adam;  and  Michael,  or  Miriam 
('Sea-brine') the Virgin Mary, was similarly the instrument of his creation.

Jesus was also held to have fulfilled the prophecy in  the  i ioth Psalm:

Jehovah  has  sworn  and  will  not  repent:  thou  art  a  priest  forever

after  the  order of Melchizedek.Jesus was also held to have fulfilled the prophecy in  the  i ioth Psalm:

Jehovah  has  sworn  and  will  not  repent:  thou  art  a  priest  forever

after  the  order of Melchizedek.

This  is  enlarged  upon  in  St.  Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  Melchizedek 
(Genesis  XIV,  18-20)  the  Sacred  King  of  Salem  who  welcomed  'Abra 
ham'  to  Canaan  ('Abraham'  being in this sense the far-travelled tribe  that 
came  down  into  Palestine  from  Armenia  at  the  close  of the  third  millen 
nium  B.C.)  'had  neither  father  nor  mother'.  'Salem'  is  generally  taken  to 
mean  Jerusalem  and  it  is  probable  that  Salem  occurs  in  the  Boibel-Loth 
as  a  compliment  to  Melchizedek,  who  was  priest  to  the  Supreme  God. 
But  J.  N.  Schofield  in  his  Historical Background to  the  Bible  notes  that  to 
this  day  the  people  of Hebron  have  not  forgiven  David  for  moving  his 
capital  to  Jerusalem  ('Holy  Salem')  which  they  refer  to  as  'The  New 
Jerusalem'  as  though  Hebron  were  the  authentic  one.  There  is  a  record 
in  the  Talmud  of  a  heretical  sect  of  Jews,  called  Melchizedekians,  who 
frequented  Hebron  to  worship  the  body  (consult  the  spirit?)  of  Adam 
which was  buried  in  the  cave of Machpelah.  If these  Melchizedekians  wor 
shipped  Adam,  the  only  other  character  in  the  Bible  who  had  neither1A  similar  marriage  was  that  of  Joshua  to  Rahab  the  Sea-goddess,  w ho  appears  in  the 
Bible  as  Rahab  the  Harlot.  By  this  union,  according  to  Sifre,  the  oldest  Midrash,  they  had 
daughters  only,  from  w h om  descended  many  prophets  including  Jeremiah;  and  Hannah, 
Samuel's  mother,  was  Rahab's  incarnation.  T he  story  of  Samuel's  birth  suggests  that  these 
'daughters  of  Rahab'  were  a  matrilinear  college  of  prophetic  priestesses  by  ritual  marriage 
with  w h om  Joshua  secured  his  title  to  the  Jericho  valley.  Since  Rahab  is  also  said  to  have 
married  Salmon  (and  so  to  have become  an  ancestress  of David  and  Jesus)  it  may  well  be  that 
Salmon  was  the  title  that  Joshua  assumed  at  his  marriage;  for  a  royal  marriage  involved  a 
ritual  death  and  rebirth  with  a  change  of  name,  as  when  Jacob  married  Rachel  the  D o v e-
priestess  and  became Ish-Rachel or Israel—'Rachel's  man*.

1 61

father  nor  mother,  they  were  doubtless  identifying  Melchizedek's  king 
ship with the  autochthonous Adam's.  For Adam,  'the  red  man', seems  to 
have  been  the  original  oracular hero  of Machpelah;  it  is  likely that  Caleb 
consulted  his shade  not Abraham's,  unless Adam and Abraham are tides 
of the same hero. Elias Levita, the fifteenth-century Hebrew commentator, 
records  the tradition that the teraphim which  Rachel stole from her father 
Laban  were  mummified  oracular  heads  and  that  the  head  of Adam  was 
among them. If he was right, the Genesis narrative refers to a seizure of the 
oracular shrine of Hebron by Saul's Benjamites from the Calebites.Caleb  was an Edomite  clan;  which  suggests  the identification  of Edom 
with Adam: they are the same word, meaning 'red'. But if Adam was really 
Edom,  one  would  expect  to  find  a  tradition  that  the  head  of Esau,  the 
ancestor of the Edomites,  was  also  buried  at  Hebron;  and  this  is,  in  fact, 
supplied by the  Talmud.  T he artificial explanation given  there is that Esau 
and his sons opposed  the burial  of Jacob in  the  Cave of Machpelah on  the 
ground  that  it  was  an  Edomite  possession;  that  Joseph,  declaring  that  it 
had  ceased  to  be Edomite when Jacob  sold his birthright to  Esau,  sent  to 
Egypt for the relevant documents;  that a fight ensued in which the sons of 
Jacob  were  .victorious  and  Esau  was  beheaded  at  one  stroke  by  a  dumb 
Danite;  that Esau's  body  was  carried  off for  burial  on  Mount Seir by  his 
sons; and that his head was buried at Hebron by Joseph.

Melchizedek's lack of a  father is  intelligible,  but why should he have  no 
mother?  Perhaps  the  stories  of Moses,  Llew  Llaw,  Romulus  and  Cretan 
Zeus  explain  this.  In  every  case  the  boy  is  removed  from  his  mother  as 
soon as born.  Thus, in effect, he has no mother; usually a goat, a wolf or a 
pig suckles him and he passes under the care of tutors. It is  the transitional 
stage from matriarchy to patriarchy. In the Eleusinian Mysteries the Divine 
Child was carried in by shepherds, not by his mother or by a nurse.

The  seventh  and  eighth  stanzas  of  Yr  Awdil  Vraith  are  the  strangest  of

all:

Twice  five,  ten and eight, 
She  was self-bearing, 
The mixed burden

Ofman-woman.

And once,  not hidden, 
She brought forth Abel, 
And Cain  the  solitary 
Homicide.all:

Twice  five,  ten and eight, 
She  was self-bearing, 
The mixed burden

Ofman-woman.

And once,  not hidden, 
She brought forth Abel, 
And Cain  the  solitary 
Homicide.

This means, I  suppose,  that E ve bore twenty-eight children,  acting as her 
own  midwife,  then  Cain  and  Abel  and  then  . ..  A  stanza  has  been  sup 
pressed:  a  stanza  evidently  containing  the  Sethian  heresy,  a  well-known 
development  of  the  Clementine  syncretic  theory,  in  which  Seth  was

1 62

viewed  as  an  earlier  incarnation  of Jesus.1  It  will  be  recalled  that  Rhea 
figures  in  the  Hanes  Taliesin  riddle—Rhea  as  the  mother  both  of Cretan 
Zeus  and  Romulus.  The  legend  was  that  she  bore  a  number of children, 
all  of whom  Saturn her  lover ate,  until finally she  bore  Zeus  who  escaped 
and  eventually avenged  his brothers on  Saturn  by castrating him.  Gwion 
is  hinting  that  E v e,  whom  he  identifies  with  Rhea,  brought  forth  thirty 
children in all—and then the Divine  Child Seth.  Thirty doubdess because 
the  'reign  of  Saturn'  lasted  thirty  days  and  culminated  with  the  mid 
winter  feast  which  afterwards  became  Yule,  or  Christmas.  The  letter  R 
(Riuben  or  Rhea  or  Reu  in  the  Boibel-Loth,  and  Ruis  in  the  Beth-Luis-
Nion)  is  allotted  to  the  last month  of the year.  The  reign  of Saturn  there 
fore corresponds with  the  Christian  period  of Advent,  preliminary  to  the 
Day of the birth of the Divine  Child.  Sir James Frazer givec details of this 
thirty-day  period  in  the  Golden  Bough,  in  his  account  of  the  fourth-
century  martyr  St.  Dasius.  The  Clementines  rejected  the  orthodox story 
of the  Fall  as  derogatory  to  the  dignity  of Adam  and  Eve,  and  Gwion  in 
his version similarly puts the blame for their expulsion wholly on Satan.The  'twelve  young  men,  four  of  them  angels'  (i.e.  evangels),  are 
evidently  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel,  four  of  whom—Joseph,  Simeon 
(Simon),  Judah  (Jude)  and  Levi  (Matthew)—gave  their names  to  books 
in  the  early  canon  of the  New  Testament;  and  they  perhaps  represent  the 
twelve signs of the Zodiac in  Clementine syncretism.

The stanza:

Solomon obtained, 
In  Babel's  tower, 
All the sciences 
OfAsia's

'ana.

needs  careful  examination.  'The  confusion  of  languages  after  the  fall  of 
Babel'  was  taken  by  Babylonian  Jews  to  refer  to  the  fall  of the  famous 
nggorath,  'the  hanging  gardens',  of  Babylon.  But  the  nggorath,  unlike 
the  Tower of Babel,  was  completed.  It  is  much  more  likely  that  the  myth1  In  the  Ethiopian  Legends  of Our  Lady  Mary,  translated  by  Bridge,  the  Gnostic  theory  is 
clearly  given.  Hannah  the  'twenty-pillared  tabernacle  of  Testimony'  who  was  the  Virgin 
Mary's  mother,  was  one  of a  triad  of sisters—of which  the  other  two  were  another  Mary  and 
Sophia.  ' T he  Virgin first came  down  into  the  body  of Seth,  shining  like  a  white  pearl.'  Then 
successively entered Enos, C a i n a n . .. Jared,  Enoch,  Methuselah,  Lantech,  N o a h . ..  Abraham, 
Isaac,  Jacob.  .  .  D a v i d,  Solomon.  .  .  and  Joachim.  'And  Joachim  said  to  his  wife  Hannah: 
"I  saw  Heaven  open  and  a  white  bird  came  therefrom  and  hovered  over  my  head."  N o w, this 
bird  had  its  being  in  the  days  of old.  .  .  It  was  the  Spirit  ot  Life  in  the  form  of a  white  bird 
and  . ..  became  incarnate  in  Hannah's  w o mb  when  the  pearl  went  forth  from  Joachim's  loins 
a n d . ..  Hannah  received  it,  namely  the  body  of our  L a dy  Mary.  T he  white  pearl  is  mentioned 
for  its  purity,  and  the  white  bird  because  Mary's  soul  existed  aforetime  with  the  Ancient  of 
Days.  .  .  T h us  bird  and  pearl  are  alike  and  equal.'  From  the  Body  of  Mary,  the  pearl,  the 
white bird  of the  spirit then  entered  into  Jesus  at  the  Baptism.

I 63I 63

originates  in  the  linguistic  confusion  caused  by  the  Indo-Germanic  con 
quest  of Byblos,  the  Egyptianized  metropolis  of the  People  of the  Sea,  at 
the  beginning  of  the  second  millennium  B.C.  Doubtless  there  was  a 
'babble  of  tongues'  in  Babylon,  but  it  was  not  caused  by  any  sudden 
catastrophe, and  the babblers could at least communicate with one another 
in the  official Assyrian  language. Whether or not the Byblians had begun 
work on a gigantic Egyptian temple at the time that the city was stormed 
and  were  unable  to  complete  it,  I  do  not  know;  but  if they  had  done  so 
their  misfortune  would  naturally  have  been  ascribed  to  divine jealousy  at 
the  innovation.

Moreover,  'Asia'  was  the  name of the mother  by Iapetus, who  appears 
in  Genesis  as  Japhet,  Noah's son,  of  the  'Pelasgians'  Atlas  and  Prome 
theus;  thus  the  'Land  of  Asia'  in  stanzas  6  and  24  is  a  synonym  for 
the  Eastern  Mediterranean,  though  more  properly  it  meant  Southern 
Asia Minor.  King Solomon who  reigned about a thousand years after the 
original  fall  of Byblos—it had  fallen  and risen several  times  meanwhile— 
may  well  have  learned  his  religious  secrets  from  Byblos,  which  the  Jews 
knew as  Gebal,  for the  Byblians  helped him  to  build  his  Temple.  This  is 
mentioned  in  1  Kings,  V,  18,  though  in  the Authorised  Version  'the  men 
of Gebal' is mistranslated 'stone-squarers'.

And  Solomon's  builders  and  Hiram's  builders  did  hew  the  stones, 
and  the  men  of Gebal;  so  they  prepared  timber  and stones to build the 
house.And  Solomon's  builders  and  Hiram's  builders  did  hew  the  stones, 
and  the  men  of Gebal;  so  they  prepared  timber  and stones to build the 
house.

'Gebal'  means  'mountain-height'.  The  deep  wisdom  of  Byblos—from 
which the  Greek word for 'book'  (and  the English word  Bible)  derives— 
is  compared  by  Ezekiel,  the  prophet  to  whom  the  Essenes  seem  to  have 
owed  most,  to  that  of Hiram's  T y re  (E{ekiel,  XXVII,  8-9);  T y re was  an 
early  Cretan trading centre.  Solomon  certainly built his  temple in Aegean 
style, closely resembling that of the Great Goddess at Hierapolis described 
by  Lucian  in  his  De  Dea  Syria.  There  was  a  Danaan  colony  close  to 
Byblos, dating from the fourteenth century B.C.

It  is  possible  that  though  the  Calebites  interpreted  'Adam'  as  the 
Semitic  word  Edom  ('red')  the  original  hero  at  Hebron  was  the  Danaan 
Adamos  or Adamas  or Adamastos,  'the  Unconquerable',  or  'the Inexor 
able',  a  Homeric  epithet  of Hades,  borrowed  from  the  Death  Goddess 
his mother.

1 64

Chapter Ten

THE  TREE  ALPHABET  ( i)

1first found the Beth-Luis-Nion tree-alphabet in Roderick O'Flaherty's

Ogygia;  he  presents  it,  with  the  Boibel-Loth,  as  a  genuine  relic  of 
Druidism orally transmitted down the centuries. It is said to have been 
latterly  used  for  divination  only  and  consists  of  five  vowels  and  thirteen 
consonants.  Each  letter  is  named  after  the  tree  or  shrub  of which  it  is  the

initial:

Beth 
Luis 
Nion

Fearn

Saille 
Uath 
Duir 
Tinne 
Coll 
Muin 
Gort 
Pethboc 
Ruis

Ailm 
Onn 
Ur 
Eadha 
Idho

B 
L 
N 
F 
S 
H 
D 
T 
C 
M 
G 
P 
R

A 
O 
u 
E

I

Birch

Rowan 
Ash

Alder 
Willow 
Hawthorn 
Oak

Holly 
Hazel 
Vine 
I vy

Dwarf  Elder 
Elder

Silver Fir

Furze 
Heather

White Poplar 
Y ewB 
L 
N 
F 
S 
H 
D 
T 
C 
M 
G 
P 
R

A 
O 
u 
E

I

Birch

Rowan 
Ash

Alder 
Willow 
Hawthorn 
Oak

Holly 
Hazel 
Vine 
I vy

Dwarf  Elder 
Elder

Silver Fir

Furze 
Heather

White Poplar 
Y ew

The  names  of the  letters  in  the  modern  Irish  alphabet  are  also  those  of 
trees,  and  most  of them  correspond  with  O'Flaherty's  list,  though  T  has 
become gorse;  O, broom; and A, elm.

I  noticed  almost  at  once  that  the  consonants  of  this  alphabet  form  a 
calendar  of seasonal  tree-magic,  and  that  all  the  trees  figure  prominently 
in European folklore.

B  F OR  B E TH

The first tree  of the series  is  the self-propagating birch.  Birch twigs are 
used  throughout  Europe  in  the  bearing  of  bounds  and  the  flogging  of 
delinquents—and  formerly  lunatics—with  the  object  of  expelling  evil 
spirits.  When  Gwion  writes  in  the Cad Goddeu that the birch  'armed him 
self  but  late'  he  means  that  birch  twigs  do  not  toughen  until  late  in  the 
year.  (He  makes  the  same  remark  about  the willow and  the  rowan  whose 
twigs  were  similarly  put  to  ceremonial  use.)  Birch  rods  are  also  used  in 
rustic ritual for  driving  out  the  spirit  of the  old  year.  The  Roman  lictors 
carried  birch rods during the installation  of the  Consuls  at  this  very  same 
season;  each  Consul  had  twelve  lictors,  making  a  company  of  thirteen. 
The  birch  is  the  tree  of inception.  It  is  indeed  the  earliest  forest  tree,  with 
the  exception  of the  mysterious  elder,  to  put  out  new  leaves  (April  ist  in 
England, the beginning of the financial year), and in Scandinavia its leafing 
marks  the  beginning  of the  agricultural  year,  because  farmers  use  it  as  a 
directory  for  sowing  their  Spring  wheat.  The  first  month  begins 
immediately  after  the  winter  solstice,  when  the  days  after  shortening  to 
the  extreme  limit  begin  to  lengthen again.Since  there  are  thirteen  consonants  in  the  alphabet,  it  is  reasonable  to 
regard the tree month as the  British common-law 'lunar'  month of twenty-
eight  days  defined  by  Blackstone.  As  has  already  been  pointed  out,  there 
are  thirteen  such  months  in  a  solar  year,  with  one  day  left  over.  Caesar 
and Pliny both record that the Druidic year was reckoned by lunar months, 
but  neither  defines  a  lunar  month,  and  there  is  nothing  to  prove  that  it 
was  a  'lunation'  of roughly  twenty-nine  and  a  half days—of which  there 
are  twelve  in  a  year  with  ten  and  three-quarter  days  left  over.  For  the 
first-century B.C.  'Coligny  Calendar',  which  is  one  of  lunations,  is  no 
longer  regarded  as  Druidic;  it  is  engraved  in  Roman  letters  on  a  brass 
tablet  and  is  now  thought  to  be  part  of the  Romanizing  of native  religion 
attempted  under the early Empire.  Moreover,  twenty-eight is a  true lunar 
month  not  only  in  the  astronomical  sense  of  the  moon's  revolutions  in 
relation to  the sun,  but  in  the  mystic sense  that  the  Moon,  being a woman, 
has  a  woman's  normal  menstrual  period  ('menstruation'  is  connected  with 
the  word  'moon')1  of twenty-eight  days.8  The  Coligny  system was  prob-1  T he  magical  connection  of  the  Moon  with  menstruation  is  strong  and  widespread.  T he 
baleful  moon-dew  used  by  the  witches  of  Thessaly  was  apparendy  a  girl's  first  menstrual 
blood,  taken  during  an  eclipse  of  the  Moon.  Pliny  devotes  a  whole  chapter  of  his  Natural 
History  to  the subject and  gives  a long  list  of the  powers  for good  and  bad  that a  menstruating 
woman  possesses.  Her  touch  can  blast  vines,  i vy  and  rue,  fade  purple  cloth,  blacken  linen  in 
the wash-tub,  tarnish  copper,  make bees desert their hives,  and  cause abortions  in  mares;  but 
she  can  also  rid  a field of pests  by  walking  around  it naked  before  sunrise,  calm a storm  at sea 
by  exposing  her  genitals,  and  cure  boils,  erysipelas,  hydrophobia  and  barrenness.  In  the 
Talmud it is  said  that if a  menstruating woman  passes between  two  men,  one of them  will  die.

*  E v en  in  healthy  women  there  is  greater  variation  in  the  length  of time  elapsing  between

periods than is generally supposed: it may be anything from twenty-one to thirty-five days.

1 66

ably  brought  into  Britain  by  the  Romans  of the  Claudian  conquest  and 
memories  of its  intercalated  days are said  by Professor T.  Glynn Jones  to 
survive  in Welsh  folklore.  But  that in  both Irish and  Welsh  myths  of the 
highest antiquity 'a year and a day' is a term constantly used suggests that 
the  Beth-Luis-Nion  Calendar is  one  of 364 days  plus  one.  We can  there 
fore regard the Birch month as extending from December 24th to January 
20th.

L  F OR  L u isL  F OR  L u is

The  second  tree  is  the  quickbeam  ('tree  of life'),  otherwise  known  as 
the  quicken,  rowan  or  mountain  ash.  Its  round  wattles,  spread  with 
newly-flayed  bull's  hides,  were  used  by  the  Druids  as  a  last extremity  for 
compelling  demons 
to  answer  difficult  questions—hence  the  Irish 
proverbial  expression  'to  go  on  the  wattles  of knowledge',  meaning  to  do 
one's  utmost  to  get  information.  The  quickbeam  is  also  the  tree  most 
widely  used  in  the  British  Isles  as  a  prophylactic  against  lightning  and 
witches'  charms  of all  sorts:  for  example,  bewitched  horses  can  be  con 
trolled  only  with  a  rowan  whip.  In  ancient  Ireland,  fires  of rowan  were 
kindled  by  the  Druids  of opposing  armies  and  incantations  spoken  over 
them,  summoning  spirits  to  take  part  in  the  fight.  The  berries  of  the 
magical  rowan in  the  Irish  romance  of Fraoth,  guarded  by a dragon,  had 
the  sustaining  virtue  of  nine  meals;  they  also  healed  the  wounded  and 
added a year to a man's life. In the romance of Diarmuid and  Grainne, the 
rowan  berry,  with  the  apple  and  the  red  nut,  is  described  as  the  food  of 
the  gods.  'Food  of the  gods'  suggests  that  the  taboo  on  eating  anything 
red  was  an  extension  of the commoners'  taboo on eating scarlet  toadstools 
—for toadstools, according to a Greek proverb which Nero quoted, were 
'the  food  of  the  gods'.  In  ancient  Greece  all  red  foods  such  as  lobster, 
bacon,  red  mullet,  crayfish  and  scarlet  berries  and  fruit  were  tabooed 
except  at  feasts  in  honour  of  the  dead.  (Red  was  the  colour  of death  in 
Greece and Britain during the Bronze Age—red ochre has been found  in 
megalithic  burials  both  in  the  Prescelly  Mountains  and  on  Salisbury 
Plain.)  The  quickbeam  is  the  tree  of  quickening.  Its  botanical  name 
Fraxinus,  or  Pyrus,  Aucuparia,  conveys  its  divinatory  uses.  Another  of its 
names  is  'the witch'; and  the witch-wand,  formerly used  for metal  divin 
ing,  was  made  of rowan.  Since  it  was  the  tree  of quickening  it  could  also 
be  used  in a contrary sense.  In  Danaan  Ireland  a  rowan-stake hammered 
through  a  corpse  immobilized  its  ghost;  and  in  the  Cuchulain  saga  three 
hags spitted a dog,  Cuchulain's sacred animal,  on rowan twigs to  procure 
his death.The  oracular  use  of  the  rowan  explains  the  unexpected  presence  of 
great  rowan  thickets  in  Riigen  and  the  other  Baltic  amber-islands,  for 
merly  used  as  oracular  places,  and  the  frequent  occurrence  of  rowan,

167

noted  by  John  Lightfoot  in  his  Flora  Scotica,  1777,  in  the  neighbourhood 
of ancient stone  circles.  The  second  month  extends  from  January  21st  to 
February  17th.  The important  Celtic feast of Candlemas fell in the middle 
of it  (February  2nd).  It  was  held  to  mark  the  quickening  of the  year,  and 
was  the  first  of  the  four  'cross-quarter  days'  on  which  British  witches 
celebrated  their  Sabbaths,  the  others  being  May  E v e,  Lammas  (August 
2nd)  and  All  Hallow  E'en,  when  the  year  died.  These  days  correspond 
with  the  four  great  Irish  fire-feasts  mentioned  by  Cormac  the  tenth-
century Archbishop of Cashel. In Ireland and the Highlands February 2nd 
is,  very  properly,  the  day  of St.  Brigit,  formerly  the  White  Goddess,  the 
quickening  Triple  Muse.  The  connexion  of  rowan  with  the  Candlemas 
fire-feast  is  shown  by  Morann  Mac  Main's  Ogham  in  the  Book  of  Bally-
mote:  he  gives  the  poetic  name  for  rowan  as  'Delight  of the  E y e,  namely 
Luisiu,  flame.'

N  F OR  N I ONN  F OR  N I ON

The  third  tree  is  the  ash.  In  Greece  the  ash  was  sacred  to  Poseidon,  the 
second  god  of  the  Achaean  trinity,  and  the  Meliai,  or  ash-spirits,  were 
much  cultivated;  according  to  Hesiod,  the  Meliae  sprang  from  the  blood 
of  Uranus  when  Cronos  castrated  him.  In  Ireland  the  Tree  of  Tortu, 
The  Tree  of  Dathi,  and  the  Branching  Tree  of  Usnech,  three  of  the 
Five Magic Trees whose fall in  the year A . D.  665  symbolized  the triumph 
of Christianity  over  paganism,  were  ash-trees.  A  descendant  of the  Sacred 
Tree  of Creevna,  also an ash, was still standing at  Killura in  the  nineteenth 
century; its wood was a charm against drowning, and emigrants to America 
after the Potato Famine carried it away with them piecemeal. In British folk 
lore  the ash is  a  tree of re-birth—Gilbert White  describes  in  his  History  of 
Selborne  how  naked  children  had  formerly  been  passed  through  cleft 
pollard  ashes before sunrise as a cure for rupture.  The  custom  survived  in 
remoter  parts  of England  until  1830.  The  Druidical  wand  with  a  spiral 
decoration,  part  of  a  recent  Anglesey  find  dating  from  the  early  first 
century A . D ., was  of ash.  The  great ash  Yygdrasill, sacred  to  Woden,  or 
Wotan  or  Odin  or  Gwydion,  has  already  been  mentioned  in  the  context 
of  the  Battle  of  the  Trees;  he  used  it  as  his  steed.  But  he  had  taken  the 
tree  over  from  the  Triple  Goddess  who,  as  the  Three  Norns  of Scandin 
avian  legend,  dispensed  justice  under  it.  Poseidon  retained  his  patronage 
of horses  but  also  became  a  god  of seafarers  when  the  Achaeans  took  to 
the  sea;  as  Woden  did  when  his  people  took  to  the  sea.  In  ancient  Wales 
and  Ireland  all  oars  and  coracle-slats  were  made  of ash;  and  so  were  the 
rods  used  for  urging  on  horses,  except  where  the  deadly  yew  was  pre 
ferred.  The  cruelty  of the  ash  mentioned  by  Gwion  lies  in  the  harmful-
ness  of its  shade  to  grass  or  corn;  the  alder  on  the  contrary  is  beneficial  to 
crops  grown  in  its  shade.  So  also  in  Odin's  own  Runic  alphabet  all  the168

letters  are  formed  from  ash-twigs;  as  ash-roots  strangle  those  of  other 
forest  trees.  The  ash  is  the  tree  of sea-power,  or  of the  power  resident  in 
water;  and  the  other  name  of Woden,  'Yggr',  from  which  Ygdrasill  is 
derived,  is  evidently  connected  with  hygra,  the  Greek  for  'sea'  (literally, 
'the  wet  element').  The  third  month  is  the  month  of floods and  extends 
from  February  i8th  to  March  17th.  In  these first three months  the nights 
are longer than the days, and the sun is regarded as still under the  tutelage 
of Night.  The  Tyrrhenians  on  this  account  did  not  reckon  them  as  part 
of the  sacred year.

F  F OR  F E A RN

The  fourth  tree is the alder,  the  tree  of Bran.  In  the  Battle of the  Trees 
the alder fought  in  the  front line,  which is  an  allusion  to  the  letter  F  being 
one  of  the  first  five  consonants  of  the  Beth-Luis-Nion  and  the  Boibel-
Loth;  and  in  the  Irish  Ossianic  Song  of  the  Forest  Trees 1  it  is  described  as 
'the  very  battle-witch  of  all  woods,  tree  that  is  hottest  in  the  fight'. 
Though a poor fuel-tree,  like the willow,  poplar and  chestnut,  it  is prized 
by  charcoal-burners  as  yielding  the  best  charcoal;  its  connexion  with  fire 
is shown in the Romance of Branwen when 'Gwern' (aider), Bran's sister's 
son, is burned in a bonfire; and  in country districts  of Ireland  the crime of

1  To  be  found  in  Standish  O ' G r a d y 's  translation  in  E.  M.  Hull's  Poem  Book  of the  Gael. 
A  charming,  though  emasculated  version  of the  same  poem  is  current  on  Dartmoor.  It  tells 
which trees to b um and which not to burn as follows:

Oak-logs  will  warmyou  well,

That  are  old and dry;

Logs  of  pine  will  sweetly  smell

But  the  sparks  willfly.

Birch-logs  will  burn  too fast,

Chestnut scarce  at  all; 
Hawthorn-logs  are  good to  last—.

Cut them in the fall.Logs  of  pine  will  sweetly  smell

But  the  sparks  willfly.

Birch-logs  will  burn  too fast,

Chestnut scarce  at  all; 
Hawthorn-logs  are  good to  last—.

Cut them in the fall.

Holly-logs  will burn  like  wax,

You  may burn  them green;

Elm-logs  like  to  smouldering  flax,

No  flame  to be seen.

Beech-logs  for  winter  time, 
Yew-logs  as  well; 
Green  elder-logs it is a  crime

For any man  to  sell.

Pear-logs  and  apple-logs,

They  will scent your  room,

Cherry-logs  across  the  dogs

Smell  like  flower  of  broom.

Ash-logs,  smooth  and grey,

Burn  them green  or old, 
Buy  up  all that  come your  way—

Worth  their  weight  in gold.

169Cherry-logs  across  the  dogs

Smell  like  flower  of  broom.

Ash-logs,  smooth  and grey,

Burn  them green  or old, 
Buy  up  all that  come your  way—

Worth  their  weight  in gold.

169

felling a  sacred  alder is  held  to  be visited  with  the  burning  down  of one's 
house.  The  alder  is  also  proof against  the  corruptive  power  of water:  its 
slightly  gummy  leaves  resist  the  winter  rains  longer  than  those  of  any 
other deciduous  tree and its timber resists decay indefinitely when used  for 
water-conduits  or  piles.  The  Rialto  at  Venice  is  founded  on  alder  piles, 
and  so are several  mediaeval  cathedrals.  The  Roman  architect  Vitruvius 
mentions that alders were used as causeway piles in the Ravenna marshes. 
The connexion of Bran with the alder in this sense is clearly brought out 
in  the  Romance  of Branwen  where  the  swineherds  (oracular  priests)  ot 
King  Matholwch  of Ireland  see  a  forest  in  the  sea  and  cannot  guess  what 
it  is.  Branwen  tells  them  that  it  is  the  fleet  of Bran  the  Blessed  come  to 
avenge her.  The ships are anchored off-shore and Bran wades through the 
shallows  and  brings  his  goods  and  people  to  land;  afterwards  he  bridges 
the  River  Linon,  though  it  has  been  protected  with  a  magic  charm,  by 
lying  down  across  the  river  and  having  hurdles  laid  over him.  In  other 
words, first a  jetty,  then  a  bridge  was  built  on  alder  piles.  It  was  said  of 
Bran,  'No  house could  contain him.'  The riddle 'What can no house ever 
contain?'  has-a simple  answer:  'The  piles  upon  which it is  built.'  F or  the 
earliest European  houses  were  built  on  alder  piles  at  the  edge  of lakes.  In 
one sense the  'singing head'  of Bran was the mummied,  oracular head of a 
sacred  king;  in  another  it  was  the  'head'  of the  alder-tree—namely  the 
topmost  branch.  Green  alder-branches  make  good  whistles  and,  accord 
ing  to  my  friend  Ricardo  Sicre  y  Cerda,  the  boys  of  Cerdana  in  the 
Pyrenees have a traditional prayer in Catalan:Berng,  Berng, come out of your skin 
And I  will make you  whistle  sweetly.

which is repeated while the bark is tapped with a piece of willow to loosen 
it  from  the  wood.  Berng  (or  Verng  in  the  allied  Majorcan  language)  is 
Bran  again.  The  summons  to  Berng  is  made  on  behalf of the  Goddess  of 
the  Willow.  The use of the willow for tapping,  instead  of another piece of 
alder,  suggests  that  such  whistles  were  used  by  witches  to  conjure  up 
destructive  winds—especially  from  the  North.  But  musical  pipes  with 
several stops can be made in  the same way as the whistles, and  the singing 
head  of  Bran  in  this  sense  will  have  been  an  alder-pipe.  At  Harlech, 
where  the head  sang  for  seven  years,  there  is  a  mill-stream  running  past 
the  Castle rock, a likely place for a sacred alder-grove.  It is  possible that 
the  legend  of Apollo's  flaying  of Marsyas  the  piper  is  reminiscent  of the 
removal of the alder-bark from the wood in pipe-making.

The  alder  was  also  used  in  ancient  Ireland  for making milk  pails  and 
other  dairy  vessels:  hence  its  poetical  name  in  the  Book  of Ballymote, 
Comet  lachta—'guarding  of milk'.  This  connexion  of  Bran-Cronos,  the 
alder, with Rhea-Io,  the white moon-cow is of importance.  In Ireland,  Io

1 701 70

was called  Glas  Gabhnach,  'the green stripper', because though she yielded 
milk  in  rivers  she  never  had  a  calf.  She  had  been  stolen  out  of Spain  by 
Gavida  the  flying  dwarf-smith;  made the circuit of all Ireland  in  one day, 
guarded  by  his  seven  sons  (who  presumably  stood  for  the  days  of  the 
week);  and  gave  the name Bothar-bo-finne,  'Track  of the White  Cow',  to 
the  Galaxy.  According  to  The  Proceedings  of  the  Grand  Bardic  Academy, 
she  was  killed  by  Guaire  at  the  request  of Seanchan  Torpest's  wife,  and 
according  to  Keating's  History  of  Ireland,  was  avenged  in  A . D.  528. 
King  Diarmuid  of  All  Ireland  was  killed  by  his  eldest  son  for  having 
murdered another sacred cow.

Bran's connexion with  the Western  Ocean  is  proved  by  Caer Bran,  the

name of the most westerly hill in Britain, overlooking Land's End.Bran's connexion with  the Western  Ocean  is  proved  by  Caer Bran,  the

name of the most westerly hill in Britain, overlooking Land's End.

Alder is  rarely  mentioned  in  Greek  or Latin  myth,  having  apparently 
been  superseded as an oracular tree by the Delphic laurel.  But the  Odyssey 
and  the  Aeneid  contain  two  important  references  to  it.  In  the  Odyssey, 
alder is the first named of the three trees of resurrection—white poplar and 
cypress  are  the  two  others—that  formed  the  wood  around  the  cave  of 
Calypso, daughter of Atlas,  in her Elysian island  of Ogygia;  in  the wood 
nested  chattering  sea-crows  (sacred  to  Bran  in  Britain)  falcons  and  owls. 
This  explains  Virgil's  version  of die  metamorphosis  of the  sisters  of the 
sun-hero  Phaethon:  in  the  Aeneid  he  says  that  while  bewailing  their 
brother's death they were converted, not into a poplar grove, as Euripides 
and  Apollonius  Rhodius  relate,  but  into  an  alder  thicket  on  the  banks  of 
the river Po—evidendy  this  was  another  Elysian  islet.  The  Greek  word 
for  alder,  clethra,  is  generally  derived  from  cleio,  'I  close'  or  'I  confine'. 
The  explanation  seems  to  be  that  the  alder  thickets  confined  the  hero  in 
the  oracular  island  by  growing  around  its  shores;  the  oracular  islands 
seem to have been originally river islands, not islands in the sea.The  alder was,  and is,  celebrated  for yielding three fine dyes:  red  from 
its bark, green from its flowers, brown from its twigs: typifying fire, water 
and earth. In  Cormac's  tenth-century  Glossary of obsolete terms  the alder 
is  called  ro-eim,  which  is  glossed  as  'that  which  reddens  the  face';  from 
which  it  may  be  deduced  that  the  'crimson-stained  heroes'  of the  Welsh 
Triads,  who  were  sacred  kings,  were  connected  with  Bran's  alder  cult. 
One  reason  for  the  alder's  sanctity  is  that  when  it  is  felled  the  wood,  at 
first white, seems to bleed crimson, as though it were a man. The green dye 
is associated  in  British folklore with  fairies'  clothes:  in so  far as  the fairies 
may  be  regarded  as  survivals  of dispossessed  early  tribes,  forced  to  take 
to  hills  and  woods,  the  green  of the  clothes  is  explainable  as  protective 
colouring: foresters and outlaws also adopted it in mediaeval  times. Its use 
seems  to  be  very  ancient.  But  principally  the  alder  is  the  tree  of fire, the 
power of fire to  free the earth from water;  and  the alder-branch  by which 
Bran was recognized at the Cad Goddeu is a token of resurrection—its buds

1 71

are set in a spiral. This spiral symbol is ante-diluvian: the earliest Sumerian 
shrines  are  'ghost-houses',  like  those  used  in  Uganda,  and  are flanked by 
spiral posts.1 71

are set in a spiral. This spiral symbol is ante-diluvian: the earliest Sumerian 
shrines  are  'ghost-houses',  like  those  used  in  Uganda,  and  are flanked by 
spiral posts.

The  fourth  month  extends  from  March  18th,  when  the  alder  firts 
blooms,  to  April  14th,  and  marks  the  drying  up  of the  winter  floods  by 
the  Spring  Sun.  It  includes  the  Spring  Equinox,  when  the  days  become 
longer  than  the  nights  and  the  Sun  grows  to  manhood.  As  one  can  say 
poetically  that  the ash  trees  are  the  oars  and  coracle-slats  that  convey  the 
Spirit  of the Year through  the  floods  to  dry land,  so one  can  say that the 
alders  are  the  piles  that  lift  his  house  out  of the  floods  of winter.  Fearn 
(Bran) appears in Greek mythology as King Phoroneus, ruler of the Pelo-
ponnese, who was worshipped  as a hero at Argos which he is said to have 
founded. Hellanicus of Lesbos, a learned contemporary ofHerodotus, makes 
him  the  father  of Pelasgus,  Iasus and  Agenor,  who  divided  his  kingdom 
between  them  after his  death:  in  other words,  his  worship  at  Argos  was 
immemorially ancient.  Pausanias,  who  went to Argos  for his  information 
writes  that Phoroneus  was  the husband  of Cerdo  (the White  Goddess  as 
Muse)  and  that  the  River-god  Inachus  fathered  him  on  the  nymph 
Melia  (ash-tree).  Since  alder  succeeds  ash  in  the  tree-calendar,  and  since 
alders grow by the riverside, this is a suitable pedigree.  Pausanias clinches 
the  identification  of  Phoroneus  with  Fearn  by  disregarding  the  Pro 
metheus legend and making Phoroneus the inventor of fire. Hyginus gives 
his  mother's  name  as  Argeia  ('dazzling  white'),  who  is  the  White  God 
dess again.  So Phoroneus,  like Bran and all other sacred kings, was borne 
by,  married  to,  and finally laid  out  by,  the White  Goddess:  his  layer-out 
was  the  Death-goddess  Hera  Argeia  to  whom  he  is  said  to  have  first 
offered  sacrifices.  Phoroneus,  then,  is  Fearineus,  the  God  of  Spring  to 
whom  annual  sacrifices  were  offered  on  the  Cronian  Mount  at  Olympia 
at the  Spring  equinox.1 His  singing  head  recalls  that  of  Orpheus whose 
name  is  perhaps  short  for  Orphruoeis  'growing  on  the  river-bank'  i.e. 
'the alder'.In parts of the Mediterranean the cornel or dogwood tree seems to have 
been  used as a  substitute for  the  alder.  Its Latin name cornus  comes  from 
comix, the crow sacred to Saturn or Bran which feeds on its red 'cherries'; 
as  according to  Homer the  swine of Circe also  did.  Ovid  links it with  the 
esculent  oak  as  supplying  men  with  food  in  the  age  of Saturn.  Like  the

1  T he  Athenians,  however,  celebrated  their  Cronos  festival  early  in  J u ly  in  the  month  of 
Cronion  or  Hecatombeion  ('a  hundred  dead')  originally  also  called  Nekusion  (corpse-
month)  by the  Cretans,  and  Hyacinthion  by the  Sicilians,  after  Cronos'  counterpart Hyacinth. 
T he  barley harvest  fell  in J u l y,  and  at  Athens  Cronos was  Sabazius,  'John  Barleycorn',  w ho 
first  appeared  above  the  soil  at  the  Spring  equinox  and  whose  multiple  death  they  celebrated 
cheerfully  at  their  harvest-home.  He  had  long  lost  his  connexion  with  the  alder,  though  he 
still  shared  a  temple  at  Athens  with  Rhea,  the  lion-guarded  Queen  of the  Y e a r,  w ho  was  his 
midsummer bride and to w h om the oak was sacred  in Greece.

1 72

alder it  yields  a red  dye,  and  was held  sacred  at  Rome where  the flight of 
Romulus's cornel-wood javelin determined  the spot  where the city was to 
be  built.  Its  appropriateness  to  this  month  is  that  it  is  in  white  blossom 
by the middle of March.

S  F OR

S A I L LES  F OR

S A I L LE

The  fifth  tree  is  the  willow,  or  osier,  which  in  Greece  was  sacred  to 
Hecate, Circe, Hera and Persephone, all Death aspects of the Triple Moon-
goddess,  and  much  worshipped  by  witches.  As  Culpeper  says  succinctly 
in  his  Complete  Herbal:  'The  Moon  owns  it.'  Its  connexion  with  witches 
is  so  strong  in  Northern  Europe  that  the  words  'witch'  and  'wicked'  are 
derived from the same ancient word for willow, which also yields 'wicker'. 
The  'witch's  besom'  in  the  English  countryside  is  still  made  of ash  stake, 
birch  twigs  and  osier  binding:  of birch  twigs  because  at  the  expulsion  of 
evil  spirits  some  remain  entangled  in  the  besom;  of ash  stake  as  a  protec 
tion  against  drowning—witches are  made  harmless  if detached  from  their 
besoms  and  thrown  into  running  water;  of  osier  binding  in  honour  of 
Hecate.  The  Druidical  human  sacrifices  were  offered  at  the  full  of  the 
moon in  wicker-baskets,  and  funerary flints  were  knapped  in willow-leaf 
shape.  The  willow  (helice  in  Greek,  salix  in  Latin)  gave  its  name  to 
Helicon,  the  abode  of the  Nine  Muses,  orgiastic  priestesses  of the  Moon-
goddess.  It  is  likely  that  Poseidon  preceded  Apollo  as  the  Leader  of the 
Muses, as he did as guardian  of the Delphic Oracle; for a Helicean Grove 
was  still  sacred  to  him  in  Classical  times.  According  to  Pliny,  a  willow 
tree grew outside the Cretan cave where Zeus was born; and, commenting 
on a series of coins from  Cretan Gortyna, A.  B.  Cook in his Zeus suggests 
that  Europe  who  is  there  shown  seated  in  a  willow  tree,  osier-basket  in 
hand, and  made love to by an eagle,  is not only Eur-ope,  'she of the broad 
face',  i.  e.  the  Full  Moon,  but  Eu-rope,  'she  of  the  flourishing  willow-
withies'—alias  Helice,  sister  of  Amalthea.  The  wearing  of  the willow  in 
the hat as a sign of the rejected lover seems to be originally a charm against 
the  Moon-goddess's  jealousy.  The  willow  is  sacred  to  her  for  many 
reasons:  it is  the  tree  that  loves  water most,  and  the  Moon-goddess  is  the 
giver  of  dew  and  moisture  generally;  its  leaves  and  bark,  the  source  of 
salicylic  acid,  are  sovereign  against  rheumatic  cramps  formerly  thought 
to be caused by witchcraft.  The  Goddess's prime orgiastic bird, the w r y 
neck1,  or  snake  bird,  or  cuckoo's  mate—a  Spring  migrant  which  hisses1  Dionysus  was  called  Iyngies,  'of the wry-neck',  because  of the  use  of the wry-neck in  an 
ancient erotic charm. T he wry-neck is said by the third-century B . C. poet Callimachus to have 
been the messenger of Io which attracted Zeus to her arms; and his contemporary Nicander of 
Colophon  records  that nine Pierian  maidens w ho vied  with  the  Muses were transformed into 
birds,  of which  one  was  the  wry-neck—which  means  that  the  wry-neck  was  sacred  to  the 
original  Moon-goddess  of Mount  Pieria  in  Northern  Thessaly  (see  Chapter  T w e n t y - o n e) 
it  was  also  sacred  in E g y pt  and  Assyria.

1 73

like  a  snake, lies flat along a  bough,  erects  its  crest  when  angry,  writhes 
its  neck  about,  lays  white  eggs,  eats  ants,  and  has  v-markings  on  its 
feathers  like  those on  the scales  of oracular serpents  in  Ancient Greece— 
always nests in willow-trees. Moreover, the liknos, or basket-sieve anciently 
used  for  winnowing  corn,  was  made from  willow;  it was  in winnowing-
sieves  of this  sort,  'riddles',  that  the  North  Berwick witches  confessed  to 
King James  I  that  they  went  to  sea  on  their witches'  sabbaths.  A  famous 
Greek picture by Polygnotus at Delphi represented Orpheus  as  receiving 
the  gift  of  mystic  eloquence  by  touching  willow-trees  in  a  grove  of 
Persephone; compare the injunction in The Songof the Forest Trees: 'Burn 
not  the  willow,  a  tree  sacred  to  poets.'  The willow  is  the tree of enchant 
ment and is the fifth tree of the year;  five ( V) was the number sacred to the 
Roman Moon-goddess  Minerva.  The month extends  from  April  15 th  to 
May 12th, and May Day, famous for its orgiastic revels and its magic dew, 
falls in the middle. Itis possible that the carrying of sallow-willow branches 
on  Palm  Sunday,  a  variable feast which usually falls early  in  April,  is  a 
custom  that properly belongs to  the beginning of the willow month.H  F OR  U A TH

T he  sixth  tree  is  the  whitethorn  or  hawthorn  or  may,  which  takes  its 
name  from  the  month  of May.  It  is,  in  general,  an  unlucky  tree  and  the 
name  under which  it  appears  in  the  Irish  Brehon  L a w s,  sceith,  is  appar 
ently  connected  with  the  Indo-Germanic  root  sceath  or  sceth,  meaning 
harm;  from  which  derive  the  English  'scathe'  and  the  Greek  a-scethes, 
scatheless.  In  ancient  Greece,  as  in  Britain,  this  was  the  month  in  which 
people  went  about  in  old  clothes—a  custom  referred  to  in  the  proverb 
'Ne'er  cast  a  clout  ere  May  be  out',  meaning  'do  not  put  on  new  clothes 
until  the  unlucky  month  is  over',  and  not  necessarily  referring  to  the 
variability  of the  English  climate;  the  proverb  is,  in  fact,  also  current  in 
North-eastern  Spain  where,  in  general,  settled  hot  weather  has  come  by 
Easter.  They  also  abstained  from  sexual  intercourse—a  custom  which 
explains May as  an  unlucky  month  for  marriage.  In  Greece  and  Rome, 
May was the month in which the temples  were swept  out  and  the  images 
of  gods  washed:  the  month  of  preparation  for  the  midsummer  festival. 
The  Greek  Goddess  Maia,  though  she  is  represented  in  English  poetry 
as  'ever  fair  and  young'  took  her  name  from  maia,  'grandmother';  she 
was  a  malevolent  beldame  whose  son  Hermes  conducted  souls  to  Hell. 
She  was  in  fact  the  White  Goddess,  who  under  the  name  of Cardea,  as 
has  been  noticed,  cast  spells  with  the  hawthorn.  The  Greeks  propitiated 
her  at  marriages—marriage  being  considered  hateful  to  the  Goddess— 
with  five  torches  of hawthorn-wood  and  with  hawthorn  blossom  before 
the unlucky month began.

1 741 74

Plutarch in his Roman  Questions asks:  'W hy do not the Romans marry 
in  the  month  of May?'  and  answers  correctly:  'Is  not  the  reason  that  in 
this  month  they  perform  the  greatest  of  purification  ceremonies?'  He 
explains  that  this  was  the  month  in  which  puppets  called  argeioi  ('white 
men')  were  thrown  into  the  river  as  an  offering  to  Saturn.  Ovid  in  his 
Fasti  tells  of an  oracle  given  him  by  the  Priestess  of Juppiter  about  the 
marriage  of  his  daughter—'Until  the  Ides  of  June'  [the  middle  of  the 
month]  'there  is  no  luck  for  brides  and  their  husbands.  Until  the  sweep 
ings  from  the  Temple  of Vesta  have  been  carried  down  to  the  sea  by  the 
yellow Tiber I must myself not comb my locks which I have cut in sign of 
mourning,  nor  pare  my  nails,  nor  cohabit with  my husband  though  he  is 
the Priest of Juppiter. Be not in haste. Your daughter will have better luck 
in  marriage  when  Vesta's fire burns  on  a  cleansed  hearth.'  The  unlucky 
days came to an end on June 1 5. In Greece the unlucky month began and 
ended  a  little  earlier.  According  to  Sozomen  of  Gaza,  the  fifth-century 
ecclesiastical historian, the Terebinth Fair at Hebron was celebrated at the 
same  time  and  with  the  same  taboos  on  new  clothes  and  sexuality,  and 
with  the same object—the washing and  cleansing of the holy  images.In  Welsh  mythology  the hawthorn  appears  as  the  malevolent  Chief of 
the  Giants, Yspaddaden Penkawr, the father of Olwen ('She of the White 
Track'), another name of the White Goddess. In the Romance of Kilhwych 
and  Olwen—Kilhwych  was  so  called  because  he  was  found  in  a  swine's 
burrow—Giant  Hawthorn  puts  all  possible  obstacles  in  the  way  of 
Kilhwych's marriage to Olwen and demands a dowry of thirteen treasures, 
all apparently impossible to secure. The  Giant lived in a castle guarded  by 
nine  porters  and  nine  watch-dogs,  proof  of  the  strength  of  the  taboo 
against marriage in the hawthorn month.

The destruction  of an ancient hawthorn tree  is in Ireland attended with 
the  greatest  peril.  T wo  nineteenth-century  instances  are  quoted  in  E.  M. 
Hull's  Folklore  of the  British  Isles.  The  effect  is  the  death  of  one's  cattle 
and  children  and  loss  of all  one's  money.  In  his  well-documented  study, 
Historic  Thorn  Trees  in  the  British  Isles,  Mr.  Vaughan  Cornish  writes  of 
the  sacred  hawthorns  growing  over  wells  in  Goidelic  provinces.  He 
quotes the case of 'St.  Patrick's Thorn' at Tin'ahely in County Wicklow: 
'Devotees  attended  on  the  4th  of May,  rounds  were  duly  made  about  the 
well, and shreds torn  off their garments  and  hung on  the  thorn.'  He adds: 
'This  is  St.  Monica's  D ay but I  do  not know  of any association.'  Plainly, 
since  St.  Monica's  Day,  N ew  Style,  corresponds  with  May  1 5 t h,  Old 
Style,  this was a ceremony  in honour of the Hawthorn month, which had 
just  begun.  The  rags  were  torn  from  the  devotees'  clothes  as  a  sign  of 
mourning and propitiation.

The  hawthorn,  then, is  the tree  of enforced  chastity.  The  month  begins 
on  May  1 3 t h,  when  the  may  is  first  in  flower,  and  ends  on  June  9th.

175The  hawthorn,  then, is  the tree  of enforced  chastity.  The  month  begins 
on  May  1 3 t h,  when  the  may  is  first  in  flower,  and  ends  on  June  9th.

175

The  ascetic  use  of  the  thorn,  which  corresponds  with  the  cult  of  the 
Goddess  Cardea  must,  however,  be  distinguished  from  its  later orgiastic 
use  which  corresponds  with  the  cult  of  the  Goddess  Flora,  and  which 
accounts  for  the  English  mediaeval  habit  of riding  out  on  May  Morning 
to  pluck  flowering  hawthorn  boughs  and  dance  around  the  maypole. 
Hawthorn blossom has,  for many men,  a strong scent of female sexuality; 
which is why the Turks use  a flowering branch as an erotic symbol. Mr. 
Cornish  proves  that  this  Flora  cult was  introduced  into  the  British  Isles 
in the late first-century B . C. by the second Belgic invaders; further, that the 
Glastonbury Thorn which flowered on Old Christams D ay (January 5 th, 
N ew Style) and was cut down by the Puritans at the Revolution was a sport 
of the  common  hawthorn.  T he  monks  of Glastonbury  perpetuated it and 
sanctified it with an improving tale about Joseph of Arimathea's staff and 
the Crown of Thorns as a means of discouraging the orgiastic use of haw 
thorn blossom, which normally did not appear until May D ay (Old Style).

It is likely that the Old Bush which had grown on the site of St.  David's 
Cathedral  was  an  orgiastic  hawthorn;  for  this  would  account  for  the 
legend of David's mysterious birth.

D  FOR DU1RD  FOR DU1R

T he  seventh  tree  is  the  oak,  the  tree  of Zeus,  Juppiter,  Hercules,  T he 
Dagda (the chief of the elder Irish gods), Thor, and all the other Thunder-
gods, Jehovah in so far as he was  'El', and Allah. The royalty of the oak-
tree needs no enlarging upon:  most  people are familiar with the argument 
of Sir  James  Frazer's  Golden  Bough,  which  concerns  the  human  sacrifice 
of the oak-king of Nemi  on  Midsummer Day.  The fuel of the midsummer 
fires  is  always  oak,  the fire of Vesta  at  Rome  was  fed  with  oak,  and  the 
need-fire is always kindled in an oak-log. When  Gwion writes in the  Cdd 
Goddeu,  'Stout  Guardian  of the  door,  His  name  in  every  tongue',  he  is 
saying  that  doors  are  customarily  made  of  oak  as  the  strongest  and 
toughest  wood  and  that  'Duir',  the  Beth-Luis-Nion  name  for  'Oak', 
means  'door'  in many European languages  including Old  Goidelic dorus, 
Latin ^ora,  Greek  thura,  and  German  tur,  all  derived  from  the  Sanskrit 
Dwr,  and  that  Daleth,  the  Hebrew  letter  D,  means  'Door'—the  T  being 
originally an  'r'.  Midsummer is  the  flowering  season  of the oak,  which is 
the  tree  of endurance  and  triumph,  and  like  the  ash  is  said  to  'court  the 
lightning  flash'.  Its  roots  are  believed  to  extend  as  deep  underground 
as  its  branches  rise  in  the  air—Virgil  mentions  this—which  makes  it 
emblematic  of a  god  whose  law  runs  both  in  Heaven  and  in  the  Under 
world. Poseidon the ash-god and Zeus the oak-god were both once armed 
with  thunderbolts;  but when  the Achaeans  humbled the Aeolians, Posee-
don's bolt was converted into a trident or fish-spear and Zeus reserved the 
sole  right  to  wield  the  bolt.  It  has  been  suggested  that  oak  oracles  were

1 761 76

introduced  into  Greece  by  the  Achaeans:  that  they  originally  consulted 
the beech, as the Franks  did, but finding no beeches in Greece transferred 
their  allegiance  to  the  oak  with  edible  acorns,  its  nearest  equivalent,  to 
which  they  gave  the  name phegos—which,  as  has  been  mentioned,  is  the 
same  word  as fagus,  the  Latin  for beech. At any  rate,  the  oracular oak at 
Dodona was a phegos, not a drus, and the oracular ship Argo was, accord 
ing  to  Apollonius  Rhodius,  largely  made  of this  timber.  But  it  is  more 
likely  that  the  Dodona  oracle  was  in  existence  centuries  before  the 
Achaeans  came  and  that Herodotus was  right  in  stating on  the  authority 
of the Egyptian priests that the black dove and  oracular oak cults  of Zeus 
at  Amnion  in  the  Libyan  desert  and  of  Zeus  at  Dodona  were  coeval. 
Professor  Flinders  Petrie  postulates  a  sacred  league  between  Libya  and 
the Greek mainland well back into the third millennium B . C. The Ammon 
oak was  in  the  care  of the  tribe  of Garamantes:  the  Greeks  knew  of their 
ancestor  Garamas as 'the first of men'.  The  Zeus of Ammon was a sort of 
Hercules with  a  ram's  head  akin  to  ram-headed  Osiris,  and  to Amen-Ra 
the  ram-headed  Sun-god  of  Egyptian  Thebes  from  where  Herodotus 
says that the black doves flew to Ammon and Dodona.

The month, which takes its name from Juppiter the oak-god, begins on 
June  ioth  and  ends  on  July  7th.  Midway  comes  St.  John's  Day,  June 
24th,  the  day  on  which  the  oak-king  was  sacrificially  burned  alive.  The 
Celtic  year  was  divided  into  two  halves  with  the  second  half beginning 
in July,  apparently after a seven-day  wake,  or  funeral  feast,  in  the  oak-
king's  honour.Sir  James  Frazer,  like  Gwion,  has  pointed  out  the  similarity  of 'door' 
words  in  all  Indo-European  languages  and  shown  Janus  to  be  a  'stout 
guardian  of the door'  with his  head  pointing in  both  directions.  As usual, 
however,  he  does  not  press  his  argument  far  enough.  Duir  as  the  god  of 
the oak  month  looks both ways  because his post is at the turn  of the year; 
which  identifies  him  with  the  Oak-god  Hercules  who  became  the  door 
keeper  of the  Gods  after  his  death.  He  is  probably  also  to  be  identified 
with the British  god  Llyr or Lludd  or Nudd, a god  of the sea—i.e.  a god 
of a  sea-faring  Bronze  A ge  people—who  was  the  'father'  of Creiddylad 
(Cordelia)  an  aspect of the White  Goddess;  for according to  Geoffrey of 
Monmouth the grave of Llyr at Leicester was in a vault built in honour of 
Janus.  Geoffrey writes:

'Cordelia  obtaining  the  government  of  the  Kingdom  buried  her 
father  in  a  certain  vault which  she  ordered  to  be  made  for  him  under 
the  river  Sore  in  Leicester  (Leircestre)  and  which  had  been  built 
originally under  the  ground  in  honour  of the  god  Janus.  A nd  here  all 
the  workmen  of  the  city,  upon  the  anniversary  solemnity  of  that 
festival, used to begin their yearly labours.

1 77

Since Llyr was a pre-Roman God this amounts to saying that he was two-
headed,  like  Janus,  and  the  patron  of the N ew  Year;  but  the  Celtic year 
began  in  the  summer,  not  in  the  winter.  Geoffrey  does  not  date  the 
mourning  festival  but  it  is  likely  to  have  originally  taken  place  at  the  end 
of  June.T he old  'Wakes',  the hiring-fairs of the English countryside  came to  be 
held  at  various  dates  between  March  and  October  according  to  the  date 
of the local  saint's day.  ('At Bunbury Wakes  rye-grass  and  clover should 
be  ready  to  cut.  At  Wrenbury  Wakes  early  apples  are  ripe.'  English 
Dialect  Dictionary.)  But  originally  they  must  all  have  taken  place  at 
Lammas  between  the  hay  harvest  and  the  corn  harvest.  That  the  Wakes 
were mourning for the dead King is confirmed in  Chapter Seventeen. T he 
Anglo-Saxon  form  of Lughomass,  mass  in  honour  of  the  God  Lugh  or 
Llew,  was  hlaf-mass,  'loaf-mass',  with  reference  to  the  corn-harvest  and 
the  killing  of the  Corn-king.

What I take for a reference to L l yr as Janus occurs in the closing para 
graph  of  Merlin's  prophecy  to  the  heathen  King  Vortigern  and  his 
Druids, recorded by Geoffrey of Monmouth:

After  this Janus shall  never have priests  again.  His door will be  shut

and  remain  concealed  in  Ariadne's  crannies.

In  other  words,  the  ancient  Druidic  religion  based  on  the  oak-cult  will 
be swept away by  Christianity and the door—the god Llyr—will languish 
forgotten  in  the  Casde of Arianrhod,  the Corona Borealis.This  helps  us  to  understand  the  relationship  at  Rome  of Janus  and  the 
White  Goddess  Cardea who  is  mentioned  at  the  end  of  Chapter  Four  as 
the  Goddess  of Hinges  who  came  to  Rome  from  Alba  Longa.  She  was 
the  hinge on which the year swung—the  ancient  Latin,  not  the  Etruscan 
year—and  her  importance  as  such  is  recorded  in  the  Latin  adjective 
cardinalis—as  we  say  in  English  'of  cardinal  importance'—which  was 
also  applied  to  the  four  main .winds;  for winds  were  considered  as  under 
the  sole  direction  of the  Great  Goddess  until  Classical  times.  As  Cardea 
she  ruled  over  the  Celestial  Hinge  at  the  back of the North  Wind  around 
which,  as  Varro  explains  in  his  De  Re  Rustica,  the  mill-stone  of  the 
Universe  revolves.  This  conception  appears  most  plainly  in  the  Norse 
Edda,  where  the  giantesses  Fenja  and  Menja,  who  turn  the  monstrous 
mill-stone  Grotte  in  the  cold  polar night,  stand  for  the White  Goddess  in 
her  complementary  moods  of  creation  and  destruction.  Elsewhere  in 
Norse  mythology  the  Goddess  is  nine-fold:  the  nine  giantesses  who  were 
joint-mothers  of the  hero  Rig,  alias  Heimdall,  the  inventor  of the  Norse 
social  system,  similarly  turned  the  cosmic  mill.  Janus  was  perhaps  not 
originally  double-headed:  he  may  have  borrowed  this  peculiarity  from 
the  Goddess  herself who  at  the  Carmentalia,  the  Carmenta  Festival  in

178178

early  January,  was  addressed  by her  celebrants  as  'Postvorta  and  Ante-
vorta'—'she  who  looks  both  back  and  forward'.  However,  a  Janus  with 
long hair and  wings appears  on  an early stater of Mallos, a  Cretan  colony 
in  Cilicia.  He  is  identified  with  the  solar  hero  Talus,  and  a  bull's  head 
appears  on the same  coin.  In similar coins  of the  late fifth century B.C.  he 
holds  an  eight-rayed  disc  in  his  hand  and  has  a  spiral  of  immortality 
sprouting from his double head.

Here at last I can complete my argument about Arianrhod's  Castle and 
the  'whirling  round  without  motion  between  three  elements'.  The  sacred 
oak-king was  killed  at midsummer and  translated  to  the  Corona  Borealis, 
presided  over  by  the  White  Goddess,  which  was  then  just  dipping  over 
the Northern horizon.  But from  the song ascribed by Apollonius  Rhodius 
to  Orpheus, we know that the  Queen  of the Cirling Universe, Eurynome, 
alias  Cardea,  was  identical  with  Rhea  of  Crete;  thus  Rhea  lived  at  the 
axle  of  the  mill,  whirling  around  without  motion,  as  well  as  on  the 
Galaxy.  This  suggests  that  in  a  later  mythological  tradition  the  sacred 
king went  to  serve  her at  the  Mill,  not  in  the  Castle;  for  Samson  after his 
blinding  and  enervation  turned  a  mill  in  Delilah's  prison-house.Another  name  for  the  Goddess  of  the  Mill  was  Artemis  Calliste,  or 
Callisto  ('Most Beautiful'),  to  whom  the she-bear was sacred  in  Arcadia; 
and  in  Athens  at  the festival  of Artemis  Brauronia,  a  girl  of ten  years  old 
and  a  girl  of five, dressed  in  saffron-yellow  robes  in  honour  of the  moon, 
played  the part  of sacred  bears.  The  Great  She-bear  and  Little  She-bear 
are  still  the  names  of the  two  constellations  that  turn  the  mill  around.  In 
Greek  the  Great  Bear  Callisto  was  also  called  Helice,  which  means  both 
'that  which  turns'  and  'willow-branch'—a  reminder  that  the  willow  was 
sacred to the same Goddess.

The  evidence,  given  in  the  G w yn  context  at  the  close  of  Chapter Six, 
for  supposing  that  the  oak-cult  came  to  Britain  from  the  Baltic  between 
1600 and  1400 B.C.  suggests that the  Beth-Luis-Nion  sequence, in which 
Duir is the principal tree, was at any rate not elaborated before  1600 B.C., 
though  the rowan,  willow, elder and  alder were  perhaps already in sacral 
use.  G w y n,  'the  White  One',  son  of Llyr or Lludd  was  buried in a boat-
shaped  oak-coffin  in  his  father's  honour:  he was  a  sort  of Osiris  (his  rival 
'Victor  son  of  Scorcher'  being  a  sort  of  Set)  and  came  to  be  identified 
with  King  Arthur.  His  name  supplies  the  prefix  Win  of  many  ancient 
towns in Britain.

T  F OR  T I N ME

The  eighth  tree  is  the  holly,  which  flowers  in  July.  The  holly  appears 
in  the  originally  Irish  Romance  of Gawain  and  the  Green  Knight.  The 
Green  Knight  is  an  immortal  giant  whose  club  is  a  holly-bush.  He  and

1 791 79

Sir  Gawain,  who  appears  in  the  Irish  version  as  Cuchulain,  a  typical 
Hercules,  make a  compact  to  behead  one  another at alternate  N ew Years 
—meaning  midsummer  and  midwinter—but,  in  effect,  the  Holly  Knight 
spares  the  Oak  Knight.  In  Sir  Gawain s  Marriage,  a  Robin  Hood  ballad, 
King Arthur, who there has a seat at Carlisle, says:

—as  I came over a moor,

I see a lady where she sate

Between an oak and a green hollin.

She  was  clad in  redscarlit.

This  lady,  whose  name  is  not  mentioned,  will  have  been  the  goddess 
Creiddylad for whom, in Welsh myth, the Oak Knight and Holly Knight 
fought  every  first  of May  until  Doomsday.  Since  in  mediaeval  practice 
St.  John the  Baptist,  who  lost his  head  on  St.  John's  Day,  took  over  the 
oak-king's  titles  and  customs,  it  was  natural  to  let  Jesus,  as  John's 
merciful  successor,  take  over  the  holly-king's.  The  holly  was  thus 
glorified beyond the oak.  For example, in the Holly-Tree Carol:

Ofall the  trees that are in the wood

The Holly bears the crownOfall the  trees that are in the wood

The Holly bears the crown

—a  sentiment  that  derives  from  the  Song  of  the  Forest  Trees:  'Of  all  trees 
whatsoever the  critically best is holly.'  In each stanza  of the carol,  with its 
apt  chorus  about  'the  rising  of the  Sun,  the  running  of  the  deer',  some 
property  of  the  tree  is  equated  with  the  birth  or  passion  of  Jesus:  the 
whiteness  of  the  flower,  the  redness  of  the  berry,  the  sharpness  of  the 
prickles,  the  bitterness  of  the  bark.  'Holly'  means  'holy'.  Yet  the  holly 
which is native  to the  British Isles is unlikely to be  the  original  tree  of the 
alphabet:  it  has  probably  displaced  the  evergreen  scarlet-oak  with  which 
it  has  much  in  common,  including  the  same  botanical  name  ilex,  and 
which was  not introduced  into the  British Isles until  the sixteenth  century. 
The  scarlet-oak,  or  kerm-oak,  or  holly-oak,  is  the  evergreen  twin  of the 
ordinary oak and its  Classical  Greek  names prinos and hysge are also used 
for holly in modern Greek. It has prickly leaves and nourishes the kerm, a 
scarlet insect not unlike the holly-berry (and  once  thought to  be a berry), 
from  which  the  ancients  made  their  royal scarlet  dye  and  an  aphrodisiac 
elixir.  In the Authorised  Version  of the  Bible the word  'oak'  is sometimes 
translated  'terebinth'  and  sometimes  'scarlet-oak',  and  these  trees  make  a 
sacred  pair  in  Palestinian  religion.  Jesus  wore  kerm-scarlet  when  attired 
as  King  of the  Jews  (Matthew  X X V I I,  28).

We may regard the letters D and T as twins: 'the lily white boys clothed 
all  in  green  o!'  of the  mediaeval  Green  Rushes  song.  D  is  the  oak  which 
rules  the waxing part  of the  year—the  sacred  Druidic  oak,  the  oak  of the 
Golden  Bough.  T  is  the  evergreen  oak  which  rules  the  waning  part,  the 
180bloody  oak:  thus  an  evergreen  oak-grove  near  the  Corinthian  Asopus 
was  sacred  to  the  Furies.  Dann  or  Tann,  the  equivalent  of  Tinne,  is  a 
Celtic  word  for any  sacred  tree.  In  Gaul  and  Brittany it  meant  'oak',  in 
Celtic  Germany  it  meant  'fir';  in  Cornwall  the  compound  glas-tann 
('green  sacred  tree')  meant evergreen holm-oak,  and  the English word  'to 
tan'  comes  from  the  use  of its bark  in  tanning.  However,  in  ancient  Italy 
it  was  the  holly,  not  the  evergreen  oak,  which  the  husbandmen  used  in 
their midwinter Saturnalia. Tannus was the name of the Gaulish Thunder-
god,  and  Tina that of the Thunder-god, armed with a triple thunder-bolt, 
whom  the  Etruscans  took  over  from  the  Goidelic  tribes  among  whom 
they  settled.

The  identification  of the  pacific  Jesus  with  the holly  or  holly-oak  must 
be regretted as poetically inept,  except in so far as  he declared that he had 
come  to  bring  not  peace,  but  the  sword.  The  tanist  was  originally  his 
twin's  executioner;  it  was  the  oak-king,  not  the  holly-king,  who  was 
crucified  on  a  T-shaped  cross.  Lucian  in  his  Trial in  the  Court  of Vowels 
(about 160 A . D .) is explicit:

Men  weep,  and  bewail  their  lot,  and  curse  Cadmus  with  many 
curses  for introducing  Tau into the family of letters;  they say it was his 
body  that tyrants  took  for a  model,  his  shape  that  they imitated,  when 
they  set  up  the  erections  on  which  men  are  crucified.  Stauros  the  vile 
engine  is  called,  and  it  derives  its  vile  name  from  him.  N o w,  with  all 
these  crimes  upon  him,  does  he  not  deserve  death,  nay,  many  deaths? 
For  my  part  I  know  none  bad  enough  but  that  supplied  by  his  own 
shape—that  shape which he gave to  the gibbet named Stauros after him 
by men.And  in  a  Gnostic  Gospel  of  Thomas,  composed  at  about  the  same 
date,  the  same  theme  recurs  in  a  dispute  between  Jesus  and  his  school 
master about the  letter T.  The schoolmaster strikes Jesus on  the head and 
prophesies  the  crucifixion. 
In  Jesus's  time  the  Hebrew  character  Tav, 
the last letter of the alphabet, was shaped like the  Greek  Tau.

The  holly  rules  the  eighth  month,  and  eight  as  the  number  of increase 
is  well  suited  to  the  month  of  the  barley  harvest,  which  extends  from 
July  8th  to  August  4th.

C  F OR  C O LL

The  ninth  tree  is  the  hazel,  in  the  nutting  season.  The  nut  in  Celtic 
legend  is  always  an  emblem  of  concentrated  wisdom:  something  sweet, 
compact  and  sustaining enclosed  in  a  small  hard  shell—as  we  say:  'this  is 
the  matter in  a  nut-shell.'  T he  Rennes Dinnshenchas,  an  important  early 
Irish  topographical  treatise,  describes a beautiful  fountain called  Connla's

1 81

Well, near Tipperary, over which hung the nine hazels of poetic art which 
produced  flowers  and  fruit  (i.e.  beauty  and  wisdom)  simultaneously.  As 
the  nuts  dropped  into  the  well  they  fed  the  salmon  swimming  in  it,  and 
whatever  number  of  nuts  any  of them  swallowed,  so  many  bright  spots 
appeared  on  its  body.  All  the  knowledge  of  the  arts  and  sciences  was 
bound  up  with  the  eating  of these  nuts,  as  has  already  been  noted  in  the 
story  of Fionn,  whose  name  Gwion adopted.  In England  a  forked  hazel-
stick  was  used  until  the  seventeenth  century  for  divining  not  only  buried 
treasure and hidden water,  as now,  but guilty persons  in  cases  of murder 
and theft. A nd in the Book of St. Albans (1496 edition) a recipe is given for 
making oneself as invisible as if one had eaten fern-seed, merely by carrying 
a hazel-rod, a fathom and a half long with a green hazel-twig inserted in it.The  letter  Coll  was  used  as  the  Bardic  numeral  nine—because  nine  is 
the  number  sacred  to  the  Muses  and  because  the  hazel  fruits  after  nine 
years.  The  hazel  was  the  Bile  Ratha,  'the venerated  tree  of the  rath'—the 
rath  in  which  the  poetic  Aes  Sidhe  lived.  It  gave  its  name  also  to  a  god 
named Mac Coll or Mac Cool ('son of the Hazel')  who according to Keat-
ing's  History  of  Ireland  was  one  of  the  three  earliest  rulers  of  Ireland,  his 
two  brothers  being  Mac  Ceacht  ('son  of the  Plough')  and  Mac  Greine 
('son of the Sun').  They celebrated a triple marriage with the Triple God 
dess of Ireland, Eire, Fodhla and Banbha. This legend appears at first sight 
to record the overthrow of the matriarchal system by patriarchal invaders; 
but  since  Greine,  the  Sun,  was a  Goddess not a  God  and since both agri 
culture  and  wisdom  were  presided  over  by  the  Triple  Goddess,  the 
invaders  were  doubtless  Goddess-worshippers  themselves  and  merely 
transferred  their filial allegiance  to  the  Triple  Goddess  of the  land.

In  the  Fenian  legend  of the  Ancient  Dripping  Hazel,  the  hazel  appears 
as  a  tree  of  wisdom  that  can  be  put  to  destructive  uses.  It  dripped  a 
poisonous  milk,  had  no  leaves  and  was  the  abode  of vultures  and  ravens, 
birds  of divination.  It  split  in  two  when  the  head  of the  God  Balor  was 
placed in its fork after his death, and when Fionn used its wood as a shield 
in  battle its noxious  vapours killed  thousands  of the  enemy.  Fionn's  hazel 
shield  is  an  emblem  of the  satiric  poem  that  carries  a  curse.  It  was  as  the 
Druidic heralds'  tree  that  the  'hazel was arbiter'  in Gwion's  Cdd Goddeu; 
ancient  Irish  heralds  carried  white  hazel  wands.  The  hazel  is  the  tree  of 
wisdom and the month extends from August 5 th to September 1st.

M  F OR  M U INM  F OR  M U IN

The  tenth  tree  is  the  vine  in  the  vintage  season.  The  vine,  though  not 
native to Britain, is an important motif 'in British Bronze A ge art; so prob 
ably  the  Danaans  carried  the  tree  itself northward  with  them  as  well  as 
the  emblem.  It fruited  well  there  on a few sheltered Southern  slopes. But

182

since  it  could  not  be  established  as  a  wild  tree,  they  will  have  used  the 
bramble  as  a substitute:  the  fruiting season,  the  colour of the berries,  and 
the  shape  of the  leaf correspond,  and  blackberry  wine  is  a  heady  drink. 
(In  all  Celtic  countries  there  is  a  taboo  against  eating  the  blackberry 
though  it  is  a  wholesome  and  nourishing  fruit;  in  Brittany  the  reason 
given  is  'a cause  des fees',  'because  of the  fairies'.  In Majorca  the explana 
tion  is  different:  the  bramble  was  the  bush  chosen  for  the  Crown  of 
Thorns and the berries are Christ's blood. In North Wales as a child I was 
warned merely that they were poisonous.  In Devonshire the taboo is only 
on  eating  blackberries  after  the  last  day  of September,  when  'the  Devil 
enters  into  them';  which  substantiates  my  theory  that  the  blackberry was 
a  popular  substitute  for  Muin  in  the  West  Country.)  The  vine  was 
sacred  to  the  Thracian  Dionysus,  and  to  Osiris,  and  a  golden  vine  was 
one of the principal  ornaments  of the Temple of Jerusalem.  It is  the  tree of 
joy,  exhilaration  and  wrath.  The  month  extends  from  September  2nd  to 
September 29th and includes the autumn equinox.

G  FOR  G O RTG  FOR  G O RT

The  eleventh  tree  is  the  ivy  in  its  flowering  season.  October  was  the 
season  of  the  Bacchanal  revels  of  Thrace  and  Thessaly  in  which  the 
intoxicated  Bassarids  rushed  wildly  about  on  the  mountains,  waving  the 
fir-branches of Queen of Artemis (or Ariadne) spirally wreathed with ivy 
(the  autumnal 
—the  yellow-berried  sort—in  honour  of  Dionysus 
Dionysus,  who  must  be  distinguished  from  the  Dionysus  of the  Winter 
Solstice  who  is  really  a  Hercules),  and  with  a  roebuck  tattooed  on  their 
right  arms  above  the  elbow.  They  tore  fawns,  kids,  children  and  even 
men  to  pieces  in  their ecstasy.  The  ivy was  sacred  to  Osiris  as  well  as  to 
Dionysus.  Vine  and  ivy  come  next  to  each  other  at  the  turn  of the  year, 
and are jointly dedicated  to resurrection, presumably because they are  the 
only  two  trees  in  the  Beth-Luis-Nion  that  grow  spirally.  The  vine  also 
symbolizes  resurrection  because  its  strength  is  preserved  in  the  wine.  In 
England  the  ivy-bush  has  always  been  the  sign  of the  wine-tavern;  hence 
the proverb 'Good wine needs no bush', and ivy-ale, a highly intoxicating 
mediaeval drink, is still brewed at Trinity College, Oxford, in memory of 
a  Trinity student murdered  by  Balliol  men.  It is likely that the Bassarids' 
tipple  was  'spruce-ale',  brewed  from  the  sap  of silver-fir  and  laced  with 
ivy;  they  may  also  have  chewed  ivy-leaves  for  their  toxic  effect.  Yet  the 
main  Maenad  intoxicant  will  have  been  amanita  muscaria,  the  spotted 
toadstool  with  white  spots,  that  alone  could  supply  the  necessary 
muscular  strength.  Here  we  may  reconsider  Phoroneus,  the  Spring-
Dionysus,  inventor  of  fire.  He  built  the  city  of  Argos,  the  emblem  of 
which,  according  to  Apollodorus,  was  a  toad;  and  Mycenae,  the  main

183183

fortress  of  Argolis,  was  so  called,  according  to  Pausanias,  because 
Perseus,  a  convert  to  Dionysus  worship,  found  a  toadstool  growing  on 
the  site.  Dionysus  had  two  feasts—the  Spring  Anthesterion,  or  'Flower-
uprising';  and  the  autumn  Mysterion,  which  probably  means  'uprising 
of toadstools'  (mykosterion)  was  known  as  Ambrosia  ('food  of the  gods'). 
W as  Phoroneus  also  the  discoverer  of a  divine  fire  resident  in  the  toad 
stool,  and  therefore  Phryneus  ('toad  being')  as  well  as  Fearinus  ('Spring 
being')?  The  amanita  muscaria,  though  not  a  tree,  grows  under  a  tree: 
always  a  birch  northward  from  Thrace  and  Celtic  countries  to  the 
Arctic  Circle;  but  under  a  fir  or  pine  southward  from  Greece  and 
Palestine  to  the  Equator.  In  the  North  it  is  scarlet;  in  the  South,  fox-
coloured.  And  does  this  explain  the  precedence  given  to  the  silver-fir 
among  the vowels  as  A,  and  the  birch  among  the  consonants  as  B ?  Does 
it add a further note to 'Christ son of Alpha' ?(The  rivalry  mentioned in mediaeval English  carols  between  holly and 
ivy is not, as  one might expect, between  the tree of murder and  the tree of 
resurrection, between Typhon-Set and Dionysus-Osiris; instead  it repre 
sents  the  domestic  war  of the  sexes.  The  explanation  seems  to  be  that  in 
parts  of England  the  last  harvest  sheaf  to  be  carted  in  any  parish  was 
bound around with  Osirian  ivy and  called  the Harvest May,  the Harvest 
Bride,  or  the  I vy  Girl:  whichever  farmer  was  latest  with  his  harvesting 
was given  the I vy Girl as his penalty, an omen of ill  luck until the follow 
ing year.  Thus  the ivy came to  mean  a  carline,  or shrewish wife,  a simile 
confirmed  by  the  strangling  of trees  by  ivy.  But  ivy  and  holly  were  both 
associated  with  the  Saturnalia,  holly  being  Saturn's  club,  ivy  being  the 
nest  of the  Gold  Crest  Wren,  his  bird;  on  Yule morning,  the  last  of his 
merry  reign,  the  first  foot  over  the  threshold  had  to  be  that  of Saturn's 
representative, a dark man, called the Holly Boy, and elaborate precautions 
were  taken  to keep women  out of the way.  Thus I vy  Girl  and  Holly Boy 
became opposed; which gave rise to the Yule custom in which 'holly boys' 
and  'ivy  girls'  contended  in  a  game  of forfeits  for  precedence,  and  sang 
songs, mainly satirical, against each other.)

The ivy month extends from September 30th to October 27th.

P  F OR  P E I T H,  OR  NG  F OR  N G E T ALThe ivy month extends from September 30th to October 27th.

P  F OR  P E I T H,  OR  NG  F OR  N G E T AL

The  twelfth  tree  given  in  O'Flaherty's  list  is  Peith,  the  whitten,  or 
guelder-rose,  or  water-elder,  an  appropriate  introduction  to  the  last 
month  which  is  the  true  elder.  But  Peith  is  not  the  original  letter;  it  is  a 
Brythonic substitute  for  the  original  letter  N G,  which  was  of no  literary 
use to the Brythons, or (for that matter)  to the Goidels, but which formed 
part  of the  original  series.  The  NG  tree  was  the  Ngetal,  or  reed,  which 
becomes  ready  for  cutting  in  November.  The  canna-reed,  which  grows

184

from  a  thick  root  like  a  tree,  was  an  ancient  symbol  of  royalty  in  the 
Eastern Mediterranean.  The Pharaohs used reed sceptres  (hence Egypt is 
satirized  by  the  prophet  Isaiah  as  a  'bruised  reed')  and  a  royal  reed  was 
put into  Jesus's hand  when he was  attired  in  Scarlet.  It  is  the  tree  from 
which  arrows were cut, and  therefore appropriate  to  Pharaoh as a  living 
Sun-god  who  shot  off  his  arrows  in  every  direction  as  a  symbol  of 
sovereignty.  The  number  twelve  has  the  sense  of established  power,,  con 
firmed  by  the Irish  use  of reeds in thatching:  a house is not an established 
house  until  the  roof  is  on.  The  month  extends  from  October  28th  to 
November 24th.

R F OR RuisR F OR Ruis

The thirteenth tree is the elder, a waterside tree associated with witches, 
which  keeps  its  fruit  well  into  December.  It  is  an  old  British  superstition 
that a child laid in an elderwood  cradle will pine away or be pinched black 
and  blue  by  the  fairies—the  traditional  wood  for  cradles  is  the  birch,  the 
tree  of  inception,  which  drives  away  evil  spirits.  A nd  in  Ireland  elder 
sticks,  rather  than  ashen  ones,  are  used  by  witches  as  magic  horses. 
Although  the  flowers  and  inner  bark  of  the  elder  have  always  been 
famous  for  their  therapeutic  qualities,  the  scent  of an  elder  plantation  was 
formerly  held  to  cause  death  and  disease.  So  unlucky  is  the  elder  that  in 
Langland's  Piers  Plowman,  Judas  is  made  to  hang  himself  on  an  elder 
tree.  Spencer  couples  the  elder  with  the  funereal  cypress,  and  T.  Scot 
writes  in  his  Philomythie  ( 1 6 1 6 ):

The cursed elder and the fatal yew 
With witch  \rowan\  and nightshade in their shadows grew.

King William  Rufus was killed by an archer posted  under an  elder.  T he 
elder  is  also  said  to  have  been  the  Crucifixion  tree,  and  the  elder-leaf 
shape  of  the  funerary  flints  in  megalithic  long-barrows  suggest  that  its 
association  with  death  is  long-standing.  In  English  folklore  to  burn  logs 
of elder  'brings  the  Devil  into  the  house'.  Its  white  flowers,  which  are  at 
their  best  at  midsummer,  make  the  elder  another  aspect  of  the  White 
Goddess; and  the same is  true of the rowan.  The elder is  the tree of doom 
—hence  the  continued  unluckiness  of  the  number  thirteen—and  the 
month  extends  from  November  25th  to  the  winter  solstice  of December 
22nd.But what of the extra day? It falls outside the thirteenth-month year and 
is  therefore  not ruled  by any  of the  Trees.  I  am  assuming  that its  natural 
place  is  between  the  letter-months  of R  and  B,  in  the  day after  the winter 
solstice when the hours  of daylight begin  to  lengthen again:  in fact, about

185185

Christmas E v e, the birthday of the Divine Child. The R . B. radicals recall 
robur, the Latin for 'oak'  and  'strength', and also the  Celtic word  'robin'. 
For at  this point in the year, in  British  folklore,  the  Robin  Red  Breast as 
the Spirit of the New Year sets out with a birch-rod to kill his predecessor 
the Gold Crest Wren, the Spirit of the Old Year, whom he finds hiding in 
an  ivy  bush.  Sir  James  Frazer  has  shown  in  his  Golden  Bough  that  the 
Christmas  E ve  folk-custom  of hunting  the  wren  with  birch  rods,  which 
still survives in Ireland and the Isle of Man, was at one time also practised 
in  Rome  and  ancient  Greece,  where  the  Gold  Crest  was  known  as  'the 
little  king'.  That  the  Gold  Crest  does  frequent  ivy  bushes  at  Christmas 
time  is  ornithological  fact.  The  robin  is said  to  'murder its  father',  which 
accounts for its red breast. There is a clear reference to the story in Gwion's 
Angar  Cyvyndawd:  'Keingyddym  Eidduw  Bum  i  arweddawd',  ('Concealed 
in  the  ivy  bush,  I  have  been  carried  about').  The  wren-boys  of Ireland 
sometimes  use  a  holly-bush  instead  of  an  ivy-bush;  the  holly  being  the 
tree of the tanist, who killed the oak-king at midsummer. T he wren is pro 
tected  from  injury  at  all  other  seasons  of the  year  and  it  is  very unlucky 
to  take its  eggs.  One  of the Devonshire  names  for the wren  is  'the cuddy 
vran'—'Bran's sparrow'—and in Ireland it was linked with Bran's crow, 
or raven, as a prophetic bird. R. I. Best has edited a collection of wren and 
raven  omens  in  Erin  VIII ( 1 9 1 6 ).   Bran,  it has been shown,  was  Saturn.Perhaps  the  most  ancient  wren  tradition  is  quoted  by  Pausanias  in  his 
Description  of Greece:  he  says  that  Triptolemus,  the  Eleusinian  counter 
part  of  Egyptian  Osiris,  was  an  A r g i ve  priest  of  mysteries  named 
Trochilus  who  fled  from  Argos  to  Attica  when  Agenor  seized  the  city. 
Trochilus  means  'wren'  and  it  also  means  'of  the  wheel',  presumably 
because the wren is hunted when the wheel of the year has gone  full circle. 
The  connexion  of the  wren  with  the  wheel  was  retained  until  recently  in 
Somersetshire.  Swainson  records in  his Birds  (1885):  'It is  customary on 
Twelfth  D ay  to  carry  about  a  wren,  termed  the  King,  enclosed  in  a  box 
with  glass  windows,  surmounted  by  a  wheel  from  which  are  appended 
various  coloured  ribbands.'  A  later  version  makes  Triptolemus  a  son  of 
Picus  (the  woodpecker,  another  prophetic  bird),  and  thus  identifies  him 
with  Pan  or  Faunus.  Pausanias's  story  seems  to  refer  to  the  explusion 
from  Argos  by  Syrian  invaders  of the  priesthood  of  Cronos  (Bran),  to 
whom  the wren was sacred.

As soon as  one has  mastered  the elementary grammar and  accidence  of 
myth, and built up a small vocabulary, and learned to distinguish seasonal 
myths  from  historical  and  iconotropic  myths,  one is  surprised  how  close 
to the surface lie the explanations, lost since pre-Homeric times, of legends 
that  are  still  religiously  conserved  as  part  of our  European  cultural  in 
heritance.  For  example,  the  various  legends  of the halcyon,  or kingfisher 
which like the wren,  is associated in  Greek myth with  the winter solstice.

186186

There  were  fourteen  'halcyon  days'  in  every  year,  seven  of which  fell 
before  the  winter  solstice,  seven  after:  peaceful  days  when  the  sea  was 
smooth as a pond and the hen-halcyon built a floating nest and hatched out 
her  young.  According  to  Plutarch  and  Aelian,  she  had  another  habit,  of 
carrying  her  dead  mate  on  her  back  over  the  sea and mourning him with 
a peculiarly plaintive cry.

The  number  fourteen  is  a  moon-number,  the  days  of  the  lucky  first 
half  of  the  month;  so  the  legend  (which  has  no  foundation  in  natural 
history,  because  the  halcyon  does  not  build  a  nest  at  all  but  lays  its  eggs 
in  holes  by  the waterside)  evidently  refers  to  the  birth  of the  new  sacred 
king,  at  the  winter  solstice—after  his  mother,  the  Moon-goddess,  has 
conveyed  the  old  king's  corpse  to  a  sepulchral  island.  Naturally,  the 
winter  solstice  does  not  always  coincide  with  the  same  phase  of  the 
moon,  so  'every  year'  must  be  understood as  'every  Great Year', at  the 
close  of which  solar  and  lunar  time  were  roughly  synchronized  and  the 
sacred king's term ended.Homer  connects  the  halcyon  with  Alcyone,  a  title  of Meleager's  wife 
Cleopatra (Iliad, IX,  562)  and  with an earlier Alcyone who was  daughter 
to  Aegeale,  'she who wards  off the hurricane',  by Aeolus,  the eponymous 
ancestor  of  the  Aeolian  Greeks.  The  word  'halcyon'  cannot  therefore 
mean  hal-cyon,  'sea-hound',  as  is  usually  supposed,  but  must  stand  for 
alcy-one,  'princess  who  averts  evil'.  This  derivation  is  confirmed  by  the 
fable told by Apollodorus and Hyginus, and briefly mentioned by Homer, 
of the earlier Alcyone:  how she and her husband  Ceyx ('sea-mew')  dared 
call  themselves  Hera  and  Zeus,  and  how  the  real  Zeus  punished  them  by 
drowning  Ceyx,  whereupon  Alcyone  also  drowned  herself.  Ceyx  was 
then  metamorphosed  into  a  sea-mew  or,  according  to  Alcman,  into  a 
razor-bill,  and  she  into  a  halcyon.  The  sea-mew  part  of the  legend  need 
not  be  pressed,  though  the bird,  which has  a very plaintive  cry,  is sacred 
to  the  Sea-goddess  Aphrodite;  the  historical  basis  seems  to  be  that  late 
in  the  second  millennium  B.C.  the  Aeolians,  who  had  agreed  to  worship 
the pre-Hellenic Moon-goddess  as  their divine ancestress  and  protectress, 
became  tributary  to  the  Achaeans  and  were  forced  to  accept  the  Olym 
pian  religion.Pliny,  who  carefully  describes  the  halcyon's  alleged  nest—apparently 
the  zoophyte  called  halcyoneum  by  Linnaeus—reports  that  the  halcyon 
is  rarely seen  and  then  only at  the winter and  summer solstices and at  the 
setting  of the  Pleiads.  This  proves  her  to  have  originally  been  a  mani 
festation  of the  Moon-goddess  who  was  worshipped  at  the  two  solstices 
as  the  Goddess  of  alternatively  Life-in-Death  and  Death-in-Life—and 
who  early  in  November,  when  the  Pleiads  set,  sent  the  sacred  king  his 
summons  to  death  (as  will  be  pointed  out  in  Chapter  Twelve).  Still 
another  Alcyone,  daughter  to  Pleione,  'Queen  of  Sailing',  by  the  oak-

1 87

hero  Atlas,  was  the  mystical  leader  of  the  seven  Pleiads.  The  heliacal 
rising  of  the  Pleiads  in  May  marked  the  beginning  of  the  navigational 
year;  their  setting  marked  its  end  when  (as  Pliny  notices  in  a  passage 
about  the  halcyon)  a  remarkably  cold  North  wind  blows.  The  circum 
stances  of Ceyx's  death  show  that  the Aeolians,  who were  famous sailors, 
gave  the  goddess  the  title  'Alcyone'  because  as  Sea-goddess  she  pro 
tected  them  from  rocks  and  rough weather:  for  Zeus  had  wrecked  him  in 
defiance of Alcyone's powers by hurling lightning at the ship. The halcyon 
continued  for  centuries  to  be  credited  with  the  magical  power  of allaying 
storms,  and  its  body  when  dried  was  used  as  a  talisman  against  Zeus' 
lightning—supposedly  on  the  ground  that  where  once  it  strikes,  it  will 
not  strike  again.  I  have  twice  (with  an  interval  of many  years)  seen  a 
halcyon  skimming  the  surface  of  the  same  Mediterranean  bay,  on  both 
occasions  about  midsummer  when  the  sea  was  without  a  ripple:  its 
startlingly  bright  blue  and  white  plumage  made  it  an  unforgettable 
symbol  of the  Goddess  of calm  seas.The connexion  made  by Homer  between  Meleager's wife Alcyone and 
the  halcyon  is  that  when  her  mother,  Marpessa,  was  carried  off  by 
Apollo  from  Idas  the  Argonaut,  her  beloved  husband,  she  mourned  him 
as  bitterly  as  the  earlier Alcyone  had  mourned  Ceyx  and  therefore  gave 
her  new-born  daughter  Cleopatra  the  surname  'Alcyone'.  This  is  non 
sense.  A  priestess  named  Cleopatra  whom  the  original  Meleager  married 
may well have borne the divine title 'Alcyone'; but it is likely that Alcyone 
was  called  the  Daughter  of Marpessa  ('the  snatcher')  because  Marpessa 
was  the  White  Goddess  as  the  Old  Sow  who  ruled  mid-winter  and  be 
cause  the  halcyon  days  fall  at  mid-winter.  This  would,  incidentally, 
explain  why  Pliny  recommended  dried  and  pulverized  halcyon  nests  as  a 
'wonderful  cure'  for  leprosy;  sow's  milk  was  held  to  cause  leprosy  (the 
association  of the White  Goddess with  leprosy is  given in  detail  in  Chap 
ter Twenty-Four) and Alcyone as Marpessa's benignant daughter would 
be  immune  against  the  infection.  Apollo's  rape  of Marpessa  at  Messene, 
like  his  rape  of Daphne  ('the  bloody  one')  at  Delphi,  are  events  in  early 
Greek  tribal history:  seizure of oracular shrines by the Achaean partisans 
of Apollo.

188

Chapter  Eleven

THE  T R EE  A L P H A B ET  (2)

The vowels of the Beth-Luis-Nion make a complementary seasonal

sequence,  and  like  the  vowels  of  the  Boibel-Loth  represent 
stations in the year. I take them to be the trees particularly sacred 
to  the  White  Goddess,  who  presided  over  the  year  and  to  whom  the 
number  five  was  sacred;  for  Gwion  in  his  poem  Kadeir  Taliesin  ('The 
Chair of Taliesin'), which was the chair that he claimed as  Chief Poet of 
Wales after his confounding of Heinin  and  the  other bards, describes the 
Cauldron of Inspiration, Cerridwen's cauldron, as:Sweet cauldron of the Five Trees?

In Crete, Greece and the Eastern Mediterranean in general sacred trees are 
formalised as pillars; so these five trees may be the same as the five pillars 
with  vertical  and  spiral  flutings  which  a  man  is  shown  adoring  in  a 
Mycenaean  cylinder  seal.2  In  the  newly-discovered  Gnostic  Gospel  of

1  It  is  likely  that  G w i on  was  also  aware  of  the  value  given  to  the  number  F i ve  by  the 
Pythagoreans and  their successors. T he Pythagoreans swore their oaths on the 'holy tetractys', 
a figure consisting of ten dots arranged in a pyramid, thus:

.  .  .

T he  top  dot  represented  position;  the  two  dots  below,  extension;  the  three  dots  below  those, 
surface;  the  four dots at  the  bottom,  three-dimensional  space.  T he  pyramid,  the  most ancient 
emblem of the Triple  Goddess, was philosophically interpreted  as  Beginning, Prime and E n d; 
and  the  central  dot  of  this  figure  makes  a  five  with  each  of  the  four  dots  of  the  sides.  F i ve 
represented  the colour and  variety  which  nature  gives  to  three-dimensional  space,  and  which 
are  apprehended  by  the  five  senses,  technically  called  'the  w o o d '—a  quincunx  of  five  trees; 
this coloured various world was held to be formed by five elements—earth, air, fire, water and 
the  quintessence  or  soul;  and  these  elements  in  turn  corresponded  with  seasons.  Symbolic 
values  were  also  given  to  the  numerals  from  6  to  1 0,  which  was  the  number  of perfection. 
T he tetractys could be interpreted in  many other w a y s:  for instance, as the three  points of the 
triangle  enclosing a hexagon  of dots—six  being the  number of life—with  a central dot increas-
i ng this to  seven, technically known as 'Athene', the number of intelligence, health and light.* To  judge  from  a  design  on  a  glass  dish  of  the  Seleucid  epoch,  showing  the  facade  of 
Solomon's  Temple  as  rebuilt  by  Zerubbabel  on  the  original  Phoenician  model,  the  spirally 
fluted pillars correspond with  Boaz,  Solomon's right-hand  pillar dedicated  to growth and the 
waxing  sun;  the  vertically  fluted  with  Jachin,  his  left-hand  pillar dedicated  to  decay  and  the 
waning  sun.  T he  symbolism  became  confused  when  the  J e ws  made  their  N ew  Y e ar  corres-

189

Thomas,  five  trees  of  Paradise  are  mentioned—but  these  are  emblems  of 
the five deathless Ones,  namely Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Enoch and Elijah.

A  FOR  A I LM189

Thomas,  five  trees  of  Paradise  are  mentioned—but  these  are  emblems  of 
the five deathless Ones,  namely Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Enoch and Elijah.

A  FOR  A I LM

The first tree is the silver fir, a female tree with leaves closely resembling 
the  yew's,  sacred  in  Greece  to  Artemis  the  Moon-goddess  who  presided 
over  childbirth,  and  the  prime  birth-tree  of Northern  Europe,  familiar  in 
the  Nativity  context.  In  Orkney,  according  to  Rogers's  Social  Life  in 
Scotland,  mother  and  child  are  'sained'  soon  after  delivery  with  a  flaming 
fir-candle  whirled  three  times  round  the  bed.  It  is  remarkable  that  ailm, 
in  Old  Irish,  also  stood  for  the  palm,  a  tree  not  native  to  Ireland  (though 
it  grew  well  on  my  grandfather's  estate  in  C o.  Kerry).  The  palm,  the 
birth-tree  of  Egypt,  Babylonia,  Arabia  and  Phoenicia,  gives  its  name 
phoenix  ('bloody')  to  Phoenicia,  which  formerly  covered  the  whole 
Eastern  Mediterranean,  and  to  the Phoenix which is born and reborn  in a 
palm.  Its  poetic  connexion  with  birth  is  that  the  sea  is  the  Universal 
Mother  and  that  the  palm  thrives  close  to  the  sea  in  sandy  soil  heavily 
charged  with  salt;  without  salt  at  its  roots  a young  palm  remains  stunted. 
The  palm  is  the Tree  of Life  in  the  Babylonian  Garden  of Eden  story.  Its 
Hebrew  name  is  'Tamar'—Tamar  was  the  Hebrew  equivalent  of  the 
Great  Goddess  Istar  or  Ashtaroth;  and  the  Arabians  adored  the  palm  of 
Nejran as  a  goddess,  annually  draping  it  with  women's  clothes  and  orna 
ments.  Both  Delian  Apollo  and  Nabataean  Dusares  were  born  under  a 
palm-tree.  In  modern  Irish  'ailm'  has  come  to  mean  elm,  under  the 
influence of  the  Latin  Classics,  for in  Italy  the  elm,  ulmus,  which  is  not 
native  to  the  British  Isles,  was  used  for  supporting  the  young  vine  and 
so  became  the  alma  mater  of the  Wine-god.  This  interdependence  of vine 
and elm  was sanctified  by a  reference in  the  early  Christian  book  of reve 
lation,  The  Shepherd  of  Hermas.But  the silver fir, which  also  likes  sandy  soil  and  sea  breezes,  is  as  old  a 
birth-tree as  the  palm,  being  the  tree under which  the  God  of Byblos  was 
born: the prototype of the pre-dynastic Osiris of Egypt. The Greek for fir 
is  elate,  and  Pausanias's  account  of Elatos  the  Arcadian  is  interesting.  He 
was 'father of Ischys, the lover of Aesculapius's mother' and of Cyllen who

pond  with  the  autumn  vintage  festival,  for  the  pillars  were  then  referred  to  as  Jachin  and 
Boaz,  not Boaz and Jachin, but the tradition remained 'Boaz is to Jachin as Gerizim is  to Ebal 
—as  blessing  is  to  cursing'.  Gerizim  and  Ebal  were  the  twin  peaks  covering  the  Ephraimite 
shrine  of Shechem.  Gerizim  was  on  the  right-hand  as  one  faced  east  from  Shechem,  Ebal  on 
the  left,  and  Shechem  was  a  home  of  the  terebinth  cult  In  Deuteronomy  XI,  29  there  is  a 
prophecy  attributed  to  Moses.  ' Y ou  shall  put  the  blessing upon  Gerizim  and  the  curse  upon 
E b a l.  ..  towards  the entrance into  Shechem where dwell  the  Canaanites in the  towered  house 
beside the sacred terebinth of Moreh.'

This  was  as  it should  have  been.  T he  terebinth,  the  hard-wooded  Canaanite equivalent of 
Duir  the  oak,  was  naturally  placed  in  the  middle  with  Ebal  on  the  unlucky  left,  Gerizim  on 
the lucky right.

190190

gave  his  name  to  Mount  Cyllene  'until  then  nameless',  which  became  the 
birth-place  of  Hermes.  Other  mythographers  convert  Cyllen  into  'the 
Nymph  Cyllene',  wife  of  Pelasgus  who  founded  the  Pelasgian  race.  It 
seems  that  originally  Elatos  was  Elate  'the  lofty  one',  a name  transferred 
from Artemis to her sacred tree—an ivy-twined, fir-cone-tipped branch of 
which  was  waved  in  her  honour  at  the  Dionysian  revels—and  that 
Cyllene {Cylle And) 'the  curved  queen'  was  another  of her  titles.  The  fir-
tree  of the  Birth-goddess  is  similarly  transferred  to  her  son  in  the  myth 
of Attis,  son  of  Nana,  the  Phrygian  Adonis.  He  is  said  to  have  been 
metamorphosed  into  a fir by  the  Goddess  Cybele who  loved  him,  when 
he  lay  dying  from  a  wound  dealt  him  by  a  boar  sent  by  Zeus—or  else 
dealt  him  by  a  Phrygian  king  whom  he  had  emasculated  and  who 
emasculated  him  in  return.

The  Trojan  horse,  a  peace-offering  to  the  Goddess  Athene,  originally 
the same White Goddess, was made of silver-fir: a horse, because sacred to 
the  moon.

In  the  Museum  of Newcastle-on-Tyne  is  a  Roman-British  altar  dedi 
cated  to  'the Mothers' 1  by one  Julius  Victor.  It shows a triangle  standing 
on  its  base  with  a  fir-cone  enclosed.  Though  Druantia,  the  name  of the 
Gallic  Fir-goddess,  contains  no  reference  to  her  own  tree,  it  makes  her 
'Queen  of  the  Druids'  and  therefore mother  of  the whole  tree-calendar.

The silver fir has  its station  on  the first day  of the  year,  the  birthday  ofThe silver fir has  its station  on  the first day  of the  year,  the  birthday  of

1  At  Aries,  in  Provence,  the  cult  of  the  Goddess  as  a  Triad  or  Pentad  of  Mothers  has 
survived  under  Christian  disguise  until  today,  when  her  festival  is  celebrated  from  May  24th 
to  May  28th,  the  middle  of  the  Hawthorn,  or  Chastity,  month,  but  now  her  devotees  are 
largely  gipsies.  As  a  Triad  she has  become  known  as  'The  Three  Maries of Provence'  or  ' T he 
Three Maries of the Sea'; as a Pentad she has had Martha added to her company, and an apocry 
phal  serving-girl  called  Sara.  It  seems that  these  were  Christianizations of pre-Christian  reliefs 
on  the  tombstones  of the  cemetery  of Alyscamps  at  Aries,  in  which  the  T r i a d,  or Pentad,  was 
shown  on  one  panel;  and  below,  on  another,  the  soul  in  resurrection.  T he  scene  was  explained 
as  the  Raising  of Lazarus.  As  late  as  the  time  of Dante  the  cemetery  was  used  in  the  ancient 
style.  T he  corpse  was  laid  in  a  boat,  with  money  in  it,  called  drue  de  mourtilage  and  floated 
down  the  Rhone  to  the  Alyscamps.  T he  name  Alyscamps  has  been  explained  as  Campi 
Elysiani,  'the  Elysian  Fields',  but  it  is  as likely  that  A l ys  was  the  ancient  name  of the  Goddess; 
it  may  even  be  that  the  Homeric  adjective  Elysian  (the  e  is  a  long  one)  is  derived  from  her 
name.  A l ys  also  appears  as  alise  or  alis  in  many  French  place-names.  Dauzat's  Dictionnaire 
Etymologique,  under  alis,  alise,  meaning  a  'sheltered  creek',  derives  it  from  "the  Gaulish  w o rd 
alisia,  perhaps  pre-Celtic,  which  is  represented  by  numerous  place-names,  and  which  must 
also  have  provided  the  Spanish  word  for  alder,  aliso.'  T h is  makes  good  mythical  sense,  be 
cause  Calypso's  sepulchral  island  of  O g y g ia  was  screened  by  alder  thickets.  A l ys  or  Alis  or 
Halys  is  the  name  of the  biggest  river  of Asia  Minor,  and  that  it  is  pre-Hellenic  is  shown  by 
the  town  of Aliassus  (-assus  is  a  Cretan  termination)  built  on  its  banks  just  before  it  turns 
north  to  empty  into  the  Southern  Black  Sea.  There  are  also  two  Hales  rivers,  one  in  Ionia, 
the  other  in  Lucania,  which  may  be  named  after  the  same  goddess.  O ne  name  for  the  alder in 
German  is  else,  corresponding  with  the  Scandinavian  word  elle.  T he  Danish  EUerkonge  is  the 
alder-king,  Bran,  w ho  carries  off  children  to  the  other  world;  but  elle  also  means  'elf' which 
should  be  regarded  as a clethrad,  or  alder-fairy.  T h us  in  Goethe's well-known  ballad,  based  on 
this  predecessor  Herder's  Stimmen  der  Vblker,  EUerkonge  is  correcdy  translated  'Erlkonig', 
the commoner  German  w o rd  for alder  being  trie.I9I

the  Divine  Child,  the  extra  day  of  the  winter  solstice.  Thirteen  weeks 
separate these stations and the last of each was a death week and demanded 
a blood-sacrifice.

O  F OR  O NN

The second  tree  is  the  furze, which with  its  golden  flowers  and  prickles 
typifies the young Sun at the Spring equinox;  the  time when furze fires are 
lighted on the hills.  The effect of burning away the old  prickles is  to make 
tender  new  ones  sprout  on  the  stock,  which  sheep  eat  greedily;  and  to 
encourage  the  growth  of grass—'The  furze  but  ill-behaved,  Until  he  is 
subdued.'  The  religious  importance  of furze,  or  gorse,  which  in  Welsh 
folk-lore  is  'good  against  witches',  is  enhanced  by  its  flowers  being  fre 
quented  by  the  first  bees  of  the  year,  as  the  ivy's  are  by  the  last.  The 
name  On-niona,  a  Goddess  worshipped  by  the  Gauls  in  ash-groves,  is  a 
compound  of  Onn  and  Nion,  which  supplies  the  date  of  her  festival, 
namely  the Spring equinox at  the close of the Ash-month.

U  F OR  U RA

The  third  tree  is  the  heather,  sacred  to  the  Roman  and  Sicilian  love-
goddess  Venus  Erycina;  and  in  Egypt  and  Phoenicia  to  Isis  whose 
brother  Osiris  was  immured  in  a  heather-tree  at  Byblos,  where  she  went 
to  seek  him.  The  Isis  legend  quoted  by  Plutarch  is  late  and  artificial  but 
hints at child-sacrifice in honour of Osiris.The  eighteenth-century  antiquary  Winslow  took  Dean  Swift  to  Lough 
Crew  to  collect  local  legends  of the  Irish  Triple  Goddess.  Among  those 
collected  was  one  of  the  death  of  the  Garbh  Ogh,  an  ancient  ageless 
giantess,  whose  car  was  drawn  by  elks,  whose  diet  was  venison  milk  and 
eagles'  breasts  and  who  hunted  the  mountain  deer  with  a  pack  of seventy 
hounds  with  bird  names.  She  gathered  stones  to  heap  herself  a  triple 
cairn and  'set  up  her  chair in  a  womb  of the  hills  at  the  season  of heather-
bloom'; and then expired.

The  Gallic  Heather-goddess  Uroica  is  attested  by  inscriptions  in 
Roman  Switzerland;  her  name  is  half-way  between  Ura,  and  the  Greek 
word  for  heather,  ereice.

The heather is  the  midsummer  tree,  red  and  passionate,  and  is  associ 
ated  with  mountains  and  bees.  The  Goddess  is  herself a  queen  bee  about 
whom  male  drones  swarm  in  midsummer,  and  as  Cybele  is  often  so  pic 
tured; the ecstatic self-castration of her priests was a  type of the emascula 
tion of the drone by the queen bee in the nuptial act. Venus fatally courted 
Anchises  on  a  mountain  to  the  hum  of bees.  But  white  heather  is  lucky, 
being  a  protection  against  acts  of  passion.  The  Sicilian  Mount  Eryx  is 
famous  for  the  visit  of  Butes  the  bee-master,  son  of  the  North  Wind, 
who was given a hero-shrine there by the nymphs of the Goddess Erycina.

192

The  reference  in  Gwion's  Cad  Goddeu  to  the  heather  comforting  the 
battered poplars is to 'heather-ale', a favourite restorative in Wales.192

The  reference  in  Gwion's  Cad  Goddeu  to  the  heather  comforting  the 
battered poplars is to 'heather-ale', a favourite restorative in Wales.

The  ancient  popularity  of  lindens  or  lime-trees  among  love-poets  of 
Germany  and  Northern  France,  suggests  that  they  became  a  substitute, 
in  flat  regions,  for  mountain-heather.  Lindens  flower  from  mid-May  to 
mid-August.  They  do  not  rank  as  sacred  trees  in  Britain,  where  only  the 
small-leaved  variety  seems  to  be  indigenous.  However,  in  Thessaly, 
Cheiron the Centaur's goddess-mother associated with the erotic wryneck, 
was called Philyra  ('linden').

E  F OR  E A D HAE  F OR  E A D HA

The  fourth  tree,  the  tree  of the  autumn  equinox  and  of old  age,  is  the 
shifting-leaved  white poplar, or aspen, the shield-maker's tree.  According 
to  Pausanias  it was first introduced  into  Greece  from  Epirus by Hercules 
(but which?);  and  the  Latin  legend  is  that  he  bound  his  head  in  triumph 
with  poplar  after  killing  the  giant  Cacus  ('the  evil  one')  in  his  den  on  the 
Aventine  Hill  at  Rome.  The  side  of  the  leaves  next  to  his  brow  were 
whitened  by  the  radiant  heat  he  gave  out.  Presumably  the  myth  accounts 
for  the  difference  in  leaf and  ritual  use  between  the  aspen  and  the  black 
poplar  which  was  a  funereal  tree  sacred  to  Mother  Earth  in  pre-Hellenic 
Greece.  There is  a reference in the  Casina of Plautus  to the divinatory use 
of  black  poplar  and  silver  fir,  the  fir  apparently  standing  for  hope,  the 
poplar  for  loss  of hope1—somewhat  as  in  Pembrokeshire  a  girl  gives  a 
lover  either  a  piece of birch as  a sign  of encouragement,  'You  may begin', 
or a piece of hazel, called a collen, 'Be wise and desist'. Hercules conquered 
death,  and  in  ancient  Ireland  the  fi  or  measuring-rod  used  by  coffin-
makers  on  corpses  was  of aspen,  presumably  as  a  reminder  to  the souls 
of the  dead  that  this  was not  the end.  Golden head-dresses of aspen  leaves 
are found in Mesopotamian burials of 3000 B .C

I  F OR  I D HOI  F OR  I D HO

The fifth tree is the yew, the death-tree in all European countries, sacred 
to  Hecate in  Greece  and Italy.  At  Rome, when black  bulls were sacrificed 
to  Hecate,  so  that  the  ghosts  should  lap  their  gushing  blood,  they  were 
wreathed with yew.  The yew is  mentioned  by Pausanias  as  the  tree beside 
which  Epaminondas  found  the  bronze  urn  on  Mount  Ithome,  containing 
on  a  tin  scroll  the  secret  mysteries  of the  Great  Goddess.  On  the  other 
side  of  the  urn,  appropriately,  grew  a  myrtle,  which  (as  will  appear  in 
Chapter  Thirteen)  was  the  Greek  equivalent  of  the  elder,  the  death-
consonant  R.  That  the scroll was made of tin  is interesting;  for the ancient 
Greeks imported  their tin from  Spain and  Britain.  In Ireland  the yew was 
'the coffin of the vine':  wine  barrels were made of yew staves.  In  the  Irish

1  Sed manendum,  turn  ista  out populina fors  out  abiegina  est  tua.  ( A ct  II.)

m1  Sed manendum,  turn  ista  out populina fors  out  abiegina  est  tua.  ( A ct  II.)

m

romance  of  Naoise  and  Deirdre,  yew  stakes  were  driven  through  the 
corpses  of these  lovers  to  keep  them  apart;  but  the  stakes  sprouted  and 
became  trees  whose  tops  eventually  embraced  over  Armagh  Cathedral. 
In Brittany it is said that church-yard yews will spread a root to the mouth 
of each  corpse.  Yew  makes  the  best  bows—as  the  Romans  learned  from 
the  Greeks—and  the  deadliness  of  the  tree  was  thereby  enhanced;  it  is 
likely  that  the  Latin  taxus,  yew,  is  connected  with  toxon,  Greek  for  bow, 
and  with  toxicon,  Greek  for  the  poison  with  which  arrows  were  smeared. 
The  ancient  Irish  are  said  to  have  used  a  compound  of yew-berry,  helle 
bore  and  devil's  bit  for  poisoning  their  weapons.  John  Evelyn  in  his 
Silva  (1662)  points  out  that  the  yew  does  not  deserve  its  reputation  for 
poisonousness—'whatever  Pliny  reports  concerning  its  shade,  or  the 
story  of  the  air  about  Thasius,  the  fate  of  Cativulcus  mentioned  by 
Caesar,  and  the  ill report which the  fruit has vulgarly obtained  in  France, 
Spain  and  Arcadia.'  Cattle  and  horses  nibble  the  leaves  without  ill-effect, 
he says;  but  later  he suggests  that  the  'true  taxus'  is  indeed  'mortiferous*. 
Its  use  in  the  English  witch-cult  is  recalled  in  Macbeth  where  Hecate's 
cauldron  contained:

•

... slips of yew

Sliver'd in the Moon's eclipse.•

... slips of yew

Sliver'd in the Moon's eclipse.

Shakespeare  elsewhere  calls  it  the  'double  fatal  yew'  and  makes  Hamlet's 
uncle  poison  the  King  by  pouring  its  juice  ('hebenon')  into  his  ear.  It 
shares with the oak  the  reputation  of taking  longer  than  any  other  tree  to 
come  to  maturity,  but  is  longer  lived  even  than  the  oak.  When  seasoned 
and polished its wood has an extraordinary power of resisting corruption. 
One  of the  'Five  Magical  Trees  of Ireland'  was  a  yew.  This  was  the 
Tree  of Ross,  described  as  'a  firm  straight  deity"  (the  Irish  yew  differed 
from  the  British in being cone-shaped,  with branches growing straight up, 
not  horizontally),  'the  renown  of Banbha'  (Banbha  was  the  death  aspect 
of  the  Irish  Triple  Goddess),  'the  Spell  of  Knowledge,  and  the  King's 
Wheel'—that  is  to  say  the  death-letter  that  makes  the  wheel  of existence 
come  full  circle;  as  a  reminder  of  his  destiny,  every  Irish  king  wore  a 
brooch  in  the  form  of  a  wheel,  which  was  entailed  on  his  successor.  I 
place  the  station  of  the  yew  on  the  last  day  of  the  year,  the  eve  of  the 
Winter  Solstice.  Ailm  the  Silver-fir  of Birth  and  Idho  the  Yew  of Death 
are sisters:  they stand  next  to  each  other in  the  circle  of the  year and  their 
foliage  is almost  identical.  Fir is  to  yew as silver is to  lead.  The mediaeval 
alchemists,  following  ancient  tradition,  reckoned  silver  to  the  Moon  as 
presiding  over  birth,  and  lead  to  Saturn  as  presiding  over  death;  and 
extracted both metals from the same mixed ore.

Fir, womb of silver pain, 
Yew, tomb of leaden grief-—

194

Viragoes of one vein, 
Alike in leaf— 
With arms up-flung 
Taunt us in the same tongue: 
'Here Jove's own coffin-cradle swung'.Fir, womb of silver pain, 
Yew, tomb of leaden grief-—

194

Viragoes of one vein, 
Alike in leaf— 
With arms up-flung 
Taunt us in the same tongue: 
'Here Jove's own coffin-cradle swung'.

An  Assyrian  sculpture  published  by  Felix  Lajard  in  his  Sur  la  Cuke  de 
Mithra  (1847),  shows  the  year  as  a  thirteen-branched  tree.  The  tree  has 
five  bands around the trunk and  the sceptre-like branches are arranged six 
on  each side,  one at the summit.  Here evidendy the Eastern Mediterranean 
agricultural  year,  beginning  in  the  autumn,  has  been  related  to  the  solar 
year beginning at the Winter solstice. For there is a small ball, representing 
a  new  solar  year,  suspended  above  the  last  three  branches;  and  of the  two 
rampant  goats  which  act  as  supporters  to  the  tree  device,  the  one  on  the 
right,  which  has  turned  his  head  so  that  his  single  horn  forms  a  crescent 
moon,  rests  a  forefoot  on  the  uppermost  of  these  last  three  branches; 
while  the  other goat,  a  she-goat  turning her head  in  the  opposite  direction 
so  that  her  horn  forms  a  decrescent  moon,  is  claiming  the  first  three 
branches.  She has a full udder, appropriate to this season, because the  first 
kids  are  dropped  about  the  winter  solstice.  A  boat-like  new  moon  swims 
above the tree, and a group of seven stars, the seventh very much brighter 
than  the  others,  is  placed  beside  the  she-goat;  which  proves  her  to  be 
Amalthea,  mother  of the  horned  Dionysus.  The  he-goat  is  an  Assyrian 
counterpart  of Azazel,  the  scape-goat  sacrificed  by  the  Hebrews  at  the 
beginning  of the  agricultural  year.  The  five  bands  on  the  tree,  of which 
one  is  at  the  base  of the  trunk,  another  at  the  top,  are  the  five  stations  of

the year;  in a Babylonian  tree of the year, published in  the same book, they 
are symbolized by five fronds.

*9Sthe year;  in a Babylonian  tree of the year, published in  the same book, they 
are symbolized by five fronds.

*9S

In  the  light  of this  knowledge  we  can  re-examine  the  diagram  of the 
hand  used  as  a  signalling  keyboard  by  the  Druids  and  understand  the 
puzzling  traditional  names  of  the  four  fingers—'fore-finger',  'fool's-
finger',  'leech, or  physic-finger' and  'auricular  or  ear-finger'—in  terms  of 
the mythic value of the letters contained  on  them.The  slight  difference  in  order  of  letters  between  the  Beth-Luis-Nion 
and the Boibel-Loth does not affect the argument;  though I believe  that the 
system was based  on the  tree meanings of the  Beth-Luis-Nion, because  in 
one  of the  ancient  tales  a  really  dark  night  is  described  by  a  poet  as  one 
in  which  a  man  could  not  distinguish  oak-leaf from  hazel,  nor  study  the 
five fingers of his own stretched-out hand'. The fore-finger has Duir on 'it, 
the  oak-god  who  is  the  foremost  of the  trees,  surmounted  by  Luis,  the 
rowan,  a  charm  against  lighming;  the  fool's-finger  has  Tinne  on  it,  the 
holly-king,  or  green  knight,  who  appears  in  the  old  English  'Christmas 
Play',  a  survival  of the  Saturnalia,  as  the  Fool  who  is  beheaded  but  rises 
up again unhurt;  the leech-finger has  Coll  on it,  the sage hazel, who  is  the 
master-physician;  the ear-finger—in  French  doigt auriculaire—is based  on 
the  two  death-letters  Ruis  and  Idho  and  therefore has  oracular power;  as 
they still say in France of a person who gets information from a mysterious 
source: 'Son petit doigt le lui dit.' 'Auricular finger' is usually explained as 
'the  finger  most  easily  put  into  one's  ear-hole',  but  the  earliest  sense  of 
'auricular'  is  'secredy  whispered  in  the  ear'.  The  auricular  finger  was 
probably used  by the  Gallic and British Druids  for stopping the ear as an 
aid  to  inspiration.  Its  divinatory  character  was  established  early  enough 
in Western Europe for it to appear in a number of folk tales concerning the 
loss  of a  little  finger,  or a  little  toe,  by an  ogre's daughter;  the hero  of the 
story finds it and it enables him to win the ogre's permission to marry the 
daughter.  These stories  occur in  Brittany, Lorraine, the West Highlands, 
Viscaya  in  Spain,  and  Denmark.  In  the  Romance  of Taliesin  it  is  the  litde 
finger of Elphin's wife that is said to have been magically cut off.The 'ring-finger'  is another name for the leech-finger. The Romans and 
Greeks  used  the  thumb,  sacred  to  Venus,  for  their  seal-rings  which  were 
usually  made  of iron;  these  were  prophylactic  charms  to  maintain  their 
virility, the thumb being a synonym for the phallus and  iron a compliment 
to  Venus's  husband,  the  Smith-god  Vulcan.  But  for  their  wedding  rings 
they used  the  fourth finger of the  left hand.  This  custom was explained  by 
Macrobius, who wrote in the fifth century A . D ., on two grounds: that this 
was  the  finger  in  least  use  of the  ten  and  the  least  capable  of individual 
movement,  therefore  the  safest  to  wear  precious  jewels  upon;  and  (here 
quoting  the  authority  of  the  first-century  writer  Appian)  that  in  this 
finger  an  artery  runs  direct  to  the  heart.  The  artery  to  the  heart  is  an 
astrological,  rather  than  an  anatomical,  observation—though  a  small 
vein,  which  the  ancients  could  not  distinguish  from  an  artery,  does  show

196

at  the  bottom  joint—because  in  the  late  Classical  apportionment  of the 
human  body to planetary influences it is Apollo,  Sun-god and healer, who 
rules  the  heart,  as  Venus  rules  the  kidneys;  Mercury,  the  lungs;  Diana 
(Moon),  the head—and  so  on.  The fourth  finger  is thus used  as  the  ring-
finger  because  the  prophylactic wedding-ring,  made  of gold  in  honour  of 
Apollo,  controls  the  heart  which  is  the  seat  of enduring  love.  The  artery 
legend  is  also  quoted  in  a  medical  context  by  the  sixteenth-century 
'the  ancient 
German  humanist  Levinus  Lemnius  who  records  that 
physicians  from whom  this finger derives  its name of "physic-finger"  used 
to mix  their medicaments  and  potions with  it,  on  the theory that no poison 
can  adhere  even  to  its  extreme  tip  without  communicating  itself directly 
to the heart.'Precisely .the  same  system  survives  in  popular  cheiromancy,  which  is 
late  Classical  in origin.  Palmists  give the  fore-finger to  Juppiter the oak-
god;  the middle finger to  Saturn the  Christmas  Fool;  the fourth finger (in 
German  also  called  the  'gold  finger')  to  the  Sun—Apollo  the  Sun-god 
having  latterly  become  the  patron  of  physicians  and  god  of  wisdom 
generally;  and  the  little  finger  to  Mercury  in  his  aspect  of  Conductor  of 
Dead  Souls.  The  Moon  has  the  heel  of the  palm,  being  the  Underworld-
goddess  from  whom  Mercury  derives  his  inspiration;  Venus  the  thumb 
(as a phallic emblem); and Mars the centre of the hand, in which the weapon 
is  gripped—his  initial  M  is  formed  by  the  principal  lines  of the  hand.  A 
bronze  votive  hand  from  Phrygia  dedicated  to  Zeus  Sabazius—a  rustic 
Juppiter—contains  a  little  figure  in  Phrygian  cap  and  breeches,  with  his 
feet  resting  on  a  ram's  head  holding  up  thumb,  fore-finger  and  middle 
finger  in  what  is  called  the  Latin  Blessing—Venus's  thumb  for  increase, 
Juppiter's  fore-finger  for  fortunate  guidance,  Saturn's  middle  finger  for 
rain.  He is imitating the posture of the hand in which he is held, and on the 
fore-finger is perched Juppiter's eagle.  It was not so  much  a blessing as  a 
propitiatory gesture used before embarking on a speech or recital;  Greek 
and  Latin  orators  never  omitted  it.  The  Devil's  blessing,  still used  by  the 
Frisian  Islanders,  consists  in  raising  the  fore-finger  and  ear-finger  of the 
right hand, with  the  other fingers and  the  thumb  folded  against  the palm. 
This  is  an  invocation  to  the  Horned  God  of the  witches,  with  his  lucky 
right  horn and his unlucky left expressing his powers for good and evil.The  Apollo-finger  is  connected  with  the  poplar  in  the  story  of  the 
sun-god  Phaethon  whose  sisters  wept  for  him  when  he  died:  they 
were  metamorphosed  into  poplars  and  their  tears  into  amber,  sacred  to 
Apollo.

The  Saturn-finger  is  connected  with  the  heather in  the  story  of Osiris, 
the Egyptian  Saturn.  Osiris was enclosed  in a heather tree, and the  lowest 
consonant on  the  finger,  the  reed,  was  sacred  to  Osiris  as  King of Egypt-
According  to  the  well-informed  fourteenth-century  antiquarian  Richard 
197

of Cirencester, rich Southern Britons of the third  century A . D.  wore gold 
rings  on  the  fool's  finger;  in  the  B . L . F.  alphabet  this  finger  belonged  to 
Bran,  whom  they  must by  then  have  learned  from  the  Romans  to  identify 
with  Osiris.  To wear a ring on  the  fool's finger naturally expressed a hope 
of resurrection.

The  thumb  of Venus  is  connected  with  the  palm-tree  by  its  sacredness 
to  the  orgiastic  goddess  Isis,  Latona  or  Lat.  Lat  was  the  mother  of 
Nabatean  Dusares  the  vine-god,  worshipped  in  Egypt,  and  the  lowest 
consonant on the thumb was the vine.

The  Juppiter-finger  is  connected  with  the  furze,  or  gorse,  by  the

Spring  gorse-fires  burned  in  his  honour  as  god  of shepherds.

The connexion of the Mercury-finger with the yew is made by Mercury's 
conducting  of  souls  to  the  place  presided  over  by  the  death-goddess 
Hecate, alias his mother Maia, to whom the yew was sacred.It  is  fitting  that  the  most  sensitive  part  of the  hand,  the  tip  of the  fore 
finger,  should  belong to  Luis  as  the  diviner.  But all  the  finger-tip  trees— 
Luis  the  rowan,  Nion  the  ash,  Fearn  the  alder  and  Saille  the  willow— 
were used  in divination.  This  perhaps  throws  light on  an Irish  poetic  rite 
called  the  Dichetal do  Chennaib  ('recital  from  the  finger-ends'),  of which 
the  ollave was  required  to  be  a  master,  and which  Dr. Joyce  describes  as 
'the  utterance  of an  extempore  prophecy or  poem  that seems  to have  been 
accomplished  with  the  aid  of  a  mnemonic  contrivance  of  some  sort  in 
which the fingers played a principal part'. St. Patrick, while abolishing two 
other  prophetic  rites,  the  Imbas  Forasnai,  'palm-knowledge  of enlighten 
ment',  and  another  like  it,  because  they  involved  preUminary  sacrifice  to 
demons,  permitted  the  'recital  from  the  finger  ends'  because  it  did  not. 
In  Cormac's  Glossary the Dichetal do  Chennaib is explained:

In  my  day  it  is  by  the  ends  of his  finger-bones  that  the  poet  accom 
plishes the rite in this  manner:  'When he sees the person or thing before 
him  he makes  a verse  at once  with  his  finger  ends,  or  in  his  mind  with 
out studying, and composes and repeats at the same  time.'

It  is  less  likely  that  a  mnemonic  trick  involving  the  use  of  the  finger 
alphabet  was  used  than  that  the  poets  induced  a  poetic  trance  by  treating 
their finger-tips as oracular agents; since the Dichetal do Chennaib is always 
mentioned  with  the  other  two  divinatory  rites  as  of  the  same  general 
nature.

[At this point my  own  finger-tips  began  to  itch and  when  I  gave  them a

pen  to hold  they reconstructed  the original  incantation as follows:

Tree powers, finger tips, 
First pentad ofthe four, 
Discover aUyour poet asks 
Drumming on his brow.

1 98pen  to hold  they reconstructed  the original  incantation as follows:

Tree powers, finger tips, 
First pentad ofthe four, 
Discover aUyour poet asks 
Drumming on his brow.

1 98

Birch peg, throbbing thumb, 
By power ofdivination, 
Birch, bring him news of love; 
Loud the heart knocks.

Rowan rod, forefinger, 
By power of divination 
Unriddle him a riddle; 
The key's cast away.

Ash, middle finger, 
By power ofdivination 
Weatherwise,fool otherwise, 
Mete him out the winds.

Alder, physic finger, 
By power ofdivination 
Diagnose  all maladies 
Ofa doubtful mind.

Willow wand, ear finger, 
By power ofdivination 
Force confessions from the mouth 
Of a mouldering corpse.

Finger-ends, five twigs, 
Trees, true-divining trees, 
Discover allyour poet asks 
Drumming on his brow.]Finger-ends, five twigs, 
Trees, true-divining trees, 
Discover allyour poet asks 
Drumming on his brow.]

The  finger  alphabet  was  evidently  used  in  the  witch  cult  of mediaeval 
Britain,  to  judge  from  the  Devil  marks  tattooed  on  the  hands  of witches. 
In  Joseph  Glanvil's  Sadducismus  Triumphatus  ( 1 6 8 1)  a  detailed  account 
is  given  of two  covens  of Somersetshire witches,  one  of thirteen  formed  at 
Brewham,  another  at  Wincanton,  both  places  being  about  fourteen  miles 
from  Glastonbury.  The  British  racial  element,  as  opposed  to  the  Saxon, 
predominated  in  Somerset  and  popular  reverence  for  Glastonbury  as  a 
principal  seat  of  the  Old  Religion  was  still  strong  in  the  seventeenth 
century.  From  the  confessions  of  the  members  of  these  covens  at  their 
trial in  1664,  it appears  that the chief, or god,  of these witches was known 
as  Robin  and  that  he  sealed  initiates with  a  prick  from  a  needle  made  be 
tween  the  upper  and  middle  joints  of the  physic-finger.  This  is  precisely 
the  spot  at  which  one  would  expect  the  prick,  since  the  covens'  activities 
included  both  black and white magic  the upper  joint  belongs  to  Coll,  the 
hazel,  the  tree  of white  magic  and  healing,  the  lower  to  Straif,  the  black-

199

thorn  which,  as  will  be  shown in  Chapter  Fourteen,  was  the  tree  of  black 
magic  and  blasting.  These  witches  used  thorns  for  sticking  into  the  wax 
images  of their  enemies  under  Robin's  direction.In  Scotland  the  fool's-finger was  used  for  the  Devil's  mark,  and  though 
the  precise  location  of  the  mark  is  not  recorded,  it  was  evidently  low 
down,  since  Margaret  McLevine  of  Bute  complained  that  the  Devil 
nearly  cut  this  finger  off  her.  The  bottom  joint  of  the  fool's-finger  is 
Ura,  the heather—a suitable tree  for the initiation  of Scottish  witches  who, 
according to Shakespeare, met on blasted heaths.

Two  Northampton  witches,  Elinor  Shaw  and  Mary  Phillips,  who  were 
condemned  to  death  in  1705,  had  been  pricked  at  their  fingers'  ends: 
unfortunately the  finger  is  not specified,  but perhaps  it was  the  finger  with 
Saille  as  its  tip,  the  willow  sacred  to  Hecate,  mother  of  witches. 1

Dr.  Macalister  gives  little  more  importance  to  the  Irish  Tree-Ogham 
than  to  such  other  cypher  systems  recorded  in  the  Book  of  Ballymote  as 
Pig-Ogham,  Castle-Ogham  and  Fruit-Ogham.  But  that  the  name  for 
the  B.L.N,  alphabet, which is admittedly earlier than  the  B . L . F.  alphabet, 
begins  with'three  trees  proves  that  the  original  Ogham  was  a  Tree-
Ogham;  and  the  mythological  associations  of  the  trees  that  comprise 
O'Flaherty's list are so  ancient,  various and coherent,  that it seems  impos 
sible  to  regard  it  as  a  late  mediaeval  invention,  'pedantic  and  artificial'.  It 
seems  to  be  the  original  alphabet  invented  by  Ogma  Sun-Face.  Dr. 
Macalister disparages  the invention  of Ogham as  childish and unworthy of 
a  god;  but  this  is  because  he  regards  the  Boibel-Loth  as  the  only  genuine 
Ogham  alphabet  and  the  Beth-Luis-Nion  as  an  experimental  approach  to 
it and  considers  that  both  are  cribbed  from  the  Greek alphabet.  He  is  not 
to  be  convinced  that  either  has  any  virtue  besides  the  obvious  alphabetic 
one.An  objection  against  regarding  the  Beth-Luis-Nion  as  a  complete 
alphabet  is  that  it  has  only  thirteen  consonants,  of which  one,  N G,  is  use 
less,  while  two  ancient  letters,  Q  and  Z,  contained  in  the  Boibel-Loth  and 
known  in  Ogham  as  Quert  and  Straif,  are  omitted.  Straif  is  the  black 
thorn  and  Quert  is  the  wild  apple  tree:  both  mythologically  important 
trees.  If  Ogma  Sun-Face  raised  four  pillars  of equal  length,  the  original 
system  must  have  contained  five  vowels  and  three  sets  of five consonants. 
This  objection will  be  fully met  in  Chapter Thirteen.  It  is enough  to  note 
meanwhile  that  O'Flaherty  was  not  alone  in  recording  a  B.L.N,  alphabet 
with  only  thirteen  consonants.  O'Sullivan's  Ogham,  quoted  in  Ledwich's

1  British  sailors used  always  to be  tattooed with a star in the hollow  of the hand between  the 
thumb  and  fore-finger,  and  the  custom  survives  in  some  ports.  T h is  is  originally  a  plea  to 
Venus  as  Goddess  of the  Sea  and  Juppiter  as  G od  of the  A ir  to  bring  the  sailor  safe  ashore, 
the  star being  the  symbol of hope  and  guidance.

200

Antiquities ofIreland,  has  the  same number,  and  with  a  similar omission  of 
Q  and  Z,  though  with  NG  for  P;  O'Sullivan  adds  some  diphthongs  and 
other  mysterious  symbols  such  as  eg, feo  and  oai,  but  the  canon  of  the 
alphabet is the one discussed here.Edward  Davies  considered  that  the  Beth-Luis-Nion  alphabet  was  so 
called because B.L.N,  are the radical consonants of Belin the Celtic god of 
the  solar year.  This  makes  sense,  since  it  suggests  an  identification  of the 
thirteen  consonants,  months  of  the  year,  with  various  mythological 
companies  of thirteen—for  example  with  Arthur  and  his  Twelve  Knights 
of the  Round  Table;  Balder  and  his  twelve  judges;  Odysseus  and  his 
Twelve  Companions;  Romulus  and  his  Twelve  Shepherds;  Roland  and 
the  Twelve  Peers  of  France;  Jacob  and  his  Twelve  Sons;  Danish 
Hrolf and  his  twelve  Berserks.  Also,  with  the  head  and  the  twelve  other 
parts  of  Osiris's  torn  body  which  Isis  in  her  boat  recovered  from  the 
Nile—Osiris having originally been a tree-god.  And  we  may also  identify 
the  five  seasonal  vowels  with  the  mysterious  pentads  of  British  God 
desses,  the  deae  matronae,  (y  Mamau),  which  occur  in  inscriptions  of 
Roman  times;  and  with  the  various  five-pointed  leaves  sacred  to  the 
White  Goddess,  especially  the  ivy,  vine,  bramble,  fig  and  plane;1  and 
with  the  various  five petalled flowers sacred  to  her—the erotic  briar-rose 
and  primrose  and  the baleful blue vincapervinca,  or  periwinkle, which  the 
Italians  call  the  'flower  of death'  and  with  which,  in  mediaeval  England, 
condemned  men  were  garlanded  on  their  way  to  the  gallows.But where  did  the  Beth-Luis-Nion  series  originate?  It  will  have  been 
observed that all its trees are forest trees native to the British Isles, except 
the  vine.  That  no  orchard  trees  occur  in  the  series  suggests  to  me  that  it 
was  brought  in  very  early  times  from  a  thickly  wooded  northern  region 
where  the  vine  grew  wild.  The  only  region  answering  this  condition,  so 
far as  I  know,  was  the  Paphlagonia-Pontus  stretch  of the  Southern  Black 
Sea  coast.  A  Cretan  origin  is  out  of the  question:  the  principal  trees  that 
appear in the very numerous sacred pictures and engravings recendy exca-1  Another  five-pointed  leaf in  sacral  use was  the  cinquefoil,  a  chief  ingredient  in  the  flying 
ointment  used  by  mediaeval  French  witches.  An  alternative  in  one  formula  is  the  poplar  leaf, 
doubtless  the  five-pointed  sort.  Like  the  fleur-de-luce  used  in  the  same  ointment—apparendy 
because  of  its  three-petalled  flower  and  its  red  seeds  contained  in  a  triangular  seed-box—it 
has  no  toxic effect,  but  seems  to  have  been  introduced  in  the  Goddess's honour (with  a  thick 
ening  of  soot  and  oil,  or  infant's  fat)  to  enhance  the  effect  of  the  other  ingredients:  namely, 
the  abortificent  parsley,  bat's  blood  to  assist  nocturnal  flight,  and  the  highly  toxic  aconite, 
belladonna,  hemlock and  cowbane.  T he formulas  are  quoted  in  Miss  M.  Murray's  The  Witch 
Cult  in  Western  Europe.  Mr.  T r e v or  Furze  has  supplied  me  with  two  further  formulas  of 
English  origin:  ( i)  T he  fat  of  a  newly-born  infant;  eleoselinum  (wild  celery,  also  called 
'smallage',  or  'water-parsley',  a  mediaeval  remedy  against cramps);  skiwet  (wild  parsnip,  the 
leaves  of which  were  regarded  as  poisonous  but  used  in  poulticing);  soot.  ( 2)  Bat's  blood,  to 
be  obtained  at  the  wake  of  the  new  moon;  pentaphyllon  (cinque  foil);  poplar  leaves;  soot. 
Perhaps  the  'parsley* in the  French  formula  is  really water-parsley,  introduced  to  protect  the 
witches  against  cramps  when  flying.

20I20I

vated  in  Crete  are the  fig,  olive,  plane-tree,  cypress, vine,  pine and  palm. 
Dr.  Macalister  cannot  be  blamed  for  doubting  the  ancientness  of 
O'Flaherty's Beth-Luis-Nion, since several different systems of classifying 
trees  were  current in  mediaeval  Ireland.  For example,  under  Brehon  Law 
(IV,  1 4 7)  trees  were  divided  into  four  categories  with  a  scale  of fines for 
their unlawful  felling that diminished in severity according to  the category:

( 1) Seven Chieftain Trees

Oak 
Hazel 
Holly 
Yew 
Ash 
Pine 
Apple

dair 
coU 
cuileann 
ibur 
iundius 
ochtach 
aboil

( 2)  Seven Peasant Trees

Alder 
Willow 
Hawthorn 
Rowan 
Birch 
Elm 
?

fernn 
sail 
sceith 
caerthann 
beithe 
learn 
idha

(3)  Seven Shrub Trees

Blackthorn 
Elder 
White  hazel 
White  poplar 
Arbutus

j> 
?

draidean 
trom 
fincoll 
crithack 
caithne 
feorus 
crann-fir

(4)  Eight Bramble  Trees

Fern 
Bog-myrtle 
Furze 
Briar 
Heath 
Ivy 
Broom 
Gooseberry

raith 
rait 
aiteand 
dris 
fraech 
eideand 
gilcoch 
spin

202

This  Law  is  much  later  than  that  commemorated  in  the  Triads  ofIre 
land under  which  the  death  penalty  is  apparendy  demanded  for  the  un 
lawful  felling of two of the chieftain  trees,  the hazel  and  the apple:

Three unbreathing things paid for only with breathing things: 
An apple tree, a ha^elbush, a sacred grove.1Three unbreathing things paid for only with breathing things: 
An apple tree, a ha^elbush, a sacred grove.1

This  may  be  explained  by  the  seventh-century  poem  at  the  end  of  the 
Crib  Gablach  in  which  the  seven  Chieftain  trees  are listed,  but  with  alder, 
willow  and  birch  instead  of ash,  yew  and  pine,  the  fine  for  the  unlawful 
felling  of them being  one  cow,  or  three  for  the  whole  grove.  But I  assume 
that  the  poem  is  later  than  the  Triads,  though  earlier  than  the  Brehon 
Law,  and  that  the  death  sentence  for  the  felling  of  hazel  and  apple  has 
here  been  commuted  to  a  one-cow  fine,  as  in  the  case  of  other  trees. 
According  to  mediaeval  glossarists,  Neimhead,  meaning  'nobility',  or 
sacrosanctity,  was  applied  to  kings  or  chieftains,  poets  and  groves;  in  its 
secondary  sense  of  'worthiness',  to  musicians,  smiths,  carpenters,  cows 
and Church dignitaries.

The  Commentator  on  the  Brehon  Law  explains  the  'nobility'  of  its

seven  Chieftain  Trees in the following glosses:

Oak: its site, handsomeness, and its pig-fattening acorns. 
Hazel: its nuts and wattles. 
Apple: its fruit, and bark suitable for tanning. 
Yew: its timber, used for household vessels, breast-plates, etc. 
Holly: its timber, used for chariot shafts. 
Ash:  its  timber,  used  for  supporting  the  King's  thigh  (i.e.  for  making

regal thrones) and for the shafts ofweapons.

Pine: its amber, usedfor making puncheons.regal thrones) and for the shafts ofweapons.

Pine: its amber, usedfor making puncheons.

The  triumph  of Gwydion's  ash  over  Bran's  alder  at the  Cdd Goddeu  is 
incidentally  demonstrated  here:  the  ash,  which  was  originally  excluded 
from  the  sacred  grove,  is  now  the  only  tree  mentioned  in  connection  with 
royalty,  and  the  alder  has  been  degraded  to  the  status  of  peasant.  The 
utilitarian  assessment  of nobility  made  by  the  glossarist  denotes  a  pro 
found  religious  change,  and  when  the  relative  values  of the  trees  can  be 
expressed  in  terms  of  cash-compensation  for  their  illegal  felling,  the 
sanctity  of  the  grove  is  annulled  and  poetry  itself  declines.  However, 
while this  Law was in force the student for the Ollaveship of poetry had  to 
memorize  the  following  ancient  catechism,  recorded  in  Calder's  Hearings 
of the Scholars, which contains still another classification of trees:

1 At  R o me  in  the  second  century  B.C.  a  sacred  grove  could  be  felled  at  an  even  cheaper 
rate:  the  sacrifice  of  a  single  pig.  Cato  the  Censor  in  his  De  Re  Rustzca  quotes  the  prayer  of 
placation  that  the  timber-hungry  farmer  must  offer  to  the  deity concerned.

M3

{ Ocht n-athaig

A

iii

lir  aicme  Ogaim?

("  Cis 
[How many groups of Ogham?  Answer three, namely: 
ifedha  & viii  n-athaigh  &viii 
[  trees  and  8  peasant-trees  and  8  shrub  trees.  8  chieftain  trees 
(cetusfernn, dur, coll, main, gort, straif, onn, or. 
[first alder, oak, hazel, vine, ivy,  blackthorn,  furze, heath.

fidlosa.  Ocht n-airigh

.L

viii  n-airigh 
8 chieftain

,i.

hethi,

lids,

sail,  nin,  huath,

feda

is  athaig

tinne,  quert.  AT  chuit  afidlosa.  Ocht n-airigh

.L

viii  n-airigh 
8 chieftain

,i.

hethi,

lids,

sail,  nin,  huath,

feda

is  athaig

tinne,  quert.  AT  chuit  a

8  peasant  trees,  namely:  birch,  rowan,  willow,  ash, whitehorn, 
f 
1 whin,1 appletree.  As  to their letters, all other shrubs 
(feda  fidlosa  olchema. 
[are  shrub  trees. 
Here  the  trees  are  those  of  O'Flaherty's  Beth-Luis-Nion,  without  the 
intrusion  of arbutus,  elm,  white-hazel  and  the  rest.  The  unnamed  'shrub 
trees'  evidently  include  the  elder,  reed  or  water-elder,  broom  and  wood 
bine.  This  arrangement  according  to  nobility  is  eccentric—the  apple-tree 
and  holly  being  excluded  from  chieftainship—and  is  possibly  connected 
with  the  Greek  24-letter  alphabet  rather  than  with  the  Ogham  20-letter 
one or its 25-letter expansion.

The  subject  is  very  difficult,  and  the  Irish  ollaves  had  no  interest  in

making it plain to outsiders.

1  Evidently  a  mistake  for  holly.

Chapter  Twelve

T HE  S O NG  OF  A M E R G IN

1suggest  in  the  first  part  of this  argument  that  the  'I  am'  and  'I  have1  Evidently  a  mistake  for  holly.

Chapter  Twelve

T HE  S O NG  OF  A M E R G IN

1suggest  in  the  first  part  of this  argument  that  the  'I  am'  and  'I  have

been'  sequences  frequent  in  ancient  Welsh  and  Irish  poetry  are  all 
variants of the same calendar theme.  Here,  for instance, is  the 'Song of 
Amergin' (or Amorgen) said to have been chanted by the chief bard of the 
Milesian  invaders,  as  he  set  his  foot  on  the  soil  of Ireland,  in  the  year  of 
the  world  2736  (1268  B.C.).  Unfortunately  the  version  which  survives  is 
only  a  translation  into  colloquial  Irish  from  the  Old  Goidelic.  Dr.  Mac-
alister  pronounces  it  'a  pantheistic  conception  of a  Universe  where  god 
head  is  everywhere  and  omnipotent'  and  suggests  that  it  was  a  liturgical 
hymn  of as wide a  currency as,  say,  the  opening chapters  of the Koran,  or 
the  Apostles'  Creed.  He  writes:  'Was  it  of this  hymn,  or  of what  he  had 
been  told  of the  contents  of this  hymn,  that  Caesar  was  thinking  when  he 
wrote:  "The  Druids  teach  of the  stars  and  their motions,  the world,  the 
size  of lands,  natural  philosophy  and  the  nature  of the  gods"?'  He  notes 
that the same piece  'in a garbled  form'  is put into  the mouth  of the  Child-
bard  Taliesin  when  narrating  his  transformations  in  previous  existences. 
Sir  John  Rhys  pointed  out  in  his  Hibbert  Lectures  that  many  of  Gwion's 
'I have been's' imply 'not actual transformation but mere likeness, through 
a  primitive  formation  of a  predicate  without  the  aid  of a  particle  corres 
ponding to such a word as "like".'The  Song  of Amergin  begins  with  thirteen  statements,  provided  with 
mediaeval  glosses.  The  thirteen  statements  are  followed  by  six  questions, 
also  provided  with  glosses.  These  are  followed  in  Professor  John  Mac-
Neill's  version  by  an  envoie  in  which  the  Druid  advises  the  People  of the 
Sea to  invoke  the  poet of the sacred  rath  to  give them a poem.  He himself 
will  supply  the  poet  with  the  necessary  material,  and  together  they  will 
compose an incantation.

T HE  S O NG  OF  A M E R G IN

God speaks  and says:

I am a wind of the sea, 
I am a wave of the sea,

Glosses

for depth 
for weight

2 05

I am a hawk on a cliff,

I am a sound of the sea, 
I  am  an ox of seven fights, 
or  I  am  a  stag  of  seven  tines, 
I am a griffon on a cliff, 
or 
I am a tear of the sun, 
I am fair among  flowers, 
I am a boar, 
I am a salmon in a pool, 
I am  a lake on a plain, 
I  am  a hill  of poetry, 
I am a battle-waging spear, 
I am a god who  forms fire for a head.

I  am  a  god  who  forms  smoke  from

or 
sacred fire for a head. 
* 
i.  Who  makes  clear  the  ruggedness  of the

*

moun tains'? 
or  Who  but  myself  knows  the  assemb 
lies  of  the  dolmen-house  on  the  moun 
tain  of Slieve  Mis?

2.  Who  but  myself  knows  where  the  sun

shall set?

3.  Who  foretells  the ages  of the  moon? 
4.  Who brings the cattle from the House of

Tethra and segregates them?

5.  On whom  do  the  cattle  of Tethra  smile? 
or  For  whom  but  me  will  the  fish  of 
the  laughing  ocean  be  making  welcome?

6.  Who shapes weapons from hill to hill?

for horror 
for strength

for deftness

'a dewdrop'—for clearness

for valour 
'the pools of knowledge' 
for extent 
'and knowledge'

[i.e.  'gives  inspiration': 
Macalister] 
'to slay therewith'

»

'Who  but  myself will  re-
solve every question !

[i.e.  'the  fish',  Macalister, 
Le.  'the  stars',  MacNeill][i.e.  'gives  inspiration': 
Macalister] 
'to slay therewith'

»

'Who  but  myself will  re-
solve every question !

[i.e.  'the  fish',  Macalister, 
Le.  'the  stars',  MacNeill]

'wave  to  wave,  letter  to 
letter, point to point'

*

Invoke,  People  of  the  Sea,  invoke  the  poet,  that  he  may  compose  a

spell  for  you.

For I,  the Druid, who  set out letters in  Ogham, 
I, who part combatants, 
I  will  approach  the  rath  of  the  Sidhe  to  seek  a  cunning  poet  that

together  we  may  concoct  incantations.

I am a wind of the sea.

Tethra  was  the  king  of the  Undersea-land  from  which  the  People  of the 
Sea  were  later  supposed  to  have  originated.  He  is  perhaps  a  masculiniza-
206I am a wind of the sea.

Tethra  was  the  king  of the  Undersea-land  from  which  the  People  of the 
Sea  were  later  supposed  to  have  originated.  He  is  perhaps  a  masculiniza-
206

tion  of Tethys,  the  Pelasgian  Sea-goddess,  also  known  as  Thetis, whom, 
Doge-like,  Peleus  the Achaean  married  at Iolcus  in  Thessaly.  The  Sidhe 
are now popularly regarded as fairies: but in early Irish poetry they appear 
as  a real  people—a highly cultured  and  dwindling nation of warriors and 
poets living in the raths, or round stockaded forts, of which New Grange 
on the Boyne is the most celebrated. All had blue eyes, pale faces and long 
curly  yellow  hair.  The  men  carried  white  shields,  and  were  organized  in 
military  companies  of  fifty.  They  were  ruled  over  by  two  virgin-born 
kings and were sexually promiscuous but 'without blame or shame'.  They 
were, in  fact, Picts (tattooed men)  and  all that can be learned about them 
corresponds  with  Xenophon's  observations  in  his  Anabasis  on  the 
primitive  Mosynoechians  ('wooden-casde  dwellers')  of  the  Black  Sea 
coast.  The Mosynoechians were skilfully tattooed, carried long spears and 
ivy-leaf shields  made  from  white  ox-hide,  were  forest  dwellers,  and  per 
formed  the  sexual  act  in  public  They  lived  in  the  stockaded  forts  from 
which  they  took  their name,  and  in  Xenophon's  time  occupied  the  terri 
tory  assigned  in  early  Greek  legend  to  the  matriarchal  Amazons.  The 
'blue  eyes'  of  the  Sidhe  I  take  to  be  blue  interlocking  rings  tattooed 
around  the eyes,  for which  the  Thracians were known  in  Classical  times. 
Their  pallor  was  also  perhaps  artificial—white  'war-paint'  of  chalk  or 
powdered  gypsum,  in  honour  of the  White  Goddess,  such  as  we  know, 
from a scene in Aristophanes's Clouds where Socrates whitens Strepsiades, 
was used in Orphic rites of initiation. 
Slieve Mis is a mountain in Kerry.'Of seven tines' probably means of seven points on each horn, fourteen 
in all: which make a 'royal stag'.  But royalty is also conceded to a stag oi 
twelve  points,  and  since a stag must be seven  years  old  before  it can  have 
twelve points, 'seven fights' may refer to the years.

It  is  most  unlikely  that  this  poem  was  allowed  to  reveal  its  esoteric 
meaning  to  all  and  sundry;  it  would  have  been  'pied',  as  Gwion  pied  his 
poems, for reasons of security. So let us rearrange the order of statements 
in  a  thirteen-month  calendar  form,  on  the  lines  of the  Beth-Luis-Nion, 
profiting  from  what  we  have  learned  about  the  mythic  meaning  of each 
letter-month:

God  speaks  and  says:  Trees of the month

D ec  2 4 -J a n.  20  B  I  am  a  stag  of  seven  tines,  Birch  Beth

Jan. 21—Feb.  17  L

or  an ox of seven  fights, 
I  am  a  wide  flood  on  a  Quick-beam  Luis

plain,

(Rowan)

Feb.  18—Mar.  17  N

I  am  a  wind  on  the  deep  Ash

Nion

waters,

207

Mar.  18-Apr.  14  F

I  am  a  shining  tear  of the  Alder

Fearn

Apr.  15-May  12 
May  1 3 - J u n.  9 
Jun.  10-July  7 
Jun.  10-July  7

S 
H 
D

sun,

I am a hawk on a cliff, 
I am fair among  flowers, 
I  am  a  god  who  sets  the  Oak

Willow 
Hawthorn

Saille 
Uath 
Duir

July  8-Aug.  4

T

I  am  a  battle-waging  Holly

Tinne

head  afire  with  smoke,

spear,

Aug.  5 - S e pt  1 
C 
Sept. 2-Sept. 29  M 
Sept.  30-Oct. 27  G 
Oct.  28-Nov.  24  NG  I  am  a  threatening  noise  Reed

I am a salmon in the pool,  Hazel 
Vine 
I am a hill of poetry, 
Ivy 
I am a ruthless boar,

Coll 
Muin 
Gort 
Ngetal

Nov.  2 5 - D e c.  22  R 
Dec.  23

of the  sea,

I am a wave of the sea, 
Who  but  I  knows  the 
secrets  of  the  unhewn 
dolmen?

Elder

RuisColl 
Muin 
Gort 
Ngetal

Nov.  2 5 - D e c.  22  R 
Dec.  23

of the  sea,

I am a wave of the sea, 
Who  but  I  knows  the 
secrets  of  the  unhewn 
dolmen?

Elder

Ruis

There can.be litde doubt as  to  the appropriateness of this arrangement. 
B  is  the  Hercules  stag  (or  wild  bull)  which  begins  the  year.  The  seven 
fights,  or  seven  tines  of his  anders,  are  months  in  prospect  and  in  retro 
spect:  for  Beth  is  the  seventh  month  after  Duir  the  oak-month,  and  the 
seventh  month  from  Beth  is  Duir  again.  The  'Boibalos'  of  the  Hercules 
charm  contained in the Boibel-Loth  was an antelope-bull. The Orphic 'ox 
of seven  fights'  is  hinted at in  Plutarch's Isis and Osiris, where he describes 
how  at  the  Winter  solstice  they  carry  the  golden  cow  of Isis,  enveloped  in 
black  cloth,  seven  times  around  the  shrine  of  Osiris,  whom  he  identifies 
with  Dionysus.  'The  circuit  is  called  "The  Seeking  for  Osiris",  for  in 
winter  the  Goddess  longs  for  the  water  of the  Sun.  And  she  goes  around 
seven  times  because  he  completes  his  passing  from  the  winter  to  the 
summer  solstice  in  the  seventh  month.'  Plutarch  must  be  reckoning  in 
months  of 28  days,  not  30,  else  the  passage  would  be  completed  in  the 
sixth  of them.

L is February Fill-Dyke, season of  floods. 
N  is  centred  in  early  March,  which  'comes  in  like  a  lion'  with  winds

that dry the  floods.

F  is explained by  the  sentiment  of the well-known  mediaeval  carol:

He came all so still

Where his mother was,

Like dew in April

Thatfalleth  on  grass.

For  this  is  the  true  beginning  of  the  sacred  year,  when  the  deer  and 
208

wild  cow  drop  their  young,  and  when  the  Child  Hercules  is  born  who 
was  begotten  at  the  mid-summer  orgies.  Hitherto  he  has  been  sailing  in 
his  coracle over the floods; now he lies glistening on the grass.S  is  the  month  when  birds  nest.  In  Gwion's  Can y  Meirch  ('Song  of 
the Horses'),  a  partial  series  of T  have been's'  occurs  as  an  interpolation. 
One  of them  is:  I  have  been  a  crane  on  a  wall,  a  wondrous  sight.'  The 
crane  was  sacred  to  Delian  Apollo  and,  before  Apollo,  to  the  Sun-hero 
Theseus. It also appears, in triad,  in a Gaulish  bas-relief at  Paris, and  in 
another  at  Treves,  in  association  with  the  god  Esus  and  a  bull.  Crane, 
hawk,  or vulture?  That  is an important  question  because  the  provenience 
of the  poem  depends  on  the  answer.  The  hawk,  if not  the  royal  hawk  of 
Egyptian Horus, will have been the kite sacred  to  Boreas the North Wind; 
in  Greek  legend  his  Thracian  sons  Calais and  Zetes  wore  kite-feathers  in 
his  honour  and  had  the  power  of  transforming  themselves  into  kites. 
These  two  birds  are  mythologically  linked  in  the  Egyptian  hieroglyph 
for the North  Wind,  which  is  a hawk.  In  Welsh  the word  is  iarcut,  and  in 
Iranian  the  word  is  barqut,  which  supports  Pliny's  suggestion  (Natural 
History XXX,  1 3)  of a  strong  connexion  between  the  Persian  and  British 
sun-cults.  Another  mark  of  close  similarity  is  that  Mithras,  the  Persian 
Sun-god  whose  birthday  was  celebrated  at  the  winter-solstice,  was  wor 
shipped  as  a  bull  of seven  fights:  his  initiates  having  to  go  through  seven 
grades  before  they  were  sealed  on  the  brow  as  'tried  soldiers  of Mithras'. 
Mithraism  was  a  favourite  cult  of  the  Roman  legionaries  in  Imperial 
times,  but  they  never  reached  Ireland,  and  the  Song  of Amergin  is  evi 
dently  far  older  than  the  Claudian  invasion  of Britain.  The  vulture  will 
have  been  the  griffon-vulture  sacred  to  Osiris,  a  bird  also  of  great  im 
portance  to  the  Etruscan  augurs  and  with  a  wider  wing-span  than  the 
golden  eagle.  In  the  Song  of  Moses  (Deuteronomy  XXXII,  11)  Jehovah  is 
identified  with  this  bird,  which  is  a  proof  that  its  'uncleanness'  in  the 
Levitical  list  means  sanctity,  not  foulness.  The  heraldic  griffin  is  a  lion 
with griffon-vultures' wings and claws and represents the Sun-god as King 
of the earth  and  air.  The  ordinary  Welsh  word  for  hawk  is  Gwalch,  akin 
to  the  Latin fako,  falcon,  and  the  court-bards  always  likened  their  royal 
patrons  to  it.  The  mystical  names  Gwalchmai  ('hawk of May');  Gwalch-
aved  ('hawk  of  summer')  better  known  as  Sir  Galahad;  and  Gwalch-
gwyn ('white  hawk')  better  known  as  Sir  Gawain,  are  best  understood 
in  terms  of this  calendar  formula.H, which starts in the second half of May, is the season of flowers, and the 
hawthorn, or may-tree, rules it.  Olwen, the daughter of'Giant Hawthorn', 
has already been mentioned. Her hair was yellow as the broom, her  fingers 
pale as wood-anemones, her cheeks  the colour of roses and from her foot 
prints  white  trefoil  sprang  up—trefoil  to  show  that  she  was  the  summer 
aspect  of the  old  Triple  Goddess.  This  peculiarity  gave  her  the  name  of

209

Olwen—'She  of  the  White  Track'.  Trefoil,  by  the  way,  was  celebrated 
by  the  Welsh  bards  with  praise  out  of all  proportion  to  its beauty.  Homer 
called  it 'the lotus' and mentioned it as a rich fodder for horses.

D  is  ruled  by  the  midsummer  oak.  The  meaning  is,  I  think,  that  the 
painful  smoke  of green  oak  gives  inspiration  to  those  who  dance  between 
the  twin sacrificial  fires  lighted  on Midsummer Eve.  Compare  the  Song of 
the Forest Trees:

Fiercest heat-giver of all timber is green oak;

From him none may escape unhurt. 
By love of him the head is set an-aching,

By his acrid embers the eye is made sore.

T  is  the  spear  month,  the  month  of the  tanist;  the  bardic  letter  T  was

shaped like a barbed spear.

C  is  the  nut  month.  The  salmon was,  and still is,  the  King of the  river-
fish,  and the difficulty of capturing him,  once he is lodged in a pool,  makes 
him  a  useful  emblem  of  philosophical  retirement.  Thus  Loki,  the  Norse 
God  of cunning,  disguised  himself from  his  fellow-gods  as  a  salmon  and 
was  drawn  from  his  pool  only  with  a  special  net  of his  own  design.  The 
connexion  of  salmon  with  nuts  and  with  wisdom  has  already  been 
explained.M  is  the  initial  of  Minerva,  Latin  goddess  of wisdom  and  inventor  of 
numbers;  of  Mnemosyne,  the  Mother  of  the  Greek  Muses;  and  of  the 
Muses  themselves;  and  of the  Moirae,  or Fates,  who  are  credited  by some 
mythographers  with  the  first  invention  of  the  alphabet.  The  vine,  the 
prime  tree  of Dionysus,  is  everywhere  associated  with  poetic  inspiration. 
Wine  is  the  poets'  proper drink,  as  Ben  Jonson  knew  well  when  he  asked 
for  his  fee  as  Poet  Laureate  to  be  paid  in  sack.  The  base  Colley  Cibber 
asked  for  a  cash  payment  in  lieu  of wine,  and  no  Poet  Laureate  since  has 
been poet enough to  demand a return to the old system of payment.

G,  the  ivy  month,  is  also  the  month  of  the  boar.  Set,  the  Egyptian 
Sun-god,  disguised  as  a  boar,  kills  Osiris  of  the  ivy,  the  lover  of  the 
Goddess  Isis.  Apollo  the  Greek  Sun-god,  disguised  as  a  boar,  kills 
Adonis,  or  Tammuz,  the  Syrian,  the  lover  of  the  Goddess  Aphrodite. 
Finn  Mac  Cool,  disguised  as  a  boar,  kills  Diarmuid,  the  lover  of the Irish 
Goddess  Grainne  (Greine).  An  unknown  god  disguised  as  a  boar  kills 
Ancaeus  the  Arcadian  King,  a  devotee  of  Artemis,  in  his  vineyard  at 
Tegea  and,  according  to  the  Nestorian  Gannat  Busami  ('Garden  of 
Delights'),  Cretan  Zeus  was  similarly  killed.  October  was  the  boar-
hunting  season,  as  it  was  also  the  revelry  season  of  the  ivy-wreathed 
Bassarids.  The boar is the beast of death and  the 'fall'  of the year begins in 
the  month  of the boar.

NG  is  the  month  when  the  terrible  roar  of  breakers  and  the  snarling 
2IONG  is  the  month  when  the  terrible  roar  of  breakers  and  the  snarling 
2IO

noise  of pebbles  on  the  Atlantic  seaboard  fill  the  heart  with  terror,  and 
when  the  wind  whisdes  dismally  through  the  reed-beds  of the  rivers.  In 
Ireland  the  roaring  of the  sea  was  held  to be  prophetic of a  king's  death. 
The  warning  also  came  with  the  harsh  cry  of  the  scritch-owl.  Owls  are 
most  vocal  on  moonlight  nights  in  November  and  then  remain  silent 
until  February.  It  is  this  habit,  with  their  silent  flight,  the  carrion-smell 
of their  nests,  their  diet  of mice,  and  the  shining  of their  eyes  in  the  dark, 
which  makes  owls  messengers  of the  Death-goddess  Hecate,  or  Athene, 
or  Persephone:  from  whom,  as  the  supreme  source  of  prophecy,  they 
derive their reputation for wisdom.

R  is  the  month  when  the  wave  returns  to  the  sea,  and  the  end  of the 
year  to  its  watery beginning.  A wave  of the sea  in Irish and  Welsh  poetry 
is a  'sea-stag':  so  that the  year begins and  ends with  the white roebuck. In 
Irish legend  such gods  of the year as  Cuchulain and Fionn fight the waves 
with sword and spear.

The  corresponding  text  in  the  Romance  of Taliesin  is  scattered  rather

than garbled.

I have been a fierce bull and a yellow buck. 
I have been a boat on the sea. 
I fled vehemendy... on the foam of water. 
I have been a drop in the air. 
I journeyed as an eagle.

B 
L 
N 
F 
S 
H  God made me of blossom. 
I have been a tree-stump in a shovel. 
D 
I fled as a spear-head of woe to such as wish for woe. 
T 
I have been a blue salmon. 
C 
I have been a spotted snake on a hill. 
M 
I fled as a brisdy boar seen in a ravine. 
G 
NG  I have been a wave breaking on the beach. 
R  On a boundless sea I was set adrift.The  clue  to  the  arrangement  of  this  alphabet  is  found  in  Amergin's 
reference  to  the  dolmen;  it  is  an  alphabet  that  best  explains  itself when 
built  up  as  a  dolmen  of consonants  with  a  threshold  of vowels.  Dolmens 
are  closely  connected  with  the  calendar  in  the  legend  of  the  flight  of 
Grainne  and  Diarmuid  from  Finn Mac Cool.  The  flight  lasted  for a year 
and  a  day,  and  the  lovers  bedded  together  beside  a  fresh  dolmen  every 
night.  Numerous  'Beds  of Diarmuid  and  Grainne'  are  shown  in  Cork, 
Kerry,  Limerick,  Tipperary  and  the  West,  each  of  them  marked  by  a 
dolmen.  So  this  alphabet  dolmen  will  also  serve  as  a  calendar,  with  one 
post for Spring, the other for Autumn, the lintel for Summer, the threshold 
for New Year's Day.  Thus:

2 11

At  once  one  sees  the  reference  to  S  as  a  hawk,  or  griffon,  on  the  cliff; 
and  to  M  as  the  hill  of poetry  or  inspiration—a  hill  rooted  in  the  death 
letters  R  and  I  and  surmounted  by  the  C  of wisdom.  So  the  text  of the 
first part of Amergin's song may be expanded as follows:

God speaks and says:

I am the stag of seven tines. 
Over the flooded world 
J am borne by the wind. 
I descend in tears like dew, I lie glittering, 
I fly aloft like a griffon to my nest on the cliff, 
I bloom among the loveliest flowers, 
I am both the oak and the lightning that blasts it.

I embolden the spearman, 
I teach the councillors their wisdom, 
I inspire the poets, 
I rove the hills like a ravening boar, 
I roar like the winter sea, 
I return again like the receding wave. 
Who but I can unfold the secrets of the unhewn dolmen?For if the poem really consists of two stanzas, each of two triads, ending 
with  a  single  authoritative  statement,  then  the  first  'Who  but  P  (which 
does not match the other five) is the conclusion of the second stanza, and is 
uttered  by  the  New  Year  God.  This  Child  is  represented  by  the  sacred 
threshold  of the  dolmen,  the  central  triad  of vowels,  namely  O.U.E.  But 
one must read O.U.E. backwards, the way of the sun, to make sense of it-
It  is  the  sacred  name  of  Dionysus,  E U O,  which  in  English  is  usually 
written 'EVOE'.

It is clear that 'God' is  Celestial Hercules again, and that the child-poet

2 12

Taliesin  is a more appropriate person  to utter the song than Amergin, the 
leader  of  the  Milesians,  unles  Amergin  is  speaking  as  a  mouth-piece  of 
Hercules.

There  is  a  mystery  connected  with  the  line  'I  am  a  shining  tear  of the 
sun',  because  Deorgreine,  'tear  of the  Sun',  is  the  name  of Niamh  of the 
Golden  Hair,  the  lovely  goddess  mentioned  in  the  myth  of Laegaire  mac 
Crimthainne.  Celestial  Hercules  when  he  passes  into  the  month  F,  the 
month  of  Bran's  alder,  becomes  a  maiden.  This  recalls  the  stories  of 
such  sun-heroes  as  Achilles1,  Hercules  and  Dionysus  who  lived  for  a 
time  disguised  as  girls  in  the  women's  quarters  of a  palace  and  plied  the 
distaff.  It  also  explains  the  'I  have  been  a  maiden',  in  a  series  corres 
ponding  with  the  Amergin  cycle,  ascribed  to  Empedocles,  the  fifth-
century  B.C.  mystical  philosopher.  The sense  is  that the Sun  is  still under 
female  tutelage  for  half of this  month—Cretan  boys  not  yet  old  enough 
to  bear arms were called  Scotioi, members  of the women's quarters—then, 
like  Achilles,  he  is  given  arms  and  flies  off royally  like  a  griffon  or hawk 
to its nest.But why a  dolmen?  A  dolmen  is  a  burial  chamber,  a  'womb  of Earth', 
consisting  of a  cap-stone  supported  on two  or  more  uprights,  in  which a 
dead  hero  is  buried  in  a  crouched  position  like  a  foetus  in  the  womb, 
awaiting  rebirth.  In  spiral  Casde  (passage-burial),  the  entrance  to  the 
inner chamber  is  always  narrow  and  low  in  representation  of the  entrance 
to  the  womb.  But  dolmens  are  used  in  Melanesia  (according  to  Prof. 
W.  H.  R.  Rivers)  as  sacred  doors  through  which  the  totem-clan  initiate 
crawls  in  a  ceremony of rebirth;  if,  as  seems  likely,  they were used  for  the 
same  purpose  in  ancient  Britain,  Gwion  is  both  recounting  the  phases  of 
his past existence and announcing the phases of his future existence. There 
is  a  regular  row  of  dolmens  on  Slieve  Mis.  They  stand  between  two 
baetyls  with  Ogham  markings,  traditionally  sacred  to  the  Milesian 
Goddess Scota who is said  to be buried there;  alternatively, in  the account 
preserved by Borlase in his Dolmens of Ireland, to 'Bera a queen who came 
from  Spain'.  But  Bera  and  Scota  seem  to  be  the  same  person,  since  the 
Milesians came from Spain. Bera is otherwise known as the Hag of Beara.1 Sir  T h o m as  Browne  generously  remarked  in  his  Urn  Burial that  'what  song  the  Sirens 
sang,  or  what  name  Achilles  assumed  when  he  hid  himself among  women,  though  puzzling 
questions  are  not  beyond  all  conjecture'.  According  to  Suetonius  the guesses  made by  various 
scholars  w h om  the  Emperor  Tiberius  consulted  on  this  point were  'Cercysera'  on  account  of 
the  distaff  (ierkis)  that  Achilles  wielded;  'Issa',  on  account  of  his  swiftness  (aisso,  I  dart); 
'Pyrrha',  on  account of his  red  hair.  Hyginus  gives his  vote  for  Pyrrha.  My  conjecture  is  that 
Achilles  called  himself Dacryoessa  ('the  tearful  one")  or,  better,  Drosoessa  ('the  dewy  one'), 
Jrosos  being  a  poetic  synonym  for  tears.  According  to  Apollonius,  his  original  name  Liguron 
('wailing')  was  changed  to  Achilles  by  his  tutor  Cheiron.  T h is  is  to  suggest  that  the  Achilles-
cult came to Thessaly from Liguria.  Homer punningly derives Achilles from achos ('distress'), 
but Apollodorus from a 'not' and cheile 'lips', a derivation which Sir James Frazer calls absurd; 
though 'Lipless' is quite a likely name for an oracular hero.

2 I 3

The  five  remaining  questions  correspond  with  the  five  vowels,  yet 
they  are  not  uttered  by  the  Five-fold  Goddess  of the  white  ivy-leaf,  as  one 
would  expect.  They must have been substituted  for an  original  text telling 
of Birth,  Initiation,  Love,  Repose,  Death,  and  can  be  assigned  to  a  later 
bardic  period.  In  fact,  they  correspond  closely  with  the  envoi  to  the  first 
section  of the  tenth-century  Irish  Saltair  Na  Rann,  which  seems  to  be  a 
Christianized version of a pagan epigram.

For each dayfive items of knowledge 
Are required ofevery understanding person— 
From everyone, without appearance of boasting, 
Who is in holy orders.For each dayfive items of knowledge 
Are required ofevery understanding person— 
From everyone, without appearance of boasting, 
Who is in holy orders.

The day of the solar month; the age of the moon; 
The state of the sea-tide, without error; 
The day ofthe week; the calendar ofthe feasts ofthe perfect saints 
In just clarity with their variations.

For  'perfect  saints'  read  'blessed  deities'  and  no  further  alteration  is

needed.  Compare  this with Amergin's:

Who but myselfknows where the sun shall set? 
Who foretells the ages ofthe moon.'' 
Who brings the cattle from the house ofTethra and

segregates them?

On whom do the cattle ofTethra smile? 
Who shapes weapons from lull to hill, wave to wave,

letter to letter, point to point?

The  first  two  questions  in  the  Song  of  Amergin,  about  the  day  of  the  solar 
month  and  the  ages  of  the  moon,  coincide  with  the  first  two  items  of 
knowledge  in  the  Saltair.  'Who  knows  when  the  Sun  shall  set?'  means 
both  'who  knows  the  length  of the  hours  of daylight  at  any  given  day  of 
the  year?'—a  problem  worked  out  in  exhaustive  detail  by  the  author  of 
the  Book  of Enoch—and  'Who  knows  on  any  given  day  how  long  the 
particular solar month in which it occurs will last?'

The  third  question  is:  'Who  brings  the  catde  of Tethra  (the  heavenly 
bodies)  out  of the  ocean  and  puts  each  in  his  due  place?'  This  assumes  a 
knowledge:  of  the  five  planets,  Mars,  Mercury,  Juppiter,  Venus,  Saturn, 
which,  with  the  Sun  and  Moon,  had  days  of the  week  allotted  to  them  in 
Babylonian  astronomy,  and  still  keep  them  in  all  European  languages. 
Thus  it corresponds with  'the  day  of the week'.The  fourth  question,  as  the  glossarist  explains,  amounts  to  "Who  is 
lucky  in  fishing?'  This  corresponds  with  'the  state  of the  sea  tide';  for  a 
fisherman who does not know what tide to expect will have no fishing luck. 
2 14

The  fifth  question,  read  in  the  light  of its  gloss,  amounts  to:  "Who 
orders  the  calendar  from  the  advancing  wave  B  to  the  receding  wave  R; 
from  one  calendar  month  to  the  next;  from  one  season  of the  year  to  the 
next?'  (The  three  seasons  of Spring,  Summer  and  Autumn  are  separated 
by  points,  or  angles,  of the  dolmen.)  So  it  corresponds  with  'the  calendar 
of the  feasts  of the  perfect  saints'.

Another  version  of  the  poem  found  in  The  Book  of  Leacan  and  The 
Book  of the  O'Clerys,  runs  as  follows  when  restored  to  its  proper  order. 
The  glosses  are  similar  in  both  books,  though  the  O'Clerys'  are  the 
more verbose.

I am seven battalions or I am an  ox in strength—for strength 
B 
I am a flood on a plain—for extent 
L 
N 
I am a wind on the sea—for depth 
F  I  am  a  ray  of  the  sun—for  purity 
S  I  am  a  bird  of  prey  on  a  cliff—for  cunning 
H 
D

I am a shrewd navigator— 
I  am  gods  in  the  power  of transformation—/ am  a god,  a  druid, 
and a man who creates fire from magical smoke for the destruction 
of all, and makes magic on the tops of hills 
I  am  a  giant  with  a  sharp  sword,  hewing  down  an  army—in 
taking vengeance 
I am a salmon in a  river  or pool—for swiftness

T

C 
M  I  am  a  skilled  artist—for  power 
G  I  am  a  fierce  boar—for  powers  ofchieftain-like  valour 
NG 
R  I  am  a  wave  of  the  sea—for  might

I am  the roaring of the  sea—for  terrorC 
M  I  am  a  skilled  artist—for  power 
G  I  am  a  fierce  boar—for  powers  ofchieftain-like  valour 
NG 
R  I  am  a  wave  of  the  sea—for  might

I am  the roaring of the  sea—for  terror

This  seems  a  later  version,  since  the  T-month  is  awarded  a  sword,  not 
the  traditional  spear;  and  the  original  wording  of the  D-line  is  recallled 
in  a  gloss;  and  'Who  but  I  knows  the  secrets  of the  unhewn  dolmen?'  is 
omitted.  Another  change  of importance  is  that  the  H-month  is  described 
in terms of navigation, not flowers. May 14th marked the beginning of the 
deep-sea  fishing  in  ancient  Ireland  when  the  equinoctial  gales  had  sub 
sided  and  it was  safe  to  put  to  sea  in  an  ox-hide  curragh;  but  the  ascetic 
meaning of Hawthorn  is  a  reminder of the  ban  against  taking women  on a 
fishing  trip.  The  additions  to  the  poem  show,  even  more  clearly  than 
Macalister's  text,  that  it  was  preserved  as  a  charm  for  successful  fishing 
both  in river and  sea;  the Druid  being paid  by the fishermen for  repeating 
it  and  threatening  the  water  with  javelin-vengeance  if a  curragh  were  to 
be  lose—

Whither shall we go f Shall we debate in valley or on peak ? 
Where shall we dwell? In what nobler land than the isle of Sunset?

"5

Where else shall we walk in peace, to andfro, on fertile ground? 
Who but I can take you to where the stream runs, or falls, clearest?

Or who but I tell you the age ofthe moon ? 
Who but I can bring you Tethra's cattle from the recesses ofthe sea? 
Who but I can draw Tethra's cattle shoreward? 
Who can change the hills, mountains or promontories as I can ?

I am a cunning poet who invokes prophecy at the entreaty ofseafarers. 
Javelins shall be wielded to revenge the loss of our ships. 
I sing praises, Iprophesy victory. 
In closing my poem I desire other preferments, and shall obtain them.The  original  five-lined  pendant  to  the  poem  may  have  run  something

like this:

A / am the womb of every holt, 
O / am the blare on every hill, 
U / am the queen of every hive, 
E / am the shield to every head, 
I / am the tomb to every hope.

'

How  or  why  this  alphabet  of  thirteen  consonants  gave  place  to  the 
alphabet  of fifteen consonants  is  another  question,  the  solution  of which 
will be helped by a study of Latin and Greek alphabet legends.That  the  first  line  of  the  Song  of Amergin  has  the  variant  readings 
'stag  of  seven  tines'  and  'ox  of  seven  fights'  suggests  that  in  Ireland 
during  the  Bronze Age,  as  in  Crete  and  Greece,  both  stag  and  bull  were 
sacred  to  the  Great  Goddess.  In  Minoan  Crete  the bull  became dominant 
as  the  Minotaur,  'Bull-Minos',  but  there  was  also  a  Minelaphos,  'Stag-
Minos',  who  figured  in  the  cult  of  the  Moon-goddess  Britomart,  and  a 
Minotragos,  'Goat-Minos'  cult.  The  anders  found  in  the  burial  at  New 
Grange suggest that the stag was the royal beast of the Irish Danaans, and 
the  stag  figures  prominendy in  Irish  myth:  an  incident  in  The  Cattle Raid 
of  Cuailgne,  part  of  the  Cuchulain  saga,  shows  that  a  guild  of  deer-
priests  called  'The  Fair Lucky Harps'  had  their headquarters  at Assaroe 
in Donegal. Oisin was born of the deer-goddess Sadb and at the end of his 
life,  when  mounted  on  the  fairy-steed  of Niamh  of the  Golden  Hair  and 
sped by the wailing  of the  Fenians  to  her island  paradise,  he was  shown a 
vision: a hornless fawn  pursued  over the waters  of the sea by the red-eared 
white  hounds  of Hell.  The  fawn  was  himself.  There  is  a  parallel  to  this  in 
the Romance of Pwyll Prince of Dyfed: Pwyll goes out hunting and meets 
Arawn  King  of Annwn  mounted  on  a  pale  horse  hunting  a  stag  with  his 
white,  red-eared  hounds.  In  recognition  of  Pwyll's  courtesy,  Arawn, 
though  sending  him  down  to  Annwm—for  the  stag  is  Pwyll's  soul— 
2 16

permits him to  reign  there in  his  stead.  Another parallel  is  in  the  Romance 
of  Math  the  Son  of  Mathonwy:  Llew  Llaw  in  the  company  of  the  faithless 
Blodeuwedd  sees  a  stag  being  baited  to  death:  it  is  his  soul,  and  almost 
immediately afterwards he is put to death by her lover Gronw.The  fate  of the  andered  king—of whom  Cernunnos,  'the  horned  one' 
of Gaul,  is  a  familiar  example—is  expressed  in  the  early  Greek  myth  of 
Actaeon  whom  Artemis  metamorphosed  into  a  stag  and  hunted  to  death 
with  her  dogs.  She  did  this  at  her  anodos,  or  yearly  reappearance,  when 
she  refreshed  her  virginity  by  bathing  naked  in  a  sacred  fountain;  after 
which  she  took  another  lover.  The  Irish  Garbh  Ogh  with  her  pack  of 
hounds  was  the  same  goddess:  her  diet  was  venison  and  eagles'  breasts. 
This ancient myth of the betrayed stag-king survives curiously in  the con 
vention,  which  is  British  as  well  as  Continental,  that  gives  the  cuckold  a 
branching  pair  of  anders.  The  May-day  stag-mummers  of  Abbot's 
Bromley  in  Staffordshire  are  akin  to  the  stag-mummers  of  Syracuse  in 
ancient Sicily,  and  to judge from  an  epic fragment concerned with Diony 
sus,  one  of  the  mummers  disguised  as  an  Actaeon  stag  was  originally 
chased and eaten. In the Lycaean precinct of Arcadia the same tradition of 
the man  dressed in  deer skins who is chased  and eaten survived in Pausa-
nias's day, though the chase was explained as a punishment for trespassing. 
From  Sardinia  comes  a  Bronze  Age  figurine  of a  man-stag  with  horns 
resembling the foliage of an oak, a short tail, an arrow in one hand and in 
the  other  a  bow  that has  turned  into  a wriggling  serpent.  His  mouth  and 
eyes express an excusable terror at the sight; for the serpent is death. That 
the stag was part of the Elysian oracular cult is shown  in the story of Brut 
the  Trojan's  visit  to  the Island  of Leogrecia,  where  the  moon-oracle  was 
given  him  while  sleeping  in  the  newly-flayed  hide  of a  white  hart  whose 
blood had been poured on the sacrificial  fire.The  stag-cult  is  far  older  than  the  Cretan  Minelaphos:  he  is  shown 
in  palaeolithic  paintings  in  the  Spanish  caves  of  Altamira  and  in  the 
Caverne  des  Trois Frires  at Ariege in  the  French  Pyrenees,  dating  from  at 
least 20,000 B.C. The Altamiran paintings are the work of the Aurignacian 
people,  who  have  also  left  records  of their  ritual  in  the  caves  of Dombo-
shawa,  and  elsewhere  in  Southern  Rhodesia.  At  Domboshawa  a  'Bush 
man'  painting,  containing scores  of figures, shows  the  death  of a king who 
wears an  antelope mask and is  tighdy corseted;  as he dies, with arms out-
flung  and  one  knee  upraised,  he  ejaculates  and  his  seed  seems  to  form  a 
heap  of  corn.  An  old  priestess  lying  naked  beside  a  cauldron  is  either 
mimicking  his  agony,  or  perhaps  inducing  it  by  sympathetic  magic. 
Close by,  young  priestesses  dance beside a  stream,  surrounded  by clouds 
of fruit and  heaped  baskets;  beasts  are  led  off laden with  fruit;  and  a huge 
bison  bull  is  pacified  by a  priestess accompanied  by an erect python.  The 
cults  of stag  and  bull  were  evidently  combined  at  Domboshawa;  but  the

2 17

stag  is  likely  to  have  been  the  more  royal  beast,  since  the  dying  king  is 
given  the  greater  prominence.  The  cults  were  also  combined  by  the 
Aurignacians.  In  a  Dordogne  cave  painting  a  bull-man  is  shown dancing 
and  playing a musical instrument shaped like a bow.The  Minotragos  goat-cult  in  Crete  seems  to  have  been  intermediate 
between  the  cults  of  Minelaphos  and  Minotaur.  Amalthea,  the  nurse  of 
Cretan  Zeus,  was  a  goat.  The  Goddess  Athene  carried  an  aegis  ('goat 
skin')  shield,  made  it  was  said  from  Amalthea's  hide  which  had  been 
previously  used  by  her  father  Zeus  as  a  prophylactic  coat.  The  Goddess 
Libya appeared  in  triad  to  Jason  on  the  shores  of Lake  Triton,  Athene's 
birth-place,  when  the  Argo  was  landlocked  there,  and  was  clad  in  goat 
skins;  she  thereby  identified  herself  with  Aega,  sister  of  Helice  ('willow 
branch')  and  daughter  of  a  king  of  Crete—Aega  who  was  the  human 
double  of  the  goat  Amalthea;  and  with  Athene  herself.  The  tradition  of 
the  Libyan  origin  of Athene  is  supported  by  a  comparison  of Greek  and 
Roman  methods  of augury.  In  Libya  the  year  begins  in  the  autumn  with 
the  winter  rains  and  the  arrival  of birds  from  the  North;  but  in  Northern 
Europe and the Black Sea area it begins in Spring with the arrival of birds 
from  the  South.  In  most  Greek  states  the  year  began  in  the  autumn  and 
the  Greek  augurs  faced  north  when  observing  birds,  presumably  because 
they  derived  their  tradition  from  the  birth-place  of Athene,  patroness  of 
augury.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Roman  augurs  faced  south,  presumably 
because the  Dardanians  (whose  patrician  descendants  in  the early  Roman 
Republic  were  alone  permitted  to  take  auguries)  had  migrated  from  the 
Black  Sea area where birds arrive from Palestine and  Syria in the  Spring. 
The Roman year began in the Spring.The  goat-Dionysus,  or  Pan,  was  a  powerful  deity in  Palestine.  He  may 
have  come  there  from  Libya  by  way  of  Egypt  or  taken  a  roundabout 
northern  route  by way  of Crete,  Thrace,  Asia  Minor and  Syria.  The  Day 
of  Atonement  scape-goat  was  a  left-handed  sacrifice  to  him  under  the 
name  of Azazel,  and  the  source  of the  Jordan  was  a  grotto  sacred  to  him 
as  Baal  Gad,  the  goat  king,  eponymous  ancestor  of the  tribe  of Gad.  The 
prohibition  in  Deuteronomy  XIV  against  seething  a  kid  in  its  mother's 
milk is puzzling only if sentimentally read;  it is clearly written in the severe 
style  of  the  remainder  of  the  chapter,  which  begins  with  a  prohibition 
against  self-disfigurement  at  funerals,  and  directed  against  a  eucharistical 
rite  no  longer  tolerated  by  the  priesthood  of Jehovah.  The  clue  is  to  be 
found in  the well-known  Orphic formula:

Like a kid I have fallen into milk

which  was  a  password  for  initiates  when  they  reached  Hades  and  were 
challenged  by  the  guardians  of  the  dead.  They  had  become  one  with 
The Kid,  that is to say  the immortal  Dionysus,  originally  Cretan  Zagreus

2 18

or Zeus, by partaking of his flesh, and with  the  Goat-goddess,  his mother, 
in  whose  cauldron  and  milk he  had  been  seethed. 1  A  song  about  the  birth 
of the  gods  on  one  of the  recently  discovered  Ras  Shamra  tablets  contains 
an express injunction to seethe a kid in its mother's milk.

The  prohibitionThe  prohibition

in  Deuteronomy  explains  the  glib  and  obviously 
artificial myth of Esau, Jacob, Rebeccah and the blessing of Isaac, which is 
introduced  into  Genesis  XXVII  to  justify  the  usurpation  by  the  Jacob 
tribe  of  priestly  and  royal  prerogatives  belonging  to  the  Edomites.  The 
religious  picture  iconotropically*  advanced  in  support  of the  myth  seems 
to  have  illustrated  the  kid-eating  ceremony  in  Azazel's  honour.  Two 
celebrants  wearing  goatskin  disguises  are  shown  at  a  seething  cauldron 
presided  over  by  the  priestess  (Rebeccah),  one  of  them  with  bow  and 
quiver  (Esau)  the  other  (Jacob)  being  initiated  into  the  mysteries  by  the 
old  leader  of the  fraternity  (Isaac)  who  whispers  the  secret  formula  into 
his  ear,  blesses  him  and  hands  him—rather  than  is  handed  by  him—a 
piece  of the kid  to eat.  The  ceremony  probably  included  a mock-slaughter 
and  resurrection  of the  initiate,  and  this  would  account  for  the  passage  at 
the close of the chapter where Esau murderously pursues Jacob,  Rebeccah 
directs  affairs  and  the  orgiastic  'daughters  of  Heth'  in  Cretan  costume 
stand  by.  The  two  kids  are  probably  an  error:  the  same  kid  is  shown 
twice,  first  being  taken  from  its  mother,  and  then  being  plunged  into  the 
cauldron  of milk.

Nonnus,  the  Orphic writer, explains  the shift in  Crete from  the goat  to 
the  bull-sacrifice  by  saying  that  Zagreus,  or  Dionysus,  was  a  horned 
infant who  occupied  the  throne of Zeus  for a  day.  The  Titans  tore him  in 
pieces  and  ate  him  after  he  had  raced  through  his  changes  of shape:  Zeus 
with  the  goat-skin  coat,  Cronos  making  rain,  an  inspired  youth,  a  lion,  a 
horse,  a  horned  snake,  a  tiger,  a  bull.  It  was  as  a  bull  that  the  Titans  ate 
him.  The Persian Mithras was also eaten in bull form.There seems to have been a goat-cult in Ireland before the arrival of the 
Danaans and Milesians, for in a passage in the Book of the Dun Cow 'goat-
heads'  are  a  sort  of demon  associated  with  leprechauns,  pigmies,  and  the 
Fomorhns,  or  African  aborigines.3  But  by  the  time  of  the  Ulster  hero

]I  find  that  I  have  been  anticipated  in  this  explanation  by  Maimonides  ('Rambam'),  the 
twelfth-century Spanish J ew w ho reformed the Judaic religion and was, incidentally, Saladin's 
physician-royal.  In  his  Guide  a  the  Erring  he  reads  the  text  as  an  injunction  against  taking 
part  in  Ashtaroth  worship.

*  In  the  preface  to  my  King  Jesus  I  define  iconotropy  as  a  technique  of  deliberate  mis 
representation  by  which  ancient  ritual  icons  are  twisted  in  meaning  in  order  to  confirm  a 
profound  change  of  the  existent  religious  system—usually  a  change  from  matriarchal  to 
patriarchal—and  the  new  meanings  are  embodied  in  myth.  I  adduce  examples  from  the 
myths of Pasiphae,  Oedipus, and L o t.

'  Demons  and  bogeys  are  invariably  die  reduced  gods  or  priests  of a  superseded  religion: 
for  example  the  Empusae  and  Lamia*  of Greece  w ho  in  Aristophanes's  day  were  regarded  as 
emissaries  of the  Triple  Goddess  Hecate.  T he  Lamiae,  beautiful  women  w ho  used  to  seduce, 
2 19Cuchulain, the traditional date of whose death is 2 A . D ., the royal bull-cult 
was  well  established.  His  destiny  was  bound  up  with  that  of  a  brown 
bull-calf,  son  of  Queen  Maeve's  famous  Brown  Bull.  The  Morrigan,  the 
Fate-goddess, when  she first met  Cuchulain,  warned  him  that  only  while 
the  calf was  still  a  yearling would  he  continue  to  live.  The  central  episode 
in the  Cuchulain saga is  the  War ofthe Bulls,  fought between  the armies of 
Maeve  and  her  husband  King Ailell  as  the  result  of an  idle  quarrel  about 
two  bulls.  At  the  close  of it,  the  Brown  Bull,  Cuchulain's  other  self,  kills 
his  rival,  the  White-horned,  which  considering  itself too  noble  to  serve  a 
woman,  has  deserted  Maeve's herd  for  the  herd  of Ailell;  it  then goes  mad 
with pride,  charges  a  rock  and  dashes  out  its  brains.  It  is  succeeded  by 
its calf, and Cuchulain dies.

The  bull-cult was also established in  Wales at an early date. In a Welsh 
poetic  dialogue  contained  in  the  Black  Book  of Carmarthen,  Gwyddno 
Garanhir,  Elphin's  father,  describes the hero  Gwyn as:  'A bull  of conflict, 
quick to disperse an embattled host', and 'bull of conflict' here and in later 
poems  seems  to  have  been  a  sacred  tide  rather  than  a  complimentary 
metaphor; as 'hawk' and 'eagle' also were.The  War  of the  Bulls  contains  an  instance  of the  intricate  language  of 
myth:  the  Brown  Bull  and  the  White-horned  were  really  royal  swine 
herds who had the power of changing their shapes.  It seems that in ancient 
times  swine-herds had  an altogether different standing from that conveyed 
in the parable of the Prodigal  Son:  to be a swine-herd was originally to be 
a priest in the service of the Death-goddess whose sacred beast was a pig. 1 
The  War  of  the  Bulls  is  introduced  by  the  Proceedings  of  the  Grand 
Bardic Academy,  a  seventh-century  satire against  the  greed  and  arrogance 
of the  ruling  caste  of bards,  apparendy  composed  by  some  member of an 
earlier oracular fraternity which had  been  dispossessed with  the advent of 
Christianity.  The  leading  character  here  is  Marvan,  royal  swineherd  to

enervate  and  suck  the  blood  of  travellers,  had  been  the  orgiastic  priestesses  of  the  Libyan 
Snake-goddess  Lamia;  and  the  Empusae,  demons with  one  leg of brass and  one ass's  leg  were 
relics  of  the  Set  cult—the  Lilim,  or  Children  of  Lilith,  the  devotees  of  the  Hebrew  O w l-
goddess, w ho was Adam's first wife, were ass-haunched.

1  Evidence  of  a  similar  function  in  early  Greece  is  the  conventional  epithet  tSos,  'divine'1  Evidence  of  a  similar  function  in  early  Greece  is  the  conventional  epithet  tSos,  'divine'

applied  in  the  Odyssey  to  the  swine-herd  Eumaeus.  Because  of  the  horror  in  which  swine 
herds were held by the J e ws and Egyptians and the contempt in which,  thanks to  the Prodigal 
Son,  they  have  long  been  held  in  Europe,  the  w o rd  is  usually  mistranslated  "honest  or 
w o r t h y'  though  admitted  to  be  an  hapax  legomenon.  It  is  true  that  except  on  one  night of the 
year—the  full  moon that  fell  nearest  to  the winter solstice, when  the  pig  was  sacrificed  to  Isis 
and  Osiris  and  its  flesh  eaten  by  every  Egyptian—the  taboo  on  any  contact  with  pigs  was 
so  strong  that  swine-herds  though  full-blooded  Egyptians  (according  to  Herodotus)  were 
avoided  like  the  plague  and  forced  to  marry  within  their  own  caste;  but  this  was  a  tribute  to 
their  sanctity  rather  than  anything  else.  T he  public  hangman  is  similarly avoided  in  France 
and  England  because  he  has  courageously  undertaken,  in  the  interests  of public  morality, 
a peculiarly horrible and  thankless trade.

220220

King  Guaire  of  Connaught;  he  may  be  identified  with  Morvran  ("black 
raven')  son  of  the  White  Sow-goddess  Cerridwen,  who  appears  as 
Afagddu  in  the  similar  Welsh  satire  The  Romance  of Taliesin.  In  revenge 
for  the  loss  of a  magical  white  boar,  at  once  his  physician,  music-maker 
and messenger, which the ruling bards have persuaded Guaire to slaughter, 
he  routs  them  in  a  combat  of wit  and  reduces  them  to  silence  and  igno 
miny-  Seanchan  Torpest,  the  President  of the  Academy,  addresses  him  as 
'Chief Prophet  of Heaven  and  Earth'.  There  is  a  hint  in  the  Romance  of 
Branwen  that  the  swine-herds  of  Matholwch  King  of  Ireland  were 
magicians, with a power of foreseeing the future. And this hint is expanded 
in  Triad 56  which  attributes  to  Coll  ap  Collfrewr,  the  magician,  one  of 
'the  Three  Powerful  Swine-herds  of the  Isle  of Britain',  the  introduction 
into  Britain  of wheat  and  barley.  But  the  credit  was  not  really his.  The 
name  of the  White  Sow  whom  he  tended  at  Dallwr  in  Cornwall  and  who 
went  about  Wales  with  gifts  of grain,  bees  and  her  own young,  was  Hen 
Wen,  'the  Old  White  One'.  Her  gift  to  Maes  Gwenith  ('Wheatfield')  in 
Gwent  was  three  grains  of wheat  and  three  bees.  She  was,  of course,  the 
Goddess  Cerridwen  in  beast  disguise.  (The  story  is  contained  in  three 
series  of Triads  printed  in  the  Myvyrian  Archaiology.")The  unpleasant  side  of her  nature  was  shown  by  her  gift  to  the  people 
of  Arvon  of  a  savage  kitten,  which  grew  up  to  be  one  of  the  Three 
Plagues  of Anglesey,  'the  Palug  Cat'.  Cerridwen  then  is a  Cat-goddess  as 
well  as  a  Sow-goddess.  This  links  her  with  the  Cat-as-corn-spirit  men 
tioned  by  Sir  James  Frazer  as  surviving  in  harvest  festivals  in  north  and 
north-eastern  Germany,  and  in  most  parts  of  France  and  with  the 
monster  Chapalu  of French Arthurian legend.

There  was  also  a  Cat-cult  in  Ireland.  A  'Slender  Black  Cat  reclining 
upon  a  chair  of old  silver'  had  an  oracular  cave-shrine  in  Connaught  at 
Clogh-magh-righ-cat,  now  Clough,  before  the  coming  of  St.  Patrick. 
This  cat  gave very vituperative  answers  to  inquirers  who  tried  to  deceive 
her  and  was  apparently  an  Irish  equivalent  of  the  Egyptian  Cat-goddess 
Pasht.  Egyptian  cats  were  slender,  black,  long-legged  and  small-headed. 
Another  seat  of the  Irish  cat-cult  was  Knowth,  a  burial  in  Co.  Meath  of 
about  the  same  date  as  New  Grange.  In  The  Proceedings  of the  Grand 
Bardic  Academy the  Knowth  burial  chamber  is  said  to  have  been  the  home 
of  the  King-cat  Irusan,  who  was  as  large  as  a  plough-ox  and  once 
bore  Seanchan  Torpest,  the  chief-ollave  of  Ireland,  away  on  its  back  in 
revenge  for a satire.  In  his  Poetic Astronomy,  Hyginus  identifies  Pasht with 
the  White  Goddess  by  recording  that  when  Typhon  suddenly  appeared 
in  Greece—but  whether  he  is  referring  to  an  invasion  or  to  a  volanic 
eruption,  such  as  destroyed  most  of the  island  of Thera  is  not  clear—the 
gods  fled,  disguised  in  bestial  forms:  'Mercury  into  an  ibis,  Apollo  into 
a crane, a Thracian bird, Diana into a cat.'

2 212 21

The  Old  White  Sow's  gift  to  the  people  of  Rhiwgyverthwch  was  a 
wolf cub  which  also  became  famous.  The  Wolf-as-corn-spirit  survives  in 
roughly the same area as the Cat-as-corn-spirit; and in the island of Riigen 
the  woman  who  binds  the  last sheaf is  called  'The  W o lf and  must  bite  the 
lady of the house and  the stewardess, who placate her with a large piece of 
meat.  So  Cerridwen  was  a  Wolf-goddess  too,  like  Artemis.  It  looks  as  if 
she  came  to  Britain  between  2500-2000  B.C.  with  the  New  Stone  Age 
long-headed  agriculturists  from North Africa.

Why  the  cat,  pig,  and  wolf were  considered  particularly  sacred  to  the 
Moon-goddess  is  not  hard  to  discover.  Wolves  howl  to  the  moon  and 
feed  on  corpse-flesh,  their  eyes  shine  in  the  dark,  and  they  haunt wooded 
mountains.  Cats'  eyes  similarly  shine  in  the  dark,  they  feed  on  mice 
(symbol  of pestilence),  mate  openly  and  walk  inaudibly,  they  are  prolific 
but  eat  their  own  young,  and  their  colours  vary,  like  the  moon,  between 
white, reddish and black.  Pigs also vary between white,  reddish and  black, 
feed  on  corpse-flesh,  are  prolific  but  eat  their  own  young,  and  their  tusks 
are crescent-shaped.

Chapter  Thirteen

P A L A M E D ES  A ND  T HE  C R A N ES

What  interests  me  most  in  conducting  this  argument  is  theChapter  Thirteen

P A L A M E D ES  A ND  T HE  C R A N ES

What  interests  me  most  in  conducting  this  argument  is  the

difference  that  is  constantly  appearing between  the  poedc and 
prosaic methods of thought.  The prosaic method was invented 
by the Greeks of the Classical age as an insurance against the swamping of 
reason  by  mythographic  fancy.  It  has  now  become  the  only  legitimate 
means of transmitting useful knowledge. And in England, as in most other 
mercantile  countries,  the  current  popular  view  is  that  'music'  and  old-
fashioned  diction  are  the  only  characteristics  of poetry  which  distinguish 
it from prose: that every poem has, or should have, a precise single-strand 
prose  equivalent.  As  a  result,  the  poetic  faculty  is  atrophied  in  every 
educated  person who does not privately struggle to cultivate it: very much 
as the faculty of understanding pictures is  atrophied  in  the  Bedouin Arab. 
( T.  E.  Lawrence  once  showed  a  coloured  crayon  sketch  of  an  Arab 
Sheikh  to  the  Sheikh's  own  clansmen.  They  passed  it  from  hand  to hand, 
but the nearest  guess as to what it represented came from a man who took 
the  sheikh's  foot  to  be  the  horn  of a  buffalo.)  And  from  the  inability  to 
think  poetically—to  resolve  speech  into  its  original  images  and  rhythms 
and  re-combine  these  on  several  simultaneous  levels  of  thought  into  a 
multiple  sense—derives  the  failure  to  think  clearly  in  prose.  In  prose  one 
thinks  on  only  one  level  at  a  time,  and  no  combination  of words  needs  to 
contain  more  than  a  single  sense;  nevertheless  the  images  resident  in 
words  must  be  securely  related  if the  passage  is  to  have  any  bite.  This 
simple  need  is  forgotten,  what  passes  for  simple  prose  nowadays  is  a 
mechanical  stringing  together  of  stereotyped  word-groups,  without 
regard  for  the  images  contained  in  them.  The  mechanical  style,  which 
began  in  the  counting-house,  has  now  infiltrated  into  the  university, 
some  of its  most zombiesque  instances  occurring  in  the  works  of eminent 
scholars and divines.Mythographic  statements  which  are  perfecdy  reasonable  to  the  few 
poets  who  can  still  think  and  talk  in  poetic  shorthand  seem  either  non 
sensical or childish to nearly all literary scholars.  Such statements, I mean, 
as:  'Mercury invented  the alphabet after watching the  flight  of cranes',  or 
*Menw ab Teirgwaedd saw three rowan-rods growing out of the mouth of

223

Einigan  Fawr with  every kind  of knowledge and  science written on them'. 
The  best  that  the  scholars  have yet  done  for  the  poems  of Gwion  is  'wild 
and  sublime';  and  they  never  question  the  assumption  that  he,  his  col 
leagues  and  his  public  were  people  of  either  stunted  or  undisciplined 
intelligence.The  joke  is  that  the  more  prose-minded  the  scholar  the  more  capable 
he  is  supposed  to  be  of interpreting  ancient  poetic  meaning,  and  that  no 
scholar  dares  to  set  himself up  as  an  authority  on  more  than  one  narrow 
subject  for  fear  of  incurring  the  dislike  and  suspicion  of his  colleagues. 
To  know  only  one  thing  well  is  to  have  a  barbaric  mind:  civilization 
implies  the  graceful  relation  of  all  varieties  of  experience  to  a  central 
humane  system  of thought.  The  present  age  is  peculiarly  barbaric  intro 
duce, say,  a Hebrew scholar to an ichthyologist or an authority on  Danish 
place  names  and  the  pair  of them  would  have  no  single  topic  in  common 
but  the  weather  or  the  war  (if  there  happened  to  be  a  war  in  progress, 
which  is  usual  in  this  barbaric  age).  But  that  so  many  scholars  are  bar 
barians  does  not  much  matter  so  long  as  a  few of them  are  ready  to  help 
with  their  specialized  knowledge  the  few  independent  thinkers,  that  is  to 
say  the  poets,  who  try  to  keep  civilization  alive.  The  scholar is  a  quarry-
man, not a builder,  and  all  that is required of him is that he should quarry 
cleanly.  He  is  the  poet's  insurance against  factual  error.  It  is  easy enough 
for  the  poet  in  this  hopelessly  muddled  and  inaccurate  modern  world  to 
be  misled  into  false  etymology,  anachronism  and  mathematical  absurdity 
by trying  to  be  what he  is  not.  His  function  is  truth, whereas  the scholar's 
is  fact.  Fact  is  not  to  be  gainsaid;  one  may put it  in  this  way,  that fact  is 
a  Tribune  of  the  People  with  no  legislative  right,  but  only  the  right  of 
veto.  Fact  is  not  truth,  but  a  poet  who  wilfully defies  fact  cannot  achieve 
truth.The story  about  Mercury  and  the  cranes  occurs  in  the  Fables  of Caius 
Julius  Hyginus  who,  according  to  the  well-informed  Suetonius,  was  a 
native of Spain, a freedman  of the Emperor Augustus,  the  Curator of the 
Palatine  Library,  and  a  friend  of  the  poet  Ovid.  Like  Ovid,  Hyginus 
ended  his  life  in  Imperial  disfavour.  If  he  is  the  learned  author  of  the 
Fables attributed to him,  they have since been abbreviated and  botched  by 
unlearned  editors;  yet  they  are  admitted  to  contain  ancient  mythological 
matter of great importance, not found elsewhere.

In his last Fable (277) Hyginus records:

1.  that  the  Fates  invented  the  seven  letters:  Alpha,  [Omicron],  Upsilon,

Eta,  Iota,  Beta,  and  Tau. 
Or,  alternatively,  that  Mercury  invented  them  after  watching  the 
flight of cranes 'which make letters as they fly'.

2.  that Palamedes, son of Nauplius, invented eleven others.

224

3» that Epicharmus of Sicily added Theta and Chi 
(or  Psi  and  Pi).

4.  that Simonides  added  Omega,  Epsilon,  Zeta  and Psi

(or  Omega,  Epsilon,  Zeta  and Phi).224

3» that Epicharmus of Sicily added Theta and Chi 
(or  Psi  and  Pi).

4.  that Simonides  added  Omega,  Epsilon,  Zeta  and Psi

(or  Omega,  Epsilon,  Zeta  and Phi).

There  is  no  word  here  about  Cadmus  the  Phoenician,  who  is  usually 
credited  with  the  invention  of the  Greek  alphabet,  the  characters  of which 
are  indisputably  borrowed  from  the  Phoenician  alphabet.  The  statement 
about  Epicharmus  reads  nonsensically,  unless  'of  Sicily'  is  a  stupid 
editorial  gloss  that  has  intruded  into  the  text.  Simonides  was  a  well-
known  sixth-century  B.C.  Greek  poet  who  used  the  Cadmean  Greek 
alphabet  and  did  introduce  certain  new  characters  into  his  manuscripts, 
later  adopted  throughout  Greece;  and  Epicharmus  of  Sicily,  the  well-
known  writer  of comedies who  lived  not  long  afterwards and was a  mem 
ber  of  the  family  of Asclepiads  at  Cos,  evidendy  seemed  to  the  editor  of 
the Fables  a  likely  co-worker with  Simonides.  The  original  legend,  how 
ever, probably refers to another, far earlier, Epicharmus, an ancestor of the 
writer  of comedies.  The  Asclepiads  traced  their  descent  to  Apollo's  son 
Asclepius,  or  Aesculapius,  the  physician  god  of  Delphi  and  Cos,  and 
claimed to inherit  valuable  therapeutic secrets  from  him.  Two Asclepiads 
are  mentioned  in  the  Iliad as  having  been  physicians  to  the  Greeks in the 
siege  of Troy.

As  for  Palamedes,  son  of Nauplius,  he  is  credited  by  Philostratus  the 
Lemnian,  and  by  the  scholiast  on Euripides's  Orestes,  with  the  invention 
not  only  of  the  alphabet,  but  also  of  lighthouses,  measures,  scales,  the 
disc,  and  the  'art of posting sentinels'.  He took part in  the  Trojan War as 
an  ally  of the  Greeks  and  at  his  death  was  granted  a  hero-shrine  on  the 
Mysian coast of Asia Minor opposite Lesbos.The  Three  Fates  are  a  divided  form  of  the  Triple  Goddess,  and  in

Greek legend appear also as  the Three Grey Ones and the Three Muses.

Thus,  the  first  two  statements  made  by  Hyginus  account  for  the  'thir 
teen letters' which, according to some authorities (Diodorus Siculus says) 
formed the 'Pelasgian alphabet'  before  Cadmus increased  them to sixteen. 
Diodorus  evidendy  means  thirteen  consonants,  not  thirteen  letters  in  all 
which  would  not  have  been  sufficient.  Other  authorities  held  that  there 
had  been  only  twelve  of  them.  Aristotle,  at  any  rate  gives  the  numbers 
of  letters  in  the  first  Greek  alphabet  as  thirteen  consonants  and  five 
vowels  and  his  list of letters  corresponds  exacdy with  the  Beth-Luis-Nion, 
except that he gives  Zeta  for  H-aspirate and  Phi for  F—but,  in  the  case 
of Phi,  at  least,  early  epigraphic  evidence  is  against  him.  This  is not the 
only  reference  to  the  Pelasgian  alphabet.  Eustathius,  the  Byzantine 
grammarian,  quotes  an  ancient  scholiast  on  Iliad,  II,  841  to  the  effect 
that  the  Pelasgians  were  called  Dioi  ('divine')  because  they  alone  of all

"5

the  Greeks  preserved  the  use  of  letters  after  the  Deluge—the  Deluge 
meaning  to  the  Greeks  the  one  survived  by  Deucalion  and  Pyrrha. 
Pyrrha,  'the  red  one',  is  perhaps  the  Goddess-mother  of  the  Puresati, 
or Pulesati, the Philistines.The Lycians of Asia Minor are described by Herodotus as having come 
from  Crete;  so  are  their  neighbours  the  Carians,  who  claimed  to  be  kin 
to the  Lydians  and  Mysians  and spoke  much  the same  barbaric,  that  is  to 
say,  non-Greek  language.  The  Carians,  formerly members  of the  Minoan 
Empire,  had  dominated  the  Aegean  between  the  fall  of  Cnossos  in  1400 
B.C.  and  the  Dorian  invasion  of  1050  B.C.  Herodotus  found  the  Lycians 
the least  Grecianized of these  four nations and recorded that they reckoned 
descent  through  the  mother,  not  the  father.  Female  independence  of male 
tutelage and matrilinear descent were characteristic of all peoples of Cretan 
stock;  and  the  same  system  survived  in  parts  of Crete  long  after  its  con 
quest by the Greeks.  Firmicus Matemus reported it in  the  fourth  century 
A - D .1 The Lydians retained another vestige of the system—girls habitually 
prostituted  themselves  before  marriage,  and  then  disposed  of  their 
earnings and  their persons as they thought fit.

Palamedes;  then,  ruled  over  the  Mysians,  who  were  of  Cretan  stock, 
but  he  had  a  Greek  father;  his  name  means  perhaps  'Mindful  of  the 
Ancient  One',  and  he  assisted  the  Three  Fates  (the  Three  Muses)  in  the 
composition  of the  Greek alphabet.  But  it was  well  known  to  the ancients, 
as  it  is  to  us,  that  all  the  inventions  credited  to  Palamedes  originated  in 
Crete. It follows that a Greek alphabet, based on a Cretan not a Phoenician 
model,  was raised  from  five vowels  and  thirteen  consonants  to  five  vowels 
and fifteen consonants, by Epicharmus, an early Asclepiad.But  why  did  Hyginus  not  specify  the  eleven  consonants  of Palamedes, 
as  he  specified  the  original  seven  letters  and  the  additions  by  Epicharmus 
and  Simonides?  We  must first find out why he  quotes Beta  and  Tau as  the 
two  consonants  invented  by  the  Three  Fates  at  the  same  time  as  the  five 
vowels.

Simonides,  a  native  of  Ceos,  introduced  into  Athens,  where  he  was 
domiciled,  the  double-consonants  Psi  and  Xi,  the  distinction  between  the 
vowels  Omicron  and  Omega  (short  and  long  0),.and  the  distinction  be 
tween  the  vowels  Eta and  EpsUon  (long and  short E).  These  changes were 
not,  however,  publicly  adopted  there  until  the  archonship  of  Euclides 
(403  B.C.).  To  Eta,   when  thus  distinguished  from  EpsUon,  was  allotted  the 
character  H,  which  had  hitherto  belonged  to  the  aspirate  H;  and  the 
aspirate  H  became  merely  a  'rough  breathing',  a  miniature  decrescent 
moon,  while  its  absence  in  a word  beginning  with  a vowel  was  denoted  by

1  In  Crete  today  a  pre-marital  love-affair  has  only  two  possible results: a  knife  between  the 
lover's  shoulders,  or  immediate  marriage.  T he  German  Panzer  Grenadiers  stationed  in  Crete 
during W o r ld W ar II had  to go  on leave to Mount Athos if they wanted sexual diversion.

226

a  'smooth  breathing',  a  crescent  moon.  The  Digamma  F  (which  had  a  V 
sound)  had  disappeared  as  an  Attic  character  long  before  the  time  of 
Simonides;  and in  many words was supplanted  by the letter Phi,  invented 
to  represent  the  FF  sound  which  had  hitherto  been  spelt  PH.  But  the 
Digamma was retained for some generations  longer by the Aeolian  Greeks 
and  disappeared  among  the  Dorians  (the  last  to  use  it)  during  this  same 
archonship  of Euclides—at  about  the  same  time,  in  fact,  as  Gwydion 
and Amathaon won the Batde of the Trees in Britain.This  is  a  queer  business.  Though  it  is  possible  that  the  V  sound  had 
altogether  dropped  out  of ordinary  Greek  speech  and  that  therefore  the 
Digamma  F was an unnecessary  letter,  this is  by no  means  certain;  and  the 
aspirate  H  was  certainly  still  an  integral  part  of the  language.  Why  then 
was  the  aspirate  supplanted  by  Eta?  Why  was  a  new  character  not  found 
for  the  Eta  sound?  Why  were  the  unnecessary  double-consonants  Psi, 
previously  written  Pi-Sigma,  and  Xi,  previously  written  Kappa-Sigma, 
introduced  at  the  same  time?  Only religious  doctrine  can have accounted 
for this awkward change.

One  of the  reasons  is  given  in  the  same  fable.  Hyginus  connects  the 
four  additional  letters  of  Simonides  with  Apollo's  zither—Apollo 
in 
cithaera  ceteras  literas  adjecit.  This  means,  I  think,  that  each  of the  seven 
strings  of the  zither,  originally  Cretan  but  brought  from  Asia  Minor  to 
Greece about 6 76 B . C. by Terpander of Lesbos, now had a letter allotted 
to  it,  and  that  twenty-four,  the  new  number of letters  in  the  alphabet,  had 
a  sacred  significance  in  the  therapeutic  music  with  which  Apollo  and  his 
son Aesculapius were honoured  in  their island shrines.  Simonides, it must 
be noted,  belonged  to a  Cean  bardic guild  in  the service of Dionysus who, 
according  to  Plutarch,  a  priest  of Delphian  Apollo,  was  'also  at  home  in 
Delphi'.  Both  Apollo  and  Dionysus,  as  we  have  seen,  were  gods  of  the 
solar  year.  So  were  Aesculapius  and  Hercules;  and  this  was  an  age  of 
religious amalgamation.Hyginus  says  that  the  original  thirteen-consonant  alphabet  was  taken 
by Mercury into Egypt,  brought back by  Cadmus into Greece, and thence 
taken  by  Evander  the  Arcadian  into  Italy,  where  his  mother  Carmenta 
(die  Muse)  adapted  them  to  the  Latin  alphabet  of  fifteen  letters.  He 
describes  this  Mercury  as  the  same  one  who  invented  athletic  games:  in 
other words, he was a  Cretan,  or of Cretan stock.  And  Mercury in  Egypt 
was  Thoth,  the  God  whose  symbol  was  a  crane-like  white  ibis,  who  in 
vented  writing  and  who  also  reformed  the  calendar.  The  story  begins  to 
make good historical sense. Hyginus has perhaps drawn it from an Etruscan 
source:  for  the Etruscans, or Tyrrhenians, were  of Cretan stock, and  held 
the  crane  in  reverence.  Cranes  fly  in  V-formation  and  the  characters  of 
all  early  alphabets,  nicked  with  a  knife  on  the  rind  of  boughs—as 
Hesiod  wrote  his  poems—or on  clay  tablets,  were  naturally  angular.

227So  Hyginus  knew  that  the  five  vowels  of  the  Arcadian  alphabet  be 
longed to an earlier religious system  than  the seven vowels  of the  Classical 
Greek alphabet, and that in Italy these five vowels were sacred to the God 
dess  Carmenta;  also  that  in  Italy  a  fifteen-consonant  sacred  alphabet was 
used  some  six  centuries  before  the  Greek  twenty-four-letter  'Dorian' 
alphabet  from  which  all  Italian  alphabets—Etruscan,  Umbrian,  Oscan, 
Faliscan  and  Latin—are  known  to  derive. In  this,  Hyginus  is  supported 
by  Pliny  who  states  positively  in  his  Natural History  that  the  first  Latin 
alphabet  was  a  Pelasgian  one. He  does  not  mention  his  authority  but  it 
was  probably  Gnaeus  Gellius,  the  well-informed  second-century  B.C. historian,  whom  he  quotes  in  the  same  passage  as  holding  that  Mercury 
first  invented  letters  in  Egypt  and  that  Palamedes  invented  weights  and 
measures. One  must  assume  from  the  lack  of  inscriptional  evidence  in 
support  of  Hyginus's  record  that  this  alphabet  was  confined,  as  the 
Beth-Luis-Nion  originally  was,  to  use  in  deaf-and-dumb  signalling. About  Carmenta  we  know  from  the  historian  Dionysus  Periergetes 
that  she  gave  oracles  to  Hercules  and  lived  to  the  age  of  no  years, 
no  was  a  canonical  number,  the 
ideal  age  which  every  Egyptian 
wished  to  reach  and  the  age  at  which,  for  example,  the  patriarch  Joseph 
died. The  no  years  were  made  up  of twenty-two  Etruscan  lustra  of  five 
years  each;  and  no  years  composed  the  'cycle'  taken  over  from  the 
Etruscans  by  the  Romans. At  the  end  of  each  cycle  they  corrected  ir 
regularities in the solar calendar by intercalation and held Saecular Games. The secret sense of 22—sacred numbers were never chosen haphazardly— 
is that it is the measure of the circumference of the circle when  the diameter 
is  7.227

At  the  end  of  each  cycle  they  corrected  ir 
regularities in the solar calendar by intercalation and held Saecular Games. The secret sense of 22—sacred numbers were never chosen haphazardly— 
is that it is the measure of the circumference of the circle when  the diameter 
is  7. This  proportion,  now  known  as pi,  is  no  longer  a  religious  secret; 
and  is  used  today  only  as  a  rule-of-thumb  formula,  the  real  mathematical 
value  of pi  being  a  decimal  figure  which  nobody  has  yet  been  able  to 
work  out  because  it  goes  on  without  ever  ending,  as  ^  does,  in  a  neat 
recurrent  sequence. Seven  lustra  add  up  to  thirty-five  years,  and  thirty-
five  at Rome  was  the  age  at which  a man was held  to  reach his  prime  and 
might  be  elected  Consul. (The  same  age  was fixed upon  by  a  Classically-
minded  Convention  as  the  earliest  at which  an  American  might  be  elected 
President  of  the  United  States.)  The  nymph  Egeria,  the  oak-queen  who 
instructed  King  Numa  of Rome,  was  'the  fourth  Carmenta'. If the  age  of 
each  Carmenta—or  course  of  Sibylline  priestesses—was  no  years, 
Numa  reigned  not  earlier  than  330  years  after  Evander's  arrival  in  Italy, 
the  traditional  date  of which  is  some  sixty  years  before  the  Fall  of Troy, 
i.e.,  1243  B.C.

Evander  was  banished  from  Arcadia  because  he  had  killed  his  father; 
and  this  implies  the  supersession  of  the  Triple  Goddess,  Carmenta  or 
Thetis,  by  Olympian  Zeus.  Thetis  was  the  Aeolian  Greek  name  for  Car 
menta,  at whose  prompting  Evander  had  struck  the  blow;  and  for  a  king 
228to  kill his  rather  (or kingly  predecessor)  at  the  prompting  of his  Goddess 
mother  was  common  in  Italy  and  Greece  at  that  period.  The  traditional 
reason for Partholan's Danaan invasion of Ireland and Brutus's Dardanian 
invasion  of  Britain  is  the  same:  both  were  banished  for  parricide.  The 
date,  1243  B.C.,  corresponds  with  that  given  by  the  later  Greeks  for  the 
Achaean  invasion,  namely  1 2 50  B.C.  This  was  not  the  original  invasion 
but,  apparendy,  a  southward  movement,  under  Dorian  pressure,  of 
Achaeans  setded  in  North-western  Greece.  The  story  of  Pelias  and 
Neleus,  sons  of  Poseidon  who  dispossessed  the  Minyans  of  Iolcos  in 
Thessaly  and  Pylos  in  the  Western  Peloponnese,  refers  to  this  invasion 
which  resulted  in  the  institution  of Olympianism.

But  has  not  the  story  of the  invention  of the  pre-Cadmean  alphabet  of 
Palamedes,  which  was  taken  to  Italy  by  Evander  the  Arcadian  before  the 
Dorian  invasion  of Greece,  been  lying  concealed  all  this  time  in  the  con 
fusingly  iconotropic  myth  of  Perseus  and  the  Gorgon  Medusa?  Cannot 
the Palamedes story be recovered  intact by the  simple method  of restoring 
the  Perseus  myth  to  iconographic  form,  and  then  re-interpreting  the 
iconographs which  compose it?The  myth  is  that  Perseus  was  sent  to  cut  off  the  head  of the  snaky-
locked  Gorgon  Medusa,  a  rival  of  the  Goddess  Athene,  whose  baleful 
look  turned  men  into  stone;  and  that  he  could  not  accomplish  die  task 
until he had  gone  to  the  three  Graeae,  'Grey  Ones',  the  three  old sisters  of 
the  Gorgons  who  had  only  one  eye  and  one  tooth  between  them,  and  by 
stealing  eye  and  tooth  had  blackmailed  them  into  telling  him  where  the 
grove of the  Three  Nymphs was  to  be  found.  From  the Three Nymphs  he 
then  obtained  winged  sandals  like  those  of  Hermes,  a  bag  to  put  the 
Gorgon's  head  into,  and  a  helmet  of invisibility.  Hermes  also  kindly  gave 
him  a  sickle;  and  Athene  gave  him  a  mirror  and  showed  him  a  picture  of 
Medusa  so  that  he  would  recognize  her.  He  threw  the  tooth  of the  Three 
Grey  Ones,  and  some  say  the  eye  also,  into  Lake  Triton,  to  break  their 
power,  and  flew  on  to  Tartessus  where  the  Gorgons  lived  in  a  grove  on 
the  borders  of the  ocean;  there  he  cut  off the  sleeping  Medusa's  head  with 
the sickle, first looking into  the  mirror so  that  the petrifying charm  should 
be  broken,  thrust  the  head  into  his  bag,  and  flew  home  pursued  by  other 
Gorgons.

The Three  Nymphs must be understood  as  the Three Graces,  that is  to 
say,  the  Triple  Love-goddess.  The  Graeae  were  also  known  as  the 
Phorcides,  which  means  the  daughters  of Phorcus,  or  Orcus,  and  accord 
ing  to  the  Scholiast  on  Aeschylus  had  the  form  of swans—which  is  prob 
ably  an  error  for  cranes,  due  to  a  misreading  of  a  sacred  picture,  since 
cranes and swans,  equally sacred  birds,  are alike in  flying  in V-formation. 
They were, in fact, the Three Fates. Phorcus, or Orcus, became a synonym 
for  the  Underworld;  it  is  the  same  word  as porcus,  a  pig,  the  beast  sacred

229229

to  the  Death-goddess,  and  perhaps  as  Parcae,  a  tide  of the  Three  Fates, 
usually  called  Moirae,  'the  distributors'.  Ore  is  'pig'  in  Irish;  hence  the 
Orcades,  or  Orkneys,  abodes  of  the  Death-goddess.  Phorcus  was  also 
reputedly  the  father  of  the  Gorgon  Medusa,  whom  the  Argives  in 
Pasesanias's  day  described  as  a  beautiful  Libyan  queen  decapitated by 
their  ancestor  Perseus  after  a  battle  with  her  armies,  and  who 
may  therefore  be  identified  with  the  Libyan  snake-goddess  Lamia  (Neith) 
whom  Zeus  betrayed  and who  afterwards killed children.

Imagine  the  pictures  on  a  vase.  First,  a  naked  young  man  cautiously 
approaching  three  shrouded  women  of  whom  the  central  one  presents 
him  with  an  eye  and  a  tooth;  the  other  two  point  upwards  to  three  cranes 
flying  in  a  V-formation  from  right  to  left.  Next,  the  same  young  man, 
wearing  winged  sandals  and  holding  a  sickle,  stands  pensively  under  a 
willow  tree.  (Willows  are  sacred  to  the  Goddess,  and  cranes  breed  in 
willow  groves.)  Next,  another  group  of  three  beautiful  young  women 
sit side by side in a grove with  the same  young man  standing before  them. 
Above  them  three  cranes  fly  in  the  reverse  direction.  One  presents  him 
with  winged  sandals,  another  with  a  bag,  the  third  with  a  winged  helmet. 
Next, various'sea-monsters  are shown and  a helmeted  Sea-goddess, with  a 
trident,  holding  a  mirror  in  which  a  Gorgon's  face  is  reflected;  and  the 
young  man  is  seen  flying,  bag  and  sickle  in  hand,  towards  a  grove  with 
his head turned to look at the mirror. From the bag peeps out the Gorgon's 
head.  The  tooth  and  eye  are  painted,  enlarged,  on  either  side  of him,  so 
that he seems  to have  thrown  them away.  He  is followed  by  three menacing 
winged  women  with  Gorgon  faces.This  completes  the  pictures  on  the  vase  and  one  comes  again  to  the

first group.

The  myth  in  its  familiar  form,  like  that  of Zeus's  betrayal  of Lamia,  is 
descriptive  of the  breaking  of the  Argive  Triple  Goddess's  power  by  the 
first wave of Achaeans, figured as Perseus, 'the destroyer'. But the original 
meaning  of  the  iconographs  seems  to  be  this:  Mercury,  or  Hermes,  or 
Car,  or  Palamedes,  or  Thoth;  or  whatever  his  original  name  was,  is 
given  poetic  sight  by  the  Shrouded  Ones  (his  mother  Carmenta,  or Maia, 
or  Danae,  or  Phorcis,  or  Medusa,  or  whatever  her  original  name  was,  in 
her  prophetic  aspect  of  the  Three  Fates)  and  the  power  to  take  omens 
from  the flight of birds;  also  the power  to  understand  the alphabetic secret 
represented  by  the cranes.  The  tooth  was a divinatory instrument,  like  the 
one  under which  Fionn  used  to  put  his  thumb—after eating  the  salmon  of 
knowledge—whenever  he  needed  magical  counsel.  Carmenta  has  invented 
the  alphabet,  but  is  assigning  the  thirteen  consonants  to  her  son,  while 
keeping  the  five  vowels  sacred  to  herself.  He  goes  off  with  his  sickle, 
which  is  moon-shaped  in  her  honour,  like  the  sickle  which  the  Gallic 
Arch-Druid  subsequently  used  for  cutting  misdetoe;  and  will  presently

230

cut  the first alphabet  twig  from  the  grove;  in  front  of which  the  Goddess, 
unshrouded  now,  and  playing  the  nymph  not  the  crone,  is  discovered 
sitting in gracious trinity.  She gives him as his regalia a  winged helmet and 
winged  sandals,  symbolizing  the  swiftness  of  poetic  thought,  and  a  bag 
in which  to  keep  his  letters  well  hidden.Next,  she  is  revealed  as  Athene,  the  Goddess  of  Wisdom,  who  was 
born  on  the  shores  of  Lake  Triton  in  Libya  and  seems  to  have  been 
originally,  before  her  monstrous  rebirth  from  Father  Zeus's  head,  the 
Libyan  Triple  Goddess  Neith,  whom  the  Greeks  called  Lamia,  or  Libya. 
Peeping  from  his  bag  there  is  now  a  Gorgon's  head,  which  is  merely  an 
ugly  mask  assumed  by  priestesses  on  ceremonial  occasions  to  frighten 
away trespassers;  at the same time they made hissing noises, which accounts 
for Medusa's snake locks. There never was a real Gorgon (as J. E. Harrison 
was  the  first  to  point  out);  there  was  only  a  prophylactic  ugly  face  for -
malized  into  a  mask.  The  ugly  face  at  the  mouth  of the  bag  symbolizes 
that  the  secrets  of the  alphabet,  which  are  the  real  contents,  are  not  to  be 
divulged  or  misused.  A  Gorgon's  mask  was  similarly  put  on  the  doors  of 
all  ovens  and  kilns  in  ancient  Greece  to  frighten  away  the  bogeys  (and 
inquisitive  children)  who  might  spoil  the  baking.  The  winged  'Gorgons' 
in  this  picture  are  escorting,  not  pursuing,  Mercury:  they  are  the  Triple 
Goddess  again  who,  by  wearing  these  ritual  masks,  is  protecting  him 
from  profane  eyes.  She  is  also  shown  on  the  earth  holding  out  her  mirror 
with  a  Gorgon's  face  reflected  in  it,  to  protect  him  in  his  poetic  flight.  He 
is  taking  the  bag  to  Tartessus,  the  Aegean  colony  on  the  Guadalquivir; 
whence  presumably  the  Milesians  would  carry  it  to  Ireland.  Gades,  now 
Cadiz,  the  principal  city  of Tartessus,  is  said  by  the  Augustan  historian 
Velleius  Paterculus  to  have  been  founded  in  n oo  B . C .,  thirteen  years 
before  the  foundation  of Utica  in  North  Africa.  Perseus'  flight  was  dis 
played  in  gold  and  silver inlay  on  the  Shield  of Hercules,  as  extravagantly 
described  by  Hesiod;  who  places  it  between  a  scene  of the  Muses  singing 
to  a  lyre  near  a  dolphin-haunted  sea,  and  one  of the  Three  Fates  standing 
outside  a  populous  seven-gated  city.  If  this  city  is  his  own  seven-gated 
Thebes,  then  the  icon  which  Hesiod  has  misread  is  a  Boeotian  variant  of 
the  Mercury  myth,  and  the  hero  with  the  tasselled  alphabet-bag  and  the 
attendant Gorgons is Cadmus the Theban.Mercury arrived safely at Tartessus, to judge from a cryptic remark by 
Pausanias (7,  3 5,  8)  that 'there is a tree at Gades that takes diverse forms', 
which  seems  to  refer  to  the  tree-alphabet.  Gades  (Cadiz)  is  built  on Leon, 
an  island  of  Tartessus;  the  older  city  was  on  the  western  shore  and  in 
cluded  a  famous  temple  of Cronos  mentioned  by  Strabo.  It  is  likely  that 
the  island  was  once,  like  Pharos,  both  a  sepulchral  island  and  a  trading 
depot.  Pherecydes  guessed  that  it  was  the  original  'Red  Island',  Ery-
theia,  over  which  three-bodied  Geryon  ruled,  but  on  the  insufficient

2 31

ground  that  the  pasture  there  was  very  rich  and  that  Hercules  had  an 
ancient  shrine  on  the  eastern  shore.  Pausanias  (X,  4,  6)  records  the  more 
plausible  legend  that  Leon  was  originally  owned  by  the  Giant  Tityus 
who,  as will  be shown  in  Chapter  Sixteen,  was  really  Cronos—the  god  of 
the middle, or fool's finger, consigned  to  Tartarus by  Zeus.  (Titias whom 
Hercules killed and Tityus whom  Zeus killed are doublets.)The  shrine  of Hercules  seems  to  have  been  set  up  by  the  colonists  of 
1 1 00  B.C.,  some  four  hundred  years  before  Phoenician  colonists  came 
there  from  Tyre,  having  been  ordered  by  an  oracle  to  setde  near  the 
Pillars  of  Hercules.  The  Phoenicians  subsequendy  worshipped  Cronos 
as  Moloch  and  Hercules  as  Melkarth.  Strabo  quotes  Poseidonius  for 
holding  that  the  Pillars  of Hercules  were  not,  as  was  vulgarly  supposed, 
the  two  heights  of Gibraltar  and  Ceuta,  but  two  pillars  set  up  before  his 
shrine;  and  I  have  suggested  in  my  King  Jesus  (Chapter  X V I)  that  such 
columns  were  connected  with  the  secret  of the  Pelasgian  alphabet.  So  it  is 
likely  that  the  pre-Phoenician  Hercules  of Tartessus  was  Palamedes,  or 
the  lion-skinned  God  Ogmios:  whom  the Irish  credited with the  invention 
of  the  alphabet  that  they  'had  out  of  Spain'  and  whom  Gwion,  in  his 
Elegy  on  'Ercwlf', celebrates as  a planter of alphabetic  pillars.  The  people 
of Tartessus  were  famous  in  Classical  times  for  the  respect  they  paid  to 
old  men,  and  Ogmios  according  to  Lucian  was  represented  as  an  aged 
Hercules.  That  the  Gorgons  lived  in  a  grove at Tartessus  can  mean  only 
that  they  had  an  alphabetic  secret  to  guard.  This  Ogmian  Hercules  was 
also worshipped by the early Latins. King Tuba LT of Mauretania, who was 
also  an  honorary  duumvir  of  Gades,  is  quoted  by  Plutarch  (Roman 
Questions  59)  as his authority for saying that Hercules and  the Muses once 
shared an altar because he had  taught Evander's people the alphabet.  This 
tallies  with  Hyginus's  account  of  how  Carmenta, 
the  Triple  Muse, 
taught  Evander,  and  Dionysus  Periergetes'  account  of  how  she  'gave 
oracles to Hercules'.Isidore, Archbishop of Seville, who died in 636 A . D.  ,wrote an encyclo 
paedic  work  called  Twenty  Books  Concerning  Origins  or  Etymologies, 
based  on  a  wide,  if  uncritical,  study  of  Christian  and  pagan  literature, 
which  is  the  most  valuable  repository  of Iberian  tradition  extant.  In  it  he 
treats  of the  invention  of the  alphabet.  He  does  not  present  Palamedes  or 
Hercules  or  Ogma  or  Mercury  or  Cadmus  as  the  original  benefactor,  but 
the Goddess herself and names Greece as the land of origin:

Aegyptiorum  litteras  Isis  regina,  Inachis  [sic]  regis  filia,  de  Graecia

veniens in Aegyptum repperit et Aegyptis tradidit.

As  for  the  Egyptian  alphabet,  Queen  Isis,  daughter  of  King  Inachus, 
coming  from  Greece  to  Egypt  brought  them  with  her  and  gave  them 
. 
to the Egyptians.

_  .  . 
. .. 
Ortginum 1, tu (4-10).

r

2 32

Inachus,  a  river-god  and  legendary king  of Argos,  was  the  father both  of 
the  Goddess Io,  who became Isis  when  she reached Egypt,  and  of the hero 
Phoroneus,  founder of the  Pelasgian  race,  who  has  been  already  identified 
with  the  God  Bran,  alias  Cronos.  Isidore  was  a  compatriot  of Hyginus 
(who  reported  the  legend  of Mercury's  return  to  Greece  from  Egypt  with 
the  Pelasgian  alphabet);  he distinguishes  the Egyptian alphabet both  from 
the  hieroglyphic  and  demotic  scripts,  and  ascribes  the  invention  of  the 
ordinary Greek alphabet to the Phoenicians.What  material  Mercury's  bag  was  made  of,  can  be  discovered  in  the 
parallel  myth  of  Manannan,  son  of  Lyr,  a  Goidelic  Sun-hero,  predecessor 
of  Fionn  and  Cuchulain,  who  carried  the  Treasures  of  the  Sea  (i.e.,  the 
alphabet secret of the Peoples of the Sea) in a bag made of the skin of a crane; 
and  in  the  myth  of  Mider,  a  Goidelic  Underworld-god,  corresponding 
with  me British Arawn ('Eloquence') King  of Annwm, who  lived  in a  castle 
in  Manannan's  Isle  of Man with  three cranes  at his  gate whose duty was  to 
warn  off travellers,  croaking  out:  'Do  not  enter—keep  away—pass  by!' 
Perseus's  bag  must  have  been  a  crane-bag,  for  the  crane  was  sacred  to 
Athene  and  to  Artemis,  her  counterpart  at  Ephesus,  as  well  as  being  the 
inspiration  for  Hermes's  invention  of letters.  The  flying  Gorgons,  then, 
are cranes with Gorgon-faces, 1 and  watch over the secrets  of the crane-bag, 
itself protected  by  a  Gorgon  head.  It  is  not  known  what  sort  of a  dance 
the  Crane  Dance  was  that,  according  to  Plutarch,  Theseus  introduced 
into  Delos  except  that  it was  performed  around  a  horned  altar and repre 
sented  the  circles  that  coiled  and  uncoiled  in  the  Labyrinth.  My  guess  is 
that  it  imitated  the  fluttering  love-dance  of courting  cranes,  and  that  each 
movement  consisted  of  nine  steps  and  a  leap.  As  Polwart  says  in  his 
Flyting with Montgomery (1605):

The crane must aye 
Take nine steps ere sheeflie.The crane must aye 
Take nine steps ere sheeflie.

The  nine  steps  prove  her  sacred  to  the  Triple  Goddess;  and  so  does  her 
neck,  feathered  white  and  black  with  reddish  skin  showing  through,  or 
(in  the  case  of the  Numidian,  or  Balearic,  crane)  with  red  wattles.  Cranes 
make  their  spectacular  migrations  from  the  Tropic  of  Cancer  to  the 
Arctic  Circle  and  back  twice  yearly,  flying  in  chevron  formation  with 
loud  trumpetings  at  an  enormous  height;  and  this  must  have  attached 
them  to  the  Hyperborean  cult  as  messengers  flying  to  the  other  world 
which  lies  at  the  back  of  the  North  Wind.  But  Thoth  who  invented 
hieroglyphs, was symbolized  by the  ibis,  another wader  also  sacred  to  the 
moon;  and  the  Greeks  identified  Thoth  with  Hermes,  conductor  of souls 
and  messenger  of the  gods,  whom  Pherecydes  addressed  as  'ibis-shaped'.

1  A nd  probably  with  female  breasts,  as  in  a  Middle  Minoan  seal-type  from  Zakro,  pub

lished  in  S ir  Arthur  Evans*  Palace  of  Minos.

233

So  Hermes  is  credited  with  having  invented  the  alphabet  after  watching 
the  flight  of cranes,  and  the  crane  takes  on  the  scholarly  attributes  of the 
ibis, which did  not visit  Greece.A  peculiarity  of  wading  birds  such  as  the  crane  and  heron  is  that, 
when  they  have  speared  a  quantity  of small  fish  in  a  river  ready  to  take 
home  to  their  young,  they  arrange  them  on  the  bank  with  the  tails  set 
together  in  the  form  of a  wheel,  which  was  formerly  the  symbol  of  the 
sun,  and  of the  king's  life.  This  must  have  astonished  the  ancients  as  it 
astonished  me as  a boy when  I  saw a  heron  doing  it in the Nantcoll  River 
in North Wales: but naturalists explain the arrangement as merely intended 
to  make  the  fish  more  easily  picked  up  and  carried  home.  In  ancient  Ire 
land  the  association  of the  crane  with  literary  secrets is  suggested  by  the 
augury given  by its  sudden  appearance:  a  cessation of war;  for one  of the 
poet's main  functions was to part combatants, and he himself took no  part 
in  battle.  In  Greece  the  crane  was  associated  with  poets  not  only  in  the 
story of Apollo's metamorphosis into 'a crane, a Thracian bird'—meaning 
the  red-wattled  Numidian  crane  which  visited  the  Northern  Aegean— 
but  in  the  story  of Ibycus,  the  sixth-century  B.C.  Greek  erotic  poet  who, 
having  spent  the  best  part  of his  life  in  the  island  of Samos,  was  one  day 
set upon  by bandits in a lonely place near  Corinth  and  mortally wounded. 
He  called  upon  a  passing  flock  of cranes  to  avenge  his  death  and  soon 
afterwards  the  cranes  hovered  over  the  heads  of  the  audience  in  the 
Corinthian  open-air  theatre;  whereupon  one  of the  murderers,  who  was 
present,  cried  out:  'Look,  the  avengers  of Ibycus!'  He  was  arrested  and 
made a full  confession.To  sum  up  the  historical  argument.  A  Greek alphabet which  consisted 
of  thirteen,  and  later  fifteen,  consonants  and  five  vowels  sacred  to  the 
Goddess, and which was ultimately derived from Crete, was current in the 
Peloponnese before the Trojan War. It was taken to Egypt—though per 
haps  only  to  the  port  of  Pharos—and  there  adapted  to  Semitic  use  by 
Phoenician  traders who  brought it  back  into  Greece  some  centuries  later 
when  the  Dorians  had  all  but  destroyed  the  Mycenaean  culture.  The 
characters  with  their  Semitic  names  were  then  adapted  to  the  existing 
Epicharmian  system  contained  in  the  so-called  Pelasgian  characters  and 
usually  called  Cadmean,  perhaps  because  they  were  current  in  Boeotian 
Cadmea.  Later, Simonides, a devotee of Dionysus, modified the Cadmean 
alphabet in conformity with some obscure religious theory.

This is a plausible account  The history of the Greek alphabet has come 
to  light in the last few years. It is now known to have originated in  Cretan 
hieroglyphs,  which  by  late  Minoan  times  had  been  reduced  to  something 
between  an  alphabet  and  a  syllabary  of  fifty-four  signs:  only  four  more 
than  the  Sanskrit  system  allegedly  invented  by  the  Goddess  Kali,  each 
letter  of  which  was  one  of  the  skulls  in  her  necklace.  The  Mycenaeans

234234

borrowed  this  Cretan  system and  did  their best to adapt it to  the needs  of 
Greek.  Messrs Ventris  and  Chadwick,  in  1 9 5 3,  together  deciphered  the 
Mycenaean Linear Script B  (1450-1400  B.C.), which contains eighty-eight 
different  phonetic  signs.  It  had  also  been  introduced  in  earlier,  more 
cumbrous,  forms  into  Cyprus,  Caria  and  Lycia.  (In  the  Iliad,  VI,  iSSff. 
occurs  the  story  of how  Bellerophon  left  Argos  and  handed  the  King  ot 
the  Lycians  a  tablet  covered  with  signs.)  From  the  sixteenth  century 
B.C.  onward  three  or  four  attempts  were  made  to  simplify  the  various 
syllabaries  then  current  in  the  near  East  into  pure  alphabets.  The  most 
successful  of these  was  the  Phoenician,  from  which  the  'Cadmean'  Greek 
characters derive.  The  Semitic princes  of Syria wrote Assyrian  cuneiform 
in  their  correspondence  with  the  Pharaohs  of  Egypt  until  the  twelfth 
century B.C., but their merchants had  long before been using the  Phoeni 
cian alphabet, in which one  third  of the  characters was borrowed  from  the 
Cretan  system—though  whether  directly  from  Crete  or 
indirectly 
through  Greece  or  Asia  Minor  is  not  known—the  remainder  from 
Egyptian hieroglyphs.There  is  nothing  to  show  that  the  Phoenicians  invented  the  principle 
of  reducing  a  syllabary  to  letters;  and  according  to  Professor  Eustace 
Glotz's  Aegean  Civilisation  the  names  of such  Phoenician  characters  as are 
not  Semitic  names  for  the  objects  represented  in  the  corresponding 
Egyptian  hieroglyphs  cannot  be  explained  in  terms  of any  Semitic  lan 
guage, while their forms are clearly  derived  from  the  Cretan lineal script. 
The  Semites,  though  good  business  men,  were  not  an  inventive  people, 
and  the  unexplained names  of the letters  are  therefore  likely  to  be  Greek. 
The  Danaan  Greeks  probably  simplified  the  Cretan  syllabary  into  a 
sacred  alphabet  and  passed  it  on  to  the  Phoenicians—though  confiding 
only the abbreviations of the letter-names to them and altering the order of 
letters  so  as  not  to  give  away  the  secret  religious  formula  that  they  spelt 
out  The  earliest  Phoenician  inscription  is  on  a  potsherd  found  at  Beth-
shemeth  in  Palestine  dating  from  the  sixteenth  century  B.C.  The  Palaio-
Sinaitic and  Ras Shamra alphabets may have been composed in emulation 
of the Phoenician;  they were based  on  cuneiform,  not on  Cretan or Egyp 
tian  hieroglyphs.  The  Egyptians  had  been  working  towards  an  alphabet 
concurrendy with  the  Cretans  and  it  is  difficult  to  say  who first achieved 
the task it was probably the Egyptians.

Now  it  is  remarkable  that  the  names  of  several  letters  in  the  Irish 
Beth-Luis-Nion  correspond  more  exactly  with  their  counterparts  in  the 
Hebrew  alphabet,  which  is  Phoenician,  than  with  their  Classical  Greek 
counterparts.

Greek

alpha

Hebrew

Irish

aleph

ailm  (pronounced  ' a W)

235

Greek 
iota 
rho 
beta 
nu 
eta 
mu 
o  (micron)

Hebrew

Irish

jod 
resh 
beth 
nun 
heth 
mirh 
ainGreek

alpha

Hebrew

Irish

aleph

ailm  (pronounced  ' a W)

235

Greek 
iota 
rho 
beta 
nu 
eta 
mu 
o  (micron)

Hebrew

Irish

jod 
resh 
beth 
nun 
heth 
mirh 
ain

idho  (originally  'ioda') 
ruis 
beith 
nion or nin 
eadha ('dh'  pronounced  'th') 
muin 
onn

On  the  other hand  the  remaining  Greek  letters  correspond  closely enough 
with  their Hebrew counterparts, while  the Irish  letters are wholly different.

Greek

lambda 
delta 
gamma

tau 
sigma 
zeta  > 
kappa

Hebrew

lamed 
daleth 
gimmel

tav 
samech 
tzaddi 
koph

Irish

luis 
duir 
gort

tinne 
saille 
straif 
quert

It  looks  as  if the  Irish  alphabet  was  formed  before  the  Classical  Greek, 
and  that its letter-names  correspond  with those of the Epicharmian alpha 
bet  which  Evander  brought  to  Italy  from  Danaan  Greece.  It  may  even 
have kept the original  order of letters.

An  ancient  Irish  tradition  supplementing  that  of  Ogma  Sunface's  in 
vention  of the  Ogham  alphabet  is  recorded  in  Keating's  History ofIreland:

Feniusa Farsa, a grandson of Magog and King of Scythia, desirous of 
mastering  the  seventy-two  languages  created  at  the  confusion  of Babel 
sent  seventy-two  persons  to  learn  them.  He  established  a  University  a 
Magh  Seanair  near  Athens,  over  which  he  and  Gadel  and  Caoith  pre 
sided.  These  formed  the  Greek,  Latin  and  Hebrew  letters.  Gade, 
digested  the  Irish  (Goidelic)  into  five  dialects:  the  Fenian  for  die 
soldiers; the poetic and historic for the senachies and bards respectively; 
the medical for physicians;  and  the common  idiom for the vulgar.Though at first sight  this  is  a nonsense story,  cooked  up  from  scraps  to 
monkish  tradition  (such  as  the  miraculous  translation  of  the  Hebrew 
Scriptures  by seventy-two  scholars,  each  working  separately  for  seventy-
two  days  on  the  Isle  of  Pharos  and  all  producing  identically  the  same 
version)  the  closer  one  looks  at  it  the  more  interestingly  it  reads.  'Magh 
Seanair  near  Athens'  suggests  that  the  mention  of  Babel  has  led  some 
monk  to  amend  an  obscure  text  by  making  the  event  take  place  on  the 
Magh  Seanair,  'Plain  of Shinar',  in  Mesopotamia  and  assuming  that  an-

236236

other Athens  lay near.  That the alphabet was invented  in  Greece (Achaea) 
is  insisted  upon  in  The  Hearings  of  the  Scholars,  though  Achaea  has  been 
corrupted  to  'Accad'  in  some  manuscripts  and  to  'Dacia'  in  others,  and 
the  whole  account  is  given  a  very  monkish  twist.  The  original,  I  think, 
was  'Magnesia  near  Athens'  meaning  Magnesia  in  Southern  Thessaly.  It 
was  described  as  'near  Athens'  presumably to  distinguish  it  from  other 
Pelasgian  Magnesias—the  Carian  one  on  the  Meander  River,  and  the 
Lydian  one  on  the  Hermus,  connected  with  the myth  of the  Titan  Tityos, 
from  which  in  ancient  times  Hercules  sent  a  colony  to  Gades  in  Spain. 
The  three  persons  in  the  story,  Gadel,  Caoith  and  Feniusa  Farsa  are 
perhaps  recognizable  in  Greek  translation.  Caoith  as  Coieus  the Hyper 
borean  grandfather  of  Delphic  Apollo;  Gadel  as  a  tribe  from  the  river 
Gadilum,  or  Gazelle,  in  Paphlagonia  from  which  Pelops  the  Achaean 
began  his  travels;  Feniusa  Farsa  as Foeneus  ho Farsas ('the vine-man  who 
joins  together')  or  Foeneus  father  of  Atalanta,  the  first  man  to  plant  a 
in  Greece.  According  to  Greek  legend,  this  Foeneus,  or 
vineyard 
'Oeneus'  when  he  lost  his  initial  digamma,  was  a  son  of  Aegyptus 
and  came  from  Arabia,  which  perhaps  means  Southern  Judaea;  exacdy 
the  same  account  is  given  by  the  Irish  bards  of  Feniusa  Farsa,  who 
was  turned  out  of Egypt  'for  refusing  to  persecute  the  Children  of Israel', 
wandered  in  the  wilderness  for  forty-two  years  and  then  passed  north 
ward  to  the  'Altars  of the  Philistines  by  the  Lake  of Willows'—presum 
ably  Hebron  in  Southern  Judaea,  celebrated  for  its  fish-pools  and  stone 
altars—thence  into  Syria,  after  which  he  appears  in  Greece.  Foeneus's 
queen  was  Althaea,  the  Birth-goddess  associated  with  Dionysus;  and  it  is 
known that foinos, wine, is a word of Cretan origin.Why  is  Feniusa  Farsa—who  was  an  ancestor  of the  Irish  Milesians— 
described as a Scythian,  a  grandson of Magog,  and  founder of the Milesian 
race?  Gog and Magog are closely connected names.  'Gogmagog',  Gog the 
Son  of Gog—was  the name of the giant whom  'Brut the Trojan'  is  said  to 
have  defeated  at  Totnes  in  Devonshire  in  his  invasion  of  Britain  at  the 
close of the  second millennium.  But from where did  Gog mac  Gog origin 
ate?  The  answer is  to  be  found  in  Genesis,  X,  2  where  Magog  is  described 
as  a  son  of Japhet  (who  figures  in  Greek  myth  as  Iapetus  the  Titan,  the 
father  by  the  goddess  Asia  of Adas,  Prometheus  and  Epimetheus)  and  as 
a brother  of Gomer,  Madai,  Javan,  Tubal,  Meshech and  Tiras—who are 
generally  agreed  to  have  been  the  Cimmerians,  the  Medians,  the  Ionians, 
the  Tibarenians,  the  Moschians and  the Tyrrhenians.  The Moschians  and 
the  iron-working  Tibarenians  were  tribes  of the  south-eastern  Black  Sea 
region;  the  wandering  Black  Sea  tribe  of Cimmerians  eventually  became 
the  Cymry;  the  Ionians  ranked  as  Greeks  in  historical  times  but  were 
perhaps  Aegean  immigrants  into  Greece  from  Phoenicia;  the  Tyrrhen 
ians  were  an  Aegean  tribe  some  of  whom  emigrated  from  Lydia  to

2 37

I2 37

I

Etruria,  others  to  Tarsus  (St.  Paul's  city)  and  Tartessus  in  Spain;  the 
Medians  claimed  descent  from  the  Pelasgian  goddess  Medea.  G og  is 
identified  with  the  northern  tribe  of Gagi  mentioned  in  an  inscription  of 
Amenhotep  LTI,  and  'Gogarene',  in  Strabo's  day,  was  the  name  of a  part 
of Armenia  lying  to  the  east  of the  territory  of the  Moschians  and  Tibar 
enians.  Magog's  grandfather  was  Noah,  and  Noah's  Ararat  was  in 
Armenia,  so  that  Magog  is  usually  held  to  stand  for  Armenia;  though 
Josephus  interprets  the  word  as  meaning  'the  Scythians',  which  was  an 
inclusive  name  for  all  the  Black  Sea  tribes  of his  day.  The  'King  G og  of 
Meshech  and  Tubal'  mentioned  in  E^ekiel,  XXXVIII,  ly is  now  generally 
identified  with  Mithradates  VI  of  Pontus,  whose  kingdom  included  the 
country of the  Moschians and  Tibarenians.The  history  of  Foeneus  is  concerned  with  certain  mass  emigrations 
from  Canaan.  Canaanites are referred to in the Greek myth of'Agenor, or 
Chnas,  King  of  Phoenicia',  brother  of  Pelasgus,  Iasus  and  Belus,  and 
father  of  Aegyptus  and  Danaus;  Agenor  invaded  Greece  and  became 
King  of Argos.  His  was  probably  the  invasion  that  drove  the  Tuatha  di 
Danaan  out  of Greece.  Agenor  had  other sons,  or  affiliated  tribes,  besides 
Foeneus,  Aegyptus  and  Danaus.  These  were  Cadmus  (a  Semitic  word 
meaning  'of  the  East'),  who  seized  part  of  what  afterwards  became 
Boeotia;  Cylix,  who  gave  his  name  to  Cilicia;  Phoenix,  who  remained  in 
Phoenicia  and  became  completely  Sanitized;  Thasus,  who  emigrated  to 
the  island  of Thasos,  near  Samothrace;  and  Phineus,  who  emigrated  to 
Thynia, near  Constantinople,  where the Argonauts are said  to  have found 
him preyed on by Harpies. The Amorites, a part of whom lived in Judaea, 
were  also  Canaanites,  according  to  Genesis,  X,  and  in  the  time  of  the 
Hebrew  Prophets  kept  up  the  old  Aegean  customs  of mouse-feasts,  king-
crucifixion,  snake-oracles,  the  baking  of  barley-cakes  in  honour  of  the 
Queen  of  Heaven,  and  pre-marital  prostitution;  but  they  had  early  be 
come  Semitized  in  language.  In  Genesis  the  original  Canaanite  empire  is 
described  as  extending  as  far  south  as  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  at  the 
extreme  end  of  the  Dead  Sea.  This  must  be  a  very  early  legend,  for 
according  to  Genesis,  XIV  the  Canaanites  were  expelled  from  their 
southern  territory  by  the  Elamites—an  invasion  that  can  be  dated  to 
about  2300  B.C.The  historical  sense  of the  Agenor  myth  is  that  towards  the  end  of the 
third  millennium  B.C.,  an  Indo-European  tribal  confederacy—part  of a 
huge  horde  from  central  Asia  that  overran  the  whole  of  Asia  Minor, 
Greece,  Italy  and  Northern  Mesopotamia—marched  down  from Armenia 
into Syria, thence into  Syria and  Canaan, gathering allies as it went.  Some 
tribes  under  rulers  known  to  the  Egyptians  as  the  Hyksos  broke  into 
Egypt  about  1800  B.C.  and  were  expelled  with  difficulty  two  centuries 
later.  The  flow  and  ebb  of this  mass-movement  of tribes,  which  was  com-
238

plicated  by  Semitic  invasions  from  across  the  Jordan,  dislodged  from 
Syria,  Canaan  and  the  Nile  Delta  numerous  peoples  that  worshipped  the 
Great  Goddess  under such  tides  as  Belili,  or  Baalith,  and  Danae,  and  the 
Bloody  One  (Phoenissa).  One  body  whose  chief  religious  emblem  was 
the  vine  marched,  or sailed,  along  the  South  Coast  of Asia  Minor,  halted 
awhile in Milyas, the old name for Lycia, invaded Greece a little before the 
arrival there of the Indo-European Achaeans from the north, and occupied 
Argos  in  the  Peloponnese,  the  chief shrine  of the  Horned  Moon-goddess 
Io.  The  Cadmean  invasion  came  later:  it  seems  that  a  Canaanite  tribe 
originally  known  as  the  Cadmeans,  or  Easterners,  had  occupied  the 
mountainous  district  on  the  frontier of Ionia  and  Caria,  which  they called 
Cadmea;  whence  they  crossed  the  Aegean  and  seized  the  coastal  strip 
facing  Euboea,  excellent  as  a  naval  base,  which  was  thereafter  also  called 
Cadmea.In  the Irish myth  Caoith is  described  as a Hebrew.  This must be a mis 
take:  he  was  not  one  of the  Habiru,  as  the Egyptians  called  the  Hebrews, 
but  probably  a  Pelasgian,  a  representative  of the  well-known  priesthood 
of Samothrace,  the  Cabeiroi.  The  myth  thus  seems  to  refer  to  an  agree 
ment  about  a  common  use  of letters  reached  at  Magnesia  in  Mycenaean 
times by the Achaeans, typified by Gadel, the invaders of Greece;  Canaan 
ite invaders, typified by Feniusa Farsa; and the Pelasgian natives of Greece, 
typified  by  Caoith—all  of whom  were  joined  in  a  common  reverence  for 
the  vine.  The  figure  seventy-two  suggests  a  religious  mystery  bound  up 
with  the  alphabet;  it  is  a  number  closely  connected  both  with  the  Beth-
Luis-Nion and the Boibel-Loth and associated in both cases with the num 
ber five (the number of the dialects).

Now,  the  most  famous  school  of Greek  antiquity  was  kept  by  Cheiron 
the  Centaur,  on  the  slopes  of  Mount  Pelion  in  Magnesia.  Among  his 
puplis  were  Achilles  the  Myrmidon,  son  of Thetis  the  Sea-goddess,  Jason 
the Argonaut,  Hercules, and  all the other most distinguished heroes of the 
generation  before  the  Trojan  War.  He  was  renowned  for  his  skill  in 
hunting,  medicine,  music,  gymnastics  and  divination,  his  instructors 
being  Apollo  and  Artemis,  and  was  accidentally  killed  by  Hercules;  after 
which  he  became  the  Bowman  of  the  Greek  Zodiac.  He  was  evidently 
the heir  to the  Cretan culture which had reached Thessaly by the sheltered 
port  of Iolcos,  and  to  the  independent  Helladic  culture.  He  is  called  'the 
son  of Cronos'.Perhaps  we  can  make  another  identification  here:  of  Feniusa  Farsa 
with  'Amphictyon'  the  founder  of  the  Amphictyonic  League,  or  the 
League  of Neighbours.  Magnesia was a member  of this ancient  federation 
of  twelve  tribes—Athens  was  the  most  powerful—representatives  of 
which  met  every  autumn  at  Anthela  near  the  pass  of  Thermopylae  and 
every  Spring  at  Delphi.  'Amphictyon'  was  a  son  of  Deucalion  ('sweet

239239

wine'),  whose  mother  was  Pasiphae  the  Cretan  Moon-goddess,  and  of 
Pyrrha  ('the  red  one'),  the  Noah  and  Noah's  wife  of Greece.  He  was  him 
self 'the  first  man  ever  to  mix  wine  with  water'.  In  characteristic  style  he 
married  the  heiress  of Attica,  Crane—already  mentioned  as  an  aspect  of 
the  White  Goddess—expelled  his  predecessor,  and  set up  altars  to  Phallic 
Dionysus  and  the  Nymphs.  We  know  that  Amphictyon  was  not  his  real 
name,  for  the  League was  really  founded  in  honour  of the  Barley-goddess 
Demeter, or Danae, in her character of President of Neighbours ('Amphic-
tyonis')  and  the  sacrifice  at  the  autumn  meetings  was  made  to  her:  but  it 
was  the usual  habit in  Classical  Greece,  as  it  was  in  Classical  Britain  and 
Ireland,  to  deny  women  the  credit  of  inventing  or  initiating  anything 
important.  So  'Amphictyon'  was  the  male  surrogate  of  Amphictyonis, 
just as  'Don  King of Dublin and  Lochlin'  was  of the Irish  Goddess  Danu; 
and  as,  I  believe,  the  Giant  Samothes,  after  whom  Britain  had  its  earliest 
name  'Samothea',  was  of the  White  Goddess,  Samothea—for  Samothes  is 
credited  by  early  British  historians,  quoting  from  the  Babylonian 
Berossus,  with  the  invention  of  letters,  astronomy  and  other  sciences 
usually  attributed  to  the  White  goddess.  And  since  Amphictyon  'joined 
together'  the  various  states  and  was  a  vine  man,  we  may  call  him 
'Foeneus'—or  'Dionysus'.The  most  ancient  Greek  account  of  the  creation  of  the  vine  that  has 
been  preserved  is  that  given  by  Pausanias  ( X,  38):  how  in  the  time  of 
Orestheus  son  of Deucalion  a  white  bitch  littered  a  stick  which  he  planted 
and  which grew into  a  vine.  The  white  bitch  is  obviously  the  Triple  God 
dess  again:  Amphictyonis.  Of the  Amphictyonic  League  eight  tribes  were 
Pelasgian  and,  according  to  Strabo,  Callimachus  and  the  Scholiast  on 
Euripides's  Orestes,  it  was  originally  regularized  by  Acrisius  the  grand 
father  of Perseus.  But  the  composition  of the  League  in  Classical  times 
was claimed to date from about 1 1 03 B.C., and it included the Achaeans of 
Phthiotis,  who  were not there  in Acrisius's  day.  The inference is  that  four 
Pelasgian tribes were extruded in successive Greek invasions.

St.  Paul  quoted  a  Greek  proverb:  'AH  Cretans  are  liars'.  They  were 
called liars for the same reason that poets are:  because they had a different 
way  of looking  at  things.  Particularly  because  they  remained  unmoved  by 
Olympian  propaganda,  which  for  the  previous  thousand  years  or  so  had 
insisted  on  an Eternal,  Almighty,  Just  Father  Zeus—Zeus who  had  swept 
away  with  his  thunderbolt  all  the  wicked  old  gods  and  established  his 
shining  throne  for  ever  on  Mount  Olympus.  The  True  Cretans  said: 
'Zeus  is  dead.  His  tomb  is  to  be  seen  on  one  of our mountains.'  This was 
not  spoken  with  bitterness.  All  that  they  meant  was  that  ages  before  Zeus 
became  an  Eternal  Almighty  God  in  Greece,  he  had  been  a  simple  old-
fashioned  Sun-king,  annually  sacrificed,  a  servant  of the  Great  Goddess, 
and  that his remains were customarily buried in  a tomb  on  Mount Juktas.

240240

They were not liars.  There was no  Father God  in Minoan  Crete and  their 
account  squares  with  the  archaeological  finds  recendy  made  on  that  very 
mountain.  The  Pelasgians  of Leros  had  much  the  same  reputation  as  the 
Cretans, but seem to have been even more obdurate in their attachment to 
ancient  tradition,  to  judge  from  the  Greek  epigram:  'The  Lerians  are  all 
bad,  not  merely some  Lerians,  but  every  one  of them—all except Procles, 
and of course he is a Lerian too.'The  early  Welsh  and  Irish  historians  are  also  generally  regarded  as 
liars  because  their ancient  records are dated  to uncomfortably early  times 
and  do  not  square  either  with  conventional  Biblical  dates  or  with  the 
obstinate  theory  that  until  Roman  times  the  inhabitants  of all  the  British 
Isles  were  howling  savages  who  had  no  native  art  or  literature  at  all  and 
painted  themselves  blue.  The  Picts  and  Britons  certainly  tattooed  them 
selves,  as  the  Dacians,  Thracians  and  Mosynoechians  did,  with  pictorial 
devices.  That  they  used  woad  for the  purpose  is  a  proof of advanced  cul 
ture,  for  the  extraction of blue  dye  from the woad-plant,  which the ancient 
Irish also practised, is an extremely complicated chemical process; the blue 
colour  perhaps  sanctified  them  to  the  Goddess  Anu. 11  do  not  mean  that 
these  records  have  not  undergone  a  great  deal  of careless,  pious,  or  dis 
honest  editing  at  every  stage  of religious  development;  but  at  least  they 
seem  to  be  as  trustworthy  as  the  corresponding  Greek  records,  and 
rather  more  trustworthy  than  the  Hebrew—if  only  because  ancient  Ire 
land  suffered  less  from  wars  than  Greece  or  Palestine.  To  dismiss  the 
Irish  and  Welsh  as  incoherent  children  has  one  great  advantage:  it  frees 
the historian  of any  obligation  to  add  Old  Goidelic and  Old  Welsh  to  his 
multifarious other studies.In  modern  civilization  almost  the  only  place  where  a  scholar  can  study 
at  ease  is  a  University.  But  at  a  University  one  has  to  be  very  careful  in 
deed  not  to  get  out  of  step  with  one's  colleagues  and  especially  not  to 
publish  any  heterodox  theories.  Orthodox  opinions  are  in  general  based 
on  a  theory  of  political  and  moral  expediency,  originally  refined  under 
Olympianism,  which  is  the  largest single gift  of paganism  to  Christianity. 
Not only to  Christianity.  Twenty-five years ago,  when  I  was  Professor of 
English  Literature  at  the  Royal  Egyptian  University  of  Cairo,  my  col 
league  the  blind  Professor of Arabic Literature was  imprudent enough to 
suggest  in  one  of  his  lectures  that  the  Koran  contained  certain  pre-

1  It  seems  to  have  been  in  her honour,  as  Goddess  of the  dark-blue  night  sky  and  the  dark 
blue  sea,  that  the  matrons  and  girls  of Britain,  according  to  Pliny,  stained  themselves  all  over 
with woad,  for 'certain  rites', until  they were as swarthy as Ethiopians,  then  went about naked. 
An  incident  in  the  mediaeval  Life  of St.  Ciaran  proves  that  in  Ireland  woad-dyeing  was  a 
female  mystery which  no  male  was  allowed  to  witness.  If this  was  also  the  rule  in  Thrace  and 
the  Northern  Aegean,  it would  account  for  the  nasty  stench  which,  according  to  Apollodorus, 
clung  to  the  Lemnian  women,  and  made  the  men  quit  their  company;  for  the  extraction  and 
use  of  the  dye  is  such  a  smelly  business  that  the  woad-dyeing  families  of Lincolnshire  have 
always been obliged  to inter-marry.

241241

Mohammedan  metrical  compositions.  This  was  blasphemy  and  a  good 
excuse  for  his  examination-funking  students  to  go  on  strike.  So  the 
Rector  called  him  to  task  and  he  was  faced  with  the  alternatives  of losing 
his  job  and  recantation.  He  recanted.  In  American  Universities  of  the 
Bible  Belt  the  same  sort  of thing  often  happens:  some  incautious  junior 
professor  suggests  that  perhaps  the  Whale  did  not  really  swallow  Jonah 
and  supports  his  view  by  quoting  the  opinions  of eminent  natural  histor 
ians.  He  leaves at the end  of the  University year,  if not before.  In England 
the case is not quite so bad, but bad enough. Sir James Frazer was able to 
keep his beautiful rooms at Trinity College,  Cambridge, until his death by 
carefully  and  methodically  sailing  all  round  his  dangerous  subject,  as  if 
charting  the  coastline  of a  forbidden  island  without  actually  committing 
himself  to  a  declaration  that  it  existed.  What  he  was  saying-not-saying 
was  that  Christian  legend,  dogma  and  ritual  are  the refinement  of a  great 
body  of primitive  and  even  barbarous  beliefs,  and  that  almost  the  only 
original  element  in  Christianity  is  the  personality  of  Jesus.  Recent  re 
searches  that  I  have  made  into  Christian  origins,  the  history  of  the 
American  Revolution,  and  the  private  life  of  Milton,  three  dangerous 
topics,  have  astonished  me.  How  calculatedly  misleading  the  textbooks 
are!  Dog,  Lapwing and  Roebuck have long ago entered  the  service  of the 
new  Olympians.To  return  to  Dr.  Macalister,  who  does  not  account  for  the  thirteen-
consonant  Irish  alphabets  and  assumes  that  the  Druids  possessed  no 
alphabet  before  they  formed  the  B L F SN  alphabet  from  the  Formello-
Cervetri  one.  He  does  not  brush  aside  the  question,  why  the  common 
name  for all Irish alphabets  was  'Beth-Luis-Nion*—which means that the 
original  sequence  began  with  B L N,  not  B L F — b ut  makes  a  complicated 
postulate  for  which  he  has  no  epigraphic  evidence.  He  suggests  that  the 
Druids  of Southern  Gaul  chose  out  from  the  Formello-Cervetri  list  the 
letters:

B.L.N.F.S.,  M.Z.R.G.NG.,  H . C . Q . D . T .,  A.E.I.O.U.

and that this, their first alphabet of any sort lasted just long enough to give 
the Irish alphabet its name. He also suggests (without epigraphic evidence) 
that  an  intermediate  alphabet  was  devised  by  a  clever  phonetician  as 
follows:

B.F.S.L.N.,  M.G.NG.Z.R.,  H.D.T.C.Q.,  A . O . U . EX

before the order was finally settled (in Ireland at least) as:

B.L.F.S.N.,  H.D.T.C.Q.,  M.G.NG.Z.R.,  A . O . U . E J.

plus  five  'diphthongs',  as  he  rather  misleadingly  calls  the  allusive  vowel-
242

combinations  referring  to  the  foreign  letters,  for  which  characters  were 
found  in  five  of  the  six  supernumerary  letters  of  the  Formello-Cervetri 
alphabet.  He does  not deny that Beth,  Luis and  Nion  are  tree-names, but 
holds  that  as  cipher  equivalents  of  the  Formello-Cervetri  letter  names, 
which he says must have retained their original Semitic forms as late as the 
fifth  century  B.C.,  they  were  chosen  merely  as  having  the  correct  initial, 
and  suggests  that  L,  Luis  the  rowan,  might  just  as  well  have  been  the 
larch.This  argument  might  pass  muster  were  it  not  that  the  Druids  were 
famous for their sacred groves and their tree-cult, and that the old sequence 
of  tree-letters  was  evidently  of  such  religious  importance  that  the  later 
B.L.F.S.N.  alphabet, with its  misplacement of N,  could never wipe out  its 
memory.  Dr.  Macalister may regard  the Beth-Luis-Nion Tree-Ogham as 
an  'artificiality';  but  the  trees  in  it  are  placed  in  a  seasonal  arrangement 
which  has  strong  mythological  backing,  whereas  the  original  sequence 
which  he  postulates  makes  no  sense  at all  after  the  first  five  letters, which 
are  in  the  accepted  order.  For  my  part  I  cannot  believe  in  his  postulate; 
oak  and  elder  cannot  change  places;  it  is  not  easy  to  overlook  the  Latin 
proverb  that  'it  is  not  from  every  tree  that  a  statue  of  Mercury  can  be 
carved';  and  only  in joke  does  anyone  gather  nuts,  Coll,  and  may,  Uath, 
on a cold and frosty morning.At  some  time,  it  seems,  in  the  fifth  century  B.C.  the  characters  of the 
Formello-Cervetri  alphabet  were  borrowed  by  the  Druids  in  Southern 
Gaul  for the  purpose  of recording whatever was  not  protected by a taboo, 
and  passed  on by  them into  Britain and Ireland.  The  foreign  letters which 
occur  in  it  were  added  to  an  already  existing  secret  alphabet,  the 
Boibel-Loth,  the  letter  names  of  which  formed  a  charm  in  honour  of 
Canopic Hercules.  But this does not prove that the Druids did not possess 
an  earlier  alphabet  beginning  with  B.L.N.,  with  entirely  different  letter 
names  bound  up  with  the  more  barbaric  religious  cult  commemorated  in 
Amergin's  song  and  enshrined  in  a  traditional  tree-sequence  of  birch, 
rowan,  ash,  alder,  willow,  etc.  Or  that  the  historical  tradition,  at  which 
Dr.  Macalister  indulgendy  smiles,  that  letters  were  known  in  Ireland 
many  centuries  before  the  Formello-Cervetri  alphabet  reached  Italy,  is  a 
late fiction. If we can show that the B L F SN alphabet was a logical develop 
ment  from  the  B L N FS  tree-alphabet  and  can  connect  it  with  a  new 
religious  dispensation,  without  having  to  invent  intermediate  forms  for 
which  there  is  no  literary  evidence,  then  everything  will  make  poetic  as 
well  as  prose  sense.  Religious  necessity is  always a far  likelier explanation 
of  changes  in  an  alphabet  than  phonetic  theory,  to  which  alone  Dr. 
Macalister  attributes  his  hypothetic  changes  in  the  sequence  of the  Beth-
Luis-Nion:  for  all  right-minded  people  everywhere  naturally  oppose  the 
attempts  of  scholarly  phoneticians  to  improve  their  familiar  A B C,  the

*43

foundation  of  all  learning  and  the  first  thing  that  they  ever  learned  at 
school.*43

foundation  of  all  learning  and  the  first  thing  that  they  ever  learned  at 
school.

But  is  not  the  answer  to  our  question  to  be  found  in  The  Battle  of  the 
Trees}  What  distinguishes  the  B L F SN  from  the  B L N FS  is  that  the  letter 
N, Nion  the  ash,  the sacred  tree  of the  God  Gwydion,  has  been  taken  out 
of the  dead  period  of the  year,  where  it  is  still  in  black  bud,  and  put  two 
months  ahead  to  where  it  is  in  leaf,  while  Fearn  the  alder,  the  sacred  tree 
of the  God  Bran,  which  marks  the  emergence  of the  solar  year  from  the 
tutelage  of Night,  has  been  thrust  back  into  Nion's  place.  The  B L N FS  is 
the trophy raised by Gwydion over  Bran.  And  is it not  strange that a  few 
years before  the  Batde  of the  Trees was fought in  Britain  and  the letter F 
humbled,  the  Greeks  had  made  a  dead  set against  their  F,  only retaining 
it  as  a  numerical  sign  for  6?  More  than  this  happened  when  the  order  of 
letters  changed;  Gwydion's  ash,  N,  took  the  place  of the  fifth  consonant, 
SaUle  the  willow,  S,  which  was  naturally  sacred  to  Mercury,  or  Arawn; 
and  Gwydion  thereupon  became  an  oracular  god.  Also,  Amathaon  who 
had  evidendy been  a  willow-god,  S,  took  Bran's  place  at  F  and  became 
a fire-god in the service of his father Beli, God of Light. It only remained 
in  this  General  Post  for Bran  to  take  over  the maritime ash that Gwydion 
had  relinquished  and  sail  away  on  his  famous  voyage  to  one  hundred 
and fifty islands; yet sailing was no novelty to him, the tradition  preserved 
by  Virgil  being  that  the  first  boats  that  ever  took  to  the  water  were 
alder-trunks.

244

Chapter Fourteen

THE  R O E B U CK  IN  THE  THICKET

The omission  from  O'Flaherty's and  O'Sullivan's  Beth-Luis-Nion244

Chapter Fourteen

THE  R O E B U CK  IN  THE  THICKET

The omission  from  O'Flaherty's and  O'Sullivan's  Beth-Luis-Nion

of the  mythically  important  trees,  Quert,  apple,  and  Straif,  black 
thorn,  must  be  accounted  for.  The  explanation  seems  to  be  that 
though  the Beth-Luis-Nion calendar is a solar one, in so far as it expresses 
a  year's  course  of the  sun,  it  is  ruled  by  the  White  Moon-goddess  whose 
sacred  number  is  thirteen  in  so  far  as  her  courses  coincide  with  the  solar 
year, but fifteen in so far as the full moon falls on the fifteenth day of each 
lunation.  Fifteen is also  the multiple  of three and  five:  three expressing the 
three phases of the moon and the Goddess's three aspects of maiden, nymph 
and hag, and five expressing the five stations of her year: Birth, Initiation, 
Consummation, Repose and Death. Thus because fifteen letters are needed 
to present the Goddess as both a triad and a pentad, and to express the days 
in  a month up to full moon,  and  since  only thirteen 28-day months can be 
fitted into a year, two of the months must be shared between pairs of trees.

Since  Q  was  sometimes  written  CC  by  the  Irish  ollaves—as  in 
O'Flaherty's alphabet—we may conclude that Z was similarly written S S, 
as  it  was  in  Latin  during  the  greater  part of the  Republic  This  is  to  say 
that  Quert  the wild  apple shared  a month with  Coll the  hazel,  because  the 
apple  and  nut  harvest  coincide,  and  that  Straif the  blackthorn  shared  a 
month with Saille the willow, because the White  Goddess  has  to make an 
appearance in tree form in the Spring—in France the blackdiorn is called 
La Mere  du  Bois  ('the  Mother of the W o o d ' ).The blackthorn (bellicum in Latin) is an unlucky tree; villagers in Galm-
pton  and  Dittisham,  South  Devon, still  fear  'the  black  rod'  carried  as  a 
walking  stick  by  local  witches,  which  has  the  effect  of  causing  mis 
carriages.  When  Major  Weir, the  Covenanter  and  self-confessed  witch, 
was  burned  at  Edinburgh  in  April  1 6 7 0,  a  blackthorn  staff was  burned 
with  him  as  the  chief instrument  of his  sorceries.  Blackthorn  is  also  the 
traditional  timber with  which  bellicose  Irish tinkers fight at  fairs  (though 
the  shillelagh,  contrary  to  popular  belief,  is  an  oak  club),  and  the  words 
'strife'  and  'strive',  modelled  on  the  old  Northern  French  estrif and 
estriver,  may be the same word Straif, derived from the Breton; at least, no 
other  plausible  derivation  has  been  suggested.  Gilbert  White  remarks  in

2 45

his  Se&orne:  'Blackthorn  usually  blossoms  when  cold  N.E.  winds  blow; 
so  that  the harsh  rugged weather obtaining  at  this  season  is  called  by  the 
country  people  "blackthorn  winter".'  The  blackthorn  is  also  called  the 
sloe, after its fruit  and the words  'sloe'  and  'slay'  are closely connected  in 
early English. Since Good Friday falls in this month, the Crown of Thorns 
was  sometimes  said  to  have  been  made  of blackthorn;  and  this  was  the 
explanation  that  the  monks  gave  for  the  unluckiness  of the  tree.  It  is  said 
that  whitethorn,  tree  of  chastity,  will  destroy  any  blackthorn  growing 
nearby.That  Coll and  Quert share  a  month  between  them  is  appropriate.  The 
hazel  is  the  poet's  tree,  and  the  apple's  power  as  the  salvation  of poets  is 
brought  out  in  the  Welsh  legend  of Sion  Kent  (a verse  of whose  I  quote 
in  Chapter  Nine)  whom  the  Prince  of  the  Air  tried  to  carry  off:  Kent 
won  permission  to  'sip  an  apple'  first,  then  caught hold  of the apple  tree, 
a  sanctuary  from  which  he  could  not  be  removed.  Therefore  'being  too 
sinful  for  Heaven  yet  safe  from  Hell  he  haunts  the  earth  like  a  will  o'  the 
wisp'. In other words, he secured poetic immortality. Quert and Coll are also 
associated in the Dinnschencas with  the  oak,  the  King  of Trees:  the  Great 
Tree of Mugna contained in itself the virtues of apple, hazel and oak, 'bear 
ing  every  year  one  crop  each  of goodly  apples,  blood-red  nuts and  ridgy 
acorns:  its  crown was  as  broad  as  the  whole  plain,  its girth  thirty  cubits, 
its height three hundred  cubits.'  It fell with  the advent of Christianity.

There  is  a  reference 
in  Amergin's  song  to 
the  'secrets  of  the  un 
hewn  dolmen'.  It  will 
be  seen  that  there  is 
room for an extra letter 
at  each  corner  of  the 
dolmen  arch  which  I 
to  eluci 
date  the  reference:  the 
Oghams  being  nicked 
on 
edges,  not 
painted  on  the  face,  of 
the  stones.

the

Q

j ^G  constructedthe

Q

j ^G  constructed

It  will  be  observed  that the  seventh to  eleventh  letters  of this  alphabet, 
which  follow  the  same  sequence  in  the  Boibel-Loth,  are  the  letters 
H.D.T.C.Q.  These  letters,  as  Sir  John  Rhys  has  pointed  out,  form  the 
initials  of the  Old  Goidelic  numerals,  from  one  to  five:  a  hoina,  a  duou,  a 
ttri,  a  ccetuor,  a  qquerujue,  which  correspond  very  nearly  to  the  Latin 
numerals  unum,  duo,  tres,  quattuor,  quinque.  This  may  explain  why  the 
inventors  of the  Boibel-Loth  made  H.D.T.C.Q.  the  central  five  letters  of

M6

the  alphabet  and  transferred  Z  to  a  position  between  NG  and  R.  Yet  the 
ancientness  of  the  Old  Goidelic  numerals  suggests  that  in  the  original 
Beth-Luis-Nion  finger  alphabet  the  first  flight  of consonants—the  Spring 
months—numbered  only  five,  not  six,  to  allow  H.D.T.C.Q.  to  form  the 
second  or  Summer  series,  and  that  Z  was  therefore  reckoned  to  the  last 
series, the Winter series, as a premonitory 'blackthorn winter*. Thus:

Each  series  thus  has  its  full  five  letters,  the  aggregate  number  of strokes 
in each case being  fifteen.

*47

But  though  this  is  a logical  arrangement,  necessitated  by  the  initials  of 
the  first five  numerals  in  Latin and  Old  Goidelic,  a  sense  of mathematical 
proportion  demands  that  each  side  of  the  dolmen  should  have  a  single 
series  cut  upon  it.  This  would  involve  a  change  of  places  between  Z  and 
Q,  to  make  Apple  and  Willow,  Hazel  and  Blackthorn,  share  months,  (as 
above).This arrangement makes good seasonal sense, for the wild apple blossoms 
during the willow month and  the sloe is ripe in the hazel  month.  Poetically 
it also makes good sense, for the Apple White Goddess is of happier omen 
than  the  Blackthorn  White  Goddess  as  introducing  the  summer;  and  the 
hostile  blackthorn  with  its  mouth-puckering  sloe  is  complementary  to 
the apple, in the nut-month, as representing the poet in his  satiric capacity. 
I believe that both these arrangements were used in Ogham,  the necessary 
ambivalence  of poetic meaning  being  thus  maintained:  it  is  an  axiom  that 
the White Goddess is both lovely and cruel, ugly and  kind.

Now  it  will  be  noticed  that  there  are  two  more  unoccupied  corner 
positions  on  the  threshold  of the  dolmen  which  represents  the  extra  day 
of the calendar year; and these can be assigned to J  (pronounced Y) and to 
long O: Y as a reduplication of I, the death-vowel; long O as a reduplication 
of A,  the  birth-vowel.  That only a single character served for both J  and I 
in  Latin and  Greek is well known; and the close connexion between long O 
(Omega)  and  A  appears  both  in  Ionic  Greek,  where  Omega  was  often 
written  instead  of Alpha—oristos  for  aristos  ('best');  and  in  Doric  Greek 
where Alpha was  often written for  Omega—aspratistos forprotistos ('first').Omega  ('Great  O')  seems  to  signify  the  world-egg  of  the  Orphic 
mysteries  which  was  split  open  by  the  Demiurge  to  make  the  universe: 
for  the  majuscular  Greek  character  for  Omega  represents  the  world-egg 
laid  on  the  anvil  and  the  minuscular  character  shows  it  already  split  in 
halves.  The majuscular Omicron  ('little  O')  and  the minuscular  Omicron 
both  show  the  egg  of  the  year  waiting  to  hatch  out.  The  glain,  or  'red 
egg  of the  sea  serpent',  which  figured  in  the  Druidical  mysteries  may  be 
identified  with  the  Orphic  world-egg:  for  the  creation  of  the  world, 
according to the  Orphics,  resulted from the sexual act performed between 
the  Great  Goddess  and  the  World-Snake  Ophion.  The  Great  Goddess 
herself  took  the  form  of  a  snake  and  coupled  with  Ophion;  and  the 
coupling  of snakes  in  archaic  Greece  was  consequendy  a  forbidden  sight 
—the man who witnessed  it was struck with the 'female disease': he had  to 
live  like a woman  for seven  years,  which  was  the  same  punishment as  was 
permanendy  inflicted  on  the  Scythians  who  sacked  the  Temple  of  the 
Great  Goddess  of Askalon.  The  caduceus  of Hermes,  his  wand  of office 
while  conducting  souls  to  Hell,  was  in  the  form  of coupling  snakes.  The 
Goddess  then  laid  the  world-egg,  which  contained  infinite  potentiality 
but  which  was  nothing  in  itself until  it  was  split  open  by  the  Demiurge.

248248

The  Demiurge  was  Helios,  the  Sun,  with  whom  the  Orphics  identified 
their God Apollo—which was natural, because  the  Sun  does hatch snakes' 
eggs—and  the  hatching-out  of the  world  was  celebrated  each  year  at  the 
Spring  festival  of the  Sun,  to  which  the  vowel  Omicron  is  assigned  in  the 
alphabet.  Since  the  cock  was  the  Orphic  bird  of resurrection,  sacred  to 
Apollo's  son  Aesculapius  the  healer,  hens'  eggs  took  the  place  of snakes' 
in  the  later  Druidic  mysteries  and  were  coloured  scarlet  in  the  Sun's 
honour; and became Easter eggs.

But  Litde  O  is  not  Great  O.  Great  O,  Omega,  must be  regarded  as  an 
intensification  of Alpha,  and  as  symbolizing  the  birth  of birth.  Here  then 
is the new dolmen  figure:

SS

H

D

T

C

And at last we can complete our Beth-Luis-Nion calendar, with the proper 
tree  accredited  to  each  letter—for  the  doubled  I,  or  J,  letter-tree,  the  tree 
belonging  to  the  Day  of  Liberation  which  stands  apart  from  the 
3 64  days  of the  thirteen  months,  is  soon  found.  Put  the  requirements  of 
the tree into a bardic riddle and there can be only one answer:

The day that is no day calls for a tree 
That is no tree, of low yet lofty growth. 
When the pale queen of Autumn casts her leaves 
My Leaves are freshly tufted on her houghs. 
When the wild apple drops her goodly fruit 
My all-heal fruit hangs ripening on her boughs. 
Look, the twin temple-posts ofgreen and gold, 
The overshadowing lintel stone of white. 
For here with white and green and gold I shine— 
Graft me upon the King when his sap rises

249

That I may bloom with him at the year's prime, 
That I may blind him in his hour of joy.249

That I may bloom with him at the year's prime, 
That I may blind him in his hour of joy.

For the mistletoe, the berries of which were formerly prized both as an all 
heal  and  as  an  aphrodisiac,  is  not  a  tree  in  the  sense  that  it grows  in  the 
earth;  it  subsists  on  other  trees.  There  are  two  sorts  of misdetoe,  the 
misdetoe  proper  and  the  loranthus.  The  Greeks  distinguished  them  as, 
respectively,  hypear  and  ixos  or  ixias.  The  loranthus  is  found  in  Eastern 
Europe,  but not in Western and, unlike mistletoe proper, grows on oaks. 
It also  grows  on  tamarisks,  and  its  flame-coloured  leaves  may  have  been 
the  original  'burning  bush'  from  which  Jehovah  appeared  to  Moses. 
Whether  the  loranthus  was  once  native  to  Western  Europe,  or  whether 
the Celtic Druids brought it with them from the Danube area where their 
religion  was  first  formulated,  or  whether  they  grafted  mistletoe  proper 
from  poplar,  apple,  or  other  host-trees,  on  their  oaks,  cannot  be  deter 
mined.  It is most likely that  they grafted it,  to judge from the insistence in 
Norse  myth  on  oak-mistletoe.  Virgil  notes  that  the  mistletoe  is  the  only 
tree  that leafs  freshly  in wintry  weather.  Its  colours  are  white, green and 
gold  like  the  pillars  and  lintel  shown  to  Herodotus  in  the  ancient  temple 
of Hercules  at  Tyre.  On  midsummer  day,  in  ancient  Europe,  the  Eye  of 
the year was blinded with a mistletoe stake, all  the other trees (according 
to  the  Norse  legend)  having  refused  to  do  so.  The  Church  now  admits 
holly  and  ivy  as  reputable  church  decorations  at  Christmas,  but  forbids 
the  mistletoe  as  pagan.  However,  mistletoe  cannot  be  ousted  from  its 
sovereignty  of  Midwinter,  and  the  exchange  of  kisses  forbidden  at  all 
other  seasons  is  still  permitted  under  its  bough,  if it  has  berries  on  it. 
Chemists  have  tried  to  learn  how  mistletoe  won  the  name  'all-heal',  by 
analyzing  its alkaloids.  They can find none of any curative virtue,  though 
this is not final proof of the mistletoe's medicinal valuelessness. Camomile, 
for  example,  had  medicinal  properties,  but  no  extractable  alkaloid.  A 
plant  is  rarely  awarded  mystic  virtue  unless  it  has  some  property  bene 
ficial  to  man.  Yet  the  spectacle  of green  leaves  and  white  berries  on  an 
otherwise  bare  tree  may  have  been  sufficiently  odd  to  invest  them  with 
supernatural  powers.  The  wood,  by  the  way,  is  extremely  hard  and 
tough,  mistletoe  being  slow-growing;  Haedury's  mistletoe  spear  which 
pierced  Balder's  gentle  breast  in  the  legend  was  no  poetic  fancy—I  once 
cut one for myself in Brittany.This  calendar  explains  the  reference  in  Gwion's  Preiddeu  Annwm  to 
the  'ox  with  seven-score  knobs  on  his  collar':  the  ox  is  the  first  flight  of 
five  months, consisting of 140 days; it is presumably followed by a lion of 
one hundred and twelve days, and  a serpent of the same length,  to justify 
the  two  texts  already  quoted  (in  Chapter  Eight)  from  Euripides  and  the 
Welsh  poet  Cynddelw—both  appealing  to  the  God  of the year to  appear 
as a wild bull, a fire-breathing lion and a many-headed snake. The griffon-

250250

eagle  must  be  the  creature  of the  extra  day,  since  the  god  becomes  im 
mortal  in  this  form.  The  year  of Bull,  Lion,  Serpent  and  Eagle  is  Baby 
lonian:  a  calendar  beast,  called  Sir-rush,  on  the  Dragon  Gate  at  Babylon 
having  the  body  and  horns  of a  bull;  forelegs  and  mane  of a  lion;  head, 
scales  and  tail  of a  serpent;  hindlegs  and  feet  of an  eagle.  The  calendar 
has  several  secret  qualities.  One  is  that  the  number  of vowels  is  increased 
to  seven,  the  Roebuck's  own  number.  Another  is  that  II  in  Ogham 
makes  a  ten-stroke  letter,  and  AA  makes  a  two-stroke  letter:  thus  the 
aggregate  number  of  letter-strokes  for  the  complete  twenty-two  letter 
alphabet  is  7 2,  a  number  constantly  recurring  in  early  myth  and  ritual; 
for  72  is  the  multiple  of the  nine,  the  number  of lunar wisdom,  and  eight 
the number of solar increase. 172, Mr. Clyde Stacey suggests, is also linked 
to  the  Goddess,  astronomically,  by  the  seventy-two-day  season  during 
which  her  planet  Venus  moves  successively  from  maximum  eastern 
elongation  to  inferior  conjunction  (closest  approach  to  earth)  and  thence 
to  maximum  west  elongation.  A  third  quality  is  that  the  proportion  of all 
the  letters  in  the  alphabet  to  the  vowels  is  22  to  7,  which,  as  has  already 
been  mentioned,  is  the  mathematical  formula,  once  secret,  for  the  relation 
of the  circumference of the  circle  to  the  diameter.Before  examining  the  fourth  and,  for  our purpose,  the  most  important 
quality of this  calendar,  the  poetic relation  between  Hazel  and  Apple must 
be  considered.  It has  now  been  established  that  the  Roebuck,  originally a 
White  Hind,  hides  in  the  thicket,  and  that  the  thicket  is  composed  of 
twenty-two  sacred  trees.  The  poet  naturally  asks  a  further  question: 
'But where exactly is the beast lodged in the grove?'

'Where?'  is  the  question  that  should  always  weigh  most  heavily  with 
poets  who  are  burdened  with  the  single  poetic  Theme  of life  and  death. 
As Professor Ifor Williams has pointed out, it is because the cuckoo utters 
its  'Where?'  so constandy that it is  represented  in  early Welsh  poetry as a 
kill-joy:  for  'cw-cw',  pronounced  'ku-ku'  means  'where?  where?'.  It 
cries: 'Where is my love gone? Where are my lost companions?'  Curiously 
enough,  the  same  sentiment  occurs  in  Omar  Khayyam's  elegy  where  the 
'solitary  ring-dove'  broods  in  the  ruined  palace  crying:  'Ku?  Ku?  Ku? 
Ku?'—the  Iranian  for  'where'  being  the  same  as  Welsh;  and  in  Greek 
myth  Tereus the  hoopoe  cries  'Pou?  Pou?'  for his lost brides.  'Where'  in1  T he  obsession  of  the  Orphic  mystics,  from  w h om  the  Pythagoreans  derived  their  main 
doctrines,  with  sacred  numbers  is  remarked  upon  by  Iamblichus  in  his  life  of  Pythagoras: 
'Orpheus  said  that  the  eternal  essence  of  number  is  the  most  providential  principle  of  the 
universe,  of heaven,  of earth,  and  of the  nature  intermediate  to  these;  and,  more,  that  it  is  the 
basis  of  the  permanency  of  divine  natures,  gods  and  demons.'  T he  Pythagoreans  had  a 
proverb  'all  things  are  assimilated  to  number',  and  Pythagoras  is  quoted  by  Iamblichus  as 
having  laid  down  in  his  Sacred Discourse  that  'number  is  the  ruler  of forms  and  ideas,  and  the 
cause  of  gods  and  demons'.  T he  numbers  8  and  9  were  favourite  objects  of  Pythagorean 
adoration.

2 51

English  is  derived,  according  to  the  Oxford English  Dictionary,  'from  the 
interrogative  stem  qua'.  Nearly  all  interrogatives  in  Indo-European  lan 
guages begin  with  Q  (except where  Q has  been,  as  in  Greek,  changed  into 
a P or, as in German,  into a W), and in  Old  Scots  'where'  is spelt 'Quhair'. 
Q,  in  fact,  is  the letter of perpetual  question.  Latin  has  a fine range of Q's:

Quare?  Quis?  Qua?  Quid?  Qualis?  Qui?  Quo?  Quomodo?

Quando?  Quorsum?  Quo

ties?  Quantum?  Quot?

And  the  Serpent's  dangerous  question  Qtddni?  'Why  not?'  "Where?'  is 
Qua?

But  the  Muse's  promise  to  the  poet  is  'Seek  patiently,  and  you  shall 
find',  so  where  else  should  the  Wild  Hind  be  hiding  except  under  the  Q 
tree, which is the Wild  Apple?

Valentin  Iremonger,  the  poet,  has  confirmed  this  for  me  in  the  Hear

ings of the Scholars:

•»5*

Queirt  dano  is  o  chrand  regainmnighead  .i.  abull  ut  dicitur  clithar

boaiscille .i. elit gelt quert .i. aball.ings of the Scholars:

•»5*

Queirt  dano  is  o  chrand  regainmnighead  .i.  abull  ut  dicitur  clithar

boaiscille .i. elit gelt quert .i. aball.

"The  letter  Q  is  from  a  tree  named  Quert,  that  is  to  say,  an  apple  tree. 
As  the  saying  is:  "Quert  is  the  shelter  of  the  wild  hind"—meaning  that 
the  apple  tree  is  so.'  An  interesting  poetic  gloss  on  'shelter  of  the  wild 
hind'  occurs in the same book:

JL boscell.i. gelt. basceall J. is and tic a cialldo in tan degas a has

'that  is  to  say,  of the  boscell,  lunatic,  the  word  being  derived  from  bas 
ceall,  "death-sense",  for a lunatic's  wits  come  to  him  when  he  goes  to  his 
death.'

The  comment  means  that  love  of the  Goddess  makes  the  poet  mad:  he

goes to his death and in death is made wise.

Quert  is  not  only  one  of the  'seven  noble  sacred  trees  of the  grove'  but 
is  recorded  in  the  Triads  of  Ireland  as  being,  with  Coll,  the  Hazel,  one  of 
the  only  two  sacred  trees  for  the wanton  felling  of which  death  is  exacted. 
The apple in European literature and folklore is the symbol of consumma 
tion,  as  the egg is  of initiation.  The  1 12  days  of the  Lion flight of months 
in  the  Beth-Luis-Nion  run  ab  ovo  usque  ad  malum,  from  egg  to  apple, 
from  the  end  of Saille,  the  nesting  month,  to  the  end  of  Quert,  the  apple 
month.  Thus  when  the  Biblical  legend  of Adam  and  Eve  reached  North-
Western  Europe,  the  fruit  of  the  Tree  of  Knowledge  of  Good  and  Evil 
was  understood  as  an  apple—not  as  a  fig,  despite  the  fig-leaf  context. 
Adam  had  eaten  from  the  forbidden  tree  of intelligence  given  him  by  Eve, 
'the  Mother  of  All  Living',  and  the  bards  therefore  translated  'fruit'  as 
'apple'.The  seven  noble  sacred  trees  of the  grove  particularized  in  a  seventh-
century  poem  appended  to  the  ancient  Irish  Law  Crith  Gablach  were: 
birch,  alder,  willow,  oak,  holly,  hazel,  apple.  Except  that  Beth,  the  birch, 
the  lucky  tree  of  the  birth-month,  takes  the  place  of Huath,  the  unlucky 
whitethorn,  the  trees  run  in  a  clear  sequence  from  the  Spring  equinox  to 
the  end  of the  apple  harvest.  The  Birch  is  mentioned  as  'very  noble'  in 
Gwion's  Cdd Goddeu,  but  the  apple-tree  was  the  noblest  tree  of all,  being 
the  tree  of immortality.  The  poets  of Wales  have  always  been  aware  of its 
spiritual pre-eminence, and the lovely mediaeval AfaUenaux

Sweet apple-tree crimson in hue 
Which grows concealed in Forest Celyddon....

is  not a  poem  about the  orchard  apple-tree but about  the  apple-tree of the 
sacred thicket, the tree that is the harbourage of the hind. As Gwion writes: 
*I fled as a roe to the entangled thicket.'

*53

Where  did  King  Arthur  go  to  be  healed  of his  grievous  wounds?  To 
the  Isle  of Avalon,  the  secret  'island  of apple-trees'.  With  what  talisman 
was  Bran  summoned  by  the  White  Goddess  to  enter  the  Land  of Youth? 
With  'a  silver  white-blossomed  apple  branch  from  Emain  in  which  the 
bloom  and  branch  were  one'.  The  island  of Emain,  the  Goidelic  Elysium, 
is  described  thus  in  a  poem  by  Ragnall,  son  of Godfrey,  King  of the  Isles:

An amaranthine place is faery Emain: 
Beauteous is the land where it is found, 
Lovely its rath above all other raths. 
Plentiful apple-trees grow from that ground.An amaranthine place is faery Emain: 
Beauteous is the land where it is found, 
Lovely its rath above all other raths. 
Plentiful apple-trees grow from that ground.

Oisin,  when  taken  to  the  same  Land  of  Youth  by  Niamh  of the  Golden 
Hair,  sees  his  weird first  as  a  hornless fawn  pursued  by a  red-eared  white 
hound,  but  then  in his own  shape  royally dressed  and  mounted  on a white 
horse  in  pursuit of a beautiful girl  on a dark horse;  in her hand  is a golden 
apple.  Both  apparitions  are  skimming  over  the  calm  sea;  he  does  not 
recognize  their  meaning  and  Niamh  gently  evades  his  questions  about 
them.  It  has  been  suggested  in  a  footnote  to  Chapter  Twelve  that  the 
Goddess  of the  sepulchral  island  of Alyscamps,  in  the  Rhone,  was  named 
Alys  and  that  the  alder,  aliso  in  Spanish,  was  named  after her.  Dauzat  in 
his Dictionnaire £tymologique connects alisier,  the service-tree, with aliso, 
the  alder  which  screened  these  sepulchral  islands.  The  same  resemblance 
is  found  between  the  Scandinavian  and  North-German  els or ebe  (service-
tree)  and  else  (alder);  and  the name Alys  seems  to  be  recorded  in  the Use, 
the  stream  that  runs  from  the  Brocken  to  the  Oker,  where  a princess  Use 
was  once  drowned.  Since  the  fruit  of  the  service  tree  (both  the  Medi 
terranean  and  Northern  varieties)  is  a  sort  of sorb-apple,  it  is  likely  that 
this  was  the  apple  of  immortality  in  pre-Christian  France,  Spain  and 
Scandinavia. If so,  the Elysian Fields,  or Alyscamps, would have  the same 
meaning  as  Avalon:  apple-orchards.  The  sorb  emblemizes  'from  corrup 
tion,  sweetness':  it  cannot  be  eaten  until  it  has  rotten  to  a  corpse-like 
purple-brown.  Perhaps  this  is  why  the  tree  is  mentioned  in  The  Hearings 
of the Scholars as a euphemism for yew, the death-tree; though the explana 
tion  there  given  is  that  both  bore  the  name  'oldest  of woods';  'oldest',  as 
applied  to  the  service-tree,  could  mean  only  'of most  ancient  fame',  be 
cause it is not particularly long-lived.Mr.  Kenneth  Dutfield  in  a  recent  letter  to  the  Times  Literary  Supple 
ment  plausibly  suggests  that  Avernus,  the  abode  of  the  dead,  which  the 
Latins  incorrectly  derived  from  the  Greek  a-ornis,  'birdless',  is  the  same 
word  as  Avalon;  which  would  identify  the  Elysian  Fields  with  Avernus. 
Lake  Avernus  near  Cumae  apparendy  won  its  nickname  from  the  un 
healthy airs of the surrounding marshes and  from  the near-by shrine of the 
Cumaean Sibyl who conjured up  the spirits of the dead.

*54*54

On August 13th, the pre-Christian feast of the Mother Goddess Diana, 
or  Vesta,  was  once  celebrated  with  cyder,  a  roasted  kid  spitted  on  hazel-
twigs  and  apples  hanging in  clusters  from  a bough.  Another name  of this 
Goddess was Nemesis  (from the  Greek nemos,  'grove')  which in  Classical 
Greek connotes  divine vengeance for breaches  of taboo.  In  her statues she 
carries  an  apple-bough  in  one  hand,  and  the  fifth-century  Christian  poet 
Commodianus  identifies  her  with  Diana  Nemorensis  ('of  the  grove') 
whose  followers  'worship  a  cut  branch  and  call  a  log  Diana'.  But  both 
Nemesis and Diana Nemorensis are associated with the deer, not the goat, 
cult.  Nemesis carries a wheel in her other hand to show that she is the god 
dess of the turning year, like Egyptian Isis and Latin Fortuna, but this has 
been  generally  understood  as  meaning  that  the  wheel  will  one  day  come 
full circle and vengeance be exacted  on the  sinner.1 In Gaul she was Diana 
Nemetona,  nemeton  being  a  sacred  grove;  and  was  represented  with  an 
apple-bough,  a  cyder-bowl  with  Aethiopians  on  it,  and  a  lion-eagle 
griffin  to  denote  the  season  of her  feast.  This  feast  was  converted  in  the 
Middle  Ages  into  that  of the  Assumption  of the  Blessed  Virgin  (August 
15  th)  which,  because  of  the  seventeenth-century  calendar  changes  (re 
ferred  to  in  the  hawthorn  context),  means  August  6th,  the  beginning  of 
Quert.  The Virgin  is  believed  to  have  died  on  August  1 3 t h,  to  have  risen 
again  and  ascended  to  Heaven  on  the  third  day.  Since  the  Virgin  was 
closely  associated  by  the  early  Church  with  Wisdom—with  the  Saint 
'Sophia', or Holy Wisdom, of the Cathedral  Church  at  Constantinople— 
the  choice  of this  feast  for  the  passing  of Wisdom  into  Immortality was  a 
happy one.The  Litany  of the  Blessed  Virgin  contains  the  prayer  Sedes  sapientiae, 
ora pro nobis, 'Seat of Wisdom, pray for us!' For St. Peter Chrysologos in 
his  Sermon  on  the  Annunciation  had  represented  the  Virgin  as  the  seven-
pillared  temple which  Wisdom  (according  to  Proverbs,  IX,  10)  had  built 
for  herself.  So  the  meaning  of  the  mediaeval  allegory  about  the  milk-
white  unicorn  which  could  be  captured  only with  the  assistance  of a  pure 
virgin is now easily read. The Unicorn is the Roe in the Thicket. It lodges 
under  an  apple-tree,  the  tree  of immortality-through-wisdom.  It  can  be 
captured only by a pure virgin—Wisdom herself. The purity of the virgin 
stands  for  spiritual  integrity.  The  unicorn  lays  its  head  on  her  lap  and

1  T he  oracular  Wheels  of Fortune,  worked  by  a  rope,  still  found  in  a  few  early  Continental 
churches,  derive  from  the  golden  iynges  (literally  'wrynecks')  which  were  oracular  wheels, 
originally  sacred  to  the  White  Goddess,  that decorated,  among  others,  the  temple of Apollo  at 
Delphi.  Philostratus  in  his  Life  of Apollonius  connects  them  with  similar  wheels  used  by  the 
Mages  of Babylon,  and  they  also  occurred  in  Egyptian  temples  of the  3rd  century  B.C.  T he 
celebrated  Irish  Druid  M o gh  Ruith  of  Kerry  (according  to  die  Coir  Anmann)  'derived  his 
name,  which  signifies  Magus  Rotarum,  "the  wizard  of the  wheels",  from  the  wheels  by  which 
he  used  to  make  his  magic  observations'.  In  O ' G r a d y 's  Silva  GaJelica  there  is  an  account  of 
Mogh  Ruith's  daughter  w ho  went  with  him  to  the  East  to  learn  magic,  and  there  made  a 
'rowing  wheel'.

*5  J*5  J

weeps  for  joy.  But  the  Provencal  version  of  the  story  is  that  the  beast 
nuzzles  to  her  breasts  and  attempts  other  familiarities,  whereupon  the 
virgin  gently  grasps  him  by  the  horn  and  leads  him  away  to  the  hunters: 
here he is, in fact, a type of profane love rejected by spiritual love.

The  unicorn's  wildness  and  untameability  had  become  proverbial  in

early  Christian  times  because  of the  text  in Job,  XXXIX,  9:

Will the unicorn be able to serve thee or abide by thy crib?early  Christian  times  because  of the  text  in Job,  XXXIX,  9:

Will the unicorn be able to serve thee or abide by thy crib?

and  this  Biblical  unicorn,  (a  mistranslation  by  the  Septuagint 1  of  rem, 
the  Judaean  aurochs  or  wild  ox)  became  identified  with  the  goat-stag, 
the  hirco-cervus  of Dionysian  mysteries,  which  was  another  wild  untame-
able  animal.  Charles  Doughty  in  his  Arabia  Deserta  suggests  that  the  rem 
is  not  the  aurochs  but  a  large,  very  dangerous  antelope  called  wothyhi  or 
'wild  ox'  by  the  Arabs.  He  is  likely  to  be  right;  and  I  take  the  wothyh:  to 
be  the boubalis  or  boibalis,  'an  oryx  the  size  of an  ox',  mentioned  by  Hero 
dotus  (Melpomene,  192),  and  also  by  Martial,  as a fierce beast used  in the 
Roman  amphitheatre.  Doughty  writes:  'Her  horns  are  such  slender  rods 
as  from  our  childhood  we  have  seen  pictured  "the  horns  of the  unicorn". 
We read  in  Balaam's  parable:  "El  brought  them  out of Egypt;  He hath  as 
it  were  the  strength  of  the  reem";  and  in  Moses's  blessing  of  the  tribes 
Joseph's  horns  are  the  two  horns  of reems.'  Doughty  illustrates  this  with 
a  sketch  of a  wothyhi's  horn,  nearly  two  feet  long  and  somewhat  curved, 
with  raised  rings  at  the  base.  H<i  adds:  'It  was  a  monkish  darkness  in 
natural  knowledge  to  ascribe  a  single  horn  to  a  double  forehead.'  This  is 
unfair  on  the  monks:  it  was  the  pre-Christian  Sepmagint  who  had  first 
given  the  rem  a  single  horn.  And  it  is  possible  that  they  translated  rem  as 
'unicorn'  from  a  misunderstanding  of  an  icon  in  the  margin  of an  illus 
trated  Hebrew  Pentateuch—such  there  were.  In  the  context  of  Moses's 
blessing,  Joseph  'with  the  horns  of  a  rem'  would  naturally  have  been 
depicted  in  the  persons  of his  two  sons,  Ephraim  and  Manasseh,  joindy 
called  'Joseph',  as  twin  rems with  only  one  horn  apiece.  The  single  horn, 
emphasized  by  its  double  occurrence,  would  suggest  to  the  translators  the 
beast  described  by  Ctesias  in  his  Indka.  The  horn  was  a  cure-all  and 
especially good  against  poison.The  connexion  of the  apple-tree  with  immortality  is  ancient  and  wide 
spread  in  Europe.  What  does  'apple'  mean?  According  to  the  Oxford 
English  Dkaonary  its  etymology  is  unknown,  but  the  word  runs  North 
westward across Europe all  the way from the Balkans to Ireland in a form 
approximating  in most  languages  to  Apol.

It  is  clear  that  the  ancient  icon  of the  Three  Goddesses,  the  apple  and 
the  young  shepherd  of Ida,  which  has  been  iconotropically  interpreted  by 
some  early  enemy  of women  in  the  story  of the  'Apple  of Discord'  (how

1 Seventy-two (not seventy) Alexandrian J e w s.

2 561 Seventy-two (not seventy) Alexandrian J e w s.

2 56

Paris  adjudicated  the  apple  to  the  Love-goddess)  had  an entirely different 
meaning.  To  award  an  apple  to  the  Love-goddess  would  have  been  an 
impertinence  on  the  Shepherd's  part.  All  apples  were  hers.  Did  Merddin 
present  Olwen  with  the  apple  orchard?  Did  Adam  give  the  Mother  of All 
Living  an  apple? 1  Obviously  the  three  Goddesses  are,  as  usual,  the  three 
persons  of  the  ancient  Triple  Goddess,  not  jealous  rivals,  and  obviously 
the  Love-goddess  is  giving  the  apple  to  the  Shepherd  (or  goatherd),  not 
receiving  it  from  him.  It  is  the  apple of  immortality and  he  is  the young 
Dionysus—the  god  commemorated  by  the  kid  stuffed  with  apples;  for 
according  to  Hesychius  and  Stephanus  of  Byzantium  one  of  Dionysus's 
titles  was Eriphos,  'the  Kid'.  Virgil  has expressed  the wrong notion  in his 
Georgics:  he  says  that  the  kid  spitted  on  hazel  is  sacrificed  to  Dionysus 
because  the  goat  and  the  hazel-tree  are  both  inimical  to  the  vine.  Whether 
the  word  Apol is  a  chance  approximation  to  Apollo,  who  is  the  immortal 
part  of Dionysus,  or  whether  the  apple  is  named  after  him,  is  a  doubtful 
point  But  it  is  remarkable  that  in  Greece  the  words  for  'goat'  (or  sheep) 
and  'apple'  are  identical  (melon)—the  Latin is malum.  Hercules, who  com 
bined  Dionysus  and  Apollo  in  a  single  person,  was  called  Melon  because 
apples  were  offered  to  him  by  his  worshippers;  and  because  he  was  given 
the  bough  with  the  golden  apples  by  the  Three  Daughters  of the  West— 
the  Triple  Goddess  again;  it  was  these  apples  that  made  him  immortal. 
The  conclusion  of  the  story  of  the  Apple  of  Discord,  that  the  Shepherd 
won  Helen  as  a  reward  for  his  judgement,  evidently  derives  from  a  com 
panion  icon  to  the  'Judgement',  showing  a  young  Shepherd  hand  in  hand 
with  Helen.  But  Helen  was  not  a  mortal  woman;  she  was  Helle,  or 
Persephone,  a  Goddess  of  Death  and  Resurrection.  Hercules,  Theseus, 
Castor  and  Pollux,  were  all  depicted  in  her  company  in  archaic  works  of 
art.Though  the  apple  was  the  most  palatable  of  wild  fruits  growing  on

1  In  the  Genesis  story  of  A d am  and  E ve  the  iconotropic  distortion  is,  nevertheless,  v e ry 
thorough.  Clearly,  Jehovah  did  not figure in  the original myth.  It is  the Mother of all  Living, 
conversing  in  triad,  who  casts  Adam  out  of  her  fertile  riverine  dominions  because  he  has 
usurped  some  prerogative  of hers—whether caprifying  fig-trees  or  planting  grain  is  not  clear 
—lest  he  should  also  usurp  her  prerogative  of dispensing  justice  and  uttering  oracles.  He  is 
sent  off  to  till  the  soil  in  some  less  bountiful  region.  T h is  recalls  what  seems  to  be  an  inter 
mediate  version  of the  same  myth:  Triptolemus,  a  favourite  of the  Barley-goddess  Demeter, 
is sent  off from  Eleusis  in  Attica  with  a  bag  of seed,  to  teach  the  whole  world  agriculture,  and 
departs  in  a  car  drawn  by  serpents.  T he  curse  in  Genesis  on  the  woman,  that  she  should  be  at 
enmity  with  the  serpent,  is  obviously  misplaced:  it  must  refer  to  the  ancient  rivalry  decreed 
between  the  sacred  king A d am  and the Serpent  for the favours of the Goddess; A d am  is  fated 
to  bruise  the  Serpent's  head,  but  the  Serpent  will  sting  Adam's  sacred  heel,  each  in  turn 
bringing  the  other  to  his  annual  death.  T h at  E v e,  'the  Mother  of  A ll  L i v i n g'  was  formed  by 
G od  from  Adam's  rib  seems  an  anecdote  based  on  a  picture  of the  naked  goddess  Anatha  of 
Ugarit  watching while  A l e y n, alias  Baal,  drives  a  curved  knife  under  die fifth rib  of his  twin 
Mot:  this  murder has been  iconotropically misread  as Jehovah's  removal  of a  sixth  rib,  which 
turns  into  E v e.  T he  twins,  w ho  fought  for  her  favours,  were  gods  of the  W a x i ng  and  the 
Waning  Year.

2-572-57

trees,  why  should  it  have  been  given  such  immense  mythic  importance? 
The clue is  to be found  in  the  legend of Curoi's soul  that was hidden  in  an 
apple;  when  the  apple  was  cut  across  by  Cuchulain's  sword  'night  fell 
upon  Curoi'.  For  if an  apple  is  halved  cross-wise  each  half shows  a  five-
pointed  star  in  the  centre,  emblem  of immortality,  which  represents  the 
Goddess  in  her five stations  from  birth  to  death  and  back  to  birth  again. 
It  also  represents  the  planet  of  Venus—Venus  to  whom  the  apple  was 
sacred—adored as Hesper the evening star on one half of the apple, and as 
Lucifer Son of the Morning on  the other.

The  apple  of  the  Thracian  Orphic  cult  seems  to  have  been  the  sorb 
rather than the quince, the crab, or the true apple, because Orpheus, whose 
name  and  singing  head  identify  him  with  Bran  the  alder-god,  is  called 
the son of Oeagrius;  Oea Agria means  the wild service-tree'.

258

Chapter  Fifteen

T HE  S E V EN  P I L L A RS

Since  the  seven  pillars  of Wisdom  are  identified  by  Hebrew  mystics

with the seven days  of Creation and with  the seven days of the week, 
one suspects  that  the astrological system which  links each day of the 
week to one of the heavenly bodies has an arboreal counterpart. The astro 
logical system is so ancient, widespread and consistent in its  values that it 
is worth noting in its various forms.  Its origin is probably, but not neces 
sarily,  Babylonian.  The  second  list  shown  here  is  that  of the  Sabians  of 
Harran,  who  took  part  in  the  Sea-people's  invasion  of  Northern  Syria 
about  1200 B . C .; it makes the connexion between the Babylonian and the 
Western lists.

Planet

Sabian  Latin

Baby 
lonian 
Sol 
Samas 
Samas 
Luna 
Sin 
Sin 
Nergal  Nergal  Mars

Sun 
Moon 
Mars 
Mercury  Nabu 
Juppiter  Marduk  Bel 
Venus 
Saturn

Ishtar 
Ninib

French

German  English

Dominus 
Luna 
Mars

SunSun 
Moon 
Mars 
Mercury  Nabu 
Juppiter  Marduk  Bel 
Venus 
Saturn

Ishtar 
Ninib

French

German  English

Dominus 
Luna 
Mars

Sun

Sun 
Moon  Moon 
Zivis

Zio

Nabu  Mercurius  Mercurius  Wotan  Woden 
Juppiter 
Venus 
Saturn

Belt's 
Cronos  Saturnus

Thor 
Freia 
Saturn

Thor 
Frigg 
Saturn

Juppiter 
Venus

In  Aristotle's  list,  Wednesday's  planet  is  ascribed  alternatively  to 
Hermes  or  Apollo,  Apollo  having  by  that  time  exceeded  Hermes  in  his 
reputation  for  wisdom;  Tuesday's  alternatively  to  Hercules  or  Ares 
(Mars), Hercules being a deity of better omen than Ares; Friday's alterna 
tively  to  Aphrodite  or  Hera,  Hera  corresponding  more  closely  than 
Aphrodite with the Babylonian Queen of Heaven, Ishtar.

The  seven  sacred  trees  of  the  Irish  grove  were,  as  has  already  been 
mentioned: birch, willow, holly, hazel, oak, apple and alder. This sequence 
also  holds  good  for  the  days  of the  week,  since  we  can  confidently  assign 
the alder to Saturn (Bran); the apple to the Love-goddess Venus or Freia; 
the  oak  to  the  Thunder-god  Juppiter  or  Thor;  the  willow  to  the  Moon 
Circe  or Hecate);  the holly to  Mars,  the scarlet-faced  War-god;  and  the

*59

birch  naturally  begins  the  week  as  it  begins  the  solar  year.1  The  tree  of 
Wednesday,  sacred  to  the  God  of  Eloquence,  one  would  expect  to  be 
Woden's  ash;  but with  the ancient Irish  the tree  of eloquence  and  wisdom 
was  the  hazel,  not  the  ash,  the  Belgic  god  Odin  or  Woden  having  been  a 
latecomer to Ireland. So these are the seven trf es, with their planets, days 
and letters:

Sun 
Moon 
Mars 
Mercury 
Juppiter 
Venus 
Saturn

Sunday 
Monday 
Tuesday 
Wednesday 
Thursday 
Friday 
Saturday

Birch 
Willow 
Holly 
Hazel (or ash) 
Oak 
Apple 
Alder

B 
S 
T 
C 
D 
Q 
FSun 
Moon 
Mars 
Mercury 
Juppiter 
Venus 
Saturn

Sunday 
Monday 
Tuesday 
Wednesday 
Thursday 
Friday 
Saturday

Birch 
Willow 
Holly 
Hazel (or ash) 
Oak 
Apple 
Alder

B 
S 
T 
C 
D 
Q 
F

It is  easy to  reconstruct the appropriate  formula in  Classical Latin for the 
daily dedication to the Lord of the Heavens of the devotee's heart:

Benignissime, Solo Tibi Cordis Devotionem Quotidianam Facio. 
('Most  Gracious  One  to  Thee  alone  I  make  a  daily  devotion  of my

heart.')

And  the  Greek,  which  had  lost  its  Q  (Koppa)  and  F  (Digamma)  must

content itself with a second C (Kappa) and a Ph (Phi):

Beltiste Soi Ten Cardian Didomi Cathemerios Pkylaxomenen, 
('Best One, every day I give my heart into Thy Keeping.')

So  the  poetic  answer  to  Job's  poetic  question:  'Where shall  wisdom  be 
found  and  where  is  the  place  of  understanding?'  which  his  respect  for 
Jehovah the All-wise prevented  him from  facing is:  'Under an apple-tree, 
by pure meditation, on a Friday evening, in the season of apples, when the 
moon is full.'  But the finder will  be Wednesday's  child.

The  sacred  grove  is  perhaps  referred  to  in  E\ekiel,  XL VII  (a  passage 
quoted  in  the  Gnostic  Epistle  to  Barnabas,  XI,  16).  Ezekiel  in  a  vision 
sees  the  holy  waters  of a  river  issuing  eastward  from  under  the  threshold 
of  the  House  of  God,  full  of  fish,  with  trees  on  both  sides  of  the  river 
'whose  leaves  shall  not fade  nor their  fruit  be  consumed.  Each  shall  bring 
forth new fruit according to their months,  the fruit for meat and  the leaves 
for  medicine:  and  this  shall  be  the  border  whereby  you  shall  inherit  the 
land according to .the tribes of Israel, and Joseph shall have two portions.' 
The  reference  to  thirteen  tribes,  not  twelve,  and  to  the  'months'  of the1  In  the  North  Country  ballad  of  The  Wife  of Usher's  Well,  the  dead  sons  w ho  return  in 
the  dead  of winter  to  visit  their  mother,  wear  birch  leaves  in  their  hats.  T he  author  remarks 
that  the  tree  from  which  they  plucked  the  leaves  grew  at  the  entrance  of  the  Paradise  where 
their  souls  were  housed,  which  is  what  one  would  expect.  Presumably  they  wore  birch  as  a 
token  that  they were not earth-bound  evil  spirits  but blessed  souls  on  compassionate  leave.

260

trees,  suggests  that  the  same  calendar  is  being  used.  Moreover,  the 
theme  of roe and  apple-tree  occurs in  the  Canticles.

The  Canticles,  though  apparendy  no  more  than  a  collection  of village 
love-songs,  were  officially  interpreted  by  the  Pharisee  sages  of  Jesus's 
day  as  the  mystical  essence  of King  Solomon's  wisdom,  and  as  referring 
to  the  love  of Jehovah  for Israel;  which  is  why  in  the  Anglican  Bible  they 
are interpreted as  'Christ's love for his  Church'.  The fact is  that originally 
they  celebrated  the  mysteries  of  an  annual  sacred  marriage  between 
Salmaah  the  King  of the year and  the  Flower  Queen,  and  their Hellenistic 
influence  is  patent.

The second  chapter of the  Canticles runs:

I am the rose  of Sharon, the lily of the valleys. 
As the  lily among thorns, so is my love among the daughters. 
As  the  apple  tree  among  the  trees  of  the  grove,  so  is  my  beloved 
among the sons.  I  sat down under his  shadow with great  delight and  his 
fruit was sweet to my taste.

He  brought  me  to  the  banquet-house  and  his  banner  over  me  was

love.

Stay me with flagons, comfort me with apples, for I am sick of love. 
His left hand is under my head, his right hand doth embrace me. 
I  charge  you,  O  ye  daughters  of Jerusalem  by  the  roes  and  by  the

hinds of the field that ye stir not up, nor wake my love till he  please.hinds of the field that ye stir not up, nor wake my love till he  please.

The  voice  of  my  beloved!  Behold  he  cometh  leaping  upon  the

mountains,  skipping upon  the hills.

My beloved is  like a roe or a wild h a r t . . .. 
My beloved  is mine,  I am his, he  feedeth among the  lilies.

The  'lilies'  are  the  red  anemones  that  sprang  up  from  the  drops  of 
blood  that  fell  from  Adonis's  side  when  the  wild  boar  killed  him.  The 
apple  is  the  Sidonian  (i.e.  Cretan)  apple,  or  quince,  sacred  to  Aphrodite 
the Love-goddess, and first cultivated in Europe by the  Cretans.  The true 
apple  was  not  known  in  Palestine  in  Biblical  times  and  it  is  only  recendy 
that  varieties  have  been  introduced  there  that  yield  marketable  fruit.  But 
the  apple  grew  wild  in  ancient  times  on  the  Southern  shores  of the  Black 
Sea,  the provenience of the  other trees  of the series,  and  around  Trebizond 
still  occasionally  forms  small  woods.  It  also  occurred  in  Macedonia—the 
original  home  of the  Muses—and  in  Euboea  where  Hercules  received  the 
injury  that  sent  him  to  the  pyre  on  Mount  Oeta;  but  in  both  these  cases 
may have been an early importation.

There  seems  to  be a strong connexion between  the tree-calendar and  the 
ritual  at  the  Feast  of the  Tabernacles  at  Jerusalem,  already  mentioned  in 
connexion  with  the  willow  and  alder.  The  worshippers  carried  in  their 
right  hand  an  ethrog,  a  sort  of citron,  and  in  their left  a lulab,  or thyrsus, 
261consisting  of  the  intertwined  boughs  of  palm,  willow  and  myrtle.  The 
ethrog was  not  the  original  fruit,  having  been  introduced  from India  alter 
the  Captivity,  and  is  thought  to  have  displaced  the  quince  because  of the 
quince's  erotic  connotations.  In  the  reformation  of  religion  which  took 
place  during  the  Exile  the  Jews  broke  as  far  as  possible  all  the  ties  which 
bound  them  to  orgiastic  religion.  The ritual of Tabernacles was  taken  over 
by  the  Hebrews  with  other  rites  in  honour  of the  Moon-goddess,  and  the 
ordinances  for  its  observance  were  fathered  on  Moses,  as  part  of the  great 
recension  of the  Law  ascribed  to  King  Josiah  but  probably  made  during 
the  Exile.  I  have  already  mentioned  the  disparaging  Haggadah  on  the 
willow;  the  meaning  of  the  myrtle  was  also  changed  from  the  shadow  of 
death  to  the  pleasant  shade  of  summer,  on  the  authority  of  Isaiah  who 
had  praised  the  tree  {Isaiah,  XLI,  19;  LV,  13).The  feast  began  on  the  first  new  moon  of the  year,  and  in  the  quince 
season.  Both  willow  and  apple  have  5—the  number  especially  sacred 
letter-strokes  in  the 
to  the  Moon-goddess—as  the  number  of  their 
Ogham finger-alphabet. The myrtle does  not occur in the Beth-Luis-Nion, 
but  may  well  be  the  Greek  equivalent  of the  remaining  consonant  in  the 
Beth-Luis-Nidn  that  has  5  as  its  number  of  strokes—the  elder.  The 
myrtle  was  sacred  to  the  Love-goddess  Aphrodite  all  over  the  Mediter 
ranean,  partly  because  it grows  best  near  the  sea  shore,  partly  because  of 
its  fragrance;  nevertheless,  it  was  the  tree  of death.  Myrto,  or  Myrtea,  or 
Myrtoessa  was  a  title  of hers  and  the  pictures  of her  sitting  with  Adonis 
in  the  myrde-shade  were  deliberately  misunderstood  by  the  Classical 
poets.  She  was  not  vulgarly  courting  him,  as  they  pretended,  but  was 
promising  him  Life-in-Death;  for  myrtle  was  evergreen  and  was  a  token 
of the  resurrection  of the  dead  King  of the  year.  The  myrde  is  connected 
in Greek myth with the death of kings: Myrtilus, son of Hermes (Mercury) 
who  was  charioteer  to  Oenomaus  the  King  of Elis,  pulled  the  linch-pins 
from  the  wheels  of his  master's  chariot  and  so  caused  his  death.  Pelops, 
who  then  married  Oenomaus's  widow,  ungratefully  threw  Myrtilus  into 
the  sea.  Myrtilus  cursed  the  House  of  Pelops  with  his  dying  breath  and 
thereafter  every  Pelopid  monarch  was  dogged  by  his  ghost.  The  'wheel' 
was the life of the King; R, the last consonant of the alphabet 'pulls out the 
pin'  at the  last  month  of his  reign.  Pelops's  dynasty  obtained  the  throne  of 
Elis,  but  all  his  successors  similarly  met  their  end  in  the  R  month. 
(Myrtilus  became  the  northern  constellation  Auriga,  the  charioteer.)  The 
myrde  resembles  the  elder  in  the  medicinal  qualities  attributed  to  its 
leaves  and  berries;  the  berries  are  ripe  in  December,  the  R  month. 
Myrtle  boughs  were  carried  by  Greek  emigrants  when  they  intended 
to  found  a  new  colony,  as  if  to  say:  'The  old  cycle  is  ended;  we  hope 
to  start a new one with the  favour of the Love-goddess,  who  rules  the sea.'Thus  the  thyrsus  contained  three  trees,  each  representing  a  flight  of

262

five calendar letters, or one-third of the year; besides the palm which repre 
sented  the  extra  day  (or  period  of  five  days)  on  which  the  Sun-god  was 
born.  The  number  fifteen  was  therefore  of  prime  importance  in  the 
Festival:  the  Levites  sang  the  fifteen  Songs  of Ascent  (attributed  to  King 
David)  as  they  stood  on  the  fifteen  steps  leading  up  from  the  Women's 
Court  to  the  Court  of Israel.  The  number  also  figures  in  the  architecture 
of  Solomon's  'house  of  the  Forest  of  Lebanon'  which  was  more  than 
twice  the  size  of  the  House  of  the  Lord.  It  was  built  on  three  rows  of 
cedar pillars, fifteen to a row, and was  50 cubits  long by 30 high  and  wide; 
with  an  adjoining  porch  30  cubits  wide,  50  long,  height  not  given—pro 
bably  10 cubits.

The Hebrew canon of the trees of the week, the seven pillars of Wisdom, 
is not difficult to establish.  For the birch, which was not a  Palestinian  tree, 
the  most  likely  substitute  is  the  retem  or  wild  broom,  which  was  the  tree 
under  which  the  prophet  Elijah  rested  on  Mount  Horeb  ('the  mountain 
of  glowing  heat')  and  seems  to  have  been  sacred  to  the  Sun.  Like  the 
birch,  it  was  used  as  a  besom  for  the  expulsion  of  evil  spirits.  Willow 
remains  the  same.  For  the  holly,  the  kerm-oak,  already  mentioned  in 
Chapter  Ten  as  the  tree  from  which  the  ancients  obtained  their  royal 
scarlet  dye.  This  ascription  of  the  kerm-oak  to  Nergal  or  Mars,  is  con 
firmed  by a characteristic passage in Frazer's Golden Bough:The  heathen  of Harran  offered  to  the  sun,  moon  and  planets  human 
victims  who  were  chosen  on  the  ground  of their  supposed  resemblance 
to  the  heavenly  bodies  to  which  they  were  sacrificed;  for  example,  the 
priests,  clothed  in  red  and  smeared  with  blood,  offered  a  red-haired, 
red-cheeked  man  to  'the red planet Mars'  in a  temple which was  painted 
red and draped with red hangings.

The substitute  for the hazel was  the almond: this was the tree from which 
Aaron  took  his  magic  rod,  and  the  Menorah  the  seven-branched  candle 
stick in  the  Temple  Sanctuary at Jerusalem had  its  sconces  in  the  form  of 
almonds  and  represented  Aaron's  rod  when  it budded.  It was  this  branch 
that  Jeremiah  (Jeremiah  I,  it)  was  shown  as  a  visionary  token  that  God 
had  granted  him  prophetic  wisdom.  The  sconces  stood  for  the  seven 
heavenly  bodies  of  the  week,  and  the  central  sconce  was  the  fourth, 
namely  that  dedicated  to  Wisdom,  which  gives  its  name  to  all  the 
rest;  its  branch  formed  the  shaft  of the  candlestick.  For  the  oak,  the  tere 
binth  sacred  to  Abraham.  For  the  apple,  the  quince.  For  the  alder,  since 
we  know  that  the  alder was  banned  in  Temple  worship,  the  pomegranate 
which  supplies  a  red  dye  as  the  alder  does.  The  pomegranate  was  Saul's 
sacred  tree,  and  sacred  to  Rimmon,  a  name  for  Adonis  from  whose 
blood  it  is  said  to  have sprung.  Also,  the  Paschal victim was  traditionally 
spitted  on  pomegranate  wood.  The  pomegranate  was  the  only  fruit 
263allowed  to  be  brought  inside  the Holy of Holies—miniature pomegranates 
were  sewn  on  the  High  Priest's  robes  when  he  made  his  yearly  entry. 
Since  the  seventh  day  was  sacred  to  Jehovah  and  Jehovah  was  a  form  of 
Bran,  or  Saturn,  or  Ninth,1  everything  points  to  the  pomegranate  as  the 
tree of the seventh day.  So:

Sun 
—Broom 
Moon  —Willow 
Mars  —Kerm 
Mercury—Almond 
Juppiter—Terebinth 
Venus  —Quince 
Saturn  —Pomegranate.

The one doubtful tree here is the broom, or its Irish counterpart, the birch. 
The  seven  trees  of the Irish  grove  all  belong to  the  summer months  except 
B,  the birch, which has  taken  the place  of H,  the hawthorn:  and has  appar 
ently  been  chosen  because  it  is  the  leading  letter  of the  first  flight  of five 
trees,  as  H  is  of the  second.  But,  as  will  be  shown  in  the  next  chapter,  B 
was  used  as  the  cypher  equivalent  of H  not  only  in  Hyginus's  Fable  271 
but in the third century A . D.  Ogham inscription on the Callen Stone. So it 
seems  that  Sunday's  original  letter was  not  B,  but H,  of which  the Hebrew 
tree,  corresponding  with  the  hawthorn,  was  the  Sant,  or  wild  acacia,  the 
sort with  golden  flowers  and  sharp  thorns,  better known  to  readers  of the 
Bible  as  'shittim'-wood,  i.e.  from  Cyprus.  It  was  from  its  water-proof 
timber  that the arks of the Sun-hero  Osiris and his counterparts Noah and 
Armenian  Xisuthros  were  built;  also  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant,  the  re 
corded  measurements  of  which  proved  it  sacred  to  the  Sun.  This  is  a 
host-tree  of  the  mistletoe-like  loranthus,  Jehovah's  oracular  'burning 
bush', and the source of manna.The  use  of H  for  Sunday's  letter  explains  Lucan's  puzzling  account  of 
the  sacred  grove  at  Marseilles which  Julius  Caesar  felled  because  it inter 
fered  with  his  fortification  of the city.  Marseilles was  a  Greek city,  a centre 
of  Pythagoreanism,  and  Caesar  had  to  use  an  axe  himself on  one  of the 
oaks  before  he  could  persuade  anyone  to  begin  the  work  of  desecration. 
The  grove,  according  to  Lucan,  contained holly-oak,  Dodonian oak,  and 
alder—T,  D  and  F.  He  specifies  none  of  the  remaining  trees  except  the

1  Ninib,  the  Assyrian  Saturn,  was  the  god  of  the  South,  and  therefore  of  the  noon-day 
S u n,  and  also  of  mid-Winter  when  the  Sun  attains  its  most  southerly  point  and  halts  for  a 
day.  In  both  these  capacities  he  was  the  god  of  Repose,  for  noon  is  the  time  for  rest  in  hot 
climates.  T h at  Jehovah  was  openly  identified  with  Satum-Ninib  in  Bethel  before  the  N o r 
thern  Captivity  is  proved  in  Amos,  V,  26 where  the  image  and  star  of  'Succoth-Chiun'  are 
mentioned  as  having  been  brought  to  the  shrine;  and  that  the  same  was  done  in  Jerusalem 
before  the  Southern  Captivity  is  proved  by  the  vision  of Eiekiel,  VII,  3,  5  where  his  image, 
'the  image  of jealousy'  was  set up  at  the  north  gate  of the  Temple,  so  that  devotees  would  face 
southwards  while  adoring him;  and  close by  (verse  14)  women  were wailing for Adonis.

264264

cypress,  which  the  Massiliots  had  brought  from  their  parent  state  of 
Phocis  where  it  was  sacred  to  Artemis.  One  would  not  have  expected  the 
cypress in the grove; but elsewhere in  Greece,  particularly at  Corinth  and 
Messene, it was sacred  to Artemis  Cranae or  Carnasia; which makes  it an 
H  tree,  an evergreen substitute  for  the hawthorn  also  sacred  to  Cranae  or 
Carnea.  Thus  as  the  tree  of Sunday,  succeeding  the  alder  of Saturday,  it 
symbolized  resurrection  in  the  Orphic  mysteries,  the  escape  of  the  Sun-
hero  from  Calypso's  alder-girt  island,  and  became  attached  to  the  cult of 
Celestial  Hercules.  Cypress  is  still  the  prime  resurrection  symbol  in 
Mediterranean church-yards.1

There  is  a  clear  correspondence  between  this  canon  and  that  of  the

seven days of Creation as characterized  in  the first chapter of Genesis.

Sun  — Light 
Moon  —  Division  of Waters 
Mars  —  Dry Land, Pasture and Trees 
Mercury  —  Heavenly  Bodies and  the  Seasons 
Juppiter  —  Sea-beasts and Birds 
Venus  —  Land-beasts, Man and Woman 
Saturn  —  Repose.

The  apparent  illogic  of  the  creation  of  Light,  and  even  of  Pasture  and 
Trees,  before  that  of  the  Heavenly  Bodies  and  Seasons—though  here  it 
has  been  ingeniously  suggested  by  Mr.  Ernst  Schiff  that  the  Heavenly 
Bodies  were  not  visible  until  the  fourth  day  because  of the  'damp  haze' 
mentioned  in  verse  9  of the  Creation  story,  and  therefore  not  created  in 
the  sense  of not  being manifested—is  accounted  for  by  the powers  proper 
to  the  deities  who  rule  over  the  planetary  days  of the  week.  The  Sun-

1  T he   cypress  occurs  in  the  riddling   list  of  Ecclesiasticus  XXIV, 13-17,  (I  quote  the  text  as

restored by Edersheim)  where W i s d om describes herself as  follows:1  T he   cypress  occurs  in  the  riddling   list  of  Ecclesiasticus  XXIV, 13-17,  (I  quote  the  text  as

restored by Edersheim)  where W i s d om describes herself as  follows:

I was exalted like a cedar in Lebanon and like a cypress-tree on Mount Hermon. 
I  was  exalted  like  a  palm-tree  in  Engedi  and  as  a  rose-tree  in  Jericho,  as  an  olive  in  the

field, and as a plane-tree.

I exhaled  sweet smell  like cinnamon and  aromatic asphalathus,  I  diffused  a  pleasant odour

like  the  best  myrrh,  like  galbanum,  onyx  and  sweet  storax,  and  like  the  fumes  of  frankin 
cense.

Like  an  oleander  ['turpentine-tree'  in  A . V .]  I  stretched  out  my  branches  which  are

branches of glory and beauty.

Like a vine I budded  forth beauty and my flowers ripen into glory and  riches.

Ecclesiasticus has  mixed  alphabetic  trees  with  aphrodisiac  perfumes  and  trees  of another  cate 
gory; but H  for cypress and M for vine suggests that  the last-mentioned, or  only, trees in verses 
1 3,  1 4,  16  and  1 7,  spell  out  Chokmah,  the  Hebrew  word  for  Wisdom:  Ched,  Kaf,  Mem,  He. 
(In  Hebrew,  vowels are not written.)  If this is so, the oleander is  C H; and the plane is a surro 
gate  for  the  almond,  K,  which  as  the  tree  of W i s d om  herself cannot  figure  as  a  part  of  the 
tree-riddle  of  which  it  is  the  answer;  in  the  time  of  Ecclesiasticus  the  plane  had  long  been 
associated  by  the  Greeks  with  the  pursuit  of wisdom.  T he  four  other  trees,  cedar,  palm,  rose 
and  sweet  olive,  represent  respectively  sovereignty,  motherhood,  beauty  and  fruitfulness— 
Wisdom's characteristics as a quasi-goddess.

2 6;2 6;

god  rules  over  Light,  the  Moon  over  Water,  Mars  over  Pasture  and 
Trees,  and  Mercury  is  the  God  of  Astronomy.  Clearly  the  Genesis 
legend  is  subsequent  to  the  fixing  of  the  canon  of  planets,  days  and 
gods.  The  allocation  of Sea-beasts  and  Birds  to  the  fifth  day  is  natural, 
because the god  of the oak or terebinth cult is,  in general, the son of a  Sea-
goddess  to  whom  the  Dove,  the  Eagle  and  all  other  birds  are  sacred,  and 
himself  takes  the  form  of a  sea-beast.  The  order  to  man  and  woman  to 
couple  and  produce  their  kind,  like  the  creatures  over  which  they  have 
dominion,  is  appropriate  to  the  day  of  Venus.  The  pleasant  sloth  of 
Saturn—in  whose  golden  day,  according  to  the  Classical  poets,  men  ate 
honey and  acorns  in  a  Terrestrial  Paradise  and  did  not  trouble  to  till  the 
soil,  or  even  to  hunt,  since  the earth  brought  forth  abundantly  of her  own 
bounty—explains  the  seventh  day  as  one  of  repose.  The  Jewish  apoca 
lyptic  prophecy  (which  Jesus  took  literally)  of the  Heavenly  Kingdom  of 
Jehovah  referred  to  a  restoration  of  this  same  golden  age  if  only  man 
would  cease  to  busy  himself with  wars and  labours;  for  Jehovah  required 
rest  on  the  seventh  day.  As  has  been  already  explained,  the  geographical 
situation  of  the  former  Terrestrial  Paradise  was  variously  given.  The 
Babylonians  placed  it  in  the  Delta  of the  Euphrates;  the  Greeks  in  Crete; 
the pre-Exilic Hebrews at Hebron in Southern Judaea.It  is  of  the  highest  theological  importance  that  Jehovah  announced 
himself to  Moses  as  'I  am  that  I  am'  or  (more  literally)  'I  am  whoever  I 
choose  to  be'  from  the acacia rather than from any other tree;  because this 
constituted  a  definition  of his  godhead.  Had  he  announced  himself from 
the  terebinth,  as  the earlier Jehovah had  done at  Hebron,  this  would  have 
been  to  reveal  himself as  Bel,  or  Marduk,  the  god  of Thursday  and  of the 
seventh  month,  the  Aramaean  Juppiter,  the  Paeonian  Apollo.  But  from 
the  acacia,  the  tree  of the  first  day  of the  week,  he  revealed  himself as  the 
God  of the  Menorah,  the  transcendental  Celestial  God,  the  God who pre 
sently  said:  'Thou  shalt  have  none  other  Gods  but  me  . ..  for  I  the  Lord 
thy  God  am  a jealous  God.'  The  acacia  is,  indeed,  a  thorny,  jealous,  self-
sufficient  tree,  needs  very  little  water  and,  like  Odin's  ash,  strangles  with 
its  roots  all  odier  trees  growing  near  it.  Uath,  the  month  dedicated  to  the 
acacia,  was  the  one  in  which  the  annual  Hebron  Fair  took  place,  and  so 
holy  that  (as  has  been  mentioned  in  Chapter  Ten)  all  sexual  congress  and 
self-beautification  was  tabooed  during  it:  it  was  the  month  of the  annual 
purification of the temples in Greece, Italy and the Near East.

The  not  yet  completed  Ages  of  the  World,  quoted  from  Nennius  by

Gwion, are based on the same planetary canon:

[Sunday]

'The first Age of the World is  from Adam  to Noah.' 
Adam's  was  the  first  human  eye  to  see  the  light  of the

sun, or the Glory of God. Sunday is the day of light.

266

[Monday]

'The second  Age is from  Noah  to Abraham.'

Noah's  Age  was  introduced  by  the  Deluge.  Monday  is

the  day  of Water.

[Tuesday]

'The third Age is from Abraham to David.'266

[Monday]

'The second  Age is from  Noah  to Abraham.'

Noah's  Age  was  introduced  by  the  Deluge.  Monday  is

the  day  of Water.

[Tuesday]

'The third Age is from Abraham to David.'

Abraham  was  famous  for  his  flocks  and  herds  and  for 
having  the  fertile  Land  of  Canaan  promised  to  his  de 
scendants.  Tuesday is the day of Trees and  Pasture.

[Wednesday]

'The  fourth  Age is  from  David  to  Daniel.'

The  third  Age  should  really  run  from  Abraham  to 
Solomon  and  the  fourth  from  Solomon  to  Daniel—the 
change  was  apparendy  made  in  honour  of  St.  David— 
since  in  the  introductory  paragraph  Nennius  gives  the 
number  of years,  1048,  from  Abraham  to  the  building  of 
Solomon's  Temple,  which  David  was  to  have  built  if  he 
had  not  sinned.  Solomon's  wisdom  was  embodied  in  the 
Temple.  Wednesday  is  the  day  of Wisdom.

[Thursday]

[Friday]

In

the

'The fifth Age is from  Daniel  to John  the Bapdst.' 
introductory  paragraph  Nennius  gives

the 
number  of  years,  6 1 2,  'from  Solomon  to  the  rebuilding 
of  the  Temple  which  was  accomplished  under  Darius 
King  of  the  Persians.'  Here  Daniel  has  been  substituted 
for  Darius  (who  put  him  in  the  lions'  den  at  Babylon)  as 
being  under  the  particular  guidance  of  God;  but  in  the 
myth  of Jonah  the  power  of  Babylon  was  symbolized  by 
the  whale  which  swallowed  and  then  spewed  out  the 
chosen  people  when  they  cried  out  from  its  belly.  Thurs 
day is  the day of Sea-beasts and  Fishes.

'The  sixth  Age  is  from  John  the  Baptist  to  the 
Judgement  Day.''The  sixth  Age  is  from  John  the  Baptist  to  the 
Judgement  Day.'

Nennius  gives  the  number  of  years:  548,  from  Darius 
to  the  Ministry  of  Jesus  Christ;  so  John  the  Baptist 
figures  here  as  having  assisted  at  Jesus's  Baptism.  The 
object  of the  Ministry  was  to  preach  the  Gospel  of Love; 
to  separate  the  sheep  from  the  goats;  to  make  the  lion  lie 
down  with  the  lamb;  to  persuade  man  to  be  born  again— 
the  Second  Adam  redeeming  the  First  Adam.  Friday  is 
the day of Land-beasts, Man and Love.

[Saturday]

'In  the  seventh  Age  our Lord  Jesus  Christ  will  come 
to  judge  the  living  and  the  dead,  and  the  world  by 
fire.'

267

In  the  present  Age,  the  sixth,  of which  9 73  years  had 
passed  when  Nennius  wrote,  man  must  look  hopefully 
forward  to  the  seventh  Age  for  eventual  repose  of  soul. 
Saturday is the day of Repose.1

The  Rabbinical  explanation  of the  Menorah,  in  terms  of the  creation  of 
the  world  in  seven  days,  is  obviously  faulty:  the  ascription  of the  central 
light to the Sabbath contradicts the  'Let there be Lights' text of the fourth 
day.  The  more  ancient  tradition  preserved  in  the  Zohar.  'These  lamps, 
like  the  seven  planets  above,  receive  their  light  from  the  Sun',  goes  back 
to  the  pre-exilic  Sun-cult.  The  Menorah  was  placed  in  the  Sanctuary  to 
face  W.S.W.,  towards  On-Heliopolis,  as  the  original  home  of  the  Sun-
god to whom Moses was priest.

Josephus  (Antiquities  v.  5;  5)  writes  of  the  three  wonders  of  the

Sanctuary, namely the table of shew-bread, and the altar of incense:Josephus  (Antiquities  v.  5;  5)  writes  of  the  three  wonders  of  the

Sanctuary, namely the table of shew-bread, and the altar of incense:

'Now,  the seven  lamps  signified  the seven  planets,  for so  many  there 
were  springing  out  of  the  candlestick;  the  twelve  loaves  that  were 
upon  the  table  signified  the  circle  of the  Zodiac  and  the  year;  and  the 
altar  of  incense  by  its  thirteen  kinds  of  sweet-smelling  spices  with 
which  the sea  replenished  it,  signified  that  God  is  the  lord  of all  things 
in  both  the  uninhabitable  and  the  habitable  parts  of the  earth,  and  that 
they are all to be dedicated to his use.'

These  thirteen  (rather  than  four)  spices  must  belong  to  an  early  secret 
tradition  not  mentioned  in  the  Law,  coeval  with  the  instructions  in 
Numbers  xxix,  13  for  the  sacrifice  of thirteen  bullocks  on  the  first  day  of 
the Feast of Tabernacles.  (Incidentally,  the total  number of bullocks  to  be 
sacrificed from  the inauguration of the critical seventh month  to  the end of 
the  seven  days  of the  Feast  was  the  sacred  seventy-two  again.  The  sacri 
fice of a single bullock on the eighth day was a separate matter.) Josephus 
is hinting that the number thirteen refers to Rahab, the prophetic Goddess 
of  the  Sea,  Guardian  of  Sheol  ('the  uninhabitable  parts  of  the  world') 
where God also,  however, claims suzerainty.

1 T he tradition of Nennius's Seven A g es has survived in an English folk-saying which runs:

The  lives  ofthree  wattles,  the  life  of  a  hound;

The lives of three hounds, the life of a steed;

The lives of three steeds, the life of a man;

The lives of three men, the life of an eagle;

The  lives  of  three  eagles,  the  life  of  ayew;

The  life  of  ayew,  the  length  of  a  ridge;

Seven  ridges  from  Creation  to  Doom.The lives of three men, the life of an eagle;

The  lives  of  three  eagles,  the  life  of  ayew;

The  life  of  ayew,  the  length  of  a  ridge;

Seven  ridges  from  Creation  to  Doom.

A watde (hurdle) lasts for three years:  therefore a hound for 9, a horse for 27,  a man for 81, an

eagle for  243  and a y ew for 729.  ' T he length of a  ridge'  is evidendy  a mistake,  the saying  being

translated  from  the  monkish  Latin  aevum,  age,  miscopied  as  arvum,  ridge.  W i th  the  length  of

an A ge averaging 729 years, the total length of the seven A g es is 5103, which corresponds well

enough with  Nennius's account.

268

What  appears  to  have  been  a  jewel-sequence  corresponding  with 
Ezekiel's  tree-sequence  was  arrayed  in  three  rows  on  the  golden  breast 
plate  worn  by  the  High  Priest,  called  in  Greek  the  logion  or  'litde word-
giver'  (Exodus  XXVIII,  15).  It  was  made by  Egyptian  craftsmen;  and  the 
King of Tyre wore a similar one in honour of Hercules Melkarth (E^ekiel, 
XXVIII,  13).  The  jewels,  which  gave  oracular  responses  by  lighting  up 
in  the  dark  of the  Sanctuary,  were  probably  hollow-cut  with  a  revolving 
drum  behind  them  on  which  was  a  small  strip  of phosphorus:  when  the 
drum was  revolved  the message was  spelt out in  ouija style as  the strip  of 
phosphorus came to rest behind different letters in turn.The  account  of  the  breastplate  given  in  Exodus  mentions  twelve 
precious  stones,  inscribed  with  the  names  of the  Twelve  Tribes,  set  in  a 
gold  plaque  eight  inches  square.  But  there  is  a  thirteenth  stone  which  is 
given  such  importance elsewhere  in  the  Bible,  for example  in Isaiah,  LIV, 
12,  that we may  assume it to  have been  part of the original  series.  This is 
the  kadkod,  mistranslated  in  the  Authorised  Version  as  'agate',  probably 
the  red  carbuncle,  and  we  may  assign  it  to  the  tribe  of Gad  which  disap 
peared  early  in  Israelite  history.  All  the  jewels  are  mistranslated  in  the 
Authorised  Version,  and  a  slighdy  different  set  appears,  in  Revelation, 
XXI,  19,  as  forming  the  foundations  of the  New  Jerusalem.  The  breast 
plate  was  still  in  existence  in  the  time  of Josephus,  though  it  no  longer 
lighted  up,  and  probably  contained  all  the  original  stones  except  the 
kadkod.  We  can  build  up  our  jewel-sequence  from  it,  relying  on  J.  I. 
Myers'  solid scholarship to identify the jewels and  then  re-arranging them 
in  a  likely seasonal  order.  For  we may  assume  that  the  order given  in  the 
Bible,  like  the  order  of  the  elements  in  the  Song  of  Amergin,  has  been  pur 
posely confused for reasons of security.We  know  that  amethyst,  ahlamah,  is  the  wine  stone—its  Greek  name 
means  'charm  against drunkenness'—and  can  be assigned  to  M,  the  vine 
month.  Similarly,  yellow  serpentine,  tarsis,  naturally  belongs  to  G,  the 
yellow-berried  ivy  month.  The  banded  red  agate,  sebo,  belongs  to  C, 
the  month  before  the  vintage,  when  the  grapes  are  still  red.  The  white 
carnelian, yahalem,  and  the  yellow  cairngorm,  lesem,  may  belong  to  the 
glaring  hot  D  and  T  months;  the  blood-red  carbuncle,  kadkod,  to  S,  the 
month  of the  ra?7ia  or raiding  party;  and  the lapis  lazuli, sappur,  to  H,  the 
first  month  of summer,  since it typifies  the dark blue sky.  Sappur is trans 
lated  'sapphire'  in the Authorised  Version, and Ezekiel mentions  it  as  the 
colour  of the  Throne  of God.  The  light  green  jasper, yasepheh,  and  the 
dark  green  malachite,  soham,  suit  NG  and  R,  the  winter  rain-months  of 
Palestine.  Nophek,  the  bright  red fire-garnet, or  pyrope,  is  likely  to  be  F, 
the  month  of  the  Spring  equinox.  The  rusty-red  Edomite  sard,  odem, 
comes  first  in  the  year  in  honour  of Adam,  the  red  man—for  'Edom', 
'Adam'  and  'Odem'  are all variants  of the same word meaning rusty-red;

269

odem  belongs  to  the  month  B.  The  remaining  two  stones  corresponding 
with  L,  the month  of Hercules's  golden  cup,  and  N,  the  month  of his  sea-
voyage,  are pitdan,  clear yellow chrysolite,  and  bareketh,  green  beryl—the 
name beryl  meaning, in  Greek, the sea-jewel.We  can  go  further:  with  the  help  of  the  names  given  to  the  tribes  by 
their  mothers  in  Genesis  XXIX and  XXX,  and  of  the  prophetic  blessings 
or  curses  bestowed  on  them  by  Jacob  in  Genesis  XL VIII and  XL1X,  we 
can  assign  a  letter  and  month  to  each  tribe.  To  Ephraim  ('fruitful')  and 
Manasseh  ('forgetfulness'),  the  two  sons  of  Joseph  who  was  a  'fruitful 
vine'  we can assign  the months  C and  M;  and  B  to  Reuben  the  first-born, 
who  had  Edomite  connections.  To  Reuben's  four  full-brothers,  Gad  ('a 
robber  band')  Levi  ('set  apart')  Asher  ('royal  dainties  are  on  his  plate') 
and  Simeon  ('the  bloody brother  whose anger is  fierce'),  the  months  of S, 
H,  D  and  T.  Gad  has  the  month  of the  ra^ia,  when  the  corn  is  invitingly 
ripe;  Levi  has  the  H  month  because  it  is  the  month  of peculiar  holiness; 
Asher  has  the  important  royal  D  month  because  his  name  is  connected 
with  the Ashera,  the  terebinth groves  of the  midsummer sacrifice;  Simeon 
has  T,  the  murderous  month  when  the  sun  is  at  its  fiercest.  To  Issachar, 
'the  strong  ass  between  two  burdens', we  can  assign  L,  the  month  of rest 
between  sowing  and  harvest.  To  Zebulon,  'among  the  ships',  belongs  the 
sea-voyage  month  of  N;  to  Judah  ('lion's  whelp'),  the  Spring  solstice 
month  of  F;  to  Naphtali,  'he  strove',  the  ploughing  month,  R.  And  to 
'Litde  Benjamin  their  ruler'  belongs  New  Year's  Day,  the  day  of the 
Divine  Child.  When we have assigned  to  Dan,  'like a serpent',  the serpen 
tine  month  of  G,  we  naturally  fill  the  Ng  month,  which  alone  remains 
vacant,  with  the  tribe  of Dinah:  for  Dinah,  the  female  twin  of Dan,  was 
another  tribe  that  disappeared  early  (see  Genesis,  XXXIV),  and  since  the 
Ng  month  marks  the  beginning  of  the  rains  and  the  resumption  of  the 
seasonal cycle of growth, a woman naturally belongs there.In my King Jesus I have tentatively reconstructed the hymn to Hercules 
Melkarth on  which  'Jacob's  Blessing'  seems  to  be  based.  It combines  the 
words of the Blessing with the traditional meanings of the tribal names and 
begins  with  Hercules  swaying  to  and  fro  in  his  golden  cup.  I  take  this 
opportunity of correcting my misplacement of the brothers Levi,  Gad and 
Ashen

Reuben—B

SEE  THE  SON on the water tossed 
In might and excellency of power,

Issachar—L

Resting at ease between two feats— 
He has paid the shipman all his HIRE—

270

Zebulon—N

DWELLING secure in the hollow ship 
Until by winds he is wafted home.

Judah—Y

Hark, how he roars like a lions whelp, 
Hark,  how  his  brothers  PRAISE his  name..»

Gad—S 
Though A TROOP of raiders cast him down 
He will cast them down in his own good time.

Levi—H

He  is  SET APARTfrom  all his  brothers 
And held in service to the shrine.

Asher—D

HAPPY is he; his bread is fat, 
Royal dainties are on his plate, etc.

Here  then,  for  what  it is worth,  is  a  list  of the jewels  of the  months  and 
of the  tribes.  (The  breastplate  was  made  entirely  of gold  in  honour  of the 
Sun:  but  if a  sequence  of five metals  corresponded  with  the  five  vowels 
A.O.U.E.I.  it was  probably,  to judge  from  the  traditional  planetary  signs 
still attached to them: silver, gold, copper, tin, lead.)

B 
L 
N 
F 
S 
H 
D 
T 
C 
M 
G 
Ng 
R

D ec 24 
Jan.  21 
Feb.  18 
March  18 
April  15 
May  13 
June  10 
J u l yS 
Aug. 5 
Sept. 2 
Sept. 30 
Oct.  28 
Nov. 25

Red Sard 
Yellow  Chrysolite 
Sea-green Beryl 
Fire-Garnet 
Blood-red  Carbuncle 
Lapis Lazuli 
White  Carnelian 
Yellow Cairngorm 
Banded Red Agate 
Amethyst 
Yellow Serpentine 
Clear Green Jasper 
Dark  Green  Malachite

Reuben 
Issachar 
Zebulon 
Judah 
Gad 
Levi 
Asher 
Simeon 
Ephraim 
Manasseh 
Dan 
Dinah 
NaphtaliReuben 
Issachar 
Zebulon 
Judah 
Gad 
Levi 
Asher 
Simeon 
Ephraim 
Manasseh 
Dan 
Dinah 
Naphtali

For  the  extra  day,  D ec  23rd,  which  belongs  to  Benjamin  'Son  of  My 
Right  Hand',  that  is  to  say  'The  Ruler  of  the  South',  (since  the  Sun 
reaches  its  most  southerly  stage  in  mid-winter)  the  jewel  is  amber,  which 
Ezekiel  makes  the  colour  of the  upper  half of Jehovah's  body;  the  lower 
half  being  fire.  Benjamin's  tree  was  the  hyssop,  or  wild  caper,  which 
grows green in walls and crannies and was the prime lustral tree in  Hebrew 
use, or the holy  loranthus, which preys on desert tamarisks.

Chapter  Sixteen

T HE  H O LY  U N S P E A K A B LE 
N A ME  OF  G OD

The  Ogham  Craohh,  which  is  printed  in  Ledwich's  Antiquities  of

Ireland  and  attested  by  an  alphabetic  inscription  at  Callen, 
County Clare, Ireland, ascribed to 295 A . D ., runs as follows:

T  S 
B  L  N 
B  D  T  C  Q 
M  G  Ng  Z  R

This  is  the  ordinary  Ogham  alphabet  as  given  by  Macalister;  except  that 
where  one  would  expect  F  and  H  it  has  T  and  B—the  very  consonants 
which  occur  mysteriously  in  Hyginus's  account  of  the  seven  original 
letters invented  by the Three  Fates.  There was evidently a taboo  at  Callen 
on the F and H —T and  B had  to  be used instead; and it looks as if just the 
same  thing  had  happened  in  the  15-consonant  Greek  alphabet  known  to 
Hyginus, and  that  he  refrained  from  specifying  Palamedes's  contribution 
of  eleven  consonants  because  he  did  not  wish  to  call  attention  to  the 
recurrence  of B  and  T.

If  so,  the  Palamedes  alphabet  can  be  reconstructed  as  follows  in  the

Ogham order:

B  L  N  F  S 
H  D  T  C 
M  G  [Ng]

RIf  so,  the  Palamedes  alphabet  can  be  reconstructed  as  follows  in  the

Ogham order:

B  L  N  F  S 
H  D  T  C 
M  G  [Ng]

R

There  is  no  warrant  for  Ng  in  Greek,  so  I  have  enclosed  it  in  square 
brackets,  but it  must  be  remembered  that  the  original  Pelasgians  talked  a 
non-Greek  Language.  This  had  nearly  died  out  by  the  fifth  century  B.C. 
but,  according  to  Herodotus,  survived  in  at  least  one  of  the  oracles  of 
Apollo,  that of Apollo  Ptous,  which  was  in  Boeotian  territory.  He  records 
that a  certain  Mys,  sent  by  the son-in-law  of King  Darius  of Persia to  con 
sult  the  Greek  oracles,  was  attended  by  three  Boeotian  priests  with  tri 
angular  writing  tablets.  The  priestess  made  her  reply  in  a  barbarous 
tongue  which  Mys,  snatching  a  tablet  from  one  of  the  priests,  copied 
down.  It proved  to be in the  Carian dialect, which Mys  understood, being 
2 72

a  'European',  that  is  to  say  of  Cretan  extraction—Europe,  daughter  of 
Agenor,  having  ridden  to  Crete  from  Phoenicia  on  the  back  of a  bull.  If 
Cretan was,  as  is  probable,  a  Hamitic language  it  may well  have  had  Ng 
at  place  14.  Ng  is  not  part  of  the  Greek  alphabet  and  Dr.  Macalister 
points  out  that  even  in  Old  Goidelic  no  word  began  with  Ng,  and  that 
such words as  N G O M A I R, and  N G E T AL  which occur in the Ogham alphabets 
as  the  names  of the  Ng  letter  are   wholly  artificial  forms  of  G O M A IR  and 
G E T A L.  But  in  Hamitic  languages  the  initial  Ng is  common,  as  a glance  at 
the  map  of Africa will show.The  existence  of this  dubious  Pelasgian  letter  Ng,  which  had  not  been 
borrowed  by  the  makers  of the  Cadmean  alphabet,  may  explain  the  un 
certainty  of  'twelve,  or  some  say  thirteen  letters'  ascribed  by  Diodorus 
Siculus  to  the  Pelasgian  alphabet;  and  may  also  explain  why  Ng  in  the 
middle  of a word  was  in  Greek  spelt  G G, as Aggelos  for Angelas,  G  being 
the  letter  which  immediately  precedes  Ng  in  the  Beth-Luis-Nion.  Yet 
from  the  analogy  of  the  Beth-Luis-Nion  it  may  be  suspected  that  the 
Palamedes  alphabet  contained  two  secret  letters  which  brought  the 
number up to fifteen. The Latin alphabet at any rate was originally a  1 5-
consonant one, with  5  vowels, and was probably arranged by 'Carmenta' 
as  follows:

B  L  F 
S  N 
H  D  T  C  Q 
M  G  Ng  P  R

For the  Romans  continued  to use the  Ng sound  at  the beginning of words 
in  Republican  times—they  even  spelt  natus  as  gnatus,  and  navus  ('dili 
gent')  as gnavus—and  probably  pronounced it  like  the gn in  the  middle  of 
such French words as Catalogue and seigneur.

It  looks  as  if  Epicharmus was  the  Greek who  invented  the early form 
of the  Cadmean  alphabet  mentioned  by  Diodorus  as  consisting  of sixteen 
consonants, namely the thirteen of the  Palamedes alphabet as  given above, 
less  the  Ng;  plus  Zeta,  and  Pi as  a  substitute  for Koppa  (Q);  plus  Chi  and 
Theta.  But  only  two  letters  are  ascribed  to  Epicharmus  by  Hyginus;  and 
these  are  given  in  the  most  reputable  MSS.  as  Chi  and  Theta.  So  Pi  (or 
Koppa)  and  Zeta  are  likely to  have  been  concealed  letters  of the  Palamedes 
alphabet,  as  Quert  and  Straif  "are  concealed  letters  of  the  Beth-Luis-Nion; 
not mentioned  by Hyginus  because they were merely doubled  C and  S.We  know  that  Simonides  then  removed  the  H  aspirate  and  also  the  F, 
Digamma,  which  was  replaced  by  Phi,  and  added  Psi  and  Xi  and  two 
vowels—long  E,  Eta,  to  which  he  assigned  the  character  of H  aspirate, 
and  long  O,  Omega;  which  brought  the  total  number  of  letters  up  to 
twenty-four.

All  these  alphabets  seem  to  be  carefully  designed  sacred  alphabets,  not

*73

selective  Greek  transcriptions  of the  commercial  Phoenician  alphabet  of 
twenty-six  letters  as  scratched  on  the  Formello-Cervetri  vases.  One 
virtue  of the  Epicharmian  alphabet  lay in its having sixteen  consonants— 
sixteen  being  the  number  of  increase—and  twenty-one  letters  in  all, 
twenty-one  being  a  number  sacred  to  the  Sun  since  the  time  of  the 
Pharaoh Akhenaton who introduced into Egypt about the year  1 4 15  B.C. 
the  monotheistic  cult  of the  sun's  disc.  Epicharmus,  as  an  Asclepiad,  was 
descended from the Sun.It must be  noted  that  Simonides's new consonants were artificial  ones— 
previously  Xi  had  been  spelt  chi-sigma  and  Psi, pi-sigma—and  that  there 
was  no  real  need  for  them  compared,  for  instance,  with  the  need  of new 
letters  to  distinguish  long  from  short  A,  and  long  from  short  1.1  suspect 
Simonides  of having  composed  a  secret  alphabetical  charm  consisting  of 
the  familiar  letter-names  of the  Greek  alphabet  arranged  with  the  vowels 
and  consonants  together,  in  three eight-letter  parts,  each  letter suggesting 
a  word  of the  charm;  for  example  xi, psi  might  stand  for  xiphon psilon,  'a 
naked  sword'.  Unfortunately  the  abbreviations  of  most  of  the  Greek 
letter  names  are  too  short  for  this  guess  to  be  substantiated;  it  is  only  an 
occasional  letter,  like lambda,  which  seems  to  stand  for lampada  ('torches') 
and  sigma,  which  seems  to  stand  for  sigmos  ('a  hissing  for  silence'),  that 
hints at the secret.But can we  guess  why Simonides  removed  F  and  H  from  the alphabet? 
And why Hyginus  the  Spaniard and  the author of the Irish  Callen inscrip 
tion  used  B  and  T as  cipher  disguises  for  these same  two  letters?  We  can 
begin  by  noting  that  the  Etruscan  calendar,  which  the  Romans  adopted 
during  the  Republic,  was  arranged  in  nundina, or  eight-day  periods,  in 
Greek called 'ogdoads' and that the Roman Goddess of Wisdom, Minerva, 
had  5  (written  V)  as  her  sacred  numeral.  We  can  identify  Minerva  with 
Carmenta,  because she  was  generally credited  at  Rome with the invention 
of  the  arts  and  sciences  and  because  flower-decorated  boats,  probably 
made  of alder  wood,  were  sailed  on  her  festival,  the  Qtunquatria.  'Quin-
quatria'  means  'the  five  halls',  presumably  five  seasons  of  the  year,  and 
was  celebrated  five  days  after  the  Spring  New  Year  feast  of the  Calendar 
Goddess  Anna  Perenna;  this  suggests  that  the  five  days  were  those  left 
over when  the year had been divided into five seasons  of 72  days each,  the 
sanctity  of the  five  and  the  seventy-two  having  been  similarly  established 
in the Beth-Luis-Nion system.

An  alphabet-calendar  arranged  on  this  principle,  with  the  vowels  kept 
apart  from  the  consonants,  implies  a  360-day  year  of five vowel-seasons, 
each  of 72  days,  with  five  days  left  over;  each  season  being  divided  into 
three  periods  each  consisting  of twenty-four  days.  The  360-day  year  can 
also  be  divided,  in  honour  of  the  Triple  Goddess,  into  three  120-day 
seasons  each  containing  five  periods  of equal  length,  namely  twenty-four

274274

days—with  the  same  five  days over;  and  this is  the year that was in public 
use  in  E g y pt  The  Egyptians  said  that  the  five  days  were  those  which  the 
God  Thoth  (Hermes  or  Mercury)  won  at  draughts  from  the  Moon-
goddess  Isis,  composed  of  the  seventy-second  parts  of every  day  in  the 
year;  and  the  birthdays  of  Osiris,  Horus,  Set,  Isis  and  Nephthys  were 
celebrated  on  them  in  this  order.  The  mythic  sense  of the  legend  is  that a 
change  of religion  necessitated  a  change  of calendar:  that  the  old  Moon-
goddess  year  of  364  days  with  one  day  over  was  succeeded  by  a  year  of 
360  days  with  five  over,  and  that  in  the  new system  the first three  periods 
of the  year were  allotted  to  Osiris,  Horus and  Set,  and  the  last  two  to Isis 
and  Nephthys.  Though,  under  Assyrian  influence,  each  of  the  three 
Egyptian seasons  was  divided  into  four  periods  of 30 days,  not  five  of 24, 
the  72-day  season  occurs  in  the  Egypto-Byblian  myth  that  the  Goddess 
Isis  hid  her  child  Horus,  or  Harpocrates,  from  the  rage  of the  ass-eared 
Sun-god  Set  during  the  72  hottest  days  of the  year,  namely  the  third  of 
the  five  seasons,  which  was  astronomically  ruled  by  the  D og  Sirius  and 
the  two  Asses.  (The  hiding  of  the  Child  Horus  seems  to  have  been 
assisted  by  the  Lapwing,  a  bird  much  used  in  the  Etruscan  science  of 
augury  which  the  Romans  borrowed;  at any  rate,  Pliny  twice  mentions  in 
his  Natural  History  that  the  Lapwing  disappears  completely  between  the 
rising of Sirius and its setting.)

But  here  the  argument  must  be  held  up  by  a  discussion  of  Set  and  his

worship.But  here  the  argument  must  be  held  up  by  a  discussion  of  Set  and  his

worship.

The  Greek  legend  that  the  God  Dionysus  placed  the  Asses  in  the  Sign 
of Cancer  ('the  Crab')  suggests  that  the  Dionysus  who visited  Egypt and 
was  entertained  by  Proteus  King  of  Pharos  was  Osiris,  brother  of  the 
Hyksos god  Typhon,  alias Set.  The  Hyksos  people,  non-Semitic pastoral-
ists, coming from Armenia or beyond, pressed down through  Cappadocia, 
Syria and Palestine into Egypt about the year 1780 B.C. That they managed 
so  easily  to  establish  themselves  in  Northern  Egypt  with  their  capital  at 
Pelusium, on the  Canopic arm of the  Nile  Delta,  can be accounted  for only 
by  an  alliance  with  the  Byblians  of  Phoenicia.  Byblos,  a  protectorate  of 
Egypt  from very early times, was the  'Land  of Negu'  ('Trees')  from which 
the  Egyptians  imported  timber,  and  a  cylinder  seal  of  the  Old  Empire 
shows  Adonis,  the  God  of  Byblos,  in  company  with  the  horned  Moon-
goddess  Isis,  or Hathor,  or Astarte.  The  Byblians  who,  with the  Cretans, 
managed the Egyptian carrying-trade—the Egyptians hated the sea—had 
trading  stations  at  Pelusium  and  elsewhere  in  Lower  Egypt  from  very 
early  times.  To  judge  from  the  Homeric  legend  of  King  Proteus,  the 
earliest  Pelasgian  settlers  in  the  Delta  used  Pharos,  the  lighthouse  island 
off  what  afterwards  became  Alexandria,  as  their  sacred  oracular  island. 
Proteus,  the  oracular  Old  Man  of the  Sea,  who  was  King  of Pharos  and 
lived  in  a  cave—where  Menelaus  consulted  him—had  the  power  of

*75*75

changing  his  shape,  like  Merddin,  Dionysus,  Atabyrius,  Llew  Llaw, 
Periclymenus  and  all  Sun-heroes  of the  same sort.  Evidendy  Pharos  was 
his  Isle  of Avalon.  That  Apuleius  connects  the  sistrum  of Osiris,  used  to 
frighten  away  the  God  Set,  with  Pharos suggests  that  Proteus  and  Osiris 
were there regarded as  the same person.  Proteus, according to Virgil, had 
another sacred island, Carpathus, between Crete and Rhodes; but that was 
the Thessalian Proteus. Another Proteus, spelt  Proetus,  was  an  Arcadian. 
It  would  be  a  great  mistake  to  think  of  Pharos  as  a  secluded  sacred 
island  inhabited  only  by  the  attendants  of  the  oracle:  when  Menelaus 
came  there  with  his  ships  he  was  entering  the  largest  port  in the  Mediter 
ranean.1 Gaston Jondet in his Les ports submerges de I'ancienne lie de Pharos 
( 1 9 1 6)  has  established  the  existence  here  even  in  pre-Hellenic  times  of a 
vast  system  of harbour-works,  now  submerged,  exceeding  in  extent  the 
island  itself.  They  consisted  of an  inner  basin  covering  1 50  acres  and  an 
outer basin of about half that area, the massive sea-walls, jetties and quays 
being  constructed  of enormous  stones,  some  of them  weighing  six  tons. 
The  work  seems  to  have  been  carried  out  towards  the  end  of  the  third 
millennium  B.C.  by  Egyptian  labour  according  to  plans  submitted  to  the 
local  authorities  by  Cretan  or  Phoenician  marine  architects.  The  wide 
landing-quay  at  the  entrance  to  the  port  consisted  of rough  blocks,  some 
of  them  sixteen  feet  long,  deeply  grooved  with  a  chequer-work  of 
pentagons.  Since  pentagons  are  inconvenient  figures  for  a  chequer,  com 
pared  with  squares  and  hexagons,  the  number  five  must  have  had  some 
important  religious  significance.  Was  Pharos  the  centre  of a  five-season 
calendar system?The island  was  oddly  connected  with the numbers five and seventy-two 
at the beginning  of the  Christian era:  the Jews  of Alexandria  used  to  visit 
the  island  for an  annual  (five-day?)  festival,  the excuse  for which was  that 
the  Five  Books  of  Moses  had  been  miraculously  translated  there  into 
Greek  by  seventy-two  doctors  of  the  Law  ('the  Septuagint')  who  had 
worked for seventy-two days on them, each apart from the rest, and agreed 
exactly  in  their  renderings  at  the  conclusion  of their  task.  There  is  some 
thing  behind  this  myth.  All  similar  festivals  in  the  ancient  world  com 
memorated  some  ancient  tribal  treaty  or  act  of  confederacy.  What  the 
occasion  here  was  remains  obscure,  unless  the  Pharaoh  who  married

1 Homer says that Pharos lies a full clay's sail from the river of E g y p t. T h is has been absurdly 
taken  to  mean  from  the  Nile;  it  can  only  mean  from  the  River  of E g y pt  {Joshua,  XV,  4)  the 
southern boundary of Palestine,  a stream well  known  to  Achaean  raiders of the  thirteenth  and 
twelfth  centuries  B . C.

T he  same  mistake  has  been  made  by  a  mediaeval  editor  of the  Ktbra  Nagasi,  the  Ethiopian

Bible.  He has  misrepresented  the flight of the men w ho  stole  the A rk from Jerusalem as mira 
culous,  because  they  covered  the  distance  between  Gaza  and  the  River  of E g y pt  in  only  one 
day,  whereas  the caravan time-table reckoned it a thirteen days' journey.  T he absence of pre 
historic  remains  on  the  island  itself  suggests  that  all  except  the  shore  was  a  tree-planted 
sanctuary of Proteus, oracular hero and giver of winds.

276276

Sarah, the goddess mother of the 'Abraham'  tribe that visited Egypt at the 
dose  of  the  third  millennium,  was  the  priest-king  of  Pharos.  If  so,  the 
festival  would  be  a  record  of the  sacred  marriage  by  which  the  ancestors 
of the  Hebrews  joined  the  great  confederacy  of  the  Peoples  of  the  Sea, 
whose  strongest  base  was  Pharos.  Hebrews  seem  to  have been in  continu 
ous  residence  in Lower  Egypt for the next two millennia,  and  the  meaning 
of the  festival  would  have  been  forgotten  by  the  time  that  the  Pentateuch 
was translated into Greek.

In the  Odyssey,  which  is a popular  romance not at all  to be depended  on 
for  mythical  detail,  Proteus's  transformations  are  described  as  lion,  ser 
pent, panther, boar, water, fire and leafy tree.  This is a mixed list,1 remind 
ing  one  of Gwion's  deliberately  muddled  T  have  been's'.  The  boar  is  the 
symbol of the G month; lion and serpent are seasonal symbols; the panther 
is  a  mythical  beast  half-leopard,  half-lion,  sacred  to  Dionysus.  It  is  a  pity 
that  Homer  does  not  particularize  the  leafy  tree;  its  association  here  with 
water and fire suggests the alder, or cornel-tree, as sacred to Proteus, a god 
of  the  Bran  type—though  in  the  story  Proteus  is  degraded  to  a  mere 
herdsman  of seals  in  the  service  of the  Ash-god  Poseidon.The  Nile  is  called  Ogygian  by Aeschylus,  and  Eustathius  the  Byzantine 
grammarian says  that  Ogygia was  the earliest  name  for Egypt.  This  sug 
gests  that  the  Island  of Ogygia  ruled  over  by  Calypso  daughter  of Atlas, 
was  really  Pharos  where  Proteus,  alias  Atlas  or  'The  Sufferer',  had  an 
oracular  shrine.  Pharos  commanded  the  mouth  of  the  Nile,  and  Greek 
sailors  would  talk  of 'sailing  to  Ogygia'  rather  than  'sailing  to  Egypt';  it 
often happens that a small island used as a trading depot gives its name to a 
whole  province—Bombay  is  a  useful  example.  The  waters  of  Styx  are 
also  called  Ogygian by Hesiod;  not  (as  Liddell  and  Scott suggest)  because 
Ogygian  meant  vaguely  'primeval',  but  because  the  head-waters  were  at 
Lusi,  the  seat  of the  three  oracular  daughters  of Proetus,  who  is  appar 
ently  the  same cult-character as Proteus.

When  the  Byblians  first  brought  their  Syrian  Tempest-god  to  Egypt, 
the  one who,  disguised  as a boar, yearly killed  his  brother Adonis,  the god 
always  born  under  a  fir-tree,  they  identified  him  with  Set,  the  ancient1  Compare  the  equally  mixed  list  given  by  Nonnus  of Zagreus's  transformations:  'Zeus  in 
his  goat-skin  coat,  Cronos  making  rain,  an  inspired  youth,  a  lion,  a  horse,  a  homed  snake,  a 
tiger,  a  bull'.  T he  transformations  of Thetis  before  her  marriage  with  Peleus  were,  according 
to  various  authors  from  Pindar  to  Tzetzes,  fire,  water,  wind,  a  tree,  a  bird,  a  tiger,  a  lion,  a 
serpent,  a  cutdefish.  T he  transformations  of  Tarn  Lin  in  the  Scottish  ballad  were  snake  or 
newt,  bear,  lion,  red-hot  iron  and  a  coal  to  be  quenched  in  running  water.  T he  zoological 
elements  common  to  these  four  versions  of  an  original  story,  namely  snake,  lion,  some  other 
fierce  beast (bear,  panther, or  tiger)  suggest a calendar sequence of diree seasons corresponding 
with  the  Lion,  G o at and  Serpent  of the  Carian  Chimaera,  or  the  Bull,  Lion  and  Serpent of the 
Babylonian  Sir-rusk;  if  this  is  so,  fire  and  water  would  stand  for  the  sun  and  moon  which 
between  them  rule  the  year.  It  is  possible,  however,  that  the  animals  in  Nonnus's  list,  bull, 
lion,  tiger,  horse and  snake,  form a Thraco-Libyan  calendar of five, not three, seasons.

277277

Egyptian  god  of the  desert  whose  sacred  beast  was  the  wild  ass,  and  who 
yearly  destroyed  his  brother  Osiris,  the  god  of the  Nile  vegetation.  This 
must  be what  Sanchthoniatho  the  Phoenician,  in  a  fragment  preserved  by 
Philo, means when he says  that the mysteries of Phoenicia were brought to 
E g y pt  He  reports  that  the  two  first  inventors  of  the  human  race,  Up-
souranios  and  his  brother  Ousous  consecrated  two  pillars,  to  fire  and 
wind—presumably the Jachin  and  Boaz  pillars  representing Adonis,  god 
of the waxing year and  the  new-born  sun,  and  Typhon,  god  of the waning 
year and of destructive winds.  The Hyksos Kings under Byblian influence, 
similarly converted  their  Tempest-god  into  Set,  and  his  new  brother,  the 
Hyksos  Osiris,  alias  Adonis,  alias  Dionysus,  paid  a  courtesy  call  on  his 
Pelasgian counterpart, Proteus King of Pharos.In  pre-dynastic  times  Set  must  have  been  the  chief of all  the  gods  of 
Egypt,  since  the  sign  of royalty  which  all  the  dynastic  gods  carried  was 
Set's ass-eared reed sceptre.  But he had  declined  in importance before the 
Hyksos  revived  his  worship  at  Pelusium,  and  reverted  to  obscurity  after 
they  were  thrown  out  of  Egypt  about  two  hundred  years  later  by  the 
Pharaohs  of the  18th  Dynasty.1  The  Egyptians  identified  him  with  the 
long-eared  constellation  Orion,  'Lord  of the  Chambers  of the  South', and 
'the  Breath  of  Set'  was  the  South  wind  from  the  deserts  which,  then  as 
now,  caused  a  wave  of criminal  violence  in  Egypt,  Libya  and  Southern 
Europe whenever it blew.  The  cult of ass-eared  Set in  Southern Judaea is 
proved  by Apion's account of the golden ass-mask  of Edomite Dora,  cap 
tured  by  King  Alexander  Jannaeus  and  cleverly  stolen  back  again  from 
Jerusalem by one  Zabidus.  The ass occurs in many  of the more obviously 
iconotropic  anecdotes  of  Genesis  and  the  early  historical  books  of  the 
Bible:  Saul chosen as king when in search of Kish's lost asses;  the ass that 
was  with  Abraham  when  he  was  about  to  sacrifice  Isaac;  the  ass  whose 
jawbone  Samson  used  against  the  Philistines;  the  ass  of Balaam  with  its 
human  voice.  Moreover,  Jacob's  uncle  Ishmael  son  of  Hagar  with  his 
twelve  sons  is  described  in  Genesis,  XVI,  12  as  a  wild  ass  among  men: 
this  suggests  a  religious  confederacy  of  thirteen  goddess-worshipping 
tribes  of the  Southern  desert,  under  the  leadership  of a  tribe  dedicated  to 
Set. Ishmael perhaps means 'the beloved man', the Goddess's favourite.The  legend  of  Midas  the  Phrygian  and  the  ass's  ears  confirms  this 
association  of Dionysus  and  Set,  for  Midas,  son  of the  Mother  Goddess, 
was  a  devotee of Dionysus.  The  legend  is  plainly an  iconotropic  one  and 
Midas  has  been  confidently  identified  with  Mita,  King  of the  Moschians, 
or  Mushki,  a  people  from  Thrace—originally  from  Pontus—who  broke 
the  power  of the  Hittites  about  the  year  1 2 00  B .C  when  they  captured

' T y p h o n 's  counterpart  in  the  Sanscrit  Rig-veda,  composed  not  later  than  1 3 00  B.C.,  is 
Rudra,  the  prototype  of  the  Hindu  Siva,  a  malignant  demon,  father  of  the  storm-demons;  he 
is addressed as a  'ruddy divine boar'.

278

Pteria  the  Hittite  capital.  Mita  was  a  dynastic  name  and  is  said  to  have 
meant  'seed'  in  the  Orphic  language;  Herodotus  mentions  certain  rose-
gardens  of  Midas  on  Mount  Bermios  in  Macedonia,  planted  before  the 
Moschian  invasion  of  Asia  Minor.  It  is  likely  that  their  Greek  name 
Moschoi,  'calf-men',  refers  to  their  cult  of the  Spirit  of the  Year  as  a  bull-
calf:  a  golden  calf like  that  which  the  Israelites  claimed  to  have  brought 
them safely out of Egypt.That  no  record  has  survived  in Egypt  of a  five-season  year  concurrent 
with  the  three-season  one,  is  no  proof  that  it  was  not  in  popular  use 
among  the  devotees  of  Osiris.  For  that  matter  absolutely  no  official 
Pharaonic record has been found in Egypt of the construction, or even the 
existence,  of the  port  of Pharos  though  it  commanded  the  mouths  of the 
Nile,  controlled  the  South-Eastern  terminus  of  the  Mediterranean  sea-
routes,  and  was in active use for at least a  thousand years.  Osiris worship 
was  the  popular  religion  in  the  Delta  from  pre-dynastic  times,  but  it  had 
no  official standing.  Egyptian texts and pictorial records are notorious for 
their  suppression  or  distortion  of  popular  beliefs.  Even  the  Book  of the 
Dead,  which  passes  for  popular,  seldom  expresses  the  true  beliefs  of the 
Osirian  masses:  the  aristocratic  priests  of  the  Established  Church  had 
begun  to  tamper  with  the  popular  myth  as  early as  2800  B.C.  One  of the 
most  important  elements  in  Osirianism,  tree-worship,  was  not  officialized 
until about 300 B.C., under the Macedonian Ptolemies. In the Book of the 
Dead  many  primitive  beliefs  have  been  iconotropically  suppressed.  For 
instance,  at  the  close  of  the  Twelfth  Hour  of  Darkness,  when  Osiris' 
sun-boat  approaches  the  last  gateway  of  the  Otherworld  before  its  re-
emergence into  the  light  of day,  the god  is  pictured  bent backwards in  the 
form  of a hoop with  his hands  raised  and  his  toes  touching  the back of her 
head.  This is explained  as  'Osiris whose circuit is  the  Otherworld':  which 
means  that  by  adopting  this  acrobatic  posture  he  is  defining  the  Other-
world  as a circular region behind  the ring of mountains  that surround  the 
ordinary  world,  and  thus  making  the  Twelve  Hours  analogous  with  the 
Twelve  Signs  of  the  Zodiac  Here  an  ingenious  priesdy  notion  has 
clearly been  superimposed  on  an earlier popular icon:  Osiris  captured  by 
his  rival  Set  and  tied,  like  Ixion  or  Cuchulain,  in  the  five-fold  bond  that 
joined  wrists,  neck  and  ankles  together.  'Osiris  whose  circuit  is  the 
Otherworld'  is  also  the  economical  way  of identifying  the  god  with  the 
snake  Ophion,  coiled  around  the  habitable  earth,  a  symbol  of universal 
fertility  out  of death.Gwion's  'Ercwlf (Hercules)  evidently used  the  three-season  year when

he laid his 'four pillars of equal height', the Boibel-Loth, in order:

279

The vowels  represent  the  five  extra days,  the  entrance to  the year,  and  the 
lintel and two pillars each represent 1 20 days. But Q and  Z have no months 
of their  own  in  the  Beth-Luis-Nion  and  their  occurrence  as  twenty-four 
day  periods  in  the  second  part  of the  Boibel-Loth  year  makes  Tinne,  not 
Duir  as  in  the  Beth-Luis-Nion,  the  central,  that  is  the  ruling,  letter. 
Tinnus,  or  Tannus,  becomes  the  chief  god,  as  in  Etruria  and  Druidic 
Gaul.  From this figure the transition to the disc arrangement is simple:

A  O  U  E  I 
As  8  is  the sacred  numeral  of Tinne's  month—and  in  the Imperial  Roman 
Calendar also  the ruling month was  the eighth,  called  Sebastos  ('Holy')  or 
Augustus—so  the  eight-day  period  rules  the  calendar.  In  fact,  Tannus 
displaces  his  oak-twin  Durus  and  seems  to  be  doing  him  a  great  kindness 
—the  same  kindness  that  Celestial  Hercules  did  for  Adas—in  relieving 
him  of his  traditional  burden.  The  twins  were  already  connected  with  thenumeral  8  because  of their  eight-year  reign,  which  was  fixed  (as  we  have 
seen)  by the approximation  at every hundredth  lunation  of lunar and  solar 
time.  That a calendar of this sort was in use in ancient Ireland  is suggested 
by numerous ancient  Circles of the Sun,  consisting of five stones surround 
ing  a  central  altar;  and  by  the  ancient  division  of the  land  into  five  prov 
inces—Ulster,  the  two  Munsters,  Leinster  and  Connaught—meeting  at  a 
central  point in what  is  now West  Meath,  marked  by  a Stone  of Divisions. 
(The  two Munsters  had  already coalesced  by the  time  of King Tuathal  the 
Acceptable, who reigned from 1 3 0 - 1 60 A . D .; he took off a piece of all four 
provinces  to  form  his  central  demesne  of  Meath.)  And  there  is  a  clear 
reference to  this  calendar system  in  the  tenth-century A . D.  Irish Saltair na 
Rann  where  a  Heavenly  City  is  described,  with  fifteen  ramparts,  eight 
gates,  and  seventy-two  different kinds  of fruit in  the gardens enclosed.

Now,  it  has  been  shown  that  the  God  Bran  possessed  an  alphabetic 
secret  before  Gwydion,  with  Amathaon's  help,  stole  it  from  him  at  the 
Battle  of the Trees  in  the course of the first Belgic  invasion  of Britain;  that 
close  religious  ties  existed  between  Pelasgia  and  Bronze  Age  Britain;  and 
that  the  Pelasgians  used  an  alphabet  of the  same  sort  as  the  British  tree-
alphabet, the trees of which came from the north of Asia Minor.As  might  be  expected,  the  myth  connecting  Cronos,  Bran's  counter 
part,  with  an  alphabetic  secret  survives  in  many  versions.  It  concerns  the 
Dactyls  (fingers),  five  beings  created  by  the  White  Goddess  Rhea,  'while 
Zeus  was  still  an  infant  in  the  Dictaean  Cave',  as  attendants  on  her  lover 
Cronos.  Cronos  became  the  first  king  of  Elis,  where  the  Dactyls  were 
worshipped,  according  to  Pausanias,  under  the  names  of  Heracles, 
Paeonius,  Epimedes,  Jasius  and  Idas,  or Aces-Idas.  They were  also  wor 
shipped in Phrygia, Samothrace, Cyprus, Crete and at Ephesus. Diodorus 
quotes  Cretan historians  to the effect that the Dactyls made magical incan 
tations  which  caused  a  great  stir  in  Samothrace,  and  that  Orpheus  (who 
used  the  Pelasgian  alphabet)  was  their  disciple.  They  are  called  the 
fathers of the Cabeiroi of Samothrace, and their original seat is said to have 
been  either  Phrygia  or  Crete.  They  are  also  associated  with  the  mysteries 
of smith-craft,  and  Diodorus  identifies  them  with  the  Curetes,  tutors  of 
the  infant  Zeus  and  founders  of Cnossos.  Their  names  at  Elis  correspond 
exacdy with the fingers. Heracles is the phallic thumb;  Paeonius  ('deliverer 
from  evil')  is  the  lucky  fore-finger;  Epimedes  ('he  who  thinks  too  late')  is 
the middle, or fool's, finger; Jasius  ('healer')  is  the physic finger; Idas ('he 
of Mount Ida'—Rhea's  seat)  is  the oracular  litde  finger.  The syllable Aces 
means  that he averted  ill-luck,  and  the  Orphic willow tree,  the tree belong 
ing  to  the  little  finger-tip,  grew just  outside  the  Dictaean  Cave which was, 
perhaps for that reason, also called the Idaean Cave.

The  Alexandrian  scholiast  on  Apollonius  Rhodius  gives  the  names  of 
281The  Alexandrian  scholiast  on  Apollonius  Rhodius  gives  the  names  of 
281

three  of  the  Dactyls  as  Acmon  ('anvil')  Damnameneus  ('hammer')  and 
Celmis ('smelter'). These  are  probably  names  of the  thumb  and  first  two 
fingers, used in the Phrygian (or 'Latin') blessing: for walnuts are cracked 
between  thumb  and  forefinger;  and  the  middle  finger  based  on  U,  the 
vowel of sexuality, still retains its ancient obscene reputation as the smelter 
of  female  passion.  In  mediaeval  times  it was  called  digitus  impudicus  or 
obscenus because,  according  to  the seventeenth-century  physician  Isbrand 
de  Diemerbroek,  it used  to  be  'pointed  at men  in  infamy or derision'—as 
a  sign  that  they  had  failed  to  keep  their  wives'  affection.  Apollonius  had 
mentioned  only two  Dactyls by name:  Titias and  Cyllenius.  I have shown 
that Cyllen (or Cyllenius) was son of Elate, 'Artemis of the fir tree'; so the 
Dactyl  Cyllenius  must  have  been  the  thumb,  which  is  based  on  the  fir-
letter  A.  And  Titias  was  king  of Mariandyne  in  Bithynia,  from  where 
Hereules  stole  the  Dog,  and  was  killed  by  Hercules  at  a  funeral  games. 
Some mythographers  make  Titias  the  father  of Mariandynus,  founder  of 
the  town.  Since  Hercules  was  the  god  of  the  waxing  year  which  begins 
with  A,  the thumb,  it follows that Titias was  the  god  of the waning  year, 
which  begins  with  U,  the  fool's  finger—the  fool  killed  by  Hercules  at 
the winter-solstice. The name 'Titias' is apparently a reduplication of the 
letter  T,  which  belongs  to  the  fool's  finger,  and  identical  with  the  Giant 
Tityus whom  Zeus  killed  and  consigned  to  Tartarus.Here  is  a  neat  problem  in  poetic  logic:  if the  Dactyl  Cyllenius  is  an 
alias of Hercules, and Hercules is the thumb, and Titias is the fool's finger, 
it should  be  possible  to  find  in  the myth  of Hercules  and  Titias  the name 
of the  intervening  finger,  the  forefinger,  to  complete  the  triad  used  in  the 
Phrygian  blessing.  Since  the  numerical  sequence  Heis,  Duo,  Treis,  'one, 
two,  three',  corresponds  in  Greek,  Latin  and  Old  Goidelic  with  the 
H.D.T.  letter  sequence  represented  by  the  top-joints  of the  Dactyls  used 
in  this blessing,  it is likely  that the missing name begins with D  and  has a 
reference  to  the  use  or  religious  associations  of  the  finger.  The  answer 
seems  to  be  'Dascylus'.  According  to  Apollonius  he  was  king  of  the 
Mariandynians, and presided at the games at which Hercules killed Titias. 
For  the  forefinger  is  the  index-finger  and  Dascylus  means  'the  littie 
pointer' Greek didasco, Latin disco.  Presidents at athletic contests use it for 
solemn  warnings  against  foul  play.  The  root Da-  from  which  Dascylus  is 
derived  is  also  the  root  of the  Indo-Germanic  word  for  thunder,  appro 
priate  to  D  as  the  letter  of the  oak-and-thunder  god.  Dascylus  was  both 
father and son of Lycus (wolf); the wolf is closely connected with the oak-
cult.

The  argument  can  be  taken  farther.  It  has  been mentioned  in  Chapter 
Four  that  Pythagoras  was  a  Pelasgian  from  Samos  who  developed  his 
doctrine  of the  Transmigration  of  Souls  as  the  result  of  foreign  travel. 
According  to  his  biographer  Porphyrius  he went  to  Crete,  the seat of the

282282

purest Orphic doctrine,  for initiation  by the Idaean  Dactyls.  They  ritually 
purified him with a thunderbolt, that is to say they made a pretence of kill 
ing him  with  either  a  meteoric  stone  or a  neolithic  axe  popularly  mistaken 
for a  thunderbolt;  after  which  he  lay  face-downwards  on  the  sea  shore  all 
night  covered  with  black  lamb's  wool;  then  spent  'three  times  nine  hal 
lowed  days  and  nights  in  the  Idaean  Cave';  finally  emerged  for  his  initia 
tion.  Presumably  he  then  drank  the  customary  Orphic  cup  of goat's  milk 
and  honey  at  dawn  (the  drink  of Cretan  Zeus  who  had  been  born  in  that 
very  cave)  and  was  garlanded  with  white  flowers.  Porphyrius  does  not 
record  exactly  when  all  this  took  place  except  that  Pythagoras  saw  the 
throne  annually  decorated  with  flowers  for  Zeus;  which  suggests  that  the 
twenty-eight  days  that  intervened  between  his  thunderbolt  death  and  his 
revival  with  milk  and  honey  were  the  twenty-eight-day  month  R,  the 
death-month ruled by the elder or myrtle; and that Pythagoras was reborn 
at  the  winter  solstice  festival  as  an  incarnation  of Zeus—a  sort  of Orphic 
Pope or Aga  Khan—and  went  through  the  usual  mimetic  transformation: 
bull,  hawk,  woman,  lion,  fish,  serpent,  etc.  This  would  account  for  the 
divine  honours  subsequently  paid  him  at  Crotona,  where  the  Orphic  cult 
was  strongly  established;  and  also  for those  paid  to  his  successor Empe-
docles,  who  claimed  to  have  been  through  these  ritual  transformations. 
The  Dactyls  here  are  plainly  the  Curetes,  the  dancing  priests  of the  Rhea 
and  Cronos cult,  tutoring the infant Zeus  in  the Pelasgian calendar-alpha 
bet,  the  Beth-Luis-Nion;  the  tree-sequence  of which  had  been  brought  to 
Greece  and  the  Aegean  islands  from  Paphlagonia,  by  way  of  Bithynian 
Mariandyne and  Phrygia,  and  there  harmonized  with  the alphabetic  prin 
ciple originated in  Crete by 'Palamedes'.  For climatic reasons the canon of 
trees taught by the Cretan Dactyls must have differed from that of Phrygia, 
Samothrace  and  Magnesia—Magnesia  where  the  five  Dactyls  were  re 
membered  as  a  single  character,  and  where  the  Pelasgian  Cheiron  ('the 
Hand')  son  of Cronos  and  Philyra  (Rhea),  successively tutored  Hercules, 
Achilles,  Jason  the Orphic hero, with numerous other sacred  kings.It  seems  however  that  Pythagoras,1  after  mastering  the  Cretan  Beth-
Luis-Nion, found that the Boibel-Loth calendar, based on a year of 360 + 5 
days, not on the Beth-Luis-Nion year of 3 6 4+ 1  days, was far better suited

1  T he  influence  of  Pythagoras  on  the  mediaeval  mystics  of  North-Western  Europe  was  a 
strong  one.  Bernard  of Morlaix  {circa  1140)  author  of  the  ecstatic  poem  De  Contemptu  Mundi, 
wrote:  'Listen  to  an  experienced  m a n . . ..  Trees and  stones  will  teach  you  more  than  you  can 
learn  from  the mouth  of a doctor of theology.'  Bernard  was  b om  in  Brittany  of English  parents 
and  his  verse  is  in  the  Irish  poetic  tradition.  His  ecstatic  vision  of the  Heavenly  Jerusalem  is 
prefaced  by the line:

Ad  tua  munera  sit  via  dextera,  Pytkagoraea. 
'May our w ay to  your  Pythagorean  blessings  be an  auspicious  one.'

F or  he  was  not  a  nature  worshipper,  but  held  that  the  mythical  qualities  of chosen  trees  and 
chosen  precious  stones,  as  studied  by  the  Pythagoreans,  explained  the  Christian  mysteries 
better than Saint Athanasius had ever been able to do.

283

than  the  Beth-Luis-Nion  to  his  deep  philosophic  speculations  about  the 
holy  tetractys,  the  five  senses  and  elements,  the  musical  octave,  and  the 
Ogdoad.283

than  the  Beth-Luis-Nion  to  his  deep  philosophic  speculations  about  the 
holy  tetractys,  the  five  senses  and  elements,  the  musical  octave,  and  the 
Ogdoad.

But why was  it necessary  to  alter  the alphabet  and  calendar in  order  to 
make eight  the  important  number,  rather  than seven?  Simonides's  alpha 
bet,  it  has  been  seen,  was  expanded  to  3  x 8  letters;  perhaps  this was  to 
fulfil  the  dark  prophecy current  in  Classical  Greece  that Apollo  was  fated 
to  castrate  his  father  Zeus  with  the  same  sickle  with  which  Zeus  had 
castrated  his  father  Cronos  and  which  was  laid  up  in  a  temple  on  the 
sickle-shaped  island  of  Drepane  ('sickle'),  now  Corfu.  In  so  far as  the 
supreme god  of the Druids  was  a Sun-god,  the fulfilment of this  prophecy 
was demonstrated every year at their ritual emasculation of the sacred  oak 
by  the  lopping  of the  mistletoe,  the  procreative  principle,  with  a  golden 
sickle—gold  being  the  metal  sacred  to  the  Sun.  Seven  was  the  sacred 
number  of the  week, governed by the Sun, the Moon and  the  five  planets. 
But eight was sacred  to  the  Sun  in  Babylonia,  Egypt and Arabia,  because 
8 is  the symbol  of reduplication—2  x  2  x  2.  Hence  the  widely distributed 
royal sun-disc with an eight-armed cross  on  it,  like a simplified version  of 
Britannia's shield; and hence the sacrificial barley-cakes baked in the same 
pattern.

Now  to  examine  Diodorus's  famous  quotation  from  the  historian

Hecateus  (sixth century  B.C.):Now  to  examine  Diodorus's  famous  quotation  from  the  historian

Hecateus  (sixth century  B.C.):

Hecateus,  and  some  others,  who  treat  of ancient  histories  or  tradi 
tions,  give  the  following  account:  'Opposite  to  the coast of Celtic  Gaul 
there  is  an  island  in  the  ocean,  not  smaller  than  Sicily,  lying  to  the 
North—which  is  inhabited  by  the  Hyperboreans,  who  are  so  named 
because  they  dwell  beyond  the  North  Wind.  This  island  is  of a  happy 
temperature, rich in soil and  fruitful in everything, yielding its  produce 
twice  in  the  year.  Tradition  says  that  Latona  was  born  there,  and  for 
that  reason,  the inhabitants venerate Apollo  more than  any other  God. 
They  are,  in  a  manner,  his  priests,  for  they  daily  celebrate  him  with 
continual songs of praise and pay him abundant honours.

'In  this  island,  there  is  a  magnificent  grove  (or  precinct)  of Apollo, 
and  a  remarkable  temple,  of a  round  form,  adorned  with  many  conse 
crated  gifts.  There  is  also  a  city,  sacred  to  the  same  God,  most  of the 
inhabitants  of  which  are  harpers,  who  continually  play  upon  their 
harps  in  the  temple,  and  sing  hymns  to  the  God,  extolling his  actions. 
The Hyperboreans use a peculiar dialect, and have a remarkable attach 
ment  to  the  Greeks,  especially  to  the  Athenians  and  the  Delians, 
deducing  their  friendship  from  remote  periods.  It  is  related  that  some 
Greeks  formerly  visited  the  Hyperboreans,  with whom  they left  conse 
crated gifts of great value, and also that in ancient times Abaris, coming

284

from  the  Hyperboreans  into  Greece,  renewed  their  family  intercourse 
with  the  Delians.284

from  the  Hyperboreans  into  Greece,  renewed  their  family  intercourse 
with  the  Delians.

'It  is  also  said  that  in  this  island  the  moon  appears  v e ry  near  to  the 
earth,  that  certain  eminences  of a  terrestrial  form  are  plainly  seen  in  it, 
that A p o l lo  visits  the island  once  in  a course  of nineteen  years,  in which 
period  the  stars  complete  their  revolutions,  and  that  for  this  reason  the 
Greeks  distinguish  the  cycle  of  nineteen  years  by  the  name  of  "the 
great  year".  D u r i ng the season  of his  appearance the G od  plays  upon  the 
harp  and  dances  every  night,  from  the  vernal  equinox until  the  rising  of 
the  Pleiads,  pleased  with  his  o wn  successes.  T he  supreme  authority  in 
that  city  and  the  sacred  precinct  is  vested  in  those  w ho  are  called 
Boreadae,  being  the  descendants  of Boreas,  and  their  governments  have 
been  uninterruptedly  transmitted  in  this  line.'

Hecateus  apparently  credited  the  pre-Belgic  Hyperboreans  with  aHecateus  apparently  credited  the  pre-Belgic  Hyperboreans  with  a

knowledge  of the  19-year  cycle  for  equating  solar  and  lunar  time;  which 
involves  an  intercalation  of  7  months  at  the  close.  This  cycle  was  not 
publicly  adopted  in  Greece  until  about  a  century  after  Hecateus's  time.  As 
a  'golden  number',  reconciling  solar  and  lunar  time,  19  can  be  deduced 
from  the  thirteen-month  Beth-Luis-Nion  calendar  which  contains  four 
teen  solar  stations  (namely  the  first  day  of each  month  and  the  extra  day) 
and  five  lunar  stations.  Probably  it  was  in  honour  of  this  A p o l lo  (Beli) 
that  the  major  stone  circles  of the  Penzance  area  in  Cornwall  consisted  of 
19  posts,  and  that  Cornwall  was  called  Belerium.  There is evidently some 
basis  for  the  story  that  Abaris  the  Hyperborean  instructed  Pythagoras  in 
philosophy.  It  tooks  as  if  the  Bronze  A ge  people  (who  imported  the 
E g y p t i an  beads  into  Salisbury Plain from  Akhenaton's  short-lived  capital, 
the  C i ty  of the  Sun,  at  Tell  Amarna  about  1 3 50  B . C .)  had  refined  their 
astronomy  on  Salisbury  Plain  and  even  anticipated  the  invention  of  the 
telescope.  Since,  according  to  Pliny,  the  Celtic  year  began  in  his  day  in 
J u ly  (as  the Athenian  also  did)  the  statement  about  the  country  producing 
t wo  harvests,  one  at  the  beginning and one at the end  of the  year, is under 
standable.  T he  hay  harvest  would  fall  in  the  old  year,  the  corn  harvest  in 
the  new.

T he  L o rd  of  the  Seven-day  W e ek  was  ' D i s ',  the  transcendental  g od 
of the Hyperboreans,  whose secret name was betrayed  to  G w y d i o n.  H a ve 
we  not  already  stumbled  on  the  secret?  W as  the  N a me  not  spelt  out  by 
the  seven vowels  of the  threshold,  cut with  three  times nine holy  nicks and 
read sunwise?

Or  in  R o m an  letters:Or  in  R o m an  letters:

If  so,  the  link  between  Britain  and  Egypt  is  evident:  Demetrius,  the 
first-century B . C. Alexandrian philosopher, after discussing in his treatise 
On  Style  the  elision  of vowels  and  hiatus,  and  saying  that  'with  elision  die 
effect is duller and  less  melodious',  illustrates  the advantage of hiatus with:

In  Egypt  the  priests  sing  hymns  to  the  gods  by  uttering  the  seven 
vowels  in  succession,  the  sound  of which  produces  as  strong  a  musical 
impression  on  their  hearers  as  if flute and  lyre  were  used.  To  dispense 
with  the  hiatus  would  be  to  do  away  altogether  with  the  melody  and 
harmony  of  language.  But  perhaps  I  had  better  not  enlarge  of  this 
theme in  the present context.

He  does  not  say  what  priests  they  were  or  to  what  gods  they  addressed 
themselves,  but it  is safe to  guess that  they were  the gods of the  seven-day 
week,  comprising  a  single  transcendent  deity,  and  that  the  hymn  con 
tained  the  seven  vowels  with  which  Simonides  provided  the  Greek  alpha 
bet and was credited with a therapeutic effect.When  the  Name  was  revealed,  Amathaon  and  Gwydion  instituted 
a  new  religious  system,  and  a  new  calendar,  and  new  names  of letters, 
and  installed  the  Dog,  Roebuck  and  Lapwing  as  guardians  not  of the  old 
Name,  which  he  had  guessed,  but  of the  new.  The  secret  of the  new  Name 
seems  to  be  connected  with  the  substitution  of  the  sacred  numeral  7  by 
the sacred  numeral  8, and  with a  taboo  on  the letters  F and  H  in ordinary 
alphabetic  use.  Was  it  that  the  Name  was  given  8  letters  instead  of  7? 
We  know from  Hyginus's  account  that  Simonides  added  Omega  (long  O) 
and  Eta  (long E)  to  the original  seven  letters  A O U E I F H,  invented  by the 
Fates,  'or  some  say,  by  Mercury',  and  that  he  also  removed  H  aspirate 
from  the  alphabet  by  allotting  its  character  to  Eta.  If  he  did  this  for 
religious reasons,  the eight-fold  Name of God,  containing the Digamma F 
(V)  and  H  aspirate—the  Lofty  Name  which  gave  Gwion  his  sense  of 
power and authority—was perhaps:

J E H U O V AO

but spelt, for security reasons, as:

J E B U O T AO

It  certainly  has  an  august  ring,  lacking  to  Tahu'  and  'Jahweh',  and  if I 
have  got  it  right,  will  be  'the  eight-fold  City  of  Light'  in  which  the 
'Word',  which  was  Thoth,  Hermes,  Mercury and,  for the  Gnostics,  Jesus 
Christ was said to dwell.  But the Fates had first invented F and H; why?

J I E V O A O, the earlier seven-letter form, recalls the many guesses at the 
'Blessed  Name  of the  Holy  One  of Israel'  made  by  scholars,  priests  and 
magicians  in  the  old  days.  This  was  a  name  which  only  the  High  Priest 
was allowed  to utter,  once a year and  under his  breath, when he visited the

2.862.86

Holy  of Holies,  and  which  might  not  be  committed  to  writing.  Then  how 
in  the  world  was  the  Name  conveyed  from  one  High  Priest  to  another? 
Obviously  by  a  description  of  the  alphabetical  process  which  yielded  it. 
Josephus  claimed  to  know  the  Name,  though  he could  never have heard  it 
spoken  or  seen  it  written.  The  Heads  of  the  Pharisaic  academies  also 
claimed  to know it.  Clement of Alexandria  did  not know  it,  but he guessed 
an  original  IAOOUE—which  is  found 
in  Jewish-Egyptian  magical 
papyri,  'Zeus, Thunderer,  King Adonai, Lord  Iaooue'—also expanded  to 
I A O U AI  and  I A O O U A I.  The  disguised  official  formula,  J E H O W I H, 
or  J E H O W A H,  written  J H WH  for  short,  suggests  that  by  the  time  of 
Jesus  the  Jews  had  adopted  the  revised  Name.  The  Samaritans  wrote  it 
IAHW  and  pronounced  it  IABE.  Clement's  guess  is,  of course,  a  very 
plausible  one  because I.A.O.OU.E  is  the  name  spelt  out  by  the  vowels  of 
the  five-season  year  if one  begins  in  the  early  winter,  the  opening  of  the 
agricultural  year.1  The  Name  taught  in  the  Academies  is  likely  to  have 
been  a complicated  one of either 42  or 72  letters.  Both  forms  are  discussed 
by Dr.  Robert Eisler in  the Jubilee volume for the Grand Rabbi of France 
in  La  Revue  des  Etudes  Juives.  The  calendar  mystery  of  72  has  already 
been discussed; that of 42 belongs to the Beth-Luis-Nion system.2

In  Chapter  Nine  the  first-century  writer  Aelian  was  quoted  as  having 
said  that  Hyperborean  priests  regularly  visited  Tempe.  But  if their  busi-

1  Clement  is  very  nearly  right  in  another  sense,  which  derives  from  the  suppression  in  the

Phoenician  and  early Hebrew alphabets  of all  the  vowels,  except  altph,  occurring in  the  GreekPhoenician  and  early Hebrew alphabets  of all  the  vowels,  except  altph,  occurring in  the  Greek

alphabet  with which  they  are  linked.  T he introduction  into  Hebrew  script  of pure  vowel  signs

in  the  form  of dots  is  ascribed  to  Ezra  w h o,  with  Nehemiah,  established  the  N ew  L aw  about

the  year 430.  It  is likely  that  the  vowels had  been  suppressed  at  a  time when  the  Holy  Name  of

the  deity  w ho  presided  over  the  year  consisted  of  vowels  only;  and  the  proof  that  Ezra  did

not  invent  them  but  merely  established  an  inoffensive  notation  for  a  sacred  series  long  fixed  in

oral  tradition lies in  the  order  which  he  used,  namely  I . E . E . U . O . A O U . 6.  T h is is  the  Pala-

medan  I . E . U . O . A.  with  the  addition  of three  extra  vowels  to  bring  the  number  up  to  eight,

the  mystic numeral  of increase.  Since the dots  with  which he chose  to  represent  them  were  not

part  of  the  alphabet  and  had  no  validity  except  when  attached  to  consonants,  they  could  be

used  without  offence.  Nevertheless,  it  is  remarkable  thai  the  consonants  which  compose  the

Tetragrammaton,  namely yod,  he  and  vav  may  cease  to  carry  consonantal  force  when  they

have  vowel  signs  attached  to  them;  so  that  J H WH  could  be  sounded  I A O O U A.  T h is  is  a

peculiarity  that  no  other  Hebrew  consonant  has,  except  ain,  and  ain  not  in  all  dialects  of

Hebrew.  Clement  got  the  last  vowel  wrong,  E  for  A,  perhaps  because he  knew  that  the  letter

H is known as He in  Hebrew.Hebrew.  Clement  got  the  last  vowel  wrong,  E  for  A,  perhaps  because he  knew  that  the  letter

H is known as He in  Hebrew.

*  42  is  the  number  of  the  children  devoured  by  Elisha's  she-bears.  T h is  is  apparently  an 
iconotropic  myth  derived  from  a  sacred  picture  of the  Libyo-Thraco-Pelasgian  'Brauronia' 
ritual.  T he  two  she-bears were  girls dressed  in  yellow  dresses  w ho  pretended  to  be  bears and 
rushed  savagely  at  the  b o ys w ho  attended  the  festival.  T he ritual was  in  honour  of A r t e m is 
Callisto,  the  Moon  as  Bear-Goddess,  and  since  a  goat  was  sacrificed  seems  to  belong  to  the 
Midsummer  festivities. 42  is  the  number  of days  from  the  beginning  of the  H  month, which  is 
the  preparation  for the midsummer marriage and  death-orgy,  to  Midsummer  D a y.  42  is also 
the  number  of infernal jurymen  w ho  judged  Osiris:  the  days  between  his  midsummer  death 
and  the  end  of the  T  month,  when  he  reached  Calypso's  isle,  though  this  is obscured  in  the 
priesdy  Book  of  the  Dead.  According  to  Clement  of  Alexandria  there  were  forty-two  books  of 
Hermetic mysteries.

287287

ness  was  with  Apollo,  why  did  they  not  go  to  the  more  important  shrine 
of Delphi?  Tempe,  Apollo's  earlier  home,  lies  in  the  valley  of the  Peneus 
between  Mounts  Ossa  and  Olympus  and  seems  to  have  become  the 
centre  of a cult  of a  Pythagorean  god  who  partook of the natures of all  the 
Olympian  deities.  We  know  something  about  the  mysteries  of  the  cult 
because  Cyprian,  a  third-century  bishop  of  Antioch,  was  initiated  into 
them as a youth of fifteen.  As he records in his  Confession, he was taken up 
on to Mount Olympus for forty days and  there seven mystagogues  taught 
him the meaning of musical sounds and the causes of die birth and decay of 
herbs, trees and bodies. He had a vision of tree-trunks and magical herbs, 
saw the succession of seasons and their changing spiritual representatives, 
together  with  the  retinues  of  various  deities,  and  watched  the  dramatic 
performances of demons in conflict. In an Egyptian magical papyrus pub 
lished  by  Parthey  in  1866,  a  close  connexion  between  this  Druid-like 
instruction and Essene mysticism is made in the following lines:

Come foremost angel ofgreat Zeus I AO [Raphael] 
And thou too, Michael, who holdest Heaven [rules the planets], 
And Gabriel thou, the archangel from Olympus.

Gabriel,  it  has  been  shown,  was  the  Hebrew  counterpart  of Hermes,  the 
official herald and mystagogue of Mount Olympus.Gabriel,  it  has  been  shown,  was  the  Hebrew  counterpart  of Hermes,  the 
official herald and mystagogue of Mount Olympus.

Was  Stonehenge  the  temple  of Apollo  the  Hyperborean?  The  ground 
plan  of  Stonehenge  suggests  a  round  mirror  with  a  handle—a  round 
earthwork,  entered  by  an  avenue,  with  a  circular  stone  temple  enclosed. 
The  outer ring of stones in  the  temple  once formed  a continuous  circle of 
thirty  arches,  built  of enormous  dressed  stones:  thirty  posts  and  thirty 
lintels.  This  circle  enclosed  an  ellipse,  broken  at  one  end  so  that  it  re 
sembled  a  horseshoe,  consisting  of  five  separate  dolmens,  each  of  two 
posts and a lintel, built of the same enormous stones.  Sandwiched between 
the circle and the horseshoe stood a ring of thirty much smaller posts; and 
within  the  horseshoe,  again,  stood  another  horseshoe  of  fifteen  similar 
small  posts,  arranged  in  five  sets  of  three  to  correspond  with  the  five 
dolmens.

Perhaps  'horseshoe'  is  wrong:  it  may well  have  been  an  ass-shoe  from 
its  narrowness.  If Stonehenge  was  Apollo's  temple  and  if Pindar,  in  his 
Tenth  Pythian  Ode,  is  referring  to  the  same  Hyperboreans  as  Hecateus  it 
must have been an ass-shoe; for Pindar shows that Apollo was worshipped 
by  the  Hyperboreans  in  the  style  of Osiris  or Dionysus, whose  triumph 
over his enemy Set the ass-god was celebrated by the sacrifice of a hundred 
asses at a time. But it is clear that by the middle of the fifth century B . C ., 
the  connexion  between  Greece  and  the  Hyperboreans  had  long  been 
broken,  presumably  by  the  seizure  of the  approaches  to  Britain  by  the 
Belgic tribes.Pindar  is  demonstrably  wrong  in  his  Third  Olympian  Ode  when  he 
makes  Hercules  go  to  the  springs  of the  Ister  to  bring  back  wild  olive  to 
Olympia  from  the  servants  of Apollo,  the  Hyperboreans.  We  know  from 
other  sources  that  he  fetched  back  the  white  poplar,  not  the  olive  which 
had  been  cultivated  in  Greece  centuries  before  his  time  and  which  is  not 
native  to  the  upper  Danube;  the  connexion  of poplar  with  amber,  which 
came  from  the  Baltic  by  way  of  the  Danube  and  Istria,  and  which  was 
sacred  to Apollo,  has already been noted.  Pindar's  mistake derives from  a 
confusion  of  the  Hercules  who  fetched  the  poplar  from  Epirus  with  the 
earlier  Hercules  who  fetched  the  olive  from  Libya  to  Crete.  He  writes  in 
the Tenth Pythian Ode:

Neither by  ships  nor  by  land  can  you  find  the  wonderful  road  to  the

trysting-place  of the  Hyperboreans.

Yet  in  times  past,  Perseus  the  leader  of his  people  partook  of  their 
banquet  when  he  entered  their  homes  and  found  them  sacrificing 
glorious  hecatombs  of asses  in  honour  of the  God.  In  the  banquets  and 
hymns  of  that  people  Apollo  chiefly  rejoices  and  laughs  as  he  looks 
upon  the  brute  beasts  in  their  ramping  lewdness.  Yet  such  are  their 
ways  that  the  Muse  is  not  banished,  but  on  every  side  the  dances  of the 
girls,  the  twanging  of lyres  and  sound  of flutes are  continually  circling, 
and  with  their  hair  crowned  with  golden  bay-leaves  they  make 
merry  .  .  .  yet  avoid  divine  jealousy  by  living  aloof from  labour  and 
war.  To  that  home  of happy  folk,  then,  went  Danae's  son  [Perseus]  of 
old,  breathing  courage,  with  Athena  as  his  guide.  And  he  slew  the 
Gorgon and returned with her head.Pindar seems  to  be  wrong about the  Gorgon  and  about  the  bay-leaves, 
sacred  to  Apollo  only  in  the  South;  and  since  he  does  not  tell  us at what 
season  the  sacrifice  took  place  we  cannot  tell  what  leaves  they  were.  If at 
mid-winter,  they  may  have  been  elder-leaves;  at  any  rate,  asses  are  con 
nected  in  European  folk-lore,  especially  French,  with  the  mid-winter 
Saturnalia,  which  took  place  in  the  elder  month,  and  at  the  conclusion  of 
which the  ass-eared  god,  later  the  Christmas  Fool,  was  killed  by his  rival. 
This  explains  the  otherwise  unaccountable  connexion  of  asses  and  fools 
in  Italy  as  well  as  in  Northern  Europe:  for  asses  are  more  intelligent 
animals  than  horses.  That  there  was  an  ass-cult  in  Italy  in  early  times  is 
suggested  by  the  distinguished  Roman  clan-names  Asina  and  Asellus, 
which  were  plebeian,  not  patrician;  the  patricians  were  an  immigrant 
horse-worshipping  aristocracy  from  the  East  who  enslaved  the  plebeians. 
The  use  of holly  at  the  Italian  Saturnalia  supports  this  theory:  holly  was 
the  tree  of the  ass-god,  as  the  oak  was  the  tree  of his  wild-ox  twin  who 
became paramount in patrician Rome.

Plutarch  in  his  Isis  and  Osiris  writes:  'Every  now  and  then  at  certain 
289Plutarch  in  his  Isis  and  Osiris  writes:  'Every  now  and  then  at  certain 
289

festivities they (the Egyptians) humiliate the broken power of Set, treating 
it  despitefully,  to  the  point  of rolling  men  of Typhonic  colouring  in  the 
mud  and  driving  asses  over  a  precipice.'  By  'certain  festivities'  he  must 
mean  the celebration  of the divine  child  Harpocrates's  victory over Set,  at 
the  Egyptian  Saturnalia.  So  Set,  the  red-haired  ass,  came  to  mean  the 
bodily  lusts,  given  full  rein  at  the  Saturnalia,  which  the  purified  initiate 
repudiated; indeed, the spirit as rider, and the body as ass, are now legitim 
ate Christian concepts. The metamorphosis of Lucius Apuleius into an ass 
must  be  understood  in  this  sense:  it was  his  punishment  for  rejecting  the 
good  advice  of  his  well-bred  kinswoman  Byrrhaena  and  deliberately 
meddling  with  the erotic  witch  cult  of Thessaly.  It  was  only  after uttering 
his de profundis prayer to the White Goddess (quoted at the close of Chap 
ter  Four)  that  he  was  released  from  his  shameful  condition  and  accepted 
as  an  initiate  of  her  pure  Orphic  mysteries.  So  also,  when  Charite 
('Spiritual Love') was riding home in chaste triumph on ass-back from the 
robbers' den, Lucius had joked  at this as an extraordinary event:  namely, 
that a girl should triumph over her physical desires, despite all dangers and 
assaults.  The  Orphic degradation of the ass explains a  passage in Aristo-
phanes's  Frogs,  which,  as  J.  E.  Harrison  points  out,  is  staged  in  a  thor 
oughly  Orphic  Hell.  Charon  shouts  out  'Anyone  here  for  the  Plains  of 
Lethe? Anyone here for the Ass Clippings? For Cerberus Park? Taenarus? 
Crow Station?'  Crow Station was evidently Set-Cronos's  infernal  seat to 
which  Greeks  consigned  their  enemies  in  the  imprecation  'To  the  Crows 
with  you!';  and  the  Ass  Clippings  was  the  place  where  criminals  shaggy 
with  sin  were  shorn  to  the  quick.  The  horse  was  a  pure  animal  for  the 
Orphics,  as  the  ass  was  impure,  and  the  continuance  of this  tradition  in 
Europe is shown  most  clearly in  Spain where caballero  'horseman',  means 
gentleman  and  where  no  gentleman's  son  is  allowed  to  ride  an  ass,  even 
in  an  emergency,  lest he  lose  caste.  The ancient  reverence  of unchivalrous 
Spaniards  for  the  ass  appears  perversely  in  the  word  carajo,  the  great 
mainstay  of  their  swearing,  which  is  used  indiscriminately  as  noun,  ad 
jective, verb or adverb;  its  purpose is  to avert the evil  eye,  or ill-luck, and 
the more often it can  be introduced  into an  oath,  the better.  Touching the 
phallus,  or an  amulet in  phallus  form,  is  an  established  means  of averting 
the  evil  eye,  and  carajo  means  'ass's  phallus';  the  appeal  is  to  the  baleful 
God  Set,  whose  starry  phallus  appears  in  the  Constellation  Orion,  to 
restrain his anger.The  great  dolmens  of  Stonehenge,  all  of  local  stone,  look  as  if  they 
were  erected  to  give  importance  to  the  smaller  stones,  which  were  placed 
in  position  shortly  after  they  themselves  were,  and  to  the  massive  altar 
stone  lying  in  the  centre.  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  smaller  ones, 
which  are  known  to  have  been  transported  all  the  way  from  the  Prescelly 
Mountains  in  Pembrokeshire,  were  originally  disposed  in  another  order

290

there  and  rearranged  by  the  people  who  erected  the  larger  ones.  This  is 
likely,  and  it  is  remarkable  that  these  imported  stones  were  not  dressed 
until  they  were  re-erected  at  Stonehenge  itself.  The  altar  stone  has  also 
been  transported  from  the  same  region,  probably  from  Milford  Haven. 
Since  this transportation was done over a thousand years before the  Belgic 
invasion it is clear at least that Gwydion was not responsible for the building. 
The  plan of the five dolmens  corresponds exactly with  the disc alphabet, 
since  there  is  a broad  gap  between  the  two  standing  nearest  to  the avenue 
(like  the  gap  which  contains  the  five  holy  days  of  the  Egyptian,  or 
Etruscan, year) and  between  the gap and  the avenue stood a group of four 
smaller  undressed  stones,  corresponding  with  the  groups  of three  stones 
in  the  inner  horseshoe,  but  with  a  gap  in  the  middle;  and  far  back,  in  the 
avenue itself,  the huge undressed  'Heel'  stone made a fifth and  central  one. 
This  is  not  to assume  that  Stonehenge was  built  to  conform  with  the disc-
alphabet.  The  calendar  may  have  anteceded  the  alphabet  by  some  cen 
turies.  All  that  seems  clear  is  that  the  Greek  alphabetic  formula  which 
gives  the  Boibel-Loth  its  letter-names  is  at  least  a  century  or  two  earlier 
than 400 B . C. when the Battle of the Trees was fought in Britain.The  formula  is  plain.  The  Sun-god  of  Stonehenge  was  the  Lord  of 
Days,  and  the  thirty  arches  of the  outer  circle  and  the  thirty  posts  of the 
inner  circle  stood  for  the  days  of  the  ordinary  Egyptian  month;  but  the 
secret  enclosed  by  these  circles  was  that  the  solar  year was  divided  into 
five  seasons,  each  in  turn  divided  into  three  twenty-four-day  periods, 
represented  by  the  three  stones  of the  dolmens,  and  each  of  these  again 
into  three  ogdoads,  represented  by  the  three  smaller  posts  in  front  of 
the  dolmens.  For  the  circle  was  so  sited  that  at  dawn  of  the  summer 
solstice  the  sun  rose  exactly  at  the  end  of the  avenue  in  dead  line  with  the 
altar and  the  Heel  stone;  while,  of the  surviving pair of the  four undressed 
stones,  one  marks  the  sun's  rising  at  the  winter  solstice,  the  other  its 
setting at the summer solstice.

But  why  were  the  altar  stone  and  the  uprights  transported  all  the  way 
from  South  Wales?  Presumably  to  break  the  religious  power  of the  Pem 
brokeshire  Death-goddess—the  pre-Celtic  Annwm,  as  we have  seen,  was 
in  Pembroke—by  removing  her  most  sacred  undressed  stones  and  re-
erecting  them,  dressed,  on  the  Plain.  According  to  Geoffrey  of  Mon 
mouth,  this  was  done  by  Merlin.  Geoffrey,  who  mistakenly  dates  the 
event  to  the  time  of  Hengist  and  Horsa,  says  that  Merlin  obtained  the 
stones from Ireland, but the tradition perhaps refers to the Land of Erin— 
Erin, or Eire or Eriu, being a pre-Celtic  Fate-goddess who gave her name 
to Ireland.  'Erin', usually explained as  the dative case of Eriu's name, may 
be the  Greek Triple  Fate-goddess  'Erinnys'  whom we know as the  Three 
Furies.  The  amber  found  in  the  barrows  near  Stonehenge  is  for  the  most 
part red, not golden; like that found on the Phoenician coast.

291291

Seventy-two will have been the main canonical number at Stonehenge: 
the  seventy-two  days  of  the  midsummer  season.  Seventy-two  was  the 
Sun's  grandest  number;  eight,  multiplied  ninefold  by  the  fertile  Moon. 
The Moon was Latona, Hyperborean Apollo's mother, and she determined 
the  length  of  the  sacred  king's  reign.  The  approximate  concurrence  of 
solar and lunar time once every nineteen years—19 revolutions of the Sun, 
235  lunations  of the  Moon—ruled  that  Apollo  should  be  newly  married 
and crowned  every nineteenth year at the Spring solstice, when he kept a 
seven  months'  holiday  in  the  Moon's  honour.  The  number  19  is  com 
memorated  at  Stonehenge  in  nineteen  socket-holes  arranged  in  a  semi 
circle  on  the  South-east  of the arched  circle. 1  The  fate  of the  old  king was 
perhaps  the  hill-top  fate  of  Aaron  and  of  Moses,  darkly  hinted  at  in 
Exodus,  and  the  fate  of Dionysus  at  Delphi:  to  be  disrobed  and  dismem-1 T he  number  occurs  also  in  two  royal  brooches—'king's  wheels'—found  in  1 9 45  in  a 
Bronze  A ge  'Iberian'  burial  at  Lluch  in  Majorca,  the  seat  of a  Black  Virgin  cult,  and  dated 
about  1 5 00 B . C. T he first is a disc of seven inches in diameter,  made for pinning on a cloak and 
embossed  with  a  nineteen-rayed  sun.  T h is  sun  is  enclosed  by  two  bands,  the  outer  one  con 
taining  thirteen  separated  leaves,  of  five  different  kinds,  perhaps  representing  wild  olive, 
alder,  prickly-oak,  i vy  and  rosemary,  some  turned  clockwise,  some  counter-clockwise,  and 
all  but two  of them  with  buds  or  rudimentary  flowers  joined  to  them half-way  up  their stalks. 
T he  inner  hand  contains  five  roundels  at  regular  intervals,  the  spaces  between  the  roundels 
filled  up  with  pairs  of leaves  of the  same  sort  as those in  the  outer  ring,  except  that  the  alder is 
not  represented.  T he  formula  is:  thirteen  months,  a  pentad  of goddesses-of-the-year,  a  nine 
teen-year reign.

T he  other,  slighdy  smaller,  royal  disc  found  in  the  same  burial  has  a  border  of nineteen 
semi-circles,  a central sun with twenty-one detached rays and, between the sun and the border, 
two  intervening  bands—the  inner  one  containing  forty-five  small  bosses,  the  outer  twenty 
hearts.  T he  head  of the  pin  is  shaped  like  a  swan's;  as  that  of the  other,  which  has  perished, 
may  have  also  been.  Here  the  formula  is:  a  nineteen-year  reign,  with  a  fresh  victim  (the 
twenty  hearts)  offered  at  the  beginning  of every  year,  the  king  himself being  the  twentieth. 
T he White Swan,  his Mother, will carry him off to her Hyperborean paradise. T w e n t y - o ne is 
the  number  of  rays  on  Akhenaton's  sun.  Forty-five  is  the  pentad  of  goddesses-of-the-year, 
multiplied by the number nine to  show that each is an aspect of the Moon-goddess.So  far as  I  know,  the  Bronze  A ge and  early Iron A ge smiths w h o, like the poets  and physi 
cians,  came  under  the  direct  patronage  of  the  Muse,  never  embellished  their  w o rk  with 
meaningless  decoration.  E v e ry  object  they  made—sword,  spear-head,  shield,  dagger,  scab 
bard,  brooch,  jug,  harness-ring,  tankard,  bucket,  mirror,  or  what  not—had  magical  pro 
perties  to  which  the  shape  and  number  of  its  various  decorations  testified.  F ew  archaeolo 
gists  lay  any  emphasis  on  magic,  and  this  makes  most  museum-guides  pretty  dull  reading. 
F or  example,  in  the  British  Museum  Guide  to  the  Antiquities  of  the  Early  Iron  Age  ( 1 9 0 5 ),  fig. 
1 40 shows a beaded bronze collar from Lochar  Moss,  Dumfriesshire.  T he editorial  comment 
is  only  on  the  melon-like  shape  of the  beads  which  has,  it  is  said,  affinities  with  that  of  tur 
quoise-coloured  glass  beads  common  on  sites  in  Roman  Britain.  W h at  needed  to  be  pointed 
out  was  that  there  are  thirteen  of these  beads  in  the  collar,  each  with  seven  ribs,  and  that  the 
design  on  the  rigid  crescent-shaped  part  is  an  interlace  of nine  S's:  a  collar  replete  with  lunar 
fate.  Similarly, the open-work bronze disc (fig.  1 2 2)  found in the Thames at Hammersmith is 
interesting  because the  sun which  forms  its  centre has eight rays and  is pierced with  a Maltese 
cross;  but  the editor's  only  comment  is  on  its  stylistic  relation  with  open-work  bronze  horse-
poitrels  from  a  Gaulish  chariot-burial  at  Somme  Bionne  (Plate  I I I ),  one  of which  contains 
pierced  crosses.  T h is  is  irrelevant,  unless  attention  is  paid  to  the  three  swastikas  in  this 
poitrel and  to  the  numbers nine and  thirteen which characterize the horse head-stall ornaments 
shown in the same plate.

2 922 92

bered  by  his  successor and,  when  the  pieces  were  gathered  together,  to  be 
secretly  buried  in  a  chest  with  the  promise  of an  eventual  glorious  resur 
rection.

Stonehenge  is  now  generally  dated  between  1700  and  1500  B.C.  and 
regarded  as  the  work  of broad-skulled  Bronze-Age  invaders.  The  stones 
are  so  neady  cut  and  jointed  that  one  responsible  archaeologist,  G.  F. 
Kendrick  of  the  British  Museum,  suggests  that  they  were  not  placed  in 
position  until  Belgic  times;  but  the  more  probable  explanation  is  that  the 
architects had studied in Egypt or Syria.If  then  the  God  of  Stonehenge  was  cousin  to  Jehovah  of  Tabor  and 
Zion,  one  would  expect  to  find  the  same  taboos  on  the  eating  or  killing  of 
certain  animals  observed  in  Palestine  and  ancient  Britain,  taboos  being 
far  more  easily  observable  than  dogma.  This  proposition is simply  tested 
by  inquiring  whether  the  edible  but  tabooed  beasts  in  Leviticus  which  are 
native to both  countries were ever  tabooed  in  Britain.  There  are only two 
such  beasts,  the  pig  and  the  hare;  for  the  'coney'  of Leviticus  is  not  the 
British  coney,  or  rabbit,  but  the  hyrax,  an  animal  peculiar  to  Syria  and 
sacred to the Triple Goddess because of its triangular teeth and its litters of 
three.  Both  hare  and  pig were  tabooed  in  ancient  Britain:  we  know  of the 
hare-taboo  from  Pliny;  and  that  the  hare was  a  royal  animal  is  proved  by 
the  story  of  the  hare  taken  by  Boadicea  into  battle.  The  Kerry  peasants 
still  abominate  hare-meat:  they  say  that  to  eat  it  is  to  eat  one's  grand 
mother.  The  hare  was  sacred,  I  suppose,  because  it  is  very  swift,  very 
prolific—even  conceives,  Herodotus  notes,  when  already  pregnant—and 
mates  openly without embarrassment  like  the  turtle-dove,  the  dog,  the  cat 
or  the  tattooed  Pict.  The  position  of the  Hare  constellation  at  the  feet  of 
Orion  suggests  that  it  was  sacred  in  Pelasgian  Greece  too.  The  pig  was 
also  sacred  in  Britain,  and  the  pig-taboo  survived  until  recently  in  Wales 
andScodand; but as in Egypt, and according to Isaiah among the Canaan 
ites  of Jerusalem,  this  taboo  was  broken  once  a  year  at  mid-winter  with  a 
Pig-feast,  the feast  of the  Boar's  Head.  The  fish-taboo,  partial in Leviticus, 
was  total  in  Britain  and  among  the  Egyptian  priesthood  and  must  have 
been most inconvenient.  It survived in parts of Scotland until  recent  times. 
The  bird-taboos,  already  mentioned  in  the  lapwing  context  as  common  to 
Britain and Canaan, are numerous. The porpoise (mistranslated 'badger') 
whose  skins  made  the  covering  for  the  Ark  of the  Covenant  has  always 
been  one  of the  three  royal  'fish'  of Britain,  the  others  being  the  whale— 
the first living  thing  created  by Jehovah,  and  'whale'  includes  the  narwhal 
—and  the sturgeon,  which does  not  occur in the Jordan  but was sacred  in 
Pelasgian  Greece  and  Scythia.  According  to  Aelian,  fishermen  who 
caught  a  sturgeon  garlanded  themselves  and  their  boats;  according  to 
Macrobius it was brought to table crowned with  flowers  and preceded by a 
piper.293

The  Hebrews  seem  to  have  derived  their  Aegean  culture,  which  they 
shared  with  the  descendants  of  the  Bronze  Age  invaders  of  Britain, 
partly  from  the  Danaans  of Tyre  and  the  Sabians  of Harran,  but  mostly 
(as  has  already  been  suggested  in  Chapter  Four)  from  the  Philistines 
whose vassals  they were for some generations;  the Philistines,  or Puresati, 
being  immigrants  from  Asia  Minor  mixed  with  Greek-speaking  Cretans. 
Those  of Gaza  brought  with  them  the  cult  of Zeus  Mamas  (said  to  mean 
'virgin-born'  in  Cretan)  which  was  also  found  at  Ephesus,  and  used 
Aegean writing for some  time  after the  Byblians  had  adopted  Babylonian 
cuneiform.  The  Philistine  city  of Ascalon  was  said  by  Xanthus,  an  early 
Lydian  historian,  to  have  been  founded  by  one  Ascalos,  uncle  to  Pelops 
of Eneve  on  the  Southern  Black  Sea  Coast,  whose  king  was  Aciamus,  a 
native of the same region. Among the Philistines mentioned in the Bible are 
Piram  and  Achish,  identifiable  with  the  Trojan  and  Dardanian  names 
Priam  and  Anchises;  the  Dardanians  were among  the  tribes  under Hittite 
leadership that Rameses II defeated at the Battle of Kadesh in 1 3 35 B .C It 
is  probable  that  the  Levitical  list  of tabooed  beasts  and  birds  was  taken 
over  by  the  Israelites  from  the  Philistines:  and  perhaps  written  down  in 
the ninth century B . C ., which is when the Lycian tale  of  Proetus,  Anteia 
and  Bellerophon  was  inappropriately  incorporated  in  the  story of Joseph 
—Anteia  becoming  Potiphar's  wife.Avebury undoubtedly dates  from  the end  of the third millennium B . C. 
It is  a  circular earthwork enclosing a  ring  of one  hundred  posts  and  these 
again  enclosing  two  separate  temples,  all  the  stones  being  unhewn  and 
very  massive.  The  temples  consist  of circles  of posts,  of which  the  exact 
numbers  are not known  because  so  many have  been removed  and  because 
the  irregular  size  of  the  remainder  makes  calculation  difficult:  but  there 
seem  to  have  been  about  thirty  in  each  case.  Within  each  of these  circles 
was  an  inner  circle  of twelve  posts:  one  of them  containing  a  single  altar 
post, the other three.

One  hundred  months  was  the  number  of  lunations  in  the  Pelasgian 
Great  Year,  which  ended  with  an  approximation  of lunar  and  solar  time, 
though  a  much  rougher  one  than  at  the  close  of the  nineteen-year  cycle. 
The  twin  kings  each  reigned  for  fifty  of these  months;  which  may account 
for the two temples. If in one temple the posts of the outer circle numbered 
twenty-nine,  and  in  the  other thirty,  this  would  represent  months  of alter 
nately  twenty-nine  and  thirty  days,  as  in  the  Athenian  calendar—a  luna 
tion  lasting  for  29^  days.  On  the  analogy  of the  story  in  Exodus,  XXIV,  4 
we  may  assume  that  the  inner  circles  represented  the  king  and  his  twelve 
clan-chieftains,  though  in  one  case  the  central  altar  has  been  enlarged  to 
three, perhaps in honour of the king as three-bodied  Geryoa.

A  serpentine  avenue  enters  the  Avebury  earthwork  from  the  south 
east  and  south-west  and  encloses  two  barrows,  one  of them  heaped  in  the

294A  serpentine  avenue  enters  the  Avebury  earthwork  from  the  south 
east  and  south-west  and  encloses  two  barrows,  one  of them  heaped  in  the

294

shape  of a  phallus  and  the  other  in  the  shape  of a  scrotum.  To  the  south, 
beyond  these,  rises  Silbury  Hill,  the  largest  artificial  mound  in  Europe, 
covering  over  five  acres,  with  a  flat  top  of  the  same  diameter  as  that  of 
New  Grange but  thirty feet higher.  I  take  Silbury to  be  the  original  Spiral 
Castle of Britain, as New Grange is of Ireland; the oracular shrine of Bran, 
as New Grange was of The Dagda. Avebury itself was not used for burials. 
An  interesting  subject  of poetic  speculation  is:  why  the  Beth-Luis-Nion 
order  of vowels,  A.O.U.E.I.,  which  is  an  order  phonetically expressive  of 
the progress and retreat of the year, with U as its climax, was altered in the 
Cadmean  and  Latin  alphabets  to  A.E.I.O.U.  The  clue  lies  perhaps  in  the 
numerical  values  known  to  have  been  assigned  in  mediaeval  Irish  litera 
ture  to  the vowels, namely A,  one; E,  two;  I,  three;  O,  four.  The numerical 
value  five  was  assigned  to  B,  the  first  consonant  of  the  alphabet,  which 
suggests  that  it  originally  belonged  to  U,  the  remaining  vowel,  which  had 
no numerical value in this system, but which is the character that expresses 
the  Roman  numeral  5.  If the  vowels  are  regarded  as  a  seasonal  sequence, 
with  A  for  New  Year,  O  for  Spring,  U  for  Summer,  E  for  Autumn  and  I 
for  Winter,  the  original  numerical  values  make  poetic  sense.  A  had  One, 
as  the  New  Year  Goddess  of origin;  E  had  Two,  as  the Autumn  Goddess 
of rutting and  combat;  I  had  Three,  as  the Winter  Goddess  of Death,  pic 
tured  as  the  Three  Fates,  or  the  Three  Furies, or the three Graeae,  or the 
three-headed  Bitch; O  had Four, as the Spring Goddess of increase;  U had 
Five, as the Summer Goddess, the leafy centre of the year, the Queen of the 
whole  Pentad.  It  follows  speculatively  that  the  original  numerical  value  of 
the  Pelasgian  vowels—A,  One;  E,  Two;  I,  Three;  O,  Four;  U,  Five— 
suggested  to  the  makers  of the  Cadmean  alphabet  that  the  vowels should 
be logically arranged in simple arithmetical progression from One to Five.The  numerical  values  given  by  the  Irish  to  the  remaining  letters  of the

13-consonant Beth-Luis-Nion are as follows:

B 
L 
N 
F 
S 
H 
D 
T 
C 
M 
G 
P 
R

Beth 
Luis 
Nion 
Fearn 
Saille 
Uath 
Duir 
Tinne 
Coll 
Min 
Gort 
Peth 
Ruis

Five 
Fourteen 
Thirteen 
Eight 
Sixteen 
No value 
Twelve 
Eleven 
Nine 
Six 
Ten 
Seven 
Fifteen

295

Exactly  why  each  of these  values  was  assigned  to  its  consonant  may  be 
debated at length;  but obvious poetic reasons appear in several cases.  For 
example, Nine is the number traditionally associated  with  Coll,  the Hazel, 
the  tree  of Wisdom;  Twelve  is  the  number  traditionally  associated  with 
the  Oak—the  Oak-king  has  twelve  merry  men;  Fifteen  is  the  number  of 
Ruis,  the last month,  because  it  is  the  fifteenth  consonant  in  the complete 
alphabet.  The  numbers  Eight  and  Sixteen  for  the  consonants  F  and  S 
which  follow  on  the  Spring  vowel  O,  or  Four,  make  obvious  sense  in  the 
context  of increase.  That  H  and  U  are  denied  numerical  values  suggests 
that  they  were  kept  out  of the  sequence  for  religious  reasons.  For  U  was 
the  vowel  of the  Goddess  of Death-in-Life,  whom  the  Sun-god  deposed; 
H  was  the consonant of Uath,  the unlucky,  or too holy,  May month.If this  number  system is  of Apollonian origin and  belongs  to  the  period 
when  the Irish had  come under  Greek influence,  it is  likely that  P  has been 
given  seven,  and  L  fourteen,  and  N  thirteen  as  their  values,  in  honour  of 
Apollo.  For  the  assignment  of these values  to  the  consonants  of his  seven-
lettered  Greek  name  turns  it  into  a  miniature  calendar:  P,  the  seven  days 
of the  week;  L L,  the  twenty-eight  days  of a  common-law  month;  N,  the 
thirteen  common-law  months  of the  year.  The  vowel  values  complete  the 
table:  A,  the  single  extra  day;  O,  the  four  weeks  of  the  common-law 
month; long O, the two halves of the year: A P O L L O N.

This  sort  of ingenious  play with letters and  numerals was  characteristic 
of the  Celtic  poets.  What  fun  they  must  have  had  in  their  forest  colleges! 
And  such  restorations  of  their  lore  as  can  still  be  made  from  surviving 
records  are  more  than  quaint historical  curiosities;  they illustrate a  poetic 
method  of  thought  which  has  not  yet  oudasted  its  usefulness,  however 
grossly abused by mystical quacks of the intervening centuries.Consider,  for  instance,  the  Bird-ogham  and  Colour-ogham  in  the 
Book  of  Ballymote.  The  composers  of  these  two  cyphers  had  to  bear  in 
mind not only the initial of every word but its poetic relation to the already 
established  letter-month.  Thus  no  migratory  bird  appears  in  the  list  of 
winter  months,  and  samad (sorrel)  is  not  applied  to  the  S-month,  as  one 
might  have  expected,  because  the  sorrel  plant  goes  sorrel-colour  only  in 
the  late summer.  The lists  could have been  made more nearly poetic if the 
initials  had  allowed;  thus  the  Robin  would  doubtless  have  led  in  the year, 
had he begun with a B,  not an  S  (spidiog),  and  there was  no word  for Owl 
that could  be used for the Ng-month when  owls are most vocal.

I  can  best  make  my  point  by  glossing  the  cyphers  in  imitation  of the 
style  used  in  the  Book  of  Ballymote  itself,  drawing  on  bardic  lore  in  every 
case.

Day  of  the  Winter  Solstice—A—aidhircledg,  lapwing;  alad,  piebald. 
Why is  the Lapwing at the head of the vowels?

296

Not  hard  to  answer.  It  is  a  reminder  that  the  secrets  of the  Beth-Luis-
Nion  must  be  hidden  by  deception  and  equivocation,  as  the  lapwing  hides 
her  eggs.  And  Piebald  is  the  colour  of this  mid-winter  season  when  wise 
men  keep  to  their  chimney-corners,  which  are  black  with  soot  inside  and 
outside  white  with  snow;  and  of  the  Goddess  of  Life-in-Death  and 
Death-in-Life, whose prophetic bird is the piebald magpie.

Day ofthe Spring Equinox—O—odorscrach, cormorant; odhar, dun. 
Why is the Cormorant next? 
Not hard. This is the season of Lent when, because of the Church's ban 
on  the  eating  of meat  and  the  scarcity  of other  foods,  men  become  Cor 
morants  in  their  greed  for  fish.  And  Dun  is  the  colour  of  the  newly 
ploughed fields.Day  of  the  Summer  Solstice—U—uisedg,  lark;  usgdha,  resin-coloured. 
Why is the Lark in the central place? 
Not"  hard.  At  this  season  the  Sun  is  at  his  highest  point,  and  the  Lark 
flies  singing up  to  adore  him.  Because  of the heat  the  trees  split and  ooze 
resin,  and  Resin-coloured is the honey that  the heather yields.

Day  of  the  Autumn  Equinox—E—ela,  whistling  swan;  ere,  rufous-red. 
Why is  the Whistling Swan  in  the next place? 
Not  hard.  At  this  season  the  Swan  and  her  young  prepare  for  flight.

And Rufous-red is the colour of the bracken, and of the Swan's neck. 
Day of the Winter Solstice—I—illait, eaglet; irfind, very white. 
Why is the Eaglet in the next place? 
Not  hard.  The  Eaglet's  maw  is  insatiable,  like  that  of  Death,  whose 
season  this  is.  And  Very White are  the  bones  in  his nest,  and  the  snow on 
the  cliff-ledge.

•

•

#

Dec.  24—Jan.  21—B—besan,  pheasant;  ban,  white. 
Why is  the Pheasant at  the head  of the consonants? 
Not  hard.  This  is  the  month  of which  Amergin  sang:  'I  am  the  Stag  of 
Seven  Tines';  and  as venison  is  the best flesh that runs,  so  Pheasant is  the 
best that flies. And White is the colour of this Stag and of this Pheasant.

Jan.  22-Feb.  18—L—lachu,  duck;  liath,  grey. 
Why is the Duck in  the next place? 
Not  hard.  This  is  the  month  of  floods,  when  Ducks  swim  over  the

meadows. And Grey is the colour of flood-water and of rainy skies.

Feb.  19-Mar.  18—N—naescu,  snipe;  necht,  clear. 
Why is  the Snipe in the next place? 
Not hard.  This  is  the  month  of the  mad  March  Wind  that whirls  like a

Snipe. And Clear is the colour of Wind.

ig-Apr.  15—F—faelinn,  gul\;flann,  crimson.

Mar. 
Why is  the Gull in the next place? 
Not hard.  In  this  month  Gulls  congregate  on  the ploughed fields. And 
297ig-Apr.  15—F—faelinn,  gul\;flann,  crimson.

Mar. 
Why is  the Gull in the next place? 
Not hard.  In  this  month  Gulls  congregate  on  the ploughed fields. And 
297

Crimson  is  the  colour of the glain,  the  magical  egg which  is  fount!  in  this 
month,  and  of alder-dye,  and  of the  Young  Sun  struggling  through  the 
haze.

Apr.  16-May  13—S—seg,  hawk;  sodath,  fine-coloured. 
Why is the Hawk in  the next place? 
Not  hard.  Amergin  sang  of this  month:  'I  am  a  Hawk  on  a  Cliff.'  And

Fine-coloured are its meadows.

The same—SS—stmolach,  thrush;  sorcha,  bright-coloured. 
Why is the Thrush joined with the Hawk? 
Not  hard.  The  Thrush  sings  his  sweetest  in  this  month.  And  Bright-

coloured are the new leaves.

May  14—Jun.  10—H—hadaig,  night-crow;  huath,  terrible. 
Why is the Night-crow in the next place? 
Not  hard.  This  is  the  month  when  we  refrain  from  carnal  pleasures 
because of terror, which in Irish is uath, and the Night-crow brings terror. 
Terrible is its colour.

Jun.  11—July 8—D—droen,  wren;  dub,  black. 
Why is the Wren in the central place? 
Not hard.  The  Oak is  the  tree of Druids  and  the king of trees,  and  the 
Wren,  Drui-in,  is  the  bird  of the  Druids  and  the  King  of all  birds.  And 
the  Wren  is  the  soul  of the  Oak.  Black  is  the  colour  of the  Oak when  the 
lightning  blasts  it,  and  black  the  faces  of  those  who  leap  between  the 
Midsummer fires.

July sr-Aug.  5—T—truith,  starling;  temen,  dark-grey. 
Why is the Starling in the next place? 
Not  hard.  Amergin  sang  of this  month:  'I  am  a  Spear  that  roars  for 
blood.' It is the warrior's month, and the Starlings' well-trained army will 
wheel  swiftly  and  smoothly  on  a  pivot,  to  the  left  or  to  the  right,  without 
a  word  of command  or  exhortation;  thus  batdes  are  won,  not  by  single 
feats and broken ranks. And Dark-grey is the colour of Iron, the warriors' 
metal.Aug.  6-Sept.  2—C—[corr,  crane];  cron,  brown. 
Why is the Crane in the next place? 
Not  hard.  This  is  the  month  of wisdom,  and  the wisdom  of Manannan 
Mac  Lir,  namely  the  Beth-Luis-Nion,  was  wrapped  in  Crane-skin.  And 
Brown are the nuts of the Hazel, tree of wisdom.

The  same—Q—querc,  hen;  quiar,  mouse-coloured. 
Why is the Hen joined with the  Crane? 
Not hard.  When  the harvest  is  carted,  and  the gleaners  have gone,  the 
Hen  is  turned  into  the  cornfields  to  fatten  on  what  she  can  find.  And  a 
Mouse-coloured little rival creeps around with her.

Sept. 2—Sept. 30—M—mintan, titmouse; mbracht, variegated. 
Why is the Titmouse in the next place?

298

Not hard.  Amergin  sang  of this  month:  'I  am  a  Hill  of Poetry';  and  this 
is  the  month  of  the  poet,  who  is  the  least  easily  abashed  of men,  as  the 
Titmouse  is  the  least  easily  abashed  of  birds.  Both  band  together  in 
companies  in  this  month,  and  go  on  circuit in  search  of a liberal  hand;  and 
as  the  Titmouse  climbs  spirally  up  a  tree,  so  the  Poet  also  spirals  to  im 
mortality.  And  Variegated  is  the  colour  of  the  Titmouse,  and  of  the 
Master-poet's dress.

Oct.  i-Oct.  29—G—giis,  mute  swan; gorm,  blue. 
Why is the Mute Swan in  the next place? 
Not  hard.  In  this  month  he  prepares  to  follow  his  companion  the 
Whistling  Swan.  And  Blue  is  the  haze  on  the  hills,  Blue  the  smoke  of the 
burning weed,  Blue the skies  before the November rain.

Oct.  29—Nov.  25—Ng—ng&igh,  goose;  nglas,  glass-green. 
Why is  the Goose in  the next place? 
Not  hard.  In  this  month  the  tame  goose  is  brought  in  from  misty 
pasture  to  be  cooped  and  fattened  for  the  mid-winter  feast;  and  the  wild 
goose  mourns  for  him  in  the  misty  meadows.  And  Glassy-green  is  the 
wave that thuds against the cliff, a warning that the year must end.Nov.  26—Dec.  22—R—rdcnat,  rook;  ruadh,  blood-red. 
Why is the Rook in the last place? 
Not hard.  He wears  mourning for  the  year that dies  in  this month.  And 
Blood-red are the rags of leaves on the elder-trees, a token of the slaughter.

*

•

*

The  Pheasant  was  the  best  available  bird  for  the  B-month,  bran  the 
raven  and  bunnan  the  bittern  being  better  suited  to  later  months  of  the 
year.  The  author  of the  article  on  pheasants  in  the  Encyclopaedia  Britan-
nica  states  that  pheasants  (sacred  birds  in  Greece)  are  likely  to  have  been 
indigenous  to  the  British  Isles  and  that  the  white,  or  'Bohemian',  variety 
often appears among pheasants of ordinary plumage.

It  is  possible  that  the  original  S-colour  was  serind,  primrose,  but  that 
the  primrose's  erotic  reputation  led  to  its  replacement  by  the  euphemism, 
sodath.

The  omission  of corr,  the  Crane,  for  the  C-month  is  intentional;  the 
contents  of the  Crane-bag  were  a  close  secret  and  all  reference  to  it  was 
discouraged.

And  what  of Dec.  23rd,  the  extra  day  of the  year,  on  which  the  young 
King,  or  Spirit  of  the  Year,  was  crowned  and  given  eagle's  wings,  and 
which  was  expressed  by  the  semi-vowel  J,  written  as  double I?  Its  bird 
was  naturally  the Eagle, iolar in  Irish, which has  the right initial.  The Irish 
poets  were  so  chary  of  mentioning  this  day  that  we  do  not  even  know 
what its  tree was;  yet that they regarded  the Eagle as  its bird  is proved  by 
the use  of the  diminutive Wait, Eaglet,  for  the  letter I:  that is  to  say  that if

2 99

the extra  day,  double-I,  had  not been  secretly given  the  cypher-equivalent 
iolar,  there  would  be  no  need  to  express  the  preceding  day,  that  of  the 
Winter  Solstice,  namely  single  I,  by  illait,  Eaglet—for  E  is  not  expressed 
by  Cygnet,  nor A  by  Lapwing-chick.These  cyphers  were  used  to  mystify  and  deceive  all  ordinary  people 
who  were  not  in  the  secret.  For  example,  if  one  poet  asked  another  in 
public:  'When  shall  we  two  meet  again?'  he  would  expect  an  answer  in 
which  elements  of  several  cypher  alphabets  were  used,  and  which  was 
further disguised by being spelt backwards or put in a foreign language,  or 
both.  He  might,  for  instance,  be  answered  in  a  sentence  built  up  from  the 
Colour, Bird, Tree and Fortress oghams:

When  a  brown-plumaged rook  perches  on  the  fir  below  the  Fortress  of

Seolae.

That would spell out the Latin  CRAS—'tomorrow'.

Besides  the  one  hundred  and  fifty  regular  cypher-alphabets  that  the 
candidate for  the  ollaveship  had  to  learn,  there were coundess  other  tricks 
for  putting  the  uninitiated  off the  scent;  for  example,  the  use  of the  letter 
after,  or  before,  the  desired  one.  Often  a  synonym  was  used  for  the  tree-
cypher  word—'the  chief  overseer  of  Nimrod's  Tower'  for  Beth,  birch; 
'activity of bees'  for Saille,  willow;  'pack  of wolves'  for Straif,  blackthorn, 
and so on.In  one  of  the  cypher-alphabets,  Luis  is  given  as  elm,  not  rowan, 
because  the  Irish  word  for  elm,  lemh,  begins  with  an  L;  Tinne  is  given  as 
elder  because  the  Irish  word  for  elder,  trom,  begins  with  a  T;  similarly, 
Quert  is  given  as  quulend,  holly.  This  trick  may  account  for  Ngetal,  reed, 
being  so  frequently  read  as  broom,  the  Irish  of  which  is  rigilcach;  but 
there  is  also  a  practical  poetic  reason  for  the  change.  The  Book  of  Bally-
mote  gives  broom  the  poetic  name  of 'Physicians'  Strength',  presumably 
because  its  bitter  shoots,  being  diuretic,  were  prized  as  'a  remedy  for 
surfeits  and  to  all  diseases  arising  therefrom*.  (A  decoction  of  broom-
flowers  was  Henry  VTH's  favourite  medicine.)  A  medical  tree  suited  the 
month  of November,  when  the  year  was  dying  and  the  cold  winds  kept 
well-to-do  people indoors  with  litde  diversion  but eating and drinking.

300

Chapter  Seventeen

T HE  LION  W I TH  T HE  S T E A DY  H A ND

Llew  Llaw  Gyffes  ('the  Lion  with  the  Steady  Hand'),  a  type  of300

Chapter  Seventeen

T HE  LION  W I TH  T HE  S T E A DY  H A ND

Llew  Llaw  Gyffes  ('the  Lion  with  the  Steady  Hand'),  a  type  of

Dionysus  or  Celestial  Hercules  worshipped  in  ancient  Britain,  is 
generally  identified  with  Lugh,  the  Goidelic  Sun-god,  who  has 
given  his  name  to  the  towns  of Laon,  Leyden,  Lyons  and  Carlisle  (Caer 
Lugubalion).  The  name  'Lugh'  may  be  connected  with  the  Latin  lux 
(light)  or  kicus  (a  grove);  it  may  even  be  derived  from  the  Sumerian  lug 
meaning 'son'.  'Llew'  is  a  different  word,  connected  with  leo  (lion),  an 
appellation  of Lugh's.  In  Ireland  he  was  called  'Lugh  the  Long-handed', 
defeater  of  the  Africans,  the  earliest  settlers  in  Ireland;  he  possessed 
a  magic  spear  which  thirsted  for  blood  and  flashed  fire  or  roared  aloud 
in  battle;  and  he  was  the  first  to  use  the  horse  in  warfare.  When  he 
approached  from  the  West,  at  the  Battle  of  Moytura,  Breas  (Boreas?) 
Balor,  the  one-eyed  King of the  old  Gods  and  later styled  Lugh's  grand 
father,  cried  out:  'I  wonder  that  the  Sun  has  risen  in  the  West  today 
rather than in the East.' His druids answered: 'Would that it were no more 
than  the  Sun!  It  is  the  glowing  face  of Lugh  the  Long-handed'—which 
nobody  could  gaze  upon  without  being  dazzled.  Another  account  of his 
parentage  quoted  by  H.  d'Arbois  de  Joubainville  in  his  monumental 
Cycle  Mythologique  Irlandaise  makes  him  the  son  not  of Balor's  daughter 
Ethne by one Cian, but of Clothru (who is apparently a single form of the 
Triple  Goddess  Eire,  Fodhla  and  Bar.bha)  by  Balor's  three  grandsons 
Brian,  Iuchar  and  Iuchurba;  a  row  of  red  circles  on  his  neck  and  belly 
marking  off the  parts  of his  body that each  father had  begotten.  His  death 
on  the first Sunday in  August—called  Lugh  nasadh  ('Commemoration of 
Lugh'),  later  altered  to  'Lugh-mass'  or  'Lammas'—was  until  recently 
observed  in Ireland  with  Good  Friday-like  mourning and  kept as  a feast 
of dead  kinsfolk,  the  mourning  procession  being  always  led  by  a  young 
man carrying a hooped wreath. Lammas was also observed as a mourning 
feast  in  most  parts  of England  in  mediaeval times; which  accounts  for the 
extraordinary  popular  demonstrations  when  William  Rufus's  body  was 
brought up  from  the New  Forest  for burial.  The  peasants were bewailing 
a  mythical  Lugh  when  along  came  the  body  of  their  own  red-headed 
king  laid  on  a  harvest  cart.  Nowadays  the  only  English  Lammas  cele-301

brated  is  the  Lancashire  Wakes  Week,  the  dismal  meaning  of which  has 
been  forgotten among  the  holiday distractions  of Blackpool.

The  famous Tailltean  Games  of Ireland,  originally  funeral  games  in  the 
Etruscan  style, with  chariot  races  and  sword-play,  take  place  at  Lammas. 
The  Irish  tradition  that  they  were  held  in  memory  of one  Tailte,  Lugh's 
dead  foster-mother,  is  late  and  misleading.  The  games,  which  in  early 
mediaeval  times  were  so  well-frequented  that  the  chariots  occupied  six 
miles  of road,  were  marked  by Tailtean  (or Teltown)  marriages  in honour 
of Lugh  and  his  capricious  bride.  These  were  trial  marriages  and  lasted 
'for a year and a day', that is, for 3 65  days, and could be dissolved only by 
an  act  of divorce  performed  in  the  place  where  they  had  been  celebrated. 
Then  the  man  and  woman  stood  back  to  back  in  the  centre  of the  Black 
Rath and  walked apart, one to the north,  the other to the south.  Lugh was 
incarnate in  the  famous  Ulster hero  Cuchulain:  he  flew  in  at  the  mouth  of 
Cuchulain's  mother  Dechtire  in  the  form  of a  may-fly.  Cuchulain  was  so 
much  of a sun-god  that when he  plunged  into  a cold  bath  the water hissed 
and  began  to  boil.  That  Lugh's  magical  weapon  was a spear suggests  that 
he  belongs 
the  earlier  Bronze  Age  invaders  of Ireland;  the  later  ones 
were  armed  with  swords.  He  may  be  identified  with  Geryon,  King  of 
in  one',  whom  Hercules  despoiled  of 
the  West, 
his  red  cattle,  guarded  by  a  two-headed  dog,  and  killed  in  Erytheia 
('red island').

'with  three  bodies'with  three  bodies

According  to  the  mythographers,  Hercules  sailed  to  the  West  from 
Greece,  with  ships  from  Crete,  and  went  by  way  of  North  Africa,  the 
Straits  of Gibraltar,  Tartessus,  and  Gaul  (where  he  fathered  the  Celts). 
This  is  the  same  course  as  the  Milesians  took,  and  the  Tenth  Labour  of 
Hercules  reads  like  one  more  account  of  the  defeat  of  the  New  Stone 
Age  invaders—Partholan's  and  Nemed's  peoples—by  Bronze  Age  men 
from  Spain;  but  Erytheia  is  perhaps  Devonshire,  famous  for  its  bright 
red  soil  and  red  cattle,  which  the  Bronze  Age  men  also  conquered  from 
New Stone Age  people.  It was  during this Labour  that Hercules borrowed 
the golden  cup  from  the  Sun, and  became lotus-borne.  Geryon  appears  to 
have  been  a  Western  version  of the  Vedic  god  Agni,  the  earliest  Indian 
trinity, who had three births and three bodies. As born of water, Agni was 
a  calf who  yearly  grew  to  'a  bull  that  sharpens  his  horns';  as  born  of two 
sticks  (the  fire-drill),  he was  a  glutton  with  a  fiery  tongue;  as  born  in  the 
highest heaven,  he  was  an  eagle.  The  Vedic  hymns  also  celebrate  him  as  a 
supporter of the  sky,  namely the  pillar  of cloud  that rises up  when fires are 
lighted  in  his  honour,  and  as  an  omniscient  immortal  who  has  taken  up 
his abode among mortals.  Thus when Hercules  killed  Geryon and  carried 
off his  cattle he was,  in  fact,  gaining a victory over one of his own selves.

In  some  parts  of Wales  Lammas  is  still  kept  as  a  fair.  Sir  John  Rhys 
records  that  in  the  1850's  the  hills  of  Fan  Fach  and  South  Barrule  in 
302In  some  parts  of Wales  Lammas  is  still  kept  as  a  fair.  Sir  John  Rhys 
records  that  in  the  1850's  the  hills  of  Fan  Fach  and  South  Barrule  in 
302

Carmarthenshire  were  crowded  with  mourners  for  Llew  Llaw  on  the  first 
Sunday  in  August,  their  excuse  being  that  they  were  'going  up  to  bewail 
Jephthah's  daughter  on  the  mountain'.  This,  oddly  enough,  was  the  very 
same  excuse  that  the  post-Exilic  Jewish  girls  had  used,  after  the  Deutero-
nomic  reforms,  to  disguise  their  mourning  for  Tammuz,  Llew  Llaw's 
Palestinian  counterpart.  But  with  the  Welsh  Revival  the  practice  was 
denounced  as  pagan and  discontinued.

Here  is  Llew  Llaw's  own  story  (translated  by  Lady  Charlotte  Guest) 
which  forms  the  second  part  of  the  Romance  of  Math  the  Son  of  Mathonwy. 
Though  not  a  saga  in  the  grand  style,  like  that  of Cuchulain,  and  in  part 
falsified  by  the  intrusion  of the  God  Woden  (Gwydion)  into  territory  not 
originally  his,  it  is  one  of the  best  summaries  extant  of the  single  poetic 
Theme.The  first  part  of  this  romance  relates  to  Gwydion's  stealing  of  the 
sacred  pigs  from  Pryderi  the  King  of  the  Pembrokeshire  Annwm,  on 
behalf of Math  the  son  of Mathonwy,  King  of North  Wales.  Math  is  pic 
tured  as  a sacred  King  of the ancient  type whose virtue was  resident  in  the 
feet.  Except  when  his  kingdom  was  attacked  and  he  was  obliged  to  ride 
into  battle,  Math  was  bound  by  convention to  keep  his  foot  in  the  lap  of a 
priestess.  The  office  of  royal  foot-holder  survived  in  the  Welsh  princely 
courts  until  early  mediaeval  times,  but  was  then  assigned  to  a  man,  not  a 
woman.  Math's  was  a  matrilinear  kingdom,  his  heirs  being  his  sister's 
sons;  that  is  to  say  the  husbands  of his  sister-in-law's  daughters.  One  of 
them,  Gilvaethwy,  attempts  to  usurp  the  throne  by  seducing  the  reigning 
queen,  Math's  foot-holder,  while  Math  is  away  on  campaign.  Math 
counters  with  all  his  magical  resources,  eliminates  his  rival,  and  then  de 
cides  to  marry  his  niece Arianrhod.  The holding of the foot was  doubtless 
protective,  the  heel  being  the one vulnerable  point of sacred  kings:  witness 
the  heel  of  Achilles  pierced  by  Paris's  arrow;  the  heel  of  Talus  pierced 
by  Medea's  pin;  the  heel  of Diarmuid  pierced  by  the  bristle  of  the  Benn 
Gulban  Boar;  the  heel  of Harpocrates  stung  by  the  scorpion;  the  heel  of 
Balder  (in  the  Danish  version  of the  myth)  pierced  by  the  mistletoe  flung 
by  the  god  Holder  at  the  instigation  of  Loki;  the  heel  of  Ra  stung  by 
the  magic  snake  sent  by  Isis;  the  heel  of Mopsus  the  Lapith  stung by  the 
black  snake  of Libya,  the  heel  of Krishna  in  the  Mahahharata,  pierced  by 
an  arrow which his  brother  Jara  the  Hunter shot.  Talus  is  closely  related 
to  Achilles  in  Apollodorus's  version  of the  myth,  where  the  cause  of his 
death  is  given  as  a  wound  in  the  foot  from  an  arrow  shot  by  Hercules's 
heir,  Poeas.Since  recently  I  had  the  ill-luck  to  tread  on  a  Pyrenean  viper—a 
variety  stated  to  be  eight  times  more  lethal  than  the  English—I  can  take 
the  argument  further  and  assert  confidently  that  'Silver Island'  or  'White 
Island',  or  'Revolving Island',  to which  the  sacred  king  goes  at his  death, 
303

is  prophetically  seen  by  him  when  his  heel  is  bitten  by  the  serpent  or 
scorpion,  or  pricked  with  the  (presumably)  poisoned  arrow.  Soon  after 
the first pain  and  vomiting  my eyesight  began  to  fail.  A  small  silver spot 
appeared in the centre of my field of vision, which gradually enlarged into 
an island with sharply defined bastions; the shores spread wider and wider, 
as  though I  were  nearing it across  a  sea.  When I started  to  walk home,  I 
could  not  see  where  I  was  going;  and  then  the  island  began  slowly  to 
revolve  in  a  clockwise  direction.  I  cannot  say  whether  it  would  have 
revolved  the  canonical  four  times  if the poison  had  been  more virulent or 
if I  had  been  obsessed  by  the  sense  of coming  death  as  these  kings  were; 
the illusion had faded  long before I was given an  anti-toxin.  I was thank 
ful  that,  unlike  my  youngest  son  whom  I  was  carrying  on  my  shoulder 
at the  time,  I had not been  born  on  the day of the winter solstice.  My foot 
remained  so  swollen  for  a  couple  of months  that  I  could  only  hobble. 
Finally a Catalan doctor prescribed hot fomentations of wild-olive leaves, 
which reduced the swelling within three days.  This traditional remedy has 
mythological  sense  as  well  as  practical  value:  the  wild-olive  was  the 
timber  of Hercules's  club,  and  therefore  a  prime  expulsive  of lingering 
venom.I  should,  of course,  have  remembered  the Emperor  Claudius's  special 
edict  recorded  in  Suetonius,  'how  there  is  nothing better  for  the  bite of a 
viper than the juice of yew'. This was the correct homoeopathic treatment; 
as wild-olive was the allopathic. I find that Topsell in his Serpents ( 1 6 5 8 ), 
recommends  the  juice  of  the  periwinkle;  this  is  another  homoeopathic 
remedy, the periwinkle being 'the flower of death'.

T HE  R O M A N CE  OF  L L EW  L L AW  G Y F F ES

. ..  Math  the  Son  of Mathonwy  said:  'Give  your  counsel  unto  me, 
what  maiden  I  shall  seek.'  'Lord,'  said  Gwydion  the  son  of Don,  'it  is 
easy  to  give  thee  counsel;  seek  Arianrod,  the  daughter  of  Don,  thy 
niece, thy sister's daughter.'

And  they  brought  her  unto  him,  and  the  maiden  came  in.  'Ha, 
damsel,'  said  he,  'art  thou  the  maiden?'  'I  know  not,  lord,  other  than 
that  I  am.'  Then  he  took  up  his  magic  wand,  and  bent  it.  'Step  over 
this,'  said  he,  'and  I  shall  know  if thou  art  the  maiden.'  Then  stepped 
she  over  the  magic  wand,  and  there  appeared  forthwith  a  fine  chubby 
yellow-haired  boy.  And  at the  crying  out  of the boy,  she went  towards 
the door. And  thereupon some small form was seen;  but before anyone 
could get a second glimpse of it,  Gwydion had taken it, and had flung a 
scarf of velvet  around  it,  and  hidden  it  Now  the  place  where  he  hid  it 
was the bottom of a chest at the foot of his bed.

'Verily,' said Math the son of Mathonwy, concerning the fine yellow-

304

haired  boy,  'I will  cause this  one to  be baptized, and  Dylan is  the name 
I  will  give him.''Verily,' said Math the son of Mathonwy, concerning the fine yellow-

304

haired  boy,  'I will  cause this  one to  be baptized, and  Dylan is  the name 
I  will  give him.'

So  d:ey  had  the  boy  baptized,  and  as  they baptized  him  he  plunged 
into  the  sea.  And  immediately  when  he  was  in  the  sea,  he  took  its 
nature,  and swam  as  well  as  the  best fish that was  therein.  And  for that 
reason was  he  called  Dylan,  the son  of the  Wave.  Beneath him no wave 
ever broke.  And  the  blow whereby he  came  to  his  death,  was  struck by 
his uncle Govannion.  The third  fatal blow was it called.

As  Gwydion lay one morning on his bed awake, he heard a cry in the 
chest  at  his  feet;  and  though  it  was  not  loud,  it  was  such  that  he  could 
hear  it.  Then  he  arose  in  haste,  and  opened  the  chest:  and  when  he 
opened it, he beheld an infant boy stretching out his arms from the  folds 
of the  scarf,  and  casting  it  aside.  And  he  took  up  the  boy  in  his  arms, 
and carried him to a  place where he knew there was a woman that could 
nurse  him.  And  he  agreed  with  the  woman  that she should  take charge 
of the boy. And that year he was nursed.

And  at  the  end  of the  year  he  seemed  by  his  size  as  though  he  were 
two  years  old.  And  the  second  year  he  was  a  big  child,  and  able  to  go 
to  the  Court  by  himself.  And  when  he  came  to  the  Court,  Gwydion 
noticed  him,  and  the  boy  became  familiar  with  him,  and  loved  him 
better  than  anyone  else.  Then  was  the  boy  reared  at  the  Court  until  he 
was four years old, when he was as big as though he had been eight.And  one day  Gwydion  walked  forth,  and  the  boy followed  him,  and 
he went  to  the  Castle  of Arianrod,  having  the  boy with  him;  and  when 
he  came  into  the  Court,  Arianrod  arose  to  meet  him,  and  greeted  him 
and bade him welcome.  'Heaven prosper thee,'  said  he.  'Who is  the boy 
that  followeth  thee?'  she  asked.  'This  youth,  he  is  thy  son,'  he 
answered.  'Alas,'  said she,  'what has  come  unto  thee  that  thou shouldst 
shame  me  thus,  wherefore  dost  thou  seek  my  dishonour,  and  retain  it 
so  long  as  this?'  'Unless  thou  suffer  dishonour  greater  than  that  of my 
bringing up  such a  boy as this,  small  will  be  thy disgrace.'  'What is the 
name of the boy?'  said  she.  'Verily,'  he replied,  'he has not yet a name.' 
'Well,'  she said,  'I  lay this  destiny upon  him,  that he shall  never have a 
name  until  he  receives  one  from  me.'  'Heaven  bears  me  witness,' 
answered  he,  'that  thou  art  a  wicked  woman.  But  the  boy  shall  have  a 
name  how  displeasing  soever  it  may  be  unto  thee.  As  for  thee  that 
which afflicts thee is that thou art no longer called a damsel.'  And there 
upon he went forth in wrath, and returned to  Caer Dathyl,  and  there he 
tarried that night.

And  the  next  day  he  arose  and  took  the  boy  with  him,  and  went  to 
walk  on  the sea shore between  that place  and  Aber  Menei.  And  there he 
saw  some  sedges  and  sea  weed,  and  he  turned  them  into  a  boat.  And 
out  of  dry  sticks  and  sedges  he  made  some  Cordovan  leather,  and  a

3oj3oj

great deal  thereof,  and he coloured it in such a manner that no  one ever 
saw  leather more beautiful  than it.  Then he made a sail  to  the boat,  and 
he  and  the  boy  went  in  it  to  the  port  of the  castle  of Arianrod.  And  he 
began  forming  shoes  and  stitching  them,  until  he  was  observed  from 
the  castle.  And  when  he  knew  that  they  of  the  castle  were  observing 
him,  he  disguised  his  aspect,  and  put  another  semblance  upon  himself, 
and  upon  the  boy,  so  that  they  might  not  be  known.  'What  men  are 
those in yonder boat?' said Arianrod. 'They are cordwainers,' answered 
they.  'Go  and  see  what  kind  of  leather  they  have,  and  what  kind  of 
work they can do.'

So they came unto them. And when they came he was colouring some 
Cordovan leather, and gilding it. And the messengers came and told her 
this.  'Well,'  said  she,  'take  the measure of my foot, and desire the  cord-
wainer  to  make  shoes  for  me.'  So  he  made  the  shoes  for  her,  yet  not 
according to the measure, but larger.  The shoes then were brought unto 
her,  and  behold  they  were  too  large.  'These  are  too  large,'  said  she, 
'but  he  shall  receive  their  value.  Let  him  also  make  some  that  are 
smaller  than  they.'  Then  he  made  her  others  that  were  much  smaller 
than  her  foot,  and  sent  them  unto  her.  'Tell  him  that  these  will  not  go 
on  my  feet,'  said  she.  And  they  told  him  this.  'Verily,'  said  he,  'I  will 
not  make  her  any  shoes,  unless  I  see  her  foot.'  And  this  was  told  unto 
her.  'Truly,' she answered, 'I will go unto him.'So  she  went  down  to  the  boat,  and  when  she  came  there,  he  was 
shaping shoes and  the boy stitching them.  'Ah,  lady,'  said he,  'good day 
to  thee.'  'Heaven  prosper  thee,'  said  she.  'I  marvel  that  thou  canst  not 
manage to make shoes according to a measure.' 'I could not,' he replied, 
'but now I shall be able.'

Thereupon  behold  a  wren  stood  upon  the  deck  of the  boat,  and  the 
boy  shot  at  it,  and  hit  it  in  the  leg  between  the  sinew  and  the  bone. 
Then she smiled.  'Verily,'  said  she,  'with a steady hand did  the lion aim 
at it.'  'Heaven  reward thee not, but now has he got a name.  And a good 
enough name it is.  Llew Llaw Gyffes  be he called henceforth.'

Then  the  work  disappeared  in  sea  weed  and  sedges,  and  he  went  on 
with  it  no  further.  And  for  that  reason  was  he  called  the  third  Gold-
shoemaker.  'Of a  truth,'  said  she,  'thou  wilt  not  thrive  the  better  for 
doing  evil  unto  me.'  'I  have  done  thee  no  evil  yet,'  said  he.  Then  he 
restored  the  boy  to  his  own  form.  'Well,'  said  she,  'I  will  lay  a  destiny 
upon  this  boy,  that  he  shall  never  have  arms  and  armour  until  I  invest 
him with  them.'  'By  Heaven,'  said  he,  'let  thy  malice  be  what  it  may, 
he shall have arms.'

Then  they  went  towards  Dinas  Dinllev,  and  there  he  brought  up 
Llew Llaw  Gyffes, until he could manage any horse, and he was perfect 
in  features,  and  strength,  and  stature.  And  then  Gwydion  saw  that  he

306306

languished through the want of horses, and arms. And he called him unto 
him.  'Ah,  youth,'  said  he,  'we will  go  to-morrow on an errand together. 
Be  therefore  more  cheerful  than  thou art.'  "That I will,' said  the youth. 
Next  morning,  at  the  dawn  of day,  they  arose.  And  they  took  way 
along  the  sea  coast,  up  towards  Bryn  Aryen.  And  at  the  top  of Cevn 
Clydno  they  equipped  themselves  with  horses,  and  went  towards  the 
Castle of Arianrod.  And  they changed  their form,  and  pricked  towards 
the gate  in the semblance  of two  youths,  but the  aspect of Gwydion was 
more  staid  than  that  of the  other.  'Porter,'  said  he,  'go  thou  in  and  say 
that  there  are  here  bards  from  Glamorgan.'  And  the  porter  went  in. 
'The welcome of Heaven be unto  them, let them  in,' said Arianrod.

With  great  joy  were  they  greeted.  And  the  hall  was  arranged,  and 
they  went  to  meat.  When  meat  was  ended,  Arianrod  discoursed  with 
Gwydion  of tales  and  stories.  Now  Gwydion  was  an  excellent  teller  of 
tales.  And  when  it  was  time  to  leave  off feasting,  a  chamber  was  pre 
pared  for them, and  they went to  rest.In  the  early  twilight  Gwydion  arose,  and  he  called  untp  him  his 
magic  and  his  power.  And  by  the  time  that  the  day  dawned,  there 
resounded through the land uproar, and  trumpets,  and shouts.  When it 
was  now  day,  they  heard  a  knocking  at  the  door  of the  chamber,  and 
therewith  Arianrod  asking  that  it  might  be  opened.  Up  rose  the  youth 
and opened unto her, and she entered and a maiden with her.  'Ah, good 
men,'  she  said,  'in  evil  plight  are  we.'  'Yes,  truly,'  said  Gwydion,  'we 
have  heard  trumpets,  and  shouts;  what  thinkest  thou  that  they  may 
mean?'  'Verily,'  said  she,  'we  cannot  see  the  colour  of  the  ocean  by 
reason  of all  the  ships,  side  by  side.  And  they  are  making  for  the  land 
with  all  the  speed  they  can.  And  what  can  we  do?'  said  she.  'Lady,' 
said  Gwydion,  'there is  none  other counsel  than  to  close the  castle upon 
us,  and  to defend  it as best as we may.' 'Truly,' said she, 'may Heaven re 
ward you. And do you defend it. And here may you have plenty of  arms.'And  thereupon went she forth for the arms,  and  behold she  returned, 
and  two  maidens,  and  suits  of armour  for  two  men,  with  her.  'Lady,' 
said  he,  'do  thou  accoutre  this  stripling,  and  I  will  arm  myself with  the 
help  of  thy  maidens.  Lo,  I  hear  the  tumult  of  the  men  approaching.' 
'I will  do  so,  gladly.'  So  she armed  him  fully,  and  that right cheerfully. 
'Hast  thou  finished  arming  the  youth?'  said  he.  T  have  finished,'  she 
answered.  T likewise have finished,' said  Gwydion.  'Let us now take off 
our arms, we have no  need  of them.'  'Wherefore?' said she.  'Here is the 
army around  the house.'  'Oh,  lady,  there is here  no  army.'  'Oh,'  cried 
she,  'whence  then  was  this  tumult?'  'The  tumult  was  but  to  break  thy 
prophecy  and  to  obtain  arms  for  thy  son.  And  now  has  he  got  arms 
without  any  thanks  unto  thee.'  'By  Heaven,'  said  Arianrod,  'thou  art  a 
wicked  man.  Many  a  youth  might  have  lost  his  life  through  the  uproar

3 °7

thou  hast  caused  in  this  Cantrev  to-day.  Now will  I  lay  a  destiny  upon 
this youth,' she said, 'that he shall never have a wife of the race that now 
inhabits this earth.' 'Verily,' said he, 'thou wast ever a malicious woman, 
and  no  one  ought  to  support  thee.  A  wife  shall  he  have  notwithstand 
ing.'They  went  thereupon  unto  Math  the  son  of  Mathonwy,  and  com 
plained  unto  him  most  bitterly  of  Arianrod.  Gwydion  showed  him  also 
how he had procured arms for the youth. 'Well,' said Math, 'we will seek, 
I  and  thou,  by  charms  and  illusion,  to  form  a  wife  for  him  out  of 
flowers.  He  has  now  come  to  man's  stature,  and  he  is  the  comeliest 
youth  that was  ever beheld.'  So  they  took the blossoms  of the oak,  and 
the blossoms  of the broom,  and  the blossoms  of the meadow-sweet,  and 
produced  from  them  a  maiden,  the  fairest  and  most  graceful  that  man 
ever  saw.  And  they  baptized  her,  and  gave  her  the  name  of  Blodeu 
wedd.

After she had become his bride, and they had  feasted, said  Gwydion, 
It  is  not  easy  for  a  man  to  maintain  himself without  possessions.'  'Of a 
truth,'  said  Math,  'I  will  give the young man the best  Cantrev  to hold.' 
'Lord,'  said  he,  'what  Cantrev  is  that?'  'The  Cantrev  of Dinodig,'  he 
answered.  Now  it  is  called  at  this  day  Eivionydd  and  Ardudwy.  And 
the  place  in  the  Cantrev  where  he  dwelt,  was  a  palace  of his  in  a  spot 
called  Mur-y-Castell,  on  the  confines  of Ardudwy.  There dwelt he and 
reigned, and both he and his sway were beloved by all.

One  day  he  went  forth  to  Caer  Dathyl,  to  visit  Math  the  son  of 
Mathonwy.  And  on  the  day  that  he  set  out  for  Caer  Dathyl,  Blodeu 
wedd walked in the court. And she heard the sound of a horn. And after 
the  sound  of  the  horn,  behold  a  tired  stag  went  by,  with  dogs  and 
huntsmen  following  it.  And  after  the  dogs  and  the  huntsmen  there 
came  a  crowd  of men  on  foot.  'Send  a  youth,'  said  she,  'to  ask  who 
yonder  host  may  be.'  So  a  youth  went,  and  inquired  who  they  were. 
'Gronw  Pebyr  is  this,  the  lord  of  Penllyn,'  said  they.  And  thus  the 
youth  told  her.Gronw  Pebyr  pursued  the  stag,  and  by  the  river  Cynvael  he  over 
took  the  stag  and  killed  it.  And  what  with  flaying  the  stag  and  baiting 
his  dogs,  he  was  there  until  the  night  began  to  close in  upon  him.  And 
as  the  day departed  and  the night drew near,  he  came  to  the gate of the 
Court  'Verily,'  said  Blodeuwedd,  'the  Chieftain  will  speak  ill  of us  if 
we  let  him  at  this  hour  depart  to  another  land  without  inviting  him  in.' 
'Yes, truly, lady,' said  they,  'it will be most fitting to invite him.'

Then  went  messengers  to  meet him and bid him in.  And  he accepted 
her  bidding  gladly,  and  came  to  the  Court,  and  Blodeuwedd  went  to 
meet  him  and  greeted  him,  and  bade  him  welcome.  'Lady,'  said  he, 
'Heaven repay thee thy kindness.'

308

When  they  had  disaccoutred  themselves,  they  went  to  sit  down. 
And  Blodeuwedd  looked  upon  him,  and  from  the  moment  that  she 
looked  on  him  she  became  filled  with  his  love.  And  he  gazed  on  her, 
and  the  same  thought  came  unto  him  as  unto  her,  so  that  he  could  not 
conceal  from her that he loved  her,  but he declared unto her that he did 
so.  Thereupon  she  was  very  joyful.  And  all  their  discourse  that  night 
was  concerning the  affection  and  love which they felt  one  for the  other, 
and  which  in  no  longer  space  than  one  evening  had  arisen.  And  that 
evening passed they in each other's company.

The  next  day  he  sought  to  depart.  But  she said,  T  pray  thee  go  not 
from  me  to-day.'  And  that  night  he  tarried  also.  And  that  night  they 
consulted  by  what  means  they  might  always  be  together.  'There  is 
none  other  counsel,'  said  he,  'but  that  thou  strive  to  learn  from  Llew 
Llaw Gyffes in what manner he will meet his death. And  this must thou 
do under the semblance of solicitude concerning him.'The  next  day  Gronw  sought  to  depart.  'Verily,'  said  she,  'I  will 
counsel  thee  not  to  go  from  me  to-day.'  'At  thy instance  will  I  not  go,' 
said  he,  'albeit,  I  must  say,  there  is  danger  that  the  chief who  owns  the 
palace  may  return  home.'  'To-morrow,'  answered  she,  'will  I  indeed 
permit thee to go forth.'

The  next  day he  sought  to  go,  and  she  hindered  him  not.  'Be  mind 
ful,' said  Gronw,  'of what I have said  unto  thee, and  converse with him 
fully,  and  that  under  the  guise  of the  dalliance  of love,  and  find  out  by 
what means he may come to his death.'That  night  Llew  Llaw  Gyffes  returned  to  his  home.  And  the  day 
they spent in discourse, and minstrelsy, and feasting. And at night they 
went  to  rest, and  he spoke  to  Blodeuwedd  once,  and  he spoke  to her a 
second  time.  But,  for  all  this,  he  could  not  get  from  her  one  word. 
'What aileth thee,' said he, 'art thou well?' T was thinking,' said she, 'of 
that  which  thou  didst  never  think  of concerning  me;  for I  was  sorrow 
ful  as  to  thy  death,  lest  thou  shouldst  go  sooner  than  I.'  'Heaven  re 
ward  thy  care  for  me,'  said  he,  'but  until  Heaven  take  me  I  shall  not 
easily  be  slain.'  'For  the  sake  of Heaven,  and  for  mine,  show  me  how 
thou  mightest  be  slain.  My  memory  in  guarding  is  better  than  thine.' 
1  will  tell  thee  gladly,'  said  he.  'Not  easily  can  I  be  slain,  except  by  a 
wound.  And  the  spear  wherewith  I  am  struck  must  be  a  year  in  the 
forming.  And nothing must be done towards it except during the sacri 
fice on Sundays.' 'Is this certain?' asked she. 'It is in truth,' he answered. 
'And I cannot be slain within a house, nor without.  I cannot be slain on 
horseback  nor  on  foot.'  'Verily,'  said  she,  'in  what  manner  then  canst 
thou be slain?' T will tell thee,' said he.  'By making a bath for me by the 
side of a river, and by putting a roof over the cauldron, and thatching it 
well  and  tighdy,  and  bringing  a  buck,  and  putting  it  beside  the  caul-

309

dron.  Then  if I  place  one  foot  on  the  buck's  back,  and  the  other  on  the 
edge  of the  cauldron,  whosoever  strikes  me  thus  will  cause  my  death.' 
'Well,'  said she,  'I thank Heaven that it will be easy to avoid  this.'

No  sooner  had  she  held  this  discourse  than  she  sent  to  Gronw 
Pebyr.  Gronw  toiled  at  making  the  spear,  and  that  day  twelvemonth  it 
was  ready.  And  that very day he caused  her to  be informed  thereof.'Lord,'  said  Blodeuwedd  unto  Llew,  'I  have  been  thinking  how  it  is 
possible  that  what  thou  didst  tell  me  formerly  can  be  true;  wilt  thou 
show  me  in  what manner  thou  couldst  stand  at  once  upon  the  edge  of a 
cauldron  and  upon  a  buck,  if I  prepare  the  bath  for  thee?'  'I  will  show 
thee,' said he.

Then  she  sent  unto  Gronw,  and  bade  him  be  in  ambush  on  the  hill 
which  is  now  called  Bryn  Kyvergyr,  on  the  bank  of the  river  Cynvael. 
She caused also to be collected all the goats that were in the Cantrev, and 
had  them brought to the other side of the river, opposite Bryn Kyvergyr. 
And  the next day she spoke  thus.  'Lord,'  said  she,  'I  have caused  the 
roof and  the  bath  to  be  prepared,  and  lo!  they  are  ready.'  'Well,'  said 
Llew,  'we will  go  gladly  to  look  at  them.'

The  day  after  they  came  and  looked  at  the  bath.  'Wilt  thou  go  into 
the  bath,  lord?'  said  she.  'Willingly  will  I  go  in,'  he  answered.  So  into 
the  bath  he  went,  and  he  anointed  himself.  'Lord,  'said  she,  'behold  the 
animals  which  thou  didst  speak  of as  being  called  bucks.'  'Well,'  said 
he,  'cause  one  of them  to  be  caught  and  brought  here.'  And  the  buck 
was  brought.  Then  Llew  rose  out  of the  bath,  and  put  on  his  trowsers, 
and  he  placed  one  foot  on  the  edge  of  the  bath  and  the  other  on  the 
buck's back.

Thereupon  Gronw  rose  up  from  the  hill  which  is  called  Bryn 
Kyvergyr,  and  he  rested  on  one  knee,  and  flung  the  poisoned  dart and 
struck  him  on  the  side,  so  that  the  shaft  started  out,  but  the  head  of the 
dan  remained  in.  Then  he  flew  up  in  the  form  of an  eagle  and  gave  a 
fearful  scream.  And  thenceforth was he no  more seen.And  soon  as  he  departed  Gronw  and  Blodeuwedd  went  together 
unto  the  palace  that  night.  And  the  next  day  Gronw  arose  and  took 
possession  of Ardudwy.  And  after  he  had  overcome  the  land,  he  ruled 
over it,  so  that Ardudwy and  Penllyn  were both under his sway.

Then  these  tidings  reached  Math  the  son  of Mathonwy.  And  heavi 
ness  and  grief came  upon  Math,  and  much  more  upon  Gwydion  than 
upon him.  'Lord,'  said  Gwydion,  'I shall  never rest until I  have  tidings 
of  my  nephew.'  'Verily,'  said  Math,  'may  Heaven  be  thy  strength.' 
Then  Gwydion set forth and  began to go forward. And he went through 
Gwynedd  and  Powys  to  the  confines.  And  when  he  had  done  so,  he 
went  into  Arvon,  and  came  to  the  house  of  a  vassal,  in  Maenawr 
Penardd.  And  he  alighted  at  the  house,  and  stayed  there  that  night-

3 10

The  man  of the  house  and  his  household  came  in,  and  last  of all  came 
there  the  swineherd.  Said  the  man  of  the  house  to  the  swineherd, 
"Well,  youth, hath  thy sow come in  to-night?'  'She hath,'  said  he,  'and 
is  this  instant  returned  to  the  pigs.'  'Where  doth  this  sow  go  to?'  said 
Gwydion.  'Every  day,  when  the  sty  is  opened,  she  goeth  forth  and 
none  can  catch  sight  of her,  neither is  it  known  whither  she  goeth  more 
than  if  she  sank  into  the  earth.'  'Wilt  thou  grant  unto  me,'  said 
Gwydion,  'not  to  open  the  sty  until  I  am  beside  the  sty  with  thee?' 
'This will I do, right gladly,' he answered.That  night  they  went  to  rest;  and  as  soon  as  the  swineherd  saw  the 
light of day, he awoke Gwydion. And  Gwydion arose and dressed him 
self,  and  went  with  the  swineherd,  and  stood  beside  the  sty.  Then  the 
swineherd  opened  the  sty.  And  as  soon  as  he  opened  it,  behold  she 
leaped  forth,  and  set  off with  great  speed.  And  Gwydion  followed  her, 
and she went against the course of a river, and made for a brook, which 
is  now  called  Nant  y  Llew.  And  there  she  halted  and  began  feeding. 
And  Gwydion  came  under  the  tree,  and  looked  what  it  might  be  that 
the sow was feeding on. And he saw that she was eating putrid flesh  and 
vermin.  Then  looked  he  up  to  the  top  of the  tree,  and  as  he  looked  he 
beheld  on  the  top  of the  tree  an  eagle,  and  when  the  eagle  shook  itself, 
there  fell  vermin  and  putrid  flesh  from  it,  and  these  the  sow  devoured. 
And it seemed  to him that the eagle was Llew. And he sang an Englyn:

Oak that grows between the two banks; 
Darkened is the sky and hill! 
Shall I not tell him by his wounds, 
That this is Llew?

Upon this the eagle came down until he reached the centre of the tree.

And  Gwydion sang another Englyn:

Oak that grows in upland ground, 
Is it not wetted by the rain ? Has it not been drenched 
By nine score tempests? 
It bears in its branches Llew Llaw Gyffes!

Then  the  eagle  came  down  until  he  was  on  the  lowest  branch  of the

tree, and  thereupon  this Englyn did  Gwydion sing:

Oak that grows beneath the steep; 
Stately and majestic is its aspect! 
Shall I not speak of it 
That Llew will come to my lap ?

And  the  eagle  came  down  upon  Gwydion's  knee.  And  Gwydion 
struck  him  with  his  magic  wand,  so  that  he  returned  to  his  own  form. 
3 11

No  one ever saw a  more  piteous  sight,  for he was  nothing but skin and 
bone.No  one ever saw a  more  piteous  sight,  for he was  nothing but skin and 
bone.

Then  he  went  unto  Caer  Dathyl,  and  there  were  brought  unto  him 
good  physicians  that  were  in  Gwynedd,  and  before  the end  of the  year 
he was quite healed.

'Lord,'  said  he  unto  Math  the  son  of Mathonwy,  'it  is  full  time  now 
that  I  have  retribution  of him  by  whom  I  have  suffered  all  this  woe.' 
'Truly,'  said  Math,  'he  will  never  be  able  to  maintain  himself in  the 
possession  of that  which  is  thy  right'  'Well,'  said  Llew,  'the  sooner  I 
have my right, the better shall I be pleased.'

Then  they  called  together  the  whole  of  Gwynedd,  and  set  forth  to 
Ardudwy.  And  Gwydion  went  on  before  and  proceeded  to  Mur-y-
Castell. And when  Blodeuwedd heard that he was coming, she took her 
maidens  with  her,  and  fled  to  the  mountain.  And  they  passed  through 
the  river  Cynvael,  and  went  towards  a  court  that  there  was  upon  the 
mountain,  and  through  fear  they  could  not  proceed  except  with  their 
faces  looking  backwards,  so  that  unawares  they  fell  into  the  lake.  And 
they  were  all  drowned  except  Blodeuwedd  herself,  and  her  Gwydion 
overtook. And  he said  unto her,  'I will  not slay thee,  but I will  do unto 
thee worse than that.  For I will turn thee into a bird; and because of the 
shame  thou  hast  done  unto  Llew  Llaw  Gyffes,  thou  shalt  never  show 
thy  face  in  the  light  of day  henceforth;  and  that  through  fear  of all  the 
other birds.  For it shall be their nature to attack thee, and  to  chase thee 
from  wheresoever  they  may  find  thee.  And  thou  shalt  not  lose  thy 
name,  but  shalt  be  always  called  Blodeuwedd.'  Now  Blodeuwedd  is  an 
owl  in  the  language  of this  present  time,  and  for  this  reason  is  the  owl 
hateful unto all birds. And even now the owl is called  Blodeuwedd.Then  Gronw  Pebyr  withdrew  unto  Penllyn,  and  he  despatched 
thence  an  embassy.  And  the  messengers  he  sent  asked  Llew  Llaw 
Gyffes,  if he  would  take  land,  or  domain,  or  gold,  or  silver,  for  the 
injury  he  had  received.  'I  will  not,  by  my  confession  to  Heaven,'  said 
he.  'Behold  this  is  the  least that I will  accept from  him;  that he  come  to 
the  spot  where  I  was  when  he  wounded  me  with  the  dart,  and  that  I 
stand where he did,  and  that with a dart I  take my aim at him. And this 
is the very least that I will accept'

And  this  was  told  unto  Gronw  Pebyr.  'Verily,'  said he,  'is  it needful 
for  me  to  do  thus?  My  faithful  warriors,  and  my  household,  and  my 
foster-brothers,  is  there not one  among you who  will  stand  the blow in 
my  stead?'  'There  is  not,  verily,'  answered  they.  And  because  of their 
refusal  to  suffer  one stroke  for  their  lord,  they  are  called  the  third  dis 
loyal  tribe even unto  this day.  'Well,'  said  he,  'I will meet i t'

Then  they  two  went  forth  to  the  banks  of  the  river  Cynvael,  and 
Gronw stood  in  the place where Llew Llaw  Gyffes  was when he struck

3 12

him,  and Llew in  the place where Gronw was.  Then said  Gronw Pebyr 
unto  Llew,  'Since  it  was  through  the  wiles  of a  woman  that  I  did  unto 
thee as I have done, I adjure thee by Heaven  to  let me place between me 
and  the  blow,  the  slab  thou  seest yonder  on  the  river's  bank.'  'Verily,' 
said  Llew,  'I  will  not  refuse  thee  this.'  'Ah,'  said  he,  'may  Heaven 
reward  thee.'  So  Gronw  took  the  slab  and  placed  it  between  him  and 
the  blow.Then  Llew  flung  the  dart  at  him,  and  it  pierced  the  slab  and  went 
through  Gronw likewise,  so  that  it  pierced  through his  back.  And  thus 
was  Gronw  Pebyr  slain.  And  there  is  still  the  slab  on  the  bank  of the 
river  Cynvael,  in  Ardudwy,  having  the  hole  through  it.  And  therefore 
is it even now called Llech  Gronw.

A second rime did  Llew Llaw Gyffes  take possession  of the land,  and 
prosperously  did  he  govern  it.  And  as  the  story  relates,  he  was  lord 
after this  over Gwynedd.

3 13

Chapter  Eighteen

T HE  B U L L - F O O T ED  G OD

Poets  who  are  concerned  with  the  single  poetic  Theme,  cannot

afford  to  draw  disingenuous  distinction  between  'sacred  history* 
and  'profane  myth'  and  make  the usual  dissociation  between  them, 
unless  prepared  to  reject  the  Scriptures  as  wholly  irrelevant  to  poetry. 
This would be a  pity,  and  in  these days  of religious  toleration I cannot see 
why  they  need  accept  so  glaringly  unhistorical  a  view  of the  authorship, 
provenience,  dating and  original  texts  of the  Old  Testament,  that its  close 
connexion  with  the  Theme  is  severed.  In  the  following  chapter  I  will  knit 
up a few more broken strands.The  myth  of  Llew  Llaw  Gyffes  has  kept  its  original  oudines  pretty 
well,  though  carefully  edited  so  as  to  give  gods  all  the  credit  for  magic 
feats  which  we  know,  by  comparison  with  myths  of the  same  type,  were 
originally  performed  by  goddesses.  For  example,  the  Divine  Child  Llew 
Llaw  is  born  of a  virgin,  but  by  the  wizardry  of Math,  and  Arianrhod  is 
not only unaware that she has brought forth a child, but righteously indig 
nant  that  she  is  accused  of being  an  unmarried  mother;  whereas  in  the 
Cuchulain  version  of  the  Llew  story  his  mother  Dechtire  conceives  by 
swallowing a may-fly without magical aid. And Nana, who  is the Phrygian 
counterpart  of Arianrhod  and  whose  son  Attis  has  much  the  same  later 
history  as  Llew  Llaw,  conceives  of her  own  free  will  by  the  magic  use  of 
an  almond  or,  some  mythographers  say,  a  pomegranate;  again,  Blodeu 
wedd,  Llew's  wife,  is  created  by  Gwydion  from  the  blossoms  of  oak, 
broom, meadow-sweet and six other plants and  trees; whereas in the older 
legend  she is  Cybele  the  Mother  of All  Living,  and wholly independent of 
any male demiurge.

That  Blodeuwedd's  fingers  are  'whiter  than  the  ninth  wave  of the  sea' 
proves  her  connexion  with  the  Moon;  nine  is  the  prime  Moon-number, 
the  Moon  draws  the  tides,  and  the  ninth  wave  is  traditionally  the  largest. 
Thus  Heimdall,  Llew's  counterpart,  porter of the Norse heaven and  rival 
of Loki,  was  'the  Son  of the  Wave'  by  being  born  from  nine  waves  by 
Odin's  (Gwydion's)  enchantment  After  his  fight  with  Loki,  in  which 
both  of them  dressed  in  seal-skins,  Heimdall was given  the apple of Life-
in-death  by Iduna,  born  of flowers, Blodeuwedd's  counterpart,  and  rode

3M3M

his  horse  'Golden-mane'  along  the  Milky  Way  which  also  occurs  in  the 
Llew  Llaw  story.  But  the  Norse  scalds  have  tampered  with  the  myth, 
awarding  Heimdall  the  victory  and  doubly  disguising  Loki's  seduction 
of Heimdall's  bride,  Iduna.

When  Blodeuwedd  has  betrayed  Llew,  she  is  punished  by  Gwydion 
who  transmogrifies  her  into  an  Owl.  This  is  further  patriarchal  interfer 
ence.  She  had  been  an  Owl  thousands  of years  before  Gwydion  was  born 
—the  same  Owl  that  occurs  on  the  coins  of  Athens  as  the  symbol  of 
Athene,  the  Goddess  of  Wisdom,  the  same  owl  that  gave  its  name  to 
Adam's  first  wife  Lilith  and  as  Annis  the  Blue  Hag  sucks  the  blood  of 
children  in  primitive British  folk-lore.  There is a poem  about  Blodeuwedd 
the  Owl  by  Davydd  ap  Gwilym,  in  which  she  swears  by  St.  David  that 
she  is  daughter  of the  Lord  of Mona,  equal  in  dignity  to  Meirchion  him 
self.  This  is  to  call  herself  a  'Daughter  of  Proteus'—Meirchion  could 
change  his  shape  at  will—and  perhaps  to  identify  herself  with  the  old 
bloody  Druidic  religion  suppressed  by  Paulinus  in  Anglesey  in  A . D.  68. 
Davydd  ap  Gwilym,  the  most  admired  of all  Welsh  poets,  was  distressed 
by  the  contemporary  attitude  to  women  and  did  his  best  to  persuade  a 
nun  whom  he  loved  to  break  out  of her cloister.In  the  Romance,  only  the  carrion-eating  Sow  of Maenawr  Penardd  is 
independent of the  male magician's rod.  She is  Cerridwen,  the White Sow-
goddess, in disguise. It will be seen  that Arianrhod the Birth-goddess; and 
Arianrhod  the  Goddess  of Initiation  who  gives  a  name  and  arms  to  Llew; 
and  Blodeuwedd,  the  Love-goddess;  and  Blodeuwedd  the  Owl,  Goddess 
of  Wisdom;  and  Cerridwen,  the  Old  Sow  of Maenawr  Penardd,  form  a 
pentad.  They are the  same  goddess  in  her five seasonal  aspects:  for which 
Ailm,  Onn,  Ura,  Eadha,  and  Idho  are  the  corresponding  vowels  in  the 
Beth-Luis-Nion  calendar.  Why  the  two  Arianrhods  and  the  two  Blodeu-
wedds  are not  distinguished  here is  because  the  pentad  can  also  be viewed 
as  a  triad:  the author of the  Romance,  in  order to  keep  a more intelligible 
narrative sequence, is story-telling in terms of a three-season year.

Similarly,  Llew  Llaw  changes  his  name  with  the  seasons.  Dylan  the 
Fish  is  his  New  Year  name—though  in  some  accounts  Dylan  and  Llew 
are  twins;  Llew  Llaw  the  Lion  is  his  Spring-Summer name;  his  Autumn 
name  is  withheld;  in  mid-Winter  he  is  the  Eagle  of  Nant y  Llew.  He  is 
represented  in  the  Romance  as  being  a  wonderful  horseman;  for  so 
Hercules  rode  the  wild  horse  Arion,  and  Bellerophon  rode  Pegasus.  In 
legend  his  counterpart  Lugh  is  credited  with  the  invention  of 
Irish 
horsemanship.

The  story  of his  deception  by  Blodeuwedd  recalls  that  of  Gilgamesh's 
deception  by  Ishtar,  and  Samson's  deception  by  Delilah.  Samson  was  a 
in  the 
Palestinian  Sun-god  who,  becoming  inappropriately  included 
corpus  of Jewish  religious  myth,  was  finally  written  down  as  an  Israelite

315hero  of  the  time  of  the  Judges. That  he  belonged  to  an  exogamic  and 
therefore  matrilinear  society  is  proved  by  Delilah's  remaining  with  her 
own  tribe  after  marriage;  in  patriarchal  society  the  wife  goes  to  her  hus 
band's  tribe. The name  'Samson'  means  'Of the  Sun'  and  'Dan',  his  tribe, 
is an  appellation  of the Assyrian  Sun-god. Samson,  like  Hercules,  killed  a 
lion  with  his  bare  hands,  and  his  riddle  about  the  bees  swarming  in  the 
carcase  of the  lion  which  he  had  killed,  if returned  to  iconographic  form, 
shows  Aristaeus  the  Pelasgian  Hercules  (father  of Actaeon,  the  stag-cult 
king,  and  son  of Cheiron  the  Centaur)  killing  a  mountain  lion  on  Mount 
Pelion,  from  the  wound  in  whose  flesh  the  first  swarm  of bees  emerged. In the Cuchulain version of the same story, Blodeuwedd is named Blathnat 
and  extracts  from  her husband  King  Curoi—the only man  who  ever gave 
Cuchulain  a  beating—the  secret  that  his  soul  is  hidden  in  an  apple  in  the 
stomach  of a  salmon  which  appears  once  every seven  years  in  a  spring  on 
the side of Slieve Mis (the mountain of Amergin's dolmen). This apple can 
be  cut  only  with  his  own  sword. Her  lover  Cuchulain  waits  for  seven 
years  and  obtains  the  apple. Blathnat  then  prepares  a  bath  and  ties  her 
husband's  long hair to the bedposts and bedrail;  takes his sword and gives 
it  to  her  lover  who  cuts  the  apple  in  two. The  husband  loses  his  strength 
and  cries  out:  'No  secret  to  a  woman,  no  jewel  to  slaves!'  Cuchulain  cuts 
off his  head. There  is  a  reference  to  this  story in  one  of Gwion's  poems. A 
Greek version of the same story is referred  to Minoan times: Nisus King of 
Nisa—an  ancient  city  near  Megara  destroyed  by  the  Dorians—had  his 
'purple'  lock  plucked  by  his  daughter  Scylla  who  wished  to  kill  him  and 
marry  Minos  of  Crete.315

There  is  a  reference  to  this  story in  one  of Gwion's  poems. A 
Greek version of the same story is referred  to Minoan times: Nisus King of 
Nisa—an  ancient  city  near  Megara  destroyed  by  the  Dorians—had  his 
'purple'  lock  plucked  by  his  daughter  Scylla  who  wished  to  kill  him  and 
marry  Minos  of  Crete. The  Greeks  have  given  this  story  an  unlikely 
moral  ending,  that  Minos  drowned  Scylla  as  a parricide  from  the stern  of 
his  galley;  at  any  rate,  the  genealogy  of the  Kings  of Nisa  makes  it  plain 
that  the throne went by matrilinear succession. Still another version occurs 
in  the  Excidium  Troiae,  a  mediaeval  Latin  summary  of the  Trojan  War, 
compiled  from  very  early  sources;  here  the  secret  of Achilles's  vulnerable 
heel  is  wormed  from  him  by  his  wife  Polyxena  'since  there  is  no  secret 
that women  cannot extract  from  men  in  proof of love'. It may  be assumed 
that,  in  the  original  legend  of Osiris,  Isis  was  a  willing  accomplice  in  his 
yearly  murder  by  Set;  and  that,  in  the  original  legend  of  Hercules, 
Deianeira  was  a  willing  accomplice  in  his  yearly  murder  by  Acheloiis,  or 
by Nessus the Centaur; and that each of these heroes was killed in a bath— 
as  in  the  legends  of Minos's  bath-murder  by  the  priestess  of Cocalus,  at 
Daedalus's  instigation,  and  of  Agamemnon's  bath-murder  by  Clytem-
nestra  at  Aegisthus's  instigation—though  in  the  popular  version  of  the 
Osiris story it is a coffin, not a bath, into which he is decoyed. The Jackals, 
who were sacred in Egypt to Anubis,  Guardian  of the  Dead,  because  they 
fed  on  corpse-flesh  and  had  mysterious  nocturnal  habits,  must  have 
known all about  the murder.

3 16

T HE  J A C K A L S'  A D D R E SS  TO  I S IS3 16

T HE  J A C K A L S'  A D D R E SS  TO  I S IS

Grant Anup's children this: 
To howl with you, Queen Isis, 
Over the scattered limbs ofwronged Osiris. 
What harder fate than to be woman? 
She makes and she unmakes her man. 
In Jackal-land it is no secret 
Who tempted red-haired, ass-eared Set 
To such bloody extreme; who most 
Must therefore mourn and fret 
To pacify the unquiet ghost. 
And when Horusyour son 
Avenges this divulsion 
Sceptre in fist, sandals on feet, 
We shall return across the sana 
From loyal Jackal-land 
To gorge five nights and days on ass's meat.A  Canaanite  version  of the  same  story  appears  in  iconotropic  form  in 
the  patently  unhistorical  Book  of  Judith,  composed  in  Maccabean  times. 
The  Jews  seem  always  to  have  based  their  religious  anecdotes  on  an 
existing  legend,  or icon,  never to have written  fiction  in  the  modern  sense. 
Return  the  account  of Judith,  Manasses,  Holofernes  and  Achior  to  pic 
torial  form,  and  then  re-arrange  the  incidents  in  their natural  order.  The 
Queen ties her royal husband's hair to the bedpost to immobilize him, and 
beheads  him  with  a  sword  (XIII,  6-8);  an  attendant brings  it  to  the  lover 
whom  she  has  chosen  to  be  the  new  king  (XIV,  6);  after  mourning  to 
appease the ghost of the old king, the  Corn-Tammuz, who has died at the 
barley-harvest  (VIII,  2—6),  she  purifies  herself  in  running  water  and 
dresses  as  a  bride  (X,  3-4);  presently  the  wedding  procession  forms  up 
(X,  iy—21);  and  the  marriage  is  celebrated  with  much  merriment  (XII, 
15—20),  bonfires  (XIII,  13),  religious  feasting  (XVI,  20),  dancing  and 
waving  of  branches  (XV,  12),  many  gifts  (XV,  2),  killing  of  victims 
(XV,  5),  and  the  ritual  circumcision  of  the  bridegroom  (XIV,  10).  The 
Queen  wears  a  crown  of olive  as  an  emblem  of fruitfulness  (XV,  13).  The 
head  of the  old  king  is  put  up  on  the  wall  of the  city  as  a  prophylactic 
charm  {XIV,  11);  and  the  Goddess  appears  in  triad,  Hag,  Bride  and 
Maid  (XVI,  23)  to  bless  the  union.That  the  Goddess  Frigga  ordered  a  general  mourning  for  Balder 
incriminates  her  in  his  death.  She  was  really  Nanna,  Balder's  bride, 
seduced by his rival Holder; but like the Egyptian priests of Isis, the Norse 
scalds  have  altered  the  story  in  the  interests  of  marital  rectitude.  In 
precisely  what  part  of  die  heel  or  foot  were  Talus,  Bran,  Achilles, 
Mopsus, Cheiron, and the rest mortally wounded? The myths of Achilles

3 17

and  Llew  Llaw  give  the  clue.  When  Thetis  picked  up  the  child  Achilles 
by  the  foot  and  plunged  him  into  the  cauldron  of  immortality,  the  part 
covered  by  her  finger  and  thumb  remained  dry  and  therefore  vulnerable. 
This  was  presumably  the spot  between  the Achilles  tendon  and  the ankle-
bone  where,  as  I  point  out  in  my  King  Jesus,  the  nail  was  driven  in  to  pin 
the  foot  of the  crucified  man  to  the  side  of the cross,  in  the  Roman  ritual 
borrowed  from  the  Canaanite  Carthaginians; for the victim of crucifixion 
was  originally  the  annual  sacred  king.  The  child  Llew Llaw's exact aim 
was  praised  by  his  mother  Arianrhod  because  as  the New  Year  Robin, 
alias Belin,  he transfixed his father the  Wren, alias Bran  to whom the wren 
was sacred, 'between the sinew and the bone' of his leg.Arianrhod's  giving  of  arms  to  her  son  is  common  Celtic  form;  that 
women  had  this  prerogative  is  mentioned  by  Tacitus  in  his  work  on  the 
Germans—the  Germany  of  his  day  being  Celtic  Germany,  not  yet 
invaded by the patriarchal square-heads whom we call Germans nowadays. 
Gronw Pebyr, who figures as the lord of Penllyn—'Lord of the Lake'— 
which  was  also  the  title  of  Tegid  Voel,  Cerridwen's  husband,  is  really 
Llew's  twin  and  tanist.  Llew  never  lacks  a  twin;  Gwydion  is  a  surrogate 
for  Gronw  during  the  visit  to  the  Castle  of  Arianrhod.  Gronw  reigns 
during  the  second  half of the  year,  after Llew's sacrificial  murder;  and  the 
weary  stag  whom  he  kills  and  flays  outside  Llew's  castle  stands  for  Llew 
himself  (a  'stag  of  seven  fights').  This  constant  shift  in  symbolic  values 
makes  the  allegory  difficult  for  the  prose-minded  reader  to  follow,  but  to 
the  poet  who  remembers  the  fate  of  the  pastoral  Hercules  the  sense  is 
clear:  after  despatching  Llew  with  the  dart  hurled  at  him  from  Bryn 
Kyvergyr,  Gronw flays him,  cuts  him  to  pieces  and  distributes  the  pieces 
among  his  merry-men.  The  clue  is  given  in  the  phrase  'baiting  his dogs'. 
Madi had similarly made a stag of his rival Gilvaethwy, earlier in the story. 
It  seems  likely  that  Llew's  mediaeval  successor,  Red  Robin  Hood,  was 
also  once  worshipped  as  a  stag.  His  presence  at  the  Abbot's  Bromley 
Horn  Dance  would  be  difficult  to  account  for  otherwise,  and  'stag's 
horn'  moss  is  sometimes  called  'Robin  Hood's  Hatband'.  In  May,  the 
stag  puts on his red summer coat.Llew visits the Castle  of Arianrhod  in a coracle of weed and sedge.  The 
coracle is  the same old  harvest  basket  in which  nearly  every  antique Sun-
god  makes  his  New  Year  voyage;  and  the  virgin  princess,  his  mother,  is 
always  waiting  to  greet  him  on  the  bank.  As  has  already  been  mentioned, 
the  Delphians  worshipped  Dionysus  once  a  year  as  the  new-born  child, 
Likmtes,  'the  Child  in  the  Harvest  Basket',  which  was  a  shovel-shaped 
basket of rush and osier used as a harvest basket, a cradle, a manger, and a 
winnowing-fan  for  tossing  the  grain  up  into  the  air  against  the  wind,  to 
separate it from the chaff.

The  worship  of  the  Divine  Child  was  established  in  Minoan  Crete, 
318The  worship  of  the  Divine  Child  was  established  in  Minoan  Crete, 
318

its  most  famous  early home  in  Europe.  In  1903,  on  the  site  of the  temple 
of Dictaean  Zeus—the  Zeus  who  was  yearly born  in  Rhea's  cave  at  Dicte 
near  Cnossos,  where  Pythagoras  spent  'thrice  nine  hallowed  days'  of 
his  initiation—was  found  a  Greek  hymn  which  seems  to  preserve  the 
original  Minoan  formula  in  which  the  gypsum-powdered,  sword-dancing 
Curetes,  or tutors,  saluted  the  Child  at his  birthday  feast.  In  it he is  hailed 
as  'the  Cronian  one'  who  comes  yearly  to  Dicte  mounted  on  a  sow  and 
escorted  by  a  spirit-throng,  and  begged  for  peace  and  plenty as a  reward 
for  their  joyful  leaps.  The  tradition  preserved  by  Hyginus  in  his  Poetic 
Astronomy  that  the  constellation  Capricorn1 
('He-goat')  was  Zeus's 
foster-brother  Aegipan,  the  Kid  of the  Goat  Amalthea  whose  horn  Zeus 
also  placed  among  the  stars,  shows  that  Zeus  was  born  at  mid-winter 
when  the  Sun entered  the house of Capricorn.  The date is  confirmed  by the 
alternative  version  of the  myth,  that  he  was  suckled  by  a  sow—evidently 
the  one  on  whose  back  he  yearly  rode  into  Dicte—since  in  Egypt 
swine's  flesh  and  milk  were  permitted  food  only  at  the  mid-winter 
festival.  That  the  Sun-gods  Dionysus,  Apollo  and  Mithras  were  all  also 
reputedly  born  at  the  Winter  solstice  is  well  known,  and  the  Christian 
Church  first  fixed  the  Nativity feast  of Jesus  Christ  at  the  same season,  in 
the year A . D.  273.  St.  Chrysostom, a century later, said that the intention 
was  that  'while  the  heathen  were  busied  with  their  profane  rites  the 
Christians  might  perform  their  holy  ones  without  disturbance',  but 
justified  the  date  as  suitable  for  one  who  was  'the  Sun  of Righteousness'. 
Another  confirmation  of  the  date  is  that  Zeus  was  the  son  of  Cronos, 
whom  we  have  securely  identified  with  Fearn,  or  Bran,  the  god  of  the 
F  month  in  the  Beth-Luis-Nion.  If one  reckons  back  280  days  from  the 
Winter  Solstice,  that  is  to  say  ten  months  of the  Beth-Luis-Nion  calendar, 
the  normal  period  of human  gestation,  one  comes  to  the first day  of Fearn. 
(Similarly,  reckoning  280  days  forward  from  the  Winter  Solstice,  one 
comes  to  the first day of the  G  month,  Gort,  sacred  to  Dionysus;  Dionysus 
the vine and ivy-god, as opposed to the Sun-god, was son to Zeus.) Cuchu-
lain  was  born  as  the  result  of his  mother's  swallowing  a  may-fly;  but  in 
Ireland  may-flies often appear in late March, so his birthday was probably 
the same.Llew's  soul  escapes  in  the  form  of an  eagle,  like  the  soul  of Hercules, 
and  perches  on  an  oak.  This  apotheosis  was  in  the  ancient  royal  tradition. 
The  souls  of lesser  men  might  fly  off in  the  form  of white  birds  or  golden 
butterflies,  but  a  sacred  king's  soul  had  the  wings  of  an  eagle  or  royal 
gryphon.  Lion-headed  eagles  appear  on  seals  in  Minoan  Crete.  It  was  of 
the  highest  political  importance  that  when  the  Emperor  Augustus  died  he 
1  In  the  Egyptian  Zodiac  he  is  shown  with  a  fish  tail,  which  aligns  him  with  the  W a t e r-
carrier  and  the  Fishes  as  a  Sign  of the  three  months  of Flood.  But  the  Egyptian  floods  come 
in  the  summer with  the  melting  of  the  Abyssinian  snows,  so  that  the  Zodiac  must  have  been 
an importation from some other region.

3 193 19

should  be  translated  to  Heaven  and  become  the  prime  deity  of the  Roman 
Empire;  and  a  Roman  knight  who  declared  on  oath  that  he  had  seen  the 
Emperor's  soul  rising  from  his  pyre  in  the  form  of an  eagle  was  therefore 
rewarded  by  Livia,  Augustus's  widow,  with  a  handsome  present.  Gany 
mede  in  the  original  legend  was  a  Phrygian  prince who  rose  to  Heaven  as 
an eagle;  he was not carried off on  an eagle's back to be  Zeus's cup-bearer, 
as  in  the  version  dear  to  homosexuals.  It  is  likely  that,  like  Cretan 
Dionysus,  son  of Zeus;  Icarus,  son  of Daedalus;  Phaethon,  son  of Apollo; 
Aesculapius,  son  of  Apollo;  Demophoon,  son  of  Celeus;  Melicertes,  son  of 
Athamas; Mermerus and Pheres, sons of Jason; Gwern, son of Matholwch; 
Isaac,  son  of Abraham,  and  many  other  unfortunate  princes  of the  same 
sort,  Ganymede  son  of Tros  was  invested  with  a  single-day  royalty  and 
then  burned  to  death.1  As  I  showed  in  the  case  of  Peleus,  Thetis  and 
Achilles,  the Pelasgian sacred king of the  Minos  type  could  not continue in 
office  beyond  the  hundred  months  allowed  him  by  law,  but  that  he  could 
become  the  successor  of a  son  who  was  titular  king  for  the  one  day  that 
did  not  form  part  of the  year.  During  the day  of his son's  reign,  to  judge 
from  the story  of  Athamas,  the  old  king  pretended  to  be  dead,  eating the 
foods  reserved for  the dead;  immediately it ended  he began a new reign by 
marriage  to  his  widowed  daughter-in-law,  since  the  throne was  conveyed 
by  mother-right.  When  the  statutory  reign  was  lengthened  to  a  hundred 
months  the  old  king  often  lengthened  it  still  further  by  abducting  the 
nearest  heiress,  who  was  theoretically  his  own  daughter,  as  in  the  case 
of King  Cinyras  of Cyprus.  The  stories  of Sextus  Tarquin  and  Lucretia, 
David  and  Bathsheba,  Math  and  Arianrhod,  are  to  be  read  in  this 
sense.The subsequent  resurrection  of Llew  takes  place  in  the  dead  of Winter, 
in  the  season  of  the  Old  Sow,  the  time  of  the  annual  Athenian  pig-
sacrifice  to  the  Barley-goddess,  her daughter Persephone and  Zeus:  'nine-
score  tempests',  that  is  to  say  180  days,  have  elapsed  since  his  murder  at 
midsummer.  The  holed  stone  called  Llech  Gronw,  'the  stone  of Gronw', 
was perhaps  one  of the very common  prehistoric  holed  stones,  apparendy 
representing  the  mouth  of  the  baetylic  Mother  Goddess,  through  which 
spirits  passed  in  the  form  of  winds  and  entered  the  wombs  of  passing 
women.  In  other  words,  Gronw  by  interposing  the  stone  between  his 
body and  Llew's  dart  assured  himself of regeneration.

The  death  of Blodeuwedd's  maidens  in  the  lake  refers,  it  seems,  to  the 
conquest  of the  priestesses  of the  old  religion  by  the  new  Apollo  priest-

1  D r.  Rafael  Patai  suggests  in  his  Hebrew  Installation  Rites  (Cincinnati,  1 9 4 7 ),  that  the 
attempted  murder  by  Saul  of his  son  Jonathan  (/  Samuel,  XIV,  iS)  which  was  avoided  only 
by  the  provision  of a  surrogate,  and  the  burning  by  fire  from  Heaven  of t wo  sons  of Aaron 
on  the  day  of  his  coronation  {Leviticus,  X,  1-3),  were  both  ritual  sacrifices.  If  he  is  right 
about  Aaron,  the  story  has  been  telescoped:  one  of his  'sons'  must  have  been  burned  at  the 
close  of each  year  of office,  not both  at his first installation.

320

hood—and  so  recalls  the  story  of  how  Melampus  cured  the  mad 
daughters  of  Proetus  and  washed  away  their  madness  in  a  spring  at 
Lusi.  But there is a clearer parallel than this:  the death of the fifty Pallantid 
priestesses  of Athens  who  leaped  into  the  sea  rather  than  submit  to  the 
new patriarchal  religion.The  Romance  ends  with  the  killing  of  Gronw  by  the  re-born  Llew 
Llaw,  who  reigns  again  over  Gwynedd.  This  is  the  natural  close  of  the 
story,  except  that  Llew  Llaw  should  really  have  another  name  when  he 
kills  Gronw:  for Gronw corresponds with the god  Set who kills  Osiris and 
tears  him  in  pieces,  also  with  the  Greek  Typhon  and  the  Irish  Finn  Mac 
Coll,  all  gods  of the  same  sort.  Osiris  dies,  but  is  re-born  as  Harpocrates 
('the  Child  Horus')  and  takes  his  revenge  on  Set  just  as  Wali  avenges 
Holdur's  murder  of Balder;  thus  the  Egyptian  Pharaohs  were  honoured 
with  the  name  of Horus  and  spoken  of as  'suckled  by Isis'.Llew's  autumn  name,  omitted  in  the  story,  can  be  recovered  by  the 
logic  of myth.  That  his  rivalry  with  Gronw Lord  of Penllyn  for  the  love 
of  Blodeuwedd  is  the  same  as  that  of  Gwyn  with  Gwythyr  ap  Greidawl 
for  the  love  of  Creiddylad  is  proved  by  Triad  14,  where  Arianrhod  is 
described  as  the  mother  of the  twin  heroes  Gwengwyngwyn  and  Gwanat. 
Gwengwyngwyn  is  merely  'The  Thrice-white-one',  or  Gwyn's  name 
three  times  repeated,  and  Gwyn's  duty,  as  we  have  seen,  was  to  conduct 
souls  to  the  Castle  of  Arianrhod,  like  Thrice-great  Hermes;  in  fact, 
Gwyn,  like  Dylan  and  Llew,  was  Arianrhod's  son.  But  Dafydd  ap 
Gwilym  reports  that  the  autumnal  owl,  Blodeuwedd  in  disguise,  was 
sacred  to  Gwyn;  it  follows  that  when  Llew  who  began  the  year  as  Dylan, 
reached  goat-haunted  Bryn  Kyvergyr,  the  midsummer  turning-point— 
and  was  killed  by  his  rival  'Victor, son  of Scorcher',  he disappeared  from 
view  and  presently  became  Gwyn  the  leader  of the  autumnal  Wild  Chase. 
Like  the  White  Goddess,  alternately  Arianrhod  of  the  silver  wheel, 
Blodeuwedd  of the  white  flowers,  and  Cerridwen  the  spectral  white  sow, 
he  also  was  Thrice-white:  alternately Dylan  the  silver fish, Llew  the white 
stag,  and  Gwyn  the  white  rider  on  the  pale  horse  leading  his  white,  red-
eared  pack.  That  Gwyn's  father was  Nudd  or  Lludd,  and  Gwengwyn-
gwyn's  was  one Lliaws, does not spoil  the argument.  Hermes's  fatherhood 
was similarly disputed in Greece.The  chest  in  which  Llew  is  laid  by  Gwydion  is  an  ambivalent  symbol. 
It  is  in  one  sense  the  chest  of re-birth,  of the  sort  in  which  dead  Cretans 
were  laid.  In  another  it  is  the  ark  in  which  the  Virgin  and  Child—Danae 
and  Perseus  is  the  most  familiar  of  several  instance—are  customarily  set 
adrift  by  their  enemies;  this  is  the  same  acacia-wood  ark  in  which  Isis 
and  her  child  Harpocrates  sailed  over  the  waters  of  the  flooded  Delta 
seeking  the  scattered  fragments  of  Osiris.  In  this  case,  however,  Arian 
rhod  is  not  in  the  chest with Llew.  The  author  is  doing  his  best  to  keep

3 21

the  Goddess,  in  her maternal  aspect,  out  of  the  story;  she  does  not  even 
suckle  Llew.

Mur-y-Castell,  now  called  Tomen-y-Mur  is  a  mediaeval  British  fort— 
a  fair-sized  artificial  mound  surmounted  by  a  stockade—in  the  hills 
behind  Ffestiniog  in  Merioneth.  It  has  been  constructed  around  the  north 
gate  of a  Roman  camp,  and  the considerable  remains  of the  Roman  baths, 
supplied  by  water  from  the  river  Cynfael,  are  still  clearly  visible  near  by. 
Apparendy  the  Camp  was  occupied  by  the  pagan  Welsh  when  the 
Romans  evacuated  it  in  the  fifth  century,  and  then  became  the  centre  of a 
Llew  Llaw  cult—if it  had  not  been  sc  already,  like  the  Roman  camps  of 
Laon,  Lyons  and  Carlisle.  The  bath  system  lent  itself to  the  story.  The 
mound  may  be  funerary,  with  the  remains  of a  dead  king  buried  in  the 
ruins  of the  Roman  gate around  which  it has been  heaped.The  bath  in  the  story  of  Llew's  murder  is,  as  I  have  said,  familiar. 
Sacred  kings  often  meet  their  end  in  that  way:  for  example,  Minos  the 
Cretan  Sun-god  at  Agrigentum  in  Sicily  at  the  hands  of the  priestess  of 
Cocalus  and  her  lover  Daedalus;  and  Agamemnon,  the  sacred  king  of 
Mycenae,  at  the  hands  of  Clytemnestra  and  her  lover,  Aegisthus.  It  is  a 
lustral  bath  of the  sort  that  kings  take  at  their  coronation:  for Llew  Llaw 
anoints  himself  while  in  it.  The  merry-men  in  attendance  are  usually 
depicted  as  goat-legged  satyrs.  In  the  Romance  of Llew  Llaw,  too,  they 
are summoned as goats to assist in the sacrifice of their master.

The  shoe-making  business  is  odd,  but  it  throws  light  on  the  mysterious

twelfth-century  French  ballad  of the  Young  Shoemaker.

Sur les marches du palais 
L'est une tant belle femme

Elle a tant d'amouroux 
Quelle ne salt lequel prendre.

C'est le p'tit cordonnier 
Qua eu la preference.

Un jour en la chaussant 
Illuifit  sa  demande:

'La belle si vous I'vouliei, 
Nous dormirons ensembbz.

'Dans un grand lit carre. 
Orne de tele blanche,

'Et aux quatre coins du lit 
Un bouquet de pervenches.

3 22

'Et au mitan du lit 
La rivikre est sigrande

'Que les chevaux du Roi 
Powroient y boire ensemble

'Et Id nous dormirions 
Jusqu'a la fin du monde.'3 22

'Et au mitan du lit 
La rivikre est sigrande

'Que les chevaux du Roi 
Powroient y boire ensemble

'Et Id nous dormirions 
Jusqu'a la fin du monde.'

The beautiful  lady with  the many lovers and  a great square bed hung with 
white  linen  is  unmistakably  the  Goddess,  and  the  young  shoemaker  is 
Llew Llaw.  The speaking parts have been interchanged. In stanza 2 Elle a 
tant d'amouroux should be, for the  rhyme's sake Elle a  tant d'enamouris. 
In  stanza 4,  'En la  chaussant II luifit sa  demande'  should  be Sur la  chaussee 
Elle  lui fit sa  demande.  'La  belle'  should  be  'Bel homme'  in  stanza  5,  roi 
should  be  rei  in  stanza  9,  and  in  the  last  stanza,  'nous  dormirions'  should 
be  'vous  dormiriei'.  Those  posies  of  periwinkles  show  that  the  'river' 
(still  a  term  for the  sag furrowed  in  a mattress  by  love-making)  where  all 
the King's  horses  could  drink  together,  is  the river  of death,  and  that the 
shoemaker will never rise again from  the bridal couch.  His bride will bind 
him  to  the bedpost,  and  summon his  rival  to  kill  him.  The periwinkle was 
the  flower  of death  in  French,  Italian  and  British  folklore.  In  mediaeval 
times  a  garland  of periwinkles  was  placed  on  the  heads  of men  bound  for 
execution.  The  flower  has  five  blue  petals  and  is  therefore  sacred  to  the 
Goddess,  and  its  tough  green  vines  will  have  been  the  bonds  she  used  on 
her  victim.  This  can  be  deduced  from  its  Latin  name  vincapervinca 
('bind  all  about'),  though  mediaeval  grammarians  connected  it  with 
vincere,  'to  conquer',  rather  than  vincire,  'to  bind',  and  so  'pervinke' 
came  to mean  'the all-conquering'.  But death  is all-conquering; so it came 
to  the  same  thing.  Most  likely  that  the custom of garlanding the criminal 
with  periwinkle was  taken  over from  the sacrifice ritual in honour of Llew 
Llaw  the  shoemaker.  It  is  clear  that  the  magical  power  of  Arianrhod, 
like  that  of  Math,  rested  in  her  feet  and  that  once  Llew  had  taken 
her  foot  in  his  hand  as  if to  measure  it  for  a  shoe,  he was  able  to  make 
her  do  what  he  wished.  Perhaps  Perrault's  story  of  Cinderella's  slipper 
is a  degenerate  version  of the same  myth.  Foot-fetishists  are by  no means 
rare  even  in  modern  times—the  aberrants  spend  all  their  spare  time 
buying  or  stealing  women's  high-heeled  shoes  for  the  exaltation  of 
spirit  that  the  possession  gives  them.  What  is  more,  it  is  possible 
that  foot-fetishism  was  an  ancient  cult  in  Ardudwy,  the  scene  of 
this  Romance,  though  I  do  not  know  whether  the  evidence  has  ever 
been  officially  recorded.  A  few  miles  from  Mur-y-Castell,  on  the  hills 
between  Harlech (where I lived as a boy)  and Llanfair,  there is a Goidels' 
Camp—a  cluster  of  ruined  round  huts  dating  from  perhaps  the  fourth323

century  A . D . — a nd  not far off,  towards  Llanfair,  a woman's  footprint  is 
sunk  an  inch  or  so  deep  in  a  large  flat  stone.  It  is  locally  called  'the 
Virgin's  footprint', and another mark near by is  called  the  'Devil's  thumb 
print'.  The  stone  is  at  the  far  left-hand  corner  of  a  field  as  one  comes 
along the road from Harlech. Similar sacred footprints are still worshipped 
in Southern India.

Why  'Cordovan'  leather?  Probably  because  the  Llew  cult  came  to 
Britain from Spain, as it is known that  the buskin did. At  Uxama in  Spain 
a dedication has been  found  to  'the  Lugoves',  i.e.  the Lughs,  by a guild  of 
shoemakers.  And  why  coloured  and  gilded  shoes?  Because  such  shoes 
were  a symbol  of royalty among the  Celts.  They used  also  to  figure  in  the 
English  Coronation  ceremony,  but  dropped  out  after  the  reign  of George 
II.  Though  officially styled  'sandals',  they were  gilded  half-boots,  like  the 
purple  buskins  in  which  the  Byzantine  Emperors  were  crowned,  with 
purple  soles  and  wooden  heels  covered  with  scarlet  leather.  Scarlet  was  a 
product  of  the  kerm-oak  and  doubtless  the  heels  were  oaken.  In  the 
Romance  the  colour  of the  shoes  is  not  specified;  which  suggests  a  further 
connexion  with  Spain,  where  bos^eguis  de  piel  Colorado  does  not  mean 
'buskins  of  coloured  leather',  but  'buskins  of  scarlet  leather'.  Similar 
buskins  are  thought  to  have  been  used  in  the  sanctification  of the  kings  of 
Rome,  since they were part of the sacred  dress  of the  Triumphant  General 
in Republican  times,  and  this dress was  of regal  origin.  Sandals also  occur 
in  the  legends  of the solar hero  Theseus,  whose  Goddess  mother gave him 
a pair at  the same  time  as  she gave  him  his  arms  and  sent  him  out  to  slay 
monsters; of Perseus, another monster-slayer; and of Mercury.The  implication  of  this  part  of  the  story  is  that  Llew  Llaw  kept  the 
third pair of gold shoes for his own use. He was one of the Three Crimson-
stained  Ones  of  Britain,  as  we  learn  from  Triad 24;  another  of  these  was 
King Arthur.  To  be  'crimson-stained'  is  to  be a sacred  king:  at  Rome  the 
Triumphant  General  had  his  face  and  hands  stained  red  as  a  sign  of 
temporary  royalty.  Sacred  kings,  it  seems,  were  not  allowed  to  rest  their 
heels  on  the  ground  but  walked  on  their  toes,  like  the  Canaanite  Agag. 
The  cothurnus,  or  high-heeled  buskin,  of  the  God  Dionysus  can  be  ex 
plained  only  in  this  sense,  though  the  reason  was  disguised  in  Greece  by 
the  observation  that buskins  gave  an effect  of height.

In  Genesis,  XXXII Jacob  wresdes  all  night  with  an  angel  at  Peniel  and 
is  lamed  by  him  so  that  the  sinew  in  the  hollow  of his  thigh  is  shrunken. 
Jacob sustained  an injury once common  to wrestlers,  the inward  displace 
ment  of the  hip first described  by  Hippocrates.  The  result  of this  disloca 
tion,  which  is  produced  by  forcing  the  legs  too  widely  apart,  is  that  the 
injured  person  finds  his  leg  flexed,  abducted  and  externally  rotated:  in 
other words  he can  only  walk,  if at all,  with  a  lurching  or swaggering gait 
and  on  his  toes.  The  leg  affected  is  lengthened  by  the  peculiar  position  of

3*43*4

the  head  of  the  femur,  or  at  least  looks  longer  than  the  other.  The 
lengthening  of the  leg  tightens  the  tendons  in  the  thigh  and  the  muscles 
go into spasm,  which is presumably what is meant by the shrinking  of the 
sinew in  the hollow  of the  thigh.  Since Jacob  belongs  to  the  mother-right 
age,  and  since  he  won  his  sacred  name  and  inheritance,  both  of  which 
could  only be given him by a woman,  on  this same occasion, the  story has 
evidendy  been  censored  by  the  patriarchal  editors  of  Genesis.  But  the 
Arabic lexicographers  agree  that  the  result  of Jacob's  injury  was  that he 
could walk only on the toes of his injured leg; and they should know.While  still  in  the  womb  Jacob  supplants  his  twin  Esau  by  catching  at 
his  heel,  and  so  draining  him  of royal  virtue.  Hosea,  XII,  4  connects  this 
supplanting  with  the  wresding  incident,  which  suggests  that  Jacob's  real 
name was Jah-aceb,  'the heel-god'.  Jacob  is  translated  'the supplanter'  in 
the  Authorised  Version  of the Bible and what does  'supplant'  mean but to 
put  one's  hand  sub plantam  alicujus,  under  someone's  foot,  and  trip  him 
up?  The  Greek  word pterru\ein,  used  by  the Septuagint in  this  context, is 
still  more  accurate:  it  means  'to  trip  up  someone's  heel'  and  is  the  first 
recorded  use  of the  word  in  this  sense.  Jacob  is  the  sacred  king  who  has 
succeeded  to  office  by  tripping up  a rival; but  the  penalty  of his  victory  is 
that  he  must  never  again  set  his  own  sacred  heel  to  the  ground.  The 
comment  in  Genesis  on  Jacob's  lameness  is:  'Therefore  the  Children  of 
Israel  eat  not  of  the  sinew  which  shrank,  which  is  in  the  hollow  of  the 
thigh, to this day.' Jacob's grandfather, Abraham, also had a sacred  thigh 
and  in  Genesis XXIV,  2  he  makes his  servant put his  under it when  taking 
an  oath,  just  as  Jacob  makes  Joseph  do  in  Genesis  XL VII,  29.  Mrs. 
Hermione  Ashton  writes  that  several  tribes  of Southern  Arabia  kiss  the 
thigh  of  their  Emir  in  homage;  she  has  seen  this  done  herself  by  the 
Qateibi  who  live  about  a  hundred  miles  north  of Aden—one  of the  four 
tribes  of the Amiri  race who  boast  that  they  are  the  sons  of Ma'in  and  the 
oldest race in the world.The  mincing  or swaggering  gait  of sacred  kings,  either  due  to  this  dis 
location  or  assumed  in  imitation  of it,  was  used  by  tragic  actors  on  the 
Greek  stage  who  wore  the  cothurnus  in  honour  of Dionysus.  As  an  off 
stage  affectation  it  was  generally  understood  by  the  Greeks  in  an  erotic 
sense:  the  letters  SALM which  occur in  the names  of several ancient kings 
suggest  the  word  saleuma,  an  oscillation  or  waggling;  with  'of  the  but 
tocks'  added,  or understood,  this  implied  a  deliberate  flaunting  of sexual 
charms.  Greek  prostitutes  were  called  'Salmakides'.  Isaiah,  III,  16 chides 
the  Daughters  of Israel  for  walking  in  this  lascivious  style,  rolling  their 
eyes as  they walk.

Plutarch  asks  in  his  Greek  Questions:  'Why  do  the  women  of  Elis 
summon  Dionysus  in  their  hymns  to  come  among  them  with  his  bull-
foot?' It is a good question, but as J. E. Harrison has pointed out, Plutarch

3 253 25

was  always  better  at  asking  questions  than  at  answering  them.  Well,  why 
with his bull-foot? Why not with his bull-horns, bull-brow, bull-shoulders, 
bull-tail—all  of which  are  more  symbolic  of the  bull's  terrible  power  than 
its feet?  And why foot,  not feet?  Plutarch does  not even make a guess,  but 
fortunately  he  quotes  the  ritual  hymn  used  in  the  mystery  to  which  he 
refers;  from  which  it  appears  that  the  'women  of  Elis'  were  dramatic 
representatives  of the  'Charites',  the  Three  Graces  who  at Elis  shared  an 
altar  with  Dionysus.  The  answer  seems  to  be:  'Because  in  ancient  times 
the  sacred  king  of the  mystery  drama  who  appeared  in  response  to  the 
invocation  of the  Three  Graces  really had  a  bull-foot.'  That  is  to  say,  the 
dislocation  of his  thigh  made  one  of his  feet  resemble  that  of a  bull,  with 
the  heel  as  the  fetlock,  and  that  he  hurried  among  them  with  a  rush  and 
clatter of buskins.  Plutarch should have remembered  that in  the Pelasgian 
island  of Tenedos  a  sacred  cow  had  once  been  'kept  for  Dionysus'  and 
when  in  calf had  been  treated  like a woman  during her confinement.  If she 
bore a bull-calf it was put into buskins and despatched with a sacrificial axe, 
or  labris,  as  if  it  were  Zagreus,  the  infant  Dionysus—which  shows  the 
ritual  connexion  of bulls'  feet  with  buskins;  but  Aelian,  the  authority  for 
this  ceremony,  does  not  mention  that  the  calf  was  robed,  crowned  or 
otherwise  adorned.  It  is  perhaps  worth  noting  that  in  the  Spanish  bull 
fight,1  brought from Thrace to Rome by the Emperor Claudius and thence 
introduced  into  Spain,  the  matador  who  kills  his  bull  with  outstanding 
heroism  and  grace  is  rewarded  by  the  President  with  the  pata,  or 
foot.The  connexion  of the  buskin  with  sexuality  is  explained  by  Egyptian 
and  Cypriot  inscriptions.  The  name  of the  Goddess  Mari  of  Cyprus  is 
written with a 'buckled post' which  stands  for a reed-hut,  meaning  'dwell 
ing in', and a buskin; so she was resident in a buskin, like the Goddess Isis 
who  in  Egypt bore her name  'Asht'  on  her head,  together with  a  buskin. 
In  both  cases  some  stick-like  object  protrudes  from  the  mouth  of  the 
buskin,  which  Mr.  E.  M.  Parr  takes  as  a  symbol  of fertilization  since  the 
buskin  hieroglyph  is  reas  as  Ush,  'the  mother'.  This  throws  new  light  on1  There  may,  however,  have  been  an  earlier introduction of the  bullfight  into  Spain  by  the 
Iberian settlers of the third millennium B . C ., w ho had cultural affinities with Thrace. Archaeo 
logical  evidence  from  Crete  suggests  that  the  fiesta  originated  as  an  annual  display  of  the 
bull's  domination  by  acrobatic  Moon-goddesses  after  he  had  been  allowed  to  tire  himself by 
chasing and killing men; and  that  the bull was a surrogate for the sacred king.  However,  in no 
Minoan  painting or  sculpture is there any picture of the final episode  of the fiesta, in which  the 
bull  is despatched  with  a sword,  and  this may have been  omitted  in  Crete,  as in  the Provencal 
bullfight.  Even  in  Spain,  where  the bull is always  killed  and  where  the fiesta is a  royal  institu 
tion,  a  glorification  of man's  courage  (supposed  to  be  resident  in  his  testicles)  for  the  benefit 
of the  ladies  seated  near  the  President's  box—especially  for  the  Queen,  and  Isabella  II  was 
not  ashamed  to  accept  the  most  famous  bullfighter  of her  day  as  her  lover—the  tradition  of 
the  woman  bullfighter  persists  obstinately.  W h en  Prince  Charles  went  to  Madrid  in  1623  to 
court  the Infanta he  saw a woman-fighter despatch  her bull with  skill and grace,  and  there are 
still two or three women  in the profession.

326

the  second  marriage  of the  Eleusinian  Mysteries,  after  the  performance  of 
which it is known  that the initiate said:  T have fitted what was  in the drum 
to  what  was  in  the  liknos.'  We  know  what  was  in  the  liknos—a  phallus— 
and  on  the  analogy  of  the  buskins  ceremonially  presented  to  the  sacred 
king  at  his  marriage,  it  may  be  concluded  that  the  drum  contained  a 
buskin  into  which  the  phallus  was  inserted  by  the  initiate  as  a  symbol  of 
coition.An  act  of invocation  corresponding  with  the  Elian  ritual  mentioned  by 
Plutarch  is  recorded  in  I  Kings,  XVIII,  26,  where  the  priests  of  Baal 
dance at  the altar  and  cry  out  'Baal, hear us!':  appealing  to  him  to  light 
the  Spring  bonfires  and  burn  up  the  corpse  of the  old  year.  They  leaped 
up  and  down,  according  to  the  Authorised  Version;  but  the  original 
Hebrew  word  is  formed  from  the  root  P S CH  which  means  'to  dance  with 
a limp', and from which Pesach, the name of the Passover Feast, is derived. 
The  Passover appears  to  have  been  a  Canaanite  Spring  festival  which  the 
tribe  of Joseph  adopted  and  transformed  into  a  commemoration  of their 
escape  from  Egypt  under  Moses.  At  Carmel,  the  dance  with  a  limp  must 
have  been  sympathetic  magic  to  encourage  the  appearance  of  the  God 
with  a  bull's  foot  who  was  armed,  like  Dionysus,  with  a  torch.  'Baal' 
merely  means  'Lord'.  The  annalist  refrains  from  mentioning  his  real 
name;  but  since  the  priests  of Baal  were  Israelites  it  is  likely  to  have  been 
'Jah  Aceb'  or  'Jacob'—the  Heel-god.  Jah  Aceb  seems  to  have  been  also 
worshipped  at  Beth-Hoglah—'The  Shrine  of the  Hobbler'—a  place  be 
tween  Jericho and  the Jordan  south  of Gilgal and  identified  by Epiphanius 
with the threshing floor of Atad, mentioned in Genesis, L, 1 1, as the place 
where  Joseph  mourned  for  Jacob.  Jerome  connects  this  place  with  a 
round  dance,  apparently  performed  in  honour  of Talus  the  Cretan  Sun-
hero—Hesychius  says  that  Talus  means  'Sun'—to  whom  the  partridge 
was  sacred.  In  Athenian  legend  Talus  was  thrown  down  by  Daedalus 
from  a  height  and  transformed  into  a  partridge  while  in  the  air  by  the 
Goddess  Athene.  The  Arabic  word  for  'hobble'  which  gives  its  name  to 
Beth-Hoglah  is  derived  from  the  word  for  partridge;  the  deduction  being 
that  the  dance  was  a  hobbling  one.  The  partridge  is  a  Spring  migrant, 
sacred  to  the  Love-goddess  because  of  its  reputation  for  lasciviousness 
(mentioned  by Aristotle and  Pliny) and  the dance must have mimicked  the 
love  dance  of the  cock-partridge  which  it  carries  out,  like  the  wood-cock, 
on a regular dancing floor. It is a war dance, performed for a hen audience: 
the  cocks  flutter  around  in  circles  with  a  hobbling  gait,  one  heel  always 
held  in  readiness  to  strike  at  a  rival's  head.  The  hens  look  on,  quaking 
with excitement.  The proverb  quoted by Jeremiah:  'The partridge gathers 
young  that she has  not brought forth',  means  that  Jewish  men  and  women 
were  attracted  to  these  alien  orgiastic  rites.  So  also  the  understanding 
Titian  gives  us  a  glimpse  of  a  partridge  through  the  window  of  the3 27

room  in  which  his  naked  Love-goddess  is  lasciviously  meditating  fresh 
conquests.1

The  connexion  between  the  hobbling  partridge  and  the  lame  king  is 
confirmed  by  the  mythographers  Hyginus  and  Ovid,  who  identify  the 
hero  Perdix  ('partridge')  with  Talus.  Apollodorus  and  Diodorus  Siculus 
make  Perdix  feminine,  the  mother  of Talus,  but  this  is  as  much  as  to  say 
that  Talus  was  virgin-born;  because,  according  to  Aristode,  Pliny  and 
Aelian  the  hen-partridge  can  be  impregnated  by  the  sound  of the  cock-
partridge's  voice  or  by  his  scent  blown  down  the  wind.  Pliny  says  'in  no 
other  animal  is  there  any  such  susceptibility  in  the  sexual  feelings',  and 
that when  the  female is sitting on  her eggs  the cocks relieve their emotions 
by  practising  sodomy—an  observation  which  may  have  inspired  the 
organized  sodomy  in  the  temples  of  the  Syrian  Moon-goddess,  though 
dogs  and  doves,  also  associated  with  her  worship,  are  credited  with  the 
same habit. The Aegean island most famous for its partridges was Anaphe, 
the  Argonauts'  first  landfall  on  their  homeward  voyage  from  Crete  after 
Medea had killed  Talus; where  Radiant Apollo was worshipped with rites 
closely  paralleling  those  of the  Hebrew  Tabernacles,  though  of an  erotic 
cast. This Apollo was a Sun-god, not an  Underworld one.Partridges become so deeply absorbed  in  their dance that even if a man 
comes  up  close and  kills  some  of the dancers  the  rest continue undeterred; 
a  habit  of which  the  ancients  took  full  advantage.  In  the  mating-season 
they used  to put a decoy cock-partridge in a cage at the end  of a long nar 
row  winding  brushwood  tunnel  and  gave  it  corn  to  eat.  Its  lonely  cry, 
combining the call to love with the call to food, attracted the hens along the 
tunnel,  and  when  diey  reached  the  cage  and  it  uttered  its  usual  challenge 
call,  other cocks would  come running up,  only to be knocked  on  the  head 
with sticks by the waiting hunters as soon as they emerged from the tunnel. 
Thus  in  / Samuel,  XXVI,  20  Saul  is  taunted  for  his  unkingly  behaviour 
in  hunting  David,  who  is  not  only  as  insignificant  as  a  flea  but  as  easily 
caught as a mountain partridge. The decoy partridge was one that had dis 
located  its  leg in  trying to  escape  from  the horse-hair slip-knot in  which it 
was snared.  This lame, and therefore easily tamed, decoy was fattened in a 
cage  like a  sacred king in  his  palace—both honoured  prisoners—and  the 
more  numerous  its  victims,  the  more  gleeful  its  cry.  In  Ecclesiasticus 
(XI,  36)  the caged  partridge  is an  allegory of the proud  man  who  rejoices1  T he  quail,  sacred  to  Delian  A p o l lo  and  Hercules  Melkarth,  was  decoyed  in  the  same  w ay 
and had  a similar erotic reputation.  T he moral of the flock of migrating quails  that invaded  the 
Israelites'  camp  in  the  Wilderness  is  carefully  pointed  in  Numbers  {XI,  33,  34).  Whereas  in 
Exodus  {XVI,  13),  the  earlier  version  of  the  story,  the  Israelites  apparently  eat  without  evil 
consequences  according  to  the  Lord's  promise,  the  author  of Numbers  does  not  let  them  so 
much  as  chew  a  morsel;  but  records  that  G od  smote  them  with  a  great  plague  and  that  the 
place  was  called  Kibroth-Hattaavah,  'the  grave  of lust*.  He  is  allegorically  warning  his  post-
Exilic audience against having anything to do with Melkarth worship.

328

at  the  disasters  into  which  he  has  decoyed  his  neighbours.  This  form  of 
sport is still practised in Mediterranean countries as far west as Majorca.328

at  the  disasters  into  which  he  has  decoyed  his  neighbours.  This  form  of 
sport is still practised in Mediterranean countries as far west as Majorca.

It seems, then, that in the pesach a bull-cult had been superimposed on a 
partridge cult;  and  that  the  Minotaur  to  whom  youths and  maidens  (from 
Athens  and  elsewhere)  were  sacrificed  had  once  represented  the  decoy 
partridge  in  the  middle  of a  brushwood  maze,  towards  which  the  others 
were lured  for  their death  dance.  He was,  in  fact,  the centre of a  ritual  per 
formance,  originally  honouring  the  Moon-goddess,  the  lascivious  hen-
partridge,  who  at Athens  and  in  parts  of Crete  was  the  mother  and  lover 
of the  Sun-hero  Talus.  But  the  dance  of the hobbling  cock-partridge  was 
later  transformed  into  one  honouring  the  Moon-goddess  Pasiphae,  the 
cow  in  heat,  mother  and  lover  of  the  Sun-hero,  the  bull-headed  Minos. 
Thus  the  spirally-danced  Troy-game  (called  the  'Crane Dance'  in  Delos 
because  it  was  adapted  there  to  the  cult  of the  Moon-goddess  as  Crane) 
had  the  same  origin  as  the pesach.  The  case  is  proved  by  Homer  who 
wrote:

Daedalus in Cnossos once contrived 
A dancing-floor for fair-haired AriadneDaedalus in Cnossos once contrived 
A dancing-floor for fair-haired Ariadne

—a verse which  the scholiast explains as  referring  to  the Labyrinth dance; 
and  by  Lucian  who  in  his  Concerning  the  Dance,  a  mine  of mythological 
tradition,  gives  as  the  subjects  of  Cretan  dances:  'the  myths  of Europe, 
Pasiphae,  the  two  Bulls,  the  Labyrinth,  Ariadne,  Phaedra  [daughter  of 
Pasiphae], Androgeuos [son of Minos], Icarus, Glaucus [raised by Aescula 
pius  from  the  dead],  the  magic  of Polyidus,  and  of Talus  the  bronze  man 
who  did his sentry round in Crete.'  Polyidus means 'the many-shaped' and 
since  the  Corinthian  hero  of that  name  had  no  connexion  with  Crete,  the 
dance  was  probably  the  shape-shifting  dance  of  Zagreus  at  the  Cretan 
Lenaea.

Here some  loose ends can be tied up.  The maze pattern has been shown 
to  represent  'Spiral  Castle'  or  'Troy  Town',  where  the  sacred  Sun-king 
goes  after  death  and  from  which,  if lucky,  he  returns.  The  whole  myth 
is  plainly  presented  on  an  Etruscan  wine-jar  from  Tragliatella,  dated 
from  the  late  seventh  century  B . C.  Two  mounted  heroes  are  shown; 
the  leader  carries  a  shield with  a  partridge  device,  and  an  ape-like  demon 
perches  behind  him;  his  companion  carries  a  spear  and  a  shield  with  a 
duck  device.  They  are  riding  away  from  a  maze  marked  'TR.UIA' 
('Troy').  Apparently the sacred king,  though due to  die like  the partridge 
in  the  brushwood  maze,  and  be  succeeded  by  his  tanist,  has  escaped. 
How  he  escaped,  another  picture  on  the  same  vase  shows:  an  unarmed 
king  leads  a  sunwise  procession,  escorted  by seven  footmen  each  carrying 
three  javelins  and  a  huge  shield  with  a  boar  device;  the  spear-armed

3*93*9

tanist,  whose  badge  this  is,  brings  up  the  rear.  These  seven  footmen 
evidently  represent  the  tanist's  seven  winter  months  which  fall  between 
the  apple  harvest  and  Easter.  The  king  is  being  warned  of  his  ritual 
death. A Moon-priestess has come to meet him: a terrible robed figure with 
one arm menacingly akimbo, as  she offers an  apple, his passport to Para 
dise.  The  javelins  threaten  death.  Yet  a  diminutive  female  figure,  robed 
like  the  priestess,  guides  the  king—if the  hero  is  Theseus,  we  may  call 
her  Ariadne—who  has  helped  him  to  escape  from  the  maze.  And  he 
boldly  displays  a  counter-charm—namely  an  Easter-egg,  the  egg  of 
resurrection.  Easter  was  the  season  when  Troy  Town  dances  were 
performed on the turf-cut mazes of Britain; and of Etruria,  too, where the 
famous  Lars  Porsena  of  Clusium  built  a  labyrinth  for  his  own  tomb. 
(Similar  labyrinth  tombs  existed  in  pre-Hellenic  Greece:  near  Nauplia, 
oh  Samos,  and  on  Lemnos.)  An  Etruscan  egg  of polished  black  trachite, 
found  at  Perugia,  with  an  arrow  in  relief running  around  it,  is  the  same 
holy egg.  Against  the spearmen on  the vase is  written MAIM;  against the 
king,  E K R A U N;  against  the  priestess,  MLTHES.  L U E I.  If,  as  seems 
probable,  these  words  are  Western  Greek,  they  mean  respectively: 
'Winter',  'He  reigned',  and  'Having  pronounced,  she  sets  free'.  The 
letters written against Ariadne are indecipherable.The  lame  King  is  frequently  connected  with  the  mysteries  of  smith 
craft. Jacob was connected with the cult of the Kenite Smith-god; Talus in 
one account was son,  or maternal  nephew,  to  Smith  Daedalus,  in another 
was  forged  in  the  furnace  of Smith  Hephaestus.  Dionysus,  because  of his 
titles  pyrigenes  and  ignigena  ('engendered  by  fire')—a  reference  to  the 
autumnal  Toadstool-Dionysus  engendered  by 
lightning—may  have 
been  equated  with  Talus  in  this  sense.  Wieland  the  Scandinavian  Smith-
god, was lamed by a woman.

But what evidence is  there  for any  lameness  in  Dionysus?  Why should 
the buskins  not have been worn merely to add  to his height,  rather than as 
surgical  boots  to  compensate  for  his  deformity?  The  best  evidence  is  his 
name,  Dio-nysus,  usually  translated  as  'The  Light  God  of Mount  Nyse' 
but more likely to mean 'The Lame God of Light'. Nysos was a Syracusan 
word for 'lame'  and therefore probably of Corinthian origin,  for Syracuse 
was  a  colony  of Corinth.  Yet,  as  Mr.  E.  M.  Parr  has  pointed  out  to  me, 
Dionysus  may  really  have  taken  his  name  from  Nyse,  Nyssa  or Nysia,  a 
name attached to various shrines in the area where the sacred lameness was 
cultivated.  There are three Nyssas in Asia Minor,  three Nysias in Thrace, 
a Nyza near Mosul, and  a Nysia in Arabia where, according to Diodorus, 
the Goddess Isis was born. This suggests that Nyse was a title of Isis, and 
that  since  Dionysus  was  a  tide  of  the  Libyo-Thracian  Harpocrates,  her 
lame  son,  the  Corinthian  Greeks  read  Nysus,  which  was  really  his 
matronymic,  as meaning  'lame'.  Mr.  Parr writes:  'There  seem  to  be  con-

330330

fusing results  when an  established  divine title is  retained  in  a new tongue. 
For  instance:  Apollo  Agieueis  of  Athens  is  described  as  the  leader  of 
colonies,  but  is  more  likely  to  have  been  the  Cyprian  Apollo  who  wore  a 
wreath  (aga,  agii).'  Dionysus,  who  was  regarded  by  the  Greeks  of 
the  Classical  age  as  a  Thracian  God,  is  said  to  have  come  there  from 
Crete, as his counterpart, King Proteus, is said to have come from Pharos. 
In  Crete  he  was  not  lame,  neither was  Velchanos,  a  Cretan  Cock-demon 
who  became  Vulcan  when  his  worship  was  introduced  into  Italy.  But 
in  Italy  Vulcan  was  said  to  be  lame  and  to  walk  with  the  help  of high-
heeled  gold shoes,  because he was  identified  with  Hephaestus,1 a Pelasgian 
deity  from  Lemnos,  who  like  Talus  was  hurled  down  from  a  height—the 
tradition of sacred lameness seems to have been Danaan, not early Cretan. 
And,  according  to  Homer,  Hephaestus's  wife  was  Charis,  whom  he  else 
where calls Aphrodite.  The Three  Graces  are thus explained as  the Love-
goddess  Aphrodite  in  triad;  and  when  they invoke  Dionysus  at  Elis  they 
are  calling  their  lame  buskined  husband  to  perform  the  act  of love  with 
them.Here  we  may  reconsider  another  of  Dionysus's  titles,  'Merotraphes', 
which  is  usually  translated  'thigh-nursling'  because  of a  silly  Olympian 
fable  about  Dionysus  having  been  sewn  up  in  Jove's  thigh,  while  an 
infant,  to  hide him  from  the jealous anger of Hera;  the simpler meaning is 
'one  whose  thigh  is  taken  very  good  care  o f.  And  v.hat  of  Mercury's 
winged  sandals,  and  those of Theseus and  Perseus?  Mercury,  or  Hermes, 
is  commonly  represented  as standing  on  tiptoe:  was  this  because  he  could 
not  put  his  heel  to  the  ground?  It  is  likely  that  the  eagle-wings  on  his 
sandals were  originally not a  symbol  of swiftness  but a sign  of the  holiness 
of  the  heel,  and  so,  paradoxically,  a  symbol  of  lameness.  In  the  Hittite 
cylinder-seal reproduced as an illustration to my King Jesus, the king who 
is  about  to  be  crowned  after  mounting  three  steps  of a  throne  has  his 
sacred  heel  protected  by  a dog-demon.  In  Latin  those sandals  were called 
talaria  from  the  word  talus,  meaning  a  heel:  and  dice  were  called  tali 
because  they were  made  from the  heel-bones  of the  sheep  or goats sacred 
to  Hermes  or Mercury,  though  those of the  boibalis,  the  Libyan antelope, 
were more  highly  prized  by  the  illuminated.

Mercury  was not only patron  of dice-players but prophesied  from  dice. 
He  used  five  dice  with  four  markings  on  each,  in  honour  of his  Mother, 
precisely  like  those  given  an  Indian  King  at  his  coronation  in  honour  of 
the Mother; and if, as I suppose, he used them for alphabetic divination he 
had  his  own  alphabet  of fifteen consonants  and  five  vowels.  The  game  of1  Hephaestus,  according  to  Hesiod,  was  the  parthogenous  son  of Hera—in  other  words,  he 
belonged  to  the  pre-Hellenic  civilization—and  not  even  Homer's  authority  for  the  view  that 
Zeus  was  his  father  carried  any  weight  with  subsequent  Greek  and  Latin  mythographers. 
Servius  makes  this  clear  in  his  comment  on  Aeneid,  VIII,  4S4.

3 31

hucklebones  is  still  played  in  Great  Britain with  the  traditional  set  of  five. 
In  the  case  of six-sided  dice,  however,  three  made  a  set  in  ancient  times; 
these would  provide  the  diviner with  eighteen  letters  of the  alphabet,  as  in 
the  thirteen-consonant  Beth-Luis-Nion.But was the sacred king chosen because he had  accidentally suffered  this 
injury,  or  was  the  injury  inflicted  on  him  after  he  had  been  chosen  for 
better  reasons?  The  answer  is  to  be  found  in  the  otherwise  meaningless 
story of Llew Llaw's balancing between the rim of his sacred cauldron and 
the  back  of a  buck.  Llew  was  to  become  a  sacred  king  by  marriage  with 
Blodeuwedd,  the  May  Bride,  a  king  of  the  delicately-treading  golden-
shoed  or  purple-buskined  sort;  but  he  was  not  properly  equipped  for  his 
office until he had  sustained  Jacob's  injury which  would  prevent  him  from 
ever  again  putting  his  sacred  heel  on  the  ground,  even  by  mistake.  This 
injury was  artificially  produced  by  an  ingenious  incident  in  the  coronation 
ritual.  His  bride  made  him  stand  with  one  foot  on  the rim  of the bath,  the 
other  on  the  haunch  of a  sacred  beast  with  his  hair  tied  to  an  oak-branch 
above  his  head.  And  then  a  cruel  trick  was  played  on  him.  Messrs. 
Romanis  and  Mitchener  in  their  Surgery  put  it  in  these  words:  'Such  in 
ward  or  anterior  dislocations  of the  hip,  produced  by  wide  abduction  of 
the  thighs,  may  result  when  a  person  embarking  in  a  boat  remains  un 
decided  whether  to  get  in  or  remain  on  land.'  As  with  quay  and  boat,  so 
with  cauldron and  buck.  The  buck  moved  suddenly  away  from  the  caul 
dron.  Llew  could  not  save  himself by  throwing  himself forward,  because 
his head was fixed by the hair.  The result was  this anterior dislocation, but 
when  he  fell,  his  sacred  heel  did  not  touch  the  ground:  because  his  hair 
held  him  up,  which  is  exactly what  happened  to  Absalom  ('Father  Salm') 
when  the  beast  moved  from  under  him  in  the  oak-wood  of Ephraim.  I 
postulate  as  a  main  source  of the  anecdotal  parts  of the  early  books  of the 
Bible  a  set  of icons,  captured  by  the  Israelites  at  Hebron,  illustrating  the 
ritual fate of the sacred king; one part of the series becomes iconotropically 
reinterpreted  as  the  story  of Saul,  another  as  that  of Samson,  another  as 
that  of  Absalom,  another  as  that  of Samuel.  A  restoration  of the  icons  is 
attempted  in  the  King  Adam  chapter  of  my  King  JesusIt  will  be  noticed  that  all  these  names  look  like  corrupt  forms  of the 
same  word  Salma,  or  Salmon,  a  royal  title  among  the  Kenites,  who  were 
King  David's  ancestors,  among  the  Phoenicians  (Selim),  among  the 
Assyrians  (Salman),  among  the  Danaans  of  Greece  and  late  Minoan 
Crete  (Salmoneus).  Solomon  adopted  the  tide  too.  His  original  name 
seems  to  have  been  Jedidiah  (2  Samuel  XII,  25);  if not,  he  would  have 
had  a  less  convincing  right  to  the  throne  than  Adonijah.  Absalom's 
original  name is  unknown,  but  that  he was  David's  favourite,  not his  son 
except  by  courtesy,  is  shown  in  2  Samuel XII,  1 1,  where  he  is  described 
as  David's  neighbour.  The  discrepancy  between  the  account  of  his

3 323 32

parentage  in  2  Samuel III,  3  and  2  Samuel XIII,  37  suggests  that  his  real 
name  was  Talmai,  son  of Ammihud,  King  of Geshur  and  one  of David's 
allies,  and  that  he  became  Absalom  only  when  he  seized  David's  throne 
and  married  the  royal  harem  of heiresses  at  Hebron.  As  a  god,  Salma  is 
identified  with  Reseph  the  Canaanite  Osiris.  Among  these  icons  there 
may  have been  one showing Absalom  with  his  hair  tied  to  an  oak-branch 
—really an  incident  in  the  marriage  of the  King.  The assassination  of the 
king  on  such  an  occasion  was  easy,  but  sanctification,  not  death,  was  the 
object  of the trick;  and  if we can accept A.  M.  Hocart's conclusion that the 
coronation  ceremony  throughout  the  ancient  world  typified  the  marriage 
of the  Sun  King  to  the  Earth  Queen,  his  death  as  a member of his  former 
tribe  and  his  re-birth  with  a  new  name  into  that  of his  Queen,  then  the 
ritual  on  which  all  these  myths  are  based  must  have  included  a  mock-
assassination  of  the  king  in  the  course  of  the  bath-ceremony;  which  is 
proved  by  the  victims  offered  in  the  king's  stead  in  many  forms  of the 
ritual  known  to  us.  The  confused  elements  in  the  myth  of Hephaestus, 
who was married  to  the Love-goddess and deceived by her,  and  lamed  by 
suddenly  being  thrown  down  from  Olympus  by  the  Goddess  Hera,  and 
mocked  by  the  whole  company  of  Heaven,  compose  another  variant  of 
the  same  ritual.  Originally  the  king  died  violently  as  soon  as  he  had 
coupled  with  the  queen;  as  the  drone  dies  after  coupling  with  the  queen-
bee.  Later, emasculation and  laming were substituted  for death; later still, 
circumcision  was  substituted  for emasculation  and  the wearing  of buskins 
for laming.Once  we  know  that  the  sacred  king  was  ritually  lamed  in  a  way  that 
obliged  him  to  swagger  or  lurch  on  high  heels,  we  understand  at  last  two 
or  three  hitherto  mysterious  ancient  icons.  Tantalus,  suspended  over  the 
water  with  a  fruit-branch  above  his  head  and  the  water  always  slipping 
iway  is  evidently  being  lamed  in  Llew Llaw  fashion:  originally his  hair  is 
ied  to  the  branch,  one  foot  is  on  the  bank,  the  other  rests  on  something 
in  the  water—perhaps  a  large  boat-shaped  basin—that  slips  away.  Tan 
talus is a perfect type of Dionysus: he was married to Euryanassa (another 
form  of Eurynome)  a  Moon-goddess;  he  was  thrown  down  from  Mount 
Sipylus,  in  Pelasgian  Lydia,  where  he  was  afterwards  buried  and  had  a 
hero  shrine;  he was  Pelops's  cannibalistic  father;  he  helped  to  steal  a  D og 
from  a  Cretan  cave;  and  from  his  name  derive  three  other  Greek  words 
meaning,  like  saleuein,  from  which  saleuma  is  formed,  'to  swagger  or 
lurch in one's gait':  tantaloein,  tantaleuein and, by a metathesis,  talantoein.

Like Ixion and Salmoneus, Tantalus belonged to the old religion super 
seded  by  Olympianism,  and  the  Olympian  priests  have  deliberately mis 
interpreted  the  icons  in  favour  of Father  Zeus  by  presenting  him  as  an 
odious  criminal.  Tantalus's  crime,  the  mythographers  explain,  was  that, 
having  been  privileged  to  eat  ambrosia,  the  food  of  the  gods,  with  the

3 333 33

Olympians,  he  later invited  commoners  to  try  it.  Ambrosia was  the  name 
of Dionysus's  autumnal  feast  in which,  I  suggest,  the intoxicant  toadstool 
once  inspired  his  votaries  to  a  divine  frenzy;  and  in  my  What  Food  the 
Centaurs  Ate,  I  show  that  the  ingredients  given  by  Classical  grammarians 
for  ambrosia,  nectar,  and  kekyon  (Demeter's  drink  at  Eleusis)  represent 
a  food-oghan—their  inidal  letters  all  spell  out  forms  of a  Greek word  for 
'mushroom'.  The  story  of  Tantalus's  crime  may  have  been  told  when 
wine  displaced  toadstools  at  the  Maenad  revels,  and  a  toadstool— 
perhaps  not  amanita  muscaria,  but  the  milder,  more  entrancing panaeolus 
papilionaceus—was  eaten  by  adepts  at  the  Eleusinian,  Samothracian  and 
Cretan  Mysteries,  who  became  as  gods  by  virtue  of  the  transcendental 
visions  it  supplied.  However  the  dislocation  may  have been produced— 
and  it  is  likely  that  still  another  method  was  practised  on  a  hill-top  not 
beside  a  river—there  was  a  taboo  in  Canaan  on  eating  the  flesh  around 
the  thigh-bone,  as  is  expressly  stated  in  Genesis  in  the  story  of Jacob's 
wrestling  at  Peniel.  Robertson-Smith  rightly  connects  this  taboo  with 
the  practice,  common  to  all  Mediterranean  countries,  of dedicating  the 
thigh-bones of all sacrificial beasts, and  the parts about them, to  the gods: 
they  were  burned  first  and  then  the  rest  of  the  beast  was  eaten  by  the 
worshippers.  But  the  anthropological  rule  'No  taboo  without  its  relaxa 
tion'  applies  here.  In  primitive  times  the  flesh-covered  thighbone  of the 
dead  king  must have  been  eaten  by his  comrades.  This  practice was  until 
recently  followed,  as  Mgr.  Terhoorst,  a  Roman  Catholic  missionary 
records,  by  the  younger  warriors  of the  Central  African  Bantu  tribe  of 
Bagiushu  among  whom  he  worked.  The flesh was  eaten  on  the  death  of 
their  Old  Man,  or  when  the  chief of an  enemy  tribe  was  killed  in  battle. 
Mgr.  Terhoorst  states  that  this  was  done  to  inherit  the  courage  of the 
dead  man  which  was  held  to  reside  in  the  thigh,  and  that  the  rest  of the 
body  was  not  touched.  The  Bagiushu,  who  file  their  front  teeth  into  a 
triangular shape, are not cannibalistic on other occasions.In myAm^/ejMjIsuggestthat theHebrew tradition found in the Talmud 
Babli  Sanhedrin  and  the  ToV  Doth  Yeshu,  that  Jesus  was  lamed  while 
attempting to fly, refers to a secret Coronation ceremony on Mount Tabor, 
where  he  became  the  new  Israel  after  being  ritually  lamed  in  a  wrestling 
match.  This  tradition  is  supported  by  Gospel  evidence  which  I  adduce, 
and by a remark of Jerome's  that Jesus was deformed.  Mount Tabor was 
one of Jehovah's chief shrines. Tabor is named after Atabyrius, the son of 
Eurynome and grandson of Proteus, as the Septuagint recognized, and we 
know  a  good  deal  about  this  god,  who  also  had  a  shrine  built  to  him  on 
Mount  Atabyria in  Rhodes  by  one  'Althaeamenes  the  Cretan'.  Althaea-
menes  means  'Mindful  of  the  Goddess  Althaea'  and  Althaea  ('she  who 
makes  grow')  was  another  name  for  Atabyrius's  mother  Eurynome,  the 
Moon-goddess of the Orphics. The marshmallow—in Welsh hocys bendi-

334334

gaid the  holy mallow—was  Althaea's  flower,  and  she  loved  Dionysus  the 
Vine-god.  She became the mother by him of Deianeira, the same  Deianeira 
who  played  the  part  of  Blodeuwedd  to  Hercules  of  Oeta.  Atabyrius, 
being  one  of  the  Cretan  Telchines,  had  the  power,  like  Dionysus  or 
Proteus,  to  transform  himself into  any  shape;  and  in  his  Rhodian  shrine 
brazen  bulls  were  dedicated  to  him  which  bellowed  whenever  anything 
extraordinary was about  to  happen—the same sort of brazen bull that was 
made  by Daedalus  for  King  Minos  of Crete.  And  we know that Atabyrius 
was  the  god,  worshipped  as  a  golden  calf,  whom  Israel  credited  with 
having  brought  them  out  of  Egypt.  But  the  byrius  termination  occurs 
in  the  royal  title  of  Burna-buriash,  one  of  the  Third  Dynasty  Kassite 
(Indo-European) Kings of Babylon who reigned from 1 7 50 to 1 1 73 B . C .; 
Atabyrius was clearly not a native Cretan, nor a Semite,  but a  Kassite god 
who  entered  Syria  early in  the  second  millennium.  How and  when his  cult 
was  carried  to  Thrace,  Rhodes  and  Crete  is  not  clear;  but he  is  likely  to 
have gone into Egypt with the Hyksos.  He was also called Tesup.This  mythological rigmarole adds up  to an  identification  of the Israelite 
Jehovah  of Tabor,  or Atabyrius,  with  Dionysus  the  Danaan  White  Bull-
god:  an  identification  which  rests  on  respectable  Classical  authority.  In 
Plutarch's  Convivial Questions  one  of the  guests  claims  to  be  able  to  prove 
that  the  God  of the  Jews  is  really  Dionysus  Sabazius,  the  Barley-god  of 
Thrace  and  Phrygia;  and  Tacitus  similarly  records  in  his  History  (v.  5) 
that  'some  maintain  that  the  rites  of the  Jews  were  founded  in  honour  of 
Dionysus'.  Also,  the  historian  Valerius  Maximus  records  that  about  the 
year 1 39 B . C. the Praetor of Foreigners, C. Cornelius Hispallus, expelled 
from  Rome  certain  Jews who  were  'trying to  corrupt Roman morals by a 
pretended  cult of Sabazian Jove'.  The inference is that the Praetor did  not 
expel  them  for  a  legitimate  worship  of this  god,  but  because  they  foisted 
novelties  on  the  Thracian  cult—probably  circumcision,  which  was  re 
garded  by the  Romans as self-mutilation and a corruption of morals—for 
they admitted  aliens  to  their Sabbaths.  According  to  Leclercq's Manual of 
Christian  Archaeology,  burials  in  the  cemetery  of  Praetextatus  at  Rome 
confirm  this  cult  of a  Jewish  Sabazius.  That  the  Jews  of the  Dispersion 
may  have  used  false  etymology  to  equate  'Sabazius'  with  'Sabaoth'— 
Jehovah  was  the  Lord  of the  Sabbath,  and  also  of Sabaoth,  'of hosts'— 
does not disprove  the original  identity of the two  gods.Sabazian Zeus and Sabazian Dionysus were different names of the same 
character,  the  Son  of Rhea;  which  means  that  he  was  of  Cretan  origin. 
The  Phrygians  called  him Attis  and  made him  the  son  of Cybele,  but  this 
amounted  to  the same thing;  and  an  inscription of Jewish  origin  has  been 
found  in  Rome:  'To  Attis  the  Most  High  God  who  holds  the  Universe 
together.'  The serpent was sacred  to  Sabazius;  and  this  recalls the  Brazen 
Seraph  Ne-esthan  or  Nehushtan,  which  Moses  used  as  a  standard  and

335

which is said to have been destroyed as  idolatrous by Good  King Hezekiah 
because incense was burned to it as to a god.1 But the Jewish sect of Ophites, 
centred  in  Phrygia,  revered  the  Serpent  in  early  Christian  times,  holding 
that  the  post-exilic  Jehovah  was  a  mere  demon  who  had  usurped  the 
Kingdom  of the  Wise  Serpent,  the Anointed  One.  Sabazian  Dionysus  was 
represented with bull's horns because,  as  Diodorus Siculus records, he was 
the  first  to  yoke  oxen  to  the  plough  for  agriculture:  in  other  words  to 
plant  barley.  Since  Jehovah  was  pre-eminently  a  protector  of barley—the 
Passover  was  a  barley  harvest-festival—Plutarch's  convivial  guest  would 
have  had  little  trouble  in  proving  his  contention,  especially since,  accord 
ing  to  the  legend,  Sabazius  was  torn  by  the  Titans  into  seven  pieces. 
Seven  was  Jehovah's  mystical  number;  so  also  was  42,  the  number  of 
letters  in  his  enlarged  Name,  and  according  to  Cretan  tradition,  the 
number of pieces into which the Titans tore the bull-god Zagreus.Dionysus  Sabazius  was  the  original  Jehovah  of  the  Passover;  and 
Plutarch  also  identifies  the  Jehovah  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  with 
Dionysus  Liber,  or Lusios  ('he  who  frees  from  guilt'),  the  Wine-god,  by 
suggesting  that  the  word  'Levite'  is  formed  from  Lusios;  and  he  says  that 
the  Jews abstain  from  swine's flesh because  their  Dionysus  is  also Adonis, 
who  was  killed  by  a  boar.  The  rituals  of Jehovah  and  Dionysus,  as  Plu 
tarch  pointed  out,  corresponded  closely:  mysteries  of barley-sheaves  and 
new  wine,  torch  dances  until  cock-crow,  libations,  animal  sacrifices, 
religious ecstasy.  It  also  appears  that  the  promiscuous  love-making  of the 
Canaanite  rites,  though  severely  punished  at  Jerusalem  in  post-exilic 
times,  still  survived  among  the  peasantry  who  came  up  for  the  Taber 
nacles.  The  Temple  priests  in  the  time  of  Jesus  admitted  the  original 
nature  of  the  Feast,  while  declaring  that  its  nature  had  changed,  by 
announcing  at  the  close:  'Our  forefathers  in  this  place  turned  their  backs 
on  the  Sanctuary of God  and  their faces  to  the East,  adoring  the  Sun;  but 
we  turn  to  God.'  For the  Sun  represented  the  immortal  part  of Dionysus; 
the barley and  the vine his mortal part,There  is  even  numismatic  evidence  for  the  identification  of  Jehovah 
and  Dionysus:  a  silver  coin  of the  fifth  century  B . C .,  (which  appears  in 
G.  F.  Hill's  Catalogue  of the  Greek  Coins  of Palestine)  found  near  Gaza 
with  on  the  obverse  a  bearded  head  of Dionysus  type  and  on  the  reverse 
a  bearded  figure  in  a  winged  chariot,  designated  in  Hebrew  characters 
JHWH—Jehovah.  This  is  not,  of course,  by  any  means  the  whole  story 
of Jehovah,  whose  affinity with  other  gods,  especially  Cronos  (Bran),  has 
already  been  mentioned.  It  is  easiest  perhaps  to  write  about  him  in  terms 
of  days  of  the  week.  His  first  pictorial  appearance  is  at  the  copper-

1  J.  N.  Schofield  in  his  Historical Background to  the  Bible  suggests  that  he  destroyed  it  for 
political  reasons—the  Serpent  cult  being  Egyptian,  and  Hezekiah  wishing  to  signalize  his 
return  to Assyrian  vassalage.

3 363 36

workings  of  Ras-Shamra  in  Sinai  in  a  carving  of  about  the  sixteenth 
century  B . C.  He  is  then  Elath-Iahu  a  Kenite  Smith-god,  the  G od  of 
Wednesday,  presumably  the  lover  of  Baalith  the  local  Aphrodite  and 
Goddess  of  Friday.  Later  in  his  theophanies  at  Moreh,  Hebron  and 
Ophrah  he  is  the  terebinth-god  Bel,  the  G od  of  Thursday.  T he  story  of 
his  defeat  of  the  prophets  of  Carmel  concerns  the  conquest  of  his  Bel 
aspect  by  Cronos  the  G od  of  Saturday  in  the  person  of  Elijah.  Bel  and 
Cronos  are  always  appearing  in  opposition,  Bel  being  Beli  and  Cronos, 
Bran;  as  has  been  shown.  'When  Israel  was  in  E g y p t ',  J e h o v ah  was Set, 
the  G od  of Sunday.  At  the  Jerusalem  feast  of Tabernacles,  on  the  D ay  of 
W i l l o w s,  he  was  the  G od  of Monday,  His  name  E l,  connected  with  the 
scarlet  oak,  proves  him  to  have  been  also  the  G od  of Tuesday.  T h us  the 
universality  claimed  for him  by  the  Pharisees  and  typified  by  the  Menorah, 
the  seven-branched  candlestick,  rests  on  a  solid  enough  mythological 
basis.Further,  the  name  Iahu  is  far  older  than  the  sixteenth  century  B . C.  and 
of wide  distribution.  It  occurs  in  E g y pt  during  the  Sixth  D y n a s ty  (middle 
of the  third  millennium  B . C .)  as  a  title  of the  G od  Set:  and  is  recorded  in 
Deimel's Akkadian-Sumerian  Glossary as  a  name  for Isis.  It also  seems  to 
be  the  origin  of  the  Greek  name  Iacchus,  a  title  of  the  shape-shifting 
Dionysus  Lusios  in  the  Cretan  mysteries.  T h us  although  I . A . U.  are  the 
vowels  of  the  three-season  year  of  Birth,  Consummation  and  D e a t h— 
with  Death  put  first  because  in  the  Eastern  Mediterranean  the  agricultural 
year  begins  in  the  I  season—they seem  to  be  derived  from  a  name  that  was 
in  existence  long  before  any  alphabet  was  formed,  the  components  of 
which  are  IA  and  H U.  'Ia'  means  'Exalted'  in  Sumerian  and  ' H u'  means 
D o v e ';  the  Egyptian  hieroglyph  ' H u'  is  also  a  dove.  T he  Moon-goddess 
of Asianic  Palestine  was  worshipped  with  doves,  like  her  counterparts  of 
Egyptian  Thebes,  Dodona,  Hierapolis,  Crete  and  C y p r u s.  But  she  was 
also  worshipped  as  a  long-horned  cow;  Hathor,  or Isis,  or Ashtaroth  K a r-
naim.  Isis  is  an  onomatopoeic  Asianic  word,  Ish-ish,  meaning  'She  w ho 
weeps',  because  the  Moon  was  held  to  scatter  dew  and  because  Isis,  the 
pre-Christian  original  of  the  Mater  Dolorosa,  mourned  for  Osiris  when 
Set  killed  him.  She  was  said  to  be  the  white,  or,  according  to  Moschus,  the 
golden  Moon-cow  Io  w ho  had  settled  down  in  E g y pt  after  long  wander 
ings  from  A r g o s.  T he  o  in  I o 's  name  is  an  omega,  which  is  a  common 
Greek  variant  of alpha.Ia-Hu  therefore  seems  to  be  a  combination  ot  la,  'the  Exalted  One',  the 
Moon-goddess  as  C o w,  and  Hu,  the  same  goddess  as  D o v e.  We  k n ow 
from  Plutarch  that  at  the  mid-winter  solstice  mysteries  Isis,  as  the  golden 
Moon-cow,  circled  the  coffin  of Osiris  seven  times  in  commemoration  of 
the  seven  months  from  solstice  to  solstice;  and  we  k n ow  also  that  the 
climax  of  the  orgiastic  oak-cult  with  which  the  D o v e - g o d d e ss  was  con-

3 37

cerned  came  at  the  summer  solstice.  Thus  Ia-Hu  stands  for  the  Moon-
goddess  as  ruler  of the  whole  course  of the  solar  year.  This  was  a  proud 
tide and Set seems to have claimed it for himself when his ass-eared sceptre 
became the Egyptian symbol of royalty. But the Child Horus, the reincar 
nation  of Osiris,  overcomes  Set  yearly  and  it  is  a  commonplace  that  con 
quering  kings  their  tides  take  from  the  foes  they  captive  make.  Thus 
Horus  was  Iahu  also,  and  his  counterparts  the  Cretan  Dionysus  and 
Canaanite Bel became respectively I A C C H US and (in an Egyptian record) 
I A H U - B E L.  The Welsh god  Hu  Gadarn  and  the  Guernsey god  Hou,  or 
Har  Hou,  are  likely  to  be  the  same  deity:  that  Hou  was  an  Oak-god  is 
suggested  by the  same  formula having been  used  in  his  mediaeval  rites  as 
in those of the Basque Oak-god Janicot, who is Janus.Iahu  as a  tide  of Jehovah  similarly marks  him  out as a ruler of the solar 
year,  probably  a  transcendental  combination  of  Set,  Osiris  and  Horus 
(alias Egli-Iahu, the Calf Iahu). But the Hu syllable of his name has come 
to  have  great  importance  in  Christianity:  for  when  at  Jesus's  lustration 
by  John  the  Baptist  the  Coronation  Psalm  was chanted and a Dove desc 
ended,  this  must  be  read  as  the  ka,  or  royal  double,  that  descended  on 
him  in  a  stream  of  light  from  his  father  Iahu—as  it  descended  on  the 
Pharaohs  at  their  coronation  from  their  father  the  Sun-god  Ra,  in  the 
form  of a hawk.No  mention  has  been  made  so  far  of the religious  meaning  of the  cedar, 
which  figures  so  prominendy  in  the  Old  Testament  as  the  loftiest  and 
grandest of all trees: 'even the cedars of Libanus which Thou hast planted.' 
It  was  used  by  Solomon  with  the  'choice  fir'  in  the  building  of the  three 
contiguous  temples  which  he  raised  in  honour  of a  Trinity  consisting  of 
Jehovah  and  two  Goddesses.  The  identity  of the  second  of these  temples 
is  disguised  by  Pharisee  editors  as  'the  House of the  Forest  of Lebanon', 
meaning  the  temple  of the  Mountain-goddess,  the  Love  and  Battle  god 
dess  of  Midsummer;  that  of  the  third  is  disguised  as  'The  House  of 
Pharaoh's  daughter',  who  is  shown  by  the story of Moses to have been the 
Birth-goddess  of  the  Winter  Solstice.  Since  we  know  that  the  fir  was 
sacred  to  the  Birth-goddess  and  that  the  floor  of the  Temple  was  of  fir 
planking,  it  follows  that  the  cedar  of the  pillars  and  beams  was  sacred  to 
the  Love-and-Batde  goddess  of  Mount  Lebanon,  Astarte  or  Anatha. 
Cedar  stood,  in  fact,  for  the  vowel  U,  of which  the  tree  in  Byblos  and 
Western  Europe  was  the  Heather.  The  only  other  timber  used  in  these 
Temples  was  olive,  which  as  has  been  already  mentioned  in  the  context  of 
Hercules and  the  Dactyls  stood  for  the Spring Sun—Jehovah as Marduk, 
alias Paeonian Apollo.

Cedar is  also  coupled with  hyssop  (probably the wild-caper  tree  which 
grows very green  in  the crannies of rocks  or walls,  in Egypt and  Palestine) 
in  the  two  most  primitive  sacrifices  of the  Old  Testament:  the  red  heifer

338338

sacrifice  of  Numbers,  XIX,  6  and  the  'sparrow'  sacrifice  of  Leviticus, 
XIV,  4,  both  originally  offered  to  a  goddess  not  a  god.  The  hyssop  was 
evidently  the  Palestine  equivalent  of the  misdetoe,  the  tree  of the  Day  of 
Liberation, which it resembles by growing sometimes in the fissures of old 
trees  where  there  is  leaf mould  to  keep  it  alive;  so  that  the  mythological 
conjunction  of cedar  and  hyssop  means  the whole  course  of the  sun  from 
its  infancy  at  the  winter  solstice  to  its  prime  at  the  summer  solstice,  and 
back  again.  Thus  when  it  is  recorded  ml Kings, IV,  33:

And  God  gave  Solomon  wisdom  and  understanding  exceeding 
m u c h . ..  and  he spake  of trees,  from  the cedar that is in Lebanon even 
unto the hyssop that is upon the wall,And  God  gave  Solomon  wisdom  and  understanding  exceeding 
m u c h . ..  and  he spake  of trees,  from  the cedar that is in Lebanon even 
unto the hyssop that is upon the wall,

this  is  as  much  as  to  say  that  he  knew  all  the  mystic  lore  of  the  tree-
alphabet.  But hyssop was  the  tree of the winter solstice, IA:  and the cedar 
was  the  tree  of  the  summer  solstice,  HU;  so  Solomon  is  credited  with 
knowing  the  Divine  Name  of which  IAHU was  the  permissible synonym. 
JHWH's  Massoretic  title,  supposedly  the  oldest,  was  Q're  Adonai 
('Lord  Q're')—though  some  Hebrew  scholars  prefer  to  interpret  the 
words  as  meaning:  'Read  Adonai',  i.e.  'give  the  consonants  of J H WH 
the  same  vowels  as  in  "Adonai".'  Q're  sounds  Cretan.  The  Carians, 
Lydians and Mysians, who were of Cretan stock, had a common shrine of 
Zeus Carios at Mylassa in Caria, a god whom their cousins the Tyrrhenians 
took to Italy as Karu, and who  is also  Carys,  the founder of Megara. The 
Quirites  of  Rome  came  from  a  Sabine  town  Qures,  which  apparently 
bore his name or that of his mother Juno Quiritis, mentioned by Plutarch; 
and  the  Curetes  of Delos,  Chalcis,  Aetolia  and  Crete  are  perhaps  also 
called  after  him,  though  to  the  Greeks,  who  could  make  nothing  of the 
barbarous word  Q're,  'Curetes'  meant boys who  had sacrificed  their hair-
trimmings  (Kourai)  to  the  god.  These  Curetes  are identified  by  Pausanias 
with  the  Children  of Anax,  the  ten-cubit-high  Son  of Uranus.  Anax  was 
a  Carian who  ruled  Miletus  before its  conquest  by  the Milesians  of Crete, 
gave  it  the  name  of Anactoria,  and  was  the  father  of  the  ten-cubit-high 
Asterius.  Pausanias  connects  Anax  with  the  Pelasgian  mysteries  of 
Samothrace.  The  Children  of Anax  appear  in  the  Bible as  the  tall  people 
of  Hebron  whom  Caleb  expelled  and  who  subsequently  lived  in  Gaza 
and  neighbouring  cities.  In  other words,  they were  Asianic  'People of the 
Sea'  who  worshipped  the  God  Q're,  or  (as  he  was  called  in  Syria  in  the 
time  of Thothmes,  a  Pharaoh  of the  Middle  Kingdom)  'the  Great  God 
Ker'.  His  chief  Carian  title  was  Panemerios  ('of  the  live-long  day')— 
at  least  this was  the  Greek  version  of a  Carian  original—and  he seems  to 
have  been  a  god  of the  solar  year  who,  like  Samson  of Tyre  or  Nisus  of 
Nisa  (Megara),  was  annually  shorn  of his  hair  and  power  by  the  Moon-
goddess; his male adorants dedicating  their forelocks to him in mourning,339

at  a  festival  called  the  Comyria.  That  Jehovah  as  Q're  continued  to  have 
hair sacrificed  to  him,  as  to  his  Carian  counterpart,  until  the  reformation 
of his  religion  during  the  Exile  is  indicated  by  the  Deuteronomic  injunc 
tion  "Ye  shall  not  make  a  baldness  between  your  eyes  for  the  dead'.  The 
radical  letters of his name—Q, apple, or quince or ethrog,  and  R, myrde— 
were  represented  in  the kdab,  or thyrsus,  used  at  the  Feast  of Tabernacles 
as  a  reminder of his  annual  death  and  translation  to  Elysium.  This  moon-
festival,  indeed,  initiated  the  season of the year which  runs  from  Q to  R.But  Q're  probably  derived  his  tide  from  his  Moon  mother—later,  in 
Greece,  his  twin-sister—the  White  Goddess  Artemis  Caryatis  ('of  the 
nut-tree')  whose  most  famous  temple  was  at  Caryae  in  Laconia.  She  was 
the goddess  of healing and  inspiration,  served  by  Caryatid  priestesses  and 
is  to  be  identified  with  the  nymph  Phyllis 1  who,  in  the  Thesean  Age,  was 
metamorphosed  into  an  almond  tree—Phyllis  may  be  a  Greek  variant  of 
Belili.  At any  rate,  he  became  for a  time  Nabu  the  Wise  God  of Wednes 
day,  represented  by  the almond-tree  stem  of the  seven-branched  Menorah; 
and it was  particularly to him  that Job  referred his  question,  'Where shall 
Wisdom  be  found?',  on  the ground  that it was he who  measured,  weighed 
out  and  enunciated  the  powers  controlled  by  his  six  fellow-deities;  such 
as  Sin,  Monday's  Rain-god;  Bel,  Thursday's  god  of  Thunder  and 
Lightning;  and  Ninib,  Saturday's  god  of  Repose,  controller  of  the 
Chthonian  Winds.  Artemis  Caryatis  may  be  identified  with  Carmenta, 
the  Muse  mother  of  Evander  the  Arcadian,  who  adapted  the  Pelasgian 
alphabet  to  the  Latin.  Her  name,  which  Plutarch  in  his  Roman  Questions 
absurdly  derives  from  carens  mente,  'out  of her  mind'  seems  to  be  com 
pounded  of Car and  Menta:  the first syllable  standing  for  Q're,  the  second 
presumably  for  Mann  'the  revealer'.  Pliny  preserves  the  tradition  that 
'Car,  after  whom  Caria  takes  its  name,  invented  augury';  this  Car, 
evidently  Thothmes's  Great  God  Ker,  is  mentioned  by  Herodotus  as 
brother to Lydus and Mysus,  the eponymous ancestors of the Lydians and 
Mysians.  Another  Car,  the  son  of  Phoroneus,  and  brother  of  Pelasgus, 
Europe  and  Agenor,  is  said  by  Pausanias  to  have  been  an  early  king  of 
Megara  after  whom  the  acropolis  of the  city  was  named.  Car's  sex  seems 
to have been changed  in both cases:  for the  Carians,  Mysians and Lydians 
were  matrilinear,  and  the  Megarean  acropolis  must  have  been  called  after 
the  White  Goddess  who  ruled  all  important  hills  and  mountains.  The 
Goddess  Car seems  also  to  have given  the  river Inachus its  original  name, 
Carmanor,  before  Inachus  the  father  of Phoroneus,  as  Plutarch  reports, 
went mad and  leapt into it.At  this  point  we  can  reconsider  the  Myvyrian  account  of the  Bank  of 
the Trees and suggest a textual emendation which makes better sense of it:

1  G o w er  derives  the  word  'filbert'  from  this  Phyllis,  though  the  orthodox  explanation  is

that filberts are first ripe on St. Philebert's D ay (August 22nd, Old Style).

340

There  was  a  man  in  that  battle  who  unless  his  name  were  known 
could  not be  overcome,  and  there was  on  the other side a  woman called 
Achren  ('Trees'), and  unless her name were  known her party  could  not 
be  overcome.  And  Gwydion  ap  Don,  instructed  by  his  brother 
Amathaon,  guessed  the  name  ofthe  woman....For  it  has  already  been  shown  that  the  Battle  of the  Trees  was  fought be 
tween  the  White  Goddess  ('the  woman')  for  whose  love  the  god  of  the 
waxing year and  of the waning  year were  rivals,  and  'the man', Immortal 
Apollo,  or  Beli,  who  challenged  her  power.  In  other  words,  the  sacred 
name  IEVOA,  or J I E V O AO  its enlargement,  revealed  by Amathaon  to 
Gwydion and  used  as a means of routing  Bran, was the name of the  Five 
fold  Goddess  Danu.  This was a name  in which  Bran  could  claim  to speak 
oracularly from  her kingdom  of Dis,  as one who  had  had  intimate experi 
ence  of each  of her  five  persons—by  being  born  to  her,  initiated  by  her, 
becoming her lover, being  lulled  to  sleep  by her,  and finally killed  by her. 
The  new  name  of eight  letters  which  replaced  it  was  Beli-Apollo's  own, 
not  shared  with  the  White Goddess, and it was therefore conveniendy for 
gotten  by  later mythographers  that  the  original  one belonged  to  Bran,  or 
Q're,  or  Iahu,  only  by  virtue  of  his  birth,  marriage  and  death  under 
female  auspices.  Professor  Sturtevant,  expert  on  the  Hittites,  translates 
Q're  as  Karimni which  means  merely  'to  the god';  but,  as  Mr.  E.  M.  Parr 
points  out,  El  is  both  the  common  word  for  'god'  in  Syria  and  a  proper 
name for the oak-god El.  He holds  that other forms of this same word  are 
Horus,  or  Qouros,  a  god  of  the  island  of  Thera—the  Semitic  form  of 
Horus  is  Churu.  The  identity  of  Q're  is  confused  by  the  Gods  Nergal 
and  Marduk  having  also  assumed  the  name  (Qaru):  Marduk's  Amorites 
called  him  Gish  Qaru,  'Q're  of  trees  and  herbs',  to  identify  him  with 
Nergal, the God of Tuesday on which  trees and herbs were first created.

341

Chapter  Nineteen

T HE  N U M B ER  OF  T HE  B E A ST

Iittle  Gwion  forced  himself  on  me  pleasantly  but  importunately,  as341

Chapter  Nineteen

T HE  N U M B ER  OF  T HE  B E A ST

Iittle  Gwion  forced  himself  on  me  pleasantly  but  importunately,  as

children  do,  at  a  time  when  I  was  too  busy  with  another  book  to 
-J  think  of  anything  else.  He  refused  to  be  shaken  off,  though  I  pro 
tested  that I  had  not  the  least  intention  of breaking into  the  field  of bardic 
myth and no scholarly equipment for doing so. Despite my present appear 
ance  of easy  familiarity  with  Celtic  literature  I  could  not  at  the  time  have 
answered  a  single  question  in  the  Hanes  Taliesin  puzzle  (which  at  first 
sight  recalled  the  'lovely  riddle—all  in  poetry—all  about  fishes'  that  the 
White Queen asked Alice at the final banquet in Looking-Glass Land) if I 
had  not  known  most  of  the  answers  beforehand  by  poetic  intuition. 
Really, all that I needed to do was to verify them textually; and though I had 
no  more  than  one  or  two  of the necessary books  in  my  very  small  library 
the rest were soon sent, unasked for, by poet friends or tumbled down into 
my hands  from  the  shelves  of a second-hand  sea-side bookshop.  I  drafted 
this  whole  volume  at  about  one-half  of  its  present  length,  in  six  weeks, 
then returned to  the other book;  but spent she years polishing  the  draft.The  train  of  coincidences  that  made  my  task  possible  was  of  a  sort 
familiar  to  poets.  What  after  all  does  'coincidence'  mean?  What  did  it 
mean to Euclid? It meant, for example, that if in certain circumstances you 
applied  the  triangle  Alpha-Beta-Gamma  to  the  triangle  Delta-Epsilon-
Zeta  then  Gamma  and  Zeta  would  be  more  or  less  identically  situated. 
Similarly,  since  I  knew  in  advance  the  answers  to  Gwion's  riddles,  this 
presupposed  the  necessary  book-knowledge  as  extant  and  accessible  and 
therefore  the  books  subsequently  coincided  with  my  needs.  Zeta  and 
Gamma gently kissed, and I could dress up in reasonable form an arrange 
ment of thought arrived at by unreason.

One  day  William  Rowan  Hamilton,  whose  portrait  occurs  on  the 
centenary  stamps  of  Eire  issued  in  1 9 4 3,  was  crossing  Phoenix  Park 
in  Dublin,  when  the  foreknowledge  came  to  him  of an  order  of mathema 
tics,  which  he  called  'quaternions',  so  far  in  advance  of  contemporary 
mathematic development  that  the gap  has  only recendy  been bridged  by a 
long succession  of intervening  mathematicians.  All  outstanding mathema 
ticians  have  this  power  of making a  prodigious  mental  leap  into  the  dark

3 423 42

and  landing  firmly  on  both  feet  Clerk  Maxwell  is  the  best  known  case, 
and  he  gave  away  the  secret  of  his  unscientific  methods  of  thought  by 
being  such  a  poor  accountant  he  could  arrive  at  the  correct  formula  but 
had  to  rely on his  colleagues to justify the result by pedestrian  calculation. 
Most  outstanding  physicians  diagnose  the  nature  of a  disease  by  the 
same  means,  though  afterwards  they  may  justify  their  diagnoses  by  a 
logical  examination  of the  symptoms.  In  fact,  it  is  not  too  much  to  say 
that all  original  discoveries and  inventions and  musical  and  poetical  com 
positions  are  the  result  of proleptic  thought—the  anticipation,  by  means 
of a  suspension  of time, of a  result  that  could  not have  been  arrived  at  by 
inductive  reasoning—and  of what  may  be  called  analeptic  thought,  the 
recovery  of lost events  by the same suspension.

This  need  mean  no  more  than  that  time,  though  a  most useful  conven 
tion  of thought,  has  no  greater intrinsic value  than,  say,  money.  To  think 
in  temporal  terms  is  a  very  complicated  and  unnatural  way  of thinking, 
too;  many children master foreign languages  and  mathematic  theory long 
before  they  have  developed  any  sense  of  time  or  accepted  the  easily  dis 
proved  thesis that cause precedes effect.

I wrote about the Muse some years ago in a poem:

If strange things happen where she is 
So that men say that graves open 
And the dead walk, or that futurity 
Becomes a womb, and the unborn are shed— 
Such portents are not to be wondered at 
Being tourbillions in Time made 
By the strong pulling ofherbladed mind 
Through that ever-reluctant element.Poets  will  be able  to  confirm  this  from  their own experience.  And  because 
since I wrote this  poem J. W.  Dunne's Experiment with  Time has prosa-
icized  the  notion  that  time  is  not  the  stable  moving-staircase  that  prose-
men  have  for  centuries  pretended  it  to  be,  but  an  unaccountable  wibble-
wobble,  the  prose  men  too  will  easily  see  what  I  am  driving  at  In  the 
poetic act, time is suspended and  details of future experience often become 
incorporated  in  the  poem,  as  they  do  in  dreams.  This  explains  why  the 
first  Muse  of the  Greek  triad  was  named  Mnemosyne,  'Memory':  one  can 
have  memory of the  future  as well  as  of the  past.  Memory of the  future  is 
usually called  instinct in animals, intuition in human beings.

An  obvious  difference  between  poems  and  dreams  is  that in  poems  one 
is  (or  should  be)  in  critical  control  of the  situation;  in  dreams  one  is  a 
paranoiac,  a  mere  spectator  of myfhographic  event.  But  in  poems  as  in 
dreams there is a suspension of temporal criteria; and when the Irish poets 
wrote  of enchanted  islands  where  three  hundred  years  went  by  as  if they

343

were  a  day,  and  put  these  islands  under  the  sovereignty of the  Muse,  they 
were  defining  this  suspension.  The  sudden  shock  of  a  return  to  the 
familiar temporal mode of thought is typified  in  the myths by the breaking 
of the  saddle  girth  when  the  young  hero  rides  back  home  on  a  visit  from 
the Island. His foot touches the ground and the charm is broken:  'then the 
troubles of old age and sickness fell suddenly upon him.'

A  sense  of the  equivocal  nature  of time  is  constantly  with  poets,  rules 
out  hope  or  anxiety  about  the  future,  concentrates  interest  detachedly  in 
the  present.  I  wrote  about  this  with  proleptic  detail  in  1 9 3 4,  in  a  poem 
'The  Fallen Tower of Siloam', which  began:Should the building totter, spring for an archway! 
We were there already...

But an interesting feature of prolepsis and analepsis is  that the coincidence 
of the  concept  and  the  reality  is  never  quite  exact:  Gamma  coincides  with 
Zeta,  but  not so  closely  that  either loses  its  identity.  The  coincidence  is  as 
close,  you  may say,  as  between  the  notes  B  natural  and  C flat which,  for 
economy's  sake,  are  given  only  a  single string  on  a  pianoforte:  they have 
slighdy  different  vibration  lengths,  but  only  a  remarkably  true  ear  can 
distinguish  one  from  the  other.  Or,  as  close  as  between  the  values  y  and 
pi:  if you  wish  to  calculate,  say,  how  much  binding  you  will  need  for  the 
bottom  of  a  bell-tent  three  yards  in  diameter,  ^  will  be  an  adequate 
formula.

In  September  1 9 4 3,  when  I  could  not  stop  my  mind  from  running  all 
day  and  all  night  in  chase  of the  Roebuck,  so  rapidly  that  my  pen  could 
not keep up with it, I  tried  to  preserve a critical  detachment.  I said  to  my 
self:  'I  am  not  particularly enjoying this  jaunt.  I  am  not greatly  interested 
in  the  strange  country  through  which  my  broom-stick  mind  is  flying  me, 
and not at all  sure whether I  should  trouble to chart  it.'  Then I  addressed 
myself  schizophrenically:  'I'll  tell  you  what,  Robert.  I'll  propound  a 
simple,  well-known,  hitherto  unsolved  riddle  and  if you  can  make  sense 
of that,  very well, I'll  pay attention  to your other discoveries.'

The riddle that I propounded was  the last verse of the thirteenth chapter

of the Apocalypse:

Here  is  wisdom.  Let  him  that  hath  understanding count the number

of the Beast:  for it is the number of a man and his number is 666.of the Apocalypse:

Here  is  wisdom.  Let  him  that  hath  understanding count the number

of the Beast:  for it is the number of a man and his number is 666.

I vaguely remembered, from my school  days,  the two  traditional solutions 
of St.  John's  cryptogram.  They  are  both  based  on  the  assumption  that, 
since  letters  of the  alphabet  were  used  to  express  numerals  in  Greek  and 
Hebrew alike,  666 was a sum arrived  at by adding together the letters  that 
spelt  out  the  Beast's  name.  The  earliest  solution,  that  of  the  second-
century bishop Irenaeus, is L A T E I N O S, meaning 'The Latin One' and so

344

denoting  the  race  of the  Beast;  the most widely accepted  modern  solution 
—I  forgot  whose—is  N E R ON  K E S A R,  namely  the  Emperor  Nero 
regarded  as Antichrist.1  Neither solution  is  quite  satisfactory.  'The Latin 
One'  is  too  vague  a  characterization  of  Beast  666,  and  KAISAR,  not 
K E S A R,  was  the  ordinary  Greek  way  of writing  'Caesar'.  Besides,  the 
possible  combinations  of letter-values  which  add  up  to  666,  and  the  pos 
sible anagrammatic arrangements  of each  of these sets  of letter-values, are 
so numerous that the aggregate of possibility approaches as near to infinity 
as anyone  could  wish.

The  Apocalypse  was  written  in  Greek,  but  my  analeptic  self,  when  thus 
addressed, stubbornly insisted  on  thinking in Latin;  and I saw in a sort of 
vision  the  Roman  numerals  flashed  across  the  wall  of the  room  I  was  in. 
They made a placard:

D.  C. L. X. 
V .LD.  C. L. X. 
V .L

When  they  steadied,  I  looked  at  them  slantwise.  Poets  will  know  what  I 
mean  by  slantwise:  it  is  a  way  of  looking  through  a  difficult  word  or 
phrase  to  discover  the  meaning  lurking  behind  the  letters.  I  saw  that  the 
placard  was a  titulus,  the  Roman  superscription  nailed  above  the  heads  or 
criminals  at  the  place  of execution,  explaining  their  crime.  I  found  myself 
reading out:

D O M I T I A N US  C A E S AR  L E G A T OS  XTT 
V I L I T ER  I N T E R F E C IT

'Domitian  Caesar  basely  killed  the  Envoys  of  Christ.'  I.N.R.I.  was

the titulus of Christ; D . C . L . X . V . I. was the titulus of Antichrist.

The only word I stumbled at was V I L I T E R; it had a blurred look. 
The  persecution  of the  Church  under  Nero  and  Domitian  had  never 
greatly interested  me,  and  the  test  that I  had  set my mind  was  therefore a 
routine  one—just  as  I  might have  tested  myself with  the  routine  formula: 
'The Leith police dismisseth us,' if I had suspected myself of being drunk. 
No  historical  prejudice was  involved,  and  my  clinical  observations  on  the 
case are therefore to be trusted.

In  the  first  place  I  had  been  aware  that  the  Apocalypse  was  referred  by

most  Biblical  scholars  to  the  reign  of Nero  ( A . D.  5 4 - 6 7 ),  not  to  that  of 
Domitian ( A . D. 8 1 - 9 6 ), the whole trend of the visions being anti-Neronic. 
And  yet  my  eye  read  'Domitianus'.  In  the  second,  I  was  aware  that

1  T he  solution  is  based  on  the  Hebrew.  Nun  =  50;  Resh  = 200;  Vav=6;  Nun  =  50  = Neron.1  T he  solution  is  based  on  the  Hebrew.  Nun  =  50;  Resh  = 200;  Vav=6;  Nun  =  50  = Neron.

Koph  =  100;  Samtch  = da;  Resh  = 2 0 0= K e s a r.  But  Nero  in  Latin  remains  N e ro  when  written 
in  Hebrew,  and  Kaisar  (which  meant  'a  head  of  hair'  in  Latin  and  'a  crown'  in  Hebrew— 
perhaps both  words  were  borrowed  from  a  common  Aegean  original)  should be  spelt with a 
Kaph ( — 20), not a Kopk, which makes the sum add up to only 626.

3 4J

viliter,  in  the  Silver  Age  of Latin,  means  'cheaply,'  and  that  its  derived 
sense  of 'basely'  implies  worthlessness,  not  wickedness.  And  yet  my  eye 
read 'viliter'.

It was some weeks before I began to understand this paradox. It seemed 
to  me  that  the work which  my  analeptic  self had  done  was  sound  enough: 
D . C . L . X . V . I.  was  the  correct  text,  and  the solution  was  correct.  But  my 
eye,  under  the  influence  of my  reasonable  self,  had  evidently been  at  fault: 
it  had  misread,  as  it  frequently  misreads  letters  and  newspaper  headings 
when I am not quite awake in  the morning.  The text had really been:

D O M I T I US  C A E S AR  L E G A T OS  X T! 
V I O L E N T ER  I N T E R F E C ITD O M I T I US  C A E S AR  L E G A T OS  X T! 
V I O L E N T ER  I N T E R F E C IT

But since  'Domitius  Caesar'  meant  nothing  to  my  reasonable  self—indeed, 
there was no  person of that name—it had  officiously corrected  the mistake 
by  reading  'Domitianus'.  Now  I  remembered  that  Domitius  was  Nero's 
original name before the Emperor Claudius adopted him into the Imperial 
family and  changed  his name  to  Nero  Claudius  Caesar Drusus  Germani-
cus,  and  that  he  hated  to  be  reminded  of his  plebeian  origin,  (I  think  it is 
Suetonius  who  mentions  this  sensitivity  of  Nero's.)  Nero's  criminal 
father,  Gnaeus  Domitius Ahenobarbus, when congratulated  on the  child's 
birth, replied coolly that any offspring of himself and his wife Agrippinilla 
could  bring  only  ruin  on  the  State.  So  'Domitius  Caesar'  was  a  suitable 
taunt  for  the  cryptogram—as  anti-Hitlerians  in  1 9 33  made  political 
capital  out  of  'Chancellor  Schickelgruber'.  St.  John  the  Divine  would 
naturally  not  have  respected  Nero's  feelings  when  composing  it,  and  the 
use of D . C.  for N.C.  would have served to  protect the secret.

Violenter  means  something  more  than  'roughly'  or  'impetuously':  it 
contains  the  sense  of sacrilegious  fury  and  outrage.  So  it  seemed  that  my 
amending eye had  brought up  the EN from  V I O L E N T ER into  the word 
written  just  above  it,  to  form  DOMITLENUS,  which  came  near enough 
to  'Domitianus'  to  make  no  odds;  and  that  the  meaningless  word 
VTOLTER which remained below was a blur which I stumblingly read as 
V I L I T E R, recognizing it as a word of condemnation.(I do not claim more for this reading than that it makes historical sense. 
Who  can  say whether  the  sense  was  put  there  by  St.  John,  as  it  were  for 
my  benefit,  or  by  myself,  as  it  were  for  St.  John's  benefit?  All  I  know  is 
that I read the words off just about as easily and unthinkingly as, say, the 
censor  of soldiers'  mail  reads  the  cryptogram  at  the  close  of a  letter  to  a 
wife:  'X.X.X.—W.I.W.R.D.D.Y?* as 'Kiss-kiss-kiss—wish it was real, 
darling, don't you?')

This  is  not  all.  When  I  came  to  scrutinize  the  Apocalypse  text,  I  found

in the margin a cross-reference  to  Chapter XV, verse  2.  which runs:

346

And  I  saw  as  it  were  a  sea  of glass  mingled  with  fire  and  them  that 
had  gotten  the victory  over the Beast,  and  over his  image,  and  over his 
mark,  and  over  the  number  of his  name,  standing  on  the  sea  of glass, 
having the harps  of God.

The  'image'  is  the  one  mentioned  in  the  previous  context:  apparently 
the  meaning  is  that  Christians  were  martyred  who  loyally  refused  to 
worship Nero's statue.  So  'them  that  had  gotten  the victory over the Beast 
and  over his  image  and  over  his  mark  and  over  the  number  of his  name' 
were  the  Envoys  of  Christ  who  refused  to  be  terrorized  into  Emperor 
worship, and  who  when  sacrilegiously  slain  were  carried  straight  up  into 
Paradise.Now  the  question  arose:  why  had  my  eye  read  'Domitianus'  when  the 
text was  'Domitius'?  That had  to  be  answered,  for  my eye  had  been  con 
vinced  that Domitian,  not Nero, was meant, and had  rapidly amended  the 
text  to  prove  its  point.  Perhaps  my  eye  had  been  a  servant  of my  crazy 
analeptic  self after  all.  Perhaps  both  Domitius  and  Domitian  were meant. 
I  mean,  perhaps  the  Apocalypse  was  originally  written  in  the  time  of 
Nero's  persecutions,  but  expanded  and  brought  up-to-date  in  the  reign 
of  Domitian,  who  revived  the  Neronic  persecutions  and  whose  name 
means 'of Domitius's kind'. What about the verses:

I  saw  one  of the  Beast's  heads  as  it  were wounded  to  death,  and  his

deadly wound was healed and all the world wondered at the Beast.

And  they  .  .  .  worshipped  the  Beast  saying:  'Who  is  like  unto  the

Beast? Who is able to make war with him?'

And  there  was  given  unto  him  a  mouth  speaking  great  things  and 
blasphemies  and  power was  given  unto  him  to  continue  forty-and-two 
months....

And  it  was  given  unto  him  to make war with  the saints,  and  to  over

come  them.

The  reference  is  clearly  to  the  well-known  contemporary  belief that  Nero 
would  come again,  surviving his  deadly sword-wound,  and  to the natural 
Christian supposition that he was reincarnate in Domitian.

[Excellent:  I  now find that this  is  the  conclusion  of Dr.  T.  W.  Crafer in

his  recent work  on  the Apocalypse.][Excellent:  I  now find that this  is  the  conclusion  of Dr.  T.  W.  Crafer in

his  recent work  on  the Apocalypse.]

Forty-two is the number of years ( A . D. 54-96) between the accession of 
Nero  the  seventh  Caesar  and  the  death,  by  the  sword,  of  Domitian  the 
twelfth  and  last  Caesar.  In  this sort  of prophetic writing years are usually 
expressed  as  months,  and  months  as  days.  The  sentence  'and  power  was 
given  unto  him  to  continue  forty-and-two  months'  seems  to  be  an  inter 
polated  gloss  on  the  original  prophecy  that  Domitian,  who  blasphem 
ously  called  himself Lord  and  God,  would  come  to  a  violent  end.  The

347

Church  had  a  comparatively  peaceful  time  under  Domitian's  successor, 
Nerva.

That  some  MSS.  read  616,  not  666,  does  not  spoil  my  argument  it, 
merely cuts out the L for legatos.  D C X VI means  that, in  St.  Paul's  words 
the Beast 'crucified the Son of God afresh'.

The  result  of the  test  satisfied  me,  and  I  hope  will  satisfy  others,  that  I

had not slid into certifiable paranoia.The  result  of the  test  satisfied  me,  and  I  hope  will  satisfy  others,  that  I

had not slid into certifiable paranoia.

I  should  add,  however,  that since  the eleventh  chapter  of the Apocalypse 
predicts  the  preservation  of the  Temple,  the  original  version  of the  book 
must  have  been  written  after  the  death  of Nero,  but  before  the  destruc 
tion  of the Temple and  at a time when  rumours of his reappearance in  the 
flesh  were  widely  current.  Also  that  the  Hebrew  letters  T R J V N,  which 
add up to 666 (Tav = 400; Resh = 200; Yod— 10; Vav — 6; Nun = 50), 
form  the  common  cypher-disguise  in  Talmudic  literature  for  Nero 
(trijon  means  'little  beast')  and  that  the  authors  of  the  Talmud are  most 
unlikely  to  have  borrowed  from  the  Gentile  Christians.  It  is  possible, 
then,  that  the  first  version  of  the  Apocalypse  was  a  Jewish  nationalist 
tract,  written  in  Aramaic  before  A . D.  70,  in  which  666  was  a  cypher 
meaning  'Little  Beast',  which  pointed  to  Nero;  but  that  it was  re-written 
in  Greek  and  expanded  for  Christian  readers  at  the  close  of  the  first 
century,  by  which  time  the  Pauline  converts,  who  knew  no  Hebrew, 
were at pains to prove that Jesus had rejected the Law of Moses and trans 
ferred  Jehovah's  blessing  from  the  Jews  to  themselves.  And  that  in  this 
second  version,  with  its  many  interpolations  and  uncritical  retention  of 
out-of-date  material,  the  cypher  666  was  given  a  new  solution,  and  one 
that any intelligent  person  could  understand without recourse  to  Hebrew: 
namely  D C L X V I.  If  this  is  so,  the  legend  was  never  Domitius  Caesar 
etc.,  yet  my  analeptic  eye  was  right  to  recognize  that  since  the  original 
Hebrew  meaning  of  the  cypher  was  T R I J O N;  the  beasdy  spirit  of 
Domitius was latent in Domitianus.The  proleptic  or  analeptic  method  of  thought,  though  necessary  to 
poets,  physicians,  historians  and  the  rest,  is  so  easily  confused  with  mere 
guessing,  or  deduction  from  insufficient  data,  that  few  of  them  own  to 
using  it.  However  securely  I  buttress  the  argument  of  this  book  with 
quotations,  citations  and  footnotes,  the  admission  that  I  have  made  here 
of how  it  first  came  to  me  will  debar  it  from  consideration  by  orthodox 
scholars:  though they cannot refute it, they dare not accept it.

348

Chapter  Twenty

A  C O N V E R S A T I ON  AT  P A P H O S— 
A . D.  43

Circling the circlings of theirfish, 
Nuns walk in white andpray; 
For he is chaste as they....

These lines will  serve as a text to  demonstrate the peculiar workings

of poetic  thought.  They  came  to  me,  from  nowhere  in  particular, 
as  the  first  three  lines  of a  rhyming  stanza,  in  the  epigrammatic 
style  of the  Welsh  englyn,  which  required  two  more  to  complete  it.  Their 
manifest  meaning is  that  the  white nuns  walk  in  silent  prayer  in  their con 
vent  garden,  circling  the  fish  pool  and  circling  their  rosaries  in  chaste 
prayer; the fish swims around  inside.  The fish, like the nuns, is proverbial 
for  his  sexual  indifference,  and  the  Mother  Superior  permits  him  as  a 
convent  pet  because  he  cannot  possibly  awake  any  lascivious  thoughts  in 
her charges.A  neat  piece  of observation,  but  not  yet  a  poem;  the  truth,  but  not  the 
whole  truth.  To  tell  the  whole  truth,  I  had  to  consider  first  the  pheno 
menon  of nuns,  who  voluntarily  forgo  the  pleasures  of  carnal  love  and 
motherhood  in  order  to  become  the  Vestal  brides  of Christ,  and  then  the 
phenomenon  of sacred  fish  of all  sorts  and  sizes,  from  the  great  fish  that 
swallowed  Jonah  to  the  little  spotted  fish  in  wishing  wells  that  still  grant 
lovers  or  babies  to  peasant women  in  remote  parishes;  not  forgetting  the 
'mighty and stainless Fish from the Fountain whom a pure virgin grasped' 
in  the  epitaph  of the  late  second-century  bishop  Aviricius  of the  Phrygian 
Pentapolis.  Only  when  I  had  asked  and  answered  some  scores  of teasing 
questions would  the fourth  and fifth lines  be found,  to  complete  the poem 
with  a  simple  concentration  of difficult  meaning.

I began by noting the strange continuance in Christianity of the original 
pagan  title  of Chief Pontiff,  which  the  Bishop  of Rome,  the  successor  of 
St.  Peter  the  Fisherman,  assumed  two  centuries  after  Christianity  had 
become  the  Roman  state  religion.  For  the  Chief Pontiff,  in  Republican 
and  early  Imperial  times,  was  personally  responsible  to  the  Capitoline 
Trinity  (Juppiter,  Juno  and  Minerva),  for  the  chaste  behaviour  of the

349

Vestals, as his successor now is  to  the  Christian Trinity for that of Roman 
Catholic nuns.  Then I  threw my mind  back in an analeptic trance. I found 
myself listening  to  a  conversation  in  Latin,  helped  out with  Greek,  which 
I  understood perfectly.  Presently I began to distinguish the voices as those 
of Theophilus,  a  well-known  Syrian-Greek  historian  and  Lucius  Sergius 
Paulus,  a  Roman  Governor-General  of  Cyprus  under  the  Emperor 
Claudius.Paulus was  saying rather heavily:  'My learned  friend,  a festal  system of 
such  complexity  cannot  have  been  conveyed  from  country  to  country 
among  the  bales  of merchandize  that  traders  carry in  barter.  It may  have 
been  imposed  by  conquest,  yet  had  there  ever  been  an  Empire  of  Europe 
which  included  all  the distant  parts  you  mention—'

T  should  also  have  included  Portugal  among  them,'  interjected  Theo

philus.

'—doubtless  we  should  have  heard  of  it.  But  Alexander's  conquests 
were  all  in  the  East:  he  dared  not  challenge  the  power  of  Republican 
Rome.'philus.

'—doubtless  we  should  have  heard  of  it.  But  Alexander's  conquests 
were  all  in  the  East:  he  dared  not  challenge  the  power  of  Republican 
Rome.'

Theophilus  said:  'What  I  mean  is  this.  I  postulate  a  constant  emigra 
tion,  in  ancient  times,  of tribes  inhabiting  the  Southern  coast  of the  Black 
Sea,  a  process  that  has  indeed  ceased  only in  the  last century  or  two.  The 
climate  was  healthy,  the  people  vigorous  and  well  organized,  but  the 
coastal  strip  narrow.  Every  hundred  years  or  so,  as  I  suppose,  the  land 
grew  over-populated,  and  one  tribe  or  another  was  necessarily sent  away 
to  seek  its  fortune  and  make  room  for  the  rest.  Or  it  may  be  that  they 
were  forced  to  move  by  pressure  from  the  East,  when  wandering  hordes 
from  the  plains  of Asia broke through  the  Caspian  Gates  of the  Caucasus 
mountains.  Of these  tribes,  some  took  the  route  southward  across  Asia 
Minor  and  ventured  through  Syria  and  as  far  as  Egypt—we  have  the 
authority  of Herodotus  for  this;  some  took  the  route  westward  across  the 
Bosphorus and Thrace and into  Greece, Italy and  Gaul and even, as I say, 
to  Spain  and  Portugal.  Some  struggled  south-eastward  into  Chaldaea 
across  the  Taurus  mountains;  some  moved  northward  up  the  Western 
shore of the  Black  Sea and  then  followed the Danube to  Istria,  condnuing 
their  march  across  Europe  until  they  reached  the  north-westerly  tip  of 
Gaul; whence,  it is said,  some crossed  over into  Britain,  and  from  Britain 
into  Ireland.  They  took the festal  system with them.'

'Yours is a very daring theory,' said Paulus, 'but I can recall no authen

tic tradition that supports it.'

Theophilus  smiled.  'Your  Excellency  is  a  true  Roman—"no  truth 
unless  hallowed  by  a  tradition."  Well,  then:  tell  me,  from  what  land  did 
your hero Aeneas come?'Theophilus  smiled.  'Your  Excellency  is  a  true  Roman—"no  truth 
unless  hallowed  by  a  tradition."  Well,  then:  tell  me,  from  what  land  did 
your hero Aeneas come?'

'He  was  a  King  of  Dardanus  on  the  Bosphorus  before  he  settled  in

Troy.

350

'Good:  Dardanus  is  three-quarters  of the  way  back  from  Rome  to  the 
Black  Sea.  And,  tell  me,  what  was  the  priceless  possession  that  Aeneas 
brought  with  him  from  Troy?  Pray  forgive  the  dialectical  method.'

'You  must  mean  the  Palladium,  most  learned  Socrates,'  answered 
Paulus  in  ironically  academic  tones,  'on  the  safety  of  which  the  fate  of 
Troy  once depended;  and  the  fate of Rome  depends  now.' 
'And what, honoured Alcibiades, is the  Palladium?' 
'A  venerable statue of Pallas  Athene.' 
'Ah, but who is she?' 
'You  suggested  this  morning,  during  our  visit  to  the  wrestling-school, 
that  she  was  originally  a  Sea-goddess  like  our  local  Cyprian  deity;  and 
mythographers record that she was born by the Lake of Triton in Libya.'

'So  she  was.  And  who  or  what  is  Triton,  besides  being  the  name  of a

once extensive lake which is now shrinking into salt marsh?'

'Triton  is  a  marine  deity  with  a  fish's  body  who  accompanies  Poseidon 
the  Sea-god  and  his  wife  Amphitrite  the  Sea-goddess,  and  blows  a  conch 
in their honour.  He is said to be their son.'

'You give me the most helpful answers.  But what does Pallas mean?' 
'How  long  is  this  cross-examination  to  last?  Would  you  send  me  back 
to  school  again?  Pallas  is  one  of  Athene's  tides.  I  have  never  accepted 
Plato's  derivation  of the word frompallein, to brandish; he says, you know, 
that she is  called  Pallas  because she  brandishes  her aegis,  or  shield.  Plato's 
etymology  is  always  suspect.  What  puzzles  me  is  that  Pallas  is  a  man's 
name, not a woman's.''I  hope  to  be  able  to  explain  the  paradox.  But, first, what  do  you  know

about men called Pallas?'

'Pallas?  Pallas?  There  have  been  many  men  of  the  name,  from  the 
legendary  Pallas  the  Titan  to  our  present  egregious  Secretary  of  State. 
The  Emperor made  the  Senate  snigger  the  other  day  by declaring  that  the 
Secretary  was  of the  famous  Pallas  family  that  gave  its  name  to  the  Pala 
tine  Hill.'

'I  doubt  whether  the  remark  was  as  absurd  as  it  must  have  sounded. 
Claudius,  for  all  his  eccentric  habits,  is  no  mean  historian,  and  as  Chief 
Pontiff  has  access  to  ancient  religious  records  denied  to  others.  Come, 
your  Excellency,  let  us  go  together  through  the  list  of  ancient  Pallases. 
There  was,  as  you  say,  Pallas  the  Titan,  who  was  brother  to  Astraeus 
("the  Starlike")  and  Perses  ("the  Destroyer")  and  who  married—what 
ever  that  means—the  River  Styx  in  Arcadia.  He  was  the  father  of Zelos 
("Zeal"),  Cratos  ("Strength"),  Bia  ("Force")  and  Nice  ("Victory"). 
Does  that not convey his  mystical nature  to  you?'

'I  regret  to  admit  that  it  does  not.  Pity  me  as  a  stupid,  legalistic  and

practical Roman.'

'If  your  Excellency  is  not  careful  I  shall  begin  praising  your  elegiac

3 5*

poem  on  the  Nymph  Egeria,  a  copy  of  which  was  lately  sent  me  from 
Rome  by  one  of  our  mutual  friends.  Well,  next  comes  Homer's  Pallas, 
whom  he  calls  the  father  of the  Moon.  And  next  another  Titan,  the  Pallas 
who  was  flayed  by  Athene;  it  was  this  Pallas  from  whom  she  is  said  to 
have taken her name.''I never heard that story.' 
'It  rests  on  good  authority.  And  then  comes  Pallas,  the  founder  of 
Pallantium  in  Arcadia,  a  Pelasgian  son  of the  Aegeus  who  gave  his  name 
to  the  Aegean  Sea;  now,  he  is  of  interest  to  us  because  his  grandson 
Evander  emigrated  to  Rome  sixty  years  before  the  Trojan  war  and 
brought your sacred  alphabet with  him.  It was  he who  founded  a  new  city 
of Pallantium  on  the  Palatine  Hill  at  Rome,  long  since  incorporated  in  the 
City.  He  also  introduced  the  worship  of  Nice,  Neptune,  (now  identified 
with  Poseidon),  Pan  of Lycos,  Demeter  and  Hercules.  Evander had  a  son 
named  Pallas,  and  two  daughters,  Rome  ("Strength")  and  Dyne 
("Power").  And  I  had  almost  forgotten  still  another  Pallas,  brother  of 
Aegeus and Lycos, and therefore uncle to Evander's grandfather Pallas.'

'A fine crop of Pallases.  But I am still in the dark.' 
'Well,  I  dp  not  blame  your  Excellency.  And  I  hardly  know  where  to 
shine  the  lantern.  But  I  appeal  to  you  for  patience.  Tell  me,  of what  is  the 
Palladium made?'

Paulus  considered.  'I  am  rather  rusty  on  mythology,  my  dear  Theo-

philus, but I seem to remember that it is made of the bones of Pelops.'

Theophilus  congratulated  him.  'And  who  was  Pelops?  What  does  his

name mean?'philus, but I seem to remember that it is made of the bones of Pelops.'

Theophilus  congratulated  him.  'And  who  was  Pelops?  What  does  his

name mean?'

'I  was  reading  Apollonius  Rhodius  the  other  day.  He  says  that  Pelops 
came  to  Phrygia  from  Enete  in  Paphlagonia  and  that  the  Paphlagonians 
still  call  themselves  Pelopians.  Apollonius  was  curator  of the  great  Alex 
andrian Library and his ancient history is as reliable as anyone's. As for the 
name  "Pelops",  it  means  dusky-faced.  The  body  of Pelops  was  served  up 
as  a stew by Tantalus,  his  father,  for the  Gods;  they discovered  that it was 
forbidden  food  just  in  time.  Only  the  shoulder  had  been  eaten—by 
Demeter,  was  it  not?—but some  say  Rhea,  and  restitution  was  made  with 
an  ivory shoulder.  Pelops  was  brought back to life.'

'What do you make of this cannibalistic myth?' 
'Nothing at all,  except that we  now seem  to  have  traced  the  Dardanians 
back  to  the  Black  Sea,  if the  sacred  Palladium  was  made  of the  bones  of 
their ancestor from Enete.'

'If I suggest to you  that Pelops and  Pallas  are different titles of Kings  of

the same early Greek  dynasty, will  that help your Excellency?'

'Not in the least. Pray, give me a hand out of this quaking bog.' 
'Allow me to ask you a riddle:  What is it with a dusky face and an ivory 
shoulder  that  comes  rushing  victoriously  up  a  river,  as  if to  a  wedding,

3 J*3 J*

full of Zeal, Force and Strength, and whose hide is well worth the  flaying?' 
'I  am  good  at riddles,  though bad  at myths.  A fish of sorts.  I  guess  the 
porpoise.  The  porpoise  is  not  an  ordinary  fish,  for  it  couples,  male  with 
female:  and  how  royally  it  charges  into  a  river-mouth  from  the  sea!  It is 
pale  below and  dark above,  with  a  blunt,  dusky muzzle.  And it has  a  fine 
white  shoulder-blade—broad  like  a  paddle;  and  porpoise  leather  makes 
the best-wearing shoes procurable.'

'It is not a fish at all.  It is a warm-blooded  creature, a cetos, a sea-beast 
with  lungs,  not  an  ichthus,  a  fish  with  gills  and  cold  blood.  To  the  sea-
beast  family,  according  to  Aristotle's  system,  belong  all  whales,  seals, 
porpoises,  grampuses  and  dolphins.  Unfortunately  in  Greece  we  use  the 
same  word  delphis  indiscriminately  for  both  the  beaked  dolphin  and  the 
blunt-muzzled  porpoise;  and  though  Arion's  musical  mount  is  likely  to 
have  been  a  true  dolphin,  it  is  uncertain  whether  Delphi  was  originally 
named  after  the  dolphin  or the  porpoise.  "Pallas"  in  Greek  once  meant a 
lusty young man,  and  I  suppose  that  it  became  the  royal  title  of Pelopon-
nesian  kings, whose sacred  beast was  the  lusty porpoise, when  the tribe of 
Pelops  came  down  into  Greece  from  the  Black  Sea.  Do  you  remember 
Homer's  much  disputed  epithet  for  Lacedaemon—Cetoessa,  which  liter 
ally means "Of the Sea-beast"?'T  will  try  to  think  along  the  lines  you  lay  out  for  me,'  said  Paulus. 
"The  Peloponnese  is,  of course,  sometimes  called  the  Land  of Poseidon, 
who  is  the  Achaean  god  of all  sea-beasts  and  fishes.  Arcadia  is  the  centre 
of  the  Peloponnese,  and  Pallas  the  Sea-beast-god  reigned  there,  and  in 
Lacedaemon too. Let me work this out for myself—yes—Pallas is married 
to the River Styx, meaning that the porpoise comes rushing up the Crathis 
towards  the  Styx  in  his  mating  season.  (At  the  mouth  of the  Crathis  is 
Aegae—I  once  served  in  that  part  of  Greece—which  explains  the  con 
nexion  with  Aegeus.  Opposite  Aegae,  across  the  Gulf of Corinth,  stands 
Delphi,  sacred  to  Apollo  the  Dolphin-god  or  Porpoise-god.)  Later, 
Evander a grandson  of Pallas,  and with a  son  of the  same  name,  is  driven 
out  of Arcadia,  about  the  time  of the  great  Achaean  invasion,  and  comes 
to  Rome.  There  he  forms  an  alliance  with  the  people  of Aeneas,  claiming 
kinship with them in virtue of a common descent from Pelops. Is that how 
you  read  the  story?'

'Exacdy.  And  Evander  was  probably  a  Pallas  too,  but  changed  his

name, after killing his father, to throw the avenging Furies off the scent.'

'Very  well.  He  introduces  the  worship  of  the  Sea-god  Neptune;  of

Nice, the daughter of the original Pallas; of Hercules—why Hercules?'

'His  sexual  lustiness  commended  him,  and  he  was  not  only  a  great-

grandson of Pelops but an ally of the Enetians, the original Pelopians.'

'And  why Demeter?' 
'To rescue  her  from  Poseidon  the  god  of the Achaeans  who,  it  is  said,

3 53grandson of Pelops but an ally of the Enetians, the original Pelopians.'

'And  why Demeter?' 
'To rescue  her  from  Poseidon  the  god  of the Achaeans  who,  it  is  said,

3 53

had  raped  her.  You  remember  perhaps  that  she  retreated  from  him  up 
the  Crathis  to  the  Stvx and  there  cursed  the water.  Demeter was  old  Deo, 
the barley-planting Mother-goddess  of the  Danaan  Arcadians.  That  some 
mythographers call her Rhea proves her  Cretan origin.  Her famous mare-
headed  statue  at  Phigalia,  by  the  River  Neda  in  Western  Arcadia,  held  a 
porpoise  in  one  hand  and  in  the  other  a  sacred  black  dove  of the  sort  that 
is used at the oak-oracle of Dodona.'

'Why mare-headed?' 
"The  horse  was  sacred  to  her,  and  when  the  Pelopians  intermarried 
with  the  original  Arcadians,  this  was  recorded  in  myth  as  a  marriage  be 
tween  Pelops  and  Hippodameia,  "the  Horse-tamer",  who  is  also  called 
Danais by some  mythographers.  And  among  their children were  Chrysip-
pos,  "Golden  Horse";  Hippalcmos,  "Bold  Horse";  Nicippe,  "Victorious 
Mare"—new  clan-names.'T  see.  It  is  not  so  nonsensical  as  it  sounds.  Well,  now  I  can  fill  out  the 
story.  The  Mother-goddess  was  served  by  the  so-called  Daughters  of 
Proetus or  Proteus, 1 who lived in  a cave  at  Lusi,  by  the  headwaters  of the 
Styx.  Her  priestesses  had  a  right  to  the  shoulder-blade  of the  sacred  por 
poise  at  a  sacrificial  feast.  Porpoise  beef makes  very  good  eating,  especi 
ally  when  it  has  been  well  hung.  And  Proteus,  according  to  Homer, 
became  herdsman  to  Poseidon  and  tended  his  sea-beasts.  That  must  have 
been  after  Poseidon's  conquest  of  the  Goddess,  which  he  celebrated  by 
calling  himself  the  Mare-tamer.  I  take  Proteus  to  be  another  name  for 
Pallas,  the  Sea-beast:  the  Achaeans,  in  fact,  enslaved  the  Pelopians,  who 
were  now  also  styled  Danaans,  and  Poseidon  took  over  the  prerogatives 
and titles of Pallas.'T  congratulate  your  Excellency.  You  evidently  agree  with  me  in  dis 
missing as mistaken  the view that  Pelops was an Achaean—unless  perhaps 
an  earlier  Achaean  horde  had  entered  Greece  many  centuries  before  with 
the  Aeolians;  I  suppose  that  the  mistake  arose  from  the  knowledge  that 
Pelops  was  once  worshipped  in  the  northern  province  of the  Peloponnese 
now  called  Achaea.  For  the  enslavement  of the  Pelopians  by  the  Achaeans 
is  confirmed  in  another,  rather  frivolous  myth:  Poseidon  is  said  to  have 
fallen  in  love  with  Pelops,  as  Zeus  with  Ganymede,  and  to  have  carried 
him  off to  be  his  cup-bearer.  Neptune,  who  emigrated  to  Italy  was,  you 
will  agree,  also  Pallas  and  must  not  be  identified  with  Poseidon  as  the 
custom is. But I should guess Proteus to be a general name of the god who 
is  the  son,  lover  and  victim  of  the  old  Mother  Goddess,  and  assumes  a 
variety  of shapes.  He  is  not  only  Pallas,  the  sea-beast,  but  Salmoneus  the 
human oak-king,  Chrysippos the golden horse, and so forth.'

'But Pan of Lycos? What had Evander to do with him?'

1  'Proetus*  is  the  earlier  spelling  of the  w o r d,  which  means  'the  early  man',  formed  from

the  adverb proi  or pro.

354

'His  ancestor  Pelops  probably  brought  him  from  the  River  Lycos, 
which  flows  into  the  Black  Sea  not  far  from  Enete.  Another  lusty  god. 
You  will  recall  that  he  danced  for  joy  when  Pelops  was  fitted  out with  his 
new white  shoulder.  By the  way,  do  you  recall  the various  stories  of Pan's 
parentage?''The usual  one  makes him a son  of the nymph  Dryope by Hermes.' 
'What  does  that  convey  to  you?' 
'I  have  never  considered.  "Dryope"  means  a  woodpecker  of the  sort 
that  nests  in  oaks  and  makes  an  extraordinary  noise  with  its  bill  in  the 
cracks  of trees,  and  climbs  spirally  up  the  trunk.  It  has  a  barbed  tongue 
and  portends  rain,  as  the  dolphin  and  porpoise  portend  storms  by  their 
frisking.  And  the  nymph  Dryope  is  connected  with  the  cult  of Hylas,  a 
Phrygian  form  of  Hercules  who  dies  ceremonially  every  year.  And 
Hermes—he's  the  prime  phallic  god,  and  also  the  god  of eloquence,  and 
his erotic statues are usually carved from an oak.'

'The  tree  of  shepherds,  the  tree  of  Hercules,  the  tree  of  Zeus  and 
Juppiter.  But  Pan,  as  the  son  of an  oak-woodpecker,  is  hatched  from  an 
egg-'

'Hold  hard,'  said  Paulus.  'I  remember  something  to  the  point.  Our 
Latin  god  Faunus,  who  is  identical  with  Pan,  the god of shepherds,  is  said 
to  have  been  a  King  of Latium  who  entertained  Evander  on  his  arrival. 
And  Faunus  was  the  son  of  Picus,  which  is  Latin  for  woodpecker. 
Evidently  another  Pelopian  tribe  had  reached  Latium  from  the  Black  Sea 
before either Evander  or Aeneas.  Faunus  is worshipped  in  sacred  groves, 
where  he  gives  oracles;  chiefly  by  voices  heard  in  sleep  while  the  visitant 
lies on a sacred  fleece.''Which  establishes  the  mythical  connexion  between  Pan,  the  oak,  the 
woodpecker,  and  sheep.  I  have  read  another  legend  of his  birth,  too.  He  is 
said  to  have  been  the  son  of  Penelope,  Ulysses'  wife,  by  Hermes  who 
visited  her  in  the  form  of a  ram.  A  ram,  not  a  goat.  This  is  odd,  because 
both  Arcadian  Pan  and  his  Italian  counterpart  Faunus  have  goat  legs and 
body.  I  think  I  see  how  that  comes  about.  Pallas  the  Titan,  the  royal  sea-
beast,  was  the  son  of  Crios  (the  Ram).  This  means  that  the  Pelopian 
settlers  from  Enete  formed  an  alliance  with  the  primitive  Arcadians  who 
worshipped  Hermes  the  Ram,  and  acknowledged  him  as  the  father  of 
their  sea-beast  King  Pallas.  Likewise  the  Aegeans—the  goat-tribe— 
formed  an  alliance  with  the  same Arcadians  and  acknowledged  Hermes  as 
the  father  of their  Goat-king,  Pan,  whose  mother  was  Amalthea  and  who 
became  the  He-goat  of the  Zodiac'

Paulus  said  smiling:  'Neatly  argued.  That disposes  of the other scand 
alous  legend  that  Pan  was  the  son  of Penelope  by  all her  suitors  in  the 
absence  of Ulysses.'

'Where did you get that version?  It is extraordinarily interesting.'

355

1  cannot  remember.  From  some  grammarian  or  other.  It  makes  little

sense to  me.''Where did you get that version?  It is extraordinarily interesting.'

355

1  cannot  remember.  From  some  grammarian  or  other.  It  makes  little

sense to  me.'

'I  knew  that  Pan  was  the  son  of Penelope,  but  your  version  is  a  great 
improvement  on  it.  Penelope,  you  see,  is  not  really  Ulysses'  wife  except 
in  a  manner  of  speaking;  she  is  a  sacred  bird,  the  penelops  or  purple-
striped  duck.  So  again,  as  in  the  Dryope  version  of his  parentage,  Pan  is 
born  from  a  bird—which  explains  the  legend  that  he  was  perfecdy 
developed  from birth,  as  a hatched  chicken is.  Now to come to  the suitors, 
by  what  I  fear  will  be  a  longish  argument.  I  postulate  first  of all  that  the 
Palladium  is  made  from  the  bones  of Pelops,  that  is  to  say  from  the  ivory 
shoulder-blades of porpoises, a suitable and durable material, and that it is 
a  phallic  statue,  not  the  statue  of a  goddess.  I  support  my  thesis  by  the 
existence,  until  a  few years  ago,  of another sacred  shoulder-blade  of Pelops 
in  the  precinct  which  his  great-grandson  Hercules  built  in  his  honour  at 
Olympia.  Now,  according  to  the  myth,  Pelops  had  only  one  sacred 
shoulder-blade,  the  right  one;  yet  nobody  has  ever  questioned  the 
genuineness either of the relic at  Olympia  or of the  Palladium.  The history 
of the  Olympian  blade  is  this.  During  the  siege  of Troy  the  Greeks  were 
told  by  an  oracle  that  the  only  offensive  counter-magic  to  the  defensive 
magic of the Palladium preserved in the Citadel of Troy was the shoulder-
blade  of Pelops  which  a  tribe  of Pelopians  had  taken  to  Pisa  in  Italy.  So 
Agamemnon  sent  for  the  thing,  but  the  ship  that  was  bringing  it  to  him 
went  down  off the  coast  of Euboea.  Generations  later,  a  Euboean  fisher 
man  dragged  it  up  in  his  net and  recognized  it  for  what  it  was—probably 
by  some  design  carved  on  it.  He  brought  it  to  Delphi  and  the  Delphic 
Oracle  awarded  it  to  the  people of Olympia, who  made  the  fisherman  its 
pensioned  guardian.  If the  bone  was  the  shoulder-blade  of a  sacred  por 
poise,  not  of a  man,  the  difficulty  of  Pelops's  having  had  more  than  one 
right  shoulder-blade  disappears.  So  does  the  difficulty  of  believing  that 
when  boiled  and  eaten  by  the  gods  he  came  alive  again—if  the  fact  was 
that a new sacred  porpoise  was caught  and  eaten  every year at  Lusi  by the 
devotees  of Deo.  Does  all  this sound  reasonable?''More  reasonable,  by  far,  than  the  usual  fantastic  story,  though 
cannibalism  in  ancient  Arcadia  is  not  incredible.  And  that  the  Palladium 
is  a  phallic  statue,  rather  than  that  of a  goddess,  may  explain  why  such  a 
mystery has  been  made  of its  appearance  and  why  it  is  hidden  out  of sight 
in  the  Penus  of the  Temple  of Vesta.  Yes,  though  your  thesis  is  startling 
and  even,  at first hearing,  indecent,  it has much  to  commend  it.'

'Thank  you.  To  continue:  you  remember  that  two  or  three  of the  early

kings of Rome had  no discoverable father?'

'Yes.  I  have  often wondered  how  that happened.' 
'You  remember,  too,  that  the  Kingdom  descended  in  the  female  line:  a 
man  was  king  only  by  virtue  of marriage  to  a  queen  or  of descent  from  a 
356

queen's daughter. The heir to the Kingdom, in fact, was not the king's son 
but  the  son  of either  his  youngest  daughter  or  his  youngest  sister—which 
explains  the  Latin  word  nepos,  meaning both  nephew  and  grandson.  The 
focus  of the  community  life  was  literally  the focus,  or  hearth-fire,  of the 
royal  house,  which  was  tended  by  the  princesses  of the royal  line,  namely 
the Vestal  Virgins.  To  them  the  Palladium  was  delivered  for safe-keeping 
as  the fatale pignus  imperii,  the  pledge  granted  by  the  Fates  for  the  per 
manency  of the  royal  line.'

'They  still  have  it  safe.  But  if you  are  right  about  the  statue's  obscene 
nature, the Vestal Virgins seem rather an odd choice of guardians, because 
they are strictly forbidden to indulge in sexual intercourse!'Theophilus  laid  his  forefinger  along  his  nose  and  said:  'It  is  the 
commonplace  paradox  of religions  that  nothing  is  nefas,  unlawful,  that  is 
not  also fas,  lawful,  on  particularly  holy  occasions.  Among  the  Egyptians 
the  pig is viewed  with  abhorrence and  its very touch  held  to  cause  leprosy 
—indeed,  the  Egyptian  pig  as  a  scavenger  and  corpse-eater  merits  this 
abhorrence—yet  the  highest-born  Egyptians  eat  its  flesh  with  relish  at 
their  midwinter  mysteries  and  fear  no  untoward  consequence.  The  Jews, 
it  is  said,  formerly  did  the  same,  if they  do  not  do  so  now.  Similarly,  the 
Vestal  Virgins  cannot  always  have  been  debarred  from  the  full  natural 
privileges  of  their  sex,  for  no  barbarous  religion  enforces  permanent 
sterility  on  nubile  women.  My  view  is  that  at  midsummer  during  the 
Alban  Holiday,  which  was  a  marriage  feast  of  the  Oak-queen—your 
Excellency's  charming  nymph  Egeria—with  the  Oak-king  of  the  year, 
and  the  occasion  of promiscuous  love-making,  the  six  Vestals,  her  kins 
women,  coupled  with  six  of  the  Oak-king's  twelve  companions—you 
will  recall  Romulus's  twelve  shepherds.  But  silently,  in  the  darkness  of a 
sacred  cave  so  that  nobody  knew  who  lay  with  whom,  nor  who  was  the 
father  of any  child  born.  And  did  the  same  again  with  the  six  other  com 
panions  at  midwinter  during  the  Saturnalia.  Then,  failing  a  son  of  the 
Oak-queen,  the  new  king  was  chosen  from  a  child  born  to  a  Vestal.  So 
Penelope's  son  by  six  suitors  is  explained.  The  Lusty  God—call  him 
Hercules or Hermes or Pan or Pallas or Pales or Mamurius or Neptune or 
Priapus  or  whatever  you  please—inspired  the  young  men  with  erotic 
vigour when  they had first danced  around  a blazing bonfire  presided  over 
by his  obscene  statue—the  Palladium  itself.  Thus  it  happened  that  a  king 
was said to be born of a virgin mother, and either to have no known father, 
or to be the son of the god.''That  is  a  still  more  startling  notion  than  the  other,'  protested  Paulus, 
'and  I  cannot  see  either  that  you  have  any  proof  of  it,  or  that  you  can 
explain  how  the  Vestals  ceased  to  be  love-nymphs  and  became  barren 
spinsters as now.'

'The  cessation  of  the  royal  love-orgies,'  said  Theophilus,  'follows

3 57

logically  on  the  historical  course  that we  discussed  yesterday—the  exten 
sion  of  the  kingship  in  ancient  times  from  one  year  to  four  years;  from 
four  to  eight;  from  eight  to  nineteen;  until  finally  it  became  a  life-tenure. 
Though  popular  love-orgies  might continue—and  at  Rome  continue still 
—to  be held  at midsummer and at the close of the year, they ceased to have 
any significance as occasions for breeding new kings. As we know, children 
are  often  born  of  these  holiday  unions  and  are  considered  lucky  and 
cheerfully  legitimized;  but  they  have  no  claim  to  the  kingship,  because 
their  mothers  are no longer princesses, as formerly. It seems  to have been 
King Tarquin the Elder who first prescribed  for the Vestals what amounts 
to  perpetual  virginity,  his  object  being  to  prevent  them  from  breeding 
claimants to the throne. It was certainly he who introduced burying alive as 
a  punishment  for  any  Vestal  who  broke  the  rule;  but  even  now  the  pre 
scribed  virginity is not perpetual—for after thirty years a Vestal Virgin is, 
I  understand,  entitled  to  unsanctify  herself,  if  she  pleases,  and  marry.'

Tt  happens  very  seldom;  after  thirty  years  of illustrious  spinsterhood 
it  is  hard  for  a  woman  to  win  a  husband  of  any  worth,  and  she  soon 
wearies of the  world  and  usually dies of remorse.''Now,  as  fo  the  proof that  the  Virgins  were  once  permitted  occasional 
erotic  delights:  in  the  first  place  the  novice,  when  initiated  by  the  Chief 
Pontiff on  behalf of the  God,  is  addressed  as  "Amata",  beloved  one,  and 
given a head-dress bordered with pure purple, 1 a white woollen fillet and a 
white  linen  vestment—the  royal  marriage  garments  of  the  bride  of  the 
God.  In  the  second,  we  know  that  Silvia,  the  mother  of  Romulus  and 
Remus, was  a  Vestal  Virgin  of Alba  Longa  and  unexpectedly became  the 
bride  of Mamurius  or  Mars,  then  a  red-faced,  erotic  Shepherd-god;  and 
was  not  buried  alive  as  a  Vestal  would  now  be  if she  became  pregnant— 
even  though she claimed  that a god  had  forced her.'

'They drowned Silvia in the River Anio, at all events.' 
'Only  in  a  manner  of  speaking,  I  think.  After  the  birth  of her  twins, 
whom  she  laid  in  the  ark  of osier  and  sedge,  which  is  a  commonplace  in 
nativity  myths  of this  sort,  and  consigned  to  the  mercy  of the  waves,  she 
took  much  the  same  baptismal  bath  in  renewal  of  her  virginity  as  the 
Priestess of Aphrodite yearly takes here at Paphos 2 in the blue sea, and the 
nymph Dryope in her fountain at Pegae.'

'The  connexion  between  Rome  and  Arcadia  is,  I  grant,  very  close.

1  Purpureas  is  a  reduplication  of purus,  "very,  very  pure.''The  connexion  between  Rome  and  Arcadia  is,  I  grant,  very  close.

1  Purpureas  is  a  reduplication  of purus,  "very,  very  pure.'

* Aphrodite  persists  tenaciously  at  Paphos.  In  the  village  of  Konklia,  as  it  is  now  called 
after  the  sea-shell  in  which  she  rode  ashore  there,  a  rough  anaconic  stone,  her  original  neo 
lithic  image,  remains  on  the  site  of the  early  Greek  sanctuary  and  is  still  held  in  awe  by  the 
local  people.  Close  by  is  a  Frankish  church,  re-built  about  1450  as  an  ordinary  Greek  chapel, 
where  the  saint  is  a  golden-haired  beauty  called  Panagia  Chrisopolitissa,  'the  all-holy  golden 
woman  of  the  town'—a  perfect  figure  of  Aphrodite  with  the  infant  Eros  in  her  arms.  Mr. 
Christopher  Kininmonth  w ho  gives  me  these  particulars,  says  that  the  beach is  a  particularly

358

The  Shepherd-god  sends  a  wolf,  lycos,  to  alarm  Silvia  and  then  over 
powers  her  in  a  cave.  And  when  the  twins  are  born,  a wolf and a wood 
pecker  bring  them  food.  By  the  way,  can  you  explain  how  Pan  comes  to 
have a wolf in his service, if he is a god of shepherds?'

It  was  probably  a  were-wolf.  The  Arcadian  religious  theory  is  that  a 
man  is  sent  as  an  envoy  to  the  wolves.  He  becomes  a  were-wolf for  eight 
years,  and  persuades  the  wolf-packs  to  leave  man's  flocks  and  children 
alone  during  that  time.  Lycaon  the  Arcadian  initiated  the  practice,  they 
say,  and  it  is  likely  that  your  ancient  Guild  of Lupercal  priests  originally 
provided  Rome  with  her  were-wolf  too.  But  to  speak  again  of  Silvia. 
The  God  not  only  ravished  her  in  a  dark  cave  overshadowed  by  a 
sacred  grove,  but  took  advantage  of a  total  eclipse  of  the  sun.  He  was 
hiding his true shape, I suppose; which was that of a sea-beast.''You  seem  to  have  the  whole  business  worked  out.  Perhaps  you  can 
also explain  why  the hair of a  Vestal  is cut  at marriage  and  never allowed 
to grow?'

'That  must  have  been  King  Tarquin's  prudent  regulation.  Women 
with their hair cut cannot perform magical spells.  Doubtless he feared  that 
they  would  revenge  themselves  on  him  for  his  severity  towards  them. 
Vestal  Virgins  were under the  king's sole  charge  in  those days.  It was  he, 
not  the  Chief Pontiff,  who  had  the  privilege  of scourging  any  Vestal  who 
let  the  sacred  fire  go  out,  and  scourging  to  death  any  Vestal  who  took a 
private lover.'

'And  can  you  also  tell  me  why  they  use  spring-water  mixed  with

powdered and purified brine in their sacrifices?'

'Tell  me  first  what  are  the  medical  properties  of  water  mixed  with

brine?'

'It is a strong emetic and purge.' 
'Suitable  for  preparing  celebrants  for  the  midsummer  and  midwinter 
feasts? I had not thought of that supplementary use.  What I am suggesting 
is  that when  the  twelve young shepherds—the  leaping priests of Mamurius 
or Pallas—performed  their orgiastic dance  for hour after hour around  the 
blazing  bonfires  they  must have  sweated  terribly  and  come  near  to  faint 
ing.'

'I  see  what  you  mean.  In  the  harvest-fields  countrymen  always  refresh 
themselves with  brine-water in  preference  to  plain:  it  restores  the salt  that 
has  been  lost  by  sweating.  Brine-water  fetched  by  Vestals  at  the  mid 
summer orgy must have restored  the vigour of the shepherds like a charm. 
Still  another  question,  in  revenge  for  all  those  that  you  asked  me:  how 
does  Triton come to be a son of Poseidon?'

fine  one  and  that  the  Romans,  w ho  substituted  their  massive  and  tasteless  Temple  of Venus 
for  the  earlier  Greek  building  did  not  despise  the  conical  image  but  incoiporated  it  in  their 
shrine.359359

'In  the  same  way  as  Proteus  comes  to  be  his  herdsman.  Originally 
Poseidon had  nothing  to  do with  the sea.  The  porpoise of the  Crathis,  the 
Delphic  dolphin  and  the  Phocian  seal  all  belong  to  the  earlier  civilization. 
Poseidon  won  them  as  his  own  when  he  seized  the  Peloponnese  and  the 
opposite  shores  of  the  Gulf  of  Corinth  and  married  the  Sea-goddess 
Amphitrite.  Triton must have been her son,  probably by Hermes; perhaps 
he ruled at "Lacedaemon of the Sea-beast". At any rate, Poseidon becomes 
his  foster-father  by  marrying  the  Sea-goddess  Amphitrite—I  take  this  to 
be  one  of  Athene's  original  titles.  (By  the  way,  the  ancient  Seal-king 
Phoceus,  who  gave  his  name  to  Phocis,  was  the  son  of  Ornytion,  which 
means  Son of the  Chicken—and  the  Chicken, I suppose,  is  Pan again who 
was  hatched  from  a woodpecker's  egg  or  the egg  of a  penelope  duck.)  Of 
one  thing  I  am  sure:  unless  we  recognize  Triton  and  Pallas  and  Pelops 
as  originally  a  sea-beast  incarnate  in  a  dynasty  of ancient  kings,  we  can 
hope  to  find  no  sense  in  the  legends  of heroes  who  rescued  maidens  from 
sea-beasts.  The  heroes  are  princes  who  challenge  the  sea-beast  king  to 
combat  and  kill  him,  and  marry  the  royal  heiress  whom  he  has  put  under 
close  restraint  and  reign  in  his  stead  by  virtue of this marriage.  The  royal 
heiress  is  his  daughter,  but  she  is  also  an  incarnation  of the  Moon;  which 
explains  why  Homer's  Pallas  was  the  Moon's  father.  You  find  the  same 
story  in  the  marriage  of Peleus  to  the  Sea-goddess  Thetis  after his  killing 
of Phocus,  the  Seal-king  of Aegina.  Peleus  means  "the  muddy  one"  and 
may  be  a  variant  form  of Pelops—as  Pelias,  the  name  of the  king  whose 
former  territory  Peleus  annexed,  certainly  is.  There  was  a  sea-beast  at 
Troy;Hercules,  in  company with  the same Peleus,  killed  it and rescued the 
princess  Hesione  and  made  himself  master  of  the  city.  And  clearly  the 
many  stories  of  princes  who  were  saved  by  dolphins  from  drowning 
suggest  sacred  paintings  of these  princes  riding  on  dolphin-back  in  proof 
of sovereignty. Arion and Icadius and E n a l u s . . .''Theseus,  of c o u r s e . . .' 
'And  Coeranus  too,  and  Taras  and  Phalanthus.  The  common  people 
always  prefer  anecdote,  however  improbable,  to  myth,  however  simple: 
they  see  a  prince  pictured  astride  a  dolphin  and  take  this  for  literal  truth 
and feel obliged to account for his strange choice of steed.'

'But  what  you  undertook  to  explain  at  the  beginning  of this  conversa 
tion,  and  have  not  yet  explained,  is  why  the  Goddess  Athene  has  a  male 
name as her principal  tide.'

'She  has  become  androgynous:  there  are  many  such  deities.  Sin,  for 
example,  the  Moon-deity  of the  Semites,  and  the  Phoenician  Baalith,  and 
the  Persian Mithras. The Goddess  is worshipped  first and  is  all-powerful; 
presently a  God  enters  into  equal  power  with her,  and  either  they become 
twins,  as  happened  when  Artemis  agreed  to  share  Delos  with  Apollo  of 
Tempe,  or  else  they  are  joined  in  a  single  bi-sexual  being.  Thus  the 
-?6o

Orphic  hymn  celebrates  Zeus  as  both  Father  and  Eternal  Virgin.  Your 
own Juppiter is in the same hermaphroditic tradition.'

'Our own Juppiter? You surprise me.' 
'Yes,  do  you  not  know  the  couplet  written  by  Quintus  Valerius 
Soranus,  whom  Crassus  praised  as  the  most  learned  of all  who  wore  the 
toga? No? It runs:

Juppiter Omnipotens, rerum regum-que repertor, 
Progenitor genetrix-que Deum, Deus units et idem.

All kings, all  things, entire

From Jove the Almighty came—

Of Gods  both dam  and  sire

Yet God the sole and same.All kings, all  things, entire

From Jove the Almighty came—

Of Gods  both dam  and  sire

Yet God the sole and same.

And  Varro,  his  rival  in  learning,  writing of the  Capitoline Trinity, agreed 
that  together  they  form  a  single  god:  Juno  being  Nature  as  matter,  Jup 
piter  being  Nature  as  the  creative  impulse,  and  Minerva  being  Nature  as 
the  mind  which  directs  the  creative  impulse.  Minerva,  as  you  know,  often 
wields  Juppiter's  thunderbolts;  therefore  if  Juppiter  is  Eternal  Virgin, 
Minerva  is  equally  Eternal  Father.  And  there  we  are  again:  Minerva  is 
universally  identified  with  Pallas  Athene,  who  is  the  Goddess  of Wisdom. 
Athene is to Pallas as Minerva is to Juppiter: his better half.'

'I  am  getting  confused  in  my  mind  between  these  various  goddesses.

Are they all the same person?'

'Originally.  She  is  older  than  all  the  gods.  Perhaps  her  most  archaic 
form  is  the  Goddess  Libya.  If  you  read  Apollonius  recently  you  will 
recall  that  she  appeared  in  triad  by Lake  Triton  to  Jason,  wearing goat 
skins.'

'A bi-sexual deity naturally remains chaste, or so I judge from  Minerva's

case,' Paulus commented.

'Chaste as a fish.' 
'But when Juppiter began he was as unchaste as a sea-beast.' 
'Minerva reformed him.' 
1  daresay  that  is  why  she  is  called  his  daughter.  My  daughter  Sergia 
reformed me. All daughters reform their fathers.  Or try to. I was a leaping 
sea-beast as a young man.'

'So  was  Apollo  before  his  sister  Artemis  reformed  him:  he  was  a  lusty 
dolphin  once.  But  now  chaste  sacred  fish  are  kept  in  his  temples  at  Myra 
and Hierapolis.'

'That  reminds  me  of  a  question  on  which  I  am  most  anxious  to  be 
informed:  what  do  you  know of sea-beasts  and fish in  the  Jewish  religion? 
I understand that you have read  their sacred books with some care.''Not recendy.  But I remember that there is a partial  taboo on fish in  the

361

Jewish  Torah,  or  Law;  which  suggests  Egyptian  influence.  But  not  on 
scaled  fish,  only  on  the  unsealed,  and  that  would  point  to  their  having 
once  held  sea-beasts,  such  as  the  porpoise  and  dolphin,  in  reverence. 
Moreover,  their  sacred  Ark—now  lost—was  covered  with  sea-beast 
skins;  that  is  important.  The  Jews  were  tributary  once  to  the  Philistines, 
whose  God  was  a  sea-beast  of many  changes  named  Dagon—the  Phili 
stines  are  originally  immigrants  of  Cretan  Stock,  despite  their  Semitic 
language.  As  I  remember  the  story,  the  Philistines  conquered  the  Jews 
and  laid  up  the  Ark  in  Dagon's  temple  before  his  phallic  statue,  but  the 
God  enclosed  in  the  Ark  wresded  with  Dagon  and  broke  his  statue  into 
pieces.  Yes,  and  the  legendary  hero  who  led  the  Jews  into  Judaea  was 
called Jeshua, son of the Fish.''Ha!  That  is  exactly  what I  wanted  to  know.  You  see,  a  curious  thing 
happened  the  other  day.  A  written  report  reached  me  that  a  Jew  named 
Barnabas was preaching some new mystical doctrine in a Jewish synagogue 
at  the  other end  of the  island;  it was  described  by my  informant,  a  Syrian 
Greek  from Antioch with  a  Jewish  mother,  as  a  doctrine  endangering  the 
peace  of the  island.  I  sent  for  Barnabas  and  the  other  fellow  and  heard 
what  both  had  to  say.  I  forget  his  original  name,  but  he  had  become  a 
Roman citizen and asked  my  permission  to  call himself Paulus,  to  which I 
had weakly assented. I will not go into the story in detail: suffice it to say that 
Barnabas was preaching a new demigod, so  far as I can  make out a recent 
reincarnation of this heroic  Jeshua.  I  did  not know until you  mentioned  it 
just now that Jeshua was son of the Fish; perhaps this explains the mystery. 
At all events, my Oriental Secretary, a harmless litde man called Manahem, 
took Barnabas's part warmly, rather too warmly, and sent the other fellow 
about his  business  with  a fierceness of which  I  should  never have  believed 
him capable.'

'I  know  Manahem;  he  came  to  you  from  the  Court  of  Antipas  of

Galilee, did he not?''I  know  Manahem;  he  came  to  you  from  the  Court  of  Antipas  of

Galilee, did he not?'

'That's  the  man.  He  is  now  away  on  leave  in  Alexandria.  Well,  when 
the case was settled and  Barnabas and  the other fellow had  both been  sent 
out  of the  island  with  a warning  never  to  return,  I  called  Manahem  to  my 
private  room  and  gave him  a  piece  of my mind.  I  am  not naturally  obser 
vant, but long experience as a magistrate has  taught me  to  use my eyes in 
court,  and  I  had  caught  Manahem  surreptitiously signalling  to  Barnabas 
to  leave  the  case  in  his  hands.  He  was  making  a  secret  sign  with  his  foot, 
the outline  of a fish traced  on  the pavement.  I  gave Manahem  the  fright of 
his  life—threatened  to  put  him  to  the  torture  unless  he explained  that  fish 
to  me.  He confessed at once, and begged me to  forgive him.  The fish sign, 
it appears, is the pass-word of Barnabas's society which cultivates a sort of 
universal pacifism under the guidance of a demi-god named Jeshua—Jesus 
in Greek—who has the tide of the Anointed One. The pass-word is for use

3 62

among  Greek-speaking  Jews  and  stands,  Manahem  says,  for  Jesus 
CAristos  Theos  which  are,  of course,  the  first  letters  of ichthus,  fish.  But 
there is more to it than that, I believe.'

'I  have  heard  of  the  society.  They  celebrate  a  weekly  love-feast  with 
fish,  wine  and  bread,  but  tend  to  Pythagorean  asceticism.  You  may  be 
sure that Jeshua the Fish is of the chaster sort. The Jeshua who founded it 
was executed under Tiberius; and oddly enough his mother was a Temple 
Virgin at Jerusalem, and there was a mystery about his birth.''Yes, Manahem revealed it under an oath of secrecy. You are right about 
this  God's chastity. Erotic religion is going out of fashion everywhere;  it is 
inconsistent  with  modern  social  stability,  except  of  course  among  the 
peasantry.  Do  you  know,  Theophilus,  a  picture rises in  my  mind,  almost 
a  vision.  I  see  the  white-clad  Vestal  Virgins  in  their  Temple  grounds 
offering up little prayers to chaste Juppiter, Father and Virgin, whom they 
serve.  I  see  them  devoutly circling  the  fish-pool  which  the  sacred fish also 
mystically circles—the cool, pale-faced fish, as chaste as they—'

Theophilus  interrupted:'—Who  was  dark-faced and hoc  in  Silvia's  day,' 
'And in his pool drowns each unspoken wish,' Paulus agreed.

*

*

*

Theophilus  was  wrong  to  suggest  that  the  hero  rescues  the  chained 
virgin  from  a  male  sea-beast.  The  sea-beast  is  female—the  Goddess 
Tiamat or Rahab— and the God Bel or Marduk, who wounds her mortally 
and  usurps  her  authority,  has  himself chained  her  in  female  form  to  the 
rock  to  keep  her  from  mischief.  When  the  myth  reaches  Greece, 
Bellerophon  and  Hercules  are more  chivalrously  represented  as  rescuing 
her  from  the monster. It  has even been suggested  that in the original icon, 
the  Goddess's  chains  were  really  necklaces,  bracelets  and  anklets,  while 
the sea-beast was her emanation.

363

Chapter  Twenty-One

T HE  W A T E RS  OF  S T YX

In  Parry's  edition  of  Archbishop  Ussher's  Letters—Ussher  was  the

learned  Primate  of  Ireland  in  the  reign  of  Charles  I  who  dated  the 
creation of Adam in the year 4004 B.C.—appears a note that Langbaine 
the  Irish  antiquarian  communicated  to  Ussher  the  following  bardic  tradi 
tion:Nemninus being upbraided by a  Saxon scholar as a Briton and there 
fore  ignorant  of the  rudiments  of learning,  invented  these  letters  by  an 
improvisation, to clear his nation of the charge of dullness and ignorance.

A L AP 
B R A UT 
C U RI 
D E XI 
E G IN 
F I CH 
G U I D IR 
HULL 
J E C H U IT 
KAM 
L O U B ER 
MUIN 
NIHN 
OR

A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
F 
G 
H 
I 
K 
L 
II 
N 
0 
K E NC

P A R TH 
Q U I TH 
R AT 
T R A US 
S U NG 
UIR 
J E IL 
O FR 
Z E I RC 
A I UN 
ESTTAUL 
E G UI 
A UR 
EMC 
E L AU

P

Q 
R 
T 
S 
U 
X 
E 
Z 
AE 
ET 
EU 
AU 
EI

This  obviously  was  a  joke  at  the  stupid  Saxon's  expense,  because  the 
British  bards  had  used  an  alphabet  for  centuries  before  the  arrival  of the 
Saxons.  But  what  do  these  improvised  letter-names  mean?  Since  the 
stupid  Saxon  would  have  used  the  A BC  Latin  order  of  letters  and  was 
apparendy  unaware  that  any  other  order  existed,  let  us  try  restoring  the 
Alap-Braut-Curi to its B L F SN Ogham order. And since we can be pretty 
sure  that  Nemninus  was  showing  off his  superior  learning—probably  his 
knowledge  of  Greek  to  tease  the  stupid  Saxon  who  knew  only  a  litde 
364

monkish  Latin—let us  try writing  out  the  letter-names  in  Greek,  and  see 
whether certain familiar combinations of words do not strike the eye.

This  is  a  difficult  puzzle,  because  the  extra  words  K E N C,  E L AU  and 
E S T I A UL  have  been  inserted  without  explanation  among  the  letter-
names and because the vowels have been mixed. (If E is O F R, OR is prob 
ably E R .)  Nevertheless  the  D E X I - T R A U S - K A M - P A R TH  sequence is 
striking;  we  evidently  have  hit  on  an  Egyptian  Christian  formula.  With 
Clement of Alexandria's specialized vocabulary in mind we read it as:

D E X I T E R AN  T R A U S EI  P A R T H E N O M E T RA  K A M AXD E X I T E R AN  T R A U S EI  P A R T H E N O M E T RA  K A M AX

'The  spear will wound  the Virgin  Mother as she stands at his right hand.' 
This  neady  constructed  pentameter  is  a  reminiscence  of  St.  Luke's 
Gospel  (II,  jS).  Kamax  is  both  a  spear  and  a  vine-prop,  and  therefore  a 
most  appropriate  word.  The weapon  mentioned  by  Luke  is  a  sword;  but 
the  fulfilment  of the  prophecy,  for  Christian  mystics,  came with  the spear 
that  pierced  the  side  of Jesus  at  the  Crucifixion.  And  as  I  read  the  eight-
lettered Holy Name sequence at the end, the Lintels of Heaven ( O P H R EA 
O U R A N E I A)  are  invited  to  raise  a  shout  ( I A C H E S T H A I)  of 'Shiloh' 
(JELL) since the love-fish ( E R OS A L A B E S) has neared ( E G G I K E N) the 
land  of On  (AUNAN).  Aunan,  or  On, known  to the  Greeks as Heliopolis 
and  probably  the  oldest  city  in  Egypt,  was  the  centre  of the  Osiris  cult 
and  probably  also  of  the  Christ-as-Osiris  cult.  At  'Aun',  according  to 
Coptic  tradition,  the  Virgin  Mary  washed  the  Infant  Jesus's  swaddling 
clouts  in  the  spring  Ain-esh-Shems,  formerly  sacred  to  the  Sun-god  Ra. 
From  the  drops  that  dripped  from  the  strings,  up  sprang  the  sacred 
Balsam-tree. It is probable that this legend was originally told of the God 
dess  Isis  and  the  Infant  Horus.  Gwion  is,  I  think,  referring  to  it  in  the 
line:  'I  have  been  the  strings  of  a  child's  swaddling  clout'  in  the  Cdd 
Goddeu  and  in  'Whence  is  the  sweetness  of  the  balm?'  in  the  Angar 
Cyvyndawd.  The  Alabes  was  worshipped  at  Aun,  and  was  a  Nilotic  cat 
fish.

But this is a digression, and I will leave whatever Greek scholar may be 
interested  to  work  out  the  rest  of the  charm,  without  troubling  him  with 
my own approximate solution.But this is a digression, and I will leave whatever Greek scholar may be 
interested  to  work  out  the  rest  of the  charm,  without  troubling  him  with 
my own approximate solution.

Of the  various  objectives  proposed  in  Chapter  Eight  one  has  not  yet 
been  attained:  it  still  remains  to  find  out  the  meaning  of the  letter-names 
of the  Beth-Luis-Nion.  We  may assume  them  originally  to  have  stood  for 
something  else  than  trees,  for  the  Irish  tree-names,  with  the  exception  of 
Duir  and  Saille,  are  not  formed  from  roots  common  to  the  Greek,  Latin 
and Slavonic languages, as one might have expected.

The  meaning  of the  vowels  in  the  Bowel-Loth  proved  to  be  a  sequence 
of stages  in  the  life  of the  Spirit  of the  Year, incarnate in the sacred  king, 
365The  meaning  of the  vowels  in  the  Bowel-Loth  proved  to  be  a  sequence 
of stages  in  the  life  of the  Spirit  of the  Year, incarnate in the sacred  king, 
365

and  the  trees  named 
in  the  vowels  of  the  Beth-Luis-Nion  similarly 
proved to form a seasonal sequence. Is it possible that the separation of the 
vowels  from  the  consonants  was  a  late  development  and  that  originally 
they  were  distributed  among  the  consonants  at  regular  intervals,  as  they 
are in the Greek and Latin alphabets? That A, the birth letter, rather than 
B,  the  letter  of  inception,  really  began  the  alphabet;  and  that  the  form 
'Ailm-Beth'  was  even  earlier  than  'Beth-Luis-Nion'?  Since  Irish  legends 
about  the alphabet particularize  Greece  as  the place where it was  invented 
and  there  is  an  obstinate  countryside  tradition  in Ireland  that  the  Tuatha 
d£  Danaan  spoke  Greek,  why  not  put  the  Beth-Luis-Nion  into  ancient 
Greek  and  distribute  the  vowels  in  their  seasonal  order  among  the  con 
sonants,  placing  A  at  the  winter  solstice,  O  at  the  spring  equinox, 
U  at  the  summer  solstice,  E  at  the  autumn  equinox,  I  at  the  winter 
solstice  again;  and  placing  Straif  at  the  beginning  and  Quert  at  the 
end  of  the  summer  flight  of  letters?  Would  they  spell  out  another 
religious  charm?

Thus:

Ailm,  Beth,  Luis,  Nion,  Onn,  Fearn,  Saille,  Straif,  Huath,  Ura,

Duir, Tinn,  Coll,  Quert, Eadha,  Muin,  Gort, Ngetal, Ruis, Idho.Thus:

Ailm,  Beth,  Luis,  Nion,  Onn,  Fearn,  Saille,  Straif,  Huath,  Ura,

Duir, Tinn,  Coll,  Quert, Eadha,  Muin,  Gort, Ngetal, Ruis, Idho.

Ailm  Beth  does  not  make  a  hopeful  start  until  one  recalls  that  Ailm 
(silver  fir)  is  pronounced  Alv  or  Alph  in  Irish.  The  root  alph  expresses 
both  whiteness  and  produce:  thus  alphas  is  dull  white  leprosy  (albula  in 
Latin)  and  alphe  is  'gain'  and  alphiton  is  pearl  barley  and  Alphito  is  the 
White  Grain-goddess  or  Pig-Demeter,  alias  Cerdo  (which  also  means 
'gain'),  whose  connexion  with  Cerridwen  the  Welsh  Pig-Demeter,  alias 
the  Old  White  One,  has  already  been  pointed  out.  The  principal  river in 
the  Peloponnese  is  the  Alpheus.  Beth  or  Beith  is  the  birch  month  and 
since  the  birch  is  betulus  in  Latin,  we  may transliterate  it into Greek and 
write  Baitulus.  At  once  the  words  begin  to  make  sense  as  an  invocation. 
Alphito-Baitule,  a  compound  word 
like  Alphito-mantis  ('one  who 
divines from pearl barley') suggests a goddess of the same sort as ASHIMA 
B A E T YL  and  A N A T HA  B A E T Y L,  the  two  Goddess-wives  of  the 
Hebrew  Jehovah  in  his  fifth-century  B.C.  cult  at  Elephantine  in  Egypt. 
The  meaning  of Baitulos  is  a  sacred  stone  in  which  a  deity  is  resident;  it 
seems  to  be  connected  with  the  Semitic  Bethel  ('House  of  God')  but 
whether  Baitulos  is  derived  from  Bethel or  vice  versa  is  not  known.  The 
Lion-goddess  Anatha  Baetyl  was  not  originally  Semitic,  and  was  wor 
shipped as Anaitis in Armenia.

Luis,  the  next  Beth-Luis-Nion  letter,  suggests  Lusios,  a  divine  tide  of

many  Greek  deities,  meaning  'One  who  washes  away guilt'.  It  is  particu 
larly applied  to  Dionysus,  the Latin equivalent being Liber.  But Dionysus 
in  the  Orphic  Hymns  is  also  called  Luseios  and  Luseus,  which  suggests

366366

that  the  adjective  is  formed  not  directly  from  louein,  'to  wash',  but  from 
the  city  Lusi  in  Arcadia  famous  for  its  connexion  with  Dionysus.  Lusi  is 
overshadowed  by  the  enormous  mountain Aroania,  now Mount  Chelmos, 
and  lies  close  to  the  valleys  of the  Aroanius  River,  which  flows  into  the 
Alpheus,  and  of the  Styx  which  flows  into  the  Crathis.  The  Styx  ('hate-
fur)  was  the death-river by which  the  Gods were  said  to  swear,  and  which 
Demeter,  the  Barley  Mother,  cursed  when  Poseidon  pursued  her with  his 
unwelcome  attentions,  presumably  during  the  Achaean  conquest  of  the 
Crathis valley.

A L P H I T O - B A I T U LE  L U S IA

'White  Barley  Goddess,  Deliveress  from  guilt'

Here is Pausanias's account of Lusi and its neighbourhood:

As  you  go  westward  from  Pheneus,  the  road  to  the  left  leads  to  the 
city  of  Clitor  beside  the  channel  which  Hercules  made  for  the  river 
Aroanius.  .  .  .  The  city  is  on  the  river  Clitor  which  falls  into  the 
Aroanius  not  more  than  seven  furlongs  away.  Among  the  fish  in  the 
Aroanius  are  the  spotted  ones  which  are  said  to  sing  like  thrushes.  I 
saw  some  that  had  been  caught  but  they  did  not  utter  a  sound,  though 
I  stayed  by  the  river  till  sunset  when  they  are  supposed  to  sing  their 
best.  The most famous shrines at  Clitor are those of the Barley Mother, 
Aesculapius  and  the  Goddess  Ilithyia  whom  Olen  the  ancient  Lycian 
poet,  in  a  hymn  which  he  composed  for  the  Delians,  calls  'the  deft 
spinner' and so clearly identifies with the Fate Goddess.

The  road  to  the  right  leads  to  Nonacris  and  the waters  of  the  Styx. 
Nonacris  ['nine  heights']  was  once  an  Arcadian  city,  named  after  the 
wifeofLycaon.The  road  to  the  right  leads  to  Nonacris  and  the waters  of  the  Styx. 
Nonacris  ['nine  heights']  was  once  an  Arcadian  city,  named  after  the 
wifeofLycaon.

Lycaon  the  Pelasgian,  son  of  the  Bear-goddess  Callisto,  practised 
cannibalism  and  must  have  been  an  oak-god,  since  he  was  killed  by  a 
flash  of lightning.  His  clan  used  the  wolf-totem  and  Lycaon  as  wolf-king 
(or  werewolf)  reigned  until  the  ninth  year.  The  choice of King was settled 
at  a  cannibalistic  feast.  His  wife  Nonacris  was  clearly  the  Ninefold  God 
dess, and he is described as the first man to civilize Arcadia.

Not  far  from  the  ruins  of  Nonacris  is  the  highest  cliff  I  have  ever 
seen  or  heard  of,  and  the  water  that  trickles  down  from  it  is  called  the 
Water of S t y x . . ..  Homer  puts  a  mention  of the  Styx into  the  mouth  of 
Hera:

Witness me now, Earth and broad Heaven above 
And the down-trickling Stygian stream/

367

This  reads  as  if Homer had  visited  the  place.  Again  he  makes  the  God 
dess Athene  say:

Had I but known this in my wary mind 
When Zeus sent Hercules below to Hades 
To bring up Cerberus from his loathed home, 
Never would he have cheated Styx's water 
Tumbling from high.Had I but known this in my wary mind 
When Zeus sent Hercules below to Hades 
To bring up Cerberus from his loathed home, 
Never would he have cheated Styx's water 
Tumbling from high.

The  water  which,  tumbling  from  this  cliff at  Nonacris  falls  first  on  a 
high  rock and  afterwards  into  the river  Crathis,  is  deadly to  man and  to 
every  other  living  c r e a t u r e . . ..  It  is  remarkable  too  that  a horse's  hoof 
alone  is  proof  against  its  poison,  for  it  will  hold  the  water  without 
being  broken  by  it  . ..  as  cups  of  glass,  crystal,  stone,  earthenware, 
horn  and  bone  are.  The  water  also  corrodes  iron,  bronze,  lead,  tin, 
silver,  electrum  and  even  gold,  despite  Sappho's  assurance  that  gold 
never  corrodes.  Whether  or  not  Alexander  the  Great  really  died  of the 
poison of this water I  do  not know:  but the story is certainly current.

Above  Nonacris  are  the  Aroanian  mountains  and  in  them  is  a  cave 
to  which  the  Daughters  of Proetus  are said  to  have  run  when  madness 
overtook  them.  But  Melampus  by secret sacrifices  and  purificatory rites 
brought  them  down  to  Lusi,  a  town  near  Clitor,  of which  not  a  vestige 
now  remains.  There  he  healed  them  of their  madness  in  a  sanctuary  of 
the  Goddess  Artemis,  whom  the  people  of  Clitor  have  ever  since 
called  'the  Soother'.Melampus  means  'black  foot'  and  he  was  the  son  of Amythaon  and  the 
nymph  Melanippe  ('black  mare').  The  story  of  how  he  purged  the 
daughters  of  Proetus  with  black  hellebore  and  pig-sacrifices,  and  after 
wards washed away their madness in a stream,  probably refers  to the cap 
ture of this Danaan shrine by the Achaeans, though Melampus is reckoned 
as  an Aeolian  Minyan.  He also  conquered  Argos,  the centre of the  Danaan 
cult.  The  three  daughters  were  the  Triple  Goddess,  the  Demeter  of the 
Styx,  who  must  have  been  mare-headed,  else  a  horse's  hoof  would  not 
have  been  proof against  the  poison  of the  water.  But  according  to  Philo 
of Heraclea  and  Aelian,  the  horn  of a  Scythian  ass-unicorn  was  also  proof 
against  the  poison;  and  Plutarch  in  his  Life  of  Alexander  says  that  an  ass's 
hoof  makes  the  only  safe  vessel.  Near  by,  at  Stymphalus,  was  a  triple 
sanctuary  founded  by  Temenus  ('precinct')  the  Pelasgian,  in  honour  of 
the  Goddess  Hera  as  'girl,  bride and  widow',  a remarkable survival  of the 
original  triad.  She  was  called  'widow',  the  Stymphalians  told  Pausanias, 
because she quarrelled with  Zeus and retired to Stymphalus; this probably 
refers  to  a later revival  of the primitive  cult in  defiance  of Olympianism.

Sir  James  Frazer  visited  Lusi  in  1 8 9 5,  and  he  has  given  a  valuable 
account of it which allows us to read Nonacris as a name for the succession 
368Sir  James  Frazer  visited  Lusi  in  1 8 9 5,  and  he  has  given  a  valuable 
account of it which allows us to read Nonacris as a name for the succession 
368

of  nine  precipices  of  Mount  Aroania  which  overhang  the  gorge  of  the 
Styx.  Even  in  the  late  summer  there was still  snow  in  the  clefts  of what he 
described  as  the  most  'awful  line of precipices'  he had ever seen.  The  Styx 
is  formed  by  the  melting  snow and  seems  to  run  black  down  the  cliff-side 
because  of the  dark  incrustation  of the  rock  behind,  but  afterwards  bright 
blue because of the slatey rocks over which it flows in the gorge. The whole 
line  of  precipices  is  vertically  streaked  with  red  and  black—both  death 
colours  in  ancient  Greece—and  Frazer  accounts  for Hesiod's  description 
of  the  'silver  pillars'  of  the  Styx  by  observing  that  in  winter  immense 
icicles  overhang  the  gorge.  He  records  that  a  chemical  analysis  of  Styx 
water  shows  it  to  contain  no  poisonous  substance,  though  it  is  extremely 
cold.

The  next  letter  of the  Beth-Luis-Nion  being  Nion  we  can  continue  the

dactylic  invocation:

A L P H I T O - B A I T U LE  L U S IA  N O N A C R IS 
'White  Barley  Goddess,  Deliveress  from  guilt,  Lady of 
the  Nine  Heights'

Frazer  found  that  the  belief in  the  singing  spotted  fish  still  survived  at 
Lusi—they  recall  the  spotted  poetic  fish  of  Connla's  Well1—and  so  did 
the  tradition  of the  snakes  that  Demeter  set  to  guard  the  Styx  water.  He 
visited  the  cave of the  Daughters  of Proetus  which  overlooks  the  chasm 
of the  Styx,  and  found  that  it  had  a  natural  door  and  window  formed  by 
the  action  of water.

The  next  letter  is  Onn.  A  and  O  being  so  easily  confused  in  all  lan

guages,  we can continue with:

A N NAThe  next  letter  is  Onn.  A  and  O  being  so  easily  confused  in  all  lan

guages,  we can continue with:

A N NA

on  the strength  of the  Pelasgian  Goddess Anna,  sister of Belus,  whom  the 
Italians  called  Anna  Perenna  or  'Perennial  Anna'.  Ovid  in  his  Fasti says 
that  this  Anna was  regarded  by some  as  the  Moon-goddess  Minerva,  by 
others as Themis, or Io  of Argos. He  also  connects  her  with  barley cakes. 
Her  festival  fell  on  March  15 th,  which  is  just  where  Onn  occurs  in  the 
Beth-Luis-Nion  calendar.  Anna  probably  means  'queen',  or  'Goddess-

1  Pausanias had evidendy come  at the w r o ng  time  of year:  for in  the mayfly  season  trout do

utter  a  sort  of dry  squeak,  when  they  throw  themselves  ecstatically  out  of the  water  and  feel

the  air  on  their  gills.  T he  Irish  legend  of 'singing  trout'  apparendy  refers  to  an  erotic  Spring

dance,  in  the W h i te  Goddess's honour,  of fish  nymphs  who  mimicked the  leaping,  squeaking

trout:  for the Irish  princess  Dechtire conceived  her son  Cuchulain,  a reincarnation of the  G od

L u g h,  as  the  result  of  swallowing  a  mayfly,  and  he  was  able  to  swim  like  a  trout  as  soon as

b o m.  Cuchulain's  Greek  counterpart  was  Euphemus  ('well-spoken')  the  famous  swimmer,

son  of the  Moon-Goddess  Europe,  w ho  was  b om  by  the  Cephissus river  in  Phocis but  had  a

hero-shrine  at  Taenarus,  the  main  Peloponnesian  entrance  to  the  Underworld.  Euphemus's

w ay  of swimming was  to  leap out  of the water like  a fish and  skim from w a ve  to  wave; and in

Classical times Poseidon, G od of Fishes, claimed to be his father.

369w ay  of swimming was  to  leap out  of the water like  a fish and  skim from w a ve  to  wave; and in

Classical times Poseidon, G od of Fishes, claimed to be his father.

369

mother';  Sappho  uses  Ana  for  Anassa  (queen).  She  appears  in  Irish 
mythology  as  the  Danaan  goddess  Ana  or  Anan,  who  had  two  different 
characters.  The first was  the  beneficent Ana,  a  tide  of the  Goddess  Danu, 
mentioned  in  Cormac's  Glossary  as  equivalent  to  Buan-ann  (glossed  as 
'Good  Mother').  She  was  the  mother  of the  original  three  Danaan  gods 
Brian, Iuchurba and Iuchar, and she suckled and nursed them so well that 
her  name  'Ana'  came  to  signify  'plenty';  she.was  worshipped  in  Munster 
as  a  Goddess  of Plenty.  Two  mountains  in  Kerry,  'the  Paps  of Anu',  are 
named  after  her.  She  has  also  been  identified  by  E.  M.  Hull  with  Aine  of 
Knockaine,  a  Munster Moon-goddess who had charge  of crops  and  cattle 
and  is  connected  in  legend  with  the  meadow-sweet  to  which  she  gave  its 
scent,  and  with  the  midsummer  fire-festival.  The  maleficent  Ana  was  the 
leading person of the Fate Trinity, Ana, Badb and Macha, together known 
as the Morrigan,  or Great  Queen.  Badb,  'boiling',  evidendy refers  to  the 
Cauldron, and Macha is glossed in the Book of Lecan as meaning 'raven'.Ana  occurs  in  British  folklore  as  Black  Annis  of Leicester  who  had  a 
bower in  the  Dane  (Danaan?)  Hills  and  used  to  devour  children,  whose 
skins  she  hung  on  an  oak  to  dry.  She  was  known  as  'Cat  Anna'  but, 
according to E. M. Hull, Annis is a shortened form of Angness or Agnes, 
which  would  identify  her  with  Yngona,  'Anna  of  the  Angles',  a  well-
known  Danish  goddess.  Black  Annis  was  concerned  with  a  May-Eve 
hare-hunt,  later  transferred  to  Easter  Monday,  and  must  therefore  have 
been  nymph  as  well  as  hag.  Yngona,  certainly,  was  both  Nanna  (sharing 
her  favours  between  Balder  and  his  dark  rival  Holder)  and  Angurboda, 
the  Hag  of the  Iron  Wood,  mother  of Hel.  But  the  chances  are  that  the 
Hag  had  been  in  residence  near  Leicester  long before  the  Danes  occupied 
her  part of Mercia,  and  that she was  the  Danaan  Goddess Anu before she 
was Agnes.  In  Christian  times  she became a nun and  there  is  a  picture  of 
her wearing nun's habit in  the  vestry of the Swithland  Church.  She  is  the 
Blue  Hag  celebrated  in  Milton's  Paradise  Lost  and  Comus  as  sucking 
children's  blood  by  night  disguised  as  a  scritch-owl.  The  Irish  Hag  of 
Beare  also  became  a  nun;  it  was  easy  to  Christianize  a  Death-goddess 
because  her  face was  already  veiled.  In  Chapter  Three  I  mentioned  that 
Beli was reckoned  as the son  of Danu;  and  the  identity  of Ana  and  Danu 
is  made  quite  clearly  in  a  pedigree  in  Jesus  College  Manuscript  20, 
supposed  to  be  of the  thirteenth  century,  where  Beli  the  Great  is  a son  of 
Anna, absurdly said to be a daughter of the Emperor of Rome. Elsewhere, 
the  pedigree  of  Prince  Owen,  son  of  Howel  the  Good,  is  traced  back 
to  Aballac fUius Amalechi qui fuit  Beli Magni  films,  et Anna mater ejus.11  T h is  is  queer.  If it  stands  for  Abimelech  son  of Amalek  the  son  of Baal,  and  of Anatha,  it 
commemorates  a  tradition  that  the  family  were  formerly  lords  of Canaanite  Shechem.  W h en 
the  Israelite  tribe  of  Ephraim  setded  in  Shechem,  a  city  which  the  Song  of  Deborah  shows  to 
have  originally belonged to  the tribe of Amalek,  a treaty marriage was celebrated between the

370

It  is  added,  as  absurdly,  quam  dicunt  esse  consobrinam  Mariae  Virginis, 
Matris  Domini  nostri  Jhesu  Christi.

Ovid  and  Virgil  knew  their  Goddess  Anna  Perenna  to  have  been  a 
sister  of Belus,  or  Bel,  who  was  a  masculinization  of the  Sumerian  God 
dess  Belili;  so  also  the  god  Anu,  of the  Babylonian  male  trinity  completed 
by Ea and  Bel, was  a masculinization  of the  Sumerian  Goddess Anna-Nin, 
usually  abbreviated  to  Nana.1  Bel's  wife  was  Belit,  and  Anu's  wife  was 
Anatu.  Ea's  wife,  the  third  member  of the  Sumerian  female  trinity,  was 
Dam-Kina;  the  first  syllable  of whose  name  shows  her  to  have  mothered 
the  Danaans.  Anna-Nin  has  further  been  identified  by  J.  Przbuski  in  the 
Revue  de I'Histoire  des  Religions  ( 1 9 3 3)  with  Ana-hita  the  Goddess  of the 
Avesta,  whom  the  Greeks  called  Anaitis  and  the  Persians  Ana-hid—the 
name  that  they  gave  to  the  planet  Venus.Mr.  E.  M.  Parr writes  to  me  that An is  Sumerian for  'Heaven'  and  that 
in  his  view  the  Goddess  Athene  was  another  Anna,  namely  Ath-enna,  an 
inversion  of Anatha,  alias  Neith  of Libya;  also  that  Ma  is  a  shortening  of 
the  Sumerian  Ama,  'mother',  and  that  Ma-ri  means  'the  fruitful  mother' 
from  rim,  'to  bear  a  child'.  Mari  was  the  name  of the  goddess  on  whose 
account the Egyptians of 1000 B.C. called Cyprus 'Ay-mari', and who ruled 
at Mari on the Euphrates (a city sacked by Hammurabi in 1800 B.C.) and at 
Amari  in  Minoan  Crete.  So  Ma-ri-enna  is  'the  fruitful  mother  of Heaven', 
alias  Miriam,  Marian  of Mariandyne,  the  'leaping  Myrrhine'  of Troy,  and 
Mariamne:  a word  of triple power.  But the basic word  is Anna, which con 
fers  divinity  on  mere  parturition  and  which  also  seems  to  form  part  of 
Arianrhod's  name.  Arianrhod in  fact  may  not  be  a  debasement  of Argen-
tum  and  rota  'silver,  wheel'  but  Ar-ri-an,  'High  fruitful  mother'  who  turns 
the wheel of heaven; if so, Arianrhod's Cretan counterpart Ariadne would 
be  Ar-ri-an-de,  the  de  meaning  barley,  as  in  Demeter.  The  simple  form 
Ana,  or  Anah,  occurs  as  a  Horite  clan  name  in  Genesis,  XXXVI;  though

Ephraimite  Chieftain  Gideon, w ho  thereupon  took the name Jeruhbaal ('Let Baal  strive'),  and 
the  local  heiress,  presumably  a  priestess  of the  Lion-Goddess  Anatha.  Her  son  succeeded  to 
the  throne  by  mother-right  after  a  massacre  of  his  rivals  and  took  the  Canaanite  title  of 
Abimelech;  establishing  his  position  with  the  help of his  mother's kinsmen  and  the  god  Baal-
berith,1  At  the  beginning  of  Chapter  Eleven  I  described  Attis  son  of  Nana  as  the  Phrygian 
Adonis;  and  at  the  beginning  of  Chapter  Eighteen  mentioned  that  Nana  conceived  him 
virginally  as  the  result  of swallowing  either  a  ripe  almond  or  else  a  pomegranate  seed.  T he 
mythological  distinction  is  important.  T he  pomegranate  was  sacred  to  Attis  as  A d o n i s— 
T a m m u z— D i o n y s u s— R i m m o n,  and  at Jerusalem,  as has been  shown,  the  pomegranate  cult 
was  assimilated  to  that of Jehovah.  But the almond was  also,  it seems,  sacred  to  Attis  as  Nabu 
— M e r c u r y— H e r m e s— T h o t h,  whose  cult  was  also  assimilated  to  that  of  Jehovah;  which 
explains  the  myth  recorded  by  Euhemerus,  the  Sicilian  sceptic,  that  Hermes  so  far  from 
ordaining  the  courses  of the  stars  was  merely  instructed  in  astronomy  by  Aphrodite—that  is 
to  say by  his  mother Nana  w ho  gave her name  to  the  planet  Venus.  T h us Nana,  as  mother of 
Jehovah  in  two  of his characters  can  be claimed  as the paternal,  as well as the  maternal,  grand 
mother of Jehovah's O n ly Begotten Son.

3 7i

masculinized  in  two  out  of  the  three  mentions  of her,  she  is  principally 
celebrated  as  the  mother  of Aholibamah  ('tabernacle  of the  high  place'), 
the heiress whom Esau married  on his  arrival  in  the Seir pastures.  (Ana's 
alleged  discovery  of  mules  in  the  wilderness  is  due  to  a  scribal  error.) 
James  Joyce  playfully  celebrates  Anna's  universality  in  his  Anna  Livia 
Pkvrabelk.  And  indeed  if one  needs  a  single,  simple,  inclusive  name  for 
the Great  Goddess,  Anna  is  the  best  choice.  To  Christian  mystics  she  is 
'God's Grandmother'.The next letter, Fearn,  explains  Perenna as  a  corruption of Fearina,  the 
adjective formed  from Fear or ear,  Spring.  In Latin the word  has  kept  its 
Digamma and is written ver.  From this it follows  that Bran's  Greek name 
Phoroneus-—of  which  we  have  already  noted  the  variant  forms  Vront 
Berng  and  Ephron—was  a  variation  of  Fearineus  and  that  he  was 
originally  the  Spirit  of the  Year  in  his  lusty,  though  foredoomed,  Spring 
aspect  The Latin form seems to have been Veranus, which would accoun, 
for the plebeian family name Veranius;  and  for the verb vernare,  'to  renew 
oneself in  Spring',  which  is  supposed  to  be  irregularly  formed  from  ver, 
verts, but may be an abbreviation of veranare.

ANNA  FEARINA 
'Queen  of the  Spring'

The  next  letter  is  SaUle.  We  have  seen  that  Saille  is  connected  in  the 
Boibel-Loth with Salmoneus, Salmaah and Salmon, and this suggests that 
the corresponding word in the charm is Salmone, another tide of the God 
dess. So:

SALMAONA

There  were  several  places  named  after her  in  the Eastern  Mediterranean 
including  Cape  Salmone  in  Crete,  the  city  of Salmone  in  Elis,  and  Sal 
mone,  a  village  near  Lusi.  The  tide  is  apparendy  compounded  of Salma 
and  One  as  in  Hesi-one.  Hesione  is  said  to  mean  'Lady  of Asia',  and  the 
meaning  of  Salma  can  be  deduced  from  its  occurrence  in  geographical 
names.  It  is  an  Aegean  word  of  extraordinarily  wide  distribution  and 
seems always  to be connected with the notion of easterliness. 1  Salma was  a 
tribe  in  Southern  Judaea living east  of the  Minoan  colony  of Gaza;  also  a1  T he  complementary  Aegean  word  to  Salma  seems  to  have  been  Tar,  meaning  the  west, 
or  the  dying  sun.  Tartessus  on  the  Atlantic  was  the  most  westerly  Aegean  trading  station,  as 
Salmydessus  the  most  easterly.  Tarraco  was  the  port  on  the  extreme  west  of  the  Mediter 
ranean,  and  Tarrha  the  chief port  of western  Crete.  T he  reduplication  tar-tar,  meaning  'the 
far,  far west', has  evidendy given  Tartara,  the land  of the  dead,  its name.  F or though  Homer 
in  the  Iliad  places  Tartara  'as  far  below  earth  as  Heaven  is  above  it',  Hesiod  makes  it  the 
abode  of C r o n os  and  the  Titans,  w h om we know  to  have  gone  west after their defeat by  Zeus. 
Taranis  was  a  Gaulish  deity  mentioned  by  Lucan  as  being  served  by  even  more  terrible 
rites  than  was  Scythian  Diana,  meaning  the  Taurian  Artemis,  w ho  loved  human  sacrifice. 
T h o u gh  the  Romans  identified  Taranis  with  Jupiter  she  was  at  first  probably  a  Death-
Goddess,  namely  T a r - A n i s,  Annis  of  the  W e s t. 
372station  in  Central  Arabia  on  the caravan  route  from  the Mediterranean  to 
the  Persian  Gulf.  Salmalassus  was  a  station  in  Lesser  Armenia  on  the 
caravan route  from Trebizond  to  the  Far East;  Salmydessus was  the most 
easterly  city  of  Thrace,  fronting  the  Black  Sea;  Salmone  was  the  most 
easterly  cape  of Crete;  Salamis  the most easterly city of Cyprus;  the island 
of Salamis  lay  east  of the  Cretan  city  of Corinth,  and  the  mountain  sacred 
to  Salamanes  (in Assyrian Salmanu)  lay east of the great river-plain behind 
Antioch.  As  has  already  been  pointed  out  Salma  became  a  divine  name  in 
Palestine  and  Solomon,  Salmon  and  Absalom  are  all  variants  of it,  Salma 
was  the  deity  to  whom  the  hill  of  Jerusalem  was  originally  sacred;  the 
place  is  mentioned  in  the  Egyptian  Tell  Amarna  letters  ( 1 3 70  B . C .)  as 
Uru-Salim, and in Assyrian monuments as Ur-Salimu. In 1400 B . C. it was 
held by a chieftain with the Semite name of Abd-Khiba, a vassal of Egypt, 
who  like  Melchizedek  of Salem—Uru-Salim?—claimed  to  rule  neither by 
father-right  nor mother-right,  but by  the will  of the  God.  Professor  Sayce 
translates Uru-Salim as  'City of the God  Salim'.  Josephus records  that the 
first  name  of  the  city  was  Solyma.  Salma,  or  Salim,  was  evidently  the 
Semite  god  of the  rising  or  renewed  sun;  Salmaone  was  the  Aegean  god 
dess  from  whom  he  took  his  titles,  as  did  Salmoneus  the  Aeolian  who 
opposed  the  later  Achaean  invaders  and  insisted  on  inducing  thunder  by 
rattling  a brazen  chariot—thereby infringing  the  prerogative of Olympian 
Zeus.  But  it  is  probable  that  Salma  took  his  title  as  the  demi-god  of the 
renewed  Sun  from  his  Moon-bride  Circe,  or  Belili,  the  Willow  Mother, 
Sal-Ma,  in  whose  honour willow-branches  were  waved  at  this  season,  and 
that the meaning of easterliness is a secondary one.ANNA  FEARINA  SALMAONl 
'Queen  of Spring,  Mother  of the  Willow'

Straif  is  the  next  letter.  A  main  verb  is  called  for,  to  begin  the  second 
flight  of  letters.  Strebloein,  or  strabloein,  formed  from  the  verbal  root 
streph,  'to  twist',  means  'to  reeve  with  a  windlass,  to  wrench,  dislocate, 
put  on  the  rack',  and  gives  Straif,  the  blackthorn,  its  necessarily  cruel 
connotation.

Next  comes  Huath.  The  u  merely  shows  that  the  H  is  aspirated.  We 
have  no  clue  to  the  name  of the  person,  or  persons,  whom  the  Goddess 
racks,  presumably  on  Duir,  the  oak,  but  my  guess  is  the  Athaneatids,  or 
Hathaneatids,  members  of one  of the  four  original  royal  clans  of Arcadia. 
It  is  likely  that  this  word,  like  athanatoi,  means  'the  not-mortal  ones',  the 
Greek  word  thnetos  ('mortal')  being  a  shortened  form  of  thaneatos.  The 
clan  from  which  the  sacred  king,  the  victim  of the  story  that  is unfolding, 
was  chosen  would  naturally  be  called  'The  Immortals',  because  the  king 
alone  could  win  immortality  by  his  sufferings,  the  lesser  members  of the 
nation  being doomed  to  become  twittering ghosts  in  HelL

3 73

S T R A B L OE

[ H ] A T H A N E A T I D AS  U RAFor  Ura  is  the  next letter of the  alphabet,  the midsummer letter,  the  letter 
of Venus  Urania,  the  most  violent  aspect  of the  Triple  Goddess. As  has 
already  been  pointed  out,  Ura means  Summer;  it  also  means  the  tail  of a 
lion  or  bear,  expressive  of its  fury,  and  the  word  ouraios  ('uraeus'),  the 
royal serpent of Egypt, is formed from the same root. 'Uranus', the father 
of the  Titans  according  to  Greek  Classical  mythology,  is  likely  to  have 
originally  been  their  Mother—Ura-ana,  Queen  Ura. But  we  should  not 
look  for  only  one  or  even  two  meanings  of  the  syllable  ur;  the  more 
numerous  the  poetic  meanings  that  could  be  concentrated  in  a  sacred 
name,  the  greater  was  its  power. The  authors  of  the  Irish  Hearings  of  the 
Scholars  connected  the  midsummer-letter  Ur  with  ur,  'earth';  and  we  are 
reminded  that  this  is  the  root  found  in  the  Latin  words  area,  'a  plot  of 
earth',  arvum,  'a  ploughed  field',  and  urvare,  which  means  'to  drive  a 
plough  ceremonially  around  the  proposed  site  of  a  city'—a  sense  also 
found  in  the  Homeric  Greek  ouron,  'a  boundary  marked  by  the  plough'. Grammarians assume a primitive  Greek word  era,  'earth'  connected with 
this group of words; which suggests that Erana,  or Arana,  or Urana, was 
the  Earth-goddess  whose  favour  had  to  be  asked  when  fields  were 
ploughed  or  cities  (urves  or  urhes)  founded,  and  marriage  with  whose 
local  representative  gave  a  chieftain  the  right  to  rule  in  her  lands. If this 
is  so,  the  uraeus  in  the  royal  head-dress  stood  both  for  the  great  sea-
serpent  that  girdled  the  Earth  and  for  the  Goddess's  spotted  oracular 
snakes. But  her  name  could  also  carry  three  or  four further meanings.[ H ] A T H A N E A T I D AS  U RA

If this 
is  so,  the  uraeus  in  the  royal  head-dress  stood  both  for  the  great  sea-
serpent  that  girdled  the  Earth  and  for  the  Goddess's  spotted  oracular 
snakes. But  her  name  could  also  carry  three  or  four further meanings. It 
might  stand  for  'Mountain-goddess'  (from  the  Homeric  Greek  ouros,  a 
mountain)  which  would  point  her  identity  with  Mousa,  the  Muse,  a  tide 
of the  same  meaning;  and  for  'Queen  of the  Winds'  (from  the  Homeric 
Greek  ouros,  a  wind)  which  would  explain  the  uraeus  as  symbolizing  her 
power  over  the  winds,  all  winds  being  snake-tailed  and  housed  in  a 
mountain-cave. Urana then is a multiple title: Mother Earth,  Our Lady of 
Summer, Mountain  Goddess,  Queen of the Winds,  Goddess  of the Lion's 
Tail. It  might  equally  mean  'Guardian  Queen'  (ouros,  'a  guardian');  or, 
with  reference  to  her  aspect  as  a  Moon-cow,  'Ruler  of Wild  Oxen'  (ourus, 
Latin  urus,  'a  wild  ox'),  like  the  Irish  Goddess  Buana. And  we  must  not 
overlook the  Sanscrit word  varunas,  meaning  'the  night  firmament',  from 
the  root  var,  'to  cover',  from  which  Varuna,  the  third  member  of  the 
Aryan  Trinity,  took  his  name. When  the first wave  of Achaeans  entered 
Greece and were forced under the sovereignty of the Triple-goddess Ana, 
or  De-Ana,  or Ath-Ana,  or  Di-Ana,  or  Ur-Ana,  who  ruled  the  world  of 
day  as  well  as  the  world  of night,  varunas  lost  its  specialized  sense,  was 
changed  from  varun-  to  uran-,  in  her  honour,  and  came  to  mean  the  sky 
in general. Hence Ana's classical tide Urania, 'The Heavenly One'.

374

STRABLOE  ATHANEATIDAS  URA  DRUEI 
'Ura,  reeve the Immortal ones  to your oak tree'374

STRABLOE  ATHANEATIDAS  URA  DRUEI 
'Ura,  reeve the Immortal ones  to your oak tree'

The next word  T'mne,  or  Tarm, can be expanded to  Tanaous 'stretched', 
in  memory  of Hesiod's  derivation  of  the  word  Titan  from  titainein,  'to 
stretch'.  He says  that the  Titans were so  called  because they stretched  out 
their  hands:  but  this  explanation  is  perhaps  intended  to  disguise  the 
truth,  that  the  Titans  were  men  stretched,  or  racked,  on  the  wheel,  like 
Ixion.  Frazer  noted  that  the  holly-oak,  which  is  the  tree  of Tinne,  grows 
nobly  at  Lusi,  and  that  the  valley  of the  Styx  is  full  of the  white  poplar, 
Eaaha,  the  tree sacred  to Hercules.

The  letter  Coll  completes  the  second  flight  of  the  alphabet.  Kola-
breusthai  or  kolabrhrein  is  to  dance  a  wild  taunting  Thracian  dance,  the 
kolabros, the sort that the Goddess Kali dances on the skulls of her foes:

DRUEI  TANAOUS  KOLABREUSOMENA 
'Stretched  out,  ready  to  taunt  them in your wild  dance'

The  dance  was  evidently  concerned  with  pigs,  since  kolabros  also  meant 
a young  pig.  In  ancient  Irish  poetry  the skulls  of men  freshly  killed  were 
called  'the  mast  of the  Morrigan', that  is  to say of the Fate Goddess Anna 
in  the  guise  of a  sow.  As  will  be  noted,  a  young  pig  figures  in  the  dance 
of the nine moon-women in the Old Stone Age cave-painting at Cogul.

The  next  words  are  Quert,  also  spelt  Kirt,  Eaaha,  and  Muin.  My  guess

is:

KIRKOTOKOUS  ATHROIZE  TE  MANI 
'And  gather  the  Children  of  Circe  together  to  the  Moon'The  next  words  are  Quert,  also  spelt  Kirt,  Eaaha,  and  Muin.  My  guess

is:

KIRKOTOKOUS  ATHROIZE  TE  MANI 
'And  gather  the  Children  of  Circe  together  to  the  Moon'

Circe, 'daughter of Hecate' was the Goddess of Aeaea ('wailing'), a sepul 
chral  island  in  the  Northern  Adriatic.  Her  name  means  'she-falcon',  the 
falcon  being  a  bird  of  omen,  and  is  also  connected  with  circos,  a  circle, 
from the circling of falcons and from the use of the magic circle in enchant 
ment;  the  word  is  onomatopoeic,  the  cry  of  the  falcon  being  'circ—circ'. 
She  was  said  to  turn  men  into  swine,  lions  and  wolves,  and  the  Children 
of Circe are probably women dressed as sows participating in a full-moon 
festival  held  in  her  honour  and  in  that  of Dionysus.  Herodotus  describes 
this  ritual  as  common  to  Greek  and  Egyptian  practice.  At  the  Persian 
orgies  of Mithras,  which  had  a  common  origin  with  those  of Demeter  and 
in  which  a  bull  was  sacrificed  and  eaten  raw,  the  men  celebrants  were 
called  Leontes  (lions)  and  the women  celebrants  Hyaenae  (sows).  Possibly 
Lion-men also took part in this kolabros as  Children of Circe.

The  last  letters  are  Gort—Ngetal—Ruis—Idho.  Here  we  are  on  very 
insecure  ground.  The  only  clue  to  Idho  is  that  the  Hebrew  form  of the 
word  is iod, and  the  Cadmean is iota;  and  that the one  Greek word begin-

375375

ning  with  gort  is  Gortys,  the  name  of the  reputed  founder  of  Gortys,  a 
city in  Southern  Arcadia,  which stands  on  a  tributary  of the Alpheus,  the 
Gortynios  (otherwise  called  the  Lusios).  Gortyna,  the  name  of a  famous 
town  in  Crete,  may  be  the  word  needed,  and  represent  some  tide  of the 
Goddess.  But  perhaps  the  abbreviation  Gort  should  be  Gorp.  GorgSpa, 
'fearful-faced',  an  epithet  of  the  Death  Goddess  Athene,  makes  good 
sense.  To  preserve  the  metre  the word  must  be  spelt  Grogopa,  as  kirkos  is 
often  spelt  krikos.

G R O G O PA   GNATHOl  R U S E IS

I O TA

'As the fearful-faced  Goddess  of Destiny  you  will  make  a snarling 
noise  with  your  chops'

Iotes  (Aeolic Iotas)  is  a  Homeric  word  meaning  Divine  Will  or  Behest;  it 
may  have  supplied  this  personification  of  the  Goddess  of  Destiny,  like 
Anagke  (Necessity)  the  first  syllable  of which  is  probably  Ana  or  Arum, 
and  like  Themis  (Law),  both  of  which  are  likewise  feminine  in  gender. 
Euripides  calls  Anagke  the  most  powerful  of all  deities,  and  it  was  from 
Themis  that  Zeus  derived  his  juridical  authority:  according  to  Homer, 
Themis  was  the  mother  of the  Fates  and  convened  the  assemblies  of the 
identification  of  her  with  Anna  has  just  been 
Olympians.  Ovid's 
mentioned.

So:

A L P H I TO  B A I T U LE  L U S YA  N O N A C R IS  A N NA  F E A R I NA  S A L M A O NA

S T R A B L OE  H A T H A N E A T I D AS  U RA  D R U EI  T A N A O US  K O L A B R E U S O M E NA

K F R K O T O K O US  A T H R O T ZE  TE  M A N?  G R O G O PA  G N A T H O I ' R U S E I S I O TA

'White  Barley  Goddess,  Deliveress  from  guilt,  Lady  of the  Nine 
Heights,  Queen  of  Spring,  Mother  of  the  Willow,

'Ura,  reeve  the  Immortal  Ones  stretched  out  to  your  oak,  taunt 
them  in your wild dance,'Ura,  reeve  the  Immortal  Ones  stretched  out  to  your  oak,  taunt 
them  in your wild dance,

'And gather the  Children of Circe under the Moon;  as  the  fearful-
faced  Goddess  of  Destiny  you  will  make  a  snarling  noise  with 
your  chops.'

Perhaps  the  Goddess  appeared  as  the  Triple-headed  Bitch,  Hecuba  or 
Hecate,  on  this  occasion,  for  nqein  was  used  mosdy  of  dogs;  but  since 
Cerridwen  is  usually  in  at  the  death  of the  Sun-hero,  perhaps  the  noise 
intended  was  the  whining  grunt  of  the  corpse-eating  Old  Sow  of 
Maenawr Penardd, to whom 'skulls are mast'.

No  Greek  verse  has  survived  of an  early  enough  date  to  act  as  a  check 
on  the metre and verbal  forms  of this hypothetic song.  But at least it built 
376No  Greek  verse  has  survived  of an  early  enough  date  to  act  as  a  check 
on  the metre and verbal  forms  of this hypothetic song.  But at least it built 
376

itself  up  logically  against  most  of  my  original  expectations  of  how  it 
would  turn  out,  so  that  I  cannot  regard  it  as  of  my  own  composition. 
^  _)  and 
The  supersession  of  dactylic  words  (-  ^)  by  anapaestic 
iambic 
_)  in  the  second  half  of  the  song  happened  naturally  without 
my  noticing  its  significance.  The  dactylic  and  trochaic  feet  in  Greece 
originally  expressed  praise  and  blessing;  but  the  anapaestic  and  iambic 
were  originally  confined  to  satires  and  curses;  as  the  spondaic  ( —)  foot 
was  to  funerary  chants.1  (The  use  of the  iambic  was  extended  to  tragedy 
because  this was  concerned with  the working out of a divine  curse;  and  to 
comedy because it was satiric in intention.)  This  song suggests a dance by 
twelve  persons  around  a  circle  of  twelve  standing  stones—there  are 
twelve  beats  in  each  half  of  it—with  each  alternate  beat  marked  by  a 
dancer  striking  the  stone  nearest  him  with  the flat of his  hand  or  perhaps 
a pig's bladder. In the middle of the circle the sacred king is  corded to  the 
lopped  oak-tree  in  the  five-fold  bond  of willow  thongs,  waiting  for  his 
bloody  end.

According  to  some  mythographers there were twelve Titans, male and 
female;  and  this  canonical  number  was  preserved  in  the  number  of  the 
Olympian gods  and  goddesses  who  superseded  them.  Herodotus  records 
that  the  Pelasgians  did  not  worship  gods  and  consented  to  the  Olympian 
system  only  at  the  express  command  of  the  Dodona  oracle—I  suppose 
when  the  oracle,  once  the  mouthpiece  of the  Pelopian  woodland  goddess1  T he  Anglo-Saxon  grounding  of  English  prevents  the  use  of  the  Classical  dactyl  as  the 
basic  metrical  foot.  T he  dactylic or anapeestic  poems  attempted  in  the  early  and  middle  nine 
teenth  century  by  B y r o n,  Moore,  Hood,  Browning  and  others  read  over-exuberandy  and 
even  vulgarly;  though  school  children  enjoy  them.  W h at  has  gradually  evolved  as  the 
characteristic  English  metre  is  a  compromise  between  the  iambic—borrowed  from  French 
and  Italian,  ultimately from  the  Greek—and  the  stress rhythm  of Anglo-Saxon, based  on  the 
pull  of the  oar.  Shakespeare's  gradual  modification  of the  ten-foot  iambic  line  that  he  took 
over  from  W y a tt and  the  Earl  of Surrey  is  iHuminating:

T he first  lines  of King John  run:

K I NG   J O H N:   Now  say,  ChadOon,  what  would  France  with  us? 
C H A T I L L O N:   Thus,  after  greeting,  speaks  the  King  of  France,

In  my  behaviour,  to  the  majesty, 
The  borrowed  majesty  ofEngland here....

Fifteen  years  later,  in  the  Tempest,  after  the  opening  scene  which  s  almost  wholly  prose

Miranda addresses Prospero:

If  by  your  art,  my  dearestfather,you  have 
Put  the  wild waters  in  this  roar,  allay  them/ 
The  sky,  it  seems,  wouldpour  down  stinking  pitch 
But  that  the  sea,  mounting  to  the  welkin's  cheek 
Dashes  the  fire  out.  O,  I have  suffered....

It has been suggested  that Shakespeare w as consciously working forward to a rhythmic p r o ' -. 
T h is  seems  to  me a  misreading  of his intentions:  after disruptive  variations  on  the  iambic  ten-
syllabled norm  he always returned to it as a reminder that he was still writing verse;  and could 
never  have  done  otherwise.  Here,  for  example,  Miranda,  after  this  first  outburst  of horror, 
finishes her speech with metrical sobriety.

3 773 77

Dione,  had  been  captured  by  the Achaeans.  He is  likely  to  be  right:  they 
worshipped  only  a  Goddess  and  her  semi-divine  son  of  the  king.  In 
Arcadia,  he  seems  to  have  worn  antlers.  A  late  Minoan  gem  in  my 
possession—a  banded  white  carnelian  pendant—shows  a  roebuck 
crouched  beside  a wood,  in  the  attitude heraldically  called  regardant.  The 
ten  tines  of his  antlers  refer  perhaps  to  the  tenth  month,  M,  the  month  of 
the  vintage  moon;  a  new  moon rides above him.  That these Titans  figure 
in Greek myth as children of Uranus may mean no more than that they were 
companions  to  the  Sacred  King,  who  took  his  title  from  the  Uranian 
Goddess.  The other Titans, who number seven, rule the sacred Week.

If,  as  it  has  been  suggested,  Pythagoras  was  initiated  into  this  alpha 
betic  mystery  by  the  Dactyls,  it  is  possible  that  he  derived  from  them  his 
theory-of the  mystical  connotations  of number;  and  the  possibility  turns 
to probability when the initial letters of the charm are numbered from one 
to  twenty:

i 
A  — 
B —  2 
L  —  3 
N  —  4 
0  —  5 
F  —  6 
S  —  7 
z  —  8 
H  —  9 
U  — io

D  —n 
T  —  12 
C 
- 13

Q  —14 
E 
- 15 
M  —16 
G  —17 
Gn  —18 
R  — 19

I  — 20i 
A  — 
B —  2 
L  —  3 
N  —  4 
0  —  5 
F  —  6 
S  —  7 
z  —  8 
H  —  9 
U  — io

D  —n 
T  —  12 
C 
- 13

Q  —14 
E 
- 15 
M  —16 
G  —17 
Gn  —18 
R  — 19

I  — 20

In this  table an even closer approximation  to  poetic truth is  discovered 
than  in  the  Irish  bardic  system  of  letter-numerals,  given  at  the  end  of 
Chapter Sixteen, which is based  on a  different alphabetic order and denies 
any value  either  to  H  or  U.  Here,  the  dominant pentad  of vowels  hold  the 
first  and last places, as  one would  expect, also the fifth, the  tenth  (respec 
tively 'the grove of the senses' and 'perfection' in the Pythagorean system), 
and  the  ecstatic  fifteenth,  the  full-moon  climax  of  the  Song  of  Ascents  at 
Jerusalem. The second, fourth, sixth and eighth places—even numbers are 
male  in  the  Pythagorean  system,  odd  are  female—are  held  by  B  (incep 
tion),  N  (flood),  F  (fire),  Z  (angry  passion),  a  sequence  suggesting  a 
rising tide of male  lust which,  after being checked  by  H,  nine,  the  letter  of 
pre-marital  chastity  enforced  by  the  Nine-fold  Goddess,  finds  its  con 
summation  at  U,  1 0,  where  male  and  female  principles  unite.  The  inter 
mediate  letters  are  L,  3,  the  letter  of torch-lit  regeneration  presided  over 
by  three-torched  Hecate;  O,  5,  the  letter  of initiation  into  the  mysteries 
of  love;  S,  7,  the  letter  of  female  enchantment  ('Athene'  in  the  Pytha 
gorean  system).  The  eleventh  and  twelfth  places  are  held  respectively

378378

by  D  and  T,  the  twin  leaders  of  the  company  of  twelve  (in  the  Irish 
system  the  order  is  reversed);  the  thirteenth  by  C,  the  letter  of the  God 
dess's  sacrosanct  swineherd  magicians;  and  the  nineteenth  by  R,  the 
Death  letter,  appropriate  to  the  close  of  the  nineteen-year  cycle.  The 
numerical  values  of  the  remaining  letters  work  out  with  equal  facility. 
Since  the  charm  taught  by  the  Dactyls  was  an  orgiastic  one  it  appropri 
ately  contained  twenty  elements—as  it  were  the  fingers  of  the  woman's 
hands  and  those  of her  lover's;  but  Pythagoras  was  content  to  speculate 
on the tetractys of his own ten fingers alone.To  sum  up.  This  twenty-word  Greek  charm  provided  the  letter-names 
of an  alphabet  which  was  used  in  late  Minoan  Arcadia  until  the  second 
Achaean  invasion,  by  descendants  of the  original  invaders  who  had  gone 
over  to  the worship  of the White  Goddess.  Their  cult  involved  the use  of 
an  artificial  thirteen-month  solar  calendar,  each  month  represented  by  a 
different  tree,  which  had  been  invented  independently  of  the  alphabet 
and  was in widespread  use.  Some  of its seasonable elements  can  be shown 
to  date  from  pre-dynastic  times,  and  though  the  trees  in  the Irish version, 
the  only  one  that  survives  complete,  suggest  a  Pontine  or  Paphlagonian 
origin  the  calendar  may  have  originated  in  the  Aegean  or  Phoenicia  or 
Libya  with  a  somewhat  different  canon  of trees.  Nor  is  it  likely  that  the 
alphabet arrived  in  Britain at the same time as the calendar.  The calendar 
may  have  been  introduced  in  the  late  third  millennium  B . C.  by  the  New 
Stone  Age  people,  who  were  in  close  touch  with  Aegean  civilization, 
along  with  agriculture,  apiculture,  the  maze-dance  and  other  cultural 
benefits.  The  alphabet  seems  to  have  been  introduced  late  in  the  second 
millennium  B . C.  by  refugees  from  Greece.

Since  there were  always  twelve stones  in  the gilgal,  or stone-circle,  used 
for  sacrificial  purposes,  the  next  jaunt  is  to  chase  the  White  Roebuck 
speculatively around  the  twelve  houses  of the  Zodiac.When  and  where  the  Zodiac  originated  is not known,  but  it  is  believed 
to  have  gradually  evolved  in  Babylonia  from  the  twelve  incidents  in  the 
life-story  of the  hero  Gilgamesh—his  killing  of the  Bull,  his  love-passage 
with  the  Virgin,  his  adventures  with  two  Scorpion-men  (the  Scales  later 
took  the  place  of one  of these)  and  the  Deluge  story  (corresponding  with 
the Water Carrier).  Calendar tablets of the seventh century B . C. bear this 
out,  but  the  Epic  of Gilgamesh  is  not  a  really  ancient  one;  Gilgamesh  is 
thought  to  have  been  a  Hyksos  (Kassite)  invader  of  Babylonia  in  the 
eighteenth  century  B . C.  to  whom  the  story  of an  earlier hero  was  trans 
ferred, a Tammuz of the familiar son already connected with the Zodiac.

The  original  Zodiac,  to  judge  from  the  out-of-date  astronomical  data 
quoted  in  a  poem  by  Aratus,  a  Hellenistic  Greek,  was  current  in  the  late 
third millennium B . C. But it is likely to have been first fixed at a time when

379

the  Sun  rose in  the Twins  at the  Spring equinox—the Shepherds'  festival; 
in  the  Virgin  who  was  generally  identified  with  Ishtar,  the  Love-goddess, 
at  the  Summer  solstice;  in  the  Archer,  identified  with  Nergal  (Mars)  and 
later  with  Cheiron  the  Centaur,  at  the  Autumn  equinox,  the  traditional 
season  of  the  chase;  in  the  resurrective  Fish  at  the  Winter  solstice,  the 
time  of  most  rain.  (It  will  be  recalled  that  the  solar  hero  Llew  Llaw's 
trasnformations  begin with a  Fish at the Winter  solstice.)The  Zodiac  signs  were  borrowed  by  the  Egyptians  at  least  as  early  as 
the sixteenth century B . C ., with certain alterations—Scarab for Crab, Ser 
pent  for  Scorpion,  Mirror  for He-goat,  etc.,—but by  that  time  the pheno 
menon  known  as  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes  had  already  spoilt  the 
original story. About every 2000 years the Sun rises in an earlier sign; so in 
3800 B . C. the Bull began to push the Twins out of the House of the Spring 
equinox,  and  initiated  a  period  recalled  by  Virgil  in  his  account  of  the 
Birth  of Man:

The white bull with his gilded horns 
Opens  the  year...

At the  same .time the  tail  of the  Lion  entered  the  Virgin's  place at the Sum 
mer  solstice—hence  apparently  the  Goddess's  subsequent  title  of 'Oura', 
the  Lion's  Tail—and  gradually  the Lion's  body  followed,  after which  for 
a  time  she became leonine with  a Virgin's head  only.  Similarly the  Water-
carrier succeeded  the  Fish  at  the  Winter solstice—and  provided  the water 
to float the Spirit of the Year's cradle ark.

About  1800 B . C.  the Bull was itself pushed  out of the  Spring House by 
the  Ram.  This  may  account  for  the  refurbishing  of the  Zodiac  myth  in 
honour of Gilgamesh,  a  shepherd king  of this  period;  he was  the  Ram who 
destroyed  the  Bull.  The  Crab  similarly succeeded  the Lion  at the Summer 
solstice;  so  the  Love-goddess  became  a  marine  deity with  temples  by  the 
sea-shore.  The  He-goat  also  succeeded  the  Water-carrier  at  the  Winter 
solstice; so the Spirit of the New Year was born of a She-goat. The Egyp 
tian  Greeks then called the  Ram the 'Golden Fleece' and recast the Zodiac 
story as  the voyage  of the  Argonauts.The  disadvantage  of the  Zodiac  is,  indeed,  its  failure  to  be  a perpetual 
calendar  like  the  Beth-Luis-Nion  tree-sequence  which  makes  no  attempt 
to  relate  the  equinoxes  and  the  solstices  to  the  twelve  constellations  of the 
Zodiac.  Perhaps  the  original  Zodiac  myth  was  based  on  the  Roebuck 
story  which  is  associated  with  a  tree-sequence  in  the  Song  of  Amergin;  a 
supposed  scientific  improvement  on  it  because  a  thirteen-month  year 
with  the  equinox  and  solstice  stations  falling  at  irregular  intervals  is  less 
easy  to  handle  than  a  twelve-month  year  with  exacdy  three  months  be 
tween  each  of the  four stations.  At any  rate,  the  archtype  of Gilgamesh  the 
Zodiac  hero  was  'Tammuz',  a  tree-cult  hero  of  many  changes;  and  the

3 80

thirteen-month  tree-calendar  seems  more  primitive  than  the  twelve 
month  one.1  Certainly the  story it  tells  is  more coherent  than  those of Gil 
gamesh  or Jason.  It  is pure myth uncombined  with  history.  It so  happens 
that  the  tree-alphabet,  with  the  Twins  combined  in  a  single  sign,  does  co 
incide with  the  Zodiac as it stands at present, with the Fishes in  the House 
of the Spring Equinox. (See the figure above.)But  we  have  not  yet  answered  the  question:  why  are  the  Fates  credited 
Hyginus  with  the  invention  of  the  letters  F  and  H? 
Hyginus's  attribution  to  Palamedes  of  the  invention  of  the  disc  is  a 
helpful  clue,  if Professor  O.  Richter  is  right  in  suggesting  that  the  late 
Cyprian  female  figurines  which  hold  discs  of the  same  proportionate  size 
as  the  Phaestos  disc  (seven  inches  in  diameter)  anticipate  Athene  and  her 
aegis.  We  know  from  the  legend  of the  infant  Erichthonius  that  the  aegis 
was  a  goat-skin  bag,  converted  into  a  shield  by  a  circular stiffening.  Was 
it  a  bag-cover  for  a  sacred  disc,  like  the  crane-bag  which  contained  the 
Pelasgian  letters  of Palamedes's  Pelasgian  alphabet,  and  with  the warning 
Gorgon-mask  similarly  placed  at  the  mouth?  If so,  it seems  probable  that 
the  concealed  disc was engraved  spirally with her  own  Holy  and  Ineffable

1  T h at  the  Osirian  year  originally  consisted  of thirteen  twenty-eight  day  months,  with  one 
day  over,  is  suggested  by  the  legendary  length  of Osiris's  reign,  namely twenty-eight  y e a r s— 
years  in  mythology  often  stand for  days, and  days  for  years—and by  the number of pieces into 
which  he  was  torn  by  Set,  namely  thirteen  apart  from  his  phallus  which  stood  for  the  extra 
day.  W h en  Isis  reassembled  the  pieces,  the  phallus  had  disappeared,  eaten  by  a  letos-fish. 
T h is accounts for the priestly  fish-taboo  in E g y p t, relaxed only one day in the year.

38l38l

Name as the Libyao-Pelasgian Goddess of Wisdom; and if this Name was 
spelt  in  letters,  not  hieroglyphs,  it  may  have  been  either  the  five-letter 
I E U O A,  or  the  seven-letter  J I E U O A O,   formed  by  doubling  the  first  and  last 
letters  of  I E U O A.  Or,  since  she  was  the  triple  Moon-goddess,  namely  the 
Three  Fates  who  invented  the  five  vowels,  together with  F  and  H,  it may 
have  been  a nine-letter  form  J I E H U O V ( F ) A 6,   composed  to  contain  not only 
the seven-letter Name but  also  the  two  consonants,  representing  the  first 
and  last  days  of her  week,  which  revealed  her  as  Wisdom,  hewer-out  of 
the  Seven  Pillars.  If  it  was   J I E H U O V A O,  Simonides  (or  more  likely  his 
predecessor  Pythagoras)  showed  little  inventiveness  in  stabilizing  the 
eight-letter  form  J E H U O V AO  in  honour  of the  Immortal  Sun-god  Apollo, 
by  the  omission  of I,  the  death-vowel,  while  retaining  Y,  the  semi-vowel 
of generation.

382

Chapter  Twenty-Two

T HE  T R I P LE  M U SE

Why do  poets  invoke  the Muse?

Christian,  of transcending it:

Milton  in  the  opening  lines  of  Paradise  Lost  briefly  sum 
marizes  the  Classical  tradition,  and  states  his  intention,  as  a

Sing, heav'nly Muse, that on the secret top 
OfOreb, or of Sinai, didst inspire 
That shepherd, who first taught the chosen seed 
In the beginning how the Heav'ns and Earth 
Rose out of Chaos: Or ifSion hill 
Delight thee more, and Siloa's brook thatflow'd 
Fast by the orach of God: I thence 
Invoke thy aid to my advent'rous song 
That with no middlefight intends to soar 
Above th'Aonian mount, while it pursues 
Things unattemptedyet in prose or rhime.The  Aonian  Mount  is  Mount  Helicon  in  Boeotia,  a  mountain  a  few  miles 
to  the  east  of Parnassus,  and  known  in  Classical  times  as  'the  seat  of the 
Muses'.  The adjective 'Aonian'  is a reminiscence of a memorable line from 
Virgil's Georgicsr.

Aonio rediens deducam vertice Musas

which  is  spoken  by  Apollo,  the  God  of poetry,  who  by  Virgil's  time  was 
also  recognized  as  the  Sun-god.  The  line means  'On my return I shall  lead 
the Muses down from  the top  of Mount Helicon'.  Apollo is  referring to  the 
transplanting  of the  worship  of the  Muses  from  Ascra,  a  town  on  a  ridge 
of  Helicon,  to  Delphi,  on  Mount  Parnassus,  a  place  which  had  become 
sacred  to  himself.  On  Helicon  rose  the  spring  named  Hippocrene,  'The 
Horse  Well',  which  was  horse-shoe  shaped.  The  legend  was  that  it  had 
been  struck  by  the  hoof of the  horse  Pegasus,  whose  name  means  'of the 
springs  of water'.  Poets  were  said  to  drink  of Hippocrene  for  inspiration. 
Hence  John  Skelton's  lines  (Against  Garnesche):

I gave him ofthe sugryd welle 
OfEliconys waters crystallyne. 
383

the

then  destroyedI gave him ofthe sugryd welle 
OfEliconys waters crystallyne. 
383

the

then  destroyed

But  it  may  be  supposed  that  Hippocrene  and  Aganippe  were  originally 
struck  by  the  moon-shaped  hoof of Leucippe  ('White  Mare'),  the  Mare-
headed  Mother'  herself,  and  that  the  story  of  how  Bellerophon  son  of 
triple-shaped 
Poseidon  mastered  Pegasus  and 
Chimaera  is  really  the  story  of  an  Achaean  capture  of  the  Goddesss' 
shrine:  Pegasus,  in  fact,  was  originally  called  Aganippe.  Aganos  is  a 
Homeric  adjective  applied  to  the  shafts  of Artemis  and  Apollo,  meaning 
'giving  a  merciful  death';  so  Aganippe  would  mean:  "The  Mare  who 
destroys  mercifully.'  This  supposition  is  strengthened  by  the  Greek 
legend  of the  pursuit  of Demeter,  the  Barley  Mother,  by  the  Achaean  god 
Poseidon.  Demeter,  to  escape  his  attentions,  disguised  herself as  a  mare 
and  concealed  herself  among  the  horses  of  Oncios  the  Arcadian,  but 
Poseidon became a stallion and covered her; her anger at this outrage was 
said  to  account  for  her  statue  at  Onceum,  called  Demeter Erinnus—the 
Fury.Demeter as  a  Mare-goddess  was  widely worshipped  under  the  name  of 
Epona,  or  'the  Three  Eponae',  among  the  Gallic  Celts,  and  there  is  a 
strange  account  in  Giraldus  Cambrensis's  Topography  of  Ireland  which 
shows  that .relics  of  the  same  cult  survived  in  Ireland  until  the  twelfth 
century.  It  concerns  the  crowning  of an  Irish  petty-king  at  Tyrconnell, 
a  preliminary  to  which  was  his  symbolic  rebirth  from  a  white  mare.  He 
crawled naked towards her on all fours as if he were her foal; she was then 
slaughtered,  and  her  pieces  boiled  in  a  cauldron.  He  himself entered  the 
cauldron and  began sucking up  the broth and eating the flesh. Afterwards 
he  stood  on  an  inauguration  stone,  was  presented  with  a  straight  white 
wand,  and  turned  about  three  times  from  left  to  right,  and  then  three 
times  from  right  to  left—'in  honour  of the  Trinity'.  Originally  no  doubt 
in honour of the Triple White Goddess.The  horse,  or  pony,  has  been  a  sacred  animal  in  Britain  from  pre 
historic times, not merely since the Bronze Age introduction of the stronger 
Asiatic  breed.  The  only  human  figure  represented  in  what  survives  of 
British  Old Stone Age art is a man wearing a horse-mask, carved in bone, 
found  in  the  Derbyshire  Pin-hole  Cave;  a  remote  ancestor  of the  hobby 
horse  mummers  in  the English  'Christmas  play'.  The  Saxons  and  Danes 
venerated  the  horse  as  much  as  did  their  Celtic  predecessors,  and  the 
taboo on eating horse-flesh survives in  Britain as a strong physical repug 
nance,  despite  attempts  made  during  World  War II  to  popularize  hippo-
phagism;  but  among  the  Bronze  Age  British  the  taboo  must  have  been 
lifted at an annual  October horse-feast, as among the Latins. In mediaeval 
Denmark  the  ecstatic  three-day  horse-feast,  banned  by  the  Church,  sur 
vived among the heathenish serf-class; a circumstantial description is given 
by  Johannes  Jensen  in  his  Fall  of the  King.  He  mentions  that  the  priest 
first  sprinkled  bowls  of the  horse's  blood  towards  the  South  and  East—

384

which  explains  the  horse  as  an  incarnation  of the  Spirit  of the  Solar Year, 
son  of the  Mare-goddess.384

which  explains  the  horse  as  an  incarnation  of the  Spirit  of the  Solar Year, 
son  of the  Mare-goddess.

In  the  Romance  of Pwyll,  Prince  of Dyfed  the  Goddess  appears  as 
Rhiannon  mother  of  Pryderi.  Rhiannon  is  a  corruption  of  Rigantona 
('Great  Queen')  and  Dyfed  consisted  of  most  of  Carmarthen  and  the 
whole  of Pembrokeshire  and  included  St.  David's;  its  central  point  was 
called  "The  Dark  Gate',  an  entrance  to  the  Underworld.  When  Pwyll 
('Prudence')  first  sees  Rhiannon  and  falls  in  love  with  her,  he  pursues  her 
on  his  fastest  horse  but  cannot  overtake  her;  evidendy  in  the  original 
story  she  took  the  form  of a  white  mare.  When  at  last  she  consents  to  be 
overtaken, and marries him twelve months later, she bears him a son after 
wards  called  Pryderi  ('Anxiety')  who  disappears  at  birth;  and  her  maids 
falsely  accuse  her  of  having  devoured  him,  smearing  her  face  with  the 
blood  of puppies.  As  a  penance  she  is  ordered  to  stand  at  a  horse-block 
outside  Pwyll's  palace,  like  a  mare,  ready  to  carry  guests  on  her  back. 1 
The  life  of her  son  Pryderi  is  closely  connected  with  a  magical  foal  which 
has  been  rescued  from  a  harpy;  all  the  previous  foals  of the  same  mare 
have  been  snatched  off  on  May  Eve  and  never  seen  again.  Pryderi,  a 
Divine  Child  of the  sort  that  is  taken  away  from  its  mother—like  Llew 
Llaw,  or  Zeus,  or  Romulus—is  later,  as usual,  given  a  name and  arms  by 
her,  mounts  the  magical  horse  and  eventually  becomes  a  Lord  of  the 
Dead.  Rhiannon is thus seen to be a Mare-goddess, but she is also a Muse-
goddess,  for  the  sirens  that  appear  in  the  Triads,  and  also  in  the  Romance 
of Branwen,  singing  with  wonderful  sweetness  are  called  'The  Birds  of 
Rhiannon'.  The  story  about  the  puppies  recalls  the  Roman  habit  of 
sacrificing  red  puppies  in  the  Spring  to  avert  the  baleful  influence  of the 
Dog-star on  their grain;  the sacrifice was  really  to  the  Barley-mother who 
had  the  Dog-star  as  her  attendant.  Rhiannon,  in  fact,  is  the  Mare-
Demeter,  a  successor  of  the  Sow-Demeter  Cerridwen.  That  the  Mare-
Demeter  devoured  children,  like  the  Sow-Demeter,  is  proved  by  the 
myth  of  Leucippe  ('White  Mare')  the  Orchomenan,  who  with  her  two 
sisters  ran  wild  and  devoured  her  son  Hippasus  ('foal');  and  by  the  myth 
recorded  by Pausanias, that when  Rhea gave birth to  Poseidon she offered 
her  lover  Cronos a  foal  to  eat instead  of the  child,  whom  she gave  secretly 
into the charge of the shepherds of Arcadian Arne.Mount Helicon was  not  the earliest seat  of the  Muse  Goddesses,  as  their 
tide  'The  Pierians'  shows;  the  word  Muse  is  now  generally  derived  from 
the  root  mont,  meaning  a  mountain.  Their  worship  had  been  brought 
there  in  the  Heroic  Age  during  a  migration  of the  Boeotian  people  from

• T h is  magical  tradition  survived  in  the  Northern  witch-cult.  In  1 6 73  Anne  Armstrong 
the  Northumbrian  witch  confessed  at her  trial  to  having  been  temporarily  transformed into 
a mare  by her  mistress A nn  Forster of Stockiield,  w ho  threw  a  bridle  over her  head  and  rode 
her to  a meeting of five witch-covens at Riding Mill  Bridge End.

385385

Mount  Pieria  in Northern  Thessaly.  But  to  make  the  transplanted  Muses 
feel  at  home  on  Helicon,  and  so  to  preserve  the  old  magic,  the  Boeotians 
named  the  geographical  features  of the mountain—the springs,  the  peaks 
and  grottoes—after the corresponding features of Pieria.  The Muses were 
at  this  time  three  in  number,  an  indivisible  Trinity,  as  the  mediaeval 
Catholics  recognized  when  they  built  the  church  of  their  own  Holy 
Trinity  on  the  site  of  the  deserted  shrine  of  the  Heliconian  Muses.  The 
appropriate  names  of  the  three  Persons  were  Meditation,  Memory  and 
Song.  The  worship  of  the  Muses  on  Helicon  (and  presumably  also  in 
Pieria)  was  concerned  with  incantatory  cursing  and  incantatory  blessing; 
Helicon  was  famous  for  the  medicinal  herbs  which  supplemented  the 
incantations—especially  for  the  nine-leaved  black  hellebore  used  by 
Melampus  at Lusi  as  a  cure  for  the  Daughters  of  Proetus,  which  could 
either  cause  or  cure  insanity  and  which  has  a  stimulative  action  on  the 
heart  like  digitalis  (fox-glove).  It  was  famous  also  for  the  erotic  fertility 
dances  about  a  stone  herm  at  Thespiae,  a  town  at  its  foot,  in  which  the 
women-votaries  of the  Muses  took  part.  Spenser  addresses  the  Muses  as 
'Virgins  of Helicon';  he  might  equally  have  called  them  'witches',  for  the 
witches  of  his  day  worshipped  the  same  White  Goddess—in  Macbeth 
called Hecate—performed  the same fertility dances on their Sabbaths, and 
were similarly gifted in incantatory magic and knowledge of herbs.The  Muse  priestesses  of Helicon  presumably  used  two  products  of  the 
horse  to  stimulate their ecstasies:  the  slimy vaginal issue of a  mare in  heat 
and  the  black membrane, or  hippomanes,  cut  from  the forehead  of  a new 
born  colt,  which  the  mare  (according  to  Aristotle)  normally  eats  as  a 
means  of  increasing  her  mother-love.  Dido 
in  the  Aeneid  used  this 
hippomanes  in  her  love-potion.

Skelton  in  his  Garland  of  Laurell  thus  describes  the  Triple  Goddess  in

her three characters as Goddess of the Sky, Earth and Underworld:

Diana in the leaves green, 
Lima that so bright doth sheen,

Persephone in Hell.

As Goddess of the Underworld she was concerned with Birth, Procreation 
and  Death.  As  Goddess  of  the  Earth  she  was  concerned  with  the  three 
seasons of Spring, Summer and Winter: she animated  trees and plants and 
ruled all  living creatures. As  Goddess  of the Sky she was the Moon, in her 
three phases  of New  Moon,  Full  Moon,  and  Waning  Moon.  This explains 
why from a triad she was so often enlarged to an ennead.  But it must never 
be forgotten that the Triple Goddess, as worshipped for example at Stym-
phalus,  was  a  personification  of primitive  woman—woman  the  creatress 
and destructress. As the New Moon or Spring she was girl; as the Full Moon 
or Summer she was woman;  as the Old Moon or Winter she was hag.

386386

In  a  Gallo-Roman  'allee  couverte'  burial  at  Tresse-  near  St.  Malo  in 
Brittany  two  pairs  of  girls'  breasts  are  sculptured  on  one  megalithic 
upright,  two  maternal  pairs  of breasts  on  another;  the  top  of a  third  up 
right  has  been  broken  off,  but  V.  C.  C.  Collum  who  excavated  the  burial 
suggests-that  it  pictured  a  third  pair—probably  the  shrunken  breasts  of 
the Hag. A very interesting find in  this same burial, which  can be dated by 
a bronze coin  of Domitian  to  the end  of the first century A . D .,  was a  flint 
arrow-head  of  the  usual  willow-leaf  shape  with  an  incised  decoration  of 
half-moons.  The willow,  as  we have seen,  was  sacred  to  the  Moon,  and  in 
the  Beth-Luis-Nion  is  Saille,  the  letter  S.  The  most  primitive  character  of 
the  Greek  letter  S  is  C,  which  is  borrowed  from  the  Cretan  linear  script. 
Sir  Arthur  Evans  in  his  Palace  of  Minos  gives  a  table  showing  the  gradual 
development  of the  Cretan  characters  from  ideograms,  and  the  sign  C  is 
there explained as a waning moon—the Moon-goddess as hag.  The arrow 
head,  which  in  Roman  Brittany  was  as  completely  out  of date,  except  for 
ritual  uses,  as  the  Queen's  sword  of  state,  or  the  Archbishop's  crozier  is 
now, must be an offering to  the third person of the female Trinity. 1 V.  C.  C. 
Collum  took  the  trouble  to  have  an  analysis  made  of the  charcoal  found 
under  the  uprights, apparendy the  remains  of the  funerary  pyre  on  which 
the  dead  man  had  been  cremated.  It  was  willow,  oak  and  hazel  charcoal, 
expressive  of the  sequence:  enchantment,  royalty,  wisdom.In Europe there were at first no male gods contemporary with the  God 
dess  to  challenge  her  prestige  or  power,  but  she  had  a  lover  who  was 
alternatively  the  beneficent  Serpent  of  Wisdom,  and 
the  beneficent 
Star  of Life,  her  son.  The  Son  was  incarnate  in  the  male  demons  of the 
various  totem  societies  ruled  by her,  who  assisted  in  the erotic dances  held 
in  her  honour.  The  Serpent,  incarnate  in  the  sacred  serpents  which  were 
the  ghosts  of  the  dead,  sent  the  winds.  The  Son,  who  was  also  called 
Lucifer  or  Phosphorus  ('bringer  of light')  because  as  evening-star  he  led 
in  the  light  of  the  Moon,  was  reborn  every  year,  grew  up  as  the  year 
advanced,  destroyed  the  Serpent,  and  won  the  Goddess's  love.  Her  love1  Insufficient  notice  has  yet  been  taken  of the  shape  of flint  arrow-heads  as  having  a  magical 
rather  than  a  utilitarian  origin.  T he  tanged  arrow-head  of fir-tree shape,  for  example,  needs 
explanation.  It  must  have  been  very  difficult  to  knap  without  breaking  off either  one  of the 
tangs  or  the  projecting  stem  between  them,  and  has  no  obvious  advantage  in  hunting  over 
the  simple  willow-leaf or elder-leaf types.  F or  though  a  narrow  bronze  arrow-head  with  four 
tangs  cannot  be  easily  drawn  out  through  a  wound,  because  the  flesh  closes  up  behind,  the 
broad  two-tanged  flint  one  would  not  be  more  difficult  to  draw  out  than  an  elder-leaf  or 
willow-leaf  one  shot  into  a  beast  with  equal  force.  T he  fir-tree  shape  seems  therefore  to  be 
magically  intended:  an  appeal  to  Artemis  Elate—Diana  the  Huntress,  Goddess  of the  F i r-
tree—to  direct  the-aim.  T he  point  was  probably  smeared  with  a  paralysant  poison—a 'merci 
ful  shaft'  of  the  sort  with  which  the  Goddess  was  credited.  An  Irish  fir-tree  arrow-head  in 
my  possession,  taken  from  an  Iron  A ge  burial,  cannot  have  been  seriously  intended  for 
archery.  T he  chip  of white  flint  from which it has been  knapped is awkwardly curved, and it 
has  so  large  a  'bulb  of percussion'  and  so  short  a  stem  as  to  prevent  it  from  being  spliced  to 
admit an arrow-shaft: it is clearly for funerary use only.

387387

destroyed  him,  but  from  his  ashes  was  born  another  Serpent  which,  at 
Easter,  laid  the  glain  or  red  egg  which  she  ate;  so  that  the  Son  was 
reborn to her as a child once more.  Osiris was a Star-son, and though after 
his  death  he  looped  himself around  the world  like  a  serpent,  yet  when  his 
fifty-yard  long  phallus  was  carried  in  procession  it  was  topped  with  a 
golden  star;  this  stood  for  himself renewed  as  the  Child  Horus,  son  of 
Isis,  who  had  been  both  his  bride  and  his  layer-out  and  was  now  his 
mother once again.  Her absolute  power was  proved by a yearly holocaust 
in her  honour  as  'Lady  of  the  Wild  Things',  in  which  the  totem  bird 
or  beast of each society was burned alive.The  most  familiar  icon  of  Aegean  religion  is  therefore  a  Moon-woman, 
a  Star-son  and  a  wise  spotted  Serpent  grouped  under  a  fruit-tree— 
Artemis,  Hercules  and Erechtheus.  Star-son and  Serpent are at war;  one 
succeeds  the  other  in  the  Moon-woman's  favour,  as  summer  succeeds 
winter,  and  winter  succeeds  summer;  as  death  succeeds  birth  and  birth 
succeeds  death.  The  Sun  grows  weaker  or  stronger  as  the  year  takes  its 
course,  the  branches  of  the  tree  are  now  loaded  and  now  bare,  but  the 
light  of the  Moon  is  invariable.  She  is  impartial:  she  destroys  or  creates 
with  equal passion.  The  conflict  between  the  twins  is  given  an  ingenious 
turn in  the  Romance of Kilhwych and Olwen:  Gwyn  ('White')  and  his  rival 
Gwythur  ap  Greidawl  ('Victor,  son  of  Scorcher')  waged  perpetual  war 
for Creiddylad (alias Cordelia), daughter of Lludd (alias Llyr, alias Lear, 
alias Nudd,  alias  Nuada,  alias Nodens),  each in  turn  stealing her  from  the 
other,  until  the  matter was  referred  to  King Arthur.  He  gave  the  ironical 
decision  that  Creiddylad  should  be  returned  to  her  father  and  that  the 
twins  should  'fight  for  her  every first of May,  until  the  day  of doom',  and 
that whichever of them should  then be conqueror should keep her.There are as yet  no  fathers,  for the  Serpent is  no  more  the father of the 
Star-son  than  the  Star-son is  of the  Serpent.  They are  twins,  and  here  we 
are  returned  to  the  single  poetic  Theme.  The  poet  identifies  himself with 
the  Star-son,  his  hated  rival  is  the  Serpent;  only  if  he  is  writing  as  a 
satirist, does he play the Serpent.  The Triple Muse is woman in her divine 
character:  the  poet's  enchantress,  the  only  theme  of his  songs.  It must  not 
be  forgotten  that  Apollo  himself was  once  a  yearly  victim  of the  Serpent: 
for Pythagoras carved an inscription  on his tomb at Delphi,  recording his 
death  in  a  fight  with  the  local  python—the  python  which  he  was  usually 
supposed  to  have  killed  outright.  The  Star-son  and  the  Serpent  are  still 
mere demons, and in  Crete the Goddess is not even pictured with a divine 
child  in  her  arm?.  She  is  the  mother  of  all  things;  her  sons  and  lovers 
partake of the sacred essence only by her grace.

The  revolutionary  institution  of  fatherhood,  imported  into  Europe 
from  the  East,  brought  with  it  the  institution  of  individual  marriage. 
Hitherto  there had  been  only group  marriages  of all  female  members  of a 
388particular  totem  society  with  all  members  of  another;  every  child's 
maternity  was  certain,  but  its  paternity  debatable  and  irrelevant.  Once 
this revolution had occurred, the social status of woman altered: man took 
over  many  of the  sacred  practices  from  which  his  sex  had  debarred  him, 
and finally declared himself head  of the  household,  though much  property 
still  passed  from  mother  to  daughter.  This  second  stage,  the  Olympian 
stage,  necessitated  a change in mythology.  It was not enough to introduce 
the  concept  of  fatherhood  into  the  ordinary  myth,  as  in  the  Orphic 
formula  quoted  by  Clement  of Alexandria,  'The Bull  that is  the  Serpent's 
father,  the  Serpent  that  is  the  Bull's.'  A  new  child  was  needed  who 
should  supersede both  the Star-son and  the Serpent.  He was celebrated by 
poets  as  the  Thunder-child,  or  the  Axe-child,  or  the  Hammer-child. 
There  are  different  legends  as  to  how  he  removed  his  enemies.  Either he 
borrowed  the  golden  sickle  of  the  Moon-woman,  his  mother,  and 
castrated  the  Star-son;  or he  flung  him down  from  a  mountain  top;  or he 
stunned  him  with  his  axe  so  that  he  fell  into  perpetual  sleep.  The  Serpent 
he  usually  killed  outright.  Then  he  became  the  Father-god,  or  Thunder-
god,  married  his  mother and  begot  his  divine  sons  and  daughters  on  her. 
The  daughters  were  really  limited  versions  of herself—herself in  various 
young-moon  and  full-moon  aspects.  In  her  old-moon  aspect  she  became 
her  own  mother,  or  grandmother,  or  sister,  and  the  sons  were  limited 
revivals  of the  destroyed  Star-son  and  Serpent.  Among  these  sons  was  a 
God  of poetry,  music,  the arts  and  the sciences:  he  was  eventually  recog 
nized  as  the  Sun-god  and  acted  in  many  countries  as  active  regent  for his 
senescent  father,  the  Thunder-god.  In  some  cases  he  even  displaced  him. 
The  Greeks  and  the  Romans  had  reached  this  religious  stage  by  the  time 
that Christianity began.The  third  stage  of  cultural  development—the  purely  patriarchal,  in 
which  there  are  no  Goddesses  at  all—is  that  of  later  Judaism,  Judaic 
Christianity,  Mohammedanism  and  Protestant  Christianity.  This  stage 
was  not reached  in  England  until  the  Commonwealth,  since  in  mediaeval 
Catholicism  the Virgin  and  Son—who  took over  the  rites and  honours  of 
the Moon-woman and her Star-son—were  of greater religious  importance 
than  God  the  Father.  (The  Serpent  had  become  the  Devil;  which  was 
appropriate  because  Jesus  had  opposed  fish  to  serpent  in  Matthew,  VII, 
io,  and  was  himself  symbolized  as  a  fish  by  his  followers.)  The  Welsh 
worshipped  Virgin  and  Son  for  fifty  years  longer  than  the  English;  the 
Irish  of  Eire  still  do  so.  This  stage  is  unfavourable  to  poetry.  Hymns 
addressed  to  the  Thunder-god,  however  lavishly  they  may  gild  him  in 
Sun-god  style—even  Skelton's  magnificent  Hymn  to  God  the  Father— 
fail  as  poems,  because  to  credit  him  with  illimitable  and  unrestrained 
power  denies  the  poet's  inalienable  allegiance  to  the  Muse;  and  because 
though the Thunder-god has been a jurist, logician, declamator and prose-

389

stylist,  he  has  never  been  a  poet  or  had  the  least  understanding  of  true 
poems since he escaped  from his Mother's tutelage.389

stylist,  he  has  never  been  a  poet  or  had  the  least  understanding  of  true 
poems since he escaped  from his Mother's tutelage.

In  Greece,  when  the  Moon-woman  first  became  subordinated  to  the 
Thunder-god  as  his  wife,  she  delegated  the  charge  of  poetry  to  her  so-
called  daughter,  her  former  self  as  the  Triple  Muse,  and  no  poem  was 
considered  auspicious  that  did  not  begin  with  an  appeal  to  the  Muse  for 
inspiration.  Thus  the  early  ballad,  The  Wrath  of Achilles,  which  intro 
duces  the Iliad of Homer,  begins:  'Sing,  Goddess,  of the  destructive  anger 
of Achilles,  son  of  Peleus.'  That  Achilles  is  styled  'son  of  Peleus'  rather 
than  'son  of  Thetis'  proves  that  the  patriarchal  system  was  already  in 
force,  though  totem  society  lingered  on  as  a  social  convenience,  Achilles 
being a sacred  king  of the  Myrmidons  of Thessaly,  apparently an  Ant  clan 
subject to  the  Goddess  as  Wryneck;  but the  Goddess  is  clearly  the  Triple 
Muse, not merely one  of the nine little  Muses,  mentioned  in  a less primitive 
part  of the Iliad, whom Apollo later led  down  from Helicon,  and  up to  Par 
nassus  when,  as  recorded  in  the  Hymn  to  Pythian  Apollo,  he  superseded 
the  local  Earth-goddess  in  the  navel-shrine  at  Delphi.  Apollo  ('Destroyer 
or Averter') was at this time considered  to be a male twin  to  the  daughter-
goddess  Artemis;  they  were  represented  as  children  of the  Thunder-god, 
born  on  Quail  Island,  off Delos,  to  the  Goddess Latona the Hyperborean, 
daughter  of Phoebe  and  Coieus  ('Moonlight and  Initiation').The  myths  get  confused  here  because  Latona,  being  a  newcomer  to 
Delos, was not at first recognized by the local Triple Goddess; and  because 
Artemis,  the  name  of Apollo's  twin,  had  previously  been  a  Greek  title  of 
the  Triple  Goddess  herself.  Artemis  probably  means  'The  Disposer  of 
Water'  from ard-  and  themis.  Apollo,  one may say,  was  securing his  posi 
tion  by  persuading  his  twin  to  take  over  the  emblems  and  titles  of  her 
predecessor:  he  himself  adopted  the  titles  and  emblems  of  a  Pelasgian 
'Averter'  or  'Destroyer',  in  one  aspect  (as  his  title  Smintheus  proves)  a 
Cretan  Mouse-demon.  Apollo  and  Artemis  then  together  took  over  the 
charge  of  poetry  from  the  Triple  Muse  (in  this  context  their  mother 
Latona);  but  Artemis  soon  ceased  to  be  an  equal  partner  of  Apollo's, 
though  she  continued  to  be  a  Goddess  of magical  charms  and  eventually 
was  credited  with  evil  charms  only.  So  Tatian  records  in his  Address to  the 
Greeks:  'Artemis  is  a  poisoner,  Apollo  performs  cures.'  In  Ireland,  simil 
arly,  the  Goddess  Brigit  became  overshadowed  by  the  God  Ogma.  In 
Cormac's  Glossary it  was  necessary  to  explain  her  as:  'Brigit,  daughter  of 
The  Dagda,  the  poetess,  that  is,  the  goddess  worshipped  by  the  poets  on 
account  of the  great  and  illustrious  protection  afforded  them  by  her.'  It 
was  in  her  honour  that  the  ollave  carried  a  golden  branch  with  tinkling 
bells when he went abroad.

About  the  eighth  century  B . C.  the  Muse  triad  became  enlarged  under 
Thraco-Macedonian  influence  to  three  triads,  or an ennead.  Here  the  nine 
390About  the  eighth  century  B . C.  the  Muse  triad  became  enlarged  under 
Thraco-Macedonian  influence  to  three  triads,  or an ennead.  Here  the  nine 
390

orgiastic  priestesses  of the  Island  of Sein  in  West  Brittany,  and  the  nine 
damsels  in  the  Preiddeu  Annwm  whose  breaths  warmed  Cerridwen's 
cauldron,  will  be  recalled.  A  ninefold  Muse  was  more  expressive  of  the 
universality  of  the  Goddess's  rule  than  a  threefold  one;  but  the  Apollo 
priesthood  who  ruled  Greek  Classical  literature soon used  the  change as a 
means  of  weakening  her  power  by  a  process  of  departmentalization. 
Hesiod  writes  of  the  Nine  Daughters  of  Zeus,  who  under  Apollo's 
patronage were  given  the following  functions  and  names:

Epic poetry, Calliope. 
History,  Clio. 
Lyric poetry, Euterpe. 
Tragedy, Melpomene. 
Choral dancing, Terpsichore. 
Erotic poetry and mime, Erato. 
Sacred Poetry,  Polyhymnia. 
Astronomy,  Urania. 
Comedy, Thaleia.

Calliope  ('beautiful  face')  was  a  name  of  the  original  Muse,  in  her  full-
moon  aspect;  so  were  Erato  'the  beloved  one';  and  Urania  'the  heavenly 
one'.  The  first  mention  of Erato  in  Greek  myth  is  as  the  Oak-queen  to 
whom Areas  was married;  he gave his name to Arcadia and  was the son of 
Callisto the She-bear and father of Atheneatis. The other names apparendy 
refer  to  the  several  functions  of the  Muses.  It will  be  observed  that  though 
the  Muses  of Helicon  still  had  erotic  tendencies,  their  chief function,  that 
of  healing  and  cursing  by  incantation,  had  been  taken  away  from  them 
under  Olympianism.  It  had  passed  to  Apollo  himself and  a  surrogate,  his 
physician  son Aesculapius.Apollo,  though  the  God  of Poetry and  the  leader of the Muses,  did  not 
yet,  however,  claim  to  inspire  poems:  the inspiration was still  held  to come 
to  the poet from the Muse or Muses. He had originally been a mere Demon 1 
whom  his  Muse  mother  had  inspired  with  poetic  frenzy;  now  he  required 
that,  as  the  Ninefold  Muse,  she  should  inspire  individual  poets  in  his 
honour—though  not  to  the  point  of ecstasy.  These  poets,  if they  proved 
to  be  his  faithful  and  industrious  servants,  he  rewarded  with  a  garland  of 
laurel—in  Greek,  daphne.  The  connexion  of  poetry  with  laurel  is  not 
merely  that laurel  is  an evergreen and  thus an emblem  of immortality:  it is 
also  an  intoxicant.  The  female  celebrants  of the  Triple  Goddess  at  Tempe

1  T he  ancients  were  well  aware  of  Apollo's  frequent  changes  of divine  function.  Cicero  in 
his  essay  On  the  Nature  of the  Gods  distinguishes  four  Apollos  in  descending  order  of anti 
quity:  the  son  of  Hephaestos;  the  son  of  the  Cretan  Corybantes;  the  Arcadian  Apollo  w ho 
gave  Arcadia  its  laws;  and  lasdy  the  son  of Latona  and  Zeus.  He  might  have  enlarged  his  list 
to twenty or thircy.

9I

39I

3

had  chewed  laurel  leaves  to  induce  a  poetic  and  erotic  frenzy,  as  the 
Bacchanals chewed ivy—daphne  may be a  shortened  form  of daphoine,  'the 
bloody  one',  a  title  of  the  Goddess—and  when  Apollo  took  over  the 
Delphic  oracle  the  Pythian  priestess  who  continued  in  charge  learned  to 
chew  laurel  for  oracular  inspiration.  The  laurel  had  become  sacred  to 
Apollo—bis  legendary  pursuit  of the  nymph  Daphne  records  his  capture 
of the  Goddess's  shrine at  Tempe near Mount Olympus—but he was now 
the  God  of  Reason  with  the  motto  'nothing  in  excess',  and  his  male 
initiates  wore  the  laurel  without  chewing  at  it;  Empedocles,  as  Pytha-
goras's  semi-divine  successor,  held  laurel-chewing  in  as  great  horror  as 
bean-eating. Poetry as a magical practice was already in decline.The  Romans  conquered  Greece  and  brought  Apollo  with  them  to 
Italy.  They  were  a  military  nation,  ashamed  of  their  own  rude  poetic 
tradition,  but  some  of them  began  to  take  up  Greek  poetry  seriously  as 
part of their education in  political  rhetoric,  an art which  they found  neces 
sary  for  consolidating  their  military  conquests.  They  studied  under  the 
Greek  sophists  and  understood  from  them  that  major  poetry  was  a  more 
musical  and  more  philosophical  form  of rhetoric  than  could  be  achieved 
by prose and that minor poetry was the most elegant of social accomplish 
ments.  True poets will agree that poetry is spiritual illumination delivered 
by  a  poet  to  his  equals,  not  an  ingenious  technique  of swaying  a  popular 
audience or of enlivening a sottish dinner-party, and will think of Catullus 
as  one  of the  very  few  poets  who  transcended  the  Graeco-Roman  poetic 
tradition.  The reason perhaps was  that he was  of Celtic birth:  at any rate, 
he  had a fearlessness,  originality and  emotional sensitivity entirely lacking 
in  the  general  run  of  Latin  poets.  He  alone  showed  a  sincere  love  of 
women;  the  others  were  content  to  celebrate  either  comrade-loyalty  or 
playful  homosexuality.  His  contemporary,  Virgil,  is  to  be  read  for 
qualities  that  are  not  poetic  in  the  sense  that  they  invoke  the  presence  of 
the  Muse.  The  musical  and  rhetorical skill,  the fine-sounding periphrases, 
and  the  rolling  periods,  are  admired  by  classicists,  but  the  Aeneid  is 
designed  to  dazzle  and  overpower,  and  true  poets  do  not find it consistent 
with  their  integrity  to  follow  Virgil's  example.  They  honour  Catullus 
more,  because  he  never  seems  to  be  calling  upon  them,  as  posterity,  to 
applaud a demonstration of immortal genius; rather, he appeals to them as 
a  contemporary:  'Is  this  not  so?'  For  Horace  as  the  elegant  verse-writer 
they  may  feel  affection,  and  admire  his  intention  of avoiding  extremes  of 
feeling and  the natural  Roman temptation  to be vulgar.  But for all his wit, 
affability  and  skilful  gleemanship  they  can  hardly reckon  him  a  poet, any 
more than  they can reckon, say,  Calverley or Austin Dobson.To summarize the history of the  Greek Muses: 
The  Triple  Muse,  or  the  Three  Muses,  or  the  Ninefold  Muse,  or 
Cerridwen,  or  whatever  else  one  may  care  to  call  her,  is  originally  the

3 92

Great  Goddess  in  her  poetic  or  incantatory  character.  She  has  a  son  who 
is  also  her  lover  and  her  victim,  the  Star-son,  or  Demon  of the  Waxing 
Year.  He  alternates  in  her  favour  with  his  tanist  Python,  the  Serpent  of 
Wisdom,  the  Demon of the  Waning year,  his darker self.

Next,  she  is  courted  by  the  Thunder-god  (a  rebellious  Star-son 
infected  by  Eastern  patriarchalism)  and  has  twins  by  him,  a  male  and  a 
female—in  Welsh  poetry  called  Merddin  and  Olwen.  She  remains  the 
Goddess  of  Incantation,  but  forfeits  part  of  her  sovereignty  to  the 
Thunder-god, particularly law-making and the witnessing of oaths.

Next,  she  divides  the  power  of poetic  enchantment  between  her  twins, 
whose symbols  are  the  morning star and  the evening  star,  the  female  twin 
being herself in decline, the male a revival of the Star-son.

Next,  she  becomes  enlarged  in  number,  though  reduced  in  power,  to  a 
bevy  of  nine  litde  departmental  goddesses  of  inspiration,  under  the 
tutelage  of the former male  twin.

Finally,  the  male  twin,  Apollo,  proclaims  himself the  Eternal  Sun,  and 
the  Nine  Muses  become his  ladies-in-waiting.  He  delegates  their functions 
to male gods who are himself in multiplication.

(The legendary origin of Japanese poetry is in an encounter between the 
Moon-goddess  and  the  Sun-god  as  they  walked  around  the  pillar  of the 
world  in  opposite  directions.  The  Moon-goddess  spoke  first,  saying  in 
verse:

What joy beyond compare 
To see a man so fair!What joy beyond compare 
To see a man so fair!

The  Sun-god  was  angry  that  she  had  spoken  out  of  turn  in  this  unseemly 
fashion;  he  told  her  to  return  and  come  to  meet  him  again.  On  this 
occasion he spoke first:

To see a maid so fair— 
What joy beyond compare!

This  was the first verse ever composed. In  other words,  the  Sun-god  took 
over  the  control  of  poetry  from  the  Muse,  and  pretended  that  he  had 
originated it—a lie that did Japanese poets no good at all.)

With  that,  poetry becomes academic and  decays  until  the Muse chooses

to reassert her power in what are called Romantic Revivals.

In  mediaeval  poetry  the  Virgin  Mary  was  plainly  identified  with  the 
Muse  by  being  put  in  charge  of the  Cauldron  of Cerridwen.  D.  W.  Nash 
notes in his edition of the Taliesin poems:

The  Christian  bards  of  the  thirteenth  and  fourteenth  centuries 
repeatedly refer to the Virgin  Mary herself as the cauldron or source of 
inspiration—to  which  they  were  led,  as  it  seems,  partly  by  a  play  on

393

the  word  pair,  a  cauldron,  and  the  secondary  form  of  that  word,  on 
assuming  the  soft  form  of  its  initial  mair,  which  also  means  Mary. 
Mary  was  Mair,  the  mother  of  Christ,  the  mystical  receptacle  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  and  Pair  was  the  cauldron  or  receptacle  and  fountain  of 
Christian  inspiration.  Thus  we  have  in  a  poem  of Davydd  Benfras  in 
the  thirteenth  century:

Crist mab Mair am Pair pur vonhedd. 
Christ, son of Mary,  my cauldron of pure descentCrist mab Mair am Pair pur vonhedd. 
Christ, son of Mary,  my cauldron of pure descent

In  mediaeval  Irish  poetry  Mary  was  equally  plainly  identified  with 
Brigit  the  Goddess  of  Poetry:  for  St.  Brigit,  the  Virgin  as  Muse,  was 
popularly  known  as  'Mary  of the  Gael'.  Brigit  as  a  Goddess  had  been  a 
Triad:  the  Brigit  of Poetry,  the  Brigit  of Healing and  the  Brigit of Smith 
craft.  In  Gaelic  Scotland  her  symbol  was  the  White  Swan,  and  she  was 
known  as  Bride  of the  Golden  Hair,  Bride  of the  White  Hills,  mother  of 
the  King  of Glory.  In  the  Hebrides  she  was  the  patroness  of childbirth. 
Her  Aegean  prototype  seems  to  have  been  Brizo  of  Delos,  a  moon-
goddess  to  whom  votive  ships  were  offered,  and  whose  name  was  derived 
by  the  Greeks  from  the  word  braein,  'to  enchant'.  Brigit  was  much  culti 
vated in Gaul and Britain in Roman times, as numerous dedications to her 
attest,  and  in  parts  of Britain  Saint  Brigit  retained  her  character  of Muse 
until  the  Puritan  Revolution,  her  healing  powers  being  exercised  largely 
through  poetic  incantation  at  sacred  wells.  Bridewell,  the  female  peniten 
tiary in London, was originally a nunnery of hers. 1

A  Cornish invocation to the local Brigit Triad runs:

Three Ladies came from the East, 
One with fire and two with frost. 
Out with thee, fire, and in with thee, frost.A  Cornish invocation to the local Brigit Triad runs:

Three Ladies came from the East, 
One with fire and two with frost. 
Out with thee, fire, and in with thee, frost.

It is a charm against a  scald.  One dips nine bramble leaves in spring water 
and  then  applies  them  to  the  scald;  the  charm must be  said  three  times  to 
each  leaf to  be effective.  For the  bramble  is  sacred  both  to  the  Pentad  and 
Triad  of seasonal  Goddesses,  the  number  of leaves  on  a  single  stalk  vary 
ing  between  three  and  five—so  that  in  Brittany  and  parts  of Wales  there 
is a strong taboo on the eating of blackberries. In this charm the Goddesses 
are  clearly  seasonal,  the  Goddess  of  Summer  bringing  fire,  her  sisters 
bringing  frost  A  fourth  rhyming  line  is  usually  added,  as  a  sop  to  the 
clergy: In the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

The  mediaeval  Brigit  shared  the  Muse-ship  with  another  Mary,  'Mary 
Gipsy'  or  St  Mary  of  Egypt,  in  whose  honour  the  oath  'Marry'  or 
'Marry  Gyp!'  was  sworn.  This  charming  Virgin  with  the  blue  robe  and

1  T he  fourteenth-century  Swedish  St.  Brigid,  or  Birgit,  w ho  founded  the  Order  of  S t. 
Brigid  was  not,  of  course,  the  original  saint,  though  some  houses  of  the  Order  reverted 
merrily  to  paganism.

394394

pearl  necklace  was  the  ancient  pagan  Sea-goddess  Marian  in  transparent 
disguise—Marian,1  Miriam,  Mariamne  ('Sea  Lamb')  Myrrhine,  Myrtea, 
Myrrha,2  Maria  or  Marina,  patroness  of  poets  and  lovers  and  proud 
mother  of the  Archer  of Love.  Robin  Hood,  in  the  ballads,  always  swore 
by her. She was swarthy-faced, and in a mediaeval Book of the Saints she is 
recorded  to  have  worked  her  passage  to  the  Holy  Land,  where  she  was  to 
live for years as a desert  anchorite,  by offering herself as a prostitute to  the 
whole  crew  of the  only  vessel  sailing  there;  so,  once in  Heaven,  she  showed 
particular indulgence to carnal sins.A familiar disguise of this same  Marian  is  the merry-maid,  as 'mermaid' 
was  once  written.  The  conventional  figure  of  the  mermaid—a  beautiful 
woman  with  a  round  mirror,  a  golden  comb  and  a  fish-tail—expresses 
'The  Love-goddess  rises  from  the  Sea'.  Every  initiate  of  the  Eleusinian 
Mysteries,  which  were  of Pelasgian  origin,  went  through  a  love  rite  with 
her representative  after taking a cauldron  bath in  Llew Llaw fashion.  The 
round  mirror,  to  match  the  comb,  may  be  some  bygone  artist's  mistaken 
substitute  for the  quince,  which  Marian  always  held  in  her hand  as  a  love-
gift;  but  the  mirror  did  also  form  part  of  the  sacred  furniture  of  the 
Mysteries,  and  probably  stood  for  'know  thyself.  The  comb  was  origin 
ally  a  plectrum  for  plucking  lyre-strings.  The  Greeks  called  her  Aphro 
dite  ('risen  from  sea-foam')  and  used  the  tunny,  sturgeon,  scallop  and 
periwinkle,  all  sacred  to  her,  as  aphrodisiacs.  Her  most  famous  temples 
were  built  by  the  sea-side,  so  it  is  easy  to  understand  her  symbolic  fish 
tail.  She  can  be identified  with the  Moon-goddess  Eurynome  whose statue 
at  Phigalia in Arcadia was a mermaid  carved  in  wood.  The myrtle,  murex 
and  myrrh  tree  were  also  everywhere  sacred  to  her;  with  the  palm-tree 
(which  thrives  on  salt),  the  love-faithful  dove,  and  the  colours  white, 
green,  blue  and  scarlet.  Botticelli's  Birth  of V»nus  is  an  exact  icon  of her 
cult.  Tall,  golden-haired,  blue-eyed,  pale-faced,  the  Love-goddess  arrives 
in  her  scallop-shell  at  the  myrtle-grove,  and  Earth,  in  a  flowery  robe, 
hastens  to  wrap  her  in  a  scarlet  gold-fringed  mantle.  In  English  ballad-
poetry  the  mermaid  stands  for  the  bitter-sweetness  of  love  and  for  the 
danger  run  by  susceptible  mariners  (once  spelt  'merriners')  in  foreign 
ports: her mirror and comb stand for vanity and heartlessness.Constantine,  the  first  Christian  Emperor,  officially  abolished  Mary-
worship,  but  much  of the  ancient  ritual  survived  within  the  Church:  for 
example  among  the  Collyridians,  an  Arabian  sect  who  used  to  offer  the 
same  cake  and  liquor  at  her  shrine  as  they  had  formerly  offered  to 
Ashtaroth.  Myrrh,  too,  but  this  was  more  orthodox  because  St.  Jerome 
had  praised  the  Virgin  as  Stilla  Maris,  'Myrrh  of  the  Sea'.  St.  Jerome

1  T he  earliest  spelling  of  the  Virgin's  name  in  English  is  Marian—not  Mari  am  which  is

the  Greek  form used in  the  Gospels.

*  She  was  the  mother  of  Adonis;  hence  the  Alexandrian  grammarian  Lycophron  calls

Byblos  "The  C i ty  of Myrrha'.

395

was  punning  on  the  name  'Mary',  connecting  it  with  Hebrew  words 
marah  (brine)  and mor  (myrrh)  and  recalling  the  gifts  of the  Three  Wise 
Men.395

was  punning  on  the  name  'Mary',  connecting  it  with  Hebrew  words 
marah  (brine)  and mor  (myrrh)  and  recalling  the  gifts  of the  Three  Wise 
Men.

When  the  Crusaders  invaded  the  Holy  Land,  built  castles  and  settled 
down,  they  found  a  number  of heretical  Christian  sects  living  there  under 
Moslem  protection,  who  soon  seduced  them  from  orthodoxy.  This  was 
how  the  cult  of Mary  Gipsy came to England, brought through  Compos-
tella  in  Spain  by  poor  pilgrims  with  palm-branches in  their  hands,  copies 
of the  Apocryphal  Gospels  in  their  wallets  and  Aphrodite's  scallop-shells 
stitched  in  their  caps—the  palmers,  celebrated  in  Ophelia's  song  in 
Hamlet.  The  lyre-plucking,  red-stockinged  troubadours,  of whom  King 
Richard  Lion-Heart  is  the  best  remembered  in  Britain,  ecstatically 
adopted  the  Marian  cult.  From  their  French  songs  derive  the  lyrics  by 
'Anon'  which  are  the  chief glory  of early  English  poetry;  as  the  prettiest 
carols  derive  from  the  Apocryphal  Gospels,  thanks  to  the  palmers.  The 
most  memorable  result  of  the  Crusades  was  to  introduce  into  Western 
Europe  an  idea  of romantic  love  which,  expressed  in  terms  of the  ancient 
Welsh  minstrel  tales,  eventually  transformed  the  loutish  robber  barons 
and  their  sluttish  wives  to  a  polished  society  of courtly  lords  and  ladies. 
From  the  casde  and  court  good  manners  and  courtesy  spread  to  the 
country  folk;  and  this  explains  'Merry  England'  as  the  country  most 
engrossed  with  Mary-worship.In  the  English  countryside  Mary  Gipsy  was  soon  identified  with  the 
Love-goddess  known  to  the  Saxons  as  'The  May  Bride'  because  of her 
ancient  association  with  the  may-tree  cult  brought  to  Britain  by  the 
Atrebates in the first century B . C. or A . D. She paired off with Merddin, by 
this  time  Christianized as 'Robin Hood',  apparently a variant  of Merddin's 
Saxon  name,  Rof  Breoht  Woden,  'Bright  Strength  of  Woden,'  also  known 
euphemistically  as  'Robin  Good-fellow'.  In  French  the  word  Robin, 
which is regarded  as  a diminutive  of Robert but is  probably pre-Teutonic, 
means  a  ram  and  also  a  devil.  A  robinet,  or  water-faucet,  is  so  called 
because  in  rustic  fountains  it  was  shaped  like  a  ram's  head.  The  two 
senses  of  ram  and  devil  are  combined  in  the  illustration  to  a  pamphlet 
published in London in 1 6 3 9: Robin Goodfellow, his mad pranks and merry 
gests.  Robin  is  depicted  as  an  ithyphallic  god  of  the  witches  with  young 
ram's  horns  sprouting  from  his  forehead,  ram's  legs,  a  witches'  besom 
over  his  left  shoulder,  a  lighted  candle  in  his  right  hand.  Behind  him  in  a 
ring  dance  a  coven  of  men  and  women  witches  in  Puritan  costume,  a 
black  dog adores  him,  a  musician  plays  a  trumpet,  an  owl  flies  overhead. 
It  will  be  recalled  that  the  Somersetshire  witches  called  their  god  Robin, 
and  'Robin  son  of Art'  was  the  Devil  of Dame  Alice  Kyteler,  the  famous 
early  fourteenth-century  witch  of  Kilkenny,  and  used  sometimes  to  tac 
tile  form  of a black  dog.  For  the  Devil  as  ram  the  classical  instance  is  the

396396

one  whom  in  1 3 03  the  Bishop  of  Coventry  honoured  with  a  Black  Mass 
and  saluted  with  a  posterior  kiss.  In  Cornwall  'Robin'  means  phallus. 
'Robin Hood'  is  a  country name for red campion ('campion'  means 'cham 
pion'),  perhaps  because its  cloven petal suggests  a ram's hoof, and because 
'Red  Champion'  was  a  title  of the  Witch-god.  It  may  be  no  more  than  a 
coincidence  that  'ram'  in  Sanscrit  is  huda.  'Robin',  meaning  'a  ram', 
has  become  mythologically  equated  with  Robin  (latin:  rubens),  meaning 
the red-breast.Here  the  story  becomes  complicated.  The  merry exploits  of one  Robin 
Hood,  the  famous  outlaw  of  Sherwood  Forest—whom  J.  W.  Walker1 
has  now  proved  to  have  been  a  historical  character,  born  at  Wakefield  in 
Yorkshire  between  the  years  1285  and  1 2 9 5,  and  in  the  service  of King 
Edward II in the years 1 3 23 and 1324—became closely associated with the 
May  Day  revels.  Presumably  this  was  because  the  outlaw  happened  to 
have  been  christened  Robert  by  his  father  Adam  Hood  the  forester,  and 
because  during  the  twenty-two  years  that  he  spent  as  a  bandit  in  the 
greenwood  he  improved  on  this  identification  of  himself  with  Robin  by 
renaming his wife  Matilda  'Maid Marian'.  To judge  from  the early ballad, 
The  Banished Man,  Matilda  must  have  cut  her  hair  and  put  on  male  dress 
in  order  to  belong  to  the  outlaw  fraternity,  as  in  Albania  to  this  day 
young women join male hunting parties,  dress as men and  are so  treated— 
Atalanta  of  Calydon  who  took  part  in  the  hunt  of  the  Calydonian  Boar 
was  the  prototype.  The  oudaw  band  then  formed  a coven  of thirteen with 
Marian  acting  as  the pucelle,  or  maiden  of the  coven;  presumably she wore 
her proper clothes in the May Day orgies as  Robin's bride.  By his success 
ful  defiance  of the  ecclesiastics  Robin  became  such  a  popular  hero  that  he 
was  later  regarded  as  the  founder  of  the  Robin  Hood  religion,  and  its 
primitive  forms  are  difficult  to  recover.  However,  'Hood'  (or  Hod  or 
Hud)  meant  'log'—the  log  put  at  the  back  of the  fire—and  it  was  in  this 
log,  cut  from  the sacred  oak,  that  Robin had  once been believed  to  reside. 
Hence  'Robin  Hood's  steed',  the  wood-louse  which  ran  out  when  the 
Yule  log  was  burned.  In  the  popular  superstition  Robin  himself escaped 
up  the  chimney  in  the  form  of  a  Robin  and,  when  Yule  ended,  went  out 
as Belin against his rival Bran, or Saturn—who had been 'Lord of Misrule' 
at the Yule-tide revels.  Bran hid  from  pursuit in  the ivy-bush disguised as 
a  Gold  Crest  Wren;  but  Robin  always  caught  and  hanged  him.  Hence 
the  song:' Who'll hunt the Wren? cries Robin the Bobbin.

Since  'Maid  Marian'  had  been  acting  as  Lady  of Misrule  in  the  Yule-
tide  revels  and  deserting  Robin  for  his  rival,  it  is  easy  to  see  how  she 
earned a bad name for inconstancy.  Thus  'Maud Marian' was often written

1  Yorkshire  Archaeological Journal,  N o.  1 4 1,  1944. 
397

for  'Maid  Marian':  'Maud'  is  Mary  Magdalene  the  penitent.  In  Tom  o' 
Bedlam's Song she is  Tom's  Muse—'Merry  Mad  Maud'.

Christmas was merry in the middle ages, but May Day was still merrier. 
It  was  the  time  of beribboned  Maypoles,  of Collyridian  cakes  and  ale,  of 
wreaths  and  posies,  of  lovers'  gifts,  of  archery  contests,  of  merritotters 
(see-saws) and merribowks (great vats of milk-punch). But particularly of 
mad-merry  marriages  'under  the  greenwood  tree',  when  the  dancers  from 
the  Green went off, hand  in  hand,  into  the greenwood and  built  themselves 
little  love-bowers  and  listened  hopefully  for  the  merry  nightingale.  'Mad 
Merry'  is  another  popular  spelling  of 'Maid  Marian',  and  as  an  adjective 
became  attached  to  the  magician  Merlin  (the  original  'Old  Moore'  of the 
popular almanacks)  whose  prophetic  almanacks  were hawked  at  fairs and 
merrimakes.  Merlin  was  really  Merddin,  as  Spenser  explains  in  the 
Faerie  Queene,  but  Robin  Hood  had  taken  his  place  as  the  May  Bride's 
lover,  and  he  had  become  an  old  bearded  prophet.  The  'merritotter'  is 
perhaps  called  after  the  scales  (representing  the  Autumn  equinox)  in  the 
hand  of  the  Virgin  in  the  Zodiac,  who  figured  in  the  Mad  Merry  Merlin 
almanack:  devoted  readers  naturally 
identified  her  with  St.  Mary 
Gipsy,  for  true-lovers'  fates  tottered  in  her  balance,  see-sawing  up  and 
down.Many  of these  greenwood  marriages,  blessed  by  a  renegade  friar  styled 
Friar  Tuck,  were  afterwards  formally  confirmed  in  the  church-porch. 
But  very  often  'merrybegots'  were  repudiated  by  their  fathers.  It  is  prob 
ably  because  each  year,  by  old  custom,  the  tallest  and  toughest village  lad 
was  chosen  to  be  Little  John  (or  'Jenkin')  Robin's  deputy  in  the  Merry 
Men  masque,  that  Johnson,  Jackson  and  Jenkinson  are  now  among  the 
commonest  English  names—Little  John's  merrybegots.  But  Robin  did 
as  merrily  with  Robson,  Hobson,  Dobson  (all  short  for  Robin),  Robin 
son,  Hodson,  Hudson  and  Hood;  Greenwood  and  Merriman  were  of 
doubtful  paternity.  The  Christmas  'merrimake'  (as  Sir  James  Frazer 
mentions  in  The  Golden  Bough)  also  produced  its  crop  of children.  Who 
knows  how  many  of the  Morrises  and  Morrisons  derive  their  patronymics 
from  the  amorous  'morrice-men' 1,  Marian's  'merry-weathers'?  Or  how 
many  'Princes',  'Lords'  and  'Kings'  from  the  Christmas  King,  or Prince, 
or Lord, of Misrule?

The  Christmas  merry-night  play was  an  important  part  of the English 
Yule-tide  festivities:  seven  or  eight  versions  survive.  The  principal  in 
cidents  are  the  beheading  and  restoration  to  life  of  the  Christmas  King,

1 T h is same  word  'morris',  as  the  prefix  to  'pike',  is first written  'maris':  so  it  is  likely  that 
the  morris-men  were  Mary's  men,  not  moriscoes  or  Moorish  men,  as  is  usually  supposed. 
T he  innocent  word  'merry'  has  deceived  the  editors  of  the  Oxford  English  Dictionary. 
T h ey  trace it back to  an Indo-Germanic root murgjo meaning  'brief, arguing that when one is 
merry,  time  flies;  but  without  much  confidence,  for  they  are  obliged  to  admit  that  murgjo 
does not take this  course in  any other language.

3 983 98

or Christmas Fool. This is one of the clearest survivals of the pre-Christian 
religion, and  ultimately derives  from ancient  Crete.  Firmicus Matemus in 
his  On  the  Error  of  Profane  Religion  tells  how  Cretan  Dionysus  (Zagreus) 
was  killed  at  Zeus's  orders,  boiled  in  a  cauldron  and  eaten by  the  Titans. 
The  Cretans,  he  says,  celebrated  an  annual  funeral  feast,  in  which  they 
played  out  the  drama  of  the  boy's  sufferings—and  his  shape-shifting— 
eating  a  live  bull  as  his  surrogate.  Yet  he  did  not  die  for,  according  to 
Epimenides, quoted by St, Paul, Minos made a panegyric over him:

Thou diest not, but to eternity thou livest and standest.

St, Paul quoted a similar passage from the poet Aratus:

In  thee  we  live,  move, and  have  our  being.

At  Athens,  the  same  festival,  called  the  Lenaea,  ('Festival  of  the  Wild 
Women')  was  held  at  the  winter  solstice,  and  the  death  and  rebirth  of the 
harvest  infant  Dionysus  were  similarly  dramatized.  In  the  original  myth 
it  was  not  the  Titans  but  the  wild  women,  the  nine  representatives  of the 
Moon-goddess Hera, who tore  the  child in  pieces  and  ate  him. And at the 
Lenaea it was a yearling kid, not a bull, that was eaten; when Apollodorus 
says  that Dionysus was transformed into a kid, Eriphos,  to save him  from 
the wrath of Hera, this means that Hera once ate him as a human child, but 
that when men  (the Titans or tutors)  were admitted  to  the  feast a kid was 
substituted as victim.The most ancient surviving record  of European  religious practice is an 
Aurignacian  cave-painting  at  Cogul  in  North-Eastern  Spain  of the  Old 
Stone  Age  Lenaea.  A  young  Dionysus  with  huge  genitals  stands  un 
armed,  alone  and  exhausted  in  the  middle  of a  crescent  of nine  dancing 
women, who  face him.  He  is  naked,  except  for what appear to  be a  pair of 
close-fitting  boots  laced  at  the  knee;  they are  fully  clothed  and  wear small 
cone-shaped  hats.  These  wild  women,  differentiated  by  their  figures  and 
details  of  their  dress,  grow  progressively  older  as  one  looks  clock-wise 
around  the  crescent.  The  row  begins  with  three  young  girls,  the  first  two 
in long skirts,  on  the right and  ends with  two  thin  dark elderly women on 
the left and an emaciated crone on the far side;  the crone has a face like the 
old  moon  and  is  dancing  widdershins.  In  between  are  three  vigorous 
golden-haired  women,  one  of  them  in  a  short,  bright  party-frock.  They 
clearly  represent  the  New  Moon,  Old  Moon  and  Full  Moon  triads—the 
crone being Atropos, the senior member of the Old Moon triad.

In  front  of  the  senior  member  of  the  New  Moon  triad  is  an  animal 
whose fore-quarters are concealed by her skirt—it seems to be a black pig. 
And  in  the  foreground  of the  picture, bounding away behind  the backs  of 
the Full Moon  triad,  is the very creature  that  Oisin saw in his vision when 
being  conveyed  by  Niamh  of the  Golden  Hair  to  the  Land  of Youth:  a 
hornless  fawn.  Balanced  erect  on  the  fawn's  neck,  and  facing  backwards,

399399

is  a  boyish-looking imp  or sprite,  as  clearly as  anything  the escaping soul 
of the  doomed  Dionysus.  For  the  wild  women  are  closing  in  on  him  and 
will  presently  tear  him  in  bloody  morsels  and  devour  him.  Though  there 
is nothing in the painting to  indicate the season, we can be sure that it was 
the  winter  solstice.So we get back once more  to  the dramatic  romance of Gwion—the boy 
who  was  eaten  by  the  wild  hag  Cerridwen  and  reborn  as  the  miraculous 
child  Taliesin—and  to  the  dispute  between  Phylip  Brydydd  and  the 
'vulgar  rhymesters'  (see  Chapter  Five)  as  to  who  should  first  present  a 
song  to  their  prince  on  Christmas  Day.  The  Romance  of Taliesin  is  a  sort 
of  Christmas  play,  in  which  the  sufferings  of the  shape-shifting  child  are 
riddlingly  presented.  This  is  the  elder  version,  reflecting  the  religious 
theory  of early  European  society  where  woman  was  the  master  of man's 
destiny: pursued, was not pursued; raped, was not raped—as may be read 
in  the  faded  legends of Dryope and  Hylas,  Venus and Adonis,  Diana  and 
Endymion,  Circe  and  Ulysses.  The  danger  of  the  various  islands  of 
women  was  that  the  male  who  ventured  there  might  be  sexually assaulted 
in the same murderous  way as, according to  B.  Malinowski  in  The Sexual 
Life  of  Savages,  men  of  North-Western  Melanesia  are  punished  for  tres 
passes  against  female  privilege.  At  least  one  coven  of nine  wild  women 
seems  to  have  been  active  in  South  Wales  during  early  mediaeval  times: 
old  St.  Samson  of Dol,  travelling  with  a  young  companion,  was  unlucky 
enough  to  trespass  in  their  precinct.  A  frightful  shriek  rang  out suddenly 
and from a thicket darted a grey-haired, red-garmented hag with a bloody 
trident in her hand.  St.  Samson stood his ground; his companion fled, but 
was soon  overtaken  and  stabbed  to  death.  The hag  refused  to  come  to  an 
accommodation  with  St.  Samson  when  he  reproached  her,  and  informed 
him  that  she  was  one  of the  nine  sisters  who  lived  in  those  woods  with 
their  mother—apparently  the  Goddess  Hecate.  Perhaps  if  the  younger 
sisters  had  reached  the  scene  first,  the  young  man  would  have  been  the 
victim of a concerted sexual assault. Nine murderous black-garbed women 
occur  in  the  Icelandic  saga  of Thidrandi,  who  one  night  opened  his  door 
to  a  knock,  though  warned  against  the  consequences,  and  saw  them 
riding against him from  the north.  He resisted  their attack with his  sword 
for awhile, but fell mortally wounded.The  transformations  of Gwion  run  in  strict  seasonal  order  hare  in  the 
autumn  coursing  season,  fish  in  the  rains  of winter;  bird  in  the  spring 
when  the  migrants  return,  finally  grain  of  corn  in  the  summer  harvest 
season.  The  Fury  rushes  after  him  in  the  form  first  of greyhound  bitch, 
then  of bitch-otter,  then  of falcon,  finally  overtakes  him  in  the  shape  of a 
high-crested  black  hen—red  comb  and  black  feathers  show  her  to  be  the 
Death  Goddess.  In  this  account  the  solar  year  ends  in  the  winnowing 
season  of early autumn,  which points  to  an  Eastern  Mediterranean  origin

400

of the story. In Classical times the Cretan, Cyprian and Delphic years, and 
those of Asia Minor and Palestine, ended in September.400

of the story. In Classical times the Cretan, Cyprian and Delphic years, and 
those of Asia Minor and Palestine, ended in September.

However,  when  the  victory  of the  patriarchal  Indo-Europeans  revolu 
tionized  the  social  system  of the  Eastern  Mediterranean,  the  myth  of  the 
sexual chase was reversed.  Greek and Latin mythology contains numerous 
anecdotes  of the  pursuit  and  rape  of elusive  goddesses  or nymphs  by  gods 
in  beast  disguise:  especially  by  the  two  senior  gods,  Zeus  and  Poseidon. 
Similarly  in  European  folk-lore  there  are  scores  of variants  on  the  'Two 
Magicians'  theme,  in  which  the  male  magician,  after  a  hot  chase,  out-
magics  the  female  and  gains  her maidenhead.  In  the English  ballad  of The 
Coal Black  Smith,  a  convenient  example  of this  altered  form  of chase,  the 
correct  seasonal  order  of events  is  broken  because  the  original  context  has 
been  forgotten.  She  becomes  a  fish,  he  an  otter;  she  a  hare,  he  a  grey 
hound;  she  becomes  a  fly,  he  a  spider  and  pulls  her  to  his  lair;  finally  she 
becomes  a  quilt  on  his  bed,  he  a  coverlet  and  the  game  is  won.  In  a  still 
more  debased  French  variant,  she  falls  sick,  he  becomes  her  doctor;  she 
turns  nun,  he  becomes  her  priest  and  confesses  her  night  and  day;  she 
becomes a star, he a cloud and muffles her.In  the  British  witch-cult  the  male  sorcerer  was  dominant—though  in 
parts  of Scodand  Hecate,  or the  Queen  of Elfin  or  Faerie,  still  ruled—and 
The  Coal Black  Smith  is  likely  to  have  been  the  song  sung  at  a  dramatic 
performance  of the  chase  at  a  witches'  Sabbath;  the  association  of smiths 
and  horned  gods  is  as  ancient  as  Tubal  Cain,  the  Kenite  Goat-god.  The 
horned  Devil  of  the  Sabbath  had  sexual  connexion  with  all  his  witch 
attendants,  though  he  seems  to  have  used  an  enormous  artificial  member, 
not  his  own.  Anne  Armstrong,  the  Northumbrian  witch  already  ment 
ioned,  testified  in  1673  that,  at  a  well-attended  Sabbath  held  at  Allans-
ford,  one  of her  companions,  Ann  Baites  of Morpeth,  successively  trans 
formed  herself into  cat,  hare,  greyhound  and  bee,  to  let the Devil—'a long 
black  man,  their  protector,  whom  they  call  their  God'—admire  her 
facility  in  changes.  At first I  thought  that  he  chased Ann  Baites,  who  was 
apparently  the  Maiden,  or  female  leader  of the  coven,  around  the  ring  of 
witches,  and  that she  mimicked  the  gait and  cry  of these various  creatures 
in  turn  while  he  pursued  her,  adapting  his  changes  to  hers.  The  formula 
in  The  Coal Black  Smith  is  'he  became  a  greyhound  dog',  or  'he  became 
an  otter  brown',  'and  fetched  her  home  again'.  'Home  again'  is  used  here 
in the technical sense of'to her own shape', for Isobel Gowdie of Auldearne 
at  her  trial  in  1662,  quoted  the  witch  formula  for  turning  oneself into  a 
hare:

I shall go into a hare 
With sorrow and sighing and mickle care, 
And I shall go in the Devil's name 
Aye, till I come home again.I shall go into a hare 
With sorrow and sighing and mickle care, 
And I shall go in the Devil's name 
Aye, till I come home again.

It  is  clear  from  her  subsequent  account  that  there  was  no  change  of out 
ward  shape,  but  only  of  behaviour,  and  the  verse  suggests  a  dramatic 
dance.  I  see  now  that  Ann  Baites  gave  a  solo  performance,  alternately 
mimicking  the  pursued  and  the  pursuer,  and  that  the  Devil  was  content 
merely to applaud her. Probably the sequence was seasonal—hare and grey 
hound,  trout  and  otter,  bee  and  swallow,  mouse  and  cat—and  inherited 
from the earlier form of chase, with the pursuer as the Cat-Demeter  finally 
destroying  the  Sminthean  mouse  on  the  threshing-floor  in  the  winnowing 
season.  The whole song is easy to restore in its original version.1An  intermediate  form  of the  'Two  Magicians'  myth,  quoted  by  Dio 
dorus  Siculus,  Callimachus  in  his  Hymn  to  Artemis  and  Antoninus 
Liberalis,  the second-century A . D.  mythographer, in his  Transformations, 
who  all  refer  it  to  different  regions,  is  that  the  Goddess  Artemis,  alias 
Aphaea,  Dictynna,  Britomart  or Atergatis,  is  unsuccessfully  pursued  and 
finally  escapes  in  fish  form.  Callimachus  makes  Minos  of Crete  the  erotic 
pursuer  and  Britomart  the  chaste  pursued,  and  relates  that  the  pursuit 
lasted  for  nine  months  from  the  early  flood  season  to  the  winnowing 
season.  The  myth  is  intended  to  explain  the  fish-tail  in  the  statues  of the 
goddess  at  Ascalon,  Phigalia,  Crabos,  Aegina,  Cephallenia,  Mount 
Dictynnaeum  in  Crete  and  elsewhere,  and  to  justify  her  local  devotees  in 
remaining  faithful  to  their  pre-Hellenic  rites  and  marital  customs.  Fisher 
men  figure  prominendy  in  the  story—Dictynna  means  a  net—and  fisher 
men  are  notoriously  conservative  in  their  beliefs.  In  the  Philistine  version 
from  Ascalon,  quoted  by  Athenaeus,  the  Goddess  was  Derketo  and  the 
pursuer  was  one  Moxus  or  Mopsus:  perhaps  this  should  be  Moschus  the 
ancestor  of King  Midas's  tribe  who  defeated  the  Hittites.  Cognate  with

Cunning and art he did not lack

Yet I shall go into a bee

But aye her whisde would fetch him back.

With  mickle  horror  and  dread  of  thee,

0,1  shall  go  into  a  hare

With  sorrow  and sighing  and mickle  care, 
And  I  shall  go  in  the  Devil's  name

Aye,  till  I  he fetched home.

—Hare,  take  heed  of  a  hitch  greyhound 
Will  harry  thee  all  these  fells  around, 
For here  come I in  Our  Lady's name 
All  hut  for  to  fetch  thee  home.

Cunning and art, e tc

Yet I shall go into a trout

With  sorrow  and sighing  and mickle  doubt, 
And show  thee  many  a  merry gameCunning and art, e tc

Yet I shall go into a trout

With  sorrow  and sighing  and mickle  doubt, 
And show  thee  many  a  merry game

Ere  that  I  be fetched hame.

—Trout,  take  heed ofan  otter  lank 
Will  harry  thee  close  from  bank  to  bank, 
For here  come I in  Our  Lady's  name 
All  butfor  to  fetch  thee  home.

Cunning and art, e tc

And  flit  to  hive  in  the  Devil's name

Ere  that  I  befetched home.

—Bee,  take  heed  of  a  swallow  hen 
Will  harry  thee  close,  both  butt  and  ben, 
For  here  cornel in  Our  Lady's  name 
All  butfor  to  fetch  thee  hame.

Cunning and art, e tc

Yet I shall go into a mouse

And  haste  me  unto  the  miller's  house,

There in his corn to have good game 
Ere  that  I  be  fetched  home.

—Mouse,  take  heed  of  a  white  tib-cat 
That  never  was  baulked  of  mouse  or  rat, 
For I'll crack  thy  bones  in  Our  Lady's  name: 
Thus shalt thou be fetched home.

Cunning and art, e tc

this  myth  is  the  fruitless  attempt  by  Apollo  on  the  maidenhead  of  the 
nymph  Daphne.Cunning and art, e tc

this  myth  is  the  fruitless  attempt  by  Apollo  on  the  maidenhead  of  the 
nymph  Daphne.

The  love-chase  is,  unexpectedly,  the  basis  of  the  Coventry  legend  of 
Lady  Godiva.  The  clue  is  provided  by  a  miserere-seat  in  Coventry 
Cathedral,  paralleled  elsewhere 
in  Early  English  grotesque  wood-
carving  which  shows  what  the  guide-books  call  'a  figure  emblematic  of 
lechery': a long-haired woman wrapped in a net, riding sideways on a goat 
and  preceded  by  a  hare.  Gaster  in  his  stories  from  the  Jewish  Targum, 
collected all over Europe, tells of a woman who when given a love-test by 
her  royal  lover,  namely  to  come  to  him  'neither  clothed  nor  unclothed, 
neither on foot nor on horseback, neither on water nor on dry land, neither 
with  or without a  gift'  arrived  dressed  in  a  net,  mounted  on  a  goat,  with 
one  foot  trailing  in  the  ditch,  and  releasing  a  hare.  The  same  story  with 
slight  variations,  was  told  by  Saxo  Grammaticus  in  his  late  twelfth-
century  History  of  Denmark.  Aslog,  the  last  of  the  Volsungs,  Brynhild's 
daughter by  Sigurd, was  living on  a  farm  at  Spangerejd  in  Norway,  dis 
guised  as  a sooty-faced  kitchen-maid  called  Krake  (raven).  Even  so,  her 
beauty  made  such  an  impression  on  the  followers  of  the  hero  Ragnar 
Lodbrog  that he  thought  of marrying  her,  and  as  a  test  of her worthiness 
told  her  to  come  to  him  neither  on  foot  nor  riding,  neither  dressed  nor 
naked, neither fasting nor feasting, neither attended nor alone. She arrived 
on  goatback,  one foot trailing on  the ground,  clothed  only in her hair and 
a  fishing-net,  holding an onion to her lips, a hound by her side.If the  two  stories  are  combined  into  a  picture,  the  'figure  emblematic 
of lechery'  has  a  black  face,  long  hair,  a  raven  flying  overhead,  a  hare 
running ahead, a hound  at her side, a fruit to her lips, a net over her and a 
goat  under  her.  She  will  now  be  easily  recognized  as  the  May-eve  aspect 
of the  Love-and-Death  goddess  Freya,  alias  Frigg,  Holda,  Held,  Hilde, 
Goda,  or  Ostara.  In  neolithic  or early  Bronze Age times she went  North 
from  the  Mediterranean,  where  she  was  known  as  Dictynna  (from  her 
net),  Aegea  (from  her  goat),  Coronis  (from  her  raven),  also  Rhea, 
Britomart, Artemis and so on, and brought the Maze Dance with her.

The  fruit at her lips is probably  the apple of immortality and  the  raven 
denotes  death  and  prophecy—Freya's  prophetic  raven  was  borrowed 
from  her  by  Odin,  just  as  Bran  borrowed  Danu's  and  Apollo  Athene's. 
The Goddess was established in Britain as  Rhiannon, Arianrhod,  Cerrid 
wen,  Blodeuwedd,  Danu  or  Anna  long  before  the  Saxons,  Angles  and 
Danes brought very  similar versions of her with  them.  Hilde was  at home 
in  the  Milky  Way,  like  Rhea  in  Crete  and  Blodeuwedd  (Olwen)  in 
Britain,  both  of  whom  were  connected  with  goats;  and  in  the  Brocken 
May-eve ceremony a  goat was  sacrificed  in  her honour.  As  Holda she was 
mounted  on  a  goat  with  a  pack  of  twenty-four  hounds,  her  daughters, 
running  beside  her—the  twenty-four  hours  of May  Eve—and  was  some-

403403

times  shown  as  piebald  to  represent  her  ambivalent  character  of  black 
Earth-mother  and  corpse-like  Death—Holda  and  Hel.  As  Ostara,  the 
Saxon  Goddess  after  whom  Easter  is  named,  she  attended  a  May-eve 
Sabbath  where  a  goat  was  sacrificed  to  her.  The  hare  was  her  ritual 
animal:  it still  'lays'  Easter eggs.  The  goat spelt fertility of cattle;  the hare, 
good  hunting; the net, good  fishing;  the long hair,  tall crops.

The  May-eve  goat,  as  is  clear  from  the  English  witch  ceremonies  and 
from  the  Swedish  May-play,  'Biikkerwise',  was  mated  to  the  goddess, 
sacrificed and resurrected:  that is to say,  the Priestess had  public  connexion 
with  the  annual  king  dressed  in  goatskins,  and  either  he  was  then  killed 
and resurrected in the form of his successor, or else a goat was sacrificed in 
his  stead  and  his  reign  prolonged.  This  fertility  rite  was  the  basis  of the 
highly  intellectualized  'Lesser  Mysteries'  of Eleusis,  performed  in  Febru 
ary,  representing the  marriage  of Goat-Dionysus  to  the  Goddess  Thyone, 
'the  raving  queen',  his  death  and  resurrection.1  At  Coventry,  she  evi-
dendy  went  to  the  ceremony  riding  on  his  back,  to  denote  her  domination 
of him—as Europa rode on the Minos bull, or Hera on her lion.The  hare,  as  has  been  pointed  out  in  Chapter  Sixteen,  was  sacred  both 
in  Pelasgian  .Greece  and  Britain  because  it  is  swift,  prolific  and  mates 
openly  without  embarrassment.  I  should  have  mentioned  in  this  context 
that  the  early  British  tabu  on  hunting  the hare,  the  penalty  for a  breach  of 
which  was  to  be  struck  with  cowardice,  was  originally  lifted  on  a  single 
day  in  the  year—May-eve—as  the  tabu  on  hunting  the  wren  was  lifted 
only  on  St.  Stephen's  Day.  (Boadicea  let  loose  the  hare  during  her  battle 
with  the  Romans  in  the  hope,  presumably,  that  the  Romans  would  strike 
at it  with their swords  and so lose courage.)

The  hare  was  ritually  hunted  on  May-eve,  and  the  miserere-seat 
'figure  of lechery'—which  is  a  fair  enough  description  of the  Goddess  on 
this  occasion—is  releasing  the  hare  for  her  daughters  to  hunt.  The  folk 
song  If all  those young  men  evidently  belongs  to  these  May-eve  witch 
frolics:

If all those young men were like hares on the mountain 
Then all those pretty maidens would get guns, go a-hunting.

'Get  guns'  is  eighteenth-century;  one  should  read  'turn  hounds'.  There 
are other verses:'Get  guns'  is  eighteenth-century;  one  should  read  'turn  hounds'.  There 
are other verses:

1 In  the  corresponding  ancient  British  mysteries  there  seems  to  have  been  a  formula  in 
which  the  Goddess  teasingly  promised  the  initiate  w ho  performed  a  sacred  marriage  with  her 
that  he  would  not  die  'either  on  foot  or on  horseback,  on  water or on  land,  on  the  ground  or 
in  the  air,  outside  a  house  or  inside,  shod  or  unshod,  clothed  or  unclothed,'  and  then,  as  a 
demonstration  of  her  power,  manoeuvred  him  into  a  position  where  the  promise  was  no 
longer  valid—as  in  the  legend  of L l ew  L l aw  and  Blodeuwedd,  where  a  goat  figures  in  the 
murder  scene.  Part  of  the  formula  survives  in  the  Masonic  initiation  ritual.  T he  apprentice 
'neither  naked  nor  clothed,  barefoot  nor  shod,  deprived  of all  metals,  hood  winked,  with  a 
cable-tow about his neck is led  to  the  door of the  lodge in  a  halting  moving  posture.'

404

Ifall those young men were like fish in the water 
Then all those pretty maidens would soon follow after.

With  nets?  As  we  know  from  the  story  of  Prince  Elphin  and  Litde 
Gwion,  May-eve  was  the  proper  day  for  netting a weir, and the Goddess 
would not bring her net to the Sabbath for nothing.

If all those young men were like rushes a-growing 
Then all those pretty maidens would get scythes go a-mowing.

The  love-chase  again:  the  soul  of  the  sacred  king,  ringed  about  by 
orgiastic women, tries  to escape in  the likeness of hare,  or fish, or bee; but 
they pursue him relendessly and in the end he is caught, torn in pieces and 
devoured.  In  one variant  of the  folk-song,  the man  is  the pursuer,  not the 
pursued:

Young women they run like hares on the mountain 
If I were but a young man I'd soon go a-hunting.Young women they run like hares on the mountain 
If I were but a young man I'd soon go a-hunting.

The  story  of Lady  Godiva,  as  recorded  by  Roger  of Wendover,  a  St 
Albans  chronicler,  in  the  thirteenth  century,  is  that  shortly  before  the 
Norman  Conquest  the  Saxon Lady Godiva (Godgifu)  asked her husband 
Leofric  Earl  of Mercia  to  relieve  the  people  of Coventry  from  oppressive 
tolls.  He consented on condition  that she rode naked through the crowded 
market on a fair-day; and she did so with a knight on either side,  but pre 
served  her  modesty  by  covering  herself  with  her  hair,  so  that  only  her 
Very white legs'  showed  underneath.  The  story,  which  is  also  told  of the 
Countess  of Hereford  and  'King John'  in  connexion with  the  distribution 
of bread  and  cheese at  St.  Briavel's in  Gloucestershire,  cannot be histori 
cally true,  because  Coventry in  Lady  Godiva's  day was  a village  without 
either tolls  or fairs.  But it is  certain  that in  1040 she  persuaded Leofric  to 
build  and  endow  a  Benedictine  monastery  at  Coventry,  and  what  seems 
to  have  happened  is  that  after  the  Conquest  the  monks  disguised  a  local 
May-eve  procession  of  the  Goddess  Goda,  during  which  all  pious 
Christians were at first required to keep indoors, with  an edifying anecdote 
about  their  benefactress  Lady  Godiva,  modelling  the  story  on  Saxo's. 
The  fraud  is  given  away  by  the  'Lady  Godiva'  procession  of  Southam 
(twelve  miles  south  of  Coventry  and  included  in  Leofric's  earldom), 
where  two figures were carried,  one white and one black—the  Goddess  as 
Holda  and  Hel,  Love  and  Death.  The  story  of Peeping  Tom  the  Tailor 
is  not  mentioned  by  Roger  of  Wendover,  but  may  be  a  genuine  early 
tradition.  The St.  Briavel's  ceremony which  took  place,  like  the  Southam 
and  Coventry  processions,  on  Corpus  Christi,  a  date  associated  both  at 
York  and  Coventry  with  mystery  plays,  is  said  to  have  commemorated 
the  freeing  of the  people  from  a  tax  on  the  gathering  of  fire-wood  in  the405

neighbouring  forest;  Corpus  Christi  always  falls  on  a  Friday,  the  God 
dess's  own  day,  and  corresponds  roughly  with  May  Eve;  thus,  it  seems 
that  the  mystery-play  has  its  origin  in  the  May  Eve  festivities,  Biikker-
wise,  in honour of Goda,  the Bona Dea.  If there was a  prohibition  against 
men  witnessing  the  procession,  as  there  was  at  Rome  in  the  Bona  Dea 
ceremonies,  and  as  there  was  in  Celtic  Germany  according  to  Tacitus 
(Germania,  chap.  46)  against  any  man  witnessing  Hertha's  annual  bath 
after her progress back to her sacred  grove, and as there was in Greece in 
the  days  of Actaeon,  when  Diana  took  her  woodland  bath,  Peeping  Tom 
may  record the memory of this.

The  British  are  a  mixed  race,  but  the  non-Teutonic  goddess-worship 
ping  strains  are  the  strongest.  This  explains  why  the  poets'  poetry 
written  in  English  remains  obstinately  pagan.  The  Biblical  conception  of 
the  necessary supremacy  of man  over woman is  alien  to  the  British  mind: 
among  all  Britons  of sensibility  the  rule  is  'ladies first' on  all  social  occa 
sions.  The  chivalrous  man  dies  far  more  readily  in  the  service  of a  queen 
than  of a  king:  self-destruction  is  indeed  the  recognized  proof  of grand 
passion:

And for bonnie Annie Laurie 
I wad lay me doon and dee.And for bonnie Annie Laurie 
I wad lay me doon and dee.

There is  an unconscious hankering in  Britain after goddesses,  if not  for a 
goddess  so  dominant  as  the  aboriginal  Triple  Goddess,  at  least  for  a 
female  softening  of  the  all-maleness  of  the  Christian  Trinity.  The  male 
Trinity  corresponds  increasingly  less  with  the  British  social  system,  in 
which woman, now that she has become a property owner and a voter, has 
nearly  regained  the  position  of  respect  which  she  enjoyed  before  the 
Puritan  revolution.  True,  the  male  Trinity  antedated  the  Puritan  revolu 
tion  but it was  a theological  not an emotional  concept:  as has  been shown, 
the  Queen  of Heaven  with  her  retinue  of female  saints  had  a  far  greater 
hold  in  the popular imagination between  the  Crusades  and  the  Civil  War 
than  either  the  Father  or  the  Son.  And  one  of the  results  of Henry  VIII's 
breach  with  Rome  was  that  when  his  daughter  Queen  Elizabeth  became 
head  of  the  Anglican  Church  she  was  popularly  regarded  as  a  sort  of 
deity:  poets  not  only  made  her  their  Muse  but  gave  her  titles—Phoebe, 
Virginia,  Gloriana—which identified her with  the  Moon-goddess,  and  the 
extraordinary  hold  that  she  gained  on  the  affections  of her  subjects  was 
largely due to  this cult.

The  temporary  reinstatement  of the  Thunder-god  in  effective  religious 
sovereignty  during  the  Commonwealth  is  the  most  remarkable  event  in 
modern  British  history:  the  cause  was  a  mental  ferment  induced  by  the 
King  James  Bible  among  the  mercantile  classes  of the  great  towns  and  in 
parts of Scodand  and  England where  Celtic blood ran  thinnest.  The  first 
406Civil  War  was  fought  largely  between  the  chivalrous  nobility  with  their 
retainers  and  the  anti-chivalrous  mercantile  classes  with  their  artisan 
supporters.  The  Anglo-Saxon-Danish  south-east  was  solidly  Parliamen 
tarian  and  the  Celtic  north-west  as  solidly  Royalist.  It  was  therefore 
appropriate  that at the Battle  of Naseby, which decided  the war,  the rival 
battle cries were, for the Parliamentary army, 'God our Strength' and for 
the  Royalist  army  'Queen  Marie'.  Queen  Marie  was  a  Catholic  and  her 
name  evoked  the  Queen  of Heaven  and  of Love.  The  Thunder-god  won 
the  day,  and  vented  his  spite  not  only  on  the  Virgin  and  her  retinue  of 
saints,  but  on  Maid  Marian  and  her  maypole  retinue,  and  on  the  other 
Triple  Goddess  cult  which  still  survived  secredy  in  many  parts  of  the 
British  Isles—the  witch  cult.  But  his  triumph  was  short-lived  because 
after  gaining  the  victory  he  had  removed  the  King, 1  his  chief representa 
tive.  He was  therefore temporarily ousted  at the  Restoration and when he 
returned in 1688 with a Protestant King as his representative, his thunder 
ous  fury  had  been  curbed.  He  gained  a  second  access  of strength  in  the 
enthusiastic  religious  revival,  fostered  by  the  merchant  class,  which 
accompanied  the  Industrial  Revolution;  but  lost  ground  again  at  the 
beginning  of the  present  century.

Elizabeth  was  the  last  Queen  to  play  the  Muse.  Victoria,  like  Queen 
Anne,  preferred  the  part  of  War-goddess  in  inspiring  her  armies,  and 
proved  an  effective  substitute  for  the  Thunder-god.  In  the  reign  of  her 
grandson the  88th  Carnatics  of the  Indian Army were still singing:

Cooch parwani 
Good time coming.1 
Queen Victoria 
Very good man! 
Rise up early 
In the morning. 
Britons never, never 
Shall  be  slave....Cooch parwani 
Good time coming.1 
Queen Victoria 
Very good man! 
Rise up early 
In the morning. 
Britons never, never 
Shall  be  slave....

But  Victoria  expected  the women  of England  to  reverence  their  husbands 
as  she  had  reverenced  hers  and  displayed  none  of the  sexual  coquetry  or 
interest  in  love-poetry  and  scholarship  that  serve  to  make  a  queen  into  a 
Muse  for  poets.  Queen  Anne  and  Queen  Victoria  both  gave  their  names 
to  well-known  periods  of English  poetry,  but  the  name  of  Queen  Anne 
connotes  passionless  decorum  in  writing,  and  that  of Victoria  didacticism 
and rococo ornament.

1  It  is  a  strange  paradox  that  Milton,  though  he  had  been  the  first  Parliamentary  author  to 
defend  the  execution  of  Charles  I  and  was  the  Thunder-god's  own  Laureate,  fell  later  under 
me  spell  of'the  Northern  Muse',  Christina  of  Sweden,  and  in  his  Second  Defense  of  the  English 
People  his  flattery  of her  is  not  only  as  extravagant  as  anything  that  the  Elizabethans  wrote 
about Elizabeth, but seems wholly sincere.

407

The  British  love  of  Queens  does  not  seem  to  be  based  merely  on  the 
common-place  that  'Britain  is  never  so  prosperous  as  when  a  Queen  is 
on  the  Throne':  it  reflects,  rather,  a  stubborn  conviction  that  this  is  a 
Mother Country not a Father Land—a peculiarity that the Classical Greeks 
also  noted  about  Crete—and  that  the  King's  prime  function  is  to  be  the 
Queen's consort. Such national apprehensions or convictions or obsessions 
are  the  ultimate  source  of  all  religion,  myth  and  poetry,  and  cannot  be 
eradicated either by conquest or education.

408

Chapter  Twenty-Three

F A B U L O US  B E A S TS

Indian  mystics  hold  that  to  think  with  perfect  clarity  in  a  religious408

Chapter  Twenty-Three

F A B U L O US  B E A S TS

Indian  mystics  hold  that  to  think  with  perfect  clarity  in  a  religious

sense  one  must  first  eliminate  all  physical  desire,  even  the  desire  to 
continue  living;  but  this  is  not  at  all  the  case  with  poetic  thinking, 
since  poetry  is  rooted  in  love,  and  love  in  desire,  and  desire  in  hope  of 
continued  existence.  However,  to  think  with  perfect  clarity  in  a  poetic 
sense  one must first rid  oneself of a great deal  of intellectual encumbrance, 
including  all  dogmatic  doctrinal  prepossessions:  membership  of  any 
political  party or religious sect or literary school  deforms  the  poetic sense 
—as  it  were,  introduces  something  irrelevant  and  destructive  into  the 
magic  circle,  drawn  with  a  rowan,  hazel  or  willow  rod,  within  which  the 
poet  insulates  himself  for  the  poetic  act.  He  must  achieve  social  and 
spiritual  independence  at  whatever  cost,  learn  to  think  mythically  as 
well  as  rationally,  and  never  be  surprised  at  the  weirdly  azoological 
beasts  which  walk  into  the  circle;  they  come  to  be  questioned,  not  to 
alarm.If  the  visitant  is  a  Chimaera  ('She-goat')  for  example,  the  poet  will 
recognize  her  by  the  lion-head,  goat-body  and  serpent-tail  as  a  Carian 
Calendar-beast—another  form  of the  winged  goat,  on  which,  according 
to  Clement  of Alexandria,  Zeus  flew  up  to  Heaven.  The  Chimaera was  a 
daughter  of Typhon,  the  destructive storm  god,  and  of Echidne,  a winter 
Snake-goddess;  the  Hittites  borrowed  her  from  the  Carians  and  carved 
her  likeness  on  a  temple  at  Carchemish  on  the  Euphrates.  Cerberus,  a 
bitch miscalled a dog, is also likely to appear in the circle: a cognate beast, 
with  the  usual  triad  of  heads—lioness,  lynx  and  sow.  The  lynx  is  an 
autumn  beast,  apparendy  mentioned  by  Gwion  in  his  Can  Y  Meirch, 
though  he  may  be  referring  to  the Palug Cat, the Anglesey Cat-Demeten 
'I have been a spotted-headed cat on a forked tree.'

The unicorn may puzzle the  poet.  But the unicorn of Pliny's description 
—which  is  embodied  in  the  heraldic  unicorn  of the  British  Royal  Arms, 
except that the horn is a straight white spiral—makes good calendar sense: 
it  stands  for  the  five-season  solar  year  of the  Boibel-Loth  alphabet.  The 
horn  is  centred  in  the  Dog-days,  and  is  the  symbol  of power:  T  will  exalt 
your  horn.'  It  stands  for  the  E  season,  then  beginning;  as  the  head  of the 
409deer  stands  for  the  I  season,  in  which  deer  were  hunted;  the  body  of the 
horse  for  the  A  season,  at  the  beginning  of which  the  October  Horse  was 
sacrificed  at  Rome;  the  feet  of the  elephant  for  the  O  season,  in  which  the 
earth  puts  out  her  greatest  strength;  the  tail  (Ura)  of the  lion  for  the  U 
season.  The  beast  of  the  horn  was  originally,  it  seems,  the  rhinoceros, 
which  is  the  most  formidable  beast  in  the  world—'and  who  would  cross 
Tom  Rhinoceros  does  what  the  Panther  dares  not'—but  owing  to  the 
difficulty  of obtaining  rhinoceros  horn  the  long  curved  black  horns  of the 
oryx  were  in  Pliny's  time  fraudulently  supplied  by  traders  as  'unicorn's 
horn'.  Pliny,  who  had  the  usual  Roman  dislike  and  mistrust  of fabulous 
beasts  and  mentioned  the  unicorn  as  a  genuine  zoological  specimen,  must 
have seen  such  a horn.  In  Britain,  however,  the narwhal  horn  became  the 
accepted  type,  because  of its  white  colour  and  superior  hardness  and  be 
cause  it  is  curved  in  the  spiral  of immortality,  and  because  the  variously 
named  God  of the  Year always  came  out  of the  sea—as  Gwion  puts  it  in 
his  Angar  Cyvyndawd:  'From  the  Deep  he came in  the  flesh.'  The narwhal 
is  called  the  'sea-unicorn'  in consequence.  However,  a  few  British  mytho 
graphers,  such  as  the  early  seventeenth-century  Thomas  Boreman, 
accepted  Pliny's view, recording: 'His horn is as hard as iron and as rough 
as  any file, twisted  and  curled  like  a  flaming  sword;  very  straight,  sharp 
and  everywhere  black,  excepting  the  point.'  An  interesting  variety  of the 
unicorn  is  the  wild-ass  unicorn,  which  Herodotus  accepted  as  genuinely 
zoological;  the  wild  ass  is  the  beast  of Set,  whose  fifth  part  of  the  year 
centres  at midsummer and  whose horn  is  thus  exalted.  But it must not be 
forgotten  that the fifth-century B . C. historian,  Ctesias, the first Greek to 
write about the unicorn, describes its horn, in his Indica, as being coloured 
white,  red  and  black.  These  are  the  colours  of the  Triple  Moon-goddess, 
as  has  been  shown  in  the  mulberry-and-calf  riddle  quoted  from  Suidas 
near  the  close  of  Chapter  Four,  to  whom  the  God  of  the  Year  was 
subject.The  unicorn  probably  had  a  spatial  as  well  as  a  temporal  meaning, 
though space has always been divided  by four quarters  of the horizon,  not 
by  five  fifths.  The  square  cross,  whether  plain  or  converted  into  a 
swastika  or  cross-crosslet,  has  from  time  immemorial  represented  the 
fullest  extent  of  sovereignty;  it  was  a  prime  symbol  in  Minoan  Crete, 
either  alone or enclosed  in  a circle,  and  was  reserved  for the  Goddess  and 
her  royal  son,  the  King.  In  parts  of India where  Kali  is  worshipped,  with 
rites  closely resembling those of the Cretan and Pelasgian Great Goddess, 
as  the  most  potent  of  a  Pentad  of  deities,  namely  Siva,  Kali,  Vishnu, 
Surya  and  the  elephant-god  Ganesa—roughly  corresponding  with  the 
Egyptian pentad, namely Osiris, Horus, Isis, Set and Nephthys—five has a 
definite  spatial  sense.  In  the  coronation  ritual  of  an  Indian  king,  the 
officiating  priest  as  he  invests  the  king  with  a  sacred  mande  called  'the

4 10

Womb'  in  a  ceremony  of rebirth,  gives  him  five  dice  and  says:  'Thou  art 
the  master;  may  these  five  regions  of thine  fall  to  thy  lot.'  The  five  regions 
are the four quarters  of the earth, and  the zenith.

Thus  the  unicorn's  single  exalted  horn  represents  'the  upper  pole' 
which  reaches  from  the  king  directly  up  to  the  zenith,  to  the  hottest  point 
attained  by  the  sun.  The  unicorn's  horn  in  Egyptian  architecture  is  the 
obelisk;  which  has  a  square  base  tapering  to  a  pyramidical  point:  it  ex 
presses  dominion  over  the  four  quarters  of the  world  and  the  zenith.  In 
squatter form it is the pyramid, and  the dominion  originally expressed  was 
not  that  of the  Sun-god,  who  never  shines  from  the  north,  but  that  of the 
Triple  Goddess  whose  white  marble  triangle  encloses  her  royal  son's 
tomb  from every side.Kali,  like  her  counterpart  Minerva,  has  five  as  her  sacred  numeral. 
Thus her mystic,  the poet  Ram  Prasad,  addresses her as she dances madly 
on Siva's prostrate body:

My  heart  is  five  lotuses.  You  building  these  five  into  one,  dance  and

swell  in  my  mind.

He  is  referring  to  the cults  of the five deities, all  of which are  really cults  of 
Kali. It will  be recalled  that both  Dionysus and  the sacred white cow, Io  of 
Argos,  who ultimately  became  the goddess  Isis,  are  recorded  to  have paid 
visits to India.

In  the  Dionysian  Mysteries  the  hirco-cervus,  goat-stag,  was  the  symbol 
of resurrection,  of man's  hope  of immortality,  and  it  seems  that  when  the 
Hyperborean  Druids  visited  Thessaly  they  recognized  the  goat  stag, 
associated  with  apples,  as  their  own  immortal  white  hart  or  hind,  which 
also was  associated  with apples.  For the apple  tree,  ut dicitur,  is  the shelter 
of the white  hind.  It  is  from  the  goat-stag  that  the  unicorn  of heraldry  and 
of mediaeval  art derives  its  occasional  beard;  but  among  Christian mystics 
the  Greek  goat-unicorn  of  Daniel's  vision  has  contributed  bellicosity  to 
this  once  pacific beast.In Britain  and  France,  the white hart or hind was  not ousted by the uni 
corn;  it  persisted  in  popular  tradition  and  figured  in  the  mediaeval 
romances  as  an  emblem  of  mystery.  King  Richard  II  adopted  'a  white 
hart  lodged'  as  his  personal  badge;  which  is  how  the  beast  found  its  way 
to  the  sign-boards  of British  inns.  It  sometimes  wore  a  cross  between  its 
anders  as  it  had  appeared  to  St.  Hubert,  patron  of  huntsmen,  who  had 
been  chasing  it  through  the  dense  forest  for weeks  without  rest  and  to  St. 
Julian  the  Hospitaler.  Thus  the  Unicorn  of the  desert and  the White Hart 
of  the  forest  have  the  same  mystical  sense;  but  during  the  Hermetic 
vogue  of  the  early  seventeenth  century  were  distinguished  as  meaning 
respectively  the  spirit  and  the  soul.  The  Hermetics  were  neo-Platonists 
who  patched  their  philosophic  cloaks  with  shreds  of half-forgotten  bardic

4U

lore.  In  the  Book  of  Lambspring,  a  rare  Hermetic  tract,  an  engraving 
shows a deer and a unicorn standing together in a forest.  The  text is:

The  Sages  say  truly  that  two animals are in this forest:  one glorious, 
beautiful  and  swift,  a  great  and  strong  deer;  the  other  an  unicorn.  ..  . 
If we  apply  the  parable  of our  art,  we  shall  call  the  forest  the  b o d y . . .. 
The  Unicorn  will  be  the  spirit  at  all  times.  The  deer  desires  no  other 
name  but  that  of the  soul.  . ..  He  that  knows  how  to  tame  and  master 
them by art,  to  couple  them  together,  and to lead  them in and  out of the 
forest, may justly be called a Master.

An anonymous  beast  may  appear  to  the  poet  with  deer's  head  crowned 
with  gold,  horse's  body  and  serpent's  tail.  He  will  be  out  of a Gaelic poem 
published  by  Carmichael  in  Carmina  Gadelica,  a  dialogue  between  Bride 
and her unnamed son.

B R I D E: Black the  town yonder,B R I D E: Black the  town yonder,

Black those that are in it; 
I am the White Swan,

Queen of them all.

SON: / will voyage in God's name

In likeness ofdeer, in likeness of horse, 
In likeness ofserpent, in likeness of king.

More powerful will it be with me than with all others.

The  son  is  evidently  a  god  of  the  waning  year,  as  the  sequence  of deer, 
horse and  serpent shows.

Or  a  phoenix  may  fly  into  the  circle.  The  phoenix,  though  literally 
believed  in  by  the  Romans—I  suppose  because  its visits  to  On-Heliopolis 
were  said  to  be  so  brief and  far  between  that  nobody  could  disprove  its 
existence—was  also  a calendar  beast.  For  the Egyptians had  no  leap-yean 
every  year  the  fragment  of a  day  which  was  left  over  at  New  Year  was 
saved up, until finally after  1460 years, called a Sothic Year, the fragments 
amounted  to  a whole  year;  and  the  fixed  festivals  which  had  become  more 
and more displaced as the centuries went by (with the same sort of attend 
ant  inconveniences  as  New  Zealanders  experience  from  their  midsummer 
Christmas)  fetched  up again where they had  originally stood;  and  a whole 
year  could  be  intercalated  in  the  annals.  This  was  the  occasion  of much 
rejoicing,  and  at  On-Heliopolis,  the  chief Sun  Temple  of Egypt,  an  eagle 
with  painted  wings  was,  it  seems,  burned  alive  with  spices  in  a  nest  of 
palm branches to celebrate the event.

This  eagle  represented  the  Sun-god,  and  the  palm  was  sacred  to  the 
Great  Goddess  his  mother;  the  Sun  had  completed  his  great  revolution 
and  the old  Sun-eagle was  therefore  returned  to  the  nest for the inaugura 
tion  of a  new  Phoenix  Age.  The  legend  was  that  from  the  ashes  of  the

4 124 12

Phoenix  a  little  worm  was  born  which  presently  turned  into  a  real 
Phoenix.  This  worm  was  the  six  hours  and  the  few  odd  minutes  which 
were left over at the end of the Phoenix Year: in four years they would add 
up  to  a  whole  day,  a  Phoenix  chick.  From  Herodotus's  muddled  account 
of the  Phoenix  it  seems  that  there  was  always  a  sacred  eagle  kept  at  On-
Heliopolis,  and  that  when  it  died  it  was  embalmed  in  a  round  egg  of 
myrrh,  which  would  preserve  it  indefinitely;  then  another  eagle  was  con 
secrated.  Presumably  these eggs  of myrrh  were  included  in  the final holo 
caust.  That the Phoenix came flying from Arabia need mean no more than 
that,  for  the  Egyptians,  the  sun  rose  from  the  Sinai  desert.  It  is  ironical 
that  the  early  Christians  continued  to  believe  in  a  literal  Phoenix,  which 
they  made  a  type  of the  resurrected  Christ,  long  after  the  Phoenix  had 
been  killed.  The Emperor Augustus  unwittingly killed  it in  30 B.C.  when 
he stabilized the Egyptian calendar.1Or  a  pack  of tall,  white  Gabriel  Hounds  with  red  ears  and  pink  noses 
may  come  streaming  into  view  in  pursuit  of an  unbaptised  soul.  Despite 
their  spectral  appearance  and  their  sinister  reputation  in  British  myth, 
these  animals  are  decently  zoological.  They  are  the  ancient  Egyptian 
hunting  dogs,  pictured  in  tomb  paintings,  which  though  extinct  in  Egypt 
are still  bred  in  the Island  of Ibiza,  where  they were originally brought by 
Carthaginian  colonists.  The  breed  may  also  have  been  introduced  into 
Britain  towards  the  close  of the  second  millennium  B.C.  along  with  the 
blue  Egyptian  beads  found  in  Salisbury  Plain  burials.  They  are  larger 
and  faster  than  greyhounds  and  hunt  by  smell  as  well  as  by  sight;  when 
in  view  of game  they  make  the  same  yelping  noise  that  migrating  wild 
geese—especially  the  barnacle-goose—make  when  they  fly  far  over 
head  at  night  a  sound  taken  in  the  North  and  West  of England  as  an 
omen of approaching death. Anubis, the embalmer-god who conveyed the 
soul  of  Osiris  to  the  Underworld,  was  originally  a  prowling  jackal  but 
came  to  be  pictured  as  a  noble-hearted  hunting  dog,  only  his  bushy  tail 
remaining as evidence of his jackal days.Or  the  visitant  may  be  a  Cherub.  The  Cherub  mentioned  in  the  first 
chapter  of E^ekiel is  also  clearly  a  beast  of the  calendar  sort.  It  has  four 
parts  which  represent  the  'four  New  Years'  of Jewish  tradition:  Lion  for 
Spring; Eagle for Summer; Man for Autumn, the principal New Year; and 
Ox  for  Winter,  the  Judaean  ploughing  season.  This  Cherub  is  identified 
by  Ezekiel  with  a  fiery  wheel,  which  is  as  plainly  the  wheel  of the  solar 
year  as  the  God  whom  it  serves  is  plainly  the  Sun  of Righteousness,  an 
emanation  of  the  Ancient  of  Days.  Moreover,  each  Cherub—there  are 
four  of them—is  a  wheel  of this  God's  chariot  and  rolls straight  forward,

1  K i ng Ptolemy Euergetes ('the well-doer') had sentenced the Phoenix to death in 264 B . C .; 
but  the  priests disregarded  this  order to  reform  the  calendar,  so  Augustus has the notoriety of 
being its murderer.

4 13

lore.  In  the  Book  of  Lambspring,  a  rare  Hermetic  tract,  an  engraving 
shows  a deer and  a unicorn standing together in a forest.  The text is:

The  Sages  say  truly  that  two animals are in this  forest:  one glorious, 
beautiful  and  swift,  a  great  and  strong  deer;  the  other  an  unicorn.  . .. 
If we  apply  the  parable  of our  art,  we  shall  call  the  forest  the  b o d y . . .. 
The  Unicorn  will  be  the  spirit  at  all  times.  The  deer  desires  no  other 
name but  that of the  soul.  .  .  .  He  that  knows  how  to  tame  and  master 
them  by art, to  couple them  together,  and  to  lead  them in and  out  of the 
forest, may jusdy be called a Master.

An  anonymous  beast  may  appear  to  the  poet with  deer's  head  crowned 
with  gold,  horse's  body  and  serpent's  tail.  He  will  be  out  of a Gaelic poem 
published  by  Carmichael  in  Carmina  Gadelica,  a  dialogue  between  Bride 
and  her unnamed son.

BRIDE: Black the townyonder,BRIDE: Black the townyonder,

Black those that are in it; 
I am the White Swan,

Queen of them all.

SON: I will voyage in God's name

In likeness ofdeer, in likeness of horse, 
In likeness ofserpent, in likeness of king.

More powerful will it be with me than with all others.

The  son  is  evidently  a  god  of  the  waning  year,  as  the  sequence  of deer, 
horse and serpent shows.

Or  a  phoenix  may  fly  into  the  circle.  The  phoenix,  though  literally 
believed  in  by  the  Romans—I  suppose  because its visits  to  On-Heliopolis 
were  said  to  be  so  brief and  far  between  that  nobody  could  disprove  its 
existence—was  also  a  calendar  beast.  For  the Egyptians  had  no  leap-yean 
every  year  the  fragment  of a  day  which  was  left  over  at  New  Year  was 
saved up, until finally after  1460 years, called a Sothic Year, the fragments 
amounted  to  a whole year;  and  the  fixed  festivals  which had  become  more 
and  more  displaced  as  the  centuries  went  by  (with  the  same  sort  of  attend 
ant  inconveniences  as  New  Zealanders  experience  from  their  midsummer 
Christmas)  fetched up again  where they had  originally stood; and a whole 
year  could  be  intercalated  in  the  annals.  This  was  the  occasion  of much 
rejoicing,  and  at  On-Heliopolis,  the  chief Sun  Temple  of Egypt,  an  eagle 
with  painted  wings  was,  it  seems,  burned  alive  with  spices  in  a  nest  of 
palm branches to celebrate the event.

This  eagle  represented  the  Sun-god,  and  the  palm  was  sacred  to  the 
Great  Goddess  his  mother;  the  Sun  had  completed  his  great  revolution 
and  the  old  Sun-eagle was  therefore  returned  to  the nest for the  inaugura 
tion  of a  new  Phoenix  Age.  The  legend  was  that  from  the  ashes  of  the

4 124 12

Phoenix  a  little  worm  was  born  which  presently  turned  into  a  real 
Phoenix.  This  worm  was  the  six  hours  and  die  few  odd  minutes  which 
were left over at the end of the Phoenix Year:  in four years  they would add 
up  to  a  whole day,  a  Phoenix  chick.  From  Herodotus's  muddled  account 
of the  Phoenix  it  seems  that  there  was  always  a  sacred  eagle  kept  at  On-
Heliopolis,  and  that  when  it  died  it  was  embalmed  in  a  round  egg  of 
myrrh,  which  would  preserve  it  indefinitely;  then  another  eagle  was  con 
secrated.  Presumably these eggs  of myrrh  were  included  in  the final holo 
caust.  That the Phoenix came flying from Arabia need mean no more than 
that,  for  the  Egyptians,  the  sun  rose  from  the  Sinai  desert.  It  is  ironical 
that  the  early  Christians  continued  to  believe  in  a  literal  Phoenix,  which 
they  made  a  type  of the  resurrected  Christ,  long  after  the  Phoenix  had 
been  killed.  The Emperor Augustus  unwittingly killed  it in  30 B.C.  when 
he stabilized the Egyptian calendar.1Or  a  pack  of tall,  white  Gabriel  Hounds  with  red  ears  and  pink  noses 
may  come  streaming  into  view  in  pursuit  of an  unbaptised  soul.  Despite 
their  spectral  appearance  and  their  sinister  reputation  in  British  myth, 
these  animals  are  decently  zoological.  They  are  the  ancient  Egyptian 
hunting  dogs,  pictured  in  tomb  paintings,  which  though  extinct  in  Egypt 
are  still  bred  in  the Island  of Ibiza,  where  they were originally brought by 
Carthaginian  colonists.  The  breed  may  also  have  been  introduced  into 
Britain  towards  the  close  of  the  second  millennium  B.C.  along  with  the 
blue  Egyptian  beads  found  in  Salisbury  Plain  burials.  They  are  larger 
and  faster  than  greyhounds  and  hunt  by  smell  as  well  as  by  sight;  when 
in  view  of game  they  make  the  same  yelping  noise  that  migrating  wild 
geese—especially  the  barnacle-goose—make  when  they  fly  far  over 
head  at  night:  a  sound  taken  in  the  North  and  West  of England  as  an 
omen of approaching death. Anubis, the embalmer-god who conveyed the 
soul  of  Osiris  to  the  Underworld,  was  originally  a  prowling  jackal  but 
came  to  be  pictured  as  a  noble-hearted  hunting  dog,  only  his  bushy  tail 
remaining as evidence of his jackal days.Or  the  visitant  may  be  a  Cherub.  The  Cherub  mentioned  in  the  first 
chapter  of E\ekkl is  also  clearly  a  beast  of the  calendar  sort.  It  has  four 
parts  which  represent  the  'four  New  Years'  of Jewish  tradition:  Lion  for 
Spring; Eagle for Summer; Man for Autumn, the principal New Year; and 
Ox  for  Winter,  the  Judaean  ploughing  season.  This  Cherub  is  identified 
by  Ezekiel  with  a  fiery  wheel,  which  is  as  plainly  the  wheel  of the  solar 
year  as  the  God  whom  it  serves  is  plainly  the  Sun  of Righteousness,  an 
emanation  of  the  Ancient  of  Days.  Moreover,  each  Cherub—there  are 
four  of them—is  a  wheel  of this  God's  chariot  and  rolls  straight  forward,

1  K i ng Ptolemy Euergetes ('the well-doer')  had  sentenced  the  Phoenix to  death  in 264 B . C .; 
but  the  priests  disregarded  this  order to  reform  the calendar,  so  Augustus has  the  notoriety of 
being its murderer.

4 134 13

without  deflexion.  Ezekiel's  summary:  'And  their  appearance  and  their 
work  was  as  it  were  a  wheel  in  the  middle  of a  wheel'  has  become  pro 
verbial  for  its  unintelligibility.  But  it  makes  simple  calendar  sense.  Each 
wheel  of God's  chariot  is  the  annual  cycle,  or  wheel,  of the  four  seasons; 
and  the  chariot's  arrival  inaugurated  a  cycle,  or  wheel,  of  four  years. 
Every  year,  in  fact,  wheels  within  a  four-year  wheel  from  the  beginning 
to  die  end  of  time:  and  the  Eternal  Charioteer  is  the  God  of Israel.  By 
making  the  Cherub-wheels  themselves  provide  the  motive  power  of  the 
chariot,  Ezekiel  avoided having  to  put an angelic horse between  the shafts: 
he remembered  that horse-drawn votive chariots set up by King Manasseh 
in  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem  had  been  removed  as  idolatrous  by  Good 
King Josiah. But Ezekiel's Eagle should really be a Ram or a Goat, and his 
Man  a  man-faced  fiery  Serpent;  with  eagle's  wings  for  each  of the  four 
beasts. His reasons for this misrepresentation will appear in my last chapter. 
The  colour  of  these  bright  cloud-borne  Cherubim  was  Apollonian 
amber,  like  that  of the  Man  whom  they  served.  They  might  well  be  min 
isters of Hyperborean Apollo the Sun-god, whose sacred jewel was amber. 
What  is  more,  each  golden  spoke  of the  wheel  ended  in  the  leg  of a  calf; 
and  the  golden  calf was  the  sacred  beast  of  the  god  who,  according  to 
King  Jeroboam,  had  brought  Israel  out  of Egypt,  as  it  also  was  of  the 
God  Dionysus,  the changing part of the unchanging Apollo.This  apparent  identification  of  Jehovah  with  Apollo  seems  to  have 
alarmed  the  Pharisees,  though  they  did  not  dare  reject  the  vision.  It  is 
recorded that a student who recognized the meaning of hashmal (amber— 
'hashmaT  is  modern  Hebrew  for  electricity;  'electricity'  is  derived  from 
the  Greek  word  for  amber)  and  discussed  it  imprudently  was  blasted  by 
lightning (Haggada, i J . B ). For this reason, according to the Mishnah, the 
Mdaseh  Merkabah  ('Work  of  the  Chariot')  might  not  be  taught  to  any 
one  unless  he  were  not  only  wise  but  able  to  deduce  knowledge  through 
wisdom  ('gnosis')  of his  own,  and  no  one  else  might be  present during  the 
teaching.  And  'he  who  speaks  of  the  things  which  are  before,  behind, 
above  and  below,  it  were  better  that  he  had  never  been  born'.  On  the 
whole  it was considered  safest to leave the Merkabah alone, especially as it 
was  prophesied  that  'in  the  fullness  of  time  Ezekiel  will  come  again  and 
unlock  for  Israel  the  chambers  of the  Merkabah.'  (Cant.  Rabbah, 1,4.)

Thus  only  a  few  known  Rabbis  taught  the  mystery  and  only  to  the 
most  select  of  their  pupils;  among  them  Rabbi  Johanan  ben  Zadkai, 
Rabbi  Joshua  (Vice-President  of the  Sanhedrin  under  Gamaliel),  Rabbi 
Akiba and  Rabbi Nehunia.  Rabbi  Zera said that even chapter headings  of 
the  Merkabah  must  not  be  communicated  except  to  a  person  who  was  the 
head  of an  academy and  was  cautious  in  temperament.  Rabbi Ammi  said 
the  doctrine  might  be  entrusted  only  to  one  who  possessed  all  the  five 
qualities  enumerated  in  Isaiah,  III,  3:  the  captain  of  fifty,  the  honourable

4 144 14

man,  the  counsellor,  the  skilled  craftsman,  the  eloquent  orator.  The  belief 
grew  that  expositions  of  the  Merkabah  mystery  would  cause  Jehovah  to 
appear. 'Rabbi Johanan ben Zadkai was riding along the road upon his ass, 
while his  pupil  Eleazar ben Arak walked  behind  him.  Said  Rabbi Eleazar: 
"Master,  teach  me  about  the  Work  of  the  Chariot."  Rabbi  Johanan 
declined.  Rabbi  Eleazar  said  again:  "Am  I  permitted  to  repeat  in  your 
presence  one  thing  which  you  have  already  taught  me?"  Rabbi  Johanan 
assented,  but  dismounted  from  his  ass,  wrapped  himself in  his  gown  and 
seated  himself upon  a  stone  under  an  olive-tree.  He  declared  that  it  was 
unseemly  that  he  should  be  riding  while  his  pupil  was  discoursing  on  so 
awful  a  mystery,  and  while  the  Shekinah  ('the  Brightness')  and  the 
Malache  ha-Shareth  ('the  Angels-in-Waiting')  were  accompanying  them. 
Immediately  Rabbi  Eleazar  began  his  exposition,  fire  came  down  from 
Heaven  and  encircled  them  and  the  whole  field.  The  angels  assembled  to 
listen,  as  the sons  of man  assemble  to  witness  the  festivities  of a  marriage; 
and  there  was  a  singing  in  the  terebinth-trees:  "Praise  the  Lord  from  the 
earth,  ye  dragons  and  all  deeps,  fruitful  trees  and  all  cedars,  praise  ye  the 
Lord!"  To  which  an  angel  answered  from  the  fire,  saying:  "This  is  the 
Work  of the  Chariot!"  When Eleazar had  finished,  Rabbi  Johanan  stood 
up and kissed him on the head. He said: "Praised be the God of Abraham, 
Isaac  and  Jacob,  for  He  has  given  our  father  Abraham  a  wise  son  who 
knows how to discourse on the glory of our Father in Heaven." 'Rabbi  Jose  ha-Kohen  and  Rabbi  Joshua  had  similar experiences.  And 
once  Rabbi  Ben  Azzai  was  sitting  in  meditation  on  the  Scriptures  when 
suddenly a flame encircled  him.  His  pupils  ran  to  Rabbi Akiba, who came 
up  and  said  to  Azzai:  'Art thou  studying the mysteries  of the Merkabah}'

The  mystery  was  not  monopolized  by  the  Jews.  According  to  Macro-
bius,  the  oracle  of  Colophon,  one  of  the  twelve  Ionian  cities  of  Asia 
Minor,  gave  the  nature  of  the  transcendent  God  Iao  as  fourfold.  In  the 
Winter  he  was  Hades,  or  Cronos;  in  the  Spring,  Zeus;  in  the  Summer, 
Helios  (the  Sun);  in  the  Autumn  Iao,  or  Dionysus.  This  lore  must  have 
been  part  of the  instruction,  mentioned  in  Chapter  Fifteen,  that  was  given 
to  Cyprian  of  Antioch  on  Mount  Olympus  by  his  seven  mystagogues. 
Iao  in  the  Orphic religion was  also  known  as  the  four-eyed  Phanes  (from 
phaino,  T  appear')  first-born  of the  Gods.  In  the  Orphic  fragment  63,  he 
is  described  as  having golden wings, and  the heads  of ram,  bull,  snake and 
lion.  Bull's  heads  were  fastened  to  his  side  to  denote  his  principal  nature 
and  he wore a great snake as a head-dress, which  'resembled  every sort of 
wild  beast'.

Here  we  can  make  a  bold  identification  of the  Cherub  with  the  turning 
wheel  that  guards  the  Paradises  of Celtic  legend:  for  according  to  Genesis, 
III,  24,  Cherubs  were  stationed  at  the  East  Gate  of  Eden.  They  were 
armed  with  'the  whirling  sword  of  Jehovah'—the  one  with  which  (accord-

4 154 15

ing  to  Isaiah,  XXVII, 
i)  he  killed  the  Dragon,  as  Marduk  had  killed 
Tiamat—to  prevent  anyone  from  entering.  The  paradise  of  Ezekiel's 
tradition  (Chapter  XXXVIII,  13-16)  is  a  well-watered  garden  at  the  base 
of  a  hill  which  heroes,  such  as  the  King  of  Tyre,  occasionally  visit.  It 
glitters with precious stones and is a place of drum and pipe. We have seen 
that  Gwion  placed  it  in  the  valley  of Hebron.  The  Seraphs,  or  'fiery  ser 
pents',  associated  with  the  Cherubs  in  their  guardian duties,  are evidently 
another  way  of expressing  the  sacred  spirals  carved  as  a  warning  on  the 
gate of the sacred enclosure; the Cherubs, because distinguished from them, 
are likely to have been swastikas, or  fire-wheels.The  King  of  Tyre  in  Ezekiel's  account  is  easily  recognized  as  the 
Canopic  Hercules,  originally  an  Aegean  sun-hero,  who  became  Semitized 
as  Melkarth  the  chief god  of  Tyre.  The  islet  off Tyre  is  thought  to  have 
been  the  chief  station  used  by  the  Peoples  of  the  Sea  during  the  second 
millennium B . C. in their trade with Syria; as Pharos was in their trade with 
Egypt  Ezekiel,  cognisant  of the  original  closeness  of the  cults  of Jehovah 
and  Melkarth,  declares  that  no  further religious  understanding is  possible 
between  Jerusalem and  Tyre,  as  in  the time of Solomon and  Hiram.  King 
Hiram  of  Tyre,  like  Solomon  whom  he  equalled  and  even  surpassed  in 
wisdom,  was  a  priest  of Melkarth,  and  Jehovah  now  admits  through  the 
mouth  of Ezekiel:  'Thou  sealest  up  the  sum,  full  of wisdom  and  perfect  in 
beauty.'  However,  he  charges  the  present  King  of Tyre  with  having  com 
mitted  the  sin  of claiming  to  be  a  god,  Melkarth  as  an  Immortal,  and  the 
punishment  for  his  presumption  is  death.  This  is  an  indirect  warning  to 
Ezekiel's  own  King,  Zedekiah  of Judah,  a  descendant  of Solomon,  not  to 
be  seduced  by  the  Tyrian  into  similarly  presuming  to  be  Jehovah. 
(Zedekiah  did  not  listen  to  the  warning  and  'the  profane,  wicked  Prince' 
died  blind  and  in  chains  at  Riblah,  the  capital  of his  Cushite  foes.  He  was 
the  last  King  of Judah.)  So  Ezekiel  utters  a  lament  for  Melkarth  that,  like 
Adam,  he  has  been  ousted  from  the  Paradise  by  the  Cherub,  despite  his 
original holiness and wisdom, and must now be burned to ashes.  This was, 
of course,  no  more  than  Melkarth's  destiny:  in  the  Greek  account he  went 
to  the  apple-grove  of the  West—the  Garden  of the  Hesperides—but  had 
to  obey  the  herald  Copreus  and  return  from  its  delights;  and  ended  in 
ashes on Mount  Oeta.The  poetic  connexion  of  the  Cherub  with  the  burning  to  death  of 
Hercules-Melkarth is that the pyre was kindled by a Cherub, that is to say, 
by a whirling  round  of the  swastika-shaped  fire-wheel,  attached  to  a  drill. 
This  method  of making fire by  the  drilling  of an  oak-plank  survived  until 
the  eighteenth  century  in  the  Scottish  highlands,  but  only  in  the  kindling 
of  the  Beltane  need-fire,  to  which  miraculous  virtue  was  ascribed. 
Hawthorn,  the  wood  of  chastity,  was  often  used  for  the  drilling.  Sir 
James  Frazer  describes  the  need-fire  ceremony  at  length  in  The  Golden

4 16

Bough  and  shows  that  it  originally  culminated  in  the  sacrifice  of a  man 
representing  the  Oak-god.  In  some  Scottish  parishes  the  victim  was even 
called 'Baal', which was Melkarth's usual title.

So we see that Ezekiel is a master of ambivalent statement.  He has made 
the  fate  of Hercules  a  symbol  of the  approaching  destruction  of Tyre  by 
King  Nebuchadnezzar  of  Babylon;  in  punishment  for  the  vice  of  pride 
which  since  the  city  rose  to  commercial  prosperity  ('the  multitude  of thy 
merchandize, the iniquity of thy traffic') has corrupted its rulers.

Not all  composite beasts  are calendar beasts.  The  Sphinx,  for instance, 
with  her woman's  face,  lion's  body and eagle's wings is  Ura or Urania the 
goddess,  with  dominion  over  air  and  earth,  who  delegates  sovereignty  to 
her royal son,  the King;  and  the Assyrian winged  bull  with his man's  face 
is  the  Sphinx's  patriarchal  counterpart.  It  is  likely  that  an  iconotropic 
misinterpretation  of  the  Assyrian  winged  bull  accounts  for  the  curious 
details of King Nebuchadnezzar's madness in the Book of Daniel:'Father, what is that?' 
'It  is  an  old  statue,  my  son,  representing  King  Nebuchadnezzar  who 
carried  our  ancestors  away  captive,  more  than  three  hundred  years  ago, 
because  they had  angered  the Lord  God.  Afterwards,  they say, he lost his 
reason  for forty-nine months and wandered  about like a brute beast in his 
beautiful palace gardens.'

'Did he really look like that?' 
'No,  my  son.  That  is  a  symbolical  statue,  meaning  that  he  partook  of

the nature of the creatures which compose its body and limbs.'

'Then  did he eat  grass  like a bull  and flap his  arms  like wings,  and  dig 
things  up  with  his  nails,  and  stay out  in  the  rain  all  night  and  never have 
his hair cut?'

'God  has  even  stranger ways  of showing  his  displeasure,  my  son.' 
The  Egyptian  Sphinx  became  masculine like the Assyrian winged bull; 
the  Pharaonic  cult  being  patriarchal,  though  also  matrilinear.  But  the 
Pelasgian  Sphinx  remained  female.  'Sphinx'  means  'throttler'  and  in 
Etruscan  ceramic  an  she  is  usually  portrayed  as  seizing men,  or standing 
on  their  prostrate figures, because she  was  fully revealed  only at the close 
of  the  king's  reign  when  she  choked  his  breath.  After  her  super 
session  as  Ruler of the Year by  Zeus  or Apollo,  this  art-convention  led  to 
her being associated in  Greece with disease and death and being described 
as  a  daughter  of  Typhon,  whose  breath  was  the  unhealthy  sirocco. 
Apollo's  claim  to  be  ruler  of the  year  was  supported  by  the  sphinxes  on 
his  throne  at  Amyclae,  and  so  was  Zeus's  by  those  on  his  throne  at 
Olympia—read  as  a  trophy  of his  conquest of Typhon.  But  Athene  still 
wore  them on her helmet,  for she had  once been  the Sphinx herself.

A  flock  of bird-winged  Sirens  may  alight  in  the  circle.  Having  already

4 17A  flock  of bird-winged  Sirens  may  alight  in  the  circle.  Having  already

4 17

ventured,  in  Chapter  Twelve,  to  guess  'what  name  Achilles  assumed 
when  he  hid  himself among  the  women,  though  a  puzzling  question  not 
beyond  all  conjecture',  I  feel  a  poetic  compulsion  to  answer  the  other 
question  that  Sir  Thomas  Browne  linked  with  it:  'What  song  the  Sirens 
sang.'  The  Sirens  ('Entanglers')  were  a  Triad—perhaps  originally  an 
Ennead,  since  Pausanias  records  that  they  once  unsuccessfully  competed 
with  the Nine  Muses—living on an  island  in  the Ionian  Sea.  According  to 
Plato they were the daughters of Phorcus (i.e. Phorcis, the Sow-Demeter); 
according  to  others,  of  Calliope  or  some  other  of the  Muses.  Ovid  and 
Hyginus connect them with the Sicilian myth of Demeter and Persephone. 
Their  names  are  variously  given  as  'Persuader',  'Bright-face'  and  'Be-
witcher';  or  'Virgin-face,  'Shrill-voice'  and  'The  Whitened  One'.  Their 
wings were  perhaps  owl-wings,  since  Hesychius  mentions  a  variety  of owl 
called  'the Siren',  and  since owls, according to  Homer,  lived  in  Calypso's 
alder-girt  isle  of Ogygia  along  with  the  oracular  sea-crows.  In  classical 
times  they still had a temple dedicated to them near SurrentumsAll  this amounts  to  their having been  a  college  of nine  orgiastic moon-
priestesses,  attendants  of an  oracular  island  shrine.  Their  song,  of nine 
stanzas,  may  be  reconstructed  without  recourse  to  Samuel  Daniel's 
vigorous  Ulysses  and the  Siren,  on  the  model  of similar  songs  in  ancient 
Irish  literature:  for  instance  'The  Sea  God's  Address  to  Bran'  in  The 
Voyage  of  Bran,  Son  of  Febal,  and  'Mider's  Call  to  Befind'  in  The  Wooing 
of Etain.  Both  poems  are  slightly  Christianized  versions  of  an  ancient 
theme, the voyage of the alder-and-crow hero Bran (Cronos)  to his island 
Elysium.  In  the  first  poem  the  speaker  must  originally  have  been  the 
Island  Queen,  not  the  Sea  God;  in  the  second  Befind  and  Mider  have 
clearly changed  parts,  the original invitation  being from  princess  to  hero, 
not  contrariwise.  The  Homeric  story  of  the  Danaan  Odysseus  and  the 
Sirens suggests that Odysseus  ('angry' according to Homer) was a tide of 
Cronos  and  referred  to his  face  artificially  coloured  crimson  with  the  dye 
of the sacred  alder.  The  origin of the story  that Odysseus stopped  his ears 
with  wax  and  refused  the  Sirens'  summons  is  probably  that  in  the  late 
thirteenth  century B . C.  a sacred  king of Ithaca,  Cronos's  representative, 
refused  to  die  at  the  end  of his  term  of office.  This  would  explain  why  he 
killed  all  the  suitors  for his  wife  Penelope's  hand,  after  disguising  himself 
in dirt and rags during the usual temporary abdication.

T HE  S I R E N S'  W E L C O ME  TO  C R O N OS

Cronos Odysseus, steer your boat 
Toward Silver Island whence we sing; 
Here you shallpass your days.

Through a thick-growing alder-wood 
4 18

We clearly see, but are not seen, 
Hid in a golden haze.

Our hair the hue of barley sheaf, 
Our eyes the hue of blackbird's egg, 
Our cheeks like asphodel.Through a thick-growing alder-wood 
4 18

We clearly see, but are not seen, 
Hid in a golden haze.

Our hair the hue of barley sheaf, 
Our eyes the hue of blackbird's egg, 
Our cheeks like asphodel.

Here the wild apple blossoms yet, 
Wrens in the silver branches play 
Andprophesy you well.

Here nothing ill or harsh is found. 
Cronos Odysseus, steer your boat 
Across these placid straits.

With each of us in turn to lie 
Taking your pleasure on young grass 
That for your coming waits.

No grief nor gloom, sickness nor death, 
Disturbs our long tranquillity; 
No treachery, no greed.

Compared with this, what are the plains 
OfElis, where you ruled as king? 
A wilderness indeed.

A starry crown awaits your head, 
A hero feast is spread for you: 
Swineflesh, milk and mead.

The Sirens are the Birds of Rhiannon who sang at  Harlech in  the myth

of  Bran.

But  if the  visitant  to  the  magic  circle  is  the  old  Nightmare  .  .  .  What

follows is a poem, of which I will give the prose rendering:

If the  visitant  is  the  Nightmare,  the  poet  will  recognize  her  by  the  fol 
lowing  signs.  She will  appear  as  a  small  mettlesome  mare,  not  more  than 
thirteen hands high,  of the  breed  familiar  from  the  Elgin  marbles:  cream-
coloured,  clean-limbed,  with  a  long  head,  bluish  eye,  flowing  mane  and 
tail.  Her  nine-fold  will  be  nine  fillies  closely  resembling  her,  except  that 
their hooves  are  of ordinary shape,  whereas  hers  are  divided  into  five  toes 
like  those  of Julius  Caesar's  charger.  Around  her  neck  hangs  a  shining 
poitrel  of the sort known  to archaeologists  as lunula,  or little moon:  a  thin 
disc  of Wicklow  gold  cut  in  crescent  shape  with  the  horns  expanded  and 
turned  on edge,  fastened  together behind  her arching neck  with a  braid  of 
scarlet and white linen. As  Gwion says  of her in a passage from his  Song of

4 194 19

the  Horses1  which  had  been  included  by  mistake  in  the  Cad Goddeu  (lines 
206-209), and which is intended  for the mouth of the White  Goddess her 
self:

Handsome is the yellow horse, 
But a hundred limes better 
Is my cream-coloured one 
Swift as a sea-mew...

Her  speed  when  she  sets  her  ears  back  is  indeed  wonderful;  no  tall 
thoroughbred  on  earth  can  long  keep  her  pace—proof  of  which  is  the 
pitiable  condition  in  which  hag-ridden  horses  used  to  be  found  at  cock 
crow in the stables from which they had been stolen for a midnight frolic— 
in  a  muck-sweat,  panting  like  bellows,  with  bleeding  sides  and  foam  on 
their lips,  nearly foundered.

Let  the  poet  address  her  as  Rhiannon,  'Great  Queen',  and  avoid  the 
discourtesy  of  Odin  and  St.  Swithold,  greeting  her  with  as  much  affec 
tionate  respect  as,  say,  Kemp  Owyne  showed  the  Laidley  Worm  in  the 
ballad. She will respond with a sweet complaisance and take him the round 
of her nests.One  question I  should  myself like to  ask her  is  a  personal  one:  whether 
she  ever  offered  herself as  a  human  sacrifice  to  herself.  I  think  her  only 
answer  would  be  a  smiling  shake  of her  head,  meaning  'not  really';  for 
instances  of the  ritual  murder  of women  are  rare  in  European  myth  and 
most  of them  apparendy refer  to  the  desecration  of the  Goddess's  shrines 
by the Achaean  invaders.  That  there were bloody  massacres  and  rapes  of 
priestesses is shown in the Tirynthian Hercules's batdes with the Amazons, 
with  Hera  herself  (he  wounded  her  in  the  breast),  and  with  the  nine-
headed  Hydra,  a  beast  portrayed  on  Greek  vases  as  a  giant  squid  with 
heads  at  the  end  of  each  tentacle.  As  often  as  he  cut  off  the  Hydra's 
heads they grew again, until he used fire to sear  the stumps: in other words, 
Achaean  attacks  on  the  shrines,  each  of nine  armed  orgiastic  priestesses, 
were ineffective until  the  sacred  groves were  burned  down.  Hydrias means 
a  water-priestess  with  a  hydria,  or  ritual  water-pot;  and  the  squid  was  a 
fish  which  appears  in  works  of art  dedicated  to  the  Goddess  not  only  in 
Minoan Crete but in Breton sculptures of the Bronze Age.

Tales  of princesses  sacrificed  for  religious  reasons,  like  Iphigeneia  or 
Jephthah's daughter,  refer to  the subsequent patriarchal era;  and  the fate 
supposedly  intended  for  Andromeda,  Hesione,  and  all  other  princesses1  T h is  song  belongs  to  the  account  of  the  horse-race  at  the  close  of  the  Story  of Taliesin, 
when  Taliesin  helps  Elphin's  jockey to beat the twenty-four race horses of K i ng Maelgwn on 
the  plain  of Rhiannon,  by  charring  twenty-four holly-twigs  with  which  to  strike  the  haunch 
of  each  horse  as  he  overtook  it,  until  he  had  passed  them  all.  T he  horses  represent  the  last 
twenty-four  hours  of the  Old  Y e a r,  ruled  over  by  the  H o l ly  King,  which  (with  the  help  of 
destructive  magic)  the  Divine  Child  puts  behind  him  one  by  one.  It  will  be  recalled  that  the 
main  action  of the  Story of Taliesin  takes  place  at  the  winter  solstice.

420

rescued  by heroes in  the nick of time, is probably due to iconotropic error. 
The  princess  is  not  the  intended  victim  of the  sea-serpent  or  wild  beast; 
she  is  chained  naked  to  the  sea-cliff by  Bel,  Marduk,  Perseus  or  Hercules 
after  he  has  overcome  the  monster  which  is  her  emanation.  Yet  the  taboo 
on  the  death  of a  priestess  may have  been  lifted,  in  theory,  on  certain  rare 
occasions;  for example,  at the  close of every saeculum,  of 100 or  i io years, 
which  was  when  the  Carmenta  priestess  ended  her  life,  according  to 
Dionysius Periergetes, and the calendar was revised.The German folk-stories of Sleeping Beauty and Snow  White seem to 
refer to  this  type  of death.  In  the first story twelve wise women  are invited 
to  the  princess's  birthday;  eleven  shower  her  with  blessings,  a  thirteenth, 
called  Held,  who  had  not  been  invited  because  there  were  only  twelve 
gold plates  at the palace, curses her with death from a spindle-prick in her 
fifteenth  year.  The  twelfth,  however,  converts  this  death  into  a  century-
long  trance;  from  which  the  hero  rescues  her  with  a  kiss  after  bursting 
through  a  terrible  hedge  of  thorn,  in  which  others  have  perished,  the 
thorns  turning  into  roses  as  he  goes.  Held  is  the  Nordic  counterpart  of 
Hera;  from whose name the word hero is  derived,  just as held means  'hero' 
in  German.  The  thirteenth  month  is  the  death-month,  ruled  over  by  the 
Three  Fates,  or  Spinners,  so  it  must have  been  a  yew spindle.  Fifteen,  as 
has  been shown,  is a number of completeness:  three  times  five.In  the  Snow  White  story  a  jealous  stepmother,  the  elder  aspect  of  the 
Goddess,  tries  to murder the young  princess.  First she is taken off into  the 
woods  to  be  killed,  but  the  huntsman  brings  back  the  lung  and  liver  of a 
young  wild  boar  instead;  and  so,  according  to  one  account,  a  doe  was 
substituted  for  Iphigeneia  at  Aulis.  Then  the  stepmother,  who  darkens 
her face  to show that she  is the Death-goddess,  uses a constrictive girdle, a 
poisoned comb and, finally, a  poisoned apple;  and  Snow White is  laid as if 
dead  in  a  glass  coffin  on  top  of a  wooded  hill;  but  presently  is  rescued  by 
the  prince.  The  seven  dwarfs,  her  attendants,  workers  in  precious  metals 
who  save  her  from  the  first  attempts  on  her  life  and  recall  the  Telchins, 
stand perhaps  for the seven sacred trees of the grove,  or the seven heavenly 
bodies.  The  glass  coffin  is  the  familiar  glass-castle  where  heroes  go  to  be 
entertained  by  the  Goddess  of Life-in-Death,  and  the  comb,  glass,  girdle 
and  apple  which  figure  in  the  story  are  her  well-known  properties;  the 
owl,  raven  and  dove,  who  mourn  for  her,  are  her  sacred  birds.  These 
deaths  are  therefore  mock-deaths  only—for  the  Goddess  is  plainly  im 
mortal—and  are  staged,  perhaps  during  the  period  of intercalated  days 
or hours at the end  of the sacred saeculum,  with  the sacrifice of a young pig 
or  doe;  but  then  the  annual  drama  is  resumed,  with  the  amorous  prince 
chafing,  as usual,  at  the ascetic restrictions  of theHawthorn,  but free  to do 
as  he  pleases  in  the  Oak-month,  the  month  of  the  hedge-rose,  when  his 
bride consents to  open her half-closed eyes and smile.

4 21

Chapter  Twenty-Four

T HE  S I N G LE  P O E T IC  T H E ME

Poetry—meaning  the  aggregate  of instances  from  which  the  idea  of4 21

Chapter  Twenty-Four

T HE  S I N G LE  P O E T IC  T H E ME

Poetry—meaning  the  aggregate  of instances  from  which  the  idea  of

poetry  is  deduced  by  every  new  poet—has  been  increasingly 
enlarged for many centuries.  The instances are as numerous, varied 
and contradictory as instances of love; but just as 'love' is a word of power 
ful  enough  magic  to  make  the  true  lover  forget  all  its  baser  and  falser 
usages, so is 'poetry' for the true poet.

Originally,  the  poet  was  the  leader  of  a  totem-society  of  religious 
dancers.  His  verses—versus  is  a  Latin  word  corresponding  to  the  Greek 
strophe and means 'a turning'—were danced around an altar or in a sacred 
enclosure  and  each  verse  started  a  new  turn  or  movement  in  the  dance. 
The word  'ballad' has the same origin:  it is a  dance poem, from the  Latin 
baUare,  to dance.  All  the totem-societies in  ancient Europe were under the 
dominion  of  the  Great  Goddess,  the  Lady  of  the  Wild  Things;  dances 
were  seasonal  and  fitted  into  an  annual  pattern  from  which  gradually 
emerges  the  single grand  theme  of poetry:  the life,  death  and  resurrection 
of the Spirit of the Year, the Goddess's son and lover.

At  this  point  it  will  be  asked:  "Then  is  Christianity  a  suitable  religion

for the poet? And if not, is there any alternative?'At  this  point  it  will  be  asked:  "Then  is  Christianity  a  suitable  religion

for the poet? And if not, is there any alternative?'

Europe has been officially  Christian for the past sixteen hundred  years, 
and  though  the  three  main  branches  of the  Catholic  Church  are  disunited 
all claim to derive their divine mandate from Jesus as God. This seems, on 
the  face  of it,  most  unfair  to  Jesus  who  made  clear  disavowals  of deity: 
'Why  callest  thou  me  good?  None  is  good  except  the  Father',  and  'My 
God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?'  They  have  also  renounced 
obedience to the Mosaic Law, as refined by Hillel and his fellow-Pharisees, 
which  Jesus  considered  essential  for  salvation  and,  while  retaining  the 
Pharisaic  ethical  code,  have  incorporated  into  Christianity  all  the  old 
pagan  festivals  commemorative  of the  Theme  and  worship  Jesus  as  the 
'Incarnate  Word  of God'  in  the  pre-Christian  Gnostic  sense,  and  as  the 
Sun of Righteousness—the crucified Man-god of prehistoric paganism.

Yet  though  Jesus  denied  the  Theme  by  his  unswerving  loyalty  to  the 
only  contemporary  God  who  had  cast  off all  association  with  goddesses, 
and  by declaring war  on  the  Female  and  all  her works,  the  Christian  cult 
4 22can  in  great  part  be  historically  justified.  Jesus  came  of royal  stock,  was 
secredy crowned  King  of Israel  with  the  antique  formula,  preserved  in  the 
Second  Psalm,  that made him a titular Son  of the  Sun-god,  and  concluded 
that  he  was  the  destined  Messiah.  At  the  Last  Supper,  in  the  attempt  to 
fulfil  a  paradoxical  prophecy  of Zechariah,  he  offered  himself as  a  euchar-
istic  sacrifice  for his  people,  and  ordered  Judas  to  hasten  the  preparations 
for  his  death.  In  the  event  he  was  crucified  like  a  harvest  Tammuz,  not 
transfixed with  a sword as the  Messiah was fated  to be; and  since Jehovah's 
curse  on  a  crucified  man  debarred  him  from  participation  in  the  Hebrew 
after-world,  there  is  no  reason  why  he  should  not  now be  worshipped  as  a 
Gentile  god;  and  indeed  many  poets  and  saints,  unaware  of his  uncom 
promising  Judaism,  have  worshipped  him  as  if he  were  another  Tammuz, 
Dionysus,  Zagreus,  Orpheus,  Hercules or  Osiris.

A C H A I F A,  O S S A,  O U R A N I A,  H E S U C H IA  and  IACHEMA—the 
five  seasonal  stations  through  which  the  Spirit  of the  Year  passed  in  the 
cult  of Canopic Hercules—could  be expressed  in  the formula:

He shall be found. 
He shall do wonders. 
He shall reign. 
He shall rest. 
He shall depart.

This  saying,  quoted  by  Clement  of  Alexandria  from  the  Gospel 
According  to  the  Hebrews,  seems  to  be  an  adaptation  of this  formula  to  the 
needs  of the  Christian  mystic:

Let him who seeks continue until he find. 
When he has found, he shall wonder. 
When he has wondered, he shall reign. 
When he has reigned, he shall rest.Let him who seeks continue until he find. 
When he has found, he shall wonder. 
When he has wondered, he shall reign. 
When he has reigned, he shall rest.

Since  the  mystic,  by  being  made  one  with  the  solar  Jesus  at  the  Sacra 
ment,  shared  his  triumph  over  death,  the  fifth  station  was  excused  him; 
Jesus  was  equated  with  H E S U C H IA  (repose),  the  fourth  station  when 
trees  cast  their  leaves  and  rest  until  the first stirrings  of Spring.  It  is  likely 
that  a  formula  conveyed  by  the  mystagogues  to  pre-Christian  initiates  of 
Hercules  went  something  like  this:

Seek the Lord, the beloved of the Great Goddess. 
When he is borne ashore, you shall find him. 
When he performs great fiats, you shall wonder. 
When he reigns, you shall share his glory. 
When he rests,you shall have repose. 
When he departs, you shall go with him 
To the Western Isle, paradise of the blest.

4*3

In  this  lost  Gospel  According  to  the  Hebrews  occurs  a  passage  which  has 
been  preserved  by  Origen:

Even now my  mother  the Holy  Spirit took  me by the hair and  carried

me up to the great mountain  Tabor.

Tabor,  as  has  been  shown,  was  an  ancient  centre  of Golden  Calf wor 
ship,  the  Golden  Calf being  Atabyrius,  the  Spirit  of the  Year,  son  of the 
Goddess Io,  Hathor,  Isis,  Althaea,  Deborah,  or whatever one cares  to call 
her.  Thus  the  connexion  between  Graeco-Syrian  Christianity  and  the 
single  poetic  theme  was  very  close  in  the  early  second  century;  though 
later  the  Gospel  of  the  Hebrews  was  suppressed  as  heretical,  apparendy  be 
cause it left the door open  for a return to orgiastic religion.Christianity  is  now  the  sole  European  faith  of  any  consequence. 
Judaism  is  for  the  Jews  alone,  and  Ludendorff's  abortive  revival  of  the 
primitive  Teutonic  religion  was  a  matter  merely  of  German  domestic 
politics.  Graeco-Roman  paganism  was  dead  before  the  end  of  the  first 
millennium A . D.  and  the paganism  of North-Western Europe, which was 
still  vigorous  in  the  early  seventeenth  century  and  had  even  taken  root  in 
New  England,  was  destroyed  by  the  Puritan  revolution.  The  eventual 
triumph  of  Christianity  had  been  assured  as  soon  as  the  Emperor  Con-
stantine  had  made  it  the  State  religion  of the  Roman  world.  He  did  this 
grudgingly  under  pressure  from  his  army,  recruited  among  the  servile 
masses  that  had  responded  to  the  Church's  welcome  for  sinners  and  out 
casts,  and  from  his  Civil  Service  which  admired  the  energy  and  discipline 
of Church  organization.  The  ascetic  doctrine  which  was  the  main  element 
of primitive  Christianity  lost  power  only  gradually,  and  it  was  not  until 
the  eleventh  century  that  the  old  Virgin  Goddess  Rhea—mother  of Zeus 
and  now  identified  with  the  mother  of Jesus—began  to  be  honoured  with 
all  her  old  titles  and  attributes  and  restored  to  the  queenship  of Heaven; 
the  restoration  was  not  complete  until  the  twentieth  century,  though  it 
had  been  anticipated  by  the  fifth-century  Emperor  Zeno  who  re-dedicated 
the Temple of Rhea at Byzantium to  the Virgin Mary.The  Puritan  Revolution  was  a  reaction  against  Virgin-worship,  which 
in  many  districts  of  Great  Britain  had  taken  on  a  mad-merry  orgiastic 
character.  Though  committed  to  the  mystical  doctrine  of  the  Virgin 
Birth,  the  Puritans  regarded  Mary  as  a  wholly  human  character,  whose 
religious  importance  ended  at  the  birth-stool;  and  anathematized  any 
Church  ritual  or  doctrine  that  was  borrowed  from  paganism  rather  than 
from  Judaism.  The  iconoclastic  wantonness,  the  sin-laden  gloom  and 
Sabbatarian  misery  that  Puritanism brought with  it shocked  the  Catholics 
beyond  expression.  It  was  a  warning  to  them  to  strengthen  rather  than 
weaken the festal side of their cult, to cling to the Blessed Virgin as the chief 
source of their religious happiness, and  to emphasize as little as possible the

424424

orthodox Judaism of Jesus. Though the 'divided household' of Faith and 
Truth,  that  is  to  say  the  attempt  to  believe  what  one  knows  to  be  histor 
ically  untrue,  has  been  condemned  by  recent  Popes,  educated  Catholics 
do in  practice  avert  their  eyes from  the  historical  Jesus  and Mary and  fix 
them  devoutly  on  the  Christ  and  the  Blessed  Virgin:  they  are  content  to 
suppose  that  Jesus  was  speaking  of himself,  rather  than  prophesying  in 
Jehovah's  name,  when  he  said:  'I  am  the  Good  Shepherd',  or 'I am  the 
Truth',  and  prophesied eternal life  to  whoever believed in  him.  Neverthe 
less, they have long put their house in order; though many of the mediaeval 
clergy  not  only  connived  at  popular  paganism  but  actively  embraced  it, 
the  Queen  of Heaven  and  her  Son  are  now  decisively  quit  of the  orgiastic 
rites  once  performed  in  their honour.  And  though  the Son is still  officially 
believed  to  have  harrowed  Hell  like  Hercules,  Orpheus and  Theseus,  and 
though  the  mystic  marriage  of the  Lamb  to  a  White  Princess  identified 
with the  Church  remains  orthodox doctrine in every  Christian  profession, 
the Samson and  Delilah incident is not admitted into the myth, and  the Old 
Goat-footed Devil, his  mortal enemy, is  no longer represented as  his twin. 
The  old  religion was  dualistic  in  an  ivory  relief of the  fourteenth century 
B.C.  found at  Ras  Shamra the  Goddess  is  shown in  Minoan  dress, with a 
sheaf of three heads of barley in either hand, dividing her favours between a 
man-faced ram on her left, god  of the waxing year, and a goat  on  her right, 
god  of the waning  year.  The goat is  bleating  in  protest  that  the  Goddess's 
head  is  turned  away and  insists  that  it  is  now  his  turn  to  be  cosseted.  In 
Christianity the sheep are permanently favoured at the expense of the goats, 
and  the  Theme  is  mutilated:  ecclesiastic  discipline  becomes  anti-poetic 
The cruel, capricious, incontinent White Goddess and  the mild,  steadfast, 
chaste Virgin  are  not to  be  reconciled except in  the  Nativity context.The  rift  now  separating  Christianity  and  poetry  is,  indeed,  the  same 
that divided Judaism and Ashtaroth-worship after the post-Exilic religious 
reformation.  Various  attempts  at  bridging  it  by  the  Clementines,  Colly-
ridians,  Manichees  and  other  early  Christian  heretics  and  by  the  Virgin-
worshipping  palmers  and  troubadours  of Crusading  times  have  left  their 
mark on  Church ritual and doctrine, but have always been succeeded  by a 
strong  puritanical  reaction.  It has  become impossible to  combine the  once 
identical  functions  of priest and  poet  without doing violence to  one  calling 
or  the  other,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  works  of Englishmen  who  have  con 
tinued  to write  poetry after  their  ordination:  John  Skelton,  John  Donne, 
William  Crashaw,  George  Herbert,  Robert  Herrick,  Jonathan  Swift, 
George  Crabbe,  Charles  Kingsley,  Gerard  Manley  Hopkins.  The  poet 
survived  in  easy  vigour  only  where  the  priest  was  shown  the  door;  as 
when  Skelton,  to  signalize  his  independence  of  Church  discipline,  wore 
the Muse-name 'Calliope'  embroidered  on his  cassock in silk and gold,  or 
when  Herrick proved his  devotion  to  poetic myth by pouring  libations  of

4*5

Devonshire  barley-ale  from  a  silver  cup  to  a  pampered  white  pig.  With 
Donne,  Crashaw and Hopkins the war between  poet and priest was  fought 
on  a  high  mystical  level;  but  can  Donne's  Divine  Poems,  written  after  the 
death  of  Ann  More,  his  only  Muse,  be  preferred  to  his  amorous  Songs  and 
Sonnets?  or can  the self-tortured  Hopkins  be commended for humbly sub 
mitting his  poetic ecstasies  to  the  confession-box?I  remarked  in  the  first  chapter  that  poets  can  be  well  judged  by  the 
accuracy  of their  portrayal  of the  White  Goddess.  Shakespeare  knew  and 
feared  her.  One  must  not  be  misled  by  the  playful  silliness  of the  love-
passages  in  his  early  Venus  and  Adonis,  or  the  extraordinary  mytho 
graphic  jumble  in  his  Midsummer-Night's  Dream,  where  Theseus  appears 
as  a  witty  Elizabethan  gallant;  the  Three  Fates—from  whose  name  the 
word  'fay*  derives—as  the  whimsical  fairies,  Peaseblossom,  Cobweb  and 
Mustard-seed;  Hercules  as  a  mischievous  Robin  Goodfellow;  the  Lion 
with  the  Steady  Hand  as  Snug  the  Joiner;  and,  most  monstrous  of alL 
the  Wild  Ass  Set-Dionysus  and  the  star-diademed  Queen  of  Heaven  as 
ass-eared Bottom and tinselled Titania. He shows her with greater sincerity 
in  Macbeth  as  the  Triple  Hecate  presiding  over  the  witches'  cauldron,  for 
it  is  her  spirit'that  takes  possession  of Lady  Macbeth  and  inspires  her  to 
murder  King  Duncan;  and  as  the  magnificent  and  wanton  Cleopatra  by 
love of whom Antony is  destroyed.  Her  last  appearance  in  the  plays  is  as 
the  'damned  witch Sycorax'  in  the  Tempest.1  Shakespeare in  the person  of 
Prospero  claims  to  have  dominated  her  by  his  magic  books,  broken  her 
power  and  enslaved  her  monstrous  son  Caliban—though  not  before 
extracting  bis  secrets  from  him  under  colour  of kindness.  Yet  he  cannot 
disguise  Caliban's title to  the island nor the original  blueness  of Sycorax's 
eyes,  though  'blue-eyed'  in  Elizabethan  slang  also  meant  'blue-rimmed 
with  debauch'.  Sycorax,  whose  connexion  with  Cerridwen  has  been 
pointed  out  early  in  Chapter  Eight,  came  to  the  island  with  Caliban 
in a boat, as Danae came to Seriphos from  Argos  with  the  infant  Perseus; 
or  as  Latona  came  to  Delos  with  the  unborn  Apollo.  She  was  a  goddess 
with  the  power  to  control  the  visible  Moon—'make  ebbs  and  flows  and 
deal  in  her  command'.  Shakespeare  says  that  she  was  banished  from 
Algiers  (was  this  really  Argos?)  for  her  witchcrafts.  But  he  is  poetically 
just to Caliban, putting the truest poetry of the play into his mouth:1  The  Tempest  seems  to  be  based  on  a  vivid  dream  of  extremely  personal  content,  expressed 
in  a  jumble  of ill-assorted  literary  reminiscences:  not  only  of  the  Romance  of Taliesin  but  of 
die  twenty-ninth  chapter  of Isaiah;  a  Spanish  romance  by  Ortunez  de  Calahorra  called  'A 
Mirror  of Princely  Deeds  and  Knighthood's  three  accounts  of  recent  voyages  to  the  N ew 
W o r l d;  various  contemporary  Huguenot  and  anti-Spanish  pamphlets;  a  magi 1*"!  book  called 
Steganographia  written  in  Latin  by  a  monk  of  Spanheim;  and  a  German  play,  A y r e r 's  Von 
der  schbnen  Sidee.  Caliban  is  partly  A f a g d du  in  the  Romance  of Taliesin;  partly  Ravaillac,  the 
Jesuit-prompted  murderer  of  Henry  I V;  partly  an  Adriatic  devil  in  Calahorra's  romance; 
partly  a  sea-monster,  'in  shape  like  a  man',  seen  off Bermuda  during  Admiral  Sommers'  stay 
there;  partly  Shakespeare's o wn  malus angelus.

426

Be not afeared; the isle is full ofnoises, 
Sounds and sweet airs that give delight and hurt not, 
Sometimes a thousand twangling instruments 
Will hum about mine ears; and sometime voices, 
That if I then had wak'd after long sleep 
Will make me sleep again: and then in dreaming 
The clouds me thought would open and show riches 
Ready to drop upon me; that, when I wak'd 
I cried to dream again.

It  will  be  noticed  that  the  illogical  sequence  of  tenses  creates  a  perfect 
suspension of  time.

Donne  worshipped  the  White  Goddess  blindly  in  the  person  of  the 
woman  whom  he  made  his  Muse;  so  far  unable  to  recall  her  outward 
appearance  that  all  that  he  could  record  of her  was  the  image  of his  own 
love-possessed  eye  seen  reflected  in  hers.  In  A  Fever  he  calls  her  'the 
world's soul', for if she leaves him the world is but her carcase. And:

Thy beauty and all parts which are thee 
Are unchangeable firmament.Thy beauty and all parts which are thee 
Are unchangeable firmament.

John  Clare  wrote  of  hen  "These  dreams  of  a  beautiful  presence,  a 
woman  deity,  gave  the  sublimest  conceptions  of beauty  to  my  imagina 
tion;  and  being  last  night  with  the  same  presence,  the  lady  divinity  left 
such  a  vivid  picture  of her  visits  in  my  sleep,  dreaming  of dreams,  that  I 
could  no longer doubt her existence.  So I wrote  them down to  prolong the 
happiness of my faith in believing her my guardian genius.'

Keats  saw  the  White  Goddess  as  the  Belle  Dame  Sans  Merci.  Her  hair 
was  long,  her  foot was  light  and  her  eyes  were  wild,  but  Keats  character 
istically  transferred  the  lily  on  her  brow  to  the  brows  of her  victims,  and 
made  the knight set her on his  steed  rather than himself mount  on  hers,  as 
Oisin had  mounted  on  the steed  of Niamh  of the  Golden  Hair.  So  he  also 
wrote pityingly of Lamia, the Serpent-goddess,  as if she  were a distressed 
Gretchen or Griselda.

The  case  of the  Belle  Dame  Sans  Merci  calls  for  detailed  consideration 
in  the light of the  Theme.  Here is  the poem  as it first appeared,  with  a few 
joking  comments  at  the  end,  copied  out  in  a  journal  letter  to  Keats' 
brother George in America.  Cancelled words  are  not italicized and shown 
in parentheses:

Wednesday Evening1

LA  B E L LE  D A ME

S A NS  M E R CI

0 What can ail thee Knight at arms 
Alone andpalely loitering?

1  Probably April  28th  1 8 1 9.

4*7

The sedge is withered from the Lake

And no birds sing!

0  What can ail thee Knight at arms 
So haggard and so woe begone?

The squirrel's granary is full 
And the harvest's done.

1 see (death's) a lily on thy brow

With anguish moist and fever dew,

And on thy cheeks a fading rose 
Fast Withereth too—

/ met a Lady in the (Wilds) Meads 
Full beautiful, a faery's child1 see (death's) a lily on thy brow

With anguish moist and fever dew,

And on thy cheeks a fading rose 
Fast Withereth too—

/ met a Lady in the (Wilds) Meads 
Full beautiful, a faery's child

Her hair was long, her foot was light 
And her eyes were wild—

I made a Garland for her head,

And bracelets too, and fragrant Zone,

She look'd at me as she did love 
And made sweet moan—

I set her on my pacing steed

And nothing else saw all day long,

For sidelong would she bend and sing

A faery's  song—

She found me roots ofrelish sweet

And honey wild and (honey) manna dew,

And sure in language strange she said

I love thee true—

She took me to her elfin grot

And there she wept (and there she sighed)

and sighed full sore,

And there I shut her wild wild eyes

With kisses four—

And there she lulled me asleep

And there I dream d Ah Woe betide!

The latest dream I ever dreamt 
On the cold hillside.

I saw pale Kings, and Princes too

Pale warriors death pale were they all 
428

Who cried La belle dame sans merci

Thee hath in thralL

I saw their starv'd lips in the gloam

(All  tremble) 
With horrid warning (wide agape) gaped wide,

And I awoke, and found me here 
On the cold hill's side

And this is why I (wither) sojourn here 
Alone andpalely loitering;

Though the sedge is witheredfrom the Lake

And no  birds  sing—...

Why  four  kisses—you  will  say—why  four  because  I  wish  to  restrain 
the  headlong  impetuosity  of  my  Muse—she  would  fain  have  said 
'score'  without  hurting  the  rhyme—but  we  must  temper  the  Imagina 
tion  as  the  Critics say with Judgement. I was obliged  to  choose a num 
ber that both eyes might have fair play, and  to speak truly I think two a 
piece  quite  sufficient.  Suppose  I  had  said  seven  there  would  have  been 
three-and-a-half a  piece—a very awkward  affair and  well  got  out  of on 
my side—The  context  of the  poem  is  discussed  at  length  in  Sir  Sidney  Colvin's 
Life  of Keats.  Keats  had  been  reading  a  translation,  then  ascribed  to 
Chaucer,  of  Alain  Chartier's  La  Belle  Dame  sans  Mercy,  in  which  a 
'gendeman  finding no  mercy at the  hand  of a gendewoman dyeth  for  sor 
row'. In the translation  these lines occun

Riding  an  easypaas

I came into a lustie green vallay 
Full offloures 
I fell in thought of joy full desperate 
With great disease andpaine, so that I was 
Of all lovers the most unfortunate.

Other  literary sources  of the  ballad  have  been  found.  In  Spenser's Faerie 
Queene  (II,  6),  the  enchantress  Phaedria  is  seen  in  a  rowing-boat  by  the 
Knight  Cymochiles as he  wanders  on  the river-bank. He accepts her invi 
tation  to  embark  with  her,  and  they  have  a  pleasant  time  together.  She 
sings, jests, decks her head with garlands, and puts fresh flowers about her 
neck,  to  the  knight's  wondrous  great  content.  They  land  on  an  island  in 
the  'Idle Lake',  where  she takes  the  'wretched  thrall'  to a shady dale, lulls 
him fast asleep with his head on her lap, and there maroons him. Similarly 
in  Malory's  Morte  &  Arthur,  (IV,  i)  the  prophetic  poet  Merlin  'was 
assotted and doated upon' Nimue, the enchantress. She decoyed him into a 
grotto and there left him immured.

429429

Amy  Lowell  has  traced  another  source  of  the  poem  in  the  romance 
Palmyrin  of England  which  Keats  is  known  to  have  read  with  avidity. 
Palmyrin  is  madly  in  love  with  one  Polinarda  whom  he  fears  he  has 
offended,  and  ponders  his  grief  under  trees  by  the  water-side  'And  the 
passion  therefore became  so  strong upon  him  that his  strong heart  failed, 
and  such  was  the  power  of these  fantastic  thoughts  over him  that with  the 
semblance  of one  dead  he  lay  at  the  foot  of the  willow  trees.'  In  another 
episode  Palmyrin  'espied  a damsel  on  a white palfrey come  riding  toward 
him,  her  hair  spread  over her  shoulders  and  her  garments  seeming  to  be 
greatly  misused;  all  the  way  as  she  rode  she  used  many  shrieks  and 
grievous  lamentations,  filling  the  air with  her  cries.'  She was  an emissary 
of the  sorceress Eutropa,  sent  to  decoy him.  And  towards  the  close  of the 
romance occurs a description of kings and princes embalmed in a mortuary 
temple  on  Perilous  Isle,  which  seems  to  account  for  the  'pale  Kings  and 
Princes too'.There  are  also  reminiscences  in  the  Belle  Dame  Sans  Merci  of  Cole 
ridge's  Kubla Khan with  its  singing  maiden and  poetic honey-dew  ('honey 
wild  and  manna  dew'  is  Keats'  version),  of a  line  by  Wordsworth,  'Her 
eyes  are  wild',  and  of another  in  William  Browne's  Pastorals  'Let  no  bird 
s i n g . . . ';  but  the  most  important  source  of  all  is  the  Ballad  of  Thomas  the 
Rhymer,  one  version  of which  had  recendy  been  published  by  Sir  Walter 
Scott  in  his  Border  Minstrelsy  and  another  by  Robert  Jamieson  in  his 
Popular  Ballads.  Thomas  of Erceldoune  was  taken  up  by  the  Queen  of 
Elfland  on  her  milk-white  steed  and  carried  to  a  garden  where  she  fed 
him  on  bread  and  wine,  lulled  him  to  sleep  in  her  lap,  and  gave  him  the 
gift  of  poetic  insight;  but  warned  him  that  he  might  be  destined  as  a 
Sabbatical  sacrifice  to  hell,  going by  the road  that  'lies out owr yon  frosty 
fell'(or'cold  hillside').Keats  was  now  twenty-four  years  old  and  at  a  crisis  of his  affairs.  He 
had  abandoned  medicine  for literature but was growing doubtful whether 
he could support himself by it; lately a 'loitering indolence' had overtaken 
his work.  He had  conceived  a jealously possessive  passion  for  the  'beauti 
ful and elegant,  graceful,  silly, fashionable and  strange  . ..  MINX'  Fanny 
Brawne.  She was evidently flattered by his addresses and willing to let him 
be her beau,  but her frivolous ways  caused  him  increasing pain;  the more 
so, because he was not in any position to offer her marriage or insist on her 
remaining  faithful  to  him.  The  'kisses  four'  in  the  poem  are  likely  to  be 
autobiographical,  rather  than  a  modification,  to  suit  the  rhyme,  of  the 
ballad  convention  'kisses  three'.  But  often  Fanny  seems  to  have  treated 
him  mercilessly  in  resentment  of his  masterful  ways  and  even,  as he  com 
plains in a letter,  to have made his  'heart a football by flirting with Brown', 
his  friend.  Thus  the  Belle  Dame  was,  in  one  aspect,  the  elfish  Fanny 
Brawne, whom he figuratively placed before him on the saddle of his Pega-

430

sus;  and  it  is  true  that  she  admired  his  poems  sufficiently  to  copy  one  or 
two of them out in a manuscript book of her own.430

sus;  and  it  is  true  that  she  admired  his  poems  sufficiently  to  copy  one  or 
two of them out in a manuscript book of her own.

Keats,  writing  to  his  brother  George  who  was  in  low  water  and  far 
from  home,  took  pains  to  conceal  both  the  strength  of his  passion  for 
Fanny  and  the  serious  condition  of  his  health  which  complicated  his  other 
distresses.  He  was  now  in  the  early  stages  of a  consumption  induced,  six 
months previously,  by an exhausting walking tour in  Scodand from which 
he  had  returned  to  find  his  elder  brother  Tom  dying  of the same  disease. 
As  an  ex-medical  student  he  knew  that  no  cure  had  yet  been  found  for it. 
He  had  seen  the  lily  on  Tom's  brow,  the  hectic  rose  on  his  cheek,  his 
starved  lips  a-gape  in  horrid  warning,  and  had  closed  his  wild  wild  eyes 
with coins,  not kisses.In  the  letter  which  contains  the  Belle  Dame  Sans  Merci Keats  mentions 
having  just  met  Coleridge  walking  by  Highgate  Ponds  with  Green,  a 
former  medical  instructor  of his  own.  Coleridge's  account  of the  meeting 
has been preserved.  Keats asked  leave to  press his hand, wishing to  carry 
away  the  memory  of meeting  him,  and  when  he  had  gone  Coleridge  told 
Green:  'There  is  death  in  that hand.'  He  characterized  it  as  'a heat  and  a 
dampness',  but  'fever  dew'  is  Keats'  own  description.  Thus  the  Belle 
Dame  Sans  Merci  was,  in  another  aspect,  Consumption:  whose  victims 
warned  him  that  he  was  now  of their  number.  Although  it  was  not  for 
nearly  another  year  that  he  received  his  'death-warrant'  in  the  form  of 
violent arterial bleeding in the lungs, Keats must have already realized that 
even  if  it  were  financially  possible  to  support  Fanny  he  could  not  now 
honourably  ask  her  to  marry  him;  especially  since  the  consumption  was 
aggravated  by venereal  disease which  he  had  caught  two  years  before  this 
at  Oxford  while  visiting  his  friend  Bailey  the  Divinity  student.  Thus  the 
features  of the  Belle  Dame  were  beautiful  in  a  strange  pale,  thin  way  as 
Fanny's  were,  but  sinister and  mocking:  they  represented  both  the  life  he 
loved—in his  letters to Fanny he identified her with both Life and L o v e— 
and the death he feared.There  is  a  third  constituent  of  this  nightmare  figure:  the  spirit  of 
Poetry.  Keats'  chief comfort  in  his  troubles,  his  ruling  passion,  and  the 
main  weapon  with  which  he  hoped  to  clear  his  way  to  Fanny's  love  was 
poetic  ambition.  Now  Poetry was  proving  an unkind  mistress.  In  the  dis 
turbed  state  of his heart and  mind  he  could  not  settle  down  to writing  the 
romantic  epics  on  which,  in  emulation  of Milton,  he  hoped  to  build  his 
fame.  Recendy he  had  stopped  work  on  Hyperion  after writing  two  and  a 
half books,  and  confided  to  his  friend  Woodhouse  that he  was  so  gready 
dissatisfied with it that he could not continue.

That  the  Belle  Dame  represented  Love,  Death  by  Consumption  (the 
modern leprosy) and Poetry all at once can be confirmed by a study of the 
romances  from  which  Keats  developed  the  poem.  He  seems  to  have  felt

4 31

intuitively,  rather than  known historically,  that  they were all  based  on  the 
same  antique  myth.  The  Queen  of Elfland  in  Thomas  the  Rhymer was  the 
mediaeval  successor  of the  pre-Celtic  White  Goddess  who  carried  off the 
sacred  King  at  the  end  of his  seven  years'  reign  to  her  island  Elysium, 
where  he  became  an  oracular  hero.  The  story  of the  prophet  Merlin  and 
the  enchantress  Nimue  has  the  same  origin;  so  has  that  of Palmyrin  and 
the  enchantress  on  the  white  horse;  and  that  of  Cymochiles  and  the 
enchantress  Phaedria.  She  was  Death,  but she granted  poetic immortality 
to  the victims whom she had seduced  by her love-charms.The  case  of  Thomas  the  Rhymer,  alias  Thomas  of  Erceldoune,  is  a 
remarkable  one.  He  was  an  early  thirteenth-century  poet  who  claimed  to 
have  been  given  poetic  insight  by  the  Queen  of  Elfland,  or  Elphame,  who 
appeared suddenly to him as he lay on Huntlie Bank and  chose him as her 
lover;  and  it  was  for  this  reason  that  his  vaticinations  were  so  highly 
prized by the Scots. (They were said by Thomas Chambers, in 1 8 7 0, to be 
'still widely current among the peasantry'.)  Although  it looks at first sight 
as  though  Thomas  had  merely  borrowed  the  Gaelic  myth  of  Oisin  and 
Niamh  of the  Golden  Hair,  of which  the Arthurian  variant is  the  romance 
of Ogier the Dane1 and Morgan le Faye, and applied it fancifully to himself, 
this is unlikely to  be the case.  What seems to have happened is  that he was 
accosted  on  Huntlie  Bank  not  by  a  phantom  but  by  a  living  woman,  the 
titular  'Queen  of  Elphame',  the  contemporary  incarnation  of  Hecate, 
goddess of witches. She made him renounce Christianity and initiated him 
into the witch cult under the new baptismal name of'True Thomas'.

As we know from the Scottish witch trials, the same adventure happened 
to other likely young Scotsmen, three or four centuries later.  At Aberdeen 
in  1 5 9 7,  for  instance,  Andro  Man  confessed  to  carnal  dealings  with  the 
then  Queen  of Elphame,  who  had  'a  grip  of all  the  craft'  and  who  had 
attended  that year's  Harvest meeting at  the  Binhill  and  Binlocht  riding  on 
a white hackney.  'She is very pleasant and will be  old and  young when  she 
pleases.  She  makes  any  King  whom  she  pleases  and  lies  with  any  she 
pleases.'  (Old  and  young,  naturally,  because  she  represented  the  Moon-
Goddess in her successive phases.)  William Barton of Kirkliston similarly 
became the beloved  of a later  Queen,  as he confessed  at his  trial  in  1 6 5 5,1  T he  late  mediaeval  legend  of  Ogier  the  D a ne  proves  that  Avalon  was  understood  as  an 
island  of the  dead  by  the  Arthurian  romance-writers.  F or  Ogier  is  there  said  to  have  spent 
two  hundred  years  in  the  'Casde  of A v a l o n ',  after  early exploits  in  the  East;  then  to  have  re 
turned  to  France,  in  the  days  of K i ng  Philip  L,  with  a firebrand in  his  hand  on  which  his  life 
depended—like  that  of Meleager  the  Argonaut.  But  K i ng  Philip  reigned  two  hundred  years 
after  Charlemagne,  Ogier's  liege-lord  in  the  Carolingian  cycle;  in  other  words,  the  second 
Ogier  was  the  reincarnation  of  the  first.  It  was  nothing  new  for  Ogier  le  Danois  to  live  in 
A v a l o n.  T he  name  is  merely  a  debased  form  of ' O g yr  V r a n'  which,  as  has  been  suggested  in 
Chapter  Five,  means  'Bran  the  Malign'  or  'Bran,  G od  of  the  Dead'.  His  Norse  counterpart 
O g ir ('the  Terrible*)  was  G od  of the  Sea and  of Death,  and played  the harp on  an island  where 
he lived with his nine daughters.

43*43*

renounced  Christianity,  was  renamed  John  Baptist  and  received  the 
Devil's  mark.  But  already  by  the  thirteenth  century  the  sacrifice  of  the 
king  in  the  seventh,  or  Sabbatical,  year  seems  to  have  been  no  longer 
insisted  on,  or  only  symbolically  performed:  for  in  the  garden  to  which 
the  Queen  took  Thomas  of  Erceldoune  he  was  warned  on  pain  of  death 
not  to  pluck  the apples  growing  there,  the  traditional  food  of the oracular 
dead.  If Thomas  had  eaten  them  he  would  not  have  lived  to  tell  his  tale 
and  keep  his  'green  velvet  shoes  and  coat  of even  cloth'  that  had  been  his 
livery  as  the  Queen's  gudeman.  The  account  of his  mystical  experiences 
corresponds  with  what  is  known  of the  initiation  ceremonies  of the  witch 
cult.  Like  Ogier the Dane, he had first mistaken  her for the Virgin,  a  par 
donable  mistake  since  (according  to  the  confession  of  the  witch  Marion 
Grant of Aberdeen, an associate of Andro Man) she was addressed as 'Our 
Lady'  by  the witches and appeared like a fine lady clad in a  'white walicot'.

Keats  in  his  letters  to  Fanny makes  it  clear  that  to  become  her  lover in 
as  complete  a  sense  as  Thomas  of Erceldoune  became  the  Queen  of El-
phame's,  he  would  gladly  have  received  the  Mark  and  signed  the  blood 
compact which  thereafter delivered his soul  to hell.  He was not a  Christian. 
'My religion is Love and you are its only tenet,' he wrote to her.  But Fanny 
was not well  cast  for  the part he forced  upon  her.  Though  at first, like  the 
Queen  whom  William  Barton  met  on  the  way  to  the  Queen's  Ferry,  she 
pretended  to  be 'angry and  very nyce'  when he offered her gallantries, and 
later  took  pity  on  his  distresses  and  humoured  him  to  some  degree,  it  is 
clear that she never 'suffered  him  to do  that which  Christian ears ought not 
to  hear  of.Coleridge,  at  his  best,  had  a  stricter  poetic  conscience  than  Keats. 
Though  the  second  part  of Christabel belies  the  moon-magic  of the  first, 
his  description  in  the  Ancient  Mariner  of the  woman  dicing  with  Death  in 
the phantom ship is as faithful a record of the White Goddess as exists:

Her lips were red, her looks were free,

Her locks were yellow as gold,

Her skin was white as leprosy. 
The Nightmare Life-in-Death  was she, 
Who thicks man's blood with cold

Anonymous  English  balladists  constantly  celebrate  the  Goddess's 
beauty  and  terrible  power.  Tom  o'  Bedlam's  Song  is  direcdy  inspired  by 
hen

The Moon's my constant mistress

And the lonely owl my marrow,

The flaming drake 
And the night-crow make

Me music to my sorrow.

433

So is the Holy Land of Walsinghame.

Such a one did I meet, good sir, 
Such an angelic face

Who like a nymph, like a queen, did appear

In her gait, in her grace.

She hath left me here alone, 
All alone, as unknown,

That sometime did me lead with herself

And me loved as her own.

The  Holy  Land of Walsinghame  recalls  the  tender  description  of the  God 
dess  in  the  ancient  Irish  Sickbed  of Cuchulain,  spoken  by  Laegh  after 
visiting the rath of the Sidhe:

There is a maiden in the noble house 
Surpassing all women of Ireland. 
She steps forward, with yellow hair, 
Beautiful  and many-gifted

Her discourse with each man in turn 
Is beautiful, is marvellous, 
The heart of each one breaks 
With longing and love for her.

For  though  she  loves  only  to  destroy,  the  Goddess  destroys  only  to 
quicken.

io,  the  leper's

in  Leviticus  XIV,For  though  she  loves  only  to  destroy,  the  Goddess  destroys  only  to 
quicken.

io,  the  leper's

in  Leviticus  XIV,

Coleridge's  mention  of leprosy  is  strangely  exact.  The  whiteness  of the 
Goddess  has  always  been  an  ambivalent  concept.  In  one  sense  it  is  the 
pleasant  whiteness  of  pearl-barley,  or  a  woman's  body,  or  milk,  or  un-
smutched  snow;  in  another  it  is  the  horrifying  whiteness  of a  corpse,  or  a 
spectre,  or  leprosy.  Thus 
thank-
offering  after  his  cure,  originally  paid  to  the  Goddess  Mother,  was  a 
measure of barley flour. Alphito, it has been shown, combined these senses: 
for alphas is white  leprosy,  the vitiliginous  sort which attacks  the face,  and 
alphiton  is  barley,  and  Alphito  lived  on  the  cliff tops  of Nonacris  in  per 
petual  snow.  Pausanias  connects  leprosy,  the  meaning  of which  is  'scali-
ness',  a  characteristic  of true  leprosy,  with  the  town  of Lepreus,  which  lay 
close  to  the river Alpheus  in  the district of Triphylia  ('trefoil'), which  was 
a  leper-colony  founded  by  a  goddess  called  Leprea:  it  afterwards  came 
under  the  protection  of 'Zeus  of the  White  Poplar',  for  another  name  for 
leprosy  is  leuce,  which  also  means  'the  white  poplar'.  This  ties  together 
several  loose  ends  of argument.  The  white  trefoils  which  spring  up  wher 
ever  the  Love-goddess  Olwen  treads  can  be  described  as  'white  as 
leprosy'.  And  we  may  assume  that  the  leaves  of  the  white  poplar  (the

434434

autumn  tree  of the  Beth-Luis-Nion),  which  still  grows  in  the  Styx valley, 
were  prophylactic  against  all  forms  of  leprosy:  for  alius  and  albums  in 
Latin  have  all  the  connotations  of the  Greek  alphos.  When  Evander  came 
to  Italy  from  Arcadia  he  brought  the  name  of  the  River  Alpheus  with 
him:  Albula  was  the  old  name  for  the  Tiber,  though  its  yellow  waters 
would  have  earned  it  the  name  'Xanthos',  or  'Flavus',  if the  White  God 
dess had not sponsored the migration.

The priestesses of the White Goddess in ancient times are likely to have 
chalked  their  faces  in  imitation  of the  Moon's white disc  It is  possible  that 
the  island  of Samothrace,  famous  for  its  Mysteries  of the  White  Goddess, 
takes  its  name  from  scaly  leprosy;  for  it  is  known  that  Samo means  white 
and  that  the  Old  Goidelic  word  for  this  sort  of leprosy  was  Samothrusc. 
Strabo  gives  a  warrant  for  this  suggestion  in  his  Georgicr.  he  quotes 
Artemidorus as writing that 'there is an island near Britain where the same 
rites are performed in honour of Ceres and  Persephone as in Samothrace.' 
In  the  Ancient Mariner,  when  the  Nightmare Life-in-Death  has  won

her game  of dice:

'The game is done, I've won, I've won,'

Quoth she and whistles thrice.her game  of dice:

'The game is done, I've won, I've won,'

Quoth she and whistles thrice.

She  whistles  for  the  magical  breeze  that  is  presently  to  save  the  Mariner's 
life.  Here  again  Coleridge  is  beautifully  exact.  The  White  Goddess 
Cardea,  as  has  been  mentioned,  was  in  charge  of the  four  cardinal  winds; 
mythologically  the  most  important  was  the  North  Wind  at  the  back  of 
which  she  had  her  starry  castle,  close  to  the  polar  hinge  of the  Universe. 
This was  the same wind  that blew in  answer to  Gwion's final riddle in  the 
Romance  and  helped  to  liberate  Elphin,  and  the  wind  which,  according 
to  Hecataeus,  gave  its  name  to  the  Hyperborean  priesthood  of  Apollo. 
Whistling  three  times  in  honour  of the  White  Goddess  is  the  traditional 
witch  way  of  raising  the  wind;  hence  the  proverbial  unluckiness  of  'a 
crowing  hen  and  a  whistling  maid'.  Til  give  thee  a  wind.'  'And  I  an 
other.'—as  the  witches  say  in  Macbeth.  . ..  'All  the  quarters  that  they 
know,  I'  the  Shipman's  card.'  The  close  connexion  of  winds  with  the 
Goddess  is also  shown in  the widespread  popular belief that only pigs and 
goats  (both  anciendy  sacred  to  her)  can  see  the  wind,  and  in  the  belief 
that mares  can conceive merely by  turning  their hindquarters  to  the wind.

The earliest  Classical  reference  to  this belief about mares  is  found  in the 
Iliad,  where  Boreas  grows  amorous  of  the  three  thousand  mares  of 
Erichthonius  the  Dardanian;  he  finds  them  grazing  on  the  plains  about 
Troy,  and  impregnates  twelve  of them.  Classical  scholars  have  been  con 
tent  to  read  this  merely  as  an  allegory  of the swiftness  of the  twelve  sacred 
horses  born  to  Boreas;  but  the  myth  is  far  more  complex  than  that. 
Boreas  lived  with  his  three  brothers,  the  other  cardinal  winds,  in  a  sacred

435435

cave  on  Mount  Haemus  in  Thrace, which  lies  due  north  of Troy,  but  was 
also  worshipped  at  Athens.  The  Athenians  gave  him  the  honourable  tide 
of 'brother-in-law'  and  their ancient respect for him was heightened  by his 
sudden  descent  from  Haemus  during  the  Persian  invasion  of  Greece, 
when  he  sank  most  of Xerxes's  fleet  off  Cape  Sepias.  Boreas  was  repre 
sented on the famous carved Chest of Cypselus as half man, half serpent— 
a  reminder  that  winds  were  under  the  charge  of the  Death-goddess  and 
came out of oracular caves or holes in the ground. He was shown in the act 
of carrying  off the  nymph  Oreithuia,  daughter  of  another  Erichthonius, 1 
the first King  of Athens  (who  introduced  four-horse  chariots there)  to  his 
mountain home in Thrace.

This gives a clue to the provenience of the North Wind  cult.  The mares 
of Erichthonius  were  really  the  mares  of Boreas  himself,  for Erichthonius 
was  also  half man,  half serpent.  Erichthonius,  styled  an  autochthon,  that

1 T h is  Erichthonius,  alias  Erechtheus,  figures  in  the  complex  and  nonsensical  myth  of1 T h is  Erichthonius,  alias  Erechtheus,  figures  in  the  complex  and  nonsensical  myth  of

Procne,  Philomela  and  the  Thracian  King  Tereus  of  Daulis,  which  seems  to  have  been  in 
vented  by  the  Phocian  Greeks  to  explain  a  set  of Thraco-Pelasgian  religious  pictures  which 
they  found  in a  temple at  Daulis and  could  not understand.  T he story is that  Tereus  married 
Procne  daughter  of King  Pandion  of Attica,  begot  a  son,  Itys,  on  her,  then  concealed  her  in 
the  country  in  order  to  be  able  to  marry  her  sister  Philomela.  He  told  her  that  Procne  was 
dead,  and  when  she  learned  the  truth  cut  out  her  tongue  so  that  she  should  not  be  able  to  tell 
anyone.  But  she  embroidered  some  letters  on  a  peplum,  which  enabled  Procne  to  be  found  in 
time.  Procne returned  and  in  revenge for her ill-treatment killed  her  son  Itys,  w h om  she  laid 
on  a  dish  before  Tereus.  Tereus  had  meanwhile  attended  an  oracle  which  told  him  that  Itys 
would  be  murdered,  and  suspecting  that  his  brother  D ry  as  was  the  destined  murderer,  had 
killed him.  T he  sisters then fled,  Tereus caught up an axe,  and  the gods changed  them all into 
birds:  Procne  became  a  swallow,  Philomela  a  nightingale,  Tereus  a  hoopoe.  Procne  and 
Philomela were survived by twin brothers, Erechthonius and Butes.

T h is  iconotropic  myth,  when  returned  to  pictorial  form,  makes  a  series  of instructional

scenes,  each  depicting a different method  of taking oracles.

T he  scene  of the  cutting  out  of Philomela's  tongue  shows  a  priestess  w ho  has  induced  a 
prophetic trance by chewing laurel leaves;  her face is contorted with ecstasy,  not pain, and the 
tongue that has been cut out is really a laurel leaf that an attendant is handing her to  chew.T he  scene  of the  letters  sewn  into  the  peplum  shows  a  priestess  w ho  has  cast  a  handful  of 
oracular sticks on a white cloth, in Celtic fashion as described by Tacitus; they fall in the shape 
of letters,  which  she interprets.

T he  scene  of the  eating of Itys by  Tereus shows  a  priest taking  omens from  the entrails  of a

sacrificed child.

T he scene of Tereus and the oracle probably shows him sleeping on a sheep-skin in a temple

and having a revelation in dream; the Greeks would not have mistaken this scene.

T he  scene  of the  killing  of D r y as  shows  an  oak-tree  and  priests  taking  omens under  it,  in

Druidic fashion, from the w ay that a man falls when he dies.

T he  scene  of  Procne  transformed  into  a  swallow  shows  a  priestess  in  swallow-disguise

taking auguries from the flight of a swallow.

T he  scenes  of Philomela  transformed into  a  nightingale,  and  of Tereus  transformed  into a

hoopoe have  a similar sense.

T wo  further  scenes  show  an  oracular  hero,  depicted  with  snake's  tail  for  legs,  being  con 
sulted with blood-sacrifices;  and a young man consulting a bee-oracle.  These are respectively 
Erechthonius,  and  Butes  (the  most  famous  bee-keeper  of antiquity),  the  brothers  of  Procne 
and  Philomela.  Their  mother  was  Zeuxippe  ('she  w ho  yokes  horses'),  evidendy  a  mare-
headed  Demeter.

436436

is  to  say  'one  who  springs  from  the  earth',  was first said  to  be  the son  of 
Athene  by  Hephaestus  the  demiurge,  but  later,  when  Athene's  unblem 
ished  maidenhood  was  insisted  upon  by  the Athenians  as  a matter  of civic 
pride,  he  was  made  the  son  of Hephaestus  and  Ge,  the  Earth-goddess. 
The  name  of Oreithuia,  the  nymph  whom  he  carried  off,  means  'She  who 
rages  upon  the  mountain'—evidently  the  Love-goddess  of  the  divine 
triad  in  which  Athene  was  the  Death-goddess;  which  explains  Boreas  as 
her  brother-in-law,  and  so  the  brother-in-law  of  all  Athenians:  whose 
ancient  friendship  with  the  Boreas  priesthood  of  the  Hyperboreans  is 
mentioned  by Hecataeus.  But since North  Winds cannot blow backwards, 
the story of Boreas's  rape of Oreithuia  to  Thrace must refer to  the spread 
to  Thrace  of the  Athenian  orgiastic  cult  of the  Triple  Goat-goddess  and 
her lover Erichthonius,  alias  Ophion,  and  its  adaptation there,  as at near 
by  Troy,  to  an  orgiastic  cult  of  the  Triple  Mare-goddess;  the  twelve 
sacred  horses  of  Boreas  provided  her  with  three  four-horse  chariots. 
Since  Erichthonius shortly after birth  took  refuge  from his  persecutors  in 
the  aegis  of Athene—the  bag  made  from  the  hide  of the  goat  Amalthaea 
—he  must  have  come  from  Libya  with  her.  In  Libya  he  would  have  been 
more beloved than in  Greece; northerly breezes  freshen  the  early morning 
along  the whole  Libyan  coast  throughout  the  summer—thus  Hesiod  calls 
Boreas  the  son  of  Astraeus  ('the  starry  one')  and  Eos  ('dawn').  That 
Portuguese mares were fertilized by the zephyr—according to Varro, Pliny 
and  Columella—is  an  obvious  error  derived  from  the  extreme  westerly 
position  of Portugal.  The  philosopher  Ptolemy  rightly  attributes  only  to 
the  planet  Zeus  (Juppiter),  which  ruled  the  north,  'winds  that  fertilize', 
and  Boraeus  was  one  of Zeus's  titles.1  Lactantius,  the  late  third-century 
Christian  Father,  makes  this  fertilization  of  the  mares an  analogy of  the 
mysterious  impregnation  of the Virgin  Mary  by  the  Holy  Spirit  (literally 
'breath'):  a  comment which was not at the time regarded as in bad taste.According  to  the  Odyssey,  the  home  of  the  winds,  that  is  to  say  the 
centre  of the  cult  of Boreas  and  his  brothers,  was  not  on  Mount  Haemus 
but  in  an  Aeolian  island;  perhaps  this  was  the  Aegean  island  of  Tenos 
which  lies  immediately  north  of  Delos,  where  a  megalithic  logan-stone 
was  shown  as  the  memorial  raised  by  Hercules  to  Calais  and  Zetes,  the 
heroic sons of Boreas and  Oreithuia.  But the cult  of Boreas  spread west as 
well  as north from Athens—the Thurians of Italy are known to have wor 
shipped  him—and  is  likely  to  have  reached  Spain  with  other  Greek 
colonists.  In late  Classical times Homer's  'Aeolian Isle'  was believed  to be

1  Traces  of  a  Palestinian  North  W i nd  cult  are  found  in  Isaiah,  XIV,  13,  Ezekiel,  I,  4, 
Psalms,  XLVIII,  2  and  Job,  XXXVII,  29.  God's  mountain  is  placed  in  the  far  north  and 
windy  manifestations  of his  glory  proceed  from  there.  In  the  earliest assignment of parts  of the 
heaven to deities,  Bel had the north pole and Ea  the south.  Bel was Zeus-Juppiter, Thursday's 
god,  often  identified  with  Jehovah;  but  had  taken  over  the  rule  of the North  from his  mother 
Belili,  the  White  Goddess.

437

Li  pari  which  had  been  colonized  by  Aeolians;  Lipari  bears  due  north 
from Sicily where the belief probably originated.

A  slighdy  Christianized  pagan  Irish  poem,  printed  in  Vol.  LI  of  the 
Ossianic  Society's Publications,  1 8 5 5,  gives  the  natal  characteristics  of the 
four  cardinal  winds.  It  not  only  shows  the  connexion  of winds  with  Fate 
but presents the child who is  born when  the north wind  blows as a type  of 
Hercules.

W I N DS  OF  F A TE

The boy who is born when the wind is from the west, 
He shall obtain clothing, food he shall obtain; 
He shall obtain from his lord, I say, 
No more than food and clothing.W I N DS  OF  F A TE

The boy who is born when the wind is from the west, 
He shall obtain clothing, food he shall obtain; 
He shall obtain from his lord, I say, 
No more than food and clothing.

The boy who is born when the wind is from the north, 
He shall win victory, but shall endure defeat. 
He shall be wounded, another shall he wound, 
Before he ascends to an angelic Heaven,

' The boy who is born when the wind is from the south, 
He shall get honey, fruit he shall get, 
In his house shall entertain 
Bishops and fine musicians.

Laden with gold is the wind from the east, 
The best wind ofall the four that blow; 
The boy who is born when that wind blows 
Want he shall never taste in all his life.

Whenever the wind does not blow 
Over the grass of the plain or mountain heather, 
Whosoever is then born, 
Whether boy or girl, a fool shall be.

At  this  point  we  can  clear  up  one  or  two  outstanding  puzzles.  If  the 
Athenians  worshipped  the  North  Wind  in  very  primitive  times  and  had 
brought  the  cult  with  them  from  Libya,  then  the  original  Hyperboreans, 
the  'back-of-the-North-wind  people',  a  priesthood  concerned  with  a 
Northern  other-world,  were  Libyans.  This  would  explain  Pindar's  mis 
taken  notion  that  Hercules  fetched  the  wild  olive  from  the  distant  north: 
he really fetched it from  the south,  perhaps from as  far south  as Egyptian 
Thebes where  it still  grew with  oaks  and  persea-trees  in  the  time  of Pliny 
—just  as  the  'Gorgon'  whom  Perseus  killed  during  his  visit  to  the  ass-
sacrificing Hyperboreans was  the southern  Goddess Neith  of Libya.  This 
was not Hercules the  oak-hero,  but the other Hercules,  the phallic  thumb,

438438

leader  of the  five  Dactyls,  who  according  to  the  tradition  that  Pausanias 
found  at  Elis  brought  such  an  abundance  of  wild-olive  from  Hyper-
boraea  that,  after  he  had  crowned  the  victor  of the  foot-race  run  by  bis 
brothers,  they all  slept  on  heaps  of its  fresh  leaves.  Pausanias,  though  he 
names  the  competitors,  does  not  say  who  won;  but  it  was  obviously 
Paeonius  the  forefinger,  which  always  comes  in first when  you  run your 
fingers  on  the  table  and  make  them  race,  for  the paean  or paeon  was  the 
song of victory. Moreover, Pausanias says that Zeus wresded with Cronos 
on  this  occasion,  and  beat  him;  Zeus  is  the  god  of the  forefinger,  and 
Cronos  the god  of the  middle,  or  fool's finger. The  Dactyl  who  came  in 
second  in  the  race  was  evidently  Epimedes,  'he  who  thinks  too  late',  the 
fool;  for  Pausanias  gives  the  names  in  this  order:  Hercules,  Paeonius, 
Epimedes, Jasius and Idas.The wild  olive,  then,  was  the  crown  of Paeonius  the  forefinger:  which 
means  that  the  vowel  of the  forefinger,  namely  O,  which  is  expressed  by 
the gorse  Onn in  the  Beth-Luis-Nion, was  expressed  by the wild  olive in 
the  Greek  tree  alphabet.  This  explains  the  use  of  olive  at  the  Spring 
festival  in  the  ancient  world,  which  continues  in  Spain  at  the  'Ramos' 
(boughs)  festival;  and  Hercules's  olive-wood  club—the  Sun  first  arms 
himself at the Spring equinox; and the olive-leaf in the bill of Noah's dove 
which  symbolizes  the  drying up  of the  winter  floods  by  the  Spring  Sun. 
It also  explains Paeonius  as  a  title  of Apollo  Helios  the  god  of the  young 
Sun, which however he seems  to have derived  from  the  Goddess Athene 
Paeonia who first brought the olive to Athens; and the name of the peony, 
paeonia,  a  Mediterranean  wild  flower  which  blooms  only  at  the  Spring 
solstice and quickly sheds its petals.

Spenser's  White  Goddess  is  the  Arthurian  'Lady  of the  Lake',  also

called  'the White Serpent',  'Nimue', and 'Vivien', whom Professor Rhys

in his Arthurian Legend identifies with  Rhiannon.  She is mistress  of Merlin

(Merddin)  and  treacherously  entombs  him  in  his  magic  cave  when,  as

Llew  Llaw to  Blodeuwedd,  or Samson  to  Delilah,  or  Curoi  to  Blathnat,

he has revealed  some of his  secrets  to her.  However,  in the earliest Welsh

account,  the  Dialogue  of Gwenddydd and  Merddin,  she  tells  him  to  arise

from  his  prison  and  'open  the  Books  of Inspiration  without  fear'.  In  this

dialogue she calls him 'twin-brother' which reveals her as Olwen, and she

is also styled  Gwenddydd wen adlam  Cerddeu,  'White Lady of Day,  refuge

of poems',  which  proves  her  to  be  the  Muse,  Cardea-Cerridwen,  who

inspires cerddeu, 'poems', in Greek, cerdeia.is also styled  Gwenddydd wen adlam  Cerddeu,  'White Lady of Day,  refuge

of poems',  which  proves  her  to  be  the  Muse,  Cardea-Cerridwen,  who

inspires cerddeu, 'poems', in Greek, cerdeia.

'What  is  inspiration?'  is  a  question  that  is  continually  asked.  T he 
derivation of the word supplies  two  related  answers.  'Inspiration' may be 
the  breathing-in  by  the  poet  of  intoxicating  fumes  from  an  intoxicating 
cauldron,  the  Awen  of the  cauldron  of Cerridwen,  containing  probably  a

439

mash  of barley,  acorns,  honey,  bull's  blood  and  such  sacred  herbs  as ivy, 
hellebore1  and  laurel,  or  mephitic  fumes  from  an  underground  vent  as  at 
Delphi,  or  the  fumes  that rise  to  the  nostrils when  toadstools  are  chewed. 
These  fumes  induce  the  paranoiac  trance  in  which  time  is  suspended, 
though  the  mind  remains  active  and  can  relate  its  proleptic  or  analeptic 
apprehensions in verse.  But 'inspiration'  may also  refer to  the inducement 
of  the  same  poetic  condition  by  the  act  of  listening  to  the  wind,  the 
messenger  of the  Goddess  Cardea,  in  a  sacred  grove.  At  Dodona  poetic 
oracles  were  listened  for  in  the  oak-grove,  and  the  prophetic  trance  was 
perhaps  induced  in  the  black-dove  priestesses  who  first  controlled  the 
oracle  by  the  chewing  of acorns;  at  any  rate,  a  scholiast  on  Lucan  notes 
that  this  method  was  used  among  the  Gallic  Druids.  In  Canaan  the 
prime  oracular  tree  was  the  acacia—the  'burning  bush'  discussed  in 
Chapter  Fifteen—and  there  is  a  reference  to  this  sort  of inspiration  in 
i  Chronicles,  XIV,  i5:

When  thou  hearest  the  sound  of marching  in  the  tops  of  the  mul

berry trees, then bestir thyself.When  thou  hearest  the  sound  of marching  in  the  tops  of  the  mul

berry trees, then bestir thyself.

Here, 'mulberry trees' should be 'acacias'. Jehovah himself was in the wind, 
and  the context—David's  assault  on  the  Philistines  from  Gibeon  to  Gaza 
—shows  that  it  blew  from  the  North.  This  story  dates  from  a  time  when 
Jehovah  was  not  yet  a  transcendental  God  but  lived,  like  Boreas,  in  a 
mountain to the far north; he was, in fact, the white bull-god Baal  Zephon 
('Lord  of  the  North')  who  had  borrowed  his  tide  from  his  Goddess 
Mother  Baaltis  Zapuna,  a  name  attested  in  an  inscription  from  Goshen 
where  the  tribe  of Joseph  was  once  setded.  The  Canaanites  worshipped 
him  as  King  of  the  Northern  Otherworld  and  the  Philistines  of  Ekron 
had taken over the cult; he was a god of prophecy and fertility. Another of 
his titles was  Baal-Zebul,  'the  Lord  of the  Mansion  [of the North]'  which 
named  the  tribe  of  Zebulon:  they  worshipped  him  on  Mount  Tabor. 
When  King  Ahaziah  of Israel  consulted  his  oracle  at  Ekron  (2  Kings,  I, 
1—4)  he  earned  Elijah's  reproach  for  not  consulting  the  native  Israelite 
oracle, presumably on Tabor. I suspect that Baal  Zabul was an autumnal 
Dionysus,  whose  devotees  intoxicated  themselves  on  amanita  muscaria, 
which still grows there;  the Biblical name for these toadstools being either 
'ermrods'  or  'little  foxes'.  By the  time  of Jesus, who was  accused  of traffic 
with  Beelzebub,  the  Kingdoms  of Israel  and  Philistia  had  long been  sup 
pressed  and  the shrines  of Ekron and Tabor destroyed;  and  Baal-Zebul's 
functions  having  been  taken  over  by  the  archangel  Gabriel,  he  had 
declined  to  a  mere  devil  mockingly  called  Baal-Zebub,  'Lord  of  Flies'.

1  T h is  perhaps  means  HeUe-bora,  'the  food  of the  Goddess  Helle'.  Helle  was the  Pelasgian1  T h is  perhaps  means  HeUe-bora,  'the  food  of the  Goddess  Helle'.  Helle  was the  Pelasgian

goddess w ho gave her name to the Hellespont.

440

Yet  the  Levite  butchers  continued  the  old  ritual  of  turning  the  victim's 
head to  the north when they sacrificed.

The acacia  is  still  a sacred tree in Arabia Deserta and  anyone who even 
breaks off a twig is expected  to die within the year.  The common  Classical 
icon  of the  Muse  whispering in  a  poet's  ear  refers  to  tree-top  inspiration: 
the  Muse is  the  dryad  (oak-fairy),  or  melia  (ash-fairy),  or melia  (quince-
fairy),  or  caryatid  (nut-fairy),  or  hamadryad (wood-fairy  in  general),  or 
heliconian  (fairy  of Mount  Helicon,  which  took  its  name  as  much  from 
helice,  the willow-tree sacred  to  poets,  as  from  the stream which  spiralled 
round it).

illegitimate  prophecy—'prophecy'  meaningillegitimate  prophecy—'prophecy'  meaning

Nowadays  poets  seldom  use  these  artificial  aids  to  inspiration,  though 
the  sound  of  wind  in  the  willows  or  in  a  plantation  of  forest-trees  still 
exercises  a  strangely  potent  influence  on  their  minds;  and  'inspiration'  is 
therefore  applied  to  any  means  whatsoever  by  which  the  poetic  trance  is 
induced.  But  a  good  many  of the  charlatans  or weaklings  resort  to  auto 
matic  writing  and  spiritism.  The  ancient  Hebrew  distinction  between 
legitimate  and 
inspired 
poetry,  in which  future events  are not  necessarily,  but usually,  foretold— 
has  much  to  recommend  it.  If a  prophet went into a  trance  and  was  after 
wards  unconscious  of what  he  had  been  babbling,  that  was  illegitimate; 
but  if he  remained  in  possession  of  his  critical  faculties  throughout  the 
trance and afterwards, that was legitimate.  His powers were heightened by 
the  'spirit of prophecy',  so  that his words  crystallized  immense experience 
into  a  single  poetic  jewel;  but  he  was,  by  the  grace  of  God,  the  sturdy 
author  and  regulator  of this  achievement.  The  spiritistic  medium,  on  the 
other  hand,  whose  soul  momentarily  absented  itself  so  that  demonic 
principalities  and  powers  might  occupy  his  body  and  speak  pipingly 
through  his  mouth  was  no  prophet  and  was  'cut  off from  the  congrega 
tion'  if it  was  found  that  he  had  deliberately  induced  the  trance.  The  ban 
was presumably extended to automatic writing.

Chapter  Twenty-Five

W AR  IN  H E A V EN

Must poetry necessarily be original? According to the Apollonian,Chapter  Twenty-Five

W AR  IN  H E A V EN

Must poetry necessarily be original? According to the Apollonian,

or  Classical,  theory  it  need  not  be,  since  the  test  of  a  good 
poet  is  his  ability  to  express  time-proved  sentiments  in  time-
honoured  forms  with  greater  fluency,  charm,  sonorousness  and  learning 
than his  rivals;  these,  at  least, are  the  qualities  that  win  a  man  a  bardic 
Chair.  Apollonian  poetry  is  essentially  court-poetry,  written  to  uphold 
the  authority  delegated  to  poets  by  the  King  (regarded  as  a  Roi Soleil, 
Apollo's  vice-regent)  on  the understanding  that  they  celebrate  and  per 
petuate  his  magnificence  and  terror.  They  therefore  use  old-fashioned 
diction,  formal  ornament,  and  regular,  sober,  well-polished  metre,  as  a 
means of upholding the dignity of their office; and make frequent eulogistic 
references to ancestral  events and  institutions.  There  is  an  extraordinary 
sameness in  their eulogies:  the Aztecs flattered their patriarchal Inca as  'a 
well-fed hawk, always ready for war'  which was a phrase worked  to  death 
by  the  early  mediaeval  Welsh  bards.

A  Classical  technique  such  as  was  perfected  by  these  bards,  or  by  the 
French poets of the Louis XTV period, or by the English poets of the early 
eighteenth-century  Augustan  Age  is  a  sure  sign  of  political  stability 
based on force of arms; and to be original in such an age is to be either a 
disloyal subject or a vagrant.The Augustan Age was so  called because  the poets were celebrating the 
same  renewal  of firm central  government  after  the  troubles  leading to  the 
execution  of one  king  and  the  banishment  of another,  as  the  Latin  poets 
(under orders  from  Maecenas, Minister of Propaganda  and  the Arts)  had 
celebrated after Augustus's triumph at the close of the Roman Civil Wars. 
The  new  poetic  technique  was  based  partly  on  contemporary  French 
practice—the  'Golden  Age'  of French  literature  had  just  begun—partly 
on  that  of  the  'Golden  Age'  of  Latin.  The  fashionable  ten-or-twelve-
syllabled  iambic  couplet,  well-balanced  and  heavily  packed  with  anti 
thetical  wit,  was  French.  The  use  of  'poetical  periphrasis'  as  a  formal 
ornament  was  Latin:  the  poet  was  expected  to  refer,  for  instance,  to  the 
sea as the 'briny deep'  or 'the fishy kingdom'  and  to fire as the 'devouring 
element'.  The  original  reason  for  this  convention  was  forgotten;  it  hadgrown  out  of the  old  religious  taboo  against  direct  mention  of dangerous, 
powerful  or  unlucky  things.  (This  taboo  survived  until  recendy  in  the 
Cornish  tin-mines,  where  fear  of the  pixies  made  the  miner  refrain  from 
speaking of'owls,  foxes, hares, cats or rats save in Tinner's language,' and 
in  Scodand  and  North-Eastern  England  among  fishermen  who  had  a 
similar fear of annoying the  pixies  by un-periphrastic  mention  of pigs,  cats 
or priests.)  Because  the  Latin  poets  also had  a poetic  diction,  with  vocab 
ulary  and  syntax  forbidden  to  prose-writers,  which  they  found  useful  in 
helping them  to accommodate Latin  to the  Greek  convention  of hexameter 
and  elegiac  couplet,  the  English  Augustans  gradually  developed  a  similar 
diction which  they  found  useful  in  resolving  awkward  metrical  problems. 
The  fanciful  use  of  periphrasis  was  extended  in  the  period  of  mid-
Victorian  Classicism.  Lewis  Carroll  apdy  parodied  the  poets  of his  time 
in  Poeta  Fit,  Non  Nascitur  (1860-63).

'Next, whenyou are describing 
A shape, or sound, or tint

Don't state the matter plainly 
But put it in a hint; 
And learn to look at all things

With a sort ofmental squint'

'For instance, if I wished, Sir,

Of mutton-pies to tell

Should I say" dreams offleecy flocks 
Pent in a wbeaten cell" ?

" Why,yes," the old man said: "thatphrase

Would answer very well." '

And  the  Romantic  Revival  had  brought  a  highly  archaic  diction  into 
fashion.  It was considered  improper to write:

But where the west winds blow, 
You care not, sweet, to know.

The correct language was:

Yet whitherward the ^ephyrs fare 
To ken thou lis test not, 0 maid most rare.But where the west winds blow, 
You care not, sweet, to know.

The correct language was:

Yet whitherward the ^ephyrs fare 
To ken thou lis test not, 0 maid most rare.

and  if  'wind'  was  used  it  had  to  rhyme  with  'mind'  not  with  'sinned'. 
But  Victorian  Classicism was  tainted  with  the ideal  of progress.  The dull, 
secure Augustan  'rocking-horse'  alexandrine and  heroic  couplet  had  been 
abandoned  since  Keats's  attack  on  them  and  a  poet  was  encouraged  to 
experiment in a variety  of metres and  to  take  his  themes  from anywhere  he 
pleased.  The change  marked  the  instability of the social  system:  Chartism 
threatened,  the  monarchy  was  unpopular,  and  the  preserves  of  the  old

443

landed  nobility  were  being  daily  encroached  upon  by  the  captains  of 
industry  and  the  East  India  Company  Nabobs.  Originality  came  to  be 
prized  as  a  virtue:  to  be  original  in  the  mid-Victorian  sense  implied  the 
'mental  squint'  which enlarged  the  field  of poetry by weaving  poetic spells 
over  such  useful  but  vulgar  things  as  steam-boats,  mutton-pies,  trade 
exhibitions and gas lamps. It also implied borrowing themes from Persian, 
Arabic or Indian literature, and acclimatizing the sapphic, alcaic, rondel and 
triolet as English metrical forms.The  true  poet must  always  be  original,  but  in  a simpler sense:  he  must 
address  only  the  Muse—not  the  King  or  Chief  Bard  or  the  people  in 
general—and tell her the truth about himself and her in his own passionate 
and  peculiar words.  The  Muse  is  a deity,  but she  is  also  a woman,  and  if 
her  celebrant  makes  love  to  her  with  the  second-hand  phrases  and 
ingenious  verbal  tricks  that  he  uses  to  flatter  her  son  Apollo  she  rejects 
him  more  decisively  even  than  she  rejects  the  tongue-tied  or  cowardly 
bungler.  Not  that the  Muse  is  ever completely satisfied.  Laura  Riding has 
spoken on her behalf in three memorable lines:

•

Forgive me, giver, if I destroy the gift: 
It is so nearly what wouldplease me 
I cannot but perfect it.

A  poet  cannot  continue  to  be a  poet if he  feels  that he  has made a  perma 
nent conquest of the Muse, that she is always his for the asking.

The Irish and Welsh distinguished carefully between poets and satirists: 
the poet's task was creative or  curative, that  of the  satirist  was  destructive 
or  noxious.  An  Irish  poet  could  compose  an  aer,  or  satire,  which  would 
blight  crops,  dry  up  milk,  raise  blotches  on  his  victim's  face  and  ruin  his 
character  for  ever.  According  to  The  Hearings  of  the  Scholars,  one 
'Brimon  smetrach',  that  is,  word-feat-ear-
synonym  for  satire  was 
tweaking:

A  brotherly  trick  used  to  be  played  by  poets  when  they  recited 
satire,  namely  to  tweak  the  ear-lobe  of their  victim  who,  since  there  is 
no bone there, could claim no compensation for loss of honour—— as he would have been  able  to  do if the poet had  tweaked his nose.  Nor 
might he forcibly resist, since the poet was sacrosanct; however, if he was 
satirized undeservedly,  the blotches would rise on  the poet's  own face and 
kill  him  at  once,  as  happened  to  the  poets  who  lampooned  the  blameless 
Luan  and  Cacir.  Edmund  Spenser  in  his  View  of the  Present  State  of 
Ireland writes of the Irish poets of his own day:

None dare displease  them for feare to runne into reproach thorough

their offence, and to be made infamous in the mouthes of men.

444

And  Shakespeare mentions  their power of 'rhyming rats  to  death',  having 
somewhere  heard  of the  seventh-century  Seanchan  Torpest,  the  master-
ollave  of  Ireland  who,  one  day  finding  that  rats  had  eaten  his  dinner, 
uttered  the  vindictive aer:

Rats have sharp snouts 
Yet are poor fighters...

which  killed  ten  of them  on  the spot,Rats have sharp snouts 
Yet are poor fighters...

which  killed  ten  of them  on  the spot,

In  Greece  the  metres  allotted  to  the  satirist  were  the  poetic  metres 
in  reverse.  Satire  can  be  called  left-handed  poetry.  The  Moon  travels 
from  left  to  right,  the  same  way  as  the  Sun,  but  as  she  grows  older 
and  weaker  rises  every  night  a  little  farther  to  the  left;  then,  since  the 
rate of plant growth under a waxing moon  is greater than under a waning 
moon,  the right hand has always been associated with growth and strength 
but the  left with  weakness  and  decay.  Thus  the word  'left'  itself means,  in 
Old  Germanic,  'weak,  old,  palsied'.  Lucky  dances  by  devotees  of  the 
Moon were therefore made  right-handed  or clockwise,  to  induce  prosper 
ity;  unlucky  ones  to  cause  damage  or  death  were  made  left-handed,  or 
'widdershins'.  Similarly,  the  right-handed  fire-wheel,  or  swastika,  was 
lucky;  the  left-handed  (adopted  by  the  Nazis)  unlucky.  There  are  two 
sides to  the worship  of the Indian Goddess  Kali:  her right side as benefac 
tress  and  universal  mother,  her  left  side  as  fury  and  ogress.  The  word 
'sinister'  has  come  to  mean  more  than  left-handed  because  in  Classical 
augury birds seen on the left hand portended ill-luck.The word 'curse'  derives from the Latin cursus,  'a running'—especially 
circular  running as in  a  chariot  race—and is short  for cursus contra  solem. 
Thus  Margaret Balfour, accused as a witch in sixteenth-century Scodand, 
was  charged  with  dancing  widdershins  nine  times  around  men's  houses, 
stark naked;  and my friend A.  K.  Smith  (late of the I.C.S.)  once accident 
ally  saw  a  naked  Indian  witch  do  the  very  same  thing  in  Southern  India 
as a ceremony of cursing. The Muse-priestesses of Helicon and Pieria, in a 
sinister  mood,  must  have  danced  nine  times  about  the  object  of  their 
curse, or an emblem of it,

Most  English  poets  have  occasionally  indulged  in  left-handed  satire, 
Skelton,  Donne,  Shakespeare,  Coleridge,  Blake  among  them;  those  who 
have  built  up  their  reputation  principally  on  satire,  or  parody—such  as 
Samuel  Buder,  Pope,  Swift,  Calverley—are  only grudgingly allowed  the 
tide  of poet  But there is  nothing in the  language  to  match  the  Irish  poets 
in  vindictiveness,  except  what  has  been  written  by  the  Anglo-Irish.  The 
technique  of  parody  is  the  same  as  that  employed  by  Russian  witches: 
they  walk  quiedy  behind  their  victim,  exacdy  mimicking  his  gait;  then 
when in  perfect sympathy with him suddenly stumble and fall,  taking care 
to  fall  soft while he  falls  hard.  Skilful  parody of a poem  upsets  its  dignity,

445

sometimes  permanently  as  in  the  case  of  the  school-anthology  poems 
parodied by Lewis Carroll in Alice in  Wonderland.445

sometimes  permanently  as  in  the  case  of  the  school-anthology  poems 
parodied by Lewis Carroll in Alice in  Wonderland.

The  purpose  of satire  is  to  destroy  whatever  is  overblown,  faded  and 
dull,  and  clear  the  soil  for a  new sowing.  So  the  Cypriots  understood  the 
mystery  of the  God  of the  Year  by  describing  him  as  amphidexios,  which 
includes  the  sense  of 'ambidextrous',  'ambiguous',  and  'ambivalent',  and 
putting  a  weapon  in  each  of his  hands.  He  is  himself and  his  other  self at 
the  same  time,  king  and  supplanter,  victim  and  murderer,  poet  and 
satirist—and  his  right  hand  does  not  know  what  his  left  hand  does.  In 
Mesopotamia,  as  Nergal,  he  was  both  the  Sower  who  brought  wealth  to 
the  fields and  the Reaper,  the God  of the Dead; but elsewhere, in order to 
simplify  the  myth,  he  was  represented  as  twins.  This  simplification  has 
led,  through  dualistic  theology,  to  the  theory  that  death,  evil,  decay  and 
destruction  are  erroneous  concepts  which  God,  the  Good,  the  Right 
Hand, will one day disprove. Ascetic theologians try to paralyze or lop off 
the  left  hand  in  honour  of the  right;  but  poets  are  aware  that  each  twin 
must  conquer  in  turn,  in  an  agelong  and  chivalrous  war  fought  for  the 
favours  of the  White  Goddess,  as  the  heroes  Gwyn  and  Greidawl  fought 
for  the  favours  of Creiddylad,  or  the  heroes  Mot  and  Aleyn  for  those  of 
Anatha  of Ugarit.  The war between  Good  and  Evil  has  been  waged  in  so 
indecent  and  painful  a  way  during  the  past  two  millennia  because  the 
theologians,  not  being  poets,  have  forbidden  the  Goddess  to  umpire  it, 
and  made  God  impose  on  the  Devil  impossible  terms  of  unconditional 
surrender.That woman  must  not  be  excluded  from  the  company of poets  was  one 
of  the  wise  rules  at  the  Devil  Tavern  in  Fleet  Street,  just  before  the 
Puritan  Revolution,  when  Ben  Jonson  laid  down  the  laws  of poetry  for 
his  young  contemporaries.  He knew  the  risk  run  by  Apollonians  who  try 
to  be  wholly  independent  of  women:  they  fall  into  sentimental  homo 
sexuality.  Once  poetic  fashions  begin  to  be  set  by  the  homosexual,  and 
'Platonic  love'—homosexual  idealism—is  introduced,  the  Goddess takes 
vengeance.  Socrates,  remember,  would  have  banished  poets  from  his 
dreary  Republic.  The  alternative  evasion  of  woman-love  is  monastic 
asceticism,  the  results  of  which  are  tragic  rather  than  comic  However, 
woman  is  not a  poet  she is  either a  Muse  or she is  nothing.1 This is not  to

1  T h e re are  only  a  few  recorded references in  English  Literature  to  a  male Muse,  and  most 
of these  occur in  poems written  by  homosexuals and  belong  to  morbid  pathology.  H o w e v e r, 
George  Sandys  in  A  Relation  of  a  Journey  Begun  ( 1 6 1 5 ),  calls  James  I  a  'Crowned  Muse'  per 
haps  because  James  behaved  more  like  a  Queen  than  a  K i ng  towards  his  favourites  at  Court 
and  because  he  published  an  elementary  treads e  on  versification.  A nd  Milton  writes  in 
Lycidas:

So  may  some gentle  Muse

With  lucky  words  favour  my  desrind  urn

And,  as  he passes,  turn,

And  bidfair  peace  be  to  my  sable  shroud. 
446So  may  some gentle  Muse

With  lucky  words  favour  my  desrind  urn

And,  as  he passes,  turn,

And  bidfair  peace  be  to  my  sable  shroud. 
446

say  that  a  woman  should  refrain  from  writing  poems;  only,  that  she 
should  write  as  a  woman,  not  as  if she  were  an  honorary  man.  The  poet 
was  originally  the mystes,  or  ecstatic  devotee  of the  Muse;  the women  who 
took  part in her rites were  her representatives,  like  the nine  dancers in the 
Cogul  cave-painting,  or  the  nine  women  who  warmed  the  cauldron  of 
Cerridwen  with  their  breaths  in  Gwion's  Preiddeu  Annwm.  Poetry  in  its 
archaic  setting,  in  fact,  was  either  the  moral  and  religious  law  laid  down 
for man  by the nine-fold  Muse, or the ecstatic utterance of man in  further 
ance  of  this  law  and  in  glorification  of  the  Muse.  It  is  the  imitation  of 
male  poetry  that  causes  the  false  ring  in  the  work  of  almost  all  women 
poets.  A woman who  concerns herself with  poetry should, I  believe, either 
be a silent Muse and inspire the poets by her womanly  presence, as  Queen 
Elizabeth  and  the  Countess  of  Derby  did,  or  she  should  be  the  Muse  in 
a  complete  sense:  she  should  be  in  turn  Arianrhod,  Blodeuwedd  and  the 
Old  Sow  of  Maenawr  Penardd  who  eats  her  farrow,  and  should  write 
in  each  of  these  capacities  with  antique  authority.  She  should  be  the 
visible  moon:  impartial,  loving,  severe,  wise.Sappho  undertook  this  responsibility:  one  should  not  believe  the 
malevolent  lies  of the  Attic  comedians  who  caricature  her  as  an  insatiable 
Lesbian.  The quality of her poems proves her to  have been a true  Cerrid 
wen.  I  once  asked  my  so-called  Moral  Tutor  at  Oxford,  a  Classical 
scholar  and  Apollonian:  'Tell  me,  sir,  do  you  think  that  Sappho  was  a 
good  poet?'  He looked up and  down  the street, as if to see whether anyone 
was  listening  and  then  confided  to  me:  'Yes,  Graves,  that's  the  trouble, 
she was very, very good!'  I gathered  that he considered it fortunate that so 
little  of  her  work  had  survived.  The  sixteenth-century  Welsh  woman-
poet,  Gwerfyl  Mechain,  also  seems  to  have  played  the  part  of Cerridwen: 
T  am  the  hostess  of  the  irreproachable  Ferry  Tavern,  a  white-gowned 
moon welcoming  any man who  comes  to  me with  silver.'

The main theme of poetry is, properly, the relations of man and woman, 
rather than those of man and man, as the Apollonian Classicists would have 
it.  The  true  poet who  goes  to  the  tavern  and  pays  the  silver  tribute  to 
Blodeuwedd  goes over the river to his death. As in the story of Llew Llaw: 
'All  their  discourse  that  night  was  concerning  the  affection  and  love  that 
they  felt  one  for  the  other  and  which  in  no  longer  space  than  one  evening 
had  arisen.'  This  paradise  lasts  only  from  May  Day  to  St.  John's  Eve. 
Then  the  plot  is  hatched  and  the  poisoned  dart flies; and  the  poet  knows 
that it must be so.  For him there is no other woman but Cerridwen and he 
desires one thing above all else in the world:  her love. As Blodeuwedd, she 
will  gladly give  him her love,  but at  only one  price:  his  life.  She will exact

However,  this is a mere  conceit.  "Muse' stands for 'poet possessed by  a Muse': Milton had just

traditionally addressed the female Muse with:However,  this is a mere  conceit.  "Muse' stands for 'poet possessed by  a Muse': Milton had just

traditionally addressed the female Muse with:

Begin,  then,  Sisters  of the  sacred  well...

447

payment  punctually  and  bloodily.  Other  women,  other  goddesses,  are 
kinder-seeming.  They  sell  their  love  at  a  reasonable  rate—sometimes  a 
man  may even  have  it  for  the  asking.  But not  Cerridwen:  for  with  her 
love  goes  wisdom.  And  however  bitterly  and  grossly  the  poet  may rail 
against  her  in  the  hour  of his  humiliation—Catullus  is  the  most  familiar 
instance—he has been party  to  his  own  betrayal and  has no  just  cause  for 
complaint

Cerridwen  abides.  Poetry  began  in  the  matriarchal  age,  and  derives 
its  magic  from  the  moon,  not  from  the  sun.  No  poet  can  hope  to  under 
stand  the  nature  of poetry  unless  he  has  had  a  vision  of the  Naked  King 
crucified  to  the  lopped  oak,  and  watched  the  dancers,  red-eyed  from  the 
acrid  smoke  of the sacrificial fires, stamping  out  the  measure  of the  dance, 
their  bodies  bent  uncouthly  forward,  with  a  monotonous  chant  of:  'Kill! 
kill! kill!' and 'Blood! blood! blood!'Constant illiterate  use  of the  phrase  'to  woo  the Muse'  has  obscured  its 
poetic  sense:  the  poet's  inner  communion  with  the  White  Goddess, 
regarded  as  the  source  of truth.  Truth  has  been  represented  by  poets  as  a 
naked  woman:  a  woman  divested  of all  garments  or  ornaments  that  will 
commit her to any particular position in time and space. The Syrian Moon-
goddess  was  also  represented  so,  with  a  snake  head-dress  to  remind  the 
devotee  that  she  was  Death  in  disguise,  and  a  lion crouched watchfully 
at  her  feet.  The  poet  is  in  love  with  the  White  Goddess,  with  Truth:  his 
heart  breaks  with  longing  and  love  for  her.  She  is  the  Flower-goddess 
Olwen  or  Blodeuwedd;  but  she  is  also  Blodeuwedd  the  O w l,  lamp-eyed, 
hooting dismally,  with  her  foul  nest  in  the  hollow of a  dead  tree,  or  Circe 
the  pitiless  falcon,  or  Lamia  with  her  nickering  tongue,  or  the  snarling-
chopped  Sow-goddess,  or  the  mare-headed  Rhiannon  who  feeds on  raw 
flesh.  Odi  atque  amo:  'to  be  in  love  with'  is  also  to  hate.  Determined  to 
escape  from  the  dilemma,  the  Apollonian  teaches  himself  to  despise 
woman,  and teaches woman  to despise herself.Solomon's  wit  is  bitterly  succinct:  'The  horse-leech's  two  daughters: 
Give  and  Give'  The  horse-leech  is  a  small  fresh-water  animal  akin  to  the 
medicinal leech, with thirty teeth in its jaws.  When a beast goes down to a 
stream  to  drink,  the  leech  swims  into  its  mouth  and  fastens  on  the  soft 
flesh at the back of its throat. It then sucks blood until completely distended, 
driving the beast frantic,  and as a type  of relentless greed gives its  name to 
the  Alukah,  who  is  the  Canaanite  Lamia,  or  Succuba,  or  Vampire.  The 
two  daughters  of  Alukah  are  insatiable,  like  Alukah  herself:  and  their 
names are Sheol and the W o m b, or Death and Life. Solomon says, in other 
words: 'Women are greedy of children; they suck the vigour of their men 
folk,  like  the  Vampire;  they  are  sexually  insatiable;  they  resemble  the 
horse-leech  of the  pond  which  plagues  horses.  A nd  to  what  purpose  are 
men  born  of women?  Only  in  the end  to  die.  T he grave  and  woman  are

448

equally  insatiable.'  But  Solomon  of the  Proverbs  was  a  sour  philosopher, 
not  a  romantic  poet  like  the  Galilean  'Solomon'  of  the  Canticles  who  is 
really  Salmaah,  the  Kenite  Dionysus,  making  love  in  Hellenistic  style  to 
his twin-sister,  the May bride of Shulem.The  reason  why so  remarkably  few young  poets  continue  nowadays  to 
publish  poetry  after  their  early  twenties  is  not  necessarily—as  I  used  to 
think—the  decay  of patronage  and  the  impossibility  of earning  a  decent 
living  by  the  profession  of poetry.  There  are  several  ways  of supporting 
life  which  are  consonant  with  the  writing  of  poems;  and  publication  of 
poems  is  not difficult.  The  reason  is  that  something  dies  in  the  poet.  Per 
haps  he  has  compromised  his  poetic  integrity  by  valuing  some  range  of 
experience  or  other—literary,  religious,  philosophical,  dramatic,  political 
or  social—above  the  poetic.  But  perhaps  also  he  has  lost  his  sense  of the 
White  Goddess:  the  woman  whom  he  took  to  be  a  Muse,  or  who  was  a 
Muse,  turns  into  a  domestic  woman  and  would  have  him  turn  similarly 
into  a  domesticated  man.  Loyalty  prevents  him  from  parting  company 
with  her,  especially  if she  is  the  mother of his  children and  is  proud  to  be 
reckoned  a  good  housewife;  and  as  the  Muse  fades  out,  so  does  the  poet. 
The  English  poets  of  the  early  nineteenth  century,  when  the  poetry-
reading public was  very large, were uncomfortably aware  of this  problem 
and  many  of  them,  such  as  Southey  and  Patmore,  tried  to  lyricize 
domesticity,  though none of them with  poetic success.  The White  Goddess 
is  anti-domestic;  she  is  the  perpetual  'other woman',  and  her  part  is  diffi 
cult  indeed  for  a  woman  of sensibility  to  play  for  more  than  a  few  years, 
because  the  temptation  to  commit suicide  in  simple  domesticity  lurks  in 
every maenad's and muse's heartAn  unhappy  solution  to  this  difficult  problem  was  attempted  in  Con-
naught  in  the  seventh  century  A . D.  by Liadan  of Corkaguiney,  a  noble 
woman  and  also  an  ollave-poet.  She  went  with  her  train  of twenty-four 
poet-pupils,  as  the  immemorial  custom  was,  on  a  poetic  cuairt,  or  circuit 
of visits  where,  among others,  the  poet  Curithir  made  an  ale-feast  for her 
and  she  fell  in  love  with  him.  He  felt  an  answering  love  and  asked  her: 
'Why  should  we  not  marry?  A  son  born  to  us  would  be  famous.'  She 
answered:  'Not now,  it would spoil my round  of poetic visits.  Come to me 
later at  Corkaguiney and I will go with you.'  Then she began to brood  on 
his  words,  and  the  more  she  brooded  the  less  she  liked  them:  he  had 
spoken  not  of their  love  but  only  of their  fame  and  of a  famous  son  who 
might  one  day  be  born  to  them.  Why  a  son?  Why  not  a  daughter?  Was 
he rating his gifts above hers? And why irrelevantly contemplate the birth 
of future  poets?  Why  was  Curithir  not  content  to  be  a  poet  himself and 
live  in  her  poetic  company?  To  bear  children  to  such  a  man  would  be  a 
sin  against  herself;  yet  she  loved  him  with  all  her  heart  and  had  solemnly 
promised  to  go with him.

449449

So  when  Liadan  had  finished  her  circuit  of  visits  to  the  kings'  and 
chieftains'  houses  of  Connaught,  exchanging  poetic  lore  with  the  poets 
she  found  there,  and  receiving  gifts  from  her  hosts,  she  took  a  religious 
v ow of chastity which it would be death to break;  and  did this not for any 
religious  motive,  but  because  she  was  a  poet  and  realized  that  to  marry 
Curithir  would  destroy  the  poetic  bond  between  them.  He  came  to  fetch 
her presently and, true to her promise, she went with him; but, true to her 
vow,  she  would  not  sleep  with  him.  Overwhelmed  with  grief he  took  a 
similar  vow.  The  two  then  placed  themselves  under  the  direction  of the 
severe  and  suspicious  St.  Cummine,  who  gave  Curithir  the  choice  of 
seeing  Liadan  without  speaking  to  her,  or  speaking  to  her  without  seeing 
her.  As  a  poet  he  chose  speech.  Alternately  each  would  wander  around 
the  other's  wattled  cell  in  Cummine's  monastic  settlement,  never  being 
allowed  to  meet.  When  Curithir finally persuaded  Cummine  to  relax  the 
severity  of this  rule,  he  at  once  accused  them  of unchastity  and  banished 
Curithir from the settlement.  Curithir renounced  love, became  a pilgrim, 
and  Liadan  died  of remorse  for  the  barren  victory that she  had  won over 
him.The  Irish  have  been  aware  of  the  poet's  love-problem  since  pre-
Christian  times.  In  the  Sickbed  of  Cuchulain,  Cuchulain,  who  is  a  poet  as 
well  as  a  hero,  has  deserted  his  wife  Emer  and  fallen  under  the  spell  of 
Fand,  a  Queen of the  Sidhe.  Emer herself was  originally his  Muse  and  at 
their  first  meeting  they  had  exchanged  poetic  conversation  so  abstruse 
that nobody present understood a word; but marriage had estranged them. 
Emer  comes  angrily  to  Fand's  rath  to  reclaim  Cuchulain,  and  Fand 
renounces  her  possession  of him,  admitting  that  he  does  not  really  love 
her and that he had better return to Emen

Emer, noble wife, this man is yours. 
He has broken away from me, 
But still I am fated to desire 
What my hand cannot hold and keep.

Cuchulain goes back, but Emer's victory is as barren as Liadan of Corka-

guiney's.  An  ancient Irish  Triad is justified:  'It is  death  to mock a poet,  to

love a poet, to be a poet.'

Let  us  consider  Suibne  Geilt,  the  poet-King  of  Dal  Araidhe,  about

whom an anonymous  ninth-century Irishman composed a prose tale,  The

Madness  of  Suibne,  incorporating  a  sequence  of  dramatic  poems  based  on

certain  seventh-century  originals  which  were  attributed  to  Suibne

himself.  In  the  tale,  as  it  has  come  down  to  us,  Suibne  was  driven  mad 
because  he  had  twice  insulted  St.  Ronan: first, by  interrupting  the  Saint

as  he  marked  out  the  site  of a  new  church  without  royal  permission,  and

4 5°as  he  marked  out  the  site  of a  new  church  without  royal  permission,  and

4 5°

tossing his psalter into  a stream;  and next, by  flinging  a spear at him as he 
tried  to  make  peace between  the  High  King  of Ireland  and  Suibne's  over 
lord, just before the Batde of Magh Rath. The spear hit St. Ronan's mass-
bell,  but  glanced  off harmlessly.  St.  Ronan  thereupon  cursed  Suibne  with 
the  flying  madness.  Evidence  found  in  three  early  chronicles,  however, 
suggests  that  Suibne's  second  insult  was  directed  not  at  St.  Ronan  but 
at  an  ollave,  or  sacrosanct  poet,  who  was  trying  to  make  peace  on  the  eve 
of Magh  Rath between  the rival army-commanders,  namely  King  Domnal 
the  Scot,  and  Domnal  High  King  of Ireland.  In  the  seventh  century,  such 
peacemaking  was  an  ollave's  function,  not  a  priest's.  Perhaps  Suibne's 
spear  struck  the  branch  of golden  bells  which  were  the  ollave's  emblem 
of office;  and  the  ollave vengefully  threw  in  his  face  a  so-called  'madman's 
wisp'  (a  magical  handful  of straw),  which  sent him  fleeing  crazily  from  the 
battlefield.  At  any  rate,  Suibne's  wife  Forann  had  tried  to  restrain  him 
from  this  act  of  folly,  and  was  therefore  spared  the  curse.  The  flying 
madness  is  described  as  making  his  body  so  light  that  he  could  perch  in 
the  tops  of  trees,  and  leap  desperate  leaps  of  a  hundred  feet  or  more 
without  injury.  (Mediaeval  Latin  philosophers  described  the  condition  as 
spiritualhatio,  agilitas  and  subtilitas,  and  applied  it  to  cases  of  levitation 
by  ecstatic  saints.)  Feathers  then  sprouted  on  Suibne's  body,  and  he  lived 
like  the  wild  things:  feeding  on  sloes,  hollyberries,  watercress,  brooklime, 
acorns;  sleeping  in  yew-trees  and  rocky  clefts  of ivy-clad  cliffs,  and  even 
in  hawthorn  and  bramble  bushes.  The  slightest  noise  would  startle him 
into  flight,  and he was cursed with a perpetual distrust of all men.Suibne  had  a  friend,  Loingseachan,  who  constantly  went  in  pursuit, 
trying  to  catch  and  cure  him.  Loingseachan  succeeded  in  this  on  three 
occasions,  but  Suibne  always  relapsed:  a  fury  known  as  'the  Hag  of the 
Mill',  would  soon  tempt  him  to  renew  his  frantic  leaps.  During  a  lucid 
interval  after  seven  years  of  madness,  Suibne  visited  Forann,  who  was 
being  forced  to  marry  his  successor  the  new  king—and  one  most  moving 
dramatic poem records  their conversation:

SUIBNE:  'At  ease  you  are,  bright  £orann,

Bound bedward to your lover; 
It is not so with Suibne here— 
Long has he wandered footloose.

Lightly once, great £orann, 
You whispered words that pleased me. 
"I could not live," you said, "were I 
Parted one day from Suibne."

'Now it is clear and daylight clear, 
How small your care for Suibne;

45*

You lie warm on a good down bed, 
He starves for cold till sunrise.'

E O R A N N:   ' Welcome, my guileless madman, 
Dearest of humankind! 
Though soft I lie, my body wastes 
Since the day of your downfall!

S U I B N E:  'More welcome than I, that prince

Who escorts you to the banquet. 
He is your chosen gallant; 
Your old love you neglect.'

E O R A N N:   ' Though a prince may now escort me

To the carefree banquet-kali, 
I had liefer sleep in a tree's cramped bole 
With you, Suibne, my husband.

'Could I choose from all the warriors 
Of Ireland and of Scotland, 
I had liefer live, blameless, with you 
On watercress and water.'

S U I B N E:  'NO path for his belovid

Is Suibne's track of care; 
Cold he lies at ArdAbhla, 
His lodgings cold are many.

'Far better to feel affection 
For the prince whose bride you are, 
Than for this madman all uncouth, 
Famished and stark-naked.'

E O R A N N:  'I grieve for you, toiling madman, 
So filthy and downcast; 
I grieve that your skin is weather worn. 
Torn by spines and brambles . ..E O R A N N:  'I grieve for you, toiling madman, 
So filthy and downcast; 
I grieve that your skin is weather worn. 
Torn by spines and brambles . ..

'O that we were together, 
And my body feathered too; 
In light and darkness would I wander 
With you, for evermore!'

S U I B N E:  'One night I spent in cheerful Mourne,

One night in Banns sweet estuary. 
I have roved this land from end to end. ..

452

The  tale  continues:

'Hardly  had  Suibne  spoken  these  words  when  the  army  came 
marching  into  the  camp  from  all  directions.  He  sped  away  in  wild 
flight,  as he had  often  done before;  and presendy, when he had perched 
on  a  high,  ivy-clad  branch,  the Hag of the Mill  setded  close beside him. 
Suibne then made this poem, describing the trees and herbs of Ireland:

Bushy oak, leafy oak, 
You tower above all trees. 
O hazel, little branching one, 
Coffer for sweet nuts I

You are not cruel, O alder. 
Delightfully  you  gham, 
You neither rend nor prickle 
In the gap you occupy.

Blackthorn, little thorny one, 
Dark provider of sloes. 
Watercress, Rule green-topped one, 
From the stream where blackbirds drink.

O apple-tree, true to your kind, 
You are much shaken by men; 
0 rowan, cluster-berried one, 
Beautiful is your blossom /

0 briar, arching over, 
You never play me fair; 
Ever again you tear me, 
Drinking your fill of blood.

Yew-tree,yew-tree, true to your kind, 
In churchyards you are found; 
0  ivy, growing ivy-like. 
You are found in the dark wood.

0 holly, tree of shelter, 
Bulwark against the winds; 
0 ash-tree, very baleful one, 
Haft for the warrior's spear.

0 birch-tree, smooth and blessed, 
Melodious  andproud,

453

Delightful every tangled branch 
At the top of your crown....0 birch-tree, smooth and blessed, 
Melodious  andproud,

453

Delightful every tangled branch 
At the top of your crown....

Yet  misery  piled  upon  misery,  until  one  day,  when  Suibne  was  about 
to  pluck  watercress  from  a  stream  at  Ros  Cornain,  the  wife  of  the 
monastery  bailiff  chased  him  away  and  plucked  it  all  for  herself,  which 
sent him into  utter despair:

Gloomy is this life, 
In lack of a soft bed, 
To know the numbing frost, 
And rough wind-driven snow.

Cold wind, icy wind, 
Faint shadow ofa feeble sun, 
Shelter of a single tree 
On the top ofa flat hill.

,

Enduring  the  rain-storm, 
Stepping along deer-paths, 
Slouching through greensward 
On a day ofgrey frost.

A belling of stags 
That echoes through the wood, 
A climb to the deer-pass, 
The  roar  of  spumy  seas....

Stretched on a watery bed 
By the banks of Loch Erne, 
I consider early rising 
When the day shall dawn.

Then Suibne thought again of Jlorann. The story goes:

'Thereafter  Suibne  went  to  the  place  where  fiorann  was,  and  stood 
at  the  outer  door  of the  house  wherein  were  the  queen  and  her  women 
folk,  and  said  again:  "At  ease  you  are,  Eorann,  though  ease  is  not  for 
me."

'  "True," said Eorann, "yet come in," said she. 
'  "Indeed  I  will  not,"  said  Suibne,  "lest  the  army  pen  me  into  the

house."

'  "Methinks,"  said  she,  "your  reason  does  not  improve  with  time, 
and  since  you  will  not  stay  with  us,"  said  she,  "go  away  and  do  not

454

visit us  at  all,  for  we  are  ashamed  that  you  should  be  seen  in  this  guise 
by those who  have seen you  in  your true guise."

'  "Wretched  indeed  is  that,"  said  Suibne.  "Woe to  him  who  trusts  a

w o m a n . . . ."  ''  "Wretched  indeed  is  that,"  said  Suibne.  "Woe to  him  who  trusts  a

w o m a n . . . ."  '

Suibne  resumed  his  fruidess  wanderings,  until  befriended  by  a  cow 
man's  wife,  who  would  secredy  pour  a  little  milk  for  him  into  a  hole  she 
had  stamped  with  her  heel  in  the  stable  cow-dung.  He  lapped  the  milk 
gratefully,  but  one  day  the  cowman  mistook  him  for  her  lover,  flung  a 
spear,  and  mortally  wounded  him.  Then  Suibne  regained  his  reason  and 
died in peace.  He  lies buried  beneath  a fine headstone which  the generous-
hearted St. Moling raised to h i m . . ..

This  impossible  tale  conceals  a  true  one;  that  of the  poet  obsessed  by 
the  Hag  of the  Mill,  another  name  for  the  White  Goddess.  He  calls  her 
'the  woman  white  with  flour'  just  as  the  Greeks  called  her  'Alphito, 
Goddess  of the  Barley  Flour'.  This  poet  quarrels  with  both  the  Church 
and  the  bards  of the  Academic  Establishment,  and  is  outlawed  by  them. 
He  loses  touch  with  his  more  practical  wife,  once  his  Muse;  and  though, 
pitying  such  misery,  she  admits  to  a  still  unextinguished  love  for  him, 
he  can  no  longer  reach  her.  He  trusts  nobody,  not  even  his  best  friend, 
and  enjoys  no  companionship  but  that  of  the  blackbirds,  the  stags,  the 
larks,  the  badgers,  the  little  foxes,  and  the  wild  trees.  Towards  the  end 
of his  tale  Suibne  has  lost  even  the  Hag  of the  Mill,  who  snaps  her  neck-
bone  in  leaping  along  with  him;  which  means,  I  suppose,  that  he  breaks 
down  as  a  poet  under  the  strain  of  loneliness.  In  his  extremity  Suibne 
returns  to Eorann; but her heart has  gone dead  by now, and she sends him 
coldly  away.The  tale  seems  to  be  devised  as  an  illustration  of the  Triad  that  it  is 
'death  to  mock  a  poet,  death  to  love  a  poet,  death  to  be  a  poet'.  Suibne 
found  it  death  to  mock  a  poet;  and  death  to  be  a  poet;  Eorann  found  it 
death  to  love  a  poet.  Only  after  he  had  died  in  misery  did  Suibne's  fame 
flourish again.

This  must  be  the  most  ruthless  and  bitter  description  in  all  European 
literature  of an  obsessed  poet's  predicament.  The  woman-poet's  predica 
ment  is  described  in  an  almost  equally  poignant  tale:  The  Loves  of  Liadan 
and Curithir,  discussed above, is as sorrowful as  Suibne's.

But  let  us  not  wallow  in  these  griefs  and  flying-madnesses.  A  poet 
writes, as a rule, while he is young, and has  the spell of the White Goddess 
on  him.

My love is of a birth as rare

As 'tis by nature strange and high:

It was begotten by despair 
Upon impossibility.

455

In  the  result,  he  either  loses  the  girl  altogether,  as  he  rightly  feared; 
or else he marries her and  loses  her  in  part.  Well,  why  not?  If she  makes 
him  a  good  wife,  why  should  he  cherish  the  poetic  obsession  to  his  own 
ruin?  Again,  if a  woman-poet  can  get  a  healthy  child  in  exchange  for  the 
gift  of poetry,  why  not?  The  sovereign  White  Goddess  dismisses  both 
deserters  with  a  faintly  scornful  smile,  and  inflicts  no  punishment,  so  far 
as  I  know;  but  then  neither  did  she  praise  and  cosset  and  confer  Orders 
on  them  while  they  served  her.  There  is  no  disgrace  in  being  an  ex-poet; 
if  only  one  makes  a  clean  break  with  poetry,  like  Rimbaud,  or  (more 
recently) Laura Riding.Yet,  is  the  alternative  between  service  to  the  White  Goddess,  on  the 
one  hand,  and  respectable  citizenship,  on  the  other,  quite  so  sharp  as  the 
Irish  poets  presented  it?  Suibne  in  his  tale  has  an  over-riding  obsession 
about poetry;  so  has  Liadan  in hers.  But was  either of them  gifted  with a 
sense  of  humour?  Doubdess  not,  or  they  would  never  have  punished 
themselves  so  cruelly.  Humour  is  one  gift  that  helps  men  and  women  to 
survive  the  stress  of  city  life.  If  he  keeps  his  sense  of  humour,  too,  a 
poet  can  go  mad  gracefully,  swallow  his  disappointments  in  love  grace 
fully,  reject  the  Establishment  gracefully,  die  gracefully,  and  rause  no 
upheaval  in'society.  Nor  need  he  indulge  in  self-pity,  or  cause  distress  to 
those who love him;  and that goes for a woman-poet also.

Humour  is  surely  reconcilable  with  devotion  to  the  White  Goddess; 
as  it  is,  for  example,  with  perfect  sanctity  in  a  Catholic  priest,  whose 
goings  and  comings  are  far  more  strictly  circumscribed  than  a  poet's, 
and  whose  Bible  contains  not  one  smile  from  Genesis  to  the  Apocalypse. 
Andro  Man said of the  Queen of Elphame in  1 5 9 7:  'She can be young or 
old,  as  it  pleases  her';  and  indeed,  the  Goddess  reserves  a  delightfully 
girlish  giggle  for  those  who  are  not  daunted  by  her  customary  adult 
marble  glare.  She  may  even  allow  her  poet  an  eventual  happy  marriage, 
if  he  has  taken  his  early  tumbles  in  good  part.  For  though  she  is,  by 
definition,  non-human,  neither  is  she  altogether  inhuman.  Suibne  com 
plains  about a snowstorm  that caught him without clothes in the fork of a 
tree:

I am in great distress tonight, 
Pure wind my body pierces; 
My feet are wounded, my cheek pale, 
Great God, I have cause for grief!I am in great distress tonight, 
Pure wind my body pierces; 
My feet are wounded, my cheek pale, 
Great God, I have cause for grief!

Yet  his  sufferings  were  by  no  means  the  whole  story.  He  enjoyed  life 
to  the  full  in  better  weather:  his  meals  of  wild  strawberries  or  blue 
berries,  the  swift  flight  that  enabled  him  to  overtake  the  wood-pigeon, 
his  rides  on  the  antlers  of a stag  or on  the back of a slender-shinned  fawn. 
He  could  even  say:  T  take  no  pleasure  in  the  amorous  talk  of man  with 
456

woman;  far more  lovely,  to  my  ear,  is  the  song of the blackbird.'  Nobody 
can  blame  Eorann  for  asking  Suibne  politely  to  begone,  when  he  had 
reached  that  stage.  What  preserved  her,  and  what  he  lacked,  was  surely 
a  sense  of  humour?  Eorann's  earlier  wish  for  a  feathered  body  which 
would  let her fly  around  with  him,  suggests  that  she  too  began  as  a  poet, 
but sensibly resigned when the time for poetry had gone by.

Can  the matter be  left at this point?  And should  it be left there? In  our

chase  of the  Roebuck:

W''m powlert up and down a bit and had a rattkng dayCan  the matter be  left at this point?  And should  it be left there? In  our

chase  of the  Roebuck:

W''m powlert up and down a bit and had a rattkng day

like the Three Jovial Huntsmen.  But is it enough to have described some 
thing of the peculiar way in which  poets have always thought, and  to have 
recorded at the same time the survival of various  antique themes and con 
cepts,  or even  to have suggested a new intellectual approach to myths and 
sacred  literature?  What  comes  next?  Should  a  practical  poetic  creed  be 
drafted, which poets might debate, point by point, until it satisfied  them as 
relevant  to  their  immediate  writing  needs  and  in  proper  form  for  unani 
mous  subscription?  But  who  would  presume  to  summon  these  poets  to  a 
synod  or  preside  over  their  sessions?  Who  can  make  any  claim  to  be  a 
chief  poet  and  wear  the  embroidered  mande  of  office  which  the  ancient 
Irish  called  the  tugen?  Who  can even  claim  to  be  an  ollave?  The  ollave in 
ancient  Ireland  had  to  be  master  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  Oghams,  or 
verbal  ciphers,  which  allowed  him  to  converse  with  his  fellow-poets  over 
the  heads  of  unlearned  bystanders;  to  be  able  to  repeat  at  a  moment's 
notice  any  one  of  three  hundred  and  fifty  long  traditional  histories  and 
romances,  together with  the incidental poems they contained, with appro 
priate  harp  accompaniment;  to  have  memorized  an  immense  number  of 
other poems of different sorts;  to  be  learned  in philosophy;  to be a doctor 
of  civil  law;  to  understand  the  history  of  modern,  middle  and  ancient 
Irish  with  the  derivations  and  changes  of meaning  of every  word;  to  be 
skilled  in  music,  augury,  divination,  medicine,  mathematics,  geography, 
universal  history,  astronomy,  rhetoric  and  foreign  languages;  and  to  be 
able to extemporize poetry in fifty or more complicated metres. That any 
one  at  all  should  have  been  able  to  qualify  as  an  ollave  is  surprising;  yet 
families  of ollaves  tended  to  intermarry;  and  among  the  Maoris  of New 
Zealand  where  a  curiously  similar  system  prevailed,  the  capacity  of the 
ollave  to  memorize,  comprehend,  elucidate  and  extemporize  staggered 
Governor Grey and other early British observers.Again,  if this  hypothetic  synod  were  reserved  for  poets  whose  mother 
tongue  is  English,  how  many  poets  with  the  necessary  patience  and 
integrity  to  produce  any  authoritative  document  would  respond  to  a 
summons?  And  even  if  the  synod  could  be  summoned,  would  not  a

457

cleavage  be  immediately  apparent  between  the  devotees  of  Apollo  and 
those  of the  White  Goddess?  This  is  an  Apollonian  civilization.  It  is  true 
that  in  English-speaking  countries  the  social  position  of  women  has 
improved  enormously  in  the  last  fifty  years  and  is  likely  to  improve  still 
more  now  that  so  large  a  part  of the  national  wealth  is  in  the  control  of 
women—in  the  United  States  more  than  a  half;  but  the  age  of religious 
revelation  seems  to  be  over,  and  social  security  is  so  intricately  bound  up 
with  marriage  and  the  family—even  where  registry  marriages  predomin 
ate—that  the  White  Goddess  in  her  orgiastic  character  seems  to  have  no 
chance  of  staging  a  come-back,  until  women  themselves  grow  weary  of 
decadent  patriarchalism,  and  turn  Bassarids  again.  This  is  unlikely  as 
yet,  though  the  archives  of morbid  pathology  are  full  of  Bassarid  case-
histories.  An  English  or  American  woman  in  a  nervous  breakdown  of 
sexual  origin  will  often  instinctively  reproduce  in  faithful  and  disgusting 
detail  much  of the  ancient  Dionysiac  ritual.  I  have  witnessed  it  myself in 
helpless terror.The  ascetic  Thunder-god  who  inspired  the  Protestant  Revolution 
has again  yielded  pride  of place  to  Celestial  Hercules, the  original  patron 
of the  English  monarchy.  All  the  popular  feasts  in  the  Christian  calendar 
are  concerned  either  with  the  Son  or  the  Mother,  not  with  the  Father, 
though  prayers  for  rain,  victory  and  the  King's  or President's  health  are 
still half-heartedly addressed to him. It is only the pure allegiance of Jesus, 
recorded  in  the  Gospels,  that  has  kept  the  Father from going  'the way of 
all  flesh'—the  way of his  predecessors  Saturn,  The  Dagda and  Kai 1—to 
end  as  chief cook  and  buffoon  in  the  mid-winter  masquerade.  That  may 
yet  be  the  Father's  end  in  Britain,  if popular  religious  forces  continue  to 
work  in  their traditional  fashion.  An  ominous sign is  the conversion of St. 
Nicholas,  the  patron  saint  of  sailors  and  children  whose  feast  properly 
falls  on  the  sixth  of December,  into  white-bearded  Father  Christmas,  the 
buffbonish  patron  of the  holiday.  For  in  the  early  morning  of Christmas 
Day,  clad  in  an  old  red  cotton  dressing-gown,  Father  Christmas  fills  the 
children's  stockings  with  nuts,  raisins,  sugar  biscuits  and  oranges;  and, 
while  the  family  are  at  church  singing  hymns  in  honour  of the  new-born 
king,  presides  in  the  kitchen  over  the  turkey,  roast  beef,  plum  pudding, 
brandy  butter  and  mince  pies;  and  finally  when  the  lighted  candles  of the 
Christmas  tree  have  guttered  down,  goes  out  into  the  snow—or  rain— 
with an empty sack and senile groans of farewell.

This  is  a  cockney  civilization  and  the  commonest  references  to  natural 
phenomena  in  traditional  poetry,  which  was  written  by  countrymen  for 
countrymen,  are  becoming  unintelligible.  Not  one  English  poet  in  fifty1  Vulcan is  another example  of a  god  w ho  'went  the w ay of all flesh' before his final extinc 
tion.  T he last  addition  to  the  Vulcan  legend  was  made  by  Apuleius in  The  Golden  Ass  where 
Vulcan cooks  the wedding breakfast for  Cupid and  Psyche.

458

could  identify  the  common  trees  of the  Beth-Luis-Nion,  and  distinguish 
roebuck  from  fallow  deer,  aconite  from  corn-cockle,  or  wryneck  from 
woodpecker.  Bow and spear are antiquated weapons; ships have ceased  to 
be  the  playthings  of wind and  wave;  fear  of ghosts  and  bogeys  is  confined 
to  children  and  a  few  old  peasants;  and  the  cranes  no  longer  'make  letters 
as  they  fly'—the  last  crane  to  breed  in  this  country  was  shot  in  Anglesey 
in the year 1908.The  myths  too  are wearing  thin.  When  the  English  language  was  first 
formed,  all  educated  people  were  thinking  within  the  framework  of the 
Christian myth cycle, which was  Judaeo-Greek  with numerous paganistic 
accretions  disguised  as  lives  of  the  Saints.  The  Protestant  revolution 
expelled  all  but  a  few  saints,  and  the  growth  of  rationalism  since  the 
Darwinian  controversy has so weakened  the  Churches that Biblical myths 
no  longer serve  as  a secure  base  of poetic  reference;  how many  people  to 
day  could  identify  the  quotations  of a  mid-Victorian  sermon?  Moreover, 
the  Greek  and  Latin  myths  which  have  always  been  as  important  to  the 
poets (professionally at least) as the Christian, are also losing their validity. 
Only  a  severe  Classical  education  can  impress  them  on  a  child's  mind 
strongly  enough  to  give  them  emotional  relevance,  and  the  Classics  no 
longer  dominate  the  school  curriculum  either  in  Britain  or  the  United 
States.  There  is  not  even  an  official  canon  of two  or  three  hundred  books 
which every educated  person may be assumed  to  have read  with  care,  and 
the  unofficial  canon  contains  many  famous  books  which  very  few  people 
indeed  have  really  read—for  example,  Langland's  Piers  Plowman,  Sir 
Thomas  More's  Utopia and  Lyly's Euphues.The  only  two  English  poets  who  had  the  necessary  learning,  poetic 
talent,  humanity,  dignity  and  independence  of  mind  to  be  Chief  Poets 
were  John  Skelton  and  Ben  Jonson;  both  worthy  of the  laurel  that  they 
wore.  Skelton,  on  terms  of easy  familiarity  with  Henry  VLTI,  his  former 
pupil, reckoned himself the spiritual superior,  both as scholar and poet, of 
his  ecclesiastical  superior  Cardinal  Wolsey,  a  half-educated  upstart, 
against  whom  at  the  risk  of death  he  published  the  sharpest  satires;  and 
consequently  spent  the  last  years  of his  life  in  sanctuary  at  Westminster 
Abbey,  refusing  to  recant.  Jonson  went  on  poetic  circuits  like  an  Irish 
ollave,  sometimes  with  pupils  'sealed  of the  tribe  of Ben',  and  spoke  with 
acknowledged  authority  on  all  professional  questions.  As  one  of his hosts, 
the second Lord Falkland, wrote of him:

He had an infant's innocence and truth, 
The judgement ofgray hairs, the wit of youth, 
Not a young rashness, not an ag'd despair, 
The courage of the one, the other's care; 
And both of them might wonder to discern

His ableness to teach, his skill to learn,

459

These lines are memorable as a summary of the ideal poetic temperament. 
Since  Jonson  there  have  been  no  Chief Poets  worthy  of the  name,  either 
official  or unofficial  ones.459

These lines are memorable as a summary of the ideal poetic temperament. 
Since  Jonson  there  have  been  no  Chief Poets  worthy  of the  name,  either 
official  or unofficial  ones.

The  only  poet,  as  far  as  I  know,  who  ever  seriously  tried  to  institute 
bardism in England was  William  Blake:  he intended  his  Prophetic  Books 
as  a  complete  corpus  of  poetic  reference,  but  for  want  of intelligent  col 
leagues  was  obliged  to  become  a  whole  Bardic  college  in  himself,  without 
even  an  initiate  to  carry  on  the  tradition  after  his  death.  Not  wishing  to 
cramp  himself by using blank verse  or  the heroic couplet,  he  modelled  his 
style  on  James  Macpherson's  free-verse  renderings  of the  Gaelic  legends 
of  Oisin,  and  on  the  Hebrew  prophets  as  sonorously  translated  in  the 
Authorised  Version  of  the  Bible.  Some  of  his  mythological  characters, 
such as the Giant Albion, Job, Erin and the Angel  Uriel, are stock  figures 
of mediaeval  bardism;  others are  anagrams  of key words found  in  a poly 
glot Bible—for example, Los  for  Sol,  the Sun-god.  He kept strictly  to his 
system  and  it is  only  occasionally that figures occur in  his  prophecies  that 
seem  to  belong  to  his  private  story  rather  than  to  the  world  of literature. 
Yet  as  a  leading  English  literary  columnist  says  of  Blake's  readers  who 
admire  the  gleemanship  of  Songs  of  Innocence:  'Few  will  ever  do  more 
than  dive into  the prophetic  poems  and  swim  a  stroke or two  through  the 
seas of shifting symbols and fables.' He quotes these lines from Jerusalem:

Albion cold lays on his Rock: storms and snows beat round him 
Beneath the Furnaces and the starry Wheels and the Immortal Tomb:

*

*

*

**Albion cold lays on his Rock: storms and snows beat round him 
Beneath the Furnaces and the starry Wheels and the Immortal Tomb:

*

*

*

**

The weeds of Death inwrap his hands and feet, blown incessant 
And waslid incessant by thefor-ever restless sea-waves foaming abroad 
Upon the White Rock. England, a Female Shadow, as deadly damps 
Of the Mines of Cornwall and Derbyshire, lays upon his bosom heavy, 
Moved by the wind in volumes of thick cloud, returning, folding round 
His loins and bosom, unremovable by swelling storms and loud rending 
Of enraged thunders. Around them the Starry Wheels of their Giant Sons 
Revolve, and over them the Furnaces of Los, and the Immortal Tomb around, 
Erin sitting in the Tomb to watch them unceasing night and day: 
And the body ofAlbion was closed apart from all Nations. 
Over them the famish'd Eagle screams on boney wings, and around 
Them howls the Wolfof famine; deep heaves the Ocean black, thundering...

He  comments:  'Blake's  feelings  and  habits  were  those  of the  artisan,  the 
handicraft worker.  His  point of view was  that  of the  class whose  peace and 
welfare  were  disastrously  undermined  by  the  introduction  of machinery, 
and  who  were  enslaved  by  the  capitalization  of  industry.  Recall  how  the 
imagery  of wheels,  forges,  furnaces,  smoke.  "Satanic  mills",  is  associated

in  the Prophetic Books with misery and torment.  Remember that the years 
of  Blake's  life  were  also  years  of  incessant  wars.  It  is  obvious  that  the 
imagery  of this  passage,  as  of many  others,  is  an  upsurging  from  Blake's 
subliminal consciousness  of political  passions.  Albion  as a mythical  figure 
may  typify  Heaven  knows  what  else  besides,  but  that  is  neither  here  nor 
there. Note the imagery of war and mechanism...'It is  the  function  of English  popular  critics  to  judge  all  poetry  by glee-
man standards. So the clear traditional imagery used by Blake is character 
istically  dismissed  as  'neither  here  nor  there'  and  he  is  charged  with  not 
knowing  what  he  is  writing  about.  The  White  Goddess's  Starry  Wheel 
here  multiplied  into  the  twelve  wheeling  signs  of  the  Zodiac,  and  the 
intellectual  Furnaces  of  Los  (Apollo),  and  the  Tomb  of  Albion—alias 
Llew  Llaw  Gyffes, who  also appears as the  famished  Eagle with his boney 
wings—are misread as dark, mechanistic images  of capitalistic oppression. 
And  the  perfecdy  clear  distinction  between  archaic  Albion  and  modern 
England is disregarded. Blake had read contemporary treatises on Druidism. 
The bond that united  the poets of the British Isles in pre-Christian days 
was  the  oath  of  secrecy,  sworn  by  all  members  of  the  endowed  poetic 
colleges, to hele,  conceal  and  never  reveal  the college secrets.  But once  the 
Dog,  Roebuck  and  Lapwing  began  to  relax  their  vigilance  and  in  the 
name  of universal  enlightenment  permitted  the  secrets  of the  alphabet,  the 
calendar  and  the  abacus  to  be  freely  published,  a  learned  age  ended. 
Presently  a sword  like Alexander's severed the  Gordian master-knot, 1 the 
colleges  were  dissolved,  ecclesiasts  claimed  the  sole  right  to  declare  and 
interpret  religious  myth,  gleeman  literature  began  to  supersede  the1  Gordium  was  in  Eastern  Phrygia,  and  according  to  local  tradition  whoever  untied  the 
knot would become master of Asia.  Alexander, w ho had not the learning,  patience or ingenuity 
to  perform  the  task  decendy,  used  his  sword.  It  was  a  raw-hide  knot  on  the  ox-yoke  which 
had  belonged  to  a  Phrygian  peasant  named  Gordius,  and  Gordius had been divinely  marked 
out for  royalty when  an  eagle  settled  on  the yoke;  by  marriage  with  the  priestess  of Tel missus 
he became a  petty king and  presendy extended  his dominion  over all  Phrygia.  W h en he built 
the  fortress  of Gordium  he  dedicated  the  yoke  to  K i ng  Zeus,  it is  said,  and  laid  it  up  in  the 
citadel.  Gordium commanded  the  main  trade  route across  Asia Minor from the  Bosphorus  to 
Antioch,  so  that  the  manifest  meaning  of  the  prophecy  was  that  nobody  could  rule  Asia 
Minor w ho did not hold Gordium; and it was from Gordium that Alexander began his second 
Eastern  campaign  which  culminated  in  the  defeat  of Darius  at  Issus.  N o w,  Gordius  was  the 
father of Midas, w ho has  already  been  mentioned  as a devotee of the  Orphic Dionysus,  so  the 
yoke  must  originally  have  been  dedicated  to  King  Dionysus,  not  to  Father  Zeus.  A nd  the 
secret  of  the  knot  must  have  been  a  religious  one,  for  another  widespread  early  means  of 
recording  messages,  besides  notching  sticks  and  scratching  letters  on  clay,  was to  tie  knots in 
string or  strips of raw-hide.  T he  Gordian  knot, in  fact,  should  have  been  'untied'  by  reading 
the  message  it  contained,  which  was  perhaps  a  divine  name  of Dionysus,  the  one  contained 
in  the  vowels  of  the  Beth-Luis-Nion.  By  cutting  the  knot  Alexander  ended  an  ancient 
religious  dispensation,  and  since  his  act  seemed  to  go  unpunished—for  he  afterwards  con 
quered  the  whole  East  as  far  as  the  Indus  valley—it  became  a  precedent  for  rating  military 
power  above  religion  or  learning;  just  as  the  sword  of  Brennus  the  Gaul,  thrown  into  the 
scales  that  measured  out  the  agreed  tribute  of Roman  gold,  provided  a  precedent  for  rating 
military power above justice or honour.461

literature  of learning,  and  poets  who  thereafter  refused  to  become  Court 
lackeys  or  Church  lackeys  or  lackeys  of the  mob  were  forced  out  into  the 
wilderness.  There,  with  rare  intermissions,  they  have  resided  ever  since, 
and  though  sometimes  when  they  die  pilgrimages  are  made  to  their 
oracular tombs, there they are likely to remain for as long as who cares?

In  the  wilderness  the  temptation  to  monomaniac  raving,  paranoia  and 
eccentric  behaviour  has  been  too  much  for  many  of the  exiles.  They  have 
no  Chief Poet  or  visiting  ollave  now  to  warn  them  sternly  that  the  good 
name  of poetry  is  dishonoured  by  their  mopping  and  mowing.  They  rave 
on  like  Elizabethan  Abraham-men,  until  raving  becomes  a  professional 
affectation; until the bulk of modern poetry ceases to make poetic, prosaic, 
or even pathological sense.  A strange  reversal  of function:  in ancient  times 
the  painters  were  supplied  with  their  themes  by  the  poets,  though  at 
liberty  to  indulge  in  as  much  decorative  play  as  was  decent  within  the 
limits  of a given  theme;  later,  the  failure  of the poets  to keep  their position 
at  the  head  of  affairs  forced  painters  to  paint  whatever  their  patrons 
commissioned,  or  whatever  came  to  hand,  and  finally  to  experiment  in 
pure  decoration;  now  affectations  of  madness  in  poets  are  condoned  by 
false  analogy  with  pictorial  experiments  in  unrepresentational  form  and 
colour.  So Sacheverell Sitwell wrote in  Vogue (August,  1 9 4 5 ):

Once again we are leading Europe in the A r t s . ..

He lists the fashionable painters and sculptors and adds:Once again we are leading Europe in the A r t s . ..

He lists the fashionable painters and sculptors and adds:

The  accompanying works  of the poets  are not hard  to  find...  Dylan 
Thomas, whose  texture  is  as  abstract as  that  of any modern  painter  . .. 
There  is  even  no  necessity  for him  to  explain  his  imagery,  for  it is  only 
intended  to  be half understood.

It is  not  as  though  the  so-called  surrealists,  impressionists,  expressionists 
and  neo-romantics  were  concealing  a  grand  secret  by  pretended  folly,  in 
the  style  of Gwion;  they are  concealing  their unhappy  lack  of a secret.

For there  are  no  poetic  secrets  now,  except  of  course  the  sort  which 
the  common  people  are  debarred  by  their  lack  of poetic  perception  from 
understanding,  and  by  their anti-poetic  education  (unless  perhaps  in  wild 
Wales)  from  respecting.  Such secrets,  even  the Work  of the  Chariot,  may 
be  safely  revealed  in  any  crowded  restaurant  or  cafe  without  fear  of the 
avenging  lightning-stroke:  the  noise  of the  orchestra,  the  clatter  of plates 
and  the  buzz  of a  hundred  unrelated  conversations  will  effectively  drown 
the  words—and, in any case, nobody will be listening.

*

*

*

If this  were  an  ordinary  book  it  would  end  here  on  a  dying  close,  and 
having  no  wish  to  be  tedious  I  tried  at  first  to  end  it  here;  but  the  Devil 
462*

*

*

If this  were  an  ordinary  book  it  would  end  here  on  a  dying  close,  and 
having  no  wish  to  be  tedious  I  tried  at  first  to  end  it  here;  but  the  Devil 
462

was in  it and would  not give me peace until I had  given him  his  due, as he 
put  it. Among the  poetic questions  I  had  not answered was Donne's 'Who 
cleft  the  Devil's  foot?'  And  the  Devil,  who  knows  his  Scriptures  well, 
taunted  me  with  having  skated  too  lightly  over  some  of the  elements  in 
Ezekiel's  vision  of the  Chariot,  and  with  having  avoided  any  discussion 
of  the  only  Mystery  that  is  still  regarded  in  the  Western  World  with  a 
certain awe.  So back I had  to go again, weary as I was,  to the Chariot and 
its  historical  bearing  on  the  Battle  of the  Trees  and  the  poetic  problems 
stated at the beginning of this book. It is a matter of poetic principle never 
to  fob  the  Devil  off with a  half-answer or a lie.Ezekiel's vision was of an Enthroned Man surrounded by a rainbow, its 
seven  colours  corresponding  with  the  seven  heavenly  bodies  that  ruled 
the  week.  Four  of these  bodies  were  symbolized  by  the  four  spokes  of the 
chariot-wheels:  Ninib  (Saturn)  by  the  mid-winter  spoke,  Marduk  (Jup 
piter)  by  the  Spring  equinox  spoke,  Nergal  (Mars)  by  the  mid-summer 
spoke,  Nabu  (Mercury)  by  the  Autumn  equinox  spoke.  But  what  of the 
three  other  heavenly  bodies—the  Sun,  the  Moon  and  the  planet  Ishtar 
(Venus)—corresponding  with  the  Capitoline  Trinity  and  with  the 
Trinity  worshipped  at  Elephantine  and  at  Hierapolis?  It  will  be  recalled 
that  the  metaphysical  explanation  of  this  type  of  Trinity,  brought  to 
Rome by the Orphics, was that Juno was physical nature (Ishtar), Juppiter 
was  die  impregnating  or  animating  principle  (the  Sun)  and  Minerva  was 
the  directing  wisdom  behind  the  Universe  (the  Moon).  This  concept  did 
not appeal to Ezekiel, because it limited Jehovah's function  to blind pater 
nity;  so  though  the  Sun  figures in  his vision  as  the  Eagle's  wings,  neither 
the Moon nor Ishtar is present.The  Devil  was  right.  The  vision  cannot  be  fully  explained  without 
revealing  the  mystery of the  Holy  Trinity.  It must be  remembered  that  in 
ancient  religions  every  'mystery'  implied  a  mystagogue  who  orally  ex 
plained its logic to initiates: he may often have given a false or iconotropic 
explanation  but  it  was  at  least  a  full  one.  As  I  read  Origen's  second-
century In  Celsum,  the  early  Church  had  certain  mysteries  explained  only 
to a small circle of elders—Origen says in effect 'Why should we not keep 
our mysteries  to  ourselves?  You  heathen  do—and  the  logical  explanation 
of the  Trinity,  whose  seeming  illogic  ordinary  members  of the  Church 
had  to  swallow  by an  act  of faith,  must  have  been  the  mystagogue's  most 
responsible task. The mystery itself is no secret—it is stated very precisely 
in  the  Athanasian  Creed;  nor  is  the  mystery  which  derives  from  it,  the 
redemption  of the  world  by  the  incarnation  of the  Word  as  Jesus  Christ. 
But unless the College of Cardinals has been remarkably discreet through 
out all  the intervening  centuries,  the  original  explanation  of the  mysteries, 
which  makes  the  Credo  quia  absurdum  needless,  has  long  been  lost.  Yet,  I 
believe,  not  irrecoverably  lost,  since  we  may  be  sure  that  the  doctrine

463

developed  from  Judaeo-Greek  mythology  which  is  ultimately  based  on 
the single poetic Theme.The  religious  concept  of  free  choice  between  good  and  evil,  which  is 
common  to  Pythagorean  philosophy  and  prophetic  Judaism,  developed 
from  a  manipulation  of  the  tree-alphabet. In  the  primitive  cult  of  the 
Universal  Goddess,  to which  the  tree-alphabet  is  the  guide,  there  was  no 
room  for choice:  her devotees accepted  the events,  pleasurable and  painful 
in turn, which she imposed on them as  their destiny in  the natural  order of 
things. The  change  resulted  from  the  Goddess's  displacement  by  the 
Universal  God,  and  is  historically  related  to  the  forcible  removal  of the 
consonants  H  and  F  from  the  Greek  alphabet  and  their  incorporation  in 
the  secret  eight-letter  name  of  this  God:  it  seems  clear  that  the  Pytha 
gorean mystics who instigated the change had adopted the Jewish Creation 
myth  and  regarded  these  two  letters  as  peculiarly  holy  since  uncontamin-
ated with the errors of the material universe. For,  though in  the old myth 
ology H  and  F had  figured  as  the months  sacred  respectively to  the harsh 
Hawthorn-goddess  Cranaea and  her doomed  partner  Cronos,  in  the new 
they  represented  the first and  the  last  trees  of the  Sacred  Grove,  the  first 
and  the  last  days  of Creation. On  the first day  nothing  had  been  created 
except disembodied  Light, and  on  the last nothing at all  had  been  created. Thus  the  three  consonants  of the  Logos,  or  'eightfold  city  of light',  were 
J,  die  letter  of new  life  and  sovereignty;  H,  the  letter  of the first Day  of 
Creation, 'Let there be Light'; and F, the letter of the last day of Creation, 
'Let there be Rest', which appears as W in  the J H WH  Tetragrammaton.developed  from  Judaeo-Greek  mythology  which  is  ultimately  based  on 
the single poetic Theme.

On  the first day  nothing  had  been  created 
except disembodied  Light, and  on  the last nothing at all  had  been  created. Thus  the  three  consonants  of the  Logos,  or  'eightfold  city  of light',  were 
J,  die  letter  of new  life  and  sovereignty;  H,  the  letter  of the first Day  of 
Creation, 'Let there be Light'; and F, the letter of the last day of Creation, 
'Let there be Rest', which appears as W in  the J H WH  Tetragrammaton. It is remarkable that these are the month-letters allotted  to  the three  tribes 
of the  Southern  kingdom,  Benjamin,  Judah  and  Levi;  and  that  the  three 
jewels respectively assigned  to  them  in  the jewel-sequence—Amber,  Fire-
Gamet  ('the  terrible crystal'), and Sapphire—are  the  three  connected  by 
Ezekiel  with  the  radiance  of  God,  and  with  his  throne. The  Enthroned 
Man  is  not  God,  as  might  be  supposed:  God  lets nobody see his  face and 
live. It  is  God's  likeness  reflected  in  spiritual  man. Thus,  though  Ezekiel 
retains  the  traditional  imagery  of  the  unchanging  Sun-God  who  rules 
from  the  apex  of a  cone  of light  over  the  four  regions  of the  round  uni 
verse—the  eagle  poised  above  the  four beasts—and  of the ever-changing 
bull-calf,  Celestial  Hercules,  he  has  withdrawn  Jehovah  from  the  old 
Trinity  of  Q're  (Sun),  Ashima  (Moon)  and  Anatha  (Ishtar)  and  re 
defined  him  as  the  God  who  demands  national  perfection,  whose  simili 
tude  is  a  holy  Being,  half Judah,  half Benjamin,  seated  on  Levi's  throne. This explains Israel as a 'peculiar people'—the Deuteronomy text is of about 
the same  date as Ezekiel's  vision—dedicated  to  a peculiarly holy god  with 
a  new  name,  derived  from  a  new  poetic  formula  which  spells  out  Life, 
Light and Peace.I  am  suggesting,  in  fact,  that  the  religious  revolution  which  brought

464

about  the  alphabetic  changes  in  Greece  and  Britain  was  a  Jewish  one, 
initiated  by  Ezekiel  ( 6 2 2 - 5 70  B.C.)  which  was  taken  up  by  the  Greek-
speaking  Jews  of Egypt  and  borrowed  from  them  by  the  Pythagoreans. 
Pythagoras,  who  first  came  into  prominence  at  Crotona  in  529  B.C.,  is 
credited  by  his  biographers  with  having  studied  among  the  Jews  as  well 
as  the Egyptians,  and  may have been  the Greek who first internationalized 
the  eight-letter  Name.  The  Name  must  have  come  to  Britain  by  way  of 
Southern  Gaul where the Pythagoreans were established early.The  result  of  envisaging  this  god  of  pure  meditation,  the  Universal 
Mind  still  premised  by  the  most  reputable  modern  philosophers,  and  en 
throning  him  above  Nature  as  essential  Truth  and  Goodness  was  not  an 
altogether  happy  one.  Many  of the  Pythagoreans  suffered,  like  the  Jews, 
from  a  constant  sense  of guilt  and  the  ancient  poetic  Theme  reasserted  it 
self perversely. The new God claimed to be dominant as Alpha and Omega, 
the  Beginning  and  the  End,  pure  Holiness,  pure  Good,  pure  Logic,  able 
to  exist  without  the  aid  of woman;  but  it  was  natural  to  identify  him  with 
one of the original  rivals of the Theme and  to ally the woman and  the other 
rival  permanently  against  him.  The  outcome  was  philosophical  dualism 
with  all  the  tragi-comic  woes  attendant  on  spiritual  dichotomy.  If  the 
True  God,  the  God  of the  Logos,  was  pure  thought,  pure  good,  whence 
came  evil  and  error?  Two  separate  creations  had  to  be assumed:  the  true 
spiritual  Creation and the false material  Creation. In  terms of the heavenly 
bodies,  Sun  and  Saturn  were  now  jointly  opposed  to  Moon,  Mars,  Mer 
cury,  Juppiter and  Venus.  The five heavenly  bodies  in  opposition  made a 
strong  partnership,  with  a  woman  at  the  beginning  and  a  woman  at  the 
end.  Juppiter  and  the  Moon  Goddess  paired  together  as  the  rulers  of the 
material  World,  die  lovers  Mars  and  Venus  paired  together as  the  lustful 
Flesh,  and  between  the  pairs  stood  Mercury  who  was  the  Devil,  the  Cos-
mocrator  or  author  of the  false  creation.  It  was  these  five  who  composed 
the  Pythagorean  hyle,  or  grove,  of the five material  senses;  and  spiritually 
minded  men,  coming  to  regard  them  as  sources  of  error,  tried  to  rise 
superior  to  them  by  pure  meditation.  This  policy  was  carried  to  extreme 
lengths  by  the  God-fearing  Essenes,  who  formed  their  monkish  com 
munities,  within  compounds  topped  by  acacia  hedges,  from  which  all 
women  were  excluded;  lived  ascetically,  cultivated  a  morbid  disgust  for 
their  own  natural  functions  and  turned  their  eyes  away  from  World, 
Flesh  and  Devil.  Though  they  retained  the  Bull-calf myth,  handed  down 
from Solomon's days, as emblematic of the spiritual life of mortal man and 
linked  it  to  the seven-letter name  of immortal  God,  it is  clear  that initiates 
of  the  highest  Order  cultivated  the  eight-letter  name,  or  the  enlarged 
name  of seventy-two  letters,  and  devoted  themselves  wholly  to  the  medi 
tative  life:  ruled  by  acacia  and  pomegranate,  Sunday  and  Saturday, 
Illumination and  Repose.465

War  had  now  been  declared  in  Heaven,  Michael  and  the  archangels 
fighting  against  the  Devil,  namley  the  Cosmocrator.  For  in  the  new  dis 
pensation,  God  could  not  afford  to  surrender  the  whole  working  week  to 
the  Devil,  so  he  appointed  archangels  as his  deputies,  with  a  day  for each, 
which  were  the  archangels  cultivated  by  the  Essenes.  Michael  was  given 
charge  over  Wednesday;  so  it  fell  to  him  not  only  to  collect  the  dust  for 
the true creation of Adam but to offer batde to the Devil who disputed that 
day  with  him.  The  Devil  was  Nabu,  pictured  as  a  winged  Goat  of Mid 
summer;  so  that  the  answer  to  Donne's  poetic  question  about  the  Devil's 
foot is: 'The prophet Ezekiel'. Michael's victory must be read as a prophecy 
rather  than  as  a  record:  a  prophecy  which  Jesus  tried  to  implement  by 
preaching  perfect  obedience  to  God  and  continuous  resistance  to  the 
World,  Flesh  and  Devil.  He  reproached  the  Samaritan  woman  at  Sychar, 
in  a  riddling  talk which  she  may  or  may  not  have  understood,  for  having 
had five husbands,  the five material  senses,  and  for having as  present hus 
band  one  who  was  not  really  her  husband,  namely  the  Cosmocrator,  or 
Devil.  He  told  her  that  salvation  came,  not  from  the  Calf-god  whom  her 
fathers  had  idolatrously  worshipped  on  near-by  Ebal  and  Gerizim,  but 
from the all-holy God of the Jews—the God, that is to say, of Judah, Ben 
jamin  and  Levi.  His  faith  was  that  if the  whole  nation  repented  of their 
erroneous  devotion  to  the  material  universe,  and  refrained  from  all  sexual 
and  quasi-sexual  acts,  they  would  conquer  death  and  live  for  a  thousand 
years, at the end of which they would become one with the true God.The  Jews  were  not  yet  ready  to  take  this  step,  though  many  of  them 
approved  of it  in  theory;  and  a  conservative  minority,  the  Ophites,  con 
tinued  to  reject  the  new  faith,  holding  that  the  true  God  was  the  God  of 
Wednesday, whom  they pictured  as a benign  Serpent,  not a goat,  and  that 
the  God  of the Logos was an  impostor.  Their case rested  on  the  Menorah, 
a  pre-Exilic  instrument  of  worship,  the  seven  branches  of which  issued 
from  the  central  almond  stem,  typifying  Wednesday;  and 
indeed  the 
revised  view  recorded  in  the  Talmud,  that  the  stem  represented  the  Sab 
bath, made neither poetic nor historical  sense.  This  Serpent had  originally 
been  Ophion  with  whom,  according  to  the  Orphic  creation  myth,  the 
White  Goddess  had  coupled  in  the  form  of a  female  serpent,  and  Mercury 
the  Cosmocrator  therefore  used  a wand  of coupling  serpents  as  his  badge 
of office.  It  is  now  clear  why  Ezekiel  disguised  two  of the  four  planetary 
beasts  of his vision:  recording  eagle  instead  of eagle-winged  goat and  man 
instead  of man-faced  serpent.  He  was  intent  on  keeping  the  Cosmocrator 
out  of the  picture,  whether  he  came  as  Goat  or  Serpent.  It  may  well  have 
been  Ezekiel  who  appended  the  iconotropic  anecdote  of  the  Serpent's 
seduction  of  Adam  and  Eve  to  the  Genesis  Creation  myth,  and  once  it  was 
approved as canonical, in the fourth century B . C ., the Ophite view became 
a  heresy.  It  must  be  emphasized  that  the  Genesis  Seven  Days  of Creation

466466

narrative  is  based  on  the  symbolism  of the  Menorah,  a  relic  of the Egyp 
tian  sun-cult,  not  derived  from  the  Babylonian  Creation  Epic,  in  which 
the  Creator  is  the  Thunder-god  Marduk  who  defeats  Tiamat  the  Sea-
Monster  and  cuts  her  in  half.  Marduk—Bel  in  the  earlier  version  of the 
story—was  the  God  of Thursday,  not  Nabu  the  God  of Wednesday  nor 
Samas  the  God  of Sunday.  The  resemblances  between  the  two  myths  are 
superficial,  though  the  Deluge  incident  in  Genesis  has  been  taken  directly 
from  the Epic, and Ezekiel may have edited it.1In  Rabbinical  tradition  the  Tree  of the  Knowledge  of Good  and  Evil, 
whose  fruit  the  Serpent  in  the  Genesis allegory gave Adam  and  Eve  to  eat, 
was  a  composite  one.  This  means  that  though  they  were  originally  inno 
cent  and  holy  he  introduced  them  to  the  pleasures  of the  material  senses. 
Monday's  willow  and  Tuesday's  kerm-oak  (or  holly)  do  not  supply 
human  food,  but  they  must  have  eaten  Wednesday's  almonds  (or  hazel 
nuts),  Thursday's  pistachios  (or  edible  acorns),  and  Friday's  quinces  (or 
wild  apples).  So  God  expelled  them  from  the  tree-paradise  for  fear  that 
they  might  meddle  with  the  Tree  of Life—presumably  Sunday's  acacia 
grafted  with  Saturday's  pomegranate—and  thus  immortalize  their  follies. 
This  reading  of the  myth  is  supported  by  the  ancient  Irish  legend,  first 
published  in  Eriu  IV,  Part  2,  of  Trefuilngid  Tre-eochair  ('the  triple 
bearer  of the  triple  key'—apparently  an  Irish  form  of Hermes  Trisme-
gistos) a giant who appeared in Ireland early in the first century A . D. with 
immense  splendour  at  a  meeting  of the  great  manor-council  of Tara.  He 
bore  in  his  right  hand  a  branch  of wood  from  the  Lebanon  with  three 
fruits on  it—hazel-nuts,  apples  and  edible acorns—which  perpetually  sus 
tained  him  in  food  and  drink.  He  told  them  that  on  enquiring  what  ailed 
the Sun  that day  in  the East,  he  had  found  that it had  not shone  there be 
cause  a  man  of great  importance  (Jesus)  had  been  crucified.  As  the  giant 
went  off,  some  of the  fruit  dropped  in  Eastern  Ireland  and  up  sprang  five 
trees—the five trees of the senses—which would  fall  only when  Christianity 
triumphed.  These  trees  have  already  been  mentioned  in  the  discussion 
of the  tree-alphabet.  The  Great  Tree  of Mugna  bred  true  to  its  parent 
branch with successive crops of apples, nuts and edible acorns. The others1 In  the  Babylonian  E p ic  is  was  Ishtar,  not  any  male  G o d,  w ho  caused  the  Deluge.  G i l 
gamesh  (Noah)  stocked  an  ark  with  beasts  of every  kind  and  gave  a  N ew  Year's  feast  to  the 
builders  with  great  outpouring  of  new  wine;  the  N ew  Year's  Feast  being  an  autumnal  one. 
T he  myth  seems  to  be  iconotropic,  for  the  account  of the  great wine-drinking,  which  appears 
in  the  Genesis  version  as  a  moral  story  of  Noah's  drunkenness  and  the  bad  behaviour  of 
his  son  Canaan  ( H a m ),  recalls  the  myth  of  the  wine-god  Dionysus.  W h en  captured  by 
Tyrrhenian  pirates,  Dionysus  changed  the  masts of their ship  into  serpents, himself into  a  lion 
and  the  sailors  into  dolphins,  and  wreathed  everything  with  i v y.  T he  original  Asianic  icon 
from  which  both  myths  are  presumably  derived  must  have  shown  the  god  in  a  moon-ship 
at  the  Vintage  Feast,  going  through  his habitual N ew Y e ar changes—bull,  lion,  snake  and  so 
on—which  gave  rise  to  the  Babylonian  story  of  the  cargo  of  animals.  T he  pirates'  ship  is 
probably  described  as  Tyrrhenian  because  it  had  a  figure-head  in  the  shape  of a  Telchin,  or 
dog  with  fins  for  feet,  an  attendant of the  Moon-goddess.

467

seem  to  be allegorical  glosses,  by some later poet.  T he Tree  of Tortu  and 
the Branching Tree of Dathi were ashes, presumably representing the false 
magic  of the  Brythonic  and  Danish  ash-cults.  The  Tree  of Ross  was  a 
Y e w,  representing  death  and  destruction.  I  cannot find what  the Ancient 
Tree  of  Usnech  was:  it  is  likely  to  have been  a  blackthorn,  representing 
strife.The  Holy  Trinity  doctrine  was  pre-Christian,  founded  on  Ezekiel's 
vision,  the  Trinity  consisting  of the  three  main  elements  of  the  Tetra 
grammaton.  The First person was the true Creator, the All-Father,  'Let 
there be Light', represented by the letter H, the acacia, the tree of Sunday, 
the tree of Levi, the lapis lazuli symbolizing the blue sky as yet untenanted 
by the heavenly bodies;  he was  identified  by  the Jewish  apocalyptics  with 
the 'Ancient of Days' in the Vision of Daniel, a later and inferior prophecy 
which dates  from  the Seleucid  epoch.  The  Second  Person  was  comprised 
in  Ezekiel's  Enthroned  Man—spiritual  man  as  God's  image,  man  who 
abstained  in  perfect  peace  from  the  dangerous  pleasures  of the  false  crea 
tion  and  was destined  to  reign  on  earth everlastingly;  he was  represented 
by  F,  the fire-garnet, the  pomegranate,  the  tree  of the  Sabbath  and  of 
Judah.  The  apocalyptics  identified  him  with  the  Son  of Man  in  Daniels' 
vision.  But  only  the  lower  half of the  Man's  body  was fire-garnet: the 
male part. The upper half was amber: the royal part, linking him with the 
Third  Person.  F or the  Third  Person  comprised  the  remaining six  letters 
of the name, six being the Number of Life in the Pythagorean philosophy. 
These letters were the original  White-goddess vowels, A  O  U E I,  repre 
senting the  spirit that moved on the face of the waters in the Genesis  narra 
tive:  but with the death vowel I replaced by the royal consonant J, amber, 
Benjamin's  letter,  the  letter  of  the  Divine  Child  born  on  the  D ay  of 
Liberation;  and  with  the  'birth  of birth'  vowel  omega  supplementing  the 
birth vowel alpha. The Third Person was thus androgynous:  'virgin with 
child',  a  concept  which  apparendy  accounts  for  the  reduplication  of the 
letter H  in  the J  H W H Tetragrammaton.  The second H is  the Shekinah, 
the  Brightness  of God,  the  mystic  female  emanation  of H,  the  male  First 
Person;  with  no  existence  apart  from  him,  but  identified  with  Wisdom, 
the  brightness  of his  meditation,  who  has  'hewn  out  her Seven  Pillars' of 
the  true  Creation  and  from  which  the  'Peace  that passeth understanding' 
derives when Light is  linked  with  Life.  The  sense  of this  mystery is  con 
veyed  in  the  Blessing  of  Aaron  {Numbers,  VI,  22-2y),  which  only  priests 
were authorized to utter:The Lord bless you and keep you. 
The Lord make his face to shine uponyou and be gracious unto you, 
The Lord lift up the light ofhis countenance uponyou, 
And give you peace.

468

This  fourfold  blessing, which  was  certainly not composed  earlier than  the 
time  of Ezekiel,  is  explained  in  the  last  verse  of the  chapter  as  a  formula 
embodying the Tetragrammaton:

And they [Aaron and his sons]  shall put my Name upon the Children

of Israel, and I shall bless them.

The  first  two  blessings  are  really  one,  together  representing  the  Third 
Person,  Life  and  the  Brightness,  J H;  the  third  blessing  represents  the 
First person,  Light,  H;  the fourth blessing represents  the Second  Person, 
Peace,  W.  This  Trinity  is  one  indivisible  God,  because  if  a  single  letter  is 
omitted  the  Name  loses  its  power,  and  because  the  three  concepts  are 
interdependent.  The  Second  Person  is  'begotten  by  the  Father  before  all 
the  world'  in  the  sense  that  'the  World'  is  a  false  Creation  which  he  pre 
ceded.  This  interpretation  of J  H  W H  as  'Light and  the  Glory,  Life and 
Peace'  further explains why the priests sometimes enlarged it to 42 letters. 
In  the  Pythagorean  system,  7,  written  as  H  aspirate,  was  the  numeral  of 
Light and  6, written  as Digamma F (W in Hebrew), was that of Life.  But 
6  also  stood  for the  Glory,  and  7 for Peace as  the  seventh day of the week; 
so  six  times  seven,  namely  42,  expressed  Light,  the  Glory  and  Peace 
multiplied  by  Life.  Though  the  Jews  used  the  Phoenician  notation  of 
numeral  letters  for  public  purposes,  it  is  likely  that  they  used  the  early 
Greek in  their mysteries, just as  they used  the  Greek  'Boibalos'  calendar-
alphabet.The  Menorah  symbolized  the  fullness  of  Jehovah's  Creation,  yet  it 
did  not  contain  the first of the  four letters  of the Tetragrammaton;  and  its 
lights  recalled  his  seven-letter  Name,  but  not  the  eight-letter  one.  How 
ever,  at  the  Feast  of Illumination,  or  'The  Feast  of  Lights',  (mentioned 
in John  X,  22  and  Josephus's  Antiquities,  XII,  7.7),  the  ancient  Hebrew 
Winter  Solstice  Feast,  an  eight-branched  candlestick  was  used,  as  it  still 
is  in  Jewish  synagogues,  known  as  the  Chanukah  candlestick.  The 
rabbinical  account  is  that  this  eight-day  festival  which  begins  on  the 
twenty-fifth  day  of the  month  Kislev,  was  instituted  by  Judas  Maccabeus 
and  that  it  celebrates  a  miracle:  at  the  Maccabean  consecration  of  the 
Temple  a  small  cruse  of sacred  oil  was  found,  hidden  by  a  former  High 
Priest,  which  lasted  for  eight  days.  By  this  legend  the  authors  of  the 
Talmud hoped  to  conceal  the  antiquity  of the  feast,  which  was  originally 
Jehovah's  birthday  as  the  Sun-god  and  had  been  celebrated  at  least  as 
early  as  the  time  of Nehemiah  (Maccabees,  I,  18).  Antiochus  Epiphanes 
had sacrificed  to  Olympian  Zeus,  three years before Judas's re-institution 
of the  festival,  at the same place  and  on  the same  day:  Zeus's birthday  fell 
at  the  winter  solstice  too—as  did  that  of Mithras  the  Persian  Sun-god 
whose  cult  had  greatly  impressed  the  Jews  in  the  time  of their  protector 
Cyrus.  According  to  rabbinical  custom  one  light  of the  candlestick  was

469

kindled  each  day  of  the  festival  until  all  eight  were  alight;  the  earlier 
tradition  had  been  to  begin  with  eight  lights  and  extinguish  one  each  day 
until  all were o ut469

kindled  each  day  of  the  festival  until  all  eight  were  alight;  the  earlier 
tradition  had  been  to  begin  with  eight  lights  and  extinguish  one  each  day 
until  all were o ut

In  the  Chanukah  candlestick which,  among the  Moroccan  Jews  (whose 
tradition is the oldest and purest)  is surmounted by a small pomegranate, 
the  eight  lights  are  set  in  a  row,  each  on  a  separate  branch,  as  in  the 
Menorah; and an arm projects from the pedestal with a separate light in its 
socket  from  which  all  the  rest  are  kindled.  The  eighth  light  in  the  row 
must  stand  for  the  extra  day  of the  year,  the  day  of the  letter  J,  which  is 
intercalated  at  the  winter  solstice:  for  the  pomegranate,  the  emblem  not 
only  of the  seventh  day  of the  week  but  of the  planet  Ninib,  ruler  of the 
winter  solstice,  shows  that  this  candlestick  is  a  Menorah  enlarged  to  con 
tain all the letters of the Tetragrammaton,  that it is, in fact,  the  'Eightfold 
City  of  Light'  in  which  the  Word  dwelt  The  number  Eight,  the  Sun-
god's number of increase, recalled Jehovah's creative order to increase and 
multiply;  and  the  eight  lights  could  further  be  understood  (it  will  be 
shown)  as symbolizing the eight essential  Commandments.The  Chanukah  candlestick  was  the  only  one  ritually  used  in  the  syna 
gogues  of  tiie  Dispersion,  because  of  the  Sanhedrin  law  forbidding  the 
reproduction  of the  Menorah  or of any  other object  housed  in  the  Holy  of 
Holies.  This  law  was  designed  to  prevent  the  foundation  of  a  rival 
Temple to that of Jerusalem, but aimed also, it seems, at the Ophites, who 
justified  their heretical  religious  views  by  the  centrality  of the  fourth  light 
(that  of the  Wise  Serpent  Nabu)  in  the  seven-branched  candlestick;  they 
would find no  central  light in  this  one.  The separate  light probably stood 
for  the  oneness  of Jehovah  as  contrasted  with  the  diversity  of his  works 
and brought the total number of lights  up to  nine, symbolizing  the  thrice-
holy  Trinity.  The  meaning  of  the  pomegranate  at  the  top  has  been  for 
gotten by the Moroccan Jews,  who  regard  it as a mere decoration  though 
agreeing  that  it  is  of high  antiquity;  Central  European Jews  have  substi 
tuted  for it a knob surmounted  by a Star of David.  Among the Moroccan 
Jews a  pomegranate  is  also  placed  on  the sticks  around  which  the  sacred 
scroll  of the  Torah  is  wound,  the  sticks  being  called  Es  Chajim,  'the  tree 
of  life';  Central  European  Jews  have  reduced  this  pomegranate  to  the 
crown  formed  by  its  withered  calyx.  The  common-sense  Rabbinical  ex 
planation  of  the  sanctity  of  the  pomegranate  is  that  it  is  the  only  fruit 
which worms do not corrupt.The  Ten  Commandments,  which  are  among  the  latest additions  to  the 
Pentateuch,  are designed  as  glosses  on  the same mystery.  The  oddness  of 
their  choice  seems  to  have  struck  Jesus  when  he  quoted  the  'Love  thy 
God'  and  'Love  thy  neighbour'  commandments,  from  elsewhere  in  the 
Pentateuch, as  transcending them in spiritual value.  But it is a more care 
fully  considered  choice  than  appears  at first sight.  The  Commandments,

470

which  are  really  eight,  not  ten,  to  match  the  numbers  of  letters  in  the 
Name,  fall into two groups:  one of three "Thou shalts' concerned  with the 
True  Creation, and  the other of five 'Thou shalt nots'  concerned  with  the 
False  Creation:  each  group  is  prefaced  by a  warning.  The  order  is  pur 
posely 'pied', as one would expect.

The first group  corresponds  with  the  letters  of the  Tetragrammaton,

and the warning preface is therefore III:  'Thou shalt not take God's name

in vain.'

V: 'Honour thy father and thy mother.'

i.e. J H: Life and the Brightness.

TV: 'Observe the Sabbath Day.

i.e. W:  Peace.

I: 'Thou shalt worship me alone.'

i.e.  H:  Light.

The  second  group  corresponds  with  the  powers  of the  five  planets  ex

cluded from the Name and the warning preface is therefore IT:  'Thou shalt

not  make  nor  adore  the simulacrum of any star,  creature, or marine mon

ster.'

X:  'Thou shalt not bewitch.'

(The Moon, as the Goddess of Enchantment)

V I : ' T h ou shalt not kill.'

(Mars  as  the  God  of War.)

V H I: 'Thou shalt not steal.'

(Mercury, as the God of Thieves, who had

stolen man from  God.)

I X: 'Thou shalt not bear false witness.'

(Juppiter as the false god before whom oaths

were sworn.)

VTI: 'Thou shalt not commit adultery.'

(Venus as the Goddess of profane love.)I X: 'Thou shalt not bear false witness.'

(Juppiter as the false god before whom oaths

were sworn.)

VTI: 'Thou shalt not commit adultery.'

(Venus as the Goddess of profane love.)

T he  eight  Commandments  are  enlarged  to  a  decalogue  apparently  be 
cause  the  series  which  it  superseded,  and  which  is  to  be  found  in  Exodus, 
XXXIV,  14-26,  was  a  decalogue  too.

In Talmudic  tradition  this new Decalogue was  carved  on  two  tables  of 
sappur  (lapis  lazuli);  and  in  Isaiah,  LIV,  12,  the  gates  of the  ideal  Jeru 
salem were of'fire-stones'  (pyropes  or fire-garnets). So the poetic formula 
is:

Light was myfirst Jay of Creation, 
Peace after labour is my seventh day,

4 71

Life and the Glory are my day of days. 
I carved my Law on tables of sapphirus, 
Jerusalem shines with mypyrope gates, 
Four Cherubs fetch me amber from the north. 
Acacia yields her timber for my ark, 
Pomegranate sanctifies my priestly hem, 
My hyssop sprinkles blood at every door. 
Holy, Holy, Holy is my name.

This  mystical  god  differed  not  only  from  the  Babylonian  Bel  or  Marduk 
but  from  Ormazd,  the  Supreme  God  of the  Persian  Zoroastrians,  with 
whom  some Jewish syncretists identified  him,  in having separated  himself 
from  the  erroneous  material  universe  to  live  securely  cloistered  in  his 
abstract  city  of  light.  Ormazd  was  a  sort  of  three-bodied  Geryon,  the 
usual Aryan  male  trinity  that first married  the  Triple  Goddess,  then  dis 
possessed her and went about clothed  in her three colours—white, red  and 
dark  blue,  like  the  heifer  calf in  Suidas's  riddle,  performing  her  ancient 
functions.  Thus Ormazd  appeared in priestly white to create (or recreate) 
the  world; in  warrior  red  to  combat  evil;  in  husbandman's  dark  blue  to 
'bring forth fecundity'.The pre-Christian Jewish apocalyptics, probably influenced by religious 
theory  brought  from  India,  along with  the  ethrog,  by  Jewish  merchants, 
expected  the  birth  of a  divine  child:  the  Child,  prophesied  by  the  Sibyl, 
who  would  free  die  world  from  sin.  This  implied  that  Michael  and  the 
archangels  to  whom  the  new  Idealistic  God  had  delegated  the  immediate 
care  of mankind  had  proved  no  match  for  the World,  Flesh  and  Devil— 
the  grosser  powers  which  he  had  repudiated.  T he  only  solution  was  for 
the  Prince of Peace, namely the Second  Person,  the Son  of Man, who had 
hitherto  had  no  independent  existence,1  to  become  incarnate  as  perfect 
man—the human Messiah born of Judah, Benjamin and Levi. By exposing 
the vanity of the material  Creation he would bring all Israel to repentance 
and  thus  initiate  the  deathless  millennary  kingdom  of God  on  earth,  to 
which  the  Gentile  nations  would  ultimately  be  admitted.  This  was  the 
faith of Jesus, who was of Judah, Benjamin and Levi and had been ritually 
rebegotten  by  God  at  his  Coronation:  he  expected  the  actual  historical 
appearance  of the  Son  of Man  on  the  Mount  of Olives  to  follow  his  own 
prophesied  death  by  the  sword,  and  assured  his  disciples  that  many  then 
living  would  never  die  but  enter  directly  into  the  kingdom  of God.  The 
prophecy was not fulfilled  because  it was founded  on a confusion  between 
poetic  myth  and  historical  event,  and  everyone's  hopes  of the  millennium 
were dashed.

1 T h is was denounced  as the  Beryllian heresy at Bostia in A . D.  244.

4721 T h is was denounced  as the  Beryllian heresy at Bostia in A . D.  244.

472

The Grecians then claimed that those hopes had not after all been prema 
ture,  that  Jesus  had  indeed  been  the  Second  Person  of  the  Trinity,  and 
that  the  Kingdom  of God  was  at  hand,  the  dreadful  signs  which  would 
portend  its  coming,  the  so-called  Pangs  of the  Messiah,  being apparent  to 
everyone.  But  when  the  Gentile  Church  had  wholly  separated  itself from 
the Judaistic Church and Jesus as King of Israel was an embarrassing con 
cept  to  Christians  who  wished  to  escape  all  suspicion  of  being  Jewish 
nationalists,  it  was  decided  that  he  had  been  born  as  the  Second  Person 
not at his  coronation  but at his  physical  birth;  though spiritually begotten 
before all  the  world.  This made  Mary  the Mother of Jesus into  the imma 
culate  human  receptacle  of  the  Life  and  Brightness  of  God,  the  Third 
Person  of the  Trinity;  so  that  it  had  to  be  presumed  that  she  was  herself 
immaculately conceived  by  her mother St.  Ann.  Here was  a fine breeding-
ground  for  all  sorts  of  heresy,  and  soon  we  return  in  our  argument  to  the 
point  where  the  Theme  reasserted  itself popularly  with  the  Virgin  as  the 
White  Goddess,  Jesus  as  the  Waxing  Sun,  the  Devil  as  the  Waning  Sun. 
There was  no  room  here  for the  Father  God,  except as  a  mystical  adjunct 
of Jesus (T and the Father are One').

473

Chapter  Twenty-Six

R E T U RN  OF  T HE  G O D D E SS

W hat, then, is to be the future of religion in the West?473

Chapter  Twenty-Six

R E T U RN  OF  T HE  G O D D E SS

W hat, then, is to be the future of religion in the West?

Sir James  Frazer attributed  the defects  of European  civili 
zation  to  'the  selfish  and  immoral  doctrine  of  Oriental  re 
ligions  which  inculcated  the  communion  of  the  soul  with  God,  and  its 
eternal  salvation,  as  the  only  objects  worth  living  for'.  This,  he  argued, 
undermined  the  unselfish  ideal  of Greek  and  Roman  society  which  sub 
ordinated  the individual to  the welfare of the  State. Adolf Hitler said  later, 
more succinctly:  'The Jews  are  to  blame for all our troubles.'  Both state 
ments, however, were historically untrue.Frazer,  an  authority  on  Greek  religion,  must  have  known  that  the 
Salvationist  obsession  of  the  Greek  Orphics  was  Thraco-Libyan,  not 
Oriental,  and  that  long  before  the  Jews  of the  Dispersal  had  introduced 
to  the  Greek  world  their  Pharisaic  doctrine  of  oneness  with  God,  city-
state  idealism  had  been  destroyed  from  within.  Once  speculative  philo 
sophy had made sceptics of all  educated  Greeks  who were not  Orphics  or 
members  of some  other mystical  fraternity,  public as  well  as  private faith 
was  undermined  and,  despite  the  prodigious  conquests  of  Alexander, 
Greece  was  easily  defeated  by  the  semi-barbarous  Romans,  who  com 
bined  religious  conservatism  with  national  esprit  de  corps.  The  Roman 
nobles  then  put  themselves  to  school  under  the  Greeks,  and  caught  the 
philosophical  infection;  their  own  idealism  crumbled  and  only  the  regi 
mental  esprit  de  corps  of the  untutored  legions,  combined  with  Emperor-
worship on the Oriental model, staved off political collapse. Finally, in the 
fourth  century  A . D .,  they  found  the  pressure  of the  barbarians  against 
their  frontiers  so  strong  that  it was  only  by  recourse  to  the  still  vigorous 
faith of Christianity that they could save what remained  of the Empire.

Hitler's  remark,  which was not original,  referred  to  the  alleged  econo 
mic  oppression  of  Europe  by  the  Jews.  He  was  being  unfair:  under 
Christianity  the  Jews  had  for  centuries  been  forbidden  to  hold  land  or 
become  members  of ordinary  craft-guilds,  and  obliged  to  live  on  their 
wits.  They became jewellers,  physicians, money-lenders and bankers, and 
started  such  new,  highly  skilled  industries  as  the  manufacture  of optical 
glass  and  drugs;  England's  sudden  commercial  expansion  in  the  seven-

474474

teenth  century  was  caused  by  Cromwell's  welcome  to  the  Dutch  Jews, 
who  brought  their modern  banking-system  to London.  If Europeans  dis 
like  the  results  of unlimited  capitalism  and  industrial  progress,  they  have 
only themselves  to blame:  the Jews originally invoked  the power of money 
as  a  bulwark  against  Gentile  oppression.  They  were  forbidden  by  the 
Mosaic  Law  either  to  lend  money  at  interest  among  themselves  or  to  let 
loans  run  on  indefinitely—every  seventh  year  the  debtor  had  to  be  re 
leased  from  his  bond—and  it is not their  fault  that money,  ceasing  to  be a 
practical  means  of  exchanging  goods  and  services,  has  achieved  irre 
sponsible divinity in  the  Gentile world.

Yet  neither  Frazer  nor  Hitler  were  far  from  the  truth,  which  was  that 
the  early  Gentile  Christian  borrowed  from  the  Hebrew  prophets  the  two 
religious  concepts,  hitherto  unknown  in  the  West,  which  have  become 
the  prime  causes  of our  unrest:  that  of a  patriarchal  God,  who  refuses  to 
have  any  truck  with  Goddesses  and  claims  to  be  self-sufficient  and  all-
wise;  and  that  of a  theocratic  society,  disdainful  of the  pomps  and  glories 
of the world,  in  which everyone who  rightly  performs his  civic duties  is  a 
'son  of  God'  and  entitled  to  salvation,  whatever  his  rank  or  fortune,  by 
virtue  of direct  communion with  the  Father.Both  these  concepts  have  since  been  vigorously  contested  within  the 
Church  itself.  However  deeply  Westerners  may  admire  Jesus's  single-
minded  devotion  to  the  remote,  all-holy,  Universal  God  of the  Hebrew 
prophets,  few of them have ever accepted  whole-heartedly  the antagonism 
between  flesh  and  spirit  implied  in  his  cult.  And  though  the  new  God 
head  seemed  philosophically  incontrovertible,  once  the warlike  and  petu 
lant  Zeus-Juppiter,  with  his  indiscreet  amours  and  quarrelsome  Olym 
pian  family,  had  ceased  to  command  the  respect  of intelligent  people,  the 
early  Church  Fathers  soon  found  that  man  was  not  yet  ready  for  ideal 
anarchy:  the All-Father,  a  purely meditative  patriarch  who  did  not  inter 
vene  personally  in  mundane  affairs,  had  to  resume  his  thunderbolt  in 
order  to  command  respect.  Even  the  communistic  principle,  for  a  breach 
of which  Ananias  and  Sapphira had  been  struck dead, was  abandoned  as 
unpractical.  As  soon  as  the  Papal  power  was  acknowledged  superior  to 
that  of kings,  the  Popes  assumed  magnificent  temporal  pomp,  took  part 
in  power-politics,  waged  wars,  rewarded  the  rich  and  well-born  with  in 
dulgences  for sin  in  this  world  and  promises  of  preferential  treatment  in 
the  next,  and  anathematized  the  equalitarian  principles  of  their  simple 
predecessors.  And  not  only  has  Hebrew  monotheism  been  modified  at 
Rome  by  the  gradual  introduction  of Virgin-worship,  but  the  ordinary 
Cadiolic  layman  has  long  been  cut  off  from  direct  communication with 
God:  he  must  confess  his  sins  and  acquaint  himself with  the  meaning  of 
God's word, only through the mediation of a priest.

Protestantism  was  a  vigorous  reassertion  of the  two  rejected  concepts,

475Protestantism  was  a  vigorous  reassertion  of the  two  rejected  concepts,

475

which  the  Jews  themselves  had  never  abandoned,  and  to  which  the  Mo 
hammedans  had  been almost equally faithful.  The  Civil  Wars  in England 
were  won  by  the  fighting  qualities  of the  Virgin-hating  Puritan  Indepen 
dents,  who  envisaged  an  ideal  theocratic  society  in  which  all  priestly  and 
episcopal  pomp  should  be abolished,  and  every  man  should  be  entitled  to 
read  and  interpret  the  Scriptures  as  he pleased,  with  direct access  to  God 
the  Father.  Puritanism  took  root  and  flourished  in  America,  and  the 
doctrine  of  religious  equalitarianism,  which  carried  with  it  the  right  to 
independent thinking,  turned  into  social equalitarianism,  or democracy,  a 
theory which  has  since dominated  Western  civilization.  We are now at the 
stage  where  the  common  people  of  Christendom,  spurred  on  by  their 
demagogues,  have  grown  so  proud  that  they  are  no  longer  content  to  be 
the  hands  and  feet  and  trunk  of  the  body  politic,  but  demand  to  be  the 
intellect  as  well—or,  as  much  intellect  as  is  needed  to  satisfy  their  simple 
appetites.  As  a  result,  all  but  a  very  few  have  discarded  their  religious 
idealism, Roman Catholics as well as Protestants, and come to the private 
conclusion  that  money,  though  the  root  of  all  evil,  is  the  sole  practical 
means  of  expressing  value  or  of  determining  social  precedence;  that 
science  is  the  only  accurate  means  of describing  phenomena;  and  that  a 
morality  of common  honesty  is  not  relevant  either  to  love,  war,  business 
or  politics.  Yet  they  feel  guilty  about  their  backsliding,  send  their 
children  to  Sunday  School,  maintain  the  Churches,  and  look with  alarm 
towards the East, where a younger and more fanatic faith threatens.What  ails  Christianity  today  is  that  it  is  not  a  religion  squarely  based 
on a single myth; it is a complex of juridical decisions made under political 
pressure  in  an  ancient  law-suit  about  religious  rights  between  adherents 
of the  Mother-goddess  who  was  once  supreme  in  the  West,  and  those  of 
the  usurping  Father-god.  Different  ecclesiastical  courts  have  given 
different decisions,  and  there is  no  longer a supreme judicature.  Now that 
even the Jews have been seduced into evading the Mosaic Law and whoring 
after  false  gods,  the  Christians  have  drifted  farther  away  than  ever  from 
the ascetic holiness to which Ezekiel, his Essene successors, and Jesus,  the 
last of the  Hebrew prophets, hoped  to  draw  the world.  Though  the  West 
is  still  nominally  Christian,  we  have  come  to  be  governed,  in  practice, 
by  the  unholy  triumdivate  of Pluto  god  of wealth,  Apollo  god  of science, 
and  Mercury  god  of  thieves.  To  make  matters  worse,  dissension  and 
jealousy rage openly  between  these  three,  with  Mercury and  Pluto  black 
guarding  each  other,  while  Apollo  wields  the  atomic  bomb  as  if it were  a 
thunderbolt;  for since  the  Age  of Reason  was  heralded  by  his  eighteenth-
century  philosophers,  he  has  seated  himself on  the  vacant  throne  of Zeus 
(temporarily indisposed) as Triumdival Regent.

The propaganda services of the West perpetually announce that the only 
way  out  of our  present  troubles  is  a  return  to  religion,  but  assume  that 
476The propaganda services of the West perpetually announce that the only 
way  out  of our  present  troubles  is  a  return  to  religion,  but  assume  that 
476

religion  ought  not  to  be  defined  in  any  precise  sense:  that  no  good  can 
come from publicizing either the contradictions  between  the main  revealed 
religions  and  their  mutually  hostile  sects,  or  the  factual  mis-statements 
contained  in  their  doctrines,  or  the  shameful  actions  which  they have  all, 
at  one  time  or another,  been  used  to  cloak.  What is  really  being  urged  is 
an  improvement  in  national  and  international  ethics,  not  everyone's 
sudden  return  to  the  beliefs  of his  childhood—which,  if undertaken  with 
true  religious  enthusiasm,  would  obviously  lead  to  a  renewal  of religious 
wars:  only  since  belief  weakened  all  round  have  the  priests  of  rival 
religions  consented  to  adopt  a  good-neighbourly  policy.  Then  why  not 
say  ethics,  since  it  is  apparent  that  the  writers  and  speakers,  with  few 
exceptions,  have  no  strong  religious  convictions  themselves?  Because 
ethics  are  held  to  derive  from  revealed  religion,  notably  the  Ten  Com 
mandments,  and  therefore  the  seemingly  unethical  behaviour  of  com 
munists is attributed  to their total  repudiation of religion; and because the 
co-existence  of contradictory  confessions  within  a  State  is  held  by  non-
communists to be a proof of political health; and because a crusade against 
Communism can be launched only in the name of religion.Communism  is  a  faith,  not  a  religion:  a  pseudo-scientific  theory 
adopted  as  a cause.  It is  simple,  social equalitarianism,  generous and  un-
nationalistic  in  original  intention,  the  exponents  of  which,  however, 
have been  forced, as  the early  Christians were,  to  postpone their hopes of 
an  immediate  millennium  and  adopt  a  pragmatic  policy  that  will  at  least 
guarantee  their  own  survival  in  a  hostile  world.  The  repository  of  the 
Communistic  faith  is  the  Kremlin  and,  the  Slavs  being what  their pitiless 
climate  has  made  them,  the  Party  has  slid  easily  enough  into  authori 
tarianism,  militarism  and  political  chicanery,  which  have  brought  with 
them  distortion  of history  and  interference  with  art,  literature  and  even 
science;  though  all  these,  they  assert,  are  temporary  defensive  measures 
only.

Well,  then:  since  the  Communistic  faith,  however  fanatically  held,  is 
not a religion, and since all contemporary religions contradict one another, 
however  politely,  in  their  articles  of faith,  can  any  definition  of the  word 
religion  be  made  that  is  practically  relevant  to  a  solution  of the  present 
political problems?

The  dictionaries  give  its  etymology  as  'doubtful'.  Cicero  connected 
it with relegere,  'to read duly'—hence 'to pore upon, or study'  divine lore. 
Some  four-and-a-half  centuries  later,  Saint  Augustine  derived  it  from 
religare,  'to  bind back'  and  supposed  that it implied a pious  obligation  to 
obey  divine  law;  and  this  is  the  sense  in  which  religion  has  been  under 
stood  ever  since.  Augustine's  guess,  like  Cicero's  (though  Cicero  came 
nearer  the  truth),  did  not  take  into  account  the  length  of the first syllable 
of religio  in  Lucretius's  early  De  Rerum  Natura,  or  the  alternative  spelling

477477

relligio.  Relligio can be  formed  only  from  the phrase rem legere,  'to choose, 
or pick, the right thing', and religion for the primitive Greeks and Romans 
was not obedience  to  laws  but  a means  of protecting  the  tribe  against evil 
by  active  counter-measures  of good.  It  was  in  the  hands  of a  magically-
minded  priesthood,  whose  duty  was  to  suggest  what  action  would  please 
the  gods  on  peculiarly  auspicious  or  inauspicious  occasions.  When,  for 
example,  a  bottomless  chasm  suddenly  opened  in  the  Roman  Forum, 
they read it as a sign that the gods demanded a sacrifice of Rome's best; one 
Mettus  Curtius  felt  called  upon  to  save  the  situation  by  choosing  the 
right  thing,  and  leaped  into  the  chasm  on  horseback,  fully  armed.  On 
another  occasion  a  woodpecker  appeared  in  the  Forum  where  the  City 
Praetor,  Aelius  Tubero,  was  dispensing justice,  perched  on his  head  and 
allowed  him  to  take  if  in  his  hand.  Since  the  woodpecker  was  sacred  to 
Mars, its unnatural tameness alarmed the augurs, who pronounced that, if 
it  were  released,  disaster  would  overcome  Rome;  if  killed,  the  Praetor 
would  die  for  his  act  of sacrilege.  Aelius  Tubero  patriotically  wrung  its 
neck,  and  afterwards  came  to  a violent end.  These unhistorical  anecdotes 
seem  to  have  been  invented  by  the  College  of Augurs  as  examples  of how 
signs should be read and how Romans should act in response to them.The case of Aelius Tubero is a useful illustration not only of relligio but 
of the difference between  taboo and  law.  The theory of taboo is  that certain 
things  are  prophetically  announced  by  a  priest  or  priestess  to  be  harmful 
to  certain  people  at  certain  times—though  not  necessarily  to  other 
people  at  the  same  time,  or  to  the  same  people  at  other  times;  and  the 
primitive  punishment  for  the  breach  of a  taboo  is  ordained  not  by  the 
judges  of the  tribe  but  by  the  transgressor himself,  who  realizes  his  error 
and  either dies  of shame  and grief or flees to another  tribe  and  changes his 
identity.  It  was  understood  at  Rome  that  a  woodpecker,  as  the  bird  of 
Mars,  might  not  be  killed  by  anybody except  the  King,  or  his  ritual  suc 
cessor under the Republic, and only on a single occasion in the year,  as an 
expiatory  sacrifice  to  the  Goddess.  In  a  less  primitive  society  Tubero 
would  have  been  publicly  tried,  under  such-and-such  a  law,  for  killing  a 
protected sacred bird, and either executed, fined or imprisoned;  as  it was, 
his breach of taboo was left to his own sense of divine vengeance.

Primitive  religion  at  Rome  was  bound  up  with  the  sacred  monarchy: 
the  King  was  restrained  by  a  great  number  of taboos  designed  to  please 
the various-titled  Goddess of Wisdom whom he served,  and  the members 
of her  divine  family.  It  seems  that  the  duty  of his  twelve  priesdy  com 
panions,  one  for every month  of the  year,  called  the Uctores,  or  'choosers', 
was  to  protect  him  against  ill-luck  or  profanation  and  pay  careful  atten 
tion  to  his  needs.  Among  their  tasks  must  have  been  the  relictio,  or 
'careful  reading', of signs,  omens,  prodigies  and  auguries;  and  the selectio 
of  his  weapons,  his  clothes,  his  food  and  the  grasses  and  leaves  of  his

478478

tectum  or  bed.1  On  the  extinction  of the  monarchy,  the  purely  religious 
functions of the King were invested in die Priest of Jove, and the executive 
functions passed  to  the  Consuls;  die lictors became  their guard of honour. 
The  word  lictor  then  became  popularly  connected  with  the  word  re/igare, 
'to  bind',  because  it  was  a  lictorial  function  to  bind  those  who  rebelled 
against  the  power  of the  Consuls.  Originally  there  had  been  no  Twelve 
Tables,  nor  any  other  Roman  code  of  laws;  there  had  only  been  oral 
tradition,  based  on  instinctive  good  principles  and  particular  magical 
announcements. Mettus Curtius and Aelius Tubero are not represented  as 
having been under any legal  obligation  to  do what  they did;  they made an 
individual  choice  for moral reasons.

It  must  be  explained  that  the  word  lex,  'law',  began  with  the  sense  of a 
'chosen  word',  or  magical  pronouncement,  and  that,  like  lictor,  it  was 
later  given  a  false  derivation  from  ligare.  Law  in  Rome  grew  out  of re 
ligion:  occasional  pronouncements  developed  proverbial  force  and  be 
came legal principles.  But as soon as religion in its primitive sense is inter 
preted  as  social  obligation  and  defined  by  tabulated  laws—as  soon  as 
Apollo  the  Organizer,  God  of  Science,  usurps  the  power  of his  Mother 
the  Goddess  of inspired  truth,  wisdom  and  poetry,  and  tries  to  bind  her 
devotees  by  laws—inspired  magic  goes,  and  what  remains  is  theology, 
ecclesiastical ritual, and negatively ethical behaviour.If,  therefore,  it is wished  to  avoid disharmony,  dullness and  oppression 
in all  social  (and all  literary)  contexts,  each  problem must  be  regarded  as 
unique,  to  be  setded  by  right  choice  based  on  instinctive  good  principle, 
not by reference to a code or summary of precedents; and, granted that the 
only  way  out  of  our  political  troubles  is  a  return  to  religion,  this  must 
somehow  be  freed  of  its  theological  accretions.  Positive  right  choosing 
based  on  moral  principle  must  supersede  negative  respect  for  the  Law 
which,  though  backed  by  force,  has  grown  so  hopelessly  inflated  and 
complex  that  not  even  a  trained  lawyer  can  hope  to  be  conversant  with 
more  than  a single  branch  of it.  Willingness  to  do  right  can  be  inculcated 
in  most  people  if  they  are  caught  early  enough,  but  so  few  have  the 
capacity  to make a  proper moral  choice between circumstances or actions 
which  at first sight  are  equally  valid,  that  the  main  religious  problem  of 
the  Western  world,  is  briefly,  how  to  exchange  demagogracy,  disguised 
as  democracy,  for  a  non-hereditary  aristocracy  whose  leaders  will  be  in 
spired  to  choose  righdy  on  every  occasion,  instead  of blindly  following 
authoritarian procedure. The Russian Communist Party has confused  the 
issue  by  presenting  itself  as  such  an  aristocracy  and  claiming  to  be  in 
spired  in  its  choice  of policy; but  its  decisions  bear litde  relation  to  truth,

1 T he  English  w o rd  Utter,  derived  from  ledum,  has  the  double  sense  of bed and  bedding; 
and  the L o rd of the Manor of Oterarsee in Angevin  times held his fief 'by the service of  finding 
litter for the King's bed:  in summer grass and herbs, and  in winter straw'.

479

wisdom  or virtue—they are  wholly  authoritarian  and  merely  concern  the 
eventual  fulfilment of Karl  Marx's  economic  prophecies.

#

#479

wisdom  or virtue—they are  wholly  authoritarian  and  merely  concern  the 
eventual  fulfilment of Karl  Marx's  economic  prophecies.

#

#

#479

wisdom  or virtue—they are  wholly  authoritarian  and  merely  concern  the 
eventual  fulfilment of Karl  Marx's  economic  prophecies.

#

#

#

There  are  two  distinct  and  complementary  languages:  the  ancient, 
intuitive  language  of  poetry,  rejected  under  Communism,  merely  mis 
spoken  elsewhere,  and  the  more  modern,  rational  language  or  prose, 
universally  current.  Myth  and  religion  are  clothed  in  poetic  language; 
science,  ethics,  philosophy  and  statistics  in  prose.  A  stage  in  history  has 
now  been  reached  when  it  is  generally  conceded  that  the  two  languages 
should  not  be  combined  into  a  single  formula,  though  Dr.  Barnes,  the 
liberal  Bishop  of Birmingham,  complains 1  that  a  majority  of reactionary 
bishops  would  like  to  insist  on a  literal  belief even  in  the stories  of Noah's 
Ark and  Jonah's  Whale.  The  Bishop is  right  to  deplore the way  in which 
these  venerable  religious  symbols  have  been  misinterpreted  for  didactic 
reasons;  and  to  deplore  still  more  the  Church's  perpetuation  of fables  as 
literal  truth.  The  story  of  the  Ark  is  probably  derived  from  an  Asianic 
icon  in which  the  Spirit  of the  Solar  Year is  shown  in  a moon-ship,  going 
through his habitual  New Year changes—bull,  lion, snake and so  on; and 
the  story  of the  Whale  from  a  similar  icon  showing  the  same  Spirit  being 
swallowed  at  the  end  of  the  year  by  the  Moon-and-Sea-goddess,  re 
presented as a sea-monster, to be presently re-born as a New Year fish, or 
finned  goat.  The  she-monster  Tiamat  who,  in  early  Babylonian  mytho 
logy, swallowed  the Sun-god  Marduk (but whom he  later claimed  to  have 
killed  with  his  sword)  was  used  by  the  author  of  the  Book  of  Jonah  to 
symbolize  the  power  of the  wicked  city,  mother  of harlots,  that swallowed 
and  then  spewed  up  the  Jews.  The  icon,  a  familiar  one  on  the  Eastern 
Mediterranean, survived in  Orphic art, where it represented  a ritual cere 
mony  of initiation:  the  initiate  was  swallowed  by  the  Universal  Mother, 
the  sea-monster,  and  re-born  as  an  incarnation  of the  Sun-god.  (On  one 
Greek  vase  the  Jonah-like figure is  named  Jason,  because  the  history  of 
his  voyage  in  the  Argo  had  by  that  time  been  attached  to  the  signs  of the 
Zodiac  around  which  the  Sun  makes  its  annual  voyage.)  The  Hebrew 
prophets  knew  Tiamat  as  the  Moon-and-Sea-goddess  Rahab,  but  re 
jected  her  as  the  mistress  of all  fleshly  corruptions;  which  is  why  in  the 
ascetic Apocalypse the faithful are promised  'No more sea'.Dr.  Barnes  was  quoting  the  stories  of the  Whale  and  Ark  as  obvious 
absurdities,  but  at  the  same  time  warning  his  fellow-bishops  that  few 
educated  persons  believe  literally  even  in  Jesus's  miracles.  The  merely 
agnostic attitude,  'He  may have risen to  Heaven;  we have no  evidence  for 
or  against  this  claim',  has  now  given  place  in  the  back-rooms  to  the 
positively  hostile:  'Scientifically,  it  does  not  add  up.'  A  New  Zealand

1  February,  1949. 
480

atomic scientist assured me the other day that Christianity had received its 
heaviest  blow  in  1945:  a  fundamental  tenet  of  the  Church,  namely  that 
Jesus's  material  body  was  immaterialized  at  the  Ascension  had,  he  said, 
been  spectacularly  disproved  at  Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki—anyone  with 
the  least  scientific  perception  must  realize  that  any  such  break-down  of 
matter  would  have  caused  an  explosion  large  enough  to  wreck  the  entire 
Middle East.Now  that  scientists  are  talking  in  this  strain,  Christianity  has  little 
chance  of maintaining  its  hold  on  the  governing  classes  unless  the  histori 
cal  part  of ecclesiastical  doctrine can  be separated  from  the mythical:  that 
is  to  say,  unless  a  distinction  can  be  drawn  between  the  historical  concept 
'Jesus  of  Nazareth,  King  of  the  Jews',  and  the  equally  valid  mythical 
concepts  'Christ'  and  'Son  of  Man'  in  terms  of which  alone  the  Virgin 
Birth,  the Ascension  and  the miracles make unchallengeable sense.  If this 
were  to  happen,  Christianity  would  develop  into  a  pure  mystery-cult, 
with  a  Christ,  divorced  from  his  temporal  history,  paying  the  Virgin-
Queen  of Heaven  a filial obedience  that Jesus  of Nazareth  reserved  for his 
Incomprehensible  Father.  Scientists  would  perhaps  welcome  the  change 
as  meeting  the  psychological  needs  of  the  masses,  involving  no  anti-
scientific  absurdities,  and  having a  settling effect  on  civilization;  one of the 
reasons  for  the  restlessness  of  Christendom  has  always  been  that  the 
Gospel  postulates an  immediate end  of time and  therefore denies mankind 
a  sense  of spiritual  security.  Confusing  the  languages  of prose  and  myth, 
its authors claimed  that a final revelation had at last been delivered: every 
one  must  repent,  despise  the  world,  and  humble  himself  before  God  in 
expectation  of  the  imminent  Universal  Judgement.  A  mystical  Virgin-
born  Christ,  detached  from  Jewish  eschatology  and  unlocalized  in  first-
century Palestine, might restore religion to contemporary self-respect.However,  such  a  religious  change  is  impossible  under  present  condi 
tions:  any neo-Arian attempt to degrade Jesus from God to man would be 
opposed as lessening the authority of his ethical message of love and peace. 
Also,  the  Mother-and-Son  myth  is  so  closely  linked  with  the  natural 
year  and  its  cycle  of ever-recurring  observed  events  in  the  vegetable  and 
animal  queendoms  that  it  makes  little  emotional  appeal  to  the  confirmed 
townsman,  who  is  informed  of  the  passage  of  the  seasons  only  by  the 
fluctuations  of his  gas  and  electricity  bills  or  by  the  weight  of his  under 
clothes.  He  is  chivalrous  to  women  but  thinks  only  in  prose;  the  one 
variety  of religion  acceptable  to  him  is  a  logical,  ethical,  highly  abstract 
sort  which  appeals  to  his  intellectual  pride  and  sense  of detachment  from 
wild  nature.  The  Goddess is no  townswoman:  she is  the  Lady of the Wild 
Things,  haunting  the  wooded  hill-tops—Venus  Cluacina,  'she who  puri 
fies  with  myrde',  not Venus  Cloacina,  'Patroness  of the  Sewage  System', 
as  she first became  at  Rome;  and  though  the  townsman has now begun  to

4 8!

insist that built-up areas  should  have a limit,  and  to  discuss  decentraliza 
tion  (the decanting of the  big towns  into small,  independent communities, 
well  spaced  out),  his  intention  is  only  to  urbanize  the  country,  not  to 
ruralize the town. Agricultural life is rapidly becoming industrialized and 
in England,  the world's soberest social laboratory,  the last vestiges of the 
ancient  pagan  celebrations  of the  Mother  and  Son  are  being  obliterated, 
despite a loving insistence on Green Belts and parks and private gardens. 
It  is  only  in  backward  parts  of  Southern  and  Western  Europe  that  a 
lively sense still survives in the countryside of their continued worship.No:  there  seems  no  escape  from  our  difficulties  until  the  industrial 
system breaks  down  for some  reason  or other,  as it nearly did in Europe 
during the Second World W a r, and nature reasserts herself with grass and 
trees among the ruins.

The  Protestant  Churches  are  divided  between  liberal  theology  and 
fundamentalism, but the Vatican audtorities have made up their minds how 
to  face  the problems  of the day.  T h ey encourage  two  antinomous  trends 
of thought to co-exist within the Church: the authoritarian, or paternal, or 
logical,  as  a  means  of securing  the  priest's  hold  on  his  congregation  and 
keeping  them  from  free-thinking;  the  mythical,  or  maternal,  or  supra-
logical,  as  a  concession  to  the  Goddess,  without  whom  the  Protestant 
religion has lost its romantic glow. T h ey recognize her as a lively, various, 
immemorial obsession, deeply fixed in the racial memory of the European 
countryman and  impossible to exorcize; but are equally aware that this is 
an  essentially  urban  civilization,  therefore  authoritarian,  and  therefore 
patriarchal.  It  is  true  that  woman  has  of late  become  virtual  head  of the 
household  in  most  parts  of  the  Western  world,  and  holds  the  purse-
strings, and can take up almost any career or position she pleases; but she 
is  unlikely  to  repudiate  the  present  system,  despite  its  patriarchal  frame 
work. With all its disadvantages, she enjoys greater liberty of action under 
it than man has retained for himself; and though she may know, intuitively, 
that  the  system  is  due  for  a  revolutionary  change,  she  does  not  care  to 
hasten  or  anticipate  this.  It  is  easier  for  her  to  play  man's  game  a  little 
while longer, until  the situation  grows  too  absurd and  uncomfortable  for 
complaisance. The Vatican waits watchfully.Meanwhile,  Science  itself is  in  difficulties.  Scientific  research  has  be 
come  so  complicated  and  demands  such  enormous  apparatus  that  only 
the State or immensely rich patrons can pay for it, which in practice means 
that  a  disinterested  search  for  knowledge  is  cramped  by  the  demand  for 
results that will justify the expense: the scientist must turn showman. Also, 
a  huge  body  of technical  administrators  is  needed  to  implement his  ideas, 
and these too rank as scientists; yet, as Professor Lancelot Hogben points 
out,1  (and he  is  exceptional  in being an  F . R . S.  with sufficient knowledge

1  The  New  Authoritarianism,  C o n w ay  Memorial  Lecture,  1 9 4 9. 
4821  The  New  Authoritarianism,  C o n w ay  Memorial  Lecture,  1 9 4 9. 
482

of history  and  the  humanities  to  be  able  to  view  science  objectively)  they 
are  no  more  than 
'fellow-travellers'—careerists,  opportunists,  and 
civil-service-minded  authoritarians.  A  non-commercial  benevolent  insti 
tution  like  the  Nuffield  Foundation,  he  says,  is  as  high-handed  in  its 
treatment of scientists  as  a  Treasury-controlled  Government department. 
In  consequence,  pure  mathematics  is  almost  the  only  free  field  of science 
left.  Moreover,  the  corpus  of scientific  knowledge,  like  that  of law,  has 
grown  so  unwieldy  that  not  only  are  most  scientists  ignorant  of even  the 
rudiments  of more  than  one  specialized  study,  but  they  cannot  keep  up 
with  the  publications  in  their  own  field,  and  are  forced  to  take  on  trust 
findings  which  they  should  properly  test  by  personal  experiment.  Apollo 
the  Organizer,  in  fact,  seated  on  Zeus's  throne,  is  beginning  to  find  his 
ministers  obstructive,  his  courtiers  boring,  his  regalia  tawdry,  his  quasi-
royal  responsibilities  irksome,  and  the  system  of  government  breaking 
down  from  over-organization:  he  regrets  having  enlarged  the  realm  to 
such  absurd  proportions  and  given  his  uncle  Pluto  and  his  half-brother 
Mercury  a  share  in  the  Regency,  yet  dares  not  quarrel  with  these  un 
reliable wretches for fear of worse to come, or even attempt to re-write the 
constitution  with  their  help.  The  Goddess  smiles  grimly  at  his  predica 
ment.This  is  the  'brave  new  world'  satirized  by  Aldous  Huxley,  an  ex-poet 
turned  philosopher.  What  has  he  to  offer  in  its  place?  In  his  Perennial 
Philosophy  he  recommends  a  saintly  mysticism  of  not-being  in  which 
woman  figures  only  as  an  emblem  of the  soul's  surrender  to  the  creative 
lust  of God.  The  West,  he  says  in  effect,  has  failed  because  its  religious 
feelings  have  been  too  long  linked  with  political  idealism  or  the  pursuit  of 
pleasure; it must now look to India for guidance in  the rigorous discipline 
of asceticism.  Little  or  nothing  is,  of course,  known  to  the  Indian  mystics 
that was unknown  to  Honi  the  Circle-drawer and  the  other Essene  thera 
peutics  with  whom  Jesus  had  so  close  an  affinity,  or  to  the  Mohammedan 
mystics;  but  talk  of  political  reconciliation  between  Far  East  and  Far 
West  is  in  fashion  and  Mr.  Huxley  therefore  prefers  to  style  himself  a 
devotee of Ramakrishna, the most famous Indian mystic of modern times.

Ramakrishna's  case  is  an  interesting  one.  He  lived  all  his  life  in  the 
grounds  of  the  White  Goddess  Kali's  temple  at  Dakshineswar  on  the 
Ganges, and in  1842, at the age of six, had  fallen in a faint at the beauty of 
a  flock  of cranes,  her  birds,  flying  across  a  background  of storm  clouds. 
At  first  he  devoted  himself to  Kali-worship  with  true  poetic  ecstacy  like 
his  predecessor  Ramprasad  Sen  ( 1 7 1 8 - 1 7 7 5 );  D U t)   when  he  grew  to  man 
hood,  allowed  himself to  be  seduced:  he  was  unexpectedly  acclaimed  by 
Hindu pundits as a re-incarnation of Krishna and Buddha, and persuaded 
by  them  into  orthodox  techniques  of devotion.  He  became  an  ascetic  saint 
of the  familiar  type  with  devoted  disciples  and  a  Gospel  of ethics  posthu-mously  published,  and  was  fortunate  enough  to  marry  a  woman  of the 
same mystic capacities as himself who,  by agreeing to  forgo  physical  con 
summation,  helped  him  to  illustrate  the  possibility  of  a  purely  spiritual 
union of the sexes.  Though he did not need  to  declare war on  the  Female, 
as  Jesus  had  done,  he  set  himself painfully  to  'dissolve  his  vision  of the 
Goddess'  in order to  achieve the ultimate bliss  of samadhi,  or communion 
with  the Absolute; holding that the  Goddess,  who was  both  the  entangler 
and  the  liberator  of physical  man,  has  no  place  in  that  remote  esoteric 
Heaven.  In  later  life  he  claimed  to  have  proved  by  experiment  that 
Christians  and  Mohammedans  could  also  achieve  the  same  bliss  as  him 
self;  first,  by  turning  Christian  and  devoting  himself  to  the  Catholic 
liturgy until he achieved  a vision  of Jesus  Christ,  and  then  Moslem,  until 
he  achieved  a  vision  of  Mohammed—after  each  experience  resuming 
samadhi.

What,  then,  is  samadhi}  It  is  a  psychopathic  condition,  a  spiritual 
orgasm,  indistinguishable  from  the  ineffably  beautiful  moment,  described 
by  Dostoievsky,  which  precedes  an  epileptic fit. Indian  mystics  induce  it 
at will  by  fasting  and  meditation,  as  the  Essenes  and  early  Christian  and 
Mohammedan  saints  also  did.  Ramakrishna  had,  in  fact,  ceased  to  be  a 
poet  and  become  a  morbid-psychologist  and  religious  politician  addicted 
to the most refined form of solitary vice imaginable. Ramprasad had never 
allowed  himself to  be  thus  tempted  from  his  devotion  to  the  Goddess  by 
spiritual  ambition.  He  had  even  rejected  the  orthodox  hope  of  'not-
being',  through  mystic  absorption  in  the Absolute,  as  irreconcilable with 
his sense of individual uniqueness as the Goddess's child and lover.

Sugar I like, yet I have no desire 
To become sugar,Sugar I like, yet I have no desire 
To become sugar,

and faced the prospect of death with poetic pride:

How can you shrinkfrom death, 
Child ofthe  Mother ofAll Living? 
A snake, and you fear frogs?

One  Kalipuja  D ay  he  followed  Kali's  image  into  the  Ganges  until  the

waters closed over his head.

The  story  of  Ramprasad's  devotion  to  Kali  reads  familiarly  to  the 
Western  romantic;  samadhi,  the  unchivalrous  rejection  of  the  Goddess, 
will not appeal even to the Western  townsman. N or are any other revivals 
of  Father-god  worship,  whether ascetic  or epicurean,  autocratic or  com 
munist,  liberal or fundamentalist,  likely to solve our troubles; I foresee no 
change for the better until  everything gets  far worse.  Only after a period 
of  complete  political  and  religious  disorganization  can  the  suppressed

484

desire of the Western  races, which  is  for some  practical form  of Goddess-
worship, with her love not  limited  to maternal benevolence and her after-
world not deprived of a sea, find satisfaction at last-H ow  should  she  then  be  worshipped?  Donne  anticipated  the  problem 
in his early poem  The Primrose. He knew that the primrose is sacred  to  the 
Muse  and  that  the  'mysterious  number'  of its  petals  stands  for  women. 
Should  he  adore  a  six-petalled  or  a  four-petalled  freak,  a  Goddess  that  is 
either more, or less,  than true woman? He chose five petals and proved by 
the  science  of numbers  that  woman,  if she  pleases,  has  complete  domina 
tion  of man.  But  it  was  said  of the  lotus-crowned  Goddess  in  the  Corin 
thian  Mysteries,  long  before  the  phrase was  applied  to  the  ideally benign 
Father-god,  'Her  service  is  perfect  freedom';1  and,  indeed, her habit has 
never  been  to  coerce,  but  always  to  grant  or  withhold  her  favours  ac 
cording  as  her  sons  and  lovers  came  to  her with  exacdy the  right  gifts  in 
their  hands—gifts  of their  own  choosing,  not  her  dictation.  She  must  be 
worshipped  in  her  ancient  quintuple  person,  whether  by  counting  the 
petals  of lotus  or  primrose:  as  Birth,  Initiation,  Consummation,  Repose 
and  Death.

There  are  frequent  denials  of her  power,  for  example Allan  Ramsay's

Goddess of the Slothful (from The Gentle Shepherd, 1 7 2 5 ):

0 Goddess of the Slothful, blind and vain, 
Who with foul hearts, Rites, foolish and profane, 
Altars and Temples hallowst to thy name.1

Temples I or Sanctuaries vile, said I? 
To protect Lewdness and Impiety, 
Under the Robe ofthe Divinity?

And thou, Base Goddess ! that thy wickedness,

When others do as bad, may seem the less,

Givest them the reins to all lasciviousness.

Rotter ofsoul and body, enemy

Of reason, plotter of sweet thievery,

The little and great world's calamity.

Reputed worthily the Ocean's daughter:

That treacherous monster, which with even water

First soothes, but ruffles into storms soon after.

Such  winds  ofsighs,  such  Cataracts  of  tears,Reputed worthily the Ocean's daughter:

That treacherous monster, which with even water

First soothes, but ruffles into storms soon after.

Such  winds  ofsighs,  such  Cataracts  of  tears,

Such breaking waves ofhopes, such gulfs of fears,

Thou makest of men, such rocks of cold despairs.

1 Borrowed  by  St-  Augustine  from  Lucius's  address  to  Isis  in  Apuleius's  Golden  Ass,  and

now part of the Protestant liturgy.

485

Tides ofdesire so headstrong, as would move 
The world to change thy name, when thou shalt prove 
Mother of Rage and Tempests, not of Love.

Behold what sorrow now and discontent 
On a poor pair ofLovers thou hast sent I 
Go thou, that vaunt'st thyself Omnipotent.

But the longer her hour is  postponed, and  therefore  the  more exhausted 
by  man's  irreligious  improvidence  the  natural  resources  of  the  soil  and 
sea  become,  the  less  merciful will  her  five-fold  mask  be,  and  the narrower 
the  scope  of action  that  she  grants  to  whichever  demi-god  she  chooses  to 
take  as  her  temporary  consort  in  godhead.  Let  us  placate  her  in  advance 
by assuming  the  cannibalistic worst:

Under your Milky Way

And slow-revolving  Bear,

Frogs from the alder-thicket pray 
In terror ofthe judgement day,

Loud with repentance there.

The log they crowned as king

Grew sodden, lurched and sank.

Dark waters bubble from the spring, 
An owlfloats by on silent wing,

They invoke you from each bank.

At dawn you shall appear,

A gaunt, red-wattled crane, 
She whom they know too wellfor fear, 
Lunging your beak down like a spear 
To fetch them home again.They invoke you from each bank.

At dawn you shall appear,

A gaunt, red-wattled crane, 
She whom they know too wellfor fear, 
Lunging your beak down like a spear 
To fetch them home again.

And  we  owe  her  a  satire  on  the  memory  of  the  man  who  first  tilted 
European  civilization  off balance,  by enthroning  the  restless  and  arbitrary 
male  will  under  the  name  of  Zeus  and  dethroning  the  female  sense  of 
orderliness, Themis.  The  Greeks knew him as  Pterseus  the Destroyer,  the 
Gorgon-slaying  warrior-prince 
from  Asia,  remote  ancestor  of  the 
destroyers Alexander,  Pompey  and  Napoleon.

Swordsman of the narrow lips, 
Narrow hips and murderous mind 
Fenced with chariots and ships, 
By yourjoculators hailed 
The mailed wonder of mankind, 
Far to westward you have sailed.

486

You it was dared seize the throne 
Ofa blown and amorous prince 
Destined to the Moon alone, 
A lame, golden-heeled decoy, 
Joy of hens that gape and wince 
Inarticulately coy.

You who, capped with lunar gold 
Like an old and savage dunce, 
Let the central hearth go cold, 
Grinned, and left us here your sword 
Warden of sickfields that once 
Sprouted of their own accord.

Gusts of laughter the Moon stir 
That her Bassarids now bed 
With the unnoble usurer, 
While an ignorant pale priest 
Rides the beast with a man's head 
To her long-omitted feast.

Chapter  Twenty-Seven

P O S T S C R I PT  1 9 60

is the story.

People  often  ask  me how  I  came  to  write  The  White  Goddess.  Here

Though  a  poet  by  calling,  I  make  my  livelihood  by  prose— 
biographies,  novels,  translations  from  various  languages,  and  so  forth. 
My home has been in Majorca since  1929.  Temporarily exiled because of 
the Spanis.i Civil W a r, I wandered around Europe and the United States; 
and  the Second World W ar caught  me in  England,  where  I  stayed  until 
it ended and J could return to Majorca.In  1944, at the Devonshire village of Galmpton, I was working against 
time  on  a  historical  novel  about  the  Argonauts,  when  a  sudden  over 
whelming  obsession  interrupted  me.  It  took  the  form  of an  unsolicited 
enlightenment  on  a  subject  which  had  meant  little  enough  to  me.  I 
stopped  marking  across  my  big  Admiralty  chart  of  the  Black  Sea  the 
course  taken  (the  mythographers  said)  by  the  Argo  ftom  the  Bosphorus 
to  Baku  and  back.  Instead,  I  began  speculating  on  a  mysterious  'Battle 
of the  Trees',  fought  in  pre-historic  Britain,  and  my  mind  ran  at  such  a 
furious  rate  all  night,  as  well  as  all  the  next  day,  that  it  was  difficult  for 
my  pen  to  keep  pace with it.  Three weeks  later,  I  had written a seventy-
thousand-word book, called  The Roebuck in the Thicket.

I am no mystic:  I avoid  participation in witchcraft,  spiritualism, yoga, 
fortune-telling,  automatic  writing,  and  the  like.  I  live  a  simple,  normal, 
rustic  life with my family and  a wide circle of sane and  intelligent  friends. 
I  belong  to  no  religious  cult,  no  secret  society,  no  philosophical  sect; 
nor  do  I  trust  my  historical  intuition  any  further  than  it  can  be  factually 
checked.

While  engaged  on  my  Argonaut  book,  I  found  the White Goddess of 
Pelion growing daily more important to  the narrative.  N o w, I had in my 
work-room  several  small  West  African  brass  objects—bought  from  a 
London  dealer—gold-dust  weights,  mostly  in  the  shape  of  animals, 
among  them  a  humpback  playing  a  flute.  I  also  had  a  small  brass-box, 
with a lid, intended (so  the dealer told me)  to contain gold dust. I kept the 
humpback  seated  on  the  box.  In  fact,  he  is  still  seated  there;  but  I  knew 
nothing  about  him,  or  about  the  design  on  the  box-lid,  until  ten  years

488488

had gone by. Then I learned that the humpback was a herald in the service 
of the  Queen-mother  of some  Akan  State;  and  that  every  Akan  Queen-
mother  (there  are  a  few reigning  even  today)  claims  to  be  an  incarnation 
of the  Triple Moon-goddess  Ngame.  The  design  on  the box-lid,  a  spiral, 
connected  by  a  single  stroke  to  the  rectangular  frame  enclosing  it—the 
frame  having  nine  teeth  on  either  side—means:  'None  greater  in  the uni 
verse  than  the  Triple  Goddess  Ngame!'  These  gold  weights  and  the box 
were made before the British seizure of the  Gold  Coast, by craftsmen sub 
servient to the Goddess, and regarded as highly magical.

Very  well:  put  it  down  to  coincidence.  Deny  any  connexion  between 
the  hump-backed  herald  on  the  box  (proclaiming  the  sovereignty  of the 
Akan Triple Moon-goddess, and set in a ring of brass animals representing 
Akan  clan  totems)  and  myself,  who  suddenly  became  obsessed  by  the 
European White  Goddess,  wrote about her clan  totems  in  the Argonaut 
context,  and  now  had  thrust upon me ancient secrets  of her  cult  in Wales, 
Ireland  and  elsewhere.  I  was  altogether  unaware  that  the  box  celebrated 
the  Goddess  Ngame,  that  the  Helladic  Greeks,  including  the  primitive 
Athenians,  were  racially  linked  with  Ngame's  people—Libyan  Berbers, 
known  as  the  Garamantians,  who  moved  south  from  the  Sahara  to  the 
Niger in the eleventh century A . D ., and there intermarried with negroes. 
Or that Ngame herself was a Moon-goddess, and  that the White  Goddess 
of Greece  and  Western  Europe  shared  her  attributes.  I  knew  only  that 
Herodotus recognized the Libyan Neith as Athene.On  returning  to  Majorca  soon  after  the  W a r,  I  worked  again  at  The 
Roebuck in the  Thicket, now called  The  White Goddess, and wrote more 
particularly about the Sacred  King as  the Moon-goddess's  divine victim; 
holding that every Muse-poet must,  in a sense,  die  for  the  Goddess whom 
he adores,  just as  the King died.  Old  Georg Schwarz, a German-Jewish 
collector, had  bequeathed me five or six more Akan gold-weights, among 
them  a  mummy-like  figurine  with  one  large  eye.  It  has  since  been 
identified  by  experts  on  West  African  art  as  the  Akan  King's  okrafo 
priest.  I  had  suggested  in  my  book  that,  in  early  Mediterranean  society, 
the  King  fell  a  sacrifice  at  the  end  of his  term.  But  later  (to  judge  from 
Greek  and  Latin  myths)  he  won  executive  power  as  the  Queen's  chief 
minister  and  the  privilege  of sacrificing  a  surrogate.  The  same  govern 
mental  change,  I  have  since  learned,  took  place  after  the  matriarchal 
Akan  arrived  at  the  Gold  Coast.  In  Bono,  Asante,  and  other  near-by 
states,  the  King's  surrogate  victim  was  called  the  'okrafo  priest'.  Kjers-
meier,  the  famous  Danish  expert  on  African  art,  who  has  handled  ten 
thousand  of these  gold-weights,  tells  me  that  he  never  saw  another  like 
mine.  Dismiss  it  as  a  coincidence,  if you  please,  that  the  okrafo  figurine 
lay beside  the herald  on  the  gold  box,  while  I  wrote  about  the  Goddess's 
victims.

After  The  White  Goddess  had  been  published,  a  Barcelona  antiquary 
read  my  Claudius  novels  and  invited  me  to  choose  myself a  stone  for  a 
seal-ring from a collection of Roman gems recendy bought. Among them 
was a stranger, a banded carnelian seal of the Argonaut period, engraved 
with a royal stag galloping towards a thicket, and a crescent moon on its 
flank! Dismiss that as a coincidence, too, if you please.Chains  of  more-than-coincidence  occur  so  often  in  my  life  that,  if I 
am  forbidden  to  call  them  supernatural  hauntings,  let  me  call  them  a 
habit.  Not  that  I  like  the  word  'supernatural';  I  find  these  happenings 
natural enough, though superlatively unscientific.

In  scientific  terms,  no  god  at  all  can  be  proved  to  exist,  but  only 
beliefs  in  gods,  and  the  effects  of  such  beliefs  on  worshippers.  The 
concept  of  a  creative  goddess  was  banned  by  Christian  theologians 
almost  two  thousand  years  ago,  and  by  Jewish  theologians  long  before 
that.  Most  scientists,  for  social  convenience,  are  God-worshippers; 
though  I  cannot  make  out  why  a  belief in  a  Father-god's  authorship  of 
the  universe,  and  its  laws,  seems  any  less  unscientific  than  a  belief in  a 
Mother-goddess's  inspiration  of  this  artificial  system.  Granted  the  first 
metaphor,  the  second  follows  logically—if  these  are  no  better  than 
metaphors....True  poetic  practice  implies  a  mind  so  miraculously  attuned  and 
illuminated that it can form words, by a chain of more-than-coincidences, 
into  a  living  entity—a  poem  that  goes  about  on  its  own  (for  centuries 
after the author's  death,  perhaps)  affecting readers with its  stored magic. 
Since  the  source  of poetry's  creative  power  is  not  scientific  intelligence, 
but  inspiration—however  this  may  be  explained  by  scientists—one  may 
surely  attribute  inspiration  to  the  Lunar  Muse,  the  oldest  and  most 
convenient European term for this source? By ancient tradition, the White 
Goddess  becomes  one  with  her  human  representative—a  priestess,  a 
prophetess,  a  queen-mother.  No  Muse-poet grows  conscious  of the  Muse 
except  by  experience  of  a  woman  in  whom  the  Goddess  is  to  some 
degree resident; just as no Apollonian poet can perform his proper func 
tion unless he lives under a monarchy or a quasi-monarchy. A Muse-poet 
falls in love, absolutely, and his true love is for him the embodiment of the 
Muse.  As  a  rule,  the  power  of absolutely  falling  in  love  soon  vanishes; 
and,  as  a  rule,  because  the  woman  feels  embarrassed  by  the  spell  she 
exercises  over  her  poet-lover  and  repudiates  it;  he,  in  disillusion,  turns 
to Apollo who,  at least, can provide him with a livelihood and intelligent 
entertainment,  and  reneges  before  his  middle  'twenties.  But  the  real, 
perpetually  obsessed  Muse-poet  distinguishes  between  the  Goddess  as 
manifest  in  the  supreme  power,  glory,  wisdom  and  love  of woman,  and 
the individual woman whom the Goddess may make her instrument for a 
month,  a  year,  seven  years,  or  even  more.  T he  Goddess  abides;  and

perhaps  he  will  again  have  knowledge  of her  through  his  experience  of 
another  woman.perhaps  he  will  again  have  knowledge  of her  through  his  experience  of 
another  woman.

Being in  love  does  not,  and  should  not,  blind  the  poet  to  the  cruel  side 
of  woman's  nature—and  many  Muse-poems  are  written  in  helpless 
attestation of this by men whose love is no longer returned:

'As ye came from the holy land 
Of  Walsinghame, 
Met you not with my true love

By the way as ye came ?'

'How should I know your true love, 
That have met many a one

As I came from the holy land,

That have come, that have gone ?

'She is neither white nor brown, 
But as the heavens fair; 
There is none hath her divine form 
In the earth, in the air.'

'Such a one did I meet, good sir, 
Such an angelic face,

Who like a nymph, like a queen, did appear

In her gait, in her grace.'

'She hath left me here alone, 
All alone, as unknown,

Who sometimes did me lead with herself,

And me loved as her own.'

'What's the cause that she leaves you alone

And a new way doth take,

That sometime didyou love as her own, 
And her joy didyou make f

'I have loved her all my youth,

But now am old, as you see:

Love likes not the falling fruit,

Nor the withered tree.'

It  will  be  noticed  that  the  poet  who  made  this  pilgrimage  to  Mary  the 
Egyptian,  at  Walsinghame,  the  mediaeval  patron  saint  of  lovers,  has

491

adored  one  woman  all  his  life,  and  is  now  old.  Why  is  she  not  old,  too? 
Because  he  is  describing  the  Goddess,  rather  than  the  individual  woman. 
Or take Wyatt's:

Theyflee from me who sometime did me seek 
With naked foot stalking within my chamber . ..

He  writes:  'They  flee  from  me',  rather  than  'She  flees  from  me':  namely, 
the  women  who  were  in  turn  illumined  for  Wyatt  by  the  lunar  ray  that 
commanded  his  love—such  as  Anne  Boleyn,  later  Henry  V  Ill's  unfor 
tunate  queen.A  prophet  like  Moses,  or  John  the  Baptist,  or  Mohammed,  speaks  in 
the name  of a  male  deity,  saying:  'Thus  saith  the Lord!'  I  am  no  prophet 
of the  White  Goddess,  and  would  never  presume  to  say:  'Thus  saith  the 
Goddess!' A simple loving declaration:  'None greater in  the universe than 
the  Triple  Goddess!'  has  been  made  implicidy  or  explicidy  by  all  true 
Muse-poets  since poetry began.

492