# Full Text

(Source: book.pdf)

The Secret History of the World 
And How to Get Out Alive

Books by 
Laura Knight-Jadczyk

The Wave Series  
The High Strangeness of Dimensions, Densities and the Process of Alien 
Abduction  
Amazing Grace 
9-11: The Ultimate Truth

The Secret History of 
the World

And How To Get Out Alive

Laura Knight-Jadczyk

Red Pill Press 
2005

! Copyright 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005 Laura Knight-Jadczyk 
http://www.cassiopaea.org/ 
All Rights Reserved 
ISBN# 0-9765041-0-3

No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, or otherwise, other 
than for “fair use”, without the written consent of the author.

This book was previously published in a slightly different form under the title 
Ancient Science.  Sections of this volume were published on the Cassiopaea website 
as early as 1995.

Printed in Canada

Acknowledgements

Since  this  book  is  ulitmately  one  of  synthesis,  I  want  to  thank  all  the  great 
seekers  who  have  contributed  so  much  to  my  own  researches.  I  have  tried  to 
acknowledge each and every one and their unique ideas throughout the text in the 
footnotes, and in the bibliography. If I have missed any, my sincere apologies.

My  thanks  go  to  Henry  See  for  being  a  wonderful  editor  and  critic;  to  the 
Quantum Future Group for support; to our readers for the questions that led to the 
answers; to my children for feeding Mommy while she was writing; to my Ark for 
understanding and accepting me and my passions; and to Cassiopaea, myself in the 
future, for showing me that future.

Table of Contents

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

PREFACE BY PATRICK RIVIÈRE

NOTE TO THE READER ABOUT THE CASSIOPAEANS

FOREWORD

INTRODUCTION

LAYING THE GROUNDWORK 
THE SCAM OF DISTRACTION 
SOMETHING WICKED THIS WAY COMES 
COINTELPRO AND ASCENSION 
PRIME TIME 
THE REAL PRIZE

CHAPTER 1 THE NATURE OF THE QUESTFOREWORD

INTRODUCTION

LAYING THE GROUNDWORK 
THE SCAM OF DISTRACTION 
SOMETHING WICKED THIS WAY COMES 
COINTELPRO AND ASCENSION 
PRIME TIME 
THE REAL PRIZE

CHAPTER 1 THE NATURE OF THE QUEST

THE ANCIENT SECRET SCIENCE REVEALED 
DISJECTA MEMBRA 
ALCHEMY AND THE ENCLAVE IN THE PYRENEES 
A KNIGHT ON A QUEST 
GURDJIEFF AND MOURAVIEFF

CHAPTER 2 THE CHEMISTRY OF ALCHEMY

THE LANGUAGE OF THE GODS 
THE ANALOGY WITH BRAIN PHYSIOLOGY 
BONDING 
RECEPTORS 
LIGANDS 
SPIRITUAL DRUGS 
ALCOHOL AND CAFFEINE 
PLEASURE CENTERS AND DRUGS

V

XI

XIII

XV

1 
1 
6 
8 
23 
24 
25

29 
29 
29 
39 
57 
72

87 
87 
89 
90 
91 
92 
93 
94 
95

viii

Table of Contents

CHAPTER 3 THE QUEST OF THE PAST 
BACK TO THE HOLY GRAIL AND LANGUAGE 
“YOU KNOW MY METHOD. IT IS FOUNDED UPON  
THE OBSERVANCE OF TRIFLES.” 
THE TERROR OF HISTORY 
A FEW WORDS ABOUT RADIOMETRIC DATING

CHAPTER 4 HYPERDIMENSIONAL REALITY

HYPERDIMENSIONAL SPACE — THE REALM OF THE “GODS” 
MATHEMATICAL DIMENSIONS 
THE MAGIC OF ABSTRACT THOUGHT 
DIMENSIONAL THINKING IN WESTERN SPIRITUALITY 
GETTING A HANDLE ON PSI PHENOMENA 
EINSTEIN AND HYPERDIMENSIONAL PHYSICS

CHAPTER 5 WHOSE WORLD IS IT, ANYWAY?

THE TREE OF LIFE AND THE END OF TIME 
A NEW HEAVEN AND A NEW EARTH 
SUMMING UP 
INTERMIXING OF THE RACES 
OPS AND THE BIG PICTURE 
THE CATHARS

CHAPTER 6 HISTORY AND CATASTROPHE

THE NOAH SYNDROME 
WHAT PLATO TELLS US ABOUT ATLANTIS 
THE DOUBLE CATASTROPHE: THE BROTHERS HELIOPOLIS 
CYCLIC CATASTROPHES 
UNIFORMITARIANISM 
CATASTROPHISM

CHAPTER 7 ANCIENT ENIGMAS

DINOSAURS 
THE MYSTERY OF MALTA 
THE JOMON PUZZLE 
GLOBAL EVIDENCE OF ANCIENT, PRE-HISTORIC HIGH CIVILIZATIONS 
ANCIENT FLIGHT? 
THE NEANDERTHAL ENIGMA 
EVIDENCE OF THE ICA STONES 
OTHER ARTIFACTS 
THE SUDDEN APPEARANCE OF CRO-MAGNON 
THE ROLE OF THE SHAMAN 
TYING IT ALL TOGETHER 
ORION, THE ARK AND THE HOLY GRAIL

109 
109

114 
117 
119

123 
123 
126 
126 
129 
133 
135

139 
139 
142 
157 
157 
159 
164

171 
171 
176 
182 
184 
188 
190109 
109

114 
117 
119

123 
123 
126 
126 
129 
133 
135

139 
139 
142 
157 
157 
159 
164

171 
171 
176 
182 
184 
188 
190

201 
201 
216 
220 
223 
224 
227 
230 
231 
233 
239 
242 
243

Table of Contents

ix

THE RELEVANCE OF ORION TO OUR SITUATION 
FROM SCYTHIA TO CAMELOT

CHAPTER 8 THE CULTURE OF STONES

MAGIC AND MEGALITHS 
MORRIS JESSUP AND GRAVITATIONAL NODES 
THE DANCE OF THE HOURS 
POSSIBLE ANTAGONISTIC POLARITIES IN ANCIENT CIVILIZATIONS 
STONE TECHNOLOGY AND T.C. LETHBRIDGE 
STONES AND “SACRED GEOMETRY” 
THE CORAL CASTLE AND SPINNING AIRPLANE SEATS 
EGYPTIAN STONE VASES 
PYTHAGORAS AND THE BARBARIANS 
THE DANCING GOD 
THE LABYRINTH 
THE SECRET OF CRETE

CHAPTER 9 PERCY-ING THE VEIL

RETURN TO CAMELOT 
WHY PERCEVAL? 
ARCADIA? 
NEO, NOAH, NOË = PERSEUS

CHAPTER 10 WHO WROTE THE BIBLE AND WHY? 
THE ARK OF THE COVENANT AND THE TEMPLE OF SOLOMON 
THE HOUSE OF DAVID 
AHAB AND JEZEBEL: SOLOMON AND SHEBA? 
THE TEN LOST TRIBES 
THE FIRST “TORAH” AND THE FIRST “TEMPLE” 
THE TRIBE OF DAN 
THE FESTIVAL OF TABERNACLES 
I’M MY OWN GRANDPA 
SOTHIS: THE SHARP TOOTHED 
MOSES AND AARON 
THE SIN OF MANASSEH: EXILE IN BABYLON

244 
247

255 
255 
258 
261 
264 
265 
272 
272 
277 
279 
283 
290 
298

305 
305 
316 
318 
335

345 
345 
360 
362 
369 
371 
382 
387 
410 
426 
440 
446

x

Table of Contents

CHAPTER 11 TIME

THE CULT OF THE HEAD 
BACK TO ATLANTIS 
SARGON THE GREAT 
SARGON REPRISE 
THE GUANCHE LANGUAGE. 
THE RISE OF SACRIFICE 
THE SHELL GAME 
THE END OF TIME

CHAPTER 12 OUT OF TIME

ONCE UPON A TIME 
TIME IS ON MY SIDE 
THE HOPE OF THE WORLD 
THE TREE OF LIFE 
TRANSMUTATION OF THE PERSONALITY

AFTERWORD

BIBLIOGRAPHY

INDEX

467 
467 
469 
475 
487 
487 
489 
501 
505

527 
527 
528 
531 
544 
606

619

681

697

Preface by Patrick Rivière

The Secret History of The WorldAFTERWORD

BIBLIOGRAPHY

INDEX

467 
467 
469 
475 
487 
487 
489 
501 
505

527 
527 
528 
531 
544 
606

619

681

697

Preface by Patrick Rivière

The Secret History of The World

This book of revolutionary importance is essential reading.  
With  this  original  work,  Laura  Knight-Jadczyk  shares  with  us  her  prodigious 
discoveries  that  put  into  question  History  as  well  as  our  habitual  observations 
concerning  the  myth  of  the  “Grail”.  She  does  this  by  revisiting  the  Bible  and 
comparative  mythology,  looking  closely  into  parallel  universes  and  hyperspace, 
and  penetrating  into  quantum  physics,  genetics,  and  the  mysteries  of  the  diverse 
creations populating the hyperdimensions of the Cosmos.

Throughout her exposé, Laura Knight-Jadczyk refers to two powerful works of 
the scientist-alchemist Fulcanelli: The Mystery of the Cathedrals and Dwellings of 
the Philosophers. She applies her vast knowledge to the continuation of his work.

Thus,  following  in  the  footsteps  of  Fulcanelli  (citing  Huysmans)  when  he 
denounces the constant lies and omissions from official History over the course of 
time, Laura Knight-Jadczyk, citing numerous examples, exposes the manipulations 
in the official history of ancient civilizations of which humanity is the victim. She 
strives to re-establish the truth, and her answers are often enlightening.According to Laura Knight-Jadczyk, the mysteries of the Holy Grail and the Ark 
of the Temple refer to a particular, very advanced “technology” – with the aim, for 
example, of teleportation and changing between space-time dimensions – a secret 
and sacred science of which only a few great “Initiates” have remained custodians. 
Christ  Jesus  was  the  surest  guarantor  of  this  precious  legacy,  and,  although  it 
might  displease  Dan  Brown  (author  of  The  DaVinci  Code),  the  genealogical 
lineage of the “Sangréal” (the “Sang Royal” or “Holy Blood”), is not at all as he 
believes it to be! The reader of this important work by Laura Knight-Jadczyk will 
realize that there are completely different conclusions to that mystery.

Her  erudition  cannot  but  impress  the  reader  during  the  course  of  an  assiduous 
reading of this quite astonishing book. As to her inspiration, what can we say, and, 
from whence could it come, if not the Light of the stars?

Patrick Rivière

xii

Preface by Patrick Rivière

Patrick  Rivière  is  a  writer  and  author  of  numerous  works  that  have  been 
published  in  France  and  that  have  been  translated  and  published  in  many 
languages.  He  is  a  specialist  on  the  “Grail”  (On  the  Paths  of  the  Grail)  and  of 
Alchemy following the path of Fulcanelli (Fulcanelli Revealed), two works soon to 
be published by Red Pill Press.

Note to the Reader About the CassiopaeansNote to the Reader About the Cassiopaeans

The  term  “Cassiopaeans”  appears  in  several  places  in  this  book.  While  the 
information contained in this book could as well be given without referring to this 
term,  it  is  better  to  point  out  the  source  of  the  inspiration.  The  name  Cassiopaea 
was given by a source contacted by LKJ in 1994 after a two year long experiment 
in superluminal communication. The source identified itself by saying “we are you 
in  the  future”.  Modern  physics  does  not  provide  us  with  practical  means  for  this 
type  of  communication  and  theories  on  this  subject  are  not  well  developed;  they 
are, in fact, inconclusive and controversial.

When interpreting “we are you in  the future” in  an oversimplified way, we are 
faced  with  causal  paradoxes.  On  the  other  hand,  from  the  theoretical  papers 
published  in  physics  journals  we  can  learn  that,  with  a  proper  and  careful 
interpretation, and taking into account quantum uncertainties, communication into 
the past cannot be dismissed as impossible. Improbable perhaps is the right word, 
but  there  are  many  things  that  are  improbable  and  yet  happen.  The  more 
improbable  is  a  given  phenomenon,  the  more  information  is  carried  by  its 
occurrence, the more we can learn by its study. That is why we did not dismiss the 
“we  are  you  in  the  future”  as  impossible  and  therefore  ignorable.  Instead  we 
decided to continue the “communications” as a form of a controlled experiment in 
“superluminal  thought  transfer”  –  even  if  it  was  clear  that  the  term  should  be 
considered  as  a 
indication  of  only  one  out  several  possible 
interpretations.

tentativetentative

The  information  received  from  this  experiment  is  presented  in  the  context  of 
broad ranging historical, scientific and other metaphysical material and offers the 
clues  that  have  led  to  the  world  view  and  inferences  presented  by  us  in  our 
numerous  publications  on  the  Web  and  in  print.  Perhaps  it  is  only  our  own 
“subconscious  mind”  that  presents  itself  as  a  “source”,  but  even  if  it  is  so,  does 
that tell us more? Do we really know what “unconscious mind” is and of what is it 
capable?

We  sometimes  ask  ourselves  if  the  Cassiopaeans  are  who  they  say  they  are, 
because we do not take anything as unquestionable truth. We take everything with 
a grain of salt, even if we consider that there is a good chance that it is truth. We 
are constantly analyzing this material as well as a great quantity of other material 
that comes to our attention from numerous fields of science and mysticism.

We invite the reader  to share  in our seeking of Truth by reading with an open, 
but skeptical mind. We do not encourage “devotee-ism” nor “True Belief”. We do 
encourage  the  seeking  of  Knowledge  and  Awareness  in  all  fields  of  endeavor  as 
the  best  way  to  be  able  to  discern  lies  from  truth.  The  one  thing  we  can  tell  the

xiv

A Note to the Reader

reader is  this: we work very hard, many hours a day, and have done so for many 
years,  to discover the “bottom  line” of our existence on Earth. It  is our vocation, 
our  quest,  and  our  job.  We  constantly  seek  to  validate  and/or  refine  what  we 
understand to be either possible or probable or both. We do this in the sincere hope 
that  all  of  mankind  will  benefit,  if  not  now,  then  at  some  point  in  one  of  our 
probable futures.

Laura Knight-Jadczyk and Arkadiusz Jadczyk, PhD

ForewordLaura Knight-Jadczyk and Arkadiusz Jadczyk, PhD

Foreword

I suspected something was wrong with the “facts of life” as they were presented 
to  me  when  I  was  a  kid.  Sure,  I  then  spent  a  little  over  thirty  years  trying  to  be 
“normal”  and  make  that  square  peg  fit  the  round  hole,  “looking  for  a  reason  to 
believe.” But then there was a memorable day when I finally grew up and admitted 
that  maybe  -  just  maybe  -  the  Emperor  was  naked.  And  here  it  is,  over  twenty 
years  later,  and  now  -  well,  now  I  know  that  not  only  is  something  rotten  in 
Denmark,  I  also  know  there  is  a  dead  elephant  in  the  middle  of  the  collective 
global living room and I can never NOT see it again.

During that twenty plus years of uncovering that huge, dead critter that occupies 
a central place in our reality, I was driven by the idea that  I just wanted to know 
what  was  REALLY  going  on  in  this  strange  world  I  lived  in  where,  on  the  one 
hand, science was moving so fast that we would soon be able to destroy our planet, 
while on the other hand, the varied religions were telling us not to worry, God was 
probably gonna destroy it for us and we had better believe in the “right god” or we 
were toast.

How  can  a  person  live  in  a  world  where  “the  End  of  the  World”  is  being

predicted every minute? That’s crazy!

But darned if that isn’t what just about every religion on the planet talks about!  
You  go  to  church,  get  scared  to  death  in  an  hour  and  a  half,  warned  about 
hellfire  and damnation,  and then they pass the plate so that you can pay the high 
priests to put in a good word for you with God so that maybe you won’t suffer as 
much as that jerk down the street who goes to a different church! And even if you 
do suffer here on earth,  if you believe hard enough, and prove it by putting your 
money where your faith is, at least you’ll get your reward in paradise.This was back in 1982 when I had three small children. As a mother, I wanted to 
know what to teach my children. I knew that what I had been taught to believe was 
frightening. I had grown up in a time when children were regularly taught what to 
do in case of an atomic bomb attack - Cuba was only 90 miles from Florida where 
I was born - and at the same time, the standard religious teaching of my family - 
mainstream  Protestants  -  promoted  the  “suffer  on  Earth  to  get  rewarded  in 
Heaven” routine.

I knew I had certainly suffered from the state of the world and the teachings of 
my  faith.  I  really,  REALLY  wanted  to  know  if  this  was  something  that  I  should 
pass on to my children.

When  I  held  my  babies  and  rocked  them  or  looked  into  their  sweet,  innocent 
faces - untroubled by the concerns of the world around, certain that Mother would 
make them safe - I had to ask myself “How can I tell them these things? How can I

xvi

The Secret History of the World

“break it to them” that this world into which they have been born is so frightening 
and uncertain and full of traps that not only are their lives in constant danger, their 
very souls may be in peril?

How could I tell that to my children??? 
If it was true, I HAD to tell them.  
But what if it wasn’t true?  
WHAT IF IT WASN’T TRUE? 
I knew one thing and one thing only: I wanted more than anything in the world 
to tell my children the truth, to prepare them for whatever might lie ahead of them 
in their lives. And the question burned inside me: What if I told those little beings 
who  I  loved  more  than  my  own  life  a  LIE?  What  kind  of  a  mother  would  I  be? 
What kind of “Mother Love” is that?The  End  of  the  World  is  an  idea,  which  has  fascinated  man  for  all  recorded 
history and perhaps beyond. In every religion, philosophy,  and mystery teaching, 
there are hints, allusions or outright claims to knowledge of this purported end to 
man’s current status on the earth.

Some teachings say that the earth itself will cease to exist. Others proclaim that 
man will cease to exist in material form; still others claim a great judgment day, in 
which  the  wicked  are  wiped  from  the  face  of  the  planet  while  the  “saved”  are 
rescued in some miraculous fashion to return and inhabit a new, heaven-like “City 
of God”. The persistence of these ideas and their prevalence is centered around the 
idea that man began somewhere, sometime, somehow, and will therefore come to 
an end somewhere, sometime, somehow.

This  assumption  is  born  of  the  conscious  mind’s  tendency  to  think  in  linear 
terms.  Scientific  materialism  has  carried  this  tendency  to  the  ultimate  heights: 
“The  world  must  have  been  born,  therefore,  it  must  die”.  Also,  scientific 
materialism claims nothingness before birth and nothingness after death. Scientific 
philosophies refer to the “accidental mechanicalness” of the universe and teach us 
that  the  only  meaning  to  life  is  no  meaning  at  all.  “Eat,  drink,  and  be  merry  for 
tomorrow you may die”, and then -- oblivion.Scientifically speaking, for a long time matter and motion were accepted as the 
basis of reality and, to a great extent, continue to be. Yet, in actual fact, matter and 
motion are unknown quantities x and y, and are  always defined by means of one 
another. It is an absurdity to define one unknown by means of another! What this 
means is  that science defines matter as  that which  moves,  and defines  motion as 
changes in  matter.  The “Big Bang” or  Cosmic Firecracker  theory is explained  in 
these terms. A primal atom, (matter), of incredible density “exploded” into motion. 
(Where  the  primal  atom  came  from,  how  the  space  it  exploded  into  came  into 
being,  and  where  the  impetus  for  this  event  originated,  are  still  on  the  drawing 
board.)  And  from  this  event,  our  universe  and  the  life  within  it  just  sort  of 
“accidentally”  happened.  Man  is  the  “amoral  end  of  a  deadly  biological 
evolution”.  The  mind  and  soul  are  inexplicable  byproducts  of  the  struggle  for 
survival.

To  the  average  person,  a  table,  a  chair,  an  orange,  is  a  real  object.  They  have 
dimension -- three, to be exact - they are real. But are they? The physicist (and the 
knowledgeable layperson) knows that the object is composed of atoms. And there 
lies  the  rub!  The  dissected  atom  (quantum  particles)  often  displays  some  very

Foreword

xvii

disturbing properties. Who has really seen matter or force? We think we see matter 
in motion, but physics has shown us that what we see is an illusion. When we try 
to focus on it, a quantum particle/wave is an infinite-dimensional entity incapable 
of  being  perceived,  in  that  instant,  as  a  three-dimensional  body  moving  through 
space.  When  we  look  away,  the  quantum  particle/wave  acts  like  a  wave  of  pure 
energy - invisible force.So, just what is matter? What is this estate in which we find our existence? Does 
the physical run out when it becomes  invisible? Obviously  not, as we cannot see 
electricity  and  other  forces  in  the  universe  measurable  only  by  their  effect  upon 
“matter”. Do these forces run out when they become undetectable by our senses or 
by  our  instruments?  Do  the  things  we  detect  with  the  subtle  mechanisms  of  our 
mind and emotions not exist simply because we cannot see or measure them?

Science  hands  those  questions  over  to  religion  and  basically,  we  are  told  to 
“believe  what  you  like”  in  that  area  because  science  isn’t  in  the  business  of 
describing  things  it  cannot  materially  weigh  or  measure.  There  is  a  not-so-subtle 
implication  in  such  a  view  that  it  really  doesn’t  matter  what  a  person  believes 
anyway because, as Danish physicist Niels Bohr put it, “There is no deep reality!” 
So, for those people who have  the  idea  that there  is something “deeper”, some 
“meaning” to life, if you want to put it that way, there is really only one place to 
go for answers: religion, of which there are three major ones in  the world  today, 
all of them “Monotheistic” and based, essentially, on a single religion, Judaism.

The  Bible  says,  “In  the  Beginning,  God  created  the  heaven  and  the  earth”. 
Neither  the  Bible  nor  science  has  much  to  say  about  what  happened  before  the 
beginning.  St.  Augustine  was  once  asked  the  question  “What  was  God  doing 
before  He  created  the  world?”.  The  Bishop’s  rejoinder:  “Creating  Hell  for  those 
who ask that question!”, put a period to such inquiries. Few have asked it since.There  are,  of  course,  various  “interpretations”  of  the  teachings  of  Monotheism 
that exist inside and outside of the “orthodox” explanations. Some interpreters say 
that the only meaning to life is in spiritual self-improvement and creating a better 
future in the afterlife, or in future lives. Other interpreters say that the meaning to 
life lies in working  to dissolve  the  ego into nothingness. Among the more recent 
variations  is  the  idea  that  the  true  purpose  of  life  is  to  align  our  “self-created 
realities” so that they become as one, and thereby we may achieve a unified race, 
which  will  either  “ascend”  or  will  survive  beyond  predicted  cataclysms  for  a 
thousand  years  before  things  wind  down  a  bit  into  the  usual  state  of  decay. 
Naturally  this  effect  can  only  be  initiated  and  maintained  by  a  group  effort  at 
consciousness raising. There are other  ideas and combinations of ideas similar to 
these -- all leading where?

Are we, in fact, an accident of evolution in an accidental universe, on a race to 
nowhere  except  oblivion?  Or,  worse  still,  are  our  very  minds  -  our  belief  in  and 
desire for knowledge of higher things - our greatest flaw? Are we damned by our 
religion  for  asking  such  questions,  or  ridiculed  by  science  for  thinking  that  they 
even  ought  to  be  asked?  The  choice  seems  to  be  between  a  sick  joke  and  a 
mistake.

Yet,  the  question  must  be  asked:  why  do  we  live  in  a  world  in  which  material 
extinction  is  a  real  possibility?  Are  we  truly  on  the  edge  of  an  abyss,  losing  our

xviii

The Secret History of the World

balance, preparing to fall into a hole so deep and dark that we shall never come out 
of it?xviii

The Secret History of the World

balance, preparing to fall into a hole so deep and dark that we shall never come out 
of it?

There are two main theories of the future - that of a predestined future and that 
of a free future. The theory of predestination asserts that every future event is the 
result of past events and if we know all the past then we could know all the future.  
The idea of a free future is based on quantum “probabilities”. The future is either 
only  partially  determined  or  undetermined  because  of  the  varied  interactions 
possible  at  any  given  point.  This  idea  of  “free  will”  says  that  quite  deliberate 
volitional acts may bring about a subsequent change in events. Those who support 
predestination say that so-called “voluntary” actions are, in fact, not, but are rather 
the  results  of  incompletely  understood  causes  which  have  made  them  imperative 
acts -- in short, nothing is accidental.

On the one hand we have “cold predestination” come what may, nothing can be 
changed -- on the other hand we have a reality which is only a point on some sort 
of needle named the present surrounded on all sides by the Gulf of Nonexistence - 
a world which is born and dies every moment.

During  those  early  days  of  asking  questions  outside  of  my  “standard  religious 
faith”,  I  came  across  an  idea  put  forth  by  P.D.  Ouspensky  in  his  book  Tertium 
Organum:

“At every given moment all the future of the world is predestined and existing, but 
it is predestined conditionally, i.e., there must be one or another future in 
accordance with the direction of events of the given moment, if no new factor 
comes in. And a new factor can come in only from the side of consciousness and 
the will resulting from it. In the past, what is behind us, lies not only in what was, 
but also in what could have been. In the same way, in the future lies not only what 
will be but also what may be.”In  other  words,  there  was  the  possibility  -  just  a  suggestion,  mind  you  -  that 
human beings might be able to choose something different than the future that was 
obviously  developing  all  around  us.  It  was  clear  to  me  that  such  a  choice  could 
only be made if one made an effort to “predict” the future. In other words, the only 
way  to  know  the  right  choice  of  the  moment  was  to  have  some  idea  of  the 
consequences.

Of  course,  the  “standard  religions”  all  around  us  are  suggesting  something  of 
that sort all the time: their solution is that the only change human beings can make 
is to “choose the right god” and believe in him strongly enough that this god will 
step in and fix things right up, either by miraculously intervening in reality, or at 
least hauling the good people out of the soup at some future time when they have 
proved themselves AND, at the same time, making all those nasty people who bet 
on the wrong horse suffer!

It was at this point that I decided that I really ought to check out all the various 
religions and their “track records”, so to say in order to determine which was the 
“right god”, After all, since there exists such diversity of beliefs around the globe, 
the  assumption  is  that  either  somebody  is  right,  excluding  all  others,  or  that 
nobody is right, including all.

With  the  world  in  an  obvious  mess,  with  every  preacher  in  just  about  every 
church  across  America  passionately  declaring  that  “The  End  is  Nigh”,  I  decided 
that I had better get moving on this project. After all, I had these small beings in

Foreword

xixForeword

xix

my care and above ALL things, I wanted to tell my children the Truth as far as I 
was able to determine it. And that certainly meant that I should put forth all efforts 
to determine what  that  truth was before I gave  it  to  them.  After  all,  if your child 
asks for bread, will you give him a stone? If he asks for fish, will you give him a 
serpent? I wanted  to give  my children  the very best I could, and  that was, at  the 
foundation,  the  primary  motivation  for  my  search  for  the  truth:  Love  for  my 
children.

You could say that Love for my babies gave me the courage to begin to look at 
my  own  faith  in  a  critical  way,  and  then  to  search  for  the  answers  to  their 
questions.

And so it still is. 
What this amounted to was to apply the scientific method to the study of religion

and “deeper realities” - things that went beyond the physics of materialism.

I discovered that I wasn’t the first one who had thought about doing this and so 
there was certainly a large body of material to go through. And I have been doing 
it in a concentrated and systematic way for over 20 years now.The Cassiopaean Communication was only a part of this process. Looking back 
on this experiment in accessing “higher consciousness” which, at that point, I only 
theorized  might  exist,  there  is  a  lot  to  be  said  for  the  idea  that  most  of  what  has 
come  “from  the  C’s”  could  very  well  have  come  from  my  own  subconscious. 
After  all,  I  had  spent  nearly  my  whole  life  reading  everything  from  history  to 
psychology. The phenomenon of the scientist working on a difficult problem who 
then,  after he has  examined  all  the parameters, dreams of a novel way  to put  the 
different  parts  together  that  solves  the  problem  is  well  known  in  the  history  of 
science. The discovery of the benzene ring is a case in point. So it isn’t too much 
of a stretch  to say  that  the  material  that came “from the  C’s”, who  clearly stated 
“we are YOU in the future”, was merely a similar process.

The  attentive  reader  may  notice  that  most  of  the  C’s  material  has  to  do  with 
history  and  the  hidden  motivations  for  the  events  in  our  world.  These  were 
certainly  the  things  that  concerned  me  -  events  and  choices  of  action  and  being 
that could lead to a positive future or a negative future - and so, perhaps my vast 
reading was sorted and assembled in novel ways by my own subconscious mind or 
superconscious mind.

Be that as it may, it does not, in my opinion, at all detract from the usefulness of 
the  material.  The  discovery  of  the  benzene  ring  came  from  a  dream  and  led  to  a 
breakthrough in science. And so it has seemed that the concerted effort to examine 
all the parameters of reality, and then to “allow” it to sort itself and “come out” in 
a novel process of reassembly, has proven very fruitful in many respects.

Ark discussed the essential nature of this approach recently in an exchange with

Robin Amis, the editor and commentator of Boris Mouravieff‘s Gnosis:

Ark to Robin Amis:Ark discussed the essential nature of this approach recently in an exchange with

Robin Amis, the editor and commentator of Boris Mouravieff‘s Gnosis:

Ark to Robin Amis:

You stated that:

1) Scientific method has its limitations.

2) Knowledge should be understood in broader terms so as to include, for instance 
“noetic knowledge”. In particular:

xx

The Secret History of the World

a) there is a true form of knowledge that is normally associated with religion

b) those with intellectual training tend to regard it as not being knowledge at all

3) That you - Praxis - teach this other form of knowledge, and the conditions under 
which it can be understood.

4) The reason that Praxis (and other religions) depends on a suspension of judgment 
is “that newcomers studying this material, despite quickly getting confirmation of 
its reality, will not understand it deeply enough”.

I will try to address and expand the above points and, perhaps, try to add some new 
ideas, if only for the future discussion.

Point 1) I agree. I agree completely. In fact it takes a scientist to truly know the 
limitation and the weaknesses of science, as many of the tricks and games and even 
lies are known only to the insiders - scientists.

Point 2) I agree that there is such a knowledge; I agree that is important and, in fact, 
is crucial. And it is because of this fact that we stress on our Website and in our 
publications the importance of “knowledge”, not just “science” or facts. It depends 
on whether you start with a fact and follow the clues to real knowledge, or whether 
you start with an assumption, and interpret all facts based on what may, at the very 
beginning, be a lie.

a) Whether this “true knowledge” is, was, or should be “associated with religion” is 
disputable.

The term “associated” is somewhat vague and can lead to misunderstandings. 
Science is also associated with religion. The Pope has scientific advisers; the 
Vatican supports scientific research.The term “associated” is somewhat vague and can lead to misunderstandings. 
Science is also associated with religion. The Pope has scientific advisers; the 
Vatican supports scientific research.

On the other hand the greatest crimes of history have also been - and probably are 
still - associated with religion, one way or another.

Religion, if analyzed sincerely and critically, has many dark spots, and analyzing 
the reasons for this is not an easy task.

But I hope you will agree with me that one of the reasons why religions have these 
dark spots is that people were lulled into believing that they have (in opposition to 
others) the “true knowledge”.

So the very concept of “true knowledge” is risky. It is easy to imagine that two 
different people will have different, orthogonal truths. For one, the truth may be 
that he needs to kill the other man, while for the other man, the truth may involve 
avoiding being killed. Every noetic truth has down-to-earth implications. Or so I 
think.

b) Though I agree that what you wrote may describe a general tendency, yet there 
are exceptions. History knows scientists - great scientists - that were “mystics” at 
the same time. Pascal, Newton, Poincare - just few examples. So, indeed, the term 
“tend to regard” that you used seems to be appropriate. But for this present point, it 
is important to know whether there is a real contradiction between being a scientist 
and appreciating other forms of knowledge at the same time. It seems to me and, I 
believe, you will agree, that there is no intrinsic contradiction.

Foreword

xxi

Point 3) Here of course you are assuming that Praxis is already in possession of 
such a knowledge. Perhaps this is the case or, perhaps, Praxis has only “fragments 
of unknown teachings”, and not the complete picture.Being a scientist I am always careful and I would never state that I have the full and 
complete “knowledge” of something. I may know about tools, theories, formal 
structures, data etc. But one day, all my tools, data, theories and formal structures 
may prove to be wrong or useless with the uncovering of a single datum that shifts 
the entire structure. A true scientist MUST be open to this. What is important in 
science is being always open to surprises, to new paradigm shifts etc.

So, I think, you - Praxis - are teaching what you BELIEVE to be, at the present 
moment, “the true knowledge”, and you may have very good reasons for such a 
belief. You may have very important pieces of knowledge - as we think based on 
research - but, perhaps, you are still lacking some of other important pieces - which 
we also think, based on research.

How can we know in advance where the next unexpected discovery will lead us?

And here I would like to make some constructive - or so I think - comments.

Looking at the history of “our civilization”, religion seems to have been in 
existence much longer than “science”. And yet we see that religion has failed. In 
spite of its teachings people are still constantly at war with each other. Human 
beings have not become better, and they are often much worse than animals. 
Gurdjieff described seeing the truth of our condition - the condition of our reality in 
general - as the “terror of the situation”. It is terrible because, when you really SEE 
it, you realize how great a failure religion or the “powers” of the various versions of 
God really are.

Science, which came later and has exploded in the last millennium, has failed too. It 
has brought mankind to the edge of self-destruction. Advances in mathematical, 
physical and computer sciences have brought about “applied game theory”, where 
“wars” are called “games”, and to “win the game” is to kill as many people as 
possible with as little cost as possible.Is there any hope at all? And if there is, then where?

Perhaps it is time to try something new? Perhaps a “marriage of science and 
mysticism” has a chance?

Why not take what is good from science and what is good from religion, and 
discard what is wrong?

What is the best thing about religion?

Religion teaches us to be open minded and accepting of possibilities which are far 
from being “rational”. Religions teach us to pay attention to singular events, 
miracles, phenomena that are fragile and hardly repeatable. Finally religion teaches 
us to look inside as much as outside: know thyself.

The strengths of the approach of religion just happen to be the weak points in 
science.

Science is often narrow-minded and conservative restricting everything to what is 
material and rigidly repeatable. Science teaches us that what is “out there” is not 
connected to what is “in here”, that it must be captured, weighed, measured and

xxii

The Secret History of the World

manipulated. That is why new paradigms are so painful when they come - but they 
DO come in science, and they seldom come in religion which is “fixed” and 
dogmatic and not open to discussion.

What is the best thing about science?

Science is open to criticism and discussion. Even if many forces on the earth try to 
make a sort of religion of science, in general, scientific theories must be published 
and publicly discussed. We can find an error in Einstein’s papers because these, as 
well as other papers, are publicly available. Everyone can learn mathematics, as 
advanced as you wish, from reading monographs, articles, going to conferences, 
and discussing with other scientists.The strength of science just happens to be the weakness of religion. Religions are 
always “secret” in one respect or another - even if that secrecy is only the 
declaration that no changes can be made, no questions asked, because the ultimate 
truth about God is a “mystery”, a “secret”. That is why the teachings of religion are 
so easily distorted and misunderstood. It is so easy for the central “authority” to 
achieve the “pinnacle” of the religion and declare to the followers the correct 
interpretation and that no other is permitted.

Point 4) What you say about students not being able to judge for a long time is 
certainly true. But whether discouraging them from such judgments is the only 
solution - I am not sure.

Certainly that was the way it was done in the past. Groups were usually small, 
whether exoteric or esoteric. Travel and communication possibilities were severely 
restricted. But today a qualitative change has occurred: we are now in the era of 
networking and instant communication on a planetary scale.

Therefore a different approach is possible: instead of having few students and 
“teach them even when they are not yet ready”, we can address ourselves to those 
who are ready.

This was not so easy to do in the past when teachers communicated, at best, to 
merely hundreds of potential students. But it is possible now, when we can 
communicate with millions.

Whoever is not yet ready for the next stage, let him stay where he is or go back 
where he was. Those who ARE ready, will find you - if you take care and 
NETWORK efficiently.

So, I would not discourage students from making early judgments and discussing 
subjects for which they are not prepared . If they come to the wrong conclusions 
and go away or attack you, that is their free will. Let them go where their minds and 
their hearts lead them.

Foreword

xxiiiForeword

xxiii

That is, at least, our approach in QFS1. Perhaps we are making a mistake here, but 
it is always good to try different methods - if available.

So it is, we seek to combine science and mysticism for the few who are colinear 
with  this  approach.  And  this  was  uppermost  in  our  minds  -  to  convey  this 
effectively  -  when  planning  the  look  and  emphases  of  the  new  and  revised 
Cassiopaea  Website.  We  understood  clearly  that  there  are  many  “seekers”  in  the 
“New Age” milieu who would be turned off to this approach. They are seeking a 
guru, to be underwritten in their choices, a messiah. As Ark has written: those who 
are not ready for this stage of Becoming Free, let them stay where they are or go 
back  to  where  they  were.  Therefore,  if  readers  form  conclusions  based  on  their 
illusions, that is  their free will and we have no quarrel with that. Each individual 
should be where their minds and hearts lead them.

Of  course,  there  are  still  some  items  that  the  C’s  have  come  up  with  that 
obviously  could  NOT  come  from  a  “reordering”  of  the  masses  of  material 
available  to  my  subconscious  from  years  of  reading.  In  that  respect,  due  to  the 
novel way in which the material was obtained as a “group effort”, perhaps some of 
the  material  was  extracted  from  the  subconscious  databanks  of  the  other 
participants?  And  perhaps  some  of  the  data  was  nonsense  -  my  own  and  others? 
These are all questions we consider when we analyze the material and subject it to 
verification or testing.

There  is  still  another  category  of  material  -  that  which  later  proves  to  be 
insightful in ways that simply could not come from the subconscious data of ANY 
of the participants.There  is  still  another  category  of  material  -  that  which  later  proves  to  be 
insightful in ways that simply could not come from the subconscious data of ANY 
of the participants.

Or could it? 
Perhaps an awareness of what is going on politically and socially can be “sorted 
and reassembled” in the subconscious the same way the information that led to the 
discovery  of  the  Benzene  Ring  was?  Perhaps  probabilities  are  calculated  in  the 
subconscious mind based on vast collections of data that we don’t even realize we 
have?  Perhaps  lifetimes  of  observations  of  the  world  “out  there”,  consisting  of 
billions  of  databits  can  be  stored  in  our  subconscious  and  lead  to  very  complex 
“data sorting” and “probability estimation”?

Perhaps  there  is,  after  all,  a  completely  scientific  and  material  explanation  for 
the Cassiopaean Material; except for just a few items that I am certain were NOT 
part  of  the  conscious  or  subconscious  data  of  any  of  the  participants  -  items  that 
were known to only a few people on the planet and which we had to dig deep to 
verify. But then, that is only evidence of an ability to access information that may 
be in the databanks of unknown others at a distance...

1 Quantum Future School

xxiv

The Secret History of the World

But, isn’t that the point? That we search for that tiny clue that there IS a reality

beyond that which the materialist scientific view accepts as measurable?

Just as certain mechanical aids can augment the perception of certain ranges of 
light such as infra-red, ultra-violet, x-rays, and radio waves, so might our so-called 
psychic perceptions be similarly augmented. This was my theory at the beginning 
of  the  Cassiopaean  Experiment,  though  I  never  thought  it  would  evolve  into  a 
dialogue with “myself in the future”.The brain is an instrument devised to focus reality in mathematical constructs -- 
interpreting waveforms as material objects. What I had in mind from the beginning 
was a process of not only being able to perceive those ranges of energies that are 
normally beyond the range of three dimensional perception, but to be able to do so 
in a repeatable way with practical applications. By developing such a process, the 
implication is that we can not only perceive the effects of myriads of waveforms, 
but  also,  depending  upon  the  amplitudes  and  energies,  predict  the  outcomes  of 
certain motions, even, perhaps, in very precise terms.

Of  course,  it  seems  that  the  descriptions  of  the  greater  reality  beyond  three 
dimensional  space  and  time  must  be,  in  an  essential  way,  difficult  to  describe 
except  metaphorically.  So,  I  think  we  can  assume  that  the  finite  nature  of  our 
minds  is self-limiting in a certain  sense. It  seems that all the instruments we can 
create and build are probably incapable of penetrating into such realms because of 
the simple fact that they are three-dimensional. The only material way we may be 
able  to  go  beyond  our  reality  is  through  mathematics,  which  seems  to  transcend 
time and space.

There  is,  indeed,  a  lot  of  research  in  physics  that  sounds  provocatively  like 
ancient mystical  teachings, yet  the possibility is that  the true nature of the reality 
behind our world is beyond quantum mechanics and theory.

Ark: As Wheeler so succinctly points it out:

We have every right to assume that the universe is filled with more uncertainty than 
certainty. What we know about the universe - indeed, what is knowable - is based 
on a few iron gateposts of observation plastered over by papier-mâché molded from 
our theories.

Popper makes these important observations:Popper makes these important observations:

“... all explanatory science is incompleteable; for to be complete it would have to 
give an explanatory account of itself. An even stronger result is implicit in Gödel’s 
famous theorem of the incompletability of formalized arithmetic (though to use 
Gödel’s theorem and other mathematical incompleteness theorems in this context is 
to use heavy armament against a comparatively weak position). Since all physical 
science uses arithmetic (and since for a reductionist only science formulated in 
physical symbols has any reality), Gödel’s incompleteness theorem renders all 
physical science incomplete. For the nonreductionist, who does not believe in the 
reducibility of all science to physically formulated science, science is incomplete 
anyway.”

“Not only is philosophical reductionism a mistake, but the belief that the method of 
reduction can achieve complete reduction is, it seems, mistaken too. We live in a 
world of emergent evolution; of problems whose solutions, if they are solved, beget 
new and deeper problems. Thus we live in a universe of emergent novelty; of

Foreword

xxv

novelty which, as a rule, is not completely reducible to any of the preceding 
stages.”

Then he adds:

“Nevertheless, the method of attempting reductions is most fruitful, not only 
because we learn a great deal by its partial successes, by partial reductions, but also 
because we learn from our partial failures, from the new problems which our 
failures reveal. Open problems are almost as interesting as their solutions; indeed 
they would be just as interesting but for the fact that almost every solution opens up 
in its turn a whole new world of open problems.”We may find that much truth was known by the peoples of the past and that they 
did,  in  fact,  express  deep,  mysterious,  realities  in  their  poetic  and  obscure 
messages. Mystics and seers - even in terms of communicating with “myself in the 
future”  -  seem  to  perceive  quantum  states,  which  are  demonstrably  difficult  to 
translate into language.

The  experience  of  viewing  simultaneous,  cause/effect  reality  is  extremely 
difficult  to  maintain  when  one  is  constantly  being  bombarded  by  three-
dimensional interpretation.

Imagine the difficulty of explaining to a snail the expanse of an acre of ground?! 
Mystics and Seers have attempted to do just that for millennia with the result that 
the  vast  majority  of  mankind  have  absolutely  and  totally  misunderstood  these 
concepts. And, there is no worse lie than a truth misunderstood by those who hear 
it: the greatest lies are the dark and evil systems of religion created by those who 
do not understand.

You never know how much you really believe anything until its truth or falsehood 
becomes a matter of life and death. It is easy to say you believe a rope is strong as 
long as you are merely using it to cord a box. But, suppose you had to hang by that 
rope over a precipice? Wouldn’t you then first discover how much you really 
trusted it? (C.S. Lewis)

Laura Knight-Jadczyk

Introduction

Laying the Groundwork

Like many of you who have chosen to purchase this book, I am a seeker of what 
we generally call “spiritual advancement”. And, like many of you, I have been in 
this seeking mode as  long as I can remember—from birth,  even. Also, like many 
of  you,  in  my  search  for  “spiritual  truths”,  I  have  encountered  the  term 
“Ascension” repeatedly in the course of this Quest. And finally, like many of you, 
I  have  come  across  many  definitions  of  the  word,  as  well  as  varied  purported 
techniques to accomplish this allegedly desirable objective.In seeking a concise definition and philosophy behind it, I decided to search the 
Internet  for  clues.  I  typed  the  word  “ascension”  along  with  the  word  “spiritual” 
into a popular search engine. It returned 115,000 pages for my edification. This led 
me  to  ask:  Why,  at  this  present  moment  in  history,  is  so  much  attention  being 
focused on this subject?

Well,  we  all  know  the  answer  to  that  question.  It  is  because  of  the  frightening

state of the World in which we live.

One might think that  the Laws of Probability would mandate  that, without  any 
intelligent  input,  50%  of  the  time  the  events  in  our  world would  lead  to  benefits 
for  mankind.  In  a  strictly  mechanical  way,  life  in  our  world  ought  to  have 
manifested  a  sort  of  “equilibrium”.  Factoring  in  intelligent  decisions  to  do  good 
might bring this average up to about 70%. That would mean that humanity would 
have advanced over the millennia to a state of existence where good and positive 
things happen in our lives more often than “negative” or “bad” things. In this way, 
many of the problems of humanity would have been  effectively solved.  War  and 
conflict  would  be  a  rarity,  perhaps  70  percent  of  the  earth’s  population  would 
have  decent  medical  care,  a  comfortable  roof  over  their  heads,  and  sufficient 
nutritious food so that death by disease or starvation would be almost unheard of. 
In other words, human society would have “evolved” in some way, on all levels.The facts are, however, quite different. 
More  than  840,000,000  people  on  the  Earth  suffer  from  hunger.  That’s  about 
three  times  the  population  of  the  entire  USA.  This  is  chronic,  persistent  hunger, 
which  kills  24,000  people  every  day,  or  over  8  million  human  beings  each  year. 
Three  out  of  four  who  die  from  starvation  are  younger  than  five  years  old.  How 
can “evolved” human beings accept that fact as “normal”?

According to the Historical Atlas of the Twentieth Century, during the past 100 
years there have been approximately 2 billion deaths (including civilians) resulting 
from war, tyrannical governments, and man-made famine. When these figures are

2

The Secret History of the World

broken  down  into  deaths  caused  by  Communism  vs.  Capitalism,  they  are  almost 
equal,  with  the  figures  slightly  higher  for  Capitalism  which  may  surprise  some 
people who believe that the Capitalistic system is the “right” one. “By their fruits 
you shall know them.”Turning to mortality statistics that are not related to war and famine, we find that 
it is a bit difficult to get an actual number because the statistics are nearly always 
expressed  in  terms  of  percentages  rather  than  in  hard  population  numbers.  One 
gets the feeling that the actual count is so frightening that this approach is used for 
the express purpose of avoiding having to face the facts. One thing we do know is 
that deaths from cardiovascular diseases and stroke are the leading cause of death 
in 31 of the 35 Western Hemisphere countries that report disease related mortality 
statistics.  The  highest  of  these  mortality  rates  are  found  in  the  English-speaking 
Caribbean,  USA,  Canada,  Argentina,  Chile  and  Uruguay.  Mortality  rates  from 
these causes are  increasing in  the  Central American and  Latin  Caribbean regions 
as  they  come  more  and  more  under  the  sway  of  Western  capitalism.  Again,  “By 
their fruits you shall know them.”

What  we  are  talking  about  above  are  the  “quiet”  statistics,  from  our  present 
reality.  They  are  quiet  because  nobody  ever  makes  a  big  deal  about  them.  The 
headlines  of  our  newspapers  do  not  trumpet  them  on  the  front  page  where  they 
rightly belong. Even now it is easy to forget that there were 65 million deaths from 
WW  II  alone  and  that  deaths  from  disease  and  starvation  continue  as  a  quiet, 
steady,  drumbeat  of  increasing  mortality  behind  the  blaring  headlines  of  school 
shootings, sensational murder trials, and little Cuban boys who become the center 
of international custody disputes.I don’t think that one single person on this planet will disagree that they want a 
better life for themselves and their children; and most of them will add that they do 
not  presently  have  the  capacity  to  make  it  a  reality.  Except  for  a  very  small 
minority of very sick people, I don’t think anybody really likes to see misery and 
suffering, disease and death and despair, in any context. And again we must ask: if 
these  things  are  so  detestable  to  human  beings  at  large,  if  so  many  people  are 
working  and  thinking  and  praying  to  improve  the  conditions  of  our  world,  why 
isn’t it happening?

Seekers  of  Spiritual  Verity  -  a  large  number  of  whom  could  be  considered 
“Intelligentsia” -  are always aware of these things, and they are asking, “What  is 
the origin of all the misery and suffering? Does it just happen? Do people and only 
people  cause  others  to  suffer?  Is  it  that  God  is  good,  but  allows  bad  things  to 
happen?”

“Don’t  forget  the  power  of  prayer”,  we  are  told  by  our  religious  leaders,  or 
“positive  thinking”,  as  the  New  Age  gurus  tell  us.  The  only  problem  is,  prayers 
and positive  thinking do not seem to have improved the world very much on the 
occasions  when  it  is  certain  that  nearly  every  human  being  was  praying  for  a 
certain outcome.

Jesus promised: “If any two of you shall agree and ask... it shall be done”. (Matt

18:19) That’s a promise. What do you want or need? Just ask!

But it doesn’t work and we see it! 
Over sixty  million people died because God didn’t do what everybody thought 
he should do. C.S. Lewis struggled with this issue in the latter part of his life. He

Introduction

3Introduction

3

saw clearly that, before World War II, practically every human being on the planet 
was  praying—to  Jesus,  God  the  Father,  the  Virgin  Mary,  Allah,  Buddha  and 
whoever else you  can name or  mention, so  all  the bases were  covered—that this 
terrible  thing  would  not  happen.  The  memory  of  the  previous  “Great  War”  was 
still  fresh  in  the  mind  of  mankind.  They  remembered  the  horrible  carnage  and 
vowed, never again!

In the end,  after the  mightiest  cry of prayer in human  memory, rising from the 
earth,  almost  one-third  of  the  world  was  uninhabitable  and  sixty-five  million 
human beings were dead. Are we to think that this was God’s answer to prayer? It 
certainly doesn’t give us much hope for the “power of positive thinking”.

Think about it. 
Throughout history we find one group praying to their god to protect them from 
the depredations of another group. The other group is praying just as fervently that 
their depredations will be successful. When one group succeeds in killing another, 
is  that  proof  that  its  god  is  supreme?  What  then  happens  if  the  members  of  the 
successful group are then reincarnated2 into  the group that  was defeated?  This is 
not a rhetorical question since a very interesting book3 was written about the great 
numbers of Jews who died in the holocaust now being reincarnated as Christians. 
There has also been some suggestion that many Nazis are now being reincarnated 
as Jews.4 What  then, does such an idea do to the concept of “my god is the only 
right one”?I can assure the reader from my own experience as a hypnotherapist, that every 
single case I have worked with in terms of “past life therapy”, has demonstrated a 
“string” of “past lives” in such variety of nationality and religious orientation, that 
it literally makes a joke of anyone stating with absolute certainty, that their beliefs 
or  religious  orientation  now,  are  the  only  right  ones.  It  is  evident  that  those  who 
declaim  against  another  group  most  vehemently  will  most  certainly  find 
themselves a member of that very group in the next “round” of incarnation.

This begs the question of why people cannot remember the previous lessons in 
past  lives;  why  the  wisdom  of  the  soul  is  not  available  to  the  person.  If  humans 
have  souls  or  spirits,  why  is  the  knowledge  of  past  karmic  cycles  not  part  of  a 
person’s wisdom? The answer to that question is, of course, part of the Quest for 
Ascension - to reclaim that knowledge, among other things.

The questions about how our beliefs may shape our reality are among the most 
significant  in  all  of  consciousness  research.  And  so  it  is  that  many  seekers  step

2 We are assuming reincarnation to have a high probability of being an objective fact due to extensive 
research. 
3 Gershom, Yonassan, Rabbi, Beyond the Ashes (Virginia Beach: A.R.E. Press 1992). 
4 If this is so, then we might also wonder why - that is, what will be the “karmic payoff?”

4

The Secret History of the World

outside of the “standard religions” and begin to seek the “truth” of the ways and 
means of Ascension.4

The Secret History of the World

outside of the “standard religions” and begin to seek the “truth” of the ways and 
means of Ascension.

As noted, “Ascension” is discussed widely in books, articles, on the Internet, in 
classes and workshops, and in other  media. The general trend of ideas expressed 
includes  the  search  for  the  “one  thing  that  will  transform  your  life.”  Various 
“techniques”  are  advertised  which  promise  to  provide  stress  relief  and  even  the 
“key to the highest levels of human consciousness”. The shopper in the market of 
ascension  “tools”  is  told  that  they  can  now  make  a  choice  to  “swiftly  and  easily 
free the nervous system from stress, enjoy maximum creativity, clarity and health, 
experience  inner  peace,  fulfillment  and  joy”,  and  of  course,  change  one’s  self-
limiting beliefs.

Another  perspective  on  “ascension”  tells  us  that  ascension  is  “the  way  to 
integrate all portions of your self in a conscious way”. The seeker is told that he or 
she  is  a  “multi-dimensional being  who seeded portions of itself  into  the physical 
reality”, and that fully “remembering who you are” is the act of integration and the 
“removal  of  the  veil  of  time,  identities  and  separateness  in  yourself”.  What, 
precisely, the result will be—other than being “healthy, wealthy and wise”—is not 
clear.As  we  read  further  in  the  available  literature,  we  discover  other  ideas.  One 
“expert”  on  the  subject  tells  us  that  this  thing  called  “ascension”  was  only 
achieved  in  the  past  upon  dying,  and  that  now  people  can  do  it  and  take  their 
physical body with them. He suggests that spirituality is so advanced in the present 
age  that  souls  can  graduate  more  quickly.  It  is  as  though  he  is  suggesting  a 
“grading  curve”  has  been  instituted  so  that  the  requirements  are  lessened.  Either 
that, or he hasn’t been paying much attention to what is going on “out there”.

The evidence of “advanced spirituality“ in our world is severely lacking in spite 
of the New Age claims that “light workers” can “help bring forth the ascension for 
the masses before physical death, before totally wearing out the physical body in 
resistance  to  evolution.  Much  more  energy  can  be  expended  on  the  positive  and 
much less wasted on the negative”.

Again, we note that objective reality does not support such a claim. If anything, 
since the inception of the New Age “movement,” if it can be so called, things have 
gotten a lot worse.

This leads to another point: it seems that we must accept the objective fact that 
attempts  to change the world spiritually, or  to regulate large scale events, simply 
do not work. Yes, there does seem to be evidence that individuals or small groups 
of individuals can make small changes or produce effects  with a limited range of 
influence. But for some reason, the world as it is, seems to operate based on rules 
or laws that we do not understand. The fundamental nature of the physical world 
seems to be antithetical to this “spiritualization”.

Introduction

5

One recent work that attempts to provide a scientific explanation for this ability

to influence the world, Conscious Acts of Creation, tells us:Introduction

5

One recent work that attempts to provide a scientific explanation for this ability

to influence the world, Conscious Acts of Creation, tells us:

This book marks a sharp dividing line between old ways of scientific thought and 
old experimental protocols, wherein human qualities of consciousness, intention, 
emotion, mind and spirit cannot significantly affect physical reality, and a new 
paradigm wherein they can robustly do so!5

The book, written by three mainstream scientists, goes on to tell us that:

…utilizing a unique experimental protocol on both inanimate and animate systems, 
that the human quality of focused intention can be made to act as a true 
thermodynamic potential and strongly influence experimental measurements for a 
variety of specific target experiments.

After almost 400 pages of math and speculation and descriptions of experiments

we are told:

Under some conditions, it is indeed possible to attach an aspect of human 
consciousness, a specific intention, to a simple electrical device and have that 
device, when activated, robustly influence an experiment conducted in its vicinity in 
complete accord with the attached intention. Thus, if they do it right, humans can 
influence their environment via specific, sustained intentions. […] Some new field 
appears to be involved in the information passage that occurs between conditioned 
locales that are widely separated from each other in physical space. Even with 
transmitters and receivers located inside electrically grounded Faraday cages, highly 
correlated patterns of information appeared in the remotely located locales.[…] 
Although we don’t fully understand them, we now have some new tools with which 
to probe the deeper structures of the universe and a new adventure is underway for 
humanity.6It  is  important  to  note  that  the  “intenders”  of  the  experiments  were  long-time 
practitioners  of  Siddha  Yoga  and  could  thus  be  considered  metaphysically  “in 
tune”  to  some  considerable  extent.  The  question  is:  What  did  they  accomplish? 
Based  on  the  descriptions,  it  sounds  pretty  earth  shaking,  right?  Well,  as  noted, 
after almost 400 pages we find that the most significant result seems to have been 
changing the pH of a small sample of water.

Yup. That’s it. 
Nevertheless,  this  is  important  for  the  simple  reason  that  they  managed  to 
scientifically  demonstrate  a  principle,  even  if  the  overall  result  was  that  it  was  - 
most often - an iffy proposition and there didn’t seem to be a lot of control. Most 
results were “statistical” and this has always been a problem with the “create your 
own reality” idea. When all the data is examined, what we generally find is that it

5  Tiller,  William  A.,  Ph.D.,  Dibble,  Walter  E.,  Ph.D.,  Kohane,  Michael  J.,  Ph.D.,  Conscious  Acts  of 
Creation (Walnut Creek: Pavior 2001) (www.pavior.com). 
6 Tiller et al, op. cit.

6

The Secret History of the World

is  six  of  one,  half  dozen  of  the  other.  Sometimes  it  works,  sometimes  it  doesn’t. 
What the real rules are, nobody seems to know.

While we all might like to think we can transform our world by praying and/or 
thinking positively, we must remember that  there is a great deal of evidence that 
real  transformations  of 
the  planet  have  repeatedly  been  cataclysmic.  A 
philosophy, which ignores this fact, is courting disaster.And so we have a clue that the problem may not be as easily solved as the many 
promoters  of  the  different  “methods  or  techniques  of  Ascension”  would  have  us 
believe. The question then becomes: if the process of Ascension is possibly more 
complex than the many promoters of the various methods offered in our day would 
have us think, what is the reason for the 115,000 web pages? This matter deserves 
some  discussion  in  the  context  of  certain  problems  in  our  world  that  are 
undoubtedly related.

The Scam of Distraction

In 1931, Aldous Huxley wrote Brave New World in which he stated:

The older dictators fell because they never could supply their subjects with enough 
bread, enough circuses, enough miracles and mysteries. Nor did they possess a 
really effective system of mind-manipulation.

Under a scientific dictator, education will really work—with the result that most 
men and women will grow up to love their servitude and will never dream of 
revolution. There seems to be no good reason why a thoroughly scientific 
dictatorship should ever be overthrown.

Aldous Huxley also made  an early  connection between the effects experienced 
by those partaking of psychedelic drugs and the experiences of Eastern Mysticism 
and  this  set  the  consciousness-raising  bomb  off  with  a  BANG!  Along  came 
Timothy  Leary  and  Richard  Alpert,  AKA  Baba  Ram  Dass,  with  their  LSD  and 
other  modes  of  mind  marvels,  leading  the  parade  of  those  who  were  “turned  on, 
tuned  in”.  Abraham  Maslow  became  a  father  figure  to  the  new  “wave”  of  those 
desiring  to  fill  the  gaping  hole  of  their  reality  with  “peak  experiences”.  Maslow 
cited psychedelic drugs as one of the means in which even ordinary people could 
have a little of what the  Eastern  Mystics worked many years to develop. Now, it 
could be had for a weekend seminar at Big Sur, or a study by mail course at only 
$29.95 per lesson! What a deal!Peak Experiences—experience, experience, and experience—became the pot of 
gold at the end of the rainbow of the 1960’s. No one needed to live in Existential 
Despair  any  longer!  Everyone  could  become  a  “spiritual  voyager”  and  achieve 
extended periods in realms of consciousness they had only heard about in veiled,

Introduction

7

mysterious allusions down through the ages. 7 Encounter groups, radical therapies, 
old and new combinations of theories  and practice came rolling off the conveyor 
belt  of  techno-spirituality.  The  intangibles  of  spirit  had  been  harnessed!  Anyone 
could  evoke  some  desirable  experience  by  manipulating  awareness  at  the  basic 
physical  and  psychological  levels.  Never  mind  that  all  of  this  bypassed  the  vital 
processes of reason and conscious decision making. By its very nature, the whole 
techno-spiritual  machine  operated  completely  without  critical  thinking;  it  tapped 
the bottomless pit of feeling-emotion—primal being. Never mind that much of this 
emotion was negative, confusing, anxious and fearful! Let’s just get it all out here 
in the open and have a party with it!Each  of  the  many  techniques  developed  during  this  time  was  fully  capable  of 
producing  an  emotional  high  of  one  sort  or  another.  There  were  endless  “peak 
experiences”, and dramatic “personal breakthroughs”. The mixtures of Zen, yoga, 
meditation,  and  drugs  along  with  strict  mechanical  technology,  were  a  veritable 
adventure  in  awareness!  The  only  problem  was:  in  the  midst  of  all  this  peaking, 
mind-blowing,  turning  on  and  tuning  in,  ecstasy  and  encountering,  many  people 
encountered things that, perhaps, ought not have been awakened. Boundaries were 
breached into unseeable and terrifying realms of consciousness. William Chittick, 
translator of the works of the great Sufi Shaykh, Ibn al-’Arabi, wrote: 
Nowadays most people interested in the spirituality of the East desire the 
“experience”, though they may call what they are after intimate communion with 
God. Those familiar with the standards and norms of spiritual experience set down 
by disciplined paths like Sufism are usually appalled at the way Westerners seize 
upon any apparition from the domain outside of normal consciousness as a 
manifestation of the “spiritual”. In fact, there are innumerable realms in the unseen 
world, some of them far more dangerous than the worst jungles of the visible 
world. 8

So preserve yourselves, my brothers, from the calamities of this place, for 
distinguishing it is extremely difficult! Souls find it sweet, and then within it they 
are duped, since they become completely enamored of it. 9

By  the  end  of  the  decade  of  the  60’s,  the  “human  potential”  movement  had 
become  a  veritable  potpourri  of  religion,  science,  mysticism,  magick  and  “the 
occult”.  The  drug  use  got  out  of  hand,  the  “techniques”  began  to  show  serious 
flaws with a number of tragedies resulting in crime or madness, and the whole idea 
of human beings becoming “psychic supermen” hit the skids. The promise of the7  Conway,  Flo,  Siegelman,  Jim,  Snapping:  America‘s  Epidemic  of  Sudden  Personality  Change, 
(Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins 1978). 
8 Chittick, William, The Sufi Path of Knowledge, (Albany: State University of New York 1989) p. 263. 
9  Sufi  Shaykh,  Ibn  Al-’Arabi,  in  Futuhat  (Unveiling)  III  38.23,  translated  and  quoted  by  William 
Chittick in The Sufi Path of Knowledge, p. 263.

8

The Secret History of the World

60’s decayed into an aimless lethargy—old hippies  living in communes, braiding 
their gray locks  and lusting  after the  sweet young teeny boppers while they fired 
up another bong and reminisced about the “good old days” at Esalen.

But wait! Something else happened here! Remember, this is America! The home 
of the Free—Market that is. Many people suggest that the subsequent proliferation 
of the “New Age” consciousness raising movement was the result of big business 
seeing  a  pile  of  money  to  be  made  in  the  development  of  slick,  newly  packaged 
psychoanalysis  and  psychodrama.  There  was,  indeed,  mass  distribution  and 
Madison  Avenue  marketing  of  things  like  Mind  Dynamics,  Arica,  Silva  Mind 
Control, Transcendental Meditation, and on and on. Individual entrepreneurs knew 
a good thing when they saw it. However, there is more to this than meets the eye. 
This is important to our subject, so bear with me.

Something Wicked This Way Comes

is

the  National  Security  State

Richard  Dolan’s  UFOs  andSomething Wicked This Way Comes

is

the  National  Security  State

Richard  Dolan’s  UFOs  and

the  first 
comprehensive  study  of  the  past  50  years  of  the  U.S.  Government’s  response  to 
the  intrusion  of  UFO  phenomena  in  America.  The  compiled  evidence  -  which 
includes government documents - suggests that  a group of  specialists  working in 
the  shadows,  set  up  and  executed  the  most  massive  cover-up  in  the  history  of 
government;  and  that  the  Human  Potential  movement  and  the  subsequent  New 
Age movements, were key elements of this cover-up. In other words, they not only 
have  used  the  “colorful  community”  of  alternative  ideas  as  an  unwitting  tool  of 
disinformation, it is highly probable that most of it was literally created by them as 
COINTELPRO.  According  to  analysts,  COINTELPRO  was  the  FBI’s  secret 
program  to  undermine  the  popular  upsurge,  which  swept  the  country  during  the 
1960s.  Though  the  name  stands  for  “Counterintelligence  Program”,  the  targets 
were not  enemy spies. The FBI set out to  eliminate “radical” political opposition 
inside  the  US.  What  a  lot  of  people  do  not  realize  is  that  this  was  a  high  level 
psychological operation specifically set up to vector “ideological” trends - beliefs, 
etc. To get a complete picture of the problem, Dolan writes:The UFO problem has involved military personnel around the world for more than 
fifty years, and is wrapped in secrecy. […] Because this subject is so widely 
ridiculed, it is important to stress why it is worthy of serious attention.[…] Stories 
of strange objects in the sky go far back into time, but the problem received little 
attention until the Second World War. […] During the UFO wave of 1947, 
American military and intelligence organizations conducted multiple, simultaneous 
investigations of these sightings. […] By the end of 1947, a contingent of analysts 
at the Air Technical Intelligence Center at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base 
believed that UFOs were extraterrestrial. By the summer of 1948, this team 
prepared an “Estimate of the Situation.” […] As the story goes, Air Force 
Commander Hoyt Vandenberg rejected [this conclusion.] […]

In the summer of 1952… UFO sightings were so frequent and often of such high 
quality that some in the air force actually wondered whether an invasion was under 
way. With some help from the secret CIA sponsored Robertson Panel of January 
1953, the air force improved censorship over the problem. Still, it never quite went 
away. Civilian organizations began to collect and analyze interesting UFO reports. 
[…] Then came the great UFO wave of 1965 and 1966, when the air force could no

Introduction

9

longer hide behind weather balloons and swamp gas, nor withstand public scrutiny. 
[…]Introduction

9

longer hide behind weather balloons and swamp gas, nor withstand public scrutiny. 
[…]

Let us pause to assess the situation. By the mid-1940s, America’s intelligence 
apparatus had reason to believe that there were artifacts in the skies that did not 
originate from America, Russia, Germany, or any other country. These objects 
violated some highly sensitive military airspace, and did not appear to be natural 
phenomena. One may presume that the affected national security authorities made 
it an immediate obsession to determine the nature and purpose of these objects, and 
we may infer that the issue probably became a deep secret by 1946, or 1947 at the 
latest.10

It was at this precise  moment in  time that  the Human Potential  movement was 
“born”. Do we think that this was a coincidence? By the mid-50s, it was becoming 
obvious  that  things  were  getting  out  of  control  and  in  August  of  1956,  the  FBI 
began  its  COINTELPRO  operation.  When  traditional  modes  of  repression 
(exposure,  blatant  harassment,  and  prosecution  for  political  crimes)  failed  to 
counter  the  growing  insurgency,  and  even  helped  to  fuel  it,  the  Bureau  took  the 
law into its own hands. Its methods ranged far beyond surveillance, and amounted 
to a domestic version of the covert action for which the CIA has become infamous 
throughout the world.

Usually,  when  we  think  of  COINTELPRO,  we  think  of  the  most  well  known 
and  typical  activities  which  include  sending  anonymous  or  fictitious  letters 
designed  to  start  rumors,  among  other  things,  publishing  false  defamatory  or 
threatening  information,  forging  signatures  on  fake  documents,  introducing 
disruptive  and  subversive  members  into  organizations  to  destroy  them  from 
within, and so on. Blackmailing insiders in any group to force them to spread false 
rumors, or to foment factionalism was also common.What  a  lot  of  people  don’t  keep  in  mind  is  the  fact  that  COINTELPRO  also 
concentrated  on  creating  bogus  organizations.  These  bogus  groups  could  serve 
many functions which might include attacking and/or disrupting bona fide groups, 
or even just simply creating a diversion with clever propaganda in order to attract 
members  away  so  as  to  involve  them  with  time-wasting  activity  designed  to 
prevent  them  from  doing  anything  useful.  COINTELPRO  was  also  famous  for 
instigation  of  hostile  actions  through  third  parties.  According  to  investigators, 
these FBI programs were noteworthy because all documents relating to them were 
stamped “do not file”. This meant that they were never filed in the system, and for 
all intents and purposes, did not exist. This cover was blown after activists broke 
into  an  FBI  office  in  Media,  Pennsylvania  in  1971.  The  possibility  of  finding

10  Dolan,  Richard,  UFOs  and  the  National  Security  State,  (Charlottesville:  Hampton  Roads  2002) 
Introduction p. xix.

10

The Secret History of the World

evidence  for  any  of  it,  after  that  event,  is  about  zero.  To  spell  it  out  in  Dolan’s 
words:

Regarding matters connected with “national security”, there appears to be a wealth 
of information that does not exist officially. Thus, a request to find such documents 
through a Freedom of Information Act request would be in vain. Add to this the 
likelihood that perhaps the most sensitive information regarding UFOs may not 
even exist in document form (“the first rule in keeping secrets is nothing on paper”, 
Richard Helms), and one can appreciate the difficulty that an honest UFO 
researcher has in ferreting out the truth.11Now,  let  us  take  a  few  logical  steps.  The  UFO  problem  emerged  into  the 
national consciousness in 1947, or thereabouts. Not long afterward, a lot of people 
began  asking  a  lot  of  questions.  The  government  wasn’t  answering,  and  so  the 
people began to band together to find out the answers for themselves. They started 
forming groups. And this is where things get just a bit curious. The thing that was 
most  threatened  by  the  UFO/alien  issue  seems  to  have  been  the  Standard 
Monotheistic  Religions.  Religion seems  to be  a necessary component of political 
control.  Social  control  -  that  is  the  mainstay  of  religion  -    was  most  definitely 
under threat. In fact, what seems to be true is that it is not even clear that religions 
-  as  we  know  them  -  would  have  survived  a  full  disclosure.  So  the  logical 
conclusion  is  that  part  of  the  main  reason  for  the  cover-up  was  to  “protect  the 
religious status quo”.

As  things  stood  at  the  time,  protecting  the  religious  status  quo  -  mainly  the 
social  controls  that  stem  from  religion  -  was  iffy  at  best.  After  a  century  of 
scholarly investigation into many religious texts, and the raising of many questions 
about the “old time religion”, there were a lot of people in society who were most 
definitely  turning  away  from  religious  dogma.  It’s  fairly  simple  to  take  the  next 
logical  step  and  see  that  a  combining  of  the  questions  of  those  who  were 
disenchanted with religion,  with the questions of those who wanted  to know just 
what the heck was going on in terms of possible “extraterrestrials”, was seen as a 
dangerous and explosive mixture. Something had to be done.The activities of COINTELPRO in attempting to neutralize political opposition 
have  been  pretty  well  exposed.  But  we  are  now  considering  the  fact  that,  in 
addition to political activists, it seems that COINTELPRO has particularly targeted 
groups  that  are  seeking  the  truth  about  the  interactions  between  the  US 
government and Ultra Terrestrials, or so-called “aliens”. That a long-time cover-up 
of these matters has been in effect is certainly evident to any careful researcher.

The COINTELPRO files show the U.S. Government targeted a very broad range 
of religious, labor and community groups opposed to any of its agendas, and it is 
only logical to assume that the same type of operation would be created to cover

11 Ibid., p. 184.

Introduction

11

up the “alien agenda”. Such a theoretical COINTELPRO operation also goes far in 
explaining why, when the sincere researcher of UFO phenomena enters this field, 
he  or  she  discovers  only  lies,  lies,  and  more  lies;  confusion  and  disinformation. 
That is most definitely the signature of COINTELPRO.

Considering all of this, would anybody care to suggest that it did not also occur 
to the Powers that Be that the chief means of diverting attention and covering up 
the  truth  would  be  to  literally  fund  and  create  the  “New  Age”  and  “Human 
Potential movement”, so that it would follow their agenda of keeping secrets?

In  other  words,  it  is  extremely  likely  that  the  most  successful  and  popular  of 
Metaphysical  Mavens  and  New  Age  Impresarios  are  COINTELPRO  agents  - 
either  consciously  or  as  dupes  of  those  who  are.  The  objective  seems  to  be  to 
attack and “neutralize” those who are seeking the answers. Those who are sincere, 
who do bona fide research and seek to explicate the truth, are infiltrated, attacked, 
and marginalized according to standard COINTELPRO procedures.What  all  of  this  seems  to  suggest  is  that  the  Powers  That  Be  (PTB)  have 
developed  COINTELPRO  to  an  all  new  level  of  Social  Shaping,  Cultural 
Brainwashing, and the main targets of this activity would include virtually anyone 
who  is  seeking  the  truth  about  the  shifting  realities  of  our  world.  The  cases  of 
COINTELPRO activities against political groups must be no more than the tip of 
the  iceberg,  given  that  the  great  bulk  of  COINTELPRO-type  operations  remain 
secret  until  long  after  their  damage  has  been  done.  By  all  indications,  domestic 
covert  operations  have  become  a  permanent  feature  of  U.S.  politics  and  Social 
Programming, and it is hardly likely, considering the evidence, that the New Age 
and Human Potential fields are exempt.

The  implications  of  this  are  truly  alarming.  Those  who  manage  to  get  close  to 
the  truth of  these matters, despite  the  many obstacles  in their path, face National 
covert  campaigns  to  discredit  and  disrupt  their  research  and  reputations.  Clearly, 
COINTELPRO  and  similar  operations  under  other  names  also  work  to  distort 
academic  and  popular  perceptions  of  the  problems  facing  our  world.  They  have 
done enormous damage to the search for the Truth.

“Terrorism  is  changing.  New  adversaries,  new  motivations  and  new  rationales 
have  surfaced  in  recent  years  to  challenge  much  of  the  conventional  wisdom...”, 
wrote  Dr.  Bruce  Hoffman,  Director  of  RAND.  And  he  was  right.  The  only 
problem is that the reader is largely unaware of the definition of “new adversaries” 
that  might be implied  in his remarks. A careful reading of  Richard Dolan’s book 
will  immediately  reveal  what  Dr.  Hoffman  really  meant  in  his  remarks  about 
“terrorism”.Based on the documents assembled by Dolan, it is obvious that the governments 
of the world do indeed see the UFO problem as a very, very serious matter. In the 
course of assembling the documents  and reporting  the  events, Dolan  came  to the 
inescapable conclusion that there exists an “Above Top Secret” group with access 
to  all  available  UFO  data,  and  that  this  group  “straddled”  the  worlds  of 
government, military, and industry. The evidence proves that the military created a 
complete fiction for public consumption designed to convince the masses that the 
UFO problem was “nonexistent”. They were assisted in pulling the wool over the 
eyes  of  the  public  by  “heavy  handed  official  media  and  culture”,  and  they  were 
obviously under orders to consistently and repeatedly “debunk” the idea that aliens

12

The Secret History of the World

were  ensconced  in  our  world.  What  seems  to  be  true  is  that  most  of  our  elected 
officials are as  much victims of the debunking as  anybody else. And  the same is 
true about mainstream science.

Dolan writes:

Next to the bureau, the military intelligence services became the most important 
component of the domestic intelligence scene. Army intelligence had nearly 
unlimited funds, extensive manpower, specialized personnel, deep planning and 
training resources, and the most sophisticated communications and data processing 
capability. [...] The army’s intelligence surveillance did not focus on tactical 
and reconnaissance data, but on political and ideological intelligence within 
the United States. (This was wholly illegal.) [...]Then there was the CIA. By the late 1960s, there were more spies than diplomats in 
the State Department, or employees in the Department of Labor. [...] When the 
Weather Underground, a radical splinter of the SDS, had an “acid test” to detect 
agent’s provocateurs, they had no idea that the CIA had been tripping on LSD 
throughout the 1950s, creating a special caste of “enlightened agents” for precisely 
these occasions. [Based on this, we wonder about “agents provocateur” in the New 
Age and UFO community who are “specially trained”?]

The agency continued its work on mind control. Following the work of Dr. Jose 
Delgado [experiments in] Electrical Stimulation of the Brain [were conducted.] 
This involves implanting electrodes into the brain and body, with the result that the 
subject’s memory, impulses, and feelings could all be controlled. Moreover, ESB 
could evoke hallucinations, as well as fear and pleasure. “It could literally 
manipulate the human will at will,” [said Dr. Robert Keefe, a neurosurgeon at 
Tulane University.]

In 1968, George Estabrooks, another spook scientist, spoke indiscreetly to a 
reporter for the Providence Evening Bulletin. “The key to creating an effective spy 
or assassin, rests in creating a multiple personality with the aid of hypnosis”, a 
procedure which he described as “child’s play.”.

By early 1969, teams within the CIA were running a number of bizarre experiments 
in mind control under the name Operation Often. In addition to the normal 
assortment of chemists, biologists, and conventional scientists, the operation 
employed psychics and experts in demonology.

Over at the NSA, all one can say with certainty is that its budget dwarfed all others 
within the intelligence community.12Over at the NSA, all one can say with certainty is that its budget dwarfed all others 
within the intelligence community.12

Dolan documents how  the  intelligence organizations of the United States,-  and 
very  likely  other  countries  who  are  working  in  concert  with  them,  despite  their 
outward show of opposition,t, have conducted terminal mind-control experiments, 
biological  spraying  of  American  cities,  human  plutonium  and  syphilis  injections,

12 Ibid., p. 361.

Introduction

13

illegal  communications  interception,  nationwide  domestic  surveillance  of  private 
citizens,  political  assassinations  and  coups,  ongoing  media  manipulation  and 
outright public lying on a continual basis, most especially in regards to UFOs. The 
above organizations, via any and all means available, made sure that, to the public 
at large, UFOs and aliens were a “dead issue”.

Scientist  and  UFO  disclosure  advocate  James  McDonald  said  in  1969,  “I  am 
enough of a realist to sense that, unless this AAAS symposium succeeds in making 
the  scientific  community  aware  of  the  seriousness  of  the  UFO  problem,  little 
response  to  any  call  for  new  investigations  is  likely  to  appear”.  McDonald 
presented  a  brilliant  paper  entitled,  “Science  in  Default:  Twenty-two  Years  of 
Inadequate  UFO  Investigations”.  Dolan  comments  that  it  was  “perhaps  the  most 
damning  statement  about  UFO  research  ever  made”.  Speaking  before  the 
convention  at  Boston’s  Sheraton  Plaza  Hotel,  McDonald  came  down  hard  on 
everyone:  Condon,  Menzel, Hynek, and finally the scientific establishment itself. 
He said:“No scientifically adequate investigation of the UFO problem has been carried out 
during the entire twenty-two years that have now passed since the first extensive 
wave of sightings of unidentified aerial objects in the summer of 1947. ...In my 
opinion, the UFO problem, far from being the nonsense problem that many 
scientists have often labeled it, constitutes a problem of extraordinary scientific 
interest. The grave difficulty with essentially all past UFO studies had been that 
they were either devoid of any substantial scientific content, or else have lost their 
way amidst the relatively large noise content that tends to obscure the real signal in 
the UFO reports.” 13

This high noise to signal ratio is, based on the evidence, the direct product of the 
frenzied  activities  of  the  “National  Security  State”  in  their  promulgation  of  the 
New  Age/Human  Potential  smoke  and  mirrors  magic  show.  What  is  also  clearly 
evident  is  that  this  noise  is  the  fundament  of  the  prevailing  scientific  doctrine. 
What we see is that the Scientific Community - though they claim to be seekers of 
advanced scientific truth - have been  as  easily duped  as Joe Sixpack  and Shirley 
Seeker of Truth. The former is interested in little more than his truck, his dog, and 
his weekend football game, while  the  latter is generally looking for a lifestyle of 
higher  “experiences”.  What  I  also  suspect  is  that  even  the  lower  echelons  of  the 
intelligence  and  military  organizations  must  be  included  in  this  rather  large 
grouping of the duped and deceived sheep.

An  example  of  this  duping  of  those  investigating  the  matter  from  the  “bottom 
up”,  is Andrew Tully who  wrote The Super Spies, supposedly an  early report on 
the  NSA.  He,  and  many  who  have  followed  him,  suggest  that  the  UFO  is  an

13 Ibid., quoted by Dolan, p. 368.

14

The Secret History of the World13 Ibid., quoted by Dolan, p. 368.

14

The Secret History of the World

“intelligence”  device  and  that  it  evolved  out  of  Nazi  Secrets  brought  to  the  US 
under Project Paperclip.14

Dolan lays out the evidence and disabuses us of the notion that the UFO activity 
could  be  human,  technological  breakthroughs,  as  such  naive  conspiracy  theorists 
propose. As he says, “all of the indicators point to a definitive NO”. He then points 
out  that,  every  single  person  who  actually  studies  the  UFO  problem  [yours  truly 
included  -  who  began  as  a  flaming  skeptic],  becomes  convinced  that  it  IS  a 
problem of Alien invasion of our planet. Every official study of UFOs persuaded 
the researchers that aliens were the explanation for the data. But that data has been 
denied,  and  when  denial  no  longer  worked,  it  was  obscured  by  the  noise,  the 
smoke  and  mirrors  that  prevail  today  in  UFO  research  and  the  New  Age  and 
Human Potential movements. Do we think that this is coincidence?

Another  evident  production  of  “noise”  is  the  nonsense  that  passes  today  as 
“channeling“  or  “alien  contacts”.  Indeed,  our  own  work  involves  what  can 
certainly be called inspirational material, but as we have noted repeatedly, it is not 
your  usual  “channeled”  info,  nor  do  we  treat  it  as  such.  For  us,  a  controlled

14  Convinced  that  German  scientists  could  help  America‘s  postwar  efforts,  President  Harry  Truman 
agreed  in  September  1946  to  authorize  “Project  Paperclip,”  a  program  to  bring  selected  German 
scientists to work on America’s behalf during the “Cold War” .However,  Truman  expressly  excluded  anyone  found  “to  have  been  a  member  of  the  Nazi  party  and 
more than a nominal participant in its activities, or an active supporter of Nazism or militarism.” The 
War  Department’s  Joint  Intelligence  Objectives  Agency  (JIOA)  conducted  background  investigations 
of  the  scientists.  In  February  1947,  JIOA  Director  Bosquet  Wev  submitted  the  first  set  of  scientists’ 
dossiers to the State and Justice Departments for review. The Dossiers were damning. Samuel Klaus, 
the State Departments representative on the JIOA board, claimed that all the scientists in this first batch 
were  “ardent  Nazis.”  Their  visa  requests  were  denied.  Wev  wrote  a  memo  warning  that  “the  best 
interests  of  the  United  States  have  been  subjugated  to  the  efforts  expended  in  ‘beating  a  dead  Nazi 
horse.’” He also declared that the return of these scientists to Germany, where they could be exploited 
by  America‘s  enemies,  presented  a  “far  greater  security  threat  to  this  country  than  any  former  Nazi 
affiliations which they may have had or even any Nazi sympathies that they may still have.”When  the  JIOA  formed  to  investigate  the  backgrounds  and  form  dossiers  on  the  Nazis,  the  Nazi 
Intelligence leader Reinhard Gehlen met with the CIA director Allen Dulles. Dulles and Gehlen hit it 
off immediately, Gehlen was a master spy for the Nazis and had infiltrated Russia with his vast Nazi 
Intelligence network. Dulles promised Gehlen that his Intelligence unit was safe in the CIA. Dulles had 
the  scientists  dossier’s  re-written  to  eliminate  incriminating  evidence.  As  promised,  Allen  Dulles 
delivered the Nazi Intelligence unit to the CIA, which later opened many umbrella projects stemming 
from  Nazi  mad  research.  (MK-ULTRA  /  ARTICHOKE,  OPERATION  MIDNIGHT  CLIMAX)  By 
1955, more than 760 German scientists had been granted citizenship in the U.S. and given prominent 
positions in the American scientific community. Many had been longtime members of the Nazi party 
and the Gestapo, had conducted experiments on humans at concentration camps, had used slave labor, 
and had committed other war crimes. In a 1985 expose in the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists Linda 
Hunt wrote that she had examined more than 130 reports on Project Paperclip subjects--and every one 
“had been changed to eliminate the security threat classification.” President Truman, who had explicitly 
ordered no committed Nazis to be admitted under Project Paperclip, was evidently never aware that his 
directive had been violated.

Introduction

15

channeling  experiment  is  the  10%  inspiration  that  must  be  matched  by  the  90% 
perspiration of real research. With a broad historical awareness of the facts, a firm 
grounding  in  the  realization  that  most  of  what  is  out  there  is  deliberate 
disinformation, 
the  plethora  of  “alternative 
information” in books and on the Internet, can easily recognize the “noise” factor 
produced by the Secret State. Dolan tells us:

individual  who  surveys

theindividual  who  surveys

the

By the early 1970s, there were already means available to alter the moods of 
unsuspecting persons. A pocket-sized transmitter generating electromagnetic 
energy at less than 100 milliwatts could do the job. This is no pie-in-the-sky theory. 
In 1972, Dr. Gordon J.F. McDonald testified before the House Subcommittee on 
Oceans and International Environment on the issue of electromagnetic weapons 
used for mind control and mental disruption. He stated:

[T]he basic notion was to create, between the electrically charged ionosphere in the 
higher part of the atmosphere and conducting layers of the surface of the Earth, this 
neutral cavity, to create waves, electrical waves that would be tuned to the brain 
waves. ...About ten cycles per second. ...You can produce changes in behavioral 
patterns or in responses.

The following year, Dr. Joseph C. Sharp, at Walter Reed Hospital, while in a 
soundproof room, was able to hear spoken words broadcast by ‘pulsed                                                                                                               
microwave audiogram’. These words were broadcast to him without any implanted 
electronic translation device. Rather, they reached him by direct transmission to the 
brain. 15

Consider  the  above  in  terms  of  “chemtrails”.  Also,  note  the  comments  of  our 
own experimentally obtained material regarding the above- not from “aliens”, but 
rather from “us in the future”.12-04-99 
Q: (L) But, the fact still remains, in my opinion, that there are a LOT, LOT, LOT of 
planes flying above us in the past few years! Whether they are dumping anything 
on our heads, or what, there are an extreme number of planes flying in these upper 
level criss-cross patterns. Now, whether they are just playing war-games, or they 
are spy planes, they are doing SOMETHING! What is the reason for all of this 
upper level flying that results in these criss-crossed contrails that everybody is 
seeing?  
A: A lot of it is “training maneuver” oriented.  
Q: Why are they training so many pilots? What are they preparing for?  
A: Military budgets must be justified, you know. Review “Military-Industrial 
Complex 101”.  
Q: So, this is just training flight, justification of budget, and nothing more than 
that?  
A: Well, we would not say “not anything more to it than that,” but, when you

15 Ibid., p. 382.

16

The Secret History of the World

say “M-IC,” you have said a lot!  
Q: Are you implying that there is a build-up of the Military-Industrial Complex for 
a reason?  
A: To preserve status quo during “peacetime”. This peace business is not very 
profitable, you know.  
Q: Does that suggest that they are building up to set off a war so they can make 
more money?  
A: Maybe if indeed, and if the populous can be hoodwinked. But, fortunately, the 
public is less hoodwink able. Maybe the real enemy is “out there”, rather than “over 
there”. Was it not always?  
Q: Does any of this increased aircraft activity have anything to do with the 
increased awareness and activities of aliens in and around our planet?  
A: As always. But, this awareness is factionalized and compartmentalized.The C’s comments take on a whole new meaning in light of the present situation 
-  9-11  and  all  that  -  as  well  as  Bush’s  drive  for  “war”.  We  also  note  the  most 
interesting  remark  that,  “awareness  of  the  activities  of  aliens  in  and  around  our 
planet”  is  “factionalized  and compartmentalized”.  This  is  where we come  to the 
COINTELPRO function of creating bogus organizations to attack or disrupt bona 
fide groups.

We  have  already  noted  the  fact  that  research  in  Electrical  Stimulation  of  the 
brain  can  produce  hallucinations.  If  you  put  hallucinations  together  with  words, 
you  can  produce  just  about  anything  that  you  want  in  the  way  of  “noise”  to 
obscure  the  truth  -  including  the  “shape-shifting  reptoids-as-humans”,  or  a  “gray 
dude  in  the  bathroom”,    a  “Guardian  Alliance”,    a  “Nibiruan  Council”  or  an 
“Ashtar  Command”, or talking whales and dolphins,  etc. You name  it -  they  can 
produce  it  via  voices  in  the  head  and  hallucinations  and  transmissions  of 
frequencies that produce ecstatic states, healings, or whatever. And so it is that the 
human  element  of  the  Cosmic  COINTELPRO  operation  manages  their  many 
“agents” of disinformation - pied pipers leading the masses of New Age seekers - 
so that whatever the real truth is remains  their secret. And that’s exactly the way 
they want it.

Notice the dates in the above quote from Dolan’s book telling us that in the early 
70s certain technologies were being developed that could “broadcast” signals over 
the entire nation. We certainly suspect that this technology was developed further 
in the subsequent years. The question is: what did they do with it? Better yet, what 
ARE they doing with it?What  strikes  me  as  an  essential  turning  point  in  this  COINTELPRO  operation 
was the beginning of the “expose” of two particular items that hold sway in certain 
“conspiracy” circles to this very day: Alien Abduction and Satanic Ritual Abuse.

The  Gray  alien  scenario  was  “leaked”  by  Budd  Hopkins.  Whitley  Strieber’s 
alien abduction books, including Communion, followed a few years after. Prior to 
the publication of these books, the ubiquitous  “Gray aliens” had never been seen 
before. In fact,  a review of  the history of  “contact” cases show that the  type  and 
variety  and  behavior  of  “aliens”  around  the  world  are  quite  different  across  the 
board.  But,  along  came  Budd,  followed  by  Whitley  and  his  glaring  alien  on  the 
cover, and suddenly the Grays were everywhere.

In  respect  of  Whitley  and  his  Grays,  allow  me  to  emphasize  one  of  Dolan’s 
comments  quoted  above:  “By  early  1969,  teams  within  the  CIA  were  running  a

Introduction

17

number of bizarre experiments in mind control under  the name Operation Often. 
In  addition  to  the  normal  assortment  of  chemists,  biologists,  and  conventional 
scientists,  the operation employed psychics and experts  in demonology.” This, of 
course, brings us to the parallel event of that period of time: Satanic ritual abuse. 
SRA is the name given to the allegedly systematic abuse of children (and others) 
by Satanists.As it happens, keeping our timeline in mind, it was in the mid to late 1970s that 
the allegations of the existence of a “well-organized intergenerational satanic cult 
whose  members  sexually  molest,  torture  and  murder  children  across  the  United 
States”, began to emerge in America. There was a panic regarding SRA triggered 
by  a  fictional  book  called  Michelle  Remembers.  The  book  was  published  as  fact 
but has subsequently been shown by at least three independent investigators to be 
a hoax. No hard evidence of Satanic Ritual Abuse in North America has ever been 
found, just as no hard evidence of abductions by Gray aliens has ever been found. 
Nevertheless,  the  allegations  were  widely  publicized  on  radio  and  television  talk 
shows, including Geraldo Rivera’s show.

Religious  fundamentalists  promoted  the  hysteria  and,  just  as  during  the 
Inquisitions,  endless  self-proclaimed  “moral  entrepreneurs”  both  fed  the  fires  of 
prosecution  and  earned  a  good  living  from  it.  Most  of  the  early  accusations  of 
satanic  ritual  abuse  were  aimed  at  working-class  people  with  limited  resources, 
and with a few exceptions, the media and other groups that are ordinarily skeptical 
either  remained  silent  or  joined  in  the  feeding  frenzy  of  accusations.  The  few 
professionals who spoke out against the hysteria were systematically attacked and 
discredited by government  agencies and private organizations.

The question has  to be asked: If there are  thousands of baseless  accusations of 
SRA and thousands upon thousands of cases of unverifiable alien abductions, how 
do they originate?The question has  to be asked: If there are  thousands of baseless  accusations of 
SRA and thousands upon thousands of cases of unverifiable alien abductions, how 
do they originate?

Most  of  the  SRA  cases  are  said  to  originate  with  children.  Since  there  is  a 
widespread belief that children wouldn’t  make up stories of eating other children 
or being forced to have sex with giraffes after flying in an airplane while they were 
supposed  to  be  in  day  care,  the  stories  are  often  taken  at  face  value  by  naive 
prosecutors,  therapists,  police  officers  and  parents.  Researchers  have  found  that 
children  are  unlikely  to  invent  stories  of  satanic  ritual  abuse  on  their  own.  So, 
where do the stories come from?

Accusing  the  therapists,  district  attorneys,  police  and  parents  of  inducing  such 
stories  from  children  doesn’t  seem  to  be  a  very  productive  answer.  Yes,  it  may 
happen  in  some  cases,  but  certainly  doesn’t  seem  likely  in  the  vast  number  of 
cases.

Now,  let’s  go  back  and  think  about  our  timeline.  As  it  happens,  Michelle 
Remembers  was  published  in  1980,  co-written  by  Michelle  Smith  and  Lawrence 
Pazder, M.D. Budd Hopkins finished Missing Time in December of 1980, with an 
“afterward”  by Aphrodite Clamar, Ph.D.

It’s looking pretty “coincidental” from where I sit. 
What  occurs  to  me  -  putting  the  pieces  of  the  puzzle  together  -  is  that  there  is 
some  general  kind  of  imagery  being  widely  broadcast  in  the  “neutral  cavity” 
described  above,  and  that  it  depends  a  lot  on  the  individual  and  their  cultural 
programming  how  it  “takes”.  When  we  consider  the  fact  that  Operation  Often

18

The Secret History of the World18

The Secret History of the World

employed  “the  normal  assortment  of  chemists,  biologists,  and  conventional 
scientists”  and  “psychics  and  experts  in  demonology”,  we  begin  to  think  that 
electronic  COINTELPRO  includes  a  whole  supermarket  of  new  “beliefs”  -  Gray 
aliens  and  “alien  contacts”  for  the  New  Age  crowd  and  a  whole  range  of 
“sexual/ritual abuse scenarios” for those who are not open to the alien shtick.

Is the whole thing beamed out as some sort of “free-formal imaging”, and, based 
on  the  conscious  acceptance  of  one  or  another  version,  it  takes  on  its  individual 
characteristics  in  the  minds  of  the  millions  of  recipients?  In  other  words,  is  it 
picked up by the subconscious in alpha states or in sleep, perceived as traumatic in 
a general scenario that can then be interpreted by the individual belief systems in 
terms of either being examined and or sexually manipulated by aliens on a table or 
“raped  on  an  altar”  by  Satanists?  Are  the  public  productions,  books  by  Hopkins, 
Strieber, and the SRA scandals, just variations on the closing of the circuit by the 
conscious mind accepting or creating one or the other scenario as the explanation 
for the constant bombardment of such signals as described in Dolan’s book? Is it 
the  job  of  COINTELPRO  to  create  “bogus  organizations”  that  produce  various 
“explanations” to close the circuit and “make it real” in the person’s mind?

One has to wonder about the name of the program: Operation Often in terms of 
the claims of abductees - victims of repeated  and “often” abductions - as well  as 
the claims of those who suggest the SRA explanation. In either case, the believer 
is being “herded” into a “response camp” of either faith in alien saviors, or faith in 
Jesus to save them from the demonic/satanic Illuminati, Jews, Pagans - take your 
pick.Let me make it clear that I am in no way suggesting that “abductions” or some 
whacked  out  satanic  rituals  do  not  ever  take  place  somewhere,  under  some 
circumstances. What I am suggesting is that the Gray Alien and SRA phenomenon 
most  certainly was not restricted  in any way by COINTELPRO, and may indeed 
be the smoke and mirrors that hides a far more insidious state of affairs.

In essence, Dolan’s book shows us the history of how the many levels of society 
have been duped and deceived - or directly controlled - from the average citizen, 
to the seeker of higher truths, to the scions of science and industry, to the hallowed 
halls  of  government.  Each  “type”  has  been  targeted  in  the  way  most  likely  to 
“manage”  them best. Those who  cannot be “managed” generally die,  as  scientist 
James  McDonald, and others, did.  But  all  the  while, the UFOs kept coming,  and 
people kept seeing them, and they kept asking questions.

In April 1971, an engineering research magazine, Industrial Research, published 
the results of a poll in which 80 percent of its members rejected the Condon Report; 
76 percent believed that the government was concealing UFO facts; 32 percent 
believed that UFOs were extraterrestrial. Poll or no poll, the CIA continued to lie 
about its UFO interests. [...]

The worst story of 1971 was the demise of James McDonald. [Atmospheric 
physicist from the University of Arizona.] As far as anyone could tell, McDonald 
was fine all through 1970 and into 1971. On March 2, 1971, he testified as an 
expert in atmospheric physics at the House committee on Appropriations regarding 
the supersonic transport (SST) and its potentially harmful atmospheric effects. 
McDonald’s opponents questioned his credentials and ridiculed him as someone

Introduction

19

who believed in “little men flying around the sky”. Laughter broke out several 
times.Introduction

19

who believed in “little men flying around the sky”. Laughter broke out several 
times.

Shortly after this incident, McDonald shot himself in the head and became blind. 
He was committed to the psychiatric ward of the VA medical Center in Tucson. In 
June, he signed himself out. On Sunday morning, June 13, a woman in south 
Tucson, identifying herself as a doctor, said a deranged blind man had taken a cab 
to the area. She wanted to know where the driver had dropped him off, and she 
made several calls. Meanwhile, a married couple and their children, walking along 
a shallow creek, found McDonald’s body under a bridge at 11:40 a.m. A .38 caliber 
revolver was in the sand, near his head. A brief note attributed his suicide to 
marriage and family problems. [...]

We know that many intelligence agencies were skilled in “creating” suicides. But, 
one might ask, wasn’t McDonald’s mental condition already deteriorating? Jerome 
Clark stated that McDonald was ready to “crack” in the aftermath of the SST 
hearings. But what caused this? Embarrassment at the SST hearings? His marriage? 
Perhaps, one supposes, but both of these explanations feel flimsy. Without 
exception, those who knew McDonald described him as possessing great integrity 
and courage. Was he really the type of person to commit suicide? 16

McDonald  had  been  described  as  a  man  who  was  “afraid  of  nothing”.  What 
seems  to  be  so  is  that  this  was  why  he  was  destroyed.  Hynek  had  written  that 
McDonald was considered by the Air Force to be an “outstanding nuisance”.With the mind control arsenal that has been described at their disposal, we have 
a good idea of what “they” can do to  the  mind.  Even  the strongest.  Courage and 
integrity, it seems, are no protection. We would like to note another curious death - 
that of Edward Ruppelt. After years as an advocate of disclosure, he suddenly did 
an  about  face  -  re-wrote  his  book  recanting  his  belief  that  UFOs  were 
extraterrestrial craft, and was dead within a year at a very young age.

It looks to me as though, if they can’t corrupt you, they kill you, and if they can 
corrupt  you,  they  still  kill  you  so  you  won’t  have  a  chance  to  change  your  mind 
and  recant  your  recantation  like  Jacques  de  Molay  did  when  the  Templars  were 
destroyed. Those who get close to the belly of the beast are generally subjected to 
a new “approach” it seems. And that approach is the biggest betrayal of all.

Many  important  and  influential  people  have  attested  to  the  reality  of  the  UFO 
phenomenon  as  an  “alien  reality”.  Within  the  military  organizations,  those  who 
affirm the “alien hypothesis” are widespread and numerous. But, as Dolan shows 
us, they cannot discuss those views without risking the penalties of imprisonment 
and stiff fines.

In the present day, we have Steven Greer’s  “Disclosure  Project”.  Based on the 
mail I get, it seems that many in the New Age/UFO community think that this is a

16 Ibid., p. 381.

20

The Secret History of the World16 Ibid., p. 381.

20

The Secret History of the World

great and novel idea. However, history shows that it has been tried before. The one 
thing about Greer’s effort that suggests it is just more and better COINTELPRO is 
his  attachment  to  the  “aliens  are  here  to  help  us”  idea,  which  is  directly 
contradicted  by  history,  though  widely  promoted  by  most  “contactees”.  Even 
Linda  Howe,  for  a  long  time  the  most  reputable  of  careful  researchers  -  and  no 
stranger to the machinations of the Secret State - seems to have fallen for this one -  
COINTELPRO.  It  is  also  now  being  promoted  in  Fate  Magazine  by  Rosemary 
Guiley,  who  has  the  odor  of  COINTELPRO  about  her  with  her  notable 
connections  to  military  “agents”.  Jerome  Clark,  quoted  above,  is  also  a  regular 
contributor to Fate.

Let  me  make  it  clear  at  this  point  that  I  am  convinced  that  a  lot  of  honest, 
sincere, hard-working individuals are being duped and/or controlled without being 
fully aware of it.

Dolan  documents  the  failure  of  civilian  groups  in  their  efforts  to  really  “end 
UFO  secrecy”.  NICAP  had  prominent  and  active  members,  connections  to 
Congress and to the military, and their effort continued for over ten years. NICAP 
fought diligently for congressional hearings, and yet every time they got “close” to 
bringing  it  to  the  table  for  public  consideration,  the  congressional  sponsorship 
“backed off” and reversed their support.What kind of group is it  that  can control our government officials in this way? 
An  even  deeper  question  might  be:  What  kind  of  group  is  it  that  can  control  the 
media, the military, the CIA, the FBI, NSA, and even the President? What do they 
do  to  intimidate  and  dominate  ethical  and  substantial  persons  in  positions  of 
authority? Whatever it is, we would certainly like to know because it suggests that 
they are hiding something so significant that even hints of it behind closed doors 
can send the most powerful congressmen running with their tails  tucked between 
their legs.

This  brings  us  back  to  the  problem  of  the  Secret  State  and  its  agenda.  Some 
people  believe  that  this  secrecy  is  absolutely  essential.  They  say  that  the  public 
simply could not handle the truth about aliens. They say that there is no reason to 
spoil people’s lives with the truth because there is nothing that the average person 
could  do  about  it  anyway.  Is  that  really  true?  Would  there  be  so  much  effort  to 
conceal the alien agenda if disclosure of the truth wasn’t harmful to that agenda?

Dolan’s  chronological  history  of  the  actual  interaction  between  UFOs  and  the 
public and the corresponding behavior of the military, the intelligence community, 
the  media,  and  the  scientific  community  in  its  interaction  with  the  public,  make 
this abundantly clear. Dolan writes:

Some believe this is, as it ought to be. Can the public really handle the truth about 
aliens? If the presence of others constitutes a threat to humanity, for example, what

Introduction

21

could the average person even do about it? There are those who believe that secrecy 
about UFOs is in the public’s best interest. 17Introduction

21

could the average person even do about it? There are those who believe that secrecy 
about UFOs is in the public’s best interest. 17

What is clearly evident, and most especially so in the past year or two, is that the 
“public  interest”  is  not  the  concern  of  those  making  these  decisions.  As  Dolan 
rightly says, secrecy is being utilized not to protect the public, but to protect those 
keeping  the  secrets  -  the  “Above  Top  Secret”  group  -  and  very  likely,  even  the 
aliens themselves.

When  we  consider  the  modus  operandi  of  the  intelligence  community,  in  its 
historical perspective, what we see is that, at every level, right up to the very top, 
there is control and manipulation. This leads me to suggest that even those at the 
top  level  of  the  human  Consortium  are  being  duped  and  deceived  and  are  as 
unable and/or unwilling to consider that possibility as those at the lower levels.

It seems obvious from the documentary evidence as well as the behavior of the 
military  in  response  to  UFOs  and  the  “alien  matter”,  that  the  aliens  do  have  an 
agenda, and that, at some level in the layers of secrecy, there are those who know -  
on a “need to know” basis - what that agenda is. It seems abundantly evident that 
the secrecy has been enjoined on this group by the aliens themselves. Even more 
alarming is that a careful assessment of the evidence does not suggest a benevolent 
agenda.As  a  result  of  the  manipulations  of  this  “Consortium”,  the  majority  of 
Americans  are  inculcated  into  the  fiction  of  a  representative  government,  a 
democracy,  and  that  our  scientists  and  representatives  are  “taking  care  of 
business” for us,  and even  if they  are  sometimes  corrupt,  they aren’t  as bad  as  a 
totalitarian  regime.  It  has  become  most  definitely  obvious  in  the  past  couple  of 
years that this is not the case  and probably never was. We don’t even really elect 
our  representatives.  It’s  all  a  sham.  But  the  fiction  propagated  by  the  media  has 
clouded the ability of the American people to see their society and government for 
what  it  really  is:  an  oligarchy  that  pretends  to  be  a  democracy  to  placate  and 
deceive the public.

To those who suggest that it doesn’t really matter since it is an efficient way to 
organize  and manage millions of people, let us suggest that it  is suicidal  to think 
that an oligarchy is not primarily interested in maintaining its own position to the 
exclusion of all other considerations. When we consider the evidence, we see that 
the groups in question have never acted in the best interests of the public. If you 
doubt this, spend some time reading about nonconsensual human experimentation.  
Logically speaking, there is no reason to even suggest that the secrecy surrounding 
the “alien reality” is any different.

Dolan notes that, as a result of the concerted “debunking” of UFOs perpetrated 
on  a  populace  that  has  been  mind  manipulated  and  dumbed  down  by  public

17 Ibid., p. 392.

22

The Secret History of the World17 Ibid., p. 392.

22

The Secret History of the World

“education”  for  a  very  long  time,  our  society  has  become  extraordinarily 
schizophrenic  about  UFOs.  At  the  level  of  “officialdom”,  as  in  academia, 
mainstream media, government and so forth, UFOs are either ignored or treated as 
a  joke.  You  won’t  find  UFOs  or  Aliens  -  or  their  repeated  invasion  of  sensitive 
airspace  -  discussed  on  the  nightly  news.  You  won’t  find  Ted  Koppel  analyzing 
them  as  a  threat  to  National  Security.  And  this  state  of  affairs  is  totally  bizarre 
because it is abundantly - overwhelmingly - clear and evident that our military and 
intelligence organizations consider them to be so important that information about 
them is classified “Above Top Secret”.

However,  being  classified  “Above  Top  Secret”  does  not  seem  to  matter  to  the 
aliens. They arrogantly do as they please and leave the “clean up” to their human 
lackeys  the  same  way  some  media  personalities  have  been  reported  to  destroy 
hotel rooms, and  then have their  accountants  write checks  to cover  the damages, 
while their agents give press releases that deny any such thing ever happened.This brings us back to the efforts of COINTELPRO. Since the military is in the 
position of dealing with beings of such arrogance that their checks don’t cover the 
damage  they  do,  the  “press  releases”  are  issued  in  the  form  of  diversion  and 
division.  UFOs  and  the  “alien  reality”  are  promoted  in  ways  that  simply  do  not 
relate to the documentary evidence or the factual data. UFOs and aliens are given 
cachet in the New Age and metaphysical communities, and groups studying them 
or  “channeling”  them  are  “managed”  so  that  the  possibility  of  exposure  of  the 
Truth is completely minimized in the plethora of conflicting, generated “beliefs”. 
At the same time, there are organizations that are set up to operate as “professional 
debunkers” and disinformation artists; smoke and mirrors and endless confusion.

What is evident from the documents and statements of those “in on the secret”, 
is that the current “popularity” of aliens and New Age presentations of the subject 
are  the  direct  result  of  deliberate  infiltration  by  intelligence  personnel    who  are 
continually “spinning the wheel” of lies and distortion.

UFOs  have  national  security  implications  for  a  lot  of  reasons,  not  the  least  of 
which is that they have involved military and industrial personnel of many nations 
around the globe. This situation has existed for over fifty years. In fact, a careful 
study  of  history  shows  an  intersection  between  UFOs  and  the  military  for 
hundreds, if not thousands of years! Unauthorized airspace  violations  continue to 
occur;  attempted  interceptions  repeatedly  take  place,  and  the  secrecy  orders  are 
more severe now than ever.We have to ask ourselves why this is so?  
If  the  military  organizations  are  as  interested  in  UFOs  and  Aliens  as  we  know 
them  to be, based on the evidence, and  if they  are in  the dark about them, as  the 
evidence  also  suggests,  would  they  not  be  utilizing  the  many  claimed  “alien 
contacts” among the New Age community as resources, if there was the possibility 
that  such  sources  really  were  in  contact  with  the  “real  aliens”  in  and  about  the 
planet ? There are certainly many of these contactees that claim “extreme military 
interest”  in  their  work.  However,  based  on  the  facts  of  the  operations  of  the 
National Security State, we can pretty well objectively assess that if this were true, 
such contactees would not be out there promulgating their information. That they 
often  operate  unmolested,  and  even  achieve  great  popularity  is  compelling 
evidence  that  their  “information”  is  useless  to  the  military,  if  not  created  by  it.

Introduction

23

What  seems  to  be  true  is  that  most  contactees  and  channelers  are  dupes  of  the 
military cover-up - victims of COINTELPRO - created to generate  the noise that 
hides  the  signal  of  the  true  Alien  Reality.  In  short,  the  majority  of  claims  of 
channelers, contactees, new age gurus, UFO researchersand the like, both in books 
and on the internet, about the “alien reality”, is COINTELPRO at its finest.Take that to the bank.  
One thing is clear: the UFOs themselves are not under the control of the military 
-  or  anybody  else.  The  evidence  that  the  Consortium  continues  to  debunk  and 
cover this up - in the face of its violations of their own airspace - suggests  again 
the  analogy  of  arrogant  and  powerful  Masters  of  Reality,  aided  and  abetted  by 
their  military  and  intelligence  organization  servants  who,    while    obeying  the 
powerful  overlords,  seek  to  keep  everything  quiet,  trying  desperately  to  discover 
the secrets of power, so as to arrogate it to themselves. And it seems evident that, 
in  the  present  time,  the  game  is  afoot  in  the  citadels  of  Power  and  Secrets. 
Something is happening and the servants of the  alien masters are running scared. 
They  are  trying  to  cement  controls,  to  solidify  their  power  base,  because 
Something Wicked This Way Comes.

COINTELPRO and Ascension

This  brings  us  back  to  the  subject  of  Ascension.  As  I  noted,  the  subject  of 
Ascension seems to be the number one topic of the New Age and Human Potential 
movement. If, as we suspect, the New Age and Human Potential movement is the 
product of COINTELPRO, that means that targeting the correct understanding of, 
and process of, Ascension is their major goal. Does that mean that such a potential 
does  not  exist  at  all?  No.  The  concepts  of  Ascension  have  been  with  us  a  long 
time,  as  we  will  examine  further  on.  What  is  different  about  the  present  day 
promotions is the type of process that is being promoted. Based on an assessment 
of  the  potentials  of  Ascension,  it  is  obvious  that  the  reason  it  is  such  a  popular 
subject  is  that  it  is  one  of  the  main  things  that  COINTELPRO  is  designed  to 
obstruct and prevent.Let me repeat  the observation I made  above: Would there be so much effort to 
conceal the alien agenda if disclosure of the truth wasn’t harmful to that agenda? 
Rephrasing this: Would there be so much effort to divert the Ascension process if 
it wasn’t harmful to the negative agendas?

As  the  fellow  at  RAND  noted,  “Terrorism  is  changing.  New  adversaries,  new 
motivations and new rationales have surfaced in recent years to challenge much of 
the  conventional  wisdom...”.  We  already  have  the  idea  that  the  Consortium,  the 
National Security State, does not have our best interests at heart, and that at some 
level,  they  seem  to  be  operating  at  the  behest  of  the  alien  invaders.  Considering 
this, we might wish to look with new eyes at some of the ideas of Ascension that 
are currently being promulgated.

In order to understand the growth of the “Ascension Industry”, we need to look 
at  a  close  parallel:  general  culture.  Among  the  observers  of  the  American  socio-
cultural scene, there are many experts who tell us that there has been a deliberate 
effort for over 100 years, to “dumb down” the American population both in terms 
of intellect and ethics. This subject is too vast to be covered in detail here and will

24

The Secret History of the World

be dealt with fully in a future volume. For now, let us just point out that the same 
process that has been used to dumb down the population in social and intellectual 
terms  has  been  used  to  dumb  us  down  in  terms  of  philosophy,  metaphysics  and 
spiritual awareness. We might observe that it is hardly likely that the effort would 
be expended on mind control of the masses for the purposes of external controls, 
without a parallel program being instituted to pervert the spirit and bring it under 
domination also.

Prime TimePrime Time

While everyone will readily admit that  there is probably  too much violence on 
television  and  that  the  ads  are  revoltingly  juvenile,  very  few  people  have  a  real 
conception of the precise nature and extent of the hypnotic influence of the media. 
Still  fewer  have  any  idea  of  the  purposes  behind  this  inducement.  Wallace  and 
Wallechinsky write in The People’s Almanac:

“After World War II, television flourished... Psychologists and sociologists were 
brought in to study human nature in relation to selling; in other words, to figure out 
how to manipulate people without their feeling manipulated. Dr. Ernest Dichter, 
President of the Institute for Motivational Research made a statement in 1941... ‘the 
successful ad agency manipulates human motivations and desires and develops a 
need for goods with which the public has at one time been unfamiliar -- perhaps 
even undesirous of purchasing.’

Discussing the influence of television, Daniel Boorstin wrote: “Here at last is a 
supermarket of surrogate experience. Successful programming offers entertainment 
- under the guise of instruction; instruction - under the guise of entertainment; 
political persuasion - with the appeal of advertising; and advertising - with the 
appeal of drama.”

[…] programmed television serves not only to spread acquiescence and 
conformity, but it represents a deliberate industry approach.” 18

Allen Funt, host of a popular television show, Candid Camera, was once asked 
what  was  the  most  disturbing  thing  he  had  learned  about  people  in  his  years  of 
dealing  with  them  through  the  media.  His  response  was  chilling  in  its 
ramifications:“The worst thing, and I see it over and over, is how easily people can be led by any 
kind of authority figure, or even the most minimal kinds of authority. A well-
dressed man walks up the down escalator and most people will turn around and try 
desperately to go up also... We put up a sign on the road, ‘Delaware Closed Today’. 
Motorists didn’t even question it. Instead they asked: ‘Is Jersey open?’” 19

18 Quoted by Wallace and Wallechinsky in The People’s Almanac, pp. 805, 807. 
19 Ibid.

Introduction

25

Thus, we have submission to minimal signs of authority; lack of knowledge and 
awareness; and a desire for a quick fix and an easy way out. Paraphrasing Daniel 
Boorstin:  “For  seekers  of  Ascension,  here  at  last  is  a  supermarket  of  surrogate 
experience.  Successful  [ascension  philosophies]  offer  entertainment  -  under  the 
guise of instruction; instruction - under the guise of entertainment; [metaphysical] 
persuasion  -  with  the  appeal  of  advertising;  and  advertising  -  with  the  appeal  of 
[Cosmic Drama].”

When  we  consider  the  information  about  mind  programming  and  its  potentials 
compiled in Dolan’s book, UFOs and the National Security State, and how it has 
probably been used on the masses of humanity, we must also consider, as a logical 
step,  that  the  major  and  most  popular  components  of  the  New  Age  alternative 
approach to interpreting reality and seeking spiritual advancement, have also been 
produced by this same process in the context of electronic COINTELPRO.What  seems  to  be  so  is  that  most  of  the  New  Age  and  Human  Potential 
movement  consists  of  a  new  sub-set  of  programmers  that  work  to  “prepare  the 
ground”,  so  to  speak,  so  that  the  audience  will  be  warmed  up  and  ready  for  the 
final drama. They are the “sales team” that sells the ideas upon which the “closer” 
depends for success. They are here, now, in our world running New Age Circuses, 
seminars,  workshops  and  “methods”  or 
for  “ascension”,  or 
accomplishing any of a dozen occult or purported spiritual aims. They are the New 
Age COINTELPRO in its function of creating “bogus organizations”.

techniques

The Real Prize

If we cannot rely on what is passing as “New Age Theology”, or philosophy, to

guide us, what is the key to REAL ascension?

What the modern day seekers of ascension are looking for—whether they realize 
it or not— is the age-old quest of the Knight - the quest for the Holy Grail. When 
we begin to research the matter, we also discover that the Great Work of Alchemy 
is described in terms of a “great battle” with forces - dragons, deception, difficult 
and prolonged work on the self - which make us realize that the stories of the Grail 
Quest  must  have  originally  been  stories  of  “alchemical  transformation.”.  They 
never were stories about a “real” object - cup or otherwise - that must be found. Or 
were  they  both?  What  is  most  fascinating  is  the  way  the  Grail  Stories,  and  the 
writings of the Alchemists about their “sacred science”, also relate quite closely to 
the most ancient of heroic myths.What  this  means  is  that  the  Quest  for  the  Holy  Grail  and  the  Work  of  the 
Alchemists  hold  many  clues  for  us  as  to  the  real  work  of  ascension.  Repeatedly 
they present allegories of struggle, deception, battles with dragons, deceivers, and 
evil forces of all kinds. The story of the Knight who slays the Dragon and rescues 
the  Princess  from  the  Tower  after  years  of  seeking,  struggling,  suffering  and 
overcoming, is an allegory that is as valid today as it was in ages past. It is the true 
path of ascension.

As  we  present  the  information  in  this  volume,  the  reader  will  be  introduced  to 
the idea that the science of the ancients may have included a very comprehensive 
knowledge  of  the  deeper  reality  that  present  day  sciences,  including  physics, 
chemistry, mathematics, and astrophysics, are only rediscovering. And here we do

26

The Secret History of the World

not mean the ancient Egyptians or Babylonians or Sumerians, but rather peoples of 
far  greater  antiquity  than  they,  and  that  the  Egyptians,  Babylonians,  Sumerians, 
and  so  on,  retained  only  a  distorted  and  corrupted  version  of  these  ideas  in  the 
form  of  myths  and  legends  which  they  elaborated  and  utilized  in  their  “magical 
practices”.  Further,  that  it  is  only  in  the  light  of  the  present  day  scientific 
knowledge that  the true  ancient knowledge, depicted in these myths, legends and 
religious rites can be properly understood. This is not to say that we are suggesting 
that we understand or have interpreted all of them. We are only saying that there 
are  many  ideas  in  these  ancient  stories  that  suggest  the  former  existence  of  an 
advanced  science  that  may  have  enabled  an  interface  between  layers,  or 
dimensions of reality, on this planet in archaic times.This idea is not original to us, as many readers will know. However, we do think 
that  we  have  been  able  to  shine  a  light  into  certain  dark  corners  that  have  been, 
heretofore,  poorly  understood.  Arthur  C.  Clarke  pointed  out,  “Any  sufficiently 
evolved technology is indistinguishable from  magic.” When we divest our minds 
of preconceived notions about what the ancients may or may not have known, and 
we just look at myths and legends, the substrate of religions, over and over again 
we  see  descriptions  of  activities,  events,  terms  and  potentials  that  express  such 
things  as  a  knowledge  of  free  energy,  anti-gravity,  time  travel,  interplanetary 
travel,  atomic  energy,  atomic  molecularization  and  demolecularization;  just  a 
whole host of doings that were formerly understood as  the wild and superstitious 
imaginings  of  howling  savages,  that  today  -  with  scientific  knowledge  -  are 
becoming  commonplace  activities.  Many  scholars  explain  that  such  stories  were 
attempts  to  understand  the  environment  by  personifying,  or  anthropomorphizing, 
the forces of nature. Other interpreters make the mistake of assuming that it was a 
“sacred science” in terms that strictly deny any form of material interpretation.I gave this idea a great deal of thought at one point, all the while observing my 
five children develop, paying close attention to how and when they noticed things 
in  their  environment,  how  they  explained  phenomena  to  themselves  and  each 
other;  avoiding  my  own  input  as  long  as  possible  so  that  the  child’s  originality 
would  develop  as  naturally  as  possible.  One  of  the  earliest  observations  I  made 
about  my  children  (and  other  children  with  whom  they  interacted)  and  their 
reactions  to  their  environment,  was  that  they  pretty  much  just  accept  it  as  it  is. 
They  don’t  seem  to  need  “explanations”  for  it.  It  is  what  it  is  until  some  adult 
repeats  to  them  some  story  about  it  which  may  entertain  them  or  frighten  them. 
Until  “stories”  are  told  to  them,  children  are  intensely  busy  just  imitating  what 
they see other people do, most generally the adults in their lives. Without fantastic 
tales being told to them, their games of make-believe consist of ordinary mundane 
dramas.  Even  when  they  are  told  magical  stories  about  flying  horses  or  people 
with  super  powers,  they  often  resist  these  dramas  in  preference  for  those  that 
directly apply to their own experience and observation.

Perhaps  the  comparison  of  the  development  of  a  child’s  thinking  in  relation  to 
their environment, to the development of evolutionary thinking of human beings in 
general is a stretch. But, I do think that it ought to give us some pause to question 
just where and how the creation of myth and legend actually served human beings, 
evolutionarily  speaking.  Why  would  anyone  tell  a  story  about  a  man  with  magic 
sandals that enabled him to fly if they are merely anthropomorphizing the forces of

Introduction

27Introduction

27

nature? If it is a “magical being“ such as a “god”, why does he need sandals to fly 
with?  He  could  just  as  easily  have  wings  that  are  part  of  his  physical  structure. 
He’s already a god, after all. He’s not human. So why the sandals? Why should a 
technological device that enables a man to fly be part of an archaic ontology?

Indeed,  there  may  be  an  “archetypal  pool  of  ideas”  from  which  all  humanity 
may draw in dreams  and visions, but  that leads us  into realms of thought that do 
not answer the simple question of what benefit  there was for howling savages  to 
make up fantastic tales about the forces of nature, tales  that also included certain 
elements that suggest a technology and not only a “magical state of being”.

In the present day, there are all sorts of “mystical” groups and organizations that 
claim  to  be  the  recipients  of  ancient  knowledge,  what  is  commonly  called 
“occultism”,  or  the  “esoteric”,  or  magical  practices.  There  is  a  plethora  of  books 
that  purport  to  be  scientific,  but  which  totally  reject  mainstream  science  in  any 
context.  Subjects  such  as  sacred  geometry,  archaeoastronomy,  and  new  physics 
have  all  become  subjects  of  fevered  study  in  order  to  discern  the  “occult 
significance”  of  the  works  of  the  ancients.  And,  invariably,  it  is  done  in  strictly 
ritual  terms,  positing  that  all  of  the  abilities  of  the  ancients  were  accomplished 
strictly by magical rites or rituals - controlling what is “up there” by rituals “down 
here”.Occultists claim that the mental and spiritual powers of the ancients were what 
we  have  lost.  They  then  assert  that  this  ancient  wisdom  was  broken  up  and 
obscured in magical doctrines, which those who are not “initiated” simply cannot 
grasp. They claim that parts of it have been handed down by continuous tradition, 
and  released  to  the  world  at  opportune  times,  and  other  parts  have  only  been 
released to an elect few, of which exalted company, they, of course, are obviously 
members.

When  considering  such  ideas,  we  do  come  to  the  thought  that  it  is  very  likely 
that  there  are  rites  or  stories  or  myths  behind  the  rituals  that  may,  indeed,  have 
been passed down in such secret groups in a more pure form than the stories that 
make their way around the globe across millennia. But that does not mean that the 
“priesthood” of such groups truly understands the stories or rites of which they are 
guardians—especially if they do not consider the possibility that such information 
may be scientific codes and require a trained scientist to decode them.

Most of the so-called “occultists”  and “sacred geometers” remind  me of David 
Macaulay’s  Motel  Of  Mysteries,20  a  humorous  account  of  an  archaeological 
excavation  of  a  twentieth  century  motel,  in  which  everything  is  meticulously 
excavated, recorded and then totally misinterpreted. The “vast funerary” complex 
unearthed  by  Howard  Carson  contains  wonders  such  as  the  “Great  Altar”

20 Macaulay, David, Motel Of Mysteries (Boston: Houghton Mifflin 1979).

28

The Secret History of the World

(Television),  a  statue  of  the  deity  WATT  (bedside  lamp)  and  the  Internal 
Component Enclosure (or ICE box).

There  are  other  promulgators  of  the  occult  who  seem  to  be  part  of  the  very 
Control  System  we  have  described  above  and  who  seem  to  have  extremely 
dangerous proclivities, as we will discuss further on.In  terms  of  archaeology,  there  are  processes  involved  in  the  formation  of  the 
archaeological record. A lack of understanding of these formation processes is not 
always  confined  to  the  non-professionals.  It  has  only  relatively  recently  been 
suggested  that  the  archaeology  of  a  site  is  not  a  direct  record  of  what  went  on 
there, but instead may have been distorted by a whole series of processes.

We are suggesting that the  same may be true regarding myths and legends and 
religious rites. They are a sort of archaeological record of the history of mankind 
held in archetypal terms, buried in stories, distorted by a whole series of processes. 
Even  if  some  of  the  purported  ancient  schools  and  mystical  paths  have  kept 
some  of  this  information  intact,  or  in  a  purer  state,  it  still  seems  that  much  has 
“faded on the page” due to the long period of time since such things were part of 
the  external reality. But still,  there are those who have seen the  contradictions  in 
our  reality  and  our  beliefs  and  who  have  sought  in  these  ancient  teachings  to 
discover what might have been known. Many of them have made discoveries that, 
when  considered  with  information  from  many  other  fields,  assists  us  in  this 
essential discovery of our true condition and purpose.

The question naturally arises, what does the history of our subject - Ascension as 
Ancient Science - have to tell us about what may or may not “really work”? Can 
we examine it; can we track it and discover not only the obstacles to the process, 
but  also  the  real  benefits  that  might  accrue  to  the  Seeker?  Can  we  track  and 
discover  the  apparent  abilities  that  are  the  signs  of  accomplishment  of  the 
successful Quest?

In  short,  what  is  the  real  Philosophers  Stone?  What  can  the  Hero  really

accomplish when he finds the Holy Grail?

Chapter 1 
The Nature of the QuestIn  short,  what  is  the  real  Philosophers  Stone?  What  can  the  Hero  really

accomplish when he finds the Holy Grail?

Chapter 1 
The Nature of the Quest

The Ancient Secret Science Revealed

Many literary critics seem to  think  that a hypothesis about  obscure and remote 
questions of history can be refuted by a simple demand for the production of more 
evidence than in fact  exists. […] But the  true test of a hypothesis,  if it  cannot be 
shown to conflict with known truths, is the number of facts that it correlates and 
explains.

[Cornford, Origins of Attic Comedy]

Disjecta Membra

The theme of the Quest for the Holy Grail is so much a part of Western Culture 
that  it  would  be  difficult  to  even  imagine  its  absence.  The  number  of  books, 
paintings,  sculptures,  plays,  movies,  popular  songs  and  other  artistic  or  literary 
expressions  that  deal  with  the  “matter  of  the  Grail”  are  too  numerous  to  even 
count. The Holy Grail represents many things  to many people, but in general we 
could  say  that  it  represents  the  Quest  for  All  and  Everything.  This  attitude  has 
crept  into  our  language  when  we  say,  “Oh,  he’s  searching  for  the  Holy  Grail  of 
_____”. You can fill in the blank with about any field of endeavor. Everyone who 
considers the subject, even momentarily, is certain that, at the core of the Legend 
is  a  secret  and/or  some  ultimate  prize  of  a  material  nature.  It  could  even  be  said 
that the attachment Western Society has to the Legends of the Grail is really all out 
of  proportion  to  the  actual  confusing  content  of  the  stories  themselves.  In  fact, 
many  people  who  are  certain  that  there  is  a  deep  meaning  to  the  Legend  of  the 
Holy Grail haven’t even read the original stories that gave birth to that legend.Yet, something acts on us - each and every one - to trigger the imagination, the 
soul,  whenever  the  subject  comes  up;  and  this  suggests  that  there  is  some  vital 
thing  -  some  magic  -  some  mysterious  archetypal  dream  -  that  the  very  words 
“Holy  Grail”  awakens  in  the  spirit  of  Western  peoples.  It  activates  something  in 
our  collective  unconscious,  transforming  the  muddled  and  confusing  elements  of 
the  original  stories  into  an  enchanted  land  of  heroic  love  and  mighty  feats  of 
derring-do that can only be performed by the purest and the best; and all of us - in 
our  most  private  fantasies  -  dream  that  we  are  “The  One”  who  can  achieve  the 
Grail.

Anyone who studies the matter of the Grail already knows that there are literally 
multiple thousands of scholarly and/or imaginative works on the subject. There are

30

The Secret History of the World

essays, studies, criticisms - volumes of them - devoted to this fascinating subject. 
The  student  of  Grail  literature  also  knows  that  these  endless  treatments  of  the 
subject  present  an  almost  hopeless  muddle  of  contradictory  opinions  and 
perspectives. For example: there is one school of thought that proposes the Grail to 
be  an  entirely  “Christian  matter”.  There  are  undeniably  Christian  elements  that 
dominate certain versions. Then, there is the school of thought that claims that the 
Grail matter is essentially pagan, and  most definitely of Celtic provenance.  They 
point  out  that  the  later  Christianized  versions  were  attempts  by  ecclesiastics  to 
“cover-up” and amalgamate a popular theme to Christian purposes. These two are 
the broadest divisions, but no means the only ones! Each group can be subdivided 
into branching schools, holding forth on any of dozens of theories.The  problem  is  that  each  of  these  two  perspectives  and  their  many  subsets  are 
faced  with  insurmountable  problems  when  trying  to  promote  their  individual 
arguments. The theory of the Christian origin of the Grail breaks down completely 
when confronted with the most distressing fact that there is no Christian tradition 
concerning a “Joseph of Arimathea”. It seems that Joseph does not exist outside of 
the Grail  stories  and must be relegated - by Christianity - to romantic fantasy. In 
fact,  as  Jessie  Weston  reported,  as  early  as  1260,  the  Dutch  writer,  Jacob  van 
Maerlant  denounced  the  whole  Grail  issue  as  “lies”,  declaring  that  the  Church 
knew  nothing  of  it.  And  he  was  right.  The  Pagan-Celtic  advocates  have  to  face 
their own difficulties when dealing with the legends. The part of the Grail stories 
that  can  be  proven  to  be  definitely  pagan  and  Celtic  -  the  Perceval  story  -  in  its 
original form, has nothing to do with the Grail at all!

So the problem is this: while parallels can be found for one or another feature of 
the  whole  cycle  of  stories  when  taken  in  isolation,  this  cannot  serve  a  broad 
overview  because  to  derive  parallels  necessitates  breaking  the  stories  up  into  a 
group  of  independent  themes.  There  is  no  “Q”  document,  as  is  theorized  for  the 
Gospels  of  the  New  Testament  -  a  lost  original  source  from  which  different 
elements are drawn. There is no prototype with all the elements in one story - the 
Waste  Land,  the  Fisher  King,  the  Hidden  Castle  with  its  otherworldly  feast  and 
mysterious vessel and maidens, the Bleeding Lance and Cup.In  short,  for  either  the  pagan-Celtic  or  Christian  perspective,  there  is  just  no 
original source that has preserved all of the elements together. What this means is 
that the most logical approach to take to the subject is to understand at the outset 
that neither school of thought can ignore the other and that a broader approach is 
needed.  This  means  that  the  origin  of  the  Grail  story  must  be  somewhere  other  
than in popular legends or Christianized tales.

Jessie  L.  Weston,  after  more  than  thirty  years  of  study,  wrote  a  little  book 
entitled  From  Ritual  to  Romance.  She  noted  therein  an  observation  that  was 
startling in its implications:

Some years ago, when fresh from the study of Sir J. G. Frazer’sThe Golden Bough, 
I was struck by the resemblance existing between certain features of the Grail story, 
and characteristic details of the Nature Cults described. The more closely I 
analyzed the tale, the more striking became the resemblance, and I finally asked 
myself whether it were not possible that this mysterious legend - mysterious alike 
in its character, its sudden appearance, the importance apparently assigned to it, 
followed by as sudden and complete a disappearance - we might not have the

Chapter 1: The Nature of the Quest

31

confused record of a ritual once popular, later surviving under conditions of strict 
secrecy? This would fully account for the atmosphere of awe and reverence, which 
even under distinctly non-Christian conditions never fails to surround the Grail.[…]The more closely one studies pre-Christian Theology, the more strongly one is 
impressed with the deeply and daringly spiritual character of its speculations, and 
the more doubtful it appears that such teaching can depend on the unaided 
processes of human thought, or can have been evolved from such germs as we find 
among the supposedly ‘primitive’ peoples. […] Are they really primitive? Or are 
we dealing, not with the primary elements of religion, but with the disjecta membra 
of a vanished civilization? Certainly it is that so far as historical evidence goes our 
earliest records point to the recognition of a spiritual, not of a material, origin of the 
human race.

The Folk practices and ceremonies studied - the dances, the rough Dramas, the 
local and seasonal celebrations, do not represent the material out of which the Attis-
Adonis cult was formed, but surviving fragments of a worship from which the 
higher significance has vanished.

My aim has been to prove the essentially archaic character of all the elements 
composing the Grail story rather than to analyze the story as a connected whole.21

Let me repeat those two most important statements: The “disjecta membra of a 
vanished  civilization”,  and  “surviving  fragments  of  a  worship  from  which  the 
higher significance has vanished”. In short, what Ms. Weston has proposed is that 
the  Grail  Stories  were  a  brief  emergence  into  the  general  consciousness  of 
something  so  ancient  that  finding  the  threads  and  re-weaving  the  whole  cloth  of 
the Sacred Tapestry might require a perspective of not merely thousands of years, 
but possibly tens of thousands of years - antediluvian,  even! The very thought of 
something so daring in scope literally took my breath away. However, being naïve 
and something of a fool willing to rush in where angels fear to tread, I made the 
decision  that I was going  to search for the pieces  to this puzzle  if  it  took me  the 
rest of my life.Upon  considering  this  idea  as  a  hypothesis,  I  began  to  imagine  how  such  an 
event might manifest. I came across another interesting item that helped me adjust 
the  “lens”  through  which  I  was  viewing  reality.  There  is  a  story  found  in  the 
History of Herodotus,  which is an  exact  copy of an original tale of Indian origin 
except for  the fact  that  in  the original,  it was an animal fable, and in  Herodotus’ 
version, all the characters had become human. In every other detail, the stories are 
identical.  Joscelyn  Godwin  quotes  R.  E.  Meagher,  professor  of  humanities  and

21 Weston, Jessie L., From Ritual to Romance (London: Cambridge University Press 1920) pp. 3, 4, 7, 
10.

32

The Secret History of the World

translator  of  Greek  classics,  saying:  “Clearly,  if  characters  change  species,  they 
may change their names and practically anything else about themselves.”22

Going  further  still,  Mircea  Eliade  clarifies  for  us  the  process  of  the 
“mythicization”  of  historical  personages.  Eliade  describes  how  a  Romanian 
folklorist  recorded  a  ballad  describing  the  death  of  a  young  man  bewitched  by  a 
jealous  mountain  fairy  on  the  eve  of  his  marriage.  The  young  man,  under  the 
influence  of  the  fairy,  was  driven  off  a  cliff.  The  ballad  of  lament,  sung  by  the 
fiancée, was filled with “mythological allusions, a liturgical text of rustic beauty”. 
The folklorist, having been told that the song concerned a tragedy of “long ago”, 
discovered  that  the  fiancée  was  still  alive  and  went  to  interview  her.  To  his 
surprise,  he  learned  that  the  young  man’s  death  had  occurred  less  than  40  years 
before. He had slipped and fallen off a cliff; in reality, there was no mountain fairy 
involved.Eliade notes that “despite the presence of the principal witness, a few years had 
sufficed  to  strip  the  event  of  all  historical  authenticity,  to  transform  it  into  a 
legendary  tale”.  Even  though  the  tragedy  had  happened  to  one  of  their 
contemporaries,  the  death  of  a  young  man  soon  to  be  married  “had  an  occult 
meaning  that  could  only  be  revealed  by  its  identification  with  the  category  of 
myth”.

The myth seemed truer, more pure, than the prosaic event, because “it made the

real story yield a deeper and richer meaning, revealing a tragic destiny”.

In  the  same  way,  a  Yugoslavian  epic  poem  celebrating  a  heroic  figure  of  the 
fourteenth century, Marko Kraljevic, abolishes his historic identity, his life story is 
“reconstructed  in  accordance  with  the  norms  of  myth”.  His  mother  is  a  Vila,  a 
fairy,  as  is  his  wife.  He  fights  a  three-headed  dragon  and  kills  it,  fights  with  his 
brother and kills him, all in conformity with classical mythic themes.

The historic character of the persons celebrated in epic poetry is not in question, 
Eliade  notes.  “But  their  historicity  does  not  long  resist  the  corrosive  action  of 
mythicization.”  A  historic  event,  despite  its  importance,  doesn’t  remain  in  the 
popular memory intact.

“Myth is the last – not the first – stage in the development of a hero.” The memory 
of a real event survives perhaps three centuries at best, as the historic figure is 
assimilated to his mythical model and the event itself is blurred into a category of 
mythical actions.“This reduction of events to categories and of individuals to archetypes, carried out 
by the consciousness of the popular strata in Europe almost down to our day, is 
performed in conformity with archaic ontology”, Eliade writes. “We have the right 
to ask ourselves if the importance of archetypes for the consciousness of archaic 
man, and the inability of popular memory to retain anything but archetypes, does

22 Godwin, Joscelyn Arktos, (Kempton Illinois: Adventures Unlimited Press, 1996).

Chapter 1: The Nature of the Quest

33

not reveal to us something more than a resistance to history exhibited by traditional 
spirituality?”23

This mythicization of historical personages appears  in exactly the  same way  in 
all  times  and  cultures.  As  it  says  in  the  Book  of  Ecclesiastes,  “There  is  nothing 
new under the sun”. Historical events are “assimilated” to the mythical archetype, 
and  things  that  were  never  done  by  the  hero  are  often  assigned  to  him.  Events, 
places  and  other  characteristics  of  the  “larger  and  deeper”  context  are  also 
“attached”.What  this  suggests  is  that  mythicization  of  historical  persons  takes  place  in 
accordance with some “exemplary standard” This is why all of the mythical heroes 
resemble one another in so many respects. It’s not that each and every one of them 
did the same things;  it is that somebody did something - at least one  thing -  that 
was  heroic  and  therefore  belonged  to  the  exemplar.  By  so  doing,  they  were 
“assimilated”  to  the  archetype.  We  are  not  suggesting  that  the  real  heroes  or 
historical  characters  did  not  exist  or  that  they  did  nothing  heroic.  That  is  not  in 
question. What seems to be evident is that their real, historical nature - what they 
really  did  -  cannot  resist  the  “corrosive  action  of  mythicization”.  Therefore, 
discovering  the  identity  of  any  hero  by  trying  to  compare  his  story  to  actual 
historical “facts” just simply will not work. And there is something else important 
to  consider  here:  if  a  fairly  ordinary  “hero”  and  his  collection  of  localized  deeds 
are “assimilated” to an exemplar, even if we do discover his identity, it means very 
little. We have only discovered one of many, many individuals assimilated to the 
same  archetype,  and  we  risk  going  around  in  circles  forever,  trying  to  sort  the 
facts,  in  order  to  discover  some  “magical  artifact”  that  is  connected  to  the 
exemplar.  In  some  instances  the  tribal  memory  can  “hold”  a  recollection  of  an 
ancestor’s name,  even  if they have no clue about what  that ancestor really did in 
complete  terms.  In  other  cases,  the  real  name  is  forgotten  and  the  name  of  the 
exemplar  is  attached.  This  may  not  seem  to  be  much  help  in  figuring  out  who 
really did what, but, with care and patience and comparison, we can come to some 
logical conclusions about the past, before written historical records based on facts 
were written down - or before the original written accounts were destroyed - which 
is another distinct possibility.Another  point  that  is  crucial  to  our  investigation  is  that  myths  do  tend  to 
preserve  the ideas of institutions,  customs and landscapes  even if we cannot rely 
on  them  for  what  we  would  call  personal  historical  truth.  And  finally,  what  we 
perceive  from  studying  myths,  legends,  sagas,  and  epics  is  the  evident  fact  that 
they  are  not  “creative  inventions”  of  whole  cloth.  There  is  a  model.  There  is  a 
reduction of events  to categories and individuals to  archetypes, and  this  model  is

23  Eliade,  Mircea,  The  Myth  of  The  Eternal  Return;  (New  York:  Bollingen  Foundation,  Princeton 
University Press 1954) pp. 40, 43, 44, 46.

34

The Secret History of the World

in  conformity  with  archaic  ontology!  It  could  even  be  said  that  mythicization  of 
historical persons lays bare for us the meaning of the person and event - meaning 
that  can  only  be  seen  by  withdrawing  from  the  immediate  historical  event.  This 
leads us to  ask the question:  “Does  this tendency of the consciousness of man  to 
retain  archetypes  and  assimilate  historical  events  and  people  to  those  exemplars 
reveal something to us about the true nature of the Exemplar itself?”“What is the true nature of the Exemplar?” This is going to be a very important 
question to remember as we go along. It will assist not only in understanding how 
stories from various sources can be both  true  and not  true  at  the same time. It  is 
also going to be a major clue in our investigation of certain very important matters 
that  will  come  into  play  as  being  pivotal  in  the  Grail  Quest.  Is  there  a  level  of 
reality at which the Exemplar exists and which impresses itself upon humanity in 
broad psychological terms? In other words, does the mythical archetype refer to a 
Theological  Reality,  a  hyperdimensional  realm,  from  which  our  own  is 
“projected” like a movie, and in which we live and move and have our being like 
game pieces on a board?

As  we  study  the  Grail  stories  in  comparison  to  other  myths  and  legends,  we 
notice the ubiquity of the universal theme of a Golden Age, which was destroyed 
in some terrible way - a deluge, a fall from grace, a punishment. We suspect that 
Geoffrey  of  Monmouth  interwove  this  tradition  cleverly  with  the  story  of  King 
Arthur. In most cases, the stories talk about the world before, giants, the gods and 
their  doings,  in  terms  that  seem  to  be  utterly  fantastic.  The  usual  explanation 
ascribes such stories  to any number of  theories based on the fearful and ignorant 
state of the howling savages of the Stone Age who imaginatively created myths to 
explain the inexplicable forces of nature around them.Many  “alternative”  researchers  and  theorists  have  already  expounded  at  great 
length on the idea that many myths represent an archaic reality. Among the ideas 
they have proposed are those that follow the pattern that there was a time in human 
history  when  the  planets  interacted  violently  and  these  became  the  foundational 
myths of the “wars of the gods”. In such scenarios, the “thunderbolts” of Jove are 
the exchanges of  electrical potentials between planets. Others have proposed that 
such  stories  represent  the  interactions  of  aliens  or  alien-human  hybrids  with 
advanced  technology.  In  these  theories,  the  “thunderbolts”  of  Jove  are  nuclear 
weapons and Jove was just a regular guy with a big bomb.

After  considering  our  little  story  about  the  mythicization  of  history  and  the 
historicization of myth, we have some idea that both of these approaches could be 
true. In the case of the Grail Stories, we are dealing with the same problem many 
times over. However, in the Grail stories, there are repeated references to the same 
symbols  or  “objects  of  cultic  value”.  These  mysterious  objects  form  the  central 
theme of the action of the story of the quest, and it seems that a true understanding 
of these objects is as essential to the hero himself as it is to the modern day “seeker 
of mysteries”. The objects are a cup or dish, a lance or sword, and a stone. If we 
begin to search through myth and legend, finding one of them here, another there, 
and  then  reassemble  these  elements,  we  come  to  a  certain  idea:  that  they  all  are 
part of an ensemble.

But  what  does  this  ensemble  of  elements  really  represent?  When  we  consider 
these  elements  carefully,  and  study  them,  we  come  to  the  idea  that  an  ancient

Chapter 1: The Nature of the Quest

35Chapter 1: The Nature of the Quest

35

scientific  knowledge  might  be  what  is  being  portrayed  in  these  stories,  and  how 
such  knowledge  might  be  “mythicized”  over  time  if  the  infrastructure  of 
civilization  were  destroyed.  Naturally,  the  story  Lord  of  the  Flies  immediately 
comes to mind as one example, but there are certainly many other situations where 
this process can be examined. In any event, the more we examine this matter, and 
the more examples we study, the more we realize that Ms. Weston was definitely 
onto something.

Let us consider  the  “Grail Hallows”, appearing repeatedly in myth and  legend, 
as  elements  of  an  ancient  technology.  Let  us  observe  how  these  objects  were 
utilized, and the magical powers that were attributed to them. Let us note that all 
of  these  abilities  were  the  attributes  of  a  mastery  of  Space-Time  manipulation. 
Keeping  in  mind  that  that  myths  DO  tend  to  preserve  the  ideas  of  institutions, 
customs  and  landscapes.  If  this  is  so,  the  ancient  legends  are  a  stunning  view  of 
the universe as well as descriptions of very exciting technology.

So,  let  us  proceed  with  this  idea  as  a  working  hypothesis.  We  don’t  have  to

accept it as true, let’s just play with it.So,  let  us  proceed  with  this  idea  as  a  working  hypothesis.  We  don’t  have  to

accept it as true, let’s just play with it.

Imagine, if you will, a worldwide civilization similar in many ways to our own - 
with  advanced  technology  (though  the  technology  of  the  ancient  world  was 
obviously quite different, as we will see). Imagine further that the imminent threat 
of a great cataclysm is realized too late to make proper preparations to preserve the 
civilization  itself;  or,  perhaps  the  calamity  is  so  devastating  that  it  cannot  be 
preserved. Imagine that the infrastructure of the civilization is destroyed. Imagine 
that, over the entire globe, out of say, six billion people, only 10 million survive, 
so  terrible  is  the  cataclysm.  Furthermore,  the  survivors  themselves  are  so  widely 
scattered, and all means of travel and communication have been destroyed, so that 
any  idea  of  them  gathering  together  to  re-implement  the  infrastructure  that 
formerly existed is impossible. What is more, many of those who survived are not 
even technically capable of doing so.

But, in four or five locations, a small handful of people with higher educations 
did  survive.  However,  the  unfortunate  thing  is,  their  education  is  so  specialized 
that they are able to re-implement only limited and selected elements of the former 
civilization. And so, they do the best they can. They become the Lords of the Flies, 
so to speak, and they seek to find a way to re-create what was lost; to seek out the 
additional knowledge, to rebuild the world from the ashes.Having only uneducated and technically deficient people to do all the necessary 
work,  and  knowing  that  when  they  die,  what  they  do  know  will  be  lost,  they 
attempt  to  pass  on  as  much  knowledge  as  they  can  to  as  many  as  they  can, 
knowing that even this  is incomplete. Or,  conversely, they create  an “elite power 
structure” where the knowledge  is only dispensed  to  a very few  in order  to keep 
the reins of power in their own hands and the hands of their descendants.

In such a situation, what knowledge would be  considered  the most valuable to

pass on? What would be foremost in the mind of such a person?

Well, the progenitor of a power hungry elite would certainly pass on knowledge 
that would perpetuate the Control of others. But an individual who wishes to help 
humanity as a whole might be  thinking that  a better world may come if  they can 
only pass on what they know, and leave it up to those who come after to add the 
missing  pieces.  Would  not  this  knowledge  be  the  important  things  about  the

36

The Secret History of the World

civilization  itself?  It’s  infrastructure?  It’s  modes  of  communication,  of  travel,  of 
laws and ethics; its high science; and most of all, the terrible information that was 
revealed  at  the  very  last,  just  before  everything  was  blasted  back  to  Stone  Age 
conditions:  the  knowledge  that  the  earth  regularly  and  cyclically  undergoes 
cataclysm.Imagine  the  sighting  of  an  oncoming  disaster,  such  as  a  barrage  of  comets,  in 
our  own  civilization.  The  first  thing  our  scientists  would  do  would  be  to  make 
measurements  and  observations;  study  path  and  trajectory;  and  soon  they  would 
announce on television, to the world, that we are about to go through a dangerous 
period  that,  apparently,  is  part  of  a  long  period  cometary  shower.  They  would 
announce their numbers to the world, and everyone would know, just a short time 
before  the  destruction,  that  what  they  are  facing  has  been  here  before.  And  that 
knowledge,  revealed  too  late,  would  be  the  one  thing  that  the  survivors  of  such 
destruction  would  want  to  pass  on  to  their  children.  And  so,  in  such  an 
environment, under such conditions, myths would be born consisting of memories 
of the world before and all its glorious technology, how it ended, and that disaster 
will come again.

Imagine,  if  you  will,  a  group  of  survivors.  They  emerge  from  their  place  of 
safety to find that the world that they knew is not just damaged, but that the violent 
convulsions of the planet have folded over, ground up, and washed away most of 
what  formerly  existed.  The  factories, 
the 
superhighways,  the  railway  lines,  the  airports  and  airplanes,  the  great  ships  and 
industrial  complexes  -  all  reduced  to  twisted  bits  of  iron,  incinerated  wood,  and 
concrete  that  has  been  ground  into  gravel.  With  what  skills  they  have,  lacking 
anything  but  the  most  rudimentary  hand-made  tools,  they  build  their  little 
community and try to survive in the best way they can.

the  power  plants,

the  cities,the  power  plants,

the  cities,

As  time  goes  by,  our  little  community  of  survivors  is  doing  well.  They  have 
grown old, and now they sit around the fires with a new generation of little ones 
gathered  around  to  hear  stories  of  “what  did  you  do  when  you  were  young, 
grandpa?”  And  the  grandfathers  sigh  with  longing  for  the  ease  and  comfort  and 
marvels of all that was lost, and answer: “We went out to dinner at fine restaurants 
and watched movies.”

“What is a movie, Grandpa?” 
“Well,  it  is  a big place where everybody used  to go to see  famous movie stars 
having wonderful adventures. Everybody would sit in a row of seats and the movie 
would appear on a big white wall in front of us.”

“What appeared on the wall?” 
“The images of the movie stars.” 
“What is a movie star, grandpa?” 
“A movie star is a famous person who pretends  to be someone else in order to

tell a story.”

“What is an image, grandpa?” 
“It’s  a sort of projection of the real movie star who is not  actually  there.  They 
live somewhere else, and when they are not acting in movies, they have ordinary 
lives.”

“How does it happen that the image of the movie star can be seen when they are

not really there?”

Chapter 1: The Nature of the Quest

37

“Well,  that’s  technology.  It  has  to  do  with  a  light  that  is  shone  through  a  long

piece of transparent stuff that runs around a wheel.”

“What runs the wheel, grandpa?” 
“Electricity.” 
“What is electricity, Grandpa?” 
“It’s  a  great  force  that  is  in  the  air.  Electricity  is  what  you  see  when  you  see 
lightning.  When  we  were  little,  we  used  electricity  to  make  everything  work.  It 
was  the  power  that  made  our  lights  come  on.  It  was  what  we  used  to  cook  our 
food. We used electricity to run our stereos and radios and televisions.”“Grandpa, what is a television?” 
“It’s  a  sort  of  box  and  the  images  of  the  same  movie  stars  that  you  see  in  a

theater can be seen right in your own house.”

“How do the images get into the television?” 
“They come through the air. There were satellites floating high in the air around 
the world that sent these images into the television. The same satellites also helped 
us to be able to talk to anybody anywhere in the world on a telephone.”

“Grandpa, what’s a telephone?” 
We will leave this most interesting question and answer process and jump now 
to a time when Grandpa has gone to his reward, and the grandchild has grown up 
and  has  children.  He  is  telling  his  own  children  about  the  stars  in  the  skies  that 
send messages  into boxes  and make  it possible for  anyone  to talk  to anyone  else 
anywhere in the world. He also is telling his grandchildren about the great movie 
stars  in Hollywood who could appear on a blank wall  in a  big theater after a big 
banquet with the gods, or, under special circumstances, if the gods choose to speak 
from the heavens, in a special box in a person’s very own home.

Skip  another  generation,  and  we  have  the  community  falling  upon  hard  times. 
They remember the stories of the world before, and it seems that  they need help. 
Perhaps if they build a replica of the box like object that was so important a part of 
the time of plenty, they will be able to communicate with the gods in Hollywood 
who will then bring the famine or plague to an end.So, they build a box and set it on an altar. They begin to call upon the different 
names they remember from the grandfather’s stories. “Oh, great mother Elizabeth 
Taylor!  Hear  our  plea!  Come  to  help  us  great  father  Clark  Gable!”  But  nothing 
happens. Perhaps the gods are angry? Maybe they want something? How about a 
sacrifice? Some wine, perhaps? Maybe the gods miss the banquet part? They want 
a nice succulent lamb. No? Well, how about a newborn infant? A virgin? Two? A 
dozen or so?

And so, as time goes by, the facts of what existed before become little more than 
fairy tales, clues  to a former  time, buried  in layers of  ignorance  and superstition. 
And  as  the  populations  grow,  and  travel  is  undertaken,  they  meet  tribes  with 
similar  stories  but  from  different  angles.  Perhaps  they  meet  a  group  whose 
“grandfather”  was  a  great  scientist.  He  taught  his  grandchildren  to  memorize 
scientific formulas. Naturally, because their grandfather was a scientist and passed 
“scientific and superior knowledge” to them, they feel that they are in a position to 
instruct  those  ignorant  rubes  that  are  invoking  Liz  Taylor  and  Clark  Gable.  No, 
indeed,  it must be done this way: you have to form a circle around the television 
and say the right words, the magical formulas. And so, the combined tribes begin

38

The Secret History of the World

to  dance  around  the  “Cube  of  Space”,  chanting  “Eeee  equals  Emmmm  Ceeee 
squared!  Eeee  equals  Emmmm  Ceeee  squared!  Eeee  equals  Emmmm  Ceeee 
squared! We appeal to the great god of Ein- Stein! Speak to us!”

And if they do it  long enough, they will induce  the production of certain brain 
chemicals,  which  will  lead  to  states  of  ecstasy,  and  there  you  have  it!  The  proof 
that it works. And so, we have our legends of great occult science in the making.I’m sure that the reader can take these short vignettes even further, and see how 
the  memory  of  the  golden  age  was  passed  down,  and  how  myths,  if  they  were 
properly  examined  and  analyzed,  could  be  the  key  to  finding  the  threads  of  an 
ancient technology, the disjecta membra of a lost civilization.

However,  that  is  not  to  say  that  there  were  not  some  groups  who  did  actually 
manage to re-create some of the technology. It seems evident that some scientists, 
some technocrats, survived and were responsible for the sudden emergence of the 
civilizations that we know in our recorded history. It is also equally likely, human 
nature being what it is, that the very progenitors of these civilizations became the 
elite,  and  as  often  happens,  when  the  elite  take  advantage  of  the  masses, 
revolutions come about destroying the very wellsprings of that knowledge.

Also,  as  noted,  there  were  probably  others  who  sought  to  preserve  the 
knowledge, encoded for the future time when only a revival of technology would 
make any of it comprehensible. This brings us to another line of thought.In 1984, the Office of Nuclear Waste Isolation and a group of other institutions 
commissioned Thomas A. Sebeok, to elaborate answers to a question posed by the 
US  Nuclear  Regulatory  Commission.  The  American  government  had  chosen 
several desert areas in the US for the burial of nuclear waste. The idea was that it 
was  easy  to  protect  it  from  intrusions  at  the  present  time,  but  since  they  were 
dealing with deadly elements which had half-lives of ten thousand years or more, 
how  to  protect  people  in  the  future  from  destroying  humanity  by  dangerous 
intrusions into such areas? Ten thousand years is more than enough time for great 
empires  and  civilizations  to  rise  and  perish.  In  just  a  few  centuries  after  the  last 
pharaoh  had  disappeared,  the  knowledge  of  how  to  read  hieroglyphs  had 
disappeared as well, so it is conceivable that mankind could be reduced to a “dark 
age”  existence  that  came  into  being  following  the  decline  of  the  Golden  Age  of 
Greece,  and the fall of the Roman Empire. The question was: How will we warn 
the future about the danger? Umberto Eco discusses Sebeok’s findings: 
Almost immediately, Sebeok discarded the possibility of any type of verbal 
communication, of electric signals as needing a constant power supply, of olfactory 
messages as being of brief duration, and of any sort of ideogram based on 
convention. Even a pictographic language seemed problematic.

Sebeok  analyzed  an  image  from  an  ancient  primitive  culture  where  one  can 
certainly  recognize  human  figures,  but  it  is  hard  to  say  what  they  are  doing  - 
dancing, fighting, or hunting?Another solution would be to establish temporal segments of three generations 
each, (calculating that, in any civilization, language will not alter beyond 
recognition between grandparents and grandchildren), giving instructions that, at 
the end of each segment, the message would be reformulated, adapting it to the 
semiotic conventions prevailing at the moment. But even this solution presupposes 
precisely the sort of social continuity that the original question had put into doubt.

Chapter 1: The Nature of the Quest

39

Another  solution  was  to  fill  up  the  entire  zone  with  messages  in  all  known 
languages and semiotic systems, reasoning that it was statistically probable that at 
least one of these messages would be comprehensible to the future visitors. Even if 
only  part  of  one  of  the  messages  was  decipherable,  it  would  still  act  as  a  sort  of 
Rosetta stone, allowing the visitors to translate all the rest. Yet even this solution 
presupposed a form of cultural continuity, however weak it would be.

The only remaining solution was to institute a sort of ‘priesthood‘ of nuclear 
scientists, anthropologists, linguists and psychologists supposed to perpetuate itself 
by co-opting new members. This caste would keep alive the knowledge of the 
danger, creating myths and legends about it. Even though, in the passage of time, 
these ‘priests’ would probably lose a precise notion of the peril that they were 
committed to protect humanity from, there would still survive, even in a future state 
of barbarism, obscure but efficacious taboos.It is curious to see that, having been presented with a choice of various types of 
universal language, the choice finally fell on a ‘narrative’ solution, thus re-
proposing what REALLY DID HAPPEN MILLENNIA AGO (my emphasis). 
Egyptian has disappeared, as well as any other perfect and holy primordial 
language, and what remains of all this is only myths, tales without a code, or whose 
code has long been lost. Yet they are still capable of keeping us in a state of vigil in 
our desperate effort at decipherment. 24

It is extraordinarily significant to me that Eco has suggested so clearly here the 
idea that our ancient ancestors may have been faced with the knowledge of a very 
great peril to mankind and “brain-stormed” for a solution as to how to transmit this 
information to future generations. And it is with this idea that we come back to the 
myths  that  formed  the  foundation  for  said  religions  and  form  a  “working 
hypothesis”  that  such  stories  are  the  “narratives”  provided  by  our  ancestors  to 
warn us about something, as defined by Thomas Sebeok in his report to the Office 
of  Nuclear  Waste  Isolation.  And  here  we  find  the  problem:  We  cannot  just  read 
these things, put the pieces together like a regular puzzle and thereby discover the 
answer.  We have to deeply analyze the stories, discover the various versions  and 
their  inversion;  and,  by  tracking  the  roots  of  words,  discover  their  relations.  In 
such a way, we just MIGHT be able to discover what it is our ancestors knew and 
what they have so desperately tried to tell us.

Alchemy and the Enclave in the Pyrenees

Nowadays,  our  materialistic  science  derides  alchemists  as  misguided  mystics 
who followed a dream of discovering a substance that could transform base metals 
into  gold.  Yes,  they  admit  that  much  scientific  discovery  was  accomplished  in24 Eco, Umberto,  The Search For The Perfect  Language, (Oxford: Blackwell 1995) p. 177, emphasis 
mine.

40

The Secret History of the World

these  pursuits,  but  they  toss  out  the  objective  of  the  alchemists  as  just  a  pipe 
dream.  Nevertheless,  there  are  interesting  stories  there,  some  so  deeply  curious 
that  the  mind  cannot  grapple  with  the  implications,  and  they  are  immediately 
discarded  as  too  fantastic  for  serious  consideration.  I  want  to  recount  a  few  of 
them  here  so  that  the  reader  who  is  not  familiar  with  the  literature  might  be 
sufficiently intrigued to do research on his/her own.

But first, a short discussion of the “Philosopher’s Stone”. This is the goal of the 
Alchemist; a fabled substance that can not only transmute metals into gold, but can 
heal any  illness, banish all sickness from  a person’s life,  and confer an extended 
lifespan, if not immortality, on the body. At least, that is how it is described. That 
may or may not be a “cover story”.

It was thought that, by a lengthy process of purification, one could extract from 
various minerals the “natural principle” that supposedly caused gold to “grow” in 
the  earth.  In  an  anonymous  17th  Century  alchemical  text,  The  Sophic  Hydrolith, 
this  process  is  described  as  “purging  [the  mineral]  of  all  that  is  thick,  nebulous, 
opaque  and  dark”,  and  what  would  be  left  would  be  a  mercurial  “water  of  the 
Sun”, which had a pleasant, penetrating odor, and was very volatile.

Part  of  this  liquid  is  put  aside,  and  the  rest  is  then  mixed  with  a  twelfth  of  its 
weight of “the divinely endowed body of gold”, (ordinary gold won’t do because it 
is defiled by daily use). This mixture then forms a solid amalgam which is heated 
for  a  week.  It  is  then  dissolved  in  some  of  the  mercurial  water  in  an  egg-shaped 
phial.Then,  the  remaining  mercurial  water  is  added  gradually,  in  seven  portions;  the 
phial is sealed, and kept at such a temperature as will hatch an egg. After 40 days, 
the phial’s contents will be black; after seven more days small grainy bodies like 
fish eyes are supposed to appear. Then the “Philosopher’s Stone” begins to make 
its appearance: first reddish in color; then white, green and yellow like a peacock’s 
tail then dazzling white; and later a deep glowing red. Finally, “the revivified body 
is quickened, perfected and glorified” and appears in a beautiful purple.

This  and  many  similarly  obscure  and  crazy  sounding  texts  are  the  bulk  of 
Alchemical Literature. It occurred to me early on that these texts were a code, and 
so I persisted in reading many texts of this kind and searching for clues there and 
in the stories of the  alchemists  themselves. It was in reading the anecdotes about 
so-called  Alchemists  that  I  became  convinced  that  there  was,  indeed,  something 
very mysterious going on here.

For  example:  In  1666,  Johann  Friedrich  Schweitzer,  physician  to  the  Prince  of 
Orange, writes of having been visited by a stranger who was “of a mean stature, a 
little long face, with a few small pock holes, and most black hair, not at all curled, 
a beardless chin, about three or four and forty years of age (as I guessed), and born 
in North Holland.”

Before I finish the story, it needs to be pointed out that Dr. Schweitzer, who was 
the  author  of  several  medical  and  botanical  books,  was  a  careful  and  objective 
observer and was a colleague of the philosopher, Baruch Spinoza. Schweitzer was 
a  trained  scientific  observer;  a  reputable  medical  man,  and  not  given  to  fraud  or 
practical jokes. And yet, what I am about to describe is, in modern understanding, 
impossible.

Chapter 1: The Nature of the Quest

41Chapter 1: The Nature of the Quest

41

Now, what happened was that the stranger made small talk for awhile and then, 
more or less out of the blue, asked Dr. Schweitzer whether he would recognize the 
“Philosopher’s  Stone”  if  he  saw  it.  He  then  took  out  of  his  pocket  a  small  ivory 
box that held “three ponderous pieces or small lumps... each about the bigness of a 
small  walnut,  transparent,  of  a  pale  brimstone  colour”.  The  stranger  told 
Schweitzer that this was the very substance sought for so long by the Alchemists.

Schweitzer held one of the pieces in his hand and asked the stranger if he could 
have just a small piece. The man refused, but Schweitzer managed to steal a small 
bit  by  scraping  it  with  his  fingernail.  The  visitor  left  after  promising  to  return  in 
three weeks time to show Dr. Schweitzer some “curious arts in the fire”.

Well,  as  soon  as  he  was  gone,  Dr.  Schweitzer  ran  to  his  laboratory  where  he 
melted  some  lead  in  a  crucible  and  added  the  tiny  piece  of  stone.  But,  the  metal 
did NOT turn into gold as he anticipated. Instead, “almost the whole mass of lead 
flew away, and the remainder turned into a mere glassy earth”.

Three  weeks  later,  the  mysterious  stranger  was  at  his  door  again.  They 
conversed,  and  for  a  long  time  the  man  refused  to  allow  Dr.  Schweitzer  see  his 
stones  again,  but,  at  last  “he  gave  me  a  crumb  as  big  as  a  rape  or  turnip  seed, 
saying, receive this small parcel of the greatest treasure of the world, which truly 
few kings or princes have ever known or seen”.

Schweitzer must have been a whiner because he recounts that he protested that 
this  was  not  sufficient  to  transmute  as  much  as  four  grains  of  lead  into  gold.  At 
this, the stranger took the piece back, cut it in half, and flung one part in the fire, 
saying: “it is yet sufficient for thee!”At  this  point,  Schweitzer  confessed  his  theft  from  the  previous  visit,  and 
described how the substance had behaved with his molten lead. The stranger began 
to laugh and told him, “Thou are more dextrous to commit theft than to apply thy 
medicine;  for  if  thou  hadst  only  wrapped  up  thy  stolen  prey  in  yellow  wax,  to 
preserve it from the arising fumes of lead, it would have penetrated to the bottom 
of the lead, and transmuted it to gold.”

The  guy  leaves  at  this  point  and  promises  to  return  the  next  morning  to  show

Schweitzer the correct way to perfom the transmutation but,

The next day he came not, nor ever since. Only he sent an excuse at half an hour 
past nine that morning, by reason of his great business, and promised to come at 
three in the afternoon, but never came, nor have I heard of him since; whereupon I 
began to doubt of the whole matter. Nevertheless late that night my wife... came 
soliciting and vexing me to make experiment... saying to me, unless this be done, I 
shall have no rest nor sleep all this night... She being so earnest, I commanded a fire 
to be made - thinking, alas, now is this man (though so divine in discourse) found 
guilty of falsehood... My wife wrapped the said matter in wax, and I cut half an 
ounce of six drams of old lead, and put into a crucible in the fire, which being 
melted, my wife put in the said Medicine made up in a small pill or button, which 
presently made such a hissing and bubbling in its perfect operation, that within a 
quarter of an hour all the mass of lead was transmuted into the ... finest gold.Baruch Spinoza, who lived nearby, came the next day to examine this gold and 
was  convinced  that  Schweitzer  was  telling  the  truth.  The  Assay  Master  of  the 
province,  a  Mr.  Porelius,  tested  the  metal  and  pronounced  it  genuine;  and  Mr. 
Buectel, the silversmith, subjected it to further test that confirmed that it was gold. 
The testimony of these men survives to this day.

42

The Secret History of the World

Now, either ALL of them are lying, or Dr. Schweitzer really did have a strange 
experience  exactly  as  he  describes  it.  The  interesting  thing  is  that  other  people 
have described similar visitations by strange men who proclaim to them the truth 
of the alchemical process, demonstrate it, and then mysteriously disappear. It has 
happened  sufficiently  often,  in  widely  enough  separated  places  and  times  to 
suggest that it is not a collusive fraud nor a delusion.

Twenty  years  before  Schweitzer’s  meeting  with  the  mysterious  stranger,  Jan 
Baptiste  van  Helmont,  who  was  responsible  for  several  important  scientific 
discoveries,  and was the first  man  to realize  that  there  were other gases  than  air; 
and who invented the term “gas”, wrote:

For truly I have divers times seen it [The Philosopher’s Stone], and handled it with 
my hands, but it was of colour such as is in Saffron in its powder, yet weighty, and 
shining like unto powdered glass. There was once given unto me one fourth part of 
one grain [16 milligrams]... I projected [it] upon eighty ounces [227 grams] of 
quicksilver [mercury] made hot in a crucible; and straightaway all the quicksilver, 
with a certain degree of noise, stood still from flowing, and being congealed, settled 
like unto a yellow lump; but after pouring it out, the bellows blowing, there were 
found eight ounces and a little less than eleven grains of the purest gold.Sir Isaac Newton studied alchemy until his death, remaining convinced that the 
possiblity  of  transmutation  existed.  The  great  philosophers  and  mathematicians, 
Descartes  and  Leibnitz,  both  were  convinced  that  transmutation  was  a  reality. 
Even  Robert  Boyle  who  wrote  a  book  entitled  The  Sceptical  Chymist,  was  sure 
until the end of his life, that transmutation was possible!

Why? These men were scientists. The argument that their ideas or observations 
were  less  scientific  than  those  of  the  present  day  simply  does  not  stand  up  to 
scrutiny.  As  noted,  alchemists  were  rumored  at  various  times  to  have  gained 
immortality,  and  one  of  these  was  Nicolas  Flamel.  Flamel  was  a  poor  scribe,  or 
scrivener  and  copyist.  The  story  goes  that,  in  1357  he  bought  an  old  illuminated 
book...

The cover of it was of brass, well bound, all engraven with letters of strange 
figures... This I know that I could not read them nor were they either Latin of 
French letters... As to the matter that was written within, it was engraved (as I 
suppose) with an iron pencil or graver upon... bark leaves, and curiously coloured...

Reportedly,  the  first  page  was  written  in  golden  letters  that  said  Abraham  the 
Jew, Priest, Prince, Levite, Astrologer and Philosopher, to the Nation of the Jews 
dispersed by the Wrath of God in France, wisheth Health. So, quite rightly, Flamel 
referred to the manuscript as the Book of Abraham the Jew.The dedication was followed by curses upon anyone who was not either a priest 
or a Jew reading the book. But, Flamel was a scribe, which he must have imagined 
exempted  him  from  these  curses,  so  he  read  the  book.  The  purpose  of  the  book 
was  avowedly  to  give  assistance  to  the  dispersed  Jews  by  teaching  them  to 
transmute  lead  into  gold  so  that  they  could  pay  their  taxes  to  the  hated  Roman 
government.  The  instructions  were  clear  and  easy,  but  only  described  the  latter 
part  of  the  process.  The  instructions  for  the  beginning  were  said  to  be  in  the 
illustrations  given  on  the  4th  and  5th  leaves  of  the  book.  Flamel  remarked  that, 
although these were well executed,

Chapter 1: The Nature of the Quest

43

...yet by that could no man ever have been able to understand it without being well 
skilled in their Qabalah, which is a series of old traditions, and also to have been 
well studied in their books.

As the story goes, Flamel tried for 21 years to find someone who could explain 
these  pictures  to  him.  Finally,  his  wife  urged  him  to  go  to  Spain  and  seek  out  a 
rabbi  or  other  learned  Jew  who  might  assist  him.  So,  he  made  the  famous 
pilgrimage to the shrine of  St. James  at  Compostela, carrying with him carefully 
made copies of the book.

After his devotions at the shrine, he went to the city of Leon in northern Spain 
where he met a certain “Master Canches”, a Jewish physician. When this man saw 
the  illustrations,  he  was  “ravished  with  great  astonishment  and  joy”,  upon 
recognizing  them  as  parts  of  a  book  that  had  long  been  believed  to  have  been 
destroyed. He declared his  intention to return with  Flamel  to France, but he died 
on the trip at Orleans. Flamel returned to Paris alone. But, apparently, the old Jew 
must have told him something for he wrote:I had now the prima materia, the first principles, yet not their first preparation, 
which is a thing most difficult, above all things in the world... Finally, I found that 
which I desired, which I also knew by the strong scent and odour thereof. Having 
this, I easily accomplished the Mastery... The fist time that I made projection 
[transmutation] was upon Mercury, whereof I turned half a pound, or thereabouts, 
into pure silver, better than that of the Mine, as I myself assayed, and made others 
assay many times. This was upon a Monday, the 17th of January about noon, in my 
home, Perrenelle [his wife] only being present, in the year of the restoring of 
mankind 1382.

Several  months  later  Flamel  did  his  first  transmutation  into  gold.  Is  this  just  a 
story? Well, what IS true and can be verified is that Nicolas and Perenelle Flamel 
endowed,  “fourteen  hospitals,  three  chapels  and  seven  churches,  in  the  city  of 
Paris, all which we had new built from  the ground, and  enriched with great gifts 
and  revenues,  with  many  reparations  in  their  churchyards.  We  also  have  done  at 
Boulogne about  as much as we have done at Paris, not to speak of the charitable 
acts  which  we  both  did  to  particular  poor  people,  principally  widows  and 
orphans.”

After  Flamel’s  death  in  1419  the  rumours  began.  Hoping  that  they  could  find 
something hidden in one of his houses, people searched them again and again until 
one  of  them  was  completely  destroyed.  There  were  stories  that  Nicolas  and 
Perenelle were still alive. Supposedly, she had gone to Switzerland and he buried a 
log in her grave, and then another log was buried at his own funeral.In  the  intervening  centuries,  the  stories  persist  that  Flamel  and  Perenelle 
defeated  death.  The  17th  century  traveller,  Paul  Lucas,  while  travelling  in  Asia 
Minor,  met  a  Turkish  philosopher  who  told  him  that  “true  philosophers  had  had 
the  secret  of  prolonging  life  for  anything  up  to  a  thousand  years...”.  Lucas  said, 
“At  last  I  took  the  liberty  of  naming  the  celebrated  Flamel,  who,  it  was  said, 
possessed  the  Philosopher’s  Stone,  yet  was  certainly  dead.  He  smiled  at  my 
simplicity, and asked with an air of mirth: Do you really believe this? No, no, my 
friend, Flamel is still living; neither he nor his wife has yet tasted death. It is not 
above  three  years  since  I  left  both...  in  India;  he  is  one  of  my  best  friends.”  In

44

The Secret History of the World

1761, Flamel and his wife were reported to have been seen attending the opera in 
Paris.

Well,  there  is  an  issue  here  regarding  the  supposed  clue  about  “Abraham  the 
Jew” which seems to point us in the direction of a Jewish fraternity of alchemists 
or keepers of secrets. I don’t want to go off on that thread here and now because it 
would  add  so  much  complexity  to  the  issues  that  we  might  never  find  our  way 
through the maze. But, to ease the mind of the reader, I will make a few remarks 
about this here.  Even  though we have not yet  come to  the  mystery of Fulcanelli, 
supposedly  a  20th  century  alchemist  who  accomplished  the  great  work,  let  me 
mention  while  the  subject  is  at  hand  that  Eugene  Canseliet,  in  his  preface  to  the 
Second  Edition  of  Fulcanelli’s  Le  Mystere  des  Cathedrales,  apparently  upon  the 
instruction  of  the  master  alchemist,  emphasized  dramatically  the  difference 
between kabbala and Cabala saying:...this book has restored to light the phonetic cabala, whose principles and 
application had been completely lost. After this detailed and precise elucidation and 
after the brief treatment of it, which I gave in connection with the centaur, the man-
horse of Plessis-Bourre, in Deux Logis Alchimiques, this mother tongue need never 
be confused with the Jewish Kabbala. Though never spoken, the phonetic cabala, 
this forceful idiom, is easily understood and it is the instinct or voice of nature.

By contrast, the Jewish Kabbala is full of transpositions, inversions, substitutions 
and calculations, as arbitrary as they are abstruse. This is why it is important to 
distinguish between the two words, CABALA and KABBALA in order to use them 
knowledgeably. Cabala derives from cadallhz or from the Latin caballus, a horse; 
kabbala is from the Hebrew Kabbalah, which means tradition. Finally, figurative 
meanings like coterie, underhand dealing or intrigue, developed in modern usage 
by analogy, should be ignored so as to reserve for the noun cabala the only 
significance which can be assured for it.25

Now,  the  curious  bringing  in  of  the  terms  “coterie”,  “underhand  dealing”  and 
“intrigue” in conjunction with what he has just remarked about Kabbalah meaning 
“tradition”, and Cabala being “horse”, is a most curious juxtaposition of words. It 
almost seems that Canseliet is telling us that the Kaballah, or the tradition is a red 
herring.  Fulcanelli  himself  makes  a  curious  remark  in  The  Dwellings  of  the 
Philosophers:

Alchemy is obscure, only because it is hidden. The philosophers who wanted to 
transmit the exposition of their doctrine and the fruit of their labors to posterity 
took great care not to divulge the art by presenting it under a common form, so that 
the layman could not misuse it.2625 Fulcanelli, The Mystery of the Cathedrals, 1984, Brotherhood of Life, Las Vegas. 
26 Fulcanelli, The Dwellings of the Philosophers, 1999, Archive Press, Boulder.

Chapter 1: The Nature of the Quest

45

The point of this short aside is this: don’t assume anything about Jews, Masons, 
or any other group when trying to solve the mystery. Nearly everything we come 
across  will  be  obscured.  And,  when  it  is  right  out  in  plain  view,  it  will  be  even 
more difficult to see!

Getting  back  to  our  purported  alchemists,  we  come  now  to  the  year  1745  in 
which Prince Charles Edward Stuart, known as the “Young Pretender”, staged his 
Jacobite rebellion in an attempt to regain the British throne for his father the “Old 
Pretender”.  The  Jacobite  cause,  for  all  intents  and  purposes,  had  been  crushed  at 
the  battle  of  Culloden  in  April  of  that  year,  yet  there  was  a  constant  fear  by  the 
British  government  that  the  Jacobites  were  still  plotting  with  their  French 
sympathizers,  and being French  and in London was, at that time,  a liability. This 
“spy fever” resulted in the arrest of many Frenchmen on trumped up charges, and 
most of them were later released, but it was a dangerous time for Gallic visitors!

In  November  of  that  year,  one  Frenchman  was  arrested  and  accused  of  having 
pro-Jacobite letters in his possession. He became very indignant and claimed that 
the correspondence had been “planted” on him. Considering the mood of the time, 
it  is quite surprising that he was believed  and released! Horace  Walpole, English 
author and Member of Parliament, wrote a letter about this incident to Sir Horace 
Mann on December 9, 1745 saying:“The other day they seized an odd man who goes by the name of Count Saint-
Germain. He has been here these two years, and will not tell who he is or whence, 
but professes that he does not go by his right name. He sings and plays on the violin 
wonderfully, is mad and not very sensible.”

This is one of the few “authentic” on the scene comments about one of the most 
mysterious  characters  of  the  18th  century,  the  Count  Saint-Germain.  Another 
acquaintance  of  the  Count  Saint-Germain,  Count  Warnstedt,  described  Saint-
Germain  as,  “The  completest  charlatan,  fool,  rattle-pate,  windbag  and  swindler”. 
Yet, his last patron said that Saint-Germain was, “perhaps one of the greatest sages 
who ever lived”. Clearly this was one of those people you either love or hate!

Saint-Germain first comes to our attention in the fashionable circles of Vienna in 
about 1740, where he  made a stir by wearing black all the  time!  Everybody else 
was  into  bright  colors,  satins  and  laces,  ornate  patterns  and  designs;  and  along 
comes Saint-Germain with his somber black outfits set off by glittering diamonds 
on his fingers, shoe buckles, and snuff box! What an attention getter! If you want 
to stand out in a roomful of robins, cardinals and bluejays, just be a blackbird! He 
also had the habit of carrying handfuls of loose diamonds in his pockets instead of 
cash!

So, there he is, garnering attention to himself in this bizarre way, and naturally 
he  makes  the  acquaintance  of  the  local  leaders  of  fashion,  Counts  Zabor  and 
Lobkowitz, who introduce him to the French Marshal de Belle Isle. Well, it seems 
that the Marshal was seriously under-the-weather, but his illness is not recorded so 
we  can’t  evaluate  the  claims  that  Saint-Germain  cured  him.  Nevertheless,  the 
Marshal was so grateful that he took Saint-Germain to Paris with him and set him 
up with apartments and a laboratory.The details of the Count’s life in Paris are pretty well known, and it is there that 
the rumors began. There is an account by a “Countess de B___” (a nom de plume, 
it seems, so we have to hold the information somewhat suspect), who wrote in her

46

The Secret History of the World

memoirs, Chroniques de l’oeil de boeuf, that, when she met the Count at a soiree 
given  by  the  aged  Countess  von  Georgy,  whose  late  husband  had  been 
Ambassador  to  Venice  in  the  1670’s,  that  the  old  Countess  remembered  Saint-
Germain  from    those  former  times.  So,  the  old  girl  asked  the  Count  if  his  father 
had been there at the time. He replied no, but HE had!

Well,  the  man  that  Countess  von  Georgy  had  known  was  at  least  45  years  old 
then,  at  least  50  years  previously,  and  the  man  standing  before  her  could  not  be 
any older than 45 now! The Count smiled and said: “I am very old”.

“But then you must be nearly 100 years old”, the Countess exclaimed. 
“That  is  not  impossible”,  the  Count  replied.  He  then  related  some  details  that

convinced the old lady that it was really him she had met in Venice.

The Countess exclaimed: “I am already convinced. You are a most extraordinary

man, a devil!”

“For  pity’s  sake!”,  cried  Saint-Germain  in  a  loud  voice  heard  all  around  the 
room.  “No  such  names!”    He  began  to  tremble  all  over  and  left  the  room 
immediately.

A  pretty  dramatic  introduction  to  society,  don’t  you  think?  But,  was  it  real,  or 
the ploy of a very clever con artist? Did he deliberately choose to adopt the name 
of someone long dead, about whom he may have already known a great deal, and 
then did he set out to deceive and con in a manner well known to us in the present 
time as the modus operandi of the psychopath? Was he a snake oil salesman or a 
true man of mystery?In any event, that was the beginning of the “legend”, and many more stories of a 
similar nature spread  through society like wildfire.  Saint-Germain  apparently fed 
the fires with hints that he had known the “Holy Family” intimately and had been 
invited  to  the  marriage  feast  at  Cana  where  Jesus  turned  water  into  wine,  and 
dropped casually the remark that he “had always known that Christ would meet a 
bad  end”.  According  to  him,  he  had  been  very  fond  of  Anne,  the  mother  of  the 
Virgin Mary, and had even proposed her canonization at the Council of Nicaea in 
A.D. 325! What a guy! A line for every occasion!

Pretty soon the Count had Louis XV and his mistress, Madame de Pompadour, 
eating out of his hand,  and it certainly  could be  true  that he was  a French spy in 
England  when  he  was  arrested  there,  because  he  later  did  handle  some  sticky 
business for the credulous king of France.

In 1760, Louis sent Saint-Germain to the Hague as his personal representative to 
arrange a loan with Austria that was supposed to help finance the SevenYears’ war 
against England. But, while in Holland, the Count had a falling out with his friend 
Casanova, who was also a diplomat at the Hague. Casanova tried hard to discredit 
Saint-Germain in public, but without success. One has to wonder just what it was 
that Casanova discovered or came to think about Saint-Germain at this time.

In  any  even,  Saint-Germain  was  making  other  enemies.  One  of  these  enemies 
was the Duc de Choiseul, King Louis’ Foreign Minister. The Duc discovered that 
Saint-Germain had been scoping out the possibilities of arranging a peace between 
England  and  France.  Now,  that  doesn’t  sound  like  a  bad  plan  at  all,  but  the  Duc 
managed to convince the King that this was a dire betrayal, and the Count had to 
flee to England and then back to Holland.

Chapter 1: The Nature of the Quest

47Chapter 1: The Nature of the Quest

47

In Holland,  the  Count  lived under  the name  Count Surmont,  and he  worked to 
raise money to set up laboratories in which he made paint and dyes and engaged in 
his  alchemical  experiments.  By  all  accounts,  he  was  successful  in  some  sense, 
because he disappeared from Holland with 100,000 guilders!

He next shows up in Belgium as the “Marquis de Monferrat”. He set up another 
laboratory  with  “other  people’s  money”  before  disappearing  again.  (Are  we 
beginning to see a pattern here?)

For a number of years, Saint-Germain’s activities continued to be reported from 
various  parts  of  Europe  and,  in  1768  he  popped  up  in  the court  of  Catherine  the 
Great.  Turkey  had  just  declared  war  on  Russia,  and  Saint-Germain  promoted 
himself  as  a  valuable  diplomat  because  of  his  status  as  an  “insider”  in  French 
politics. Pretty soon he was the adviser of Count Alexei Orlov, head of the Russian 
Imperial Forces. Orlov made him a high-ranking officer of the Russian Army and 
Saint-Germain acquired an English alias, “General Welldone”.

His successes  in Russia could have enabled him  to retire on his laurels, but he 
didn’t.  In  1774  he  appeared  in  Nuremberg  seeking  money  from  the  Margrave  of 
Brandenburg,  Charles Alexander. His ostensible alias  at this point (apparently he 
was  no  longer  satisfied  with  being  either  a  Count  or  a  Marquis)  was  Prince 
Rakoczy of Transylvania!

Naturally,  the  Margrave  of  Brandenburg  was  impressed  when  Count  Orlov 
visited  Nuremburg  on  a  state  visit  and  embraced  “the  Prince”  warmly.  But  later, 
when  the  Margrave  did  a  little  investigating,  he  discovered  that  the  real  Prince 
Rakoczy  was  indubitably  dead  and  that  this  counterfeit  Prince  was,  in  fact,  only 
Count Saint-Germain! Saint-Germain did not deny the charges, but apparently he 
felt that it was now time to move on.The  Duc  de  Choiseul,  Saint-Germain’s  old  enemy,  had  claimed  that  the  Count 
was in the employ of Frederick the Great. But, that was probably not true because, 
at  this  point,  Saint-Germain  wrote  to  Frederick  begging  for  patronage.  Frederick 
ignored him, which is peculiar if he had been in the employ of the Prussian king as 
de Choiseul thought.

In the way of the psychopathic con man who can never quite figure out when to 
quit,  Saint-Germain  went  to  Leipzig  and  presented  himself  to  Prince  Frederick 
Augustus of Brunswick as a Freemason of the fourth grade!

Now, Frederick Augustus just happened to be the Grand Master of the Prussian 
Masonic  Lodges,  so  this  was  really  a  stupid  move  on  the  part  of  Saint-Germain 
since it turned out that he was not a Mason! But, it is true of the pattern of all con 
men;  their  egos  eventually  prove  to  be  their  downfall!  The  Prince  challenged 
Saint-Germain because he did not know the secret signals and sent him away as a 
fraud.

In 1779, Saint-Germain was an old man in his 60’s who continued to claim to be 
vastly  older.  He  hadn’t  lost  his  touch  because,  at  Eckenforde  in  Schleswig, 
Germany, he was able to charm Prince Charles of Hesse-Cassel. At this point, part 
of  his  scam  included  being  a  mystic,  for  he  is  recorded  as  having  told  Prince 
Charles:

“Be the torch of the world. If your light is that only of a planet, you will be as 
nothing in the sight of God. I reserve for you a splendour, of which the solar glory

48

The Secret History of the World

is a shadow. You shall guide the course of the stars, and those who rule Empires 
shall be guided by you.”48

The Secret History of the World

is a shadow. You shall guide the course of the stars, and those who rule Empires 
shall be guided by you.”

Sounds rather like the build-up to another con job! Nothing like feeding the ego 
of the “mark” before slipping away with all his money! However, Saint Germain 
was on the way to a place where money was of no use. On February 27, 1784, he 
died at Prince Charles’ home on Eckenforde. He was buried locally and the Prince 
erected a stone that said:

He who called himself the Comte de Saint-Germain and Welldone, of whom there 
is no other information, has been buried in this church.

And  then  the  Prince  burned  all  of  the  Count’s  papers  “lest  they  be 
misinterpreted”. The only reason we can conceive of for that is because the Prince 
wanted to continue  to believe  in the powers of Saint Germain, and  the papers of 
the Count did not support that belief.

Supposedly  there  is  evidence  that  the  Count  did  not  die,  and  many  occultists 
claim  he  is  still  alive  for  these  past  two  centuries!  Based  upon  his  pattern  of 
behavior, however, Count Saint Germain seems merely to have been your garden 
variety  psychopath.  He  may  have  had  certain  esoteric  knowledge  -  he  was 
certainly well-versed in many subjects - but his history, and the conflicting stories 
told about him give us a different perspective, particularly  when we  examine  the 
histories and personalities of those who believed in him as opposed to those who 
did not. You can tell a lot about a man by his friends and his enemies.The mystery of Saint-Germain is mostly due to the uncertainty surrounding his 
origins.  One source says  that he was born in 1710 in San  Germano, son of a tax 
collector.  Eliphas  Levi,  the  19th  century  occultist  said  that  Saint-Germain  was 
born in Lentmeritz in  Bohemia, and was  the bastard son of a nobleman who was 
also a Rosicrucian. Levi’s story and accomplishments suggest that he was another 
psychopath, so his word on the matter is useless.

It is known that Saint Germain had a genuine gift for languages and could speak 
French, German, English, Dutch and Russian fluently. He also claimed that he was 
fluent  in  Chinese,  Hindu  and  Persian,  but  there  was  no  one  about  to  test  him  on 
those.  And,  we  note  that  Horace  Walpole  said  that  he  was  a  wonderful  violinist 
and  singer  and  painter,  though  none  of  his  purported  art  has  been  known  to 
survive.  Supposedly,  he  was  able  to  paint  jewels  that  glittered  in  a  very  lifelike 
way.There is also a great deal of evidence that Saint-Germain was an expert jeweller 
-  he  claimed  to  have  studied  the  art  with  the  Shah  of  Persia!  In  any  event,  he  is 
reported to have repaired a flawed diamond for Louis XV, who was very pleased 
with the result. Saint-Germain also had an extensive knowledge of chemistry in all 
its  branches  at  the  time,  and  the  many  laboratories  that  he  set  up  with  borrowed 
money  were  all  designed  to  produce  brighter  and  better  pigments  and  dyes  and 
also for alchemical studies. Then, there was his reputation as a healer. Not only did 
he cure the Marshal de Belle Isle, he also cured a friend of Madame de Pompadour 
of  mushroom  poisoning.  Saint-Germain  never  ate  in  company,  which  was 
obviously  part  of  his  plan  to  focus  attention  on  himself.  He  could  sit  at  a  table 
where everyone else was gorging on the most amazing array of delectable dishes, 
and eat and drink nothing. Casanova wrote:

Chapter 1: The Nature of the Quest

49

Instead of eating, he talked from the beginning of the meal to the end, and I 
followed his example in one respect as I did not eat, but listened to him with the 
greatest attention. It may safely be said that as a conversationalist he was 
unequalled.

We note that this is another of the many talents attributed to psychopaths. Colin 
Wilson,  author  of  The  Occult,  thought  that  Saint-Germain  must  have  been  a 
vegetarian.  I  think  everything  he  did  was  designed  to  create  an  image,  an 
impression,  and  a  false  one  at  that.  In  the  end,  the  real  mystery,  aside  from  his 
origins,  but  the  two  may  be  connected,  is  where  did  Saint-Germain  get  all  his 
specialized knowledge? Of course, as we have noted here, not all who met Saint-
Germain  were  impressed  by  his  talents.  Casanova  was  entertained  by  him,  but 
nevertheless thought that he was a fraud and a charlatan. He wrote:This extraordinary man, intended by nature to be the king of impostors and quacks, 
would say in an easy, assured manner that he was three hundred years old, that he 
knew the secret of the Universal Medicine, that he possessed a mastery over nature, 
that he could melt diamonds, professing himself capable of forming, out of 10 or 12 
small diamonds, one of the finest water... All this, he said, was a mere trifle to him. 
Notwithstanding his boastings, his bare-faced lies, and his manifold eccentricities, I 
cannot say I found him offensive. In spite of my knowledge of what he was and in 
spite of my own feelings, I thought him an astonishing man...”

Count  Alvensleben,  a  Prussian  Ambassador  to  the  Court  at  Dresden,  wrote  in

1777:

He is a highly gifted man with a very alert mind, but completely without 
judgement, and he has only gained his singular reputation by the lowest and basest 
flattery of which a man is capable, as well as by his outstanding eloquence, 
especially if one lets oneself be carried away by the fervour and the enthusiasm 
with which he can express himself. Inordinate vanity is the mainspring driving his 
whole mechanism.

I  don’t  know  about  you,  but  I  have  met  a  few  people  with  all  of  the  above 
qualities and have even been deceived by one or two for a short while. Everything 
we discover about Saint Germain tends to the theory of the brilliant psychopath. It 
sounds like an easy thing to dismiss Saint Germain out of hand. But, in the case of 
the Count, we have a little problem: just which of the stories are really about him? 
The plot thickens!It seems that Berthold Volz, in the 1920’s, did some deep research on the subject 
and  discovered,  or  so  it  is  claimed,  (I  have  never  been  able  to  track  down  this 
purported  proof),  that  the  Duc  de  Choiseul,  who  was  overwhelmingly  jealous  of 
the Count, hired a look-alike imposter to go about as the Count, exaggerating and 
playing the fool in order to place the Count in a bad light. Is this just another story, 
either wishful  thinking or deliberately designed to perpetuate the legend? Are we 
getting familiar with this “bait and switch” routine yet?

Supposedly,  Saint-Germain  foretold  the  outbreak  of  the  French  Revolution  to 
Marie Antoinette who purportedly wrote in her diary that she regretted that she did 
not heed his advice. I haven’t seen it, so I can’t vouch for it. But, in my opinion, it 
wouldn’t  take  a  genius  to  predict  that  event,  considering  the  social  and  political 
climate of the time!

50

The Secret History of the World

It was said that Saint-Germain appeared in Wilhelmsbad in 1785, a year after he 
was supposed to have died, and he was accompanied by the magician Cagliostro, 
the hypnotist Anton Mesmer, and the “unknown philosopher”, Louis Claude de St. 
Martin. But that is hearsay also.

Next he was alleged to have gone to Sweden in 1789 to warn King Gustavus III 
of danger. After that, he visited his friend, diarist Mademoiselle d’Adhemar, who 
said he still looked like he was only 46 years old! Apparently, he told her that she 
would  see  him  five  more  times,  and  she  claimed  this  was,  in  fact,  the  case. 
Supposedly  the  last  visit  was  the  night  before  the  murder  of  the  Duc  de  Berri  in 
1820. Again, we find this to be unsupported by evidence.Napoleon III ordered a commission to investigate the life and actvities of Saint-
Germain, but the findings were destroyed in a fire at the Hotel de Ville in Paris in 
1871 - which many people think is beyond coincidence. My thought would be that 
the only reason to destroy such a report would be if it had proved the Count to be a 
fraud. The result of this fire is that the legend is enabled to live on; it is likely that 
the  report  would  have  made  some  difference  in  the  legend,  such  as  putting  it  to 
rest as a fraud. Had it been helpful to the legend, it would not have changed what 
is already the case, which is that people believe that Saint-Germain was something 
of a supernatural being. Thus,  its destruction, if engineered, must only have been 
to protect the status quo.

One  of  the  next  threads  of  the  legend  was  gathered  into  the  hands  of  Helena 
Blavatsky who claimed that Saint-Germain was one of the “hidden masters” along 
with Christ, Buddha, Appollonius of Tyana, Christian Rosencreutz, Francis Bacon 
and others. In my opinion, Blavatsky’s credibility becomes highly questionable by 
merely making this claim. A group of Theosophists traveled to Paris after WW II 
where they were told they would meet the Count; he never showed up.

In  1972,  a  Frenchman  named  Richard  Chanfray  was  interviewed  on  French 
television. He claimed to be Saint-Germain and, supposedly, in front of television 
cameras, transmuted lead into gold on a camp stove! And, lest we forget the more 
recent  “communications”  of  the  count  to  the  head  of  the  Church  Universal  and 
Triumphant, Elizabeth Clare Prophet.

In the end, on the subject of Saint-Germain, we find lies and confusion. Get used 
to  it.  And,  if  Saint-Germain  was  a  fraud  we  have  to  think  somewhat  carefully 
about those who claim him as their “connection” to things esoteric!During  the  19th  and  20th  centuries,  alchemy  lost  favor  with  the  rise  of 
experimental  science.  The  time  was  that  of  such  stellar  names  as  Lavoisier, 
Priestley and Davy. Dalton’s atomic theory and a host of discoveries in chemistry 
and  physics  made  it  clear  to  all  “legitimate”  scientists  that  alchemy  was  only  a 
“mystical” and, at best, harmless pastime of no scientific value.

Organizations  such  as  the  Golden  Dawn  and  Ordo  Templi  Orientis  devised 
corrupted mixtures of snippets of alchemy and oriental philosophy, stirred in with 
the  western  European  magical  traditions,  but  these  were  clearly  distorted 
imitations  composed  mostly  of  wishful  thinking,  romantic  nonsense,  and 
monstrous  egos.  When  one  deeply  studies  the  so-called  “adepts”  of  these 
“systems”,  one  is  confronted  again  and  again  with  the  archetype  of  the  “failed 
magician” so  that one can only shake the head and remember the warning of the 
great  alchemists,  that  those  who  do  not  develop  within  themselves  the  “special

Chapter 1: The Nature of the Quest

51Chapter 1: The Nature of the Quest

51

state” that is required for the “Great Work”, can only bring disaster . There  is no 
doubt in my mind that such groups dabble in “alchemy” of a sort, or “magick” of 
another,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  they  may,  in  fact,  “conjure”  connections  to 
sources  of  “power”  on  occasion.  But,  overall,  a  survey  of  what  can  be  learned 
about  them  tends  to  point  in  the  direction  of  much  wishful  thinking  or  even  the 
possibility of domination by the forces of entropy in the guise of “angels of light”. 
In  1919,  British  physicist  Ernest  Rutherford  announced  that  he  had  achieved  a 
successful  transmutation  of  one  element  into  another:  nitrogen  to  oxygen! 
Admittedly,  his  procedures  and  results  in  no  way  resembled  the  work  of  the 
alchemists;  but,  what  he  had  done  was  refute  the  insistence  of  most  scientists  of 
the  day  that  transmutation  was  impossible.  In  fact,  it  soon  became  known  that 
radioactive  elements  gradually  “decay”,  giving  off  radiation  and  producing 
“daughter  elements”  which  then  decay  even  further.  For  instance  one  such  chain 
starts with uranium and the end product is lead. So, the question became, can the 
process be reversed? Or, if you start with another element, what might you end up 
with?Franz Tausend was a 36 year-old chemical worker in Munich who had a theory 
about the structure of the elements that was a strange mixture of Pythagoreanism 
and  modern  chemistry.  He  published  a  pamphlet  entitled,  “180  elements,  their 
atomic  weight,  and  their  incorporation  in  a  system  of  harmonic  periods”.  He 
thought that every atom had a frequency of vibration characteristic of that element, 
related  to  the  weight  of  the  atom’s  nucleus  and  the  grouping  of  the  electrons 
around it. This part of his idea was shown to be basically correct by later research. 
However, Tausend further suggested that matter could be “orchestrated” by adding 
the  right  substance  to  the  element,  thereby  changing  its  vibration  frequency,  in 
which case, it would become a different element.

As  it  happened,  at  about  the  same  time,  Adolf  Hitler  was  sent  to  prison  for 
attempting  to  organize  an  armed  uprising.  One  of  his  cohorts  was  General  Erich 
Ludendorff, but Ludendorff was acquitted of the charges and ran for president of 
Germany  the  following  year.  He  was  defeated  by  Hindenburg,  so  he  turned  his 
mind to raising money for the nascent Nazi party. He heard rumors that a certain 
Tausend had transmuted base metals into gold,  and he formed a group, including 
numerous industrialists, to investigate this process.

Tausend  gave  instructions  that  they  should  purchase  iron  oxide  and  quartz 
which were melted together in a crucible. A German merchant and member of this 
group,  named  Stremmel,  took  the  crucible  to  his  hotel  bedroom  for  the  night  so 
that it could not be tampered with. The next morning, Tausend heated the crucible 
in  his  electric  furnace  in  the  presence  of  his  patrons,  and  then  added  a  small 
quantity  of  white  powder  to  the  molten  mass.  It  was  allowed  to  cool,  and  then, 
when it was broken open, a gold nugget weighing 7 grams was inside.Ludendorff,  to  say  the  least,  was  ecstatic.  He  set  about  forming  a  company 
called “Company 164”. Investment money poured in and within a year the general 
had diverted some 400,000 marks into Nazi Party funds. Then, in December, 1926, 
he resigned, leaving Tausend to handle all the debts. Tausend managed to continue 
raising  money  and  on  June  16,  1928,  supposedly  made  25  ounces  of  gold  in  a 
single operation. This enabled him to issue a series of “share certificates” worth 22 
pounds each (10 kilograms of gold).

52

The Secret History of the World

A year later, when no more gold had been produced, Tausend was arrested for 
fraud,  tried,  found  guilty,  and  sentenced  to  four  years  in  prison.  Nevertheless, 
while  waiting  for  trial,  he  was  able  to  perform  a  transmutation  under  strict 
supervision, in the Munich Mint. This was submitted to the court as evidence that 
no fraud had taken place, but it was contested and did not save him from prison.

In  the  same  year  that  Tausend  was  convicted,  a  Polish  engineer  named 
Dunikovski  announced  in  Paris  that  he  had  discovered  a  new  kind  of  radiation 
which  would  transmute  quartz  into  gold.  The  mineral,  spread  on  copper  plates, 
was melted by an electric discharge at 110,000 volts, and was then irradiated with 
these new “z-rays”. Investors poured two million francs into Dunikovski’s project, 
but,  within  a  few  months,  when  no  gold  appeared,  he  was  also  tried  and  found 
guilty of fraud. After two years in prison, Dunikovski’s lawyer obtained an early 
release, and he went with his family to Italy where he again began to experiment. 
Rumors  soon  started  that  he  was  supporting  himself  by  the  occasional  sale  of 
lumps  of  gold.  His  lawyer,  accompanied  by  the  eminent  chemist,  Albert  Bonn, 
went to see him.What  was  discovered  was  that  the  quartz  being  used  by  Dunikovski  (and 
presumably by Tausend as well) already contained minute quantities of gold. The 
gold could be extracted by a usual process, producing about 10 parts per million, 
but Dunikovski’s technique produced almost 100 times as much. Nevertheless, he 
was only dealing with small quantities of gold because his equipment could only 
handle small quantities of quartz.

Dunikovski  claimed  that  his  process  accelerated  the  natural  growth  of 
“embryonic”  gold  within  the  quartz.  He  gave  a  demonstration  before  an  invited 
group  of  scientists  that  attracted  considerable  attention.  An  Anglo-French 
syndicate formed to bring sand from Africa and treat it in a big new laboratory on 
the south coast of England, but WW II started at  about this time and Dunikovski 
disappeared.  It  was  rumored  that  he  was  “co-opted”  by  the  Germans  and 
manufactured gold for them to bolster their failing economy - but there is no proof. 
Since  WW  II,  there  have  been  and  still  are,  many  practitioners  of  alchemy. 
Much  of  this  activity  has  been  centered  in  France,  including  Eugene  Canseliet, 
who claimed to have been a pupil of the mysterious Fulcanelli mentioned above.

In  studying  alchemy  and  the  history  of  alchemy  and  all  related  books  I  could 
find, I came finally to Fulcanelli and the mention of him in the book Morning of 
the Magicians by Pauwels and Bergier.Bergier  claimed  that  in  June  of  1937  -  eight  years  before  the  first  atom-bomb 
test  in  New  Mexico  -  that  he  was  approached  by  an  impressive  but  mysterious 
stranger. The man asked Bergier to pass on a message to the noted physicist Andre 
Helbronner, for whom Bergier was then working. The man said that he felt it was 
his duty to warn orthodox scientists of the danger of nuclear energy. He said that 
the  alchemists  of  bygone  times  -  and  previous  civilizations  -  had  obtained  such 
secret knowledge and it had destroyed them. The mysterious stranger said that he 
really had no hope that his warning would be heeded, but felt that he ought to give 
it  anyway.  Jacques  Bergier  remained  convinced  until  the  day  he  died  that  the 
stranger  was  Fulcanelli.  As  the  story  goes,  the  American  Office  for  Strategic 
Services, the forerunner of the CIA, made an intensive search for Fulcanelli at the 
end of the war. He was never found.

Chapter 1: The Nature of the Quest

53

The argument against this strange event ever having happened is that plutonium 
was specifically named by the mystery man, yet it was not isolated until February 
of  1941,  and  was  not  named  until  March  of  1942.  This  was  five  years  after 
Bergier’s encounter. Nevertheless, Bergier stood by his story. 27 And, the fact is, if 
we  are  talking  about  Master  Alchemists,  the  history  seems  to  indicate  that  they 
have “time travel” capabilities to some extent. So, the matter of knowing the name 
of the element would not have been too great a difficulty.In the early 1920’s, in Paris, there was a small man in his early twenties, named 
Eugene  Canseliet  who  was  known  as  an  alchemical  enthusiast.  He  made  many 
references to the fact that he worked with an actual “Master of the Art”. His friend 
and companion, a poverty stricken illustrator named Jean-Julien Champagne, who 
was a score of years older than Canseliet, supported these claims. The two of them 
lived  in  a  run-down  building,  in  adjacent  apartments,  at  59  bis,  rue  de 
Rochechouart,  in  the  Butte-Montmartre  district.  Because  of  their  hints  that  they 
had contact with such a “Hidden Master”, they soon became the center of a circle 
of aspiring occultists who became known as the  Brothers of Heliopolis. It  seems 
that both  Canseliet and  Champagne were frequently seen  in the city libraries, the 
Bibliotheque  Nationale,  the  Mazarin,  the  Arsenal  and  the  Sainte  Genevieve, 
studying rare books and manuscripts. Obviously, they were looking for something. 
The story heard by those on the edges of this elite little group was to the effect 
that this “Hidden Master Fulcanelli” was old, distinguished - possibly an aristocrat 
- and very rich. He was also said to be an immensely learned, practicing alchemist 
who had either already, or almost, achieved the Great Work.

Nobody  (until  later,  as  we  saw  with  Jacques  Bergier)  except  Canseliet  and 
Champagne  ever  claimed  to  have  met  Master  Fulcanelli,  and,  because  of  this,  a 
great  deal  of  skepticism  arose  in  the  occult  circles  of  Paris.  But  then,  the 
skepticism was laid to rest with  the publication of Le mystere des  cathedrales  in 
1926.  This  first  edition  consisted  of  only  300  copies,  and  was  published  by  Jean 
Schemit  of  45  rue  Lafitte,  in  the  Opera  district.  It  was  subtitled,  “An  esoteric 
interpretation  of  the  hermetic  symbols  of  the  Great  Work”,and  its  preface  was27 It has been noted by the student of Fulcanelli’s only disciple, Eugene Canseliet, Patrick Riviere, that 
Bergier - just before he died - claimed that Schwaller and Fulcanelli were one and the same individual.

Andre  VandenBroeck’s  AL-KEMI,  A  MEMOIR:  Hermetic,  Occult,  Political  and  Private  Aspects  of 
R.A.  Schwaller  de  Lubicz  (1987  Inner  Traditions/Lindisfarn  Press)  claims  a  clandestine  collaboration 
between  Fulcanelli  and  Rene  Schwaller.  Supposedly,  Schwaller  confided  to  VandenBroeck  that 
Fulcanelli stole from him an original manuscript on the alchemical symbolism of the Gothic Cathedrals 
and published it under his own name as Mystery of the Cathedrals. VandenBroeck’s allegation seems 
to be supported only by VandenBroeck himself, and simply does not fit the facts or the timeline.

In her work Fulcanelli Dévoilé (1992 Dervy) Geneviève Dubois suggests that Schwaller believed Jean-
Julien Champagne to be Fulcanelli and that it was Champagne who took the manuscript. Champagne 
was quite a practical joker and was happy to let others think he was Fulcanelli.

54

The Secret History of the World

written by Eugene Canseliet, then aged only 26. The book had 36 illustrations, two 
of them in color, by the artist,  Champagne. So, in one fell  swoop, both Canseliet 
and  Champagne  were  vindicated,  and  their  place  among  the  coterie  of  occultists 
assured!The  subject  of  the  book  was  a  purported  interpretation  of  the  symbolism  of 
various  Gothic  cathedrals  and  other  buildings  in  Europe  as  being  encoded 
instructions of alchemical secrets. This idea, that the secrets were contained in the 
stone structures, carvings, and so forth, of the medieval buildings had been hinted 
at by other writers on esoteric art and architecture, but no one had ever explicated 
the  subject  so  clearly  and  in  such  detail  before.  In  any  event,  Fulcanelli’s  book 
caused  a  sensation  among  the  Parisian  occultists.  In  the  preface,  written  by 
Canseliet, there is the hint that Master Fulcanelli had “attained the Stone” - that is, 
had become mystically transfigured and illuminated and had disappeared! 
He disappeared when the fatal hour struck, when the Sign was accomplished... 
Fulcanelli is no more. But we have at least this consolation that his thought 
remains, warm and vital, enshrined for ever in these pages.28

The  extraordinary  scholarship  of  Les  Mystere  drove  the  occult  crowd  of  Paris 
mad  with  desire  to  know  who  Fulcanelli  really  was!  Rumor  and  speculation  ran 
wild!  About  these  speculations  regarding  Fulcanelli’s  possible  identity,  Kenneth 
Rayner Johnson writes:There were suggestions that he was a surviving member of the former French royal 
family, the Valois. Although they were supposed to have died out in 1589 upon the 
demise of Henri III, it was known that members of the family had dabbled in magic 
and mysticism and that Marguerite de France, daughter of Henri II and wife of 
Henri IV of Navarre, survived until 1615. What is more, one of her many lovers 
was the esoterically inclined Francis Bacon (whom many still claim as an adept to 
this day); she was divorced in 1599 and her personal crest bore the magical 
pentagram, each of whose five points carried one letter of the Latin word salus - 
meaning ‘health.’ Could the reputedly aristocratic Fulcanelli be a descendant of the 
Valois, and did the Latin motto hint that some important alchemical secret of 
longevity had been passed on to him by the family?

Some claimed Fulcanelli was a bookseller-occultist, Pierre Dujols, who with his 
wife ran a shop in the rue de Rennes in the Luxembourg district of Paris. But 
Dujols was already known to have been only a speculative alchemist, writing under 
the nom de plume of Magophon. Why should he hide behind two aliases? Another 
suggestion was that Fulcanelli was the writer J. H. Rosny the elder. Yet his life was 
too well-known to the public for this theory to find acceptance.

There were also at least three practical alchemists working in the city around the 
same period. They operated under the respective pseudonymns of Auriger,

28 From Canseliet’s introduction to Fulcanelli’s book.

Chapter 1: The Nature of the Quest

55

Faugerons and Dr. Jaubert. The argument against them being Fulcanelli was much 
the same as that against Dujols-Magophon: why use more than one alias?

Finally, there were Eugene Canseliet and Jean-Julien Champagne, both of whom 
were directly connected with Fulcanelli’s book, and both of whom had claimed to 
have known the Master personally.29Finally, there were Eugene Canseliet and Jean-Julien Champagne, both of whom 
were directly connected with Fulcanelli’s book, and both of whom had claimed to 
have known the Master personally.29

There was one major objection to Canseliet being Fulcanelli: he was too young 
to possibly have gained the knowledge apparent in the book. And, yes, a study of 
his preface as compared with the text demonstrated distinctly different styles. So, 
Canseliet was excluded.

Champagne  is  the  next  likely  suspect  because  he  was  older  and  more 
experienced, and it was a certainty that his work as an artist had taken him around 
France so that he would have had opportunity to view all the monuments described 
in  such  detail.  The  only  problem  with  this  theory  was  that  Champagne  was  a 
“noted  braggart,  practical  joker,  punster  and  drunkard,  who  frequently  liked  to 
pass himself off as Fulcanelli - although his behaviour was entirely out of keeping 
with  the  traditional  solemn  oath  of  the  adept  to  remain  anonymous  and  let  his 
written  work  speak  for  itself”.  And,  in  addition  to  that,  Champagne  was  an 
alcoholic whose imbibing of absinthe and Pernod eventually killed him. He died in 
1932 of gangrene at the age of 55. His toes actually fell off. Doesn’t sound much 
like  a  “Master  Alchemist”.  As  a  humorous  note,  some  of  the  descriptions  of  the 
transmutation of the alchemist make you wonder if the toes falling off isn’t part of 
the process!Joking aside, there are many more details and curiousities involved in the sorting 
out of who or what Fulcanelli may have really been, with no more resolution than 
we  had  at  the  beginning  of  the  discussion!  It  just  goes  around  in  circles!  The 
bottom  line  is:  more  than  one  person  has  attested  to  Fulcanelli’s  existence,  his 
success  in  transmutation  and  to  his  continued  existence  into  the  present  time  - 
which would make him over 140 years old! And some  theorists  think he  may be 
older than that!

The  Morning  of  the  Magicians,  by  Louis  Pauwels  and  Jacques  Bergier,  was 
published  in  1963,  and  it  was  only  then  that  English  speaking  occultists  and 
students of alchemy became aware of Fulcanelli. At that point in time, it was to be 
another  eight  years  before  Le  mystere  des  cathedrales  would  be  translated  into 
English. But, each of these books awoke a whole new audience of Seekers to the

29 Johnson, Kenneth R., The Fulcanelli Phenomenon,1992. These stories have since been laid to rest as 
everything from idle speculation to overt disinfo with the publication in French of Fulcanelli by Patrick 
Rivière  in  2000.  An  updated and  revised  second edition,  with  much new material,  appeared  in 2004, 
published  by  Pardès  in  their  series  “Qui  suis-je?”  An  English  translation  of  Mr.  Rivière’s  book  will 
soon appear and should settle once and for all the questions of Fulcanelli’s identity.

56

The Secret History of the World

possibility  of  present  day  miracles  as  well  as  the  very  real  likelihood  of  a 
millennia old secret held in trust by persons unknown.56

The Secret History of the World

possibility  of  present  day  miracles  as  well  as  the  very  real  likelihood  of  a 
millennia old secret held in trust by persons unknown.

In the English edition of Mystery of the Cathedrals, Eugene Canseliet said that 
the  Master  had  given  him  a  minute  quantity  of  the  alchemical  “powder  of 
projection” in 1922 - and permitted him  to transmute 4 ounces of  lead into gold. 
Walter  Lang,  who  wrote  the  introduction  to  the  book  received  a  letter  from 
Canseliet which said, in part:

The Master was already a very old man but he carried his eighty years lightly. 
Thirty years later, I was to see him again... and he appeared to be a man of fifty. 
That is to say, he appeared to be a man no older than I was myself.

Canseliet has since said that he has met with Fulcanelli several times since and that 
Fulcanelli is still living.30

Canseliet  said  that  he  met  the  Master  in  Spain  in  1954  under  highly  unusual 
circumstances.  The  late  Gerard  Heym,  founder  member  of  the  Society  for  the 
Study of Alchemy and Early Chemistry and editor of Ambix, its journal, acclaimed 
as  Europe’s  formost  occult  scholar  of  his  day,  made  friends  with  Canseliet’s 
daughter and through her, had a look at Canseliet’s passport. It did carry a Spanish 
entry-visa stamp for 1954. So, at least on this one item we have a small fact, even 
if it is hearsay. I haven’t seen it myself.One  friend  of  Canseliet,  who  wished  to  remain  anonymous,  said  that  this 
meeting was “in another dimension... a point where such  meetings  are possible”. 
The  story  was  that  Canseliet  “received  a  summons”,  of  some  sort;  perhaps 
telepathic,  and  traveled  to  Seville  where  he  was  met  and  taken  by  a  long, 
roundabout  route,  to  a  large  mountain  chateau  which  proved  to  be  an  enclave  of 
alchemists  -  a  colony!  He  said  that  Fulcanelli  appeared  to  have  undergone  a 
curious  form  of  transformation  so  that  he  had  characteristics  of  both  male  and 
female - he was androgynous. At one point, Canseliet said, Fulcanelli actually had 
the  complete  characteristics  of  a  woman.  Some  of  the  more  obscure  alchemical 
literature does point to this androgyny. The adept going through the transformation 
supposedly loses all hair,  teeth and nails and grows new ones. The skin becomes 
younger, smoother and the face takes on asexual characteristics.

After  Canseliet’s visit to the Enclave of the Alchemists, apparently somewhere 
in  the  Pyrenees,  Gerard  Heym  said  that  he  only  had  vague  recollections  of  his 
experiences in Spain,  as though some form of hypnosis had been used on him  to 
make him forget the details of what he had seen and been told. (Why are we not 
surprised?!)

The point of this recitation is that there have been many well attested stories of 
strange things about alchemy reported by reliable and reputable witnesses, and the

30 Johnson, op. cit.

Chapter 1: The Nature of the Quest

5730 Johnson, op. cit.

Chapter 1: The Nature of the Quest

57

stories continue in a sort of “subculture” down to our very day. There is something 
going  on,  and  it  has  been  going  on  for  a  very  long  time!  And  since  we  have 
encountered an alchemist in recent times - Fulcanelli - who may (or may not) have 
a clue, we might want to make note of some of the things he had to say about our 
present  subject  that  may  be  the  equivalent  of  the  thread  of  Ariadne  out  of  this 
labyrinth of confusion.

A Knight on a Quest

Before proceeding to the subject at hand, some little background is in order. As 
a child, I was always attracted to the stories of King Arthur and his Knights of the 
Round Table. This was only natural, considering my patronymic of birth: Knight. 
Thus,  a  great  many  books  on  the  subject  were  read  and  digested  at  a  very  early 
age. But, my general opinion of them changed as I grew older. I consigned them to 
the realm of fantasies or children’s stories. There was no “real” grail; it was just a 
pretty tale. They were nice to read and imagine in times of idleness, but I felt that I 
needed  to  get  about  the  REAL  work  of  “finding  God”.  I  didn’t  realize  that,  in  a 
very  real  sense  this  is  the  true  nature  of  the  Grail  quest.  In  any  event,  I 
concentrated  many  years  on  this  “finding  God”  business.  For  me  it  was  as 
essential a thing to do as it was necessary for me to breathe.I started in pretty basic ways: believing nothing, testing everything; and over the 
years I gradually found my way from the hard sciences to the “soft” sciences to the 
“Para-sciences”. I analyzed and categorized everything as I went and, at the “end”, 
I  thought  I  had  pretty  well  run  the  gamut.  My  categories  were  more  varied  and 
extensive than those of many people, but they were categories nonetheless - and I 
had  more  or  less  reconciled  myself  to  never  really  knowing  God  except  through 
“mind”, and mind was, after all, as far as I could see, the beginning and end point 
of everything. Cogito ergo sum. That was all we could know. I wasn’t happy with 
this answer, but what else was there?

That  is  where  matters  rested  until  the  events  described  in  my  autobiography, 
Amazing  Grace,  that  led  to  the  Cassiopaean  transmissions.  And  then,  the  Quest 
began in earnest.

New  evidence,  new  knowledge,  can  change  the  entire  foundation  of  what  we 
think  we  know.  And  this,  of  course,  is  part  of  the  very  problem  of  the  Grail. 
Everyone builds a hypothesis based on what is generally available in the context of 
“ordinary  research”  or  hypotheses  constructed  on  the  foundations  of  our 
assumptions about our reality that are part of the social/cultural milieu in which we 
live. And because we  are so invested in our fundamental beliefs  about the nature 
of our reality, we become emotionally invested in these hypotheses - emotionally 
attached,  that  is  -  and  when  new  information  is  discovered  or  brought  to  our 
attention, we often not only do not WANT to hear or see it - we simply cannot.Beginning  with  a  state  of  psychic  bankruptcy  in  1984,  the  Cassiopaeans  spent 
ten years disabusing me of my assumptions about our reality, as we perceive it. I 
had  prayed  fervently  for  answers,  and  the  Universe  began  to  answer  me  in  the 
dynamics  of  my  very  life.  At  a  certain  point,  when  I  had  passed  many  tests,  the 
mode  of  communication  became  more  direct  and  conscious  -  the  Cassiopaean 
Transmissions  themselves  -  and  it  became  very  clear  that  the  Grail  Quest  was

58

The Secret History of the World

indeed important. It also became clear that it was a far deeper and more complex 
an issue than  most scholars and amateur Grail Questors suppose. What was even 
more  interesting  was  the  fact  that  the  Cassiopaeans  led  me  to  discover  that  the 
Grail  Quest  and  the  “Quest  of  the  Alchemists  for  the  Philosopher’s  Stone”  is 
identical.

During  the  years  of  this  initiation,  I  was  guided  to  re-visit  many  of  the  texts  I 
had casually dismissed in my youth in order to “read between the lines” with my 
“new eyes”. The Cassiopaeans also suggested lines of study and research that had 
not  been  a  part  of  my  previous  work.  Among  the  texts  I  was  guided  to  consider 
were  the  works  of  the  alchemist  Fulcanelli.  And  in  the  writings  of  Fulcanelli,  I 
discovered that the very problem I was considering was described:“Furthermore, in our opinion, it seems insufficient to know how to recognize and 
classify facts exactly; one must still question nature and learn from her in what 
conditions and under the control of what will her manifold productions take place. 
Indeed, the philosophical mind will not be content with the mere possibility of 
identifying bodies. It demands the knowledge of the secret of their elaborations. To 
open ajar the door of the laboratory where nature mixes the elements is good; to 
discover the occult force, under whose influences her work is accomplished, is 
better. […]

“Alchemy is obscure only because it is hidden. The philosophers who wanted to 
transmit the exposition of their doctrine and the fruit of their labors to posterity 
took great care not to divulge the art by presenting it under a common form so that 
the layman could not misuse it. Thus because of the difficulty one has of 
understanding it, because of the mystery of its enigmas and of the opacity of its 
parables, the science has come to be shut up among reveries, illusions and 
chimeras. […]

“With their confused texts, sprinkled with cabalistic expressions, the books remain 
the efficient and genuine cause of the gross mistake that we indicate. For, in spite of 
the warnings... students persisted in reading them according to the meanings that 
they hold in ordinary language. They do not know that these texts are reserved for 
initiates, and that it is essential, in order to understand them, to be in possession of 
their secret key. One must first work at discovering this key.“Most certainly these old treatises contain, if not the entire science, at least its 
philosophy, its principles, and the art of applying them in conformity with natural 
laws. But if we are unaware of the hidden meaning of the terms - for example, the 
meaning of Ares, which is different from Aries - strange qualifications purposely 
used in the composition of such works, we will understand nothing of them or we 
will be infallibly led into error.

“We must not forget that it is an esoteric science. Consequently, a keen 
intelligence, an excellent memory, work, and attention aided by a strong will are 
NOT sufficient qualities to hope to become learned in this subject. Nicolas 
Grosparmy writes:

‘Such people truly delude themselves who think that we have only made our books 
for them, but we have made them to keep out all those who are not of our sect.’

“Batsdorff, in the beginning of his treatise, charitably warns the reader in these 
terms:

Chapter 1: The Nature of the Quest

59

‘Every prudent mind must first acquire the Science if he can; that is to say, the 
principles and the means to operate. Otherwise he should stop there, without 
foolishly using his time and his wealth. And so, I beg those who will read this little 
book to credit my words. I say to them once more, that THEY WILL NEVER 
LEARN THIS SUBLIME SCIENCE BY MEANS OF BOOKS, AND THAT IT 
CAN ONLY BE LEARNED THROUGH DIVINE REVELATION, HENCE IT IS 
CALLED DIVINE ART, or through the means of a good and faithful master; and 
since there are very few of them to whom God has granted this grace, there are also 
very few who teach it.’”31

At this point in time, as I write this little monograph, I can say that it is true that 
only  by  Revelation  -  by  the  Initiatory  work  of  the  Cassiopaeans  -  myself  in  the 
future - that much of the Secret has been thus far revealed.The  question  may  be  asked:  why  am  I  revealing  the  secret  if  it  has  been  the 
tradition  to  conceal  it?  Because  I  am  as  I  am,  and  from  my  perspective,  what  is 
given  to  me  is  only  serving  myself  until  I  give  it  to  others  in  response  to  their 
asking. And many have asked.

After over thirty years of work, the one thing that has become evident is that the 
energies of Creation emanate “downward”, and our individuality as human beings 
is  merely  an  expression  of  the  “Theological  Dramas”,  so  to  say.  To  attempt  to 
exert  our  will  or  to  make  our  voice  travel  “upward”,  against  Creation  is,  in 
essence,  an attempt  to violate the Free Will of  Creation, i.e. Hubris.  This is why 
praying, rituals designed to “change” reality, “positive thinking” with the “intent” 
to  change  something  “up  there”,  in  order  to  receive  the  benefits  “down  here”,  is 
always doomed to produce more strife, misery and suffering globally.

As I searched through the literature in hundreds of fields of study, the chief thing 
that  became  apparent  to  me  is  that  mankind  is  in  the  iron  grip  of  an  uncaring 
control  system  that  raises  him  up  and  brings  him  low  for  its  own  mysterious 
purposes. No group, no nationality, no secret society or religion, is exempt.I needed answers. I couldn’t live haunted daily by this grief for humanity and the 
many horrors of history. That was the motivation for the Cassiopaean experiment. 
Everything we are taught in our society, our history, our religions, and the new age 
versions  of  same,  is  all  logically  inconsistent  and  makes  a  mockery  of  the  very 
idea  of  a  Creator  -  Ribbono  Shel  Olom  -  Master  of  the  Universe.  There  was 
something strange and mysterious going on here on Earth,  and I wanted to know 
the  answers.    So  I  undertook  the  channelling  experiment  that  resulted,  after  two 
years of dedicated work, in what is known as the Cassiopaean Transmissions.

In spite of the fact that we hold an “open opinion” regarding the source of this 
material, the answers we received from the Cassiopaeans - us in the future - were 
intriguing, to say the least. The closest analogy to the view of reality presented by

31 Fulcanelli, The Dwellings of the Philosophers (Boulder: Archive Press 1999) pp. 49, 65, 84.

60

The Secret History of the World

the Cassiopaeans is graphically explicated in  the movie, The Matrix, wherein our 
reality  is  presented  as  a  computer  program/dream  that  “stores”  human  beings  in 
“pods”  so  that  they  are  batteries  producing  energy  for  some  vast  machine 
dominating  the  world.  Certain  programmed  life-scenarios  of  great  emotional 
content  were  designed  in  order  to  produce  the  most  “energy”  for  this  machine. 
And it seems that pain and suffering are the “richest” in terms of “juice”.Another major concept presented in The Matrix was that the “real now” was the 
reality of the control system that produced the “programmed dream of reality” that 
was  being  experienced  by  those  “trapped  in  the  Matrix”.  The  Matrix  Dream 
Reality was based on the way things were  in the past, before a terrible  thing had 
occurred  to  destroy  the  world-that-was,  after  which  it  came  under  the  control  of 
computers  which  had  become  sentient  and  needed  to  utilize  human  beings  as 
“power sources”, or “food”.

The  difference  between  the  metaphor  of  The  Matrix  and  the  view  of  the 
Cassiopaeans  is  that  they  propose  a  para-physical  realm  as  another  layer  in  the 
structure of space-time from which our own reality is projected, looping over and 
over again in endless variations. You could say that the hyperdimensional realms 
are the “future” in a very real sense.

This  para-physical  reality  of  hyperdimensional  space  -  the  realm  of  the  Matrix 
programmers  -  is  inhabited,  according  to  the  Cassiopaeans,  by  beings  of  both 
positive  and  negative  polarity  who  have  “graduated”  from  our  reality,  but  not 
necessarily  in  the  sense  of  “dying”  and  going  to  a  strictly  ethereal  realm.  It  is, 
effectively, a world of the future  that creates our present by projecting  itself  into 
the past. What is important to realize is that if we think about the future in terms of 
probable futures, or branching universes, then what we do now, whether we wake 
up  from  the  Matrix  or  not,  determines  what  kind  of  future  we  experience, 
individually and collectively.

While these ideas might seem more suited to science fiction than science proper, 
in  fact,  some  of  the  most  well-known  physicists  have  proposed  models  and 
research  programs  that  in  no  way  contradict  this  hypothesis.  They  may  one  day 
demonstrate the mathematical proof of such a perspective.For example, Paul Dirac wrote:

“There are, at present, fundamental problems in theoretical physics the solution of 
which will presumably require a more drastic revision of our fundamental concepts 
than any that have gone before. Quite likely, these changes will be so great that it 
will be beyond the power of human intelligence to get the necessary new ideas by 
direct attempts to formulate the experimental data in mathematical terms. The 
theoretical worker in the future will, therefore, have to proceed in a more direct 
way. The more powerful method of advance that can be suggested at present is to 
employ all resources of pure mathematics in attempts to perfect and generalize the 
mathematical formalism that forms the existing basis of theoretical physics, and 
after each success in this direction, to try to interpret the new mathematical features 
in terms of physical entities.”

Certain ontological problems related particularly to quantum theory suggest that 
an “observer” (J. A. Wheeler’s “Eye”), watching the universe so as to “create it”, 
may  need  to  be  included  in  our  consideration.  That  suggests  the  necessity  for 
expanding  the  scope  of  what  is  nowadays  considered  as  “physical  entities”.  The

Chapter 1: The Nature of the Quest

61

answer  to  “observability of parallel universes” 
may  involve  taking  into  account  such  an 
extension.

Now, consider the idea that there are several 
- maybe even infinite - “probable future yous” 
as  observers.  In  the  picture  above,  this  would 
be represented  as many “eyes” but  all of them 
converging  on  a  single  point  on  the  tail  -  the 
“now”  moment  that  we  perceive,  which  is  the 
moment of  “choice”. It  is from  these probable 
futures  of  infinite  potential  -  of  “thought 
centers” - that reality is projected. It is through 
are 
human  beings

energies

these

that

transduced and become “real”.energies

these

that

transduced and become “real”.

You  in  the  here  and  now  -  at  the  conjunction  of  all  of  these  probabilities  all 
vying  with  one  another  to  become  “real”  -  have  no  possibility  of  “creating” 
anything  in  this  reality  from  “down  here”,  so  to  say.  The  realities  -  the  creative 
potentials  -  are  a  projection  from  higher  levels  of  density.  You  are  a  receiver,  a 
transducer, a reflector of the view of which eye is viewing YOU, nothing more.

that

these

to  more  directly

The  phenomenon

that  of 
ideas  speak 
hyperdimensional realities wherein mental energies or consciousness energies are 
amplified  and  can  be  interactive  with  the  environment:  technology  that  suggests 
not  only  power  for 
is  partly  physical,  partly  “ethereal”; 
communication that is also partly physical and partly ethereal, as well as powers of 
“manifestation”  that  might  seem  impossible  to  us  in  our  present  state  of 
technology. All of these properties do belong to hyperdimensional  existence, and 
such  a  state  of  being  has  been  reported  for  millennia  as  being  the  “realm  of  the 
gods”, including Dragons and Serpents, and critters of all sorts.

transport

that

is

If we can describe such realms mathematically and give them a physical reality, 
as  Dirac  suggests,  then  we  might  also  consider  the  hypothesis  that  they  may  be 
inhabited. Could our “Gods” be inhabitants of this realm?

As many physicists will tell you, all  that really  exists are “waveforms” and we 
are waveforms of reality, and our consciousness is something that “reads waves”. 
We  give  form  and  structure  to  the  waves  we  “read”  according  to  some  agreed 
upon convention.And so, certain denizens of hyperdimensional space are “read” as more or  less 
“reptilian”  because  that  is  the  “essence”  of  their  being,  the  frequency  of  their 
“wave  form”.  We  call  them  the  Overlords  of  Entropy.  They  are  not  necessarily 
physical  as  we  understand  the  term,  nor  are  they  necessarily  “alien”  as  we 
understand  that  term  either.  We  suspect  that  the  perceptions  of  these  levels  of 
reality  and  their  “consciousness  units”  are  what  is  behind  many  religious 
conceptions  and  mythological  representations  of  “gods  and  goddesses”  and 
creatures of all sorts.

It is in this context of the Matrix, and realizing that the inner knowledge of many 
great  mystery  teachings  down  through  the  ages  have  presented  the  same,  or  a 
similar concept, that I have  come to view  the phenomena  and interactions of our 
world.  Such  a  view  certainly  produces  results  of  becoming  “free”  from  the

62

The Secret History of the World

controls  of  this  Matrix,  so  I  can  say  that  in  terms  of  experiment,  it  produces 
replicable results. However, as Morpheus explained to Neo in the movie:

The Matrix is a system, Neo. That system is our enemy. But when you’re inside, 
you look around; what do you see? Businessmen, teachers, lawyers, carpenters. The 
very minds of the people we are trying to save. But until we do, these people are 
still a part of that system, and that makes them our enemy. You have to understand; 
most of these people are not ready to be unplugged. And many of them are so 
inured, so hopelessly dependent on the system that they will fight to protect it. 
Were you listening to me Neo, or were you looking at the woman in the red dress? 
They will fight to protect it...We could just as well re-write this to say: When you are inside the Matrix, you 
look  around  and  see  Christians,  Jews,  Mohammedans,  Zoroastrians,  Wiccans, 
Magicians...  most  of  these  people  are  not  ready  to  be  unplugged...  they  are  so 
hopelessly  inured,  so  hopelessly  dependent  on  the  system  that  they  will  fight  to 
protect  it.  Were  you  listening  to  me,  or  were  you  listening  to  that  ZionistBaptist 
Evangelist, or purveyor of Magick and mumbo jumbo?

It  was  also  pointed  out  by  Morpheus  that  any  human  being  who  was  plugged 
into the system could be used as an “agent” by something similar to a downloaded 
program  that  was  designed  to  activate  them  in  a  certain  way.  A  similar  state  of 
affairs seems to be the actual case in our reality, with the Controllers acting from 
some hyperdimensional space of which we have but  limited awareness, and even 
less access.

The  option  that  does  seem,  realistically,  to  be  open  to  us  is  to  choose  our 
alignment and prepare ourselves for the emanations that are traveling “downward” 
to be better received. This is the essential point of Castaneda’s Don Juan when he 
said:

One of the greatest accomplishments of the seers of the Conquest was a construct 
he called the three-phase progression. By understanding the nature of man, they 
were able to reach the incontestable conclusion that if seers can hold their own in 
facing [human] petty tyrants, they can certainly face the unknown with impunity, 
and then they can even stand the presence of the unknowable.“The average man’s reaction is to think that the order of that statement should be 
reversed,” he went on. “A seer who can hold his own in the face of the unknown 
can certainly face petty tyrants. But that’s not so. What destroyed the superb seers 
of ancient times was that assumption. We know better now. We know that nothing 
can temper the spirit of a warrior as much as the challenge of dealing with 
impossible people in positions of power. Only under those conditions can warriors 
acquire the sobriety and serenity to stand the pressure of the unknowable.”32

32 Casteneda, Carlos, The Fire From Within, (New York: Pocket Books 1985) p. 19.

Chapter 1: The Nature of the Quest

63

All around us we see the result of this error: the idea that we can exert our will 
and voice upward to change what is “above” us in order to change our reality. This 
idea is at the root of rites and rituals, demanding, pleading, visualizations, tapping, 
“workings”,  and  so  forth.  People  who  think  that  “meditating  on  compassion”,  or 
“feeling the feelings of all beings”, is going to result in the “sonic entrainment of 
the  heart’s  rhythm  [being]  braided  into  more  complex  and  coherent  patterns”, 
which will then enable the person to “create a diamond imperishable body for use 
as  a  teaching  vehicle  down  here  on  earth”,  have  missed  the  entire  point.  To 
compare such ideas to the true work of Seeker of Ascension is simply ignorant.

What seems  to be true  is  that before  the  seeker of Ascension can  ever achieve 
the  point  of  being  able  to  think  even  momentarily  about  “the  oneness  of  all 
beings”, or the “feelings of all beings”, or be in possession of “super-awareness”, 
he or she has spent many, many years in the struggle to “face petty tyrants”, or to 
fully  realize  objective  reality  in  a  step  by  step  process  that  includes  action  in 
concert with understanding.They have repeatedly exposed themselves to as many “unpleasant experiences” 
as  they  can  find,  all  the  while  struggling  to  master  their  emotions,  desires,  and 
physicality. It is the work of making the physical vehicle “down here” receptive to 
what one chooses to align with “up there”, as opposed to trying to forcibly change 
something “up there” in order to have it “down here”. This process is very much 
involved with what is called “discernment”.

The  great  Sufi  Shaykh  Ibn  al-’Arabi  explains  that  “imperfection”  exists  in 
Creation  because  “were  there  no  imperfection,  the  perfection  of  existence  would 
be imperfect”. From  the point of view of Sheer Being, there is nothing but good. 
But  Infinite  Potential  to  BE  includes  -  by  definition  of  the  word  “infinite”  -  the 
potential  to  not  be.  And  so,  Infinite  Potential  “splits”  into  Thought  Centers  of 
Creation and Thought Centers of non-being. It can be said that Infinite Potential is 
fundamentally Binary - on or off - to be or not to be. That is the first “division”.Since  absolute  non-being  is  an  impossible  paradox  in  terms  of  the  source  of 
Infinite  Potential  to  BE,  the  half  of  the  consciousness  of  Infinite  Potential  that 
constitute  the  IDEAS  of  non-being  -  for  every  idea  of  manifestation,  there  is  a 
corresponding idea for  that  item of creation  to NOT  manifest - “falls asleep” for 
lack of a better term. Its “self observation” is predicated upon consciousness  that 
can  only  “mimic”  death.  Consciousness  that  mimics  death  then  “falls”  and 
becomes  Primal  Matter.  What  this  means  is  that  the  “self  observing  self”  at  the 
level  of  the  Master  of  the  Universe  is  constituted  of  this  initial  division  between 
Being  and  Non-being  which  is,  again,  only  the  initial  division  -  the  on/off,  the 
yes/no - of creation. You could picture this as an open eye observing a closed eye. 
It has been represented for millennia in  the yin-yang symbol, which, even on the 
black half that represents “sleeping consciousness that is matter”, you can see the 
small white dot of “being” that represents to us that absolute non-existence is not 
possible. There is only “relative” non-existence.

These  “thoughts  of  being  and  non-being”  interact  with  one  another  -  the 
observer and the observed - like a viewer looking into a mirror. Creation manifests 
between the viewer and the mirror. It is at once real, because it consists of matter 
informed by consciousness, and unreal, because it is ultimately composed of only 
consciousness acting on consciousness.

64

The Secret History of the World64

The Secret History of the World

At  our  level  of  reality,  the  understanding  that  “nothing  is  real”,  as  has  been 
promulgated by gurus and  teachers down  through history,  is as useless as saying 
“gravity  isn’t  real”.  Such  considerations  are  useful  only  for  expansion  of 
perception.  They  are  not  useful  for  practical  application  since  the  energies  of 
creation  apparently  transduce  through  several  “levels”  before  they  meet  in  the 
middle,  so  to  say,  in  our  third  density  reality.  Organic  life  exists  at  the 
“crossroads”  of  the  myriad  ideas  or  thought  centers  of  being  and  non-being.  As 
such,  they have the capacity to  transduce energies “up” or  “down” depending on 
the “consciousness energy directors” of that unit. And again, there are apparently 
two  broad  divisions:  directed  toward  being/  observing,  or  directed  toward  non-
being/ mirroring. This division manifests across all levels of organic life, including 
human  beings.  Human  beings  exist  to  transduce  cosmic  energies  of  creation  via 
organic  life.  Our  “higher  selves”  are  the  directors  of  this  transducing  of  cosmic 
energies,  and  the  direction  in  which  the  energy  “flows”  is  determined  by  the 
activities of these higher selves. Against the opposition of those forces seeking to 
“capture” energy of consciousness and induce it to the “sleep of non-being”, which 
is gravitational in  a certain sense, the energies of consciousness seek to “inform” 
matter,  via  awakening  the  self-awareness  of  those  organic  units  on  earth  that  are 
capable of resistance to the gravity of non-being.As self-aware “transducing units”,  the human being has the potential for going 
either  way  -  toward  intensified  being,  or  toward  intensified  non-being.  In  this 
sense,  humans  also  function  very  much  like  a  lens  that  can  be  “adjusted”  like  a 
telescope.  It  can  be  dialed  to  select  the  viewing  range,  which  can  be  distant  and 
inclusive of more “space/time”, or it can be shortened to only see what is up close 
and evident in the material world. In other words, our first and most fundamental 
choice is to choose what we SEE.

When we choose what we SEE - and here we do NOT mean with  the physical 
eyes or even psychically, but rather a more inclusive term that suggests whether or 
not  we  are  capable  of  objectivity  or  subjectivity  -  we  are  receiving  impressions. 
Impressions can become knowledge if assimilated. Knowledge leads to awareness. 
Knowledge and awareness then direct emotions, which then energize actions in the 
organic world. This is the transducing of energies of Cosmic Thought Centers.Ibn al-’Arabi tells us that Goodness is Being; to which all positive and beautiful 
attributes  or  “names”  of  God  belong.  Evil  is  the  lack  of  good,  so  it  is 
“nonexistence”. In other words, at the root, Being dwells in “non-existence” which 
is  evil.  Here  is  the  sticking  point,  the  item  that  is  generally  omitted  from  most 
“systems  of  ascension”.  Human  beings  at  our  level  of  reality  exist  at  the 
crossroads of the Thoughts of Being and Non-being - Good and Evil. Mankind is 
made  in  the  form  of  all  the  names  of  God  -  those  of  Being  and  Non-being. 
Assuming the traits of the Names is synonymous with manifesting their properties. 
The Science of Ascension is to obtain deep knowledge of all the Names and their 
true properties, the high and the low, the pleasant and the loathsome, the light and 
the darkness, in differentiated detail, so as to be able to CHOOSE which traits will 
be assumed. It is only with a full field of vision that a man can discover if what he 
subjectively  thinks  is  good  actually  is  good  and  leads  to  Being,  or  if  it  is  a 
deception that induces to Non-being by pretense.

Chapter 1: The Nature of the Quest

65

God  is  the  root  of  ALL  Names,  noble  and  base.  The  task  of  the  seeker  of 
ascension  is  to  bring  the  Noble  traits  from  latency  into  actuality  and  to  discover 
the  positive  applications  of  the  base  traits  -  even  if  that  application  is  to 
“overcome”  or  transmute.  The  Shaykh  tells  us  “noble  character  traits  are  only 
those connected to interaction with others”. In other words: DOing. If you SEE the 
illusion  of  separation,  that  is  certainly  the  first  thing.  The  lie  is  smuggled  in  by 
suggesting that this is all that is necessary, that if you just “see it” everything will 
“change” for you.God creates the good and the evil, the ugly and the beautiful, the straight and the 
crooked, the moral and the immoral. Between these traits lie the manifold dangers 
of the path of the seeker of Truth.  Many  modern day “teachers”  and “gurus”  tell 
us, “Since there is only One Being which permeates all things, all we have to do is 
see  everything  as  only  light”,  and  that  will  transmute  the  darkness,  and  we  will 
“create  our  own  reality  of  light”.  Such  a  statement  ignores  the  fact  that  the 
statement  “God  is  One”  describes  a  reality  that  is  a  higher  level  from  which  our 
own “mixed being” manifests. The man who assumes that he can become like God 
at  this  level  just  by  thinking  it,  ignores  the  facts  of  Being  vs.  Non-being  which 
outrays  from  “God  is  One”  at  a  level  of  existence  that  is  clearly  several  levels 
above our own.Evil  is  REAL  on  its  own  level,  and  the  task  of  man  is  to  navigate  the  Cosmic 
Maze without being defiled by the Evil therein. This is the root of Free Will. Man 
faces  a  predicament  as  REAL  as  himself:  he  is  forced  to  choose  -  to  utilize  his 
knowledge by applying it - between the straight path which leads to Being, and the 
crooked  paths  which  lead  to  Non-Being.  Human  beings  are  required  to  discern 
between  good  and  evil  -  consciousness  energy  directors  -  at  every  stage  of  their 
existence  in  this  reality.  Because,  in  fact,  they  must  understand  that  God  is 
consciousness  and  God  is  matter.  God  is  good,  and  God  is  evil.  The  Creation 
assumes all the different properties of the many “Names of God”. The Cosmos is 
full  of  Life-giving  and  Slaying,  Forgiveness  and  Vengeance,  Exaltation  and 
Abasement, Guidance and Deception.  To attempt  to assume God’s point of view 
and  “mix  everything”  at  this  level,  results  only  in  STAYING  at  this  level. 
Therefore,  human  beings  must  always  separate  God’s  point  of  view  from  their 
own  point  of  view  and  the  fact  that  all  creation  assumes  the  divine  Names  and 
Traits.

Thus, the first Divine Command is BE! And that includes Being and Non-being 
instantaneously.  Therefore,  the  second  law  is  “follow  Being  or  Non-being 
according to your choice and your inherent nature”. All creation is a result of this 
engendering  command.  So,  in  this  respect,  there  is  no  Evil,but  the  second, 
prescriptive law determines to which “Face of God” one will return: Life or Death.If the engendering command alone is considered, there is no imperfection in the 
cosmos, since all creatures follow what God desires for them. In this respect, what 
is normally called “imperfection“ is in fact perfection, since it allows for the 
actualization of the various levels of existence and knowledge. In other words, were 
there no imperfections - in the sense of diminishment, decrease, and lack - there 
would be no creation. Were there no creation, the Hidden Treasure would remain 
hidden. Hence Being would be unseen in every respect. There would be no self-
disclosure of the Divine Reality, Light would not shine, and God would be the 
Nonmanifest but not the Manifest. But all this is absurd, since it demands the

66

The Secret History of the World

imperfection of Being Itself, which by definition is nondelimited perfection. 
Being’s perfection requires the manifestation of Its properties. The effects of the 
Names and Attributes must be displayed for God to be God. […] In other words, 
Imperfection is demanded by existence itself. To be “other than God” is to be 
imperfect. …But it is precisely the “otherness” which allows the cosmos and all the 
creatures within it to exist. If things were perfect in every respect, they would be 
identical with God Himself, and there would be nothing “other than God.” But then 
we could not even speak about the cosmos, since there would be no cosmos and no 
speakers. …So, imperfection is a kind of perfection. [Chittick]At  the  particular  stage  of  existence  in  which  man  finds  himself,  he  is  equally 
“receptive”  toward  the  Two  primary  Faces  of  God:  Being  and  Non-being.  The 
Shaykh  tells  us  that  whatever  property,  or  trait,  any  human  being  ultimately 
“chooses”  is  what it originally possessed  in its state of  immutability. The task of 
the Seeker is to discover  what is immutable within,  and to  purify and amplify  it. 
This is the development of Will. Will is a relationship, which follows knowledge 
while knowledge follows the object of knowledge. In the process of “ascension”, 
the  object  of  knowledge  is  YOU.  Knowledge,  in  and  of  itself,  has  no  effects. 
YOU,  however,  the  seeker,  can  give  to  knowledge  what  you  actually  are,  in 
yourself, thereby displaying YOURSELF in knowledge by your actions in concert 
with your knowledge.

As  noted,  there  are  many  Names  of  God  that  call  to  us  in  our  present  state  of 
existence.  But  you  are  not  required  to  answer  every  one  that  calls.  The  fact  that 
human beings are, in general, ignorant of their own true “essence” gives them the 
illusion of freedom. And the fact is, all paths come from God, and all paths Lead 
back  to  God,  but  again,  it  can  be  via  different  faces.  As  the  Shaykh  says:  “Unto 
Allah  all  things  come  home,  and  he  is  the  end  of  every  path.  However,  the 
important thing is which divine name you will reach and to which you will come 
home?”And  this  brings  us  to  what  the  Shaykh  calls  “perspicacity”.  This  is  the  special 
development of  the “eye of  insight”, or “seeing  the unseen” that is crucial  to the 
Seeker.  Just  as  the  physical  eye,  with  the  refraction  of  light  from  the  Sun,  can 
discern  between  the  large  and  the  small,  the  beautiful  and  the  ugly,the  shades  of 
colors, the moving from the still, the high and the low, the ability to see the unseen 
is  a  property  of  an  “inner  light”.  This  light  reveals  to  the  seeker  things  about 
external objects that are NOT apparent to the five senses. It reveals to its possessor 
when a choice that  may  appear  to be benevolent, is a  step  on the path of Evil. It 
reveals when a choice that may appear to human estimation as negative is actually 
a difficult step to felicity for all involved. The Sufis tell us  that some  individuals 
have achieved such a level of “seeing” that - upon seeing a person’s footprint on 
the ground,  even  if the person  is not present -  they  are  able to say  whether he is 
following a life of felicity or wretchedness.

The light of perspicacity seems to be a gift that not everyone has, and those who 
do have it, may not have developed it to the same degree. What is evident is that 
those  who  have  it  possess  an  immutable  nature  of  Being  which  is  able  to  “see” 
good  and  evil  -  they  do  not  see  “only  good”.  Thus,  they  are  able  to  discern 
between the “calls” of Nonbeing and Being,  and therefore,  are able  to strengthen 
their Will along the path of intrinsic Being. It then follows that individuals who are

Chapter 1: The Nature of the Quest

67

not able to see - or who choose not to see - both Good and Evil, are formed in the 
mold of subjectivity, which is the human expression of the Call of Non-being.67

not able to see - or who choose not to see - both Good and Evil, are formed in the 
mold of subjectivity, which is the human expression of the Call of Non-being.

A human being whose immutable nature is that of Being can strengthen the light 
of  perspicacity  by  “assuming  the  traits”  of  the  Names  of  Being.  This  does  not 
mean  that  a  person  comes  to  possess  traits  that  do  not  already  belong  to  him.  It 
means that these traits  are  amplified  and “cultivated”. The  Ruling property of  an 
individual  is  determined  by  what  Face  of  God  is  disclosed  to  him,  and  this  is 
determined by his preparedness. Felicity can only be disclosed when Evil has been 
turned  away  from,  rejected;  which  can  only  be  achieved  by  a  long  period  of 
“testing” or being challenged to SEE and then to choose Being over Non-being in 
order  to  grow  the  Will  or  alignment  to  Being  in  a  feedback  loop.  As  the  Seeker 
travels  this  path,  he  must  not  see  these  traits  as  his  own,  but  rather  that  he  is  a 
locus of God’s manifestation of an ontological attribute.

People imagine that they believe in God when, in fact, what they believe always 
takes  the  shape  of  the  receptacle.  The  old  saying  is  that  the  water  takes  on  the 
color  of  its  cup.  The  deeper  implication  of  this  is  that  a  person  will  only  be  in 
disequilibrium  if  his  conscious  beliefs  are  not  in  conformity  with  his  own 
immutable  nature.  In  other  words,  a  person  whose  intrinsic  nature  is  aligned 
toward  Being,  will  experience  disequilibrium,  struggle,  and  even  illness  by 
attempting  to  assume  those  traits  that  do  not  exist  in  him.  In  this  sense,  careful 
observation  of  the  physical  state  -  even  the  physical  environment  -  can  act  as  a 
guide as to whether or not the whole being is coming into alignment.So it is that different paths can produce different effects for different individuals 
according to their immutable nature within. Those whose intrinsic nature is toward 
Being,  follow  the  path  of  the  developing  the  ability  to  SEE  and  to  choose 
alignment with  the  infinite potential of  creation,  thereby being conduits of Being 
as  GOD  chooses  to  manifest  through  them.  They  not  only  see  that  limitation  is 
illusion,  they  consciously  ACT  -  they  utilize  that  knowledge  to  generate  energy 
and light.

Those whose intrinsic nature is toward Non-being, follow the path of limitation 
of Infinite Being by assuming that they, in their state of ignorance and subjectivity, 
know better than God how Creation ought to be fixed. They pray for change, they 
perform rituals, they chant mantras and repeat endless visualizations of “magickal 
forms”  that  are  supposed  to  “change”  reality.  They  bomb  others  with  “Love  and 
Light”,  (their  subjective  version  of  it,  of  course),  and  they  seek  to  fix  the  world 
“out there” by projecting their subjective view of reality onto the infinite wisdom 
of Creation. This  “consciousness  energy direction”  even  includes the  assumption 
that  just  knowing  that  all  division  is  illusion  will  accomplish  the  goal  of 
“Ascension”, and that is the most cunning lie of all.Each approach “ties a knot” in the heart of the believer and fixes him on a path, 
the object of his belief being the end of the path. All beliefs are equivalent in that 
God  -  of  one  sort  or  another  -  is  their  ultimate  objective.  But  each  belief  is 
different  in  that  it  leads  to  a  different  name  of  God,  or  Thought  Center.  Even 
materialistic  skepticism  is  a  “belief”  and 
the 
consciousness  that  follows  this  belief.  What  is  more  difficult  to  discern  are  the 
many  mixed  up  “spiritual”  paths  that  twist  and  distort  the  concepts  of  Being  to 
engage the seeker on a path to Non-Being.

to  “matterizing”  of

leads

68

The Secret History of the World

Going  back  to  the  idea  of  the  human  being  as  a  transducing  unit  with  a  “lens 
capacity”,  what  seems  to  be  so  is  that  the  process  of  Ascension  begins  with  the 
choice of tuning the lens. If the individual  chooses  to “adjust the dial” to see the 
entire  field  of  Thought  Centers  influencing  creation,  he  can  then  begin  to  select 
those  that  enhance  and  enliven  Creation  and  Being  -  the  Thought  Centers  of 
Awakened  Consciousness - then a feedback  loop that  selects that probable future 
will be established.A  human  being  can,  by  great  effort,  expand  his  or  her  “field  of  view”  toward 
greater  and  greater  objectivity.  With  a  wider  and  farther  field  of  view,  the 
awareness  of  those  things,  which  emanate  from  the  Thought  Centers  come  into 
focus.  When  thought  centers  are  more  in  focus,  the  individual  then  has  greater 
ability to discern whether impressions emanate from the Thought Centers of being, 
or from the Thought Centers of non-being. At this stage, the individual is then able 
to further “shape” his emotions and direct his actions so as to become an efficient 
transducing  unit  of  the  cosmic  energies  of  Being  into  this  reality.  This  is 
knowledge utilization, which generates energy, which generates light.

As this process continues, as the feedback loop is activated between the Cosmic 
observer  and  the  transducing/actions  of  the  creature  -  the  organic  unit,  the 
transducing  organ,  so  to  say  -  strengthens  and  the  exchange  between  it  and  the 
Cosmic Observer accelerates and intensifies. The transducing organ then begins to 
act as a “homing beacon” for greater levels of that chosen Thought Center energy - 
that “observer from the future” - the “eye” that is the creator.In the development of such a feedback loop, the human being - as a conduit of 
creation,  a  vessel  -  becomes  an  active  participant  of  the  creation  of  his  own 
FUTURE in the act of choosing which observation platform and scope he accepts 
as  “real”  -  objective  or  subjective.  Furthermore,  as  the  energy  of  such  a  being  is 
changed and enhanced by the “flow of cosmic energy” passing through him, as he 
perceives  more  and  more  of  the  creative  expressions  of  Infinite  potential,  and 
chooses  those  he  wishes  to  align  with,  he  becomes  colinear  with  those  other 
expressions of Being - other organic units that may be quite different in make-up, 
but similarly aware of Infinite Potential - and is thus able to interact with them in a 
manner that further expands and commutates the energy of transducing.

This  can  then  lead  to  exponential  amplification  of  the  transducing  of  the 
energies  of  Being  which  can  then  completely  alter  the  physical  nature  of  the 
organic unit. Just as  a pipe that is used  to channel water gets wet from the water 
flowing through it, so does the human being who has begun the process of aligning 
with  Being becomes saturated with  the higher energies being manifested through 
him  or  her.  This  process  leads  to  permeation  of  the  organic  nature  of  the  vessel 
which  leads  to  transformation,  in  that  it  “awakens”  the  “sleeping  matter”  of  the 
organic unit and makes  it  a full participant in  Being, rather than a weight for the 
soul  to  carry  or  struggle  against.  The  energy  of  the  organic  vehicle  is  then 
available  in  the  terms  described  in  Einstein’s  famous  formula,  which  might  give 
some indication of the potential of such a being.As the reader can  easily see by now, the teachings of the  current spate of New 
Age  Gurus  constitute  the  idea  that  we  can  exert  our  will  and  voice  that  exists 
“down here” upward to  change what is “above” us in order to change our reality 
down  here.  They  tell  us  that  we  can  change  our  lives,  our  thinking,  move  our

Chapter 1: The Nature of the Quest

69

brains  into  harmony,  or  aid  the  “heart  in  opening”,  obtaining  “harmony  and 
balance”  which  is  then  going  to  “open  windows  in  our  mind,  our  heart,  and  our 
spirit”, etc. It is claimed that we can do this basically by assuming God’s point of 
view that “all is one, all is love”. It is stated, (with some truth I should add, since 
good disinformation is always wrapped in a warm and fuzzy truth), that, “without 
Divine Unity inside of us, these windows of inspiration are rarely available”. What 
they do NOT tell you is that the staircase to Divine Unity of Being requires a full 
field  of  awareness  of  Being  and  Non-being,  and  this  can  only  be  achieved  by 
divesting oneself of the controls of Nonbeing which are, indeed, part of Being, but 
which  seek  to  obviate  Being  in  a  paradoxical  sleep  of  “Unification”  which  often 
begins by believing the lie that “knowledge protects” simply by having it.

Indeed, many of the “techniques” sold in the slick packages of “ascension tools” 
will  temporarily  produce  chemical  changes  that  will  feel  VERY  good,  the  same 
way a good meal satisfies hunger temporarily. It really,  “feels good”! But just as 
the  steak  and  salad  are  digested  and  most  of  the  matter  excreted  in  a  few  hours, 
and  another  steak  and  salad  is  needed  to  fill  the  stomach  again,  so  do  such 
practices fail to do anything more  than perpetuate the  “food chain”. And, staying 
with  the  analogy,  very  little  of  the  “substance”  of  such  practices  actually  “stays 
with” the individual.A  considerable  period  of  time  is  required  for  the  seeker  to  finally  come  to  the 
realization  that  techniques  that  relieve  stress  or  produce  “good  feelings”,  have 
done  nothing  to  actually  change  their  lives  or  their  “vibrations”.  They  are  still 
recognized by their neighbor’s dog, they still find new gray hairs on  their heads, 
and they still get sick and have aches and pains like everyone else. The problem is, 
again, the “bottom up” ideas have been employed, which only result in remaining 
in the “mixed” state, or worse, being drawn deeper into the path of non-being.

Well,  I  should  qualify  that:  to  those  for  whom  Non-being  is  their  immutable 
nature, this is only natural and right and they will thrive following the path of non-
being. But for those many, many seekers whose immutable nature is toward Being, 
this is a terrible trap - the gravitational effect of the Thought Center of Non-Being 
-  to  draw  all  of  Creation  into  Non-Being  will  act  on  them  in  ways  that  are 
crippling  to  their  relationships  and  health.  Human  beings  who  go  through  life 
feeling  as  though  they  have  a  “hole  in  their  hearts”  are  those  who  are  not 
synchronized with their immutable nature.

The natural field of view for the organic unit alone - with no connection to the 
higher  self  -  is  that  of  the  material  and/or  mechanical  interpretation  of  all 
phenomena.  The  influences  of  the  Thought  Center  of  non-being  -  the  source  of 
matter - have been increasing through the manifestation of billions of such units at 
a single point in time: the present.The Thought Center of non-being is of a certain nature - contractile subjectivity 
- that exerts a more or less “gravitational” pull - a desire to absorb and assimilate 
the  soul  energies  of  Being  -  so  as  to  feed  its  own  contracting  nature.  Even  if  it 
promotes a full field of awareness in principle, it can only view Being as a traitor 
to its own need to not exist. This results in an individual who may proclaim that all 
is illusion, but whose actions - or rather lack thereof - betray the deeper immutable 
state of being. Due to its intrinsic nature, there is a powerful exertion of non-being

70

The Secret History of the World

to destroy and obviate Being and Creation - all the while it is unable to achieve the 
awareness that it only exists by virtue of Being and Creation IN ACTION!

The  powerful  exertion  of  the  Thought  Center  of  non-being  to  absorb  and 
assimilate all of creation, powered by its own contractile subjectivity, poses certain 
problems both for itself and for Being. Since the fundament of non-being is a LIE 
-  that  is  to  say,  the  state  of  absolute  non-being  that  it  promotes  is  a  paradoxical 
impossibility  -  and  the  fundament  of  Being  is  the  objective  fact  that  Existence 
simply  IS  via  ACTION  -  or  utilization  of  knowledge  which  generates  light,  the 
essential conflict is between lies and truth. The Thought Center of non-being tells 
itself the biggest  lie of all - that  it does not exist - and goes to sleep in pretense. 
And from this essential point, we see that the nature of subjectivity is that of lies. 
Lies and belief in lies - whether or not the believer is aware that they are believing 
a lie - all partake of the same essence - subjectivity and non-being.The  Thought  Center  of  non-being  -  in  its  expression  as  matter  -  as  being 
“impressed”  by  Creative  consciousness  in  ACTION,  which  partially  awakens  it 
and  draws  it  into  the  creation  of  the  organic  world  -  wraps  itself  around  this 
awakened  consciousness.  Its  intrinsic  nature  of  pretense  to  non-being  acts 
“gravitationally” on consciousness, and twists and distorts it into varying degrees 
of subjectivity. It is this interaction of the energy of all possibility, lensed through 
subjectivity  of  matter,  that  produces  the  myriad  manifestations  of  the  material 
universe.

In the realm of the Thought Center of non-being, there are many manifestations 
- or ways - of seeking annihilation - the “Base Names of God”. These modes act in 
a gravitational way to engage, enfold, and distort consciousness to their ends. This 
results  in  the  formation  of  consciousness  units  of  great  power  and  depth  of 
cunning - far beyond anything imaginable in our own reality.

These  consciousness  units  use  their  wiles  to  assimilate  weaker  consciousness 
units  so  as  to  accrue  more  contractile  power.  Obviously,  the  more  “dense”  the 
consciousness units “consumed”, the more “nutritious” they are. And so they seek, 
by  great  cunning,  to  carefully,  and  with  great  patience,  manipulate  the 
consciousness  units  selected  for  assimilation.  It  is,  effectively,  trans-millennial 
stalking.These Overlords of Entropy, or so we may call them, by virtue of the overlay of 
intensified  subjectivity,  -  the  hallmark  of  the  influence  of  the  Thought  Center  of 
non-being - interface with  the organic world on a  “geographic” scale.  Since  they 
have, so to say, an intimate relationship with matter, the contractile consciousness 
of  such  a  being  can  affect  its  area  of  chosen  dominion  very  much  like  an 
overshadowing “cloud” with millions of tendrils of connections between it and its 
range  of  influence.  This  includes  even  the  very  matter  of  the  bodies  of  human 
beings.  It  is  through  these  etheric  fibers  that  the  Overlords  of  Entropy  assimilate 
energy.

These  overlords  have  “organs”  so  to  speak.  Just  as  a  group  of  people  were 
described  by  the  Apostle  Paul  as  “the  body  of  Christ”,  so  are  the  organs  of 
entropic overlords manifested as individual beings, though their direct connection 
to  a  single  massive  consciousness  unit  makes  them  more  like  “projections”  than 
individually souled beings.

Chapter 1: The Nature of the Quest

71

Because of their great drive to conserve and assimilate energy, the overlords are 
“stingy” with allowances to their organ-beings. It seems that they do not “waste” 
energy in manifesting and maintaining organic structures for their organs, and thus 
the organic physicality takes on the configuration of less complex creatures in the 
organic world.  Rather  than interacting with an organic structure  in a cooperative, 
awakened state, they exercise control over theirs. Utilizing organic structures that 
require the least energy to maintain conserves energy. To this end, they draw  the 
energy  for  their  organic  units  from  the  pools  of  archetypal  form  of  the  animal 
kingdom.  This  energy  is  more  easily  accessed,  is  lower  in  frequency,  and  thus 
more amenable to control.This  seems  to  be  the  reason  why,  when  perceived  by  individuals  of  the  third 
dimensional  self-consciousness  -  third  density  -  realm,  their  appearance  is 
generally  startling.  The  reptilian  type  comes  to  mind  as  being  the  most  energy 
efficient. Again, remember that consciousness is merely “reading waves”.

Due to the contractile nature of this hierarchy and its energy consumption, it is 
extremely difficult for these organ-beings of the Overlords of Entropy to actively 
function in our realm for any period of time. When they enter our realm, assuming 
a  third  density  organic  form,  they  are  at  a  disadvantage.  They  are  temporarily 
disconnected from the energy pool,  which weakens them, but they  are  at  another 
great  disadvantage  as  well.  Since  they  are  not  internally  connected  to  an 
expanding, creative feedback loop of Creative Being, their own entropic overlord 
is a constant drain on them, pulling them gravitationally as  it were, making them 
even weaker  than  the natural denizens of this realm.  Such  are  those  called aliens 
and  “Men  in  Black”.  It  is  this  great  strain  on  their  energy  resources  that  makes 
such appearances so rife with anomalous glitches. There is no creativity, and thus 
no  ability  to  pull  off  such  an  intrusion  into  our  reality  with  any  convincing 
effectiveness.

For  this  reason  they  generally  avoid  direct  interaction  in  the  organic  world, 
preferring to utilize other methods to stalk and conquer weaker units to “feed” the 
Thought  Center  of  non-being.  To  this  end,  these  entropic  overlords  seek  to 
establish  and  maintain  the  “entrainment  of  creative  energy”  within  the  third 
density  reality  by  deceptively  enhancing  third  density,  material  interpretations  of 
the phenomenal world.In  short,  such  beings  of  enormous  geographic  domination  actively  operate, 
within their geographic field of influence, to divert  and discourage  those organic 
units who have tenuous connections to creative energy - their higher selves - from 
interpretations  which  will  lead  to  the  establishing  of  a  feedback  loop  with  those 
Thought Centers of Being/Creation.

As noted, the nature of such beings, and the dynamic of their existence, requires 
massive  energy  input  in  order  to  “control”  and  direct  their  own  organic 
physicality.  This  is  possible  at  the  level  of  overlord/sub-units  of  the  Thought 
Center of non-being by virtue of the extensive assimilation of other consciousness 
units, and most especially by virtue of their “geographic” character, which enables 
them  to  “connect”  to  thousands,  if  not  millions,  of  organic  beings  in  the  organic 
realm. This is, effectively, the “Program of the Matrix”.

This  connection  is  naturally  enabled  by  the  aforementioned  intrinsic  nature  of 
organic units to only perceive the field of view of the organic realm. That is to say

72

The Secret History of the World

that mechanical and  material feedback loops  are far more easily created between 
organic  units  and  the  sub-units  of  Non-being  by  a  sort  of  “gravitational”  pull  of 
these sub-units upon the natural inclinations of the organic being.This  establishes  “feedback  loops”  as  previously  described.  The  organic  unit, 
“infected”  with  the  material/mechanical  view,  begins  to  act  according  to  that 
Thought Center’s dictates, and this generates activities of that nature in the organic 
unit. Due  to  the fact that  any given sub-unit of  the  Thought  Center of non-being 
may be connected to millions of organic units in third density, any of them may be 
activated singly, or in concert, to fulfill the wishes of the Overlords of Entropy, a 
“larger” sub-unit of the Thought Center of Non-being.

Gurdjieff and Mouravieff

Machiavelli observed that religion and its teachings of faith, hope, charity, love, 
humility  and  patience  under  suffering  were  factors  that  render  men  weak  and 
cause them to care less about worldly and political things, and thus they will turn 
political  power  over  to  wicked  men  who  are  not  influenced  by  such  ideals.  Of 
course,  the  real  trick  is  to  convince  people  that  the  “afterlife”  is  the  only  thing 
worth thinking about, and it is to this end that Christianity has been formulated. It 
is  also  to  this  end  that  many  of  the  New  Age  beliefs  and  “formulations”  of  the 
truth  about  Ascension  have  been  engineered.  All  you  have  to  do  is  have  faith  or 
meditate or  acquire knowledge  and  awareness that will help you love everything 
and everybody. Nothing is said about the day-by-day struggle and the necessity for 
action.Again let me say  this: if  the Truth about the  REAL process of Ascension were 
not so detrimental to the agenda of the Controllers of our world, the Matrix, they 
would not have gone to so much trouble to cover it up. When we finally make the 
connection between that fact, and the fact that our governing elite is operating on 
the instructions of the Controllers, we  then begin to realize that  the drama on the 
political stage is a shadow of the higher-level agenda. And that leads us to realize 
that the COINTELPRO operation in the New Age and Human Potential movement 
has truly been the “opening act”.

Based on observation and research, it is apparent that humanity has now reached 
a  great  historical  crossroads.  We  have  come  to  the  end  of  a  two  thousand  year 
history of intolerance, cruelty and stupidity, which has created our present state of 
global, collective  madness. Humanity, as a collective whole, is arriving at a state 
of    Spiritual  Bankruptcy,  or  “death”.  And  yet,  we  cannot  assume  that  this  is 
meaningless.  Those who understand the principles of electricity will comprehend 
when  I  say  that  this  present  global  estate  is  the  way  nature  works  and  is  the 
establishing of sufficient Contact Potential Difference for the inflow of energy of 
Cosmic  Light.  But  just  as  it