Google

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project
to make the world’s books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that’s often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book’s long journey from the
publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.

We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google’s system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attribution The Google “watermark” you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can’t offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book’s appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google’s mission is to organize the world’s information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world’s books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

atthtto: //books.gqoogle.com/

le ©

Gins >. Ms Charles S Fanchels.

~~ ean \
Sa ake,

a ee

HISTORY OF GREECE.

BY

GEORGE GROTE, Esa.

VOL. V.

REPRINTED FROM THE LONDON EDITION,

NEW YORK:

HARPER & BROTHERS, psraheg ar acs oe

$329 anvd $331 PEAEL STARR ST.
‘1859. ‘

e ve *%~« w 2
> ee © ue ye

THE NEW YORK

PUBLIC LIBRARY
Deets ft
ASTOR, LENOX AND

TR.DEN FOUNDATIONS.
R 1911

L

PREFACE ro VOL. V.

VOLUMES V axp VE

FROM THE BATTLE OF MARATHON TO THE
PEACE OF NIKIAS.

B.C. 490-421.

I sap reckoned upon carrying my readers in these twyu
voluizes down to the commencement of the great Athenian
expedition against Syracuse.

But the narration of events, now that we are under the
positive guidance of Thucydidés,— coupled with the exposi-
tion of some points on which I differ from the views generally
taken by my predecessors,— have occupied greater space
than I had foreseen: and I have been obliged to enlarge
my Sixth Volume beyond the usual size, in order to arrive
even at the Peace of Nikias.

The interval of disturbance and partial hostility, which
ensued between that peace and the Athenian expedition, will
therefore be reserved for the beginning of my Seventh Vcl-
ume, the publication of which will not be long delayed.

 G. G.

Dec. 1848.

CONTENTS.
VOL. V.

PART II.

CONTINUATION OF HISTORIOAL GREBOSR.

CHAPTER XXXVIII.

fROM THE BATTLE OF MARATHON TO THE MARCH OF XERXES AGAINST
GREECB.

Resolutions of Darius to invade Greece a second time. His death. —Suc-
ceeded by his son Xerxes. — Revolt and reconquest of Egypt by the Per
sians. — Indifference of Xerxes to the invasion of Greece — persons who
advised and instigated him — persuasions which they employed — proph-
ecies produced by Onomakritus. — Xerxes resolves to invade Greece. —
Historical manner and conception of Herodotus. — Xerxes announces
his project to an assembly of Persian counsellors — Mardonius and Arta-
banus, the evil and good genius. — Xerxes is induced by Artabanus to re-
nounce his project —his repeated dreams—divine command to invade
Greece. — Religious conception of the sequences of history — common
both to Persians and Greeks — Vast preparations of Xerxes. —

of Xerx2s from the interior of Asia—collection of the invading army

at Sardis — his numerous fleet and large magazines of provision before-

hand. — He throws a bridge of boats across the Hellespont. — The bridge
is destroyed by a storm — wrath of Xerxes — he puts to death the engi-
neers and punishes the Hellespont. — Remarks on this story of the pun-
ishment inflicted on the Hellespont: there is no sufficient reason for dis-
believing its reality.— Reconstruction of the bridge — description of it
in detail. — Xerxes cuts a ship-canal across the isthmus of Mount Athos.

— Superior intelligence of the Phenicians.— Employment of the lash

over the workmen engaged on the canal— impression made thereby on

the Greeks. — Bridge of boats thrown across the Strymon.— March of

Xerxes from Sardis — disposition of his army. — Story of the rich Kap-

padokian Pythius —his son put to death by order of Xerxes.-+>- March

to Abydos — respect shown to Ilium by Xerxes. — Xerxes and his army
cross over the Hellespontine bridges. — March to Doriskus in Thrace,
near the mouth of the Hebrus —his fleet joins him here.— Review and
muster on the plain of Doriskus — immense variety of the nations

hronght together. — Numbering of the army — method employed. — Im-

mense and incredible to‘als brought out by Herodotus. — Comments

a*®

vi CONTENTS.

upon the evidence of Herodotus and upon himself as witness and judge.
— Other testimonies about the number of the Persians. — Xerxes passes
in review the land-force and the fivet at Doriskus —his conversation with
the Spartan king Demaratus.— March of Xerxes from Doriskus west-
ward along Thrace. — Contributions levied on the Grecian towns on the
coast of Thrace — particularly Thasus and Abdéra.— Xerxes crosses
the Strymon — marches to Akanthus — zeal of the Akanthians in regard
to the canal of Athos.— March of Xerxes to Therma —his fleet join
him in the Thermaic Gulf. — Favorable prospects of the invasion — zeal
of the Macedonian princa to assist Kerxes........0...0s00. vovee lhe

CHAPTER XXXIX

PROCEEDINGS IN GREECE FROM THE BATTLE OF MARATHON TO THE
TIME OF THE BATTLE OF THERMOPYLEA.

Violent proceedings and death of Kleomenés king of Sparta. — Complaint
of the Aginetans at Sparta against Kleomenés and Leotychidés, on the
subject of the hostages which those two kings had taken from na ey —
The S deliver Leotychidés to the Beginctans, who require him to
go with them to Athens, to get back the hostages. — Refusal of the
Athenians to give up the hostages — reprisals of the A¢ginetans.— The
ZEginetan Nikodromus lays a scheme for a democratical revolution in

ina, in concert with Athens—the movement fails. — Treatment of
the defeated conspirators — sacrilege. — The Athenians land a force in
4igina — war which ensues. — Effect of this war in inducing the Athe-
nians to ak their military force.— Themistoklés and Aristeidés, the
chief men at Athens intense rivalry between them.— Banishment of
the latter by ostracism. — Conversion of Athens from a land power into
a naval power proposed and urged by Themistoklés.— Views and long-
sighted calculations of Themistoklés — he was at this time more essen-
tial to his country than Aristeidés. — Fleet of Athens —the salvation of
Greece as well as of herself.— Valuable fund now first available to
Athens from the silver mines of Laurium in Attica. — Themistoklés pre-
vails upon the Athenian people to forego the distribution of this fund,
and employ it in building an increased number of rp a — Preparations
of Xerxes — known beforehand in Greece. — Heralds from Persia to de-
mand earth and water from the Grecian cities reer! of them comply
and submit.— Pan-Hellenic congress convened jointly by Athens and
Sparta at the Isthmus of Corinth.— Important effect on Grecian mind.
— Effects of the congress in healing feuds among the different Greeks —
especially between Athens and Agina.— Alarm and mistrust prevalent
throughout Greece.— Terror conveyed in the reply of the Delphian
oracle to the Athenian envoys.— Sentence of the oracle frightful, yet
obscure: efforts of the Athenians to interpret it: ingenuity and success
of Themistoklés.— Great and genuine Pan-Hellenic pstriotism of the
Athenians — strongly attested by Herodotus, as his own judgment.—
Unwillingness, or jnability, on the part of a large proportion of Greeks,
to resist the Persians.— Ambiguous neutrality of Argos.— Different
stories current in Greece about Argos — opinion of Herodotas. — Refusal
or equivocation of the Kretans and Korkyrzans.— Mission to Gelon at
Syracuse —his reply. Greciam army sent into Thessaly, to defend

f

CONTENTS. wh

the defile of Tempé against Xerxes. — On arriving, they find that is
eannot be successfully held against him, and retire. — Consequences of
this retreat — the Thessalians, and nearly all Helles north of Kithseron,

cither submit to Xerxes OF WAVEr....-eseseeteccecccccer esses s hbnsO

CHAPTER XL.
BATTLES OF THERMOPYLE AYD ARTEMISIUM.

a das taken by the Confederate Greeks —— such Greeks as joined
the Persians. — Resolution taken to defend Thermopyls: as well as the
adjoining strait of Eubcea. — Pass of Thermopyls and its neighborhood.
The Greeks take post at Thermopyls — Leonidas, king of Sparta, con-
ducts the force thither — the combined fleet under Eurybindés occupy the
Enbcean strait. — Numbers and composition of the force of Leonidas. —
Phocians and Lokrians. — Olympian and Karneian festivals — the Greeks
could not bring themselves i weet these, even under such imminent
danger. — Path over Mount Gta by which Thermopyle might be evaded
—Teonidas first informed of it on reaching the spot— the i

engage to defend it. — Numbers and composition of the Greek fleet at
-Artemisium.— Three triremes of the Grecian fleet sent forward as scouts
__their first encounter with the Persian fleet. — oe of these three
triremes — panic of the general Grecian fleet, who abandon Artemisium,
and retire to Chalkis. — Imminent danger of the Greek scheme of de-
fence —they are rescued by a terrific storm. — Movements of Xerxes
from Therma. — He arrives with his army in the Malian territory, close
upon the pass of Thermopyle.— Advance of the Persian fleet — it is
overtaken by a destructive storm and hurricane on the coast of Magnesia.
—Immense dam inflicted upon it by the storm. — Encouragement
occasioned to the Greek fleet — they retarn from Chalkis to Artemisiam.
— Delay of Kerxes with his land-force near Trachis. — Impressions of
Xerxes about the defenders at Thermopyles — conversation with Dema-
ratus, whom he will not believe. — Doubts about the motives ascribed by
Herodotus to Xerxes. — First attack upon Thermopyle — made by the
Median troops — repulsed. — Repeated attacks, he e best troops in the
Persian army, all repulsed with slaughter. — Embarrassment of Xerxes
__he is relieved from it by hearing of the path over the mountain. — A
Persian detachment under Hydarnés march over the ,mountain-path,
driving away the Phocian guard. — They arrive in the rear of Leonidas.
— Debate among the defenders of Thermopyls, when it became known
that the Persians were approaching their rear. — Resolution of Leonidas
to stay and die in the pass. — The three hundred Spartans, together with
the Thespians, remain with Leonidas: the rest of the detachment retire.
— Doubts about the Theban contingent. — Last exploits and death of
Leonidas and his band. — Individuals among them distingdished — scorm
exhibited towards Aristodémus who did not fight. — Fate of the Theban
cot.tingent.— Impressions of Xerxes after the combat— advice given to
him by Demaratus — he rejects it. —- Proceedings of the two fleets, at Arte-
misium and Aphetss—alarm among the Grecian fleet — Themistoklés
determines them to stay and fight, at the urgent instance of the Euboans.
— Important service thus rendered by Themistoklés. — Confident hopes
ef the Persian figet — they detach a squadrca to sail reund Euboa, and

viii CONTENTS.

take the Greeks in the rear.—Sea-fight off Artemisium — advantage
gained by the Greeks. — Second storm — increased damage to the Per-
sian fleet, and ruin to the detachment sent round Eubcea. — Renewed sea-
fight off Artemisium —indecisive—but the Greek fleet resolves to re-
treat. — They retreat immediately on hearing of the disaster at Thermo-
pyle — they go to Salamis. — Advance of the Persian fleet to Eubosa —
manoeuvres ascribed to Xerxes in respect to the dead bodies at Thermo-

ylw. —- Numbers of dead on both sides. — Subsequent commemorating
inscriptions. — Impressive epigram of Simonidés.............. 70-104

CHAPTER XLI.
BATTLE OF SALAMIS.— RETREAT OF XERXES.

Surprise and terror of the Greeks immediately after the battle of Thermo-
haar aa ulterior plan of defence formed ~ no new position to be
ound, capable of defending Attica — the Peloponnesians crowd to fortify
the Isthmus of Corinth.— Hopeless situation of the Athenians — no
measures yet taken to remove their families from Attica. —The Athe-
mians abandon Attica, removing their families and property to Salamis,
4igina, Troezen, etc.— Unavoidable hurry and sufferings of the emi-
nts.— Energy of the Athenians, and unanimity of the leaders —
hemistoklés proposes the restoration of Aristcidés from exile. — Num-
bers and composition of the combined Greek fleet at Salamis. — Xerxes
occupiés Athens and Attica — the Persian fleet enters the road of Pha-
lérum. — The Persian army ravage the Phocian townships in their march
from ices Yard? hoy to Attica— pillage of the temple at Abs. — Persian
division detached against the temple of Delphi.— Failure, flight, and
rain of the detachment. — Xerxes with the Peisistratids in Athens — the
acropolis holds out — is taken and sacked.— Atoning visit of the Peisis-
tratids to the ruined acropolis. — Xerxes reviews his fleet at Phaléruam —
debate about the policy of fighting a naval battle at Salamis — prudent
counsel of Queen Artemisia. — Resolution taken by Xerxes to fight at
Salamis. — Dissensions among the Greeks in the fleet at Salamis. Re-
solution taken to remove the fleet to the Isthmus.— Ruinous conse-
uences, if that resolution had been executed. — Themistoklés opposes
the resolution, persuades Eurybiadés, and prevails upon him to reopen the
debate. — Synod of Grecian chiefs again convened — Themistoklés tries
to get the former resolution rescinded —the Peloponnesians adhere to it
— angry words. — Menace of Themistoklés to retire with the Athenian
squadron, unless a battle were to be fought at Salamis — Eurybiadés
es upon him to adopt this measure.— The Pel nesian chiefs,
silenced for the moment, afterwards refuse obedience. Third synod con-
vened — renewed disputes ; the majority opposed to Themistoklés and
determined on retreating to the Isthmus.— Desperate stratagem of
Themistoklés — he sends a private message across to Xerxes, persuading
him to surround the Greek fleet in the night, and thus render retirement
impossible. — a, Gop haste of Xerxes to prevent any of the Greeks
from escaping — his fleet incloses the Greeks during the night. — Aris
teidés comes in the night to the Greek fleet from gina — informs the
- chiefs that they are inclosed by the Persjans, and that escape has become
impossible. — Position of Xerxes — order of the fleets, and plan of at

CONTENTS. ix

tack. — Battle of reper Ri amiy se and complete defeat of the nie!
sians. — Distinguish of Queen Artemisia. — Expectations 0:

the Greeks that the conflict wold be renewed — fears of Xerxes for his
own personal safety — he sends his fleet away to Asia. — Xerxes resolves
to go back himself to Asia — advice and recommendation of Mardonius,
who is left behind, as general, to finish the conquest of Greece. — The
Greeks pursue the Persian fleet as far as Andros— second s of
Themistoklés by secret message to Xerxes. — Themistoklés with the fleet
— levying money in the Cyclades. — Xerxes evacuates Attica and returns
home by land, with the larger portion of his army.— Retreating march
of Xerxes to the Hellespont —sufferings of his troops. He finds the
bridge broken, and crosses the strait on shipboard into Asia.—Joy of
the Greeks — distribution of honors and prizes.— Honors rendered to
"TUG Stok O65 ee ec é 60 4 00.0 OK Sw ee 6S OS KOR Oke O% eS®esanes eo . 104-147

CHAPTER XLII.
BATTLES OF PLATZA AND MYKALE.— FINAL REPULSE OF THE PERSIANS.

7 be Persian fleet, after retiring from Greece, winters at Kymé, and collects
in the spring at Samos.— The Greek fleet assembles in the spring at
Jigina. — General adherence of the medizing Greeks to Mardonius — re-
volt of Potidwa — which is besieged in vain by Artabazus.— Mardonius,
after wintering in Thessaly, resumes operations in the spring in Beeotia.
He consults the Boeotian oracles. — Mardonius sends Alexander of Mace-
don to Athens, to offer the most honorable terms of .— Temptation
to Athens to accept this offer —fear of the Taceismonians that she
would accept it— Lacedemonian envoys sent to Athens to prevent it.—
Resolute reply of the Athenians, and determination {o carry on the war,

_ in spite of great present suffering.— Selfish indifitrence displayed by
Sparta and the Peloponnesians towards Athens. — a tee jog having
fortified the Isthmus, leave Attica undefended - Onius occupies
Athens a second time. — Second migration of the Athenians to Salamis
—their bitter disappointment and anger against Sparta for deserting
them. — Second offer of Mardonius to the Athenians — again refused —
intense resolution which they display. — Remonstrance sent by the Athe-
nians to Sparta— ungenerous slackness of the Spartans. — Large Spar-
tan force collected under Pausanias at the Isthmus. — Mardonius, after
ravaging Attica, retires into Boeotia.— Discouragement in the army of
Mardonius generally: Thersander of Orchomenus at the banquet: jeal-
ousies between Mardonius and Artabazus, the second in command — zeal
and eagerness of the Thebans. ——Numbers of the Greeks collected under
Pausanias. — March of Pausanias over Kitheron into Boeotia.— He is at-
tacked by the Persian cavalry under Masistius, and much harassed —su-
a efficiency of the Athenians against cavalry — Masistius is slain. —

he Greeks quit the protection of the mountain-grounds and take up a
position nearer to Platea, along the Asépus. — nius alters his
sition, and posts himself nearly opponte to the Greeks on the other side
of the Asépus.— Unwillingness of both armies to begin the attack — the
prophets on both sides discourage first aggression. — Mardonius annoys
the Greeks with his cavalry, and cuts off their supplies in the rear.— Im-
patience of Mardonius —in spite of the reluctance of Artabazus and other

: CONTENTS.

officers he determines on a general attack: he trics to show that the
prophecies are favorable to. him.— His intention communicated to the
Athenians in the a by Alexander of Macedon. — Pausanias chan
places in the line between the Spartans and Athenians. —- Mardonius
in attacks them with his cavalry. — In consequence of the annoyance
of the Persian cavalry, Pausanias determines to move in the night into
the Island. — Confusion of the Grecian army in executing this night-
movement. — Refusal of the S lochage Amompharetus to obey the
order for the night-march.— Mistrust of Pausanias and the S ns,
exhibited by the Athenians. — Pausanias moves without Amompharetus,
who speedily follows him.— Astonishment of Mardonius on discovering
that the Greeks had retreated during the night —he pursues and attacks
them with disorderly impatience.— Battle of Platsea.— Great personal
_ bravery of the Persians —they are totally defeated, and Mardonius slain.
— The Athenians on the left wing defeat the Thebans. — Artabazus, with
a large Persian corps, abandons the contest and retires out of Greece —
the rest of the Persian army take up their position in the fortified camp.
— Small proportion of the armies on each side which really fought. —
The Greeks attack and the fortified camp.— Loss on both sides. —
Funeral obsequies by the, Greeks — monuments— dead body of Mardo-
nius — distribution of booty.—Pausanias summons Thebes, requiring
the surrender of the leaders—these men give themselves up, and are put
to death. — Honors and distinctions among the Greek warriors. — Rever-
ential tribute to Platwa, as the scene of the victory, and to the Platewans:
solemnities decreed to be periodically celebrated by the latter, in honor
of the slain. — Permanent Grecian confederacy decreed by the victors, to
hold meetings at Platza.— Proceedings of the Grecian fleet: it moves to
the rescue of Samos from the Persians. — The Persian fleet abandons
Samos and retires to Mykalé in Ionia. — Mistrust of the fidelity of the
Ionians entertained by the Persian generals. — The Greeks land.to attack
the Persians ashore —revelation of the victory of Platea, gained by
their countrymen on the same morning, springs up in their minds before
the battle. — Battle of Mykalé — revolt of the Ionians in the Persian
camp — complete defeat of the Persians. — Retirement of the defeated
Persian army to Sardis. — Reluctance of the Spartans to adopt the con-
tinental Ionians into their alliance — proposition to transport them across
the Aigean into Western Greece—rejected by the Athenians. — The
Grecian fleet sails to the Hellespont: the Spartans return home, but the
Athenians remain to attack the Chersonese. — Siege of Sestos — antipa-
thy of the Chersonesites against Artayktés. — Capture of Sestos — craci-
fixion of Artayktés. — Return of the fleet to Athens........... 147-203

CHAPTER XDLITITI.

EVENTS IN SICILY DOWN TO THE EXPULSION OF THE GELONIAN DYN:
ASTY AND THE ESTABLISHMENT OF POPULAR GOVERNMENTS THROUGH-
OUT THE ISLAND.

Agrigentum and Gela superior to Syracuse before 500 8.c.— Phalaris
despot of Agrigentum. — Syracuse in 500 z.c. — oligarchical government
under the Gamori, or privileged descendants of the original proprietary.
colonists — the Demos — the Kyllyrii, or Serfs. —Early governments of

CONTENTS. xi

the Greek cities in Sicily — original olga subverted in many places
by despots — attempted colony of the prince Dorieus. —

der despot of Gela, B.c. about 500.— First rise of Gelo and nesidé-
mus in his service. Télinés, the first marked ancestor of Gelo.— Gelo—
in high command among the mercenaries of Hippokratés despot of Gela.
— Fate of the Ionic town of Zanklé, afterwards Messina — it is seized by
the Samians — conduct of Hippokratés. — Hippokratés is victorious over
the barbie _— het comers a: ney — Gelo becomes in his place
despot o — Greatness o. o—he gets possession of Syracus
gad traiafors the seat of his from Gela to Siracaie: — Conquest of
various Sicilian towns by Gelo — he transports the oligarchy to Syracuse
and sells the Demos for slaves. — power and population of S
cuse under Gelo — it becomes the first city in Sicily.— Power of Gelo
when the envoys from Sparta and Athens came to entreat his aid, B.c.
481.— Plans of Gelo for strengthening Sicilian Hellenism agaiust the bar-
baric interests in the islands. — Spartan and Athenian envoys apply to
Gelo —his answer. — igen. ‘pump invasion of Sicily, simultaneous with
the invasion of Greece by Xerxes.— The Carthaginian army under
Hamilkar besiege Himera — battle of Himera — complete victory gained
over them by Gelo. — Supremacy of Gelo in Sicily — he grants peace to
the Carthaginians. — Conduct of Gelo towards the confederate Greeks
who were contending against Xerxes.— Number of prisoners taken at
the battle of Himera and distributed among the Carthaginian cities —
their prosperity, especially that of Agrigentum.— Death and obsequice
of Gelo. — Number of new citizens whom Gelo had introduced at Syra-
cuse.— Hiero, brother and successor of Gelo at Syracuse — jealous of
his brother Polyzélus — harsh as a ruler — quarrel between Hiero of Syr-
acuse and Théro of Agrigentum — appeased by the poet Simonidés.—
sabhaty aarp itie of the ep aecaa Himera ee — Power and
exploits of Hiero — against the Ca inians an se, re ¢
‘Anaxilans — he founds the city of Ztna— new eioleaels transplanta-
tion of inhabitants — compliments of Pindar. — Death of Anaxilaus of
Rhegium, and of Théro of ig Thrasydeus, son of Théro,
rules Agrigentum and Himera. His cruel government —he is defeated
by Hiero and expelled.— Great power of Hiero, after the defeat of
Thrasydseus — his death. — eabe hiperr brother and successor of Hiero
— disputes among the members of the Gelonian family. — Cruelties and
unpopularity of Thrasybulus — mutiny Prey him at Syracuse. — Ex-
aulsion of Thrasybulus, and extinction of the Gelonian dynasty. — Pop-
ular governments established in all the Sicilian cities — confusion and
disputes arising out of the number of new citizens and mercenaries dom-
iciliated by the Gelonian princes. — Internal dissensions and. combat in
Syracuse.— Defeat of the Gelonians — Syracuse made into one popular
government, one city, one fortification. — Disorders in other Sicilian
cities, arising from the return of exiles who had been dispossessed under
the Gelonian dynasty. Katana apd tna. — General congress and com-
promise — the exiles are provided for—Kamarina again restored as a
separate autonomous city.— Reactionary feelings against the previous
despotism, and in favor of popes government, at Syracuse and in the
other cities. —Italiot Greeks— destructive defeat -of the inhabitants of
_ Tarentum and of Rhegium..... er Tt ee sais waneuae 204-239

xii CONTENTS.

CHAPTER XLIV.

FROM THE BATTLE OF PLATH#A AND MYKALE DOAN TO TUE DEATHS
OF THEMISTOKLES AND ARISTEIDES.

Causes of the disgraccful repulse of Xerxes from Greece —his own defects
—inferior quality and slackness of most of his army. — Tendency to ex-
aggerate the heroism of the Greeks.— Comparison of the invasion of
Greece by Xerxes with the invasfon of Persia afterwards by Alexander
the Great. — No improvement in warfare among the Persians during that
interval of one hundred and fifty years — great improvement among the
Greeks. — Progressive spirit in Greece —operating through Athenian
initiative.— Conduct of Athens in the repulse of the Persians — her
position, temper, and influence, after that event. — Proceedings of the
Athenians to restore their city — jealous obstructions caused by the Pelo-
ponnesians.— Stratagem of Themistoklés to procure for the Athenians
the opportunity of fortifying their city.— Athens fortified — confusion
of the Spartans — disappointment of the allies. — Effect of this intended,
but baffled, intervention upon Athenian feelings. — Enlargement of the
walls of Athens. noe plans of Themistoklés for the naval aggran-
dizement of the city —fortified town and harbor provided at Peirseus —
vast height and thickness projected for the walls. — Advantages of the
enlarged and fortified harbor — increase of metics and of commerce at
Athens. — Resolution to build twenty new triremes annually. — Expedi-
tion of the united Greek fleet against Asia, under the Spartan Pausanias —
capture of Byzantium. — Miscondact of Pausanias — refusal of the allies
to obey him — his treasonable correspondence with Xerxes. — Pausanias,
having assurances of aid from Xerxes, becomes more intolerable in his
behavior. He is recalled to Sparta.— The allies transfer the headship
from Sparta to Athens. — Importance of this change in the relations of
the Grecian states. — Tendency of the Spartan kings to become corrupt-
ed on foreign service — Leotychidés, — Momentary Pan-Hellenic anion
under Sparta, immediately after the repulse of Xerxes — now broken up
and passing into a schism, with two distinct parties and chiefs, Sparta
and Athens. — Proceedings of Athens in her capacity of leader — good
conduct of Aristeidés.— Formation of the confederacy of Delos, under
Athens as president — general meetings of allies held in that island. —
Assessment of the confederacy and all its members, made by Aristeidés
— definite obligation in ships and money —money total — Hellénotamiz.
— Rapid growth, early magnitude, of the confederacy of Delos: willing
adhesion of the members. — State and power of Persia at the time when .
the confederacy of Delos was first formed.— Conduct of Pausanias after
being removed from the command —he prosecutes his treasonable designs
in conjunction with Persia. — He is recalled to Sparta — imprisoned —
pu on his trial — tries to provoke the Helots to revolt. — He is detected

y the revelation of a slave —incredulity or fear of the Ephors. — His
arrest and death —atonement made for offended sanctuary. — Themis-
toklés is compromised in the detected treason of Pausanias. — Position
of Themistoklés at Athens —tendency of Athenian parties and politics.
— Effect of the events of the Persian war upon Athenian political senti-
ment — stimulus to democracy.— Alteration of the Kleisthenean consti-
tution —all citizens without exception are rendered politically admissible
to office: first, universal eligibility and election of magistrates — next,
sortition, or drawing by lot.—TJ crease of the power of the Stratégi—

CONTENTS. xiii

alteration in the functions and diminution of the importance of the Ar
chons.— Administration of Athens —new functionaries ap-
pointed — distribution between Athens and Pcirseus.— Political career
and precarious tenor of Themistoklés — bitter rivals against him — Ki-
mon} Alkmzon, etc.— His liability to charges of corruption. — Themisto-
klés is charged with accepting bribes from Persia— acquitted at Athens.
— Increased bitterness of feud between him and his political rivals,
after this acquittal. H6 is ostracized.— While in banishment under oe-
tracism, the dzmonians B joie’ a charge of treason against him. —
Flight and adventures of Themistoklés.— Themistoklés gets over to
Asia, and seeks refuge with the Persian king.— Stories about the rela-
tions between the Persian king and Themistoklés.— Real treatment of
‘Themistoklés in Persia. — Influence which he acquires with the Persian
king.— Large reward which he yeceives—His death at Magnesia. —
Death of Aristeidés— his poverty. ....ccesceccccee ccsecevee .RS9=289

CHAPTER XLV.

PROCEEDINGS OF THB CONFEDERACY UNDER ATHENS AS HEAD. — FIRST
FORMATION AND RAPID EXPANSION OF THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE.

Consequence of the formation of the confederacy of Delos. —~ Bifurcation
of Grecian politics between Sparta and Athens.— Distinction between the
confederacy of Delos, with Athens as president—and the Athenian
empire which grew out of it.— ‘Tendency to confuse these two, and to
impute to Athens long-sighted plans of ambition. —The early years,
after the formation of the confederacy of Delos, were years of active ex-
ertion on the part of Athens. — Our imperfect knowledge of them.—
Necessity of continued action against the Persians, even after the battles
of Plata and Mykalé. This necessity was the cause, both of the willing
organization of the confederacy of Delos and of the maritime improve-
ment of Athens.— Confederacy of Delos —sworn to by all the members
— perpetual and peremptory —not allowing retirement nor evasion.—
Enforcing sanction of Athens, strictly exercised, in harmony with the
general synod. — Gradual alteration in the relations of the allies —sub-
stitution of money-payment for personal service, demanded by the allies
themselves, suitable to the interests and feelings of Athens.— Change in
the position as well as in the feelings of Athens.— movie veropalert
of Athens throughout Greece — causes of it.—Synod of aise pred:
wand declines in importance and vanishes. — Superior qualities and merit
of the Athenians as compared with the confederates of Delos generally.
— Tribute first raised by the synod of Delos — assessment of Aristeidés.
——- Events between B.c. 476-466. — Eion— Skyros — tos. — Athens
as guardian of the Avgean sea against piracy.— The Hero Theseus.—
First revolt among the members of the confederacy of Delos— Naxos re-
volts and is reconquered.— Operations of Athens and the confederacy
against Persia‘— Defeat of the Persians by Kimon at the river Euryme-
don.— Revolt of Thasos from the confederacy of Delos.— Siege of
Thasos by the.Athenians under Kimon.— Mines in Thrace. — First at-
tempt of Athens to found a city at Ennea Hodoi on the Strymon above
Eion. The attempt fails and the settlers are slain. — Reduction of Tha-
sos after a blockade of two years —it is disarmed and dismantled. — Ap-

B

kiv CONTENTS.

plication of the Thasians to Sparta for aid— granted, but not carried into
effect — glimpse of hostilities between Sparta and Athens.— Trial and
acquittal of Kimon at Athens. — Great increase of the Athenian power.
= Proceeilings in Central Greece between 470-464 B.c. Thebes and the
Beeotian towns. Discredit of Thebes. — Sparta restores and upholds the
supremacy of Thebes over the lesser Boeotian towns. — Events in Pelopon-
nesus — Arcadia — Elis, etc.— Terrible earthquake at Sparta, 464 z.c.
— Revolt of the Helots.-— Th: Lacedemonians invoke the aid of their
allies against the revolted Helots.— March of the Athenians under Ki-
mon into Laconia, to aid them.— Mistrust conceived -by the Lacedexmo
nians of their Athenian auxiliaries, who are dismissed from Laconia. Dis
pleasure and change of policy at Athens. — The Athenians renounce the
alliance of Sparta, and contract alliance with nee Position of Axgos
—her conquest of Mykénw and other towns.— Megara becomes allied
with Athens. Growing hatred of Corinth and the neighboring Pelopon-
nesian states towards Athens.— Energetic simultaneous action of t the
Athenians — in rus, Phenicia, Egypt, and Greece—they build the
first “Long Wall” from M to Niss.— War of Athens Cor-
inth, Agina, etc. Total defeat of the Aginetans at sea.— The Atheni-
ans besiege AUgina — the Corinthians, Epidaurians, etc. are defeated
the Athenians nnder Myrénidés. — The Long Walls between Athens
Peirseus are projected — espoused by Periklés, opposed by Kimon— po-
litical contentions at Athens — importance of the Long Wall. — Ex i
tion of the Lacedzmonians into tia—they restore the ascende
of Thebes. — Intention of the Spartan army in tia to threaten Athens
and sustain the Athenian oligarchical party opposed to the Long Walls
— Battle of Tanagra — defeat of the Athenians.— Effects of the battle —
generous behavior of Kimon —he is recalled from ostracism.— Compro-
mise and reconciliation between the rival leaders and parties at Athens. —
Victory of Ginophyta gained by the Athenians — they acquire ascendency
over all Boeotia, Phocis, and Lokris.— Completion of the Long Walls.
— Conquest of gina, which is disarmed, dismantled, and rendered trib- -
utary.— The Athenians first sail round Peloponnesus — their operations
in the gulf of Corinth. —~ Defeat and losses of the Athenians in Egypt.
— The revolted Helots in Laconia capitulate and leave the country. —
Truce for five years concluded between Athens and Lacedemonians,
through the influence of Kimon. — Fresh expeditions of Kimon against
Persia. — Death of Kimon at Cyprus — victories of the Athenian fleet —~
it returns home. — No farther expeditions of the Athenians against Per-
sia— convention concluded between them. — Mistakes and exaggerations
respecting this convention — doubts raised as to its historical reality.
Discussion of those doubts — confirmatory hints of Thucydidés. — Thu-
didés, son of Melésias, succeeds Kimon as leading opponent of Peri-
és.— Transfer of the common fund of the confederacy from Delos to
Athens. — Gradual passage of the confederacy into an Athenian empire.
-— Transfer of the fund was proposed by the Samians.— Position of
Athens with a numerous alliance both of inland and maritime states. —
Commencement of reverses and decline of power to Athens. — Revolt
of Beotia from Athens — defeat of the Athenians at Koréneia — they
evacuate Bootia. — Revolt of Phocis, Lokris, Eubea, and Megara: in-
vasion of Attica by the Peloponnesians under the Lacedemonian king
Pleistoanax. — Eubcea reconquered by Periklés.— Humiliation and de-
 amgpergr of Athens. — Conclusion of the Thirty years’ truce. — Dimina-
tion of Athenian power. — Feud between Athens and Megara. 290-359

CONTENTS. : x¢

CHAPTER XLVI.

CONSTITUTIONAL AND JUDICIAL CHANGES AI ATHENS UNDER PERIELSS.

First establishment of the democratical judicial system at Athens.— Union,
in the same hands, of functions both administrative and judicial in earl
Athens — great powers of the magistrates, as well as of the senate
Areopagas. — istrates generally wealthy men — oligarchical tenden-
cies of the senate of Areopagus —-increase of democratical sentiment
among the bulk of the citizens.— Political parties in Athens. — Periklés
and Ephialtés democratical: Kimon, oligarchical or vonservative. —
Democratical Dikasteries, or Jury-courts, constituted by Periklés and
Ephialtés. — How these dikasteries were arranged. — Pay to the dikasts
introduced and made regular.— The magistrates are deprived of their
judicial and confined to administrative functions. — Senate of Areo
— its antiquity — semi-religious character — large and undefined con-

trollin wer.—— Large powers of the senate of Areopagns, in
nbuse peace inconsistent with the feelings of the people the Per.
sian invasion. — New interests and tendencies then growing up at Athens.
— Senate of Areo —a centre of action for the conservative party
and Kimon. — ition between Kimon and Periklés — inherited from
their fathers.— Character and working of Periklés.— Reserved, philo-
sophical, and business-like habits of Periklés —his little pains to court
popularity —less of the demagogue than casi eae ialtés belonging
to the democratical party, and originally equal to Periklés in influence.—
Efforts of Ephialtés 5 ace magisterial abuse. Kimon and his party,
more _ werful than Ephicitcs and Periklés, until the time when the
Athenian troops were dismis;ed from Laconia. — Ostracism of Kimon. —
Measures carried by Ephialtés and Periklés to abridge the power of the
senate of Areopagus as well as of individual magistrates. — Institution
of the paid dikasteries.— Separation of judicial from administrative func-
tions. — Assassination of Ephialtés by the conservative abe Apere Com-
mencement of the great ascendency of Periklés, after the of Ephi-
altés. Compromise between him and Kimon.— Brilliant succéss of
Athens, and era of the maximum of her power.— Other constitutional
changes. — The Nomophylakes. — The Nomothetss —.distinction between
laws and psephisms, or special decrees — process by which laws were en-
acted and repealed.— Procedure in making or repealing of laws assim-
ilated to the procedure in judicial trials. —Graphé Paranomdn — indict-
ment against the mover of illegal or unconstitutional propositions. —
Working of the Graphé Paranomén. — Conservative spirit in which it is
framed.— Restraint upon new propositions, and upon the unlimited
initiative belonging to every citizen.— Abusive extension of the Graphé
Paranomén afterwards. It was often used as a simple way of procuring
the repeal of an existing law — without personal aim against the author
of the law. — Numbers and pay of the dikasts, as provided by Periklés.
— The Athenian democracy, as constituted by Periklés, remained sub-
stantially unaltered afterwards down to the loss of Athenian independ-
ence — excepting the temporary interruptions of the Four Hun and
the Thirty.— Working of the numerous dikasteries — their num-
essential to exclude corruption or intimidation — liability of individ-
ual magistrates to corruption. — The Athenian dikasteries are jury-trial
applied on the broadest scale — exhibiting both its excellences and ite

<vi CONTENTS.

defects in an igo 4 babepa form.— The encomiums usually pronounced
upon the theory o ake a would apply yet more strongly to the Athe-
nian dikasteries. — rfections of jury-trial — exaggerated in tho pro-
cedure of the dikasterics, — Powerful effects of the dikasteries in exer-
cising and stimulating the intellect and feelings of individual citizens. —
Necessity of 4 to speak — growth of professional teachers of
rhetoric — professio

Sophists. — Polemics of Sokratés, himself a sophist, against the sophists

generally. — Sophists and rhetors were the natural product of the age and’

of the democracy.— The dikasteries were composed, not exclusively of
poor men, but of middling and poorer citizens indiscriminatelv. 3529-407

composers of speeches for others. — Rhetors and —

HISTORY OF GREECE.

PART IL

CONTINUATION OF HISTORICAL GREECE.

CHAPTER XXXVIII.

FROM THE BATTLE OF MARATHON TO THE MARCH OF XERXES
7 AGAINST GREECE.

In the last chapter but one of the preceding volume, I de-
scribed the Athenian victory at Marathon, the repulse of the
Persian general Datis, and the return of his armament across
the Atgean to the Asiatic coast. He had been directed to con-
quer both Eretria and Athens: an order which he had indeed
executed in part with success, as the string of Eretrian prisoners
brought to Susa attested, — but which remained still unfulfilled
in regard to the city principally obnoxious to Darius. Far from
satiating his revenge upon Athens, the Persian monarch was
compelled to listen to the tale of an ignominious defeat. His
wrath against the Athenians rose toa higher pitch than ever,
and he commenced vigorous preparations for a renewed attack
upon them, as well as upon Greece generally. Resolved upon as-
sembling the entire force of his empire, he directed the various
satraps and sub-governors throughout all Asia to provide troops,
horses, and ships, both of war and burden. For no less than three
years the empire was agitated by this immense levy, which Da-
rius determined to conduct in person against Greece.! Nor was

ee

! Herodot. vii, 3. 4.
VOL. v. 1 foc.

9 HISTORY OF GREECE.

'

_his determination abated by a revolt of the Egyptians, which
broke out about the time when his preparations were completed.
He was on the point of undertaking simultaneously the two en-
terprises, — the conquest of Greece and the reconquest of Egypt,
when he was surprised by death, after a reign of thirty-six
years. As a precaution previous to this intended march, he had
nominated as successor Xerxes, his son by Atossa; for the ascen-
dency of that queen insured to Xerxes the preference over his
elder brother Artabazanes, son of Darius by a former wife, and
born before the latter became king. The choice of the reigning
monarch passed unquestioned, and Xerxes succeeded without
opposition.! It deserves to be remarked, that though we shall
meet with several acts of cruelty and atrocity perpetrated in the
Persian regal family, there is nothing like that systematic fratri-
cide which has been considered necessary to eveeiee succession
in Turkey and other Oriental empires.

The intense wrath against Athens, which had become the pre-
dominant sentiment in the mind of Darius, was yet unappeased -
at the time of his death, and it was fortunate for the Athenians
that his crown now passed to a prince less obstinately hostile as
well as in every respect inferior. Xerxes, personally the hand-

* Herodot. vii, 1-4. He mentions —simply as a report, and seemingly
witheut believing it himself—that Demaratus the exiled king of Sparte
was at Susa at the moment when Darius was about to choose a successor
‘among his sons (this cannot consist with Ktesias, Persic. c. 23): and that
he suggested to Xerxes a convincing argument by which to determine the
mind of his father, urging the analogy of the law of regal succession at
Sparta, whereby the son of a king, born after his father became king, was
preferred to an elder son born before that event. The existence of such a
eustom at Sparta may well be doubted.

Some other anecdotes, not less difficult of belief than this, and alike cal-
culated to bestow a factitious importance on Demaratus, will be noticed in
the subsequent pages. The latter received from the Persian king the grant
of Pergamus and Teuthrania, with their land-revenues, which his descen4-
ants long afterwards continued to occupy (Xenoph. Hellen. iii, 1-6): and
perhaps these descendants may have been among the persons fro:: whom
Herodotus derived his information respecting the expedition of Xerxes.
See vii, 239.

Plutarch (De Fraterno Amore, p. 488) gives an account in many respects
different comcernins tle circumstances which determined the succession of
Xerxes to the throuc, in preference to his elder brother.

ACCESSION OF XERXES. 8

somest! and most stately man amid the immense crowd which he
led against Greece, was in character timid and faint-hearted,’
over and above those defects of vanity, childish self-conceit, and
blindness of appreciation, which he shared more or less with all
the Persian kings. Yet we shall see that, even under his con-
duct, the invasion of Greece was very near proving successful :
and it well might have succeeded altogether, had he been either
endued with the courageous temperament, or inflamed with the
fierce animosity, of his father.

On succeeding to the throne, Xerxes found the forces of the
empire in active preparation, pursuant to the orders of Darius ;
except Egypt, which was in a state of revolt. His first necessity
was to reconquer this country ; a purpose for which the great
military power now in readiness was found amply sufficient.
Egypt was subdued and reduced to a state of much harder de-
pendence than before: we may presume that the tribute was in-
creased, as well as the numbers of the Persian occupying force
maintained, by contributions levied on the natives. Achsenienes,
brother of Xerxes, was installed there as satrap.

But Xerxes was not at first equally willing to prosecute the
schemes of his deceased father against Greece. At least such is
the statement of Herodotus; who represents Mardonius as the
grand instigator of the invasion, partly through thirst for war-
like enterprise, partly from a desire to obtain the intended con-
quest as a satrapy for himself. Nor were there wanting Grecian
counsellors to enforce his recommendation, both by the promise
of help and by the color of religion. The great family of the
Aleuadz, belonging to Larissa, and perhaps to other towns in
Thessaly, were so eager in the cause, that their principal mem-
bers came to Susa to offer an easy occupation of that frontier
territory of Hellas: while the exiled Peisistratids from Athens
still persevered in striving to procure their own restoration at
the tail of a Persian army. On the present occasion, they
brought with them to Susa a new instrument, the holy mystic
Onomakritus, —a man who had acquired much reputation, not
by prophesying himself, but by collecting, arranging, interpret-

1 Herod. vii, 187. The like personal beauty is ascribed to Darius Co-
aomannus, the last of the Persian kings (Plutarch, Alexand. c. 21 )-

4 ‘HISTORY OF GREECE.

ing, and delivering out, prophetic verses passing under the name
‘of the ancient seer or poet Museus. Thirty years before, in the
flourishing days of the Peisistratids, he had lived at Athens, en-
joying the confidence of Hipparchus, and consulted by him as the
expositor of these venerated documents. But having been de-
tected by the poet Lasus of Hermione, in the very act of inter-
polating them with new matter of his own, Hipparchus banished
him with indignation. The Peisistratids, however, now in banish-
ment themselves, forgot or forgive this offence, and carried
Onomakritus with his prophecies: to Susa, announcing him as a
person of oracular authority, to assist in working on the mind of
Xerxes. To this purpose his interpolations, or his omissions,
were now directed : for when introduced to the Persian monarch,
he recited emphatically various encouraging predictions wherein
‘the bridging of the Hellespont and the triumphant march of a
barbaric host into Greece, appeared as predestined; while he
carefully kept back all those of a contrary tenor, which portended
calamity and disgrace. So at least Herodotus,! strenuous in up-
holding the credit of Bakis, Muszus, and other Grecian prophets
whose verses were in circulation, expressly assures us. The
religious encouragements of Onomakritus, and the political co-
operation proffered by the Aleuadz, enabled Mardonius effectn-
ally to overcome the reluctance of his master. Nor indeed
was it difficult to show, according to the feelings then prevalent,
that a new king of Persia was in honor obliged to enlarge the
boundaries of the empire.2 The conquering impulse springing
from the first founder was as yet unexhausted ; the insults offered
by the Athenians remained still unavenged: and in addition to
‘ this double stimulus to action, Mardonius drew a captivating pic-
ture of Europe as an acquisition ;— “it was the finest land in
the world, produced every variety of fruit-bearing trees, and was

' Herodot. vii, 6 ; viii, 20, 96, 77. ’Ovouaxptroc — xarédeye Tv ypnopev-
el pév Te tvéot odadua gépov 7) Tlépog, tay piv Edeye obdév: 6 62 ra ebrv-
xéoTaTa Exdeyouevos, EAeye Tov Te ‘EAAjorovroy oc Cevydivat ypéov ely br?
évdpdc Tlépoew, tay Te EAaowy eEnyedpevos, ete.

An intimation somewhat curious respecting this collection of prophecies;
it was of an extremely varied character, and contained promises or threats
to meet any emergency which might arise.

® Aschylus, Pers. 761.

HERODOTUS. 8

too good a possession for any mortal man except the Persian
kings.”! Fifteen years before, the Milesian Aristagoras,2 when
entreating the Spartans to assist the Ionic revolt, had exaggerated
the wealth and productiveness of Asia in contrast with the pov-
erty of Greece, — a contrast less widely removed from the truth,
at that time, than the picture presented by Mardonius.

Having thus been persuaded to alter his original views, Xerxes
convoked a meeting of the principal Persian counsellors, and
announced to them his resolution to invade Greece, setting forth
the mingled motives of revenge and aggrandizement which im-
pelled him, and representing the conquest of Greece as carrying
with it that of all Europe, so that the Persian empire would be-
come coextensive with the wether of Zeus and the limits of the
sun’s course. On the occasion of this invasion, now announced
and about to take place, we must notice especially the historical
manner and conception of our capital informant, — Herodotus.
The invasion of Greece by Xerxes, and the final repnise of his
forces, constitute the entire theme of his three last books,
and the principal object of his whole history, towards which the
previous matter is intended to conduct. Amidst those prior cir-
cumstances, there are doubtless many which have a substantive
importance and interest of their own, recounted at so much
length that they appear coordinate and principal, so that the
thread of the history is for a time put out of sight. Yet we shall
find, if we bring together the larger divisions of his history,
omitting the occasional prolixities of detail, that such thread is
never lost in the historian’s own mind: it may be traced by an
attentive reader, from his preface and the statement immediately
following it — of Croesus, as the first barbaric conqueror of the
Ionian Greeks — down to the full expansion of his theme, “ Gre-
cia Barbarie lento collisa duello,” in the expedition of Xerxes.
That expedition, as forming the consummation of his historical
scheme, is not only related more copiously and continuously than
any events preceding it, but is also ushered in with an unusual
solemnity of religious and poetical accompaniment, so that the

1 Herodot. vii, 5. o¢ 7 Etpomn mepexaddane xopn, wat vévdpea navroia
gépec Ta fuepa, BaciAé te pobvy Sunray din exripcOas —xOpqy Tapygo-
pwré wy (vii, 8). ' 8 Herodot. v, 49.

6 . HISTORY OF GREECE.

seventh book of Herodotus reminds us in many points of the
second book of the Iliad: probably too, if the lost Grecian epics
had reached us, we should trace many other cases in which the
imagination of the historian has unconsciously assimilated itself
to them. The dream sent by the gods to frighten Xerxes, when
about to recede from his project, — as well as the ample cata-
logue of nations and eminent individuals embodied in the Persian
host, — have both of them marked parallels in the Iliad: and
Herodotus seems to delight in representing to himself the enter-
prise against Greece as an antithesis to that of the Atreids
against Troy. He enters into the internal feelings of Xerxes
with as much familiarity as Homer into those of Agamemnon,
and introduces “the counsel of Zeus” as not less direct, special,
and overruling, than it appears in the Iliad and Odyssey :! though
the godhead in Herodotus, compared with Homer, tends to be-
come neuter instead of masculine or feminine, and retains only
the jealous instincts of a ruler, apart from the appetites, lusts,
and caprices of a man: acting, moreover, chiefly as a ‘centralized,
or at least as a homogeneous, force, in place of the discordant
severalty of agents conspicuous in the Homeric theology. The
religious idea, so often presented elsewhere in Herodotus, — that
the godhead was jealous and hostile to excessive good fortune or im-
moderate desires in man, — is worked into his history of Xerxes
as the ever-present moral and as the main cause of its disgrace-
ful termination: for we shall discover as we proceed, that the
historian, with that honorable frankness which Plutarch calls his
“malignity,” neither ascribes to his countrymen credit greater
than they deserve for personal valor, nor seeks to veil the many
chances of defeat which their mismanagement laid open.2

1 Homer, Iliad, i, 3. Asd¢g &” éreAeiero BovAn. Herodotus is charac-
terized as ‘Oujpov CnAwri¢ — ‘Ounpixorarog (Dionys. Halic. ad Cn. Pom-
peium, p. 772, Reiske; Longinus De Sublim. p. 86, ed Pearce).

2 While Plutarch — if indeed the treatise De Herodoti Malignitate be the
work of Plutarch — treats Herodotus as uncandid, malicious, corrupt, the
calumniator of great men and glorious deeds, — Dionysius of Halikarnassus,
‘on the contrary, with more reason, treats him as a pattern of excellent
dispositions in an historian, contrasting him in this respect with Thucydi-
des, to whom he imputes an unfriendly spirit in criticizing Athens, arising
from his long banishment: ‘H uév ‘Hpodérov d:adeote év Gracty éncernge,
kal roig wir ayadoicg ovvndopuévn, toig 62 Kaxoig ouvadyotca’ 7 dé Govxvdl-

——— eee
~_ weer ee ee ———ae an 5

XERXES RESOLVES TO INVADE GREECE. q

I have already mentioned that Xerxes is described as having
originally been averse to the ‘enterprise, and only stimulated
thereto by the persuasions of Mardonius: this was probably the
genuine Persian belief, for the blame of so great a disaster would
naturally be transferred from the monarch to some evil counsel-
jor.! As soon as Xerxes, yielding to persuasion, has announced
to the Persian chief men whom he had convoked his resolution
.to bridge over the Hellespont and march to the conquest of
Greece and Europe, Mardonius is represented as expressing his
warm concurrence in the project, extolling the immense force? of
Persia and depreciating the Ionians in Europe — so he denomi-
nated them — as so poor and disunited that success was not only
certain but easy. Against the rashness of this general — the
evil genius of Xerxes — we find opposed the prudence and long
experience of Artabanus, brother of the deceased Darius, and
therefore uncle to the monarch. The age and relationship of
this Persian Nestor emboldens him to undertake the dangerous
task of questioning the determination which Xerxes, though pro-
fessing to invite the opinions of others, had proclaimed as already

dov d:a8eate abdexactég rig Kal mexpd, xal rH warpids THe GvyYT¢ prnoLKa-
xovoa > Ta nev yop deapripara éxetépyerat kal eaAa axpiBac, Tov d2 card voby
wexopyxiter kaBanat ob péuyynra: Sonep tvayxasuévocs. (Dionys. Hal.
ad. Cn. Pompeium de Precip. Historicis Judic. p. 774, Reisk.)

Precisely the same fault which Dionysius here imputes to Thucydides
{though in other places he acquits him, dxd navrd¢ gdévou Kat Tacy¢ Ko-
Aaxeiac, p. 824), Plutareh and Dio cast far more harshly upon Herodotus.
In neither case is the reproach deserved.

Both the moralists and the rhetoricians of ancient times were very apt
to treat history, not as a series of true matters of fact, exemplifying the
laws of human nature and society, and enlarging our knowledge of them
for purposes of ffture inference, —but as if it were a branch of fiction, so
to be handled as to please our taste or improve our morality. Dionysius,

~ blaming Thucydides for the ehoice of his subject, goes so far as to say that

the Peloponnesian war, a period of ruinous discord in Greece, ought to
have been left in oblivion and never to have passed into history (ocw7g xa?
Andy rapadoGetc, ind trav émiytyvopéver Hyvoja8at, ibid. p. 768),— and
that especially Thucydides ought never to have thrown the blame of it
eupon his own city, since there were many other causes to which it might
have been imputed (érépace Eyovra roAAaic dgoppaic meprawpat tac alriac, p.
770). ? Herodot. viii, 99. Mapdéviov év airig redévrec : compare c. 100,
® Herodot. vii, 9.

8 HISTORY OF GREECE.

settled ir. hit own mind. The speech which Herodotus puts into
the mouth of Artabanus is that of a thoughtful and religious
Greek : it opens with the Grecian conception of the necessity
of hearing and comparing opposite views, prior to any final de-
cision, — reproves Mardonius for falsely depreciating the Greeks
and seducing his master into personal danger, —sets forth the
probability that the Greeks, if victorious at sea, would come and
destroy the bridge by which Xerxes had crossed the Hellespont,
— reminds the latter of the imminent hazard which Darius and
his army had undergone in Scythia, from the destruction —
averted only by Histiseus and his influence — of the bridge over
the Danube: such prudential suggestions being further strength-
ened by adverting to the jealous aversion of the godhead towards
overgrown human power.!

The impatient monarch silences his uncle in a tone of insult
and menace: nevertheless, in spite of himself, the dissuasions
work upon him so powerfully, that before night they gradually
alter his resolution, and decide him to renounce the scheme. In
this latter disposition he falls asleep, when a dream appears: a
tall, stately man stands over him, denounces his change of
opinion, and peremptorily commands him to persist in the enter
' prise as announced. In spite of this dream, Xerxes still adheres
to his altered purpose, assembles his council the next morning,
and after apologizing for his angry language towards Artabanus,
acquaints them to their great joy that he adopts the recommen-
dations of the latter, and abandons his project against Greece.
But in the following night, no sooner has Xerxes fallen asleep,
than the same dream and the same figure again appear to him,
repeating the previous command in language of terrific menace.
The monarch, in a state of great alarm, springs from his bed and
sends for Artabanus, whom he informs of the twice-repeated
vision and divine mandate interdicting his change of resolution.
“If (says he) it be the absolute will of God that this expedition
against Greece should be executed, the same vision will appear
to thee also, provided thou puttest on my attire, sittest in my
throne, and sleepest in my bed.”® Not without reluctance,

RD

1 Herodot. vii, 10.
2 Herodot. vii, 15. El av Sede tore 6 ériméurwv nai of mavrwe bv Hbovj

DE:Ams OF XERXES. 9

Artabanus obeys this order (for it was high treason in any
Persian to sit upon the regal throne !), but he at length complies,
' expecting to be able to prove to Xerxes that the dream deserved
no attention. “Many dreams (he says) are not of divine origin,
nor anything better than mere wandering objects such as we have
been thinking upon during the day: this dream, of whatever
nature it may be, will not be foolish enough to mistake me for
the king, even if I be in the royal attire and bed; but if it shall
still continue to appear to thee, I shall myself confess it to be
divine.”? Accordingly, Artabanus is placed in the regal throne
and bed, and, as soon as he falls asleep, the very same figure
shows itself to him’ also, saying, “ Art thou he who dissuadest
Xerxes, on the plea of solicitude for his safety, from marching
against Greece? Xerxes has. already been forewarned of that
which he will suffer if he disobeys, and thou too shalt not escape,
either now or in future, for seeking to avert that which must and
shall be.” With these words the vision assumes a threatening
attitude, as though preparing to burn out the eyes of Artabanus
with hot irons, when the sleeper awakes in terror, and runs to
communicate with Xerxes. “I have hitherto, O king, recom-
mended to thee to rest contented with that vast actual empire on
account of which all mankind think thee happy; but since the
divine impulsion is now apparent, and since destruction from on
high is prepared. for the Greeks, I too alter-my opinion, and
advise thee to command the Persians as God directs; so that
nothing may be found wanting on thy part for that which God
puts into thy hands.” 3

gore yevéoSac otparnAaciny ént tiv “EAAdda, éximrjcerat Kai cot réwrd
todro Svetpov, duoiwe nat éuot évreAAcuevov, Etpioxa 0? ode dv yivopeva
Tatra, el AGBowg rHv éujv oxevav xaeayv, cal tvddc, peta Tatra Koo be
roy éudv Dpdvoy, xal Exetra ev xoiry TH tug xaruxvacerac. Compare vii, 8.
Sed re otra dyet, etc.

1 See Brissonius, De Regno Persarum, lib. i, p. 27.

* Herodot. vii, 16. Od yap 6) é rocotré ye ebySeing avfjxet rotro, bt
87 xoré bore rd éxidatvouevdr tos by tH trvy, Gore ddger bus dpGv oe dpgv,
7H OF éodire Tekuatpomevoy...... el yap 67 émidocrgcecé ye cvvexéws, gaigy
Gy kai atroc¢ Seiov elvat.

3 Herodot. vii, 18. "Eve? d2 datpovin rig yiyverat dppi, kat “EAAnvag, oc
foixe, GUoph Tig KaTaAaepuPBaver YenAaroc, tyd wey Kal abrd¢ Tparopat, cat

: 1* ;

-

10 HISTORY ux GREECE.

It is thus that Herodotus represents the great expedition of
Xerxes to have originated: partly in the rashness of Mardonius,
who reaps his bitter reward on the field of battle at Platea, —
but still more in the influence of “mischievous Oneiros,” who is
sent by the gods —as in the second book of the Iliad —to put a
cheat upon Xerxes, and even to overrule by terror both his
scruples and those of Artabanus. The gods having determined
—as in the instances of Astyagés, Polykratés, and others — that
the Persian empire shall undergo signal humiliation and repulse
at the hands of the Greeks, constrain the Persian monarch into
@ ruinous enterprise against his own better judgment. Such

_ religious imagination is not to be regarded as peculiar to Herod-

otus, but as common to him with. his contemporaries generally,
Greeks as well as Persians, though peculiarly stimulated among
the Greeks by the abundance of their epic or quasi-historical
poetry: modified more or less in each individual narrator, it is
made to supply connecting links as well as initiating causes for
the great events of: history. As a cause for this expedition, in-
comparably the greatest fact and the most fertile in consequences,
throughout the political career both of Greeks and Persians,
nothing less than a special interposition of the gods would have
satisfied the feelings either of one nation or the other. The story
of the dream has its rise, as Herodotus tells us,! in Persian fancy,
and is in some sort a consolation for the national vanity ; but it
is turned and colored by the Grecian historian, who mentions

TY yvounv petarivepat...... Tloiee dé obra dxwe, rod Seot wapadidovrog,
tav ody bvdenoerat under.
The expression rod eod rapadidovrog in this place denotes what is ex-
pressed by 7d ypéov yiyveodat, c. 17. The dream threatens Artabanus
and Xerxes for trying to turn aside the current of destiny, — or in other
words, to contravene the predetermined will of the gods.
1 Herodot. vii, 12. Kat 67 xov éy 1 vuxri elde dyiv rorpvde, O¢ Acyerac
“$xd Mepcéav.
Herodotus seems to use dvetpov in the neuter gender, not dverpo¢ in the
masculine: for the alteration of Bahr (ad vii, 16) of é6vra in place of
éévrocg, is not at all called for. The masculine gender évecpoc is commonly
used in Homer; but there are cases of the neuter dvecpor.
Respecting the influence of dreams in determining the enterprises of the
early Turkish Sultans, see Von Hammer, Geschichte des Osmanischen
Reichs, book ii, vol. i, p. 49.

= a es Ee eee

DREAMS OF XERXES. ll

also a third dream, which appeared to Xerxes after his resolution
to march was finally taken, and which the mistake of the Magian
interpreters falsely construed! into an encouragement, though it
‘really threatened ruin. How much this religious conception of
the sequence of events belongs to the age, appears by the fact,
that it not only appears in Pindar and the Attic tragedians gen-
erally, but pervades especially the Perse of Aschylus, exhibited
seven years after the battle of Salamis, —in which we find the
premonitory dreams as well as the jealous enmity of the gods
towards vast power and overweening aspirations in man,? though
without any of that inclination, which Herodotus seems to have
derived from Persian informants, to excalpate Xerxes by repre-
senting him as disposed himself to sober counsels, but driven in
a contrary direction by the irresistible fiat of the gods.s

1 Compare the dream of Darius Codomannus. Plutarch, Alexander, c. 18.
Concerning the punishment inflicted by Astyagés on the Magians for
misinterpreting bis dreams, see Herodot. i, 128.

Philochorus, skilled in divination, affirmed that Nikias put 2 totally
wrong interpretation upon that fatal eclipse of the moon which induced
him to delay his retreat, and proved his ruin (Plutarch, Nikias, c. 23).

* Aschylus, Pers. 96, 104, 181, 220, 868, 745, 825: compare Sophocl
Ajax, 129, 744, 775, and the end of the Cidipus Tyrannus; Euripid.
Hecub. 58; Pindar, Olymp. viii. 86; Isthm. vi, 39; Pausanias, ii, 33, 3.
Compare the sense of the word decoidaiuwy in Xenophon, Agesilaus, c. 11,
sect. 8, —“ the man who in the midst of success fears the envious gods,” —
opposed to the person who confides in its continuance; and Klausen, The-
ologumena schyli, p. 18.

3 The manner in which Herodotus groups together the facts of his history,
in obedience to certain religious and moral sentiments in his own mind, is
well set forth in Hoffmeister, Sittlich — religidse Lebensansicht des Herod-
otos, Essen, 1832, especially sects. 21, 22, pp. 112, segg. Hoffmeister traces
the veins of sentiment running through, and often overlaying, or trans-
foriting, the matters of fact through a considerable portion of the nine
books. He does not, perhaps, sufficiently advert to the circumstance, that the
informants from whom Herodotus collected his facts were for the most part
imbued with sentiments similar to himself; so that the religious and moral
vein pervaded more or less his original materials, and did not need to be
added by himself. There can be little doubt that the priests, the ministers
of temples and oracles, the exegets or interpreting guides around these
holy places were among his chief sources for instructing himself: a stranger,
visiting so many different cities must have been constantly in a situation to
have no other person whom he could consult. The temples weve interest

12 HISTUR: UF GREECE.

While we take due notice of those religious conceptions with
which both the poet and the historian surround this vast conflict

ing both in themselves and in the trophies and offerings which they ex-
hibited, while the persons belonging to them were, as a general rule, ac-
cessible and communicative to strangers, as we may see both from Pausa-
nias and Plutarch, — both of whom, however, had books before them also to
consult, which Herodotus hardly.had at all. It was not only the priests and
ministers of temples in Egypt, of Héraklés at Tyre, and of Bélus at Baby-
lon, that Herodotus questioned (i, 181; ii, 3, 44, 143), but also those of
Delphi (AcAgeyv olda Eyo obtug dxoboag yevéoSat, i, 20: compare i, 91, 92,
51); Dédéna (ii, 52); of the Ismenian Apollo at Thebes (v, 59); of
Athéné Alea at Tegea (i. 66); of Démétér at Paros (vi, 134— if nos the
priests, at least persons full of temple inspirations); of Halus in Acnaia
Phthidtis (vii, 197); of the Kabeiri in Thrace (ii, 51); of persons connect-
ed with the Heréon of Protesilaus in the Chersonese (ix, 116,120). The
facts which these persons communicated to him were always presented
along with associations referring to their own functions or religious senti-
ments, nor did Herodotus introduce anything new when he incorporated
them as such in his history. The treatise of Plutarch — “ Cur Pythia nune
non reddat Oracula Carmine” — affords an instructive description of the
ample and multifarious narratives given by the expositors at Delphi, re-

specting the eminent persons and events of Grecian history, so well fitted
to satisfy the visitors who came full of Curiosity — prAoVedpovec, peAcAoyor,
and ¢:Aouavei¢ (Plutarch, ib. p. 394)—such as Herodotus was in a high
degree. Compare pp. 396, 397, 400, 407, of the same treatise: also Pla-
tarch, De Defectu Oraculorum, p. 417 — of AeAgav SedAoyot, ete. Plutarch
remarks that in his time political life was extinguished in Greece, and that
the questions put to the Pythian priestess related altogether to private and
individual affairs ; whereas, in earlier times, almost all political events came
somehow or other under her cognizance, either by- questions to be answered,
or by commemorative public offerings (p. 407). In the time of Herodotus,
the great temples, especially those of Delphi and Olympia, were interwoven
with the whole web of Grecian political history. See the Dissertation of
Preller, annexed to his edition of Polemonis Fragmenta, c. 3, pp. 157-162;
De Historid atque Arte Periegetarum ; also K.¥. Herrmann, Gottesdienstli
che Alterthiimer der Griechen, part 1, ch. 12, p. 52.

The religious interpretation of historical phenomena is not peculiar to
Herodotus, but belongs to him in common with his informants and his age
generally, as indeed Hoffmeister remarks (pp. 31-136): though it is re
markable to notice the frankness with which he (as well as the contempo-
rary poets : see the references in Monk ad Euripid. Alcestis, 1154) predicates
envy and jealousy of the gods, in cases where the conduct, which he sup-
poses them to pursue, is really such as would deserve that name in a man,
— and such as he himself ascribes to the despot (iii, 80): he does not think
himself obliged to call the gods just and merciful while he is attributing te

— -- =

-~

PREPARATIONS AND MARCH OF XERXES. 18

Greeks and barbarians, we need look no farther than ambition
and revenge for the real motives of the gnvasion: considering
that it had been a proclaimed project in the mind of Darius for
three years previous to his death, there was no probability that
his son and successor would gratuitously renounce it. Shortly
after the reconquest of Egypt, he began to make his preparations,
the magnitude of which attested the strength of his resolve as
well as the extent of his designs. The satraps and subordinate
officers, throughout the whole range of his empire, receivel or-
ders to furnish the amplest quota of troops and munitions of war,
—horse and foot, ships of war, horse-transports, provisions, or
supplies of various kinds, according to the circumstances of the
territory ; while rewards were held out to those who should ex-
ecute the orders most efficiently. For four entire years these
preparations were carried on, and as we are told that similar prep-
arations had been going forward during the three years preced-
ing the death of Darius, though not brought to any ultimate re-
sult, we cannot doubt that the maximum of force, which the
empire could possibly be made to furnish,! was now brought to
execute the schemes of Xerxes. The Persian empire was at
this moment more extensive than ever it will appear at any sub-
sequent period ; for it comprised maritime Thrace and Macedonia
as far as the borders of Thessaly, and nearly all the islands of
the /Egean north of Krete and east of Eubca, including even

them acts of envy and jealousy in their dealing with mankind. But the
religious interpretation does not reign alone throughout the narrative of
Herodotus: it is found side by side with careful sifting of fact and specifi-
cation of positive, definite, appreciable causes: and this latter vein is what
really distinguishes the historian from his age, — forming the preparation
for Thucydides, in whom it appears predominant and almost exclusive.
See this point illustrated in Creuzer, Historische Kunst der Grieschen,
Abschnitt iii, pp. 150-159.

Jiiger (Disputationes Herodotes, p. 16. Gdttingen, 1828) professes to
detect evidences of old age (senile ingenium) in the moralizing color which
overspreads the history of Herodotus, but which I believe to have belonged
to his middle and mature age not less than to his latter years, — if indeed
he lived to be very old, which is noway proved, except upon reasons which
I have already disputed in my preceding volume. See Bahr, Commentatio
de Vita et Scriptis Herodoti, in the fourth volume of his edition, c. 6, p.388

1 Herodot. vii, 19. yapov wavratpevvdr rig hreipov.

14 HISTORY OF GREECE.

the Cyclades. There existed Persian forts and garrisons at Do-
riskus, Eion, and o®her places on the coast of Thrace, while
Abdéra, with the other Grecian settlements on that coast were
numbered among the tributaries of Susa.' It is necessary to
bear in mind these boundaries of the empire, at the time when
Xerxes mounted the throne, as compared with its reduced limits
at the later time of the Peloponnesian war, — partly that we
may understand the apparent chances of success to his expedi-
tion, as they presented themselves both to the Persians and to
the medizing Greeks, — partly that we may appreciate the after-
circumstances connected with the formation of the Athenian
maritime empire.

In the autumn of the year 481 B.c., the vast army thus raised
by Xerxes arrived, from all quarters of the empire, at or near to
Sardis; a large portion of it having been directed to assemble
at Kritala in Kappadokia, on the. eastern side of the Halys,
where it was joined by Xerxes himself on the road from Susa.2
From thence he crossed the Halys, and marched through Phry-
gia and Lydia, passing through the Phrygian towns of Kelenz,
Anaua, and Kolosse, and the Lydian town of Kallatébus, until
he reached Sardis, where winter-quarters were prepared for him.
But this land force, vast as it was (respecting its numbers, I shall
speak farther presently), was not all that the empire had been
required to furnish. Xerxes had determined to attack Greece,
not by traversing the Aigean, as Datis had passed to Eretria and
Marathon, but by a land force and fleet at once: the former cross-
ing -the Hellespont, and marching through Thrace, Macedonia,
and Thessaly ; while the latter was intended to accompany and
cooperate. A fleet of one thousand two hundred and seven ships
of war, besides numerous vessels of service and burden, had
been assembled on the Hellespont and on the coasts of Thrace

? Herodot. vii, 106. Karéoracay yap.étt mporepov rabryg rig e€eAacatog -
(2. e. the invasion by Xerxes) izapyoe év ry Opnixy nai rod ‘EAAnomévrov
mavraxy. vii, 108. édedotvAwto yap, O¢ xat mpdrepor pot dedjAwrat, 7 méexpL
Oeccadhing maoa, xai nv i7d BactAja Sacpoddpoc, MeyaBalov tre karacrpepa--
uévov kal torepov Mapdoviov; also vii, 59, and Xenophon, Memorab. iii, 5,
11. Compare Eschylus Pers. 871-896, and the vision ascribed to Cyrus
in reference to his successor Darius, covering with his wings both Europe
and Asia (Herodot. i, 209). * Herodot. vii, 20-31.

PREPARATIONS AND MARCH OF XERXES. 18

and Ionia; moreover, Xerxes, with a degree of forethought
much exceeding that which his father Darius had displayed in
the Scythian expedition, had directed the formation of large mag-
azines of provisions at suitable maritime stations along the line
of march, from the Hellespont to the Strymonic gulf. During
the four years of military preparation, there had been time to
bring together great quantities of flour and other essential articles
from Asia and Egypt.!

If the whole contemporary world were overawed by the vast
assemblage of men and muniments of war which Xerxes thus
brought together, so much transcending all past, we might even
say all subsequent, experience, — they were no less astounded
by two enterprises which entered into his scheme, — the bridging
of the Hellespont, and the cutting of a ship-canal through the
. isthmus of Mount Athos. For the first of the two there had
indeed been a precedent, since Darius about thirty-five years be-
fore had caused a bridge to be thrown over the Thracian Bos-
phorus, and crossed it in his march to Scythia; but this bridge,
though constructed by the Ionians and by a Samian Greek, hav-
ing had reference only to distant regions, seems to have been
little known or little thought of among the Greeks generally, as
we may infer from the fact, that the poet Auschylus? speaks as
if he had never heard of it, while the bridge of Xerxes was ever
remembered, both by Persians and by Greeks, as a most impos-
ing display of Asiatic omnipotence. The bridge of boats — or
rather, the two separate bridges not far removed from each other
— which Xerxes caused to be thrown across the Hellespont,
stretched from the neighborhood of Abydos, on the Asiatic side
to the coast between Sestos and Madytus on the European, where
the strait is about an English mile in breadth. The execution
of the work was at first intrusted, not to Greeks, but to Phe-
nicians and Egyptians, who had received orders long beforehand
to prepare cables of extraordinary strength and size expressly
for the purpose ; the material used by the Phenicians was flax,
that employed by the Egyptians was the fibre of the papyrus.
Already had the work been completed and announced to Xerxes
as available for transit, when a storm arose, so violent as alto

1 Herodot. vii, 23—25. * Aischylus, Pers. 731, 754, 873.

16 HISTORY OF GREECE.

gether to ruin it. The wrath of the monarch, when apprized of
this catastrophe, burst all bounds; it was directed partly against
the chief-engineers, whose heads he caused to be struck off,! but
partly also against the Hellespont itself. He commanded that
the strait should be scourged with three hundred lashes, and that
a set of fetters should be let down into it asa farther punish-
ment: moreover Herodotus had heard, but does not believe, that
he even sent irons for the purpose of branding it. “Thou bitter
water (exclaimed the scourgers while inflicting this punishment),
this is the penalty which our master inflicts upon thee, because
thou hast wronged him though he hath never wronged thee.
King Xerxes will cross thee, whether thou wilt or not; but thou
deservest not sacrifice from any man, because thou arta treacher-
ous river of (useless) salt water.”2

Such were the insulting terms heaped by order of Xerxes on
the rebellious Hellespont, — Herodotus calls them “ non-Hellenie
and blasphemous terms,” which, together with their brevity,
leads us to believe that he gives them as he heard them, and that
’ they are not of his own invention, like so many other speeches in
his work, where he dramatizes, as it were, a given posifion. It
has been common, however, to set aside in this case not merely
the words, but even the main incident of punishment inflicted on
the Hellespont,3 as a mere Greek fable rather than a real fact:
the extreme childishness and absurdity of the proceeding giving
to it the air of an enemy’s calumny. But this reason will not

1 Plutarch (De Tranquillitate Animi, p. 470), speaks of them as having
had their noses and ears cut off.

* Herodot. vii, 34, 35. éveréAdero 6) Gv parilovrac, Aéyery BapBapa re
Kai Grac9ala,'Q mixpdv bdwp, deordtyg roe dingy ésireSet rivée, dre pew
Heixnoac, oidéiv mpdcg exeivov Gdcxov nadév. Kal Bacthede piv Béptne
diaBjoerai oe, pv te ob ye BovAy, qv Te Kal uy cot d2 xara dixny dpa odbders
avdporayv Siet, oc ddvTe deAep~ Te Kal dAuupp roTau@.

The assertion — that no one was in the habit of sacrificing to the Hel.
lespont — appears strange, when we look to the subsequent conduct of
Xerxes himself (vii, 53): compare vii, 113, and vi, 76. The epithet salt
employed as a reproach, seems to allude to the undrinkable character of
the water.

3 See Stanley and Blomfield ad schyl. Pers. 731, and K. O. Miiller (in
his Review of Benjamin Constant’s work Sur la Religion), Kleine Schrif

ten, vol. ii, p. 59.

PREPARATIONS AND MARCH OF XERXES. 17

appear sufficient, if we transport ourselves back to the time and
to the party concerned. To transfer to inanimate objects the
sensitive as well as the willing and designing attributes of human
beings, is among the early and wide-spread instincts of mankind,
and one of the primitive forms of religion: and although the
enlargement of reason and experience gradually displaces this
elementary Fetichism, and banishes it from the regions of reality
into those of conventional fictions, yet the force of momentary
_passion will often suffice to supersede the acquired habit, and
even an intelligent man! may be impelled in a moment of agoniz-
ing pain to kick or beat the lifeless object from which he has suf-
fered. By the old procedure, never formally abolished, though
gradually disused, at Athens,— an inanimate object which had
caused the death of a man was solemnly tried and cast out of the
border: and the Arcadian youths, when they returned hungry
from an unsuccessful day’s hunting,? scourged and pricked the

See Auguste Comte, Traité de Philosophie Positive, vol. v, leson 52,
- pp. 40, 46.

*See vol. ii, part 2, c. i, p. 297 of the present work; and compare
Wachsmuth, Hellenisch. Alter:hfimer, 2, i, p. 820, and K. F. Herrmann,
Griech. Staatsalterthumer, sect. 104.

For the manner in which Cyrus dealt with the river Gyndés; see Herodot
i, 202. The Persian satrap Pharnuchés was thrown from his horse at
Sardis, and received an injury of which he afterwards died: he directed his
attendants to lead the horse to the place where the accident had happened,
to cut off all his legs, and ledve him to perish there (Herodot. vii, 88).
The kings of Macedonia offered sacrifice even during the time of Herod-
otus, to the river which had been the means of preserving the life of their
ancestor Perdikkas ; after he had crossed it, the stream swelled and arrested
his pursuers (Herodot. viii, 138): see an analogous story about the inhab-
itants of Apollonia and the river Aous, Valerius Maxim. i, 5, 2.

After the death of the great boxer, wrestler, etc., Theagenés of Thasus,
& statue was erected to his honor. A personal enemy, perhaps onc of the
fourteen hundred defeated competitors, came every night to gratify his
wrath and revenge by flogging the statue. One night the statue fell down
upon this scourger and killed him; upon which his relatives indicted the
statue for murder: it was found guilty by the Thasians, and thrown into
the sea. The gods, however, were much displeased with the proceeding,
and visited the Thasians with continued famine, until at length a fisher-
man by accident fished up the statue, and it was restored to its place
(Pausan. vi, 11.2). Compare the story of the statue of Hermés in Ba
brius, Fabul. 119, edition of Mr. Lewis.

VOL. V. Zoc.

18 HISTORY OF GREECE

god Pan or his statue by way of revenge. Much more may we
suppose a young Persian monarch, corrupted by universal sub-
servience around him, to be capable of thus venting an insane
wrath: and the vengeance ascribed by Herodotus to Cyrus to-
wards the river Gyndés (which he caused to be divided into
three hundred and sixty streamlets, because one of his sacred
horses had been drowned in it), affords a fair -parallel to the
scourging of the Hellespont by Xerxes. To offer sacrifice to
rivers, and to testify in this manner gratitude for service ren-
dered by rivers, was a familiar rite in the ancient religion. While
the grounds for distrusting the narrative are thus materially
weakened, the positive evidence will be found very forcible.
The expedition of Xerxes took place when Herodotus was about
four years old, so that he afterwards enjoyed ample opportunity
of conversing with persons who had witnessed and taken part in
it: and the whole of his narrative shows that he availed himself
largely of such access to information. Besides, the building of
the bridge across the Hellespont, and all the incidents connected
with it, were acts essentially public in their nature, —— known to
many witnesses, and therefore the more easily verified, — the de-
capitation of the unfortunate engineers was an act fearfully im-
pressive, and even the scourging of the Hellespont, while essen-
tially public, appears to Herodotus! (as well as to Arrian, after-
terwards), not childish but impious. The more attentively we
balance, in the case before us, the positive testimony against
the intrinsic negative probabilities, the more shall we be dis-
posed to admit without diffidence the statement of our original
historian.

New engineers — perhaps Greek along with, or in place of,
Phenicians and Egyptians — were immediately directed to re-
commence the work, which Herodotus now describes in detail,
and which was doubtless executed with increased care and so-
lidity. To form the two bridges, two lines of ships — triremes
and pentekonters blended together — were moored across the
strait breastwise, with their sterns towards the Euxine, and their
heads towards the Avgean, the stream flowing always .rapidly

' Herodot. vii. 35-54: compare viii, 109. Arrian, Exp. Alex. vii, 14. 9

PREPARATIONS AND MARCH OF XERXES. 19

towards the latter.1 They were moored by anchors head and
stern, and by very long cables. The number of ships placed to

} Herodot. vii, 36. The language in which Herodotus describes the po-
sition of these ships which formed the two bridges, seems to me to have
been erroneously or imperfectly apprehended by most of the commenta-
tors: see the notes of Bahr, Kruse, Wesseling, Rennell, and especially
Larcher: Schweighiuser is the most satisfactory. — rot pév Ilévrov émtxap-
aiac, rot dt ‘EAAnonévrov xara péov, The explanation given by Tzetzes of
énixapoiac by the word tAayiac seems to me hardly exact: it means, not
oblique, but at right angles with. The course of the Bosphorus and Helle-
spont, flowing out of the Euxine sea, is conceived by the historian as meet-
ing that sea at right angles; and the ships, which were moored near together
along the current of the strait, taking the line of each from head to stern,
were therefore also at right angles with the Euxine sea. Moreover, Herod-
otus does not mean to distinguish the two bridges hereby, and to say that
the ships of the one bridge were rod IIcvrov éxixapoiac, and those of the
other bridge rov ‘EAAnorovrov xara féoy, as Bahr and other commentators
suppose: both the predicates apply alike to both the bridges, — as indeed it
stands to reason that the arrangement of ships best for one bridge must
also have been best for the other. Respecting the meaning of émixapotog
in Herodotus, see iv, 101; i,180. In the Odyssey (ix, 70: compare Eustath.
ad loc.) éxcxapocat does not mean oblique, but headlong before the wind :
compare érixap, Iliad, xviii, 392. The circumstance stated by Herodotus
— that in the bridge higher up the stream, or nearest to the Euxine, there
were in all three hundred and sixty vessels, while in the other bridge there
were no more than three hundred and fourteen—has perplexed the com-
mentators, and induced them to resort to inconvenient explanations, —as
that of saying, that in the higher bridge the vessels were moored not in a
direct line across, but in a line slanting, so that the extreme vessel on the
European side was lower down the stream than the extreme vessel on the
Asiatic side. This is one of the false explanations given of émtxapoiac
(slanting, echrag): while the idea of Gronovius and Larcher, that the vessels
in the higher bridge presented their broadside to the current, is still more
inadmissible. But the difference in the number of ships employed in the
one bridge compared with the other seems to admit of an easier explana-
tion. We need not suppose, nor does Herodotus say, that the two bridges
were quite close together: considering the multitude which had to cross
them, it would be convenient that they should be placed at a certain dis-
tance from each other. If they were a mile or two apart, we may well sup-
pose that the breadth of the strait was not exactly the same in the two
places chosen, and that it may have been broader at the point of the upper
bridge, — which, moreover, might require to be made more secure, as hav-
ing to meet the first force of the current. The greater number of vessels
in the upper bridge will thus be accounted for in a simple and satisfactory
manner,

30 HISTORY OF GREECE.

carry the bridge nearest to the Euxine was three hundred and
sixty: the number in the other, three hundred and fourteen.

In some of the words used by Herodotus there appears an obscurity:
they run thus, — {edyvucay d2 ade: Ilevraxovrépoue xai tpthpeac ovr Bévrec,
iad piv rv (these words are misprinted in Bahr’s edition) zpd¢ rot Edé.-
eivov Ilévrov é&jxovra te xal rpinxocias, dd d2 TH» érépny récoepac Kal déxa
Kal Tpinxooiag (rot yey Ilévrov, éxixapoiac, rot 62 “EAAnordévtov xara poor),
iva dvaxwyety Trdv Tovey Tov drAwy: ouvdévres dé, dyxipac Karijxay mweptyuy-
wea, etc.

There is a difficulty respecting the words fva dvaxwyévy rov révov rév
éxAov,— what is the nominative case to this verb? Bahr says in his note,
sc. 5 féo¢, and he construes Tv é7Awy to mean the cables whereby the an-
chors were held fast. But if we read farther on, we shall see that ra SrAa
mean, not the anchor-cables, but the cables which were stretched across from

shore to shore to form the bridge ; the very same words Tov 5rAwy rod révov,

applied to these latter cables, occur a few lines afterwards. I think that the
nominative case belonging to dvaxwxevy is ) yepipa (not 6 Jdoc), and that the
words from rod pv Ilévrov down to fdov are to be read parenthetically, as I
have printed them above: the express object for which the ships were moored
was, “that the bridge might hold up, or sustain, the tension of its cables
stretched across from shore to shore.” I admit that we should naturally
expect dvaxwxzetwor and not dvaxwyxevy, since the proposition would be true
of both bridges ; but though this makes an awkward construction, it is not
inadmissible, since each bridge had been previously described in the singu-
lar number.

Bredow and others accuse Herodotus of ignorance and incorrectness in
this description of the bridges, but there seems nothing to bear out this
charge.

Herodotus (iv, 85), Strabo (xiii, p. 591), and Pliny (HL N. iv, 12; vi, 1)
give seven stadia as the breadth of the Hellespont in its aatrowent part.
Dr. Pococke also assigns the same breadth: Tournefort allows but a mile
(vol. ii, lett. 4). Some modern French measurements give the distance as
something considerably greater, — eleven hundred and thirty or eleven
hundred and fifty toises (see Miot’s note on his translation of Herodotus).
The Duke of Ragusa states it at seven hundred toises (Voyage en Turquie,
vol. ii, p. 164). If we suppose the breadth to be one mile, or five thousand
two hundred and eighty feet, three hundred and sixty vessels at an average
breadth of fourteen and two thirds feet would exactly fill the space. Ren-
nell says, “Eleven feet is the breadth of a barge: vessels of the size of the
smallest coasting-craft were adequate to the purpose of the bridge.” (Ou
the Geography of Herodotus, p. 127.)

The recent measurements or estimates stated by Miot go much beyond
Herodotus: that of the Duke of Ragusa nearly coincides with him. But

we necd not suppose that the vessels filled up entirely the whole breadth, —

PREPARATIONS AND MARCH OF XERXES. 31

Over or through each of the two lines of ships, across from shore
to shore, were stretched six vast cables, which discharged the
double function of holding the ships together, and of supporting
the bridge-way to be laid upon them. They were tightened by
means of capstans on each shore: in three different places along
the line, a gap was left between the ships for the purpose of
enabling trading vessels, in voyage to or from the Euxine, to pass
and repass beneath the cables.

Out of the six cables assigned to each bridge, two were of
flax and four of papyrus, combined for the sake of increased
strength; for it seems that in the bridges first made, which
proved too weak to resist the winds, the Phenicians had
employed cables of flax for one bridge, the Egyptians those of
papyrus for the other.! Over these again were laid planks of
wood, sawn to the appropriate width, secured by ropes to keep
them in their places: and lastly, upon this foundation the cause-
way itself was formed, out of earth and wood, with a palisade
on each side high enough to prevent the cattle which passed over
from seeing the water.

The other great work which Xerxes caused to be performed,
_ for facilitating his march, was, the cutting through of the isth-
mus which connects the stormy promontory of Mount Athos

without leaving any gaps between: we only know, that there were no gaps
left large enough for a vessel in voyage to sail through, except in three
specified places.

1 For the long celebrity of these cables, see the epigram of Archimélus,
composed two centuries and a half afterwards, in the time of Hiero the
Second, of Syracuse, ap. Athenseum, v, 209.

Herodotus states that in thickness and compact make (ayuri¢ xa? xad-
Aov7) the cables of flax were equal to those of papyrus; but that in weight
the former were superior; for each cubit in length of the flaxen cable weighed
a talent: we can hardly reason upon this, because we do not know whether
he means an Aftic, aa Euboic, or an Avginean talent: nor, if he means an
Attic talent, whether it be an Attic talent of commerce, or of the monetary
standard.

The cables contained in the Athenian dockyard are distinguished as
cyoiva oxtwdaxrvAa, é§daxrvia,— in which expressions, however, M.
Boeckh cannot certainly determine whether circumference or diameter be
meant: he thinks probably theformer. See his learned book, Das Seewesen
der Athener, ch. x, p. 165.

92 ; HISTORY OF GREECE.

with the main land.' That isthmus, near the point where it joins
the main land, was about twelve stadia or furlongs across, from
the Strymonic to the Toronaic gulf: and‘the canal dug by order of
Xerxes was broad and deep enough for two triremes to sail abreast.
In this work too, as well as in the bridge across the Hellespont, the
Phenicians were found the ablest and most efficient among all the
subjects of the Persian monarch; but the other tributaries, espec-
jally the Greeks from the neighboring town of Akanthus, and
indeed the entire maritime forces of the empire,2 were brought
together to assist. The head-quarters of the fleet were first at
Kymé and Phokeea, next at Eleus in the southern extremity of
the Thracian Chersonese, from which point it could protect and
second at once the two enterprises going forward at the Helle-

‘spont and at Mount Athos. The canal-cutting at the latter was

placed under the general directions of two noble Persians, —
Bubarés and Artacheus, and distributed under their measure-
ment as task-work among the contingents of the various nations ;
an ample supply of flour and other provisions being brought for
sale in thé neighboring plain from various parts of Asia and
Egypt. }

Three circumstances in the narrative of Herodotus, respecting
this work, deserve special notice. First, the superior intelli-
gence of the Phenicians, who, within sight of that lofty island
of Thasos which had been occupied three centuries before by
their free ancestors, were now laboring as instruments to the
ambition of a foreign conqueror. Amidst all the people en-
gaged, they alone took the precaution of beginning the excava-
tion at a breadth far greater than the canal was finally destined
to occupy, so as gradually to narrow it, and leave a convenient
slope for the sides: the others dug straight down, so that the
time as well as the toil of their work was doubled by the con-
tinual falling in of the sides, ——a remarkable illustration of the
degree of practical intelligence then prevalent, since the nations
assembled were many and diverse. Secondly, Herodotus re-
marks that Xerxes must have performed this laborious work ©

1 For a specimen of the destructive storms near the promontory of Athos
see Ephorus, Fragment. 121, ed. Didot; Diodor. xiii, 41.
* Herodot. vii, 22,28 116; Diodor. xi, 2.

PREPARATIONS AND MARCH OF XERXES. 33

from motives of mere ostentation: “for it would hare cost no
trouble at all,” he observes,! “to drag all the ships in the fleet

1 Herodot. vii, 24: O¢ pev due ovpBarrecpevoy etpioxety, peyadogpocivne
elvexa aird Répén¢ dptocerv ixéAeve, tVéduv re sivauty drodeixvucVat, war
punpoovva AinécBat’ rapedy yap, pydéva wévov AaBbvrac, rdv lodpaw
Tac véag dtetpicat, dpbocev txéAeve dtdpvya tH Vadacoy, evpog ac dbo
Tpinpear TAéety duov AacTpevpévac.

According to the manner in which Herodotus represents this excavation
to have been performed, the earth dug out was handed up from man to
man from the bottom of the canal to the top—the whole performed by
hand, without any aid of cranes or barrows.

The pretended work of turning the course of the river Halys, which
Grecian report ascribed to Croesus on the advice of Thales, was a far greater
work than tlie cutting at Athos (Herodot. i, 75).

As this ship-canal across the isthmus of Athos has been treated often as
a fable both by ancienta (Juvenal, Sat. x,) and by moderns (Cousinéry,
Voyage en Macédoine), I transcribe the observations of Colonel Leake.
That excellent observer points out evident traces of its past existence: but
in my judgment, even if no such traces now remained, the testimony of
Herodotus and Thucydides (iv, 109) would alone be sufficient to prove that
it had existed really. The observations of Colonel Leake illustrate at
the same time the motives in which the canal originated: “ The canal (he
says) seems to have been not more than sixty feet wide. As history does
not mention that it was ever kept in repair after the time of Xerxes, the
waters from the heights around have naturally filled it in part with soil, in
the course of ages. It might, however, without much labor, be renewed:
and there can be no doubt that it would be useful to the navigation of the
/fégean: for such is the fear entertained by the Greek boatmen, of the
strength and uncertain direction of the currents around Mount Athos, and
of the gales and high seas to which the vicinity of the mountain is subject
during half the year, and which are rendered more formidable by the de-
ficiency of harbors in the gulf of Orfana, that I could not, as long as I was
on the peninsula, and though offering a high price, prevail upon any boat
to carry me from the eastern side of the peninsula to the western. Xerxes,
therefore, was perfectly justified in cutting this canal, as well from the secu-
rity which it afforded to his fleet, as from the facility of the work and the
advantages of the ground, which seems made expressly to tempt such an
undertaking. The experience of the losses which the former expedition
under Mardonius had suffered suggested the idea. The circumnavigation
of the capes Ampelus and Canastreum was much less dangerous, as the
gulfs afford some good harbors, and it was the object of Xerxes to collect
forces from the Greek cities in those gulfs as he passed. If there be any
difficulty arising from the narrative of Herodotus, it is in comprehending
how the operation should have required so long a time as three years, when
the king of Persia had such multitudes at his disposal, and among them

24 HISTORY OF GREECE.

across the isthmus ; so that the canal was nowise needed.” So fa-
miliar a process was it, in the mind of a Greek of the fifth century
B.C., to transport ships by mechanical force across an isthmus ;
a special groove, or slip, being seemingly prepared for them:
such was the case at the Diolkus across the isthmus of Corinth.
Thirdly, it is to be noted, that the men who excavated the canal
at Mount Athos worked under the lash; and these, be it borne
in mind, were not bought slaves, but freemen, except in so far as
they were tributaries of the Persian monarch; and that the
father of Herodotus, a native of Halikarnassus, and a subject
of the brave queen Artemisia, may perhaps have been among
them. We shall find other examples as we proceed, of this
indiscriminate use of the whip, and full conviction of its indis-
pensable necessity, on the part of the Persians,! — even to drive
the troops of their subject-contingents on to the charge in battle.
To employ the scourge in this way towards freemen, and espec-
ially towards freemen engaged in military service, was alto-
gether repugnant both to Hellenic practice and to Hellenic feel-
ing: the Asiatic and insular Greeks were relieved from it, as
from various other hardships, when they passed out of Persian
dominion to become, first allies, afterwards subjects, of Athens:

and we shall be called upon hereafter to take note of this fact,

when we appreciate the complaints preferred against the
hegemony of Athens.

" At the same time that the subject-contingents of Xerxes ex-

Egyptians and Babylonians, accustomed to the making of canals.” (Leake,
Travels in Northern Greece, vol. iii, ch. 24, p. 145.)

These remarks upon the enterprise are more judicious than those of
Major Rennell (Geogr. of Herodot. p. 116). I may remark that Herodotus
does not affirm that the actual cutting of the canal occupied three years,
— he assigns that:time to the cutting with all its preliminary arrangements
included,— mpoerotpatero éx tpiwy éréwy Kov padiora é¢ tov "ADwr (vii, 22).

1 Herodot. vii, 22: Gpvocoy ixd pacriywv ravrodanol Tig oTpariie:
dctadoya & époirwv.—vii, 56: Répinc 62, éret re dtéBn é¢ rv Etporny,
édneiro tov orpatdy trd pactiywy diaBaivovra ;— compare’ vii, aos, and
Xenophon, Anabasis, iii, 4—25.

The essential necessity, and plentiful use, of the whip, towards subject.
tributaries, as conceived by the ancient Persians, finds its parallel in the

modern Turks. See the Mémoires du Baron de Tott, vol. i, p. 256, segy.,

anc his dialogue on this subject with his Turkish conductor Ali-Aga.

PREPARATIONS AND MARCH OF XERXES. 25

eavated this canal, which was fortified against the sea at its two
extremities by compact earthen walls, or embankments, they also
' threw bridges of boats over the river Strymon: and these two
works, together with the renovated double bridge across the Hel-
lespont, were both announced to Xerxes as completed and ready
for passage, on his arrival at Sardis at the beginning of winter,
481-480 s.c. Whether the whole of his vast army arrived at
Sardis at the same time as himself, and wintered there, may
reasonably be doubted ; but the whole was united at Sardis and
ready to march against Greece, at the beginning of spring,
480 B.c.

While wintering at Sardis, the Persian monarch despatched
heralds to all the cities of Greece, except Sparta and Athens, to
demand the received tokens of submission, earth and water: for
news of his prodigious armament was well calculated to spread
terror even among the most resolute of them. And he at the
same time sent orders to the maritime cities in Thrace and Mace-
donia to prepare “dinner” for himself and his vast suite as he
passed on his march. That march was commenced at the first
beginning of spring, and continued in spite of several threaten-
ing portents during the course of it, — one of which Xerxes was
blind enough not to comprehend, though, according to Herodotas,
nothing could be more obvious than its signification,! — while

' Herodot. vii, 57. Tépac og¢t épavy péya, rd RépEnce bv ovdev? Ay
éroejoaro, Kainep evovuBAnrov tév:larog yap Erexe Aayov. EtotpBanrov
ov rade tyévero, Ste Euedre pdv EAGv orparuyy Ent tiv ‘EAAGéa Hépine
dyavpérara xal peyadonperéorara, driaw 62 rept EGvtob Tpéxov Hew bc roy
abrov yopor.

The prodigy was, that a mare brought forth a hare, which signified that
Xerxes would set forth on his expedition to Greece with strength and
splendor, but that he would come back in timid and disgraceful flight.

The implicit faith of Herodotus, first in the reality of the fact, —next, in
the certainty of his interpretation, — deserves notice, as illustrating his
canon of belief, and that of his age. The interpretation is doubtless here
the generating cause of the story interpreted: an ingenious man, after the
expedition has terminated, imagines an appyopriate simile for its proud
commencement and inglorious termination (Parturiunt montes, nascetgr
tidiculus mus), and the simile is recounted, either by himself or by some
hearer who is struck with it, as if it had been a real antecedent fact. The
aptness of this supposed antecedent fact to foreshadow the great Persian
invasion (7d edoduGAgrov of Herodotus) serves as presumptive evidence to

VOL. V. 2

26 HISTORY OF GREECE.

another was misinterpreted into a favorable omen by the comph-
ant answer of the Magian priests. On quitting Sardis, the vast
host was divided into two nearly equal columns: a spacious
interval being left between the two for the king himself, with his
guards and select Persians. First of all! came the baggage,
carried by beasts of burden, immediately followed by one half
of the entire body of infantry, without any distinction of nations :
next, the select troops, one thousand Persian cavalry, with one
thousand Persian spearmen, the latter being distinguished by
carrying their spears with the point downwards, as well as by
the spear itself, which had a golden pomegranate at its other
extremity, in place of the ordinary spike or point whereby the
weapon was planted in the ground when the soldier was
not on duty. Behind these troops walked ten sacred horses,
of vast power and splendidly caparisoned, bred on the Niszan
plains in Media: next, the sacred chariot of Zeus, drawn by
eight white horses,— wherein no man was ever allowed to
mount, not even the charioteer, who walked on foot behind with
the reins in his hand. Next after the sacred chariot came that pf
Xerxes himself, drawn by Nisan horses ; the charioteer, a noble
Persian, named Patiramphés, being seated in it by the side of
the monarch,— who was often accustomed to alight from the
chariot and to enter a litter. Immediately about his person were
a chosen body of: one thousand horse-guards, the best troops and
of the highest breed among the Persians, having golden apples
at the reverse extremity of their spears, and followed by other
detachments of one thousand horse, ten thousand foot, and ten
thousand horse, all native-Persians. Of these ten thousand Per-
sian infantry, called the Immortals, because their number was
always exactly maintained, nine thousand carried spears with
pomegranates of silver at the reverse extremity, while the re-
maining one thousand distributed in front, rear, and on each side
of this detachment, were marked by pomegranates of gold on
their spears. With them ended what we may call the household

-béar out the witness asserting it; while departure from the established

analogies of nature affords no motive for disbelief to a man who admita
that the gods occasionally send special signs and warnings.

? Compare the escription of the processional march of Cyrus, as giver
m the Cyropedia of Xenophon, viii, 2, 1-20.

CRUELTY OF XERXES. a7

treops: after whom, with an interval of two furlongs, the remain-
ing host followed pell-mell.! Respecting its nambers and constit-
uent portions I shall speak presently, on occasion of the great
review at Doriskus.

On each side of the army, as it marched oat of Sardis, was seen
suspended one half of the body of a slaughtered man, placed
there expressly for the purpose of impressing a lesson on the sub-
jects of Persia. It was the body of the eldest son of the wealthy
Pythiue, a Phrygian old man resident at Kelsens, who had en-
tertained Xerxes in the course of his march from Kappadokia to
Sardis, and who had previously recommended himself by rich
gifts to the preceding king Darius. So abundant was his hospi-
tality to Xerxes, and so pressing his offers of pecuniary contri-
bution for the Grecian expedition, that the monarch asked him
what was the amount of his wealth. “I possess (replied Pyth-
ius) besides lands and slaves, two thousand talents of silver, and
three million nine hundred and ninety-three thousand of golden
darics, wanting only seven thousand of being four million. All
this gold and silver do I present to thee, retaining only my lands
and slaves, which will be quite enough.” Xerxes replied by the
strongest expressions of praise and gratitude for his liberality ;
at the same time refusing his offer, and even giving to Pythius
out of his own treasure the sum of seven thousand darics, which
was wanting to make up the exact sum of feur million. The
latter was so elated with this mark of favor, that when the army
was about to depart from Sardis, he ventured, under the influ-
ence of terror from the various menacing portents, to prefer a
prayer to the Persian monarch. His five sons were all about to
serve in the invading army against Greece : his prayer to Xerxes
was, that the eldest of them might be left behind, as a stay to his
own declining years, and that the service of the remaining four
with the army might be considered as sufficient. But the un-
happy father knew not what he asked. “ Wretch! (replied
Xerxes) dost thou dare to talk to me about thy son, when I am
myself on the march against Greece, with my sons, brothers, re-
latives, and friends? thou who art my slave, and whose duty it

1 Herodot. vii, 41. Merd dd riv leroy dieAéAerrro nat dbo cradiove, gal
Execta 6 Aocmdc Suchoc Hie dvapis.

’

98 HISTORY OF GREECE.

is to follow me, with thy wife and thy entire family? Know that
the sensitive soul of man dwells in his ears: on hearing good
things, it fills the body with delight, but boils with wrath when
it hears the contrary. As, when thou didst good deeds and
madest good offers to me, thou canst not boast of having sur
passed the king in generosity, —so now, when thou hast turned
round and become impudent, the punishment inflicted on thee
shall not be the full measure of thy deserts, but something less.
For thyself.and for thy four sons, the hospitality which I re.
ceived from thee shall serve as protection; but for that one son
whom thou especially wishest to keep in safety, the forfeit of his
life shall be thy penalty.” He forthwith directed that the son
of Pythius should be put to death, and his body severed in twain :
of which one half was to be fixed on the right-hand, the other
on the left-hand, of the road along which the army was to
pass. eo ; .

A tale essentially similar, yet rather less revolting, has been
already recounted respecting Darius, when undertaking his ex-
pedition against Scythia. Both tales illustrate the intense force
of sentiment with which the Persian kings regarded the obliga-
tion of universal personal service, when they were themselves in
the field. They seem to have measured their strength by the
number of men whom they collected around them, with little or
no reference to quality: and the very mention of exemption —
the idea that 3 subject and a slave should seek to withdraw him-
self from a risk which the monarch was about to encounter —
was an offence not to be pardoned. In this as in the other acts of
Oriental kings, whether grateful, munificent, or ferocious, we trace
nothing but the despotic force of personal will, translating itself
into act without any thought of consequences, and treating sub-
jects with less consideration than an ordinary Greek master
would have shown towards his slaves.

From Sardis, the host of Xerxes directed its march to Aby-
dos, first across Mysia and the river Kaikus,— then through
Atarneus, Kariné, and the plain of Thébé: they passed Adra-

1 The incident respecting Pythius is in Herodot. vii, 27, 28, 38, 39. I
place no confidence in the estimate of the wealth of Pythius; but in other
respects, the story seems well entitled to credit.

= _ om ee eee ee eee
ee
. — nn ey a ee

ARRIVAL OF XERXES IN EUROPE. 99

myttium and Antandrus, and crossed the range of Ida, most part
of which was on their left hand, not without some loss from
stormy weather and thunder.! From hence they reached Dium
and the river Skamander, the stream of which was drunk up, or
probably in part trampled and rendered undrinkable, by the vast
host of men and animals: in spite of the immortal interest which
the Skamander derives from the Homeric poems, its magnitude
is not such as to make this fact surprising. To the poems them-
selves, even Xerxes did not disdain to pay tribute: he ascended
the holy hill of Dlium,— reviewed the Pergamus where Priam
was said to have lived and reigned, —sacrificed one thousand
oxen to the patron goddess Athéné,— and caused the Magian
priests to make libations in honor of the heroes who had fallen
on that venerated spot. He even condescended to inquire into
the local details,2 abundantly supplied to visitors by the inhabi-
tants of Ilium, of that great real or mythical war to which Gre-
cian chronologers had hardly yet learned to assign a precise date:
and doubtless when he contemplated the narrow area of that
Troy which all the Greeks confederated under Agamemnon had
been unable for ten years to overcome, he could not but fancy .
that these same Greeks would fall an easy prey before his innu-
merable host. Another day’s march between Rhoeteium, Ophry-
neium, and Dardanus on the left-hand, and the Teukrians of
Gergis on the right-hand, brought him to Abydos, where his
two néwly-constructed bridges over the Hellespont awaited
him.

‘On this transit from Asia into Europe Herodotus dwells with
peculiar emphasis,— and well he might do so, since when we
consider the bridges, the invading number, the unmeasured hopes
succeeded by no less unmeasured calamity, — it will appear not
only to have been the most imposing event of his century,
but to rank among the most imposing events of all history. He
surrounds it with much dramatic circumstance, not only mention-
ing the marble throne erected for Xerxes on a hill near Abydos,
from whence he surveyed both his masses of land-force covering
the shore, and his ships sailing and racing in the strait (a race in
ee pe eae ee a 5 ay ee he a ae

1 Herodot. vii, 42.

2 Herodot. vii, 43. Senoauevog d2, xat seb ipiwse xelvoy Exacta, ate.

30 HISTORY OF GREECE.

which the Phenicians of Sidon surpassed the Greeks and all the
other contingents), but also superadding to this real fact a dia-
logue with Artabanus, intended to set forth the internal mind of
Xerxes. He farther quotes certain supposed exclamations of
the Abydenes at the sight of his superhuman power. “Why
(said one of these terror-stricken spectators!), why dost thou, O
Zeus, under the shape of a Persian man and the name of Xerxes,
thus bring together the whole human race for the ruin of Greece?
It would have been easy for thee to accomplish that without so
much ado.” Such emphatic ejaculations exhibit the strong feel-
ing which Herodotus or his informants throw into the scene,
though we cannot venture to apply to them the scrutiny of his-
torical criticism.

At the first moment of sunrise, so sacred in the mind of Ori-
entals,? the passage was ordered to begin: the bridges being
perfumed with frankintense. and strewed with myrtle boughs,
while Xerxes himself made libations into the sea with a golden
censer, and offered up prayers to Helios, that he might effect
without hindrance his design of conquering Europe even to its
farthest extremity. Along with his libation he cast into the Hel-
lespont the censer itself, with a golden bowl and a Persian cim-
eter; — “I do not exactly know’ (adds the historian) whether he
threw them in as a gift to Helios, or as a mark of repentance ©
and atonement to the Hellespont for the stripes which he had in-
flicted upon it.” Of the two bridges, that nearest to the Euxine
was devoted to the military force,— the other, to the attendants,
the baggage, and the beasts of burden. The ten thousand Per-
sians, called Immortals, all wearing garlands on their heads, were

1 Herodot. vii, 45, 53, 56. "2 Zed, ri d) dvdpl eldduevoe Uépoy, xat obvoua
avril Ade Zépkea Dépevog, dvacrarov tiv ‘EAAGda tdédere wotjoat, dyuv
navrac avOporoug ; Kal yap avev Tovréwp Egy Tot woléety TavTa.

2 Tacitus, Histor. iii, 24. ‘“ Undique clamor, et orientem solem, ita in
Syrid mos est, consalutavére,” — in his striking description of the night
battle near Cremona, between the Roman troops of Vitellius and Vespa-
sian, and the rise of the sun while the combat was yet unfinished : so ea
also Quintns Curtius (iii, 3, 8, p. 41, ed. Mutzel).

3 Herodot. vii, 54. raira ob« Ext érpexéwc dtaxpivat, ote ei To ‘HAig-
évarideig xarixe é¢ Td néhayos, ore el petepédnoé of td> ‘F: eA TTROU ETSY pas.
teyoa yrt, kal avTitouvtéwn rH Sadaccay Edwpéero.

— — — ee : pee
ana > aes OO ae gate ene
= 7

PROGRESS OF THE ARMY OF XERXES. 31

the first to pass over, and Xerxes himself, with the remaining
army, followed next, though in an order somewhat different from
that which had been observed in quitting Sardis: the monarch
having reached the European shore, saw his troops crossing the
bridges after him “under the lash.” But in spite of the use of
this sharp stimulus to accelerate progress, so vast were the num-
bers of his host, that they occupied no less than seven days and
seven nights, without a moment of intermission, in the business
of crossing over, —a fact to be borne in mind presently, when
we come to discuss the totals computed by Herodotus.!

Having thus cleared the strait, Xerxes directed his march
along the Thracian Chersonese, to the isthmus whereby it is
joined with Thrace, between the town of Kardia on his left hand
and the tomb of Hellé on his right, — the eponymous heroine of
the strait. After passing this isthmus, he turned westward along
the coast of the gulf of Melas and the /Xgean sea,— crossing
the river from which that gulf derived its name, and even drink-
ing its watera up — according to Herodotus — with the men and
animals of his army. Having passed by the olic city of ASnus
and the harbor called Stentoris, he reached the sea-coast and
plain called Doriskus, covering the rich delta near the mouth of
the Hebrus: a fort had been built there and garrisoned by Da-
rius. The spacious plain called by this same name reached far
_ along the shore to Cape Serreium, and comprised in it the towns

of _Salé and Zoné, possessions of the Samothracian Greeks
planted on the territory once possessed by the Thracian Kikones
on the mainland. Having been here joined by his fleet, which
had doubled? the southernmost promontory of the Thracian
Chersonese, he thought the situation convenient for a general
review and enumeration both of his land and his naval force.

Never probably in the history of mankind has there been

1 Herodot. vii, 55, 56. Acéfy dé 6 orpardg abrod éy érrad népyot wat by
éxra ebopdvyat, tAtvicag oidéva ypovov.

* Herodot. vii, 58-59 ; Pliny, H.N.iv,11. See some valuable remarke
on the topography of Doriskus and the neighborhood of the town still
calied Enos, in Grisebach, Reise durch Rumelien und nach Brussa, ch. vi,
vol. i, pp. 157-159 (Gottingen, 1841). He shows reason for believing that
the indentation of the coast, marked on the map as the gulf of Ainos, did
not exist in ancient times, any more than it exists now. —

a

$3 HISTORY OF GREECE. -

brought together a body of men from regions so remote and sc
widely diverse, for one purpose and under one command, as those
which were now assembled in Thrace near the mouth of the
Hebrus. About the numerical total we cannot pretend to forma
any definite idea; about the variety of contingents there is no
room for doubt. “ What Asiatic nation was there (asks Herod-
otus,! whose conceptions of this expedition seem to outstrip his
powers of language) that Xerxes did not bring against Greece ?”
Nor was it Asiatic nations alone, comprised within the Oxus, the
Indus, the Persian gulf, the Red Sea, the Levant, the Augean and
the Euxine: we must add to these also the Egyptians, the Ethiopi-
ans on the Nile south of Egypt, and the Libyans from the desert
near Kyréné. Not all the expeditions, fabulous or historical,
of which Herodotus had ever heard, appeared to him compar-
able to this of Xerxes, even for total number; much more in
respect of variety of component elements. Forty-six different
nations,? each with its distinct national costume, mode of arming,
and local leaders, formed the vast land-force ; eight other nations
furnished the fleet, on board of which Persians, Medes, and
Sake served as armed soldiers or marines; and the real lead-
ers, both of the entire ariny and of all its various divisions, were

1 Herodot. vii, 20-21.

* See the enumeration in Herodotus, vii, 61-96. In chapter 76, one name
has dropped out of the text (see the note of Wesseling and Schweigh-
hauser,) which, in addition to those specified under the head of the land-
force, makes up exactly forty-six. It is from this source that Herodotus
derives the boast which he puts into the mouth of the Athenians (ix, 27)
respecting the battle of Marathon, in which they pretend to have van-
quished forty-six nations, — évixjoauev Edvea EF xai recoapaxovra: though
there is no reason for believing that so great a number of contingents were
engaged with Datis at Marathon.

Compare the boasts of Antiochus king of Syria (z.c. 192) about his im-
mense Asiatic host brought across into Greece, as well as the contemptuour
comments of the Roman consul Quinctius (Livy, xxxv, 48-49). ‘“ Varia
enim genera armorpm, et multa nomina gentium inauditarum, Dahas, et
Medos, et Cadusios, et Elymxos — Syros omnes esse: hand paulo man-
cipioram melius, propter servilia ingenia, quam militum genus :” and the
sharp remark of the Arcadian envoy Antiochus (Xenophon, Hellen. vii, },
33). Quintus Curtius also has some rhetorical turns about the number
of nations, whose names even were hardly known, tributary to the Persian
empire (iii, 4, 29; iv, 45, 9), “ignota etiam ipsi Dario gentium nomina,” ete

ee eee

MUSTER OF THE ARMY OF XERXES. 83

native Persians of noble blood, who distributed the various ne
tive contingents into companies of thousands, hundreds, and tens.
The forty-six nations composing the land-force were as follows :
. Persians, Medes, Kissians, Hyrkanians, Assyrians, Baktrians,
Sake, Indians, Arians, Parthians, Chorasmians, Sogdians, Gan-
darians, Dadike, Kaspians, Sarange, Paktyes, Utii, Myki, Pari-
kanii, Arabians, Ethiopians in Asia and Ethiopians south of
Egypt, Libyans, Paphlagonians, Ligyes, Matieni, Mariandyni,
Syrians, Phrygians, Armenians, Lydians, Mysians, Thracians,
Kabélians, Mares, Kolchians, Alarodians, Saspeires, Sagartii.
The eight nations who furnished the fleet were: Phenicians,
three hundred ships of war; Egyptians, two hundred ; Cypriots,
one hundred and fifty; Kilikians, one hundred; Pamphylians,
thirty ; Lykians, fifty ; Karians, seventy ; Ionic Greeks, one hun-
dred ; Doric Greeks, thirty ; Acolic Greeks, sixty ; Hellespontic
Greeks, one hundred; Greeks from the islands in the Agean,
seventeen ; in all one thousand two hundred and seven triremes,
or ships of war, with thrée banks of oars. The descriptions of
costume and arms which we find in Herodotus are curious and
varied ; but it is important to mention that no nation except the
Lydians, Pamphylians, Cypriots and, Karians (partially also the
Egyptian marines on shipboard) bore arms analogous to those of
the Greeks (¢. e. arms fit for steady conflict and sustained charge,!
— for hand combat in line as well as for defence of the person,
— but inconveniently heavy either in pursuit or in flight); while
the other nations were armed with missile weapons, — light
shields of wicker or leather, or no shields at all,——turbans or
leather caps instead of helmets,-—swords, and scythes. They
were not properly equipped either for fighting in regular order
or for resisting the line of spears and shields which the Grecian
hoplites brought to bear upon them ; their persons too were much
less protected against wounds than those of the latter; some of
them indeed, as the Mysians and Libyans, did not even carry
spears, but only staves with the end hardened in the fire.® A
nomadic tribe of Persians, called Sagartii, to the number of eight
thousand horsemen, came armed only with a dagger and with the
rope known in South America as the lasso, which they cast im

1 Herodot. vii, 89-98. * Herodot. vii, 61-81.
VOL. V.' 3 Soc.

84 HISTORY OF GREECE.

the fight to entangle an antagonist. The Athiopians from the
Upper Nile had their bodies painted half red and half white,
wore the skins of lions and panthers, and carried, besides the
javelin, a long bow with arrows of reed, tipped with a point of
sharp stone.

It was at Doriskus that the fighting men of the entire land-
army were first numbered; for Herodotus expressly informs us
that the various contingents had never been numbered separate-
ly, and avows his own ignorance of the amount of each. The
means employed for numeration were remarkable. Ten thou-
sand men were counted,! and packed together as closely as possi-
ble: a line was drawn, and a wall of inclosure built around the
space which they had occupied, into which all the army was
directed to enter successively, so that the aggregate number of
divisions, comprising ten thousand each, was thus ascertained.
One hundred and seventy of these divisions were affirmed by
the informants of Herodotus to have been thus numbered, con-
stituting a total of one million sevefit hundred thousand foot,
besides eighty thousand horse, many war-chariots from Libya
and. camels from Arabia, with a presumed total of twenty thou-
sand additional men.2 Such was the vast land-force of the Per-
sian monarch: his naval equipments were of corresponding
magnitude, comprising not only the twelve hundred and seven
triremes,? or war-ships, of three banks of oars, but also three
thousand smaller vessels of war and transports. The erew of
each trireme comprised two hundred rowers, and thirty fighting-
men, Persians or Saks; that of each of the accompanying ves-
sels included eighty: men, according to an average which Herodo-
tus supposes not far from the truth. If we sum up these items,
the total numbers brought by Xerxes from Asia to the plain and

to the coast of Doriskus would reach the astounding figure of

1 The army which Darius had condusted against Scythia is said to have
been counted by divisions of ten thousand each, but the. process is not de-
scribed in detail (Herodot. iv, 87).

* Herodot. vii, 60, 87,184. This same rude mode of enumeration was
employed by Darius Codomannus a century and a half afterwards, before
he marched his army to the field of Issus (Quintus Curtius, iii, 2 3, p. 2%,
Mutzel).

* Herodot. vii, 89-97

MUSTER OF THE ARMY OF XERXES. 85

two million three hundred and seventeen thousand men. Nor
is this all. In the farther march from Doriskus to Thermopyla,
Xerxes pressed into his service men and ships from all the
people whose territory he traversed: deriving from hence a rein-
forcement of one hundred and twenty triremes with aggregate
crews of twenty-four thousand men, and of three hundred thou-
sand new land troops, so that the aggregate of his force when he
appeared at Thermopylz was two million six hundred and forty
thousand men. To this we are to add, according to the conject-
ure of Herodotus, a number not at all inferior, as attendants,
slaves, sutlers, crews of the provision-craft and ships of burden,
etc., so that the male persons accompanying the Persian king
when he reached his first point of Grecian resistance amounted
to five million two hundred and eighty-three thousand two hun-
dred and twenty! So stands the prodigious estimate ef this
army, the whole strength of the Eastern world, in clear and
express figures of Herodotus,! who himself evidently supposes
the number to have been even greater; for he conceives the
number of “camp followers” as not only equal to, but consider-
ably larger than, that of fighting-men. We are to reckon,
besides, the eunuchs, concubines, and female cooks, at whose
mumber Herodotus does not pretend to guess: together with
cattle, beasts of burden, and Indian dogs, in indefinite multi
tude, increasing the consumption of the regular army.

To admit this overwhelming total, or anything near to it, is
obviously impossible: yet the disparaging remarks which it has
drawn down upon Herodotus are noway merited.2 He takes
pains to distingujsh that which informants told him, from that
which he merely guessed. His description of the review at
Doriskus is so detailed, that he had evidently conversed with
persons who were present at it, and had learned the separate
totals promulgated by the enumerators, — infantry, cavalry, and
ships of war, great and small. As to the number of triremes,

1 Herodot. vii, 185-186. érayev ravra rov Gov orpardv éx rag *Acine
(vii, 157). “ Vires Orientis et ultima secum Bactra ferens,” to use the lan
guage of Virgil about Antony at Actium.

? Even DahImann, who has many good remarks in defence of Herodotus,
hard!y does him justice (Herodot, Aus seinem Buche sein Leben, ch. xxxiv
p. 176).

‘

86 HISTORY OF GREECE.

his statement seems beneath the truth, as we may judge from
the contemporary authority of Asechylus, who in the “ Perse”
gives the exact number of twelve hundred and seven Persian
ships as having fought at Salamis: but between Doriskus and
Salamis, Herodotus! has himself enumerated six hundred and
forty-seven ships as lost or destroyed, and only one hundred and
twenty as added. No exaggeration, therefore, can well be sus-
pected in this statement, which would imply about two hundred
and seventy-six thousand as the number of the crews, though
there is here a confusion or omission in the narrative which we
cannot clear up. But the aggregate of three thousand smaller
shipe, and still more, that of one million seven hundred thousand
infantry, are far less trustworthy. There would be little or no
motive for the enumerators to be exact, and every motive for
them to exaggerate,-—-an immense nominal total would be no
less pleasing to the army than to the monarch himself, — so that
the military total of land-force and ships’ crews, which Merodo- -
tus gives as two million six hundred and forty-one thousand on
the arrival at Thermopyle, may be dismissed as unwarranted
and incredible. And the computation whereby he determines
the amount of non-military persons present, as equal or more
than equal to the military, is founded upon suppositions noway
admissible ; for though in a Grecian well-appointed army it was
customary to reckon one light-armed soldier, or attendant, for
every hoplite, no such estimate can be applied to the Persian
host. A few grandees and leaders might be richly provided
with attendants of various kinds, but the great mass of the army

1 Only one hundred and twenty ships of war are mentioned by Herod
otus(vii,185) as having joined afterwards from the seaports in Thrace. But
four hundred were destroyed, if not more, in the terrible storm on the coast
of Magnesia (vii, 190); and the squadron of two hundred sail, detached
by the Persians round Eubeea, were also all lost (viii, 7) ; besides forty-five
taken or destroyed in the various sea-fights near Artemisium (vii, 194; viil,
11). Other losses are also indicated (viii, 14-16).

As the statement of Aischylus for the number of the Persian triremes at -
Salamis appears well-entitled to credit, we must suppose either that the
number of Doriskus was greater than Herodotus has mentioned, or that a
number greater than that which he has stated joined afterwards.

See a good note of Amersfoordt, ad Demosthen. Orat. de Symmoriis, p.
88 (Leyden, 1821).

MUSTER OF THE ARMY OF XERXES. 87

would have none at all. Indeed, it appears that the only way in
which we can render the military total, which must at all events
have been very great, consistent with the conditions of possible
subsistence, is by supposing a comparative absence. of attendants, -
and by adverting to the fact of the small consumption, and habit-
ual patience as to hardship of Orientals in all ages. An Asiatic
soldier will at this day make his campaign upon scanty fare, and
under privations which would be intolerable to an European.!
And while we thus diminish the probable consumption, we have
to consider that never in any case of ancient history had so much
previous pains been taken to accumulate supplies on the line of
march : in addition to which the cities-in Thrace were required
to furnish such an amount of provisions, when the army passed
by, as almost brought them to ruin. Herodotus himself expresses
his surprise how provisions could have been provided for so vast
@ multitude ; and were we to admit his estimate literally, the diffi-
culty would be magnified into an impossibility. Weighing the
circumstances of the case well, and considering that this army
was the result of a maximum of effort throughout the vast em-
pire, that a great numerical total was the thing chiefly demand-
ed, and that prayers for exemption were regarded by the Great
King as a capital offence, and that provisions had been col-
lected for three years before along the line of march, — we may

1 See on this point Volney, Travels in Egypt and Syria, ch. xxiv, vol. ii,
pp. 70, 71; ch: xxxii, p. 367; and ch. xxxix, p. 435, (Engl. transl.)

Kinneir, Geographical Memoir of the Persian Empire, pp. 22-23. Ber-
nier, who followed the march of Aurungzebe from Delhi, in 1665, says that
some estimated the number of persons in the camp at three hundred thou-
sand, others at different totals, but that no one knew, nor had they ever been
counted. He says: “ You are, no doubt, at a less to conceive how so vast
a number both of men and animals can be maintained in the field. Tho
best solution of the difficulty will be found in the temperance and simple
diet of-the Indians.” (Bernier, Travels in the Mogul Empire, translated
by Brock, vol. ii, App. p. 118.)

So also Petit de la Croix says, about the enormous host of Genghis-
Khan: “Les hommes sont si sobres, qu’ils s’'accommodent de toutes sortes
d’alimens.”

That author scems to estimate the largest army of Genghis at seven
hundred thousand men (Histoire de Genghis, liv. ii, ch. vi, p. 193).

88 HISTORY OF GREECE.

well believe that the numbers of Xerxes were greater than were
ever assembled in ancient times, or perhaps at any known epoch
of history. But it would be rash to pretend to guess at any
positive number, in the entire absence of ascertained data: and
when we learn from Thucydides that he found it impossible to
find out the exact numbers of the small armies of Greeks who
fought at Mantineia,! we shall not be ashamed to avow our ina-
bility to count the Asiatic multitudes at Doriskus. We may
remark, however, that, in spite of the reinforcements received
afterwards in Thrace, Macedonia, and Thessaly, it may be doubt-
ed whether the aggregate total ever afterwards increased; for
Herodotus takes no account of desertions, which yet must have
been very numerous, in a host disorderly, heterogeneous, without
any interest in the enterprise, and wherein the numbers of each
separate contingent were unknown.

Ktesias gives the total of the host at eight hundred thousand
men, and one thousand triremes, independent of the war-chari-
ots: if he counts the crews of the triremes apart from the eight
hundred thousand men, as seems probable, the total will then
be considerably above a million. lian assigns an aggregate

1 Thucydid..v, 68. Xenophon calls the host of Xerxes innumerable, —
évapidunroy orpariay (Anabas. iii, 2, 13). ;

It seems not to be considered necessary for a Turkish minister to know
the numbers of an assembled Turkish army. In the war between the Rus-
aians and Turks in 1770, when the Turkish army was encamped at Babadag
near the Balkan, Baron de Tott tells us: “ Le Visir me demanda un jour
fort sérieusement si l’armée Ottomane étoit nombreuse. C’est & vous que
je m’adresserois, lui dis-je, si j’étais curieux de le savoir. Je l’ignore, me
repondit-il. Si vous l’ignorez, comment pourrois-je en étre instruit? Er
lisant la Gazette de Vienne, me répliqua-t-il. Je restai confondu.”

The Duke of Ragusa (in his voyage en Hongrie, Turquie, etc.), after
mentioning the prodigiously exaggerated statements current about the
numbers slain in the suppressed insurrection of the Janissaries at Constan-
tinople in 1826, observes: “ On a dit et répété, que leur nombre s’étoit élévé
a huit ou dix mille, et cette opinion s’est accréditée (it was really about five
hundred). Mais les Orientaux en général, et les Turcs en particulier, n’ont
aucune idée des nombres: ils les emploient sans exaetitude, et ils sont par
caractére portés 4 l’exagération. D’un autre coté, le gouvernement a dd
favoriser cette opinion populaire, pour frapper l’imagination et inspirer une
plus grande terreur.” (Vol. ii, p. 37.)

MUSTER OF THE ARMY OF XERXES. 89

of seven hundred thousand men: Diodorus! appears to follow
partly Herodotus,-partly other authorities. None of these wit-
nesses enable us to correct Herodotus, in a case where we are
obliged to disbelieve him. He is, in some sort, an original wit-
ness, having evidently conversed with persons actually present
at the muster of Doriskus, giving us both their belief as to the
numbers, together with the computation, true or false, circulated
among them by authority. Moreover, the contemporary Aachy-
lus, while agreeing with him exactly as to the number of triremes,
gives no specific figure as to the land-force, but conveys to us, in
his Persz, a general sentiment of vast number, which -may seem
in keeping with the largest statement of Herodotus: the Persian
empire is drained of men, — the women of Susa are left without
husbands and brothers,-— the Baktrian territory has not beer
allowed to retain even its old men.2 The terror-striking effect

1 Ktesias, Persica, c. 22, 23; Aélian, V. H. xiii, 83; Diodorus, xi, 2-11.

Respecting the various numerical statements in this case, see the note o!
Bos ad Cornel. Nepot. Themistocl. c. 2, pp. 75, 76.

The Samian poet Cheerilus,a few years younger than Herodotus, an.
contemporary with Thucydides, composed an epic poem on the expeditior.
of Xerxes against Greece. Two or three short fragments of it are all thay:
is preserved : he enumerated all the separate nations who furnished contin-
gents to Xerxes, and we find not only the Sake, but also the Solymi (ap-
parently the Jews, and so construed by Josephus) among them. See Frag-
ments, iii and iv, in Neke’s edition of Cherilus, pp. 121-134. Josephuz
cont. Apion. p. 454, ed. Havereamp.

* Aischylus, Pers. 14-124, 722-737. Heeren (in his learned work on the
commerce of the ancient world, Uéber den Verkehr der alten Welt, part 1,
‘sect. 1, pp. 162, 558, 3d edition) thinks that Herodotus had seen the actual
muster-roll, made by Persian authority, of the army at Doriskus. I canno!
think this at all probable: it is much more reasonable to believe that al!
his ‘information was derived from Greeks who had accompanied the expe-
dition. He must have seen and-conversed with many such. The Persian
royal scribes, or secretaries, accompanied the king, and took note of any
particular fact or person who might happen to strike his attention (Herodot.
vii, 100; viii, 90), or to exhibit remarkable courage. They seem to have
been specially attached to the person of the king as ministers to his curi-
osity and amusement, rather than keepers of authentic and continuous
records.

Heeren is disposed to accept the numerical totals, given by Herodotus as
fo the army of Xerxes, much too easily, in my judgment: nor is he correct

40 HISTORY OF GREECE.

of this crowd was probably quite as great as if its numbers had
really corresponded to the ideas of Herodotus.

After the numeration had taken place, Xerxes passed in his
chariot by each of the several contingents, observed their equip-
ment, and put questions to which the royal scribes noted down
the answers: he then embarked on board a Sidonian trireme,
which had been already fitted up with a gilt tent, and sailed
along the prows of his immense fleet, moored in line about four
hundred feet from the shore, and every vessel completely manned
for action. Such a spectacle was well calculated to rouse emo-
tions of arrogant confidence, and it was in this spirit that he sent
. forthwith for Demaratus, the exiled king of Sparta, who was
among his auxiliaries, — to ask whether resistance on the part of
the Greeks to such a force was even conceivable. The conver-
sation between them, dramatically given by Herodotus, is one of
the most impressive manifestations of sentiment in the Greek
language.1 Demaratus assures him that the Spartans most

in supposing that the contingents of the Persian army marched with their
wives and families (pp. 557-559).

1 When Herodotus specifies his informants — it is much to be.regretted
that he does not specify them oftener — they seem to be frequently Greeks,
such as Dikseus the Athenian exile, Thersander of Orchomenus in Bootia,
Archias of Sparta, etc. (iii, 55; viii,65; ix,16.) He mentions the Spartan
king Demaratns often, and usually under circumstances both of dignity
and dramatic interest: it is highly probable that he may have conversed
with that prince himself, or with his descendants, who remained settled for
a long time in Teuthrania, near the olic coast of Asia Minor {Xenoph.
Hellenica, iii, 1, 6), and he may thus have heard of representations offered
by the exiled Spartan king to Xerxes. Neveitheless, the remarks made by
Hoffmeister, on the speeches ascribed to Demaratus by Herodotus, are well
deserving of attention (Sittlich-religidse Lebensansicht des Herodotos, p.
118). :

“ Herodotus always brings into connection with insolent kings some man
or other through whom he gives utterance. to his own lessons of wisdom.
To Croesus, at the summit of his glory, comes the wise Solon: Croesus
himself, reformed by his captivity, performs the same part towards Cyrus
and Kambyses: Darius, as a prudent and honest man, does not require any
such counsellor; but Xerxes in his pride has the sententious Artabanus and
the sagacious Demaratus attached to him; while Amasis king of Egypt is
employed to transmit judicious counsel to Polykratés, the despot of Samos.
Since all these men speak one and the same language, it appears certain
that they are introduced by Herodotus merely as spokesmen for his own

. MARCH OF XERXES. 4]
certainly, and the Dorians of Peloponnesus probably, will resist
him to the death, be the difference of numbers what it may.
Xerxes receives the statement with derision, but exhibits no feel-
ing of displeasure: an honorable contrast to the treatment of
Charidemus a century and a half afterwards, by the last monarch
ef Persia.! .

After the completion of the review, Xerxes with the army
pursued his march westward, in three divisions and along three
different lines of road, through the territories of seven distinct
tribes of Thracians, interspersed with Grecian maritime colonies :
all was still within his own empire, and he took reinforcements
from ‘each as he passed: the Thracian Satre were preserved
from this levy by their unassailable seats amidst the woods and.
snows of Rhodopé. The islands of Samothrace and Thasus,
with their subject towns on the mainland, and the Grecian colo-

criticisms on the behavior and character of the various monarchs, — criti
cisms which are nothing more than general maxims, moral and relig
ious, brought out by Solon, Croesus, or Artabaaus, on occasion of particular
events. The speeches interwoven by Herodotus have, in the main, not the
same purpose as those of Taci‘n:,—~ to make the reader more intimately
acquainted with the existing po.ture of affairs, or with the character of the
agents, — but a different purpose quite foreign to history: they embody in
the narrative his own personal convictions respecting human life and the
divine government.”

This last opinion of Hoffmeister is to a great degree true, but is rather
too absolutely delivered.

1 Herodot: vii, 101-104. How inferior is the scene between Darius and
Charidemnd, in Quintus Curtius! (iii, 2, 9-19, p. 20, ed. Mutzel.)

Herodotus takes up substantially the same vein of sentiment and the
same antithesis as that which runs through the Perse of Aischylus ; but
he handles it like a social philosopher, with a strong perception of the real
causes of Grecian superiority.

It is not improbable that the skeleton of the conversation between Xerxes
and Demaratus was a reality, heard by Herodotus from Demaratus him-
self or from his sons; for the éxtreme specialty with which the Lacede-
monian exile confines his praise to the Spartans and Dorians, not includ-
ing the other Greeks, hardly represents the feeling of Herodotus himself.

The minuteness of the narrative which Herodotus gives respecting the
deposition and family circumstances of Demaratus (vi, 63, seg.), and his view
of the death of Kleomenés as an atonement to that prince for injury doua,
may seem derived from family information (vi, 84}.

42 . HISTORY OF GREECE.

nies Diksea,! Maroneia, and Abdéra, were successively laid under
contribution for contingents of ships or men; and, what was still
more ruinous, they were further constrained to provide a day’s
meal for the immense host as it passed: for the day of his pas-
sage the Great King was their guest. Orders had been trans-
mitted for this RgrPoee long beforehand, and for many montbs
the citizens had béen assiduously employed in collecting food for
the army, as well as delicacies for the monarch, — grinding flour
of wheat and barley, fattening cattle, keeping up birds and fowls;
together with a decent display of gold and silver plate for the
regal dinner. A superb tent was erected for Xerxes and his
immediate companions, while the army received their rations in
the open region around: on commencing the march next morn-
ing, the tent with all its rich contents was plundered, and noth-
ing restored to those who had furnished it. Of course, so prodig-
ious a host, which had occupied seven days and seven nights in
crossing the double Hellespontine bridge, must also have been
for many days on its march through the territory, and therefore
at the charge, of each one among the cities, so that the cost
brought them to the brink of ruin, and even in some cases drove
them to abandon house and home. The cost incurred by the
city of Thasus, on account of their possessions of the mainland,
for this purpose, was no less than four hundred talents? (equal to
ninety-two thousand eight hundred pounds): while at Abdéra,
the witty Megakreon recommended to his countrymen to go in a
body to the temples and thank the gods, because Xerxes was
pleased to be satisfied with one meal in the day. Had the mon-
arch required breakfast as well as dinner, the Abderites must
have been reduced to the alternative either of exile or of utter
destitution.3 A stream called Lissus, which seems to have been

? Herodot. vii, 109, 111, 118.

2 This sum of four hundred talents was equivalent to the entire annual
tribute charged in the Persian king’s rent-roll, upon the satrapy compris-
ing the. western and southern coast of Asia Minor, wherein were included all
the Ionic and olic Greeks, besides Lykians, Pamphylians, etc. (Herodot.
iii, 90.

2 ae vii, 118-120. He gives (vii, 187) the computation of the
quantity of corn which would have been required for daily consumption,
assuming the immense numbers as he conjectures them, and reckoning one

ad

XERXES REACHES THE STRYMON. 48

=

of no great importance, is said to have been drunk up by the
army, together with a lake of some magnitude near Pistyrus.!
Through the territory of the Edonian Thracians and the Pieri-
ans, between Pangzus and the sea, Xerxes and his army reached
the river Strymon at the important station called Ennea Hodoi,
or Nine-Roads, afterwards memorable by the foundation of Am-
phipolis. Bridges had been already thrown over the river, to
which the Magian priests rendered solemn honors by sacrificing
white horses and throwing them into the stream. Nor were his
religious feelings satisfied without the more precious sacrifices
often resorted to by the Persians: he here buried alive nine na-
tive youths and nine maidens, in compliment to Nine-Roads, the
name of the spot * moreover, he also left, under the care of the
Pzeonians of Siris, the sacred chariot of Zeus, which had been
brought from the seat of empire, but which doubtless was found
inconvenient on the line of march. From the Strymon he
marched forward along the Strymonic gulf, passing through the
territory of the Bisaltz, near the Greek colonies of Argilus and
Stageirus, until he came to the Greek town of Akanthus, hard
by the isthmus of Athos, which had been recently cut through.
The fierce king of the Bisaltz? refused submission to Xerxes,
fled to Rhodopé for safety, and forbade his six sons to join the
Persian host. Unhappily for themselves, they nevertheless did
so, and when they came back he caused all of them to be
blinded. :
. All the Greek cities, which Xerxes had passed by, obeyed his
orders with sufficient readiness, and probably few doubted the
ultimate success of so prodigious an armament. But the inhabi-
tants of Akanthus had been eminent for their zeal and exertions
in the cutting of the canal, and had probably madg considerable
profits during the operation; Xerxes now repaid their zeal by

cheenix of wheat for each man’s daily consumption, equal to one eighth of
a medimnus. It is unnecessary to examine a computation founded on
such inadmissible data.

1 Herodot. vii, 108, 109.

* Herodot. vii, 114. He pronounces this savage practice to be specially
Persian. The old and cruel Persian queen Amestris, wife of Xerxes,
sought to prolong her own life by burying alive fourteen victims, children
of illustrious men, as offerings to the subterranean god.

* Herodot. viii, 116 _

44 HISTORY OF GREECE.

contracting with them the tie of hospitality, accompanied with
praise and presents; though he does not seem to have ex-
empted them from the charge of maintaining the army while in
their territory. He here separated himself from his fleet, which
was directed to sail through the canal of Athos, to double the
two southwestern capes of the Chalkidic peninsula, to enter the
Thermaic gulf, and to await his arrival at Therma. The fleet in
its course gathered additional troops from the Greek towns in
the two peninsulas of Sithonia and Palléné, as well as on the
eastern side of the Thermaic gulf, in the region called Krusis, or
Krossza, on the continental side of the isthmus of Palléné.
These Greek towns were numerous, but of little individual impor-
tance. Near Therma (Salonichi) in Mygdonia, in the interior
of the gulf and eastward of the mouth of the Axius, the fleet
awaited the arrival of Xerxes by land from Akanthus. He
seems to have had a difficult march, and to have taken a route
considerably inland, through Pzonia and Kresténia,—a wild,
woody, and untrodden country, where his baggage-camels were
set upon by lions, and where there were also wild bulls, of pro-
digious size and fierceness: at length he rejoined his fleet at
Therma, and stretched his army throughout Mygdonia, the an-
cient Pieria, and Bottisis, as far as the mouth of the Haliakmén.!

Xerxes had now arrived within sight of Mount Olympus, the
northern boundary of what was properly called Hellas; after a
march through nothing but subject territory, with magazines laid
up beforehand for the subsistence of his army, with additional
contingents levied in his course, and probably with Thracian
volunteers joining him in the hopes of plunder. The road along
which he had marched was still shown with solemn reverence by
the Thracians, and protected both from intruders and from til-
lage, even in the days of Herodotus.2 The Macedonian princes,
the last of his western tributaries, in whose territory he now
found himself, — together with the Thessalian Aleuadsx, — un-
dertook to conduct him farther. Nor did the task as yet appear
difficult: what steps the Greeks were taking to oppose him, shall
be related in the coming chapter.

1 Herodot. vii, 122-127. :
Respecting the name Pieria, and the geography of these regions, see the
previous volume, vol. iv, ch. xxv. p. 14. * Herodot. vii, 116.

KLEOMENES AND LEOTYCHIDES. 45

CHAPTER XXXIX.

PROCEEDINGS IN GREECE FROM THE BATTLE OF MARATHON TO
THE TIME OF THE BATTLE OF THERMOPYLE.

Oovr information respecting the affairs of Greece immediately
after the repulse of the Persians from Marathon, is very scanty.

Kleomenés ‘and Leotychidés, the two kings of Sparta (the
former belonging to the elder, or Eurystheneid, the latter to the
younger, or the Prokleid, race), had conspired for the purpose of
dethroning the former Prokleid king Demaratus: and Kleom-
enés had even gone so far as to tamper with the Delphian
priestess for this purpose. His manceuvre being betrayed shortly
afterwards, he was so alarmed at the displeasure of the Spartans,
that he retired into Thessaly, and from thence into Arcadia,
where he employed the powerful influence of his regal character
and heroic lineage to arm the Arcadian people against his coun-
try. The Spartans, alarmed in their turn, voluntarily invited
him back with a promise of amnesty. But his renewed lease
did not last long: his habitual violence of character became ag-
gravated into decided insanity, insomuch that he struck with his
stick whomsoever he met; and his relatives were forced to con-
fine him in chains under a Helot sentinel. By severe menaces,
he one day constrained this man to give him his sword, with
which he mangled himself dreadfully and perished. So shock-
ing a death was certain to receive a religious interpretation, but
which among the misdeeds of his life had drawn down upon him
the divine wrath, was a point difficult to determine. Most of the
Greeks imputed it to the sin of his having corrupted the Pythian
priestess :! but the Athenians and Argeians were each disposed to
an hypothesis of their own, — the former believed that the gods
had thus punished the Spartan king for having cut timber in the
sacred grove of Eleusis,—the latter recognized the avenging
hand of the hero Argus, whose grove Kleomenés had burnt,

} Herodot. vi, 74, 75.

7

46 HISTORY OF GREECE.

along with so many suppliant warriors who had taken sanctuary
in it. Without pronouncing between these different suppositions,
Herodotus contents himself with expressing his opinion that the
miserable death of Kleomenés was an atonement for his conduct
to Demaratus. But what surprises us most is, to hear that the
Spartans, usually more disposed than other Greeks to refer every
striking phenomenon to divine agency, recognized on this occa-
sion nothing but a vulgar physical cause: Kleomenés had gone
mad, they affirmed, through habits of intoxication, learned from
some Scythian enyoys who had come to Sparta.!

The death of Kleomenés, and the discredit thrown on his char-
acter, emboldened the /iginetans to prefer a complaint at Sparta
respecting their ten hostages whom Kleomenés and Leotychidés
had taken away from the island, a little before the invasion of
Attica by the Persians under Datis, and deposited at Athens as
guarantee to the Athenians against aggression from ‘gina at
that critical moment. Leotychidés was the surviving auxiliary
of Kleomenés in the requisition of these hostages, and against
him the Atginetans complained. Though the proceeding was
one unquestionably beneficial to the general cause of Greece,2
yet such was the actual displeasure of the Lacedsemonians against
the deceased king and his acts, that the’survivor Leotychidés was
brought to a public trial, and condemned to be delivered up as
prisoner in atonement to the Atginetans. The latter were about
to carry away their prisoner, when a dignified Spartan named
Theasidés, pointed out to them the danger which they were in-
curring by such an indignity against the regal person, — the Spar-
tans, he observed, had passed sentence under feelings of tem-
porary wrath, which would probably be exchanged for sympathy
if they saw the sentence realized.

Accordingly the Avginetans, instead of executing the sentence,
contented themselves with stipulating that Leotychidés should
accompany them to Athens and redemand their hostages detained
there. The Athenians refused to give up the hostages, in spite
of the emphatic terms in which the Spartan king set forth the

1 Herodot. vi, 84.
*® Herodot. vi, 61. KAecopévea, tévra tv r§ Alyivy, xal xowwd v9 ‘EAAGGs
éyada mpocepyalopuevoy, etc.

AFFAIRS OF SPARTA. #2

sacred obligation of restoring a deposit :! they justified the re
fusal in part by saying that-the deposit had been lodged by the
two kings jointly, and could not be surrendered to one of them
alone: but they probably recollected that the hostages were
placed less as a deposit than as a security against Aginetan hos-
tility, — which security they were not disposed to forego.

Leotychidés having been obliged to retire without success, the
/tginetans resolved to adopt measures of retaliation for them-
selves: they waited for the period of a solemn festival celebrated
every fifth year at Sunium, on which occasion a ship pecu-
liarly equipped and carrying some of the leading Athenians as
Theérs, or sacred envoys, sailed thither from Athens. This ship
they found means to capture, and carried all on board prisoners
to Aigina. Whether an exchange took place, or whether the
prisoners and hostages on both sides were put to death, we do
not know; but the consequence of their proceeding was an active
and decided war between Athens and Atgina,? beginning seem-
ingly about 488 or 487 8.c., and lasting until 481 B.c., the year
preceding the invasion of Xerxes.’

An Atginetan citizen named Nikodromus took advantage of
this war to further a plot against the government of the islands
having been before, a3 he thought, unjustly banished, he now
organized a revolt of the people against the ruling oligarchy,
concerting with the Athenians a simultaneous invasion in support
of his plan. Accordingly, on the appointed day he rose with his

1 Herodot. vi, 85: compare vi, 49-78, and the preceding volume of this
history, c. xxxvi, pp. 487-441.

* Herodot. vi, 87, 88.

Instead of 77v yap 67 roict "ADyvaiown: wevtapys ent Lovviy (vi, 87), 1
follow the reading proposed by SchOmann and sanctioned by Boéckh—
wevretnpic. It is hardly conceivable that the Athenians at that time
should have had any ships with five banks of oars (srevrjp7¢): moreover,
apart from this objection, the word zevyr#py¢ makes considerable embar-
rassment in the sentence; see Boéckh, Urkunden iiber das Attische See-
wesen, chap. vii, pp. 75, 76.

The elder Dionysius of Syracuse is said to have been the first Greek
who constructed revrjpecc or quinquereme ships (Diodor. xiv, 40, 41)

There were many distinct pentaéterides, or solemnities celebrated every
fifth year, included among the religious customs of Athens: see Aristoteles,
Modtr. Fragm. xxvii, ed. Neumann; Pollax, viii, 107.

48 HISTORY OF GREECE.

“ partisans in arms and took possession of the Old Town,—a
strong post which had been superseded in course‘of time by the
more modern city on the sea-shore, less protected though mors
convenient.! But no Athenians appeared, and without them he
was unable to maintain his footing: he was obliged to make his
escape from the island after witnessing the complete defeat of his
partisans, —a large body of whom, seven hundred in number,
fell into the hands of the government, and were led out for exe-
cution. One man alone among these prisoners burst his chains,
fled to the sanctuary of Démétér Thesmophorus, and was fortu-
nate enough to seize the handle of the door before he was over-
taken. In spite of every effort to drag him away by force, he
¢lung to it with convulsive grasp: his pursuers did not venture
to put him to death in such a position, but they severed the hands
from the body and then executed him, leaving the hands still
hanging to and grasping? the door-handle, where they seem to
have long remained without being taken off. Destruction of the
seven hundred prisoners does not seem to have drawn down upon
the Avginetan oligarehy either vengeance from the gods or cen-
sure from their contemporaries; but the violation of sanctuary,
in the case of that one unfortunate man whose hands were cut
off, was a crime which the goddess Démétér never forgave. More
than fifty years afterwards, in the first year of the Peloponnesian
war, the AXginetans, having been previously conquered by Athens,
were finally expelled from their island: such expulsion was the
divine judgment upon them for this ancient impiety, which half a

' See Thucyd. i, 8

The acropolis at Athens, having been the primitive city inhabited, tote
the name of The City even in the time of Thucydides (ii, 15), at a time
‘when Athens and Peirseus covered so large a region around and near it.

* Herodot. vi, 91. yetpeg 62 xeivar éumeduaviat Hoav toiot éxcomacripot.
The word xeiva: for éxeivat, “those hands,” appears so little suitable in

- this phrase, that I rather imagine the real reading to have been xecva?. (the

Tonic dialect for xevai), “the hands with nothing attached to them :” com-
pare a phrase not very unlike, Homer, Iliad, iii, 376, xecv) 62 Tpvgddcca
up’ Eorero, etc.

Compare the narrative of the arrest of the Spartan king Pausanias, and
of the manner in which he was treated when in sanctuary at the temple of
Athéné Chalkiwkos (Thucyd. i, 134).

WAR WITH ZGINA. 49

eentury of continued expiatory sacrifice had not been sufficient to
wipe out,!

The Athenians who were to have assisted Nikodromus arrived
at Aigina ane day too late. Their proceedings had been de-
layed by the necessity of borrowing twenty triremes from the
Corinthians, in addition to fifty of their own: with these seventy
sail they defeated the Adginetans, who met them with a fleet of
equal number, and then landed on the island. The Aginetans
solicited aid from Argos, but that city was either too much dis-
pleased with them, or too much exhausted by the defeat sus-
tained from the Spartan Kleomenés, to grant it. Nevertheless,
one thousand Argeian volunteers, under a distinguished cham-
pion of the pentathlon named Eurybatés, came to their assistance,
and a vigorous war was carried on, with varying success, against
the Athenian armament.

At sea, the Athenians sustained a defeat, being attacked at a
moment when their fleet was in disorder, so that they lost four
ships with their crews: on land they were more successful, and
few of the Argeian volunteers survived to return home. The
, general of the latter, Eurybatés, confiding in his great personal
strength and skill, challenged the best of the Athenian warriors
to single combat: he slew three of them in succession, but the
arm of the fourth, Séphanés of Dekeleia, was victorious, and
proved fatal to him.? At length the invaders were obliged to
leave the island without any decisive result, and the war seems

' Herodot. vi, 91. ’Axd robrov d2 xat Gyog ogt eyévero, rd ta Pvoacdat
otvy oiot te éyévovTo émisnyavamevol, GAN’ EpSyoav Exrecdvres xpuTepoy éx
THC vaoov 7 age lAewy yevéoSat THY Sedy.

Compare Thucyd. ii, 27 about the final expulsion from AMginsu. The
Lacedssmonians assigned to these expelled Mginetans a new abode in the
territory of Thyrea, on the eastern coast of Peloponnesus, where they were
attacked, taken prisoners, and put to death by the Athenians, in the eighth
year of the war (Thucyd. iv, 57). Now Herodotus, while he mentions the
expulsion, does not allude to their subsequent and still more calamitous
fate. Had he known the fact, he could hardly have failed to notice it, as a
farther consummation of the divine judgment. We may reasonably pre-
sume ignorance in this case, which would tend to support the opinion
hrown out in my preceding yolume (chap. xxxiii, p. 225, note) respecting
the date of composition of his history, — in the earliest years of the Pelo-
ponnesian war. * Herodot. ix, 75.

VOL. Vv. 8 4oc.

50 HISTORY OF GREEOE.

to have been prosecuted by frequent descents and privateering on
both sides, —in which Nikodromus and the Aginetan exiles,
planted by Athens on the coast of Attica near Sunium, took an
active part ;! the advantage on the whole being on the side of
Athens.

The general course of this war, and especially the failure of
the enterprise concerned with Nikodromus in consequence of de-
lay in borrowing ships from Corinth, were well calculated to
impress upon the Athenians the necessity of enlarging their
naval force. And it is from the present time that we trace among
them the first growth of that decided tendency towards maritime
activity, which coincided so happily with the expansion of their
democracy, and opened a new phase in Grecian history, as well
as a new career for themselves.

The exciting effect produced upon them by the repulse of the
Persians at Marathon has been dwelt upon in my preceding
volume. Miltiades, the victor in that field, having been removed
from the scene under circumstances already described, Aristeidés
and Themistoklés became the chief men at Athens: and the for-
mer was chosen archon during the succeeding year. His exem-
plary uprightness in magisterial functions insured to him lofty
esteem from the general public, not without a certain proportion
of active enemies, some of them sufferers by his justice. These
enemies naturally became partisans of his rival, Themisto-
klés, who had all the talents necessary for bringing them into
cooperation: and the rivalry between the two chiefs became so
bitter and menacing, that even Aristeidés himself is reported to
have said, “If the Athenians were wise, they would cast both of
us into the barathrum.” Under such circumstances, it is not too
much to say that the peace of the country was preserved mainly
by the institution called Ostracism, of which so much has been
said in the preceding volume. After three or four years of con-
tinued political rivalry, the two chiefs appealed to a vote of ostra-
cism, and Aristeidés was banished.

’ Herodot. vi, 90-93. Thucyd. i, 41. About Séphanés, comp. ix, 75.

How much damage was done by such a privateering war, between coun.
trices so near as gina and Attica, may be seen by the more detailed de
scription of a later war of the same kind in 388 s.c. (Kenophon. Hellenic
v. 1.)

NAVAL POWEE OF ATHENS. 51

Of the particular points on which their rivalry turned, we are
unfortunately little informed. But it is highly probable that one
of them was, the important change of policy above alluded to, —
the conversion of Athens from a land-power into a sea-power, —
the development of this new and stirring element in the minds
ot the people. By all authorities, this change of policy is
ascribed principally and specially to Themistoklés:! on that ac-
count, if for no other reason, Aristeidés would probably be found
opposed to it,— but it was, moreover, a change not in harmony
with that old-fashioned Hellenism, undisturbed uniformity of life
and narrow range of active duty and experience, which Aris-
teidés seems to have approved in common with the subsequent
philosophers. The seaman was naturally more of a wanderer
and cosmopolite than the heavy-armed soldier: the modern
Greek seaman even at this moment is so to a remarkable degree,
distinguished for the variety of his ideas and the quickness of his
intelligence :* the land-service was a type of steadiness and in-

-! Plutarch, Themist. c. 19.

* See Mr. Galt’s interesting account of the Hydriot sailors, Voyages and
Travels in the Mediterranean, pp. 376-378 (London, 1802).

“ The city of Hydra originated in a small colony of boatmen belonging
to the Morea, who took refage in the island from the tyranny of the Turks.
About forty years ago they had multiplied to a considerable number, their
little village began to assume the appearance of a town, and they had
cargoes that went as far as Constantinople. In their mercantile transac-
tions, the Hydriots acquired the reputation of greater integrity than the
other Greeks, as well as of being the most intrepid navigators in the Archi-
pelago; and they were of course regularly preferred. Their industry and
honesty obtained its reward. The islands of Spezzia, Paros, Myconi, and
Ipsara, resemble Hydra in their institutions, and possess the same charac-
ter for commercial activity. In paying their sailors, Hydra and its sister
islands have a peculiar custom. The whole amount of the freight is con-
sidered as a common stock, from which the charges of victualing the ship
are deducted. The remainder is then divided into two equal parts: one is
allotted to the crew, and equally shared among them without reference to
ago or rank ; the other part is appropriated to the ship and captain. The
capital of the cargo is a trust given to the captain and crew on certain
fixed conditions. The character and manners of the Hydriot sailors, from
the moral effect of these customs, are much superior in regularity to the
ideas that we are apt to entertain of sailors. They are sedate, well-dressed,
well-bred, shrewd, informed, and speculative. They seem to form a class,
in the orders of mankind, which has no existence among us. By their

x

52 HISTORY OF GREECE.

flexible ranks, the sea-service that of mutability and adventure.
Such was the idea strongly entertained by Plato and other phi-
losophers:! though we may remark that they do not render jus-
tice to the Athenian seaman, whose training was far more perfect
and laborious, and his habits of obedience far more complete,2
than that of the Athenian hoplite, or horseman: a training be-
ginning with Themistoklés, and reaching its full perfection about
the commencement of the Peloponnesian war.

In recommending extraordinary efforts to create a navy as
well as to acquire nautical practice, Themistoklés displayed all
that sagacious appreciation of the circumstances and dangers of
the time for which Thucydides gives him credit : and there can be
no doubt that Aristeidés, though the honester politician of the two,
was at this particular crisis the less essential to his country. Not
only was there the struggle with Aigina, a maritime power equal
or more than equal, and within sight of the Athenian harbor, —
but there was also in the distance a still more formidable contin-
gency to guard against. The Persian armament had been driven
with disgrace from Attica back to Asia; but the Persian mon-
arch still remained with undiminished means of aggression and
increased thirst for revenge; and Themistoklés knew well that
the danger from that quarter would recur greater than ever. He
believed that it would recur again in the same way, by an expe-
dition across the A¥gean like that of Datis to Marathon ;3 against

voyages, they acquire a liberality of notion which we expect only among
gentlemen, while in their domestic circumstances their conduct is suitable
to their condition. The Greeks are all traditionary historians, and possess
much of that kind of knowledge to which the term learning is usually ap-
plied. This, mingled with the other information of the Hydriots, gives
them that advantageous character of mind which I think they possess.”

1 Plato, Legg. iv, pp. 705, 706. Plutarch, Themistoklés, c, 19. Iso-
kratés, Panathenaic, c. 43.

Platarch, Philopcemen. c. 14. TAjv ’Erapewovdav piv tveot Aéyovow
bxvovvra yetoat rév xara Sadaccay Odedetdy rode modirac, rac abtG ur
AGSwow avr? povizwv dritrév, xara WAétwva, vairar yevdpevor xal diag
Oapévrec, Grpaxrov éx tie Aciacg kal Trav vagwy areAVeiv éExovotec: com-
pare vii, p. 301.

* See the remarkable passage in Xenophon (Memorab. iii, 5, 19), attest-
ing that the Hoplites and the Hippeis, the persons first in rank in the city
were also the most disobedient on military service.

* Thucyd. i, 93. iddv (Themistoklés) rij¢ Bactding orpariac rie xara
OaiAaeouy Edcdov ebropwripay rie KaTa yRY otcay.

POLICY OF THEMISTOKLES. 53

which the best defence would be found in a numerous and well-
trained fleet. Nor could the large preparations of Darius for
renewing the attack remain unknown to a vigilant observer, ex-
tending as they did over so many Greeks subject to the Persian
empire. Such positive warning was more than enough to stimu-
late the active genius of Themistoklés, who now prevailed upon
his countrymen to begin with energy the work of maritime prep-
aration, as well against gina as against Persia.! Not only
were two hundred new ships built, and citizens trained as sea-
men,— but the important work was commenced, during the
year when Themistoklés was either archon or general, of form-
ing and fortifying a new harbor for Athens at Peirsus, instead
of the ancient open bay of Phalérum. The latter was indeed
somewhat nearer to the eity, but Peirseu’, with its three separate
. nataral ports,2 admitting of being closed and fortified, was incom-
parably superior in safety as well as in convenience. It is not
too much to say, with Herodotus,— that the Avginetan “ war
was the salvation of Greece, by constraining the Athenians to
make themselves a maritime power.”8 The whole efficiency of
the resistance subsequently made to Xerxes turned upon this
new movement in the organization of Athens, allowed as it was
to attain tolerable completeness through a fortunate concurrence
of accidents; for the important delay of ten years, between the
defeat of Marathon and the fresh invasion by which it was to be
avenged, was in truth the result of accident. First, the revolt of
Egypt; next, the death of Darius; thirdly, the indifference of
Xerxes, at his first accession, towards Hellenic matters, — post-
poned until 480 B.c., an invasion which would naturally have
been undertaken in 487 or 486 B.c., and which would have found
Athens at that time without her wooden walls, — the great engine
of her subsequent salvation.

Another accidental help, without which the new fleet could not
have been built, — a considerable amount of public money, —
was also by good fortune now available to the Athenians. It is

1 Thucyd. i, 14. Herodot. vii, 144. * Thucyd. i, 93.

3 Herodot. vii, 144. Odbrog yap 6 méAenoe overag Eowoe Tore THy 'EAAGda,
évayxaoac Sadacciouc.yevécdas ’AOnvaiove.

Thucyd. i, 18. vavrixol tyévovro.

54 HISTORY OF GREECE.

first in an emphatic passage of the poet Auschylus, and next
from Herodotus on the present occasion, that we hear of the silver
mines of Laurium! in Attica, and the valuable produce which
they rendered to the state. ‘They were situated in the southern
portion of the territory, not very far from the promontory of
Sunium,? amidst a district of low hills which extended across
much of the space between the eastern sea at Thorikus, and the
western at Anaphlystus. At what time they first began to be
worked, we have no information; but it seems hardly possible
that they could have been worked with any spirit or profitable
result until after the expulsion of Hippias and the establishment
of the democratical constitution of Kleisthenés. Neither the
strong local factions, by which different portions of Attica were
set against each other before the time of Peisistratus, nor
the rule of that despot succeeded by his two sons, were
likely to afford confidence and encouragement. But when the
democracy of Kleisthenés first brought Attica into one systematic
and comprehensive whole, with equal rights to all the parts, and
a common centre at Athens, — the power of that central govern-
ment over the mineral wealth of the country, and its means of
binding the whole people to respect agreements concluded with
individual undertakers, would give a new stimulus to private
speculation in the district of Laurium. It was the practice of
the Athenian government either to sell, or to let for a long term
of years, particular districts of this productive region to indi-
viduals or companies, — on consideration partly of a sum or fine
paid down, partly of a reserved rent equal to one-twenty-fourth
part of the gross produce.

We are told by Herodotus that there was in the Athenian

1 Aeschylus, Persse, 235. 7

*The mountain region of Laurium has been occasionally visited by
modern travellers, but never carefully surveyed until 1836, when Dr. Fiedler
examined it mineralogically by order of the present Greek government.
See his Reisen durch Griechenland, vol. i, pp. 39, 78. The region is now
little better than a desert, but Fiedler especially notices the great natural
fertility of the plain near Thorikus, together with the good harbor at that -
place, — both circumstances of great value at the time when the mines were
in work. Many remains are seen of shafts sunk in ancient times,— and
sunk in S0 workmanlike a manner as to satisfy the eye of a miner of the
present day.—p. 76.

~

INCREASE OF THE aca NAVY. 55

treasury, at the time when Themistoklés made his proposition te
enlarge the naval force, a great sum! arising from the Laurian
mines, out of which a distribution was on the point of being
made among the citizens,—-ten drachms to each man. This
great amount in hand must probably have been the produce of
the purchase-money or fines received from recent sales, since the
small annual reserved rent can hardly have been accumulated
during many successive years: new and enlarged enterprises in
mines must be supposed to have been recently begun by indi-
viduals under contract with the government, in order to produce
at the moment so overflowing an exchequer and to furnish means
for the special distribution contemplated. Themistoklés availed
himself of this precious opportunity, — set forth the necessities
of the war. with Agina and the still more formidable menace
from the great enemy in Asia, -— and prevailed upon the people
to forego the promised distribution for the purpose of obtaining an
efficient navy.2, One cannot doubt that there must have been

1 Herodot. vii, 144. “Ore ‘AYnvaiowac: yévopévov xpnuator peydiwv dv r@
Kowv@, Ta éx Tov peradAAwy ogt TpooTATe Toy dxd Aaupeiov, EuedAov Aakea-
Oat ipynddv Exacrog déxa dpaxpac.

* Ali the information — unfortanately it is very scanty—which we
possess respecting the ancient mines of Laurium, is brought together in the
valuable Dissertation of M. Boéckh, translated and appended to the Eng-
lish translation of his Public Economy of Athens. He discusses the fact
stated in this chapter of Herodotus, in sect. 8 of that Dissertation: but
there are many of his remarks in which I cannot concur.

After multiplying ten drachmew by the assumed number of twenty thou
sand Athenian citizens, making a sum total distributed of thirty-three and
one-third talents, he goes on: “ That the distribution was made annually
might have been presumed from the principles of the Athenian administra-
tion, without the testimony of Cornelius Nepos. We are not, therefore, to
suppose that the savings of several years are meant, nor merely a surplus:
but that all the public money arising from the mines, as it was not required
for any other object, was divided among the members of the community,”
(p. 632.)

We are hardly authorized to conclude from the passage of Herodotus
that all the sum received from the mines was about to be distributed: the
treasury was very rich, and a distribution was about to be made, —but it
does not follow that nothing was to be left in the treasury after the distribu-
tion. Accordingly, all calculations of the total producé of the mines, based
upon this passage of Herodotus, are uncertain. Nor is it clear that there
97838 any regular annual distribution, unless we are to take the passage of

5G HISTORY OF GREECE.

many speakers who would try to make themselves napdise by
opposing this proposition and supporting ‘the distribution, i inso-
much that the power of the people generally to feel the force of
a distant motive as predominant over a present gain deserves
notice as an earnest of their approaching greatness.

Immense, indeed, was the recompense reaped for this self-
denial, not merely by Athens but by Greece generally, when the
preparations of Xerxes came to be matured, and his armament
was understood to be approaching. The orders for equipment
of ships and laying in of provisions, issued by the Great King to
his subject Greeks in Asia, the Augean, and Thrace, would of
course become known throughout Greece Proper, — especially
the vast labor bestowed on the canal of Mount Athos, which would
be the theme of wondering talk with every Thasian or Akan-
thian citizen who visited the festival games in Peloponnesus.
All these premonitory evidences were public enough, without any
need of that elaborate stratagem whereby the exiled Demaratus

Cornelius Nepos as proving it: but he talks rather about the magistrates
employing this money for jobbing purposes, — not about a regular distribe-
tion : “ Nam cum pecunia publica que ex metallis redibat, largitione magis-
tratuum quotannis periret.” Corn. Nep. Themist.e.&. A story is told by
Polysenus, from whomsoever he copied it, — of a sum of one hundred tal-
ents in the treasury, which Themistoklés persuaded the people to hand over
to one hundred rich men, for the purpose of being expended as the latter
might direct, with an obligation to reimburse the money in case the people
were not satisfied with the expenditure: these rich men employed each the
sum awarded to him in building a new ship, much to the satisfaction of the
people (Polysn. i, 30). ‘This story differs materially from that ef Herodo-
tus, and we cannot venture either to blend the two See or to rely
upon Polysenus separately.

I imagine that the sum of thirty three talents, or fifty talents, necessary
for the distribution, formed part of a larger sum lying in the treasury,
arising from the mines. Themistoklés persuaded.the people to employ the
whole sum in ship-building, which of course implied that the distribution
was to be renounced. Whether there had been. distributions of a similar
kind in former years, as M. Boéckh affirms, is a matter on which we have
no evidence. M. Boéckh seems to me not to have kept in view the fact,
which he himself states jast before, that there were two sources of receipt
into the treasury, — original purchase-money paid down, and reserved
annual rent. It is from the former source that I imagine the large sum
lying in the treasury to have been derived: the small reserved rent probably
went among the annual items of the state-budget.

CONGRESS AT CORINTH: 57

28 alleged to have secretly transmitted, from Susa to Sparta, in-
telligence of the approaching expedition.! The formal announce-
ments of Xerxes all designated Athens as the special object cf
his wrath and vengeance,? and other Grecian cities might thus
hope to escape without mischief: so that the prospect of the
great invasion did not at first provoke among them any unani-
mous dispositions to resist. Accordingly, when the first heralds
despatched by Xerxes from Sardis in the autumn of 481 B.c., a
little before his march to the Hellespont, addressed themselves
to the different cities' with demand of earth and water, many
were disposed to comply. Neither to Athens, nor to Sparta,
were any heralds sent ; and these two cities were thus from the
beginning identified in interest and in the necessity of defence.
Both of them sent, in this trying moment, to consult the Delphian
oracle: while both at the same time joined to convene a Pan-
Hellenic congress at the Isthmus of Corinth, for the purpose of
organizing resistance against the expected invader.

I have in the preceding volume pointed out the various steps
whereby the separate states of Greece were gradually brought,
even against their own natural instincts, into something ap-
proaching more nearly to political union. The present congress,
assembled under the influence of common fear from Persia, has
more of a Pan-Hellenic character than any political event which
has yet occurred in Grecian history. It extends far beyond the
range of those Peloponnesian states who constitute the immedi-
ate allies of Sparta: it comprehends Athens, and is even sum-
moned in part by her strenuous instigation: it seeks to combine,
moreover, every city of Hellenic race and language, however
distant, which can be induced to take part in it, even the
Kretans, Korkyreans, and Sicilians. It is true that all these
states do not actually come, but earnest efforts are made to
induce them to come: the dispersed brethren of the Hellenic
family are intreated to marshal themselves in the same ranks
for a joint political purpose,’ —the defence of the common

1 Herodot. vii, 239. ® Herodot. vii, 8-138.

2 Herodot. vii, 145. Spovfoavrec el xug tv re yévoito Td ‘EAAnvendy, xal
el ovyxinpavtes rutrd npqocoiey moves, Gg devov ixiévrav duolug xaos
*EAAgot. .

ge

58 ¢ HISTORY OF GREECE.

hearth and metropolis of the race. This is a new fact in Gre-
cian history, opening scenes and ideas unlike to anything which
has gone before,— enlarging, prodigiously, the functions and
duties connected with that headship of Greece which had hith-
erto been in the hands df Sparta, but which is about to become
too comprehensive for her to manage, — and thus introducing
increased habits of cooperation among the subordinate states, as
well as rival hopes of aggrandizement among the leaders. The
congress at the isthmus of Corinth marks such further advance
in the centralizing tendencies of ,Greece, and seems at first to
promise an onward march in the same direction: but the prom-
ise will not be found realized.

Its first step was, indeed, one of inestimable value. While
most of the deputies present came prepared, in the name of their
respective cities, to swear reciprocal fidelity and brotherhood,
they also addressed all their efforts to appease the feuds and dis-
sensions which reigned among the particular members of their
own meeting. Of these the most prominent, as well as the most
dangerous, was the war still subsisting between Athens and
ZEgina. The latter was not exempt, even now, from suspicions
of medizing,! t. e., embracing the cause of the Persians, which
had been raised by her-giving earth and water ten years before
to Darius: but her present conduct.gave no countenance to such
suspicions: she took earnest part in the congress as well as in
the joint measures of defence, and willingly consented to accom-
modate her difference with Athens.? In this work of reconciling
feuds, so essential to the safety of Greece, the Athenian Themis-
toklés took a prominent part, as well as Cheileos of Tegea in
Arcadia. The congress proceeded to send envoys and solicit
_ cooperation from such cities as were yet either equivocal or
indifferent, especially Argos, Korkyra, and the Kretan and Sici-
lian Greeks, — and at the same time to despatch spies across to
Sardis, for the purpose of learning the state and prospects of
the assembled army.

These spies presently returned, having been detected and
condemned to death by the Persian generals, but released by

1 Herodot. viii, 92. * Herodot. vii. 145
Plutarch, Themistokl. c. 10. About Cheileos, Herodot. ix, 9.

-

ANSWER OF 1'HE DELPHIAN ORACLE. 59

express order of Xerxes, who directed that the full strength of
his assembled armament should be shown to them, in order that
the terror of the Greeks might be thus magnified. The step
was well calculated for such a purpose: but the discouragement
throughout Greece was already extreme, at this critical period
when the storm was about to burst upon them. Even to intelli-
gent and well-meaning Greeks, much more to the careless, the
timid, or the treacherous, — Xerxes with his countless host ap-
peared irresistible, and indeed something more than human:! of
course, such an impression would be encouraged by the large
number of Greeks already his tributaries: and we may even
trace a manifestation of a wish to get rid of the Athenians alto-
gether, as the chief objects of Persian vengeance and chief hin-
drance to tranquil submission. This despair of the very contin-
uance of Hellenic life and autonomy breaks forth even from the
eanctuary of Hellenic religion, the Delphian temple; when the
Athenians, in their distress and uncertainty, sent to consult the
oracle. Hardly had their two envoys performed the customary
sacrifices, and sat down in the inner chamber near the priestess
Aristoniké, when she at once exclaimed: “ Wretched men, why
sit ye there? Quit your land and city, and flee afar! Head

body, feet, and hands are alike rotten: fire and sword, in the
train of the Syrian chariot, shall overwhelm you: nor only your
city, but other cities also, as well as many even of the temples of
the gods,—- which are now sweating and trembling with fear,
and foreshadow, by drops of blood on their roofs, the hard calam-
ities impending. Get ye away from the sanctuary, with your
souls steeped in sorrow.” ?

1 Herodot. vii, 203. ob ydp Oedy eivas rov éxiovra Ext rv “EAAada, GA)’
dv3pwroyv, etc.: compare also vii, 56.

* Herodot. vii, 140.

AAA’ irov bE adbroto, xaxoic & éxixidvare Oupdy.

The general sense and scope of the oracle appears to me clear, in this
case. It is a sentence of nothing but desolation and sadness; though Bahr
and Schweighiuser, with other commentators, try to infuse into it some
thing of encouragement by construing Yuydv, fortitude. The translation of
Valla and Schultz is nearer to the truth. But even when the general sense
of an oracle is plain (which it hardly ever is), the particular phrases are
always wild and vague. 7

60 HISTORY OF GREECE.

So terrific a reply had rarely escaped from the lips of the
priestess. The envoys were struck to the earth by it, and durst
not carry it back to Athens. In their sorrow they were encour-
aged yet to hope by an influential Delphian citizen named Timon
(we trace here, as elsewhere, the underhand working of these
leading Delphians on the priestess), who advised them to pro-
vide themselves with the characteristic marks of supplication,
and to approach the oracle a second time in that imploring
guise: “QO lord, we pray thee (they said), have compassion on
these boughs of supplication, and deliver to us something more
comfortable concerning our country ; else we quit not thy sanc-
tuary, but remain here until death.” Upon which the priestess
replied: “Athéné with all her prayers and all her sagacity
cannot propitiate Olympian Zeus.! But this assurance I will
give you, firm as adamant: when everything else in the land of
Kekrops shall be taken, Zeus grants to Athéné that the wooden
wall alone shall remain unconquered, to defend you and your
children. Stand not to await the assailing horse and foot from
the continent, but turn your backs and retire: you shall yet live
to fight another day. O divine Salamis, thou too shalt destroy
the children of women, either at the seed-time or at the har-
vest.” 2

This second answer was a sensible mitigation of the first: it
left open some hope of escape, though faint, dark, and unintelli-
gible, — and the envoys wrote it down to carry back to Athens,
not concealing, probably, the terrific sentence which had preceded
it. When read tothe people, the obscurity of the meaning pro-
voked many different interpretations. What was meant by “the
wooden wall?” Some supposed that the acropolis itself, which

1 Herodot. vii, 141.
Ob divara: TlaAdAds AP ?OAtpmoy siAadoao9ar
Atooopévn moAdoiot Aéyotc Kat pHride ruKvgZ.
Compare with this the declaration of Apollo to Croesus of Lydia (i, 91)
3 ....Teizor Tptroyevei EdAwov didot etptora Zede
Mobvoy dnépSyrov reréderv, 7d ot réxva P dvqaer.

"Q Sein Tadapic, arodeic d2 od réxva yuvaxey, etc.
(Herodot vii, 141).

ADVICE OF THEMISTOKLES. 61

had originally been surrounded with a wooden palisade, was the
refuge pointed out: but the greater number, and among them
most of those who were by profession expositors of prophecy,
maintained that the wooden wall indicated the fleet. But these
professional expositors, while declaring that the god bade them
go on shipboard, deprecated all idea of a naval battle, and insist-
ed on the necessity of abandoning Attica forever: the last lines
of the oracle, wherein it was said that Salamis would destroy the
children of women, appeared to them to portend nothing but
disaster in the event of a naval combat. Such was the opinion
of those who passed for the best expositors of the divine will: it
harmonized completely with the despairing temper then preva-
lent, heightened by the terrible sentence pronounced in the first
oracle ; and emigration to some foreign land presented itself as
the only hope of safety even for their persons. The fate of
Athens, —and of Greece generally, which would have been
helpless. without Athens,— now hung upon a thread, when
‘Themistoklés, the great originator of the fleet, interposed with
equal steadfastness of heart and ingenuity, to insure the proper
use of it. He contended that if the god had intended to desig-
nate Salamis as the scene of a naval disaster to the Greeks, that
island would have been called in the oracle by some such epithet
as “ wretched Salamis :” but the fact that it was termed “ divine
Salamis,” indicated that the parties, destined to perish there,
were the enemies of Greece, not the Greeks themselves. He
encouraged his countrymen, therefore, to abandon their city and
country, and to trust themselves to the fleet as the wooden wall
recommended by the god, but with full determination to fight
and conquer on board.! Great, indeed, were the consequences

1 Herodot. vii, 143. Tatty OegoroxAéove drrogarvopevov, ’ADyvaio: tatTa
ogt Eyvacay alperarepa elvat paddAov ) Ta Tév YonouodAdyur, ol otk eluv
vavpaxiny apréeoSat, GAAd éixdemévrag xOpny rev’ Arrixiy, GAAnv Trivd
oixiger. :

There is every reason to accept the statement of Herodotus as true, re-
specting these oracles delivered to the Athenians, and the debated interpre-
tation of them. They must have been discussed publicly in the Athenian
assembly, and Herodotus may well have conversed with persons who had
heard the discussion. Respecting the other oracle which he states to
have been delivered to the Spartans,—intimating that either Sparta

62 HISTORY OF GREECE.

which turned upon this bold stretch of exegetical conjectare.
Unless the Athenians had been persuaded, by some plausible
show of interpretation, that the sense of the oracle encouraged
instead of forbidding a naval combat, they would in their exist-
ing depression have abandoned all thought of resistance.

Even with the help of an encouraging interpretation, however,
nothing Jess than the most uneonquerable resolution and patriot-
ism could have enabled the Athenians to bear up against such
terrific denunciations from the Delphian god, and persist in re-
sistance in place of seeking safety by emigration. Herodotus
emphatically impresses this truth upon his readers:! nay, he
even steps out of his way to do so, proclaiming Athens as the
real saviour of Greece. Writing as he did about the beginning
of the Peloponnesian war,—at a time when Athens, having
attained the maximum of her empire, was alike feared, hated, —
and admired, by most of the Grecian states, — he knows that the
opinion which he is giving will be unpopular with his hearers
generally, and he apologizes for it as something wrung from him
against his will by the force of the evidence. Nor was it only

must be conquered or a king of Sparta must perish, — we may well doubs
whether it*was in existence before the battle of Thermdpylx (Herodot.
vii, 220).

The later writers, Justin (ii, 12), Cornelius Nepos (c. 2), and Polysenus
(i, 30), give an account of the proceeding of Themistoklés, inferior to
Herodotus in vivacity as well as in accuracy.

1 Herodot. vii, 139. obd2 ogéacg yonornpia goBepa, tADovra éx AeApoy, wai
be deiua Badévra, Ereioe éxdineiv tHv 'EAAGCa, etc.

For the abundance of oracles and prophecies, from many different
sources, which would be current at such a moment of anxiety, we may
compare the analogy of the outbreak of the Peloponnesian war, described
by the contemporary historian (Thucyd. ii, 8).

* Herodot. vii, 1389. ’Evdatra dvayxaig tépyouat yviunv anodééa-
oda, Erigtovoy piv xpdg TOY KALOvaY GvB porary: Suu 6, TH yé
pot paiveras eivat aGAndic, oix émoxjow. El *AYnvaia, catappodjoarres
roy éxiovra xivduvey, t&édirov Ti ogertépny, etc....... Niv di, 'AYyvaiovg
dy Tig Aéywv owrjpac yevéoSat rig "EAAGSog, obx dv duapravo 7d dAnVEc, ete.

The whole chapter deserves peculiar attention, as it brings before us the
feelings of those contemporaries to whom his history is addressed, and the
mode of judging with which they looked back on the Persian war. One is
apt unconsciously to fancy that an ancient historian writes for men in the
abstract, and not for men of given sentiments, prejudices, and belief. The

4

RESOLUTION OF THE ATHENIANS. 68

that the Athenians dared to stay and fight against immense odds:
the,, and they alone, threw into the cause that energy and for-
wardness whereby it was enabled to succeed,! as will appear
farther in the sequel. But there was also a third way, not less
deserving of notice, in which they contributed to the result. As
soon as the congress of deputies met at the isthmus of Corinth,
it became essential to recognize some one commanding state, and
with regard to the land-force no one dreamed of contesting the
preéminence of Sparta. But in respect to the fleet, her preten-
sions were more disputable, since she furnished at most only six-
teen ships, and little or no nautical skill; while Athens brought
two-thirds of the entire naval force, with the best ships and sea-
men. Upon these grounds the idea was at first started, that
Athens should command at sea and Sparta on land: but the ma-
jority of the allies manifested a decided repugnance, announcing
that they would follow no one but a Spartan. To the honor of
the Athenians, they at once waived their pretensions, as soon as
they saw that the unity of the confederate force, at this moment
of peril, would be compromised.2 To appreciate this generous
abnegation of a claim in itself so reasonable, we must recollect
that the love of preéminence was among the most prominent at-
tributes of the Hellenic character: a prolific source of their
greatness and excellence, but producing also -no stall amount
both of their follies and their crimes. To renounce at the call
of public obligation a claim to personal honor and glory, is per-
haps the rarest of all virtues in a son of Hellen.

We find thusthe Athenians nerved up to the pitch of resist-
ance, — prepared to see their country wasted, and to live as well
as to fight on shipboard, when the necessity should arrive, — fur-

persons whom Herodotus addressed are those who were so full of admira-
tion for Sparta, as to ascribe to her chiefly the honor of having beaten back
the Persians; and to maintain that, even without the aid of Athens, the
Spartans and Peloponnesians both could have defended, and would have
defended, the isthmus of Corinth, fortified as it was by a wall built ex-
pressly. The Peloponnesian allies of that day forgot that they were open
to attack by sea as well as by land.

1 Herodot. vii, 139. éAduevoe 62 tiv ‘EAAGda weptetvar LAevdépny, TovTo
Td 'EAAnvixdy av 7d Aoirdy, doov ph eundtoe, abro? obrot aav of éreyei-

_ pavrec, cat Baoiléa pera ye Seode dvwoduevos

* Herodot. viii, 2,8: compare vii, 161.

64 HISTORY OF GREECE.

nishing two thirds of the whole fleet, and yet prosecuting the
building of fresh ships until the last momenf,! — sending forth
the ablest and most forward leader in the common cause, while
content themselves to serve like other states under the leadership
of Sparta. During the winter preceding the march of Xerxes
from Sardis, the congress at the Isthmus was trying, with little
success, to bring the Grecian cities into united action. Among
the cities north of Attica and Peloponnesus, the greater number
were either inclined to submit, like Thebes and the greater part
of Boeotia, or at least lukewarm in the cause of independence, —
so rare at this trying moment (to use the language of the unfoz
tunate Platzans fifty-three years afterwards), was the exertion
of resolute Hellenic patriotism against the invader.2 Even in
the interior of Peloponnesus, the powerful Argos maintained an
ambiguous neutrality. It was one of the first steps of the con-
gress to send special envoys to Argos, to set forth the common
danger and solicit cooperation; the result is certain, that no
cooperation was obtained, — the Argeians did nothing throughout
the struggle ; but as so their real position, or the grounds of their
refusal, contradictory statements had reached the ears of Herodo-
tus. They themselves affirmed that they were ready to have
joined the Hellenic cause, in spite of dissuasion from the Del-
phian oracle, — exacting only as conditions, that the Spartans
should conclude a truce with them for thirty years, and should
equally divide the honors of headship with Argos. To the pro-
posed truce there would probably have been no objection, nor
was there any as to the principle of dividing the headship: but
the Spartans added, that they had two kings, while the Argeiana
had only one; and inasmuch as neither of the two Spartan kings
could be deprived of his vote, the Argeian king could only be
admitted to a third vote conjointly with them. This proposition
appeared to the Argeians, who considered that even the undi-
vided headship was no more than their ancient right, as nothing

1 Herodot. vii, 144.

* Thucyd. iii, 56. év xatpoi¢ ol¢ omdviov dv trav ‘EAARvev rivd dperiy TH
mépgou dvvapet dvriragaoVat.

This view of the case is much more conformable to history than the
boasts of later orators respecting wide-spread patriotism in these times
See Demosthen. Philipp. iii, 37, p. 120.

—_———— — — -ee——E 2,
a moe tect

AMBIGUOUS CONDUCT OF THE ARGIVES. 65

better than insolent encroachment, and incensed them so much
that they desired the envoys to quit their territory before sunset,
— preferring even a tributary existence under Persia to a formal
degradation as compared with Sparta.!

Such was the story told by the Argeians themselves, but seem-
wngly not credited either by any other Greeks or by Herodotus
himself. The prevalent opinion was, that the Argeians had a
secret understanding with Xerxes, and some even affirmed that
they had been the parties who invited him into Greece, as a
means both of protection and of vengeance to themselves against
Sparta after their defeat by Kleomenés. And Herodotus himself
evidently believed that they medized, though he is half afraid to
say so, and disguises his opinion in a cloud of words which be-
tray the angry polemics going on about the matter, even fifty
years afterwards.? It is certain that in act the Argeians were

} Herodot. vii, 147-150.

* The opinion of Herodotus is delivered in a remarkable way, without
mentioning the namé of the Argeians, and with evident reluctance. After
enumerating all the Grecian contingents assembled” for the defence of the
Isthmus, and the different inhnhitants of Peloponnesus, ethnically classified,
he proceeds to say: Tottwy dv ray énra d3véuv al Aowral wodic, wapet Td»
aaréAcga, tx tov pécov txaréaro’ el dé thevdiépuc Egeore elxeiv,
éx rot péocov xarhpevot éuqdsCoy (viii, 73). This assertion in-
cludes the Argeians without naming them.

Where he speaks respecting the Argeians by name, he is by no means s0
free and categorical; compare vii, 152,—he will give no opinion of his
own, differing from the allegation of the Argeians themselves, — he men-
tions other stories, incompatible with that allegation, but without guaran-
teeing their accuracy,—he delivers a general admonition that those who
think they have great reason to complain of the conduct of others would
generally find, on an impartial scrutiny, that others have as much reason
to complain of them,— “and thus the conduct of Argos has not been se
much worse than that of others,” —obrw d) obx ’Apyeiotce aloxiora
WET OLNTAL,

At the beginning of the Peloponnesian war, when the history of Herod-
otus was probably composed, the Argeians were in a peculiarly favorable
position. They took part neither with Athens nor Lacedsemon, each of
whom was afraid of offending them. An historian who openly counte-
nanced a grave charge of treason against them in the memorable foregone
combat against Xerxes, was thus likely to incur odium from both parties
in Greece.

The comments of Plutarch on Herodotus in respect to this matter are

VOL. V. 500.

66 HISTORY OF GREECE.

neutral, and one of their reasons for neutrality was, that they did
not choose to join any Pan-Hellenic levy except in the capacity
of chiefs; but probably the more powerful reason was, that they
shared the impression then so widely diffused throughout Greece
as to the irresistible force of the approaching host, and chose to
hold themselves prepared for the event. They kept up secret
negotiations even with Persian agents, yet not compromising
themselves while matters were still pending ; nor is it improbable,
in their vexation against Sparta, that they would have been better
pleased if the Persians had succeeded, — all which may reason-
ably be termed, medizing.

The absence of Hellenic fidelity in Argos was borne out by
the parallel examples of Krete and Korkyra, to which places
envoys from the Isthmus proceeded at the same time. The
Kretans declined to take any part, on the ground of prohibitory
injunctions from the oracle ;! the Korkyrzans promised without
performing, and even without any intention to perform. Their
neutrality was a serious loss to the Greeks, since they could fit
out a naval force of sixty triremes, second only to that of Athens.
With this important contingent they engaged to join the Grecian
fleet, and actually set sail from Korkyra; but they took care not
to sail round cape Malea, or to reach the scene of action. Their
fleet remained on the southern or western coast of Peloponnesus,
under pretence of being weatherbound, until the decisive result
of the battle of Salamis was known. Their impression was that
the Persian monarch would be victorious, in which case they
would have made a merit of not having arrived in time; but they
were also prepared with the plausible excuse of detention from
foul winds, when the result turned out otherwise, and when they
were reproached by the Greeks for their absence.? Such dupli-
city is not very astonishing, when we recollect that it was the
habitual policy of i to isolate herself from Hellenic con-
federacies.3

of little value (De Herodoti Malignit. c. 28, p. 863), and are indeed unfair,
since he represents the Argeian version of the facts as being universally
believed (Gmavre¢ icactyv), which it evidently was not.

1 Herodot. vii, 169.

* Herodot. vii, 168.

* Thucyd. i, 32-37. It is perhaps singular that the Corinthian envoys in

THE GREEKS ENTER THESSALY 63

The envoys who visited Korkyra proceeded onward on their
mission to Gelon, the despot of Syracuse. Of that potentate,
regarded by Herodotus as more powerful than any state in
Greece, I shall speak more fully in a subsequent chapter: it is
sufficient to mention now, that he rendered no aid against Xerxes.
Nor was it in his power to do so, whatever might have been his
inclinations ; for the same year which brought the Persian mon-
arch against Greece, was_glso selected by the Carthaginians for
a formidable invasion of Sicily, which kept the Sicilian Greeks
to the defence of their own island. It seems even probable that
this simultaneous invasion had been concerted between the Per-
sians and Carthaginians.!

The endeavors of the deputies of Greeks at the Isthmus had
thus produced no other reinforcement to their cause except
some fair words from the Korkyreans. It was near the time
when Xerxes was about to pass the Hellespont, in the begin-
ning of 480 B.c., that the first actual step for resistance was taken,
at the instigation of the Thessalians. Though the great Thes-
salian family of the Aleuad« were among the companions of
Xerxes, and the most forward in inviting him into Greece, with
every promise of ready submission from their countrymen, it
seems that these. promises were in reality unwarranted: the
Aleuadz were at the head only of a minority, and perhaps were
even in exile, like the Peisistratidse 2 while most of the Thessalians
were disposed to resist Xerxes, for which purpose they now sent
envoys to the Isthmus,3 intimating the necessity of guarding the
passes of Olympus, the northernmost entrance of Greece. They
_ offered their own cordial aid in this defence, adding that they
should be under the necessity of making their own separate sub-
mission, if this demand were not complied with. Accordingly, a
body of ten thousand Grecian heavy-armed infantry, under the

Thucydides do not make any allusion to the duplicity of the Korkyreans
in regard to the Persian invasion, in the strong invecfive which they de-
liver against Korkyra before the Athenian assembly (Thucydid. i, 37-42).
The conduct of Corinth herself, however, on the sarie occasion, was not
alfogether without reproach.

} Herodot. vii, 158-167. Diodor. xi, 22.

* See Schol. ad Aristeid., Anathenaic. p. 138.

* Herodot. vii, 172: compare c. 130.

68 HISTORY OF GREECE.

emmand of the Spartan Eusnetus and the Athenian Themis-
toklés, were despatched by sea to Halus in Achza Phthiétis,
where they disembarked and marched by land across Achza and
Thessaly.!1 Being joined by the Thessalian horse, they occupied
the defile of Tempé, through which the river Peneius makes its
way to the sea, by a cleft between the mountains Olympus and
Oszsa.

The long, narrow, and winding defile of Tempé, formed then,
and forms still, the single entrance, open throughout winter as
well as summer, from lower or maritime Macedonia into Thes-
saly: the lofty mountain precipices approach so closely as to
leave hardly room enough in some places for a road: it is thus
eminently defensible, and a few resolute men would be sufficient
to arrest in it the progress of the most numerous host.2. But the
Greeks soon discovered that the position was such as they could
not hold, — first, because the powerful fleet of Xerxes would be
able to land troops in their rear; secondly, because there was
also a second entrance passable in summer, from upper Macedo-
nia into Thessaly, by the mountain-passes over the range of
Olympus; an entrance which traversed the country of the Perr-
hebians and came into Thessaly near Gonnus, about the spot
where the defile of Tempé begins to narrow. It was in fact by
hia second pass, evading the insurmountable difficulties of Tempé,

? Herodot. vii, 173.

* Herodot. vii, 172. riv eoGodnv ri 'OAuumixqyv. See the description
and plan of Tempé in Dr. Clarke’s Travels, vol. iv, ch. ix, p. 280; and the
Dissertation of Kriegk, in which all the facts about this interesting defile
are collected and compared (Das Thessalische Tempe. Frankfort, 1834).

The description of Tempé in Livy (xliii, 18; xliv, 6) seems more accu-
rate than that in Pliny (H. N. iv, 8). We may remark that both the one
and the other belong to times subsequent to the formation and organiza-
tion of the Macedonian empire, when it came to hold Greece in a species
of dependence. The Macedonian princes after Alexander the Great, while
they added to the natural difficulties of Tempé by fortifications, at the
same time made the road more convenient as a military communication.
In the time of Xerxes, these natural difficulties had never been approached

by the hand of art, and were doubtless much greater.

‘The present road through the pass is about thirteen feet broad in its
narrowest part, and between fifteen and twenty feet broad elsewhere, — the
pass is about five English miles in length (Kriegk, pp. 21-33).

ALARM OF THE GREEKS. 69

that the advancing march of the Persians was destined to be
made, under the auspices of Alexander, king of Macedon, tribu-
tary to them, and active in their service; who sent a communica
tion of this fact to the Greeks at Tempé, admonishing them that -
they would be trodden under foot by the countless host approach-
ing, and urging them to renounce their hopeless position.! This
Macedonian prince passed for a friend, and probably believed him-
self to be acting as such in dissuading the Greeks from unavail-
ing resistance to Persia: but he was in reality a very dangerous
mediator ; and as such the Spartans had good reason to dread him,
in a second intervention of which we shall hear more hereafter.?
On the present occasion, the Grecian commanders were quite
ignorant of the existence of any other entrance into Thessaly,
besides Tempé,-until their arrival in that region. Perhaps it
might have been possible to defend both entrances at once, and
considering the immense importance of arresting the march of
the Persians at the frontiers of Hellas, the attempt would have
been worth ‘some risk. So great was the alarm, however, pro-
duced by the unexpected discovery, justifying, or seeming to jus-
tify, the friendly advice of Alexander, that they remained only a
few days at Tempé, then at once retired back to their ships, and
returned by sea to the isthmus of Corinth, — about the time when
Xerxes was crossing the Hellespont.’

This precipitate retreat produced consequences highly disas-
trous and discouraging. It appeared to leave all Hellas north
of mount Kithzron and of the Megarid territory without de-
fence, and it served either as reason or pretext for the majority
of the Grecian states north of that boundary to make their sub-
mission to Xerxes, which some of them had already begun to do
before. When Xerxes in the course of his march reached the
Thermaic gulf, within sight of Olympus and Ossa, the heralds
whom he had sent from Sardis brought him tokens of submission
from a third portion of the Hellenic name,—the Thessalians,
Dolopes, Anianes, Perrbebians, Magnétes, Lokrians, Dorians,
Melians, Phthidtid Achwans, and Beeotians,— among the latter

1 Herodot. vii, 173. ® Herodot. viii, 140-143.
3 Herodot: vii, 173, 174.
* Diodor. xi, 3. Ers mapobone rig év Totg Téurect gvdAanic, etc.

70 HISTORY OF GREECE

is included Thebes, but not Thespiz or Platzea. The Theasalians,
especially, not only submitted, but manifested active zeal and
rendered much service in the cause of Xerxes, under the stim-
ulus of the Aleuadz, whose party now became predominant : they
were probably indignant at the hasty retreat of those who had
come to defend them.!

Had the Greeks been able to maintain the passes of Olympus
and Ossa, all this northern fraction might probably have been
induced to partake in the resistance instead of becoming auxil-
iaries to the invader. During the six weeks or two months
which elapsed between the retreat of the Greeks from Tempé
and the arrival of Xerxes at Therma, no new plan of defence
appears to have been formed; for it was not until that arrival -
became known at the Isthmus that the Greek army and fleet
made its forward movement to occupy Thermopyle and Ar
temisium.?

CHAPTER XL.

BATTLES OF THERMOPYLEZ AND ARTEMISIUM.

It was while the northerly states of Greece were thus succes-
sively falling off from the common cause, that the deputies as-
sermbled at the Isthmus took among themselves the solemn
engagement, in the event of success, to inflict upon these recusant
brethren condign punishment, —to tithe them in property, and
perhaps to consecrate a tenth of their persons, for the profit of
the Delphian god. Exception was to be made in favor of those
states which had been driven to yield by irresistible necessity.?
Such a vow seemed at that moment little likely to be executed
it was the manifestation of a determined feeling binding together

' Herodot. vii, 131, 132, 174. * Herodot. vii, 177
* Herodot. vii, 182; Diodor. xi, 3. ;

-_ in ——" a ee ee ee ee rs
——— iniinasinmmimeinsccieeess peewee

BATTLES OF THERMOPYLE AND ARTEMISIUM. al

che states which took the pledge, but it cannot have contributed
much to intimidate the rest.

To display their own force, was the only effective way of
keeping together doubtful allies; and the pass of Thermopylae
was now fixed upon as the most convenient point of defence,
next to that of Tempé,— leaving out indeed, and abandoning
to the enemy, Thessalians, Perrhebians, Magnétes, Phthidtid
Acheans, Dolopes, A®Snianes, Malians, etc., who would all have
been included if the latter line had been adhered to; but com-
prising the largest range consistent with safety. The position of
Thermopylz presented another advantage which was not to be
found at Tempé; the mainland was here separated from the
island of Eubea only by a narrow strait, about two English
miles and a half in its smallest breadth, between mount Knémis
and cape Kéneum. On the northern portion of Eubea, im-
mediately facing Magnesia and Achza Phthiétis, was situated
the line of coast called Artemisium: a name derived from the
temple of Artemis, which was its most conspicuous feature, be-
longing to the town of Histisa. It was arranged that the Gre-
cian fleet should be mustered there, in order to cooperate with
the land-force, and to oppose the progress of the Persians on
both elements at once. To fight in a narrow space! was sup-
posed favorable to the Greeks on sea not less than on land, inas-
much as their ships were both fewer in number and heavier in
sailing than those in the Persian service. From the position of
Artemisium, it was calculated that they might be able to prevent
the Persian fleet from advancing into the narrow strait which
severs Eubcea, to the north and west, from the mainland, and
which, between Chalkis and Boeotia, becomes not too wide fora
bridge. It was at this latter point that the Greek seamen would
have preferred to place their defence: but the occupation of the
northern part of the Eubcean strait was indispensable to prevent
the Persian fleet from landing vere in the rear of the defenders
of Thermopyle.

Of this Eubcean strait, the western limit is formed by what

* Herodot. viii, 15-60. Compare Isokratés, Panegyric, Or. iv, p. 59.

I shall have occasion presently to remark the revolution which took
piace in Athenian feeling on this point between the Persian and Pelopon
mesial wars.

72 HISTORY OF GREECE.

was then called the Maliac gulf, into which the river Spercheius
poured itself, — after a course from west to east between the line
of Mount Othrys to the north, and Mount Cita to the south, —
near the town of Antikyra. The lower portion of this spacious
and fertile valley of the Spercheius was occupied by the various
tribes of the Malians, bordering to the north and east on Achzea
Phthiétis: the southernmost Malians, with their town of Trachis,
occupied a plain——in some places considerable, in others very
narrow —inclosed between mount Cita and the sea. From
Trachis the range of C&ta stretched eastward, bordering close on
the southern shore of the Maliac guif: between the two lay the
memorable pass of Thermopylz.! On the road from Trachis to
‘Chermopyle, immediately outside of the latter and at the mouth
cf the little streams called the Phenix and the Asépus, was placeé
-the town of Anthéla, celebrated for its temples of Amphiktyor
and of the Amphiktyonic Démétér, as well as for the autumnal
assemblies of the Amphiktyonic council, for whom seats were
provided in the temple. -

Immediately near to Anthéla, the northern slope of the mighty
and prolonged ridge of CEta approached so close to the gulf, or
at least to an inaccessible morass which formed the edge of the
gulf, as to leave no more than one single wheel track between.
This narrow entrance formed the western gate of Thermopyle.
At some little distance, seemingly about a mile, to the eastward,
the same close conjunction between the mountain and the sea was
repeated, -— thus forming the eastern gate of Thermopylz, not
far from the first town of the Lokrians, called Alpéni. The
space between these two gates was wider and more open, but it
was distinguished, and is still distinguished, by its abundant flow
of thermal springs, salt and sulphureous. Some cells were here
prepared for bathers, which procured for the place the appella-
tion of Chytri, or the Pans: but the copious supply of mineral
water spread its mud and deposited its crust over all the adja-
eent ground ; and the Phocians, some time before, had designedly
endeavored so to conduct the water as to render the pass. utterly

* The word Pass commonly conveys the idea of a path inclosed between
mountains. In this instance it is employed to designate a narrow passage,
having mou tains on one side only, and water (or marsh ground) on the
other

BATTLES OF THERMOPYLE AND ARTEMISIUM. 73

impracticable, at the same time building a wall across it near to
the western gate. They had done this in order to keep off the
attacks of the Thessalians, who had been trying to extend their
conquests southward and eastward. The warm springs, here as
in other parts of Greece, were consecrated to Héraklés,! whose
legendary exploits and sufferings ennobled all the surrounding
region, — mount CE&ta, Trachis, cape Kenzum, Lichades islands,
the river Dyras: some fragments of these legends have*been
transmitted and adorned by the genius of Sophoklés, in his drama
of the Trachinian maidens. .

Such was the general scene -—two narrow openings with an
intermediate mile of enlarged road and hot springs between them
— which passed in ancient times by the significant name of
Thermopyle, the Hot Gates; or sometimes, more briefly, Pyle
— The Gates. Ata point also near Trachis, between the moun-
tains and the sea, about two miles outside or westward of Ther-
mopylz, the road was hardly less narrow, but it might be turned
by marching to the westward, since the adjacent mountains were
lower, and presented less difficulty of transit; while at Ther-
mopyle itself, the overhanging projection of mount Citta was
steep, woody, and impracticable, leaving access, from Thessaly
into Lokris and the territories southeast of CEta, only through
the strait gate ;2 save and except an unfrequented as well as cir-

? According to one of the numerous hypotheses for refining religious
legend into matter of historical and physical fact, Héraklés was supposed
to have been an engineer, or water-finder, in very early times, — decvdg rept
Carnot bdGrwv Kat ouvaywyny. See Plutarch, Cum principibas viris =
losopho esse disserendum, c. i, p. 776.

* About Thermopylmx, see Herodot. vii, 175, 176, 199, 200.

‘H & ad dca Tpnyivog toodog é¢ trav ‘EAAada Eort, T9 cretvéraroy, hind.
Ypov ob pévrot kara tovTé y’ Eore Td oTEtvoTaToY TIE YaPNC THE GAAne, GAA’
Eurpoodé te Sepuorvdéwy kal OmtoVe* xara te 'AArnvods, Eriode sovrac,
éovca duatiric potvn- Kal sumpoode xara Poivixa worapov, duafirdc] GAAy
nobvn.

Compare Pausanias, vii, 15,2. 1d orévov rd ‘HpaxAeiag re uetagd xal
OcpyorvaAéwr; Strabo, ix, p. 429; and Livy, xxxvi, 12.

- Herodot1s says about Thermopyle# — cretvorépy yap épaiveto eovoa rig
eig Osooadiny, i. e. than the defile of Tempé.

If we did not possess the clear topographical indications given by Herod.
otus, it would be almost impossible to comprehend the memorable event

VOL. V.

74 HISTORY OF GREECE.

cuitous mountain-path, which will be presently spoken of. The
wall originally built across the pass by the Phocians was now
half ruined by age and neglect: but the Greeks easily reéstab-
lished it, determined to await in this narrow pass, in that age
narrower even than the defile of Tempé, the approach of the
invading host. ‘The edge of the sea line appears to have been
for the most part marsh, fit neither for walking nor for sailing:
but there were points at which boats could land, so that constant
communication could be maintained with the fleet at Artemisium,
while Alpéni was immediately in their rear to supply provisions.

Though the resolution of the Greek deputies assembled at the
Isthmus, to defend conjointly Thermopyle and the Eubcean

here before us; for the configuration of the coast, the course of the rivers,
and the general local phenomena, have now so entirely changed, that
modern travellers rather mislead than assist. In the interior of the Maliac
gulf, three or four miles of new land have been formed by the gradual ac-
cumulation of river deposit, so that the gulf itself is of much less extent,
and the mountain bordering the gate of Thermopyle is not now near to
the sea. The river Spercheius has materially altered its course ; instead
of flowing into the sea in an easterly direction considerably north of Ther-
mopyls, as it did in the time of Herodotus, it has been divetted southward
in the lower part of its course, with many windings, so as to reach the sea
much south of the pass: while the rivers Dyras, Melas, and Asépus, which
in the time of Herodotus all reached the sea separately between the mouth
of Spercheius and Thermopylx, now do not reach the sea at all, but
fall into the Spercheius. Moreover, the perpetual flow of the thermal
springs has tended to accumulate deposit and to raise the level of the soil
generally throughout the pass. Herodotus seems to consider the road be-
tween the two gates of Thermopyls as bearing north and south, whereas it
would bear more nearly east and west. He knows nothing of the appella-
tion of Callidromus, applied by Livy and Strabo to an undefined portion of
the eastern ridge of (Eta.

Respecting the past and present features of Thermopyle, see the valuable
observations of Colonel Leake, Travels in Northern Greece, vol. ii, ch. x,
pp. 7-40; Gell, Itinerary of Greece, p. 239; Kruse, Hellas, vol. iii, ch. x, p.
129. Dr. Clarke observes: “The hot springs issue principally from two
mouths at the foot of the limestone precipices of (Eta, upon the left of the
causeway, which here passes close under the mountain, and on this part of
it scarcely admits two horsemen abreast of each other, the morass on the
- yight, between the causeway and the sea, being so dangerous, that we were
very near being buried, with our horses, by our imprudence in venturing a
few paces into it from the paved road.” (Clarke’s Travels, vol. iv, ch. viii
p. 247.)

BATTLES OF THERMOPYLE AND ARTEMISIUM. 72

strait, had been taken, seemingly, not long after the retreat
from Tempé, their troops and their fleet did not actually occupy
these positions until Xerxes was known to have reached the
‘Thermaic gulf. Both were then put in motion; the land-force
under the Spartan king Leonidas, the naval force under the
Spartan commander Eurybiadés, apparently about the latter part
of the month of June. Leonidas was the younger brother, the
successor, and the son-in-law, of the former Eurystheneid king
Kleomenés, whose only daughter Gorgo he had married. Another
brother of the same family — Dorieus, older than Leonidas —
had perished, even before the death of Kleomenés, in an un-
successful attempt to plant a colony in Sicily ; and room had
been thus made for the unexpected succession of the youngest
brother. Leonidas now conducted from the Isthmus to Ther-
mopyle a select band of three hundred Spartans, — all being
citizens of mature age, and persons who left at home sons to
supply their places.! Along with them were five hundred hop-
lites from Tegea, five hundred from Mantineia, one hundred and
twenty from the Arcadian Orchomenus, one ‘thousand fram the
rest of Arcadia, four hundred from Corinth, two hundred from
Phlius, and eighty from Mykenz. There were also, doubtless,
Helots and other light troops, in undefined number, and probably
a certain number of Lacedzemonian hoplites, not Spartans. In
their march through Beeotia they were joined by seven hundred
hoplites of Thespiz, hearty in the cause, and by four hundred
Thebans, of more equivocal fidelity, under Leontiadés. It ap-
pears, indeed, that the leading men of Thebes, at that time under
a very narrow oligarchy, decidedly medized, or espoused the
Persian interest, as much as they dared before the Persians were
actually in the country: and~Leonidas, when he made the requi-

1 Herodot. vii, 177, 205. ércAeEauevog avdpacg te trode xarecredrag Tpin-
kootovc, Kal toioe triyxavoy maideg édvTec.

In selecting men for a dangerous service, the Spartans took by preference
those who already had families: if euch a man was slain, he left behind him
a son to discharge his duties to the state, and to maintain the continuity of
the family sacred rites, the extinction of which was considered as a great mis-
fortune. In our ideas, the life of the father of a family in mature age would
be considered as of more value, and his death a greater loss, than that of a
younger and unmarried man.

76 HISTORY OF GREECE.

sition for a certain number of their troops to assist in the defence
of Thermopyle, was doubtful whether they would not refuse
compliance, and openly declare against the Greek cause. The
Theban chiefs thought it prudent to comply, though against their
real inclinations, and furnished a contingent of four hundred
men,!' chosen from citizens of a sentiment opposed to their own.
Indeed the Theban people, and the Beotians generally, with the
exception of Thespize and Plateza, seem to have had little senti-
ment on either side, and to have followed passively the inspira-
tions of their leaders.

With these troops Leonidas reached Thermopylz, whence he
sent envoys to invite the junction of the Phocians and the
Lokrians of Opus. The latter had been among those who had
sent earth and water to Xerxes, of which they are said to have
repented : the step was taken, probably, only from fear, which at
this particular moment prescribed acquiescence in the summons
of Leonidas, justified by the plea of necessity in case the Per-
sians should prove ultimately victorious:? while the Phocians,
if originally disposed to medjze, were now precluded from doing
so by the fact that their bitter enemies, the Thessalians, were
active in-the cause of Xerxes, and influential in guiding his
movements. The Greek envoys added strength to their sum-
mons dy all the encouragement in their power. “The troops
now at Thermopylz, they said, were a mere advanced body,
preceding the main strength of Greece, which was expected to
arrive every day: on the side of the sea, a sufficient fleet was
already on guard: nor was there any cause for fear, since the

' Herodot. vii, 205; Thucyd. iii, 62; Diodor. xi, 4; Plutarch, Aristeides,
c. 18.

The passage of Thucydides is very important here, as confirming, to a
great degree, the statement of Herodotus, and enabling us to appreciate the
criticisms of Plutarch, on this particular point very plausible (De Herodoti
Malign. pp. 865,866). ‘The latter seems to have copied from a lost Beeotian
author named Aristophanes, who tried to make out a more honorable case
for his countrymen in respect to their conduct in the Persian war.

The statement of Diodorus, — OnBaiwy amd rij¢ érépag péptdog O¢ TeTpa-
kéocot, —is illustrated by a proceeding of the Korkyrean governmenr
(Thucyd. iii, 75), when they enlisted their enemies in order to send them
away : also that of the Italian Cumz (Dionys. Hal. vii, 5).

* Diodor. xi. 4. _ . § Herodot. viii, 30.

BATTLES OF THERMOPYLZE AND ARTEMISIUM. 77

mvader was, after all, not a god, but a man, exposed to those
reverses of fortune which came inevitably on all men, and most
of all, upon those in preéminent condition.”! Such arguments
prove but too evidently the melancholy state of terror which then
pervaded the Greek mind: whether reassured by them or not,
the great body of the Opuntian Lokrians, and one thousand
Phocians, joined Leonidas at Thermopyle.

That this terror was both genuine and serious, there cannot be
any doubt: and the question naturally suggests itself, why the
Greeks did not at once send their full force instead of a mere
advanced guard? ‘The answer is to be found in another attri-
bute of the Greek character, — it was the time of celebrating
both the Olympic festival-games on the banks of the Alpheius,
and the Karneian festival at Sparta and most of the other Do-
rian states.2 Even at a moment when their whole freedom and
existence were at stake, the Greeks could not bring themselves
to postpone these venerated solemnities : especially the Pelopon-
nesian Greeks, among whom this force of religious routine ap-
pears to have been the strongest. At a period more than a
century later, in the time of Demosthenes, when the energy of
the Athenians had materially declined, we shall find them, too,
postponing the military necessities of the state to the complete
and splendid fulfilment of their religious festival obligations, —
starving all their measures of foreign policy in order that the
Theéric exhibitions might be imposing to the people and satis-
factory to the gods. At present, we find little disposition in the
Athenians to make this sacrifice, — certainly much less than in
the Peloponnesians. The latter, remaining at home to celebrate

' Herodot. vii, 203. Aeyovrec dv? ayyéAwy, O¢ abrol piv frocev mpddpopot
Tév GAdwy, of d2 Aotrol rév cuppaxav mpocdonimot waoay elot hutpny:....
wai ogt ein decvdv obdév: ob ydp Bedv elvas tov éxiovta én? riv "EAA Gda,
GAN dvSpwrov- elvat 62 Dvytdv obdéva, otd? EcecDat, tH Kaxdv 8 dprie
yivopévy ob ovvepixdn, toict d2 peyiorowct abtéwy, péytota’ ddeidecy dv cal
rov éredatvovra, we éévta Guntdv, and rie bEnc mecéetv av.

* Herodot. vil, 206. It was only the Dorian states (Lacedemon, Argos,
Sikyon, etc.) which were under obligation of abstinence from aggressive
military operations during the month of the Katneian festival: other states
(even in Peloponnesus), Elis, Mantineia, etc., and of course Athens, were
not under similar restraint (Thucyd. v, 54, 75).

73 HISTOBY OF GREECE.

their festivals while an invader of superhuman might was at
their gates, remind us of the Jews in the latter days of their
independence, who suffered the operations of the besieging Ro-
man army round their city to be carried on without interruption
during the Sabbath.1 The Spartans and their confederates
reckoned that Leonidas with his detachment would be strong
enough to hold the pass of Thermopyle until the Olympic and
Karneian festivals should be past, after which period they were
prepared to march to his aid with their whole military force :2
and they engaged to assemble in Beotia for the purpose of de-
fending Attica against attack on the land-side, while the great
mass of the Athenian force was serving on shipboard.

At the time when this plan was laid, they believed that the
narrow pass of Thermopyle was the only means of possible access
for an invading army. But Leonidas, on reaching the spot, dis-
covered for the first time that there was also a mountain-path
starting from the neighborhood of Trachis, ascending the gorge
of the river Asdpus and the hill called Anopsa, then crossing
the crest of (ta and descending in the rear of Thermopyle
near the Lokrian town of Alpéni. ‘This path—then hardly
used, though its ascending half now serves as the regular track
from Zeitun, the ancient Lamia, to Salona on the Corinthian
gulf, the ancient Amphissa — was revealed to him by its first -
discoverers, the inhabitants of Trachis, who in former days had
conducted the Thessalians over it to attack Phocis, after the
Phocians had blocked up the pass of Thermopyle. It was
therefore not unknown to the Phocians: it conducted from Tra-
chis into their country, and they volunteered to Leonidas that
they would occupy and defend it.3 But the Greeks thus found
themselves at Thermopyle under the same necessity of provid-
ing a double line of defence, for the mountain-path as well as for
the defile, as that which had induced their former army to aban-
don Tempé: and so insufficient did their numbers seem, when

' Josephus, Bell. Judaic. i, 7, 3; ii, 16, 4; ibid. Antiqq. Judaic. xiv, 4, 2.
If their bodies were attacked on the Sabbath, the Jews defended themselves ;,
but they would not break through the religious obligations of the day in
order to impede any military operations of the besiegers. See Reimar. ad
Dion. Cass. lxvi. 7.

* Herodot. vi 206; viii, 49. $ Herodot. vii, 212, 216, 218.

BATTLES OF THERMOPYLE AND ARTEMISIUM. 79

the vast host of Xerxes was at length understood to be approach-
ing, that a panic terror seized them; ahd the Peloponnesian
troops especially, anxious only for their own separate line of
defence at the isthmus of Corinth, wished to retreat thither
forthwith. The indignant remonstrances of the Phocians and Lo-
krians, who woutd thus have been left to the mercy of the invader,
. induced Leonidas to forbid this retrograde movement: but he
thought it necessary to send envoys to the various cities, insisting
on the insufficiency of his numbers, and requesting immediate
reinforcements.! So painfully were the consequences now felt,
of having kept back the main force until after the religious festi-
vals in Peloponnesus.

Nor was the feeling of confidence stronger at this moment in
their naval armament, though it had mustered in far superior
numbers at Artemisium on the northern coast of Euboea, under
the Spartan Eurybiadés. It was composed as follows: one hun-
dred Athenian triremes, manned in part by the citizens of Platea,
in spite of their total want of practice on shipboard ; forty Corin-
thian, twenty Megarian, twenty Athenian, manned by the inhab-
itants of Chalkis, and lent to them by Athens; eighteen Avgi-
netan, twelve Sikyonian, ten Lacedemonian, eight Epidaurian,
seven Eretrian, five Troazenian, two from Styrus in Eubcea, and
two from the island of Keos. There were thus in all two hun-
dred and seventy-one triremes ; together with nine pentekonters,
furnished partly by Keos and partly by the Lokrians of Opus.
Themistoklés was at the head of the Athenian contingent, and
Adeimantus of the Corinthian ; of other officers we hear nothing.?
Three cruising vessels, an Athenian, an Aéginetan, and a Treze-
nian, were pushed forward along the coast of Thessaly, beyond
the island of Skiathos, to watch the advancing movements of the
Persian fleet from Therma.

It wag here that the first blood was shed in this memorable
contest. Ten of the best ships in the Persian fleet, sent forward
in the direction of Skiathos, fell in with these three Grecian tri-
remes, who probably supposing them to be the precursors of the

' Herodot. vii, 207.
? Herodot. viii, 1, 2,38. Diodorus (xi, 12) makes the Athenian number
stronger by twenty triremes.

80 HISTORY OF GREECE.

entire fleet sought safety in flight. The Athenian trireme es-
caped to the mouth of the Peneius, where the crew abandoned
her, and repaired by land to Athens, leaving the vessel to the
enemy : the other two ships were overtaken and captured afloat,
— not without a vigorous resistance on the part of the AE ginetan,
one of whose hoplites, Pythés, fought with desperate bravery,
and fell covered with wounds. So much did the Persian war-
riors admire him, that they took infinite pains to preserve his life,
and treated him with the most signal manifestations both of
kindness and respect, while wand dealt with his comrades as
slaves.

On board the Troezenian vessel, which was the first to be cap-
tured, they found a soldier named Leon, of imposing stature;
this man was immediately taken to the ship’s head and slain, as
& presaging omen in the approaching contest: perhaps, observes
the historian, his name may have contributed to determine his
fate. The ten Persian ships advanced no farther than the dan-
gerous rock Myrméx, between Skiathos and the mainland, which
had been made known to them by a Greek navigator of Skyros,
and on which they erected a pillar to serve as warning for the
coming fleet. Still, so intense was the alarm which their pres-
ence — communicated by fire-signals? from Skiathos, and strength-
ened by the capture of the three look-out ships — inspired to the
fleet at Artemisium, that they actually abandoned their station,
believing that the entire fleet of the enemy was at hand? They
sailed up the Eubosan strait to Chalkis, as the narrowest and most
defensible passage ; leaving scouts on the high lands to watch the
enemy's advance.

Probably this sudden retreat was forced upon the generals by
the panic of their troops, similar to that which king Leonidas,
more powerful than Eurybiadés and Themistoklés, had found
means to arrest at Thermopyle. It ruined for the time the

1 Herodot. vii, 180. raya é’ dv re kal Tod dvouatoc éxatpotrto.

Respecting the influence of a name and its etymology, in this case un-
happy for the possessor, compare “Herodot. ix, 91; and Tacit. Hist. iv, 53.

*¥or the employment of fire-signals, compare Livy, xxviii, 5; and the
opening of the Agamemnon of Zischylus, and the same play, v. '270, 300.
also Thucydides, iti, 22-80.

3 Herodot. vii, 181, 182, 183.

% BATTLES OF THERMOPYLE AND ARTEMISIUM. 81

whole scheme of defence, by laying open the rear of the army at
Thermopylse to the operations of the Persian fleet. But that
which the Greeks did not do for themselves was more than com-
pensated by the beneficent intervention of their gods, who op-
posed to the invader the more terrible arms of storm and hurri-
cane. He was allowed to bring his overwhelming host, land-
force as well as naval, to the brink of Thermopyle and to the
coast of Thessaly, without hindrance or damage; but the time
had now arrived when the gods appeared determined to humble
him, and especially to strike a series of blows at his fleet which
should reduce it to a number not beyond what the Greeks could
contend with. Amidst the general terror which pervaded
Greece, the Delphians were the first to earn the gratitude of
their countrymen by announcing that divine succor was at hand.?
On entreating advice from their own oracle, they were directed
to pray to the Winds, who would render powerful aid to Greece.
Moreover, the Athenian seamen, in their retreat at Chalkis, re-
collecting that Boreas was the husband of the Attic princess or
heroine Oreithyia, daughter of their ancient king Erechtheus,
addressed fervent prayers to their son-in-law for his help in need.
Never was help more effective, or more opportune, than the de-
structive storm, presently to be recounted, on the coast of Mag-
nesia, for which grateful thanks and annual solemnities were still
rendered even in the time of AORN, at Athens as well as at
Delphi?

1 Herodot. vii, 184. wéypt pv 6) robrov rot yopov Kai Trav OepuorvdAéoy,
aradig Te kaxdv Env 5 orpardg, kat rAZVoc Egy ryvixaira Eri Trocov, etc.—
Viii, 13. éxocéero 62 ray brd rot Beod, Sxkuc av Etawdeing re "EAAnvia® rd
Tlepotxdy, und ToAA@ wAéov eln. Compare vili, 109; and Diodor. xi, 13.

* Herodot. vii, 178. AeAgot dt defauevoe rd pavrnjiov, mpora uev, “EAAR-
vey Tolot BovAouévorce elvat sAevdéiporoe tEnyyecday ra xpnodEevta abroiat:
kat og detvig xarappwdéovar tov BapBapov tiayyetAavrec, xapiy Gdavarov
aarédevto.

3 Herodot. vii, 189. The language of the historian in this chapter is
remarkable: his incredulous reason Father gets the better of religee
acquiescence.

Clemens Alexandrinas, reciting this incident together, with some sila
miracles of Ackus, Aristsus, Empedoklés, etc., rwproves his pagan oppo-
nents for their inconsistency, while believing these, in rejecting the mira
cles of Moses and the prophets (Stromat. vi, pp. 629, 630).

VOL. V. 4° oc.

>

«

82 HISTORY OF GREECE.

Xerxes had halted on the Thermaic gulf for several days,
employing a large portion of his numerous army in cutting down
the woods and clearing the roads, on the pass over Olympus
from upper Macedonia ‘into Perrhebia, which was recomménded
by his Macedonian allies as preferable to the defile of Tempé.1
Not intending to march through the latter, he is said to have
gone by sea to view it; and remarks are ascribed to him on the
facility of blocking it up so as to convert all Thessaly into one
vast lake.2 His march from Therma through Macedonia, Per-
rhebia, Thessaly, and Achxa Phthidtis, into the territory of the
Malians and the neighborhood of Thermopyle, occupied eleven
or twelve days 3 the people through whose towns he passed had
already made their submission, and the Thessalians eapecially
were zealous in seconding his efforts. His numerous host was

1The pass over which Xerxes passed was that by Petra, Pythium, and
Oloosson, —-“saltam ad Petram,” —“ Perrhebis saltum,” — (Livy, xlv,
21; xliv, 27.) Petra was near the point where the road passed from Pieria,
or lower Macedonia, into upper Macedonia (see Livy, xxxix, 26).

Compare respecting this pass, and the general features of the neigh
boring country, Colonel Leake, Travels in Northern Greece, vol. iii, ch
Xviii, pp. 387-343, and ch. xxx, p. 430; also Boué, La Turquie en Europe,
vol. i, pp. 198-202.

The Thracian king Sitalkés, like Xerxes on this occasion, was obliged
to cause the forests to be cut, to make a road for his army, in the early part
of the Peloponnesian war (Thucyd. ii, 98).

* Herodot. vii, 180,131. That Xerxes, struck by the view of Olympus
and Ossa, went to see the narrow defile between them, is probable enough ;
but the remarks put into his mouth are probably the fancy of some inge-
nious contemporary Greeks, suggested by the juxtaposition of such a land-
scape and such a monarch. To suppose this narrow defile walled up, was
easy for the imagination of any spectator: to suppose that he could order
it to be done, was in character with a monarch who disposed of an in-
definite amount of manual labor, and who had just finished the cutting of
Athos. Such dramatic fitness was quite sufficient to convert that which
_ might have been said into that which was said, and to procure for it a place
among the historical anecdotes communicated to Herodotus. _

+ The Persian fleet did not leave Therma until eleven days after Xerxes
and his land-force (Herodot. vii, 183); it arrived in one day on the Sépias
Akté, or southeastern coast of Magnesia (ibid.), was then assailed and dis-
tressed for three days by the hurricane (vii, 191), and proceeded imme-
diately afterwards to Aphets (vii, 193). When it arrived at the latter
places, Xerxes himself had been three days in the Malian territory (vii, 196)

BATTLES OF THEBMOPYLZE AND ARTEMISIUM. 88

etill farther swelled by the presence of these newly-submitted
people, and by-the Macedonian troops under Alexander ; so that
the river Onochénus in Thessaly, and even the Apidanus in
Achexa Phthiétis, would hardly suffice to supply it, but were
drunk up, according to the information given to Herodotus. At
Alus in Achwa, he condescended to listen to the gloomy legend
connected with the temple of Zeus Laphysteus and the sacred
grove of the Athamantid family: he respected and protected
these sacred places, — an incident which shows that the sacrilege
and destruction of temples imputed to him by the Greeks, though
true in regard to Athens, Abs, Milétus, etc. was by no means
universally exhibited, and is even found qualified by occasional
instances of great respect tor Grecian religious feeling.! Along
the shore of the Malian gulf he at length came into the Trachi-
nian territory near Thermopylx, where he encamped, seemingly
awaiting the arrival of the fleet, so as to combine hia farther
movements in advance,® now that the enemy were immediately in
his front.

But his fleet was not destined to reach the point of communi-
eation with the same ease as he had arrived before Thermopyls.
After having ascertained by the ten ships already mentioned,
which captured the three Grecian guardships, that the channel
between Skiathos and the mainland was safe, the Persian admiral
Megabates sailed with his whole fleet from Therma, or from
Pydna,? his station in the Thermaic gulf, eleven days after the
monarch had begun his land-march ; and reached in one long
day’s sail the eastern coast of Magnesia, not far from its south-
ernmest promontory. The greater part of this line of coast,
formed by the declivities of Ossa and Pelion, is thoroughly rocky
and inhospitable: but south of the town called Kasthanea there
was a short extent of open beach, where the fleet rested for the
night before coming to the line of coast called the Sépias Akté.*

ee,

' This point is set forth by Hoffmeister, Sittlich-religidse Lebensansicht
des Herodotos, Essen, 1832, sect. 19, p. 93.

2 Herodot. vii, 196,197, 201. ° Diodor.xi, 12.

‘Diodorus (xi, 12), Plutarch (Themistoklés, 8), and Mannert (Geogr.
der Gr. und Romer, vol. vii, p. 596), seem to treat Sépias as a cape, the
southeastern corner of Magnesia: this is different from Herodotus, who

84 HISTORY OF GREECE.

The first line of ships were moored to the land, but the larger
number of this immense fleet swung at anchor in a depth of eight
lines. In this condition they were overtaken the next morning
by a sudden and desperate hurricane —a wind called by the
people of the country Hellespontias, which blew right upon the
shore. The most active among the mariners found means to
forestall the danger by beaching and hauling their vessels ashore;
but a large number, unable to take such a precaution, were carried
before the wind and dashed to pieces near Meliboea, Kasthanza,
and other points of this unfriendly region. Four hundred ships
of war, according to the lowest estimate, together with a count-
less heap of transports and provision craft, were destroyed : and
the loss of life as well as property was immense. For three
entire days did the terrors of the storm last, during which time
the crews ashore, left almost without defence, and apprehensive
that the inhabitants of the country might assail or plunder them,
were forced to break up the ships driven ashore in order to make
a palisade out of the timbers.! Though the Magian priests who
accompanied the armament were fervent in prayer and sacrifice,
—not merely to the Winds, but also to Thetis and the Nereids,
the tutelary divinities of Sépias Akté,—they could obtain no
mitigation until the fourth day::? thus long did the prayers of
Delphi and Athens, and the jealousy of the gods against super-
human arrogance, protract the terrible visitation. At length, on
the fourth day, calm weather returned, when all those ships which
were in condition to proceed, put to sea and sailed along the land,
round the southern promontory of Magnesia, to Aphetsz, at the
entrance of the gulf of Pagasez. Little, indeed, had Xerxes
gained by the laborious cutting through mount Athos, in hopes to

mentions it as a line of some extent (daca dxr?} 7 Zymide, vii, 191), and
notices separately T7v axpny ri¢ Mayvyoing, vii, 193.

The geography of Apollonius Rhodius (i, 560-580) seems sadiy in-
accurate. 1 Herodot. vii, 189-191.

* Herodot vii, 191. On this occasion, as in regard to the prayers ad-
dressed by the Athenians to Boreas, Herodotus suffers a faint indication of
skepticism to escape him: 7puépac yap 6) Exeiwale rpeic> réAog d2, Evropa te
movevvTeg Kal Kataeidovres yootot TH dvény ol Mayot, mpo¢ re TrobToies, xed
Oért nal tHot Nypyliot Svovre,, Exavoav rerapry yuépy’ GAAur «ue
ab-dc EDEAov Exbnace.

- —_— ee oe ee
A ee ee

BATTLES OF THERMOPYLE AND ARTEMISIUM. 85

escape the unseen atmospheric enemies which howl around that
formidable promontory : the work of destruction to his fleet was
only transferred to the opposite side of the intervening Thracian
sea.

Had the Persian fleet reached Aphets without misfortune,
they would have found the Eubcsan strait evacuated by the
Greek fleet and undefended, so that they would have come im-
mediately into communication with the land army, and would
have acted upon the rear of Leonidas and his division. But the
_ storm completely altered this prospect, and revived the spirits of

the Greek fleet at Chalkis. It was communicated to them by
their scouts on the high lands of Eubea, who even sent them
word that the entire Persian fieet was destroyed: upon which,
having returned thanks and offered libations to Poseidon the
Saviour, the Greeks returned back as speedily as they could to
Artemisium. To their surprise, however, they saw the Persian
fleet, though reduced in number, still exhibiting a formidable
total and appearance at the opposite station of Aphete. The
_ last fifteen ships of that fleet, having been so greatly crippled by
the storm as to linger behind the rest, mistook the Greek ships
for their own comrades, fell into the midst of them, and were all
captured. Sanddkés, sub-satrap of the /Lolic Kymé, —-Aridélis,
despot of Alabanda in Karia,— and Penthylus, despot of Pa-
phos in Cyprus, — the leaders of this squadron, were sent pris-
oners to the isthmus of Corinth, after having been questioned
respecting the enemy : the latter of these three had brought to
Xerxes a contingent of twelve ships, out of which eleven had
foundered in the storm, while the last was now taken with him-
self aboard.!

Meanwhile Xerxes, encamped within sight of Thermopylae,
suffered four days to pass without making any attack: a proba-
ble reason may be found in the extreme peril of his fleet, report-
ed to have been utterly destroyed by the storm: but Herodotus
assigns a different cause. Xerxes could not believe, according
to him, that the Greeks at Thermopyle, few as they were in
number, had any serious intention to resist: he had heard it his
march that a handful of Spartans and other Greeks, under an

1 Herodot. vii, 194.

86 HISTORY OF GREECE.

Herakleid leader, had taken post there, but he treated the news
with scorn: and when a horseman, —whom he sent to recon-
noifre them, and who approached near enough to survey their
position, without exciting any attention among them by his pres-
ence, — brought back to him a description of the pass, the wall
of defence, and the apparent number of the division, he was yet
more astonished and puzzled. It happened too, that at the mo-
ment when this horseman rode up, the Spartans were in the
advanced guard, outside of the wall: some were engaged in
gymnastic exercises, others in combing their long hair, and none
of them heeded the approach of the hostile spy. Xerxes next
sent for the Spartan king, Demaratus, to ask what he was to
think of such madness; upon which the latter reminded him of
their former conversation at Doriskus, again assuring him that
the Spartans in the pass would resist to the death, in spite of
the smallness of their number; and adding, that it was their cus-
tom, in moments of special danger, to comb their hair with pecu-
liar care. In spite of this assurance from Demaratus, and of
the pass not only occupied, but in itself so narrow and impracti-
cable, before his eyes, Xerxes still persisted in believing that the
Greeks did not intend to resist, and that they would disperse of
their own accord. He delayed the attack for four days: on the
fifth he became wroth at the impudence and recklessness of the
petty garrison before him, and sent against them the Median and
Kissian divisions, with orders to seize them and bring them as
prisoners into his presence.!

Though we read thas in Herodotus, it is hardly possible to
believe that we are reading historical reality: we rather find laid
out before us a picture of human self-conceit in its most exag-
gerated form, ripe for the stroke of the jealous gods, and des-
tined, like the interview between Croesus and Solon, to pot and
enforce that moral which was ever present to the mind of the
historian ; whose religious and poetical imagination, even uncon-
sciously to himself, surrounds the naked facts of history with
_ accompaniments of speech and motive which neither Homer nor
4Eschylus would have deemed unsuitable. The whole pro-

? Herod. vii, 208, 210. wéumes é¢ abrode Mjdove xa? Kicciovg Suuaderg
bvretAauevos ogeac Gwyppoavrag ayetv ec SW TH» swirod.

~~

~ BATTLES OF THERMOPYLE AND ARTEMISIUM. 87

ceedings of Xerxes, and the immensity of host which he sum-
moned, show that he calculated on an energetic resistance; and
though the numbers of Leonidas, compared with the Persians,
were insignificant, they could hardly have looked insignificant
in the position which they then occupied, — an entrance
little wider than a single carriage-road, with a cross wall, a
prolonged space somewhat widened, and then another equally
narrow exit, behind it. We are informed by Diodorus! that
the Lokrians, when they first sent earth and water to the Per-
sian monarch, engaged at the same time to seize the pass of
Thermopyle on his behalf, and were only prevented from doing

_so by the unexpected arrival of Leonidas; nor is it unlikely

that the Thessalians, now the chief guides of Xerxes,? together
with Alexander of Macedon, would try the same means of
frightening away the garrison of Thermopyle, as had already
been so successful in causing the evacuation of Tempé. An
interval of two or three days might be well bestowed for the
purpose of ‘leaving to such intrigues a fair chance of success:
the fleet, meanwhile, would be arrived at Aphete after the dan-
gers of the storm: we may thus venture to read the conduct of
Xerxes in a manner somewhat less childish aes it is depicted
by Herodotus.

The Medes, whom Xerxes first ordered to the attack, animated
as well by the recollection of their ancient Asiatic supremacy as
by the desire of avenging the defeat of Marathon,? manifested
great personal bravery. The position was one in which bows
and arrows were of little avail: a close combat hand to hand was
indispensable, and in this the Greeks had every advantage of
organization as well asarmor. Short spears, light wicker shields,
and tunics, in the assailants, were an imperfect match for the
long spears, heavy and spreading shields, steady ranks,4 and
practised fighting of the defenders. Yet the bravest men of the
Persian army pressed on from behind, and having nothing but
numbers in their favor, maintained long tkis unequal combat,
with great slaughter to themselves and little loss to the Greeks.
Though constantly repulsed, the attack was as constantly renewed,

'Diodor. xi, 4. Herodot. vii, 174; viii, 29-382. * Diodor. xi, 6.
¢ Herodot. vii, 211; ix, 62,63 ; Diodor. xi, 7: compare Aischyl. Pers. 244.

88 HISTORY OF GREECE.

for two successive days: the Greek troops were sufficiently
numerous to relieve each other when fatigued, since the space
was so narrow that few could contend at once; and even the
Immortals, or ten thousand choice Persian guards, and the other
choice troops of the army, when sent to the attack on the second
day, were driven back with the same disgrace and the same
slaughter as the rest. Xerxes surveyed this humiliating repulse
from a lofty throne expressly provided for him: “thrice (says
the historian, with Homeric vivacity) did he spring from his
throne, in agony for his army.” !

At the end of two days’ fighting no impression had been made,
the pass appeared impracticable, and the defence not less trium-
phant than courageous,— when a Malian, named Ephialtés, re-
vealed to Xerxes the existence of the unfrequented mountain-
path. This at least was the man singled out by the general
voice of Greece as the betrayer of the fatal secret: after the
final repulse of the Persians, he fled hia country for a time, and
a reward was proclaimed by the Amphiktyonic assembly for his
head; having returned to his country too soon, he was slain by a
' private enemy, whom the Lacedemonians honored as a patriot.2
There were, however, other Greeks who were also affirmed to
have earned the favor of Xerxes by the same valuable informa-
tion; and very probably there may have been more than one
informant, — indeed, the Thessalians, at that time his guides, can
hardly have been ignorant of it. So little had the path been
thought of, however, that no one in the Persian army knew it to
_ be already occupied by the Phocians. At nightfall, Hydarnés
with a detachment of Persians was detached along the gorge of
the river Asdpus, ascended the path of Anopza, through the
woody region between the mountains occupied by the CXteans
and those possessed by the Trachinians, and found himself at
daybreak near the summit, within sight of the Phocian guard of
one thousand men. In the stillness of daybreak, the noise of

1 Herodot. vii, 212. "Ev rabryot rgot mpocddorar tpg wayne Aéyerat Bacrdéa,
Inetpevov, tpi¢ avadpapuety tx rod Ypévov, deicavta mept TZ orpariy. See
Homer, Iliad, xx, 62; Atschyl. Pers. 472.

* Herodot. vii, 213, 214 ; Diodor. xi, 8.

Ktesias states that it was two powerful men of Trachis, Kalliadés and
Timaphernés, who disclosed to Xerxes the mountain-path (Persica, c. 24)

BATTLES OF THERMOPYLE AND ARTEMISIUM. 89 .

his army trampling through the wood! aroused the defenders ;
but the surprise was mutual, and Hydarnés in*alarm asked his
guide whether these men also were Lacedemonians. Having
ascertained the negative, he began the attack, and overwhelmed
the Phocians with a shower of arrows, so as to force them to
abandon the path and seek their own safety on a higher point of
the mountain. Anxious only for their own safety, they became
unmindful of the inestimable opening which they were placed to
guard. Had the full numerical strength of the Greeks been at
Thermopyle, instead of staying behind for the festivals, they
might have planted such a force on the mountain-path as would
have rendered it not less impregnable than the pass beneath.
Hydarnés, not troubling himself to pursue the Phocians, fol-
lowed the descending portion of the mountain-path, shorter than
the ascending, and arrived in the rear of Thermopyle not long
after midday.2, But before he had yet completed his descent,
the fatal truth had already been made known to Leonidas, that
the enemy were closing in upon him behind. Scouts on the hills,
and deserters from the Persian camp, especially a Kymzan?
named Tyrastiadas, had both come in with the news: and even
if such informants had bcen wanting, the prophet Megistias,
descended from the legendary seer Melampus, read the approach
of death in the gloomy aspect of the morning sacrifices. It was
evident that Thermopyle could be no longer defended ; but there
was ample time for the defenders to retire, and the detachment
of Leonidas were divided in opinion on the subject. The greater
number of them were inclined to abandon a position now become
untenable, and.to reserve themselves for future occasions on
which they might effectively contribute to repel the invader.
Nor is it to be doubted that such was the natural impulse, both

1 Herodot. vii, 217, 218. jog re 6) dtépacve —hy piv d) vyvepuin, podov d&
yevopévov woAdod, etc.

I cannot refrain from transcribing a remark of Colonel Leake: “ The
stillness of the dawn, which saved the Phocians from being surprised, is very
characteristic of the climate of Greece in the season when the occurrence
took place, and like many other trifling circumstances occurring in the his-
tory of the Persian invasion, is an interesting proof of the accuracy and
veracity of the historian.” (Travels in Northern Greece, vol. ii, c. x, p. 55.)
. * Heradot. vii, 216, 217. 2 Diodor. xi, 9.

90 HISTORY OF GREECE.”

of brave soldiers and of prudent officers, under the circumstances,
But to Leonidas the idea of retreat was intolerable. His own
personal honor, together with that of his Spartan companions
and of Sparta herself,! forbade him to think of yielding to the
enemy the pass which he had been sent to defend. The laws of
his country required him to conquer or die in the post assigned
to him, whatever might be the superiority of number on the part
of the enemy :2 moreover, we are told that the Delphian oracle
had declared that either Sparta itself, or a king of Sparta, must
fall a victim to the Persian arms. Had he retired, he could hardly
have escaped that voice of reproach which, in Greece especially,
always burst upon the general who failed: while his voluntary
devotion and death would not only silence every whisper of cal-
umny, but exalt him to the pinnacle of glory both as a man and
asa king, and set an example of chivalrous patriotism at the
moment when the Greek world most needed the lesson.

The three hundred Spartans under Leonidas were found fully
equal to this act of generous and devoted self-sacrifice. Perhaps
he would have wished to inspire the same sentiment to the whole
detachment: but when he found them indisposed, he at once
ordered them to retire, thus avoiding all unseemly reluctance and
dissension:? the same order was also given to the prophet
Megistias, who however refused to obey it and stayed, though he
sent away his only son.4 None of the contingents remained with

1 Herodot. vii, 219. 2v¥atra éBovAebovro ol “EAAnves, xai ogewy Eoxilovro
ai yropat.

2 Herodot. vii, 104.

3 Herodot. vii, 220. Tatty xat uaAAov TH yvauy rAciorog ius, Aewvidyy,
brei re HoGero Trove ovppaxove s6vrag dnpodipoug, nal ovK bEAovTag ovy-
Staxivdvvevery, xeAedoai opeac dradAadocecSat’ atte dé amévat ob Kadi
Bye: pévovte 62 abt@ KAéog péya tAeimeto, Kal 7 Lrapryg etdaipovin ob«
éfnAcigero.

Compare a similar act of honorable self-devotion, under less conspicuous
circumstances, of the Lacedsemonian commander Anaxibius, when sur-
prised by the Athenians under Iphikratés in the territory of Abydus (Xen-
ophon, Hellenic. iv, 8, 38). He and twelve Lacedemonian harmosts, all
refused to think of safety by flight. He said to his men, when resistance
wus hopeless, ‘Avdpec, guol piv xaddv Exdade amodaveiv; tueic dé, xply
Evupitae roig woAepior, enevdere ele Thy owTnpiay.

4 Herodot. vit, 221. According to Plutarch, there were also two persona

6

BATTLES OF THERMOPYLZ AND ARTEMISIUM. 91

Leonidas except the Thespian and the Theban. The former,
under their general Demophilus, volunteered to share the fate of
the Spartans, and displayed even more than Spartan heroism,
since they were not under that species of moral constraint which
arises from the necessity of acting up to a preéstablished fame
and superiority. But retreat with them presented no prospect
better than the mere preservation of life, either in slavery or in
exile and misery ; since Thespiz was in Beotia, sure to be over-
run by the invaders;! while the’ Peloponnesian contingents had
behind them the isthmus of Corinth, which they doubtless hoped
still to be able to defend. With respect to the Theban contin-
gent, we are much perplexed ; for Herodotus tells us that they
were detained by Leonidas against their will as hostages, that
they took as little part as possible in the subsequent battle, and
surrendered themselves prisoners to Xerxes as soon as they could.
Diodorus says that the Thespians alone remained with the Spar-
tans; and Pausanias, though he mentions the eighty Mykenzans
as having stayed along with the Thespians (which is probably
incorrect), says nothing about the Thebans.? All things con-

belonging to the Herakleid lineage, whom Leonidas desired to place in
safety, and for that reason. gave them a despatch to carry home. They in-
dignantly refused, and stayed to perish in the fight (Plutarch. Herodot
Malign. p. 866).

1 The subsequent distress of the surviving Thespians is painfally illus-
trated by the fact, that in the battle of Plata in the following year, they
had no heavy armor (Herodot. ix, 830). After the final repulse of Xerxes,
they were forced to recruit their city by the admission of new citizens
(Herodot. viii, 75).

* Herodot. vii, 222. OnBaio: pev déxovrec Euevov, xa ob Bovdduevor,
kareixe yap apeag Aewvidye, ty dunpwv Adyy trovetpevoc. How could these
Thebans serve as hostages? Against what evil were they intended to guard
Leonidas, or what advantages could they confer upon him? Unwilling
comrades on such an occasion would be noway desirable. Plutarch (De
Herodot. Malign. p. 865) severely criticizes this statement of Herodotus, and
on very plausible grounds : among the many unjust criticisms in his treatise,
this is one of the few exceptions.

Compare Diodorus, xi, 9; and Pausan. x, 20, 1.

Of course the Thebans, taking part as they afterwards did heartily with
Xerxes, would have an interest in representing that their contingent had
done as little as possible against him, and may have circulated the story
that Leonidas detained them/as hostages. The politics of Thebes before

99 HISTORY OF GREECE.

sidered, it seems probable that the Thebans remained, but re-
mained by their own offer, — being citizens of the anti-Persian
party, as Diodorus represents them to have been, or perhaps
‘because it may have been hardly less dangerous for them to retire
with the Peloponnesians, than to remain, suspected as they were
of medism: but when the moment of actual crisis arrived, their
courage not standing so firm as that of the Spartans and Thes-
pians, they endeavored to save their lives by taking credit for

medism, and pretending to mete been moreanty detained by
Leonidas.

The devoted band thus left with Leonidas at Thermopyle con-
sisted of the three hundred Spartans, with a certain number of
Helots attending them, together with seven hundred Thespians
and apparently four hundred Thebans. If there had been before
any Lacedzmonians, not Spartans, present, they must have re-
tired with the other Peloponnesians. By previous concert with
the guide, Ephialtés, Xerxes delayed his attack ugon them until
near noon, when the troops under Hydammés might soon be ex-
pected in the rear. On this last day, however, Leonidas, knowing
that all which remained was to sell the lives of his detachment
dearly, did not confine himself to the defensive,! but advanced
into the wider space outside of the pass ; becoming the aggressor
and driving before him the foremost of the Persian host, many
of whom perished as well by the spears of the Greeks as in the
neighboring sea and morass, and even trodden down by their

the battle of Thermopylez were essentially double-faced and equivocal : not
daring to +:ke any open part against the Greeks before the arrival of
Xerxes.
The eighty Mykenszans, like the other Peloponnesians, had the isthmus
of Corinth behind them as a post which presented good chances of defence.
1 The story of Diodorus (xi, 10) that Leonidas maae an attack upon the
Persian camp during the night, and very nearly penetrated ta the regal

tent, from which Xerxes was obliged to flee suddenly, in order to save his ,

life, while the Greeks, after having caused immense slaughter in the camp,
were at length overpowered and slain, —is irreconcilable with Herodotus
and decidedly to be rejected. Justin, however (ii, 11), and Plutarch (De
Herodot. Malign. p. 866), follow it. The rhetoric of Diodorus is not cal-
culated to strengthen the evidence in its favor. Plutarch had written, or
intended to write, a sa of Leonidas (De Herodot. Mal. zbid.) ; but
it is not preserved.

BATTLES OF THERMOPYLE AND ARTEMISIUM, 93 ~-

own numbers. It required all the efforts of the Persian officers,
assisted by threats and the plentiful use of the whip, to force
their men on to the fight. The Greeks fought with reckless
bravery and desperation against this superior host, until at length
their spears were broken, and they had no weapon left except
their swords. It was at this juncture that Leonidas himself was
slain, and around his body the battle became fiercer than ever-:
the Persians exhausted all their efforts to possess themselves of
it, but were repulsed by the Greeks four several times, with the
loss of many of their chiefs, especially two brothers of Xerxes.
Fatigued, exhausted, diminished in number, and deprived of their
most effective weapons, the little band of defenders retired, with
the body of their chief, into the narrow strait behind the cross
wall, where they sat all together on a hillock, exposed to the
attack of the main Persian army on one side, and of the detach-
ment of Hydarnés, which had now completed its march, on the
other. They were thus surrounded, overwhelmed with missiles,
and slain to a man; not losing courage even to the last, but de-
fending themselves with their remaining daggers, with their un-
armed hands, and even with their mouths.!

Thus perished Leonidas with his heroic comrades, — three
hundred Spartans and seven hundred Thespians. Amidst such
equal heroism, it seemed difficult to single out any individual as
distinguished: nevertheless, Herodotus mentions the Spartans
Diénekés, Alpheus, and Maron, — and the Thespian Dithyram-
bus, — as standing preéminent. The reply ascribed to the first
became renowned.2 “'The Persian host (he was informed) is so
prodigious that their arrows conceal the sun.” “So much the
better (he answered), we shall then fight them in the shade.”
Herodotus had asked and learned the name of every individual
among this memorable three hundred, and even six hundred
years afterwards, Pausanias could still read the names engraved
. ona column at Sparta One alone among them — Aristodémus

1 Herodot. vii, 225.— _* Herodot. vii, 226.

* Herodot. vii, 224. éruSéuny d2 nat drayrav rdv tpiaxociwy. Paus&
nias, iii, 14,1. Annual festivals, with a panegyrical oration and gymnastic
matches, were still celebrated even in his time in honor of Leonidas,
jointly with Pausanias, whose subsequent treason tarnished his laurels
ecquired at Platea. Yt is remarkable, and not altogether creditable to

94 HISTORY OF GREECE.

— returned home, having taken no part in the combat. He, to-
gether with Eurytus, another soldier, had been absent from the
detachment on leave, and both were lying at Alpéni, suffering
from a severe complaint in the eyes. Eurytus, apprized that the
fatal hour of the detachment was come, determined not to sur-
vive it, asked for his armor, and desired his attendant Helot to
lead him to his place in the ranks; where he fell gallantly fight-
ing, while the Helot departed and survived. Aristodémus did
not imitate this devotion of his sick comrade: overpowered with
physical suffering, he was carried to Sparta— but he returned
only to scorn and infamy among his fellow-citizens. He was
denounced as “the coward Aristodémus;” no one would speak
or communicate with him, or even grant him a light for his fire.?

Spartan sentiment, that the two kings should have been made partners in
the same public honors.

! Herod. vii, 229. ’Apiorddnpoy — Aecropvyéovra Acig0 iva: — dAyjoarvta
arovoorzoa é¢ Sraprygyv. The commentators are hard upon Aristodémus
when they translate these epithets, “animo deficientem, timidum, pusillani-
mum,” considering that dAecrowbyyoe is predicated by Thucydides (iv, 12)
even respecting the gallant Brasidasy. Herodotus scarcely intends to imply
anything like pusillanimity, but rather the effect of extreme physical suffer-
ing. It seems, however, that there were different stories about the cause
which had kept Aristodémus out of the battle.

The story of another soldier, named Pantités, who having been sent on a
message by Leonidas into Thessaly, did not return in time for the battle,
and was so disgraced when he went back to Sparta that he hanged him-
self, — given by Herodotus as a report, is very little entitled to credit. It
is not likely that Leonidas would send an envoy into Thessaly, then occn-
pied by the Persians: moreover, the disgrace of Aristodémus is particularly
explained by Herodotus by the difference between his conduct and that of
his comrade Eurytus: whereas Pantités stood alone.

2 See the story of the single Athenian citizen, who returned home alone,
after all his comrades had perished in an unfortunate expedition to the
island of Acgina. The widows of the slain warriors crowded round him,
each asking him what had become of her husband, and finally put him to
death by pricking with their bodkins (Herodot. v, 87).

In the terrible battle of St. Jacob on the Birs, near Basle (August, 1444),
where fifteen hundred Swiss crossed the river and attacked forty thousand
French and Germans under the Dauphin of France, against strong re-
monstrances from their commanders, — all of them were slain, after deeds
of unrivalled valor and great loss to the enemy, except sixteen men, who
receded from their countrymen in crossing the river, thinking the enter-
prise desperate. These sixteen men, on their return, were treated with

-

BATTLES OF THERMOPYLA AND ARTEMISIUM. 95

After a year of such bitter disgrace, he was at length enabled to
retrieve his honor at the battle of Platea, where he was slain,
after surpassing all his comrades in heroic and even reckless
valor.

Amidst the last moments of this gallant band, we turn with
repugnance tothe desertion and surrender of the Thebans. They
are said to have taken part in the final battle, though only to save
appearances and under the pressure of necessity : but when the
Spartans and Thespians, exhausted and disarmed, retreated to
die upon the little hillock within the pass, the Thebans then
separated themselves, approached the enemy with outstretched
hands, and entreated quarter. They now loudly proclaimed that
they were friends and subjects of the Great King, and had come
to Thermopyle against their own consent; all which was con-
firmed by the Thessalians in the Persian army. Though some
few were slain before this proceeding was understood by the
Persians, the rest were admitted to quarter; not without the
signal disgrace, however, of being branded with the regal mark
as untrustworthy slaves,— an indignity to which their com-
mander, Leontiadés was compelled to submit along with the rest.
Such is the narrative which Herodotus recounts, without any ex-
pression of mistrust or even of doubt: Plutarch emphatically
contradicts it, and even cites a Boeotian author,! who affirms that
Anaxarchus, not Leontiadés, was commander of the Thebans at
Thermopyle. Without calling in question the equivocal conduct
and surrender of this Theban detachment, we may reasonably
dismiss the story of this ignominious branding, as an invention of
that strong anti-Theban feeling which prevailed in Greece after
the ‘repulse of Xerxes.

The wrath of that monarch, as he went over the field after the
close of the action, vented itself upon the corpse of the gallant
Leonidas, whose head he-directed to be cut off and fixed on a
cross. But it was not wrath alone which filled hie mind : he was

intolerable scorn and hardly escaped execution (Vogelin, Geschichte dex
Schweizer Eidgenossenschaft, vol. i, ch. 5, p. 393).

! Herodot. vii, 233; Plutarch, Herndot. Malign. p. 867. The Beeotian
history of Aristophanés, cited by the latter, professed to be founded in part
upon memorials arranged accerding to the sequence of magistrates and
generals — é« Tév xara dpyovtas trouynpater lorépyce. —-

96 HISTORY OF GREECE.

farther impressed with involuntary admiration of the little de-
tachment which had here opposed to him a resistance so unex-
pected and so nearly invincible, — he now learned to be anxious
respecting the resistance which remained behind. “ Demaratus
(said he to the exiled Spartan king at his side), thou art a good
man: all thy predictions have turned out true: now tell me, how
many Lacedzemonians are there remaining, and are they all such
warriors as these fallen men?” “QO king (replied Demaratus),
the total of the Lacedzmonians and of their towns is great; in
Sparta alone, there are eight thousand adult warriors, all equal
to those whe have here fought; and the other Lacedzmonians,
though inferior to them, are yet excellent soldiers.” “Tell me
(rejoined Xerxes), what will be the least difficult way of con-
quering such men?” Upon which Demaratus advised him to
send a division of his fleet to occupy the island of Kythéra, and
from thence to make war on the southern coast of Laconia, which
would distract the attention of Sparta, and prevent her from
cooperating in any combined scheme of defence against his land-
force. Unless this were done, the entire force of Peloponnesus
would be assembled to maintain the narrow isthmus of Corinth,
where the Persian king would have far more terrible battles to
fight than anything which he had yet witnessed.!

Happily for the safety of Greece, Achsemenes, the brother of
Xerxes, interposed to dissuade the monarch from this prudent
plan of action; not without aspersions on the temper and mo-
tives of Demaratus, who, he affirmed, like other Greeks, hated
all power, and envied all good fortune, above his own. The
fleet, added he, after the damage sustained by the recent storm,
would bear no farther diminution of number: and it was essen-
tial to keep the entire Persian force, on land as well as on sea,
in one undivided and cooperating mass.?

A few such remarks were sufficient to revive in the monarch
his habitual sentiment of confidence in overpowering number :
yet while rejecting the advice of Demaratus, he emphatically
repelled the imputations against the good faith and sincere
attachment of that exiled prince.3

1 Herodot: vii, 235. * Herodot. vii, 236.
? Herodot. vii, 237. ‘ The citizen (Xerxes is made to observe) does in-

SATTLES OF THERMOPYLE AND ARTEMISIUM. 97

Meanwhile the days of battle at Thermopyle had been not
less actively employed by the fleets at Aphete and Artemisium.
It has already been mentioned that the Greek ships, having
abandoned their station at the latter place and retired to Chalkis,
were induced to return, by the news that the Persian fleet had
been nearly ruined by the recent storm, — and that, on returning
to Artemisium, the Grecian commanders felt renewed alarm on
seeing the enemy’s fleet, in spite of the damage just sustained,
still mustering in overwhelming number at the opposite station
of Aphete. Such was the effect of this spectacle, and the
impression of their own inferiority, that they again resolved to
“retire without fighting, leaving the strait open and undefended.
Great consternation was caused by the news of ‘their determina-
tion among the inhabitants of Euboea, who entreated Eurybiadés
to maintain his position for a few days, until they could have
time to remove their families and their property. But even such
postponement was thought unsafe, and refused: and he was on
the point of giving orders for retreat, when the Eubceans sent
their envoy, Pelagon, to Themistoklés, with the offer of thirty
talents, on condition that the fleet should keep its station and
hazard an engagement in defence of the island. Themistoklés ~
employed the money adroitly and successfully, giving five talents
to Eurybiadés, with large presents besides to the ‘other leading
chiefs: the most unmanageable among them was the Corinthian
Adeimantus, — who at first threatened to depart with his own
squadron alone, if the remaining Greeks were mad enough to
remain. His alarm was silenced, if not tranquillized, by a pres-
ent of three talents.!

However Plutarch may be scandalized at such inglorious rev-
elations preserved to us by Herodotus respecting the underhand
agencies of this memorable struggle, there is no reason to call in
question the bribery here described. But Themistoklés doubt-
less was only tempted to do, and enabled to do, by means of the

deed natarally envy another citizen more fortunate than himself, and if
asked for counsel, will keep back what he has best in his mind, unless he be
a man of very rare virtue. But a foreign friend usually sympathizes
heartily with the good fortune of another foreigner, and will give him the
best advice in his power whenever he is asked.”

1 Plutarch, Themistoklés, c. 7; Herodot. viii, 5, 6.

VOL. V. 5 Zee.

98 HISTORY OF GREECE.

Eubcean money, that which he would have wished and had
‘ probably tried to accomplish without the money, — to bring on
a naval engagement at Artemisium. It was absolutely essential
ta the maintenance of Thermopylez, and to the general plan of
defence, that the Eubcean strait should be defended against the
Persian fleet, nor could the Greeks expect a more favorable posi-
tion to fight in. We may reasonably presume that Themistoklés,
distinguished not less by daring than by sagacity, and the great
originator of, maritime energies in his country, concurred unwill-
ingly in the projected abandonment of Artemisium: but his high
mental capacity did not exclude that pecuniary corruption which
rendered the presents of the Eubceans both admissible and wel-
come, — yet still more welcome to him perhaps, as they supplied
means of bringing over the other opposing chiefs and the Spar-
tan admiral.! It was finally determined, therefore, to remain,
and if necessary, to hazard an engagement in the Eubcean strait :
but at any rate to procure for the inhabitants of the island a
short interval to remove their families. Had these Eubceans
heeded the oracles, says Herodotus,2 they would have packed up
and removed long before: for a text of Bakis gave them express
warning: but, having neglected the sacred writings as unworthy
of credit, they were now severely punished for such presumption.

Among the Persian fleet at Aphetz, on the other hand, the
feeling prevalent was one of sanguine hope and confidence in
‘heir superior numbers, forming a strong contrast with the dis-
.uuragement of the Greeks at Artemisium. Had they attacked
ené latter immediately, when both fleets first saw each other from
their opposite stations, they would have gained an easy victory,

1 The expression of Herodotus is somewhat remarkable: Ovroi re db}

mwAnyévrec Sapotoe (Eurybiadés, Adeimantus, etc.), dvametetouévor Hoav, Kal
totot Etfloéect éxexiptato: atrog re 6 OepicroxAéng éxépdgve, tAavdave de
Ta AowTa Exwr.

* Herodot. viii, 20. Of yap EiBoée¢ mapaypnodpevor riv Baxidog ypnopudy
wg obdiv Aéyovra, obre Tt eSexopicavro ovdév, obte mpoecisavTo, We mape-
conévoy oft woAguov: mepimeréa 62 Exoijoavro odiot abroiot Ta mp7yLaTa.
Baxcde yap Ode Exet repl rovTwr 6 ypnopos:

dpaleo BapBapdduvoy Srav Cvydv ele GAa BadAy

BtBiAivov, EtBoing aréxery roAvunnadac aiyag.
Tobrooe d2 obddv roict Erect ypnoapévorc: tv roice téte napsotoi te xal
mpordoxipsotos KaKxoiol, Kapiyy opt oupgopy xpjaVat mpoc Ta péylora.

BATTLES OF THERMOPYLZ AND ARTEMESIUM. 99

for the Greek fleet would have fled, as the admiral was on the
point of ordering, even without an attack. But this was not
suflicient for the Persians, who wished to cut off every ship
among their enemies even from flight and escape.'! Accordingly,
they detached two handred ships to circumnavigate the island of
Eubcea, and to sail up the Eubcean strait from the south, in the
rear of the Greeks, -—- and postponing their own attack in front
until this squadron should be in position to intercept the retreat-
ing Greeks. But though the mancuvre was concealed by send-
ing the squadron round outside of the island of Skiathos, it
became known immediately among the Greeks, through a
deserter, — Skyllias of Skioné. This man, the best swimmer
and diver of his time, and now engaged like other Thracian
Greeks in the Persian service, passed over to Artemisium, and
communicated to the Greek commanders both the particulars of
the late destructive storm, and the despatch of the intercepting
squadron.?

It appears that his communications, respecting the effects of
the storm and the condition of the Persian fleet, somewhat reas-
sured the Greeks, who resolved during the ensuing night to sail
from their station at Artemisium for the purpose of surprising
the detached squadron of two hundred ships, and who even be-
came bold enough, under the inspirations of Themistoklés, to go
out and offer battle to the main fleet near Aphete.? Wanting to
acquire some practical experience, which neither leaders nor
soldiers as yet possessed, of the manner in which Phoenicians
and others in the Persian fleet handled and manceuvred their
ships, they waited till a late hour of the afternoon, when little
daylight remained.‘ Their boldness in thus advancing out, with
inferior numbers and even inferior ships, astonished the Persian
admirals, and distressed the Jonians and other subject Greeks

1 Herodot. viii, 6. a2 EzeAdov d7dev bxped$erdas (ol “EAAnves): Edes 62
und? ruppépor, TH Exeivav (Ilepodv) Adyy, meptyevérdat.

3 Herodot. viii, 7, 8 Wonderful stories were recounted respecting the
prowess of Skyllias as a diver.

* Diodorus, xi, 12.

4 Herodot. viii, 9. deiAny dpinv yivoptyny Ti hueone gvaagavtes, abvrot
twavérAwov int rode BapBapove, dmémetpav abray roijoacGat BovAdpevos Tie
Te uaxnc Kat Tov dcexwAdov.

”

400 HISTORY OF GREECE.

who were serving them as unwilling auxiliaries: to both it
seemed that the victory of the Persian fleet, which was speedily
brought forth to battle, and was numereus enough to encompass

" the Greeks, would be certain as well as complete. The Greek

ships were at first marshalled in a circle, with the sterns in the
interior, and presenting their prows in front at all points of the
circumference ;! in this position, compressed into a narrow space,
they seemed to be awaiting the attack of the enemy, who formed
a larger circle around them: but on a second signal given, their
ships assumed the aggressive, rowed out from the inner circle in
direct impact against the hostile ships around, and took or dis-
abled no less than thirty of them: in one of which Philaon,
brother of Gorgus, despot of Salamis in Cyprus, was made pris-
oner. Such unexpected forwardness at first disconcerted the
Persians, who however rallied and inflicted considerable damage
and loss on the Greeks: but the near approach of night put an
end to the combat, and each fleet retired to its former station, —
the Persians to Aphete, the Greeks to Artemisium.?

The result of this first day’s combat, though indecisive in itself,
surprised both parties and did much to exalt. the confidence of -
the Greeks. But the events of the ensuing night did yet more.
Another tremendous storm was sent by the gods to aid them.
Though it was the middle of summer,—a season when rain
rarely falls in the climate of Greece,—the most violent wind,
rain, and thunder, prevailed during the whole night, blowing
right on shore against the Persians at Aphets, and thus but little
troublesome to the Greeks on the opposite side of the strait.
The seamen of the. Persian fleet, scarcely recovered from the
former storm at Sépias Akté, were almost driven to despair by
this repetition of the same peril: the more so when they found
the prows of their ships surrounded, and the play of their oars
impeded, by the dead bodies and the spars from the recent battle,
which the current drove towards their shore. If this storm was

1 Compare the description in Thucyd. ii, 84, of the naval battle between
the Athenian ficet under Phormio and the Lacedwmonian fleet, where the
ships of the latter are marshalled in this.same array.

* Herodot. viii, 11. moAAdv aod défav cyuvicdpevo — érepadxtot
&yuvilouévoug, etc. , ;

BATTLES OF THERMOPYLZE AND ARTEMISIUM. 101

injurious to the main fleet at Aphetsx, it proved the entire ruin
of the squadron detached to circumnavigate Eubcea, who, over-
taken by it near the dangerous eastern coast of that island,
called the Hollows of Eubcea, were driven upon the rocks and
wrecked. The news of. this second conspiracy of the elements,
or intervention of the gods, against the schemes of the invaders,
was highly encouraging to the Greeks ; and the seasonable arrival
of fifty-three fresh Athenian ships, who reinforced them the next
day, raised them to a still higher pitch of confidence. In the
afternoon of the same day, they sailed out against the Persian
fleet at Aphetz, and attacked and destroyed some Kilikian ships
even at their moorings; the fleet having been too much dam-
aged by the storm of the preceding night to come out and fight.)

But the Persian admirals were not of a temper to endure such
insults, — still less to let their master hear of them. About noon
on thé ensuing day, they sailed with their entire fleet near to the
Greek station at Artemisium, and formed themselves into a half
moon; while the Greeks kept near to the shore, so that they
could not be surrounded, nor could the Persians bring their entire
fleet into action; the ships running foul of each other, and not
finding space to attack. The battle raged fiercely all day, and
with great loss and damage on both sides: the Egyptians bore
off the palm of valor among the Persians, the Athenians among
the Greeks. Though the positive loss sustained by the Persians
was by far the greater, and though the Greeks, being near their
own shore, became masters of the dead bodies as well as of the
disabled ships and floating fragments, — still, they were them-
selves hurt and crippled in greater proportion with reference to
their inferior total: and the Athenian vessels especially, foremost
in the preceding combat, found one half of their number out of
condition to renew it.2 The Egyptians alone had captured five
Grecian ships with their entire crews.

Under these circumstances, the Greek leaders, — and Themis-
toklés, as it seems, among them, — determined that they could no
longer venture to hold the position of Artemisium, but must

- ' Herodot. viii, 12, 18, 14; Diodor. xi, 12.
2 Herodot. viii, 1%, 18. oa

102 HISTORY OF GREECE.

withdraw the naval force farther into Greece :! though this was
in fact a surrender of the pass of Thermopyle, and though the
removal which the Eubceans were hastening was still unfinished.
These unfortunate men were forced to be satisfied with the prom-
ise of Themistoklés to give them convoy for their boats and
their persons; abandoning their sheep and cattle for the con-
sumption of the fleet, as better than leaving them to become
booty for the enemy. While the Greeks were thus employed
in organizing their retreat, they received news which rendered
retreat doubly necessary. The Athenian Abroénychus, sta-
tioned with his ship near Thermopyle, in order to keep up com-
munication between the army and fleet, brought the disastrous
intelligence that Xerxes was already master of the pass, and
that the division of Leonidas was either destroyed or in flight.
Upon this the fleet abandoned Artemisium forthwith, and sailed
up the Eubcean strait; the Corinthian ships in the van, the Athe-
nians bringing up the rear. Themistoklés, conducting the latter,
stayed long enough at the various watering-stations and landing-
places to inscribe on some neighboring stones invitations to the
Ionian contingents serving under Xerxes: whereby the latter
were conjured not to serve against their fathers, but to desert, if
possible, — or at least, to fight as little and as backwardly as they
could. Themistoklés hoped by this stratagem perhaps to detach
some of the Ionians from the Persian side, or, at any rate, to
render them objects of mistrust, and thus to diminish their effici-
ency.2 With no longer delay than was requisite for such inscrip-
tions, he followed the remaining fleet, which sailed round the
coast of Attica, not stopping until it reached the island of Sa-
lamis.

The news of the retreat of the Greek fleet was speedily con-
veyed by a citizen of Histiza to the Persians at Aphetz, who at
first disbelieved it, and detained the messenger until they had
sent to ascertain the fact. On the next day, their fleet passed
across to the north of Eubcea, and became master of Histiea
and the neighboring territory: from whence many of them, by

‘ permission and even invitation of Xerxes, crossed over to Ther-

ae

1 Herodot. viii, 18. dpyagdv 6) EBobAevoy tow é¢ tiv “EAAaC a.
® Herodot. viii, 19, 21, 22; Plutarch, Themistoklés, c. 9.

BATTLES OF THERMOPYLE AND ARTEMISIUM. 108

mopyle to survey the field of battle and the dead. Respecting
the number of the dead, Xerxes is asserted to have deliberately
imposed upon the spectators: he buried all his own dead, except
one thousand, whose bodies were left out, — while the total num-
ber of Greeks who had perished at Thermopylex, four thousand
in number, were all left exposed, and in one heap, 80 as to create
an impression that their loss had been much more severe than
their own. Moreover, the bodies of the slain Helots were in-
cluded in the heap, all of them passing for Spartans or Thespians
in the estimation of the spectators. We are not surprised to
hear, however, that this trick, gross and public as it must have
been, really deceived very few.'! According to the statement of
Herodotus, twenty thousand men were slain on the side of the
Persians, —no unreasonable estimate, if we consider that they
wore little defensive armor, and that they were three days fight-
ing. The number of Grecian dead bodies is stated by the same
historian as four thousand: if this be correct, it must include a
considerable proportion of Helots, since there were no hoplites
present on the last day except the three hundred Spartans, the
seven hundred Thespians, and the four hundred Thebans. Some
hoplites were of course slain in the first two days’ battles, though
apparently not many. The number who originally came to the
defence of the pass seems to have been about seven thousand 2
but the epigram, composed shortly afterwards, and inscribed on
the spot by order of the Amphiktyonic assembly, transmitted to
posterity the formal boast that four thousand warriors “from
Peloponnesus had here fought with three hundred myriads or
three million of enemies.”3 Respecting this alleged Persian
total, some remarks have already been made: the statement of
four thousand warriors from Pelaponnesus, must indicate all

' Herodot. viii, 24, 25. ot pay obd tAavdave rove dtaBeBnndracg Zépene
Taira mpntag wept rode vexpode Tod éwitrod * xal yap d) Kal yeAoiov fy, ete.

* About the numbers of the Greeks at Thermopylx, compare Herodot.
vii, 202 ; Diodorus, xi, 4; Pausanias, x, 20,1; and Manso’s Sparta, vol. ii,
p. 308; Beylage 24th.

Isokratés talks about one thousand Spartans, with a few allies, Pare-
gyric, Or. iv, p.59. He mentions also only sixty Athenian ships of war at

ium : in fact, his namerical statements deserve little attention.
* Herodot. vii, 228.

-

104 HISTORY OF GREECE:

those who originally marched out of that peninsata under Jeon
idas. Yet the Amphiktyonic assembly, when they furnishes
words to record this memorable exploit, ought not to have im
mortalized the Peloponnesians apart from their extra-Pelopon-
nesian comrades, of merit fully equal, — especially the Thespians,
who exhibited the same heroic self-devotion as Leonidas and his
Spartans, without having been prepared for it by the same elabo
rate and iron discipline. While this inscription was intended as
a general commemoration of the exploit, there was another near
it, alike simple and impressive, destined for the Spartan dead
separately : “ Stranger, tell the Lacedzmonians, that we lie here,
in obedience to their orders.” On the hillock within the pass,
where this devoted band received their death-wounds, a mont
ment was erected, with a marble lion in honor of Leonidas ; dec-
orated, apparently, with an epigram by the poet Simenides.
That distinguished genius composed at least one ode, of which
nothing but a splendid fragment now remains, to celebrate the
glories of Thermopyle ; besides several epigrams, one of which
was consecrated to the prophet Megistias, “who, though well
aware of the fate coming upon him, would not desert the Spartan
chiefs.”

CHAPTER XULf.
BATTLE OF SALAMIS.—RETREAT OF XERXES.

THE sentiment, alike durable and unanimous, with which the
Greeks of after-times looked back on the battle of Thermopyle,
and which they have communicated to all subsequent readers,
was that of just admiration for the courage and patriotism of
Leonidas and his band. But among the contemporary Greeks
that sentiment, though doubtless sincerely felt, was by no means
predominant: it was overpowered by the more pressing emotions
of disappointment and terror. So confident were the Spartans

BATTLE OF SALAMIS.— RETREAT OF XERXES. 105

and Péloponnesians in the defensibility of Thermopyle and
Artemisium, that when the news of the disaster reached them,
not asingle soldier had yet been put in motion: the season of
the festival games had passed, but no active step had yet beer
taken.! Meanwhile the invading force, army and fleet, was
in its progress towards Attica and Peloponnesus, without the
least preparations, — and, what was still worse, without any com-
bined and concerted plan,— for defending the heart of Greece
The loss sustained by Xerxes at Thermopylz, insignificant in
proportion to his vast total, was more than compensated by the
fresh Grecian auxiliaries which he now acquired. Not merely
the Malians, Lokrians, and Dorians, but also the great mass of
the Boeotians, with their chief town Thebes, all except Thespiee
and Plateza, now joined him.2 Demaratus, his Spartan com-
panion, moved forward to Thebes to renew an ancient tie of
hospitality with the Theban oligarchical leader, Attaginus, while
small garrisons were sent by Alexander of Macedon to most of
the Boeotian towns,? as well to protect them from plunder as to
insure their fidelity. The Thespians, on the other hand, aban-
doned their city, and fled into Peloponnesus ; while the Plateeans,
who had been serving aboard the Athenian ships at Artemisium,‘
were disembarked at Chalkis as the fleet retreated, for the pur
pose of marching by land to their city, and removing their fami-
lies. Nor was it only the land-force of Xerxes which had been
thus strengthened; his fleet also had received some accessions
from Karystus in Eubcea, and from several of the Cyclades, —
so that the losses sustained by the storm at Sépias and the fights
at Artemisium, if not wholly made up, were at least in part
repaired, while the fleet remained still prodigiously superior in
number to that of the Greeks.5

? Herodot. viii, 40, 71, 73. \

* Herodot. viii, 66. Diodorus calls the battle of Thermopyle a Kad-
meian victory for Xerxes, —~which is true only in the letter, but not in the
spirits he doubtless lost a greater number of men in the pass than the
Greeks, but the advantage which he gained was prodigious (Diodor. xi, 12);
and Diodorus himself sets forth the terror of the Grecks after the event

(xi, 13-15). .
? Plutarch, De Herodot. Malignit. p. 864; Herodot. viii, 34.
4 Herodot. viii, 44, 50. * Herodot. viii, 66.

ae

106 HISTORY OF GREECE.

At the beginning of the Peloponnesian war, near fifty years
after these events, the Corinthian envoys reminded Sparta that
she had allowed Xerxes time to arrive from the extremity of
the earth at the threshold of Peloponnesus, before she took any
adequate precautions against him: a reproach true almost to the
letter.' It was only when roused and terrified by the news of
the death of Leonidas, that the Lacedsmonians and the other
Peloponnesians began to put forth their full strength. But it
was then too late to perform the promise made to Athens, of tak-
ing up a position in Bootia so as to protect Attica. To defend
the isthmus of Corinth was all that they now thought of, and
seemingly all that was now open to them: thither they rushed
with all their available population under the conduct of Kleom-
brotus, king of Sparta (brother of Leonidas), and began to draw
fortifications across it, as well as to break up the Skironian road
from Megara to Corinth, with every mark of anxious energy.
The Lacedemonians, Arcadians, Eleians, Corinthians, Sikyoni-
ans, Epidaurians, Phliasians, Troezenians, and Hermionians, were
all present here in full numbers; many myriads of men (bodies
of ten thousand each) working and bringing materials night and
day.2 As a defence to themselves against attack by land, this
was an excellent position: they considered it as their last
chance,? abandoning all hope of successful resistance at sea.
But they forgot that a fortified isthmus was no protection even
to themselves against the navy of Xerxes,‘ while it professedly
threw out not only Attica, but also Megara and Atgina. And
_ thus rose a new peril to Greece from the loss of Thermopyla:
no other position could be found which, like that memorable
strait, comprehended and protected at once all the separate cities.
The disunion thus produced brought them within a hair’s breadth
of ruin.

If the causes of alarm were great for the Peloponnesians, yet
more desperate did the position of the Athenians appear. Ex-
pecting, according to agreement, to find a Peloponnesian army in

1 Thucyd. i, 69. rév re yop Midoy abrot louev dxd weparuv yrc xpbrepw
én? eAorévynooy tAvdvra, npiv rd nap tudy dling xpoaravrijcas.

2 Herodot. viii, 71. ovvdpaydvree tx roy rodiov,

* Herodot. viii, 74. 4 Herodot. vii, 189.

BATTLE OF SALAMIS.—RETREAT OF XERXES. 107

Beotia ready to sustain Leonidas, or at any rate to cooperate in
the defence of Attica, they had taken no measures to remove
their families or property: but they saw with indignant disap-
pointment as well as dismay, on retreating from Artemisiam, that
the conquerer was in full march from Thermopylz, that the road
to Attica was open to him, and that the Peloponnesians were
abeorbed exclusively in the défence of their own isthmus and
their own separate existence.! The fleet from Artemisium had
been directed to muster at the harbor of Trozen, there to await
such reinforcements as could be got together: but the Athenians
entreated Eurybiadés to halt at Salamis, so as to allow them a
short time for consultation in the critical state of their affairs,
and to aid them in the transport of their families. While Eury-
biadés was thus staying at Salamis, several new ships which had
reached Troezen came over to join him; and in this way Salamis
became for a time the naval station of the Greeks, without any
deliberate intention beforehand.2

Meanwhile Themistoklés and the Athenian seamen landed at
Phalérum, and made their mournful entry into Athens. Gloomy
as the prospect appeared, there was little room for difference of
Opinion, and still less room for delay. The authorities and the
public assembly at once issued a proclamation, enjoining every
Athenian to remove his family out of the country in the best

? Plutarch, Themistoklés, c.9. dua pev dpy? rie mpodociac elxe rode 'ADy-
vaiovg, dua dt ducdupia Kal xarhigera pepovupévore.

Herodot. viii, 40. doxéovreg ydp etpjcew Wedorovenaiovs ravdnpel ty 7%
Bowwrig broxarnpévove tov BapBapov, rdv piv evtpov odbdev tdv, ol d2 Exvy-
Vavovto rdv "loDpudv abradg reiyéovrag bg tiv TleAonévvgooy, wept xAeicrov
02 rotovmévovg wepteivat, Kat rabryy Exovrag év guAaky, Ta Te GANG amtévas,

Thucyd. i, 74. dre yotw huev (we Athenians) fr: dot, ob rapeyéverde
(Spartans).

Both Lysias (Oratio Funebr. c. 8) and Isokratés take pride in the fact
that the Athenians, in spite of being thus betrayed, never thought of mak-
ing separate terms for themselves with Xerxes (Panegyric, Or. iv. p. 60).
But there is no reason to believe that Kerxes would have granted them
separate terms: his particular vengeance was directed against them. Iso-
kratés has confounded in his mind the conduct of the Athenians when they
refused the offers of Mardonius in the year following the battle of Salamis,
with their conduct before the battle of Salamis against Xerxes.

* Herodot. viii, 40-42. 2 Plato, Legg. iii, p. 699

108 HISTORY OF GREECE.

way he could. We may conceive the state of tumult and terror
which followed on this unexpected proclamation, when we reflect
that it had to be circulated and acted upon throughout all Attica,
from Sunium to Orépus, within the narrow space of less than six
days; for no longer interval elapsed before Xerxes actually
arrived at Athens, where indeed he might have arrived even
sooner.1 The whole Grecian fleet was doubtless employed in
carrying out the helpless exiles; mostly to Troezen, where a
kind reception and generous support were provided for them (the
Troezenian population being seemingly semi-Ionic, and having
ancient relations of religion as well as of traffic with Athens),—
but in part also to Aigina: there were, however, many who could
not, or would not, go father than Salamis. Themistoklés im-
pressed upon the sufferers that they were only obeying the
oracle, which had directed them to abandon the city and to take
refuge behind the wooden walls; and either his policy, or the
mental depression of the time, gave circulation to other stories,
intimating that even the divine inmates of the acropolis were for
a while deserting it. In the ancient temple of Athéné Polias on
that rock, there dwelt, or was believed to dwell, as guardian to
the sanctuary and familiar attendant of the goddess, a sacred
serpent, for whose nourishment a honey-cake was placed once in
the month. The honey-cake had been hitherto regularly con-
sumed ; but at this fatal moment the priestess announced that it
remained untouched: the sacred guardian had thus set the ex-
ample of quitting the acropolis, and it behooved the citizens to
follow the example, confiding in the goddess herself for future
return and restitution. The migration of so many ancient men,
women, and children, was a scene of tears and misery inferior
only to that which would have ensued on the actual capture of
the city.2. Some few individuals, too poor to hope for mainte-

1 Herodot. viii, 66,67. ‘There was, therefore, but little time for the break-
ing up and carrying away of furniture, alluded to by Thucydides, i, 18—
dtavondévrec exAireiy THY TOALY Kal GvacKkevacapervosl, etc.

* Herodot. viii, 41; Plutarch, Themistoklés, c. x.

In the years 1821 and 1822, during the struggle which preceded the lib-
eration of Greece, the Athenians were forced to leave their country and seek
refuge in Salamis three several times. These incidents are sketched in a
manner alike interesting and instructive by Dr. Waddington, in his Visit to

BATTLE OF SALAMIS.—RE‘1REAT OF XERXES. 109

nance, or tog old to care for life, elsewhere, — confiding, moreover,
-in their own interpretation! of the wooden wall which the
Pythian priestess had pronounced to be inexpugnable, —shut
themselves up in the acropolis along with the administrators of the
temple, obstructing the entrance or western front with wooden
doors and palisades.? When we read how great were the suffer-
ings of the population of Attica near half a century afterwards,
compressed for refuge within the spacious fortifications of Athens
at the first outbreak of the Peloponnesian war,3 we may form
some faint idea of the incalculably greater misery which over-
whelmed an emigrant population, hurrying, they knew not
whither, to escape the long arm of Xerxes. Little chance did

Greece (London, 1825), Letters, vi, vii. x. He states, p. 92, “ Three times
have the Athenians emigrated in a body, and sought refuge from the sabre
among the houseless rocks of Salamis. Upon these occasions, I am assured,
that many have dwelt in caverns, and many in miserable huts, constructed
on the mountain-side by their own feeble hahds. Many have perished
too, from exposure to an intemperate climate; many, from diseases con-
tracted through the loathsomeness of their habitations ; many from hunger
and misery. On the retreat of the Turks, the survivors returned to their
country. But to what a country did they return? To a land of desolation
and famine ; and in fact, on the first reoccupation of Athens, after the
departure of Omer Brioni, several persons are known to have subsisted for
some time on grass, till a supply of corn reached the Pirseus from Syra and
Hydra.”

A century and a half ago, also. in the war between the Turks and Ve-
netians, the population of Attica was forced to emigrate to Salamis, Hgina,
and Corinth. M. Buchon observes, “ Les troupes Albanaises, envoyécs-en
1688 par les Turcs (in the war against the Venetians) se jetérent sur )’Atti-
que, mettant tout a feu et a sang. En 1688, les chroniques d’Athénes
racontent que ses malheureux habitants furent obligés de se refugier &
Salamine, 4 Egine, et & Corinthe, et que ce ne fut qu’aprés trois ans qu’ils
purent rentrer qn partie dans leur ville et dans leurs champs. Beaucoup
des villages de l’Attique sont encore habités par les déscendans de ces
derniers envahisseurs, et avant la derniére révolution, on n’y parloit que la
langue albanaise: mais leur physionomie différe autant que leur langue de
la physionomie de la race Grecque.” (Buchon, La Gréce Continentale et
la Morée. Paris, 1843, ch. ii, p. 82.)

‘ Pausanias seems to consider these poor men somewhat presumptuous
for pretending to understand the oracle better than Themistoklés, —’A0y-
vaiuy rode wA€oy Te be Tov ypnopdy f OenorokAne eldévat vouiCovrag (i, 18, 2}.

* Herodot. viii, 50. 3 Thacyd. ii, 16, 17.

110 HISTORY OF GREECE.

ahere seem that they would ever revisit their homes except as
his slaves.

In the midst of circumstances thus calamitous and threatening,
neither the warriors nor the leaders of Athens lost their energy,
—— arm as well as mind was strung to the loftiest pitch of human
resolution. Political dissensions were suspended: Themistoklés
proposed to the people a decree, and obtained their sanction, in-
viting home all who were under sentence of temporary banish-
ment: moreover, he not only included but even specially desig-
nated among them his own great opponent Aristeidés, now in
the third year of ostracism. Xanthippus the accuser, and Kimon
the son, of Miltiadés, were partners in the same emigration: the
latter, enrolled by his scale of fortune among the horsemen of
the state, was seen with his companions cheerfully marching
through the Kerameikus to dedicate their bridles in the acropolis,
and to bring away in exchange some of the sacred arms there
suspended, thus setting an example of ready service on ship-
board, instead of on horseback.'! It was absolutely essential to
obtain supplies of money, partly for the aid of the poorer exiles,
but still more for the equipment of the fleet ; there were no
funds in the public treasury, — but the Senate of Areopagus,
then composed in large proportion of men from the wealthiei
classes, put forth all its public authority as well as its private
contributions and example to others,2 and thus succeeded i
raising the sum of eight drachms for every soldier serving.

This timely help was indeed partly obtained by the inexhaust-
ible resource of Themistoklés, who, in the hurry of embarkation,
either discovered or pretended that the Gorgon’s head from the
statue of Athéné was lost, and directing upon this ground every
man’s baggage to be searched, rendered any treasures, which
private citizens might be carrying out, availableto the public
service.3 By the most strenuous efforts, these few important
days were made to suffice for removing the whole population of
Attica, — those of military competence to the fleet at Salamis, —

1 Plutarch, Themistoklés, c. 10, 11; and Kimon, c. 5.

* Whether this be the incident which Aristotle (Politic. v, $, 5} had in his
mind, we cannot determine.

® Plutarch, Themistoklés, c. x

BATTLE OF SALAMIS.— RETREAT OF XERXES. 111

the rest tosome place of refuge, — together with as much prop-
erty as the case admitted. So complete was the desertion of
the country, that the host of Xerxes, when it became master, could
not seize and carry off more than five hundred prisoners.'! More-
over, the fleet itself, which had been brought home from Artemi-
sium partially disabled, was quickly repaired, so that, by the time
the Persian fleet arrived, it was again in something like fighting
condition.

The combined fleet which had now got together at Salamis
consisted of three hundred and sixty-six ships;s—a force far
greater than at Artemisium. Of these, fo less than two hundred
were Athenian ; twenty among which, however, were lent to the
Chalkidians, and manned by them. Forty Corinthian ships,
thirty 7ginetan, twenty Megarian, sixteen Lacedzmonian, fif-
teen Sikyonian, ten Epidaurian, seven from Ambrakia, and as
many from Eretria, five from Troezen, three from Hermioné,
and the same number from Leukas; two from Keos, two from
Styra, and one from Kythnos ; four from Naxos, despatched as
& contingent to the Persian fleet, but brought by the choice of
their captains and seamen to Salamis;— all these triremes,
together with a small squadron of the inferior vessels called
pentekonters, made up the total. From the great Grecian cities
in Italy there appeared only one trireme, a volunteer, equipped
and commanded by an eminent citizen named Phayllus, thrice
Victor at the Pythian games.? The entire fleet was thus a trifle
larger than the combined force, three hundred and fifty-eight
ships, collected by the Asiatic Greeks at Ladé, fifteen years ear-
lier, during the Ionic revolt. We may doubt, however, whether

____this total, borrowed from Herodotus, be not larger than that
which actually fought a little afterwards at the battle of Salamis,
and which.Aschylus gives decidedly as consisting of three hun-
dred sail, in addition to ten prime and chosen ships. That great
poet, himself one of the combatants, and speaking in a drama
represented only seven years after the battle, is better authority
on the pdint even than Herodotus.’

=

} Herodot. ix, 99. 2 Herodot. viii, 43-48.
* schylus, Persm, 347; Herodot. viii, 48; vi, 9; Pausanias, 1, 14, 4.
The total which Herodotus announces is three hundred and seventy-eigh* j

112 HISTORY OF GREECE.

Hardly was the fleet mustered at Salamis, and the Athenian
population removed, when Xerxes and his host overran the de-

but the items which he gives amount, when summed up, only to three hun-
dred and sixty-six. There seems no way of reconciling this discrepancy
except by some violent change, which we are not warranted in making.

Ktesias represents that the numbers of the Persian war-ships at Salamis
wore above one thousand, those of the Greeks seven hundred (Persica,

c. 26).

" ‘The Athenian orator in Thucydides (i, 74) calls the total of the Grecian
fleet at Salamis “ nearly four hundred ships, and the Athenian contingent
somewhat less than two parts of this total (vaic pév ye é¢ rd¢ retpaxoaiag
dAiyy tAdooove ray dio potpoy).”

The Scholiast, with Poppo and most of the commentators on this pas-
sage, treat rév dvo potpov as meaning unquestionably two parts out of three :
and if this be the sense, J should agree with Dr. Arnold in considering the
assertion as a mere exaggeration of the orator, not at all carrying the au
thority of Thucydides himself. But I cannot think that we are here driven
to such a necessity; for the construction of Didot and Goller, though Dr.
Arnold pronounces it “a most undoubted error,” appears to me perfectly
admissible. They maintain that ai dto pocpa? does not of necessity mean
two parts out of three: in Thucydid. i, 10, we find xairos TleAorovygcov ron
mévre Tag dbo poipda¢ véuovrat, where the words mean two parts out of five
Now in the passage before us, we have vais pév ye &¢ rac rerpaxociac dAiyy
éAaooove Tév dvo poipGv: and Didot and Gdller contend, that in the word
rerpaxooia¢g is implied a quaternary division of the whole number, — four
hundreds or hundredth parts: so that the whole meaning would be —“ To
the aggregate four hundreds of ships we contributed something less than
two.” The word retpaxooiac, equivalent to réooapag éxarovradaz, naturally
includes the general idea of réocapag poipag: and this would bring the
passage into exact analogy with the one cited above, — ray mévre rag dio
potpac. With every respect to the judgment of Dr. Arnold on an author
whom he had so long studied, I cannot enter into the grounds on which he
has pronounced this interpretation of Didot and Gdoller to be “an un-
doubted error.” It has the advantage of bringing the assertion of the
orator in Thucydides into harmony with Herodotus, who states the Athe-
nians to have furnished one hundred and eighty ships at Salamis.

Wherever such harmony can be secured by an admissible construction
of existing words, it is an unquestionable advantage, afd ought to count as
a reason in the case, if there be a doubt between two admissible construc-
tions. But on the other hand, I protest against altering numerical state-
ments in one author, simply in order to bring him into accordance with
another, and without some substantive ground in the text itself. Thus,
for example, in this very passage of Thucydides, Bloomfield and Poppo
propose to alter retpaxociac into tptaxoaiac, in order that Thucydides may
be in harmony with Aschylus and other authors, though not with Herod-

BATTLE OF SALAMIS..-RETREAT OF XERXES. 113

serted country, his ficet occupying the roadstead of Phalérum
with the coast adjoining. His land-force had been put in motion
under the guidance of the Thessalians, two or three days after
the battle of. Thermopyle, and he was assured by some Arca-
dians who came to seek service, that the Peloponnesians were,
even at that moment, occupied with the celebration of the Olym-
pic games. “ What prize does the victor receive?” he asked.
Upon the reply made, that the prize was a wreath of the wild
olive, Tritanteechmés, son of the monarch’s uncle Artabanus, is
said to have burst forth, notwithstanding the displeasure both of
the monarch himself and of the bystanders: “ Heavens, Mar-
donius, what manner of men are these against whom thou hast
brought us to fight! men who contend not for money, but for
honor !”! Whether this be a remark really delivered, or a dra-
matic illustration imagined by some contemporary of Herodotus,
it is not the less interesting as bringing to view a characteristic
of Hellenic life, which contrasts not merely with the manners of
contemporary Orientals, but even with those of the earlier Greeks
themselves during the Homeric times.

Among all the various Greeks between Thermopyle and the
borders of Attica, there were none except the Phocians disposed
to refuse submission: and they refused only because the para-
mount influence of their bitter enemies the Thessalians made
them despair of obtaining favorable terms.2 Nor would they
even listen to a proposition of the Thessalians, who, boasting
that it was in their power to guide as they pleased the terrors of
the Persian host, offered to insure lenient treatment to the terri-
tory of Phocis, provided a sum of fifty talents were paid to
them.3 The proposition being indignantly refused, they con-
ducted Xerxes through the little territory of Doris, which medized
and escaped plunder, into the upper valley of the Kephisus,

otus; while Didot and Goller would alter rpcexociwy into retpaxociwy in
Demosthenes de Corona (c. 70), in order that Demosthenes may be in har-
mony with Thucydides. Such emendations appear to me inadmissible in
principle: we are not to force different witnesses into harmony by retouch:
ing their statements.

1 Herodot. viii, 26. Ilawai, Mapdévte, xoiove éx’ Gvdpac ayayes paxnoopes
vou nuéac, of ob wept ypnuaTuy Toy dya@va TotedvTat, GAAQ wept apETHC.

? Herodot. viii, 30. 3 Herodot. viii. 28, 29.

VOL. V. 8ac.

2

114 HISTORY OF GREECE.

among the towns of the inflexible Phocians. All of them were
found deserted ; the inhabitants having previously escaped either
to the wide-spreading summit of Parnassus, called Tithorea, or
even still farther, across that mountain into the territory of the
Ozolian Lokrians. Ten or a dozen small Phocian towns, the
most considerable of which were Elateia and Hyampolis, were
sacked and destroyed by the invaders, nor was the holy temple
and oracle of Apollo at Abz better treated than the rest: all its
treasures were pillaged, and it was then burnt. From Panopeus
Xerxes detached a body of men to plunder Delphi, marching
with his main army through Beeotia, in which country he found
all the towns submissive and willing, except Thespise and Platzxa:
both were deserted by their citizens, and both were now burnt.
From hence he conducted his army into the abandoned territory
of Attica, reaching without resistance the foot of the acropolis at
Athens.!

Very different was the fate of that division which he had de-
tached from Panopeus against Delphi: Apollo defended his
temple here more vigorously than at Abe. The cupidity of the
Persian king was stimulated by accounts of the boundless wealth
accumulated at Delphi, especially the profuse donations of Croesus.
The Delphians, in the extreme of alarm, while they sought safety
for themselves on the heights of Parnassus, and for their families
by transport across the gulf into Achaia, consulted the oracle
whether they should carry away or bury the sacred treasures.
Apollo directed them to leave the treasures untouched, saying
that he was competent himself.to take care of his own property.
Sixty Delphians alone ventured to remain, together with Akéra-
tus, the religious superior: but evidences of superhuman aid
soon appeared to encourage them. The sacred arms suspended
in the interior cell, which no mortal hand was ever permitted to
touch, were seen lying before the door of the temple ; and when
the Persians, marching along the road called Schisté, up that
rugged path under the steep cliffs of Parnassus which conducts
to Delphi, had reached the temple of Athéné Proncea,—on a
sudden, dreadful thunder was heard, — two vast mountain crags
detached themselves and rushed down with deafening noise

es cep A Gira me <i

' Herodot. viii, 32-34.

BATTLE OF SALAMIS.— RETREAT OF XERXES. 115

among them, crushing many to death, —the war-shout was also
heard from the interior of the temple of Athéné. Seized with a
panic terror, the invaders turned round and fled; pursued not
only by the Delphians, but also, as they themselves affirmed, by
two armed warriors of superhuman stature and destructive arm.
The triumphant Delphians confirmed this report, adding that the
two auxiliaries were the heroes Phylakus and Autonoiis, whose
sacred precincts were close adjoining: and Herodotus himself
when he visited Delphi, saw in the sacred ground of Athéné the
identical masses of rock which had overwhelmed the Persians.!
Thus did the god repel these invaders from his Delphian sane-
tuary and treasures, which remained inviolate until one hundred
and thirty years afterwards, when they were rifled by the sacri-
legious hands of the Phocian Philomélus. On this occasion, as
will be seen presently, the real protectors of the treasures were,
the conquerors at Salamis and Platea.

Four months had elapsed since the departure from Asia when
Xerxes reached Athens, the last term of his advance. He
brought with him the members of the Peisistratid family, who
doubtless thought their restoration already certain, — and a few
Athenian exiles attached to their interest. Though the country
was altogether deserted, the handful of men collected in the
acropolis ventured to defy him: nor could all the persuasions of

' Herodot. viii, 38, 89; Diodor. xi, 14; Pausan. x, 8, 4.

Compare the account given in Pausanias (x, 23) of tho subsequent re-
pulse of Brennus and the Gauls from Delphi: in his account, the repulse is
not so exclusively the work of the gods as in that of Herodotus: there is a
larger force of human combatants in defence of the temple, though greatly
assisted by divine intervention: there is also loss on both sides. A similar
descent of crags from the summit is mentioned.

See for the description of the road by which the Persians marched, and
the extreme term of their progress, Ulrichs, Reisen und Forschungen in
Griechenland, ch. iv, p. 46; ch. x, p. 146.

Many great blocks of stone and cliff are still to be seen near the spot,
which have rolled down from the top, and which remind the traveller of
these passages.

The attack here described to have been made by order of Xerxes upon .
the Delphian temple, seems not easy to reconcile with the words of Mar.
donius, Herodot. ix, 42: still less can it be reconciled with the statement
of Plutarch (Numa, c. 9), who says that the Delphian temple was burnt by

the Medes,

116 HISTORY OF GREECE.

the Peisistratids, eager to preserve the holy place from pillage,
induce them to surrender.! The Athenian acropolis, — a craggy
rock rising abruptly about one hundred and fifty feet, with a flat
summit of about one thousand feet long from east to west, by
five hundred feet broad from north to south, — had no practica-
ble access except on the western side :? moreover, in all parts
where there seemed any possibility of climbing up, it was de-
fended by the ancient fortification called the Pelasgic -wall.
Obliged to take the place by force, the Persian army was posted
around the northern and western sides, and commenced their
operations from the eminence immediately adjoining on the
northwest, called Areopagus :° from whence they bombarded, if
we may venture upon the expression, with hot missiles, the wood-
work before the gates ; that is, they poured upon it multitudes of
arrows with burning tow attached to them. The wooden pali-
sades and boarding presently took fire and were consumed : but
when the Persians tried to mount to the assault by the western
road leading up to the gate, the undaunted little garrison still
kept them at bay, having provided vast stones, which they rolled
down upon them in the ascent. For a time the Great King
seemed likely to be driven to the slow process of blockade; but
ut length some adventurous men among the besiegers tried to
scale the precipitous rock before them on its northern side, hard
by the temple or chapel of Aglaurus, which lay nearly in front
of the Persian position, but behind the gates and the western
ascent. Here the rock was naturally so inaccessible, that it was

1 Herodot. viii, 52.

* Pausanias, i, 22,4; Kruse, Hellas, vol. ii, ch. vi, p. 76. Ernst Curtius
(Die Akropolis von Athens, p. 5, Berlin, 1844) says that the plateau of the
acropolis is rather less than four hundred feet higher than the town:
Fiedler states it to be one hundred and seventy-eight fathoms, or one thou-
sand and sixty-eight feet above the level of the sea (Reise durch das KGni-
greich Griechenland, i, p. 2); he gives the length and breadth of the
plateau in the same figures as Kruse, whose statement I have copied in the
text. In Colonel Leake’s valuable Topography of Athens, I do not find
any distinct stavement abont the height of the acropolis. We must under-
stand Kruse’s statement, if he and Curtius are both correct, to refer only
to the precipitous impracticable portion of the whole rock.

* Athenian legend represented the Amazons as having taken post on the

BATTLE OF SALAMIS.—RETREAT OF XERXES. . 117

altogether unguarded, and seemingly even unfortified :! more-
over, the attention of the little garrison was all concentrated on
the host which fronted the gates. Hence the separate escalad-
ing party was enabled to accomplish their object unobserved, and
to reach the summit in the rear of the garrison ; who, deprived
of their last hope, either cast themselves headlong from the
walls, or fled for safety to the inner temple. The successful
escaladers opened the gates to the entire Persian host, and the
whole acropolis was presently in their hands. Its defenders
were slain, its temples pillaged, and all its dwellings and build-
ings, sacred as well as profane, consigned te the flames.2 The
citadel of Athens felt into the hands of Xerxes by a surprise,
very much the same as that which had placed Sardis in those of
Cyrus.3

Thus was divine prophecy fulfilled: Attica passed entirely
into the hands of the Persians, and the conflagration of Sardis
was retaliated upon the home and citadel of its captors, as it
also was upon their sacred temple of Eleusis. Xerxes immedi-
ately despatched to Susa intelligence of the fact, which is said to
have excited unmeasured demonstrations of joy, confuting, seem-

Areopagus, and fortified it as a means of attacking the acropolis, — avre-
nopywoay (Aschyl. Eumenid. 638). .

1 Herodot. viii, 52, 53. ...... Eurpoote Ov mpd THe axpordAtoc, SricVe
62 Trav ridewy cal tie dvédov, TZ 67 obre Tig EpbAacze, obr’ Gv FACE KA
coré Tic KaTa TatTa avaBain av0porwr, ratty dvéByoay rive Kata 7d [pov
ring Kéxpowog Ovyarpog ’AyAatpov, xairorrep droxpnyvov edvTog Tov Xapov.

That the Aglaurion was on the north side of the acropolis, appears
clearly made out; see Leake, Topography of Athens, ch. v, p. 261; Kruse,
Hellas, vol. ii, ch. vi, p. 119; Forchhammer, Topographie Athens, pp. 365,
366; in Kieler Philologischen Studien, 1841. Siebelis (in the Plan of
Athens prefixed to his edition of Pausanias, and in his note on Pausa-
nias, i, 18, 2) places the Aglaurion erroneously on the eastern side of the
acropolis.

The expressions Eumpoo’e mpd Tij¢ axpondAtog appear to refer to the posi-
tion of the Persian army, who.would naturally occupy the northern and
western fronts of the acropolis: since they reached Athens from the north,
—and the western side furnished the only regular access. The hill called
Areopagus would thus be nearly in the centre of their position. Forch
hammer explains these expressions unsatisfactorily.

* Herodot. viii, 52, 53. 3 Herodot. i, 84.

118 HISTORY OF GREECE.

ingly, the gloomy predictions of his uncle Artabanus.! On the
next day but one, the Athenian exiles in his suite received his
orders, or perhaps obtained his permission, to go and offer sacri-
fice amidst the ruins of the acropolis, and atone, if possible, for
the desecration of the ground: they discovered that the sacred
olive-tree near the chapel of Erechtheus, the special gift of the
goddess Athéné, though burnt to the ground by the recent flames,
had already thrown out a fresh shoot of one cubit long, —at
least the piety of restored Athens afterwards believed this en-
couraging portent,? as well as that which was said to have been
seen by Diksus, an Athenian companion of the Peisistratids, in
the Thriasian plain. It was now the day set apart for the cele-
bration of the Eleusinian mysteries; and though in this sorrow-
ful year there was no celebration, nor any Athenians in the ter
ritory, Dikseus still fancied that he beheld the dust and heard the
loud multitudinous chant, which was wont to accompany in ordi-
nary times the processional march from Athens to Eleusis. He
would even have revealed the fact to Xerxes himself, had not
Demaratus deterred him from doing so: but he as well as He
rodotus construed it as an evidence that the goddesses them-
selves were passing over from Eleusis to help the Athenians
at Salamis. But whatever may have been received in after
times, on that day certainly no man could believe in the speedy
resurrection of conquered Athens as a free city: not even if he
had witnessed the portent of the burnt olive-tree suddenly sprout-
ing afresh with preternatural vigor. So hopeless did the circum-
stances of the Athenians then appear, not less to their confeder-
ates assembled at Salamis than to the victorious Persians.

About the time of the capture of the acropolis, the Persian
fleet also arrived safely in the bay of Phalérum, reinforced by
ships from Karystus as well as from various islands of the
Cyclades, so that Herodotus reckons it to have been as strong
as before the terrible storm at Sépias Akté,—an estimate cer-
tainly not admissible.

1 Herodot. v, 102; viii, 58-99; ix, 65. édee yap xara 1d Seorpomior
maoay THY 'ATTiKny Thy bv TH hreipy yevéodas Umd Tépoyot.

* Herodot. viii, 55-65.

* Herodot. viii, 66. Colonel Leake observes upon this statement (Athens

BATTLE OF SALAMIS.— RETREAT OF XERXES. 119

Soon after their arrival, Xerxes himself descended to the shore
to inspeet the fleet, as well as to take counsel with the various
naval leaders about the expediency of attacking the hostile fleet,
now so near him in the narrow strait between Salamis and the
coasts of Attica. He invited them all to take their seats in an
assembly, wherein the king of Sidon occupied the first place and
the king of Tyre the second. The question was put to each of
them separately by Mardonius, and when we learn that all pro-
nounced in favor of immediate fighting, we may be satisfied that
the decided opinion of Xerxes himself must have been well
known to them beforehand. One exception alone was found to
this unanimity, — Artemisia, queen of Halikarnassus in Karia ;
into whose mouth Herodotus puts a speech of some length,
deprecating all idea of fighting in the narrow strait of Salamis,
— predicting that if the land-force were moved forward to attack -
Peloponnesus, the Peloponnesians in the fleet at Salamis would
return for the protection of their own homes, and thus the fleet
would disperse, the rather as there was little or no food in the
island, -— and intimating, besides, unmeasured contempt for the
efficacy of the Persian fleet and seamen as compared with the
Greek, as well as for the subject contingents of Xerxes gener-
ally. That queen Artemisia gave this prudent counsel, there is
no reason to question ; and the historian of Halikarnassus may
have had means of hearing the grounds on which her opinion
rested: but I find a difficulty in believing that she can have pub-
licly delivered any such estimate of the maritime subjects of
Persia, —an estimate not merely insulting to all who heard it,
but at the time not just, though it had come to be nearer the
truth at the time when Herodotus wrote,! and though Artemisia

and the Demi of Attica, App. vol. ii, p. 250), “ About one thousand ships is
the greatest accuracy we can pretend to, in stating the strength of the Per-
sian fleet at Salamis: and from these are to be deducted, in estimating the
number of ships engaged in the battle, those which were sent to occupy the
Megaric strait of Salamis, two hundred in number.”

The estimate of Colonel Leake appears somewhat lower than the proba
ble reality. Nor do I believe the statement of Diodorus, that ships were
detached to occupy the Megaric strait: see a note shortly following.

? The picture drawn in the Cyropedia of Xenophon represents the sub
jects of Persia as spiritless and untrained to war (4vaAxcde¢ xal dotytaxros)

120 HISTORY OF GREECE.

herself may have lived to entertain the conviction afterwards
Whatever may have been her reasons, the historian. tells us that
friends as well as rivals were astonished at her rashness in dis-
suading the monarch from a naval battle, and expected that she
would be put to death. But Xerxes heard the advice with per-
fect good temper, and cven esteemed the Karian queen the more
highly: though he resolved that the opinion of the majority, or
his own opinion, should be acted upon: and orders were accord-
ingly issued for attacking the next day,! while the land-force
should move forward towards Peloponnesus.

Whilst on the shore of Phalérum, an omnipotent will com
pelled seeming unanimity and precluded all real deliberation, —
great, indeed, was the contrast presented by the neighboring
Greek armament at Salamis, among the members of which
unmeasured dissension had been reigning. It has already been
stated that the Greek fleet had originally got together at that
island, not with any view of making it a n&val station, but sim-
ply in order to cover and assist the emigration of the Athenians.
This object being accomplished, and Xerxes being already in
Attica, Eurybiadés convoked the chiefs to consider what position
was the fittest for a naval engagement. Most of them, especially
those from Peloponnesus, were averse to remaining at Salamis,
and proposed that the fleet should be transferred to the isthmus
of Corinth, where it would be in immediate communication with
the Peloponnesian land-force, so that in case of defeat at sea, the
ships would find protection on shore, and the men would join in
the land service,— while if worsted in a naval action near
Salamis, they would be inclosed.in an island from whence there
were no hopes of escape.2 In the midst of the debate, a mes-
senger arrived with news of the capture and conflagration of
Athens and her acropolis by the Persians: and such was the
terror produced by this intelligence, that some of the chiefs,
‘without even awaiting the conclusion of the debate and the final
vote, quitted the council forthwith, and began to hoist sail, or
prepare their rowers, for departure. The majority came to 2
a ae ee ae eae ie LE ee CR eee ee
and even designedly kept so, forming a contrast to the native Persians

(Xenophon, Cyroped. viii, 1, 45). 7
2 Herodot. viii, €8, 69, 70. § Herodot. viii, 70.

BATTLE OF SALAMIS.— RETREAT OF XERXES. 121

vote for removing to the Isthmus, but as night was approaching,
actual removal was deferred until the next morning.!

Now was felt the want of a position like that of Thermopyle,
which had served as a protection to all the Greeks at once, so as
to check the growth of separate fears and interests. We can
hardly wonder that the Peloronnesian chiefs, — the Corinthian
in particular, who furnished so large a naval contingent, and
within whose territory the land-battle at the Isthmus seemed
about to take place, — should manifest such an obstinate reluc-
tance to fight at Salamis, and should insist on removing to a
position where, in case of naval defeat, they could assist, and be
assisted by, their own soldiers on land. On the other hand,
Salamis was not only the most favorable position, in consequence
of its narrow strait, for the inferior numbers of the Greeks, but
could not. be abandoned without breaking up the unity of the
allied fleet ; since Megara and A®gina would thus be left uncov-
ered, and the contimgents of each would immediately retire for
the defence of their own homes, — while the Athenians also, a
large portion of whose expatriated families were in Salamis and
Aégina, would be in like manner distracted from combined mari-
time efforts at the Isthmus. If transferred to the latter place,
probably not even the Peloponnesians themselves would have
remained in one body; for the squadrons of Epidaurus, Treezen,
Hermioné, etc., each fearing that the Persian fleet might make a
descent on one or other of these separate ports, would go home
to repel such a contingency, in spite of the efforts of Eurybiadés
to keep them together. Hence the order for quitting Salamis

and repairing to the Isthmus was nothing less than a sentence of

extinction for all combined maritime defence ; and it thus became

doubly abhorrent to all those who, like the Athenians, Agine-

tans, and Megarians, were also led by their own separate safety

to cling to the defence of Salamis. In spite of all such opposi-
. tion, however, and in spite of the protest of Themistoklés, the
obstinate determination of the Peloponnesian leaders carried the
vote for retreat, and each of them went to his ship to prepare fou
it on the following morning.

When Themistoklés returned to his ship, with the gloom of

‘ Herodot. viii, 49, 59, 56:
VOL. V. 6

123 HISTORY OF GREECE.

this melancholy resolution full upon his mind, and with the neces-
sity of providing for removal of the expatriated Athenian fami-
lies in the island as well as for that of the squadron, — he found
an Athenian friend named Mnésiphilus, who asked him what the
synod of chiefs had determined. Concerning this Mnésiphilus,
who is mentioned generally as a sagacious practical politician, we
unfortunately have no particulars: but it must have been no
common man whom fame selected, truly or falsely, as the inspir-
ing genius of Themistoklés. On learning what had been resolved,
Mnésiphilus burst out into remonstrance on the utter ruin which
its execution would entail: there would presently be neither any
- united fleet to fight, nor any aggregate cause and country to fight
for. He vehemently urged Themistoklés again to open the
question, and to press by every means in his power for a recall
of the vote for retreat, as well as for a resolution to stay and
fight at Salamis. Themistoklés had already in vain tried to
enforce the same view: but disheartened as he was by ill-success,
the remonstrances of a respected friend struck him so forcibly as
to induce him to renew his efforts. He went instantly to the
ship of Eurybiadés, asked permission to speak with him, and
being invited aboard, reopened with him alone the whole subject
of the past discussion, enforcing his own views as emphatically
as he could. In this private communication, all the arguments
bearing upon the case were more unsparingly laid open than it
had been possible to do in an assembly of the chiefs, who would
have been insulted if openly told that they were likely to desert
the fleet when once removed from Salamis. Speaking thus
freely and confidentially, and speaking to Eurybiadés alone,
Themistoklés was enabled to bring him partially round, and even
prevailed upon him to convene a fresh synod. So soon as this
synod had assembled, even before Eurybiadés had explained the
object and formally opened the discussion, Themistoklés addressed
himself to each of the chiefs separately, pouring forth at large _
his fears and anxiety as to the abandonment of Salamis: inso-
much that the Corinthian Adeimantus rebuked him by saying

 Herodot. viii, 57. Ovros dpa fv araipwot rac vgag ard Ladapivor, rep
obdepuing Ett warpidog vavpaxjoec* Kata yap wodug Exagrot tpépovrat, cte
Compare vii, 189, and Thucyd. i, 78. _

BATTLE OF SALAMIS.— RETREAT OF XERXES. 123

“‘ Themistoklés, those who in the public festival-matches rise up
before the proper signal, are scourged.” “True, (rejoined the
Athenian), but those who lag behind the signal win no crowns.”!
PPS g Se eg PG ee oe eg ee eg ee ee ee
1 Herodot. viii, 58, 59. The account given by Herodotus, of these mem
orable debates which preceded the battle of Salamis, is in the main distinct,
instructive, and consistent. It is more probable than the narrative of
Diodorus (xi, 15, 16), who states that Themistoklés succeeded 10 fally
convincing beth Eurybiadés and the Peloponnesian chiefs of the propnety
of fighting at Salamis, but that, in spite of all their efforts, the armament
would not obey them, and insisted on going to the Isthmas. And it de-
serves our esteem still more, if we contrast it with the loose and careless
accounts of Plutarch and Cornelius Nepos. Plutarch (Thumist.c. 11) de-
scribes the scene as if Eurybiadés was the person who desired to restrain
the forwardness and oratory of Themistoklés, and with that view, first
made to him the observation given in my text out of Herodotus, which
Themistoklés followed up by the same answer, — next, lifted up his stick to
strike Themistoklés, upon which the latter addressed to him the well-known
observation, —“ Strike, but hear me,” (IIaragov piv, dxovoov dé.) Larcher
expresses his surprise that Herodotus should have suppressed so impressive an
anecdote as this latter: but we may see plainly from the tenor of his
narrative that he cannot have heard it. In the narrative of Herodotus,
Themistoklés gives no offence to Eurytiadés, nor is the latter at all dis-
pleased with him: nay, Eurybiadés is even brought over by the persuasion
of Themistoklés, and disposed to fall in with his views. The persons whom
Herodotus represents as angry with Themistoklés, are the Peloponnesian
chiefs, especially Adeimantus the Corinthian. They are angry too, let it
be added, not without plausible reason : a formal vote has just been taken
by the majority, after full discussion; and here is the chief of the minority,
who persuades Eurybiadés to reopen the whole debate : not an unreasonable
cause for displeasure. Moreover, it is Adeimantus, not Eurybiadés, who
addresses to Themistoklés the remark, that “ persons who rise before the
proper signal are scourged :” and he makes the remark because Themisto-
klés goes on speaking to, and trying to persuade, the various chiefs, before
the business of the assembly has been formally opened. Themistoklés
draws upon himself the censure by stuning against the forms of business,
and talking before the proper time. But Plutarch puts the remark intc
.the mouth of Eurybiadés, without any previous circumstance to justify it.
and without any fitness. Hisnarrative represents Eurybiadés as the person
who was anxious both to transfer the ships to the Isthmus, and to prevent
Themistoklés from offering any opposition to it: though such an attempt
to check argumentative opposition from the commander of the Athenian
squadron is noway credible.
Dr. Blomfield (ad Eschyl. Pers. 728) imagines that the story about
Enrybiadés threatening Themistoklés with hig stick, grew out of the story

194 HISTORY OF GREECE.

Eurybiadés then explained to the synod that doubts had arisen
in his mind, and that he called them together to reconsider the
previous resolve: upon which Themistoklés began the debate,
and vehemently enforced the necessity of fighting in the narrow
sea of Salamis and not in the open waters at the Isthmus, — as
_ well as of preserving Megara and AX®gina: contending that a naval
victory at Salamis would be not less effective for the defence of
Peloponnesus than if it took place at the Isthmus, whereas, if the
fleet were withdrawn to the latter point, they would only draw
the Persians after them. Nor did he omit to add, that the
Athenians had a prophecy assuring to them victory in this, their
own island. But his speech made little impression’ on the Pelo-
ponnesian chiefs, who were even exasperated at being again sum-
moned to reopen a debate already concluded,— and concluded
in a way which they deemed essential to their safety. In the
bosom of the Corinthian Adeimantus, especially, this feeling of
anger burst all bounds. He sharply denounced the presumption
of Themistoklés, and bade him be silent as a man who had now
no free Grecian city to represent, — Athens being in the power
of the enemy: nay, he went so far as to contend that Eurybi-
adés had no right to count the vote of Themistoklés, until the
latter could produce some free city as accrediting him to the
synod. Such an attack, alike ungenerous and insane, upon the

leader of more than half of the whole fleet, demonstrates the
ungovernable impatience of the Corinthians to carry away the
‘ fleet to their Isthmus: it provoked a bitter retort against them
from Themistoklés, who reminded them that while he had
around him two hundred well-manned ships, he could procure for
himself anywhere both city and territory as good or better than
Corinth. But he now saw clearly that it was hopeless to think
of enforcing his policy by argument, and that nothing would suc-
ceed except the direct language of intimidation. Turning to
Eurybiadés, and addressing him personally, he said: “If thou
wilt stay here, and fight bravely here, all will turn out well: but

as related in Herodotus, though to Herodotus himself it was unknown.
cannot think that this is correct, since the story will not fit on to the narra-
tive of that historian: it does not consist with his conception of the rcla-
tions between Eurybiadés and Themistoklés.

BATTLE OF SALAMIS.— RETREAT OF XERXES. 125

if thou wilt not stay, thou wilt bring Hellas to ruin.1 For with
us, all our means of war are contained in our ships. Be thou
yet perstiaded by me. If not, we Athenians shall migrate with
our families on board, just as we are, to Siris in Italy, which is
ours from of old, and which the prophecies announce that we are
one day to colonize. You chiefs then, when bereft of allies like
us, will hereafter recollect what I am now saying.”

Eurybiadés had before been nearly convinced by the impres-
sive pleading of Themistoklés. But this last downright menace
clenched his determination, and probably struck dumb even the
Corinthian and Peloponnesian opponents: for it was but too
plain, that. without the Athenians the fleet was powerless. He
did not however put the question again to vote, but took upon
himself to rescind the previous resolution and to issue orders for
staying at Salamis to fight. In this order all acquiesced, willing
or unwilling ;? the succeeding dawn saw them preparing for fight
instead of for retreat, and invoking the protection and compan-
ionship of the Aakid heroes of Salamis, — Telamon and Ajax:
they even sent a trireme to Hgina to implore Aakus himself
and the remaining akids. It seems to have been on this same
day, also, that the resolution of fighting at Salamis was taken by
Xerxes, whose fleet was seen in motion, towards the close of the
day, preparing for attack the next morning.

But the Peloponnesians, though not venturing to disobey the
orders of the Spartan admiral, still retained unabated their for-
mer fears and reluctance, which began again after a short interval
to prevail over the formidable menace of Themistoklés, and were
further strengthened by the advices from the Isthmus. The
messengers from that quarter depicted the trepidation and af-
fright of their absent brethren while constructing their cross wall
at that point, to resist the impending land invasion. Why were

' Herodot. viii, 61, 62. 2d el wevéerg abrod, xat pévov Ecear dvip dyadéc:
el 68 2}, dvarpépets riv “EAAGda.

All the best commentators treat this as an elliptical phrase, — some such
words as owoetg tiv ‘EAAada or xadde Gv Eyot, being understood after
dyadéc. I adopt their construction, not without doubts whether it be the
true one

7 Herodot. viii, 64. Obrw piv obs rept Zahauiva, Erect GxpoBadiaauevos
drei re EipyBiads bdoke, abrod tapeoxevélovro Oe vavuayjoorres.

126 HISTORY OF GREECE.

they not there also, to join hands and to help in the defence, —
even if worsted at sea, —at least on land, instead of wasting
their efforts in defence of Attica, already in the hands of the
enemy? Such were the complaints which passed from man to
man, with many a bitter exclamation against the insanity of
Eurybiadés: at length the common feeling broke out in public
and mutinous manifestation, and a fresh synod of the chiefs was
demanded and convoked.!_ Here the same angry debate, and the
same irreconcilable difference, was again renewed; the Pelo-
ponnesian chiefs clamoring for immediate departure, while the
Athenians, A‘ginetans,? and Megarians, were equally urgent, in
favor of staying to fight. It was evident to Themistoklés that
the majority of votes among the chiefs would be against him, in
apite of the orders of Eurybiadés; and the disastrous crisis,
destined to deprive Greece of all united maritime defence, ap-
peared imminent,— when he resorted to one last stratagem to
meet the desperate emergency, by rendering flight impossible.
Contriving a pretext for stealing away from the synod, he de
spatched a trusty messenger across the strait with a secret coir
munication to the Persian generals. Sikinnus his slave, — seem-
ingly an Asiatic Greek,3 who understood Persian, and had perhaps
been sold during the late Ionic revolt, but whose superior qual-
ities are marked by the fact that he had the care and teaching of
the children of his master,— was instructed to acquaint them
privately, in the name of Themistoklés, who was represented as
wishing success at heart to the Persians, that the Greek fleet

1 Herodot. viii, 74. Ewe piv b7 abrav dvip dvdpi rapicraro, Séuua mosed-
evar Ti Ebpupiidew aBovainu: rédog d2, seppicyn be Td péoov, CbAAOYOE TE
67) éyivero, kal woAAd édéyero mepi Tov abroy, etc. Compare Plutarch,
Themist. c. 12.

* Lykurgus (cont. Leokrat. c. 17, p. 185) numbers the Aginctans among
those who were anxious to escape from Salamis during the night, and
were only prevented from doing so by the stratagem of Themistoklés.
This is-a great mistake, as indeed these orators are perpetually miscon-
eciving the facts of their past history. The 2@ginetans had an interest not
less strong than the Athenians in keeping the fleet together and fighting at
Salamis.

* Plutarch (Themistoklés, c. 12) calls Sikinnus a Persian by birth, which
cannot be true. ~

BATTLE OF SALAMIS.— RETREAT OF XERXES. 127

was not only in the utmost alarm, meditating immediate flight, but
that the various portions of it were in such violent dissension,
that they were more likely to fight against each other than against
any common enemy. A splendid opportunity, it was added, was
thus opened to the Persians, if they chose to avail themselves of
it without delay, first, to inclose and prevent their flight, and
then to attack a disunited body, many of whom would, when the
combat began, openly espouse the Persian cause.!

Such was the important communication despatched by The
mistoklés across the narrow strait, only a quarter of a mile in
breadth at the narrowest part, which divides Salamis from the
neighboring continent on which the enemy were posted. It was
delivered with so much address as to produce the exact impres-
sion which he intended, and the glorious success which followed
caused it to pass for a splendid stratagem: had defeat ensued,
his name would have been covered with infamy. What surprises
us the most is, that after having reaped signal honor from it in
the eyes of the Greeks, as a stratagem, he lived to take credit for
it, during the exile of his latter days,? as a capital service ren-
dered to the Persian monarch: nor is it improbable, when we
reflect upon the desperate condition of Grecian affairs at the mo-
ment, that such facility, of double interpretation was in purt his
inducement for sending the message.

It appears to have been delivered to Kerxes shortly after he
had issued his orders for fighting on the next morning: and he
entered so greedily into the scheme, as to direct his generals to
Close up the strait of Salamis on both sides during the night,3 to

‘ Herodot. viii, 75.

* Thacydid. i, 137. It ia curious to contrast this with Aschylus, Perse,
R51, seg. See also Herodot. viii, 109, 110.

Isokratés might well remark about the ultimate rewards given by the
Persians to Themistoklés, — OenuioroxAed 0°, d¢ trip rig 'EAAGdo¢ abrode
Karevaveaynoe, TOY peyiotay dupéwy hEtooayv (Panegyric, Or. iv, p. 74); —
though that orator speaks as if he knew nothing about the stratagem by
which Themistoklés compelled the Gretks to fight at Salamis against their
will. See the same Oration, c. 27, p. 61.

3 Aschylus, Persse, 370.

Herodotus does not mention this threat to the generals, nor does he even
notice the personal interference of Xerxes in any way, so far as regards the
night-movement of the Persian fleet. He treats the communication of

128 HISTOBY OF GREECE.

the north as well as to the south of the town of Salamis, at tho
rsk of their heads if any opening were left for the Greeks to
escape. ‘The station of the numerous Persian fleet was along
the coast of Attica, — its head-quarters were in the bay of Pha-
lérum, but doubtless parts of it would occupy those three natural
harbors, as yet unimproved by art, which belonged'to the deme
of Peirseus, —and would perhaps extend besides to other por-
tions of the western coast southward of Phalérum: while the
Greek fleet was in the harbor of the town called Salamis, in the
portion of the island facing mount Aégaleos, in Attica. During
the night,! a portion of the Persian fleet, sailing from Peireus
northward along the western coast of Attica, closed round to the
north of the town and harbor of Salamis, se as to shut up the
northern issue from the strait on the side of Eleusis: while
another portion blocked up the other issue between Peirsus and
the southeastern corner of the island, landing a detachment of
troops on the desert island of Psyttaleia, near to that corner?

Sikinnus as having been made to the Persian generals, and the night-move
ment as undertaken by them. The statement of the contemporary poet
seems the more probable of the two: but he omits, as might be expected,
all notice of the perilous dissensions in the Greek camp.

1 Diodorus (xi, 17) states that the Egyptian squadron im the fleet of
Xerxes was detached to block up the outlet between Salamis and the
Megarid ; that is, to sail round the southwestern corner of the island to
the northwestern strait, where the northwestern corner of the island is
separated by a narrow strait from Megara, near the spot where the fort of
Budorum was afterwards situated, during the Peloponnesian war.

Herodotus mentions nothing of this movement, and his account evi-
dently implies that the Greek fleet was inclosed to the north of the town of
Salamis, the Persian right wing having got between that town and Eleusis.
The movefnent announced by Diodorus appears to me unnecessary and
improbable. If the Egyptian squadron had been placed there, they would
have been far indeed removed from the scene of the action, but we may see
that Herodotus believed them to have taken actual part in the battle along
with the rest (viii, 100).

* Herodot. viii, 76. Totor 6? d¢ mora byivero Ta ayyeASévra, rovro per,
be rv vyoida ri Furraiecav, perafd) Ladapivors re xetpévynv xai rie Hrreipor,
ToAAove T3y pEpeeee dreBiBacay- rotro 82, éretda tyivovro pécat vOKTE,
dvizyov pév Td an’ éarépyc xépag kukAobuevos mpd¢ THY Zarcpive : aviyov 0
of aug? riv Kéov re xal riyv Kuvécovpay reraypévot, xareixév re expt
Movvvying ravra trav rop0uav rHot vRbol.

BATTLE OF SALAMIS.—RETREAT OF XERXES. 129

These measures were all taken during the night, to prevent the
anticipated flight of the Greeks, and then to attack them in
the narrow strait close on their own’ harbor the next morning.

He had previously stated Phalérum as the main station of the Persiar
fleet ; not necessarily meaning that the whole of it was there. The pas.
sage which I have just transcribed intimated what the Persians did to ac
complish their purpose of surrounding the Greeks in the harbor of Salamis
and the first part of it, wherein he speaks of the western (more properly
northwestern) wing, presents no extraordinary difficulty, though we do
not know how far the western wing extended before the movement was
commenced. Probably it extended to the harbor of Peirsus, and began
from thence its night-movement along the Attic coast to get beyond the
town of -Salamis. But the second part of the passage is not easy to com-
prehend, where he states that, “those who were stationed about, Keos and
Kynosura also moved, and beset with their ships the whole strait as far as
Maunychia.” What places are Keos and Kynosura, and where were they sit-
uated ? The only known places of those names, are the island of Keos, not far
south of cape Sunium in Attica,— and the promontory Kynosura, on the
northeastern coast of Attica, immediately north of the bay of Marathon.
It seems hardly possible to suppose that Herodotus meant this latter prom-
ontory, which would be too distant to render the movement which he de-
scribes at all practicable: even the island of Keos is somewhat open to the
same objection, though not in so great a degree, of being too distant.
Hence Barthélemy, Kruse, Bahr, and Dr. Thirlwall, apply the names
Keos and Kynosura to two promontories (the southernmost and the south-
easternmost) of the island of Salamis, and Kiepert has realized their idea
in his newly published maps. But in the first place, no authority is pro-
duced for giving these names to two promontories in the island, and the
critics only do it because they say it is necessary to secure a reasonable
meaning to this passage of Herodotus. In the next place, if we admit their
supposition, we must suppose that, before this night-movement commenced, the
Persian fleet was already stationed in part off the island of Salamis: which
appears to me highly improbable. Whatever station that fleet occupied
before the night-movement, we may be very sure that it was not upon an
island then possessed by the enemy: it was somewhere on the coast of
Attica: and the names Keos and Kynosura must belong to some unknown
points in Attica, not in Salamis. I cannot therefore adopt the supposition
of these critics, though on the other hand Larcher is not satisfactory in his
attempt to remove the objections which apply to the supposition of Keos
and Kynosura as commonly understood. It is difficult in this case to
reconcile the statement of Herodotus with geographical considerations, and
I rather suspect that on this occasion the historian has been himself misled
by too great a desire to find the oracle of Bakis truly fulfilled. It is from
Bakis that he copies the name Kynosura (viii, 77).
VOL. V. 6* Poe.

180 HISTORY OF GREECE.

Meanwhile, that angry controversy among the Grecian chiefs,
in the midst of which Themistoklés had sent over his secret
envoy, continued without abatement and without decision. It
was the interest of the Athenian general to prolong the debate,
and to prevent any concluding vote until the effect of his strata-
gem should have rendered retreat impossible : nor was prolonga-
tion difficult in a case so critical, where the majority of chiefs
. was on one side and that of naval force on the other, — especially
as Eurybiadés himself was favorable to the view of Themis-
toklés. Accordingly, the debate was still unfinished at nightfall,
and either continued all night, or was adjourned to an hour before
daybreak on the following morning, when an incident, interesting
as well as important, gave to ita new turn. The ostracized
Aristeidés arrived at Salamis from A¢gina. Since the revocation
of his sentence, proposed by Themistoklés himself, he had had
no opportunity of revisiting Athens, and he now for the first time
rejoined his countrymen in their exile at Salamis ; not uninformed
of the dissensions raging, and of the impatience of the Pelopon-
nesians to retire to the Isthmus. He was the first to bring the
news that such retirement had become impracticable from the
position of the Persian fleet, which his own vessel, in coming
from Aégina, had only eluded under favor of night. He caused
Themistoklés to be invited out from the assembled synod of
chiefs, and after a generous exordium, wherein he expressed his
hope that their rivalry would for the future be only a competition
in doing good to their common country, apprized him that the
new movement of the Persians excluded all hope of now reaching
the Isthmus and rendered farther debate useless. ‘Themistokiés
expressed his joy at the intelligence, and communicated his own
secret message whereby he had himself brought the movement
about, in order that the Peloponnesian chiefs might be forced to
fight at Salamis, even against their own consent. He moreover
desired Aristeidés to go himself into the synod, and communicate
the news: for if it came from the lips of Themistoklés, the
Peloponnesians would treat it as a fabrication. So obstinate
indeed was their incredulity, that they refused to accept it as
truth even on the assertion of Aristeidés: nor was it until the
arrival of a Tenian vessel, deserting from the Persian fleet, that
they at last brought themselves to credit the actual posture of

BATTLE OF SALAMIS. —RETREAT OF XERXES. 181.

affairs and the entire impossibility of retreat. Once satisfied of
this fact, they prepared themselves at dawn for the impending
battle.t ,
Having caused his land-force to be drawn up along the shore
opposite to Salamis, Xerxes had erected for himself a lofty
seat, or throne, upon one of the projecting declivities of mount
4Egaleos, near the Herakleion and immediately overhanging the
sea,?—— from whence he could plainly review all the phases of
the combat and thé conduct of his subject troops. He was per-
suaded himself that they had not done their best at Artemisium,
in consequence of his absence, and that his presence would in-
spire them with fresh valor: moreover, his royal segjbes stood
ready by his side to take the names both of the brave and of the
backward combatants. On the right wing of his fleet, which
approached Salamis on the side of Eleusis, and was opposed to
the Athenians on the Grecian left,— were placed the Pheni-
cians and Egyptians; on his left wing the Ionians,? — approach-
ing from the side of Peirzus, and opposed to the Lacedemo-
nians, Aeginetans, and Megarians. The seamen of the Persian

1 Herodot. viii, 79, 80.

Herodotus states, doubtless correctly, that Aristeidés, immediately after
he had made the communication to the synod, went away, not pretending
to take part in the debate: Plutarch represents him as present, and as
taking part in it (Aristeidés, c.9). According to Plutarch, Themistoklés
desires Aristeidés to assist him in persuading Eurybiadés: according to
Herodotus, Eurybiadés was already persuaded: it was the Peloponnesian
chiefs who stood out.

The details of Herodotus will be found throughout both more credible
and more consistent than those of Plutarch and the later writers.

? Aeschylus, Pers. 473; Herodot. viii, 90. The throne with silver feet,
upon which Xerxes had sat, was long preserved in the acropolis of Athens,
— having been left at his retreat. Harpokration, ’Apyupdzoue digpog.

A writer, to whom Plutarch refers, — Akestodérus, — affirmed that the
seat of Xerxes was erected, net under mount Avgaleos, but much farther to
the northwest, on the borders of Attica and the Megarid, under the moun-
tains called Kerata (Plutarch, Themistoklés, 13). If this writer was ac-
quainted with the topography of Attica, we must suppose him to have
ascribed an astonishingly long sight to Xerxes: but we may probably take
the assertion as a sample of that carelessness in geography which marks so .
many ancient writers. Ktesias recognizes the ‘Hoaxdeiov (Persica, c. 26)

3 Hexodot. viii, 85 ; Diodor. xi, 16.

182 HISTORY OF GREECE.

fleet, however, had been on shipboard all night, ia making that
movement which had brought them into their actual position:
while the Greek seamen now began without previous fatigue,
fresh from the animated harangues of Themistoklés and the
other leaders: moreover, just as they were getting on board,
they were joined by the triremes which had been sent to gina
to bring to their aid Lakus, with the other Aakid heroes. Hon-
ored with this precious heroic aid, which tended so much to raise
the spirits of the Greeks, the A‘ginetan trireme now arrived
“just in time to take her post in the line, having eluded pursuit
from the intervening enemy.!

The Grgeks rowed forward from the shore to attack with the
usual psean, or war-shout, which was confidently returned by the
Persians; and the latter were the most forward of the two to
begin the fight: for the Greek seamen, on gradually nearing the
enemy, became at first disposed to hesitate, — and even backed
water for a space, so that some of them touched ground on their
own shore: until the retrograde movement was arrested by a
supernatural feminine figure hovering over them, who exclaimed
with a voice that rang through the whole fleet, — “ Ye worthies,
how much farther are ye going to back water?” The very cir-
culation of this fable attests the dubious courage of the Greeks
at the commencement of the battle.2 The brave Athenian cap-

1 Herodot. viii, 83; Plutarch (Themistoklés, c. 18; Aristeidés, c. 9; Pe-
lopidas, c. 21). Plutarch tells a story out of Phanias respecting an incident
in the moment before the action,which it is pleasing to find sufficient ground
for rejecting. Themistoklés, with the prophet Euphrantidés, was offering
sacrifice by the side of the admiral’s galley, when three beautiful youths,
nephews of Xerxes, were brought in prisoncrs. As the fire was just then
blazing brilliantly, and sneezing was heard from the right, the prophet en-
joined Themistoklés to offer these three prisoners as a propitiatory offering
to Dionysus Oméstés: which the clamor of the bystanders compelled him
to do against his will. This is what Plutarth states in his life of Themis
toklés ; in his life of Aristeidés, he affirms that these youths were brought
prisoffers from Psyttaleia, when Aristeidés attacked it at the beginning of the
action. Now Aristeidés did not attack Psyttaleia until the naval combat
was nearly cver, so that no prisoners can have been brought from thence at

* the commencenient of the action: there could therefore have been no Per
sian prisoners to sacrifice, and the story may be dismissed as a fiction.

® Herodot viii, 84. ¢aveicay 62 dtaxeAcboac8at, O2Te <a? dxav dxoiea

BATTLE OF SALAMIS.+ RETREAT OF XERXES. 183

tains Ameinias and Lykomédés (the former, brother of the poet
4Eschylus) were the first to obey either the feminine voice or the
inspirations of their own ardor: though according to the version
current at ‘gina, it was the A¢ginetan ship, the carrier of the
fEakid heroes, which first set this honorable example.! The
Naxian Demokritus was celebrated by Simonides as the third
ship in action. Ameinias, darting forth from the line, charged
with the beak of,his ship full against a Phenician, and the two
became entangled so that he could not again get clear: other
ships came in aid on both sides, and the action thus became gen-
eral. Herodotus, with his usual candor, tells us that he could
procure few details about the action, except as to what concerned
Artemisia, the queen of his own city: so that we know hardly
anything beyond the general facts. But it appears that, with
the exception of the Ionic Greeks, many of whom — apparently
@ greater number than Herodotus likes to acknowledge — were
lukewarm, and some even averse,? the subjects of Xerxes con-
ducted themselves generally with great bravery: Phenicians,
Cyprians, Kilikians, Egyptians, vied with the Persians and
Td Taw ‘EAAjvev orparéredov, dvedioacav mporepov rade 'Q datpdviot,
péexpe Kooov Ere rpipvay avaxpovedde ;

ZEschylus (Pers. 396-415) describes finely the war-shout of the Greeks
and the response of the Persians: for very good reasons, he does not
notice the incipient backwardness of the Greeks, which Herodotus brings
before us.

The war-shout, here described by schylus, a warrior actually engaged,
shows us the difference between a naval combat of that day and the im-
proved tactics of the Athenians fifty years afterwards, at the beginning of
the Peloponnesian war. Phormio especially enjoins on his men the neces-
sity of silence (Thucyd. ii, 89).

' Simonides, Epigram 138, Berygk ; Plutarch, De Herodot. Malignitate,
c. 36.

According to Plutarch (Themist.12) and Diodorus (xi, 17), it was the
Persian admiral’s ship which was first charged and captured: if the fact
had been so, Aschylus would probably have specified it.

* Herodot. viii, 85; Diodor. xi, 16. Aschylus, in the Perss, though he
gives a long list of the names of those who fought against Athens, does not
make any allusion to the Ionic or to any other Greeks as having formed
part of the catalogue. See Blomfield ad Aischyl. Pers. 42. Such silence
easily admits of explanation : yet it affords au additional reason for believ-
ing that the persons so admitted did not fight very heartily.

184 AISTORY OF GREECE.

Medes serving as soldiers on shipboard, in trying to satisfy the
exigent monarch who. sat on shore watching their behavior.
Their signal defeat was not owing to any want of courage, —
but, first, to the narrow space which rendered their superior
number a hindrance rather than a benefit: next, to their want
of orderly line and discipline as compared with the Greeks:
thirdly, to the fact that, when once fortune seemed to turn against
them, they had no fidelity or reciprocal attachment, and each
ally was willing to sacrifice or even to run down others, in order
to effect his own escape. Thetr numbers and absence of concert
threw them into confusion, and caused them to run foul of each
other: those in the front could not recede, nor could those in the
rear advance:! the oar-blades were broken by collision, — the
steersmen lost control of their ships, and could no longer adjust
the ship’s course so as to strike that direct blow with the beak
which was essential in ancient warfare. After some time of
combat, the whole Persian fleet- was driven back and became
thoroughly unmanageable, so that the issue was no longer doubt-
ful, and nothing remained except the efforts of individual bravery
to protract the struggle. While the Athenian squadron on the
left, which had the greatest resistance to surmount, broke up and
drove before them the Persian right, the A®ginetans on the right
intercepted the flight of the fugitives to Phalérum :2 Demokritus,
the Naxian captain, was said to have captured five ships of the
Persians with his own single trireme. The chief admiral, Ari-
abignés, brother of Xerxes, attacked at once by two Athenian
triremes, fell, gallantly trying to board one of them, and the num-
ber of distinguished Persians and Medes who shared his fate
was great:3 the more so, as few of them knew how to swim,
while among the Greek seamen who were cast into the sea, the
greater number were swimmers, and had the friendly shore of

 Herodot. viii, 86; Diodor. xi, 17. The testimony of the former, both
to the courage manifested by the Persian fleet, and to their entire want of
order and system, is decisive, as well as to the effect of the personal over -
looking of Xerxes. R

* Simonides, Epigr. 138, Bergk.

* The many names of Persian chiefs whom schylus reports as having
been slain, are probably for the most part inventions of his own, to please
the ears of his audience. See Blomfield, Preefat. ad AZschy! Pers. p. xii.

BATTLE OF SALAMIS.—RETREAT OF XERXES. . 135
Salamis near at hand. It appears that the Phenician seamen of
the fleet threw the blame of defeat upon the Ionic Greeks; and
some of them, driven ashore during the heat of the battle under
the immediate throne of Xerxes, excused themselves by denounc-
‘ ing the others as traitors. The heads of the Ionic leaders might
have been endangered if the monarch had not seen with his own
eyes an act of surprising gallantry by one of their number. An
Ionic trireme from Samothrace charged and disabled an Attic
trireme, but was herself almost immediately run down by an
fEginetan. The Samothracian crew, as their vessel lay disabled
on the water, made such excellent use of their missile weapons,
that they cleared the decks of the Aginetan, sprung on board,
and became masters of her This exploit, passing under the
eyes of Xerxes himself, induced him to treat the Phenicians as
dastardly calumniators, and to direct their heads to be cut off:
his wrath and vexation, Herodotus tells us, were boundless, and
he scarcely knew on whom to vent it.!

In this disastrous battle itself, as in the debate before the bat-
tle, the conduct of Artemisia of Halikarnassus was such as to
give him full satisfaction. It appears that this queen maintained
her full part in the battle until the disorder had become irretriev-
able ; she then sought to escape, pursued by the Athenian trie-
rarch, Ameinias, but found her progress obstructed by the number
of fugitive or embarrassed comrades before her. In this dilemma,
she preserved herself from pursuit by attacking one of her own
comrades ; she charged the trireme of the Karian prince, Da-
masithymus, of Kalyndus, ran it down and sunk it, so that the
prince with all his crew perished. Had Ameinias been aware
that the vessel which he was following was that of Artemisia,
nothing would have induced him to relax in the pursuit, —for
the Athenian captains were all indignant at the idea of a female
invader assailing their city ;2 but knowing her ship only as one
among the enemy, and seeing her thus charge and destroy
another enemy’s ship, he concluded her to be a deserter, pales

1 Herodot. viii, 90.

* Compare the indignant language of Demosthenés a century and u
quarter afterwards, respecting the second Artemisia, queen of Karia, as the
enemy of Athens, — tueic 0’ dvrec "ADynvaioy BapBapov dvSpurroyv, kat Tatra
yuvaixa, goBnIjce09e (Demosthenes, De Rhodior. Libertat. c. x, p. 1971

186 . HISTORY OF GREECE.

his pursuit elsewhere, and suffered her to escape. At the same
time, it so happened that the destruction of the ship of Damasi-
thymus happened under the eyes of Xerxes and of the persons
around him on shore, who recognized the ship of Artemisia, but
supposed the ship destroyed to be a Greek. Accordingly they
remarked to him, “ Master, seest thou not how well Artemisia
fights, and how she has just sunk an enemy’s ship 7 2?” Assured
that it was really her deed, Xerxes is said to have replied, “My
men have beeome women; my women, men.” ‘Thus was Artc-
Misia not only preserved, but exalted to a -higher place in the
esteem of Xerxes by the destruction of one of his own ships, —
among the crew of which not a man survived to tell the true
story.! :
Of the total loss of either fleet, Herodotus gives us no esti-
mate ; but Diodorus states the number of ships destroyed on
the Grecian side as forty, on the Persian side as two hundred ;
- independent of those which were made prisoners with all their
erews. ‘To the Persian loss is to be added, the destruction of all
those troops whom they had landed before the battle in the island
of Psyttaleia: as soon as the Persian fleet was put to flight,
Aristeidés carried over some Grecian hoplites to that island,
overpowered the enemy, and put them to death toa man. This

* Herodot. viii, 87,88,93. The story given here by Herodotus respecting
the stratagem whereby Artemisia escaped, seems sufficiently probable ; and
he may have heard it from fellow-citizens of his own who were aboard her
vessel. Though Plutarch accuses him of extravagant disposition to com-
pliment this queen, it is evident that he does not himself like the story, nor
consider it to be a compliment; for he himself insinuates a doubt: “I do
not know whether she ran down the Kalyndian ship intentionally, or came
accidentally into collision with it.” Since the shock was so destructive that
the Kalyndian ship was completely run down and sunk, so that every man
of her crew perished, we may be pretty sure that it was intentional; and
the historian merely suggests a possible hypothesis to palliate an act of
great treachery. Though the story of the sinking of the Kalyndian ship
has the air of truth, however, we cannot say the same about the observa
tion of Xerxes, and the notice which he is reported to have taken of tho
act: all this reads like nothing but romance.

We have to regret (as Plutarch observes, De Malign. Herodot. p,,873)
that Herodotus tells us so much less about others than about Artemisia ;
but he doubtless heard more about her than about the rest, and perhaps his
own relatives may have been among her contingent

BATTLE OF SALAMIS.—RETREAT OF XERXES. . 187

loss appears to have been much deplored, as they were chuice
troops ; in great proportion, the native Persian guards.!

Great and capital as the victory was, there yet remained after
it a sufficient portion of the Persian fleet to maintain even mari-
time war vigorously, not to mention the powerful land-force, as
yet unshaken. And the Greeks themselves, immediately after
they had collected in their island, as well as could be done, the
fragments of shipping and the dead bodies, made themselves
ready for a second engagement.® But they were relieved from
this necessity by the pusillanimity? of the invading monarch, in
whom the defeat had occasioned a sudden revulsion from con-
temptuous confidence, not only to rage and disappointment, but
to the extreme of alarm for his own personal safety. He was
possessed with a feeling of mingled wrath and mistrust against his
naval force, which consisted entirely of subject nations, — Phe-
nicians, Egyptians, Kilikians, Cyprians, Pamphylians, Ionic
Greeks, etc., with a few Persians and Medes serving on board,
in a capacity probably not well suited to them. None of these
subjects had any interest in the success of the invasion, or any
other motive for service except fear, while the sympathies of the
Ionic Greeks were even decidedly against it. Xerxes now came
to suspect the fidelity, or undervalue the courage, of all these
naval subjects ;4 he fancied that they could make no resistance to
the Greek fleet, and dreaded lest the latter should sail forthwith
to the Hellespont, so as to break down the bridge and intercept
his personal retreat ; for, upon the maintenance of that bridge he
conceived his own safety to turn, not less than that of his father
Darius, when retreating from Scythia, upon the preservation of
the bridge over the Danube.5 Against the Phenicians, from

' Herodot. viii, 95; Plutarch, Aristid. c. 9; Atschyl: Pers. 454-470;
Diodor. xii, 19. * Herodot. viii, 96.

4 The victories of the Greeks over the Persians were materially aided by
the personal timidity of Xerxes, and of Darius Codomannus at Issus and
Arbela (Arrian, ii, 11, 6; iii, 14, 3). .

‘See this feeling especially in the language of Mardonius to Xerxes
(Herodot. viii, 100), as well as in that put into the mouth of Artemisia by
the historian (viii, 68), which indicates the general conception of the histo.
rian himself, derived from the various information which reached him.

® Herodot. vii, 10.

138 HISTORY OF GREECE.

whom he had expected most, his rage broke out in such fierce
threats, that they stole away from the fleet in the night, and
departed homeward.! Such a capital desertion made future
naval struggle still more hopeless, and Xerxes, though at first
breathing revenge, and talking about a vast mole or bridge to be
thrown across the strait to Salamis, speedily ended by giving
orders to the whole fleet to leave Phalérum in the night, — not
without disembarking, however, the best soldiers who served on
board.2, They were to make straight for the Hellespont, and
there to guard the bridge against his arrival.

This resolution was prompted by Mardonius, who saw the real
terror which beset his master, and read therein sufficient evidence
of danger to himself. When Xerxes despatched to Susa intelli-
gence of his disastrous overthrow, the feeling at home was not
simply that of violent grief for the calamity, and fear for the
personal safety of the monarch,— it was farther imbittered by

Se ee a, ee

1 This important fact is not stated by Herodotus, but it is distinctly
given in Diodorus, xi, 19. It seems probable enough.

If the tragedy of Phrynichus, entitled Phenigse, had been preserved, we
should have known more about the position and behavior of the Phenician
contingent.in this invasion. It was represented at Athens only three years
after the battle of Salamis, in s.c. 477 or 476, with Themistoklés- as
choregus, four years earlier than the Perse of schylus, which was
affirmed by Glaukus to have been (zaparero:qjodat) altered from it. The
Chorus in the Pheenisse tonsisted of Phenician women, possibly the widows
of those Phenicians whom Xerxes had caused to be beheaded after the
battle (Herodot. viii, 90, as Dr. Blomfield supposes, Pref. ad Asch. Pers.
p. ix), or only of Phenicians absent on the expedition. The fragments
remaining of this tragedy, which gained the prize, are too scanty to sustain
any conjectures as to its scheme or details (see Welcker Griechische
Trageed. vol. i, p. 26; and Droysen, Phrynichos, A‘schylos, und die
Trilogie, pp. 4~6). * Herodot. ix, 32.

3 Herodot. viii, 97-107. Such was the terror of these retreating seamen,
that they are said to have mistaken the projecting cliffs of Cape Zdostér
(about half-way between Peirseus and Sunium) for ships, and redoubled
the haste of their flight as if an enemy were after them, —a story which
we can treat as nothing better than silly exaggeration in the Athenian
informants of Herodotus. ;

Ktesias, Pers. c. xxvi; Strabo, ix, p. 395; the two latter talk about the
intention to carry a mole across from Attica to Salamis, as if it had been
conceived before the battle. )

BATTLE OF SALAMIS.— RETREAT OF XERXES. 189

anger against Mardonius, as the instigator of this ruinous enter-
prise. That general knew full well that there was no safety for
him! in returning to Persia with the shame of failure on his
head: it was better for him to take upon himself the chance of
subduing Greece, which he had good hopes of being yet able to
do, — and to advise the return of Xerxes himself to a safe and
easy residence in Asia. Such counsel was eminently palatable
to the present alarm of the monarch, while it opened to Mar
donius himself a fresh chance not only of safety, but of increased
power and glory. Accordingly, he began to reassure his master,
by representing that the recent blow was after all not serious, —
that it had only fallen upon the inferior part of his force, and
upon worthless foreign slaves, like Phenicians, Egyptians, etc.,
while the native Persian troops yet remained unconquered and
unconquerable, fully adequate to execute the monarch’s revenge
upon Hellas ;— that Xerxes might now very well retire with the
bulk of his army if he were disposed, and that he, Mardonius,
would pledge himself to complete the conquest, at the head of
three hundred thousand chosen troops. This proposition afforded
at the same time consolation for the monarch’s wounded vanity,
and safety for his person: his confidential Persians, and Arte-
misia herself, on being consulted, approved of the step. The
latter had acquired his confidence by the dissuasive advice which
she had given before the recent deplorable engagement, and she
had every motive now to encourage a proposition indicating
solicitude for his person, as well as relieving herself from the
obligation of farther service. “If Mardonius desires to remain
(she remarked, contemptuously?), by all means let him have the
troops: should he succeed, thou wilt be the gainer: should he
even perish, the loss of some of thy slaves is trifling, so long as
thou remainest safe, and thy house in power. Thou hast already
accomplished the purpose of thy expedition, in burning Athens.”
Xerxes, while adopting this counsel, and directing the return of
his-fleet, showed his satisfaction with the Halikarnassian queen,
by intrusting her with some of his children, directing her te
transport them to Ephesus.
The Greeks at Salamis learned with surprise and joy the de- ~

1 Compare Herodot. vii, 10 * Herodot. viii, 101, 102.

140 . HISTORY OF GREECE.

parture of the hostile fleet from the bay of Phalérum, and
immediately put themselves in pursuit; following as far as the
island of Andros without success. Themistoklés and the Athe-
nians are even said to have been anxious to push on forthwith to
the Hellespont, and there break down the bridge of boats, in
order to prevent the escape of Xerxes,—had they not been
restrained by the caution of Eurybiadés and the Peloponnesians,
who represented that it was dangerous to detain the Persian
monarch in the heart of Greece. Themistoklés readily suffered
himself to be persuaded, and contributed much to divert his
countrymen from the idea; while he at the same time sent the
faithful Sikinnus a second time to Xerxes, with the intimation
that he, Themistoklés, had restrained the impatience of the
Greeks to proceed without delay and burn the Hellespontine
bridge, — and that he had thus, from personal friendship to the
monarch, secured for him a safe retreat.! Though this is the
story related by Herodotus, we can hardly believe that, with the
great Persian land-force in the heart of Attica, there could have
been any serious idea of so distant an operation as that of attack-
ing the bridge at the Hellespont. It seems more probable that
Themistoklés fabricated the intention, with a view of frightening
_ Xerxes away, as well as of establishing a personal claim upon
his gratitude in reservé for future contingences.

Such crafty manceuvres and long-sighted calculations of pos
sibility, seem extraordinary : but the facts are sufficiently attested,
—since Themistoklés lived to claim as well as to receive fulfil-
ment of the obligation thus conferred, — and though extraordi-
nary, they will not appear inexplicable, if we reflect, first, that
the Persian game, even now, after the defeat of Salamis, was not
only not desperate, but might perfectly well have succeeded,
it had been played with reasonable prudence: next, that there
existed in the mind of this eminent man an almost unparalleled

1 Herodot. viii, 109, 110; Thucyd. i, 137. The words jv wevdag mpooe
mothoaro may probably be understood in a sense somewhat larger than that
which they naturally bear in Thucydidés. In point of fact, not only
was it false that Themistoklés was the person who dissuaded the Greeks
from going to the Hellespont, but it was also false that the Greeks b
ever any serious intention of going there. Compare Cornelius NepoS
Themistokl. c. 5. :

BATTLE OF SALAMIS.— RETREAT OF XERXES. 141

combination of splendid patriotism, long-sighted cunning, and
selfish rapacity. Themistoklés knew better than any one else
that the cause of Greece had appeared utterly desperate, only a
few hours before the late battle: moreover, a clever man, tainted
with such constant guilt, might naturally calculate on being one
day detected and punished, even if the Greeks proved suc-
cessful.

He now employed the fleet among the islands of the Cyclades,
for the purpose of levying fines upon them as a punishment for
adherence to the Persian. He first laid siege to Andros, telling
the inhabitants that he came to demand their money, bringing
with him two great gods, — Persuasion and Necessity. To which
_ the Andrians replied, that “Athens was a great city, and blest
with excellent gods: but that they were miserably poor, and that
there were two unkind gods who always stayed with them and
would never quit the island, — Poverty and Helplessness.! In
these gods the Andrians put their trust, refusing to deliver the
money required; for the power of Athens could never overcome
their inability.” While the fleet was engaged in contending
against the Andrians with their sad protecting deities, Themisto-
klés sent round to various other cities, demanding from them
private sums of money on condition of securing them from
attack. From Karystus, Paros, and other places, he thus ex-
torted bribes for himself apart from the other generals,2 but it
appears that Andros was found unproductive, and after no very
long absence, the fleet was brought back to Salamis.3

The intimation sent by Themistoklés perhaps had the effect of
hastening the departure of Xerxes, who remained in Attica only
a few days after the battle of Salamis, and then withdrew his
army through Beotia into Thessaly, where Mardonius made
choice of the troops to be retained for his future operations. He
retained all the Persians, Medes, Sake, Baktrians, and Indians,

™ Herodot. viii, 111. érret ’Avdpiovg ye elvar yewreivag é¢ ra péytota az7-
xovrac, kal Yeot¢ dio aypjorave obx exdAeirew ogéwv riv vijcoy, GAA’ Ge
grAoxwpécty — Ilevinu re xalt "Apnyaviny.
- Compare Alksus, Fragm. 90, ed. Bergk, and Herodot. vii, 172.

* Herodot. viii, 112; Plutarch, Themistoklés, c. 21,— who cites a few
bitter lines from the contemporary poet Timokreon.

3 Herodot. viii, 112-121.

142 HISTOBY OF GREECE.

horse as well as foot, together with select detachments of the
remaining contingents: making in all, according to Herodotus,
three hundred thousand men. But as it was now the beginning
- of September, and as sixty thousand out of:his forces, under
Artabazus, were destined to escort Xerxes himself to the Helle-
spont, Mardonius proposed to winter in Thessaly, and to postpone
farther military operations until the ensuing spring.!

Having left most of these troops under the orders of Mardonius
in Thessaly, Xerxes marched away with the rest to the Helle-

spont, by the same road as he had taken in his advance a few

months before. Respecting his retreat, a plentiful stock of stories
were circulated,?—~-inconsistent with each other, fanciful and

1 Herodot. viii, 114-126.

* The account given by ZEschylus of this retiring march appears to me
exaggerated, and in several points incredible (Persz, 482-513). That they
suffered greatly during the march from want of provisions, is doubtless
true, and that many of them died of hunger. But we must consider in

deduction: 1. That this march took place in the months of October and

November, therefore not very long after the harvest. 2. That Mardonius
maintained a large army in Thessaly all the winter, and brought them out
in fighting condition in the spring. 38. That Artabazus also, with another
large division, was in military operation in Thrace all the winter, after
having escorted Xerxes into safety.

When we consider these facts, it will seem that the statements of A¢schy-
lus, even as to the sufferings by famine, must be taken with great allow-
ance. But his statement about the passage of the Strymon appears to me
incredible, and I regret to find myself on this point differing from Dr.
Thirlwall, who considers it an undoubted fact. (Hist. Greece, ch. xv, p. 351,
2d ed.) “The river had been frozen in the night hard enough to bear
those who arrived first. But the ice suddenly gave way under the morning
sun, and numbers perished in the waters,” —so Dr. Thirlwall states, after
A&schylas, — adding, in a note, “It is a little surprising that Herodotus,
when he is describing the miseries of the retreat, does not notice this disas-
ter, which is so prominent in the narrative of the Persian messenger in
fEschylus. There can, however, be no doubt as to the fact: and perhaps it
may furnish a useful warning, not to lay too much stress on the silence of
Herodotus, as a ground for rejecting even important and interesting facts
which are only mentioned by later writers,” etc.

That a large river, such as the Strymon, near its mouth (180 yards broad,
and in latitude about N. 40° 50’), at a period which could not have been
later than the beginning of November, should have been frozen over in one
night so hardly and firmly ss to admit of a portion of the army marching
over it at daybreak, before the sun became warm,—is a statement which

BATTLE OF SALAMIS. RETREAT OF XERXES. 148

even incredible: Grecian imagination, in the contemporary poet
ZEschylus, as well as in the Latin moralizers Seneca or Juvenal,!
delighted in handling this invasion with the maximum of light
and shadow, — magnifying the destructive misery and humilia-
tion of the retreat so as to form an impressive contrast with the
superhuman pride of the advance, and illustrating the antithesis
with unbounded license of detail. The sufferings from want of
provision were doubtless severe, and are described as frightful
and death-dealing: the magazines stored up for the advancing
march had been exhausted, so that the retiring army were now
forced to seize upon the corn of the country through which they
passed, — an insufficient maintenance, eked out by leaves, grass,
the bark’of trees, and other wretched substitutes for food. Plague
and dysentery aggravated their misery, and occasioned many to

surely requires a more responsible witness than Zschylus to avouch it. In
fact, he himself describes it as a “frost out of season,” (yeeucv’ dwpor,)
brought about by a special interposition of the gods. If he is to be believed,
none of the fugitives were saved, except such as were fortunate enough to
cross the Strymon on the ice during the interval between break of day and
the sun’s heat. One would imagine that there was a pursuing enemy on
their track, leaving them only a short time for escape: whereas in fact, they
had no enemy to contend with, — nothing bat the difficulty of finding sub-
sistence. During the advancing march of Xerxes, a bridge of boats had .
been thrown over the Strymon: nor can any reason be given why that
bridge should not still have been subsisting: Artabazus must have recrossed
it after he had accompanied the monarch to the Hellespont. I will add,
that the town and fortress of Eion, which commanded the mouth of the
Strymon, remained as an important strong-hold of the Persians some years
after this event, and was only captured, after a desperate resistance, by the
Athenians and their confederates under Kimon.

The Athenian auditors of the Persse would not criticize nicely, the his-
torical credibility of that which Aeschylus told them about the sufferings
of their retreating foe, nor his geographical credibility when he placed
Mount Pangeeus on the hither side of the Strymon, to persons marching out
of Greece (Perse, 494). But I must confess that, to my mind, his whole
narrative of the retreat bears the stamp of the poet and the religions man,
not of the historical witness. And my confidence in Herodotus is increased
when I compare him on this matter with Aischylus,—as well in what he—
says as in what he does not say.

1 Juvenal, Satir. x, 178.

Iile tamen qualis rediit, Salamine relicta,
In Caurum atque Eurum solitxs ssevire flagellis, etc

144 HISTORY OF GREECE.

be left behind among the cities through whose territory the
retreat was carried ; strict orders being left by Xerxes that these
cities should maintain and tend them. After forty-five days’
march from Attica, he at length found himself at the Hellespont,
whither his fleet, retreating from Salamis, had arrived long
before him.! But the short-lived bridge had already been
knocked to pieces by a storm, so that the army was transported
on shipboard across to Asia, where it first obtained comfort and
abundance, and where the change from privation to excess engen-
dered new maladies. In the time of Herodotus, the citizens of
Abdéra still showed the gilt cimeter and tiara, which Xerxes
had presented to them when he halted there in his retreat,
in token of hospitality and satisfaction: and they even went
the length of affirming that never, since his departure from
Attica, had he loosened his girdle until he reached their city. So
fertile was Grecian fancy in magnifying the terror of the repulsed
invader! who reéntered Sardis, with a broken army and hum-
bled spirit, only eight months after he had left it, as the presumed
conqueror of the western world.2

Meanwhile the Athenians and Peloponnesians, liberated from
the immediate presence of the enemy either on land or sea, and
passing from the extreme of terror to sudden ease and security,
indulged in the full delight and self-congratulation of unexpected
victory. On the day before the battle, Greece had seemed irre-
trievably lost: she was now saved even against all reasonable
hope, and the terrific cloud impending over her was dispersed.3

' Herodot. viii, 130.

? See the account of the retreat of Xerxes, in Herodotus, viii, 115-120,
with many stories which he mentions only to reject. The description given
in the Perse of Aischylus (v, 486, 515, 570) is conceived in the same spirit.
The strain reaches its loudest pitch in Justin (ii, 13), who tells us that Xerxes
was obliged to cross the strait in a fishing-boat. “Ipse cum pancis Abydon
contendit. Ubi cum solutum pontem hibernis. tempestatibus offendisset,
piscatorid scapha trepidus trajecit. Erat res spectaculo digna et, estima-
tione sortis humane, rerum varietate miranda —in exiguo latentem videre
navigio, quem paulo ante vix squor omne capiebat: carentem etiam omni
servorum ministerio, cujus exercitus propter multitudinem terris graves
erant.” :

3 Herodot. viii, 109. ‘etic dt, ebpnua yéo etppxauev quéag ai rods Kat
‘EdAaéa py dtoxwperv avdpac pevyovrag. .

BATTLE OF SALAMIS —RETREAT OF XERXES. 145

In the division of the booty, the A°ginetans were adjudged to have
distinguished themselves most in the action, and to be entitled to
the choice lot; while various tributes of gratitude were also set
apart for the gods. Among them were three Phenician triremes,
which were offered in dedication to Ajax at Salamis, to Athéné
at Sunium, and to Poseidon at the isthmus of Corinth; farther
presents were sent to Apollo at Delphi, who, on being asked
whether he’ was satisfied, replied, that all had done their duty to
him excépt the Aginetans: from them he required additional
munificence on account of the prize awarded to them, and they
weré constrained to dedicate in the temple four golden stars upon
a staff of brass, which Herodotus himself saw there. Next to
the Aéginetans, the second place of honor was awarded to the
Athenians; the A®ginetan Polykritus, and the Athenians Eu-
menés and Ameinias, being ranked first among the individual
combatants.! Respecting the behavior of Adeimantus and the
Corinthians in the battle, the Athenians of the time of Herodo-
tus drew the most unfavorable picture, representing them to have
fled at the commencement, and to have been only brought back
by the information that the Greeks were gaining the victory.
Considering the character of the debates which had preceded,
and the impatient eagerness manifested by the Corinthians to
fight at the Isthmus instead of at Salamis, some such backward-
ness on their part, when forced into a battle at the latter place,
would not be in itself improbable: yet in this case it seems that
not only the Corinthians themselves, but also the general voice
of Greece, contradicted the Athenian story, and defended them’
as having behaved with bravery and forwardness. We must
recollect that, at the time when Herodotus probably collected
his information, a bitter feeling of hatred prevailed between
Athens and Corinth, and Aristius, son of Adeimantus, was
among the most efficient enemies of the former.? _

1 Herodot. viii, 98-122; Diodor. xi, 27.

* Herodot. viii, 94; Thucyd. i, 42,103. 1d ogodpdv picog from Corinth
towards Athens. About Aristeus, Thucyd. ii, 67.

Plutarch (De Herodot. Malignit. p. 870) employs many angry words in
refuting this Athenian scandal, which the historian himself does not up-
hold as truth. The story advanced by Dio Chrysostom (Or. xxxvii, p.
456), that Herodotus asked for a reward from the Corinthians, and on being

VOL. V. 7 . (0G

146 HISTORY OF GREECE.

Besides the first and second prizes of valor, the chiefs at the
Isthmus tried to adjudicate among themselves the first and second
prizes of skill and wisdom. Each of them deposited two names
on the altar of Poseidon: and when these votes came to be
Inpked at, it was found that each man had voted for himself as
deserving the first prize, but that Themistoklés had a large
wajority of votes for the second.! The result of such voting
allowed no man to claim the first prize, nor could the chiefs give
a second prize without it ; so that Themistoklés was disappointed
of his reward, though exalted so much the higher, perhaps,
through that very disappointment, in general renown. He went
shortly afterwards to Sparta, where he received from the Lace-
dzmonians honors such as were never paid, before nor after-
wards, to any foreigner. A crown of. olive was indeed given to
Eurybiadés as the first prize, but a like crown was at the same
time conferred on Themistoklés as a special reward for unparal-
jeled sagacity ; together with a chariot, the finest which the city
afforded. Moreover, on his departure, the three hundred select
youths called Hippeis, who formed the active guard, and police
of the country, all accompanied him in a body as escort of honor
to the frontiers of Tegea.2 Such demonstrations were so aston-
ishing, from the haughty and immovable Spartans, that they
were ascribed by some authors to their fear lest Themistoklés
should be offended by being deprived of the general prize,—

refused, inserted this story into his history for the purpose of being re
venged upon them, deserves no attention without some reasonable evidence:
the statement of Diyllus, that he received ten talents from the Athenians
as a reward for his history, would be much less improbable, so far as the
fact of pecuniary reward, apart from the magnitude of the sum: but this
also requires proof. Dio Chrysostom is not satisfied with rejecting this
tale of the Athenians, but goes the length of affirming that the Corinthi
ans carried off the palm of bravery, and were the cause of the victory.
The epigrams of Simonides, which he cites, prove nothing of the kind
(p. 459). Marcellinus (Vit. Thucyd. p. xvi), insinuates a charge against
Herodotus, something like that of Plutarch and Dio.

1 Herodot. viii, 128. Plutarch (Themist. 17: compare De Herodot
Malign. p. 871) states that each individual chief gave his second vote to
Themistoklés. The more we test Herodotus by comparison with others
the more we shall find him-free from the exaggerating spirit.

* Herodot. viii 124; Plutarch, Themist. c. 17.

BATTLES OF PLATZA AND MYKALE. 147

and they are even said to have excited the jealousy of the Athe-
nians so much, that he was displaced from his post of general
and Xanthippus nominated.!- Neither of these last reports is
likely to be true, nor is either of them confirmed by Herodotus:
the fact that Xanthippus became general of the fleet during the
ensuing year, is in the regular course of Athenian change of
officers, and impli9s no peculiar jealousy of Themistoklés.

CHAPTER XLII.

BATTLES OF PLATZA AND MYKALE.— FINAL REPULSE OF THE
PERSIANS.

THOUGH the defeat at Salamis deprived the Persians of all hope
from farther maritime attack of Greece, they still anticipated
success by land from the ensuing campaign of Mardonios. Their
fieet, after having conveyed the monarch himself with his accom-
panying land-force across the Hellespont, retired to winter at
Kymé and Samos: in the latter of which places large rewards
were bestowed upon Theoméstor and Phylakus, two Samian cap-
tains who had distinguished themselves in the late engagement.
Theoméstor was even nominated despot of Samos under Persian
protection.2 Early in the spring they were reassembled, to the
number of four hundred sail, but without the Phenicians, at the
naval station of Samos, intending, however, only to maintain a
watchful guard over Ionia, and hardly supposing that the Greek
fleet would venture to attack them.3

For a long time, the conduct of that fleet was such as to jus-
tify such a helief in its enemies. Assembled at Avgina in the:
spring, to the number of one hundred and ten ships, under the

’ Diodor. xi, 27: compare Herodot. viii, 125, and Thucyd. i, 74.
* Herodot. viii, 85. 3 Herodot. viii, 130; Diodor xi, 27.

a

148 HISTURY OF GREECE.

Spartan king Leotychidés, it advanced as, far as Delos, but not
farther eastward: nor could all the persuasions of Chian and
other Ionian envoys, despatched both to the Spartan authorities
and to the fleet, and promising to revolt from Persia as soon as
the Grecian fleet should appear, prevail upon Leotychidés to
hazard any aggressive enterprise. Ionia and the western waters
of the Aégean had now been for fifteen years completely under
the Persians, and so little visited by the Greeks, that a voyage
thither appeared, especially to the maritime inexperience of a
Spartan king, like going to the Pillars of Héraklés,! — not less
venturesome than the same voyage appeared fifty-two years af-
terwards to the Lacedemonian admiral Alkidas, when he first
hazarded his fleet amidst the preserved waters of the Athenian
empire. 2 :

Meanwhile the hurried and disastrous retreat of Xerxes had
produced less disaffection among his subjects and allies than
might have been anticipated. Alexander, king of Macedon, the
Thessalian Aleuadz,? and the Boeotian leaders, still remained in
hearty cooperation with Mardonius: nor were there any, except
the Phocians, whose fidelity to him appeared questionable, among
all the Greeks northwest of the boundaries of Attica and Meg-
aris. It was only in the Chalkidic peninsula, that any actual
revolt occurred. Potidea, situated on the isthmus of Palléné,

1 Herodot. viii, 131, 182: compare Thucyd. iii, 29-32.

Herodotus says, that the Chian envoys had great difficulty in inducing
Leotychidés to proceed even as far as Delos, — 1d yap poowrépw nav decvdv
hv roto “EAAnot, obre Tov yOpwv sotct Eureipotat, orpariig Te wavTa niéa
éddxec elvar tHv 68 Lapov exioréaro dofy wal ‘Hpaxdéac otpdac icov dréyecv.

This last expression of Herodotus has been erroneously interpreted by
some of the commentators, as if it were a measure of the geographical
ignorance, either of Herodotus himself, or of those whom he is describing.
In my judgment, no inferences of this kind onght to be founded upon it :
it marks fear of an enemy’s country which they had not been accustomed
to visit, and where they could not calculate the risk beforehand, —rather
than any serious comparison between one distance and another. Speaking
of our forefathers, such of them as were little used to the’ sea, we might
say, — “ A voyage to Bordeaux or Lisbon seemed to them as distant as a
voyage to the Indies,” — by which we should merely affirm something as to
their state of feeling, not as to their geographical knowledge.

* Herodot. ix, 1, 2, 67; viii, 136.

BATTLES OF PLATZA AND MYKALE. 149

~

together with the other towns in thé long tongue of Palléna,
declared themselves independent: and the neighboring town of
Olynthus, occupied bythe semi-Grecian tribe of Bottizars, was
on the point of following. their example. The Persian general,
Artabazus, on his return from escorting Xerxes to the Helle-
spont, undertook the reduction of these towns, and succeeded
perfectly with Olynthus. He took the town, slew all the innabi-
tants, and handed it over to a fresh population, consisting of
Chalkidic Greeks, under Kritobulus of Toréné. It was in this
manner that Olynthus, afterwards a city of so much consequence
and interest, first became Grecian and Chalkidic. But Arta-
bazus was not equally successful in the siege of Potidewa, the
defence of which was aided by citizens from the other towns in
Palléné. A plot which he concerted with Timoxenus, com-
mander of the Skiénzan auxiliaries in the town, became acci-
dentally disclosed: a considerable body of his troops perished
while attempting to pass at low tide under the walls of the city,
which were built across the entire breadth*of the narrow isthmus
joining the Pallenzan peninsula to the mainland: and after .
three months of blockade, he was forced to renounce the enter- _
prise, withdrawing his troops to rejoin Mardonius, in Thessaly.!
The latter, before he put himself in motion for the spring
campaign, thought it advisable to consult the Grecian oracles,
especially those within the limits of Bootia and Phocis. He
sent a Karian, named Mys, familiar with the Greek as well as
the Karian language, to consult Trophénius at Lebadeia, Amphi-
araus, and the Ismenian Apollo at Thebes, Apollo at mount
Ptéon near Akrephie, and Apollo at the Phocian Abe. This
step was probably intended as a sort of ostentatious respect
towards the religious feelings of allies upon whom he was now
very much dependent: but neither the questions put, nor the
answers given, were made public: and the only remarkable fact
which Herodotus had heard was, that the priest of the Ptéian
Apollo delivered his answer inf Karian, or at least in a language
intelligible to no person present except the Karian Mys himself.
it appears, however, that at this period, when Mardonius was

1 Herodot. viii, 128, 129.
* Herodot. viii, 134, 135; Pausanias, ix, 24, 3.

e

150 HISTORY OF GREECE.

seeking to strengthen himself by oracles, and laying his plans
for establishing a separate peace and alliance with Athens against
the Peloponnesians, some pergons in his#tinterest circulated pre-
dictions, that the day was approaching when the Persians and
the Athenians jointly would expel the Dorians from Pelopon-
nesus.! The way was thus paved for him to send an envoy to
Athens, — Alexander, king of Macedon ; who was instructed to
make the most seductive offers, to promise reparation of all the
damage done in Attica, as well as the active future friendship of
the Great King, and to hold out to the Athenians a large acquisi-
tion of new territory as the price of their consent to form with
him an equal and independent alliance.2 —The Macedonian prince
added warm expressions of his own interest in the welfare of the
Athenians, recommending them, as a sincere friend, to embrace
propositions so advantageous as well as so honorable : especially
as the Persian power must in the end prove too much for them,
and Attica lay exposed to Mardonius and his Grecian allies, _
without being covered by any common defence as Peloponnesus
was protected by its isthmus.?

This offer, despatched in the spring, found the Athenians re-
established wholly or partially in their half-ruined city. A
simple tender of mercy and tolerable treatment, if despatched

1 Herodot. viii, 141. Aaxedatpovios d2...... avapvnovevres Tay Aoyiwy,
Gc ogeag ypedv éort Gua roiot GAAoiot Awptetor exxinrety bx TleAorovvgcou
brd Mpdwv re cal ’Adnvaiwr, xapta te Edetoayv pn duodoyjowot rH Tépog
AdDnvacot, ete.

Such oracles must have been generated by the hopes of the medizng
party in Greece at this particular moment: there is no other point of time
to which they could be at all adapted,—no other, in which expulsion of
ell the Dorians from Peloponnesus, by united Persians and Athenians,
could be even dreamed of. The Lacedsemonians are indeed said here, “to
call to mind the prophecies,”—as if these latter were old, and not now
produced for the first time. But we must recollect that a fabricator of
prophecies, such as Onomakritus, would in all probability at once circulate
them as old; that is, as forming part of some old collection like that of
Bakis or Musseus. And Herodotus doubtless, hitnself, believed them to be
old, so that he would naturally give credit to the Lacedsmonians for the
same knowledge, and suppose them to be alarmed by “ calling these prophe-

cies to mind.”
* Herodot. ix, 7. Herodot. viii. 142.

~

BATTLES OF PLATZA AND MYKALE. 151

by Xerxes from Thermopyle the year before, might perhaps
have been sufficient to detach them from the cause of Hellas : and
even at the present moment, though the pressure of overwhelm-
ing terror had disappeared, there were many inducements for
them to accede to the proposition of Mardonius. The alliance
of Athens would insure to the Persian general unquestionable
predominance in Greece, and to Athens herself protection from
farther ravage as well as the advantage of playing the winning
game: while his force, his position, and his alliances, even as
they then stood, threatened a desolating and doubtful war, of
which Attica would bear the chief brunt. Moreover, the Athe-
nians were at this time suffering privations of the severest char-
acter; for not only did their ruined houses and temples require
to be restored, but they had lost the harvest of the past summer,
together with the seed of the past autumn.! The prudential
view of the case being thus favorable to Ma~donius rather than
otherwise, and especially strengthened by the ‘istress which
reigned at Athens, the Lacedsmonians were so much afraid lest
Alexander should carry his point, that they sent envoys to dis-
suade the Athenians from listening to him, as well as to tender
succor during the existing poverty of the city. After having
heard both parties, the Athenians delivered their reply in terms
of solemn and dignified resolution, which their descendants
delighted in repeating. To Alexander they said: “ Cast not in
our teeth that the power of the Persian is many times greater
than ours: we too know that, as well as thou: but we, neverthe-
less, love freedom well enough to resist him in the best manner
we can. Attempt not the vain task of talking us over into alli-
ance with him. Tell Mardonius that as long as the sun shall
continue in his present path, we will never contract alliance with
Xerxes: we will encounter him in our own defence, putting our
trust in the aid of those gods and heroes to whom he has shown

1 Herodot. wii, 142. IeeCevyévoroe pévrot tiv ovvaydoueda (say the
‘Spartan envoys to the Athenians), xa? drt xaprov éorep7Syre diSav Hén,
kal Gre olxopSopnoSe xpovov 7dn moAAéyv. Seeing that this is spoken before
the invasion of Mardonius, the loss of two crops must include the seed of
the preceding autumn ; and the advice of Themistoklés to his countryinen
—xai rig olkinv re dvariacéodu, kal onépov Gvaxde éxéTw (vill, 109-—
must have been found impracticable in most cases to carry into effect.

152 HISTORY OF GREECE.

no reverence, and whose houses and statues he has burned.
Come thou not to us again with similar propositions, nor persuade
us, even in the spirit of good-will, into unholy proceedings: thou
art the guest and friend of Athens, and we would not that thou
shouldst suffer injury at our hands.”!

To the Spartans, the reply of the Athenians was of a similar
decisive tenor: protesting their unconquerable devotion to the
common cause and liberties of Hellas, and promising that no
conceivable temptations, either of money or territory, should
induce them to desert the ties of brotherhood, common language,
and-religion. So long as a single Athenian survived, no alli-
ance shold ever be made with Xerxes. They then thanked
thé: Spartans for offering them aid during the present privations :
but while declining such offers, they reminded them that Mar-
donius, when apprized that his propositions were refused, would
probably advance immediately, and they therefore earnestly
desired the presence of a Peloponnesian army in Beotia to
assist in the defence of Attica.2 The Spartan envoys, promising
fulfilment of this request,3 and satisfied to have ascertained the
sentiments of Athens, departed.
= Such unshaken fidelity on the part of the Athenians to the
getieral cause cf Greéce, in spite of present suffering, combined
with’ seductive offers for the future, was the just admiration of
theiidescendants, and the frequent theme of applause by their

oraters.4 But among the contemporary Greeks it was hailed
anise oft

‘' Zykurpus the Athenian orator, in alluding to this incident a century
dnd. x helf:ufterwards, represents the Athenians as having been “on the
point of; stoning Alexander,” —jxpod deity’ xaréAevcay (Lykurg. cont.

t. ¢.;17, p. 186) — one among many specimens of the careless man-
ner in “which these orators deal with past history.

7 Herodot. Vili, 143, 144; Plutarch, Aristeidés, c. 10. According to
Plutarch, it was ‘Aristeidés who proposed and prepared the reply to be de-
‘livered. Bat here as elsewhere, the loose, exaggerating style of Plutarch
contrasts unfavorably with the simplicity and directness of Herodotus.

* Herodot. ix, 7. cuvdépevoe dé jyiv rov TWépogy ayreocerSat é¢ tiv
Bowwriny, ete.

Diodorus gives the account of this embassy to Athens substantially in
the same manner, coupling it however with some erroneous motives (xi, 28).

4-Herodot. ix, 7. émordmevoi tre drt xepdareorepdv tore dpodeyéew TO
Tlépoy piAAov 7} wodepéety, ete.

™~

BATTLES OF PLATZA AND MYKALE. 158

only as a relief from danger, and repaid by a selfish and ungen-
erous neglect. The same feeling of indifference towards all
Greeks outside of their own Isthmus, which had so deeply endan-
gered the march of affairs before the battle of Salamis, now
manifested itself a second time among the Spartans and Pelo-
ponnesians. ‘The wall across the Isthmus, which they had been
so busy in constructing, and on which they had relied for protec-
tion against the land-force of Xerxes, had been intermitted and
left unfinished when he retired: but it was resumed as soon as
the forward march of Mardonius was anticipated. It was, how-
ever, still unfinished at the time of the embassy of the Macedo-
nian prince to Athens, and this incomplete condition of their
special defence was one reason of their alarm lest the Athenians
should accept the terms proposed. That danger being for the
lime averted, they redoubled their exertions at the Isthmus, so
that the wall was speedily brought into an adequate state of
defence, and the battlements along the summit were in course of
being constructed. Thus safe behind their own bulwark, they
thought nothing more of their promise to join the Athenians in
Beeotia, and to assist in defending Attica against Mardonius :
- indeed, their king Kleombrotus, who commanded the force at the
Isthmus, was so terrified by an obscuration of the sun at the
moment when he was sacrificing to ascertain the inclinations of
the gods in reference to the coming war, that he even thought it
necessary to retreat with the main force to Sparta, where he soon
after died.} Besides these two reasons, — indifference and unfa-
vorable omens,— which restrained the Spartans from aiding
Attica, there was also a third: they were engaged in celebrating
the festival of the Hyakinthia, and it was their paramount object,
says the historian,? to fulfil “ the exigences of the god.” As the

The orators are not always satisfied with giving to Athens the credit
which she really deserved : they venture to represent the Athenians as hay-
ing refused these brilliant offers from Xerxes on his first invasion, instead _
of from Mardonius in the ensuing summer. ‘Xerxes never made any offers
to them. See Isokratés, Or. iv, Panegyric, c. 27, p. 61.

1 Herodot. ix, 10.

® Herodot. ix, 7. Ol ydp Aaxedacuévos bpratéy re rodrov roy Xpévoy Kas
op Fy ‘Yaxiv9ia: rept rAeiorov & hyov ra tod Yeod ropotvesw* Gua d2 1a
reizog ogt Td bv TH lodup ereixeov, cat nbn EmaAgere AGuBave.

qe

154 HISTORY OF GREECE.

Olympia and the Karneia in the preceding year, so now did the
Hyakinthia, prevail over the necessities of defence, putting out
of sight both the duties of fidelity towards an exposed ally, and
the bond of an express promise.

Meanwhile, Mardonius, informed of the unfavorable reception
which his proposals had received at Athens, put his army in mo-
tion forthwith from Thessaly, joined by all his Grecian auxil-
iaries, and by fresh troops from Thrace and Macedonia. As he
marched through Boeotia, the Thebans, who heartily espoused
his cause, endeavored to dissuade him from farther military
operations against the united force of his enemies, — urging him
to try the efficacy of bribes, presented to the leading men in the
different cities, for the purpose of disuniting them. But Mardo-
nius, eager to repossess himself of Attica, heeded not their
advice: about ten months after the retreat of Xerxes, he entered
the country without resistance, and again established the Persian
head-quarters in Athens, May or June, 479 B.c.!

Before he arrived, the Athenians had again removed to Sala-
mis, under feelings of bitter disappointment and indignation.
They had in vain awaited the fulfilment of the Spartan promise,
that a Peloponnesian army should join them in Beeotia for the
defence of their frontier; at length, being unable to make head
against the enemy alone, they found themselves compelled to
transport their families across to Salamis.2 The migration was
far less terrible than that of the preceding summer, since Mar-
donius had no fleet to harass them; but it was more.gratuitous,
and might have been obviated had the Spartans executed their
covenant, which would have brought about the battle of Platexa
two months earlier than it actually was fought.

Mardonius, though master of Athens, was so anxious to con-
ciliate the Athenians, that he at first abstained from damaging
either the city or the country, and despatched a second envoy to

Nearly a century after this, we are told that it was always the practice
for the Amyklzan hoplites to go home for the celebration of the Hyskia-
thia, on whatever expedition they might happen to be employed ar
Hellen. iv, 5, 11).

1 Diodor. xi, 28; Herodot. ix, 2, 3, 17. of pév GAAoe waévrec “napeigor
orpariny Kai ovvecéBarov be "ADivac Soot rep éuhdilov ‘EAAQvey Tov TatTH
aknpéver, etc. - * Herodot. ix, 4.

BATTLES OF PLATEA AND MYKALE. 155

Salamis to repeat the offers made through Alexander of Macedon.
he thought that they might now be listened to, since he could
offer the exemption of Attica from ravage, as an additional
temptation. Murychidés, a Hellespontine Greek, was sent to
renew these propositions to the Athenian senate at Salamis; but
he experienced a refusal not less resolute than that of Alexander
of Macedon when sent to Athens, and all but unanimous. One
unfortunate senator, Lykidas, made an exception to this unani-
mity, and ventured to recommend acceptance of the propositions
of Murychidés. So furious was the wrath, or so strong the sus-
picion of corruption, which his single-voiced negative provoked,
that senators and people both combined to stone him to death:
while the Athenian women in Salamis, hearing what had passed,
went of their own accord to the house of Lykidas, and stoned to
death his wife and children. In the desperate pitch of resolution
to which the Athenians were now wound up, an opponent passed
for a traitor: unanimity, even though extorted by terror, was
essential to their feelings.! Murychidés, though his propositions
were refused, was dismissed without injury.

While the Athenians thus gave renewed proofs of their steadfast
attachment to the cause of Hellas, they at the same time sent

1 Herodot. ix, 5. I dare not reject this story about Lykidas (see Lykur-
gus cont. Leokrat. c. 30, p. 222), though other authors recount the same
incident as having happened to a person named Kyrsilus, during the pre-
ceding year, when the Athenians quitted Athens: see Demosthen. de
CoronA, p. 296, c. 59; and Cicero de Officiis, iii, 11. That two such acts
were perpetrated by the Athenians, is noway probable: and if we are to
choose between the two, the story of Herodotus is far the more probable.
In the migration of the preceding year, we know that a certain number of
Athenians actually did stay behind in the acropolis, and Kyrsilus might
have been among them, if he had chosen. Moreover, Xerxes held out no
offers, and gave occasion to no deliberation ; while the offers of Mardonius
might really appear to a well-minded citizen deserving of attention.

Isokrates (Or. iv, Panegyric. p. 74, c. 42) states that the Athenians con-
demned many persons to death for medism (in allusion doubtless to The-
mistoklés as one), but he adds, — “ even now they imprecate curses on any
citizen who enters into amicable negotiation with the Persians,” —éy 62
Toig ovAAdyorg Ert kal viv dpd¢ rotobvra, elrig éxixnpvxederas Tépoate Tov
moAirav, It is difficult to believe that in his time any such imprecation
ean have been included in the solemnities whereby the Athenian meetings
were opened. ;

156 : HISTORY OF GREECE.

envoys, conjointly with Megara and Platea, to remonstrate with
the Spartans on their backwardness and breach of faith, and to
invoke them even thus late to come forth at once and meet Mar-
donius in Attica: not omitting to intimate, that if they were thus
deserted, it would become imperatively necessary for them,
against their will, to make terms with the enemy. So careless,
however, were the Spartan ephors respecting Attica and the
Megarid, that they postponed giving an answer to these envoys
for ten successive days, while in the mean time they pressed with
all their efforts the completion of the isthmic fortifications. And
after having thus amused the envoys as long as they could, they
would have dismissed them at last with a negative answer, —
such was their fear of adventuring beyond the Isthmus, — had
not a Tegean, named Chileos, whom they much esteemed, and
to whom they communicated the application, reminded them that
no fortifications at the Isthmus would suffice for the defence of
Peloponnesus, if the Athenians became allied with Mardonius,
and thus laid the peninsula open by sea. The strong opinion of
this respected Tegean, proved to the ephors that their selfish
policy would not be seconded by their chief Peloponnesian allies,
and brought to their attention, probably for the first time, that
' danger by sea might again be renewed, though the Persian fleet
had been beaten in the preceding year, and was now at a distance
from Greece. It changed their resolution,.not less completely
than suddenly ; and they despatched forthwith in the night five
thousand Spartan citizens to the Isthmus, — each man with seven
Helots attached to him. And when the Athenian envoys, igno-
rant of this sudden change of policy, came on the next day to
give peremptory notice that Athens would no longer endure such
treacherous betrayal, but would forthwith take measures for her
own security and separate pacification, — the ephors affirmed on
their oath that the troops were already on their march, and were
probably by this time out of the Spartan territory.! Considering

! Herodot. ix, 10, 11; Plutarch, Aristeidés, c. 10. Plutarch had read a
decree ascribed to Aristeidés, in which Kimon, Xanthippus, and Myrénidés,
were named envoys to Sparta. But it is impossible that Xanthippus could
have taken part in the embassy, seeing that he was now in command of
the fleet. 4

Probably the Helots must have followed: one hardly sees how so great &

BATTLES OF PLATAA AND MYKALE. 157

that this step was an expiation, imperfect, tardy, and reluctant,
for foregoing desertion and breach of promise,— the ephors
may probably have thought that the mystery of the night-march,
and the sudden communicgtion of it as an actual fact to the
envoys, in the way of reply, would impress more emphatically
the minds of the latter, — who returned with the welcome tidings
to Salamis, and prepared their countrymen for speedy action.
Five thousand Spartan citizens, each with seven light-armed
Helots as attendants, were thus on their march to the theatre of
war. Throughout the whole course of Grecian history, we never
hear of any number of Spartan citizens at all approaching to
five thousand being put on foreign service at the same time.
But ‘this was not all: five thousand Lacedemonian Periceki,
each with one light-armed Helot to attend him, were also de-
spatched to the Isthmus, to take part in the same struggle. Such
unparalleled efforts afford sufficient measure of the alarm which,
though late yet real, now reigned at Sparta. Other Pelopon-
nesian cities followed the example, and a large army was new
collected under the Spartan Pausanias.

It appears that Mardonius was at this moment in secret cor-
respondence with the Argeians, who, though professing neutrality,
are said to have promised him that they would arrest the march
of the Spartans beyond their own borders.! We may reasonably
doubt whether they ever made such a promise: but at any rate,
the suddenness of the march as well as the greatness of the
force prevented them from fulfilling it; and they were forced to
content themselves with apprizing Mardonius instantly of the
fact, through their swiftest courier. It determined that general

mumbcr could have been all suddenly collected, and marched off in one
night, no preparations having been made beforehand.

Dr. Thirlwall (Hist. Gr. ch. xvi, p. 366) suspects the correctness of the
narrative of Herodotus, on grounds which do not appear to me convincing.
It seems to me that, after all, the lite~al narrative is more probable than
anything which we can substitute in its place. The Spartan foreign policy
all depended on the five ephors; there was no public discussion or criti-
cism. Now the conduct of these ephors is consistent and intelligible, —
though selfish, narrow-minded, and insensible to any dangers except what
are present and obvious. Nor can I think, with Dr. Thirlwall, that the
manner of communication ultimately adopted is of the nature of a jest.

 } Herodot. ix, 12

158 HISTORY O GREECE.

to evacuate Attica, and to carry on the war in Boeotia, — a coun-
try in every way more favorable to him. He had for some time
refrained from committing devastations in or round Athens,
hoping that the Athenians might be jnduced to listen to his prop-
ositions; but the last days of his stay were employed in burning
and destroying whatever had been spared by the host of Xerxes
during the preceding summer. After a fruitless attempt to sur-
prise a body of one thousand Lacedzmonians which had been
detached for the protection of Megara,! he withdrew all his
army into Beeotia, not taking either the straight road to Platza
through Eleuthere, or to Thebes through Phylé, both which
roads were mountainous and inconvenient for cavalry, but march-
ing in the northeasterly direction to Dekeleia, where he was met
by some guides from the adjoining regions near the river Asdépus,
and conducted through the deme of Sphendaleis to Tanagra.
He thus found himself, by a route longer but easier, in Beotia,
on the plain of the Asépus: along which river he next day
marched westward to Skdlus, a town in the territory of Thebes,
seemingly near to that of Platewa.2 He then took up a position
not far off, in the plain on the left bank of the Asépus: his left
wing over against Erythra, his centre over against Hysie, and

’ There were stories current at Megara, even in the time of Pausanias,
respecting some of these Persians, who were said to have been brought to
destruction by the intervention of Artemis (Pausan. i, 40, 2).

* Herodot. ix, 15. The situation of the Attic deme Sphendalé, or Sphen-
daleis, seems not certainly known (Ross, Uéber die Demen von Attika, p.
138); but Colonel Leake and Mr. Finlay think that jt stood “near Aio
Merkurio, which now gives name to the pass leading from Dekeleia through
the ridges of Parnes into the extremity of the Tanagrian plain, at a place
called Malakasa.” (Leake, Athens and the Demi of Attica, vol. ii, sect.1v. °
p- 123.)

Mr. Finlay (Oropus and the Diakria, p. 38) says that “ Malakasa is the

only place on this road where a considerable body of cavalry could con-
veniently halt.”
_ It appears that the Beeotians from the neighborhood of the Asépus were
necessary as guides for this road. Perhaps even the territory of Ordpus
was at this time still a part of Boeotia: we do not certainly know at what
period it was first conquered by the Athenians.

The combats between Athenians and Boeatians will be found to take
place most frequently in this southeastern region of Boeotia, —Tana>®
CEnophyta, Delium, ete.

”

BATTLES OF PLATEA AND MYKALE. 159

his right in the territory of Plateea: and he employed his army
in constructing forthwith a fortified camip! of ten furlongs square,
defended by wooden walls and towers, cut from trees in the
Theban territory.

Mardonius found himself thus with his numerous army, in a
plain favorable for cavalry ; with a camp more or less defensible,
— the fortified city of Thebes = in his rear, — and a considerable
stock of provisions as well as a friendly region behind him from
whence to draw more. Few among his army, however, were either
hearty in the cause or confident of success :3 even the native Per-
sians had been disheartened by the flight of the monarch the year
before, and were full of melancholy auguries. A splendid banquet
to which the Theban leader Attaginus invited Mardonius, along
with fifty Persians and fifty Theban or Beotian guests, exhibited
proofs of this depressed feeling, which were afterwards recounted
to Herodotus himself by one of the guests present, —an Orcho-
menian citizen of note named Thersander. The banquet being
80 arranged as that each couch was occupied by one Persian and —
one Theban, this man was accosted by his Persian neighbor in
Greek, who inquired to what city he belonged, and, upon learning
that he was an Orchomenian,‘ continued thas: “ Since thou hast
now partaken with me in the same table and cup, I desire to
leave with thee some memorial of my convictions: the rather, in
order that thou mayst be thyself forewarned so as to take the
best counsel for thine own safety. Seest thou these Persians
here feasting, and the army which we left yonder encamped near
the river? Yet a little while, and out of all these thou shalt
behold but few surviving.” Thersander listened to these words

! Yferodot. ix, 15.

* The strony-town of Thebes was of much service to him (Thucyd. i, 90).

2 Herodot. ix. 40, 45, 67; Plutarch, Aristeidés, c. 18.

4 Herodot. ix, 16. Thersander, though an Orchomenian, passes as a
Theban — [lépony re xai OnGaiov tv «Aivg éxaory — a proof of the intimate
connection between Thebes and Orchomenus at this time, which is farther
illustrated by Pindar, Isthm. i, 51 (compare the Scholia ad loc. and at the
beginning of the Ode), respecting the Theban family of Herodotus and
Asopodorus. The ancient mythical feud appears to Have gone to sleep, but
a deadly hatred will he found to grow up in later times between these two
towns.

160 HISTORY OF GREECE.

with astonishment, spoken as they were with strong emotion and
a flood of tears, and replied: “Surely, thou art bound to reveal
this to Mardonius, and to his confidential advisers:” but the
Persian rejoined: “My friend, man cannot avert that which
God hath decreed to come: no one will believe the revelation,
sure though it be. Many of us Persians know this well, and are
here serving only under the bond of necessity. And truly this
is the most hateful of all human sufferings, — to be full of knowl-
edge, and at the same time to have no power over any result.” !
“ This (observes Herodotus) I heard myself from the Orchome-
nian Thersander, who told me farther that he mentioned the fact
to several persons about him, even before the battle of Platea.”
It is certainly one of the most curious revelations in the whole
history ; not merely as it brings forward the historian in his own
personality, communicating with a personal friend of the Theban
leaders, and thus provided with good means of information as to
the general events of the campaign, — but also as it discloses to
us, on testimony not to be suspected, the real temper of the
native Persians, and even of the chief men among them. If so
many of these chiefs were not merely apathetic, but despondent,
in the cause, much more decided would be the same absence of
will and hope in their followers and the subject allies. To follow
the monarch in his overwhelming march of the preceding year,
was gratifying in many ways to the native Persians: but every
man was sick of the enterprise as now cut down under Mar-
' donius: and Artabazus, the second in command, was not merely
slack but jealous of his superior.2 Under such circumstances we
shall presently not be surprised to find the whole army disap-
pearing forthwith, the moment Mardonius is slain.

Among the Grecian allies of Mardonius, the Thebans. and

1 Heredot. ix, 16, 17. The last observation here quoted is striking .
_ and emphatic —éyViorn 62 ddbvqg tort trav év dvdparoict atta, roAAa
gpovéovra pydevdg xparéetv. It will have to be more carefully considered at
a later period of this history, when we come to touch upon the scientific
life of the Greeks, and upon the philosophy of happiness and duty as con-
ceived by Aristotle. If carried fully out, this position is the direct negative
of what Aristotle lays down in his Ethics, as to the superior happiness of
the Biog Yewpyrixoc, or life of scientific.observation and reflection.
* Herodot. ix, 66.

\

BATTLES OF PLATZA AND MYKALE. 161

Beeotians were active and zealous, most of the remainder luke-
warm, and the Phocians even of doubtful fidelity. Their contin-
gent of one thousand hoplites, under Harmokydés, bad been
tardy in joining him, having only come up since he retired from
Attica into Beotia: and some of the Phocians even remained
behind in the neighborhood of Parnassus, prosecuting manifest
hostilities against the Persians. Aware of the feeling among
this contingent, which the Thessalians took care to place before
him i. an unfavorable point of view, Mardonius determined to
impress upon thein a lesson of intimidation. Causing them to
form in a separate body on the plain, he then brought up his
numerous cavalry-all around them: while the phémé, or sudden
simultaneous impression, ran through the Greek allies as well as
the Phocians themselves, that he was about to shoot them down.!
The general Harmokydés, directing his men to form a square and
close their ranks, addressed to them short exhortations to sell
their lives dearly, and to behave like brave Greeks against bar-
barian assassiis,— when the cavalry rode up, apparently to the
charge, and advanced close to the square, with uplifted javelins
and arrows on the string, some few of which were even actually
discharged. The Phocians maintained, as enjoined, steady ranks
with a firm countenance, and the cavalry wheeled about without
any actual attack or damage. After this mysterious demonstra-
tion, Mardonius condescended to compliment the Phocians on
their courage, and to assure them, by means of a herald, that he
had been greatly misinformed respecting them: he at the same
time exhorted them to be faithful and forward in service for the
future, and promised that all good behavior should be amply
recompensed. Herodotus seems uncertain, — difficult as the sup-
position is to entertain,— whether Mardonius did not really
intend at first to massacre the Phocians in the field, and desisted
from the intention only on seeing how much blood it would cost
to accomplish. However this may be, the scene itself was a

1 Herodot. ix, 17. dteEqade nun, Oc xaraxovtiei agéac. Respecting 977,
see a note a little farther on, at the Battle of Mykalé, in this same chapter.

Compare the case of the Delians at Adramyttium, surrounded and slain
with missiles by the Persian satrap, though not his enemies — tepior7oac
rodg Eavtod xarnxovtioe (Thucyd. viii, 108)

VOL. V. lloc.

162 _ HISTORY OF GREECE.

remarkable reality, and presented one among many other proofs
of the lukewarmness and suspicious fidelity of the army.!
Conformably to the suggestion of the Thebans, the liberties of .
Greece were now to be disputed in Beeotia: and not only had
the position of Mardonius already been taken, but his camp also
fortified, before the united Grecian army approached Kitheron
in its forward march from the Isthmus. After the full force of
the Lacedzemonians had reached the Isthmus, they had to await
the arrival of their Peloponnesian and other confederates. The
hoplites who joined them were as follows: from Tegea, fifteen
hundred ; from Corinth, five thousand, — besides a small body of
three hundred from the Corinthian colony of Potidea; from the
Arcadian Orchomenus, six hundred; from Sikyon, three thou-
sand; from Epidaurus, eight hundred ; from Troezen, one thou-
sand; from Lepreon, two hundred; from Mykéne and Tiryns,
four hundred ; from Phlius, one thousand ; from Hermioné, three
hundred; from Eretria and Styra, six hundred; from Chalkis, —
four hundred ; from Ambrakia, five hundred ; from Leukas and
Anaktorium, eight hundred; from Palé in Kephallenia, two hun-
dred; from A®gina, five hundred. Onmarching from the Isthmus
to Megara, they took up three thousand Megarian hoplites ; and as
won as they reached Eleusis in their forward progress, the army
was completed by the junction of eight thousand Athenian
hoplites, and six hundred Platean, under Aristeidés, who passed
over from Salamis.2 The total force of hoplites, or heavy-armed

1 Od« Eyw drpexéug elreiv, obre el GAGov pev Grodéovres rode buxéac,
lenVévruv Tov Oecoaddy, etc. (Herodot. ix, 18.)

This confession of uncertainty as to motives and plans, distingnishing
between them and the visible facts which he is describing, is not without
importance as strengthening our confidence in the historian.

* Compare this list of Herodotus with the enumeration which Panusanias
read inscribed on the statue of Zeus, erected at Olympia by the Greeks who
took part in thé battle of Platsea (Pausan. v, 23, 1).

Pausanias found inscribed all the names here indicated by Herodotus
except the Palés of Kephallenia: and he found in addition the Eleians
Keans, Kythnians, Tenians, Naxians, and Mélians. The five last names
are islanders in the Augean: their contingents sent to Platsa must, at all
events, have been very small, and it is surprising to hear that they sent any,

especially when we recollect that there was a Greek fleet at this moment

a BATTLES OF PLATZ AND MYKALE. 168

troops, was thus thirty-eight thousand seven hundred men: there
were ne cavalry, and but very few bowmen; but if we add those
who are called light-armed, or unarmed generally, — some perhaps
with javelins or swords, but none with any defensive armor, —
the grand total-was not less than one hundred and ten thousand
men. Of these light-armed, or unarmed, there were, as com-
puted by Herodotus, thirty-five thousand in attendance on the
five thousand Spartan citizens, and thirty-four thousand five hun-
dred in attendance on the other hoplites, — together with eighteen
hundred Thespians, who were properly hoplites, yet so badly
armed as not to be reckoned in the ranks.}

Such was the number of Greeks present or near at hand in
the combat against the Persians at Platzea, which took place
some little time afterwards: but it seems that the contingents
were not at first completely full, and that new additions 2 contin-
ued to arrive until a few days before the battle, along with the
convoys of cattle and provisions which came for the subsistence
of the army. Pausanias marched first from the Isthmus to
Eleusis, where he was joined by the Athenians from Salamis:
at Eleusis, as well as at the Isthmus, the sacrifices were found
encouraging, and the united army then advanced across the ridge
of Kithzron, so as to come within sight of the Persians. When
Pausanias saw them occupying the line of the Asépus in the
plain beneath, he kept his own army on the mountain declivity

on service, to which it would be natural that they should join themselves
in preference to land-service.

With respect to the name of the Eleians, the suspicion of Brondstedt is
plausible, that Pausanias may have mistaken the name of the Palés of
Kephallenia for theirs, and may have fancied that he read FAAEIOI when
it was really written ITAAEIZ, in an inscription at that time about six han-
dred years old. The place in the series wherein Pausanias places the name
of the Eleians, strengthens the suspicion. Unless it be admitted, we shall
be driven, as the most probable alternative, to suppose a fraud committed:
by the vanity of the Eleians, which may easily have led them to alter a
name originally belonging to the Palés. The reader will recollect that the
Eleians were themselves the superintendents and curators at Olympia.

Plutarch seems to have read the same inscription as Pausanias (De
Herodoti Malignit. p. 873).

' Herodot. ix, 19, 28, 29.

* Herodot. ix, 28. of érigorravrég re wat ol dpxny EAdovrec ‘EAARvon.

164 HISTORY OF GREECE.

near Erythre, without choosing to adventure Limself in the level
ground. Mardonius, finding them not disposed to seek battle in
the plain, despatched his numerous and excellent cavalry under
Masistius, the most distinguished officer in his army, to attack
them. For the most part, the ground was so uneven as to check
their approach, — but the Megarian contingent, which happened
to be more exposed than the rest, were so hard pressed that they
were forced to send to Pausanias for aid. They appear to have had
not only no cavalry, but no bowmen or light-armed troops of any
sort with missile weapons; while the Persians, excellent archers
and darters, using very large bows, and trained in such accom-
plishments from their earliest childhood, charged in successive
squadrons and overwhelmed the Greeks with darts and arrows,
— not omitting contemptuous taunts on their cowardice for keep-
ing back from the plain.! So general was then the fear of the
Persian cavalry, that Pausanias could find none of the Greeks,
except the Athenians, willing to volunteer and go to the rescue
of the Megarians. A body. of Athenians, however, especially
three hundred chosen troops under Olympiodorus, strengthened
with some howmen, immediately marched to the spot and took up
the combat with the Persian cavalry. For some time the strug-
gle was sharp and doubtful: at length the general, Masistius, —
a man renowned for bravery, lofty in stature, clad in conspicu-
ous armor, and mounted on a Niswan horse with golden trap-
pings, — charging at the head of his troops, had his horse struck
by an arrow in the side. The animal immediately reared and
threw his master on the ground, close to the ranks of the Athe-
nians, who, rushing forward, seized the horse, and overpowered
Masistius before he could rise. So impenetrable were the de-
fences of his helmet and breastplate,? however, that they had
considerable difficulty in killing him, though he was in their
power: at length a spearman pierced him in the eye. The
death of the general passed unobserved by the Persian cavalry,
but as soon as they missed him and became aware of the loss,

_ About the missile weapons and skill of the Persians, see Herodot.i, 136:
Xenophon, Anabas. iii, 4, 17.

Cyrus the younger was eminent in the use both of the bow and the jave
lin (Xenoph. Anab. i, 8, 26; i, 9,5: compare Cyropeed. i, 2, 4).

* See Quintus Curtius, iii, 11, 15; and the note of Miitzel.

BATTLES OF PLATEA AND MYKALE. 165

they charged furiously, and in one mass to recover the dead body.
At first the Athentans, too few in number to resist the onset,
were compelled for a time to give way, abandoning the body;
but reinforcements presently arriving at their call, the Persians
were driven back with loss, and it finally remained in their pos-
session.!

‘The death of Masistius, coupled with that final repulse of the
cavalry which left his body in possession of the Greeks, produced
a strong effect on both armies, encouraging the one as much as it
disheartened the other. Throughout the camp of Mardonius,
the grief was violent and unbounded, manifested by wailings so
loud as to echo over all Boeotia; while the hair of men, horses,
and cattle, was abundantly cut in teken of mourning. The
Greeks, on the other hand, overjoyed at their success, placed the
dead body in a cart, and paraded it around the army: even the
hoplites ran out of their ranks to look at it; not only hailing it
as a valuable trophy, but admiring its stature and proportions*®
And so much was their confidence increased, that Pausanias now
ventured to quit the protéction of the mountain-ground, inconve-
nient from its scanty supply of water, and to take up his posi-
tion in the plain beneath, interspersed only with low hillocks.
Marching from Erythre in a westerly direction along the decliv-
ities of Kitheron, and passing by Hysiwe, the Greeks occupied a
line of camp in the Platean territory along the Asépus and on
its right bank; with their right wing near to the fountain called
Gargaphia,? and their left wing near to the chapel, surrounded

1 Herodot. ix, 21, 22, 23; Plutarch, Aristeidés, c. 14.

2 Herodot. ix, 24, 25. olpwy7 Te xpeduevor anAér@: Gmacav yap rv
Bow Tiny xareiye 7x0, etc.

The exaggerated demonstrations of grief, ascribed to Xerxes and Atossa
in the Perse of Auschylus, have often been blamed by critics: we may see
from this passage how much they are in the manners of Orientals of that
day.

8 Hesodot. ix, 25-30; Plutarch, Aristeidés,c. 11. 1d rod ’Avdpoxparove
fp@ov tyyv¢ dice muxvav Kat ovokiwy dévépav mrepteyopuevor.

The expression of Herodotus respecting this position taken by Pausanias,
Otro: piv ody raxSévtec ent tH’Aowor® lorparorredebovro, as well as the
words which follow in the next chapter (31) — Ol BapBapor, ruPdpevor elvat
rode “EAAnvac év TlAaratgot, tappoay Kal abrot én? rdv ’Aowndv Tov ratty
béovra, — show plainly that the Grecian troops were encamped along the

166 HISTORY OF GREECE.

by a shady grove, of the Platwan hero, Androkratés. In this
position they were marshalled according to nations, or separate
fractions of the Greek name,— the Lacedzmonians on the right
wing, with the Tegeans and Corinthians immediately joining
them, — and the Athenians on the left wing; a post which, as
second in point of dignity, was at first claimed by the Tegeans,
chiefly on grounds of mythical exploits, to the exclusion of the
Athenians, but ultimately adjudged by the Spartans, after hear-
ing both sides, to Athens.! In the field, even Lacedzemonians
followed those democratical forms which pervaded so generally
Grecian military operations: in this case, it was not the generals,
but the Lacedemonian troops in a body, who heard the argu
ment, and delivered the verdict by unanimous acclamation.

Asépus on the Platzan side, while the Persians in their second position oc-
cupied the ground on the opposite, or Theban side of the river. Which-
ever army commenced the attack had to begin by passing the Asdpus
(c. 36-59).

For the topography of this region, and of the positions occupied by the two
armies, compare Squire, in Walpole's Turkey, p. 338; Kruse, Hellas, vol. ii,
ch. vi, p. 9, seg., and ch. viii, p. 592, seg.: and the still more copious and
accurate information of Colonel Leake, Travels in Northern Greece, ch.
xvi, vol. ii, pp. 824-360. Both of them have given plans of the region;
that which I annex is borrowed from Kiepert’s maps. I cannot but think
that the fountain Gargaphia is not yet identified, and that both Kruse and
Leake place the Grecian position farther from the river Asdépus than is con-
sistent with the words of Herodotus; which words seem to specify points
near the two extremities, indicating that the fountain of Gargaphia was
near the river towards the right of the Grecian position, and the chapel of
Androkratés also near the river towards the left of that position, where the
Athenians were posted. Nor would such a site for a chapel of Androkratés
be inconsistent with Thucydides (iii, 24), who merely mentions that chapel
as being on the right hand of the first mile of road from Platza to Thebes.

Considering the length of time which has elapsed since the battle, it
would not be surprising if the spring of Gargaphia were no longer recog-
nizable. At any rate, neither the fountain pointed out by Colonel Leake
(p.332) nor that of Vergutiani, which had been supposed by Colonel Squire
and Dr. Clarke, appear to me suitable for Gargaphia.

The errors of that plan of the battle of Plata which accompanies the
Voyage d’Anacharsis, are now well understood.

1 Herodot. ix, 26-29. Judging from the battles of Corinth (n.c. 396) and
Mantineia (.c. 418), the Tegeans seem afterwards to have dropped this
pretension to occupy the left wing, and to have preferred the post in the
line next to the Lacedsmonians (Xenoph. Hellen. iv, 2, 19).

BATTLES OF PLATZA AND MYKALE. . 467

Mardonius, apprized of this change of position, marched his
army also a little farther to the. westward, and posted himself
opposite to the Greeks, divided from them by the river Asépus.
At the suggestion of the Thebans, he himself, with his Persians
and Medes, the picked men of his army, took post on the left
wing, immediately opposite to the Lacedemonians on the Greek
right, and even extending so far as to cover the Tegean ranks on
the left of the Lacedemonians: Baktrians, Indians, Saks, with
other Asiatics and Egyptians, filled the centre: and the Greeks
and: Macedonians in the service of Persia, the right, — over
against. the hoplites of Athens. The numbers of these last-
mentioned Greeks Herodotus could not learn, though he esti-
mates them conjecturally at fifty thousand:! nor can we place
any confidence in the total of three hundred thousand, which he
gives as belonging to the other troops of Mardonius, though
probably it cannot have been much less.

In this position lay the two armies, separated only by a narrow
space including the river Asépus, and each expecting a battle,
whilst the sacrifices on behalf of each were offered up. Pausa-
nias, Mardonius, and the Greeks in the Persian army, had each
a separate prophet to offer sacrifice, and to asceftain tlie dispo-
sitions of the gods; the two first had men from the most distin-
guished prophetic breeds in Elis, — the latter invited one from
Leukas.2 All received large pay, and the prophet of Pausanias
had indeed been honored with a recompense above all pay, —
the gift of full Spartan citizenship for himself as well as for his
brother. It happened that the prophets on both sides delivered
the same report of their respective sacrifices, — favorable for
resistance if attacked; unfavorable for beginning the battle. At
a moment when doubt and indecision was the reigning feeling on
both sides, this was the safest answer for the prophet to give, and
the most satisfactory for the soldiers to hear. And though the
answer from Delphi had been sufficiently encouraging, and the

1 Herodot. ix, 31, 92.

* Herodot. ix, 36, 38. peptodapévog obk dAiyov.

These prophets were men of great individual consequence, as May ve
seen by the details which Herodotus gives respecting their adventuma
compare also the history of Euenins, ix, 93.

168 HISTORY OF GREECE.

kindness of the patron-heroes of Platwa! had been solemnly
invoked, yet Pausanias did not venture to cross the Asépus and
begin the attack, in the face of a pronounced declaration from
his prophet. Nor did even Hegesistratus, the prophet employed
by Mardonius, choose on his side to urge an aggressive move-
ment, though he had a deadly personal hatred against the Lace-
dzemonians, and would have been delighted to see them worsted.
There arose commencements of conspiracy, perbaps‘encouraged by
promises or bribes from the enemy, among the wealthier Athenian
hoplites, to establish an oligarchy at Athens under Persian su-
premacy, like that which now existed at Thebes, — a conspiracy
full of danger at such a moment, though fortunately repressed2
by Aristeidés, with a hand at once gentle and decisive. More
over, the annoyance inflicted by the Persian cavalry, under the
guidance of the Thebans, was incessant: ¢heir constant assaults,
and missile weapons from the other sidé of the Asopus, prevented
the Greeks from using it for supplies of water, so that the whole
army was forced to water at the fountain Gargaphia, at the
extreme right of the position,3 near the Lacedxmonian hoplites.
Moreover, the Theban leader, Timegenidas, remarking the egn-
voys which arrived over the passes of Kithzron, in the rear of
the Grecian camp, and the constant reinforcements of hoplites
which accompanied them, prevailed upon Mardonius to employ
his cavalry in cutting off such communication. The first move-

! Plutarch, Aristeidés, c. xi; Thucyd. ii, 74.

* Plutarch, Aristeidés, c. 13.

3 Herodot. ix, 40, 49, 50. r7v re kphynv tiv Tapyadiny, aw ne tdpevero
way Td arparevpa Td 'EAAnvixov — épuxdpevor 62 axd tod 'Acwrod, obrw J
én? Triv Kpyvny epoiteov’ dard Tot rotapyot yap age obk éEqv tédup gopéeoar,
br6 te tov lnxéwv Kat rokevparun.

Diodorus (xi, 30) affirms that the Greek position was so well defended
by the nature of the ground, and so difficult of attack, that Mardonius was
prevented from making use of his superior numbers. It is evident from
the account of Herodotus that this is quite incorrect. The position seems
to have had no protection except what it derived from the river Asépus,
and the Greeks were ultimately forced to abandon it by the incessant at-
tacks of the Persian cavalry. The whole account, at once diffuse and
wninstructive, given by Diodorus of this battle (xi, 30-86), forms a strong
contrast with the clear, impressive, and circumstantial narrative of He
rodotus.

BATTLES OF PLATZA AND MYKALE. 169

ment of this sort, undertaken by night against the pass called
the Oak Heads, was eminently successful : a train of five hundred
beasts of burden with supplies, was attacked descending into the
plain with its escort, all of whom were either slain or carried
prisoners to the Persian camp: nor was it safe for any farther
convoys to approach the Greeks.! Eight days had already
been passed in inaction before Timegenidas suggested, or Mar-
donius executed, this manceuvre, which it is fortunate for the
Greeks that he did not attempt earlier, and which afforded clear
proof how much might be hoped from an efficient employment of
his cavalry, without the ruinous risk of a general‘action. Never-
theless, after waiting two days longer, his impatience became
uncontrollable, and he determined on a general battle forthwith.2
In vain did Artabazus endeavor to dissuade him from the step,
—taking the same view as the Thebans, that in a pitched battle
the united Grecian army was invincible, and that the only suc-
cessful policy was that of delay and corruption to disunite them :
he recommended standing on the defensive, by means of Thebes,
well fortified and amply provisioned, — which: would allow time
for distributing effective bribes among the leading men through-
out the various Grecian cities. This suggestion, which Herodo-
tus considers as wise and likely to succeed, was repudiated by
Mardonius as cowardly and unworthy of the recognized superior-
ity of the Persian arms.3

But while he overruled, by virtue of superior authority, the
objections of all around him, Persian as well as Greek, he could.
not but feel daunted by their reluctant obedience, which he sus-
pected might arise from their having heard oracles or prophecies
of unfavorable augury. He therefore summoned the chief officers,
Greek as well as Persian, and put the question to them, whether
they knew any prophecy announcing that the Persians were
doomed to destruction in Greece. All were silent: some did
not know the prophecies, but others, Herodotus intimates, knew
them full well, though they did not dare to speak. Receiving
no answer, Mardonius said, “Since ye either do not know or

' Heredot. ix, $8, 89. * Herodot. ix, 40, 41.
® Herodot. ix, 42.
VOL. V. 8

170 HISTORY OF GREECE.

will not tell, I, who know well, will myself speak out. There is
an cracle to the effect, that Persian invaders of Greece shall
plunder the temple of Delphi, and shall afterwards all be de-
stroyed. Now we, being aware of this, shall neither go against
that temple, nor try to plunder it: on that ground, therefore, we
shall not be destroyed. Rejoice ye, therefore, ye who are well-
affected to the Persians, — we shall get the better of the Greeks.”
With that he gave orders to prepare everything for a general
attack and battle on the morrow.! .

It is not improbable that the Orchomenian Thersander was
present at this interview, and may have reported it to Herodotus.
But the reflection of the historian himself is not the least curious
part of the whole, as illustrating the manner in which these proph-
ecies sunk into."men’s minds, and determined their judgments.
Herodotus knew, though he does not cite it, the particular prophecy
to which Mardonius made allusion; and he pronounces, in the
most affirmative tone,? that it had no reference to the Persians: it
referred to an ancient invasion of Greece by the Illyrians and the
Encheleis. But both Bakis, from whom he quotes four lines,
and Musszeus had prophesied, in the plainest manner, the destruc-
tion of the Persian army on the banks of the Thermédon and
Asépus. And these are the prophecies which we must suppose
the officers convoked by Mardonius to have known also, though
they did not dare to speak out: it was the fault of Mardonius
himself that he did not take warning.

The attack of a multitude like that of Mardonius was not
likely under any circumstances to be made so rapidly as to take
the Greeks by surprise: but the latter were forewarned of it by
a secret visit from Alexander, king of Macedon; who, riding up
to the Athenian advanced posts in the middle of the night, desired
to speak with Aristeidés and the other generals, Announcing to
them alone his name, and proclaiming his earnest sympathy for
the Grecian cause, as well as the hazard which he incurred by
this nightly visit, he apprized them that Mardouius, though

1 Herodot. ix, 42.

* Herodot. ix, 43. Toitov & tywye rdv ypnoudy tov Mapddriog else be
Ilépoag Exetv, b¢ "TAAvpioug re nat rdv 'EyyeAéov orpardy olda re
woinpévoy, GAA’ oik bc Tépoac. "AAAR ra udv Baxeds be raurqv rds
uaxny gore mewosnuéva, ete.

BATTLES OF PLATZA AND MYKALE. 17}

eager for a battle long ago, could not by any effort obtain favor-
able sacrifices, but was, nevertheless, even in spite of this obstacle,
determined on an attack the next morning. “Be ye prepared
accordingly ; and if ye succeed in this war (said he) remember
to liberate me also from the Persian yoke: I too am a Greek by
descent, and thus risk my head because I cannot endure to see
Greece enslaved.”!

The communication of this important message, made by Aris-
teidés to Pausanias, elicited from him a proposal not a little
surprising as coming from a Spartan general. He requested the
Athenians to change places with the Lacedzemonians in the line.
“We Lacedemonians (said he) now stand opposed to the Per-
sians and Medes, against whom we have never yet contended,
while ye Athenians have fought and conquered them at Mara-
thon. March ye then over to the right wing and take our places,
while we will take yours in the left wing, against the Boeotians
and Thessalians, with whose arms and attack we are familiar.”
The Athenians readily acceded, and the reciprocal change of
order was accordingly directed: nor was it yet quite completed
when day broke, and the Theban allies of Mardonius immediately
took notice of what had been done. That general commanded a
corresponding change in his own line, so as to place the native
Persians once more over against the Lacedemonians: upon
which Pausanias, seeing that his manceuvre had failed, led back
his Lacedemonians to the right wing, while a second movement
on the part of Mardonius replaced both armies in the order orig-
inally observed.?

No incident similar te this will be found throughout the whole
course of Lacedemonian history. To evade encountering the
best troops in the enemy’s line, and to depart for this purpose
from their privileged post on the right wing, was a step well
calculated to lower them in the eyes of Greece, and could hardly

1 Herodot. ix, 44-45. The language about the sacrifices is remarkable,
— Aéyw db? dv bre Mapdoviy re xal r§ orparcg ob divarat TA ofGyta
karadvipta yevécdat: madat yap Gv tuayeode, etc.

Mardonius had tried many unavailing efforts to procure better sacrifices :
it could not be done,

* Herodot. ix, 47; Platarch, Aristeidés, c.16. Here, as on many other
occasions, Plutarch rather spoils than assists the narrative of Herodotus.

172 HISTORY OF GREECE. -

have failed to produce that effect, if the intention had been
realized: it is at the same time the highest compliment to the
formidable reputation of the native Persian troops, — a reputa-
tion recognized by Herodotus, and well sustained at least by their
personal bravery.!. Nor can we wonder that this publicly mani-
fested reluctance on the part of the leading troops in the Grecian
army contributed much to exalt the rash confidence of Mardonius:
a feeling which Herodotus, in Homeric style,? casts into the
speech of a Persian herald sent to upbraid the Lacedemonians,
and challenge them to a “single combat with champions of equal
numbers, Lacedemonians against Persians.” This herald, whom
no one heard or cared for, and who serves but as a mouthpiece
for bringing out the feelings belonging to the moment, was fol-
lowed by something very real and terrible, —a vigorous attack
on the Greek line by the Persian cavalry ; whose rapid motions,
and showers of arrows and javelins, annoyed the Greeks on this
day more than ever. The latter, as has been before stated, had
no cavalry whatever; nor do their light troops, though sufficiently
numerous, appear to have rendered any service, with the excep-
tion of the Athenian bowmen. How great was the advantage
gained by the Persian cavalry, is shown by the fact that they for
a time drove away the Lacedemonians from the fountain of
. Gargaphia, so as to choke it up and render it unfit for use. As
the army had been prevented by the cavalry from resorting to
the river AsOpus, this fountain had been of late the only water-
ing-place: and without it the position which they then occupied
became untenable, — while their provisions also were exhausted,
inasmuch as the convoys, from fear of the Persian cavalry, could
not descend from Kithzron to join them.3

In this dilemma, Pausanias summoned the’ Grecian chiefs to
his tent, and after an anxious debate the resolution was taken, in
case Mardonius should not bring on a general action in the course
of the day, to change their position during the night, when there

! Herodot. ix, 71.

* Compare the reproaches of Hektor to Diomédés (Iliad, viii, 161).

3 Herodot. ix, 49,50. Pausanias mentions that the Plateans restored
the fountain of Gargaphia after the victory (rd idwp dveovoarro) ; but he
hardly seems to speak as if he had himself seen it (ix, 4, 2). Z

BATTLES OF PLATZA AND MYKALE. 178

would be no interruption from the cavalry; and to occupy the
ground called the island, distant about ten furlongs in a direction
nearly west, and seemingly north of the town of Platea, which
was itself about twenty furlongs distant: this island, improperly
so denominated, included the ground comprised between two
branches of the river Ocervé,! both of which flow from Kitheron,
and, after flowing for a certain time in channels about three furlongs
apart, form a junction and run in a northwesterly direction to-
wards one of the recesses of the gulf of Corinth, — quite distinct
from the Asopus, which, though also rising near at hand in the
lowest declivities under Kithseron, takes an easterly direction and
discharges itself into the sea opposite Euboea. Wher in this
so-called island, the army would be secure of water from the
stream in their rear; nor would they, as now, expose an extended
breadth of front to a numerous hostile cavalry separated from
them only by the Asépus.2_ It was farther resolved, that so soon
as the army should once be in occupation of the island, half of
the troops should forthwith march onward to disengage the con-
voys blocked up on Kithzron and conduct them to the camp.
Such was the plan settled in council among the different Grecian
chiefs; the march to be commenced at the beginning of the
second night-watch, when the enemy’s cavalry would have com-
pletely withdrawn.

In spite of what Mardonius is said to have determined, he
passed the whole day without any general attack : but his cavalry,
probably elated by the recent demonstration of the Lacedsemo-
nians, were on that day more daring and indefatigable than ever,
and inflicted much loss as well as severe suffering ;3 insomuch
that the centre of the Greek force (Corinthians, Megarians, ete.,
between the Lacedemonians and Tegeans on the right, and the

1 See a good description of the ground in Colonel Leake, Travels in
Northern Greece, ch. xvi, vol. ii, p. 358.

* Herodot. ix, 51. "Eg rotrov 67) rdv ydpov éBovAetoavro peracrivat, iva
cat tdare Exywot ypaoSa: agVive, nai oi lnréec ogége un otvoiaro, Gorep Kar’
idd govrar,

The last words have reference to the position of the two hostile armies,
extended front to front along the course of the Asdépus.

3 Herodot. ix, 52. xeivyy pay tiv huépny néoar, mpooxerpévnc Tie Inrov,
elyov Tovoy arputoyv,

174 HISTORY OF GREECE.

Athenians on the left), when the hour arrived for retinzg to the
island, commenced their march indeed, but forgot or disregarded
the preconcerted plan and the orders of Pausanias, in their im-
patience to obtain a complete shelter against the attacks of the
cavalry. Instead of proceeding to the island, they marched a
distance of twenty furlongs directly to the town of Platea, and
took-up a position in front of the Hereum, or temple of Héré,
where they were protected partly by the buildings, partly by the
comparatively high ground on which the town with its temple
stood. Betweén the position which the Greeks were about to
leave and that which they had resolved to occupy (@. e. between
the course of the Asépus and that of the Oeroé), there appear to
have been a range of low hills: the Lacedemonians, starting
from the right wing, had to march directly over these hills, while
the Athenians, from the left, were to turn them and get into the
plain on the other side.!' Pausanias, apprized that the divisions
of the centre had commenced their night-march, and concluding
of course that they would proceed to the island according to
orders, allowed a certain interval of time in order to prevent
confusion, and then directed that the Lacedemonians and Tege-
ans should also begin their movement towards that same position.
But here he found himself embarrassed by an unexpected obsta-
cle. The movement was retrograde, receding from the enemy,
and not consistent with the military honor of a Spartan; never-
theless, most of the taxiarchs, or leaders of companies, obeyed
without murmuring; but: Amompharetus, lochage or captain of
that band-which Herodotus calls the lochus of Pitana,2 obsti-
nately refused. Not having been present at the meeting in which
the resolution had been taken, he now heard it for the first time

1 Herodot. ix, 56. avoaviag —onpuyvac arizye 61d Tov Kodwvav rode
Aoinod, wavrag: sixovto d? wai Teyenras, ‘AYnvaio: d2 raySévres ficay Ta
Euradiy 4 Aaxedaipoviot. Ol piv yap rdv re dySuv dvreixovto Kal ri¢
brupeing Tov KiSapavoc. "ADyvaios d2, nara tpagdévtes é¢ rd sediov.

With which we must combine another passage, c. 59, intimating that the
track of the Athenians led them to turn and get behind the hills. which
prevented Mardonius from seeing them, though they were marching’ along
the plain: Mapdoviog—meixe éxt Aaxedatpoviovg xat Teyeyrag potvoug:
"ADyvaiovg yap tparopévoug bo rd wediov bxd trav dyVuv ob KaTedpa.

* There is on this point a difference between Thucydides and Herodo-

°

BATTLES OF PLATEA AND MYKALE. 175

with astonishment and disdain, declaring “ that he for one would
never so far disgrace Sparta as to run away from the foreigner.”!
Pausanias, with the second m command, Euryanax, exhausted
every effort to overcome his reluctance: but they could by no
means induce him to retreat; nor did they dare to move without
him, leaving his entire lochus exposed alone to the enemy.?
Amidst the darkness of night, and in this scene of indecision
and dispute, an Athenian messenger on horseback reached Pau-
sanias, instructed to ascertain what was passing; and to ask for
the last directions: for in spite of the resolution taken after
formal debate, the Athenian generals still mistrusted the Lace-
dzmonians, and doubted whether, after all, they would act as
they had promised: the movement of the central division having
become known to them, they sent at the last moment before they
commenced their own march, to assure themselves that the Spar-
tans were about to move also. A profound, and even an exag-
gerated mistrust, but too well justified by the previous behavior
of the Spartans towards Athens, is visible in this proceeding :$
yet it proved fortunate in its results,—for if the Athenians,
satisfied with executing their part in the preconcerted plan, had
marched at once to the island, the Grecian army would have
been severed without the possibility of reuniting, and the issue
of the battle might have proved altogether different. The
Athenian herald found the Lacedemonians still stationary in
their position, and the generals in hot dispute with Amomphare-
tus; who despised the threat of being left alone to make head
against the Persians, and when reminded that the resolution had
been taken by general vote of the officers, took up with both
hands a vast rock, fit for the hands of Ajax or Hektor, and cast

tus: the former affirms that there never was any Spartan lochus so called
(Thucyd. i, 21).

We have no means of reconciling the difference, nor can we be certain that
Thucydides i is right in his negative comprehending all a time — d¢ ofd”
éyéveto morore.

' Herodot. ix, 53, 54.

* Herodot. ix, 52, 53.

* Herodot. ix, 54, "Adnvaios — elyov arpépas ogéac abrode Iva trazxdnoayr,
éxiordpevor Ta samen ak gpovizara, og GAAa gpovedyTwy Kal dAda
AevorTur. ;

XN

~“

176 HISTORY OF GREECE.

it at the feet of Pausanias, saying —“ This is my pebble, where-
with I give my vote not to run away from the strangers.” Pau-
sanias denounced him as a madman,—desiring the herald to
report the scene of embarrassment which he had just come to
witness, and to entreat the Athenian generals not to commence
their retreat until the’ Lacedzmonians should also be in march.
In the mean time the dispute continued, and.was even prolonged
by the perverseness of Amompharetus until the morning began
to dawn; when Pausanias, afraid to remain longer, gave the
signal for retreat, — calculating that the refractory captain, when
he saw his lochus really left alone, would probably make up his
mind to follow. Having marched about ten furlongs, across the
hilly ground which divided him from the island, he commanded
a halt, — either to await Amompharetus, if he chose to follow, or
to be near enough to render aid and save him, if he were rash
enough to stand hia ground single-handed. Happily the latter,
seeing that his general had really departed, overcame his scru-
ples, and followed him; overtaking and joining the main body
in its first halt near the river Moloeis and the temple of Eleusi-
nian Démétér.!. The Athenians, commencing their movement at
the same time with Pausunias, got round the hills to the plain on
the other side and proceeded on their march towards the island.

When the day broke, the Persian cavalry were astonished to
find the Grecian position deserted. They immediately set them-
selves to the pursuit of the Spartans, whose march lay along
the higher and more conspicuous ground, and whose progress
had moreover been retarded by the long delay of Amompharetus :
the Athenians on the contrary, marching without halt and being
already behind the hills, were not open to view. To Mardonius,
this retreat of his enemy inspired an extravagant and confemptu-
ous confidence, which he vented in full measure to the Thessalian
Aleuade: “These are your boasted Spartans, who changed
their place just now in the line, rather than fight the Persians,
and have here shown by a barefaced flight what they are really
worth!” ‘With that, he immediately directed his whole army to
pursue and attack, with the utmost expedition. The Persians
crossed the Asépus, and ran after the Greeks at their best speed,

1 Herodot. xi. 56, 57. -

BATTLES OF PLATZA AND MYKALE. 177

pell-mell, without any thought of order or preparations for over-
coming resistance: the army already rang with shouts of victory,
in full confidence of swallowing up the fugitives as soon as they
were overtaken.

The Asiatic allies all followed the example of this disorderly
rush forward :! but the Thebans and the other Grecian allies on
the right wing of Mardonius, appear to have maintained some-
what better order.

Pausanias had not been able to retreat farther than the neigh-
borhood of the Demetrion, or temple of Eleusinian Déméter,
where he had halted to take up Amompharetus. Overtaken first
by the Persian horse, and next by Mardonius with the main
body, he sent a horseman forthwith to apprize the Athenians, and
to entreat their aid. Nor were the Athenians slack in comply-
ing with his request: but they speedily found themselves en-
gaged in conflict against the Theban allies of the enemy, and
therefore unable to reach him.® Accordingly, the Lacedsemo-
nians and Tegeates had to encounter the Persians single-handed,
without any assistance from the other Greeks. The Persians,
on arriving within bowshot of their enemies, planted in the
ground the spiked extremities of their gerrha, or long wicker
shields, forming a continuous breastwork, from behind which
they poured upon the Greeks a shower of arrows :3 their bows
were of the largest size, and drawn with no less power than skill.
In spite of the wounds and distress thus inflicted, Pausanias per-
sisted in the indispensable duty of offering the battle sacrifice,
and the victims were for some time unfavorable, so that he did

1 Herodot. ix. 59. éediwxov ae moddv Exacrog elyov, obre xoouq obdevi
xoounSévrec, obre rake. Kat obros pev Bog re xat duidy érjicay, o¢ dvap-
racéuevoe rode “EAAnvas.

Herodotus dwells especially on the reckless and disorderly manner in
which the Persians advanced: Plutarch, on the contrary, says of Mardo-
nius, — fyuv ovvreraypévny ti sivauy éxepépero troic Aaxedotpovioie,
etc. (Plutarch, Aristeid. c. 17.)

Plutarch: also says that Pausanias 7ye tiv GAAnv déivauiv mpdc ra¢
TlAaracae, etc., which is quite contrary to the real narrative of Herodo
tus. Pausanias intended to march to the island, not to Platwa: he did not
reach either the one or the other.

* Herodot. ix, 60, 61.

2 About the Persian bow, see Xenoph. Anabas. iii, 4, 17.

VOL. V. 8* 120c.

5 HISTORY OF GREECE.

not venture to give orders for advance and close combat. Many
were here wounded or slain in the ranks,' among them the brave
Kallikratés, the handsomest and strongest man in the army:
until Pausanias, wearied out with this compulsory and painful
delay, at length raised his eyes to the conspicuous Herzum of
the Plateans, and invoked the merciful intervention of Héré to
remove that obstacle which confined him to the spot. Hardly
had he pronounced the words, when the victims changed and
became favorable :2 but the Tegeans, while he was yet praying,
anticipated the effect and hastened forward against the enemy,
followed by the Lacedemonians as soon as Pausanias gave
the word. The wicker breastwork before the Persians was soon
overthrown by the Grecian charge: nevertheless the Persians,
though thus deprived of their tutelary hedge, and having no
defensive armor, maintained the fight with individual courage,
the more remarkable because it was totally unassisted by disci-
pline or trained collective movement, against the drilled array,
the regulated step, the well-defended persons, and the long
spears, of the Greeks.3 They threw themselves upon the

! Herod. ix, 72.

* Herodot. ix, 62; Ka? roio: Aaxedaruoviowt abrixa peta tiv ebyny rip
Tlavoaview tyivero Suvopévoice Ta ogayta ypnora. Plutarch exaggerates the
long-suffering of Pausanias (Aristeid.c.17, ad finem).

The lofty and conspicuous site of the Heron, visible to Pausanias at the

«distance where he was, is plainly marked in Herodotus (ix, 61).

For incidents illustrating the hardships which a Grecian army endured
from its reluctance to move without favorable sacrifices, see Xenophon,
Anabasis, vi, 4, 10-25; Hellenic. iii, 2, 17.

3 Herodot. ix, 62,63. His words about the courage of the Persians are
remarkable: Ajuare pév vuv cal pouy ob« Eoooves Yoav oi Iépoat: avorAce
dé tdvrec, Kai mpdc, dvemiornuovec hoav, nat obx dpolot roiot évarrtiosce .
coginv....wAeicroy yap ageac édndéeto 7 tadie ipjpoe tovca brAwv: mpd¢
yap dmdirag tévreg yuuvigres dyava éxoetvte. Compare the striking con-
versation between Xerxes and Demaratus (Herodot. vii, 104).

The description given by Herodotus of the gallant rush made by these
badly-armed Persians, upon the presentéd line of spears in the Lacedsemo-
nian ranks, may be compared with Livy (xxxii, 17), a description of the
Romans attacking the Macedonian phalanx, and with the battle of Sem-
pach (June, 1386), in which fourteen hundred half-armed Swiss overcame a
large body of fully-armed Austrians, with an impenetrable front of project-
ing spears; which for some time théy were unable to break in upon, until

BATILES OF PLATEA AND MYKALE 179

Lacedsemonians, seizing hold of their spears, and breaking
them: many of them devoted themselves in small parties of
ten to force by their bodies a way into the lines, and to get to
individual close combat with the short spear and the dagger.!
Mardonius himself, conspicuous upon a white horse, was among
the foremost warriors, and the thousand select troops who formed °
his body-guard distinguished themselves beyond all the rest. At
length he was slain by the hand of a distinguished Spartan
named Aeimnéstus; his thousand guards mostly perished
round him, and the courage of the remaining Persians,
already worn out by the superior troops against which they
had been long contending, was at last thoroughly broken by
the death of their general. They turned their backs and fled,
not resting until they got into the wooden fortified camp con-
structed by Mardonius behind the Asépus. The Asiatic allies
also, as soon as they saw the Persians defeated, took to flig&t
without striking a blow.®

The Athenians on the left, meanwhile, had been engaged in a
serious conflict with the Beeotians; especially the Theban lead-
ers with the hoplites immediately around them, who fought with
great bravery, but were at length driven back, after the loss of -
three hundred of their best troops. The Theban cavalry, how-
ever, still maintained a good front, protecting the retreat of the
infantry and checking the Athenian pursuit, so that the fugitives
were enabled to reach Thebes in safety ; a better refuge than

at length one of their warriors, Arnold von Winkelried, grasped an armful
of spears, and precipitated himself upon them, making a way for his coun-
trymen over his dead body. See Vogelin, Geschichte der Schweizerischen
Kidgenossepschaft, ch. vi, p. 240, or indeed any history of Switzertind, for
a description of this memorable incident.

1 For the arms of the Persians, see Herodot. vii, 61.

Herodotus states in another place that the Persian troops adopted the
Egyptian breastplates (Sapyxac): probably this may have been after the
battle of Platea. Even at this battle, the Persian leaders on horseback
had strong defensive. armor, as we may sce by the case of Masistius, above
narrated : by the time of the battle of Kunaxa, the habit had become more
widely diffused (Xenoph. Anabas. i, 8,6; Brisson, De Regno Persarum,
lib. iii, p. 361), for the cavalry at least. .

2 Herodot. ix, 64, 65.

180 HISTORY OF GREECE.

the Persian fortified camp.! With the exception of the Thebans
and Boeotians, none of the other medizing Greeks rendered any-
real service: instead of sustaining or reinforcing the Thebans,
they never once advanced to the charge, but merely followed in
the first movement of flight. So that, in point of fact, the only
troops in this numerous Perso-Grecian army who really fought,
were the native Persians and Sake on the left, and the Beo-
tians on the right: the former against the Lacedemonians, the
latter against the Athenians.?

Nor did even all the native Persians take part in the combat.
A body of forty thousand men under Artabazus, of whom some
must doubtless have been native Persians, left the field without
fighting and without loss. That general, seemingly the ablest
man in the Persian army, had been from the first disgusted with.
the nomination of Mardonius as commander-in-ehief, and had
farther incurred his displeasure by deprecating any general
action. Apprized that Mardonius was hastening forward to
attack the retreating Greeks, he marshalled his division and led
them out towards the scene of action, though despairing of suc-
cess, and perhaps not very anxious that his own prophecies
should be contradicted. And such had been the headlong
impetuosity of Mardonius in his first forward movement, — so
complete his confidence of overwhelming the Greeks when he
discovered their retreat, —that he took no pains to insure the
concerted action of his whole army: accordingly, before Artaba-
zus arrived at the scene of action, he saw the Persign troops,
who had been engaged under the commander-in-chief, already
defeated and in flight. Without making the least attempt either
to save them or to retrieve the battle, he immediately gave orders
to his own division to retreat: not repairing, however, either to
the fortified camp, or to Thebes, but abandoning at once the
whole campaign, and taking the direct road through Phocis to
Thessaly, Macedonia, and the Hellespont.3

‘As the native Persians, the Sake, and the Beeotians, were
the only real combatants on the one side, so also were the Lace-

1 Herodot. ix, 67, 68. ;

® Herodot. ix, 67,68. Tév d2 dAAwy 'EAAnvey ray peta Baclréog ede.
Joxaxeévruy ...Kal TOY GAAwv ovpuayor 6 wae butdog obre dtayaxecauevoe
obdev? ore rt arodefauevor Eguyev. 3 Heradot. ix, 66

BATTLES OF PLATZA AND MYKALE. 181

dsemonians, Tegeans, and Athenians, on the other. It has already
been mentioned that the central troops of the Grecian army, dis-
obeying the general order of march, had gone during the night
to the town of Platza instead of to the island. They were thus
completely severed from Pausanias, and the first thing which
they heard about the battle, was, that the Lacedemonians were
gaining the victory. Elate with this news, and anxious to come
in for some share of the honor, they rushed to the scene of
action, without any heed of military order; the Corinthians
taking the direct track across the hills, while the Megarians,
Phliasians, and others, marched by the longer route along the
plain, so as to turn the hills and arrive at the Athenian position.
The Theban horse.under Asépodérus, employed in checking the
pursuit of the victorious Athenian hoplites, seeing these fresh
troops coming up in thorough disorder, charged them vigorously,
and drove them back to take refuge in the high ground, with the
loss of six hundred men.! But this partial success had no effect
in mitigating the ruin of the general defeat.

Following up their pursuit, the Lacedzmonians proceeded to
attack the wooden redoubt wherein the Persians had taken
refuge. But though they were here aided by all or most of the
central Grecian divisions, who had taken no part in the battle,
they were yet so ignorant of the mode of assailing walls, that
they made no progress, and were completely baffled, until the
Athenians arrived to their assistance. The redoubt was then
stormed, not without a gallant and prolonged resistance on the
part of its defenders. The Tegeans, being the first to penetrate
into the interior, plundered the rich tent of Mardonius, whose .
manger for his horses, made of brass, remained long afterwards
exhibited in their temple of Athéné Alea, — while his silver-
footed throne, and cimeter? were preserved in the acropolis of
Athens, along with the breastplate of Masistius. Once within
the wall, effective resistance ceased, and the Greeks slaughtered
withqut mercy as well as without limit; so that if we are to credit

1 Herodot. ix, 69.
* Herodot. ix, 70; Demosthenés cont. Timokrat. p. 741, ¢. 83. Pausanias
(i, 27, 2) doubts whether this was really the cimeter of Mardonius, con-

tending that the Lacedemonians would never have-permitted the Athevi
ans to take it.

182 HISTORY OF GREECE.

Herodotus, there survived only three thousand men out of the
three hundred thousand which had composed the army of Mar-
donius, — save and except the forty thousand men who accom:
panied Artabazus in his retreat.! Respecting these numbers,
the historian had probably little to give except some vague
reports, without any pretence of computation: about the Gre-
cian loss, his statement deserves more attention, when he tells us
. that there perished ninety-one Spartans, sixteen Tegeans, and
fifty-two Athenians. Herein, however, is not included the loss
of the Megarians when attacked by the Theban cavalry, nor is
the number of slain Lacedemonians, not Spartans, specified ;
while even the other numbers actually stated are decidedly
smaller than the probable truth, considering the multitude of
Persian arrows and the unshielded right side of the Grecian
hoplite. On the whole, the affirmation of Plutarch, that not less
than thirteen hundred and sixty Greeks were slain in the action,
appears probable: all doubtless hoplites, — for little account was
then made of the light-armed, nor indeed are we told that they
took any active part in the battle Whatever may have been
the numerical loss of the Persians, this defeat proved the total
ruin of their army: but we may fairly presume that many were
spared and sold into slavery, while many of the fugitives prob-
ably found means to join the retreating division of Artabazus.
That general made a rapid march across Thessaly and Macedo-

1 Herodot. ix, 70: compare Atschyl. Pers. 805-824. He singles out “ the
Dorian spear” as the great weapon of destruction to the Persians at Pla-
tsa, — very justly. Dr. Blomfield is surprised at this compliment ; but it
is to be recollected that all the earlier part of the tragedy had been em-
ployed in setting forth the glory of Athens at Salamis, and he might well
afford to give the Peloponnesians the credit which they derived at Platza.
Pindar distributes the honor between Sparta and Athens in like manner
(Pyth. i, 76).

? Plutarch, Aristeidés, c.19. Kleidemus, quoted by Plutarch, stated that
all the fifty-two Athenians who perished belonged to the tribe antis,
which distinguished itself in the Athenian ranks. But it seems impossible
to believe that no citizens belonging to the other nine tribes were killed.

3 Diodorus, indeed, states that Pausanias was so apprehensive of the
aumbers of the Persians, that he forbade his soldiers to give quarter or take
any prisoners (xi, 32); but this is hardly to be believed, in spite of his
assertion. His statement that the Greeks lost ten thousand men is still lesa
admissible.

BATTLES OF PLATZ AND MYKALE. 183

nia, keeping strict silence about the recent battle, and pretending
to be sent on a special enterprise by Mardonius, whom he re-
ported to be himself approaching. If Herodotus is correct
(though it may well be doubted whether the change of senti-
ment in Thessaly and the other medtzing Grecian states was 80
rapid as he implies), Artabazus succeeded in traversing these
countries before the news of the battle became generally known,
and then retreated by the straightest and shortest route through
the interior of Thrace to Byzantium, from whence he passed into
Asia: the interior tribes, unconquered and predatory, harassed
his retreat considerably ; but we shall find long afterwards Per-
sian garrisons in possession of many principal places on the
Thracian coast.1 It will be seen that Artabazus afterwards rose
higher than ever in the estimation of Xerxes.

Ten days did the Greeks employ after their victory, first in
burying the slain, next in collecting and apportioning the booty.
The Lacedsemonians, the Athenians, the Tegeans, the Megarians,
and the Phliasians, each buried their dead apart, erecting a sepa-
rate tomb in commemoration: the Lacedemonians, indeed, dis-
tributed their dead into three fractions, in three several burial-
places: one for those champions who enjoyed individual renown
at Sparta, and among whom were included the most distinguished
men slain in the recent battle, such as Poseidonius, Amompha-
retus, the refractory captain, Philokyon, and Kallikratés, —a
second for the other Spartans and Lacedzemonians,? — and a

1 Herodot. ix, 89. The allusions of Demosthenés to Perdikkas king of
Macedonia, who is said to have attacked the Persians on their flight from
Platsea, and to have rendered their ruin complete, are too loose to deserve
attention; more especially as Perdikkas was not then king of Macedonia
(Demosthenés cont. Aristokrat. pp. 687, c. 51; and mepi Luvrégeuc, p.
173, c. 9).

* Herodot. ix, 84. Herodotus indeed assigns this second burial-place
only to the other Spartans, apart from the Select. He takes no notice of
the Lacedsemonians not Spartans, either in the battle or in reference to
burial, though he had informed us that five thousand of them were included
in thearmy. Some of them must have been slain, and we may fairly pre-
sume that they were buried along with the Spartan citizens generally. As
to the word ipéac, or elpevag, or lnréag (the two last being both conjectural
readings), it seems impossible to arrive at any certainty: we do not know
by whet name these sclect warriors were called. :

184 HISTORY OF GREECE.

third for the Helots. Besides these sepulchral monuments,
erected in the neighborhood of .Plateea by those cities whose citi-
zens had really fought and fallen, there were several similar
monuments to be seen in the days of Herodotus, raised by other
cities which falsely pretended to the same honor, with the conni-
vance and aid of the Platezans.. The bedy of Mardonius was
discovered among the slain, and treated with respect by Pausa-
nias, who is even said to have indignantly repudiated advice offered
to him by an Avginetan, that he should retaliate upon it the igno-
minious treatment inflicted by Xerxes upon the dead Leonidas.?
On the morrow, the body was stolen away and buried ; by whom,
was never certainly known, for there were many different preten-
ders who obtained reward on this plea from Artyntés, the son of
Mardonius: the funereal monument was yet to be seen in the
time of the traveller Pausanias.3

» Herodot. ix, 85. Tov 0 dArwv Sc0e wai gaivovra: tv WAarasgoe etovres
Tagot, Tobrouc dt, O¢ yO mvvd avop at, érasoxvvopévouc TH arecTot TIT
payne, éxGorove youata xOoa ketvd, Tov Emtyivouévwn eivexev dvOparay*
éret xat Alywntéiwy bori abrod: nadedpevog ragoc, tov £0 dxotw Kal déxa
Ereot torepoy pera raira, deqdévtov rov Alywytéiwv, yOoat KAeadyy rov

 Abrodixov, &vdpa TlAaracéa, rpdfecvoy tévra abrav.

This is a curious statement, derived by Herodotus doubtless from per-
sonal inquiries made at Platza.

* Herodot. ix, 78, 79. This suggestion, so abhorrent to Grecian feeling,
is put by the historian into the mouth of the Aiginetan Lampén. In my
preceding note, I have alluded to another statement made by Herodotus,
not very creditable to the Aginetans: there is, moreover, a third (ix, 80), in
which he represents them as having cheated the Helots in their purchases
of the booty. We may presume him to have heard all these anecdotes at
Platsea: at the time when he probably visited that place, not long before
the Peloponnesian war, the inhabitants were united in the most intimate
manner with Athens, and doubtless sympathized in the hatred of the Athe-
nians against Aigina. It does not from hence follow that the stories are
all untrue. I disbelieve, indeed, the advice said to have been given by
Lampén to crucify the body of Mardonius, — which has more the air of &
poetical contrivance for bringing out an honorable sentiment, than of a real -
incident. But there seems no reason to doubt the.truth of the other two
stories. Herodotus does but too rarely specify his informants: it is inter-
esting to scent out the track in which his inquiries have been prosecuted.

After the battle of Kunaxa, and the death of Cyras the younger, his
dead body had the head and hands cut off, by order of Artaxerxes, and
nailed to a cross (Xenoph. Anab. i, 10, 1; iii, 1, 17).

* Herodot. ix, 84; Pausanias, ix, 2, 2.

BATTLES OF PLATEA AND MYKALE. 189

The spoil was rich and multifarious,— gold and silver in
Darics as well as in implements and ornaments, carpets, splendid
arms and clothing, horses, camels, etc., even the magnificent tent
of Xerxes,:- left on his retreat with Mardonius, was included.!
By order of the general Pausanias, the Helots collected all the
yaluable articles into one spot for division; not without stealing
many of the golden ornaments, which, in ignorance of the value,
they were persuaded by the Atginetans to sell as brass. After
reserving a tithe for the. Delphian Apollo, together with ample
offerings for the Olympic Zeus and the Isthmian Poseidon, as
well as for Pausanias as general,—the remaining booty was
distributed among the different contingents of the army in pro-
portion to their respective numbers. The concubines of the
Persian chiefs were among the prizes distributed: there were
probably. however among them many of Grecian birth, restored
to their families ; and one especially, overtaken in her chariot
amidst the flying Persians, with rich jewels and a numerous
suite, threw herself at the feet of Pausanias himself, imploring
his protection. She proved to be the daughter of his personal
friend Hegetoridés, of Kos, carried off by the Persian Pharan-
datés ; and he had the sati.“uction of restoring her to her father3
Large as the booty collected was, there yet remained many valu-
able treasures buried in the ground, which the Platean inhabi-
tants afterwards discovered and appropriated.

_The real victors in the battle of Platea were the Lacedzemo-
nians, Athenians, and Tegeans: the Corinthians and others,
forming part of the army opposed to Mardonius, did not reach
the field until the battle was ended, though they doubtless aided
both in the assault of the fortified camp and in the subsequent
operations against Thebes, and were universally recognized, in
inscriptions and panegyrics, among the champions, who had con-

1 Herodot. ix, 80, 81: compare vii, 41-83.

? Diodorus (xi, 33) states this proportional distribution. Herodotus only
says — EAaPov Exaoro: Trav aétot hoay (ix, 81).

3 Herodot. ix, 76, 80, 81, 82. The fate of these female companions of the
Persian grandees, on the taking of the camp by an enemy, forms a melan-
choly picture here as well as at Issus, and even at Kunaxa: see Diodor.
xvii, 35; Quintus Curtius, iii, xi, 21; Xenoph. Anab. i, 10, 2,

186 HISTORY OF GREECE.

tributed to the liberation of Greece.! It was not till after the
taking of the. Persian camp that the contingents of Elis and
Mantineia, who may perhaps have been among the convoys
prevented by the Persian cavalry from descending the passes of
Kithzron, first reached the scene of action. Mortified at having
missed their share in the glorious exploit, the new-comers were
at first eager to set off in pursuit of Artabazus: but the Lace-
dzmonian commander forbade them, and they returned home
without any other consolation than that of banishing their generals
for not having led them forth more. promptly.?

There yet remained the most efficient ally of Mardonius, —
the city of Thebes; which Pausanias summoned on the eleventh
day after the battle, requiring that the medizing leaders should
be delivered up, especially Timégenidas and Attaginus. On
receiving a refusal, he began to batter their walls, and to adopt
the still more effective measure of laying waste their territory,
— giving notice that the work of destruction would be continued

1 Plutarch animadverts severely (De Malign. Herodot. p. 873 ; compare
Plut. Aristeid. c. 19) upon Herodotus, because he states that none of the
Greeks had any share in the battle of Platszea except the Lacedemonians,
Tegeans, and Athenians: the orator Lysias repeats the same statement
(Oratio Funebr. c. 9).

If this were the fact (Plutarch asks) how comes it that the inscriptions
and poems of the time recognize the exploit as performed by the whole
Grecian army, Corinthians and others included? But these inscriptions
do not really contradict what is affirmed by Herodotus. The actual battle
happened to be fought only by a part of the collective Grecian army; but
this happened in a great measure by accident; the rest were little more
than a mile off, and until within a few hours had been occupying part of
the same continuons line of position; moreover, if the battle had lasted a
little longer, they would have come up in time to render actual help. They
would naturally be considered, therefore, as entitled to partake in the glory
of the entire result.

When however in after-times a siaxigee visited Platsa, and saw Lacede-
monian, Tegean, and Athenian tombs, but no Corinthian nor A‘ginetan,
etc., he would naturally inquire how it happened that none of these latter
had fallen in the battle, and would then be informed that they were not
really present at it. Hence the motive for these cities to erect empty sep-
ulchral monuments on the spot, as Herodotus informs us that they after
wards did or caused to be done by individual Platseans

® Herodot. ix, 77.

~X

BATTLES OF PLATEA AND MYKALE. 187

until these chiefs were given up. After twenty days of endur-
ance, the latter at length proposed, if it should prove that
Pausanias peremptorily required their persons and refused to
accept a sum of money m commutation, to surrender themselves
voluntarily as the priee of liberation for their country. A nego-
tiation was accordingly entered into with Pausanias, and the
persons demanded were surrendered to him, excepting Attaginus,
who found means to escape at the last moment. His sons, whom
he left behind, were delivered up as substitutes, but Pausanias
refused to touch them, with the just remark, which in those times
was even generous,! that they were nowise implicated in the
medism of their father. Timégenidas and the remaining pris

oners were carried off to Corinth, and immediately put to death,
without the smallest discussion or form of trial: Pausanias was
apprehensive that if any delay or consultation were granted, their
wealth and that of their friends would effectually purchase voices
for their acquittal, indeed, the prisoners themselves had been
induced to give themselves up partly in that expectation.? It is
remarkable that’ Pausanias himself, only a few years afterwards,
when attainted of treason, returned and surrendered himself at
Sparta, under similar hopes of being able to buy himself off by
money.? In this hope, indeed, he found himself deceived, as
Timégenidas had been deceived before: but the fact is not the
less to be noted, as indicating the general impré8sion that the
leading men in a Grecian city were usually open to bribes in
judicial matters, and that individuals superior to this temptation
were rare exceptions. I shall have occasion to dwell upon this
recognized untrustworthiness of the leading Greeks when I come

! See, a little above in this chapter, the treatment cf the wife and chil-
dren of the Athenian senator Lykidas (Herodot. ix, 5). Compare also
Herodot. iii, 116; ix, 120.

? Herodot. ix; 87, 88.

* Thucyd. i, 131. cai miorebuv ypnuact diadtoew riv dtaBoazy. Com-
pare Thucyd. viii, 45, where he states that the trierarchs and gencrals of
the Lacedsemonian and allied ficet, all except Hermokratés of Syracuse,
received bribes from Tissaphernes to betray the interests both of their
seamen and of their country: also c. 49 of the same book about the Lace-
deemonian general Astyochus. The bribes received by the Spartan kings
Leotychidés and Pleistoanax are recorded (Herodot. vi, 72; Thucyd
ii, 2h).

~

188 HISTORY OF GREECE.

to explain the extremely popular cast of the Athenian judi-
cature.

Whether there was any positive vote taken among the Greeks
respecting the prize of valor at the battle of Platza, may well
be doubted : and the silence of Herodotus goes far to negative
an important statement of Plutarch, that the Athenians and
Lacedzmonians were on the point of coming to an open rupture,
each thinking themselves entitled to the prize, — that Aristeidés
appeased the Athenians, and prevailed upon them to submit to
the general decision of the allies, — and that Megarian and Cor-
inthian leaders contrived to elude the dangerous rock by bestow-
ing the prize on the Plateans, to which proposition both Aris-
teidés and Pausanias acceded.! But it seems that the general
opinion recognized the Lacedzmonians and Pausanias as bravest
among the brave, seeing that they had overcome the best troops
of the enemy and slain the general. In burying their dead
warriors, the Lacedzmonians singled out for peculiar distinction
Philokyon, Poseidonius, and Amompharetus the lochage, whose
condact in the fight atoned for his disobedience to orders. There
was one Spartan, however, who had surpassed them all, — Aris-
todémus, the single survivor of the troop of Leonidas at Ther-
mopyle. Having ever since experienced nothing but disgrace
and insult from his fellow-citizens, this unfortunate man had
become reckless of life, and at Platea he stepped forth single-
handed from his place in the ranks, performing deeds of the most
heroic valor, and determined to regain by his death the esteem
of his countrymen. But the Spartans refused to assign to him
the same funereal honors as were paid to the other distinguished
warriors, who had’ manifested exemplary forwardness and skill,
yet without any desperate rashness, and without any previous
taint such as to render life a burden to them. Subsequent valor
might be held to efface this taint, but could not suffice to exalt
Aristodémus to a level with the most honored citizens.?

But though we cannot believe the statement of Plutarch, that
the Plateans received by general vote the prize of valor, it is

- certain that they were largely honored and recompensed, as the
Ba a see tent oe Ee eae eee

1 Plutarch, Aristeidés, c. 20; De Herodot. Malign. p. 873.
* Herodot. iv, 71, 72.

BATTLES OF PLATZA AND MYKALE. 189

proprietors of that ground on which the liberation of Greece had
been achieved. The market-place and centre of their town was
selected as the scene for the solemn sacrifice of thanksgiving,
offered up by Pausanias, after the battle, to Zeus Eleutherius, in
the name and presence of all the assembled allies. The local
gods and heroes of the Platean territory, whe had been invoked
in prayer before the battle, and who had granted their soil as a
propitious field for the Greek arms, were made partakers of this
ceremony, and witnesses as well as guarantees of the engage-
ments with which it was accompanied.! The Plateans, now re-
entering their city, which the Persian invasion had compelled

them to desert, were invested with the honorable duty of cele-
brating the periodical sacrifice in commemoration of this great
victory, as well as of rendering care and religious service at the
tombs of the fallen warriors. As an aid to enable them to dis-
charge this obligation, which probably might have pressed hard
upon them at a time when their city was half-ruined and their
fields unsown, they received out of the prize-money the large
allotment of eighty talents, which was partly employed in build-
ing and adorning a handsome temple of Athéné,—~ the symbol
probably of renewed connection with Athens. They undertook
to render religious honors every year to the tombs of the warriors,
and to celebrate in every fifth year the grand public solemnity
of the Eleutheria with gymnastic matches analogous to the other
great festival games of Greece.2 In consideration of the dis-
charge of these duties, together with the sanctity of the ground,
Pausanias, and the whole body of allies, bound themselves by
oath to guarantee the autonomy of Platea, and the inviolability

1 Thacyd. ii, 71,72. So the Roman emperor Vitellius, on visiting the
field of Bebriacum, where his troops had recently been victorious, “instau-
rabat sacrum Diis loci.” (Tacitus, Histor. ii, 70.)

* Thucyd. ii, 71; Plutarch, Aristeidés, c. 19-21; Strabo, ix, p. 412;
Pausanias, ix, 2, 4.

The Eleutheria were celebrated on the fourth of the Attic month
Boedromion, which was the day on which the battle itself was fought ;
while the annual decoration of the tombs, and ceremonies in honor of the
deceased, took place on the sixteenth of the Attic month Mamaktérion.
K. F. Hermann (Gottesdienstliche Alterthiimer der Griechen, ch. 63, note
9) has treated these two celebrations as if they were one.

¢

190 HISTORY OF GREECE.

of her territory. This was an emancipation of the town from
the bond-of the Besotian federation, and from the enforcing
supremacy of Thebes as its chief.

But the engagement of the allies appears to have had other
objects. also, larger than that of protecting Platza, or establish-
ing commemorative ceremonies. The defensive league against
the Persians was again sworn to by all of them, and rendered
permanent: an aggregate force of ten thousand hoplites, one thou-
sand cavalry, and one hundred triremes, for the purpose of carrying
on the war, was agreed to and promised, the contingent of each
ally being specified: moreover, the town of Platza was fixed on
as the annual place of meeting, where deputies from all of them
were annually to assemble.! This resolution is said to have
been adopted on the proposition of Aristeidés, whose motives it
is not difficult to trace. ‘Though the Persian army had sustained
a signal defeat, no one knew how soon it might reassemble, or
. be reinforced ; indeed, even later, after the battle of Mykalé had
become known, a fresh invasion. of the Persians was still re-
garded as not improbable,® nor did any one then anticipate that
extraordinary fortune and activity whereby the Athenians after-
wards organized an alliance such as to throw Persia on the
defensive. Moreover, the northern half of Greece was still
medizing, either in reality or in appearance, and new efforts on
the part of Xerxes might probably keep up his ascendency in
those parts. Now assuming the war to be renewed, Aristeidés
and the Athenians had the strongest interest in providing a line
of defence which should cover Attica as well as Peloponnesus,
and in preventing the Peloponnesians from confining themselves
to their isthmus, as they had done before. To take advantage
for this purpose of the new-born reverence and gratitude which
now bound the Lacedzmonians to Platza, was an idea eminently
suitable to the moment, though the unforeseen subsequent start
of Athens, combined with other events, prevented both the exten-
sive alliance and the inviolability of Platea, projected by Aris-
teidés, from taking effect.3

-

X
1 Plutarch, Aristeidés, c. 21. * Thucyd. i, 90.
7 It is to this general and solemn meeting, held at Platsa after the viec-
tory, that we might probably refer another vow noticed by the historians
=

BATTLES OF PLATZA AND MYKALE. 191

On the same day that Pausanias and the Grecian land army
conquered at Platza, the naval armament under Leotychidés and
Xanthippus was engaged in operations hardly less important,
at Mykalé on the Asiatic coast. The Grecian commanders of
the fleet, which numbered one hundred and ten triremes, having
advanced as far as Delos, were afraid to proceed farther east-
ward, or to undertake any offensive operations against the Per-
sians at Samos, for the rescue of Ionia, — although Ionian envoys,
especially from Chios and Samos, had urgently solicited aid both
at Sparta and at Delos. Three Samians, one of them named
Hegesistratus, came to assure Leotychidés, that their countrymen.
were ready to revolt from the despot Theoméstor, whom the
Persians had installed there, so soon as the Greek fleet should
appear off the island. In spite of emphatic appeals to the com-
munity of religion and race, Leotychidés was long deaf to the
entreaty; but his reluctance gradually gave way before the
persevering earnestness of the orator. While yet not thoroughly
determined, he happened to ask the Samian speaker what was
his name. To which the latter replied, “Hegesistratus, ¢. e.
army-leader.” “I accept Hegesistratus as an omen (replied

and orators of the subsequent century, if that vow were not of suspicious
authenticity. The Greeks, while promising faithful attachment, and con-
tinued peaceful dealing among themselves, and engaging at the same time
to amerce in a tithe of their property all who had medized,— are said to
have vowed: that they would not repair or rebuild the temples which the
Persian invader had burnt; but would leave them in their half-rained con-
dition as a monument of his sacrilege. Some of the injured temples near
Athens were seen in their half-burnt state even by the traveller Pausanias
(x, 35, 2), in his time. Periklés, forty years after the battle, tried to con-
voke a Pan-Hellenic assembly at Athens, for the purpose of deliberating
what should be done with these temples (Plutarch, Periklés,c.17). Yet
Theopompus pronounced this alleged oath to be a fabrication, though both
the orator Lykurgus and Diodorus profess to report it verbatim. We may
safely assert that the oath, as they give tt, is not genume; but perhaps the
vow of tithing those who had voluntarily joined Xerxes, which Herodotus
refers to an earlier period, when success was doubtful, may now have been
renewed in the moment of victory: see Diodor. ix, 29; Lykurgus cont.
Leokrat. c. 19, p. 193; Polybius, ix, 33; Isokrates, Or. iv; Panegyr. c. 41,
p. 74; Theopompas, Fragm. 167, ed. Didot; Suidas, v. Aexaredecv, Cicero
de Republica, iii, 9, and the beginning of the chapter last but one preceding.
of this history. .

192 HISTORY OF GREECE.

Leotychidés, struck with the significance of this name), pledge
thou thy faith to accompany us,— let thy companions prepare
the Samians to receive us, and we will go forthwith.” Engage-
ments were at once exchanged, and while the other two envoys
were sent forward to prepare matters in the island, Hegesistratus
remained to conduct the fleet, which was farther encouraged by
favorable sacrifices, and by the assurances of the prophet Déi-
phonus, hired from the Corinthian colony of Apollonia.!

When they reached the Herzeum near Kalami in Samos,? and
had prepared themselves for a naval engagement, they discovered
that the enemy’s fleet had already been withdrawn from the
island to the neighboring continent. For the Persian command-
ers had been so disheartened with the defeat of Salamis that
‘they were not disposed to fight again at sea: we do not know the
numbers of their fleet, but perhaps a considerable proportion of
it may have consisted of Ionic Greeks, whose fidelity was now
very doubtful. Having abandoned the idea of a sea-fight, they
permitted their Phenician squadron to depart, and sailed with
their remaining fleet to the promontory of Mykalé near Miletus.3

4 Herodot. ix, 91, 92, 95; viii, 132, 188. The prophet of Mardonius at
Platea bore the same name, and was probably the more highly esteemed
for it (Herodot. ix, 37).

Diodorus states the fleet as comprising two hundred and fifty triremes
(xi, 34).

The anecdotes respecting the Apolloniate Euenius, the father of Dei-
phonus, will be found curious and interesting (Herodot. ix, 93, 94). Euenius,
as a recompense for having been unjustly blinded by his countrymen, had
received from the gods the grant of prophecy transmissible to his descend-
ants: a new prophetic breed was thus created, alongside of the Iamids,
Telliads, Klytiads, etc.

* Herodot. ix, 96. gre? d2 tyévovro rij¢ Laping mpd¢ Kaddyuouot, of piv
airod dputoduevot xara rd ‘Hpaiov 1rd ratty, napeoxevalovto e¢
pavpayiny.

It is by no means certain that the Herseum here indicated is the cele-
brated temple which stood near the city of Samos (iii, 80): the words of
Herodotus rather seem to indicate that another temple of Héré, in some
other part of the island, is intended.

* Herodotus describes the Persian position by topographical indications
known to his readers, but not open to be determined by us, — Geson,
Skolopeeis, the chapel of Démétér, built by Philistus, one of the primitive
colonists of Miletus, etc. (ix, 96): from the language of Herodotus, we may

BATTLES OF PLATEZA AND MYKALE. 193

Here they were under the protection of a land-force of sixty
thousand men, under the command of Tigranés, — the main reli-
ance of Xerxes for the defence of Jonia: the ships were dragged
ashore, and a rampart of stones and stakes was erected to protect
them, while the defending army lined the shore, and seemed
amply sufficient to repel attack from seaward.!

It was not long before the Greek fleet arrived. Disappointed
of their intention of fighting, by the flight of the enemy from
Samos, they had at first proposed either to return home, or to
turn aside to the Hellespont : but they were at last persuaded by
the Ionian envoys to pursue the enemy’s fleet and again offer bat-
tle at Mykalé. On reaching that point, they discovered that the
. Persians had abandoned the sea, intending to fight only on land.
So much had the Greeks now become emboldened, that they
ventured to disembark and attack the united land-force and sea-
force before them: but since much of their chance of success
depended on the desertion of the Ionians, the first proceeding of
Leotychidés was, to copy the previous maneuvre of. Themis-
toklés, when retreating from Artemisium, at the watering-places
of Eubcea. Sailing along close to the coast, he addressed,
through a herald of ‘loud voice, earnest appeals to the Fenians
among the enemy to revolt; calculating, even if they did not
listen to him, that he should at least render them mistrusted by
the Persians. He then disembarked his troops and marshalled
them for the purpose of attacking the Persian camp on land;
while the Persian generals, surprised by this daring manifesta-
tion, and suspecting, either from his manceuvre or from previous
evidences, that the Ionians were in secret collusion with him,
ordered the Samian contingent to be disarmed, and the Milesians
to retire to the rear of the army, for the purpose of occupying
the various mountain roads up to the summit of Mykalé, —

suppose that Geeson was the name of a town as well as of a river (Ephonas
ap. Athena. vi, p. 311.

The eastern promontory (cape Poseidion) of Samos was separated only
by seven stadia from Mykalé (Strabo, xiv, p. 637), near to the place where
Glauké was situated (Thucyd. viii, 79),—-modern observers make the
distance rather more than a mile (Poppo, Prolegg. ad Thucyd. vol. ii,
p- 465). ,

1 Herodot. ix, 96, 97. .

VOL. V. 9 13oc.

194 HISTORY OF GREECE.

with which the latter were familiar as a part of their own ter-
ritory.!

Serving as these Greeks in the fleet were, at a distance from
their own homes, and having left a-powerful army of Persians
and Greeks under Mardonius in Bootia, they were of course full
of anxiety lest his arms might prove victorious and extinguish
the freedom of their country. It was under these feelings of
solicitude for their absent brethren that they disembarked, and
were made ready for attack by the afternoon. But it was the
afternoon of an ever-memorable day, — the fourth of the month
Boédromion (about September) 479 B.c. By a remarkable co-
incidence, the victory of Platea.in Beeotia had been gained by
Pausanias that very morning. At the moment when the Greeks
were advancing to the charge, a divine phémé, or message, flew
into the camp, — whilst a herald’s staff was seen floated to the
shore by the western wave, the symbol of electric transmission
across the Aigean;— the revelation, sudden, simultaneous, irre-
sistible, struck at once upon the minds of all, as if the multitude
had one common soul and sense, acquainting them that on that
very morning their countrymen in Beotia had gained a complete
victory over Mardonius. At once the previous. anxiety was dis-
sipated, and the whole army, full of joy and confidence, charged
with redoubled energy. Such is the account given by Herodo-
tus,2 and doubtless universally accepted in his time, when the

—_—

1 Herodot. ix, 98, 99, 104.

® Herodot. ix, 100, 101. dovar dé ogc (“EAAnot) O47 un Te boétwraro i¢ tS
oTpatéomedoy Tay, Kat KypuKniov tpuvy tml tag KupaTwyne Keimevorv. 7
82 ony GtHADE odt Oée, a ol "EAAnvec tiv Mapdoviou orparijy vingev
év Bowwrig paxopevor. AjAa 6) moAdoict Texmnpiotct tote TA Beia row
mpnypatav: el Kal tore Tie airing nuépns ovuninrobonc rob re év TAaratgos
nal rod gy Muxaay péddovrog EceaDat tpdparoc, gnun Toict “EAAnot roice
rauty todrixeto, Gore Sapojoai re Tivy orparinv TOAAG paAador, Kai EdéAEY
Tpoduporepoy Kivdovebery,.....yeyovévat de vikny Tov peta Teavoaview
‘EAAnvev bp8ac og: 7 Ofpyn cuvéBatve EADVotca’ Td wey yap bv
WAaragoc mpet Ere rig qpépne tyivero: rd de bv MuxcAy, wepl deiAnv.....-
hv dé appudixy ogc xpiv ry onuny ~Ecantxécdat, obtc wepl opéwr atTav obra,
Og tv ‘EAAgver, uh tept Mapdoviy mraiog 7 ‘EAAGs, O¢ pévToe 7) KAQDOY
atrn oge soé€mraro, paAAdy Tt Kal raybtepov Ty npocodoy ExotedvTo:
compare Plutarch, Paul. Emilius, c. 24, 25, about the battle of Pydna. The

- ¢jzy which circulated through the assembled army of Mardonius in Beeotia,

BATTLES OF PLATZA AND MYKALE. 195

combatants of Mykalé were alive to tell their own story: he
moreover mentions another of those coincidences which the

—

————

respecting his intention to kill the Phocians, turned out incorrect (Herodot
ix, 17). :

Two passages in Aschines (cont. Timarchum. c. 27, p. 57, and De Fals.
Legat. c. 45, p. 290) are peculiarly valuable as illustrating the ancient idea
of 77, — a divine voice, or vocal goddess, generally considered as inform-
ing a crowd of persons at once, or moving them all by one and the same
unanimous feéling, —the Vox Dei passing into the Vox Populi. There
was an altar to ®7u7 at Athens (Pausan. i, 17,1); compare Hesiod. Opp.
Di. 761, and the "Ocoa of Homer, which is essentially the same idea as
jun: Miad, ii, 98. pera dé opto "Oooa dedyer ‘Orpivove’ lévat, Ards EyyeAog;
also Odyssey, i, 282 — opposed to the idea of a distinct human speaker or
informant — 7v ti¢ rot elxyot Bporav, 7 "Occay axoboyc "Ex Atde, fre padrora
péper KAéoc avdporocoe ; and Odyss. xxiv, 412. "Ocoa & dp’ dyyedocg Oxa xara
NTOALY GyeTo navry, Mynorzperv orvyepdy Yavarov xai xijp’ evérrovea. The
word «Ayddy is used in the same meaning by Sophokles, Philoktet. 255 (see
Andokides de Mysteriis, c. 22, p. 64): and Herodotus in the passage now
before us considers the two as identical,—compare also Herodot. v, 72:
both words are used also to signify an omen conveyed by some undesigned
human word or speech, which in that particular case is considered as deter-
mined by the special intervention of the gods for the information of some
person who hears it: see Homer, Odyss, xx, 100: compare also Aristophan.
Aves, 719; Sophoklés, Gedip. Tyr. 43-472 ; Xenophon, Symposion, c. 14, 8. 48.

The descriptions of Fama by Virgil, Atneid, iv, 176, seqgg., and Ovid
Metamorph. xii, 40, segqg., are more diffuse and overcharged, departing from
the simplicity of the Greek conception.

We may notice, as partial illustrations of what is here intended, those
sudden, unaccountable impressions of panic terror which occasionally ran
through the ancient armies or assembled multitudes, and which were sup-
posed to be produced by Pan or by Nymphs — indeed sudden, violent, and
contagious impressions of every kind, not merely of fear. Livy, x, 28. “ Vic-
torem equitatum velut lymphaticus pavor dissipat.” ix, 27. “ Milites, incertum
ob quam causam, lymphatis similes ad arma discurrunt,” —in Greek, »uugo-
Anrro:: compare Polyzn. iv, 3, 26, and an instructive note of Mutzel, ad
Quint. Curt. iv, 46, 1 (iv, 12, 14).

_ But I cannot better illustrate that idea. which the Greeks invested with
divinity under the name of &7, than by transcribing a striking passage
from M. Michelet’s Histoire de la Révolution Francoise. The illustration
is the more instructive, because the religious point of view, which in Herod
otus is predominant, —and which, to the believing mind, farnishes' an ex-
planation preéminently satisfactory, — has passed away in the historian of
the nineteenth century, and gives place to a graphic description of the real
phenomenon, of high importance in human affairs; the common susceptr

196 - HISTORY OF GREECE.

Greek mind always seized upon with so much avidity, there was
a chapel of Eleusinian Démétér close to the field of battle at

bilities, common inspiration and common spontaneous impulse, of a mul-
titude, effacing for the time each man’s separate individuality.

M. Michelet is about to describe that ever-memorable event, the cap-
ture of the Bastile, on the 14th of July, 1789 (ch. vii, vol. i, p. 105).

“Versailles, avec un gouvernement organisé, un roi, des ministres, un
général, une armée, n’étoit qu’hésitation, doute, incertitude, dans la plus
complete anarchie morale.

“Paris, bouleversé, délaissé de toute autorité légale, dans un désordre
aprarent, atteignit, le 14 Juillet, ce qui moralement est l’ordre le plus pro
fond, l'unanimite des esprits.

“Te 13th Juillet, Paris ne songeait qu’é se defendre. Le 14, il attaqua.

“Le 13, au soir, il y avoit encore des doutes, il n’y en eut plus le matin.
Le soir étoit plein de troubles, de fureur goer: Le matin fut lum-
ineux et d’une sérénité terrible.

“ Une idée se leva sur Paris avec le jour, et tous virent la méme lumiére. Une
lumiére dans les esprits, et dans chaque coeur une voix: Va, et tu prendras la
Bastille! ‘

“Cela étoit impossible, insensé, étrange 4 dire;...Et tous le crarent
néanmuins. Et cela se fit.

“ La Bastille, pour étre une vieille forteresse, n’en étoit pas moins im-
prenable, 4 moins d’y mettre plusieurs jours, et beaucoup d’artillerie. Le
peuple n’avoit en cette crise ni le temps ni les moyens de faire un siége
régulier. L’eit il fait, la Bastille n’avoit pas 4 craindre, ayant assez de
vivres pour attendre un secours si proche, et d’immenses munitions de
guerre. Ses murs de dix pieds d’épaisseur au sommet des tours, de trente
et quarante a la base, pouvaient rire longtemps des boulets: et ses batteries,
a elle, dont le feu plongeoit sur Paris, auroient pu en attendant démolir tout
le Marais, tout le Faubourg St. Antoine.

“ L’attaque de la Bastille ne fut un acte nullement raisonnable. Ce fut
un acte de foi.

“ Personne ne proposa. _ Mais tous crurent et tous agirent. Le long des rues,
des quais, des ponts, des boulevards, la foule criait 4 la foule— 4 la Bas-
tille—a la Bastille. Et dans le tocsin qui sonnoit, tous entendoient: a
la Bastille.

“ Personne, je le répéte, ne donna Timpulsion. Les parleurs du Palais Royal
passerent le temps 4 dresser une liste de proscription, 4 juger & mort la
Reine, la Polignac, Artois, le prévét Flesselles, d’autres encore. Les noms
des vainqueurs de la Bastille n’offrent pas un seul des faiseurs de motions.
Le Palais Royal ne fut pas le point de départ, et ce n’est pas nonplus au
Palais Royal que les vainqueurs raméneérent les eee et les prison-
niers.

“ Encore moins les électeurs qui siegeaient a PHotel de Ville eurent ils
Vidée de Pattaque. Loin de la, pour l’cmpécher, pour prévenir le carnage

BATTLES OF PLATZA AND MYKALE 197

Mykalé as well as at Platea. Diodorus and other later writers,!
who wrote when the impressions of the time had vanished, and
when divine interventions were less easily and literally admitted,
treat the whole proceeding as if it were a report designedly cir-
culated by the generals, for the purpose of encouraging their
army.

The Lacedsemonians on the right wing, and the portion of
the army near them, had a difficult path before them, over hilly
ground and ravine ; ‘while the’ Athenians, Corinthians, Sikyonians,
and Troezenians, and the left half of the army, marching only
along the beach, came much sooner into conflict with the enemy.
The Persians, as at Platea, employed their gerrha, or wicker
bucklers, planted by spikes in the ground, as a breastwork, from
behind which they discharged their arrows, and they made a
strenuous resistance to prevent this defence from being over-
thrown. Ultimately, the Greeks succeeded in demolishing it,
and in driving the enemy into the interior of the fortification,
where they in vain tried to maintain themselves against the
ardor of the pursuers, who forced their way into it almost along
with the defenders. Even when this last rampart was carried,
and when the Persian allies had fled, the native Persians still
continued to prolong the struggle with undiminished bravery.
Unpractised in line and drill, and acting only in small knots,2
with disadvantages of armor, such as had been felt severely at
Plateza, they still maintained an unequal conflict with the Greek
hoplites ; nor was it until the Lacedemonians with their half of
the army arrived to join in the attack, that the defence was
abandoned as hopeless. The revolt of the Tonians in the camp
put the finishing stroke to this ruinous defeat: first, the disarmed

yue la Bastille pouvoit faire si aisément, ils allérent jusqu’’ promettre au
gouverneur, que s'il retirait ses canons, on ne l’attaqueroit pas. Les élec-
teurs ne trahissoient pas comme ils en furent accusés; mais ils n’avoient
pas la foi.

“Qui Peut? Celui qui eut aussi le devoument, la force, pour accomplir
‘ safoi. Qui? Le peuple, tout le monde.”

' Diodor. xi, 35; Polyen.i, 33. Justin (ii, 14) is astunished in relating
“ tantam fams velocitatem.”

* Herodot. ix, 102, 103. Ovroe de (ILépoaz), Kar’ “biyoug yevopevot, bude
xovro Toiat alet é¢ rd Tetyor éoxinrover ‘'EAARvaer.

198 HISTORY OF GREECE.

Samians ; next, other Ionians and olians ; lastly, the Milesians
who had been posted to guard the passes in the rear, not only
deserted, but took an active part in the attack ; and the Milesians
especially, to whom the Persians had trusted for guidance up to
the summits of Mykalé, led them by wrong roads, threw them
into the hands of their pursuers, and at last set upon them with
their own hands. A large number of the native Persians, together
with both the generals of the land-force, Tigranés and Mardontés,
perished in this disastrous battle: the two Persian admirals,
Artayntés and Ithamithrés, escaped, but.the army was irretrieva-
bly dispersed, while all the ships which had been dragged up on
the shore fell into the hands of the assailants, and were burned.
But the victory of the Greeks was by no means bloodless : among
the left wing, upon which the brunt of the action had fallen, a
considerable number of men weré slain, especially Sikyonians,
with their commander Perilaus.1 The honors of the battle were
awarded, first to the Athenians, next to the Corinthians, Siky-
onians, and Troezenians; the Lacedzmonians having done com-
paratively little. Hermolykus the Athenian, a celebrated pankra-
tiast, was the warrior most distinguished for individual feats of
arms.?

The dispersed Persian army, so much of it at least as had at
first found protection on the heights of Mykalé, was withdrawn
from the coast forthwith to Sardis under the command of Ar-
tayntés, whom Masistés, the brother of Xerxes, bitterly re-
proached on the score of cowardice in the recent defeat: the
general was at length so maddened by a repetition of these in-
sults, that he drew his cimeter and would have slain Masistés,
had he not been prevented by a Greek of Halikarnassus named
Xenagoras,3 who was rewarded by Xerxes with the government

1 Herodot. ix, 104, 105. Diodorus (xi, 36) seems to follow different
authorities from Herodotus: his statement varies in many particulars, but
is less probable.

Herodotus does not specify the loss on either side, nor Diodorus that of
the Greeks; but the latter says that forty thousand Persians and allies
were slain.

* Herodot. ix, 105. .

* Herodot. ix, 107. I do not know whether we may suppose Herodotus
to have heard this from his fellow-citizen Xenagoras.

BATTLES OF PLATZA AND MYKALE. 199

of Kilikia. Xerxes was still at Sardis, where he had remained
ever since his return, and where he conceived a passion for the
wife of his brother Masistés; the consequences of his passion
entailed upon that unfortunate woman sufferings too tragical to be
described, by the orders of his own queen, the jealous and savage
Améstris.! But he had no fresh army ready to send down to the
coast, so that the Greek cities, even on the continent, were for
the time practically liberated from Persian supremacy, while the
insular Greeks were in a position of still greater safety.

The commanders of the victorious Grecian fleet had full con-
fidence in their power of defending the islands, and willingly
admitted the Chians, Samians, Lesbians, and the other islanders
hitherto subjects of Persia, to the protection and reciprocal en-
gagements of their alliance. We may presume that the despots
Stratis and Theoméstor were expelled from Chios and Samos.?
But the Peloponnesian commanders hesitated in guaranteeing
the same secure autonomy to the continental cities, which could
not be upheld against the great inland power without efforts
incessant as well as exhausting. Nevertheless, not enduring to
abandon these continental Ionians to the mercy of Xerxes, they’
made the offer to transplant them into European Greece, and to
make room for them by expelling the medizing Greeks from their
seaport towns. But this proposition was at once repudiated by
the Athenians, who would not permit that colonies originally
planted by themselves should be abandoned, thus impairing the
metropolitan dignity of Athens. The Lacedzmonians readily
acquiesced in this objection, and were glad, in all probability, to
find honorable grounds for renouncing a scheme of wholesale
dispossession eminently difficult to execute,4— yet, at the same

1 Herodot. ix, 108-113. He gives the story at considerable length: it
illustrates forcibly and painfully the interior of the Persian regal palace.

* Herodot. viii, 132.

* Herodot. ix, 106; Diodor. xi, 37. The latter represents the Ionians
and Aolians as having actually consented to remove into European
Greece, and indeed the Athenians themselves as having at first consented
to it, though the latter afterwards repented and opposed the scheme.

* Sach wholesale transportations of population from one continent to
another have always been more or less in the habits of Oriental despots,
the Persians in ancient times and the Turks in more modern times: to a

200 HISTORY OF GREECE.

time, fo be absolved from onerous obligations towards the Innians,
and to throw upon Athens either the burden of defending or the
shame of abandoning them. The first step was thus taken,
which we shall quickly see followed by others, for giving to
Athens a separate ascendency and separate duties in regard to
the Asiatic Greeks, and for introducing first, the confederacy of
Delos, — next, Athenian maritime empire.

From the coast of Ionia the Greek fleet sailed northward te
the Hellespont, chiefly at the instance of the Athenians, and for
the purpose of breaking down the Xerxeian bridge; for so im-
perfect was their information, that they believed this bridge to be
still firm and in passable condition in September, 479 8.c., though
it had been broken and useless at the time when Xerxes crossed
the strait in his retreat, ten months before, about November, 480
B.c.1 Having ascertained on their arrival at Abydos the destruc-
tion of the bridge, Leotychidés and the Peloponnesians returned
home forthwith; but Xanthippus with the Athenian squadron
resolved to remain and expel the Persians from the Thracian
Chersonese. This peninsula had been in great part an Athenian
possession, for the space of more than forty years, from the first
settlement of the elder Miltiadés2 down to the suppression of
the Ionic revolt, although during part of that time tributary te
Persia: from the flight of the second Miltiadés to the expulsion
of Xerxes from Greece (493-480 B.c.), a period during which
the Persian monarch was irresistible and full of hatred to Athens,
no Athenian citizen would find it safe to live there. But the
Athenian squadron from Mykalé were now naturally eager
both to reéstablish the ascendency of Athens and to regain the
properties of Athenian citizens in the Chersonese, — probably
many” of the leading men, especially Kimon, son of Miltiadés,
had extensive possessions there to recover, as Alkibiades had in

conjunction of free states, like the Greeks, they must have been imprac-
ticable.

See Von Hammer, Gesehichte des Osmannischen Reichs, vol. i, book vi,
p- 251, for the forced migrations of people from Asia into Europe, directed
by the Turkish Sultan Bajazet (a.D. 1390-1400).

1 Herodot. viii, 115, 117; ix, 106,114.

* See the preceding volume of this RiOry, ch. xxx, p 119; ch. xxxiy, p-
971; ch. xxxv, p. 307.

BATTLES OF PLATZA AND MYKALE. 201

after days, with private forts of his own.! To this motive for
attacking the Chersonese may be added another, —the impor-
tance of its corn-produce as well as of a clear passage through
the Hellespont for the corn ships out of the Propontis to Athens
and ASgina.2 Such were the reasons which induced Xanthippus
and the leading Athenians, even without the codperation of the
Peloponnesians, to undertake the siege of Sestus, — the strong-
est place in the peninsula, the key of the strait, and the centre in
which all the neighboring Persian garrisons, from Kardia and
elsewhere, had got together, under Ctobazus and Artayktés.>
The Grecian inhabitants of the Chersonese readily joined the
Athenians in expelling the Persians, who, taken altogether by
surprise, had been constrained to throw themselves into Sestus,
without stores of provisions or means of making a long defenee.
But of all the Chersonesites the most forward and exasperated
were the inhabitants of Eleus, — the southernmost town of the
peninsula, celebrated for its tomb, temple, and sacred grove of
the hero Protesilaus, who figured in the Trojan legend as the
foremost warrior in the host of Agamemnon to leap ashore, and
as the first victim to the spear of Hektor. The temple of Pro-
tesilaus, conspicuously placed on the sea-shore,* was a scene of
worship and pilgrimage not merely for the inhabitants of Elseus,
but also for the neighboring Greeks generally, insomuch that it
had been enriched with ample votive offerings, and probable de-
posites for security,—- money, gold and silver saucers, brazen
implements, robes, and various other presents. The story ran,
that when Xerxes was on his march across the Hellespont into
Greece, Artayktés, greedy of all this wealth, and aware that the
monarch would not knowingly permit the sanctuary to be de-
spoiled, preferred a wily request to him: “ Master, here is the
house of a Greek, who, in invading thy territory, met his just
reward and pérished: I pray thee give his house to me, in order

- 1 Xenoph. Hellen. i, 5,17. 1a éavrod reiyn.
_ ? Herodot. vii, 147. Schol. ad Aristophan. Equites, 262.
To illustration of the value set by Athens upon the command of the Hel
lespont, see Demosthenés, De Fals. Legat. c. 59.
' 3 Herodot. ix, 114, 115.° Zyordv — dpotpiov nat gvAanjy Tod wavrie
'EAAnonévrov — Thucyd. vil, 62: peomipate Xenophon, Hellenic. ii, 1, 25
* Thacyd. viii, 102.
9#

~

202 HISTORY OF GREECE.

that people may learn for the future not to invade thy land,”—
the whole soil of Asia being regarded by the Persian monarchs
as their rightful possession, and Protesilaus having been ‘in this
sense an aggressor against them. Xerxes, interpreting the
request literally, and not troubling himself to ask who the
invader was, consented: upon which, Artayktés, while the army
were engaged in their forward march into Greece, stripped the
sacred grove of Protesilaus, carrying all the treasures to Sestus.
Nor was he content without still farther outraging Grecian senti-
ment: he turned cattle into the grove, ploughed and sowed it,
and was even said to have profaned: the sanctuary by visiting it
with his concubines.! Such proceedings were more than enough
to raise the strongest antipathy against him among the Cherso-
nesite Greeks, who now crowded to reinforce the Athenians and
blocked him up in Sestus. After a certain length of siege, the
stock of provisions in the town failed, and famine began to make
itself felt among the garrison, which nevertheless still held out,
by painful shifts and endurance, until a late period in the autumn,
when the patience even of the Athenian besiegers was well-nigh
exhausted; nor.was it without difficulty that the leaders re-
pressed the clamorous desire manifested in their own camp to
return to Athens.

Impatience having been appeased, and the seamen kept to-
gether, the siege was pressed without relaxation, and presently
the privations of the garrison became intolerable; so that Ar-
tayktés and CXobazus were at last reduced to the necessity of
escaping by stealth, letting themselves down with a few follow-
ers from the wall at a point where it was imperfectly blockaded.
(Eobazus found his way into Thrace, where, however, he was
taken captive by the Absinthian natives and offered up as a sac-
rifice to their god Pleistérus: Artayktés fled northward along
the shores of the Hellespont, but was pursued by the Greeks,
and made prisonernear AXgos Potamos, after a strenuous resist-
ance. He was brought with his son in chains to Sestus, which
immediately after his departure had been cheerfully surrendered

1 Herodot. ix, 116: compare i, 4. ‘Apradaryc, dvip Tépone, decveg dé xa?
aragvahog bg Kai PBaotdéa éAabvovta tn’ ADHvac ténnaryce, td HpwreciAew
rod 'IgixAov xpjuata &§ "EAatoivrog tpeAduevoc. Compare Herodot. ii, 64.

BATTLES OF PLATZA AND MYKALE. 208

by its inhabitants to the Athenians. It was in vain that he
offered a sum of one hundred talents as compensation to the
treasury of Protesilaus, and a farther sum of two hundred tal-
ents to the Athenians as personal ransom for himself and his
son. So deep was the wrath inspired by his insults to the sacred
ground, that both the Athenian commander Xanthippus and the
citizens of Elseus disdained everything less than a severe and
even cruel personal atonement for the outraged Protesilaus.
Artayktés, after having first seen his son stoned to death before
his eyes, was hung up to a lofty board fixed for the purpose, and
left to perish, on the spot where the Xerxeian bridge had been
fixed. There is something in this proceeding more Oriental
than Grecian: it is not in the Grecian character to aggravate
death by artificial and lingering preliminaries.

After the capture of Sestus, the Athenian fleet returned home
with their plunder, towards the commencement of winter, not
omitting to carry with them the vast cables of the Xerxeian
bridge, which had been taken in the town, as a trophy to adorn
the acropolis of Athens.?

1 Herodot. ix, 118, 119, 120. Ol yap "EAatobotoe ripwpéovrec rp pwreoi-
Aey édéovtd piv xaraxpnodpvat xal abtod rob orpatnyod rabry 6 voog Epepe.

* Herodot. ix, 121. It must be either to the joint Grecian armament of
this year, or to that of the former year, that Platarch must intend his cele-
brated story respecting the proposition of Themistoklés, condemned by
Aristeidés, to apply (Plutarch, Themistoklés, c. 20; Aristeidés, c. 22). He
tells us that the Greek fleet was all assembled to pass the winter in the
Thessalian harbor of Pagass, when Themistoklés formed the project of
burning all the other Grecian ships except the Athenian, in order that no
. city except Athens might have a naval force. Themistoklés,-he tells us,
intimated to the people, that he had a proposition, very advantageous to the
state, to communicate; but that it could not be publicly proclaimed and
discussed: upon which they desired him to mention it privately to Aris-
teidés. Themistoklés did so: end Aristeidés told the people, that the
project was at once eminently advantageous and not less eminently unjust.
Upon which the people renounced it forthwith, without asking what it was.

Considering the great celebrity which this story has obtained, some allu-
sion to it was necessary, though it has long ceased to be received as matter
of history. It is quite inconsistent with the narrative of Herodotus, as well
as with all the conditions of the time: Pagass was Thessalian, and a3 such
hostile to the Greek fleet rather than otherwise: the fleet seems to have
never been there: moreover, we may add, that taking matters as they then

(ad

204 HISTORY OF GREECE.

CHAPTER XLIII.

EVENTS IN SICILY DOWN TO THE EXPULSION OF THE GELONIAN
DYNASTY AND THE ESTABLISHMENT OF POPULAR GOVERN
_ MENTS THROUGHOUT THE ISLAND.

I HavE already mentioned, in the third volume of this history,
the foundation of the Greek colonies in Italy and Sicily, together
with the general fact, that in the sixth century before the Chris-
tian era, they were among the most powerful and flourishing
cities that bore the Hellenic name. Beyond this general fact,
we obtain little insight into their history.

Though Syracuse, after it fell into the hands of Gelo, about
485 B.c., became the most powerful city in Sicily, yet in the pre-
ceding century Gela and Agrigentum, on the south side of the
island, had been its superiors. The latter, within a few years of
its foundation; fell under the dominion of one of its own citizens,
named Phalaris; a despot energetic, warlike, and cruel. An
exile from Astypalea near Rhodes, but a rich man, and an early

settler at Agrigentum, he contrived to make himself despot,
seemingly, about the year 570 B.c. He had been named to one
of the chief posts in the city, and having undertaken at his own
cost the erection of a temple to Zeus Polieus in the acropolis (as
the Athenian Alkmeénids rebuilt the burnt temple of Delphi),
he was allowed on this pretence to assemble therein a consider-
able number of men; whom he armed, and availed himself of
the opportunity of a festival of Démétér to turn them against
the people. - He ‘is said to have made many conquests over the

stood, when the fear from Persia was not at all terminated, the Athenians
would have lost more than they gained by burning the ships of the other
Greeks, s0 that Themistoklés was not very likely to conceive the scheme,
nor Aristeidés to describe it in the language put into his mouth.

The story is probably the invention of some Greek of the Platonic age,
who wished to contrast justice with expediency, and Aristeidés with The-
mistoklés, —as well as to bestow at the same time panegyric upon Athens
in the days of her glory.

SICILIAN AFFAIRS.—GELO AND HIS DYNASTY. 205

petty Sikan communities in the neighborhood: but exaction and
cruelties towards his own subjects are noticed as his most prom-
inent characteristic, and his brazen bull passed into imperishable
memory. This piece of mechanism was hollow, and sufficiently
capacious to contain one or more victims inclosed within it, to
perish in tortures. when the metal was heated: the cries of these
suffering prisoners passed for the roarings of the animal. The
artist was named Perillus, and is said to have been himself the
first person burnt in it, by order of the despot. In spite of the
odium thus incyrred, Phalaris maintained himself as despot for
sixteen years; at the end of which period a general rising of
the people, headed by a leading man named Telemachus, termin-
ated both his reign and his life.1 Whether Telemachus became
despot or not, we have no information: sixty years afterwards,
we shall find his descendant Théron established in that position.
It was about the period of the death of Phalaris that the
Syracusans reconquered their revolted colony of Kamarina (in
the southeast, of the island between Syracuse and Gela), ex-
pelled or dispossessed the inhabitants, and resumed the terri-
tory.2. With the exception of this accidental circumstance, we
are without information about the Sicilian cities until a ‘time

1 Everything which has ever been said about Phalaris is noticed and dis-
cussed in the learned and acute Dissertation of Bentley on the Letters of
Phalaris: compare also Seyffert, Akragas und sein Gebiet, pp. 57-61, who,
however, treats the pretended Letters of Phalaris with more consideration
than the readers of Dr. Bentley will generally be disposed to sanction.

The story of the brazen bull of Phalaris seems to rest on sufficient evi-
dence: it is expressly mentioned by Pindar, and the bull itself, after having
been carried away to Carthage when the Carthaginians took Agrigentum,
was restored to the Agrigentines by Scipio when he took Carthage. See
Aristot. Polit. v, 8,4; Pindar, Pyth. i, 185; Polyb. xii, 25; Diodor. xill,
90; Cicero in Verr. iv, 33.

Tt does not appear that Timeus really called in question the historical
reality of the bull of Phalaris, though he has been erroneously supposed to
have done so. Timeeus affirmed that the bull which was shown in his own
time at Agrigentum was not the identical machine: which was correct, for
it must have been then at Carthage, f from whence it was not restored to

Agrigentum until after 146 B.c. See a note of Boeke on the Scholia ad
Pindar. Pyth. i, 185.

. Thucyd. vi, 5; Schol. ad Pindar. eee v, 19; compare Wesneling ad

Diodor. xi, 76.

206 HISTORY OF GREECE.

rather before 500 B.c., just when the war between Kroton and
Sybaris had extinguished the power of the latter, and when
the despotism of the Peisistratids at Athens had been ex-
changed for the democratical constitution of Kleisthenés. The
first forms of government amopg the Sicilian Greeks, as
among the cities of Greece Proper in the early historical
age, appear to have been all oligarchical: we do not know
under what particular modifications, but probably all more or
less resembling that of Syracuse, where the Gamori — or
wealthy proprietors descended from the original colonizing
chiefs — possessing large landed properties titled by a numer-
ous Sikel serf population called Kyllyrii, formed the qualified
citizens, out of whom, as well as by whom, magistrates and
generals were chosen; while the Demos, or non-privileged free-
men, comprised the small proprietary cultivators who maintained
themselves, by manual labor and without slaves, from their own
lands or gardens, together with the artisans and tradesmen. In
the course of two or three generations, many individuals of the
privileged class would have fallen into ‘poverty and would find
themselves more nearly on a par with the non-privileged ; while
such members of the latter as might rise to opulence were not
for that reason admitted into the privileged body. Here were
ample materials for discontent: ambitious leaders, often them-
selves members of the privileged body, put themselves at the
head of the popular opposition, overthrew the oligarchy, and made
themselves despots; democracy being at that time hardly known
anywhere in Greece. The general fact of this change, preceded
by occasional violent dissensions among the privileged class
themselves,! is all that we are permitted to know, without those
modifying circumstances by which it must have been accom-
panied in every separate city. Towards or near the year 900
B.c., we find Anaxilaus despot at Rhegium, Skythés at Zanklé,
Térillus at Himera, Peithagoras at Selinus, Kleander at Gela,
and Panetius at Leontini.2 It was about the year 509 B.c. that

1 At Gela, Herodot. vii, 153; at Syracuse, Aristot. Politic. v, 3. 1.

2 Aristot. Politic. v, 8, 4; v, 10, 4. Kat el¢ Tepavvida peraBaAre &9
dAtyapyiac, Gonep tv TiKedig ‘evaton al wAeiorat roy adpxaiuv: év Acovrivots
ei¢ tiv Tavatriov Tupavvida, kai dv Tédg ei Thy KAedydpov, wal év aAdace
modAaic rédeciv Ocabruc.

.Y

SICILIAN AFFAIRS.—GELO AND HIS DYNASTY. 207

the Spartan prinze Dorieus conducted a body of emigrants to the
territories of Eryx and Egesta, near the northwestern corner of
the island, in hopes of expelling the non-Hellenic inhabitants
and founding a new Grecian colony. But the Carthaginians,
whose Sicilian possessions were close adjoining, and who had
already aided in driving Dorieus from a previous establishment
at Kinyps in Libya, — now lent such vigorous assistance to the
Egesteean inhabitants, that the Spartan prince, after a short
period of prosperity, was defeated and slain with most of his
companions: such of them as escaped, under the orders of Eury-
leon, took possession of Minoa, which bore from henceforward
the name of Herakleia, —a colony and dependency of the
neighboring town of Selinus, of which Peithagoras was then
despot. Euryleon joined the malcontents at Selinus, overthrew
Peithagoras, and established himself as despot, until, after a
short possession of power, he was slain in a popular mutiny.2

We are here introduced to the first known instance of that
series of contests between the Phenicians and Greeks in Sicily,
which, like the struggles between the Saracens and the Nor-
mans in the eleventh and twelfth centuries after the Christian
era, were destined to determine whether the island should be a
part of Africa or a part of Europe, — and which were only ter-
minated, after the lapse of three centuries, by the absorption of
both into the vast bosom of Rome. It seems that the Cartha-
ginians and Egesteans not only overwhelmed Dorieus, but also
made some conquests of the neighboring Grecian possessions,
which were subsequently recovered by Gelo of Syracuse.®

Not long after the death of Dorieus, Kleander, despot of Gela,
began to raise his city to ascendency over the other Sicilian Greeks,

1 Diodorus ascribes the foundation of Herakleia to Doricus ; this seems
not consistent with the account of Herodotus, unless we are to assume that
the town of Herakleia which Dorieus founded was destroyed by the Cartha-
ginians, and that the name Herakleia was afterwards given by Euryleon or
his successors to that which had before been called Minoa (Diodor. iv, 23).

A funereal moriument in honor of Athenseus, one of the settlers who per-
ished with Dorieus, was seen by Panusanias at Sparta (Pausanias, iii, 16, 4).

* Herodot. y, 43, 46.

? Herodot. vii, 158. The extreme brevity of his allusion is perplexing,
as we have no collateral knowledge to illustrate it.

~

208 HISTORY OF GREECE.

who had hitherto been, if not all equal, at least all independent.
His powerful mercenary force, levied in part among the Sikel
tribes,! did not preserve him from the sword of a Geloan citizen
named Sabyllus, who slew him after a@ reign of seven years: but
it enabled his brother and successor Hippokratés to extend his
dominion over nearly half of the island. In that mercenary
force two officers, Gelo and Ainesidémus (the latter a citizen of
‘Agrigentum, of the conspicuous family of the Emmenide, and
descended from Telemachus, the deposer of Phalaris), particu
larly distinguished themselves. Gelo was descended from a
native of Télos near the Triopian cape, one of the original set-
tlers who accompanied the Rhodian Antiphémus to Sicily. His
immediate ancestor, named Télinés, had first raised the family tc
' distinction, by valuable aid to a defeated political party, who had
been worsted in a struggle, and forced to seek shelter in the
neighboring town of Maktorium. Télinés was possessed of cer-
tain peculiar sacred rites (or visible and portable holy symbols,
with a privileged knowledge of the ceremonial acts and formali-
ties of divine service under which they were to be shown) for
propitiating the subterranean goddesses, Démétér and ‘ Perse-
phoné ; “from whom he obtained them, or how he got at them
himself (says Herodotys) I. cannot say:” but such was the im-
posing effect. of his presence and manner of exhibiting them,
that he ventured to march into Gela at the head of the exiles
from Maktorium, and was enabled to reinstate them in power, —

deterring the people from resistance in the same manner as the
Athenians had been overawed by the. spectacle of Phyé-Athéné
in the chariot’along with Peisistratus. The extraordinary bold-
ness of this proceeding excites the admiration of Herodotus,
especially as he had been informed that Télinés was of an un-
warlike temperament: the restored exiles rewarded it by grant-
ing to him, and to his descendants after him, the hereditary
dignity of hierophants of the two goddesses,? — a function cer-

1 Polyznus, v, 6.

*See about Télinés and this hereditary priesthood, Herodot. vii, 153.
rovroug Gv 6 Tydivng xarnyaye é¢ TéAnv, Exwv obdepiav_ avdpoy dbvauty,
GAW ipa robruv trav Yedv> SVev d2 aita tAaBe, # abrd¢ éixtHoato, Totre
obk Eyw elrat. Trobroio d2 Gy Tiovvog tdv, kaTHyaye, ev’ @ Te of aTbyove

SICILLAN AFFAIRS.—GELO AND HIS DYNASTY. 909

tainly honorable, and probably lucrative, connected with the

abrov ipopdivrat tov Sewv etcovrat: coupe a previous passage of this
history, vol. i, chap. i, p. 26.

It appears from Pindar, that Hiero evenined this hereditary priesthood
(Olymp. vi, 160 (95), with the Scholia ad loc. and Scholia ad Pindar.
Pyth. ii, 27).

. About the story of Phyé personifying Athéné at Athens, see above, vol.
iv of this history, chap. xxx, p. 105.

. The ancient religious worship addressed itself more to the eye ‘than to
the ear; the words spoken were of less importance than the things ex-
hibited, the persons performing, and the actions done. The vague sense
_of the Greek and Latin neuter, lepd, or sacra, includes the entire ceremony,
and is difficult to translate into a modern language: but the verbs con-
nected with it, Eyecv, xexrijadat, xouivecy, paivery, lepa — lepogiyrne, etc.,
relate to exhibition and action. This was particularly the case with the
mysteries (or solemnities not thrown open to the general public but acces-
sible only to those who went through certain preliminary forms, and under
certain restrictions) in honor of Démétér and Persephoné, as well as
of other deities in different parts of Greece. The Acydpeva, or things
said on these occasions, were of less importance than the dpépera and
detaviueva, or matters shown and things done (see Pausanias, ii, 37, 3)
Herodotus says, about the lake of Sais in Egypt, "Ev d2 rg Aipyy
Tatty Ta d einnaa Tov m2rdéav adrod (of Osiris) wuxtdi¢ srocetor,
Ta Kadéovet pooripia Alytrriot: he proceeds to state that the Thesmo
phoria celebrated in honor of Démétér in Greece were-of the same nature,
and gives his opinion that they were imported into Greece from Egypt.
Homer (Hymn. Cerer. 476): compare Pausan. ii, 14, 2.

Aeiéer Tpemrodéue re, AcdxAet re rAndinrp
Apnopoctyny lepdyv: xa txétpader oprte ware?
TpeoBurépye KeAéowo......

"OABtos, b bc tad Sbrarev emiyVoviny dvdparuy, ete.

Compare Enripid. Hippolyt. 25; Pindar, Fragm. xcvi; Sophocl. Frag.
Iviii, ed. Brunck ; Plutarch, De Profect. in Virtute, ¢. 10, p. 81: De Isid. et
-_Osir. p. 353, c. 3. ‘dg yap ol redobuevor car’ dpya¢ tv YopiBy cal Bog mpdc
GAAnAove AVobpevos avviact, dpapévay dé cal detxvupévav Tov
lepGv, npocéyovowy dn peta goBov ka. otwn7¢: and Isokratés, Pane-
gyric. c. 6, about Eleusis, rd lepd xai viv deixvupev xa® Exacrov
éviavrov. These mysteries consisted thus chicfly of exhibition and action
addressed to the eyes of the communicants, and Clemens Alexandrinus
calls them a mystic drama — Ayo xa? Képn dpdpe tyevéoSnv pvatixdy, kat
iv TAGYNy Kal Tiy dpray}v Kal 7d wévBoc 7 ’EAevale dgdovzet. The word
épyca is originally nothing more than a consecrated expression for épya—
kepada Epya (see Pausanias, iv, 1, 4, 5), though it comes afterwards to desig-
nate the whole ceremony, matters shown as well as matters done — Ta

VOL. V. 140c.

-

210 HISTORY OF GREECE.

administration of consecrated property and with the enjoyment
of a large portion of its fruits.

bpyia Kopilwv—bpyiwy mavroiuy ovvdérnc, etc.: compare Plutarch,
Alkibiad. 22-34.

The sacred objects exhibited formed an essential part of the ceremony,
together with the chest in which such of them as were movable were
brought out— reAerijc éyxtpova pvotida xioryyv (Nonnus, ix, 127). ZEs-
chines, in assisting the religious lustrations performed by his mother, was
bearer of the chest — xcordgopoc xai Arcvdgopoc (Demosthen. de Corona, c.
79, p. $18). Clemens Alexandrius (Cohort. ad Gent. p.14) describes the
objects which were contained in these mystic chests of the Eleusinian mys-
teries,— cakes of particular shape, pomegranates, salt, ferules, ivy, etc.
The communicant was permitted, as a part of the ceremony, to take these
out of the chest and put them into a basket, afterwards putting them back
again: “Jejunavi et ebibi cyceonem: ex cista sumpsi et in calathum
misi: accepi rursus, in cistulam transtuli,” (Arnobius ad Gent. v, 175, ed.
Elmenherst,) while the uninitiated were excluded from seeing it, and forbid-
den from looking at it “ even from the house-top.”

Tov xadadoy xariévra xaual Sacciode BEBaAot
Mae’ ard 76 réyeoe. (Kallimachus, Hymn. in Cercrem, 4.)

Lobeck, in his learned and excellent treatise, Aglaophamus (i, p. 51), says:
“ Sacrorum nomine tam Greeci, quam Romani, precipué signa et imagines
Deorum, omnemque sacram supellectilem dignari solent. Que res animum
illuc potius inclinat, ut putem Hierophantas ejusmodi lepe in conspectum
hominum protulisse, sive deoram simulacra, sive vasa sacra et instrumenta
aliave prisces religionis monumenta; qualia in sacrario Eleusinio asservata
fuisse, etsi nullo testimonio affirmare possumus, tamen probabilitatis spe-
ciem habet testimonio similem. Namque non solum in templis feré omnibus
cimelia venerands antiquitatis condita erant, sed in mysteriis ipsis talium
rerum mentio occurrit, quas initiati samma4 cum veneratione aspicerent, non
initiatis ne aspicere quidem liceret...... Ex his testimoniis efficitur (p. 61)
sacra que Hierophanta ostendit, illa ipsa fuisse dy:a ¢aoyuara sive simulacra
Deorum, eorumque aspectum qui preebeant deifac ra lepd vel wapéxetv vel
paivecy dici, et ab hoc quasi primario Hierophantsz actu tum Eleusiniorum
sacerdotum principem nomen accepisse, tum totum negotium esse nun-
cupatum.”

Compare also K. F. Herrmann, Gottesdienstliche Alterthiimer der Grie
chen, part ii, ch. ii, sect. 32.

A passage in Cicero de Haruspicum Responsis (c. 11), which is tran-
scribed almost entirely by Arnobius adv. Gentes, iv, p. 148, demonstrates
the minute precision required at Rome in the performance of the festival
of the Megalesia: the smallest omission or alteration was supposed to
render the festival unsatisfactory to the gods.

The memorable history of the Holy Tunic at Treves, in 1845, shows

SICILIAN AFFAIRS.—GELO AND HIS DYNASTY. 211

Gelo thus belonged to an ancient and distinguished hierophan-
tic family at Gela, being the eldest of four brothers, sons of
Deinomenes, — Gelo, Hiero, Polyzelus, and Thrasybulus: and
he further ennobled himself by such personal exploitg in the
army of the despot Hippokratés as to be promoted to the supreme
command of the cavalry. It was greatly to his activity that the
despot owed a succession of victories and conquests, in which
the Ionic or Chalkidic cities of Kallipolis, Naxos, Leontini, and
Zanklé, were successively reduced to dependence.!

The fate of Zanklé, — seemingly held by its despot Skythés,
in a state of dependent alliance under Hippokratés, and in stand-
ing feud with Anaxilaus of Rhegium, on the opposite side of the
strait of Messina,—-was remarkable. At the time when the
Tonic revolt in Asia was suppressed, and Milétus reconquered by
the Persians (B.c. 494-493), a natural sympathy was manifested
by the Ionic Greeks in Sicily towards the sufferers of the same
raee on the east of the Aigean sea. Projects were devised for
assisting the Asiatic refugees to a new abode, and the Zankleans
especially, invited them to form a new Pan-Ionic colony upon the
territory of the Sikels, called Kalé Akté, on the north coast of
Sicily, — a coast presenting fertile and attractive situations, and
along the whole line of which there was only one Grecian colony,
— Himera. This invitation was accepted by the refugees from
Samos and Milétus, who accordingly put themselves on shipboard
for Zanklé ; steering, as was usual, along the coast of Akarnania
to Korkyra, from thence across to Tarentum, and along the Ital-
ian coast to the strait of Messina. It happened that when they
reached the town of Epizephyrian Lokri, Skythés, the despot of
Zanklé, was absent from his city, together with the larger portion
of his military force, on an expedition against the Sikels, —
perbaps undertaken to facilitate the contemplated colony at Kalé
Akté: and his enemy the Rhegian Anaxilaus, taking advantage
of this accident, proposed to the refugees at Lokri that they should.
seize for themselves, and retain, the unguarded city of Zanklé.
They followed his suggestion, and possessed themselves of the

what immense and wide-spread effect upon the human mind may be pro-
duved, even in the nineteenth century, by Jepa detxvipeva.
? Herodot. vii, 154.

213 ' HISTORY OF GREECE.

city, together with the families and property of the absent Zan-
kleans; who speedily returned to repair their loss, while their
prince Skythés farther invoked the powerful aid of his ally and
superior, Hippokratés. The latter, however, provoked at the
loss of one of his dependent cities, seized and imprisoned Skythés,
whom he considered as the cause of it,! at Inykus, in the interior
of the island; but he found it at the same time advantageous to
accept a proposition made to him by the Samians, captors of the
city, and to betray the Zankleans whom he had come to aid. By
a convention, ratified with an oath, it was agreed that Hippo-
kratés should receive for himself all the extra-mural, and half
the intra-mural, property and slaves belonging to Zankleans,

leaving the other half to.the Samians. Among the property
without the walls, not the least valuable part consisted in the
persons of those Zankleans whom Hippokratés had come to
assist, but whom he now carried away as slaves: excepting,
however, from this lot, three hundred of the principal citizens,
whom he delivered over to the Samians to be slaughtered, —
probably lest they might find friends to procure their ransom,
and afterwards disturb the Samian possession of the town. Their
lives were however spared by the Samians, though we are not
told what became of them. This transaction, alike perfidious on
the part of the Samians and of Hippokratés, secured to the
former a flourishing city, and: to the latter an abundant booty.
We are glad to learn that the imprisoned Skythés found means
to escapé to Darius, king of Persia, from whom he received a
generous shelter, — imperfect compensation for the iniquity of
his fellow Greeks.2 The Samians, however, did not long retain
possession of their conquest, but were expelled by the very per-

1 Herodot. vi, 22, 23. Zxidyv piv rdv pobdvapyoy trav Zayxraiay, o¢
aroBadbyra riv roAcy, 6 ‘Inroxparne medjoac, Kal roy ddeAgedy abrod Iv3o-
yévea, é¢ “Ivuxov woAty arérepe.

The words d¢ droBaddvra seem to imply the relation preéxisting between
Hippokratés and Skythés, as superior and subject; and »unishment inflicted
by the former upon the latter for having lost an important post.

* Herodot. vi, 28, 24. Aristotle (Politic. v, 2,11) represents the Samians
as having been first actually received into Zanklé, and afterwards expelling
the prior inhabitants: his brief notice is not to be set against the perspicu
ous narrative of Herodotus. :

SICILIAN AFF AIRS.—GELO AND HIS DYNASTY. 218

son who had instigated them to seize it, — Anaxilaus, of Rhegium.
He planted in it new inhabitants, of Dorian and Messenian
race, recolonizing it under the name of Messéné,—a name
which it ever afterwards bore ;! and it appears to have been
governed either by himself or by his son Kleophron, until his
death about B.c. 476.

Besides the conquests above mentioned, Hippokratés of Gela
was on the point of making the still more important acquisition
of Syracuse, and was only prevented from doing x0, after defeat-
ing the Syracusans at the river Hel6rus, and capturing many
prisoners, by the mediation of ‘the Corinthians and Korkyrzans,
who prevailed on him to be satisfied with the cession of Kama-
rina and its territory as a ransom. Having repeopled this terri-
tory, which became thus annexed to Gela, he was prosecuting
his conquests farther among the Sikels, when he died or was
killed at Hybla. His death caused a mutiny among the Geloans,
who refused to acknowledge his sons, and strove to regain their
freedom ; but Gelo, the general of horse in the army, espousing
the cause of the sons with energy, put down by force the resist-
ance of the people. As soon as this was done, he threw off the
mask, deposed the sons of Hippokratés, and seized the sceptre
himself.

Thus master of Gela, and succeeding probably to the ascend-
ency enjoyed by his predecessor over the Ionic cities, Gelo be-
came the most powerful man in the island; but an incident which
occurred a few years afterwards (B.C. 485), while it aggrandized
him still farther, transferred the seat of his power from Gela to
Syracuse. The Syracusan Gamori, or oligarchical order of
proprietary families, probably humbled by their ruinous defeat
at the Heldérus, were dispossessed of the government by a com- -
bination between their serf-cultivators, called the Kyllyrii,
and the smaller freemen, called the Demos; they were
forced to retire to Kasmenz, where they invoked the aid of
Gelo to restore them. That ambitious prince undertook the
task, and accomplished it with facility ; for the Syracusan people,

1 Thucyd. vi, 4; Schol. ad Pindar. Pyth. ii, 84; Diodor. xi, 48.

? Herodot. vii, 155; Thucyd. vi, 5. The ninth Nemean Ode of Pindar
(v, 40), addressed to Chromius the friend of Hiero of Syracuse, commem-
orates, among other exploits, his con ‘uct at the battle of the Heldrus.

-

214 HISTORY OF GREECE.

probably unable to resist, their political opponents when backed
by such powerful foreign aid, surrendered to him without strik-
ing a blow.! But instead of restoring the place to the previous
oligarchy, Gelo appropriated it to himself, and left Gela to be
governed by his brother Hiero. He greatly enlarged the city of
Syracuse, and strengthened its fortifications: probably it was he
who first carried it beyond the islet of Ortygia, so as to include a
larger space of the adjacent mainland (or rather island of Sicily)
which bore the name of Achradina. To people this enlarged
space, he brought all the residents in Kamarina, which town he
dismantled, — and more than half of those in Gela; which was

thus reduced in importance, while Syracuse became the first city
in Sicily, and even received fresh addition of inhabitants from

' Herodot. vii, 155., ‘O yap dzpyog é rév Xvpaxovoiwy éniovre TéAwve
mapad.idol THY TOALY Kal éwiTor,

Aristotle (Politic. v, 2,6) alludes to the Syracusan democracy prior to
the despotism of Gelo as a case of democracy ruined by its own lawless-
ness and disorder. But such can hardly have been the fact, if the narrative
of Herodotus is to be trusted. The expulsion of the Gamori was not an
act of lawless democracy, but the rising of free subjects and slaves against
a governing oligarchy. After the Gamori were expelled, there was no time
for the democracy to constitute itself, or to show in what degree it possessed
capacity for government, since the narrative of Herodotus indicates that
the restoration by Gelo followed closely upon the expulsion. And the sn-
perior force, which Gelo brought to the aid of the expelled Gamori, is quite
sufficient to explain the submission of the Syracusan people, had they been
ever so well administered. Perhaps Aristotle may have had before him
reports different from those of Herodotus: unless, indeed, we might venture
to suspect that the name of Gelo appears in Aristotle by lapse of memory in
place of that of Dionysius. It is highly probable that the partial disorder
into which the Syracusan democracy had fallen immediately before the des
potism of Dionysius, was one of the main circumstances which enabled him
to acquire the supreme power; but a similar assertion can hardly be made
applicable to the early times preceding Gelo, in which, indeed, democracy
was only just beginning in Greece.

The confusion often made by hasty historians between the names of
Gelo and Dionysius, is severely commented on by Dic nysius of Halikar-
nassus (Antiq. Roman. vii, 1, p.1314): the latter, however, in his own state-
ment respecting Gelo, is not altogether free from error, since he describes
Hippokratés as brother of Gelo. We must accept the supposition of Larcher,
that Pausanias (vi, 9, 2), while professing to give the date of Gelo’s occupa-
tion of Syracuse, has really given the date of Gelo’s occupation of Gela,
(see M. Fynes Clinton, Fast. Hellen. ad ann. 491 3.c.)

SICILIAN AFFAIRS.—GELO AND HIS DYNASTY. 215

the neighboring towns of Megara and Eubcea. Both these towns,
like Syracuse, were governed by oligarchies, with serf cultivators
dependent upon them, and a Démos, or body of smaller freemen,
excluded from the political franchise: both were involved in war
with Gelo, probably to resist his encroachments, — both were
besieged and taken. The oligarchy who ruled these cities, and
who were the authors as well as leaders of the year, anticipated
nothing but ruin at the hands of the conqueror; while the De-
mos, who had not been consulted and had taken no part in the
war (which we must presume to have been carried on by the
oligarchy and their serfs alone), felt assured that no harm would
be done to them. His behavior disappointed the expectations of
both. After transporting both of them to Syracuse, he estab-
lished the oligarchs in that town as citizens, and sold the Demos
as slaves, under covenant that they should be exported from
Sicily. “His conduct (says Herodotus!) was dictated by the
conviction, that a Demos was a most troublesome companion to
- live with.” It appears that the state of society which he wished
to establish was that of Patricians and clients, without any Plebs ;
something like that of Thessaly, where there was a proprietary
oligarchy living in the cities, with Penestz, or dependent cultiva-
tors, occupying and tilling the land on their account, — but no
small self-working proprietors or tradesmen in sufficient number
to form a recognized class. And since Gelo was removing the
free population from these conquered towns, and leaving in or
around the towns no one except the serf-cultivators, we may pre-
sume that the oligarchical proprietors when removed might still
continue, even as residents at Syracuse, to receive the produce
raised for them by others: but the small self-working proprie-
tors, if removed in like manner, would be: deprived of subsist-
ence, because their land would be too distant for personal tillage,
1 Herodot. vii, 156. Meyapéacg te trode év Lexedig, O¢ rrodAropxeduevor é¢
dpodoyinv npocexapycay, trode pév atta mazéag, detpayévovg te moAguov
abr Kai mpoodoxéovrac droAéeaFat 6: rovro, &yew é¢ Zvpaxoboag roksjrag
émoince> tov d& djpov tév Meyapéwr, ote tévta petairiov Tov moAémov
Tovrov, obd2 mpoodexduevoy Kaxdy obdty meicea9at, dyayOv Kal Tobrouc é¢ Tag
Lvpaxotoac, érédoro én’ kEaywyH &x DixeAing. Tdvrd d2 robrov kat EtBoéag
rode bv Sixerig éxoince dtaxpivac. ‘Eroiee d2 raita rotrove dugoréoous,
vouicac dijpov elvat ovvoixnpa Gyaptroraroy

”

916 HISTORY OF GREECE. ©

and they had no serfs. While therefore we fully believe, with
Herodotus, that Gelo considered the small free proprietors as
“troublesome yoke-fellows,” — a sentiment perfectly natural to a
Grecian despot, unless where he found them useful aids to his
own ambition against a hostile oligarchy, — we must add that
they would become peculiarly troublesome in his scheme of con-
centrating the free population of Syracuse, seeing that he would
have to give them land in the neighborhood or to provide in
some other way for their maintenance.

So large an accession of size, walls, and population, rendered
Syracuse the first Greek city in Sicily. And the power of
‘Gelo, embracing as it did not merely Syracuse,.but so consider-
able a portion of the rest of the island, Greek as well as Sikel,
was the greatest Hellenic force then existing. It appears to
have comprised the Grecian cities on'the east and southeast of
the island from the borders of Agrigentum to those of Zanklé or
Messéné, together with no small proportion of the Sikel tribes.
Messéné was under the rule of Anaxilaus of Rhegium, Agrigen-
tum under that of Théro son of Acnesidémus, Himera under that of
Terillus ; while Selinus, close on the. borders of Egesta and the
Carthaginian possessions, had its own government free or des-
potic, but appears to have been allied with or dependent upon
Carthage! A dominion thus extensive doubtless furnished
ample tribute ; besides which Gelo, having conquered and dispos-
sessed many landed proprietors and having recolonized Syracuse,
could easily provide both lands and citizenship to recompense
adherents. Hence, he was enabled to enlarge materially the
military force transmitted to him by Hippokratés, and to form a
naval force besides. Phormis? the MsenaWan, who took service
under him and became citizen of Syracuse, with fortune enough
to send donatives to Olympia, — and Agésias, the Iamid prophet
from Stymphélus,3— are doubtless not the only examples of

1 Diodor. xi, 21.

? Pausan. v, 27,1,2. We find the elder Dionysius, about a century after-
wards, transferring the entire free population of conquered towns (Kaulonia
and Hipponium in Italy, etc.) to Syracuse (Diodor. xiv, 106, 107).

7 See the sixth Olympic Ode of Pindar, addressed to the Syracusan
Agésias. The Scholiast on v. 5, of that ode, — who says that not Agésias
himself, but some of his progenitors migrated from Stymphdélus to Syra-

SICILIAN AFFAIRS.—GELO AND HIS DYNASTY. 217

emigrants joining him from Arcadia; for the Arcadian popula-
tion were poor, brave, and ready for mercenary soldiership ; nor
can we doubt that the service of a Greek despot in Sicily must
have been more attractive to them than that of Xerxes.! More-
over, during the ten years between the battles of Marathon and
Salamis, when not only so large a portion of the Greek cities
had become subject to Persia, but the prospect of Persian inva-
sion hung like a cloud over Greece Proper, the increased feeling
of insecurity throughout the latter probably rendered emigration
to Sicily unusually inviting.

These circumstances in part explain the immense power and
position which Herodotus represents Gelo to have enjoyed,
towards the autumn of 481 B.c., when the Greeks from the isth-
mus of Corinth, confederated to resist Xerxes, sent to solicit his
aid. He was then imperial leader of Sicily: he could offer to
the Greek — so the historian tells us — twenty thousand hoplites,
two hundred triremes, two thousand cavalry, two thousand arch-
ers, two thousand slingers, two thousand light-armed horse,
besides furnishing provisions for the entire Greciam force as long
as the war might last.2 If this numerical statement could be at
all trusted, which I do not believe, Herodotus would be much
within the truth in saying, that there was no other Hellenic
power which would bear the least comparisen with that of Gelo :3

cuse,—is contradicted not only by the Scholiast on v. 167, where Agésias
is rightly termed both ’Apxd¢ and Zvpaxdatog ; but also by the better evi-
dence of Pindar’s own expressions, — cvvoixtorhp te Tay KAeiway Lupaxoo-
odv, —olxodev olxade, with reference to Stymphdlas and Syracuse, — do’
aynxipat (v, 6, 99, 101 = 166-174).

Ergotelés, an exile fram Knéssus in Krete, must have migrated gome-
where about this time to Himera in Sicily. See the twelfth Olympic Ode
of Pindar.

' Herodot. viii, 26.

2 Herodot. vii, 157. od 62 duvauséc re fxete peyadAnc, Kal poipa Tot rig
‘EAAadoc otk tAaxiorn péra, Gpyovti ye TexeAing : and even still stronger,
c. 163. édyv LexeAing ripavvoc. ;

The word dpywy corresponds with dpxz?, such as that of the Athenjans,
and is less strong than ripavvoc.

The numerical statement is contained in the speech composed by Herod-
otus for Gelo (vii, 158).

3 Herodot. vii, 145. 1a 62 Tédwvoc rpjyyara peyada édeyero elvac: obda-
way 'EAAnvacy toy ob wodAoy peso.

VOL. V. 10

218 HISTORY OF GREECE.

and we may well assume such general superiority to be substan-
tially true, though the numbers above mentioned may be an
empty boast rather than a reality.

Owing tothe great power of Gelo, we now for the first time
trace an incipient tendency in Sicily to combined and central
operations. It appears that Gelo had formed the plan of uniting
the Greek forces in Sicily for the purpose of expelling the Car-
thaginians and Egesteans, either wholly or partially, from their
maritime possessions in the western corner of the island, and of
avenging the death of the Spartan prince, Dorieus ;— that he
even attempted, though in vain, to induce the Spartans and other
‘central Greeks to cooperate in this plan, — and that, upon their
refusal, he had in part executed it with the Sicilian forces alone.!
We have nothing but a brief and vague allusion to this exploit,
wherein Gelo appears as the chief and champion of Hellenic
against barbaric interests in Sicily, — the forerunner of Diony-
sius, Timoleon, and Agathoklés. But he had already begun to
conceive himself, and had already been recognized by others, in
this commanding position, when the envoys of Sparta, Athens,

Corinth, etc., reached him from the isthmus of Corinth, in 481

1 Herodot. vii, 158. Gelo says to the envoys from Peloponnesva :—
"Avdpec "EAAnvec, Aédyov Exovreg wAeovéxtny, EroAunoate bud ciupcxor ini rdv
BapPapov rapaxadéovrec EADeiv. Adbrot d2, éued xpdrepow den 9évrocg BapGa-
ptkovd otparod ovveraypacdat, dre yor mpd Kapyndoviovs veixog ouvarro, émia-
xymrovréc te Tov Awptbog Trot ’Avagavdpiden mpdc ’Eyectaioy gévov tanpyg.
aovat, troreivovrég te Td éundpta ovvedevbepoiv, an’ dv tiv peyada
Opediac re nai érravpéctes yeydvace : obre éued elvenanAdere BoySyoovrec, obte
rov Auptéog gévov exrxpngipevac: Td 62 kar’ tpuéac, rade Exavta txd BapPa-
potot véverat, "AAAA eb yap hulv wal én? rd duetvov xaréory: viv 02, Exedy
meplteAnAvde 6 méAeuog Kal drixras é¢ tuéas, obra 07 TéAwvoe priate yéyove.

It is much to be regretted that we have no farther information respecting
the events which these words glance at. They seem to indicate that the
Carthaginians and Egesteeans had made some encroachments, and threat-
ened to make more: that Gelo had repelled them by actual and successful
war. I think it strange, however, that he should be made to say: “ You
(the Peloponnesians) have derived great and signal advantages from these
seaports ;”-—the profit derived from the latter by the Peloponnesians can
never have been so great as to be singled out in this pointed manner. I
should rather have expected, dx’ Gv fyuiv (and not dz’ dy tpiv),—
which must have been true in point of fact, and will be found to read quite
consistently with the general vurport of Gelo’s speech.

SICILIAN AFFAIRS.—GELO AND HIS DYNASTY. 219

B.C., to entreat his aid for the repulse of the vast host of invad-
ers about to cross the Hellespont. Gelo, after reminding them
that they had refused a similar application for aid from him, said
that, far from requiting them at the hour of need in the like un-
generous spirit, he would bring to them an overwhelming rein-
forcement (the numbers as given by Herodotus have been
already stated), but upon one condition only, — that he should be
recognized as generalissimo of the entire Grecian force against
the Persians. His offer was repudiated, with indignant scorn, by
the Spartan envoy: and Gelo then so far abated in hia demand,
as to be content with the command either of the land-force or
the naval force, whichever might be judged preferalie. But
here the Athenian envoy interposed his protest: “ We ate sent
here (said he) to ask for an army, and not for a general; aud
thou givest us the army, only in order to make thyself general.
Know, that even if the Spartans would allow thee to command
at sea, we would not. The naval command is ours, if they
decline it: we Athenians, the oldest nation in Greece, — the only
Greeks who have never migrated from home, — whose leader
before Troy stands proclaimed by Homer as the best of all the
Greeks for marshaHing and keeping order in an army,— we,
who moreover furnish the largest naval contingent in the fleet,—
we will never submit to be commanded by a Syracusan.”

«“ Athenian stranger (replied Gelo), ye seem to be provided
with commanders, but ye are not likely to have soldiers to be
commanded. Ye may return as soon as you please, and tell the
‘Greeks that their year is deprived of its spring.” !

That envoys were sent from Peloponnesus to solicit assistance
from Gelo against Xerxes, and that they solicited in vain, is an
incident not to be disputed: but the reason assigned for refusal
— conflicting pretensions about the supreme command — may be
suspected to have arisen less from historical transmission, than
from the conceptions of the historian, or of his informants, re-
specting the relations between the parties. In his time, Sparta,

’ Herodot. vii, 161,162. Polybius ‘xii, 26) does not seem to have read
this embassy as related by Herodotus, — or at least he must have preferred
some other account of it; —he gives a different account of the answer which

they made to Gelo: an answer (not insolent, but) business-like and evasive,
— TpayuaTikOratoy aéxpiua, etc. See Timmas, Fragm. 87, ed. Didot.

220 HISTORY OF GREECE.

Athens, and Syracuse were the three great imperial cities of
Greece, and his Sicilian witnesses, proud of the great past power
of Gelo, might well ascribe to him that competition for preém-
inence and command which Herodotus has dramatized. The
immense total of forces which Gelo is made to promise becomes
the more incredible, when we reflect that he had another and a
better reason for refusing aid altogether. He was attacked at
home, and was fully employed in defending himself.

The same spring which brought Xerxes across the Hellespont
into Greece, also witnessed a formidable Carthaginian invasion
of Sicily. Gelo had already been engaged in war against them,
as has been above stated, and had obtained successes, which
they would naturally seek the first opportunity: of retrieving.
The vast Persian invasion of Greece, organized for three years
before, and drawing contingents not only from the whole eastern
world, but especially from their own metropolitan brethren at
Tyre and Sidon, was well calculated to encourage them: and
there seems good reason for believing that the simultaneous
attack on the Greeks both in Peloponnesus and in Sicily, was
concerted between the Carthaginians and Xerxes,! — probably
by the Phenicians on behalf of Xerxes. Nevertheless, this alli-
ance does not exclude other concurrent circumstances in the
interior of the island, which supplied the Carthaginians both
with invitation and with help. Agrigentum, though not under
the dominion of Gelo, was ruled by his friend and relative
Théro: while Rhegium and Messéné under the government of
Anaxilaus, Himera under that of his father-in-law Terillus, and
Selinus, seem to have formed an opposing minority among
the Sicilian Greeks; at variance with Gelo and Théro, but in
amity and correspondence with Carthage? It was seemingly
about the year 481 8.c., that Théro, perhaps invited by an
Himerean party, expelled from Himera the despot Terillus, and

’ Ephorus, Fragment. 111, ed. Didot; Diodor. xi, 1,20. Mitford and
Dahlmann (Forschungen, Herodotus, etc., sect. 35, p. 186) call in question
this alliance or understanding between Xerxes and the Carthaginians; but
on no sufficient grounds, in my judgment. ;

* Herodot. vii, 165; Diodor. xi, 23: compre also xiii, 55, 59. In like
manner Rhegium and Messéné formed the opposing interest to Syracuse,
under Dionysius the elder (Diodor xiv, 44).

SICILIAN AFFAIRS.—GELO AND HIS DYNASTY. 321

became possessed of the town. Terillus applied for aid to Car-
thage, backed by his son-in-law Anaxilaus, who espoused the
quarrel so warmly, as even to tender his own children as hostages
to Hamilkar the Carthaginian suffes, or general, the personal
friend or guest of Terillus. ‘The application was favorably enter-
tained, and Hamilkar, arriving at Panormus in the eventful year
480 B.c., with a fleet of three thousand ships of war and a still
larger number of storeships, disembarked a land-force of three
hundred thousand men: which would even have been larger, had
not the vessels carrying the cavalry and the chariots happened to
be dispersed by storms.! These numbers we can only repeat as
we find them, without trusting them any farther than as proof
that the armament was on the most exterisive scale. But the
different nations of whom Herodotus reports the land-force to
have consisted are trustworthy and curious: it included Pheni-
cians, Libyans, Iberians, Ligyes, Helisyki, Sardinians, and Cor-
sicans.2 This is the first example known to us of those numer-
ous mercenary armies, which it was the policy of Carthage to
compose of nations different in race and language,3 in order to
obviate conspiracy or mutiny against the general. Having landed
at Panormus, Hamilkar marched to Himera, dragged his vessels
on shore under the shelter of a rampart, and then laid siege to
the town: while the Himereans, reinforced by Théro and the
army of Agrigentum, determined on an obstinate defence, and
even bricked up the gates. Pressing messages were despatched
to solicit aid from Gelo, who collected his whole force, said to
have amounted to fifty thousand foot, and five thousand horse,
and marched to Himera. His arrival restored the courage of
the inhabitants, and after some partial fighting, which turned out
to the advantage of the Greeks, a general battle ensued. It was
obstinate and bloody, lasting from sunrise until late in the after-

1 Herodotus (vii, 165) and Diodorus (xi, 20) both give the number of
the land-force: the latter alone gives that of the fleet.

* Herodot. vii, 165. The Ligyes came from the southern junction of
Italy and France; the gulfs of Lyons and Genoa. The Helisyki cannot
be satisfactorily verified : Niebuhr considers them to have been the Volsci:
an ingenious conjecture.

> Polyb. i, 67. His description of the mutiny of the Carthaginian mer
senaries, after the conclusion of the first Punic war, is highly instructive.

\

232 HISTORY OF GREECE.

noon ; and its success was mainly determined by an intercepted
letter which fell into the hands of Gelo, — a communication from
the Selinuntines to Hamilkar, promising to send a body of horse
to his aid, and ‘intimating the time at which they would arrive.
A party of Gelo’s horse, instructed to personate this reinforce-
ment from Selinus, were received into the camp of Hamilkar,
where they spread consternation and disorder, and are even said
to have slain the general and set fire to the ships: while the
Greek army, brought to action at this opportune moment, at
length succeeded in triumphing over both superior numbers and a
determined resistance. If we are to believe Diodorus, one hundred
and fifty thousand men were slain on the side of the Carthagi-
nians; the rest fled partly to the Sikanian mountains, where they
became prisoners of the Agrigentines, — partly to a hilly ground,
where, from want of water, they wére obliged to surrender at
discretion : twenty ships alone escaped with a few fugitives, and
these twenty were destroyed by a storm in the passage, so that
only one small boat arrived at Carthage with the disastrous
tidings.' Dismissing such. unreasonable exaggerations, we can
only venture to assert that the battle was strenuously disputed,
the victory complete, and the slain as well as the prisoners
numerous. The body of Hamilkar was never discovered, in
spite of careful search ordered by Gelo: the Carthaginians affirm-
ed, that as soon as the defeat of his army became irreparable, he
had cast himself into the great sacrificial fire, wherein he had been
offering entire victims (the usual sacrifice consisting only of a
small part of the beast),? to propitiate the gods, and had there
been consumed. The Carthaginians erected funereal monuments
to him, graced with periodical sacrifices, both in Carthage and in

1 Diodor. xi. 21-24.

* Herodotus, vii, 167. cduara dda xarayitev. This passage of Herodotus
receives illustration from the learned comment of Mévers on the Pheniciar
inscription recently discovered at Marseilles. It was the usual custom of
the Jews, and it had been in old times the- custom with the Phenicians
(Porphyr. de Abstin. iv, 15), to burn the victim entire: the Phenicians
departed from this practice, but the departure seems to have been considered
as not strictly correct, and in times of great misfortune or anxiety the old
habit was resumed (Movers, Das Opferwesen der Karthager. Breslau, 1847,
pp. 71-118).

SICILIAN AFF AIRS.—GELO AND HIS DYNASTY. 228

their principal colonies :1 onthe field of battle itself also, a mon-
ument was raised to him by the Greeks. On that monument,
seventy years afterwards, his victorious grandson, fresh from the
plunder of this same city of Himera, offered the bloody sacrifice
of three thousand Grecian prisoners.?

We may presume that Anaxilaus with the forces of Rhegium
shared in the defeat of the foreign invader whom he had called
in, and probably other Greeks besides. All of them were now
compelled to sue for peace from Gelo, and to solicit the privilege
of being enrolled as his dependent allies, which was granted to
them without any harder imposition than the tribute probably
involved in that relation. Even the Carthaginians themselves
were 80 intimidated by the defeat, that they sent envoys to ask
for peace at Syracuse, which they are said to have obtained
mainly by the solicitation of Damareté, wife of Gelo, on condi-
tion of paying two thousand talents to defray the costs of the
war, and of erecting two temples in which the terms of the treaty
were to be permanently recorded.4 If we could believe the asser-
tion of Theophrastus, Gelo exacted from the Carthaginians a
stipulation that they would for the future abstain from human

1 Herodot. vii, 166, 167. Hamilkar was son of a Syracusan mother: a
curious proof of connubtum between Carthage and Syracuse. At the moment
when the elder Dionysius declared war, against Carthage, in 398 B.C.
there were many Carthaginian merchants dwelling both in Syracuse and
in other Greco-Sicilian cities, together with ships and other property.
Dionysius gave license to the Syracusans, at the first instant when he had
determined on declaring war, tu plunder all this property (Diodor. xiv, 46).
This speedy multiplication of Carthaginians with merchandise in the Gre-
cian cities, so soon after a bloody war had been concluded, is a strong proof
of the spontaneous tendencies of trade. .

2 Diodor. xiii, 62. According to Herodotus, the battle of Himera took
place on the same day as that of Salamis; according to Diodorus, on the
same day as that of Thermopyle. If we are forced to choose between the
two witnesses, there can be no hesitation in preferring the former: but it
seems more probable that neither is correct. :

As far as we can judge from the brief allusions of Herodotus, he must
have conceived the battle of Himera in a manner totally different from
Diodorus. Under such circumstances, I cannot venture to trust the details
given by the latter.

3 I presume this treatment of Anaxilaus by Gelo must be alluded to in
Diodorus, xi, 66: at least it is difficult to understand what other “great
benefit” Gelo had conferred on Anaxilaus. 4 Diodor. xi, 26.

224 HISTORY OF GREECE.

sacrifices in their religious worship:! but such an interference
with foreign religious rites would be unexampled in that age, and
we know, moreover, that the practice was not permanently dis-
continued at Carthage.? Indeed, we may reasonably suspect that
Diodorus, copying from writers like Ephorus, and Timzus, long
after the events, has exaggerated considerably the defeat, the
humiliation, and the amercement, of the Carthaginians. For the
words of the poet Pindar, avery few years after the battle of
Himera, represent a fresh Carthaginian invasion as matter of
present uneasiness and alarm:3 and the Carthaginian fleet is
found engaged in aggressive warfare on the coast of Italy, requir-
ing to be coerced by the brother and successor of Gelo.

The victory of Himera procured for the Sicilian cities immu-
nity from foreign war together with a rich plunder. Splendid
offerings of thanksgiving to the gods were dedicated in the tem-
ples of Himera, Syracuse, and Delphi: and the epigram of
Simonidés,* composed for the tripod offered in the latter temple,
described Gelo with his three brothers Hiero, Polyzélus, and
Thrasybulus, as the joint liberators of Greece from the Barbe-
rian, along with the victors of Salamis and Platea. And the
Sicilians alleged that he was on the point of actually sending
reinforcements to the Greeks against Xerxes, in spite of the
necessity of submitting to Spartan command, when the intelli-
gence of the defeat and retreat of that prinee reached him. But
we find another statement decidedly more probable, — that he
sent a confidential envoy named Kadmus, to Delphi, with orders
to watch the turn of the Xerxeian invasion, and in case it should
prove successful (as he thought that it probably would be) to
tender presents and submission to the victorious invader on behalf
of Syracuse.5 When we consider that until the very morning
of the battle of Salamis, the cause of Grecian independence

‘ must have appeared to an impartial spectator almost desperate,

1 Schol. ad Pindar. Pyth. ii, 3; Plutarch, De Serd Numinis Vindicta,
p. 552, ¢. 6.
e *Tiodor. xx, 14.

* Pindar, Nem. ix, 67 (= 28 B.) with the Scholia.

4 Simonidés, Epigr. 141, ed Bergk.

® Herodot. vii, 163-165: compare Diodor. xi, 26; Ephorus, Fragzn. 111,
ed. Didot.

SICILIAN AFFAIRS.—GELO AND HIS DYNASTY. 235

we cannot wonder that Gelo should take precautions for prevent-
ing the onwatd progress of the Persians towards Sicily, which
was already sufficiently imperiled by its formidable enemies in
Africa. The defeat of the Persians at Salamis, and of the Car.
thaginians at Himera, cleared away, suddenly and unexpectedly,
the terrific cloud from Greece as well as from Sicily, and left a
sky comparatively brilliant with prosperous hopes.

To the victorious army of Gelo, there was abundant plunder
for recompense as well as distribution: among the most valuable
part of the plunder were the numerous prisoners taken, who were
divided among the cities in proportion to the number of troops
furnished by each. Of course the largest shares must have fallen
to Syracuse and Agrigentum: while the number acquired by the
latter was still farther increased by the separate capture of those
prisoners who had dispersed throughout the mountains in and
near the Agrigentine territory. All the Sicilian cities allied with
or dependent on Gelo, but especially the two last mentioned, were
thus put in possession of a number of slaves as public property,
who were kept in chains to work,! and were either employed on
public undertakings for defence, ornament, and religious solem-
nity, — or let out to private masters so as to afford a revenue to
the state. So great was the total of these public slaves at Agri-
gentum, that though many were employed on state-works, which
elevated the city to signal grandeur during the flourishing period
of seventy years which intervened between the recent battle and
its subsequent capture by the Carthaginians, — there nevertheless
remained great numbers to be let out to private individuals, some
of whom had no less than five hundred slaves respectively in their
employment.?

The peace which now ensued lef Gelo master of Syracuse
and Gela, with the Chalkidic Greek towns on the east of the

! Diodor. xi, 25. al d2 mode ele wédag xaréorycay trove diaipedévrag
Gizypaddroue, xal Tod¢ dedepévovg’ Trdv Epywv dia robrwyv Ereckevatov.

For analogous instances of captives taken in war being employed in
public works by the captors, and laboring in chains, see the cases of Tegea
and Samos in Herodot. i, 66; iii, 39.

2 Diodor. xi, 25. Respecting slaves belonging to the public, and let out
for hire to. individual employers, compare the large financial project cov
ceived by Xenophon, De Vectigalibus, capp. 3 and 4.

-VOL. V. 10* 150e.

296 HISTORY OF GREECE.

island; while Théro governed in Agrigentum, and his son
Thrasydsus in Himera. In power as well as in reputation, Gelo
was unquestionably the chief person in the island; moreover, he
was connected by marriage, and lived on terms of uninterrupted
friendship, with Théro. His conduct both at Syracuse and —
towards the cities dependent upon him, was mild and conciliating.
But his subsequenf career was very short : he died of a dropsical
complaint, not much more than a year after the battle of Himera,
while the glories of that day were fresh in every one’s recollwc-
tion. As the Syracusan law rigorously interdicted expensive
funerals, Gelo had commanded that his own obsequies should be
conducted in strict conformity to the law: nevertheless, the zeal
of his successor as well as the attachment of the people disobeyed
these commands. The great mass of citizens followed his funeral
procession from the city to the estate of his wife, fifteen miles
distan{: nine massive towers were erected to distinguish the
spot; and the solemnities of heroic worship were rendered to
him. Nor did the respectful recollections of the conqueror of
Himera ever afterwards die. out among the Syracusan people,
though his tomb was defaced, first by the Carthaginians, and
afterwards by the despot Agathoklés.1 And when we recollect
the destructive effects caused by the subsequent Carthaginian
invasions, we shall be sensible how great-was the debt of grati-
tude owing to Gelo by his contemporaries.

It was not merely as conqueror of Himera, but as a sort of
second founder of Syracuse,? that Gelo was thus solemnly wor-
shipped. The size, the strength, and the population of the town
were all greatly increased under him. Besides the number of
new inhabitants which he brought from Gela, the Hyblean
Megara, and the Sicilian Eubcea, we are informed that he also
inscribed on the roll of citizens no less than ten thousand mer-
cenary soldiers. It will, moreover, appear that these new-made
citizens were in possession of the islet of Ortygia, and the portion
' of the city closely bordering on it, which bore the name of
Achradina,3 —the interior strongholds of Syracuse. It has

1 Diodor. xi, 38, 67; Plutarch, Timoleon, c. 29; Aristotle, TeAdwv Todi.
reca; Fragm. p. 106, ed. Neumann. _ * Diodor. xi, 49.
? Diodor. xi, 72 73

SICILIAN AFFAIRS.—GELO AND HIS DYNASTY. 997

already been stated that Ortygia was the original settlement, and
that the city did not overstep the boundaries of the islet before
the enlargements of Gelo. We do not know by what arrange-
ments Gelo provided new lands for so large a number of new-
comers ; but when we come to notice the antipathy with which
these latter were regarded by the remaining citizens, we shall be
inclined to believe that the old citizens had been dispossessed and
degraded. ;

Gelo left a son in tender years ; but his power passed, by his
own direction, to two of bis brothers, Polyzélus and Hiero; the
former of whom married the widow of the deceased prince, and
was named, according to his testamentary directions, commander
of the military force,— while Hiero was intended to enjoy the
government of the city. Whatever may have been the wishes
of Gelo, however, the real power fell to Hiero, —a man of
energy and determination, and munificent as a patron of contem-
porary poets, Pindar, Simonidés, Bacchylidés, Epicharmus, A¢s-
chylus, and others; but the victim of a painful internal com-
plaint, jealous in his temper, cruel and rapacious in his govern-
ment,! and noted as an organizer of that systematic espionage
which broke up all freedom of speech among his subjects.
Especially jealous of his brother Polyzélus, who was very popu-
lar in the city, he despatched him on a military expedition against
the Krotoniates, with a view of indirectly accomplishing his
destruction : but Polyzélus, aware of the snare, fled to Agrigen-
tum, and sought protection from his brother-in-law, the despot
Théron ; from whom Hiero redemanded him, and, on receiving
a refusal, prepared to enforce the demand by arms. He had
already advanced on his march as far as the river Gela, but no
actual battle appears to have taken place: it is interesting to hear
that Simonidés the poet, esteemed and rewarded by ‘both these
princes, was the mediator of peace between them.?

The temporary breach, and sudden reconciliation, between

' Diodor. xi, 67; Aristotel. Politic. v, 9,3. In spite of the compliments
directly paid by Pindar to Hiero (pad dotoic, of ¢9ovivy dyaoic, Leivors
dé Savpacrde rarhp, Pyth. iii, 71 = 125), his indirect admonitions and hints
sufficiently attest the real character (see Dissen ad Pindar. Pyth. i, and ii,
pp. 161-182).

* Diodor. xi, 48; Schol. Pindar, Olymp. ii, 29.

928 HISTORY OF GREECE.

these two powerful despots, proved the cause of sorrow and ruin
at Himera. That city, under the dominion of the Agrigentine
Théro, was administered by his son Thrasydeus,—a youth
whose oppressive conduct speedily excited the strongest antipa-
thy. The Himerzans, knowing that they had_little chance of
redress from Théro against his son, took advantage of the quar-
rel between him and Hiero to make propositions to the latter,
and to entreat his aid for the expulsion of Thrasydeus, tendering
themselves as subjects of Syracuse. It appears that Kapys and
Hippokratés, cousins of Théro, but at variance with him, and
also candidates for the protection of Hiero, were concerned in
this scheme for detaching Himera from the dominion of Théro.
But so soon as peace had been concluded, Hiero betrayed to
Théro both the schemes and the malcontents at Himera. We
seem to make out that Kapys and Hippokratés collected some
forces to resist Théro, but were defeated by him at the river
Himera:! his victory was followed by seizing and putting to
death a large number of Himerzan citizens. So great was the
number slain, coupled with the loss of others who fled for fear
of being slain, that the population of the city was sensibly and
inconveniently diminished. Théro.invited and enrolled a large
‘addition of new citizens, chiefly of Dorian blood.2

The power of Hiero, now reconciled both with Théro and with
his brother Polyzélus, is marked by several circumstances as.
noway inferior to that of Gelo, and probably the greatest not
merely in Sicily, but throughout the Grecian world. The citi-
zens of the distant city of Cuma, on the coast of Italy, harassed
by Carthaginian and Tyrrhenian fleets, entreated his aid, and
received from him a squadron which defeated and drove off their
enemies :3 he even settled a Syracusan colony in the neighbor-

1 Schol. ad Pindar. Olymp. ii, 178. For the few facts which can be made
out respecting the family and genealogy of Théro, see Goller, De Situ et
Origine Syracusarum, ch. vii, pp. 19-22. The Scholiasts of Pindar are
occasionally useful in explaining his brief historical allusions; but they
seem to have had very few trustworthy materials before them for so doing.

* Diodor. xi, 48, 49.

* The brazen helmet, discovered near the site of Olympia, with the name

of Hiero and the victory at Cums inscribed on it, yet remains as an inter-
esting relic to commemorate this event: it was among the offerings ore-—

SICILIAN AFFAIRS.—GELO AND HIS DYNASTY. 229

wg island of Pithekusa. Anaxilaus, despot of Rhegium and
Messéné, had attacked, and might probably have overpowered,
his neighbors, the Epizephyrian Lokrians; but the menaces of
Hiero, invoked by the Lokrians, and conveyed by the envoy
Chromius, compelled him to desist.! Those heroic honors, which
in Greece belonged to the cekist of a new city, were yet want-
ing to him; and he procured them by the foundation of the new
city of Actna,? on the site and in the place of Katana, the inhab-
itants of which he expelled, as well as those of Naxos. While
these Naxians and Katanzans were directed to take up their
abode at Leontint along with the existing inhabitants, Hiero
planted ten thousand new inhabitants in his adopted city of
“&tna: five thousand from Syracuse and Gela, — with an equal
number from Peloponnesus. ‘They served as an auxiliary force,
ready to be called forth in the event of discontents at Syracuse,
as we shall see by the history of his successor: he gave them
not only the territory which had before belonged to Katana, but
also a large addition besides, chiefly at the expense of the neigh-
boring Sikel tribes. His son Deinomenés, and his friend and
confidant, Chromius, enrolled as an A‘tnean, became joint ad-
ministrators of the city: its religious and social customs were
assimilated to the Dorian model,? and Pindar dreams of future
relations between the despot and citizens of /®tna, analogous to
those between king and citizens at Sparta. Both Hiero and
Chromius were proclaimed as AZtnzans at the Pythian and Ne-

sented by Hiero to the Olympic Zeus: see Boechk, Corp. Inscriptt. Gree.
No. 16, part i, p. 34.

' Diodor. xi, 51; Pindar, i, 74 (== 140); ii, 17 (= 35) with the Scholia ;
Epicharmus, Fragment, p. 19, ed. Krusemann ; Schol. Pindar. Pyth. i, 98;
Strabo, v, p. 247.

2Jépwy olxcotras ayte rupayvov BovaAdpevog elvat, Karavyy
éFedav Airvny petovouace riv woAty, éavrody olxtoriw xpooayopetoag (Schol.
ad Pindar. Nem. i, 1).

Compare the subsequent case of the foundation of Thurii, among the
citizens of which violent disputes arose, in determining who should be
recognized as cekist of the place. On referring to the oracle, Apollo di-
rected them to commemorate himself as cekist (Diodor. xii, 35).

3 Chromius éxitporog rig Alrvng (Schol. Pind. Nem.ix, 1). About the
Dorian institutions of tna, etc., Pindar, Pyth. i, 60-71.

Deinomenés survived his father, and commemorated the Olympic victo-
ries of the latter by costly offerings at Olympia (Pausan. vi, 12, 1).

230 HISTORY OF GREECE.

mean games, when their chariots gained victories; on which
occasion the assembled crowd heard for the first time of the new
Hellenic city of Atna. We see, by the compliments of Pindar,!
that Hiero was vain of his new title as founder; but we must
remark that it was procured, not, as in most cases, by planting
Greeks on a spot previously barbarous, but by the dispossession
and impoverishment of other Grecian citizens, who seem to have
given no ground of offence. Both in Gelo and Hiero we see the
first exhibition of that propensity to violent and wholesale trans-
plantation of inhabitants from one seat to another, which was not
uncommon among Assyrian and Persian despots, and which was
exhibited on a atill larger scale by the successors of Alexander
the Great in their numerous new-built cities.

Anaxilaus of Rhegium died shortly after that message of
Hiero which had compelled him to spare the Lokrians; but such
was the esteem entertained for his memory, and so efficient the
government of Mikythus, a manumitted slave whom he consti-
tuted regent, that Rhegium and Messéné were preserved for his
children, yet minors.® But a still more important change in
Sicily was caused by the death of the Agrigentine Théro, which
took place, seemingly, about 472 B.c. This prince, a partner
with Gelo in the great victory over the Carthaginians, left a
reputation of good government as well as ability among the
Agrigentines, which we find perpetuated in the laureate strains
of Pindar,—and his memory doubtless became still farther
endeared from comparison with his son and successor. Thrasy-
dus, now master both of Himera and Agrigentum, displayed on
a larger scale the same oppressive and sanguinary dispositions
which had before provoked rebellion at the former city. Feeling
himself detested by his subjects, he enlarged the military force
which had been left by his father, and engaged so many new
mercenaries, that he became master of a force of twenty thou-
sand men, horse and foot. And in his own territory, perhaps, he
might long have trodden with impunity in the footsteps of Phal-

? Pindar, Pyth. i, 60 (= 117); iii, 69 (= 121). Pindar. ap. Strabo. vi,
p- 269. Compare Nemes, ix, ]—30, addressed to Chromius. Hiero is pro-
claimed in some odes as a Syracusan ; but Syracuse and the newly-founded
Etna are intimately joined together: see Nemea, i, init.

* Justin, iv, 2.

SICILIAN AFFAIRS.—GELO AND HIS DYNASTY. 981

asus, had he not imprudently provoked his more powerful neigh-
bor, Hiero. In an obstinate and murderous battle between these
two princes, two thousand men were slain on the side of the Syr-
acusans, and four thousand on that of the Agrigentines: an im-
mense slaughter, considering that it mostly fell upon the Greeks
in the two armies, and not upon the non-Hellenic mercenaries.!
But the defeat of ‘Chrasydzus was so complete, that he was com-
pelled to flee not only from Agrigentum, but from Sicily: he
retired to Megara, in Greece Proper, where he was condemned
to death and perished? The Agrigentines, thus happily re-

leased from their oppressor, sued for and obtained peace from
Hiero: they are said to have established a democratical govern-
ment, but we learn that: Hiero sent many citizens into banish-
ment from Agrigentum and Himera, as well as from Gela? nor
can we doubt that all the three were numbered among his subject
cities. ‘The moment of freedom only commenced for them when
the Gelonian dynasty shared the fate of the Theronian.

The victory over Thrasydzus rendered Hiero more completely
master of Sicily than his brother Gelo had been before him.
The last act which we hear of him, is, his interference on behalf
of his brothers-in-law,‘ the sons of Anaxilaus of Rhegium, who
were now of age to govern. He encouraged them to prefer, and
probably. showed himself ready to enforce, their claim against -
Mikythus, who had administered Rhegium since the death of
Anaxilaus, for the property as well as the sceptre. Mikythus

1 §o I conceive the words of Diodorus are to be understood, — rAetoros
ray raparagapévey 'EAAqvav mpd¢ “EAAqvas Execov (Diodor. xi, 53).

2 Diodor. xi, 53. éxel Yavarou xarayvwodels bredetryaev. This is a re-
markable specimen of the feeling in a foreign city towards an oppressive
ropavvoc. The Megarians of Greece Proper were much connected with
Sicily, through the Hyblean Megara, as well as Selinus.

3 Diodor. xi, 76. Of xara riv ‘Iépwvog duvacreiay éxmewruxértec ix Tov
Miuy réAewy —Tobtey & noay T'eAwo: xat Axpayavrivor xai ‘Inepator.

4 Hiero had married the daughter of Anaxilaus, but he seems also to
have had two other wives, — the sister or cousin of Théro, and the daugh-
ter of a Syracusan named Nikoklés: this last was the mother of his son
- Deinomenés (Schol. Pindar. Pyth. i, 112). :

We read of Kleophron, son of Anaxilaus, governing Messéné during his
father’s lifetime: probably this young man must have died, otherwise
Mikythus would not have succeeded (Schol. Pindar. Pyth. ti, 34).

282 HISTORY OF GREECE.

complied readily with the demand, rendering an account so exact
and faithful, that the sons of Anaxilaus themselves entreated him
to remain and govern,—or more probably to lend his aid to
their government. This request he was wise enough to refuse:
he removed his own property and retired to Tegea in Arcadia.
Hiero died shortly afterwards, of the complaint under which he
had so long suffered, after a reign of ten years.!

On the death of Hiero, the succession was disputed betweea
his brother Thrasybulus, and his nephew, the youthful son of
Gelo, so that the partisans of the family became thus divided.
Thrasybulus, surrounding his nephew with temptations to lux.uri-
ous pleasure, contrived to put him indirectly aside, and thus to
seize the government for himself.2 This family division, —a
curse often resting upon the blood-relations of Grecian despots,
and leading to the greatest atrocities,3 — coupled with the con-
duct of Thrasybulus himself, caused the downfall of the mighty
Gelonian dynasty. The bad qualities of Hiero were now seen
greatly exaggerated, but without his energy, in Thrasybulus, —
who put to death many citizens, and banished still more, for the
purpose of seizing their property, until at length he provoked
among the Syracusans intense and universal hatred, shared even
by many of the old Gelonian partisans. Though he tried to
strengthen himself by increasing his mercenary force, he could

} Diodor. xi, 66.

® Aristotel. Politic. v, 8,19. Diodorus does not mention the son of Gelo.

Mr. Fynes Clinton (Fasti Hellenici, App. chap. 10, p. 264, seg.) has dis-
cussed all the main points connected with Syracusan and Sicilian chron-
ology.

% Xenophon, Hiero, iii, 8. El rotvyy 0 éAecc¢ xaravoeiv, elpnaec piv rodg
Idcorag bxd-robrwv padtora gtAovpévove, Todce 68 Tupavvovg TOAAODE pev
maidac éautay arexrovnxérac, ToAAode 0’ bd Traiddy abrote aroAw2érac,
noAdodc d2 GdeAgodc év rupavviaty GAAnAogévone yeyevnpévovs, roAAode 62 Kat
tnd yuvatkGy tov éavrdv rupavvove dtegVappuévoue, kal vd éraipwy ye Toy
padora doxotytwy gdidwy elvat: compare Isokratés, De Pace, Orat. viii, p.
182, § 138.

So also Tacitus (Hist. v, 9) respecting the native kings of Judsa, after
the expulsion of the Syrian dynasty: “Sibi ipsi reges 1mposuere: qui,
thobilitate vulgi expulsi, resumpt4 per arma dominatione, fugas civium,
urbium eversiones, —fratrum, conjugum, parentum, neces,— aliaque solta
regibus ausi,” etc.

SICILIAN AFFAIRS.—@GELO AND HIS DYNASTY. 2338

not prevent a general revolt from breaking out among the Syra-
cusan population. By summoning those citizens whom Hiero
had planted in his new city of A®tna, as well as various troops
from his dependent allies, he found himself at the head of fifteen
thousand men, and master of the interior strongholds of the city,
— the island of Ortygia with Achradina, while the great body of
the revolted Syracusans were assembled in the outer city called
Tyché. Though superior in number, yet being no match in mil-
itary efficiency for the forces of Thrasybulus, they were obliged
to invoke aid from the other cities in Sicily, as well as from the
Sikel tribes, — proclaiming the Gelonian dynasty as the common
enemy of freedom in the island, and holding out universal inde-
pendence as the reward of victory. It was fortunate for them
that there was no brother-despot, like the powerful Théro, to
espouse the cause of Thrasybulus: Gela, Agrigentum, Selinus,
Himera, and even the Sikel tribes, all responded to the call with
alacrity, so that a large force, both military and naval, came to
reinforce the Syracusans: Thrasybulus was totally defeated, first
in a naval action, next on land, and obliged to shut himself up
in Ortygia and Achradina, where he soon found his situation
hopeless. He accordingly opened a negotiation with his oppo-
nents, which ended in his abdication and retirement to Lokri,
while the mercenary troops whom he had brought together were
also permitted to depart unmolested! The expelled Thrasybu

lus afterwards lived and died as a private citizen at Lokri,—a
very different fate from that which had befallen Thrasydzus, son
of Théro at Megara, though both seem to have given the same
provocation.

Thus fell the powerful Gelonian dynasty at Syracuse, after a
continuance of eighteen years.2 Its fall was nothing less than
an extensive revolution throughout Sicily. Among the various
cities of the island there had grown up many petty despots, each
with his separate mercenary force; acting as the instruments, and
relying on the protection, of the great despot at Syracuse. All
these were now expelled, and governments more or less demo-
cratical were established everywhere. The sons of Anaxilaus

4 Diodor. ix, 67, 68. * Aristotel. Politic. v, 8, 23.
3 Diodor. xi, 68.

234 HISTORY OF GREECE.

maintained themselves a little longer at Rhegium and Messéné,
but the citizens of these two towns at length followed the general
example, compelled them to retire,! and began their era of
freedom.

But though the Sicilian despots had thus been expelled, the free
governments established in their place were exposed at first to much
difficulty and collision. It has been already mentioned that Gelo,
Hiero, Théro, Thrasydeus, Thrasybulus, etc., had all condemned
many citizens to -exile with confiscation of property; and had
planted on the soil new citizens and mercenaries in numbers no
less considerable. To what race these mercenaries belonged, we
are not told: it is probable that they were only in part Greeks.
~ Such violent mutations, both of persons and property, could not
occur without raising bitter conflicts, of interest as well as of
feeling, between the old, the new, and the dispossessed proprie-
tors, as soon as the iron hand of compression was removed. This
source of angry dissension was common to all the Sicilian cities,
but in none did it flow more profusely than in Syracuse. In that
city, the new mercenaries last introduced by Thrasybulus, had
retired at the same time with him, many of them to the Hiero-
nian city of Actna, from whence they had been brought; but
there yet remained the more numerous body introduced princi-
pally by Gelo, partly also by Hiero,—the former alone had
enrolled ten thousand, of whom more than seven thousand yet
remained. What part these Gelonian citizens had taken in
the late revolution, we do not find distinctly stated: they seem
not to have supported Thrasybulus, as a body, and probably many
of them took part against him. After the revolution had been
accomplished, a: public assembly of the Syracusans was convened,
in which the first resolution was, to provide for the religious
commemoration of the event, by erecting a colossal statue of
Zeus Eleutherius, and by celebrating an annual festival to be
called the Eleutheria, with solemn matches and sacrifices. They
next proceeded to determing the political constitution ; and such
was the predominant reaction, doubtless aggravated by the
returned exiles, of hatred and fear against the expelled dynasty,
—that the whole body of new citizens, who had been domicili-

1 Diodor. xi, 76.

SICILIAN AFFAIRS.—GELO AND HIS DYNASTY. 285

ated under Gelo and Hiero, were declared ineligible to magis-
tracy or honor. This harsh and sweeping disqualification, falling
at once upon a numerous minority, naturally provoked renewed
irritation and civil war. ‘The Gelonian citizens, the most war-
like individuals in the state, and occupying, as favored partisans
of the previous dynasty, the inner and separately fortified sec-
tions of Syracuse,!— Achradina and Ortygia,— placed them-
selves in open revolt ; while the general mass of citizens, masters
of all the outer sections of the city, were not strong enough to
assail ‘with success this defensible position. They could only
block it up, and intercept its supplies, which the garrison within
were forced to come out and fight for. This disastrous internal
war continued for some months, with many partial conflicts both
by land and sea: the general body of citizens became accus-
tomed to arms, while a chosen regiment of six hundred trained
volunteers acquired especial efficiency. Unable to maintain
themselves longer, the Gelonians were forced to hazard a gen-
eral battle, which, after an obstinate struggle, terminated in their
complete defeat. The chosen band of six hundred, who had

' Diodor. xi, 73. ryv re ’Axpadivgy xal tiv Nijcov- dugotépuy trav Torey
rovtuy éxovTav idtov reixoc, KaAwS KaTeckevacpévoy.

Diodorus goes on to say that the general mass of citizens rd mpdg ra¢
"Eminoddg retpaupévov abring txereixioav,—if we could venture to
construe this last word rigidly, we might suppose that the parts of the city,
exterior to Achradina and the island, had before been unfortified.

Aristotle (Politic. v, 2,11) mentions, as one of his illustrations of the
mischief of receiving new citizens, that the Syracusans, after the Gelonian
dynasty, admitted the foreign mercenaries to citizenship, and from hence
came to sedition and armed conflict. But the incident cannot fairly be
quoted in illustration of that principle which he brings it to support. The
-mercenanies, 80 long as the dynasty lasted, had been the first citizens in the
community: after its overthrow, they became the inferior, and were ren-
dered inadmissible to honors. It is hardly matter of surprise that so great
a change of position excited them to rebel; but this is not a case properly
adducible to prove the difficulty of adjusting matters with new-coming
citizens.

After the expulsion of Agathoklés from Syracuse, nearly two centuries
after these events, the same quarrel and sedition was renewed, by the exclu-
sion of his mercenaries from magistracy and posts of honor (Diodor. xxi,
Fragm. p. 282).

- 2386 HISTORY OF GREECE.

eminently contributed to this victory, received from their fellow
citizens a crown of honor, and a reward of one mina per head!

The meagre annals, wherein these interesting events are indi-
cated rather than described, tell us scarcely anything of the
political arrangements which resulted from so important a vic-
tory. Probably the Gelonians were expelled: but we may
assume as certain, that the separate fortifications of the island
and Achradina were abolished, and that from henceforward there

‘ was only one fortified city, until the time of the despot Diony-
sius, more than fifty years afterwards.?

Meanwhile the rest of Sicily had experienced disorders analo-
gous in character to those of Syracuse. At Gela, at Agrigen-
tum, at Himera, the reaction against the Gelonian dynasty had
brought back in crowds the dispossessed exiles; who, claiming
restitution of their properties and influence, found their demands
sustained by the population generally. The Katanzans, whom
Hiero had driven from their own city to Leontini, in order that
he might convert Katana into his own settlement A‘tna, assem-
bled in arms and allied themselves with the Sikel prince Duke-
tius, to reconquer their former home and to restore to the Sikels
that which Hiero had taken from them for enlargement of the
/Etnean territory. They were aided by the Syracusans, to
whom the neighborhood of these Hieronian partisans: was dan-
gerous: but they did not accomplish their object until after a
long contest and several battles with the Actnzans. A conven-
tion was at length concluded, by which the latter evacuated Ka-
tana and were allowed to occupy the town and territory, —
seemingly Sikel,—of Ennesia, or Inessa, upon which they
bestowed the name of tna? with monuments commemorating
Hiero as the founder, — while the tomb of the latter at Katana
was demolished by the restored inhabitants.

These conflicts, disturbing the peace of all Sicily, came to be
so intolerable, that a general congress was held between the
various cities to adjust them. It was determined by joint reso-

1 Diodor. xi, 72, 73, 76. 2 Diodorus, xiv, 7.

2 Diodorus,. xi, 76; Strabo, vi, 268. Compare, as an analogous event,
the destruction of the tomb of Agnon, the cekist of Amphipolis, after the
revolt of that city from Athens (Thucyd. v, 11).

SICILIAN AFFAIRS.—GELO AND HIS DYNASTY. 287

lation to readmit the exiles and to extrude the Gelonian settlers
everywhere : but an establishment was provided for these latter
in the territory of Messéné. It appears that the exiles received
back their property, or at least an assignment of other lands in ~
compensation for it. The inhabitants of Gela were enabled to
provide for their own exiles by reéstablishing the city of Kama-
rina,! which had been conquered from Syracuse by Hippokratés,
despot of Gelo, but which Gelo, on transferring his abode to
Syracuse, had made a portion of the Syracusan territory, con-
veying its inhabitants to the city of Syracuse. The Syracusans
now renounced the possession of it, —a cession to be explained
probably by the fact, that among the new-comers transferred by
Gelo to Syracuse, there were included not only the previous
Kamarinzans, but also many who had before been citizens of
Gela.2 For these men, now obliged to quit Syracuse, it would
be convenient.to provide an abode at Kamarina, as well as for
the other restored Geloan exiles; and we may farther presume «
that this new city served as a receptacle for other homeless citi-
zens from all parts of the island. Jt was consecrated by the
Geloans as an independent city, with Dorian rights and customs:
its lands were distributed anew, and among its settlers were men
rich enough to send prize chariots to Peloponnesus, as well as to
pay for odes of Pindar. The Olympic victories of the Kamari-
nean Psaumis secured for his new city an Hellenic celebrity, at a
moment when it hardly yet emerged from the hardships of
initiatory settlement.3
Such was the great reactionary movement in Sicily against
the high-handed violences of the previous despots. We are only
enabled to follow it generally, but we see that all their trans-

1 Diodor. xi, 76. pera 6? radra Kapapivay piv Teddor xarotxioavrec &&
apxi¢g karexAnpotynoar.

See the note of Wesseling upon this passage. There can be little doubt
that in Thucydides (vi, 5) the correction of xatgxiody tnd TeAoov (in
place of td TéAwvoe) is correct. ;

* Herodot. vii, 155. -

3 See the fourth and fifth Olympic odes of Pindar, referred to Olympiad
$2, or 452 B.c., about nine years after the Geloans had reéstablished Kama-
rina. Tay véoixov Edpav (Olymp. vy, 9); 4%’ duaxaviag dyuv be paog rovde
édyor dorév (Olymp. v, 14).

288 i HISTORY OF GREECE.

plantations and expulsions of inhabitants were reversed, and all
their arrangements overthrown. In the correction of the past
injustice, we cannot doubt that new injustice was in many
cases committed, nor are we surprised to hear that at Syracuse
many new enrolments of citizens took place without any rightful
claim,’ probably accompanied by grants of land. The reigning
feeling at Syracuse would now be quite opposite to that of the days
of Gelo, when the Demos, or aggregate of small self-working pro-
prietors, was considered as “a troublesome yoke-fellow,” fit only
to be sold into slavery for exportation: it is highly probable that
the new table of citizens now prepared included that class of men
in larger number than ever, on principles analogous to the liberal .
enrolments. of Kleisthenés at Athens. In spite of all the con-
fusion, however, with which this period of popular government
opens, lasting for more than fifty years until the despotism of
the elder Dionysius, we shall find it far the best and most pros-
perous portion of Sicilian history. We shall arrive at it in a
subsequent chapter.

Respecting the Grecian cities “aloue the coast of Italy; during
the period of the Gelonian dynasty, a few words will exhaust
the whole of our knowledge. Rhegium, with its despots Anax-
ilaus and Mikythus, figures chiefly as a Sicilian city, and has
been noticed as such in the stream of Sicilian politics. But it is
also involved in the only event which has been preserved to us
respecting this portion of the history of the Italian Greeks. It
was about the year B.c. 473, that the Tarentines undertook an
expedition against their non-Hellenic neighbors the Iapygians,
in hopes of conquering Hyria. and the other towns belonging to
them. Mikythus, despot of Rhegium, against the will of his
citizens, despatched three thousand of them by constraint as aux-
iliaries to the Tarentines. But the expedition proved. signally
disastrous to both. The Iapygians, to the number of twenty
thousand men, encountered the united Grecian forces in the
field, and completely defeated them: the battle having taken
place in a hostile country, it seems that the larger portion, both
of Rhegians and Tarentines, perished, insomuch that Herodotus
pronounces it to have been the greatest Hellenic slaughter within

' Diodor. xi, 86. woAAdv elay xat de Eruxe mermoAitoypadgnpévav.

_GRECIAN AFFAIRS AFTER THE PERSIAN INVASION. 989

his knowledge.! Of the Tarentines slain, a great proportion
were opulent and substantial citizens, the loss of whom eensibly
affected the city ; strengthening the Demos, and rend- Ang the
constitution more democratical. In what particulars ’ e change
consisted we do not know: the expression of Aristotle gives
reason to suppose that even before this event the constitution had
been popular.?

CHAPTER XLIV.

FROM THE BATTLES OF PLATZA AND MYKALE DOWN TO THE
DEATHS OF THEMISTOKLES AND ARISTEIDES.

AFTER having in the last chapter followed the repulse of the
Carthaginians by the Sicilian Greeks, we now return to the cen-
tral Greeks and the Persians, —a case in which the triumph was
yet more interesting to the cause of human improvement gen-
erally. The disproportion between the immense host assembled
by Xerxes, and the little which he accomplished, naturally pro-
vokes both contempt for Persian force and an admiration for the

! Herodot. vii, 170; Diodor. xi, 52. The latter asserts that the Iapygian
victors divided their forces, part of them pursuing the Rhegian fugitives,
the rest pursuing the Tarentines. Those who followed the former were s0
rapid in their movements, that they entered, he says, along with the fugi-
tives into the town of Rhegium, and even became masters of it.

To say nothing of the fact, that Rhegium continues afterwards, as before,
under the rule of Mikythus, —we may remark that Diodorus must have
formed to himself a strange idea of the geography of southern Italy, to talk
of pursuit and flight from lapygia to Rhegium.

* Aristotel. Polit. v, 2,8. :Aristotle has another passage (vi, 3, 5) in
which he comments on the government of Tarentum: and O. Miller applies
this second passage to illustrate the particular constitutional changes which
were made after the Japygian disaster. I think this juxtaposition of the
two passages unauthorized : there is nothing at all to connect them together.
See History of the Dorians, iii, 9, 14.

v0 .° HISTORY OF GREECE.

comparative handful of men by whom they were 60 ignomini-
ously beaten. Both these sentiments are just, but both are often
exaggerated beyond the point which attentive contemplation of
the facts will justify. The Persian mode of making war (which
we may liken fo that of the modern Turks,! now that the period
of their energetic fanaticism has passed away) was in a high
degree disorderly and inefficient: the men indeed, individually
taken, especially the native Persians, were not deficient in the
qualities of soldiers, but their arms and their organization were
wretched, — and their Jeaders yet worse. On the other hand,
the Greeks, equal, if not superior, in individual bravery, were
incomparably superior in soldier-like order as well as in arms:
but here too the leadership was defective, and the disunion ‘a
constant source of peril. Those who, like Plutarch (or rather
the Pseudo-Plutarch) in his treatise on the Malignity of Herod-
otus, insist on acknowledging nothing but magnanimity and
heroism in the proceedings of the Greeks throughout these criti-
cal years, are forced to deal very harshly with the inestimable
witness on whom our knowledge of the facts depends, — and
who intimates plainly that, in spite of the devoted courage dis-
played, not less by the vanquished at Thermopyle than by the
victors at Salamis, Greece owed her salvation chiefly to the
imbecility, cowardice, and credulous rashness, of Xerxes.2 Had
he indeed possessed either the personal energy of Cyrus or the
judgment of Artemisia, it may be doubted whether any excel-
lence of management, or any intimacy of union, could have pre-
served the Greeks against so great a superiority of force; but it
is certain that all their courage as soldiers in-line would have
been unavailing for that purpose, without a higher degree of gen-
eralship, and a more hearty spirit of codperation, than that which
they actually manifested.

One hundred and fifty years after this eventful period, we shall
see the tables turned, and the united forces of Greece under
Sagat bea ice sai i ee

1} Mr. Waddington’s Letters from Greece, describing the Greek revolution
of 1821, will convey a good idea of the stupidity of Turkish warfare: com-
pare also the second volume of the Memoirs of Baron de Tott, part iif.

2 Thucyd. i, 69. émiorapevoe Kal Tov BapBapov abrdy rept abo ra wAtio
oparévrs, etc.: corspare Thucyd. vi, 33.

————————

GRECIAN AFFAIRS AFTER THE PERSIAN INVASION. 944

Alexander of Macedon becoming invaders of Persia. We shall
find that in Persia no improvement has taken place during this
long interval, — that the scheme of defence under Darius Codo-
mannus labors under the same defects as that of attack under
Xerxes, — that there is the same blind and exclusive confidence
in pitched battles with superior numbers,! — that the advice of
Mentor the Rhodian, and of Charidemus, is despised like that of
Demaratus and Artemisia,— that Darius Codomannus, essen-
tially of the same stamp as Xerxes, is hurried into the battle of
Issus by the same ruinous temerity as that which threw away
the Persian fleet at Salamis,— and that the Persian native
infantry (not the cavalry) even appear to have lost that indi-
vidual gallantry which they displayed so conspicuously at Plateea.
But on the Grecian side, the improvement in every way is very
great: the orderly courage of the soldier has been sustained and
even augmented, while the generalship and power of military
combination has reached a point unexampled in the previous
history of mankind. Military science may be esteemed a sort
of creation during this interval, and will be found to go through
various stages: Demosthenés and Brasidas, the Cyreian army
and Xenophon, Agesilaus, Iphikratés, Epaminondas, Philip of
Macedon, Alexander :2 for the Macedonian princes are borrowers
of Greek tactics, though extending and applying them with a
personal energy peculiar to themselves, and with advantages of
Position such as no Athenian or Spartan ever enjoyed. In this
comparison between the invasion of Xerxes and that of Alexan-
der we contrast the progressive spirit of Greece, serving as herald
and stimulus to the like spirit in Europe, with the stationary
mind of Asia, occasionally roused by some splendid individual,
but never appropriating to itself new social ideas or powers,

_either for war.or for peace.

It is out of the invasion of Xerxes that those new powers of
combination, political as well as military, which lighten up Gre-
cian history during the next two centuries, take their rise. They
are brought into agency through the altered position and charac-

' Thucyd. i, 142. rA7Sec ray duadiay Spacwwvovtes, etc.
7 See a remarkable passage in the third Philippic of Demosthenés, c. 10.

> 3. 128.

VOL. ¥. 11 160c

\

942 HISTORY OF GREECE.

ter of the Athenians — improvers, to a-certain extent, of military
operations on land, but the great creators of marine tactics and
manceuvring in Greece,—and the earliest of all Greeks who
showed themselves capable of organizing and directing the joint
action of numerous allies and dependents, — thus uniting the twe
distinctive qualities of the Homeric Agamemnon,! —ability is
command, with vigor in execution.

In the general Hellenic confederacy, which had acted against
Persia under the presidency of Sparta, Athens could hardly be
said to occupy any ostensible rank above that of an ordinary
member: the post of second dignity in the line at Platzea had
indeed been adjudged to her, but only after a contending claim
from Tegea. But without any difference in ostensible rank, she
was in the eye and feeling of Greece no longer the same power
as before. She had suffered more, and at sea had certainly done
more, than all the other allies put together: even on land at
Platea, her hoplites had manifested a combination of bravery,
discipline, and efficiency against the formidable Persian cavalry
superior even to the Spartans: nor had any Athenian officer
committed so perilous an act of disobedience as the Spartan
Amompharetus. After the victory of Mykalé, when the Pelo-
ponnesians all hastened home to enjoy their triumph, the Athe-
nian forces did not shrink from prolonged service. for the impor-
tant object of clearing the Hellespont, thus standing forth as the
willing and forward champions of the Asiatic Greeks against
Persia. Besides these.exploits of Athens collectively, the only
two individuals gifted with any talents for command, whom this
omentous conquest had thrown up, were both of them Athe-
stans: first, Themistoklés; next, Aristeidés. From the beginning
to the end of the struggle, Athens had displayed an unreserved
Pan-Hellenic patriotism, which had been most ungenerously
requited by the Peloponnesians ; who had kept within their isth-
mian walls, and betrayed Attica twice to hostile ravage; the first
time, perhaps, unavoidably, —- but the second time a culpable
neglect, in postponing their outward march against Mardonius.
And t).¢ Peloponnesians could not but feel, that while they had

1 "Augorepov, Bacirric P dyaddc, xparepée 1’ alyunrne.
; Homer, Iliad, iii, 179.

GRECIAN AFFAIRS AFTER THE PERSIAN INVASION. 9248
i

left Attica unprotected, they owed their own salvation at Salamis
altogether to the dexterity of Themistoklés and the imposing
Athenian naval force.

Considering that the Peloponnesians had sustained little or no
mischief by the invasion, while the Athenians had lost for the
time even their city and country, with a large proportion of their
movable property irrecoverably destroyed, — we might naturally
expect to find the former, if not lending their grateful and active
aid to repair the damage in Attica, at least cordially welcoming
the restoration of the ruined city by its former inhabitants. In-
stead of this, we find the same selfishness again prevalent among
them ; ill-will and mistrust for the future, aggravated by an admi-
ration which they could not help feeling, overlays all their grati-
tude and sympathy. The Athenians, on returning from Salamis
after the battle of Platza, found a desolate home to harbor them.
Their country was laid waste, — their city burnt or destroyed, so
that there remained but a few houses standing, wherein the Per-
sian officers had taken up their quarters, — and their fortifica-
tions for the most part razed or overthrown. It was their first
task to bring home their families and effects from the temporary
places of shelter at Troezen, Aigina, and Salamis. After provid-
ing what was indispensably necessary for immediate wants, they
began to rebuild their city and its fortifications on a scale of
enlarged size in every direction.! But as soon as they were seen
to be employed on this indispensable work, without which neither
political existence nor personal safety was practicable, the allies
took the alarm, preferred complaints to Sparta, and urged her to
arrest the work: in the front of these complainants, probably,
stood the Aiginetans, as the old enemies of Athens, and as having
most to apprehend from her might at sea. The Spartans, per-
fectly sympathizing with the jealousy and uneasiness of their
allies, were even disposed, from old association, to carry their
dislike of fortifications still farther, so that they would have been
pleased to see all the other Grecian Cities systematically defence-
leas like Sparta itself.2 But while sending an embassy to Athens,

1 Thucyd. i. 89. ; :
* Thucyd. i, 90. 72 pév Kal adroi fdiov Gv dpavres pyre Exetvovg pyr’ GAAov
undéva telyog Eyovra, rd 02 mAgov, ray Evppaxav Eorpvertwv kal gofov-

244 HISTORY OF GREECE.

to offer a friendly remonstrance against the project of re-fortify-
ing the city, they could not openly and peremptorily forbid the
exercise of a right common to every autonomous community, —~
nor did they even venture, at a moment when the events of the
past months were fresh in every one’s remembrance, to divulge
their real jealousies as to the future. They affected to offer pru-
‘dential reasons against the scheme, founded on the chance of a
future Persian invasion; in which case it would be a dangerous
advantage for the invader to find any fortified city outside of
Peloponnesus to further his operations, as Thebes had recently
seconded Mardonius. They proposed to the Athenians, therefore,
not merely to desist from their own fortifications, but also to
assist them in demolishing all fortifications of other cities beyond
the limits of Peloponnesus, — promising shelter within the isth-
mus, in case of need, to all exposed parties.

A statesman like Themistoklés was not likely to be imposed
upon by this diplomacy :_ but he saw that the Spartans had the
power of preventing the work if they chose, and that it could
only be executed by the help of successful deceit. By his advice,
the Athenians dismissed the Spartan envoys, saying that they
would themselves send to Sparta and explain their views. Ac-
cordingly, Themistoklés himself was presently despatched thither,
as one among three envoys instructed to enter iffto explanations
with the Spartan authorities ; but his two colleagues, Aristeidés
and Abronichus, by previous concert, were tardy in arriving, —
and he remained inactive at Sparta, making use of their absence
as an excuse for not even demanding an audience, but affeeting
surprise that their coming was so long delayed. But while Aris-
teidés and Abronichus, the other two envoys, were thus studiously
kept back, the whole population of Athens labored unremittingly at
the walls. Men, women, and children, all tasked their strength
to the utmost during this precious interval: neither private
houses, nor sacred edifices, were spared to furnish materials ;
and such was their ardor in'the enterprise, that, before the three
envoys were united at Sparta, the wall had already attained a
height sufficient at least to attempt defence. Yet the interval

Remora

a)

uévey Tod Te vavTixod abray T3 TAFVOC, 8 nplv oby Unjpxe, kal tiv &¢ roy
Mydtxdv rdAeuoy réApay yevopévyr.

GRECIAN AFFAIRS AFTER THE PERSIAN INVASION. 9245

had. been long enough to provoke suspicion, even in the slow
tind of the Spartans, while the more watchful Aginetans sent
them positive intelligence that the wall was rapidly advancing.
Themistoklés, on hearing this allegation, peremptorily denied the
truth of it; and the personal esteem entertained towards him was
at that time so great, that his assurance! obtained for some time

, unqualified credit, until fresh messengers again raised suspicions

in the minds of the Spartans. In reply to these, Themistoklés
urged the ephors to send envoys of their own to Athens, and
thus convince themselves of the state of the facts. They unsus-
pectingly acted upon his recommendation, while he at the same
time transmitted a private communication to Athens, desiring
that the envoys might not be suffered to depart until the safe
return of himself and his colleagues, which he feared might be
denied them when his trick came tobe divulged. Aristeidés and
Abronichus had now atrived,—the wall was announced to be
of a height at least above contempt, — and Themistoklés at once
threw off the mask: he avowed the stratagem practised, — told
the Spartans that Athens was already fortified sufficiently to

“insure the safety and free will of its inhabitants, —- and warned

them that the hour of constraint was now past, the Athenians
heing in a condition to define and vindicate for themselves theiz
own rights and duties in reference to Sparta and the allies. He
reminded them that the Athenians had always been found compe
tent to judge for themselves, whether in joint consultation, or in

- any separate affair, such as the momentous crisis of abandoning

their city and taking to their ships: they had now, in the exer.
cise of this self-judgment, resolved upon fortifying their city, as
a step indispensable to themselves and advantageous even to the
allies generally. Nor could there be any equal or fair inter-
change of opinion unless all the allies had equal means of
defence: either all must be unfortified, or Athens must be forti-
fied as well as the rest.2

Mortified as the Spartans were by a revelation which showed
that they had been not only detected in a dishonest purpose, but

' Thucyd. i, 91. ro pev ‘Oeutoton? ei éretVovro dia ptAiav avrod.

* Thucyd. i, 91. Ob yap oldu re elvac pi amd dv wwalov mapackevijg duotoy
Ts flaov bc Td Kowvdy BovreterSar, "H wavras oy dretxiorove toy xpinvas
Sumpayxely 7} Kal rade vouively dpSig Exerv

246 MISTORY OF GREECE.

completely outwitted,— they were at the same time overawed
by the decisive tone of Themistoklés, whom they never after-
wards forgave. To arrest beforehand erection of the walls
would have: been practicable, though not perhaps without diffi-
culty ; to deal by force with the fact accomplished, was perilous
in a high degree: moreover, the inestimable services just ren-
dered by Athens became again predominant in their minds, so
that sentiment and prudence for the time coincided. They
affected therefore to accept the communication without manifest-
ing any offence, nor had they indeed put forward any pretence
which required-to be formally retracted. The envoys on both
sides returned home, and the Athenians completed their fortifica-
tions without obstruction,! — yet not without murmurs on the
part of the allies, who bitterly reproached Sparta afterwards for
having let slip this golden opportunity of arresting the growth
of the giant.2

If the allies were apprehensive of Athens before, the mixture
of audacity, invention, and deceit, whereby she had just eluded
the hindrance opposed to her fortifications, was well calculated to
aggravate their uneasiness. On the other hand, to the Athe-
nians, the mere hint of intervention to debar them from that
common right of self-defence which was exercised by every
autonomous city except Sparta, must have appeared outrageous
injustice, — aggravated by the fact that it was brought upon
them by their peculiar sufferings in the common cause, and by
the very allies who, without their devoted forwardness, would

1 We are fortunate enongh to possess this narrative, respecting the re-
building of the walls of Athens, as recounted by Thucydidés. It is the
first incident which he relates, in that general sketch of events between the
Persian and Peloponnesian war, which precedes his professed history (i, 89~
92). Diodorus (xi, 39, 40), Plutarch (Themistoklés, c. 19), and Cornelius
Nepos (Themist. c. 6, 7),.seem all to have followed Thucydidés, though
Plutarch also notices a statement of Theopompus, to the effect that The-
mistoklés accomplished his object by bribing the ephors. This would not
be improbable in itself, —nor is it inconsistent with the narrative of Thu-
cydidés ;_but the latter either had not heard or did not believe it.

* Thucyd. i, 69. Kat rdvde tpei¢ alti: (says the Corinthian envoy.ad-
dressing the Laccdsemonians), ré re mparov édoavreg abrove (the Athe-
nians) tiv woAy uera Ta Mydixd xparivat, Kal torepov Ta paxpa oTHoGs
reixn, etc.

GRECIAN AFFAIRS AFTER THE PERSIAN INVASION. 247

now have been slaves of the Great King. And the intention of
the allies to obstruct the fortifications must have been known to
“every soul in Athens, from the universal press of hands re-
quired to hurry the work and escape interference ; just as it was
proclaimed to after-generations by the shapeless fragments and
irregular structure of the wall, in which even sepulchral stones
and inscribed columns were seen imbedded.! Assuredly, the
sentiment connected with this work, performed as it was alike
by rich and poor, strong and weak, — men, women, and children,
— must have been intense as well as equalizing: all had en-
dured the common miseries of exile, all had contributed to the
victory, all were now sharing the same fatigue for the defence _
of their recovered city, in order to counterwork the ungenerous
hindrance of their Peloponnesian allies. We must take notice
of these stirring circumstances, peculiar to the Athenians and
acting upon a generation which had now been nursed in democ-
racy for a quarter of a century, and had achieved unaided the
victory of Marathon, — if we would understand that still strong-
er burst of aggressive activity, persevering self-confidence, and
aptitude as well as thirst for command, — together with that
still wider spread of democratical organization, — which marks
their character during the age immediately following.

The plan of the new fortification was projected on a scale not
unworthy of the future grandeur of the city. Its circuit was
sixty stadia, or about seven miles, with the acropolis nearly in
the centre: but the circuit of the previous walls is unknown, so
that we are unable to measure the extent of that enlargement
‘which Thucydidés testifies to have been carried out on every
side. It included within the town the three hills of the Areopa-
gus, the Pnyx, and the Museum; while on the south of the town
it was carried for a ‘space even on the southern bank of the
Nlissus, thus also comprising the fountain Kallirhoé.2 In spite

? Thucyd. i, 93. Cornelius Nepos (Themist. c. 7) exaggerates this into a
foolish conceit.

.? For the dimensions and direction of the Themistoklean walls of Athens,
see especially the excellent Treatise of Forchhammer— Topographie von
Athen — published in the Kieler Philologische Studien. Kiel, 1841.

The plan of Athens, prepared by Kiepert after his own researches and

¢

248 HISTORY OF GREECE.

of the excessive hurry in which it was raised, the structure was
thoroughly solid and sufficient against every external enemy :
but there is reason to believe that its very large inner area was
never filled with buildings. Empty spaces, fer the temporary
shelter of inhabitants driven in from the country with their
~pronerty, were eminently useful to a Grecian city-community ;
‘to none more useful than to the Athenians, whose principal
strength lay in their fleet, and whose citizens habitually resided
in large proportion in their separate demes throughout Attica.
The first indispensable step, in the renovation of Athens after
her temporary extinction, was now happily accomplished: the
city was made secure against external enemies. But Themisto-
klés, to whom the Athenians owed the late successful stratagem,
and whose influence must have been much strengthened by its
success, had conceived plans of a wider and more ambitious
range. He had been the original adviser of the great maritime
start taken by his countrymen, as well as of the powerful naval
force which they had created during the last few years, and
which had so recently proved their salvation. He saw in that
force both the only chance of salvation for the future, in case the
Persians should renew their attack by sea, — a contingency at
that time seemingly probable, — and boundless prospects of
future ascendency over the Grecian coasts and islands: it was
the great engine of defence, of offence, and of ambition. To
continue this movement required much less foresight and genius
than to begin it, and Themistoklés, the moment that the walls
of the city had been finished, brought back the attention of his
countrymen to those wooden walls which had served them as a-
refuge against the Persian monarch. He prevailed upon them
to provide harbor-room at once safe and adequate, by the en-
largement and fortification of the Peireus, This again was
only the prosecution of an enterprise previously begun: for he
had already, while in office two or three years before,! made his

published among his recent maps, adopts for the mest part the idcas of
Forchhammer, as to the course of the walls.

1 Thucyd. i, 93. é&retoe dé wat tov Tletpaséwe ra Aosmd 6 Cepioronan
olxodopety (txipxto & abrod nporepoy Eni rig Exeivoy Gpync, Ao Kat’ Eviavtdny
"ADnvaiore npse}.

Upon which words the Scholiast observes (Ke~ éviatrdv)— xara riva

GRECIAN AFFAIRS AFTER .THE PERSIAN INVASION. 249

countrymen sensible that the open roadstead of Phalérum was
thoroughly insecure, and had prevailed upon them to improve
and employ in part the more spacious harbors of Peirsus and
Munychia, —tbree natural basins, all capable of being closed
and defended. Something had then been done towards the en-
largement of this port, though it had probably been subsequently
ruined by the Persian invaders: but Themistoklés now resumed
the scheme on a scale far grander than he could then have ven-
tured to propose, — a scale which demonstrates the vast auguries
present to his mind respecting the destinies of Athens. Peireus
and Munychia, in his new plan, constituted a fortified space as
large as the enlarged Athens, and with a wall far more elaborate
and unassailable. The wall which surrounded them, sixty stadia
in circuit, was intended by him to be so stupendous, both in
height and thickness, as to render assault hopeless, and to enable
the whole military population to act on shipboard, leaving only
old men and boys as a garrison.2 We may judge how vast his

éviavrdv FyepOv éyéveto’ mpd d2 rov Mndixdy hpte OeutoroxAge évavrov
Eva.

It seems hardly possible, having no fuller evidence to proceed upon, to
determine to which of the preceding years Thucydidés means to refer this
aoxn of Themistoklés. Mr. Fynes Clinton, after discussing the opinions
of Dodwell and Corsini (see Fasti Hellenici, ad ann. 481 n.c. and Preface,
p. xv), inserts Themistoklés as archon eponymus in 481 8.0c., the year before
the invasion of Xerxes, and supposes the Peirssus to have been commenced
in that year. This is not in itself improbable: but he cites the Scholiast as
having asserted the same thing before him (xpd rév Mydixav hpfe Oensoro-
KAnc éviavrdy &va), in which I apprehend that he is not ‘borne out by
the analogy of the language: évcavrdv éva, in the accusative case, denotes
only the duration of the dpx?, not the position of the year (compare
Thucyd. iii, 68).

I do not feel certain that Thucydidés meant to ‘designate Themistoklés
as having been archon eponymus, or as having been one of the nine
archons. He may hava meant, “during the year when Themistoklés was
stratégus (or general),” and the explanation of the Scholiast, who employs
the word 7yez0y, rather implies that he so understood it. The stratégi were
annual as well as the archons. Now we know that Themistoklés was one of
the generals in 480 n.c., and that he commanded. in Thessaly, at Artemi-
sium, and at Salamis. The Peireus may have been begun in the early
part of 480 3.c., when Xerxes was already on his march, or at least at

' Thucyd. n, 13. * Thucyd. i, 98.

11*

950 HISTORY OF GREECE.

project was, when we learn that the wall, though in practice
always found sufficient, was only carried up to half the height
which he had contemplated.! In respect to thickness, however,
his ideas were exactly followed: two carts meeting one another
brought stones which were laid together right and left on the
outer side of each, and thus formed two primary parallel walls,
between which the interior space — of course, at least as broad
as the joint breadth of the two carts — was filled up, “not with
rubble, in.the usual manner of the Greeks, but constructed,
throughout the whole thickness, of squared stones, cramped to-
gether with metal.”2 The result was a solid wall, probably not
less than fourteen or fifteen feet thick, since it was intended to
carry so very unusual a height. In the exhortations whereby
he animated the people to this fatiguing and costly work, he
labored to impress upon them that Peirseus was of more value
to them than Athens itself, and that it afforded a shelter into
which, if their territory should be again overwhelmed by a supe-
rior land-force, they might securely retire, with full liberty of
that maritime action in which they were a match for all the
world.3 We may even suspect that if Themistoklés could have
followed his own feelings, he would have altered the site of the
city from Athens to Peirzus: the attachment of the people to
their ancient and holy rock doubtless prevented any such propo-
sition. Nor did he at that time, probably, contemplate the pos-
sibility of those long walls which in a few years afterwards
consolidated the two cities into one.

Forty-five years afterwards, at the beginning of the Pelopon-
nesian war, we shall hear from Periklés, who espoused and
carried out the large ideas of Themistoklés, this same language

1 Thucyd. i, 93. Td d2 typos fustov pahora tredéodn ov dtevoetro: sB0bAeT0
yap TH peyéder xal TH maze Gdioravat Tag Tov roAepion ExtBevddc, avdpo-
muy 62 tvouilev dAiyor Kal Tov axpeiorarey dpxécety tov gvdAaxny, Tove J
GAdove é¢ rac vac toBjoec Sar.

* Thucyd. i, 93. The expressions are. those of Colonel Leake, derived
from inspection of the scanty remnant of these famous walls still to be seen
— Topography of Athens, ch. ix, p.411: see edit. p. 293, Germ. transl
Compare Aristophan. Aves, 1127, about the breadth of the wal] of Nephel-
okokkygia.

* Thacyd. i, 93 (compare Cornel. Nepos, Themistok. c.6) raig vavot
mpeg Gravrac dyViorac8at,

GRECIAN AFFAIRS AFTER THE PERSIAN INVASION. 92)

a
about the capacity of Athens to sustain a great power exclusively
or chiefly upon maritime action. But the Athenian empire was
then an established reality, whereas in the time of Themistoklés
it was yet a dream, and his bold predictions, surpassed as they
were by the future reality, mark that extraordinary power of
practical divination which Thucydidés so emphatically extols in
him. And it proves the exuberant hope which had now passed
into the temper of the Athenian people, when we find them, on
the faith of these predictions, undertaking a new enterprise of
so much toil and expense; and that too when just returned from
exile into a desolated country, at a moment of private distress
and public impoverishment. However, Peirseus served other
purposes besides its direct use as a dockyard for military marine :
its secure fortifications and the protection of the Athenian navy,
were well calculated to call back those metics, or resident for-
eigners, who had been driven away by the invasion of Xerxes,
and who might feel themselves insecure in returning, unless
some new and conspicuous means of protection were exhibited.
To invite them back, and to attract new residents of a similar
description, Themistoklés proposed to exempt them from the
metoikion, or non-freeman’s annual tax:! but this exemption
can only have lasted for a time, and the great temptation for
them to return must have consisted in the new securities and
facilities for trade, which Athens, with her fortified ports and
navy, now afforded. The presence of numerous metics was
profitable to the Athenians, both privately and publicly: much
of the trading, professional, and handicraft business was in their
hands: and the Athenian legislation, while it excluded them
from the political franchise, was in other respects equitable and
protective to them. In regard to trading pursuits, the metics
had this advantage over the citizens, — that they were less fre-
quently carried away for foreign military service. The great
increase of their numbers, from this period forward, while it
tended materially to increase the value of property all through-
out Attica, but especially in Peireeus and Athens, where they
mostly resided, helps us to explain the extraordinary prosperity,
together with the excellent cultivation, prevalent throughout the

1 Diodor. xi, 43. ©

253 . HISTORY O¥ GREECE.

country before the Peloponnesian war. The barley, vegetables,
figs, and oil, produced in most parts of the territory, — the char-
coal prepared in the flourishing deme of Acharnz,! — and the
fish obtained in abundance near the coast, —all found opulent
buyers and a constant demand from the augmenting town popu-
lation. ;
We are farther told that Themistoklés2 prevailed on the
Athenians to build every year twenty new ships of the line, —
s0 we may designate the trireme. Whether this number was
always strictly adhered to, it is impossible to say: but to repair
the ships, as well as to keep up their numbers, was always re-
garded among the most indispensable obligations of the execu-
tive government.

It does not appear that the Spartans offered any opposition to
the fortification of the Peireus, though it was an enterprise
greater, more novel, and more menacing, than that of Athens.
But Diodorus tells us, probably enough, that Themistoklés
thought it necessary to send an embassy to Sparta,3 intimating
that his scheme was to provide a safe harbor for the collective
navy of Greece, in the event of future Persian attack.

Works on so vast a scale must have taken a considerable time,
and absorbed much of the Athenian force; yet they did not pre-

' See the lively picture of the Acharnian demots in the comedy of Aris-
tophanés so entitled.

Respecting the advantages derived fiom the residence of metics and from
foreign visitors, compare the observations of Isokratés, more than a century
after this period, Orat. iv, De Pace, p. 163, and Xenophon, De Vectigali-
bus, ¢. iv.

? Diodor. xi, 43.

* Diodor. xi, 41, 42,43. I mean, that the fact of such an embassy being
sent to Sparta is probable enough, — separating that fact from the prelim-
inary discussions which Diodorus describes as having preceded it in the
assembly of Athens, and which seem unmeaning as well as incredible. His
story —that Themistoklés told the assembly that he had a concefred
scheme of great moment to the state, but that it did not admit of being made
public beforehand, upon which the assembly named Aristeidés and Xan-
thippus to hear it confidentially and judge of it—seems to indicate that
Diodorus had read the well-known tale of the project of Themistoklés to
burn the Grecian fleet in the harbor of Pagass, and that he jumbled it in his
memory with this other project for enlarging and fortifying the Peirsrus.

‘“

GRECIAN AFFAIRS AFTER THE PERSIAN INVASION. 253

vent Athens ftom lending active aid towards the expedition which,
in the year after the battle of Platea (B.c. 478) set sail for Asia
under the Spartan Pausanias. Twenty ships from the various
cities of Peloponnesus! were under his command: the Athenians
alone furnished thirty, under the orders of Aristeidés and Kimor,:
other triremes also came from the Ionian and insular allivs.
They first sailed to Cyprus, in which island they liberated most
of the Grecian cities from the Persian government : next, they
turned to the Bosphorus of Thrace, and undertook the siege of
Byzantium, which, like Sestus in the Chersonese, was a post of
great moment, as well as of great strength, occupied by a con
siderable Persian force, with several leading Persians and even
kinsmen of the monarch. The place was captured,? seemingly
after a prolonged siege: it might probably hold out even longer
than Sestus, as being taken less unprepared. The line of eom-
munication between the Euxine sea and Greece was thus cleared
of obstruction.

The capture of Byzantium proved the signal for a capital and
unexpected change in the relations of the various Grecian cities ;
a change, of which the proximate cause lay in the misconduct of
Pausanias, but towards which other causes, deep-seated as well
- as various, also tended. In recounting the history of Miltiades,3
I noticed the deplorable liability of the Grecian leading men to
be spoiled by success: this distemper worked with singular
rapidity on Pausanias. As conqueror of Platza, he had acquired
a renown unparalleled in Grecian experience, together with a
prodigious share of the plunder: the concubines, horses,‘ camels,
and gold plate, which had thus passed into his possession, were
well calculated to make the sobriety and discipline of Spartan
life irksome, while his power also, though great on foreign com-
mand, became subordinate to that of the ephors when he return-
ed home. His newly-acquired insolence was manifested immedi-
ately after the battle, in the commemorative tripod dedicated by

1 Thucyd. i, 94; Plutarch, Aristeidés, c. 23. Diodorus (xi, 44) says that
the Peloponnesian ships were fifty in number: his statement is not to be
accepted, in opposition to Thucydidés. )

* Thucyd, i, 94.
3 See the volume of this history immediately preceding, ch. xxxvi, p. 372
¢ Herodot. ix, 81.

254 HISTORY OF GREECE.

his order at Delphi, which proclaimed himself by name and
singly, as commander of the Greeks and destroyer of the Per-
sians: an unseemly boast, of ‘which the Lacedemonians them-
selves were the first to mark their disapprobation, by causing the
inscription to be erased, and the names of the cities who had taken
part in the combat to be all enumerated on the tripod.! Never-
theless, he was still sent on the command against Cyprus and By-
zantium, and it was on the capture ofthis latter place that his
ambition and discontent first ripened into distinct treason. He
entered into correspondence with Gongylus the Eretrian exile
(now a subject of Persia, and invested with the property and
government of a district in Mysia), to whom he intrusted his
new acquisition of Byzantium, and the care of the valuable pris-
oners taken in it. These prisoners were presently suffered to es-
cape, or rather sent away underhand to Xerxes; together with a
letter from the hand of Pausanias himself, to the following effect :
« Pausanias, the Spartan commander, having taken these captives,
sends them back, in his anxiety to oblige thee. I am minded, if -
it so please thee, to marry thy daughter, and to bring under thy
dominion both Sparta and the rest of Greece: with thy aid, I
think myself competent to achieve this. If my proposition be
acceptable, send some confidential person down to the seaboard,
through whom we may hereafter correspond.” Xerxes, highly
pleased with the opening thus held out, immediately sent down
Artabazus (the same who had been second in command in
Beeotia) to supersede Megabatés in the satrapy of Daskylium ;
the new satrap, furnished with a letter of reply bearing the regal
seal, was instructed to further actively the projects of Pausanias.
The letter was to this purport:“Thus saith King Xerxes to
Pausanias. Thy name stands forever recorded in my house as a

—-

‘In the Athenian inscriptions on the votive offerings dedicated after the
capture of Eion, as well as after the great victories near the river Euryme-
don, the name of Kimon the commander is not even mentioned (Plutarch.
Kimon, c. 7; Diodor. xi, 62).

A strong protest, apparently familiar to Grecian feeling, against singling
out the general particularly, to receive the honors of victory, appears in
Euripid. Andromach. 694: striking verses, which are said to have been
indignantly repeated by Kleitus, during the intexication of the banquet
wherein he was slain by Alexander (Quint. Curtius viii, 4, 29 (vili, 4);
Plutarch, Alexand. c. 51).

GRECIAN AFFAIRS AFTER THE PERSIAN INVASION. 9255

well-doer, on account of the men whom thou hast saved for me
beyond sea at Byzantium: and thy propositions now received are
acceptable to me. Relax not either night or day in accomplishing
that which thou promisest, nor let thyself be held back by cost,
either gold or silver, or numbers of men, if thou standest in need of
them, but transact in confidence thy business and mine jointly with
Artabazus, the good man whom I have now sent, ia such manner
as may be best for both of us.”!

Throughout the whole of this expedition, Pauganias had been
insolent and domineering, degrading the allies at quarters and
watering-places in the most offensive manner as compared with
the Spartans, and treating the whole armament in a manner
which Greek warriors could not tolerate, even in a Spartan Her-
akleid, and a victorious general. But when he received the
letter from Xerxes, and found himself in immediate communica-
tion with Artabazus, as well as supplied with funds for corrup-
tion,? his insane hopes knew no bounds, and he already fancied

himself son-in-law of the Great King, as well as despot of Hellas.
Fortunately for Greece, his treasonable plans were not deliberate-
ly laid and veiled until ripe for execution, but manifested with
childish impatience. He clothed himself ia Persian attire — (a
proceeding which the Macedonian army, a century and a half
afterwards, could not tolerate,3 even in Alexander the Great) —
he traversed Thrace with a body of Median and Egyptian guards,
— he copied the Persian chiefs, both in the luxury of his table and
in his conduct towards the free women of Byzantium. Kleon-
iké, a Byzantine maiden of conspicuous family, having been rav-
ished from her parents by his order, was brought to his chamber
. at night: he happened to be asleep, and being suddenly awak-
ened, knew not at first who was the person approaching his bed,

1 These letters are given by Thucydidés verbatim (i, 128, 129): he had
seen them or obtained copies (@¢ torepov dvevpédn} — they were, doubtless,
communicated along with the final revelations of the confidential Argilian
slave. As they are autographs, I have translated them literally, retaining
that abrupt transition from the third person to the first, which is one of
their peculiarities. Cornelius Nepos, who translates the letter of Pausanias,
has effaced this peculiarity, and carries the third person from the beginning
to the end (Cornel. Nep. Pausan. c. 2). * Diodor. xi, 44.

2 Arrian. Exp. Alex. iv, 7, 7; vii, 8,4; Quint. Curt. vi, 6, 10 (vi, 21, 11).

256 HISTORY OF GREECE.

but seized his sword and slew her.! Moreover, his haughty re-
serve, with uncontrolled bursts of wrath, rendered him unap-
proachable; and the allies at length came to regard him as a
despot rather than a general. The news of such outrageous
behavior, and the manifest evidences of his alliance with the
Persians, were soon transmitted to the Spartans, who. recalled
him to answer for his conduct, and seemingly the Spartan vessels
along with him.?

In spite of the flagrant conduct of Pausanias, the Lacedzemo-
nians acquitted him on the allegations of positive and individual
wrong; yet, mistrusting his conduct in reference to collusion with
the enemy, they sent out Dorkis to. supersede him.as commander.
But a revolution, of immense importance for Greece, had taken
place in the minds. of the allies. The headship, or hegemony,
was in the hands of Athens, and Dorkis the i clans found the
allies not disposed to recognize his authority.

Even before the battle of Salamis, the question had bea
raised,? whether Athens was not entitled to the command at sea,
in consequence of the preponderance of her naval contingent.
The repugnance of the allies to any command except that of
Sparta, either on land or water, had induced .the Athenians to
waive their pretensions at that.critical moment. But the subse-
quent victories had materially exalted the latter in the eyes of
Greece: while the armament now serving, differently composed
from that which had fought at Salamis, contained a large pro-
portion of the newly-enfranchised Ionic Greeks, who not only
had no preference for Spartan command, but were attached to
the Athenians on every ground, — as well from kindred race, as
from the certainty that Athens with her superior fleet was the
only protector upon whom they could rely against the Persians.
Moreover, it happened that the Athenian poner on wae S=Pe:

‘ Plutarch, Kimon, c.6; also Plutarch, De Ser. Numin. “Vind. c. 10, p.
555. Pausanias, iii, 17,8. It is remarkable that the latter heard the story
of the death of Kleoniké from the lips of a Byzantine citizen of his own
day, and seems to think that it had never found place in any written work.

* Thucyd. i, 95-131 : compare Daris and Nymphis apud Atheneum, xii,
p. 535.

? Herodot. viii, 2,3. Compare the language of the Athenian envoy, as it
stands in Herodotus (vii, 155) addressed to Gelo.

GRECIAN AFFAIRS AFTER THE PERSIAN INVASION, 957

dition, Aristeidés and-Kimon, were personally just and conciliat-
ing, forming a striking contrast with Pausanias. Hence the
Tonic Greeks in the fleet, when they found that the behavior of
the latter was not only oppressive towards themselves but also
revolting to Grecian sentiment generally, addressed themselves
to the Athenian commanders for protection and redress, on the
plausible ground of kindred race;! entreating to be allowed to
serve under Athens as leader instead of Sparta. Plutarch tells
us that Aristeidés not only tried to remonstrate with Pausanias,
who repelled him with arrogance, — which is exceedingly proba-
ble, —— but that he also required, as a condition of his compli-
ance with the request of the Ionic allies, that they should person-
ally insult Pausanias, so as to make reconciliation impracticable:
upon which a Samian and a Chian captain deliberately attacked
and damaged the Spartan admiral-ship in the harbor of Byzan-
tium. The historians from whom Plutarch copied this latter
statement must have presumed in the Athenians a disposition to
provoke that quarrel with Sparta which afterwards sprung up
as it were spontaneously: but the Athenians had no interest in
doing s0, nor can we credit the story,— which is, moreover,
unnoticed by Thucydidés. ‘To give the Spartans a just ground
of indignation, would have been glaring imprudence on the part
of Aristeidés: but he had every motive to entertain the request
of the allies,.and he began to take his measures for acting as
their protector and chief. And his proceedings were much facil-
itated by the circumstance that the Spartan government about
this time recalled Pausanias to undergo an examination, in con-
sequence of the universal complaints against him which had
reached them. He seems to have left no Spartan authority
behind him,-——even the small Spartan squadron accompanied
him home: so that the Athenian generals had the best opportu-
nity for insuring to themselves and exercising that command
which the allies besought them to undertake. So effectually did
they improve the moment, that when Dorkis arrived to replace
Pausanias, they were already in full supremacy; while Dorkis,

1 Thucyd. i, 95, #giovy avrode nyepivac opadyv yevéadat kata rd Evyyevés
wai Ilavoavig un éxirpérety nv mov Rualyras

* Plataroh, Aristeidés, c, 23

VOL.V -; 17oc.

258 HISTORY OF GREECE.

having only a small force, and being in no condition to employ
constraint, found himself obliged to return home.!

This incident, though not a declaration.of war against Sparta,
was the first open renunciation of her authority as presiding
state among the Greeks; the first avowed manifestation of a
competitor for that dignity, with numerous and willing followers ;
the first separation of Greece — considered in herself alone and
apart from foreign solicitations, such as the Persian invasion —
into two distinct organized camps, each with collective interests
and projects of its own. In spite of mortified pride, Sparta was
constrained, and even in some points of view not indisposed, to
_ patient acquiescence: for she had no means of forcing the dispo
sitions of the Ionic allies, while the war with Persia altogether,
— having now become no longer strictly defensive, and being
withal maritime as well as distant from her own. territory, —
had ceased to be in harmony with her home routine and strict
discipline. Her grave senators, especially an ancient Herakleid
named Hetcmaridas, reproved the impatience of the younger
citizens, and discountenanced the idea of permanent maritime
command as a dangerous innovation: they even treated it as an
advantage, that Athens should take the lead in carrying on
the Persian war, since it could not be altogether dropped ; nor
had the Athenians as yet ‘manifested any sentiments posi-
tively hostile, to excite their'alarm.2 Nay, they actually took
credit in the eyes of Athens, about a centary afterwards, for
having themselves advised this separation of command at sea
from command on land.2 Moreover, if the war continued

? Thacyd. i, 95; Diodorus, xi, 44-47.

? Thucyd.i, 95. Following Thucydidés in his conception of these events,
I have embodied in the narrative as much as seems consistent with it in
Diodorus (xi, 50), who evidently did not here copy Thucydidés, but proba-
bly had Ephorus for his guide. The name of Hetcmaridas, as an influ-
ential Spartan statesman on this occasion, is probable enough; but his
alleged speech on the mischiefs of maritime empire, which Diodorus seems
to have had before him, composed by Ephorus, would probably have repre-
sented the views and feelings of the year 350 8.c., and not those of 476
B.c. The subject would have been treated in the same manner as Iso-
kratés, the master of Ephorus, treats it, in his Crat. viii, De Pace, pp.

179, 180.
* Xenophon, Hellen. vi, 5,34. It was at the moment when the Spartans

GRECIAN AFFAIRS AFTER THE PERSIAN INVASION. 9369

_ ander Spartan guidance, there would be a continued necessity
for sending out their kings or chief men to command: and the
example of Pausanias showed them the depraving effect of such
military power, remote as well as unchecked. The example of their
king Leotychidés, too, near about this time, was a second illustra-
tion of the same tendency. At the same time, apparently, that
Pausanias embarked for Asia to carry on the war against the
Persians, Leotychidés was sent with an army into Thessaly to
put down the Aleuade and those Thessalian parties who had
sided with Xerxes and Mardonius. Successful in this expedi-
tion, he suffered himself to be bribed, and was even detected
with a large sum of money actually on his person: in conse-
quence of which the Lacedzmonians condemned him to banish-
ment, and razed his house to the ground: he died afterwards in
exile at Tegea.! Two such instances were well calculated to

were soliciting Athenian aid, after their defeat at Leuktra. érxoptyvioxovrec
ury, Og Tov BapBapoy Kowwg arepayécavTo —~ avamimvaokovrec 62, O¢ "ADn-
vaiot re dnd Trav ‘EAAnver yptdnoav 7yepdves Tod vavTixod, Kal TOY Kotvyar
Xenparav gidacec, tov Aaxedainoviov taira ovpBovAcvopévwv’ abroi re
cata yi duodoyovupévuc te’ dravruv trav "EAAqvoer ipyepoves mpoxpiSeinoay,
ovpSovdevopévuy av Tabta Tév ’ASyvaiuy.

1 Herodot. vi, 72; Diodor. xi, 48; Pausanias, iii, 7, 8: compare Plutarch,
De Herodoti Malign. c. 21, p. 859.

Leotychidés died, according to Diodorus, in 476 3.c.: he had commanded
at Mykalé-in 479 ns. c. The expedition into Thessaly must therefore have
been in one of the two intermediate years, if the chronology of Diodorus
were, in this case, thoroughly trustworthy. But Mr. Clinton (Fasti Hel
lenici, Appendix, ch. iii, p. 210) has shown that Diodorus is contradicted by
Plutarch, about the date of the accession of Archidamus, — and by others,
about the date of the revolt at Sparta. Mr. Clinton places the accession
of Archidamus and the banishment of Leotychidés (of course, therefore,
the expedition into Thessaly) in 469 3.c. I incline to believe that the ex-
pedition of Leotychidés against the Thessalian Aleuads took place in the
year or in the second year following the battle of Platsea, because they had
been the ardent and hearty allies of Mardonius in Beotia, and because the
war would seem not to have been completed withont putting them down
and making the opposite party in Thessaly predominant.

Considering how imperfectly we know the Lacedemonian chronology of
this date, it is very possible that some confusion may have arisen in the
case of Leotychidés, from the difference between the date of his banishment
and that of his death. King Pleistoanax afterwards, having been banished
for the same offence as that committed by Leotychidés, and having lived

260 HISTORY OF :GREECE.

make the Lacedzmonians distrust the conduct of their Herak-
leid leaders when on foreign service, and this feeling weighed
much in inducing them to abandon the Asiatic headship in favor
of Athens. It appears that their Peloponnesian allies retired
from this contest at the same time as they did, so that the prose-
cution of the war was thus left to Athens as chief of the newly-
emancipated Greeks.!

It was from these considerations that the Spartans were in-
duced to submit to that loss of command which the misconduct
of Pausanias had brought upon them. Their acquiescence facil-
itated the immense change about to take place in Grecian politics.
According to the tendencies in progress prior to the Persian
invasion, Sparta had become gradually more and more the presi-
dent of something like a Pan-Hellenic union, comprising the
greater part of the Grecian states. Such at least was the point
towards which things seemed to be tending; and if many sepa-
rate states stood aloof from this union, none of them at least
sought to form any counter-union, if we except the obsolete and
impotent pretensions’‘of Argos. The preceding volumes: of this
history have shown that Sparta had risen to such ascendency, not
from her superior competence in the management of collective
interests, nor even in the main from ambiticus efforts on her own
part to acquire it, — but from the converging tendencies of Gre-
cian feeling, which required some such presiding state, and from
the commanding military power, rigid discipline, and ancient
undisturbed constitution, which attracted that feeling towards
Sparta. The necessities of common defence against Persia
greatly strengthened these tendeneies, and the success of the de-
fence, whereby so many Greeks were emancipated who required
protection against their former master, seemed destined to have

many years in banishment, was afterwards restored: and the years which
he had passed in banishment were counted as a part of his reign (Fast.
Hellen. Lc. p. 211). The date of Archidamus may, perhaps, have been
reckoned in one account from the banishment of Leotychidés,—in another,
from his death; the rather, as Archidamus must have been very young,
since he reigned forty-two years even after 469 B.c. And the date which
Diodorus has given as that of the death of Leotychidés, may ged be only
the date of his banishment, in which he lived until 469B 3. —
’ Thucyd. i, 18.

GRECIAN AFFAIRS AFTER THE PERSIAN INVASION. 936] .

the like effect still more. For an instant, after the battles of
Platwa and Mykalé,— when the town of Plateea was set apart
as a consecrated neutral spot for an armed confederacy against
the Persian, with periodical solemnities and meetings of deputies,
— Sparta was exalted to be the chief of a full Pan-Hellenic
union, Athens being only one of the principal members: and had
Sparta been capable either of comprehensive policy, of self-
directed and persevering efforts, or of the requisite flexibility of
dealing, embracing distant Greeks.as well as near, — her position
was now such, that her own ascendency, together with undivided
Pan-Hellenic union, might long have been maintained. But she
was lamentably deficient in all the requisite qualities, and the
larger the union became, the more her deficiency stood manifest.
On the other hand, Athens, now entering into rivalry as a sort of
leader of opposition, possessed all those qualities in a remarkable
degree, over and above that actual ‘maritime force which was the
want of the day; so that the opening made by Spartan incompe-
tence and crime, so far as Pausanias was concerned, found her in
every respect prepared. But the sympathies of the Peloponne-
sians still clung to Sparta, while those of the Ionian Greeks had
turned to Athens: and thus not only the short-lived symptoms
of an established Pan-Hellenic union, but even all tendencies
towards it from this time disappear. There now stands out a
manifest schism, with two pronounced parties, towards one of
which nearly all the constituent atoms of the Grecian world
gravitate: the maritime states, newly enfranchised from Persia,
towards Athens, — the land-states, which had formed most part:
of the confederate army at Platea, towards Sparta.! Along with
ee he

' Thucyd.i, 18. Kal ueyadov xevdtvou ixixpepaodévroc ol re Aaxedatpoviot
rov Evurodeunoavtev ‘EAAjvar jyjoavro duvauer npotxyovres, Kal ol ’ADn-
vaiot, dtavondévrec bxAireiv- tov mdAty Kal dvacxevacdcpevot, é¢ Tag vai¢
éuPavres vavrixol tyévovro. Korg 62 drwcauevos tov PapBapov, torepov ob
TOAAG StexpiPnoav mpoc Te ’AVnvaious Kat Aaxedatuoviouc, ol re arocravrec
Baotdéug “EAAnvec xal ol Evurrodepgoarter. Avvipet yap ratra péytore
dtegivyn ~ layvov yap ol pee kata yiv, ol d2 vavoi. Kat dAiyov pev xpévor
ovvépevev 7 duatxy pia, Exeira dt dtevexdéivtec ol Aaxedaipsrviot Kal ot
*AUnvaio: troléunoay pera Tov Suppaxov mpdg GAAHAove* Kal Tov dAAop
‘EAAfvoy eltivécg mov dtacraiev, mpdc tobrovc Fén éxopovv. “Qore axd trév
Mydixdyv io rovde Gel rdv rddcpoy, ete.

This is a clear and concise statement of the great evga in Grecian

262 HISTORY OF GREECE. -

this national schism and called into action by it, appears the inter-
nal political schism in each separate city between oligarchy and

affairs, comparing the period before and after the Persian war. Thucydidés
goes on to trace briefly the consequences of this bisection of the Grecian
world into two great leagues, —the growing improvement in military skill,
and the increasing stretch of military effort on both sides from the Persian
invasion down to the Peloponnesian war ;— he remarks also, upon the dif-
ference between Sparta and Athens in their way of dealing with their allies
respectively. He then states the striking fact, that the military force put
forth separately by Athens and her allies on the one side, and by Sparta and
her allies on the other, during the Peloponnesian war, were each of them
greater than the entire force which had been employed by both together in
the most powerful juncture of their confederacy against the Persian inva-
ders, — Kai éyévero atroic¢ & rovde rov woAepov 7 ldia wapacKev}
ueilwy f Oc Ta KparioTa Tore peTa akpatdvodc tHe Evepayiag
hvdnoav (i, 19).

I notice this last passage especially (construing it as the Scholiast seems
to do), not less because it conveys an interesting comparison, than because
it has been understood by Dr. Arnold, Goller, and other commentators, in a
sense which scems to me erroneous. They interpret thus: adroi¢ to mean
the Athenians only, and not the Lacedemonians, —7 idia mapaoxev) to
denote the forces equipped by Athens herself, apart from her allies, — and
axpatgvode Fuupayiac to refer “to the Athenian alliance only, at a period a
little before the conclusion of the thirty years’ treaty, when the Athenians
were masters not only of the islands, and the Asiatic Greek colonies, but
had also united to their confederacy Boeotia and Achaia or the continent of
Greece itself.” (Dr. Arnold’s note.) Now so far, as the words go, the meaning
assigned by Dr. Arnold might be admissible; but if we trace the thread of
ideas in Thucydidés, we shall see that the comparison, as these commenta-
tors conccive it, between Athens alone and Athens aided by her allics—
between the Athenian empire as it stood during the Peloponnesian war, and
the same empire as it had stodd before the thirty ycars’ truce —is quite for-
eign to his thoughts. Nor had Thucydidés said one word to inform the
reader, that the Athenian empire at. the beginning of the Pcloponnesian
war had diminished in magnitude, and thus was no longer axpaidvig¢ : with-
out which previous notification, the comparison supposed by Dr. Arnold
could not be clearly understood. I conceive that there are two periods, and
two sets of circumstances, which, throughout all this passage, Thucydidés
means to contrast : first, confederate Greece at the time of the Persian war;
next, bisected Greece in a state of war, under the double headship of
Sparta and Athens. Adroic refers as much to Sparta as to Athens — dxpacé-
vovc Tie Evuuuayiag means what had been before expressed by dpuacypia —
and qore set against rovde Tdw TéAcpuov, is equivalent to the expressicn
which had before been used — ard tov Mydixdv é¢ révde det roy méAzpov.

GRECIAN AFFAIRS AFTER THE PERSIAN INVASION. 963

democracy. Of course, the germ of these parties had already
previously existed in the separate states, but the energetic democ-
racy of Athens, and the pronounced tendency of Sparta to rest
upon the native oligarchies in each separate city as her chief
support, now began to bestow, on the conflict of internal polit-
ical parties, an Hellenic importance, and an aggravated bitter-
ness, which had never before belonged to it.

The departure of the Spartan Dorkis left the Athenian gen-
erals at liberty; and their situation imposed upon them the duty
of organizing the new confederacy which they had been chosen
to conduct. The Ionic allies were at this time not merely willing
and unanimous, but acted as the forward movers in the enter-
prise; for they stood in obvious need of protection against the
attacks of Persia, and had no farther kindness to expect from
Sparta or the Peloponnesians. But even had they been less
under the pressure of necessity, the conduct of Athens, and of
Aristeidés as the representative of Athens, might have sufliced
to bring them into harmonious cooperation. The new leader
was no less equitable towards the confederates than energetic
against the common enemy. The general conditions of the con-
federacy were regulated in a common synod of the members,
appointed to meet periodically for deliberative purposes, in the
temple of Apello and Artemis at Delos, — of .old, the venerated
spot for the religious festivals of the Ionic cities, and at the same
time a convenient centre for the members. A definite obligation,
either in equipped ships of war or in money, was imposed upon
every separate city ; and the Athenians, as leaders, determined in
which form contribution should be made by each: their assess-
ment must of course have been reviewed by the synod, nor had
they at this time power to enforce any regulation not approved
by that body. It had been the good fortune of Athens to profit
by the genius of Themistoklés on two recent critical occasions
(the battle of Salamis and the rebuilding of her walls), where
sagacity, craft, and decision were required in extraordinary
measure, and where peeuniary probity was of less necessity: it
was no less her good fortune now, —in the delicate business of
assessing a new tax and determining how much each state should
bear, without precedents to guide them, when unimpeachable
honesty in the assessor was the first of all qualities, — not to

=

964 HISTORY OF GREECE.

have Themistoklés; but to employ in his stead the well-known,
we might almost say the ostentatious, probity of Aristeidés.
This must be accounted good fortune, since at the moment when
Aristeidés was sent out, the Athenians could not have anticipated
that any such duty would devolve upon him. His assessment
not only found favor at the time of its original proposition, when
it must have been freely canvassed by the assembled allies — but
also maintained its place in general esteem, as equitable and mod-
erate, after the once responsible headship of Athens had degener-
ated into an unpopular empire.!

Respecting this first assessment, we scarcely know more than
one single fact, — the aggregate in money was four hundred and
sixty talents, equal to about one hundred and six thousand
pounds sterling. Of the items composing such aggregate, — of
the individual cities which paid it, — of the distribution of obliga-
tions to furnish ships and to furnish money, — we are entirely
ignorant: the little information which we possess on these points
relates to a period considerably later, shortly before the Pelopon-
nesian war, under the uncontrolled empire then exercised by
Athens. Thucydidés, in his brief sketch, makes us clearly
understand the difference between presiding Athens, with her

' Thucyd. v, 18; Plutarch, Aristeidés, c. 24. Plutarch states that the
allies expressly asked the Athenians to send Aristeidés for the purpose of
assessing the tribute. This is not at all probable: Aristeidés, as com-
mander of the Athenian contingent under Pausanias, was at Byzantium
when the mutiny of the Jonians against Pausanias occurred, and was the
person to whom they applied for protection. As such, he was the natural
person to undertake such duties as devolved upon Athens, without any
necessity of supposing that he-was specially asked for to perform it. ”

Plutarch farther states that a certain contribution had b¥en levied from
the Greeks towards the war, even during the headship of Sparta. This
statement also is highly improbable. The headship of Sparta covers only
one single campaign, in which Pausanias had the command: the Ionic
Greeks sent their ships to the fleet, which would be held sufficient, and there
was no time for measuring commutations into money.

Pausanias states, but I think quite erroneously, that the name of Arts-
teidés was robbed of its due honor because he was the first person who
Erafe gopode toic “EAAnot (Pausan. viii, 52,2). Neither the assessment nor
the name of Aristeidés was otherwise than popular.

Aristotle employs the name of Aristeidés as a symbol of unrivalled prob-
ity (Rhetoric. ii, 24, 2).

é

GRECIAN AFFAIRS AFTER THE PERSIAN INVASION. 965

autonomous and regularly assembled allies in 476 3.c., and ¢mpe-
rial Athens, with her subject allies in 432 B.c.; the Greek word
equivalent to ally left either of these epithets to be understood, by .
an ambiguity exceedingly convenient to the powerful states, —
and he indicates the general causes of the change: but he gives
us few particulars as to'the modifying circumstances, and none
at all as to the first start. He tells us only that the Athenians
appointed a peculiar board of officers, called the Hellénotamiz, to
receive and administer the common fund,— that Delos was con-
stituted the general treasury, where the money was to be kept,
—and that the payment thus levied was called the phorus ;! a
name which appears then to have been first put into circulation,
though afterwards usual,—-and to have conveyed at first no
degrading import, though it afterwards became so odious as to be
exchanged for a more innocent synonym.

Endeavoring as well as we can to conceive the Athenian alli-
ance in its infancy, we are first struck with the magnitude of the
total sum contributed; which will appear the more remarkable
when we reflect that many of the contributing cities furnished
ships besides. We may be certain that all which was done at first
was done by general consent, and by a freely determining major-
ity: for Athens, at the time when the Ionic allies besought her
protection against Spartan arrogance, could have had no power
of constraining unwilling parties, especially when the loss of
supremacy, though quietly borne, was yet fresh and rankling
among the countrymen of Pausanias. So large a total implies,
from the very first, a great number of contributing states, and
we learn from hence to appreciate the powerful, wide-spread, and
voluntary movement which then brought together the maritime
and insular Greeks distributed throughout the A‘gean sea and
the Hellespont. The Phenician fleet, and the Persian land-force,
might at any moment reappear, nor was there any hope of resist-
ing either except by confederacy: so that confederacy, under
such circumstances, became, with these exposed Greeks, not
merely a genuine feeling, but at that time the first of all their
feelings. It was their common fear, rather than Athenian ambi-

1 Thucyd. i, 95, 96.
VOL. V. 12

266 HISTORY OF GREECE.

tion, which gave birth to the alliance, and they were grateful to
Athens for organizing it. The public import of the name Hel-
lénotamiz, coined for the occasion, — the selection of Delos asa
centre, and the provision for regular meetings of the members,
—demonstrate the patriotic and fraternal purpose which the
league was destined to serve. In truth, the protection of the
/Egean sea against foreign maritime force and lawless piracy,
as well as that of the Hellespont and Bosphorus against the
transit of a Persian force, was a purpose essentially public, for
which all the parties interested were bound in equity to provide
by way of common contribution: any island or seaport which
might refrain from contributing, was a gainer at the cost of oth-
ers: and we cannot doubt that the general feeling of this common
danger as well as equitable obligation, at a moment when the fear
of Persia was yet serious, was the real cause which brought
together so many contributing members, and enabled the forward
parties to shame into concurrence such as were more backward.
How the confederacy came to be turned afterwards to the pur-
poses of Athenian ambition, we shall see at the proper time: but
in its origin it was an equal alliance, in so far as alliance between
the strong and the weak can ever be equal,—not an Athenian
empire: nay, it was an alliance in which every individual mem-
ber was more exposed, more defenceless, and more essentially
benefited in the way of protection, than Athens. We have here
in truth one of the few moments in Grecian history wherein a
purpose at once common, equal, useful, and innocent, brought
together spontaneously many fragments of this disunited race,
and overlaid fora time that exclusive bent towards petty and
isolated autonomy which ultimately made slaves of them all. It
was a proceeding equitable and prudent, in principle as well as
in detail ; promising at the time the most beneficent consequences,
—not merely protection against the Persians, but a standing
police of the Atgean sea, regulated by a common superintending
authority. And if such promise was not realized, we shall find
that the inherent defects of the allies, indisposing them to the
hearty appreciation and steady performance of their duties as
equal confederates, are at least as much chargeable with the fail-
ure as the ambition of Athens. We may add that, in selecting
Delos as a centre, the Ionic allies were conciliated by a renova-

‘

GRECIAN AFFAIRS AFTER THE PERSIAN INVASION. 967

tion of the solemnities which their fathers, in the days of former
freedom, had crowded to witness in that sacred island.
. At the time when this alliance was formed, the Persians still
held not only the important posts of Eion on the Strymon and
Doriskus in Thrace, but also several other posts in that country,!
which are not specified to us. We may thus understand why
the Greek cities on and near the Chalkidic peninsula, — Argilus,
Stageirus, Akanthus, Skélus, Olynthus, Spartélus, etc.,— which
we know to have joined under the first assessment of Aristeidés,
were not less anxious? to seek protection in the bosom of the
new confederacy, than the Dorian islands of Rhodes and Kos,
the Ionic islands of Samos and. Chios, the olic Lesbos and
Tenedos, or continental towns such as Milétus and Byzantium:
by all of whom adhesion to this alliance must have been contem-
plated, in 477 or 476 8.c., as the sole condition of emancipation
from Persia. Nothing more was required, for the success of a
foreign enemy against Greece generally, than complete autonomy
of every Grecian city, small as well as great,—such as the
Persian monarch prescribed and tried to enforce ninety years
’ afterwards, through the Lacedemonian Antalkidas, in the pacifi-
cation which bears the name of the latter: some sort of union,
organized and obligatory upon each city, was indispensable to
the safety of all. Nor was it by any means certain, at the time
when the confederacy of Delos was first formed, that, even with
that aid, the Asiatic enemy would be effectually kept out; espec-
ially as the Persians were strong, not merely from their own
force, but also from the aid of internal parties in many of the
Grecian states, — traitors within, as well as exiles without.
Among these, the first in rank as well as the most formidable,
was the Spartan Pausanias. Summoned home from Byzantium
to Sparta, in order that the loud complaints against him might be

1 Herodot. vii, 106, Sxapyoe év r9 Opntey nal rod ‘EXAnonévrov way.
Tax7. Otro: Oy wmavrec, ol te é« Opnixyc wat rod ‘EAAnorévrov, wARy
tov ty Aopioxy, brd ‘EAAQvur torepov rairng Tig orparnAaotne t§ypéIyoay,
etc. :

* Thucyd. v, 13. Tag 62 méAecc, pepobcag tdv gdpov Tov én’ ’Aptoreidov,
atrovopovc elvat ...elat 62, "ApytAoc, Zrayerpoc, "Axavdoc, XaGAog, "OAvy-
Vor, Draptrwrdog. :

=

268 HISTORY OF GREECE.

examined, he had been acquitted! of the charges of wrong and
oppression against individuals; yet the presumptions of medtsm,
or treacherous correspondence with the Persians,.appeared so
strong that, though not found guilty, he was still not reappointed
to the command. Such treatment seems to have only emboldened
him in the prosecution of his designs against Greece, and he came
out with this view to Byzantium in a trireme belonging to Her-
mioné, under pretence of aiding asa volunteer without any formal
authority in the war. He there resumed his negotiations with
Artabazus: his great station and celebrity still gave him a strong
hold on men’s opinions, and he appears to have established a sort
of mastery in Byzantium, from whence the Athenians, already
recognized heads of the confederacy, were constrained to expel
‘him by force:2 and we may be very sure that the terror excited by
his presence as well as by his known designs tended materially
to accelerate the organization of the confederacy under Athens.
He then retired to Kolénz in the Troad, where he continued for
some time in the farther prosecution of his schemes, trying to
form a Persian party, despatching emissaries to distribute Per-
sian gold among various cities of Greece, and probably employing
the name of Sparta to impede the formation of the new confede-
racy :3 until at length the Spartan authorities, apprized of his

' Cornelius Nepos states that he was fined (Pausanias, c. 2), which is
neither noticed by Thucydidés, nor at all probable, looking at the subse
quent circumstances connected with him.

_ *Thucyd. i, 180, 131. Kal é rod Bulavriov Big tnd rov *ADzvaier

éxrroAopxyBelc, etc.: these words seem to imply that he had acquired a
strong position in the town.

2 Tt is to this time that I refer the mission of Arthmius of Zeleia (an
Asiatic town, between Mount Ida and the southern coast of the Propontis)
to gain over such Greeks as he could by means of Persian gold. In the
course of his visit to Greece, Arthmius went to Athens: his purpose was
discovered, and he was compelled to flee: while the Athenians, at the in-
stance of Themistoklés, passed an indignant decree, declaring him and his
race enemies of Athens, and of all the allies of Athens, — and proclaiming -
that whoever should slay him would be guiltless; because he had brought
in Persian gold to bribe the Greeks. This decree was engraven on a brazen
column, and placed on record in the acropolis, where it stood near the
great statue of Athéné Promachos, even in the time of Demosthenés and
his contemporary orators. See Demosthen. Philippic. iii, c. 9, p. 122, and

GRECIAN AFFAIRS AFTER THE PERSIAN INVASION. 969

proceedings, sent a herald out to him, with peremptory orders
that he should come home immediately along with the herald:
if' he disobeyed, “the Spartans would declare war against him,” —
or constitute him a public enemy.

As the execution of this threat would have frustrated all the
ulterior schemes of Pausanias, he thought it prudent to obey;
the rather, as he felt entire confidence of escaping all the charges
against him at Sparta by the employment of bribes,! the means
for which were abundantly furnished to him through Artabazus.
He accordingly returned along with the herald, and was, in the
first moments of indignation, imprisoned by order of the ephors ;
who, it seems, were legally competent to imprison him, even had
he been king instead of regent. But he was soon let out, on his
own requisition, and under a private arrangement with friends
and partisans, to take his trial against all accusers.2 Even to

De Fals. Legat. c. 76, p. 428; Aschin. cont. Ktesiphont. ad fin. Harpokrat.
v. "Artuoc — Deinarchus cont. Aristogeiton, sects. 25, 26.

Plutarch (Themistoklés, c. 6, and Aristeidés, tom. ii, p. 218) tells us that
Themistoklés proposed this decree against Arthmius and caused it to be
passed. But Plutarch refers it to the time when Xerxes was on the point
of invading Greece. Now it appears to me that the incident cannot well
belong to that point of time. Xerxes did not rely upon bribes, but upon
other and different means, for conquering Greece: besides, the very tenor
of the decree shows that it must have been passed after the formation of
the confederacy of Delos, — for it pronounces Arthmius to be an enemy of
Athens and of all the allies of Athens. Toa native of Zeleia it might be
a serious penalty to be excluded and proscribed from all the cities in alli-
ance with Athens; many of them being on the coast of Asia. I know no
point of time to which the mission of Arthmius can be so conveniently
referred as this, — when Pausanias and Artabazus were engaged in this very
part of Asia, in contriving plots to get up a party in Greece. Pausanias
was thus engaged for some years,— before the banishment of Themis-
toklés.

’ Thucyd. i, 181. ‘Od BovAdpevoe de fxcora tronrog elvat nat meorebuv
APHpact Cradtoery riv dtaBodAjy, avexopet Td dedrepov é¢ Larapryy.

* Thucyd. i, 131. Ka? é¢ pév riv elpxriv lorinret rd rpdrov bd Tév bpdpwv :
Eretta dtanpasipevoc borepov bjAVe, nal xadiornoty éavrdv b¢ xpioty roi¢
Bovdopévore rept abrov bAéyyerv.

The word dtarpafapevog indicates, first, that Pausanias himself originated
the efforts to get free, —next, that he came to an underhand arrangement:
very probably by a bribe, though the word does not necessarily imply
it. The Scholiast says so, distinctly, ~ xpfuace kat Adyote danpakauevos

\

270 HISTORY OF GREECE.

stand forth as accuser against so powerful a man was a serious
peril: to undertake the proof of specific matter of treason
against him was yet more serious: nor does it appear that any
Spartan ventured to do either. It was known that nothing short
of the most manifest and invincible proof would be held to justi-
fy his condemnation, and amidst a long chain of acts carrying
conviction when taken in the aggregate, there was no single trea-
son sufficiently demonstrable for the purpose. Accordingly, Pau- —
sanias remained not only at large but unaccused, still audaciously
persisting both in ‘his intrigues at home and his correspondence
abroad with Artabazus. He ventured to assail the unshielded
side of Sparta by opening negotiations with the Helots, and in-
stigating them to revolt ; promising them both liberation and ad-
mission to political privilege ;! with a view, first, to destroy the
board of ephors, and render himself despot in his own country,—
next, to acquire through Persian help the supremacy of Greece.
Some of those Helots to whom he addressed himself revealed
the plot to the ephors, who, nevertheless, in spite of such grave
peril, did not choose to take measures against Pausanias upon
no better information, — so imposing was still his name and posi-
tion. But though some few Helots might inform, probably many
others both gladly heard the proposition and faithfully kept the
secret: we shall find, by what happened a few years afterwards,
that there were a large number of them who had their spears in
readiness for revolt. Suspected as Pausanias was, yet by the fears
of some and the connivance of others, he was allowed to bring
his plans to the very brink of consummation ; and his last letters
to Artabazus,? intimating that he was ready for action, and be-
speaking immediate performance of the engagements concerted
between them, were actually in the hands of the messenger.
Sparta was saved from an outbreak of the most formidable kind,

dnAdvore Staxpovoauevocg THY Katynyopiay. Dr. Arnold translates d:ampaég-
dapevoc, “having settled the business.”

Aristotel. Politic. iv, 13, 13; v, 1,55 v, 6,2; Herodot. v,32. Aristotle
calls Pausanias king, though he was only regent: the truth is, that he had
all the power of a Spartan king, and seemingly more, if we compare his
treatment with that of the Prokleid king Leotychidés.

* Thucyd. i, 132. 6 wéAAwy ra¢g redevraiag Paarrei éxtorohdc mpd¢
"ApTaRaloy Kouteiv, dvnp "Apyidtog, etc.

GRECIAN AFFAIRS AFTER THE PERSIAN INVASION. 97]

‘aot by the prudence of her authorities, but by a mere accident, or
-rather by the fact that Pausanias was not only a traitor to his
country, but also base and cruel in his private relations.
The messenger to whom these last letters were intrusted was
a native of Argilus in Thrace, a favorite and faithful slave of Pau-
sanias ; once connected with him by that intimate relation which
Grecian manners tolerated, and admitted even to the full confi-
dence of his treasonable projects. It was by no means the in-
' tention of this Argilian to betray his master ; but, on receiving the
letter to carry, he recollected, with some uneasiness, that none of
the previous messengers had ever come back. Accordingly, he
broke the seal and read it, with the full view of- carrying it for-
ward to its destination, if he found nothing inconsistent with his
own personal safety: he had farther taken the precaution to
counterfeit his master’s seal, so that he could easily reclose the
- letter. On reading it, he found his suspicions confirmed by an ex-
press injunction that the bearer was to be put to death, —a dis-
covery which left him no alternative except to deliver it to the
ephors. But those magistrates, who had before disbelieved the
Helot informers, still refused to believe even the confidential
slave with his master’s autograph and seal, and with the full ac-
count besides, which doubtless he would communicate at the
same time, of all that had previously passed in the Persian cor-
respondence, not omitting copies of those letters between Pausa-
nias and Xerxes, which I have already cited from. Thucydidés -
for in no other way can they have become public. Partly from
the suspicion which, in antiquity, always attached to the tes-
timony of slaves, except when it was obtained under the pre-
tended guarantee of torture, partly from the peril of dealing
with so exalted a criminal,— the ephors would not be satisfied
with any evidence less than his own speech and their own ears.
They directed the Argilian slave to plant himself as a suppliant
in the sacred precinct of Poseidon, near Cape Tenarus, under
the shelter of a double tent, or hut, behind which two of them
concealed themselves. Apprized of this unexpected mark of .
alarm, Pausanias hastened to the temple, and demanded the rea-
son: upon which the slave disclosed his knowledge of the con-
tents of the letter, and complained bitterly that, after long and
faithfnl service, — with a secrecy never once betrayed, through-

272 HISTORY OF GREECE.

out this dangerous correspondence, — he was at length rewarded
with nothing better than the same miserable fate which had be-
fallen the previous messengers. Pausanias, admitting all these
facts, tried to appease the slave's disquietude, and gave him a
solemn assurance of safety if he would quit the sanctuary ;
urging him at the same time to proceed on the journey forthwith,
in order that the schemes in progress might not be retarded.

All this passed within the hearing of the concealed ephors ;
who at length thoroughly satisfied, determined to arrest Pausa-
nias immediately on his return to Sparta. ‘They met him in the
public street, not far from the temple of Athéné Chalkiokus (or
of the Brazen House) ; but as they came near, either their men-
acing looks, or a significant nod from one of them, revealed to
this guilty man their purpose; and he fled for refuge to the
temple, which was so near that he reached it before they could
overtake him. He planted himself as a suppliant, far more
hopeless than the Argilian slave whom he had so recently talked
over at Trenarus, in a narrow-roofed chamber belonging to the
sacrea building; where the ephors, not warranted in touching
him, took off the roof, built up the doors, and kept watch until
he was on the point of dcath by starvation. According te a cur-
rent story,!— not recognized by Thucydidés, yet consistent with
Spartan manners, — his own mother was the person who placed
the first stone to build up the door, in deep abhorrence of his trea-
son. His last moments being carefully observed, he was brought
away just in time to expire without, and thus to avoid the desecra-
tion of the temple. The first impulse of the ephors was to cast
his body into the ravine, or hollow, called the Keeadas, the usual
place of punishment for criminals: probably, his powerful friends
averted this disgrace, and he was buried not far off, until, some
time afterwards, under the mandate of the Delphian oracle, his
body was exhumed and transported to the exact spot where he
had died. Nor was the oracle satisfied even with this reinter-
ment: pronouncing the whole proceeding to be a profanation of
the sanctity of Athéné, it enjoined that two bodies should be
presented to her as an atonement for the one carried away. In
the very early days of Greece, —or among the Carthaginians,

1 Diodor. xi, 45; Cornel. Nepos, Pausan. c. 5; Polysen. viii, 51

GREEIAN AFFAIRS AFTER THE PESSIAN INVASION. 9278

even at this period, — such an injunction would probably have
produced the slaughter of two human victims : on the present
occasion, Athéné, or Hikesius, the tutelary god of suppliants, was
supposed to be satisfied by two brazen statues; not, however,
without some attempts to make out that the expiation was inade-
quate.!

Thus perished a Greek who reached the pinnacle of renown
simply from the accidents of his lofty descent, and of his being
general at Platea, where it does not appear that he displayed any
superior qualities. His treasonable projects implicated and
brought to disgrace a man far greater than himself, the Athenian
Themistoklés.

The chronology of this important period is not so fully known
as to enable us to make out the full dates of particular events ;
but we are obliged—in consequence of the subsequent events
connected with Themistoklés, whose flight to Persia is tolerably
well marked as to date —to admit an interval of about nine years
between the retirement of Pausanias from his command at By-
zantium, and his death. To suppose so long an interval engaged
in tregsonable correspondence, is perplexing; and we can only
explain it to ourselves very imperfectly by considering that the
Spartans were habitually slow in their movements, and that the
suspected regent may perhaps have communicated with partisans,
real or expected, in many parts of Greece. Among those whom
he sought to enlist as accomplices was Themistoklés, still in great
power,—though, as it would seem, in declining power, — at
Athens: and the chargé of collusion with the Persians connects
itself with the previous movement of political parties in that city.

The rivalry of Themistoklés and Aristeidés had been greatly
appeased by the invasion of Xerxes, which had imposed upon
both the peremptory necessity of cooperation against a common
enemy. Nor was it apparently resumed, during the times which
immediately succeeded the ‘return of the Athenians to their
country: at least we hear of both in effective service, and in
prominent posts. Themistoklés stands forward as the contriver
of the city walls and architect of Peireus: Aristeidés is com-
mander of the fleet, and first organizer of the confederacy of

1 Thacyd. i, 183, 184; Pausanias, iii, 17, 9.
«428

VOL. V: 180c.

274 HISTORY OF GREECE.

Delos. Moreover, we seem to detect a change in the character
of the latter: he had ceased to be the champion of Athenian
old-fashioned landed interest, against Themistoklés as the origi-
nator of the maritime innovations. Those innovations had now,
since the battle of Salamis, become an established fact; a fact
of overwhelming influence on the destinies and character, public
as well as private, of the Athenians. During the exile at Sal-
amis, every man, rich or poor, landed proprietor or artisan, had
been for the time a seaman: and the anecdote of Kimon, who
dedicated the bridle of his horse in the acropolis, as a token that
he was about to pass from the cavalry to service on shipboard,! is
a type of that change of feeling which must have been impressed
more or Jess upon every rich man in Athens. From hencefor-
ward the fleet is endeared to every man as the grand force, offen-
sive and defensive, of the state, in which character all the political
leaders agree in accepting it: we ought to add, at the same time,
that this change was attended with no detriment either to the
land-force or to the landed cultivation of Attica, both of which
will be found to acquire extraordinary development during the
interval between the Persian and Peloponnesian wars. Still, the
triremes and the men who manned them, taken collectively, were
now the determining element in the state: moreover, the men
who manned them had just returned from Salamis, fresh from a
scene of trial and danger, and from a harvest of victory, which
had equalized for the moment all Athenians as sufferers, as com-
batants, and as patriots. Such predominance of the maritime
impulse, having become .pronounced immediately after. the return
from Salamis, was farther greatly strengthened by the construc-
tion and fortification of the Peirzeus,—a new maritime Athens,
as large as the old inland city, — as well as by the unexpected
formation of the confederacy at Delos, with all its untried pros-
pects and stimulating duties. - ;
The political change arising from hence in Athens was not
less important than the military.. “The. maritime multitude,
authors of the victory of Salamis,” 2 and instruments of the new

! Plutarch, Kimon, c. 8.
* Aristotel. Politic. v, 5,5. Kal wade 6 vaurixde bxAo¢, yevopevog

GRECIAN AFFAIRS AFTER THE PERSIAN INVASION. 975

vocation of Athens as head of the Delian confederacy, appear
now ascendant im the political constitution also; not in any way
as a separate or privileged class, but as leavening the whole
mass, strengthening the democratical ‘sentiment, and protesting
against all recognized political inequalities. In fact, during the
struggle at Salamis, the whole city of Athens had been nothing
else than “a maritime multitude,” among which the proprietors
and chief men had been confounded, until, by the efforts of all,
the common country had been reconquered: nor was it likely
that this multitude, after a trying period of forced equality, during
which political privilege had been effaced, would patiently ac-
quiesce in the full restoration of such privilege at home. We
see by the active political sentiment of the German people, after
the great struggles of 1813 and 1814, how much an energetie
and successful military effort of the people at large, blended with
endurance of serious hardship, tends to stimulate the sense of
political dignity and the demand for developed citizenship: and
if this be the tendency even among a people habitually passive
on such subjects, much more was it to be expected in the Athe-
nian population, who had gone through a previous training of
‘near thirty years under the democracy of Kleisthenés. At the
time when that constitution was first established,! it was perhaps
the most democratical in Greete: it had worked extremely well
and had diffused among the people a sentiment favorable to
equal citizenship and unfriendly to avowed privilege: so that
the impressions made by the struggle at Salamis found the pop-
ular mind prepared to receive them. Early after the return to
Attica, the Kleisthenean constitution was enlarged as respecte
eligibility to the magistracy. According to that constitution, the
fourth or last class on the Solonian census, including the consid-
erable majority of the freemen, were not admissible to offices
of state, though they possessed votes in common with the rest:
no person was eligible to be a magistrate unless he belonged to

witiog tig wept Ladapiva vinne, kal 61d tabrye tie Hyepoviag nat 6d Tiv
Kata Yudacocay déivauiy, tiv dnuoxpatiav loyvporépav Te:

‘OQ vaurixds dxAo¢ (Thucyd. viii, 72 and passim).

1 ¥For the constitution of Kleisthenés, see vol. iv, of this History, cl.
xxxi, p. 142, segq.

276 HISTORY OF GREECE.

one of the three higher classes. This restriction was now an-
nulled, and eligibility extended to all the citizers. We may
appreciate the strength of feeling with which such reform was
demanded, when we find thst it was proposed by Aristeidés; a
man the reverse of what is called a demagogue, and a strenuous
friend of the Kleisthenean constitution. No political system
would work after the Persian war, which formally excluded
“ths maritime multitude” from holding magistracy. I rather
imagine, as has been stated in the previous volume, that election
of magistrates was still retained, and not exchanged for drawing
lots until a certain time, though not a long time, afterwards.
That which the public sentiment first demanded was the recogni-
tion of the equal and open principle: after a certain length of
experience, it was found that pogr men, though legally qualified
to be chosen, were in point of fact rarely chosen: then came the
lot, to give them an equal chance with the rich. The principle
of sortition, or choice by lot, was never applied, as I have before
remarked, to all offices at Athens, — never, for example, to the
stratégi, or generals, whose functions were more grave and re-
sponsible than those of any other person in the service of the
state, and who always continued to be elected by show of hands.

_ In the new position into which Athens was now thrown, with
80 great an extension of what may be termed her foreign rela-
tions, and with a confederacy which imposed the necessity of
distant military service, the functions of the stratégi naturally
tended to become both more absorbing and complicated; while
the civil administration became more troublesome, if not more
difficult, from the enlargement of the city, and the still greater
enlargemen. of Peirseus, — leading to an increase of town pop-
ulation, amd especially to an increase of the metics, or resident
non-freemen. And it was probably about this.period, during the
years immediately succeeding the battle of Salamis, — when the
force of old habit and tradition had been partially enfeebled by
so many stirring novelties, — that the archons were withdrawn
altogether from political and military duties, and confined to civil
or judicial administration. At the battle of Marathon, the pole-
-march is a: military commander, president of the ten stratégi:'

ee)

0 ea ap re ne =

' Herod. vi, 109.

GRECIAN AFFAIRS AFTER THE PERSIAN INVASION. 277

we know him afterwards only as a civil magistrate, administering
justice to the metics, or non-freemen, while the stratégi perform
military duties without him. I conceive that this alteration, indi

cating as it does a change in the character of the archons gen

- erally, must have taken place at the time which we have now
reached,! — a time when the Athenian establishments on all sides
required a more elaborate distribution of functionaries. The
distribution of so many Athenian boards of functionaries, part to
do duty in the city, and part in the Peireus, cannot have com-
menced until after this period, when Peireus had been raised
by Themistoklés to the dignity of town, fortress, and state-harbor.
Such boards were the astynomi and agoranomi, who maintained
the police of streets and markets, —- the metronomi, who watched
over weights and measures, — the sitophylakes, who carried into
effect various state regulations respecting the custody and sale
of corn,— with various others who acted not less in Peireus
than in the city.2. We may presume that each of these boards
was originally created as the exigency appeared to call for it, at
a period later than that which we have now reached, most of
these duties of detail having been at first discharged by the
archons, and afterwards, when these latter became too full of
occupation, confided to separate administrators. The special and
important change which characterized the period immediately
succeeding the battle of Salamis, was the more accurate line
drawn between the archons and the stratégi; assigning the
foreign and military department entirely to the stratégi, and ren-
dering the archons purely civil magistrates, — administrative as
well as judicial; while the first creation of the separate boards
above named was probably an ulterior enlargement, arising out
of increase of population, power, and trade, between the Persian
and Peloponnesian wars. It was by some such steps that the
Athenian administration gradually attained that complete devel-
opment which it exhibits in practice during the century from the

’ Aristotel. [loAcrecv Fragm. xlvii, ed. Neamann; Harpokration, v,
TloAépvapyoc ; Pollux, viii, 91: compare Meier und Schomann, Der Attische
Prozess, ch. ii, p. 50, seqg. .

* See Aristotel. DloArrecov, Fragm. ii, v, xxiii, xxxviii, 1, ed. Neumann:
Schomann, Antiqq. Jur. Publ. Gree. c. xli, xlii, xiii.

978: i HISTORY OF GREECE. - oT

Peloponnesian war downward, to which nearly all our Positive
and direct information relates.

With this expansion both of democratical feeling and of mili-
tary activity at Athens, Aristeidés appears to have sympathized ;
and the popularity thus insured to him,‘ probably heightened by
some regret for his previous ostracism, was calculated to acquire
permanence from his straightforward and incorruptible character,
now brought into strong relief from his function as assessor to
the new Delian confederacy. On the other hand, the ascendency
of Themistoklés, though so often exalted by his unrivalled politi-
cal genius and daring, as well as by the signal value of his public
recommendations, was as often overthrown by his duplicity of
means and unprincipled thirst for money. New political oppo-
nents sprung up against him, men sympathizing with Aristeidés,
and far more violent in their antipathy than Aristeidés himself.
Of these, the chief were Kimon— son of Miltiades—and Alk-
mzon ; moreover, it seems thatthe Lacedsemonians, though full of
esteem for Themistoklés immediately after the battle of Salamis,
had now become extremely hostile to him,—a change which
may be sufficiently explained from his stratagem respecting the
fortifications of Athens, and his subsequent ‘ambitious ‘projects in
reference to the Peireus. The Lacedemonian influence, then
not inconsiderable in Athens, was employed to second the politi-
cal combinations against him.! He is said to have given offence
by manifestations of personal vanity,— by continual boasting of his
great services to the state, and by the erection of a private chapel,
close to his own house, in honor of Artemis Aristobulé, or Arte-
mis of admirable counsel; just as Pausanias had irritated the
Lacedemonians by inscribing his own single name on the Del-
phian tripod, and as the friends of Aristeidés had displeased the
Athenians by endless encomiums upon’ his’ justice.2 But the
main cause of his discredit was, the prostitution of his great
influence for arbitrary and corrupt purposes. In thé ‘unsetfled
condition of so many different Grecian communities, recently
emancipated from Persia, when there was past misrule to avenge,

1 Plutarch, Kimon, c. 16; Scholion 2, ad Aristophan. Equit. 84.
* Plutarch (Themistoklés, c. 22; peimon, c. 5~8; Aristeidés, c. 25); Di-
odorus, xi, 54. .

GRECIAN AFFAIRS AFTER THE PERSIAN INVASION. 979

wrong-doers to be deposed and perhaps punished, exiles to be
restored, and all the disturbance and suspicions aecompanying so
great a change of political condition as well as of foreign pulicy,
—— the influence of the leading men at Athens must-have been
great in determining the treatment of particular individuals.
Themistoklés, placed at the head of an Athenian squadron and
sailing among the islands, partly for the purposes of war against
Persia, partly for organizing the new confederacy, — is affirmed
to have ‘accepted bribes without scruple, for executing sentences
just and unjust, — restoring some citizens, expelling others, and
even putting some to death. We learn this from a friend and
guest of Themistoklés,—the poet Timokreon of Ialysus in
Rhodes, who had expected his own restoration from the Athenian
commander, but found that it was thwarted by a bribe of three
talents from his opponents; so that he was still kept in exile on
the charge of medism. ‘The assertions of Timokreon, personally
incensed on this ground against Themistoklés, are doubtless to be
considered as passionate and exaggerated: nevertheless, they are
a valuable memorial of the feelings of the time, and are’ far too
much in harmony with the general character of this eminent
man to allow of our disbelieving them entirely. Timokreon is
as emphatic in his admiration of Aristeidés as in his censure
of en whom he Benouncee as “a lying and unjust
traitor.”

Such oe as that described by this new Archilochus, even
making every allowance for exaggeration, must have caused
Themistoklés to be both hated and feared among the insular
allies, whose opinion was now of considerable importance to the
Athenians. <A similar sentiment grew up partially against him
in Athens itself, and appears to have been connected with suspi-
cions of treasonable inclinations towards the Persians.. As the
Persians could offer the highest bribes, a man open to corruption
might naturally be suspected of inclinations towards their cause ;
and if Themistoklés had rendered preéminent service against
them, so also had Pausanias, whose conduct had undergone so
fatal a change for the worse. It was the treason of Pausanias,
suspected and believed against him by the Athenians even when

Say

! Plutarch, Themist. c. 21

280 HISTORY OF GREECE.

he was in command at Byzantium, though not proved against
him at Sparta until long afterwards, — which first seems to have
raised the presumption of medtsm against Themistoklés also,
when combined with the corrupt proceedings which stained his
public conduct: we must recollect, also, that Themistoklés had
given some color to these presumptions, even by the stratagems
in reference to Xerxes, which wore a double-faced aspect, capa-
ble of being construed either in a Persian or in a Grecian sense.
The Lacedemonians, hostile to Themistoklés since the time
when he had outwitted them respecting the walls of Athens, —
and fearing him also as a supposed accomplice of ‘the suspected
Pausanias, — procured the charge of medism to be preferred
against him at Athens; by secret instigations, and, as it is said,
by bribes, to his political opponents.!_ But no satisfactory proof
could be furnished of the accusation, which Themistoklés himself
strenuously denied, not without emphatic appeals to his illustri-
ous services. In spite of violent invectives against him from
Alkmzon and Kimon, tempered, indeed, by a generous modera-

1 This accusation of treason brought against Themistoklés at Athens,
prior to his ostracism, and at the instigation of the Lacedemonians, —is
mentioned by Diodorus (xi, 54). Thucydidés and Plutarch take notice
only of the second accusation, after his ostracism. But Diodorus has made
his narrative confused, by supposing the first accusation preferred at Athens
to have come after the full detection of Pausanias and exposure of his cor-
respondence ; whereas these latter events, coming after the first accusation,
supplied new proofs before unknown, and thus brought on the second, after
Themistoklés had been ostracized. But Diodorus has preserved to us the
important notice of this first accusation at Athens, followed by trial, acquit-
tal, and temporary glorification of Themistoklés, — and preceding his
ostracism.

The indictment stated by Plutarch to have been preferred against The-
mistoklés by Leébotas son of Alkmeon, at the instance of the Spartans,
probably relates to the first accusation at which Themistoklés was acquit-
ted. For when Themistoklés was arraigned after the discovery of Pausa-
nias, he did not-choose to stay, nor was there any actual trial: it is not,
therefore, likely that the name of the accuser would be preserved,—'‘O d2
ypapapevoc abrov mpodocias AewBérng hv AAxpaiwvoc, Gua cuvenatriopéver
roy Lrapriaroy (Plutarch, Themist. c. 23).

Compare the second Scholion on Aristophan. Equit. 84, and Aristeidé,,
Orat. xlvi, "‘Yxtp rév Terrapwy (vol. ii, p. 318, ed. Dindorf, p. 243, Jebb).

GRECIAN AFFAIRS AFTER THE PERSIAN INVASION. 928}

tion on the part of Aristeidés,! his defence was successful. He
carried the people with him and was acquitted of the charge.
Nor was he merely acquitted, but, as might naturally be expected,
a reaction took place in his favor: his splendid qualities and
exploits were brought impressively before the public mind, and ©
he seemed for the time to acquire greater ascendency than ever.®

Such a charge, and such a failure, must have exasperated to
the utmost the animosity between him and his chief opponents,
—~- Aristeidés, Kimon, Alkmzon, and others; nor can we wonder
that they were anxious to get rid of him by ostracism. In ex-
plaining this peculiar process, 1 have already stated that it could —
never be raised against any one individual separately and osten-_
sibly, — and that it could never be brought into operation at all,
unless its necessity were made clear, not merely to violent party
men, but also to the assembled senate and people, including, of
course, a considerable proportion of the more moderate citizens.
' ‘We may well conceive that the conjuncture was deemed by many
dispassionate Athenians well suited for the tutelary intervention
of ostracism, the express benefit,of which consisted in its sepa-
rating political opponents when the antipathy between them
threatened to push one or the other into extra-constitational pro-
ceedings, — especially when one of those parties was Themisto-
klés, a man alike vast in his abilities and unscrupulous in his
morality. Probably also there were not a few who wished to
revenge the previous ostracism of Aristeidés: and lastly, the
friends of Themistoklés himself, elate with his acquittal and his
seemingly augmented popularity, might indulge hopes that the
vote of ostracism would turn out in his favor, and remove one or
other of his chief political opponents. From all these circum- ”
stances we learn without astonishment, that a vote of ostracism was.
soon after resorted to. It ended in the temporary banishment of
Themistokls.

} Plutarch, Aristeidés, c. 25.

* Diodor. xi, 54. rore piv aréguye riy rij¢ mpodociac xpioty: dtd Ka?
Td pev prov pera Ty droAvoty péyac hv rapa roig 'ASyvaiog: hyaTer
yap atrov dtagepéytuc ol modAirars pera 62 radra, ol piv, poBydévreg
abrov tiv brepBodjy, of d2, p9ovioavres re Goky, Tov piv etepyeaidy
éweAadovro, tiv 62 loyvy cal 1d dpdvnua tareivody Earevdor.

282 - HISTORY OF GREECE. , =

He retired into exile, and was residing at Argos, whither he
carried a considerable property, yet occasionally visiting other
parts of Peloponnesus,! —- when the exposure and death of Pau-
sanias, together with the discovery of his correspondence, took
place at Sparta. Among this correspondencé were found proofs,
which Thucydidés seems to have considered as real and sufficient,
of the privity of _Themistoklés. According to Ephorus and
others, he is admitted to have been solicited by Pausanias, and
to have known his plans, —— but to have kept them secret while
refusing to cooperate in them,? — but probably after his exile he
took a more decided share in them than before ; being -well-
placed for that purpose at Argos, a city not only unfriendly to
Sparta, but strongly believed to have been in collusion with
Xerxes at his invasion of Greece. On this occasion ‘the Lace-
dzemonians sent to Athens, publicly to prefer a formal charge of
treason against him, and to urge the necessity of trying him as
a Pan-Hellenic criminal before the synod of the allies assembled
at Sparta.3 Whether this latter request would have been granted,
or whether Themistoklés would have been tried at Athens, we
cannot tell : for no sooner was he apprized that joint envoys from
Sparta and Athens had been despatched to arrest him, than he fled
forthwith from Argos to Korkyra. The inhabitants of that island,

1 Thucyd.i, 187. Ave yap abr@ borepov Ek te ASnvay rapa Trav giAay,
nal 2 "Apyoucd inmeféxecrro, ete.

I follow Mr. Fynes Clinton, in considering the year 471 B.c. to be the date
of the ostracism of Themistoklés. It may probably be so, nor is there any
evidence positively to contradict it: but I think Mr. Clinton states it too
confidently, as he admits that Diodorus includes, in the chapters which he
devotes to one archon, events which must have happened in several differ-
ent years (see Fast. Hellen. s.c. 471).

After the expedition under the command of Pausanias in 478 B.c., we
have no one date at once certain and accurate, until we come to the death
of Xerxes, where Diodorus is confirmed by the Canon of the Persian kings,
s.c. 465. This last event determines by close approximation and inference,
the flight of Themistoklés, the siege of Naxos, and the death of Pausanias :
for-the other events of this period, we are reduced to a more vague approx
imation, and can ascertain little beyond their order of succession.

? Thucyd. i, 135; Ephorus ap. Plutarch.de Malign. Herodoti, c. 5, p. 855;
Diodor. xi, 54; Plutarch, Themist. c. 23.

* Diodor. xi, 55.

GRECIAN AFFAIRS AFTER THE PERSIAN INVASION. 98§

though owing gratitude to him and favorably disposed, could not
venture to protect him against the two most powerful states in
Greece, but sent him to the neighboring continent. Here, how-
ever, being still tracked and followed by the envoys, he was
obliged fo seek protection from a man whom he had formerly
thwarted in a demand at Athens, and who had become his per-
sonal enemy, — Admétus, king of the Molossians. Fortunately
for him, at the moment when he arrived, Admétus was not at
home ; and Themistoklés, becoming a suppliant to his wife, con-
ciliated her sympathy so entirely, that she placed her child in his
arms and planted him at the hearth in the full solemnity of
supplication to soften her husband. As soon as Admétus re-
turned, Themistokles revealed his name, his pursuers, and his
danger, — entreating protection as a helpless suppliant in the last
extremity. He appealed to the generosity of the Epirotic prince
not to take revenge on a man now defenceless, for offence given
under such very different circumstances; and for an offence too,
after all, not of capital moment, while the protection now en-
treated was to the suppliant a matter of life or death. Admétas
raised him up from the hearth with the child in his arms, —an
evidence that he accepted the appeal and engaged to protect
him ; refusing to give him up to the envoys, and at last only
sending him away on the expression of kis own wish to visit the
king of Persia. Two Macedonian guides conducted him across
the mountains to Pydna, in the Thermaic gulf, where he found a
merchant-ship about to set sail for the coast of Asia Minor, and
took a passage on board ; neither the master nor the crew know-
ing his name. _ An untoward storm drove the vessel to the island
of Naxos, at that moment besieged by an Athenian armament:
had he been forced to land there, he would of course have been
recognized and seized, but his wonted subtlety did not desert
him. Having communicated both his name and the peril which
awaited him, he conjured the master of the ship to assist in
saving him, and not to suffer any one of the crew to land; men-
acing that if by any accident he were discovered, he would bring
the master to ruin along with himself, by representing him as an
accomplice induced by money to facilitate the escape of Themis-
toklés : on the other hand, in case of safety, he promised a large
reward. Such promises and threats weighed with the master,

,
‘N

284 HISTORY OF GREECE.

who controlled his crew, and forced them to beat about during 4
day and a night off the coast, without seeking to land. After that
dangerous interval, the storm abated, and the ship reached Ephe-
sus in safety.!

Thus did Themistoklés, after a series of perils, find himself
safe on the Persian side of the Aigean. At Athens, he was pro-
claimed a traitor, and his property confiscated: nevertheless, as
it frequently happened in cases of confiscation, his friends se-
creted a considerable sum, and sent it over to him in Asia,
together with the money which he had left at Argos; so that he
was thus enabled liberally to reward the ship-captain who had
preserved him. With all this deduction, the property which he
possessed of a character not susceptible of concealment, and
which was therefore actually seized, was found to amount to
eighty talents, according to Theophrastus,—to one hundred
talents, according to Theopompus. In contrast with this large
sum, it is melancholy to learn that he had begun his political
career with a property not greater. than three talents.2 ._The
poverty of Aristeidés at the end of his life presents an impressive
contrast to the enrichment of his rival.

The escape of Themistoklés, and his adventures in Persia,
appear to have formed a favorite theme for the fancy and exag-
geration of authors a century afterwards: we have thus many
anecdotes which contradict either directly or by implication the
simple narrative of Thucydidés. Thus we are told that at the
moment when he was running away from the Greeks, the Per-
sian king also had proclaimed a reward of two hundred talents
for his head, and that some Greeks on the coast of Asia were
watching to take him for this reward: that he was forced to
conceal himself strictly near the coast, until means were found

? Thucyd. i, 137. Cornelius Nepos (Themist. c. 8) for the most part fol-
lows Thucydidés, and professes to do so; yet he is not very accurate, espee-
ially about the relations between Themistoklés and Admétus. Diodorus
(xi, 56) seems to follow chiefly other guides: also to a great extent Plu-
tarch (Themist. c. 24-26). There were evidently different accounts of his
voyage, which represented him as reaching, not Ephesus, but the AXZolic
Kymé. Diedorus does not notice his voyage by sea.

* Plutarch, Themist. c. 25; also Kritias ap. Zlian. V. H. x, a: compare
Herodot. viii, 12.

GRECIAN AFFAIRS AFTER THE PERSIAN INVASION. 9285

to send him up to Susa in a closed litter, under pretence that it
was a woman for the king’s harem: that Mandané, sister of
Xerxes, insisted upon having him delivered up to her as an
expiation for the loss of her son at the battle of Salamis: that -
he learned Persian so well, and discoursed in it so eloquently, as
to procure for himself an acquittal from the Persian judges, when
put upon his trial through the importunity of Mandané: that
the officers of the king’s household at Susa, and the satraps in
his way back, threatened him with still farther perils: that he
was admitted to see the king in person, after having received a
lecture from the chamberlain on the indispensable duty of falling
down before him to do homage, etc., with several other uncer-
tified details,! which make us value more highly the narrative
of Thucydidés. Indeed, Ephorus, Deiné, Kleitarchus, and Her-
akleidés, from whom these anecdotes appear mostly to be derived,
even affirmed that Themistoklés had found Xerxes himself alive
and seen him: whereas, Thucydidés and Charon, the two con-
temporary authors, for the former is nearly contemporary, asserted
that he had found Xerxes recently dead, and his son Artaxerxes
on the throne.

According to Thucydidés, the eminent exile does not seem to
have been exposed to the least danger in Persia. He presented
himself as a deserter from Greece, and was accepted as such:
moreover, — what is more strange, though it seems true, — he
:was received as an actual benefactor of the Persian king, and’ a
sufferer from the Greeks on account of such dispositions, — in
consequence of his communications made to Xerxes respecting
the intended retreat of the Greeks from Salamis, and respecting.
the contemplated destruction of the Hellespoptine bridge. He
was conducted by some Persians on the coast up to Susa, where
he addressed a letter to the king couched in the following terms,
such as probably no modern European king would tolerate except
from a Quaker: “I, Themistoklés, am come to thee, having done
to thy house more mischief than any other Greek, as long as I
was compelled in my own defence to resist the attack of thy
father, — but having also done him yét greater good, when I
could do so with safety to myself, and when his retreat was

1 Diodor. xi, 56; Plutarch, Themist. c. 24-30.

4

286 HISTORY OF GREECE.

endangered. Reward is yet owing to me for my past service:
moreover, I am now. here, chased away by the Greeke, in conse-
quence of my attachment to thee,' but able still to serve thee
‘with great effect. I wish to wait a year, and then to come before
thee in person to explain my views.”

Whether the Persian interpreters, who read this letter to Ar
taxerxes Longimanus, exactly rendered its brief and direct
expression, we cannot say. But it made a strong impression
upon him, combined with the previous reputation of the writer,
and he willingly granted the prayer for delay: though we shall
not readily believe that he was so transported as to show his joy
by immediate sacrifice to the gods, by an unusual measure of
convivial indulgence, and by crying out thrice in his’ sleep, “I
have got Themistoklés the Athenian,”— as some of Plutarch’s
authors informed him.? In the course of the year granted, The-
mistoklés had learned so much of the Persian language and cus-
toms as to be able to communicate personally with the king, and
acquire his confidence: no Greek, says Thucydidés, had ever
before attained such a commanding influence and position at the
Persian court. His ingenuity was now displayed in laying out
schemes for the subjugation of Greece to Persia, which were emi-
nently captivating to the monarch, who rewarded him with a
Persian wife and large presents, sending him down to Magnesia,
on the Meander, not far from the coast of Ionia. The revenues
of the district round that town, amounting to the large sum of
fifty talents yearly, were assigned to him for bread: those of the
neighboring seaport of Myus, for articles of condiment to his
bread, which was always accounted the main nourishment: those
of Lampsakus on the Hellespont, for wine.3 Not knowing the
amount of these two latter items, we cannot determine how much

‘“Proditionem wltrd imputabant (says Tacitus, Hist. ii, 60, respecting
Paullinus and Proculus, the generals of the army of Otho, when they sur-
rendered to Vitellius after the defeat at Bebriacum), spatium longi ante
prelium itineris, fatigationem Othonianorum, permixtum vehiculis agmen,
ac pleraque fortuita fraudi sue assignantes. — Et Vitellius credidit de perfidiA,
et fraudem absolvit.”

* Plutarch, Themist. c. 28.

* Thucyd. i, 138; Diodor. xi, 57. Besides the three above-named places,
Neanthés and Phanias described the grant as being still fuller and mor.

-

GRECIAN AFFAIRS AFTER THE PERSIAN INVASION. 9287

revenue Themistoklés received altogether: but.there can Be no
doubt, judging from the revenucs of Magnesia alone, that he was
a great pecuniary gainer by his change of country. After hav-
ing visited various parts of Asia,' he lived for a certain time at
Magnesia, in which place his family joined him from Athens.
How long his residence at Magnesia lasted we do not know, but
seemingly long enough to aequire local estimation and leave me-
mentos behind him. He at length died of sicknes3, when sixty-
five years old, without having taken any step towards the accom-
plishment of those victorious campaigns which he had promised
to Artaxerxes. That sickness was the real cause of his death,
we may believe on the distinct statement of Thucydidés ;? who
at the same time notices a rumor partially current in his own time,

specific: they stated that Perkété was granted to Themistoklés for bedding,
and Palesképsis for clothing (Platarch, Themist. c. 29; Athenzeus, i, p.29).
_ This seems to have been a frequent form of grants from the Persian and
Egyptian kings, to their queens, relatives, or friends, —a grant nominally
40 supply some particular want or taste: see Dr. Arnold’s note on the pas-
sage of Thucydidés. I doubt his statement, however, about the land-tax,
or rent; I do not think that it was a tenth ora fifth of the produce of the
soil in these districts which was granted to Themistoklés, but the portion of
regal revenue, or tribute, levied in them. The Persian kings did not take
the trouble to assess and collect the tribute: they probably left that to the
inhabitants themselves, provided the sum total were duly paid.

' Plutarch, Themistoklés, c. 31. mAavepevog rept riv ’Aciay: this state-
ment seems probable enongh, though Plutarch rejects it.

2 Thucyd. i, 188. Noajoac d2 reAevrg rdv Biow- Aéyovar dé river, xal
Exobotov gapuixy arodaveiv abrdv, adivarov vopicavra elvas émttedéoa
Baocrei & trécxero.

_ This current story, as old as Aristophanés (Equit. 83, compare the Scho-
lia), alleged that Themistoklés had poisoned himself by drinking bull’s

“blood (see Diodor. xi, 58), who assigns to this act of taking poison a still
more sublime patriotic character by making it part of a design on the part
of Themistoklés to restrain the Persian king from warring against Greece.

Plutarch (Themist. c. 31, and Kimon, c. 18) and Diodorus both state, as
an unquestionable fact, that Themistoklés died by poisoning himself: omit-
ting even to notice the statement of Thucydidés, that he died of disease.
Cornelius Nepos (Themist. c. 10) follows Thucydidés. Cicero (Brutus, c.
L1) refers the story of the suicide by poison to Clitarchus and Stratoklés,
recognizing it as contrary to Thucydidés. He puts into the mouth of his
fellow dialogist, Atticus, a just rebuke of the facility with which historical
truth was sacrificed to rhetorical purpose.

288 HISTORY OF GREECE.

of pofson voluntarily taken, from painful consciousness on the part
of Themistoklés himself that the promises made could never be
performed, — a farther proof of the general tendency to surround
the last years of this distinguished man with impressive adven-
tures, and to dignify his last moments with a revived feeling, not
unworthy of his earlier patriotism. The report may possibly
have been designedly circulated by his friends and relatives, in
order to conciliate some tenderness towards his memory (his sons
still continued citizens at Athens, and his daughters were married
there). These friends farther stated that they had brought back
his bones to Attica, at his own express command, and buried
them privately without the knowledge of the Athenians; no con-
demned traitor being permitted to be buried in Attic soil. If,
however, we even suppose that this statement was true, no one
could point out with certainty the spot wherein such inter-
ment had taken place: nor does it seem, when we mark the
cautious expressions of Thucydidés,! that he himself was satis-
fied of the fact: moreover, we may affirm with confidence that
the inhabitants of Magnesia, when they showed the splendid se-
pulchral monument erected in honor of Themistoklés in their own
market-place, were persuaded that his bones were really inclosed
within it.

Aristeidés died about three or four years after the ostracism of
Themistokiés ; 2? but respecting the place and manner of his death,

1 Thucyd.i, 138. ra dé? dora Gaot coptc¥dHvar atrod of rpoch-
kovrec oixade xedebcarvrog éxeivon, xal redjvar xpiga 'ADn-
vaiwy év rg’ Arrixg: ob yap bij Yartev, d¢ Ext npodocia petyovros.

Cornelius Nepos, who here copies Thucydidés, gives this statement by
mistake, as if Thucydidés had himself affirmed it: “Idem (sc. Thucydidés)
ossa ejus clam in AtticA ab amicis sepulta, quoniam legibus non concedere-
tur, quod proditionis esset damnatus, memoris prodidit.” This shows the
haste or inaccuracy with which these secondary authors so often cite: Thu-
cydidés is certainly hot a witness for the fact: if anything, he may be said
to count somewhat against it.

Plutarch (Themist. c. 32) shows that the burial-place of Themistoklés,
supposed to be in Attica, was yet never verified before his time: the guides
of Pausanias, however, in the succeeding century, had become more confi-
dent (Pausanias, i, 1, 3).

* Respecting the probity of Aristeidés, see an interesting fragmeut of
Eupolis, the comic writer (Ajzoc, Fragm, iv, p. 457, ed. Meineke).

GRECIAN AFFAIRS AFTER THE PERSIAN INVASION. 939

there were several contradictions among the authors whom Plu-
tarch had before him. Some affirmed that he perished on foreign
service in the Euxine sea; others, that he died at home, amidst
the universal estcem and grief of his fellow-citizens. A third
story, confined to the single statement of Kraterus, and strenu-
ously rejected by Plutarch, represents Aristeidés as having been
falsely accused before the Athenian judicature and condemned to
a fine of fifty minz, on the allegation of having taken bribes
during the assessment of the tribute upon the allies, — which fine
he was unable to pay, and was therefore obliged to retire to Ionia,
where he died. Dismissing this last story, we find nothing cer-
tain about his death except one fact, — but that fact at the same
time the most honorable of all, —that he died very poor. It is
even asserted that he did not leave enough to pay funeral ex-
penses, — that a sepulchre was provided for him at Phalérum at
the public cost, besides a handsom:> donation to his son Lysima
chus, and a dowry to each of his two daughters. In the two or
three ensuing generations, however, his descendants still continued
poor, and even at that remote day, some of them received aid out
of the public purse, from the recollection of their incorruptible
ancestor. Near a century and a half afterwards, a poor man,
named Lysimachus, descendant of the just Aristeidés, was to be
seen at Athens, near the chapel of Iacchus, carrying a mysterious
tablet, and obtaining his scanty fee of two oboli for interpreting
the dreams of the passers by: Demetrius the Phalerean procured
from the people, for the mother and aunt of this poor man, a
small daily allowance.! On all these points the contrast is
marked when we compare Aristeidés with Themistoklés. The
latter, having distinguished himself by ostentatious cost at Olym-
pia, and by a choregic victory at Athens, with little scruple as to
the means of acquisition, — ended his life at Magnesia in dishon-
orable affluence, greater than ever, and left an enriched posterity
both at that place and at Athens. More than five centuries after-
wards, his descendant, the Athenian Themistoklés, attended the
lectures-of the philosopher Ammonius at Athens, as the comrade
and friend of Plutarch himself.2

1 Plutarch, Arist. c. 26,27; Cornelius Nepos, Arist. c.3: compare Aris-
tophen. Vesp. 53. ® Plutarch, Themist. c, 5-32.

VOL. V. 13 19oc.

-

290 HISTORY OF GREECE.

CHAPTER XLV.

“PROCEEDINGS OF THE CONFEDERACY UNDER ATHENS AS HEAD
— FIRST FORMATION AND RAPID EXPANSION OF THE ATHE
‘NIAN EMPIRE. -

we

.

I wAVE already recounted, in the preceding chapter, how the
Asiatic Greeks, breaking loose from the Spartan Pausanias, en-
treated Athens to organize a new confederacy, and to act as pre-
siding city (Vorort), — and how this confederacy, framed not only
for common and pressing objects, but also on principles of equal
rights and constant control on the part of the members, attracted
soon the spontaneous adhesion of a large proportion of Greeks,
insular or maritime, ‘near the Atgean sea. I also noticed this
event as giving commencement to a new era in Grecian politics.
For whereas there had been before a tendency, not very power-
ful, yet on the whole steady and increasing, towards something
like one Pan-Hellenic league under Sparta as president,— from
henceforward that tendency disappears and a bifurcation begins :
Athens and Sparta divide the Grecian world between them, and
bring a much larger number of its members into codperation,
either with one or the other, than had ever been so arranged
before.

Thucydidés marks precisely, as far as general words can go,
the character of the new confederacy during the first years after
its commencement: but unhappily he gives us scarcely any par-
ticular facts, — and in the absence of such controlling evidence,
a habit has grown up of describing loosely the entire period be-
tween 477 B.c., and 405 B.c. (the latter date is that of the battle
of Aigos Potamos), as constituting “the Athenian empire.” This
word denotes correctly enough the last part, perhaps the last
forty years, of the seventy-two years indicated; but it is mis-.
leading when applied to the first part : nor, indeed, can any single
word be found which faithfully characterizes as well the one part
as the other. A great and serious change had taken place, and
we disguise the fact of that change, if we talk of the Athenian

GRECIAN CONFEDERACY UNDER ATHENS. 291

hegemony, or headship, as a portion of the Athenian empire.
Thucydidés carefully distinguishes the two, speaking of the Spar-
tans as having lost, and of the Athenians as having acquired, not
empire, but headship, or hegemony.! The transition from the

1 Thucyd. i, 94. éSeroAsopanday (Bulavriov) tv rgde rg Hyepovig, ie.
under the Spartan hegemony, before the Athenians were invited to assume
the hegemony: compare jyyodapuevor, i, 77, and Herodot. viii, 2,3. Next,
we have (i, 95) go:ravré re (the Ionians, etc.) xpd¢ rode ’APnvaiove #fiouy
atroic hyepdvag opdv yevéodat xara 7rd Evyyevéc. Again, when the
Spartans send out Dorkis in place of Pausanias, the allies ofxer: égiecav
rHyv nyenoviay, Then, as to the ensuing proceedings of the Athenians
(i, 96) —xapadaBovres d2 ol 'ADnvaing THY Hyepoviay TovTy TH TPdT™
éxovtwv tov Evupayey dia 7d avoaviov picog, etc.: compare i, 75,— juin
d2 rpoceASovruv tov Evuuaxov Kal airov dexSivrav nyeuovac xarac-
T7vat, and vi, 76.

Then the transition from the 7yeuovia to the dpy7 (i, 97) — Fyotpevor dd

atrovénur Td TpaTov tay Evpuaxov kat dxd nowvav Evvddwy BovaActortur,
Trocade ExHADov modmy re Kai diaxetpice: npayuatuv petasd rovde
Tov wodéuov xal rod Mydexod.
- Thucydidés then goes on to say, that he shall notice these “ many strides
in advance” which Athens made, starting from her original hegemony, so
as to show in what manner the Athenian empire, or épy?, was originally
formed, — dua Jt xal rig dpxyi¢ Grddeckev Eyer tig tov ADnvaiur, ev oly
tpéry xaréorn. The same transition from the yyepuovia to the apy? is
described in the oration of the Athenian envoy at Sparta, shortly before the
Peloponnesian war (i, 75): but as it was rather the interest of the Athenian
orator to confound the difference between #ryeuovia and apy}, so, after he has
clearly stated what the relation of Athens to her allies had been at first,
and how it afterwards became totally changed, Thucydidés makes him slur
over the distinction, and say,—otrug otd’ fyueig Yavpacrdy obddv meroth-
aapev......e1 apynv tre dsdopévnyv éedeEapeda nat ravtyv pi
aveizev, etc.; and he then proceeds to defend the title of Athens to com-
mand on the ground of superior force and worth: which last plea is ad
vanced a few years afterwards, still more nakedly and offensively, by the
Athenian speakers. Read also the language of the Athenian Euphémus at
Kamarina (vi, 82), where a similar confusion appears, as being suitable to
the argument.

It is to be recollected that the word hegemony, or headship, is extremely
general, denoting any case of following a leader, and of obedience, however
temporary, qualified, or indeed little more than honorary. Thus it is used
by the Thebans to express their relation towards the Bootian confederated
towns (iyenoveveodat tg’ fudy, Thuc. iii, 61, where Dr. Arnold draws atten-
tion to the distinction between that verb and dpyery, and holds language
respecting the Athenian cpy?, more precise than his langaage in the note

299 HISTORY OF GREECE.

Athenian hegemony to the Athenian empire was doubtless grad-
ual, so that 10 one could determine precisely where the former
ends and the latter begins : but it had been consummated before the
thirty years’ truce, which was concluded fourteen years before the
Peloponnesian war, — and it was in fact the substantial cause of
that war. Empire then came to be held by Athens, — partly as a
fact established, resting on acquiescence rather than attachment
or consent on the minds of the subjects, — partly as a corollary
from necessity of union combined with her superior force: while
this latter point, superiority of force as a legitimate title, stood
more and more forward, both in the language of her speakers and
in the conceptions of her citizens. Nay, the Athenian orators
of the middle of the Peloponnesian war venture to affirm that
their empire had been of this same character ever since the
repulse of the Persians: an inaccuracy so manifest, that if we
could suppose the speech made by the Athenian Euphémus at
Kamarina in 415 B.c. to have been heard by Themistoklés or
Aristeidés fifty years before, it would have been alike effensive
to the prudence of the one and to the justice of the other. The
imperial state of Athens, that which she held at the beginning of
the Peloponnesian war, when her allies, except Chios and Les-
bos, were tributary subjects, and when the igean sea was an
Athenian lake, — was of course the period of her greatest splen-
dor and greatest action upon the Grecian world. It was also the
period most impressive to historians, orators, and philosophers,
— suggesting the idea of some one state exercising domini

ad Thucyd. i, 94), and by the Corinthians to express their claims as metrop-
olis of Korkyra, which were really little more than honorary,— éx? ro
Hyepoveg re elvat xal ra elxora Savualecdat (Thucyd. i, 38): compare
vii, 55. Indeed, it sometimes means simply a guide (iii, 98; vii, 50).

But the words dpy?, dpyecv, gaveoVat, voc. pass., are much less extensive
in meaning, and imply both superior dignity and coercive authority to a
greater or less extent: compare Thucyd. v, 69; ii, 8,etc. The wéAsc dpyny
Eyovoa is analogous to avip ripavvog (vi, 85).

Herodotus is less careful in distinguishing the meanings of these words
than Thucydidés: see the discussion of the Lacedemonian and Athenian
envoys with Gelo (vii. 155-162). But it is to be observed that he makes
Gelo ask for the 7yevovia and not for the dpy?, — putting the claim in the
least offensive form: compare also the claim of the Argeian for jyezovia
(vii, 148).

GRECIAN CONFEDERACY UNDER ATHENS. 293

over the Adgean, as the natural condition of Greece, so that if
_ Athens lost such dominion, it would be transferred to Sparta, —
holding out the dispersed maritime Greeks as a tempting prize
for the aggressive schemes of some new conqueror,—and even
bringing up by association into men’s fancies the mythical Minos
-of Krete, and others, as having been rulers of the A¢gean in
times anterior to Athens.

Even those who lived under the full-grown Athenian empire
Kad before them no good accounts of the incidents between 479-
450 B.c.; for we may gather from the intimation of Thucydidés,
as well as from his barrenness of facts, that while there were
chroniclers both for the Persian invasion and for the times before,
no one cared for the times immediately succeeding.! Hence, the
little light which has fallen upon this blank has all been, borrowed
— if we except the careful Thucydidés — from a subsequent age ;
and the Athenian hegemony has been treated as a mere com-
mencement of the Athenian empire: credit has been given to
Athens for q long-sighted ambition, aiming from the Persian war
downwards at results which perhaps Themistoklés? may have
partially divined, but which only time and successive accidents
opened even to distant view. But such systematic anticipation

! Thucyd. i, 97. roig mpd éuot Gracty éxAcréc hy rovro rd yoptov, nal } ra
rpd Tov Mydixdy EvveriPecav 7 abra rd Mydixa- robtrov 62 borep nal
Qparo ty rg ’Arrexg Svyypagdz ane Bpaxyéwe Te Kai rotg xpdvoic
obk axpipacg érepvgodn.

Hellanikus, therefore, had done no more than touch upon the events of this
period: and he found so little good information within his reach as to fall
into chronological blunders.

* Thucyd. i, 93. r#¢ yap 6) Saddoone mpGrog éroAugoer elreiv we dvbexréa
got, xai ri apyjv ebdd¢ Evyxareckedace.

Dr. Arnold says in his note, “ ebdi¢ signifies probably immediately after
the retreat of the Persians.” I think it refers to an earlier period, — that
point of time when Themistoklés first counselled the building of the fleet,

.or at least when he counselled them to abandon their city and repose all
théir hopes im their fleet. It is only by this supposition that we pet a rea-
sonable meaning for the words éréAunoe elreiv, “he was the first who dared
to say,” — which implies a counsel of extraordinary boldness. ‘“ For he
was the first who dared to advise them to grasp at the sea, and from that
moment forward he helped to establish their empire.” The word v yxare-
oxevale seems to denote a collateral consequence, not directly contem
‘plated, though perhaps divined, by Themistoklés.

a

294 HISTORY OF GREECE.

of subsequent results is fatal to any correct understanding, either
of the real agents or of the real period; both of which are to be
explained from the circumstances preceding and actually present,
with some help, though cautious and sparing, from our acquaint-
ance with that which was then an unknown future. When Aris-
teidés and Kimon dismissed the Lacedsmonian admiral Dorkis,
and drove Pausanias away from Byzantium on his second coming
out, they had to deal with the problem immediately before them ;
they had to complete the defeat of the Persian power, still for-
midable, — and to create and organize a confederacy as yet only
inchoate. This was quite enough to occupy their attention, with-
out ascribing to them distant views of Athenian maritime empire.

In that brief sketch of incidents preceding the Peloponnesian
war, which Thucydidés introduces as “the throwing off of his
narrative,”! he neither gives, nor professes to give, a complete
enumeration of all which actually occurred. During the interval
between the first desertion of fhe Asiatic allies from Pausanias
to Athens, in 477 B.c., — and the revolt of Naxos in 466 B.c.,—
he recites three incidents only: first, the siege and capture of
Eion, on the Strymon, with its Persian garrison, — next, the
capture of Skyros, and appropriation of the island to Athenian
kleruchs, or out-citizens, — thirdly, the war with Karystus in
Eubeea, and reduction of the place by capitulation. It has been
too much the practice to reason as if these three events were
the full history of ten or eleven years. Considering. what
Thucydidés states respecting the darkness of this period, we
might perhaps suspect that they were all which he could learn
about it on good authority: and they are all, in truth, events
having a near and special bearing on the subsequent history of
Athens herself,— for Eion was the first stepping-stone to the
important settlement of Amphipolis, and Skyros in the time of
Thucydidés was the property of outlying Athenian citizens, or
_kleruchs. Still, we are left in almost entire ignorance of the
proceedings of Athens, as conducting the newly-established con-
federate force: for it is certain that the first ten years of the
Athenian hegemony must have been years of most active

‘1 Thucyd. i, 97. Eypapya 62 abra nat trav ExBorAny rod Adyov

brotyoauny da téde, ete.

GRECIAN CONFEDERACY UNDER ATHENS. 295

warfare against the Persians. One positive testimony to this
effect has been accidentally preserved to us by Herodotus, who
mentions, that “before the invasion of Kerxes, there were Per-
sian commanders and garrisons everywhere in Thrace and the
Hellespont,' all of whom were conquered by the Greeks after
that invasion, with the single exception of Maskamés, governor
of Doriskus, who could never be taken, though many different
Grecian attempts were made upon the fortress. Of those who
were captured by the Greeks, not one made any defence suffi-
cient to attract the admiration of Xerxes, except Bogés, governor
of Eion.” Bogés, after bravely defending himself, and refusing
offers of capitulation, found his provisions exhausted, and farther
resistance impracticable. He then kindled a vast funeral pile, —
slew his wives, children, concubines, and family, and cast
them into it, — threw his precious effects over the wall into the
Strymon, — and lastly, precipitated himself into the flames.? His
brave despair was the theme of warm encomium among the Per-
sians, and his relatives in Persia were liberally rewarded by
Xerxes. This capture of Eion, effected by Kimon, has been

« Herodot. vii, 106,107. Karécracayv yap &r: mpérepov rairne ric éAaceo¢
Srapxoe ty Ty Opgixy xai rod ‘EAAnoxovrou xavrayh. Obra Gv xayrec, of re
éx Opnixyg xat tov ‘EAAnoxévrov, xAjv rod bv Aopioxy, txd ‘EAAQvev
borepov tavrng Th¢ oTpatnAacing éEypéSnoar: rdv d2 év Aopioxy Macxaugy
ovdapos kw edvvacdncay beeheivy, TOAAGY Tetpnoapéevary.

The loose chronology of Plutarch is little to be trusted; but he. too, ac-
knowledges the continuance of Persian occupations in Thrace, by aid of
the natives, until a period later than the battle of the Eurymedon (Pin-
tarch, Kimon, c. 14).

It is a mistake to suppose, with Dr. Arnold, in his note on Thucyd. viii,
62, “that Sestus was almost the last place held by the Persians in Eu-
rope.”

Weissenborn (Hellen oder Beitrage zar genaueren Erforschang der alt-
gviechischen Geschichte. Jena, 1844, p. 144, note 31) has taken notice of
this important passage of Herodotus, as well as of that in Plutarch; but he
does not see how much it embarrasses all attempts to frame a certain chron-
ology for those two or three events which Thucydidés gives us between
476-466 B. C.

? Kutzen (De Atheniensiam Imperio Cimonis atque Periclis tempore
constitato. Grime, 1837. Commentatio, i, p.8) has good reason to call in
question the stratagem ascribed to Kimon by Pausanias (viii, 8, 2) for the
capture of Eion.

“‘

296 HISTORY OF GREECE.

mentioned, as already stated, by Thucydidés; but Herodotus
here gives us to understand that it was only one of a string of
enterprises, all unnoticed by Thucydidés, against the Persians.
Nay, it would seem from his language, that Maskamés main-
tained himself in Doriskus during the whole reign of Xerxes,
and perhaps longer, repelling successive Grecian assaults.

Thé valuable indication here cited from Herodotus would be
of itself a sufficient proof that the first years of the Athenian
hegemony were full of busy and successful hostility against the
Persians. And in truth this is what we should expect: the
battles of Salamis, Platza, and Mykalé, drove the Persians out
of Greece, and overpowered their main armaments, but did not
remove them at once from all the various posts which they occu-
pied throughout the Aigean and Thrace. Without doubt, the
Athenians had to clear the coasts and the islands of a great
number of different Persian detachments: an operation never
short nor easy, with the then imperfect means of siege, as we
may see by the cases of Sestus and HKion; nor, indeed, always
practicable, as the case of Doriskus teaches us. The fear of
these Persians, yet remaining in the neighborhood,! and even the
chance of a renewed Persian invading armament, formed one
pressing motive for Grecian cities to join the new confederacy :
while the expulsion of the enemy added to it those places which
he had occupied. It was by these years of active operations at sea
against the common enemy, that the Athenians first established?
that constant, systematic, and laborious training, among their
own ships’ crews, which transmitted itself with continual im-

1To these “remaining operations against the Persians” the Athenian
“envoy at Lacedsemon alludes, in his speech prior to the Peloponnesian war
— tuov piv (you Spartans) obx éVeAnodytwy mapapeivat mpd¢ Ta bwé-
Aotra Tov BapBapor, ipiv d mpoceASivron rév Evupayov Kal abrov
denSévtay yyepovag Kataotivat, etc. (Thucyd. i, 75:) and again, iii, 11.
ra érdAora Tév ipyor.

Compare also Plato, Menexen.c. 11. abrd¢ d2 fyyéAAero Bactreds dsa-
voeiaSat oc Exiyetpjowr mad Ext rode “EAAnvag, etc.

* The Athenian nautical training begins directly after the repulse of the
Persians. Td dé rij¢ Yaddoone éniorjpovac yevéoSat (says Periklés respect.
ing the Peloponnesians, just at the commencement of the Peloponnesian
war) od fading abroig mpooyevgoerac> obd2 ydp dmeic, peaderavrec abtd
evdd¢ ard TOY Mydixdr, tgeipyacvé rw (Thucyd. i, 142).

GRECIAN CONFEDERACY UNDER ATHENS. 297

provements down to the Peloponnesian war: it was by these,
combined with the present fear, that they were enabled to or-
ganize the largest and most efficient confederacy ever known
among Greeks,—to bring together deliberative deputies, — to
plant their own ascendency as enforcers of the collective resolu-
tions, — and to raise a prodigious tax from universal contribution.
Lastly, it was by these same operations, prosecuted so success-
fully as to remove present-alarm, that they at length fatigued the
more lukewarm and passive members of the confederacy, and
created in them a wish either to commute personal service for
pecuniary contribution, or to escape from the obligation of service
in any way. The Athenian nautical training would never have
been acquired, —the confederacy would never have become a
working reality,—the fatigue and discontents among its mem-
bers would never have arisen, — unless there had been a real
fear of the Persians, and a pressing necessity for vigorous and
organized operations against them, during the ten years between
477 and 466 B.c.

As to the ten years from 477-466 8B. c., there has been a
tendency almost unconscious to assume that the particular inci-
dents. mentioned by Thucydidés about Eion, Skyros, Karystus,
and Naxos, constitute the sum total of events. To contradict
this assumption, I have suggested proof sufficient, though indi-
rect, that they are only part of the stock of a very busy period,
—the remaining details of which, indicated in outline by the
large general language of Thucydidés, we are condemned not to
know. Nor are we admitted to be present at the synod of Delos,
_ which during all this time continued its periodical meetings:

though it would have been highly interesting to trace the steps
whereby an institution which at first promised to protect not
less the separate rights of the members than the security of the
whole, so lamentably failed in its object. We must recollect that
this confederacy, formed for objects common to all, limited toa
certain extent the autonomy of each member; both conferring
definite rights and imposing definite obligations. Solemnly sworn
to by all, and by Aristeidés on behalf of Athens, it was intended
to bind the members in perpetuity, — marked even in the form
of ihe oath, which was performed by casting heayy lumps of

13* ‘

298 HISTORY OF GREECE.

iron into the sea never again to be seen.! As this confederacy
was thus both perpetual and peremptory, binding each member
‘to the rest, and not allowing either retirement or evasion, so it
was essential that it should be sustained by some determining
authority and enforcing sanction. The determining authority
was provided by the synod at Delos: the enforcing sanction was
exercised by Athens as president. And there is every reason
to presume that Athens, for a long time, performed this duty ina
legitimate and honorable manner, acting in execution of the re-
solves of the synod, or at least in full harmony with its general
purposes. She exacted from every member the regulated quota
of men or money, employing coercion against recusants, and
visiting neglect of military duty with penalties. In all these
requirements she only discharged her appropriate functions as
chosen leader of the confederacy, and there can be no reasonable
doubt that the general synod went cordially along with her? in
strictness of dealing towards those defaulters who obtained pro-
tection without bearing their share of the burden.

But after a few years, several of the confederates becoming
weary of personal military service; prevailed upon the Athenians
to provide ships and men in their place, and imposed upon them-
selves in exchange a money-payment of suitable amount. This
commutation, at first probably introduced to meet some special
case of inconvenience, was found so suitable to the taste of all
parties that it gradually spread through the larger portion of the
confederacy. To unwarlike allies, hating labor and privation, it
was a welcome relief, — while to the Athenians, full of ardor and
patient of labor, as well as discipline, for the aggrandizement of
their country, it afforded constant pay for a fleet more numerous
than they could otherwise have kept afloat. It is plain from the
statement of Thucydidés that this altered practice was introduced
from the petition of the confederates themselves, not from any

1 Plutarch, Aristeidés, c. 24. i

* Sach concurrence of the general synod is in fact implied in the speech
put by Thucydidés into the mouth of the Mitylenzan envoys at Olympia, in
‘he third vear of the Peloponnesian war: a speech pronounced by parties”
altogether hostile to Athens (Thucyd. iii, 11)—dua pév yap paprupig
éypavro (the Athenians) uw? dv rote ye LoopHgpove dxovrag, el
uh tt bdixovy ol¢ éxgeoay, Evetparetety.

GRECIAN CONFEDERACY UNDER ATHENS. 299

pressure or stratagem, on the part of Athens.! But though such
was its real source, it did not the less fatally degrade the allies in
reference to Athens, and extinguish the original feeling of equal
rights and partnership in the confederacy, with communion of
danger as well as of glory, which had once bound them together.
The Athenians came to consider themselves as military chiefs
and soldiers, with a body of tribute-paying subjects, whom they
were entitled to hold in dominion, and restrict, both as to foreign
policy and internal government, to such extent as they thought
expedient, — but whom they were also bound to protect against
-foreign enemies. The military force of these subject-states was
thus in a great degree transferred to Athens, by their own act,
just as that of so many of the native princes in India has been
made over to the English. But the military efficiency of the
confederacy against the Persians was much increased, in propor-
tion as the vigorous resolves of Athens? were less and less par-
alyzed by..the contentions and irregularity of a synod; so that
the war was prosecuted with greater success than ever, while
those motives of alarm, which had served as the first pressing
stimulus to the formation of the confederacy, became every year
farther and farther removed.

Under such circumstances several of the confederate states
grew tired even of paying their tribute,— and averse to con-
tinuance as members. They made successive attempts to secede,
but Athens, acting seemingly in conjunction with the synod, re-
pressed their attempts one after the other, — conquering, fining,
and. disarming the revolters; which was the more easily done,

1 Thucyd. i, 97-99. Alriac 62 GAAat Hoay Tov arootacéwy, nal péytorat,
ai tov g¢dpwrv kal vedv éxdeiat nal Aetroorpariov, ef Ty tyévero* ol yap
’"ASyvaio axptBac Expaccoy, Kal Avrnpol hoav, otk eludooty edd? BovdAopévore
Tadainwpeiv mpocayovres tag advayxac. ‘Hoay dé rug xai dAAwc ol ’Adqvaios
ovKete duoiug év idovg dpyovrec, cat obre Evvesrparevov dd Tov loov, bgdioy
te mpocayeatat hy abtoicg rode ddicranévovg> Gv avro? alrio:z éyé-
yovro of Stupayor dua ydp ray dréavyow tabryy rév orparetay, ol
wheiovg abtév, iva uy dm oixov Oot, yonuata traavro dvr ray veov
70 ixvotpevor dvadwua gépety, kal Tol¢ wey "ASqvalore nbseTo Td vavTiKdy Grd
tig Oanaung fv Exeivor Evugépocev, abrot d2 drote drooraier, 4maoaoxevot
wal depot é¢ rov méAeuoyv KaVioravro,

2 See the contemptuous remarks of Periklés upon the debates of the
Lacedsemonian allies at Sparta (Thucyd i, 141).

-

800 HISTORY OF GREECE. -

since in most cases their naval force had been in great pars
handed over te her. As these events took place, not all at once,
but successively in different years, — the number of mere tribute-
paying allies as well as of subdued revolters continually inereas-
ing, — so there was never any one moment of conspicuous change
in the character of the confederacy: the allies slid unconsciously
into subjects, while Athens, without any predetermined plan,
passed from-a chief into a despot. By strictly enforcing the ob-
ligations of the pact upon unwilling members, and by employing
coercion against revolters, she had become unpopular in the same
proportion as she acquired new power, — and that, too, without
any guilt of her own. In this position, even if she had been in-
clined to relax her hold upon the tributary subjects, considera-
tions of her own safety would have deterred her from doing so ;
for there was reason to apprehend that they might place their
. strength at the disposal of her enemies. It is very certain that
she never was s0 inclined; it would have required a more self-
denying public morality than has ever been practised by any state,
either ancient or modern, even to conceive the idea of relin-
quishing voluntarily an immense ascendency as well as a lucra-
tive revenue: least of all was such an idea likely to be conceived
by Athenian citizens, whose ambition increased with their power,
and among whom the love of Athenian ascendency was both pas-
sion and patriotism. But though the Athenians were both dis-
posed and qualified to push all the advantages offered, and even
to look out for new, we must not forget that the foundations of
their empire were laid in the most honorable causes: voluntary
invitation, efforts both unwearied and successful against a common
enemy, unpopularity incurred in discharge of an imperative duty,
and inability to break up the confederacy without endangering
themselves as well as laying open the Aigean sea to the Per-
sians.! :

1 The speech of the Athenian envoy at Sparta, a little before the Pelo-
ponnesian war, sets forth the growth of the Athenian empire, in the main,
with perfect justice (Thucyd. i, 75,76). He admits and even exaggerates
its unpopularity, but shows that such unpopularity was, to a great extent,
and certainly as to its first origin, unavoidable as well as undeserved. He
of course, as might be supposed, omits those other proceedings by which
Athens had herself aggravated it.

GRECLAN CONFEDERACY UNDER ATHENS. 201

There were two other causes, besides that which has just been
adverted to, for the unpopularity of imperial Athens. First, the
existence of the confederacy, imposing permanent obligations,
was in conflict with the general instinct of the Greek mind, tend-
ing towards separate political autonomy of each city, as well as
with the particular turn of the Ionic mind, incapable of that
steady personal effort which was requisite for maintaining the syn-
od of Delos, on its first large and equal basis. .Next,— and this is
the great cause of all, — Athens, having defeated the Persians,
and thrust them to a distance, began to employ the force and the
tribute of her subject-allies in warfare against Greeks, wherein
these allies had nothing to gain from success, — everything to
apprehend from defeat, — and a banner to fight for, offensive to
Hellenic sympathies. On this head, the subject-allies had great
reason to complain, throughout the prolonged wars of Greek
against Greek, for the purpose of sustaining Athenian predomi-
nance: but on the point of practical grievances or oppressions,
they had little ground for discontent, and little feeling of actual
discontent, as I shall show more fully hereafter. Among the
general body of citizens in the subject-allied cities, the feeling
towards Athens was rather indifference than hatred: the move-
ment of revolt against her proceeded from small parties of lead-
ing men, acting apart from the citizens, and generally with
collateral views of ambition for themselves: and the positive
hatred towards her was felt chiefly by those who were not her
subjects.

It is probable that the same indisposition to personal effort,
which prompted the confederates of Delos to tender money-pay-
ment as a substitute for military service, also induced them to

Kal yap airiv rivde (ray apxynv) éAaBopuer ob Bracauevor....é& abrod dd
tov Epyou Katnvayxaodnpevy To mpGtov mpoayayeiv avriy é¢ rode, uadtora
pév b70 déove, Execra d2 al Tine, borepov Kat Opedeiac. Kal obx dopadds
Ere Edoxei elvat toig woAdoic arnydnuévouc, kai river nal ién arocravTar
Kexetpupévur, tudv te guiv obxete duoiug didwy GAA’ dréatwv Kal diagdpur
évtuv, avévrag kivdvvebety Kal yap dv al drocracets mpdg tude Eyiyvovro
mace de averiPSovoy Ta Evxudépovta roy peyiorwy rept kevdbvur eb Tiderdas,

The whole speech well merits attentive study: compare also the speech
of Periklés at Athens, in the second year of the Peloponnesian war
(Thucyd. ii, 63).

802 HISTOBY OF GREECE.

neglect attendance at the synod. But we do not know the steps
whereby this assembly, at first an effective reality, gradually
dwindled into a mere form and vanished. Nothing, however,
can more forcibly illustrate the difference of character between
the maritime allies of Athens, and the Peloponnesian allies of
Sparta, than the fact, — that while the former shrank from personal
service, and thought it an advantage to tax themselves in place
of it,—the latter were “ready enough with their bodies,” but
uncomplying and impracticable as to contributions.! The con-
tempt felt by these Dorian landsmen for the military efficiency of
the Ionians recurs frequently, and appears even to have ex-
ceeded what the reality justified: but when we turn to the con-
duct of the latter twenty years earlier, at the battle of Ladé, in
the very crisis of the Ionic revolt from Persia,2— we detect the
same want of energy, the same incapacity of personal effort and
labor, as that which broke up the corifederacy of Delos with -all
its beneficial promise. To appreciate fully the indefatigable ac-
tivity and daring, together with the patient endurance of labori-
ous maritime training, which characterized the Athenians of that
day, — we have only to contrast them with these confederates, so
remarkably destitute of both. Amidst such glaring inequalities
of merit, capacity, and power, to maintain a confederacy of equal
members was impossible: it was in the nature of things that the
confederacy should either break up, or be transmuted into an
Athenian empire.

It has already been mentioned that the first aggregate assess-
ment of tribute, proposed by Aristeidés, and adopted by the
synod at Delos, was four hundred and sixty talents in money. At
that time many of the confederates paid their quota, not m money
but in ships; but this practice gradually diminished, as the com-
mutations above alluded to, of money in place of ships, were
multiplied, while the aggregate tribute, of course, became larger.
It was no more than six hundred talents? at the commencement
of ithe Peloponnesian war, forty-six years after the first forma-

} Thucyd. i, 141. ocdpaot d2 érotudrepor of abrovpyot rév avSporev ®
xPnuact ToAEpety, etc.

* See Herodot. vi, 12 and the preceding volume of this history, chap.
XXxXvV, vol. iv, p. 301 > Thucyd. ii, 13.

GRECIAN CONFEDERACY UNDER ATHENS. 808

tion of the confederacy; from whence we may infer that it was
never at all increased upon individual members during the inter.
val. For the difference between four hundred and sixty talents
and six hundred admits of being fully explained by the numerous
commutations of service for money, as well as by the acquisitions
of new members, which doubtless Athens had more or less the
opportunity of making. It isnot to be imagined that the confed-
eracy had attained its maximum number, at the date of the first
assessment of tribute: there must have been various cities, like
Sinopé and Agina, subsequently added.

Without some such preliminary statements as those just given,
respecting the new state of Greece between the Persian and
Peloponnesian wars, beginning with the Athenian hegemony,
or headship, and ending with the Athenian empire, the reader
would hardly understand the bearing of those particular events
which our authorities enable us to recount ; events unhappily few
in number, though the period must have been full of action, and
not well authenticated as to dates. The first known enterprise
of the Athenians in their new capacity — whether the first abso-
lutely or not, we cannot determine — between 476 B.c. and 466
B.c., was the conquest of the important post of Lion, on the
Strymon, where-the Persian governor, Bogés, starved out after a
desperate resistance, destroyed himself rather than capitulate,
together with his family and precious effects, as has already been
stated. The next events named are their enterprises against the
Dolopes and Pelasgi in the island of Skyros, seemingly about 470
B.c., and the Dryopes in the town and district of Karystus, in
Eubeea. To the latter, who were of a different kindred from the
inhabitants of Chalkis and Eretria, and received no aid from
them, they granted a capitulation: the former were more rigor-
ously dealt with, and expelled from their island. Skyros was
barren, and had little to recommend it, except a good maritime
position and an excellent harbor ; while its inhabitants, seemingly
akin to the Pelasgian residents in Lemnos, prior to the Athenian
occupation of that-spot, were alike piratical and cruel. Some
Thessalian traders, recently plundered and imprisoned by them,
hed raised a complaint against them before the Amphiktyonic

' Thucyd. i, 108; Plutarch, Periklés, c. 20.

td

804 _ HISTORY OF GREECE.

synod, which condemned the island to make restitution : the mass
of the islanders threw the burden upon those who had committed
the crime; and these men, in order to evade payment, invoked
Kimon withthe Athenian armament,— who conquered the island,
expelled the inhabitants, and peopled it with Athenian settlers.

Such clearance was a beneficial act, suitable to the new char-
acter of Athens as guardian of the Augean sea against piracy :
but it seems also connected with Athenian plans. The island
lay very convenient for the communication with Lemnos, which
the Athenians had doubtless reoccupied after the expulsion of
the Persians,! and became, as well as Lemnos, a recognized ad-
junct, or outlying portion, of Attica: moreover, there were old
legends which connected the Athenians with it, as the tomb of
their hero Theseus, whose name, as the mythical champion of
democracy, was in peculiar favor at the period immediately fol-
lowing the return from Salamis. It was in the year 476 B.c.,
that the oraele had directed them to bring home the bones of
Theseus from Skyros, and to prepare for that hero a splendid
entombment and edifice in their new city : they had tried ta
effect this, but the unsocial manners of the Dolopians had pre-
vented a search, and it was only after Kimon had taken the
island that he found, or pretended to find, the body. It was
brought to Athens in the year 469 B.c.,2 and after being wel-

1 Xenophon, Hellenic, v, 1, 31.

2Mr. Fynes Clinton (Fasti Hellenic. ad ann. 476 B.c.) places the con
quest of Skyros by Kimon in the year 476 s.c. He says, after citing,
a passage from Thucyd. i, 98, and from Plutarch, Theseus, c. 86, as well as
a proposed correction of Bentley, which he justly rejects: “ The island was
actually conquered in the year of the archon Phedon, B.c. 476. This we
know from Thucyd. i, 98, and Diodor. xi, 41-48, combined. Plutarch
named the archon Phedon, with reference to the conquest of the island:
then, by a negligence not unusual with him, connected the oracle with that
fact, as a contemporary transaction: although in truth the oracle was not
procured till six or seven years afterwards.” :

Plutarch has many sins to answer for against chronological exactness; ;
but the charge here made against him is undeserved. He states that the
oracle was given in (476 B.c.) the year of the archon Phzdon; and that the
body of Theseus was brought back to Athens in (469 B.c.) the year of the
archon Aphepsion. There is nothing to contradict either statement; nor
do the passages of Thucydidés and Diodorus, which Mr. Clinton adduces,

JRECIAN CONFEDERACY UNDER AYIHENS. 805

comed by the people in solemn and joyous procession, as if the
hero himself had come back, was deposited in the interior of the

prove that which he asserts. The two passages of Diodorus have, indeed,
no bearing upon. the event: and in so far as Diodorus is in this case an au-
thority at all, he goes against Mr. Clinton, for he states Skyros to have
been conquered in 470 B.c. (Diodor. xi, 60). Thucydidés only tells us that
the operations against Eion, Skyros, and Karystus, took place in the order
here indicated, and at some periads between 476 and 466 z.c.; but he
does not enable.us to determine positively the date of either. Upon what
authority Mr. Clinton states, that “the oracle was not procured till six or
seven years afterwards,” (t. e., after the conquest,) I do not know: the ac-
count of Plutarch goes rather to show that it was procured six or seven
years before the conquest: and this may stand good until some better testi-
mony is produced to contradict it. As our information now stands, we
have no testimony as to the year of the conquest except that of Diodorus,
who assigns it to 470 3.c., but as he assigns both the conquest of Eion and
the expeditions of Kimon against Karia and Pamphylia with the victories
of ‘he Eurymedon, all to the same year, we cannot much trast his author-
ity Nevertheless, I incline to believe him as to the date of the conquest
of Skyros: because it seems to me very probable that this conquest took
place in the year immediately before that in which the body of Theseus
was brought to Athens, which litter event may be referred with great con-
fidence to 469 B.c., in consequence of the interesting anecdote related by
Plutarch about the first prize gained by the poet Sophoklés.

Mr. Clinton has given in his Appendix (Nos. vi~viii, pp. 248-253) two
Dissertations respecting the chronology of the period from the Persian war
down to the close of the Peloponnesian war. He has rendered much ser-
vice by correcting the mistake of Dodwell, Wesseling, and Mitford (founded
upon an inaccurate construction of a passage in Isokratés) in supposing,
after the Persian invasion of Greece, a Spartan hegemony, lasting ten years,
prior to the commencement of the Athenian hegemony. He has shown
that the latter must be reckoned as commencing in 477, or 476 B.c., imme-
diately after the mutiny of the allies against Pausanias, — whose command,
however, need not be peremptorily restricted to one year, as Mr. Clinton
(p. 252) and, Dodwell maintain: for the words of Thucydidés, éy rjde rj
nyepovig, imply nothing as to annual duration, and designate merely “the
hegemony which preceded that of Athens.”

But the refutation of this mistake does not enable us to establish any
good positive chronology for the period between 477 and 466 B.c. It will
not do to construe IIpérov pév (Thuc. i, 98) in reference to the Athenian
conquest of Eion, as if it must necessarily mean “ the year after” 477 B.c. If
we could imagine that Thucydidés had told us all the military operations
between 477-466 3.c.. we should be compelled to admit plenty of that
“interval of inaction” against which Mr. Clinton so strongly protests (p.

VOL. V.

406 HISTORY OF GREECE.

city,— the monument called the Theseium, with its sacred pre-
cinct being built on the spot, and invested with the privilege of
a sanctuary for men of poor condition who might feel ground for
dreading the oppressions of the powerful, as well as for slaves in
case of cruel usage.! Such were the protective functions of the
mythical hero of democracy, whose installation is interesting as
marking the growing intensity of democratical feeling in Athens
since the Persian war. -

It was about two years or more after this incident, that the
first breach of union in the confederacy of Delos took place.
The important island of Naxos, the largest of the Cyclades, —
an island which thirty years before had boasted a large marine

252). Unhappily, Thucydidés has told us but a small portion of the events
which really happened.

Mr. Clinton compares the various periods of duration assigned by ancient
authors to that which is improperly called the Athenian “empire,” — be-
tween 477-405 B.o. (pp. 248, 249.) I confess that I rather agree with Dr.
Gillies, who admits the discrepancy between these authors broadly and un-
disguisedly, than with Mr. Clinton, who seeks to bring them into compara-
tive agreement. His explanation is only successful in regard to one of
them, — Demosthenés; whose two statements (forty-five years in one place
and seventy-three years in another) are shown to be consistent with each
other as well as chronologically just. But surely it is not reasonable to
correct the text of the orator Lykurgus from évvevijxovta to éBdoufqxovra,
and then to say, that “ Lykurgus may be added to the number of those who
describe the period as seventy years,” (p. 250.) Neither are we to bring
Andokidés into harmony with others, by supposing that “his calculation
ascends to the battle of Marathon, from the date of which (B.c. 490) to the
battle of A2gos Potami, are just eighty-five years.” (Ibid.) Nor ought we to
justify a computation by Demosthenés, of sixty-five years, by saying, “ that
it terminates at the Athenian defeat in Sicily,” (p. 249). ;

The truth is, that there is more or less chronological inaccuracy in all
these passages, except those of Demosthenés,— and historical inaccuracy
in all of them, not even excepting those. It is not true that the Athenians
npSav tie Valacons —hpsav trav ‘EAAnver — mpoorara: hoav rv ‘EAAnvey
— for seventy-three years. The historical language of Demosthenés, Plato,
Lysias, Isokratés, Andokidés, Lykurgus, requires to be carefully examined
before we rely upon it.

1 Plutarch (Kimon, c.8; Theseus, c, 36). gor? d? pifsov olkéracg not
mao Toic Taretvorépore Kal dedioat Kpeitrovac, we Kal Tod Oncéwe MpooraTiKos
rivog Kal BonSytikod yevouému Kai mpoadexouévon gidavOporws tig Top
tareivorépwr denaric.

GRECIAN CONFEDERACY UNDER ATHENS. 807

force and eight thousand hoplites,— revolted; on what special
ground we do not know: but probably the greater islands fancied
themselves better able to dispense with the protection of the
confederacy than the smaller, — at the same time that they were
more jealous of Athens. After a siege, of unknown duration,
by Athens and the confederate force, it was forced to surrender,
and reduced to the condition of a tributary subject ;! its armed
ships being doubtless taken away, and its fortifications razed :
whether any fine or ulterior penalty was levied, we have no
information.

We cannot doubt that the reduction of this powerful island,
however untoward in its effects upon the equal and self-maintain-
ing character of the confederacy, strengthened its military force
by placing the whole Naxian fleet with new pecuniary contribu-
tions in the hands of the chief: nor is it surprising to hear that
Athens sought both to employ this new force, and to obliterate
the late act of severity, by increased exertions against the com-
mon enemy. ‘Though we know no particulars respecting oper-
ations against Persia, since the attack on Hion, such operations
must have been going on; but the expedition under Kimon,
undertaken not long after the Naxian revolt, was attended with
memorable results. That commander, having under him two
hundred triremes from Athens, and one hundred from the various
confederates, was despatched to attack the Persians on the south
western and southern coast of Asia Minor. He attacked and
drove out several of their garrisons from various Grecian settle-
ments, both in Karia and Lykia: among others, the important
trading city of Phasélis, though at first resisting, and even stand-

_ing a siege, was prevailed upon by the friendly suggestions of
the Chians in Kimon’s armament to pay a contribution of ten
talents and join in the expedition. From the length of time
occupied in these various undertakings, the Persian satraps had
been enabled to assemble a powerful force, both fleet and army,
near the mouth of the river Eurymedon, in Pamphylia, under
the command of Tithraustés and Pherendatés, both of the regal

1 Thucyd. i, 98. It has already been stated in the, preceding chapter,
that Themistoklés, as a fugitive, passed close to Naxos while it was under
siegc, and incurred great danger of being taken.

308 HISTORY OF GREECE.

blood. The fleet, chiefly Phenician, seems to have consisted of
two hundred ships, but a farther reinforcement of eighty Pheni-
cian ships was expected, and was actually near at hand, and the
commanders were unwilling to hazard a battle before its arrival.
Kimon, anxious for the same reason to hasten on the combat,
attacked them vigorously: partly from their inferiority of num-
bers, partly from discouragement at the absence of the reinforce-
ment, they seem to have made no strenuous resistance. They
were put to flight and driven ashore; so speedily, and with sv
little loss to the Greeks, that Kimon was enabled to disembark
his men forthwith, and attack the land-force which was drawn up
on shore to protect them. The battle on land was long and gal-
lantly contested, but Kimon at length gained a complete victory,
dispersed the army with the capture of many prisoners, and
either took or destroyed the entire fleet. As soon as his victory
and his prisoners were secured, he sailed to Cyprus for the pur-
pose of intercepting the reinforcement of eighty Phenician ships
in their way, and was fortunate enough to attack them while yet
they were ignorant of the victories of the Eurymedon. These
ships too were all destroyed, though most of the crews appear to
have escaped ashore on the island. Two great victories, one at
sea and the other on land, gained on the same day by the same
armament, counted with reason among the most glorious of all
Grecian exploits, and were extolled as such in the inscription on
the commemorative offering to Apollo, set up out of the tithe of
the spoils.! The number of prisoners, as well as the booty taken
by the victors, was immense.

1¥For the battles of the Eurymedon, see Thucyd. i, 100; Diodor. xi,
60-62 ; Plutarch, Kimon, 12, 13.

The accounts of the two latter appear chiefly borrowed from Ephorus and
Kallisthenés, authors of the following century ; and from Phanodemus, an
author later still. I borrow sparingly from them, and only so far as con-
sists with the brief statement of Thucydidés. The narrative of Diodorus
is exceedingly confused, indeed hardly intelligible.

Phanodemus stated the number of the Persian fleet at six hundred ships
Ephorus, at three hundred and fifty. Diodorus, following the latter, gives
three hundred and forty. Plutarch mentions the expected reinforcement
of eighty Phenician ships; which appears to me a very credible circnm-
stance, explaining the easy nautical victory of Kimon at the Eurymedon.
From Thucydidés, we know that the vanquished fleet at the Eurvmedon

a

i GRECIAN CONFEDERACY UNDER ATHENS. 809

A victory thus remarkable, whieh thrust back the Persians to
the region eastward of Phasélis, doubtless fortified materially the
position of the Athenian confederacy against them ; but it tended
not less to exalt the reputation of Athens, and even to popularize
her with the confederates generally, from the large amount of
plunder divisible among them. Probably this increased power
and popularity stood her instead throughout her approaching
contest with Thasos, at the same time that it explains the increas-
ing fear and dislike of the Peloponnesians.

Thasos was a member of the confederacy of Delos; but her
quarrel with Athens seems to have arisen out of causes quite
distinct from confederate relations. It has been already stated
that the Athenians had within the last few years expelled the
Persians from the important post of Ejion, on the Strymon, the
most convenient post for the neighboring region of Thrace, which
was not less distinguished for its fertility than for its mining
wealth. In the occupation of this post, the Athenians had had
time to become acquainted with the productive character of the
adjoining region, chiefly occupied by the Edonian Thracians ;
and it is extremely probable that many private settlers arrived

ew

consisted of no more than two hundred ships; for so I venture to construe
the words of Thucydidés, in spite of the authority of Dr Armold, — Ka?
elAov ("AYnvaios) tpinpecc Potvixwyv Kal dtépecpav Tag mucag é¢ (Td)
dtaxosiag. Upon which Dr. Arnold observes: “ Amounting in all to two
hundred: that is, that the whole number of ships taken or destroyed wag
two hundred, — not that the whole fleet consisted of no more.” Admitting
the correctness of this construction (which may be defended by viii, 21)
we may remark that the defeated Phenician fleet, according to the univer.
sal practice of antiquity, ran ashore to seek protection from its accompany-
ing land-force. When, therefore, this land-force was itself defeated and
dispersed, the ships would all naturally fall into the power of the victors ;
or if any escaped, it would be merely by accident. Moreover, the smaller
number is in this case more likely to be the truth, as we must suppose an
easy naval victory in order to leave strength for a strenuous land-battle on
the same day.

It is remarkable that the inscription on the commemorative offering only
specifies “one hundred Phenician ships with their crews” as having been
captured (Diodor. xi, 62). The other hundred ships were probably de-
stroyed. Diodorus represents Kimon as having captured three hundred
and forty ships;though he himself cites the inscription which mentions ou'y
on hundred. :

“

@ $810 HISTOBY OF GREECE.

from Athens, with the view of procuring grants or making their
fortunes by partnership with powerful Thracians in working
the gold-mines round Mount Pangzus. In so doing, they speedily
found themselves in collision with the Greeks of the opposite
island of Mount Thasos, who possessed a considerable strip of
and, with various dependent towns on the continent of Thrace,
and derived a large revenue from the mines of Skapté Hylé, as
well as from others in the neighborhood.' The condition of
Thasos at this time, about 465 B.c., indicates to us the progress
which the Grecian states in the /“gean had made since their
liberation from Persia. It had been deprived both of its fortifi-
cations and of its maritime force, by order of Darius, about 491
B.C., and must have remained in this condition until after the
repulse of Xerxes; but we now find it well-fortified and possess-
ing a powerful maritime force.

In what precise manner the quarrel between the Thasians and
the Athenians of Eion manifested itself, respecting the trade and
the mines in Thrace, we are not informed ; but it reached sucha
height that the Athenians were induced to send a powerful arma-
ment against the island, under the command of Kimon.2 Hav-
ing vanquished the Thasian force at sea, they disembarked,
gained various battles, and blocked up the city by land as well
as by sea. And at the same time they undertook — what seems
to have been part and parcel of the same scheme —the estab-
fishment of a larger and more powerful colony on Thracian
ground not far from Eion. On the Strymon, about three miles
higher up than Ejion, near the spot where the river narrows
itself again out of a broad expanse of the nature of a lake, was
situated the Edonian town or settlement called Ennea Hodoi,
(Nine Ways), a little above the bridge, which here served as an
important communication for all the people of the interior. Both

? About Thasos, see Herodot. vi, 46-48; vii,118. The position of Ragusa
in the Adriatic, in reference to the despots of Servia anJ Bosnia in the fif-
teenth and sixteenth centuries, was very similar to that of Athens and
Thasos in regard to the Thracian princes of the interior. In Engel’s His
tory of Ragusa we find an account of the large gains made in that city by
its contracts to work the gold and silver mines belonging to these princes
(Engel, Geschichte des Freystaates Ragusa, sect. 36, p. 163. Wien, en)

* Thucyd. i, 100, 101; Plutarch, Kimon, e. 14; Diodor xi, 70.

GRECIAN OONFEDERACY UNDER ATHENS. $11

Histieus and Aristagoras, the two Milesian despots, had been
tempted by the advantages of this place to commence a settle-
ment there: both of them had failed, and a third failure on a
‘still grander scale was now about to be added. The Athenians
sent thither a large body of colonists; ten thousand in number,
partly from their own citizens, partly collected from their allies
and the temptations of the site probably rendered volunteers
numerous. As far as Ennea Hodoi was concerned, they were
successful in conquering it and driving away the Edonian pos-
sessors: but on trying to extend themselves farther to the east-
ward, to a spot called Drabéskus, convenient for the mining
region, they encountered a more formidable resistance from a
powerful alliance of Thracian tribes, who had come to the aid
of the Edonians in decisive hostility to the new colony, — prob-
ably not without instigation from the inhabitants of Thasos. All
or most of the ten thousand colonists were slain in this warfare,
and the new colony was for the time completely abandoned: we
shall find it resumed hereafter.!

Disappointed as the Athenians were in this enterprise, they
did not abandon the blockade of Thasos, which held out more
than two years, and only surrendered in the third year. Its
fortifications were razed; its ships of war, thirty-three in nam-
ber, taken away 2 its possessions and mining establishments on
the opposite continent relinquished: moreover, an immediate
contribution in money was demanded from the inhabitants, over
and abqve the annual payment assessed upon them for the future.
The subjugation of this powerful island was another step in the
growing dominion of Athens over her confederates.

The year before the Thasians surrendered, however, they had

1 Thucyd. i, 101. Philip of Macedon, in his dispute more than a century
after this period with the Athenians respecting the possession of Amphip-
olis, pretended that his ancestor, Alexander, had been the first to acquire
possession of the spot after the expulsion of the Persians from Thrace, (see
Philippi Epistola ap. Demosthen. p. 164, R.) If this pretence had been
true, Ennea Hodoi would have been in possession of the Macedonians at this
time, when the first Athenian attempt was made upon it: but the state-
ment of Thucydidés shows that it was then an Edonian township.

* Plutarch, Kimon,c.14. Galépsus and C&symé were among the Thasian
settlements on the mainland of Thrace (Thucyd. iv, 108).

812 HISTORY OF GREECE.

taken a step which deserves particular notice, as indicating the
newly-gathering clouds in the Grecian political horizon. They
had made secret application to the Lacedamonians for aid, en-
treating them to draw off the attention of Athens by invading
Attica; and the Lacedsmonians, without the knowledge of
Athens, having actually engaged to comply with this request,
were only prevented from performing their promise by a grave
and terrible misfortune at home.' Though accidentally unper-
formed, however, this hostile promise is a most significant event :
it marks the growing fear and hatred on the part of Sparta and
the Peloponnesians towards Athens, merely on general grounds
’ of the magnitude of her power, and without any special provoca-
tion. Nay, not only had Athens given no provocation, but she
was still actually included as a member of the Lacedemonian
alliance, and we shall find her presently both appealed to and
acting as such. We shall hearso much of Athens, and that too
with truth, as pushing and aggressive, — and of Sparta as home-
keeping and defensive, — that the incident just mentioned be-
comes important to remark. The first intent of unprovoked and
even treacherous hostility — the germ of the future Peloponnesian
war — is conceived-and reduced to an engagement by Sparta.

We are told by Plutarch, that the Athenians, after the surren-
der of Thasos and the liberation of the armament, had expected
from Kimon some farther conquests in Macedonia,— and even
that he had actually entered upon that project with such promise
of success, that its farther consummation was certain as well as
easy.. Having under these circumstances relinquished it and
returned to Athens, he was accused by Periklés and others of
having been bought off by bribes from the Macedonian king
Alexander ; but was acquitted after a public trial.2

During the period which had elapsed between the first forma-
tion of the confederacy of Delos and the capture of Thasos
(about thirteen or fourteen years, B.c. 477-463), the Athenians
xeem to have been occupied almost entirely in their maritime
pperations, chiefly against the Persians, — having been free from

1 Thucyd. i, 101. of dt ixécyxerro piv xpiga tov ‘Advair kal EpeAAov,
Stexoavdynoay dé dd rot yevopévov cecopod. ~
* Plutarch, Kimon, c. 14.

GRECIAN CONFEDERACY UNDER ATHENS. $13

embarrassments immediately around Attica. But this freedom
was not destined to last much longer; and during the ensuing ten
years, their foreign relations near home become both active and
complicated; while their strength expands so wonderfully, that
they are found competent at once to obligations on both sides of
+he ADgean sea, the distant as well as the near.

Of the incidents which had taken place in Central Greece
during the twelve or fifteen years immediately succeeding the
battle of Platza, we have scarcely any information. The feelings
of the time, between those Greeks who had supported and those
who had resisted the Persian invader, must have remained un-
friendly even after the war was at an end, and the mere occupation
of the Persian numerous host must have inflicted severe dam-
age both upon Thessaly and Beotia. At the meeting of the Am-
phiktyonic synod which succeeded the expulsion of the invaders,
a reward was proclaimed for the life of the Melian Ephialtés,
who had betrayed to Xerxes the mountain-path over (Eta, and
thus caused the ruin of Leonidas at Thermopyle: moreover, if
we may trust Plutarch, it was even proposed by Lacedzmon that
all the medtzing Greeks should be expelled from the synod,! — a
proposition which the more long-sighted views of Themistoklés
successfully resisted. Even the stronger measure, of razing the
fortifications of all the extra-Peloponnesian cities, from fear that
they might be used to aid some future invasion, had suggested
itself to the Lacedzemonians, — as we see from their language on
the occasion of rebuilding the walls of Athens ; and in regard to
Beeotia, it appears that the headship of Thebes as well as the
coherence of the federation was for the time almost suspended.
The destroyed towns of Platea and Thespiz were restored, and
the latter in part repeopled,? under Athenian influence ; and the
general sentiment of Peloponnesus as well as of Athens would
have sustained these towns against Thebes, if the latter had tried
a‘ that time to enforce her supremacy over them in the name of

! Plutarch, Themistokl. c. 20.

* See the case of Sikinnus, the person through whom Themistoklés com
municated with Xerxes before the battle of Salamis, and for whom he after-”
wards procured admission among the batch of newly-introduced citizens at
Thespiz (Hevodot. viii, 75).

VOL. V. 14

314 HISTORY OF GREECE.

“ancient Boeotian right and usage.”! The Theban government
was then in discredit for its previous medism, —even in the eyes
of Thebans themselves ;? while the party opposed to Thebes
in the other towns was so powerful, that many of them would
probably have been severed from the federation to become allies
of Athens like Platea, if the interference of Lacedsemon had not
arrested such a tendency. The latter was in every other part
of Greece an enemy to organized aggregation of cities, either
equal or unequal, and was constantly bent on keeping the little
autonomous communities separate ;3 whence she sometimes be-
came by accident the protector of the weaker cities against com-
pulsory alliance imposed upon them by the stronger: the interest
of her own ascendency was in this respect analogous to that of
the Persians when they dictated tle peace of Antalkidas, — of
the Romans in administering their extensive conquests, — and of
the kings of medieval Europe in breaking the authority of the
barons over their vassals. But though such was the policy of
_ Sparta elsewhere, her fear of Athens, which grew up during the
ensuing twenty years, made her act differently in regand to
Beeotia: she had no other means of maintaining that country as
her own ally and as the enemy of Athens, except by organizing
the federation effectively, and strengthening the authority of
- Thebes. It is to this revolution in Spartan politics that Thebes
owed the recovery of her ascendency,!— a revolution so con-
spicuously marked, that the Spartans even aided in enlarging her
circuit and improving her fortifications: nor was it without difli-
culty that she maintained this position, even when recovered,
against the dangerous neighborhood of Athens, a circumstance
which made her not only a vehement partisan of Sparta, but
even more furiously anti-Athenian than Sparta, down to the close
of the Peloponnesian war.
_ The revolution, just noticed, in Spartan politics towards Bao
tia, did not manifest itself until about twenty years after the com-

1 Te rév Bowrtév natpia — ra Koive Tov névtws Bowrév rarpta (Thucyd.
iii, 61-65).

* Thucyd. iii, 62.

* See, among many other evidences, the remarkable case of the Olyn-
thian confederacy (Xenophon, Hellen. v, 2, 16).

* Diodor. xi, 81; Justin, iii, 6.

GRECIAN CONFEDERACY UNDER ATHENS. 315

mencement of the Athenian maritime confederacy. During the
course of those twenty years, we know that Sparta had had more
than one battle to sustain in Arcadia, against the towns and vil-
lages of that country, in which she came forth victorious: but
we have no particulars respecting these incidents. We also
know that a few years after the Persian invasion, the inhabitants
of Elis concentrated themselves from many dispersed townships
into the one main city of Elis:! and it seems probable that Le-
preum in Triphylia, and one or two of the towns of Achaia, were
either formed or enlarged by a similar process near about the
same time.2? Such aggregation of towns out of preéxisting sep-
arate villages was not conformable to the views, nor favorable to
the ascendency, of Laced#mon: but there can be little doubt that
her foreign policy, after the Persian invasion, was both embar-
rassed and discredited by the misconduct of her two contem-
porary kings, Pausanias, who, though only regent, was practically
equivalent to a king, and Leotychidés, — not to mention the rapid
dévelopment of Athens and Peirus. But in the year B.c. 464,
the year preceding the surrender of Thasos to the Athenian
armament, a misfortune of yet more terrific moment befell Sparta.
' A violent earthquake took place in the immediate neighborhood
of Sparta itself, destroying a large portion of the town, and a
vast number of lives, many of them Spartan citizens. It was
the judgment of the earth-shaking god Poseidon, aecording ta
the view of the Lacedszmonians themselves, for a recent viola-
tion of his sanctuary at Teenarus, from whence certain suppliant
Helots had been dragged away not long before for punishment,
— not improbably some of those Helots whom Pausanias had
instigated to revolt. The sentiment of the Helots, at all times
one of enmity towards their masters, appears at this moment to
have been unusually inflammable: so that an earthquake at
Sparta, especially an earthquake construed as divine vengeance
for Helot blood recently spilt, was sufficient to rouse many of
them at once into revolt, together with some even of the Pericki
The insurgents took arms and marched directly upon Sparta,

1 Diodor. xi, 54; Strabo, viii, p. $37.
* Strabo, viii, pp. 337, 348, 356.
* Thucyd. i, 101-128; Diodor. xi, 62.

316 HISTORY: OF GREECE.

which they were on the point of mastering during the first mo-
ments of consternation, had not the bravery and presence of
mind of the young king Archidamus reanimated the surviving
citizens and repelled the attack. But though repelled, the insur-
gents were nat subdued: for some time they maintained the
field against the Spartan force, and sometimes with considerable
advantage, since Aeimnéstus, the warrior by whose hand Mar-
donius had fallen at Platea, was defeated and slain with three
hundred followers in the plain of Stenyklérus, overpowered by
superior numbers.! When at length defeated, they occupied and
fortified the memorable hill of Ithémé, the ancient citadel of
their Messenian forefathers. Here they made a long and obsti-
nate defence, supporting, themselves doubtless by incursions
throughout Laconia: nor was defence difficult, seeing that the
Lacedemonians were at that time confessedly incapable of as- ©
sailing even the most imperfect species of fortification. After
the siege had lasted some two or three years, without any pros-
pect of success, the Lacedzmonians, beginning to despair of their
own sufficiency for the undertaking, invoked the aid of their
various allies, among whom we find specified the -A‘ginetans, the
Athenians, and the Plateans.2® The Athenian troops are said to
have consisted of four thousand men, ‘ander the command of
Kimon ; Athens being still included i in the list = Lacedsemonian
allies.

So imperfect were the means of attacking walls at that day,
even for the most intelligent Greeks, that this increased force
made no immediate impression on the fortified hill of Ith6mé.
And when the Lacedemonians saw that their Athenian allies
were not more successful than they had been themselves, they
soon passed from surprise into doubt, mistrust, and apprehension.
The troops had given no ground for such a fgeling, and Kimon,
their general, was notorious for his attachment to Sparta; yet
the Lacedemonians could not help calling to mind the ever-wake-
ful energy and ambition of these Ionic strangers, whom they had
introduced into the interior of Laconia, together with their own
promise — though doubtless a secret promise — to invade Attica,
not long before, for the benefit of the Thasians. They even ‘be~

? Herodot. ix, 64. * Thucyd. i, 102; iii, 54; iv, 57.

-—

GRECIAN CONFEDERACY UNDER ATHENS. 817

gan to fear that the Athenians might turn against them, and
listen to solicitations for espousing the cause of the besieged.
Under the influence of such apprehensions, they dismissed the
Athenian contingent forthwith, on pretence of having no farther
occasion for them; while all the other allies were retained, and
the siege or blockade went on as before.!

1 Thucyd. i, 102. riv piv bropiay ob dndotvrec, elmovrec 02 bre obdev
mpocdéovTat avray Ert.

Mr. Fynes Clinton (Fast. Hellen. ann. 464-461 B.c.), following Plutarch,
recognizes two Lacedemonian requests to Athens, and two Athenian expe-
ditions to the aid of the Spartans, both under Kimon; the first in 464 B.c.,
immediately on the happening of the earthquake and consequent revolt, —
the second in 461 B.c., after the war had lasted some time.

In my judgment, there is no ground for supposing more than one appli-
cation made to Athens, and one expedition. The duplication has arisen
from Plutarch, who has construed too much as historical reality the comic
exaggeration of Aristophanés (Aristoph. Lysistrat. 1138; Plutarch, Kimon,
16). The heroine of the latter, Lysistrata, wishing to make peace between
the Lacedemonians and Athenians, and reminding each of the services
which they had received from the other, might permit herself to say to the
Lacedemonians: “Your envoy, Perikleidas, came to Athens, pale with
terror, and put himself a suppliant at the altar to entreat our help as a
matter of life and death, while Poseidon was still shaking the earth, and the
Messenians were pressing you hard: then Kimon with four thousand hop-
lites went and achieved your complete salvation.” ‘This is all very telling
and forcible, as a portion of the Aristophanic play, but there is no histor-
ical trath in it except the fact of an application made and an expedition
sent in consequence.

We know that the earthquake took place at the time when the siege of
Thasos was yet going on, because it was the reason which prevented the
Lacedemonians from aiding the besieged by an invasion of Attica. But
Kimon commanded at the siege of Thasos (Plutarch, Kimon, c. 14); ac-
cordingly, he could not have gone as commander to Laconia at the time
when this first expedition is alleged to have been undertaken.

Next, Thucydidés acknowledges only one expedition: nor, indeed, does
Diodorus (xi, 64), though this is of minor consequence. Now mere silence
on the part of Thucydidés, in reference to the events of a period which he
only professes to survey briefly, is not always a very forcible negative arga-
ment. Butin this case, his account of the expedition of 461 B.0., with its
very important consequences, is such as to exclude the supposition that he
knew of any prior expedition, two or three years earlier. Had he known of
any such, he could not have written the account which now stands in his
text. He dwells especially on the prolongation of the war, and on the in-
capacity of the Laccdwmonians for attacking walls, as the reasons why

818 HISTORY OF GREECE.

This dismissal, ungracious in the extreme, and probably ret:
dered even more offensive by the habitual roughness of Spartan
dealing, excited the strongest exasperation both among the Athie-
nian soldiers and the Athenian people, — an exasperation height-
ened by circumstances immediately preceding. For the resolu-
tion to send auxiliaries into Laconia, when the Lacedzmonians
first applied for them, had not been taken without considerable
debate at Athens: the party of Periklés and Ephialtés, habituat-
ly in opposition to Kimon, and partisans of the forward demo-
cratical movement, had strongly discountenanced it, and conjured
their countrymen not to assist in renovating and strengthening
their most formidable rival. Perhaps the previous engagement
of the Lacedemonians to invade Attica on behalf of the Thasi-
ans may have become known to them, though not so formally as
to exclude denial; and even supposing this engagement to have
remained unknown at that time to every one, there were not
wanting other grounds to render the policy of refusal plausible.
But Kimon, with an earnestness which even the philo-Laconian
Kritias afterwards characterized as a sacrifice of the grandeur of
Athens to the advantage of Lacedzmon,! employed all his credit
and influence in seconding the application: The maintenance of
alliance with Sparta on equal footing, — peace among the great
powers of Greece, and common war against Persia, — together
with the prevention of all farther democratical changes in Athens,
— were the leading points of his political creed. As yet, both
his personal and political ascendency was predominant over his
opponents: as yet, there was no manifest conflict, which had only
just begun to show itself in the case of Thasos, between the

they invoked the Athenians as well as their other allies: he implies that
their presence in Laconia was a new and threatening incident: moreover,
when he tells us how much the Athenians were incensed by their abrupt
and mistrustful dismissal, he could not have omitted to notice, as an aggra-
‘vation of this feeling, that, only two or three years before, they had rescued
Lacedsemon from the brink of ruin. Let us add, that the supposition of
Sparta, the first military power in Greece, and distinguished for her uninter-
mitting discipline, being reduced all at once to a condition of such utter
helplessness as to owe her safety to foreign intervention, —is highly im
probable in itself: inadinissible, except on very good evidence.

For the reasons here stated, I reject the first expedition into Laconia
mentioned in Plutarch. ' Plutarch, Kimon, ¢. 16

GRECIAN CONFEDERACY UNDER ATHENS. - B19

maritime power of Athens, and the union of land-force under
Sparta: and Kimon could still treat both of these phenomena as
coexisting necessities of Hellenic well-being. Though no way
distinguished as a speaker, he carried with him the Athenian as-
sembly by appealing to a large and generous patriotism, which
forbade them to permit the humiliation of Sparta. “Consent not
to see Hellas lamed of one leg, and Athens drawing without her
yoke-fellow ;”! sueh was his language, as we learn from his friend
and companion, the Chian poet Ion: afid in the lips of Kimon
it proved.effective. It is a speech -of almost melancholy inter-
est, since ninety years passed over before such an appeal was
ever again addressed to an Athenian assembly.2_ The despatch
of the auxiliaries was thus dictated by a generous sentiment, to
the disregard of what might seem political prudence: and we
may imagine the violent reaction which took place in Athenian
feeling, when the Lacedemonians repaid them by singling out
their troops from all the other allies as objects of insulting sus-
picion, — we may imagine the triumph of Periklés and Ephialtés,
who had opposed the mission, — and the vast loss of influence to
Kimon, who had brought it about, — when Athens received again
into her public assemblies the hoplites sent back from Ithémé.
Both in the internal constitution, indeed,— of which more pres-
ently,— and in the external policy of Athens, the dismissal of
tnese soldiers was pregnant with results. The Athenians imme-
diately passed a formal resolution to renounce the alliance be-
tween themselves and Lacedemon against the Persians. They
did more: they looked out for land enemies of Lacedemon,
with whom to ally themselves. Of these by far the first, both in
Hellenic rank and in real power, was Argos. That city, neutral
during the Persian invasion, had now recovered from the effects of
the destructive defeat suffered about thirty years before from the
Spartan king Kleomenés: the sons of the ancient citizens had
grown to manhood, and the temporary predominance of the Pe-

* Plutarch, Kimon,c.16. ‘0 & ‘lov dmropuvyueveter xal.tov Adyor, §
wAtora Tove ‘'AYnvaiouc Exivnoe, mapaxaday pyre Tiyv ‘EAAGda Zod, uyre
fy woaw érepovvya, Teptidew yeyevnpévnv.

* See Xenophon, Hellenic. “i, 3, — about 372 B. c.—a little before the

eattle of Leuktra.

320 HISTORY OF GREE SE.

riceki, acquired in consequence of the ruinous loss of citizens in.
that defeat, had been again put down. In the neighborhood of
Argos, and dependent upon it, were situated Mykene, Tiryns,
and Midea, — small in power and importance, but rich in mythi-
cal renown. Disdaining the in glorious example of Argos, at the
period of danger, these towns had furnished contingents both to
Thermopyle and Platea, which their powerful neighbor had been
unable either to prevent at the time, or to avenge afterwards,
from fear of the intervention of Lacedemon. But so soon as the
latter was seen to be endangered and occupied at home, with a
formidable Messenian revolt, the Argeians availed themselves of
the opportunity to attack not only Mykenz and Tiryns, but also
Ornez, Midea, and other semi-dependent towns around them.
Several of these were reduced; and the inhabitants robbed of
their autonomy, were incorporated with the domain of Argos:
but the Mykenians, partly from the superior gallantry of their
resistance, partly from jealousy of their mythical renown, were
either sold as slaves or driven into banishment.! Through these
victories Argos was now more powerful than ever, and the prop-
ositions of alliance made to her by Athens, while strengthening
both the two against Lacedsemon, opened to her a new chance of
recovering her lost headship in Peloponnesus. The Thessalians
became members of this new alliance, which was a defensive al-
liance against Lacedemon: and hopes were doubtless entertained
of drawing in some of the habitual allies of the latter.

The new character which Athens had thus assumed, as a com-
petitor for landed alliances, not less than for maritime ascendency,
came opportunely for the protection of the neighboring town of
Megara. It appears that Corinth, perhaps instigated, like Argos,
by-the helplessness of the Lacedemonians, had been making
border encroachments on the one side upon Kle6nz, on the other
side upon Megara :2 on which ground the latter, probably despair
ing of protection from Lacedzmon, renounced the Lacedemoni-

? Diodor. xi, 65; Strabo, viii, p. 372; Pausan. ii, 16,17, 25. Diodores
places this incident in 468 B.c,: but as it undoubtedly comes after the earth-
quake at Sparta, we must suppose it to have happened about 463 a.
See Mr. Fynes Clinton, Fasti Hellenici, Appendix, 8.

* Platarch, Kimon, c. 17.

GRECIAN CONFEDERACY UNDER ATHENS. $21

an connection, and obtained permission to enrol herself as an ally
of Athens.! This was an acquisition of signal value to the Athe-
nians, since it both opened to them the whole range of terri-
tory across the outer isthmus of Corinth to the interior of the
Krissean gulf, on which the Megarian port of Pegx was situated,
and placed them in possession of the passes of Mount Geraneia,
so that they could arrest the march of a Peloponessian army
over the isthmus, and protect Attica from invasion. It was, more-
over, of great importance in its effects on Grecian politics: for
it was counted as a wrong by Lacedemon, gave deadly offence
to the Corinthians, and lighted up the flames of war between
them and Athens; their allies, the Epidaurians and A¢ginetans,
taking their part. Though Athens had not yet been guilty of
unjust encroachment against any Peloponnesian state, her ambi-
tion and energy had inspired universal awe; while the maritime
states in the neighborhood, such as Corinth, Epidaurus, and A¢gina,
saw these terror-striking qualities threatening them at their own
doors, through her alliance with Argos and Megara. Moreover,
it is probable that the ancient feud between the Athenians and
/Eginetans, though dormant since a little before the Persian in-
vasion, had never been appeased or forgotten: so that the
/Eginetans, dwelling within sight of Peirzus, were at once best
able to appreciate, and most likely to dread, the enormous mari-
time power now possessed by Athens. Periklés was wont to call
/Egina the eyesore of Peirteus :? but we may be very sure that
Peireus, grown into a vast fortified port, within the existing
generation, was in a much stronger degree the eyesore of Avgina.

The Athenians were at this time actively engaged in prose-
cuting the war against Persia, having a fleet of no less than two
hundred sail, equipped by or from the confederacy collectively,
now serving in Cyprus and on the Phenician coast. Moreover,
the revolt of the Egyptians under Inaros, about 460 B.c., opened
to them new means of action against the Great King; and their
fleet, by invitation of the revolters, sailed up the Nile to Mem-
phis, where there seemed at first a good prospect of throwing off
the Persian deminion. ‘Yet in spite of so great an abstraction
trom their disposable force, their military operations near home

! Thucyd. i, 103. * Plutarch, Periklés, c. 8.

VOL. V. 14* 2loc.

$22 HISTORY OF GREECE.

were conducted with unabated vigor: and the inscription which
remains, — a commemoration of their ‘citizens of the Erechtheid
tribe, who were slain in one and the same year, in Cyprus, Egypt,
Phenicia, the Halieis, A®gina, and Megara, — brings forcibly
before us that energy which astonished and even alarmed their
eontemporaries. Their first proceedings at Megara were of a
sature altogether novel, in the existing condition of Greece. It
was necessary for the Athenians to protect their new ally against
the superiority of Peloponnesian land-force, and to insure a constant
communication with it by sea; but the city, like most of the ancient
Hellenic towns, was situated on a hill at some distance from the
sea, separated from its port Nisza by a space of nearly one mile.
One of the earliest proceedings of the Athenians was to build
two lines of wall, near and parallel to each other, connecting the
city with Nisa, so that the two thus formed one continuous for-
tress, wherein a standing Athenian garrison was maintained, with
the constant means of succor from Athens in case of need. These
“long walls,” though afterwards copied in other places, and on a
larger scale, were at that juncture an ingenious inventign, for the
purpose of extending the maritime arm of Athens to an inland
city.

The first operations of Corinth, however, were not directed
against Megara. The Athenians having undertaken a landing
in the territory of the Halieis, the population of the southern
Argolic peninsula, bordering on Troezen and Hermioné, were
defeated on land by the Corinthian and Epidaurian forces: pos-
sibly it may have been in this expedition that they acquired
possession of Troezen; which we find afterwards in their depen-
dence, without knowing when it became so. But in a sea-fight
which took place off the island of Kekryphaleia, between A¢gina
and the Argolic peninsula, the Athenians gained the victory.
After this victory and defeat, — neither of them apparently very
decisive, — the Aeginetans began to take a more energetic part
in the war, and brought out their full naval force, together with
that of their allies, — Corinthians, Epidaurians, and other Pel-
oponnesians: while Athens equipped a fleet of corresponding
magnitude, summoning her allies also; though we do not know
the actual numbers on either side. In the great naval battle
which ensued off the -island of ®gina, the superiority of the

rd

* GRECIAN CONFEDERACY UNDER ATHENS. 323

new nautical tactics, acquired by twentv years’ practice of the
Athenians since the Persian war, — over the old Hellenic ships
and seamen, as shown in those states where, at the time of the
battle of Marathon, the maritime strength of Greece had resided,
— was demonstrated by a victory most complete and decisive.
The Peloponnesian and Dorian seamen had as yet had no expe-
rience of the improved seacraft of Athens, and when we find
how much they were disconcerted with it, even twenty-eight years
afterwards, at the beginning of the Peloponnesian war, we shall
not wonder at its destructive effect upon them in this early battle.
The maritime power of A¢gina was irrecoverably ruined: the
Athenians captured seventy ships of war, landed « large force
upon the island, and commenced the siege of the city by land as
well as by sea.!

If the Lacedemonians had not been occupied at home by the
blockade of Ithémé, they would have been probably induced to
invade Attica as adiversion to the AXginetans ; especially as the
Yersian Megabazus came to Sparta at this time on the part of
Artaxerxes to prevail upon them to do so, in order that the
Athenians might be constrained to retire from Egypt: this Per-
sian brought with him a large sum of money, but was neverthe-
less obliged to return without effecting his mission.2 The Co-
rinthians and Epidaurians, however, while they carried to Atgina
a reinforcement of three hundred hoplites, did their best to aid
her farther by an attack upon Megara; which place, it was
supposed, the Athenians could not possibly relieve without with-
drawing their forces from A®gina, inasmuch as so many of their
men were at the same time serving in Egypt. But the Athenians
showed themselves equal to all these three exigencies at one and
the same time, — to the great disappointment of their enemies.
Myrénidés marched from Athens to Megafa at the head of the
citizens in the two extremes of military age, old and young;
these being the only troops at home. He fought the Corinthians
near the town, gaining a slight, but debatable advantage, which
he commemorated by a trophy, as soon as the Corinthians had
returned home. But the latter when they arrived at home, were

' Thucyd. i, 105; Lysias, Orat. Funebr. c. 10. Diodor. xi, 78-
* Thucyd. i, 109. ;

334 HISTORY OF GREECE.

so much reproached by their own old citizens, for not having van
quished the refuse of the Athenian military force,! that they
returned back at the end of twelve days and erected a trophy on
their side, laying claim to a victory in the past battle. The
Athenians, marching out of Megara, attacked them a second
time, and gained on this occasion a decisive victory. The de-
feated Corinthians were still more unfortunate in their retreat;
for a body of them, missing their road, became entangled in a
space of private ‘ground, inclosed on every side by a deep ditch,
and having only one narrow entrance. Myrdnidés, detecting
this fatal mistake, planted his hoplites at the entrance to prevent
their escape, and then surrounded the enclosure with his light-
armed troops, who, with their missile weapons, slew all the Cor-
inthian hoplites, without possibility either of flight or resistance.
The bulk of the Corinthian army effected. their retreat, but
the destruction of this detachment was a sad blow to the city.®
Splendid as the success of the Athenians had been during this
year, both on land and at sea, it was easy for them to foresee
that the power of their enemies would presently be augmented
by the Lacedsmonians taking the field. Partly on this account,
— partly also from the more energetic phase of democracy, and
the long-sighted views of Periklés, which were now becoming
ascendent in the city,—the Athenians began the stupendous
undertaking of connecting Athens with the sea by means of long
walls. The idea of this measure had doubtless been first sug-
gested by the recent erection of long walls, though for so much
smaller a distance, between Megara and Nisza: for without such
an intermediate stepping-stone, the idea of a wall forty stadia
long (equal to four and a half miles) to join Athens with Peirus,
and another wall of thirty-five stadia (equal to about four miles) ,
to join it with Phalérum, would have appeared extravagant even

1 Lysias, Orat. Funebr.c. 10. évixwv paxduevo: Gracav tiv divauey ry
Exeivwy Tog 70n ametpnxoct Kal Toic obxw duvapévote, etc.

The incident mentioned by Thucydidés about the Corinthians, that the
old men of their own city were so indignant against them on their return,
is highly characteristic of Grecian manners, — xaxcCouevor bd Tov by ry
noAet tpecBuTépwy, etc.

® Thucyd. i, 106. aoc péya robro KopivSiow éyévero. Compare Diodor.
xi, 78, 79, — whose chronology, however, is very misleading.

GRECIAN CONFEDERACY UNDER ATHENS. 325

to the sanguine temper of Athenians,— as it certainly would
have seemed a few years earlier to Themistoklés himself. Com-
ing as an immediate sequel of great recent victories, and while
7Egina, the great Dorian nayal power, was prostrate and under
blockade, it excited the utmost alarm among the Peloponnesiana,
— being regarded as the second great stride,' at once conspicuous
and of lasting effect, in Athenian ambition, next to the fortifica-
tion of Peireus. But besides this feeling in the bosom of
enemies, the measure was also interwoven with the formidable
contention of political parties then going on at Athens. Kimon
had been recently ostracized; and the democratical movement
pressed by Periklés and Ephialtés — of which more presently —
was in its full tide of success, yet not without a violent and un
principled opposition on the part of those who supported the
existing constitution. . Now, the long walls formed a part of the
foreign policy of Periklés, continuing on a gigantic scale the
plans of Themistoklés when he first schemed the Peireus. They
were framed to render Athens capable of carrying on war against
any superiority of landed attack, and of bidding defiance to the
united force of Peloponnesus. But though thus calculated for
- contingencies which a long-sighted man might see gathering in
the distance, the new walls were, almost on the same grounds,
obnoxious to a considerable number of Athenians: to the party
recently headed by Kimon, who were attached to the Lacedemo-
~nian connection, and desired above all things to maintain peace
at home, reserving the energies of the state for anti-Persian
enterprise : to many landed proprietors in Attica, whom they
seemed to threaten with approaching invasion and destruction of -
their territorial possessions : to the rich men and aristocrats of
Athens, averse toa still closer contact and amalgamation with
the maritime multitude in Peirzus: lastly, perhaps, to a certain
vein of old Attic feeling, which might look upon the junction of
Athens with the separate demes of Peireus and Phalérum as
effacing the special associations connected with the holy rock of

1 Kai ravde tyueic abriot, 76 re mpGrov tacavres avrods Thy woAtpy pera
Ta Mydtxa xparivat, kal torepov ra waxpa orhaat Teixn, —is the language
addressed by the Corinthians to the Spartans, in reference to Athens, a
little before the Peloponnesian war (Thucyd. i, 69).

326 HISTORY OF GREECE.

Athéné. When, to all these grounds of opposition, we add, the
expense and trouble of the undertaking itself, the interference
with private property, the peculiar violence of party which hap-
pened then to be raging, and the absence of a large proportion
of military citizens in Egypt, — we shall hardly be surprised to
find that the projected long walls brought on a risk of the moat
serious character both for Athens and her democracy. If any
farther proof were wanting of the vast importance of these long
walls, in the eyes both of friends and of enemies, we might find
it in the fact, that their destruction was the prominent mark of
Athenian humiliation after the battle of A°gos Potamos, and their
restoration the immediate boon of Pharnabazus and Konon after
the victory of Knidus.

Under the influence of the alarm now spread by the proceed-
ings of Athens, the Lacedsmonians were prevailed upon to
undertake an expedition out of Peloponnesus, although the Helots
in Ithémé were not yet reduced to surrender. Their force con-
sisted of fifteen hundred troops of their own, and ten thousand
of their various allies, under the regent Nikomédés. The osten-
sible motive, or the pretence, for this march, was the protection
of thé little territory of Doris against the Phocians, who had
recently invaded it and taken one of its three towns. The mere
approach of so large a force immediately compelled the Phocians
to relinquish their conquest, but it was soon seen that this was only
a small part of the objects of Sparta, and that her main purposes,
under instigation of the Corinthians, were directed against the
agerandizement of Athens. It could not escape the penetration
of Corinth, that the Athenians might presently either enlist or -
constrain the towns of Bootia into their alliance, as:‘they had
recently acquired Megara, in addition to their previous ally,
Platea: for the Boeotian federation was at this time much dis-
organized, and Thebes, its chief, had never recovered her ascen-
dency since the discredit of her support lent to the Persian
invasion. To strengthen Thebes, and to render her ascendency
_ effective over the Bozotian cities, was the best way of providing
a neighbor at once powerful and hostile to the Athenians, so as to
prevent their farther aggrandizement by land: it was the same
policy as Epaminondas pursued eighty years afterwards in organ-
izing Arcadia and Messené against Sparta. Accordingly, the

GRECIAN CONFEDERACY UNDER ATHENS, $27

Peloponnesian force was now employed partly in enlarging and
strengthening the fortifications of Thebes herself, partly in con-
straining the other Boeotian cities into effective obedience to her
.Supremacy : probably by placing their governments in the hands
of citizens of known oligarchical politics,! and perhaps banishing
suspected opponents. To this scheme the Thebans lent them-
selves with earnestness; promising to keep down for the future
their border neighbors, so as to spare the necessity of armies
coming from Sparta.2

But there was also a farther design, yet more important, in
contemplation by the Spartans and Corinthians. The oligarchical
opposition at Athens were so bitterly hostile to the Long Walls,
to Periklés, and to the democratical movement, that several of
them opened asecret negotiation with the Peloponnesian leaders,
inviting them into Attica, and entreating their aid in an internal
rising for the purpose not only of putting a stop to the Long
_ Walls, but also of subverting the democracy. And the Pelopon-
nesian army, while prosecuting its operations in Bosotia, waited .
in hopes of seeing the Athenian malcontents in arms, encamping
at Tanagra, on the very borders of Attica, for the purpose of im-
mediate cooperation with them. ‘The juncture was undoubtedly
one of much hazard for Athens, especially as the ostracized Ki-
mon and his remaining friends in the city were suspected of being
implicated in the conspiracy. But the Athenian leaders, awaré
of the Lacedzmonian operations in Boeotia, knew also what was
meant by the presence of the army on their immediate borders,
and took decisive measures to avert the danger. Having obtained
a reinforcement of one thousand Argeians and some ‘Thessalian
horse, they marched out to Tanagra, with the full Athenian force
then at home; which must, of course, have consisted chiefly of the
old and the young, the same who had fought under Myrénidés at
Megara; for the blockade of A®gina was still going on. Nor

1 Diodor. xii, 81; Justin, iii, 6. Tae piv Tov OnBaiurv rédews peilova rov
nepiBodov xarsoxevacay, Tag 0 dy Bowwrig wodetg fvayxacay drorarrecdat
roi¢ On@aiorg. ;

®Diodor.l.c. It must probably be to the internal affairs of Beotia,
somewhere about this time, full as they were of internal dissension, that
the dictum and simile of Periklés alludes, — which Aristotle notices in his
Rhetoric. iii, 4,2. -

828 HISTORY OF GREECE.

was it possible for the Lacedemonian army to return into Pel-
oponnesus without fighting; for the Athenians, masters of the
Megarid, were in possession of the difficult highlands of Gera-
neia, the road of march along the isthmus; while the Athenian
fleet, by means of the harbor of Pegs, was prepared to intercept
them, if they tried to come by sea across the Krissean gulf, by
which way it would appear that they had come out. Near Tan-
agra, a bloody battle took place between the two armies, wherein
the Lacedemonians were victorious, chiefly from the desertion of
the Thessalian horse, who passed over to them in the very heat
of the engagement.! But though the advantage was on their
side, it was not sufficiently decisive to favor the contemplated
rising in Attica: nor did the Peloponnesians gain anything by it,
except an undisturbed retreat over the highlands of Geraneia,
after having partially ravaged the Megarid.

Though the battle of Tanagra was a defeat, yet there were
circumstances connected with it which rendered its effects highly
beneficial to Athens. The ostracized Kimon presented him-
self on the field as soon as the army had passed over the
boundaries of Attica, requesting to be allowed to occupy his
station as an hoplite and to fight in the ranks of his tribe, — the
Cinéis. But such was the belief, entertained by the members
of the senate and by his political enemies present, that he was an
accomplice in the conspiracy known to be on foot, that permission
was refused and he was forced to retire. In departing, he con-
jured his personal friends, Euthippus, of the deme Anaphlystus,
and others, to behave in such a manner as might wipe away the
stain resting upon his fidelity, and in part also upon theirs. His
friends retained his panoply, and assigned to it the station in the
ranks which he would himself have occupied: they then entered
the engagement with desperate resolution, and one hundred of

_them fell side by side in their ranks. Periklés, on his part, who
, Was present among the hoplites of his own tribe, the Akamantis,
aware of this application and repulse of Kimon; thought it in-
cumbent upon him to display not merely his ordinary personal
courage, but an unusual recklessness of life and safety, though
it happened that he escaped unwounded. All these incidents
srought about a generous sympathy and spirit of compromise

1 Thucyd. i, 107.

GRECIAN CONFEDERACY UNDER ATHENS. 829

among the contending parties at Athens, while the unshaken
patriotism of Kimon and his friends discountenanced and dis-
armed those conspirators who had entered into correspondencé
with the enemy, at the same time that it roused a repentant ad-
miration towards the ostracized leader himself. Such was the
happy working of this new sentiment that a decree was shortly
proposed and carried, — proposed too, by Periklés himself, — to
abridge the ten years of Kimon’s ostracism, and permit his im-
mediate return.! We may recollect that, under circumstances
partly analogous, Themistoklés had himself proposed the restor-
ation of his rival Aristeidés from ostracism, a little before the
battle of Salamis :2 and in both cases, the suspension of enmity
between the two leaders was partly the sign, partly also the aux-
iliary cause, of reconciliation and renewed fraternity among the
general body of citizens. It was a moment analogous to that sal-
utary impulse of compromise, and harmony of parties, which
followed the extinction of the oligarchy of Four Hundred, forty-
six years afterwards, and on which Thucydidés dwells emphati-
cally as the salvation of Athens in her distress, — a moment rare
in free communities generally, not less than among the jealous
competitors for political ascendency at Athens.3

1 Plutarch, Kimon, c. 14; Periklés, c.10. Plutarch represents the Athe-
nians as having recalled Kimon from fear of the Lacedssmonians who had
just beaten them at Tanagra, and for the purpose of procuring peace. He
adds that Kimon obtained peace for them forthwith. Both these assertions
are incorrect. The extraordinary successes in Boeotia, which followed so
quickly after the defeat at Tanagra, show that the Athenians were under
no impressions of fear at that juncture, and that the recall of Kimon pro-
ceeded from quite different feelings. Moreover, the peace with Sparta was
not made till some years afterwards.

2 Plutarch, Themistoklés, c. 10.

2 Plutarch, Kimon, ec. 17; Periklés,c.10; Thucyd. viii, 97. Plutarch
observes, respecting this reconciliation of parties after the battle of Tana-
gra, after having mentioned that Periklés himself proposed the restoration
of Kimon —

Oirw rore woAitinxal piv hody al deagopal, pérpror 62 of Guyot Kal mpdg 70
nowvdy ebavaxAnros cbudepor, 7 62 dtAorivia TavTuY Emtxparotea TOY Tadd»
roic Tig watpidog breyapet Kaipotc.

_ Which remarks are very analogous to those of Thucydidés, in recounting
the memorable proceedings of the year 411 B.c., after the deposition of the
oligarchy of Four Hundred (Thucyd. viii, 97).

830 HISTORY OF GREECE.

So powerful was this burst of fresh patriotism and unanimity
after the battle of ‘T'anagra, which produced the recall of Kimon,

Kai oby fxtora 6) tov mpGrov ypdvov éni ye Euod 'AYqvaiot gaivovrat ed
wodtreboavrec* petpia yap fj re é¢ rove bAiyoug Kaz rode woAAode Fbyxpacn
éyévero; wal ix novnpGy Tov xpayparwv yevouévav TovTO TpOTov avizveyxe
tiv woAtv. I may remark that the explanatory note of Dr. Arnold on this
passage is less instructive than his notes usually are, and even involves, in
my judgment, an erroneous supposition as to the meaning. Dr. Arnold
says: “It appears that the constitution as now fixed, was at first, in the
opinion of Thucydidés, the best that Athens had ever enjoyed within his
memory ; that is, thé best since the complete ascendency of the democracy
effected under Periklés. But how long a period is meant to be included by
the words rdv zpdrov xpévov, and when, and how, did the implied change
take place? Tov rparov ypovoy can hardly apply to the whole remaining
term of the war, as if this improved constitution had been first subverted by
the triumph of the oligarchy under the Thirty, and then superseded by the
restoration of the old democracy after their overthrow. Yet Xenophon
mentions no intermediate change in the government between the beginning
of his history and the end of the war,” etc.

Now I do not think that Dr. Arnold rightly interprets rdv mpdrov ypavov.
The phrase appears to me equivalent to rovrov rdv ypdovov mpdrov: the
words Tov mp@rov ypovov, apply the comparison altogether to the period pre-
ceding this event here described, and not to the period following it. “ And it
was during this period first, in my time at least, that the Athenians most of
all behaved like good citizens: for the Many and the Few met each other
in a spirit of moderation, and this first brought up the city from: its deep
existing distress.” No such comparison is intended as Dr. Arnold supposes,
between the first moments after this juncture, and the subsequent changes :
the comparison is between the political temper of the Athenians at this
juncture, and their usual temper as far back as Thucydidés could recollect.

Next, the words et mod:tetcavtec are understood by Dr. Arnold in a
sense too special and limited, —as denoting merely the new constitution,
or positive organic enactments, which the Athenians now introduced. But
it appears to me that the words are of wider import: meaning the gen-
eral temper of political parties, both reciprocally towards each other and
towards the commonwealth: their inclination to relinquish antipathies,
to accommodate points of difference, and to codperate with each other
heartily against the enemy, suspending those Idfag ¢:Aortuiac, idiag draBodrag
wept Tie Tod Onuov xpooraciag (ii, 65) noticed as having been so mischiev-
ous before. Of course, any constitutional arrangements introduced at such
& period would partake of the moderate and harmonions spirit then preva-
lent, and would therefore form a part of what is commended by Thucy-
didés: but his commendation is not confined to them specially. Compare
the phrase ii. 38. éAevPépwe 62 Ta Te mpd¢ TA KoLvVdY ToALTEdvoLEY, etc.

GRECIAN CONFEDERACY UNDER ATHENS. 88)

and appears to have overlaid the preéxisting conspiracy, that the
Athenians were quickly in a condition to wipe off the stain of
their defeat. It was on the sixty-second day after the battle that
they undertook an aggressive march under Myrdnidés into Beo-
tia: the extreme precision of this date,— being the single case
throughout the summary of events between the Persian and
Peloponnesian wars, wherein Thucydidés is thus precise, marks
how strong an impression it made upon the memory of the
Athenians. Af the battle of Ginophyta, engaged against the
aggregate Theban and Beeotian forces, —or, if Diodorus is to be
trusted, in two battles, of which that of Cinophyta was the last,
Myrénides was completely victorious. The Athenians became
masters of Thebes as well as of the remaining Beeotian towns ;
reversing all the arrangements recently made by Sparta, — estab-
lishing democratical governments, — and forcing the aristocratical
leaders, favorable to Theban ascendency and . Lacedzemonian
connection, to become exiles. Nor was it only Bootia which the
Athenians thus acquired: Phocis and Lokris were both succes-
sively added to the list of their dependent allies, — the former
being in the main friendly to Athens and not disinclined to the
change, while the latter were so decidedly hostile that one hun-
dred of their chiefs were detained and sent ‘o Athens as host-
ages. The Athenians thus extended their influence, — maintained
through internal party-management, backed by the dread of in-
terference from without in case of need,—from the borders of
the Corinthian territory, including both Megara and Pégz, to
the strait of Thermopyle.!

These important acquisitions were soon crowned by the com-
pletion of the Long Walls and the conquest of A‘gina. That
island, doubtless starved out by its protracted blockade, was
forced to capitulate on condition of destroying its fortifications,
surrendering all its ships of war, and submitting to annual tri- ,
bute as a dependent ally of Athens. The reduction of this once
powerful maritime city, marked Athens as mistress of the sea on
the Pelopontiesian coast not less than on the Augean. Her ad-
miral Tolmidés displayed her strength by sailing round Pelopon-
nesus, and even by the insult of burning the Lacedzemonian ports

1 Thucyd. i, 108; Diodor. xi,.81, 82.

882 ; HISTOBY OF GREECE.

of Methéné and of Gythium.. He took Chalkis, a possession of
the Corinthians, and Naupaktus belonging to the Ozolian Lo-
krians, near the mouth of the Corinthian gulf, — disembarked
troops near Sikyon with some advantage in a battle against op-~
ponents from that town,— and either gained or forced imto the
Athenian alliance not only Zakynthus and Kephallénia, but also
some of the towns of Achaia; for we afterwards find these latter
attached to Athens without knowing when the connection began.!

During the ensuing year the Athenians reneffed their attack
upon Sikyon, with a force of one thousand hoplites under Peri-
klés himself, sailing from the Megarian harbor of Pége in the
Krissean gulf. This eminent man, however, gained no greater
advantage than Tolmidés, — defeating the Sikyonian forces in
the field and driving them within their walls: he afterwards made
an expedition into Akarnania, taking the Achzan allies in addi-
tion to his own forces, but miscarried in his attack on Céniadse and
accomplished nothing. Nor were the Athenians more successful
in a march undertaken this same year against Thessaly, for the
purpose of restoring Orestes, one of the exiled princes or nobles
of Pharsalus. Though they took with them an imposing force,
igcluding their Boeotian and Phocian allies, the powerful Thes-
salian cavalry forced them to keep in a compact body and con-
fined them to the ground actually occupied’ by their hoplites;
while all their attempts against the city failed, and their hopes
of internal rising were disappointed.2 .

Had the Athenians succeeded in Thessaly, they would have
acquired to their alliance nearly the whole of extra-Peloponne-
sian Greece: but even without Thessaly their power was pro-
digious, and had now attained a maximum height, from which it
never varied except to decline. As a counterbalancing loss
against 80 many successes, we have to reckon their ruinous defeat
in Egypt, after a war of six years against the Persians (B.c. 460
—455). At first, they had gained brilliant advantages, in con-
junction with the insurgent prince Inarés; expelling the Per-
sians from all Memphis except the strongest part, called the
White Fortress: and such was the alarm of the Persian king,

' Thucyd. i, 108-115; Diodor. xi, 84.
* Thucyd. i, 111; Diodor. xi, 85.

GRECIAN CONFEDERACY UNDER ATHENS. 388

Artaxerxes, at the presence of the Athenians in Egypt, that he
sent Megabazus with a large sum of money to Sparta, in order to
- induce the Lacedemonians to invade Attica. This envoy, how-
ever, failed, and an augmented Persian force being sent to Egypt
under Megabyzus, son of Zopyrus,! drove the Athenians and their
allies, after -an obstinate struggle, out of Memphis into the island
of the Nile called Prosépitis. Here they were blocked up
for eighteen months, until at length Megabyzus turned the arm
of the river, laid the channel dry, and stormed the island by
land. A very few Athenians escaped by land to Kyréné: the
rest were either slain or made captive, and Inarés himself was
crucified. And the calamity of Athens was farther aggravated
by the arrival of fifty fresh Athenian ships, which, coming after
the defeat, but without being aware of it, sailed into the Mende-
sian branch of the Nile, and thus fell unawares into the power of
the Persians and Phenicians; very few either of the ships or
men escaping. The whole of Egypt became again subject to the
Persians, except Amyrtzeus, who contrived, by retiring into the
inaccessible fens, still to maintain his independence. One of the
largest armaments ever sent forth by Athens and her confederacy
was thus utterly ruined.?

It-was about the time of the destruction of the Athenian army
in Egypt, and of the circumnavigation of Peloponnesus by Tol-
tidés, that the internal war, carried on by the Lacedsmonians,
against the Helots or Messenians at Ithémé, ended. These be-
sieged men, no longer able to stand out against a protracted
blockade, were forced to abandon this last fortress of ancient
Messenian independence, stipulating for a safe retreat from Pel-
oponnesus with their wives and families, with the proviso, that if
any one of them ever returned to Peloponnesus, he should
become the slave of the first person who seized him. They were
established by Tolmidés at Naupaktus, which had recently been

1 Herodot. iii, 160. '
2 Thucyd. i, 104, 109, 110; Diodor. xi, 77; xii, 3. The story of Diodo-
cus, in the first of these two passages, — that most of the Athenian forces
were allowed to come back under a favorable capitulation granted by the
Persian generals, —is contradicted by the total ruin which he himself
states to have befallen them in the latter passages, as well as by Thacydidés.

334 HISTORY OF GREECE.

taken by the Athenians from the -Ozolian Lokrians,\— waere
they will be found rendering good service to Athens in the fol-
lowing wars.

After the victory of Tanagra, the Laseaeusiinas made ne
farther expeditions out of Peloponnesus for several succeeding
years, not even to prevent Boeotia and Phocis from being absorbed
into the Athenian alliance. The reason of this remissness lay,
partly, in their general character; partly, in the continuance of
the siege of Ithémé, which occupied them at home; but still
more, perhaps, in the fact that the Athenians, masters of the
Megarid, were in occupation of the road over the highlands of
Geraneia, and could therefore obstruct the march of any army
out from Peloponnesus. Even after the surrender of Ithémé,
the Lacedzmonians remained inactive for three years, after which
time a formal truce was concluded with Athens by the Pelopon-
nesians generally, for five years longer.2 This truce was con-
cluded in a great degree through the influence of Kimon,3 who
was eager to resume effective operations against the Persians ;
while it was not less suitable to the political interests of Periklés

1 Thucyd. i, 103; Diodor. xi, 84. * Thucyd i, 112.

* Theopompus, Fragm. 92, ed. Didot; Plutarch, Kimon, c. 18; Diodor.
xi, 86.

It is to be presumed that this is the peace which schines (De Fals
Legat. c. 54, p. 300) and Andokides or the Psendo-Andokides (De Pacc.
c. 1), state to have been made by Miltiades, son of Kimon, proxenus of
the Lacedsemonians; assuming that Miltiades son of Kimon is put by
them, through lapse of memory, for Kimon son of Miltiades. But the pas-
sages of these orators involve so much both of historical and chronological
inaccuracy, that it is unsafe to cite them, and impossible to amend them
except by conjecture. Mr. Fynes Clinton (Fasti Hellen. Appendix, 8, p.
257) has pointed out some of these inaccuracies; and there are others be-
sides, not less grave, especially in the oration ascribed to Andokides. It is
remarkable that both of them séem to recognize only two long walls, the’
northern and the southern wall; whereas, in the time of Thucydidés, there
were three long walls: the two near and parallel, connecting Athens with
Peirseus, and a third connecting it with Phalérum. This last was never re-
newed, after all of them had been partially destroyed at the disastrous close
of the Peloponnesian war: and it appears to have passed out of the recdl-
lection of AXschines, who speaks of the two walls as they existed in his
time. I concur with the various critics who pronounce the oration ascribed
to Andokides to be spurious. "

~~

GRECIAN CONFEDERACY UNDER ATHENS. 838E

that his most distinguished rival should be absent on foreign ser-
vice,' so as not to interfere with his influence at home. Accord-
‘ingly, Kimon equipped a fleet of two hundred triremes, from
Athens and her confederates, and set sail for Cyprus, from
whence he despatched sixty ships to Egypt, at the request of the
insurgent prince Amyrteus, who was still maintaining himself
against the Persians amidst the fens, — while with the remaining
armament he laid siege to Kitium. In the prosecution of this
siege, he died, either of disease or of a wound. The armament,
under his suceessor, Anaxikrates, became so embarrassed for
want of previsions that they abandoned the undertaking alto-
gether, and went to fight the Phenician and Kilikian fleet near
Salamis, in Cyprus. They were here victorious, first on sea, and
afterwards oh land, though probably not on the same day, as at
the Eurymedon; after which they returned home, followed by —
the sixty ships which had gone to Egypt for the purpose of aid-
ing Amyrtzus.?

From this time forward no farther operations were undertaken
by Athens, and her confederacy against the Persians. And it
appears that a convention was concluded between them, whereby
the Great King on his part promised two things: To leave free,
undisturbed, and untaxed, the Asiatic maritime Greeks, not
sending troops within a given distance of the coast: to refrain
from sending any ships of war either westward of Phasélis
(others place the boundary at the Chelidonean islands, rather more
to the westward) or within the Kyanean rocks at the confluence

1 Plutarch, Periklés, c. 10, and Reipublic. Gerend. Preecep. p. 812.

An understanding to this effect between the two rivals is so natural, that
we need not resort to the supposition of a secret agreement concluded be-
tween them through the mediation of Elpiniké, sister of Kimon, which
Plutarch had read in some authors. The charms as well as the intrigues
of Elpiniké appear to have figured conspicuously in the memoirs of Athe-
nian biographers: they were employed by one party as a means of calum-
niating Kimon, by the other for discrediting Periklés.

* Thucyd.’i, 112; Diodorus, xii, 13. Diodorus mentions the name of the
general Anaxikrates. He affirms farther that Kimon lived not only to
take Kitium and Mallus, but also to gain these two victories. But the au-
thority of Thucydidés, superior on every ground to Diodorus, is more par-
ticularly superior as to the death of Kimon, with whom he was connected
by relationship.

836 HISTORY OF GREECE.

of the Thracian Bosphorus with the Euxine. On their side, the
Athenians agreed to leave him in undisturbed possession of Cy-
prus and Egypt. ‘Kallias, an Athenian of distinguished family,
with some others of his countrymen, went up to Susa to negoti-
ate this convention ; and certain envoys from Argos, then in alli-
ance with Athens, took the. opportunity of going thither at the
same time, to renew the friendly understanding which their city
had established with Xerxes at the period of his invasion of
Greece.!

As is generally the case with treaties after hostility,— this
convention did little more than recognize the existitg state of
things, without introducing any new advantage or disadvantage on
either side, or calling for any measures to be taken in conse-
quence of it. We may hence assign a reasonable ground for the
silence of Thucydidés, who does not even notice the convention
as having been made: we are to recollect always that in the in-
terval between the Persian and Peloponnesian wars, he does not
profess to do more than glance briefly at the main events. But
the boastful and inaccurate authors of the ensuing century, ora-
tors, rhetors, and historians, indulged in so much exaggeration
and untruth respecting this convention, both as to date and as
to details,— and extolled as something so glorious the fact of

1 Herodot. vii, 151; Diodor. xii, 3,4. Demosthenés (De Falsa Legat. c.
77, p. 428, R: compare De Rhodior. Livert. c. 138, p.199) speaks of this
peace as THv Und Tavtwrv VpvAdovsévyy elpyvyv. Compare Lykurgus, cont.
Leokrat. c. 17, p. 187; Isokratés, Panegyr. c. 33, 34, p. 244; Areopagitic. c.
37, pp. 150, 229; Panathenaic, c. 20, p. 360.

The loose language of these orators makes it impossible to determine
what was the precise limit in respect of vicinity to the coast. Isokratés is
careless enough to talk of the river Halys as the boundary; Demosthenés
states it as “a day’s course for a horse,”— which is probably larger than
the truth.

The two boundaries marked by sea, on the other hand, are both clear and
natural, in reference to the Athenian empire,— the Kyanean rocks at one
end, Phasélis, or the Chelidonian islands—there is no material distance
between these two last-mentioned places —on the other.

Dahlmann, at the end of his Dissertation on the reality of this Kimo-
nian peace, collects the various passages of authors wherein it is men-

tioned : among them are several out of the rhetor Aristeidés (Forschungen
pp. 140-1 48. .

GRECIAN CONFEDERACY UNDER ATHENS. 887

having imposed such hard conditions on the Great King, — that
they have raised a suspicion against themselves. Especially, they
have occasioned critics to ask the very natural question, how this
splendid achievement of Athens came to be left unnoticed by Thu-
cydidés ? Now the answer to such question is, that the treaty itself
was really of na great moment: it is the state of facts and relations
implied in the treaty, and existing substantially before it was con-
cluded, which constitutes the real glory of Athens. But to the
later writers, the treaty stood forth as the legible evidence of
facts which in their time were passed and gone; while Thucydi-
dés and his contemporaries, living in the actual fulness of the
Athenian empire, would certainly not appeal to the treaty as an
evidence, and might well pass it over, even as an event, when
studying to condense the narrative. Though Thucydidés has not
mentioned the treaty, he says nothing which dis proves its re-
ality, and much which is in full harmony with it. For we may
show, even from him: 1. That all open and direct hostilities
between Athens and Persia ceased, after the last-mentioned vjc-
tories of the Athenians near Cyprus: that this island is re-
nounced by Athens, not being included by Thucydidés in his cat-
alogue of Athenian allies prior to the Peloponnesian war;! and
that no farther aid is given by Athens to the revolted Amyrtzus,
in Egypt. 2. That down to the time when the Athenian power
was prostrated by the ruinous failure at Syracuse, no tribute was
collected by the Persian satraps in Asia Minor from the Greek
cities on the coast, nor were Persian ships of war allowed to ap-
pear in the waters of the Avgean,? nor was the Persian king

' Thucyd. ii, 14.

* Thucyd. viii, 5, 6, 56. As this is a point on which very erroneous rep-
vesentations have been made by some learned critics, especially by Dahl-
mann and Manso (see the treatises cited in the subsequent note, p. 457), I
transcribe the passage of Thucydidés. He is speaking of the winter of
B.C. 412, immediately succeeding the ruin of the Athenian army at Syra-
cuse, and after redoubled exertions had been making — even some months
before that ruin actually took place — to excite active hostile proceedings
against Athens from every quarter (Thucyd. vii, 25): it being seen that
there was a promising opportunity for striking a heavy blow at the Athenian
power. The satrap Tissaphernes encouraged the Chians and Erythreans
to revolt, sending an envoy along with them to Sparta with persuasions

VOL. ¥. ; 15 2

338 HISTORY OF GREECE.

-

rndmitted to be sovereign of the country down to the coast.
Granting, therefore, that we were even bound, from the silence of
te eae ee eee a mee, e a

end promises of aid, — émjyero xa: 6 Tiscadépvae tovc Medorovynaioue xal
incoxveiro Tpogyy mapéferv. “Yrd Baotaéwe yap vewort ériyxave wen-
paypuévog rode Ex ric Lavrov apyis popove, ov¢ dv’ "AYnvaiouc ard tov ‘EAAnvidwy
roAewy ob dvvayevoc mpaccro0ar ErugeiaAnoe. Totc re ody gopove uaAdov
evopuile xopteiodat, kaxoac Tove ’AUnvaiove, nai dua Baotrei Evupayouc Aaxe-
Satnoviovg rotgoetv, etc. In the next chapter, Thucydidés tells us that the
satrap Pharnabazus wanted to obtain Lacedzmonian aid in the same man-
ner as Tissaphernes, for Ais satrapy also, in order that he might detach the
(reek cities from Athens, and be able to levy the tribute upon them. Two
Greeks go to Sparta, sent by Pharnabazus, drwe vai¢ xouiceray é¢ rdv
"EAAgjorovtov, cai abrdg, el ddvvatro drep 6 Trocadépyne npobSupeiro, rac Te
ev rg éavrod dpyg méAe 'ASnvaiwy dmootncete did Tod¢g dépouc, Kat
ag’ éavrod Bacrrei rav Evpuaziav Trav Aaxedatpoviwy mojoete.

These passages, strange to say, are considered by Manso and Dahlmann
as showing that the Grecian cities on the Asiatic coast, though subject to
the Athenian empire, continued, nevertheless, to pay their tribute regularly
to Susa. To me, the passages appear to disprove this very supposition :
they show that it was essential for the satrap to detach these cities from the
Athenian empire, as a means of procuring tribute from them to Persia:
that the Athenian empire, while it lasted, prevented him from getting any
tribute from the cities subject to it. Manso and Dahlmann have over-
looked the important meaning of the adverb of time vewort —“ lately.”
By that word, Thucydidés expressly intimates that the court of Susa had
only recently demanded from Tissaphernes and Pharnabazus, tribute from
the maritime Greeks within their satrapies: and he implies that unéz re-
cenily no such demand had been made upon them. The court of Susa, ap-
prized, doubtless, by Grecian exiles and agents, of the embarrassments into
which Athens had fallen, conceived this a suitable moment for exacting
tributes ; to which, doubtless, it always considered itself entitled, though the
power of Athens had compelled it to forego them. Accordingly, the de-
mand was now for the first time sent down to Tissaphernes, and he “ became
a debtor for them” to the court (émw¢eiAnce), until he could collect them :
which he could not at first do, even then, embarrassed as Athens was, —
and which, @ fortiori, he could not have done before, when Athens was in
full power. :

We learn from these passages two valuable facts. 1. That the maritime
Asiatic cities belonging to the Athenian empire paid no tribute to Susa, °
from the date of the full organization of the Athenian confederacy down
to a period after the Athenian defeat in Sicily. 2. That, nevertheless, these
cities always continued, throughout this period, to stand rated in the Per-
sian king’s books each for its appropriate tribute, — the court of Susa wait-
ing for a convenient moment to occur, when it should be able to enforce its
demands, from misfortune accruing to Athens.

GRECIAN CONFEDERACY UNDER ATHENS. 8389

Thucydidés, to infer that no treaty was concluded, we should still
be obliged also to infer, from his positive averments, that a state

This state of relations, between the Asiatic Greeks and the Persian court
under the Athenian empire, authenticated by Thucydidés, enables us to ex-
plain a passage of Herodotus, on which also both Manso and Dahlmann
havo dwelt (p. 94) with rather more apparent plausibility, as proving their
view of' the case. Herodotus, after describing the rearrangement and
remeasurement of the territories of the Ionic cities by the satrap Artapher-
nes (about 493 B.c., after the suppression of the Ionic revolt), proceeds to
state that he assessed the tribute of each with reference to this new meas-
urement, and that the assessment remained unchanged until his own
(Herodotus’s) time, — xa? rag xopag ogéwy petphoas Kata mapacayyag....
gopovc Erase éxacrotct, ol xara yopnv dtareAgover Eyovrec éx robrov row
xpovov aiet Erte xal bc tut, o¢ eraxSnoay 8 ’Apragéipveoce érayYncay de
oxeddv kata Ta atta Ta Kat mporepov eixov (vi, 42). Now Dahlmann and
-Manso contend that Herodotus here affirms the tribute of the Ionic cities
to Persia to have been continuously‘and regularly paid, down to his own
time. But in my judgment this is a mistake: Herodotus speaks, not about
the payment, but about the assessment: and these were two very different
things, as Thucydidés clearly intimates in the passage which I have cited
above. The assessment of all the Ionic cities in the Persian king's books
remained unaltered all through the Athenian empire; but the payment was
not enforced until immediately before 412 3.c., when the Athenians were
supposed to be too weak to hinder it. It is evident by the account of the
- general Persian revenues, throughout all the satrapies, which we find in the
third book of Herodotus, that he had access to official accounts of the Per-
sian finances, or at least to Greek secretaries who knew those accounts. He
would be told, that these assessments remained unchanged from the time of
Artaphernes downward: whether they were realized or not was another
question, which the “books” would probably not answer, and which he
might or might not know.

The passages above cited from Thucydidés appear to me to afford posi- —
tive proof that the Greek cities on the Asiatic coast — not those in the inte-
rior, a8 we may see by the case of Magnesia given to Themistoklés — paid
no tribute to Persia during the continuance of the Athenian empire. But
if there were no such positive proof, I should still maintain the same opin-
ion. For if these Greeks went on paying tribute, what is meant by the
phrases, of their having “revolted from Persia,” of their “having been
liberated from the king,” (of Grooravreg Baoidéwc “EAAnves— ol ard "Iwviac
kat ‘EAAnorévrov ién ddeornxéres amd Baoitéwe— Soar ard PBaotdéng
vewarl hAevdépwrvro, Thucyd. i, 18, 89, 95?)

So much respecting the payment of tribute. As to the other point, —
that between 477 and 412 B.c.,, no Persian ships were tolerated along the
coast of Ionia, which coast, though claimed by the Persian king, was not

’

$40 HISTORY OF GREECE.

of historical fact, such as the treaty acknowledged and prescribed,
became actually realized. But when we reflect farther, that
Herodotus ! certifies the visit of Kallias and other Athenian en-
_ voys to the court of Susa, we can assign no other explanation of
such visit so probable as the reality of this treaty: certainly, no
envoys would have gone thither during a state of recognized war ;
and though it may be advanced as possible that they may have
gone with the view to conclude a treaty, and yet not have succeed-
ed, —this would be straining the limits of possibility beyond
what is reasonable.?

recognized by the Greeks as belonging to him, — proof will be found in
Thucyd. viii, 56: compare Diodor. iv, 26.

1 Herodot. vii, 151. Diodoras also states that this peace was concluded
by Kallias the Athenian (xii, 4).

2 I conclude, on the whole, in favor of this treaty as an historical fact, —
though sensible that some of the arguments urged against it are not with-
out force. Mr. Mitford and Dr. Thirlwall (ch. xvii, p. 474), as well as
Manso and Dahimann, not to mention others, have impugned the reality of
the treaty: and the last-mentioned author, particularly, has examined the
case at length and set forth all the grounds of objection; urging, among
some which are really serious, others which appear to me weak and untena-
ble (Manso, Sparta, vol. iii, Beylage x, p. 471; Dahlmann, Forschungen
anf dem Gebiete der Geschichte, vol. i, Ueber den Kimonischen Frieden, pp.

1-148). Boéckh admits the treaty as an historical fact.

If we deny altogether the historical reality of the treaty, we must adopt
some such hypothesis as that of Dahlmann (p. 40): “The distinct men-
tion and averment of such a peace as having been formally concluded, ap-
pears to have first arisen among the schools of the rhetors at Athens, shortly
after the peace of Antalkidas, and as an oratorical antithesis to oppose to
that peace.”

To which we must add the supposition, that some persons must have
taken the trouble to cause this fabricated peace to be engraved on a pillar,
and placed, either in the Metréon or somewhere else in Athens, among the
records of Athenian glories. For that it was so engraved on a column is
certain (Theopompus ap. Harpokration. 'Arrixoicg ypauyact). The sus-
picion started by Theopompus (and founded on the fact that the peace was
engraved, not in ancient Attic, but in Ionic letters —the latter sort having
been only legalized in Athens after the archonship of Eukleides); that this
treaty was a subsequent invention and not an historical reality, does not
weigh with me very much. Assuming the peace to be real, it would natu-
rally be drawn up and engraved in the character habitually used among the
Ionic cities of Asia Minor, since they were the parties most specially inter-
ested in it: or it might even have been reéngraved, seeing that nearly a

GRECIAN CONFEDERACY UNDER ATHENS. $41

We may therefore believe in the reality of this treaty between
Athens and Persia, improperly called the Kimonian treaty : im-

century must have elapsed between the conclusion of the treaty and the
time when Theopompus saw the pillar. I confess that the hypothesis of
Dahlmann appears to me more improbable than the historical reality of
the treaty. I think it more likely that there was a treaty, and that the ora-
tors talked exaggerated and false matters respecting it,— rather than that
they fabricated the treaty from the beginning with a deliberate purpose,
and with the false name of an envoy conjoined.

Dahlmann exposes justly and forcibly — an easy task, indeed — the loose,
inconsistent, and vainglorious statements of the orators respecting this
treaty. The chronological error by which it was asserted to have been
made shortly after the victorvies of the Eurymedon — and was thus con-
nected with the name of Kimon — is one of the circumstances which have
most tended to discredit the attesting witnesses: but we must not forget
that Ephorus (assuming that Diodorus in this case copies Ephorus, which
is highly probable — xii, 8,4) did not fall into this mistake, but placed the
treaty in its right chronological place, after the Athenian expedition under
Kimon against Cyprus and Egypt in 450-449 s.c. Kimon died before the
great results of this expedition were consummated, as we know from Thu-
cydidés : on this point Diodorus speaks equivocally, but rather giving it to
be understood that Kimon lived to complete the whole, and then died of
sickness.

The absurd exaggeration of Isokratés, that the treaty bound the Persian
kings not to come westward of the river Halys, has also been very properly
censured. He makes this statement in two different orations (Areopagatic.
p. 150; Panathenaic. p. 462).

But though Dahlmann succeeds in discrediting the orators, he tries in
vain to show that the treaty is in itself improbable, or inconsistent with any
known historical facts. A large portion of his dissertation is employed in
this part of the case, and I think quite unsuccessfully. The fact that the
Persian satraps are seen at various periods after the treaty lending aid —
underhand, yet without taking much pains to disguise it — to Athenian re-
volted subjects, does not prove that no treaty had been concluded. These
satraps would, doubtless, be very glad to infringe the treaty, whenever they
thought they could do so with advantage: if any misfortune had happened
to Athens from the hands of the Peloponnesians,— for example, if the
Athenians had been unwise enough to march their aggregate land-force out
of the city to repel the invading Peloponnesians from Attica, snd had been
totally defeated, —the Persiang would, doubtless, have tried to regain Tonia
forthwith. So the Lacedemonians, at a time when they were actually in
alliance with Athens, listened to the persuasions of the revolted Thasians,
and promised secretly to invade Attica, in order to aid their revolt (Thucyd.
i, 103). Because a treaty is very imperfectly observed,— or rather because
the parties, without coming to open war, avail themselves of opportunities

842 HISTORY OF GREECE.

properly, since not only was it concluded after the death of
Kimon, but the Athenian victories by which it was immediately
brought on were gained after his death. Nay, more, —the
probability is, that if Kimon had lived, it would not have been
concluded at all; for his interest as well as his glory led him to
prosecute the. war against Persia, since he was no match for
his rival Periklés, either as a statesman or as an orator, and
could only maintain his popularity by the same means whereby he
had earned it, — victories and plunder at the cost of the Per-
sians. His death insured more complete ascendency to Periklés,
whose policy and character were of a cast altogether opposite :!
while even Thucydidés, son of Melésias, who succeeded Kimon,
his relation, as leader of the anti-Periklean party, was also a
man of the senate and public assembly rather than of campaigns
and conquests. Averse to distant enterprises and precarious
acquisitions, Periklés was only anxious to maintain unimpaired
the Hellenic ascendency of Athens, now at its very maximum : he
was well aware that the undivided force and vigilance of Athens
would not be too much for this object,—nor did they in fact
prove sufficient, as we shall presently see. With such disposi-
tions he was naturally glad to conclude a peace, which excluded
the Persians from all the coasts of Asia Minor, westward of the
Chelidoneans, as well as from all the waters of the A‘gean, under
the simple condition of renouncing on the part of Athens farther
ageressions against Cyprus, Phenicia, Kilikia, and Egypt. The
Great King on his side had had sufficient experience of Athenian
energy to fear the consequences of such aggressions, .if pros-
ecuted ; nor did he lose much by relinquishing formally a tribute
which at the time he could have little hope of realizing, and
which of course he intended to resume on the first favorable
opportunity. Weighing all these circumstances, we shall find
that the peace, improperly called Kimonian, results naturally
from the position and feelings of the contracting parties.

to evade it and encroach upon its prescriptions, — we are not entitled to
deny that it has ever been made (Dahlmann, p. 116).

It seems to me that the objections which have been taken by Dahlmann
and others against the historical reality of this treaty, tell for the most part
only against the exaggerated importance assigned to it by subsequent’
orators _ ? Plutarch, Periklés, c. 21-28,

GRECIAN CONFEDERACY UNDER ATHENS. 3438

Athens was now at peace both abroad and at home, under the
administration of Periklés, with a great empire, a great fleet,
and a great accumulated treasure. The common fund collected
from the contributions of the confederates, and originally depos-
ited at Delos, had before this time been transferred to the
acropolis at Athens. At what precise time this transfer took
place, we cannot state: nor are we enabled to assign the succes-
sive stages whereby the confederacy, chiefly with the freewill of
its own members, became transformed from a body of armed and
active warriors under the guidance of Athens, into disarmed and
passive tribute-payers, defended by the military force of Athens,
—from allies free, meeting at Delos, and self-determining, into
. Subjects isolated, sending their annual tribute, and awaiting
Athenian orders. But it would appear that the change had been-
made before this time: some of the more resolute of the allies
had tried to secede, but Athens had coerced them by force, and
reduced them to the condition of tribute-payers, without ships or
defence; and Chios, Lesbos, and Samos were now the only allies
free and armed on the original footing. Every successive change
of an armed ally into a tributary,—every subjugation of a
seceder, — tended of course to cut down the numbers, and en-
feeble the authority, of the Delian synod; and, what was still
Athens it altered the reciprocal relation and feelings both of
worse, and her allies,— exalting the former into something
like a despot, and degrading the latter into mere passive subjects.

Of course, the palpable manifestation of the change must have
been the transfer of the confederate fund from Delos to Athens.
The only circumstance which we know respecting this transfer
is, that it was proposed by the Samians,! — the second power in
the confederacy, inferior only to Athens, and least of all likely
to favor any job or sinister purpose of the Athenians. It is far-
‘ther said that, when the Samians proposed it, Aristeidés charac-
terized it_as a motion unjust, but useful: we may well doubt,
however, whether it was made during his lifetime. “When the
synod at Delos ceased to be so fully attended as to command
respect, — when war was lighted up, not only with Persia, but
with Egina and Peloponnesus, —the Samians might not unnat-

ae

ee eS oe:

- ' Plutarch, Aristeidés, c. 25.

844 HISTORY OF GREECE.

urally feel that the large accumulated fund, with its constant
annual accessions, would be safer at Athens than at Delos, which
latter island would require a permanent garrison and squadron
to insure it against attack. But whatever may have been the
grounds on which the Samians proceeded, when we find them
coming forward to propose the transfer, we may reasonably infer
that it was not displeasing, and did not appear ‘unjust, to the
larger members of the confederacy, — and that it was no high-
handed and arbitrary exercise of power, as it is often called, on
the part of Athens. ;

After the conclusion of the war with Avgina, and the conse-
quences of the battle of C&nophyta, the position of Athens
became altered more and more. She acquired a large catalogue
of new allies, partly tributary, like /Egina, — partly in the same
relation as Chios, Lesbos, and Samos; that is, obliged only to a
conformity of foreign policy and to military service. In this last
category were Megara, the Beeotian cities, the Phocians, Lokrians,
etc. All these, though allies of Athens, were strangers to Delos
and the confederacy against Persia; and accordingly, that con-
federacy passed insensibly into a matter of history, giving place
to the new conception of imperial Athens, with her extensive list
of allies, partly free, partly subject. Such transition, arising
spontaneously out of the character and circumstances of the
confederates themselves, was thus materially forwarded by the
acquisitions of Athens extraneous to the confederacy. She was
now not merely the first maritime state of Greece, but perhaps
equal to Sparta even in land-power, — possessing in her alliance
Megara, Beeotia, Phocis, Lokris, together with Achza and Tre-
zen, in Peloponnesus. Large as this aggregate already was,
both at-sea and on land, yet the magnitude of the annual tribute,
and still more the character of the Athenians themselves, supe-
rior to all Greeks in that combination of energy and discipline
which is the grand cause of progress, threatened still farther
. increase. Occupying the Megarian harbor of Pége, the Athe-
nians had full means of naval action on both sides of the Corin
thian isthmus: but, what was of still greater importance to them,
by their possession of the Megarid, and of the highlands of
Geraneia, they could restrain any land-force from marching out
of Peloponnesus, and were thus, considering besides their mas

\

GRECIAN CONFEDERACY UNDER ATHENS. 845

tery at sea, completely unassailable in Attica. Ever since the
repulse of Xerxes, Athens had been advancing in an uninter-
rupted course of power and prosperity at home, as well as of
victory and ascendency abroad, —to which there was no excep-
tion, except the ruinous enterprise in Egypt. Looking at the
position of Greece, therefore, about 448 B.c.,— after the con-
clusion of the five years’ truce between the Peloponnesians and
Athens, and of the so-called Kimonian peace between Persia
and Athens,—a discerning Greek might well calculate upon
farther aggrandizement of this imperial state as the tendency of
the age; and accustomed as every Greek was to the conception
of separate town-autonomy as essential to a freeman and a citi-
zen, such prospect could not but inspire terror and aversion. The
sympathy of the Peloponnesians for the islanders and ultra-
Inaritime states, who constituted the original confederacy of
Athens, was not considerable ; but when the Dorian island of .
/Egina was subjugated also, and passed into the condition of a
defenceless tributary, they felt the blow sorely on every ground.
The ancient celebrity and eminent service rendered at the battle
of Salamis, of this memorable island, had not been able-to pro- .
tect it; while those great A‘ginetan families, whose victories at
the sacred festival-games Pindar celebrates in a large proportion
of his odes, would spread the language of. complaint and indigna-
tion throughout their numerous “ guests ” in every Hellenic city.
Of course, the same anti-Athenian feeling would pervade those
Peloponnesian states who had been engaged in actual hostility
with Athens,— Corinth, Sikyon, Epidaurus, etc, as well as ~
Sparta, the once-recognized head of Hellas, but now tacitly
degraded from her preéminence, baffled in her projects respect-
ing Beotia, and exposed to the burning of her port at Gythium,
without being able even to retaliate upon Attica. Putting all
those circumstances together, we may comprehend the powerful
feeling of dislike and apprehension now diffused so widely over
Greece against the upstart despot city; whose ascendency, newly
acquired, maintained by superior force, and not recognized as
legitimate, — threatened, nevertheless, still farther increase.
Sixteen years hence, this same sentiment will be found exploding
into the Peloponnesian war; but it became rooted in the Greek
mind during the period which we have now reached, when
15*

346 HISTORY OF GREECE.

Athens was much more formidable than she had come to be at
the commencement of that war: nor shall we thoroughly appre-
ciate the ideas of that later period, unless we take them as handed
down from the earlier date of the five years’ truce, about 451-
446 B.C.

Formidable as the Athenian empire both really was and ap-
peared to be, however, this wide-spread feeling of antipathy
proved still stronger, so that, instead of the threatened increase,
the empire underwent a most material diminution. This did
not arise from the attack of open enemies; for during the five
years’ truce, Sparta undertook only one movement, and that not
against Attica: she sent troops to Delphi, in an expedition dig-
nified with the name of the Sacred War, —expelled the Phocians,
who had assumed to themselves the management of the temple,
—and restored it to the native Delphians. To this the Athe-
nians made no direct opposition: but as soon as the Lacedemo-
nians were gone, they themselves marched thither and placed
the temple again in the hands of the Phocians, who were then
their allies! The Delphians were members of the Phocian
league, and there was a dispute of old standing as to the admin-
istration of the temple, — whether it belonged to them sepa-
rately or to the Phocians collectively. The favor of those who
administered it counted as an element of considerable moment
in Grecian politics ; the sympathies of the leading Delphians
led them to embrace the side of Sparta, but the Athenians now
hoped to counteract this tendency by means of their preponder-
ance in Phocis. We are not told that the Lacedzemonians took
any ulterior step in consequence of their views being frus-
trated by Athens, —a, significant evidence of the politics of that
day.

The blow which brought down the Athenian empire from this
its greatest exaltation, was struck by the subjects themselves. The
Athenian ascendency over Beeotia, Phocis, Lokris, and Eubcea,
was maintained, not by means of garrisons, but through domestic
parties favorable to Athens, and a suitable form of government;
just in the same way as Sparta maintained her influence over her

’Thucyd. i, 112; compare Philochor. Fragm. 88, ed. Didot.

GRECIAN CONFEDERACY UNDER ATHENS. 847

Peloponnesian allies.! After the victory of CEnophyta, the
Athenians had broken up the governments in the Beeotian cities
established by Sparta before the battle of Tanagra, and converted
them into democracies at Thebes and elsewhere. Many of
the previous leading men had thus been sent into exile: and as
the same process had taken place in Phocis and Lokris, there was
at this time a considerable aggregate body of exiles, Bceotian,
Phocian, Lokrian, Eubcean, /Eginetan, etc., all bitterly hostile to
Athens, and ready to join in any attack upon her power. We
learn: farther that the democracy,? established at Thebes after the
battle of C&nophyta, was ill-condycted and disorderly: which
circumstances laid open Beeotia still farther to the schemes of as-
sailants on the watch for every weak point. These various ex-
iles, all joining their forces and concerting measures with their
partisans in the interior, succeeded in mastering Orchomenus,
Chzeroneia, and some other less important places in Bootia. The
Athenian general, Tolmidés, marched to expel them, with one
thousand Athenian hoplites and an auxiliary body of allies. It
appears that this march was undertaken in haste and rashness:
the hoplites of Tolmidés, principally youthful volunteers, and be-
longing to the best families of Athens, disdained the enemy too
much to await a larger and more commanding force: nor would
the people listen even to Periklés, when he admonished them
that the march would be full of hazard, and adjured them not to
attempt it without greater numbers as well as greater caution.3
Fatally, indeed, were his predictions justified. ‘Though Tolmidés
was successful in his first enterprise, —the recapture of Chzro-
neia, wherein he placed a garrison, — yet in his march, probably

ed

1 Thucyd, i, 19. Aaxedarydviot, oby drareretc Exovteg ddpov rode Fuupa-
youve, war’ dAtyapyiav d2 ogioww abroig povoy énirydeiug brug roAcretoovet
Sepanebovrec — the same also i, 76-144.

* Aristotel. Politic. v, 2,6. Kat év O7Gar¢ pera rv év Olvogiroig uaynr,
Kakig Todcrevopévu, } Snuoxparia diepdapn.

3 Plutarch. Periklés, c, 18; also, his comparison between Periklés and
Fabius Maximus, c. 3.

Kleinias, father of the celebrated Alkibiadés, was slain in this battle : he
had served, thirty-three years before, at the sea-fight of Artemisium: he
eannot therefore be numbered among the youthful warriors, though a
person of the first rank (Plutarch, Alkibiad. c. 1).

848 HISTORY OF GREECE.

incautious and disorderly, when departing from that place, he
was surprised and attacked unawares; near Koréneia, by the
united body of exiles and their partisans. No defeat in Grecian
history was ever more complete or ruinous. Tolmidés himself was
slain, together with many of the Athenian hoplites, while a large
number of them were taken prisoners. In order torecover these
prisoners, who belonged to the best farhilies in the city, the Athe-
nians submitted to a convention whereby they agreed to evacuate
Beeotia altogether: in all the cities of that country, the exiles
were restored, the democratical government overthrown, and
Beeotia was transformed from an ally of Athens into her bitter
enemy.! Long, indeed, did the fatal issue of this action dwell in
the memory of the Athenians,? and inspire them with an appre-
hension of Beeotian superiority in heavy armor on land: but if
the hoplites under Tolmidés had been al slain on the field, their
death would probably have been avenged and Beotia would not
have been lost,— whereas, in the case of living citizens, the Athe-
nians deemed no sacrifice too great to redeem them. We shall
discover hereafter in the Lacedzmonians a feeling very similar,
respecting their brethren captured at Sphakteria.

The calamitous consequences of this defeat came upon Athens
in thick and rapid succession. The united exiles, having carried
their point in Beeotia, proceeded to expel the philo-Athenian gov-
ernment both from Phocis and Lokris, and to carry the flame of
revolt into Eubcea. To this important island Periklés himself
proceeded forthwith, at the head of a powerful force ; but before
he had time to complete the reconquest, he was summoned home
by news of a still more formidable character. The Megarians
had revolted from Athens: by a conspiracy previously planned,
a division of hoplites from Corinth, Sikyon, and Epidaurus, was
already admitted as garrison into their city: the Athenian sol-
diers who kept watch over the Long Walls had been overpowered
and slain, except a few who escaped into the fortified port of Nissea.
As if to make the Athenians at once sensible how seriously this

1 Thucyd. i, 118; Diodor. xii, 6. Platea appears to have been consid-
ered as quite dissevered from Beeotia: it remained in connection with
Athens as intimately as before.

* Xenophon, Memorabil. iii, 5, 4.

GRECIAN CONFEDERACY UNDER ATHENS. $49

disaster affected them, by throwing open the road over Geraneia,
— Pleistoanax, king of Sparta, was announced as already on his
march for an invasion of Attica. He did,in truth, conduct an
army, of mixed Lacedemonians and Peloponnesian allies, into
Attica, as far as the neighborhood of Eleusis and the Thriasian
plain. He was avery young man, so that a Spartan of mature
years, Kleandridés, had been attached to him by the ephors as
adjutant and counsellor. Periklés, it is said, persuaded both the
one and the other, by means of large bribes, to evacuate Attica
without advancing to Athens. We may, well doubt whether they
had force enough to adventure so far into the interior, and we
shall hereafter observe the great precautions with which Archi-
damus thought it necessary to conduct his invasion, during the
first year of the Peloponnesian war, though at the head of a
more commanding force. Nevertheless, on their return, the
Lacedzemonians, believing that they might have achieved it,
found both of them guilty of corruption. Both were banished :
Kleandridés never came back, and Pleistoanax himself lived for
a long time in sanctuary near the temple of Athéné, at Tegea,
until at length he procured his restoration by tampering with the
Pythian priestess, and by bringing her bought admonitions to act
upon the authorities at Sparta!

So soon as the Lacedemonians had retired from Attica, Peri-
klés returned with his forces to Eubcea, and reconquered the
island completely. With that caution which always distinguished
him as a military man, so opposite to the fatal rashness of Tol-
midés, he took with him an overwhelming force of fifty triremes
and five thousand hoplites. He admitted most of the Eubcan
towns to surrender, altering the government of Chalkis by the
expulsion of the wealthy oligarchy called the Hippobote ; but
. the inhabitants of Histiza, at the north of the island, who had
taken an Athenian merchantman and massacred all the crew,
were more severely dealt with,— the free population being all
or in great part expelled, and the land distributed among Athe-
nian kleruchs, or out-settled citizens.2

iz x

1 Thucyd. i, 114; v, 16, Plutarch, Periklés, c. 22.
® Thucyd. i, 114; Plutarch, Periklés, c. 23 ; Diodor. xii, 7.

i

850 HISTORY OF GREECE. _

But the recoryuest of Euboea was far from restoring Athens
_to the position which she had occupied before the fatal engage-
ment of Koréneia. Her land empire was irretrievably gone, to-
gether with her recently acquired influence over the Delphian
oracle; and she reverted to her former condition of an exclu-
sively maritime potentate. For though she still continued to
hold Niswa and Pegez, yet her communication with the latter
harbor was now cut off by the loss of Megara and its appertain-
ing territory, so that she thus lost her means of acting in the
Corinthian gulf, and of protecting as well as of constraining her
allies in Achaia. Nor was the port of Nissa of much value to
her, disconnected from the city to which it belonged, except as a
post for annoying that city. Moreover, the precarious hold which
she possessed over unwilling allies had been demonstrated in a
manner likely to encourage similar attempts among her maritime
subjects, — attempts which would now be seconded by Pelopon-
nesian armies invading Attica. The fear of such a combination
of embarrassments, and especially of an irresistible enemy car-
rying ruin over the flourishing territory round Eleusis and
Athens, was at this moment predominant in the Athenian mind.
We shall find Periklés, at the beginning of the Peloponnesian
war, fourteen years afterwards, exhausting all his persuasive
force, and not succeeding without great difficulty, in prevailing
upon his countrymen to endure the hardship of invasion, — even
in defence of their maritime empire, and when events had been
gradually so ripening as to render the prospect of war familiar,
if not inevitable. But the late series of misfortunes had burst
upon them so rapidly and unexpectedly, as to discourage even
Athenian confidence, and to render the prospect of continued war
full of gloom and danger. The prudence of Periklés would
doubtless counsel the surrender of their remaining. landed pos-
sessions or alliances, which had now become unprofitable, in
order to purchase peace ; but we may be sure that nothing short
of extreme temporary despondency could have induced the Athe-
nian assembly to listen to such advice, and to accept the inglori-
ous peace which followed. A truce for thirty years was con-
cluded with Sparta and her allies, in the beginning of 445 B.c.,
whereby Athens surrendered Niswa, Peg, Achaia, and Troozen,

GRECIAN CONFEDERACY UNDER ATHENS. $51

._'—thus abandoning Peloponnesus altogether,! and leaving the
Megarians — with their full territory and their two ports —to be
- included among the Peloponnesian allies of Sparta.

It was to the Megarians, especially, that the altered position
of Athens after this truce was owing: it was their secession from
Attica and junction with the Peloponnesians, which laid open
Attica to invasion. . Hence, arose the deadly hatred on the part
of the Athenians towards Megara, manifested during the ensuing
years, — a sentiment the more natural, as Megara had spontane-
ously sought the alliance of Athens a few years before as a pro-
tection against the Corinthians, and had then afterwards, without
any known ill-usage on the part of Athens, broken off from the alli-

1 Thucyd. i, 114, 115; ii, 21; Diodor. xii, 5. Ido not at all doubt that
the word Achaia here used, means the country in the north part of Pelopon- -
nesus, usually known by that name. The suspicions of Gdller and others,
that it means, not this territory, but some unknown town, appear to me
quite unfounded. Thucydidés had never noticed the exact time when the
Athenians acquired Achaia as a dependent ally, though he notices the
Acheans (i, 111) in that capacity. This is one argument, among many,
to show that we must be cautious in reasoning from the silence of Thu-
cydidés against the reality of an event, — in reference to this period between
the Persian and Peloponnesian wars, where his whole summary is so brief.

In regard to the chronology of these events, Mr. Fynes Clinton remarks:
“ The disasters in Boeotia produced the revolt of Eubcea and Megara about

‘eighteen months after, in Anthestérion 445 s.c.: and the Peloponnesian in-
-vasion of Attica, on the expiration of the five years’ truce,” (ad ann. 447
B.C.)

Mr. Clinton seems to me to allow a longer interval than is probable: I
incline to think that the revolt of Eubcea and Megara followed more closely
upon the disasters in Beeotia, in spite of the statement of archons given by
Diodorus: ob woAA®G torepov, the expression of Thucydidés means prob-
ably no more than three or four months; and the whole series of events
were evidently the product of one impulse. The truce having been con-
cluded in the beginning of 445 3.c., it seems reasonable to place the revolt
of Eubcea and Megara, as well as the invasion of Attica by Pleistoanax, in
446 B.c.—and the disasters in Boeotia, either in the beginning of 446 b.o.,
or the close of 447 B.c.

It is hardly safe to assume, moreover (as Mr. Clinton does, ad ann. 450,
es wellas Dr. Thirlwall, Hist. Gr. ch. xvii, p. 478), that the five years’ truce
must have been actually expired before Pleistoanax and the Lacedsemo-
nians invaded Attica: the thirty years’ truce, afterwards concluded, did not
run ont its full time.

852 HISTORY OF GREECE.

ance and become her enemy, with the fatal consequence of ren
dering her vulnerable on the land-side. Under such circumstances
we shall not be surprised to find the antipathy of the Athe-
nians against Megara strongly pronounced, insomuch that the
system of exclusion which they adopted against her was among
the most prominent causes of the Peloponnesian war.

Having traced what we may call the foreign relations of
Athens down to this thirty years’ truce, we must notice the im
portant internal and constitutional changes which she had experi
enced during the same interval.

CHAPTER XLVI.

CONSTITUTIONAL AND JUDICIAL CHANGES AT ATHENS UNDER
PERIKLES.

THE period which we have now passed over appears to have
been that in which the democratical cast of Athenian public life
was first brought into its fullest play and development, as to judi-
cature, legislation, and administration.

The great judicial change was made by the methodical distri-
bution of a large proportion of the citizens into distinct judicial
divisions, by the great extension of their direct agency in that
department, and by the assignment of a constant pay to every
citizen 89 engaged. It has been already mentioned that even
under the democracy of Kleisthenés, and until the time succeed.
ing the battle of Platea, large powers still remained vested both
in the individual archons and in the senate of Areopagus: which
latter was composed exclusively of the past archons after their
year of office, sitting in it for life, — though the check exercised
by the general body of citizens, assembled for law-making in the
ekklesia, and for judging in the heliza, was at the same time

~

CHANGES AT ATHENS UNDER PEvrk ES. 358

materially increased. We must farther recollect, that the dis-
tinction between powers administrative and judicial, so highly
valued among the more elaborate governments of modern Eu-
rope, since the political speculations of the last century, was in
the early history of Athens almost unknown. Like the Roman
kings,! and the Roman consuls before the appointment of the
preetor, the Athenian archons not only administered, but also ex-
ercised jurisdiction, voluntary as well as contentious, — decided
disputes, inquired into crimes, and inflicted punishment. Of the
same mixed nature were the functions of the senate of Areopa-
gus, and even of the annual senate of Five Hundred, the creation
of Kleisthenés. The stratégi, too, as well as the archons, had
doubtless the double competence — in reference to military, naval,
and foreign affairs — of issuing orders and of punishing by their

1 See K. F. Herrmann, Griechische Staatsalterthiimer, sects. 53-107, and
his treatise De Jure et Auctoritate Magistratuum ap. Athen. p.53 (Heidelb.
1829); also Rein, Romisches Privatrecht, pp. 267408, Leips. 1836. M.
Laboulaye also insists particularly upon the confusion of administrative
and judiciary functions among the Romans (Essai sur les Loix Criminelles
des Romains, pp. 23, 79, 107, cte.): and compare Mr. G. C. Lewis, Essay
on the Government of Depend.ncies, p. 42, with his citation from Hugo,
Geschichte des Rémischen Rechts, p. 42. Mr. Lewis has given just and
valuable remarks upon the goodness of the received classification of powers
as a theory, and upon the extent to which the separation of them either has
been, pr can be, carried in practice: see also Note E, in the same work, p.
347.

The separation of administrative from judicial fanctions appears unknown
in early societies. M. Meyer observes, respecting the judicial institutions
of modern Europe: “ Anciennement les fonctions administratives et judi-
ciaires n’étoient pas distinctes. Dua temps de la liberté des Germains et
méme long temps apres, les plaids de la nation ou ceux du comté rendoient
la justice et administroient les intéréts nationaux ou locaux dans une seule
et méme assemblée: sous le régime féodal, le roi on Yempereur dans son
conseil, sa cour, son parlement composé des hants barons ecclésiastiques et
laies, exerygait tons les droits de souveraineté comme de justice: dans la
commune, le dailli, mayeur, ou autre fonctionnaire nommé par le prince,
administraient les intéréts communaux et jageoient les bourgeois de Davis
de Ia communauté entitre, des corporations qui la composoient, ou des
autorités et conseils qui la réprésentoient: on n’avoit pas encore soupgonné
que le jugement d’une cause entre particuliers pit étre étranger 4 la cause
commune.” — Meyer, Esprit des Institutions Judiciaires, book v, chap. 12
vol. ili, p. 239; also chap. 18, p. 383.

VOL. V. 2300.

$54 HISTORY OF GREECE.

own authority, disobedient parties: the gmpertum of the magis-
trates, generally, enabled them to enforce their own mandates as
well as to decide in cases of doubt whether any private citizen
had or had not been guilty of infringement. Nor was there any
appeal from these magisterial judgments ; though the magistrates
were subject, under the Kleisthenean constitution, to personal re-
sponsibility for their general behavior, before the people judicially
assembled, at the expiration of their year of office, and to the
farther animadversion of the ekklesia, or public deliberative as-
sembly, meeting periodically during the course of that year: in
some of which ekklesie, the question might formally be raised
for deposing any magistrate, even before his year was expired.
Still, in spite of such partial .checks, the accumulation, in the
same hand, of powers to administer, judge, punish, and decide
civil disputes, without any other canon than the few laws then
existing, and without any appeal,— must have been painfully
felt, and must have often led to corrupt, arbitrary, and oppressive
dealing: and if this be true of individual magistrates, exposed
f» annual accountability, it is not likely to have been less true
of the senate of Areopagus, which, acting collectively, could
hardly be rendered accountable, and in which the members sat
for life.2

I have already mentioned that shortly after the return of the
expatriated Athenians from Salamis, Aristeidés had been impel-
led, by the strong democratical sentiment which he found among
his countrymen, to propose the abolition of all pecuniary qualifi-
cation for magistracies, so as to render every citizen legally eligi-
ble. This innovation, however, was chiefly valuable as a victory

1 A case of such deposition of an archon by vote of the public assembly,
even before the year of office was expired, occurs in Demosthenés, cont.
Theokrin. c. 7: another, the deposition of a stratégus, in Demosthen. cont.
Timoth. e. 3.

2 Aischinés (cont. Ktesiphont, c. 9, p. 373) speaks of the senate of Areo-
pagus as dreiSuvo¢, and so it was doubtless understood to be: but it is diffi- .
cult to see how accountability could be practically enforced against such a
body. They could only be responsible in this sense, — that, if any one of
their number could be proved to have received a bribe, he would be individ-
ually punished. But in this sense the dikasteries themselves would also be
responsible: though it is always affirmed of them that they were not re
sponsible,

CHANGES AT ATHENS UNDER PERIKLES. 855

and as an index of the predominant sentiment: notwithstanding
the enlarged promise of eligibility, little change probably took
place in the fact, and rich men were still most commonly chosen.
Hence the magistrates, possessing the large powers administra-
tive and judicial above described, — and still more the senate of
Areopagus, which sat for life, —still belonging almost entirely to
the wealthier class, remained animated more or less with the
same oligarchical’ interest and sympathies, which manifested
themselves in the abuse of authority. At the same time the
democratical sentiment among the mass of Athenians went on
steadily increasing from the time of Aristeidés to that of Peri-
klés : Athens became more and more maritime, the population of
Peirseus augmented in number as well as in importance, and the
spirit even of the poorest citizen was stimulated by that collec-
tive aggrandizement of his city to which he himself individually
contributed. Before twenty years had elapsed, reckoning from
the battle of Platea, this new fervor of democratical sentiment
made itself felt in the political contests of Athens, and found able
champions in Periklés and Fphialtés, rivals of what may be
called the conservative party, headed by Kimon.

We have no positive information that it was Periklés who in-
troduced the lot, in place of election, for the choice of archons
and various other magistrates, but the change must have been
introduced nearly at this time, and with a view of equalizing the
chances of office to every candidate, poor as well as rich,
who chose to give in his name, and who fulfilled certain personal
and family conditions ascertained in the dokimasy, or preliminary
examination. But it was certainly to Periklés and Ephialtés
that Athens owed the elaborate constitution of her popular di-
kasteries, or jury courts regularly paid, which exercised so im
portant an influence upon the character of the citizens. These
two eminent men deprived both the magistrates and the senate
of Areopagus of all the judicial and penal competence which
they had hitherto possessed, save and except the power of im-
posing a small fine. This judicial power, civil as well as crimi-
nal, was transferred to numerous dikasts, or panels of jurors
selected from the citizens ; six thousand of whom were annual] y
drawn by lot and sworn, and then distributed into ten panels of
five hundred each, the remainder forming a supplement in case of

356 HISTORY OF GREECE. ©

vacancies. The magistrate, instead of deciding causes, or inflicting
punishment by his own authority, was now constrained to impanel
a jury, — that is, to submit each particular case, which might call
for a penalty greater than the small fine to which he was compe-
tent, to the judgment of one or other among these numerous
popular dikasteries. Which of the ten he should take, was de-
termined by lot, so that no one knew beforehand what dikastery
would try any particular cause : he himself presided over it daring
the trial, and submitted to it the question at issue, with the results of
his own preliminary examination, in addition to the speeches of
accuser and accused, with the statements of their witnesses. So
also the civil judicature, which had before been exercised in con-
troversies between man and man by the archons, was withdrawn
from them and transferred to these dikasteries under the presi-
dence of an archon. It is to be remarked, that the system of
reference to arbitration for private causes! was extensively ap-
plied at Athens: a certain number of public arbitrators were

1 Respecting the procedure of arbitration at Athens, and the public as
well as private arbitrators, see the instructive treatise of Hudtwalcker, Uber
die dffentlichen und Privat Schieds-richter (Diaeteten) zu Athen: Jena,
1812.

Each arbitrator seems to have sat alone to inquire into and decide dis-
putes: he received a small fee of one drachma from both parties: also an
additional fee when application was made for delay (p. 16). Parties might
by mutual consent fix upon any citizen to act as arbitrator: bat there were
@ certain number of public arbitrators, elected or drawn by lot from the
citizens every year: and a plaintiff might bring his cause before any one of
these. They were liable to be punished under efSvvaz, at the end of their
year of office, if accused and convicted of corruption or unfair dealing.

The number of these public distets, or arbitrators, was unknown when
Hudtwalcker’s book was published. An inscription, since discovered by
Professor Ross, and published in his work, Uber die Demen von Attika, p.
22, records the names of all the dixtets for the year of the archon An- -
tiklés, n.c. 325, with the name of the tribe to which each belonged.

The total number is one hundred and four: the number in each tribe4s une-
qual ; the largest number is in Kekropis, which farnishes sixteen ; the smallest
in Pandionis, which sends only three. They must have been either elected or
drawn by lot from the general body of citizens, without any reference to
tribes. The inscription records the names of the distetz for this vear x.c.
325, in consequence of their being crowned or receiving a vote of thanks

from the people. The fragment of a like inscription for the year B.c. 337,
elso exists.

CHANGES AT ATHENS UNDER PERIKLES. 857

annually appointed, to one of whom -—or to some other citizen
adopted by mutual consent of the parties —all private disputes
were submitted in the first instance. . If dissatisfied with the de-
cision, either party might afterwards carry the matter before the
dikastery: but it appears that in many cases the decision of the
arbitrator was avquiesced in without this ultimate resort. -

I do not here mean to affirm that there never was any trial by
the people before the time of Periklés and Ephialtés : I doubt not
that, before their time, the numerous judicial assembly called
Heliza, pronounced upon charges against accountable magistrates
as well as upon various other accusations of public importance;
and perhaps in some cases, separate bodies of them may have been
drawn by Jot for particular trials. But it is not the less true,
that the systematic distribution and constant employment of the
numerous dikasts of Athens cannot have begun before the age of
these two statesmen, since it was only then that the practice of
paying them began: for so large a sacrifice of time on the part of
poor men, wherein M. Boéckh states,! doubtless in very exagger-
ated language, that “nearly one-third of the citizens sat as judges
every day,” cannot be conceived without an assured remuneration.
From and after the time of Periklés, these dikasteries were the
exclusive assemblies for trial of all causes, civil as well as
criminal, with some special exceptions, such as cases of homicide
and a few others: but before his time, the greater number of
these causes had been adjudged either by individual magistrates
or by the senate of Areopagus. We may therefore conceive how
great and important was the revolution wroyght by that states-
- man, when he first organized these dikastic assemblies into sys-
tematic action, and transferred to them nearly all the judicial
power which had before been exercised by magistrates and sen-

* Public Economy of the Athenians, book ii, chap. xiv, p.227. Engl
transl.

M. Boéckh must mean that the whole six thousand, or nearly the whole,
were employed every day. It appears to me that this supposition greatly
Overstates both the number of days and the number of men actually em-
ployed. For the inference in the text, however, a much smaller number is
sufficient.

See the more accurate remark of Schémann, Antiquit. Juris Public.
Grecor., sect. lxxi, p. 310.

™

358 HISTORY OF GREECE.

ate. The position and influence of these latter became radically
altered: the most commanding functions of the archon were ab-
rogated, and he retained only the power of receiving complaints,
inquiring into them, exercising some small preliminary interfer-
ence with the parties for the furtherance of the cause or accusa-
tion, fixing the day for trial, and presiding over the dikastic as-
sembly, by whom peremptory verdict was pronounced. His
administrative functions remained unaltered, but his powers,
inquisitorial and determining, as a judge, passed away.!

In reference to the senate of Areopagus also, the changes
introduced were not less considerable. That senate, anterior to
the democracy in point of date, and standing alone in the enjoy-
ment of a life-tenure, appears to have exercised an undefined
and extensive control which long continuance had gradually con-
secrated. It was invested with a kind of religious respect, and
believed to possess mysterious traditions emanating from a divine
source :2 especially, the cognizance which it took of intentional

} Aristotel. Politic. ii, 9,3. Ka? riv piv bv ’Apein nayy Bovdgy "Egcaarne
éxddAvvoe nal epixanc: ra d2 dtxacrypia piododdpa naréornoe Tlepexage:
Kai Trovsoy 67) Tov Tporov ExaaTog TOY dnuaywyav npojyayev, abfuv elo riy
viv Onuoxpariay, ‘Paiverar d’ ob kata tiv LoAwvog yevéodat roito mpoaipe-
ow, GAAG paAAov Grd ovgrnraparoc. Tio vavapyiac yap év roig Mydtxoig 6
Siuog aitcog yevouevog e&ppovnpariody, kat dypaywyode EAaBe padAove,
éytimodttevopévav tov ExteixGv: érel LoAwy y’ Eotxe tHv dvayxatorargy
crodidévat TH Onuy dbvayev, Td Tag apxd¢ alpeiodat kal ebVivery> pnd? yap
robrov xiptog dv 6 dipog dovAog dv ely nat sroAéusoc.

The words ra dé dixaornpia piodogdpa xaréoryoe epixAge, are commonly
translated, “ Periklés first gave pay to the dikasteries,” wherein it is as-
sumed that these bodies had before judged gratuitously. But it appears to
me that the words ought to be translated, “ Periklés first constituted the
paid dikasteries:” that is, the dikasteries as well as the pay were of his
introduction.

It is evident from this whole passage that Aristotle did not suppose the
dikasteries, either gratuitous or paid, to have been constituted by Solon, but
to have been foreign to the’ purpose of. that lawgiver, and to have been
novelties emanating from Periklés and Ephialtés, at the same time that the
jedicial functions of the senate of Areopagus were cut down.

* Deinarchus cont. Demosthen. Or. i, p. 91. guAarre: Tdg droppyrovg
diadyxac, dv ale Ta THe wéAEwWES GuTNpLa KeiTat, etc. So also Mschinés calls

this senate tiv oxu9pwrdy cai Toy peyictwv Kupiav BovaAjy (cont. Ktesi- ,

phont. c. 9, p. 373: compare also cont. Timarchum, c. 16, p. 41; Demostn.

 a ee

4

CHANGES AT ATHENS UNDER PERIKLES. 859

homicide was a part of old Attic religion not less than of judica-
ture. Though put in the background for a time, after the expul-
sion of the Peisistratids, it had gradually recovered itself when
recruited by the new archons under the Kleisthenean constitution ;
and during the calamitous sufferings of the Persian invasion, its
forwardness and patriotism had been so highly appreciated as to
procure for it an increased sphere of ascendency. Trials for
homicide were only a small part of its attributions: it exercised
judicial competence in many other cases besides, and what was
of still greater moment, it maintained a sort of censorial police
over the lives and habits of the citizens, — it professed to enforce
a tutelary and paternal discipline, beyond that which the strict
letter of the law could mark out, over the indolent, the prodigal,
the undutiful, and the deserters from old rite and custom. To
crown all, the senate of Areopagus also exercised a supervision —
over the public assembly, taking care that none of the proceed-
ings of those meetings should be such as to infringe the estab-
lished laws of the country. These were powers immense as well
as undefined, not derived from any formal grant of the people,
but having their source in immemorial antiquity, and sustained
by general awe and reverence : when we read the serious expres-
sions of this sentiment in the mouths of the later orators, —
Demosthenés, Aéschinés, or Deinarchus, — we shall comprehend
how strong it must have been a century and a half before them,
at the period of the Persian invasion. Isokratés, in his Discourse
‘usually called Areopagiticus, written a century and a quarter
after that invasion, draws a picture of what the senate of Are-
opagus had been while its competence was yet undiminished, and
ascribes to it a power of interference little short of paternal des-
potism, which he asserts to have been most salutary and improv-
ing in its effect. That the picture of this rhetor is inaccurate,

cont. Aristokrat. c. 65, p. 641). Plutarch, Solon, c. 19. vv dvw Bevdzy
éricxoroy navrwv Kal gtAaxa Tov vopuy, etc.

"Edixalov obv of __Apeonayirat wep tavtwy oxeddy Tov TéaAuaTuv Kal
Tapavouiay, we amavraé gnoww ’Avdpotiny tv mpary xal iAdxzupog iv devrépa
kal tpitg tov ’Ardidwy (Philochorus, Fr. 17-58, ed. Didot, p. 19, ed.
Siebelis).

See about the Areopagus, Schémann, Antiq. Jur. Att. sect. xvi, KK. F.
Hermann, Gricch. Staatsalterthiimer, sect. 109.

860 HISTORY OF GREECE.

—and to a great degree indeed ideal, insinuating his own recome
mendations under the color of past realities, —is sufficiently
obvious: but it enables us to presume generally, the extensive
regulating power of the senate of Areopagus, in affairs both
public and private, at the time which we are now describing.
Such powers were pretty sure to be abused, and when we
learn that the Spartan senate! was lamentably open to bribery,
we can hardly presume much better of the life-sitting elders at
Athens. But even if their powers had been guided by all that
beneficence of intention which Isokratés affirms, they were in
their nature such as could only be exercised over a passive and
stationary people; and the course of events at Athens, at that
time peculiarly, presented conditions altogether the reverse.
During the pressure of the Persian invasion, indeed, the senate
of Areopagus had been armed with more than ordinary author-
ity, which it had employed so creditably as to strengthen its
influence, and tighten its supervision during the period immedi-
ately following: but that same trial had also called forth in the
general body of the citizens a fresh burst of democratical senti-
ment, and an augmented consciousness of force, both individual
and national. Here then were two forces, not only distinct but
opposite and conflicting, both put into increased action at the
same time.2 Nor was this all: a novel cast was just then given
to Athenian life and public habits by many different circum-
stances, — the enlargement of the city, the creation of the forti-
fied port and new town of Peireeus, the introduction of an in-
creased nautical population, the active duties of Athens as head

1 Aristotel. Politic. ii, 6, 18.

* Aristotle particularly indicates these two conflicting tendencies in
Athens, the one immediately following the other, in a remarkable passage
of his Politics ({v, 3, 5),

MeraBaAdovor d? kal el¢ dAcyapyiay Kal sic djpov Kai el¢ woAirecav &« Tod
eidoniujoai tt} avéndjvat ) apxeior 7} poptov Tie méAewc: olor, 7 év 'Apei
mayy Bovan evdoxiunoaca ty toig Mydexoic idole cuvTovarépayv mojoas
Thy wodcreiav. Kai madi 6 vavtixdg bxAog yevduevog aitiog Tho mepr
Larapiva ving nai dia ravryg tHe gyepoviag nai did tiv kata Yadarray
duvaurv, trav SOnpoKkpariay loxvporépay énoincer.

The word gvvrovwrépay (stricter, more rigid,”) stands opposed in
anothe’ passage to dvetuévag (iv, 3, 5).

CHANGES £T ATHENS UNDER PERIKLES. 861

of the Delian confederacy, etc. All these circumstances tended
t open new veins. of hope and feeling, and new lines of action,
in the Athenians between 480-460 B.c., and by consequence to
render the interference of the senate of Areopagus, essentially
old-fashioned and conservative as it was, more and more difficult.
Rut at the very. time when prudence would have counselled that
it should have been relaxed or modified, the senate appear
to have rendered if stricter, or at least to have triedato do so:
which could not fail to raise against them a considerable body
of enemies. Not merely the democratical innovators, but also
the representatives of new interests generally at Athens, became
opposed to the senate as an organ of vexatious repression, em-
ployed for oligarchical purposes.!

From the character of the senate of Areopagus, and the an-
cient reverence with which it was surrounded, it served naturally
as a centre of action to the oligarchical or conservative party, —
that party which desired to preserve the Kleisthenean constitu-
tion unaltered, with undiminished authority, administrative as
well as judicial, both to individual magistrates and to the collec-
tive Areopagus. Of this sentiment, at the time of which we
are now speaking, Kimon was the most conspicuous leader, and
his brilliant victories at the Eurymedon, as well as his exploits
in other warlike enterprises, doubtless strengthened very much
his political influence at home. The same party also probably
included the large majority of rich and old families at Athens;
who, so long as the magistracies were elected and not chosen by
lot, usually got themselves chosen, and had every interest in
keeping the power of such offices as high as they could. More-
over, the party was farther strengthened by the pronounced
support of Sparta, imparted chiefly through Kimon, proxenus of
Sparta at Athens. Of course, such aid could only have been
indirect, yet it appears to have been of no inconsiderable mo-
ment,—for when we consider that ASgina had been in ancient

Plutarch. Reipub. Ger. Precept. p. 805. Obx dyvod dé, dre Bovdgy
riveo éraxdi wal dAcyapxixiy Kodoicavrec, Sorep "EqtcAtys "ADAvyct Kar
@oppiwv rap’ Hreiorc, dvvayuv dua «rt dogav Eaxov.

About the oligarchical character of the Areopagites, see Deinarchua
cont. Demosthen. pp. 46, 98.

VOL. Vs. 16

362 HISTORY OF GREECE.

feud with Athens, and Corinth in a temper more hostile than
friendly, the good feeling of the Lacedemonians might well ap-

to Athenian citizens eminently desirable to preserve :
and the philo-Laconian character of the leading men at Athens
contributed to disarm the jealousy of Sparta during that crit-
ical period while the Athenian maritime ascendency was in
progress.!

The political opposition between Periklés and Kimon wae
hereditary, since Xanthippus, the father of the former, had been
the accuser of Miltiadés, the father of the latter. Both were of
the first families in the city, and this, combined with the military
talents of Kimon, and the great statesmanlike superiority of
Periklés, placed both the one and the other at the head of the
two political parties which divided Athens. Periklés must have
begun his political career very young, since he maintained a posi-
tion first of great influence, and afterwards of unparalleled moral
and political ascendency, for the long period of forty years,
against distinguished rivals, bitter assailants, and unscrupulous
libellers (about 467-428 B.c.) His public life began about the
time when Themistoklés was ostracized, and when -Aristeidée
was passing off the stage, and he soon displayed a character
which combined the pecuniary probity of the one with the re-
source and large views of the other; superadding to both a
discretion and mastery of temper never disturbed, — an excellent
musical and lettered education. received from Pythokleidés, — an
eloquence such as no one before had either heard or conceived, —
and the best philosophy which the age afforded. His military
duties as a youthful citizen were faithfully and strenuously per-
formed, but he was timid in his first political approaches to the
people, — a fact perfectly in unison with the caution of his tem-
perament, but which some of his biographers? explained by
saying that he was afraid of being ostracized, and. that his coun-
tenance resembled that of the despot Peisistratus. We may be
pretty sure, however, that this personal resemblance, like the
wonderful dream ascribed to his mother? when pregnant of him,
was an after-thought of enemies, when his ascendency was already

1 Plutarch, Kimon, c. 16; Themistoklés, c. 20.

* Platarch, Periklcs, c. 4—7, seq. 3 Herodot. vi, 131. -

CHANGES AT ATHENS UNDER PERIKLES. 868

established, — and that young beginners were in little danger of
ostracism. The complexion of political parties in Athens had
greatly changed since the days of Themistoklés and Aristeidés ;
for the Kieisthenean constitution, though enlarged by the latter
after the return from Salamis to the extent of making all citizens
without exception eligible for magistracy, had become unpopular
with the poorer citizens, and to the keener democratical feeling
which now ran through Athens and Peireus.

It was to this democratical party,—-the party of movement
against that of resistance, or of reformers against conservatives,
if we are to employ modern phraseology, — that Periklés devoted
his great rank, character, and abilities. From the low arta which
it is common to ascribe to one- who espouses the political interests
of the poor against the rich, he was remarkably exempt: he was
indefatigable in his attention to public business, but he went little
into society, and disregarded almost to excess the airs of popu-
larity: his eloquence was irresistibly impressive, yet he was by
no means prodigal of it, taking care to reserve himself, like the
Salaminian trireme, for solemn occasions, and preferring for the
most part to employ the agency of friends and partisans :! more-
over, he imbibed from his friend and teacher Anaxagoras, a tinge
of physical philosophy, which greatly strengthened his mind,1
and armed him against many of the reigning superstitions, — but
which at the same time tended to rob him of the sympathy of
the vulgar, rich as well as poor. The arts of demagogy were
in fact much more cultivated by the oligarchical Kimon, whose
open-hearted familiarity of manner was extolled, by his personal
friend the poet Ion, in contrast with the reserved and stately
demeanor of his rival Periklés. Kimon employed the rich plun-
der, procured by his maritime expeditions, in public decorations
as well as in largesses to the poorer citizens, — throwing open
his fields and fruits to all the inhabitants of his deme, and causing
himself to be attended in public by well-dressed slaves, directed
to tender their warm tunics in exchange for the threadbare gar-
ments of those who seemed in want; while the property of

a

1 Plutarch, Reipub. Gerend. Prascept. p. 812; Periklés, c. 5, 6, 7.
* Plato, Phadrus, c. 54, p.270; Plutarch, Periklés, c. 8; Xenoph. Mentor.
i, 2, 46.

364 HISTORY OF GREECE.

Periklés was administered with a strict, though benevolent econ-
omy, by his ancient steward Evangelus, —the produce of his
lands being all sold, and the consumption of his house supplied
by purchase in the market.! It was by such regularity that his
perfect and manifest independence of all pecuniary “seduction
was sustained. In taste, in talent, and in character, Kimon was
the very opposite of Periklés,— a brave and efficient com-
mander, a lavish distributor, a man of convivial and amorous
habits, but incapable of sustained attention to business, untaught
in music or letters, and endued with Laconian aversion to rhet-
oric and philosophy; while the ascendency of Periklés was
founded on his admirable combination of civil qualities, — prob-
ity, firmness, diligence, judgment, eloquence, and power of guid-
ing partisans. As a military commander, though noway deficient
in personal courage, he rarely courted distinction, and was prin-
cipally famous for his care of the lives of the citizens, discoun-
tenancing all rash or distant enterprises: his private habits were
sober and recluse, — his chief conversation was with Anaxagoras,
Protagoras,? Zeno, the musician Damon, and other philosophers,
— while the tenderest domestic attachment bound him to the
engaging and cultivated Aspasia.
Such were the two men who stood forward at this time as most
. conspicuous in Athenian party-contest, — the expanding democ-
racy against the stationary democracy of the past generation,
which now passed by the name of oligarchy, —- the ambitious and
talkative energy spread even among the poor population, which
was now forming more and more the characteristic of Athens,
against the unlettered and uninquiring valor of the conquerors of
Marathon. Ephialtés, son of Sophénidés, was at this time the
leading auxiliary, seemingly indeed the equal of Periklés, and no
way inferior to him in personal probity, though he was a poor
man :4 a8 to aggressive political warfare, he was even more active

1 Plutarch, Periklés, c. 9, 16; Kimon, c. 10; Reipubl. Gerend. Prescept.
p- 818.

* The personal intercourse between Periklés and Protagoras is attested by
the interesting fragment of the latter which we find in Plutarch, (‘onsolat.
ad Apollonium, c. 33, p. 119.

? Aristophan. Nubes, 972, 1000, seg. and Ran, 1071.

‘Plutarch, Kimon, c. 10; lian, V. H. ii, 43; xi, 9.

a

CHANGES AT ATHENS UNDER PERIKLES. 865

than Periklés, who appears throughout his long public life to
have manifested but little bitterness against political enemies.
Unfortunately, our scanty knowledge of the history of Athens
brings before us only some general causes and a few marked
facts: the details and the particular persons concerned are not
within our sight : yet the actual course of political events depends
everywhere mainly upon these details, as well as upon the gen-
eral causes. Before Ephialtés advanced his main proposition for
abridging the competence of the senate of Areopagus, he appears
to have been strenuous in repressing the practical abuse of mag-
isterial authority, by accusations brought against the magistrates
at the period of their regular accountability. After repeated
efforts to check the practical abuse of these magisterial powers,}
Ephialtés and Periklés were at last conducted to the proposition
of cutting them down permanently, and introducing an altered
system.

We are not surprifed to find that such proceedings provoked —
extreme bitterness of party-feeling, and it is probable that this
temper may have partly dictated the accusation preferred against
Kimon, about 463 B.c., after the surrender of Thasos, for alleged
reception of bribes from the Macedonian prince Alexander,— an
accusation of which he was acquitted. At this time the oligarch-
ical or Kimonian party was decidedly the most powerful : and when
the question was proposed for sending troops to aid the Laceds-
monians in reducing the revolted Helots on Ithémé, Kimon carried
the people along with him to comply, by an appeal to their gen-
erous feelings, in spite of the strenuous opposition of Ephialtes.?
But when Kimon and the Athenian hoplites returned home, hav-
ing been dismissed by Sparta under circumstances of insulting
suspicion, as has been mentioned in the preceding chapter, the
indignation of the citizens was extreme: they renounced their
alliance with Sparta, and entered into amity with Argos. Of
course the influence of Kimon, and the position of the oligarchi-

1 Plutarch, Periklés, c. 10: compare Valer. Maxim. iii, 8, 4. "EgsaArqv
uty odv, goBepdy dvra Toig bAcyapytxoic Kal wept Tag ebPbvac Kal didkere TOy
rov djuov adixotvrwy arapairyrov, exiBovdedcavres of ex Spot ds’ ’Aptoro-
Sixov rod Tavaypixod Kpudaing avetAor, etc.

* Plutarch, Kimon, c. 16.

866 HISTORY OF GREECE.

cal party, was materially changed by this incident: and in the
existing bitterness of political parties, it is not surprising that his
opponents should take the opportunity for proposing, soon after-
wards, a vote of ostracism,!—- a challenge, indeed, which may, per-
haps, have been accepted not unwillingly by. Kimon and his party,
since they might still fancy themselves the strongest, and suppose
that the sentence of banishment would fall upon Ephialtés or
Periklés. However, the vote ended in the expulsion of Kimon,
a sure proof that his opponents were now in the ascendent. On
this occasion, as on the preceding, we see the ostracism invoked
to meet a period of intense political conflict, the violence of which
it would at least abate, by removing for the time one of the con-
tending leaders.

It was now that Periklés and Ephialtés carried their important
scheme of judicial reform. The senate of Areopagus was de-
prived of its discretionary censorial power, as well as of all its
judicial competence except that which relat@d to homicide. The
individual magistrates, as well as the senate of Five Hundred,
were also stripped of their judicial attributes, except the power
of imposing a small fine,® which were transferred to the newly
created panels of salaried dikasts, lotted off in ten divisions from
the aggregate helisa. Ephialtés3 firat brought down the laws
of Solon from the acropolis to the neighborhood of the market-
place, where the dikasteries sat,-—a visible proof that the judi-
cature was now popularized.

In the representations of many authors, the full bearing of this
great constitutional change.is very inadequately conceived. What
we are commonly told, is, that Periklés was the first to assign a
salary to these numerous dikasteries at Athens; he bribed the

1 Plutarch, Kimon, c. 17. Ol d2 mpd¢ bpyiy areAdovrec fdq rol¢ Aa-
novilover pavepiic byadéracvoy, eal row Kinwva uixpas errAaBopevoe
xpogaceuc tiuorpaxioay ele Evy déxa. ;

I transcribe this passage as a specimen of the inaccurate manner in
which the ostracism is so often described. Plutarch says: “The Athenians
took advantage of a slight pretence to ostracize Kimon:” but it was the
peculiar characteristic of ostracism that it had no pretence: it was a jadg-
ment passed without specific or assigned cause.

* Demosthen. cont. Euerg. et Mnesibal. c. 12.

? Harpokration —‘O xérwdev véu0¢ — Pollux, viii, 128.

CHANGES AT ATHENS UNDER PERIKLES. 367

people with the public money, says Plutarch, in order to make
head against Kimon, who bribed them out of his own private
purse: as if the pay were the main feature in the case, and as if.
all which Periklés did, was to make himself popular by paying
the dikasts for judicial service, which they had kefore rendered
gratuitously. The truth is, that this numerous army of dikasts,
distributed into ten regiments and summoned to act systematical-
ly throughout the year, was now for the first time organized: the
commencement of their pay is also the commencement of their
regular judicial action. What Periklés really did, was to sever
for the first time from the administrative competence of the mag-
istrates that judicial authority which had originally gone along
with it. The great men who had been a¢cuetomed to hold these
offices were lowered both in influence and authority :! while on
the other hand a new life, habit, and sense of power, sprang up
among the poorer citizens. A plaintiff, having cause of civil ac-
tion, or an accuser, invoking punishment against citizens guilty of
injury either to himeelf or to the state, had still to address himself
to one or other of the archons, but it was only with a view of ul-
timately arriving before the dikastery, by whom the cause was to
be tried. While the magistrates acting individually were thus
restricted to simple administration and preliminary police, they
experienced a still more serious loss of power in their capacity of

1 Arist. Polit. iv, 5,6. &re 8 ol raig dpxaic tyxadobvrec rav dipdy dao
Seiv Kpivety - 68 dapévac déxera: thw meester: Gere xcaradtevrar- raoat
qi dpyai, etc.; compare vi, 1,8...

The remark of Aristotle is not justly applicable to the change effected by
Periklés, which transferred the power taken from the magistrates, not to the peo-
ple but to certain specially constituted, though numerous and popular dikaste-
ries, sworn to decide in conformity with known and written laws. Nor is the
separation of judicial competence from administrative, to be characterized
as “dissolving or extinguishing magisterial authority.” On the contrary,
it is conformable to the best modern notions. Periklés cannot be censured
for having effected this separation; however persons may think that the
judicatare which he cgnstitated was objectionable.

Plato seems also to have conceived administrative péwer as essentially
accompanied by judicial (Legg. vi, p. 767) — mévra dpyovra dvayxaiov xal
Stxaorhy eivat rivey — an opinion, doubtless, perfectly just, up to a certain
narrow limit: the separation between the two sorts of powers cannot be
rendered absolutely complete. ~

868 HISTORY OF GREECE.

members of the Areopagus, after the year of archonship was
expired. Instead of their previous unmeasured range of super-
vision and interference, they were now deprived of all judicial
sanction, beyond that small power of fining, which was still left
both to individual magistrates, and to the senate of Five Hundred.
But the cognizance of homicide was still expressly reserved te
them,—for the procedure, in,this latter case, religious not less
than judicial, was so thoroughly consecrated by ancient feeling,
that no reformer could venture to disturb or remove it. It was.

1 Demosthen. cont. Nezr. p. 1372; cont. Aristokrat. p. 642.

Meier (Attischer Prozess, p. 143) thinks that the senate of Areopagus
was also deprived of its cognizance of homicide as well as of its other
functions, and that this was only restored after the expulsion of the Thirty.
He supposes this to be proved by a passage of Lysias which he produces
(De Cede Eratosthenis, pp. 31-33).

M. Boéckh and O. Miiller adopt the same opinion as Meier, and seem-
ingly on the authority of the same passage, (see the Dissertation of O.
Miiller on the Eumenides of schylus, p. 113, Eng. transl.) But in the
first place, this opinion is contradicted by an express statement in the anony-
mous biographer of Thucydidés, who mentions the trial of Pyrilampés for
murder before the Areopagus ; and contradicted also, seemingly, by Xeno- -
phon (Memorab. iii, 5, 20); ix the next place, the passage of Lysias appears to
me to beara different meaning. Hesays: @ xai watptov tort nai ég’ budy aro-
Gédorat Tod Pévou Tac dikac dixalerv: now— even if we admit the conjectural
reading é¢’ tuay in place of éd’ ipziv to be correct — still, this restoration of
functions to the Areopagus, refers naturally to the restored democracy after
the violent interruption occasioned by the oligarchy of Thirty. Consider
ing how many persons the Thirty caused to be violently put to death, and
the complete subversion of all the laws which they introduced, it seems
impossible to suppose that the Areopagus could have continued to hold its
sittings and try accusations for intentional homicide, under their govern-
ment. On the return of the democracy after the Thirty were expelled,
the functions of the senate of Areopagus would return also.

If the supposition of the eminent authors mentioned above were correct,
-— if it were true that the Areopagus was deprived not only of its supervis-
ing function generally, but also of its cogniaance of homicide, during the
fifty-five years which elapsed between the motion of Ephialtés and the
expulsion of the Thirty, —this senate must have been without any func-
tions at all durin that long interval; it must have been for all practical
purposes non-existent. But during so long a period of total suspension.
the citizens would have lost all their respect for it; it could not have ra
tained so much -influence as we know that it actually possessed immedi-
ately before the Thirty (Lysias c. Eratosth.c. 11, p. 126); and it would

CHANGES AT ATHENS UNDER PERIKLES. 869

upon this same ground probably that the stationary party de-
fended all the prerogatives of the senate of Areopagus,—
denouncing the curtailments proposed by Ephialtés as impious
and guilty innovations... How extreme their resentment be-

hardly have been revived after the expulsion of the Thirty. Whereas, by
preserving during that period its jurisdiction in cases of homicide, apart
from those more extended privileges which had formerly rendered it ob-
noxious, the ancient traditional respect for it was kept alive, and it was re-
vived, after the fall of the Thirty, as a venerable part of the old democ
racy ; even apparently with some extension of privileges.

The inferences which O. Miller wishes to draw, as to the facts of these
times, from the Eumenides of Aischylus, appear to me ill-supported. In
order to sustain his view, that, by virtue of the proposition of Ephialtés
“the Areopagus almost entirely ceased to be a high court of judicature,”
(sect. 86, p. 109,) he is forced to alter the chronology of the events, and to
affirm that the motion of Ephialtés must have been carried subsequently to
the representation of the Eumenides, though Diodorus mentions it in the
year next but one before, and there is nothing to contradict him. All that
we can safely infer from the very indistinct allusions in Aschylus, is, that
he himself was fall of reverence for the Areopagus, and that the season was
one in which party bitterness ran so high as to render something like civil
war (éu¢tAcov “Apy, v, 864) within the scope of reasonable apprehension.
Probably, he may have been averse to the diminution of the privileges of
the Areopagus by Ephialtés: yet even thus much is not altogether certain,
inasmuch as he pats it forward prominently and specially as a tribunal for
homicide, exercising this jurisdiction by inherent prescription, and con-
firmed in it by the Eumenides themselves. Now when we consider that
such jurisdiction was precisely the thing confirmed and left by Ephialtés to
the Areopagus, we might plausibly argue that Auschylus, by enhancing the
solemnity and predicting the perpetuity of the remaining privilege, in-
tended to conciliate those who resented the recent innovations, and to soften
the hatred between the two opposing parties.

The opinion of Boéckh, O. Miiller, and Meier, respecting the with-
drawal from the senate of Areopagus of the judgments on homicide, by
the proposition of Ephialtés, has been discussed, and in my judgment
refated, by Forchhammer, in a valuable Dissertation, De Areopago non
privato per Ephialten Homicidii Judiciis. Kiel, 1828.

1 This is the language of those authors whom Diodorus copied (Diodor.
xi, 77) —o0b piv &9pbug ye dtéguye ryAtcotrose dvopun-
paoty éxiBardpevog (Ephialtés), dAaa ric vuxrdeedvaipedelc, GdnAov
Baye riv rob Biov reAevr@v. Compare Pausanias, i, 29, 15.

Plutarch (Periklés, c. 10) cites Aristotle as having mentioned the assas-
sination of Ephialtés. Antipho, however, states that the assassin was never
formally known or convicted (De Cede Hero. c. 68).

VOL. V. 16” 24oc.

870 HISTORY OF GREECE.

came, when these reforms were carried, and how fierce was the
collision of political parties at this moment, we may judge by
the result. The enemies of Ephialtés caused him to be privately
assassinated, by the hand of a Bocotian of Tanagra, named Aris-
todikus. Such a crime —rare in the political annals of Athens,
for we come to no known instance of it afterwards, until the oli-
garchy of the Four Hundred, in 411 B.c. —marks at once the
gravity of the change now introduced, the fierceness of the oppo-
sition offered, and the unscrupulous character of the conservative
party: Kimon was in exile, and had no share in the deed.
Doubtless the assassination of Ephialtés produced an effect un-
favorable in every way to the party who procured it: the popu- ~
lar party, in their resentment, must have become still more
attached to the judicial reforms just assured to them, while the
hands of Periklés, the superior leader, left behind and now acting
singly, must bave been materially strengthened.

It is from this point that the administration of that great man
may be said to date: he was now the leading adviser, we might
almost say prime minister, of the Athenian people. His first
years were marked by a series of brilliant successes, already
mentioned, the acquisition of Megara as an ally, and the victori-
ous war against Corinth and A¢gina. But when he proposed the
great and valuable improvement of the Long Walls, thus making
one city of Athens and Peireus, the same oligarchical party
which had opposed his judicial changes and assassinated Ephial-
tés again stood forward in vehement resistance. Finding direct
opposition unavailing, they did not scruple to enter into treason-
able correspondence with Sparta, invoking the aid of a foreign
force for the overthrow of the democracy; so odious had it be-
come in their eyes since the recent innovations. How serious
was the hazard incurred by Athens, near the time of the battle
of Tanagra, has heen already recounted ; together with the rapid
and unexpected reconcilidtion of parties after that battle, princi-
pally owing to the generous patriotism of Kimon and his imme-

The enemies of Periklés circulated a report, mentioned by Idcmeneus,
that it was he who had procured the assassination of Ephialtés, from jeal-
ousy of the superiority of the latter (Plutarch, Periklés, c.10). We may
infer from this report how great the eminence of Ephialtés was.

CHANGES AT ATHENS UNDER PERIKLES. $71

diate friends. He was restored from ostracism on this occasion,
before his full time had expired, and the rivalry between him and
Periklés henceforward becomes mitigated, or even converted into
a compromise,! whereby the internal affairs of the city were left
to the one, and the conduct of foreign expeditions to the other.
The successes of Athens during the ensuing ten years were more
brilliant than ever, and she attained the maximum of her power:
which doubtless had a material effect in imparting stability to the
democracy, as well as to the administration of Periklés, and ena-
bled both the one and the other to stand the shock of those great
public reverses, which deprived the Athenians of their dependent
landed alliances, during the interval between the defeat of Koré-
neia and the thirty years’ truce.

Along with the important judicial revolution brought about by
Periklas, were introduced other changes belonging to the came
scheme and system.

Thus a general power of supervision, both over the magistrates
and over the public assembly, was vested in seven magistrates,
now named for the first time, called Nomophylakes, or Law-Guar
dians, and doubtless changed every year. These nomophylakes
sat alongside of the proédri, or presidenta, both in the senate and in
the public assembly, and were charged with the duty of interposing
whenever any step was taken or any proposition made contrary
to the existing laws: they were also empowered to constrain the
magistrates to act according to law.2 We do not know whether

‘ The intervention of Elpiniké, the sister of Kimon, in bringing about
this compromise between her brother and Periklés, is probable enough
(Plutarch, Periklés, c. 10, and Kimon, c.14). Clever and engaging, she
seems to have played an active part in the political intrigues of the day:
but we are now at all called upon to credit the scandals insinuated by
Eupolis and Stesimbrotus, =

* We hear about these nomophylakes in a distinct statement cited from
Philochorus, by Photius, Lexic. p. 674, Porson. NopogtAaxes : Erepoé eice
Tov Geopoderay, d O¢ Sidbxopog by (> of udv yap dpyovreg dvéBaivov el¢
Apetov rayov loregavipmevot, of d2 vopogbAanec ypbora arpogia Gyovrecg* Kal
taig Geaic tvavrioy dpyévraw exadiovro* nat rv wouriy Exeprov Tz
HladAade rag d2 dpydc hvaynaloy roi¢ véopore xppoVas- Kal év rg ixxAnowg
kal ty rp BovAg peta rdv mpoédpwv eadgvto, kwAbovres TA dovpudopa TH
woe. nparrev: Exra dé hoav: nal xcarésrnoay, O¢ DcAdyopoc, bre 'EdiaArage
sovy xarédure rH GE Apeiou rayou Bovag ra brép rot adpuaroc.

372 HISTORY OF GREECE.

they possessed the presidency of a dikastery, — that is, whether
they could themselves cause one of the panels of jurors to be
summoned, and put an alleged delinquent on his trial before it,
under their presidency, or whether they were restricted to enter-
ing a formal protest, laying the alleged illegality before the public
assembly. To appoint magistrates, however, invested with this
special trust of watching and informing, was not an unimpor-
tant step; for it would probably enable Ephialtés to satisfy many
objectors who feared to abolish the superintending power of the
Areopagus without introducing any substitute. The nomophylakes
were honored with a distinguished place at the public processions
and festivals, and were even allowed, like the archons, to enter
the senate of Areopagus after their year of office had expired: but
they never acquired any considerable power, such as that senate
had itself exercised.. Their interference must have been greatly
superseded by the introduction and increasing application of the
Graphé Paranomén, presently to be explained; nor are they
even noticed in the description of that misguided assembly which
condemned the six generals after the battle of Arginusez, by a
gross violation of legal form not less than of substantial justice.!
After the expulsion of the Thirty, the senate of: Areopagus was
again invested with a supervision over magistrates, though with-
out anything like its ancient ascendency.

Another important change which we may with probability refer
to Periklés, is the institution of the Nomothete. These men were,
in point of fact, dikasts, members of the six thousand citizens an-
nually sworn in that capacity. But‘they were not, like the dikasts
for trying causes, distributed into panels, or regiments, known by
@ particular letter, and acting together throughout the entire
year: they were lotted off to sit together only on special occa-
sion and as the necessity arose. According to the reform now
introduced, the ekklesia, or public assembly, even with the sanction
of the senate of Five Hundred, became incompetent either to pass

Harpokration, Pollux, and Suidas, give substantially the same account
of these magistrates, though none except Photius mentions the exact date
of their appointment. There is no adequate ground for the doubt which
M. Boéckh expresses abouf the accuracy of this statement: see Schomann,
Antiq. Jur. Pub. Greec. sect. xvi; and Cicero, Legg. iii, 20.

* See Xenophon, Hellenic. i, 7; Andokidés de Mysteriis, p. 40.

N

a

CHANGES AT ATHENS UNDER PERIXKLES. 873

a new law or to repeal a law already in existence; it could only
enact a psephism, — that is, properly speaking, a decree, applica-
ble only to a particular case; though the word was used at Ath-
ens in a very large sense, sometimes comprehending decrees of
general as well as permanent application. In reference to laws,
a peculiar judicial procedure was established. The thesmothe-
tze were directed annually to examine the existing laws, noting
any contradictions or double laws on the same matter ; and in the
first prytany (tenth part).of the Attic year, on the eleventh day,
an ekklesia was held, in which the first business was to go through
the laws seriatem, and submit them for approval or rejection: first
beginning with the laws relating to the senate, next, those of more
general import, especially such as determined the functions and
competence of the magistrates. If any law was condemned by
the vote of the public assembly, or if any citizen had a new law
to propose, the third assembly of the prytany was employed,
previous to any other business, in the appointment of nomothete,
and in the provision of means to pay their salary. Pfevious notice
was required to be given publicly by every citizen who had new
propositions of the sort to make, in order that the time necessary
for the sitting of the nomothetz might be measured according to
the number of matters to be submitted to their cognizance. Public
advocates were farther named to undertake the formal defence
of all the laws attacked, and the citizen who proposed to repeal
them had to make out his case against this defence, to the satis
faction of the assembled nomothete. These latter were taken
from the six thousand sworn dikasts, and were of different num-
bers according to circumstances: sometimes we hear of them as
five hundred, sometimes as one thousand, and we may be certain
that the number was always considerable.

The effect of this institution was, to place the making or re-
pealing of laws under the same solemnities and guarantees as the
trying of causes or accusations in Judicature. We must recollect
that the citizens who attended the ekklesia, or public assembly,
were not sworn like the dikasts ; nor had they the same solemni-
ty of procedure, nor the same certainty of hearing both sides of
the question set forth, nor the same full preliminary notice. How
much the oath sworn was brought to act upon the minds of the
dikasts, we may see by the frequent appeals to it in the orators,

374 HISTORY OF GREECE.

who contrast them with the unsworn public assembly.! And
there can be no doubt that the nomothete afforded much
greater security than the public assembly, for a proper decision.
That security depended upon the same principle as we see to
pervade all the constitutional arrangements of Athens; upon a
fraction of the people casually taken, but sufficiently numerous to
have the same interest with the whole, —not permanent, but del-
egated for the: occasion,— assembled under a solemn sanction, and
furnished with a full exposition of both sides of the case. The
power of passing psephisms, or special decrees, still remained
with the public assembly, which was doubtless mueh more liable
to be surprised into hasty or inconsiderate decision than either
the dikastery or the nomothets,—-in spite of the necessity of
previous authority from the senate of Five Hundred, before any
proposition could be submitted to it.

As an additional security both to the public assembly and the
nomothets against being entrapped into decisions contrary to
existing law, another remarkable provision has yet to be men-

1 Demosthen, cont. Timokrat. c. 20, pp. 725, 726. wag’ obv Ty doxet ovp-
gépery TH wWoAet Totobrog vopoc, d¢ dixaornpiov yrdcews abroc xuptorepor
borat, Kal rag bd TOv duopowstwr yvdcetc toi¢ dvepsrots mpoorages Aveuy ;
Evdupeiote, Grd rod dixacrnpiov xal rig xarayvoceac ol dsexgdncev
(Timokratés) ér?2 rov djyov, ixxdénrov tiv hdixyxota! Compare De-
moethen. cont. Eubulid. c. 15. , ;

See, about the nomothetm, Schémann, De Comitiis, ch. vii, p- 248, seqq.,
and Platner, Prozess und Klagen per den Attikern, Abschn, ii, 3, 3, p. 33,
seqq.

Both of them maintain, in my-opinion ecransoualy: that the nomothets
are an institution of Solon. Demosthenés, indeed, ascribes it to Solon
(Sch6mann, p. 268): but this counts, in my view, for nothing, when I see
that all the laws which he cites for governing the proceedings of the no-
mothets, bear unequivocal evidence of a time much later. Schémann ad-
mits this to a certain extent, and in reference to the style of these laws, —
“Tiloram quidem fragmentorum, que in Timokrated extant, receniiorum
Solonis atate formam atque orationem apertum est.” But it is not-merely the
style which proves them to be of post-Solonian date: it is the mention of
post-Solonian institutions, such as the ten prytanies into which the year
was divided, the ten statues of the eponymi,—all derived from the crea-
tion of the ten tribes by Kleisthenés. On the careless employment of the
name of Solon by the orators, whenever they desire to make a strong im-
pression on the dikasts, I have already remarked.

CHANGES AT ATHENS UNDER PERIKLES. 875

tioned, — a provision probably introduced by Periklés at the
same time as the formalities of law-making by means of specially
delegated nomothete. This was the Graphé Paranomén, —~
indictment for informality or illegality, — which might be brought
on certain grounds against the proposer of any law or any pseph-
ism, and rendered him liable to punishment by the dikastery.
He was required, in bringing forward his new measure, to take
care that it should not be in contradiction with any preéxisting
law, — or if there were any such contradiction, to give formal
notice of it, to propose the repeal of that which existed, and to
write up publicly beforehand what his proposition was, —in
order that there might neVer be two contradictory laws at the
same time in operation, nor any illegal decree passed either by
the senate-or by the public assembly. If he neglected this pre-
caution, he was liable to prosecution under the graphé parano-
mén, which any Athenian citizen might bring against him before
the dikastery, through the intervention and under the presidency
of the thesmothets.

Judging from the title of this indictment, it was originally
confined to the special ground of formal contradiction between the
new and the old. But it had a natural tendency to extend itself:
the citizen accusing would strengthen his case by showing that
the measure which he attacked contradicted not merely the letter,
but the spirit and purpose of existing laws, — and he would pro-
ceed from hence to denounce it as generally mischievous and
disgraceful to the state. In this unmeasured latitude, we find
the graphé paranomén at the time of Demosthenés: the mover
of a new law or psephism, even after it had been regularly dis-
cussed and passed, was liable to be indicted, and had to defend
himself not only against alleged informalities in his procedure,
but also against alleged mischiefs in the substance of his measure.
If found guilty by the dikastery, the punishment inflicted upon
him by tham was not fixed, but variable according to circum-
stances; for the indictment belonged to that class wherein, after -
the verdict of guilty, first a given amount of punishment was
proposed by the accuser, next, another and lighter amount was
named by the accused. party against himself,—-the dikastery
being bound to make their option between one and the other,
without admitting any third modification, —so that it was the

‘
4

876 : HISTORY OF GREECE.

interest even of the accused party to name against himself a
measure of punishment sufficient to satisfy the sentiment of the
dikasts, in order that they might not prefer the more severe
proposition of the accuser. At the same time, the accuser him-
self, as in other public indictments, was fined in the sum of one
thousand drachms, unless the verdict of guilty obtained at least
_ one-fifth of the suffrages of the dikastery. The personal respon-
sibility of the mover, however, continued only one year after the
introduction of his new law: if the accusation was brought at a
greater distance of time than one year, the accuser could invoke
no punishment against the mover, and the sentence of the dikasts
neither absolved nor condemned anything but the law. Their
condemnation of the law, with or without the author, amounted
tpso facto to a repeal of it.

Such indictment against the author of a law or of a decree,
might be preferred either at some stage prior to its final enact-
ment, —-as after its acceptance simply by the senate, if it was
a decree, or after its approval by the public assembly, and prior
to its going before the nomothete, if it was a law,—or after it
had reached full completion by the verdict of the nomothets. In
the former case, the indictment stayed its farther progress until
sentence had been pronounced by the dikasts.

This regulation is framed in a thoroughly conservative spirit,
to guard the existing laws against being wholly or partially nul-
lified by a new proposition. As, in the procedure of the nomo-
thet, whenever any proposition was made for distinctly repeal-
ing any existing law, it was thought unsafe to intrust the defence
of the law so assailed to the chance of some orator gratuitously
undertaking it, and paid advocates were appointed for the pur-
pose ; so also, when any citizen made a new positive proposition.
sufficient security was not supposed to be afforded by the chance
of opponents rising up at the time ; and a farther guarantee was
provided in the personal responsibility of the mover. That the
latter, before he proposed a new decree or a new law, should
take care that there was nothing in it inconsistent with existing
laws, — or, if there were, that he should first formally bring for-
ward a direct proposition for the repeal of such preéxistent law,
— was in no way unreasonable: it imposed upon him an obliga-
tion such as he might perfectly well fulfil, —- it served as a check

Be he

. CHANGE! AT ATHENS UNDER PERIKLES. 377

upon the use of that right, of free speech and initiative .« the
public assembly, which belonged to every Athenian witht ex-
ception,! and which was cherished by the democracy as nuuch as
it was condemned by oligarchical thinkers, — it was a security to
the dikasts, who were called upon to apply the law to particular
eases, against the perplexity of having conflicting laws quoted
before them, and being obliged in their verdict to set aside either
one or the other. In modern European governments, even the
most free and constitutional, laws have been both made and ap-
plied either by select persons or select assemblies, under an
organization so different as to put out of sight the idea of per-
sonal responsibility on the proposer of a new law. Moreover,
even in such assemblies, private initiative has either not existed
at all, or has been of comparatively little effect, in law-making ;
while in the application of laws when made, there has always
been a permanent judicial body exercising an action of its own,
more or less independent of the legislature, and generally inter-
preting away the text of contradictory laws so as to keep up a
tolerably consistent course of. forensic tradition. But at Athens,
the fact that the proposer of a new decree, or of a new law, had
induced the senate or the public assembly to pass it, was by no
means supposed to cancel his personal responsibility, if the prop-
osition was illegal: he had deceived the senate or the people,
in deliberately keeping back from them a fact which he knew, or
at least might and ought to have known.

But though a full justification may thus be urged on behalf of
the graphé paranomén, as originally conceived and intended, it
will hardly apply to that indictment as applied afterwards in its
plenary and abusive latitude. Thus Atschinés indicts Ktesiphon
under it for having, under certain circumstances, proposed a
crown to Demosthenés. He begins by showing that the proposi-
tion was illegal,— for this was the essential foundation of the
indictment : he then goes on farther to demonstrate, in a splendid

1 The privation of this right of public speech (za/fnaia) followed on the
condemnation of any citizen to the punishment called driuia, disfranchise-
ment, entire or partial (Demosthen. cont, Negr. p. 1352, ¢. 9; cont. Meidi-
am, p. 545, c. 27). Compare for the oligarchical sentiment, Xenophon
Republi. Athen. i, 9. :

378 HISTORY OF GREECE.

harangue, that Demosthenés was a vile man and a mischievous
politician: accordingly, assuming the argument to be just, Ktesi-
phon had deceived the people in an aggravated way, — first, by
proposing a reward under circumstances contrary to law ; next,
by proposing it in favor of an unworthy man. The first part of
the argument only is of the essence of the graphé paranomén

the second part is in the nature of an abuse growing out of it, —
springing from that venom of personal and party enmjty which
is inseparable, in a greater or less degree, from free political

action, and which manifested itself with virulence at Athens, -

though within the limits of legality. That this indictment, as
one of the most direet vents for such enmity, was largely applied
and abused at Athens, is certain ; but though it probably deterred
unpractised citizens from originating new propositions, it did not
produce the same effect upon those orators who made politics a
regular business, and who could therefore both calculate the tem-
per of the people, and reckon upon support from a certain knot
of friends. Aristophon, towards the close of his political life,
made it a boast that he had been thus indicted and acquitted
seventy-five times. Probably, the worst effect which it produced
was that of encouraging the vein of personality and bitterness
which pervades so large a proportion of Attic oratory, even in
its most illustrious manifestations ; turning deliberative into ju-
dicial eloquence, and interweaving the discussion of a law, or
decree, along with a declamatory harangue against the character
of its mover. We may at the same time add that the graphé
paranomén was often the most convenient way of getting a law
or a psephism repealed, so that it was used even when the an-
nual period had passed over, and when the mover was therefore
out of danger, — the indictment being then brought only against
the law, or decree, as in the case which forms the subject of the
harangue of Demosthenés against Leptinés. If the speaker of
this harangue obtained a verdict, he procured at once the repeal
of the law, or decree, without proposing any new provision in
its place; which he would be required to do, — if not peremp-
torily, at least by common usage, — if he had carried the law for
repeal before the nomothetz.

The dikasteries provided under the system of Periklés varied
in number of members: we never hear of less than two hun-

]

CHANGES AT ATHENS UNDER PERIKLES. $79

dred members, —- most generally of five hundred,—~ and some-
times also of one thousand, fifteen hundred, two thousand mem-
bers, on important trials.! Each man received pay from the
treasurers, called Kolakrete, after hig day's business was over, of
three oboli, or half a drachm: at least this was the amount paid
during the early part of the Peloponnesian war. M. Boéckh
supposes that the original pay proposed by Periklés was one
obolus, afterwards tripled by Kleon; but his opinion is open to
much doubt. It was indispensable to propose a measure of pay
sufficient to induce citizens to come, and come frequently, if not
regularly : now one obolus seems to have proved afterwards an
inadequate temptation even to the ekklesiasts, or citizens who at-
tended the public assembly, who were less frequently wanted,
and must have had easier sittings, than the dikasts: much less,
therefore, would it be sufficient in the case of the latter. I in-
cline to the belief that the pay originally awarded was three
obeli:2 the rather, as these new institutions seem to have nearly
coincided in point of time with the transportation of the confeder

1 See Meier, Attisch. Prozess, p. 139. Andokidés mentions a trial under
the indictment of ypag7? rapavoyuwy, brought by his father Leogoras against
a senator named Speusippus, wherein six thousand dikasts sat, — that is,
the entire body of heliasts. However, the loose speech so habitual with
Andokidés, renders this statement very uncertain (Andokidés de Mysteriis,
p- 3, § 29).

See Matthie, De Judiciis Atheniensium, in his Miscellanea Philologica,
vol. i, p. 252. Matthise questions the reading of that passage in Demos-
thenés (cont. Meideam, p. 585), wherein two hundred dikasts are spoken of
as sitting in judgment: he thinks if ought to be wevraxociove instead of
dtaxociovc, — but this alteration would be rash.

* See on this question, Boéckh, Public Econ. of Athens, ch. xv, p. 233;
K.F. Herrmann, Griech. Staatsalt. § 134.

_ The proof which M. Boéckh brings to show, first, that the original pay
was one obolus, — next, that Kleon was the first to introduce the triobolus,
—is in both cases very inconclusive.

Certain passages from the Scholiast, stating that the pay of the dikasts
fluctuated (obx tornxev — dAAore dAAuwe édidoro) do not so naturally indi-
cate a rise from one obolus to three, as a change backwards and forwards
according to circumstances. Now it seems that there were some occasions
when the treasury was so very poor that it was doubtful whether the dikasts
could be paid: see Lysias, cont. Epikrat. c.1; cont. Nikomach. c. 22; and
Aristophan. Equit. 1870. The «mount of pay may, therefore, have been
sometimes affected by this cause.

380 HISTORY OF GREECE.

ate treasure from Delos to Athens, — so that the exchequer would
then appear abundantly provided. As to the number of dikasts
actually present on each day of sitting, or the minimum number
requisite to form a sitting, we are very imperfectly informed.
Though each of the ten panels or divisions of dikasts included
five hundred individuals, seldom probably did all of them attend ;
but it also seldom happened, probably, that all the ten divisions
sat on the same day: there was therefore an opportunity of
making up deficiencies in division A, when its lot was called and
when its dikasts did not appear in sufficient numbers, from those
who belonged to division B or A, besides the supplementary di-
kasts who were not comprised in any of the ten divisions: though
on all these poinf& we cannot go beyond conjecture. Certain it is,
however, that the dikasteries were always numerous, and that none
of the dikasts could know in what causes they would be employed,
so that it was impossible to tamper with them beforehand.!

Such were the great constitutional innovations of Periklés and
Ephialtés,— changes full of practical results,— the transforma-
tion as well as the complement of that democratical system which
Kleisthenés had begun, and to which the tide of Athenian feeling
had been gradually mounting up, during the preceding twenty
-years. The entire force of these changes is generally not per-
ceived, because the popular dikasteries and the nomothetz are

} There is a remarkable passage on this point in the treatise of Xeno
phon, De Republic. Athen. iii,6. He says:—

dépe dQ, GAAG gyoi Tic XpHvatr dixdlew pév, LAGrrove dé dixdlecy. "Avayay
Toivuy, édy pev moAAd (both Weiske and Schneider substitute moAAd here
in place of dAcya, which latter makes no sense) ro:Gvrat dcxacrnpia, bAcyou
ty éixdotp iocovrat rq dixacrnpiy’ Gore xai dtaoxevacacGa: Agdiov Eoras
apo¢ bAiyouc dixaordc, kat ovvdexaca: (so Schneider ahd Matthiz, in place
-of auvdixacat) 0Ad Frrov dixaiwg dixcletv.

That there was a good deal of bribery at Athens, where individuals could
be approached and dealt with, is very probable (see Xenoph. de Repub.
Ath. iii. 3): and we may well believe that there were also particular occa-
sions on which money was given to the dikasts, some of whom were pun-
ished with death for such corrupt receipt (A¢schinés cont. Timarch. c. 17-
22, pp. 12-15). But the passage above quoted from Xenophon, an unfriendly
witness, shows that the precautions taken to prevent corruption of the
dikasteries were well-devised and successful, though these precautions
might sometimes be eluded.

CHANGES AT ATHENS UNDER PERIKLES. 881

so often represented as institutions of Solon, and as merely sup-
plied with pay by Periklés. This erroneous supposition prevents
all clear view of the growth of the Athenian democracy, by
throwing back its last elaborations to the period of its early and
imperfect start. To strip the magistrates of all their judicial
power, except that of imposing a small fine, and the Areopagus
of all its jurisdiction, except in cases of homicide, — providing
popular, numerous, and salaried dikasts to decide all the judicial
business at Athens, as well as to repeal and enact laws; this was
the consummation of the Athenian democracy: no serious consti-
tutional alteration — I except the temporary interruptions of the
Four Hundred and the Thirty — was afterwards made until the days
of Macedonian interference. As Periklés made it, so it remained
in the days of Demosthenés, — though with a sensible change in
the character, and abatement in the energies, of the people, rich
as well as poor.

In appreciating the practical working of these numerous di
kasteries at Athens, in comparison with such justice as might
have been expected from individual magistrates, we have to con-
sider, first, that personal and pecuniary corruption seems to have
been a common vice among the leading men of Athens and Spar-
ta, when acting individually or in boards of a few members, and
not uncommon even with the kings of Sparta, — next, that in the
Grecian cities generally, as we know even from the oligarchical
Xenophon (he particularly excepts Sparta), the rich and great
men were not only insubordinate to the magistrates, but made a
parade of showing that they cared nothing about them.’ We
know, also, from the same unsuspected source,? that while the

' Xenophon, De Republ. Laced. c. 8,2. Texpaipouas 62 raidra, dr év pev
Taig GAAate wodcot ol duvardrepae ot re BotAovrat doxeiv rag ap-
Vag goPeia¥at, aAdAa vouivov os TOdTO aGvededsd Epo eivas*
év dt 79 Lrdpry ol kparioros xal bxépxovras padiora rac dpyae, etc.

Respecting the violent proceedings committed by powerful men at
Thebes, whereby it became almost impossible to procure justice against
them for fear of being put to death, see Diksearchus, Vit. Grec. Fragm. ed.
Fabr. p. 143, and Polybius, xx, 4,65; xxiii, 2.

. Xenophon, Memorab. iii, 5,18. Mydapdc, &dn 6 Loxparne, @ Mepixdece,
obra fryov dvnxéoty twovnpig vooeiv "AYnvaioug: Oix opgc, WE evTaKToL
név elaty év roig vavrixoic, ebraxtuc & éy roig yuuvixoig dyaot
weiSovrat Toig émiorarate, obdévwv 62 xatadeéctepov ev roig xopoicg brxgpe-

f

$82 HISTORY OF GREECE.

poorer Athenian citizens who served on ship board were distin-
guished for the strictest discipline, the hoplites, or middling
burghers, who formed the infantry, were less obedient, and the rich
citizens who served on horseback the most disobedient of all. To
make rich and powerful criminals effectively amenable to justice,
has indeed been found so difficult everywhere, until a recent period
of history, that we should be surprised if it were otherwise in
Greece. When we follow the reckless demeanor of rich men
like Kritias, Alkibiadés,! and Meidias, even under the full grown
democracy of Athens, we may be very sure that their predeces-
sors under the Kleisthenean constitution would have been often too
formidable to be punished or kept down by an individual archor
of ordinary firmness? even assuming him to be upright and well

rovat Toic didackGAotc; Totro yap rot, éon, xat Yavpacriy tori: rd Tov,
pev rocotrove wetdapyeiv roic épeorict, rove dé dmAirag,
cai rode lrreic, ol doxotct xadoxayatvig, mpoxexpiodat Tar
woAtroy, GwetVeorarove elyat Tartar.

1 See Xenophon, Memorab. i, 2, 12-25; Thucyd. vi, 15, and the speeck
which he gives as spoken by Alkibiadés in the assembly, vi, 17; Plutarch
Alkibiad. c. 7-8-16, and the Oration of Demosthenés against Meidias
throughout: also Fragm. v. of the [léAapyo: of Aristophanés, Meineke, ii,
p. 1128.

® Sir Thomas Smith, in his Treatise on the Commonwealth of England.
explains the Court of Star-thamber as originally constitated in order “to
deal with offenders too stout for the ordinary course of justice.” The abun-
dant compounds of the Greek language furnish a single word exactly de-
scribing this same class of offenders, —‘TSprerdd:xasz— the title of one of
the lost comedies of Eupolis: see Meineke, Historia Critica Comicoruam
Greecorum, vol. i, p. 145. a

Dean Tucker observes, in his Treatise on Civil Government: “ There was
hardly a session of parliament, from the time of Henry the Third to Henry
the Eighth, but laws were enacted for restraining. the feuds, robberies,
and oppressions of the barons and their dependents on the one side, — and
to moderate and check the excesses and extortions of the royal purveyors
on the other; these being the two capital evils then felt. Respecting the
tyranny of the ancient baronage, even squires as well as others were not
ashamed to wear the liveries of their leaders, and to glory in every badge
of distinction, whereby they might be known to be retained 2s the bullies
of such or such great men, and to engage in their quarrels, justor unjust,
right or wrong. The histories of those times,gogether with the statutes of the
realm, inform us that they associated (or, as they called it, confederated to
gether) in great bodies, parading on horseback in fairs and markets, and
clad in armor, tothe great terror of peaceable subjects; nay, that they

CHANGES AT ATHENS UNDER PERIKLES. 883

intentioned. Now the dikasteries established by Periklés were
inaccessible both to corruption and intimidation: their number,

attended their lords to parliament, equipped in the same military dress, and
even dared sometimes to present themselves before the judge of assize, and
to enter the courts of justice, in a hostile manner, — while their principals
sat with the judges on the bench, intimidating the witnesses, and influenc-
ing the juries by looks, nods, signs and signals.” (Treatise concerning Civil
Government, p. 337, by Josiah Tucker, D.D. London, 1781.)

The whole chapter (pp. 301-355) contains many statutes and much other
matter, illustrating the intimidation exercised by powerful men in those
days over the course of justice.

A passage among the Fragmenta of Sallust, gives a striking pictare of
the conduct of powerful citizens under the Roman Republic. (Fragm
lib. i, p. 158, ed. Delph.)

“ At discordia, et avaritia, et ambitio, ct cetera secundis rebus oriri sueta
mala, post Carthaginis excidium maximé aucta sunt. Nam injuria valid-
iorum, et ob eas discessio plebis 4 Patribus, alisque dissensiones domi
fuere jam inde a principio: neque amplius, quam regibus exactis, dum
metas & Tarquinio et bellum grave cum Etruria positum est, equo et mod-
esto jure agitatum: dein, servili imperio patres plebem exercere: de vita
atque tergo, regio more consulere : agro pellere, et & czsteris expertibus, soli
in imperio agere. Quibus servitiis, et maximé fonoris onere, oppressa
plebes, cum assiduis beilis tributum simul et militiam toleraret, armata
Montem Sacrum et Aventinum insedit. Tumque tribunos plebis, et alia
sibi jura paravit. Discordiarnm ¢t certaminis utrimque finis fait secundum
bellum Punicum.”

Compare the exposition of the condition of the cities throughout Europe
- in the thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth centuries, in Hiillmann’s St&dte-
Wesen des Mittelalters, especially vol. iii, pp. 196~199, segg.

The memorable institution which spread through nearly all the Italian
cities during these centuries, of naming as podesta, or supreme magistrate,
a person not belonging to the city itself, to hold office for a short time, —
was the expedient which they resorted to for escaping the extreme perver-
sion of judicial and administrative power, arising out of powerful family con-
nections. The restrictions which were thought necessary to guard against
either favor or antipathies on the part of the podesta, are extremely singu-
lar. (Hiillmann, vol. iii, pp. 252-261, sedq.)

“ The proceedings of the patrician families in these cities (observes Hiill
mann) in respect to the debts which they owed, was among the worst of the
many oppressions to which the trading classes were exposed at their hands,
one of the greatest abuses which they practised by means of their superior
position. How often did they even maltreat their creditors, who came to
demand merely what was due to them!” (Stadte-Wesen, vol. ii, p. 229.)

Machiavel’s History of Florence illustrates, throughout, the inveterate
habit of the powerful families to set themselves above the laws and iudicial

384 ° HISTORY OF GREECE.

their secret suffrage, and the impossibility of knowing beforehand
what individuals would sit in any particular cause, prevented both
the one and the other. And besides that the magnitude of their
number, extravagant, according to our ideas of judicial business,
was essential to this tutelary effect,’ it served farther to render
the trial solemn and the verdict imposing on the minds of parties
and spectators, as we may see by the fact that, in important
causes, the dikastery was doubled or tripled. Nor was it possi-
ble, by any other means than numbers,? to give dignity to an as-

authority. Indeed, he seems to regard this as an incorrigible chronic mal-
ady in society, necessitating ever-recurring disputes between powerful men
and the body of the people. ‘‘ The people (he says) desire to live according to
the laws; the great men desire to overrule the laws: it is therefore impossi-
ble that the two should march in harmony.” “ Volendo il popolo vivere se-
condo le leggi, e i potenti comandare a quelle, non 2 possibile che capino
insieme.” (Macciavelli, Istorie Fiorentine, liv. ii, p. 79, ad ann. 1282.)

The first book of the interesting tale, called the Promessi Sposi, of Man-
zoni, — itself full of historical matter, and since published with illustrative
notes by the historian Cantu, — exhibits a state of judicial administration,
very similar to that above described, in the Milanese, during the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries: demonstrated by repeated edicts, all ineffectual,
to bring powerful men under the real control of the laws.

Because men of wealth and power, in the principal governments of
modern Europe, are now completely under the control of the laws, the
modern reader is apt to suppose that this isthe natural state of things. It
is therefore not unimportant to produce some references, which might be
indefinitely multiplied, reminding him of the very different Preneien?
which past history exhibits almost everywhere.

1 The number of Roman judices employed to try a criminal cause under
the questiones perpetue in the last century and a half of the Republic, seems
to have varied between one hundred, seventy-five, seventy, fifty-six, fifty-
one, thirty-two, etc. (Labeulaye, Essai sur les Loix Criminelles des Ro-
mains, p. 336, Paris, 1845.)

In the time of Augustus, there was a total of four thousand judices at

Rome, distributed into four decuries (Pliny, H. N. xxxiii, 1, 31).
_ The venality, as well as the party corruption of these Roman judices, or
jurors, taken from the senatorial and equestrian orders, the two highest and
richest orders in the state, — was well-known and flagrant (Appian, Bell.
Civ. i, 22, 35, 37; Labonlaye, ibid. pp. 217-227 ; Walter, Geschichte des
Rémischen Rechts, ch. xxviii, sect. 287, 238; Asconius in Ciceron. Verrin.
pp. 141-145, ed. Orell.; and Cicero himself, in the remarkable letter to At-
ticus, Ep. ad Attic. i, 16).

* Numerous dikasteries taken by lot seem to have been established in

® ~

CHANGES AT ATHENS UNDER PERIKLES. 885

sembly of citizens, of whom many were poor, some old, and al,
were despised individually by rich accused persons who were
brought before them,— as <Aristophanés and Xenophon give us
plainly to understand.' If we except the strict and peculiar ed-
ucational discipline of Sparta, these numerous dikasteries afforded
the only organ which Grecian politics could devise, for getting re-
dress against powerful criminals, public as well as private, and
for obtaining a sincere and uncorrupt verdict.

Taking the general working of the dikasteries, we shall find
that they are nothing but jury-trial applied on a scale broad, sys-
tematic, unaided, and uncontrolled, beyond all other historical

later times in Rhodes and other Grecian cities, though Rhodes was not
democratically constituted, and to have worked satisfactorily. Sallust
says (in his Oratio ii. ad Cesarem de Republica, ordinanda, p. 561, ed.
Cort.) ; “Judices 4 paucis probari regnum est; ex pecuniAé legi, inhonestum.
Quare omnes prime classis judicare placet ; sed numero plures quam judi-
cant. Neque Rhodgios, neque alias civitates unquam suorum judicioram
penituit ; ubi promiscué dives et pauper, ut cuique sors talit,de maximis
rebus juxta ac de minimis disceptat.”

‘he necessity of a numerous judicature, in a republic where there is po
standing army, or official force professionally constituted, as the only mreans
of enforcing public-minded justice against powerfal criminals, is insistcd
upon by Machiavel, Discorsi sopra Tito Livio, lib. i, c. 7.

“Potrebbesi ancora allegare, a fortificazione della soprascritta conclu-
sione, l’accidente seguito pur in Firenze contra Piero Soderini: il quale al
tutto segul per non essere in quella republica alcuno modo di accuse contro
alla ambizione dei potenti cittadini: perché lo accusare un potente a otto
giudici in una republica, non basta: bisogna che i giudici siano assai, per:
ché pochi sempre fanno a modo de’ pochi,” etc.: compare the whole of the
same chapter. . a

1 Aristophan. Vesp. 570; Xenophon, Rep. Ath. i, 18. We are not to
suppose that all the dikasts who tried a cause were very poor: Demosthe-
nés would not talk to very poor men, as to “ the slave whom each of them
might have left at home.” (Demosthenés cont. Stephan. A. c. 26, p. 1127.)

It was criminal by law in the dikasts to receive bribes in the exercise of
their functions, as well as in every citizen to give money to them (Demosth.
cont. Steph. B. c. 13, p. 1137). And it seems perfectly safe to affirm that
in practice the dikasts-were never tampered with beforehand : had the fact
been otherwise, we must have seen copious allusions to it in the many free-
spoken pleadings which remain to us, just as there are in the Roman orsa-
tors: whereas, in point of fact, there are hardly any such allusions. The
word dexafwv (in Isokratés de Pac. Or. viii, p. 169, sect. 63) does not allad.
to obtaining by corrupt means verdicts of dikasts in the dikastery, but tc

VOL. V. 17 250c.

386 HISTORY OF GREECE.

experience, and that they therefore exhibit in exaggerated pro-
portions both the excellences and the defects characteristic of the
jury-system, as compared with decision by trained and _ profes-
sional judges. All the encomiums, which it is customary to pro-
nounce upon jury-trial, will be found predicable of the Athenian
dikasteries in a still greater degree: all the reproaches, which
can be addressed on yood ground to the dikasteries, will’ apply to
modern juries also, though in a less degree. Nor is the parallel
less just, though the dikasteries, as the most democratical feature
of democracy itself, have been usually criticized with marked
disfavor, — every censure, or sneer, or joke against them, which
can be found in ancient authors, comic as well as serious, being
accepted as true almost to the letter; while juries are so popular
an institution, that their merits have been over-stated, in England
at least, and their defects kept out of sight. The theory of the
Athenian dikastery, ‘and the theory of jury-trial, as it has pre
vailed in England since the revolution of 1688,are one and the

obtaining by such means votes for offices in the public assembly, where the
election took place by show of hands. Isokratés says that this was often
done in his time, and so perhaps it may have been: but in the case of the
dikasteries, much better security was taken against it.

The statement of Aristotle (from his Hodvreia:, Fragm. xi, p. 69, ed.
Neumann: compare Harpokration v, Aexafecy; Plutarch, Coriolan.c. 14;
and Pollux, viii, 121) intimates that Anytus was the first person who
taught the art rot dexalecy rd dixacrnpia, 8 short time before the battle of
JEgos Potamos. But besides, that the information on this point is ta the
last degree vague, we may remark that between the defeat of the oligarchy
of Four Hundred and the battle of gos Potamos, the financial and politi-
cal condition of Athens was so exceedingly embarrassed, that it may, well
be doubted whether she could maintain the paid dikasteries on the ordinary
footing. Both all the personal service of the citizens, and all the public
money, must have been put in requisition at that time for defence against the
enemy, without leaving any surplus for other purposes: there was not
enough even to afford constant pay to the soldiers and sailors (compare
Thucyd. vi, 91; viii, 69, 71, 76, 86). If therefore, in this time of distress,
the dikasteries were rarely convoked, and without any certainty of pay,a
powerful accused person might find it more easy to tamper with them be-
forehand, than it had been before, or than it came to be afterwards, when

the system was regularly in operation. We can hardly reason with satets, .

therefore, from the period shortly preceding the battle of A8gos Potamos,
either to that which preceded the Sicilian expedition, or to that which fol
lowed the subversion of the Thirty.

—_—

CHANGES AT ATHENS UNDER PERIKLES. 887

same : recourse to a certain number of private citizens, taken by
chance, or without possibility of knowing beforehand who they
will be, sworn to hear fairly and impartially plaintiff and defend-
ant, accuser and accused, and to find a true verdict, according to
their consciences, upon a distinct issue before them. But in Ath-
ens this theory was worked out to its natural consequences ; while
English practice, in this respect as in so many others, is at vari-
ance with English theory: the jury, though an ancient and a
constant portion of the judicial system, has never been more
than a portion, — kept in subordination, trammels, and pupilage,
by a powerful crown, and by judges presiding over an artificial
system of law. In the English state trials, down to a period not
long before the revolution of 1688, any jurors who found a ver-
dict contrary to the dictation of the judge were liable to fine ; and
at an earlier period, if a second jury on being summoned found
an opposite verdict, even to the terrible punishment of attaint.!

'Mr. Jardine, in his interesting and valuable publication, Criminal
Trials, vol. i, p. 115, after giving an account of the trial of Sir Nicholas
Throckmorton in 1553, for high treason, and his acquittal, observes:
“ There is one circumstance in this trial, which ought not to be passed over
without an observation. It appears that after the trial was over, the jury
were required to give recognizances to answer for their verdict, and were
afterwards imprisoned for nearly eight months, and heavily fined, by a sen-
tence of the Star-chamber. Such was the security which the trial by jury
afforded to the subject in those times: and such were the perils to which
juries were then exposed, who ventured to act upon their conscientious
opinions in state prosecutions! But even these proceedings against the
jury, monstrous as they appear to our improved notions of the administra.
tion of justice, must not be considered as a wanton exercise of unlawful
power on this particular occasion. The fact is, that the judges of England
had for centuries before exercised a similar authority, though not without
some murmuring against it; and it was not until more than a century after
it, in the reign of Charles the Second, that a solemn decision was pro-
nounced against its legality.”

selene “In the reign of James the First, it was held by the Lord Chancel-
lor Egerton, together with the two Chief Justices and the Chief Baron, that
when a party indicted is found guilty on the trial, the jury shall not be ques
tioned ; but on the other side, when a jury hath acquitted a felon or a traitor
against manifest proof, they may be charged in the Star-chamber for their
partiality in finding a manifest offender not guilty. After the abolition of
the Star-chamber, there were several instances in the reign of Charles the
Second. in which it was resolved, that both grand and petit juries might be

888 HISTORY OF GREECE.

And though, for the last century and a half, the verdict of the
jury has been free as to matters of fact, new trials having taken
the place of the old attaint, yet the ascendency of the presiding
judge over their minds, and his influence over the procedure as
the authority on matters of law, has always been such as to
overrule the natural play of their feelings and judgment as men
and citizens,’ sometimes to the detriment, much oftener to the
benefit — always excepting political trials — of substantial justice.
But in Athens, the dikasts judged of the law as well as of the
fact: the laws were not numerous, and were couched in few, for
the most part familiar, words. To determine how the facts
stood, and whether, if the facts were undisputed, the law invoked
was properly applicable to them, were parts of the integral ques-
tion submitted to them, and comprehended in their verdict:
moreover, each dikastery construed the law for itself, without be-
ing bound to follow the decisions of those which had preceded

fined for giving verdicts against plain evidence and the directions of the
court.” Compare Mr. Amos’s Notes on Fortescue, De Laudibus Legum
Anglig, c. 27.

' Respecting the French juries, M. Cottu (Réflexions sur la Justice Crim-
inale, p. 79) remarks : —

“ Le désir ardent de bien faire dont les jurés sont généralement animés,
et la crainte de s’égarer, les jette dans une obéissance passive & l’impulsion
qui leur est donnée par le président de la Cour d’Assise, et si ce magistrat
sait s'emparer de leur estime, alors leur confiance en lui ne connoit plus de
bornes. Ils le consid¢rent comme I’étoile qui doit les guider dans l’obscur-
ité qui les environne, et pleins d'un respect aveugle pour son opinion, ils
n’attendent que la manifestation qu'il leur en fait pour la sanctionner par
leur déclaration. Ainsi au lieu de deux juges que l’accusé devoit avoir, il
n’en a bien souvent qu’un seul, qui est le président de la Cour d’ Assise.”

Anselm Feuerbach (in the second part of his work, Ueber die Oeffent-
lichkeit und Miindlichkeit der Gerechtigkeitspflege, which contains his
review of the French judicial system, Ueber die Gerichtsverfassung Frank-
reichs, Abt. iii, H. v, p. 477) confirms this statement from a large observa-
tion of the French courts of justice.

The habit of the French juries, in so many doubtful cases, to pronounce
a verdict of guilty, by a majority of seven against five, in which case the
law threw the actual condemnation upon the judges present in court, direct-
ing their votes to be counted along with those of the jury. is a remarkable
proof of this aversion of the jurv to the responsibility of decision; see
Feuerbach, ibid. p. 481, segg. Compare also the treatise of the same
author, Betrachtungen iiber das Geschwornen Gericht. pp. 186-198.

CHANGES AT ATHENS UNDER PERIKLES. 889

it, except in so far as such analogy might really influence the
convictions of the members. They were free, self-judging per-
sons, unassisted by the schooling, but at the same time untram-
melled by the awe-striking ascendency, of a professional judge,
obeying the spontaneous inspirations of their own consciences,
and recognizing no authority except the laws of the city, with
which they were familiar.

Trial by jury, as practised in England ei since 1688, has been
politically most valuable, as a security against the encroachments
of an anti-popular executive: partly for this reason, partly for
others, not necessary to state here, it has had greater credit as an
instrument of judicature generally, and has been supposed to
produce much more of what is good in English administration of
justice, than really belongs to it. Amidst the unqualified enco-
miums so frequently bestowed upon the honesty, the unprejudiced
rectitude of appreciation, the practical instinct for detecting false-
hood and resisting sophistry, in twelve citizens taken by hazard
and put into a jury-box, — comparatively little account is taken
either of the aids, or of the restrictions, or of the corrections in
the shape of new trials, under which they act, or of the artificial
forensic medium into which they are plunged for the time of
their service: so that the theory of the case presumes them to be
more of spontaneous agents, and more analogous to the Athenian
dikasts than the practice confirms. Accordingly, when we read
these encomiums in modern authors, we shall find‘that both the
direct benefits ascribed to jury-trial in insuring pure and even-
handed justice, and still more its indirect benefits in improving
and educating the citizens generally, might have been set forth yet’
more emphatically in a laudatory harangue of Periklés about the
Athenian dikasteries. If it be true that an Englishman or an
American counts more certainly on an impartial and uncorrupt
verdict from a jury of his country, than from a permanent pro-
fessional judge, much more would this be the feeling of an ordi
nary Athenian, when he compared the dikasteries with the ar-
chon. The juror hears and judges under full persuasion that he
himself, individually, stands in need of the same protection or
redress invoked by others: so also did the dikast. As to the
effects of jury-trial, in diffusing respect to the laws and constitu-
tion, in giving to every citizen a personal interest in enforcing the

890 HISTORY OF GREECE.

former and taaintaining the latter, in imparting a sentiment of dig-
nity to small and poor men, through the discharge of a function
exalted as well as useful, in calling forth the patriotic sympathies,
and exercising the mental capacities of every individual; all
these effects were produced in a still higher degree by the dikas-
teries at Athens; from their greater frequency, numbers, and
spontaneity of mental action, without any professional judge,
upon whom they could throw the responsibility of deciding for
them.!

1T transcribe from an eminent lawyer of the United States, Mr. Living
ston, author of a Penal Code for the State of Louisiana (Preface, pp. 12-16),
an eloquent panegyric on trial by jury. It contains little more than the
topics commonly insisted on, but it is expressed with peculiar warmth, and
with the greater fulness, inasmuch as the people of Louisiana, for whom
the author was writing, had no familiarity with the institution and its work-
ing. The reader will observe that almost everything here said in recom-
mendation of the jury might have been urged by Periklés with much truer
and wider application, in enforcing his transfer of judicial power from indi-
vidual magistrates tothe dikasteries. :

“ By our constitution (:. e. in Louisiana), the right of a trial by jury is se-
cured to the accused, but itis not exclusively established. This, however,
may be done by law, and there are so many strong reasons in its favor, that
it has been thought proper to insert in the codea precise declaration that, in
all criminal prosecutions, the trial by jury is a privilege which cannot be re-
nounced. Were it left entirely at the option of the accused, a desire to
propitiate the favor of the judge, ignorance of his interest, or the confusion
incident to his situation, might induce him to waive the advantage of a
trial by his country, and thus by degrees accustom the people to a spectacle
which they ought never to behold, — a single man Aetermining the fact, ap-
plying the law, and disposing at his will of the life, liberty, and reputation
of a citizen..... -- Lhose who advocate the present disposition of our law
say, — admitting the trial by jury to be an advantage, the law does enongh
when it gives the accused the option to avail himself of its benefits; he is
the best judge whether it will be useful to him; and it would be unjust to
direct him in so important a choice. This argument is specious, but not
solid. There are reasons, and some have already been stated, to show that
this choice cannot be freely exercised. -There is, moreover, another interest
besides that of the culprit to be considered. If he be guilty, the state has
an interest in his conviction: and, whether guilty or innocent, it has a high-
er interest, — that the fact should be fairly canvassed before judges inac-
cessible to influence, and unbiased by any false views of official duty. Is -
has an interest in the character of its administration of justice, and a para-
mount duty to perform in rendering it free from suspicion. It is not true,
therefore, to say that the laws do enough when they give the choice between

CHANGES AT ATHENS UNDER PERIKLES. 891

On the other hand, the imperfections inherent in jury-trial
were likewise disclosed in an exaggerated form under the Athe-
a fair and impartial trial, and one that is liable to the greatest objections.
They must do more; they must restrict that choice, so as not to suffer
an ill-advised individual to. degrade them into instruments of ruin, though
it should be voluntarily inflicted ; or of death, though that death should be
suicide.

“ Another advantage of rendering this mode of trial obligatory is, that it
diffuses the most valuable information among every rank of citizens; it is
a school, of which every jury that is impanelled is a separate class, where
the dictates of the laws, and the consequences of disobedience to them, are
practically taught. The frequent exercise of these important functions,
moreover, gives a sense of dignity and self-respect, not only becoming to
the character of a free citizen, but which adds to his private happiness.
Neither party-spirit, nor intrigue, nor power, can deprive him of this share
in the administration of justice, though they can humble the pride of every
other office and vacate every other place. Every time he is called on to
act in this capacity, he must feel that though placed in the humblest station, he
ts yet the guardian of the life, the liberty, and the reputation of his fellow-citizens
_ against injustice and oppression ; and that while his plain understanding has been

Sound the best refuge for innocence, his incorruptible integrity 1s pronounced
a sure pledge that guilt will not escape. A state whose most obscure citizens are
thys individually elevated to perform these august functions; who are alter-
nately. the defenders of the injured, the dread of the guilty, the vigilant
guardians of the constitution ; without whose consent no punishment can
be inflicted, no disgrace incurred ; who can by their voice arrest the blow of
oppression, and direct the hand of justice where to strike, such a state
can never siak into slavery, or easily submit to oppression. Corrupt rulers
may pervert the constitution: ambitious demagogues may violate its pre-
cepts: foreign influence may control its operations ; but while the people
enjoy the trial by jury, taken by lot from among themselves, they cannot
cease to be free. The information it spreads, the sense of dignity and inde-
pendence it inspires. the courage it creates, will always give them an energy
of resistance that can grapple with encroachments, and a renovating spirit
that will make arbitrary power despair. The enemies of freedom know this:
they know how admirable a vehicle it is, to convey the contagion of those
liberal principles which attack the vitals of their power, and they therefore
guard against its introduction with more care than they would take to avoid
pestilential disease. In countries where it already exists, they insidiously
endeavor to innovate, because they dare not openly destroy: changes incon-
sistent with the spirit of the institution are introdaced, under the plausidie
pretext of improvement: the common class of citizens are too ill-informed to per-
Jorm the functions of jurors,—a selection is necessary. This choice must be con-
fided to an agent of executive power, and must be made among the most ~
eminent for education. wealth,.and respectability: so that, after several suc

892 HISTORY OF GREECE.

nian system. Both jaror and dikast represent the average mau
of the time and of the neighborhood, exempt, indeed, from pecu-
niary corruption or personal fear, deciding according to what he
thinks justice, or to some genuine feeling of equity, mercy, religion,
or patriotism, which in reference to the case before him he thinks

cessful operations of political chemistry, a shining result may be obtained,
freed, indeed, from all republican dross, but without any of the intrinsic
value that is found in the rngged but inflexible integrity, and incoruptible
worth, of the original composition. Men impanelled by this process, bear
no resemblance but in name to the sturdy, honest, unlettered jurors who derive
no dignity but from the performance of their duties; and the momentary exercise
of whose functions gives no time for the work of corruption or the influence of
fear. By innovations such as these the institution is so changed as to leave
nothing to attach the affections or awaken the interest of the people,
and it is neglected as an useless, or abandoned as a mischievous, con-
trivance.” ;

Consistently with this earnest admiration of jury-trial, Mr. Livingston, by
the provisions of his code, limits very materially the interference of the
presiding judge, thus bringing back the jurors more nearly to a similarity
with the Athenian dikasts (p. 85): “I restrict the charge of the judge toan ~
opinion of the law, and to the repetition of the evidence, only when required by
any one of the jury. The practice of repeating all the testimony from notes,
always (from the nature of things) imperfectly, not seldom inaccuratety,
and sometimes carelessly taken,— has a double disadvantage: it makes
the jurors, who rely more on the judge’s notes than on their own memory,
inattentive to the evidence: and it gives them an imperfect copy of that
which the nature of the trial by jury requires that they should record in
their own minds. Forced to rely upon themselves, the necessity will quick-
en their attention, and it will be only when they disagree in their recollec-
tion, that recourse will be had to the notes of the judge.” Mr. Livingston
goes on to add, that the judges, from their old habits, acquired as practising
advocates, are scarcely ever neutral, — almost always take a side, and gen-
erally against the prisoners on trial.

The same considerations as those which Mr. Livingston here sets forth to
demonstrate the value of jury-trial, are also insisted upon by M. Charles
Comte, in his translation of Sir Richard Phillips’s Treatise on Juries, en-
larged with many valuable reflections on the different shape which the jury-
system has assumed in England and France. (Des Pouvoirs et des Obliga-
tions des Jury, traduit de P Anglois, par Charles Comte, 2d ed. Paris, 1828,
with preliminary Considérations sur le Pouvoir Judiciaire, pp. 100, segq.)

The length of this note forbids my citing anything farther either from the
eulogistic observations of Sir Richard Phillips or from those of M. Comte:
but they would be found, like those of Mr. Livingston, even more applica-
ble to the dikasteries of Athens than to the juries of England and Americe

e
’
”
4
wv,

Ya gee etal
ig te
a, * ry

5 ¢

mee geet ON eee Oem gere ape 6 wu ght OE ene ee aN ons
>in . * es .
gis

:¥’. ‘

ae, ne
wae] Pas es
- Se 'y z

on aaa? ad’

af

td Pt of
ad .
es

CHANGES AT ATHENS UNDER PERIKLES. $98

iain justice, — but not exempt from sympathies, antipa-
Thies and prejudices, all of which act the more powerfully be-
cauge there is often no consciousness of their presence, and
_because they even appear essential to his idea of plain and
‘straight-forward good sense. According as a jury are composed
‘of Catholics or Protestants, Irishmen or Englishmen, tradesmen,
. farmers, or inhabitants of a frontier on which smuggling prevails,
, there is apt to prevail among them a corresponding bias: at the’ -
- time of any great national delusion, such as the Popish Plot, — or . .

ms ee any powerful local excitement, such as that of the Church.

%

4 .

nae Y

rer
. 8 @

* arily used within the city of London, among such persons as passen and
-- been impannelled in issue, joined between party anJj party.’

: #&
<

ke ‘
Po ar

,and King mobs, at Birmingham, in 1791, against Dr. Priestley
and the Dissenters, —juries are found to perpetrate what a
' calmer age recognizes to have been gross injustice. A jury who
sauaoprore of the infliction of capital punishment for a particular

crime, will acquit prisoners in spite of the clearest evidence of
: guile It is probable that a delinquent, indicted for any state

<'” ‘offence before the dikastery, at Athens, — having only a private

+ accuser to contend against, with equal power of speaking in his
‘own defence, of summoning witnesses, and of procuring friends

ang ~ I speak for him, — would have better ‘chance of a fair trial than

" he would now have anywhere, except in England and the United
"- States of America; and better than he would have had in Eng-

.. land down to the seventeenth century.' Juries bring the com-

“aa Mr. Jardine (Crimimal Trials, Introduct. p. 8) observes, that the “ pro-
i... ceedings against persons accused of state offences, in the earlier periods of
‘2 : owr history, do not deserve the name of trials: they were a mere mockery
ae

: of justice,” etc.

- Respecting what English juries have been, it is curious to peruse the fol-
lowing remarks of Mr. Daines Barrington, Observations on the Statutes,
+ y:409. In remarking on a statute of Henry the Seventh, a.p. 1494, he says :

“ The twenty-first chapter recites: ‘That perjury is much and custom-

“This offence hath been before this statute complained of in preambles
“tp several laws, being always the perjury of a juror, who finds a verdict con-
* trary to his oath, and not that which we hear too much of at present, in the
Witnesses produced at a trial.

.- “In the Dance of Death, written originally in French, by Macharel, and

 ftanslated by John Lydgate in this reign, with some additions, to adapt it
oe English characters, —a juryman is mentioned, who had often been

17*

894 HISTORY OF GREECE.

mon feeling as well as the common reason of the public, —or

often, indeed, only the separate feeling of particular fractions of
the public, — to dictate the application of the law to particular
cases: they are a protection against anything worse, — especially
_ against such corruption and servility as are liable to taint per-
manent official persons, but they cannot possibly reach anything
better. Now the dikast trial at Athens effected the same object,
and had in it only the same ingredients of error and misdecision,

bribed for giving a false verdict, which shows the offence to have been very
common. The sheriff, who summoned the jury, was likewise greatly ac-
cessory to this crime, by summoning those who were most partial and
prejudiced. Carew, in his account of Cornwall, informs us that it was a
common article in an attorney's bill, to charge pro amicitid vicecomitis.

“Jt is likewise remarkable, that partiality and perjury in jurors of the
city of London is more particularly complained of than in other parts of
England, by the preamble of this and other statutes. Stow informs us that
in 1468, many jurors of this city were punished by having papers fixed on
their heads, stating their offence of having been tampered with by the parties
to the suit. He likewise complains that this crying offence continued in the

time of Queen Elizabeth, when he wrote his account of London: and Fal- .
ler, in his English Worthies, mentions it as a proverbial saying, that Lon-- -
don juries hang half and save half. Grafton also, in his Chronicle, informs ~ . -

us that the Chancellor of the diocese of London was indicted for a mur-
der, and that the bishop wrote a letter to Cardinal Wolsey, in behalf of his

officer, to stop the prosecution, ‘because London juries were so prejudiced, °

that they would find Abel guilty for the murder of Cain.’

“The punishment for a false verdict by the petty jury is by writ of at-
taint: and the statute directs, that half of the grand-jury, when the trial is
per medietatem lingue, shall be strangers, not Londoners.

‘ And there’s no London jury, but are led
In evidence as far by common fame,
As they are by present deposition.’
(Ben Jonson’s Magnetic Lady, Act. iii, Sc. 3.)

“Tt appears by 15 Henry the Sixth, c. 5, — which likewise recites the great
imcrease of perjury in jurors, and in the strongest terms,—that in every
attaint there were thirteen defendants: the twelve jurors who gave the ver-
dict, and the plaintiff or defendant who had obtained it, who therefore was
supposed to have used corrupt means to procure it. For this reason, if the
verdict was given in favor of the crown, no attaint could be brought,
because the king could not be joined as a defendant with the jury who
were prosecuted.”

Compare also the same work, pp. 394-457, and Mr. Amos’s Notes on
Fortescue de Laudib. Leg. Angliz, c. 27.

«

CHANGES AT ATHENS UNDER PERIKLES. 855

as the English jury: but it had them in stronger dose,! without

1 In France, jury-trial was only introduced for the first time by the Con-
stituent Assembly in 1790, and then only for criminal procedure: I tran-
scribe the following remarks on the working of it from the instructive
article in Merlin’s “ Répertoire- de Jurispradence,” article Juré. Though
written in a spirit very favorable to the jury, it proclaims the reflections of
an observing lawyer on the temper and competence of the jurymen whom
he had seen in action, and on their disposition to pronounce the verdict
according to the feeling which tke case before them inspired.

“Pourquoi faut il qu’ane institution qui rdssure les citoyeps contre
Pendurcissement et la prévention si faneste 4 innocence, que peut produire
Vhabitude de juger les crimes .... qu’une institution ,ai donne pour juges
& un accusé, des citoyens indépendans de toute espéce d’influence, ses pairs,
ses égaux .... pourquoi faut il que cette institutioa, dont les formes sont
simples, touchantes, patriarchalea, dont la théorie flatte et entraine Desprit
par une séduction irrésistible, ait été si souvent méconnue, trompée par
Vignorance et la pusillanimité, prostitutée peut-étre par une vile et coupable
corruption ? ; =

“ Rendons pourtant justice anx erreurs, méme A la prévarication, des
jarés : ils ont trop de fois acquitté les coupables, mais il n’a pas encore été
prouvé qu’ils eussent jamais fait couler une goutte de sang innocent: et si
Yon pouvoit sppposer qu’ils eussent va quelquefois le crime 1a od i] n’y en
avoit qu’une apparence trompeuse et fausse, ce ne seroit pas leur conscience
qu'il faudroit accuser: ce seroit la fatalité malheureuse des circonstances
qui auroicnt accompagné l’accusation, e¢ qui auroit trompé de méme les
juges les plus pénétrans et les plus exercés & rechercher la vérité et a la
déméler du mensonge. .

‘Mais les reproches qu’ont souvent mérités les jurés, c'est d’avoir cédé &
une fausse commisération, ob 4 Vintérét qu’étoient parvenus & leur inspirer les
familles d’accusés qui avaient un rang dans la société: c’est souvent d’étre
sortis de leurs attributions, qui se borneut 4 apprécier les faits, et les juger
d’une maniere différente de la loi. Jai wu cent exemples de ces usurpations de
pouvoir et de ce despotisme des jurés. Trop souvent ils ont voulu voir une
action innocente, la od la loi avoit dit qu’il y avait un crime, et alors ils
n’ont pas craint de se jouer de fa vérité pour tromper et éluder la loi.”
Tee ee RO et ee “ Serat-il possible d’améliorer Piistitution
des jurés, et d’en prévenir les écarts souvent trop scandalenx? Gardons
nous d’en douter. Que l’on-commence par composer le jury de proprié
taires intéressés & punir le crime pour Je rendre plus rare: que surtout on
en éloigne les artisans, les petits cultjvateurs, hommes chez qui sans doute
la probité est heureusement fort commune, mais dont l’esprit est peu exerceé,
et qui, accoutumés anx déférences, aux égards, cédent toujours 4 Popinion
Je ceux de leurs collégues dont le rang est plus distingué : ou qui, familiar-
. 4sés seulement avec les idées relatives & leur profession, n’ont jamais eu,
dans tout le reste, que des idées d’emprunt ou d’inspiration. On sait

896 . HISTORY OF GREECE.

the counteracting authority of a judge, and without the benefit
of s procedure such as has now been obtained in England. The

qu’aujourdhui ce sont ces hommes qui dans presque toute In France forment
toujours la majorité des jurés: mettez au milieu d’eux un homme d’un
état plus élevé, d’un esprit délié, d’une ¢locution facile, il entrainera ses col-
légues, il décidera la délibération : et si cet homme a le jugement faux ou
le cour corrompu, cette délibération sera nécessairemept mauvaise.

“Mais pourra-t on parvenir & vaincre l'insouciance des propri¢taires
riches et éclairés, & leur faire abandonner leurs affaires, leurs familles, leurs
habitudes, pour les entrainer dans les villes, et leur y faire remplir des fonc-
tions qui tourmentent quelquefois la probité, et donnent des inquiétudes
d’autant plus vives que la conscience est plus délicate? Pourquoi non ?%
Pourquoi les mémes classes de citoyens qui dans les huit ou dix premiers
mois de 1792, se portaient avec tant de zéle a l’exercice de ces fonctions,
les fuiroient elles aujourdhui? surtout si, pour les y rappeler, la loi fait
mouvoir les deux grands ressorts qui sont dans sa main, si elle s’engage a
récompenser l’exactitude, et & punir la négligence?” (Merlin, Répertoire
de Jurisprudence, art. Jurés, p. 97.) "

In these passages, it deserves notice, that what is particularly remarked
about juries, both English and French, is, their reluctance to convict ac-
cused persons brought before them. Now the character of the Athenian
dikasts, as described by Mr. Mitford and by many other authors, is the pre-
cise reverse of this: an extreme severity and cruelty, and a disposition to
convict all accused persons brought before them, upon little or no evidence,
—especially rich accused persons. I venture to affirm that, to ascribe to
them such a temper generally, is not less improbable in itself, than ansup-
ported by any good evidence. In the speeches remaining to us from de-
fendants, we do indeed find complaints made of the severity of the dikas-
teries : but in those speeches which come from accusers, there are abun-
dance of complaints to the contrary, — of over-indulgence on the part of
the dikasteries, and consequent impunity of criminals. Nor does Aristoph-
anés, — by whom most modern authors are guided, even when they do .
not quote him, — when fairly studied, bear out the temper ascribed by Mr.
Mitford to the dikasts; even if we admitted Aristophanés to be a faithful
and trustworthy witness, which no man who knows his picture of Sokratés
will be disposed to do. Aristophanés takes hold of every quality which
will raise a laugh against the dikasts, and his portrait of them as wasps was
well calculated for this purpose,—to describe them as boiling over with
acrimony, irritation, impatience, to find some one whom they could convict
and punish. But even he, when he comes to describe these dikasts in action,
represents them as obeying the appeals to their pity, as well as those to their
anger, — as being yielding and impressionable when their feelings are ap-
proached on either side, and unable, when they hear theexculpatory appeal of
the accused, to maintain the anger which had been raised by the speech of the

CHANGES AT ATHENS UNDER PERIKLES. 897

feelings of the dikasts counted for more, and their reason for less:

‘not merely because of their greater numbers, which naturally

heightened the pitch of feeling in each individual, but also because
the addresses of orators or parties formed the prominent part of the
procedure, and the depositions of witnesses only a very subordi-
nate part; the dikast,! therefore, heard little of the naked facts,

accuser. (See Aristophan. Vesp. 574, 713, 727, 794.) Moreover, if from
the Vespx we turn to, the Nubes, where the poet attacks the sophists and
not the dikasts, we are there told that the sophists could arm any man with
fallacies and subterfuges which would enable him to procure acquittal from
the dikasts, whatever might be the crime committed.

I believe that this open-mindedness, and impressibility of the feelings on
all sides, by art, eloquence, prayers, tears, invectives, etc., is the true char-
acter of the Athenian dikasts. And I also believe that they were, as a gen-
eral rule, more open to commiseration than to any other feeling, — like
what is above said respecting the French jurymen: etvxivyrog mpd dpynv (6
"AUnvaiwy djpuoc), evueTadetog mpdg EAcov,— this expression of Plutarch
abcut the Athenian demos is no less true about the dikasts: compare aleo
the description given by Pliny (H. N. xxxv, 10) of the memorable picture
of the Athenian demos by the painter Parrhasius.

? That the difference between the dikast and the juryman, in this respect,
is only one of degree, I need hardly remark. M. Merlin observes, “Je ne
pense pas, comme bien des gens, que pour étre propre.aux fonctions de
jaré, il suffise d’avoir une intelligence ordinaire et de la probité. Si Vaccusé
paroissoit seul aux débats avec lec témoins, il ne faudroit sans doute que du
bon sens pour reconnoitre la vérité dans des déclarations faites avec sim-
plicité et dégagées de tout raisonnement : mais il y paroit assisté presque tou-
jours d’un ou de plusieurs défenseurs qui par des interpellations captieuses,
embarrassent ou égarent les témoins ; et par une discussion subtile, sonvent
sophistique, quelquefois éloquente, enveloppent la vérité des nuages, et ren-
dent l’evidence méme problématique. Certes, il faut plus que de bonnes
intentions, il faut plus que du bon sens, pour ne pas se laisser entrainer &
ces fausses lueurs, pour se garantir des écarts de la sensibilité, et pour se
maintenir immuablement dans la ligne du vrai, au milieu de ces impulsions
données en méme temps a l’esprit et au cceur.” (Merlin, Répertoire de
Jurisprudence, art. Jurés, p. 98).

At Athens, there were no professional advocates: the accuser and the ac-
cused — or the plaintiff and defendant, if the cause was civil— each ap-
peared in person with their witnesses, or sometimes with depositions which
the witnesses had sworn to before the archon: each might come with a
speech prepared by Antipho (Thucyd. viii, 68) or some other rhetor: each
might have one or more gvv7yédpove to speak on his behalf after himself, but
seemingly only out of the space of time allotted to him by the clepsydra,

’ In civil causes, the defendant must have been perfectly acquainted with the

398 HISTORY OF GREECE.

the appropriate subjects for his reason, — but he was abundantly
supplied with the plausible falsehoods, calumnies, irrelevant
statements ani suggestions, etc., of the parties, and that too in a
manner skilfully adapted to his temper. To keep the facts of
the case before the jury, apart from the falsehood and coloring of
parties, is the most useful function of the modern judge, whose
influence is also considerable as a restraint upon the pleader.
The helps to the reason of the dikast were thus materially dimin-
ished, while the action upon his feelings, of anger as well as of
compassion, was sharpened, as compared with the modern juror.!
We see, in the remaining productions of the Attic orators, how
much there is of plausible deception, departure from the true
issue, and appeals to sympathies, antipathies, and prejudices of

plaintiff s case, since, besides the anakrisis, or preliminary examination be-
fore the archon, the cause had been for the most part already before an
arbitrator. In a criminal case, the accused party had only the anakrisis to
guide him, as to the matter of which he to be accused: but it appears
from the prepared speeches of accused parties which we now possess, that
this anakrisis must have been sufficiently copious to give him a good idea
of that which he had to rebut. The accuser was condemned to a fine of
one thousand drachms, if he did not obtain on the verdict one-fifth of the
votes of the dikasts engaged.

Antipho not only composed speeches for pleaders before the dikastery,
but also gave them valuable advice generally as to the manner of conduct-
ing their case, etc., though he did not himself speak before the dikasts: so
also Ktesiklés the Aoyéypagog (Demosthenés cont. Theokrin. c. 5) acted as
general adviser, or attorney.

’ Aristotle, in the first and second chapters of his Treatise de Rhetoricé,
complains that the teachers and writers on rhetoric who preceded him,
treated almost entirely of the different means of working on the feelings
of the dikasts, and of matters “extraneous to the real question which the
dikasts ought to try.” (ep? roév fu rot mpaypatog Ta mwAeiora mpaypared-
ovrat’ dtaBoAy ydp wat EAeog nal dpy?, ob epi tov mpayparog tory, GAAC
npoc Toy d:xacriy, etc., i, 1,1: compare, i, 2, 3, and iii, 1, 2.)

This is sufficient to show how prominent such appeals to the feelings of
the dikasts were, in actual fact and practice, even if we did not know it
from the perusal of the orations themselves.

Respecting the habit of accused persons to bring their wives and childrea
before the dikasts as suppliants for them, to obtain mercy or acquittal, ses
Aristophan. Vesp. 567-9764 Andokidés de Mysteriis (ad finem), and Lysias,
Orat. iv, de Vulnere (ad finem).

‘

2

CHANGES AT ATHENS UNDER PERIKLES. 899

every kind, addressed to the-dikasteries.1 Of course, such arti

1 To a person accustomed to the judicature of modern Europe, conducted
throughout all its stages by the instrumentality of professional men,—
judges, advocates, attorneys, etc.,— and viewed by the general public as a
matter in which no private citizen either could act or ought to act for him-
self, —nothing is more remarkable in reading the Attic judicial orations,
to a certain extent also the Roman, than the entire absence of this pro-
fessional feeling, and the exhibition of justice both invoked and adminis
tered by private citizens exclusively The nearest analogy to this, which
modern justice presents, is to be found in the courts of Requests and other
courts for trying causes limited to small sums of property, — too small to
be worth the notice of judges and lawyers.

These courts, in spite of their direct and important bearing on the wel-
fare and security of the poorer classes, have received little elucidation. The
History of the Birmingham Court of Requests, by Mr. William Hutton, —
lately republished by Messrs. Chambers,— forms an exception to this
remark, and is full of instruction in respect to the habits, the conduct,
and the sufferings of poor persons. It furnishes, besides, the closest ap
proach that I know to the feelings of Athenian dikasts and pleaders,
though of course with many important differences. Mr. Hutton was for
many years unremitting in his attendance as a commissioner, and took
warm interest in the honorable working of the court. His remarks upon
the position, the duties, and the difficulties of the commissioners, illus-
trated by numerous cases given in detail, are extremely interesting, and
represent thoughts which must have often suggested themselves to intelli-
gent dikasts at Athens.

“ Law and equity (he says, p. 34) often vary. If the commissioners can-
not decide against law, they can decide without it. Their oath hinds them to
proceed according to good conscience (rept drod obx elot vopol, yvouy TH
éixacorary, was the oath of the Athenian dikast). A man only needs
information to be able to decide.”

A few words from p. 36, about the sources of misjudgment. ‘“ Misinfor-
mation is another source of evil: both parties equally treat the commis-
sioners with deceit. The only people who can throw light upon the subject
will not.

- “Tt is difficult not to be won by the first speaker, if he carries the air of
mildness and is master of his tale; or not to be biased in favor of infir-
mity or infancy. Those who cannot assist themselves, we are much inclined
to assist.

“Nothing dissolves like tears. Though they arise from weakness, they
are powerful advocates, which instantly disarm, particularly those which the
afflicted wish to hide. They come from the heart and will reath it, if the
judge has a heart to reach. Distress and pity are inseparable.

“Perhaps there never was a judge, from seventeen to seventy, who could
look with indifference upon beauty in distress; if he could, he was unfit; to

400 HISTORY OF GREECE.

fices were ‘esorted to by opposite speakers in each particular
trial, nor have we any means of krowing to what extent they
actually perverted the judgment of the hearers.!' Probably, the
frequent habit of sitting in dikastery, gave them a penetration in
detecting sophistry not often possessed by non-professional citi-
zens: nevertbeless, it cannot be doubted that, in a considerable
proportion of cases, success depended less upon the intrinsic merits
of a case, than upon apparent airs of innocence and truth-telling,
dexterity of statement, and good general character, in the purties, -
their witnesses, and the friends who addressed the court on their
behalf. The accusatory speeches in Attic oratory, wherein pun-
ishment is invoked upon an alleged delinquent, are expressed
with a bitterness which is now banished from English criminal
judicature, though it was common in the state trials of two
centuries ago. Against them may be set the impassioned and
emphatic appeals made by defendants and their friends to the
commiseration of the dikasts; appeals the more often successful,
because they came last, immediately before decision was pro-
nounced. This is true of Rome as well as of Athens.2

be a judge. He should be a stranger to decision, who is a stranger to com-
passion. All these matters influence the man, and warp his judgment.”

This is a description, given by a perfectly honest and unprofessional judge,
of his own feelings when on the bench. It will be found illustrated by fre-
quent passages in the Attic pleaders, where they address themselves to the
feelings here described in the bosom of the dikasts.

1 Demosthenés (cont. Phormio. p. 913, c. 2),emphatically remarks, how
much more cautious witnesses were of giving false testimony before the
numerous dikastery, than before the arbitrator.

* Asconius gives an account of the begging off and supplication to the
jadices at Rome, when sentence was about to be pronounced upon Scanu-
rus, whom Cicero defended (ad Ciceron. Orat. pro Scauro, p. 28, ed. Orelli)-:
“ Laudaverunt Scaurum consulares novem — Horum magna pars per tabel
las laudaverunt, qui aberant: inter quos Pompeius quoque. Unus preeterea
adolescens laudavit, frater ejus, Faustus Cornelius, Sylle filius. Is in lau
datione multa humiliter et cum lacrimis locutus non minus audientes per-
movit, quam Scatrus ipse permoverat. Ad genua judicum, cum sententie
ferrentur, bifariam se diviserunt qui pro eo rogabant: ab uno latere Scaurus
ipse et M, Glabrio, sororis filius, et Paulus, et P. Lentulus, et L. Amilius
Buca, et C. Memmius, supplicaverunt: ex altera parte Sylla Faustus, frater
Scauri, et T. Annius Milo, et T. Peducseus, et C. Cato, et M. Octavius
Leenas.”

Compare also Cicero, Brutus, c. 23, about the defence of Sergius Galba,;
Onintilian, L O, ii, 15

\

CHANGES AT ATHENS UNDER PERIKLES. 401

As an organ for judicial purposes, the Athenian dikasteries
were thus a simple and plenary manifestation of jury-trial, with
its inherent excellences and defects both brought out in exagger-
ated relief: they insured a decision at once uncorrupt, public-
minded, and imposing, — together with the best security which
the case admitted against illegal violences on the part of the rich
and great.!. Their extreme publicity, as well as their simple and
oral procedure, divested of that verbal and ceremonial technical-
ity which marked the law of Rome, even at its outset, was no
small benefit: and as the verdicts of the dikasts, even when
wrong, depended upon causes of misjudgment common to them
with the general body of the citizens, so they never appeared to
pronounce unjustly, nor lost the confidence of their fellow-citizens
generally. But whatever may have been their defects as judicial
instruments, as a stimulus both ¢o thought and speech, their ef-
ficacy was unparalleled, in the circumstances of Athenian society.
Doubtless, they would not have produced the same effect if
established at Thebes or Argos: the susceptibilities of the Athe-
nian mind, as well as the previous practice and expansive ten-
dencies of democratical citizenship, were also essential conditions,
-—and that genuine taste of sitting in judgment, and hearing
both sides fairly, which, however Aristophanés may caricature
and deride it, was alike honorable and useful to the people.
The first establishment of the dikasteries is nearly coincident
with the great improvement of Attic tragedy in passing from
ZEschylus to Sophoklés. The same development of the national
genius, now preparing splendid manifestations both in tragic and
comic poetry, was called with redoubled force into the path of
oratory, by the new judicial system. A certain power of speech
now became necessary, not merely for those who intended to
take a prominent part in politics, but also for private citizens to
vindicate their rights, or repel accusations in a court of justice.
It was an accomplishment of the greatest practical utility, even

' Plato, in his Treatise de Legibus (vi, p. 768) adopts all the distinguish
ing principles of the Athenian dikasteries. He particularly insists, that the
citizen, who does not take his share in the exercise of this function, con-
ceives himself to have no concern or interest in the commonwealth, —~
7) maparay THe TOAEUE cb péTOXoS elvas.

VOL. V: 260c.

402. HISTORY OF GREECE. is

apart from ambitious purposes; hardly less so than the use of
arms or the praetice of the gymnasium. Accordingly, the teach-
ers of grimmar and rhetoric, and the composers of written
speeches to be delivered by others, now began to multiply and to
acquire an unprecedented importance,— as well at Athens as
under the contemporary democracy of Syracuse,! in which, also,
some form of popular judicature was established. Style and
speech began to be reduced to a system, and so communicated :
not always happily, for several of the early rhetors 2 had adopted
an artificial, ornate, and conceited manner, from which Attic
good taste afterwards liberated itself, — but the very character
of a teacher of rhetoric as an art,—a man giving precepts and
putting himself forward in show-lectures as a model for others,
is a feature first belonging to the Periklean age, and indicates a
new demand in the minds of the citizens. We begin to hear, in
the generation now growing up, of the rhetor and the sophist, as
persons of influence and celebrity. These two names denoted
persons of similar moral and intellectual endowments, or often
indeed the same person, considered in different points of view ;3
either as professing to improve the moral character, or as com-
municating power and facility of expression, or as suggesting
premises for persuasion, illustrations on the common-places of
morals and politics, argumentative abundance on matters of or-
dinary experience, dialectical subtlety in confuting an oppoyent,

1 Aristot. ap. Cicero. Brut. c. 12. “Itaque cum sublatis in Sicilia tyran-
nis res private longo intervallo judiciis repeterentur, tum primum quod
esset acuta ea gens et controversa natura, artem et precepta Siculos Cora-
cem et Tisiam conscripsisse,”etc. Compare Diodor. xi, 87; Pausan. vi,
17, 8

* Especially Gorgias: see Aristotel. Rhetor. iii, 1, 26; Timeus, Fr.;
Dionys. Halicarn. De Lysia Judicium, c.3; alsq Foss, Dissertatio de Gorgia
Leontino, p. 20 (Halle, 1828); and Westermann, Geschichte der Bered
samkeit in Griechenland und Rom., sects. 30, 31.

3 Plato (Gorgias, c. 20-75; Protagoras, c.9). Lysias is sometimes desig-
nated as a sophist (Demosthen. cont. Neer. c. 7, p. 1351; Athens. xiii, p.
592). There is no sufficient reason for supposing with Taylor (Vit. Lysizx,
p. 56, ed. Dobson) that there were two persons named Lysias, and that the
person here named is a different man: from the author of the speeches
which remain to us: see Mr. Fynes Clinton, Fast. H. p. 360. Appendix,
c. 20.

e

CHANGES AT ATHENS UNDER PERIKLES. 403

etc! Antipho of the deme Rhamnus in Attica, Thrasymachus
of Chalkédon, Tisias, of Syracuse, Gorgias of Leontini, Pro-
tagoras of Abdéra, Prodikus of Keés, Theodérus of Byzantium,
Hippias of Elis, Zeno of Elea, were among the first who distin-
guished themselves in these departments of teaching. Antipho
was the author of the earliest composed speech really spoken in
a dikastery, and preserved down to the later critics.2 These men
were mostly not citizens of Athens, though many of them be-
longed to towns comprehended in the Athenian empire, at a time
when important judicial causes belonging to these towns were
often carried up to be tried at Athens, — while all of them looked
to that city as a central point of action and distinction. The
term sophist, which Herodotus 3 applies with sincere respect to
men of distinguished wisdom, such as Solon, Anacharsis, Pythag-
oras, etc. now came to be applied to these teachers of virtue, -
rhetoric, conversation, and disputation; many of whom professed

—

1 See the first book of Aristotle’s Rhetoric — alluded to in a former note
-—for his remarks on the technical teachers of rhetoric before his time.
He remarks—-and Plato remarked before him (i, 1 and 2)—that their
teaching was for the most part thoroughly narrow and practical, bearing
exclusively on what was required for the practice of the dikastery (ep? rot
dixaleodat navrec meipGvrat rexvodoyeiv): see also a remarkable passage in
his Treatise de Sophisticis Elenchis, c. 32, ad fmem. And though he him-
self lays down a far more profound and comprehensive theory of rhetoric,
and all matters appertaining to it, — in a treatise which has rarely been sur-
passed in power of philosophical analysis, — yet when he is recommending
his speculations to notice, he appeals to the great practical value of rhetor-
ical teaching, as enabling a man to “help himself,” and fight his own bat-
tles, in case of need—’Aromov el TH copare piv aloypdiv py divacdas
Bondeiv éavTd, Adyy dé obk aloypéy (i, 1,3: compare iii, 1,2; Plato Gor-
gias, c, 41-55; Protagoras, c. 9; Phedrus, c. 43-50; Euthydem. c. 1-31
and Xenophon, Memorab. iii, 12, 2, 3).

See also the character of Proxenus in the Anabasis of Xenophon, ii, 6, .
16; Plutarch, Vit. x, Orator. p. 307; Aristoph. Nubes, 1108; Xenophon,
Memorab. i, 2, 48; Plato, Alkibiadés, i, c. 31, p. 119; and a striking pas-
sage in Plutarch’s Life of Cato the elder, c. 1.

2 Plutarch, Vit. x, Orator. p. 832; Quintilian, iii, 1,10. Compare Van
Spaan, or Ruhnken, Dissertatio de Antiphonte Oratore Attico, pp. 8, 9,
prefixed to Dobson’s edition of Antipho and Andokidés. Antipho is said
to have been the teacher of the historian Thucydidés. The statement of
Piutarch, that the father of Antipho was also a sophist, can hardly be true.

3 Herodot. i, 29; iv, 95.

404 HISTORY OF GREECE.

acquaintance with the whole circle of human science, physical as
well as moral (then narrow enough), so far as was necessary to
talk about any portion of it plausibly and effectively, and to an-
swer any question which might be proposed to them. Though
these men passed from one Grecian town to another, partly in
the capacity of envoys from their fellow-citizens, partly as ex-
hibiting their talents to numerous hearers, with much renown and
large gain, — they appeared to have been viewed with jealousy
and dislike by a large portion of the public:? for at a time when
every citizen pleaded his own cause before the dikastery, they
imparted, to those who were rich enough to purchase it, a pecu-
liar skill in the common weapons, which made them seem like
fencing-masters, or professional swordsmen, amidst a society of
untrained duellists* Moreover, Sokratés,— himself a product
of the same age, and a disputant on the same subjects, — and
bearing the same name of ‘a sophest,4 but despising political and

1 Plato (Hippias Major, c. 1,2; Menon, p. 95; and Gorgias, c. 1, with
Stallbaum’s note); Diodor. xii, 53 ; Pausan. vi, 17, 8.

* Xenophon, Memorab. i, 2,31. To teach or learn the art of speech was
the common reproach made by the vulgar against philosophers and lettered
men,— Td xorvg Toi¢g giAoadgorg bxd Tov TOAAOY eniTipwopevov (Xenoph.
Memor. i, 2, 31). Compare Aschinés cont. Timar. about Demosthenés, c.
25, 27, which illustrates the curious fragment of Sophoklés, 865. Oi ydp
yivavdpot kal Aéyerw HoKnkores.

* Such is probably the meaning of that remarkable passage in which
Thucydidés describes-the Athenian rhetor, Antipho, (viii, 68): "Avripay, dvip
"AUnvaiuy dperg Te obdevdc basepog, xal xpartorog évSupndhvasr yevouevor xal
@ dy yvoin elreiv: Kal és pew djpov ob mapidv otd’ é¢ GAAov aydva éxovorog
obdéva, GAN trontracg TH TAnGEs Bia dégav detvdtrynrog ét-
aKeipevoc, rode pévroe dywrigouévoug kal éy dixacrnpiy kai dv dnpy,
tAeiora ele avip, dorig EvuBovdAetoarto Tt, duvapevog agedeiv. “ Inde illa
circa occultandam eloquentiam simulatio,” observes Quintilian, Inst. Or.
iv, 1, 8.

@ompare Plato (Protagoras, c. 8; Phsedrus, c. 86), Isokratés cont. Sophis-
tas, Or. xiii, p. 295, where he complains of the teachers, — olrivec tnéaxov-
fo, dcxaceodac didaoxety, éxAefayevor Td dvcyepéctaroy Tov dvouatur, 6 Tay
g9ovoivruy Epyov eln Aéyetv, GAN’ ob Tov npoeoTOTwr Tig ToLadTyg maded-
tews, Demosthen. De Fals. Legat, c. 70, 71, pp. 417-420; and Auschin. cont.
Ktesiphon. c. 9, p. 371,— xakotpyov cogioriy, olépevov pauact trode vopous
dvaipycetv.

* Xschinés cont. Timerch. c. 34 p. 74. ‘Ypeic wey, d ADgvala, Tok pa-

CHANGES AT ATHENS UNDER PERIKLES. 405

judicial practice, and looking to the production of intellectual
stimulus and moral impresgidns upon: bis hearers, — Sokratés
carried on throughout his life a constant polemical warfare
against the sophists and rhetors, in that negative vein in which
he was unrivalled. And as the works of these latter have not re-
mained, it is chiefly from the observations of their opponents that
we know them; so that they are in a situation such as that in
which Sokratés himself would have been, if we had been com-
pelled to judge of him only from the Clouds of Aristophanés, or
from those unfavorable impressions respecting his character,
which we know, even from the Apologies of Plato and Xenophon,
to have been generally prevalent at Athens. This is not the op-
portunity, however, for trying to distinguish the good from the
evil in the working of the sophists and rhetors: at present, it is
enough that they were the natural product of the age, — supply-
ing those wants, and answering to that stimulus, which arose
partly from the deliberations of the ekklesia, but still more from
the contentions before the dikastery,—in which latter a far
greater number of citizens took active part, with or without their
own consent. The public and frequent dikasteries constituted by
Periklés,opened to the Athenian mind precisely that career of
improvement which was best suited to its natural aptitude: they
were essential to the development of that.demand out of which
grew not only Grecian oratory, but also, as secondary products,

THY pev TOV CodlorHy arexreivare, bret Kpiriav éoavy weracdevads,
Eva Tv tTptaKkovTa TOV Tov djpov KaradvouvToy.

Among the sophists whom Isokratés severely criticizes, he evidently seems
to include Plato, as may be seen by the contrast between doga and értorjun,
which he particularly notes, and which is so conspicuously set forth in the
Platonic writings (Isokratés cont. Sophistas, Or. xiii, p. 293; also p. 295)..
We know also that Lysias called both Plato and /Eschinés the disciple of
Sokratés, by the name of sophists (Aristeidés, Orat. Platonic. xlvi, ‘Yrip
Tov TeTTrapwy, p. 407, vol. ii, ed. Dindorf). Aristeidés remarks justly that
the name sophist was a general name, including all the philosophers,
teachers, and lettered men.

The general name, sophists, in fact, included goed. bad, and indifférent ;
like “the philosophers. the political economists, the metaphysicians,” etc. I
shall take a future opportunity of examining the indiscriminate censures
against them as a class, which most modern writers have copied implicitly
from the polemics of ancient times.

406 HISTORY OF GREECE.

the speculative moral and political philosophy, and the didactie
analysis of rhetoric and grammar, which long survived after
Grecian creative genius had passed away! And it was one of
the first measures of the oligarchy of ‘Vhirty, to forbid, by an
express law, any teaching of the art of speaking. Aristophanés
Jerides the Athenians for their love of talk and controversy, as
if it had enfeebled their military energy: but in his time, most
undoubtedly, that reproach was not true; nor did it become true,
even in part, until the crushing misfortunes which marked the
close of the Peloponnesian war. During,the course of that war,
restless and energetic action was the characteristic of Athens,
even in a greater degree than oratory or political discussion,
though before the time of Demosthenés a material alteration had
taken place.

The establishment of these paid dikasteries at Athens was
thus one of the most important and prolific events in all Grecian
history. The pay helped to furnish a maintenance for old citi-
zens, past the age of military service. Elderly men were the
best persons for such a service, and were preferred for judicial
purposes both at Sparta, and, as it seems, in heroic Greece:
nevertheless, we need not suppose that all the dikasts were either
old or poor, though a considerable proportion of them were so,
and though Aristophanés selects these qualities as among the
most suitable subjects for his ridicule. Periklés has been often
censured for this institution, as if he had been the first to insure
pay to dikasts who before served ‘for nothing, and had thus
introduced poor citizens into courts previously composed of citi-
zens above poverty. But, in the first place, this supposition is
not correct in point of fact, inasmuch as there were no such con-
stant dikasteries previously acting without pay; next, if it had
béen true, the habitual exclusion of the poor citizens would have
nullified the popular working of these bodies, and would have
prevented them from answering any longer to the reigning senti-

1 Xenoph. Memor. i, 2, 31. Adywv réyvyv py didacxerv. Xenophon
ascribes the passing of this law to a personal hatred of Kritias against
Sokratés, and connects it with an anecdote exceedingly puerile, when con-
sidered as the alleged cause of that hatred, as well as of the consequent
law. But it is evident that the law had a far deeper meaning, and was
aimed directly at one of the prominent democratica! habits.

‘CHANGES AT ATHENS UNDER PERIKLES. 407

ment at Athens. Nor could it be deemed unreasonable to as-
sign a regular pay to those who thus rendered regular service:
it was, indeed, an essential item in the whole scheme! and pur-
pose; so that the suppression of the pay of itself seems to have
suspended the dikasteries, while the oligarchy of Four Hundred
was established, — and it can only be discussed in that light. As
the fact stands, we may suppose that the six thousand heliasts
_who filled the dikasteries were composed of the middling and
poorer citizens indiscriminately: though there was nothing to
exclude the richer, if they chose to serve.

! Thucyd. viii, 67. Compare a curious passage, even in reference to the
time of Demosthenés, in the speech of that orator contra Bootum de

Nomine, c. 5. «at el puodde bropicdy roig diaacrypios, elojyov Gy pe
Siow Sri, ete. ,

-~wer oe

THE NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY
REFERENCE DEPARTMENT

This book is under no circumstances to be

taken from the Building

—

 ) :

 #
'

 :

ee
