2 WEN LA 
| Y Ў 52% 
pas 4i 977 
; Жа 
== 
қ

= =

tee 
y

AS

EN

^J. 4. 4 d —

ти

ІЅВМ 0-87728-789-9 
| | | | 000> 
9 780877 287896 | 
| А

The 
H. AND BO O K 
of

Yoruba Religious Concepts

Baba Ifa Karade

SAMUEL WEISER, INC

York Beach, Maine

First published in 1994 by 
Samuel Weiser, Inc.

P. O. Box 612

York Beach, ME 03910-0612

Copyright € 1994 Baba Ifa Karade

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced 
or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechan- 
ical, including photocopy, without permission in writing from 
Samuel Weiser, Inc. Reviewers may quote brief passages.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Karade, Ifa. 
The handbook of Yoruba religious concepts / by Ifa Karade. 
p. em. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
1. Yoruba (African people)—Religion. I Title 
BL2480.Y6K372 1994

299 68333—4dc20 93-45888 
CIP

ISBN 0-87728-789-9

BJ

Cover art is a painting titled “Adura” (a Yoruba word pronounced 
“a-doo-ra” meaning “prayer”). Copyright © 1994 Oswald Sim- 
monds.

Typeset in 11 point Palatino

Printed in the United States of America 
99 98 97 96 95 94 
10987654321

The paper used in this publication meets the minimum require- 
ments of the American National Standard for Permanence of 
Paper for Printed Library Materials Z39.48-1984.

Table of Contents

Acknowledgments ................................. vii 
„ 00 ͤ ⁵⁵³‚ T ix 
ON side ates eR A O A SE Y xi 
Chapter 1: The Yoruba History ....................... 1 
Chapter 2: Orunmila and the Ifa Corpus ............... 7 
Chapter 3: The Orisha as Angelic Forces .............. 21 
Chapter 4: Divination, Sacrifice, Initiations ............ 81 
Religious Phrases of the Yoruba ..................... 111 
W/ 113 
. ͥͥ ²ðrww̃-r˙v˙!, ũ ¼mn—²ů m 119 
PPV —A—T— a eden E N CET 121 
EIER TAE ETT YET YARIS CECI T IZ TETTE 123

Acknowledgments

To Oludumare, Orunmila, the Orisha, and the Egun.Acknowledgments

To Oludumare, Orunmila, the Orisha, and the Egun.

To the elders of Пе Iya Olorisha in Ejigbo, Nigeria, 
Africa. Special appreciation to Chief Araba Malomo and Iya 
Keye (now an ancestor) for initiating me into the priestly 
order.

To my wives—Akpetebi Sokoya Onayemi Aya Karade 
for editing, insight, word processing, illustration, and loving 
support; and to Akpetibi Olayinka Osunkunle Aya Karade 
for maintaining the temple momentum, her patience and 
stability, helpfulness, and love. I thank you both for your 
devotion and lasting friendship.

To all members of Ile Tawo Lona for the trust so grace- 
fully expressed. For the photographs, Aborisha Yewande 
Ekundayo Karade, Babalorisha Odedeyi Karade, and Fasola 
Agbaje Onakomaya Karade.

To all teachers and mentors, including the Epegas of 
Nigeria, the Valdez of Puerto Rico, and Oba Oesijeman 
Adefunmi I of the Village of Oyotunji, South Carolina.

A Note to Readers

Whenever cultures interface, either through conquest or 
through peaceful assimilation, the dominant cultural reli- 
gious structure will extract the more positive aspects of the

jugated culture. What is left in its wake are the negative 
Lec "Sub-cultural" people accept this negativity because 
it is the part of the origin or tradition that is presented by the 
dominant culture. For example, in respect to the Yoruba reli- 
gious practice, what is left is the negative "voodoo—roots" 
mentality. This “voodoo mentality" is devoid of the sacred 
realities born of African thought in respect to religion, phi- 
losophy, and dignity.

New world descendants of the Yoruba culture are 
beginning to research the origins of their faith with focused 
intensity. It is becoming quite apparent that the negativity 
that we are subjected to is but a mere shadow of the great- 
ness of our vast West African tradition.Those seeking their traditional heritage eventually face 
the spirituality of their ancestors. When this facing occurs, a 
deep psychological rift is formed. On the one side is the soci- 
etal dominant religious structure; on the other side, the infi- 
nite ancestral structure. Adherents to the ancestral Yoruba 
must be aware of the dangers of crossing this rift. Spiritual 
enlightenment, deep study, and gradual acceptance will pro- 
vide the courage and strength needed to make the mighty 
leap through the negativity and across the abyss.

Baba Ifa Karade

Introduction 
RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS

TO RE-INVESTIGATE the African cultural structure is to 
reawaken and strengthen the African conceptual conscious- 
ness. In respect to religion, concepts are philosophical and 
transcendental aspects of developmental sciences. They are 
the fundamental ethos and world-views of a people. To be 
able to conceptualize is one of the higher orders of thinking 
which inevitably leads a person or people to a greater logic. 
What is conceived, or born from this logic is that oneness 
with the Creative Essence brings about a wholeness in the 
potential of the human essence. The tenets of Yoruba- 
African religious thought revolve around this.

The understandings which lead to the acceptance and 
the actualization of logic in spiritual development are often 
defined as mystical. The major error of many seeking the 
traditional Yoruba faith is that they confuse mysticism with 
occultism. “Mystical searching has no relation whatsoever 
in aim or means to phenomena or powers known as occult. 
... The aim of man's mystical search is to acquire an imper- 
ishable consciousness through a progressive communion of 
his physical body (his temporal reality), with his spiritual 
being (his immortal reality), and his ‘kinship’ with his 
divine cause.“The Yoruba religion is different in the Old World of 
Nigeria, West Africa than in the New World of the Ameri- 
cas. The difference is that the basic fundamental concepts

‘Isha Schwaller de Lubicz, Her-Bak: Egyptian Initiate (Rochester, VT: Inner 
Traditions, 1978), p. 369.

xii / Baba Ifa Karade

have been largely misinterpreted in the New World. The 
mysticism has been overshadowed by the occultism. Basic 
misconceptions result from this. In the Old World it has not 
been forgotten that the aim of the mystic or priestly orders 
is not to dwell upon occult powers but to seek the divine 
essence. From a conceptual standpoint this is all-pervasive 
and all-important. Seekers, or aspirants of the Yoruba reli- 
gion, need to be constantly reminded, as reiterated through- 
out the book, that Yoruba is not a cult nor is it "occult." 
Yoruba is a divine journey to the inner self and to God-Con- 
sciousness. Yoruba is a religion.

"The indigenous Yoruba has a belief in the existence of 
a self-existent being who is believed to be responsible for 
the creation and maintenance of heaven and earth, of men 
and women, and who also brought into being divinities and 
spirits who are believed to be his functionaries in the theo- 
cratic world as well as intermediaries between mankind 
and the self-existent Being.”? The Yoruba word for God is 
both Oludumare and Olorun. There is no doubt that the 
African conceived the One God theosophy eons before 
external foreign influence.In regard to traditional systems in general—and 
specifically in Yoruba religion—it is said that they are 
pagan and heathenistic. Clearly, the absurdity of such 
views are relative to the lack of spiritual-religious sub- 
stance of those who hold them. To say that one religion is 
pagan is to say that they are all pagan. Inscribed within the 
very scriptures of religious cultures throughout the world 
there exist variants and strata of substantial recognition of 
insubstantial forms of feelings, thought processes, super- 
natural beings, transcendental worlds, and forces that 
direct the creation and destruction of all things.

ese forms materialize as structural tangible objects 
shaped by the culture that expresses them. Statues, sym-

2 Omosade Awolalu, Yoruba Beliefs and Sacrificial Rites (White Plains, NY: 
Longman Group, 1979), p. 3.

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / xiii

bolic religious artistic creations, and sacred physical posi- 
tions, all demonstrate the human need and ability to make , 
concrete the multiplicity of realities that exist within the 
universe.

Those beings which are deemed angels by western def- 
inition are known to the Yoruba as orisha. The aspirant is 
3 to see a orisha as emanations of the One Source 
or Oludumare. The orisha are not simply mythological con- 
structions designed to satisfy the жым Бағ нач of 
humans. As “angels” in all religious context they (the 
orisha) were created and sent by Oludumare to assist in the 
spiritual evolution of humankind. »"In the Judeo-Christian culture, the word for angels 
signifies their work as messengers, but other words for 
angels signify their essence. They are called gods, the sons 
of gods, ministers, servants, watchers, the holy ones. They 
constitute the court of Heaven. Although the Judeo-Chris- 
tian emphasis is clear, it need be fully realized that concepts 
of angels existed long before their arrival. For example, the 
Yoruba concept of ancestors and orisha as messengers of 
Oludumare were in effect thousands of years prior to Judeo- 
Christianity. Native people throughout the world speak of 
being shown rituals by holy messengers and of being

shown how to farm and domesticate animals. Ancient peo- 
ples of all world cultures depict angelic beings as seen

through their cultural eyes. They were helpers in the sur- 
vival and the raising of their nations. NM

The reality of angelic forces is based on faith and con- 
viction. In the Yoruba religious system one must believe in 
the orisha in order to ascend to God-Consciousness—in 
order to rea divine state of human being. Yet, a dis- 
ruption of this endeavor has been brought about by Chris- 
tian and Islamic influences. Burnham states, "Islamic angels 
fell after the creation of humans, but Christian angels fell

c өсір Burham, A Book of Angels (New York: Ballantine Books, 1990) 
р.

xiv / Baba Ifa Karade

before the creation of the human race."* The importance 
here is that Yoruba angels, never fell in respect to divine 
grace. 
Religious doctrines that no longer hold angelic influ- 
ence as a major part of divine intervention are apt to down- 
play and also corrupt the spiritual insights of those religious 
doctrines that do. Aspirants of the Yoruba religion need 
understand that different basic concepts of cultural-reli- 
gious structures give rise to great misunderstandings and 
misdirection. The supreme purpose of this book is to pre- 
vent such from occurring.

* A Book of Angels, p. 140.* A Book of Angels, p. 140.

THE HANDBOOK OF 
YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS

Chapter 1 
THE YORUBA HISTORY

IN ORDER TO STUDY the religious and cultural defini- 
tions of the Yoruba it is important to be somewhat versed in 
the historical conditions that gave birth to them. Students 
or aspirants of any religious system are guided by the 
priestly order and teachers of that system. They are edu- 
cated in the geographical and political dynamics which 
clearly have influenced the beginnings and the expansion 
of their religion. The same holds true for Yoruba aspi- 
rants—especially the New World descendants. Although 
the aspirants seek religious heritage, as well as ancestral 
origins, many know little or nothing of the history of 
Yorubaland in Nigeria, West Africa.

As an introduction to this area let it be stated that the 
origins of the people and culture known as Yoruba are so 
wrapped in antiquity that to exactly say where and when it 
all began is impossible. However, the sincere attempt to 
present a viable description will be undertaken.

The Yoruba history begins with the migration of an East 
African population across the trans-African route leading 
from the mid-Nile river area to the mid-Niger. Basil David- 
son writes, .. migrating peoples undoubtedly used this 
route from times that were exceedingly remote . that two 
thousand years ago and more the climate and vegetation 
would have treated trans-African travelers in a gentler way 
than they do no.“ Davidson continues, “. they came this

! Basil Davidson, The Lost Cities of Africa (Boston: Little, Brown & Co, 
1959), p. 60.

2 / Baba Ifa Karade

way [the route] from the earliest of times; and their beliefs 
and their inventions came with them.2 / Baba Ifa Karade

way [the route] from the earliest of times; and their beliefs 
and their inventions came with them.

Archaeologists, according to M. Omoleya, inform us 
that the Nigerian region was inhabited more than forty 
thousand years ago, or as far back as 65,000 f. C. This civi- 
lization has been deemed, in part, the Nok culture. The Nok 
culture was visited by the "Yoruba group," between 2000 
and 500 s.c. The group was led, according to Yoruba histor- 
ical accounts, by King Oduduwa, who settled somewhat 
peacefully in the already established Ile-Ife—the sacred city 
of the indigenous people. This time period is known as the 
Bronze Age, indicating that the civilization of both groups 
were at relatively high levels.

Olumide J. Lucus proclaims, "The Yoruba, during 
antiquity, lived in ancient Egypt before migrating to the 
Atlantic coast. He uses as demonstration the similarity or 
identity of languages, religious beliefs, customs and names 
of persons, places and things."* The key point, or focus, in 
respect to Yoruba religious evolution, is that the Egyptian 
order, coupled with the earlier peoples, produced the more 
defined statement of what makes Yoruba.

In the History of West Africa A.D. 1000-8000, Onwubiko 
states that, "According to tradition, Oduduwa, the chief 
ancestor and first king of the Yoruba settled at Ile-Ife. From 
this point his descendants became the kings and queens of 
Yoruba cities and territories. The greatest of Oduduwa's 
descendants was Oranmiyan who became the Alafin or 
ruler of the Oyo state somewhere around 1400 A.D. Oran- 
miyan's armies marched across the Southern Sudan and 
penetrated deep into the great tropical forest conquering

? The Lost Cities of Africa, p. 60.

Michael Omoleya, Certificate History of Nigeria (London & Lagos: Long- 
man Group, 1986), p. 15.

* Cheik Anta Dio, Precolonial Black Africa (Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press, 
co-published with Lawrence Hill, 1992), p. 216.* Cheik Anta Dio, Precolonial Black Africa (Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press, 
co-published with Lawrence Hill, 1992), p. 216.

*Onwubiko, KBC, History of West Africa A.D. 1000-8000 (Onitsha, Nigeria: 
Africana-FEP Publisher, 1967), p. 134-135.

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 3

and laying the foundations of the Yoruba Empire. Cen- 
turies of spectacular glory and achievement followed the 
reign of Oranmiyan. It was during this great era that 
Yoruba people re-established Ile-Ife as the sacred-spiritual 
capital and Oyo as the governmental seat.

The Enslavement Period

Onwubiko's research indicates that “the wars of expansion 
(amongst the Yoruba) during the sixteenth and seventeenth 
centuries were not fought to procure slaves for export to the 
coast but for local service on Yoruba farms. It was not until 
the eighteenth century that wars to provide slaves for sale 
to Europeans became important."^

Enslavement from European hands began in the 15th 
and 16th centuries. Around 1530 a.D., the Portuguese began 
to transport Africans from the West Coast to Spanish mines 
and plantations in the New World. Later, other European 
nations became involved. France, England, Holland, and 
Spain were all very active in the brutal manipulation and 
deception that somehow became known as the "slave 
trade."

Islamic jihads (holy wars), incited by Arabic religious 
fervor, also swept through Africa clear to the western 
coastal regions. This era lasted from about д.р. 641 through 
the 19th century. The trans-Saharan slave trade flourished. 
The Yoruba Nation, now devastated and depleted of its 
most natural resource—people—eventually collapsed.It is important to note that the greatest percentage of 
Africans enslaved for New World labor came from the 
Yoruba nation. It is also important to note that a large per- 
centage of those enslaved were war-political prisoners of 
elite classes of soldiers and warrior-priests. As a result, the 
New World became inundated with a people knowledge- 
able of their culture and who were initiated members of its

* History of West Africa, p. 136

4 / Baba Ifa Karade

higher teachings. It is of no small wonder that Yoruba cul- 
ture became the dominant theme of African-American 
transference.

African descendants were transported to New World 
countries like Cuba, Puerto Rico, Trinidad, Jamaica, Haiti, 
the Dominican Republic, and other islands of the West 
Indies; to Brazil, Argentina, and Venezuela in South Amer- 
ica; and finally to the colonies and states of North America.

The crossing of the Atlantic Ocean to reach these desti- 
nations has been deemed The Middle Passage or the Trian- 
gle Trade. Three ports were involved; one was in Nigeria, 
the other in the West Indies, the other in Europe. It has been 
estimated that over 75 million captives were taken during 
the four or five centuries we call the enslavement period.When Europeans arrived on African soil, the Judeo- 
Christian missionary zeal was planted as it would be later 
on American soil. Conversion of Africans to Christianity in 
spite of enslavement continued. The other side of the reality 
is that African people were solidly encased in the religion of 
their own culture and the zeal to implant it also existed— 
especially among the Yoruba. Maureen Warner-Lewis in her 
book, Guinea's Other Suns, quotes a study from Mobogunji 
and Omer-Cooper 1971-1977, "The fact that the Yoruba 
were dragged into the slave trade in such huge numbers 
and so soon before the trade was brought to an end had sev- 
eral important consequences . . . . Their culture and religion 
tended to dominate the sub-culture of the slave society and 
to submerge and absorb into itself surviving elements of 
African culture

There also came into being a type of homogenization or 
synthesis of the religions. From the African perspective 
there arose a special Christian interpretation based on 
African spirituality and practice. Warner-Lewis continues 
that: "Some [Africans] denounced the traditional gods; oth-

; Maureen Warner-Lewis, Guinea's Other Suns (Dover, MA: The Majority 
Press, 1991), p. 1.

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 5

ers did not even credit their existence. On the other hand, a 
large number maintained traditional beliefs and practices 
alongside Christianity, using one spiritual resource to sup- 
plement and complement the other.”* For a people stripped 
of their fundamental social structures and mores, the con- 
cepts of spirit and religion have miraculously survived. The 
African maintained the “Africanness” of religious being 
through spirituals; getting the holy ghost (a form of posses- 
sion); shouting; speaking in tongues; intense preaching, etc. 
In general, the African soul was not extinguished, but sim- 
ply transfigured to meet the Euro-social pressures under 
New World bondage.Robert Farris Thompson writes in his introduction to 
Flash of the Spirit that, "The Yoruba are black Africa's largest 
population, and are creators of one of the premier cultures 
of the world. The Yoruba believe themselves descended 
from goddesses and gods, from an ancient spiritual capital, 
Ile-Ife. They show their special concern for the proprieties of 
right living through their worship of major goddesses and 
gods, each essentially a unique manifestation of ashe . . . 
only the most widely and important (deities) survived the 
vicissitudes of the Atlantic Trade."?

These important deities bear the name of orisha, which 
are the angelic forces of Yoruba context. Among them are 
Eshu-Elegba, Obatala, Oshun, Ogun, Yemoja, Shango, Oya, 
and others too numerable to mention. Each require special 
worship, song, and sacrifice. The ability to bog dus deities 
alive in the world-reality of the Yoruba led to the conscious 
masking of them behind Christian saints and social-ritual 
performances. Catholicism, with its numerous patron-saints, 
made the masking easy. And, since the Portuguese and 
Spanish were Catholic and also major enslavers of Yoruba 
elite prisoners, the tradition survived virtually intact.

* Guinea's Other Suns, p. 51. 
*Robert Farris Thompson, Flash of the Spirit (New York: Vintage Books, 
1984), p. xv.

6 / Baba Ifa Karade

Among the Euro-speaking colonies, religious sects 
known as Santeria in Puerto Rico, Candomble in Brazil, 
Shango in Trinidad, Voodun in Haiti, and Lucumi in Cuba 
were formed. The Euro-influences, although great, could. 
not deter the African descendants from secretly maintain- 
ing their tradition. Even the language of the Yoruba 
remained, as did cultural mannerisms.English Protestants, also involved in the slave era, had 
greater success in "domesticating" the African. Lack of 
numerous patron saints in the religious construct made it 
difficult to mask the Yoruba religion. Lack of tropical envi- 
ronments in North America made it difficult for the African 
to maintain cultural relativity. Finally, the emphasis on 
inbreeding the African-American slaves brought an end to 
fresh ideas and religious fervor from newly arrived enslaved 
prisoners.

Today, many of Africa’s descendants are openly 
embracing the Yoruba faith and practice. Because of political 
struggles, especially in the 1950s, New World people from 
the Caribbean found their way to the United States. They 
were mainly from Cuba, which is often called "little Africa." 
The Cubans brought with them the Yoruba religion and 
practice as they had interpreted it. Now, African descen- 
dants in the Americas are stepping beyond the Hispanic 
interpretations, and are returning to the more unadulterated 
form of life and ancestral religion known as Yoruba. Serious 
aspirants of this religious movement have connected them- 
selves with Nigerian influenced high-priests, known as 
babalawos, who now reside in the United States.

Chapter 2 
ORUNMILA 
AND THE IFA CORPUS

ORUNMILA is deemed the prophet of Yoruba religion and 
culture. It was he who developed and expounded upon the 
system of esoteric worship known to this day as Ifa. 
Through the study of human nature and divine nature, 
Orunmila saw that dual levels of potentiality existed. 
Through him we understand that the study of animate and 
inanimate, manifest and unmanifest, visible and invisible 
worlds leads to fundamental understandings of the self- 
ontology, and that these fundamental understandings bring 
about the evolution of human spirit, which, in turn, encour- 
ages divine behavior, worldly progression, and expanded 
cosmology.Orunmila, as with all prophets, is a deified personage 
who has been elevated to a central point in the creative 
origin of life itself. According to Yoruba religion, Orun- 
mila is said to hold a position comparable to the "son of 
God." He is said to have been present (in conscious-divine 
form) when Oludumare created all beings. Hence, he 
knows the truth of all beings, and too, the destiny of all 
beings.

Of all the Yoruba divinities, Orunmila is the most eso- 
teric. He acts and speaks, yet has no physical form. There

are no sculptured reflections of Orunmila himse | refer- 
ences of him are expressed through the divinatory imple-

ments utilized by the priestly order dedicated to his 
teachings. Those of this sacerdotal order are known as Ifa 
Priests or babalawos, meaning “father of mysteries.” Yet, 
Orunmila did actually exist.

8 / Baba lfa Karade

SA WN

* 
П

Figure 1. Baba Ifa Karade, chief and high priest, prepares to recite 
the Odu marked on the Opon-Ifa. He holds the iroke (diviner's

tapper) in his right hand. The tapper is struck rhythmically upon 
the Opon-Ifa as initial prayers are made to Orunmila.

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 9

Orunmila's physical origins are shrouded in ancient 
legend, however, it is believed that he was born of humble , 
West African parents. To the people of the land he was 
clearly recognized as a divine child, and although poor and 
crippled, he expressed from the onset divine wisdom and 
attributes. Orunmila grew to be known as "the little man 
with the big head." His great intelligence superseded all 
known teachings and his divine nature was seen as a bless- 
ing of the angelic forces.

As Orunmila matured he traveled across the continent 
of Africa sharing wisdom with the prophets and sages of 
the land. There is evidence of Orunmila's influence inAs Orunmila matured he traveled across the continent 
of Africa sharing wisdom with the prophets and sages of 
the land. There is evidence of Orunmila's influence in

ancient Khamet / Egypt, and too, in the Essence community 
of the TRE uw a A era. Yet, the potency of Orun- 
mila's teachings were directed to the Yoruba people cen- 
tered around the city of Ile-Ife. It was here, in Ile-Ife, that 
Orunmila built his temple on the sacred hill called Oke Tase. 
It was here in Ile-Ife that Orunmila gained heavenly status. 
In the translation of his name is the meaning "only Heaven 
knows the way to salvation," clearly indicating his prophet- 
messianic status among those who believe in his being. 
According to oral tradition, Orunmila is described as a 
Yoruba man who came to Ile-Ife in order to teach a system 
of ethics, religious belief, and mystic vision. It must be rein- 
forced, however, that Orunmila, as all prophets, merely 
assessed and delivered systems of conscious evolution by 
means of life study—ritual and spiritual-heavenly beliefs 
that existed eons before his birth. The elders of Ifa maintain 
that they are practicing the original religion of humans on

Orunmila, in this sense, is not seen as the creator of 
Yoruba religion per se. However, Orunmila is the structural 
originator. He is the focal point of ancient religious practice 
for this era of human existence. The exact time frame of his 
presence on Earth is difficult to determine. To place his 
worldly existence at about 4,000 years ago or 2,000 в.с. is 
but an approximation.

10 / Baba Ifa Karade10 / Baba Ifa Karade

The teachings of Orunmila provide religious aspirants 
with the means and potential to reach what is called, in 
Yoruba translation, alignment. By studying the Ifa corpus 
(the once oral scriptures passed from one priestly genera- 
tion to the next), devotees strive to reach a state of divine 
oneness. That oneness comes about when one's earthly con- 
sciousness (known as Ori) is developed and elevated to the 
place of unification with one's heavenly consciousness 
(known as Iponri). Orunmila teaches that such an endeavor

is arduous, difficult, and takes years of soul searching and 
effort. Those who embark on the journey (irin ajo) need do

so with a pure heart, and with sincerity, for although the 
attainment is glorious, the pitfalls are horribly devastating.

Wisdom, ritual, and transcendence are the key ele- 
ments of Orunmila's teachings and they are bound by 
African cultural interpretation. There is no difference here 
in light of all world religions. Destiny, however, brings 
about deeper thought. What is our destiny? What is your 
destiny? It is important to somewhat determine this before 
setting out to reach it.

Destiny (ayanmo), from a religious point of view, 
describes a person's return to the inner realization of pri- 
mal essence or divine being. Orunmila, as all true 
prophets, preached that humans must return to their

divine nature. It is a human being's destiny to reach or 
return to her/his divine state internally-heavenly, and to

live upon the earth Frane existence as a reflection of that 
divine state. This is the supreme reason for true religious 
involvement.

Orunmila continues in his religious corpus known as

Ifa that one's destiny can only be reached through :

a. the divinatory processes left to us by the ancestors; 
b. prescriptions of ritual and sacrifice to the spiritual

dimensional beings whose forces impact upon human 
development and evolution;

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 11dimensional beings whose forces impact upon human 
development and evolution;

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 11

c. the moral ethics to which humans must adhere in

order to be victorious over oppressive human and spir- 
itual forces. E dos X аны

total as the odu. The odu are comprised of sixteen heavenly 
rophets who existed when the earth was very young. Sent

— —

The Ancients / Elders, who are the Ifa corpus, are known in

— — — —— ————— ma aaa xena

to be his heavenly disci from а timeless cosmic eternity.

Each of the odu represents the epitome of Yoruba 
proverbial wisdom and religiosity. Each contains an enor- 
mous amount of verses (ese) and moral teachings (kiki) 
expressed through mythological, historical, and social 
development (itan) as seen through religious eyes. The 
priestly of Yoruba are set to learn and apply the knowledge 
and wisdom of the odu so as to present ways of transcen- 
dence and salvation to spiritual seekers. Each of the 16 
major odu (Oju odu or Ol odu) and the 240 Omo odu or 
Amulu is said to contain 1,680 verses making such an 
endeavor a great one. And, although no one priest is said to

—

be able to reach such a degree, the objective is to continually 
strive for greater insight and understanding, 
Orunmila was able to reach the conscious height of the

odu and thereby reveal the holy messages that they

embody. The ability to achieve this state is manifested in the 
ability to divine. Each odu has its own mark-pattern and its 
own accounts, rituals, ethics, and morals. Within each odu 
there exist revelations of the angelic and oppressive forces 
known as orisha and ajogun respectively. The orisha are 
angels of heaven sent to continually wrestle with the human

nature in order to uplift it—to purify it. The ajogun are the

“demonic” beings. They are warlocks, wizards, witches, 
and all earthly and heavenly forces whose destructive intentnature in order to uplift it—to purify it. The ajogun are the

“demonic” beings. They are warlocks, wizards, witches, 
and all earthly and heavenly forces whose destructive intent

12 / Baba Ifa Karade 
1. Eji Ogbe 6. Oworin Meji 11. Ika Meji 
1 1 
п и 
Ш Ш 
H Ш 
2. Oyeku Мей 7. Обаға Meji 12. Oturupon Meji 
3. Iwori Meji 8. Okanran Meji 13. Otura Meji 
4. Odi Meji 9. Ogunda Meji 14. Irete Меў 
5. Irosun Meji 10. Osa Meji 15. Oshe Meji

16. Ofun Meji

Figure 2. The Sixteen Major Odu (Oju Odu) and their Pattern.

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 13 
is to waylay evolution and off-set humankind's salvation. 
The ancestral entities (egun) also dwell within the realm of 
Ifa. It is they who are the guardian spirits whose directives 
are to provide the continuation of family line, heritage, and 
identity as a people united. It is they who have made the

ory, and have set the codes of social conduct and indi-

To experience divination in the Yoruba context is to 
experience the core essence of Yoruba philosophy and wor- 
ship. Unfortunately, divination is too often related to "get- 
ting a reading," which belittles and berates the sacred act. 
Psychics can "read" a person, but religiosity is not required. 
In order to approach Ifa divination religiosity must be pres- 
ent. Only through the priestly initiated should Ifa be sum- 
moned

It is through the processes of divination that seekers 
come to know 9f themselves and the forces that res that are shaping

CTI 4 - 
divination — come for ali - 
ment with their most heavenly of selves and how to over- 
come the opposing forces that disrupt their efforts. Study, 
interpretation, reflection, and refinement of the psychologi- 
cal and spiritual selves are foremost as novices undertake 
the austerities of Orunmila's teachings.Figure 2 depicts the sixteen odu patterns as distin- 
guished by marks of (I) for light-open and (II) for dark- 
closed. In Table 1 on pages 14-20, the odu are represented 
along along with one of the verses / moral codes. Other world-reli- 
gious teachings are added comparatively so that novices 
will not be constricted in their thinking. It must be con- 
stantly reinforced that Yoruba is of a religious world-order. 
The revelations of Orunmila need be open to all, yet the 
priestly functions of divination and sacrifice need be main- 
tained by the initiated only.

14 / Baba Ifa Karade

Table 1. Odu Ethics.

Those who attain blessings are those who live by their 
wisdom; only fools know not how to direct their lives. 
If we do not bear suffering that will fill a basket; we 
will not receive blessings that will fill a cup.

Act not in heat nor haste for you may miss the good 
things that come in the evening of life.

The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the 
perverseness of the transgressors shall destroy them 
(Proverbs 11:3).

The superior person is quiet and calm, awaiting for the 
appointments of Heaven. The common person walks 
in dangerous paths looking for lucky occurrences 
(Doctrine of the Mean).

Oh my son! Establish regular prayer, enjoin what is 
just, and forbid what is wrong. And bare with patient 
constancy what'er betide thee; for this is firmness (of 
purpose) in (the conduct of) affairs (Sura 31:17).

Those who are blameless in matters of conduct, no 
words can prevail against them. And those who are 
self-mastered, the harsh are kinder to them than their 
own mothers; and all people become their servants. Let 
your name go forth, then while you yourself are silent 
you will be recognized and respected (Kagemni).

AFRICAN The heart of the wise lay quiet like the peaceful waters 
PROVERB (Cameroon ).

IFA The prevalence of temper outburst and cursing are the 
causes of difficulty in one's life.AFRICAN The heart of the wise lay quiet like the peaceful waters 
PROVERB (Cameroon ).

IFA The prevalence of temper outburst and cursing are the 
causes of difficulty in one's life.

BIBLICAL Who so diggeth a pit shall fall therein; and he that rol- 
leth a stone, it will return upon him (Proverbs 26:27).

Who so causeth the righteous to go astray in an evil

way, he shall fall himself into his own pit; but the 
upright shall have good things in possession (Proverbs 
28:10).

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 15

Table 1. Odu Ethics (continued).

For God loveth not the arrogant, the vainglorious, 
(nor) those who are vile or enjoin vileness on others . . . 
for we have prepared for those who resist faith, a pun- 
ishment that steeps them to contempt (Sura 4:36, 37).

Ashes fly back into the face of he who throws them. 
(Niger).

IFA Your children will be raised under much hardship. 
However, you should continuously persevere in

respect to their correct upbringing.

BIBLICAL Train up a child in the way they should go; and when 
they are old they will not depart from it (the training) 
(Proverbs 22:6).

Teach your sons (children) so that the straight forward 
may yet be mild, the gentle may yet be dignified, the

strong not tyrannical, and the impetuous not arrogant 
(Menicus).

ORIENTAL 
WISDOM

If you are parents of worth and wisdom, train your 
children so that they may be pleasing to God . . but. if 
they fail to follow your course, oppose your will, reject 
all counsel and set their mouth in motion with vile

words, then drive them away (Ptah Hotep).

It is a grave tragedy to die young so we pray, "May we 
be sufficiently ripe before we are eaten up by death; 
and we seek by all means to attain long life."

The fear of the Lord prolongeth days; but the years of 
the wicked shall be shortened (Proverbs 10:27)The fear of the Lord prolongeth days; but the years of 
the wicked shall be shortened (Proverbs 10:27)

Be not righteous over much; neither make thyself over 
wise. Why shouldest thou destroy thyself? Be not over 
much wicked, neither be thou foolish; why shouldest

thou die before thy time (Ecclesiastes 7:16-17)?

BIBLICAL

BIBLICAL

Seek the place of honor, respect, and accomplishment 
in this world; for you will become a revered ancestor,

Every person teaches as they act. They will speak to 
the children so that they will speak to their children, 
Each person will set an example and not give offense 
(Ptah Hotep).

Follow the footsteps of your ancestors, for the mind is 
trained through knowledge. Behold their words, 
endure in books (Kheti).

Pour libation for your father and mother who rest in 
the valley of the dead. God will witness your action 
and accept it. . . for as you do for your parents, your 
children will do for you also (Ani).

To be told and to like it; to be given advise and to 
accept it; to take advise in order to know what the 
world is like.

Advise and counsel them; if they do not learn, let 
adversity teach them (Ethiopia).

One must be uplifted from poverty-stricken accep- 
tance and state of mind. There is no virtue in being in 
poverty. Be industrious and accomplish your desires. 
Wealth will come.

Love not sleep, lest thou come to poverty; open thine 
eyes, and thou shalt be satisfied with bread (Proverbs 
20:13).

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 17

Table 1. Odu Ethics (continued).

The HUSIA- 
KHEMET

Be diligent as long as you live, always doing more

than is commanded of you. Do not misuse your time

while following the heart, for it is offensive to the soul 
to waste one's time. Do not lose the daily opportu- 
nity to increase that which you have (Pta-Hotep).

AFRICAN Poverty is slavery (Somalia). 
PROVERB

IT 
NIR A! 4

СА қ 
rAFRICAN Poverty is slavery (Somalia). 
PROVERB

IT 
NIR A! 4

СА қ 
r

One must come to realize that stubbornness is not ben- 
eficial; that the truth regarding oneself must be lis- 
tened to. Do not be overly influenced by your 
self-defensive ego. Problems in life are caused by neg- 
ligence of one's self.

BIBLICAL Every way of a man is right in his own eyes; but the 
Lord pondereth the hearts (Proverbs 21:2).

ORIENTAL | !narchery we have something of the superior person. 
When the archer misses the center of the target, he

turns around and seeks the cause of his failure in him- 
self (Doctrine of the Mean).

Guard against words and deeds of deception and 
against words that are not true. Destroy the desire to 
do and speak evil within you, for the evil person hath 
no rest (Ant).

The HUSIA- 
KHEMET

Anger does not do anything for anyone; patience is 
the father of good character; those who develop 
patience will enjoy long life. 
The HUSIA- | ,.. Be gentle and patient, then your character will be 
KHEMET beautiful. It is in the development of character that

instruction succeeds. Learn the structure and function- 
ing of the Sky. Learn the structure and functioning of 
the Earth (Ankhsheshongi).

AFRICAN A little subtleness is better than a lot of force (Zaire). 
PROVERB

Ф

16 / Baba Ifa Karade

Table 1. Odu Ethics (continued).

== RE

EL к pU ы-

171... PIES SUIS 
in this world; for you will become a revered ancestor.

The HUSIA- | Every person teaches as they act. They will speak to 
KHEMET the children so that they will speak to their children. 
Each person will set an example and not give offense 
(Ptah Hotep).

Follow the footsteps of your ancestors, for the mind is 
trained through knowledge. Behold their words, 
endure in books (Kheti).

Pour libation for your father and mother who rest in 
the valley of the dead. God will witness your action

and accept it . . . for as you do for your parents, your 
children will do for you also (Ant).and accept it . . . for as you do for your parents, your 
children will do for you also (Ant).

To be told and to like it; to be given advise and to 
accept it; to take advise in order to know what the 
world is like.

Advise and counsel them; if they do not learn, let 
adversity teach them (Ethiopia).

One must be uplifted from poverty-stricken accep- 
tance and state of mind. There is no virtue in being in 
poverty. Be industrious and accomplish your desires. 
Wealth will come.

BIBLICAL Love not sleep, lest thou come to poverty; open thine 
eyes, and thou shalt be satisfied with bread (Proverbs 
20:13).

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 17 
Table 1. Odu Ethics (continued).

Be diligent as long as you live, always doing more

than is commanded of you. Do not misuse your time

pressi asi Pipi 
to waste one's time. Do not lose the daily opportu- 
nity to increase that which you have v oun

AFRICAN Poverty is slavery (Somalia). 
PROVERB

2A 
PNE UN RU ARS

Chad tl couse Vo melas fot caso mt bo 
eficial; that the truth oneself must be lis- 
tened to. Do not be overly influenced by your 
self-defensive ego. Problems in life are caused by neg- 
ligence of one's self.

BIBLICAL Every way of a man is right in his own eyes; but the 
Lord pondereth the hearts (Proverbs 21:2).

ORIENTAL | In archery we have something of the superior person.

WISDOM When the archer misses the center of the target, he 
turns around and seeks the cause of his failure in him- 
self (Doctrine of the Mean).

Guard against words and deeds of deception and 
against words that are not true. the desire to 
do and speak evil within you, for the evil person hath 
no rest (Ani).

IFA Anger does not do anything for anyone; patience is

the father of good character; those who develop 
patience will enjoy long life.

The HUSIA- | ... Be gentle and patient, then your character will bethe father of good character; those who develop 
patience will enjoy long life.

The HUSIA- | ... Be gentle and patient, then your character will be

KHEMET beautiful. It is in the development of character that 
instruction succeeds. Learn the structure and function- 
ing of the Sky. Learn the structure and functioning of 
the Earth (Ankhsheshongi).

A little subtleness is better than a lot of force (Zaire).

©

18 / Baba а Karade

Table 1. Odu Ethics (continued).

IFA One must cease leading themselves to misfortune. 
One must cease bringing harm upon themselves.

Gentleness of conduct of every kind causes the wise to 
be praised. Do not make your mouth harsh or speak 
loudly with your tongue. For a loud voice does dam- 
age to members of the body just like an illness. Do not 
be so impatient when you ask that you get angry 
while you are listening. . . Do not yield often to your 
tongue in order to advise when you have not been 
asked (Phebhor).

It is to be that Ifa divination be continually performed 
so that the forces in one's life be understood and con- 
trolled.

IFA 
Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow 
of death, I will fear no evil. For thou art with me; thy

BIBLICAL 
rod and staff thy comfort me (Psalms 23:4).

ORIENTAL | Those who are skillful in managing life entrusted to 
WISDOM them may travel on the land without fear . . for 
within there is no place of death (Lao Tzu).

The Orisha state that we must never raise problems or 
incite conflict. That we must take the time to be sure of 
our words even before we speak.

A soft answer turneth away wrath; but grievous 
words stir up anger (Proverbs 15:1).

The tongue of the wise useth knowledge aright; but the 
mouths of fools poureth out foolishness (Proverbs 15:2).

And be moderate in thy pace, and lower thy voice; for 
the harshest of sounds without doubt is the braying of 
the ass (Sura 31:19).

BIBLICAL

QUR'AN

T

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 19BIBLICAL

QUR'AN

T

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 19

Table 1. Odu Ethics (continued).

. . offensive words that come from your mouth, if

repeated, can make bitter enemies. A person may be 
ruined by his or her tongue. Take care and you will 
fare well . . a harsh answer provokes strife, but one 
who speaks with gentleness is loved (Ani).

AFRICAN Do not say the first thing that comes to your mind 
(Guinea). 
If your mouth turns into a knife it will cut off your lips 
(Zimbabwe). 
No matter how powerful wickedness is; righteousness 
overcomes it in the end. The power of falsehood is 
transient and ephemeral; truth although seemingly 
slow and weak overcomes falsehood in the end. 
BIBLICAL The eye of the truth shall be established forever; but a 
lying tongue is but for a moment (Proverbs 12:19). 
Though the white gem be cast into the dirt, its purity 
cannot long be sullied; though the good man live in a 
vile place, his heart cannot be depraved. As the fir and 
the cypress withstand the rigors of winter, so resplen- 
dent wisdom is safe in situations of difficulty and dan- 
ger (Wisdom of Kung Fu).

ORIENTAL 
WISDOM

AFRIC. The truth is like gold, keep it locked up and you will 
PROVERB find it exactly as you first put it away (Senegal). 
“ғ ы

ATH | R ubl — TE c m tr

T 
TR —

MW s m FEBR teas Ra le G 
come to bare their burdens alone.

stoppeth his ears at the crying of the poor, he also 
28 but shall not be heard (Proverbs 
21:13).

Those who (in charity) spend of their goods by night 
and by day, in secret and in public, have their reward 
with their lord. On them shall be no fear, nor shall they 
grieve (Sura 2:274).

20 / Babe Ifa Karade

Table 1. Odu Ethics (continued).

KHEMETIAN| Help your friends with things you have, for you have 
these things by the grace of God. If you fail to help 
your friends, one will say you have a selfish Ka (Pta 
Hotep).KHEMETIAN| Help your friends with things you have, for you have 
these things by the grace of God. If you fail to help 
your friends, one will say you have a selfish Ka (Pta 
Hotep).

Eat not bread while another stands by hungry without 
extending your hand to him or her. As for food, it 
is always here, it is a man or a woman who do not 
remain , one who was rich last year may be vagrant

this year. Therefore, be not anxious to fill your belly 
without regards for others (Ani).

B

7

Unless we resort to caution and discretion we will 
miss the blessings of prosperity.

BIBLICAL Wrath is cruel, and anger is outrageous; but who is 
able to stand before envy (Proverbs 27:4).

ORIENTAL | You may do good without thinking about fame, but 
WISDOM

fame will come to you nevertheless, You may have 
fame without aiming at riches, but riches are sure to 
BIBLICAL

follow in its wake. You may be rich without wishing to 
provoke emulation and strife, yet emulation and strife 
will certainly result. Hence, the superior persons are

very cautious about how they do good (Lieh Tzu).

Do not speak of those who are ill of mind or crippled 
of body. Do not leave your home and speak badly of 
those in trouble.

Whoso mocketh the poor (and crippled) reproacheth 
his maker; and he that is glad at calamities shall not be 
unpunished (Proverbs 17:5).

Laugh not at the blind, nor make fun dwarf, nor inter- 
fere with the plans of the lame. Do not harass those 
who are in the hands of God, if they err. Surely, 
humans are clay and straw, and God is the builder 
(Amenomope).

Chapter 3

THE ORISHA 
AS ANGELIC FORCES

1 
Nature is viewed as the manifestation of OludumaresChapter 3

THE ORISHA 
AS ANGELIC FORCES

1 
Nature is viewed as the manifestation of Oludumares

Essence through degrees of material substance. That 
essence, translated as ashe, is the inherent force of all cre- 
ation. The emphasis of such study or worship is not cen- 
tered on the physical object or tangible, but on the life-force 
energy that brings about its form. The tangible object is but 
a symbol of the eternal existence that bore it.

Oludumare/Olorun is in all things as the ashe is the pri- 
mal essence of all things. It is not the tree, the rock, the statue

that African ancestors revere and worship but the deep

energy that brought about its being. In maintaining the 
"nature religion" the ancestors were able to keep and also

human beings.

This concept is basic and fundamental in respect to 
religious involvement. Oludumare, the Creator, must be 
seen in all things. Humans, devoid of oppressive ego, must

see themselves as also part of the creation, and behave

accordingly. In respect to the orisha, it is to be understood `

that as "angelic forces" they, too, are a part of nature. As 
angels, they are comprised of greater heavenly properties 
and are closer to the divine source of Existence. Their abil- 
ity to act on behalf of human beings is generally stated as

divination, belief, faith, prayer, song and praise, dance, rit- 
ual, and sacrifice inclusive. This "bringing about" is a dual 
endeavor as both priest and devotee need follow certain

22 / Baba Ifa Karade

Figure 3. "Akpetebi" Sokoya Onayemi Aya Karade among the ere 
orisha (images of orisha). The Oshun odu-orisha (the vessel con- 
taining Oshun's mysteries), the Obi Abata, and Eshu are placed 
closed to her.

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 23

guidelines and practices to efficaciously heal or correct a 
corrupted situation.THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 23

guidelines and practices to efficaciously heal or correct a 
corrupted situation.

Orisha as a term, is actually the combination of two 
Yoruba words. Ori which is the reflective spark of human 
consciousness embedded in human essence, and sha which 
is the ultimate potentiality of that consciousness to enter 
into or assimilate itself into the divine consciousness.

The human consciousness needs to pass through stages 
of development in order to attain the highest levels. The 
orisha symbolize the forces and forms of human divinity 
potential. In Her Bak, it is written that, "the Neters [divine 
beings-Orishas] are an expression of the principles and 
functions of divine power manifesting in nature. Their 
names and images as pictured in the myths define such 
principles and functions and they are offered that the stu- 
dent may learn to know them and seek them in him/her 
self.“ This concept maintained by the ancients of Egypt and 
West Africa is evident, though somewhat dismissed, in all 
forms of religious and spiritual development.

"The Yoruba maintain that worship of the orisha assist 
in the development of iwa-pele or balanced character and 
balanced attitude. That the most important purpose ofa 
person on. earth is to come and exhibit that character and 
attitude." 4 Religion. as a custom of worship, is not man’s 
purpose, but only a means to an end while the end itself is 
iwa-pele. Thus, the fundamental reality in respect to the 
divinity of self and the heavenly forces is that of pure and 
enlightened character development. This is the premise of 
true orisha involvement. The connection between one’s con- 
sciousness (ori) and one’s behavior (iwa- pele) is clearly seen 
as as reciprocal and relative. That is, the more enlightened 
one’s consciousness becomes, in respect to the divine, the

' Isha Schwaller de Lubicz, Her-Bak: Egyptian Initiate (Rochester, VT: Inner 
Traditions, 1982), p. 27.' Isha Schwaller de Lubicz, Her-Bak: Egyptian Initiate (Rochester, VT: Inner 
Traditions, 1982), p. 27.

25. Popoola, “Life: Its Purpose and Hereafter” in Orunmila, Issue 3 (June 
1987), p. 13

24 / Baba Ii Karade

more one’s behavior reflects the divine. Thus, the individual

is deemed saintly or priestly in their development.

The Orisha

Ori: G. Okemyiwa and A. Fubunmi state, “the word Ori has 
many meanings. [literally] Ori means head. It means the 
apex of all things, the highest of any endeavor. . . . In the 
human body Ori is divided into two—the physical head 
and the spiritual head. The spiritual head is [also] subdi- 
vided into two—the Ori Apari—inner [the internal spiritual 
Ori] and the Ori Apere (the sign of an individual's personal 
god (orisha).”* The Ori Ode (physical head), the Ori Inu (the 
internal spirit), and the Iponri (the soul space of the inner- 
self).are more noted definitions of the Ori. It is revealed іп 
the odu, Ogunda that "no god blesses a person without con- 
sent of their Ori. One whose Ori has accepted the sacrifice is 
one who should rejoice exceedingly." In all forms of ritual 
sacrifice offerings are first placed to the center or top of the

Obatala: "Obatala, also known as Orisha-nla, Orishaala, 
Ogiyan is deemed the arch-divinity of Yorubaland. Obatala 
represents the idea of ritual purity and ethical purity, sym- 
bolized by immaculate whiteness associated with him— 
inside walls of temples are washed white, emblems are kept 
in white containers, and white robes, ornaments, and beads 
are for his priest and priestesses."* Obatala is viewed as the 
most intelligent and even-tempered of the orishas. Not onl

is he the "father of the orisha," but also the moulder of 
human form on Earth. He is the creative sculptor that forms

* “Life: It's Purpose and Hereafter” in Orunmila, p. 15. 
* George Simpson, Yoruba Religions and Medicines of Ibadan (Ibadab Uni- 
versity Press, 1980), p. 3.* “Life: It's Purpose and Hereafter” in Orunmila, p. 15. 
* George Simpson, Yoruba Religions and Medicines of Ibadan (Ibadab Uni- 
versity Press, 1980), p. 3.

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 25

Obatala who first formed humankind out of the Earth's

priest and priestesses who present them to the altars or 
shrines on behalf of the followers.

Eshu-Elegba: Eshu, as a divinity, is viewed primarily as the 
powerful holder of the ashe or creative potency of the other 
orisha. For this reason all sacrifices and offerings must be

shared with Eshu in some manner. He is the messenger

divinity who delivers sacrifices to the orisha from humans 
and from one orisha to another. Eshu holds a conflictual

— —— Mà

position among humans and orisha alike, for he is the one

respected and revered. He is in close proximity to all 
forces positive and negative alike—as he is the prime 
negotiator between them. Awolalu writes, The Yoruba tra- 
dition holds that Eshu maintains relationships with the 
super-sensible world and with human beings on Earth. 
With regard to the super-sensible world, he maintains close 
relationship with Orunmila who is notable for his wisdom 
and who knows the wishes of Deity and divinities.”*

It is interesting to note that in Yorubaland, as stated by 
Awolalu, that “Eshu has no regular priesthood because he is 
associated with all the other divinities. But, whenever these 
other divinities are worshipped, due homage is paid to 
him.“ Images of Eshu (generally constructed of clay, wood,

stone, or concrete and adorned with cowries shells) are

* Omosade Awolalu, Yoruba Beliefs and Sacrificial Rites (White Plains, NY: 
Longman Group, 1979), p. 29. 
* Yoruba Beliefs and Sacrificial Rites, p. 30.

afi 
Мк 
f

*

mb

26 / Baba Ifa Karade

found in every Yoruba home regardless of the priestly order, 
or status of the family. Also, Eshu is to be propitiated not

only first before orisha, but also before Egun (ancestors).found in every Yoruba home regardless of the priestly order, 
or status of the family. Also, Eshu is to be propitiated not

only first before orisha, but also before Egun (ancestors).

Oshun: Oshun is the orisha of unconditional love, receptiv-

and diplomacy. She is known for her sensuality, fine 
artistic c development and beauty. Oshun is a river divinity 
symboliz and flowing motion. She has powers to 
heal with cool water and to divine based on her dream reve- 
lations and sensual perception. Oshun is said to have many 
sides. On the one hand she can be very short-tempered | ~) 
irritable on the other, she can be calm and fluid. Either could 
be the case depending on the devotee and/or the nature of 
the situation.

Oshun is also the divinity of fertility and feminine 
essence. Women appeal to her for child-bearing and for the 
alleviation of female disorders. She is fond of babies and is

sought if a baby becomes ill. Oshun is reflected in brass, 
gold, and shining gems. She is known for her love of

honey.

Ogun: Ogun is the divinity of iron and all that iron 
becomes. He is the patron of blacksmiths, hunters, and war-

riors. Ogun is also the divinity of clearing paths, specifically 
in respect to building civilizations. He is also depicted as the 
divinity of mechanization. Ogun is the essence of divine jus- 
tice and truth on Devotees swear upon him in solemn 
reverence, Known for his keen insight into the hearts of men 
he is the liberator or executioner in the world.

Yemoja: Yemoja is the divinity of all the oceans. She is said 
to be the mother of all orisha and expresses her mothering

throughout the earth! апа heavenly realms. Yemoja i is the

matriarchal head of the cosmic universe. She is the ambiotic 
fluid in the womb of the pregnant woman, as well as, the 
E which nurture. She is known to be very stern and

ramental and ¢ expresses the protective energies s of the

T

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 27ramental and ¢ expresses the protective energies s of the

T

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 27

feminine force. Being of the earth-essence, she is proficient ` 
in the secret arts and will use them to protect her devotees. H

Oya: Oya is the divinity that guards the cemetery. More 
specifically she protects the souls of the departed as they 
journey onward. Oya is viewed as a warrior with ; great

strength. She stands well on her own, but is usually in the ` i V^

company of her te Sh . Oya is also recognized 
for her psychic abilities which manifest in the winds. She is 
the deity of the storm and hurricanes. Oya is often seen as the 
deity of death, but upon deeper realization, she is the deity of 
rebirth as things must die so that new beginnings arise.

Shango: Shango is the deified Alafin (ruler) of medieval Oyo 
said to have hung himself because of his over-indulgence. 
His elevation to the orisha realm was brought about by his 
devout followers. They merged him with the deity of light- 
ning and fierce retribution known as Jakuta. Shango's sym-

bol is the double ax mounted on the head of the holy s

EE RE De holy statues. 
or dance wands (Oshe Shango). Shango is the orisha of the 
drum and dance. He the ability to transform base

substance into that which is pure and valuable. His devotees 
approach him for legal problems, protection from enemies, 
and to make bad situations better. Often viewed as a bit Î 
earthy, Shango is revered and earnestly listened to for he

speaks only once and is prone to be temperamental. 
000

"In Africa, it is believed that divinities or gods are personi- 
fications of God's activities and manifestations. God's activ- 
ities and manifestations are also discernible in natural 
phenomenon and objects, nature spirits, deified heroes and 
mythological figures."^ As the study of orisha intensifies it 
becomes apparent that throughout Yorubaland every aspect7 M. Duko, “God & Godling's in African Ontology” in Orunmila, Issue 5 
(June 1990), p. 49.

ac |

-

ANS

28 / Baba а Karade

of nature is a vehicle to god-consciousness. Although the 
major seven have survived the Middle Passage, they were 
not the only ones.

The Yoruba orisha are examined in tables 2-4 on pages 
29 and 30. The depictions show concise views of those attrib- 
utes most generally related by New World practitioners. The 
general notion is that this is where the involvement with 
orisha stops. Aspirants who proclaim their affiliations based 
on worldly intentions must guard against delusion. Delusion

leads to witchcraft or the manipulation of the ashe i in order to

satisfy the | lower-base self. As — study y orisha, they

faith—to express divine character, cr attitude (iwa- 
le). Devotees are not to rest on preconceived notions as to 
the orisha are about and attempt to "act like" the orisha. 
This is unwise. Through devotion to the orisha ordained as 
messenger, helper and patron, the ashe will "act through" 
the devotee for the sole purpose of transformation, purifica- 
tion, and enlightenment. This as This ashe is to be channeled by the 
devotee through the process known as aba, which brings 
forth the manifestation of light into the world. 
As New World Yoruba initiates expand their aware- 
ness, more orisha are revealed. A list of other orisha are 
included with one of their many attributes:

Olokun: Orisha of the depths of the ocean.

Oshoosi: Orisha of warriors and hunters.

Osun: The staff of the babalawo symbolizing health, wisdom and 
protection.

Ibeji: Twins symbolizing the dual aspect of the cosmos.

Oba: River orisha.

Aganyu: Orisha of the volcano and core of the earth.

Oko: Orisha of the farm.

Erinle: Orisha of medicine.

Osain: Orisha of the plants and herbs.

Babaluaiye: Orisha of sickness and epidemics.

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 29

Table 2. The Seven Major Orisha.Erinle: Orisha of medicine.

Osain: Orisha of the plants and herbs.

Babaluaiye: Orisha of sickness and epidemics.

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 29

Table 2. The Seven Major Orisha.

Creator of Human Form, Elder of the 
Orisha, Wisdom, Purity, Morality, Strategy, 
High Intelligence, Peacemaker, Father, God 
of the White Cloth, Silver.

Messenger of the Orisha, Courier of Offer- 
ings to the Orisha, Policeman of the Yoruba 
Cosmology, Guardian of the Cross-roads, 
Holder of Ashe (power) among the Orisa, 
Laterite Stone.

Orisha of Iron, War, Creator of Civilizations, 
Courage, Strength, Justice and Oaths, Execu- 
tioner, Pathmaker, Force, Stabilization, Secu- 
rity, Protection, Vehicles and Tools.

Motherhood, Mother of Waters, Family, Sex- 
uality, Sorcery, Primal Waters, Nurturer.

Sensuality, Fine Arts and Humanities, Love, 
Beauty, Graciousness, Gracefulness, Money, 
Sorcery, Luxury, Brass, Gold, Cowrie, Rivers, 
Intuition, Divination.

Kingly, Stately, Orator, Sorcery, Virility, 
Dance, Music (drums), Masculinity, Busi- 
ness, Fire, Lightning, Stones, Protector / War-

rior, Magnetism.

Tempest, Guardian of the Cemetery, Winds 
of Change, Warrior, Hurricanes, Storms, 
Death, Progression.

30 / Baba Ifa Karade

Table 3. Color, Number, and Natural Environment.

NATURAL 
ORISHA | COLOR NUMBER* | ENVIRONMENT 
Elegba Red and Black 1,3, 21 Woods, Crossroads, 
White and Black Gateways 
Yemoja | Blue and Crystal 7 Oceans, Lakes 
(salt water) 
Oshun Yellow Rivers, Lakes 
(fresh water) 
Ogun Green and Black 3 Railroads, Woods, 
Forges 
Shango 6, 12 Places struck by light- 
ning, base of trees 
Reddish-brown, Cemetery, places hit 
Rust, Earth-tones by Hurricanes, Storms

* Numbers of the orisha may also include their multiples. Colors may be taken 
in shades

Table 4. Physical Correspondences.

ORISHA PHYSICAL CORRESPONDENCES

Obatala brain, bones, white fluids of the body

sympathetic nervous system, para sympathetic nervousTable 4. Physical Correspondences.

ORISHA PHYSICAL CORRESPONDENCES

Obatala brain, bones, white fluids of the body

sympathetic nervous system, para sympathetic nervous

womb, liver, breasts, buttocks

circulatory system, digestive organs, elimination system, 
pubic area (female)

heart, kidney (adrenal glands), tendons, and sinews

reproductive system (male), bone marrow, life force or chi

Oya lungs, bronchial passages, mucous membranes

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOLIS CONCEPTS / 31 
Ewe

The use of herbs and plants, called ewe in Yoruba, is one of 
great emphasis. Herbs are picked for medicinal, and spiritu- 
ally empowering purposes. In Yorubaland herbs are gath- 
ered by the priestly and/or by the various types of herbalists 
who inhabit the regions. The herbs are often made available 
to the population either through private practice, or they can 
be purchased in a marketplace. In the New World, Yoruba- 
based aspirants are also herbally directed. Various botanicas 
(base word botany) exist in major cities in the Americas. Here 
priests and devotees alike go to obtain herbs for baths, reli- 
gious artifacts, etc. Most botanicas are run by Hispanics, but

Figure 4. Ewe (herbs) obtained from botanicas for spiritual baths 
and consecration of sacred objects.

32 / Baba Ifa Karade

they are not limited to Hispanic patronage. Nigerians and 
people from other African countries have begun to set up 
businesses in increasing numbers in the Americas. Indige- 
nous herbs are now becoming more accessible to Yoruba- 
directed devotees.

The ewe (herbs) are for the “healing of nations” and 
various health food stores provide them in both leaf and 
capsule form. Adherents to traditional practices are 
advised to apply herbs before going to synthetic products 
for healing. Numerous books on herbology can be found. 
Exploration of the possibilities of herbal use is recom- 
mended.Table 5 shows herbal directives. They provide exam- 
ples of the ewe based on the presiding orisha correspon-

ж

Table 5. The Ewe and Presiding Orisha Correspondences.

ORISHA | EWE (HERBS) FOR MEDICINAL USAGE

Obatala | Skullcap, Sage, Kola Nut, Basil, Hyssop, Blue Ver- 
vain, White Willow, Valerian

Elegba All Herbs 
Yellow Dock, Burdock, Cinnamon, Damiana, Anis, 
Raspberry, Yarrow, Chamomile, Lotus, Uva-Ursi, 
Buchu, Myrrh, Echinacea

Yemoja | Kelp, Squawvine, Cohosh, Dandelion, Yarrow, 
Aloe, Spirulina, Mints, Passion Flower, Wild Yam 
Root

Eucalyptus, Alfalfa, Hawthorn, Bloodroot, Parsley, 
Motherwort, Garlic

Oya Mullein, Comfrey, Cherrybark, Pleurisy Root, Ele- 
campane, Horehound, Chickweed

Shango | Plantain, Saw Palmetto, Hibiscus, Fo-ti, Sarsapar- 
illa, Nettles, Cayenne

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 33

dence. It is best that novices seek out divination before 
attempting to get and prepare herbal solutions. It is also 
advisable to rely on priests and herbalists to begin the heal- 
ing process before getting involved with the property and 
f ourself.

The generally accepted way to prepare these herbs are 
as follows: The herbs are added alone or in combination to a 
kettle of mildly boiling water. Steep for approximately 
thirty minutes before straining. The remaining herbal solu- 
tion is then prepared as a drink. In some instances the 
herbal solutions are used in diluted form for enemas. Sugar 
should never be added to herbal solutions. Honey may be 
used along with lemon.

Spiritual Baths 
Spiritual baths require the following:

1. That the correct herbs are used. The formula is based 
upon divination by the priestly. The presiding orisha or 
egun is determined and the corresponding herbs are 
obtained and prepared.

2. That the spiritual baths be continued for the number of 
days specified. The number can range from 1 day to 21 
days. This is also determined by divination.2. That the spiritual baths be continued for the number of 
days specified. The number can range from 1 day to 21 
days. This is also determined by divination.

3. During the period specified for the taking of spiritual 
baths there is to be light eating, sexual abstinence, emo- 
tional balance, and no use of intoxicants. Daily prayer and 
affirmations need to be said as well.

Before taking spiritual baths make sure that you set up your 
space. There are a number of things that you need to do to 
prepare yourself.

34 / Baba Ifa Karade

1. You need a white sheet or large towel to wrap yourself 
in, and a white cloth to cover your head immediately after 
the bath (all sheets, etc., should be made of cotton).

2. Your space should be cleansed with incense made of 
myrrh and frankincense. 
3. The tub, sink, and vessel that will hold the spiritual

bath should be clean. Other areas involved should also be 
clean.

4. White candles should be lit in the bathroom and any 
other areas involved.

5. Silence or meditative sounds should prevail.

6. Keep spiritual bath concentrates in the refrigerator when 
not in use, and always label the bottle!

The spiritual bath does not require that one sit in a tub. This 
is an immersion and should be specifically prescribed by 
the diviner or herbalist. The herbal solution should be 
diluted with water at a 12:1 or 8:1 ratio. (Example: 12 parts 
water to 1 part herbal solution.) The water should be cool or 
tepid, but never hot. Shake the herbal solution well before 
pouring it into the basin or gourd. It really doesn’t matter 
which goes in first, but it is easiest to measure the solution 
first, and then add the water.

1. First bathe or shower with natural soaps and shampoos. 
2. Dry off (optional).

3. Kneel reverently or stand with conviction in the tub or 
shower area.

4. Gently pour the diluted herbal solution over your body. 
Pray aloud or silently for peace and protection.3. Kneel reverently or stand with conviction in the tub or 
shower area.

4. Gently pour the diluted herbal solution over your body. 
Pray aloud or silently for peace and protection.

5. Lightly pat-dry yourself off, wrap up in the white sheet, 
cover your hair with the cloth.

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 35

6. Clean the tub, vessel, or sink by wiping it out with a mild 
cleanser,

7. Retire for study, meditation, or just quiet time. Relax.

Note: Early morning or night quiet are the preferred times to take 
a spiritual bath. You may take a regular bath or shower 
after at least four hours have elapsed, if necessary. Sisters, 
if you are menstruating, or pregnant, ask the diviner to 
check specifically to determine if it is appropriate for you to 
take a spiritual bath during these times.

Spiritual baths are basically made by placing the specific 
herbs into a pot of heated water (see table 6 on page 36 for 
specific herbs and their Orisha correspondence). The herbs 
are then set to boil. After the herbs have boiled (which 
releases the ashe) they are strained. The solution remain- 
ing constitutes the spiritual bath. Various substances such 
as efun and oils, are added to enhance the ashe as needed. 
The bath constitution is known as omiero when sacrificial 
blood is included.

Prayers are said over the herbs as they are being pre- 
pared. Osain, the divinity-orisha of botany and herbology, is 
invoked so that the healing elements be forthcoming. One 
incantation to Osain is “Ashe Omo Osain Ewe Aye” (The 
power of Osain’s children, the plants of the Earth).Spiritual baths are suggested to devotees who need to 
be cleansed of negative influences which have impacted 
upon their aura or essence. The herbal properties are 
absorbed into the human dimensions and assist in the dissi- 
pation of negative influences. Spiritual baths may also be 
prescribed as preventives in these regards. Many forms of 
Yoruba initiations involve the bathing of the initiate in the 
ewe in order to enhance her/his ashe. Religious objects are 
also bathed in omiero as a part of the consecration of those

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 37 
36 / Baba Ifa Karade

Table 6. Ewe (Herbs) for Spiritual Baths (continued).

Caimito 
Yucca

Table 6. Ewe (Herbs) for Spiritual Baths.

SPANISH

(HIERBAS OR PLANTAS) 
Marjorana 
Platano 
Yerba Buena 
Verbena 
Canutillo 
Cucaracha

Salvia-de-Castilla 
Paraiso

Suco Blanco 
Malva

Aquinaldo Blanco

Papaya Lechosa

Wild Lettuce

Bonset Rompesaraguey

Cinnamon Caisimon 
Cassava 
Boton de Oro 
Abre Camino 
Sauco Blanco

Amansa Guapo

Alamo 
Coaba

Cedar

Ceiba

Platano 
Rompesaraguey

Siempre Viva Cano

Maravilla

Romerillo

Oya Royal Poinciana | Flamboyan 
Cucaracha |

Zarzaparilla

38 / Baba Ifa Karade

The Orisha Internal 
The highest purpose of esotericism is that of the internaliza-

tion of concepts, philosophies, and religious practices. Inter- 
nalization is the process which brings the devout to stages

of development based on inner growth and understanding. 
If no religious practice or doctrine were internalized then

change would not be possible, especially from a spiritual- 
religious standpoint.of development based on inner growth and understanding. 
If no religious practice or doctrine were internalized then

change would not be possible, especially from a spiritual- 
religious standpoint.

Theosophical questions in regards to where the orisha 
literally dwell arise when devotees begin to sense the 
unfolding of the orisha's divine attributes from within. The 
answers are relatively simple. Yes, the orisha dwell within 
the human existence. Eastern and western traditions alike 
maintain that the holy ones—sacred entities, prophets, 
angels—do have a focal point in the vast dimensions of the 
human mind and body. Yogic chakras, as internal wheels of 
energy that exist in the physical / spiritual body, are exam- 
ined in this light.

Through actual experience and research it has been 
noted that within the chakras, (see figure 5) regardless of 
cultural persuasion, there exist psycho-hormones, nerve 
plexi, and divinities. The chakras, the orisha, and the behav- 
ioral modes which are related to them are presented in fig- 
ures 6 through 12 on pages 40-46. Upon study, it becomes 
evident that the chakra modes correspond very easily to the 
directives of the orisha.*

* Information regarding the chakras is adapted from Harish Johari's 
Chakra's: Energy Centers of Transformation (Rochester, VT: Inner Traditions, 
1987).

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 39

7th Chakra: Ori 
(Crown Chakra)

6th Chakra: Orunmila 
(Third Eye)

(Navel Region)

7% 
2nd Chakra: Yemoja 
(Reproductive Region)

1st Chakra: Shango 
(Anal Region)

Figure 5. The Chakras of the human body.

40 / Baba Ifa Karade

YORUBA YOGIC

Oran Sra

1) Relax tensions in order to reduce karama and world entangle- 
ments.

2) Refine sense organs so that confusion and pain do not follow 
the seeking of temporary gratification.

3) Guard against polluting the sensory organs through over-indul- 
gence.

4) Begin to act wisely and with moderation.

5) Seek liberation from the lower reaims.3) Guard against polluting the sensory organs through over-indul- 
gence.

4) Begin to act wisely and with moderation.

5) Seek liberation from the lower reaims.

6) Guard against violent behavior based on insecurity. 
7) Be motivated towards self-development.

Figure 6. The first chakra.

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 41

1) Observe and study the effect of the moon upon the emotions.

2) Monetary wealth should precede fulfillment of sensual desires 
and sexual life.

3) Become free of base emotions such as anger, envy, and greed. 
4) Remember always that a negative mind brings disaster.

5) Guard against being over possessive.

6) Regulate primal needs in order to maintain your health.

7) Elevate the consciousness through fine arts and crafts.

Figure 7. The second chakra.

42 / Baba Ifa Karade

YORUBA

YOGIC 
QUE

1) Recognize that using anger to control others leads to long term 
failure.

2) Reflect more on the consequences of actions.

3) Guard against vanity and false pride.

4) Motivation is stimulated by the need for recognition, immortality, 
and power.

5) Seek to develop a positive ego and identity.

6) Give charity and selfless service.

7) Let love and compassion radiate from within.

Figure 8. The third chakra.

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 43

1) Develop a higher sense of awareness and sensitivity.

2) Emphasize a sense of purity, innocence, and magnestism. 
3) Reflect upon inner sounds (Nada Yoga).

4) Strive to become independent and self-emanating.

5) Strive to attain wisdom and inner strength,

6) Seek to control the breathing and heart rate.

7) Purity of relationships comes through the inner balancing of 
male and female energies.

Figure 9. The fourth chakra,

44 / Baba Ifa Karade

YORUBA YOGIC

T | 
| Оғаһа = Obatala Chakra = Vishudda

1) Purify your sound to affect listeners in a positive way.

2) Awaken the dawning of awareness of eternal knowledge.

3) Supreme reason must overcome the emotions of the heart.1) Purify your sound to affect listeners in a positive way.

2) Awaken the dawning of awareness of eternal knowledge.

3) Supreme reason must overcome the emotions of the heart.

4) Use psychic energy and clairvoyance to communicate without 
words.

5) Guard against negative thought and use your knowledge wisely. 
6) Become the master of the entire self. 
7) Concentrate on the cooling mechanism (throat chakra).

Figure 10. The fifth chakra.

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 45

1) Meditate on the third eye to eradicate sins and impurities.

2) You reveal the divine within; you reflect divinity within others.

3) Practice austerity to bring about cosmic oneness.

4) Maintain proper balance through spiritual devotion.

5) Become One-Pointed. Become beyond the negative forces that 
pull one in many directions.

6) You may interpret the inner meanings of Cosmic Laws. You may

generate scriptures.

7) You have the ability to induce visions of the past, present, 
future.

Figure 11. The sixth chakra.

46 / Baba Ifa Karade

1) Strive to reach the guru within. Through the consciousness one 
is able to attain oneness of all things.

2) Strive to lose the illusion of the individual self. Realize that the 
cosmic principles that govern the entire universe are within you 
also.

3) Strive to feel the divine and fully realize the divinity within.

Figure 12. The seventh chakra.

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 47

Prayer

"Prayer is the means by which the conviction that God is 
becomes instilled. God becomes, through prayer, a living 
force in the life of man. The real conviction that God is, 
comes to man not by belief that there is a God in the outer- 
world, but in the realization of the Divine within himself; 
and this realization is attained through prayer. . .. Prayer 
generates a moral force which not only changes с our lives, 
but the lives of others also.”?Prayer (adura) is very important in Yoruba religion. To 
make supplications to one's ori, the ancestors, orisha, Orun- 
mila, and Oludumare is viewed as an essential aspect of 
Yoruba worship. It is to be understood that prayers 2 the

divinities are for the purification and elevation of base

human qualities. The highest form of prayer is that of f the 
evotee asking for g except transcendence and pro-

tection from negating forces. By means of sincere prayer the 
devotee is better able to pass through the lower realms and 
attain the heavenly states.

Yoruba priests and priestesses are directed to assist 
devotees in their heavenly and earthly trials. Prayers to the 
deities for bearing children, finance, employment, marriage,

etc., fall under earthly tribulations. Prayers are strong voices

against the oppressive earth forces that are limiting human

stability and growth. By "calling on" the heavens the 
priestly are lending their voices to the eternal ether.

Through their power (the power of prayer) they seek to 
bring about change. The heavenly host are activated to com- 
bat or placate the detrimental forces.

Bringing about such changes for the purpose of 
worldly gains only is considered sorcery. Prayer and sorcery 
do not connect. It is somewhat ill ical to the divine psyche 
to place the m together. When prayer is connected with the

sacred unfoldment of the devotee a sense of divine feeling

* Muhammad Ali, The Muslim Prayer Book (Ahmaduiyya, 1938), pp. 11-14

ЕЗ

48 / Baba Ifa Karade

Figure 13. An Ifa worshiper (onifa) gazes solemnly toward the 
inner heavens. The staff (opa) that she holds represents stability 
and strength gained from the Earth.

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 49THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 49

ensues. This divine feeling is absent when sorcery is con- 
nected to a devotee. Prayer brings about divine intervention 
and the betterment of the devotee's person. Sorcery does 
not. If clearly examined, we can conclude that sorcery 
brings about the opposite of priestly development. Prayer, 
of course enhances it. This is why the priestly are constantly 
directing the people in the way of the divine. The people 
must not fall victim to the forces of sorcery and illusion. It is 
as if to say "pray or be preyed upon"—in other words, pray 
or fall victim to disruptive forces.

It is important to set specific times and places for

prayer. This disciplines the mind, which must be clear and 
focused, in order to strengthen. the endeavor. Dawn, or 
upon rising, is an especially good time for prayer as the 
mind and emotions have not yet been caught up in the 
world. At dawn, the ori. is clear and the consciousness of 
the body is more open to creative sources of light and 
energy. Prayer before going to sleep is also potent. The 
aspirant then clears the ori of the day-long experiences and 
is set to rest from the worldly trials. The essence of spirit is 
reawakened and maintained throughout the dream-sub- 
conscious states.

For the Yoruba traditionalist, set ting the proper atmo- 
sphere for prayer is duly important. Candles, incense, bowls 
of water and fruits provide the spiritual essence that usually

envelopes a place ‹ of prayer or reverence. Musical instru-

Yoruba devotees e T , rattles, bells, handclaps,

and song in the prayer directive. Prayers are often ' sung” or

chanted in rhythm and in harmony with the music. When

prayers are said in the way of praise songs they are called 
oriki. The or oriki more sore specifically tell of the attributes and 
powers of the deities. The deities are > approached with awe 
and respect openly. The oriki speak of the angelic force, wis- 
dom, and abilities.Devotees are set to learn prayers specific to their per- 
sonal deities under the auspices of their priest. Novices are

50 / Baba Ifa Karade THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 51

not to overextend themselves in the desire to learn all 
prayers. It is better to grasp what can be understood and go

deep within. The prayers on pages 51—59 to the orisha are Ori

given in English so that New World worshipers have means

to strengthen their religiosity through heavenly commune. My Ori it is you. 
Although prayers need to be made at the shrines or Ori I hail you,

altars of the given orisha, in no way is this a limitation.

You who always remembers your devotee, 
Prayers may be said at anytime and at anyplace conducive

You who gives blessings to your devotee

to the elevating of one's self. more quickly than other deities.

No deity blesses one without consent of their

A person whose sacrifice is accepted by their 
own Ori 
Should rejoice exceedingly.

Ori please do not shut the gate.

It is to you that ат coming.

Come and make my life prosperous 
It is Ori that brings fortune.

52 / Baba Ifa Karade

* Eshu

Eshu protect my family.

Protect the initiates of the Temple and me also.

Let me not be moved against the people. 
Let not the people be moved against me. 
Grant me long life.

Grant me peace.

Grant me elevation of my consciousness. 
Grant me the ability to use my own hands. 
Eshu I salute you.

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS /

Obatala *

Orisa'ala, the great one who owns the world,

And to whom the control of the world must be 
assigned.

Obatala, Obatarisa, the Orisa with authority

Who is as precious as pure honey.

The orisha with inexhaustible strength,

The inheritor of reputation

Whose great fame does not detract from his 
authority.

Obatala save me!

One expects salvation from one's orisha.

I do not know how to save myself.

54 / Baba Ifa Karade

Oshun

Oshun, who is full of understanding.

Most gracious mother, Oshun,Obatala save me!

One expects salvation from one's orisha.

I do not know how to save myself.

54 / Baba Ifa Karade

Oshun

Oshun, who is full of understanding.

Most gracious mother, Oshun,

Most gracious Orisha.

One who has large robust breasts,

One who appeases children

With brass ornaments.

Onikii who knows the secrets of cults,

But does not disclose them.

One who has a cool, fresh пе.

One who buries money in the sand.

“Тһе gracious mother, The Queen of the River

Water which moves sleeplessly.

One who gives healing water free of charge.

One who gives good effective treatment to 
children.

One who has neither bone nor blood.

Ayila save me!

One expects salvation from one's deity.

I do not know how to save myself.

I give homage to Oshun, Ashe

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 55

Yemoja

Yemoja, mother of the fishes, 
Mother of the waters on the earth. 
Nurture me, my mother 
Protect and guide me,

Like the waves of the ocean, 
wash away the trials that I bear. 
Grant me children.

Grant me peace.

Let not the @tches devour me. 
Let not evil people destroy me. 
Yemoja, mother of all,

Nurture me my mother.

56 / Baba |а Karade

Oba Shango

Shango has come. Let every human being 
come and watch.

Shango, do not quarrel with me.

I am not one of them who is against you.

There are two solutions to a problem; Shango 
please resolve them.

Obakosa, the powerful king,

My lord, the owner of the big royal drums,

Protect us from misfortune,

Protect us from illness,

* Let us experience the calm and gentle things of

life.

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 57

Ogun

Ogun the powerful one,

Sufficiently great to stand before death. 
One who makes human beings prosperous. 
One who is not enriched by Ogun wilL 
Find it difficult to get sacrificial kola-nuts. 
Ogun enrich me.

Ogun the powerful one,

The strong one of the earth,

The great one of the other world,

The protector of those who are being injured. 
Ogun support me.Ogun the powerful one,

The strong one of the earth,

The great one of the other world,

The protector of those who are being injured. 
Ogun support me.

58 / Baba Ifa Karade

Oya

As powerful as the strong wind,

More fierce than the storm,

Oya guard my soul against the many fingers of 
evil.

Help me to rest upon the earth free from strain 
and undue frustration.

Oya, warrior of the wind, let not our land be 
overrun 
with destroyers.

Let us not die in pain and sorrow.

` Extend your weapon to protect us from 
destruction.

Oya, may we live and die to live again.

Oya, may our lives be long and our death short.

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS /

Orunmila

Orunmila, witness of fate second to Oludumare,

thou art more efficacious than medicine.

Thou the immense orbit that averts the day of 
death. Гр"

My Lord Almighty to save, Mysterious spirit 
that fought death—to thee salutation is 
first due in the morning.

Thou,equilibrium that adjust World forces, thou 
art the one whose exertion it is to 
reconstruct the creature of bad lot.

Repairer of misfortune—those who know thee 
become immortal.

My Lord the “undeposible” King— perfect in 
the house of wisdom—infinite in the 
house of knowledge—for not knowing 
thee in full, we are futile.

Oh, Of we could but know thee in full, all would 
be well with us.

59

60 / Baba Ifa Karade

Sacred Places of Worship

ings as they pray to the angelic forces. Temples or "houses" 
as they are known in the New World, contain the shrines of 
a particular or group of orisha. Devotees attend the temples 
and are serviced by the priestly orders in the way of 
prayers, offerings, sacrifices, and ritual. Yet, as earlier 
stated, prayers and offerings need not be done solely at 
temple shrines. They may be done at the natural site of 
orisha essence. The Earth itself is viewed as a shrine in this 
respect. Devotees may religiously seek the orisha from this 
perspective as well.It is not necessary to kneel while praying, although it 
has always been a Yoruba way. To stand, prostrate oneself, 
or to kneel are all noted as positions of the Yoruba to offer

prayer and homage. The emphasis of prayer is the opening 
of one's heart to the love of life and one's mind to the way

of the Universe. The physical position taken is of secondary

ence are called foribale. (Mo)foribale—I place my head to

1 Omosade Awolalu, Yoruba Beliefs and Sacrificial Rites (White Plains, NY: 
Longman Group, 1979), p. 114.

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 61

the earth—is the term that is solemnly uttered by devotees 
when homage is paid to the ancestors, orisha, or the priestly. 
Males and females foribale differently but, this is not a gen- 
der statement from a human point of view. In the New

another way of foribale is designated.

Prostration in front of the shrine or elegun (one pos- 
sessed with orisha) is most commonly done when the devo- 
tee has a male - Placing the Tigh t hip and elbow to the 
ground while putting the head on the right hand then 
switching sides is done by devotees who have female 
orisha. All devotees prostrate themselves before queens, 
kings, chiefs, and babalawos; or they kneel slightly touching 
the right hand to the floor or ground.

62 | Baba Ifa Karade

Figure 15. Ogun is 
symbolized by the 
cauldron into which 
metal objects are 
placed. Knives are 
often added as Ogun 
is first to taste the 
blood of any sacrifi- 
is represented by the 
bow and arrow. This 
symbol is also placed 
in the cauldron as 
Ogun and Oshoosi | 
live together.

Figure 16. The Osun is that 
version of the babalawos staff. 
It is presented along with the 
ajagun (warriors). The Osun 
symbolizes health, wisdom, 
and protection against 
witches. If it ever falls, a 
babalawo is consulted.

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 63 
ljuba—To Give Homage 
The pouring of libation or mojubar (I give homage) is aTHE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 63 
ljuba—To Give Homage 
The pouring of libation or mojubar (I give homage) is a

prominent facet in regards to Yoruba reverence. The 
mojubar is given before all religious and social events. To 
give homage to the orisha, to de ancestors, to Oludumare, 
and to one's teachers or god-parents is a necessary step 
which needs to be taken before any endeavor is begun. 
Pouring libation is generally performed by one of the 
priestly order. If there are none present, then an aborisha 
may pour the libation or one who is spiritually motivated

although he or she has no initiations. Water is the element 
used in the pouring of libation. The priest pours small 
amounts on the floor, ground, or earth and recites the 
mojubar (see page 64). 1 gin (oti) is used.

Dance and Song (ljo ati Orin) 
Among the Yoruba, the expression of worship rough

dance and song is all encompassing. Every aspect of the 
religion finds its way through the human embodiment as 
movement and vocalization open the devotee to the ashe of 
the ancestors and/or the orisha. Drewal writes that,

enal world. The god is said to mount the devotee and, for a 
time, that devotee becomes the god. . Possession and

trance states are often expressed through the medium of

dance." As in other devotional expressions it is the priestly 
who direct and monitor the dance and song of the orisha. 
The priestly must be knowledgeable of the orisha as they 
manifest themselves through the human vehicle. Invoked 
through their particular dance patterns and song (orin) the 
orisha “mounts” the priest or 5 — The priest must be 
able to invoke and channel the healing forces of the orisha.

" Margaret Thompson Drewal, Yoruba Ritual; Performers, Plays, Agency 
(Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana University Press, 1992), p. 23.

64 / Baba Ifa Karade

T THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 65

Mojubar

Omi Tutu 
Ile Tutu 
Ona Tutu 
Tutu Eshu 
Tutu Orisha64 / Baba Ifa Karade

T THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 65

Mojubar

Omi Tutu 
Ile Tutu 
Ona Tutu 
Tutu Eshu 
Tutu Orisha

Mojubar Olorun, Mojubar Olofi 
Mojubar Oludumare

Mojubar Ibae Egun Gbogbo 
Egun Ibae

Mojubar Babalorisha, lyalorisha 
Oluo Ara Arun

Mojubar Gbogbo Iku Nbelese 
Oludumare Iba'iye Orun

Ki Nkan Ma Se 
(insert names 
of god-parents)

Kosi Iku: Death

Kosi Arun: Sickness

Kosi Ofo: Loss

Kosi Fitibo: Being Overwhelmed 
Kosi Idina: Obstacles

Kosi Egba: Paralysis

Kosi Ese: Evil

Kosi Eyo: Tragedy

Ariku Babawa: Let us not see death, our Father. 
Ariku lyawa: Let us not see death, our Mother.

Mojubar: I give homage 
Omi: Water

Tutu: Cool, fresh

Пс: House / Temple 
Ona: Road / path

Babalorisha: Godfather 
lyalosarisha: Godmother 
Oluo Ara Run: Elder 
Citizens of Heaven

All the Dead that bow at

the feet of Oludumare 
in Heaven

Protect us (those of my 
spiritual lineage)

Figure 17. Yoruba aborisha (devotee) uplifts her hands in praise as 
she dances for the orisha. She wears the ilekes— religious beads 
ceremoniously presented to New World Yoruba aspirants — 
proudly around her neck.

Often, the high priest of Yoruba are set to remind 
devotees that dance, in respect to religion, is beyond the 
superficial taking of orisha dance classes. Orisha dance is a 
form of prayer and empowerment centered on the body- 
temple. Orisha dance should not be separated from orisha 
worship.

Novices of the religion are set to learn the sacred 
dances and songs. Much of these forms have come from the 
New World interpretations as expressed through Santeria

Kosi: To avert

66 / Baba Ifa Karade

and Lucumi. Frequent communal gatherings (bembe in 
New World terms) provide opportunities to dance and singKosi: To avert

66 / Baba Ifa Karade

and Lucumi. Frequent communal gatherings (bembe in 
New World terms) provide opportunities to dance and sing

to the rhythm of bata drums or congas as a way of giving 
praise to orisha and invoking their power. The dance 
energy and movements reflect the natural attributes of the 
corresponding orisha. Obatala is more slow and concen- 
trated: Ogun i is strong and rooted; Yemoja is like the tides 
of the ocean; Oshun is graceful and expresses beau 
COUPE lightning. devin Eo fe oy: Ova ing li :

` Somen religious songs (orin) have been presented on the 
following pages so that devotees are better able to join in the 
communal giving of praise to the orisha. Numerous record- 
ings and books on Yoruba (branches) have been produced.” 
Rhythmic patterns and melodies are more New World inter- 
pretation than Yoruba proper. Devotees may continually 
lend their own accent in order to feel elevated and at one 
with the heavenly states of being.

!! See especially John Mason’ 8 Orin Orisa: Songs for Selected Heads (Yoruba 
Theological Archministry, 1992). The Yoruba religious songs are part of 
the New World Orisha tradition. You may find some of these songs in 
orisha dance classes or at your local music store in the international sec- 
поп.

Chorus:

Lead:

Chorus:

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 67

Elegba 1 
MOJUBA ORISA, MOJUBA O, MOJUBA ORISA

: ASE, MOJUBA ORISA

(Authority, I pay homage to the selected head.)

MOJUBA O, MOJUBA ORISA 
(I pay homage to the selected head.)

: ASE MOJUBA ORISA

MOJUBAO MOJUBA ORISA

: ASE, MOJUBA ORISA

IBA ORISA IBA ALAYE O

(Homage to the selected head, homage to the owner of 
the World.)

ASE, MOJUBA ORISA

Elegba 2

IBA'RA'GO MOJUBA

IBA'RA'GO AGO MOJUBA

OMODE КОМГКО S'IBAGO AGO MOJUBA 
ELEGBA ESU LONA

Repeat same.

68 / Baba Ifa Karade

Lead:

Chorus:

Lead:

Chorus:ASE, MOJUBA ORISA

Elegba 2

IBA'RA'GO MOJUBA

IBA'RA'GO AGO MOJUBA

OMODE КОМГКО S'IBAGO AGO MOJUBA 
ELEGBA ESU LONA

Repeat same.

68 / Baba Ifa Karade

Lead:

Chorus:

Lead:

Chorus:

(Homage to the relative of the Club. Give way, I pay 
homage. Child who teaches the doctrine of paying 
homage to the club, make way. I pay homage to the 
Owner of Vital Force (Ase), Esu is the one who owns 
the road.)

ALAGONGON ‘LARO, AGONGON ‘LAROYE 
ELEGBA DE MA DA NKIO 
Repeat same.

(Owner of swiftness, owner of titles of honor. Swift- 
footed owner of titles. Owner of vital force come, but do 
not greet me only.)

ALAGONGON 'LARO

: LAROYE

ALAGONGON 'LARO

: ELEGBA

ALAGONGON 'LARO

: ESUL'ONA

ALAGONGON 'LARO

Elegba 3

ELEGBA O ELEGBA NSO YANGA 
ALAROYE MO DA NKI O 
ELEGBA NSO YANGO

Repeat same.

(Owner of vital force, owner of vital force, talking 
pridefully. Owner of communication, I alone salute 
you, Owner of vital force, talking pridefully.)

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 69

Obatala

: BABA FU RURU, L'ORE'RE O.

OKA YEYE ELEJIGBO 
ELERI'FA, GBA SI GBA SA WO. 
EJIGBO RE RE GBA SI GBA WO 
E NU AYE, EYA WA L'ORO 
EYA WA L'ORO ELESE'KA

(Father of the white cloth that rises and swells

[like a cloud].

Owner of the whips of profit.

Boa honored, honored Chief of Ejigbo

The Owner of the Head of Advantage strikes and 
strikes [with a stick] just behold

Ejigbo's whips of profit, strike and strike behold

You clean the world.

Our tribe has the tradition

Our tribe has the tradition as supports of the boa.)

: ENU AYE'MI'MOSEO

E NU AYE'MI BABA

E NU AYE'MI'MOSEO

E NU AYE 'MI BABA

OBATALA TA WINIWINI SE KU'RE 
GBOGBO LA NYA SE RERE

(You fill the world with life, knowledge accomplishes it 
You fill the world with life, father.

King of the White Cloth, a blessing,

All dream of warming the flow of goodness.)

70 / Baba Ifa Karade

Lead:

Chorus:

Orunmila 
ORUNMILA TALADE, BABA MO FORI BALE

Repeat sameKing of the White Cloth, a blessing,

All dream of warming the flow of goodness.)

70 / Baba Ifa Karade

Lead:

Chorus:

Orunmila 
ORUNMILA TALADE, BABA MO FORI BALE

Repeat same

("Only Heaven can effect Salvation" is who owns the 
crown, Father I put my head on the ground.)

Egun 
EGUN MOJUBA IBA E 
EGUN MOJUBA IBA E 
EGUN GBOGBO MOJUBA IBA E 
EGUN GBOGBO MOJUBA IBA E

(I pay homage to the Ancestors. All pay homage to the 
Ancestors.)

Ogun

OGUN DE ARE'RE IRE GBOGBO LO O KU AIYE 
OGUN WA NILE OKE WA L'ONA

IRE GBOGBO LO O KU AYE

(Ogun arrives, title-holder of Ire [township he founded]. 
All of Ire proclaim, May you live forever in the world. 
Ogun comes to occupy the house.

The mountain comes to have the road

All of Ire proclaims, may you live forever in the world.)

Ori 
ORI I MI, ORI I MI, YO MI 
(My mind save [me].)

Lead:

Chorus:

Lead:

Chorus:

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 71

Oshoosi 
OSHOOSI O MO MI WARA WARA OKE OKE 
OBA 'LOKE O MO MI WARA WARA OKE OKE

(Oshoosi you know me, quickly cherish [me] cherish 
[me]

King who owns the mountain, you know me quickly. 
Cherish [me]

Cherish [me]).

Repeat. :

OSHOOSI AYILOODA. MALAMALA DE 
Repeat.

(Oshoosi, revolver that turns away famine, The daz- 
zling one arrives.)

YAA BE ILEKE IWORO ODE MATA. AGO 
OLONA

Repeat.

(Let us quickly petition the uppermost caretaker of the 
hunter's tradition, do not shoot. Make way, owner of 
the path.)

S'IRE S'IRE

: ODE MATA ORE ORE

WOLE WOLE

: ODE MATA ORE ORE

ҮГКЕ ҮРКЕ

: ODE MATA ORE ORE

(Uncover goodness, uncover goodness, 
Hunter do not shoot, friend, friend 
Enter the house, Enter the house 
Hunter do not shoot, friend, friend 
Turn goodness, turn goodness [to me] 
Hunter do not shoot, friend, friend.)

72 / Baba Ifa Karade

All:

All:

Oshun

IYA MI ILE ODO 
IYA MI ILE ODO 
GBOGBO ASE, O BI NI SALA MAA WO E 
IYA MIILE ODO72 / Baba Ifa Karade

All:

All:

Oshun

IYA MI ILE ODO 
IYA MI ILE ODO 
GBOGBO ASE, O BI NI SALA MAA WO E 
IYA MIILE ODO

(My Mother's house is the river. My Mother's house is the 
river. 
All powerful. Women that flee for safety habitually visit 
her.)

IYA MI ILE ОКО; IYA MI ILE ORO 
GBOGBO ASE, ISE MISARAA MAA WO E 
IYA MI ILE ORO

(My Mother, House of tradition; My Mother, House of Tra- 
dition

All powerful, my deeds of charity habitually consult you. 
My Mother, House of tradition.)

Repeat.

BI'MO OSUN GBA ILE LE

O SU O. ASE WOLE WU'RE

(You sprout abundantly yes. Power enter the house; swell 
goodness.) 
Repeat.

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 73 
Yemoja 
YEMOJA ASE'SUN, ASE'SUN YEMOJA 
YEMOJA ASE'SUN, ASE'SUN YEMOJA

YEMOJA OLODO, OLODO YEMOJA

YEMOJA OLODO, OLODO YEMOJA

( Yemoja is the Gush of the Spring, The Gush of the spring 
is Yemoja.

The Mother of the Children of Fishes is the Owner of the 
Rivers.)

Shango

MO FORI BO RERE O SHANGO TO'KAN O YA 
DE

Chorus: Repeat.

A WA'NILE ONILE O KU O 
A WA'NILE ONILE O YA

Chorus: Repeat.

Call & Response:

(1 use my head to be covered with good, 
Sango is worthy, he who's tears arrives. 
Owner of the Earth long life to you.

We come to the owner of the earth,

the owner of the Earth who tears.)

Oya 
OYA O YA ILE O 
OYA MO BA L'ORO'KE

(Tearer, you borrow the house, 
The Tearer, 1 found, has the highest 
tradition.)

74 / Baba Ifa Karade

Ancestral Reverence

lt is the ancestors who have interpreted and revealed the

words of the universal construct. They have actualized the

` ashe in regards to psychological and cultural expression.Ancestral Reverence

lt is the ancestors who have interpreted and revealed the

words of the universal construct. They have actualized the

` ashe in regards to psychological and cultural expression.

They have uncovered the inherent divinity and spirituality 
of human existence. The ancestors provide the ethics and 
worldview by which adherents to the culture must abide by 
for the development of the self and culture. Ways of behav- 
ior to ensure a good life are primarily ancestral statements. 
It is a good life which leads to a good death. A death which 
leads beyond the gate and is life everlasting. The Alaashe 
provide examples of right living as handed down by Yoruba 
ancestors.

1) Ifarabale: Composure 
2) Owo: Respect

3) Suuru: Patience

4) Eso: Caution

5) Imo: Knowledge

6) Ogbon: Wisdom

7) Oye: Understanding

The Development of Self-Yoruba Philosophy

The Thirteen Guidelines for Yoruba Self-Development have 
also been handed down by Yoruba ancestors to further 
enhance right living. They are as follows:

1) There is to be No Practice of Wickedness. 
“Those who sow the seeds of wickedness plant them upon the 
heads of their children.” 
“Verily, ashes fly back into the face of he who throws them.”

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 75

2) There is to be No Stealing. 
“Even if Man does not see; Oludumare sees.”

3) There is to be No Selfishness. 
“Those who are selfish will come to bare their loads alone.”

4) There is to be No Covenant Breaking Nor Falsehood. 
“The covenant breakers will be carried away by the Earth.” 
“The sacrifices of covenant breakers and liars are not accepted.” 
“Do not lie against companions. Do not break a covenant 
with an associate. Such acts verify bring about our sleeping.”

5) There is to be No Hypocrisy.

6) There is to be No Acts of Atrocity committed against 
one’s neighbors.5) There is to be No Hypocrisy.

6) There is to be No Acts of Atrocity committed against 
one’s neighbors.

7) There is to be Honor and Respect to the Elders. 
“The relationship of service between Elders and Youth is to be 
strengthened continuously.” 
“The hand of the young does not reach the high shelf. That of 
the Elder does not go into the gourd.”

8) There is to be Protection of the Women. 
“Women are the flowers of the garden; Men are the fence 
around them.”

9) There is to be Truthfulness and Uprighteousness. 
“Those who are truthful and upright have the blessings of the 
divinities.”

10) There is to be Kindness and Generosity.

“Kindness begets Kindness.”

11) There is to be Sensitivity in respect to person-to-per-

son relationships.

12) There is to be Chastity in respect to vows of mates.

“Man, do not seduce another man’s wife; Woman, do not 
seduce another woman's husband.”

13) There is to be Hospitable Directives."

13 Adapted from Bolaji Idowu's Oludumare: God in Yoruba Belief (London 
Longmans, Green & Co, 1961).

76 / Baba Ifa Karade

It is stated by Oba Oseijeman Adefunmi I, King of the Yoruba

in North America that, “The egun [ancestors] are the deter- 
miners of what is moral and truthful in respect to life. The

orisha do not dictate morality, the ancestors do.” The “good

life” is established by being respectful to the elders / ances- 
tors. Their wisdom and life directives need to be studied and 
adhered to. By following proverbial wisdom, insight, and lis- 
tening to ancestral voices, Yoruba devotees are led to inner 
strengths and worldly balance. It must not be forgotten that 
the tenets of Ifa itself are ancestral understandings and inter- 
pretations. The very culture is built upon this.“The ancestors are people who have distinguished 
themselves on the moral plane. They, are therefore accorded 
great respect and are held up as models for the living to 
emulate. They act as a spur to good conduct and the living 
in turn honor them by offering libations as well as naming 
their children after them.“ ”, . the ancestors are not wor- 
shipped in the way West Africans worship God. They are 
not the final authority in all matters, nor are they given the 
same attributes as the Creator. They are, however, revered, 
honored, and respected, not as gods, but as spirits and pre-

decessors . . Who are next to the Creator."

The area of reincarnation is seen as an extension of the

ancestral being. The Yoruba word tunde reflects this. 
Babatunde (father returns), lyatunde (mother returns) аге 
examples TicYj Eu е spiritual essence which іп 
part brings itself back. The greater importance appears not 
to be so much on the plane of souls reliving on and on 
through karmic planes, but on the constant reliving of 
morals and values. Ironically, to the Yoruba, the returning or 
reincarnating of the ancestral soul is desired. One strives to 
live righteously so that they may return from heaven to

earth. By returning to the earth, good ancestral souls

" Kofi Opoku, West African Traditional Religion (FEP International Pri- 
vate Limited, 1978), p. 53. 
west African Traditional Religion, р. 53.

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 77

strengthen the lives and the spirits of their surviving 
descendants. 
The Yoruba maintain that the soul of a deceased

either journeys to orun rere (good heaven), or orun padi orun 
buruku (рас heaven). Souls that are taken before their time

come ghosts upon the earth until Olorun comes and 
delivers t to Orun. The realization of an afterlife is as 
foremost in Yoruba religion as any other. It has already been

noted that the living of a good life is brought about b 
revering and emulating the ancestors. This life 2noted that the living of a good life is brought about b 
revering and emulating the ancestors. This life 2

human being contains a number of souls. And, that upon 
death, these souls are released and are each placed in the 
heavens or the earth according to the person’s life and deep- 
ness of wisdom. It has been said by the elders that, “death 
to those who die knowing is not like death to those who die 
unknowing.” Those who have lived a cruel and abusive life

to the place where their souls can never be restored. They 
can never again return to the living. People who commit 
suicide also fall into this category.

e structuring of the individual according to the 
Yoruba ancestors is totally intertwined with the structuring 
of the community or tribal nation. The tribe or band 
becomes the focal point of identification. It provides the 
individual with a center for her or his sense of belonging, 
education in the ways of the world, and methods for tran- 
scendence beyond the worlds. (See figure 18 on p. 78.)

Each stage of the life cycle is complete with ritual and 
religious ceremony as the core, and social developmental 
directives as the outer expression. For the individual to be 
considered as part of the tribal nation they must be initi- 
ated into it even though they are physically born into it. 
Through initiation the candidate passes beyond the natural 
mode and gains access to the cultural mode—that is they 
are introduced to spiritual values. In the Yoruba culture 
those who are uninitiated do not have the full blessings of

78 / Baba Ifa Karade

the ancestors nor the tribe. The term for these persons is 
ologberi.

Those who are initiated may grow to attain greater 
position and status within the family and the community.

The olori ebi is the head of the extended family. She or he is 
responsible for rituals and ju dgments regarding the family. 
e oba, baale, oloja is the chief of the town or village. TheThe olori ebi is the head of the extended family. She or he is 
responsible for rituals and ju dgments regarding the family. 
e oba, baale, oloja is the chief of the town or village. The

aworo constitute the priestly order. The elegun are the medi- 
ums. The oloogun are the medicine (holy) persons These 
positions provide but a simplistic view of the multiplicity of 
strata that are a Yoruba community.

Yoruba social expression allows for polygamy, which is 
the marital condition whereby a man may have more than

CHILD-BEARING

Figure 18. Traditional Life-Stages of the Yoruba culture.

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 79

one wife. The key word here is marital. The man and the 
women involved are ritually embraced by both religious 
and social mores. They combine to form a productive unit 
geared toward interrelationship, child care, business profit, 
and communal stability. The wives consider themselves co- 
wives with the emphasis on cooperation. The dynamics of 
polygamy are many yet, for centuries upon centuries 
Yoruba (as well as other world traditions) have continued to 
evolve both religiously and worldly.

Yoruba religious expression also allows for those of the 
priestly orders to be married and raise children. Outside of 
specific sacred commitments priests and priestesses are 
encouraged to marry. Orunmila, the prophet, was married 
to a number of wives and sired many children. The state-

ment is clear that in respect to the ancestral way, male and 
female forces must be approached and balanced in order to 
create a stable person, a stable family, community, and 
nation.

The creation of egbe or specific societies are also an inte-

gral part of Yoruba communal functioning. The primary 
egbe are the:

1) Ogboni /Osugbo Society who reflect the balancing of

male and female forces in human construct and universalgral part of Yoruba communal functioning. The primary 
egbe are the:

1) Ogboni /Osugbo Society who reflect the balancing of

male and female forces in human construct and universal

design. The Ogboni are headed by elders who revere the 
Earth-Mother and strive to protect and uphold her purity. 
These elders are set to carry on the traditions of the ances- 
tors. They also pass judgment on those who defy the tradi-

tional laws. Members are initiated into the society.

2) Egungun Society is devoted to the Earth, but more so 
with the deceased who are buried in it. Those of the Egun- 
gun Society are mediums who have the ability to possess

the spirit of those departed. They then communicate the 
desires and last messages to the family. The Egungun are 
known for their enormous masks and raffia dress with

attached cloth covering their entire body.

80 / Baba Ifa Karade

3) Gelede Society are devoted to Yemoja. Their function is 
to bring about harmonious reconciliation between humans 
and the witches (aje). The Gelede cult wear masks with 
tribal markings and dress in padded clothing (representing 
the fullness of Yemoja). They invoke the witches and sacri- 
fice to them in order to neutralize their powerful negativity 
and destructive potential.

Chapter 4

DIVINATION, 
SACRIFICE, INITIATIONS

AT THE VERY CENTER of the Yoruba religious practice 
and character development lays divination. As discussed in 
Chapter 2 divination is perceived as that mystic state of 
communing with the divinities as revealed by Orunmila, 
the Prophet. Every branch of Yoruba in the New World 
respects the various forms of divination born from the Ifa

corpus. Babalawo (high priest), babalorisha (male priests), 
lyalorisha (priestesses), and to some degree aborisha 
oruba devotees who are not yet of the priestly order) all

utilize divination in order to:

1) seek the scriptual messages of Ifa; 
2) to inquire as to what offerings are expected by the

orisha;utilize divination in order to:

1) seek the scriptual messages of Ifa; 
2) to inquire as to what offerings are expected by the

orisha;

3) to inquire if the offerings are accepted by the orisha.

Divination implements differ at each level of the priest- 
hood, yet all implements may be applied for revelations 
and inquiries to the divinities. The high priest utilizes the 
ikin (palm nuts) and opon-Ifa (divining board); and / or the 
opele (divining chain). The o'lorisha (priest/priestesses) 
utilize the merindil sixteen cowrie shells). The abor-

also used by all levels of the priestly orders.

82! Baba Ifa Karade

Obi Shell Patterns

The obi abata is actually the name of the Nigerian kola 
nut. The kola nuts are split into four quarters showing

two male (ako meji) and two female E meji) sides. 
Yoruba diviners notate and interpret the quarters based 
on how they fall when cast. In the New World obi abata 
ve been replaced by four pieces of a coconut shell with 
a cowrie attached to each piece.’ Two males aine that 
show the bulb side) and two females (she t show the 
rid are cast. Divination is then completed in the same 
mater asthe Nigeria ORT V igerian-Old World (as seen in table 7). 
more general use of the obi abata is to ask yes or no 
questions either of the orisha, the ancestors, or the ori of the 
seeker, The Obi are also used to determine if an offering is

acceptable to the orisha. The obi are cast and may land 
either face up (O) or face down (9)

Prior to actually casting the obi, water is sprinkled 
on them by the devotee. The devotee prays to the obi,

saying:

ago obi, ago obi, ago obi 
(listen obi)

obi ni ibi iku

(the obi averts death) 
obi ni ibi orun

(the obi averts sickness) 
obi ni ibi ofo

(the obi averts loss)

obi ni ibi fitibo

(the obi averts being overwhelmed) 
obi ni ibi idina

(the obi averts obstacles)(the obi averts sickness) 
obi ni ibi ofo

(the obi averts loss)

obi ni ibi fitibo

(the obi averts being overwhelmed) 
obi ni ibi idina

(the obi averts obstacles)

' Agbon is the Yoruba term for coconut, yet when used for religious pur- 
poses in the New World, the term obi is applied. This reflects the trans- 
ferences of usage, not a misnaming of object.

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 83 
In reference to the orisha approached either at the ojubo-

shrine, or at the natural environment or sacred place, a 
rayer is also made. The devotee holds the obi in the left

and with the right hand she/he knocks upon the floor 
or ground times and incants:

Ile mo ki e o, Ile mo ki e o, Ile mo ki e o. 
(Shrine I greet you.)

The obi are then placed in the right hand and with the left 
knocking the devotee incants:

Ile mo ki e o iki eye. Ile mo ki e o iki eye. Ile mo ki e o iki

e. 
focios I greet you with кесе) 
The obi are returned back to the left hand and with the right 
hand knocking the devotee incants:

Obi (the name of Orisha or Egun) Ile mo ki e o iki eye. 
(Obi I greet you with honor)

* NOTE: When Etawa appears, cast again then make the determination 
based thereon. If Pais uias on the second cast also, the answer is 
yes. Etawa implies struggle, or not giving oneself enough Ashe.

84 / Baba Ifa Karade

Table 7 shows the various patterns which the Obi can fall 
when cast and how to interpret them. If the obi fall in pat- 
terns indicating a yes response, then not much more 
needs to be done. If the fall indicates a no response, then 
the priest or devotee must continue to state other offer- 
ings. After each statement the shells are cast again. This 
process is repeated until a yes pattern appears. In this 
manner, it is determined if offerings have been accepted 
or if the intent or desire of the devotee is acceptable to the 
orisha or egun.Figure 19. The obi cast shows Ejife (a definite yes) to a question 
asked to the orisha. The only consideration here is whether the 
shells face up or down. Male and female cowries are not taken into 
account.

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 85

Ifa Revelations

Divination that focuses more on the revelations of Ifa are 
divided into four dimensions. These dimensions are studied 
by the priestly. The dimensions of divination are integral 
parts of each other. They may be developed and expounded 
upon separately, yet in actual practice, they overlap and 
blend into a oneness which is the foundation of divination. 
The four dimensions are supported by four steps which are 
the processes of:

1) Divination: the casting of obi, merindilogun, opele, or 
ikin. 
2) Notation: in writing, speech, or mind, the recording of

the number and/or patterns. In Yoruba proper—the Odu.

3) Interpretation: use of proverbs, stories, experiences, etc., 
which are based upon the odu cast and noted. As such, the 
diviner gives the seeker the nature of his or her concerns as 
well as supporting psychological and spiritual insights and 
directives.

the seeker is to do. This may be as involved as complex 
cleansing rituals, or as simple as wearing a particular color. 
Application, in a sense, has at heart the offering of one's 
self-energies to the Orisha and or Egun for the elevation,

the spirit, and the aversion of the dangers in one’s life.

Before the Obi Abata are cast mojubar is offered (see page 
64). The devotee now places the shells or the actual split 
kola-nuts (obi abata) into her/his hands. Upon gently shak- 
ing them the devotee chants:

Akinmoran, Akinmoran, Akinmoran 
(may the divine spirit in heaven assist the divine

spirit on earth).

86 / Baba Ifa Karade

The devotee then exhales on the shells three times andAkinmoran, Akinmoran, Akinmoran 
(may the divine spirit in heaven assist the divine

spirit on earth).

86 / Baba Ifa Karade

The devotee then exhales on the shells three times and

places them (still cupped in her /his hands) to forehead. 
Now, with the words "dida obi" (cast obi for) the name of 
opon (little divining tray), ate (mat), or white cloth. The 
character is determined and the counseling begins. To 
determine the character is the first degree of interpretation. 
See Table 8.

The direction of the shells are the next degree of inter- 
preting that the novice must study. If the shell closest to the 
top is male and points to the right or topward, then the 
interpretation of the situation is positive. If the male shell 
points to the left or toward the bottom, then a negative 
interpretation is made. If the shell closest to the top is 
female and points to the right or bottom, then a positive 
interpretation is made. If the female shell points to the left 
or toward the top then a negative interpretation is made. In

Table 8. Obi Abata Interpretations.

[Bie [Male Female shali | Friendships; Relationships | 
FERE

2 Female shells 
Akoran 2 Male shells Stability; Peaceful Devel- 
opment; Upliftment 
Akita 2 Male and 1 Female Success after hardship; 
Controversy

Obita 2 Female and 1 Male Home situation and envi- 
ronment

All shells up Justice; Righteousness 
Transformation: Rebirth

Note: The direction in which the shell(s) point is also of great importance

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS

Figure 20. The Obi Abata cast on the kekere opon (little divining 
tray). The character depicted is Akita — two males and one female. 
The Odu is Ogunda, as noted from the way the shells have fallen 
from the top to the bottom of the opon.

either case the healing messages of the diviner must lend to 
the elevation of those seeking assistance.either case the healing messages of the diviner must lend to 
the elevation of those seeking assistance.

The third degree of interpreting the Obi Abata is to 
determine the odu by the concave and convex fall of the 
shells from the top of the opon to the bottom. The concave is 
open and is marked as I (light). The convex is closed and is 
marked as II (dark). (See figure 2 on page 12 for the 16 major 
odu.) The patterns are those of the opele as examined in 
chapter 1 (Ifa Corpus) and the odu may be examined as 
done by a babalawo. Only the initiated need work to this 
degree as sacrifices are necessary.

The merindilogun, or sixteen cowries, represent the 
third level of Ifa divination. They are only to be utilized by 
the priest/ priestess of the orisha order. The sixteen cowries 
are part of the consecrated religious objects obtained when

88 / Baba Ife Karade

Figure 21. An Obi abata cast depicting the character Ogbe (all 
light) as noted from the way the shells have fallen from the top to 
the bottom of the opon.

Figure 22. The merindilogun (sixteen cowries) used for the div- 
ination by the priests of the Yoruba religion. The cast depicts Oshe 
(five elders).

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 89

an aborisha is initiated into the sacerdotal order. They are

not be used by the uninitiated. 
Once this level of Ifa divination is attained, the ashe

of the odu, the orisha, and all the spiritual forces of the

Yoruba planes of realization become actual. The process of 
learning and fortifying the initiate is the responsibility of 
the god-parent (priestly mentor). Nowhere in Yorubaland 
are the odu approached lightly. And, as the merindilogun 
reflect the odu, nowhere are they taken lightly. The rea- 
sons for providing the divine expressions of the shells are 
to:

1) elevate the respect level for them as to what they repre- 
sent;1) elevate the respect level for them as to what they repre- 
sent;

2) erase the ignorance of so many devotees who are liter- 
ally being taken advantage of due to their lack of knowl- 
edge;

3) stimulate interest in devotees so that they further inves- 
tigate Yoruba priestly orders intelligently and spiritually.

000

The forces of heaven (orun) and earth (aye) are unfolded 
through t the odu. The diviner must prepare for the immer- 
sion into Ifa realms. The mojubar is given; prayers are said 
(particularly to the orisha of the shells being used). The 
shells are rubbed between the diviner's hands as prayers 
for the seeker are offered. The shells are then placed in a

sacred bowl and presented to the seeker who exhales on

them three times. The diviner then touches the forehead of 
the seeker with the shells (enclosed in his/her hands) and 
the cast is made with the words, “difa fun” (cast Ifa for) the 
name of the seeker. Then a second cast is made so that a 
double odu results. The first is dominant, the second i is the 
balancing factor. How the shells fall in respect to the female 
sides showing, or shells up, determines the odu. Table 9 
presents the merindilogun. The order of the odu is different

90 / Baba Ifa Karade

for the o'lorisha than for the babalawo as cited on page 14. 
Although they are interpreted basically the same, the baba- 
lawo has deeper insights and revelations.

Table 9. The Merindilogun Cast and their Order.*

B 
D 
FUN

OYEKU 2 shells up

о 
А 
OSUN 
7 OSHE 5 shells up 
OBARA 6 shells up 
ODI 
BE 
A 
ORI 
PIRA

"The merindilogun are cast twice. If the same odu appears on the second cast the 
term тей is added. For example, okanran cast twice is okanran meji. If the second 
cast is different than the first then the odu is called accordingly. For example, if the 
first cast is okanran, and the second otura, the cast is called okanran-otura.

OGUND

IR 4 shells up 
OG

OS

OOGUND

IR 4 shells up 
OG

OS

O

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 91 
The Ikin and the Opele

The ikin and the opele are the fourth level reflections of 
the divine odu. This is the level of the odu as interpreted 
by the high priest of the Yoruba tradition. The high priest 
is known as Ifa priest or babalawo (father of mysteries). 
Only he is permitted to use the ikin (sacred palm nuts) 
and the opele (divining chain) for the purpose of divina- 
tion. The ikin are deemed sacred because of Orunmila. He 
ordain cp they would be the symbolic objects repre- 
senting his divine being on earth. The ikin, as with the 
later developed opele, are presented to the babalawo 
apprentice after they have completed their actual initia- 
tion.

Divination on this level yields the greatest insight into 
the cosmic intelligence and spirit-energy of the odu. This 
insight yields the deepest of understandings and interpreta- 
tion of the odu and the divinities who exist within them. By

“pounding” the ikin or casting the opele, the diviner is able

to determine the odu which, in the mystic sense, calls down 
the heavenly entity. The babalawo must be able to recall and 
recite messages pertinent to the seeker's situation. He must 
also be able to devise and develop workable and applicable 
ways for the seeker to be elevated through or by means of 
sacrifice (ebo). For these reasons the babalawo is the final 
mortal messenger. Priest and priestesses of the orisha con- 
sult the babalawo in times of difficulties and to attain 
greater insight into the religion. Members of the Yoruba tra- 
dition view the babalawo as the epitome of cultural main- 
tainers and the guides to inner awareness, spiritual 
elevation, and soul salvation.

Before the cast is made the babalawo prepares himself 
through prayers to Orunmila, chants and contemplation.

Prayers for the seeker follow. The babalawo then takes theBefore the cast is made the babalawo prepares himself 
through prayers to Orunmila, chants and contemplation.

Prayers for the seeker follow. The babalawo then takes the

divining implements and presents them to the seeker. The 
seeker exhales upon the ikin or opele three times. The 
exhalation is done so that the emi or inner spirit may acti-

92 / Baba Ifa Karade

vate the divining apparatus to focus on the seeker specific. 
This is often done but not always. The purity and strength

of the babalawo is more usually the greater of factors.

Figure 23. The sacred palm nuts of Orunmila (ikin) presented to 
the babalawo for prayer and divination. The ikin are also presented 
to devotees receiving the one hand of Orunmila. They are only

used for the purpose of prayer in this instance.

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 93

Figure 24. The opele of the babalawo. The casting of the opele 
shows the odu which is interpreted by the babalawo. This cast is 
Oworin Osa as stated from left to right.

94 / Baba Ifa Karade

Figure 25. The Opon-Ifa (divination tray) of the babalawo. The 
tray symbolizes the universe and | the inherent truths to be found 
within it. The babalawo marks the odu on the powder (iyersoun) 
which is spread on the Opon-lfa. The face at the top always repre

sents Eshu.

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 95

Ebo: Offerings and Sacrifices

It has been stated throughout the previous chapters that 
offerings and sacrifices are presented to the orisha (and also 
the egun). In Yoruba terms this is called ebo, which may be 
divided into two categories:

1) Ebo: The offerings of sacrificial animals to the orisha; the 
offering c of any plant or object that has been first utilized to 
spiritua lly cleanse oneself (as in baths, rubbing fruit over 
the body, etc.); and offerings that involve the work of the 
devotee such as cooking food and carving statues.or ed or uncooked foods; a: — СЕБЕ objects to the Orisha not 
prepared or carve or carved by by the devotee.

Divination by one's priest or priestess determines the type of 
ebo or adimu that is prescribed. Yoruba practitioners rarely 
go about invoking the deities or presenting sacrificial offer- 
ings to them without first consulting the diviners. Ebo is pre- 
scribed, in one form or another, whenever Ifa is consulted. 
This is because of the Yoruba belief in the “reciprocity of 
ashe.” The heavenly forces are reverently invoked and 
prayed to and are expected to respond to the devout, grant- 
ing their supplications and providing protection from malev- 
olent forces. In return, the devout are expected to replenish

the ashe ‘throu rough animal sacrifice and offerings. Many times

greater devotion and the sincere effort to change their way- 
ward character are also expected.

Human cultures have always practiced multiple forms 
of sacrifice for religious purposes. Although the forms may 
be questioned, the purpose remains the same. The human 
attempt to reach the divinity through themselves and their 
world. What continues to be misunderstood is that sacri- 
fice—in the physical or spiritual sense—is an active propo 
nent of all religious involvement.

96 / Baba Ifa Karade96 / Baba Ifa Karade

The most ancient builders of nations such as the 
Khametans of Africa, the peoples of India and China, and 
other Far Eastern countries all have religious accounts of 
blood sacrifice and prescribed offerings to the deities of 
their culture. Near Eastern countries, such as Israel, Jordan, 
and others have lent us the Biblical Testaments which give 
credence to blood sacrifice—especially for the atonement of 
sins. Native Americans sacrificed to their cultural deities as 
studies of the Aztecs so clearly reveal. Tribal nations across 
the North and South American continent sacrificed to earth 
and sky deities. Europeans also practiced the way of sacri- 
fice. For example, in Homer's Odyssey it is said that 
Odysseus made sacrifice of sheep for the dead (Homer, 
Odyssey, XI, 18-50). The ancient Greeks, Romans, and tribal 
nations of European origin made continual offerings and 
sacrifices to their gods.

Reasons why sacrifices are offered:

a) To give thanks for the granting of a need or desire. 
b) Asa promise or sacred vow made to the deity.

c) To prevent the cause of suffering.

d) To remove the cause of suffering.

e) As a way of substituting the sacrificial animal for the 
devotee.

f) To provide strength, stability, and courage to achieve in 
the visible world, as well as the invisible world.

2 Mircae Eliade, From Primitive to Zen (New York: Harper & Row, 1967).

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 97

33 act of sacrifice, or "making ebo" is comprised of

1) The priest presents the devotee and the ebo to the holy 
symbol representing the deity.

2) Prayers over the devotee and to the ebo are made to con- 
secrate them.

2 The deity is invoked to participate and receive the sacri- 
ce.

4) The offering is placed at the shrine of the deity. The 
blood is let upon the religious object as prayers are said.

Sacrifice, however, is only one aspect in the complexity of 
ritual. Prayer, dance, symbolic gestures, personal and com-Sacrifice, however, is only one aspect in the complexity of 
ritual. Prayer, dance, symbolic gestures, personal and com-

munal elevation are all active elements in sacrificial ritual.

These elements are combined to "call down" the orisha in

Yoruba practice. Novices must not be misled into believing 
the making ebo" is the highest form of sacrifice—one that 
iis make slat ey right in a world gone wrong. To make 
ebo is to open the opportunity for positive change—to 
enhance the possibility of growth. The human factor must 
not be overlooked. The greatest sacrifice is the human sacri- 
fice—the sacrificing of negative thoughts and destructive 
Piin the sacrifice of the lower based self for the

vine principle of being. All other sacrifices are intended to 
о this human endeavor.

[he types of Ebo or Offerings ted t

and / or Orisha are: ay presented to the Egun

* spiritual baths; 
* medicinal herbs; 
* prayers and meditation;

۰ offerings of fruit, flowers, tobacco, cloth, or foods of the

,

98 / Baba Ifa Karade

Table 10. Offering to the Orishas.

ORISHA SACRIFICIAL OFFERINGS

Obatala White fruits; Coconut; White kola nuts; Efun; White yams; | 
Snails; Snail water; Shea butter; Rice; Hens; Pigeons; 
Female goats.

Elegba Palm oil; Tobacco; All fruits / nuts; Roasted corn; Coconut;

Roosters; Male goats; Yams,

Honey; Cinnamon; Pumpkin; Lettuce; Oranges; Eggs; 
Guinea-hens; Hens; Sheep.

Yemoja Molasses; Seafoods; Ducks; Hens (or Roosters 
Ogun Palm wine; Rum; Palm oil; Pineapple / fruits; Roasted corn; 
Tobacco; Roosters; Male goats; Yams. 
Rum; Red wine; Eggplant; Rice and beans; Plums; Tobacco; 
Purple grapes; Hens (or Roosters); Female goats; Plantains. 
Shango Plantain; Yams; Okra; Green bananas; Tobacco; Rum; Bitter 
kola nuts; Rams; Roosters (red).

Oshun

Table 11. Objects Associated with Each Orisha.Oshun

Table 11. Objects Associated with Each Orisha.

Obatala Elephants, white birds, statues of elder African men 
dressed in white; images of mountains; white cloth 
Elegba Statues of male figures with an erect penis and /or long- 
braided hair; rocks; coconuts 
un Fertility artifacts; objects of brass or gold; peacock feathers; 
mirrors; fans; fine jewelry; cowrie shells

Osh 
Yemoja Strong matriarchal statues; creatures of the sea; shells from 
the sea; images of the sea

Ogun Machetes; all iron objects; statues of hunters and warriors; 
blacksmiths; vehicles of iron or metal

Oya Buffalo horns; grotesque masks; multi-colored cloth; 
images of storms

Shango Double ax (oshe Shango); black cats; ram heads; drums; 
stones; trees struck by lightning; horses; turtles

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 99

* socially charitable acts;

* fruit and flower cleansings; 
* incense and oils;

* self-reflective directives;

* altars and shrines;

* stronger religious involvement; 
* song and dance; 
* flaws of character.

Table 10 gives examples of the various foods and animals 
which may be offered to the specific Orisha. Remember, 
ebo is done under the guidance of the priests. It is strongly 
advised that no invocation or offering be made without 
their knowledge or approval. See Tables 10 and 11 for 
information about offerings and objects associated with 
the oriska.

100 / Baba Ifa Karade 
Initiation into the Priestly Realms

“Being a priest / priestess involves the merging of one's per- 
sonality into a much bigger whole. Humility, subjugation to 
orisha and to the discipline ritual are essential qualities for a 
priest to achieve. So, for the orisha priest, modesty and com- 
plete lack of selfishness are pre-requisites of wisdom." 
Yoruba Priestly Wisdom.The process of becoming a Yoruba priest is defined by 
marked stages of ritual ceremony along with related teach- 
ings. Novices embarking on this journey must first find a 
babalawo (high-priest) or o'lorisha (priest / priestess) who 
will provide them with the nurturing and patience so 
strongly needed. There should be relatively little conflict or 
"bad vibrations" between novice and priest / priestess. The

two must work harmoniously to achieve the goal and objec- 
tive, which is to develop the novice to the point of priestly 
insight, understanding, and ability,

Not all people who involve themselves in orisha prac- 
tice need to become initiated into the priestly order. Many 
find solace in achieving any one of the various stages avail- 
able to them. Yoruba provides, in New World practice, a 
number of levels of achievement. The following reflects five 
of these levels. They are by no means the only stages, but 
they are the foremost ones.

1. Receiving the Ilekes: Ilekes are the religious beads 
that mark the first level of actual commitment made by the 
novice. Five ilekes are presented ceremoniously to the initi-

ate. Each ileke represents an orisha: white—Obatala; black 
and red— Elegba; yellow—Oshun; blue—Yemoja; red and

and have the ashe, which will empower the devotee with 
the essence of the orisha.

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 101

2. Receiving the Ajagun: The word ajagun is Yoruba for 
warriors. The ajagun are comprised of Elegba, Ogun, 
Oshoosi, and Osun. Their function is to protect the aborisha 
from destruction by opposing spiritual forces (ajogun) and 
opposing people (omo-aiye). In no way should this be inter- 
preted as sorcery or witchcraft. All religious systems pro- 
vide their believers with protectors against the demonic. 
Yoruba is no different.Those temples which express love and light infuse that 
energy into the ashe of the consecrated ajagun. In doing so, 
protection is a worthy response of the angelic. Hence, there 
is little to fear from “negative forces.” Those temples that 
express conflict and confusion lend this energy to the ashe 
of the ajagun and the perpetuation of that energy.

3. The One Hand of Orunmila—Onifa: This ceremonial rit-

and the odu. Devotees receive the consecrated objects of

Orunmila: the ikin (sacred palm nuts); the agere (the con- 
tainer for the ikin; a yellow and green ileke; and the ide 
(religious beads formed as a wristlet). The ide is worn on 
left wrist and is Orunmila’s symbol to Iku (death) that 
the devotee is a “child of the prophet” and should not be 
taken before their time. The babalawo utilizes his ikin to 
determine the odu, which the heavenly disciples present to 
guide the initiate to sacredness and divine wisdom. The ini- 
tiate is instructed on how to pray with the kin and how to 
call upon her/his odu for worldly assistance and spiritual 
elevation. Only the babalawo can preside over this ritual.

4. Priesthood—Elehan: At this stage the initiate is pro- 
claimed ready to serve as priest/ priestess of the religion. 
They have demonstrated their degree of commitment and 
have stood the test set upon them by orisha, ancestors, and 
god-parents alike. There are different reasons why one is 
called into the priesthood. Some are called for spiritual rea- 
sons that involve only themselves and they work very little 
with others; some are called to be as messengers (Ojise

102 / Baba Ifa Karade

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 103

Figure 26. Akpetebi Olayinka Osunkunle aya Karade holds her 
tambourine —an object she uses in prayer, ceremony and worship. 
The Priestess Olayinka is also the daughter of Oshun and an Ifa

worshiper (onifa).

Figure 27worshiper (onifa).

Figure 27

Yoruba Priest of Oshoosi in full regalia. This babalor 
isha is currently studying Ifa as a babalawo apprentice

104 / Baba Ifa Karade

Olorun); others are called to serve the orisha in order to save 
themselves or loved ones from grave illness.

Elehan may last from three to seven days. During this 
time the initiate (iyawo—bride of the orisha) is set to undergo 
a series of trials and teachings so that the priestly abilities and 
understandings are crystallized. She / he must reside in the 
temple (ile) during the entire time. Fasting, abstinence, inter- 
nal study, learning about the orisha, divination (use of the 
merindilogun), and daily sacrifices are all focused upon dur- 
ing this period. Drumming, religious dance, communal wor- 
ship are also parts of the initiation. The temple is full of 
images that reflect the orisha (ere orisha) which will “own the 
head" of the new o'lorisha. On or about the third day divina- 
tion is performed. This is the day of the ita. The ita reveals, 
through the odu, the messages to be seriously contemplated 
and acted upon by the new priest for the entire time of their 
priestly involvement. The period of apprenticeship lasts from 
three months to one year depending on the will of the orisha, 
as determined through divination.

Only those who have made elehan can preside over 
those making elehan. The presiding priest / priestess is 
responsible for the development of the initiate through the 
period of elehan, or to a greater degree, when the iyawo is 
able to establish and maintain their own temple and god-chil- 
dren. Another priest / priestess is deemed the ajubona or 
instructor. The ajubona has the responsibility of teaching the 
iyawo the constructs of the Yoruba religion and of breaking 
down the revelations of the god-parent to more applicable 
workings.

On the final day of elehan the iyawo receives the odu-On the final day of elehan the iyawo receives the odu-

of the specific orisha. Inside, the ashe is symbolized by the 
religious objects consecrated to the orisha. The objects have 
been consecrated by means of herbal washings, blood sacri- 
fice, cleansing by incense, fruit offerings, song, and prayer. 
The New World directive is to present the “crown orisha” 
along with four others of the set. For example, if the aborisha

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 105

making elehan is to be a priestess of Oshun, she would also 
receive Elegba, Obatala, Shango, and Yemoja. The elder 
Yoruba directive is to present only that orisha who is the 
“crown orisha” of the initiate. No other orisha are received 
during elehan unless so determined through divination. 
The function of the initiation rituals are to make the 
orisha essence stronger within the devotee. The more ritu- 
als that are done, the more this essence is solidified and 
actualized. The essence then impacts upon the being of the 
devotee who now becomes an active element of it within 
the family, community, nation, and world. Those who pass 
through the various levels must intensify their lives 
through constant prayer, devotion, and sacrifice to the 
orisha. Those who become priests must understand their 
position as seen through the eyes of heaven more so than 
the eyes of earth. The priestly have the sacred duty to assert 
and re-assert the divinity of all human beings. That is, they 
work to elevate the base human nature to divine nature.

5. Babalawo—High Priest: Those who become babalawo 
are the high-priests in the Yoruba cultural-religion. They are 
revered for their humility, conviction, faith, honesty and sin- 
cerity. Basic and stringent codes of conduct were laid down 
by Orunmila to the elder Ifa priests to ensure that this order 
not be corrupted in its ideals. Those priests who do not 
abide by the code will be punished by Orunmila.Professor W. Abimbola writes and lectures on the sub- 
ject of the babalawo. He states that, “The training of the Ifa 
priest is a supreme example of sacrifice in human endeavor. 
he aim of the training is to give the priest-in-training a 
disciplined attitude to the many problems in life. . . It was 
therefore the primary aim of the training to prepare him 
adequately to meet the grave responsibilities of important 
positions in the community."?

* Wande Abimbola, Ifa: An Exposition of Ifa Literary Corpus (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1976), p. 18.

106 / Baba Ifa Karade

The initiation into Ifa is only done by male members 
of the culture. Females have also explored the intense 
energies which are encountered. Women who have been 
ordained Iyalawo must follow strict rules for admittance. 
Those infants who are divined to become babalawo begin 
the actual ritualization at age 7. Older members of the cul- 
ture may also become initiated if so revealed through Ifa.

Itefa

The ritualization process for babalawo initiation is called 
Itefa. The process lasts from three to fourteen days and is 
presided over by a babalawo. The aspirant is shaved of all 
facial hairs and led to the igbodu (sacred hut built for the 
ritual). Inside the igbodu the babalawo initiate undergoes 
the secret trials. Upon its completion, the kekero awo (little- 
bit babalawo) emerges. He is now ready to:

a) study the Ifa corpus; 
b) learn the way of the divination implements;

с) become proficient in the way of sacrifice and rit-

ual; 
d) become the epitome of divine nature among the 
people. 
Rituals (Etutu)

"Rituals make us no longer passive beings in the 
cosmos, but we become creative agents of exis- 
tence.”

* John S. Mbiti, Introduction to African Religion (Portsmouth, NH: Heine- 
mann, 1975), p. 126.

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 107* John S. Mbiti, Introduction to African Religion (Portsmouth, NH: Heine- 
mann, 1975), p. 126.

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 107

"Rituals generate a sense of certainty and familiar- 
ity. They provide continuity among those who per- 
form or attend them. In turn people find a degree 
of identity through its common observance and

experience."

It is important to designate the space and time that rituals 
are to be performed. To the Yoruba, order is of the utmost 
significance. The ability to effectively conduct a ritual cere- 
mony is the responsibility of the presiding priest or priest- 
ess. They must ensure that all stages are orderly and that 
transitions from one level to the next are smooth. Support- 
ing temple members ensure that the directives of the presid- 
ing o'lorisha or babalawo are carried out effectively.

The ritual is harmonious and creative. There is no need 
for ill-energy to exist, as this opens the way for negating 
beings to disrupt the sacred objective. Rituals need not be 
sterile or done by rote. To create is to recreate the infinite 
magnitude of nature's expression. The important statement 
is that the presiding o'lorisha must be sensitive to the spirit 
of the initiate, and set the initiation or ritual accordingly.

There are rules and guidelines which need be adhered 
to by the priest and devotee alike:

1) There is to be a period of sexual abstinence (at least 
24 hours) before and after the initiation.

2) No over-the-counter prescription drugs are to be 
taken (unless absolutely necessary for health purposes)

on the day of the ritual. 
3) Women who are menstruating or pregnant must not

participate in rituals that involve blood sacrifice or spir-

itual possession unless determined by the presiding 
priest / priestess. 
4) There is to be no use of intoxicants or drugs.

* Introduction to African Religion, p. 126.

108 / Baba Ifa Karade

5) Novices must bathe and take spiritual baths before 
the ritual begins.* Introduction to African Religion, p. 126.

108 / Baba Ifa Karade

5) Novices must bathe and take spiritual baths before 
the ritual begins.

6) Novices must be well aware of the purpose for the 
ritual.

7) After the ritual, intiates must find rest and solitude 
for at least one day.

000

As novices begin to seriously contemplate Yoruba as a reli- 
gion, as a cultural expression, it is important to understand 
ritualization. All too often the misconception is that acade- 
mic research and passive involvement are sufficient. That 
following a course is better than flowing with the essence of 
worship internalized. The result is the production of a less 
than open mind and spirit. Rituals performed must serve to 
open the devotee and make him or her more receptive to the 
ashe of the teachers, ancestors, and orisha. The ritual is seen 
as spiritual and is done to bring about the cleansing and 
heightening of the spirit. In other words, spiritual enlight- 
enment and elevation are the ends to the means of rituals— 
specifically religious ones.

The spirit is not considered the soul of a person, 
although the words are often used interchangeably. It is the 
spirit, once enlightened and elevated, that frees the soul. The 
spirit is the bonding essence of human nature with divine 
nature. The soul is the inner flame that exists as a cinder or 
spark arising from the creative fire. Social rituals, such as 
marriage, childbirth and funerals appear to be non-religious. 
However, they are not. The social ritual has, as its core, reli- 
gious substance. It is a priest or priestess that performs the 
wedding, the stepping into the world (for infants), and pre- 
sides over funerals. Although these stages of life may be 
done without ritual, the results have been catastrophic. 
Those who adhere to Yoruba need to seriously consider the 
importance of ritual and the involvement thereof.

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 109

ConclusionTHE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 109

Conclusion

The Yoruba religion is a viable and time-honored way of life. 
Those who seek to change their relationship with them- 
selves, the world, and universal forces may consider Yoruba 
a possible vehicle. Seekers of the inner self may embrace 
Yoruba as a source of light, as a source of esoteric teachings. 
It is important to continually review the contents of this 
book. Degrees of acceptance and resistance to areas of spe- 
cific study need to be weighed and discussed, especially 
those relating to divination, polygamy, ancestor reverence, 
orisha worship, and Yoruba priesthood.

The true objective of Yoruba religious involvement is to 
live according to ancestral wisdom and divine righteous- 
ness. By embracing the odu of the Yoruba philosophy, you 
embrace the purity and religiosity of the tradition. By accept- 
ing the rituals, initiations, and teachings as your own, you 
may sense the dawning of their spirit and the emergence of 
their soul. Follow the true objective. To approach Yoruba 
from any other place or state of mind is viewed as ungrace- 
ful and immature, especially by the elders.

As you study the Yoruba religion, keep in mind that 
intellect and academia alone are not enough. The student or 
devotee of Yoruba must also be immersed in ritual, because 
it is through rituals and initiations that the essence beyond 
the intellect is awakened. That essence is spirit. The culture 
of the religion must be accepted, for culture and religion 
cannot be separated. When you have finished reading, you 
will need a spiritual guide—a mentor. Yoruba priests and 
priestesses become “god-father” and "god-mother." They 
perform the rituals, the intiations, the sacrifices. Their infor- 
mation and insights are invaulable. Please feel to write to 
me for more information.

Aboru, Aboye, Aboisise 
May the offerings be carried; 
May the offerings be accepted; 
May the offerings set divine forces into motion.Aboru, Aboye, Aboisise 
May the offerings be carried; 
May the offerings be accepted; 
May the offerings set divine forces into motion.

Religious Phrases of the Yoruba

YORUBA ENGLISH TRANSLATION 
Ohun ori wa se What ori comes to fulfill, 
Ko ma nis alai se eo It cannot but fulfill it. 
The world is a marketplace. 
Aye l'ajo, orun n'ile The spirit world is home. 
That which we do on earth, 
Ohun gbogbo ti a ba se we shall account for kneel 
laye la ookunle re lorun ing in heaven. 
The offerings are accepted, 
Ebo fin, Eru da evil forces depart. 
Ojo o buru In days of turbulence, 
ebo nii gbe ni o it is ebo that saves. 
Perform truth, perform 
S otito s ododo s oora righteousness, perform 
ma $ ika kindness, avoid cruelty. 
She/he was praising the 
Ni nyin awon awo, diviners, the diviners were 
awon awo nyin sa praising orisha.

Dide dide lalafi 
worisha

ide Бе. arise] 
God's work is great and

Ise Olorun tobi mighty. 
Let us keep looking to the

Ka maa orisha.

Orunmila eleri ipin Orunmila, witness of fate 
ibekeji Oludumare second to the Creator.

112 / Baba Ifa Karade

Religious Phrases of the Yoruba (continued).

When there is life, there is 
B'ao ku ishe o tan still hope.

Salutation to babalawo by 
all yoruba traditionalists, 
(May the offerings be car- 
ried, may the offerings be 
accepted, may the offerings 
şişe bring about change.)

Like proverbs, like 
Bi owe, bi owe, ru Ifa soro | proverbs, is how Ifa speaks.

It is the offerings of sacri- 
fices that brings blessings. 
Neglect of sacrifices blesses 
no one.

Yoruba Vocabulary

A

Aba: the manifestation of ashe into righteous human devel- 
opment.

Aborisha: a devotee of orisha who has received the elekes.

Adie: chicken.

Adimu: Offerings made to one’s ancestors and to the orisha.

Adura: prayers.

Agbon: coconut.

Agere: container or vessel which holds the sacred palm nuts 
(ikin of Orunmila).

Ago: listen.

Aiku: long life.

Aiye: earth.Adura: prayers.

Agbon: coconut.

Agere: container or vessel which holds the sacred palm nuts 
(ikin of Orunmila).

Ago: listen.

Aiku: long life.

Aiye: earth.

Ajagun: angelic warriors comprised of Eshu, Ogun, 
Oshoosi, Osun.

Ajogun: malevolent forces intent on destroying human- 
kind.

Ajubona: religious teacher.

Akpetebi: wife of an Ifa priest (babalawo).

Akuku: rooster.

Alaashe: those who reflect the codes of ancestral conduct.

Alafia: peace.

Ara: body.

Arun: sickness.

Asaro: meditation.

Ashe: essence of primal power and creative potential.

Ate: mat.

Awe: fasting; religious abstinence from food.

Awo: those of the priestly order.

Ayanmo: destiny.

114 / Baba Ifa Karade

Baba: father.

Baba mi: my father.

Babalawo: father of mysteries.

Babalorisha: priest of any one of the various sects of orisha 
worship.

Babarugbo: old man.

Bata: sacred drums of orisha worship (New World).

Bembe: communal worship as tribute to the Orisha (New 
World).

Beni: all is well; yes.

с

Candomble: Yoruba religion combined with Catholicism as 
practiced in South America.

D

Dida obi: cast obi for.

Dide: arise.

Die Die: bit by bit; little by little. 
Difa fun: cast Ifa for.

Dojude: darkness.

Ebo: animal and plant sacrifices to one’s ancestors or to the 
orisha.

Efun: white chalk-like substance taken from the earth for 
religious consecration.

Egun: ancestor.

Egungun: society of priests who possess the spirits of the 
deceased.

Elegun: those who are mounted / possessed by the orisha.

Emi: the spiritual essence of a person's breath or being.

Epo: palm oil.

Eran: meat, animals.

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 115

Ere (orisha): religious images, statues, etc., of the orisha. 
Ese: verse of the Ifa corpus.

Etutu: ritual.

Ewe: herbs and plants.

Ewo: restriction; taboos.

Ewure: she-goat.

Eyele: pigeon.

F

Fun Fun: white. 
Fun: to give.

G

Gbogbo: all. 
Gelede: society that reconciles the differences between 
humans and witches.

IEwo: restriction; taboos.

Ewure: she-goat.

Eyele: pigeon.

F

Fun Fun: white. 
Fun: to give.

G

Gbogbo: all. 
Gelede: society that reconciles the differences between 
humans and witches.

I

Ibeji: twins.

Ibi: to avert; aversion of misfortune.

Ifa: the cosmic intelligence of Yoruba cultural expression.

Ifunpa: amulet.

Igbodu: hut constructed during babalawo initiations.

Ijuba: the paying of homage or reverence.

Ikin: sacred palm nuts used by the babalawo in worship 
and divination.

Ikoode: red parrot feather tied to initates head during ocha.

Iku: death.

Ile: house; temple.

Ilekes: spiritual beads consecrated to the orisha and pre- 
sented to novices ceremoniously.

Ile-Ife: holy city of the Yoruba religion.

Imo: knowledge.

Imule: oath.

Ire: blessings; good fortune.

116 / Baba Ifa Karade

Irosun: camwood.

Ita: divination at ocha on the third day.

Itan: historical and mythological narratives described in the 
Ifa

Itefa: the ritual ceremony of initiating the Ifa devotee to 
actual babalawo.

Iwa-pele: balanced character.

lya: mother.

lyalorisha: priestess of any one of the various sects of orisha 
worship.

Iyawo: initiate into the priestly realm - Ocha; (wife of the 
Orisha).

lyerosun: special powder used by the babalawo to mark the 
odu on the Opon-ifa.

ж

) 
Jinle: deep (as in thought or expression).

K

Kekere: small, little. 
Kiki: moral of a verse or story.

L

Lucumi: Yoruba religion combined with Spanish Catholi- 
cism on the island of Cuba.

M

Mariwo: palm fonds.

Meji: two or twice.

Merindilogun: sixteen cowrie shells used by priest and 
priestesses for Ifa divination.

Modupe: I give thanks.

Mojubar: I give homage.

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 117

O

Obuko: he-goat.

O'lorisha: male and female priests.

Oba: chief; king.

Obe: knife.

Obi Abata: actual kola nuts divided in four parts used for 
divination.

Odabo: good bye.O

Obuko: he-goat.

O'lorisha: male and female priests.

Oba: chief; king.

Obe: knife.

Obi Abata: actual kola nuts divided in four parts used for 
divination.

Odabo: good bye.

Odu: sixteen heavenly disciples named by Orunmila as the 
epitome of Yoruba culture and religion.

Ofo: loss.

Ojuba: sacred shrine room for orisha worship.

Oju odu: the first sixteen odu meji of the babalawo.

Ologberi: the uninitiated.

Oloogun: medicine healers of the Yoruba.

Olori ebi: religious head of the family or social function.

Oludumare / Olorun: God.

Omi: water.

Omiero: herbal solution used for spiritual baths and conse- 
cration of religious objects.

Omo: child.

Omo-aiye: malevolent human beings.

Omo odu: the 240 combinations of different odu casts.

Ona: road.

Onifa: worshippers of Ifa (Orunmila).

Onile: Earth goddess.

Onje: food; meals.

Opele: the divining chain of the babalawo.

Opon Ifa: round or rectangular wooden tray used by babal- 
awo to divine.

Oriki: praise songs and chants to the orisha.

Orin: songs to the orisha.

Orisha: angelic emanations of the Creator manifesting 
through nature.

Orita: crossroads.

Orun: sky; heaven.

118 / Baba Ifa Karade

Orunmila: The prophet of the Yoruba religion.

Osha: period of time the initiate undergoes priestly devel- 
opment.

Ota: stones as the symbols of immortality.

Oti: strong alcoholic drink.

Owo: money; prosperity.

5

Santeria: Yoruba religion combined with Spanish Catholi- 
cism.

Siju: light; open.

Suuru: patience.

T

Tutari: incense. 
Tutu: cool.

V

Vodun: West African term meaning God; Yoruba and 
French Catholicism combined in Haiti.

т

Yoruba: ethnic group and culture of African origin.

Bibliography

Abimbola, Wande. Ifa. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1976.

——— Sixteen Great Poems of Ifa. Unesco and Abimbola, 1975.

Ali, Muhammad. The Muslim Prayer Book. Ahmadiyya, 1938.

Apter, Andrew. Black Critics and Kings. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago 
Press, 1992.Ali, Muhammad. The Muslim Prayer Book. Ahmadiyya, 1938.

Apter, Andrew. Black Critics and Kings. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago 
Press, 1992.

Awolalu, J. Omasade. Yoruba Beliefs and Sacrificial Rites. White Plains, NY:

Group, 1979.

Bascom, William. Ifa Divination. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University 
Press, 1991.

— The Yoruba of Southwestern Nigeria. Prospects Heights, IL: Wave- 
land Press, 1969.

Burham, Sophy. A Book of Angels. New York: Ballantine Books, 1990.

Cortes, Enrique. Secretos del Oriata de la Religion Yoruba. Vilaragut Articu- 
los Religiosos Corn, 1980.

Davidson, Basil. The Lost Cities of Africa. Boston: Little, Brown and Com- 
pany, 1988.

De Lubicz, Isha Schwaller. Her-Bak: Egyptian Initiate. Rochester, VT: Inner 
Traditions, 1982.

Diallo, Yaya and Mitchell Hall. The Healing Drum. Rochester, VT: Destiny 
Books, 1989.

Dio, Cheik Anta. Precolonial Black Africa. Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press, 
co-published with Lawrence Hill & Co., 1992,

Drewal, Henry and John Pemberton Ш. Yoruba: Nine Centuries of African 
Art and Thought. New York: The Center for African Art in associa- 
tion with Harry N. Abrams, Inc., 1989.

Drewal, Margaret Thompson. Yoruba Ritual. Bloomington, IN: Indiana 
University Press, 1992.

Eliade, Mircea. From Primitives to Zen. New York: Harper & Row, 1967.

Epega, Afolabi. Obi: The Mystical Oracle of Obi Divination. Bronx, NY: 
Imole Oluwa Institute, 1985.

Fasade, Olaoluwa. The Herbs of Orisa. Iwa's Publishing, 1991.

Gideons Holy Bible.

Graves, Kersey. The Worlds Sixteen Crucified Saviors. San Diego, CA. Truth 
Seeker, 1991.

Heinerman, John. Herbal Dynamics. Root of Life, Inc., 1982.

Ibie, Cromwell Osamoro. Ifism: The Complete Work of Orunmila. Hong 
Kong: Design Printing, 1986.

120 / Baba Ifa Karade

Idowu, Bolaji. Oludumare: God in Yoruba Belief. London: Longmans Green 
& Co., 1961.120 / Baba Ifa Karade

Idowu, Bolaji. Oludumare: God in Yoruba Belief. London: Longmans Green 
& Co., 1961.

Johnson, Samuel. The History of the Yorubas: From the Earliest times to the 
Beginning of the British Protectorate. New York & London: Routledge, 
1971. Reprint of the 1921 edition.

Karenga, Maulana. The Husia. Los Angeles: Kawaida Publications, 1984.

Lawson, E. Thomas. Religions of Africa. San Francisco: Harper & Row, 
1985.

Leslau, Charlotte and Wolf. African Proverbs. White Plains, NY: Peter Pau- 
per Press, 1962.

Mason, John. Four New World Yoruba Rituals. Yoruba Theological Arch- 
ministry, 1985.

— Orin Orisa: Songs for Selected Heads, Yoruba Theological Archmin- 
istry, 1992.

Mbiti, John S. Introduction to African Religion. Portsmouth, NH: Heine- 
mann, 1975.

McClelland, E. The Cult of Ifa Among the Yoruba. Anchor Press, 1982.

Minick, Michael. The Wisdom of Kung Fu. New York: William Morrow and 
Company, 1974.

Omolewa, Michael. Certificate History of Nigeria, London and Lagos: 
Longman Group, 1986.

Onwubiko, KBC. History of West Africa. Ontisha, Nigeria: Africana-FEP 
Publisher, 1967.

Opoku, Kofi Asare. West African Traditional Religion. FEP International 
Private, 1978,

Orunmila Magazine, Lagos, Nigeria: Orunmila Youngsters International.

Simpson, George E. Yoruba Religion & Medicine in Ibadan. Ibadan Univer- 
sity Press, 1980.

Thompson, Robert Farris. Flash of Spirit. New York: Vintage Books, 1984.

Warner-Lewis, Maureen. Guinea's Other Suns. Dover, MA: Majority Press, 
1991.

Williams, Geoffrey. African Designs from Traditional Sources. New York: 
Dover Publications, 1971.

Witte, Hans. Earth and the Ancestors: Ogboni Iconography. Amsterdam: 
Gallery Balolu, 1988.

. Ifa and Esu. Holland: Kunsthandel, Luttik, 1984.

Yusef Ali, Abdullah. The Holy Quran. Islamic Propagation Center Interna- 
tional, 1946.

Resources. Ifa and Esu. Holland: Kunsthandel, Luttik, 1984.

Yusef Ali, Abdullah. The Holy Quran. Islamic Propagation Center Interna- 
tional, 1946.

Resources

If you want to study Yoruba religious teachings and initiations, you may 
want to contact me about the temple that we have in New Jersey. You can 
write to me in care of the publisher. You may also want to explore these 
teachings with other teachers. Each Yoruba Temple will present these 
teachings in their own way, so if you contact the temples listed below, 
they may approach the teachings differently than I do. The important fac- 
tor is the learning and growth that takes place as a result of your involve- 
ment. If you sincerely journey forth to find the self, the self will be that 
which leads you.

Chief Lowo Osi Oba—Baba Ifa Karade 
c/o Samuel Weiser, Inc.

Box 612

York Beach, ME 03910-0612

King Oseijeman Adefunmi I

Akoda—Medahoci K. Zannu 
Milwaukee, WI 
Telephone: 414-449-8996

Babalawo—lfayomi 
Ile Orisha Shango 
Mt. Vernon, NY 
(914) 664-0931

Valdez 
Yoruba Cultural Center 
Santure, Puerto Rico 
(809) 725-6403

lyalorisha—Ocan de Nille 
Philadelphia, PA 
(215) 329-6072Babalawo—lfayomi 
Ile Orisha Shango 
Mt. Vernon, NY 
(914) 664-0931

Valdez 
Yoruba Cultural Center 
Santure, Puerto Rico 
(809) 725-6403

lyalorisha—Ocan de Nille 
Philadelphia, PA 
(215) 329-6072

A third, 39, 42 
aba, 28 congas, 66 
aborisha, 60, 81, 89 consciousness, 23 
adinu, 95 cowries, 87 
adura, 47 
Aganyu, 28 D 
Agna, 45 dance, 63 
ajagun, 61 demonic beings, 11 
ajogun 11 devotee, 21, 28, 32, 50, 61, 62, 65, 
Alafin, 2, 27 101 
Anahata, 43 divination, 81, 85, 91, 104 
ancestors, 47, 62, 63, 76 divine, 11 
ancestral reverence, 74 expression, 89 
ancestral way, 79 divine oneness, 9 
Ancients, 11, 23 divining board, 81 
ashe, 21, 28, 63, 83, 101 divinity, 23 
aspirants, 1, 28, 49 messenger, 25 
ayanmo, 9 E 
Aye, 11, 89 ebo, 95 
B egbe, 79 
babalawo, 6, 7, 62, 91, 92, 101,104 Egun, 26, 70, 85, 97 
babalorisha, 81 Egypt, 2,8 
Babaluaiye, 28 Egungun Society, 79 
Babatunde, 76 Ejife, 84 
bata drums, 66 Elders, 11, 76 
botanicas, 31 Elegba, 29, 30 32, 36, 66, 67, 68, 98, 
104 
С elegun, 62 
Candomble, 6 elehan, 101, 104 
chakras, 38, 40 enslavement period, 4, 6 
fifth, 39, 44 Erinle, 28 
first, 39, 40 ese, 11 
fourth, 39, 43 Eshu, 22, 52 
second, 39, 41 Eshu-Elegba, 5, 25, 62 
seventh, 39, 46 Eso, 74

sixth, 39, 45 ethics, 11, 74

124 / Baba Ifa Karade

etutu, 106

ewe (herbs), 31, 36 
medicinal usage, 32 
for spiritual baths, 36, 37

Idi, 15

Ifa, 7, 9, 13, 81 
application, 85 
corpus, 9, 11 
divination, 13, 85 
interpretation, 85 
notation, 85

Ifarabale, 74

igbodu, 106

Ijuba, 63

Ika, 18

Ikin, 91

Ile-Ife, 2, 3, 9

ilekes, 65, 100

Imo, 74

incense, 104

initiations, 81, 100

Iponri, 24

Irete, 19

iroke, 8

THE HANDBOOK OF YORUBA RELIGIOUS CONCEPTS / 125

Oba, 28 
Obara, 16 
Obatala, 5, 24, 29, 30, 32, 36, 39, 44,

patterns, 83, 84 
odu, 8, 24, 88, 90, 91, 101 
ethics, 14-20 
12

/Osugbo Society, 79

Ogun, 5, 26, 29, 30, 32, 36, 39, 43, 
57, 61, 66, 70, 98

Ogunda, 17patterns, 83, 84 
odu, 8, 24, 88, 90, 91, 101 
ethics, 14-20 
12

/Osugbo Society, 79

Ogun, 5, 26, 29, 30, 32, 36, 39, 43, 
57, 61, 66, 70, 98

Ogunda, 17

o'lorisha, 81, 104, 106 
Olorun, 21 
Oludumare, 21, 25, 47, 63 
onifa, 48, 101 
omiera, 35, 100

48

ori, 23, 24, 39, 46, 50, 70 
ode, 24

oriki, 49 
orin, 65, 66 
orisha, 5, 11, 21, 22, 28, 38, 47, 60, 
62, 65, 82, 85, 97 
attributes, 29 
color, 30 
crown, 62, 104 
natural environment, 30 
number, 30 
physical correspondence, 30 
Orun, 11, 77, 89 
Orunmila, 7, 8, 10, 39, 45, 47, 59, 
70, 79, 92 
teachings of, 13 
Oshe, 20, 27 
Osain, 28, 35 
Osa, 18 
Oshoosi, 28, 71 
Oshun, 5, 26, 29, 32, 36, 39, 42, 54, 
61, 66, 72, 98, 100, 104

Oya, 5, 27, 29, 30, 32, 36, 58, 66, 73, 
98

oye, 74 
oyeku, 14

P

palm nuts, 91

polygamy, 78

prayer, 47, 104

priest, 21, 47, 65, 70, 77, 100, 101, 
105

priestess, 47, 70, 100, 101

priesthood, 101

priestly initiated, 13

priestly orders, 79, 100

R

religious ceremony, 77 
reincarnation, 76

126 / Baba Ifa Karade

ritual, 10, 11, 77, 106, 107 
ritualization process, 106

S

sacrifice, 10, 81, 89, 95, 96 
blood, 104

sahasrara, 46

santeria, 6, 66

self-Yoruba philosophy, 74

sexual abstinence, 107

Shango, 5, 6, 27, 29, 30, 32, 37, 39,

40, 56, 66, 98, 100, 104

slave trade, 3 
trans-Saharan, 3 
songs, 63, 104 
of prayer, 49 
spiritual baths, 33 
Svadhisthara, 41 
Suuru, 74

T 
temples, 60 
traditional life-stages, 78

Triangle Trade, 4 
tribal nation, 77 
tunde, 76

V 
Vishudda, 44 
Voodun, 6

Ww 
worship, 
place of, 60

Y 
Yemoja, 26, 29, 30, 32, 36, 39, 41, 
55, 66, 73, 79, 98, 100, 104

Yoruba,

cultural-religion, 105

empire, 3

history, 1

New World, 28

religion, 7,9

traditionalist, 49 
Yorubaland, 1, 24, 25, 31Yoruba,

cultural-religion, 105

empire, 3

history, 1

New World, 28

religion, 7,9

traditionalist, 49 
Yorubaland, 1, 24, 25, 31

Baba Ifa Karade is a Chief in the Yoruba culture—an Ifa Priest (babalaw 
and Priest of Obatala (babalorisha). He received his initiations in Ejigt 
Nigeria, Africa іп 1991, culminating an extensive period of study а 
preparation. In 1992, Baba Ifa returned to Nigeria in order to make his p 
grimage to the sacred city of Ile-Ife and to continue his development a: 
Yoruba traditionalist.

Baba Ifa Karade is a member of the јо Orunmila Igbo Mimo, a + 
ciety of African American Babalawo and is also a member of the Ogbx 
Society. He was ordained Chief Lowo Osi Oba (the left hand of the king) 
His Royal Highness, Oba Oseijeman Adefunmi L As Chief, he has be 
directed to set as an objective the elevation of Yoruba religiosity and t 
establishing of a Yoruba based cultural community in the North East 
region of the United States. Presently, Baba Ifa Karade is the spirit: 
leader of Ile Tawo Lona (Temple of the Mystic Path) which he founded 
the state of New Jersey. He continues to lecture and write newspaper a 
cles, as well as books and periodicals, on the Yoruba religious experien