QS CDI EDITT ODOR DIDIT DII CDD CDD CCS CTI PP

e

f NOT TO BE ISSUED

i OUT CF THE LIBRARY. 1 
5

ERRAR RERAN AAA rr

Aa

00058144

— enpe

T t ——

~~? 
| 
Sei ier der- der

w 
| 1 BOMBAY BRANCH 9. 
| 4 9 
E or THE $i 
G ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY. © 
H vo WN HALL, BOMBAY. 3 
„„

E ELLO i

Digitized with financial assistance from the

Government of Maharashtra 
on 15 June, 2016

THE

CHINESE CLASSICS:

| :

LE

| WITH

TRANSLATION, CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL NOTES, 
PROLEGOMENA, AND COPIOUS INDEXES.

. 58144

JAMES LEGGE, DD.

Or TE LONDON MISSIONARY SOCIETY.

IN SEVEN VOLUMES.

VOL. I.,

CONTAINING

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS, THE GREAT LEARNING, ^ 
THE DOCTRINE OF THe tty

OR: 
RASA nm 
Legie

ET T

HONGKONG: 
Pntzrnp AT ru Lox box Missiondny Society's 
PRINTING OFFICE,

TO THE MEMORY 
or 
THE HON. JOSEPH JARDINE, ESQ, - 
BY waos MUNIFICENT ASSISTANCE IT IS NOW PUBLISHED,

AND BUT FOR WHICH IT MIGHT NEVER HAVE BEEN PUBLISHED,

This Work is inscribed.

PREFACE.

Tun author arrived in the East as a Missionary towards the end 
of 1839, and was stationed at Malacca for between three aud four 
years. Before leaving England, he had enjoyed the benefit of a few 
months’ instruction in Chinese from the late Professor Kidd at the 
University of London, and was able in the beginning of 1840 to‘commence the study of the first of the Works in the present publi- 
cation. It seemed to him then and the experience of one and 
twenty years gives its sanction to the correctness of the judgment 
that he should not be able to consider himself qualified for the 
duties of his position, until he had thoroughly mastered the Classical 
Books of the Chinese, and had investigated for himself the whole 
ficld of thought through which the sages of China had ranged, and 
in which were to be found the foundations of the moral, social, and 
political life of the people. Under this conviction he addressed 
himself eagerly to the reading of the Confucian Analects, and pro- 
eceded from them to the other Works, Circumstances occurred in, 
the Mission at Malacca to throw various engagements upon him, 
which left him little time to spend at his books, and he consequently, 
sought about for all the assistance which he could find from the 
labours of men who had gone before.

In this respect he was favourably situated, the charge of the 
Anglo-Chinese College having devolved upon him, so that he had 
free access to all the treasures in its Library. He had translations and 
dictionaries in abundance, and they facilitated his progress. Yet he 
desiderated some Work upon the Classics, more critical, more full 
und exact, thun any which he had the opportunity of consulting,

viii PREFACE.viii PREFACE.

and he sketched to himself the plan of its execution. This was dis- 
ductly before him in 1841, and for several vears he hoped to hear 
that some experienced Chinese scholar was preparing to give to the 
public something of the kind. As time went on, and he I to feel 
assured as to his own progress in the language, it oceurred to him 
that he wight venture on such an undertaking himself. He studied, 
wrote out translations, and made notes, with the project iu his mind. 
Ile hopes he can say that it did not divert him from the usual active 
labours of a Missionary in preaching and teaching, but it did not 
allow him to rest satisfied in any operations of the time then being.In 1856, he first talked with some of his friends about his purpose, 
and among them was the Rey. Josiah Cox, of the Wesleyan Mission- 
ary Society. The question of the expense of. publication came 
up. The author’s idea was that by-and-by he would be able to 
digest his materials in readiness for the press, and that then he 
would be likely, on application, to meet with such encouragement 
from the British and other foreign merchants in China, as would 
enable him to go forward with his plan. Mr. Cox, soon after, with- 
out the slightest intimation of his intention, mentioned the whole 
matter to his friend, Mr. Joseph Jardine. In consequence of what 
he reported of Mr. Jardine’s sentiments, the author had an interview 
with that gentleman, when he very gencrously undertook to bear 
the expense of carrying the Work through the press. His lamented 
death leaves the author at liberty to speak more freely on this point 
than he would otherwise have done. Mr. Jardine expressed himself 
favourably of the plan, and said, “I know the liberality of the 
merchants in China, and that many of them would readily give their 
help to such an undertaking, but you need not have the trouble of 
canvassing the community. If you are.prepared for the toil of the 
publication, I will bear the expense of it. We make our money in 
China, and we should be glad to assist in whatever promises to be of 
benefit to it."

The author could not but be grateful to Mr. Jardine for his 
proffer, nor did he hesitate to accept it. The interruption of mission- 
ary labours, consequent on the breaking out of hostilities in the 
eud of 1856, was favourable to retired and literary work, and 
he immediately set about preparing some of his materials for the 
press. A necessary visit to England in 1857, which kept him absent

PREFACE. iX

from the Colony for cighteen months, proved a serious interrup- 
tion, but the first-fruits of his labours are now in a state to be 
presented to the public.PREFACE. iX

from the Colony for cighteen months, proved a serious interrup- 
tion, but the first-fruits of his labours are now in a state to be 
presented to the public.

The first conception of the present work and the cirenmstances 
under which it is published have thus been detailed. Of the style 
and manner of its execution it is for others to judge. It origi- 
nated in the author's feeling of his own wants. IIe ‘has translated, 
annotated, aud reasoned, always in the first place to satisfy himself, 
He hopes that the volumes will be of real service to Missionaries 
and other stúdents of the Chinese language and literature. They 
have been foremost in his mind as those whom he wished to benefit. 
But he has thought also of the general reader. The Chinese is the 
largest fanily of mankind. Thoughtful minds in other parts of the 
world cannot but be anxious to know what the minds of this many- 
millioned people have had to live upon for thousands of years. 
The Work will enable them to draw their own conclusions on the 
subject. The author will give his views on the scope and value of 
their contents in his prolegomena to the several volumes. Some

‘will agree with his opinions, and others will probably differ from 
them.’ He only hopes that he will be found to advance no judg- 
ment for which he does not render a reason. To think freely and for 
himself is a source to him of much happiness; his object is to supply 
to others the means of realizing the same for themselves, so far as 
the subjects here investigated are concerned. IIe hopes also that the 
time is not very remote, when among tlie Chinese themselves there 
will be found many men of intelligence, able and willing to read with- 
out prejudice what he may say about the teachings of their sages.The title-page says that the Work will be in seven volumes, — 
two, that is, for the Four Books, and one for each of the Five Ning. 
It will be necessary, however, from their size, to publish more than 
one of the latter in two or more parts, so that to the eve the 
Work will present the appearance perbaps of ten volumes. Should 
life and health be spared, the author would like to give a supple- 
mentary volume or two, so as to embrace all the Books in ** The 
Thirteen King." The second volume is two-thirds printed, and wi! 
appear, God willing, before the end of the present year He must then 
be permitted to rest for a time, before proceeding with the Shoo- 
king or The Book of History. Ilis directly missionary labours

x PREFACE.

are the chief business of his life, and require of course his chief 
attention. The fact that the Work is inscribed to the me mory of Mr.

Jardine i impresses him deeply with the frailty of life and the uncer- 
tainty of all human plans. While he has been putting the finish- 
ing hand to this first volume, the same solemn truth has been still 
more realizingly forced upon him by the news of the death of his 
own eldest brother, the thought of giving pleasure to whom by the 
publication was one of the greatest stimuli under the toil of its pre- 
paration. Whether he shall be permitted to accomplish what he

contemplates, the future alone can determine.contemplates, the future alone can determine.

It would have been an easy matter to swell the volume now 
presented to double the size. In the Chinese Commentators he had 
abundant materials to do so; but the author's object has been to 
condense rather than expand. He has not sought to follow Choo He 
or any other authority. The text, and not the commentary, has 
been his study. He has read the varying views of scholars exten- 
sively, but only that he might the better understand what was 
written in the Book. Tle has also consulted the renderings of other 
translators, but never till he had made his own. Ile may have 
sometimes altered his own to adopt a happier expression from them, 
but the translation is independent. He has not made frequent 
mention in his notes of the labours of other scholars, — not because he 
undervalues them, but because there.was no necessity to call atten- 
tion to the circumstance, where he agreed with them, and where he 
differed, he thought it more scemly to avoid “doubtful disputations.”

In expressing the sounds of proper names, the, author has follow- 
ed the orthography of Morrison and Medhurst; and in the index 
of Chinese characters he has given, in addition, that of Mr. Wade, 
taken from his “Peking Syllabary.” Yet he is afraid that Mr, 
Wade may find some characters incorrectly represented, as the 
author could only fix their pronunciation by the analogy of others. 
It may seem strange also to some scholars, that where he has spoken 
in the notes of the tones of characters, he-has assumed that in the 
Court dialect there are eight, tones in the same way as in the dia- 
lect of Canton Province. The author has not paid sufficient atten- 
“tion to the Court dialect to justify his speaking on this point with 
If K'ang-he's dictionary were to determine the ques-

positiveness. 
how oe a distinction of “upper” and “lower

tion, it could be s

PREFACE. XIpositiveness. 
how oe a distinction of “upper” and “lower

tion, it could be s

PREFACE. XI

is made in all the tones, and not in the first or “even” one only. 
The author, moreover, has fancied that he could detect that distinc- 
tion in the pronunciation of teachers of the Court dialect. On this 
suhject, however, he speaks with submission.

There are many deficiencies in the present volume in point of 
typographical execution, for which the author ventures to ask the 
indulgence of the reader. The only workinen employed upon it 
have been Chinese. He is under great obligation to his excellent 
friend, Mr. Hwang Shing, the superintendent of the Mission Printing 
Office; but well-skilled as he is in the English language, he could 
not perform the duties of proof-reader. The work of correction has 
mainly devolved on the author himself or members of his family, and 
has been done when the mind was otherwise occupied, or amid con- 
stant interruptions. The errors would have been much more nume: 
rous than they are but for the great kindness of Mr. Jeffrey, formerly 
of the ‘China Mail” Office, who has read nearly all the sheets before 
their finally going to press. To Mr. Low, of the same Office, and 
latterly to Mr. Dixson, the proprietor of the “ China Mail,” the author

ids glad to take this opportunity of expressing his thanks for their 
advice and help in many typographical matters. The more serions 
mistakes will be found corrected, it is hoped, in the subjoined lists. 
For others of smaller importance the circumstances just mentioned 
may form some apology ; and where the sound of a Chinese character 
may in a few instances have been represented somewhat incorrectly, 
the character itself in ax foot-note, or its sound in the 7th Index, 
will supply the necessary correction. The author has likewise to 
thank his friend, and former colleague in the Mission at Hongkong, 
the Rev. Mr. Chalmers, for the compilation of the indexes of Subjects 
and Proper Names.IIoxaxoxa, 26% March 186 1.

CONTENTS.

I. THE PROLEGOMENA.

CHAPTER I,

OF THE CHINESE CLASSICS GENERALLY.

SECTION PAGE 
I. Books included under the name of the Chinese Classics,. es " fas 1 
II. The Authority of the Chinese Classics,. e e e Fea AS 3 
CIIAPTER II. 
OF THE CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 
12

I. Formation of the Text of the Analects by the Scholars of the Han dynasty,... 
II. At what time, and by hoo the Analects were written; their Plan; and "Aüthen- 
ticity, . es sä 3s es je 14 
III. Of Commentaries upon the Analects, See n ds A 897 see M 18 
: 21

IV. Of Various Readings, ... ise see T ave see

toe eee —

CHAPTER III.

OF THE GREAT LEARNING.

I. IIistory of the Text, and the different Arrangements of it which have been proposed, 23 
II. Of the Authorship, and distinction of the text into Classical Text and Somes) 26 
III. Its Scope and Value, P ma s $e "is m E m 21

CHAPTER IV. s

THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN. 
I. Its place in the Le Ke, and its Publication separately, z: sue ae 85 
II. Its Author, and some account of him, ... watt. io cas AA T "T m 36 
III. Its Integrity, m ave eee 885 m si 207 iss iis 43 
IV. Its Scope and Value, or T eis bo T E $i eis 44 
CIIAPTER V. 
CONFUCIUS AND nis IMMEDIATE DISCIPLES.

I. Life of Confucius, — ... zs "E nm "m ü s “ve vis 5R 
II. His Influence and Opinions, m ss m " tee e et see 90 
: ere ace eee 1 13

III. His Immediate Disciples, 0. ' ter m ave en

ERRATA.

CIIAPTER VI,

LIST OF THE PRINCIPAL WORKS WHICH HAVE BREN CONSCLTED IN THE PREPARATION

UF TINS VOLUME.

T. Chinese Works. with brief notices, ..: 
‘Translations and other Works, .

II. THE BODY OF THE VOLUME.

II.

xiii

TUNER i Xf. 
for y 700 read iu. 
after " insert HY: 
for E read H.T. Chinese Works. with brief notices, ..: 
‘Translations and other Works, .

II. THE BODY OF THE VOLUME.

II.

xiii

TUNER i Xf. 
for y 700 read iu. 
after " insert HY: 
for E read H.

I. Confucian Analects, . T dee vs 82 8 
II. The Great Learning, e 
III. The Doctrine of the Menn. 
III. INDEXES. 
T. Subjects in the Confucian Annleets ae E ^ 
II. Proper Names in the Confucian Analects,... ste m M 
TH. Subjeets in the Great Learning,... ss oe eae E se 
IV. Proper Names in the Great Learning, Ses es T as 
V. Subjects in the Doctrine of the Mean, ... D 
VI. Proper Names in the Doctrine of the Mean, tee e ase 
VII. Chinese Characters and Phrases, ave Wm oe 828 a 
` 
ERRATA. 
< I IN THE CHINESE TEXT, 
Page. Column, Page. Column, 
3, 2, for A read 4 . | 185, 9, 
21, 1, is inverted. | 199, b, 
70, 9, for m read T 228, 8, 
92, 4, transpose At · 230, 4, 
101, 2, for us read nies 237, 9, 
114, 5, 4- P . | 256, 1, 
116, 2, B 5 LS 213, 6, 
y 6, jd „ f. 2785, 2, 
130, 10, E is inverted, | 285, 2, 
142, 10, for ir read Sig. 200, 4, 
143, 3, 2f „ SHE. | 295, 4, 
181, 1, p. fd, 
> - ^ 
Pace 11, between the 6th and 7th Columns, for J read 
ry 
» 23, — „ „ meeexee gy dees 
» 20.5 cse ESTE STTS Ist aud 9d............ ; 
3 Ji xeesecesde d eade toad dth and 5th. .... for — "n 
„„ 7 . 3d and 4th. „by * insert —— 
ao H6... vares 6th und 7th........., after . „ — 
» 258, Sav saves e e od and 4th. 38 for MEA read 
3i 293, — “000”. [72 » LEITET 33 di m

xiv.

LRRATA.

IH. CHINESE CHARACTERS IN THE NOTES, 
Page. Line. — Column. Page. Line. Column. .

3, 20 II., for Fe read Ze 182, 22, L, for gj read H H :

7 10, i „ M „ . | 193, 2, * „VI „ X

40, 1, * Ho. FR. 107, 4, " „ Ue» B

52, 3, i „ Hb „ ff. | 207, 1, II., WWW. yh3, 20 II., for Fe read Ze 182, 22, L, for gj read H H :

7 10, i „ M „ . | 193, 2, * „VI „ X

40, 1, * Ho. FR. 107, 4, " „ Ue» B

52, 3, i „ Hb „ ff. | 207, 1, II., WWW. yh

88, 6, n. „ Fe» . | , 6o wwe ow. due 
102, 9, A „ JB o» HEROS 13, „ tas, HE. JE. 
117, 6, » or BEE oe me s, „ .HB. JK 
138, 2, M „ JE I. 20, 12, 1, „ N , dV 
141, 3, " „ „ Fi. 200, 1 „ „ E. JE 
152, 5, " P fei „ . 203, 15 si „ 44 „ By. 
100, 2, Lo » AA» N. 204, 5, „ „ Ho 4H 
173, 16, I, „ f „ . » II., p .

III. IN THE PROLEGOMENA. 
Page. Line. : Page. Line. EP

2, 24, for Kuh Leang-ch äh 20, 1l for Ping read .. .. Ping.

read Kuh-leang Ch5h. | 40, 34, , transpose , K'ung and Sung.

4, 6, for 44. „ 6. 67, 14, „ who „ . — Which.

10, 24, „ Léang „ tre tee Lew, | 85, 15, „ ages » ee ages

15, 15, „ 490.. „ 430.

IV. IN THE TRANSLATION AND NOTES.

1, 3, for pleasant read ., delightful. | 26, 17, col. II, for 540 read 612. 
130, 5, , government „ governments | „ 18 „ 5 „ Pd. „ .. pa 
155, 6, refer to char. no , Index vii. 166, 26, „ I, „ HEAD, .. MAND. 
183, 1, for hing read ... ...shing. | 269, 6, „ XI., „ Ships pes ... slips. 
201, 9, „ nobody. „ .. . . nobody. 271, 23, „ II, „ Not, Lin, Sin,

read Not, Lin. Sin.

PROLEGOMENA.

CHAPTER L

OF THE CHINESE CLASSIOS GENERALLY.

SECTION I.

BOOKS INCLUDED UNDER THE NAME OF THE CHINESE CLASSICS.

1. The Books now recognized as of highest authority in China 
are comprehended under the denominations of “The five King,“ 
and “The four hoo? The term King is of textile origin, and 
signifies the war p threads of a web, and their adjustment. An easy 
applieation of it is to denote what is regular and insures regularity. 
As used with reference to books, it indicates their authority on the 
subjects of. which they treat. “The five King” are the five canonical 
Works, containing the truth upon the highest subjects from the 
sages of China, and which should be received as law by all genera- 
tions. The term Shoo simply means Writings or Books.2. The five King are: the F/, or, as it has been sty led, The 
Dook of Changes; n the S, or The Book of History ;" the She,’ 
or “The ook. of Poetry ;” the Le Ke, or“ Record of Rites ;” 
the Ch'un Ts'ew,? or “Spring and Autumn,” a chronicle of events, 
extending from 721 to 480, r.c. The authorship, or compilation 
rather, of all these works is loosely attributed to Confucius. But 
much of the Le Ke is from later hands. Of the Yih, the Shoo, and the 
She, it is only in the first that we find additions from the philoso- 
pher himself, in the shape of appendixes. The Ch'un Ts‘ew is the 
only one of the five King which can rightly be described as of his 
own “making.”

EKR 2 PY HE. s . oGEQ ORR 6 AMAL. A N.

and

PROLEGOMENA.] THE CHINESE CLASSICS GENERALLY. Lon. 1.

“The four Books" is an abbreviation for“ The Books of the four 
Philosophers.” 8 The first is he Luu Lu,? or “Digested Conversa- 
tions,” being occupied chiefly with the sayings of Confucius. Ile 
is the philosopher to whom it belongs. It appears in this Work 
under the title of ‘Confucian Analects.” The second is the Ta 
Héd,! or “Great Learning,” now commonly attributed to Tsing 
Sin, I a disciple of the sage. He is the philosopher of it. The third 
is the Chung Yung,! or Doctrine of the Mean,” ascribed to K‘ung. 
Reih, s the grandson of Confucius. He is the philosopher of it. 
The fourth contains the works of Mencius.' i

3. This arrangement of the Classical Books, which is commonly 
supposed to have originated with the scholars of the Sung dynasty, is 
defective. The Great Learning and the Doctrine pf the Mean are 
both found in the Record of Rites, being the forty-second and thirty- 
first Books respectively of that compilation, according to the usual 
arrangement of it.4. The oldest efiumerations of the Classical Books specify only the 
Jive King. The Yö Ke, or“ Record of Musie,"!* the remains of which 
now form one of the Books in the Le Ke, was sometimes added to 
those, making with them the siz King. A division was also made into 
nine King, consisting of the Yih, the She, the Shoo, the Chow Le, 16 
or “Ritual of Chow,” the E Le, io or * Ceremonial Usages,” the Le 
Ke, and the three annotated editions of the Ch‘un Ts‘ew,!7 by Tso- 
k‘ew Ming, is Kung-yang Kaou,!® and Kuh Léang-ch4h.?0 In the 
famous compilation of the classical Books, undertaken by order of 
T‘ae-tsung, the second emperor of the T'ang dynasty (B.c. 627— 
649), and which appeared in the reign of his successor, there are 
thirteen King ; viz., the Yih, the She, the Shoo, the three editions of 
the Ch*un Ts‘ew, the Le Ke, the Chow Le, the E Le, the Confucian 
Analects, the Urh Ya,?! a sort of ancient dictionary, the Heaou 
King,” or “ Classic of Filial Picty,” and the works of Mencius.

5. A distinction, however, was made among the Works thus 
comprehended under the same common name, and Mencius, the 
Lun Yu, the Ta Hë, the Chung Yung, and the Heaou King were

D? 
spoken of as the seaou King, or “smaller Classics.” It thus appears, 
’ 4

8 N Z Ar. 9 36 B 10 X. 11 fi Z. 12 rH Jd. 19 XL K. 
u ea. o Mug. tf. 17 XR AK = (SE 1 Ze H H. ZA XE 
ps 20 EJ ng dE ex

2]

snc mn.) AUTHORITY OF THE CHINESE CLASSICS. [rnorgaouExA

contrary to the ordinary opinion on the subject, that the Ta Hes 
aud Chung Yung had been published as separate treatises before 
the Sung dynasty, and that the Four Books, as distinguished from 
the greater King, had also previously found a place in the literature 
of China.?3

SECTION II.

THE AUTIIORITY OF THE CHINESE CLASSICS,

LJSECTION II.

THE AUTIIORITY OF THE CHINESE CLASSICS,

LJ

1. This subject will be discussed in connection with cach separate 
Work, and it is only designed here to exhibit generally the evidence 
on which the Chinese Classics claim to be received as genuine pro- 
ductions of the time to which they are referred.

2. In the memoirs of the Former Han dynasty (n.c. 201—4.n. 
24), we have one chapter which we may call the History of Litera 
ture! It commences thus: —“ After the death of Confucius,? ilero 
was an end of his exquisite words; and when his sev centy disciples 
had passed away, violence began to be done to their meaning. Jt 
came about that there were five different editions of the Ch'un 
Ts‘ew, four of the She, and several of the Yih. Amid the disorder 
and collision of the warring States (m.c. 480-221), truth and 
falsehood were still more in a state of warfare, and a sad confusion 
marked the words of the various scholars. Then came the calamity 
inflicted under the Ts‘in dynasty (u.c. 220-200), when the literary 
monuments were destroyed by fire, in order to keep the people in 
ignorance. But, by-and-by, there arose the Han dynasty, which 
set itself to remedy the evil wrought by the Ts‘in. Great efforts were 
made to collect slips and tablets? and the way was thrown wide 
open for the bringing in of Books. In the time of the emperor 
Ileaou-woo* (B. C. 139-86), portions of Books being wanting and 
tablets lost, so that ceremonies and music were suffering great

23 For the sentemonts in the two last paragraphs, sce p iW 2 yas fE, K EL a X. 
ZR »

j 5 W ür N A NK. 2 ſih N. 3 hn fip tte md 
tablets on bamboo, which supplied iu 58 days the place of paper, 4 [it te N zd ris 
eA 
SE Is:

. 3]

PROLEGOMENA,] THE CHINESE CLASSICS GENERALLY. [on. 1.j 5 W ür N A NK. 2 ſih N. 3 hn fip tte md 
tablets on bamboo, which supplied iu 58 days the place of paper, 4 [it te N zd ris 
eA 
SE Is:

. 3]

PROLEGOMENA,] THE CHINESE CLASSICS GENERALLY. [on. 1.

damage, he was moved to sorrow, and said, „J am very sad for 
this.. He therefore formed the plan of Repositories, in which 
the Books might be stored, and appointed officers to transcribe Books 
on an extensive scale; embracing the works of the various scholars, 
that they might all be placed in the Repositories. The emperor 
Shing? (B. C. 31—4), finding that a portion ‘of the Books still con- 
tinued ‘dispersed or missing, commissioned Ch'in Nung, the super- 
intendent of guests, to search for undiscovered Books throughout 
the empire, and by special edict ordered the chief of the Banqueting 
House, Lew Heang, 7 to examine the classical Works, along with the 
commentaries on them, the writings of the scholars, and all poctical 
productions; the master-controller of infantry, Jin Hwang,“ to ex- 
amine the Books on the art of war; the grand historiographer, 
Yin Héen,9 to examine the Books treating of the art of numbers (le., 
divination); and the imperial physician, Le Ch*oo-kó,!9 to examine 
the books on medicine. Whenever any Book was done with, Heang 
forthwith arranged it, indexed it, and made a digest of it, which was 
presented to the emperor. While the undertaking was in pro- 
gress, Heang died, and the emperor Gae (B.c. 5—a.p.) appointed 
his son, Hin,!! a master of the imperial carriages, to complete his 
father's work. On this, IIin collected all the books, aud presented 
a report of them, under seven divisions.”The first of these divisions scems to have been a general cata- 
logue, 12 containing perhaps only the titles of the works included in 
the other six. The second embraced the classical Works.!? From 
the abstract of it, which is preserved in the chapter referred to, we 
find that there were ,294 collections of the Yih-king, from 13 dif- 
ferent individuals or editors ; 412 collections of the Shoo-king, from 
9 different individuals; 416 volumes of the She-king, from 6 differ- 
ent individuals;! of the Books of. Rites, 555 collections, from 13

SARET ERAD TIEK RAM. s Rii 
IST CE Bs. o Je BR aS 2t de. o TEES REB. n f rh E ifr dn 
Je fü v AEWA o AS HEN ML .. = H A T AA. 
How much of the whole Work was contained in each fidi» it is impossible for us to ascertain, P. 
Regis says :—“ Pien, quemadmodum Gallice dicimus ‘des pieces d'eloquence, de poesie. 15 BÓ. e

Be, pu ü — + oe T. The colleetious of the She-king are mentioned under the name 
of Keuen, sections," portions.” Had en been used, it night have been understood of individual 
odes. This change of terms shows that by p'éux in the other summaries, we are not to understand 
single blucks or chapters,

4]

srcr. 1] AUTHORITY OF TIIE CHINESE CLASSICS. [PROLEGOMENA.4]

srcr. 1] AUTHORITY OF TIIE CHINESE CLASSICS. [PROLEGOMENA.

different individuals; of the Books on Music, 165 collections, 
from 6 different editors; 948 collections of History, under the head- 
ing of the Ch‘un Ts‘ew, from 23 different individuals; 229 collec- 
tions of the Lun Yu, including the Analects and kindred fragments, 
from 12 different individuals; of the Heaou-king, embracing also 
the Urh Ya, aud some other portions of the ancient literature, 59 
collections, from 11 different individuals; and finally of the Lesser 
Learning, being works on the form of the characters, 45 collections, 
from 11 different individuals, The Works of Mencius. were includ- 
ed in the second division, 6 among the Writings of what were 
deemed orthodox scholars,!7 of which there were 836 collections, 
from 53 different individuals.

. The above important document is sufficient to show how the 
emperors of the [lan dynasty, as soon as they had made good their 
possession of the ‘empire, turned their attention to recover the 
ancient literature of the nation, the Classical Books engaging their 
first care, and how earnestly and effectively the scholars of the time 
responded to the wishes of their rulers. In addition to the facts 
specified*in the preface to it, I may relate that the ordinance of the 
Tsin dynasty against possessing the Classical Books (with the 
exception, as will appear in its proper place, of the Yih-king) was 
repealed by the second sovereign of the Han, the emperor Heaou 
Hwuy,! in the 4th year of his reign, s.c. 190, and that a large 
portion of the Shoo-king was recovered in the time of the third 
emperor, B. C. 178-156, while in the year B. 0. 135, a special Board 
was constituted, consisting of literati who were put in charge of the 
five King?4, The collections reported on by Lew Hin suffered damage in 
the troubles which began a.p. 8, and continued till the rise of the 
second or eastern Han dynasty in the year 25. The founder of it 
(A. D. 25-57) zealously promoted the undertaking of his predecés- 
sors, and additional repositories’ were required for the books which 
were collected, His successors, the emperors, Heaouaning?? (58-75), 
Ieaou-chang?! (76-88), and Heaou-hwo?? (89-105), took a part 
themselves in the studics and discussions of the literary tribunal,

6 ERP. u fa Be A ie 7835 1B e ß. o aR TUR

4p. 22 10 H a Hn E 20 Bo A ZEW E aye. 21 BY Se 2 % ES ip 
22 25 III Fb

PROLEGOMENA,] THE CHINESE CLASSICS GENERALLY. ten. 1

and the emperor Heaou- ling, 28 between the years 172-178, had the 
text of the five King, as it had been fixed, cut in slabs of stone, in 
characters of three different forms.

5. Since the Han, the successive dynasties have considered the 
literary monuments of the country to be an object of their special care. 
Many of them have issued editions of the classics, embodying the 
commentaries of preceding generations. No dynasty has distin- 
guished itself more in this line than the present Manchew possessors 
of the Empire. In fine, the evidence is complete that the Classical 
Books of China have come down from at least a century before 
our Christian era, substantially the same as we have them at pres- 
ent.6. But it still remains to inquire in what condition we may suppose 
the Books were, when the scholars of the Han dynasty commenced 
their labours upon them. They acknowledge that the tablets—we 
cannot here speak of manuscripts—were mutilated and in disorder. 
Was the injury which they had reeeived of such an extent that all the 
care and study put forth on the small remains would be of little use ? 
This question can be answered satisfactorily, only by an examination 
of the evidence which is adduced for the text of each particular 
Classic; but it can be made apparent that there is nothing, in the 
nature of the case, to interfere with our‘ believing that the materials 
were sufficient to enable the scholars to execute the work intrusted 
to them.

7. The burning of the ancient Books by order of the founder of 
the Ts‘in dynasty is always referred to as the greatest disaster which 
they sustained, and with this is coupled the slaughter of many of 
the Literati by the same monarch.

The account which we have of these transactions in the Historical 
Records is the following :—?*

* [n his 34th year," (the 34th year, that is, after he had ascended 
the throne of Ts‘in. It was-only the 8th after he had been acknow 
ledged Sovereign of the empire, coinciding with B.c. 212), the 
emperor, returning from a visit to the south, which had extended as 
far as Vu, gave a feast in the palace of Heen-yang, when the Great

23 zz po B af 24 I have thought it well to endeavour to translate the whole of the 
passages, Father de Mailla merely constructs from them a narrative of his own; see L'Histoire 
Generale de La Chine, tome II., pp. 399-402, The iif ju Abid E avoids the difficulties of the 
original by giving an abridgment of it.

61

sect. 1..] AUTIIORITY OF THE CHINESE CLASSICS. [rnorzGOMENA.61

sect. 1..] AUTIIORITY OF THE CHINESE CLASSICS. [rnorzGOMENA.

Scholars, amounting to seventy men, appeared and wished him long 
life. One of the principal ministers, Chow "Ts'ing-shin,?9 caine for- 
ward and said, ‘Formerly, the State of Ts‘in was only 1,000 le in 
extent, but Your Majesty, by your spirit-like efficacy and intelli- 
gent wisdom, has tranquillized and settled the whole empire, and 
driven away all barbarous tribes, so that, wherever the sun and 
moon shine, all appear before you as guests acknowledging subjec- 
tion. You have formed the States of the various princes into pro- 
vinces and districts, where the people enjoy a happy tranquillity, 
suffering no more from the calunities of war and contention. 
"This condition of things will be transmitted for 10,000 generations. 
From the highest antiquity there has been no one in awful virtue 
like Your Majesty.’ 
, “The Emperor was pleased with this flattery, when Shun Yu- 
yué,27 one of the great scholars, a native of Ts‘e, advanced and 
snid, ‘The sovereigus of Yin and Chow, for more than a thousand 
years, invested their sons and younger brothers, and meritorious 
ministers, with domains and rule, and could thus depend upon them 
for support and aid that I have heard. But now Your Majesty 
is in possession of all within the seas, and your sons and younger 
brothers are nothing but private individuals. The issue will be that 
some one will arise to play the part of T'een Chang, 28 or of the six 
nobles of Tsin. Without the support of your own family, where will 
you find the aid which you may require? That a state of things not 
modelled from the lessons of antiquity can long continue ;—that is 
what I have not heard. Ts‘ing is now showing himself to be a flatterer, 
who increases the errors of Your Majesty, and not a loyal minister.’ 
„The Emperor requested the opinions of others on this representa- 
tion, when the premier, Le Sze,?? said, ‘The five emperors were 
not one the double of the other, nor did the three dynastics accept 
one another's ways. Each had a peculiar system of government, 
not for the sake of the contrariety, but as being required by the 
changed times. Now, Your Majesty has laid the foundations of 
imperial sway, so that it will last for 10,000 generations. This is25 T + 2 + A T y» EN The [it + were not only ‘great scholars,’ but had

an official rank, There was what we may call a college of them, consisting of seveuty members,

26 tz 5p JA iW B. 27 Ped F aby. 28 III ty — BS should probably be jg. as

it is given in the T'ung Këën. 29 21 48 Æ f. 
r

7]

PROLECONENA.] TIE CHINESE CLASSICS GENERALLY. [ei 1.

. indeed beyond what a stupid scholar can understand. And, more- 
over, Yué only talks of things belonging to the Three Dynasties, 
which are not fit to be models to you. At other times, when the 
princes were all striving together, they endeavoured to gather the 
wandering scholars about them; but now, the empire is in a stable 
condition, and laws and ordinances issue from one supreme authority. 
Let those of the people who abide in their homes give their strength 
to the toils of husbandry, and those who become scholars should study 
the various laws and prohibitions. Instead of doing this, however, 
the scholars do not learn what belongs to the present ‘day, but study 
antiquity. They go on to condemn: the present time, leading the 
masses of the people astray, and to disorder. i“At the risk of my life, I, the prime minister, say,—Formerly, 
when the empire was disunited and disturbed, there was no one 
who could give unity to it. The princes therefore stood up toge- 
ther; constant references were made to antiquity to the.injury of 
the present state; baseless statements were dressed up to confound 
what was real, and inen made a boast of their own peculiar learn- 
ing to condemn what their rulers appointed. And now, when Your 
Majesty has consolidated the empire, and, distinguishing black from 
white, has constituted it a stable unity, they still honour their 
peculiar learning, and combine together; they teach men what 
is contrary to your laws. When they hear that an ordinance has 
been issued, every one sets to discussing it with his learning. In 
the court, they are dissatisfied in heart; out of it, they keep talking 
in the streets. While they make a pretence of vaunting their Mas- 
ter, they consider it fine to have extraordinary views of their own. 
And so they lead on the people to be guilty of murmuring and evil 
speaking. If these things are not prohibited, Your Majesty's au- 
thority will decline, and parties will be formed. The best way is“ 
to prohibit them. I pray that all the Records in charge of the 
IIistoriographers be burned,excepting those of Ts‘in; that, with the 
exception of those officers belonging to the Doard of Great Scholars, 
all throughout the empire who presume to keep copies of the She- 
king, or of the Shoo- king, or of the books of the IIundred Schools, 
be required to go with them to the officers in charge of the several 
districts, and burn them ;% that all who may dare to speak together

80 AR uH uH T, F d $; por 2 
81

SECT. 11] AUTIIORITY OF THE CHINESE CLASSICS. [PROLEGOMENA.80 AR uH uH T, F d $; por 2 
81

SECT. 11] AUTIIORITY OF THE CHINESE CLASSICS. [PROLEGOMENA.

about the She and the Shoo be put to death, and their bodies exposed 
in the market place; that those who make mention of the past, so 
as to blame the present, be put to death along with their relatives; 
that officers who shall know of the violation of those rules and not 
inform against the offenders, be held equally guilty with them; and 
that whoever shall not have burned their Books within thirty days 
after the issuing of the ordinance, be branded and sent to labour 
ou the wall for four years, The only Books which should be spared. 
are those on medicine, divination, and husbandry. Whoever wants 
to learn the laws may go to the magistrates and learn of them.

“The imperial decision was—‘ Approved.“

The destruction of the scholars is related more briefly. In the 
year after the burning of the Books, the resentment of the emperor 
was excited by the remarks and flight of two scholars who had been 
favourites with him, and he determined to institute a strict inquiry 
about all of their class in Héen-yang; to find out whether they had 
been making ominous speeches about him, and disturbing the minds 
of the people. ‘The investigation was committed to the Censors, 2 
and it being discovered that upwards of 460 scholars had violated 
the prohibitions, they were all buried alive in pits? for a warning 
to the empire, while degradation and banishment were employed 
more strictly than before against all who fell under suspicion. The 
emperor's eldest son, Foo-soo, remonstrated with him, saying that 
such measures against those who repeated the words of Confucius 
and sought to imitate him, would alienate all the people from their 
infant dynasty, but his interference offended his father so much that 
he was sent off from court, to be with the general who was super- 
intending the building of the great wall.8. No attempts have been made by Chinese critics and historians 
to discredit the record of these events, though some have questioned 
the extent of the injury inflicted by them on the monuments of 
their ancient literature.“ It is important to observe that the edict 
against the Books did not extend to the Yih-king, which was

I D 9 35 AS Iu] RA B po JF TE GERI Gl. s? ET ER JL, A A. 
py E X ^2. F e AE Ma E By. The meaning of this passage as a whole is

sufficiently plain, but I am un: x to make out the force of the phrase 2 lo. 93 See the re- 
marks of Cheing Kön-tse ( [gx x 5 IQQ, of the Sung dynasty, on the subject, in the X 
Ek il . Bk. cixxiv. p. 5.

9]

`

PROLEGOMENA. ] THE CHINESE CLASSICS GENERALLY. [cu. 1.

exempted as being a work on divination, nor did it extend to the 
other classics which were in charge of the Board of Great Scholars. 
It is still more important to note that the burning took place only 
three years before the death of the tyrant who commanded it. He 
died B.c. 209, and the feeble reign of his second son, who succeed- 
ed. him, lasted only three years. A brief season of disorder and 
struggling between different chiefs for the supreme authority ensued,

but the reign of the founder of the Han dynasty dates from B. C. 
201. Thus, elev en years were all which intervened between the orderbut the reign of the founder of the Han dynasty dates from B. C. 
201. Thus, elev en years were all which intervened between the order

for the burning of the Books and the rise of that family, which 
signdlized itself by the care which it bestowed for their recovery; 
and from the edict of the tyrant of Ts‘in against private individuals 
having copies in their keeping, to its express abrogation by the em- 
peror Heaou Hwuy, there were only 22 years. We may believe, indeed, 
that vigorous efforts to carry the edict into eftect would not be con- 
tinued longer than the life of its author,—that is, not for more than 
about three years, The calamity inflicted on the ancient Books of 
China by the House of Ts‘in could not have approached to anything 
like a complete destruction of them. There would be no occasion 
for the scholars of the Han dynasty, in regard to the bulk of their 
ancient literature, to undertake more than the work. of recension 
and editing.

9. The idea of forgery by them on a large scale is out of the 
question, The catalogues of Leang IIin enumerated more than 
13,000 volumes of a larger or smaller size, the productions of nearly 
600 different writers, and arranged in 28 subdivisions of subjects.?* 
Iu the third catalogué, the first subdivision contained the orthodox 
writers,’ to the number of 53, with 836 Works or portions of their 
Works. Between Menciüs and Kéung Keih, the grandson of Con- 
fucius, eight different authors have place. The second subdivision 
contained the Works of the Taouist school, ainounting to 993 collec- 
tions, from 37 different authors. The sixth subdivision contained 
the Mihist writers?? to the number of 6, with their productions 
in 86 collections. I specify these two subdivisions, because they 
embraced the Works of schools or sects antagonist. to that of Con- 
fucius, and some of them still hold a place in Chinese literature,

"RAISES H+ A l. f . . e . f . A 
NME. TE A dit: "FEET $7 5 AK AG Dl

10]"RAISES H+ A l. f . . e . f . A 
NME. TE A dit: "FEET $7 5 AK AG Dl

10]

1 ' i rot . 
SREP. 11.) AUTHORITY OF THE CHINESE CLASSICS. (rnoLEGOMENA.

and contain many referewees to the five Classics, and to Confucius 
and his disciples. 
' 40: The mguiry pursued im tlie above paragraphs conducts us to 
thie, conclusion that the materials ftom which the Classics; as they 
have come down to us, were compiled and edited in the two cei- 
turies preceding our Christian era, were genuine remains, going back 
to a still: more remote: period. The injury which they sustajwed 
from the dynasty of Ts‘iw was, I believe, the same in character as 
hat to which they were exposed, during all the time of “the 
Warring. States” It may have been more intense im degree, baut the 
constant ‘warfare which prevailed for some centuries among the 
different States which composed the empire was eminently wnfüvont- 
able to the cultivation of literature. Mencius tells us how the 
Princes had made ayway with many of the records of antiquity, from 
which. their own.usurpations and innovations might have been con- 
‘derimed.®8 Still, the times were mot unfruitful, either in scholars or 
statesmen, to whom'the ways and monuments of antiquity were dear, 
and'the space from the vise of the Ts'im dymasty to Confucius was 
not very great. It only amounted to 258 years. Between these 
two periods Mencius stawds as a connective link. Born probably 
in the year B.¢..371, he reached, by the interventionof K‘ung Keih,. 
back to the sage himself, amd as his death happened n.e. 288,- 
we are ‘brought down to within nearly lialf:a century of the Ts in 
dynasty. From all these considerations we may proceed with confi- 
deuce to consider each separate Work, believing that we have in 
these Classics and Books what, tlie great sage of China and his dis- 
eiples gave to their country more than 2,000 years ago.

38, See Meneius, V. Pt. II. iis '2.

anann rr s P Ps ter e Lanne

11]38, See Meneius, V. Pt. II. iis '2.

anann rr s P Ps ter e Lanne

11]

PROLECOMENA.] THE CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. len. n.

CHAPTER II. 
OF THE CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

SECTION I.

FORMATION OF THE TEXT OF TIE ANALECTS BY TIE SCIIOLARS 
OF THE HAN DYNASTY.

1. When the work of collecting and editing 'the remains of the 
Classical Books was undertaken by the scholars of Han, there appear- 
ed two different copies of the Analects, one from Loo, the native State 
of Confucius, and the other from Ts‘e, the State adjoining. Between 
these there were considerable differences. "The former consisted of 
twenty Books or Chapters, the same as those into which the Classic 
is now divided. The latter contained two Books in addition, and in 
the twenty Dooks, which they had in common, the chapters and 
sentences were somewhat more numerous than in the Loo exemplar.

2. The names of several individuals are given, who devoted them- 
selves to the study of those two copies of the Classic. Among tlie 
patrons of the Loo copy are mentioned the names of Shing, the prince 
of Hea, grand-tutor of the heir-apparent, who died at the age of 90, 
and in the reign of the emperor Seuen (B. C. 72—48) ;! Seaou Wang- 
che? a general officer, who died in the reign of the emperor Yuen, 
(B. C. 47-32); Wei Heen, who was premier of the empire froin z. c. 
70-66; and his son Heuen-shing. As patrons of the Ts‘e, copy, we 
have Wang K‘ing, who was a censor in the year n. c. 99 ;* Yung 
Shang, and Wang Keih,® a statesman who died in the beginning of 
the reign of the emperor Yuen.

3. But a third copy of the Analects was discovered about B. o. 
150. One of the sous of the emperor King was appointed king of 
Loo,“ in the year n.c. 153, and some time after, wishing to enlarge 
his palace, he proceeded to pull down the house of the K‘ung family, 
known as that where Confucius himself had lived. While doing so,

N. AE eG. N A SP EE m . . . . 
FE EGER OEE. R dou Ci K Bh or gp.

i2]N. AE eG. N A SP EE m . . . . 
FE EGER OEE. R dou Ci K Bh or gp.

i2]

ar. 1.] FORMATION OF THE TEXT. [PROLEGOMENA,

there were found in the wall copies of the Shoo-king, the Ch'un 
Ts‘ew, the IIenou-king, and the Lun Yu or Analects, which had 
been deposited there, when the edict for the burning of the Books 
was issued. They were all written, however, in the most ancient 
form of the Chinese character,’ which had fallen into disuse, and 
the king returned them to the K‘ung family, the head of which, 
K‘ung Gan-kwi,® gave himself to the study of them, and finally, in 
obedience to an imperial order, published a Work called “The Lun 
Yu, with Explanations of the Characters, and Exhibition of the 
Meaning.“

4. The recovery of this copy will be seen to be a most import- 
aut circumstance in the history of the text of the Analects. It is 
referred to by Chinese writers, as “The old Lun Yu.” Jn the 
historical narrative which we have of the affair, a circumstance is 
added which nay appear to some minds to throw suspicion on the 
whole account. The king was finally arrested, we are told, in his 
purpose to destroy the house, by hearing the sounds of bells, musical 
stones, lutes, and harpsichords, as he was ascending the steps that led 
to the ancestral hall or temple. This incident was contrived, we 
may suppose, by the K‘ung family, to preserve the house, or it may 
have been devised by the historian to glorify the sage, but we may 
not, on account of it, discredit the finding of the ancient copies of 
the Books. We have K‘ung Gan-kwó's own account of their being 
committed to him, and of the ways which he took to decipher them. 
The work upon the Analects, mentioned above, lias not indeed come 
down to us, but his labours on the Shoo-king still remain.5. It has been already stated, that the Lun Yu of Ts‘e contained 
two Books more than that of Loo. In this respect, the old Lun 
Yu agreed with the Loo exemplar. Those two books were wanting 
it in as well. The last book of the Loo Lun was divided in it, 
however, into two, the chapter beginning, Yaou said,” forming a 
whole Book by itself, and the remaining two chapters formed ano- 
ther Book beginning ''Tsze-chang." With this trifling difference, 
the old and the Loo copies appear to have agreed together.

8 T Y Fit. ‘tadpole characters,’ They were, it is said, the original forms. 
devised by Ts‘ang-Kés, with large heads and fine tails, like the creature from which they were 
named. Sce the notes to the preface to the Shoo-king in The thirteen Classics’ 9 yL 2t 
ls. 10 Ei E Hill fi. See the Preface to the Lun Yu in ‘The thirteen King? It has been 
my principal authority in this Section.

13]

PROLEGOMENA, ] ; TIIE CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. len. u.

6. Chang Yu, prince of Gan-ch'ang, who died B. c. 4, after having 
sustained several of the highest offices of the empire, instituted a 
comparison between the exemplars of Loo and Ts‘e, with a view to 
determine the true text. The result of his labours appeared in 
twenty-one Books, which are mentioned in Lew Hin's catalogue. 
They were known as the Lun of the prince Chang,!? and commanded 
general approbation. To Chang Yu is commonly ascribed the eject- 
ing from the Classic the two additional books which the Ts‘e exem- 
plar contained, but Ma Twan-lin prefers to rest that circumstance 
on the authority of the old Lun, which we have seen was without 
them.!? If we had the two Books, we might find sufficient reason froin 
their contents to discredit them. That may have been sufficient 
for Chang Yu to condemn them as he did, but we can hardly 
suppose that he did not have before him the old Lun, which had 
come to light about a century before he published his Work.7. In the course of the second century, a new edition of the 
Analects, with a commentary, was published by one of the greatest 
scholars which China has ever produced, Ch‘ing Heuen, known also 
as Ching K'angshifig.A He died in the reign of the emperor Heen 
. (A.D, 190-220) at the age of 74, and the amount of his labours on 
the ancient classical literature is almost incredible. While he 
adopted the Loo Lun as the received text of his time, he compared 
it minutely with those of Ts'e and the old exemplar. In the last 
section of this chapter will be found a list of the readings in his 
commentary different from those which are now acknowledged, in 
deference to the authority of Choo He, of the Sung dynasty. They 
are not many, and their importance is but trifling.

8. On the whole, the above statements will satisfy the reader of 
the care with which the text of the Lun Yu was fixed during the 
dynasty of Han.

SECTION II.

AT WHAT TIME, AND BY WHOM, THE ANALECTS WERE WRITTEN ; 
TIIEIR PLAN ; AND AUTILENTICITY.

1 At the commencement of the notes upon the first Book, under 
the heading—“ The Title of the Work,” I have given the received 
11 LE 5 Fe IR Hn. 12 Ds fs Bn 13 pl ifi . Bk. olxxxiv. P. 3. 
16h E. F. e N. 1. T l ß. 
14]

-SECT. L] BY WHOM WRITTEN. [PROLEcoMENA,

account of its authorship, taken from the “ IIistory of Literature” 
of the western Ilan dynasty. According to that, the Analects were 
compiled by the disciples of Confucius, coming together after his 
death, and digesting the memorials of his discourses and conversa- 
tions which they had severally preserved. But this cannot be true. 
We may believe, indeed, that many of the disciples put on record 
conversations which they had had with their master, and notes about 
his manners aud incidents of his life, aud that these have been 
incorporated with the Work which we have, but that Work must 
have taken its present form at a period somewhat later.In Book VIII., chapters iii. and iv., we have some notices of the 
last days of Tsäng Sin, and are told that he was visited on his death- 
bed by the officer Ming King. Now King was the posthumous 
title of Chung-sun Tse, and we find him alive, (Le Ke, II. Pt. II. ii. 
2) atter the death of duke To of Loo,? which took place B. . 490, about 
fifty years after the death of Confucius.

Again, Book XIX. is all occupied with the sayings of the disciples. 
Donfucius personally does not appear in it. Parts of it, as chapters 
iii., xii, and xviii, carry us down to a time when the disciples had 
schools and followers of their own, and were accustomed to sustain 
their teachings by referring to the lessons which they had heard 
from the sage.

Thirdly, there is the second chapter of Book XL, the second 
paragraph of which is evidently a note by the compilers of the 
Work, enumerating ten of the principal disciples, and classifying 
them according to their distinguishing characteristics. We can 
hardly suppose it to have been written while any of the ten were 
alive. But there is among them the name, of Tsze-hea, who lived 
to the age of about a hundred. We find him, B. 0. 406, three quar- 
ters of a century after the death of Confucius, at the court of Wei, 
to the prince of which he is reported to have presented some of the 
Classical Books.”

2. We cannot therefore accept the above account of the origin of 
the Analects,—that they were compiled by the cisciples of Confucius. 
Much more likely is the view that we owe the work to their disci- 
ples. In the note on I. ii. 1, a peculiarity is pointed out in the

1 See Choo He's commentary, in loe ihe 5 J. 10 10 X X ^b Tf je o EE. 2 
Ti 2. 3 F Bi f E > A p ose the PE AAR M Ze Bk. i. p. 77.

15]

PROLEGOMENA.] THE CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. fcu. 15,1 See Choo He's commentary, in loe ihe 5 J. 10 10 X X ^b Tf je o EE. 2 
Ti 2. 3 F Bi f E > A p ose the PE AAR M Ze Bk. i. p. 77.

15]

PROLEGOMENA.] THE CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. fcu. 15,

use of the surnames of Yew Jö and Tsang Sin, which has made 
some Chinese critics attribute the compilation to their followers. 
But this conclusion does not stand investigation. Others a 
assigned different portions to different schools. Thus, Book V. 
given to the disciples of Tsze-kung; Book XI, to those of Min Tae. 
k cen; Book XIV, to Yuen it NE aud Book XVI has been suppos- 
ed to be interpolated from the Analects of Ts'e. : Even if we were 
to acquiesce in these decisions, we should have accounted only for 
a small part of the Work. It is better to rest in the general con- 
clusion, that it was compiled by the disciples of the disciples of the 
sage, making free use of the written. memorials concerning him 
which they had received, and the oral statements which they had 
heard, from their several masters. And we shall not be far wrong, 
if we determine its date as about the end of the fourth, or the begiu- 
ning of the fifth century before Christ.3. In the critical work on the Four Books, called ** Record of Re- 
marks in the village of Lung,“ it is observed, The Analects, in my 
opinion, were made by the disciples, just like this record of remarks. 
There they were recorded, and afterwards came a first-rate hand, 
who gave them the beautiful literary finish which we now witness, so 
that there is not a character which does not have its own indispens- 
able place.“ We have seen that the first of these statements contains 
only a small amount of truth with regard to the materials of the 
Analects, nor can we receive the second. If onc hand or one mind 
had digested the materials provided by many, the arrangement and 
style of the work would have been different. We should not have 
had the same remark appearing in several Books, with little variation, 
aud sometimes with none at all. Nor can we account on this sup- 
position for such fragments as the last chapters of the 9th, 10th, 
and 16th Books, and many others. No definite plan has been kept 
in view throughout. <A degree of unity appears to belong to some 
Books more than others, and in general to the first ten more than 
to those which follow, but there is no progress of thought or 
illustration of subject from Book to Book. And even in those where

4 Ta NER BH E — YN $i, ‘the village of Yung,’ ie, I concoive, the writer's nom de plume,

s ii pit AU E PA ts F. An i Sk — Ie GL EI BE HB RK T — 
ka S SR X M. i S SE Sb MC 
16]

Spor. 11.] THEIR AUTHENTICITY. (PROLEGOMENA.

the chapters have a common subject, they are thrown together at 
'andom more than on any plan.Spor. 11.] THEIR AUTHENTICITY. (PROLEGOMENA.

the chapters have a common subject, they are thrown together at 
'andom more than on any plan.

4. When the Work was first called the Lun Yu, we cannot tell.6 
The evidence in the preceding section is suflicient to prove that 
when the Han scholars were engaged in collecting the ancient 
Books, it came before them, not in broken tablets, but complete, 
and arranged in Books or Sections, as we now have it. The old 
Lun was found deposited in the wall of the house which Confucius 
had occupied, and must have been placed there not later than B. 0. 
211, distant from the date which I have assigned to the compilation, 
not much more than a century and a half. That copy, written in 
the most ancient characters, was, possibly, the autograph of the

compilers. 
We have the Writings, or portions of the Writings, of several

authors of the third and fourth centuries before Christ. Of these, in 
addition to “The Great Learning,” “The Doctrine of the Mean,” and 
“The Works of Mencius,” I have looked over the Works of Seun 
King? of the orthodox school, of the philosophers Chwang and Léé 
of the Taouist sehool,* and of the heresiarch Mih.9In The Great Learning, Commentary, chapter iv., we have the 
words of Ana. XII. xii. In The Doctrine of the Mean, ch. iii, 
we have Ana. VL xxvii; and in ch. xxviii. 5, we have Ana. III. 
xxiv. In Mencius, II. Pt. I. ii. 19, we have Ana, VII. xxxiii, and 
in vii. 2, Ana. IV. i; in III. Pt. I. iv. 11, Ana. VIII. xviii, xix; in 
IV. Pt. I. xiv. 1, Ana. XI. xvi. 2; V. Pt. II. vii. 9, Aua. X. xiii. 4.; 
aud in VII. Pt. II. xxxvii. 1, 2, 8, Ana. V. xxi, XIII. xxi., and XVII. 
xiii. These quotations, however, are introduced by The Master said,” 
or “Confucius said," no mention being made of any book called 
“The Lun Yu,” or Analects. In The Great Learning, Commentary, 
x, 15, we have the words of Ana. IV. iii., aud in Mencius, III. Pt. II. 
vii. 3, those of Ana. XVII. i, but without any notice of quotation.

6 In the continuation of the “General Examination of Records and Scholars, s 1 5 a 5 ef im

+ ) Bk, cxcviii. p. 17, it is said, indeed, on the authority of Wang Ch'ung GE p a due 
of the ist century, that when the Work came out of the wall it was named a Chuen or Record

CED, and that it was when Kung Gan-kwó instructed a native of Tsin, named Foo-k‘ing, iu it,

that it first got the name of Lun Yu: —4 um T 14 EE E: i3 3L BE e B A Fy ti. 
3L Je Ei] a ry EI 2394 i N it jl. 110 Ei ET EL. If it wore so; it is (ES

the cireumstuuge is not mentioned in II Ans preface. : Aj Ji. 8 HE Y^ Fi . 
o FP

17]

PROLEGOMENA.] THE CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. feu. u.

In the Writings of Seun K'ing, Dook I. page 2, we find the words 
of Ana. XV. xxx; p. 6, those of XIV. xxv. In Book VIII. p. 13. 
we have the words of Ana. II. xvii. But in these three instances 
there is no mark of quotation.In the Writings of Chwang, I have noted only one passage where 
the words of the Analects are reproduced. Ana. XVIII. v. is found, 
but with,large additions, and no reference of quotation, in his treatise 
on “The state of Men in the world, Intermediate, 10 placed, that is, 
between Heaven and Earth. In all those Works, as well as in those of 
Les and Mih, the references to Confucius aud his disciples, and to 
many circumstances of his life, are numerous. The quotations of 
sayings of his not found in the Analeets are likewise many, especially in 
the Doctrine of the Mean, in Mencius, and in the works of Chwang. 
Those in the latter are mostly burlesyues, but those by the orthodox 
writers have more or less of classical authority. Some of them may be 
found in the Kea Yu,” or“ Family Sayings,” and in parts of the Le Ke, 
while others are only known to us by their occurrence in these Writ- 
ings. Altogether, they do not supply the evidence, for which I am 
in quest, of the existence of the Analects as a distinct Work, bearing 
the name of the Lun Yu, prior to the Tsin dynasty. They leave 
the presumption, however, in favour of -those conclusions, which 
arises fromthe facts stated in the first section, undisturbed. They 
confirm it rather. They show that there was abundance of materi- 
als at hand to the scholars of Han, to compile a much larger Work 
with the same title, if they had felt it their duty to do the business 
of compilation, aud not that of editing.

SECTION IIT. , 
OF COMMENTARIES UPON THE ANALECTS.

1. It would be a vast and unprofitable labour to attempt to give 
a list of the Commentaries which have been published on this Work. 
My object is merely to point out how zealously the business of inter- 
pretation was undertaken, as soon as the text had been recovered 
by the scholars of the Han dynasty, and with what industry it has 
been persevered in down to the present time.10 A pg iit. 11 In Mih's chapter against the Literati, he mentions some of the charac-

Dl 
i

teristics of Confucius, in the very words of the 10th Book of the Analects, 12 2k

1s]

ER. 
un

Sher. 171.] COMMENTARIES, [pronecomnna

Mention has been made, in Section I. 6, of the Lun of prince 
Chang, published in the half century before our era. Paon Teen! : 
distinguished scholar and officer, of the reign of Kwang-woo,? the first 
emperor of the Eastern Han dynasty, A. D. 25-57, and another scholar 
of the surname Chow,? less known but of the same time, published 
Works, containing arrangements of this into chapters and sentences, 
with explanatory notes. The critical work of Kung Gan-kwö on the 
old Lun Yu has licen referred to. That was lost in consequence of 
suspicions under which Gan-kwó fell towards the close of the reign 
of the emperor Woo, but in the time of the emperor Shun, a.n. 126- 
144, another scholar, Ma Lung,“ undertook the exposition of the 
characters in the old Lun, giving at the sume time his views of the 
general meaning. The labours of Ch‘ing leuen in the second 
century have been mentioned. Not long after his death, there ensued 
a period of anarchy, when the empire was divided into three govern- 
ments, well known from the celebrated historical romance, called 
“The Three States.“ ‘The strongest of them, the House of Wei, pa-

. tronized literature, and three of its high officers and scholars, Ch'in 
K*eun, Wang Suh, and Chow Shaug-lié? in the first half, and pro- 
bably the second quarter, of the third century, all gave to the 
world their notes on the Analects.

Very shortly after, five of the chief ministers of the Government of 
Wei, Sun Y ung, Chang Ch*ung, Tsaou He, Seun Ke, and Ho An,

united in ihe prüdiequn of one great Work, eutitled, *A Collection ofunited in ihe prüdiequn of one great Work, eutitled, *A Collection of

Explanations of the Lun Lu.“ It embodied the labours of all the 
«writers which have been mentioned, and having been frequently 
reprinted by succeeding dynasties, it still remains. The preface of 
the five compilers, in the form of à memorial to the emperor, so 
called, of the House of Wei, is published with it, and has been of 
much assistance to me in writing these sections. Ifo An was the

lender among them, aud the work is commonly quoted as if it were

the production of him alone.

14 guy. 3C 3C f N. i ar H. B AX . Iz 5 
Bi << RRR: ^ up DC AE . . E S % eJ E Y. 6E 
"PLATES IT. pea ph: Hk 60 ma DET 
Hi, Zt SI a Be | U oot fE HP Gp ap Ve M dy ib ob bil PU De 
FT Z. 7 i Bn a fiic

19]

PROLEGOMENA.] TUE CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. fen 11.

à

3. From Ho An downwards, there has hardly been a dynasty 
which has not contributed its labourers to the illustration of the 
Analects. In the Leang, which occupied the throne a good part of 
the sixth century; there appeared the“ Comments of Wang Kan, “s 
who to the seven authorities cited by Ho An added other thirteen, 
being scholars who had deserved well of the Classic during the 
intermediate time. Passing over other dynasties, we come to the 
Sung, A.D. 960-1279. An edition of the Classics was published by 
imperial authority, about the begiuning of the 11th century, with 
the' title of “ The correct Meaning ” The principal scholar engaged 
in the undertaking was Hing Pang. The portion of it on the

' Analects!? is commonly e in "amp he Thirteen Classics," after' Analects!? is commonly e in "amp he Thirteen Classics," after

Ho An's explanations. But the names of the Sung dynasty are all 
thrown into the shade by that of Choo He, than whom China has not 
produced a greater scholar. He composed, in the 12th century, 
three Works on the Analects:—the first called “Collected Mean- 
ings, Ii the second, “Collected Comments; iz and the third, Que- 
ries"3 Nothing could exceed the grace and clearness of his style, 
and the influence which he has exerted on the literature of China 
has been almost despotic.

The scholars of the present dynasty, however, scem inclined to 
question the correctness of his views and interpretations of the 
Classics, and the chief place among them is due to Maou K'e- 
ling,!* known by the nom de plume of Se-ho.? Ilis writings, under 
the name of “The collected Works of Se-ho,”!6 have been published 
in 80 volumes, containing between three and four hundred books or, 
sections. He has nine treatises on The Four Books, or parts of 
them, and deserves to take rank with Ch‘ing Heuen and Choo Ile 
at the head of Chinese scholars, though he is a vehement opponent 
of the latter. Most of his writings are to be found also in the great 
Work called “A collection of Works on the Classics, under tlie 
Imperial dynasty of Ts‘ing,”!7 which contains 1,400 sections, and is 
a noble contribution by the present rulers of China to the illustra- 
tion of its ancient literature,

«x rs UL ER t mm) E 2 ites m il nn JE . ^ LETS Af: . 1? Bp 
Bu Ae ü at 8 B nd E Th]. 1 L ow BS 10 16 püj jay 
v B S 4 fif

20

sect, iv.] VARIOUS READINGS. [PROLEGOMENA,

SECTION IV. 
OF VARIOUS READINGS.

In “The Collection of Supplementary Observations on The Four

Books, i the second chapter contains a general view of commentaries 
on the Analects, and from it I extract the following list of various

réadings of the text. found in the comments of Ch'ing Heuen, and’

referred to in the first section of this chapter.réadings of the text. found in the comments of Ch'ing Heuen, and’

referred to in the first section of this chapter.

; viii, 112 for e; xix, TE tor gut fig . „ ＋ fit iy Ha,

. Book II. i., Bt for $E; 
1,51 A, he makes a

without th, for + IH- “ay An 45. Book III. vii., in the clause 77% 
for it: Book IV. x., iB for NM. and p for . Book V.

Tull Stop ut th; xxi. 1, 
xxi, he sper a full stop at =. Book VI. vii, he has not the characters LAS . Book VII.

1. 8 for A xxxiv., d, Pe E for FRI: Book IX. ix., f for A Book XI. 
xxv. 7, (5E for Bie Bs and f for f Ri Book XIII. iii, 3, F 22 for .; xviii, 1, H or Ha. 
T K ff In 25 So N B E f

Book XIV. xxxi., 2^ for "e xxxiy. 1, fif 
T B. Book xV. l 2, % for iB. Book XVI, I. 13, 45 for ff. Book XVII. , H for

E ; xxiv, 2, Xx for 22 Book XVIII. iv. „54 for ER viii, 1, 1K for &. 
These various readings are exceedingly few, and in themselves

insignificant. The AE who wishes to pursue this subject at

length, is provided with the means in the Work of Teih (? Chih) 
It forms sections 449-473

Kenow-show,! expressly devoted to it. 
of the Works onm the Classics, mentioned at the close of the last

section.

e N A? K e N

21]

PROLEGOMENA J TUE GREAT LEARNING. [cn nr.

CHAPTER III.

OF THE GREAT LEARNING.

SECTION I.

HISTORY OF THE TEXT, AND THE DIFFERENT ARRANGEMENTS OF IT 
WHICH HAVE BEEN PROPOSED.

1. It has already been mentioned that * The Great Learning" forins 
one of the Chapters of the Le Ke, or ** Record of Rites,” the forma- 
tion of the text of which will be treated of in its proper place. I 
will only say here, that the Book, or Books, of Rites had suffered 
much more, after the death of Confucius, than the other ancient 
Classics which had been collected and digested by him. They were 
in a more dilapidated condition at the time of the revival of the, 
ancient literature under the Han dynasty, and were then published 
in three collections, only one of which—the Record of Rites—retains 
its place among the King.The Record of Rites consists, according to the current arrange- 
ment, of 49 Chapters or Books. Lew Heang (see ch. I. sect. If. 2.) 
took the lead in its formation, and was followed by the two famous 
scholars, Tae Tih,! and his relative, Tae Shing.2 The first of these 
reduced upwards of 200 chapters, collected by Heang, to 89, and 
Shing reduced these again to 46. The three other Dooks were 
added in the second century of our era, The Great Learning being 
one of them, by Ma Yung, mentioned in the last chapter, section III. 
2. Since his time, the Work has not received any further additions. ,

2. In his note appended to what he calls the chapter of ** Classical 
Text," Choo Ie says that the tablets of the “old copies" of the rest 
of The Great Learning were considerably out of order. Dy those old 
copies, he intends the Work of Ch‘ing ITeuen, who published his com- 
mentary on the Classic, soon after it was completed by the additions 
of Ma Yung; and it is possible that the. tablets were in confusion,

and had not been arranged with sufficient care; but such a thing 
‘

1 . fii. 2 zv m . Shing was the sou of a cousin of Tih's. 
27] :

SECT I.] HISTORY OF TIE TEXT. [PROLEGOMEN A. 
does not appear to have been suspected until the 12th century, nor 
can any authority from ancient monuments be adduced in its supe. 
port.SECT I.] HISTORY OF TIE TEXT. [PROLEGOMEN A. 
does not appear to have been suspected until the 12th century, nor 
can any authority from ancient monuments be adduced in its supe. 
port.

I have related how the ancient Classics were cut on slabs of stone 
by imperial order, A.D. 175, the text being that which the various 
literati had determined, and which had been adopted by Ching 
Meuen. The same work was performed about seventy years later, 
under the so-called dynasty of Wei, between the years 240 and 248, 
aud the two sets of slabs were set up together. The only difference 
between them was, that whereas the Classics had been cut in the 
first instance in three different forms, called, the Seal character, the 
Pattern style, and the Imperfect form, there was substituted for the 
latter in the slabs of Wei the oldest form of the characters, similar 
to that which has been deseribed in connection with the discovery 
of the old Lun Yu in the wall of Confucius house. Amid the 
changes of dynasties, the slabs both of Han and Wei had perished, 
before the rise of the T'ang dynasty, A.D. 624; but under one of its 
emperors, in the year 836, a copy of the Classics was again cut on 
stone, though only in one form of the character. These slabs we 
can trace down through the Sung dynasty, when,they were known 
as the tablets of Shen.3 They were in exact conformity with the text 
of the Classics adopted by Ch‘ing Heuen in his commentaries.The Sung dynasty did not accomplish a similar work itself, nor has 
any one of the three which have followed it thought it necessary 
to engrave in stone in this way the ancient Classics, About the 
middle of the 16th century, however, the literary world in China 
was startled by a report that the slabs of Wei which contained 
The Great Learning had been discovered. But this was nothing 
more than the result of an impudent attempt at an imposition, 
for which it is difficult to a foreigner to assign any adequate cause. 
The treatise, as printed froin these slabs, has some trifling additions, 
and many alterations in the order of the text, but differing from the 
arrangements proposed by Choo He, and by other scholars. There 
seems to be now no difference of opinion among Chinese critics that 
the whole affair was a forgery. The text of The Great Learning, as 
it appears in the Book of Rites with the commentary of Ch‘ing

s pA ug

PROLEGOMENA] THE GREAT LEARNING. len. in.

Heuen, and was thrice engraved on stone, in three different dynasties, 
is, no doubt, that which was edited in the Han dynasty by Ma Yung.s pA ug

PROLEGOMENA] THE GREAT LEARNING. len. in.

Heuen, and was thrice engraved on stone, in three different dynasties, 
is, no doubt, that which was edited in the Han dynasty by Ma Yung.

3. l have said, that it is'possible that the tablets containing the 
text were not arranged with sufficient care by him, and indeed, any 
one wlio studies the treatise attentively, will probably come to the 
conclusion that the part of it forming the first six chapters of com- 
mentary in the present Work is but a fragment. It would not bea 
difficult task to propose an ‘arrangement of the text different from 
any which J have yet seen; but such an undertaking would not 
be interesting out of China. My object here is simply to mention 
the Chinese scholars who have rendered themselves famous or no- 
torious in their own country, by what they have done in this way. 
The first was Ch‘ing Haou, a native of Loh-yang in IIo-nan province, 
in the 11th century.“ His designation was Pih-shun, but since his 
death he has been known chiefly by the style of Ming.taou,5 which 
we may render the Wise-in-doctrine. The eulogies heaped on him 
by Choo He and others are extravagant, and he: is placed m 
ately after Mencius in the list of great scholars. Doubtless he w 
a man of vast literary acquirements. The greatest change which 
introduced into The Great Learning, was to read sin? for ts'in,? at 
the commencement, making the second object proposed in the trea- 
tise to be the renovation of the people, instead of loving them. This 
alteration and his various transpositions of the text are found in 
Maou Se-ho's treatise on “ The attested text of The Great Learning.“Hardly less illustrious than Ch'ing Haou was his younger brother 
Chüng E, known by the style of Ching-shuh,? and since his death 
by that of E-ch*uen.!? He followed Haou in the adoption of the read- 
ing “to renovate,” instead of “to love.” But he transposed the text 
differently, more akin to the arrangement afterwards made by Choo 
He, suggesting also that there were some superfluous sentences in the 
oll text which might conveniently be erased. The Work, as pro- 
posed to be read by him, will be found in the volume of Maou just 
referred to.

We come to the name of Choo He who entered into the labours of 
the brothers Ch'ing, the younger of whom he styles his Master, in 
his introductory note to The Great Learning. His arrangement of

S ER RU IRURE UAE EOS 
fh i K. . T i P 1E BL WY id As. TS Boum

24]

SECT. 1] HISTORY OF THE TEXT. [fRoLEGOMENA.S ER RU IRURE UAE EOS 
fh i K. . T i P 1E BL WY id As. TS Boum

24]

SECT. 1] HISTORY OF THE TEXT. [fRoLEGOMENA.

the text is that now current in all the editions of the Four Books, 
and it had nearly displaced the ancient text altogether. "The sanc- 
tion of Imperial approval was given to it during the Yuen and Ming 
dynasties. In the editions of the five king published by them, only 
the names of The Doctrine of the Mean and The Great Learning 
were preserved. No text of these Books was given, and Se-ho tells 
us that iu the reign of Kea-tsing," the most flourishing period of the 
Ming dynasty (a.p. 1522-1566), when Wang Win-shing,!? published 
a copy of The Great Learning, taken from the T'ang edition of the 
Thirteen King, all the officers and scholars looked at one another in 
astonishment, and were inclined to suppose that the Work was a 
forgery. Besides adopting the reading of sin for ts‘tn from the 
Ch‘ing, and modifying their arrangements of the text, Choo He 
made other innovations. He first divided the whole into one chap- 
ter of Classical text, which lie assigned to Confucius, and ten chapters 
of Commentary, which he assigned to the disciple Tsing. . Previous 
to him, the whole had been published, indeed, without any specifi- 
cation of chapters and paragraphs. He undertook, moreover, to 
supply.one whole chapter, which he supposed, after his master 
Ch'ing, to be missing.

Since the time of Choo He, many scholars have exercised their 
wit on The Great Learning. The Work of Maou Se-ho contains four 
arrangements of the text, proposed respectively by the scholars Wang 
Loo-chae,! Ke Plang-san, 11 Kaou King-yih,? and Ko Hoo-chen.'® 
The curious student may examine them there.Under the present. dynasty, the tendency has been to depreciate 
the labours of Choo He. The integrity of the text of Ch'ing 
Heuen is zealously maintained, and the simpler method of interpreta- 
tion employed by him is advocated in preference to the more refined 
and ingenious schemes of the Sung scholars. I have referred several 
times in the notes to a Work published a few years ago, under the 
title of “The Old Text of the sacred King, with Commentary and 
Discussions, by Lo Chung-fan of Nan-hae.”!7 I knew the man seven- 
teen years ago. He was a fine scholar, and had taken the second 
degree, or that of Keu-jin. IIe applied to me in 1843 for Christian 
baptism, and offended by my hesitancy went and enrolled himself

n by. 12 E X M. sce. ou Il. 15 Ep Ei 
CIIEFICEXTIILPIT2 =

25]

PROLEGOMENA.] TIIE GREAT LEARNING. Lell. 111.

among the disciples of another Missionary. IIe soon, however, 
withdrew into seclusion, and spent tlie last years of his lite in literary 
studies. His family have published the work on The Great Learning, 
and one or two others. He most vehemently impugns nearly every 
judgment of Choo He, but in his own exhibitions of the meaning he 
blends many ideas of the Supreme Being and of the condition of 
human nature, which he had learned from the Christian Scriptures.

SECTION II.

OF THE AUTIIORSHIP, AND DISTINCTION OF THE TEXT INTO CLASSICAL 
TEXT AND COMMENTARY.SECTION II.

OF THE AUTIIORSHIP, AND DISTINCTION OF THE TEXT INTO CLASSICAL 
TEXT AND COMMENTARY.

1. The authorship of The Great Learning is a very doubtful point, 
and one on which it does not appear possible to come to a decided 
conclusion. Choo He, as I have stated in the last section, deter- 
mined that so much of it was king, or Classic, being the very words 
of Confucius, and that all the rest was chuen, or Commentary, being 
the views of Tsing Sin upon the sage's words, recorded by his dis- 
ciples. Thus, he does not expressly attribute the composition of 
the Treatise to Tsing, as he is generally supposed to do. What he 
says, however, as it is destitute of external support, is contrary also 
to the internal evidence. The 4th chapter of commentary com- 
mences with “The Master said.” Surely, if there were anything 
more, directly from Confucius, there would be an intimation of it 
in the same way. Or, if we may allow that short sayings of Con- 
fucius might be interwoven with the Work, as in the 15th paragraph 
of the 10th chapter, without referring them expressly to him, it is 
too mucli to ask us to receive the long chapter at the beginning as 
being from him. With regard to the Work having come from the 
disciples of Tsang Sin, recording their master’s views, the paragraph 
in chapter 6th, commencing with ** The disciple Tsíug said,” seems to 
be conclusive against that hypothesis. So much we may be sure is 
Tsing's, and no more. Both of Choo He's judgments must be set 
aside. We cannot admit either the distinction of the contents into 
Classical text and Commentary, or that the Work was the produc- 
tion of T:ang’s disciples.

26]

SECT. m.) ITS SCOPE AND VALUE. (rrotEcounna.26]

SECT. m.) ITS SCOPE AND VALUE. (rrotEcounna.

2. Who then was the author? An ancient tradition attributes it 
to K‘ung Keith, the grandson of Confucius. In a notice published, 
at the time of their preparation, about the stone slabs of Wei, the 
following statement by Kea Kwei, a noted scholar of the Ist century 
is found: — When K. ung Keih was living, and in straits, in Sung, 
being afraid lest the lessons of the former sages should Devoe 
obscure, and the principles of the ancient emperors and kings fall 
to the ground, he therefore made The Great Learning as the warp 
of them, and The Doctrine of the Mean, asthe woof.”! This would 
seein, therefore, to have been the opinion of that early time, and I 
may say the only difficulty in admitting it is that no mention is 
made of it by Ching Henen. There certainly is that agreement be- 
tween the two treatises, which makes their common authorship not 
at all unlikely.

3. Though we cannot positively assign the authorship of The 
Great Keis there can be no hesitation in recciving it asa 
genuine monument of the Confucian school. There are not many 
words in it from the sage himself, but it is a faithful reflection of 
his teachings, written by some of his followers, not far removed 
froin lim by lapse of time. It must synchronize pretty nearly with 
the Analects, and may be safely referred to the fifth century before 
our era.

SECTION III.

ITS SCOPE AND VALUE.SECTION III.

ITS SCOPE AND VALUE.

1. The worth of The Great Learning has been celebrated in most 
extravagant terms by many Chinese writers, and there have been 
foreigners who have not yielded to them in their estimation of it. 
Pauthier, in the“ Argument Philosophique,” prefixed to his trans- 
lation of the Work, says: —“ It is evident that the aim of the Chinese 
philosopher is to exhibit the duties of political government as those 
of the perfecting of self, and of the practice of virtue by all men. 
IIe felt that he had a higher mission than that with which the 
greater part of ancient and modern philosophers have coutented

F FS iit Ap ET BR A t Xa Ze €T 2036 5] PRT Se

1 
Fl. 3L K $8 458 FA [VAR LAN HE ik 
ft Fc R ET) kE A Z Z l ee the N A f S d id, ;

27]

*

PROLEGOMENA.] THE GREAT LEARNING. on. m,

themselves ; and his immense love for the happiness of humanity, 
which dominated over all his other sentiments, has made of his 
philosophy a system of social perfectionating, which, we venture to 
say, has never been equalled."

Very different is the judgment passed upon the treatise by a 
writer in the Chinese Repository :—‘ The Tu Héd is a short politico- 
moral discourse. Ya Hé, or ‘Superior Learning, is at the same 
. time both the name and the subject of the discourse; it is the sem- 
mum bonum of the Chinese. In opening this Book, compiled by a 
disciple of Confucius, and containing his doctrines, we might expect 
to find a Work like Cicero's De Officiis ; bnt we find a very different 
production, consisting of a few commonplace rules for the main- 
tenance of a good government.”!

My readers will perhaps think, after reading the present section, 
that the truth lies between these two representations.My readers will perhaps think, after reading the present section, 
that the truth lies between these two representations.

2. I believe that the Book should be styled 7"ae Héd, and not 
Ta Héó, and that it was so named as setting forth the higher and 
more extensive principles of moral science, which come into use and 
manifestation in the conduct of government. When Choo He endea- 
vours to make the title mean—“ The principles of Learning, which 
were taught in the higher schools of antiquity,” and tells us how at 
the age of 15, all the sons of the emperor, with the legitimate sons of 
the nobles, and high officers, down to the more' promising scions of 
the common people, all entered these seminaries, and were taught the 
difficult lessons here inculcated, we pity the ancient youth of China. 
Such “strong meat" is not adapted for the nourishment of youthful 
minds, But the evidence adduced for the existence of such educa- 
tional institutions in ancient times is unsatisfactory, and from the 
older interpretation of the title we advance more easily to contem- 
plate the object.and method of the Work.

3. The object is stated definitely enough in the opening paragraph : 
— What The Great Learning teaches, is—to illustrate illustrious 
virtue; to love the people; and to rest in the highest excellence,” 
The political aim of the writer is here at once evident. He has be- 
fore him on one side, the people, the masses ot the empire, and over 
against them aro those whose work and duty, delegated by Heaven,

] Chinese Repository, vol. iii, p.98. 2 K El. not X £5. See the note on the title of 
the Work, p, 219.

28]

ener. ni.] ITS SCOPE AND VALUE. [PnoLEGoMENA.] Chinese Repository, vol. iii, p.98. 2 K El. not X £5. See the note on the title of 
the Work, p, 219.

28]

ener. ni.] ITS SCOPE AND VALUE. [PnoLEGoMENA.

is to govern them, culminating, as a class, in “the son of Heaven,”3 
“the one man,"* the emperor. From the 4th and 5th paragraphs, 
we see that if the lessons of the treatise be learned and carried into 
practice, the result will be that “illustrious virtue will be illustrated 
throughout the empire,” which will be brought, through all its 
length and breadth, to a condition of happy tranquillity. This 
object is certainly both grand and good; and if a reasonable and 
likely method to secure it were proposed in the Work, language 
would hardly supply terms adequate to express its value.

4. But the above account of the object of The Great Learning 
leads us to the conclusion that the student of it should be an 
emperor. What interest can an ordinary man have in it? It is 
high up in the clouds, far beyond his reach. This is a serious 
objection to it, and quite unfits it for a place in schools, such as 
Choo He contends it once had. Intelligent Chinese, whose minds 
were somewhat quickened by Christianity, have spoken to me of 
this defect, and complained of the difficulty they felt in making the 
book a practical directory for their conduct. “It is so vague and 
vast,” was the observation of one man. The writer, however, has 
made some provision for the general application. of his instructions. 
He tells us that, from the emperor down to the mass of the people, all 
must consider the cultivation of the person to be the root, that is, 
the first thing to be attended to.5 As in his method, moreover, he 
reaches from the cultivation of the person to the tranquillization of 
the Empire, through the intermediate steps of the regulation of 
the fainily, and the government of the State,9 there is room for set- 
ting forth principles that parents and rulers generally may find 
adapted for their guidance.5. The method which is laid down for the attainment of the 
great object proposed, consists of seven steps :—the investigation of 
things; the completion of knowledge; the sincerity of the thoughts; 
the rectifying of the heart; the cultivation of the person; the regu- 
lation of the family ; and the government of the State. These form 
the steps of a climax, the end of which is the empire tranquillized. 
Pauthier calls the paragraphs where they occur instances of the 
sorites, or abridged syllogism. But they belong to rhetoric, and not 
to logic.

3 XP Cl. Text, par. 6, 2. 4 — N, Comm. ix, g. 6 Cl. Text, par. 6, 6 Cl. Text, parr, 4, 5.

29]

PROLEGOMENA, ] THE GREAT LEARNING. on. in.

6. In offering some observations on these steps, and the writer's 
treatment of them, it will be well to separate them into those 
preceding the cultivation of the person, and those following it; and 
to deal with the latter first. Let us suppose that the cultivation of 
the person is all attained, every discordant mental element having 
been subdued and removed. It is assumed that the regulation of 
the family will necessarily flow from this. Two short paragraphs 
ave all that are given to the illustration of the point, and they are 
vague generalities on the subject of men's being led astray by their 
feelings and affections.The family being regulated, there will result from it the govern- 
ment of the State. First, the virtues taught in the family have their 
correspondencies in the wider sphere. Filial piety will appear as 
loyalty. Fraternal submission will be seen in respect and obedience 
to elders and superiors. Kindness is capable of universal application. 
Second, “From the loving example of one family, a whole State 
becomes loving, and from its courtesies the whole State becomes 
courteous.“7 Seven paragraphs suffice to illustrate these statements, 
and short as they are, the writer goes back to the topic of self- 
cultivation, returning from the family to the individual.

The State being governed, the whole empire will become peaceful 
and happy. There is even less of connection, however, in the treat- 
ment of this theme, between the premiss and the conclusion, than in 
the two previous chapters. Nothing is said about the relation between 
the whole empire, and its component States, or any one of them. 
It is said at once, * What is meant by ‘The making the whole em- 
pire peaceful and happy depends on the government of the State,’ 
is this.—When the sovercign behaves to his aged, as the aged should 
be behaved to, the people become filial; when the sovereign behaves 
to his elders, as elders should be behaved to, the people learn bro- 
therly submission; when the sovereign treats compassionatcly the 
young and helpless, the people do the same.”8 This is nothing but 
a repetition of the preceding chapter, instead of that chapter's being 
made a step from which to go on to the splendid consummation of 
the good government of tle whole empire.

The words which I have quoted are followed by a very striking 
euunciation of the golden rule in its negative form, and under the

7 See Comm, ix, 3. 8 See Coum, x, I.

30]

BECT, 111. : ITS SCOPE AND VALUE. [PROLEGOMENA,7 See Comm, ix, 3. 8 See Coum, x, I.

30]

BECT, 111. : ITS SCOPE AND VALUE. [PROLEGOMENA,

name of the measuring square, and all the lessons of the chapter are 
connected more or less closely with that. The application of this 
principle by a ruler, whose heart is in the first place in loving 
sympathy with the people, will guide him in all the exactions which 
he lays upon them, and in the selection of ministers, in such a way that 
he will secure the affections of his subjects, and his throne will be 
established, for “by gaining the people, the kingdom is gained, and, by 
losing the people, the kingdom islost."? There are in this part of the 
treatise many valuable sentiments, and counsels for all in authority 
over others. The objection to it is, that, as the last step of the 
climax, it does not rise upon all the others with the accumulated 
force of their conclusions, but introduces us to new principles of 
action, and a new line of argument. Cut off the commencement of 
the first paragraph which connects it with the preceding chapters, 
and it would form a brief but admirable treatise by itself on the 
art of government. lThis brief review of the writer's treatment of the concluding steps 
of his method will satisfy the reader that the execution is not equal 
to the design; and, moreover, underneath all the reasoning, and 
more especially apparent in the 8th and 9th chapters of commentary 
(according to the ordinary arrangement of the work), there lies the 
assumption that example is all but omnipotent. We find this prin- 
ciple pervading all the Confucian philosophy. And doubtless it is a 
truth, most important in education and government, that the influence 
of example is very great. I believe, and will insist upon it here-. 
after in these prolegomena, that we have come to overlook this 
clement in our conduct of administration. It will be well if the 
study of the Chinese Classics should call attention to it. Yet in 
them the subject is pushed to an extreme, and represented in an 
extravagant manner. Proceeding from the view of human nature 
that it is entirely good, and led astray only by influences from with- 
out, the sage of China and his followers attribute to personal exam- 
ple and to instruction a power which we do not find that they 
actually possess.

7. The steps which precede the cultivation of the person are 
more briefly dealt with thau those which we have just considered. 
“The cultivation of the person results from the rectifying the heart

9 Comm, x. 5.

31]

PROLEGOMENA.] THE GREAT LEARNING. Len. m,

or mind." True, but in The Great Learning very inadequately 
set. forth.9 Comm, x. 5.

31]

PROLEGOMENA.] THE GREAT LEARNING. Len. m,

or mind." True, but in The Great Learning very inadequately 
set. forth.

„The rectifying of the mind is realized when the thoughts are 
made sincere." And the thoughts are sincere, when no sclt-decep- 
tion is allowed, and we move without effort to what is right and wrong, 
“as we love what is beautiful, and as we hate a bad smell"? How 
are we to attain to this state? Here the Chinese moralist fails us., 
According to Choo He's arrangement of the Treatise, there is only 
one sentence from which we can frame a reply to the above question. 
“Therefore,” it is said, “the superior man must be watchful over 
himself when he is alone."!3 Following Choo's 6th chapter of com- 
mentary, and forming, we may say, part of it, we have in tlie old ar- 
rangement of The Great Learning all the passages which he has 
distributed so as to form the previous five chapters. But even from 
the examination of them, we do not obtain the information which 
we desire on this momentous inquiry.8. Indeed, the more I study the Work, the more satisfied I become, 
that from the conclusion of what is now called the chapter of 
Classical text to the sixth chapter of Commentary, we have only a 
few fragments, which it is of no use trying to arrange, so as fairly 
to exhibit the plan of the author. According to his method, the 
chapter on the connection between making the thoughts sincere and 
so rectifying the mental nature, should be preceded by one on the 
completion. of knowledge as the means of making the thoughts 
sincere, and that again by one on the completion of knowledge by 
the investigation of things, or whatever else the phrase kih wuk 
may mean. I am less concerned for the loss and injury which this 
part of the Work has suffered, because the subject of the connection 
between intelligence and virtue is very fully exhibited in The Doctrine 
of the Mean, and will come under my notice in the review of that 
Treatise. The manner in which Choo He has endeavoured to supply 
the blank about the perfecting of knowledge by the investigation of 
things is too extravagant. The Learning for Adults,” he says, “at 
the outset of its lessons, instructs the learner, in regard to all things 
in the: world, to proceed from what knowledge lie has of their prin- 
ciples, and pursue his investigation of them, till he reaches the 
extreine point. After exerting himself for a long time, he will

10 Comm. vii. 1. 11 Comm. Ch. vi. 12 Comm. vi. 1. 13 Comm, vi. 2.

32]

stcr. III.] ITS SCOPE AND VALUE. [PROLEGOMENA.10 Comm. vii. 1. 11 Comm. Ch. vi. 12 Comm. vi. 1. 13 Comm, vi. 2.

32]

stcr. III.] ITS SCOPE AND VALUE. [PROLEGOMENA.

suddenly find himself possessed of a wide and far-reaching penetra- 
tion. Then, the qualities of all things, whether external or internal, 
the subtle or the coarse, will be apprehended, and the mind, in its 
entire substance and its relations to things, will be perfectly intelli- 
gent. This is called the investigation of things. This is called the 
perfection of knowledge.” And knowledge must be thus perfected 
before we can achieve the sincerity of our thoughts, and the rectifying 
of our hearts! Verily this would be learning not for adults only, but 
even Metliuselahs would not be able to compass it. Yet for centuries 
this has been accepted as the orthodox exposition of the Classic. 
Lo Chung-fan does not express himself too strongly when he says 
that such language is altogether incoherent. The author would 
only be “imposing on himself and others.”

9. The orthodox doctrine of China concerning the connection 
between intelligence and virtue is most seriously erroneous, but I 
will not lay to the charge of the author of The Great Learning the 
wild representations of the commentator of the twelfth century, nor 
need I make here any remarks on what the doctrine really is. After 
the exhibition which I have given, my readers will probably conclude 
that the Work before us is far from developing, as Pauthier asserts, 
* a system of social perfectionating which has never been equalled.”

10. The Treatise has undoubtedly great merits, but they are not 
to be sought in the severity of its logical processes, or the large- 
minded prosecution of any course of thought. We shall find them 
in the announcement of certain seminal principles, which, if recog- 
nized in government and the regulation of conduct, would conduce 
greatly to the happiness and virtue of mankind. I will conclude 
these observations by specifying four such principles.First, The writer conceives nobly of the object of government, 
that it is to make its subjects happy and good. This may not be a 
sufficient account of tliat object, but it is much to have it so clearly 
laid down to “all kings and governors,” that they are to love the 
people, ruling not for their own gratification, but for the good of 
those over whom they are exalted by Heaven. Very important also is 
the statement that rulers have no divine right but what springs from 
the discharge of their duty. “The decree docs not always rest

14 Suppl. to Comm. Ch. v.

33]

PHOLEGOMENA.] THE GREAT LEARNING. fou, ur

on them.’ Goodness obtains it, and the want of goodness loses 
it

Second, The insisting on personal excellence in all who have authori- 
ty in the family, the State, and the empire, is a great moral and 
social principle. The influence of such personal excellence may be 
overstated, but by the requirement of its cultivation the writer de- 
served well of his country.

Third, Still more important than the requirement of such excel- 
lence, is the principle that it must be rooted in the state of the heart, 
and be the natural outgrowth of internal sincerity. “As a man 
thinketh in his heart, so is he.” This is the teaching alike of Solo- 
mon and the author of The Great Learning.Fourth, I mention last the striking exhibition which we have of 
the golden rule, though only in its negative form. What a man 
dislikes in his superiors, let him not display in the treatment of his | 
inferiors; what he dislikes in inferiors, let him not display in his 
service of his superiors; what he dislikes in those who are before 
him, let him not therewith precede those who are behind him; 
what he dislikes in those who are behind him, let him not therewith 
follow those who are before him; what he dislikes to receive on the 
right, let him not bestow on the left; what he dislikes to receive on 
the left, let him not bestow on the right :—this is what is called the 
principle with which, as with a measuring square, to regulate one’s 
conduct.”16

The Work which contains those principles cannot be thought 
meanly of. They are “commonplace,” as the writer in the Chinese 
Repository calls them, but they are at the same time eternal verities.

15 Comm. x. 11. 16 Comm. x. 2.

—— 3 — — P e

34

CH. iv.] THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN. [PRoLEcoMENa,

CHAPTER IV.

THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN.

SECTION I.

ITS PLACE IN THE LE KE, AND ITS PUBLICATION SEPARATELY.

"1. The Doctrine of the Mean was one of the treatises which came 
to light in connection with the labours of Lew Heang, and its place 
as the 31st Book in the Le Ke was finally determined by Ma Yung 
and Ch‘ing Heuen.2. But while it was thus made to form a part of the great collec- 
tion of Works on Ceremonies, it maintained a separate footing of its 
own. In Lew Hin’s catalogue of the Classical Works, we find “ Two 
p‘éen of Observations on the Chung Yung.”! In the Records of the 
dynasty of Suy (a.p. 589-617), in the chapter on the History of 
Literature? there are mentioned three Works on the Chung Yung; 
the first called “The Record of the Chung Yung,” in two keuen, 
attributed to Tae Yung, a scholar who flourished about the middle 
of the 5th century; the second, A Paraphrase and Commentary on 
the Chung Yung,” attributed to the emperor Woo (a.p. 502—549) 
of the Leang dynasty, i in one keuen, and the third, “A Private Re- 
cord, Determining the Meaning of the Chung Yung,” in five keuen, 
the author, or supposed author, of which is not mentioned.“

It thus appears, that the Chung Yung had been published and coni- 
inented on separately, long before the time of the Sung dynasty. 
The scholars of that, however, devoted special attention to it, tlie 
way being led by the famous Chow Léen-k‘e.t He was followed hy 
the two brothers Ch‘ing, but neither of them published upon it. At 
last came Choo He, who produced his Work called “The Chung

1 HB JE N — ? [E EP e =. b rS 
— p12. 4 ff F nt W fi — — . ug mp aS d NONE Beg WF 
in Sie — 18 3 st ur Be PEL "BH a 1 s WUT.

35]

PROLEGOMENA] THE DOCTRINE OF TIE MEAN. lou. wv.

Yung, in Chapters and Sentences,"5 which was made the text book 
of the Classic at the literary examinations, by the fourth Emperor 
of the Yuen dynasty (a.D. 1312-1320), and from that time the 
name merely of the Treatise was retained in editions of the Le Ke. 
Neither text nor ancient commentary was given.Under the present dynasty it is not so. In the superb edition 
of The Five Ang" edited by a numerous committee of scholars 
towards the end of K'ang He's reign, the Chung Yung is published 
in two parts, the ancient commentaries from “ The Thirteen King” 
being given side by side with those of Choo IIe.

SECTION II. 
ITS AUTHOR ; AND SOME ACCOUNT OF IITM.

1. The composition of the Chung Yung is attributed to K'ung 
Keih, the grandson of Confucius. Chinese inquirers and critics are 
agreed on this point, and apparently on sufficient grounds. There 
is indeed no internal evidence in the Work to lead us to such a con- 
clusion. Among the many quotations of Confucius’ words and refe- 
rences to him, we might have expected to find some indication that 
the sage was the grandfather of the author, but nothing of the kind 
is given. The external evidence, however, or that from the testi- 
mony of authorities, is very strong. In Sze-ma Ts‘cen’s IIistorical 
Records, published n.c. 103, it is expressly said that “ Tsze-sze made 
the Chung Yung." And we have a still stronger proof, a century 
earlier, from TSsze-sze's own descendant, K'ung loo, whose words: 
are, “Tsze-sze compiled the Chung Yung in 49 p'een,"? We may, 
therefore, accept the received account without hesitation.

2, As Keih, spoken of chiefly by his designation of Tsze-sze, thus 
occupies à distinguished place in the classical literature of China, it

5 Fh Hf N ij 
UJ. [Erb fe ne SB Bl. Dt BL FU x. 2 mie

Fovo ( 4+) was that descendant of Confucius, who hid several books in the wall of his house, 
on thei issuu of the imperial ediet for their barning. Ife wasa writer himself, and his Works ate

referred to under tho title of XL HE = I have not seen them, but the statement given

1 found in the yy ie ze Hi ÉR B ab art. rH IH. -I ike F Zo P AU. B 
"BA MT I ji LE

36]

BCT. 11. ACCOUNT OF THE AUTIHOR. (PROLRGOMENA,1 found in the yy ie ze Hi ÉR B ab art. rH IH. -I ike F Zo P AU. B 
"BA MT I ji LE

36]

BCT. 11. ACCOUNT OF THE AUTIHOR. (PROLRGOMENA,

may not be out of place to bring together here a few notices of him 
gathered from reliable sources.

He was the son of Le, whose death took place B.c. 482, four years 
before that of the sage, his father. I have not found it recorded in 
what year he was born. Sze-ma Ts'een says he died at the age of 
62. But this is evidently wrong, for we learn from Mencius that 
he was high in favour with the duke Muh of Loo,“ whose accession 
to that ERE: dates in B.C. 408, seventy years after the death 
of Confucius. In the * Plates and Notices of the Worthies, sacrificed 
to in the Sage's Temples,"* it is supposed that the 62 in the Historical 
Records should be 82.5 It is maintained by others that Tsze-sze's 
lite was protracted beyond 100 years.6 This variety of opinions 
simply shows that the point cannot be positively determined. To 
me it seems that the conjecture in the Sacrificial Canon must be 
pretty near the truth.?

During the years of his boyhood, then, Tsze-sze must have been 
with his grandfather, and received his instructions. It is related, 
that one day, when he was alone with the sage, and heard hinDuring the years of his boyhood, then, Tsze-sze must have been 
with his grandfather, and received his instructions. It is related, 
that one day, when he was alone with the sage, and heard hin

sighing, he went up to him, and, bowing twice, inquired the reasou 
of his grief. „Is it,” said he, “because you think that your descen- 
dants, through not cultivating themselves, will be unworthy of you?. 
Or is it that, in your admiration of the ways of Yaou and Shun, you 
are vexed that you fall short of them?” “ Child,” replied Confucius, 
“how is it that you know my thoughts?" “I have often,” said 
Tsze- sze, “ heard from you the lesson, that when the father has gather- 
ed and prepared the firewood, if the son cannot carry the bundle, he 
is to be pronounced degenerate and unworthy. The remark comes 
frequently into my thoughts, and fills me with great apprehensions.” 
The sage was delighted. He smiled and said, Now, indeed, shall

RBA «ER ups gm e] ss x NN E HN

2 i 82 aud 62 may more easily be confounded, as written in Chinese than with the Roman

figures. 6 Seo the yu az 4£ B on the preface to the Chung Yung, —ÁAF. A 25 DS AE.

7 Le himself was born in Confucius’ 21st year, and if ''sze-sze had been born in Les 21st year, he 
must have been 103 at the time of duke Muli’s accession. But the tradition is, that Tsze-sze was 
a pupil of Tsing Siu who was born s.c. 504. Wo must place his birth therefore considerably 
later, and suppose him to have been quite young when his father died. I was talking once about 
the question with a Chinese friend, who observed :—* Le was 50 when he died, and his wife married 
angnin into a family of Wei. We can hardly think, therefore, that she was any thing liko that 
age. Le could not have married so soon as his father did, Perhaps he was about 40 when Keih 
was born.”

37]

PROLEGOMENA.) THE DOCTRINE OF TIIE MEAN. Jon. rv.

I be without anxiety! My undertakings will not come to nought. 
They will be carried on and flourish."$37]

PROLEGOMENA.) THE DOCTRINE OF TIIE MEAN. Jon. rv.

I be without anxiety! My undertakings will not come to nought. 
They will be carried on and flourish."$

After the death of Confucius, Keih became a pupil, it is said, of the 
philosopher Tsing. But he received his instructions with discrimi- 
nation, and in one instance which is recorded in the Le Ke, the 
pupil suddenly took the place of the master. We there read:— 
“Tsing said to Tsze-sze, * Keih, when I was engaged in mourning for 
my parents, neither congee nor water entered my mouth for seven 
days. Tsze-sze answered, ‘In ordering their rules of propriety, it 
was the design of the ancient kings that those who would go beyond 
them should stoop and keep by them, and that those who could 
hardly reach them should stand on tiptoe to do so. Thus it is that 
the superior man, in mourning for his parents, when he has been 
three days without water or congee, takes a staff to enable himself 
to rise."9While he thus condemned the severe discipline of Tsing, Tsze- 
sze appears in various incidents which are related of him, to have 
been himself more than sufficiently ascetic. . As he was living in 
great poverty, a friend supplied him with grain, which he readily 
received. Another friend was emboldened by this to send him a bot- 
tle of wine, but he declined to receive it. You receive your corn 
from other people," urged the donor, *and why should you decline 
my gift, which is of less value? You can assign no ground in rea- 
son for it, and if you wish to show your independence, you should 
do so completely." “I am so poor,” was the reply, “as to be in want, 
and being afraid lest I should die and the sacrifices not be offered 
to my ancestors, I accept the grain as an alms. But the wine and 
the dried flesh which you offer to me are the appliances of a feast. 
For a poor man to be feasting is certainly unreasonable, This is 
the ground of my refusing your gift. I have no thought of assert- 
ing my independence."!0

'To the same effect is the account of Tsze-sze, which we have from 
Lew Heang. That scholar relates: When Keih was living in Wei, 
he wore a tattered coat, without any lining, and in 30 days had only 
9 meals. Tien Tsze-fang having heard of his distress, sent a mes- 
senger to him with a coat of fox-fur, and being afraid that he might

8 See the py gE Sf s in the place just quoted from. For the incident we are indebted 
to Kung Foo; sce note 2, 9. Le Ke, II. Pt. I. ij. 7. 10, 11 Sce the pu ü Ik 1252 as above,

38]

BECT. 11.) ACCOUNT OF ITS AUTIIOR. [rRoLEGOMENA.38]

BECT. 11.) ACCOUNT OF ITS AUTIIOR. [rRoLEGOMENA.

not receive it, he added the message, — When I borrow from a man, 
I forget it; when I give a thing, I part with it freely as if I threw it 
away. ‘T'sze-sze declined the gift thus offered, and when Tsze-fang 
said, ‘I have, and you have not; why will you not take it?’ he 
replied, * You give away so rashly, as if you were casting your things 
into a ditch. Poor as I am, I cannot think of my body as a ditch, 
and do not presume to accept your gift.”!!

Tsze-sze's mother married again, after Le's death, into a family of 
Wei. But this circumstance, which is not at all creditable in Chinese 
estimation, did not alienate his affections from her. He wasin Loo 
when lie heard of her death, and proceeded to weep in the temple of 
his family. A disciple came to him and said, * Your mother married 
again into the family of the Shoo, and do you weep for her in the 
temple of the Kung? “Iam wrong,” said Tsze-sze, “ I am wrong;" 
and with these words he went to weep elsewhere.!?

In his own married relation he does not seem to have been happy, 
and for some cause, which has not been transmitted to us, he divorced 
his wife, following in this, it would appear, the example of Confucius. 
On her death, her son, Tsze-shang,!? did not undertake any mourn- 
ing for her. Tsze-sze's disciples were surprised and questioned him. 
* Did not your father," they asked, “mourn for his mother who 
had been divorced?" “Yes,” was the reply. “Then why do you 
not cause Pih!* to mourn for his mother?" Tsze-sze answered, My 
father failed in nothing to pursue the proper path. His observances 
increased or decreased as the case required. But I cannot attain to 
this. While she was my wife, she was Pih's mother; when she 
ceased to be my wife, she ceased to be Pih's mother." The custom 
of the K'ung family not to mourn for a mother who had left it 
herself, or been divorced, took its rise from Tsze-sze. 15These few notices of K*ung Keih in his more private relations 
bring him before us as a man of strong feeling and strong will, in- 
dependent, and with a tendency to asceticism in his habits.

As a public character, we find him at the ducal courts of Wei, 
Sung, Loo, and Pe, and at each of them held in high esteem by the

12 See the Le Ko, II. Pt. II. iii. 15. pr N Z +} 5E must be understood as I have done 
above, aud not with Ching Heuen,—* Your mother was born a Miss Shoo.” 13 TW _f—this 
was the designation of "I'sze-sze's son, 14 El. this was Tsze-shung's nume, 15 See the Le Ke, 
II. PU. I. i. 4.

39]

PROLEGOMENA.] THE DOCTRINE OF TIIE MEAN. (cu. 1v.39]

PROLEGOMENA.] THE DOCTRINE OF TIIE MEAN. (cu. 1v.

rulers. To Wei he was carried probably by the fact of his mother 
having married into that State. We are told that the prince of Wei 
received him with great distinction and lodged him honourably. 
On one occasion he said to him, “ An officer of the State of Loo, 
you have not despised this small and narrow Wei, but have bent 
your steps hither to comfort and preserve it ;—vouchsafe to confer 
your benefits upon me." Tsze-sze replied, “If I should wish to 
requite your princely favour with money and silks, your treasuries 
are already full of them, and I am poor. If I should wish to requite 
it with good words, I am afraid that what I should say would not 
suit your ideas, so that I should speak in vain, and not be listened 
to. The only way in which I can requite it, is by recommending 
to your notice men of worth." The duke said, “Men of worth is 
exactly what I desire." “Nay,” said Keih, “you are not able to 
appreciate them.“ Nevertheless,“ was the reply, “I should like to 
hear whom you consider deserving that name."  Tsze-sze replied, 
* Do you wish to select your officers for the name they may have, 
or for their reality?“ ‘For their reality, certainly,” said the duke. 
His guest then said, “In the eastern borders of your State, there is 
one Le Yin, who is a man of real worth." What were his grand- 
father and father?” asked the duke. ‘They were husbandmen,” 
was the reply, on which the duke broke into a loud laugh, saying, 
“T do not like husbandry. The son of a husbandman cannot be fit 
for me to employ. I do not put into office all the cadets of those 
families even in which office is hereditary."  Tsze-sze observed, “I 
mention Le ¥iu because of his abilities; what has the fact of his 
forefathers being husbandmen to do with the case? And moreover, 
the duke of Chow was a great sage, and K‘ang-shuh was a great 
worthy. Yet if you examine their beginnings, you will find that 
from the business of husbandry they came forth to found their 
States. I did certainly have my doubts that in the selection of your 
officers you did not have regard to their real character and capacity.” 
With this the conversation ended. The duke was silent.“Tsze-sze was naturally led to K‘ung, as the Sung family originally 
sprang from that principality. One account, quoted in “The Four

*

16 See the K HE ax. 8 12 e FL N. XL 4X. 
40]

ECT, n.] ACCOUNT OF TIE AUTIIOR. [rRoLEGOMENA,

Books, Text and Commentary; with Proofs and Tllustrations,"!? 
savs that he went thither in his 16th year, and having foiled an 
officer of the State, named Yö 85, in a conversation on the Shoo- 
king, his opponent was so irritated at the disgrace put on him by a 
youth, that he listened to the advice of evil counsellors, and made au 
attack on him to put him to death. The duke of Sung, hearing the 
tumult, hurried to the rescue, and when Keih found himself i in safety, 
he said, * When king Wan was imprisoned in Yew-le, he made the 
Yih of Chow. My grandfather made the Ch‘un Ts‘ew after he had 
been in danger in Ch'in and Ts‘e. Shall I not make something 
when rescued froin such a risk in Sung?” Upon this he made the 
Chung Yung in 49 pen.

According to this account, the Chung Yung was the work of Tsze- 
szc's carly manhood, and the tradition his’ obtained a wonderful 
prevalence. The notice in “The Sacrificial Canon” says, on the 
contrary, that it was the work of his old age, when he had finally 
settled in Loo, which is much more likely.18

Of "Tsze-sze in Pe, which could hardly be said to be out of Loo, 
we have only one short notice,—in Mencius, V. Pt. II. iii. 2, where 
the duke II wuy of Pe is introduced as saying, “I treat Tsze-sze as 
my master.”We have fuller accounts of him in Loo where he spent all the 
latter years of his life, instructing his disciples to the number of 
several hundred,” and held in great reverence by the duke Muh. 
The duke indeed wanted to raise him to the highest offiee, but he 
declined this, and would only occupy the position of a “ guide, philoso- 
pher, and friend.“ Of the attention which he demanded, however, 
instances will be found iu Mencius, II. Pt. II. xi. 3; V. Pt. IL vi. 5, ¢ and 
vii. 3. In his intercourse with the duke he spoke the truth to him 
- fearlessly. In the “Cyclopedia of Surnames, 2 I find the following 
conversations, but I cannot tell from what source they are extracted 
into that Work.— One day, the duke said to Tsze-sze, ‘The oflicer

17 This is the Work so often referred to as the py a ERR. the full title being Uu E oh

HE sE 122 The passage bere truuslated from it will be found in the place several times re- 
ferred to in this section, 18 The author of the py T Hy ger ad adopts the view that the

Work was composed in Sung. Some have advocated this from ch. xxviii, 5. compared with Inn. 
III. ix, Sit being proper," they say, “that 'I'sze-sze, writing in Sung, should not depreciate it as 
Confucius had done, out of it!“ 19 Sce in the ^ Sacrificial Canon,’ on Tsze-aze. 20 This 
is the Work referred to in note 14.

41

PROLEGOMENA.) THE DOCTRINE OF TIE MEAN. fou. sv.41

PROLEGOMENA.) THE DOCTRINE OF TIE MEAN. fou. sv.

ITeen told me that you do good without wishing for any praise from 
men ;—is it so?’ Tsze-sze replied, ‘No, that is not my fecling. 
When I cultivate what is good, I wish men to know it, for when 
they know it and praise me, I feel encouraged to be more zealous in 
the cultivation. This is what I desire, and am not able to obtain. 
If I cultivate what is good, and men do not know it, it is likely that 
in their ignorance they will speak evil of me. So by my good-doing 
I only come to be evil spoken of. This is what I do not desire, but 
am not able to avoid. In the case of a man, who gets up at cock- 
crowing to practise what is good, and continues sedulous in the 
endeavour till midnight, and says at the same time that he docs 
not wish men to know it, lest they should praise him, I must say of 
such a man, that if he be not deceitful he is stupid.’”

Another day, the duke asked Tsze-sze saying, * Can my State be 
made to flourish.” “It may," was the reply. “And how?" Tsze- 
sze said, O prince, if you and your ministers will only strive to 
realize the government of the duke of Chow and of Pih-k‘in ; practis- 
ing their transforming principles, sending forth wide the favours of 
your ducal house, and not letting advantages flow in private chan- 
nels ;—if you will thus conciliate the affections of the people, and 
at the same time cultivate friendly relations with neighbouring 
States, your kingdom will soon begin to flourish.”On one occasion, the duke asked whether it had been the custom 
of old for ministers to go into mourning for a prince whose service 
and State they had left. Tsze-sze replied to him, “ Of old, priuces 
advanced their ministers to office according to propricty, and dis- 
missed them in the same way, and hence there was that rule. But. 
now-a-days, princes bring their ministers forward as if they were going 
to take them on their knees, and send them away as if they would 
cast them into an abyss. If they do not treat them as their greatest 
enemies, it is well.—How can you expect the ancient practice to be 
observed in such circumstances? 21

These instances may suffice to illustrate the character of Tsze-sze, 
as it was displayed in his intercourse with the princes of his time. 
We sce the same independence which he affected in private life, and 
a dignity not unbecoming the grandson of Confucius, But we miss 
the reach of thought iid capud for adininistration which belonged

21 This conversation is given in the Le Ke, II. Pt. II. ii, 1.

42]

SECT. 1H.) ITS INTEGRITY. (o [enorgooxESA,

to the Sage. It is with him, however, as a thinker and writer that 
we have to do, and his rank in that capacity will appear from the 
examination of the Chung Yung in the section that follows. His 
place in the temples of the Sage has been that of one of his four 
assessors, since the year 1267. IIe ranks with Yen Hwuy, Tsing 
Sin, and Mencius, and bears the title of “The Philosopher Tsze-sze, 
Transmitter of the Sage.”??

T TENES

SECTION III. 
ITS INTEGRITY.T TENES

SECTION III. 
ITS INTEGRITY.

1. Tn the testimony of K‘ung Foo, which has been adduced to 
prove the authorship of the Chung Yung, it is said that the Work 
consisted originally of 49 p‘éen. From this statement it is argued by 
some, that the arrangement of it in 33 chapters, which originated 
with Choo He, is wrong ;! but this does not affect the question of 
integrity, anc the character p'ézn is so vague and indefinite, that we 
cannot affirm that K*ung Foo meant to tell us by it that Tsze-sze 
himself divided his Treatise into so many paragraphs or chapters.

It is on the entry in Lew Hin's catalogue, quoted Section 1,— 
“Two pen of observations on the Chung Yung," that the integrity 
of the present Work is called in question. Yen Sze-koo, of the 
T'ang dynasty, has a note on that entry to the effect :—‘ There is 
now the Chung Yung in the Le Ke in one % ,n. But that is not 
the original Treatise here inentioned, but only a branch from it." 
Wang Wei, a writer of the Ming dynasty, says :—“ Anciently, the 
Chung Yung consisted of two p'éen, as appears from the History of 
Literature of the Han dynasty, but in the Le Ke we have only one 
y*éen, which Choo He, when he made his Chapters and Sentences,’ 
divided into 33 chapters. The old Work in two pen is not to be 
met with now.“

1 Seo me PY ME OP BR on ah Af. 2 UEFA LLLA m

M — mS So It 3p iE RABEL Hi)

ET TAA Ese

45 ^i ze M 5 = = A F Ei

ERRA IIA De 
43]

PROLEGOMENA.] TIIE DOCTRINE OF TIIE MEAN. [cu. 1v.1 Seo me PY ME OP BR on ah Af. 2 UEFA LLLA m

M — mS So It 3p iE RABEL Hi)

ET TAA Ese

45 ^i ze M 5 = = A F Ei

ERRA IIA De 
43]

PROLEGOMENA.] TIIE DOCTRINE OF TIIE MEAN. [cu. 1v.

These views are based on a misinterpretation of the entry in the 
Catalogue. It does not speak of two p‘éen of the Chung Yung, but 
of two per of Observations thereon. The Great Learning carries on its 
front the evidence of being incomplete, but the student will not easily 
believe that the Doctrine of the Mean is so. I sce no reason for calling 
its integrity in question, and no necessity therefore to recur to the 
ingenious device employed iu the edition of the five king published 
by the imperial authority of K‘ang IIe, to get over the difficulty 
which Wang Wei supposes. It there appears in two pen, of which 
we have the following account from the author of “Supplemental 
Remarks upon the Four Books: —“ The proper course now is to 
consider the first 20 chapters in Choo He's arrangement as making 
up the first p'en, and the remaining 13 as forming the second. In 
this way we retain the old form of the Treatise, ‘ad do not come 
into collision with the views of Choo. For this suggestion we are 
indebted to Loo Wang-chae” (an author of the Sung dy nasty).

4 See the pu = E HE f EUR art. ni hit 
SECTION IV. . 
ITS SCOPE AND VALUE.4 See the pu = E HE f EUR art. ni hit 
SECTION IV. . 
ITS SCOPE AND VALUE.

1. The Doctrine of the Mean is a work not easy to understand. 
" It first,” says the philosopher Ch‘ing, “speaks of one principle; it 
next spreads this out and embraces all things; finally, it returns and 
gathers them up under the one principle. Unroll it, and it fills tho 
universe; roll it up, and it retires and lies hid in secrecy.”! There 
is this advantase. however, to the student of it, that, more than 
most other Chinese Treatises, it has a beginning, a middle, and au 
end. The first chapter stands to all that follows in the character of 
a text, containing several propositions of which we have the expan- 
sion or development, If that development were satisfactory, we 
should be able to bring our own minds ez rapport with that of the 
author. Unfortunately it is not so. As a writer he belongs to the 
intuitional school more than to the logical. This is well put in the 
* Continuation of the General Examination of Literary Monuments 
and Learned Men,“ —“ The philosopher Tsang reached his conclu- 
sions by following in the train of things, watching and examining ;

1 See the Introductory note, pp. 246, 247.

44]

aner. wv] ITS SCOPE AND VALUE. [rRorgcoaENA.

*

whereas Tsze-sze proceeds directly and reaches to Heavenly virtue. 
llis was a mysterious power of discernment, approaching to that of 
‘Ten IIwuy.“? We must take the Book and the author, however, as 
we have them, and get to their meaning, if we can, by assiduous, 
examination and reflection.2. “ Man has reccived his nature from Heaven. Conduct. in accord- 
ance with that nature constitutes what is right and true,—is a pur- 
suing of the proper path. The cultivation or regulation of that 
path is what is called instruction.” It is with these axioms that the 
Treatise commences, aud from such an introduction we might expect 
that the writer would go on to unfold the various principles of duty, 
derived from an analysis of man’s moral constitution.

Confining himself, however, to the second axiom, he proceeds to

say that “the path may. not for an instant be left, and that the supe- 
rior man is cautious and careful in reference to what he does not see, 
and fearful and apprehensive in reference to what he does not hear. 
There is nothing inore visible than what is secret, and nothing more 
manifest than what is minute, and therefore the superior man is 
watchful over his aloneness.” This is not all very plain. Compar- 
ing it with the 6th chapter of Commentary in the Great Learning, 
it seems to inculcate what is there, called “making the thoughts 
sincere.” The passage contains an admonition about equivalent to 
that of Solomon,—“ Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it 
are the issues of life.”

The next payagraph seems to speak of the nature and the path un- 
der other names. “ While there are no movements of pleasure, anger, 
sorrow, or joy, we have what may be called the state of equilibrium. 
When those feelings have been ‘moved, and they all act in the due 
degree, we have what may be called the state of harmony. This 
equilibrium is the great root of the world and this harmony is its 
universal path." What is here called “the state of equilibrium,” 
is the same as the nature given by Heaven, considered absolutely in 
itself, without deflection or inclination. This nature, acted on from 
without, and responding with the various emotions, so as always “to 
hit"? the mark with entire correctness, produces the state of harmony,2 See the ¥ ik xf TH , Bk. excix., art. r m-e FS ITE 
a EN ET EE £k Rp i & (S ETE $8 l N S D HB 
3 Hy fi

45]

" HOLEGOMENA.] THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN. Lon. iv.

and such harmonious response is the path along which all human 
activities should proceed.

Finally, „Let the states of equilibrium and harmony exist in 
perfection, and a happy order will prevail throughout heaven and 
earth, and all things will be nourished and flourish.” Here we pass 
into the sphere of mystery and mysticism. The language, according 
to Choo He, “describes the meritorious achievements aud transform- 
ing influence of sage and spiritual men in their highest extent.” From 
the path of duty, where we tread on solid ground, the writer sud- 
denly raises us aloft on wings of air, and will carry us we know not 
where, and to we know not what.

3. The paragraphs thus presented, and which constitute Choo Hes 
first chapter, contain the sum of the whole Work. This is acknow- 
ledged by all; —by the critics who disown Choo He's interpretations 
of it, as freely as by him.“ Revolving them in my own mind often 
and long, I collect from them the following as the ideas of the 
author: — Ist, Man has received from Heaven a moral nature by 
which he is constituted a law to himself; 2d, Over this nature man 
requires to exercise a jealous watchfulness; and 3d, As he possesses it, 
absolutely and relatively, in perfection, or attains to such possession 
of it, he becomes invested with the highest dignity and power, and 
may say to himself —^1I am a god; yea, I sit in the seat of God.“ I 
will not say here that there is blasphemy in the last of these ideas; 
but do we not have in them the same combination which we found 
in The Great Learning,—a combination of the ordinary and tlie 
extraordinary, the plain and the vague, which is very perplexing to 
the mind, and renders the Book unfit ‘for the purposes of mental 
and moral discipline? 'And here I may inquire whether we do right in calling the Treatise 
by any of the names which foreigners have hitherto used for it? In 
the note on the title, pp. 246, 247, I have entered a little into this 
question. The Work is not at all what a reader must expect to find 
in what he supposes to be a treatise on “ The Golden Medium,” “The 
Invariable Mean,” or The Doctrine of the Mean.” Those names are 
descriptive only of a portion of it. Where the phrase Chung’ Yung

4 Compare Choo He's language in his concluding note to the Ist chapter R N Ar 514

— K X Y um, and Maou Se-ho's, in his rH I8 Bt —, p. 11 IH. F 
dr < “i Ex LR 
46]

SECT. iv.] ITS SCOPE AND VALUE. (PROLEGOMENA,

occurs in the quotations from Confucius, in nearly every chapter 
from the 2d to the 11th, we do well to translate it by “ the course of 
the Mean,” or some similar terms; but the conception of it in Tsze- 
sze’s, mind was of a different kind, as the preceding analysis of the 
first chapter sufficiently shows.

4. I may return to this point of the proper title for the Work 
again, but in the mean time we must proceed with the analysis of it. 
—The ten chapters from the 2d to the 11th constitute the second part, 
and in them Tsze-sze quotes the words of Confucius, “for the pur- 
pose,” according to Choo He, “ of illustrating the meaning of the first 
chapter." Yet, as I have just intimated, they do not to my mind do 
this. Confucius bewails the rarity of the practice of the Mean, and 
graphically sets forth the difficulty of it. “The empire, with its 
component States and families, may be ruled; dignities and emolu- 
ments may be declined; naked weapons may be trampled under 
foot; but the course of the Mean can not be attained to."5 “Theknowing go beyond it, and the stupid do not come up to it."6 Yet. 
some have attained to it. Shun did so, humble and ever learning 
from people far inferior to himsclf;7 and Yen Hwuy did so, holding 
fast whatever good he got hold of, and never letting it go?s Tsze- 
loo thought the Mean could be taken by storm, but Confucius taught 
him better.? And in fine, it is only the sage who can fully exemplify 
the Mean. | ö

All these citations do not throw any light on the ideas presented 
in the first chapter. On the contrary they interrupt the train of 
thouglit. Instead of showing us how virtue, or the path of duty is in 
accordance with our IIcaveu-given nature, they lead us to think of 
it as a mean between two extremes. Each extreme may be a viola- 
tion of the law of our nature, but that is not made to appear. Con- 
fucius’ sayings would be in place in illustrating the doctrine of the 
Peripatetics, “which placed all virtue in a medium between oppo- 
site viccs. 11 Here in the Chung Yung of Tsze-sze I have always felt 
them to be out of place.

5. In the 12th chapter Tsze-sze speaks again himself, and we 
sceni at once to kuow the voice. He begins by saying that “the 
way of the superior man reaches far and wide, and yet is secret,"

5 Ch ix. 0 Ch. ir. 7 Ch. iv 8 Ch vii. 9 Ch. xk. 10 Ch.xi — II Ency-

Clupedia Britannica, Preliminary Dissertations, p. 318, latest edition

47 ö

PROLEGOMENA.) THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN. Len. 1v.5 Ch ix. 0 Ch. ir. 7 Ch. iv 8 Ch vii. 9 Ch. xk. 10 Ch.xi — II Ency-

Clupedia Britannica, Preliminary Dissertations, p. 318, latest edition

47 ö

PROLEGOMENA.) THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN. Len. 1v.

by which he means to tell us that the path of duty is to be pursued 
everywhere and at all times, while yet the secret spring and rule of 
it is near at hand, in the Heaven-conferred nature, the individual 
consciousness, with which no stranger can intermeddle. Choo He, 
as will be seen in the notes, gives a different interpretation of 
the utterance. But the view which I have adopted is maintained 
convincingly by Maou Se-ho in the second part of his “ Observations 
on the Chung Yung." With this chapter commences the third part 
of the Work, which embraces also the eight chapter$ which follow. “It 
is designed,” says Choo He, “to illustrate what is said in the first 
chapter that “the path may not be left." But more than that one 
sentence finds its illustration here. Tsze-sze had reference in it also 
to what he had said— The superior man does not wait till he sees 
things to be cautious, nor till he hears things to be apprehensive. 
There i is nothing more visible than what is secret, and nothing more 
manifest than what is minute. Therefore, the superior man is watch- 
ful over himself when he is alone.”

It is in this portion of the Chung Yung that we find a good deal 
of moral instruction which is really valuable. Most of it consists of 
sayings of Confucius, but the sentiments of Tsze-sze himself in his 
own language are interspersed with them. ‘The sage of China has 
no higlicr utterances than those which are given in the 13th chapter. 
— The path is not far from man. When men try to pursue t 
course which is far from the common indications of consciousness, 
this course cannot be considered the path. In the Book of Poetry 
it is said—

‘In hewing an axe-handle, in hewing an axc-handle,‘In hewing an axe-handle, in hewing an axc-handle,

The pattern is not far off. ' 
We grasp one axe-handle to hew the other, and yet if we look 
askance from the one to the other, we may consider them as apart. 
Therefore, the superior man governs men according to their nature, 
‘with what is proper to them; aud as soon as they change what is 
wrong, he stops. When one cultivates to the utmost the moral 
principles of his nature, aud exercises them on the principle of reci- 
procity, he is not far from the path. What you do not like when 
done to yoursclf, do not do to others.

“Tn the way of the superior man there are four things, to none 
of which have I as yet attained.—To serve my futher as I would

48]

SECT. Iv.] ITS SCOPE AND VALUE. [PROLEGOMENA,

require my son to serve me: to this I have not attained ; to serve my 
elder brother as I would require my younger brother to serve me: 
to this I have not attained ; to serve my prince as I would require my 
minister t o serve me: to this I have not attained ; to set the example 
in behaving to a friend as I would require him to behave to me: to 
this I liave. not attained. Earnestin practising the ordinary virtues 
and careful in speaking about them ; ifin his practice he has anything 
defective, the superior. inan dires. not but exert himself, aud if in 
his words he has any excess, he dares not allow himself such license. 
Thus his words have respect to his actions, and his actions have re- 
spect to his words ;—is it not just an entire sincerity which marks the 
superior man ?"We have here the golden rule in its negative form expressly pro- 
pounded :—“ What you do not like when. done to yourself, do not 
do to others.” But in the paragraph which follows we have the 
rule virtually in its positive form. Confucius recognizes the duty of 
taking the initiative, —of behaving himself to others in the first in- 
stance as he would that they should behave tohim. There is a cer- 
tain narrowness, indeed, iu that the sphere of its operations seems to 
be confined to the relations of society, which are spoken of more at 
large in the 20th chapter, but let us not grudge the tribute of our 
warm approbation to the sentiments.

This chapter is followed by two from Tsze-sze, to the effect that 
the superior man does what is proper in every change of his 
situation, always finding his rule in himself; and that in his prac- 
tice there is an orderly advance from step to step,—from what is 
near to what is remote. Then follow five chapters from Confucius: 
—the first, on the operation and influence of spiritual beings, to show 
“the mauifestness of what is minute, and the irrepressibleness of 
sincerity ;" the secoud, on the filial piety of Shun, and how it was 
rewarded by Heaven with tlie empire, with enduring fame, and with 
long life; the third and fourth, on the kings Wan and Woo, and the. 
duke of Chow, celebrating them for their filial piety and other asso- 
ciate virtues; and the fifth, on the subject of government. These chap- 
ters are interesting enough in themselves, but when I go back from 
them, aud examinewhether Ihave from them any better understanding 
of the paragraphs in the first chapter which they are said to illustrate, 
l do not find that I have. Three of them, the 17th, 18th, and 19th,

49]

PROLEGOMENA.] THE DOCTRINE OF TIIE MEAN. [on. rv.49]

PROLEGOMENA.] THE DOCTRINE OF TIIE MEAN. [on. rv.

would be more in place in the Classic of Filial Piety than here 
in the Chung Yung. The meaning of the 16th is shadowy and un- 
defined. After all the study which I have directed to it, there are 
some points in reference to which I have still doubts and difficulties.

The 20th chapter which concludes the third portion of the Work 
contains a full exposition of Confucius' views on government, though 
professedly descriptive only of that of the kings Wăn and Woo. 
Along with lessons proper for a ruler there are many also of universal 
application, but the mingling of them perplexes the mind. It tells 
us of “the five duties of universal application, "—those between 
sovereign and minister, husband and wife, father and son, elder and 
younger brother, and friends; of “the three virtues by which those 
duties are carried into effect,” namely, knowledge, benevolence, and 
energy ; and of “the one thing, by which those virtues are practised,” 
which is singleness or sincerity.!° It sets forth in detail the “nine 
standard rules for the administration of government,” which are “the 
cultivatión by the ruler of his own character; the honouring men 
of virtue and talents ; affection to his relatives; respect towards the 
great ministers; kind and considerate treatment of the whole body of 
officers; cherishing the mass of the people as children ; encouraging 
all classes of artizans; indulgent treatment of men from a distance; 
and the kindly cherishing of the princes of the States."1_ There are 
these and other equally interesting topics in this chapter; but, as 
they are in the Work, they distract the mind, instead of making the 
author’s great object more clear to it, and I will not say more upon 
them here.6. Doubtless it was the mention of “singleness,” or “sincerity,” 
in the 20th chapter, which. made Tsze-sze introduce it into this 
Treatise, for froin those terms he is able to go on to develope what 
he intended in saying that “if the states of Equilibrium and Har- 
mony exist in perfection, a happy order will prevail throughout 
heaven and earth, and all things will be nourished and flourish.” It 
is here, that now we are astonished at the audacity of the writer's 
assertions, and now lost in vain endeavours to ascertain his meaning 
I have quoted the words of Confucius that it is “singlencss,” by 
which the three virtues of knowledge, benevolence, and energy are 
able to carry into practice the duties of universal obligation. Ile

10 Par. 8, 11 Par. 12. 
50]

aos

SECT. .] ITS SCOPE AND vALUE: [PROLEGONMENA.10 Par. 8, 11 Par. 12. 
50]

aos

SECT. .] ITS SCOPE AND vALUE: [PROLEGONMENA.

says also that it is this same “singleness” py which “the nine stanè ard 
rules of government” can be effectively carried out.2 This “ sin- 
gleness" is just a name for “ the states of Equilibrium and Harmony 
existing in perfection." It denotes a ‘character absolutely and rela- 
tively 8904 wanting nothing in itself, and ‘correct in all its out- 
goings. Sincerity: "ds another term for thé same thing, and in 
speaking about it, Confucius makes a distinction between sincerity 
absolute and sincerity acquired. The former is born with some, 
and practised by them without any effort; the latter is attained by 
study and practised by strong endeavotr.3 The former is “the way 
of IIeaven;“ the latter is “the way of men.“ 14 “He who possesses 
sincerity,"—absolutely, that is,——'*is he who without effort hits what 
is right, and apprehends without the exercise of thought he 
is the sage who naturally and easily embodies the right way. He 
who attains to sincerity, is he who chooses what is good and firmly 
holds it fast. And to this attainment there are requisite the ex- 
tensive study of what is good, accurate inquiry about it, careful 
reflection on it, the clear discrimination of it, and the earnest 
practice of it. "is In, these passages Confucius unhesitatingly enun- 
ciates his belief that there are some men who are absolutely perfect, 
who come into the world as we may conceive the first man was, 
when he was created by God “in His own image,” full of knowledge 
and righteousness, and who grow up as we know that Christ did, 
“increasing in wisdom and in stature." He disclaimed being con- 
sidered to be such an one himself, 1s but the sages of China were 
such, And moreover, others who are not so naturally may make 
themselves to become so. ‘Some will have to put forth more effort 
and to contend with greater struggles, but the end will be the pos- 
session of the knowledge and the achievement of the practice.I need not say that these sentiments are contrary to the views of 
human nature which are presented in the Bible. The testimony 
of Revelation is that“ there is not a just man upon earth that doeth 
good and sinneth not." “If we say that we have no sin,” and in 
writing this term, I am thinking here not of sin against God, but, 
if we can conceive of it apart from that, of failures in regard to what 
ought tó be in our regulation of ourselves, and in our behaviour to 
others ;—' if we say that we have no sin, we deccive ourselves, and

12 Pur. 15. 18 Par. 9. 14 Par. 18. 15 Parr. 18, 19, 16 Ana. VII. xix. 
51] l

PROLEGOMENA.] THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN. lon. 1v.

the truth is not in us.“ This language is appropriate in the lips of the 
learned as well as in those of the ignorant, to the highest sage as to 
the lowest child of the soil. Neither the scriptures of God nor the 
experience of man kuow of individuals absolutely perfect. The 
other sentiment that men can make themselves perfect is equally 
wide of the truth. Intelligence and goodness by no means stand to 
each other in the relation of cause and effect. The sayings of Ovid, 
“ Video meliora proboque, deteriora sequor,” * Nitimur in vetitum sem- 
Per, cupimusque negata," are a more correct expression of the facts 
of human consciousness and “conduct than the high-flown phrases of 
Confucius.

7. But Tsze-sze adopts the dicta of his grandfather without ques- 
tioning them, and gives them forth in his own style at the commence- 
ment of the fourth part of his Treatise. ** When we have intelligence 
resulting from sincerity, this condition is to be ascribed to nature; 
when we have sincerity resulting from intelligence, this condition 
is to be ascribed to instruction. But given the sincerity, and there 
shall be the intelligence; given the intelligence, and there shall be 
the sincerity."Tsze-sze does more than adopt the dicta of Confucius. He applies 
them in a way which the sage never did, and which he would pro- 
bably have shrunk from doing. The sincere, or perfect man of 
Confucius is lie who satisfies completely all the requirements of duty 
in the various relations of Society, and in the exercise of govern- 
ment; but the sincere man of Tsze-sze is a potency in the universe. 
* Able to give its full development to his own nature, he can do the 
same to the nature of other men. Able to give its full development 
to the nature of other men, he can give their full development to 
the natures of animals and things. Able to give their full develop- 
ment to the natures of creatures and things, he can assist the trans- 
forming and nourishing powers of Heaven and Earth. Able to 
assist the transforming and nourishing powers of Heaven and Earth, 
he may with Heaven aud Earth form a ternion.“ 1s Such are the 
results of sincerity natural The case below this—of sincerity 
acquired, is as follows,— The individual cultivates its shoots, From 
these he can attain to the possession of sincerity. This sincerity 
becomes apparent. From being apparent, it becomes manifest.

17 Ch. xxi, 18 Ch. xxii.

52]

a4

et 
SrCT. iv.] ITS SCOPE AND VALUE. [PROLEGOMENA.17 Ch. xxi, 18 Ch. xxii.

52]

a4

et 
SrCT. iv.] ITS SCOPE AND VALUE. [PROLEGOMENA.

From being manifest, it becomes brilliant. Brilliant, it affects others. 
Affecting others, they are changed by it. Changed by it, they are 
transformed. It is only he who is possessed of the most complete 
sincerity that can exist under heaven, who can transform.”! It, 
may safely be affirmed, that when he thus expressed himself, Tsze-sze 
understood neither what he said nor whereof he affirmed. Maou 
Se-ho and some other modern writers explain away many of his 
predicates of sincerity, so that in their hands they become nothing 
but extravagant hyperboles, but the author himself would, I believe, 
have protested against such a mode of. dealing with his words. True, 
his structures are castles in the air, but he had no idea himself that 
they were so.

In the 24th chapter there is a ridiculous descent from the sublimity 
of the two preceding. We are told that the possessor of entire sin- 
cerity is like a spirit and can foreknow, but the foreknowledge is 
only a judgiug by the milfoil and tortoise and other auguries! But 
the author recovers himself, and resumes his theme about sincerity

‘as conducting to self-completion, and the completion of other men‘as conducting to self-completion, and the completion of other men

and things, “describing it also as possessing all the qualities which 
can be predicated of Heaven and earth. Gradually the subject is 
made to converge to the person of Confucius, who is the ideal of the 
sage, as the sage is the ideal of humanity at large. An old account 
of the object of Tsze-sze in the Chung Yung is that he wrote it to 
celebrate the virtue of his grandfather." He certainly contrives to 
do this in the course of it. The 30th, 31st, and 32d chapters con- 
toin his eulogium, and never has any other mortal been exalted in 
such terms. He may be compared to heaven and earth in their 
supporting and containing, their overshadowing and curtaining all 
things; he may be compared to the four seasons in their alternating 
progress, and to the sun and moon in their successive shining." 
* Quick in apprehension, clear in discernment, of far-reaching intelli- 
gence, and all-embracing knowledge, he was fitted to exercise rule; 
magnanimous, generous, benign, and mild, he was fitted to exercise 
forbdarance ; impulsive, energetic, firm, and enduring, he was fitted 
to maintain a firm hold; self-adjusted, grave, never swerving from

19 Ch. xxiii, 20 FAF [o (i BY] E X. au 7 N N Y M. tt AP 
JE) In (o e me JAF JE BBL n

53]

PROLEGOMENA.] THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN. Lon. 1v.19 Ch. xxiii, 20 FAF [o (i BY] E X. au 7 N N Y M. tt AP 
JE) In (o e me JAF JE BBL n

53]

PROLEGOMENA.] THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN. Lon. 1v.

the Mean, and correct, he was fitted to command reverence; accom- 
plished, distinctive, concentrative, and searching, he was fitted to 
exercise discrimination." „All-embracing and vast, he was like 
heaven; deep and active as a fountain, he was like the abyss." 
“Therefore his.fame overspreads the Middle kingdom, and extends 
to all barbarous tribes. Wherever ships and carriages reach ; wher- 
ever the strength of mañ penetrates; wherever the heavens over- 
shadow and the earth sustains; wherever the sun and moon shine; 
wherever frosts and dews fall;—all who haye blood and breath 
unfeignedly honour and love him. Hence it. is said,—He is the 
equal of Heaven!” ‘Who can know him but he who is indeed 
quick in apprehension, clear in discernment, of far-reaching intelli- 
gence, and all-embracing knowledge, possessing all heavenly virtue?"8. We have arrived at the concluding chapter of the Work, in 
which the author, according to Choo He, “having carried his descrip- 
tions to the highest point in the preceding chapters, turns back and 
examines the source of his subject; and then again from the work 
of the learner, free from all selfishness and watehful over himself 
when he is alone, he carries out his description, till by easy steps he 
brings it to the consummation of the whole empire tranquillized by 
simple and sincere reverentialness. He moreover eulogizes its mys- 
teriousness, till he speaks of it at last as without sound or smell.“ 21 
Between the first and last chapters there is a correspondency, and each 
of them may be considered as a summary of the whole treatise. The 
difference between them is, that in the first a commencement is made 
with the mention of Heaven as the conferrer of man's nature, while 
in this the progress of man in virtue is traced, step by step, till at 
last it is equal to that of High Heaven.

9. I have thus in the preceding paragraphs given a general and 
somewhat copious review of this Work. My object has been to 
seize, if I could, the train of thought, and to hold it up to the reader. 
Minor objections to it, arising from the confused use of terms and 
singular applications of passages from the older Classics, are noticed in 
the notes subjoined to the translation. I wished here that its scope 
should be seen, and the means be afforded of judging how far it is 
worthy of the high character attributed to it. The relish of it,” 
says the younger Ch‘ing, “is inexhaustible. The whole of it is solid

21 See the concluding note by Choo Ile. 
54]

SECT. IY.] ö ITS SCOPE AND VALUE. (PROLEGOMENA.21 See the concluding note by Choo Ile. 
54]

SECT. IY.] ö ITS SCOPE AND VALUE. (PROLEGOMENA.

learning. When the skilful reader has explored it with delight 
till he has apprehended it, he may carry it into practice all his life, 
aud will find that it cannot be exhausted.“ 22 
My own opinion of it is much less favourable. The names by 
which it has been called in translations of it have led to misconcep- 
tions of its character. Were it styled “The states of Equilibrium and 
Harmony,” we should be prepared to expect something strange and 
probably extravagant. Assuredly we should expect nothing more 
strange or extravagant than what we have. It begins sufficiently 
well, but the author has hardly enunciated his preliminary apothegins, 
when he conducts into an obscurity where we can hardly grope our 
way, and when we emerge from that, it is to be bewildered by his 
gorgeous but unsubstantial pictures of sagely perfection. He has 
eminently contributed to nourish the pride of his countrymen. He 
_has exalted their sages above all that is called God or is worshipped, 
and taught the masses of the people that with them they have need 
of nothing from without. In the mean time it is antagonistic to 
Christianity. By-and-by, when Christianity has prevailed in China, 
men will refer to it as a striking proof how their fathers by their 
wisdom knew neither God nor themselves

22 The Introductory note, p. 217.

55].

PROLEGOMENA. ] CONFUCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. Lon. v.

CHAPTER V.

CONFUCIUS. AND HIS IMMEDIATE DISCIPLES.

SECTION L 
ö LIFE OF CONFUCIUS.22 The Introductory note, p. 217.

55].

PROLEGOMENA. ] CONFUCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. Lon. v.

CHAPTER V.

CONFUCIUS. AND HIS IMMEDIATE DISCIPLES.

SECTION L 
ö LIFE OF CONFUCIUS.

* And. have you foreigners surnames as well?" This question 
has often been put to me by Chinese. It marks tlie ignorance which 
belongs to the people of all that is external to them- 
selves, and the pride of antiquity which enters largely 
as an element into their character. If such a pride could in any case 
be justified, we might allow it to the family of the K'uug, the 
descendants of Confucius. In the reign of K‘ang-he, twenty-one 
centuries and a half after the death of the sage, they amounted to 
eleven thousand males. But their ancestry is carried back through 
a period of equal extent, and genealogical tables are common, in 
which the descent of Confucius 1 is ‘eared down from Hwang-te, the 
inventor of the cycle, B. C. 2637.!

The more moderate writers, however, content TUN M with 
exhibiting his ancestry back to the commencement of the Chow 
dynasty, B.C. 1121. Among the relatives of the tyrant Chow, the 
last emperor of the Yin dynasty, was an elder brother, by a con- 
cubine, named Re, 2 who is celebrated by Confucius, Ana. xvu. i., 
under the title of the viscount of Wei. Foresecing the impending 
ruin of their family, K‘e withdrew from the court; and subsequent- 
ly, he was invested by the emperor Shing, the second of the house 
of Chow, with the principality of Sung, which embraced the eastern 
Portion of the present province of Ho-nan, that he might there con. 
tinue the sacrifices to the emperors of Yin. K'e was followed as 
duke of Sung by a younger brother, in whose line the succession

His ancestry.

1 See Memoires concernant les Chinois, Tome XII, p. 447, et seq. Father Amiot states, p. 501, 
that he had seen the representatiye of the family, who succeeded to the dignity of {r EH PAS1 See Memoires concernant les Chinois, Tome XII, p. 447, et seq. Father Amiot states, p. 501, 
that he had seen the representatiye of the family, who succeeded to the dignity of {r EH PAS

in the 9th year of K‘éen-lung, A.D. 1744. It is hardly necessary that I should say here, that tho 
name Confucius is merely the Chinese charactors FL * F (K'ung Foo-tsze, The master, 
K'ung')latinized. 2 Er.

56]

SHOT. I.] LIFE OF CONVUCIUS. [PROLEGOMENA

continued. His great-grandson, the duke Min,3 was followed, p.c. 908, 
hy a younger brother, leaving, however, two sons Fuh-foo Ho,* and 
Faug.sze. Fuh Hos resigned his right to the dukedom in favour of 
Fang-sze, who put his uncle to death in B. C. 893, and became master 
of the State. He is known as the duke Le, 7 and to his elder brother 
belongs the honour of having the sage among his descendants.Three descents from Fuh Ho, we ‘find Ching K'au-foo,$ who was 
a distinguished officer under the dukes Tae; Woo, and Seuen? (s.c. 
199—128). He is still celebrated for his humility, and for his 
literary tastes. We have accounts of him as being in communi- 
cation with the Grand-historiographer of the empire, and engaged 
in researches about its ancient poetry, thus setting an example of one 
of the works to which Confucius gave himself. 10 K'aou gave birth 
to K'ung-foo Kea,!! from whom the surname of K‘ung took its rise. 
Five generations had now elapsed since the dukedom was held iu 
the direct line of his ancestry, and it was according to the rule in 
such cases that the brauch should cease its connection with the 
ducal stem, and merge among the people under a new surname. 
K'uug Kea was Master of the Horse in Sung, and an officer of well 
known loyalty and probity. Unfortunately for himself, he had a wife 
of surpassing beauty, of whom the chief minister of the State, by 
name Hwa Tuh,? happened on one occasion to get a glimpse. De- 
termined to possess her, he commenced a series of intrigues, which, 
ended, B. C. 709, in the murder of Kea and the reigning duke Shang.!5 
At the same time, Tuh secured the person of the lady, and hastened 
to his palace with the pue but on the way she had strangled her- 
self with her girdle.

An enihity was thus commenced between the two families of K*ung 
and IIwa which the lapse of time did not obliterate, and the latter 
being the more powerful of the two, Kea's great-grandson withdrew 
into the State of Loo to avoid their persecution. There he was ap- 
pointed commandant of the city of Fang,!* aud is known in history

3 Fe N. i dup. s OF ot. Fp . 6 Y drop here the &. (up. 2a

tone), which seems to have been used in those times in a manner equivalent to our Mr 7 hy 
A^. 8 IE E W: : TH is used in the same way as * sce note G6. 9 E niv H.tone), which seems to have been used in those times in a manner equivalent to our Mr 7 hy 
A^. 8 IE E W: : TH is used in the same way as * sce note G6. 9 E niv H.

= PAS 10, See the £e Edi and [5] AH En JF ; quoted in Keang oe s (L. N) Life 
of Confucius, which forms a part of the 7j y 3th dé ai . 11 Ju. n 12 E TFC 
13 yy ZN. 1 F/. x

51]

PROLEGOMENA.] CONFUCIUS AND IIS DISCITLES. on. v.

LI 
by the name of lF'ang-shub.!5 l'ang-shuh gave birth to Pih-hea,!6 and

from him came Shuli-leang Heih, 7 the father of Confucius. Heih 
appears in the history of the times as a soldier of great prowess and 
daring bravery. In the year B. C. 562, when serving at the siege of 
& place called Peih-yang, 18 U party of the assailants ide their way in 
at a gate which had purposely been left open, and no sooner were they 
inside than the portcullis was dropped. Heih was just entering, and 
catching the massive structure with both his hands, he gradually 
by dint of inain strength raised it and held it up, till his friends had 
inade their escape.

Thus much on the ancestry of the sage. Doubtless he could 
trace his descent in the way which bas been indicated up to the 
imperial house of, Yin, nor was there one among his ancestors dur- 
ing the rule of Chow to whom he could not refer with satisfaction. 
They had been ministers and soldiers of Sung and Loo, all men of 
worth, and in Ching K'aou, both for his humility and literary 
researches, Confucius might have special complacency.

2. Confucius was the child of Shuh-leang Heils old age. The 
soldier had married in early life, but his wife brought’ him only2. Confucius was the child of Shuh-leang Heils old age. The 
soldier had married in early life, but his wife brought’ him only

AR EN, daughters, —to tlie number of nine, and ina sen. 
first public employments. By a concubing he had a son, named Mang-p‘e 
sa ae and also Pih-ne,! who proved a cripple, so that, 
when he was over seventy years, Heih sought a second wife in the 
Yen family,? from which came subsequently Yen Hwuy, the favour- 
ite disciple of his son. There were three daughters in the family, 
the youngest being named Ching-tsae.? Their father said to them, 
* [Tere is the cominandant of Tsow. IIis father and grandfather 
were only scholars, but his ancestors before them were descendants 
of the sage emperors. He is a man ten feet high, and of extraor- 
dinary prowess, and I am very desirous of his alliance. Though he is 
old and austere, you need have no misgivings about him. Which of 
you three will be his wife?" The two elder danghters were silent, 
but Ching-tsae said, Why do you ask us, father? It is for you to 
determine.” “Very well,” said her father in reply, “you will do.”

syi , RL

A o 343 T 1,

Dg F ff K. NN. , E LN. 
See, on the length of the ancient foot, Aua. VIII. vi., but the point needs a more sifting iuvostiga-

tiun than it has yet received,

58]

SECT. 1] LIFE OF CONTUCIUS. [rnorEGoMENA.tiun than it has yet received,

58]

SECT. 1] LIFE OF CONTUCIUS. [rnorEGoMENA.

Ching. tene, accordingly, became Ileil's wife, aud in due time gave 
birth to Confucius, who received the name of New, and was subse- 
quently styled Chung-ne The event happened on the 21st day 
of the 10th month of the 21st' year of the duke Seang, of Loo, being 
the 20th year of the emperor Ling, B.c. 551. The birth-place was 
in the district of Tsow, of which Heih was the governor. It was 
somewhere within the limits of the present department of Yen-chow 
in Shan-tung, but the honour of being the exact spot is claimed for 
two places in two different districts of the department. ‘ 
The notices which we have of Confucius’ early years are very 
scanty. When he was in his third year his father died. It is related of5 K Ep. ee 4h E. The legends say that Ching-tsac, fearing lest she should not have a 
son, in consequence of her husband's age, privately ascended the Ne-k‘ew hill to pray for the boon, 
and that when she had obtained it, she commemorated the fact in the names —K'ew and Chung-ne. 
But the cripple, Mang-p‘e, had previously been styled Pih-ne. There was some reason, previous 
to Confucius’ birth, for using the term xe in the fantily. As might be expected, the birth of the 
sage is surrounded with many prodigious occurrences, One account is, that the-husband and wife 
prayed together for a son in a dell of mount Ne. As Ching-tsae went up the hill, the leaves of 
the trees and plants all erected themselves, and bent downwards on her return. That night she 
dreamt the Black Te appeared, and said to her, Lou shall have a son, a sage, and you must bring 
him forth in a hollow mulberry tree? One day during her pregnancy, she fell into a dreamy 
slate, and saw five old men in the hall, who called themselves the essences of the five planets, and 
jed an aninal which looked like a small cow with one horn, and was covered with scales like a 
dragon. This creature knelt before Ching-tsae, and cast forth from its mouth a slip of gem, on 
which was the iuscription,— The son of the essence of water shall succeed to the withering 
Chow, and be a throneless king“ Ching-tsae tied a piece of embroidered ribbon about its horn, 
and the vision disappeared. When Heih was told of it, he sid. “Phe creature must be the K'e- 
lin’ As her time drew near, Ching-tsue asked her husband if there was any place in the neigh- 
bourhood called The hollow mulberry tree? Ile told her ‘there was a dry cave in the south 
hill, which went by that name. Then she said, J will go and be confined there? Ier, husband 
was surprised, but when made acquainted with her former dream, he made the necessary arrange- 
ments. On the night when the child was born, two dragons came and kept watch on the left 
ind right of the hill, and two spirit-Indies appeared in the air, pouring out fragrant odours, as if 
to bathe Ching-tsae ; and as soon as the birth took place, a spring of clear warm water bubbled up 
from the floor of the cave, which dried up again when the child had been washed in it. ‘The child 
was of an extraordinary appearance ; with a mouth like the sen, ox lips, a dragon's back, &c., $c. 
On the top of his head was a remarkable formation, in consequence of which he was named Kew, &c. 
See the Jl äl ae Bk, Ixxviii.—Sze-ma Ts‘cen seems to make Confucius to have been ille- 
gitimate, saying that ITeih and Miss Yen cohabited in the wilderness (n 4>). Keang Yung 
says that the phrase has reference simply to the disparity of their ages.6 Sze-ma Ts-ecn says that Confucius was born in the 22d year of duke Seang, n. c. 550. He is 
followed by Choo He in the short sketch of Confucius’ life prefixed to the Lun Yu, and by * The 
Annals of the Empire’ (Hit 1 e 25 i Fe): published with imperial sanction in the reign of 
Kea-king. (To this latter work I have generally referred for my dates.) The year assigned in 
the text above rests on the authority of Kuli-I&ing and Kung-yang, the two commentators on 
the Ts‘un Ts ew. With regard to the month, however, the 10th is that assigned by Kul-léang, 
while Kung-yang names the 11th, 7 Tsow is written FR pal re and $31

59]

PROLEGOMENA.) CONFUCIUS AND IIIS DISCIPLES. Jon. v.

- a 
him, that as a boy he used to play at the arrangement of sacrificial 
. vessels, and at postures of ceremony. Of his schooling we have no 
reliable account. There is a legend, indeed, that at seven he went to 
school to Gan P‘ing-chiing,’ but it must be rejected as P'ing-chung 
belonged to the State of Ts‘e. He tells us himself that at fifteen he 
bent his mind to learning ;? but the condition of the family was one 
of poverty. At a subsequent period, when peóple were astonished 
at the variety of his knowledge, he explained it by saying “ When 
I was young, my condition was low, and therefore I acquired my 
ability in many things; but they were mean matters,”!0 -When he was nineteen, he married a lady from the State of Sung, 
of the Kéen-kwan family,!! and in the following year his son Le was 
born. On the occasion of this event, the duke Ch‘aou sent him a 
present of a couple of carp. It was to signify his sense of his prince's 
favour, that he callec his son Le (The Carp), and afterwards gave 
him the designation of Pih-yu!? (Fish Primus). No mention is made 
of the birth of any other children, though we know, from Ana. V. i., 
that he had at least;one daughter. T he fact of the duke of Loo’s 
sending him a gift on the occasion of Le's birth, shows that he was 
not unknown, but was already commanding public attention and 
the respect of the great.

It was about this time, probably in, the year after his marriage, 
that Confucius took his first public employment, as keeper of the 
stores of grain, is and in the following year he was put in charge of 
the public fields and lands.!4 ` Mencius adduces these employments 
in illustration of his doctrine that the superior man may at times take 
office on account of his poverty, but must confine himself in such a 
case to places of small emolument, and aim at nothing but the dis- 
charge of their humble duties. According to him, Confucius as 
keeper of stores, said, * My calculations must al? be right:—that is 
all I have to care about ;" and when in charge of the public fields, 
\he said, ** The oxen and sheep must be fat and strong and superior: 
—that is all I have to care about.“ 15 It does not appear whether

pe Be II. iv. 10 Ana. IX. vi. 11 REZ HFE 
12 "P Fy em m *£ 4H ff HI. 18 ju zs gi. This is Mencius’ account, b

Ts‘cen says = a E: T Hi, but his subsequent words T] fit show that the office

was the same, 14 Mencius calls this office He IHE while Sze-nia Ts'een says Ja Ti] fk BE.

15 Mencius, V. Pt. II. v. 4.

60]

SECT. I.] LIFE OF CONFUCIUS. (PROLEGOMENA.was the same, 14 Mencius calls this office He IHE while Sze-nia Ts'een says Ja Ti] fk BE.

15 Mencius, V. Pt. II. v. 4.

60]

SECT. I.] LIFE OF CONFUCIUS. (PROLEGOMENA.

these offices were held hy Confucius in the direct employment of the 
State, or asa dependent of the Ke family in whose jurisdiction he 
lived. The present of the carp from the duke may incline us to 
suppase the former. i 
3. In his twenty-second year, Confucius commenced his labours as 
a public teacher, and his house became a resort for young and 
enquiring spirits, who wished to learn the doctrines of antiquity. 
However small the fee his pupils were able to 
p ommencement, of his afford, he never refused his instructions. All 
e that he required, was an ardent desire for 
improvement, and some degree of capacity. 
“J do not open up the truth," he said, “to one who is not eager to 
get knowledge, nor help out any one who is not anxious to explain 
himself. When I have preseuted one corner of a subject to any one, 
and he cannot from it learn the other three, I do not repeat my 
lesson."? i . 
, His mother died in the year B. C. 528, and he resolved that her 
body should lie in the same grave with that of his father, and that 
their common resting place should be in Fang, the first home of the 
K'ung in Loo. But here a difficulty presented itself. His father's 
coffin had been for twenty years, where it had first been deposited, 
off the road of The Five Fathers, in the vicinity of Tsow :— would it 
be right in him to move it? He was relieved from this perplexity 
by an old woman of the neighbourhood, who told him that the 
coffin had only just been put into the ground, as a temporary ar- 
rangement, and not regularly buried. On learning this, he carried 
his purpose into execution. Both coffins were conveyed to Fang, 
and put in the ground together, with no intervening space between 
them, as was the custom in some States. And now came a new 
perplexity. He said to himself, “In old times, they had graves, 
but raised no tumulus over them. But I am a man, who belongs 
equally to the north and the south, the east and the west. I must 
have something by which I can remember the place.” Accordingly 
he raised a mound, four fect high, over the grave, and returned 
home, leaving a party of his disciples to see everything properly 
completed. In the mean time there came on a heavy storm of rain, 
and it was a considerable time before the disciples joined him.1 Ana. VII. vii. 2 Ana. VII. viii. 
61]

PROLEGOMENA,] CONFUCIUS AND IIIS DISCIPLES. Lon. v.

* What makes you so late?" he asked. “The grave in Fang fell 
down," they said. He made no reply, and they repeated their 
answer three times, when he burst into tears, and said, “Ah! they 
did not make their graves so in antiquity.”3 `

Confucius mourned for his mother the.regular period of three 
years, —three years nominally, but in fact only twenty-seven months. 
Five days after the mourning was expired, he played on his lute 
but could not sing. It required other five days before he could 
accompany an instrument with his voice.* i

Some writers have represented Confucius as teaching his disciples 
important lessons from the manner in which he buried his mother, 
and having a design to correct irregularities in the ordinary funeral 
ceremonies of the time. These things are altogether “ without 
book." We simply have a dutiful son paying the last tribute of 
affection to a good parent. In one point he departs from the ancient 
practice, raising a mound over the grave, and when the fresh earth 
gives way from a sudden rain, he is moved to tears, and seems to 
regret his innovation. This sets Confucius vividly before us,—a 
man of the past as much as of the present, whose own natural feelings 
were liable to be hampered in their development by the traditions 
of antiquity which he considered sacred. It is important, however, 
to observe the reason which he gave for rearing the mound. He 
had in it à presentiment of much of his future course. He was “a 
man of the north, the south, tlie cast, and the west." He might 
not confine himself to auy one State. He would travel, and his way 
might be directed to some “ wise ruler," whom his counsels would 
conduct to a benevolent sway that would break forth on every side 
till it transformed the empire.

4. When the mourning for his mother was over, Confucius re- 
mained in Loo, but in what special capacity we do not know. Pro-4. When the mourning for his mother was over, Confucius re- 
mained in Loo, but in what special capacity we do not know. Pro-

bably he continued to encourage the resort of 
9 poten pA NEST quirers to whom he communicated instruc- 
a tion, and pursued his own researches into 
the T. literature, and institutions of the

empire. In the year n.c. 524, the chief of che small State of T'an,1

3 Le Ke, II. Pt. I. i. 10; Pt. II. iii. 30; Pt. I. i. 6. See also the discussion of those passages in 
Keung Yung's ‘Life of Confucius,’ 4 Le Ke, H. Pt. I. i. 22.

1 See the Ts‘un Ts‘ew, under the 7th year of duke Ch'aou.—J E, Ab J Dd gj].

62]

SrcT. Y] LIFE OF CONFUCIUS. (PROLEGOMENA,

made his appearance at the court of Loo, and discoursed in a won- 
derful manner, at a feast given to him by the duke, about the names 
which the most ancient sovercigns, from Hwang-te downwards, gave 
to their ministers. The sacrifices to the emperor Shaou-haou, the 
next in descent from Hwang-te, were maintained in T‘an, so that 
the chicf fancied that he knew all about the abstruse subject on 
which he discoursed. Confucius, hearing about the matter, waited 
on the visitor, and learned from him all that he had to communi- 
rate.?

To the year B. C. 523, when Confucius was twenty-nine years old, 
is referred his studying music under a famous master of the name of 
Séang.3 lle was approaching his 30th year when, as he tells us, “he 
stood”* firm, that is, in his convictions on the subjects of learning 
to which he had bent his mind fifteen years before. Five years 
more, however, were still to pass by, before the anticipation mention- 
ed in the conclusion of the last paragraph began to receive its 
fulfilment,® though we may conclude from the way in which it was 
brought about that he was growing all the time in the estimation 
of the thinking minds in his native State.In the 24th year of duke Ch‘aou, B.c. 517, one of the principal 
ministers of Loo, known by the name of Mang He, died. Seventeen 
years before, he had painfully felt his ignorance of ceremonial obser- 
vances, and had made it his subsequent business to make himself 
acquainted with them. On his deathbed, he addressed his chief 
officer, saying, A knowledge of propriety is the stem of a man. 
Without it he has no means of standing firm. I have heard that 
there is one K*ung Kew, who is thoroughly versed in it. He is a 
descendant of Sages, and though the line of his family was extin- 
guished in Sung, among his ancestors there were Fuh-foo Ilo, who 
resigned the dukedom to his brother, and Ching K'aou-foo, who was

2 This rests on the respectable authority of Tso-k‘cw Ming's annotations on the Ts‘un Ts‘ew, 
but 1 must consider it apocryphal. The legend-writers have fashioned a journey to Tan. The 
slightest bistorical intimation becomes a text with them, on which they enlarge to the glory of 
the suge. Amiot has reproduced aud expanded their romancings, and others, such as Pauthier 
(Chine, pp. 121-183) and Thornton (History of China, vol. I. pp. 151-215) have followed in his 
wake, 8 fili JE See the Tumily Sayings,’ A =, art, X A fE: but the account 
there given is not more credible than the chief of Jaws expositions. 4 Aun. IT. iv.

5 The jonrney to Chow is placed by Sze-ma Tsen before Confucius' holding of his first 
official employments, and Choo He and most other writers follow him. It is a great error, aud 
urisen from a misunderstanding of the passage from the * N Th upon the subject.

63]

PROLEGOMENA] CONFUCIUS AND IIIS DISCIPLES. [cir. v.63]

PROLEGOMENA] CONFUCIUS AND IIIS DISCIPLES. [cir. v.

distinguished for his humility. Tsang Heih has observed that if 
sage men of intelligent virtue do not attain to eminence, distinguish- 
ed men are sure to appear among their posterity. His words are 
now to be verified, I think, in K‘ung K'ew. After my death, you 
must tell Ho-ke to go and study proprieties under him.“ In con- 
sequence of this haig Ho-ke, 7 Mang He's son, who appears in the 
Analects under the name of Mang E,s and a Brother or perhaps 
only a near relative, named Nan-kung King-shuh,® became disciples 
of Confucius. Their wealth and standing in the State gave him a 
position which he had not had before, and he told King-shuh of a 
wish which he had to visit the court of Chow, and especially to 
confer on the subject of ceremonies and music with Laou Tan. King- 
shuh represented the matter to the duke Ch‘aou, who put a carriage 
aud a pair of horses at Confucius’ disposal for the expedition. lAt this time the court of Chow was in the city of Ld," in the 
present department of Ho-nan of the province of the same name. 
The reigning emperor is known by the title of King,!? but the sove- 
reignty was little more than nominal. The state of China was then 
analogons to that of one of the European kingdoms during the pre- 
valence of the feudal system. At the commencement of the dynasty, 
the various States of the empire had been assigned to the relatives 
and adherents of the reigning family. There were thirteen princi- 
palities of greater note, and a large number of smaller dependencies. 
During the vigorous youth of the dynasty, the emperor or lord 
paramount exercised an effective control over the various chiefs, but 
with the lapse of time there came weakness and decay. The chiefs— 
corresponding somewhat to the European dukes, earls, marquises, bar- 
ons, &c.,—Qquarreled and warred among themselves, and the stronger 
among them barely acknowledged their subjection to the emperor. 
A similar condition of things prevailed in each particular State. 
There there were hereditary ministerial families, who were contin- 
ually encroaching on the authority: of their rulers, and the heads of 
those fuinilies again were frequently hard pressed by their inferior 
officers. Such was the state of China in Confucius’ time. The

: * E3. Ka ÆA KIA 
ssec FEM A DAE CES EBT unu

12 K. 10 The Re 51 makes King-shuh accompany Confucius to Chow. It is difficult to 
understand this, if King-shuh were really a son of Mang Ile who had died that year. 11 ie

12 He T Gee. 518-475 
64] '

SECT. 1.] LIFE OF CONFUCIUS. [PRoLEGOMENA.,

reader must have it clearly before him, if he would understand the 
position of the sage, and the reforms which, we shall and, it was 
subsequently his object to introduce.reader must have it clearly before him, if he would understand the 
position of the sage, and the reforms which, we shall and, it was 
subsequently his object to introduce.

Arrived at Chow, he had no intercourse with the court or rany ofthe 
principal ministers. He was there not as a politician, but an inquirer 
about the ceremonies and maxims of the founders of the dynasty. 
Laou Tan, is whom he had wished to see, the acknowledged founder 
of the Taouists, or Rationalistic sect which has maintained its ground 
in opposition to the followers of Confucius, was then a treasury- 
keeper. They met and freely interchanged their views, but no 
reliable account of their conversations has been preserved. Jn the 
5th Book of the Le Ke, which is headed, “The philosopher Tsang 
asked," Confucius refers four times to the views of Laou-tsze on 
certain points of funeral ceremonies, and in the Family Sayings,” 
Book xxiv., he tells Ke K‘ang what he had heard from him about 
“The Five Tes,” but we may hope their conversation turned also on 
more important subjects. Sze-ma Ts'een, favourable to Laou-tsze, 
‘makes him lecture his visitor in the following style: Those whom 
you talk about are dead, and their bones are mouldered to dust; 
only their words remain. When the supcrior man gets his time, he 
mounts aloft; but when the time is against him, he moves as if his 
feet were entangled. J have heard that a good merchant, though 
he has rich treasures deeply stored, appears as if he were poor, and 
that the superior man whose virtue is complete, is yet to outward 
seeming stupid. Put away your proud air and many desires, your 
insinuating habit and wild will.!“ These are of no advantage to 
you. This is all which I have to tell you," On the other hand, 
Confucius is made to say to his disciples, “I know how birds can 
fly, how fishes can swim, and how animals can run. But the run- 
ner may be snared, the swimmer.may be hooked, and the flyer may 
be shot by the arrow. But there is the dragon. I cannot tell how 
he mounts on the wind through the clouds, and rises to heaven, 
To-day I have seen Laou-tsze, and can only compare him to the 
dragon."1513 According to Sze-ma Ts‘een, Tan was the posthumous epithet of this PUE whose 
surname was Le (AX), nume Urh EE and designation Pih-yang dü n ). 143 3h NE

i Hi vg xis Au 18 See the B EMI Al t 5 = z> and compare the remarks deis to

Laou-tsze in the account of the Kung family near the beginning.

65] l ' `

PROLEGOMENA. | CONFUCIUS AND IIIS DISCIPLES. feu. v.

While at Ló, Confucius walked over the grounds set apart for 
the great sacrifices to Heaven and Earth; inspected the pattern of 
the Hall of Light, built to give audience in to the princes of the 
empire; and examined all the arrangements of the ancestral 
temple and the court. From the whole he received a profound 
impression. “Now,” said he with a sigh, “I know the sage wisdom 
of the duke of Chow, and how the house of Chow attained to the 
inperialsway."$ On the walls of the Hall of Light were paintings 
of the ancient sovereigns from Yaou and Shun downwards, their 
characters appearing in the representations of them, and words of 
praise or warning being appended. There was also a picture of the 
duke of Chow sitting with his infant nephew, the king Shing, upon 
his knees, to five audience to all the princes. Confucius surveyed 
the scene with silent delight, and then said to his followers, “ Here 
you see how Chow became so great. As we use a glass to examine 
the forms of things, so must we study antiquity in order to under- 
stand the present.“ 17 In the hall of the ancestral temple, there was 
a metal statue of a man with three clasps upon his mouth, and his 
back covered over with an enjoyable homily on the duty of keeping 
2 watch upon the lips. Confucius turned to his disciples and said, 
“Observe it, my children. These words are true, aud commend 
themselves to our feelings.”!8About music he made inquiries at Chang Hwang, „to whom the 
following remarks are attributed: “ I have observed about Chung- 
ne many marks of a sage. His has river eyes and a dragon forehead, 
—the very characteristics of Hwang-te. His arms are long, his 
back is like a tortoise, and he is ning feet six inches in height, —the 
very semblance of T'ang the Completer. When he speaks, he praises 
the ancient kings. He moves along the path of humility and 
courtesy. He has heard of every subject, and retains with a strong 
memory. His knowledge of things seems inexhaustible—Have we 
not in hin the rising of a sage?“

I have given these notices of Confucius at the court of Chow, 
more as being the only ones I could find, than because I put much 
faith in them. He did not remain there long, but returned the 
same year to Loo, and continued his work of teaching. His fame

16, 17, 18 Sae the Ae BH. AN LL art. 91 JÀ]- 19 Quoted by Keang Yung from The 
Family Sayings.’

66]

secr. 1.] ' LIFE OF CONFUCIUS., (PROLEQOMENA,

was greatly increased ; disciples came to him from different parts, 
till their number amounted to three thousand. Several of those 
who have come down to us as the most distinguished among his 
followers, however, were yet unborn, and the statement just given 
may be considered as an exaggeration. We are not to conceive of 
the disciples as forming a community, and living together. Parties 
of them may have done so. We shall find Confucius hereafter 
always moving amid a company of admiring pupils; but the greater 
number must have had their proper avocations and ways of living, 
and would only resort to the master, when they" wished specially to 
ask his counsel or to learn of him.

5. In the year sueceeding the return to Loo, that State fell into 
great confusion. There were three Families in it, all connected 
irregularly with the ducal house, who had long kept the rulers in a5. In the year sueceeding the return to Loo, that State fell into 
great confusion. There were three Families in it, all connected 
irregularly with the ducal house, who had long kept the rulers in a

condition of dependency. They appear fre- 
e ici quently in the Analects as the Ke clan, the 
55 Shuh, and the Mäng; and while Confucius 
freely spoke of their usurpations, 1 he was a sort of dependent of the 
Ke family, and appears in frequent communication with members of 
all the three. In the year B. C. 516, the duke Ch'aou came to open 
hostilities with them, and being worsted, fled into Ts‘e, the State 
adjoining Loo on the north. Thither Confucius also repaired, that 
he might avoid the prevailing disorder of his native State. me 
was then under the government of a duke, afterwar ds styled King; 
who “had a thousand teams, each of four horses, but on the day « i 
his death the people did not praise him for a single virtue.” Jis 
chief minister, however, was Gan Ying,* a man of considerable ability 
and worth. At his court the music of the ancient sage-emperor, 
Shun, originally brought to Tse from the State of Ts‘in,® was still 
preserved.

According to the “ Family Sayings,” an incident oceurred on the 
way to Tse, which I may transfer to these pages as a good speci- 
men of the way in which Confucius turned occurring matters to 
account, in his intercourse with his disciples.. As he was passing 
by the side of the Tac mountain, there was a woman weeping and 
wailing by a grave. Confucius bent forward in his carriage, and

1 See Analects, III. i., ii., et al, 2. 277 N. 3 Ana. XVI. xii. 4 AD PH This 
is the same who was afterwards styled 2" op ip. 5 pg.

671

FROLEGOMENA.] CONFUCIUS AND IIIS DISCIPLES. len. v.1 See Analects, III. i., ii., et al, 2. 277 N. 3 Ana. XVI. xii. 4 AD PH This 
is the same who was afterwards styled 2" op ip. 5 pg.

671

FROLEGOMENA.] CONFUCIUS AND IIIS DISCIPLES. len. v.

after listening to her for some time, sent Tsze-loo to ask the cause of 
her grief. “You weep, as if you had experienced sorrow upon 
sorrow,” said Tsze-loo. The woman replied, “It is so. My hus- 
band’s father was killed here by a tiger, and my husband also ; and 
now my son has met the same fate.” Confucius asked her why she did 
not remove from the place, and on her answering, * There is here no 
oppressive government," he turned to his disciples, and said, My 
children, remember this, Oppressive government is fiercer than a 
tiger."6 
As soon as he crossed the border from Loo, we are told he 
discovered from the gait and manners of a boy, whom he saw carrying 
a pitcher, the influence of the sage’s music, and told the driver of his 
carriage to hurry on to the capital? Arrived there, he heard the 
strain, and was so ravished with it, that for three months he did 
-not know the taste of flesh. “I did not think," he said, “that 
music could have been made so excellent as this.“? The duke King 
was pleased with the conferences which he had with bim, 9 and 
proposed to assign to him the town of Lin-k’ew, from the revenues 
of which he might derive a sufficient support; but Confucius refused 
the gift, and said to his disciples,” * A superior man will only receive 
reward for services which he has done. I have given advice to the 
duke King, but he has not yet obeyed it, and now he would endow 
me with this place! Very far is he from understanding me.”!0 
On one occasion the duke asked about government, and received 
the characteristic reply, “There is government when the prince is 
prince, and the minister is minister; when the father is father, and 
the son is son.“ 11 I say that the reply is characteristic. Once, when 
Tsz-loo asked him what he would consider the first thing to be done 
if entrusted with the government of a State, Confucius answered, 
What is necessary is to rectify names.“ 1? The disciple thought the6 See the Be ae, 4s yy. art, IE EI fiz. I have translated, however, from the Le Ke, 
II. Pt II. iii. 10, where the same incident is given, with some variations, and without saying 
when or where it occurred, 7 See the uit Ki 4s -+ JL. p. 18. 8 Ana, VII. xiii.

9 Some of these are related in the Family Sayings ;—about the burning of the ancestral shrine 
of the emperor $5 and a one-footed bird which appeared hopping and flapping its wings in Ts‘e. 
They are plainly fabulous, though quoted in proof of Confucius’ sage wisdom, This reference to 
them is more than enough. 10 Be EUM 4s . 11. Aua. XII. xi. 
12 Ana. XIII. iii.

. 68]

4

sEOr. 1.] LIFE OF CONFUCIUS. . PROLEGOMENA,

reply wide of the mark, but it was substantially the same with what 
he'said to the duke King. There is a sufficient foundation in 
nature for government in the several relations of society, and if 
those be W and developed according to their relative 
significancy, it is sure to obtain. This was a “frat principle in the 
political ethics of Confucius.Another day the duke got to a siinilar inquiry the reply that the 
art of government lay in an economical use of the revenues; and 
being pleased, he resumed his purpose of retaining the philosopher in 
lis State, and proposed to assign to him the fields of Ne-k'e. His 
chief minister Gan Ying dissuaded him from the purpose, saying, 
* Those scholars are impracticable, and cannot be imitated. They 
are haughty and conccited of their own views, so that they will not 
be content in inferior positions. They set a high value on all 
funeral ceremonies, give way to their grief, and will waste their 
property on great burials, so that they would only be injurious to the 
common manners, This Mr K‘ung has a thousand peculiarities. It 
would take generations to exhaust all that he knows about the 
ceremonies of going up and going down. This is not, the time to 
examine into his rules of propriety. If you, prince, wish to employ 
him to change the customs of Ts‘e, you will not be making the 
people your primary consideration."!3

I had rather believe that these were not the words of Gan Ying, 
but they must represent pretty correctly the sentiments of many 
of the statesmen of the time about Confucius. The duke of Ts‘e 
got tired ere long of having such a monitor about him, and observ- 
ed, “I cannot treat him as I would the chief of the Ke family. I 
will treat him in a way between that accorded to the chief of the Ke, 
‘and that given to the chief of the Mang family.” Finally he said, “I 
am old; I cannot use his doctrines."!* These observations were made 
directly to Confucius, or came to his hearing.!5 It was not corisis- 
tent with his self-respect to remain longer in Ts'e, and he returned 
to Loo.!6

6. Returned to Loo, he remained for the long period of about

13 See the B at, 3L J HE Zio p. 2. 14 Ana. XVIII. iii. 15 Sze- ma Ts'een6. Returned to Loo, he remained for the long period of about

13 See the B at, 3L J HE Zio p. 2. 14 Ana. XVIII. iii. 15 Sze- ma Ts'een

makes the first observation to have been addressed directly to Confucius. 16 According to 
the above account Confucius was only once, and for a portion of two years, in Ts'e, For the 
refutation of contrary accounts, sce Keang Yung's Life of the sage.

69]

PROLEGOMENA.] CONFUCIUS AND IIIS DISCIPLES. en. v.

fifteen years without being engaged in any official employment. It69]

PROLEGOMENA.] CONFUCIUS AND IIIS DISCIPLES. en. v.

fifteen years without being engaged in any official employment. It

was a time, indeed, of great disorder. The duke 
"s ae without Chaou continued a refugee in Ts'e, the govern- 
Reker: ment being in the hands of the great Families, up 
to his death in m.c. 509, on which event the rightful heir was set 
aside, and another member of the ducal house, known to us by the 
title of Ting,! substituted in his place. The ruling authority of the 
principality became thus still more enfeebled than it had been be- 
fore, and, on the other hand, the chiefs of the Ke, the Shuh, and the 
Mang, could hardly keep their ground against their own officers. 
Of those latter the two most conspicuous were Yang Hoo,? called 
also Yang Ho, and Kung-shan F uh-jaou.t At one time Ke Hwan, 
the most powerful of the chiefs, was kept a prisoner by Yang Hoo, 
and was obliged to make terms with him in order to secure his 
liberation. Confucius would give his countenance to none, as he 
disapproved of all, and he studiously kept aloof from them. Of how 
he comported himself among thém we have a specimen in the inci- 
dent related in the Analects, xvi. i.—“ Yang Ho wished to see Con- 
fucius, but Confucius would not go to see him. On this, he sent a 
present of a pig to Confucius, who, having chosen a time when Ho 
was not at home, went to pay his respects for the gift. He met 
him, however, on the way. ‘Come, let me speak with you,’ said the 
officer. ‘Can he be called benevolent, who keeps his jewel in his 
bosom, and leaves his country to confusion?’ Confucius replied, 
‘No.’ ‘Can he be called wise, who is anxious to be engaged in 
public employment, and yet is constantly losing the opportunity of 
being so?’ Confucius again said, ‘No.’ The other added, ‘The 
days and months are passing away; the years do not wait for us.’ 
Confucius said, ‘Right; I will go into office.” Chinese writers are 
eloquent in their praises of the sage for the combination of propriety, 
complaisance, and firmness, which they see in his behaviour in this 
matter. To myself there seems nothing remarkable in it but a 
somewhat questionable dexterity. But it was well for the fame of 
Confucius that his time was not occupied during those years with 
official services. He turned them to better account, prosecuting his 
researches into the poctry, history, ceremonies, and music of the 
empire. Many disciples continued to resort to him, and the legendaryE A. 2 N. % H. I 3h oh ab db 
70]

SECT. 1.) LIFE OF CONFUCIUS. (PROLEGOMENA,

writers tell us how he employed their services in digesting the results 
of his studies. I must repeat, however, that several of them, whose 
names are most famous, such as Tsing Sin, were as yet children, and 
Min Sun? was not born till s.c. 500. `

To this period we must refer the almost single instance which 
we have of the manner of Confucius’ intercourse. with his son Le. 
“ Have you heard any lessons from your father different from what 
wo have all heard?“ asked one of the disciples once of Le. No,“ 
said Le. “He was standing alone once, when I was passing through 
the court below with hasty steps, and said to me, Have you read the 
Odes?’ On my replying, Not yet,’ he added, ‘If you do not learn 
the Odes, you will not be fit to converse with.’ Another day, in the 
sume place and the same way, he said to me, ‘Have you read the 
rules of Propriety? On my replying, Not yet,’ he added, ‘If you 
do not learn the rules of Propriety, your character cannot be establish- 
ed.“ I have heard only these two things from him." The disciple 
was delighted and observed, “1 asked one thing, and I have got 
three things. I have heard about the Odes. I have heard about 
the rules of Propriety. I have also heard that the superior man 
maintains a distant reserve towards his son.”6

I can easily believe that this distant reserve was the rule which 
Confucius followed generally in his treatment of his son. A stern 
dignity is the quality which a father has to maintain upon his system, 
It is not to be without the element of kindness, but that must never 
go beyond’ the line of propriety. There is too little room left for the 
play and development of natural affection.The divorce of his wife must also have taken place during these 
years, if it ever took place at all, which is a disputed point. The 
curious reader will find the question discussed in the notes on the 
second Book of the Le Ke. The evidence inclines, I think, against 
the supposition that Confucius did put his wife away. When she 
died, at a period subsequent to ihe preseut, Le kept on weeping 
aloud for her after the period for such a demonstration of gricf had 
expired, when Confucius sent a message to him that his sorrow must 
be subdued, and the obedient son dried his tears.7 We are glad to 
kuow that ou one occasion—the death of his favourite disciple, Yen

b A lii. 6. Ana XVI. xiii, 7 See the Le Ke II. Pt Li, 27.

71]

PROLEGOMENA. ] CONFUCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. lou. v-

IIwuy—the tears of Confucius himself would flow over and above 
the measure of propriety.®

7 We come to the short period of Confucius' officiallife. In the

Heholasofice, Year B. 0. 501, things had come to a head between the 
B.C. 500-406. chiefs of the three Families and their ministers, and 
had resulted in the defeat of the latter. In s.c. 500, the resources 
of Yang Hoo were exhausted, and he fled into Ts'e, so that the 
State was delivered from its greatest troubler, and the way was 
made more clear for Confucius to go into office, should an oppor- 
tunity occur. It soom presented itself. Towards the end of that 
year he was made chief magistrate of the town of Chung-too.1Just before he received this appointment, a circumstance occured 
of which we do not well know what to make. When Yang-hoo fled 
into Ts‘e, Kung-shan Fuh-jaou, who had been confederate with him, 
continued to maintain an attitude of rebellion, and held the city of 
Pe against the Ke family. Thence he sent a message to Confucius 
inviting him to join him, and the sage seemed so inclined to go 
that his disciple Tsze-loo remonstrated with him, saying, Indeed 
you cannot go! why must you think of going to sce Kung-shan?" 
Confucius replied, “Can it be without some reason that he has in- 
vited me? If any one employ me, may I not make an eastern 
Chow?"? The upshot, however, was that he did not go, and I 
cannot suppose that he had ever any serious intention of doing so. 
Amid the general gravity of his intercourse with his followers, there 
gleam out a few iustances of quiet pleasantry, when he amused him- 
self by playing with their notions about him. This was probably 
one of them.

As magistrate of Chung-too he produced a marvellous reformation 
of the manners of the people in a short time. According to the 
“Family Sayings,” he enacted rules for the nourishing of the living 
and all observances to the dead. Different food was assigned to the 
old and the young, and different burdens to the strong and the weak. 
Males and females kept apart from each other in the streets. A

8 Ana. XI. ix.

1 r1 i . Amiot says this was ‘la ville meme ou le Souverain tenoit sa Cour’ (Vie de 
Confucius, p. 147). He is followed of course by Thornton and Pauthier. My reading has not shown 
me that such was the case. In the notes to K‘ang-he’s edition of the ‘Five King, Le Ke, II. 
Pt. I. iii. 4, it is simply said—' Chuug-too,—the name of a town of Loo. It afterwards belonged 
to To when it was called Ping-luh (2 [V^ — 2 Ana, XVII. v.

12] :

seer. s] ` LIFE OF CONFUCIUS. (PROLEGOMENA,12] :

seer. s] ` LIFE OF CONFUCIUS. (PROLEGOMENA,

thing dropt on the road was not picked up. There was no fraudu- 
lent carving of vessels. Inner coffins were made four inches thick, 
and the outer ones five. Graves were made on the high grounds, 
no mounds being raised over them, and no trees planted about them. 
Within twelve M the princes of the States all about w ished to 
imitate his style of administration.

The duke Ting, surprised at what he saw, asked whether his rules 
could be employed to govern a whole State, and Confucius told him 
that they might be applied to the whole empire. On this the duke 
appointed him assistant-superintendent of Works,“ in which capacity 
he surveyed the lands of the State, and made many improvements in 
agriculture, From this he was quickly made minister of Crime,5 
and the appointment was enough to put an end to crime. There 
was no necessity to put the penal laws in execution. No offenders 
showed theinsel ves.“These indiscriminating eulogies are of little value. One inci- 
dent, related in the annotations of Tso-k'ew on the Tsun Ts‘ew,7 
commends itself at once to our belief, as in harmony with Confucius’ 
character, The chief of the Ke, pursuing with his enmity the duke 
Ch'aou, even after his death, had placed his grave apart from the 
graves of his predecessors; and Confucius surrounded the ducal 
cemetery with a ditch so as to include the solitary resting-place, boldly 
telling the chief that he did it to hide his disloyalty. But he signa- 
lized himself most of all, in B.c. 499, by his behaviour at an interview 
between the dukes of Loo and Ts‘e, at a place called Shih-k‘e,® and 
Ke&-kuh,!? in the present district of Lae-woo, in the department of 
"'ae-gan.! Confucius was present as master of ceremonies on the 
part of Loo, and the meeting was professedlv pacific. The two 
princes were to form a covenant of alliance: The principal officer 
on the part of Ts'e, however, despising Confucius as “a man of 
ceremonies, without courage,” had advised his sovereign to make 
the duke of Loo. a prisoner, and for this purpose a. band of the half 
savage original inhabitants of the place advanced with weapons to 
the stage where the two dukes were met. Confucius understood

A EH, Bk J. 4 t] Pad This offiee, however, wae held by the chief of the Mang

family, We must understand chat Confucius was only an assistant to him, or P d for

him, 5 X ü] . * Ze RB, Be l. 7 EEA Tt aE 8 Be REO 
Bk I v tit 3E. "o n BE Ze ef. AE de Re it

73]

PROLEGOMENA.] CONFUCIUS AND IIIS DISCIPLES. [cu v.him, 5 X ü] . * Ze RB, Be l. 7 EEA Tt aE 8 Be REO 
Bk I v tit 3E. "o n BE Ze ef. AE de Re it

73]

PROLEGOMENA.] CONFUCIUS AND IIIS DISCIPLES. [cu v.

the scheme, and said to the opposite party, “Our two princes are 
inet for a pacific object. For you to bring a band of savage vassals 
to disturb the meeting with their weapons, is not the way in which 
Ts‘e can expect to give law to the princes of the empire. These . 
barbarians have nothing to do with our Great Flowery land. Such 
vassals may not interfere with our covenant. Weapons are out of 
place at such a meeting. As before the spirits, such conduct is 
unpropitious. In point of virtue, itis contrary to right. As betwcen 
man and man, it is not polite." The duke of Ts‘e ordered the dis- 
turbers off, but Confucius withdrew, carrying the duke of Loo with 
him. ‘The business proceeded, notwithstanding, and when the words 
of the alliance were being read on the part of Ts‘e,—“ So be it to 
Loo, if it contribute not 300 chariots of war to the help of Ts‘e, 
when its army goes across its borders,” a messenger from Confucius 
added,.“ And so be it to us, if we obey your orders, unless you 
return to us the fields on the south of the Wan.” At the conclusion 
of the ceremonies, the prince of Ts‘e wanted to give a grand entertain- 
ment, but Confucius demonstrated that such a thing would be con- 
trary to the established rules of propriety, his real object being to 
keep his sovereign, out of danger. In this way the two parties 
separated, they of Ts‘e filled with shame at being foiled and disgraced 
by “the man of ceremonies," and the result was that the lands of 
Loo which had been appropriated by Ts‘e were restored.!?For two years more Confucius held the office of minister of Crime. 
Some have supposed that he was further raised to the diguity of 
chief minister of the State,!? but that was not the case. One instance 
of the manner in which he executed his functions is worth recording. 
When any matter came before him, he took the opinion of different 
individuals upon it, and in giving judgment would say, “I decide 
according to the view of so and so.“ There was an approach to our 
jury system in the plan, Confucius' object being to enlist general 
sympathy, and carry the public judgment with him in his adininistra- 
tion of justice. A father having brought some charge against his 
son, Confucius kept them both in prison for three months, without

12 This meeting at Këð-kuh is related in Sze-ma Ts‘een, the Family Sayings, and Kuh-leang, 
with many exaggerations, I have followed Æ N 485. E. A^ E 2E. 13 The Be ae 
says, Bk IL, XL P fà 10 E] AE dii Al Hi. But he was a ANY only in the scuse of

au assistant of ceremonies, as at the mecting in Këá-kuh, described above.

74]

BECT. t.] LIFE OF CONFUCIUS. [PROLEGOMENA,

s

making any difference in favour of the father, and then wished to 
dismiss them both. The head of the Ke was dissatisfied, and said, 
* You are playing with me, Sir minister of Crime. Formerly you 
told me that in a State or a family filial duty was the first thiug to 
be insisted on. What hinders you now from putting to death this 
unfilial son as an example to all the people?" Confucius with a 
sigh replied, “ When superiors s fail in their duty, and yet go to put 
their inferiors to.death, it is not right, This father has not taught 
his son to be filial;—to listen to his charge would be to slay the 
guiltless. ‘The manners of the age have been long in a sad condi- 
tion; we cannot expect the people not to be transgressing the laws.”4At this time two of his disciples, Tsze-loo and Tsze-yew, entered 
the employment of the Ke family, and lent their influence, the for- 
mer especially, to forward the plans of their master. One great 
cause of disorder in the State was the fortified cities held by the 
three chicfs, in which they could defy the supreme authority, and 
were in turn defied themselves by their officers. ‘Those cities were 
like the castles of the barons of England in the time of the Norman 
kings. Confucius had their destruction very much at heart, and 
‘partly by the influence of persuasion, and partly by the assisting 
counsels of Tsze-loo, he accomplished his object in regard to Pe, l the 
chief city of the Ke, and How, 16 the chief city of the Shuh.

It does not appear that he succeeded in the same way in disman- 
tliug Shing, 7 the chief city of the Mang ;!? but his authority in the 
State greatly increased. “He, strengthened the ducal House and 
weakened the private Families. He exalted the sovereign, and 
depressed the ministers. A transforming government went abroad. 
Dishonesty and dissoluteness were ashamed and hid their heads. 
Loyalty aud good faith became the characteristics of the men, and 
chastity and docility those of the women. Strangers came in crowds 
from other States." Confucius became the idol of the people, and 
flew in songs through their moutlis. 20

14 See the HR B zm. Bk IL 15 pu. 16 mu 17 . 18 In connection 
Eai

with these eveuts, o Family Sayings and Sze-ma Ts'cen mention the summary punishment

inflicted by Confucius on an able but unscrupulous and insidious officer, the Sbaou-ching. Maou

A " IE HI). His judgment and death occupy a conspicuous place in the legendary accounts,

Wa the Analects, Tsze-sze, Mencius, and "Tso-k'ew Ming are all silent about it, and Keang

Mobi. rightly rejects it, as one óf the many narratives invented to exalt the sage. 19 Sce the

7 uh 15 , Bk II. 20 See yL i F. quoted by Keang Yung. 
75Mobi. rightly rejects it, as one óf the many narratives invented to exalt the sage. 19 Sce the

7 uh 15 , Bk II. 20 See yL i F. quoted by Keang Yung. 
75

PROLEGOMENA] CONFUCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. fen. v.

But this sky of bright promise was soon overeast, As the fame 
of the reformations in Loo went abroad, the neighbouring princes 
began to be afraid. The duke of ''s'e said, ** With Confucius at the 
head of its government, Loo will become supreme among the States, 
and Ts‘e which is nearest to it will be the first swallowed up. Let 
us propitiate it by a surrender of territory." One of his ministers 
proposed they should first try to separate between the sage and his 
sovercign, and to effect this, they hit upon the following scheme. 
Eighty beautiful girls, with musical and dancing accomplishments, 
were selected, aud a hundred and twenty of the finest horses that 
could be found, and sent as a present to duke Ting. They were put 
up at first outside the city, and Ke Hwan having gone in disguise to 
see them, forgot the lessons of Confucius, and took the duke to look 
at the bait. They were both captivated. The women were received, 
and the sage was neglected. For three days the duke gave no 
audience to his ministers. “ Master,” said Tsze-loo to Confucius, “it 
is time for you to be going." But Confucius was very unwilling 
to leave. The spring was coming on, when the great sacrifice to 
IIeaven would be offered, and he determined to wait and see whether 
the solemnity of that would bring the duke back to his right mind. 
No such result followed. The ceremony was hurried through, and 
portions of the offerings were not sent round to the various ministers, 
according to the established custom. Confucius regretfully took 
his departure, going away slowly and by casy stages?! He would 
have welcomed a messenger of recall. ‘The duke continued in his 
abandoument, and the sage went forth to thirteen weary years of 
homeless wandering.8. On leaving Loo, Confucius first bent his steps westward to the 
State of Wei, situate about where the present provinces of Chih-le

5 and Ho-nan adjoin. He was now in his 56th 
to State. l year, and felt depressed and melancholy. As 
5.0. 496—483, i ;

he went along, he gave expression to his feel- 
ings in verse :— 
“Fain would I still look towards Loo, 
But this Kwei hill cuts off iny view. 
With an axe, I'd hew the thickets through. :— 
Vain thought! 'gainst the hill I nought can do;"

21 gd aL, 3L F III. Be p. 5. Sve also Mencius, V. Pt. II. i. 4; et a) 
16]

SECT, l.] LIFE OF CONFUCIUS. (rnorgcoxENA.

and again, — 
“Through the valley howls the blast, 
Drizzliug rain falls thick and fast.

' Tlomew onl goes the youthful bride, 
(Yer the wild, crowds by her side. 
llow is it, O azure Heaven,

From my home I thus am driven,

Through the land my way to trace,

With no certain dwelling-place ?

Dark, dark, the minds of men!

Worth in vain comes to their ken.

Hastens on my term of years; 
Old age, desolate, appears.“

A number of his disciples accompanied him, and his sadness in- 
fected them. When they arrived at the borders of Wei, at a place 
called E, the warden sought an interview, and on coming out from 
the sage, he tried to comfort the disciples, saying,“ My tr riends, why 
are you distressed at your Master's loss of office? The empire has 
been long without the principles of truth and right; Heaven is 
going to use your master as a bell with its wooden tongue.” Such

was the thought of this friendly stranger. The bell did indeed 
sound, but few liad ears to hear.was the thought of this friendly stranger. The bell did indeed 
sound, but few liad ears to hear.

Confucius! fame, however, had gone before him, and he was in 
little danger of having to suffer from want. On arriving at the capital 
of Wei, he lodged at first with a worthy officer, named Yen Ch‘ow- 
yew.? The reigning duke, known to us by the epithet of Ling,“ was 
u worthless, dissipated man, but he could not neglect a visitor of 
such eminence, and soon assigned to Confucius a revenue of 60,000 
measures of grain.” Here he remained for ten months, and then for 
some reason left it to go to Ch'in. On the way he had to pass by 
K‘wang,’ a place probably in the present department of K‘ae-fung 
in Ho-nan, which had formerly suffered from Yang-hoo. It so hap- 
pened that Confucius resembled Hoo, and the atteution of the people 
being called to him by the movements of his carriage-driver, they 
thought it was their old enemy, and made an attack upon him. His

1 See Keang Yung's Life of Confucius, EE " A] AE M. 2 Ana. III. xxiv. 
3 Ul t fie Ef- See Mencius, V. Pt. I. viii, 2. 4 Re ZB AM 5 See the Eu Hl»

3L 3- llb K. 5. e p El. E.

-1 
~i 
L—

PROLEGOMENA,] CONFUCIUS AND IIIS DISCIPLES. Lon. v.

followers were alarmed, but he was calm, and tried to assure them 
by declaring his belief that he had a divine mission. He said to 
them, After the death of king Wan, was not the cause of truth 
lodged here in me? If Heaven had wislied to let this cause of truth 
perish, then I, a future mortal, should not have got such a relation 
to that cause. While Heaven does not let the cause of truth perish, 
what can the people of K wang do to me?”8 Having escaped from 
the hands of his assailants, he does not seem to have carried out his 
purpose of going to Ch‘in, but returned to Wei.On the way, he passed a house where he had formerly been lodged, 
and finding that the master was dead, and the funeral ceremonies 
going on, he went in to condole and weep. When he came out, 
he told Tsze-kung to take one of the horses from his carriage, and 
give it as a contribution to the expenses of the occasion. “ You never 
did such a thing," Tsze-kung remonstrated, *at the funeral of any 
of your disciples; is it not too great a gift on this occasion of the 
death of an old host?“ When I went in," replied Confucius, “my 
presence brought a burst of grief from the chief mourner, and [ 
joined him with my tears. I dislike the thought of my tears not 
being followed by any thing. Do it, my child."9

On reaching Wei, he lodged with Keu Pih-yuh, an officer of whom 
honourable mention is made in the Analects.!° But this time he 
did not remain long in the State. The duke was marritd 
to a lady of the house of Sung, known by the name of 
Nan-tsze, notorious for her intrigues and wickedness. She sought 
an interview with the sage, which he was obliged unwillingly to 
accord. No doubt he was innocent of thought or act of evil, 
but it gave great dissatisfaction to Tsze-loo that his master 
should have been in company with such a woman, and Con- 
fucius, to assure him, swore an oath, saying, Wherein I have done 
improperly, may Heaven reject me! May Heaven reject me!"1? He 
could not well abide, however, about such a court. One day the 
duke rode out through the streets of his capital in the same carriage 
with Nan-tsze, and made Confucius follow them in another. P erhaps

B. C. 495.

8 Ana, IX, v. In Ana. XI. xxii, there is another reference to this time, in which Yen IIwuy 
is made to appear, 9 Sce the Le Ke, II. Pt. I. ii. 16. 10 Ana. XIV. x£vi; XV. vi.

11 Sce the account in the gd aU, yL -F {tt Be p. 6. 12 Ana. VL xxvi. 
18]

BECT, I.] LIFE OF CONFUCIUS. (PROLEGOMENA,11 Sce the account in the gd aU, yL -F {tt Be p. 6. 12 Ana. VL xxvi. 
18]

BECT, I.] LIFE OF CONFUCIUS. (PROLEGOMENA,

he intended to honour the philosopher, but the people saw the in- 
congruity, and cried out, “Lust in the front; virtue behind!” 
Confucius was ashamed, and made the observation, “I have not 
seey one who loves virtue as he loves beanty."3 Wei was no place 
for him. He left it, and took his way towards Ch'in.Ch'in which formed part of the present province of Ho-nan, lay 
south from Wei. After passing the small State of Ts‘aou,!* he 
approached the borders of Sung, occupying the present prefecture 
of Kwei-tih, and had some intentions of entering it, when an incident 
occurred, which it is not easy to understand from the meagre style 
in which it is related, but which gave occasion to a remarkable say- 
ing. Confucius was practising ceremonies with his disciples, we are 
told, under the shade of a large tree. Hwan T‘uy, an ill-minded 
ofticer of Sung, heard of it, and sent a band of men to pull down the 
tree, and kill the philosopher, if they could get hold of him. The dis- 
ciples were much alarmed, but Confucius observed, Heaven has pro- 
duced the virtue that isin.me;—what can Hwan T'uy do to me?"!5 
They all made their escape, but seem to have been driven westwards 
to the State of Ching, ls on arriving at the gate conducting into which 
from the east, Confucius found himself separated from his followers. 
Tsze-kung had arrived before him, and was told by a native of 
Ch'ing that there was a mau standing by the east gate, with a fore- 
head like Yaou, a neck like Kaou-yaou, his shoulders on a level 
with those of Tsze-ch‘an, but wanting, below the waist, three inches 
of the height of Yu, and altogether having the disconsolate appear- 
ance of a stray dog." Tsze-kung knew it was the master, hastened 
to him, and repeated to his great amusement the description which 
the man had given. “The bodily appearance,” said Confucius, “is 
but a small matter, but to say I was like a stray dog—capital! 
eapital!"!7 The stay they made at Ch'ing was short, and by the end 
of. B. 0. 495, Confucius was in Chin.

All the next year he remained there lodging with the warder of the 
city wall, an officer of worth, of the name of Ching,!8 and we have 
no accounts of him which deserve to be related here.!9All the next year he remained there lodging with the warder of the 
city wall, an officer of worth, of the name of Ching,!8 and we have 
no accounts of him which deserve to be related here.!9

13 Ana, IX. xvii, 1:88. 15 Ana, IX, xxii 16 Hf. — 17 See the FA Si. 
XL Be it £. p 6. 18 tij UX H F. Sce Mencius, V. Pt I. viii. 3. 19 Keang

Yung digests in this place two foolish stories,—about a large bone found in tlie State of Yut, and 
a bird which appeared in Chitin and died, shot through with a remarkable arrow. Confucius 
knew all about them.

79]

PHOLEGOMENA.] CONFUCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. cn. v.

"

In s.c. 493, Chn was much disturbed by attacks from Woo,” a 
large State, the capital of which was in the present department of 
Soo-chow, and Confucius determined to retrace his steps to Wei. 
On the way he was laid hold of at a place called P*oo,?! which was 
held by a rebellious officer against Wei, and before he could get 
away, he was obliged to engage that he would not proceed thither. 
Thither, notwithstanding, he continued his route, and when Tsze- 
kung asked him whether it was right to violate the oath he had 
taken, he replied, “It was a forced oath. The spirits do not hear 
such."? "The duke Ling received him with distinction, but paid no 
more attention to his lessons than before, and Confucius is said then 
to have uttered his complaint, If there were any of the princes who 
would employ me, in the course of twelve months I should have 
done something considerable. In three years the government would 
be perfected.“ 23 lA circumstance occurred to direct his attention to the State of. 
Tsin,?# which occupied the southern part of the present Shan-se, 
and extended over the Yellow river into Ho-nan. An invitation 
caine to Confucius, like that which he had formerly received from 
Kung-shan Fuh-jaou. Peil Heih, an officer of Tsin, who was hold- 
ing the town of Chung-mow against his chief, invited him to visit 
him, and Confucius was inclined to go. Tsze-loo was always the 
mentor on such occasions. He said to him, “Master, I.have 
heard you say, that when a man in his own person is guilty of do- 
ing evil, a superior man wilk not associate with hin. Peih Heih is 
in rebellion ; if you go to him, what shall be said?” Confucius replied, 
“Yes, I did use those words. But is it not said that if a thing be 
really hard, it may be ground without being made thin ; and if it 
be really white, it may be steeped in a dark fluid without being made 
black? Am I a bitter gourd? Am I to be hung up out of the way 
of being eaten ? "25

These sentiments sound strangely from his lips. After all, he did 
not go to Peih Heih; and having travelled as far as the Yellow 
river that he might see one of the principal ministers of Tsin, he 
heard of the violent death of two men of worth, and returned to

t ie > d ; 1. 
20 DL. 21 sili 22. This is related by Sze-ma Ts‘cen, 3L TW II 2e p. 7, and 
also in the Family Sayings. I would fain believe it is not true, The wonder is, that no Chinese

‘critic should have set about disproving it. 23. Ana. XII. x. 24 =o 25 Ana, XVII, vii,

80]

SECT. .] LIFE OF CONFUCIUS. (rnotEGOMENA.

Wei, lamenting the fate which prevented him from crossing the

stream, and trying to solace himself with poetry.as he had done on

leaving Loo. Again did he communicate with the duke, but as inef-

, fectually, and disgusted at being questioned by him about military 
tactics, he left and went back to Ch‘in..leaving Loo. Again did he communicate with the duke, but as inef-

, fectually, and disgusted at being questioned by him about military 
tactics, he left and went back to Ch‘in..

He resided in Ch'in all the next year, m.c. 491, without any- 
thing occurring there which is worthy of note.26 Events had 
transpired in Loo, however, which were to issue in his return to his 
native State. The duke Ting had deceased B. C. 494, and Ke Hwan, 
the chief of the Ke family, died in this year. On his deathbed, he 
felt remorse for his conduct to Confucius, and charged his successor, 
known to us in the Analects as Ke K‘ang, to recall the sage; but the 
charge was not immediately fulfilled. Ke K'ang, by the advice of 
- one of his officers, sent to Ch‘in for the disciple Yen K‘ew instead.

Confuciüs willingly sent him off, and would gladly have accompanied 
him. "Let me return!” he said, Let me return!"? But that was 
not to be for several years yet.Confuciüs willingly sent him off, and would gladly have accompanied 
him. "Let me return!” he said, Let me return!"? But that was 
not to be for several years yet.

In B. c. 490, accompanied, as usual, by several of his disciples, he 
went from Ch‘in to Ts'ae, a small dependency of the great fief of 
Ts‘oo, which occupied a large part of the present provinces of Hoo-. 
nan and Hoo-pih. On the way, between Ch'in and Ts‘ae, their 
‘provisions became exhausted, and they were cut off somehow from 
obtaining a fresh supply. The disciples were quite overcome with 
want, and Tsze-loo said to the master, Has the superior man in- 
deed to endure in this way?” Confucius answered him, “The. 
superior man may indeed have to endure want; but the mean man, 
when he is in want, gives way to unbridled license.”28 According 
‘to the “Family Sayings,” the distress continued seven days, during 
which time Confucius retained his equanimity, and was even cheerful, 
playing on his lute and singing.? He retained, however, a strong 
impression of the perils of the season, and we find him afterwards 
recurring to it, and lamenting that of the friends that were with him 
in Chi‘in “and Ts‘ae, there were none remaining to enter his door.??

Escaped from this strait, he remained in Ts'ae over s.c. 489, 
and in the following year we find him in Shé, another district of

26 Tso-k‘ew Ming, indeed, relates a story of Confucius, on the report of a fire in Loo, telliug 
whose ancestral temple had been destroyed by it, 27 Ana, V. xxi. 28 Ana. XV. i. 2, 3.

EE — TE Ke = 30 Ana. XI. ii

81]

PROLEGOMENA.] -: CONFUCIUS AND IIIS DISCIPLES. ton. v.EE — TE Ke = 30 Ana. XI. ii

81]

PROLEGOMENA.] -: CONFUCIUS AND IIIS DISCIPLES. ton. v.

Ts‘oo, the chief of which had usurped the title of duke. Puzzled 
about his visitor, he-asked 'l'sze-loo what he should think of him, 
but the disciple did not venture à reply. When Confucius heard 
of it, he said to Tsze-loo, * Why did you not say to him, — Ile is 
simply a man who in his eager pursuit of knowledge forgets his 
food, who in the joy of its attainment forgets his sorrows, and who - 
does not perceive that old age is coming on? 1 Subsequently; the 
duke, in conversation with Confucius, asked him about govern- 
ment, and got the reply, dictated by some circumstances of which 
we are ignorant, Good government obtains, when those who are 
near are made happy, and those who are far off are attracted.“ 2

After a short stay in She, according to Sze-ma Ts‘een, he return- 
ed to Ts‘ae, and having to cross a river, he sent Tsze-loo to inquire 
for the ford of two men who were at work in a neighbouring field. 
They were recluses,—men who had withdrawn from public life in 
disgust at the way wardness of the times. One of them was called 
Ch'ang-tseu, and instead of giving Tsze-loo the information he want- 
ed, he asked him, * Who is it that holds the reins in the carriage 
there?" “It is K‘ung Kew." *K'ung Kew of Loo?" “Yes,” was 
the reply, and then the man rejoined, “ He knows the ford."Tsze-loo applied to the other, who was called Kéé-neih, but got 
for answer the question, Who are you, Sir?" He replied, “I am 
Chung Yew.” “Chung Yew, who is the disciple of K*ung Kew of 
Loo?" „Jes,“ again replied 'Tsze-loo, and Kéé-neih addressed him, 
“Disorder, like a swelling flood, spreads over the whole empire, 
and who is he that will change it for you? Than follow one who 
merely withdraws from this one and that one, had you. not better 
follow those who withdraw from the world altogether?" With 
this he fell to covering up the.seed, and gave no more heed to the 
‘stranger. Tsze-loo went back and reported what they had said, 
when Confucius vindicated his own course, saying, “ It is impossible 
to associate with birds and beasts as if they were the same with us. . 
If I associate not with these people —with mankind,—with whom 
shall I associate? If right principles prevailed through the empire, 
there would be no use for me to change its state."93

About the same time he had an encounter with another recluse, 
who was known as “The madman of Ts‘oo.” He passed by the

31 Ana, VII. xviii, 32 Ana, XIII. xvi, 33 Aua. XVIII. vi.

82]

SECT L) i LIFE OF CONFUCIUS. [PROLEGOMENA n

-

carriage of Confucius, singing out“ O Func, O Fuxe, how is your 
virtue degenerated! As to the past, reproof is useless, but the 
future may be provided against. Give up, give up your vain pur- 
suit.“ , Confucius alighted and wished to enter into conversation 
with him, but the man hastened away.9*But now the attention of the ruler of Ts‘oo—king, as lie styled 
himself—was directed to the illustrious stranger who was in his 
dominions, and he met Confucius and conducted him to his capital, 
which was in the present district of E-shing, in the department of 
Séang-yang,35 in Hoo-pih. After a time, he proposed endowing the 
philosopher with a considerable territory, but was dissuaded by his 
prime minister, who said to him, “Has your majesty any officer 
who could discharge the duties of an ambassador like Tsze-kung? or 
any one so qualified for a premier as Yen Hwuy? or any one to 
compare as a general with Tsze-oo? The kings Wán and Woo, 
from their hereditary dominions of a hundred le, rose to the sove- 
reignty of the empire. If K*ung K‘ew, with such disciples to be his 
ministers, get the possession of any territory, it will not be to the 
prosperity of Ts‘oo?30 On this remonstrance the king gave up his 
purpose, and when he died in the same year, Confücins left the 
State, and went back again to Wei.

The duke Ling had died four years before, soon after Confucius

1.0. 489. had last parted from him, and the reigning duke, known 
to us by the title of Ch‘uh,®? was his grandson, and was holding the 
principality against his own father. The relations between them 
were rather complicated. The father had been driven out in 
consequence of an attempt which he had instigated on the life of his

"mother, the notorious Nau-tsze, and the succession was given to his 
son. Subsequently, the father wanted to reclaim what he deemed 
his right, and an unseemly struggle ensued. The duke Ch‘uh was 
conscious how much his cause would be strengthened by the support 
of Confucius, and hence when he got to Wei, Tsze-loo could say to 
him, “The prince of Wei has been waiting for you, in order with 
you to administer the government ;—what will you consider the 
first thing to be done?“ ss The opinion of the philosopher, however,34 Ana, XVII. v. PES H H BER. 0 See the ph SU. FL F III.

N p. 10. 37 IH N. 38 Ann. XIII. iii. In the notes on this passage, I have given 
Choo He's opinion as to the time when Ts'ze-loo made this remark. It seems more correct, how- 
ever, to refer it to Confucius’ return to Wei from Ts-vo, as is done by Keang Yung.

83]

PROLEGOMENA.] CONFUCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. fen. v.

was against the propriety of the duke's course,“ and he declined - 
taking office with him, though he remained in Wei for between five 
and six years. During all that time there is a blank in his history. 
In the very year of his return, according to the “Annals of the 
Empire," his most beloved disciple Yen Hwuy died, on which 
occasion he exclaimed, * Alas! Heaven is destroying me! Heaven 
is destroying me!“ The death of his wife is assigned to B.C. 484, 
but nothing else is related which we can connect with this long 
period. 
9. His return to Loo was brouet about by the disciple Yen Yew, 
who, we have seen, went into the service of Ke K'ang, in B. C. 491. 
z In the year B. c. 483, Yew had the conduct of. 
From his return to Loo was F :

to his death, some military operations against Ts‘e, and 
OE CHE being successful, Ké Kang asked him how he 
had obtained his military skill; was it from nature, or by learning? 
He replied that he had learned it from Confucius, and entered into 
a glowing eulogy of the philosopher. The chief declared that he 
would bring Confucius home again to Loo. If you do so,” said the 
disciple, *see that you do not let mean men come between you and 
him." On this K'ang sent three officers with appropriate presents 
to Wei, to invite the wanderer home, and he returned with them 
accordingly.This event took place in the 11th year of the duke:Gae,? who 
succeeded to Ting, and according to K‘ung Foo, Confucius’ descen- 
dant, theinvitation proceeded from him.? We may suppose that while 
Ke K'ang was the mover and director of the proceeding, it was with 
the authority and approval of the duke. It is represented in the 
chronicle of Tso-k‘ew Ming as having occurred at a very opportune 
time, The philosopher had been consulted a little before by K‘ung 
Wün,* an officer of Wei, about how he Should conduct a feud with 
another officer, and disgusted at being referred to on such a subject, 
had ordered his carriage and prepared to leave the State, exclaiming, 
The bird chooses its tree, The tree does not chase the bird.“ K'ung 
Win endeavoured to excuse himself, and to prevail on Confucius

39 Ana. VII, xiv. 40 Ana. XI. viii, In the notes on Ana, XI. vii. I have adverted to the

chronological difficulty connected with the dates assigned respectively to the deaths of Yen Hwuy 
and Confucius’ own son, Le. Keang Yung assigns Hwuy’s death to B.. 481.

1 See the gd st 3L F ttt RR. 2 p: A 3 See Keang Yung's memoir,

in loa, 4 ju X F. the same who is mentioned in the Analécts, V. xiv. 
l 84]

BCT. 1.] LIFE OF CONFUCIUS. {PROLEGOMERA.

to remain in Wei, and just at this juncture the messengers from 
Loo arrived.in loa, 4 ju X F. the same who is mentioned in the Analécts, V. xiv. 
l 84]

BCT. 1.] LIFE OF CONFUCIUS. {PROLEGOMERA.

to remain in Wei, and just at this juncture the messengers from 
Loo arrived.

Confucius was now in his 69th year. The world had not dealt 
kindly with him. In every State which he had visited he had met 
with disappointment and sorrow. Only five more years remained 
.to him, nor were they of a brighter character than the past. He 
had, indeed, attained to that state, he tells us, in which “he could 
follow what his heart desired without transgressing what was 
right,” but other people were not more inclined than they had been 
to abide by his counsels. The duke Gae and Ke K‘ang often con- 
versed with him, but he no longer had weight in the guidance of State 
affairs, and wisely addressed himself to the completion of his literary 
labours. He wrote a preface to the Shoo-king; carefully digested 
the rites and ceremonies determined by the wisdom of the more 
ancient ages and kings; collected and arranged the ancient poetry ; 
and undertook the reform of music.7 He- has told us himself, “I 
, returned from Wei to Loo, and then the music was reformed, and 
the pieces in the Imperial Songs and Praise Songs found all their 
proper place.“? To the Yih-king he devoted much study, and Sze-ma 
Ts‘een says that the leather thongs by which the tablets of his copy 
were bound together were thrice worn out. “If some years were 
added to my life,” he said, “I would give fifty to the study of the 
Yih, and then I might come to be without great faults." During 
this time also, we may suppose that he supplied Tsing Sin with the 
materials of the classic of Filial Piety. The same year that he re- 
turned, Ke K‘ang sent Yen Yew to ask his opinion about an additional 
impost which he wished to lay upon the people, but Confucius re- 
fused to give any reply, telling the disciple privately his disapproval 
of the proposed measure. It was carried out, however, in the fol- 
lowing year, by the agency of Yen, on which occasion, I suppose, it 
was that Confucius said to the other disciples, * He is no disciple of 
mine; my little children, beat the drum and assail him.”!° The year 
B.C. 482 was marked by the death of his son Le, which he seems to 
have borne with more equanimity than he did that of his disciple 
Yen Hwuy, which some writers assign to the following year, though 
I have already mentioned it under ‘the year B.C. 488.s Seo the r fit, XE + — f. . 6 Ana. II. iv. 6. 7 Sce the M EU. 
FM X {lk 2e p. 12. 8 Ane, IX. xiv, ^ 9 Ana. VIT, xvi, 10 Ana, XI. xvi. 
83]

PROLEGOMENA.] CONFUCIUS AND IIS DISCIPLES. Con. v.

In the spring of B. c. 480, a servant of Ke K'ang caught a kee. lin 
on a hunting excursion of the duke in the present district of Kéa- 
tsfeang.!! No person could tell what strange animal it was, and 
Confucius was called to look at it. He at once knew it to be a lin, 
and the legend-writers say that it bore on one of its horns the piece 
of ribbon, which his mother had attached to the one that appeared 
to her before his birth. According to the chronicle of Kung-yang, 
he was profoundly affected. He cried out, “For whom have you 
come? For whom have you come?” His tears flowed freely, and 
he added, The course of my doctrines is run.”!?

Notwithstanding the appearance of the lin, the life of Confucius 
was still protracted for two years longer, though he took occasion 
to terminate with that event his history of the Ts'un Ts‘ew. This 
Work according to Sze-ma Ts‘een was altogether the production of 
this year, but we need not suppose that it was so. In it, from the 
standpoint of Loo, he briefly indicates the principal events occur- 
ring throughout the empire, every term being expressive, it is said, 
of the true character of the actors and events described. Confucius 
said himself, * It is the Spring and Autumn which will make men 
know me, and it is the Spring and Autumn which will make men 
condemn me.”!8 Mencius makes the composition of it to have been 
an achievement as great as Yu's regulation of the waters of the 
deluge.—“ Confucius completed the Spring and Autumn, and re- 
bellious ministers and villainous sons were struck with terror.”!4Towards the end of this year, word came to Loo that the duke 
of Ts‘e had been murdered by one of his officers. Confucius was 
moved with indignation. Such an outrage, he felt, called for his 
solemn interference. He bathed, went to court, and represented 
‘the matter to the duke, saying, Chan Hing has slain his sovereign, 
I beg that you will undertake to punish him.” The duke pleaded 
his incapacity, urging that Loo was weak compared with Ts‘e, but 
Confucius replied, ** One half the people of Ts‘e are not consenting’ 
to the deed. If you add to the people of Loo one half the people 
of Ts‘e, you are sure to overcome.” But he could not infuse his 
spirit into the duke, who told him to go and lay the matter before 
the chicfs of the three Families. Sorely against his sense of propriety,

u h J N Ir f. , 12 A Æ M BE AN J. If JE. caeco

Kung-yang, however, the lin was found by some wood-gatliérers. 33 Mencius III. Pt. II. ix. 8. 
14 Men, III. Pt. II. ix. 11.

86]

`

SECT. 1. LIFE OF CONFUCIUS. [PROLEGONENA, 
he did so, but they would not act, and he withdrew with the 
remark, “ Following in the rear of the great officers, I did not dare 
not to represent such a matter."!5In the year B.c. 479, Confucius had to mourn the death of another 
of his disciples, one of those who had been longest with him,— 
the well-known Tsze-loo.’ He stands out a sort of Peter in the 
Confucian school, a man of impulse, prompt to speak and prompt 
to act. Ie gets many a check from the master, but there is 
evidently a strong sympathy between them. Tze. lod uses a 
freedom with him on whieh none of the other disciples dares to 
venture, and there is not one among them all, for whom, if I may 
speak from my own feeling, the foreign student comes to form 
such a liking. A pleasant picture is presented to us in one passage 
of the Analects. It is said, “The disciple Min was standing by his 
side, looking bland and precise; Tsze-loo (named Yew), looking bold 
and soldierly ; Yen Yew and Tsze-kung, with a free and straightfor-

,ward mauner.. The master was pleased, but he observed, *Yew

there —he will not die a natural death.’ "16 
This prediction was verified. When Confucius returned to Loo 
from Wei, he left Tsze-loo and Tsze-kaoul engaged there in official 
service. Troubles arose. News came to Loo, B. C. 479, that a revolu- 
tion was in progress in Wei, and when Confucius heard it, he said, 
* Ch'ae will come here, but Yew will die.“ 1s So it turned out. 
When Tsze-kaou saw that matters were desperate he made his escape, 
but Tsze-loo would not forsake the chief who had treated him well. 
He threw himself into the melee, and wasslain. Confucius wept sore 
for him, but his own death was not far off. It took place on the 
lith day of the 4th' month in the following year, B. c. 478.19 
Early one morning, we are told, he got up, and with his hands 
behind his back, dragging his staff, he moved about by his door, 
crooning over,— 
“The great mountain must crumble; 
The strong beam must break ; 
And the wise man wither away like a plant."15 See the 7.2 Ar Ti. p A^ + yu E and Analects, XIV. xxii, 16 Ana, XI, xii. 
17 J 24 = 715 x by surname Kaou GRE. and name Ch'ae (5 A 18 See the * ti,

Ax t F Lo ag. 19 See the 2 . N E VAS T 23 AB, and Keang Yung's Life

of Confucius, in loc,

87]

PROLEGOMENA,] ^ ' CONFUCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. | fen. v.Ax t F Lo ag. 19 See the 2 . N E VAS T 23 AB, and Keang Yung's Life

of Confucius, in loc,

87]

PROLEGOMENA,] ^ ' CONFUCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. | fen. v.

After a little, he entered the house and sat down opposite the door. 
Tsze-kyng had heard his words, and said to himself, “Tf the great 
mountain crumble, to what shall I look up? If the strong beam 
break, and the wise man wither away, on whom shall I lean ? ? The 
master, I fear, is going to be ill.“ With this he hastened into the house. 
Confuvius said to him, “Ts‘ze, what makes you so late? According 
to the statutes of Hea, the corpse was dressed and coffined at the top 
of the eastern steps, treating the dead as if he were still the host. 
Under tife Yin, the ceremony was performed between the two pillars, 
as if the dead were both host and guest. The rule of Chow is to 
perform it at the top of the western steps, treating the dead as if he 
were a guest. I am a man of Yin, and last night I dreamt that I 
was sitting with offerings before me between the two pillars. No 
intelligent monarch arises; there is not one in the empire that will 
make me his master. My time has come to die." So it was. He 
i went to his couch, and after seven days expired.20 
Such is the account which we have of the last hours of the great 
l philosopher of China. His end was not unimpressive, but it was 
melancholy. He sank behind a cloud. Disappointed hopes made 
his soul bitter. The great ones of the empire had not received his 
teachings. No wife nor child was by to do the kindly offices of 
,affection for him. Nor were the expectations of another life pre- 
sent with him as he passed through the dark valley. He uttered 
no prayer, and he betrayed no apprehensions. Deep-treasured in 
his own heart may have been the thought that he had endeavoured 
to serve his generation by the will of God, but he gave no sign. 
„The mountain falling came to nought, and the rock was removed 
out of his place. So death prevailed against him and he passed; 
his countenance was changed, and he was sent away."10. I flatter myself that the preceding paragraphs contain a more 
correct narrative of the principal incidents in the life of Confucius 
than has yet been given in any European language. They might 
easily have been expanded into a volume, but I did not wish to ex-. 
haust the subject, but only to furnish a sketch, which, while it might 
satisfy the general reader, would be of special assistance to the care- 
ful student of the classical Books. I had taken many notes of the 
manifest errors in regard to chronology and other matters in the

20 See the Le Ke, II. Pt. I. ii. 20. 
^ 88]

,

8ECT. 1.] LIFE OF CONFUCIUS.. {PRoLEcoMENa,

* Family Sayings,” and the chapter of Sze-ma Ts‘een on the K‘ung 
family, when the digest of Keang Yung, to which I have made 
frequent reference, attracted my attention. Conclusions to which I 
had come were confirmed, and a clue was furnished to difficulties 
which I was seeking to disentangle. I take the opportunity to 
acknowledge here my obligations to it. With a few notices of Con- 
fucius’ habits and manners, I shall conclude this section.Very little can be gathered from reliable sources on the personal 
appearance of the sage. The height of his father is stated, as I have 
noted, to have been ten feet, and though Confucius came short 
of this by four inches, he was often called “the tall man.” It is 
allowed that. the ancient foot or cubit was shorter than the modern, 
but it must be reduced more than any scholar I have consulted has 
yet done, to bring this statement within the range of credibility. 
The legends assign to his figure “ nine-and-forty remarkable peculiari- 
ties,"1 a tenth part of which would have made him more a monster 
thanaman. Dr Morrison says that the images of him, which he 
‘had seen in the northern parts of China, represent him as of a dark 
swarthy colour.? It is not so with those common in the south. 
He was, no doubt, in size and complexion much the same as many 
of his descendants in the present day.

But if his disciples had nothing to chronicle of his personal ap- 
pearance, they have gone very minutely into an account of many of

his habits. The tenth book of the Analects is all occupied with his 
deportment, his eating, and, his dress. In public, whether in the 
village, the temple, or the court, he was the man of rule and cere- 
mony, but “at home he was not formal.” Yet if not formal, he 
was rd! In bed even he did not forget himself; —“ he did 
not lie like a Yorpse,” and “he did not speak." “ He required his 
sleeping dress to be half as long again as his body.” “If he happen- 
ed to be sick, and the prince came to visit him, he had his face to 
the east, made his court robes be put over him, and drew his girdle 
across them." a l

He was nice in his diet, —“ not disliking to have his rice dressed 
fine, nor to have his minced meat cut small.” „Anything at all

1 py x i JL X. 2 Chinese and English Dietionary, char. 3L. Sir John Davis also 
mentions seeing a figure of Confucius, in a temple uear the Po-yang lake, of which the complexion1 py x i JL X. 2 Chinese and English Dietionary, char. 3L. Sir John Davis also 
mentions seeing a figure of Confucius, in a temple uear the Po-yang lake, of which the complexion

was quite black.“ (The Chinese, vol II. p. 66). 
80]

PROLEGOMENA.] CONFUCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. (cu. v.

gone he would not touch." He must have his meat cut properly, 
and to.every kind its proper sauce; but he was not a great eater." 
“It was only in wine that he laid down no limit to himself, but he 
did not allow himself to be confused by it.“ “When the villagers 
were drinking together, on those who carried staves going out, he 
went out immediately after." "There must always be ginger at the 
table and “when eating, he did not converse." “ Although his 
food might be coarse rice and poor soup, he would offer a little of it 
in sacrifice, with a grave respectful air."

* On occasion of a sudden clap of thunder, or a violent wind, he 
would change countenance. He would do the same, and rise up 
moreover, when he found himself a guest at a loaded board." At 
the sight of a person in mourning, he would also change countenance, 
and if he happened to be in his carriage, he would bend forward 
with a fespectful salutation.” His general way in his carriage was 
not to turn his head round, nor talk hastily, nor point with his 
hands.” He was charitable. * When any of his friends died, if there 
were no relations who could be depended on for the necessary offices, 
he would say, ‘I will bury him.’”

The disciples were so careful to record these and other character- 
istics of their master, it is said, because every act, of movement or 
of rest, was closely associated with the great principles which it was 
his object to inculcate. The detail of so many sinall matters, how-. 
ever, does not impress a foreigner so favourably. There is a want 
of freedom about the philosopher. Somehow he is less a sage to 
me, after [ have seen him at his table, in his undress, in his bed, 
and in his carriage.SECTION II.

L

HIS INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS.

1. Confucius died, we have seen, complaining that of all the 
princes of the empire there was not one who would adopt his prin- 
ciples and obey his lessons. He had hardly

Jlomage rendered to N is x 8 
Confucius by the em- passed from the stage of life, when his merit 
erors of China, ;

E NUT Ee began to be acknowledged. When the duke 
Gae heard of his death, he pronounced his eulogy in the words, 
^ Heaven has not left to me the aged mau. There is none now to

90]

t a

Ser. 11.) INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS. [PROLEGOMENA,

assist me on the throne. Woe is me! Alas! O venerable Ne!" Tsze- 
kung complained of the inconsistency of this lamentation from 
one who could not use the master when he was alive, but the duke 
was probably sincere in his grief. He caused a temple to be erected, 
and ordered that sacrifice should be offered to the sage, at the four 
seasons of the year.? i .

The emperors of the tottering dynasty of Chow had not the in- 
telligence, nor were they in a position, to do honour to the departed 
philosopher, but the facts detailed in the first chapter of these pro- 
legomena, in connection with the attempt of the founder of the Ts'in 
dynasty to destroy the monuments of antiquity, show how the 
authority of Confucius had come by that time to prevail through 
the empire. The founder of the Han dynasty, in passing through 
Loo, B. C. 194, visited his tomb and offered an ox in sacrifice to 
him. Other emperors since then have often made pilgrimages to 
the spot. The most famous temple in the empire now rises over 
ithe place of the grave. K'ang-he, the second and greatest of the 
rulers of the present dynasty, in the 23d year of his reign, there set 
the example of kneeling thrice, and each time laying his forehead 
thrice in the dust, before the image of the sage. lIn the year of our Lord 1, began the practice of conferring hono- 
rary designations on Confucius by imperial authority. The emperor 
P'ing? then styled him—“The duke Ne, all-complete and illus- 
trious."* This was changed, in a.p. 492, to—“ The venerable Ne, 
the accomplished Sage."5 Other titles have supplanted this. Shun- 
che, the first of the Man-chow dynasty, adopted, in his second year, 
A.D. 645, the style,. K'ung, the ancient Teacher, accomplished and 
illustrious, all-complete, the perfect Sage;"! but twelve years later, 
a shorter title was introduced,“ K‘ung, the ancient Teacher, the 
perfect Sage.“s Since that year no further alteration has been made.

At first, the worship of Confucius was confined to the country of 
Loo, but in A.D. 57 it was enacted that sacrifices should be offered 
to him in the imperial college, and in all the colleges of the principal

1 Le Ke, II. Pt. I. iii. 43. This eulogy is found at greater length in the Æ Tà. immediately

after the notice of the sage's death. 2 See the HB iy mU, NE E x A ——, art, on

Confucius, I am indebted to this for most of the notices in this paragraph, 3 z a. 
NAR . K. K. OMG X MN E 
X X Hi. ALF Nn IL F. 
91]

FROLEGOMENA.] CONFUCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. [cu. v.

territorial divisions throughout the empire. In those sacrifices he 
was for some centuries associated with the duke of Chow, the legis- 
lator to whom Confucius made frequent reference, but in A. D. 609 
separate temples were assigned to them, and in 628 our sage dis- 
placed the older worthy altogether. About the same time began the 
custom, which continues to the present day, of erecting temples to 
him,— separate structures, in connection with all the colleges, or ex- 
amination-halls, of the country.The sage is not alone in those temples. In a hall behind the 
principal one occupied by himself are the tablets—in some cases, 
the images—of several of his ancestors, and other worthies; while 
associated with himself are his principal disciples, and many who in 
subsequent times have signalized themselves as expounders and ex- 
emplifiers of his doctrines. On the first day of every month, offer- 
ings of fruits and vegetables are set forth, and on the fifteenth there 
is a solemn burning of incense. But twice a year, in the middle 
months of spring and autumn, when the first ting day? of the 
month comes round, the worship of Confucius is performed with 
peculiar solemnity.’ At the imperial college the emperor himself is 
required to attend in state, and is in fact the principal performer. 
After all the preliminary arrangements have been made, and the 
emperor has twice knelt and six times bowed his head to the earth, 
the presence of Confucius’ spirit is invoked in the words, “Great 
art thou, O perfect sage! Thy virtue is full; thy doctrine is com- 
plete. Among mortal men there has not been thine equal All 
kings honour thee. Thy statutes and laws have come gloriously 
down. Thou art the pattern in this imperial school. Reverently 
have the sacrificial vessels been set out. Full of awe, we sound our 
drums and bells."19

The spirit is supposed now to be present, and the service proceeds 
through various offerings, when the first of which has been set forth, 
an officer reads the following," which is the prayer on the occasion :— 
“On this.. month of this.. . year, I, A. B., the emperor, offer a sacrifice 
to the philosopher K'ung, the ancient Teacher, the perfect Sage, and 
say,—O Teacher, in virtue equal to Heaven and Earth, whose doctrines 
embrace the past time and the present, thou didst digest and trans- 
mit the six classics, and didst hand down lessons for all generations!

9o ET H. 10, 11 See the Fy Tp IL AS Y — 
92]9o ET H. 10, 11 See the Fy Tp IL AS Y — 
92]

SECT. IL.) INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS. [PROLEGOMENA

Now in this second month of spring (or autumn), in reverent obser- 
vance of the old statutes, with victims, silks, spirits, and fruits, I 
carefully offer sacrifice to thee. With thee are associated the philo- 
Sopher Yen, continuator of thee; the philosopher Tsang, exhibiter 
of thy fundamental principles; the philosopber Tsze-sze, transmitter 
of thee; and the philosopher Máng, second to thee. May’st thou 
enjoy the offerings."

I need not go on to enlarge on the homage which the emperors 
of China render to Confucius. It could not be more complete. It is 
worship and not mere homage. He was unreasonably neglected 
when alive. He is now unreasonably venerated. when dead. . The 
estimation with which the rulers of China regard their sage, leads 
them to sin against God, and is a misfortune to the empire.

2. The rulers of China are not singular in this matter, but in entire 
sympathy with the mass of their people. It is the distinction of this

incu a necis f empire that education has been highly prized in 
Confucius. it from the earliest times. It was so before the 
era of Confucius, and we may be sure that the system met with his 
approbation. One of his remarkable sayings was, — To lead an 
uninstructed people to war is to throw them away." When he 
pronounced this judgment, he was not thinking of military training, 
but of education in the duties of life and citizenship. A people so. 
taught, he thought, would be morally fitted to fight for their govern- 
ment. Mencius, when lecturing to the duke of T'áng on the proper 
way of governing a kingdom, told him that he must provide the 
means of education for all, the poor as well as the rich. “Establish,” 
said he, “ts‘eang, seu, hed, and heaou,—all those educational institu- 
tions,—for the instruction of the people. TTAt the present day, education is widely diffused throughout 
China. In no other country is the schoolmaster more abroad, and 
in all schools it is Confucius who is taught. The plan of competi- 
tive examinations, and the selection for civil offices only from those 
who have been successful candidates,—good so far as the competition 
is concerned, but injurious from the restricted range of subjects with 
which an acquaintance is required,—have obtained for more than 
twelve centuries. The classical works are the text books. It is

from them almost exclusively that the themes proposed to determine

1 Ana, XIII. 80, 2 Mencius, III. Pt. I. iii 10. 
93]

PROLEGOMENA.] , CONFUCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. (cn. v.

the knowledge and ability of the students are chosen. The whole 
of the magistracy of China is thus versed in all that is recorded of 
the sage, and in the ancient literature which he preserved. His 
thoughts are familiar to every man in authority, and his character 
is more or less reproduced in him.The official civilians of China, numerous as they are, are but a frac- 
tion of its students, and the students, or those who make literature 
& profession, are again but a fraction of those who attend school 
for a shorter or longer period. Yet so far as the studies have 
gone, they have been occupied with the Confucian writings. In 
many schoolrooms there is a tablet or inscription on the wall, 
sacred to the sage, and every pupil is required, on coming to school 
on the morning of the 1st and 15th of every month, to bow before 
it, the first thing, as an act of worship. Thus all in China who 
receive the slightest tincture of learning do so at the. fountain of 
Confucius. They learn of him and do homage to him at once, I 
have repeatedly quoted the statement that during his life-time he 
had three thousand disciples. Hundreds of millions are his disciples 
now. It is hardly necessary to make any allowance in this statement : 
for the followers of Taouism and Buddhism, for, as Sir John Davis 
has observed, “whatever the other opinions or faith of a Chinese 
may be, he takes good care to treat Confucius with respect."* For 
two thousand years he has reigned supreme, the undisputed teacher 
of this most populous land. N

3. This position and influence of Confucius are to.be ascribed, I 
conceive, chiefly to two causes: —his being the preserver, namely of

The causes of his the Monuments of antiquity, and the exemplifier 
influence. and expounder of the maxims of the golden age of 
China; and the devotion to him of his immediate disciples and their 
early followers. The national and the personal are thus blended 
in him, each in its highest degree of excellence. He was a Chinese 
of the Chinese; he is also represented, and all now believe him to 
have been, the beau ideal of humanity in its best and noblest estate.

4. It may be well to bring forward here Confucius’ own estimate 
of himself, and of his doctrines. It will serve to illustrate the4. It may be well to bring forward here Confucius’ own estimate 
of himself, and of his doctrines. It will serve to illustrate the

3 During the present dynasty, the tablet of x B at Ti. the god of literature, has to & 
considerable extent displaced that of Confucius in schools. Yot the worship of him does not

clash with that of the other. He is ‘the father’ of composition only. 4 The Chinese, vol. 
II. p. 45.

94]

n

sect. 1.) INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS. [PROLECOMENA.

tis own estimate of bimscit statements just made. The following are 
and of his doctrines. some of his sayings.—“ The sage and the 
man of perfect virtue how dare I rank myself with them? It 
may simply be said of me, that I strive to become such without 
satiety, and teach others without weariness.” In letters I am 
perhaps equal to other men; but the character of the superior 
man, carrying out in his conduct what he professes, is what I have 
not yet attained to." “The leaving virtue without proper cultiva- 
tion; the not thoroughly discussing what is learned; not being 
able to move towards righteousness of which a knowledge is gain- 
ed; and not being able to change what is not good ;—these are the 
things which occasion me solicitude.” “I am not one who was 
born in the possession of knowledge; I am one who is fond of anti- 
quity and earnest in seeking it there." A transmitter and not a 
maker, believing in and loving the ancients, I venture to compare 
myself with our old P‘ang.”!ı Confucius cannot be thought to speak of himself in these declara- 
tions more highly than he ought to do. Rather we may recognize 
in them the expressions of a genuine humility. He was conscious 
that personally he came short in many things, but he toiled after 
the character, which he saw, or fancied that he saw, in the ancient 
sages whom he acknowledged; and the lessons of government and 
morals which he laboured to diffuse were those which had 
already been inculcated and exhibited by them. Emphatically he 
was “a transmitter and not a maker." It is mot to be understood 
that he was not fully satisfied of the truth of the principles which 
he had learned. He held them with the full approval and consent 
of his own understanding. He believed that if they were acted 
on, they would remedy the evils of his time. "There was nothiug 
to prevent rulers like; Yaou and Shun and the great Yu from again 
arising, and a condition of happy gang being realized 
thro ughout the empire under their sway.

If in any thing he thought himself u 0 and alone," hav- 
ing attributes which dheis could not claim, it was in his possessing 
a divine commission as the conservator of ancient truth and rules. 
He does not speak very definitely on this point. It is noted that

1 All these passages are taken from the VIIth Book of the Analects, Sce chh, xxxiii ; xxxii. ; 
ji; xix. ; and i.

95]

PROLEGOMENA.) CONFUCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. (cu. v.1 All these passages are taken from the VIIth Book of the Analects, Sce chh, xxxiii ; xxxii. ; 
ji; xix. ; and i.

95]

PROLEGOMENA.) CONFUCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. (cu. v.

“the appointments of Heaven was one of the subjects on which he 
rarely, touched.“ His most remarkable utterance was that which Ihave 
already given in the sketch of his Life: When he was put in fear 
in K‘wang, he said, ‘After the death of king Wan, was not the 
cause of truth lodged here in me? If Heaven had wished to let. 
this cause of truth perish, then I, a future mortal, should not have 
got such a relation to that cause. While Heaven does not let the 
cause of truth perish, what can the people of Kwang do to me? "s 
Confucius, then, did feel that he was in the world for a special 
purpose. But it was not to announce any new truths, or to initiate 
any new economy. It was to prevent what had previously been 
known from being lost. He followed in the wake of Yaou and 
Shun, of Tang, and king Wan. Distant from the last by a long 
interval of time, he would have said that he was distant from him 
also by a great inferiority of character, but still he had learned the 
principles on which they all happily governed the empire, and in

their name he would lift up a standard against the prevailing law

lessness of his age. 
5. The language employed with reference to. Confucius by his 
disciples and their early followers presents a striking contrast with 
] his own. I have already, in writing of the 
Estimate of him by his Pid Ndisciples and their early scope and value of “The Doctrine of the 
l Mean,“ called attention to the extravagant 
eulogies of his grandson Tsze-sze. He only followed the example 
which had been set by those among whom the philosopher went in 
and out. We have the language of Yen Yuen, his favourite, which 
is comparatively moderate, and simply expresses the genuine admira- 
tion of a devoted pupil! Tsze-kung on several occasions spoke in a 
different style. Having heard that one of the chiefs of Loo had 
said that he himself—Tsze-kung—was superior to Confucius, he 
observed, Let me use the comparison of a house and its encompass- 
ing wall My wall only reaches to the shoulders. One inay peep 
over it, and see whatever is valuable in the apartments. The wall 
of my master is several fathoms high. If one do not find the door 
and enter by it, he cannot see the rich ancestral temple with its 
beauties, nor all the officers in their rich array. But I may assume

2 Ana. IX. i. 3 Ana. IX. iii. 
1 Ana. IX. x.

96]

ve 
SECT. 11.) INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS. [PROLEGOMENA.

that they are few who find the door. The remark of the chief was 
only what might have been expected."?

Another time, the same individual having spoken revilingly of 
Confucius, Tsze-kung ‘said, “It is of no use doing so. Chung-ne 
cannot be reviled. The talents and virtue of other men are hillocks 
and mounds which may be stept over. Chung-ne is the sun or 
moon, which it is not possible to step over. Although a man may. 
wish to cut himself off from the sage, what harm can he do to the 
sun and moon? He only shows that he does not know his own 
capacity.”8In conversation with a fellow-disciple, Tsze-kung took a still 
higher flight. Being charged by Tsze-k‘in with being too modest, 
for that Confucius was not really superior to him, he replied: “For 
.one word a man is often deemed to be wise, and for.one word he is 
often deemed to be foolish We ought to be careful indeed in 
what we say. Our master cannot be attained to, just in the same 
way as the heavens cannot be gone up to by the steps of a stair. 
Were our master in the position of the prince of a State, or the chief 
of a Family, we should find verified the description which has been 
given of a sages rule:—IHe would plant the people, and forthwith 
they would be established; he would lead them on, and forthwith 
they would follow him; he would make them happy, and forthwith. 
multitudes would resort to his dominions; he would stimulate them, 
and forthwith they would be harmonious. While he lived, he would 
be glorious. When he died, he would be bitterly lamented, How is 
it possible for him to be attained to?"*

From these representations of Tsze-kung, it was not a difficult 
step for Tsze-sze to make in exalting Confucius not only to the level 
of the ancient sages, but as “the equal of Heaven.” And Mencius 
took up the theme. Being questioned by Kung-sun Chow, ono of 
his disciples, about two acknowledged sages, Pih-e and E Yin, whe- 
ther they were to be placed in the same rank with Confucius, he 
replied; “No. Since there were living men until now, there never 
was another Confucius ;” and then he proceeded to fortify his opinion 
by the concurring testimony of Tsae Go, Tsze-kung and Yew Jö, 
who all had wisdom, he thought, sufficient to know their master, 
Tsac Go's opinion was, (According to my view of our master, he is

2 Ana. XIX. xxiii 3 Ana. XIX. xxiv. 4 Ana, XIX. xxv. 
97]

PROLEGOMENA, ] CONFUCIUS AND IIIS DISCIPLES. [on. v.2 Ana. XIX. xxiii 3 Ana. XIX. xxiv. 4 Ana, XIX. xxv. 
97]

PROLEGOMENA, ] CONFUCIUS AND IIIS DISCIPLES. [on. v.

far superior to Yaou and Shun."  Tsze-kung said, * Dy viewing the 
ceremonial ordinances of a prince, we know the character of his 
government. By hearing his music, we know the character of his 
virtue. From the distance of a hundred ages after, I can arrange, 
according.to their merits, the kings of a hundred ages;—not one 
.of them can escape me. From the birth of mankind till now, there 
has never been another like our master.” Yew Jò said, “Is it only 
among men that it is so? - There is the k'e-lin among quadrupeds; 
the fung-hwang among birds; the T‘ae mountain among mounds 
and ant-hills ; and rivers and seas among rain-pools. "Though differ- 
ent in degree, they are the same in kind. So the sages among 
mankind are also the same in kind. But they stand out from their 
fellows, and rise above the level; and from the birth of mankind till 
now, there never has been one so complete as Confucius. I will 
not indulge in farther illustration. The judgment of the sage's dis- 
ciples, of Tsze-sze, and of Mencius, has been unchallenged.by the mass 
of the scholars of China. , Doubtless it pleases them to bow down 
at the shrine of the sage, for their profession of literature is thereby 
glorified. A reflection of the honour done to him falls upon them- 
selves. And the powers that be, and the multitudes of the people, 
fall in with the judgment. Confucius is thus, in the empire of 
China, the one man by whom all possible personal excellenee was 
exemplified, and by whom all possible lessons of social virtue and 
political wisdom are taught.6. The reader will be prepared by the preceding account not to 
expect to find any light thrown by Confucius on the great prob- 
, Subieets on which Confucius n. 15 the human condition s destiny. 
e e did not speculate on the creation of 
to the charge of insincerity. . things or the end of them. He was not 
troubled to account for the origin of man, nor did he seek to know 
about his hereafter. He meddled neither with physics nor’ meta- 
physics! The testimony of the Analects about the subjects of his

5 Mencius, II. Pt. I. ii. 23—28.

1 The contents of the Yih-king, and Confucius’ labours upon it, may be objected in opposition 
to this statement, and I must be understood to make it with some reservation. Six years ago, I 
spent all my leisure time for twelve months in the study of that Work, and wrote out a translation 
of it, but at the close I was only groping my way in darkness to lay hold of its scope and mean- 
ing, and up to this time I have not been able to master it so as to speak positively about it. It 
will come in due time, in its place, in the present Publication, and I do not think that what 1 here 
say of Confucius will require much, if any, modification.

98]

BEOT, 11.] INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS. ' (rRorEGOXENA.

teaching is the following :—* His frequent themes of discourse were 
the Book of Poetry, the Book of History, and the maintenance of 
the rules of Propriety.” “He taught letters, ethics, devotion of 
soul, and truthfulness.” “Extraordinary things; feats of strength; 
states of disorder; and spiritual beings; he did not like to talk 
about."?

Confucius is not to be blamed for his silence on the subjects here 
indicated. His ignorance of them was to a great extent his mis- 
fortune. He had not learned them. No report of them had come 
to him by the ear; no vision of them by the eye. And to his 
practical inind the toiling of thought amid uncertainties seemed 
worse than useless,The question has, indeed, been raised, whether he did not make 
changes in the ancient creed of China,? but I cannot believe that 
he did so consciously and designedly. Had his idiosyncrasy been 
different, we might have had expositions of the ancient views on 
some points, the effect of which would have been more beneficial than 
the indefiniteness in which they are now left, and it may be doubted 
so far, whether Confucius was not unfaithful to his guides. But 
that he suppressed or added, in order to bring in articles of belief 
originating with himself, is a thing not to be charged against him.

I will mention two important subjects in regard to which there is

a growing conviction in my mind that he came short of the faith 
of the older sages. The first is the doctrine of God. This name is 
common in the She-king, and Shoo-king. Te or Shang Te appears 
there as a personal being, ruling in heaven and on earth; the author 
of man's moral nature, the governor among the nations, by whom 
kings reign and princes decree justice, the rewarder of the good, and 
the punisher of the bad. Confucius preferred to speak of Heaven. 
Instances have already been given of this. Two others may be cited : 
—“ He who offends against Heaven has none to whom he can pray ?"4 
“ Alas!” said he, “there is no one that knows me."  Tsze-kung said, 
* What do you mean by thus saying that no one knows you?" He 
replied, “I do not murmur against Heaven. I do not grumble 
against men. My studies lie low, and my penetration rises high. 
But there is Heaven ;—that knows me!"$ Not once throughout the

2. Ana. VIL xvii; xxiv. xx. 8 See Hardwick’s Christ and other Masters,’ Part III. 
pp. 18, 19, with his reference in a note to a passage from Meadows’ The Chinese and their 
Rebellions.“ 4 Ana. III. xiii. 5 Ana. XIV. xxxvii,

99]

PROLEGOMENA,] CONFUCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. pct Lon. v.99]

PROLEGOMENA,] CONFUCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. pct Lon. v.

Analects does he use the personal name. I would say that he was 
unreligious rather than irreligious; yet by the coldness of his tem- 
perament and intellect in this matter, his influence is unfavourable 
to the development of true religious feeling among the Chinese peo- 
ple generally, and he prepared the way for the speculations of the 
literati of mediæ val and modern times, which have exposed them to 
the charge of atheism.Secondly, Along with the worship of God there existed in China, 
from the earliest historical times, the worship of other spiritual 
- beings, —especially, and to every individual, the worship of departed 
ancestors. Confucius recognized this as an institution to be de- 
voutly observed.. He sacrificed to the dead as if they were pre- 
sent; he sacrificed to the spirits as if the spirits were present. 
He said, ‘I consider my not being present at the sacrifice as if I 
did not sacrifice.” The custom must have originated from a belief 
of the continued existence of the dead. We cannot suppose that 
they who instituted it thought that with the cessation of this life ' 
on earth there was a cessation also of all conscious being. But 
Confucius never spoke explicitly on this subject. He tried to 
evade it. Ke Loo asked about serving the spirits of the dead, 
and the master said, * While you are not able to serve men, how 
can you serve their spirits?’ The disciple added, ‘I venture to 
ask about death,’ and he was answered, ‘While you do not know. 
life, how can you know about death.“ 7 Still more striking is a 
conversation with another disciple, recorded in the “ Family Say- 
ings.” Tsze-kung asked him, saying, “Do the dead have know- 
ledge (of our services, that is), or are they without knowledge?” 
The master replied, “If I were to say that the dead have such 
knowledge, I am afraid that filial sons and dutiful grandsons 
would injure their substance in paying the last offices to the de- 
parted; and if I were to say that the dead have not such knowledge, 
I am afraid lest unfilial sons should leave their parents unburied. 
You need not wish, Ts‘zc, to know whether the dead have know- 
ledge or not. There is no present urgency about the point. 
Hereafter you will know it for yourself.” Surely this was not the 
teaching proper to a sage. lle said on one occasion that he had

6 Ana. III. xii. 7 Ana. XI. xi. 92k Eb E LL art. FY III,, towards the 
end,

100]6 Ana. III. xii. 7 Ana. XI. xi. 92k Eb E LL art. FY III,, towards the 
end,

100]

SECT, u.] INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS, [PRoLEcOMENA.6 Ana. III. xii. 7 Ana. XI. xi. 92k Eb E LL art. FY III,, towards the 
end,

100]

SECT, u.] INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS, [PRoLEcOMENA.

no concealments from his disciples? Why did he not candidly tell 
his real thoughts on ‘so interesting a subject? I incline to think 
that he doubted more than he believed. If the case were not so, it 
Would be difficult to account for the answer which he returned to a 
question as to what constituted wisdom. “To give one's-self ear- 
nestly, said he, “ to the duties due to men, and, while respecting spirit- 
ual beings, to keep aloof from them, may be called wisdom.”!9 At 
any rate, as by his frequent references to Heaven, instead of follow- 
ing the phraseology of the older sages, he gave occasion to many of 
his professed followers to identify God with à principle of reason and 
the course of nature; so, in the point now in hand, he has led 
them to deny, like the Sadducees of old, the existence of any spirit 
at all, and to tcll us that their sacrifices to the dead are but an 
outward form, the mode of expression which the principle of filial 
piety requires them to adopt, when its objects have departed this life. 
It will not be supposed that I wish to advocate or to defend the 
práctice of sacrificing to the dead. My object has been to point 
out how Confucius recognized it, without acknowledging the faith 
from which it must have originated, and how he enforced it as a 
matter of form or ceremony. It thus connects itself with the most 
serious charge that can be brought against him,—the charge of 
insincerity. Among the four things which it is said he taught, 
“truthfulness” is specified,!!.and many sayings might be quoted 
from him, in which “sincerity ” is celebrated as highly and demanded 
as stringently as ever it has been by any Christian moralist; yet he 
was not altogether the truthful and true man to whom we accord 
our highest approbation. There was the case of Mang Che-fan, 
who boldly brought up the rear of the defeated troops of Loo, and 
attributed his occupying the place of honour to the backwardness 
of his horse. The action was gallant, but the apology for it was 
weak and wrong. And yet Confucius saw nothing in the whole 
but matter for praise.12 He could excise himself from seeing an 
unwelcome visitor on the ground that he was sick, when there was 
nothing the matter with him.!“ These perhaps were small matters, 
but what shall we say to the incident which I have given in the 
sketch of his Life, p. 80,—his deliberately breaking the oath which9 Ana. VIL xxiii, 10 Ana, VI. xx. 11 See above, near tlie beginning of this paragraph. 
12 Ana. VI. xiii. 13 Ana, XVII. xx.

101] 581414

PROLEGOMENA. CONFUCIUS AND IIIS DISCIPLES. — fou. v.

he had sworn, simply on the ground that it had been forced from 
him? I should be glad if I could find evidence on which to deny 
the truth of that occurrence. But it rests on the same authority as 
most other statements about him, and it is accepted as a fact by the 
people and scholars of China. It must have had, and it must still 
have, a very injurious influence upon them. Foreigners charge, 
and with reason, a habit of deceitfulness upon the nation and its 
government. For every word of falsehood and every act of insincerity, 
the guilty party must bear his own burden, but we cannot but 
regret the example of Confucius in this particular. It is with the Chi- 
nese and their sage, as it was with the Jews of old and their teachers. 
He that leads them has caused them to err, and destroyed. the way 
of their paths.1*

But was, not insincerity a natural result of the un- religion of 
Confucius? There are certain virtues which demand a true piety 
in order to their flourishing in the corrupt heart of man. Natural 
affection, the feeling of loyalty, and enlightened policy, may do 
much to build up and preserve a family and a State, but it requires 
more to maintain the love of truth, and make a lie, spoken or acted, 
to be shrunk from with shame. It requires in fact the living re- 
cognition of a God of truth, and all the sanctions of revealed religion. . 
Unfortunately the Chinese have not had these, and the example of 
him to whom they bow down as the best and wisest of men, encour- 
ages them to act, to dissemble, to sin.

7. I goon to a brief discussion of Confucius’ views on government, 
or what we may call his principles of political science. It could not7. I goon to a brief discussion of Confucius’ views on government, 
or what we may call his principles of political science. It could not

Hie views en be in his long intercourse with his disciples but that he 
government. should enunciate many maxims bearing on character 
and morals generally, but he never rested in the improvement of the 
individual. * The empire brought to a state of happy tranquillity”! 
was the grand object which he delighted to think of; that it might 
be brought about as easily as one can look upon the palm of his 
hand,” was the dream which it pleased him to indulge in.? He held 
that there was in men an adaptation and readiness to be governed, 
which only needed to be taken advantage of in the proper way. 
There must be the right administrators, but given those; and “ the

14 Isaiah, iii. 12, 
1 X ^ 2E. See the X E. X. parr. 4, ö; &c. 2 Ana, III. xi.; e al, 
EXE

SECT, 11.] INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS. [PROLEQONENA.14 Isaiah, iii. 12, 
1 X ^ 2E. See the X E. X. parr. 4, ö; &c. 2 Ana, III. xi.; e al, 
EXE

SECT, 11.] INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS. [PROLEQONENA.

growth of government would be rapid, just as vegetation is rapid 
in the earth; yea, their government would display itself like an 
easily-growing rush."? The same sentiment was common from the 
lips of Mencius. Enforcing it one day, when conversing with one 
of the petty princes of his time, he said in his peculiar style, * Does 
your Majesty understand the way of the growing grain? During 
the seventh and eighth months, when drought prevails, the plants 
become dry. Then the clouds collect 5 in the heavens, they 
send down torrents of rain, and the grain erects itself as if by a shoot. 
When it does so, who can keep it back?“ !“ Such, he contended, 
would be the response of the mass of the people to any true “ shep- 
herd of men." It may be.deemed unnecessary that I should specify 
this point, for it is a truth applicable to the people of all nations. 
Speaking generally, government is by no device or cunning crafti- 
nes$; human nature demands it. But in no other family of man- 
kind is the, characteristic so largely developed as in the Chinese. 
The love of order and quiet, and a willingness to submit to “the 
powers that be", eminently distinguish them. Foreign writers have 
often taken notice of this, and have attributed it to the influence of 
Confucius’ doctrines as inculcating subordination ; but it existed pre- 
vious to his time. The character of the people moulded his system, 
more than it was moulded by it.This readiness to be governed arose, according to Confucius, from 
“the duties of niverel obligation, or those between sovereign and, 
minister, between father and son, between husband and wife, between 
elder brother and younger, and those belonging to the intercourse 
of friends."5 Men as they are born into the world, and grow up in 
it, find themselves existing in those relations. "They are the appoint- 
ment of Heaven. And each relation has its reciprocal obligations, 
the recognition of which is proper to the Heaven-conferred nature. 
It only needs that the sacredness of the relations be maintained, and

the duties belonging to them faithfully discharged, and the * happy 
tranquillity" will prevail all under heaven. As to the institutions 
of government, the. laws and arrangements by which, as through a 
thousand channels, it should go forth to carry plenty and prosperity 
through the length and breadth of the country, it did not belong to 
Confucius, “the throneless king,” to set them forth minutely. And

3 rH hit xx 8. 4 Mencius, I. Pt. I. vi. 6. 5 th Af. XI. 8 
103]

PROLEGOMENA.] CONFUCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. len. v.

”3 rH hit xx 8. 4 Mencius, I. Pt. I. vi. 6. 5 th Af. XI. 8 
103]

PROLEGOMENA.] CONFUCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. len. v.

”

indeed they were existing in the records of. “ the ancient sovereigns. 
Nothing new was needed. It was only requisite to pursue the old 
paths, and raise up the old standards. “The government of Wan and 
Woo,“ he said, “is displayed in the records,—the tablets of wood 
and bamboo. Let there be the men, and the govermnént will 
flourish, but without the men, the government decays and ceases."6 
To the same effect was the reply which he gave to Yen Hwuy when 
asked by him how the government of a State should be administer- 
ed. It seems very wide of the mark, until we read it in the light 
of the sage’s veneration for ancient ordinances, and ‘his opinion of 
their sufficiency. “ Follow,” he said, the seasons of Hea:' Ride in 
the state-carriages of Yin, Wear the ceremonial cap of Chow. Let 
the music be the Shaou with its pantomimes. Banish the songs of 
Ch‘ing, and keep far from specious talkers.“7Confuétus' idea then of a happy, well-governed State did not. go 
beyond the flourishing of tlie five relations of society which lieve 
been mentioned ; and we have not any condensed exhibition from 
him of their nature, or of the duties belonging to the several parties 
in them. Of the two first he spoke frequently, but all that he has 
said on the others would go into small compass. Mencius has said 
that ‘between father and son there should be affection; between 
sovereign and minister righteousness; between husband and wife 
attention to their separate functions; between old and young, a 
proper order; and between friends, fidelity."5 Confucius, I apprehend: 
would hardly have accepted this account. It does not bring out 
sufficiently the authority which he claimed for the father and the 
sovereign, and the obedience which he exacted from the child and 
the minister. With regard to the relation of husband: and wife, he 
was in no respect superior to the preceding sages who had enunciated 
their views of “ propriety ” on the subject. We have a somewhat 
detailed exposition of his opinions in the Family Sayings.—“ Man," 
said he, is thé representative of Heaven, and is supreme over all 
things Woman yields obedience to the instructions of man, and 
helps to carry out his principles? On this account she can deter- 
mine nothing of herself, and is subject to the rule of the three

rH H. = E * Ana. XV. x. 8 Mencius, III. Pt. I. iv. 8.

BFK 
oe 15 2% A. H. 2 ARS uiu "LIE:

104]

SECT. 11.] : HIS INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS. [PROLEGOMENA,rH H. = E * Ana. XV. x. 8 Mencius, III. Pt. I. iv. 8.

BFK 
oe 15 2% A. H. 2 ARS uiu "LIE:

104]

SECT. 11.] : HIS INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS. [PROLEGOMENA,

obediences. When young, she must obey her father and elder 
brother; when married, she must obey her husband; when her 
husband is dead, she must obey her son. She may not think of 
-Ynarrying a second time. No instructions or orders must issue from 
the harem. Woman's business is simply the preparation and sup- 
plying of wine and food. Beyond the threshold of her apartments 
she should hot be known for evil or for good. She may not cross 
the boundaries of the State to Accompany a funeral She may take 
no step on her own motion, and may come to no conclusion on her 
own deliberation. "There are five women who are not to be taken 
in marriage :—the daughter of a rebellious house; the daughter of a 
disorderly house; the.daughter of a house which has produced. 
criminals for more than one generation; the daughter of à leprous 
house; and the daughter who has lost her father ‘and elder brother. 
A wife may be divorced for seven reasons, which may be overruled 
by three considerations. The grounds for divorce are disobedience 
to her husband’s parents; not giving birth to a son; dissolute con- 
duct; jealousy (of her husband's attentions, that is, to the other 
inmates of his harem); talkativeness; and thieving. "The three con- 
siderations which may overrule these grounds are—first, if, while 
she was taken from a home, she has now no home to return to; 
second, if she have passed with-her husband through the three years’ 
mourning for his parents; third, if the husband ‘have become rich 
from being poor. All these regulations were adopted by the sages 
in harmony with the natures of man and woman, and to give 
importance to the ordinance of marriage.“ 0 
With these ideas—not very enlarged—of the relations of society, 
Confucius dwelt much on the necessity of personal correctness of 
character on the part of those in authority, in order to secure the 
right fulfilment of the duties implied in them. This is one grand 
peculiarity of his teaching. I have adverted to it in the review of 
“The Great Learning,” but it deserves some further exhibition, and 
there are three conversations with the chief Ke K‘ang, in which it 
is very expressly set forth. “Ke K'ang asked about government, 
and Confucius replied, ‘To govern means to rectify. If you lead on 
the people with correctness, who will dare not to be correct ?'" “Ke 
Kang, distressed about the number of thieves in the State, inquired0 K BE ok A 
105]

PROLEGOMENA.] CONFUCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. Coil. v.

of Confucius about how to do away with them. Confucius said, If 
you, sir, were not covetóus, though you should reward them to do 
it, they would notsteal'" “Ke K'ang asked about government, say- 
ing, ‘What do You say to killing the unprincipled for the good 
of. the principled?’ -Confucius replied, ‘Sir, in carrying on your 
government, why should you use killing at all? Let your evinced 
desires be for what is good, and the people will be good. The 
relation between superiors and inferiors is like that between the 
wind and the grass. The grass must bend, when the wind blows 
across it. 11

Example is not so powerful as Confucius in these and many other 
passages represented it, but its influence is very great. Its virtue is 
recognized in the family, and it is demanded in the church of 
Christ. A bishop"—and I quote the term with the simple mean- 
ing of overseer— must be blameless.” It seems to me, however, 
that in the progress of society in the West we have come to think 
less of the power of example in many departments of State than 
we ought to do. It is thought of too little in the army and the 
navy. We laugh at the “self-denying ordinance," and the “new 
model" of 1644, but there lay beneath them the principle which 
Confucius so broadly propounded,—the importance of personal 
virtue in all who are in authority. Now that Great Britain is the 
governing power over the masses of India, and that we are coming 
more and more into contact with tens of thousands of the. Chinese, 
this maxim of our sage is deserving of serious consideration from 
all who bear rule, and especially from those on whom devolves the 
conduct of affairs. His words on the' susceptibility of the people to 
be acted on by those above them ought not to prove as water spilt 
on the ground.But te return to Confucius.—As he thus lays it down that the 
mainspring of the well- being of society is the personal character of 
the ruler, we look anxiously for what directions he has given for 
the cultivation of that. But here he is very defective. “ Self. adjust- 
ment and purification,” he said, “ with careful regulation of his dress, 
and the not making a movement contrary to the rules of propriety ; 
—this is the way for the ruler to cultivate his person.“ 12 This is 
layiug too much stress on what is external; but even to attain to this

11 Analects, XII. xvii. ; xviii. ; xix, 12 HH f. xx. 14, 
106] l

SECT. u.] HIS INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS. [ProLeconena.

is beyond unassisted human strength. Confucius, however, never

recognized a disturbance of the moral elements in the constitution 
of map, The people would move, according to him, to the virtue 
of their ruler as the grass bends to the wind, and that virtue would 
come to the ruler at his call. Many were the lamentations which 
he uttered over the degeneracy of his times; frequent were the 
confessions which he made of his own shortcomings. It seems strange 
that it never came distinctly before him, that there is a power of 
evil in the prince and the peasant, which no efforts of their own 
and no instruetions of sages are effectual to subdue.The government which Confucius taught was a despotism, but of 
a modified character. He allowed no “jus divinum," independent of 
personal virtue and a benevolent rule. He has not explicitly stated, 
indeed, wherein lies the ground of the great relation of the governor 
and the governed, but his views on the subject were, we may assume, 
in accordance with the language of the Shoo-king:—“ Heaven and 
Earth are the parents of all things, and of all things men are the 
most intelligent. The man among them most distinguished for in- 
telligence becomes chief ruler, and ought to prove himself the parent 
of the people.“ s And again, Heaven, protecting the inferior people, 
has constituted for them rulers and teachers, who should be able to 
be assisting to God, extending favour and producing tranquillity 
throughout all parts of the empire.“ 14 The moment the ruler ceases 
to be a minister of God for good, and does not administer a government 
that is beneficial to the people, he forfeits the title by which he holds 
the throne, and perseverance in oppression will surely lead to his 
overthrow. Mencius incülcated this principle with a frequency and 
boldness which are remarkable. It was one of the things about 
which Confucius did not like to talk. Still he held it. It is con- 
spicuous in the last chapter of “The Great Learning." Its tendency 
has been to check the violence of oppressionj and maintain the self- 
respect of the people, all along the course of Chinese history.

I must bring these observations on Confucius’ views of govern- 
ment to a close, and I do so with two remarks. First, they are 
adapted to a primitive, unsophisticated state of society. He is a good 
counsellor for the father of a family, the chief of a clan, and even 
the head of a small principality. But his views want the comprehen-

13, 14 See the Shoo-king, V. i. Sect. I. 2, 7.

107]

PROLEGOMENA. ] CONFUCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. Con. v.13, 14 See the Shoo-king, V. i. Sect. I. 2, 7.

107]

PROLEGOMENA. ] CONFUCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. Con. v.

sion which would make them of much service in a great empire. 
Within three centuries after his death, the government of China passe 
ed into a new phase. The founder of the Ts'in dynasty conceived the 
grand idea of abolishing all its feudal Kingdoms, and centralizing 
their administration in himself. He effected the revolution, and 
succeeding dynasties adopted his system, and gradually moulded it 
into the forms and proportions which are now existing. , There has 
been a tendency to advance, and Confucius has all along been trying 
to carry the nation back. Principles have been needed, and not 
* proprieties." The consequence is that China has increased beyond 
its ancient dimensions, while there has been no corresponding 
development of thought. Its body politic has the size of giant, while 
it still retains the mind of a child. Its hoary age is but senility. 
Second, Confucius makes no provision for the intercourse of his 
‘country with other and independent. nations. He knew indeed of 
none such. China was to him “The middle Kingdom,” “The 
multitude of Great States,"16 “ All under heaven."!7 Beyond it were 
only rude and barbarous tribes. He does not speak of them bitterly, 
as many Chinese have done since his time. In one place he contrasts 
them favourably with the prevailing anarchy of the empire, saying, 
“The rude tribes of the east and north have their princes, and are 
not like the’ States of our great land which are without them. 18 
Another time, disgusted with the want of appreciation which he 
experienced, he was expressing his intention to go and live among . 
the nine wild tribes of the east. Some one said, “They are rude. 
llow can you do such à thing?" His reply was, *If a superior man 
dwelt among them, what rudeness would there be?”!9 But had he 
been an emperor-sage, he would not only have influenced them by . 
his instructions, but brought them to acknowledge and submit to 
his sway, as the great Yu did.?“ The only passage of Confucius’ 
teachings from which any rule can be gathered for dealing with 
foreigners, is that in the “ Doctrine of the Mean, where “indulgent 
treatment of men from a distance" is laid down as one of the nine 
standard rules for the government of the empire. ! But “the men 
from a distance" are understood to be pin and leu? simply,— 
* guests," that is, or officers of one State secking employment in15 FR. [a]. 16 2% Ed Ana. II. v. 171 XK * ; passim. 18 Ana. IIT, v, 
19 Ana, IX. xiii 20 E ff III. i. 10; etal 21 2k Pbi A. 2 2] M. 
108]

SECT. II.] HIS INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS. [PROLEGOMENA.

another, or at the imperial court; and “visitors,” or travelling 
merchants. Of independent nations the ancient classics have not 
any knowledge, nor has Confucius. So long as merchants from 
Europe and other parts of the world could have been content to 
appear in China as suppliants, seeking the privilege of trade, so 
long the government would have ranked them with the barbarous 
hordes of antiquity, and given them the benefit of the maxim 
about “indulgent treatment,” according to its own understanding 
of it. But when their governments interfered, and claimed to treat 
with that of China on terms of equality, and that their subjects 
should be spoken to and of as being of the same clay with the Chinese 
themselves, an outrage was committed on tradition and prejudice, 
which it was necessary to resent with vehemence.

I do not charge the contemptuous arrogance of the Chinese 
government and people upon Confucius; what I deplore, is that he 
left no principles on record to check the development of such a 
spirit. His simple views of society and government were in a mea- 
sure sufficient for the people while they dwelt apart from the rest of 
mankind. His practical lessons were better than if they had been left, 
which but for him they probably would have been, to fall a prey to 
the influences of Taouism and Buddhism, but they could only subsist 
while they were left alone. Of the earth earthy, China was sure to 
go to pieces when it came into collision with a Christianly-civilized 
power. Its sage had left it no preservative or restorative elements 
against such a case. ;It is a rude awakening from its complacency of centuries which 
China has now received. Its ancient landmarks are swept away. 
Opinions will differ as to the justice or injustice of the grounds on 
which it.has been assailed, and I do not feel called to judge or to 
pronounce here concerning them. In the progress of events, it could 
not be but that the collision should come; and when it did come, it could 
not be but that China should be broken and scattered. Disorganiza- 
tion will go on to destroy it more and more, and yet there is hope 
for the people, with their veneration of the relations of society, with 
their devotion to learning, and with their habits of industry and 
sobriety ;—there is hope for them, if they will look away from all 
their ancient sages, and turn to Him, who sends them, along with 
the dissolution of their ancient state, the knowledge of Himself, the 
only living and true God, and of Jesus Christ whom He hath sent.

109]

PBROLEGOMENXA.] l CONFUCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. len. v.

8. I have little more to add on the opinions of Confucius. Many 
of his sayings are pithy, and display much knowledge of character; 
but as they are contained in the body of the Work, I will not 
occupy the space here with a selection of those which have struck 
myself as most worthy of notice. The fourth Book of the Analects, - 
which is on the subject of jin, or perfect virtue, has several utter- 
ances which are remarkable. l įThornton observes :—“ It may excite surprise, and probably in- 
credulity, to state that the golden rule of our Saviour, ‘Do unto 
others as you would that they should do unto you, which Mr. Locke 
designates as ‘the most unshaken rule of morality, and foundation 
of all social virtue, had been inculcated by Confucius, almost in the 
same words, four centuries before.”! I have taken notice of this 
fact in reviewing both “ The Great Learning,” and “The Doctrine of 
the Mean." I would be far from grudging a tribute of admiration to 
Confucius for it. The maxim occurs also twice in the Analects. In 
Book XV. xxiii, Tsze-kung asks if there be one word which may 
serve as a rule of practice for all one's life, and is answered, “ Is not 
reciprocity such a word? "What you do not want done to yourself do 
not do to others." The same disciple appears in Dook V. xi., telling 
Confucius that he was practising tlie lesson. He says, * What I do 
not wish men to do to me, I also wish not to do to men;" but the 
master tells him, * Ts'ze, you have not attained to that." It would 
appear from this reply, that he was aware of the difficulty of obeying 
the precept; and it is not found, in its condensed expression at least, 
in the older classics. The merit of it is Confucius’ own.

When a comparison, however, is drawn between it and the rule laid 
down by Christ, it is proper to call attention to the positive form of 
the latter, All things whatsoever ye would that men should do unto 
you, do ye even so to them.” The lesson of the gospel commands 
men to do what they feel to be right and good. It requires them to 
commence a course of such conduct, without regard to the conduct 
of others to themselves. The lesson of Confucius only forbids men 
to do what they feel to be wrong and hurtful. So far as the point of 
priority is concerned, moreover, Christ adds, This is the law and 
the prophets.” The maxim was to be found substantially in the 
earlier revelations of God.1 History of China, vol. I. p. 209. 
110]

sr. l.] HIS INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS. ' [rnoLEOOMENA.

Dut the worth of the two maxims depends on the intention of 
the enunciators in regard to their application. Confucius, it seems 
to me, did not think p the reciprocity coming into action beyond 
ilie circle of his five relations of society. Possibly, he might have 
required its observance in dealings even with tlie rude tr ib which 
were the only specimens of mankind besides his own comtrymen of 
which he knew anything, for on one occasion, when asked about per- 
fect virtue, he replied, “It is, in retirement, to be sedately grave; 
in the management of business, to be reverently attentive; in inter- 
course with others; to be strictly sincere. Though a man go among 
the rude uncultivated tribes, these qualities may not be neglected."2 
Still, Confucius delivered his rule to his countrymen only, and only 
for their guidance in their relations of which I have had so much 
occasion to speak. The rule of Christ is for man as man, having to 
do with other men, all with himself on the same platform, as the 
children and subjects of the one God and Father in heaven.

How far short Confucius came of the standard of Christian bene- 
volence, may be seen from his remarks when asked what was to be 
thought of the principle that injury should be recompensed with 
kindness. He replied, * With what then will you recompense kind- 
ness? Recompense injury with justice, and recompense kindness with 
kindness.”8 The same deliverance is given in one of the Books of 
the Le Ke, where he adds that “he who recompenses injury with 
kindness is a man who is careful of his person.“! Ch‘ing Heuen, the 
commentator of the second century, says that such a course would be 
incorrect in point of propriety.” This “propriety” was a great 
stumbling-block in the way of Confucius. His morality was the

‘result of the balancings of his intellect, fettered by the decisions of‘result of the balancings of his intellect, fettered by the decisions of

men of old, and not the gushings of a loving heart, responsive to 
the promptings of Heaven, and in sympathy with erring and feeble 
humanity.

This subject Jeads me on to the last of the opinions of Confucius 
which I shall make the subject of remark in this place. A com- 
mentator observes, with reference to the i inquiry about recompensing 
injury with kindness, that the questioner was asking only about 
trivial matters, which might be dealt with in the way he mentioned,

2 Analects, XIII, xix. 3 Ana. XXV. xxxvi, Me B BU * 5 Bl par. 12. 5 JE 
Md < IE

ai]

PROLEGOMENA.] CONFUCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. | fcu. v.2 Analects, XIII, xix. 3 Ana. XXV. xxxvi, Me B BU * 5 Bl par. 12. 5 JE 
Md < IE

ai]

PROLEGOMENA.] CONFUCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. | fcu. v.

while great offences such as those against a sovereign or a father, 
could not be dealt with by such an inversion of the principles of 
justice.“ In the second Book of the Le Ke there is the following 
passage:—'* With the slayer of his father, a man may not live 
under the same heaven; against the slayer of his brother, a man 
must never have,to go home to fetch a weapon; with the slayer of 
his friend, a man may not live in the same State." The lex talionis 
is here laid down in its fullest extent. The Chow Le tells us of a 
provision made against the evil consequences of the principle, by the 
appointment of. a minister called “The Reconciler.“s ‘The provision 
is very inferior to the cities of refuge which were set apart by Moses 
for the manslayer to flee to from the fury of the avenger. Such 
as it was, however, it existed, and it is remarkable that Confucius, 
when consulted on the subject, took no notice of it, but affirmed the 
duty of blood-revenge in the strongest and most unrestricted terms. 
His disciple Tsze-hea asked him, What course is to be pursued in 
‘the case of the murder of a father or mother?” He replied, “The 
son must sleep upon a matting of grass, with his shield for his 
pillow ; he must decline to take office; he must not live under the 
same heaven with the slayer. "When he meets him in the market- 
place or the court, he must have his weapon ready to strike him." 
* And what is the course on the murder of a brother?" „The sur- 
viving brother must not take office in the same State with the slayer ; 
yet if he go on his prince's service to the State where the slayer is, 
though he meet him, hé must not fight with him." “And what is 
the course on the murder of an uncle or a cousin?"  * In this case 
the nephew or cousin is notthe principal 1f the principal on whom 
the revenge devolves can take it, he has only to stand behind with 
his weapon in his hand, and support him.“Sir John Davis has rightly called attention to this as one of the 
objectionable principles of Confucius. 10 The bad effects of it are 
evident even in the present day. Revenge is sweet to the Chinese. 
I have spoken of their readiness to submit to government, and wish 
to live in peace, yet they do not like to resign even to government 
the “inquisition for blood.” Where the ruling authority is feeble,

6 See notes in loc., p. d 7 f EMI I. Pt. I. v. 1 8 J nt. 4s Z t 
V.» 16—18. 9 15 8b. Ul. Tt. . b. 20 See also the Be we A. A 
ig. 10 The a i II. p. 41.

112]

BECT. III.] © HIS IMMEDIATE DISCIPLES. [PROLEGOMENA,

as it is at present, individuals and clans take the law into their own 
hands, and whole districts are kept in a state of constant feud and 
warfare. | : :

But I must now leave the sage. I hope I have not done him 
injustice; but after: long study of his character and opinions, I 
ain unable to regard him as a great man. He was not before his 
age, though he was above the 1nass of the officers and scholars of 
his time. He threw no new light on any of the questions which 
have a world-wide interest. He gave no impulse to religion. He. 
had no sympathy with progress. His influence has been wonderful, 
but it will henceforth wane: My opinion is, that the faith of the 
nation in him will speedily and extensively pass away.

>

SECTION III.

T HIS IMMEDIATE DISCIPLES,>

SECTION III.

T HIS IMMEDIATE DISCIPLES,

Szc-ma Ts'een males Confucius say :-— The disciples who received 
my instructions, and could comprehend them, were seventy-seven 
individuals. They were all scholars of extraordinary ability." The 
-common saying is, that the disciples of the sage were three thousand, 
while among them there were seventy-two worthies. I propose to 
give here a list of all those whose names have come down to us, as 
being his followers. Of the greater number it will be seen that we 
know nothing more than their names and surnames. My principal 
authorities will be the “ Historical Records,” the * Family Sayings,” 
“The Sacrificial Canon for the Sage’s Temple, with Plates,” and the 
chapter on “The Disciples of Confucius” prefixed to the “Four 
Books, Text and Commentary, with Proofs and Illustrations.“ In 
giving a few notices of the better-known individuals, I will endeavour 
to avoid what may be gathered from the Analects.

1. Yen Hwuy, by designation Tsze-yuen (H4 Ep £ F Hil). He 
was a native of Loo, the favourite of his master, whose junior he 
was by 30 years, and whose disciple he became when he was quite a 
youth. “After I got Hwuy,” Confucius remarked, “the diseiples 
came closer to me.” We are told that once, when he found himself 
on the Nung hill with IIwuy, Tsze-loo, and Tsze-kung, Confucius

MEDERMA EN E A. RSE 
^ 118]

PROLEGOMENA ] CONFUCIUS AND IIIS DISCIPLES. lou. v.MEDERMA EN E A. RSE 
^ 118]

PROLEGOMENA ] CONFUCIUS AND IIIS DISCIPLES. lou. v.

asked them to tell him their different aims, and he would choose 
between them. Tsze-loo began, and when he had done, the master 
said, “It marks your bravery.” Tsze-kung followed, on whose 
words the judgment was, “They show your discriminating elo- 
quence.” At last came Yen Yuen, who said, *I should like to find 
an intelligent king and sage ruler whom I might assist. I would 
diffuse among the people instructions on the five great points, and 
lead them on by ‘the rules of propriety and music, so that they 
should not care to fortify their cities by walls and moats, but would 
fuse their swords and spears into implements of agriculture. They 
should send forth their flocks without fear into.the plains and forests. 
There should be no sunderings of families, no widows or widowers. 
For a thousand years there would be no calamity of war. Yew 
would have no opportunity to display his bravery, or Ts‘ze to display 
his oratory.” The master pronounced, “How admirable is this 
virtue !" l

When Hwuy was 29, his hair was all white, and in three years 
‘more he died. He was sacriticed to, along with Confucius, by the 
first emperor of the Han dynasty. The title which he now ‘has in 
the sacrificial Canon, —* Continuator of the Sage,” was conferred in 
the 9th year of the emperor, or, to speak more correctly, of the 
period, Kea-tsing, A. D. 1530. Alinost all the present sacrificial titles 
of the worthies in the temple were fixed at that time. Hwuy’s place 
is the. first of the four Assessors, on the east of the sage.? mE

2. Min Sun, styled Tsze-k'een, (Bd 4E. 52 F 45). He was a

native of Loo, 15 years young ger than Confucius, ae to Se- ina2. Min Sun, styled Tsze-k'een, (Bd 4E. 52 F 45). He was a

native of Loo, 15 years young ger than Confucius, ae to Se- ina

2 I have referred briefly, at p. 92, to the temples of Confucius. The principal hall, called X 
N e. or * Hall of the Great and Complete One,’ is that in which is his own statue or the 
tablet of his spirit, having on each side of it, within a screen, the statues, or tablets, of his * four 
Assessors.” On the east and west, along thé walls of the same apartment ate the two F. the 
places of tlie TI. or‘ twelve Wise Ones,’ those of his disciples, who, next to the * Assessórs,' 
are counted worthy of honour. Outside this apartment, and running in a Jine with the two . 
but along tlie external wall of the sacred inclosure, are the two Mx. or side-gallories, which I have 
sumetimes called the ranges of the outer court, In each there are 64 tablets of the disciples and 
other worthies, having. the sume title, as the Wise Ones, that of pj? y: or 1 Worthy,’ or 
tlie inferior title of N. i , Ancient Scholar’ Behind the principal hall is the 2 5i 12 Hn nii] b 
sacred to Confucius’ ancestors, whose tablets are in the centre, fronting the south, like that of

Confucius? On each side are likewise the tablets of certain ‘ancient Worthies,’ and ‘ancient 
Scholars,’ è 
114]

SECT. TL] HIS IMMEDIATE DISCIPLES. [PROLEGOMENA.Confucius? On each side are likewise the tablets of certain ‘ancient Worthies,’ and ‘ancient 
Scholars,’ è 
114]

SECT. TL] HIS IMMEDIATE DISCIPLES. [PROLEGOMENA.

Ts‘cen, but 50 years younger, according to the“ Family Sayings,” 
which latter authority is followed in “The Annals of the Empire” 
When he first came to Confucius, we are told, he had a starved look, i 
wllich was by-and-by exchanged for one of fulness and satisfaction.2 
Tsze- kung asked him how the change had come about. He replied, 
J came from the midst of my reeds and sedges into the school of the 
master. He trained my mind to filial piety, and set before me the 
examples of the ancient kings. I felt a pleasure in his instructions, 
but when I went abroad, and saw the people in authority, with their 
umbrellas and banners, and all the pomp and circumstance of their 
trains, I also felt pleasure in that show. ‘These two things assaulted 
each other in my breast. I could not determine which to prefer, 
and so I wore that look of distress. But now the lessons of our 
inaster liave penetrated deeply into my mind. My progress also has 
been helped by the example of you my fellow-disciples. I now know 
what I should follow and what J should avoid, and all the pomp of 
power is no more to me than the dust of the ground. It is on this 
account that I have that look of fulness and satisfaction.” Tsze-k‘een 
was high in Confucius’ esteem. He was distinguished for his purity 
and filial affection. His place in the temple is the first, east, among 
“The Wise Ones,” immediately after tlie four assessors. He was first 
sacrificed to along with Confucius, as is to be understood of the 
other “ Wise Ones,” excepting in the case of Yew Jð, in the 8th year 
of the style K*ae-yuen of the sixth emperor of the T'ang dynasty, 
A.D. 720. His title, the same as that of all but the Assessors is— 
“The ancient Worthy, the philosopher Min.”3. Yen Kang, styled Pih-new (H. f. H (el, H] 2). He 
was a native of Loo, and Confucius’ junior only by seven years. 
When Confucius became Minister of Crime, he appointed Pih-new 
to the office, which he had hinself formerly held, of commandant 
of Chung-too. His tablet is now fourth among “The Wise Ques,” 
on the west.

4, Yen Yung, styled Chung-kung (H Ik. 3 4h H). He was of 
the same clan as Yen Kang, and 29 years younger than Confucius. 
He had a bad father, but the master declared that was not to be 
counted to him, to detract from his admitted excellence. His place 
is among “The Wise Ones,” the second, east.

KE WRB 
i 115]

PROLEGOMENA. CONFUCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. (ex. v.

5. Yen Kew, styled Txze-yew (Hl. . £ FH). IIe was related 
to the two former, and of the same age as Chung-kung. Ile was 
noted among the disciples for his versatile ability and many acquire- 
ments. Tsze-kung said of him, Respectful to the old, and kind to 
the young; attentive to guests and visitors ; fond of learning and skill- 
ed in many arts; diligent in his examination of things:—these are 
what belong to Yen Kew.“ It has been noted in the life of Confucius 
that it was by the influence of Tsze-yew that he was finally restored 
to Loo. He occupies the third place, west, among “The Wise ones.”6. Chung Yew, styled Tsze-loo and Ke-loo (4h FH. F Vi. NL £ 
g). He was a native of P'éen (-k) in Loo, and only 9 years 
younger than Confucius. At their first interview, the master 
asked him what he was fond of, and he replied, * My long sword." 
Confucius said, “If to your present ability there were added the 
results of learning, you would be a very superior man." „Of what 
advantage would learning be to me?" asked Tsze-loo. “There is a 
bamboo on the southern hill, which is straight itself without being 
bent. If you cut it down and use it, you can send it though a rhino- 
ceros' hide; what is the use of learning?” “ Yes,” said the master ; 
“but if you feather it and point it with steel, will it not penetrate 
more deeply ? " Tsze-loo bowed twice, and said, “ I will reverently re- 
ecive your instructions.” Confucius was wont to say, “ From the 
time that I got Yew, bad words no more came to my ears.” For 
some time Tsze-loo was chief magistrate of the district of P*oo Gib» 
where his administration commanded the warm commendations of 
the master. He died finally in Wei, as has been related above, p. 87. 
llis tablet is now the fourth, cast, from those of the Assessors.

7. Tsae Yu, styled Tsze-go.(X€ "fs E F FR). He was a native 
of Loo, but nothing is mentioned of his age. He had “a sharp 
mouth,” according to Sze-ma Ts‘een. Once, when he was at the 
court of Ts‘oo on some commission, the king Ch‘aou offered him an 
easy carriage adorned with ivory for his master. Yu replied, “My 
master is a man who would rejoice in a government where right 
principles were carried out, aud can find his joy in himself when that is 
not the case. Now right principles and virtue are as it were in a 
state of slumber? llis wish is to rouse and put them in motion. 
Could he find a prince really anxious to rule according to them, he 
would walk on foot to his court, and be glad to do so. Why need

116]

SECT. ii] TIS IMMEDIATE DISCIPLES. [rnorrooMrkA.116]

SECT. ii] TIS IMMEDIATE DISCIPLES. [rnorrooMrkA.

he receive such a valuable gift as this from so great a distance?" 
«Confucius commended this reply; but where he is mentioned in the 
Analects, Tsze-go docs not appear to great advantage, He took ser- 
vice in the State of Ts‘e, and was chief magistrate of Lin-tsze, where 
he joined with Teen Chang in some disorderly movement,! which 
led to the destruction of his kindred, and made Confucius ashamed 
of him. His tablet is now the second, west, ace “The Wise Ones.” 
8. Twan-muk Ts'ze, styled Tsze-kung (ig K AS. ＋ F ED [al., F 
Met]), whose place is now third, east, from the Assessors. He was a 
native of Wei (ff), and 31 years younger than Confucius. He had 
great quickness of natural ability, and appears in the Analects as 
one of the most forward talkers among the disciples. Confucius 
used to say, From the time that I'got Ts ze, scholars from a distance 
caine daily resorting to me.” Several instances of the language 
which he used to express his admiration of the master have been 
given in the last section. Here is another :—The duke King of Ts‘e 
asked Tsze-kung how Chung-ne was to be ranked as a sage. I do 
not know,” was the reply. “I have all my life had the heaven over 
my head, but I do not know its height, and the earth under my feet, 
-but I do not know its thickness. In my serving of Confucius, I am 
like a thirsty man who goes with his pitcher to ‘the river, and there 
he drinks his fill, without knowing the river's depth." He took leave 
of Confucius to become commandant of Sin- yang (f3 H ), when 
the master said to him, “In dealing with your subordinates, there 
RG nothing like impartiality; and when wealth comes in your way, 
there is nothing like moderation. Hold fast these two things, and do 
not swerve from them. To conceal men’s excellence is to obscure 
the worthy; and to proclaim people’s wickedness is the part of a 
mean man. To speak evil of those whom you have not sought the 
-opportunity to instruct, is not the way of friendship and harmony.” 
Subsequently Tsze-kung was high in office both in Loo and Wei, 
and finally died in Ts'e. We saw how he was in attendance on 
Confucius at the time of the sage's death. Many of the disciples 
built huts near the master's grave, and mourned for him three years, 
but Tsze-kung remained sorrowing alone for three years more. 
9. Yen Yen, styled Tsze-yew (F Tb F T i), now the 4th in 
the western range of: “The Wise Ones." ile was a native of Woo1 Bü n qe y A BL See above, p. 7. 
117]

PROLEGOMENA.] CONFUCIUS AND NIS DISCIPLES. [en. v.

(), 45 years younger than Confucius, and distinguished for his 
literary acquireménts. Being made commandant of Woo-shing, he 
transformed the character of the people by “ proprieties " and music, 
and was praised by the master. After the death of Confucius, Ke 
Kang asked Yen how that event had made no sensation in Loo like 
that which was made by the death of Tsze-ch'an, when the men laid 
aside their bowstring rings and girdle ornaments, and the women 
laid aside their pearls and ear-rings, and the voice of weeping was 
heard in the lanes for three months. Yen replied, “The influences 
of Tsze-ch‘an and my master might be compared to those of over- 
flowing water and the fattening rain. Wherever the water in its 
overflow reaches, men take knowledge of it, while the fattening rain 
falls unobserved.”

10. Puh Shang, styled, Tsze-hea (| fj, 5p F H). It is not 
certain to what State he belonged, his birth being assigned to Wei 
(ih), to Wei (), and to Wan (if). He was 45 years younger 
than Confucius, and lived to a great age, for we find him, B. c. 406, 
at the court of the prince Win of Wei Bh), to whom he gave copies 
of some of the classical Books. He is represented as a scholar ex- 
tensively read and exact, but without great comprehension of mind. 
What is called Maou's She-king ( FẸ) is said to contain the views 
of Tsze-hea. . Kung-yang Kaou and Kuh-léang Ch‘ih are also said 
to have studied the Ch‘un Ts‘ew with him. On the occasion of the 
death of his son he wept himself blind. His place is the 5th, east, 
among The Wise Ones."11. Twan-sun Sze, styled Tsze- chan (Jin $$ Bp. ^£ -Y- HB), has 
his tablet, corresponding to that of the preceding, on the west. He 
was a native of Ch'in (M), and 48 years younger than- Confucius. 
Tsze-kung said, “ Not to boast of his admirable merit; not to signify 
joy on account of noble station; neither insolent nor indolent; 
showing no pride to the dependent: these are the characteristics of 
Twan-sun Sze.” When he was sick, he called Shin Ts'eang to him, 
and said, We speak of his end in the case of a superior man, and of 
his death in the case of à mean man. May I think that it is going 
to be the former with me to-day ?"

12. Tsáng Sin [or el’s‘an], styled Tsze-yu ( , f F H, Lal., 
F Sü]) He was a native of south Woo-shing, and 46 years younger 
than Confucius. In his 16th year he was sent by his father into

118]

seot. ut) ‘HIS IMMEDIATE DISCIPLES, [PROLBGOMENA,

Ts‘oo, where Confucius then was, to learn under the sage. Excepting

perhaps Yen Hwuy, there is not a name of greater note in the Con-118]

seot. ut) ‘HIS IMMEDIATE DISCIPLES, [PROLBGOMENA,

Ts‘oo, where Confucius then was, to learn under the sage. Excepting

perhaps Yen Hwuy, there is not a name of greater note in the Con-

fucian school. Tsze-kung said of him, “ There is no subject which he 
has not studied. His appearance is respectful. His virtue is solid. 
His words command credence. Before great men he draws himself 
up in the pride of self-respect. His eyebrows: are those of longevity.” 
He was noted for his filial piety, and after the death of his parents, 
he could not read the rites of mourning without being led to think 
of them, and moved to tears. He was a voluminous writer. Ten 
Books of his composition are said to be contained in the “ Rites of the 
elder Tae" (X & mE). The classic, of Filial Piety. he is said to 
have made under the eye of Confucius. On his connection with 
“The Great Learning,” see above, Ch. III. Sect. n. He was first 
associated with the sacrifices to Confucius in a.n. 668, but in 1267 
he was advanced to be one of the.sage's four Assessors. His title 
* Exhibiter of the Fundamental Principles of the Sage,” dates from 
the period of Kea-tsing, as mentioned in speaking of Yen Hwuy. 
13. Tan-tae Méé-ming, styled Tsze-yu (% N . F M. 
Ie was a native of Woo-shing, 39 years younger than Confucius, 
according to the * Historical Records," but 49, according to the 
“Family Sayings.” He was excessively ugly, and Confucius thought 
meanly of his talents in consequence, on his first applicatiori to him. 
After completing his studies, he travelled to the south as far as the 
Yang-tsze. Traces of his presence in that part of the country are still 
pointed out in the department of Soo-chow. He was followed by

‘about thr ec hundred disciples, to whom he laid down ‘rules for their‘about thr ec hundred disciples, to whom he laid down ‘rules for their

guidance i in their intercourse with the princes. When Confucius 
heard of his success, he confessed how he had been led by his bad 
looks to misjudge him. He, with nearly all the disciples whose names 
follow, first had a place assigned to him in the sacrifices to Confucius 
in A.D. 739, The place of his tablet is the second, east, in the outer 
court, beyond that of the “ Assessors " and “ Wise Ones.”

14. Corresponding to the preceding, on the west, is the tablet of 
Fuk Puh-ts‘e, styled Tsze-tseen ( (ak, 28 and J£, all—th) N M. 
＋ -F HE) He was a native of Loo, and, according to different 
accounts, 30, 40, and 49 ps younger thap Confucius. He was 
commandant of Tan- foo (HL & 3), and hardly needed to put forth 
any personal cffort. Wonna K'e had been in the same office, and

119]

Is

^ pROLEGOMENA.] CONFUCIUS AND IIIS DISCIPLES. Lou. v.

had succeeded by dint of the greatest industry and toil. IIe asked

Puh-ts'e how he managed 80 easily for himself, and was answered, 
“T employ men; you employ men's strength.” People pronounced 
Fuh to be a superior man. He was also a writer, and his works are 
mentioned in Lew Hin’s catalogue.

15. Next to that of Mes ming i is the tablet of Luen Hen, styled 
Tsze-sze (H In. F F M) a native of Sung, or, according to Ching 
Heuen, of Loo, and younger than Conas by 36 years. He was 
noted for his purity and modesty, and for his happiness in the prin- 
ciples of the master amid deep poverty. After the death of Confucius, 
he lived in obscurity in Wei. In the notes to Ana. VI. iii, I have 
referred to an interview which he had with Tsze-kung.

16. Kung vag Chang [al., Che], styled Tsze- Ch ang [al., Tsze-che], 
(AWG R al., E] FF R, [al., F Z)), has lis tablet next to 
that of Pih-ts'e. He was son-in-law to Confucius. His nativity is 
assigned both to Loo and to Ts‘e. :l7. Nan-kung Kwó, styled Tse yung (8 E HF [al., JE, and, 
in the “ Family “Sayings? ZA (Taou) J, F ), has the place at 
the east next to Yuen Hien. If is a question much debated whether 
he was the same with Nan-kung King-shuh, who accompanied Con- 
fucius to the court of Chow, or not. On occasion of a fire breaking 
out in the palace of duke Gae, while others were intent on securing 
the contents of the Treasury, Nan-kung directed his efforts to save 
the Library, and to him was owing the preservation of the copy of 
the Chow Le which was in Loo, and other ancient monuments.

18. Kung-scih Gae, styled Ke. ts ze [al., Ke-ch‘in] (AA H N. 5 BS 
N Lal., S]). His tablet follows that of Kung-yay. He was a na- 
tive of Loo, or of Ts‘e. Confucius commended | him for refusing to 
take office with any of the Families which were encroaching on “the 
authority of the princes of the States, and for choosing to endure tlie 
severest poverty rather than sacrifice a tittle of his principles. -

19. Tsing Teen, styled Seih ( jg Lal., 85] 5g Ef). He was the 
father of Tsáng Ts'an. His place in the temples is the hall to OE 
fucius' ancestors, where his tablet is the first, west.

20. Yen Woo-yaou, styled Loo (Pii A 44, . e P). He was the 
father of Yen Hway, younger than Confucius by six yoars. His 
sacrificial place is the first, east, in the same hall as the last.

21. Following the tablet of Nan-kung Kwo is that of Shang Keu,

J 20] ^ i

SECT. 111] HiS IMMEDIATE DISCIPLES.. . [pRoLecomena. `

styled Tsze-muh (fj IE. F AK). To him, it is said, we are in-

debted for the preservation of the Yih-king, which he received from

Confucius. Its transmission step by step, from Keu down to the 
, Han dynasty, is minutely set forth.debted for the preservation of the Yih-king, which he received from

Confucius. Its transmission step by step, from Keu down to the 
, Han dynasty, is minutely set forth.

22. Next to Kung-seih Gace is the place of Kaou Ch‘ae, styled 
Tsze-kaou and Ke-kaou ( . FK. Lal., an; for SE moreover, 
we find 53, and #2]), a native of Ts‘e, according to the “Family 
Sayings,” but of Wei, according to Sze- ma Ts‘een and Ching Heuen. 
He was 30 (some say 40) years younger than Confucius, dwarfish 
and ugly, but of great worth and ability. At one time he was 
criminal judge of Wei, and in the execution of his office condemned 
a prisoner to lose his feet. Afterwards that same man saved his 
life, when he was flying from the State. Confucius praised Ch'ae 
for being able to administer stern justice with such a spirit of 
benevolence as to disarm resentment.

23. Shang Keu is followed by Tseih-teaou K‘ae [prop. K‘e], styled 
iTsze-k‘ue, Tsze-j6, and Tsze-sew (Ar BIE B] (pr. Ex) I B EE. 
and F ff), a native of Ts'ae (SS), or, acc. to Heuen, of Loo. We

' only know him as a reader of the Shoo-king, and refusing to go into 
office.

24. Kung-pih Leaou, styled Tsze-chow ( (HA ff. F JS). He 
appears in the Analects XIV. xxxiii, slandering Tsze-loo. It is 
pi whether he'should have a place among the disciples.

. Szeana King, styled Tsze-new (HI Hj gt t£ 2, follows 
no teaou K'ae. He was a great talker, a native of Sung, and a 
brother of Hwan T*uy, to escape from whom seenis to have been the 
labour of his life.

26. The place next Kaou Ch'ae is occupied by Fan Seu, styled 
Tsze-ch‘e (4% 241, ££ T XE), a native of Ts‘e, or, acc. to others, of 
Loo, and whose age is given as 36 or 46 years younger than Con- 
fucius. When young, he distinguished himself in a military com- 
mand under the Ke family.27. Yew Jd, styled Tszejó (H H. F FE). He was a native 
of Loo, and his age is stated very variously. He was noted among 
the disciples for his great memory and fondness for antiquity. After 
the death of Confucius, the rest of the disciples, because of the 
likeness of J6’s voice to the Master’s, wished to render the same 
observances to him which they had done to Confucius, but on

121]

PROLEGOMENA.] CONFUCIUS AND IIIS DISCIPLES. [ci v. 
Ld

T-&ng Sin’s demurring to the thing, they abandoned the purpose. 
The tablet of Tsze-jò is now the 6th, east, among “The Wise Ones,” 
to which place it was promoted in the 3d year of K*éen-lung of the 
present dynasty. This was done in compliance with a memorial 
from the president of one of the Boards, who said he was moved hy a 
dream to make the request. We may suppose that his real motives 
were—a wish to do justice to the merits of Tsze-j5, and to restore 
the symmetry of the tablets in the * Hall of the Great and Complete 
One,” which had been disturbed by the introduction of the tablet of 
Choo He in the preceding reigu.

28. Kung-se Cháh, styled Tsze-hwa ( Dg zy» £ F HB), a na- 
tive of Loo, younger than Confucius by 42 years, whose place is 
the 4th, west, in the outer court. He was noted for his knowledge 
of ceremonies, and the other disciples devolved on him all the 
arrangements about the funeral of the Master.29. Woo-ma She [or K'e], styled Tsze-K‘e ( W Hi [ al., J. 
F HB Lal., F Mt ]), a native of Chin, or, ace. to Ch'ing Heuen, 
of Loo, 30 years younger than Confueius. His tablet is on the 
east, next to that of Szeana King. It is related that on one 
occasion, when Confucius was about to set out with a company of 
the disciples on a walk or journey, he told them to take umbrellas. 
They met with a heavy shower, and Woo-ma asked him, saying,. 
“There were no clouds in the morning, but after the sun had risen, 
you told us to take umbrellas. How did you know that it would 
rain?” Confucius said, “The moon last evening was in the 
constellation Peih, and is it not said in the Sho-king, *When the 
moon is in Peih, there wil be heavy rain?’ It was thus 1 knew 
it."

30. Luang Chen [al., Le], styled Shuh-yu (372 Lal. MEJ 2 KN 
ffi), occupies the eighth place, west, among the tablets of the outer 
court. lie was a man of Ts‘e, and his age is stated as 29 and 59 
years younger than Confucius. ‘The following story is told in con- 
nection with him.—When he was thirty, being disappointed that he 
had no son, he was minded to put away his wife.“ Do not do so," 
said Shang Keu to him. “I was 38 before I had a son, and my mother 
was then about to take another wife for me, when the Master pro- 
posed sending me to Tse. My mother was unwilling that I should 
go, but Confucius said, Don't be anxious. Keu will have five sous

122]

ae

8ECT. 111.] HIS IMMEDIATE DISCIPLES. ; [PROLEGOMENA,

after he is forty. It has turned out so, and I apprehend it is your 
fault, and not your wife's, that you have no són yet." Chen took 
this advice, and in the second year after, he had a son.

31. Yen ling fal., Sin, Lew, and Wei], styled Tsze-lew (Ei E (al. 3 
45), and ‘3% ik) FF Bib, occupies the place, east, after Woo-ma Se. 
lle was a native of Loo, and 46 years younger than Confucius.31. Yen ling fal., Sin, Lew, and Wei], styled Tsze-lew (Ei E (al. 3 
45), and ‘3% ik) FF Bib, occupies the place, east, after Woo-ma Se. 
lle was a native of Loo, and 46 years younger than Confucius.

32. Leang Chen is followed on the west by Yen Joo, styled Tsze- 
Loo [al., Tsze-tsing and Tsze-yu] (H. 585 Lal., fi! F H al., F H 
and F #f1}), a native of Loo, and 50 years younger than Confucius.

33. Yen Hing is followed on the east by Ts‘aou Seuh, styled. 
Tsze-seun (H ai, E F 4), a native of Ts‘ae, 50 years younger 
than Confucius.

34. Next on the west is Pih K'éen, styled Tsze-seih, or, in the 
current copies of the * Family Sayings," Tsze-k'éae (HR. A H 
[ul., F Hf] or F #4), a native of Loo, 50 years younger than Con- 
fucius.

35. Following Moses is Kung-sun Lung [al, Ch‘ung], styled 
Tsze-shih (AS $& 8 fe (ul. BE) £ E Ay) whose birth is assigned by 
different writers to Wei, IS O0, and Chaou (Hj). He was 53 years. 
younger than Confucius. We have the following account:—“ Tsze- 
kung asked Tsze-shih, saying, *Have you not studied the Book of 
Poetry?’ Tsze-shih replied, ‘What leisure have I to do so? My 
parents require me to be filial; my brothers require me to be sub- 
missive; and my friends require me to be sincere. What leisure 
have I for anything else? ‘Come to my Master,’ said Tsze-kung, 
‘and learn of him. "n

Sze-ma Ts‘een here observes :—“ Of the thirty-five disciples which 
precede, we have some details. Their age and other particulars 
are found in the Books and Records. It is not so, however, in 
regard to the fifty-two which follow."

de Yen Ke, die Tsze-ch‘an [aL Ke-ch'an and Tsze-t&] (H. 
2$, . -F JE (al. E and F 332]), a native of Loo whose place 
^ us eleventh, d next to Pih Ke

37. Nang 200 Kow-tsze or Spb Tsze, styled Tsze-che (A 
ji A) 15 foe simply 2%], F F ZZ), a native of Loo. His tablet is 
the 23d, east, in the outer court.37. Nang 200 Kow-tsze or Spb Tsze, styled Tsze-che (A 
ji A) 15 foe simply 2%], F F ZZ), a native of Loo. His tablet is 
the 23d, east, in the outer court.

38. Tsin Tsoo, styled Tsze-nan ( Z& ji. 5 F FH), a native of 
Ts5n. llis tablet precedes that of the last, two places.

123]

PROLEGOMENA] CONFUCIUS AXD HIS DISCIPLES. [cn. v.

39. Jseih-teaou Ch‘e, styled Tsze-léen (r EW (al, E) = 
-F Sk), a native of Loo. His tablet is the 13th, west.

40. Yen Kaou, styled Tsze-Keaou (M E 58). Accord- 
-ing to the “ Family Sayings, " he was the same as Yen K4h (Al, or 
HP who drove the carriage, when Confucius rode in Wei after the 
duke and Nan-tsze. But this seems doubtful. Other authorities 
make his name Ch'an (), and style him Tsze-tsing (F 48). His 
tablet is the 13th, east.

4l. 'Tseih-teaou Teoo- foo [al Ts‘ ung], styled Tsze-yew, Tsze-k'e 
and Tsze-win), E BE HE & al. (E FF AG or F & (ul., FW 
and ]) a native of Loo, whose tablet precedes that of Tseih- 
teaou Ch'e.

42. Jang Sze-ch'h, styled Tsze-t‘oo, or Tsze-ts‘ung (Ef [al. JX] 
Bl ah, £ F FE [al. F 4£)), a native of Tsin. Some consider 
Jang-sze (E E] ) to be a double surname. His tablet comes after 
that of No. 40. :

43. Shang Tsih, styled Tsze-ke and Tsze-sew (H ye F JF BE 
(aL, F 25]), a native of Loo. His tablet is immediately after that 
of Fan Seu, No. 26.

44. Shih Tsd [al., Che and Tsze]shuh, styled Tsze-ming ( 4€ 
[al., ZZ and Y. Aj t£ F WJ). Some take Shih-tsó (4G TE) asa 
double surname. His tablet follows that of No. 42.

45. Jin Puh-ts'e, styled Seuen (f£ Fe . HF W, a native of Ts*oo, 
whose tablet is next to that of No. 28.45. Jin Puh-ts'e, styled Seuen (f£ Fe . HF W, a native of Ts*oo, 
whose tablet is next to that of No. 28.

46. Kung Leang Joo, styled Tsze-ching ( N P Lal., fF), *£ F 
AE), a native of Ch‘in, follows the piccedinis d in the temples. The 
“Sacrificial Canon” says :—“ Tze ching was a man of worth and 
bravery. When Confucius was surrounded and stopt in P*oo, Tsze- 
ching fought so desperately, that the people of P‘oo were afraid, aud 
let the Master go, on his swearing that he would not proceed to Wei.“

47. How (ol, Shih] Ch‘oo 20 [6 Keen] styled Tsze-le [al., Le-che], 
( fal. 43] JE (al, X] FF H (al., HL), a native of Ts'e, 
having T fables the 17th, east.

48. Ts‘in Yen, styled K‘ae ( [1]. f fi), a native of Ts‘ac. He 
is not given in the list of the“ Family Sayings,” and on this account 
his tablet was put out of the temples in the 9th ycar of Kea-tsing. 
It was restored, however, in the second year of Yung-ching' A. b. 
1724, and is the thirty-third, east, in the outer court.

124]

ater. 11] nis IMMEDIATE DISCIPLES. ` [PReLEGOMERA.

49. Kung-hea Show, styled Shing [and Tsze-shing], (AB B (al., 
5] 5€ FE [and F 3E] ), a native of Loo, whose tablet is next that 
of No. 44.

50. He Yung-téen [or simply Teen, ] styled Tsze-seih [al., Tsze- 
keae, and Tsze-k‘eae], (A AE [or HA), F H (al., F f and 
F ), a native of Wei, having his tablet the 18th, east.

51, Kung Kéen-ting [al., Kung Yew], styled Tsze-chung (A Jj 
[al., EX] M [al., & H] FF Ap, [al., FA, and ]). His nativity 
is assigned to Loo, to Wei, and to Tsin (H). He follows No. 46.

52. Yen Tsoo [al., Seang), styled Séang, and Tsze-seang ( ME 
[al., AB], 5£ SE, and -F SE), a native of Loo, with his tablet follow- 
ing that of No. 50. l ' l

. 53. Heaou Tan [al., Woo] styled Tsze-kéa (J H (aL, F, 2 
F €), a native of Loo. His place is next to that of No. 51.. 53. Heaou Tan [al., Woo] styled Tsze-kéa (J H (aL, F, 2 
F €), a native of Loo. His place is next to that of No. 51.

54. Keu [al., Kow] Tsing-keang [and simply Tsing] styled Tsze- 
keang [al., T'sze-keae and Tsze-ming], ( [al., 4j and $4 & 
{and simply Ff), YH lal., F A, and F Hl), a . 
following No. 52. . t

55. Han [al., Tsae]-foo Hih, styled Tsze-hih [al., Tsze-só and Tsze- 
$00], (Œ (aL, 3E] 4€ S FF AR [al F N. and -F. FH), a native 
of Loo, whose tablet is next to that of No. 53. ;

56. Ts‘in Shang, styled Tsze-p‘ei (aL, P'ei-tsze, and Puh-tsze], (S 
Tj. ＋ F R (aL, A AZ, and F 2£]), a natiye of Loo, or, accord- 
ing to Ch'ing Heuen, of Ts‘oo. He was 40 years younger than 
Confucius. One authority, however, says he was only 4 years 
younger, and that his father and Confucius’ father were both cele- 
brated for their strength. His tablet is the 12th, east.

57. Shin Tang, styled Chow (FH $& +£ JAD. In the * Family 
Sayings" there is a Shin Tseih, styled Tsze-chow (FH . -F JA). 
The name is given by others as T'ang ( and fii), and Tsuh (f), 
with the designation Tsze-tsuh (F A. These are probably the 
same person mentioned in the Analects as Shin Chiang (HH c). 
Prior to the Ming dynasty they were sacrificed to as two, but in A.D. 
1530, the name of Tang was expunged from the sacrificial list, 
aud only that of Ch‘ang left. His tablet is the 31st, east.

58. Yen Che-puh, styled Tsze-shuh [or simply Shuh], GA Z 1%. 
＋ F M [or simply 41), a native of Loo, who occupies the 29th 
place, east.

125]

PROLEGOMENA, } CONFUCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES, leon. v.

59. Yung Ke, styled Tsze-k'e [al., Tsze-yen], (Ae Vr [or Wr] ^£ 
F Jit or F Jit, Lal., F I]), a native of Loo, whose tablet is the 
20th, west.

60. Héen Shing, styled Tsze-k‘e [al., Tsze- Aust CER M. FF ii t 
[al., F A), a native of Loo. His place is the 22d, east.60. Héen Shing, styled Tsze-k‘e [al., Tsze- Aust CER M. FF ii t 
[al., F A), a native of Loo. His place is the 22d, east.

61. Tso Jin-ying, [or simply Ying], styled Hing and Tsze-hing 
(Ze A Sf [or simply £8), £ F and F 49), a native of Loo. His 
tablet follows that of No. 59.

62. Yen Keih, styled Yin Lal., Tsze-sze], €: 41K (or $K], *$: Bal l 
[al., F Æ] a native of Ts‘in. His tablet is the 24th, east.

63. Ching Kwö, styled Tsze-t'oo (i85 E. F zt), a native of 
Loo. This is understood to be the same with the Seč Pang, styled 
Tsze-ts‘ung ( Ff FE F IK), of the “Family Sayings.” His tablet 
follows No. 61.

64. Ts‘in Fei, styled Tsze-che ( JE, ^£ F T), a native of Loo, 
having his tablet the 31st, west.

65. She Che-chang, styled Tsze-hing [al., chang] ji Z ‘Fy. 3 
JE [al., Nr), a native of Loo. His tablet is the 30th, east.

66. Yen K‘wae, styled Tsze-shing, GH ng. H), a native 
of Loo. His tablet is the next to that of No. 64.

67. Poo Shul-shing, styled Tsze-keu ( N N [in the “Family 
Sayings" we have Ar, an old form of NR] T Hi), a native of 
Ts‘e. Sometimes for Poo (B) v we find Shaou (4^). His tablet is 
the 30th, west.

68. Yuen K'ang, styled Tsze-tseih ( N., F 45), a native of 
Loo. Sze-ma Ts‘een calls him Yuen K'ang-tseih, not mentioning 
any designation. The “Family Sayings" makes him Yuen Nang 
(Ft), styled Tseih. His tablet is the 23d, west.

69. Yó Kae [al., Hin], styled Tsze-shing, (4% N (aL, N FT 
RE), a native of Loo. His tablet is the 25th, east.

70. Léen Këč, styled Yung and Tsze-yung (aL, Tsze-ts'aou], 
(ffe BR FAR and If (aL, F. F), a native of Wei, or of Tse. 
His tablet is next to that of No. 68.

71. Shuh-chung Hwuy [al., K*wae], styled Tsze-k‘e ( ſiß @F al., 
pe E F ), a native of Loo, or, according to Ching Heuen, 
of Tsin. IIe was younger than Confucius by 54 years, It is said 
that he aud another youth, called Kung Seuen (Fb fj), attended by 
turns with their pencils, and acted as uinanuenses to the sage, and

126]

'126]

'

seet. in.) HIS IMMEDIATE DISCIPLES, ' [PROLEGOMENA,

when Ming Woo-pih expressed a doubt of their competency, Con- 
fucus declared his satisfaction with them. He follows Léen Kéé in 
the temples.

q2. Yen Ho, styled Yen (Ai nr. F FD, a, native of Loo. The 
present copies of the “Family Sayings” do not coutain this name, 
and in A.D. 1588 Yen was displaced from his place in the temples. 
Ilis tablet, however, has been restored during the present dynasty. 
It is the 33d, west.

73. Teih Hih, styled Ché [al., Tsze-ché and Ché- che] (X Œ,

15 Lal., F 08 and F ]), a native of Wei, or of Loo. His Du 
i zh 26th, east.

74. Kwei [al., Pang] Sun, styled Tsze-léen [al., Tsze-yin] (Sf Lal., 
3j] 5€. A - Sk (aL, F HR), a native of Loo. His tablet is the 
27th, west.

75. Kung Chung, styled Tsze-maé (FL R. F). This was 
the son, it is said, of Confucius’ elder brother, the cripple Ming-p‘e. 
Ilis tablet is next to that of No. 73. His sacrificial title is “The 
ancient, Worthy, the philosopher Meč.”

16. . Kung-se Y u- joo [al., Yu], styled Tsze-shang (A BH N An al., 
fu Ps E; a native of Loo. His place is the 26th, west.

77. sn Teen, styled Tsze-shang ( DY js, (or mE qc 
/., F- ]) ), a native of Loo. His tableti is due 28th, east.

18. Kin Chang [al., Laou], styled Tsze-k‘ae (N (al., E) YT 
Bil), a native of Wei. His tablet is the 29th, west.

19. Chin Kang, styled Tsze-k‘ang [al., Tsze-k in] (rS be pa aa 
L., Y ]), a native of Chin. See notes on Ana. I.

80. Heu T'an lels T'an-foo, and F ung], styled Teze-scang (M Vf 
Lal., II X, and I1], F FF ]), a native of Loo. Some suppose that 
this-is ibo same as No. 53. The advisers of the present dynasty in 
such matters, however, have considered them to be different, and in 
1724, a tablet was assigned to Heen Tan, the 34th, west.

The three preceding names are given in the “ Fe way Sayings.’

The research of scholars has aldd about twenty others.The three preceding names are given in the “ Fe way Sayings.’

The research of scholars has aldd about twenty others.

81. Lin Fang, styled Tsze-k‘ew (JK . et FEB), a native of 
Loo. The ouly thing known of him is from the Ana. III. iv. His 
tablet was displaced under the Ming, but has been restored by the 
present, dynasty. It is the first, west.

82. Keu Yuen, styled Pib-yuh (A E Ff {H SE), an officer of

PROLEGOMENA ] CONFUCIUS AND IIS DISCIPLES. [cn. v.

Wei, and, as appears from the Analects and Mencius, an intimate 
friend of Confucius. Still his tablet has shared the same changes 
as that of Lin Fang. It is now the first, east.

83. and 84. Shin Ch'ang (FB MK), and Shin Tang (IH E). See 
No. 57.

85. Muh Pei (K J£), mentioned by Mencius, VII. Py. II. xxxvii. 
4. His entrance into the temple has been under ‘the present 
dynasty. His tablet is the 34th, east.

86. 'l'so-k'ew Ming or Tso K‘ew-ming ( Er Hj) has the 32d . 
place, east. His title was fixed in a.p. 1530 to be—“ The Ancient 
Scholar," but in 1642 it was raised to that of Ancient Worthy.” 
To him we owe the most distinguished of the annotated editions of 
the Ch‘un Ts'ew. But whether he really was a disciple of Confucius, 
and in presonal communication with him, is much debated.

The above are the only names and surnames of those of the 
disciples who now share in the sacrifices to the sage. Those who 
wish to exhaust the subject, mention in addition, on the authority 
of Tso-k‘ew Ming, Chung-sun Ho-ke (fp N T E), a son of 
Mung He (see p. 63), and Chung-sun Shwó (ſih X Fit), also a son 
of Máng He, supposed by many to be the same with No. 17; Joo 
Pei, (f 26), mentioned in the Analects XVII. XX., and in the, Le 
Ke, XVIII. Pt. II. ii. 21; ; Kung-wang Che-k ew (& 1g I3 and 
Tseu Téen (JF $$), wientionol ithe Ee Ke, XLI. 7; Pin-mow Këa(A F H), mentioned in the Le Ke, XVII. iii. 16; K‘ung Seuen 
(fL HF) and Hwuy Shuh-lan (3E Æt fi), on the authority: of the 
Family Say Bey Chang Ke ("i$ 3), mentioned by Chwang-tsze ; 
Keüh Yu (42) B), mentioned by Gan-tsze ( J); Leigu (Ac 
H6), and Loo Tseun (4@ Wf), on the authority of XM and 
finally Tsze-fuk Ho (F Jl (if), the Tsze-fuk King-pih (F It 4fD 
of the Analects, XIV. xxxviii.

ci, vi. WORKS CONSULTED. : PROLEGOMENA]

CHAPTER VI.

LIST OF THE PRINCIPAL WORKS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
CONSULTED IN THE PREPARATION OF THIS VOLUME.

SECTION I. 
CHINESE WORKS, WITH BRIEF NOTICES,

- = RE Et MN. “The Thirteen King, with Commentary and 
2xplanations," This is the great repertory of ancient lore upon 
the Classics. On the Analects, it contains the “Collection of Ex- 
planations of the Lun Yu,” by Ho An and others (see p, 19), and 
„The Correct Meaning,” or Paraphrase of Hing Ping (see p. 20). 
On the Great Learning and the Doctrine of the Mean, it contains the 
comments and glosses of Ching Heuen, and K'ung Ying-tă (fL 
3H 338) of the T'ang dynasty.

ay Zap diy S5 VY SE BA As, “A new edition of the Four Books, 
Punctuated and Annotated, for Reading.” This work was published 
in the 7th- year of T‘aou-kwang (1827) by a Kaou Lin (Ey Hh). It 
is the finest edition of the Four Books which I have seen, in point 
of typographical execution, It is indeed a volume for reading. It 
contains the ordinary “ Collected Comments" of Choo He on the 
Analects, and his * Chapters and Sentences” of the Great Learning 
and Doctrine of the Mean. The editor's own notes nre at the top 
and bottom of the pages. in rubric,PU E & F As $5 HE K, “The Proper Meaning of the Four 
Books as determined by Choo He, Compared with, and Illustrated 
from, other Commentators.” This is a most voluminous work, pub- 
lished in the tenth year of K'éen-lung, a.n. 1745, by Wang Poo- 
ts'ing (E 2E $8), a member of the Han-lin College. On the Great 
Learning and the Doctrine of the Mean, the“ Queries“ (N FJ) of 
Choo He are given in the same text as the standard commentary.

pu HE N St: E 34, The Four Books, Text and Commentary, 
with Proofs and Illustrations.” The copy of this Work which I 
have was edited by a Wang T'ing-ke (IE £E X), in the 3d year of

129]

Ld

[PROLECOMENA. WORKS CONSULTED. len. vi.

" 
Kéa-k'ing, a.n. 1798. It may be called a.commentary on the com- 
mentary. The research in all matters of Geography, History, 
mF Mel Natural stows &e., is immense.

E T sh hu iji ip 3, A Collection of the most inportant rom. 
inna of Scholars on the Four Books.” By Le P'cidin ( fifi X) 
published in the 57th year of K'ang-he, A. p. 1718. This Wor : is 
about as voluminous as the [f£ , but ou a different plan. Every 
chapter is preceded by a critical discussion of its general meaning, 
and the logical connection of its several paragraphs. This is followed 
by the text, and Choo He's standard commentary. We have then a 
paraphrase, full and generally perspicuous. Next, there is a selection 
of approved comments, from a great variety of authors; and finally, 
the reader finds a number of critical remarks and ingenious views,. 
differing often from the common interpretation, which are submit- 
ted for his examination.PU AE A Zt Bay OG "A Supplemental Commentary, and Literary 
Discussions, on the Four Books.“ By Chang Kéen-t‘aou [al., T’eih- 
gan] (K BL ü) [al., E 4E]), a member of the Han-lin college, in 
the early part, apparently, of the reign of Ktéen-lung. The work is 
on a peculiar plan, The reader is supposed to be acquainted with 
Choo He's cominentary, which is not given ; but the author generally 
supports his views, and defends them against the criticisms of some 
of the early scholars of this dynasty. His own exercitations are of 
the nature of essays more than of commentary.: It is a book for the 
student who is somewhat advanced, rather than for the learner. 
T have often perused it with interest and advantage.

URSE HER EG “The Four Books, according to the Commentary, 
with Pi araphrase.” Published in the 8th year c of Yung Ching, A. b. 
1730, by Ung Fuh [., Kh- oo] N Ah (l, J I). Every puge 
is divided into two parts. Below, we have die text and Choo He's 
commentary. Above, we have an Mes of every chapter, fol- 
lowed by a paraphrase of the several paragraphs. To the paraphr, ase 
of each paragraph are subjoined critical notes, digested! from a 
great variety of scholars, but without the mention of their names, 
A list of 116 is given who are thus laid under contribution. In 
addition, „there are maps and illustrative figures at the commence- 
ment; and to each Book there are pretiged biogr apliical ‘notices, 
explanations of peculiar allusious, &c. i

130]

sher L] CHINESE WORKS WITI BRIEF NOTICES, PROLEGOMENA, }130]

sher L] CHINESE WORKS WITI BRIEF NOTICES, PROLEGOMENA, }

39r Hp pu iE x BE it A thi fr, “The Four Books, with a com- 
plete Digest of Supplements to the Commentary, and additional 
Suggestions. A new edition, with Additions.” By Too Ting-ke 
FE E DE). Published a.n. 1779. The original of this Work 
was by T'äng Lin Gf Ak), a scholar of the Ming dynasty. It is 
perhaps the best of all editions of the Four Books for a learner. 
Fach, page is divided into three parts. Below, is the text divided 
into sentences and members of sentences, which are followed by 
short glosses. The text is followed by the usual commentary, and 
thit by a' paraphrase, to which are subjoined the Supplements and 
Suggestions. The middle division contains a critical analysis of 
the chapters and paragraphs ; and above, there are the necessary 
‘biographical and other notes. íyy az pk 4E £y, “The Four Books, with the Relish of the Radi- 
cal Meaning." This is a new Work, published in 1852. It is the 
‘production of Kin Ching, styled Ts'ew-t'an (SAN. N i8, an 
officer and: scholar, who, returning, apparently to Canton province, 
Jrom the North in 1836, occupied liis retirement with reviewing his 
literary studies of former years, and employed his sons to icsnactibe 
his notes. The writer is fully up in all the commentaries on the 
classics, and pays particular attention to the labours of the scholars 
of the present dynasty. To the Analects, for instance, there is prefix- 
ed Keang Yung's History of Confucius, with criticisms on it by 
the author himself. Each chapter is preceded by a critical analysis. 
Then follows the text with the standard commentary, carefully 
divided into sentences, often with glosses, original and selected, 
between them. To the commentary there succeeds a paraphrase, 
which is not copied by the author from those of his predecessors. 
After the paraphrase we have Explanations (ff). The Book is 
beautifully printed, and in small type, so that it is really a multum 
ih parvo, with considerable freshiiess.

H am SE usas A Paraphrase for Daily Lessons, Explaining 
the Meaning of the Four Books.” This work was produced i in 1677, by 
a multitude of the members of the Han-lin college, in obedience to an 
Imperial 1 The paraphrase is full, perspicuous, and eleg: ant.

A Sl Ja] Z3 Ur vp SE c flr BE GE ix ug AG AR Bt HE Lr ME

ae ae D AEN Th BIE 3 55 Et These works form together a superb

amiet of the Five King, published by imperial authority in the

131]

[PROLEGOMENA l) WORKS CONSULTED. Lou. vi.

reigns of K'ang-he and his successor, Lung- ching. They contain 
the standard views (A); various opinions (RÈ) ; critical decisions of 
the editors (); prolegomena; plates or cuts; and other apparatus 
for the student,

E pu jay N E E. The Collected Writings of Maou Se-ho.“E pu jay N E E. The Collected Writings of Maou Se-ho.“

See prolegomena, p. 20. The n of his Writings is 
understated there. Of M A, or Writings on the Classics, there are 
236 sections, while his X AE, or other literary compositions, amount 
to 257 sections. IIis treatises on the Great Learning and the Doc- 
trine of the Mean have been especially helpful to me. Ile is a great 
opponent of Choo He, and would be a much more effective one, if 
he possessed the saine graces of style as that ** prince of literature.”

Vu s Hit GR ER, A collection of Supplemental Observations on 
the Four Books.“ The preface of the author, Ts'aou Che-shing 
(H T JF), is dated in 1795, the last year of the reign rof 
K‘éen-lung. The work contains what we may call prolegomena on 
each of the Four Books, and then exeursus on the most difficult and 
disputed passages. Thie tone is moderate, and the learning displayed?

extensive and solid. The views of Choo Ile are fr equently well de- 
fended from the assaults of Maou Se-ho, I have fouud the Work very 
instructive.

SE BE [eal 3, “On the Tenth Book of the Analects, with Plates.” 
This W ork’ was published by the author, Keang Yung QE JK), in 
the 21st year of K'ëen-lung, A.D. 1761, when he was 76 years old. 
It is devoted to the illustration of the above portion ofi the Analects, 
and is divided into ten Sections, the first of which consists of wood- 
cuts and tables. The second, contains the Life of Confucius, of which’ 
I have largely availed myself in the last Chapter: The whole.is a 
remarkable specinren of the minute care with which Chinese scholars 
have illustrated the Classical Books.u ae AR , il Er J Jae UE EU a At. E= 
X5. We may call e volumes—'* The. Topography. of, the Four 
Books; with three Sppplements:” The Author's name is Yen Jó-keu 
(Pal 45 APR), The first volume was published in 1698, and the seqgnd, 
in 1700, „I have not been able to find the dates of. publication. of 
the other two, in which there is more biographical and general 
matter than topographical, The author apologizes for the inap- 
propriateness of their titles by saying that he could.not help calling 
them Supplements to the Topography, which was his “ first lover"

132]

SECT. I.] CHINESE WORKS WITH BRIEF NOTICES. PROLEGOMENA.

Et nu fh, “ Explanations of the Classics, under the Imperial 
er of Ts‘ing.” See above, p. 20. The Work, however, was

not published; as I have there supposed, by Imperial authority, but

under the superintendence, and at the expense (aided by other 
officers), of Yuen Tien (r tc), Governor-general of K‘wang-tung 
and K‘wang-se, in the 9th year of the last reign, 1829. The publica- 
tion of so extensive a Work shows a publie spirit and zeal for 
literature among the high officers of China, which should keep 
forcigners from thinking mennly of them.FR pH, Fanily Sayings of Confucius." Family is to be 
taken in the sense of Sect or School. In Lew Hin's Catalogue, in the 
subdivision devoted tó the Lun Yu, we find the entry :—“ Family 
Sayings of Confucius, 27 Books,” with a note by Yen Sze-koo of the 
‘Tang dynasty,-—'* Not the existing Work called the Family Sayings." 
The original Work was among the treasures found in the wall of Con- : 
fucius' old house, and was deciphered and edited by K‘ung Gan-kwo. 
The present Work is by Wang-suh of the Wei Gb dynasty, 
grounded professedly on the older one, the blocks of which had 
siiffero ed great dilapidation during the intervening centnries. It is 
allowed albo; that, since Suh's time, the Work has suffered more than 
any of the acknowledged Classics. Yet it is a very valuable frag- 
ment of antiquity, ahd it would be worth while to incorporate it 
with tlie Analects. My: Copy is the edition of Le Yung (FR) 
published i in 1780.

l e i te , Sacrificial Canon of the Sage's Temples, 
w ith n „ This Work, published in 1826, by Koo Y uen, styled 
Séng- chow ( . AH JH), is a very pains- -taking account of all

the Names sacrificed ‘to in the temples of Confucius, the dates of their

attaining to that honour, &. There are appended to it Memoirs of 
Confucius and Mencius, which are not of so muth valle: l

H- F ARE, “Thecomplete Works of the Ten! Tsze.” See Mor- 
'yison's Dictionary, under the character 4. I have only had occasion, 
ini connection with this Work, to refer to the writings of Chw ang-tsze

(HE Y) and portus (5 T). i copy is an edition of 1804.

RE (€ AA & N It n ii A Cyclopedia of Surnames, or 
Biog raphical Diederen M ot the Famous Men and Virtuous Women 
of the ‘successive Dynasties.” This is a very notable work of its class; 
published in 1793, by TTD , aud extending through d chapters 
or Books,’

133]

(PROLEGOMENA. * ' WORKS CONSULTED. i fcu. vr133]

(PROLEGOMENA. * ' WORKS CONSULTED. i fcu. vr

AX ER i . General Examination of Records and Scholars. Y 
This astonishing W ork, which cost its author, Ma Twan-lin (15 U dij 
ff), twenty years’ labour, was first published i in 1321. Remusat 
says—‘ This excellent Work is a library in itself, aud if Chinese 
literature possessed no other, the language would be worth le: arniug 
for the sake of reading this alone." It« does indeed display all but 
incredible research into every subject connected with the Govern- 
ment, Histor „Literature, Religion, &e., of the empire of China. The 
author's researches are digested in 348 Books. I have had ocea-’ 
sion to consult principally those on the Literary Monuments, em- 
braced in 76 Books, from the 174th to the 249th.

X JSk SH . A Continuation of the General Examination of 
Records and Scholars." "This Work, which is in 254 Books, and 
nearly as extensive as the former, was the production of Wang K'e 
(Æ Jp), who dates his preface in 1586, the 14th year of Wan-leih, 
the style of the reign of the 14th emperor of the Ming dynasty. Wang 
K'e brings down the Work of his predecessor to his own times. He 
also frequently goes over the. same ground, and puts things in a 
clearer light. I have found this to be the case in the chapters on the 
classical and other Books.— = “The twenty-three Histories." These are the im- 
perially-authorized ‘records of the empire, commencing with the 
* Historical Records," the work of Sze-ma Ts'een, and duding with 
the History of the Ming dynasty, which appeared in 1742, the 
result, of the joint labours of 145 officers and scholars of the present 
dynasty. The extent of the collection ‘may be understood from 
this, that my copy, bound in English fashion, makes fifty-five 
volumes, each one larger than this. No nation hasla history 80 
thoroughly digested; and on the whole it is trustworthy. In pre- 
paring this volume, my'necessities have been confined mostly to the 
Works of Sze-na Ts'een, and his successor, Pan Koo (T III), the 
Historian of the first Han dynasty. "x 6d

HE 4C ft at e “The Annals.of the Empire.“ Published by im- 
perial authority in 1803, the 8th year of .Kea-k‘ing. ` This Work is 
invaluable to a student, being, indeed, a collection of chronological 
tables, where every year from the rise of the Chow dynasty, h. e. 
1121, has a distinct column to itself, in which, in different com- 
partments, the most important events are noted. Beyond that date,

134]

DE

SECT. 11,] TRANSLATIONS AND OTHER WORKS., PROLEGOMENA ]

‘ 
it ascends to the commencement of the cycles in the 61st year of 
Hwang-te, giving-not every year, but the years of which any 
thing has been mentioned in history. From Hwang-te also, it 
ascends through the dateless ages up to P^wan-koo, the first of 
mortals,

RE (C §H BK K The Boundaries of the Empire in the successive 
Dynasties.” This Work by the same author, and published in 1817, 
does for the boundaries of the empire the same service which the 
preceding renders to its chronolog gy.

SECTION II.

TRANSLATIONS AND OTHER WORKS.SECTION II.

TRANSLATIONS AND OTHER WORKS.

Coxrvcius Sinarum PurLosoPmus; sive Scientia Sinensis Latine 
Exposita. Studio et opera Prosperi Intorcetta, Christiani Herdritch, 
Francisci Rougemont, Philippi Couplet, Patrum Societatis Jesu. 
Jussu Ludovici Magni. Parisiis: Mpcrxxsxvii.

Tun Works:or Coxrocrus; containing the Original Text, with a 
Translation. Vol. I. By J. Marshman, Serampore ; 1809.

Tae Four Books, Translated into English, by Rev. David Collie, 
of the London Missionary Society. Malacca: 1828.

L'IxvaiiasrE Mirigu, Ouvrage Moral de Tseu-sse, en Chinois et 
en Mandchou, avec une Version litterale Latine, une Traduction 
Françoise, &«, Kc. Par M. Abel-Rémusat; A Paris: 1817.

Lr Ta Hio, ou La c Erupe: Traduit en Francois, avec 
‘une Version Latiue, &e. Par G. Pautliier. Paris: 1837. r

. Y-Kixg, Antiquissimus Sinarum Liber, quem ex Latina Inter- 
pretatione P. Regis, aliorumque ex Soc. Jesu PP. edidit Julius. 
Mohl. 1839: Stuttgartiæ et Tubinge. !

.. Menorres concernant L'Histoire, Les Sciences, Les Arts, Les

Maus, Les ee &c., des Chinois. Par les Missionnaires de 
Pekin. A Paris: 1776—1814. |

lhsromu GN RRALE pe La Cue; ou Annales de cet Empire, 
Traduites du Tong-Kien-Kang-Mou. : PaWle feu Pere Joseph-Annie- 
Marie de Moyriac de Mailla, Jesuite François, Missionnaire a Pekin. 
A Paris: 1770—1785.

135]

(PROLEGOMENA. WORKS CNSULTED. i (on. vi.

,

Norima Lixeu.z Sinica. Auctore P. Premare. Malacew : cura 
Academie Anglu-Sinensis. MgCCxXxi.

Tur CHINESE REPOSTTORT. Canton, China. 20 vols. 1832— 
1851.

Dictionnaire DES Noms, Ariciens et Modernes, des Villes et Arron- 
dissements de Premier, Deuxieme, et Troisieme ordre, compris dans 
L'Empire Chinois, Ec. Par Edouard Biot, Membre du Conseil de la 
Societé Asiatique. Paris: 1842. k ,

Tun Ciusese. By John Francis Davis, Esq, F.R.S., &c. In two 
volumes. London: 1836. ! '

Cursa: its State and Prospeets. By W. it. Medhursi, D.D., of 
the London Missionary Society. London: 1838, lTun Ciusese. By John Francis Davis, Esq, F.R.S., &c. In two 
volumes. London: 1836. ! '

Cursa: its State and Prospeets. By W. it. Medhursi, D.D., of 
the London Missionary Society. London: 1838, l

L’Univers: Histoire et Description des tous les Peuples. Chine. 
Par M. G. Pauthier. Paris: 1$38. :

History or Crus, from the earliest Records to the Treaty with 
Great Britain in 1849. By Thomas Thornton, Esq., Member of the 
Royal Asiatic Society. In two volumes, London: 1844. 7

Tus Mbois KINGDOM: A Survey of the Geography, Government, 
Education, Social Life, Afts, Religion, &c., of the Chinese Empire: s 
By S. Wells Williains; LL.D. In two volumes. New York and 
Londott: 1848. .

Tan Rurrolous, CoxDrriow or Tn Cutvesr. By Rev. Joseph 
Edkins, B. A., of the London Missionary Society. London: 1859.

Cunrsr AND oTner Masters. By Charles Hardwick, M. A., 
Christian Advocate in the University of Cambridge. Part III. 
Religions of China, America, and Oceanica, Cambridge: 1858.

CONFUCIAN

ANALECTS. |

BOOK I. HEO URH.

Cuarter I. 1. The Master said, “Is it not pleasant to learn 
with a constant perseverance and application?

CN 
quarters?

“Is it not pleasant to have friends coming from distant

3. “Is he not a man of complete virtue, who feels no discompo- 
sure though men may take no note of him?" -

TITLE OF THE WORK. — i Su. * Discourses3. “Is he not a man of complete virtue, who feels no discompo- 
sure though men may take no note of him?" -

TITLE OF THE WORK. — i Su. * Discourses

and Dinlogues; that is, the discourses or dis- 
enssions of Confucius with his disciples and 
others on various topies, and his replies to their 
inquiries. Many chapters, however, and one 
whole book, are the sayings, not of the sage 
himself, but of some of his disciples. ‘The 
characters may also be rendered Digested Con- 
versations and this appears to be the more 
ancient signification attached to them, the ac- 
count being, that, after the death of Confucius, 
his disciples collected together and compared 
the memoranda of his conversations which they 
had severally preserved, digesting them into the 
twenty books which compose the work. Hence

the title Sg 8m. ‘Discussed Sayings,’ or Di- 
ions. zA EH = 
gested Conversations“ See Big pe üt it

M g . I have styled the work Con-

fucian Analects,’ as being more descriptive of its 
character than any other name I could think of,

HEADING OF THIS Boox.— Sh m GH —.

The two first characters in the book, after the 
introductory— The Master said, are adopted 
as its heading. This is similar to the custom 
of the Jews, who name many books in the Bible

from the first word in them. 4 3 —, ‘The 
first; that is, of the twenty books composing 
the whole work. In some of the books we find 
a unity or analogy of subjects, which evidently 
guided the compilers in grouping the chayters

| cates Confucius,

together. Others seem devoid of any such 
principle of combination. The sixteen chapters 
of this book are occupied, it is said, with the 
fundamental subjects which ought to engage 
the attention of the learner, and the great mat-

ters of human practice. The word E, ‘learn,’

rightly occupics the forefront in the studies of 
& nation, of which its educational system has so 
long been the distinction and glory.ters of human practice. The word E, ‘learn,’

rightly occupics the forefront in the studies of 
& nation, of which its educational system has so 
long been the distinction and glory.

1, THE wnoLE WORK AND ACHIEVEMENT OF 
THE LEARNER, FIRST PERFECTING His KNOW- 
LEDGE, ‘THEN ATTRACTING BY HIS FAME LIKE- 
MINDED INDIVIDUALS, AND FINALLY COMPLETB

IN HIMSELE, 1, » at the commencement, indi-

„ à son, ' is also the common

designation of males,—especially of virtuous 
men. We find it, in conversations, used in tho 
same way as our Sir.“ When it follows the sur- 
name, it is equivalent to our Mr., or may be ren- 
dered ‘the philosopher,’ ‘the scholar,’ ‘the officer,’ 
&c. Often, however, it is better to leave it un- 
translated. When it precedes the surname, it in- 
dicates that the person spoken of was the master

of the writer, as J VK F. my master, the

philosophe? Y% Standing single and alone, as in 
the text, it denotes Confucius, t/te philosopher. or, 
rather, the master. If we render the term by Con- 
fucius, d$ all preceding translators have done, 
we miss the indication which it gives of the 
handiwork of his disciples, and the reverence

2 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

eh a 
He de aA Aj

=

=a and x FU

(CHAPTER II. 
being filial and

riors.

SIT ETT

A

A E. EM ZEE 
AF c WM T 
TE AF dL AA,

I. The philosopher ` Yew said, “They are few who, 
Ikea are ‘fond of off ending against their supe- 
There have been ‘none, ' who; not. liking t to'offend against their

superiors, have been fond of stirring up confusion. «|

9. “The superior man bends his attention Lo what ds radical. 
That being established, all practical courses naturally grow’ up.

which it bespeaks for him. i in the old com- 
mentators, is explained by sn. * to read chant- 
ingly,“ to discuss. Choo He interprets it by Qe, 
‘to imitate,’ and makes its results to be gi

3É im 1 39]. ‘the understanding of all ex-3É im 1 39]. ‘the understanding of all ex-

cellence, and the bringing back original good- 
ness.“ Subsequent scholars profess, for the most 
part, great admiration of this explanation. It 
is an illustration, to. my mind, of the way in 
which Choo He aud bis. followers are continually

being wise above what is, written i in the classical 
, books, AA is the rapid and frequent motion of 
' the wings of.a bird in fying i used for ‘to re- 
1 peat, ‘to practise.’ 
Ders. pronoun, and'its autecedent is to be found 
t in the pregnant meaning of Gh, JJ is cx-

! lained by E N. ‘is it not? See yu REN 
HRE fij =E To bring out the force of ‘also’

án P, some say thus: The occasions for plea-

sure are many, is this not also one?’ 72 read yuč, 
las always when it has-the 4th tone marked, stands 
for . What is leeruéd becomes by prac- 
tice and application one's own, ans hence arises 
complacent pleasure in the mastering mind. 
as distinguished from f „ Øh, in the next

par., is the internal, individual, feeling of plea- 
sure, and the other, its external manifestation, 
implying also companionship. 2. N. proper-

ly, fellow-students;' but, generally, individuals 
of the samé class and character, like-minded.

3. zt I translate here a man of complete 
virtue. Literally, it is—‘a princely man.’ See 
on JN, above, It is a technical term in Chin. 
moral writers, for which there is no exact cor-

respondency in English, and which cannot bé 
rendered always in the same way. — Sce Morri-

is the obj. of the third |-

son's Dictionary, char. . Its opposite is E

A ‘a small, mean, man.’ X pt: 'Men

do not know him,’ but anciently some explain- 
ed—'men do not know,’ that is, are stupid un- 
der his teaching. The interpretation in the 
text is doubtless the correct one.

2. FILIAL PIETY AND FRATERNAL SUBMISSION 
ARE THE FOUNDATION lor ALL VIRTUOUS PRAC-

vice. 1. Yew, named 4t, and styled TH.2. FILIAL PIETY AND FRATERNAL SUBMISSION 
ARE THE FOUNDATION lor ALL VIRTUOUS PRAC-

vice. 1. Yew, named 4t, and styled TH.

and , a native of ín. was faméd 
among the other disciples of Confucius for his 
strong memory, and ‘love for the doctrines of àn- 
tiquity. In personal appearance he resembled tlie 
sage. See Mencius, III. Pt. TI: iv. 18. HW is 
lYew, the philosopher, and he and Tsing Tstan 
(or Sin) are the only two of ;Confucius' disci-

'ples who are mentioned in this style in the

Lun Yu. This has led to an opinion on tho 
part of some, that the work was Compiled by 
their disciples. This may not be sufficiently sup- 
ported, but I have not.found the peculiarity 
pointed out satisfactorily explained. The tablet 
of Yew’s spirit is now in the same apartment 
of the sage’s temples as that of the sage him- 
self, occupying the ees place in the cstern

range of ‘the wise ones? To this position’ it 
was promoted in the 3d year of [K'eeh-lung 
of the present dynasty. A degree of activity 
enters into the meaning of A in 755 R. 
playing the man,’ ‘as men, showing themselves 
filial, &c. : here= 436, * to be submissive as 
a younger brother,’ is in the low. 3d tone, With 
its proper signification, it was aucieutly in tho 
2d tone. j and yet,’ different from its sim-

ple conjunctive use and,’ in the prec. ch. "

a verb, ‘to love,’ in the up. 3d tone, diff. from 
the same char. in the 2d. tone, an adj. = good,’

fag, up. 2d tone, = few.“ On the idiom— 7 
Z H „ see Tremare's gram. p. 106. 2.

"à

co

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

bes

2i 
y 
T

Jt 
ZA 
isfag, up. 2d tone, = few.“ On the idiom— 7 
Z H „ see Tremare's gram. p. 106. 2.

"à

co

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

bes

2i 
y 
T

Jt 
ZA 
is

Filial piety and fraternal. submission Hare they not the root of all 
benevolent actions?“ | 
| Guarrer III. The Master said, “Fi ine words and an insinuating 
appearance are ‘seldom associated, with trie virtue.” 
Cuarrer IV. The philosopher” Tsang said, “T daily examine 
Inyself on three points :-—whether, in transacting business for:others, 
1 may have been not faithful ;— whether, in intercourse with friends, 
J may have been not sincere;—whether I may have not mastered 
„and practised thé instructions of my teacher.”

has a less intense singniflcation here 
than in the last chap. I translate Tho supe- 
rior man,’ for want of a better term. . ‘the 
root,’ ‘what is radical,’ is here said of filial and 
fraternal duties, pnd id. ‘ways’ or ‘courses,’ of

all that is intended by Hf) E. below. 
The particles +h, ＋ resume the discourse 
about 2 2 and introduce some further 
description of them. See Prem., p. 158. B.

in the lower 1st tone, is half interrogative, an

answer in the affirmative being implied. 2 is 
explained here as the principle of love,’ ‘the 
virtue of the heart. Mencius says. tli AS

y* is man,’ in accordance with which,

Julien translates it by humanitas. Benevolence 
often comes near it, but, as has been said before

of 4 , we cannot give a uniform rendering 
of this term.

8. FAIR APPEARANCES ARE SUSPICIOUS. ry 
E A fh -sce Shoo- king, II. iii. 2. Lh, ‘skill

aT É 
in workmanship; then, ‘skill,’ ‘cleverness,’

generally, and sometimes with a bad meaning, as 
here, =‘ artful,’ ‘hypocritical.’ Ex ‘a law, an

order, also good, and here like IB, with a

pad meaning, = pretending to be good.’ ff. 
*the manifestation of the feelings in the colour 
of the countenance,’ is here used for the appear- 
ance generally,

4. How THE PHILOSOPHER TSANG DAILY BX- 
AMINED HIMSELF, TO GUARD AGAINST UIS BEING4. How THE PHILOSOPHER TSANG DAILY BX- 
AMINED HIMSELF, TO GUARD AGAINST UIS BEING

GUILTY OF ANY IMPOSITION, säng, whose name 
was & (Ts'an, now Sonimonty read Sin 2 and

his aie „ was one of the principal

disciples of Confucius: A follower of the sage 
from his 16th year, though inferior in natural 
ability to some others, by his filial picty and 
other moral qualities, he entirely won the 
Master's esteem, and by persevering attention 
mastered his doctrines. Confucius employed

him in the composition of the' 2 K. or 
t Classic of Filial Piety.’ The authorship of the 
‘The Great Learning, “ is also ascribed

to him, though incorrectly, as we shall see. Ten 
books, moreover, of his composition are pre- 
served in the Lo-ke, His spirit tablet among the 
sage's four assessors, occupying the first place 
on the west, has precedence of that of Mencius.

E ; read sing, ‘to examine,’ = 4 is naturally

understood of ‘three times,’ but the context and 
consent of commentators make us assent to the

interpretation—‘on three points.“ H. the 
body,’ ‘one’s personality; E. Ep —yself. 5" 
is in low. 3d tone,'for. So, frequently, below. 
ih from rh, ‘middle, ‘the centre,’ and

Nd. ‘the heart,’=loyalty, faithfulness, action 
with and from the beart. Wy see ch. 1. A 
‘two hands joined,’ denoting union, N E. 
‘friends,’ 1 pea 
The translation follows Choo He. Ain

explained quite differently :—' whether I have 
given instruetion in what I had not studied and 
practised?’ It does seem more correct to take

AA is very cnigmatical.

[

CONFUCIAN , ANALECTS,

s 
SY 
S 
He

EN 
KE 
=

Ratt 
SEHE 
5

N 
C

d 
RR -e

1

S 
= 
E 
T

v 
v

HS

V 
<

pH 
x

Mitos 
TREES

zii 
(Va Hing

3H

22 
TENS

n

=z

Orr

. K yer, mE HF, N Z.

CHAPTER V. The Master i To rule 4 country of a thbusand 
chariots, there must be reverent attention to business, and sincerity; 
economy in expenditure, and love' for men; and the employment of 
the People ae 2» proper seasons.”nar ‘ER The Master said, “A youth, when at home, should 
m filial, M e , respectful to his elders, | He should be.earnest 
and truthful.’ He shoul overflow in love to all, ‘and cultivate ; the

friendship of the good. ; When he has , time and. opportunity, after 
the performance of; these things, he should employ“ "them, in polite

‘studi meh aye dup 
it VII. De Zé-heà Said, ie a à man witha Mis hind 
1 ot eene DA; to, the,, loye 
parents, he cai exert his à Mn 
tsbunottt

Char 
‘fiom the le of beauty, a and app 
the virtuous; it, in serving Jus

hie 92 1

activ

ey "^p t E tal 
„ to give instruction, 
1 "Hc

passively, “to receive . Bee py E 
"Ee. GEE, xv. 17. ria 
al hs FUNDAMENTAL PRINOIPLES FOR ‘THE: O- 
“WEiiNMENT OF A LARGE STATE. F is used for

?^ t6 rule,’ ‘to lead,” and is marked in the gd ions 
“todistinguish it from; . tlie noun, which was'ári-

44 0

z eiently read wich the2dtone. It is diff. from M 
which refers to the actual business of govern- 
ment, while 3t is the duty and purpose thereof, | 
‘Aliprchended by the prince. The standpoint of 
"dhe'ptinciples i is the prince’s mind. N, in low.

$a tone, «a Icheriot, ‘diff! from its meaning in 
thg Ist tone, ‘to ride. A country of 1000 cha- 
riots is one of the largest fiefs of the empire, 
Which could bring such an urmanient into the

‘field. The last principle, if R JA m.

means that the people should not be called from | 
their husbandry at improper seasons, to do ser- 
vice on military expeditions and public works.

6. RULES FOR THE TRAINING OF THE YOUNG:

05 í4 TET

S. 
—DUTY FIRST AND THEN ACCOMPLISHMENTS, jjj Wi

P

ty)

rather than T. avisa e sita) taken together,

zzgouths, a youth. The 2d E is for by ap 
in ch. 2., A^ H. ^ editing in, going / oit, Ant 
Jome, abroad., UL is explained by Choo He 
by „wide, ‘widely * its proper, meaning io

1 * d MIC O10" 6 
‘the rush or overflow of waters? it Ji. Setrength,;’

here embnacing the idea of leisure. S „dot1 * d MIC O10" 6 
‘the rush or overflow of waters? it Ji. Setrength,;’

here embnacing the idea of leisure. S „dot

literary studies merely, but. all. the, accomplish- 
ments of a gentleman piso :—ceremonies, musig, 
archery, horsemanship, writing, and numbers, , 
7. "Tsze-nkA'g views OF TUB SURSTANCE oF 
LEARNING. :Tsze-hen' was the designation of 
> P another ‘of the sage’s distinguished 
ibus ahd now placed 5th in the eastern range 
ot ‘the wise ones.” He was qi famed for 
2

his learning, and his views on the She-king and 
the Ch'un Ts‘ew are said to be preserved in the

comm. of E E and of a +a fa and ay Ge 
He wept himself blind on the death of

his son, but lived to a great ngo, and was much 
teemed by the people and princes of the time. 
ith regard to the scope of this chapter, there

“CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.-

ia

e 
py

j

= 
m 
ENE

O

Heo

ne,

an

CH

zn 
24

[ d

RIO

zl

ecu 
=

ni

EB 
ET

z 
m 
ya 
—

* 
[d 
Vi 
w

a

Ja:

xg 
E

A

— 
S,

XR 
EYE

44

25

i 
pisi

Hi 
A.

‘strength; if, in serving his prince, he can devote his life; if, in his in- 
tercourse with his friends, his words are sinceré:—although men 
‘say that, he has not learned, I will certainly say that. he has.”

„gar ran VIII. I. The Master said, “If the scholar be nòt grave, 
V ‘will not, call forth any veneration, and his learning will not be solid. 
9% 2. «Hold faithfulness and sincerity as first principles. ‘ 
ui 3 se Have no friends not equal to‘ yourself, — .' E SM 
TUM. „% When you have faults, do hot fear to abandon them, ^| 
"low edi! IX. Thé philosopher Tsäng said. “Let there be a 'eare-

ul attention to perform the funeral rites to parents, and let, them: be 
folldwell when 10 eones ‘of sacri

7 4% PA Hayli 
ng gone with the cerenones of sacrifice 
i^ ve fth 7 ple à ill M D af 
irtue of the people Wl resume 
mtr

Xd 
z

f

p !

te’

J 
; én ‘the 
‘ ry zpumt 
Wett el 17s Ga tui |

its. proper excellence 
e proper ex SINIT "aiXd 
z

f

p !

te’

J 
; én ‘the 
‘ ry zpumt 
Wett el 17s Ga tui |

its. proper excellence 
e proper ex SINIT "ai

is some truth in what the comm. Woo, A says, 
suthae’ 45826. Hèn A words may be wrested to de- 
Previnte learnings while those of the Master in| 
the*prec. ch. hit exactly the due medium. The 
2d EP in m concrete tioun. Written in full, 
EM it i gomposed of the characters for a iin- 
asters, loyal, anda precious shell, It convdys the

ideas of leuts and worth in the concrete, but it 
‘jd not 'éasy to render it uniformly by any one 
fermrát another language. The Ist et is a verb,

j -4 , 
ahnt treat as tt Aden." has a diff.' meaning | 
trolil that in thé 3d ch, Here it means ‘sensual

leasute,’’ Literally rendered, the first sentence 
would bí “esteemning properly the Virtuous, 
tind changing’ the love of woman,’ and great 
"tits found by some, às in = EN gt 
XH 1, with Choo He's interpretation which 
J have followed; but there is force in what his 
witherchts say. that the passage is not to be un- 
Qetsivod as iť the individual spoken of had ever 
been given to pleusure, but simply signifies the 
singerity of his love for the virtuous. E24 here 
= Ze, tto give to,’ ‘to devote.’

6. PRINCIPLES OF BELE-CULTIVATION, 1. 4Ó

has here its lightest meaning, =a student, 
gne Ino wishes to be a heun-isze. 4c . 
‘pfi tlie) luft ayndst, in the 1st half of the 2d 
century, took fr. in the sense. dt^* obsgured,’ 
‘dulled,’ and interprets‘ Let him lenrn and he 
will not fall intó error." The received interpreta- 
tion, as, in the transl., is better. 3. i as 4 
verb, f to hold to be chief’ It is often used thue.

3. The object of friendship, with Chinese mora-

lists, is to improve one's knowledge and virtue; 
hence, this scemingly selfish maxim. 43. The object of friendship, with Chinese mora-

lists, is to improve one's knowledge and virtue; 
hence, this scemingly selfish maxim. 4

9. THE GOOD EFFECT OF, ATTENTION ON TUB 
PART OF PRINCES TO TIE OFEICES:TO THE DEAD} 
“TAN ADMONITION or Tsane Six. X. *the end," 
zzdeath, and 18 , ‘distant,’ have both the force 
of adjectives, —* tlie dead,’ and ‘ the departed,’ or

e the long gone. TR. and AE. mean, *to be care-

fuliof,’ (to follow, but their application is as in 
tho translation. A. *thick, in opposition to 
$58 ‘thiu? metaphorically, - good, excellent. The 
force of Beg‘ to return,’ is to shew that this

virtue is naturally proper to the people.

x 
C

NN

"Ili 
Hu

a

e paix 
N 
€

`

2

—

vl. 
v 
m. v 
vx - mH 
- 
v 
©-

is] 
t 
* 
v 
v

PER

— 
=

J

AERE

WN 
=

"E

r

(i HAPTER X.

alt 
. 
B

ENS 
E

i: 
N 
oH

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

H

2

HNN 
3

un 
i WP 
MATER

INAN

M 
4

‘

mE

O 
ux 
Ld 
v. 
--

O 
-

ni =A 
=

NaN eS

&I

NER e Na An

ait

Dm

1.."Tsze-k'in asked Tsze-kung, saying,“ Wlien our

master comes to any country, he does not fail to learn: all about its 
government. Does he ask his information? or is it given to him?” 
2, Tsze-kung said, “Our master is benign, upright, courteous,

temperate, and complaisant, and thus he gets his information.

The

Master's mode of asking information !—is it not different from that

of other men?"

CHAPTER XI. The Master said, While a man’s father is alive, 
look at the bent of his will; when his father is dead, look at his

conduct. 
father, he may be called filial.”

10, CiranacTERISTICS OF CONFUCIUS, AND 
THEIR INFLUENCE ON THE PRINCES OF THE TIME,

1. Taze-k‘in, and Tsze-k'ang gr» are desig-conduct. 
father, he may be called filial.”

10, CiranacTERISTICS OF CONFUCIUS, AND 
THEIR INFLUENCE ON THE PRINCES OF THE TIME,

1. Taze-k‘in, and Tsze-k'ang gr» are desig-

nations of pii . one of the minor disciples of 
Confucius. IIis tablet occupies the 28th place, 
on the west, in the outer hall of the temples. 
A good story is related of him. On the death 
of his brother, his wife and major-domo wished 
to bury some living persons with him, to serve 
him in the regions below. The thing being re- 
ferred to Tsze-K in, he proposed that the wife 
and steward should themselves submit to the 
immolation, which made them stop the matter.

Tsze-kung, with the double surname Js JR

and named RH. occupies a higlier place in the

Confuciun ranks, and is now the third on the 
east, among ‘the wise ones.“ He is conspicuous 
in this work for his readiness and smartness in 
reply, and displayed on several occasions prac-

tical and political ability. X. *a general de- 
sign ation for males, =a man. X d com-

If for three years he does not alter from the wa

y of his

mon designation for a teacher or master. E

, ‘this country any country. DIA must,“ 
szdoes not fail to. The antecedent to both the 
x is the whole clause isi dtu Obs. the 
diff. in fü, up. 2d tone, to give,’ and often a 
preposition, ‘ with,’ ‘to,’ and FAL, low. 1st tone,

PR zi 
asin ch. 2, 2. The force of HH. E] is well 
— *

enough expressed by the dash in English, the 
previous ti, indicating a pause in the discourse,

which the dt, ‘it,’ resumes. i 
— *

11. Ox PILIAL DUTY, F is in the low. 3d

tone, explained by 1T P. ‘traces of walking,” 
conduct. It is to be understood that the way 
of the father had not been very bad. Au old 
interpretation, that the three years are to be 
understood of the three years of mourning for 
the father, is now rightly rejected.

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

TEMP 
E fl. SB

S

& 
7v 
v

xt

EXER

Nes

a

Wee,

|

—

Jie:

277 E»CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

TEMP 
E fl. SB

S

& 
7v 
v

xt

EXER

Nes

a

Wee,

|

—

Jie:

277 E»

An 
Cnapter XII. I. The philosopher Yew said, “In practising the

rules of propriety, a natural ease is to be prized. In the ways pre- 
‘scribed by the ancient kings, this is the excellent quality, and in 
things small and great we tollow them. ‘

2. „Let it is not to be observed in all cases. If one, knowing 
how such ease should be prized, manifests it, without regulating it 
by the rules of propriety, this likewise is not to be done.” a

CitAprer XIII. The philosopher Yew said, When agreements 
are made according to what is right, what is spoken ean be made 
good. When respect is shown according to what is proper, jone 
keeps far from shame and disgrace.’ When the parties upon whom 
a inan leans dre proper persons to bé intimate with, he can make 
them his guides and masters.”

J. Cuarrer XIV. The Master said; He who aims to be a man 
of complete virtue, in. his food does not seek to gratify his appetite,

12. IN CEREMONIES A NATURAL EASE I8 TO BE 
PRIZED, AND YET TQ BE SUBORDINATE TO THE 
END OF CEREMONIES,—THE REVERENTIAL OBSER-

1 — 
VANCE OF PROPRIETY., I. mna is not easily ren-

‘dered in another language. There underlies it

the idea of whet is proper. It is BS H. *the

fitness of things,“ what reason calls for in the 
porformance of duties towards superior beings, 
nnd between man and man. Our term ‘cere-

monies! comes near its meaning here. I is 
here à name for ie ,48 indicating the courses or

ways to be pursued by men. In AXE x 
the antecedent to x is not RI. but ne or

7. 2. Obs. the force of the Eis also, in the 
last clause, and how it affirms the general prin-

ciple enunciated in the first paragraph.7. 2. Obs. the force of the Eis also, in the 
last clause, and how it affirms the general prin-

ciple enunciated in the first paragraph.

13. To SAVE FROM FÜTURE REPENTANCE, WE 
MUST BE CAREFUL IN OUR FIRST STEPS,. A diff. 
view of the scope of this ch. is taken by Ho An. 
It illustrates, according to him, the difference 
between being sincere and righteousness, be- 
tween being respectful and propriety, and how 
a man's conduct may be venerated. The later 
view conimends itself, the only difficulty being

471 N N 
with VE N. * near to, which we must accept 
as n meiosis for t 3E. ‘agreeing with.’ X 
= X^) ta covenant,’ ‘agreement.’ i. up. 
3d tone, ‘to keep away from.’ The force of the

She can go on to make them his masters,’ 
E being taken as an active verb.

14. WIrn WHAT MIND ONE AIMING TO BE A 
KEUtN-ISZB PURSUES HIS LEARNING, IIe may 
be well, even luxuriously, fed and lodged, but,

8 CONFUCIAN

S 
—

zl

v

S BOSERHI 
ER

SES 0 
Tes

810

zu

v

TREN

T 
7

ae oes

lh

U 
3 
d

9288

|

if Q

int quK Hi, tá

zB

U

H. A. E. ff .

E

NALECTS.

3H

sagessa 
BEER mA 
Bins

A 
Ex

Y) U JN

*

nor in his dwelling-place does he seek the appliances of ease; he is 
earnest in what he is doing, and careful in his speech; he frequents 
the company of men of pone that he may be rectified :—such 
a person may,be said indeed to love to learn.” `

CHAPTER XV. 1. Tsze-kung said, “What do you pronounce 
concerning the poor man who yet does not flatter, and the rich man 
who is not proud?“ The Master replied, “They will do; but they 
are not equal to him, who, though póor, is yet cheerful, and to him, 
who, though rich, loves the rules of propriety." i

2. Tsze-kung replied, “It is said in the Book of Poetry, ‘As

ou cut and then file, as you carve and then polish. —The meaning

is the same, I apprehend, as that which you have just expressed."2. Tsze-kung replied, “It is said in the Book of Poetry, ‘As

ou cut and then file, as you carve and then polish. —The meaning

is the same, I apprehend, as that which you have just expressed."

3. The Master sáid, “ With one like Tsze, I can begin to talk 
about the Odes. I told him one point, and he knew its proper 
sequence." .

with his higher aim, these things are not hie 
secking,— fE Ed A nominative to Wy a

must be supposed,—all this, or such a person. 
The closing particles, ths, p. give emphasis 
to the preceding sentence, es indeed.

15. AN ILLUSTRATION OF THE SUCCESSIVE 
STEPS IN SELF-CULTIVATION, I. Tsze-kung had 
been poor, and then did not cringe. He became 
rich, and was not proud. He asked Confucius 
about the style of char. to which he had at- 
tained. Conf. allowed its worth, but sent him to

higher attainments, im. here, and yet.’ r

An, ‘what as?’=‘what do you say— what is 
to be thought,—of this? Obs. the force of the

„ not yet. 2, The ode quoted is the first of 
the songs of Wei (G1), praising the prince

Woo, who had dealt with himself as an ivory- 
worker who first cuts the bone, and then files

it smooth, or a lapidary whose hammer and chisel

are followed by all the appliances for smoothing 
and polishing. See the She-king, I. v. Ode I. st.

2. In H ir x aH. the antecedent to at

is gie passage of the ode, and that to is the 
reply of Confucius. 2 gu, see Premare, p. 
156. 3. Intorcetta and his co-adjutors translate 
this par. as if were in the 2d person. But 
the Chin. comm. put it in the 3d, and correctly. 
Premare, on the char. th, says, * Fere semper

aer nominibus propriis. Sic in libro Lun 
Yu, Confucius loquens de suis discipulis, Yeou,,

. Keou, Hoci, vel ipsos alloquens, dicit Hi +h,

zk th, iE 111. With the example in III.

17, before us, it is not to be denied that the 
name before th, is sometimes in the 2d person, 
but generally it is in the 8d, and the force of the

. N DC A

* CuaPTER XVI. Tlie Master17, before us, it is not to be denied that the 
name before th, is sometimes in the 2d person, 
but generally it is in the 8d, and the force of the

. N DC A

* CuaPTER XVI. Tlie Master

men's not knowing me; I will be

Hi, oa. pa II ood Tsze. B 92 
nearly 4H, b. in ch. 14. B. the final part, 
(sce Prem. p. 185), is thus marked. with a tona, 
to distinguish it from ph. self, as in next ch. 
The last clause nuiy be ziven— fell him the

past, and he knows the future.“ but the cunnce- 
tion determines the meaning as in the transition. 
a mere EB.

BK. as iu ch. 10, is a particle. iii Wy.

as it is called, ta helping’ òt supporting sound. 
16, PERSONAL ATTAINMENT SHOULD BE UUR

7 
El. fir.

amid, “I will not be afflicted at 
. i ul 
afficted that I do not know men. 
cuter Uu. Comp, ch. I. p, 3. Obs. the transe 
position in E, Al, which is more elegant than 
^al e "would be. t. ‘self,’ the person de-

pending on the context. We cannot translate 
‘do not be afflicted,’ because N is not used

imperatiyely, like 2 . A nominative to H

Ao 
hus to be assumed,- de , ‘I,’ or ay

PE [1 the 
LI ^ 
superior man.“ : '

— AA At An AA ARAIIIA nannan

IR ip Ing 
He Br, Js 
CHAPTER Í.,

„BOOK II. WEI CHING.

Jt Th 45. 
Ee

—

E=$

III M w y E, |

The Master said,

res

EASE

iy

“He who exercises government

by means of his virtue, may be compared to the north polar star, 
the 118 00 n s 1 
which keeps its place and all the stars turn towards it.“

AS y: 
Heapixe or 1118 Boox.— as E pi 
This second book contains twenty four chapters, 
and is named Ey N. The practice of govern- 
ment? That ik jhe abject to which learning, 
iryuted of in the lust book, should lead. and 
here we have the qualities which constitute, 
ahd the character of the men who administer, 
good jroverumnvent, 
. i THE INFLUENCE OP VIRTUE IN A RULER. 
qii i bs plained by 44. But the old comin. say 
. Ei * eA ET 
An fà VA tE 511 Z fu. hat creatures

get in order to their birth is called their virtue,get in order to their birth is called their virtue,

veldle Choo Hc makes i—TT i "i ＋4 (8 |

— ae : PEN 
— N XD ‘the practice of gruth aud acquisition

thereof in the heart? Choo’s view of the com- 
parison is that it sets forth the illimitable 
intluenee which virtue in à ruler exercises with- 
out his using any effort. This is extravagant, 
Mis opponents say that virtue is the polar star, 
and the various departments of government the 
ether stars. This is far-fetched. We must be 
content to accept the vague utterauce without

minutely determining its meaning. dL bx js,

no doubt, ‘the north polar stur,“ anciently be- 
lieved to coincide exactly with the place of the

real pole. Bt is up. 2d tone, used for Ht, ‘to

told the hands in saluting,’ here to turn 
respeetfull) tow ards.'

CONFUCIAN

1

©

ig 
1 
V 
© 
7

E

E!

a 
C 
v

l 
SENSN

v

iem 
e

E

Ec

S

2 Nad 
‘RES

is 
E

A

U

CHAPTER II.

ci 
x

ANALECTS.

y 
11

NÈ

= 
Ts

F 
TET 
k> HE 
fy Ng, 
Wn ux, THE —

The Master said, *In the Book of Poetry are

three hundred pieces, but tlíe design of them all may be embraced

in one sentence—‘Have no depraved thoughts.

CHAPTER III. 1. The Master

29

said, “Tf the people be led by

laws, and uniformity sought to be given them by punishments, they 
n try to avoid the punishment, but have no sense of shame.

lf they be led by virtue, and uniformity sought to be given 
das by the rules of propriety, they will have the sense of shame,

and inoreover will become good." 
Cuarrer IV. I. The Master 
bent on learning. 
2. „At thirty, I stood firm. 
* At forty, I had no doubts.

2. Tur PURE DESIGN or THE Book or 
Poetry. The number of compositions in the 
She-king is rather more than the round number

. 
here given. Al. ‘one sentence.’

&].

i= a ‘to cover,’ ‘to embrace.’ m, 74v METR. 
here given. Al. ‘one sentence.’

&].

i= a ‘to cover,’ ‘to embrace.’ m, 74v METR

see She-king; IV. ii. I. st. 4. The sentence there 
is indicative, and in praisé of the duke He, 
who had no depraved thoughts. The sage would 
seem to have been intending his own design in 
compiling the She. Individual pieces are cal- 
culated to have a diff. effect. j

3. HOW RULERS SHOULD PREFER MORAL AP-

Ax cs. 1. 3, as in I. 5. 7, them, ref.

to R. below. ER as oppos. to fili laws 
and prohibitions. 7/fA, ‘corn earing evenly;' 
hence, what is level, equal, adjusted, and here 
with the corresponding verbal force. ER . 
‘The people will avoid,’ that is, avoid breaking 
the laws thro. fear of the punishment. 2. T&

has the signif. of ‘to come to,’ and ‘te correct,’ 
from either of which the text may be explained, 
—' will come to good,“ ur will correct them-

= 
— zn ~

said, “At fifteen, I had my mind

4

1 
i 
selves.’ Obs. the diff. of H. and im in pt

ifi = but; EL = moreover"

4. CONFUCIUS OWN ACCOUNT OF HIS GRANUAT 
PROGRESS AND ATTAINMENTS. Chin. comm. are 
perplexed with this ch. Holding of Confucius

that EE p 2 S.. & iin FF S, “he 
was born with knowledge, and did what was 
right with entire ease,’ they say that he here 
conceals his sagehoud, and puts himself on the 
level of common men, to set before them & 
stimulating example. We may beliéve that 
the compilers of the Analects, the sage's imme- 
diate disciples, did not think of him se extrava- 
gantly as later men have doue, It is to be 
wished, however, that he had been more definite

and diffuse in his account of himself. 1. ^B.

in low. 3d tone, and.“ The ‘learning,’ to 
which, at 15, Cont. gave himself, is to be under- 
stood of the subjects of the © Superior Learning.’ 
See Choo He's preliminary essay to the Ta 
Héó. 2. ‘The ‘standing firm’ probably indicates 
that he no more needed to bend his will. 3. 
The ‘no doubts" may have been eoncerning 
what was proper in all circumstances and

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

— 
m"

1

o 
*- 
te 
v 
r 
2

* 
i

za 
zi 
D 
huis 
I 
= 
XE

pe 
SII

EA

Did

O

N NC REEL 
e 
ME 
SE

a 
ği 
E 
uo 
r4 
m 
"

=. 
2

He TINE 
SERIEN 
SEF 
E

Fey Str

BRO

v 
vv 
yi 
11

N 
*

sr.

v

HA 
ARE

N 
—

A du dex El. W

4, “At fifty, I knew the decrees of heaven. 
5. „At sixty, my ear was an obedient organ for the reception of 
truth. l '

6. „At seventy, I could follow what my heart desired, without 
transgressing what'was right”.

'

Cuarrer V. Ming E asked what filial piety was. The Master 
said, “It is not being disobedient.”

2. Soon after, as Fan Ch‘e was driving him, the Master told him, 
saying, Mäng-sun asked me what filial piety was, and I answered 
him, — not being disobedient.”

3. Fan Ch'esaid, "What did you mean?" The Master replied, 
“That parents, when alive, should be served according to propriety; 
that, when dead, they should be buried according to propriety; and 
that they should be sacrificed to according to propriety."

events. 4. The decrees of Heaven,’=the things 1 
decreed by Heaven, the constitution of things princely descent, and 4h 3$. AL T$. and

making what was proper to be so. 5. The a $$. became the respective surnames of 
ear obedient' is the mind receiving as by

intuition the truth from the ear. 6. Ap. fan | the families, 4h T$ was changed into ae 
instrument for determining the square.’ N I. by . the father of Mang E, on a principle 
i . i „ of humility, as he thereby only claimed to be 
iid Xp. ‘without transgressing the square. the eldest of the inferior sons or their repres- 
5. Fl. At. PIETY MUST BE SIIOWN ACCORDING | entatives,- and avoided the presumption of

TO THE RULES OF PROPRIETY. I. Mang E was $ . 
! ee ul ther of the 
à great officer of the state of Loo, by name | eeming to be a younger full brothe ineTO THE RULES OF PROPRIETY. I. Mang E was $ . 
! ee ul ther of the 
à great officer of the state of Loo, by name | eeming to be a younger full brothe ine

MES ＋ 41 m NE 
Ho-ke ( iy R ), and the chief of one of the reigning duke. 5A mild A bs 
three great families by which in the time of the posthumous honorary title given to Ho-ke, 
Conf. the authority of that state was grasped. | On F- see I. I. I. Fan, by name ZH. aud 
Thore families were descended from three : 1 {EP ; disciple of 
brothers, the sons by a concubine of the duke designatec HE, was a minor disciple o 
Hwan (B. C. 710-693), who were distinguished | the sage. Conf. repeated his remark to Fan, 
at first by the prenomens of 4h. K. and | that he might report the explanation of it to 
his friend Mang E, or Mang-sun, and thus 
prevent him from supposing that all the sage

a. 'To these was subsequently added the 
character jf. ‘grandson,’ to indicate their | intended was disobedience to parents.

CONFUCIAN

þad. 
T3

Nc 
ir bmw

s

2

L* 
- 
w

Tra " 
82

| 
l

Xp

HARTER

ar

HER 
em

TAM 
p

\ 
"

S 
3 E HNE

Pia

ANALECTS.

N 
C

Nb d 
dN

zem En ij 
SA ac AS 
— Ese.

ANTEX

v

SETENTA

i 
IN

qom

if 
v

e? 
O

E

à

The Master

CnarrrR VI. Ming Woo asked what filial piety was. 
said, “Parents are anxious lest their children should be siek.”

Cuaprer VII. Tsze-yew asked what filial piety was. The Mas- 
ter said, The filial piety of now-a-days means the support of one's 
parents. But dogs and horses likewise are able to do something in 
the way of support;-vithout reverence, what is there to distinguish 
the one support given from the other?’

CHAPTER VIII. Tsze-hea asked what filial picty was. The Mas- 
ter said, “The difficulty is with the countenance. If, when Meir 
elders have any troublesome affairs, the young take the toil of them, 
and if, when the young have wine and food, they set them before 
their elders, i is THIS to be consdered filial piety?”6. THE ANXIETY OF PARENTS ABOUT THEIR 
CHILDREN AN ARGUMENT FOR FILIAL PIETY. 
This engmatical sentence has been interpreted 
in two ways. Choo He takes uff (=f) not in 
the sense of ‘only,’ but of ‘thinking anxiously.’— 
‘Parents have the sorrow of thinking anxiously 
about their-i e their children's-being unwell. 
Therefore children should take care of their

persons.’ The old comm. again take pfe i in the

sense of only.. Let parents have only the sor- 
row of their children's illness. Let them have 
no other occasion for sorrow, This will be fiti- 
al piety.’ Mang Woo (the hon. epithet, zzi Bold 
and of straightforward Benet: ) was the son 
of Mang E, and by name Be: f H merely indi-

tates that he was the eldest son. 
How THERE MUST BB REVERENCE IN FILIAL E

& native of , and distinguished Mn ihe |

disciples of Conf. for his knowl, of the rules of 
propriety, and for his learning. He is now 4th

on the west among ‘the wise ones,’ 2 Hg i is in low. 
8d tone, = to minister support to,' the act of an

TY. anoo was the designnjion of =

‘nourish,’ ‘bring up,’

inferior to a superior. In low. 2d tone, it to 
Choo lle gives a different 
turn to the sentiment.— But dogs and horses 
likewise manage to get their support.“ The

other and older interpr. is better. E N.: 
‘Coming to, Sas to, quoad. EI , up. 4th tone, ‘ta

In low. tone, Mj

discriminate, ‘distinguish.’

= ‘to leave,’ ‘separate from.“ 
8. SUB DUTIES OF FILIAL PIETY MUST BE PER-

FORMED WITH A CHEERFUL COUNTENANCE. ff;

here, nearly analogous to I, $. Ám followed by 
9 H H

. =the ‘¢réublesome affairs! in the transl. A3

P as in I. 6. ‘The use of the phrase here ex» 
4

x

as well as to the We have in 
P to UA their respective nom to the 
two . =. read tsze, ‘rice,’ and then, food

generally. Fe LE gs. = (lit ^ 4 (earlier

born= elders) ie Z. Te. low. 1st tone, Eli].

"n. filial duty to elders generally,—to the 
Zu

— 
S

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.generally. Fe LE gs. = (lit ^ 4 (earlier

born= elders) ie Z. Te. low. 1st tone, Eli].

"n. filial duty to elders generally,—to the 
Zu

— 
S

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

Al c X5 dt EB K , 
(pom NY 4X mm yY LN y [EE 
2 T Ri Hf j* Io ^h Av 
Ak E. Bk, EH. El. By . ` 
DUE OMNE T, AE W

D

9

R 
RI

> ESPEN

LUND 2

CnaPrER IX. The Master said, “I have talked with Hwuy 
fora whole day, and he has not made any objection to.any thing I 
Selle us if he were stupid. He has retired, and I have examined 
his conduct when away from me, and found him able to illustrate:

avy teachings, Yiwuy!—He is not stupid.“ A

- r nh : ` 
CnaprrER X. 1. The Master said, ‘See what a man does. '

2. “Mark his motives. 
5. “Examine in what things he

| 
rests.

-

4. * How can a man conceal his character! 
5. How can a man conceal his character!”

CuaAPTER XI.

The Master said,

„If a man keeps cherishing his

old knowledge, so as continually to be acquiring new, he may be a

teacher of others."

‘then,’ 4 transition particle, 'To these diff* in- ! 
terrogatories about filial duty, the sage, we are 
told, made answer according to the character of 
the questioner, as ench one needed instruction. 
9. ‘CHE QUIEF RESECTIVITY OF THE DISCIPLE

pwry, ven Hwuy (i fe] ), styled J jl.

was Confucins’ favourite disciple, and is now 
honoured with the first place cast among his 
four assessors in his temples, and with the title of

T3 BH Pü P Thie second sage, the philoso- 
Pher Ken.“ At 29 his hair was entirely white, 
and at 35 he died to the excessive grief of the

sage. The subject of iR is [Up and that of 
“PP (as in 1. 40 is ZF. TET, his privacy,’ 
not meaning his conduct in secret, but only his 
way when not with the master. IR also, takes 
up An Se wes so, aud also so. [E] 4E :

Seo I, 15. 
10. How TO DETEUMINE:THE CHARACTERS OF

MCN, I. II is explained as fT, or TY Fi.

‘dou. The same. tho’ hot its comm. meaning.

is the first given to it in the Dict. For the 
noun to which the three refer, we mustMCN, I. II is explained as fT, or TY Fi.

‘dou. The same. tho’ hot its comm. meaning.

is the first given to it in the Dict. For the 
noun to which the three refer, we must

go down to X in the 4th par. There. is 4

elimax in Bir N. Wr gH (^ what from’), and

Br . and a corresponding one in the verbs

nd. ip and ZS . 4, Ai gen. a final particle, 
in low. Ist tone, is here in up. Ist., an interroga- 
tive, how? Its interrog. force blends with the

exclamatory of "n at the end. i

ll. TORE ARLE TO TEACH OTHERS ONE MUST 
FROM AIS OLD, STORES BE CONTINUALLY DEVEL-

OPING THINGS NEW. ii js exp. in the Dict. by

5 „and, with ref. to this very pass. it is said,

‘one’s old learning being thorough, again coustant- 
2 2 >

ly to practise it, is called iA: Mad. comm. say

that the ‘new learning is in the old? The iden 
probably is that of assimilating old acquisitions 
and new, the mind's harmonizing theni. Comp.

AL. ver 
FB Jf. xxvir i.

— 
.

-

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

"E

U. IA ES Ed E ESI 
o [re] — — Exe) o [xvm

Et

I- 
Sl d=

O

*

N

O

b 
4

| 
|

8. -N 
X

EH

v 
.

| ESSEE 
pe

—

m+

NSN lte 
SHORT

o 
v

e-

SEA

ont

- 
O

S

~ 
P4

CuAPTER XII. The Master said, * The accomplished scholar is

not an utensil." 
CHAPTER XIII.

. rior man.

Tsze-kung ae what constituted the supe. 
The Master said, “He acts beforé he Das and after.

wards speaks according to his actions."

CuaPTER XIV.

lic and no partizan,

The Master said, The superior man is catho. 
The mean man is a partizan! and not catholic."

Cuaprer XV. The Master said, “ Learning without thought is 
labour lost; thought without learning i is perilous.". .

CHAPTER XVL

is injurious indeed !”

12. Tna GENERAL APTITUDE OP TIE KRUN- 
TSZE. This is not like our Eng. saying, that 
*such a man is a machine,'—a blind instrument. 
A utensil has its particular use. It answers 
for that and no other. Not so with the superi- 
or man, who is ad omnia paratus.18. How WITH THE SUPERIOR MAN "WORDS 
FOLLOW ACTIONS, The reply is literally; — He 
first acts his words and afterwards follows them.’ 
A translator's diflic. is with the latter clause.

What is the antecedent to Z? It would seem

to be Hz S but in that case there is no room

for words at all. Noris there according to the 
old comm. In the interpretation I have given, 
Choo He follows the famous Chow Leen-k‘e,

Ji Jk 2

THE DIFFERENCE BETWRER "ub Keun- 
ne AND THE SMALL MAN, E. here low. 3d

The Master said, E The study of strange doctrines

t t

tone, ‘partial,’ *partizanly? The sent. is this— 
‘With the Keun-tsze, it is principles not men; 
with the small man, the reverse.’

15. IN LEARNING, READING AND THOUGHT

MUST BE COMBINED. fa. ‘a net,’ used also in 
the sense of ‘not,’ as an adverb, and here ag 
an adj. The old comm. makes T4. ‘perilous,’

simply==‘wearisome to the body.“ 
16. STRANGE DOCTRINES ARE NOT TO bg

BTUDIED. pu often ‘to attack,’ as an enemy,

here = to apply one's-self to,’ to study.“

correct; then, ‘beginnings,’ ‘first principles; 
here==‘doctrines. 441 e. as iu I 14. In 
Conf. time Buddhism was not in China, and wo

enn hardly suppose him to intend "laouium, 
| Indeed, we are ignorant to what doctrines he re-

ferred, but his maxim is of gen, application.

On

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

y

NSS

Say

3i

Mom 
TE 
B

SED

2

—

> 
[ d

v

N

EN SEEN 
vM

IX

W

M 
.

ERT 
Sabot EA 
[Eur

2

RUO

N

v

Fil

\ 
4

LA -

Cuaprer XVII. The Master said, “Yew, shall I teach you, 
what knowledge is? When you know a thing, to hold that you

know it; and when you do not know a thing, to allow that you do 
not know it;—this is knowledge."

Enon Sn 
evtl

v 
v

Cuarrer XVIII. I. Tsze-chang was learning with a view, to

official emolument. 
9.

“The Master said, Hear much and put aside the points of

which you stand in doubt, while you speak cautiously ät the sameofficial emolument. 
9.

“The Master said, Hear much and put aside the points of

which you stand in doubt, while you speak cautiously ät the same

time of the others:—then you will afford few occasions for blame 
See much and put aside the things which seem perilous, while 
are cautious at the same time in carrying the others into 
—then you will have few occasions for repentance.

| 
H 7 
ou 
ractice: 
When 'one

|

gives few occasions for blame in his words, and few occasions for 
vepentance in his conduct, he is in the way to get emolument.“

17. THERE SHOULD BE NO PRETENCE IN THE 
PROFESSION OF KNOWLEDGE, OR THE LENIAL OF 
IGNORANCE. , by surname th, and gener- 
ally known by his designation of Tsze-loo 
(Fh vas one of the most famous disciples 
of Confucius, and now occupies in the temples 
the 4th place east in the sage’s own hall. He was 
noted for his courage and forwardness, a man 
of impulse rather than reflection. Conf. had 
ferctold that he would come.to an untimely 
end, and so it happened. He was killed through 
his own rashness in a revolution in the state of 
Wei. The tassel of his cap being cut off when 
he received his death-wound, be quoted a say- 
ing— The superior man must not die without 
his cap,’ tied on the tassel, adjusted the cap,

and expired. This action AE 1 I E 
is much lauded. Of the six Ag, the 1st. and 
6th are knowledge subjective, the other four 
are knowledge objective. ‘The first Fl Z=

EU x Z id. In the other two cases, 2

1 
‘any one thing.’ E j^" ‘to take to be,’ ‘to 
consider,’ ‘to allow.’ „ thus marked with a 
tone, is uscd for Hc *you^ "

i 
18. THE END IN LEARN'NG SHOULD RE ONE'S 
OWN IMPROVEMENT, AND Nor EMOLUMENT. I.

Tsze-chang, named Bifi with the double sur-

name KA . a native of Ch. in ( pl» was noti 
18. THE END IN LEARN'NG SHOULD RE ONE'S 
OWN IMPROVEMENT, AND Nor EMOLUMENT. I.

Tsze-chang, named Bifi with the double sur-

name KA . a native of Ch. in ( pl» was not

undistinguished in the Confucian school. Tsze- 
kung praised him as a man of merit without 
boasting, -humble in a high position; and not 
arrogant to the helpless, From, this, ch., how- 
ever, it would appear that inferior mot. did

sometimes rule him. was lenrning, i. e., 
i

at some particular time. EE 4 tto seek

for” 2. BO is explained in the comm. ag in

transl, — rb 2 ie but this menn, of it is 
not found in tthe Dict. Jd XE d rh,

*Emolument is herein,’ J. e, it will come without

16 
E HM E AR 
E l 550. . JJ

ZEE

RT ese 
SSE tS

b 
G

BRA

4 RR 
CHAPTER XIX.

KA

H, 
The duke Gae asked, saying, “What should be 
done in order to secure the submission of the people?”

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

DEEST

mm e» 3i 
=e DX

b 
7

Ld

tS

—

wo v 
BE ERU

Confucius

replied, * Advance the upright and set aside the crooked, then the

people will submit.

Advance the crooked and set guide the up-

right, then the people will not submit."

“CHAPTER XX.

Ke K‘ang asked how to cause ‘the people to

reverence their ruler, to be faithful to him, and to urge themselves

to virtue. The Master said,

gravity;—then they will reverence him. 
kind to all;—then they will be faithful to him.

“Let him preside over them with

Let him be filial and 
Let him advance

the good and teach the incompetent;—then they will eagerly scek

to be virtuous." 
CHAPTER XXI. I.

Some one addressed oni saying,

«Sir,

why are you not engaged in-the government ?"

seeking; the individual is on the way to it. The 
lesson is that we are to do what is right, and not 
be anxious about temporal concerns.

19. How A PRINCE BY THE RIGHT EMPLOY- 
MENE OF HIS OFFICERS MAY SECURE THE REAL 
SUBMISSION OF HIS EUBJECTS. Gae was the19. How A PRINCE BY THE RIGHT EMPLOY- 
MENE OF HIS OFFICERS MAY SECURE THE REAL 
SUBMISSION OF HIS EUBJECTS. Gae was the

honorary cpithet of We duke of Loo (B. C. 
494-367). Conf. died in 112 16th year, Accord. 
to the laws for posthumous titles, Be denotes 
‘the respectful and benevolent, early cut off.“ 
pii = The to- be-lamented duke.’ $s 
up. 3d tone,= TE > ‘to set aside. BK is partly 
euphonious, but also indicates the plural. JI. 
F xj E. ‘The philosopher K‘ung replied.’ 
Here, for the first time, the sage is called by his 
surnanie, and, *j is used, as indicating the

roply of an iuferior to a superior. 
20. EXAMPLE IN SUPERIORS IS MORE POWER- 
EUL THAN ronce. Kang, ‘easy and pleasant,

people-soother, was the honorary epithet òf 
Ke-sun Fei (HED, the head of one of the three 
great families of Loo; sce ch. 5. His idea is 
seen in AH, ‘to cause,’ the power of force; that '

of Conf. appears in Fl. *then," the power of

influence. In u 5). A is said to= fii,

‘together with,’ ‘mutually.’ p *to divik’ 
tto teach,’ has also in the Dict. the meaning— to* 
rejoice to follow,’ which is its force here, FD

ae, ‘the practice of goodness,’ being undeꝶ

stood. . 
21. Coxrucius" EXPLANATION OF HIS NOT

BEING IN ANY OFFICE. 1. E NL The

surname indic. that the questioner was not a 
disciple. Conf. had his reason for not being in 
office at the time, but it was not expedient to 
tell. He replied therefore, as in par. 2, 2. See 
Shoo-king xxii. 1. But the text is neither cor- 
rectly applied nor exactly quoted. The old

CONFUCIAN

i

i

" 
s

URE

N 
ge 
Bi

a 
Horse 
Stn

e

DER

== 
Ki:

pai 
E

ANALECTS. `

fui 
i

e 
e

li 
v

DRAA 
Š

TUM

110

im

3

BE 
m

&

A 
AEH OO

n

2)» 1 
. KÍ, 
. .

2. The Master said, What does the Shoo-king say of filial

piety ?—* You are filial, you discharge your brotherly duties.

These

qualities are displayed in government.’ This then also constitutes

the exercise of government. 
be in the government.” 
CHAPTER XXII.These

qualities are displayed in government.’ This then also constitutes

the exercise of government. 
be in the government.” 
CHAPTER XXII.

Why must there be THAT to make one

The Master said, “I do not know how a man 
without truthfulness is to get on.

How can a large carriage be

made to go without the cross bar for yoking the oxen to, or a small 
carriage without the arrangement for yoking the horses?"

CHAPTER XXIII. I. 
ten ages after could be known. 
2.

Tsze-chang asked whether % affairs of

Confucius said, “The Yin dynasty followed the regulations

of the Hea: wherein it took from or added to them may be known. 
The Chow dynasty has followed the regulations of the Yin: where-

in it took from or added tò them may be known;

Some other may

follow the Chow, but though it be should be at the distance of a 
hundred ages, its affairs may be known.”

inter. read in one aentence EA N E E. 0 
filial piety! nothing but filial piety!’ Choo IIe, 
however, pauacs at P, and commences rightly 
the quotation with 44 2. A western may 
think that the philosopher might have made 
a happier evasion. 2 # y Bs BX the 
Pst B=- y and tt referring to the

thought in the man’s question, that office was 
necessary to one’s being in governinent.

22. THE NECESSITY TO A MAN OF BEIG TRUTII- 
FUL AND SINCERE. ilia and ig are explained 
án the Dict. in the same way— the cross bar at 
the end of the carriage pole.“ But there was a

difference. Choo He says, In the light carriage |

the end of the pole curved upwards, and the 
cross bar was suspended from a hook.’ ‘This 
would give it more elasticity.

93. Tn. GREAT PRINCIPLES GOVERNING 80CI- 
ETY ARE UNCHANGEABLD. 1. {lk may be taken

as an age=‘a century,’ or as a generation=30 
years, which is its radical meaning, being form-

ed from three tens and one d if and —), Bothas an age=‘a century,’ or as a generation=30 
years, which is its radical meaning, being form-

ed from three tens and one d if and —), Both

meanings are in the Dict. Conf. made no pre- 
tension to supernatural powers, and all comm. 
are agreed that the things here asked about 
were not what we would call contingent or in- 
different events. Ile merely says that the great 
principles of morality and relations of society 
had continued the same and would ever do so.

il, P. 2. The Hea, Yin, and Chow are

4B, ‘The three

now spoken of as the

— 
—

E` 
an

í U 
Io 1 
iy, BH 
CHAPTER XXIV. 1.

“CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

Me EL 
Ff M. ud HI

HE,

The Master said, “For a man to sacrifice

to a spirit which does not belong to him is flattery.” 
2. To see what is right and not to do it is want of courage.”

changes, i. e., the three great dynasties. The first

- Emperor of the Hea was ‘The great Yu,’ B. C.

2204, of the Yin, T'ang, B. C. 1765, and of 
Chow, Woo, B. C. 1121. }

24. NEITHER IN 8ACRIFICE NOR IN OTHER

PRACTICE MAY A MAN DO ANYTHING BUT WHAT

18 RIGHT. 1. A Di E p "The human

spirit (i. e, of the dead) is called f? Tho Fi,

of which a mau may say that they are his, are 
those only of his ancestors, and to them only he 
may sacrifice. 'The ritual of China provides for

sacrifices,to three classes of objecte— K jip,

Hh. zm A n. ‘spirits of heaven, of the 
earth, of men.’ This ch. is not to be extended 
to allthe three. It has reference only to the 
manes of departed men. :

BOOK III. PA YIH.

WW, S H p A

wy 
. As A EE, TH 
P H. 2 FE

ae 9 A 
L =n

EY

Cuaprer I. Confucius said of the head of the Ke family, who had 
eight rows of pantomimes in his area, *If he can bear to do this,

what may he not bear to do?"

HEADING OF THIS Boo. 1f 78 =.EY

Cuaprer I. Confucius said of the head of the Ke family, who had 
eight rows of pantomimes in his area, *If he can bear to do this,

what may he not bear to do?"

HEADING OF THIS Boo. 1f 78 =.

The last book treated of the practice of govern- 
ment. and therein no things, according to Chi- 
nese ideas, are more important than ceremonial 
rites and music. With those topies therefore, 
the twenty six chapters of this book are occupi- 
ed, and ‘eight rows, the principal words iu the 
first chapter, are adopted as its heading.

1. CONFUCIUS’ INDIGNATION AT THE USURPA-

TION OF IMPERIAL, RITES, a N. by contraction 
for EE ; see II. 5. FE and WE are now 
ased without distinction, meaning ‘surname,’ 
only that the PE of a woman is always spo-

ken of, and not her WE. Originally the Fe 
appears to have been used to denote the branch 
| families of one surname. zB EK ‘The Ke 
| family,’ with special reference to its head, ‘The 
Ke,’ as we should say. ff ‘a row of dancers," 
or pantomimes rather, who kept time in tho 
temple services, in the EE. the front space be-

fore the raised portion in the principal hall, 
moving or brandishing feathers, flags, or other 
articles. In his ancestral temple, the Emperor 
had 8 rows, each row consisting of eight men, 
a duke or prince had 6. and a great officer only 
4. For the Ke, therefore, to: use 8 rows wasa

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

E . fil. — 
F —

CHAPTER II. The three families used the vuxG ode, while the

vessels were being removed, at the conclusion of the sacrifice.

The

Master said, ‘“‘Assisting are the princes;—the emperor looks pro- 
found and grave :——what application can these words have in the

hall of the three families?“

CHAPTER III. The Master said, “If a man be without the virtues 
proper to humanity, what has he to do with the rites of propricty ? 
f a man be without the virtues proper to humanity, what has he

to do with music?”

Cuarter IV. Lin Fang asked what was the first thing to be

attended to in ceremonies:to do with music?”

Cuarter IV. Lin Fang asked what was the first thing to be

attended to in ceremonies:

2. The Master said, “A great question indeed !”

usurpation, for tho’ it may be argued, that 
to the ducal fantily of Loo imperial rites wore 
conceded, and that the offshoots of it (II. 5) 
might use the same, still great officers wero 
confined to the ordinances proper to their rank. 
5H js uscd here, as frequently, in the sense 
to speak of? Conf. remark may also be trans- 
lated, If this be endured, what may' not be 
endured?' And this is probably the correct in- 
terpretation, for there is force in the observations

of the author of the m t E ub that 
this remark and the following must be,assigned 
to the sage during the short time that he held 
high office in Loo.

— . 
2. AGAIN AGAINST USURPED RITES. — BR

r. ‘Those belonging to the three families,’

They assembled together, as being the descend- 
ants of duke Hwan (II. 5), in one temple. To

this temple belonged the in the last ch.,

which is called N . because circumstan- 
ces had concurred to make the Ke tho chief of 
the three fumilies; see yu zE $t. viii. 7. 
For the Yung ode, sce She-king, II. ii. Ode. II. st. 
7. It was, properly, sung in the imperial temples 
of the Chow dynasty, at the fehl *the clearing

away, of the sacrificial apparatus, and contains 
the lines quoted by Confucius, which of course 
were quite inappropriate to the circumstances

of the three families. up. 4th tone, with-

out an aspirate. AEP. —vr- 8d tone, assistant, 
‘assisting.’

3. CEREMONIES AND MUSIC VAIN WITHOUT 
VIRTUE, „ see I. 2. I don't know how to 
render it here, otherwise than in the transla.

Comm. define it Z > (h. * the entire 
virtue of the heart.“ As referred to ite it 
indicates the fecling of reverence; ‘as referred 
to 2 (gà), it indicates harmoniousness.

4. THE OBJECT OF CEREMONIES SHOULD RE- 
GULATE THEM:—AGAINST PORMALISM. l. Lin 
Fang, styled bi was a man of Loo, sup-4. THE OBJECT OF CEREMONIES SHOULD RE- 
GULATE THEM:—AGAINST PORMALISM. l. Lin 
Fang, styled bi was a man of Loo, sup-

posed to have been a disciple of Conf, and 
whose tablet is now placed first, on the west, in 
the outer court of the temples. He is known 
only by the question in this ch. Ace. to Choo

He, AS here is not 2 . ‘the radical idea,’

‘the essence ;’ but as E ‘the beginning,’ op- 
posed to K. the first thing to be attended to." 
8. nd has not the gen. meaning of the char. in 
the 1st par. As opposed to s (up. Ist tone), 
it must indicate the festive or fortunate (

ceremonies,—capping, marriage, and sacrifices.

m

. OH

v 
v

IEEE

b 
8

ane

amb

Ht.

Hl.

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

3. In festive ceremonies, it is better to be sparing than extravagant. 
In the ceremonies of mourning, it is better that there be deep sorrow 
than a minute attention to observances.”

Cnaprer V. The Master said,

“The rude tribes of the east and

north have their princes, and are not like the States of our great

land which are without them." 
CHAPTER VI.

the T‘ac mountain.

save him from this?”

The chief of the Ke family was about to sacrifi ce to 
The Master said to Yen- rew, “ Can you not 
He answered,

“I cannot.” Confucius said,

“ Alas! will you say that the Tae mountain is not so discerning as

Lin Fang?” 
, read e, low 3d tone. Choo He explains it

PE 
by ya as in Mencius— E E E Ae ‘to 
cleanse and dress the fields,’ and interprets as 
in the transl. The old comm. take the mean-

ing ANI p^ „ harmony and ease, i e, not 
being 7 Ae troubled, .

5. Tun AN ANcV or Conxrucics’ tate. The 
By were the barbarians on the east of a 
and X X. those on the north. See nd ise n 
E ‘fill, iii, 14. ‘The two are here used for 
the barbarous tribes about China generally, 
E: A is a name for China because of the

multitude of its people GE. and its greatness 
(3. 245 . ‘The flowery and great,’ is 
still à common designation of it. Choo Ilemultitude of its people GE. and its greatness 
(3. 245 . ‘The flowery and great,’ is 
still à common designation of it. Choo Ile

tukes pi us simply- 4f]. and hence the senti- 
ment in the tranel. Ho An’s comm. is to this 
effect :—' The rude tribes with their princes are

I

still not equal to China with its anarchy. 
read us, und- fE. `

6. Ox TH E FOLLY OF USURVED SACRIFICES. hk 
is suid to be the name appropriate to sacrifices

named Gg» and by designation

to mountains, but we find it applied also to sac- 
rifices to God. The Tae mountain is the first 
of the ‘five mountains’ (JI. 3v. which are

celebrated in Chinese literature, and have always 
received religious honours, It was in Loo, or 
rather on the borders between Loo and 'ls'e,

about 2 miles north of the present district city 
of Tae - gan das Fe), in the department of

Tse-nan ( 75 BD in Shan-tung. According 
to the nitual of China, sacrifice could only be 
offered to these mountains by the emperor, and 
princes in whose States any of them happened 
to he. For the chief of the Ke family, there- 
fore, to sacrifice to the Tae mountain, was a

great usurpation, us in II. 7. Nx. and fẹ 
as in IT. $,— mij, or we may take it as=

‘Have you anid,’ &. F= * ty 2 > ilt.

‘The spirit of tlie Tae mountain? Lin Fang, — 
sce ch. 4, from which the reason of this refe- 
rence to him may be understood. Yen pew 
, was 
one of the disciples of Conf, and is now ^ third, 
in the hall, on the west. Ile entered the ser- 
vice of the Ke family, and was a manof ability 
aud resources.

CONRKUCIAN ANALECTS,

ASS DOM

~~ 
wv

weu 
rep 
Y

S-

110

Neu

w

HST 
Nea

a

= 
ab

o

LN E

h2 
—

X 
E 
j

[d

l

&l 
j 
D 
i

v 
[ d

TEER 
DER

[ d

v

RRR

* 
(d

= 
EUR a l

SS

*

A 
T:

au

fü F. I.

CuaPrER VII. The Master said, “The student of virtue has no

contentions.

If it be said -he cannot avoid them, shall this be in

archery? ‘But he bows complaisantly to his competitors ; thus he ascendscontentions.

If it be said -he cannot avoid them, shall this be in

archery? ‘But he bows complaisantly to his competitors ; thus he ascends

the hall, descends, and exacts the forfeit of drinking.

tion, he is still the Keun-tsze.”

CHAPTER VIII. 1. Tsze-hea asked, saying, 
of the passage—‘The pretty dimples of her artful smile!

In his conten-

„What is the meaning 
The well

defined black and white of her eye! The plain ground for the colours?“ 
_ 2. The Master said, “The business of laying on the colours fol- 
lows the preparation of the plain ground."

8. “Ceremonies then are a subsequent thing." The Master said,

' “Tt is Shang who can bring out my meaning!

talk about the odes with him”

7. Tne SUPERIOR MAN AVOIDS ALL CONTENTI-

OUS STRIVING. Here pis F=f 1 Z

A ‘the man who prefers virtue? JA t 
D a lit., ‘if he must, shall it be archery ?' 
812 according to Choo He, extend over all

the verbs, Fp, P. fik. ^ is marked in the

Sd tone, anciently appropriate to it as a verb. 
„ up. 3d tone, ‘to give to drink,’ here=to 
exact from the vanquished the forfeit cup. In 
Conf. time there were three principal exercises 
of archery:—the great archery, under the eye 
of the Emperor, the guests’ archery, which 
might be at the imperial court or at the visits 
of the princes among themselves, and the fes- 
tive archery, for amusement. The regulations 
for the archers were substantially the same in 
them all, and served to prove their virtue, in- 
stead of giving occasion to quarreling. There 
is no end to the controversies among comm. on 
minor points. 
8. CEREMONTUS ARE SECONDARY AND ORNA-

ow I can begin to

MENTAL. 1, The sentences quoted by Tsze-hea 
are from a 358 at. one of the poems which

Conf. did not admit into the She-king. The 
two first lines, however, are found in it, I. v. 3. 
The disciple's inquiry turns on the meaning ofConf. did not admit into the She-king. The 
two first lines, however, are found in it, I. v. 3. 
The disciple's inquiry turns on the meaning of

A 45 in the last line, which he took to 
mean—‘The plain ground is to be regarded as 
the colouring.’ 2. Conf., in his reply, makes 
f$ a verb, governing A comes after the

plain ground.’ 8. ne 1e SEA, Tsze-hen's re- 
mark is an exclamation rather than a question. 
itu F . He who stirs me up, = He who 
brings out my meaning.’ On the last sentence, 
see I. 15.—The above interpretation, especially 
as to the meaning of íe 6 3. after 
Choo He, is quite the opposite of that of the 
old interpreters. Their view is of course

strongly supported by the author of py E

! By git. vin. 8.

2 . CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

E

nd

Imi 
" 
mm 
—

Ji

E 
iv

Er 
Till secte CHEE

> 
cz

v

sn 
Sob (Ne BE ROR

o`

ei 
F. AL

- RR 
NES

Rees

w

palis qe 
HERAN

UG 
RoHS

.-

We el

a

Ee 
ROS

Bex EDT 
(v 
m 
m 
= 
gu 
D 
HE

d M

CHAPTER IX. The Master said, “I am able to describe the ceremo- 
nies of the Hea dynasty, but Ke cannot sufficiently attest my words. 
I am able to deséribe the ceremonies of the Yin dias but Sung 
cannot sufficiently attest my words. They cannot do so because of the 
insufficiency of their records and wise men. If those were sufficient, . 
I could adduce them in support of my words." l

CHAPTER X. The Master said, “At the great sacrifice, after the 
pouring out of the libation, I have no wish to look on.”

CHAPTER XI. Some one asked the meaning of the great sacrifice. 
The Master said, “I dọ not know. He who knew its meaning would

O

9. THE DECAY OF THEN MONUMENTS OF ANTI- 
quiry. Of.Hea and Yin, see ll. 23. In the 
small state of Ke (originally what is now the 
district of the same name in K‘ae-fung dep. in 
Ho-nan, but in Conf. time a part of Shan-tung), 
the sacrifices to the emperors of the Hea dyn- 
asty were maintained by their descendants. So 
with the Yin dynasty and Sung, a part of thepresent Ho-nan. But the X. literary monu-

ments’ of those countries, and their EK Et 
so in the Shoo-king, v. vii. 5, et ul.) “wise men’ 
had become few. Had Conf. therefore delivered 
all his knowledge about the two dynasties, 
he would have exposed his truthfulness to 
suspicion, 15 in the sense of , ‘to witness,’ 
and, at the end, to appeal to for evidence.“ ‘The 
old comm., however take fey in the sense of WK:

*to complete,’ and interpret the whole different- 
ly.—We see from the chapter how in the time 
of Confucius many of the records of antiquity 
had perished.

10. ‘THE SAGE'S DISSATISFACTION AT THE 
WART OF PROPRIETY OF AND IN CEREMONIES.

[13 is the name belonging to different sacrifices,

but here indicating the X , ‘great sacri- 
fice” which could properly be celebrated only

by the Emperor. The individual sacrificed to 
in it was the remotest ancestor from whom the 
founder.of the reigning dynasty traced his des- 
cent. As to who were his assessors in the sac- 
rifice and how often it was offered;—these are 
disputed points. See K'ang-he's dict. char.

2 Comp. also yu = BK $8. vir, 8, and 
yu SE HE Gy BR 1. 18. An imperial rite,

7 A [n 
its use in Loo was wrong (see next ch.), but

there was something in the service after the 
early act of libation inviting the descent of the 
spirits, which more particularly moved the

anger of Conf. im Ít-)A 1$ diff. from 
{E in I. 15. k

11. THE PROFOUND MEANING OF THE GREAT 
SACRIFICE. This ch. is akin to 11. 21. Conf. 
evades replying to his questioner, it being con- 
trary to Chinese propriety to speak in a country 
of the faults of its government or rulers. If he 
had entered into an account of the re sacri- 
fice, he must have condemned the use of an 
imperial rite in Loo. EUN ‘explanation, ne

ing. The antecedent to the second K is the

whole of the preceding clause :—* The relation 
to the empire of him who knew its meaning;

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS,

We OK, He, EE zn E Hy

RN

z

o

SNTI

2 
^

BHI

Bwhole of the preceding clause :—* The relation 
to the empire of him who knew its meaning;

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS,

We OK, He, EE zn E Hy

RN

z

o

SNTI

2 
^

BHI

B

Shera 
TESS He

SESS

* 
Ld 
v 
w| 
v

e

Si 
*

\ 
d

find it as easy to govern the empire as to look on this;"—/pointing 
to his palm.

CHAPTER XII. 1. He sacrificed to the dead, as if they were present. 
He sacrificed to the spirits, as if the spirits were present.

2. The Master said, *I consider my not being present at the 
sacrifice, as if I did not sacrifice."

CHAPTER XIII. 1. Wang-sun Kea asked, saying, What is the

meaning of the saying, ‘It is better to pay court to the furnace than

to the south-west corner’?” 
2 The Master said, Not so. 
has none to whom he can pray.”

that would be as to look on this.’ P,. inter- 
jective, more than interrogative. FR. to

see,’ A, ‘under heaven,’ an ambitious de-

signation for the Chinese empire. as 4 esxougeivm 
and orbis were used by tbe Greeks and Ro- 
mans.

12. CONFUCIUS’ OWN BINCERITY JN SACRIFI-

ora, 1. a here is historical and not to be 
translated in the imperative. We have to sup-

ply an object. to the first aX, viz. pj? mH the 
dead, his forefathers, as contrasted with piii] in 
the next clause,=all the ‘spirits’ to which in 
his official éapacity he would have to sacrifice. 
2. Obs, in low 8d tone, ‘to be present at,’ 
*to take part in.' .

18. THAT THERE 18 NO RESOURCE AGAINST 
THE CONSEQUENCES OF VIOLATING THE RIGHT.

1. Kea was a great officer of Wei dp and

having the power of the state in his hands in- 
sinuated to Confucius that it would be for his

advantage to pay court to him. The „ or 
south west corner, was from the structure of 
ancient houses the cosiest nook, and the place 
of honour. Choo IIe explains the proverb hy

He who offends against HeavenHe who offends against Heaven

reference to the customs of sacrifice. The fur- 
nace was comparatively a mean place, but when 
the spirit of the fnrnace was sacrificed to, then 
the rank of the two places was changed for the 
fime, and the proverb quoted was in vogue. 
But there does not seem much force iu this ex- 
planation. The door, or well, or any other of the 
five things in the regular-sacrifices, might take 
the place of the furnace. The old explanation 
which makes no reference to sacrifice is sim-

pler. E might be the more retired and hon-

ourable place, but the Z was the more import- 
ant for the support and comfort of the household. 
The prince and his immediate attendants might 
be more honourable than such a minister as Kea; 
but more benefit might be got from him. TH. 
from woman and eyebrows,=‘to ogle, ‘to flat- 
fer? 2. Confucius’ reply was in a high tone. 
Choo He says, KAI xt f th, ‘Heaven means 
principle But why should Heaven mean prin. 
ciple, if there were not in such a use of the

term an instinctive recognition of a supreme 
' government of intelligence and righteousness?

We find FE explained in the Ht BR it by

p 5" $E E . ‘The lofty one who is

on high.“

CONFUCIAN

lise’ Ze 
.

t5 
.

— 
H

ENT

G 
Ht SETHE

[ d

T 
f 
d 
H, 3 
A

FANDA

Crarrer XIV. The Master said, 
the two past dynasties. How complete and elegant are its

viewing 
regulations! I follow Chow.”

ANALECTS. 
7 ae E 
— ej

nt 
ZH

* N

Ed

o

RS 
FRE

ady

K 
wt 
2

— 
HAF

AH, dif

“Chow had the advantage of

CHarrER XV. The Master, when he entered the grand temple, 
asked about every thing. Some one said, *Who will say that the son 
of the man of Tsow knows the rules of propriety. He has entered the

grand temple and asks about every thing."

The Master heard the

remark, and said, ‘This is a rule of propriety.”grand temple and asks about every thing."

The Master heard the

remark, and said, ‘This is a rule of propriety.”

Cuarter XVI. The Master said, “In archery it is not going 
through the leather which is the principal thing;—because people's 
strength is not equal. This was the old way.

14. THE COMPLETENESS AND ELEGANCE OF 
THE INSTITUTIONS OF THE CHOW DyXasty. By

the JE we are specially to undersand the

founders of the power and polity of the dynas- 
ty—the kings Wan and Woo, and the duke of 
Chow. ‘The two past dynasties are of course

the Hea and the Shang or Yin. X is an adj. 
15. CONFUCIUS IN THE GRAND TEMPLE. X (= 
Jo Ja was the temple dedicated to the duke

of Chow ( Já] A AN), and where he was worship-

ped with mE rites. The thing is supposed 
to have taken place, at the begin. of Conf. offi- 
cial service in Loo, when he went into the tem- 
pe with other officers to assist at the sacrifice.

Te had studied all about ceremonies, and was 
famed for his knowledge of them, but he thought 
it a mark of sincerity and earnestness to make 
minute inquiries about them on the occasion

spoken of. was the name of the town in

Loo of which Conf. father had been governor, 
who was known therefore as ‘the man of TSOow.“ 
We may suppose that Conf. would be styled as 
in the text, only in his early life, or by very 
ordinary people.

16. How THE ANCIENTS MADE ARCHERY A DIB- 
CIPLINE OF VIRTUES. We are not to understand

At F + JE of all archery among the an-

cients. The char. are found in the t ig

Pt 5]. par. 315, preceded by the char. ne. 
There were trials of archery where the strength 
was a Probably Conf. was speaking of

the me 25] of his times, when the strength

which could go through the He *skin, or leu- 
ther, in the middle of the target, was esteemed

more than the skill which could hit it.

CONFUCIAN 
s E 
— M EL

Su EE 
SEHE

[e]

8 I-

=! 
MEE

Ife 
258

SS

e

— cts

ey

TE

Lo

On

ANALECTS.

B

AS — jt 
Dr m B 
E VIO f fit

m

-

E 
DI d

—

ede 
iCONFUCIAN 
s E 
— M EL

Su EE 
SEHE

[e]

8 I-

=! 
MEE

Ife 
258

SS

e

— cts

ey

TE

Lo

On

ANALECTS.

B

AS — jt 
Dr m B 
E VIO f fit

m

-

E 
DI d

—

ede 
i

v

Ne 
SN SERE

=F,

Cnarter XVII. 1. Tsze-kung wished to do away with the offer- 
ing of a sheep connected with the inauguration of the first day of 
each month. |

2. The Master said, “Tsze, you love the sheep; I love the 
ceremony."

CuaPrER XVIII. The Master said, “The full observance of the 
rules of propriety in serving one’s prince is accounted by people to 
be flattery.”

Cuarter XIX. The duke Ting asked how a prince should employ 
his ministers, and how ministers should serve their prince. ind 
fucius replied, *A prince should employ his ministers according to 
the rules of propriety; ministers should serve their prince with 
faithfulness. "

CHAPTER XX. The Master said, The Kwan Ts‘eu is expressive 
of enjoyment without being licentious, and of grief without being

hurtfully excessive."

17. How CONPUCIDS CLEAYED. TO ANCIENT 
RITES, 1. The emperor in the last month of the 
yenr gave out to the princes a calendar for the 
ist days of the 12 months of the year ensuing. 
This was kept in their ancestral temples, and on 
the lst of every month, they offered a sheep 
and announced the day, requesting sanction for 
the duties of the mouth. This idea of request-

ing sanction is indicated by fis, read kuh, up. 
4th tone. The dukes of Loo neglected now their 
part of this ceremony, but the sheep was still 
offered: —a meaningless formality,-it seemed to 
"I'aze-kung. Conf., however, thought that while 
any part of the cer. was retained, there was a 
better chance of restor. the whole. Ae, up. 3d 
tone, an act. verb, to put away. It is disputed

whether fi in the text, mean a Jing sheep, or

a sheep killed but not roasted. 2. . in thewhether fi in the text, mean a Jing sheep, or

a sheep killed but not roasted. 2. . in the

sense of de H8. ‘to grudge,’ itis said. But 
this is hardly necessary. à 
18, How PRINCES SHOULD BE &8ERVED;-—— 
AGAINST THE SPIRIT OF THE TIMES, 
19. THE GUIDING PRINCIPLES IN THE RELA-

TION OF PRINCE AND MINISTER. . ‘Greatly 
anxious, tranquillizer of the people, was tho 
posthumous epithet of * Prince of Loo, B. C.

508-494. Jp <7 uf. ‘As it what, E re-

ferring to the two points inquired about.

20. THe PRAISE OF THE FIRST OF THE ODES, 
Ed HE is the name of the first ode in the 
fhe-king, and may be translated.—*'The mur-

; muring of the ts‘cu.’ See She-king, I. i, I.

2

I-15 
SE

dy 
N

IR>

o

(v xS 
EAE

z 
E 
z

CHAPTER XXI.

E, 
TN SETHE RE

A

za

The duke Gae asked Tsae Go about the altars

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

ar

SPEEA

[ d

E AR,

RIMS > 
hal TT Es a

d

2 A #

of the spirits of the land. Tsae Go replied, *The Hea sovereign 
used the pine tree; the man of the Vin used the cypress; and the 
man of the Chow used the chestnut tree, meaning thereby to cause 
the people to be in awe.“ 
2. When the Master heard it, he said, Things that are done, it 
is needless to speak about; things that have had their course, ‘it is 
needless to remonstrate about; things that are past, it is needless to 
blame.”

CHAPTER XXII. The Master said, Small indeed was the capa- 
city of Kwan Chung!”

2. Some one said, Was Kwan Chung parsimonious?” “Kwan,” 
was the reply, “had the San Kwei, and his officers performed no 
double duties; how can he be considered parsimonious?”

21. A RASH REPLY oF TSsAE Go ABOUT THE 
ALTARS TO THE SPIRITS OF THE LAND, AND LA~

—— 
MENT OF CONFUCIUS THEREON. * TN see 
II. 19. Tsae Go, by name T and styled F

„Was an eloquent disciple of the sage, a 
native of Loo. His place is the second west 
among ‘the wise ones.“ Dis from N. Ke, 
‘spirit or spirits of the earth, and „ ‘the

soil,’ means + Hh nil t , ‘the resting place orsoil,’ means + Hh nil t , ‘the resting place or

altars of the spirits of the land or ground. Go 
sinply tells the duke that the founders of the 
several dynasties planted such and such trees 
about those altars. The reason was that the

soil suited such trees, but as m „the chestnut 
tree,’ the tree of the existing dynasty, is used 
in the sense of PE, ‘to be afraid,’ he suggested

a reason for its planting which might lead the 
duke to severe measures against his people to 
be carried into effect at the altars. Comp. 
Shoo-king, IV. ii. 5, *Y wil put you to death

before the N. B Is KK is the Great Yu,

called i= to distinguish him from his pre-

decessors, the it and n po to distinguish 
him from ine, who was f, „ while they 
were descended from the same ancestor. Sec ch.

1, on p BE A and Jal A: in parallelism 
with B E N. must mean the founders of 
those dynasties; why they are simply styled 
A: ‘man,’ or ‘men,’ I have not found clearly

explained, though comm. feel it necess. to say 
something on the point. 2. This is all directed 
against Go's reply. He had spoken, and his 
words could not be recalled.

22. CONFUCIUS” OPINION OF KwAN-cnuxG;—

AGAINST HIM. 1. Kwan-chung, by name [o 
. is one of the most famous names in Chin. 
history. He was chief minister to the duke 
jH of Ju (B. C. 688-540), the first and great-

est of the five p'a d H or b leaders of the 
princes of the empire under the Chow dynasty. 
In the times of Conf. and Men., people thought

CONFUCIAN

EP 
o

JA c.

8.

D-

ANALEC ITS.

Nak 
S Ain

E NEG 
1 =

EF.

H FL.

hx 3E Els 
2. Ah. PA, +5 5. 
LACE A 
Sh KC EH s 
Z^ 2» m 3E HN

E

“Then, did Kwan Chung know the rules of propriety?” The

Master said, “The princes of states have a screen intercepting the view

at their gates.

of states on any friendly meeting

Kwan had likewise a screen at his gate. The princes 
g between two of them, had a standat their gates.

of states on any friendly meeting

Kwan had likewise a screen at his gate. The princes 
g between two of them, had a stand

on which to place their inverted cups. Kwan had also such a stand. 
If Kwan knew the rules of propriety, who does not know them ?"

Cuapter XXIII. The Master instructin 
of Loo said, “How to play music may be known. 
ment of the piece, all the parts should sound together.

g the Grand music-master 
At the commence- 
As it pro-

ceeds, they should be in harmony, severally distinct and flowing

without break, and thus on to the conclusion.”

more of Kwan, than those sages, no hero- 
worshippers, would ‘allow. 25 see IT. 12, but 
its signif. here is different, and our measure or 
capacity. 2. — Dar in the Dict, and the 
approved comm. of Choo He, was the name of 
an extravagant tower built by Kwan. There are 
other views of the phrase, the oldest, and the 
best supported appar., being that it means 
‘three wives (A woman's marriage is called

ER) The San Kwei and having nọ pluralists 
among his officers proved suff. that he could 
not be parsimonious. jj: up. Ist tone, ‘how,’ 
8. B ‘a tree, here in the sense of Hf. Sa 
screen,“ the screen of a prince, usurped by 
Kwan, who was only entitled to the fiit of a

great officer. f up. 8d tone. N . ta 
friendly meeting.’ The Hf: from + and di:

was a stand, made originally of earth and turf. 
Kwan usurped the use of it, as he did of the 
screen. This showed him to be as regardless 
of prescribed forms, asin par.2 he appears of 
expense, and he came far short therefore of' the 
Confucian idea of the Keun-tsze.

28. ON THE PLAYING OF MUSIC. ER, low. 8d 
tone, H *to tell, * to instruct.’ X =I) 
Bil Mi, was the title of the grand music-mas-

ter. b H By al th, ‘music, it may be

known,’ but the subject is not of the principles, 
but the performance of music. Observe theter. b H By al th, ‘music, it may be

known,’ but the subject is not of the principles, 
but the performance of music. Observe the

III. Premare says, ‘adjectivis addita sensum 
auget et exprimit modum? It is our ly or like, 
-fa 7 HN, ‘blended-tike.” tit: up. 3d tone,

the same ns K-. let go,“ i. e., proceed - 
ing, swelling ou.

28 
rl FE] 
aS Enc

xen

[d

SERT

r

cH a

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS:

i

aH 
[x ERE (Ve

wv

BN 
Ml 
F

IH

v 
o

E

| 
|

=

*

]

BEIDE E

Ld

CARRE

N.

v

er 
=

qi

WE 
> 
-

U

CHAPTER XXIV. The border - warden at E requested to be intro- 
duced to the Master, saying, When men of superior virtue have come 
to this, I have never been dénied the privilege of sceing them.” The 
followers of the sage introduced him, and when hé came out from the 
interview, he said, My friends, why arelyóu distressed by your 
master's loss of office? The.empire has long been without the principles 
of truth and right; Heaven is going to use your master as a bell with 
its wooden tongue." Rete cdi t ai

Cuaprer XXV. The Master said of the Shaou that it was ‘perfect. 
ly beautiful and also perfectly good.. He said of the; Woo that it 
was perfectly beautiful but not perfectly good. i oy

CnuaPrrER XXVI. The Master said, High station filled without in- 
dulgent generosity; ceremonies performed without reverence; mourn- 
ing conducted without sorrow;—wherewith should I contemplate 
such ways?”

24. A BTRANGER'S VIEW OF THE VOCATION OF

Conructus. E was a small town on the borders

of Wei, referred to a place in the present dis. 
of BJ . dep. BH E}, Honan prov. Conf. 
was retiring from Wei, the prince of which 
could not employ him. This was the Be (up.

&d tone), — JR fir. The 1st and 3d Jil, are 
read heen, low. 3d tone, III ti 18 Id. ‘to

introduce,’ on ‘to be introduced.’ Z in AF

2 E 1^ Hr th, has its prop. poss. power, 
In the case of a Keun-tsze's coming to this,’ 
„ lpw. 3d tone, !to attend upon? — == 
— rsintroduce,’ on ‘to be introduced.’ Z in AF

2 E 1^ Hr th, has its prop. poss. power, 
In the case of a Keun-tsze's coming to this,’ 
„ lpw. 3d tone, !to attend upon? — == 
— rs

, ‘Two or three sons,’ or ‘gentlemen,’ =‘ my 
friends.” ‘The same idiom ours elsewhere. The

X $E was a metal bell with a wooden

tongue, shaken. to call attention to announce- 
ments, or along the ways to cal! people together. 
Heaven would employ Conf. to proclaim and

call men's attention to the truth and right (A) N

25. THE COMPARATIVE MERITS OF THE MUSIC 
or SuuN AND Woo. ud was the name of tho 
music made by Shun, perfect in melody and 
sentiment, M. was the musíe of king Woo,

also perfect in melody, but breathing thé mar- 
tial air, indicative of its author.

26, THE DISREGARD OF WHAT I8 ESSENTIAL 
VITIATES ALL SERVICES. The meaning of the

| ch. turns upon fuf yA- faf A. or A {f 
| am ee yey is ess, to rulers, At to

beremonies, and N to mourning. Tf they be

wanting, one has no standpoint to view what 
are only shams or semblances.

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

BOOK IV.

es

IT 
aS TROTTER

a

MEISE SS

zl»

'

CHAPTER 1. The Master said,

LE JIN.

“Tt is virtuous manners which

constitute the excellence of a neighbourhood. If a man in select- 
ing a residence, do not fix on one where such prevail, how can he

be wise?"

Cuarter II. The Master said, Those who are without virtue, 
cannot abide long either in a condition of poverty and hardship, or

in a condition of enjoyment. 
desire virtue."be wise?"

Cuarter II. The Master said, Those who are without virtue, 
cannot abide long either in a condition of poverty and hardship, or

in a condition of enjoyment. 
desire virtue."

HEADING or TMS Boox.— M i py. 
‘Virtue in a neighbourhood— No. IV '—Such is 
thetitleof this fourth Book, which is mostly occu- 
pied with the subject of 4 2 To render that term 
invariably by benevolence, would by no means 
' suit many of the chapters. See II. I, 2. Virtue, 
as a general term, would answer better. The 
embodiment of virtue demands an acquaintance 
with ceremonies and music, treated of in the 
last book ; and this, it is said, is the reason why 
the one subject immediately follows the other.

- RULE FoR THE SELECTION OF A RESIDENCE.

According to the JA m 5 families made a 
„ and 5 AR a Hm. which we might style,

therefore, a hamlet or village. There are other 
estimates of the number of its component

households. I up. 2d tone, a verb, ‘to dwell 
in? Jt , Up, 3d tone, is the same as 29. ‘wise,’

The virtuous rest in virtue; the wise

‘wisdom.’ So, not unfrequently, below. Friend 
ship, we have seen, is for the aid of virtue (I. 8, 
8), and the same should be the object desired 
in selecting a residence. :

2. ONLY TRUE VIRTUE ADAPTS A MAN FOR THE

VARIED CONDITIONS OF LIFE. K Sto bind,’ is

used for what binds, as an onth, a covenant ; 
and here, the metaphor being otherwise directed, 
it denotes a condition of poverty and distress, 
Nl. ‘gain,’ profit, used as a verb, = , to 
desire,’ to covet.’ „ ‘to rest in virtue,’

being virtuous without effort. Fil E. ‘to 
desire virtue,’ being virtuous because it is the 
best policy. Obs. how 4 following — and

makes those terms adjectives. p B].

*may not. JR BE. ‘cannot. The inability 
is moral,

3 CONFUCIAN

N

— 
E

{a

BNO

EHH

alio se

v

ANE

am 
A

~ 
© 
w 
7

* 
To

[ d

(rep

. Ig 
“aE 
QN

4,

CHAPTER III. The Máster said,

ANALECTS. 
A El ae Be 
25. st, Y, — T

x. 
E 
I

S

O

ub 
I

Ir

x

d» 14 
„N. A. 
| iEHH

alio se

v

ANE

am 
A

~ 
© 
w 
7

* 
To

[ d

(rep

. Ig 
“aE 
QN

4,

CHAPTER III. The Máster said,

ANALECTS. 
A El ae Be 
25. st, Y, — T

x. 
E 
I

S

O

ub 
I

Ir

x

d» 14 
„N. A. 
| i

IT

pans] 
rv.

— ł 
bt

=

|

* 
TEN

&

4 
1

„It is only the truly virtuous

man, who can love; of who can hate, others.”

Cuarter IV. The Master said, Are the, will be set on virtue, 
there will be no practice of wickedness.”

CHAPTER V. I. The Master said, ‘Riches and honours are what 
men desire. If it cannot be obtained i in the ‘proper way, they should 
not be held. Poverty and meanness are what men dislike. If it 
cannot be obtained in thé proper way; they should not be avoided.

2. 
requirements of that name? 
3. 
meal, act contrary to virtüe.

3. ONLY IN THE GOOD MAN ARE EMOTIONS OF 
LOVE AND HATRED RIGHT, This ch. containing 
an important truth, is ACD with the

X Bh . x. 15. Ay and BB. Aux (read woo) 
are both verbs, up. 3d tone. 
4, THE VIRTUOUS WILL PRESERVES FROM ALL

WICKEDNESS. i not merely. if, but

tif really, Comp. the apostle's sentiment, 1. 
John, iii. 9, * Whosoever is born of God doth 
not commit sin.’

& ‘Tue DEVOTION OF THE KEUN-TSZE TO

VIRTUE. 1. For the antecedent to x in the 
recurring c. we are to look tg the foll. 
verba, È (up. 3d tone) and $- We might

translate the first F KY id 43 E “if they

cannot be obtained, &c,' but this would not suit 
the second case, *the way, h e4.the

X

“If a superior man: abandon virtue, how can he fulfil the

“The superior man does not, even for the space of a single 
‘In moments of haste, he cleaves to it. 
In seasons of danger, he cleaves to it."

T J ] 
s: " | 
proper way, If we supply a nom. to EB and 
. it must be ay F —He will not ‘abide 
in, nor go away from,’ riches and honours. 2. 
e read woo, up. 1st tone, * how.’ „ name,“ 
not reputation, but the name of a Keun-tsce,

which he bears. 3. 2 £t x B The 
space in which a meal can be finished ;’ E R

(interch. with c=) ei 20 ànd jA hti are well-which he bears. 3. 2 £t x B The 
space in which a meal can be finished ;’ E R

(interch. with c=) ei 20 ànd jA hti are well-

known expressions, the Es for haste and 
confusion, the latter for ehenge and danger, 
but it is not easy to trace the attaching of those

meanings to the characters. Jit. *to fall down, 
and jili the same, but the for. with the face up

the other with the face down. JA N Ris

Comp. Horace's.* Omnis in Noc sion.

e 
—

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

12

N

ERES

v

1 
a

TTS

tad

TAE

v

du 
(Noi ob Nez BR

\ 
-

E 
B

Nr -f 
Te

STE 
SHR Ni

o

Pe >

v

T.

F

TT

Eu 
RASA

2 
5

e. 
w

* 
Faved

seats 
x

Cuarter VI. 1. The Master said, “I have not seen a person 
who loved virtue, or one who hated what was not virtuous. He 
who loved virtue, would esteem nothing above it: He who hated 
what is not virtuous, would practise virtue in such a way that he 
would not allow any thing that is not virtuous to approach his

erson. 
i 2. Is any one able for one day to apply his strength to virtue? 
I have not seen the case in which his strength would be insufficient.

3. ‘Should there possibly be any such case, I have. not seen it."

CHATTER VIL The Master said, „The faults of men are char- 
acteristic of the class to which they belong. By observing a man's 
faults, it may be known that he is virtuous.”

&is praise.“ 3. zx bere te Stay ta 1 05 
of doubt.’ XC. & transpos., as in I. 26.

7. A MAN I8 NOT TO BE UTTERLY CONDEMNED 
BECAUSE HE HAS FAULTS. Such is the senti- 
ment found in this ch., in which we may say, 
however, that Conf. is liuble to the charge

brought against Tsze-hea, I. 7. X Pd 351

stands absolutely,—‘As to the faults of men. 4

=45 N. and I^ - (E. — Euh man follows

6. A LAMENT BECAUSE OF THE RARITY OF THE 
LOVE OF VIRTUB; AND ENCOURAGEMENT TO PRAC-stands absolutely,—‘As to the faults of men. 4

=45 N. and I^ - (E. — Euh man follows

6. A LAMENT BECAUSE OF THE RARITY OF THE 
LOVE OF VIRTUB; AND ENCOURAGEMENT TO PRAC-

TISE vintuR, 1. The first four E belong to 
the vorbs UF and RE, and give them the force 
of participles. In ERE . # belongs 
„t N AE EN 
Commonly, he or those who, but some- 
times also that or those things which.’ fa

im. ‘to add to.“ Morr., char. . translates 
the sentence wrongly— He who loves virtue 
aud benevolence can have nothing more said in

his class. Obs. the force of ya ; ‘what goes

beyond. The faults are the excesses of the 
general tendencies. Comp. Goldsmith's line, 
And even his failings leant to virtue's side’

32 CONFUCIAN 
== 3 
— | y te 
1 tH, 
Ae Ly

=

Fr 
eee

* 
& 
o 
v|

RENS

Kone 
& Beam

Aut

u

Nd

— 
J 
Ww oy 
in

— 
— m

b,

Eek 
E

zm 
HHT Reg

2 
E

\ 
d 
3

= 
bey 
n

Du

LS 
E 
w

2) RON) 
j eem 
ESO

CHAPTER VIII. The Master said, If a man in the morning hear 
the right way, he may die in the evening without regret.”

CHAPTER IX. The Master said, “A scholar, whose mind i is set 
on truth, and who is ashamed of bad clothes and bad food, is not fit 
to be discoursed. with."

CHAPTER X. The Master said, “The rd man, in the world, l 
does not set his mind either:for any thing, or against any thing 
what is right he will follow.”

CHAPTER XI. The Master said, “The superior man thinks of 
virtue; the small man thinks of comfort. The superior man thinks 
of the sanctions of law; the small man thinks of favours which he 
may receive."

8. THE IMPORTANCE OF KNOWING THE RIGHT | E, 
war. One is perplexed to translate F here.

Choo defines it— E Hy EE HE T IE ‘the

principles of what is right in events and things.”

Better is the expl. in py ae 5 üt Em 
én 25 p x H. 38 is the path’—z, ey

to be discoursed with,’ i. e., about 4 „or 
*truth, which perhaps is the best translation 
of the term in places like this.

10. RIGHTEOUSNESS 18 THE RULE OF THEto be discoursed with,’ i. e., about 4 „or 
*truth, which perhaps is the best translation 
of the term in places like this.

10. RIGHTEOUSNESS 18 THE RULE OF THE

KEUN-T8ZE'S PRACTICE, F 2 2

*The relation of the Leun-teze to the SD d 
1. e., to all things presenting themselves to him.

of action—' which is in accordance with our 
nature,’ Man is formed for this, and if he die 
without coming to the knowledge of it, his 
death is no better than that of a beast. One 
would fain recognize, in such sentences as this, 
a vague apprehension of some higher truth or 
, than Chi. sages have been able to propound. 
—Ho An takes a diff. view of the whole ch., 
and makes it a lament of Confucius that he was 
likely to die without hearing of right principles 
prevailing in the world.—‘ Could 1 once herr of 
the prevalence of right principles, I could die 
the same evening.’ 
9, THE PURSUIT OF TRUTH SHOULD RAISB A

MAN ABOYB BEING ASHAMED OF POVERTY. zx

, read teih, is explained by b: + ‘to set 
the mind exclusively on? We may take the 
last clause thus :—'his is the according with,

and keeping near to (E. low. 3d tone, I or

3b righteousness.’ This gives each char. its 
signification. 
11. THE DIFFERENT MINDINGS OF THE SUPE- 
CLS 
RIOR AND THE 8MALL MAN, tu is here emphatic,

=‘cherishes and plans about.’ , ‘earth,’ ‘the

ground,’ is here defined— Br jE Z Z. *the

rest or comforts one dwells amidst. May it 
not be used somewhat in our sense of earthly ? 
— thinks of what is eartlily?

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS,

H 
|

; H 
—

wn 
:

ye

O 
— 
X 
x 
&I

E 
NE. 
i

a

EN

[ d

He 
y. 
Li

—

Th. 
| Bd, E = 
[5] H Tu FZ.

Cuoarrer XII. The Master said, “He who acts with a constan 
view to his own advantage will be much murmured against.”E 
NE. 
i

a

EN

[ d

He 
y. 
Li

—

Th. 
| Bd, E = 
[5] H Tu FZ.

Cuoarrer XII. The Master said, “He who acts with a constan 
view to his own advantage will be much murmured against.”

Cnarrer XIII. The Master said, “Is a prince able to govern hi 
kingdom with the complaisance proper to the rules of propriety 
what difficulty will he have? If he cannot govern it. with tha 
complaisance, what has he to do with the rules of propriety?”

Cuarrer XIV. The Master said, “A man should say, Y am not 
concerned that I have no place, I am concerned how I may fit my 
self for one. I am not concerned that I am not known, I seek to 
worthy to be known,”

CnAprER XV. 1, The Master said, “Sin, my doctrine is that of a 
all-pervading unity." "The disciple Tsäng replied, “Yes.”

2. The Master went out, and the'othér disciples asked, sayir

12, Tur CONSEQUENCE OF His CONDUGT. | an official situation. B JA II. is to be ct

. up. 2d tone, = ; ‘to accord with, to pleted fy 9n 3r . it fr.

A MED, : : 
lie alongside’ — He who acts along the line of IN. CospDCTUR cotinine EAT OPA FERT

gain.“ : . ‘ This e is sai the n 
13. Tur INFLUENCE IN GOVERNMENT oF CNE. | ING ONY, This chap: 3 be 
profound in the Lur Yu. 1. t

MONILS ONSERVEQ IN THEIR PROPER SPIRIT. 
LN Z To myself it octurs to t

AJ 
hz

[ d

=

8110

| ETN 
Comuni

Č

D

TOES 
Nc

—

Dd an e 2 A Fit , & e., they are a

adindys, Zi. pti - Pe incer 
hendindys. $5 se EU zZ Ei. * the sincer, and 
subs, of cer., the spirit of it, us we should say. 
Comp. All in I. 12. n ‘to govern? 
Thln mean. is found in the Diet. p qu {iy i

sec III. 8, 
14. ADVISING TO SELF-CUTIVATION. Comp. I.

163. Hore, au thore, AY not being imper. wa 
muat supply a nominative. PL ia place,’ é e.

*my doctrines have one thing which 
them,’ but such an expos. has not be 
ed by any Chin, eonim. — E 
made to contain the copula and 
N. Eri Se 22 eat t*my doctrines have one thing which 
them,’ but such an expos. has not be 
ed by any Chin, eonim. — E 
made to contain the copula and 
N. Eri Se 22 eat t

a 49, and e it is said, AH a, 
‘refers to all affairs and all things.’ 
shows us clearly enough what the ¢ 
unity intended by Cont. was. It ws 
man's nature, of which all the relati 
ties of lilo aro oply the developme

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

= —r YL (paur wary | =] 
Uu l^ . El 
FEE (ELTE » [Fre »

m+

Ld

YE 
NR 
| Tapes e217

v

a 
2

K 
Š

T

\ 
;

*

N 
a

C

BS > Sa 
SONI

~ 
c 
O

|

* 
E

{TSS eam

„What do his words mean?” Tsing said, “The doctrine of our mas- 
ter is to be true to the principles of our nature and the benevolent 
exercise of them to others, —this and nothing more.’

Cuaprer XVI. The Master said, The mind of the superior man 
s conversant with righteousness; ; the mind of the mean man is 
onversant with gain." 
Cuabrer XVII. The Master said, “When we see men of worth, 
ve should think of equalling them; when we sce men of a contrary 
haracter, we should turn inwards and examine ourselves,” 
‘Cuavter XVIII. The Master said, “In serving his parents, a 
on may remonstrate with them, but gently ; when he sees that they 
lo not incline to follow Ais advice, he shows an increased degree 
»f reverence, but does not abandon Ais purpose; and ‘should they 
nish him, he does not allow himself to murmur.’

! and Ut MAN, = |B, ‘to understand.’ M is here

au’ 
" YA, cel | Hn to he de Sie on mand may be compared with the 
: edi GENE from Np, ‘the heart, AU Hebrew eth.

‘centre,’

which seem to be two things, 
being 
snpounded of FH. * middle,’ and 
and 31H of In ‘as,’ and . The cen-

8 y 
heart'—1, the cgo, and the ‘as heart'—the I 
Lopadu* with others.

17. THE LESSONS TO BE LEARNED FROM on- 
SERVING MEN OP DIFFERENT CHARACTERS. Of

the final particles ta and th, it is said, T

mi is duty- doing, 
consideration, or from fie impulse, of one’s 
self; zn is duty doing, on the principle ofthe final particles ta and th, it is said, T

mi is duty- doing, 
consideration, or from fie impulse, of one’s 
self; zn is duty doing, on the principle of

wity. The ch. is important, showing that 
ly claimed to unfold and enforce duties 
hy man’s mental constitution. Ile

i moral philosopher. Obs. HE, up. 
es.” Some say that PH A must 
b: own disciples, and that had they 
Conf., we should have read 5 4

icism can't be depended on. iin B,

' emphatie—* and nothing morc.’

RIGHTEOUSNESS AND SELPISHNESS 
IHE SUPERIOR MAN AND THE SMALL

^r Rr M D SERERE ter e

something of a repressive, expansive, warning 
force.’

18. How A SON MAY REMONSTRATE WITH IIIS 
See the ne sp, 
XII. i. 15. ie. up. Ist tone, ‘mildly, =the 
Tt fe qe Ps BL 
AR is the will of the parents. tig = HE 
mM 2 ek ‘again increasing his filial rever- 
ence, the xu o" Az 2 of the P RJ.

i is not abandoning his purpose of re-

PARENTS ON THEIR PAULTS.

5 and not us 4ü IN says in the

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 35 
pre — rr Eu =| 
Ge 43 5| AM is ur = 
wee — MT. px à [UJ [24

PA

e

E 
mK

Ld

vib S Ri

o

a.

Se

[d

Malis

o

Tsk

SETS

\ 
4.

I. 
Sr e

EES NOI S-

[ d

TUTTI

* 
Ld 
e

oF 
=

NE 
cm

© 
= 
& 
E 
Ld 
0

E

Bax 
NRA

"

NGC MENS 
SANE

=

ENNER

S$

N HB 7 
*

Hi f.

CnaPrER XIX. The Master said, “While his parents are alive, 
the son muy not go abroad to a distance. If he does go abroad, he 
inust have a fixed place to which he goes."

Cuarrer XX. The Master said, “If the son for three years does 
not alter from the way of his father, he may he called filial."

Cuarrer XXI. The Master said, „The years of parents may by

no means not be kept in the memory, as an occasion at once for joy 
and for fear."

Cuavrer XXII. The Master said, „The reason why the ancients 
did not readily give utterance €o their words, was that they feared 
lest their actions should not come up to them."

CnarrER XXIII. The Master said, “The cautious seldom err.“

comment given by Ho An, R n XE XCnarrER XXIII. The Master said, “The cautious seldom err.“

comment given by Ho An, R n XE X

i. * pot daring to go against the mind of his 
Kà »

g

meaning of unforgetting thoughtfulness.’ 
22. THE VIRTUE OF TUE ANCIENTS SEEN IN 
THEIR SLOWNESS TO SPEAK. Obs. the force of

narents, HA = toiled and pained,’ what the 
: P * the two a The not coming forth of the

A All Says, RE 2 D fL should they 
beat him till the blood flows.“ 
19. A nox oft NOT TO 60 TO A DISTANCE

WHERE HE WILL NOT BE ABLE TO PAY THE PUR

TS — . 
SERVICES TO Itl PARENTS, jj =— FE fi. a 
fixed direction or quarter, whence hé may be 
recalled, if necessary.

20, A REVEFITION OF FAY oF T. II.

21. WIAT grrect THE AGÉ OF PARENTS 
BMOULD DAVE ON THEIR CHILDREN. Hl, it is

snil, conveys here fes 1 T E . the

words of the ancients was shame about the 
not coming up to them of their actions.’

23. ADVANTAGE OF CAUTION, Collie's version, 
which I have adopt., is here happy. X sce cli. 
2. The ‘binding’ here is of onc's-sclt, selt-re- 
atraint,=‘caution.’ us loses tt, Z re- 
terring to whatev. bus. the cautious may be en- 
gaged in. Z, foll. an act. verb, often makes it 
neuter; at least, a neuter verb renders the ex- 
pression best in English.

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

JM Fp GF III X 
Rr sy ee 
Fro JV AA ER E

Áo.

Cuarrer XXIV. The Master said, “The superior man wishes to 
be slow in his words and earnest in his conduct."

CHAPTER XXV. The Master said, “Virtue is not left to’ stand 
alone. He who practises it will have neighbours."

CHAPTER XXVI. Tsze-yew said, «In serving a prince, frequent 
remonstrances lead to disgrace. Between fr lends, frequent reproofs, 
make the friendship distant."

21. Reve or THE KEUN-TSZE 
WORDS AND ACTIONS. 
28. THE VIRTUOUS ARE NOT LEFT ALONE ;—

AN ENCOURAGEMENT TO VIRTUE. M. ‘ father- 
less; here--solitary, friendless. {ili x N=

(i fu Ji ar AL Zz I. ‘it is not the nature

I

ABOUT HIS [ of virtue to be left to stand alone. Ap gee ch.AN ENCOURAGEMENT TO VIRTUE. M. ‘ father- 
less; here--solitary, friendless. {ili x N=

(i fu Ji ar AL Zz I. ‘it is not the nature

I

ABOUT HIS [ of virtue to be left to stand alone. Ap gee ch.

I; here, generally, for friends, associates of like 
mind.

26. A LESSON TO COUNSELLORS AND FRIENDS. 
Hy, up. 4th tone, read shd, ‘frequently, under- 
stood here in ref. to, remonstrating or reproving.

——U— Y rr

BOOK V. KUNG-YAY CHANG. 
Yu X vey [BS 
ds E Xu Ht, d bes

2 2 Voci ZF

CHAPTER I. 1. The Master said of oW. ay Ch'ang that he might 
be wived; although he was put in bonds, he had not been guilty of 
any crime, 1 he gave him his own daughter to wife.

2. Of Nan Yung he said that if the country were well governed, he

HEADING OF THIS no. — N ‘a R p

DR Kung-yay Ch‘ang, the surname and name |

of the first individual spoken of in it, heads this 
book, which is chiefly occupied with the judg- 
ment of the sage on the character of several of 
his disciples and others. As the decision fre-

quently turns on their being possessed of that 
jin, or perfect. virtue, which is so conspicuous 
in the last book. this is the reason, it is suid, 
why the one immediately follows the other. As 
Tsze-kung appears in the book several times, 
some have fancied that it was compiled by his 
disciples,

COXFUCIAN 
un ED. Yr: 
dur n, Se dim

- 
O

© 
~ 
v

SHS,

Y

i 
all

=

E

W

ANALECTS,

3

N

O

HOT

A

[ d

EENE

kde

V 
-

Ld

SE pa ne

V 
* 
- 
[d

j PNE

would not be out of office, and if it were ill governed, he would escape

punishment and disgrace. 
elder brother to wife.

He gave him the daughter of his own

Carrer II. The Master said, of Tsze-tseen, “Of superior virtue

indeed is such a man! 
could this man have acquired this

Carrer III. Tsze-kung asked,

If there were not vir tuous men in Loo, how

character?" 
* What do von sav of me, Tsze?

The Master said, “You are an utensil. i ‘What utensil?” “A genimed

acrificial utensil.”If there were not vir tuous men in Loo, how

character?" 
* What do von sav of me, Tsze?

The Master said, “You are an utensil. i ‘What utensil?” “A genimed

acrificial utensil.”

1. CONPVCIUS IN MARRIAGE-MAKING was 
QUIDED NY CHARACTER, AND NOT BY FORTUNE, 
1. Of Kung-yay Ch'ang, tho’ the son-in-law of 
Conf., nothing certain is known, and his tablet is 
only 3d on the west, among the à rexAei. Silly 
Jegends are told of his being put in prison from 
his bringing suspicion on himself by his knowl. 
of the language of birds. Choo He approves the

interpr. of AR us mean. a black rope,’ with 
which criminals were ancientiy bound KD in 
prison. 3t. and in par. 2, up. 3d tone, ‘to wive,’ 
*to give to to wife.' , in both par. = 4 
daughter? 2. Nan Yung, another of the dis- 
ciples, is now 4th, east, in the outer hall. The 
discussions about who he'was, and whether he 
in to be identified with BE EA jj, and several

other ali4ses, are very perplexing. See n

Urb rion and SHEDS Sfr, I. 24. ES, ‘to 
Iny, or be laid aside,’ here, f. e., from office. .

*to put to death." has also the lighter meaning 
or ^ distera ae.“ We cannot tell whether Cont. 
$4 giving his impress, of Yung's char., or refer- 
ring to events that had taken place.

2. "Dur KECN AZR FORVE BY INTERCOURSE

WITH OTHER Keun-tszz. IT'sze-tscen, by sur- 
name $ a^ (= E- and said to be i 9. fh» and

named pa Jk appears to have been of some

note among the disci. of Conf, both as an 
administrator and writer, tho’ his tablet is now 
only 2d west, in the outer hall. What chiefly 
disting. him, as appears here, was his cultivation 
of the friendship of men ot ability and virtue,

. A is more than ‘this man.“ It is 5 
itt X. fa man such as this. Sea the at 
Jii in loc. ‘The first f tho

second, this virtue” The paraphrasts complete

the last clause thus:—]Ur yg. {iJ Bir IK 
2 3 Wr pa P, * what friends could this

man have chosen to complete this virtue?’second, this virtue” The paraphrasts complete

the last clause thus:—]Ur yg. {iJ Bir IK 
2 3 Wr pa P, * what friends could this

man have chosen to complete this virtue?’

3. WikRETO "'szr-KUNG nab ATPAINED. Seo 
I. 10, II. 12. The SH pli were vessels richly 
adorned, uscd to contain grain-offerings in the 
Imper, ancestral temples. Under the Hea dyn., 
they were called H, and 3. under the Yin. 
See the Le Ke. XIV. 27. While the sage did 
not grant to Tsze that he was a Aea-tsze (Hf. 
12), he made bim ‘a vessel of honour, valuable 
and fit for use on high ocensions,

»

is ‘this man;

3

oo

zm

X% 
3

<i

.

W 
All 
SN

Ld

sf se TT

N 
i

ESPERE

ES

DK 
mA

He TL,

CONTFUCIAN ANALECTS.

M

CnuarrER IV. 1. Some one said, ** Yung is truly virtuous, but he

is not ready with his tongue."

2. The Master said, What is the good of being ready with the 
tongue? They who meet men with smartnesses of speech, for the

most part procure themselves hatred.

I know not whether he be

truly virtuous, but why should he show readiness of the tongue?" 
CHAPTER V. The Master was wishing Tseih-teaou K'ae to enter on

official employment. He replied, 
assurance Of THIS.”

CuarrEn VI. The Master said,

will get upon a raft, and ‘float about on the sea.

J am not yet able to rest in the

The Master was pleased.

*My doctrines make no way. I 
He that will ac-

company me will be Yew, I dare to say." Tsze-loo hearing this was

4. Or Yen Ycwc. READINESS WITH THE 
PI 
TONGUE NO PART OF VIRTUE, 1. n SE styled

4h „ has his tablet the second, on the east 
of Conf. own tablet, among ‘the wise ones.’ His 
father was a worthless character (see VI. 4), 
but he himself was the opposite. ' means 
*ability, generally, then ‘ability of speech,’ 
often, though not here, with the bad sense of 
artfulness und flattery. 2. Conf. would not 
grant that Yung was . but his not being 1 
X^

NI 
(read Let. See Dict. ), ‘smartnesses of speech. tia

was in his favour rather than otherwise. HNI 
(read Let. See Dict. ), ‘smartnesses of speech. tia

was in his favour rather than otherwise. H

is here ‘why,’ rather than ‘how,’ The first T 
JH T. is a gen. statement, not having, like

the sec., special reference to Yen Yung. In the

nt Sit, A t H = Fa JB [ic rena

as one sentence;—‘I do not know how the 
virtnous should also use readiness of speech.’ 
‘This is not so good as the received interpretation.

b. Tsentvreaou K'AE'8 OPINION OF THE 
QUALIFICATIONS NECESSARY TO TAKING OFFICE. 
'I'aeii-teaou, now 6th, on the east, in the out.

was 2 changed into bi. on the accession 
Z% Eh A. D. 155, whose 
name was also BY. The diff, in the ch. is with

Tp —what does it refer to ? and with . 
what is its force? In the ch. about the dis- 
ciples in the Re S&. it is said that K'ae was 
reading in the Shoo-king, when Conf. spoke to 
him about taking office, and he pointed to the

book, or some particular passage in it, saying, 
‘Iam not yet able to rest in the assurance of

of the Emperor

n B-iH E AE FD this’ It may have

been so. Obs. the force of the Z ;—' There is

as yet my want of faith of this.’

6. CONFUCIUS PROPOSING TO WITHDRAW 
FROM THE WORLD:—A LESSON-TO TSZ E- I. oo. 
Tsze-loo supposed his master roally meant to 
leave the world, and the idea of floating along 
the coasts, pleased his ardent temper, while he 
was delighted with the compliment paid to 
himself. But Conf. only expressed in this way 
his regret at the backwardness of men to re-

ceive his doctrines. fnt Br JR A is diff. of

interpretation. Choo IIe takes tf as being for

hell, was styled d d His nune originally | aX. ‘to cut out clothes, ‘to estimate, discrimi-

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

nd

B

Suis E=

v

t

NDS: 
EWN

[ d

BEES

o

e

|

P4 [I 
10

NE

R

SEDRE

=

(Eat Hit

[ d

ETT

xis 
T

M 
I 
2 10 - 
TINERE

TASIE

\ 
4 
o

BANN E 
ZAN

O

= 
EL VERS .

[ d

TEMES

»

ETERNE 
SS See an 
E

[E 
4c

~

-

o 
v

N

ET 
EN 
SA

= 
2 
LI 
—

Ar "v »SEDRE

=

(Eat Hit

[ d

ETT

xis 
T

M 
I 
2 10 - 
TINERE

TASIE

\ 
4 
o

BANN E 
ZAN

O

= 
EL VERS .

[ d

TEMES

»

ETERNE 
SS See an 
E

[E 
4c

~

-

o 
v

N

ET 
EN 
SA

= 
2 
LI 
—

Ar "v »

glad, upon which the Master said, “Yew is fonder of daring than I 
am. He does not exercise, his judgment upon matters."

CHATTER VII. 1. Mang Woo asked about Tsze-loo, whether he 
was perfectly virtuous. The Master said, “I do not know."

2. He asked again, when the Master replied, “In a kingdom of a 
thousand chariots, Yew might be employed to manage the military 
levies, but I do not know whether he be perfectly virtuous."

8. “And what do you say of Kew?“ The Master replied, “In a 
city of a thousand families, or a house of a hundred chariots, Ke 
might be employed as governor, but I do not know whether he is

erfectly virtuous.”

4, “What do you say of Chih?” The Master replied, “With his 
sash girt and standing in a court, Ch'ih might be employed to con- 
verse with the visitors and guests, but I do not know whether he 
is perfectly virtuous.”

nate,’ and hence the mean. in the transl. An old | 4. . 3t 1 8 
W i 25 ee II. 6. 2. F 3E 7 H. 
comm. ZÈ, keeping the mean, of ý ex- : T 
d N55 X. Keeping is $ à see I. 5. „properly, ‘revenues,’ ‘taxes,’ but

plains— duc Br N N ME M »="MY | the 5 DE soldiers contributed being regul.

meaning is not to be found in the raft. An- by the amt. of the rev., the term is used here 
other old writer makes =e and putting | for the forces, of military levies. 3. Ed see III. 
a stop at. expl.—'Yew is fond of daring; He | 6. H Ed Z . in opp. to F Fe Z Bg. 
cannot go beyond himself to find my. meaning. | was the secondary fief, the territory appropri- 
£d. here I date to say. ated to the highest nobles or officers in n lH or

7. Or Tszk-Loo, Tszr-vEW,AND Tszr-nwa. | state, suppos. also to comprehend 1000 fami?

o

l

— 
—

&I

40 CONFUCIAN AXALECTS. 
Ha Ly | ] 
J STE WA — ly 
fa

E

II

fl 
XE

e 
e

RKE

I 
AUR

Bho

TA

|o

l

— 
—

&I

40 CONFUCIAN AXALECTS. 
Ha Ly | ] 
J STE WA — ly 
fa

E

II

fl 
XE

e 
e

RKE

I 
AUR

Bho

TA

|

DUSUBERI 
zDECQUEEe SI

O

M

ETC 
SER

EE 
RN

XL 
=

SEN HE SRS

e

Sth Poe 
Se 
JKR

\ 
"

: ^w fe) ^

hea SUN N H., Hl. EM fl

CHar TR VIII. 1, The Master said to Tsze-kung, “Which do 
you consider superior, yourself or Hwuy?"

2. Tsze-kuirg replied, “How dare I compare myself with Hwuy? 
Hwuy hears one. point and knows all about a subject; I hear one 
point and know a second.”

3. The Master said, “You are not equal to him. 
you are not equal to him.”

CuAPTER IX. 1. Tsae Yu being asleep during the day time, the 
Master said, *Rotten wood cannot be carved; a wall of dirty earth 
will not receive the trowel. This Yu!——whiat is the use of my re- 
proving him?“

2. The Master said, “At first, my way with men was to hear 
their words, and give them credit for their conduct. Now my way 
is to hear their words, and look at their conduct. It is from Yu 
that I have learned to make this change.”

I grant you,

lies. A Z se, ‘Tq be its governor.’ This isa mean. af BI—)A 5t + as in the transl. 3.

pec. idiom. 4. Ch'ih, surnamed ^ py, and

styled E, having now the 14th place, 
west, in the out. hall, was famous among the 
disciples for his knowl. of rules of cer, and 
those especially relating to dress and inter-

course. § ijj. low. 1st tone. 24 and Ze may be

distinguished, the former indiceting neighbour- 
ing princes visiting the court, the lat, ministers 
and oflicers of the state present as guests.

8. SurkmiOjiTY or YEN Hwoy xo Tsze-

Kune. 2. BY, ‘to look to, ‘to look up to, here 
= Ef, to compare with.’ ‘One’ is the begin. of 
numbers, and ‘ten` the, completion; hence the

i= af ‘to allow,’ to grant to. Ho An gives 
A

here the comm. of 15 Jk; (about A. D. 50),

who interprets strangely, —‘I and vou are both 
not equal to him,’ saying that Conf. thus com- 
forted Tsze-kung.

9. Tue IDLENESS OF TsAE Yu AND ITS RE»

1 " r, >who interprets strangely, —‘I and vou are both 
not equal to him,’ saying that Conf. thus com- 
forted Tsze-kung.

9. Tue IDLENESS OF TsAE Yu AND ITS RE»

1 " r, >

PROOF. 1. 12 a Bit, *In the case of Yu! 
Ra has here the force of an exelam.; 8o, below. 
ah a strong term, to mark the severity of she

El is superfluous. ‘Fhe char. 
If not,

reproof. 2.

were probably added by a transcriber. 
they should head another chapter.

CONFUCIAN 
— — 
— xx 
xx] xz ]

ER 
DUE

~ 
SESH

m 
Sad sis

D SERES

SN 
2 
＋

Not 
EE

Hn 
SED 
= 
(Y

A.

ANALECTS. 1

ua

s 
d

2

S

. 
\ 
* 
4

SEI oH

o

i

Saal

*

[9]

ELSE

v

8 
T

SEXE DIN Ls

kz

Jud.

CHAPTER X, The Master said, “I have not seen a firm and

unbending man.“

Some one replied, There is Shin Ch‘ang.”

^ Ch'ang," said the Master, “is under the influence of his passions; 
how can he be pronounced firm and unbending?" 
CHAPTER XI. Tsze-kung said, What I do not wish men to do to 
o ?

me, I also wish not to do to men."

have not attained to that,”

The Master said, “Tsze, you

CuarrER XII. "Tsze-kung said, “The Master's personal displays 
of his principles, and ordinary descriptions of them may be heard,

His discourses about man’s nature

be heard." .

10. UNRENDING VIRTHE CANNOT COEXIST WITH 
INDULGENCE OP THE Passions, Shin Ch‘ang 
(there are several aliuses, but they are disputed, ) 
was one of the minor disciples, of whom little

or nothing is known. He was styled P3 Jk: 
and his place is 31st, east, in the out, ranges. 
J| is to be understood with reference to vir-

tue. $^ is as Bir Af. *what the passions 
love,’ ‘lusts,’ 1$ f3 are said to R H., 
and not x BE- I have transl. accordingly, 
11. Tur DIFFICULTY or ATTAINING TO THE 
NOT WISHING TO DO TO OTHERS AS WE WISH 
THEM NOT TO DO TO n It is said— fU 2 HL 
fE jt Z pa 5 . ‘this ch. shows that 
the no Z (freed. frum selfishness) is not easily 
reached, In the Jig XIII. 3, it is said

didi ER Nm A BA If Dy hth F N.didi ER Nm A BA If Dy hth F N.

what you do not like when done to yourself, 
d not do to others. The dif. between it and

, and the way of Heaven, cannot

the sent. here is said to be that of 7 4, treci»

procity,' and T *benevolence, or the highest

virtue, nppar. in the adv. and frt. the one 
prohibitive, and the other a simple, unconstrain- 
ed, negation, The golden rule of the Gospel 
is higher than both,—'Do ye unto others as 
ye would that others should do unto you.’ 
BB =J JH SE or In N. ‘to add upon, 
*to do to.'

12. THE GRADUAL WAY IN WHICH Cowruclus 
CONMBNICATED HIS DOCTRINES. So the lesson 
of this ch. is summed up, but there is hardly 
another more perplexing to & transl. Y E is 
the comm, name for essays, elegant literary 
compositions, Of course that mean, is out of the 
question, Whatever ie figured and brilliant is 
X. whatever is orderly and defined is E. The

eomm., aceordingly, make X to be the deport»

ment and manners of the sage, and y his

ordin. discourses, but fal is an inapprop. term

4 CONFUCIAN 
- = 
Ju e E 
= my 
ny Hii

ERN

O

KE

NSR

v

SARS 
ASE

E 
S 
v, 
v

E

15

SRU 
*

N 
4

dixi 
^ EN ct

8E

*

eu 
the 
: SS

o è

CHAPTER XIII.

ANALECTS. 
AAS

xx] dUd EE

T II.

E E à

ERN EOS 
SSS WAS 
CIN eS SEAS aI

a

* 
POR 
iE

PE

When Tsze-loo heard anything, if he had not

yet carried it into practice, he was only afraid lest he should -hear

something else.

Cuarter XIV.  Tsze-kung asked saying, “On what ground did

Kung-wän get that title of wax?“

The Master said, “He was of an

active nature and yet fond of learning, and he was not ashamed to 
ask and learn of his inferiors!—On these grounds he has been styled

WAN.”

CHAPTER XV. The Master said of Tsze-ch‘an that he had four

of the characteristics of a superior

man:—in his conduct of himself,

he was humble; in serving his superiors, he was respectful; in nour-

ishing the people, he was “kind; inof the characteristics of a superior

man:—in his conduct of himself,

he was humble; in serving his superiors, he was respectful; in nour-

ishing the people, he was “kind; in

with reference to the former. These things, how- 
ever, were level to the cap. of the disci. generally, 
and they had the benefit of them. As to his 
yiews about man's nature, the gift of Heaven, 
and the way of Heaven generally ;--tliege he 
only commun. to those who were prepared to 
receive them. and Tsze-kung is supposed to 
have expressed himself thus, after being on some 
occasion so privileged.

13. THE ARDOUR or 'TSZE-LOO IN PRACTISING 
THE Master’s INSTRUCTIONS, *The concl. pfé

1 Fel is to be completed bff ZU 1 ít 
2 Wr Fig]. as in the translation.

14. AN EXAMPLE OF THE PRINCIPLE ON 
WHICH HONORARY POSTHUMOUS TITLES WERE

CONFERRED. X „corresponding nearly to our 
* accomplished, was the posthum. title given to

ordering the people, he was just."

, an officer of the state of Wei, and a 
LEA of Conf. Many of his nctions had 
been of a doubtful char., which made Tsze-kung 
stumble at the applica. to him of so hon, an 
epithet. But Conf. shows that, whatever he 
might otherwise be, he had those qualities, 
which justified his being so denominated. The 
rule for posth. titles in | China has been, and is, 
very much. De mortuis nil nisi bonum?

15. Tur EXCELLENT QUALITIES oF Tazs-

ona. Tsze-ch‘an, named JL FENG was

the chief min. of the state of Ching ( HP, the

ablest perhaps, 'and most upright, of all the 
statesmen among Conf. contemporaries. ‘The 
sage wept when he heard of his death. The old 
interpret. take i in the sense of ‘employ- 
ing.’ but it seems to express more, and ordur- 
ing, regulating.’

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

X» 
e

F L^ J AD Iss 
Eal — —

eat 
N 
dice

H 
H

NRIS?

O

e

=

© 
~ 
v 
Cd

— 
=

m 
jo

SSS 
rU

DE EE

O

EER

e 
w

AHDS 
=>

TD

— 
= 
— 
>

=p

les

O

Ein

(a 
REACH

[ d

Te

Sa uf 
(C

DE

[1]

b o deat 
N 
dice

H 
H

NRIS?

O

e

=

© 
~ 
v 
Cd

— 
=

m 
jo

SSS 
rU

DE EE

O

EER

e 
w

AHDS 
=>

TD

— 
= 
— 
>

=p

les

O

Ein

(a 
REACH

[ d

Te

Sa uf 
(C

DE

[1]

b o d

Cuarter XVI. The Master said, “Gan P'ing knew well how to 
maintain friendly intercourse. The acquaintance might be long, but 
he showed the same respect as at first."

Cuarter XVII. The Master said, “Tsang Win kept a large tortoise 
in a house, on the capitals of the pillars of which he had hills made, 
with representations of duckweed on the small pillars above the 
beams supporting the rafters.—Of what sort was his wisdom?”

CHAPTER XVIII. 1. Tsze-chang asked, saying, The minister 
Tsze-wán, thrice took office, and manifested no joy in his counte- 
nance. Thrice he retired from office, and manifested no displeasure. 
He made it a point to inform the new minister of the way in which 
he had conducted the government;—what do you say of him?” “The 
Master replied, “He was loyal.” “Was he perfectly virtuous?” “I 
do not know. How can he be pronounced perfectly virtuous ?"

16. How TO MAINTAIN FRIENDSHIP. ‘Fa- | Tsang was taken by his descendants as their

surname.

miliarity breeds contempt,’ and with contempt 
friendship ends. It was not so with Gan P‘ing, 
another of the worthies of Confucius' times. Hoc

was a prin. minister of Ts‘e (IN, by name 
nn. Ping (= Ruling'and averting calamity’) 
was his posth. title. If we were to render Aifs, 
the name would be ‘Gan P'ing, secundus? Obs.

the anteced. to Zz is, A

17. Tue surerstimon or Tsang Wan. 
Tsang Wun (win is the hon. epithet, and fip, see 
last ch.) had been a great off. in Loo, and left a

reputation for wisdom, which Conf. did not think

was deserved, His full name was 1 Jf Iz. 
He was descended from the duke z* (B. C.

794-767), whose son was styled F Ji. This

This is mentioned to shew one of 
the ways in which surnames were formed among794-767), whose son was styled F Ji. This

This is mentioned to shew one of 
the ways in which surnames were formed among

H je H 
the Chinese. BS ‘a large tortoise,’ so called, 
because the state of that name was famous for 
2 2 d 2 M 
its tortoises. KR is used as an act. verb,

The $8 H EH t. ‘the capitals of the

pillars.’ The Ag? may be seen in any Ch. house.

There being no ceilings, the whole structure of 
the roof is displayed, and these small pillars 
are very conspicuous. The old interpr. make 
the keep. such a tortoise an uct of usurpa. on 
the part of Tsang Wan. Choo He finds the 
point of Conf. words in the keeping it in such 
& style.

18. Tux PRAISE OF PERFECT VIRTUE IS NOT TO 
BE LIGHTLY ACCORDED. 1. Ling vin, lit, ‘good 
corrector,’ was the name given to the chicf min.

of Tsoo de. F is still applied to officers;

* *

4

=

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

H 
f

| 
j

fs 
w

Tw

v

N 
EE

zv

— 
«| 
e|

2 
RSN 
ah NS

(CN RE

Ld

pex 
TEER TT as

v 
v 
— 
- 
w 
v

eee 
E EE

TT 
TrID N 
Mee rd

ELO

cu 
2

v 
* 
Z

Pese TIN 
ob STONES

=

N 
*

meh 
kA 
“th 
Se | 
HON SST

2. Tsze-chang proceeded, “When the officer Ts‘uy killed the 
prince of Ts‘e, Chn Win, though he was the owner of forty horses, 
abandoned them and left the country. Coming to another state, he 
said, ‘They are here like our great officer, Ts‘uy,’ and left it. He 
came to a second state, and with the same observation left it also; 
what do you say of him?” The Master replied, “He was pure.” 
* Was he perfectly virtuous?” “I do not know. How can he be 
pronounced perfectly virtuous?”

OnaPTER XIX. Ke Wan thought thrice, and then acted. When 
the Master was informed of it, he said, “Twice may do.”

CHAPTER XX. The Master said, When good order prevailed in 
his country, Ning Woo acted the part of a wise man. When his 
country was in disorder, he acted the part ofa stupid man. Others 
may equal his wisdom, but they cannot equal his stupidity."e. g, the prefect of a department is called 
iy A. Taze-win, surnamed , and named

N 2 (‘suckled by a tiger’), had 
been noted for the things mentioned by Tsze- 
chang, but the sage would not concede that he 
was therefore €. 2. E was a great officer 
of Ts‘e, Gan P‘ing (ch. 16), distinguished himself

on the occasion of the murder (B. C. 517) here 
referred to. Chin, Win was likewise an officer

of Ts'e. 2— Ff, Z is a verb, =F. 5k. 
low. 3d tone, as in L. 5, but with a diff. meaning, 
*a team of four horses.'

19. Prompr DECISION Goop. Win was the 
posth, title of f 4€ a faithful and disin-

terested officer of Loo. =, up. 3d tone, ‘three 
times,’ but some say it —. , ‘again and 
again.’ Comp. Robert Halls remark,— In mat-

ters of conscience first thoughts are best.’ 
20. Tn UNCOMMON BUT ADMIRABLE STUPI-

pity or Ning Woo. Ning Woo (M. hon. ep.

See II. 6), was an officer of Wei in the times of 
Wan, (B. C. 635-627), the second of the five 
p'a. (III. 22). In the first part of his official 
life, the state was quiet and prospereus, and he 
‘wisely’ acquitted himself of his duties. After- 
wards came confusion. The prince was driven

from the throne, and Ning Yu AE was his

name) might, like other wise men, have retired 
from the danger. But he ‘foolishly,’ as it seem-

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

EN & Fl 2h 
ere] JUD tere

» 
: E: LL AN

E

=

Q 
E 
-

su

PRBS 
erat

MHA 
ga

o

>

*

JB

rwy

* 
Ld

i

I

»

d

j

j

* 
>

[ d

BERN 
eels

fi ba N

Cuapter XXI. When the Master was in Ch'in, he said, “Let me

return! Let me return!

The little children of my school are am-

bitious and too hasty. They are accomplished and complete so far, 
but they do not know how to restrict and shape themselves.”

CHAPTER XXII.

The Master said, ** Pih-e and Shuh-ts'e did not

keep the former wickednesses of men in mind, and hence the resent- 
ments directed towards them were few."

CuarrER XXIII.

The Master said, Who says of Wei-shangkeep the former wickednesses of men in mind, and hence the resent- 
ments directed towards them were few."

CuarrER XXIII.

The Master said, Who says of Wei-shang

Kaou that he is upright? One begged some vinegar of him, and he 
begged it of a neighbour and gave it him."

€d, chose to follow the fortunes of his prince, 
and yet adroitly brought it about in the end, 
that the prince was reinstated and order re- 
stored. l

21. THE ANXIETY or CONFUCIUS ABOUT THE 
TRAINING OF HIS DISCIPLES, Confucius was thrice 
in Ch'in. It must have been the 3d time, when 
he thus expressed himself. He was then over 
60 yenrs, and bcing convínced that he was not 
to sce for himself the triumph of his principles, 
he became tlie more anxious about their trans- 
mission, and the train. of the disci. in order to 
that. Such is the com. view of the ch. Some 
way, however, that it is not to be understood of 
ail the disciples. Comp. Mencius, VIL. ii. 87.

zu dé x ay F. an affectionate way of

speaking of the disciples. jt ‘mad,’ also, ex-

travagant,’ ‘highminded.’ The are natu-

rally fi » hasty and careless of minutiæ. E

N. t accomplished-like.' F, sce ch. 12. mK

"ES, ‘something complete. FẸ, see ch. 6, but 
ite applica, here is somewhat diff. The anteced. 
to xt is all the preced. description.

22. THE GENEROSITY OF Piu-E AND SHUN- 
sk, AND ITs EFFECTS. These were ancient 
warthies of the closing period of the Shang

dynasty. Comp. Mencius, 1Li.2,9, et al. They 
were brothers, sons of the king of Koo-chuh (M '

Tf , named respectively . and . E and 
Ts‘e are their hon. epithets, and {9 and N

only indicate their relation to each other as 
elder and younger. Pih-e and Shuh-ts‘e, how- 
ever, are in effect their names in the mouths 
and writings of the Chinese. Koo-chuh was a

small state, included in the pres. depart. of N

„in Pih-chih-le. Their father left his king-small state, included in the pres. depart. of N

„in Pih-chih-le. Their father left his king-

dom to Shuh-ts'e who refused to take the 
place of his elder brother. Pih-e in turn de- 
clined the throne, so they both abandoned it, 
and retired into obscurity. When king Woo 
was taking his measures against the tyrant 
Chow, they made their appearance, and remon- 
Strated against his course. Finally, they died 
of hunger, rather than live under the.new dy- 
nasty. They were celebrated for their purity, 
and aversion to men whom they considered 
bad, but Conf. here brings out their generosity,

4%. F FE 5725. FE: N, Resent- 
ments thereby were few.’

28. SxALL MEANNESSES INCONSISTENT WITH 
UPRIGHTNESS, It is implied that Kaou gave 
the vinegar as from himself.

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

Z. Hs, < E Hb BE Zc Em D II. 
DE Gg De We f BL Bk 
AG UE $8 yw . f Hj EL. 
Jk Ea Ze Jh c Bb iy — NE 
Tre = = v

ÉHs d dir Hù B Ia

>

L d

BSN

TSN 
PTO Nt 
EX:

e

P

w

SAN TH

5 
A

(v

H | Ay,

CuaPrER XXIV. The Master said, “Fine words, an insinuating 
appearance, and excessive respect ;—Tso-k‘ew. Ming was ashamed of 
them. I also am ashamed of them. To conceal resentment against 
a pron and appear friendly with him;— Tso-k'ew Ming was. 
ashamed of such conduct. I also am ashamed of it.”

CuaPrER XXV. 1. Yen Yuen and Ke Loo being by his side, the 
Master said to them, * Come, let each of you tell his wishes." l

2. Tsze-loo said, “I should like, having chariots and horses, and 
light fur dresses, to share them with my friends, and though they 
should spoil them, I would not be displeased.”

3. Yen Yuen said, “I should like not to boast of my excellence, 
nor to make a display of my meritorious deeds.”

4. Tsze-loo then said, “I should like, sir, to hear your wishes.” 
The Master said, They are, in regard to the aged, to give them rest; 
jn regard to friends, to show them sincerity; in 8 to the young, 
to treat them tenderly." .24, PRAISE OF SINCERITY, AND OF Ts0-X'£Ew 
unc. TGS 4A HI, sce IL. 3. f AN, 
*excessive respect,’ being in 3d tone, read 
tseu. Some of the old comm., keeping the usual 
tone and meaning of , interpret the phrase

of movements of the ‘feet’ to indicate respect. 
The discussions about Tso-k‘ew Ming are end-

less. See fr ER ait. L 80. It is sufficient

for us to rest in the judgment of the comm. FB

that he was an ancient of reputation. It is 
not to be received that he was a disciple of

Conf. H. was the name of Conf. The Chinese 
decline pronouncing it, always substituting mow 
e» ‘such an one,’ for it.

25. THE DIFFERENT WISHES OP YEN YUEN, 
T&8ZzE-LOO, AND CONFUCIUS. 1. 5 4S =

H A ‘why not each tell your will?’ 2. A 
student is apt to trunslate I should like to 
have chariots and horses, &c,’ but A. is the 
import. word in the par., and under the regi- 
men of pA. K. up. 8d tone, ‘to wear.’ Sev-

BR on to La and

removing the comma at 4, read tk flit to- 
gether# but this constr. is not so good. 3. In 
Io An's compilation Hii V is interpr.—‘ not 
to impose troublesome affairs on others; Choo 
IIe's view is better, Comp. the Yih-king, x

eral writers carry the reg. of

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

+r] = 
=| ZA 
ace) HA

zz 
+I

© 
8 
-

NES

O

SHAR

gh 
=

= 
SSeS ae

ENH}

4 
e

v

[ d

UN 
-1

zz 1X, 
IZ" 
— N 
Em EN 
pia 
we e B s 
è xt ’ j 7 
I , Hit 
+

PEUH 
E

-H

e

m 
RA

[ d 
e

S NaN BE 
3

ARR 
I

CHAPTER XXVI. The Master said, „It is all over! J have not 
et scen one who could perceive his faults, and inwardly accuse

imself.“

CHAPTER XXVII. The Master said, “In a hamlet of ten families, 
‘there may be found one honourable and sincere as I am, but not

so fond of learning."

i. ruo 4. ff - Gi p ‘Toimself.“

CHAPTER XXVII. The Master said, “In a hamlet of ten families, 
‘there may be found one honourable and sincere as I am, but not

so fond of learning."

i. ruo 4. ff - Gi p ‘To

be with them with sinccrity.'—The Master and 
the disci, it is said, agreed in being devoid of 
selfishness. Hwuy's, however, was seen in a 
higher etyle of mind and object than Yew's. 
In the sage, there was an unconsciousness of self, 
and without any effort, he propos. ncting in 
regard to his classification of men just as they 
ought severally to be acted to.

26. A LAMENT OVER MEN'S PERSISTENCE IN

ERROR. 'l'he N. bas an exclamat. force. A.

*to litigate.’ A B BA . ‘one who

brings himself before the bar of his conscience.’ 
The remark affirms a fact, inexplicable on Conf, 
view of the nature of man. But perhaps such 
an exclamation should not be pressed too closely.

21. Tug HUMBLE CLAIM OF CoNFUCIUS FOR

HIMSELF. e, CK bri er 2 Tid th

is ‘the designation of the place where men dre 
collected together, and may be applied from a

hamlet upwards to a city. M= jd A. 
‘honourable,’ ‘substantial.’ Confucius thus did 
not claim higher natural and moral qualities 
than others, but sought to perfect himself by 
learning.

48

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

BOOK VI. YUNG YAY.

TEE eH ES 
2 JI F V H J. Hf. T" HE 
E X J l . MEL du 
ER. fi (i K r H. IE H3

H, Hil. Jh 1T

The Master said, * There is Yung!—He might

CHAPTER I. I. 
occupy the place of a prince.“

2. Chung-kung asked about Tsze-sang Pih-tsze. 
He does not mind small matters."

* He may pass.

o

D

The Master said,

3. Chung-kung said, ^If a man cherish in himself a reverential 
feeling of the necessity of attention to business, though he may be easy 
in small matters, in his government of the people, that may be al- 
lowed. But ifhe cherish in himself that easy feeling, and also carry

it out in his 
cessive?” 5

practice, is not such an easy mode of procedure ex-

4. The Master said, Yung's words are right.“it out in his 
cessive?” 5

practice, is not such an easy mode of procedure ex-

4. The Master said, Yung's words are right.“

HEADING or THIS noox.— ¥fE th, $8 . 
‘There is Yung!’ commences the first ch., and

stands as the title of the book. Its suhjects are 
much akin to those of the preceding book, and 
therefore, it is said, they are in juxtaposition.

1. THE CHARACTERS OF YEN YunG AND TSZEE- 
Sane Piu-TSZE, AS REGARDS THEIR ADAPTATION

FOR GOVERNMENT. 1. Ay fb [2] i. ‘might

be employed with his face to the south. In 
China, the emperor sits facing the south. So 
did the princes of the states in their several 
courts in Conf. time, An explan. of the practice

is attempted in the Yih-King, s i ch. 9, 
Bile ts NEUE p E a 
BACHE «LE. 
BS X P. gu 8j un va Be N II.

r th, ‘The diagram Le couveys the idea of

brightness, when all things are exhibited to one 
another. It is the diagram of the south. The 
custom of the sages (i. e., monarchs) to sit with 
their faces to the south, end listen to the repre» 
sentations of the empire, governing towards the 
bright region, was taken from this.’ 2. Obs, 
Chung-kung was the designation of Yen Yung,

see V. 4. Rif] has here substantially the same 
nieaning as in V. 21,— R * ‘not troubling,’ 
i. e., one's self about small matters, With ref, 
tothat place, however, the Dict., after the old 
comm., explains it by kK ‘great.’ 8. Of Tsze-

sang Pih-tsze, we know nothing certain but 
what is here stated, Choo He seems to be wrong 
in approving the identifica. of him with a Tsze»

sang Hoo. B A. ‘to dwell in respect, to

have the mind imbued with it. jg FN BF

in I. 5.

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 49

SN 
wi

[d

T 
ETIN 
Em-

ERES RE 
Les RI

=

RGSS

- 
- 
-w 
d 
ev

- 
— 
E 
v 
-

*

<n?

ASS 
St

Fa 
=

\ 
d

RO 
E> ah E> aT

= 
ral 
K

b 
4.

N 
Ne

Hs 
a

SEAS 
WE

2 bSN 
wi

[d

T 
ETIN 
Em-

ERES RE 
Les RI

=

RGSS

- 
- 
-w 
d 
ev

- 
— 
E 
v 
-

*

<n?

ASS 
St

Fa 
=

\ 
d

RO 
E> ah E> aT

= 
ral 
K

b 
4.

N 
Ne

Hs 
a

SEAS 
WE

2 b

Cuarter IT. The duke Gae asked which of the disciples loved to 
learn. Confucius replied to him, There was Yen Hwuy; nz loved 
tolearn. He did not transfer his anger; he did not repeat a fault. 
Unfortunately, his appointed time was short and he died; and now 
there is not such another. I have not yet heard of any one who loves:

3

Az VEZ, o

to learn as he did." 
Cuarter III. 1.

the disciple Yen requested grain for his mother. 
Yen requested more. “Give her an yu,” said the.

* Give her a foo." 
Master, Yen gave her five ping.

Tsze-hwa being employed on a mission to Ts‘e,

The Master said,

2. The Master said, “When Ch‘h was proceeding to Ts'e, he

had fat horses to his carriage, and wore light furs. 
*

2. TE RARITY OF A TRUE LOVE TO LEARN. 
Hwor's SUPERIORITY TO THE OTHER DISCIPLES.

In A EH fe] . that. — There was

that Yen Hwuy. IIe did not transfer his 
anger! i. e., his anger was no tumultuary 
passion in the mind, but was excited by some 
specific cause, to which alone it was directed.

4d f *E . He died an early death,’ 
but án conveys also the idea in the transl.

"The two last clauses are completed thus —

th, FU) V Cread as, ana— fill) H N. S 
fia] du E T f GE cH .

3. DISCRIMINATION OF CONFUCIUS IN RE- 
WARDING OR SALARYING OFFICERS. 1. f. up. 
Bd tone, ‘to commission,’ or ‘to be commissioned." 
Choo He says the commission was a private one 
from Confucjus,but this is not likely. The old in- 
terpretation makes it u public one from the court

do contained 6 tow (2h), and 4 shing (

I have- heard

of Loo; see JY 3E: EX gt, nr. o. Fy .

‘The disciple Yen’; see III. 6. Yen is here styled 
. like NF. in I. 2, but only in narrative, 
not as introducing any wise utterance. A 
), or 64 
sing. The Yu contained 160 sheng, and the ping 
16 Að Kp or 1600 shing. A shing of the presentday is about th less than an Englieh pint. 2. The 
Z in B Rl d refers to what follows. 9, In

He An's edition, another chapter commences 
here. Yuen Sze, named e, is now the third,

east, in the outer hali of the temples. He was 
noted for his pursuit of truth, and carelessness of 
worldly advantages. After the death of Conf., he 
withdrew iuto retirement in Wei. It is related 
that Tsze-kung, high in official station, came 
one day in great style to visit him. Sze received 
him in u tattered coat, and Tsze-kung asking

e 
e

*

N

E 
tet Ju SH

My

=

[ d

semi am 
E

ATTE 
«yate ES TD KS

\ 
d

[ d

stp 
Sores

Ne

BS

2

I

— 
I

"m

TA

that a superior man helps the distressed, but

wealth of the rich.”

3. Yuen Sze being

gave him nine hundred measures 
4. The Master said, Do not

[ d

T

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

PDEA p 
. Rd

SUE 
mo

E

mN

Ld

r2

~ 
E. 
*

5

I Be 
.

wa

nk 
BEY

i 
HN

* 
IY 
v 
¢

4 
=

N 
d

o T 
does not.add to

made governor of his town by the Master, he

of grain, but Sze declined them. 
decline them. May you not give

them away in the neighbourhoods, hamlets, towns, and villages?"

CHAPTER IV.

The Master, speakin 
the calf of a brindled cow be red and

g of Chung-kung, said, “If 
horned, although man may

not wish to use it, would the spirits of the mountains and rivers put

it aside?"

CnuarrER V. The Master said,

„Such was Hwuy that for three

months there would be nothing in his mind contrary to perfect vir- 
tue. The others may attain to this on some days or in some months,

but nothing more."

him if he were ill, he replied, ‘I have heard that 
to have no money is to be poor, and that to 
study truth and not be able to find it is to be 
il ‘This answer sent Tsze-kung away in 
confusion. ‘The 900 measures (whatever they 
were) wns the proper allowance for an officer of

Sze's station. fa 2 . See V. 7, though 
it is not easy to give the the same referenceSze's station. fa 2 . See V. 7, though 
it is not easy to give the the same reference

here as in that passage. 4. According to ancient 
statutes, n in, a le, a heung, and a tang, have 
each their specific number of component fami- 
lies, but the meaning is no more than—' the 
poor about you.’ A. makes the remark=‘ may 
you not, &c.' d

4, THE VICES OF A FATHER SHOULD NOT DIS- 
CREDIT A VIRTUOUS son. The father of Chung- 
kung (ste V. 2) wasa man of bad character,’ and 
sume would have visited this upon his son, 
which drew forth Conf. remark, ‘The rules of 
the Chow dyn. required that sacrifie, victims 
should be red, and have good horns. An ani-

4

mal with those qual., tho’ it might spring from 
one not possessing them, would certainly not 
be unacceptable on that account to the spirits

sacrificed to. I translate F by ‘calf,’ but it 
is not implied that the victim was young. a, 
up. 2d tone, = Fe. ‘to lay aside,’ ‘to put away.’ 
t4 aad & zo. 
- y an

5. Tne supenionrry or Hwuy ro THE OTHER

pnisciPLES. It is impossible to say whether we 
should translate here about Hwuy in the past

or present tense. 1 here is not * r to 
oppose,’ but Gs. ‘to depart from.’ H Al 
E, ‘come to it, i.e, the line of perfect virtue, 
in the course of a day, or a month.’ H HA may

LEN

also be, for a day or a month.“ So iu the st 
1777 
H

an 
Fr

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

EE D 
ies] MS

ae 
JE

o 
O

O

TK

ae

Z4

-

. 
AE

f

v

.. 
P 
w

v” 
O

blend cd

»

[ d

e

da

exem 
SSE SEM

ST SESE ERR 
TATE

O

I. El. M. F IKan 
Fr

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

EE D 
ies] MS

ae 
JE

o 
O

O

TK

ae

Z4

-

. 
AE

f

v

.. 
P 
w

v” 
O

blend cd

»

[ d

e

da

exem 
SSE SEM

ST SESE ERR 
TATE

O

I. El. M. F IK

Cnarrzn VI. Ke Kang asked, Is Chung: yew fit to be employ- 
ed as an officer of government?” The Master said, Yew is a man 
of decision; what difficulty would he find in being an officer of 
government?" Kang asked, “Is Tsze fit to be employed as an 
officer of government?“ and was answered, “Tsze is a man of intelli- 
gence; what difficulty would he find in being an officer of govern- 
ment?" And to the same question about Kew the Master gave 
the same reply, saying, Kew is a man of various ability.” 
CIIAPTER Vir. The chief of the Ke family sent to ask Min Tsze- 
k'een to be governor of Pe. Min Tsze-k‘cen said, “ Decline the offer 
for me politely. If any one come again to me with a second invi- 
tation, I shall be obliged to go and live on the banks of the Wan.” 
6. THE QUALITIES oF TszE-Loo, Tsze-KuNG, 
AND 'TsztE-xEw, AND THEIR COMPETENCY TO As- 
BIST IN GOVERNMENT. The prince is called 73

N . ‘the doer of government; his minis-

ters and officers are styled Ht E . {the 
9 , ^

followers of gov ernment. th, Sa and 45 4

are set, the one expression against the other, the

former indicating u doubt of the competency of

the disciples, the latter affirming their more 
than competency.

Ee

EN

the foremost of the disciples. Conf. praises his 
filial piety, and we see here, how he could stand 
firm in his virtue, and refuse the proffers of 
powerful but unprincipled families of his time.

E A Ld 44; in the transl, and in

18 (ow, low. 3d tone) , we must simi- 
larly understaud, 48 M Jj jt K. Re, 
read Pe, was a place belonging to the Ke family.

Its name is still preserved in og in the

7. Min SZE-K'kKEN REFUSES TO SERVE THE 
Kx rawiLY. The tablet of ''sze-k*een (his name

vas 4ED is now the first on the east among 
‘the wise ones’ of the temple, He was among7. Min SZE-K'kKEN REFUSES TO SERVE THE 
Kx rawiLY. The tablet of ''sze-k*een (his name

vas 4ED is now the first on the east among 
‘the wise ones’ of the temple, He was among

depart. of y r J ; in Shan-tung. The Wan

streun divided Ts‘e and Loo. Tsze-k‘eon threat- 
ens, if he should be troubled again to retreat 
to Ts‘e, where the Ke family could not reach 
him.

CONFUCIAN

f,

—

5

e

Wigs

a 
d 
%

[ d 
zi 
v

ie | SRO

E 
TE + 
[ii |

E 
^ 
KAY ER

I XE 
EE

TA

*

WI. 
TTS

O

v

INAS 
HEEE

\ 
Re

hes

"PME C

NS 
g

CHAPTER VIII.

d

ANALE

Q 
- 
zÀ

f

8

d

d 
yu

STET

\ 
d

H

fms ofa en

SME 
m

=

Hear

Ld

N

aw

S%

O 
v

N NC

Pin, -new being sick, the Master went to ask for *

him. He took hold of his hand through the window, and said, “It 
is killing him. It is the appointment “of Heaven, alas! That such 
a man should have such a sickness | That such a man should have 
such a sickness |” i4

CHAPTER IX. The Master said, “ Admirable indeed was the vir- 
tue of Hwuy! With a single bainboo dish of rice, a single gourd dish 
of drink, and living in his mean narrow lane, while others could not 
have endured the distress, he did not allow his j joy to be : affected by 
it. Admirable indeed was the virtue of Hwuy!’

CHAPTER X. Yen K'ew said, “It is not that I do not delight 
in your doctrines but my strength i is insufficient." The Master 
said, “Those whose strength is insufficient give over in the middle 
of the way, but now you limit yourself.“

8. LAMENT OF CONFUCIUS OVER THE MORTAI, 
BÍCKNESS oF Pin-new.  Pih-new, elder or

uncle New,’ was the denomination of H Alb

who had an honourable place among the dis- 
ciples of the sage. In the old interpr., his sickness

is said to have been BB ; Pe. an evil disease,’

by which name 5 called Hà. i is intended,who had an honourable place among the dis- 
ciples of the sage. In the old interpr., his sickness

is said to have been BB ; Pe. an evil disease,’

by which name 5 called Hà. i is intended,

though that char. is now employed for ‘itch.’ 
Suffering from such a disease, Pih-new would 
not see people, and Confucius took his hand 
through the window. A differ. explanation of 
that circumstance is given by Choo He. He says 
that sick persons were usually placed on the 
north side of the apartment, but when the prince 
visited them, in order that he might appear to 
them with his face to the south (see ch. 1), they 
were moved to the south. On this occasion, 
Pih-new’s friends wanted to receive Conf. after 
this royal fashion, which he avoided by not

entering the house. L appears as an act.

verb T7 ZZ, ‘It is killing him,’ X. low. lst 
tone, generally an initial particle now.“ It is 
here final, and alas !“

9. Tun HAPPINESS OF IlwUY INDEPENDENT 
or poverty. The d was simply a piece of

the stem of & bamboo, and the BN half of a

gourd eut into two. £e See II. 8. The eulogy

turns much on $f in H 4 as, as opposed to

# ja. ‘his joy, the “delight which he had

in the doctrines of his master, contrasted with 
the grief others would have felt under such 
poverty.

10. A HIGH ATM AND PERSEVERANCE PROPER 
TO A STUDENT. Conf. would not admit K'ew's 
apology for not attempting more than he did. 
„Give over in the middle of the way,’ i. e, they 
go as long and as far as they can, they are 
pursuing when they stop.

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS,

ilg

L d 
is, 
v

e

OE HS

ref >a

Fi HER

w

nm 
Pimp ANGE

o

ai Nie Shae

O

Wed

e

HRNEK

"e

ur I 
= 
2

CHAPTER XI.

v

anr 
0

—.— — 
ET = — 
XI Sy EZ

* 
- 
v 
ww

si 
D

W

€

c 
Jd

vi 
> 
joao

S

o 
*

IDEEN

e 
[ d

3 
AA

» A. t 
26

vs *

. HNA. 9.

e

yO 
NOH I MEE

l uv 
=

The Master said to Tsze-hea, Do you be a scho-

lar after the style of the superior man, and not after that of the

mean man.”e 
[ d

3 
AA

» A. t 
26

vs *

. HNA. 9.

e

yO 
NOH I MEE

l uv 
=

The Master said to Tsze-hea, Do you be a scho-

lar after the style of the superior man, and not after that of the

mean man.”

Cuarrer XII. Tsze-yew being governor of Woo-shing, the Mas- 
ter said to him, “Have you got good men there?” He answered, 
“There is Tan-t‘ae Méé-ming, who never in walking takes a short 
cut, and never comes to my office, excepting on public business.”

CuaAPTER XIII. 
of his merit.

e

not that I dare to be last. My horse would not advance.

11. How LEARNING SHOULD BE PURSUED.

P and ay A here=adjectives, qualifying

The #4 F. it is said, learns ^s e

or his own real improvement and from duty ;

the a A learning A A. for men,’ with a 
view to their opinion, and for his own material 
benefit. ; 
12. ‘Tire CHARACTER OF TAs-1'AE MER-MING. 
The ch. shows, according to Chinese comm., the 
advantage to people in authority of their having 
good meu about them. In this way after their 
usual fashion, they seek for a profound meaning 
in the remark of Conf. Tan-t‘xe Méé-ming, who

was styled X. „ has his tablet the 2d east

outside the hall. The accounts of him are 
very conflicting. Acc. to one, he was very good- 
looking, while another says he was so bad-look- 
ing that Conf. at first formed an unfavourable 
opinion of him, an error which he afterwards 
confessed on Méé-ming’s becoming eminent. He

2

The Master said, Maing Che- fan does not boast 
Being in the rear on an occasion of flight, when the 
were about to enter the gate, he whipt up his horse saying,

* It is

299

travelled southwards with not a few followers, 
and places near Soo-chow and elsewhere retain

names indicative of his presence. Ta B 3E,

three particles coming together are said to 
indieate the slow and deliberate manner in

which the sage Spoke. y gj . Comp. 
EH je] 4 jn ch. 2. a is said to= ZV .three particles coming together are said to 
indieate the slow and deliberate manner in

which the sage Spoke. y gj . Comp. 
EH je] 4 jn ch. 2. a is said to= ZV .

13. Tun virtve oF Mano CHE-FAN IN CON- 
CEALING HIS MERIT. But where was his virtue 
in deviating from the truth? And how could 
Conf. commend him for doing so? These ques-

tions have never troubled the commentators. 
Mang Che-fan, named Ai, was an officer of

Loo. The defeat, after which he thus distin- 
guished himself was in the lith year of duke 
Gae, B. C. 483. To lead the van of an army is

called BE to bring up the rear is Rix. In re- 
treat, the rear is of course the place of honour.

1X see V. 25, 4.

x3 417 I

V 
dires 
—

SRN

Pf,

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

CHAPTER XIV. The Master said, Without the specious speech 
of the litanist T‘o, and the beauty of the prince Chaou of Sung, it is 
difficult to escape in the present age." '

CuarrER XV. The Master said, Who can go out but by the 
door? How is it that men will not walk according to these ways? "

Cnaprer XVI.. The Master said, “Where the solid qualities are 
in excess of accomplishments, we have rusticity; where the accomplish- 
ments are in excess of the solid qualities, we have the manners of

a clerk.

When the accomplishments and solid qualities are equally

blended, we then have the man of complete virtue." 
Cuaprer XVII. The Master said, “Man is born for uprightness. 
If à man lose his uprightness, and yet live, his escape from death is

the effect of mere good fortune."

14. Tre DEGENERACY OF THE AGE EsrEEM-"

ING GULIBNESS OF TONGUE AND BEAUTY OF PERSON.

Mt ‘to pray,’ ‘prayers;’ here, in the concrete, 
the officer charged with the prayers in the an- 
cestral temple, I have coined. the word litanist to 
come as near to the meaning as possible, ‘This 
To was an officer of the state of Wei, styled

. Prince Chaou had been guilty of incest. Prince Chaou had been guilty of incest

45 
with his sister Nan-tsze (see ch. 26), and. after- 
wirds, when she was married to the duke Ling 
of Wei, he served as an officer there, carrying 
on his wickeduess. He was celebrated for his

beauty of person. fing is a simple connective,

Hl, and the x is made to belong to both

clauses: This seems the correct construction, 
tho’ unusual, The old comm. construe differ- 
ently :—‘If a man have not the speech of T'o, 
though he may have the beauty of Chaou, &c.,’ 
making the degeneracy of the age all: turn on 
its fondnesë for specious talk, This can’t be 
right.

15. A LAMENT OVER THE WAYWARDNESS OF

MEN'S CONDUCT. iy iB. ‘These ways, ina

moral sense; — not deep doctrines, but rules of 
life. :

16. THE EQUAL BLENDING OF SOLID EXCEL- 
LENCE AND ORNAMENTAL ACCOMPLISHMENTS IN 
A COMPLETE CHARACTER, , ‘an historian,’ 
an officer of importance in China. The term, 
however, is to be understood here of ‘a clerk,’ 
‘a scrivener in a public office,’ one that is of a 
class sharp and well informed, but insincere.

17. LIFE WITHOUT UPRIGHTNESS IS NOT TRUE 
LIFE, AND CANNOT BE CALCULATED ON. ‘NO 
more serious warning than this,’ says one comm., 
‘was ever addressed to men by Confucius.’ 
A distinction is made by Choo He and others

between'the two A, that the 1st. is Ke LE, 
‘birth,’ or ‘the beginning of life,’ and the 2d is 
AE 72 preservation in life.“ A 2 AB 
4h, [m ‘The being born of man is upright,’

which may mean either that man at his birth is 
upright, or that he is born for uprigbtness.

prefer the latter view. E 2 L3 th, ‘The

living without it,’ if we take Fg ~ file, or ‘to

CONFUCIAN

s 
EM

O

z>

8

rer

f

PEN

b.

m 
=! 
nhs zee

ew

0

MS

e 
ar

ANALECTS, 
| | 
2 N

SIH

[d

EM

S SERE 
SSN

Cuaprer XVIII. The Master said, “They who know the truth 
are not equal to those who love it, and they who love it are not 
equal to those who find pleasure in it.” jSIH

[d

EM

S SERE 
SSN

Cuaprer XVIII. The Master said, “They who know the truth 
are not equal to those who love it, and they who love it are not 
equal to those who find pleasure in it.” j

Cuarrer XIX. The Master said, “To those whose talents are 
above mediocrity, the highest subjects may be announced. To 
those who are below mediocrity, the highest subjects may not be 
announced.” `

CuarrER XX. Fan Ch'e asked what constituted wisdom. The 
Master said, “To give one’s-sclf earnestly to the duties due to men, 
and, while respecting spiritual beings, to keep aloof from them, may 
be called wisdom.” He asked about perfect virtue. The Master said, 
“The man of virtue makes the difficulty to be overcome his first busi- 
ness, and success only a subsequent consideration ;—this may be 
called perfect virtue.“ i .

defame it,’ if fa all We long here as else- 
where for more perepicuity and fuller develop- 
ment of view. An important truth struggles 
here for expression, but only finds it imperfectly. 
Without uprightness the end of mau's existence | 
is not fulfilled, but his preservation in such case 
is not merely a fortunate accident. | 
18. DIFFERENT STAGES OF ATTAINMENT. The

four x have all one reference, which must be

id or JẸ, the subject spoken of. | 
|

19. TEACHERS MUST BE GUIDED IN COMMUNI- 
CATING KNOWLEDGE BY THE SUSCEPTIVITY OF

sur Learsers. In pA b, E is read up. 2d 
tone, à verbal word, and not the prep. ‘upon,

go the ^ in A ^ is also verbal as in III.

7. The „ ‘or mediocre people,’ may have

all classes of subjects announced to them, I 
suppost. 
20. CHIEF ELEMENTS IN WISDOM AND VIRTUE.

The modern comm. take R here as=

„ and7. The „ ‘or mediocre people,’ may have

all classes of subjects announced to them, I 
suppost. 
20. CHIEF ELEMENTS IN WISDOM AND VIRTUE.

The modern comm. take R here as=

„ and

R . 9 N H 2 H, mec 
right according to the principles of humanity.’ 
With some hesitation, 1 have assented to this 
view; though ER properly means ‘the multi- 
tude,’ ‘the people,’ and the old interpr. explain 
‘Strive to perfect the righteousness of the pco- 
ple.“ We may suppose from the second clause 
that Fan Ch'e was striving after what was un- 
common and superhuman, For a full exhi- 
bition of the phrase pa see rn iB: XVI. 
Here it==‘spiritual beings,’ manes and others, 
Si up. 3d tone. js Z., ‘Keep at a distance 
from them,’ not ‘keep them at à distance. Tho 
sage’s advice therefure is—‘attend to what are 
plainly human duties, and do not be supersti- 
tious.’ „ and 1& are, as frequently else. 
where, verbs, ‘put first,’ ‘put last.“ The old 
interpreters take them differently, but not so 
well. ,

5 CONFUCIAN

mt 
Kt 
El 
gà

T"

>

[ d

NRHA 
mRNT E

ANALECTS, ; 
FF] - GP = 
— ix] B

ae

e

Dm 
o

[d

Ld

E 
mbar iss e 
TAENSA

Cuarrer XXI. The Master said, “The wise find pleasure in

water; the virtuous find pleasure in hills. 
The wise are joyful, the virtuous are long-

virtuous are tranquil, 
lived.” , 
CuarrER XXII.

The wise are active; the

The Master said, Ts'e, by one change, would

come to the state of Loo. Loo, by one change, would come to a state 
where true principles predominated."

CHAPTER XXIII.

The Master said, A cornered vessel without

corners.—A strange cornered vessel! A strange cornered vessel!"

[e]

CHAPTER XXIV. Isae Go asked, saying, “A benevolent man, 
though it be told him,—‘There is a man in the well,’ will go in after

him, I suppose.”

21. Contrasts OF THE WISE AND THE VIR- 
TUOUS. The two first 40 are read ngaou, low.him, I suppose.”

21. Contrasts OF THE WISE AND THE VIR- 
TUOUS. The two first 40 are read ngaou, low.

3d tone, EE UF, ‘to find pleasure in.“ The 
wise or knowing are active and restless, like 
the waters of a stream, ceaselessly flowing and 
advancing. The virtuous are tranquil and firm, 
like the stable mountains. ‘The pursuit of 
knowledge brings joy. The life of the virtuous 
may be expected to glide calmly on and long. 
After all, the saying is not very comprehensible.

22. THR CONDITION OF THE STATES TSE AND 
Loo. Ts‘e and Loo were both within the pre- 
sent Shan-tung. 'Pse lay along the coast on

the north, embracing the present dep. of Fi JH

and other territory. Loo was on the south, the 
larger portion of it being formed by the pre-

sent dep. of 48 JH. At the rise of the Chow 
dynasty, king Woo invested K A EE, *the

great duke Wang,’ with the principality of Ts'e, 
while his successor, king Shing, constituted the 
*

Confucius said,

“Why should he do so? A supe-

son of his uncle, the famous duke of Chow, 
prince of Loo. In Conf, time, Tse had degen-

erated more than Loo. . is pj" . E E 
at Fe 2 H. *the entirely good and admi-

rable ways of the former kings.’ 
23. Tug NAME WITHOUT THE REALITY IS FOLLY.

This was spoken (see.the üt o with ref. to 
the governments of the time, retaining ancient 
names without ancient principles. The fik

was & drinking vessel; others say a wooden 
tablet. The latter was a later use of the term. 
It was made with corners as appears from the 
composition of the character, which is formed

from $8. *& horn,' *a sharp corner, In Conf.

time, the form was changed, while the name 
was kept. ii

24. ‘THE BENEVOLENT EXERCISE THEIR BENE- 
VOLENCE WITH PRUDENCE, 'l'sae Go could sce no 
limitation to acting on the impulses of bencvo- 
lence, We are not to suppose with modern

Gn 
~}

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. .-

FEF] * w} 
1 Ay EN 
12 ’ 2 [x 0

Y 
T4

v

TAHY 
me

ON 
SH 
MAHON AH

a

Hay

o

EE

=]

HEH 
X| 
m

— 
— 
e

rms

&

NOHGn 
~}

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. .-

FEF] * w} 
1 Ay EN 
12 ’ 2 [x 0

Y 
T4

v

TAHY 
me

ON 
SH 
MAHON AH

a

Hay

o

EE

=]

HEH 
X| 
m

— 
— 
e

rms

&

NOH

74

N

O 
W

us 
SEE

HIRSS 
Em

N 
E

DOR 
He

AEE 
Me

N 
i A» ^ o 7 5

rior man may be made to go to the well, but he cannot be made to go 
down into it. He may be imposed upon, but he cannot be befooled.“ 
CnArTHR XXV. The Master said, “The superior man, exten. 
sively studying all learning, and keeping himself under the restraint of 
the rules of propriety, may thus likewise not overstep what is right," 
CharrRn XXVI, The Master having visited Nan-tsze, Tsze-loo 
was displeased, on which the Master swore, saying, Wherein I have. 
done improperly, may Heaven reject me! may Heaven reject me!" 
CUAPTER XXVII. The Master said, Perfect is the virtue which 
is according to the Constant Mean! Rare for a long time has been 
its practice among the people." 
comm, that he wished to show that benevolence

a 
SR

zs 
-H

26. CONFUCIUS VINDICATES HIMSELF FOR VISIT

was impracticable. WE belongs to the whole fol- 
lowing clause, especially to the mention of a well. 
The second ie for X. H — 
some doubt in Go's mind. Obs, the Aophal force 
of dr and 2

25. TAR HAPPY EPFEOT OF LEARNING AND 
PROPRIETY COMBINED. has here its 
lighter meaning, the student of what is right 
and true? The Z in x^) Z we naturally

refer to X. but comparing IX. 10, 2— K N 
H in. we may assent to the observa, that

R 44 g Ey, refers to the learner's own

person.’ See note on IV. 23. EP, ‘the boundary 
of a ficld;’ then, ‘to overatep that boundary.“

k, as in V. 26, but the force here is more 
tah!’ than ‘alas!’

th, indicateperson.’ See note on IV. 23. EP, ‘the boundary 
of a ficld;’ then, ‘to overatep that boundary.“

k, as in V. 26, but the force here is more 
tah!’ than ‘alas!’

th, indicate

ING THE UNWORTUuY Naw-TsZE. Nan-tsze was 
tho wife of the duke of Wei, and sister of prince 
Chaou, mentioned ch. 14. Her lewd character 
was well known, and hence Tsze-loo was dis- 
pleased, thinking an interyiew wjth her was 
disgraceful to the Master, Grent pains are 
taken to explain the incident. ‘Nan-tsze,’ says 
one, ‘sought the interview from the stirrings of 
her natural conscience.’ ‘It wasa rule,’ says an- 
other, that officers in a state should visit the 
prince’s wife! ‘Nan-tsze,’ argues a third, ‘had 
all influence with her husband, and Confucius 
wished to get currency by her means for his doc-

trine? Whether * is to be understood in the 
sense of to swear, ff, or ‘to make a declara.

tion N. is much debated. Evidently, the

thing ie an oath, or solemn protestation against 
the suspicions of Tsze-lvo.

27. THE DEFECTIVE PRACTICE OF THE PEOPLE 
IN CONFUCIUS TIMES. See m is „III.

58 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 
+h 
A e 
b —

zuo

TESS 
mt

45 ER 
PEN ! 
E E,

EURA 
SHHASE > EPH

2

ele

O 
I

(ESN TEE 
HYSI

O 
| 
v

aJ 
EHSECUENTT SERRE

— 
s

b 5

Cuarrer XXVIII. 1. Tsze-kung said, “Suppose the case of a 
man extensively conferring benefits on the people, and able to assist 
all, what would you say of him? Might he be called perfectly vir- 
tuous?” The Master said, Why speak only of virtue in connec- 
tion with him? Must he not have the qualities of a sage? Even 
Yaou and Shun were still solicitous about this.

2. Now the man of perfect virtue, wishing to be established 
himself, seeks also to establish others; wishing to be enlarged himself, 
he seeks also to enlargé others. )

3. Jo be able to judge of others by what is nigh in ourselves ;— 
this may be called the art of virtue." :

28. THE TRUE NATURE AND ART OF VIRTUE. | of Yaou and Shun. From such extravagant3. Jo be able to judge of others by what is nigh in ourselves ;— 
this may be called the art of virtue." :

28. THE TRUE NATURE AND ART OF VIRTUE. | of Yaou and Shun. From such extravagant

There are no, higher sayings in the Analects 
than we have here. 1. hii; up 3d tone, *to con-

fer benefits.’ Am E. is said to be ‘a

particle of doubt and uncertainty,’ but it is 
rather the interrogative affirmation of opinion. 
Tsze-kung appears to have thought that great 
doings were necessary to virtue, and propounds 
a case which would transcend the achievements

views the Master recalls him. 2, This is the

description of 2 1 2 WU Ag. ‘the mind

of the perfectly virtuous man" as void of all sel- 
fishness. 8. It is to be wished that the idea

intended by AE K. M B had been more

clearly expressed. Still we seem to have here 
a near approach to a positive enunciation of 
*the golden rule."

ea

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 3

BOOK VII. SHUH URH.

SiR

WEEE S| NE 
JE 
I8

EM

r

NER Ot

e 
x 
23 
> 
g

p 
IR 
> 
(N 
"c 
m

M M U ’ 
Ciiarrer I. The Master said, “A transmitter and not a maker, 
believing in and loving the ancients, I venture to compare myself 
with our old P‘ang.” 
CnarrER IL The Master said, “The silent treasuring up of 
knowledge; learning without satiety; and instructing others with- 
out being wearied :—what one of these things belongs to me?” 
'  Cuaprer III. The Master said, “The leaving virtue without 
proper cultivation; the not thorouglily discussing what is learned ; 
not being able to move towards righteousness of which a knowledge 
is gained; and not being able to change what is not good :—these 
are the things which occasion me solicitude.”

IIA DING OF tuts BOOK.—3} [P im 4

transmitter, and Book VII.“ We have in 
this book much information of a personal char- 
acter about Confucius, both from his own lips, 
and from the descriptions of his disciples. The 
two preceding books treat of the disciples and 
other worthies, and here, in contrast with them,we have the sage himself exhibited. 
1. CONFUCIUS DISCLAIMS BEING AN ORIGINA-

Y 3 
TOR OR MAKER. t-f} 1& mme, ‘simply 
to hand down the old.“ Comm. say the master’s 
language here is from his extreme humility. 
But we must hold that it expresses his true 
sense of his position and work. Who the indi- 
vidual called endearingly ‘our old P'ang? was, 
can hardly be ascertained. Choo He adopts 
the view that he was a worthy officer of the 
Shang dynasty. But that individual’s history is

a mass of fables. Others make * 2 to be

Laou-tsze, the founder of the Taou sect, and 
others again make two individuals, one this

Laou-tsze, and the other that 6 mH- 
2. CONFUCIUS HUMBLE ESTIMATE OP NIM- 
SELE, BG here by most scholars read che, up.

. A

3d tone, to remember.’ Z refers, it is said, to 
Xlll. principles, the subjects of the silent ob-

servation and reflection. 4uf "H N i [52

cannot be— what difficulty do these occasion

me?’ but= 4nf A BE "cH N FR: as in

the transl. The langunge, says Choo Ie, is 
that of humility upon humility? Some insert,

in their expl., IE. pi before fn — Besides

these, what is there in me?“ But this is quite 
arbitrary. The profession may be inconsistent 
with what we find in other passages, but the 
inconsistency must stand rather than violence 
be done to the language. Ho An gives the sin-

è, 
gular exposition of H BE N (about A. D. 
150200) — Other men have not these things, I 
only have them.“ ‘

3. CONFUCIUS’ ANXIFTY AROUT HIS SELF-CUL- 
TIVATION :-—ANOTULR HUMBLE ESTIMATE OF RIM- 
SELF. Here again, comm. find only the expres- 
sions of humility, but there can be no reason why 
we should not admit that Confucius was anxious 
lest these things. which are only put forth as 
possibilities, should become in his case actual

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. *

CHAPTER IV. When the Master was unoccupied with business, 
his manner was easy, and he looked pleased.CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. *

CHAPTER IV. When the Master was unoccupied with business, 
his manner was easy, and he looked pleased.

CHaPTER V. The Master said, Extreme is my decay. For a 
long time, I have not dreamed, as I was wont to do, that I saw the

duke of Chow.”

CHAPTER VI. I. 
path of duty.

The Master said, Let the will be set on the

2. Let every attainment in what is good be firmly grasped. 
8. “Let perfect virtue be accorded with.

4, “Let relaxation and enjoyment be found in the polite arts,”

facts. is in the sense explained] in the Dict.

by the terms 7B and ae *practising, *ex- 
amining.“

4. Tus MANNER or CONFUCIUS WHEN UNOC- 
CuPIED, The first clause, which is the subject 
of the ather two, is literally— The master's

dwelling at ease.“ Obs. 112 up. 8d tone; X. 
up. 1st tone, an: as in III, 23,

5. How THD DISAPPOINTMENT OF CONFUCIUS’ 
HOPES AFFECTED EVEN HIS DREAMS. p ^ 
(Chow-kung)is now to all intents a proper name, 
but the characters mean the duke of Chow.’ 
Chow was the name of the seat of the family

from which the dynasty so called sprang, and 
on the enlargement of this territory, king Win

divided the original seat between his sons E.

(Tan) and we (Shih). Tan was Chow kung, in

wisdom and politics, what his elder brother, the 
first emperor, Woo, was in arms. Confucius 
had longed to bring the principles and institu- 
tions of Chow-kung into practice, and in bis 
earlier years, while hope animated him, had 
often dreamt of the former sage. The orig. ter- 
ritory of Chow was what is now the dis. of K'e-

shan ai ul ) dep. of F'ung-tseang( Ja 3»

in Shen-se.

' 6. RULES ron THE FULL MATURING OF CHAR» 
ACTER. 2. (hi might be translated virtue, but 
E: perfect virtue following, we require an- 
*shan ai ul ) dep. of F'ung-tseang( Ja 3»

in Shen-se.

' 6. RULES ron THE FULL MATURING OF CHAR» 
ACTER. 2. (hi might be translated virtue, but 
E: perfect virtue following, we require an- 
*

other term. 4. M. ‘to ramble for amusement,’ 
here to seek recreation,’ EOM see note on X. 
in I. 6. A full enumeration makes six arts,“ 
vis4 ceremonies, music, archery, charioteering, 
the study of characters or language, and figures 
or arithmetic. The ceremonies Were ranged in 
five classes: lucky or sacrifices, unlucky or the 
mourning cer. ‘military, those of host and 
guest, and festive, ‘Music required thé study of 
the music of Hwang-te, of Yaou, of Shun, of 
Yu, of T'ang, and of Woo. Archery had a five- 
fold classification. Charioteering had the same. 
'The study of the characters required the exa- 
mination of them, to determine whether there 
predominated in thelr formation resemblance to 
the object, combination of ideas, indication of 
properties, a phonetic principle, a principle of 
contrarlety, or metaphorical accommodation. 
Figures were managed according to nine rules, 
as the object was the measurement of land, cn- 
pacity, &e. ‘These six subjects were the busi- 
ness of the highest and most liberal education, 
bnt we need not suppose thut Conf. had them 
all in view here.

° CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

HB ES AME = HELA 
47. 18, AT AT uT 
Gn HS R NBR H. 
Z É TARARE 
Hl] e. M, I 2S — T 38 fT 
HB. qi mmu Ww

85 
N=

Cuarrer VII. The Master said, From the man bringing his 
bundle of dried flesh for my teaċking upwards, I have never refused 
instruction to any one.” ;

CHuarrER VIII. The Master said, “I do not open up the truth 
to one who is not eager to get knowledge, nor help out any one who 
is not anxieus to explain himself. When I have presented one 
corner of a subject to any one, and he cannot from it learn the other 
three, I do not repeat my lesson."

CuaPTER IX. 1l. When the Master was eating by the side of a 
mourner, he never ate to the full.CuaPTER IX. 1l. When the Master was eating by the side of a 
mourner, he never ate to the full.

. 2. He did not sing on the same day in which 
ing.

‘Carrer X. 1. The Master said to Yen Yuen, “When called 
to office to undertake its duties; when not so called, to lie retired; 
—it is only I and you who have attained to this,”

he had been weep-

7. Tun READINESS or ÜONFECIUS TO IMPART 
INSTRUCTION. It was the rule anciently that 
when one party waited ea another, he should 
carry some present or offering with him. Pupile 
did so when they first waited on their teacher. 
Of such offerings, one of the lowest was a

bundle of 4 „ dried flesh" The wages of a

teacher are now called (8 e. * the money of

the dried flesk’? However small the offering 
brought to the sago, Jet him only see the indica- 
tion of a wish to learo, and he imparted his

instructions. [J . may be translated up- 
wards, 4e, ‘to such a man and others with 
larger gifts, È being ap. 2d tone, or the char.

may be understood! in the sense of ‘attending 
my instructions,” with its usual tone. I prefer 
the former interpretation.

8, Coxrucius REQUIRED A REAL DESIRE AND 
ABILITY IN HIS PISCYPLES. The last ch. tells of 
the sage's readiness to teach, this shows that

he did not teach where his teaching was likely 
to prove of no avail, t. in the comm. and

1 * sy ^ 
dict, is explained [J aK = iim ES BE 2 
the appearance of one with mouth wish- 
ing to speak and yet not able to do so.“ This 
being the meaning, we might have oxpected 
the character to be AE „ ‘to turn, is ex- 
plained XR yi JH BH x Ed ‘going round 
for mutual testimony." FE 48 151 
Br E, J tell him nothing more.’

9, CONFUCIUS  SYMPATHY WITH MOURNERS. 
The weeping is understood to be on occasion of 
offering his condolences to a mourner, which - 
was ‘a rule of propriety?

10. Te ATTAINMENTS OF Hwty LIKE THOSD 
or Coxructus. THEY EXCESSIVE BOLDNESS OF

TsazE-LOO. 1. Iu Hn Z A z c is o-

62 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 
= 2 pom 
Exe xe JL

Maly10. Te ATTAINMENTS OF Hwty LIKE THOSD 
or Coxructus. THEY EXCESSIVE BOLDNESS OF

TsazE-LOO. 1. Iu Hn Z A z c is o-

62 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 
= 2 pom 
Exe xe JL

Maly

a 
L

PRES

O

BSN 
SWA 
CEST REY

e

` 
NaN NAE

Sts et

[ d

SSMS +

Q

TT 
ADH

w

ya 
tama

BRE

* 
ome

Dj o

d

LUE T

M

2. Tsze- loo said, “If you had the ue of the armies of a

great state, whom would you have to act with you?”

3. T he Master said, “I would not have him to act with me, who 
will unarmed attack a tiger, or cross a river without a boat, dying 
without any regret. My associate must be the man who proceeds 
to action full of solicitude, who i is fond of adjusting his plans, and 
then carries them into execution."

Cuarter XI. The Master said, “If the search for riches is sure 
to be successful, though I should become a groom with whip in 
hand to get them, I will do so. As the search may not be successful, 
I will follow after that which I love.”

CuarrER XII. The things in reference to which the Master 
exercised the greatest caution | were—fasting, war, and sickness.

plained by . but we have seen that 2 foll. 
active verbs impurts to them a sort of neuter

signification. JA used. 12 Z =ne- 
glected.“ 2. A Keun, acc. to the JA ma. con-

sisted of 12,500 men. The imperial forces con- 
sisted of six such bodies, and those of a great

state of three. 3. 3k Ke 18 MI. see She-

king, II. ii. 1, st. 5. 4 H does not indicate timidi-

ty, but solicitude. —Tsze-loo, it would appear, 
was jealous of the praise conferred on Hwuy, 
and pluming himself on his bravery, put jn for 
a share of the Master's approbation. But he 
only bróught on himself this rebuke.

al, ‘Lae UNCERTAINTY AND FOLLY OF THE 
PURSUIT OF RICHES. It occurs to a student to 
understand the first clause—If it be proper to 
seurch for riches,’ and the third—'I will do it? 
But the transl. is aec. to the modern comm., and 
the conelusion agrees better with it. In expl.

\

3t Di] 2 +. some refer us to the attendants\

3t Di] 2 +. some refer us to the attendants

who cleared the street with their whips when 
the prince went abroad, but we need not seek

any particular allusion of the kind. Obs. iin

$e, ‘if, and then, H= sinee.—An ‘objection

to the pursuit of wealth may be made on the 
ground of righteousness, or on that of its un- 
certainty. It is the latter on which Confucius ' 
here rests.

12. WHAT THINGS CONFUCIUS WAS PARTICU-

LARLY CAREFUL ABOUT. I. read Chae, and==

JE, ‘to fast, or, rather, denoting the whole re- 
ligious adjustment, enjoined before the offer- 
ing of sacrifice, and extending over the ten days 
previous to the great sacrificial seasons.

means * to equalize’ (see II. 3), and the effect of

those previous exercises was Jk F A H

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

all

T,

Cuarter XIII.

Shaou, and for three months did not know the taste of flesh.

nH

w

ER

EN 
8

Ni

When the Master was in Ts'e, he heard the

i

nva:

8

~ 
[ d

X 
ph — 
Y Hsu

2 R

«T

did not think," he said, *that musit could have been made so

excellent as this.” 
CHAPTER XIV. 1.

Yen Yew said, “Is our Master for the prince

of Wei?" Tsze-kung said, Oh! I will ask him.“ 
2. He went in accordingly, and said, What sort of men were 
Pih-e and Shuh-ts‘e?” “They were ancient worthies," said the Mas-

ter.

“Did they have any repinings because of their course?" The

Master again replied, “They sought to act virtuously, and they did 
so; what was there for them to repine about?" On this, Tsze-kung 
went out and said, “Our Master is not for him."

AK, ‘to adjust what was not adjusted, to 
produce a perfect adjustment.’ Sacrifices pre- 
sented in such a state of mind were sure to be 
neceptable. Other people, it is said, might he 
heedless in refer. to sacrifices, to war, and to 
sickness, but not so the sage.

13. Tur EFFECT or music on Coneucivs. 
The skaou, sce II. 25. This incident must have 
happened in the 36th year of Conf., when he fol- 
lowed the duke Ch · aou iu his flight from Loo to13. Tur EFFECT or music on Coneucivs. 
The skaou, sce II. 25. This incident must have 
happened in the 36th year of Conf., when he fol- 
lowed the duke Ch · aou iu his flight from Loo to

Ts‘e, As related in the DV * Historical Re-

cords,’ before thecharacters = H ,wehave £m.

x ‘he learned it three months, which may

relieve us from the necessity of extending the 
three months over all the time in which he did 
not know the taste-of his food. In Ho An's

compilation, the ^ t js expl. by 2 H.

She was careless about and forgot. ‘The last 
clause ig also explained there—*1 did not think 
that this music had reached this country of 
Tao,

:14. CONFUCIUS DID NOT APPROVE OF A SON 
OPrPOsiNG nis FATHER, 1. The eldest son of 
duke Ling of Wei had planned to kill his mother 
(? stepmother), the notorious Nan-tsze (VI. 26). 
For this he had to fice the country, and his son, 
on the death of Ling, became duke au AN) 
and subsequently opposed his father’s attempts 
to wrest the sovereignty from him, This was 
the matter argued among the disciples, — Was

Confucius for A low. 3d tone), the son, the

reigning duke? 2. In Wei it wonld not have 
been ace. to propriety to speak by name of its 
ruler, and therefore Tsze-kung put the case of 
Pih-e and Shub-ts‘e, see V. 22. They having 
given up a throne, and finally their lives, rather 
than do what they thought wrong, and Con- 
fucius fully approving of their conduct, it was 
plain he could not approve of a son's holding 
hy force what was the rightful inheritance of

the father, Ed 1 itt f . They sought 
for virtue, aud they got virtue; ie, such was 
the character of their conduct.

: CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

EE CES H. ES 
I . Æ 
: m [2I Pw E

“4

is 
e

SES 
SS

[RRO ae.

Sn 
I:

[d

S

EEI 
$ 
i}

VS 
= 
MRS T

ac 
SHEN

> 
FH 
Ez 
FY 
>: CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

EE CES H. ES 
I . Æ 
: m [2I Pw E

“4

is 
e

SES 
SS

[RRO ae.

Sn 
I:

[d

S

EEI 
$ 
i}

VS 
= 
MRS T

ac 
SHEN

> 
FH 
Ez 
FY 
>

Cuarter XV. The Master said, With coarse rice to eat; with 
water to drink, and my bended arm for a pillow;—I have ‘still joy: 
in the midst of these things. Riches and honours acquired by unright-

eousness are to me as a floating cloud." : Gorg

CHAPTER XVI.

The Master said, “If some years were added ‘to:

‘my life, I would give fifty to the study of the VII, and then I might;

come to be without great faults."

^

Cuarter XVII. The Master's frequent themes of discourse were 
—the Odes, the History, and the maintenance of. the Rules of pro-

priety. On all these he frequently discoursed.. |,

15. Tue sox or CONFUCIUS INDEPENDENT OF 
OUTWARD CIRCUMSTANCES, Bk. low. 2d tone, ‘a

menl,’ also, as here, 2 verb, ‘to eat.’ , up. 8d 
tone, ‘to pillow,’ ‘to use as a pillow.’ Critics 
call attention to jy. making the sentiments 
*My joy is everywhere. It is amid other circum- 
stances, It Is also hero? FZ. By 
unrigliteousness I might get riches and honours, 
but such riches and honours are to me as a 
floating cloud. It is vain to grasp at them, so 
uncertain and unsubstantial.'

16. THe VALUE WHICH CONFUCIUS SET. UPON 
THe STUDY OF THE Yin. Choo He supposes that 
this was spoken when Conf. was about seventy, 
as he was in his 68th year when he ceased his 
wanderings, and gettled in Loo to the adjust- 
ment and compilation of the Yih and other 
king, If the remark be referred to that time,

an error may well be found in JI. +. for

he would hardly be speaking at 70 of having 
50 years added to his life. Choo also mentions 
the report of a certain individual that he had

econ a copy of the Lun. Yu, which read E for 
am: and Z for A Amended thus, the mean-

t 3

ing would be—'If I had some" more yearkta finish

the study of the Yih, Sc. Ho An interprets’ 
the chapter quite differently. Referring to thet 3

ing would be—'If I had some" more yearkta finish

the study of the Yih, Sc. Ho An interprets’ 
the chapter quite differently. Referring to the

saying, IL 4, 4, * At fifty, 1 knew the decrees of 
heaven,’ he supposes this to have been spoken

when Conf. was 47, and explains In a few

years more I will be fifty, and have finished

the Yih, when I may be without great faults,’

—One thing remains upon both views :—Con-

fucius never claimed, what his followers do tor 
him, to be a perfect man. 1

17. CONFUCIUS’ MOST COMMON TOPICS. =, i 
‘The History, i. e., the historical documents 
which he compiled into the Shoo-king that hasi 
come down to us in a mutilated condition, " ES; 
also, and much less ind. wust not be under- 
stood of the now existing She-king and Le-ke. 
Choo He explains HE (low. 2d. fone) by "v 
‘constantly.’ The old interpr. Ching. explains 
it by IE ‘correctly, — Conf. would speak of tho 
Odes, &c., with attention, to the correct enun- 
ciation of the charactere, This does not secm 
80 good.

Ba Ca Aa 
Gd I. H. XE x 
XA H. Z F. H. N 
. dk dE AS. 
. ff f. n f 
à ^ HE PLA T » Nr 
| Lm PRR

Cuarrer XVIII. I.

The. duke of Shé asked Taze-loo about Con-

fucius, and Tsze- loo did not answer him.

2. The Master said, “ Why did you not say to him, — He is simply 
a man, who in his eager pursuit of knowledge forgets his food, who 
in the joy of its attainment forgets his sorrows, and who does not 
perceive that old age is coming on?“

CHAPTER XIX. The Master said, “J am not one who was born 
in the possession of knowledge; I am one who.) is fond of antiquity,

and earnest in secking it there,"

CuarrER XX. The subjects on which the Master did not talk, 
were—extraordinary things, feats of strength, disorder, and spiritual

beings.

18, Conructus’ DESORIPTION OF nis CHAR- 
ACTEM, AS BEING SIMPLY A MOST BARNEST LEAR-

NER. 1. 3 (read shd) was a district of soobeings.

18, Conructus’ DESORIPTION OF nis CHAR- 
ACTEM, AS BEING SIMPLY A MOST BARNEST LEAR-

NER. 1. 3 (read shd) was a district of soo

(AK), the governor or prefect of which had | 
usurped the title of kung. Its name is still 
preserved in a district of the dep. of B .

in the south of Ho-nan, 2. sometimes 
finishos a sentence (Premare, *claudit orationem"), 
as here. The after it== £2, imparting to all

the preceding description a meaning indicated 
by our simply or only,

19. CONFUCIUS’ KNOWLEDGE NOT CONNATR, 
BUT THE RESULT OF nis STUDY OF ANTIQUITY, 
Hero again, acc. to comm., is a wonderful in- 
stance of the sage's humility disclaiming what 
he really had. The comment of F ECL bij

subjoined to Choo He's own, is to the effect 
that the knowledge born with a man is only

X und z4, while ceremonies, music) names

of things, history, &., must be learned. This

‘would make what we may call connate or

innate knowledge the moral senae, and those 
intuitive principles of reason, on and by which 
all knowledge is built up. But Confucius could 
not menn to deny hie being possessed of these. 
‘I, love antiquity;' te, the ànciente and all 
their worka.

20. SUBJECTS AVOIDED BY CONFUCIUS IN CON- 
VERSATION, , ‘confusion,’ meaning rebellions 
disorder, purricide, regicide, and auch crimes,

Choo He makes [5] nero N. 3 xe zh 1L 
Z ES ‘the mysterious, or spiritual opera · 
tions apparent in the course of nature.“ . 
BS (died A, D. 266), as given by Ho An, simply 
saye— NU. [it] 2 5. * the affairs of spiritual

beings,’ For an instance of Conf. avoiding such 
a subject, see XI. 11.

66 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 
ar =

ER 
+ 
A

SH 
BEN EL | SS RES 
See ONE

DN 
2 
NE

REIR.

> NONE

N 
SAE

8 
Ti ras * 5 
K. fc. A. M se 
pa FT E H 4T 
j^ 
T

r3

SE

N 
SMS

d

Cuapter XXI. The Master said, “When I walk along with two 
others, they. may serve me as my teachers. I will select their good 
qualities and follow them, their. bad qualities and avoid them.”d

Cuapter XXI. The Master said, “When I walk along with two 
others, they. may serve me as my teachers. I will select their good 
qualities and follow them, their. bad qualities and avoid them.”

Cuaprer XXII. The Master said, “Heaven produced the virtue 
that is in me. Hwan T‘uy—what can he do to me?“

CuarrER XXIII. The Master said, “Do you think, my disciples, 
that I have any concealments? I conceal nothing from you. There 
is nothing which I do that is not shown to you, my disciples;—that 
is my way.”

Cuarter XXIV. There were four things which the Master 
taught,—letters, ethics, devotion of soul, and truthfulness.

21. How A MAN MAY FIND INSTRUCTORS FOR 
HIMSELF, —— A TT. ‘Three men walking; 
but it is implied that the speaker is himself one 
of them. The comm, all take Te in tlie. sense 
of ‘to distinguish, ‘to determine. I will de- 
termine the one who is good, and follow him, 
&. I prefer to understand as in the transla- 
tion. „ ‘change them,’ i. e., correct 
them in myself, avoid them.

22. CoNFUCIUS CALM IN DANGER, THROUGH 
THE ASSURANCE OF MAVING A DIVINE MISSION, 
Acc. to the historical accounts, Conf. was pass- 
ing through Sung in his way from Wei to 
Chin, and was practising ceremonies with his 
disciples under a large tree, when they were set 
upon by einissaries of Hwan ‘Tuy, a high officer 
of Sung. These pulled down the tree, and 
wanted to kill the sage. His disciples urged 
hiin tó make haste and escape. when he calmed 
their fears by these words. At the same time, 
he disguiaed himself till he had got past Sung. 
This story may be apocryphal, but the saying 
remains,—a remarkable one.

23. CONFUCIUS PRACTISED NO CONCEALMENT 
WITH HIS DISCIPLES., ~~ —— F. see III. 24.

Bü is explained by Choo He by M. “to show,"

as if the meaning were, ‘There is not one of 
my doings in which 1 am not showing my doc-

trines to you? But the common signif. of HidBü is explained by Choo He by M. “to show,"

as if the meaning were, ‘There is not one of 
my doings in which 1 am not showing my doc-

trines to you? But the common signif. of Hid

may be retained, as in Flo An,—‘ which is not 
given to, shared with, you.“ To what the con- 
cealment has reference we cannot tell. Observe

the force of # foll. by th, at the end; To!

have none of my actions not: shared with you, 
that is I, Hew.’

94. Tur SUBJECTS OF CONFUCIUS TEACHING, 
VW yu . ‘took four things and taught.“ 
There were four things which—not four ways 
in which—Confucius taught, X here=our use

of letters, fj- Mi H FA. ‘what is daily

used in the relations of life.’ A - fu AUS

Z N üt ‘not a single thought not ex-

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

ums

v

— 
*«

zm BD] UR 
DF

er

zy 
zl 
DR

P

CHAPTER XXV. I.

SE

[d

e 
-3

zl 
- 
el

PEL 
2 TRH, 
8 El, a

St b

2

e 
2.

mate 
zu» ug

v

v

E

SN 
SEO aie

’

The Master said, “A sage it is not mine to see;

could I see a man of real talent and virtue, that would satisfy me.“ 
2. The Master said, A good man it is not mine to see; could I

see a man possessed of constancy, 
3.

that would satisfy me.

* Having not and yet affecting to have, empty and yet affect

ing to be full, straitened and yet affecting to be at ease:—it is diffi- 
cult with such characteristics to have constancy.”

CHAPTER XXVI.

The Master angled,—but did not use a net.

He shot, —but not at birds perching.

CHAPTER XXVII. 
act without knowing why.

hausted.’ 43 =k — A Z KE: not

a single thing without its reality.’ These are

the explanations in the pg ik fii 8- I.

confess to apprehend but vaguely the two latter

subjects as distinguished from the second. 
25. Tun PAUCITY OF TRUE MEN IN, AND THE

PRETENTIOUSNESS OF, CONFUCIUS TIME. F H :

Par. 2, is supposed by some to be an addition to thesubjects as distinguished from the second. 
25. Tun PAUCITY OF TRUE MEN IN, AND THE

PRETENTIOUSNESS OF, CONFUCIUS TIME. F H :

Par. 2, is supposed by some to be an addition to the

text. That being so, we have in the ch. a climax 
of charatter:—the man of constancy, or the 
single-hearted, stedfast man; the good man, 
who on his single-heartedness has built up his 
virtue; the Keun-tsze, the man of virtue in large 
proportions, and intellectually able besides ; and

the sage, or highest style of man. EH, from 
H. "ELS . ‘ear, mouth, and good, ' =

intuitively apprehensive of truth, and correct in 
utterance and action. Comp. Mencius, VIII. ii. 24.

The Master said, „There may be those who 
Ido not do so. 
selecting what is good and following &t, seeing much an 
in memory :—this is the second style of knowledge."

much and 
keeping it

Hearin

. 26. Tne HUMANITY or CONFUCIUS. Xj is

properly the large rope attached to a net, by 
means of which it may be drawn so as to sweep

& stream. , ‘to shoot with a string tied to 
the arrow, by which it may be drawn back 
again.’ 5j. applied to such shooting, lower 4th 
tone, read shih. Confucius would only destroy 
what life was necessary for his usc, aud in 
taking that he would not take advantage of 
the inferior ereatures. ‘This ch. is said to be 
descriptive of him in his early life.

27. AGAINST ACTING HEEDLESSLY. Paou 
Heen, in Ho An, says that this was spoken with 
ref. to heedless compilers of records. Choo He

makes {E 2 simply . ‘to do things,"

‘to act? The paraphrasts make the latter 
part descriptive of Confucius—'I heer much, 
Ke.“ This is not necessary, and the transl. had 
better he as indefinite as the original.

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS,

e 
oe

n 
att

2 
pi 
£3] 
EH

E 
R

D» [oe 
4

e

rd 
Si

zil

peres 
D

ene

E

I

( HE ux e

A Xo S EM

ny ME PR * fe ^H 1 
. be = PAZ

ge: 
Wenge

gs

Jt, Uh, 5 
"fÉ .CONFUCIAN ANALECTS,

e 
oe

n 
att

2 
pi 
£3] 
EH

E 
R

D» [oe 
4

e

rd 
Si

zil

peres 
D

ene

E

I

( HE ux e

A Xo S EM

ny ME PR * fe ^H 1 
. be = PAZ

ge: 
Wenge

gs

Jt, Uh, 5 
"fÉ .

CuarrER XXVIII. 1. It was difficult to talk with the copia of 
Hoo-heang, and a lad of that place having had an interyiew, with 
the Master, the disciples doubted.

2, The Master said, “I admit people's approach, to me, without 
committing myself as to what they may do when ay have retired. 
Why must one be so severe? If a man purify himself to wait upon 
me, I receive him so purified, without guaranteeing his past conduct."

Cuaprer XXIX. The Master said, "Is virtue a thing remote? 
I wish to be virtuous, and lo! virtue is at hand." 5 i

CuaPrER XXX. 1. The minister of crime of Ch'in asked whether 
the duke Ch aou knew propriety, and Confucius said, “ He knew 
propriety."

28. Tue READINESS or Conrucivs to MEET

1

D 
[

APPROACHES TO HIM THOUGH MADE BY THR UN-

uELY. I. In H 5i. the pp appears to be

like our local termination kam.—'The people of 
Hoo-ham. Its site is now sought in three dif- 
ferent places, 2. Choo He would here trans-

pose the order of the text, and read 4

B 2 A x immediately after T H. He

also supposes some characters lost in the sen-

tence ME ff {if €

1o."

29. VinTUE 18 Nor FAR TO exek. db. after

J$, implies the negative abewer'to be given,

80. IIow Coxrrceius ACKNOWLEDGED RIS En- 
ror. 1. Ch'in, one of the states of China in 
Conf. time. is to be referred Probably to tlie pré- 
sent department of Ch'in-chow in Ho-nan pró- 
vince. ti] was the name given in Chin 
and Tsoo to the minister elsewhere called

| E ok which terms Morrison and Medhurat 
. This ig hardly necessary, | translate criminal judge.

Bi, as in V. 8, 3,— P to allow,’ to concede |

i ser of bis sovereign on all matters’ reliting to

But judge doce

not come up to his functions, which were legis-

lative as well as executive, He was the, advi-

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

eo 
ei ser of bis sovereign on all matters’ reliting to

But judge doce

not come up to his functions, which were legis-

lative as well as executive, He was the, advi-

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

eo 
e

ES us Ag I. "E pis 
F Zt Bee im

` ` dd. Im I Dy 
An jt, BE

e

SS psa TO (V

(ERY RS 
{YSN EEE dis

j; TIERE 
tmn

AE i jt K.

2. Confucius having retired, the minister bowed to Woo- ma K'e 
to come forward, and said, “I have heard that the superior man is 
not a partizan. May the superior man bea partizan also? The prince 
married a daughter of the house of Woo, of the same surname with 
himself, and called her,—‘ The elder lady Tsze of Woo’. If the 
D knew propriety, who does not know it?"

3. ,Woo-ma K'e reported these remarks, and the Master said,“ I 
am fortunate! If I have any errors, people are sure to know them.” 
“ OuaPrER XXXI’ When the Master was in company with a per- 
son who was singing, if he sang well, he’ would make him répeat 
the song, while he accompanied it with his own voicé, `

Cuarrier XXXH. The Master said, “In letters I ‘am perhaps 
foc to other men, but the character of ihe superior man, carrying out 
jn his conduct what he professes, is what I have not yet attained to.”

te f 
31. THE GooD YELLOWSHIP or Coxzecsva,

EX See the p REF &j p |

Ch‘aou was the hon. ep. of Chow (, duke of 
' Loo. 
for the knowledga and observance of ceremo- 
nies, and Conf. answered the minister's ques- 
tion accordingly, the more readily that he was

speaking to the officer of another state, and was |

bound, therefore, to hide any failings that his 
own sdvereign might have had. 2. With all 
his knowledge of proprieties, the duke Ch'aou 
had violated an import. rule,—that which for- 
bids the intermarriage of parties of the same 
surname, , The ruling houses of Loo and Woo 
were branches of the imperial house of Chow, 
and consequently had the same surname—Kedie To conceal his violation of the rule, 
Ch'aou called his wife by the surname T'sze (fF 
paif she had belonged to the ducal house of 
Sung. M. up. 3d tone BR. 3. Conf. takes 
de criticiem of his questioner very lightly.’ ie

B. C., 541-509. He] had .& reputation

on this chapter, see the se E 
which states very distinctly the interpretation 
which I have followed, making only two sing -

ings and not three, AI. lower sa tone, heres% 
*to sing in unison with.’

. Nt 
.

32. AOKNOWLEDGMBNT OP Corruorus IN E8- 
TIMATING HIMSELF. here occasions some difi- 
culty. Ho An takes it, as it often is, ff. and

explains, ‘I am not better than others in letters! 
In the dict, with ref. to this pass, it is ex-

plained by piu. 80 that the meaning would be

‘By effort, I can equal other, men. in letters’

Choo He makes it t Be a ‘particle of doubt,’ 
perhaps.“ But this is formod for the occasion.

A HH F. ‘aui-in-persdfi-acfing Reim · co.

*

70 . 
i mH 
555

O

E A-

O

HSS 
SEND weet

v 
o

mK 
ERRAR] 
ES TEE E

e

N 
I]

D d

N 
4

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS,

8

N 
v 
zu

I

d

FON

WVNESS 
End TT Reo

O

SH

2

x

Cnaprer XXXIII. The Master said, “The sage and the man of 
pi virtue; —how dare I rank myself with them? It may simply 
e said of me, that I strive to become such without satiety, and 
teach others without weariness.” Kung-se Hwa said, This is 
just what we, the disciples, cannot imitate you in.” 
CuaPrER XXXIV. The Master being very sick, Tsze-loo asked 
leave to pray for him. He said, “May such a thing be done?" 
Tsze-loo replied, “It may. In the Prayers it is said, ‘Prayer has 
been made to the spirits of the upper and lower worlds." The 
Master said, * My praying has been for a long time.”

33. Waar Convucius DECLINED TO BE CON- 
SIDERED, ARD WHAT RE CLAIMED. P and

are said to be correlatives, in which case they 
our ‘although’ and ‘yet.’ More naturally, we33. Waar Convucius DECLINED TO BE CON- 
SIDERED, ARD WHAT RE CLAIMED. P and

are said to be correlatives, in which case they 
our ‘although’ and ‘yet.’ More naturally, we

may join + directly with 2 fü A ang 
take, pp ac - our ‘bat.’ zZ BB: see ch. 18, 2. 
N. added to ZB. incresecs its em- 
pliasis,-«'just this and nothing more. 
34. CoxPUCIU8 DECLINES TO BE PRAYED FOR, 
D i i 3 = 
KI together mean ‘very sick. A aa 
is interrogative, as we find it frequently in 
Mencius, sk “To write s eulogy, and confer

the posthumous honorary title; also, to eulo- 
gize in prayer,’ i. e., to recite one's excellencies 
ae the ground of supplication. Tsze-loo must 
have been referring to some well known collec-

tion of euch prayers. In N 71 Ri secme

rather to be sn-expletive than the pronoun. 
+ “Fe =heaven and earth, Di being the 
approp. desig. of the spirits of £he former, and 
NN of the latter. Choo He says, Prayer EC] 
the expression of repentance and promise of 
amendment, to supplicate the help of the spirits. 
If there may not be those things, then there is 
no need for praying. In the case of the sage,, 
he had committed no errors, and admitted of no

amendment. In all his conduct he had been in .

harmony with the spiritual intelligences, and 
therefore he said—my praying has been for a 
long time? We may démur to some of these 
expressions, but the declining to be prayed for, 
and concluding remark, do indicate the satisfac- 
tion of Confucius with himself. Here, as in 
other places, we wish that our information

about him were not so stinted and fragmentary. .

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

A

Cuarrer XXXV. The Master said,

WES 
A. MIT "s

T . fE, f

“Extravagance leads to

insubordination, and parsimony to meanness. It is better to be mean

than to be insubordinate.” 
CuapPrER XXXVI.

The Master said, “The superior man is

satisfied. and composed ; the mean man is aiwa s full of distress.”

CHAPTER XXXVII.

The Master was mild,

and yét dignified;The Master said, “The superior man is

satisfied. and composed ; the mean man is aiwa s full of distress.”

CHAPTER XXXVII.

The Master was mild,

and yét dignified;

majestic, and yet not fierce; respectful, and yet easy.

35. MEANNESS NOT 80 BAD AS INSUBORDINA- 
TION, N read shun, like 723 and with the same

meaning. 
36. CONTRAST IN THEIR FEELINGS BETWREN

TUE KEUN-TSZE AND THE MEAN MAN. JA. , a

level plain’ used adverbially with BR, ='light-

somely. This is its force here. R= 55 By,

‘constantly.’ 
37. How VARIOUS ELEMENTS MODIFIED ONB 
ANOTHER IN THE CHARACTER OF CONFUCIUS.

i BOOK VIII. T'AE-PIH.

WR REH $e D 
p RE CIR

rede I. ae A U said, e may he said to have 
reached the highest point of virtuous action. Thrice he declined 
the empire, and the people in ignorance of his motives could not ex- 
press their approbation of his conduct."

Tie HEADING OF THIS pooK.— Ak fü 18 
p" t T'ac-pih, Book eighth.“ As in other cases,

the first words of the book give name to it. The 
subjects of the chapter are miscellaneous, but it 
begins and ends with the character and deeds 
of ancient sages and worthies, and on this ac- 
count it follows the seventh chapter, where we 
lave Confucius himself described.

1. THE BXCBEDING VIRTUE OF T'AE-PHt. 'T'ae- 
pih was the eldest son of king Tae Fe

the grandfather of Wan, the founder of the 
Chow dynasty. Tae had formed the intention 
of upsetting the Yin dyn., of which 'f'ne-pih 
disapproved.  T'ae moreover, because of the 
sage virtues of his grandson Ch'ang () who

afterwards became king Wan, wished to hand

CONFUCIAN AN MEC TS. 
M

ARERI gu EE 
tr Jr d, e Hn] m] Bl pa 
H] M L [s n

Hi

2 HS Jà 2) IDDY ADAY

Cuapter II. 1. The Master said, Respectfulness, without the 
rules of propriety, becomes laborious bustle; carefulness, without the 
rules of propriety, becomes timidity; boldness, without the rules of 
propriety, becomes insubordination; straightforwardness, without 
the rules of propriety, becomes rudeness.2. ‘When those who are in high stations perform well all their 
duties to their relations, the people are aroused to virtue. When 
old friends are not neglected by them, the people are preserved 
from meanness.” l

Cuarrer III. The philosopher Tsăng being sick, he called to 
him the disciples of his school, and said, Uncover my feet, uncover 
my hands. fe is said in the Book of Poetry, ‘We should be appre- 
hensive and cautious, as if on the brink of a deep gulf, as if 
treading on thin ice,’ and so have I been, Now and hereafter, I know

my escape from all injury to my person, O ye, my little children."

down his principality to his 3d son, Ch‘ang’s 
father, T*ac-pih observing this, and to escape 
opposing his father’s purpose, retired with his 
second brother among the barbarous tribes of 
the south, and left their youugest brother in 
possession of the stato, ‘The motives of his 
conduct T'ae-pih kept to himself, so that the

people N #4 ii fü Z: * could not find how

to praise him.“ There is a difficulty in making 
out the refusal of the empire three times, ‘there 
being different accounts of the times and ways 
in which he did so. Choo He cuts the knot, by 
making thrice = firmly, in which solution we 
may acquiesce. ‘There is as great difficulty to 
find out a declining of the empire in "l'ae-pih's 
withdrawing from the petty state of Chow. It 
may be added that king Woo, the first emperor of 
the Chow dyn., subsequently conferred on T*ae- 
pih the posthumous title of Chief of Woo

(SR), the country to which he had withdrawn,

and whose rude inhabitants gathered round 
him. His second brother succeeded him in the 
government of them, and hence the ruling house 
of Woo had the same surname as the imperial

house of Chow, that namely of Tsze (F> See

VII. 80. E 2R give emphasis to the 
preceding declaration, Comp I. 14,house of Chow, that namely of Tsze (F> See

VII. 80. E 2R give emphasis to the 
preceding declaration, Comp I. 14,

2. "ng VALUE OF THE RULES OF PROPRIETY ; : 
AND OF gx AMPLE IN THOSE IN HIGH STATIONS. I. 
We mußt bear in mind that the ceremonies, or 
rules O propriety, spoken of in these books, aro 
not me conventionalities, but the ordinations 
of man's: moral and intelligent nature in the 
line of what ig proper. Ky, ‘to strangle,’ is hero

explained by Chow He by AN . Ho Au, after 
Ma Yung (early part of 2d century), makes it 
=o 39]. ‘sarcasm’ 2. There does not seem 
any connection between the for. paragraph and 
this, and hence this is by many considered to 
be a new chap., and assigned to the philosopher

Tsang. F. diff. here from its previous

usage, having reference more to the or 
station of the individuals indicated, than to

their fü Gr virtue. a t = 46 H tE P. 
*old ministers and old intimacies' fin often

a verb, ‘to steal; here an adj., mean.“

3. Tur PHILOSOPHER T8ANG’S FILIAL PIETY 
BEEN IN HIS CARE OF RIS PERSON. We get our 
bodies perfect from our parents, and should se 
preserve them to the last. This is a great 
branch of filial piety with the Ch., and this ch. 
is suid to illustrate how Jsang-teze had mado

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

x

`

TM

N 
2

ğal

A

i M e 
Bh ih SAS oe TA 
€ aZ dn At, |

4

CHAPTER IV. 1. The 
went to ask how he was.

2. sáng

Ser Tr city

xit

-3 
=

if

i 
B

w

d 
25

l

+ ing

Mambo 
S

Jug

at

- 
Ld

eg

SEP SEE SEE HIER

s

SIRE

- 
- 
, 
i

SUPE

O

v

11

Sn 
Ris

—

=a

ť B ’

philosopher Tsang being sèk, Mang King

g said to him,“ When a bird is about to die, its notes are

mournful; when a man is about to die, his words are good. 
3. “There are three principles of conduct which the man of highg said to him,“ When a bird is about to die, its notes are

mournful; when a man is about to die, his words are good. 
3. “There are three principles of conduct which the man of high

rank should consider specially important:—that in his deportment 
and manner he keep from violence and heedlessness ; that in regulat- 
ing his countenarice he keep near to sincerity ; and that in his words 
and tones he keep far from lowness and impropriety, As to such

matters as attending to the sacrifici 
cers for them.“ |

? this his life-long study. Ie made the disci. 
uncover his hands and feet to show them in

what preservation those members were. Er: T 
see the She · king, II. v. st. 6. In [ff] &, we 
must take m- The whole clause indi- 
cates, comm. say, not go much Tsăng’s satis- 
faction in the preservation of his person, as the 
Anxiety whit) he had had, and would continue 
to have, if life were prolunged, in preserving it.

4. THE y OSornER Tsanc’s DYING COUNSELS 
TO A MAN OF WIGH RANKS 1. ü was the hon.

Li x 4 vi . ` E a

epi, of 4h $$ Tie & great officer of Loo, and 
gon'of Mang-woo, II. 6. From the conelusior 
of this chapter, we may suppose that hé de- 
acendyd to small matters below his rank. x

al vessels, there are the proper offi- 
n " n P

refers to M. 2. t$, in fe © = EH. in-

timatès that Tsing commenced the conversation,

8. Hy, JE: and HH are all verbs governing

‘the nouns following, fa is read like PY, and

with the same meaning, ‘to rebel against,’ ‘to, 
be contrary to,“ that here opposed being id.

‘the truth and right.’ V was a bamboo dish with 
a stand, made to hold fruits and seeds af sacrifice; 
E was like it, and of the saine size, only made 
of wood, · and used to contain pickled vegetables 
and sauces, AH F is used as in ch, 2,—In 
Ho An’s compilation, the three clauses, begin,

m are taken differently, and thus he

will not suffer from men's heiug violent and in» 
sulting, &c., &c 1 prefer the modern view.

PK Y 
Pe

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

Em are taken differently, and thus he

will not suffer from men's heiug violent and in» 
sulting, &c., &c 1 prefer the modern view.

PK Y 
Pe

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

E

ag 
D

na

w

85

I

Sere 
weg 
D hn Bs

ssim

—

ESTES

ETERS

HE SS

O 
-

Tris x 
FDNENAE

ST 
EIE 
ANEREN

aa

a 
* 
v 
w 
Ld 
[d

us Paii iN:

¢

8

ui

FA

q

P 
G

v 
Cu BAS d 
2 PN HU, 
Cuarrer V. The philosopher Tsing said, “Gifted with ability, 
and yet putting questions to those who were not so; possessed of 
80 and yet putting questions to those possessed of little; having, 
as though he had not; full and yet counting himself as empty; 
offended against, and yet entering into no altercation :—formerly I 
had a friend who pursued this style of conduct.” 
Cuaprer VI. The philosopher Tsing said, “Suppose that there 
is an individual who can be entrusted with the charge of a young 
orphan prince, and can be commissioned with authority over a state 
of a hundred le, and whom no emergency however great can drive 
from his principles: —is such a man a superior man? He is a supe- 
- rior man indeed.” 
Cuarrer VII. 1. The philsopher Ts&ng said, “The scholar may 
not be without breadth of mind and vigorous endurance. His

ge — 
E

$ " . 
burden is heavy aud his course is

5. THE ADMIRABLE SIMPLICITY AND FREEDOM 
FROM EGOTISM OF A FRIEND OF THE PHILOSOPHER 
Tsanc. This friend is supposed to have been 
Yen Yuen, . ‘imprisonment by means of

wood,’ stocks.“ The Dict., after the old interpr., 
explains it with reference to this passage, by

4f tlh, EAM 111 ‘altercation,’ *recompensing.* 
{É HE N Hf sie, followed things in this

wey. 
6. A COMBINATION OF TALENTS AND VIRTUE

CONSTITUTING A IKEUN TSZ h. I A Z M. 
‘an orphan of six cubits.’ By a comparison of

a passage in the Chow Le and other references 
to the subject, it secuis to be established that

long.

‘of six cubits’ is here equivalent to ‘of 15 years,’ 
and that for every cubit more or less we should

addor deduct five years. See the $t üt FERB,long.

‘of six cubits’ is here equivalent to ‘of 15 years,’ 
and that for every cubit more or less we should

addor deduct five years. See the $t üt FERB,

where it is also said that the ancient cubit was 
shorter than the modern, and only=7.4 im, so 
that 6 cubits=4.44 cubits of the present day. 
But this estimate of the ancient cubit is proba- 
bly still too high. King Wan, it is suid, was 
10 cubits high, ‘i. e., 7.4 modern cubits or more

than 8} English feet. BH Hi Z S 
Men. V. ij. 2. Ba amounts nearly toa question, 
and is answered by 1. — ves, indeed.’

7. TIE NECESRITY TO THE BCHOLAR OF COM- 
PASS AND VIGQUR Of MIND. T. * & learned

- 
ou

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

É

[ d

NN

F 15 
NH-

\ 
a

Eus 
ES

d

d

P

TU 
N

I

E MEM

b

rin

O

SERI S

B

e

Ai

guo

js

JS.

e

rope

w

2. “Perfect virtue is the burden which he considers it is his to 
sustain ;—is it not heavy? Only with death does his course stop ;—

is it not long?" 
Cuartrer VIII. 
mind is aroused. 
2. „It is by the Rules 
established.

1. The Master said, “It is by the Odes that the

of propriety that the character is

8. “It is from Music that the finish is received.”

CHAPTER IX.

The Master said, “The people may be made to

follow a path of action, but they may not be made to understand it."

CHAPTER X. The Master said, 
and is dissatisfied with poverty, will 
So will the man who is not virtuous,

of him to an extreme.”

man,’ ‘a scholar,’ but in alt ages learning has 
been the qualification for, and passport to, 
official employment in China, hence it is also a 
general designation for ‘an officer.’ t£ low. 
3d tone, a noun, = an office,“ ‘a burden borne ;’ 
with the 1st tone, it is the verb ‘to bear.’8. THE EFFECTS OF POETRY, PROPRIETIEB, AND 
music. These three short sentences are in form 
like the four, iS N 5. Sc., in VII. 6, but 
must be interpreted differently. There the first 
term in each sentence is a verb in the impera- 
tive mood; here it is in the indicative. There 
the N is to be joined closely to the 1st charac- 
ter and here to the 3d. There it ur prepos. to; 
here it=dy. The terms Be pa. p have 
all specific reference.

9. WAT MAY, AND WHAT MAY NOT RE AT- 
TAINED TQ WITH THE PEOPLE. According to

„The man who is fond of daring 
pee to insubordination. 
when you .carry your dislike

Choo He, the first Z is AI 2 Ff A N.—

duty, what principles require, and the second is

x x Br A IR, ‘the principle of duty. 
He*also takes By and KW as= BE and

N HE If the meaning were so, then the 
sentiment would be much too broadly expressed.

See yu = Bx e. XVI. 15. As often in

other places, the B SE gives the meaning hore 
happily ; viz., that a knowledge of the reasons 
and principles of what they are called to do

need not be required from the people, — JR Wf

NR

10. DIFFERENT CAUSES OF INSUBORDINATION 
A LESSON TO RULERS,

a

ax 
Ek

E 
m 
NI

Exp ay 
Eat 
3

N 
7

Spm

i 
Eu

e 
SR 
L3 
- 
wA 
w 
~ 
Ld 
wj 
»

CES 
= 
e7«

BE 
mg

SS 
Se}

Mj

A HR .

e

zu 
e

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

DEDERE OE

=

M 
"

ANNA HELE

post

1

11 2

En.

CuarTER XI. The Master said, “Though a man have abilities as 
admirable as those of the duke of Chow, yet if he be proud and 
niggardly, those other things are really not worth being looked at."

CHAPTER XII.

The Master said, “It is not easy to find a man

! 4vho has learned for three years without coming to be good."

CHAPTER XIII. I. The 
unites the love of learning; 
the excellence of his course.

2.

disorganized one.

Master said, With sincere faith he 
holding firm to death, he is perfecting

“ Such an one will not enter a tottering state, nor dwell in a 
When right principles of government prevail inMaster said, With sincere faith he 
holding firm to death, he is perfecting

“ Such an one will not enter a tottering state, nor dwell in a 
When right principles of government prevail in

the empire, he will show himself; when they are prostrated, he will

keep concealed.

3. „When a country is well governed, poverty and a mean con- 
dition are things to be ashamed of. When a country is ill governed, 
riches and honour are things to be ashamed of."

11. THE wORTHLESSNBSS OF TALENT* WITH- 
OUT VIRTUE, The duke of Chow ;’—sce VII.

5. K Ê ‘the overplus, ‘the superfluity;

-* . . 2 
referring to the ‘talents,’ and indicating that 
ability is not the AS or root of character, not 
what is essential. th, B. as in ch. 1.

12. How QUICKLY LEARNING LEADS TO GOOD. 
This is the interpretation of K‘ung Gan-kwö, 
who takes E in the sense of Lm Choo He

takes the term in the sense of TE *emolu- 
ment, and Would change E into . making

the whole a lamentation over the rarity of the 
disinterested pursuit of learning. But we are 
not at liberty to admit alterations of the text, 
Unless, a8 received, it be absolutely unintelli- 
gible,

13. THE QUALIFICATIONS OF AN OFFICER, 
WHO WILL ALWAYS ACT RIGHT IN ACCEPTING 
AND DECLINING OFFICE. 1. This par. is to be 
taken as descriptive of character, the effects of 
whose presence we have in the next, and of ita

absence in the last. 2. R in oppos. to m.

read heen, low. 3d tone. The whole ch, seems 
to want the warmth of generous principle and 
feeling. In fact, I doubt whether its parts bear 
the relation and connection which they ure sup-

posed to have, a

CONFUCIAN ANALÉCTS.

jd

NESS

v

77 
IZ Igel 
Arn S

e

SO hee

ea a

CuapTer XIV. The Master said, “He who is not in any parti- 
cular office, has nothing to do with plans for the administration of

its duties.”

Cuarter XV. The Master said, When the music-master, Che, 
first entered on his office, the finish with the Kwan Ts‘eu was mag-its duties.”

Cuarter XV. The Master said, When the music-master, Che, 
first entered on his office, the finish with the Kwan Ts‘eu was mag-

nificent ;—-how it filled the ears !" 
The Master said, ** Ardent and yet not upright;

CHAPTER XVI.

stupid and yet not attentive; simple and yet not sincere:—such

persons I do not understand."

CuaPrER XVII. The Master said, “Learn as if you could not 
reach your object, and were always fearing also lest you should lose it."

Cuarrer XVIII. The Master 
ner in which Shun and Yu held 
were nothing to them!”

14, EVERY MAN SHOULD MIND HIS OWN BUSI- 
ness, So the sentiment of this ch. is gener- 
alized by the paraphrasts, and perhaps cor- 
rectly. Its letter, however, has doubtless oper- 
ated to prevent the spread of right notions about 
political liberty iv China.

16. ‘Tits PRAISE OF THE MUSIC-MASTER CHE. 
Neither Morrison nor Medhurst gives what ap-

pears to be the meaning of l in this ch.

K'ang-he's dict. has it~ Mi x AE . H

Bl- ‘The last part in the musical services is

called lwan’ The programme on those occa- 
sions consisted of fourzpurts, in the last of which 
a number of pieces from the jung or national 
songs was sung, commencing with the Awan- 
aster. The name lwan was also given to a sort 
of refrain, at the end of each song.—The old 
interpreters explain differently, — *when the 
music-master Che first corrected the confusion 
of the Kwan-ts‘eu,’ X6.

said, “ How majestic was the man- 
possession of the empire, as if it

16. A LAMENTATION OVER MORAL ERROR 
"Roc 
ADDED TO NATURAL DEFECT. Ej ^ ,

‘I do not know them,’ that is, say comm., na- 
tural defects of endowment are generally asso- 
ciated with certain redeeming qualities, as has- 
tiness with straightforwardness, &c. In the 
parties Conf. had in view, those redeemiug qua- 
lities were absent. He did not understand 
them, and could do nothing for them.

17. WITH WHAT EARNESTNESS AND CONTIN 
DOUSNESS LEARNING SHOULD BE PURSUED,17. WITH WHAT EARNESTNESS AND CONTIN 
DOUSNESS LEARNING SHOULD BE PURSUED,

18. THE LOFTY CHARACTFR OF SHUN AND 
Yu. Shun received the empire from Yaou, B. C. 
2254, and Yu received it from Shun, B. C. 2204. 
The throne came to them not by inheritance. 
They were called to it by their talents and 
virtue. .And yet the possession of empire did 
not affect them at all AR H. It did not

concern them, was as if nothing to them. Ho

-3 
[s]

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS,

zm

cus 
I HERE

ud

SES

e

dr

Mice 
sb

LT 
—

bj 
7

po

Die 
Amant

Se:

w

3

E

SSH

SANE

weet TH 
N 
thet 
zn

75 
RENK

DR 
HS > Rat

Sahat 
d

oA R bi 
n. “~~ W X. Jao 
R, N T * | Jj HU

CAPTER XIX. 1. The Master said, “Great indeed was Yaou as 
a sovereign! How majestic was he! It is only Heaven that is grand, 
-and only Yaou corresponded to it. How vast was his virtue! The 
people could find no name for it.

2. „How majestic was he tn the works which he accomplished! 
How glorious in the elegant regulations which he instituted !”

CHAPTER XX. 1. Shun had five ministers, and the empire was 
well governed.' .

2. King Woo said, “I have ten able ministers.”

3. Confucius said, “Is not the saying that talents are difficult 
to find, true? Only when the dynasties of T'ang and Yu met, were 
they more abundant than in this of Chow, yet there was a woman 
among them. The able ministers were no more than nine men."

An takes -R They had the empire | ministere were B8. superintendent of works, 
without seeking for it.’

to usage.

19. Tur praise or Yaou. 1. No doubt, 
Yaou, as he appears in Chinese annals, is a fit 
object of admiration, but if Confucius had had 
& right knowledge of, and reverence for, Hea- 
ven, he could not have spoken as he does here. 
Grant that it is only the visible heaven over- 
spreading all, to which he compares Yaou, even

that is sufficiently absurd, Rl Z: not sim-

vy =. 2. ‘imitated it, but HE Bd I.

HE, ‘could equalize with it.“ 2. K.that is sufficiently absurd, Rl Z: not sim-

vy =. 2. ‘imitated it, but HE Bd I.

HE, ‘could equalize with it.“ 2. K.

X HN 
D-H Hf H . M. Al. un ees 
achievements of his goverment. * (see

V. IS music, ceremonies, &c., of which he 
was the author.,

20, TIE scarcity OF MEN OF TALENT, AND

PRAISE OF THE HQUSE Or Cuow. 1, Shuu's five |

This is not according . superintendent of agriculture, 2 (8&8),

minister of instruction, EA rg. minister of 
justice, and 1$. warden of woods and.mar- 
shes. Those five, as being eminent above all 
their compeers, are mentioned. 2. See the Shoo- 
king, V.i. sect. ii. 6. „ ‘governing, 
i. e., able ministers.’ In the dict, the firat 
meaning given of Bl is*to regulate, and the

second is just the opposite, — to confound,’ 
‘confusion.’ Of the ten ministers, the most dia- 
tinguished of course was the duke of Chow. 
One of them, it is said next par., was a woman, 
but whether she was the mother of king Win, 
or his wife, is much disputed. 3. Instead of

the usual ‘the master said,’ we have here N. 
P E „ The philogopher K ung said.“ This

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

Son 
Ot

=] 
I

v 
*- 
E 
v 
v

e

NARE AS 
MAEN

BINENE 
SI unf: Se

genns

V. 
Ld 
* 
Ld

DE 3 & F.

a 
e

I

DEERE

o

mu

SY >t 3H Sra

m 
f

SIEGE 
3l

EET

| | eat stan

puse H

v 
v 
* 
Ld 
v 
E 
-

n

WA

T U.

4. King Wan possessed two of the three parts of the empire, and

with those he served the dynasty of Yin.

The virtue of the house

of Chow may be said to have reached the highest point indeed."

CHAPTER XXI. 
character of Yu.

The Master said, 
He used himself coarse food and drink, but dis- 
played the utmost filial piety towards the spirits.

“I ean find no flaw in the

His ordinary

garments were poor, but he displayed the utmost elegance in his

sacrificial cap and apron.

He lived in a low mean house, but ex-

pended all his strength on the ditches and water-channels. I can find

nothing like a flaw in Yu.”sacrificial cap and apron.

He lived in a low mean house, but ex-

pended all his strength on the ditches and water-channels. I can find

nothing like a flaw in Yu.”

is accounted for on the ground that the words of 
king Woo having been quoted immediately be- 
fore, it would not have done to crown the sage 
with his usual title of ‘the Master.“ The style 
of the whole chapter, however, is different from 
that of any previous one, and we may suspect 
that it is corrupted. Alk is a sort of pro- 
verb, or common saying, which Conf. quotes

and illustrates. EE BS. (Yaou is called

Tang, having ascended the throne from the 
marquisate of that name, and Yu became the

accepted surname or style of Shun.) T^ ir 
Bx is understood by Choo He as in the

transl, while the old comm. take exactly the 
opposite view. The whole is obscure, 4. This 
par. must be spoken of King Wan.

21. Tur PRAISE or Tu. [1]. read Kéen, up.

3d tone, ‘a crevice,’ a crack,’ d . fut p 
LAS X In Yu, find no crevice so, i e., I find

nothing in him to which I can point as a flaw. 
"a ji is interpreted of the spirits of heaven 
and earth, as well as those sacrificed to in the 
ancestral temple, but the saying that the rich

offerings were filial GE would seem to restrict

the phrase to the latter. The eyi was an apron 
made of leather, and coming down over“ the 
knees, and the Fa was a sort of cap or crown,

flat on the top, and projecting before and be- 
hind, with a long fringe on which gems and 
pearls were strung. They were both used in 
sacrificing. "s Mt generally the water-chan- 
nels by which the boundaries of the fields were 
determined, and provision made for their irriga- 
tion, and to carry off the water of floods. The

15 were 4 cubits wide and deen, and arranged 
so as to flow into the V, which were double

tho size. j 
f

80

vb

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

BOOK IX. TSZE HAN.

an

rt 
Cuarter I. The subjects of

BH A X

— (ers) 
— AN -

1. A,

which the Master seldom spoketho size. j 
f

80

vb

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

BOOK IX. TSZE HAN.

an

rt 
Cuarter I. The subjects of

BH A X

— (ers) 
— AN -

1. A,

which the Master seldom spoke

were—profitableness, and also the appointments of Heaven, and per-

fect virtue. 
CHAPTER II. 1.

A man of the village of Tá-heang ,said, * Great

indeed is the philosopher Kung! His learning is extensive, and 
yet he does not render his name famous by any particular thing."

2. 'The Master heard the observation, and said to his disciples, 
„What shall I practise? Shall I practise charioteering, or shall I 
practise archery? I will practise charioteering." |

TIEADING or THIS Boox.—-F- p: p

‘The Master seldom, No. 9. The thirty chap- 
ters of this Book are much akin to those of the 
seventh. They are mostly occupied with the 
doctring; character, and ways of Confucius him- 
self.

1. SUBJECTS SELDOM SPOREN OF BY CoN- 
FUCIUS. zal is mostly taken here in a good

senae, not as selfish gain, but as it is defined 
under the first of the diagrams in the Yih-

king. — 2 Z pn. ‘the harmoniousness of all

that is rigbteous;' that is, how what is right is 
really what is truly profitable. Comp. Mencius, 
I. i. 1. Yet even in this sense Conf. seldom 
spoke of it, as he would not have the consid- 
eration of the profitable introduced into con-

duct at all. With his not speaking of tf there

is a difficulty which I know not how to solve. 
The 1Vth book is nearly all occupied with it, 
and no doubt it was a prominent topic in Conf.

teachings. tit is not our fate, unless in the 
primary meaning of that term, Fatum est

quod dii fantur? Nor is it decree, or antecedent 
purpose and determination, but the decfee em- 
bodied and realized in its object.

2. AMUSEMENT OF CONFUCIUS. AT TIE REMARK 
OF AN IGNORANT MAN ABOUT HIM. Comm, old 
and new, say that the ch shows the exceeding 
humility of the sage, educed by his being praise

ed, but his observation on the man’s remarked, but his observation on the man’s remark

was evidently ironical, I. For want of another 
word, I render Rir tby village.’ According to

the statutes of Chow, ‘five families made g EH,

four pea [ig], and five leu or 500 families a

tang? Who the villager was is not recorded, 
though some would have him to be the same

with If Ss, the boy of whom it is said in the

ase D oh. E

= Ae ANT ERA ot 
old Confucius was a scholar to Henng 15. The 
man was able to see that Confucius was very 
extensively learned, but his idea of fame, come 
mon to the nge, was that it must be acquired by 
excellence in some one particular art. In his lips,

XL F was not more than our ‘My, K ung.

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS,

N 
AYRE

qud 
3g

Nim 
= 
2H

[d

TO tet

eT BS

e RNO,

CAES 
D

ESS

NI

CHAPTER III. I.

scribed by the rules of ceremony, but now a silk one is worn,

N 
m

a 
ANNEN

SEE

P

Bethe

1 
- 
Bi

- 
v

[ d

APER 
SSS =

v

ASS

IN

ET. o E, o na

—

a. 
v 
v

The Master said, The ligen cap is that pre-

It is

economical, and I follow the common practice,

2.

“The rules of ceremony preseribe the bowing below the hall,

but now the practice is to bow only after ascending it. That is arro- 
gant. I continue to bow below the hall, though I oppose the com-

mon practice.”

CuarrER IV. There were four things from which the Master

was entirely free,

He had no foregone conclusions, no arbitrary

predeterminations, no obstinacy, and no egoism. 
CuarrER V. I. The Master was put in fear in K^wang,

2. 
of truth lodged here in me?was entirely free,

He had no foregone conclusions, no arbitrary

predeterminations, no obstinacy, and no egoism. 
CuarrER V. I. The Master was put in fear in K^wang,

2. 
of truth lodged here in me?

3. SOME COMMON PRACTICES INDIFFERENT AND 
OTHERS NOT. I. Ihe cap here spoken of was 
that prescribed to be worn in the ancestral 
temple, and madeof very fine linen dyed of a 
deep dark colour. ‘There are long discussions 
about the number of threads that went into its 
warp. It had fallen into disuse, and was super- 
sedod by a simpler one of silk. Rather than be 
singular, Confucius gave in to a practice, which 
ínvolved no principle of right, and was eco-

nomical. 2. Choo He explains the RETI FF

P. E thus: ‘In the ceremonial intercourse 
between ministers and their prince, it was pro- 
er for them to bow below the raised hall. 
his the prince declined, on which they ascend- 
ed and completed the homage, See this illus-

trated in the K st . ae in loc, The 
prevailing disregard of the first part of the cer, 
Conf. considered inconsistent with the proper 
distance to be obeerved between prince and 
minister, and therefore he would be singular in 
adhering to the rule.

4. FRAILTIES FROM WHICH CONFUCIUS was

FREE. H: itis said, ie not prohibitive here,

He said, “After the death of king Wan, was not the canse

but simply negutive,«- file, This criticism is 
made to make it appear that it waa not by any

effort, as Ha and H more naturally suggest, 
that Confucius attained to these things,

5, CONFUCIUS ASSURED IN A TIME OF DANGER 
BY U CONVICTION OF A DIVINE MISSION, Comp, 
VII. 22, but the adventure to which this ch, 
refers i$ placed in the sage’s history before the 
other, and seems to baee occurred in his 57th 
year, not long after he had resigned office, andeft Loo, 1, There are different opinions as to 
what state K'wang belonged to, The most 
likely is that it was a border town of Ch'ing, 
and its site is now to be found in the dep, of 
K'ae-fuug in Honan, The account is that

K'wang bad suffered from JE JE, an officer of 
Loo, to whom Conf, bere & resemblance. Ag he

passed by the place moreover, a disciple, PASI, 
who had been aesocínted with Yang Foo in his 
operations againet K‘wang, was driving him, 
These círeum, made the people think that Conf, 
was their old enemy, so they attacked him, and 
kept him prisoner for five days. The accounts 
of his escape vary, sume of them being evidently

CONFUCIAN

ts

wo 
t2 
" 
v

SONI HO RSEN

SNN

eee 
REO

HERRN

R-

~~

eles

UNA

d

w

P4

3.

zt

X

=F

El

ANALECTS.

EL 
l

E

T- 
FIGS EY

ao

er

RISUS

-

SEN ESTHER 
EROS TERIS TN

e

IO

pE 
>

U o

* If Heaven had wished to let this cause of truth perish, then

I, a future mortal, should not have got such a relation to that cause. 
While Heaven does not let the cause of truth perish, what can the

people of K*wang do to me?" 
CHAPTER VI. I.

A high officer asked Tsze-kung saying, “May

we not say that your Master is a sage? How various is his ability !” 
2. Tsze Kung said, “Certainly Heaven has endowed him un-

limitedly. He is about a sage.

various."

And, moreover, his ability is

3. The Master heard of the conversation and said, “Does the 
high officer know me? When I was young, iny condition was low, 
and therefore I acquired my ability in many things, but they were

mean matters.

Must the superior man have such variety of ability ?

He does not need variety of ability." 
4. Laou said, The Master said, Having no official employment,

J acquired many arts.“mean matters.

Must the superior man have such variety of ability ?

He does not need variety of ability." 
4. Laou said, The Master said, Having no official employment,

J acquired many arts.“

fabulous, The disciples were in fear. A would 
indicate that Confucius himself was ao, but 
this is denied. 2. 
truth.“ More exactly, it is the truth embodied 
in literature, ceremonies, &c., and its use iu- 
stead of 3H ‘truth in its principles, is attri-

1 ö €4 je?

buted to Conf. modesty. LE 3$. in this, ref, 
to himself. 3. There may be modesty in his use 
of X. büt he here identifies himself with the 
Jine of the great sages, to whom Heaven has in- 
trusted the instruction of men. 1n all the six 
centuries between himself and king Wan, he

does not admit of such another. fé st Ho

che who dies afterwards, a future mortal.

AX render by ‘the cause of | the JE. the

6. Ox THE VARIOUS ABILITY OF CONFUCIUS :— 
RIS BAGEHOOD NOT THEREIN. I. According to

; was the chief of tho

six great officers of state, but the use of the do- 
sipnation in Conf. times was confined tothe states 
of Woo and Sung, and hence the officer in the 
text must have belonged to one of them. See

the st Sie in loc. The force of Ea is as ap- 
pears in the transl. 2. Bü is responded to by 
Tseze-kung with certainly, while yet by the 
use of yg he gives his answer an air of heai- 
tancy. fot c lets him go,’ i. e., does not re-

strict him at all. The officer had found the 
sagehood of Conf. in his various ability by

oo 
veo

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

S 855

`, 
z 
& 
[9]

ERE 
SEES

Pst

> 
=

eke 
ANE

mit c e

tear

\ 
7

FE 
x 
Gl

de 
mK

O

en 
Ai

0

Eu 
Sis 
=

s:

RE

Carter VII. The Master said, “Am I indeed possessed of 
knowledge? Iam not knowing. But if a mean person, who ap- 
péars quite empty-like, ask anything of me, I set it forth from one 
end to the other, and exhaust it."Charter VIII. The Master said, “The rune bird does not come; 
the river sends forth no map :—it is all over with me."

Cuarter IX. When the Master saw a person in a mourning 
dress, or any'one with the cap and upper and lower garments of full 
dress, or a blind person, on observing them approaching, though they 
were youn

by them, he would do so hastily.

the p ‘moreover,’ Tsze-Kkung makes that

ability only an addit. circum. 8. Conf. explains 
hid possess. of various ability, and repudiates 
its being essen. to the sage, or even to the Keun- 
sze. 4. Laou was a disciple, by surname K‘in

QR, and styled Tsze-k‘ac Ga BH ) or Tsze-

chang cr Bie) It is supposed that when

these conversations were being digested into 
their present form, some one remembered that 
Laou had been in the habit of mentioning the 
remark given, aud accordingly it was appended 
to the chapter. indicates that it wasa

frequent saying of Confucius.

j CONFUCIUS ‘DISCLAIMS THE KNOWLEDGE 
ATTRIBUTED TO HIM, AND DBOLAHHB HIS BAR- 
NESTNRSS IN TEACHING. The first sentence here 
was probably au exclamation with reference to 
some remark upon himself as having extraor-

dinary knowledge. Hp H Hj bie * exhi- 
hit qaui- 38 ith, ‘to agitate,") its two ends,’

f. e., discuss it from beginning to end.

8. Fon WANT OF auspicious OMENS, Coxru- 
CIUS GIVES CP THE HOPR OF THE TRIUMPIL OF 
HiB pouTuises. ‘The funy is the male of a fa- 
bulous bird, whieh has beci called the Chinese

ger than himself, he would rise up, and if he had to passger than himself, he would rise up, and if he had to pass

phoenix, said to appear when a sage ascends the 
throne or when right principles are going to 
triumph thro’ the empire. The female is call- 
ed In the days of Shun, they gambolled 
in his hall, and were heard singing. on mount 
K‘e, in the time of king Win. The river and 
the map carry us farther back still,—to the 
time of Fuh-he, to whom a monster with the 
head of a dragon, and the body of a horse, rose 
from the water, being marked on the back so as 
to give that first of the sages the idea of his

diagrams. Conf. indorses these fables. =

B * Sese. V. 26, and obs. how JN.

and d are interchanged.

9. CONFUCIUS’ SYMPATHY WITH SORROW, RR- 
SPECT FOR RANK, AND PITY FOR MISYORTUNE,

. read isse, is the lower edge of a garment’

LA 
and joined yith Eu read ts, ‘mourning gar-

meuts,’ the two char. indicate the mourning of 
the second degree of intensity, where the edge is 
unhemmed, but cut even, instead of being rag-

ged, the terms for which are H zn The 
phrase, however, seems to be for in mourning’ 
generally. AP, up. 3d tone, ‘young.’

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

eoo 
ns

aly

D

m

p

« 
z 
NS

zzi 
Kar 
5

Fi 
SHINEE

€

E

East 
go 
tm

zx 
E 
z

m 
m

-EAR 
1 
zc

SS

NERRRE 
ERN 
SE

a,

M nus Sd 
NE

48 TE cc

! CgaprgR. X. 1. Yen Yuen, in admiration of te Mastér's doctrines, 
sighed and.said, “I looked up to them, and they seemed to become 
more high; I tried to penetrate them, and they seemed to become 
more firm; I looked at them before me, and suddenly they seemed to 
be behind. Ls ;

. 19, “The Master, by orderly method, skilfully leads men on. He 
enlarged my mind with learning, and taught me the restraints of 
propriety. «.

3. “When I wish to give over the study of his doctrines, I cannot 
do so, and having exerted all my ability, there seems something to 
stand right up before me; but though I wish to follow and lay hold 
of it, I really find no way to do so.’CHAPTER XI. 1. The Master being very ill, Tsze-loo wished the 
disciples to act as ministers to him.

2. During a remission of his illness, he said, “ Long has the con- 
duct of Yew been deceitful! By pretending to have. ministers when

I have them not, whom should I impose upon? Should I impose 
upon Heaven?

* 
10. TEN Yurn’s ADMIRATION OF nis MASTER'S + „o v Ji € 
DOCTRINES, AND HIS OWN PROGRESS IN THEM. = f Br EH i M K „have not 
> 2. 4.2 " E a » 
M. Hey HK ih: *sighingly sighed. and | the means whereby to use my strength. th,

54 1 t 
the other verbs here are to be translated in tlie B. ‘yea, indeed.’—It was this which made 
past tense, as the ch. seems to give an account

ol the progress of Hwuy's mind. A. 15722. 
s. suddenly, 2. ED E 5 | xe" to lead for- 
Ward. RZ. VI. 25. 8. Hi

him sigh. 
lb. CONFUCIUS’ DISLIKE OF PRETENBION, AND 
OONTENTMENT WITH HIS CONDITION. I.

> 
‘twas causing,’ or wanted to cause. Conf. had

TH = 5 SR, an ady, ‘uprightly,’ *loftily,

x ‘to follow it, f. e., to advance there-

upon to it. . in the sense of HIE. AE

40

been a great officer, and enjoyed thé services of 
ntinistera, as in a petty court. T'sze-loo, would 
have surrounded him in his great sickness (

38 with the illusions of his former state, and

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

oo 
*

d (ay EE = 
MU NE: i E E `

N 
K !

nd H

3 
Eu

8 
*

Nr

WI

e H

EL SS

Nak

v

TRX]

Na

=] 
mo

i

Wem

v

-

A 
.

yz 
Le 
=

—

HL;

CE 
5 
*

3.

A

zm 
2

os 
8

[d

nb

[ d

den 
morat

w

| 
LAN

-

SERS ER 
BEARES

O

m

s 
— 
vi 
Ld

pot

gH?

E

e

j

E 
2

TE | 
X

bun 
EH

te ilona than that I should die in the hands of ministers,

is it not bétter that I should die in the hands of you, my disciples? 
And though I may not get a great burial, shall I die upon the road ?"

Cuarrer XII. Tsze- kung said, “ There is a beautiful gem here. 
Should I lay it up in a case and keep it? or should I seek for a

good price and sell it P The Master said, Sell it! Sell it!

But ICuarrer XII. Tsze- kung said, “ There is a beautiful gem here. 
Should I lay it up in a case and keep it? or should I seek for a

good price and sell it P The Master said, Sell it! Sell it!

But I

would wait till tlie price was offered.”

CHAPTER XIII. I. 
among the nine wild tribes of th

2. Some one said, “They are rude.

thing?" The Master said, “Ifa 
what rudeness would there be?" 
CHAPTER XIV.

The Master was wishing to go and live

e east. 
How can you do such a 
superior man dwelt among them,

The Master said, *I returned from Wei to Loo,

and then the music was reformed, and the pieces in the Imperial

songs and Praise songs found all

brought on himself this rebuke. 3. t= fot

IR, a conjunction, bun it be that,’=al- 
though. 
12. How tne mise FOR OFFICE SHOULD 
, BE QUALIFIED BY SELF-RESPECT.. 85 js interrog. 
ı here, as in VII. 25. There being no nominative 
to fall. like the ‘I’ in the transl, we might 
render, ‘should it be put, &. N. read Xa, 
up. 3d tone, = uj , ‘price, x value.’ The disciple 
wanted to elicit from Conf, why he declined office

their proper place.”

so much, and insinuated the subject in this way. 
13. How BARBARIANS, CAN BE CIVILIZED.

This ch. is to be understood, it is said like V.

6, not as if Conf. really wished to go among the

E, but that he thus expressed his regret that

his doctr. did not find accept. in China. 1,

see III. 5. There were nine tribes or varieties

(Fifi) of them, the yellow, white, red, Kc. 2.

pij 2 fi. —the Te refers tò hie purpose to 
go among the K.

14. Coxe UCIUS' SERVICES IN CORRECTING THE 
MUSIC OF HIS NATIVE STATE AND ADJUSTING THE 
*

86 
t ci (parn) 
4 pzu 1 
U

-

U 
d

F 
p

PEHÉRTI Sd 
Fake. 
ent- 
nop

REEN

a

T 
=

e

— 
= 
R

Io

7 
A

So 
| Sat

H 
3

Br

=

m 
no

w

HIR

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 
te

A 
S S

S 
RH 
=

A

2

A Bj

VI

CHAPTER XV. The Master said, Abroad, to serve the high minis-REEN

a

T 
=

e

— 
= 
R

Io

7 
A

So 
| Sat

H 
3

Br

=

m 
no

w

HIR

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 
te

A 
S S

S 
RH 
=

A

2

A Bj

VI

CHAPTER XV. The Master said, Abroad, to serve the high minis-

ters and officers; at home, to serve one's father and elder brother; 
in all duties to the dead, not to dare not to exert one's-self; and not 
to be overcome of wine:—what one of these things do I attain to?“.

CHAPTER XVI. The Master standing by a stream, said, “ It passes

on just like this, not ceasing day or night!”

CHAPTER XVII. The Master said, “IE have not seen one who

loves virtue as he loves beauty."

may be compared to what may happen in raising a mound.

Cuaprer XVIII. The Master said, “ The prosecution of learning 
If

there want but one basket of earth to complete the work, and I stop,

Book or Poetry. Conf. returned from Wei to 
Loo in his 60th year, and died 5 years after.

The AE, (read nga, low. 2d tone), and the AG, 
are the names of two, or rather three, of the divi- 
sions of the She-king, the former being the 
‘elegant’ or ‘correct’ odes, to be used with 
music at imperial festivals, and the preiso-songs, 
celebrating principally the virtues of the foun- 
ders of different dynasties, to be used in the 
services of the ancestral temple.

15. Cox rucius' YERY HUMBLE ESTIMATB OF 
HIASELF. Comp. VII. 2, but the things which 
Confucius here disclaims are of a still lower, 
char. than those there mentioned. Very. re- 
markable is the last, as from the sage. The

old interpr, treat Anf E N R 2 as they 
do in VII. 12. BS gen stand together, indicat, 
men of superior rank. If we disting. between 
them, the A^ may express the princes, high 
Officers in the imperial court, and the , the

bigh officers in the princes' courts.

16. How Conructus WAS AFFEOTED BY A 
RUNNING 8TREAM. What does the it in the

transl. refer to? and an indicate somoe-

thing in the sage’s mind, suggested by thé 
ceaseless move. of the water. Choo He makestransl. refer to? and an indicate somoe-

thing in the sage’s mind, suggested by thé 
ceaseless move. of the water. Choo He makes

it * Ah Z IL. Hour ‘course of nature., 
In the fi sh, we find for it ef ES, ‘events,’

‘the things of time? Probably Choo He is cor- 
rect. Comp. Méncius, IV. ii. 18.

17. TAB RARITY OF A 8INCBRE LOVE OP VIR-

TUB. É. as in I. 7.

18, ‘THAT LEARNERS SHOULD NOT CRASE NOR 
INTERMIT THEIR LABOURS. This is a fragment, 
like many other chapters, of some conversation, 
and the subject thus illustrated must be sup- 
plied, after the mod. comm., as in the transla- 
tion, or, after the old, by ‘the following of vir- 
tue’ See the Shoo-king, V. v. 9, where the 
subject is virtuous consistency. We might

expect 2p. in m Hh to be a verb, like 43

[ro] 
p«1

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

e 
Xd.

[ d

EES 
T wel}

v

Ti

v 
-

N 
*

[ d

MISHÉSRES

[ d 
w

a

SINL 
— ERRED | gu

le]

SW aA LE ah

nane Est

*

ajf

[ER 
rnm

enr

v

Wer 
Sede

. 2

the stopping is my own work. It may be compared to throwing 
down the earth on the level ground. Though but one basketful is : 
thrown at a time, the advancing with it is my own going forward.” 
Cuaprer XIX. The Master said, Never flagging when I set. 
forth anything to him;—ah! that is Hwuy.” 
Carter XX. The Master said of Yen Yuen, Alas! 
constant advance. I never saw him stop in his' progress." 
CuarrER XXI. The Master said, “ There are cases in which the 
blade springs, but the plant does not go on to flower! There are 
cases where it flowers, but no fruit is subsequently produced!” 
CuaPrER XXII. The Master said, “A youth is to be regarded 
with respect. . How do we know that his future will not be equal to 
our present? If he reach the age of forty or fifty, and has not 
made himself heard of, then indeed he will not be worth being re- 
garded with respect.” i

in y ul. buta good sense cannot be made

out by taking jt 30. =‘ tho’ only,’ as many

I saw hisin y ul. buta good sense cannot be made

out by taking jt 30. =‘ tho’ only,’ as many

I saw his

as if it wero so, The , ‘not yet,’ would ra- 
ther make us think differently.

take it in VI. 24. The lesson of the ch. is—that 
Tepeated acquisitions individually small will 
ultimately amount to much, and that the learn- 
cr is never to give over. $

19. HWUY THB EARNEBT STUDENT.

20. CONFUCIV8’ FOND RECOLLECTION OF HwWw-¾ ꝰ r 
AB A MODEL STUDENT. This is said to have

been spoken after Hwuy's death. TU YE. looks

21. Ir 16 TUB BND WHICH CROWNS THE WORK, 
22. How AND WHY A YOUTH SHOULD BE RBE- 
GARDBD WITH RBSPRCT. The same person is 
Spoken of throughout the ch., as is shown by

the Jk in the last sentence. This is not very con-

clusive, but it brings out a good enough mean-

ing. With Conf. remark compare that of John

Trebonius, Luther’s schoolmaster at Eisenach,

who used. to raise his cap to his pupils on enter-

ing the schoolroom, and gave as the reason 
M i

-

eo 
o

mee

m es

n 7] fs

SE EIE

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. -

+e . ee = 2k

Ke

v

UN

e

BE

bz 
v 
w 
r

-

E ME

RU 
Juez

Ld

(NRI

45 iJ 
D

ae

=A 
T

fea

v

FAR

. 
a T Ly 2 
r1 EH ` 2 llr

CuaPTER XXIII. The Master said, Can men refuse to assent 
to the words of strict admonition? But it is reforming the conduct

because of them which is valuable.

Can men refuse to be pleased

with words of gentle advice? But it is unfolding their aim which.

is valuable.

If a man be pleased with these words, but docs not

unfold their aim, and assents to those, but does not reform his con- 
duct, I can really do nothing with him.”

. Cuaprer XXIV. The Master said, “Hold faithfulness: and sin- 
cerity as first principles. Have no friends not equal to yourself. 
When you have faults, do not fear to abandon them.” 1

CHAPTER XXV. The Master said, The commander of the forces 
of a large state may be carried off, but the will of even a common

man cannot be taken from him."CHAPTER XXV. The Master said, The commander of the forces 
of a large state may be carried off, but the will of even a common

man cannot be taken from him."

*'There are among these boys men of whom God 
will one day make burgomasters, chancellors, 
doctors, and magistrates. Although you do not 
yet see them with the badges of their dignity, 
it is right that you should treat them with re-

spect.’ 16 22 after born,’ a youth. See N. 
4E. nr. 8.

23. THE HOPELESSNESS OF THE CASE OF 
THOSE WHO ASSENT AND APPROVE WITHOUT RE-

* 
FORMATION OR SERIOUS THOUGHT. ik EUN Z 
m—- ET wu >) R 
LL words of law-like admonition. Eg, is

'the name of the diagram, to which the element 
of ‘wind’ is attached. Wind enters everywhere, 
hence the char. is interpreted by ‘entering,’

and also by ‘mildness,’ ‘yielding.’ E: Eu Z 
=, ‘words of gentle insinuation? In E 77

=

Ts tb an anteced, to 2. is readily found 
in the prec. FF but in ak z= $3 tb such

an anteced. can only be found in a roundabout 
way. This is one of the cases which shows the 
inapplicability to Chinese composítion of our

strict syntactical apparatus, * as in ch, 10.

y

24. This is a repetition of part of I. 8, 
26. TRE WILL UNSUBDUABLE. == A. see 
VIL 10. él. read shwae, lower 3d tone, =: HE 
fili. ‘a general. [JL, ‘mate.’ We find in the 
dict. —' Husband and wife of thé common peo-

ple are a pair dag LL), and the applica. of tue 
term being thus fixed, an individual man is

called pc E an individual woman pu ih.

* 
r

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS,

EUR RE 
E MEN, E

+ 
gn 
D

=T

-

CEN 
ESSN

— 
NS 
0

Re 
mere

CnarrꝝER XXVI. 1.

oo 
e

=] 
3 
3+ 
Eo " 
E

HSF

mi

r

= 
saz

s

\ 
d

Em

= 
=

The Master said, * Dressed himself in a tat-

tered robe quilted with hemp, yet standing by the side of men dressed 
1

in furs, and not ashamed ;,—ah! it is Yew w

o is equal to this.

2. He dislikes none, he courts nothing ;—what can he do but

what is good?“in furs, and not ashamed ;,—ah! it is Yew w

o is equal to this.

2. He dislikes none, he courts nothing ;—what can he do but

what is good?“

3. Tsze-loo kept continually repeating these words of the ode, 
when the Master said, “ Thóse things are by no means sufficient to

constitute perfect excellence."

Cnuarrern XXVII.

The Master said, “When the year becomes

cold, then we know how the pine and the cypress are the last to lose

their leaves.” 
Cuaprer XXVIII.

The Master said, The wise are free from

perplexities ; the virtuous from anxiety; and the bold from fear.“ 
CuAprzn XXIX. The Master said, “There are some with whom 
we may study in common, but we sball find them unable to go along

with us to principles.

20, 'Pszg-Loo'8 BRAVE CONTENTMENT IN ro- 
VERTY, BUT FAILURE TO SEEK THE nionxsr AIMS. 
1. On the constr. of this par., comp. ch. 19. The

LUN is the fox. The $4. rend I, is probably

the badger. It is described as nocturnal in its 
habits, yielding a soft, warm, fur, It slecps 
much, and is carnivorous. This last character- 
istie is not altogether inapplicable to the bad-

ger. See the Zk Hi. Ek th. 2 Sec the She- 
king, 1. iti, 8. st. 4. 3. N Ey, not ‘all hie life,

as frequently. but ‘continually.’ ''aze-loo was a 
mon of impulse. with many fine points, but not 
euffivicutly reflective.

Perhaps we may go on with them to prin-

27, MEN ARE KNOWN IN TIMES OF ADVERSITY, 
4% n. ‘the after-withering,’ a meiosis for 
their being evergreens,

28. SEQUENCES OF WISDOM, VIRTUE, AND BRA- 
VERY. 1 4 Add. ini ie one of the say-

ings about virtue, which is only true of pious 
trust in God. f

29. How DIFFERENT INDIVIDUALS STOP AT 
DIFFERENT STAGES OF PROGRESS. More literal- 
ly rendered, thía ch. would be—‘It may be pos- 
sible with some parties together to study, but. it 
may not yet be possible with them to go on to

priuciples, &c.' fib. the weight of a steel-yard,

BS

NE 
EH 
a

T 
en 
m

E 
Fa

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

x . 
H èpriuciples, &c.' fib. the weight of a steel-yard,

BS

NE 
EH 
a

T 
en 
m

E 
Fa

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

x . 
H è

ciples, but we shall find them unable to get established in those 
along with us. Or if we may get so established along with them, we 
shall find them unable to weigh occurring events along with us.’

' CHAPTER XXX. 1.

How the flowers of the aspen-plum flutter

and turn! Do I not think of you? But your house is distant.

2. The Master said, “ It is the want of thought about it.

is it distant?”

then ‘to weigh.’ It isused here with ref. to oc- 
curring events,—to weigh them and determine 
the application of principles to them. In the 
old comm., gë is used here in opposition to W. 
the latter being that which is always, nnd 
everywhere right, the former a deviation from 
that in particular circumstances, to bring things 
right. This meaning of the term here is de- 
nied. The ancients adopted it probably from 
their interpretation of the second clause in the 
next ch., which they made one with this.

30. THE NECESSITY OF REFLECTION. 1. This 
is from one of the pieces of poetry, which Conf. 
did not adinit into his collection, and no more 
of it being preserved than what we have here, 
it is not altogether intelligible, There are long

disputes about the jaz Bi. Choo He makes

it a kind of small plum or cherry tree, whose 
leaves are constantly quivering, even when

How

there is no wind, and adopting a reading, in a 
book of the Tsin (H) dyn., of hij for 1hj-

and changing into i. he makes out tho 
meaning in the transl. The old comm. keep the 
text, and interpret. How perversely contrary 
are the flowers of the T‘ang-tae!’ saying that 
those flowers are first open and then shut. 
This view made them take ME in the last ch., 
as we have noticed. Who or what is meant by

BB in EF XH, we cannot tell. The two

m are mere expletives, completing the rhythm.BB in EF XH, we cannot tell. The two

m are mere expletives, completing the rhythm.

2. With this par. Choo He compares VII. 30.— 
The whole ch. is like the 20th of the last book, 
and suggests the thought of its being an addi- 
tion by another hand to the original compila- 
tion.

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 91

BOOK X. HEANG TANG.

E

d 
"t 
S

= mamn 
=

E 
mee

Sees 
ci 
+

S 
7

n

CHAPTER I. 1. Confucius, in his village, looked simple and sin- 
cere, and as if he were not able to speak.

2. When he was in the prince's ancestorial temple, or in the 
court, he spoke minutely on every point, but cautiously.

CnarrER II. 1l. When he was waiting at court, in speaking with 
the officers of the lower grade, he spake freely, but in a straight- 
forward manner; in speaking with the officers of the higher grade, 
he did so blandly, but precisely.

9. When the prince was present, his manner displayed respect- 
ful uncasiness ; it was grave, but self-possessed.

Heavrne or riis Boox.— $f de aE T

“The village, No 10. This book is different in 
its character from all the others in the work. 
It contains hardly any sayings of Confucius, 
but is descriptive of his ways and demeanour 
in a variety of places and circumstances. It is 
not uninteresting, but, as a whole, it does not 
heighten our veneration for the sage. We seem 
to know him better from it, and to Western 
minds, after being viewed in his bedchamber, 
his undregs, and at his meals, he becomes divest- 
ed of a good deal of his dignity and reputation. 
‘There is something remarkable about the style.

Only in one passage is he styled PE The 
Master’ He ‘appears either as FL F. * The

philosopher, K‘ung, or as ; „The superiorOnly in one passage is he styled PE The 
Master’ He ‘appears either as FL F. * The

philosopher, K‘ung, or as ; „The superior

man.“ A suspicion is thus raised that the 
chronicler had not the same relation to him as 
the compilers of the other books. Anciently, 
the book formed only one chapter, but it is now 
arranged under seventeen divisions. Those di- 
visions, for convenience in the translation, I con- 
tinue to denominate chapters, which is done 
also in some native editions.

J. DEMME NOUR OF CONFUCIUS IN HIS VILLAGE, 
AN THE ANCESTRAL TEMPLE, AND IN THE COURT.

1. In the dict., quoting from a record of ‘the 
former Han dyn., the sig contained 2,500

families, and the 712 only 500, but the two

terms are to be taken here together, indicating 
the residence of the Sage’s relatives. His native 
place in Loo is doubtless intended, and perhaps

the original seat of his family in Sung. y

ti Tfj] is expl. by Wang Suh ‘mild-like, and

by Choo He, as in the transl., thinking proba- 
bly that, with that meaning, it suited the next

clause better. 2. (ili. read p'een, lower 1st tone 
=F, ‘to debate,’ ‘to discriminate accurately.’

H H. . In those two places of high ceremony

and of government, it became the sage, it is 
said, to be precise and partienlar. Comp. III. 15.

2. DRUuRANJouR or CONFUCIUS AT COURT 
WITH OTHER OFFICERS, AND BEFORE THE PRINCE,

1. may be taken here as a verb, lit. court-

ing) It was the custom for all the officers to 
repair at daybreak to the court, and wait for

the prince to give them audience. * *. 
“great officer, was n general nume, applicable

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 
LI

E m duh d SUE ,

Ld

1. PP tE 
8 RAE m m F. f JE A,

Guaprer III. 1. When the prince called him to employ him in 
the reception of a visitor, his countenance appeared to change, and 
his legs to bend beneath him. jLd

1. PP tE 
8 RAE m m F. f JE A,

Guaprer III. 1. When the prince called him to employ him in 
the reception of a visitor, his countenance appeared to change, and 
his legs to bend beneath him. j

2. He inclined himself to the other officers among whom he stood, 
moving his left or right arm, as their position required, but keeping 
the skirts of his robe before and behind evenly adjusted. ,

3. He hastened forward, with his arms like the wings of a bird.

4. , When the guest. had retired, he would report to the prince, 
“The visitor is not turning round any more.”

CHAPTER IV. 1. When he entered the palace gate, he seemed 
to bend his body, as if it were not sufficient to adinit him.

to all the higher ministers ina court, At the 
imperial court they were divided into three

classes,—‘highest,’ ‘middle,’ and ‘lowest,’ Ex

nuncio, in immediate commun. with himself,

was the t f the next was the HK Hf

and below were one or more ýa T Conf.

H „ Jr, but the various princes, had only the 
first and third. Of the first order there were 
properly three, the Mf, or nobles of the state,

who were in Loo the chiefs of the ‘three fami- 
lies. Confucius belonged himself to the-lower

grade. 2. sH gs. ‘the feet moving uneasily,’ 
indieating the respectful anxiety of the mind. 
fli, low. 1st tone, here appears in the phrase

Ba B An th, jn a new sense.

3. Dssesnour or CONFUCIUS AT THR or- 
FICIAL RECEPTION OF a visitor. 1. The visitor 
is supposed to be the prince of another state. 
On the occasion of two princes mecting there 
was much ceremony. ‘The visitor having arrived, 
remained outside the front gate, and the host 
inside his reception room, which was jin the 
ancestral temple. Messages pnssed between 
them by means of a number of officers called

T, on the side of the visitor, and 4, on theT, on the side of the visitor, and 4, on the

side of the host, who formed a zigzag line of 
communication from the one to the 71 and 
passed their questions and answers along, till un 
understanding about the visit was thus officially

effected. A 2 an lis explained by Hig

ae : 
Jeg iP. ‘the appearance of turning round and 
inclination.’ I suppose I have expressed the idea 
in the transl. 2. This shows Conf. manner when 
engaged in the transmission of the messages 
between the prince and his visitor, The priuce's

must have been the shing pint, bowing to the 
right as he transmitted a message to the shang 
pin, who was an officer of the higher grade, and 
to the left as he commun, one from him to the 
shaou pin. 3. The host having come out to 
receive his visitor, proceeded in with him, it is 
said, followed by all their internuncios in u 
line, and to his manner in this movement this 
par. is generally referred. But the duty of eco- 
ing the guest off, thesubj. of next par., belonged 
to the shaag pix, and could not be performed by 
Conf. as merely n shing pin. Hence arises u 
diffieulty. Either it is true that Conf. wag at 
one time raised to the rank of the highest dig- 
Nitaries of the state, or he wns temporarily 
employed. for his knowl. of cerem., after the 
tirst act in the reception of visitors, to dischurge 
the duties of one, Assuming this, the E ME

is to be explained of some of his movements 
in the reception room, How could he hurry 
forward when walking in file with the other

internuncios? See the TH en Bb II, 93. 4.

4 1 2 
ifs 48 án ‘would return the commission,’

i. c., he had seen the guest off. according to his 
duty, and reported it. The ways of China, it 
appears, were much the same anciently ns now. 
A guest turns round and bows repeatedly in 
leaving, and the host can't return to his place, 
till these salutations are ended.4. DEMEANOUR ov Conruciva IN THE COURT 
AT AN AUDIENCE, I. The imperial court. con- 
sisted of five divisions, each having its peculiar

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

M 
Sp

4

88 
ES 
um

2 
M 
zb

— 
| FREED:

7910 
—

v

o

I

v 
v

x 
a

=o

o 
c

HEWSEES,.

EL 
BuO

ga ea Al 
SEO et

ES

RE 
x 
i

A

S

2. When he was standing, he did not occupy the middle of the 
gate-wav; when he passed in or out, he did not tread upon the

threshold.

3. When he was passing the vacant place of the prince, his counte- 
nance appeared to change, and his legs to bend under hin, and his 
words came as if he hardly had breath to utter them.

4. He ascended the dais, holding up his robe with both his

hands, and his body bent; holding in his breath also, as if he dared 
not breathe.

5. When he came out from the audience, as soon as'he had 
descended one step, he began to relax his countenance, and had a 
satisfied look. When he had got to the bottom of the steps, he 
advaneed rapidly to his place, with his arms like wings, and on

occupying it, his manner stil showed respectful uneasiness.

Cnarrer V. 1.

When he was carrying the sceptre of his prince,

he seemed to bend his body, as if he were not able to bear its weight, 
He did not hold it higher than the position of the hands in making

gute. That of a prince of a state consisted on- 
ly of three, whose gates were named hii. SHE

*

and The AA PH is the foo, or first of 
these. The bending his body when passing

through, high as the gate was. is supposed to 
indicate the great reverence which Conf. felt.

2 Jr Pi- oft fA f, tea

not stand opposite the middle of the gate-way.’ 
Each gate hid a post in the centre, called p. by2 Jr Pi- oft fA f, tea

not stand opposite the middle of the gate-way.’ 
Each gate hid a post in the centre, called p. by

which it was divided into two halves, appropriat- 
ed to ingress and egress, The prince only could 
stand in the centre of either of them, and he 
only could tread on the threshold or sill. 3. 
At the early formal audience at day-break, 
when the prince came out of the inner apart- 
ment, and received the homage of the officers,

he occupied à particular spot called e This

is the tr now empty, which Confucius passes 
in his way to the audience in the inner apart- 
ment. 4. see IX.9. Ile is now ascending

the steps to the A, *the dais, or raised plat-

form in the inner apartment, where the prince 
held bis council, or gave entertainments, and 
from which the family rooms of the palace 
branched off. 5. The audience js now over, and. 
Conf. is returning to his usual place at the for-

mal audience. K'ung Gan-kwó makes the ^r

to be the > in par. 3, but improperly. ME 
after ta is an addition that has somehow crept 
into the ordinary text. .

5. DreuEANOUR OF CONFUCIUS WHEN EMPLOY- 
ED ON A FRIENDLY Buhassr. I. SE, may be

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

R E A ACE S EC 
DPA PPSE S I5. DreuEANOUR OF CONFUCIUS WHEN EMPLOY- 
ED ON A FRIENDLY Buhassr. I. SE, may be

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

R E A ACE S EC 
DPA PPSE S I

a bow, nor lower than their position in giving anything to another. 
His countenance seemed to change, and look apprehensive, and he 
dragged his feet along as if they were held by something to the 
ground. l 
2. In presenting the presents with which he was charged, he wore 
a placid appearance, 
3. At his private audience, he looked highly pleased. 
CHAPTER VI. 1. The superior man did not use a deep purple, 
or a puce colour, in the ornaments of his dress. 
2. Even in his undress, he did not wear anything of a red or red- 
dish colour. : HP. 
3. In warm weather, he had a single garment either of coarse or 
fine texture, but he wore it displayed over an inner.garment. 
4. Over lamb’s fur he wore a garment of black; over fawn's fur 
one of white; and over fox's fur one of yellow.

translated ‘sceptre, in the sense simply of ‘a 
badge of authority. It was a precious stone, 
conferred by the emperor on the princes, and 
differed in size and shape, according to their 
rank, They took it with them when they at- 
tended the imper. court, and, ace. to Choo He, 
and the old interpr., it was carried also by their 
representatives, us their voucher, on occasions

of embassies among themselves. In the 111

& ait II. 33, however, it is contended, appar. 
on suff. grounds, that the sceptre then employed 
was different from the other. „ up. 1st tone,

to be equal to,’ ‘able for.“ 2. The prec. par. 
describes Conf, manner in the friendly court, 
. at his first interview, showing his credentials, 
and delivering his message. That done, he had 
to deliver the various presents with which he

was charged. This was called , N. 3.

After all the public presents were delivered, 
the ambassador had others of his own to give, 
and his interview for that purpose was called

& .—Choo He remarks that there is no 
record of Confucius ever having been employed& .—Choo He remarks that there is no 
record of Confucius ever having been employed

on such a mission, and supposes that this ch., 
and the preced., are simply summaries of the 
manner in which he used to say duties refer- 
red to in them ought to be discharged.

6. RULES or CoNFUCID8 IN REGARD TO HIS 
DRES8.— The discussions about the colours here

mentioned are lengthy and tedious. lam not 
confident that I have given them all correctly

in the transl. 1. pis X used here to denote 
Confucius can hardly have come from the hand

of a disciple. Hz dj u JR É ‘a

deep azure flushed with carnation,’

md

&. ‘a deep red; it was dipped thrice in a red

dye, and then twice in a black.’ $i. *for orna- 
ment,’ i.e, for the edgings of the collar and 
sleeves. The kan, it is said, by Choo He, after 
K'ung Gan-kwü, was worn in fasting, and the 
tsow in mourning, on which account Confucius 
would not use them. See this and the account 
of the colours denied in the Tff ft att in loc,

2. There are five colours which go by the nume

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

vi . Aa Spt SES J

£1 | 
1 
Ne E 
X, 8

5. The fur robe of his undress was long, with the right sleeve

short.

6. He required his sleeping dic to be half as long again as his

body.

7. 
badger.

8. When he put off mourning 
the girdle.

9.

When staying at home, he used thick furs of the fox or the

, he wore all the appendages of

His under-garment, except when it was required to be of

the curtain shape, was made of silk cut narrow above and wide

below.

10. He did not wear lamb’s fur, or a black cap, on a visit of .

condolence,

11. 
and presented himself at court.

of IE ‘correct,’ viz., LE ii. . Ey. m

‘azure, yellow, carnation, white, and black;“ 
others, among which are AL and X. go by the

See the fË

Bm in loc. Conf. would use only the correct 
colours, and moreover, Choo He adds, red and 
reddish-blue are liked by women and girls.

E. Ak. his dress, when in private. 3. sh andSee the fË

Bm in loc. Conf. would use only the correct 
colours, and moreover, Choo He adds, red and 
reddish-blue are liked by women and girls.

E. Ak. his dress, when in private. 3. sh and

L^ were made from the fibres of a creeping 
plant, the B. See the She-king, I. i. 2. DA

X m Hi x *he must display and have

it outwards.’ The interpr. of this, as in the 
transl, after Choo He, tho’ diff. from the old 
comm., seems to be correct, 4. The lamb's fur 
belonged to the court dress, the fawn’s was worn 
on enibassies, the fox's on occasions of sncrifice, 
& C. 5. Conf. know how to blend comfort and 
convenience, 6. This par. it is supposed, be- 
longs to the next ch., in which case it is not the

name of „or ‘intermediate.’

On the first day of the month, he put on his court robes,

usual sleeping garment of Conf. that is spoken 
of, but the one he used in fasting. R ; low. 3d

tone, ‘over,’ *overplus. 7. These are the 25 
zi of par. 5. 8. The appendages of the girdle 
were, the handkerchief, 2 small knife, a spike 
for opening knots, &c. d up. 2d tone, ‘to 
put away.’ 9. The vas the lower garment,

reaching below the knees like a kilt or petti- 
coat. For court and sac. dress, it was made 
curtain like, as wide at top as at bottom. In 
that worn on other occasions, Conf. saved the 
cloth in the way described. So, at least, says

K‘ung Gan-kwo. , read shae, up. 3d tone.

10. Lamb’s fur was worn black (par. 4), but 
white is the colour of mourning in China, and 
Conf, would not visit mourners, but in a sym- 
pathizing colour. 11. „ the fortunate

day of the moon,’ i. e, the first of the month.

This was Conf. practice, after he had ceased to 
be in office.

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

96 
"p A SE US AMES) ah |

Sep

e

DSS

x

8185 
SH Wea

Cuarter VIL 1. When fasting, he thought it necessary to have 
his clothes, brightly clean, and made of linen cloth. lCONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

96 
"p A SE US AMES) ah |

Sep

e

DSS

x

8185 
SH Wea

Cuarter VIL 1. When fasting, he thought it necessary to have 
his clothes, brightly clean, and made of linen cloth. l

2. When fasting, he thought it necessary to change his food, 
and also to change the place where he commonly satin the apart- 
ment. ; 1 ]

CHAPTER VIII. 1. He did not dislikerto have his rice finely 
cleaned, nor to have his minced meat cut quite small.

2. He did not eat rice which had been injured by heat or damp 
and turned sour, nor fish or flesh which was gone. He did not 
eat what was discoloured, or what was of a bad flavour, hor any- 
thing which was not in season. r i :

3. He did not eat meat which was not cut properly, nor what 
was served without its proper sauce. l

4. Though there might be a large quantity of meat, he would 
not allow what he took to exceed the due proportion for the rice. 
It was only in wine that he laid down no limit for himself, but he 
did not allow himself to be confused by it.

5. He did not partake of wine and dried meat, bought in the 
market. i

» * LI 
* N. 2 1 g om J: s 
7. RULES OBSERVED BY CONFUCIGS WHEN it to the state of 35 rice, 2. B£ in the

PASTING, I. HK, read chae, up Ist tone; see

VIL 12. The 6th par. of last ch. should come 
in as the 2d here. 2. The fasting was not from 
all food, but only from wine or spirits, and from

pot herbs. Observe the diff. between V and

XB the former ‘to change,’ the lat. ‘to change

from,’ ‘to remove.“ The whole ch, may be com- 
pared with Matt. VI. 16-18.

8. Ruves or Conrucivs ABOUT BIS FOOD. 1. 
na. ‘minced meat, acc, to the comm., was

made of beef, mutton, or fish, uncooked. 100 
shing of paddy were reduced to 30, to bring

dict., is ‘overdone,’ hence A =‘ wrong

in being overdone.’ Some, however, make the 
phrase to mean ‘badly cooked,’ either, under-dict., is ‘overdone,’ hence A =‘ wrong

in being overdone.’ Some, however, make the 
phrase to mean ‘badly cooked,’ either, under-

done, or overdone. 4. 1 (tsze) Sg, * the breath 
of the rice,’ or perhaps, ‘the life-sustaining 
power of it, but T can hardly be translated 
here. nf — HE. ‘only,’ showing, it is said, 
that in other things he had a limit, but the use 
of wine being to make glad, he could not before- 
hand set a limit to the quantity of it. 6. Lit.,

‘He did not take away ginger in eating.’ 8. 
The prince, anciently (and it is still a custom),

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

q

AI 
Der

Cog mL

o

POs

N 
1 Bao 
zu 
*

[ d

ES.

EES SESS 
=

aM 
de

| 
|

ay

€

m

H 
ZR M di

6. He was never without ginger when he ate,

7. He did not cat much,

8. When he had been assisting at the prince's sacrifice, he did

not keep the flesh which he received over night. The flesh of his

family sacrifice he did not keep over three days, If kept over three

days, people could not eat it.

an Wher eating, he did not converse. When in bed, he did not

speak.

510 Although his food might be coarse rice and vegetable soup,

he would offer a little of it in sacrifice with a grave respectful air. 
Cuarrer IX, If his mat was not straight, he did not sit on it. 
CuarrER X, 1, When the villagers were drinking together, on

those who carried staves going out, he went out immediately after. 
2. When the villagers were going through their ceremonies to.

drive away pestilential influences, he put on his court robes and

stood on, the eastern steps.

distributed among the assisting ministera the 
flesh of his sacrifice. Each would only get a 
little, and so it could be used at once, 10. Nstood on, the eastern steps.

distributed among the assisting ministera the 
flesh of his sacrifice. Each would only get a 
little, and so it could be used at once, 10. N

should be changed into . according to Choo 
Ile. ' Ho Au, however, retains it, and putting a 
comma after, it, joins it with the two preced, 
specimens of spare diet. "The ‘sacrificing’ refers 
to 9 custom something like our saying grace, 
‘The master took a few grains of rice, or part of 
the other provisions, and placed them on the 
ground, among the sacrificial vessels, a tribute 
to the worthy or worthies who first taught the 
art of cooking. The Buddhist priests in their 
monasteries have a custom of this kind, and on 
public occasions, as when Ke-ying gave an 
entertainment ia Hongkong in 1845, something 
like it is sometimes observed, but any such 
ceremony is unknown among the common habits 
of the people. However poor might be his fare,

Confucius always observed it. HR, chae, N

LJ 
the grave demeanour appropriate to fasting, T 
9. Rue or CONFUCIUS ABOUT HIS MAT. 
10. OTHER wars or CONFUCIUS IN HIS VIL 
LAGE, l, At sixty, people carried staves. Conf,

here showed his reepeet for age. Tr has here 
an adverbial foree,= Erf]. 2. There were three

ceremoníes eyery year, but that in the text

was called ‘the great zo, being observed in the 
winter season, when the officers led all the people 
of a village about. searching every house to ex- 
pel demons, and drive away pestilence. It was 
conducted with great aproar, and little better 
than a play, but Conf. saw a good old iden in 
‘it, and when the mob was in his house, he stood. 
on the eastern steps (the place of a host receiving 
guests) ín full dress. Some make the steps 
those of his ancestral temple, and his standing 
there io be to assure the spirits of his shrine.

€ONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

9 
FE = — A — 
is xa Lez] z^ Ere)

i

= 
*

woe

DNE

Spat 
X

enema 
ET

ux

Dum 
ad

b U »

v

Hm 
Owes

Ns 
USS itt

dev 
7

O 
v

ARN KE

BG

[ d€ONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

9 
FE = — A — 
is xa Lez] z^ Ere)

i

= 
*

woe

DNE

Spat 
X

enema 
ET

ux

Dum 
ad

b U »

v

Hm 
Owes

Ns 
USS itt

dev 
7

O 
v

ARN KE

BG

[ d

n 
H

Cuaprer XI. 1. When he was sending complimentary inquiries 
tb any one in another state, he bowed twice as he escorted the mes- 
senger away.

2. Ke K'ang having sent him a present of physic, he bowed and 
received it, saying, *1 do not know it. I dare not taste it."

CuaPTER XII. The stable being burned down, when he was at 
court, on his return he said, “Has any man been hurt?” He did 
not ask about the horses. '

Cuarrer XIII. 1. When the prince sent him a gift of cooked 
meat, he would adjust his mat, first taste it, and then give it away to 
others. When the prince sent him a gift of undressed meat, he would 
have it cooked, and offer it to the spirits of his ancestors. When the 
prince sent him a gift of a living animal, he would keep it alive.

2. When he was in attendance on the prince and joining in the 
entertainment, the prince only sacrificed. He first tasted every

thing.

11. Trarrs or CONFUCIUS’ INTERCOURSE 
WITH OTHERS. 1. The two bows were not to 
the messenger, but intended for the distant

friend to whom he was being sent. 2. ht was

the 2 BE of II. 20, et al. Conf. accepted

the gift, but thought it necessary to let the 
donor know he couid not, for the present at 
least, avail himself of it.

12. How CONFUCIUS VALUED HUMAN LIFE 
A x was fitted to accommodate 216 horses. 
Sce the tE E in loc. It may be used indeed 
for a private stable, but it is more natural to 
tuke it here for the ld or state kew, ‘This is 
the view in tlie 2x an’

18. DEMEANOUR OF CONFUCIUS IN RELATION 
TO itis PRINCE. J. He would not offer the 
couked meat to the spirits of his ancestors, not18. DEMEANOUR OF CONFUCIUS IN RELATION 
TO itis PRINCE. J. He would not offer the 
couked meat to the spirits of his ancestors, not

knowing but it might previously have been 
offered by the prince to the spirits of his. But 
he reverently tasted it, as if he had been in the 
prince's presence. He ‘honoured’ the gift of 
cooked food, glorified’ the undressed, and waa

kind’ to the living animal. 2. The I here is

that in ch. 8, 10. Among parties of equal rank, 
all performed the ceremony, but Conf., with his 
prince, held that the prince sacrificed for all. 
He tasted every thing, as if he had been a cook, 
it being the cook’s duty to taste every dish, be-

fore the prince partook of it. 3. H. upper 3d

tone, 54 I , ‘the direction of the head.’ The

head to the east was the proper position for a 
person in bed; a sick man might for comfort be 
lying differently, but Conf. would not see the 
prince but in the correct position, and also in 
the court dress, so far as he could accomplish 
it. 4. He would not wait a moment, but let. 
his carriage follow him.

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

3 Hs 
5

2

pl d My,

n

(T1 LIT ie . 
LEE E UM ES 
% ME JS Vesp sc 8. 8H c 
MEE J, UN & A. AT Je Bic 
W J^ Jà Ff. e dE N. A es

P Ro ; TR Ajo 8) 
41 Fe H fu x.

JR

8. When he was sick and the prince came to visit him, he had 
his head to the east, made his court robes be spread over him, and

drew his girdle across them.

4. When the prince's order called him, without waiting for his 
carriage to be yoked, he went at once.

CuaPTER XIV.

state, he asked about everything.

When he entered the ancestral temple of the

CharrER XV. 1. When any of his friends died, if he had no.

relations who could be depended 
would say, “1 will bury him.“ 
2. 
riage and horses, he did not bow. 
3. ‘The only present for which

of sacrifice. 
CHAPTER XVI. 1. In bed, he

on for the necessary offices, he

When a friend sent him a present, though it might be a car-

he bowed was that of the fleshof sacrifice. 
CHAPTER XVI. 1. In bed, he

on for the necessary offices, he

When a friend sent him a present, though it might be a car-

he bowed was that of the flesh

did not lie like a corpse. At

home, he did not put on any formal deportment.

' 2. . When he saw any one in a mourning dress, though it might 
e an acquaintance, he would change countenance; when hesaw

any one wearing the cap of full dress, or a blind person, though

he might be in his undress, he would salute them in a ceremonious

manner.

M. A repetition of III. 15. Comp. also ch. 
2. 'lhese two passages make tho explanation, 
given at III. 15, of the questioning being on his 
first entrance on office very doubtful.

15. TRAITS or CONFUCIUS IN THE RELATION

U 
or A FRIEND. 1. JJ, properly, ‘the closing 
up of the coffin,’ is here used for all the expenses 
and services necessary tointerment. 2. Between 
friends there should be a community of goods.

"repeated, with heightening circumstances,

‘The flesh of sacrifice,’ however, was that which 
had been offered by his friend to the spirits of his 
parents or ancestors. ‘That demanded acknow- 
ledgment.

16. CoxFucivs IN BED, AT HOME, HEARING 
THUNDER, &c. 2. Comp. IX. 9, which is here 
3.

ww. .

Xx is the front bar of a cart or carriage. In 
fact, the carriage of Confucius’ time was

CONFUCIAN ANALECTA,

8

l 
Et 
EA 
Sit 
m

o

Se 
Us 
[E 
c

E

REX 
^ 
No

e

LIN

| 
8 
Se 
es 
F 
8 i

FUE

E RØA MK 
W M I um ME,

3. To any person in mourning he bowed forward to the cross.

bar of his carriage; he bowed in the same way to any one bearing 
. the tables of population. ‘ `

4. When he was at an entertainment where there was an Abun- 
dance of provisions set before him, he would change countenance 
and rise up: n

5. Ona sudden clap of thunder, or a violent wind, he would 
change countenance. - m

CHaprER XVII. 1. When he was about to mount his carriage, 
he would stand straight, holding tlie cord.5. Ona sudden clap of thunder, or a violent wind, he would 
change countenance. - m

CHaprER XVII. 1. When he was about to mount his carriage, 
he would stand straight, holding tlie cord.

2, When he was in the carriage, hé did not turn his head quite 
round, he did not talk hastily, he did not point with his hands:

CuaPrER XVIII. 1. Seeing the countenance, it instantly rises. 
It flies round, and by and bye settles.

2. The Master said, “There is the hen-pheasant on the hill 
bridge. At its season! At its season!” Tsze-loo made a motion to 
it. Thrice it smelt him and then rose.

only what we call a carb In saluting when; his head quite rotind. See the Le Ke, I. i. 6. p. 
riding, parties bowed forward to this bar. 4. | 43,

He showed these signs, with reference to the ` " Hu j 
y i i 18. A fragment, which seemingly has no 
generosity of the provider. connect. with the rest of the book. Various cor- 
17. CONFUCIUS AT AND IN HIS CARIIAGE. 1. | rections of tharacters are proposed, and various 
The 12 was a strap or cord, attached to the | Views of the meaning given. IIo An’s view of 
A cuit to assist i inci 2 the conclusion is thie.—‘Tsze-loo took it and 
PAPAS E60 :85518V IN MOUNDE Ake 7d. x A served it up. The Master thrice smelt it and 
a. IIe did not look round within, ie, turn | rose’ . up. 2d tone, == jr) R

7 *

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 101

. BOOK’ XI. SEEN TSIN.

a E

Der 
al

2r 
sil 
= 
Klee

tn} LE, 
| 
92 
4

e.

BI 
a

v

w

MUR

e

ca NS 
Rud

debe 
a 
SEN 
REGE PERDE 
RI 
G

ux 
{SESE

v

Ss He 
(zs 
At

el 
E

EX X

‘Cuaprer I. 1. The Master said, «The men of former times, intn} LE, 
| 
92 
4

e.

BI 
a

v

w

MUR

e

ca NS 
Rud

debe 
a 
SEN 
REGE PERDE 
RI 
G

ux 
{SESE

v

Ss He 
(zs 
At

el 
E

EX X

‘Cuaprer I. 1. The Master said, «The men of former times, in

2. If I have occasion to use those things, I follow the men of 
former times." ` i 
. CHAPTER II. 1, The Master said, “Of those who were with me 
in Ch'in and Ts‘ae, there are none to be found to enter my door." 
2, Distinguished for their virtuous principles and practice, there 
were Yen Yuen, Min Tsze-k‘een, Yen Pih-new, and Chung-kung} 
for their ability in speech, ''sae Go and Tsze-kung ; for their adminis»

1. Hrabxo or THIS Boot. N. ME 4$ subsequently, —g f dt Bm PE Z FH tt 
—. ‘The former men--No. XI.“ With ME p? ít Pd M. But the 2d par. is

this Book there commences tlre second part of ; : Raps g ; 
the Analects, commonly called the Hea Lun decidedly against this interpretation. . 15

CK 5). There is, however, no classicat au- | not to be joined to the succeeding N ne K 
thority ſor this division. It contains 25 chap- but N quoad. It is supposed that the char-

ters, treating mostly of various disciples of : : 
: i 7 acterizing the Je ME as rustics, and their

the Master, and deciding the point of their 
worthiness. Min Tsze-K'een appears in it four | successors as keun-tsze, was a style of his times, 
which Conf. quotes ironically. We have iu it a

times, and on this account some attribute the 
Compilation of it to his disciples. There are | new instance of the various application of the 
name keun-tsze. In the i ti it is said, Of

indications in the style of a peculiar hand. 
the words and actions of men in their mutual

1. Coxrucivs’ PREFRRENCE OF THE SIMPLER 
* : 4 E s 1

WAYS OF FORMER TIMES., 1. pj" 3 fÉ, 48 MÉ, intercourse and in the business of government,

whatever indicates respect is here included in1. Coxrucivs’ PREFRRENCE OF THE SIMPLER 
* : 4 E s 1

WAYS OF FORMER TIMES., 1. pj" 3 fÉ, 48 MÉ, intercourse and in the business of government,

whatever indicates respect is here included in

i ; . dB AE : A : 
are said by Choo He to. 2 16 2 ceremonies, and whatever is expressive of Aur- 
Literally, the expressions arc,—'those who first | mony is here included in music.

udvanced,“ those who afteravards advanced,’ 1. e., 2. CONFUCIUS? REGRETFUL MEMORY OF HIS 
on the stage of the world. In Ho An, the chap. | DISCIPLES FIDELITY, CHARACTERISTICS OF TEN 
is said to speak of the disciples who had first or THE DISCIPLES, I. This utterance must have 
advanced to office, and those who had advanced been made towards the close of Conf. lite, when

102 
E 
y EE 
AN Ho

M

47˙

E 
ni eei psa C

CONFUCIAN. ANALECTS.

Ale

Shia

$us

EIL 
ME

`

2 
AER

© 
* 
v 
w|

un 
8585

y

trative lees Yen Yew and Ke Loó; for their literary acquire-

ments, Tsze-yew and Tsze-hea. 
Cuapter III. The Master said,

s Hwuy gives me no assistance.

There is nothing that I say in which he does not delight." 
Currer IV. The Master said, “ Filial indeed is Min Tsze-k‘cen ! 
Other people say nothing of him different from the report of his pe

rents and brothers.”

Cuarrer V. Nan Yung was frequently repeating the lines about

a white sceptre-stone. 
elder brother to wife.

many of his disciples had been removed by 
death, or separated from him by other causes. 
In his 62d year or thereabouts, as the accounts 
mo, he was passing, in his wanderings from 
Ch4n to ‘I's‘ae, when the officers of Ch'in, afraid 
that he would go on into Taoo, endeavoured to 
stop his course, and for several days he and 
the disciples with him were cut off from food. 
Both Ch'in and Ts'ae were in the present pro- 
vince of Et E and are referred to the depart-

ments of and Y 2. 'This par.ments of and Y 2. 'This par.

is to be taken as a note by the compilers of the 
book, enumerating the principal followers of 
Conf. on the occasion referred to, with their dis- 
tinguishing qualities. They are arranged in four

classes qu Eb. and, amounting to ten, are

known as the c Hr. The ‘four classes’ and 
ten wise ones’ are often mentioned in connec- 
tion with the sage's school.

8. HWor's SILENT RECEPTION OF THE Mas- 
TERS TEACIHINGS. A teacher is sometimes

helped by the donbts and questions of learners, 
which lead him to explain himself more fully.

Comp. III. 8, 3. i for #4 as in I. 1, 1, but 
Kung Gan-kwó takes it in its usual pronuncia., 
= fig, to explain,’

Confucius gave him the daughter of his

4. THE FILIAL PIETY OF Min T8ZE-KR'EBN. 
nj. 28 in VIII. 21, ‘could pick out no crevice

or flaw in the words, &c.’ 22 (about A D. 
200-250) as given in Ho An, explnins— men 
had no words of disparagement for his conduct 
in reference to his parents and brothers. This 
is the only instance where Conf. calls a disci- 
ple by his designation. The use of F FR is

supposed, in the 2 Yip to be a mistaké of 
the compilers.

5. Conrycius’ APPROBATION or Nax Yoko; 
Nan Yung, see V. 1. =, as in V. 19. Ihave 
translated it by ‘frequently,’ but, in the Fami- 
ly Sayings,’ it is related that Yung repeated the 
lines thrice in one day. » see the 
She-king, III. iii. 2, st. 5. The lines there ard 
—' A flaw in a white sceptre-stone, may be 
ground away ; but for a flaw in speech, nothing 
can be done.“ In his repeating of these lines, 
we have, perhaps, the ground-virtue of the char. 
for which Yung is commended in V. 1. Obs.

yL F where we might expect F.

CONFUCIAN

Of

z 
- 
1 =

[ d

Nou pros diae

RE 
SN OG

" JEN 
H, Fa N 
p Uy} 2

ERS SRE ter

SNS 
mE

RH%

` 
v 
- 
Ld

ED" 
* á te 
Cuarter VI.

learn. 
loved to learn.

35

(HP 
Ke K'ang asked which of the disciples loved to 
Confucius replied to him,

ANALECTS. 103 
(EFS) [PE 
AIT) e Pda

Ms 
ms 
rd 81 
EE .ED" 
* á te 
Cuarter VI.

learn. 
loved to learn.

35

(HP 
Ke K'ang asked which of the disciples loved to 
Confucius replied to him,

ANALECTS. 103 
(EFS) [PE 
AIT) e Pda

Ms 
ms 
rd 81 
EE .

N 
y

810

\

N K

O

ER OS at e

L3

x STE

A^

| J^ SR,

“There was Yen Hwuy; he

Unfortunately his appointed time was short, and he

died. Now there is no one who loves to learn, as he did."

Cuapter VII. I.

When Yen Yuen died, Yen Loo begged the

carriage of the Master to get an outer shell for his son's coffin. 
2. The Master said, Every one calls his son his son, whether he

has talents or has not talents. 
had a coffin but no outer shell.

There was Le; when he died, he 
I would not walk on foot to get a

shell for him, because, following after the great officers, it was not

proper that I should walk on foot.“ 
When Yen Yuen died, the Master said, Alas! 
Heaven is destroying me !”

Cuapter VIII. 
fleaven is destroying me!

6. How Hwuv LOVED To LEARN. See VI. 2, 
where the same question is put by the duke 
Gao, and the same answer is returned, only in 
& more extended form.

7. How CONFUCIUS WOULD NOT SELL HIS CAR- 
RIAGR TO BUY A SHELL FOR YEN Yuen. 1. A 
grent chronological difficulty belongs here. 
Hwuy, according to the ‘Family Sayings,’ and 
the ‘ Historical Records,’ must have died several 
‘years before Confucius’ son, Le. Either the dates. 
in them are false, or this ch. is spurious.—Yen 
Loo, the father of Hwuy, had himself been a dis-

ciple of the sage in former years. B 2 T (i. 9. 
char. in text). this is the idiom noticed in V. 7, 
3. J would almost seem to be an active verb

»

followed by a double objective. In burying, they 
used a coffin, called $ „and au outer shell, with-

outa bottom which was called Tl 2. zd

KR 2 f£. lit., ‘I follow in rear of the great»

followed by a double objective. In burying, they 
used a coffin, called $ „and au outer shell, with-

outa bottom which was called Tl 2. zd

KR 2 f£. lit., ‘I follow in rear of the great

Officers This is snid to be an expression of 
humility. Confucius, retired from office, might 
still present himself at court, in the robes of 
his former dignity, and would still be consulted 
on emergencies. He would no doubt have a 
foremost place on such occasions.

8. CONFUCIUS FELT Hwuy’s DEATH AS IF IT 
IHAD BEEN Eis OWN. The old interpr. make this 
simply the exclamation of bitter sorrow. ‘The 
modern, perhaps correctly, make the chief in-

104

H

1

sed S.

D d

v

e 
EEr

b 
-—

eh] (Hes 
TET

SEES 
ET 
=

O

Se HR HES

x 
ON

b 
CHAPTER IX. I.

d 
IAN 
ywi 
i 
at

Sea 
SSH

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

* 
ary 
zs

When Yen Yuen died, the Master bewailed

him exceedingly, and the disciples who were with him said, “Sir,

your grief is excessive?" 
2. “Isit excessive?” said he. 
3. 
I mourn?" 
CHAPTER X. 1.

“If I am not to mourn bitterly for thi

1 
s man, for whom should

When Yen Yuen died, the disciples wished ‘to

give him a great funeral, and the Master said, “ You may not do so," 
2. The disciples did bury him in great style.

3. The Master said, *Hwuy behaved towards me as his father. 
I have not been able to treat him as my son, The fault is not mine; 
it belongs to you, O disciples.”

Cuarrer XI. Ke Loo asked about serving the spirits of the dead. 
The Master said, (While you are not able to serve men, how can

you serve their spirits?” Ke Loo added, “I venture to ask about 
death ?” 
you know about death?”

gredient to be grief that the man was gone to 
whom he looked most for the transmission of 
his doctrines.

9, CONFUCIUS VINDICATES HIS GREAT GRIBF

FOR THE DEATH OY Hwux. 1. ER is the loud 
wail of grief. Moaning with tears is called Til.

8. sk Af A. This man. The third 
definition of s ín the dict. is "cH Hit Z

Bb ‘a term of definite indication,’ 18. sk Af A. This man. The third 
definition of s ín the dict. is "cH Hit Z

Bb ‘a term of definite indication,’ 1

10. CONFUCIUS’ DISSATISFACTION WITH TER 
GRAND WAY IN WIICn HwUy WAS BURIED, 1. 
The old interpreters take PH as being the 
disciples of Yen Yuen. This is not natural,

He was answered, While you do not know life, how can

and yet we can hardly understand how the 
disciples of Confucius would act so directly 
contrary to his express wishes. Conf, objected 
to a grand funeral as inconsistent with tho

poverty of the family (see ch. 7). 8. nhi lit., 
*regarded me,' but that term wonld hardly suit 
the next clause. „as in the last ch. This . 
pass., indecd, is cited in the dict, in illustration 
of that use of the term, — == qd see III.

24. 
11. CONFUCIUS AVOIDS ANSWERING QUESTIONS

ABOUT SERVING SPIRITS, AND ABOUT DEATH. A

jd are here to be taken together, and under- 
stood of the spirits of the dead. This appears

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

J

al 
E

Bà 
Sr 
>

my Ss 
m

E 
m+ 
pm silo 
ETN

T 
za

>

" 
Yu. 
=

FRE

s

BIO

Vis pe

EO

-

3

£f 
D

N 
au 
de

sp

”

105

ij

[i

D AER

v

3

E 
&l

jm

SRE SAE 
ap-

= 
c

O

aux: 
Sanaa

> 
LI

t tj 
e

giai S 
=] 
OES

OF ds

t , Li , 7? 2 f: 2

Carrer XII. 1. The disciple Min was standing by his side, 
looking bland and precise; Tsze-loo, looking-bold and soldierly ; Yen 
Yew and Tsze-kung, with a free and straiglitforward manner, The 
Master was pleased, l

2. He said, “Yew there!—he will not die a natural death,”

‘Crarrer. XIII. I. Some parties in Loo were going to take 
down and rebuild the Long treasury.

2. Min Tsze-k'een said, “Suppose it were to be repaired after its 
old style; why must it be altered, and made anew?” |

3. The Master said, “This man scldom speaks; when he does,

v

he is sure to hit the point.”

from Confucius using only OY in his reply, 
aud from the opposition between A and ÑL. 
is mán alive, while nu is man dead—-a ghost,v

he is sure to hit the point.”

from Confucius using only OY in his reply, 
aud from the opposition between A and ÑL. 
is mán alive, while nu is man dead—-a ghost,

a spirit. Two views of the replies are found in 
commentators. The older ones say—* Confucius 
pat off Ke 1/00, and gave him no answer, because

spirits and tleath are obscyre and unprofitable 
subjects to talk about.“ With this some modern 
writers agree, as the author of the 5 ab but 
others, nud the majority, say—' Confucius an- 
swered thé disciple profoundly, and showed 
him how he should prosecute his inquiries in 
the proper order. The service of the dead must 
be in the same spirit as the service of the living. 
Obedience and sacrifice are equally the expres- 
sion of the filial heart. Death is only the natural 
termination of lite. We are born with certain 
gifts aud principles, which carry us on to the 
end of our course.“ This is ingenious refining, 
but, after all, Confucius avoids answering the 
impourtant questions proposed to him,

FEES

12. Coxryctus HAPPY WITH HIS DISCIPLES 
ABOUT nix. IIR wanxs TszE-LOO. l. Pa PE

like H F- VE 3, 1. T: read hang, low. 8d

tone. 2. There wanting here the of E ag

the commencement, some would change the x s

at thé end of the let, par! into FI to supply the

blank. i H th, — 1 is used with re-

ference to the appearance and manner of 'l'eze- 
loo. LAS in the at Hit is taken as=the final 
i Some say that it indiéates some! uncer-

Dr 
tainty as to the prediction. But it was veri- 
fied; see on II. 17. .

13. Wise ApviOE oF Min Sus AGAINST USZ- 
ESS EXPENDITURE. 1. 43 A. not the peg- 
ple of Loo, but as in the transl..—certain offi- 
cers, disupprobation of whom is indicated by

simply calling them A The full meaning of

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

106

z N. l. Hh 
. U T,

ES

LR

20 
AY 
(bas N M H,

NN 
EEGLES 
SÈ | 
ZEB AM

| 
|

E 
=

A 
=

?

5

"

CuaPrER XIV. 1. 
of Yew to do in my door?"

i

j 
» 
met

aS as ah}

\ 
"

The Master said, * What has theES

LR

20 
AY 
(bas N M H,

NN 
EEGLES 
SÈ | 
ZEB AM

| 
|

E 
=

A 
=

?

5

"

CuaPrER XIV. 1. 
of Yew to do in my door?"

i

j 
» 
met

aS as ah}

\ 
"

The Master said, * What has the

Lt

[d

2 
5

|

BOHPIEXNBGE 
EE

N 
4 
4

* 
N 
[ 4

bakes oo

4

>=

arpsichord

2. The other disciples began not to respect Tsze-loo. The Master 
said,“ Yew has ascended to the hall, though he has not yet passed 
into the inner apartments.”

. Cuarrer XV I. Tsze-kung asked which of the two, Sze or Shang, 
was the superior. The Master said, **Sze goes beyond the due mean, 
and Shang does not come up to it.”

2. “Then,” said Tsze-kung, “the superiority is with Sze, I

suppose.”

3. The Master said, “To go beyond is as wrong as to fall short.”

CHAPTER XVI. 1.

ae

The head of the Ke family was richer than

the duke of Chow had been, and yet K‘ew collected his imposts for

him, and increased his wealth. 
y is collected from the rest of the chapter. 
[53 is ‘a treasury,’ as distinguished from B,

fa granary,’ and from if, ‘an arsenal.“ The 
Long treasury’? was the name of the one in 
question. 2. The use of is perplexing. 
Choo He adopts the explanation of it by the 
old comm. as ER, ‘affair,’ but with what

propriety Edo not see. The character means 
ta string of cowries, or cash,’ then ‘to thread 
together,’ ‘to connect.’ May not its force be 
here, suppose it were to be carried on—con-

- tinued—as before’? 3. ES as in ch. 9, HH, up.

3d tone, & verb, ‘to hit the mark,’ as in shoot- 
iug.

14. ConFucius’ ADMONITION AND DEFENCE 
Or'YszE-Loo. I. The form of the harpsichord 
seems to come nearer to that of the shih than

any other of our instruments. The im is a 
Kindred instrument with the , commonly

called ‘the scholar's lute? See the Chinese 
Repository, vol. VIII. p. 38. The music made 
by Yew was more martial in its air than befit- 
ted the peace-ineuleating school of the sage. 
2, ‘This contains a defence of Yew, and an il- 
Justration of his real attainments.15. Comparison Ov Sze AND SANG. Ex-

CESS AND DEFECT EQUALLY WRONG., I. E.

here -x, to overcome,’ ‘be superior to, be-

ing interchanged with für in par. 2. We find 
this meaning of the term also in the dictionary.

16. CONFUCIUS INDIGNATION AT THE SUPPORT 
OF USURPATION AND EXTORTION BY ONE OF HIS DIS- 
CiPLES. 1. as N. sce III. 1. Many illustra- 
tions might be collected of the encroachments 
of the Ko family, and its great wealth. FA 2

AX N. ‘for him collected and ingathered, “ 
i. e., all his imposts. This clause and the next 
imply that Keew was aiding in the matter of 
laying imposts on the people. 2. Beut the

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 1

— 
<> 
a

pa

St Ad

N=

IT 
—

v 
4

Naser hin

N 
3»

(1117

2. The Master said, “He is no disciple of mine.

Tu 
TN

e

7

1

A 
det

eS 
Jd

A 
SIN

+ 
TANS

iu

"sl

2110

ram 
Es

W..

TT.

ERUN

Z

O

My little chil-

dren, beat the drum and assail him."

Cuarptern XVII. I. 
2. Sin is dull. 
3. Sze is specious. 
4. Yew is coarse. 
CuaPrER XVIII. I. 
nearly attained to perfect virtue.

Ch'ae is simple.

The Master said, “There is Hwuy! He has 
He is often in want."

2. “Tsze does not acquiesce in the appointments of Heaven, and his

goods are increased by him.

Yet his judgments are often correct."

CnuaprrER XIX. Tsze-chang asked what were the characteristics of

the coop man. The Master said, 
of others, but, moreover, he does

drum and assail him,’—this refers to the practice 
of executing criminals in the market place, and 
by beat of drum collecting the people to hear 
their crimes. Comm., however, say that the 
Master only required the disciples here to tell

Kew of his faults and recover him. 
17. CHARACTERS OF THK FOUR DISCIPLER— 
Cutaz, Six, Sze, AND Yew. It is supposed a 
is missing from the beginning of this

ch. Admitting this, the sentences are to be 
translated in the present tense, and not in the 
past which would be required, if the chap. were 
simply the record of the compilers. 1. Ch‘ac, bych. Admitting this, the sentences are to be 
translated in the present tense, and not in the 
past which would be required, if the chap. were 
simply the record of the compilers. 1. Ch‘ac, by

surname ep and styled x (of there

>

are several aliases), has his tablet now the 5th 
west, in the outer'court of the temples. He 
was small and ugly, but distinguished for his 
sincerity, filial piety, and justice. Such was 
the conviction of his impartial justice, that in 
a time of peril he was saved by a man, whom 
he had formerly punished with cutting off his 
feet. 8. hf read p‘cih, is defined in the dict., 
—'practising airs with little sincerity.’—Con- 
fucius eertainly does not here flatter his fol- 
lowers.

18. Hwur AND Tsze contrastep, In Ho 
Ans compilation, this ch. is joined with the

* He does not tread in the footsteps 
hot enter the chamber of the sage."

preceding as one. 1. Jis. nere. nearly, 
‘near to.“ It is often found with 2 follow-

ing, both terms together being our ‘nearly.’ 
To make out a meaning, the old comm. supply

Hs Ñ, tthe way or doctrines of the sages,’ 
and the modern supply REM *ihe truth and

right.’ yas up. 3d tone, * emptied,’ i. e., brought

to extremity, poor, distressed. Hwuy’s being 
brought often to this state is mentioned mere- 
ly as an additional circumstance about him, in-

' tended to show that he was happy in his deep

poverty. Ho An preserves the comment of some 
one, which is worth giving here, and acc. to

which, ARE kg. ‘empty—hearted,’ free

from all vanitics and ambitions, Then =

FE ‘always.’ In this sense E A was the

7 — 
formative element of Hwuy’s character. 2. Ne 
‘to receive, here to acquiesce in.’ 1 ES EE. 
‘to form a judgment.’

19. THe coop man. Comp. VII. 25. By

A Choo He understands R im x

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

= *. E] 
ub Ug D EE 
BA E J i

O

ard

O

EERE TT] eon 
JEEE

N 
—

E

Sc

HA

m+

i

*- 
S 
“A

[ d

Bx

o

“iat

Sex

De 
v

v

N 
CRETE r GE

BSNS

0 
MNS 
ParalCONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

= *. E] 
ub Ug D EE 
BA E J i

O

ard

O

EERE TT] eon 
JEEE

N 
—

E

Sc

HA

m+

i

*- 
S 
“A

[ d

Bx

o

“iat

Sex

De 
v

v

N 
CRETE r GE

BSNS

0 
MNS 
Paral

. CuarrER XX. The Master said, “If, because a man’s discourse 
appears solid and sincere, we allow him zo be a good man, is he reilly 
a superior man? or is his gravity only in appearance?”

CHAPTER XXI.  Tsze-loo asked whether he should immediately 
carry into practice what he heard. The Master said, „There are 
your father and elder brothers to be consulted ;——why should you 
act on that principle of immediately carrying into practice what you 
hear?" Yen Yew asked the same, whether: he should immediately 
carry into practice what he heard, and the Master answered, Imme- 
diately carry into practice what you hear," Kung-se Hwa said, 
“Yew asked whether he should carry immediately into practice 
what he heard, and you said, ‘There are your father and elder 
brothers to be consulted. K'ew asked whether he should immediately 
carry into practice what he heard, and you said, ‘Carry it hnmediately 
into practice. I, Chih, am perplexed, and venture to ask you for 
an explanation." The Master said, Kew :s retiring and slow; tliere- 
fore, I urged him forward. Yew has more than his own share of 
energy; therefore, I kept him back.“

Yuw oF now CoxFUCIUS DEALT WITH HIS' DIS- 
CIPLES ACCORDING TO THEIR CHARACTERS, (n

who has not learned.! Such à man will in many , p sm 
things be a law to himself, and needs not to | T8ze-loo’s question, comp. V. 13. f] 107 TI

follow in the wake of others, but after all his | a < : OA " E 
progress will be limited. The text is rather E Hearing this SUBE thing), should I do it 
at once or not? T* 5 = Z P, likefollow in the wake of others, but after all his | a < : OA " E 
progress will be limited. The text is rather E Hearing this SUBE thing), should I do it 
at once or not? T* 5 = Z P, like

enigmatical. . A E comp. ch. 14, 2. 
20. WE MAY NOT HASTILY JUDGE A MAN TO BE Aa sh in VI 4. 3€ Af is explained 
m ZZ. an = , N ir 
GOOD FROM HIS DISCOURSE. Bi is here ‘speech, by Choo He with , ‘to overcome, ‘to be 
superior to? But we can well take it in its

conversation.“ In Ho An, this ch. is joined 
e preceding on is said to give addi- : 8 ; : 
120 1 Papier cues pi „ PES radical signification of ‘to unite, as a hand 
i : grasps two sheaves əf corn. The phrase is, 
equivalent to our English one in the trunsl.

tioned on a diff. occasion.—The construction, 
Similarly, the beat pare-gold is called Ft $

5 . ‘one of fine natural capacity, but

however, on that view is all but inextricuble. 
21. AN INSZIANCE IN TSZzBR-LO AND YEN

CONFUCIAN

Ak ES BEV EE SMe jf

SERE 
[I] -KISAA

*

\ 
"

er

MBs c

2. 
AN v 
EC

= 
—

*

A 
AR tie

(OBS HSIN 
iE Se ES EE

EHPE-

SEK

ANALECTS. 109

SPI

we

NG 
A

A 
p

DRS

o

TET ERE

Nö -l

u 
m

N

v 
[ d

ae Nato)

v

TARS

zi 
See 
N

O

= 
AA

r1 *

Cnarter XXII. The Master was put in fear in K4vang and 
Yen Yuen fell behind. The Master, on his rejoining him, said, “I 
thought you had died.“ Hwuy replied, “ While you were alive, how

should I presume to die?”

Cuarten XXIII. I. Ke Tsze-jen asked whether Chung-yew and 
Yen Kew could be called great ministers.

2. The Master said, “I thought you would ask about some ex- 
traordinary individuals, and you only ask about Yew and K'ew!

3. “What is called a great minister, is one who serves his prince ac- 
cording to what is right, and when he finds he cannot do so, retires.3. “What is called a great minister, is one who serves his prince ac- 
cording to what is right, and when he finds he cannot do so, retires.

22, YkN Yuen’s ATTACHMENT TO CONFUCIUS, 
AND CONFIDENCE IN Wis MisSION.. See IX. 5. 
It Hwuy's answer was anything more than plea- 
manfry, we must pronounce it foolish. The 
comm., however, expand it thus :—‘I knew that 
you would not perish in this danger, aud there- 
fore I would not rashly expose my own life, 
but preserved it rather, that I might continue 
to enjoy the benefit of your instructions? If 
we ingnire how Hwuy knew that Conf. would 
not perish, we are informed that he shared his 
master’s issuranco that he had a divine mission. 
—See VII. 22, IX. 5.

23. A GREAT MINISTER. CHUNG-YEW AND 
Yen KEW ONLY ORDINARY ministers, The 
paraphrasts sum up the contents thus :— Conf. 
represses tho boasting of Ke Tsze-jen, and in- 
dicatcs an acquaintance with his traitorous 
purposes. I. Ke 'Tsze-jen was a younger brother

ef Ke Ilwan, who was the b K of III. 1. 
* ?

Having an ambitious purpose on the dukedom 
of Loo, he was increasing his officers, amd having 
gotthe two disciples to enter his service, he 
bonstingly speaks to. Conſ. about them. 2.

zs N A AX lit., I supposed you were 
making a question of (=about) extraordinary 
men, and lo! it is a question about Yew and

Kew.“ = ; its force is rather diff. from 
what it has in II. 8, but is much akin to that in

III. 6. 4. H Br is explained fii fa. jd

itn B. ‘simply fitted to rank among the num- 
ber of officers.’ often means what is merely 
* official.’ FL X. ‘an official paper. H 
Ei. *mere officials. 5. XC supposes an antece- 
dent, such as =; *their master?

9

=F ag 
j

Jandy

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

Gee El. fi] H, m

=

E

v

3

AR maz

O

HEARNE

Jum 
r .

4. „Now, as to Yew and K‘ew, they may be called ordinary

ministers.“

5. Tsze-jen said, “Then they will always follow their chief; —

will they ?"

6. The Master said, In an act of parricide or regicide, theyministers.“

5. Tsze-jen said, “Then they will always follow their chief; —

will they ?"

6. The Master said, In an act of parricide or regicide, they

would not follow him." 
CHAPTER XXIV. 1. 
of Pe.

Tsze-loo got Tsze-kaou appointed governor

2. The Master said, “ You are injuring a man's son." 
3. "Tsze-loo said, „There are (there) common people and officers;

there are the altars of the spirits of the land and

grain.

Why

must one read books before he can be considered to have learned?" 
4. The Master said, “It is on this account that I hate your glib-

tongued people."

Carrer XXV. 1. Tsze-loo, Tsing Sih, Yen Yew, and Kung-se

Hwa, were sitting by the Master. 
2. He said to them, 
don’t think of that.

24, How PRELIMINARY STUDY IS NECESSARY 
TO THE EXERCISE OF GOVERNMENT :—A REPROOF 
or TszE-Loo. I. HF? cee VI. 7. This com- 
mandantship is probably what Min Sun there 
refused. TSsze-loo had entered into the service 
of the Ke family (see last ch.), and recommended

(N Tsze-kaou as likely to keep the turbulent 
Pe in order, thereby withdrawing him from his 
studies with the Master. 2. He: in. the sense

of $E, ‘to injure. ' x as in ch. 9,3. It

qualifies the whole phrase ^ zZ F. and is

„Though I am a day or so older than you,

not to be joined only with A By denomina-

ting Tsze-kaou— a man's son, Conf. intimates, 
I suppose, that the father was injured as well. 
His son ought not to be so dealt with. 3. The 
absurd defence of Tsze-loo. It is to this effect: 
— The whole duty of man is in treating other 
men right, and rendering what is due to spiritual 
beings, and it may be learned practically. with- 
out tbe study you require. 4. ht „ on 
this account,’ with reference to Tsze-loo’s reply.

25 Tur aims or TszE-roo, Tsane Sit, 
YEN Yew, Ax D Kuxa-8E Hwa, AND Cosructus' 
REMARKS ABOUT THEM. Comp. V. 7. 25. 1. The

*

— 
— 
p=

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

Iz 
EN

v

EAN 
we 
=

ESSEX 
Ann

| 
|

v 
v

x 
=

Eu?

DELE ERROR 
m

esiti

NE

e

GDS N

- 
O

-N 
RN

ow*

— 
— 
p=

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

Iz 
EN

v

EAN 
we 
=

ESSEX 
Ann

| 
|

v 
v

x 
=

Eu?

DELE ERROR 
m

esiti

NE

e

GDS N

- 
O

-N 
RN

ow

=

[ d

S 
m 
er

D

SIN 
iz 
mese

SNSAHESt 
y 
z

ERN GEI RESI SÉ 
X

— 
V 
d 
— 
np

’ à

E. 
JJ = m RA pom T fel EI

3. „From day to day you are saying, We are not known.’ 11 
some prince were to know you, what would you do?"

4. Tsze-loo hastily and lightly replied, *“ Suppose the case of a 
state of ten thousand chariots; etit be straitened between other 
large states; let it be suffering from invading armies; and to this let 
there be added a famine in corn and im all vegetables: :—if I were 
intrusted with the government of it, in three years’ time I could make 
the people to be bold, and to recognize the rules of righteous con- 
duct.” The Master smiled at him.

5. Turning to Yen Yew, he said, New, what are your wishes?" 
K‘ew replied, “Suppose a state of sixty or seventy le square, or one 
of fifty or sixty, and let me have the government of it ;—in three 
years’ time, I could make plenty to abound among the people, As 
to teaching them the principles of propriety, and music, 1 must wait 
for the rise of a superior man 0. do that.”

810

disciples mentioned here are all familiar to us | Master, and his wish that they should at-

excepting Tsang Sibh. He was the father of 4i 
the more celebrated Tsăng Sin, and himself by tach no importance to it, In mg A tE

h = 
name Teen (Bit. The four are mentioned in e. have a de V 1 
the order of their age, and Teen would have 2 nga FH F fe dont consider me to

answered immediately after Tsze-loo, but that | be your senior) 8. = F, ‘the 
Conf, passed him by, as he was occupied with d * F Z R

: . : : 5 * 
his harpsichord. 2. R. up 2d tone, ‘senior? level, ordinary, course of your lives. r A

Many understand [|] 2 tye,’ as nom. to the AE = fi A 43 FA r3 * what would you: . : : 5 * 
his harpsichord. 2. R. up 2d tone, ‘senior? level, ordinary, course of your lives. r A

Many understand [|] 2 tye,’ as nom. to the AE = fi A 43 FA r3 * what would you

5 cas ^ consider to be your use?’ i o, what course of 
first N. but it is better with Choo He to take action would you pursue? 4. 27 an adv, 
K ; 4

= BE, ‘although’ — H, ‘one day,’ ask E Ne 
=‘hastily. acc. to Choo He, = I 
g Am seem to indicate the importance which y dii d * [51 R.

the disciples attached to the seniority of their | acc. to Paou Meen, = HIR *straitened, ‘urged.’

a

1

—

2 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

t EEG n 
Av N. A fs A E ＋

TEN SS 
3E

PERAK 
zi 
| 
EL 
EHNE

mi 
SR

- 
Ld

[9]

Bh 
NS bah 
IE

v

ag S 
RIMS

[ d

x 
E

[ d 
[d

yy 
| LIAE

Ag

I E 
w 
QV.

J

SE wk 2x Tu XE

6. “What are your wishes, Chtih,” said the Master next to Kung-se 
Hwa. Chik replied, “I do not say that my ability extends to these 
things, but I should wish to learn them. At the services of the 
ancestral temple, and at the audiences of the Princes with the Em- 
peror, I should like, dressed in the dark ‘squaremade robe and 
the black linen cap, to act as à small assistant."7. Last of all, the Master asked T'sang Sih, “Teen, what are your 
wishes?" Teen, pausing as he was playing on his harpsichord, 
whileit was yet twanging, laid the instrument aside, and rose. 
“My wishes,” he said, “are different from the cherished purposes of 
these three gentlemen.” „What harm is there in that?” said the 
Master; “do you also, as well as they, speak out your wishes.” Teen 
then said, “In this, the last month of spring, with thé dress of the 
season all complete, along with five or six young men who have 
assumed the cap, and six or seven boys, I would wash in the E, 
enjoy the breeze among the rain-altars, and return home singing.” 
The Master heaved a sigh and said, *I give my approval to Teen." 
In the Chow Le, 500 men make a hfe. and 5 . *or? 6. BE 2.— x refers to the ne £5, 
or 2,500 men, make a i- The two terms to- | in p. 5. für is the name for occasional or in«

gether have here the meaning given in the trans], | cidental interviews of the princes with the em- 
28 Z, ‘managed it. K. lower 3d tone, peror, vn ae ad WE R. b] belongs to 
blends its force with the foll. N. = fl. occusions when they al presented ihemsolves 
together at court. The Ji (and from its 
* towards,’ Jat FF: “know the quarter to a

E . : colour called L Min was a robe of cere-

which to turn, the way in which to go.“ 5. At iw. A : 
xd ; mony, so ealled from its straight make, its 
the beginning of this paragraph and the two fol- component parts having no gathers nor slanting 
lowing, we must supply J. EE Jti gk! cuttings, xL Hi was the name of a cup of

3

W PR aat

—

And SÉ 
=

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 113

NB 
Lud 
wS 
c-r: 
STA 
me

zu

w 
v

FERII

u 
EI

b 
"

he 
Í

NPRN 
2

RHIN

w 
She

ll

real

NE 
HUNAR I

\ 
d

I

ASS

N 
d 
o

a 
C 
v

eT 
HAHM

O

e 
Shay

e

doge sew 
NERAN 
S RPL

DESE

x 
Lr

S

o o o FJzu

w 
v

FERII

u 
EI

b 
"

he 
Í

NPRN 
2

RHIN

w 
She

ll

real

NE 
HUNAR I

\ 
d

I

ASS

N 
d 
o

a 
C 
v

eT 
HAHM

O

e 
Shay

e

doge sew 
NERAN 
S RPL

DESE

x 
Lr

S

o o o FJ

8. The three others having gone out, Tsing Sih remained behind, 
and said, * What do you think of the words of these three friends?" 
The Master replied, “They simply told each one his wishes.”

9. Teen pursued, “Master, why did you smile at Lew?“

10. He was answered, “The management of a state demands the 
rules of propriety, His words were not humble; therefore I smiled 
at him."

11. Teen again said, “Tut was it not a state which Kew proposed 
for himself?" The reply was, * Yes; did you ever see a territory of 
sixty or seventy le, or one of fifty or sixty, which was not a state?"

12. Once more, Teen inquired, “And was it not a state which 
Ch‘h proposed for himself?” The Master again replied, “ Yes; who 
but princes have to do with ancestral temples, and audiences with 
the Emperor? If Chih were to be a small assistant in these services, 
who could be a great one?”

ceremony. It had different names under dif- 
ferent dynasties. means a MAN. The cap 
was so named, as ‘displaying the Mas,’ 7. 
=I. ‘pausing,’ stopping.“ So, in the dict. 
23. an adv, expressing the twanging sound of

the instrument. read moo, low, 3d tone, the

ename as H, ‘suuset, ‘the close of a period of

time.’ Fe (up. 30 tone) , ‘capped men.’

Capping was in China a custom similar to the 
assuming tho toga virilis among the Romans.

It took place at 20. “wy is not ‘to bathe,’ but is 
used with reference to some custom of washing

month, to put away evil influences. ER was 
the name of a sacrifice, accompanied with pray- 
er, for rain, Dancing movements were ent

ployed at it, hence the name JS" 11.4month, to put away evil influences. ER was 
the name of a sacrifice, accompanied with pray- 
er, for rain, Dancing movements were ent

ployed at it, hence the name JS" 11.4

TI E is to be supplied before pft, and PE 
HI before A. Similar supplements must be 
made in the next paragraph.—It does not appear 
whether Teen, even at the last, understood why 
Cont, had Inughed at TSze-loo, and not at the 
others. ‘It was not,’ say the comm.,“ * becnuse 
Tsze-loo was extravagant in his aims. They 
were all thinking of great things, yet not greater 
than they were able for. Tsze-loo's fault was in 
the levity with which he hud proclaimed his

Uie hands aud clothes at some stream in the 3d wishes, That was his offence against propriety!

114

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

, . BOOK XII. YEN YUEN.

2

5 
glo

[ d 
er

(Ey 
ger Ul mere

WM 
Se

[d 
[d

YSE%

v

SVENESIA

v

unen 
HEE

m

0

CHAPTER I. 1. 
Master said, To subdue one's-self 
virtue,

Yen Yuen asked about perfect virtue.

* LL E 
.. 18 18 Baas 
THE 
2 y FH 96 
hr ERT 
HE — T — 
E EH H. 
FR

and return to propriety, is perfect

If a man can for one day subdue himself and return to pro- 
priety, all under heaven will ascribe perfect virtue to him. 
practice of perfect virtue from a man himself, or is it from others

Is the

9n 
4

2. Yen Yuen said, “I beg to ask the steps of that process." The

Master replied, * Look not at what is contrary to propriety ; listen 
not to what is contrary to propriety; speak not what is contrary to 
propriety ; make no movement which is contrary to propriety.” Yen 
Yuen then said, “Though I am deficient in intelligence and vigour,

I will make it my business to practise this lesson.”

HEADING OF 11118 Boo. — I Hi 58 FI will make it my business to practise this lesson.”

HEADING OF 11118 Boo. — I Hi 58 F

Z, ‘The twelfth Book, beginning with Yen 
Yuen.’ It contains 24 chapters, conveying 
lessons on perfect virtue, government, and other 
questions of morality and policy. addressed in 
conversation by Confucius chiefly to his dis- 
ciples. The different answers, given about the 
same subject to different questioners, show well 
how the sage suited his instructions to the 
characters and capacities of the parties with 
whom he had to do.

1. 
CONVERSATION with YEN YUEN.

p e is explained by X^) E 
the body. Choo He defines 5b by B5. *to

overcome,’ and e by E x Al. Bh the

selfish desires of the body. In the t EHE it

is said— E) JE ED . f A Ell T

How TO ATTAIN TO PERVECT VIRTUE:—A 
1. In Ho An, 
„ ‘to restrain

Ey ifa IJ. the 3 BB. tere

is not exactly selfishness, but selfishness is 
what abides by being attached to the body, and

hence it is said that sclfishness is e^ And

agin, 98, E. Jk H K AL KE. 75 76 
$ B rh X. &k ths FE eB is not

subduing and putting away the seif, but sub- 
duing and putting away the selfish desires in

the self? This ‘selfishness in the self? is of a 
three-fold character:—first, I UH, said hy 
* 
Morrison to be ‘a person's natural constitution 
and disposition of mind ;’ it is, I think, very much 
the Yoyixds &vfo:aog Or ‘animal man ;' second, 
H. H „LI. 5 EK: ‘the desires of the 
ears, the eyes, the mouth, the nose; i. e., the 
dominating influences of the senses; and third,

W R- ‘Thou and I,’ i e, the lust of supe- 
rlority. Morc concisely, the U, is said, in tho

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 115 
PSA BMRA 
HI, ole E. TE N G fb dp OF 
E Hy HE ae N. Br RC P] rH 
44 H- Ge ME dk HE UN Zm Ar pi] 
dH 
2

2CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 115 
PSA BMRA 
HI, ole E. TE N G fb dp OF 
E Hy HE ae N. Br RC P] rH 
44 H- Ge ME dk HE UN Zm Ar pi] 
dH 
2

2

Cuarter II. Chung-kung asked about perfect virtue. The Mas- 
ter said, It is, when you go abroad, to behave to every one as if you 
were receiving a great guest; to employ the people as if you were 
assisting at a great sacrifice; not to do to others as you would’ not 
wish done to yourself; to have no murmuring against you in the 
country, and none in the family." Chung-kung said, “Though I

am deficient in intelligence and vigour, I will make it my business

to practise this lesson.”

,CuarrER III. 1. Sze-ma New asked about perfect virtue. 
2. The Master said, The man of perfect virtue is cautious and

slow in his speech.” :

E sk to be the X as opposed to the

i AY), ‘the mind of man’ in opposition to the

* mind of reason.’ See the Shoo-king II. ii. 9. 
This refractory ‘mind of man, it' is said,

Hil 4E {E 22 tis innate,’ or, perhaps, con-

AN

nate In all these statements, there is an ac- 
knowledgment of the fact—the morally abnormal 
condition of human nature—which underlies the 
Christian doctrine of original sin. With ref. to 
the above three-fold classification of selfish 
desires, the second par. shows that it was tho 
second order of them—the influence of the

senses, which Cont. specially intended. (sine. 
ce note on nU. VIII. 2. It is not here

ceremonies, Choo He defines 1X zy x E.

X. ‘the specific divisions and graces of hea-

venly principle or reason? This is continually 
being departed from, on the impulse of selfish- 
hess, but there is an ideal of it as proper to man, 
which is to be sought returned to —by over-

coming that. it is explained by Choo He-by 
A , S 
i, to allow.“ The gloss of the Ati H is 
. t ‘will praise his perfect virtue.’ 
The whole sentence thus seems to become a 
mere platitude. Perhaps is only

our ‘every body, or any body.“ In Ho An, 
&we is taken in the sense of to return,our ‘every body, or any body.“ In Ho An, 
&we is taken in the sense of to return,

‘the empire will return to perfect virtue,’ sup- 
posing the exemplifier to be a prince. In tho 
next sentence, which i$ designed to teach that 
every man may attain to this virtue for himself,

nn or. 2. K refers to * B 18 na. 
H = B]. a list’ or index. 4 is uscd

as an active verb; I beg to make my business 
these words.“

2. WHEREIN PERFECT VIRTUE is RRALIZRD: ` 
—A CONVERSATION WII CnuuNG-KuNG. From

this ch., it appears that reverence di and re- 
ciprocity CHU), on the largest scale, are perfect

virtue. fb KR.— ordering the people," is apt 
to be done with haughtiness. This part of the 
answer may be compared with the apostle’s 
precept—‘ Honour all men,’ only the ‘all men’

is much more comprehensive there, Li. Hf

Z. omp. V. 11. EFR 1k „= abroad,”

“at home.“ Paou Heen, in Ho An, however, 
takes the former as denoting the ‘ prince of a 
state,’ and the lat., the chief of a great offcer'a

establishment.’ This is like the interpr. of E

in last ch.— The answer, the same as that of 
Hwuy in last ch., scems to betray the hand of 
tlie compiler.

3. CAUTION IN SPEAKING A CHARACTERISTIC 
OF PERFECT VIRTUE:—A CONVERSATION WITH 
"IszE-sEW. I. Tsze-new was the designation oz

Sze-ma Kang dir. alias FD, whose tablet is

CONFUCIAN

= 
pa 
[er]

[ d

aon

4

ES 
*

a

zug 
SHEER

+= 
A 
>

T 
8

%

v

Ls

Si eda 
Em

v

2

"n 
DII

v

=

DN

[e]

9 da

W 
N

3. 
is meant by perfect virtue?" 
the difficulty of doing, can he be 
speaking?“

CuarTER IV. 1.

oo

d

LN

ANALECTS.

AES m 
4 . ad UJ. 
yY aJ E r " 
TG 
Ene

O

*

© 
~ 
v 
r

Gall

— 
*

ih 
all 
=

BIN

n 
2 
.

o n

“Cautious and slow in his speech!” said New; —“ is this what 
The Master said, When a man feels

other than cautious and slow in

LI 
Sze-ma New asked about the superior man.

The Master said, ‘The superior man has neither anxiety nor fear."

2.

„Being without anxiety or fear!" said New; —“ does this:LI 
Sze-ma New asked about the superior man.

The Master said, ‘The superior man has neither anxiety nor fear."

2.

„Being without anxiety or fear!" said New; —“ does this:

constitute what we call the superior man ? " i 
3. The Master said, “ When internal examination discovers no-

thing wrong, what is there to be

Dy 
fear?

CuAPTER V. I. Sze-ma New,

anxious about, what is there to

full of anxiety, said, “ Other men

all have their brothers, I only have not.” 
2. Tsze-hea said to him, “There is the following saying which I

have heard.

now the 7th east in the outer ranges of the dis- 
ciples. He belonged to Sung, and waa u brother 
of Hwan T.uy, VII. 22. Their ordinary surname

was Heang ( [Hi], but that of Hwan could also be

used by them, as they were descended from the 
duke so called. The office of ‘Master of the

horse’ (5 e had long been in the family, 
and that title appears here as if it were New's.

surname. 2. = JE Hi, ‘the words 
coming forth with difficulty.’ 3. $3 x =

xZ ;—comp. on Z jn the note on VII. 10, e? ai. 
— Doing being difficult, gan speaking be with- 
out difficulty of utterance.

4. How THB Kaun-TS2B HAS NEITItER AN- 
XIETY NOR FEAR, AND CONSCIOUS RHCTITUDE

FREES FROM THESE. l 4 is our ‘anxiety,’ 
trouble about coming troubles ; ym is ‘fear,’

when the troubles have arrived, 2. JA, iy “a

chronic illness; here it is understood with ref. 
to the mind, that displaying no symptom of 
disease,

5. CONSOLATION OFFERED BY TszE-HEA TO 
Tszb-NBW AXXIOUS^ABOUT THE PERIL OF HIS 
BROTHER. ]. 'l'svc-new's anxiety was occasioned 
by the conduct of his eldest brother Hwan 'I*uy, 
who, he knew, was contemplating rebellion,

which would probably lead to his death. N. 
pi ‘elder brothers’ and ‘younger brothers,’

but Ts4e-new was himself the youngest of his fa-which would probably lead to his death. N. 
pi ‘elder brothers’ and ‘younger brothers,’

but Ts4e-new was himself the youngest of his fa-

mily. The phrase simply brothers.“ All have 
their brothers, —i. e, all can rest quietly with- 
out anxiety in their relation. 2. It is naturally 
supposed that the author of the observation was

Conf. 4. The E at says that the expr:— all

within the four seas are brothers,’ N A An.

ait, ‘does not mean that all under heaven 
have the same geucalbgical register, Choo He'd

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 117

sult 
DE

m

es 
(VERON EHH 
N

[ d 
Ld

sv 
Been Ne 
STE

HS 
Een 
Aug enn

| 
— 
N

u 
To

E

ut 
NRE

EU 
NUBE

A 
v 
v,

NRA

Bu)

ret Sh 
en

n REO

E 
jr

e 
a) 
v

E

HOS 
2

zA 
Wm

ni

m» inf iff 5 f,

8. „Death and life have their determined appointment; riches 
and honours depend upon Heaven.’

4. ‘Let the superior man never fail reverentially to order his 
own conduct, and let him be respectful to others and observant of 
propriety :—then,all within the four seas will be his brothers. What

as the superior man to do with being distressed because he has no 
brothers?’

CuarrER VI. Tsze-chang asked what constituted intelligence. 
The Master said, *He with whom neither slander that gradually 
soitks into the mind, nor statements that startle like a wound in the 
flesh, are successful, may be called intelligent indeed. Yea, he with 
whom neither soaking slander, nor startling statements, are success-

ful, may be called far-seeing.”

interpr. is that, when a man so acts, other men 
will love and respect him as a brother. This, no 
doubt, is the extent of the saying. I have found no 
satisfactory gloss on the phrasc—‘the four seas.’ 
It is found in the Shoo-king, the She-king, and

the Le-ke. Inthe fig HE, asort of Lexicon,the Le-ke. Inthe fig HE, asort of Lexicon,

very ancient, which was once reckoned among 
the King, it is explained as a territorial desig- 
nation, the name of the dwelling-place of all 
the barbarous tribes. But the great Yu is 
represented as having made the four seas as 
four ditches, to which he drained the waters 
inundating the middle kingdom.“ Plainly, the 
ancient conception was of their own country as 
the great habitable tract, north, south, east, and 
west of which were four seas or oceans, be- 
tween whose shores and their own borders the in- 
tervening space was not very great, and occu- 
pied by wild hordes of inferior races. See the

yu Ei Je Hilt £n. II. 24.—Comm. con-

sider TSsze-hea's attempt at consolation altoge- 
ther wide of the mark.

6. WHAT CONSTITUTES INTELLIGENCR :-—AD- 
DRESSED TO TSszE-CUAN d. Tsze-chang, it is 
said, was always seeking to be wise about things 
lofty and.distant, and therefore Conf. brings 
him back to things near at hand, which it was

more necessary for him to attend to. ix 38g 
x a, ‘soaking, moistening, slander, which

_unperceived sinks into the mind. REZ

25 Sund interchanged with BP ‘statements

of wrongs which.startle like a wound in the 
flesh,“ to which in the surprise credence is given.

He with whom these'things N fp *no 
go,’ is intelligent,—yea, far-seeing. is = By 
< So, Choo He. The old interpr. differ

x 
in their view of SSS ny. The st

says—''The skin receives dust which gradually, 
nccumulntes.', This makes the phrase synony- 
mous with the former.

118 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

j^ En 
b G NN > RE

$8 17

aS 
E 
DOGO hs I

stb (aL Dp

V. 
v 
w! 
Ld 
-

aS I-A

-

spo | | SSH

IEI

DSF mel!

En

O

Ae 
.

O

SIA N Oh

W 
KAR EEN

(TA o

v

d o

FR EK. E. * K. T

CAP TIR VIL 1. Tsze-kung asked about government; The Mas- 
ter said, “ The requisites of government are that there be sufficiency 
of food, sufficiency of military equipment, and the confidence of the 
people in their ruler."2. Tsze-kung said, “If it cannot be helped, and one of these 
must be dispensed with, which of the three should be foregone first?“ 
“The military equipment,” said the Master. * :

3. Tsze-kung again asked, “If it cannot be helped, and one of 
the remaining two must be dispensed with, which of them should 
be foregone?” The Master answered, “Part with thefood. From 
of old, death has been the lot of all men; but if the people have 
no faith in their rulers, there is no standing for the state.”

Cuartrr VIII. 1. Kih Tsze-shing said, In a superior man it 
is only the substantial qualities which are wanted ;—why should we 
seck for ornamental accomplishments?”

50 U

7. REQUISITES IN GOVERNMEKT:—A CONVER- 
BATION WITH TszE-cHANG. 1. Fe primarily

menns ‘weapons,’ A soldier,’ the bearer of such 
weapons, is a secondary meaning. ‘There were 
no standing armies in Conf. time. The term 
is to be taken here, as military equipment,’

‘preparation for war.’ fs Z-Z refers 
to it E. ‘their ruler, 8, The difficulty

here is with the concluding clauso— fi 45

x I. Transferring the mean. of fs from 
par. 1, we naturally render as in the transl, and 
N I. p II., ‘the state will not

stand.“ This is the view, moreover, of the old 
interpreters, Choo He and his followers, how- 
ever, seek to make much more of fü On the 
Ist pur. he comments, — The granaries being 
ful, and the military preparation complete, 
then let the influence of instruction proceed.

So shall the people have faith in their ruler, 
and will not leave him or rebel.“ On the 3d 
par. he says, If the people be without food, 
they must die, but death is the inevitable lot 
of men. If they are without {8 ; though they 
live, they have not wherewith to establish them- 
selves. It is better for them in such case to 
die. Therefore it is better for the ruler to die, 
not losing faith to his people, so that the peo- 
ple will prefer death rather than lose faith to, 
him.“8. SunsTANTIAY QUALITIES AND ACCOMPLISII- 
MENTS IN THE KEUN-TSZE, 1. Tsze-shing was 
an officer of the state of Wei, and, distressed by 
the pursuit in the times of what was merel 
external, made this not sufficiently well-consi- 
dered remark, to which Tsze-kung replied, in, 
acc. to Choo He, an equally one-sided manner.

7 is thus expanded in the

1 FT VÀ AC is tim 
at Ge —ſ JH K n TR T

* why use accomplishments in order to inake &

—

CONFUCIAN AN ALE OTS. 119

RIS

SIME 
ery

ine LL OH

e

X 
2

El 
—

*

e

dx 
TH

La 
av

L sd

sth hea SET 
Sete EN TT 
XH

N s tpe 
at 
(NY

2 +h 
L^ fa F H ot = 
o HL, L * Ef, 2 L]

DIA r A (E

2. Tsze-kung said, “Alas! Your words, sir, show you to be a 
superior man, but four horses cannot overtake the tongue.

3. “Ornament is as substance; substance is as ornament., The 
hide of a tiger or leopard stript of its hair, is like the hide of a dog 
or goat stript of its hair."

‘CHAPTER IX 1. The duke Gae inquired of Yew Jð, saying, The 
year is one of scarcity, and the returns for expenditure are not suffi- 
cient ;—what is to be done?"

2. Yew Jó replied to him, “Why not simply tithé the people.”

3. „With two tenths,” said the duke, “I find them not enough; 
—-how could I do with that system of one tenth?”

4. Yew Jd answered, “If the people have plenty, their prince will 
not be left to want alone. If the people are in want, their prince 
cannot enjoy plenty alone."

Keun-tsze?’? 2. We may interpret this par., as, 
in the transl, putting & comma after at: So, 
Choo He. But the old interpr. seem to have 
read right on, without any comma, to th, in 
which case the par. would be— alas! sir, for 
the way in which you speak of the superior 
man!’ And this is the most natural construc- 
tion, 8. The mod. comm. seem hypercritical in 
condemning Tsze-kung’s language here. He 
shows the desirableness of the ornamental ac- 
complishments, but does not necessarily put 
them on the same level with the substantial 
qualities.9. -LIGHT TAXATION THE BEST WAY TO SE- 
CURE THE GOVERNMENT FROM EMDARRASSMENT 
FOR WANT OF FUNDS. 2. By the statutes of 
thé Chow dynasty, the ground was divided 
into allotments cultivated in common by the 
families located upon them, and the produce 
wus divided equally, nine tenths being given to

the farmers, and one tenth being reserved as a 
contribution to the state. This was called the 
Jaw of 1152 which term If, ‘pervading,’ gen- 
eral,’ with ref, apparently, to the system of 
common labour. 3. A former duke of Loo, 
Seuen (B. C. 608-590), had imposed an addi- 
tional tax of another tenth from each family's 
portion, 4. The meaning of this par. is given 
in the transl. Literally rendered, it is,—' The 
people having plenty, the prince—with whom 
not plenty? ‘The people not having plenty, 
with whom can the prince have plenty?’ Yew 
Jö wished to impress on the duke that a sym- 
pathy and common condition should unite him 
and his people. If he lightened his taxation to 
the regular tithe, then they would cultivate 
their allotments with so much vigour, that his 
receipts would be abundant. They would be

able, moreover, to help their kind ruler in any“ 
emergency.

1

nO 
©

In

Ro

FA 
Ar RAEAN By

È

ESAN

O

w 
[ d 
v

* 
C.

gn a 
^

> 
Sahk I $e

v 
[ d

\ 
P

EH 
IN

xi 
Lz

C

AAFJE

O

ES 
BEC 
nets

ER

T

&l

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

Ht

E 
ml 
$i

v 
w

(* 
--

ap

— 
put

2 Hi

2 
J

2 
SAER

e

SSE EES

& 
E 
s

t

SAEED

B

N

SLA SEE

a 
E 
ew 
0

|

KRA 
FRAN

ul

H

CHAPTER X. 1. Tsze-chang having asked how virtue was to be 
exalted, and delusions to be discovered, the Master said, “Hold 
faithfulness and sincerity as first principles, and be moving con- 
tinually to what is right ;—this is the way to exalt one's virtue.

2. “You love a man and wish him to live; you hate him and wish 
him to die. Having wished him to live, you also wish him to die. 
This is a case of delusion. . 52. “You love a man and wish him to live; you hate him and wish 
him to die. Having wished him to live, you also wish him to die. 
This is a case of delusion. . 5

3. „It may not be on account of her being rich, yet you come 
to make a difference.“

CuaPrER XI. 1. The duke King, of Ts‘e, asked Confucius about 
government. **

2. Confucius replied, * There is government, when the prince is 
prince, and'the minister is minister; when the father is father, and 
the son is son.” ,

3. “Good!” said the duke; “if, indeed ; the prince be not prince, 
the minister not minister, the father not father, and the son not 
son, although I have my revenue, can I enjoy it?” o |

the sage, 3, See the She-king, II. iv. 4. at. 8. 
T have translated according to the meaning in 
the She-king. "Phe quotation may be twisted

10. How TO'EXALT VIRTUE AXD DISCOVER

DELUSIONS. 1. +Æ m {8 „see I. 8. 2. The 
Master says nothing about the HE, * discrimin-

ating,’ or ‘discovering,’ of delusions, but gives 
an instance of a twofold delusion. Life and 
death, it is said, are independent of our wishes. 
To desire for a man either the one or the other, 
therefore, is one delusion. And on the change 
of our feelings to change our wishes in reference

to the same person, is another, x 
—But in this Confucius hardly appears to be

= .

into some sort of accordance with the preced- 
ing par, a8 a case of delusion, but the comm, 
Ch'ing (N) is probably correct in supposing 
that it should be transferred to XVI. 12.

11. GOOD GOVERNMENT OBTAINS ONLY WHEN 
ALL THE RELATIVE DUTIES ARB MAINTAINED, 1.

Conf. went to 'I's'e in his 36th year, and finding ,

the reigning duke— styled King after his death 
—overshadowed by his ministers, and. thinking 
of setting aside his eldest son frum the succes:

CONFUCIAN 
A XL EZ. Es 
RA TF di

O

t 
* 
* 
v

oo 
L d

NIS

-

ET 
ROE

Si

o

e

eee -N 
x

RSH

2 
n

[ d 
v

U

d

mp

CHAPTER XII,

Wo d

l. The MasterCONFUCIAN 
A XL EZ. Es 
RA TF di

O

t 
* 
* 
v

oo 
L d

NIS

-

ET 
ROE

Si

o

e

eee -N 
x

RSH

2 
n

[ d 
v

U

d

mp

CHAPTER XII,

Wo d

l. The Master

with half a word settle litigations !" 
2. 1Tsze-loo never slept over a promise.

ANALECTS,

s m KEI 
zy

Es

aa 
j

o 
O

[d

ERE

= 
z 
Gills 
Bs

Bills 
P

Hno

> Beh 
. RS

said, *Ahl it is Yew, who could

Cuarrer XIII. The Master said, “In hearing litigations, I am

like any other body. 
have no litigations,” 
Cuarrer XIV,

What is necessary, is to cause the people to

Tsze-chang asked about government, The Master 
said, “ The art of governing is to keep its

pui before the mind with-

out weariness, and to practise them with undeviating consistency." 
Cnarter XV, The Master said, “By extensively studying all 
learning, and keeping himself under the restraint of the rules of pro-

priety, one may thus likewise not

sion, he shaped his answer to the question about 
government accordingly. 3 ate fi BR, ‘al- 
though I haye the grain,’ i, e., my revenue, the 
tithe of tis produce of the country. . 14 
im f bi (= BE: comp. FF BH. XI. 
21), hal! I be able to ent it? —intimating a

sense of tlie danger he was exposed to from his 
insubordiuate officers.

12. WITU WRAT EASE 'T8zE-LOO COCLD SET- 
TLE LITIGATIONS, 1. We translate here could, 
and not--can, because Conf. is not refer- 
ring to facts, byt simply praising the disciple's 
character, Sach S. h. 2

neter. F s zz half a word

2. This par, is a note by the compilers, stating 
@ fact about "U'sze-loo, to illustrate what the

Master said of him. {8 is explained by Choo

He by m , ‘to leave,’ ‘to let remain.’ Its prim. 
menn, is to pass a night. We have in English, 
as given in the transl, a corresponding idiom.— 
Go : E = n 
in Ho An, = is . as XP oe 
aided words, mean. that Tsze-oo could judge 
rightly on hearing half a case. {8 again is ex-

err from what is right.“

plained by i. * beforehand.'—* Teze-loo madeerr from what is right.“

plained by i. * beforehand.'—* Teze-loo made

ho promises beforehand." Da 
18. To PREVENT BETTER THAN TO DETERMINE

LITIGATIONE. Sce the X (8d. IV. B as 
oppos. to i (prec. ch.) is used of civil causes 
(AF By EH ZA), and the other of criminal 
(HF JE E fa Little stress is to be Jaid 
onthe I,. Zz. n A, simply= One man is 
as good as another.“ Much stress is to be laid 
on „as to influence to,’ 
14, THe ART OF GOVERNING, E as oppos. 
| to fT. must be an active verb, and is explained 
by Choo He as in the translation, x refers 
to EC or, rather, that aspect of govern- 
ment about which Tsze-chang was inquiring.

fut f. . pi ——, first and last the 
same ;’ 1 = & HH pi ——, ‘externally

and internally the same,’ 
15. HARDLY DIFEBRENT FRO VI. 13.

122 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

== A 
—

75

eee e 
RST 
NE 
T-

AS 
om 
E 
. 
v

Sets (NR

[9]

TWH 
e

E 
FHS

v 
LS 
E 
w

-

BRETT HEH 
TSN SBA

RAD

O

v

ESA 
SACRE

SNK 
AANER

[^

w

S 
E

a 
=

O 
v

F SSS

— 
A

: ur

Cnarren XVI. The Master said, „The. superior man seeks to 
perfect the admirable qualities of men, and does not seek to perfect 
their bad qualities. The mean man does the opposite of this.”

CHaprer XVII. Ke K‘ang asked Confucius about government. 
Confucius replied, “To govern means to rectify. If you lead one

” a] 
people with correctness, who will dare not to be correct?

Cuavrer XVIII. Ke K'ang distressed about the number of thieves 
in the state, inquired of Confucius about how to do ‘away with them. 
Confucius said, “If you, sir, were not covetous, although yon should 
reward them to do it, they would not steal." |

Cnaprer XIX. Ke K. ang asked Confucius about RAN 
saying, What do you say to killing the unprincipled for the good 
of the "principled?" “Confucius replied, * Sir, in carrying on your 
government, why should you use killing at all? Let your evinced16. OPPOSITE INFLUENCE UPON OTHERS OF |. z N (Ds ‘8 given us ey of your not being 
THE SUPERIOR MAN AND THE MEAN MAN.

As

17. GOVERNMENT MORAL IN ITS END, AND 
EFFICIENT BY EXAMPLE,

18. Tne PEOPLE ARE MADE THIEVES BY TIIE 
EXAMPLE OF THUIR RULERS, This is n good in- 
stance of Conf. boldness in reproving men in 
power. Ke K'ang had confirmed himself as

head of the Ke family, and entered into all its 
usurpations, by taking ‘off the infant nephew,

who should have been ite rightful chief. WM Sk 
R . ‘did not covet,’ i. e., a position and 
Se de to which you have no right. ^il X

ambitious.’ A I| HR.

19. Kun NOT T0 BET BE OF BY RULERS; 
THE EFFECT OF THEIR EXAMPLE. In RR H

Ñ. 757 is an active verb py or N N.

„to complete,’ to per ect. fihi n is uscd in a 
vague sense, not positive virtue, "put--' nature, 
‘character,’ Some for E would read Hj-

Jii. *to add upon, but E itself must here 
have N that meaning. po EZ

j= FA. ÉT, Jj Z VI JEN ‘the grass, having

the wind upon it.“

| [5 
CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 123

Pina 
d

D

Ss

ZEN 
RS 
2 
p 
1155

at HS

ARRESE 
xm

DETT 
i

WA

E

=

9 
SEH

aN

E 
NS

= 
3 
a

HD 
Z 
n

w 
a

2+ 
BH

=

oe

hit

Ka 
RHI 
at 
te 
TU 
AE

*

RS

B 
Till

hmi 
xp 
a

v

JURARAN 
* 
EN I

XA

| XE

desires be for what is good, and the people will be good. The relation 
between superiors and inferiors, is like that between the wind and 
the grass. The grass must bend, when the wind blows across it."

Cnarrer. XX. 1. Tsze-chang asked, What must the oflicer be, 
who may be said to be distinguished ? "

2. The Master said, What is it you call being distinguished ?

3. Tsze-chang replied, “It is to be heard of through the state, to 
be heard of through the family.”

4. The Master said, “That is notoricty, not distinction.3. Tsze-chang replied, “It is to be heard of through the state, to 
be heard of through the family.”

4. The Master said, “That is notoricty, not distinction.

, 9. “Now, the man of distinction is solid and straightforward, and 
loves righteousness. He examines people's words, and looks at their 
ycountenances, He is anxious to humble himself to others. Such 
a man will be distinguished in the country; he will be distinguished 
in the family.

6. As to the man of notoriety, he assumes the appearance of vir- 
20. THE MAN OF TRUE DISTINCTION, AND THE | bo understood of ‘a scholar,’ 3j vin m,

MAN ỌF NOTORIETY. 1. + ‘a scholar, ‘an 
officer!’ The two ideas blend together in China. 
3É- n 3 v „to reach all round.’ It includes HR ‘BE, * the circle of relatives and neighbours." 
here the ideas of being influential, and that in- | 5, +h, * sce I. 2. T A. R is the verb. 
fluence being acknowledged. 3. If Ive under- The dict. explains it 1i. E . im 
stood of ‘an officer,’ then ÆR assumes him to CT to d sceni. From being on high to be-

be the minister of a prince of a state, and {E N. . 
A m . it is b ather more still. 
that he is only the minister of a great officer, come low? Butit is here r tiu. p.

who is the head of a family. If, however, + A t to come down below other men.’

Š 
m 
N 
p 
z 
4

9"?

‘the country,’ ‘people generally,’ and 2k. will==

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS;

WS

= "A ; TE Ba M 
ud xd Eb EL gl A 3. 
Ma ` zi He NEm Wy

E

CE

x 
SERE St oes

Ld

gu 2

EE iux x f] XE Nd 
fal SE Bu dt el A 
— ii Er

fe) i PLU Fab, 
fi

"WT

[4

t 
v 
v 
Ld

22

Er BEER RUSSE

E

SE

Q 
G 
-

S 
vx

AS 
E 
v

e 
v 
w

MER

A 
' 
Q

Ü

MIN 
eR S

O

5

N 
E

4 
O

v

— 
“TH

B, 
AN d FW PE * i ft

tut, but his actions are opposed to it, arid he rests in this character 
without any doubts about himself. Such à man will be heard of in 
the country; he will be héard of in the family.“ `tut, but his actions are opposed to it, arid he rests in this character 
without any doubts about himself. Such à man will be heard of in 
the country; he will be héard of in the family.“ `

Charter XXIII] Fani-ch'e rambling ‘with the Master under thé 
trees about the rain - altars, sald, “I venture to ask how to exalt vir 
tue, to correct cherishéd evil, and to discover delusions.” XE

2. The Master said, Truly a good question!“ o 3 
3. If doing what is to be done be made the first business, and 
success a secondary consideration ;--is not this the way to exalt vir 
tué? To assail one's own wickedness and not assail that of. other 
—is not this the way to correct cherished evil? For ul Morne 
anger, to disregard one's own lifc, and involve that of his parents; 
is not this a base of delusion ?" °

. . ! 
CHAPTER XXII. 1. Fan Ch'e asked about benevolence, The Mase 
ter said, *It is to love all men" He asked about knowledge. The 
Master said, “It is to know all men."

2,

21. IIow To EXALT VIRTUE, CORRECT VICE, AND 
Discover DELUSIONS. Comp. ch. 10. Here, as 
there, under the last point of the inquiry, Conf. 
simply indicates a case of delusion, and perhaps

K

D

E 
225

^

=

`

Fan Ch'e did not inmediately understand these answers,

with Ae HE (2 IG. in VI. 20, which also is

the report of a conversation with Fan Ch'e.

HA H= pi. Animself, this own.“ A

ie

that is the best way to tench how to discover. 
delusions generally. 1. E Be, see XI. 25, 
11; followed here by Pad \, there must be 
reference to the trees growing about the al-

5 
tars. fe, formed from ‘heart’ and ‘to conceal,’

sssccrat vice, 8, pj? 5 1$ 43 —comp.

morning's anger’ must be a small thing, but 
the consequences of giving way to it are very 
terrible. The case is one of great delusion,sssccrat vice, 8, pj? 5 1$ 43 —comp.

morning's anger’ must be a small thing, but 
the consequences of giving way to it are very 
terrible. The case is one of great delusion,

22. AROUT BENEVOLENCE AND wis Dou; 
HOW KNOWLEDGESUBSERVES BENEVOLENCE, Tun 
Che might well deem the Master's replies enig- 
matical, and, with the help of T'sze-hea’s ex- 
planations, the student still finds it difficult. $9

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 1

no

5

rl . 
ees JE

o

.- AE

ad 
[7 
aa

LN

uo ada

stat 
=) ae

D xm

EI Nem

oe

$f 
eRe

Petar

SHa 
ERE 1 88 zm

ES

2110

' m RU RHO 
ea E 
ud 
E

v

- 
87

[ d

ie

ES, 
VES PESE 2T

zio 
gio

NS 
a:

E 
0 
ak EU)

ic 
PE 
TTS 
“allt

4

&

Sonat 
15 
u-

" : O M

3. The Master said, “Employ the upright and put aside all.the 
crooked ;—in this way, the crooked can be made to be upright.”

4, Fan Ch'e retired, and seeing Tsze-hea, he said to him, “A 
little ago, I had an interview with our Master, and asked him about 
knowledge. He said, ‘Employ the upright, and put aside all the 
1 i—in this way, the crooked can be made to be upright.’ 
What did he mean?“ l

5. Tsze-hea said, “Truly rich is his saying!

6. „Shun, being in possession of the empire, selected from among 
all the people and employed Kaou-yaou, on which all who were 
devoid df virtue disappeared. T'ang being in possession of tlie em- 
pire, selected from among all the people, and employed E-yin, aud 
all who were devoid of virtue disappeared."

Cuarrer XXIII. Tsze-kung asked about friendship. The Mas- 
ter said.“ Faithfully admonish your friend, and kindly try to lead 
him. If you find him impracticable, stop. Do not disgrace yourself.”

understand the chapter. 1. £ here, being | and E-yin,—see the Shoo-king, II. iii, and III. 
opposed to, or distinct from, Fit. is to be taken ir. Shun and Tang showed their wisdom— 
a3 meaning ‘benevolence,’ and not as ‘perfect their knowledge of men—in the selection of; . ; R those ministers That was their employment 
2. j ‘not yet, 1. e., not immediately. 8 i 
XiBun Ae aR DON eee Y- | of the upright, and therefore all devoid of virtue

8. See II. 19. 4. Hy, up. 3d tone, in the dict. | disappeared. That was their making the crooked 
explained by H, ‘formerly? 6. Kuou-yaou, | upright and so their love reached to all.

126

LU

E 
.

E

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

Caarrer XXIV.. The philosoher Tsáng 10 w The Superior than 
on literary grounds meets with his friends, and by:their friendship

helps his v irtue.”

23. PRUDENCE 1N 'FRIENDSMIP. E read 
kah, as in III. 7, implyi ing some degree of defe-

rence, A H, as in II. 3, 1.

VA

literary studies and pursuits. PR

! "E

: 4 pi 
24. Tne FRIENDSMIP OF THR Kio i 
X. tby means of letters,’ i. e., common

BOOK

H,

Ji» 
Cuarter I. 1. Tsze-loo 
said, ** Go before the people

their affairs."

i 
XIII.

BH IL 
asked about government. 
with your ezample, and be laborious. in

TSZE-LOO.

E5 A

EE ee . Ei. ff M 
AT hee

f = i

The. Master |

* J if

2, He requested further instruction, and was answered, ‘Be

not weary in these things.” 
CHAPTER II. 1.

FIEADING OF TUIS Boo... RS $5 p a+

=, Teze-loo.— Book XIII. Here, as in the

Jast book, we have a number of subjects touched 
upon, all bearing more or less directly on the 
government of the state, and the cultivation of 
the person. ‘The book extends to thirty chap- 
tera.

1. THE SECRET OF SUCCESS IN GOVERNING I8 
THE UNWEARIED EXAMPLE OF THE RULERS :—A 
Lusgsoyx TO lszE-LOO. I. To what understood

antecedents do the Z refer? For the first, we

may suppose R =H, Z=% E. or x

; ‘precede the people,’ lead the people, that

is, do so by the example of your personal con- 
duct. But we cannot in the second clause bring

I.

"T

Chung-kung, being chief mihister to the: head 
of the Ke family, asked about government,

The Master said, Em- 
x cR in the same way under the regimenI.

"T

Chung-kung, being chief mihister to the: head 
of the Ke family, asked about government,

The Master said, Em- 
x cR in the same way under the regimen

"TAPAS 
laborious for Z5 ; that is, to set them the 
example of diligence in agriculture, &c. It is 
better, however, according to the idiom I have 
several times pointed out, to take 2 as giving 
a sort of neuter and general force to the preced-

ing words, so that the expressions are exam 
ple and laboriousness. — Kung Gan-kwó under" 
stands the meaning differently:—*set the peo“ 
ple an example, and then you may make then!

labour. But this is not so good. 2. fit n 
old copies is . The meaning comes to ti? 
sulle. : ead

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

x

I

a 
W 
ale

>F

| 
l 
22

Pisa 
Jd

zi

gl 
ES 
kga

[ d

aie Sa

=>) 
E

E 
XE

EH 
I RN

[ d 
o

SRE S 
DE 
nS push:

F 
URRAK 
=

aj 
AB

\ 
/

“tit 
Seh k=

o

nin 
AR 
SFE

pa 
IRS oh

e: 
2 
a 
Y 
=

— * 
ploy first the services of vour various officers, pardon small faults, 
und raise to office men of virtue and talents.”

2. Chung-kung said, How shall I know the men of virtue and 
talent, so that I may raise them to office?” He was answered, 
“ Raise to office those whom you know. As to those whom you do 
not know, will others neglect them ?".

CnarrER III. 1.  Tszedoo said, “The prince of Wei has been 
waiting for yous in order with you to administer the government. 
What will you consider the first thing to be done?" j

2. The Master replied, ** What is necessary is to rectify names."

3. “So, indeéd!” said Tsze-loo. “You are wide of the mark. 
Why must there be such rectification ?" i

14. The Master said, “How uncultivated you are, Yew! A su- 
perior man, in regard to what he does not know, shows a cautious

» 
yeserve, 
9. Tne Dirriks CHIEFLY TO BE ATTENDRD TO 
BY A RAD MINISTER :—A LESSOX TO Yen Yuxc.

1. X. AR fi] comp. VIII. 4, 3. The É» 
yeserve, 
9. Tne Dirriks CHIEFLY TO BE ATTENDRD TO 
BY A RAD MINISTER :—A LESSOX TO Yen Yuxc.

1. X. AR fi] comp. VIII. 4, 3. The É

Tj] are the various smaller officers. A head 
minister should assign them their duties, and 
not be interfering in them himself. His busi- 
ness is to examine into the manner in which 
they discharge them. And in doing so, he

should overlook small faults. 2. AE

BA comp. Wy Jil dt A BH: in VI. 4, 
though the force of here is not so great as

in that ch. Conf. meaning is, that Chung-kung 
need not trouble hiniself about all men of worth. 
Let him advance those he knew. There was no 
fear that the others would be neglected. Comp. 
what is said on ‘knowing men,’ in XII. 22.

8. THE SUPREME IMPORTANCE OF NAMES BE- 
IXO correct. I. This conversation is assigned 
by Choo He to the 1)th year of the duke Gae 
ot Loo, when Conf. was 69, and he returned 
from his wanderings to his native state. Tsze- 
loo had then been some time in the service of 
the duke Ch*uh of Wei, who it would appear, 
bad been wishing to get the services of the sage 
himself, and the disciple did not think that his 
Master would refuse to accept office, as he had

not objected to Ais doing so. 2. 4d must have

here a special reference, which Tsze-loo did not 
apprchend. Nor did the old interpr., for Ma

Yung explains the JE 4 by na ü N 
Z 2 ‘to rectify the names of all things.’

On this view, the reply would indeed be ‘wide 
of the mark. The answer is substantially the 
same as the reply to duke King of Tse about

~

CONFÜCIAN ANALECTS.

KRF IE.

1 —

E 
a

Sl

A

|

A

SS

vø 
n

i

[D 
e] 
— 
So

= 
Sue

ACE 
82 BH R 
an: Jt ni BEAN A A . 
ae aca PH W. S 
i ME ah d. EY BEY OR 
Hi. E. Jor Hg BR FAY ine JN, 
Ae J If L STR XU

*

5. If names be not correct, language is not in accordance with 
the truth of things. If language be not in accordance. with the 
truth of things, affairs cannot be carried on to success.*

5. If names be not correct, language is not in accordance with 
the truth of things. If language be not in accordance. with the 
truth of things, affairs cannot be carried on to success.

6. When affairs cannot be carried on to success, propricties 
and music will not flourish. When propricties and music do not 
flourish, punishments will not be properly awarded. When punish- 
ments are not properly awarded, the people do not know how to 
move hand or foot, e )

7. “Therefore a superior man considers it necessary that the 
names he uses may be spoken appropriately, and also that what he 
speaks may be carried out appropriately. What the superior man 
requires, is just that in his words there may be nothing incorrect,"

Cuarrer IV 1, Fan Ch'e requested to be taught husbandry. 
The Master said, “I am not so good for that as an old husbandman,” 
He requested also to be taught gardening, and was answered, J 
am not so good for that as an old gardener.” i

govern. in XII. 11, that it obtains when the 
prince is prince, the father father, &c; that is, 
when each man in his relations is what the name 
of his relation would require. Now, the duke 
Ch‘uh held the rule of Wei against his father; 
see VII. 14. Conf, from the necessity of the 
case and peculiarity of the circumstances, al- 
lowed his disciples, notwithetanding that, to 
take office in Wei ; but at the time of this con- 
versation, Ch*uh had been duke for nine years, 
and ought to have been so established that he 
could have taken the course of a filial son with- 
out subjecting the state to any risks. On this 
account, Conf. suid he would begin with rec- 
tifying the name of the duke, that is, with re- 
quiring him to resign the dukedom to his fa- 
ther, and be what his name of son required

him to be. See the 5 SF, in loc, ‘This view

enables us to understand better the climax that 
follows, tho’ its successive steps are still not

without difficulty, na K 3f, — . may behim to be. See the 5 SF, in loc, ‘This view

enables us to understand better the climax that 
follows, tho’ its successive steps are still not

without difficulty, na K 3f, — . may be

taken as an exclamation, or as Is it not?“ 4.

fi] . is used in the same sense as in

IL 18. The phrase is putting-aside-like,’ 
i. e., the sup. man reserves and revolves what ho 
is in doubt about, and does not rashly speak, C. 
* Proprieties' here are not ceremonial rules, but 
=sx‘order,’ what such rules are designed to dis- 
play and secure. So, ‘music’ is equivalent to, 
‘harmony.’ rp. 3d tone, is the verb; N if? 
= do not hit the mark,’

4, A RULER HAS NOT TO OCCUPY HIMERLÉ 
WITH WHAT IS PROPERLY TUR BUSINESS OF iR 
PEOPLE. It is to be supposed that Fan Che

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

SR

r

8

N

Set SSS 
z 
E

v

IS

N 
/

INO:

= 
iS 
— 
—

O

SHS ea

—

b

i l 
2. Fan Ch'e having gone out,

indeed, is Fan Seu!" 
8.

be reverent,

Nu 
pns sien t

r

U

NA

129

PE 
"4

zm

BRE

uia 
NEE GR EET

ESOS 
ER

» 
811

Mkr

e

zs re ES Sa

V 
— 
oom

—

bmi 
=

8 
zu

V 
= 
—

e

p

=I! 
I

EM > 
Bj F3,

the Master said, ^A small man,

“Tf a superior love propriety, the people will not dare not to 
If he love righteousness, the people will not dare not

to submit to his example. If he love good faith, the people will not 
dare not to be sincere. Now, when these things obtain, the people 
from all quarters will come to him, bearing their children on their 
backs, What need has he of a knowledge of husbandry ?”

Cuarrer V. The Master said, “Though a man may be able to 
recite the three hundred odes, yet if, when intrusted with a govern- 
mental charge, he knows not how to act, or if, when sent to any 
quarter on a mission, he cannot give his replies unassisted, notwith- 
standing thé extent of his learning, of what practical tse is it?”waa at thie time in office somewhere, and think- 
ing of the Master, as the villager and high offi- 
cer did, IX. 2 and 6, that his knowledge em- 
braced alinost every subject, he imagined that 
he miglit get lessons from him on the two sub- 
jecte he specifies, which he might use for the

benefit of the people. 1. fa is properly the 
* geed-sowing," and H. ta kitchen - garden, but 
they are used generally, as in the transl. 3. tij. 
‘the feelings,’ ‘desires,’ but sometimes, as here, 
in the sonse of ‘sincerity.’ Bi often joined 
with % „ is a cloth with strings by which a 
child is strapped upon the back of its mother 
or nuree.-—-Thie par. shows what people iu office

should learn. Conf. intended that it should be 
repeated to Fan Ch'e. * 
5. Literary ACQUIREMENTS USELESS WITH”

OUT PRACTICAL ABILITY. Er = FA see II. 
2 sn ‘to croon over, as Chinese students do; 
here, to have learned.’ Hfi, ‘alone,’ i. 65 
unassisted by the individuals of his suite. E 
‘many,’ refer. to the 300 odes. Jy. ‘also,’ here 
and in other places, our ‘yet,’ ‘after all." R 
E -H. it is said, FH. ‘use,’ and A

is a mere expletive, — EL SB. uS but each 
term may have its meaning, us iu the translation,

130. 
a

I

= 
— 
zB

8

EO 
WENN, 
1

Er 
Y

make 
is 
FTN

v 
v

TANN 
pu

aras 
z

NV

WEE 
E e

M 3

E 
Tyee

v 
w

= 
s 
5

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

FHSS 
Ee Noe at TO Hes

È

:

WARNA 
N N08

P

|

N 
^ 
=<

0

i

Cuarrer VI. The Master said, “When a prince's personal con- 
duct is correct, his governinent is effective without. the issuing of

orders.

but they will not be followed.” 
Cuarreg VII.

Wei are brothers.” 
CHAPTER VIII.

If his personal conduct is not correct, he may issue orders, 
The Master said, * The government of Loo and

The Master said of King, a scion of the ducal

D

family of Wei, that he khew the economy of a family well. When

he began to have means, he said, “Ha! here is a collection!” when 
8 ho , 2 ue :The Master said of King, a scion of the ducal

D

family of Wei, that he khew the economy of a family well. When

he began to have means, he said, “Ha! here is a collection!” when 
8 ho , 2 ue :

they were a little increased, he said, Ha! this is complete!“ when he

had become rich, he said, * Ea! this is adinirable

1?

CuarrER IX. 1. When the Master went to, Wei, Yen Yew acted

as driver of his carriage.,

2. The Master observed, How numerous are the people!” 
3. Yew said, “Since they are thus nuiaerous, whet more shall

be done for them?”

6. Ilis PERSONAL CONDUCT ALL IN ALL TO A 
RULER. A translator finds it impossible here 
to attain to the terse conciseness of his original.

7. Tun SIMILAR CONDITION OF THE STATES OF 
Loo asp Wer Comp. VI. 22. Loo's state had 
been from the influence of Chow-kung, and Wei

was the fief of his brother Fung (Fp), com-

monly known as K‘ang-shuh ( ER AL. They

had, similarly, maintained an equal and brother- 
ly course in their progress, or, as it was in Con- 
fucius’ time, in their degeneracy. That portion 
of the present 11o-nan, which runs up aud lies 
between Shan-se and Pih-chih-le, was the bulk 
of Wei.

3. ‘Tue CONTENTMENT OF THE OFFICER KING, 
AND BIS INDIFFERENCE IN GETTING RICH, King 
was w great officer of Wei, a scion of its ducal

* Enrich them,” was the reply.

house. RH E aR ig a difficult expression.

Literally it is— dwelt well in his house,’ TS

implies that he was a married man, the head of

a family. The 4 Em says the phrase is

equivalent to iB Ke, ‘managed his family?

Choo He explains J by II H. IH 2 Z.

i ,— it is significant of indifference and enre- 
lessness.“ Our word ‘ha!’ expressing surprise 
and satisfaction corresponda to it pretty nearly. 
The 55 E says that the is not to he yn- 
derstood ns if King really made these utter- 
ances, but that Conf. thus vividly representa 
how he felt.

CONFUCIAN

TT 
xj

O

FEE HH E Oh 
=

v

[Sai ERE

O

= 
Ss

REA 
ea d

-

SadCONFUCIAN

TT 
xj

O

FEE HH E Oh 
=

v

[Sai ERE

O

= 
Ss

REA 
ea d

-

Sad

4.. * And when thoy have heen enriched,

done?" The Master said, “Teach 
CnArTER X. The Master said,

A

: 131 
ANALECTS.

Ex wk Dh ES E

Es

v

NIS 
Sk TT SHEP zr tan) 
E

[d 
w

SHENI

o

Wut 
Mal 
INED

E 
SS

b O 
what more shall be

them.“ 
“Tf there were any of the princes

who would employ: me, in the course of twelve months, I should have

done something considerable. 
be perfected.”

CHAPTER XI.

In

three years, the government would

The Master said, „If good men were to govern a

country in succession for a hundred years, they would be able to 
transform the violently bad, and dispense with capital punishments.’

True indeed is this saying!” 
CraAPTER XII.

The Master said, “If a trul

royal ruler were

to arise, it would still require a generation, and then virtue would

H 77 
Prevail.

9. ATROPLE NUMEROUS, Y BLL-OFF, AND EDU- 
CATED, is THE GREAT ACHIEVEMENT OF GOVERN- 
MENT, I. E ‘a servant,’ but here with the 
mean, in the translation. That, indeed, is the 
second meaning of the char. given in the dict.

10. CONFUCIUS ESTIMATE OF WHAT HE COULD 
DO, IF EMPLOYED TO ADMINISTER THE GOVERN- 
MENT OF A STATE. ,is to be distinguished

Írom Hy, aud = a revolution of the year.’

"There is a comma at AH. and im B i are

read together. mn does not signify, as it 
often does, ‘and nothing more,’ but and have,’ 
being aK, a sign of the perfect tense.

— Given twelve months, and there would ho a 
pussnble result. In three years, there would be 
a completion.“

D

11. Wat A HUNDRED YRARS OF GOOD GO- 
VERNMENT COULD EFFECT. Conf. quotes here a

saying of his time, and approves of it. n. "p-

per Ist tone, ‘to be equal to.“ . would 
be equal to the violent,“ that is, to transform 
them. HY to do away with killing,’ that 
is, with capital punishments, unnecessary with 
a transformed people.

12. IN WI AT TIME A ROYAL RULER COULD12. IN WI AT TIME A ROYAL RULER COULD

TRANSFORM THE EMPIRE. £ H- tone who 
was a king? The char. E is formed by three 
straight lines representing the three powers of 
Heaven, Earth and Man, and a perpendicular

line, going through and uniting them, nnd thus 
conveys the highest idea of power nnd influence.

See the dict., char. F. Here it means the 
highest wisdom and virtue in the bighest place.

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS,

t2

13

ag

Baki 
ISSR

x

ES Ea Sogl ss 
[mnn | FES eed

mni

get

vu 
A end E

o

[ d 
Ld

RIES els 
Petras D Na

O

Se

u 
2

z=

Not MNS mtl Tri 
SER

| .

CHAPTER XIII. The Master said, “If a minister make his own 
conduct correct, what difficulty will he have in assisting in govern- 
mu m he cannot rectify himself, what has he to do with rectifying 
others

CHAPTER XIV. The disciple Yen returning from the court, the 
Master said to him, * How are you so late?” He replied, “ We had 
government business.” The Master said, “ It must have been family 
affairs. If there had been government business, though I ám not 
now in office, I should have been consulted about it.”

. CuaPrER XV. 1. The duke Ting asked whether there was a single 
sentence which could make a country prosperous. Confucius replied, 
“Such an effect cannot be expected from one sentence.

2. “There is a saying, however, which people have— To be a 
prince is difficult; to be a minister is not easy.’

The point of the ch. turns on the opposition of

the phrases A IN and H. 2 that the

court of the Ke fumily, that Js, they had really

H. ta generation,’ or thirty years. See note 
on II. 23, 1. .The old interpr. take T ass=

K. ‘virtuous government. To save Conf. 
from the charge of vanity in what Ne says, in 
ch. 10, that he could accomplish in three years, 
jt is said, that the perfection which he predi- 
cates there would only be the foundation for 
the virtue here realized.18. THAT HE BE PERSONALLY CORRECT ERSEN- 
TIAL TO AN OFFICER OF GOVERNMENT. Comp. 
eh. 6. That the subject is here an officer of 
gov., and not the ruler, appears from the phrase

TE ER see note on VI. 6. With reference to 
the other phraseology of the ch., the 4f t

‘says that tte EX embraces JE xt. * the ree- 
tification of the prince,’ and IE R. the ree-

tification of the people.’ 
14 ANIRONICAL ADMONITION TO YEN YEW ON 
THE UBUBPING TENDEKOIES OF THE KE FAMILY,

been discussing matters of government, affecting 
the state. and proper only for the prince'd court. 
Conf. affects not to believe it, and says that at 
the chict’s court they could only lia ve been dis-

* 2 2 D 
cussing the affairs of his house. F za A. 
an inversion, and i ‘although I am

now not employed. Bil, low. 3d tone.—T should

have been present and heard it.“ Superannuated 
officers night go to court on occasions of emer 
gency, and might also be consulted on such, 
though the gen. rule was to allow them to retire 
at 70. See the Le Ke, I. i. 28.

15. How tne prosperity AND RUIN OF A 
COUNTRY MAY DEPEND ON THE RULERS VIEW OP 
HIS POSITION, HIS FEELING ITS DIFFICULTY, OR 
ONLY CHURISHING A HEADSTRONG WILL,

TAS Apan

should suppose that 7 H

—

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 38

HUNP 
AS We E A — AUS 
A F Fe Ze d N 
a — K (ais. H ff. MIT "adi 
HE. S EE!

sg] 35. T B

ur | TA

MI Mer 
=

DHS CTI uy

m 
By

Ei SS 8 ld 
Caton ap o

SERVE

TW

3. “If a ruler knows this, — the difficulty of being a prince, may 
there not be expected from this one sentence the prosperity of his 
country ?" f :

4. The duke then said, “Is there a single sentence which can 
ruin a couhtry ?” Confucius replied, “Such an effect as that cannot 
be expected from one sentence. There is, however, the saying which 
people have I have no pleasure in being a prince, only in that no 
one offer any opposition to what I say5. If a rulers words be good, is it not also good that no one 
oppose them? But if they are not good, and no one opposes them, 
may there not be expected from this one sentence the ruin of his 
country ?"

us 
RH

The duke of Sh& asked about government.

Cuarrer XVI. I.

5

2. The Master said, “Good government obtains, when those who 
are, near are made happy, and those who are far off are attracted.”

the correspond. sent, below were comm. sayings, 
about which the duke asks, ina way to intimate

his disbelief of them— f$ St is not 
here in the sense of ‘a spring, or ‘primum 
mobile,’ but. in the sense of to expect,’ to 
be expected from. — = =— 4, as in 
31.2. 2. It is only tho first part of the saying 
on which Conf. dwells, That is called AE, the

principal sentence; the‘ other is only o st. 
van acocasory. & Some put a comma at the

first P. but it is better to take that N as a 
preposition ;—' May it not be expected that from 
this one word, &c.? Similurly, par. 4, N isa

prep., our in. H aS is used special- 
ly of the orders, rules, &c., which a ruler may

issue. 
16. GOOD GOVERNMENT SEEN FROM ITS EF-

FECTS. l. HE, read sid; see VII. 18. 2. Conf. is

supposed to have in view the oppressive and ng- 
gressive govt, of oco, to which /e belonged.

134 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

ay

À 
wie

gn

d 
= 
— 
—

1

N 
=

v 
bx

hes

REEDE 
i

~~ 
SE

V 
4 
Thay

=P

5

CS

44

>H 
* 
` 
=

NR TERED

[ d

REBEL 
>

mE

~ 
Lad 
A 
4

SON TD

EN. Fae > JS

yI

| 
Ec

\, 
3

EREN: 
25

us

m

zik

^v 
g

@ 
* 
vi 
[4 
O

N

—

i

*

at

pu.

Cnar TER XVII. Tsze-hea, being governor of Keu-foo, asked 
about government. The Master said, “Do not be desirous to have 
things done quickly; do not look at small advantages. Desire to 
have things done quickly prevents their being done thoroughly. 
Looking at small advantages prevents great affairs from being ac- 
complished.” a ,CharrER XVIII. I. The duke of Shé informed Confucius, say- 
ing, * Among us here there are those who may be styled upright in 
their conduct. If their father have stolen a sheep, they will bear wit- 
ness to the fact.”

2. Confucius said, “ Among us, in our part of the country, those 
who are upright are different from this. The father conceals the 
misconduct of the son, and the son conceals the misconduct of the 
father. Uprightness is to be found in this."

6B 
tb 
egt

[x 
E 
4

us to the latter view. In the SEER, accounts 
are quoted of such cases, but they are probably 
founded on this chap. is ‘to steal on oc- 
casion, i. e., on some temptation, as when an-

17. HASTE AND 8MALL ADVANTAGES NOT TO 
BE DESIRED IN GOVERNING. Kou-foo (/, up. 
2d tone) was a small city in the western bor-

ders of Loo. {i= ig the prohibitive par- 
tivie,

18. NATURAL DUTY AND UPRIGUTNESS IN 
COLLISION. 1. . Fe, ‘our village, ‘our 
neighbourhood, but J must be taken vague- 
ly, as in the transl; ‘comp. V.21. We cannot 
say whether the duke is referring to one or 
more actual cases, or giving his opinion of what

other person's animal comes into my grounds, 
and I appropriate it. ae seems to convey here 
the idea of accusation, as well as of witnessing.

2. iti 4E FH.—comp. II. 18,2. The ex-

Press. does not absolutely affirm tlint this is up- 
right, but that in this there is a better prin-

ciple than in the other conduct.—Any body but

‘a Chinese will say that both the duke's view of

his poople would do. Conf. reply would incline |. the subject and tho sage’s were incomplete.

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

cS jk Bou 
(BH. xm 2h i

eR 
pon

=

vv 
D 
1

Sto

U 
M 
V

SONGS 
BE

s 
88

i

FE 
ENT

7810

~ 
L4 
- 
[ d

anm 
CE ENSE 
A Ar

[d

ni es 
RA

v 
A] 
> 
«

S 
(VER

zu 
S

oCONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

cS jk Bou 
(BH. xm 2h i

eR 
pon

=

vv 
D 
1

Sto

U 
M 
V

SONGS 
BE

s 
88

i

FE 
ENT

7810

~ 
L4 
- 
[ d

anm 
CE ENSE 
A Ar

[d

ni es 
RA

v 
A] 
> 
«

S 
(VER

zu 
S

o

CHAPTER XIX. Fan Ch'e asked about perfect virtue. The Master 
said, „It is, in retirement, to be sedately grave; in the management 
of business, to be reverently attentive ; in intercourse witli others, to 
be strictly sincere. Though a man go among rude uncultivated 
tribes, these qualities may not be neglected."

CnarrER XX. 1. Tsze-kung asked, saying, What qualities must 
a man possess to entitle him to be called an officer?" The Master 
said, * He who in his conduct of himself maintains a sense of shame, 
and when sent to any quarter will not disgrace his prince’s commis- 
sion, deserves to be called an officer.”

2. Tsze-kung pursued, “I venture to ask who may be placed in 
the next lower rank?” and he was told, He whom the circle of his 
relatives pronounce to be filial, whom his fellow-villagers and neigh- 
bours pronounce to be fraternal.” Me

3. Again the disciple asked, “I venture to ask about the class 
still next in order." + The Master said, ‘They are determined to be 
sincere in what they say, and to carry out what they do. They are 
obstinate little men. Yet perhaps they may make the next class."

19. CuAmaoTERISTICS OF PERFECT VIRTUR. but the officer, , Shas shame; i. e, will

hid i ird ti at F Mie is repre- E j 
Thik is tho third ¾ -Pan Ch'o P avoid all bad conduet which would subject him

sented Mas 1 and it is stad A : 
an f " quest. the d R a gi in to reproach, 2. NN is a designation for all 
8 sed b eb fir: order, ^3 
pro y some to have heen the ho form hody having the same ancestor,’

2 E (up. 2d tone), in oppos. to Zt B= bia Rh [i] se tt. Hike z di. These ate

‘dwelling alone,’ ‘in retirement.’ 2 is a verb,

f -, ‘to go to,’2 E (up. 2d tone), in oppos. to Zt B= bia Rh [i] se tt. Hike z di. These ate

‘dwelling alone,’ ‘in retirement.’ 2 is a verb,

f -, ‘to go to,’

20. DIFFERENT CLASSES OF MEN WHO IN THEIR 
BEVERAL DEGREES MAY BE SrYLED OFFICERS, 
AND THE INFERIORITY OF TIE MASS OF THE 
OFFICERS or CONFUCIUS’ TIME. 1. Ton. 
ou XII. 20. Here it denotes—not the scholar,

as in V. 18, 2,—

also called PR: ‘nine branches of kindred,” 
being all of the same surname from the groat- 
grent-grandfüther to the grent-grent-grandson. 
= 3, not simply brotherly, in the strict 
sense, but ‘submissive,’ giving due honour to all 
older than himself. 3. ft ‘the sound of stones.’

M 
T

85 
j

i8

EY

EO

Ain

e

e 
w

id

SANE

>

> Lui 
(x 
PORTH

En 
Ea

Tee- kung

DI

aE 
E 
D

HSE

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

.-

Ij 
NAP

22:

Pa 
INFE

xd 
=

005

nally inquired, * Of what sort are those of the

present day, who engage in government?" The Master said, Pooh! 
they are so many pecks and hampers, not worth being taken into

account."

CuaPrER XXI. The Master said, “Since I cannot get men

pursuing

9

the due medium, to whom I might communicate my

instructions, I must find the ardent and the „ . 
The ardent will advance and lay hold of truth; the cautiously-decided 
will keep themselves from what is wrong."

CuaPrER XXII. 1. The Master said, The people of the south 
have a saying A man without constancy cannot be either a wizard

or a doctor.

Good !

2. “Inconstant in his virtue, he will be visited with disgrace.”

fu fill R. ‘stone like. The dict., with ref.

to this passage, explains it~} A 3 ‘the

appearance of a small man.’ 4. +45 Z A

i. e, mere utensils. Comp. on II. 12.

21. UUNFUCIUS OBLIGED TO CONTENT HIMSELF 
WITH THE ARDENT AND CAUTIOUS AS DISCIPLES,

Comp. V. 21, and Mencius VII. ii. 37. Bid

is explain, as in the transl.— YJ 34 fii S. 
The at Hi however, gives simply fi 2

K- ‘dwell together with them,’ and treatsComp. V. 21, and Mencius VII. ii. 37. Bid

is explain, as in the transl.— YJ 34 fii S. 
The at Hi however, gives simply fi 2

K- ‘dwell together with them,’ and treats

` 
the ch. as if it had no reference to the trans- 
mission of the eugre's doctrines, or to his disci-

ne ORC 16 .

is explained in the dict. by tha Jo ‘con- 
tracted and urgent. Oppos. to T. it would

+

seem to denote caution, bub yet not a caution 
which may not be combined with decision. AS

ff FR FR have what they will not do.

22. THe IMPORTANCE OF FIXITY AND CON- 
STANCY- OF MIND, 1. I translate AK by ‘wizard,’

for want of a better term, In the Chow Le, 
Bk. XXVI, the woo appear sustaining a sort 
of official status, regularly called in to bring 
down spiritual beings, obtain showers, &c. They 
are distinguished as men and women, though

Mis often feminine, ‘a witch,’ as opposed

to En, ‘a wizard. Conf. use of the saying, 
ace. to Choo He, is this:—' Since such small 
people must have constancy, how much more 
ought others to have it? Tho ranking of the 
doctors and wizards together sufficiently shows 
what was the position of the healing art in 
those days.—Ching K‘ang-shing interpreta thie 
Par. quite inadmissibly :—' wizards and doctors

— 
oo 
4

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

+h -H 
2) n E

= 
yz) 
i

MSS 
TU

wn 
O

v

EA DEI 
A

N 
a 
zx

E 
1 «. 
E 
wv

= 
0

SSE

[ d

MON RON 
zxz

o

CEDE SE

v

SENS 
Hr I Bir

3

wer

N 
Nur n a

e

iste del - US -

wv

rt

: E 
"vu . £ ’ 
8. The Master said, “This arises simply from not prognosticating.“ 
CuarrER XXIII. The Master said, * The superior man is affable, 
but not adulatory; the mean is adulatory, but not affable,”Cuarrer XXIV, Tsze-kung asked saying, “What do you say 
of a man who is loved by all the people of his village?" The Mas. 
ter replied, “We may aot for thüt accord our approval of him." 
* And what do you say of him who is hated by all the people of 
his village?" The Master said, „We may not for that conclude 
that he is bad, It is better than either of these cases that the good 
in the village Jove him, and the bad hate him,”

CHAPTER XXV. The Master said, The superior man is easy to 
serve and difficult to please, If you try to please him in any way 
which is not accordant with right, he will not be pleased, But in his 
employment of men, he uses them according to their capacity. The

FS NEE

cannot manage people who haye no constancy,’

—lit,, ¢ r? Ay 2 
2. This is a quotation from the Yih-king, gia- Lr lit, “not yet may,’ The general mean, of

a Chin, sentenee is often plain, and yet we are

gram M. 3. This is inexplicable to Choo He, 
Some bring out from it the mean. in the transla- 
tion.—Ch'ing Keang-shing sus: By the Y ih 
We prognosticate good and evil, but init there is 
po prognostication of people without constancy.’

23. Tux DIFFERENT MANNERS OF THE SUPE- 
RIOR AND THE MEAN mAN. Comp. II. 14, but 
here the parties are contrasted in their more 
private intercourse with others. fal: 'ngrecing 
with,'=flattering.

24. How, TO JUDGE OF A MAN FROM THE 
LIX IN as AND DISLIKINGS OF OTHERS, WE MUST 
KNOW THE CHARACTERS OF THOSE OTHERS. X

puzzled to supply exactly the subjects, nuxili⸗ 
aries, &c, which other hinguagey require. In 
rendering the phrase, I haye followed many of

the paraphrasts, who complete it thus;— N Ay

— 4＋ 4 D = — -p 
fis JE 1 FF th aud Ae BT fs dE 15 
Be thy. Tn the st Hip however, the second 
occurrence of it is expanded in the same way 
as the first. : 
25. DurrknRENCE BETWEEN TIES SUPERIOR AND 
THE MEAN MAN IN THEIR RELATION TO THOSE EM-

VENUE TOM

! —as in the transl, or we may render,— is easily

PLOYED BY THEM.VENUE TOM

! —as in the transl, or we may render,— is easily

PLOYED BY THEM.

CONFUCIAN, ANXALECTS.

!

NES

138 
Zo RA S a 
H BH; „ Ba js 
bit TF yu, 
EH

= 
prem

e 
e

zz 
uz

WS ER

+

=i

RAL 
ap ab Ee 
aS 
Tre 
PE

2 * 2

-

guis M

v

ges 
N 
>

SE

mean man js,difficult to serve, and gasy to .pleasc. Jf you tuy to 
please him though 16 be in a way which is nòt necordant with kight, 
he may be pleased. But in his employment of men, he Wishesthem 
to pe équal fo-everything.” l me ER 
marrer XXVI. The Master said, “The superior man has a

dignified case without pride.“ The mcan man, has pride without a 
diknifod cAse.” l 7 A.

Cuarrrex XXVII. The Master said, The firm, the enduring, 
‘the simple, and the modest, are near to virtue.” " EUM

| Cuavrer XXVII. Tsze-loo asked saying, What qualities must 
a man possess to entitle him to be called a scholar?” The Master 
said, “He must be. thus,—carnest, urgent, and bland :—among his 
friends, earnest and urgent; among his brethren, bland.”

è 
served, but is pleased with difficulty,’ n z not our wooden.“ It 7 He. ‘simple,’ Plain. 
—see II. 12, 4 " being here a verb. E fii: B see IV. 24. The gloss on it here is— E

is the opposite of ür . and- pA 22 D, $t. ‘slow ‘and blunt ‘Modest’ seems to be

xt 4 ^ Wes : " idea. 
8 fi — E . ‘he requires all capa- | the idea

Bilities from a single man.“ 28. QUALITIES THAT MARK THE SCHOLAR ds 
26. "l'ug DIFFERENT AMM AND BEARING OF the | SOCIAL INTERCOURSE, ` This is the satne question 
© SUPERION AND THE MEAN MAN, a8 in ch. 20, 1, but + is here ‘the scholar,’ the

27. NATURAL QUALUEIES WHIGH ARE FAYOUR- | gentleman of education, without reference to his

ANLE TO VIRTUE, K. “wood, Here an adj., but | being in office or not. if

CONFUCIAN

K pl.

:

RES

a5

s

Haud

| LE 
de Bec eA A

139

B 
Af

ANALECTS.

v

E 3

. * HARV aw H.

Cuarrer XXIX.

The Master said, Let a god man teach theCONFUCIAN

K pl.

:

RES

a5

s

Haud

| LE 
de Bec eA A

139

B 
Af

ANALECTS.

v

E 3

. * HARV aw H.

Cuarrer XXIX.

The Master said, Let a god man teach the

people seven ;years, and they may then likewiso be employed in war." 
Cup run XXX. The Master ‘said, “To lead an uninstructed peo- 
ple to war, is to throw them away.’

41

29. "How THE GOVERNMENT OF A GOOD RULER 
Wilh vite WARE TUE PEOPLE FOR wan. E A: 
Sa. poke. man, spoken with reference to him 
ns n ruler. The teaching is not to be under- 
stoodjof military training, but of the duties of 
life and citizenship ; a people so taught are mo- 
rally fitted to fight for their government. What 
military training may be included in the teach- 
ing, would merely be the hunting and drilling

oh m "

“4 ] 1 
à mn t N 
T es

i * , *

*

! ‘ 
p 3 BOOK, XIV.

057g 4

. 3

111 o. - 
eL

1 il M,

4. aai d J

„ CHAPTER I.

jt Hb. 
A T

Hëen asked what was shanieful:

in the people's repose from the toils of agricul- 
ture, . weapons of war.’ "A el DA 
They may go to their weapons.’

| 80; Tar PEOPLE MUST NE TAUGHT, TO PRE- 
PARE THEM FoR wan. Comp. the last ch. The

lang. is very strony, and EA being understood

as in last ch., showa how Cont valued education 
for all classes.

t N hal 
| 4c ud l 
en ' 6 id 
= =| j i * 4 : 
z i IUE 
HEEN-WAN.. ' il

UE. 
m mj

The Master said,

Em 
E 
FJ,

« When good government prevails in a state, to be thinking only of 
hisisalary ; and, when bad government prevails, to be. thinking, in the 
sane way, only ‘of his sulary ;—this is shameful.”

Manisa OF THIS Boon — de rn ü +e.

“Hen NS XIV. Me Sisal Hing 
Ping Ni j) says, In this Book we have theManisa OF THIS Boon — de rn ü +e.

“Hen NS XIV. Me Sisal Hing 
Ping Ni j) says, In this Book we have the

Ae of Pe Three Kings, and Two Chiefs, 
„the courses proper for princes and great officers, 
“the practice of virtue, the knowledge of what 
iy shameful, pegsonal cultivation, and the tran- 
quillizing of the people ;—all subjects of great 
importance in government. They are therefore 
colfected together, and arranged after the last 
chapter which commences with an inquiry 
zibout government.’ Some writers are of opinion 
‘that the whole book was compiled by Héen

vr Yuen Sze, who appears in the first chapter.

1. Ir is SHAMEFUL ix AN OFFICER TO RE CARS 
| ING ONLY ABOUT MiS EMoLUMENT. Iléen is the 
Yuen Sze of VI. 3, and if we suppose Conf. 
answer designed to have a practical application 
to himself, it is not chsily reconcileable with 
what appears of his character, in that other

place, 2 nere Rie ‘emolument,’ but its 
meaning must be pregnant and intensive, as in 
the transl. If we do not take it so, the senti- 
ment is contradictory to VIII. 13, 3. K · ung 
Gun-kwö, however, takes the following view or 
the reply :— When a country is well governed, 
emolument is right; when a ‘country is illgo- 
verned ! té take office and emolument is shame- 
ful? I prefer the constynction of Choo. He, 
which appears in the translation.

CONFUCIAN AKALHCTA:

b fu = » fa^ be [7 
Wr (Sex A E JA |—3À 
eet è D 2 — A »

~ 
eO 
[4 
* Sl

4

a) 
TR

Nel ti

Lu 
* 
w 
[d 
v

T 
Sacra 
8

zi] zo E ES I 
jh

V d 
en 
: 
Bu 
8 
*

Al 
DRATT 
:

Xj

Tran s 
=

S

S

zi

OA 
E.. ju E m

Cnarrer IL 1, When the love of superiority, boasting, resent: 
ments, and covctottsness are repressed; may this be deemed perfect 
virtue?“ l

2. The Master said, “This may be regarded as the achievement 
of what is difficult. But I do not kuow that it is to be deemed per- 
fect virtue." .2. The Master said, “This may be regarded as the achievement 
of what is difficult. But I do not kuow that it is to be deemed per- 
fect virtue." .

CHAPTER III. The Master said, “The scholar who cherishes the 
love of comfort, is not fit to be deemed a scholar,”

Cuarrer IV. The Master said, “When good government pre: 
vails in a state, language may be lofty and bold, and actions the 
same. When bad government prevails, the uctions may be lofty 
and bold, but the language may be with some reserve.”

Cuarren V, The Master said, “The virtuous will be sure to 
speak correctly, but those whose speech is good nuty not always be 
virtuous. Men of principle are sure to be bold, bitt those who are 
bold may not always be men of principle.”

IV. 11. Tue jen FE here is akin to the qu

there. Comp. also IV; 9.

4; WHAT ONE DOBS MUST ALWAYS BE RIGHT Í 
. WHAT ONE FEBLS NEED NOT ALWAYS BE SPOREN?

A LESSON OF PRUDENCE. Jf for p as in 
VII. 35. fit, ‘terror front being in a. higli

—

2. Tur PRAISE OF PERFECT VIRTUR I8 NOT TO 
BE ALLOWED FOR THE REPRESSION OF BAD FEEL- 
ixcs; In Ho An, this ch. is joined to the 
preceding, and Choo Hä also takes the first pat. 
to be a question of Yuct Hien, 1 b *oYer-

coming, 4. e., here the love of superiority? fX;

n8 iu V. 95, 3. x TT. * do not go, i e; are 
hot allowed to have their way, Sure repressed: 
2. TE. ditfleult, —tlie doing what is difficult. 
is quoad — i-as to its being perfect 
virtue, that I do not know: ` 
9. A SCHOLAR MUST BE AIMING AT WHAT 18 
HIGUER THAN CUMVONÈ UR PL'ABURB, Corp.

position; then * danger, dangerous. It is used 
here in a goot sense, meaning tfofty, aud what 
may seem to be. or really be, dangerous,“ uns 
der a bad government, where good principles 
do not prevail.

5. WE MAY PREDICATE THE EXTERNAL VRQs 
THE INTERNAL, BUT NOT VICE. VERSA. ` The A

= 
I 
=

E must be understood of virtuous speaking

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 14i 
EEEX] 
zm 4 H, ES

[d

NTT SSAA NEA 
Stes

O

TE SEO TO NEE

TT Sah at baat= 
I 
=

E must be understood of virtuous speaking

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 14i 
EEEX] 
zm 4 H, ES

[d

NTT SSAA NEA 
Stes

O

TE SEO TO NEE

TT Sah at baat

> 
eRe

O

[ d

FES Ss RESI ROM S

[ d

Ne Sane

O

DSSS Sy

[ d

n

Cnarrnn VI. Nan-kung Kwöh, submitting an inquiry to Con-

fucius, said, * E was skilful at archery, and Ngaou could move a 
boat along upon the land, but neither of them died a natural death. 
Yu and Tscih personally wrought at the toils of husbandry, and 
they became possessors of the empire." "The Master made no reply ;

but when Nan-kung Kwóh went out, he said, A superior man in-

deed is this! An esteemer of virtue indeed is this

” 
!

CHAPTER VII. The Master said, “Superior men, and yet not al-

ways virtuous, there have been, alas!

mean man, and, at the same time,virtuous.”

and ‘virtuously,’ or ‘correctly,’ be supplied to 
bring out the sense. A translator is puzzled

to render f E differently from "H f

Y have said *men of principle, the oppo- 
sition being between moral and animal courage; 
yet the men of principle may not be without 
the other, in order to their doing justice to 
themselves.

6. EMINENT PROWESS CONDUCTING TO RUIN; 
EMINENT VIRTUE LEADING TO EMPIRE, THE Mo- 
DEsty oF Conrucius. Nan-kung Kwoh is said 
by Choo He to have been the same as Nan 
Yung in V. 1, But this is doubtful. See on Nan 
Yung there. Kwoh, it is said, insinuated in 
his remark an inquiry, whether Conf. was not 
like Yu or Tscih, and the great men of the time 
so many Es and Ngaous; and the sage was mo- 
destly silent upon the subject. E and Ngaou 
carry us back to the 22d century before Christ. 
The first belonged to a family of princelets, fa-

mous, from the time of the emperor A (B. C. 
2432), for their archery, and dethroned the em- 
peror How Scang ( Jatt ), B. C. 2149. E was

afterwards slain by his minister, Han Tsuh, 
(SE Jb who then married his wife, and one

of their sons (SE, Keaou) was the individualafterwards slain by his minister, Han Tsuh, 
(SE Jb who then married his wife, and one

of their sons (SE, Keaou) was the individual

w’. 
here named Ngaou; who was subsequently de- 
stroyed by the emperor Shaou-k‘ang, the post- 
humous son of How-seang. Tseih was the son

of the emperor £a, of whose birth many pro- 
digies are narra nd appears in the Shoo- 
king as = fT jinister of agriculture to 
Yaou and Shun, b§ e HE. The Chow family. 
traced their descen cally from him, so that

though the empire oux’ came to his descendants.

more than a thousand years after his time, 
Nan-kung Kwóh speaks as if he had got it

himself, as Yu did, af X HE X A-

comp. V. 2.

But there never has been a.

p

7. THE HIGHEST VIRTUE NOT EASILY ATTAINED

TO, AND INCOMPATIBLE WITH MEANNESS. Comp. 
IV.4. We must supply the ‘always,’ to bring 
out the meaning.

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

Har 
t.

1

gu 
F

zS 
i

918

NA

0

TEE

TFE

o

TEH 
EN 
5.085

~ 
- 
r

A 
» 
— 
[ d

[ d 
O 
7

- v

SKANE 
KESER

O

S

a E 
"m

P um

v

—

v

Y

Nis gt t 
parana 
T:

`»

ue

r

2 Bom 
PORDAS

v

[3 
: Bll ^

CHAPT R {VIIL The. Master said, an there be love imul 
not lead to strictness with its object? ' Car there be lóyalty which 
does not lead to the itistrüction of its object?"

CHAPTER IX. The Master said,“ In preparing the ‘governmental 
notifications, P'e Shin first made the rough draught;. She-shuh ex- 
amined and discussed its contents; Tsze- yu, the manager of Foreign 
intereourse, then made additions, or subtractions; and, finally, Tsze- 
ch'an of Tung-le gave it the proper elegance and finish."

CHAPTER X. I. Some one asked about Tsze-ch'an. The Master 
said, “He was a kind man."

2. He asked about Tsze-se. The Master said, “That man! 
That man!” JCHAPTER X. I. Some one asked about Tsze-ch'an. The Master 
said, “He was a kind man."

2. He asked about Tsze-se. The Master said, “That man! 
That man!” J

3. Hé asked about Kwan Chung. For him,” said the Master, 
“the city of P‘een, with three hundred families, was taken from the 
chief of the Pih family, who did not utter & murmuring word, 
though, till he was toothless, he had only coarse rice to eat."

8. A LESSON FOR PARENTS AND MINISTERS, 
THAT THEY MUST BE STRI DECIDED, .

being (| with Em nd conveys the 
meaning àn the translati ff. from the mean- 
ing of the term in XH K'ung Gan-kwó 
takes it in the sense of to soothe,’ ‘comfort,’ 
low. 8d tone, but that does not suit the paral- 
lelism.

9. Tue Exc. LENCE OF THE OFFICIAL NOTI- 
FICATIONS OF Ci'ING, OWING TO THE ABILITY OF 
FOUR OF 118 OFFICERS. The state of Ch'ing, 
small and surrounded by powerful neighbours, 
was yet fortunate in having able ministers, 
through whose mode of conducting its govern-

ment it enjoyed considerable prosperity. ] fu

,i8 a

with ref. to this passage, is explained in the dict.

by BE 43 A m g Z BP ‘the language of 
Fla it orders, covenants, and conferences.’

See the Chow Le, XXV. p. 1l. Tsze-ch‘an (see 
v. 15,) was the chicf minister of the State, and 
in preparing such documents first used the ser- 
vices of P‘e Shin, who was noted for his wise 
planning of matters, *She-shuh"shows the rela- 
tion of the officer indicated to the ruling family.

His name was Yew-kgih (N. ) The pro:

vince of the f A w E 6 Zig

to superintend the ceremonies of communica- 
tion with other states.’ See the Chow Le, 
XXXIV. p. 13.

10. Tue JUDGEMENT OF CONFUCIUS COXCEEN- 
ING Tsze-cH‘an, TszE-sE, AND. Kwan Cuuna. 1 
See V. 18. 2. Tsze-se was the chief minister

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

"8l

SRN 
EUDÓSONER

d

—

»

—

SEL 
EN

[e]

> 
te ON >=

EN 
EES

D

FRS

zs

W

W > 
(v

o

” Cuarrer XI. The Master said,

is difficult.

b

2

[^

8

li

— 
—

we 
v 
[ d

`

[S

gs 
Jt 
;

ENI 
Na 
il

O

Pared

—

»

—

SEL 
EN

[e]

> 
te ON >=

EN 
EES

D

FRS

zs

W

W > 
(v

o

” Cuarrer XI. The Master said,

is difficult.

b

2

[^

8

li

— 
—

we 
v 
[ d

`

[S

gs 
Jt 
;

ENI 
Na 
il

O

Pare

t 
v 
w 
Ld

& 
g 
4

E

SE

A 
N

RA

“To be poor without murmuring

z

To be rich without being proud is easy.”

Cuavrer XII. The Master said, “Mang Kung-ch% is more than 
fit to be chief officer in the families of Chaou and Wei, but he is not 
fit to be minister to either of tlic states Ting or Seč.”

CiarrER. XIII. 1.

man.

Tsze-loo asked what constituted a COMPLETE 
The Master said, “Suppose a man with the knowledge of

Tsung Woo-ehung, the freedom from covetousness of Kung-ch'ó,

the bravery of Chwan

vo 
e

of Peen, aud the varied talents of Yen

Kew; add to these the accomplishments of the rules of propriety 
and music :—such an one might be reckoned a COMPLETE man."

9

dt

of 'l'soo, He had refused to accept the nomin- 
ation to the sovereignty of the state in prefer- 
ence to the rightful heir, but did not oppose 
the usurping tendencies of the rulers of 1300. 
He had moreover opposed the wish of king 
Clinaou to employ the sage. 3. Kwan Chung, 
—see III. 22. To rewanl his merits, the duke 
Hwan conferred on him the domain of the offi- 
ver mentioned in the text, who had been guilty 
of some offence, His submitting, as he did, to 
his changed fortunes was the best tribute to 
Kwan's excellence,

11. Ir Is WARDER TO fran POVERTY ARIGIIT 
TUAN TO CARRY RicnES. This sentiment may 
be coutroverted, !

12; Tur capacity or Maye Kuxc-ciu'ó. 
Kung-ch · ö was the head of the Mang, or Chung- 
sun family, and, acc. to the * Historical Records,’ 
was regarded by Cont, more than any other great

He then added, “But what is the necessity for a complete 
man of the present day to have all these things?

The man, who in

man of the times in Loo, His ostimate of him * 
however, as appears here, was not very high. 
In the sage’s time, the government of the stateThe man, who in

man of the times in Loo, His ostimate of him * 
however, as appears here, was not very high. 
In the sage’s time, the government of the state

of Tsin $2] was in the hands of the three 
families, Chaou, Woi, and Ian de. which 
afterwards divided the territory among them-

selves, and became, as we shall see in the times 
of Mencius, three independent principalities.

KH ZR: ‘head of the ministers 
of a family,’ often called * x. Tang was

a small state, the place of which is seen in the 
district of the same name in the dep. of Yen- 
chow. Sé& was another small state adjacent 
to it.

33. Or THE COMPLETE MAN: -A CONVERSATION 
wren CT*szk-noo. 1. Tsang Waoo-chang had 
been an officer of Loo in the reign anterior to

li

144 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

PRI 
SEEN

SSeS ot N 
3 
“i

X 
N.

- 
S

e SS 
HHA 
N= 
Sat

\ 
«4

> RRS

STIR 
OFS TD SEI 
zi

the view of gain thinks of righteousness; who in the view of danger 
js prepared to give up his life; and who does not forget an old 
agreement, however far back it extends: such a man may be reckons 
ed a COMPLETE man,"

CHAPTER XIV. 1, Tho Mastot asked Kung-ming Kea about 
Kung-shuh Wän, saying, “Is it true that your master speaks not, 
laughs not, and takes not?”

2. Kung-ming Kea replied, “This has arisen from tho reporters 
going beyond the truth-=My master speaks when it is the time to 
speak, and so men do not get tired of his speaking, He laughs 
when there is occasion to be joyful, and so men do not get tired of 
his laughing, He takes when it is consistent with righteousness to 
do so, and so men do not get tired of his taking.“ The Master said, 
“So! But is it so with him?“

that in which Conf, was born. So great was | —,.— ST . S 
his reputation for wisdom that the people gave SZ. implies that there was a higher

him the title of a ip A or ‘sage? Woo was | t le of man still, to whom the epithet complete 
NS would be more fully applicable. 2. The H iahim the title of a ip A or ‘sage? Woo was | t le of man still, to whom the epithet complete 
NS would be more fully applicable. 2. The H ia

to be understood of Confucius, though some 
suppose that Tsze-loo is the speaker. m up,

his honor, epithet, and 4p denotes his family 
place, among his brothers, Chwang, it is said 
by Choo He, after Chow ( Ji). one of the oldest l : aT 
— n > Py 
commentators, whose surname only has come e $n) : 5 a Me 
: . x3 i a long agreement, he does not forget the worda 
down to us, was T X X. great officer of his whole life. @he meaning is what ap- 
of the city of Peen.“ In the *Great collection | pears in the translation. 
of Surnames, a secondary branch of a family of 14. THe CHARACTER OF. Kvsa-SuUH WAN, 
; ; i WHO WAS SAID NEITHER TO SPEAK, NOR LAUGH 
the State of Tanon ¢ ) having settled in Loo, von TAKE. 1, Win was the bon, epithet of tho 
and being gifted with Peen, its members took |. dividual i ti bv name. CE d» n 
their surname thence. For the history of Chwang | Individual in question, by name Che d » OF,

and of Woo-chung, see the A. in loc. HI as some say, Fa (Bib), au officer of he state of

Au FE = 
Re is nij

.

vr

du

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 145

FREDE 
r H N H.

D

hd

CnaPTER XV. The Master said, “Tsang Woo-chung, keeping 
possession of Fang, asked of the duke of Loo to appoint a, successor 
to him in his family. Although it may be said that he,was nof 
using force with his sovereign, I believe he was." |

Cuaprer XVI. The Master said, “The duke Wn of Tsin was 
crafty and not upright. The duke Hwan of Ts‘e was upright and

not crafty,”

CHAPTER XVII. 1, Tsze-loo said, “The duke Hwan caused

1 t , 
his

brother Kew to be killed, when Shaou Hwüh died with his master,

but Kwan Chung did not die. 
in virtue?"

Wei. He was descended from the duke

and was himself the founder of the Kung-shuh 
family, being so designated, I suppose, because 
of his relation to the reigning duke. Of Kung-Wei. He was descended from the duke

and was himself the founder of the Kung-shuh 
family, being so designated, I suppose, because 
of his relation to the reigning duke. Of Kung-

ming Kea nothing seems to be known. 2. H. 
-7 
Js vit reference to Kea’s account of Kung-

shuh Win. . K BR 3E intimates Conf.

opinion that Kea was himself going beyond the 
truth.

15. Conpgmnation or TesANG Woo-cnoso 
FOR FORCING A FAVOUR FROM HIS PRINCE. 
Woo-chung (see ch. 13) was obliged to fly from 
Loo, by the animosity of the Mang family, and

took refuge in Choo (3k19) As the head of the

Tsang family, it devolved on him to offer the 
sacrifices in the ancestral temple, and he wished 
one of his half-brothers to be made the head of 
the family, in hie room, that those might not be 
neglected. To strengthen the application for 
this, which he contrived to get made, he return- 
ed himself to the city of Fang, which belonged 
to his family, aud thence sent a message to the 
court, which was tantamount to a threat that if

the application were not granted, he would hold:

possession of the place, This was what Con- 
fucius condemned, the 21 in a matter 
which should have been left to the duke's grace.

See all the circumstances in the E . qe 
AILES HR, up. Ist tone, as in ch,

May not I say that he was wanting

18, but with a diff. meaning. . ‘to force to

do,’

16, THE DIFFERENT CHARACTERS OF THB 
DUKES Wax or Tsis AxD Hwan or Tse, Hwan 
and Win were the two first of tho five leaders 
of the princes of the empire, who play an im- 
portant part iu Chinese history, during the 
period of the Chow dynasty known as the Ch'un. 
Tse. (AF HK). Hwan ruled in Tate, B. C, 
683-640, and Win in Tain B, C. 635-627, Of 
duke Hwan, sce the next ch, The nttribntes ' 
mentioned by Conf, are not to be taken abso- 
lutely, but as respectively predominating in the 
two chiefs, f

17 THE MERIT OF Kwan CHUNG;—A CONVER-

BATION wirH TSzE-L OO. 1. ZR h17 THE MERIT OF Kwan CHUNG;—A CONVER-

BATION wirH TSzE-L OO. 1. ZR h

duke's son Kew,’ but, to avoid the awkwardness 
of that rendering, I say— his brother.“ Hwan

(the hon. ep. IIis name was ^^ ÉI .) and Kew

had both been refugees in different states, the 
latte? having been carried into Loo, away from 
the troubles and dangers of Ts‘e, by the minis- 
ters, Kwan Chung and Shaou Hwuh. On the 
death of the prince of Ts‘e, Hwan anticipated 
Kew, got to Ts‘e, and took possession of the. 
state. Svon after, he required the duke of Loo 
to put his brother to death, and to deliver up

the two ministers, when Shadu (4 here== 8»

IHwuh chose to dash his brains out, and die

with his master, while Kwan Chung returned

gladly to Ts‘e, took service with Hwan, became 
: +

146 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS., og

2

N

EVE 
(ati

= 
{pwr

[ d

7

-

$ 
*

N

HTI

O.

T-

e 
pat ESS REE

SEM

Sd BENE

sets 
Tear

kiN Y

RA

Ld

x 
w% 
Tr

i 
ats 
ini

uM Xu XT KEN

KE nd 
ATT. Seit

T 
T

t 3 
e

* JH BE tr LP JU

2. The Master said, * The duke Hwan assembled all the princes 
together, and that not with weapons of war and chariots:—it was 
all through the influence of Kwan Chung. Whose beneficence was 
like his? Whose beneficence was like his?"

Cuaprern XVIII. 1. Tsze-kung said, Kwan Chung, I appre- 
hend, was wanting in virtue. When the duke Hwan caused his 
brother Kew to be killed, Kwan Chung was not able to die with 
him. Moreover, he became prime minister to Hwan.”

2. The Master said, Kwan Chung acted: as prime minister to 
the duke Hwan, made him leader of all the princes, and united and 
rectified the whole empire. Down to the present day, the people 
enjoy the gifts which he conferred. But for Kwan Chung, we 
should now be wearing our hair dishevelled, and the lappets of our 
coats buttoning on the left side. l

dying with the prince Kew ; Tsze-kung's turned 
principally on his subsequently becoming pre-dying with the prince Kew ; Tsze-kung's turned 
principally on his subsequently becoming pre-

mier to Hwan. 2. [£- 1E: ‘to rectify,’ ‘reduce 
to order, — blends with . its own verbal 
force, —' to unite.’ 14 fiit, ‘not,’ ‘if not, BE 
(Ye, low. 1st tone) S ece the Le-ke, III.

iii. 14, where this is mentioned as a character- 
istio of the eastern barbarians, Æ IT sco

the Shoo-king, V. xxv. 13. A note in the 
ET TER that anciently theright was the position

his prime minister, and made him supreme 
arbiter among the various chiefs of the empire. 
Buch conduct was condemned by 'lsze-loo.

^L Z is a peculiar expression. 2. Conf. 
'derends. Kwan Chung, on the ground of the 
services which he rendered, using 4— in a dif- 
ferent acceptation from that intended by the 
disciple. ph upper Ist tone, explained in the

dict. by A synonymous with S, though the

e 
— 
d

785

Et ys i i 
RE iit makes out more uan nine assemblages 
of princes under the presidency of duke IIwan.

an H Elk pit KK T2 12 as in the 
translation.

J8. Tue MERIT OF Kwan CHUNG :—A CON- 
FERSATION .with ''szE-kuNG. I. Tsze-loo’s 
doubts about Kwan Chung arose from his not

"

of honour, and the right hand, morcover, is the 
more convenient for use, but the practice of the 
barbarians was contrary to that of China in 
both points. The sent. of Conf. is, that but for 
Kwan Chung, his countrymen would have sunk

:

aS 
4

it

"EI

SAPA 
z 
an

N

DK 
— 
=

D 
3.

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

“Will you require from him the small

ai

> 1

Nw 
S

N- ANA

"fidelity of common

men and common women, who would commit suicide in‘a stream 
or ditch, no one knowing any thing about them?”

CuaPTER XIX. I.

The officer, Séen, who had been family-

‘minister to Kung-shuh Win, ascended to the prince's court in com-

pany with Wan.

2. The Master, having heard of it, said, He deserves to be con-

sidered WAN.”‘minister to Kung-shuh Win, ascended to the prince's court in com-

pany with Wan.

2. The Master, having heard of it, said, He deserves to be con-

sidered WAN.”

CHAPTER XX. 1. The Master was speaking about the unprin- 
cipled course of the duke Ling of Wei, when Ke K‘ang said, “Since 
he is of such a character, how is it he does not lose his throne?"

2.

to the state of the rude tribes about them. 8.

a an 
DU Je. UU Jie 1X. 25. git ^) fer 
* small fidelity,' by which is intended the faith- 
fulness of a married couple of the common 
people, where the husband takes no concubine 
in addition to his wife. The argument is this :— 
* Do you think Kwan Chung should have con- 
sidered himself bound to Kew, as a common 
man considers himself bound to his wife? And 
would you have had him commit suicide, as 
common people will do on any slight occasion?’ 
Commentators say that there is underlying the 
vindication this fact:--that Kwan Chung and 
Shaou Hwuh’s adherence to Kew was wrong in 
the first place, Kew being the younger brother. 
Chung's conduct therefore was not to be judged 
as if Kew had been the senior. There is nothing 
of this, however, in Confucius’ words. He vindi- 
cates Chung simply on the ground of his sub- 
sequent services, and his reference to ‘the small 
fidelity ' of husband and wife among the com-

mon people is very unhappy. E AK, ‘to 
strangle one’s-self,’ but in connection with

i5 $5 the phrase must be understood gener- 
ally,=‘to commit suicide.’

Confucius said, “The Chung-shuh, Yu, has the superinten-

19. Tne ERIT or Kone-suun Wan IN RE- 
COMMENDING TO OFFICE A MAN OF WORTH. l. 
Kung-shuh Win,—see ch. 14. The par. is to 
be understood as intimating that Kung-shuh, 
secing the worth and capacity of his minister, 
had recommended him to his sovercign, and 
afterwards was not.ashamed to appear in the 
same rank with him at court. B= our

*duke's £e, the duke's court. 2. x. as an 
honorary epithet, sometimes moans—$53 R*duke's £e, the duke's court. 2. x. as an 
honorary epithet, sometimes moans—$53 R

fj AY. , ‘He who confers on a common man 
rank and office.’

* 
20. THE IMPORTANCE Or GOOD AND ABLE 
MINISTERS:— SEEN IN THE STATE OF WEI. I. 
Ling was the hon. epithet of Yuen (L), duke of

Wei. B. C. 533-492. He was the husband of 
Nan-tsze, VI. 26. 2. The Chung-shuh, Yu, is

the Kung Wan of V. 14. 4h AL express his

family position, according to the degrees of kin- 
dred. The litanist, l"o,—8ee VI. 11. Wang- 
sun Kea,—see III. 13,

*

. CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

vul 
wa 
o

Nat

HOS St

P

sg

s 
Britones HEA

IN 
4 
é

1 
Ei

N 
Nu 
yet

d

TF,

dence of his guests and x strangers ; the litanist, TO, has the manage-

ment of his ancestral temple; and Wanig-suin Kea has the direction 
of the army, and forces with such officers as these, how should he 
lose his throne ?"

Cuarren XXI. The Master said, “He who speaks without mo- 
desty will find it difficult to make his words goo

Cuarrer XXII. 1. Ch'in Shing murdered the duke Kéen of 
Ts'e.

9. Confucits bathed, went to court, and informed the duke Gae, 
saying, Ch'in Hang has slain his sovereign. I beg that you will

undertake to punish. him." 
3. The duke said, Inform the chiefs of the three families of it."

4. Confucius retired, and said, *Following in the rear of the 
great officers, I did not dare not to represent such a matter, and my 
prince says, ‘Inform the chiefs of the three families of it.’”

ap ag ay x ace. to the account of this mat.

ter in the , Conf, meant that the duke

Gae should himself, with the forces of Loo, un- 
dertake the punish. of the regie (ide, Some mod, 
comm. cry out against this, The sage’s advice, 
they say, would have been that the duke should 
report the thing to the emperor, and with his 
authority associate other princes with himself

justi ; 2 e r 
to do justice on the offender, 3. 17 3e

21. EXTRAVAGANT SPEECH HARD TO BE MADE 
‘coop. Comp. IV. 22.justi ; 2 e r 
to do justice on the offender, 3. 17 3e

21. EXTRAVAGANT SPEECH HARD TO BE MADE 
‘coop. Comp. IV. 22.

22. How CONFOCIU8 WISHED TO AVENGE THE 
MURDER OF THE DUKE OF 'l'S^E :—HIS RIGHTEOUS 
AND PUBLIC SPIRIT. I. Keen, — indolent in not 
a single virtue,’ and ‘tranquil, not speaking un- 
advisedly,’ are the meanings attached to fij

as an hon. epithet, while Jik, indicates, ‘trane 
quillizer of the people, and establisher of govern- 
ment.“ The murder of the duke Kéen by his 
officer, Chin Hang Ag, took place, B. C. 480,

— 
—

„this is the use of k in XI. 24, etal. 4, 
This is taken as the remark of Confucius, or

barely two years before Conf, death. 2. PN

y implies all the fasting and all the solemn 
preparation, as for a sacrifice or other great 
occasion. Properly, Uk is to wash the bair 
with the water in which rice has been washed, 
and 2 is to wash the body with hot water.

*

his colloquy with himself, when he had gone

out from the duke. EASUCARA Z.,

see XI. 7. The E: leaves the sentence incom-

plete ;,—' my prince says, Inform the three chiefs 
of it; —this circumstance. ‘The paraphrasts

complete the sentence by faf HIl.— How ia is

, CONFUCIAN 
— ee) [r

[z^ | EFR

D [Fe 2

SIN 
Hest SH 
“6

E 
2110

in

|

s 
>P

Q

= 
DRENI -R

EE

[ d 
*

malit:

E d 
v

b 
d.

JAHM

N cu 
B

du.

5. He went to the chiefs, and 
not act.

[9]

ANALECTS,

— 
*

9

lis

xj 
^ 
ji

. 
,

QT NOES

NES!

E

Ld

O

GH eS 
Are

0 
RHO

v

SIE LOREAK S TT

E% 
RS

b 
informed them, but they would

Confucius then said, “ Following in the rear of the great

officers, I did not dare not to represent such a matter.”

CuaPTER XXIII.

Tsze-loo- asked how a sovereign should be

served. The Master said, Do not impose on him, and, moreover,

withstand him to his face.”

Cuartrr XXIV. The Master said, “The progress of the supe- 
rior man is upwards; the progress of the mean man is downwards.” 
CAPTER XXV. The Master said, In ancient times, men learnedCuartrr XXIV. The Master said, “The progress of the supe- 
rior man is upwards; the progress of the mean man is downwards.” 
CAPTER XXV. The Master said, In ancient times, men learned

with a view to their own improvement.

Now-a-days, men learn

with a view to the approbation of others.”

Cuaprer XXVI. I. 
ly inquiries to Confucius.

2. Confucius sat with him, and questioned him.

Keu Pih-yuh sent a messenger with friend-

“What,” said

he, “is your, master engaged in?” The messenger replied, “My

that the prince, &., 5. Z= FZ js the

verb—‘ to go to. J H, Z. — This 
was spoken to the chiefs, to reprove them for 
their disregard ef a crime, which concerned 
every public man. .

23. How THE MINISTER OF A PRINCE MUST BE 
BINCERE AND BOLDLY UPRIGHT. lU Z is well 
expressed by the phrase in the translation. See | 
the Le-ke, II. i. 12, where it appears that to

was required by tho duty of a minister, but not 
allowed to a son,

24. TAE DIFFERENT PROGRESSIVE TENDEN- 
CIES OF THE SUPERIOR NAN AND THE MEAN MAN,

Ho An takes x in the sense of BE, ‘to un- 
derstand.’ The.modern view seems better.

25. THE DIFFERENT MOTIVES OF LEARNERS 
IN OLD TIMES, AND IN THE TIMES OF CONFUCIUS.

A B. 75 A: ‘for themselves, for other

men.“ The meaning is as in the translation. 
26. AN ADMIRABLE MESSENGER, 1, Pih-yuh

| was: the designation of Keu Yuen qe ap

150 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 
jE F : pau P 
Y jo (x 4r. — Fre M

H

uu 
EH

E

Buo

` 
*

HATT 
KT REE

o 
x 
d 
~% 
v

TE 
=

€

E

\

| | Oak No OH 
2 vites

[d

ON TT s 
T

x

REP

© 
— 
v 
v

ee

umb 
GG

=

e 
. 
e

ONES

— 
754

er 
or

US Bevel rat Se TT oh

«X

NIH L n 
HRK U W

:

4

Ld 
d

PHEN

KR 
D

0

N

pend 
GG

O O

master is anxious to make his faults few, but he has not yet suc-

ceeded.” 
indeed! A messenger indeed!“ 
CHAPTER XXVII. The Master

He then went out, and the Master said,

“A messenger

said, “ He who is not in any par:

ticular office, has nothing to do with plans for the administration

of its duties."He then went out, and the Master said,

“A messenger

said, “ He who is not in any par:

ticular office, has nothing to do with plans for the administration

of its duties."

Cuarter XXVIII. The philosopher Tsing said, “The superior

man, in his thoughts, 
Cuarrer XXIX.

does not go out of his place,” 
The Master said, ‘‘The superior man is mo:

dest in his speech, but exceeds in his actions,"

CHAPTER XXX. I.

The Master said, 
man is threefold, but I am not equal to it.

*"The way of the superior 
Virtuous, he is free from

anxieties ; wise, he is free from perplexities ; bold, he is free from fear.” 
2. Tsze- kung said, Master, that is what you yourself say.”

officer of the state of Wei, and a disciple of the 
sage. His place is now Ist east in the outer 
court of the temples. . Conf. had lodged with 
him when in Wei, and it was after his return to 
Loo that Pih-yuh sent to inquire for him.

27. A repetition of VII. 14.

28. THE THOUGHTS OF A SUPERIOR MAN IN 
HARMONY WITH HIS POSITION. Tsing here quotes

from the „or illustration, of the 52d dia- 
grain of the Yih-king, but he leaves out one 
character, — PJ before . and thereby alters

the meaning somewhat. What is said in the Yih, 
is— The superior man is thoughtful, and so does 
not go out of hig place.’ ~The ch. . it is said, is in ·

serted here, from its analogy with the preceding. 
29. THE SUPERIOR MAN MORE IN DEEDS THAN 
IN WORDS. HS = ,—it., is ashamed of

his words.’ Comp. ch. 21, and IV. 22. 
80. CONFUCIUS’ HUMBLE ESTIMATE OF HIMSELF, 
WHICH Tsze-KUNG DENIES I. We have the

greatest part of this par in IX. 28, but the 
translation must be somewhat different, ag

LE. FAS. 5 . are here in apposition

vA T AFA di- 
Bir Ii 4f 38. E: » What the rA +

tukes to be his path.“ 2. =e, * to say?

^

N 
d

E 
=] 
55

= 
SN 
S| KEE

E 
— 
N=

[4

x

iS 
v 
[4

Mex 
ET 
s

beer

*

SE 
Ves

x 
EUER

8

= 
R

\

* 
- 
[d 
v

CONFUCIAN

O

ANALECTS.

lis 
3

= 
7 
S

+t,

ES

v 
[ d

pas 
p

* 
v

A 
EE er SEMIR

v= 
SN 
S| KEE

E 
— 
N=

[4

x

iS 
v 
[4

Mex 
ET 
s

beer

*

SE 
Ves

x 
EUER

8

= 
R

\

* 
- 
[d 
v

CONFUCIAN

O

ANALECTS.

lis 
3

= 
7 
S

+t,

ES

v 
[ d

pas 
p

* 
v

A 
EE er SEMIR

v

V 
= 
—

> 
SEIH

Eos

> 
= 
AR

CuaPTER XXXI. Tsze-kung was in the habit of comparing men 
together. The Master said, *''l's'ze must have reached a high pitch 
‘of excellence! Now, I have not leisure for this.”

OnuarrkR XXXII The Master said, “I will not be concerned at 
men’s not knowing me; I will be concerned at my own want of 
ability.’ 3

eee XXXIII. The Master said, “He who does not anti- 
cipate attempts to deceive him, nor think beforchand of his not 
being believed, and yet apprehends these things readily when they 
occur ;—is he not a man of superior worth ?”

Cuarrer XXXIV, I. We-shang Mow said to Confucius, “ K'ew,

how is it that you keep roosting about? Is it not that you are an

insinuating talker?”

2. Confucius said, “I do not dare to play the part of, such a

talker, but I hate obstinacy.”

31. ONE’S WORK IS WITH ONE'S-8ELF:— 
AGAINST MAKING COMPARISONS, RS 3E E= 
IIa! is he not superior?’ The remark is 
ironical.

32. CONCERN SHOULD BE ABOUT OUR PERSONAL 
ATTAINMENT, AND NOT ABOUT THE ESTIMATION OF 
Ornzus. See I. 16, et al. A critical canon is

laid down here by Choo IIe: — All passages,

the. same in meaniug and in words, are to be 
understood as having been spoken only once, 
and their recurrence is the work of the compilers, 
Where the meaning is the same and the lan- 
guage a little different, they are to be taken as 
having been repeated by Confucius himself, 
with the variations.’ According to this rule, the 
sentiment in this chapter was repeated by the 
master in four different utterances,

33. QUICK DISCRIMINATION WITHOUT SUSPI-

CLOUSNESS 18 HIGHLY MERITORIOUS. si „to33. QUICK DISCRIMINATION WITHOUT SUSPI-

CLOUSNESS 18 HIGHLY MERITORIOUS. si „to

be disobedient,’ ‘to rebel; also, to meet, and 
here to anticipate,’ i. e., in judgment. In R 
see XIII. 19, but the meaning is there ‘perhaps,’ 
while here the p is adversative, and=‘ but.’

yj" Hu mH is used in opposition to 1$ T 
F. and a quick apprehender, one who under- 
stands things before others.’ So, Choo He. K‘ung 
Gan-kwó, however, takes i as conjunctive, and 
, 
X. ER in apposition with the two preceding 
characteristics, and interprets the conclusion— 
‘Is such & man of superior worth?’ On Choo 
He’s view, the af is exclamatory. 
84. CONFUCIUS NOT SELF-WILLED, AND YET 
NO GLIB-TONGUED TALKER:—DKFENCE OF HIM- 
SELE FROM THE CHARGE OF AN AGE REPEQKER, 1.

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. .

fa Vs

dila 
[Dy 
CHAPTER XXXV. The Master said, “A horse is called a ke, 
not because of its strength, but because of its other good qualities." 
Cuarter XXXVI. I. Some one said, What do you say con: 
cerning the principle that injury should be recompensed with 
kindness?”

2. The Master said, “ With what then will you recompense kind-

ness ? 
3. 
with kindness.”

* Recompense injury with justice, and recompense kindness

CHAPTER XXXVII. 1: The Master said, “Alas! there is no one

that knows me."

2. Tsze-kung said, What do you mean by, thus saying—that 
no one knows you?” The Master replied, I do not murmur against

From We-shang’s addressing Conf. by his name, 
ít is presumed that he was an old man. Such a 
liberty in a young man would have been im- 
pudence, Itis presumed also, that he was one of 
those men who kept themselves retired from

the world in disgust. a ‘to perch or roost,’

as a bird, "used contemptuously with ref. to 
Conf. going about among the princes and wishing

to be called to office. 2. . Tih, 
*holding to one idea without intelligence.’

35. VIRTUE, AND NOT STRENGTH, THE FIT

juto be called to office. 2. . Tih, 
*holding to one idea without intelligence.’

35. VIRTUE, AND NOT STRENGTH, THE FIT

ju

BUBJECT OF PRAISE, B | was the name of a 
famous horse of antiquity who could run 1000 
le in one day. See the dict. in voc. It is here 
used generally for ‘a good horse’

86. GOOD Is NOT TO BE RETURNED FOR EVIL; 
EVIL TO BE MET SIMPLY WITH JUSTICE, 1,

— H , t 
{ili = I . ‘kindness? ZU resentment,’

[ou 276v 
‘hatred,’ here put for what awakens resentment, 
‘wrong,’ injury.“ The phrase VR ee 
is found in the 3 fii W. of Laou-tsze, II. 63,

but it is likely that Conf. questioner simply 
consulted him about it as a saying which he 
had heard and was inclined to approve himself.

2. A IH. ‘with straightness,’ & e, with jus-

tice, —How far the ethics of Confucius fall bo- 
low the Christian standard is evident from this 
chapter. The same expressions are attributed 
to Confucius in the Le-ke, XXXII. 11, and it

3 " yw A

is there added F AL N {ila eB . Bij T$ 
c Pat, um (= A» which is explained, Ho 
who returns good for evil is a man who is enre- 
ful of his person,’ i. e., will try to avert danger 
from himself by such a course. The author of 
the x sk says, that the injuries intended by 
the questioner were only trivial matters, which 
perhaps might be dealt with in the way he 
mentioned, but great offences, as those against 
a sovereign, a father, may not be dealt with by 
such an inversion of the principles of justice. 
The Master himself, however, does not fence 
his deliverance in any way. :

37. CONFUCIUS, LAMENTING TAT MEN DID 
NOT KNOW HIM, RESTS IN THB THOUGHT THAT

HEAVEN ENEW HIM. 1. * jt F41,—the in- 
version for an jt. ‘does not know me. 
Ile referred, comm. say, to the way in which 
he pursued his course, simply F

B t3 out of

his own conviction of duty, and for his own im- 
provement, without regard to success, or the

; ; 
CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.' 153

ET 
zv

O 
: 
EX)

(ei h So}

w

N - E

Bilt

Sst c 
fey LOR

o

Sm = spthis own conviction of duty, and for his own im- 
provement, without regard to success, or the

; ; 
CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.' 153

ET 
zv

O 
: 
EX)

(ei h So}

w

N - E

Bilt

Sst c 
fey LOR

o

Sm = spt

: fü Be 44 T 
fe a A n

e m EN

Heaven. Ido not grumble against men. My studies lie low, and 
my penetration rises high. But there is Heaven;—that knows 
me!”

CuaPTER XXXVIII. 1. The Kung-pih, Leaou, having slandered 
Tsze-loo to Ke-sun, Tsze-fuk King-pih informed Confucius of it, 
saying, *Our master is certainly being led astray by the Kung-pih, 
Leaou, but I have still power enough left to cut Leaou off, and ex- 
pose his corpse in the market and in the court.”

2. The Master said, “If my principles are to advance, it is so 
ordered. If they are to fall to the ground, it is so ordered. 
What can the Kung-pih, Leaou, do, where such ordering is con- 
cerned?”

opinions of others. 2. fif A HX mF

» ‘what is zhat—~—no man knows you ?' P 
E. E 3 beneath I learn, above I pene- 
trate; —the meaning appears to be that he con- 
tented himself with the study of men and 
things, common matters as more ambitious spi- 
rits would deem them, but from those he rose 
to understand tlie high principles involved in 
them, — the appointments of Heaven (Kay

according to one commentator. Jal E) . 
E X .— He who knows me—is that 
Heaven?“

we find him here slandering Taze-loo, that he 
might not be able, in his official connection with 
the Ke family, to Garry the Master's lessons in- 
to practice, A was the hon. ep. of Tsze-fuh 
Pih, an officer of Loo. refers to Ke- 
sun, Tiu .— is having his will deceived.’ 
Exposing the bodies quii FP of criminals, af- 
ter their execution, was called Et. The bodies 
of ‘great officers’ were so exposed in the court, 
&nd those of meaner criminals in the market-88, How CONFUCIUS RESTED, AS TO THE PRO- 
ORESS& OF HIS DOCTRINES, ON TIE ORDERING OF 
HEAVEN :—ON OCCASION OF TszrE-Loo's BEING 
SLANDERED. l, Leaou, called Kung-pih (lit., 
duke’s uncle), probably from an affinity with 
the ducal house, is said by some to have been a 
disviple of the sage, but that is not likely, as

place. ` ih [| came to be employed together, 
though the exposure could take place only in

one place, just as we have seen N. 2 used 
generally for ‘brother. 2. Ba makes the 
„ clause conditional, if. iii = X 
TF» ‘Ueaven’s ordering.

€ 
154 CONFUCIAN

Em 
:

GH

O

Im

er

MENZI

N 
7

UI S$

[ d

v

T

REVS 
mL A

^ 
E:

O

ANALECTS.

E 
118

ji

i

Ti Fs

E 
FIAR

ERAK]

v

PARSI

Bio

ot fe

' CHAPTER XXXIX. 1. The Master said, “Some men of worth

retire from the world.

+ . M . ° 
2. “Some retire from particular countries. 
8. “Some retire because of disrespectful looks.

4.

* Some retire because of contradictory languago."

Cuarrer XL. The Master said, Those who have done this are

seven men."

Cuarrer XLI. Tsze-loo happening to pass the night in Shih-mun,

the gate-keeper said to him, * Whom do you come

from?” Tsze-loo

said, From Mr. K‘ung.” “It is he,—is it not?“ —said the other, 
* who knows the impracticable nature of the times, and yet will be

‘doing in them.”

n i . le 
Cuarrer XLII. I. The Master was playing, one day, on a musical 
stone in Wei, when a man, carrying a straw basket, passed the door

39. DIFFERENT CAUSES WHY MEN OF WORTH 
WITHDRAW FROM PUBLIC Lieu, AND DIFFERENT 
EXTENTS TO WHICH THEY 80 WITHPRAW THEM-

MR o en; 
SELVES. 1. 2 pe. low. 8d tone, hf; 2. 
dt X.— the next class,’ but comm. say that 
the meaning is no more than ‘some.’ and that 
the terms do not indicate any eomparison of 
the parties on the ground of their worthiness. 
3. The ‘looks,’ and ‘langnage in par. 4, are to 
be'understood of the princes whom the worthies

wished to serve.—Tt is observed in the H Ewished to serve.—Tt is observed in the H E

sal an. NE de that Conf. could never bear 
to withdraw himself entirely from the world. 
40, ‘THE NUMBER OF MEN OF WORTH WHO RAD 
WITHDRAWN FROM PUBLIC THEE ix Coxvucius’ 
Time. ‘This ch. is understood. both by Choo Ile 
and the old commentators, in connection with the 
preceding, as appcars in the translation. Choo,

however, explains 1E hy it. have arisen.’ 
The others explain it by y^" ‘have done this.’

They also give the names of the seven men, 
2 2 ate . 2 - 
which, aec. to Choo, is 1% x, *chiselling,! i. e.,

forcing out an illustration of the text.

41. CONDEMNATION or CONFUCIUS” COURSE IN 
SEEKING TO BE EMPLOYED, BY ONE WHO HAD 
WITHDRAWN FROM PUBLIC LIFE, Che site of 
Shih-mun is referred to the district of Ch‘ang- 
ts'ing, dep. Ts'c-nan, in Shan-tung. ES FY, 
‘morning gate, —a designation of the keeper, as 
having to open the gate in the morning. Ho 
was probably one of the seven worthies, spoken 
of in the preced. chapter. We might trans-

late 4 P3 by Stony-gate.“ It secms to 
have been one of the frontier passes between 
'Ts'e and Loo. XL He ‘the K'ung, or Mr. 
K'ung. Observe the force of the final Bil.

42. THE JUDGEMENT OF A RETIRED WORTHY 
ON CONFUCIUS’ COURSE. AND REMARK OF CoxFr- 
«ics THEREON, I. The frag was one of tho 
eight musical instruments of the Chinese; ece

CONFUCIAN

[ig

Fn zr LI]

-

Ex erai e [LORS

O

"i 
p

[ d 
[d

|| [gt

O

mo EDS

w 
e

SPSL Loe im

[d

v

Sel 
Nu

AT 
it

— 
RE

88

Fi

B-T

mn 
Ct

ANALECTS. 5.

a 
ar

PA Sees TI

aH

a 
G

ENESE

e

ZrCU AE

-

ION U

NV 
‘= 
—

Se

[ d

of the house where Confucius was, and said, “ His heart is full who

so beats the musical stone."

2. A little while after, he added, How contemptible is the one-

ideaed obstinacy those sounds display! When one is taken no notice 
of, he has simply at once to give over his wish for public employment. 
‘Deep water must be crossed with the clothes on; shallow water maybe crossed with the clothes held up

99 
.

3. The Master said, “How determined is he in his purpose!

But this is not difficult.”

[AJ 
*

*

CnuáPTER XLIII. 1. Tsze-chang said, What is meant when the 
sHoo says that Kaou-tsung, while observing the usual imperial, 
mourning, was for three years: without speaking?“ a

2. The Master said, “ Why must Kaou-tsung be referred to as an

example of this? The ancients all did so.

When the sovereign

died, the officers all attended to their several duties, taking instruc- 
tions from the prime minister for three years,"

Medhurst's dict., in voc. Y „ up. 1st tone, to 
go by. Meaning ‘to go beyond, ‘to exceed,’

it is in the 8d tone. HK N is

to be read. as one sentence, and understood as if

there were a Zz after the HE 2. fm P.

—8ee XIII. 24,3. The 5 E interprets this 
clause also, as if a Zz were after the [3 and 
fitt fu had reference to the sounds of the

King, e | Z. —sec She-king I. iii. 9. 
8t. 1. The quotation was intended to illustrate 
that we must act according to circumstances.

9. zk- fit. z scems to boa mere expletive.

43. How GOVERNMENT WAS CARRIED ON DUR- 
ING TH& THREE YEARS OF SILENT-MOURNING BY

THE EMPEROR. ]. — „see the Shoo-king, 
IV. viii, Sect I. 1, but the passage there is not 
exactly as in the text. It is there said that 
Kaou-tsung, after the three years’ mourning» 
still did not speak. is * was the honorary

epithet of the emperor Woo-ting (M J), 
B. C. 1323-1208. EPF (Shoo, FS) Ir (read 
geen), acc. to the dict., means ‘the shed where 
the mourner lived the three years” Choo He 
says he does not know the meaning of the 
terms.—Tsze-chang was perplexed to know how 
government gould be carried on during so long

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

— 
Cx 
oe

Be 
SSS ON 
SNe

v

a

E 
KAER

SO HS emi

NH K

CHAPTER XLIV. The Master said, When rulers love to observe 
the rules of propriety, the people respond readily to the calls on 
them for service."Be 
SSS ON 
SNe

v

a

E 
KAER

SO HS emi

NH K

CHAPTER XLIV. The Master said, When rulers love to observe 
the rules of propriety, the people respond readily to the calls on 
them for service."

Cuarter XLV. Tsze-loo asked what constituted the superior 
man, The Master said, “The cultivation of himself in reverential 
carefulness.” And is this all?" said Zsze-loo. “He. cultivates 
himself so as to give rest to others,” was the reply. “And is this: 
all?” again asked T'sze-loo. The Master said, “He cultivates him- 
self so as to give rest to all the people. He cultivates himself so ad 
to give rest to all the people:—even Yaou and Shun were still

solicitous about this.“.

CHAPTER XLVI. “ucen Jang was squatting on his heels, and

so waited the approach of the Master,

a period of silence. 2. 2 Jo-the 
embraces the emperora, and subordinate princes 
who had their own petty courts. 44 in

* ; E d .is to manage. 
meaning is, that they did not dare to allow 
themselves any license.“ The expression is not 
an easy one, Ihave followed the paraphrasts.

44. How A LOVE OF THE RULES OF PROPRIETY 
1N RULERS FACILITATES GOVERNMENT. — .'

45. REVERENT SELY-OULTVATION THE DISTIN- 
GUISHING CHARACTERISTIC OF THE KEUN-TSZE.

y o. it is said, are not to be taken as the 
wherewith of the Keun-tsae in his cultivating 
himeelf, but as the chief thing which he keeps 
before him in the process. I translate N.

therefore, by in, but in the other sentences, it in- 
dicates the realizations, or consequences, of the

1e a. Bu the hundred surnames,’ a8

u designation for the mass of the people, occurs

who said to him, “In youth, 
as early as in the Yaou teen (SE Hi). It is

2 WŁ, ‘the surnames of the hundred

families, into which number the families of the 
people were perhaps divided at a very early 
time, The surnames of the Chinese. now 
amount to several hundreds. The small work—families, into which number the families of the 
people were perhaps divided at a very early 
time, The surnames of the Chinese. now 
amount to several hundreds. The small work—

H Ke Ht bh. made in the Sung dynasty, 
contains nearly 450. In the 4f S in loc., 
we find a ridiculous reason given for the sure 
names being a hundred, to the effect that the 
ancient sages gave a surriame for each of the & 
notes of the scale in music, and of the 5 great 
relations of life and of the 4 seas; consequently, 
5 K 5 X 4=100; It is to be observed, that in the 
Shoo-king, we find ‘a hundred surnames,’ inter-

changed with WE, * ten thousand surnames,”

and it would seem needless, therefore, to seek 
to attach a definite explanation to the number.

* Sag Ht 2] 35 By —see VI. 28,

46. CONFUCIUS’ CONDUCT TO AN UNMANNERLY 
OLD MAN OF HIS ACQUAINTANCE. Yuen Jang wag 
an old acquaintance of Confucius, but had adopt,

Ld

Dy

[d 
e

CHS C 
enn

O

Nu

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.'

EI 
v 
cle

O 
D

hey Sie SSE

2.8 
e

[d

p

re St 
rf a MES EP

set TN ESSE

ut

= 
RORIS ENNE

HB, Lo JS

not humble as befits a junior; in manhood, doing nothing worthy

of being handed down; and living on to old age:—this is to be a 
est.” With this he hit him on the shank with his staff.

| Onarreg. XLVII. I. A youth of the village of K‘euéh was

employed by Confucius to carry the messages between him and his

visitors. Some one asked about him, saying, “I suppose he has

made great progress,” :

2. - The Master said, “I observe that he is fond of occupying the 
seat of a full-grown man; I observe that he walks shoulder to shoulder 
with his elders. He is not one who is seeking.to make progress 
tn learning. He wishes quickly to become a man."

ed the principles of Laou-tsze, and gave himself 
extraordinary license in his behaviour.—-See an 
instance in the Le- ke, IT. Pt. II. iii. 94, PIS N 
—the dict. explains the two words together by

N AL FE . but that is the meaning ofN AL FE . but that is the meaning of

BR alone, and N= fc. ‘to wait for.’ So,

the commentators, old and new. The use of |

E in this sense is thus explained: The 5 
& is fond of squatting, and is therefore called

the squatting ch'e 1 KE, but it is called by 
some the chte e 6 By) and hence GA is 
used for N. to squat!’ See the Sf ae. fn loc. 
$$ for E. and E: for 48. R ;—in the

Bense of x „ our ‘pest,’ rathor than *thicf.' 
The address of Conf. might be translated in the

2d person, but it is perhaps better to keep to 
the 3d, Conne application to be understood. 
47. Coxrud s EMPLOYMENT OF A FORWARD

YOUTH. 1. FA i, —there is a tradition that 
Confucius lived and taught in lj] M, but it

is much disputed. Bap al 2

nr (gj means to convey the messages

rz * 
2

between visitors and tlie host.“

the inquirer supposed that Conf. employment 
of the lad was to distinguish him for the pro- 
gress which he had made. 2. According to 
the rules of ceremony, a youth musf sit in the 
corner, the body of the room being reserved for 
fullgrown men. See the Le-ke, II. Pt. I. i. 17.

In walking with an elder, a youth was required

to keep a little behind him. See the Le-ke, III. 
v. 15. Confucius employment of the lad, there- 
fore, was to teach him the courtesies required 
by his years.

158

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

BOOK XV. WEI LING KUNG.

F

CHAPTER I. 1. 
tactics.

1

The duke Ling 
Confucius replied, *I have heard all about sacrificial ves-

Tom

ES EN g 
oa E T ee Re

sha

] ij 
H . FL

of Wei asked Confucius about

sels, but I have not learned military matters.” On this, he took

his departure the next day. 
2.

When he was iff'Ch'in, their provisions: were exhausted, and

- his followers became so ill that they were unable to rise. 
3. "Tsze-loo, with evident dissatisfaction, said, Has the superior 
man likewise to endure in this way?” The Master said, “The su- 
perior man may indeed have to endure want, but the mean man,when he is in want, gives way to unbridled license." 
HEADING OF THIS Boor.—{ay na A p E Z A. VIII. 4, 3. The 4

II., ‘The duke, Ling, of Wei Book XV.

The conteſtts of the Book, contained in forty 
chapters, are as miscellaneous as those of the for- 
mer. Ruther they are more so, some chapters 
bearing on the public administration of govern- 
ment, several being occupied with the superior 
man, and others containing lessons of practical 
wisdom. All the subjects,’ says Ting Ping, ‘il- 
lustrate the feeling of the sense of shame and 
consequent pursuit of the correct course, and 
therefore the Book immediately follows the 
preceding one.'

1. Conrucits REFUSES TO TALK ON MILITARY 
AFFAIRS. In THE MIDST OF DISTRESS, HE SHOWS 
THE DISCIPLES HOW THE SUPERIOR MAN IS ABOVE

DISTRESS. 1. , Toad chin, low. 8d tone, ‘the ar- 
rangement of the ranks of an army, here==tac-

tics, generally. AI Ef Z comp. A

^H was a dish,

18 inches long and 8 in. brond, on a stand, 8} 
in. high, upon which the flesh of victims was 
laid, but the meaning is sacrificial vessels gener- 
ally, the business of ceremonies, It is sid 
of Conf., in the ‘Historical Records,’ that when 
a boy, he was fond of playing at Aff and E. Ho 
wished by his reply and departure, to teach the 
duke that the rules of propriety, and not war, 
were essential to the government of a state. 2. 
From Wei, Conf. proceeded to Ch‘in, and there 
met with the distress here mentioned. It is pro- 
bably the some which is referred to in XI. 2, 1, 
though there is some chronological difficulty 
about the subject. (See the note by Choo He 
in his preface to the Analects.) 3. = ves, 
indeed, with reference to 'Teze-loo's question. 
Some take it in its sense of ‘firm,—The supe- 
tior man firmly eudurcs want.’

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.-

TIN

e

HIH

REAA

5 ES

wR

O 
X im 
JU P

[ d

mss 
sm

St 
v 
w.

cu

mi 
=

[2n 
ex 
eo

S X : 
— — 
E A —

[wu

N 
2r

w

w

NASE 
kE 
dT R

yk 
HENSE

, HRA,CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.-

TIN

e

HIH

REAA

5 ES

wR

O 
X im 
JU P

[ d

mss 
sm

St 
v 
w.

cu

mi 
=

[2n 
ex 
eo

S X : 
— — 
E A —

[wu

N 
2r

w

w

NASE 
kE 
dT R

yk 
HENSE

, HRA,

Carrer II. I. The Master said, “Ts‘ze, you think, I suppose, 
that I am one who learns many things and keeps them in memory ?"

p 
3. 
CHAPTER III.

are few.“ 
CHAPTER IV.

Tsze-kung replied, ** Yes, but perhaps it is not so?” 
* No," was the answer; “I seek a unity all-pervading." 
The Master said, *Yew, those who know virtue

The Master said, * May not Shun be instanced as

having governed efficiently without exertion? What did he do? 
He did nothing but gravely and reverently occupy his imperial seat.”

CHAPTER V. 1.

Tsze-chang asked how a man might conduct

himself, so as to be everywhere appreciated.

2.

The Master said, Let his words be sincere and truthful, and

his actions honorable and careful;—such conduct may be practised

amóng the rude tribes of the South or the North.

9. Wow CowrUCIUS AIMED AT THE KNOW- 
LEDGR OF AN ALL-PERVADING UNITY. This 
chapter is to be compared with IV. 15, only, 
anys Choo Ile, ‘that is spoken with reference 
tu practice, and this with reference to know- 
ledge” But the design of Conf. was probably 
the same in: them both ; and I understand the 
first par. here as meaning—‘Ts‘ze, do you think 
that I am aiming, by the exercise of memory, to 
acquire a varied and extensive knowledge ?’ 
Then the 3d paragraph is equivalent to: I am 
not doing this. My aim is to know myself, —the 
mind which embraces all knowledge, and regu- 
lates all practice.“ This is the view of the chap- 
ter given in the H aug ILS 
2 FP E This chapter teaches that 
what is valuable in learning, is tlie knowledge 
of that which is important.’ .

If his words beIf his words be

9. FEW REALLY KNOW vrRTUE. This is un- 
derstood as spoken with reference to the dis- 
satisfaction manifested by /Tsze-loo in ch. 1. J£ 
he had possessed a right knowledge of virtue, 
he would not have been so affected by distress.

4. How SHUN was ABLE TO GOVERN WITH-

OUT PERSONAL EFFORT. EAS E. made him-

self reverent.’ IE [7] íi]; ‘correctly adjust-

ed his south-wards face ;’ see VI. I. Shun suc- 
ceeding Yaou, there were many ministers o 
great virtue and ability, to occupy all the offices 
of the government, All that Shun did, was by 
his grave and sage example. This is the lesson 
—the influence of & ruler's personal character.

5. CONDUCT THAT WILL BE APPRECIATED IN 
ALL PARTS OF THE WORLD. 1. We must supply 
a good deal to bring out the meaning here. 
Choo He compares the question with that other 
of Tsze-chang about the scholar who may be

E

; 
-N 
—1

)

N 
m 
ne

v

= 
N Baie

© 
v 
v 
*

Ex

B 
EIER

Im 
—

NV 
Ld 
© 
* 
v 
[d

s

BEDS 
N

B Es

Sess =

q

!

HASN

E

M

X

a

SEN 
She 
=

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

|

—.

ESO

ica Ed 
lt d

Sd

Eg

Natt

Seer 
| i 
w4 i4

N 
*

Hi

4

not sincere and truthful, and his actions not honorable and careful, 
will he, with such conduct, be appreciated, even in his neighbour-

hood?

fronting him.

to the yoke. 
4. 
CHAPTER VI. I.

the historiographer Vu.

*.

3. „When he is standing, let him see those tivo things, as it were

When he is in a carriage, let him see them attached 
Then may he subsequently carry them into practice." 
Tsze-chang wrote these counsels on the end of his sash. 1 
The Master said, Truly straightforward was 
When good government prevailed in his

state, he was like an arrow. When bad government prevailed, he

was like an arrow. .

2. “A superior man indeed is Keu Pih-yuh! When good go-

vernment prevails in his state, he is to be found in office.

When

bad government prevails, he can roll his principles up, and Keeps

them in his breast.“vernment prevails in his state, he is to be found in office.

When

bad government prevails, he can roll his principles up, and Keeps

them in his breast.“

called XE see XII. 20. 2. E15 is another name 
for the JU JH. the rude tribes on the north. 
2,500 families made up a ^l. and 25 made up 
a H. but the meaning of the phrase is that given 
in the translation, 3, H, ‘them, è e, such 
an 
words aud actions.—Let him see them B VA 
H. ‘before him, with himself making a trio.’

is properly the bottom of a carriage, 
planks laid over wheels, a simple hackery, but 
here it a carriage” 4 feti. denotes the ends

of the sash that hang down. R 
6. TE ADMIRABLE CHARACTERS OF 'TSZE-YU

AND Kev Pn-run. 1. X fü was the desig-

nation of f

E , the historiographer of Wei, 
on his deathbed, he left a message for his prince, 
and gave orders that his body should be laid out 
in a place and manner likely to attract his atten- 
tion when he paid the visit of condolence, It was 
80, and the message then delivered had the 
desired effect. Perhaps it was on hearing this

that Confucius made this remark. n 
‘as an. arrow,’ 2, e., straight and decided. 2. 
Keu Pih-yuh,—see XIV. 26. H =E. 4

im BE 2-2 is to be understood as ró-

ferring to ‘his principles,’ or perhaps the clause 
he could roll himself up and keep himself to 
himself, 7. e., he kept aloof from oftice.—Commi, 
say that Tsze-yu’s uniform straightforwardness 
was not equal to Pih-yuh’s rightly adapting

himself to circumstances.

oma) 
oO

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. l

Mes

me

ET 
OE-A 
if Tat

rent 
H- 
Saye url!

3 
Ne

2 
2

THES 
Pailin 
TIPPS cd

o

No 
Seah sre |S >

* 
4

*

NOR ENG

E 
n

O 
An 
SE 
MT

`

v

SERI 
INE RES rmt Sey

ANTI 
SSH TT] AFN

NE

| Hi 
Cnaprer VIL The Master said.“ When a man may be spoken 
with, not to speak to him is to err in reference to the man. henE 
n

O 
An 
SE 
MT

`

v

SERI 
INE RES rmt Sey

ANTI 
SSH TT] AFN

NE

| Hi 
Cnaprer VIL The Master said.“ When a man may be spoken 
with, not to speak to him is to err in reference to the man. hen

a man may not be spoken with, to speak to him is to err in reference 
to our words. The wise err neither in regard to their man nor to 
their words,"

Cuarrer VIII. The Master said, “The determined scholar and 
the man of virtue will not seek to live at the expense of injuring 
their virtue. They will even sacrifice their lives to preserve their 
virtue complete.“ 951

ChAPTER IX, Tsze-kung asked about the practice of virtue. 
The Master said, The mechanic, who wishes to do his work well, 
must first sharpen his tools. When you are living in any state, 
take serviee with the most worthy among its great officers, and make 
friends of the most virtuous among its scholars.“

CnarrRR X. 1. Yen Yuen asked how the government of a coun- 
try should be administered.

7. TunnzE ARE MEX WITH WHOM TO SPEAK, | ally translated They will kill themselves.’ No 
AND MEN WITH WHOM TO KEEP SILENCE. THE | doubt suicide is included in the expression (See

WISE KNOW THEM. A 4 may be translated, | the Hie to Ho An), and Confucius here justifles

literally and properly, —' to lose our words,’ But | that act, as in certain cases expressive of high 
in Englich we do not use to lose,’ in connection | virtue. " A 
with ‘men,’ in the same way. E 9. How INTERCOURSE WITH THE GOOD AIDS 
8. Higit NATURES VALUE VIRTUE MORE THAN | THE PRACTICE OF VIRTUE, Comp. Proverbs 
ure. The AE and I AK are two different | XXVII. 17, ‘Iron sharpeneth iron; so a man 
^e sharpeneth the countenance of his friend,’ 
classes, the same described IV. 2,—4— 10. CERTAIN RULES, EXEMPLIFIED IN THE AN-

» CIENT DYNASTIES, TO BE FOLLOWED IN GOVBUN- 
. Pe 1 - 
T Fit KH FA £7 "H RX A S uatur- | iyu —a RELY 10 Yen YukN. 1, The disciple

162 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

ft E

År 
Be

^i 
#

E 
d

Lay

Ke I 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5.

n 
j162 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

ft E

År 
Be

^i 
#

E 
d

Lay

Ke I 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5.

n 
j

Xu wm 
“+h 
Ti 
i

Jj 
il

BAN. i 
ISA

80

in

mE

[ d

nm

885

;

— 
=

i ONT Ak 
pn

8888 
XN

scs

TENAS

im 
Fic 
:

>a

o D ^

The Master said, “ Follow the seasons of Hea. í 
“ Ride in the state carriage of Yin. 
“Wear the ceremonial cap of Chow. 
“ Let the music be the Shaou with its pantomimes. 
6. “Banish the songs of Ch‘ing, and keep far from specious talkers, 
The songs of Ch'ing are licentious; ; specious talkers are dangerous.“ 
Car RN XL The Master said, If a man take no thought about 
what is distant, he will find sorrow near at hand." 
CHAPTER XII. The Master said, „It is all over! 
seen one who loves virtue as he loves beauty,” 
Cnarrzn XIII. The Master said,“ Was not Tsang Win like one 
who had stolen his situation? He knew the virtue : and the talents

I have not

modestly put his question with reference to the 
government of a state (FI), but the Master

answers it according to the disciple's ability, 
as Vi it had been about the ruling of the empire

aR Me

A began the year at different times. 
According to an ancient tradition, *IIenven

was opened at the time Ps ; Earth appeared at

preferred to the more ornamented ones of Chow. 
4. Yet he does not object to the more elegant eap 
of that dynasty, ‘the cap, says Choo Ile, ‘being 
a small thing, and placed over all the body.“ ö.

The skaon was the music of Shun; see III. 25. p 
The three great ancient 
—the ‘dancers,’ or  pantomimes, w ho kept time

to the music. "See the Shoo-king II. ji. 21. 5. 
[Ed Án. * the sounds of Ch'i ing,’ meaning both 
the songs of Ch'ing, and the appropriate music to

the time H ;and Man was born at the time | which they were sung. ‘Those songs form the 
7th hook of the Ist division of the She-king,

P Das 
TA 5 X commences in our December, nt the | and nre here characterized justly.P Das 
TA 5 X commences in our December, nt the | and nre here characterized justly.

: P T NECESSITY OF FORETHOUGHT AND 
tes h later ; anc A 11. Tue * 
winter solstice; JL a mont ; and a | PRECAUTION. .

month aftor Ff. The Chow dynasty began its 1 RARITY OF A TRUE LOVE OF VIRTUF. 
2 9, 2 age 
year with T the Shang with H: and the Hen BR N, see V. 26; the rest is a repetition

of Ts 17, snid to Wave been spoken by Conf. 
with ‘a As human life then commenced, the

when he was in Wei, and saw the duke riding 
year, in reference to human labours, naturally

proceeds from the spring, and Conf, approved the 
rule of the Hea dynasty, His decision has been 
the law of ull dynasties since the 'l'ssin. See 
the * Discours Preliminaire, Chap. J, in Gaubil's 
Shoo King. 3. The sfate carringe of the Yin 
dynasty was plain and substantial, which Conf.

out openly in the same carriage with Nan-taze.

13. AGAINST JEALOUSY OF OTITERS’ TALENTS $ 
—THME CASE OF Tsaro Wan, ann Ilwuy ov 
L&w-ura. Tsang Wan-chung,—See V. 17.

385 GE. is explained— Jr Yt 44 in [i

DE rat ‘as if he had.got it by theft, and

— 
E

' CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 3

j

Lx 
A 
GEYSER

Hi 
3E

4 
a

n

* 
frr 
i

um 
DAMAN

SUAS 
| | HE

SHON ST NE

X 
LI 
Sx 
= 
9

ud

ar 
[ d 
* 
=

[ d 
e

Sahih 
"

=

a 
Z

*- 
« 
J 
v

TOSI 
PERDRE 
TERI

ŽAN

we 
ex

| 
ED 
2

—

f L] [e] H

of Hwuy of Lew-hea, and yet did not procure that he should stand 
with him in court.“ l

Cuarter XIV. The Master said, “He who requires much from 
himself and little from others, will keep himself from being the object 
of resentment.”

CnarrER XV. The Master said, When a man is not in the habit 
of saying—' What shall I'think of this? What shall I think of 
this?’ I can indeed do nothing with him!“ :CnarrER XV. The Master said, When a man is not in the habit 
of saying—' What shall I'think of this? What shall I think of 
this?’ I can indeed do nothing with him!“ :

Cuarrer XVI. The Master said, When a number of people 
are together, for a whole day, without their conversation turning on 
righteousness, and when they are fond of carrying out the suggestions 
of a small shrewdness ;—theirs is indeed a hard case."

Cuarrzn XVII. The Master said, “The superior man in every- 
thing considers righteousness to be essential. He performs it acdord- 
ing to the rules of propriety. He brings it forth in humility. He 
completes it with sincerity. This is indeed a superior man." 
secretly held possession of it. Tsang Win 16. AGAINST FRIVOLOUS TALKERS AND su-

would not recommend IIwuy, because he was Bene MN : itt 
: RFICJAL SPECULATORS. Ie ius y) 
an abler and better man than himself. IIwuy srecunatons. Choo He expla 2

is a famous name in China. Ile was an officer E ik by MEY AE m T8 tH E 
of Loo, so styled after death, whose name was |, hee in. A A E.

: : e i | ‘they have no ground from which to become vir- 
R „ and designation . IIe derived hi3 | tuous, and they will meet with calamity? Ho 
revenue from a town called Lew-hea, though An gives Ch'ing K‘ang-shing’s explanation :— 
some say that it was a lew or willow tree, over- £x fit n ‘they will never complete any

hanging hi e, whic e hi z S nw . ; 
' as ehh ei timed ane n a de thing.“ Our nearly literal translation appears

1 "ar! YT $ to convey the meaning. ‘A hard case, i.e. 
willow st .9. : T h J 3 
ui^ Sus t 5 they will make nothing out, and nothing ean be 
. 7 PI 88 5 b ED * .

ni LT . made of them. 
27, it is said, is here ‘to require from,’ and

ae Pit Cr a " 17. Tur coNDUOT OF THE SUPERIOR MAN IS

ot to reprove, he one meanin sse:

faconsibly into the other ES RIGUTHOUS, COURTEOUS, HUMBLE, AND SINCERE. 
i8. Novuine CAN BE MADE OF PEOPLE WNO H ; is explained by Choo He by H Ht, ‘theot to reprove, he one meanin sse:

faconsibly into the other ES RIGUTHOUS, COURTEOUS, HUMBLE, AND SINCERE. 
i8. Novuine CAN BE MADE OF PEOPLE WNO H ; is explained by Choo He by H Ht, ‘the

TAKB THINGS EASILY, NOT GIVING THEMSELVES S d . AL Am nuu

TUB TROUBLE TO THINK. Comp. VII. 8. substance and stem; and in the fid H

SAN

16

Ht

VM IIS o A a

vv 0 [aS]

ake NOH

Vb IB 
Jd

i 
RN

UN

*

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

SET

[COME

o

SHATNER 
SDH 
wee Hi

o

a

bend

w

NEEN 
THEM

CHAPTER XVIII. The Master said, The superior man is dis- 
tressed by his want of ability. He is not distressed by men's not

knowing him." 
CHAPTER r 
the thought of his name not bein

XIX. The Master said, “The superior man dislikes

mentioned after his death.”

CuaPrER XX, The Master said, What the superior man seeks, 
is in himself. What the mean man seeks, is in others.

CHaPrER XXI. The Master said, “The superior man is dignified, 
but does not wrangle. He is sociable, but not a partizan.”

Cuarter XXII.

The Master said, “The superior man does not

promote a man simply on account of his words, nor does he put aside ]

` good words because of the man."

$ JIL, ‘foundation’ The antecedent to all t H ap and many other paraphrases, x

the Z is $ or rather the thing, whatever 
it be, done righteously,

18. OUR OWN INCOMPETENCY, AND NOT OUR 
REPUTATION, THH PROPER BUSINESS OF CONCERN 
70 us. See XIV. 32, et al.

19. THE SUPERIOR MAN WISHES TO BE HAD IN 
REMEMBRANCE, Not, say the commen., that the 
superior man cares about fame, but fame is the 
invariable concomitant of merit. Ile can't have 
been the superior man, if he be not remember-

éd; i£ [i£ g 1. II. In the tii

{it is taken a= XAR EI ‘all his life."

20. His OWN APPROBATION I8 THE SUPERIOR 
MAN'S RULE. THE APPROBATION OF OTHERS 19 
THK MEAN MANS. Comp. XIV. 25.éd; i£ [i£ g 1. II. In the tii

{it is taken a= XAR EI ‘all his life."

20. His OWN APPROBATION I8 THE SUPERIOR 
MAN'S RULE. THE APPROBATION OF OTHERS 19 
THK MEAN MANS. Comp. XIV. 25.

21. THE SUPERIOR MAN IS DIGNIFIED AND 
AFFABLE, WITHOUT THE FAULTS TO WHICH THOSE 
QUALITIES OFTEN LEAD. Comp. II 14, and VII. 
30. j^ is here= HE A Tg N, ‘grave in 
self-maintenance.’ :

22. THE SUPERIOR MAN IS DISCRIMINATING, 
IN HIS EMPLOYMENT OP MEN AND JUDGING OF 
BTATEMENTS.

n CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

TNS 
P |

Site e SE (NER LT HE

*

SORRY

nf

(C >

v

SEN it 
HESS:

Ale

z 
Zali

Sz

=

SERN SWE AS 
m

à

— .

IE

Ld

El

à 
— —

ETE

. r 
í 
= f, —

N 
/

Sf Pt. H | 
HN Q An PAN

ED

0 JM D l N. V ^

CHAPTÉR XXIII. Tszekung asked, saying, “Is there one word 
which may serve as à rule of practicé for all one's life?" Thé Mas- 
ter said, Is not RecrPROvITY such a word? What you do not want 
done to yourself, do not do to others zu 
CuaPrER XXIV. 1. The Master said, “In my dealings with 
umen, whose evil do I. blame whose goodness do I praise, beyond 
what is proper? If I do sometimes. exceed in praise, there must. be 
ground fonat in my examination iof the individual. , 
2. „This people supplied the ground why the,tliree dynasties 
‘pursued the path of straightforivardness." . .' d "TP 
CHAPTER XXV. The Master said, Even in my early days, ia 
)historiographer would leave a blank in his text, and he. who had a: 
horse would lend him to another to ride. Now, alas! there are no. 
such things.“ AE | TE

indicates: Fr gu is to be taken as the rea

28. THE GREAT PRINCIPLE OF RECIPROCITY 
18 THE RULE OF LIFE, , Comp. V. 11. It is sin- 
gular that Tsze-kung professes there to act on

the principle here recommended to him.28. THE GREAT PRINCIPLE OF RECIPROCITY 
18 THE RULE OF LIFE, , Comp. V. 11. It is sin- 
gular that Tsze-kung professes there to act on

the principle here recommended to him.

ı 24, |CoNFUCIUS SHOWED,HIS RESPECT FOR 
MEN BY STRICT TRUTHEULNESS IN AWARDING 
PRAISE OR CENSURE. 1. I have not marked ‘ be- 
yond what is proper’ with italics, because there 
is really that force in the verbs— E and . 
* Ground for itin my examination of the indi- 
vidual ;'—i. e., from examination of him I believe

he will yet verify my words. 2. Hy ER +h, 
resumes the A of the 1st par., which the th, 
«

son why,’ and F as & neuter verb, of general 
application. Y. ethe three dynasties,” 
with special reference to their great founders, , 
and the principles which they inaugurated;—.

The truth-approving nature of the people was. 
a rule even to those sages, It was the same to. 
Confucius. Í

25. INSTANCES OP THE DEGENERACY OF CON-- 
FUCIUS' TIMES, Most paraphrasts supply a Nd.

after & ;— even in my time I have seen.”

— 
— 
—

166 
= 5H — 
T zj esl

v

Wan

ERT R 
ES EON

E

CnaAprrER XXVI. The Master 
virtue. 
plans."

. Cuarter XXVII. The Master said, 
a man, it is necessary to examine into the case.

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

4 | | 
E y Iss 
an E E ^J iS

aas 
o WE

. . * 
said, *Specious words confound

Want of forbearance in small matters confounds great

“When the multitude hate 
When the multitude

like a man, it is necessary to- examine into the case."

CHAPTER XXVIII.

he Master said, A man can enlarge the

principles which he follows; those principles do not enlarge the

man."

CHAPTER XXIX. The Master

reform them,—this, indeed, should be

said, To have faults and not to’ 
ronounced having faults.”

CHAPTER XXX. The Master said, I have been the whole duy'man."

CHAPTER XXIX. The Master

reform them,—this, indeed, should be

said, To have faults and not to’ 
ronounced having faults.”

CHAPTER XXX. The Master said, I have been the whole duy'

"The appointment of the historiographer s refer- 
red to Hwang-te, or "The Yellow emperor,’ the 
inventor of the cycle. The statutes of Chow men- 
tion no fewer than five classes of such officers. 
They were attached also to the feudal courts, and 
what Confucius says, is that, in hisearly days, 
a historiographer, on any point about which he 
was not sure, would NS & blank; so careful

were they to record only truth. s iif A 
extends on to A 2 . This second sen-

tence is explained in Ho An: — If any one had 
a horse which he could not tame, he would lend 
it to another to ride and exercise it! — The com-

mentator Hoo aA ) says well, that the 
meaning of the chapter must be left in uncer-

tainty. 
20. THE DANGER OF SPECIOUS WORDS, AND

OF IMPATIENCE. ^ N 2 is not ‘a little 
impatience,’ but impatience in little things; ‘the 
hastiness, it is said, ‘of women and small 
people.’ :

27. IX JUDGING OF A MAN, WE MUST NOT BE 
GUIDED BY HIS BEING GENERALLY LIKED OR bis- 
L. IIC zb. Comp. XIII. 24.

98. PRINCIPLES OF DUTY AN INSTRUMENT IN

THE HAND OF MAN, This sentence is quite mys- 
tical in its sententiousness. The n says:

— É here is the path of duty, which all men,98. PRINCIPLES OF DUTY AN INSTRUMENT IN

THE HAND OF MAN, This sentence is quite mys- 
tical in its sententiousness. The n says:

— É here is the path of duty, which all men,

in their various relations, have to pursue, and: 
man has the three virtues of knowledge, ben- 
evolence, and fortitude, wherewith to pursue 
that path, and so. he enlarges it. Thut virtud re- 
mote, occupying an empty place, cannot enlarge!” 
man, needs not to be said? That writer's ac~ 
count of Ma] here is probably correct, and ‘duty 
unapprehended,’ ‘in an empty place, enn have 
no effect on any man; but this is a mere truism 
Duty apprehended is constantly cniarging, ele- 
vating, and energizing multitudes, who had 
! previously been uncognizant of it. The first 
clause of the chapter may be granted, but the 
second is not in accordance with truth.

29. Tue CULPABILITY OF NOT , REFORMING 
KNOWN FAULTS. Comp. I. 8. Choo He's com- 
mentary appears to make the meaning somewhat“ 
different. lle says:-—‘If one having faults ean 
change them, he comes back tothe condition of 
having no faults. But if he do not change 
them, then they go on to their completion, and - 
will never come to be changed.“

30. ‘THE FRUITLESSNESS OF THINKING, wren! 
our READING, Comp. II. 15. where the depen- 
dence of acquisition and reflection on each other 
is set forth. ——Many comm, say that Conf. merely 
transfers the things which he here mentions to 
himself for the sake of others, not that it ever

| was relly thus with himself. " ’

— 
EN 
-l

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

|

= 
EH

v

E 
fri

= 
T EEH

~w 
[4 
v

d

i

nase

x

v

Nos NES

3 
ST

v

La aN 
eis

o 
ce 
44.

ENS APT

Q 
E. 
cA

i

NESE

v

wes OK

—

NN

= 
H

r

v

p

v 
oe

Fast

O

PE dl N

Smee

\ 
. 
o 
Sz 
A 
558 
7

hui

TNR 
b

v

Si: 
N 
< E

of AN 
without eating, and 85 whole on without sleeping :— occupied 
with thinking. It was of no use. The better plan is to learn,”PE dl N

Smee

\ 
. 
o 
Sz 
A 
558 
7

hui

TNR 
b

v

Si: 
N 
< E

of AN 
without eating, and 85 whole on without sleeping :— occupied 
with thinking. It was of no use. The better plan is to learn,”

CHAPTER XXXL The Master said, “The object of the superior 
man is truth, Food is not his object. There is ploughing ;—even 
in that there is sometimes want. So with learning ;——emolument 
may be found in it, The superior man is anxious lest he should not 
get truth; he is not anxious lest poverty should come upon him."

Cuarren XXXII. I. The Master said, *When a man's know- 
ledge is sufficient to attain, and his virtue is not sufficient to enable 
him to hold, whatever he may have gained, he will lose again.

2. “When his know ledge is sufficient to attain, and he has vir- 
tue enough to hold fast, if he cannot govern with dignity, the peo- 
ple will not respect him.

8. "When his knowledge is sufficient to attain, and he has vir- 
tue enough to hold fast; when he governs also with dignity, yet if 
he try. to move the people contrary to thE rules of propriety :—full 
excellence is not reached,”

31. Tun SUPERIOR MAN SHOULD NOT BE MER- 
CENARY, BUT HAVE TRUTH FOR HIS OBJECT, Here

again we translate a by ‘truth,’ as the best

term that offers. 2. hunger, want. Want 
may be in the midst of ploughing,’—i. e., hus- 
bandry is the way to plenty, and yet despite the 
Jubours of the husbandman, a famine or scar- 
city sometimes occurs. The application of this 
to the case of learning, however, is not very

apt. Is the emolument that sometimes comcs 
with learning a calamity like famine ?—Ch'ing 
K'ang-shing's s view is:—' Although’ a man may 
plough, yet, not learning, he will come to hun- 
ger. If he learn, he will get emolument, and 
tho' he do not plough, he will not be in want. 
This is advising men to learn’!

32. How KNOWLEDGE WITHOUT VIRTUE 18 vor 
LASTING, AND TO KNOWLEDGE AND VIRTUE A 
RULER SHOULD ADD DIGNITY AND THE RULES OF32. How KNOWLEDGE WITHOUT VIRTUE 18 vor 
LASTING, AND TO KNOWLEDGE AND VIRTUE A 
RULER SHOULD ADD DIGNITY AND THE RULES OF

PuorBIETY. 1. Here the various z -and the.

KERI 
ERAT

O

at OR SSS 
. Tönt

VAD

v

*

*

v

does

Tram

H 
HO MR 
Cuarrer XXXIII.

CONFUCIAN.

ANALECTS. : 
E IH. R ^g, Ed

-

> 
* 
o>

>So «d

The Master said, “The superior man can-

not be known in little matters ; but he may be intrusted with great

concerns.

The small man may not be intrusted with great con-

cerns, but he may be known in little matters,” 
CHAPTER XXXIV. The Master said, “Virtue is more to man

than either water or fire. I have

seen men die from treading on

. water and fire, ‘but I have never seen a man die from treading the

course of virtue.”

CuapteR XXXV. The Master said, “Let every man consider 
virtue as what devolves on himself. He may not yield the perfor-

mance of it even to his teacher.”

two first in the other paragraphs, dH pE =

‘have le, or principle, for their reference.’ Fin 
Ho An, however, Paon Heen says:—‘ A man 
may have knowledge equal to the management

of his office qàá i K T but if he have not 
virtue which can hold it fast, Paper he get i it, 
he will lose it? 2. In X T. and Hh x

below, z E iz] R ==, the x have . or

people, for their beende 3. The phrase to 
move the people is analogous to several others,

euch as Bb T. pi? ze MZ, to drum

the people,’ ‘to dance them,’ ‘to rouse them." 
33. How ro KNOW THE SUPERIOR MAN ARD 
THE MEAN MAN; AND THEIR CAPACITIES. Choo

He ay, F , ‘the knowing here

is our knowing t RML individuals. The ‘little 
matters' are ingenious but trifling arts and ac- 
complishments, in which a realy great man 
may sometimes be deficient, while à small man 
will be familiar with them. The ‘knowing’ is 
not that the parties are keun-tsze and seaou-jin, 
but what attainments they have, and for what 
they are fit. The difficulty, on this view, is

with the conclusion jf] Wl AY . —Howith the conclusion jf] Wl AY . —Ho

An gives the view of Wang Shuh :—' The way

him than water or fire.’

of the keun-tsze is profound and far-reaching, 
He may not let his knowledge be small, and he 
may receive what is great. ‘The way of the 
seaou-jin is shallow and near, He may let his 
knowledge be small, and he may not receive 
what is great.’

94. VIRTUE MORE TO MAN THAN WATER OR

FIRE, AND NEVER HURTFUL TO HIM. R is here

A. man, as in VI. 20. RN K- tl

— the „People's relation to, or dependence on, 
virtue.’ ‘The case is easily conceivable of men's 
suffering death on account of their virtue. There 
have been martyrs for their loyalty and other 
virtues, as well as for their religions faith. Choo 
He provides for this diff. in his remarks :—‘The 
want of fire and water is hurtful only to man’s 
body, but to be without virtue is to lose one’s 
mind (the higher nature), and so it is more to 
See on IV. 8.

35. VIRTUE PERSONAL AND DEROATORE oN.

EVERY MAN. The old interpreters take eS in 
the sense of ‘ought.’ Choo He certainly im- 
proves on them by taking it in the sense of #8 
A. as in the translation. A student at first

takes I to be in the 2d person, but tlio X 
me. recalls hini to the 3d.

? CONFUCIAN

i E 
pa HEY

Ti

ANALECTS. 
LL. 
pi = =x 
xj En. —

v 
Ld

PRBE 
ERR N

w

BRAI-

ly te 
IAN uw 
*

w|

N 
8

5

CA TR, XXXVI.. The Master said, “The superior man is cor»

rectly firm, and not firm merely."

I TEN " e o? , ‘oe 
Carrer XXXVII. The Master said, “A minister, in serving 
his prince, revérently discharges his duties, and makes his emolu-

ment a secondary consideration.”

Cuarrer XXXVIII. The Master said, “There being instruction, 
there will be no distinction of classes.”

'" Cmarrek XXXIX. The Master said, Those whose courses are 
different cannot lay plans for one another." i

CHAPTER XL, The Master said, “In language it is simply requir-

ed that it convey the meaning.” 
. Caartsr XLI. I.

The Music-master, Meén, having called uponCHAPTER XL, The Master said, “In language it is simply requir-

ed that it convey the meaning.” 
. Caartsr XLI. I.

The Music-master, Meén, having called upon

him, when they came to the steps, the Master said, “Here are the

” 
steps.

36. Tun SUPERIOR MAN'8 FIRMNESS IS BASED 
9X RIGHT. B is used here in the sense which it

has throughout the Yih-king. Both it and Ej 
imply firmness, but A supposes a moral and 
intelligent basis which may be absent from BE} 
ace XIV. 18, 3.

97. THE FAITHFUL MINISTER. The 1 refers

not to pin but £o £he individual who 58 4 
We have to supply the subject—‘a minister.“ 
A, as in VI. 20.

88. Tun Error or TEACHING. Choo Ho 
enys on this: — The nature of all men is good, 
but we find among them the different classes of 
good and bad. This is the effect of physical 
coustitutiou and of practice, The superior man,

in consequence, employs his teaching, and all 
may be brought back to the state of good, and

When they came to the mat for the guest to sit upon, he

there is no necessity (The lang. is R ne 18 
wá FH 
Ed . X Z EE of speaking any more of 
the badness of some.’ This is very extravagant, 
Teaching is not so omnipotent.—The old in- 
térpretation is simply that in teaching there 
should be no distinction of classes.

39. AGREEMENT IN PRINCIPLE NECESSARY TO

CONCORD IN PLANS. A is the 2d tone, but I do 
not see that there would be any great difference 
in the meaning, if it were read in its usual Ist 
tone.

40. PERSPICUITY THE CHIEF VIRTUE OF LAN-

GUAGE. i may be used both of speech and 
of style. 
41. CONSIDERATION oF CONFUCIUS FOR THE

BLIND. 1. Bilt 9. X Fil. III. 23. Ancient-

ly, the blind were employed in the offices of 
music, partly because their senso of hearing

Y LET 
Z URE SUY SLE dS

When all were seated, the Master

M <£ is the mat.”

said,

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

El. 45, 
A

informed him, saying, So and so is here; so and so is here." 
2. The Music-master, Méen, having gone out, Tsze-chang asked,M <£ is the mat.”

said,

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

El. 45, 
A

informed him, saying, So and so is here; so and so is here." 
2. The Music-master, Méen, having gone out, Tsze-chang asked,

saying, 
8. The Master said, Yes. 
who lead the blind.“

was more than ordinarily acute, and partly that

they might be made of some use in the world;

see the SE ay in loc. H. —low 8d tone.

“Ts it the rule to tell those things to the Music- master?” 
This is certainly the rule for those

of a guide, but the sage met him, and under- 
took me care of him himself. 2. js govern-

ed by = E „and refers to the words of. Conf. to

Méen had come to Conf. house, under the care | Méen in the preceding paragraph.

7

BOOK XVI. KE SHE.

J^ M. H. N N e s 
Wi^H «ELI HR „

N. A N 3.

CHAPTER I. 
Chuen- yu.

po

x:

^H. H Ros N

1. The head of the Ke family was going to attack

2. Yen Yew and Ke Loo had an interview with Confucius, and 
said, “ Our chief, Ke, is going to commence operations against

Chuen-yu.”

Ed or THIS Boor. — R 72 + 3. supposed that it belonged to the Ts‘e (

73 X. ‘The chief of the ReNo nias Through- 
out this Book, Confucius is spoken of as XL 
F. ‘The philosopher Kung, and never by

the designation , or The Master.” Then,

the style of several of the chapters (IV—XT) is 
not like the utterances of Confucius to which 
we have been accustomed. From these circum-

stances, one commentator, Hung Kwóh qt

recensus of these analects; the other books be- 
longing to the Loo ( £5 recensus. This sup- 
position, however, is not otherwise supported.

1. CONFUCIUS EXPOSES THE PRESUMPTUOUS 
AND IMPOLITIO CONDUCT OF THE CHIEF OF THE 
KE FAMILY IN PROPOSING TO ATTACK A MINOR 
STATE, AND REBUKES YEN Yew Ax 'lszE-Loo

FOR ABETTING THE DESIGN. I. aR J& and 
aA 1$ below,—see III. 1. Chucn-yu was a

SEVERE SEE NESE d]

~ 
—

CONFUCIAN ANALE OTS. 1

v

icu emp SESS 8 
E

ER 
RE 
<Ñ] 
Em

Ua

Dobe Ss St

Sear 
TNE

D] aja

v

= 
Tn

e

> 
ott 
CISNE

SENE SEEPS fn HL 
x

m 
(3 
*

S

æ 
ww 
vSEVERE SEE NESE d]

~ 
—

CONFUCIAN ANALE OTS. 1

v

icu emp SESS 8 
E

ER 
RE 
<Ñ] 
Em

Ua

Dobe Ss St

Sear 
TNE

D] aja

v

= 
Tn

e

> 
ott 
CISNE

SENE SEEPS fn HL 
x

m 
(3 
*

S

æ 
ww 
v

ER

Mg

DERE Sa 
FREES 0 NSE SES OE 
M

EE 
| = tk | 
T^, E ^ 9 » Fa She 
Bl EUR 8 2

9. Confucius said, K'ew, is it not you who are in fault here?

4. “Now, in regard to Chuen-yu, long ago,.a former king ap- 
pointed it to preside over the sacrifices to the eastern Mung; more- 
over, it is in the midst of the territory of our state; and its ruler is 
a minister in direct connexion with the emperor:—What has your 
chief to do with attacking it?"

5. Yen Yew said, “ Our master wishes the thing; neither of us 
two ministers wishes it.“

6. Confucius said,“ Kew, there are the words of Chow Jin,— 
*When he can put forth his ability, he takes his place in the ranks of 
office; when he finds himself unable to do so, he retires from it. 
How can he be used as a guide to a blind man, who does not sup- 
port him when tottering, nor raise him up when fallen ?'

7. “And further, you speak wrongly. When a tiger or wild bull 
escapes from his cage; when a tortoise or gem is injured in its 
repository :—whose is the fault?"

small territory in Loo, whose ruler was of the-, | to the Mung hill. 44 is not merely ‘to attack,’

or 4th order of nobility, It was one of the states 
' enlled Fit kf. or ‘attached,’ whose chiefs could 
not appear in the presence of the emperor, ex-

cepting in the train of the prince within whose 
jurisdiction they were embraced. Their exis- 
tence was not from a practice like the sub-in- 
feudation, which belonged to the feudal system 
of Europe. They held of the lord paramount 
or emperor, but with the restriction which has 
been mentioned, and with a certain subservience 
also to their immediate superior. Its particu- 
lar position is fixed by its proximity to Pe, andbut ‘to attack and punish,’ an exercise of judi- 
cial authority, which could emanate only from 
the emperor. The term is used here, to show 
the nefarious and presumptuous character of 
the contemplated operations. 2. There is some 
difficulty here, as, ace. to the ‘Historical Re- 
cords,’ the two disciples were not in the service 
of the Ke family, at the same time. We may 
suppose, however, that 'I'sze-loo, returning with 
the sage from Wei on the invitation of duke 
Gae, took service a second time, and for a short 
period, with the Ke family, of which the chief 
was then Ke Kang. This brings the time of the

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

2 
-3 
bo

Pos 
(v

lu 
w 
v 
v

M

et 
SANNE 
- ND 
-A

ENI 
PRE

o

RDS

2 
v 
w 
v

PUDRE 
Dp SEH

pi 
n

Re 
=

v 
Q

JE 
&l-o 
rs 
7 
t 
[ d 
ray 
sS

g

EEEN ER

RAO

spes

7m . A. XE, iu, N EJ, Ht

8. Yen Yew said, “But at present, Chuen-yu is strong and 
hear to Pe; if our chief do not now take it, it will hereafter be a 
sorrow to his descendants." i

9. Confucius said, K'ew, the superior man hates that declining 
to shy want such and such a thing, and framing explanations 
Jor the conduct.

10. “I have heard that rulers of states and chiefs of families are 
not troubled lest their people should be few, but are troubled lest 
they should not keep their several places; that they are not troubled 
with fears of poverty, but are troubled with fears of a want of con- 
tented repose among the people in their several places. For when 
the people keep their several places, there will be no poverty ; when 
harmony prevails, there will ba no scarcity of people ; and when there 
is such a contented repose, there will be no rebellious upsettings.

transaction to B. C. dai or 482. T AR A.transaction to B. C. dai or 482. T AR A.

—lit., is going to have an affair.“ 3. Conf. ad- 
dresses himself only to Kew, as he had been a 
considerable time, and very active, in the Ke 
service. 4. It was the prerogative of the prin- 
ees to sacrifice to the hills and rivers within 
their jurisdictions ;— liere was the chief of

E. ‘a minister of tho altara to tho spirits 
of the land and grain, To those spirits only, 
the prince had the prerogative of sacrificing, 
The chief of Chuen-yu having this, how dared 
an officer of Loo to think of attacking him?

The 2 is used of his relation to the emperor.

Chuen-yu, imperially appointed (the ‘former 
king’ is probably ie the second emperor of 
the Chow dynasty) to be the lord of the Mung 
mountain, that is, to preside over the sacrifices 
offered to it. This raised him high above any 
mere ministers or officers of, Loo. Ihe moun- 
tain Mung is in the present district of Pe, in the 
department of E-chow. It was called eastern, to 
distinguish it from another of the same name in

Shen-se, which was the western Mung. H.

AE FR BK Z HH, —this is mentioned, to

show that Chuen-yu was so situated as to give 
Loo no occasion for apprehension. ñt TA

Choo He makes the phrase AÁ Re Pd E. 
ta minister of the ducal house,’ saying that the 
three families had usurped all the dominions 
proper of Log, leaving only the chiefs of the at- 
tached states to appear in the ducal court. I

prefer the former interpretation. a JA N 
fa must be understood with reference to the 
Ke. $3 appears to be an expletive, unless wd

conceive it joined with the nf. , the two char 
acters together being simply=‘why’ or how.“ 
b. * F. our master i, e, the chief of the

m 
A 
&

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

v

EA 
> 
uL 
m 
e

EE 
ERE

5

(S

M 
KA.

Mott

Se ohh

v

iT

ES 
= 
mu

WEI ESI

SNES 
ARNAN

O

ee

v

IHES

BUO

DNS EXE HE 
"

2.m 
A 
&

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

v

EA 
> 
uL 
m 
e

EE 
ERE

5

(S

M 
KA.

Mott

Se ohh

v

iT

ES 
= 
mu

WEI ESI

SNES 
ARNAN

O

ee

v

IHES

BUO

DNS EXE HE 
"

2.

11. “So it is.— Therefore, if remoter people are not submissive, 
all the influences of civil culture and virtue are to be cultivated to 
attract them to be so; and when they have been so attracted, they 
must be made contented and tranquil.

12. “Now, here are you, Yew and K'ew, assisting your chief. 
Remoter people are not submissive, and, with your help, he cannot 
attract them to him, In his own territory there are divisions and 
downfalls, leavings and separations, and, with your help, he cannot 
preserve it.

13. „And yet he is planning these hostile movements within our 
state.—I am afraid that the sorrow of the Ke-sun family will not 
be on account of Chuen-yu, but will be found within the screen of

a

their own court.”

Ke family. 6. Chow Jin is by Choo He simply 
called—a good historiographer of ancient times.’ 
Bome trace him back to the Shang dynasty, and 
others only to the early times of the Chow. 
There are other weighty utterances of his in 
vogue, besides that in the text. 7. Choo Heex-

plains be by BF 2E, ‘a wild bull? The dict.

says itis like an ox, and goes on to describe it

as *one-horned. The AS p ER 3 says 
that D, and are different terms for the 
same animal, 2. e, the rhinoceros. I cannot

think that Sf, here is the living tortoise. That 
would not be kept in a H or ‘coffer, like a 
gem. Perhaps the term is, by mistake, for E 
9. The regimen of He extends down to the end 
of the par. SR. in XI. 24, y Ya is 
the same idiom as Fy D SE, V. 7. 10.

Conf. uses the term AR here, with ref. to the

i in p. 8. 15. ‘equality,’ aS tr fat .

means every one getting his own proper name 
and place.“ From this point, Conf. speaks of the 
general disorganization of Loo under the man- 
agement of the three families, and especially of

the Ke. By Mm A we certainly cannot un-the Ke. By Mm A we certainly cannot un-

stand the people of Chuen-ya. 11. ak is to be 
understood with a hiphll force, to make to come,’ 
‘to attract’ 12. JK BE RK, F GE SP are 
to be understood of the head of the Ke family,

as controlling the government of Loo, and as 
being assisted by the two disciples, so that the re-

proof falls heavily on them. 13. JE rh |

Z pay. —Choo He simply says X8 LT pë

, ‘seaou-ts'eang means a screen.’ In the 
dict., after Cb'ing K‘ang-shing, seaou in this 
pass. jf, *reverent, and Len alone means 
screen and the phrase is thus explained: 
‘Officers, on reaching the screen, which they had 
only to pass, to find themselves in the presence 
of their head, were supposed to become more 
reverential’; and hence, the expression in the 
text among his own immediate officers.’

b= 
-J 
P

CONFUGIAN ANALECTS.

E 
4

Eia

«v

l 
"71 
=| 
Em. 
fal 
all

iM 
IS 
d 
E

v

= 
U

Eat - an

v 
V 
*

Em 
damey 
zm 
KEE

e

MEMES uli 
m

b

e

SH DEI pe BUE

Ld 
wo 
r 
[d

Net 
aha

v

pae

cE 
(rik

EH 
ARBRES

EO

SERRE AEN

|

Haba} ER Spe

EE 
—- BREE 
n 
zh

O o

P

CHAPTER II. I. Confucius said, When good government pre- 
vails in the empire, ceremonies, music, and punitive military expedi- 
tions, proceed from the emperor. When bad government prevails 
in the empire, ceremonies, music, and punitive military expeditions 
proceed from the princes. When these things proceed from the 
princes, as a rule, the cases will be few in which they do not lose 
their power in ten generations. When they proceed from the great 
officers of the princes, as a rule, the cases will be few in which they 
do not lose their power in five generations. When the subsidiary 
ministers of the great officers hold in their grasp the orders of the 
kingdom, as a rule, the cases will be few in which they do not lose 
their power in three generations.

2. „When right principles prevail in the empire, government 
will not be in the hands of the great officers.2. „When right principles prevail in the empire, government 
will not be in the hands of the great officers.

8. “When right principles prevail in the empire, there will be 
no discussions among the common people."

2. THe SUPREME AUTHORITY OUGHT BVER TO | which the emperor mightorder such expeditions. 
MAINTAIN ITS POWER, THB VIOLATION OF THIB | On the imperial prerogatives, see the EH 
ULE ALWAYS LEADS TO RUIN, WHICH IS SPEEDIER ; 
P 3 XXVIII. zs is here X4 *generally 
AB THE RANK OF THE VIOLATOR IS LOWER —In 
2 , & è 
these utterances, Conf. had reference to the speaking, ‘as a rule. E H= B.

disorganized state of the empire, when *the son | , 4 2s ; p. 
of Heaven’ was fast becoming an empty name, family-ministers, 2 (jj are the same as the

the princes of states were in bondage to their | previous ff ` ] 
great officers, and those again at the mercy of P s Jig» 8 {È N but having been

: dy mini ES WA | usurped by the princes, and now again snatched. 
their family ministers. 1. A . fit a. from them by their officers, they can no longer

compare XIV. 1. fiE N are to be taken | be spoken of as imperial affairs, but only us 
together, as in the transl. We read of four Zz 8 " ’ =

4 state matters.’ 3. = Hi. Er 
^ . ess 4 Va $ P > 
fib ie Sedem d west, north, e e discussions ; i. e, about the said state 
south; and of nine ; 6 €, nine grounds on | of public affairs.

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

2. . yw. 
E. = Y Is 
M mol RR, y

REITEN 
ORNARE

v

YSS a 
ES NUES 
ASI es

LL JRE TO Hi

SERES N 
3 
|| ARE

EIS

ma

FE RAE B ZL,

CHAPTER III. i said, * Tbe revenue of the state has left 
the ducal house, now for five generations. The government has been 
in the hands of the great officers for four generations. On this 
account, the descendants of the three Hwan are much reduced."CnaPrgR IV. Confucius said, “There are three friendships 
which are os and three which are injurious. 1 
with the upright; friendship with the sincere; and friendship wit 
the man of much observation: — these are advantageous. Friendship 
with the man of specious airs; friendship with the Insinuatingly soft; 
and friendship with he glib- tongued :—these are injurious.’

CuaPTER V. Confucius said, “There are three things men find 
enjoyment in which are advantageous, and three things. they find 
enjoyment in which are injurious. To find enjoyment in the dis. 
criminating study of ceremonies and music; to find enjoyment in

—

ae 
*

3. ILLUSTRATION OF THR PRINCIPLES OF Tun 
LAST CHAPTER. In the year B.C. 608, at the 
death of duke Win, his rightful heir was killed, 
and the son of a concubine raised to the “duke-

dom. He is in the annals as duke Seuen ( "HO

and after him came Shing, Seang, Ch‘aou, and 
‘Ling, in whose time this must have been spoken. 
‘These dukes were but shadows, pensionaries of 
their great officers, so that it might be said the 
revenue had gone from them. Obs. that here and 
in the prec. ch., TH- is used for ‘a reign. ‘The

three Hwan’ are the three families, as being all 
descended from duke Hwan; see op IL 5.

He R- ‘therefore,’ uttered with a sigh.— 
Choo He appears to have fallen into n mistake 
jn enumerating the four heads of the Ke family 
who had administered the government of Loo 
as Woo, Taou, P'ing, and Hwan, as Taou (i ht ) 
died before his father, and would not be said 
therefore to have the government in his hands,

The right enumeration is Wan K vw Woo

(M). Ping (2), and Hwan du. Sco tho 
Ji Bx gib III xxvi.

4. Turee FRIENDSIIPS fii un e AND 
THREE INJURIOUS. In the + it is said—~

& PNA (LIE ZEE B. 
ERE XN. ‘after z% the char-(M). Ping (2), and Hwan du. Sco tho 
Ji Bx gib III xxvi.

4. Turee FRIENDSIIPS fii un e AND 
THREE INJURIOUS. In the + it is said—~

& PNA (LIE ZEE B. 
ERE XN. ‘after z% the char-

acter is always verbal and= , Sto have 
intercourse with.’ It is ns well to translate the 
term by ‘friendship’ throughout. EN is here 
‘sincere,’ without the subtractions Be ae in 
XIV. 18, 8, XV. 36. 4Hi,—here —712. Eh, 
* practised.’ ze, SN RZ J. E is 
skilfulness in being bland. hy as in XI. 17, 8.

5. TIREE SOURCES OF ENJOYMENT ADVAN- 
TAGEOUS, AND THREE INJURIOUS. Here we have 
n with three pronunciations and in three

176

-3

22

v

CHE NS

-

| NOT Hes 
le re a

100

l

ir

N 
|

II 
nul 
EI 
mil

2 
E

Al N 
FL BE Fe HL 
T JA 
R K^

es

e

Til iN ttes | |

arn

y

1

speaking of the goodness of others; to find enjoyment in having 
many worthy friends: these are advantageous. To find enjoyment 
in extravagant pleasures; to find enjoyment in idleness and saunter- 
ing; to find enjoyment in the pleasures of feasting: —these are in- 
jurious.“

CHAPTER VI. Confucius said, There are three errors to which 
they who stand in the presence of a man of virtue and station are 
liable. They may speak when it does not come to them to speak; 
this is called rashness. They may not speak when it comes to 
them to speak ;—this is called concealment. They may speak with- 
out looking at the countenance of their superior;—this is called

blindness."

CHAPTER VIL Confucius said, “There are three things which 
the superior man guards against. In youth, when the physical

different meanings. The leading word is read

ngaou, low, 3d tone, ‘to have enjoyment in,’ as

in VI. 21. In ne Al, it is 98, music.“ The 
e ? °

two others are a, lõ, joy, ‘to delight in,’

ii ja am — iff = fil x i. e., it is a verb,ngaou, low, 3d tone, ‘to have enjoyment in,’ as

in VI. 21. In ne Al, it is 98, music.“ The 
e ? °

two others are a, lõ, joy, ‘to delight in,’

ii ja am — iff = fil x i. e., it is a verb,

to diseriminate; ‘to mark the divisions of.“ 
The idea is that ceremonies and music contain- 
ing in them the principles of propriety and 
harmony, the study of them could not but be be- 
neficial to the student himself, as having to ex-

emplify both of those things. ES. primarily, a 
* tall horse,’ often used for ‘proud’; hére,—vain 
and extravagant self-indulgence. . ‘feasting,’ 
including, says a gloss, ‘eating, drinking, music, 
women, Cc.“

6. TnREE ERRORS IN REGARD TO SPEECH TO 
BB AVOIDED IN THE PRESENCE OF THE GREAT, 
, according to Choo He, denotes here

ta man both of rank and virtue,’ ‘Without look. 
ing at the conntenance,—i e., to see whether 
he is paying attention or not.—The general 
principle is that there is a time to speak. Let 
that be observed, and these three errors will be 
avoided.

7. THE VICES WHICH YOUTH, MANHOOD, AND 
AGE, HAVE TO GUARD AGAINST. F ‘blood

and breath. In the rH |: XXI JU A 
fa N = all human beings. ge the

phrase is equivalent to ‘the physical powers.“

On ES . ‘not yet settled,’ the gloss in the

EEZLAZ 
du dL . K a 
TAE A 
ng 13,

wE N 
c WM A 
44H R 
AL BR 
Jud A

powers are not yet settled, he guards against .lust.

i

A

Ld

ANALECTS. 177

| 
3

D 
m

Eevee

v

(FH

v

hes

| ap Nos

[ d

FN St

N

qi 
O

ME B Ee ERES

M 
When he is

.strong, and the physical powers are full of vigour, he guards against

quarrelsomeness.

When he is old, and the animal powers are decay-

ed, he guards against covetousness.”

CHAPTER VIII.

in awe of the words of sages. 
2. “The mean man does not

and consequently does not stand in awe of them.

1. Confucius said, * There are three things of 
which the superior man stands in awe. 
ordinances of Heaven. He stands in awe of great men.

^

He stands in awe of the 
He stands1. Confucius said, * There are three things of 
which the superior man stands in awe. 
ordinances of Heaven. He stands in awe of great men.

^

He stands in awe of the 
He stands

know the ordinances of Heaven, 
He is disrespect-

ful to great men. He makes sport of the words of sages.”

Cuaprer IX. Confucius said,

“Those who are born with the

possession of knowledge are the highest class of men., Those who 
learn, and so, readily, get possession of knowledge, are the next.

Ai i ie— Jy ES Zz ny. *the time when they

are moving most.“ As to what causal relation 
Conf, may have supposed to exist between the 
state of the physical powers, and the several 
vices indicated, that is not developed. Hing 
Ping explains the first caution thus:—‘ Youth 
embraces all the period below 29. Then, the 
physical powers are still weak, and the sinews 
and bones have not reached their vigour, and 
indulgence in lust will injure the body.”

8. CONTRAST OF THE SUPERIOR AND THE 
MEAN MAN IN REGARD TO THE THREE THINGS OF 
WHICH THE FORMER STANDS IN AWE. X tii

according to Choo He, means the moral nature 
of man, conferred by Heaven. High above the 
nature of other creatures, it lays him under 
great responsibility to cherish and cultivate 
him. The old interpr. take the phrase to. indi- 
cate Heaven's moral administration by rewards

and punishments. The ‘great men’ are men 
high in position and great in wisdom and vir- 
tuc, the royal instructors, who have been raised 
up by Heaven for the training and ruling of 
mankind. So, the commentators ; but the 
suggests at once a more general and a lower 
view of the phrase.

9. FoUR CLASSES OP MEN IN RELATION TO 
KNOWLEDGE. On the Ist clause, see on VII. 
19, where Conf. disclaims for himself being 
ranked in the first of the classes here mentioned. 
The modern commentators say, that men aredifferenced here by the difference of their E: 
H „ or SL on which see Morrison's dict., 
part, II. vol I. char. "n B. in the dict, and 
by commentators, old and new, is explained by 
o 3h, ‘not thoroughly understanding. It

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

EH

-

zz 
E

EHR 
Bata Nit eS

ELO P 
ZUR

N

Syst 
eno

U

’ ay N. d IBM

Those who are dull and stupid, and yet compass the learning are 
another class next to these. As to those who are dull and stupid 
and yet do not learn ;—they are the lowest of the people."

CAPTER X. Confucius said, “The superior man has nine things 
which are subjects with him of thoughtful consideration. In regard 
to the use of his eyes, he is anxious to see clearly. In regard to 
the use of his ears, he is anxious to hear distinctly. In regard tó 
his countenance, he is anxious that it should be benign. In regard 
to his demeanour, he is anxious that it should be respectful. In 
regard to his speech, he is anxious that it should be sincere. In 
regard to his doing of business, he is anxious that it should be re- 
verently careful. In regard to what he doubts about, he is anxious 
to question others. When he is angry, he thinks of the difficulties 
his anger may involve him in. When he sees gain to be got, he 
thinks of righteousness.” :

CuaArrER XI. 1. Confucius said, “Contemplating good, and 
pursuing it, as if they could not reach it; contemplating evil 
and shrinking from it, as they would from thrusting the hand into 
boiling water :—I have seen such men, as I have heard such words.

HE WE REET > T

»

vH

1

ACE E EU

R Ls H . HH. J^ w

E E Fil. Zi Bj. ER ER

Au EJ 2 Eie FE ZZ,

RB BH iH E Hy pa | 
Au FL 
p — 
N.

EE

yi 
Ei

is not to be joined with E., as if the meining 11. Tne CONTEMPORARIES or CONFUCIUS

were— they learn with painful effort, although 
such effort will be required in the case of the 
10. NINE SUBJECTS OF THOUGHT TO THE su-

PERIOR MAN ;—VARIOUS INSTANCES OF THE WAY 
IN WINCH HE REGULATES HIMSELF. The con-PERIOR MAN ;—VARIOUS INSTANCES OF THE WAY 
IN WINCH HE REGULATES HIMSELF. The con-

cisencss of the text contrasts here with the 
verbosity of the translation, and yet the many 
words of the latter seein necessary.

COULD ESCHEW EVIL, AND FOLLOW AFTER GOOD, 
BUT NO ONE OFTHE HIGHEST CAPACITY NAD Ar- 
PEARED AMONG THEM, I. The two first clauses, 
here and in the next par., also, are quotations of 
old sayings, current in Confucius’ time, Such 
men were several of the sage’s own disciples. 
2 3E H. E, secking for their aims; ie. 
* #7] 2x UA » 85, 
meditating on them, studying them, fixing 
them, to be prepared to carry them out, as in 
the next clause. Such men among the anvients

is See Me TE | 
REID Est

— 
-I 
e

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

Ar i =

SE 
2 
È

d

4 
BAT 
PHS

EO

(Sg

`~ 
C 
v

SHER

v 
20 
v

T -AEn

v

EO 
NI T

Dy?

RID SEEEN

w | 
Ld 
~ 
Ww 
v 
v

i

v 
Ld 
a 
- 
v

v

=

v

SKI

a 
v 
wi 
Ld 
v

— 
e

WSS

: 
— 
NS E e sh

BROS d 
N 
STER

0 o U

2. “Living in retirement to study their aims, and practising 
righteousness to carry out their principles: —I have heard these 
words, but I have not seen such men.“

CuaPTER XII. 1. The duke King of Ts'e had a thousand teams; 
each of four horses, but on the day of his death, the people did not 
praise him for a single virtue. P‘ih-e and Shuh-ts'e died of hun- 
ger at the foot of the Show-yang mountain, and the people, down 
to the present time, praise them.

2. Is not that saying illustrated by this?“

| Cuapter XIII. 1. Chin K'ang asked Pih-yu, saying, “Have 
you heard any lessons from your father different from what-we have 
all heard?"2. Is not that saying illustrated by this?“

| Cuapter XIII. 1. Chin K'ang asked Pih-yu, saying, “Have 
you heard any lessons from your father different from what-we have 
all heard?"

2. Pih-yu replied, *No. He was standing alone once, when I 
passed below the hall with hasty steps, and said to me, ‘Have you 
learned the Odes?’ On my replying Not yet, he added, ‘If you 
do not learn the Odes, you will not be fit to converse with.’ I retired 
and studied the Odes. 
were the great ministers E-yem and T‘ae-kung. 
Such might the disciple Yen Hwuy have been,

but an early death snatched him away before

he could have an opportunity of showing what 
was in him.

par. of that chapter which might be explained, 
so as to harmonize with the sentiment of this. 
—The duke King of Ts'e,—see XII. II. Pih-e 
and Shuh-ts'e,—see VI. 22. The mountain 
Show-yang is to be found probably in the dep. 
12. WALT WITHOUT VIRTUE AND VIRTUE

WITHOUT WEALTH ;—THEIR DIFFÉRENT APPRE- 
erations.’ This chapter is plainly a fragment. 
As it stands, it would appear to come from the 
compilers and not from Confucius. ‘Then the 
24d par. implies a reference to something which 
has been lost. Under XII. 10, I have referred 
to the proposal to transfer to this place the last

of Bl 3l in Shan-se.

18. QConurucIUS' INSTRUCTION OF UTS SON NOT 
DIFFERENT FROM HIS INSTRUCTION or TUE DISCI- 
PLES GENERALLY, I. Ch'in K'ang is the Tszc-k'in 
of I. 10. When Confucius’ eldest son was born, 
the duke of Loo sent the philosopher a present 
of a carp, on which account ho named the child

180 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS,

ED — ZWF, fi

[ d 
a

22 
[d 
b

ERN 
PES 
A^

GE tN NO

O

| LBS 
mt | |

"nt

ms j Dt Non

[doe NIU

v

3 Sali

zuio-

ES

(ER

N 
Sige BE

i 
705 
zi 
ABER 
E eS

| 
2 
*

v

> 
Jd 
ERI 
WERE 
"CI 
BUE

U

1 pa 
H ARN ee AAERN 
PES 
A^

GE tN NO

O

| LBS 
mt | |

"nt

ms j Dt Non

[doe NIU

v

3 Sali

zuio-

ES

(ER

N 
Sige BE

i 
705 
zi 
ABER 
E eS

| 
2 
*

v

> 
Jd 
ERI 
WERE 
"CI 
BUE

U

1 pa 
H ARN ee AA

3. „Another day, he was in the same way standing alone, when 
1 passed, by. below t e hall with hasty- steps, and said to me, ~ Have 
you learned the rules. of Propriety?’ On my. replying ' Not, yet, 
he. added, If you do not learn the rules of Propriety, your character 
cannot be established.’ I then retired, and studi s the rüles of 
A 1 
.. * have heard bale these two things from him.” :

5 Chin K‘ang retired, and, quite delighted, nie iT askedjone 
thing, and I have g got three things. I haye heard: about. the Odes. 
have heard about the rules of Propriety. I have also heard that 
the superior man maintains a distant reserve towards his son.” 3

Quarter XIV.“ The wife of the prince of a State is called by, him 
FOÔ-JIN. ` She calls herself szaou t'una. The people of the State call

v

fi n. (the carp),.and afterwards gave him the , but there is no intimation to that effect, The

designation of. 44 fá fá. -F- Ar i E Ri different Ppa may be thus explained s

t 
Ff, ‘Have you also (i. e., as being his son) heard 3ti DA B p Jg ak ehe, who is her huns- 
different instructions?’ 2. On sy here, and | mee equal. The X in XX Ki is taken as 
— . = 0 16 
ne: next par., see on VII. 17. Before FB, Te to support, *to help, so that' that 
designation is equivalent to ‘helpmeet.’ GNE

means either ‘a youth, or ‘a girl.’ The wife

—sce VIII. 8. 4. The force of the § is to | modestly calls herself ^^ if. * the little girl.“ 
make the whole=‘ what I have heard from him The old interpreters take—most naturally

are only these two remarks. 5. Confucius is, 4 
. * as= X our prince's 
no doubt, intended by 3 y but it is best to # A A z ^ 
belp-meet, but the modern comm. take 
jecti = i ce tó the offic 
14. APPELLATIONS FOR THER WIFE OF A adjec tively, s= E, With réferenee PUMAprince. This chapter may have been spoken by of the wife to * preside over the internal economy 
-Confucius to rectify some disorder of the times, of the palace? On this view Á X A ip

here and below, we must supply a E. 3. nm?

translate it generally.

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS,

181

KEE DAE Ss En Se I a

Y Vd.

Zo # op A

E

her’ SHUN F00-JIN, ES to the people of idis States, they callher

K wa SEAOU KEUX. 
FOO-JIN. "m 1

* the domestic holp-mect? The i2 of

a prince spoke ‘of him by the style of A #4, 
‘my prince of small virtue. After that example 
‘of modesty, his wife was FRU to ) the people

*

H.

17 
LEE EX N 
1 Pim

) 
CHAPTER I. 1. 
‘would not go'to see him.

The people of other States also call her KEUN

of. other; “states, ‘our small prince of small 
virtue’ "The people of other States had no 
reason to imitate her subjects in that, and so 
they styled her—‘ your prince’s help-incet,’ or 
‘the domestic help- meet.

« 
1

[NJ 
5 n Em JL LE

„M g Ho wished to see Confucius, but Confucius 
On this, he sent a present of a pig to

Confucius, who, having chosen a time when Ho was not at home,

went to pay his respects à for the gift.

T

2. Ho said to Confucius, “Come, let me speak with you."

He met him, however, on the

He then

aed, " Can he be called benevolent, who keeps his Jewel in his bo-

'Heanisa OF — Boon. H t8 + 
. ‘Yang Ho, No. XVII. — As the last Book

commenced with the presumption of the Head 
of the Ke family, who kept his prince in subjec- 
tion, this begins with an account of an officer, 
who did for the head of the Ke what he did for 
the duke of Loo. For this reason— some simi- 
larity in the subject matter of the first chapters 
—this Book, it is said, is placed after the former. 
Tt contains 36 chapters.1. Coxpucrus' POLITE BUT DIGNIFIED TREAT- 
MENT OF A POWERFUL, BUT USURPING AND UN- 
WORTHY, OFFICER, 1. Yang Ho, known also as 
Yang Hoo ( J& was nominaly the principal 
minister of the Ke family, but its chief was 
entirely in his hands, and he was scheming to 
arrogate the whole authority | of the state of Loo 
to himself. He first appears in the Chronicles of 
Loo about the year B.C. 503, acting against 
the exiled duke Ch'aou ; in B. [n 504, we find

182 
Soh E 
[ese E

som, arid leaves his country to confusion ?" Confucius replied,

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

All 
— E

zz 
a5

O

=. 
»

SE eon 
= 
=

d No;"

„Can he be called wise, who is anxious to be engaged in public'em- 
ployment, and yet is constantly losing the opportunity óf being so?"

Confucius again said, ** No."

“The days and months are passing

away; the years do not wait for us." Confucius said, Right; Iwill

go into office.“ 
, CHAPTER

$ vo

II. The Master said, “By nature, men are nearly

alike; by practice, they get to be wide apart.” i "

Cuarrer III. The Master said, “There are only the wise of the 
highest class, and the stupid of the lowest class, who cannot be

77 
changed.

him keeping his own chief, Ke Hwan a prisoner, 
and, in 501, he is driven out, on the failure of 
his projects, a fugitive into Ts‘e. At the time 
when the incidents in this ch. occurred, Yang 
Ho was anxious to get, or appear to get, the 
support of & man of Conf. reputation, and 
finding that the sage would not call on him, 
he adopted the expedient of sending him a 
pig, at a time when Conf. was not at home, 
the rules of ceremony requiring that when 
a great officer sent a present to a'scholar, and 
the latter was not in his house on its arrival, he 
had to go to the officer’s house to acknowledge it.See the Le-ke, XIII. iii. 20. En is in the sense 
of Eg, ‘to present food, properly ‘before a 
superior, Confucius, however, was not to be en- 
trapped. He also timed di. as a verb) Hoo's 
being away from home (T7), and went to call 
on him. 2. 8 d FR- *deludes, confuses, 
--

his country,' but the meaning is only negative, 
leaves his country to confusion. ft, read 
k'e, up. 8d tone, frequently.“ I- Bit, 
all this is to be taken as the remark of Yang 
Ho, and a E supplied bofore H " JÈ Hid ; 
Hil, in the dict., and by the old interpreters, is 
here explained, as in the translation by ft. 
tto wait for.“

9. THE DIFFERENCES IN THE CHARACTERS OF, 
MEN ARE OIHIEFLY OWING TO HABIT. , it is

contended, is here not the moral constitution 
of man, absolutely considered, but his complex! 
actual nature, with its elements of the ma- 
terial, the animal, and the intellectual, by as- 
sociation with which, the perfectly good! moral 
nature is continually being led astray, The 
moral nature is the same in all, and though the 
material organism and disposition do differ in 
different individuals, they are, at first, more

nearly alike than they subsequently become.

In the st Sit» we read:—‘ The nature is the 
constitution received by man at birth, and is 
then still. While it has not been acted on hy 
external things, men are all like one another; 
they are 3 After it has been acted on by

, 
external things, then practice forms, as it were. 
a second nature. He who practises what ib 
good, becomes the superior man, and he who 
practises what is not good, becomes the. mean 
man :—men become JH Ri No doubt, it is

true that many—perhaps most—of the differ- 
ences among men are owing to habit.

8. ONLY TWO CLASSES WHOM PRACTIOE OAN- 
NoT CHANGE, This is a sequel to the last chapter 
with which it is incorporated in Ho An’s edition, 
The case of the F E would seem to be in- 
consistent with the doctrine of the perfect 
goodness of the moral nature of all men. Modern

CONFUCIANCONFUCIAN

-H 
AE 
GE 
ex HES

KII 
ESN

ES

w

AN 
xi 
z

=

. Bho 
AS 
d

Saber 
PTT

v

> ST ES S 
kee domat (Ne

BE Hj AA, 
AC Fo

CHAPTER IV.

ANALECIs. 183 
IE shyt (S75) 
r 
ME Ob

j iT X U

i

a 
(Y

SEH

N

v

v 
v

N 
‘<= 
—

|

f

zuo

Imm

T

Ko Fe

v 
4 
4

ir

N

A

v

1. The Master having come to Woo-hing, heard

there the sound of stringed instruments ‘and singing.

2. Well 
kill a fowl?’ 
3.

-pleased and smiling, he said, Why use an ox-knife to

Tsze-yew replied, “Formerly, Master, I heard you say,—

* When the man of high station is well instructed, he loves men; 
when the man of low station is well instructed, he is easily ruled.“

4. 
I said was only in sport." 
: CHAPTER V.

The Master said, “ “My disciples, Yen’s words are right. What

1. Kung-shan Fuh-jaou, when he was holding Pe,

and in an attitude of rebellion, invited the Master to visit him, who

Was rather inclined to go. 
2. 
Why must you think of going to

commentators, to get over the difficulty, say 
that they are the A AK E] and B HE . 
of Mencius, IV. Pt. I. x.

4. HOWEVER SMALL THR SPHERE OF GOVERN- 
MENT, THE HIGHEST INFLUENCES OF PROPRIETIES 
AND MUSIC SBOULD BE EMPLOYED. l. Woo- 
shing was in the district of Pe. Tsze-yew ap- 
pears as the commandant of it, in VI. 12. BY, 
* the silken string of a musical instrument, used 
here for stringed instruments generally. In the 
4t t we read, ‘The town was named Woo

€ Be. from its position, precipitous and favour- 
able to military operations, but Tsze-yew had 
been able, by his course, to transform the people, 
and make them change their mail and helmets 
for stringed instruments and singing. This was

what made the Master glad. 2. 3 (read han,

Tsze-loo was displeased, and said, “Indeed you cannot gol

see Kun g-shan f ?”

up. 2d tone) fig esmilingly.“ An ox-knife,’ a

large instrument, and not necessary for the death 
of a fowl. Conf. intends by it the high principles

of government employed by Tsze-yew. 3.up. 2d tone) fig esmilingly.“ An ox-knife,’ a

large instrument, and not necessary for the death 
of a fowl. Conf. intends by it the high principles

of government employed by Tsze-yew. 3.

I and ay A are here indicative of rank, 
and not of character. * are easily em-

ployed, ie, Katt Lb PAN rest in pntat

lot, and obey their superiors.” 4. —. — 
as in VII. 23, et al. Obs. the force of the final

H. only.’

5. THE LENGTHS TO WHICH CONFUCIUS was 
INCLINED TO GO, TO GET HIS PRINCIPLES CARRIED 
INTO PRACTICE. Kung-shan Fuh-jaou, called

also Kung-shan Fub-new ( 12 by designation 
PE i was a confederate of Yang Ho (ch. I)

N CTS. 
184 , CONFUCIAN ANALECTS

S 
yE 
IEE

ST HIE

Gt

v

AHSEN NRL 
E 
"

V. 
b 
v 
v 
wl 
E 
[ d

Sat 
MAE 
ERIN

o

zb 
RH DEN

ENS ATEN

V 
*

Bm 
oo

SO Sp ed

[ d

.-

>a 
Em 
5 
4 NEES TT

RÈ

[ d 
D 
Va 
v 
y 
[ d 
Ld 
[ d 
-

you 
= 
7a 
ut 
= 
~

mi

3. The Master said, “Can it be without some reason that he

has invited Me? If any one employ me, may I not make an eastern 
Chow?" i

CHAPTER VI. 1. Tsze-chang asked Confucius about perfect vir- 
tue. Confucius said, “ To be able to practise five things everywhere 
under heaven constitutes perfect virtue.” He begged to ask what 
they were, and was told, “Gravity, generosity of soul, sincerity, 
earnestness, and kindness. If you are grave, you will not be treat- 
ed with disrespect. If you are generous, you will win all. If you 
are sincere, people will repose trust in you. If you are earnest, you 
will accomplish much. If you are kind, this will enable you to em- 
ploy the services of others."

PD zu ; zi. iPD zu ; zi. i

and acc. to E'ung Gan kw, and the H iip The aR in fH 3t. and pr e emphatic. 
it was after the imprisonment by them, in com- | The original seat of the Chow dynnsty lay west 
mon, of Ke Hwan, that Fuh-jaou sent this invi- | from Loo, and the revival of the principles and 
tation to Conf. Others make the invitation sub- government of Wün and Woo in Loo, or even in 
sequent to Ho's discomfiture and flight to Tse. Pe, which was but a part of it, might make an 
2 » Yr: o 2 d is

See the RE te WAL, B. C. 500. We must | eastern Chow; so that Confucius would perform

conclude, with ‘I'sze-loo, that Conf. ought not to | the part of king Wän.—After all, the sage did 
have thought of accepting the invitation of such not go to Pe.

aman. 2. The first and last are the verb.

A= fit. K Zt B= There is no go- | 6. Five THINGS THE PRACTICE OF WHICH 
ing there. Indeed there is not.’ A DA A CONSTITUTES PERFECT VIRTUE, N XP, T 
LL FE ZZ A ‘why must there be going under heaven is simply==‘any where.’ ER 
to Z here—to) that (such is the force of po A .A. low 3d tone, is explained by 
Kung-shan?? 8. ge B Jk . — 4 is to Choo He by f ft. *to rely upon,' a meaning 
be taken here as referring expressly to Fuh- | of the term not found in the dictionary. Ses 
jaou, while its reference below is more general XX. I, 8.

CONFUCIÁN ANALECTS.

MEE

dc 
EB 
tem

~ 
IE 
REO

DIHS

> Waar 
end 
DAN

*

+k

D

b

ote

e f 5

ter was inclined to go.

Sper 
xxm

O

gau 
E

.

‘Cuaptrr VII. 1. Peih Heih inviting him

bm 
oo 
ot

de

Ss

P.

— —P 
zr 
&l

=

ON

v

EST

[ d

RN

ES 
Suk

2 
HANES

M 
We

[d

v

--

j Ba f. 
dus ss

im to visit him, the Mas-

[ d

AY)

2. Tsze-loo said, Master, formerly I have heard you say, When

„n man in his own person is guilty of doing evil, a superior man will

not associate with him.’ Peih Heih is in rebellion, holding pos- 
session of Chung-mow; if you go to him, what shall be said?

3. The Master said, “ Yes, I did use these words, But is it notnot associate with him.’ Peih Heih is in rebellion, holding pos- 
session of Chung-mow; if you go to him, what shall be said?

3. The Master said, “ Yes, I did use these words, But is it not

said, that, if a thing be really hard, it may be ground without be-

ing made thin? Is it not said, that, if à thing be really white, it

may be steeped in a dark fluid without being made black?

4, 
of being eaten?”

7, CONFUCIUS, INCLINED TO RESPOND TO THE 
ADVANCES OF AN UNWORTILY MAN, PROTESTS 
AGAINST MIS CONDUCT BEING JUDGED BY ORDIN- 
Any RULRS. Comp, ch. V; but the invitation of 
Peih Heih was subsequent to that of Kung-shan 
Fuh-jaou, and atter Conf. had given up office in

Loo. 1. 05 (read Peil) H. ih was commandant 
of Chung mow, for the chief of the Chaou family,

in the state of Tsin. 2. r5) N H E 3 
pa $ . he who himself, in his own per- 
son, does what is not good,’ N JA ee. to 
Kung Gan- kwö,. N A Hf EN. does not 
enter his state; acc. to Choo He, it

dt 718 ‘does not enter his party. There were

as et. 
two places of the name of Chung-mow, one be- 
longing to the state of Ch‘ing, and the other to

the state of Tsin > which is that intended 
here, and is referred to the present district of 2 
RA T Ad ; a

fe, dep. of 187, (& in Ho-nan province, 3.

^ Am I a bitter gourd! How can I be hung up out of the way

pa E is to be taken interrogatively, as in tho 
translation, Ping's paraphrase is AE N 
E. do not men way?? EX 3f 2 .^ Am I a bitter gourd! How can I be hung up out of the way

pa E is to be taken interrogatively, as in tho 
translation, Ping's paraphrase is AE N 
E. do not men way?? EX 3f 2 .

Is a thing hard, then,’ &c. y is explained 
‘black earth in water, which may be used to dye 
a black colour, The application of these strange 
proverbial sayings is to Conf, himself, as, from 
his superiority, incapable of being affected by 
evil communications, 4, Thig par, is yariously 
explained. By some, 2u N is taken as the 
name of a star; so that the meaning is— Am I, 
like such and such a star, to be hung up, &c?* 
But we necd not depart from the proper meaning 
of the characters. Choo He, with IIo An, takes 
N E actively :—' A gourd can be hung up, 
because it does not need to eat. But I must go 
about, north, south, east, and west, to get food," 
This seems to me very unnatural. The expres- 
sion is taken passively, as in the translation, in 
the H zia aud other works.

186 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 
444422 2x

2

Zr RY 4M

six words to which ar

S

MA

n 
RS 
=

4S

[d

E

t

E

* 
TANE

v 
RNO

TEKN 
E

o 
)

im

v

=

d-

N, 
.

ow

* 
d 
*

b

,

Jes 
d

w

S 
»

110

-

" 
Dis PEE

\ E 
Zn

5

*

Cuarrer, VIII. I. The. Master said, “ Yew, have you heard the

e attached six becloudings?“ Yew replied, 
„ have not.” ao a cy ug ` :

2. Sit down, and I will tell them to yous I i n |

8.. wt ere is the love of; being benevolent withont ithe love of 
learning iz-the beclouding liere leads tor a, foolish.sinplicity.: There 
is the love of knowing without the love of Jearming ;+-the beclouding 
‘here leads to dissipation of ind.. There is the love of being sincere 
"without the loye of learning;—the beclouding here leids to; an 
injurious disregard of consequences. There.is the love of straight- 
forwardness without the love of; learning z tlie beclonding , here 
leads to rudeness, ^ There is the loye of boldness, without the Joye

" ^

j l e. drif ' e te : . ‘ . à" ^

j l e. drif ' e te : . ‘ . à

of learning j—the :eclouding here Leads, th, insubordination, ht

is the love of firinnéss without a 
avagant con

. um 
ing here leads to extr 
2t dara 7 53 7 
1 'B. Krow.enes, ACQUIRED ny. LEARNING, ts! 
NECESHARY TO THE COMPLETION OF VIRTUF, BY 
“PRESERVING THE MIND FROM BEING BEOLOUDED,! 
11 1 = = 112. 
AER ae dai 3 
a n 1 LU An fà 
charade bers; see the Qi BH: They are, there- 
45 . ; ] TE aj 
‘ford,’ the benevolence, knowledge sincerity, 
"pUuightifórdardnéss, boldness, and' fitmness, 
mentioned helow, afl virtnes, but yet cach, when 
pursued without discrimination, fending tos be- 
" sg" ue XE rr € p t 
gloud the mind, | =k „to ever und 
Screen,; the primary meaning of it it eii to pe 
* -t i wily uU 
2h ¥A, “small plants.’ 2. —'sit down,’ 
Tsze-loo had risen, acc. to the rules of propriety, 
to give his answer; see the Le-ke, I. Pt. I. iii. 
21; and Conf. tells him to resume his seat. 3. I

*

— 
— 
=

M 
„ "The'six áre six

re 
love of learning jr-the becloug- 
uet.

A EA RUM II e . L 
ivé iere’the paraphedse of the H EX vn tlie 
first virtue and itg-begloucing, which may il- 
lustrate the manner in which the whole para- 
graph! is devéloped In all matters, there is a 
perfectly fight and unchangeable printiple, 
‘which Men:bughticarefully fo study, till they 
have thoroughly examined and apprehended it. 
Then their actions will be without error, and 
their virtue may be perfected’ For instance, 
loving ig what rules in benevolence. It is cer- 
tainly a beautiful virtue, but if you only set 
yourself to love men, and do not care to study 
“tp understand the principle of benevolence, then 
your mind will be beclouded by that loving, and 
you will be following a man into à well to save 
him, so that both he and you will perish. Will

not this be foolish simplicity ?*

el 1 T

CONFUCIAN ‘ANALECTS:

N12

Wind

J

RUO

NS 
zy 
Bl S

z

RNO

jen

SEFF

N 
— 
o 
v

d 
a

O

=~ Ii! 
IDE

=: 
Jd

PEU um

e

-

onot this be foolish simplicity ?*

el 1 T

CONFUCIAN ‘ANALECTS:

N12

Wind

J

RUO

NS 
zy 
Bl S

z

RNO

jen

SEFF

N 
— 
o 
v

d 
a

O

=~ Ii! 
IDE

=: 
Jd

PEU um

e

-

o

N 1 EL WA = 
bs 4 A o xd BL [s 
iU zr Tm] EE egy N 2 /] Ei 
lin Ie mm A S gx K J re 
AERAN 2 A 
TU EL Ux 5 abe eh Zu Al eR 
ri di AM. JH]. * BA 26 P

‘| Carter IX. 1. The Master säid,“ “My dune why | do you 
hot study the Book'of Poetry? — 5| "^ 1 
2. “The Odes serve to stimulate the mind. E ar

3. “They may be used fot purposes of ehe : 
|! 4r “They teach thel artiof sociability, “7 ! „nr 
5. „They show how to regulate feelin gs of resch hot: Le

6. From them ‘you learn the more inimédiate EA ‘OF Servings 
a father) ‘and the remoter one of sbry ing 'ond’s prince! *

7% 7F Fronr'tliem we become largely acquainted with the ne amnes of 
bird beasts, and plants.“ * m. i 
f OnrPTEÀ X.! The Master iid ito! "Pih 
‘self to thé Chow- nan, and the !Chaou-nà The man, Y ho has

“plot "udi iéd the Chós-hani' and the, Cliaou- at AS like, one w hó stands 
"with His face right against a wall, Is he not So?" "` 
` u Tita! ve Si 
9. BENEFITS DERIVED FROM e qne | are the titles of the first two Books in the Na-

Book pi Pqiirry. 1. A gs V. 21; VIII. tional. Songs, or first. part of the Sho-king. For 
8. I translate E nere b. y the Book ot Poetry; the meaning of the titles, sec the She-king, 1.4.

E thek dä tolare bee ivit and I. ji. They are supposed to inculcate: im- 
ecause the lesson is suppos 0 ve been g z 
"after Conf, had pb be his compilation of portant lessong about pertonal virtue aud family

d. e 
„the Odes. The Ki is that, as in XI. 9. 1, et al; government. , Chao He. explains A by Bh, 
The descriptions in them of good and evil may ‘to learn,’ ‘to study. It denotes the entire 
have this effect. 3, ‘Their awarding of praise and | mastery of the studies. (for p | 2 Z 
pläme may showa man his own character.’ 4. ĩTheir exhibitions of gravity in the midst of 1 8 Z is imperative, the $ at the end, not being 
! gure may ‘have this effect. ESA asin XV. 21: interrogative. IE D] A m 3L is for IE 
i g} "d nj II. II. In stich ac situatjon,

"Their blending of pity and earnest desire w ith re i 
n 
onc'tnmnihot adeance a step, ‘not’ sce any thing.

! próofs may tedch how to regulate our rese 
t 
ments. 6. Y grasses aud, trees Sylints 
E ^ i I have added-H'Is he Bot 407” to bring out the 
force of the fl —This chapter in the old edi-

generally, 
tions, is incor porated witli the preceding one.

RA io" Jou gite yoni-

10. THEIMPORTANCE OF STUDYING THE Cuow- 
NAN AND Cuaou-nan. Chow-ndu and Chaou-nan

CONFUCIAN’ ANALECTS,

188 
Tal EE Ht, = Jg EE 
— (Ee ( Bp Vet 
FoF Hob F FT 
BK

e

O

be

v 
[E 
E - 
Qi as 
v

a

MON

SSNS

Ld 
v

SSE NN 
m

Nd

ENI;

K

Lm 
SHY 
Sir EH Li

Ld 
Ld

Lj

; 
„ E. aly

ini 
A

Carrer XI. The Master said, ‘It is according'to the rules of

propriety,’ they say.——' It is according to the rules of propriety,’ they 
say. Are gems and silk all that is meant by propriety? ‘It is Music,’ 
they say. It is Music,’ they;say. Are bells and drums all that is 
meant by Music?” p I A ae

CHAPTER XII. The Master said, “He who puts: on an! appear- 
ance of stern firmness, while inwardly he is weak, is like one of the 
small, mean, people; yea, is he not like the thief who breaks thtough;- 
or climbs over, a wall?" ne LE

CHAPTER XIII. The Master said, “Your good careful people ‘of 
the villages are the thieves of virtue.” b. T LM 
| CHAPTER , XIV. The Master said, 4 To tell, as we go along, what

. $.« p - 2 77 + 
we have heard on the way, is'to cast away our virtue.“ . i 
D . t T ato . tal 1 : 
11. IPIS NOT THE EXTERNAL APPURTENANCES d (16. CównTBSTMENT WITU VULGAR WATS“ AND 
WHICH CONSTITUTE PROPRIBIY; NOWTHE SOUND OF! | VIEWS 1NJURIÓUS ‘TO VIRTUE. Sve the benti-

INSTRUMENTS WHICH CONSTITUTES MUSIC, ' ne

zhi 7 43 nd H. ‘as to what isINSTRUMENTS WHICH CONSTITUTES MUSIC, ' ne

zhi 7 43 nd H. ‘as to what is

called propriety.” The words approach the 
quotation of a common saying. So ijs . 
Having thus given the common views ef proprii 
ety and music, he refutes them in tho questions

that follow, E and pe being present to the 
mind as the expressions of respect and harmony.

19. THE- MEANNESS OF PRESUMPTION AND 
PUSILLANIMITY CONJOINED. is here not the

countenance merely, but the whole outward ap-

pearance, ay A is explained by fan R. 
und the latter clause shows emphatically to 
whom, among the low, mean, people, the in- 
dividual spoken of is like, —a thief, namely, 
who is in constant fear of being detected.

, menit of this, chapter explained and expanded by

Mencius, VII. Pt, II. Xxxvil.7, 8. JR ? low, 3d 
tone, the same as . See the dict., char. A · 
: MNT 
122 as in XIV. 46, though it may be tritnslated 
A 374 p T eg 
here, as generally, by the term ‘thief.’ 
14. SWIFTNESS TO SPEAK INCOMPATIBLE WITH

Tus Cuntivation OF Viktus. It. is to be ünder4 
stood that what has been heard contains some 
good lesson. “At once to be talking of it with- 
out revolving it, and striving to practise it, 
shows an indifference to our ovn improvement,

Eis ‘the.way’ or road.“ PE the same 
way, a little farther on. The glossarist on Ho

An’s work explains {la 2 E as meaning

tis what the virtuous do not do? But this id 
evidently incorrect: .

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

H 
m

e 
X 
4 
*- 
E 
w

e

Note HN mise) 
(eas

(NS ERR

Nae 
\ 
E

-

qua 
z]

v

e 
on 
(Na

e 
1

ie RN:

4

PERN

SEIIS 
SRN-

O

- 
DRO

Ld

|| 
S 
;

|i:

3

À

&.

G 
E

RNY 
SN 
neg

E

: * 
1. The Master said, „There are those mean

serve one's

re | D

&

CHarrer XV. 
1, creatures! How impossible it is along with them to 
prince! i ' ,

2. “While they have not got their aims, their anxiety is how to 
get them. When they have got them, their anxiety: is lest they 
should lose then i, !2. “While they have not got their aims, their anxiety is how to 
get them. When they have got them, their anxiety: is lest they 
should lose then i, !

3. „When they are anxious lest such things should be lost, theré 
‘is nothing to which they will not proceed.” ' 
.. Cuarrer. XVI. I. The Master said, “ Anciently, men had three 
failings, which now perhaps are not to be found.

2. „The high-mindedness of antiquity showed itself in a disre- 
ard of small things; the high-mindedness of the present diy shóws 
itself in wild license. The stern dignity of antiquity showed itself 
in grave reserve; the stern dignity of the present day shows, itself 
in, quarrelsome: perverseness.

. Nd 2 * 1 
itself in sheer deceit;

15. THe CASE OF MERCENARY OFFICERS, AND

now tr 18 3MPOSSIBLE TO SERVE ONE'S PRINCE

ALONG with THEM. 1. fit F 1 * * 
. : - UY 
. Bid AK. i e, ‘together with. Pid i

E *

ie EE Ku BL F. K dp 
deep-felt lamentation on the unfitness of such 
persons to be associated with.“ So, the tit F. 
But as the remaining paragraphs are all occupi- 
ed with describing the mercenaries, we must 
understand Confucius’ object as being to con- 
demn the employment of such creatures, rather 
than to set forth the impossibility of serving

The stupidity- of antiquity showed 
itself in straightforwardness ; the stupidity of the present da

y shows

; ‘ 
id 4 
n

with them. 2. The x here, and in p. 3, ate 
all to be understood of place and emolument , 
16. THE DEFECTS OF FORMER TIMES BROOME 
VICES IN THE TIME OF Coxrucius. I. y. 
‘bodily sickness,” here used metaphorically for

‘errors,’ vices. p EZ T (woo),— per-

haps there is the absence of them.' The next 
par. shows that worse things had taken their

place. 2. That ki is only ‘a disregard of 
smaller matters,’ or conventionalisms, appears

from its opposition to v BA, which has a more

intense siguilication than in ch. 8. M as in

190 CONFUCIAN ANADECTS.

“genh 
W 2 
ASN 
L AAA 
N 
n+ 
OTfrom its opposition to v BA, which has a more

intense siguilication than in ch. 8. M as in

190 CONFUCIAN ANADECTS.

“genh 
W 2 
ASN 
L AAA 
N 
n+ 
OT

eea — 
— N 
FS 
NT 
= ` 
EREN 
IRES 
ANAT 
yl. t 
REED 
(Na

: EE r Sia: T ff: 
Jt X BX d? i b €4 17 e à fe 
ELIT X

l XVII. lie Master said Find Words and an .

ing app ndi e'séldom associated, with. virtue.“ A m

Pafin AM «1 
tors ru The ‘Master said; “ 1 hate the manner in whig 1 
paie takes away the lustre of yermillion. I hate. the, way in which 
the Soflgs of C ing’ cünfdurid the music of the ! Gnå. I hate“ those 
who with their shiatp' micht, Gverthrow I kin gdoms and families“ M

Baur osul) 2 frin * Pota] w

10 RE ABE "The Master aid, é ‘J, would. prefer of speak 
ABBA; „if pian sort state hs gd in rt sr 000 eel 
2. Tsze- kung said, “If you, Master, do not speak, what shall i we,

your disciples, liaveto'record?" » Mo u a v

lg. Phe Master said, A Does Heàvdti ‘Speak? "The four" Seaso ans 
pursue their courses, and all things Are! conteinially) Mn redi 
but, docs. Heaven say anything? am DTE

SUL ds ITA (pov tt Lu ja m t 
*. 21, also bak an intenser, heating) Af. | aga, ede où IX. 14.7; E is a common des 
*an angular corner,’ which cannot be impinged signation for ‘a state,’ the Ig]. or kingdótà or 
oe without causing pain. It is used for

‘purity, r podesty, , but-.the meaning here ap. the. Prince, embracing the . ‘ families,’ of his 
pears 1o be that given in the > translation, great officers. (s (tert ees NT E 
anyi J perg. Tak AcTioxs or Conructs' weit Les! 
«Man Kr Pepsin 4 io res 1% l Sins AND LAWS, "AND NOT 118 ` WORDS MERELY, 
18  Covrooris' INDIGNATION AT ThE way IN | Such is the scope of this ch. „according to Choo

n 
1 „17

WHICH THE WRONG, OVERC AME THE RIGHT. X He and his school, ‘The older commi! say that

a ibis a caution to inen to. pay attention to thelt 
yd f Rise X. 6, 2. X is lere as “a Conduct rather than to their words. This inter;a ibis a caution to inen to. pay attention to thelt 
yd f Rise X. 6, 2. X is lere as “a Conduct rather than to their words. This inter;

‘correct’ colour, though it is not among thé 
2 en ; pretation is far-fetched, but, op the other hand, it 
five Suel, golours mentioned, inthe note, there: is not easy to defend Conf. from: the charge of

d Ihave here translated purple. Black presumption in ebmparing himself tó Heaven. 
and carnation mixed,’ it ig said, ‘give. x. ’ ‘The | 31 X fu z = HE, © Does Heaven Apcalk,'= 
songs or sounds of Ching, —sge XV. 10. -*Lhe | better than What does Heaven any ? ...

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS:

TEF f ah VI fa

\

elk

d

Bk

AE eee 
a hae P vd TONA i : 
* N L

8 “SKY . P ’ FL 
e EJ oc JS HL à F 
- e j 2 2t 
28, UOS nj ài m " i 
| Curarrer, XX. ,; Joo. Pei wished to see Confucius, but Confucius 
declined, on the- ground ; of, being sick, to,see him, When the

bearer of this messagé went out at the door, n: took his harpsichord, 
intl sarig to it; in order that Pei might hear him “

4 
4 44

[ix

tage P HR Jod. nn ND Ws f ty — 41 * 
Ciiarrer XXL" L., Nang Go asked about the threójyears! mourn; 
ing for parents, saying that; one year was, long enough. "WW A

2. “If. the superior man," said he,, *abstains for three years 
from the observánces'of/ propricty, those observances will be quite 
lost. If for three years he abstains from music, music will bé 
ruined. "I E E l E :

3. “Within a year, the old grain is exhausted, andi the new 
grain has sprung up, and, in procuring fire by friction, we go,throygh 
all the changes of wood for that purpose, I, After. a, complgte year, 
the mourning may stop.“ "S uu) tros nl Mid cea ed deu

4. The Master said, “If you were, after a year, to eat good rice, 
and wear embroidered. clothes, wqulq you feel at ease?” 1, J. should,” 
replied Go... i TC

"T t

di Li Jj

7h che f i 95 4 ' kt

111 11 i. d"T t

di Li Jj

7h che f i 95 4 ' kt

111 11 i. d

' Pe] : PEN 
20. ‘Wow Coxridius covrp hE xor AT. Hor, tus serviced of an interhunciis. '! He für a 
AND YET GIVE INTIMATION TO THE VISITOR OF HIB | % % ue bl, NA. + 
-Presexcy, Qf Joo Pei little is known, He was || —see XIV. 47. Ttřanslate the last Z by Aint, 
a man of Loo, and had at one time been in | put it re

iu

attendance on Confucius to receive his instruc- 
tions, There must have been some! renson 
some fault in hin—why Conf. would hot see 
‘him on the occasion in the text, and that he 
might understand that it was on that account, 
and not that he was really sick, that he declined 
jid visit, the sage acted as we mre told. But 
. what was the necessity for sending a false 
message in the first place? In the notes to the

f nd. III. 1, it is said that Joo Pei’s fault 
was in trying to sce the master without using

fers generally tò the préceding sentence, 
and might be left untranslated. 
, 4 ^ zz; 4400] !

| 21. Tur PERIOD OF THREE YEARS! MOURNING 
FOR PAYENTS ut: MAY- NOT ‘on “ANY AdcoUNT ng 
SHORTENED ; THE RH OF IT. ], We must

| understand a E either, before —, or, à"] 
prefer, before Hg. which is read ke, up. lst töne,

the same as AF, XIII. 10. On the three years’

mourning, see the 31st hook of the Le-ké. Nom-

| inally extending to three years, that period

— 
—

KARDE `

MER] | [ae

es 
d 
-— 
F

ME

clu

v

Xe

eae RT || at

[ d

tH 
T 
Z 
x

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

H 
H. 
T

—

BAN Naat N

v

JS

v

su Eu

d

v 
Kaai

CEN

— ID

E

^ Y ip 
. 
S VG 2 E 
A 4 A A IS LA 
eas hoe ee) 
J M cy 38x JA 
5. The Master said, “If you can feel at ease, do it. But a'su-

perior man, during the whole period of mourning, does not enjoy 
Pleasant food Which he may eat, nor derive pleasure from music 
which he may hear. He also does not feel at ease, if he is comfort- 
ably lodged. Therefore he does not do what you propose, But now, 
yuu feel at ease and may do it.” {6. Tsae Go then went out, and the Master said, “This shows 
Yu's want of virtue, It is not till a child is three years old that 
it is allowed to leave the arms of its parents, And the three years 
mourning is universally observed throughout the empire. ‘Did Yuf 
enjoy the three years' affection for his parents? 2"

comprehended properly but 25 months, and at

most 27 months. 2. Ak. ga XA a .

—Tssze-go finds hero a reason for his view in 
the necessity of ‘human affairs.“ 3. I. NA

X ES = Z le finds here a reason for

his view in ‘the seasons of heaven.’ D% means 
either ^a piece of metal, —a speculum, —with 
which to take fire from the sun, or ‘a piece of 
wood, with which to get fire by friction or ‘bor- 
ing’ di. It has here the latter meaning. 
Certain woods were assigned to the several sea- 
sons, to be employed for this purpose, the elm 
and willow, for instance to spring, the date and

almond trees to summer, &c, J Stu * 
ME N. K SF

X X. In boring with the WOK to 951 fire, 
we have changed from wood to 7 through

thé ones appropriate to the four seasons.’ 4.

Coarse food and course clothing were appropri- 
ate, though in varying degree to all the period 
of mourning, Tsze-go is strangely insensible

to the home-put argument of the Master ·

18 is to be understood here as RLRE

‘the most excellent grain.” The are des,

monstrative. 7 7. T Zz X f= th, responds

to all that has gone before, and forms a sort‘ of 
apodosis. Conf. added, it is said, the remarks

in this par. that they might be reported to Tsae.

Go, lest he should ‘feel at ease’ to go and do as 
he said he could. Still the reason which the 
Master finds for the statute-period of mourning 
for parents must be pronounced puerile.

-

—

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

i 
Bel

V 
v 
v 
v 
v 
v 
v 
Ld

o 
le; 
d 
2 
P

bu 
E 
v

«3H 
SO Nils

3

TUER

v 
— 
z 
v

v

URK

Seno]

v

WH

3

TN 
nV

Eres haan 
NOH TN

*

TEAR

See 
S:

eth 
N 
X 
ix

=

il

mH 
m

O

— 
zm 
ha

7

Ld

SD 
"m 
N

al And 
$3 
Hrabu 
E 
v

«3H 
SO Nils

3

TUER

v 
— 
z 
v

v

URK

Seno]

v

WH

3

TN 
nV

Eres haan 
NOH TN

*

TEAR

See 
S:

eth 
N 
X 
ix

=

il

mH 
m

O

— 
zm 
ha

7

Ld

SD 
"m 
N

al And 
$3 
Hra

rs 
(Y j

3 
S

4 o

CnaprER XXII. The Master said, “Hard is the case of him, 
who will stuff himself with food the whole day, without applying his, 
mind to anything good! Are there not gamesters and chessplayers ? 
To be one of these would still be better than doing nothing at all.”

Cnarter XXIII. Tsze-loo said, Docs the superior man esteem 
valour?” The Master said, “The superior man holds righteous- 
ness to be of highest importance, A man in a superior situation, 
having valour without righteousness, will be guilty of insubordina- 
tion; one of the lower people, having valour without righteousness,

r

will commit robbery,"

Cuapter XXIV. I. TS RUNE said, „Has the superior man 
his hatreds also?" The Master said, “He has his hatreds. He 
hates those who proclaim the evil of others, He hates the man who, 
being in a low station, slanders his superiors, , He hates those who

23. VALOUR TO BE VALUED ONLY IN SUBOR? 
DINATION TO RIGHTEOUSNESS 5 ITS CONSEQUENCES 
APART FROM THAT. The first two are

22, THE HOPELESS CASE OF GLUTTONY AND

IDLENESS. pita JA BEY. 16. 18 and

Zr are two things. To the former I am unable

to giver name; but see some account of it quoted 
3 2 2 B Ri y 
in the fE fer in loc. Zi M to play at chess,

of which there are two kinds,—the Tit, 
ployed with 361 pieces and referred to the 
emperor Yaou as its inventor, and the A. Tit.

or ivory chess, played with 32 pieces, and 
having a great analogy to the European game. 
Its invention is attributed to the first emperor 
of the Chow dynasty, though some date its

origin a few hundred years later. ^ xL—

x refers to jit Zt Eb for . as in XI. 
15, 1l.

to be understood of the man superior in virtue. 
The third brings in the idea of rank, with 
: yeeorigin a few hundred years later. ^ xL—

x refers to jit Zt Eb for . as in XI. 
15, 1l.

to be understood of the man superior in virtue. 
The third brings in the idea of rank, with 
: yee

Ah A as its correlate. 
D 
24. CHARACTERS DISLIKED BY CONFUCIUS 
AND Tszxe-KuNG. 1. Tsze-kung is understood 
to have intended Confucius himself by ‘ the su- 
perior man.“ Ty is here in the sense of class.“

V 1. 4 a ocn

m Wis = fi „ ‘men of low station. 
Tilt THE A

In 7f F f RE P, the force of FR

is to oppose mnm to e, ‘hatreds, to “loves.”

2, Hing Ping takes J H as the nominative

` J ^ rs, 
194 CONFUCIAN ANALECT

EUN A Be 
JL Za v [zx M :

E

EM

`

B

v 
ks 
Ae 2

HERDER SS 
PP

oa A 
Ne

EIH 
win. 
gus

jj Sree 
88 —

N 
D 
v 
v 
E d

wE 
Hsc

[ d

EASRA 
3 
i

f

EE NS 
NAE >

2 
M Gag 
c 
J

NC 
BET 
REX

~

B I 1

have valour merely, and-are unobsérvant of propriety- He hates 
those who are forward and determined, and, at the same n of con- 
tracted understanding." i 
2. The Master then inquired, “ Tsze, have you.also your hatreds oP 
Tsze-kung replied, J hate those who pry out matters, and ascribe 
the knowledge to their wisdom. I haté {those who are, only ‘not 
modest, and ‘think that they are valorous. I hate those who-make 
known secrets, and think that they are straightforward.“ |, , ua 
CHAPTER XXV. The Master šaid, Of tall people, girls and 
servants are the most difficult to behave to. If you. are familiar 
with them, they lose their humility. If you maintain a reserve tor 
wards/them; they are discontented.” fot ER 
‘Coapreri XA, VI. The Master said, «When, a. man at forty t is the 
object of dislike, he will always continue what, he is."

x, 
ai 
E

iN 
P

2 14 | 
to EH pe He went on to say, J, Tsze, also, &e. force ot: uf. ‘only; is as indicated jin, n?

The modérn conin., however, more oo translation.x, 
ai 
E

iN 
P

2 14 | 
to EH pe He went on to say, J, Tsze, also, &e. force ot: uf. ‘only; is as indicated jin, n?

The modérn conin., however, more oo translation.

understand T ‘the Master, he nom. to 26. Tux, DIFFICULTY OF IMPROVEMENT . 
ADVANCED YEARS, ; According to Chinese views 
and supply another El before 45M » at forty a man. is at his best in every way. Ats

25. Tue DIFFICULTY HOW TO TREAT Coxcy- | tet He. we must understand ++ H yt 
15 a 1 
BINED ANB: SERVANTS, ** Y does not méan idis Ds of dislike to the superior man? ' A

women. generally, bat girls, Z. e., concubines, ap K= : H $% iU. ‘he will end in this’

4 
ye in phe samą way, is here boys, à, e., servants, | —Youth is doubtless the Season fot improve»

ment, but the sentiment of the chapter is too 
$ ‘to iourish,’ “td keep/'==to behave to; "Phe | broadly stated. , e : 
P t! à

ad

CONFUCIAN -ANALECTS

4

BOOK XVIII. WEI TSZE..

vy ‘ a 1 
$ » — 2 x

Hails E y EEE 
ailh 7 : ——* [ze]

CHAPTER I.

ifi pop ot 
i * "a 3.9;

1. The viscount of Wei withdrew ‘from the court.

lav

The wisedunt of Ke became, a slave 20 CMoꝛb. Pe-kan remonstrated

with hi and didd.

2. Confucius said 
of virtue.“ 
Cuarter II.

?

MA t

à uo cud . 
“The. Yin dynasty possessed these: three men 
^ ' 1 t

i , n

potato!

Huy of Lew-hea being chief criminal judge, was

thrice ‘dismissed frourhis office. Some one said to him, “ Is it not yet 
tinle for you, Sir, to leave this?" He replied, „Serving men in an 
upright way, where shall I go to, and not experience such'a thrice- 
repeated dismissal? If I choose to serve men'in a crooked’ Way,

what neéessity is there for me to leave the country: of my parents?” 
E dar t e i

; DE ZR" Lgwhat neéessity is there for me to leave the country: of my parents?” 
E dar t e i

; DE ZR" Lg

HrapiNo OF runs Boon. N F 4 + 
Nin The'viscotint of Wei—No. XVIII. This 
Book, consisting of only eleven chapters, tréats 
of various individuals famous in Chinese his- 
tory, as eminent for the way in which they dis- 
charged their duties to their sovereign, or for 
their retirement from public service. It com- 
mendrntes nlsd some of the worthies of Confu- 
chis! days, who lived in retirement rather than 
Be in office in so degenerate times. The object 
of'the'whole is to illustrate and vindicate the 
eourse of Confucius himself. i i

“4. Tur viscovxré of Wet axp KE, AND Pe- 
KAN:—THREE WORTHIES OF THE YIN DENASTY. 
1. Wei-tsze and Ke-tsze are continually repeat- 
ed by Chinese, as if they were proper names. 
But Wei and Ke were the names of two small 
states, presided over by chiefs of the Tsze, or 
fourth, degree of nobility, called viscounts, for 
want of a more exact term. They both appear 
to have been within the limits of the present

Shan-se, Wei being referred to the district of ,

YF, dep. we E aud Ke to 175 Il. dep. Xr

5 / . ; foc. 
1 The chief of Wei was an elder brother

(by a concubine) of the tyrant. Chow, the last 
emperor of the Yin dynasty, B. C. 1153-1122, The 
chief of Ke, and Pe-kan, were both uncles of the 
tyrant. The first, sceing -that -xemonstrancté 
availed nothing, withdrew from court, wishing 
to preserve the sacrificed. of their family;' amid 
the ruin which he saw Was impending. The 
second was, thrown into prison, and, to escape 
death, feigned madness. He was used by Chow 
as a buffoon. ,Pe-kan, persisting in his remon- 
Strances, was put barbarously to death, the 
tyrant having his heart torn out, that he inight

see, ho said, a gnge's heart., The in *

Z is explained by E Pr. *his place. Its 
reference may also be to Xs. the tyrant him-

self. On y x M. comp. FA x SE. V.

7, 3, et al.see, ho said, a gnge's heart., The in *

Z is explained by E Pr. *his place. Its 
reference may also be to Xs. the tyrant him-

self. On y x M. comp. FA x SE. V.

7, 3, et al.

2. Ilow Hwoy or L£W-HEA, THOUGH OFTEN 
DISMISSED FROM OFFICE, STILL CLAVE TO HIS 
country. Lew-hea Hwuy,—see XV. 13. The

office of the E [ijf] is described in the Chow-

196 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 
ED. a) 47 -pE GS "y 
zm T mr. Exi MÀ

a jit. TN

Cnarter III. The duke King of Ts‘e, with reference to the mahner 
in which he should treat Confucius,- said, “I cannot treat ‘him as 
I would the chief of the Ke family. I will treat him ina. manner 
between that accorded to the chief of'the Ke, and that given to 
the chief of the Ming family." He also said, “I am old; I cannot 
use his doctrines." Confucius took his departure. i n)

Cnarter IV. The people of Ts‘e sent to Loo a présént'of female

musicians, which Ke

was held. Confucius took his departure. Y 
1. The madman of Ts'oo, Tsëč-yu, passed by

CuarrER V. | 
fucius, singing and saying, *Oh

le, XXXIV. 3. He was under the Ej] N. or 
minister of Crime, but with many subordinate 
magistrates under him, =, up. 3d tone, as in

V. 19, XL 5. We may translate ll, was 
dismissed from office, or ‘retired from office? 
A Some remarks akin to that in 
the text are ascribed to Hwuy’s wifé, It is 
observed by the commentator Hoo agp. that

there ought to be another paragraph, giving 
Conf. judgment upon Hwuy's conduct, but it 
has been lost. ‘

3. How CONFUCIUS Lert T's'E WHEN THE 
DUKE COULD NOT APPRECIATE AND EMPLOY HIM, 
It was in the year B. C. 516, that Confucius 
went to Tse. The remarks about how he should 
be treated, &c., are to be understood as having 
taken place in consultation between the duke 
and his ministers, and being afterwards report- 
ed to the suge. The Ming family (see II. 5) 
was in the time of Conf, much weaker than

thé Ke. The chief of it was only the ^ fil.

| lowest noble of Loo, while the. Ke was tho.thé Ke. The chief of it was only the ^ fil.

| lowest noble of Loo, while the. Ke was tho.

highest. ^ Yet fot the duke of Ts‘e to treat 
Conf. better than the duke of Loo treated the

wan reccived, and for three days, no court

E 
SM 
DANN 
: Con- 
* ER E 430 
Fone! Oh Fuxd!“ How’ is your 
it 7 
chief of the Ming family, was not dishonouring 
the sage. We must suppose that! Conf. left 
Tote, because of the duke’s concluding remarks. 
4. How CONFUCIUS GAVE ur OFFICIAL SER- 
vice iN Loo. In the 14th: yéar' of the-duke 
Ting, Conf. reached the, highes pojnt,of his 
official service. , He was minister of crime, nnd 
also, aec. to the general opinion, neting préntier. 
He effected in a few months a wonderful renova- 
tion of the State, and the neighbouring countries 
began to fear that under his administration, 
Loo would overtop and subdue them all To 
prevent this; the duke of Ts‘e sent a present to 
Loo of fine horses and of 80 highly accomplish- 
ed beauties. The duke of Loo was induced to 
receive these by the ndvice of the head of the 
Ke family, Ke Sze (Hp), ‘or Ke Hwan. The 
sage was forgotten; government was tégleoted, 
Confucius, indignant and sorrowful, withdtew 
from offico, and for a time, from the country 
too. md as in XVII. 1, 1. 7 Ns the people 
of Ts'e is to be understood of, the duke and his 
ministers. 4 
5. CONFUCIUS AND TIE MADMAN OF Ts‘00, WHO 
BLAMES HIS NOT RETIRING FROM THE WORLD. I. 
"Te'ét-yu was the designation of one Luh Tung

r

45

.e 
t,t 
4

S 
SIT

rae 
e

1885

E 
2

O

r 
T**4

+

o

D.

v

s

maA

— 
FARAR

PI

E 
sees

‘onl

M 
| Pl gn Jt, 
Di il. 
* o^ No

HI 
=

| virtuc/dezenerated ! 
ture maybe provided against. 
your vain pur suit. 
_-Soverpment.”

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS,

at

Se San 
UNERA NRE

n 
- *

197

dd

Es

g 
at

e

TRS

oo

gie

EZ 
i xs ag

v

ARS 
2

e

Ora?

Ain

A

i

2

O

UNER

o

la 
im 
Z a|

RON 
885

z

SNCONFUCIAN ANALECTS,

at

Se San 
UNERA NRE

n 
- *

197

dd

Es

g 
at

e

TRS

oo

gie

EZ 
i xs ag

v

ARS 
2

e

Ora?

Ain

A

i

2

O

UNER

o

la 
im 
Z a|

RON 
885

z

SN

As to the past, reproof is useless; but the fu- 
Give up your. vain pursuit. 
Peril awaits those who now engage in affairs of

Give up

| 
Confucius alighted and wished to converse with him, but 
pon yu ‘hastened away, $0 that he could no£ talk with him.

CHAPTER VI. 1. Ch ang-tseu.

"t

„% enquire for the ford.

2. Ch'ang-tseu said, “Who is 
„iage there?

'szé-loo told him, “It is „Kung Kew.“ 
"Kung K*ew of Loo?" asked he. Ves,

and Ké&-neih were at work i in the

field together, when Confucius pasted by them, and sent Tsze-loo

he that holds the reins in the'car- 
“Ts it not 
was the reply, to which

’ the ‘other rejoined, .“ He knows the, ford. v 
3. Tsze-loo then enquired of Kéé-neih, who.said to him, “Who

'aro you, Sir?"

m 3) a native of Ts'oo, who feigned him- 
' elf mad, £o escape being importuned to engage 
in publie service, There are several notices of

; him in the $f ee i in loc. It must have been 
1 about the year, B. C. 489, that the incident in

the text occurred. By tho Fung, his satirizer or 
adviser intended Confucius; seo LX. 8. The

three m tin the song are simply expletives, 
Pauses for the voice to help out the rhythm. 4H,

to overtake, generally with reference to the 
"past, but here it has reference to the future.

In the dict, with reference to this passage, it is

He answered, “I am Chung Yew.” “Are you

explained by K. ‘to come up to,’ and $e *to 
save, r to provide against.

6. CONFUCIUS AND THE TWO RECLUSES, Ün'ANG- 
TSEC AND KEE-NEIH ; WHY HE WOULD NOT WITH- 
DRAW FROM THE WORLD. 1. The surnames and 
names of these worthies are not known. It is 
supposed that they belonged to 'Ts*oo, like the 
hero of the last chapter, and that the interview 
with them occurred about the same time, The 
designations in the text are descriptive of theircharacter aud the long Rester QH. E: IE

mK H» and ‘the firm Recluse qu 4 
bum iE) What kind of feld labour is

1

e

8 "CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

4 
*

Ld 
ER 
O

I

AT 
SS 
Q

e

NS

v 
t

\ 
d

i

HSE 
ID 
3

O

TEEN 
exa 
NASN

peus 
Slo Nai

wis £ 
cu B A, 
vay Yl . 
. | 4 JL T 
KE the ih GE A 
QN : ’ » 1. AJ

g

Sz

EBENEN

SIH

MT 
fv v.

aH 
PSTN

I 
gimp NE

m

’ 
* = Y : JES. 
VE EN by Ra ACE evo 
L| » 
H 2 B ga REGLAS e 
m i iv? 1 * 1 
not the disciple of K‘ung K‘ew of Loo?” -asked the! other. “T° 'ani;"

replied he, and then Keé-neih said to him; / Disorder, like a swell⸗ 
ing flood, spreads over the whole empire; andUwho: is he that will 
change.it for you? Than follow ‘one who’ "merely withdraws 
from this one and that one, had you ‘not! better ‘follow those who 
have withdrawn from the world altogether?" |, With this he fell: ‘to 
covering up the seed, aud proceeded with his work, without stopping. 
4. Tze loo went and reported their remarks, when his master 
dbserved with a sigh, It is impossible to: associate with birds and 
beasts, as if they were the same with us. If I associate not with! 
thesé people, —with mankind, with whom shall I associate? If right

principles prevailed rough the SIDES, there would be no use: ‘for 
i "u n.

me, to change its state.“ i

hore denoted by A cannot be determined. 2. 
an

fucius, which 5 elicited the inquiry. In

„ he who holds the carriage, =

. as in the transl; Iti is supposed 
it prs the remarkable appearance of Con-

* n

YVES zs he; d. e., he, going about every

where, and seeking to 5 employed, ought to 
% Td

know the ford. 3. Y X P.the

speaker here probably pointed to the surging! 
waters before them, for the ford to cross which -| w 
the travellers were asking. Translating liter- 
ally, we should sa swelling and surging,

euch! id all the empire? H rfj. ii =,

der BE AGRE cm eom v.n N

atl

an implement for drawing the soil over the 
| seed? It may have been a hoe, or a rake. 4euch! id all the empire? H rfj. ii =,

der BE AGRE cm eom v.n N

atl

an implement for drawing the soil over the 
| seed? It may have been a hoe, or a rake. 4

is e here AFi ‘class.’ E z. JE HAL ít

il. im ate Bit cH ri am not to associate

: with the class oft these men, i. e., , with mankind,’

with whom am I to associate? T I E nsab-. 
ciate with birds and beasts. E N fil

i 
-RH Hi it is said, cae would, 
b no use. Literally, 1 should, not, have for, 
om to change the state of the. empire. The 
use of Fi in this parágráph is remarkable. 
‘Tt müsf mean ‘his Master’ and not ‘the Master." 
The compiler of this chapter can aia have 
been a disciple of the sage. Yt:

>

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.'

— 
2 
e

EN PES i Pay

eh

x 
—ꝓ 
o * 
BN

‘sl

RENE

ø

NS:

Naot 
Fos

[ d

a

o

AEE

S810

RRNA

3p

m) 
2110 
E

ATS

Oss

xe

Ld

te a a 
TESS KRESS

oe

O

AD

D

AFD 
U

rA 
XIX 
sn 
38 
m

s ; V

KE pu . & Ht |

Criarrer VII. 1, .Tsze-loo, following the Master, happened to 
fall behind, when he met an old man, carrying, across his shoulder 
ona. staff, a basket for weeds. ' ;Tsze-loo said to him, “Have you seen 
"my master, i Sir.!“ The old man replied, ‘Your four limbs are 
unaccustomed to toil} you cannot distinguish: the five kinds of 
grain: who is your níaster?" With this! he planted his staff in’ 
the ground, and. proceeded, to weed. ' d 2 sud 
‘ 3251. Tsze-loo joined his hands across his breast; and stood ‘before 
FVV DEN | 3 
^ 9. The old man kept Tsze-loò to pass the night in his house, 
killed. a, fowl, prepared millet, and feasted him. He also’ introduced 
to him his two sons... . 5 vrs T eM Te 
\4.. Next day, Tsze-loo went on his way, and reported his adven-' 
tur. ‘The Master, said, “ Hes am use; and sent Tsze-loo back‘ tol 
sce him again, but, when he got to the place, the old man was göne. !

2

RE 
ok 
>2

RE 
ok 
>

T. .'TSzE-LOO'S RENCONTRE WITH AN OLD MAN, 
A RECLUSE: IIS VINDICATION OF IIIS MASTERS 
Gornsh. This incident in this chapter was pro- 
bably-fenrly contentporaneous with those which 
occupy the two previous ones. Some say that

the old wan belonged to She, which was a part

qf Tsoo. 1.4%, as in XL 22, Ni i

pw Ais used for ‘an old man,’ as early ag

in ther Yih-king.- ia., 
colnes to have that signification, I have not dis- 
Lad, FE | ' 
covered. PE is simply called by Choo tipy 
2r *& bamboo basket. The Bt X. defines 
it aa in the translation 2 2 py pe.

tho. four bodies, à. e., the arms and legs, the

four limbs of the body, The five, grains? are; to all the orderly intercourse betwe

. How the phrase

| 5, N. . BE, and Jot rice, millet, pan- 
nicled millet, wheat, and pulse. But they are 
sometimes otherwise enumerated. We have, 
also ‘ the six kinds,’ ‘the eight kinds,’ ‘the nine 
kinds, and perhaps other classifications, 2. 
Tsze-loo, standing with his arms across his i 
breast, indicated his respect, and won upon the

;old man. , 3, £r tsze, low. 3d tone, “enters 
tained,’ ‘feasted.’ The dict. defines it with thiev

meaning, YA E H Å, ‘to give food toi

people. 5. Tsze-loo is to be understood aa here

speaking the sentiments of the Master, and viti- "

: S ld 
dicating his course, 8 2 iy keiers , 
to the manner in which the old man had intro. , 
duced his sons fo him the, evening before, aad

jud and

200 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 
= [£3] 
fi DAS 5 
VIUA: b — S ’ 2 y UE

E

v

v

(SN

UR

Beh wae 
HA RR TK

S 
—

č

~

Wa

zl 
zug

= 
SB

II zt 
=

e 
EET

| mw | APN

lets 
N 
td

f

. P, N. 8

v 
. w

8 
*

v

SEMEN SH

v

HANS

v

E 
FANS RAN RE

X

An ps

5. Tsze-loo then said to the family, “Not to take office is not ,

righteous.

If the relations between old and young may not, be,v 
. w

8 
*

v

SEMEN SH

v

HANS

v

E 
FANS RAN RE

X

An ps

5. Tsze-loo then said to the family, “Not to take office is not ,

righteous.

If the relations between old and young may not, be,

‘neglected, how is it that he. sets aside the duties that should be 
observed between sovereign and minister? Wishing to maintain his 
personal purity, he allows that great relation to come to confusion. 
A superior man takes office, and performs the righteous duties 
belonging to it. As to the failure of right: principles to make, 
progress, he is aware of that.”

Cuarter VIII. I. The men who have retired to privacy from 
the world have been Pih-e, Shith-ts‘e, Yu-chung, E-yih, Choo-chang,

Hwuy of Lew-hea, and Shaou-léen. 
2. The Master said, “Refusing to surrender their wills, or to 
submit to any taint in their persons;—such, I think, were Pih-e

and Shuh-ts'e.

young, which he had probably seen in the fam-

ily. nf H 1 ZH refers to the old 
man, but there is an indefiniteness about the

Chinese construction, which does not make it so 
personal as our he.“ So Confucius is intended

by af do though that phrase may be taken 
in its general acceptation. Ile is aware of 
that; —but will not therefore shrink from his 
righteous aervice.

8. CONFUCIUS JUDGMENT OF FORMER WOR- |

THIES WHO HAD KEPT FROM THE WORLD. HIS 
OWN GUIDING PRINCIPLE. I. y% R.— re- 
tired people.’ R is used here just as we some- 
times use people, without reference to the rank 
of the individuals spoken of. 'The 4h t

quotes, upon the phrase, from the EA Yo

to the following effect ~—‘ W. here is not thequotes, upon the phrase, from the EA Yo

to the following effect ~—‘ W. here is not the

Th, of seclusion, but is characteristic of men of 
large souls, who cannot be measured by ordin- 
ary rules. They may display their character by 
retiring from the world. They may display it 
also in the manner of their discharge of office.” 
The phrase is guarded in this way, I suppose, 
because of its application to Hwuy of Lew-hen, 
who did not obstinately withdraw from the 
world. Pih-e, and Shuh-ts'e,—seo V. 22, Lu-

chung should probably be Woo CRL)-chung. 
He was the brother of T‘ne-pih, called Chung-

yung dp E and is mentioned in the note 
on VIII. 1. He retired with T‘ae-pih among 
the barbarous tribes, then occupying the coun- 
try of Woo, and succeeded to the chieftainey of 
them on his brother's death. — *E-yih aud 
Choo-chang, says Choo Ile, *are not found iu

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

no 
e 
m

[d

1395

wè 
" 
A 
cu ` 
* 
= 
ud mo 
B

O

3. “It may be said of Hwuy of Lew-hea, and of Shaou-léén, that 
they surrendered their wills, and submitted to taint in their persons, 
but t is e words corresponded with reason, and their actions were such 
as men are anxious to sce. This is all that is to be remarked in them.

4. “Tt may be said of Yu-chung and E-yih, that, while they hid 
themselves in their seclusion, they gave a license to their words, but, 
in'their persons, they succeeded in preserving their purity, and, in

„their retirement, they acted according to the exigency of the times,

à. “I am different from all these. I have no course for which I 
am prédetermined, and no course against which I am predetermined."

CuaPTER IX, 1. The grand music-master, Che, went to Ts‘e. 
Kan, the master of the band at the second meal, went to Ts‘oo. Leaou, 
the band-master at the third meal, went to Tsíae, Keuth, the band- 
master at the fourth meal, went to Ts‘in.2. Fang-shuh, the drum-master, withdrew to the north of the 
river. Woo, the master of the hand-drum, withdrew to the Han.

the, xing and chuen de fib. See, however, | that in this respect they were inferior to Hwuy

z RT = PE NN 
the Af Er: in loe. From a passage in the and Plano léen, who 2 nm 115 He, se 
Le-ke, XXL i. 14, it appears that Shaou. note on IX. 29. 5. Confucius' openness to act 
Jéen belonged to one of the barbarous tribes ner uie s 5 is to be understood 
on the east, but was well acquainted with, and propricty: WAYS 2D SU 8 ination to right and 
observant of, the rules of ee particular- 9. THE DISPERSION OF THE MUSICIANS OF LOO, 
ly those relating to mourning. 3. The aH. at The dispersion here narrated is supposed to

the beginning of this paragraph and the next, have taken place in the time of duke Gae,

; 1 ; ither = When once Confucius had rectified the musie 
are very perplexing. As there is neither 8H of Loo (IX. 14), the musicians would no longer

nor 8 5, th be assisting in the prostitution of their art, and 
f E at the beginning of par 5, the F E 80, as the disorganization and decay proceeded, 
of p. 2 must evidently be carried on to the end | the chief among them withdrew to other coun-

af the chapter. Commentators do not seem to 
= tries, or from society altogether, 1. = 
have felt the difficulty, and understand aH to 3 K 7 j j ! X X. 
š . facetaf the chapter. Commentators do not seem to 
= tries, or from society altogether, 1. = 
have felt the difficulty, and understand aH to 3 K 7 j j ! X X. 
š . facet

be in the 3d pets.— He, i, e, the master, said,’ i ans to N. p. EA grand, paige 
"S ‘The music-master, e, see . 15. . 
&c. I have made the best of it I could. {i= The princes of China, it would appear, had 
a AI x X 2 , the order and series of | music at their meals, and a separate band per- 
don formed at each meal, or, possibly, the band. 
righteousness and principles.’ . AMZ might be the same, but under the superinten- 
ithe thonzh d solicitudes of ;.| dence of a separate officer at each meal. The 
IB, ke the thoughts and solicitudes of men's | emperor had four meals a day, and the princes 
hearts.’ 4. ‘Living in retirement, they gave a | of States only three, but it was the prerogative 
license to their words, —this is intended to show | of the duke of Loo to use the coremonies of

CONFUCI

z

ANALECTS.

ra N. 
. ß EH N

= 
de

eS

v

v

—

v

ESS

zao

v

zay IER

*

v 
* 
e

ta

SSE

[ d

EINER 
Nn

ad 
ww 
v 
r 
v

N 
Nr

KART tS

[ d

m

v

DOGS

o

A

E

—

—

V

aR

A

Ri at

w

O O

Yang, the assistant music-master, and Seang, master of the musical 
stone, withdrew to an island in the sea.”

CHAPTER X. The duke of Chow addressed his son, the duke of 
Loo, saying, “The virtuous prince does not ‘neglect. his relations. 
He does not cause the great ministers to repine at his not employ- 
ing them. Without some great cause, he does not dismiss from 
their offices the members of old families. He does not seek in one 
man talents for every employment."

CuarrER XI. TO Chow belonged the eight officers, Pih-ti, 
Pih-kwóh, Chung-tüh, Chung-hwüh, Shuh-yay, Shuh-hea, Ke-suy, 
and Ke-kwa. ) i

the imperial houschold. Nothing is said here of 
the handmaster at the first menl, perhaps he- 
cause he did not leave Loo, or nothing may 
have been known of him. 3. The River’ is ofthe imperial houschold. Nothing is said here of 
the handmaster at the first menl, perhaps he- 
cause he did not leave Loo, or nothing may 
have been known of him. 3. The River’ is of

course tlie Yellow River.“ According to the yu

As Tg Sth, art LVI, the expressions A N

In A N yh. are to be taken as meaning 
simply,— lived on the banks of the’ Ho, the 
Han.“ The interpr. in the translation is after 
Choo He, who follows the glossarist Hing Ping. 
The ancient emperors had their capitals mostly 
north and east of ‘the River, henee, the coun-

try north of it was called In Pg: and to the

south of it was called wy Rh. I don't see,

however, the applicability of this, to the 
Han, which is a tributary of the Yang-tsze, 
flowing through Hoo-pih. 5. It was from Séang

that Confucius learned to play on the .

10. INSTRUCTIONS oH CHOW-KUNG TO HIS SON 
ABOUT GOVERNMENT; A GENEROUS CONSIDERA-

TION OF OTHERS TO BE CHERISHED. JA A-

sce VI. 5. The facts of the case seem to be thut 
the duke of Chow was himself appointed tó the 
principality of Loo, but being detained at court

by his qui to tbe young emperor M. he gent 
his son 1 H $e. here enlled ‘the duke of Loo,’

to that state. as his representative, 
contains here the ideas both of rank and virtue. 
li, is read in the up. 2d tone, with the sama

meaning as UJ. Choo He, indeed, seems to 
think that Bl], should be in the text, but we 
have he in Ho An, who gives K‘ung Gan-kwó's

interpretation fit 5 th, H f X 
Zz x A t Z x Hii is to change.

He does not substitute the relatives of other men 
E 2 A V 
in the room of Lis own relatives.’ yA.—here

FA. ‘to use,’ ‘to employ. E Ti. e XIII. 
; i m

25.

CONFUCIAN

11. Tun FROITFULNRSS OF TIIR EARLY TIME 
OF TUR CHOW DYNASTY IN ABLE OFFiCEnS,. The

eight individuals mentioned here (ure said to 
have been brothers, four pairs of twins by the 
same mother. This is intimated in their names,eight individuals mentioned here (ure said to 
have been brothers, four pairs of twins by the 
same mother. This is intimated in their names,

the two first being 1 H or primi, the next pair 
4h or seca the third M. or terti, and the

ANALECTS. 203

last two A. One mother, bearing twins four

times in succession, and all proving distinguish- 
ed men, showed the vigour of the early days 
of the dynasty in all that was good.—It is dis- 
puted to what reign these brothers belonged, nor

: N t 8 <= 
is their surname ascertained. iE. 385. 2g.

A ze scem to be honorary designations,

` BOOK XIX. TSZE-CHANG.

HE

i 
CnaPren I. Tsze-chan

duty, seeing threatening

said,

anger,

“The scholar, trained for public 
is prepared to sacrifice his life.

When the opportunity of gain is presented to him, he thinks of right-

eousness,

CHAPTER II.

In sacrificing, his thoughts are reverential. 
ing, his thoughts are about the grief which he should feel. 
man commands our approbation indeed.”

Tsze-chang said, When a man

In mourn- 
Such a

holds fast virtue,

but without secking to enlarge it, and believes right principles, but 
‘without firm sincerity, what account can be made of his. existence

or non-existence ?"

IlnApING OF THIS Boox.—F- ie p +

Ju. "Tsze-chang—No. XIX. Confucius docs 
‘not appear personally in this Book at all. Choo

le says :—‘ This Book records the words of the 
disciples, Tsze-hea being the most frequent 
speaker, and Tsze-kung next to him. For in 
the Confucian school, after Yen Yuen there 
was no one of such discriminating understand- 
ing ae T'sze-kung, and, after Tsing Sin no one 
of such firm sincerity as Tsze-hea? The dis- 
ciples deliver their sentiments very much after 
the manner of their master, and yet we can 
discern a falling off from him.

J. Ts2e-cliANne’s OPINION OF THE CHIEF AT- 
{RIBUTES OF THE TRUE SCHOLAR. ＋.—see

ote on XII. 20, 1, Tsze-chang there asks 
*

Confucius about the scholar-officor. fo,J. Ts2e-cliANne’s OPINION OF THE CHIEF AT- 
{RIBUTES OF THE TRUE SCHOLAR. ＋.—see

ote on XII. 20, 1, Tsze-chang there asks 
*

Confucius about the scholar-officor. fo,

—4he danger is to be understood as threatening 
his country. Hing Ping, indeed, confines the 
danger to the person of the sovereign, for 
whom the oflicer will gladly sacrifice his life.

RH is the same as N KA in I. 7. B, 
is not to be explained by IE. as in im B. 
The combination B has occurred before, 
and--4]t, N, in I. 14. It greatly intensides

the preceding H] $

2. 'TSZE-CHANG ON NARROW-MINDEDNESS AND 
A HESITATING FAITH. Hing Ping interprets 
this chapter in the following way :—'If a man 
grasp hold of his virtue, and is not widened and

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS,

mss

ao 
a

RM E

O

M Sed

*

on

tS 
Dn

wv 
v

n rax os 
Th

LN

Q

v

ENN 
Sz

W -d gs SON

pu 
EK

NIN

\ 
"

A M. Hf Ff HE. E Hl. Z. fads

Cudprer III. The disciples of Tsze-hea asked Tsze-chang about 
the principles of intercdurse. Tsze-chang asked, What does Tsze- 
hea say on the subject?" They replied, ** Tsze-hea says: Associate 
with those who can advaptage you. Put away from you those who 
cannot do so. Tsze-chang observed, “ This is different from what 1 
have learned. The superior man honours the talented and virtuous, 
and bears with all. He praises the good, and pities the incom- 
petent. Am I possessed &f great talents and virtue?-—who is there 
among men whom I will not bear with? Am I devoid of talents 
and virtue?—men will put me away from them. What have we 
to do with the putting away of others?" :

CHAPTER IV, Tsze-hea said, Even in inferior studies and em- 
ployments there is something worth being looked at, but if it beCHAPTER IV, Tsze-hea said, Even in inferior studies and em- 
ployments there is something worth being looked at, but if it be

. U 
Master,’ Ze see V. 16. In IHN H 
FF, the F is taken differently by the old in- 
terpreters and the new. Hing Ping expounds? 
If the man be worthy, fit for you to have in- 
tercourse with, then have it, but if he be not 
worthy,’ Kc. On the other hand, we find: 
If the man will advantage you, he is a fit per-

gon ( f x ); then maintain intercourse

enlarged by it, although he may believe good 
Nut it 13 he cannot be sincere and generous. 
ut it is better to take the clauses as coordin-

ata, and not dependent oneach other. With Bt 
{h X 9), we may compare XV. 28, which 
suggests the taking actively. The two last

elauses are perplexing. Choo He, after Gan- 
kwó apparently, makes them equivalent to- is

of no cohsideration in the world? di = x

' l De 
AE HR HD.

8. THE DIFFERENT OPINIONS OF T'SZE*HEA AND 
TSZE-CHANG ON THE PRINCIPLES WHICH SHOULD 
REGULATE OUR INTERCOURSE WITH OTHERS. On 
the disciples of Tsze-hea, see the 4f 3, 
in loc. It is strange to me that they should begin 
their answer to Tsze-chang with the designa-

tion F HB. instead of saying * F. our

with him,’ &c. This seems to be merely carrying 
out Confacius’ rule, I. 8, 3. Choo He, however, 
approves of Tsze-chang’s censure of it, while 
he thinks also that TSsze-chang's own view is 
defective.—Paou Heen says.—‘ Our intercourse 
with friends should be according to Tszechea's 
rule; general intercourse according to Tsze- 
chang’s.’

4. 'ISzE-HEA'S OPINION OF THE INAPPLICABI+ 
LITY OF SMALL PURSUITS TO GREAT OBJECTS, - 
Gardening, husbandry, divining, and the heal- 
ing art, are all mentioned by Choo He as in-

*

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

f

Tak

W- HFF Hb

dE 
AGS

- 
2 
T

D-

Ld

hit

F

*

E-

HR

v

: YAS 
m 
EREE

ib

PE

205

RI

* 
or 
v 
[d

Ett

SSN 
4

*

0

EE

4 
* 
f: 
Ld

S mu 
SA

1

S

S 
mH*

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

f

Tak

W- HFF Hb

dE 
AGS

- 
2 
T

D-

Ld

hit

F

*

E-

HR

v

: YAS 
m 
EREE

ib

PE

205

RI

* 
or 
v 
[d

Ett

SSN 
4

*

0

EE

4 
* 
f: 
Ld

S mu 
SA

1

S

S 
mH

attempted to carry them out to what is remote, there is a danger 
of their proving inapplicable. Therefore, the superior man does not

practise them.”

CHAPTER V. Tsze-hea said, He, who from day to day recognizes 
what he has not yet, and from month to month does not forget 
what he has attained to, may be said indeed to love to learn."

ey CHAPTER VI.

Tsze-hea said, There are learning extensively,

and having a firm and sincere aim ; inquiring with earnestness, and 
reflecting with self-application :—virtue is in such a course,”

CHAPTER VII.

sze-hea said, Mechanics have their shops to 
dwellin, in order to accomplish their works,

The superior man

learns, in order to reach to the utmost of his principles.'

[ , 
stances of the A^ ids ‘small ways, here in-

tended, having their own truth in them, but not 
aynilable for higher purposes, or what is be-

yond themselves. ES is- imperative and em- 
phatio =j fE NR ‘push them to an extreme.’ 
‘What is intended by i, is the far-reaching 
object of the Keun-tsze, to cultivate himself 
and regulate others Y „lower 3d tone, ex- 
plained in the dict. by fig ‘water impeded.—

Ho: An makes.the sJy . to be X Ji

1 2 2 
* strange principles,’ 
3. Tum INDICATIONS OF A: REAL LOVE OF 
LEARNING :—BY 'TSzk-HEA. | . 
6. How LEARNING SHOULD BE PURSUED To 
LUAD TO VIRTUE ¿—BY TszE-HBA Kung Gan-

kwó explains AA as if it were Be to remem 
ber! On Yj RH mnm xr JH. the 4l E 
sys Hr f. N N=. Hr R. 
EB 5 WU Pd . ‘what are inquired 
about are things essential to one’s self; what

are thought about are the important personal 
duties.“ Probably it isso, but all this cannot

be put in & translation. On . . comp.

VII. 28, 4. 4— TE H H. —comp. VIL. 15; 
L . - * 
XIII. 18. , 
7. LEARNING IS THE STUDENT'S WORKSHOP :be put in & translation. On . . comp.

VII. 28, 4. 4— TE H H. —comp. VIL. 15; 
L . - * 
XIII. 18. , 
7. LEARNING IS THE STUDENT'S WORKSHOP :

—BY¥ T388-HEA. kit is here Er A pk H 
m Z Wy, ‘a place for the display and sale

of goods,’ A certain quarter was assigned an- 
ciently in Chinese towns and cities for mecba-

d

906 ‘CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 
7 3 E è * B ^. 
Ea py . rt 2 Wy E 
Fee. LA. x —

ati 
oe 
T

ej

m 
Xm

v

IRENTS

E

S

. 
2

HDE

S Hah

gil

RRMA DU

Xm 
—

x

Pd

CHAPTER VIII. Tsze-hea said, 
his faults."

SNR 
+ 
bah

Olly

Q 
Nr 
wr 
w4 4 
[ d 
[ d 
g

d-

7b. ZR

SVE 
Ve

v

-

RB | ap NOW en

Ld 
v

à 
“The mean man is ‘sure 'to

02

OSS, 
l

CuaPTER IX.  Tsze-hea said, “The superior man undergoes

three changes. Looked at from a distance, he appears stern; when 
approached, he is mild; when he is heard to speak, his language is 
firm and decided." 7 ‘| 
CHAPTER X. Tsze-hea’said, “ The superior man, having obtained 
their confidence, may then impose labours on his people. If hé 
have not gained their confidence, they will think that he is oppress- 
ing them. Having obtained the confidence of his prince, he mày

then remonstrate with him.

If he have not gained his confidence!

the prince will think that he is vilifying him." i 
CHAPTER XI. Tsze-hea said, When a person does not br Hir

thé boundary-line in the great virtues, he may pass and rep

the small virtues.”

nics, and all of one art were required to have 
their. shops together. A son must follow his 
father’s profession, and, sceing nothing but the 
exercise of that around him, it was supposed 
that he would not-be led to think of anything 
else, and become very proficient in it. .

.8. GLOSSING HIS FAULTS THE PROOF OF THE 
MEAN MAN :—BY 'TszrE-HEA. Lit, ‘The faults 
of the mean man, must gloss,’ i. e., he is sure to.

gloss, pe in this sense, a verb, low. 8d tone..8. GLOSSING HIS FAULTS THE PROOF OF THE 
MEAN MAN :—BY 'TszrE-HEA. Lit, ‘The faults 
of the mean man, must gloss,’ i. e., he is sure to.

gloss, pe in this sense, a verb, low. 8d tone.

9. CHANGING APPEARANCES OF THE SUPERIOR 
MAN TO OTHERS:— BY 'IszE-HEA. Tsze-hea 
probably intended Confucius by the Keun-tsze, 
but there is a general applicability in his lan-

guage and sentiments. Z, Bil .it. 
“look towards him, approach him. — The des-

cription is about equivalent to our ‘fortiter in 
ra, suaviter in modo,’

s it in 
i mo

10. THER IMPORTANCE OF ENJOYING CONFIDENCE 
TO THE RIGHT SERVING OF SUPERIORS AND OR- 
DERING OF INFERIORS :—BY TSZZR-nHA. Choo He

gives to {= here the double meaning of being 
sincere,’ and ‘being believed in.’ The last is 
the proper force of the term, but it requires the 
possession of the former quality.

ll. THE GREAT VIRTUES DEMAND'THE CIITEP 
ATTENTION, AND THE SMALL ONES MAY BE SOMEW 
WHAT VIOLATED:—BY 'TszE-HEA. The senti« 
ment here is very questionable. A different 
turn however, is given to the chnpter in the 
older interpreters. Hing Ping, expanding Kung 
Gan-kwó says :—' Men of great virtue never go. 
beyond the boundary-line; it is enough for 
those who are virtuous in a less degree to keep 
near to it, going beyond and coming back.’ 
We adopt the more natural interpretation of

*

.

t2 
ce 
J

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

zi

A. E BH du Pih di, Hl Ny a a 
F . Ef. A EI H T, fils 
K* An e BR Wi is Ur OUI 
ME WF E Esp fal n A, A 
= pf

yu,

88 
Nn

O

JAPE

FE 
EEVEE 
CREEL SEM 
MUT A EE 38, A, Hl E. h

, Cuarrer XII. I. Tsze-yew said, “The disciples and followers of 
Tsze-hea, in sprinkling and sweeping the ground, in answering and 
replying, in advancing and receding, are sufficiently accomplished. 
But these are only the branches of learning, and they are left ignorant 
of Mer is essential. —How can they be acknowledged as sufficiently 
taught ; !2. Tsze-hea heard of the remark and said, Alas! Yen Yew is 
wrong. According to the way of the superior man in teaching, what 
departments are there which he considers of prime importance, and 
delivers? what are there which he considers of secondary impor- 
tance; and allows himself to be idle about? But as in the case of 
plants, which are assorted according to their classes, so he deals with 
his disciples. How can the way of a superior man be suck as to make 
fools of any of them? Is it not the sage alone, who can unite in one 
the beginning and the consummation of learning ?”

3 J.

Choo He, P. ‘a piece of wood, in a doorway, 
obstructing ingress and egress;' then, an in- 
closure’ generally, ‘a.railing,’ whatever limits 
and confines,

12. 'lezr-HEA'S DEFENCE OF HIS OWN GRA- 
DUATED METNOD OF TEACHING :—AGAINST Tsze-

yew. 1. ^

vith PY A being merely, as we have found

it previously, an affectionate method of speak- 
ing of the disciples. The sprinkling, &c., are the 
things which boys were supposed anciently to 
be taught, the rudiments of learning, from which 
they advanced to all that is inculcated in the

Sh. But as Tezc-hea's pupils were not

boys, but men, we should understand, I suppose, 
these specifications as but a contemptuous re- 
ference to his instructions, as embracing merely

is to be taken in apposition.

what was external. MERN read shae and sha, up, 
lst tone, ‘to sprinkle, the ground before sweep- 
ing.“ HE, upper 3d tone, to answer a call.“ 
xj. *to answer a question." = but,’ as in

VII. 33. AS Z is expanded by the paraphrasts

—x RZ f fe ‘as to that in which the

root (or, what is essential) is^ This is, no doubt, 
the meaning, but the phrase itself is abrupt and

enigmatical. pi x ^u un Z 4j dtu 
I in opposition to the Hj AT RR above. 2.

The general scope of Tsze-hea’s reply is suffi- 
ciently plain, but the old interpreters and new 
differ in explaining the several sentences, Af- 
ter dwelling long on it, I have agreed generallyThe general scope of Tsze-hea’s reply is suffi- 
ciently plain, but the old interpreters and new 
differ in explaining the several sentences, Af- 
ter dwelling long on it, I have agreed generally

208

H

Lee ad

MIRIAM 
STE

O

nt 
enn Hoe

tos

THS 
TANNI

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

p 
G

zm 
1

EF

at 
254] 
EX

lel 
T 
OI

LS 
4 
[A

Ser 
w4 Y

ste 
zh

— 
—

|

mp;

FF

Ld

Sle HST

mme

JE,

CHAPTER XIII. Tsze-hea said, “The officer, having discharged

all his duties, 
having completed his learning, 
. Cuaprer XIV. "Tsze-hea said,

should devote his leisure, to learning. 
should apply himself to be an officer.”

The student,

“Mourning, having been carried

to the utmost degree of grief, should stop with that. i 
CuaPrER XV. Tsze-hea said, * My friend Chang can do things 
which are hard to be done, but yet he is not perfectly. virtuous,” 
Cuaprer XVI. The philosopher Tsing said, “ How i imposing is 
the manner of Chang! It is difficult along with him to practise

virtue.” 
CHAPTER XVII.

from our Master:

The philosopher Tsing said, “I heard this

—‘Men may not: have shown what is in them to

the full extent, and yet they will be found to do so, on occasion of

mourning for their parents.“

with the new school, and followed Choo He in 
the translation. EA is explained in the dict.

by Xn. ‘classes,’

19. THE OFFICER AND THE STUDENT SHOULD 
ATTEND EACH TO HIS PROPER WORK IN THE FIRST-

INSTANCE i—BY TSzE-XEw. p= HeJ

in I. 6.—The saying needs to be much supple- 
mented in translating, in order to bring out its 
meaning.

14. THR TRAPPINGS OF MOURNING MAY BE 
DISPENSED WITH :—bBY 'lszE-vEw. The senti- 
ment here is perhaps the same as that of Confu- 
cius in III. 4, but the sage guards and explains 
his utterance, —K'ung Gan kwó, following an

expression in the zx 122 makes the meaning 
to be that the mourner may not endanger hisexpression in the zx 122 makes the meaning 
to be that the mourner may not endanger his

t 
health or life by excessive grief and abstinence, 
15. 'fszE-vEWw's OPINION OF T8ZE-CUANG, A8 
MINDING TOO MUCH HIGH THINGS. 
16. ‘THE PHILOSOPHER TSANG’S OPINION OP 
5 AS TOO HIGH-PITCHED FOR FRIEND-

BHIP. . "ii is explained in the dict. by jk 
th. IE WH, ‘exuberant,’ correct. It is to

be p JE t, of Chang's manner and appear- 
ance, keeping himself aloof from other men in 
his high-pitched course.

17. How GRIEF ron THE Loss OP PARENTS 
BRINGS OUT THE REAL NATURE OF MYN: BY ''sANG-

Sin, is said to indicate the ideas both of

BÉ . ‘one’s self,’ and A LA ‘naturally.’ `

E N. ‘to put one's self out to the utmost,’

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

209

CEA Z8 -t 
An E hs, 3 EX

I 
—

b 
*

ai 
EE

[d

DEP NOES

on

v 
O

U 
SH PRS TE)

v 
—

e

WSEH RA

RSS

v

gal!!!

* *

u eng event 
SN

ENR 
SERRE

V 
"

mye

ANOS 
EARN ES

v

ER 
NRE

4

ea 
er EROR

è

Cuaprer XVIII. The philosopher Tsăng said, “I have heard

, this from our Master :— The filial piety of Măng Chwang, in other 
matters, was what other men are competent to, but, as seen in his 
not changing the ministers of his father, nor his father's mode of 
government, it is difficult to be attained to.’”

CHAPTER XIX. The chief of the Ming family having appointed 
Yang Foo to be chief criminal judge, the latter consulted the philo- 
sopher Tsing. Tsing said, “The rulers have failed in their duties, 
and the people consequently been disorganized, for a long time. 
When you have found out the truth of any accusation, be grieved.

for and pity them, and do not feel joy at your own ability.”

CHAPTER XX. Tsze-kung said,

* Chow's wickedness was not so

great as that name implies. Therefore, the superior man hates to

as we should say—‘ to come out fully,’ i. e, in 
one's proper nature and character. On the con-

struction of J th, N Ble AF, comp. XII. 
= = 
2 h B

ze 
E

B 
objectives, both governed by hi .as we should say—‘ to come out fully,’ i. e, in 
one's proper nature and character. On the con-

struction of J th, N Ble AF, comp. XII. 
= = 
2 h B

ze 
E

B 
objectives, both governed by hi .

18. Tun FILIAL PIETY oe Mane Cawane :— 
BY Tsano Six. Chwang was tlie honorary

epithet of Suh Gab. the head of the Mang

family, not long anterior to Confucius. His 
father, ace. to Choo He, had been a man of 
great merit, nor was he inferior to him, but his 
virtue especially appeured in what the text 
mentions.—Ho An gives the comment of Ma 
Yung, that though there were bad men among 
his father's ministers, and defects in his govern- 
ment, yet Chwang made no change in the one or 
the other, duriug the three years of mourning,

and that it

yas thy which constituted his ex- 
cellence. .

19. How a CRIMINAL JUDGE SHOULD CHERISH 
COMPASSION IN HIS ADMINISTRATION OF JUS- 
ric: — n ‘sane Six. Seven disciples of Tsing 
Sin are more particularly mentioned, one of 
them being this Yang Foo. dis to be under- 
stood of the moral state of the people, and not, 
physically, of their being scattered from their 
dwellings. it has occurred before in the sense 
of—‘ the truth,’ which it has here.

20. THE DANGER OF A BAD NAME :—BY 'T'szE-

KUNG. an HE Zz ue ‘so very bad as this; ' 
—the this dip is understood by ling Ping as 
referring to the epithet My, which cannot be

called honorary in this instance. According to 
8 i i N A E 
the laws for such terms, it means 227, 1H

210 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

[d

EN

EE 
areae

E

MV ESSE 
GaN COH

v 
Ld

fü A EK JE ES un, H ES 
n EE Y Ba APUL At 
LEE RN E EOP 
Lo TERRA OX . El. N. 
^H. A, A x Ale K 
. Sb

pa

FÈ

Z

3,

NEZ [E

mi 
. 
=a 
Em

è

A IP P[d

EN

EE 
areae

E

MV ESSE 
GaN COH

v 
Ld

fü A EK JE ES un, H ES 
n EE Y Ba APUL At 
LEE RN E EOP 
Lo TERRA OX . El. N. 
^H. A, A x Ale K 
. Sb

pa

FÈ

Z

3,

NEZ [E

mi 
. 
=a 
Em

è

A IP P

dwell in a low-lying situation, where all the evil of the world will 
flow in upon him." MO mie it 
CHAPTER XXI. Tsze-kung said, “The faults of the superior’man 
are like the eclipses of the sun and moon. He has his faults,'and 
all' men see them; he changes again, and all men look up to him." 
A :QuaPrcR XXII. 1. Kung-sun Ch'aou of Wei asked Tsze-kuhg, 
saying, “From whom did Chung-ne get his learning?“ SENE 
2. Tsze-kung replied, “The doctrines of Wan and Woo have not 
yet fallen to the earth. They are to be found among men. "Men 
of talents and virtue remember the greater principles of them, and 
others, not possessing such talents and virtue, remember the smaller. 
Thus, all possess the doctrines of Win and Woo. Where could our 
Master go that he should not have an opportunity of learning them? 
Aud yet what necessity was there for his having a regular master?”

H

S 
MORBI

fai 
beni

E teruel and unmerciful, injurious to right-

eousness.“ If the 12 does not in this way 
refer to the name, the remark would seem to

moon being here spoken of together, the 
must be confined to *eclipses, but the term is 
also applied to the ordinary waning of the moon.

dave occurred in a conversation about the

nee We. z 
wickedness of Chow. ^ yii is a low-lying 
situation. to which the streams flow and waters 
drain, representing here a bad reputation, which 
gets the credit of every vice.

21. Tun suPEnIOR MAN DOES NOT CONCDAL 
NIS ERRORS, NOR PERSIST IN THEM;—DY Tszr- 
x NG. Such is the lesson of this chapter, as

expauded in the H ali The sun and the21. Tun suPEnIOR MAN DOES NOT CONCDAL 
NIS ERRORS, NOR PERSIST IN THEM;—DY Tszr- 
x NG. Such is the lesson of this chapter, as

expauded in the H ali The sun and the

22. CONFUCIUS' SOURCES OF KNOWLEDGE WERE 
THE RECOLLECTIONS AND TRADITIONS OF THU 
PRINCIPLES ON Wan AND Woo :—nv TszE-Kune. 
1. Of the questioner here we have no other me- 
morial. His surname indicates that he was a de- 
scendant of some of the dukes of Wei. Observe 
how he calls Confucius by his designation of

4h . or Ne secundus. (There was an eldor 
brother, & concubine's son, who was culled 1 H

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS'

RN 
a

EPA 
AER HER

PSNI 
Spee} NOL

V

p

^

a ' Cnarrer XXIII.

SERN

NO 
— 
A 
gl

EET 
AER URS ESNA

S

v

g 
RNO

KARNIK

WN 
UR TD koh oo

— 
wa

us

1. Shuh-sun Woo-shuh observed to the great

officers in the court, saying, Tsze-kung is superior to Chung-ne.”

o

2. Tszefuh King-pih reported the observation to Tsze-kung,

who said, Let me use the comparison of a house and its encompass- 
ing wall. My wall only*reaches to the shoulders. One may, peep 
ayer it, and see whatever is valuable in the apartments. i

'9. “The wall of my master is several fathoms high. If one do 
not find the door and enter by it, he cannot see the ancestral tem-

ple with its beauties, nor all the officers in their rich array. 
4, “But I may assume that they are few who find the door. 
Was not the observation of the chief only what might have been

‘expected ?”

Je, 4h E ag Hr, ‘How did Chung · ne

learn?» but the how = from whom?’ The

‘expression below, however,—Fe F E xX

Er. expounded as in the translation, might 
suggest, from ‘what quarter ? rather than ‘from 
what person?“ as the proper rendering. The 
last clause is taken by modern commentators, as 
asserting Conf. connate knowledge, but Gan- 
kw finds in it only a repetition of the statement 
‘that the sage found teachers every where.23. TSsZH- KUNG REPUDIATES BEING THOUGHT 
BUPERIOR TO CONFUCIUS, AND, BY THE COMPARI- 
BON OF A HOUSE AND WALL, SHOWS HOW ORDI- 
NARY PEOPLE COULD NOT UNDERSTAND THE Mas-

TER, 1. ji was the hon. epithet of Chow Kew 
( Jl it one of the chiefs of the Shuh-sun

2 " : ES E 
family. From a mention of him in the RR pu

oA fe] pt we may conclude that he was

given to envy and detraction, . — used here 
os in XI. 15, 1. 2. Tsze-fuh King-pih,—sce

XIV. 38. EE Z CEP HE E ie to be 
taken generally for a house or building, and not 
in its now common acceptation of ‘a palace.’ 
It is a poor house, as representing the disciple, 
and a ducal mansion as representing his master,

.Many commen. make the wall to be the sole ob-

ject in the comparison, and ER E Z 
ns. It is better, with the Nuß to take both 
the house and the wall as members of the comp., 
ana r a. 5]pP (ul Ha . :

and ET As — hid du The wall is not a 
part of the bouse, but one inclosing it. 3. 7] 
means 7 cubits. I have translated it— fathoms,’

4. The A Y here refers to Woo-shuh.

919 CONFÜCIAN ANALECTS.

= 
R

122 
E

* 
. 
ad 
A 
|

EE 
zn 
W

=i 
um 
Ni 
SS

asd 
8 80

E

Sul ES 
Salt! NaH

vs 
unm

d 
=F 
adsl

f 
P

at. 
2)

DEN | SR 
REF 
zy

-

g

- 
- 
v 
v

THAER

-RRPARRI

rate!

K : 
TOOT WHE PASE RS

Alno 
ew

JES 
SA

ZH 
E.

NE |

a 
—

si 
NI 
à

ji duyE

Sul ES 
Salt! NaH

vs 
unm

d 
=F 
adsl

f 
P

at. 
2)

DEN | SR 
REF 
zy

-

g

- 
- 
v 
v

THAER

-RRPARRI

rate!

K : 
TOOT WHE PASE RS

Alno 
ew

JES 
SA

ZH 
E.

NE |

a 
—

si 
NI 
à

ji duy

CHAPTER XXIV. Shuh-sun Woo-shuh having spoken revilingly 
, of Chung-ne, Tsze-kung said, “It is of no use doing so., Chung-ne 
cannot be reviled. The talents and virtuetof other men are hillocks 
and mounds, which may be stept over. , Chung-ne is the sun or 
^moon, which it is not possible to step over. Although a man may 
wish to cut himself off from the sage, what harm can he do to the 
sun or moon? He only shows that he does not know his own 
capacity." 
CHAPTER XXV. 1. Tsze-kün, addressing Tsze-kung, said, You 
are too modest. How can Chung-ne be said to be superior to you?” 
2. Tsze-kung said to him, “For one word’ a man is often deemed 
to be wise, and for one word he is often deemed to be foolish. We 
ought to be careful indeed in what we say. 
3. “Our Master cannot be attained to, just in the same way as 
the heavens cannot be gone up to by the steps of a stair.

nj

~ 
— 
--

— 
=

Has A

-k

aad

24. CONFUCIUS IS LIKE THE: SUN OR MOON, | The meaning comes to the same. Choo He

HIGH ABOVE THE REACH OF DEPRECIATION :—DY

» "— Ww ARS: 1

Oe a 
= fill JH Fi; Ilt. ‘it is of no use to do this.’ 
Ab, A 2 f E. ft. Ais to be un- 
derstood, acc. to the wi H. as embracing all 
other sages. X(t.—: have supplied * from

the sage,’ after most modern paraphrasts. Hing 
Ping, however, supplies ‘/rom the sun and moon.

says that E4 here is the same with A ‘only.’

Hing Ping takes it as-- X]. ‘just.’ This mean- 
ing of the char. is not given in the dictionary, 
but it is necessary here; see supplement to Hing

Ping’s M. in loc.

25. CONFUCIUS CAN NO MORE BE EQUALLED 
THAN THB HEAVENS CAN BB CLIMBED :—~ BY 
'TszE-koxc. We find it difficult to conceive of 
the sage's disciples speaking to one another, as 
Tsze-k‘in does here to ‘I'sze-kung, and Hing

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS, 218CONFUCIAN ANALECTS, 218

DUE K 
RO AEG ME

4. “Were our Master in the position of the prince of a State or the 
chief of a Family, we should find verified the description which has 
benl given of a sage's rule: -—he would plant-the people, and forthwith 
thd} would be established; he, would lead them on, and forthwith 
they would follow him; he would make them happy, and forthwith 
smültitudes. would resort. to hi$.doménions; he would stimulate them, 
aad forthwith they would: ibe harmonious. While he lived, he 
would. be glorious. , When he: died, he would be bitterly lamented. 
How i is-it possible for him to be attained. to?”

Ping says that this was not the disciple Tsze- | transl., is quite as much as it denotes. Comp. its its 
a 
X in, but another man of the same surname and | use in I. 8, et al. 3. X F z fü RE Zk

designation. But this is inadmissible, especially * 
must be understood hypothetically, because 
E ‘we find tho same partis, in I. 10, talking nbout he never was in the position here assigned to

t thd ce of their master! 1. PE RAs him: M —as in X. 10, 1. i is for . as 
“yout ae doing ie modest. +! 9, has = EN 
E hx in I. 5 N as in XVI 1, 11. Z. ag

5t 
i Ts its ‘lightest meaning. The f Ef E makes ii XV.32, 8. Z: them, the people’ being al- 
ite: ‘a student, but ‘a man,’ as in the ways understood |

€

214 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

BOOK XX. YAOU YUE.

4r fi Ay FRB

EL

. RHO

Ye 
—

U

*

&

2 
d

ERE 
SSS 
SOTHO HOPES

Wet

zu

+|

S 
Is 
HD 
Erbe SED ERES

p

|

NS

* X

CHAPTER I. 1. Yaou said, “Oh! you, Shun, the Heaven-deter- 
mined order of succession now rests in your person. Sincerely hold 
fast the Due Mean. If there shall be distress and want: within the 
four seas, your Heavenly revenue will come to a perpetual end.“

2. Shun also used the same language in giving charge to Yu. |2. Shun also used the same language in giving charge to Yu. |

8. T'ang said, “I, the child Le, presume to use a dark-coloured 
victim, and presume to announce to Thee, O most great and sovereign 
God, that the sinner I dare not pardon, and thy ministers, O God, 
I do not keep in obscurity. The examination of them is: by thy 
mind, O God. If, in my person, I commit offences, they are not 
to beattributed to you, the people of the myriad regions. If you in 
the myriad regions commit offences, these offences must rest on

my person.”

ced ei A — 
HxADING or tius Boox. 3€ E i

-}-, ‘Yaou said—No. XX. Hing Ping says:— 
*'l'his records the words of the two emperors, 
the three kings, and of Confucius, throwing 
light on the excellence of the ordinances of

Heaven, and the transforming power of govern-

ment. Its doctrines are all those of sages, wor- 
thy of being transmitted to posterity. On this 
account, it brings up the rear of all the other 
books, without any particular relation to the 
one immediately preceding.’

1. PRINCIPLES AND ways OF TAO SAUN, 
Yu, T'ang, anv Woo, The first five paragraphs

here are mostly compiled from different parts |.

of the Shoo-king. But there are many varia- 
tions of language, The compiler may havehere are mostly compiled from different parts |.

of the Shoo-king. But there are many varia- 
tions of language, The compiler may have

thought it sufficient, if he gave the substance of 
the original in his quotations, without seeking 
to observe a verbal accuracy, or, possibly, the 
Shoo-king, as it was in his days, may have con- 
tained the passages as he gives them, and the 
variations be owing to the burning of most of 
the classical books by the founder of the Ts‘in 
dynasty, and their recovery and restoration in a 
mutilated state. 1. We do-not find this address 
of Yaou to Shun in the Shoo-king, Pt I., but the 
different sentences may be gathered from Pt II. 
ij. 14, 15, where we have the charge of Shun to 
Yu. Yaou’s reign commenced B. C. 2356, and 
after reigning 73 years, he resigned the adinin- 
istration to Shun, He died., D. C. 2256, und, two 
years after, Shun occupied the throne, in obe-

dience to the will of tlie people. KZ R Eod

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 215

ien 
1

SOM 
RR 
>g 
Prat 
RHO

| -KARENE > TT

AES 
Ete

> 
v

de

SUR 
S SHEETS

Ser

B 
we N E PR

4. Chow conferred great gifts, and the good were enriched.

5. Although he has his near relatives, they are not; equal. to 
my virtuous men. The people are throwing blame upon me, the 
one man." i

6. He carefully attended to the weights and measures, examined 
the body of the laws, restored the discarded officers, and the good 
government of the empire took its course. i6. He carefully attended to the weights and measures, examined 
the body of the laws, restored the discarded officers, and the good 
government of the empire took its course. i

7. ( He revived states that had been extinguished, restored fami- 
lies whose line of succession had been broken, and called to office 
those who had retired into obscurity, so that throughout the empire 
the hearts of the people turned towards him. , 
« 8. What he attached chief importance to, were the food of the 
people, the duties of mourning, and sacrifices. dd 
. 9, By his generosity, he won all. By his sincerity, he made the 
people. repose trust in him. By his earnest activity, his achieve- 
ments were great. By his justice, all were delighted.

Pt IV. iii. 4, 8. Down to n 1E a AN isa

prayer addressed to God by T'ang, on his un-

\ 
4

Sa! 
apa Shot BES SE PONE

lit, ‘the represented and calculated numbers 
of heaven," 2. e, the divisions of the year, its 
terius, months, and days, all described in a ca-

lendar, as they succeed one another with deter- 
mined regularity. Here, ancient and modern 
interpreters agree in giving to the expression 
the meaning which appears in the translation, 
J may observe here, that Choo’ Ie differs often 
from the old. interpreters. in explaining these 
passages of the Shoo-king, but I have followed 
him, leaving the correctness or incorrectness of 
his viows to be considered in the annotations

on the Shoo-king. 3. Before Ef here we must 
understand a. the designation of the founder 
of the Shang dynasty. The sentences here may 
in substance be collected from the Shoo-king,

dertaking the overthrow of the Hea dynasty, 
which he rehearses to his nobles and people, 
after the conipletion of his work. Tang's name

was We do not find in the Shoo-king the 
remarkable designation of God— ES m =

. For the grounds on which I translate "m 
by God, see my work on ‘The notions of the 
Chinese concerning God and Spirits.’ ,now. For the grounds on which I translate "m 
by God, see my work on ‘The notions of the 
Chinese concerning God and Spirits.’ ,now

generally used for ‘empress,’ was anciently 
used for ‘sovereign,’ and applied to the emper- 
ors. Here, it is an adjective, or in apposition

with i: The sinner is Kee HE), the tyrant,

216 CONFUCIAN 
ES A, 
in Fa IL

pm

É

BSS 
+S

m

N 
m 
0 
>

b d

+

Ale

lin

1

-—

A

ee

bí

ak.

E Sat ok AN TI] k. 
N

. El.

CHAPTER II. 1. Tsze-chang asked Confucius, saying, In what 
way should a person in authority act in order that he may conduct 
government properly?" The Master replied, “Let him honour the 
five excellent, and banish away the four bad, things ;—then may he 
conduct government properly,” Tsze-chang said, “ What are meant 
by the five excellent things?” The Master said, When the person! 
in authority is beneficent without great expenditure; when he lays» 
tasks on the people without their repining; when he pursues what he

desires without being covetous; when he maintains a dignified ease 
without being proud; when he is majestic without being fierce.” 
2. "Tsze-chang said, What is meant by being beneficent without

great expenditure?” The Master replied, “When the person in

and last emperor of the Hea dynasty. ‘The 
ministers of God’ are the able and virtuous men, 
whom T'ang had called, or would call, to office.

By fi EP, T'ang indicates that, in his 
punishing or rewarding, he only wanted to act 
iu harmony with the mind of God. fA S 
Jan Jr A^ BR N HH. in tre 
transl In the dict., it is said that Iz and fü

are interchanged. This is a case in point. 4. 
In the Shoo-king, Pt V. iii. 8, we find. king

Woo saying KEE yu F EJ t 
M , *I distributed great rewarde through

the empire, and all thé people were pleased and 
submitted.’ 5. See the Shoo-king, Pt V. i. seet.

IL6.7. The subject in ff Ff Jj] 4, is BE 
or Xj tyrant of the Yin dynasty. Jéj,—in 
the sense of Æ. 2 is used in the sense ofIL6.7. The subject in ff Ff Jj] 4, is BE 
or Xj tyrant of the Yin dynasty. Jéj,—in 
the sense of Æ. 2 is used in the sense of

„ ‘to blame. — The people found fault with

him, because he did not come to save them from 
their sullerings, by destroying their oppressor.

The remaining paragraphs are descriptive of 
the policy of king Woo, but cannot, excépting 
the 8th one, be traced in the present Shoo-king.

ff. par. 9, is in the low. 3d tone, See XVII.

6, Which chap., generally, resembles this para- 
raph. 
i 2. How GOVERNMENT'MAY BE coxpverap ' 
WITH EFPICIENCY, BY HONOURING FIVE EXCEL- | 
LENT THINGS, AND PUTTING AWAY FOUR BAD 
THINGS:—A CONVERSATION WITH ‘TsZx-CHANG, : 
It is understood that this chapter, and the next, 
give the ideas of Confucius on government, as 
‘a sequel to those of the ancient sages and em- 
perors, whose principles are set forth in the last 
Chapter, to show how Confucius was their

proper successor. 1. On see VI. 6, but

the. gios of the ig FF -h EC N 252 
BILTT EC RME De FE BC

here denotes-generally the practice of govern- 
ment. It is not to be taken as indicating æ 
minister, We may, however, retain the proper 
meaning of the phrase, Cenfucius describing 
principles to be observed by all in authority, and 
which will find in the highest their noblest

t2 
p 
al

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

HN 
S

. 
* 
vi 
[d 
-

Eg 
Mi 
S.

Pa

-

Tse 
(NESE

E

aS

v 
. 
[d 
v 
Ld

x

=

v

SY 
Ez

~ 
E 
v 
o

A S eS

o 
*

[=

5 
NE 
TS

a 
je

E Ed 
Se 
SIM

TPR -N- SS 
zE

gil 
H 
g

RAH

T

Eee

N

Ht 
3 
=

U àEg 
Mi 
S.

Pa

-

Tse 
(NESE

E

aS

v 
. 
[d 
v 
Ld

x

=

v

SY 
Ez

~ 
E 
v 
o

A S eS

o 
*

[=

5 
NE 
TS

a 
je

E Ed 
Se 
SIM

TPR -N- SS 
zE

gil 
H 
g

RAH

T

Eee

N

Ht 
3 
=

U à

authority makes more beneficial to the people the things from which 
they,naturally derive benefit; —is not this being beneficent with- 
out great expenditure? When he chooses the labours which are 
proper, and makes them labour on them, who will repine? When 
ris: desires are set on benevolent government, and he realizes it, who 
will accuse him of covetousness? Whether he has to do with many 
people or few, or with things great or small, he does not dare to in- 
dicate any disrespect ;—is not this to maintain a dignified ease with- 
out any pride? He adjusts his clothes and cap, and throws a dignity 
into his looks, so that, thus dignified, he is looked at with awe ;—is 
not this to be majestic without being fierce?”

19. Tsze-chang then asked, What are meant by the four had 
things?" The Master said, * To put the people to death without 
having instructed them;—this is called cruelty. To require from 
them, suddenly, the full tale of work, without having given them 
warning :—this is called oppression. To issue orders as if without 
urgency, a£ first, and, when the time comes, to insist on them with

embodiment. The Su favours this view. 
Seé its paraphrase in loc. I have therefore 
translated HU T by— a person in authority,’

me (o , : „ t! 
Z is instanced by the employment of the people

— — 
in advantageous public works. STA

is explained :—' Desire for what is not proper 
is covetousness, but if, while the wish to have.

5 in oA A. ee IV. 18, though the appli- 
cation of the terms there is different. i 
N Be XIII. 26. Mi PTE —~sce 
VIL 37. 2 H RZ Z is instanced py 
the promotion of agriculture, TE DER 25 in oA A. ee IV. 18, though the appli- 
cation of the terms there is different. i 
N Be XIII. 26. Mi PTE —~sce 
VIL 37. 2 H RZ Z is instanced py 
the promotion of agriculture, TE DER 2

the empire overshadowed by his benevolence' 
has not reached to universal advantaging, his 
desire does not cease, then, with a heart impa- 
tient of people's evils, he administers a govern- 
ment impatient of those evils. What he desires 
is benevolence, and what he gets is the sama;

how can he be regarded as covetous?’ mt

.218

An án VÀ S À 
A pL AE fn 
. tua,

YA uA

‘CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

=

n E

f

ewes

severity ;—this is called inj ury. And, generally speaking, " 'give 
pay or véwards to men, and tyet to: do it in a stingy way this i is 
called acting thé part of a mere official."

CHAPTER III.

1. The Master said, „Without “recognizing ithe 
ordinances of Heaven, it is impossible to bea superior man.

2. «Withoutan acquaintance with the rules. of Propriety, it is 
impossible for the character to be established. — . 
3. „Without knowing the Force of words, it. is impossible tà know

men.“ P

! * | . ) 
is explained here by * *to require from.' 
We may get that meaning out of the char., 
which=‘to examine, ‘to look for. A good 
deal has to be eupplied, here and in the sentences 
below, to bring out the. meaning asinthe trans-

lation, 36 Zis is explained by WK x and

seems to me to be nearlyzzour ‘ on the whole."

H Ah. — giving out,’ à. e., from this and “pre- 
senting,’ i e., to that. 'The whole is understood

to refer to rewarding men for their services, and .

doing it in an unwilling and stingy manner.

3. "Ins ORDINANCES OF Heavey, THE RULES

,2. Compare VIII. 8, 2. 3. 
much thought and examination of principles.

“ : : ti e

4 ) Y $ 
OF PROPRIETY, AND THE FORCE OF WORDS, ALL

NECESSARY TO BE KNOWN, I. FA here is not 
only ‘knowing,’ but believing and. Testing in."

ipi is the will of Heaven regarding right and4 ) Y $ 
OF PROPRIETY, AND THE FORCE OF WORDS, ALL

NECESSARY TO BE KNOWN, I. FA here is not 
only ‘knowing,’ but believing and. Testing in."

ipi is the will of Heaven regarding right and

wrong, of which man has the standard in his own 
moral nature: If this be not'recognized, a man 
is the slave of passion, or the sport of feeling.

here supposes

Words are the voice of the heart. ‘To know a 
man, we must attend well-to what and how he 
thinks, , : l

pini

ry 
K 3 
x

FLUIT!

3H HÀ

LEA S 
* P n s

My hiaster; the philosopher Chi ing, ‘says: The Great eni is

a book left by Confucius, and forms. the gate by which first learn-

à 
ers enter into virtue.

That we can' now perceive the order in 
. which the ancients pursued their learning, ‘is solely. owing to the

8 of this work, the Analects and Mencius coming after

| Learners must commence their course with this, and then it

Den be hoped they will be kept from error."

TITLE or THRE WorkK.— » ‘The Great

Learning. I have pointed out, in ‘the prolego- 
mena, the great differences which are found 
among Chinese commentators on this Work, on 
almost every point connected with the criticism 
and interpretation of it. We encounter them 
here on the very threshold. The name itself is 
simply the adoption of the two commencing 
characters of the treatise, according to the 
custom noticed at the beginning of the Analects; 
but in explaining those two characters, the old

and new schools differ widely. Anciently, K

was read as N. and the oldest commentator 
whose notes on the work are preserved, Ch‘ing 
K'ang-shing, in the last half of the second 
Yu sia that the book was called e E,

A EV NE S WI VA $3 Be 8

it AX al that extensive learning, which was 
available for the administration of government.’ 
This view is approved by Kung Ying-tü Gb

H 3%), whose expansion of K‘ang-shing's 
notes, written in the first half of the 7th century,

still remains. IIe says—Je Gh, E i x.H 3%), whose expansion of K‘ang-shing's 
notes, written in the first half of the 7th century,

still remains. IIe says—Je Gh, E i x.

‘ j& £s means the highest principles! Choo

He's definition, on the contrary, isfy &l E-3

KAS S th:

Learning of Adults.’

means the 
One of the ae

who follow him ers E K A 8L wy

ay Hy means adults, in opposition 
to children. The grounds of Choo He's interpr. 
are to be found in his very elegant preface to 
the Book, where he tries to make it out, that 
we have here the subjects taught in the advanced 
schools of antiquity. I have contented myself 
with the title The Great Learning,’ which is 
& literal translation of the „ whether

read as X A., or X E

THE INTRODUCTORY NOTE. E have thought it 
well to translate this, and all the other notes 
and supplements appended by Choo He to the 
original text, because they appear in nearly all 
the editions of the work, which fall into the hands 
of students, and his view of the classics is what 
must be regarded as the orthodox one. The 
translation, which is here given, is also, for the 
most part, according to his views, though my 
own differing opinion will be found treely ex- 
pressed in the notes. Another version, follow- 
ing the order of the text, before it was trans- 
posed by him and his masters, the Ch‘ing, aud 
without reference to his interpretations, will be

^H JF.

ME.

THE TEXT.OF CONFUCIUS,

THE GREAT LEARNING.

J, What the Great Learning teaches, is—to illustrate illustrious 
virtue; to renovate the people; and to rest in the highest excellence.

2. The point where to rest being known, the: object of pursuit

is then determined; and, that being determined, a calm unperturbed- 
a POM: à - * g Ae C...

ness may be attained. To that calmness there will succeed a tranquil

found in the translation of the Le. ke.— F

F. —see note to the Ana. I. i. The Ch‘ing 
here, is the second of the two brothéra, to whomfound in the translation of the Le. ke.— F

F. —see note to the Ana. I. i. The Ch‘ing 
here, is the second of the two brothéra, to whom

reference is made in the prolegomena. LN. 
“Confucius, the Kung, as ZA FX is found 
continually in the Analects for the Ke, i. e., the 
chief of the Ke family. But how can we aay 
that ‘The Great Learning’ is a work left by 
Confucius? Even Choo He ascribes only a 
small portion of it to the Master, and makes 
the rest to be the production of the disciple 
Tsang, and before his time, the whole work was

attributed generally to the sage's grandson. I 
should be, glad if I had authorlty for taking

XL N =F, P, the Confucian school.

CuarrER I. Tur text or Coxrucius. Such 
Choo He, as will be seen from his concluding 
note, determines this chapter to be, and it has

been divided into two sections (Qu. the first 
'eontaining three paragraphs, occupied with the 
heads Gay 4A) of the Great Learning, and the 
second containing four paragraphs, occupied

with the particulars (Ak E] ) of those. 
Par. 1. The heads of the Great Learning. X 
x ib the way of the Great Learning,’

3 being— ff $3 Za $E, * the methods 
of cultivating and practising it/—the Great 
Learning, that is. „is in. The first HH is 
a verb; the second is an adjective, qualifying 
fh. 'The illustrious virtue is the virtuous na- 
ture which man derives from Heaven. This is 
perverted as man grows up, through defects of 
the physical constitution. through inward lusts, 
and through outward seductions; and the great 
business of life should be, to bring the nature 
back to its original purity.— To renovate the 
people, —this object of the Great Learning is

made out, by changing the character XH of the

old text into 3 N. The Ch'ing first proposed the

alteration, and Choo He approved of it. When 
a man has entirely illustrated his own illustri-made out, by changing the character XH of the

old text into 3 N. The Ch'ing first proposed the

alteration, and Choo He approved of it. When 
a man has entirely illustrated his own illustri-

ous nature, he has to proceed to bring bout 
the same result in every other man, till ‘under 
heaven’ there be not an individual, who is not 
in the same condition as himself, ~The highest 
excellence? is understood of the two previous 
matters. It is not a third and different object 
of pursuit, but indicates a perseverance in the 
two others, till they are perfectly accomplished, 
According to these explanations, the objects 
contemplated in the Great Learning, arg not 
three, but two. Suppose them realized, and we 
should have the whole world of; mankind per- 
fectly good, every individual what he ought to 
1 Ó DEN

Against the above intorpretatjon, we hayve,to 
consider the older and simpler, (hi is yere 
not the nature, but simply virtue, or virtuous 
conduct, and the first object in the Great 
Learning is the making of one’s-aclf more and 
more illustrious in virtue, or the‘practide of bg- 
nevolence, reverence, filial piety, kindness, and

sincority, See the AS K 2 s 3. in 
loc.—There is nothing, of course, of the renovating 
of the people, in this interpretation. The second

object of the Great Learning is :

: : eu. 
aue N R. ‘to love the people. Tho third 
object Is enid by: Ylng-t& to be ‘ini resting: in

conduct which is perfectly good GE IE [3 
RE afe 2 f1» and here also, there would

seem to be only two objects, for what ‘essential 
distinction can we ninke between the first and 
third? There will be occasion below, to referseem to be only two objects, for what ‘essential 
distinction can we ninke between the first and 
third? There will be occasion below, to refer

to the reasons for changing 125 into X [add 
their unsatisfactoriness. *'l'olove the people i, 
doubtless, the second thing taught by the Great 
Learning. — Having the heads of the Great 
Learning now before us, according to both in- 
terpretations of it, we feel that the student of 
it should be an emperor, and not an ordinary 
man. Sy 
Par. 2. The mental process by which the point 
of rest may be attained. I confess that I do not 
well understand this par., in the relation ef its 
parts in itself, nor in relation to the rest of the

chapter. Choo He says — IE js the ground 
where weought to rest;'--namely, the highest ex-

OonFyctua. THE GREAT LEARNING. 991

ay 
5

MM 
SRN

Xx 
SN 
z 
Gd

2

` 
P 
Pa

2E?

EDERN 
S ee

3

NPER

.-

RFRA 
Aper

T 
Tf

teh 
SNI

S

M 
d

lu

Fer

— 
IE S 75 K N 
coram: M * 
repose. In that repose there may be careful deliberation, and that 
deliberation will be followed by the attainment of the desired end.

3. Things have their root and their completion. Affairs have 
their end and their beginning. To know what is first and what 
‘is last will lead near to what is taught in the Great Learning.

4. The ancients who wished to illustrate illustrious virtue through- 
out the empire, first ordered well their own States. Wishing to 
order well their States, they first regulated their families. Wishing 
to regulate their families, they first cultivated their persons. Wishing 
to cultivate their persons, they first rectified their hearts. Wishing

V

cellénce mentioned above. But if this be known 
in the outset, where is the necessity for the W.

, for ‘careful deliberation,’ which issues in its at- 
rtainment 7 The paraphrasts make jai IE to

embrace even all that is understood by TE Py

below.—Ying-t& is perhaps rather, for ‘careful deliberation,’ which issues in its at- 
rtainment 7 The paraphrasts make jai IE to

embrace even all that is understood by TE Py

below.—Ying-t& is perhaps rather

more intelligible. He says: When it is known 
that the rest is to be in the perfectly good, then 
ithe mind has fixedness. So it is free from con- 
vupiscence, and can be still, not engaging in 
“disturbing pursuits. That stillleads to a re- 
| pose and harmony of the feclings. That state 
| of the feelings fits for careful thought about

affairs (HE . W N 88 ) aud thence it

results that what is right in affairs is attained. 
Perhaps, the par. just intimates that the objects

«

of the G. L. being so great, a calm, serious,

thoughtfulness is required in proceeding to seck 
their attainment.

Par. 9. The order of things and methods in the 
two preceding paragraphs. So, acc. to Choo He, 
does this par. wind up the two preceding. ‘The 
illustration of virtue,’ he says, ‘is the root, and 
the renovation of the people is the completion 
(lit., zhe branches). Knowing where to rest is 
the beyinning, and being able to attain is the end. 
The root. and the beginning are what is first.

The completion and end are what is last,—Yhe 
adherents of the old commentators say, on the 
oontrary, that this par. is introductory to the

-them reach through the whole empire.“

x 
succeeding ones. They contend that the illus- 
tration of virtue and renovation of the people

are doings (H)), and not things Cf). Acc. to 
them, the things are thie person, heart, thoughts, 
Ko., mentioned below, which are * the root,’ and 
the family, kingdom, and empire, which are 
‘the branches. The affairs are the various pro- 
cesses put forth on those things.—'This, it seems 
to me, is the correct interpretation, 3 
Par. 4. The different steps by which the illustra- 
tion of illustrious virtue throughout the empire may4 T 
be brought about, , gj AA N X aS is un- 
derstood by the school of Choo Heas embracing 
the two first objects of the Great Learning, the 
illustration, namely of virtue, and the ronova- 
tion of the people. We are not aided in deter- 
mining the meaning by the synthetic arrange- 
ment of the different steps in thé next par., for

the result arrived at there is simply-— X pF

F, ‘the whole empire was made tranquil,’—

Ying-tx’s comment is—Ta I E x 9j fh 
w ia 2 R NP. ‘to display illustriously

their own illustrious virtue (or, virtues), making 
But 
the influence must be very much transforma- 
tive. Of the several steps described, the cen-

tral one is 2 £p, ‘the cultivation of the person,’ 
which, indeed, is called A. ‘the root,’ in par.

222 THE GREAT LEARNING.

~~ 
*

— 
=r

1 1 8

N

x Ns 
A N E UV HK

to rectify their hearts, they first aed to á sincere in ‘their

thoughts.

tended to the utmost their knowledge.

Wishing to be sincere in their thoughts, they first ex-

Such extension of know-

ledge lay in the investigation of things. ` — 
5. Things being investigated, knowledge became complete.

Their "knowledge being complete, their thoughts were sincere.

6.¢ This requires! the heart to be correct,’ and 
that again ‘that the thoughts be sincere,’ Choo

He defines N as EY Ff &, ‘what the 
body has for its ‘lord,’ and 153 as A? 2 Hf 
, ‘what the jV sends forth. Ying-ti says:

0 1¹ 8 . 5H Z A ‘that which

comprehends and embraces all considerings is 
called the C 18 A TE aR a S 
, the thoughts ' under emotion are what is

called . A is then the meta-physical part

of our nature, all that we comprehend under 
the terms of mind or soul, heart, and spirit.

This is conceived of as quiescent, and when ite

activity is aroused, then we have thoughts and 
‘purposes relative to what affects it. ‘The be-

ing sincere’ is explained by H. ‘real? The 
sincerity of the thoughts is to be obtained by 
MI, which means, acc. to Choo He, *earry-ing sincere’ is explained by H. ‘real? The 
sincerity of the thoughts is to be obtained by 
MI, which means, acc. to Choo He, *earry-

ing our knowledge to its utmost extent, with 
the desire that there may be nothing which it 
shall not embrace.“ This knowledge, finally, is

realized TETEA4A. The same authority takes 
2 ‘things,’ as embracing, N. ‘ affairs,’ as 
well. TA sometimes: E, ‘to come or extend 
to,’ and assuming that the ‘coming to’ here is by 
etudy, he makes it Ej *to examine ex-

haustively,’ so that ‘ 48 n means exhausting

by examination the principles of things and af- 
fairs, with the desire that their uttermost point 
may be reached.’—We feel that this explanation 
cannot be correct, or that, if it be correct, the 
teaching of the Chinese ságe is far beyond and 
above the condition and capacity of men. How 
€an we suppose that, in order to secure sincerity 
of thought and our self-cultivation, there is ne- 
cessarily the study of all the phenomena of 
Raten and metaphysics, and of the events of

istory? Moreover, Choo He's view of the two 
last elauses is n consequence of the alterations 
which he adopts in the order of the text. As 
that exists in the Le-ke, the 7th par, of this

| AS He St RE PE

Their

chapter is followed by ILE ht K. IE. fs 
Sat 2 zm th; which he has transferred and

made the 5th chapter of annotations. Ying-ti's 
comment on it is :—* The root means the person,

The person (i. e. „personal character) being re-

garded as the root, if one can know his own 
person, this is the knowledge of the root ; yea, 
this is the very extremity of knowledge.’ 1f we 
apply this conclusion to the clauses under notice, 
it is said that wishing to make our thoughts 
sincere we must first carry to the utmost our 
self-knowledge, and this extension of self- know-

ledge EAE Now, the change of the stylo

indicates that the relation of ES ^at and j&

27 is different from that of the parts in theledge EAE Now, the change of the stylo

indicates that the relation of ES ^at and j&

27 is different from that of the parts in the

other clauses. It is not said that to get the one 
thing we must first do the other. Rather it

seems to me that the 112 yi is a consequence 
of aX M. that in it is seen the other. Now, 
. “a rule or pattern, and JE. “to correct; É 
are accepted meanings of 2 and J being

taken generally and loosely as==things, it $g

will tell us that, when his self-knowledge is

complete, a man is a law to himself, measuring, 
and measuring correctly, all things with which 
hé has to do, not led astray or beclouded by 
them. This is the interpretation strongly insist-

ed on by KE r P the author of the Ur

It is the only view into 
any n t a lean place my mind.

+ harmony with it, I would print Ed EZ 1E

2 as a par. by itself, between the analytic

aid synthetic processes described in parr. 4, 5. 
Still there are difficulties connected with it, and 
J leave the vexed questions, regretting my own 
inability to clear them up. '

Par. 5. The synthesis of the preceding pracesses. 
Observe the $í of the preceding par. is changed

into E, and how xa now becomes Ps low.

223

CONFUCIUS, THE GREAT LEARNING.

* ET

7 
> 
TAH

,

W 
one

na

e

=> 
ZW 
G

NT 
fv

Ser

Ld

ees 
mS

FIN 
aoe 
i

» 
EREN

— 
I

—

S 
Ne 
xi

O

n

t.

me 
zimmer

FIH

PU 
F3 
2 
r4

(d . 4 K LE .

thoughts being sincere, their hearts were then rectified. Their hearts

being rectified, their persons were cultivated. Their persons being

cultivated, their families were regulated. Their families being

regulated, their States were rightly governed. Their States

ch g rightly governed, the whole empire was made tranquil, and 
a ,

67 Y. From the emperor down to the mass of the people, all must 
mor the cultivation of the person the root of every. thing 
besides. > n '67 Y. From the emperor down to the mass of the people, all must 
mor the cultivation of the person the root of every. thing 
besides. > n '

7. It cannot be, when the root is 1 8 that what should 
spring froin it will be well ordered. It never has been the case that 
what was of great importance has been slightly cared for, and; at the 
„same time, that wast was of slight importance has been greatly cared 
for. L :

aa, tone. 3 is ‘explained by N W. the. 
work of ruling, ‘and 7 by 3i . ‘the re-

spit? i is used for P3 as in p. 2.

Par. 6. Tie cultivation of the person ts the 
prime, radical, thing required from all. I have 
said above that the Great Learning is adapted 
only to an emperor, but it is intimated here 
that the people also may take part in it in their 
degree. X F. ‘Son of Heaven,’ a designa-

tion of the emperor, A4 E Gi T2 K, the-

' ens " 
Par. 7 . Reiteration of the importance of attend.

ing to the root. Choo He makes the root here to 
be the person, but accord. to the pree, par, it ib 
| ‘the cultivation of the person’ which ig intend;

ed. By the N or branches is intended the 
proper ordering, of the family, the state, “the 
empire. Hp ‘thick,’ and ‘thin, '—used

here metaphorically. Br . acc. to Choo He, 
means the family,’ and Br 28 ‘the state and 
the empire, but that I cannot understand,

cause he is ordained by Heaven. . - 
„all.“ Ching K'ang-shing, however,

says:—"ey N, En th, “SHE

TT 
‘means that they uniformly do this.

—

E is the same as the root. Mencius has a say- 
ing which may illustrate the second part of the

paragraph Ff J HD Mf AS

„He, who is careless in what is important, 
wi be careless in every thing.

994 THE GREAT LEARNING.

COMMENTARY,

E

RSS 8l 
" 
8 
788

8 If]

TÍ he preceding Janter of classical lect i is in the words of Confucius,994 THE GREAT LEARNING.

COMMENTARY,

E

RSS 8l 
" 
8 
788

8 If]

TÍ he preceding Janter of classical lect i is in the words of Confucius,

' handed down by lie. philosopher "Tsdng. The ten chapters! of 
explanation which follow, contain the views of Tsing, and were 
recorded by his disciples.. In the old copies of. the work, there 
appeared considerable confusion in these, from the disarrangement 
of the tablets. But now, availing myself of the decisions of the 
philosopher Chiing, and having examined anew the classical txt 
I have arranged a in order, as follows:—

COMMENTARY OF THE PHILOSOPHER TSANG. i

CHAPTER I. 1. In the Announcement to Kang it is said, “He 
was able to make his virtue illustrious." "

E 
3 O-

!

CONCLUDING NOTE. It has been shown i in the posed, to, form this and the five succeeding 
prolegomena that there. is no ground for the chapters. It was, no doubt, the occurrence us

distinction made here between so much king at- |' in the four paragraphs here, and of the- 
tributed to Confucius, and so much „ or

commentary, ascribed to his disciple Testing. The 
invention of paper is ascribed to Ts'ae Lun

A 48 an officer of the Han dynasty, in 
the time of the emperor Hwo FAD A. D. 83—. 
104. Before that time, and long ‘after also,'

slips of wood and of bamboo Cft. were used 
to write and engrave upon. We can easily

conceive how a collection of them might get |.

disarranged, but whether those containing the 
Great Learning did do so is a question vehe-

mently disputed. AK — s *the chapter

of classic on the right; wk, on the left;“

these are expressions--our ‘preceding,’ ! 
‘ag follows,’ indicating the Chinese method of 
writing and printing from the right side of a 
manuscript or book on to the left.

"CoMMENTARY OF THE PHILOSOPHER TSANG."CoMMENTARY OF THE PHILOSOPHER TSANG.

1. THe ILLUSTRATION OF ILLUSTRIOUS VIRTUE. 
The student will do well to refer here to the 
text of ‘The Great Learning,’ as it appears in 
the Le-ke. He will then see how a consider- 
able portion of it has been broken up, and trans-

| takes BE as 
y ‘to pu > 
examine,

phrase HH $i, which determined Choo He

to form them into one chapter, and refer them 
to the first head in the classical text. The. old 
commentators connect them with the great 
business of making the thoughts sincere. 1. 
See the Shoo-king, V. x. 3. The words are 
part of the address of King Woo to hia brother

Fung Gap. called also K‘ang-shuh ( Bt JB 
Bt the hon. ep:) on appointing him to the 
marquisate of 7 The eubject of p) is

king Wün, to whose example K‘ang-shuh is 
referred. We cannot determine, from this

par., between the old interpretation . of $i, as 
virtues! and ‘the new which understands by 
it, = the heart or nature, all-virtuous,’ 2. See 
the Shoo-king, IV. v. Sect. I. 2. Choo He 
^ ‘this,’ or SES ‘to judge,’ 
The old interpr. explain it by 
, ‘to correct, The sentence is part of the

address of the promier, E-yin, to T‘ae-kéi, the 
2d emperor of the Shang dynasty, B. C. 1752-

1718. The subject of H is T’ae-kea’s father,

CH. LG.

^

`g 
B 
2 
E

-A 
> 
5 
2 
pi 
E 
a 
t2 
bo 
AN

Bil

mE

AA 
X 
mm 
-" 
= 
ot 
ssp

BH 
3

* 
ww, 
v 
4 
v

EE 
SNARES

edem 
IS

aii 
DE

LI

i

at 
na: 
NS

HENS 
A

V 
/

„2. In the Tae Ke, it is said, “He contemplated and studied 
thé illustrious decrees of Heaven." 
' 8., In the Canon of the emperor Yaou, it is said, “ He was able to 
make illustrious his lofty virtue." 
4. These passages all show how those sovereigns made themselves

A t 
illustrious. .

The above first chapter of commentary explains the illustration of 
illustrious virtue.A t 
illustrious. .

The above first chapter of commentary explains the illustration of 
illustrious virtue.

Cuarter II. I. On the bathing-tub of T'ang, the following words 
were engraved :—“If you can one day renovate yourself do so 
from day to day. Yea, ‘let there be daily renovation.”

2. In the Announcement to K‘ang, it is said, “To stir up the 
new people.”

3. In the Book of Poetry, it is said, “Although Chow was an 
ancient state, the ordinance which lighted on it was new.”

4, Therefore, the superior man in every thing uses his utmost 
endeavours. !

the great T'ang. Choo He understands by H

Nx. the Ieaven-given, illustrious nature of 
man. The other school. take the phrase more 
genorully, =the HR HER ‘displayed ways’ of 
Meavon, 3. See the Shoo-king, I. 2. It ie of 
the emperor Yaou that this is said. 4. The 2 
must be referred to tlie three quotations.

2. THE RENOVATION OF THE PEOPLE. Here 
the character EUT ‘new,’ to renovate,’ occurs

five times, and it was to find something corre- 
sponding to it at the commencement of the werk,

which made the Ch‘ing change the of

R. into 3 But the E^] here have

nothing to do with the renovation of the people, 
This is self-evident in the 1st and 3d parr. ‘The 
heading of the chapter, as above, is a mis- 
nomer. 1. This fact abont Tung's bathing 
tub had come down by tradition. At least, 
we do not now find the mention of it anywhere 
but here. Jt was customary among the an- 
cients, as it is in China at the present day, to 
engrave, all about them, on the articles of their 
furniture, such moral aphorisms and lessons. 2, 
See the Kung Kaou, p. 7, where K'ang-shuh is. 
exhorted to assist the emperor *to settle tlie

decree of Heaven, and LU R. which

may mean to make the bad people of Yin into 
good people, or to stir up the new people, i. e., 
new, as recently subjected to Chow. 3. See the 
She-king, III. i. Ode I. st. 1. The subject of the

N 
N 
rat

5

DW

a 
3 
a

4 
Te

HH 
Ws

n 
>

> 
imi * e,

5N 
N 
rat

5

DW

a 
3 
a

4 
Te

HH 
Ws

n 
>

> 
imi * e,

5

S ABUS 
IJ

2M

ER 
* " 
*- 
Em

x 
gi

pins 
205

N 
C

m

Ef

m Il dk,

ARAB

Ff, Oh,

THE GREAT LEARNIKC.

COMM. CN. 111.

EA

i:

3 
— 
Ca 
BA

er

EI

n

-H 
MEN

v

n 
E

i

zs 
AE

v

deu 
FREE

e

AAA

HO 
SU

Hy

; 4 0 
The above second chapter of commentary explains the renovating

of the people. 
Cnarrer III.

2. 
rests.on a corner of the mound.”

1. In the Book of Poetry, it is said, “The impe- 
rial domain of a thousand le is where the 
In the Book of Poetry, it is said, “

people rest.” 
Lhe twittering yellow bird 
The Master said, “When it rests,

[4

it knows where to rest. Is it possible that a man should not be equal

to this bird?“

* e Ld Te Í 
3. In the Book of Poetry, it is said, “ Profound was King Wan. 
With how bright and unceasing a feeling of reverence did he regard

his resting places!" As a sovereign, he rested in benevolence.

As

+ . m * oye . 
a minister, he rested in, reverence. As a son, he rested in filial piety.

As a father, he rested. ip kindness.

jects, he rested in, good faith.

ofle ig the praise of king Win, whose virtue Jed |

to the possession of the empire hy his house, 
more than a thousand years after its first rise. 
8. Á is here the man of rank and office 
probably, as well ag the man of virtue; but I do 
not, for my own part, see the particular relation 
of this to the preced. parr.. nor the work which 
it does in relation to the whole chapter.

3. ON RESTING IN TUE MIGHEST EXCELLENCE,

“Fhe frequent occurrence of fk in these para-

‘graphs, and of E: 3, in par, 4, led. Choo-He 
to combine them in one chapter, and connect 
them with the last clause in the opening par. 
of the work. J. See the She-king, IV. iii. Ode 
UL st. 1. The ode celebrates the rise and es-

In communication with his sub-

'

tablishment of the Shang or Yin dynasty. zy

is the 1000 /e around the capital, and constitut- 
ing the imperial demesne. The quotation shows,In communication with his sub-

'

tablishment of the Shang or Yin dynasty. zy

is the 1000 /e around the capital, and constitut- 
ing the imperial demesne. The quotation shows,

according to Choo He, that nay 4 Pr

IE Zz E. ‘every thing has the place where

it ought to rest.“ But that surely is a very 
sweeping conclusion from the words, 2. Sce 
the She-king, II. viii. Ode VI. st. 2, where we 
have the complaint of a down-trodden man, 
contrasting his position with that of a bird. 
For YE here, we have it in the She-king.

PAEH Xy nre intended to express the sound of 
the bird's singing or chattering. ‘The yellow 
"bird? is kuown by a variety of names. A com-

SPB 
S 
=

Ld

cu. rtt, THE GREAT LEARNING. 227 
BE Ew ff . KAS, 
fis J ne ^p d d E WE 
EX NA ESSEN EE. 
e g Af, 4 wm o E , y 
An An 
CER E)

^H du HFT

ZH

f» th,

NOR at

v

— d 
ix

AR 
Xd 
Li

v

EL 
ES

2

E 
Stad

»

4. Inthe Book of Poetry, it is said, “Look at that winding

Here is

course of the K'e, with the green bamboos so luxuriant! 
our elegant and accomplished prince! As we cut and then file; 
as we chisel and then grind: so has he cultivated himself. How grave 
is he and dignified! How majestic and distinguished! Our elegant 
and accomplished ‘prince never can be forgotten." That erpression— 
“as we cut and then file,” indicates the work of learning. “As we 
chisel, and then grind,” indicates that of self culture. “How grave 
is he and dignified !” indicates the feeling of cautious reverence. 
* How commanding and distinguished," indicates an awe-inspiring 
deportment. “ Our elegant and accomplished prince never can be 
forgotten," indicates how, wheh virtue is complete and excellence ex- 
treme, the people cannot forget them,

mon one is 2 N. or, pruperly, fE pa, ts‘ang | ly, Rl for WA: NR for N; DE for 3E. 5j.

kang. It is a species of oriole. The -F [7| are | here, poetice, rend O. 3 =mon one is 2 N. or, pruperly, fE pa, ts‘ang | ly, Rl for WA: NR for N; DE for 3E. 5j.

kang. It is a species of oriole. The -F [7| are | here, poetice, rend O. 3 =

is used as== LL ‘says,” 
worthy of observation. Ifthe first chapter of the 
classical text, as Choo He calls it, really con- 
tains the words of Confucius, we might have 
expected it to be. headed by these characters.

Rik: lit, ‘in resting.’ 3. Sce the She-king, 
III. i. Ode I. st, 4. The stress is here all laid 
upon the final „ Which does not appear to 
have any force at all in the original, Choo He 
himself saying there that it is EA ni]: a mere 
supplemental particle" In Ni. N is read

noch, and is an interjection, 4. Sce the She-

king, I. v. Ode I. st. 1. The ode celebrates the

virtue of the duke Woo (M) of Wei (Rp, in

his laborious endenvours to cultivate his person.

There are some verbal ditlerences between the

ode in the She-king, and as here quoted; name- 
]

or ‘means. It is to be understood before B 
S. 4i HE, and I7 ferne transposition 
of this par. by Choo He to this place does seem 
unhappy. It ought evidently to come in con- 
nection with the work of 5. See the 
She-king, IV. i. Sect. I. Ode IV. st. 3. The 
former kings are Win and Woo, the founders 
of the Chow dynasty. ^ Jk are an inter- 
jection, read woo hoo. In the She-king we have

N N. 15 "mE are found with the same 
meaning. I translate . EX, E H, by 
‘what they deemed worthy,’ What they loved.“ 
When we try to determine what that what was, 
we are perplexed by the varying views of the

SIM 
BE

xil 
Dy

— 
a. 
c 
oo 
. 
© 
w 
[d 
-o

mu 
HS 
Big ais 
RS

228 THE GREAT LEARNING, coms. on. rr. 
OREB kg g 
Ar ET A cdi SE sp 
18 K WA H, fei 0 Fil M > 
2 E F. GE 
H =

8

\ 
4

SE

-

a

FN

—

Ar.

'

WN 
"

B 
> 
4

i

Mec 
. 
ws

ERmu 
HS 
Big ais 
RS

228 THE GREAT LEARNING, coms. on. rr. 
OREB kg g 
Ar ET A cdi SE sp 
18 K WA H, fei 0 Fil M > 
2 E F. GE 
H =

8

\ 
4

SE

-

a

FN

—

Ar.

'

WN 
"

B 
> 
4

i

Mec 
. 
ws

ER

ET odis | 
homer dl ? B 1 au PN 
b * . Qv 
5. In the Dook of Poetry, it is said, *Ah! the former kings are 
not forgotten.” Future princes deem worthy what they deemed 
worthy, and love what they loved. The common people, delight in 
what they delighted, and are benefited by their beneficial arrange- 
ments. It is on this account that the former kings, after they have 
quitted the world, are not forgotten. 
The above third chapter of commentary explains resting in the highest 
excellence. a 
CuarrEn IV. The Master said, “In hearing litigations, I am 
like any other body. What is necessary is to cause the pcople to 
have no litigations?” So, those who are devoid, of principle find it 
impossible to carry ont their speeches, and a great awe would be 
struck into men’s minds ;—this is called knowing the root. 
The above fourth chapter of commentary explains the root and the 
‘issue.

5 
E

which we understand that the words of Conf.

old and new schools, x T. —see Analects,

XV. xix.— Acc. to Ying-ti, ‘this par. illustrates 
the business of having the thoughts sincere." 
Acc. to Choo Ile, it tells that how the former 
kings renovated tlie people, was by their resting

in perfect excellence, so as to be able, throughout |

the empire and to future ages, to effect that there 
shoutd not be a singe thing but got its proper 
place.

4. EXPLANATION OF THE ROOT AND THE 
BRANCHES, See the Analects XII. xiii, from

terminate at E/N P, and that what follows

is fromm the compiler, According to the old 
commentators, this 5s the conclusion of the 
chapter on having the thoughts made sincere,

and that Hx +t x is thé foot. But ace.’is fromm the compiler, According to the old 
commentators, this 5s the conclusion of the 
chapter on having the thoughts made sincere,

and that Hx +t x is thé foot. But ace.’

2. PRMD 
to Choo, it is the illustration of illustrious virtue 
which is the root, while the renovation of the 
people is the result therefrom. Looking at the 
words of Confucius, we must conclude that 
sincerity was the subject in his mind.

CH. v.

SEN

pori Qaae CR Sas

THE GREAT LEARNING.

- 
L] 
XU 
EI 
1 
! Ü

" 
mn.

Sm

g 
8 
a

[ d 
e 
~ 
~

kN 
NN

zy 
n

210

v

NNB

E

ET

x 
D 
S

WSN AAS ah

OE pe EE

2110

,

SN 1

=

EEREN 
ACE 
zu

[d

v

=

ENN

[e]

inn

15

T

P 
a

SHORE

cx et 
a» 
SEIT

—

-

(v 
m 
a

v

N 
: 
EGER

F

CHAPTER V.

1. This is called knowing the root. 
2.

This is called the perfecting of knowledge.

The above fifth chapter of the commentary explained the meaning 
of “investigating things and carrying knowledge to the utmost 
extent,” but it is now lost. I have ventured to take thé views of the 
scholar Ching to supply it, as es :—The meaning of the

expression, “ The perfecting of knowledge depends on the inves-

ligation of things,” is this: If wè wish to carry our knowledge to the 
utmost, we must investigate the principles of all things we come into 
contact with, for the intelligeni mind of man is certainly formed 
to know, and there is not a single thing in. which dts principles

‘do not inhere. But so long. as all principles are not investigated,

man’s knowledge is incomplete. On this account, the Learn-

ing for Adults, at the, outset of its lessons, instructs the learner, 
in regard to all things in the” world, Ao proceed from what 
knowledge he has of their principles, and pursue' has investiga-

A i zd pr ; 
5. Ox rox INVESTIGATION OF THINGS, AND | tences come in, as the work stands in the Le-ke,

at the conclusion of what is deemed the classicalA i zd pr ; 
5. Ox rox INVESTIGATION OF THINGS, AND | tences come in, as the work stands in the Le-ke,

at the conclusion of what is deemed the classical

CARRYING KNOWLEDGE-TO THE UTMOST EXTENT. 
1. This ig said by one of the Ching to be Wt 
X. ‘superfluous text.“ 2. Choo He considers 
this to be the conclusion of a chapter which is 
now lost. But we have seen that the two sen-

text. It js not necessary to add anything here 
to what has been said there, and in the prolego- 
mena, on the new dispositions of the work from 
the time of the Sung scholars, and the manner 
in which Choo He has supplied this supposed 
missing chapter.

230 THE GREAT 
ie d 72

è 
i

-

ow 
v 
N

Sun I YA 
e |

"all

wy

ADM

ASRR

SUR

a

Sd

X 
=

SPEED

t 
Ld 
* 
[d

b 
4

em

\ 
"

is 
(SEE ESSE

Ld 
[od

SEA 
TINSA

&

38

-

Hy

=

NV

—

>

e

U

sd, An

tion of them, till he reaches

ammi um

LEARNING. 
COMM. on. vj.

<

*- 
s

- Seb

ms 
VS se

Pome NS

v

u

n:

ah Hl 
FH AIL YS i, 
Ae Jh 3l FES i 
A Bl 5. FA 48 
R m Hj 7] $5 
We E N Z. T. 
the extreme point. After exerting

himself in.this way for a long time, he will suddenly find himself” 
possessed of a wide and far-reaching penetration. Then, the 
qualities of all things, whether external or internal, the subtle or 
the coarse, will all be apprehended, and the mind, in its entire

substance and its relations to

This is called the investigation of things.

fection of knowledge

things, will be perfectly intelligent. 
This is called the per-

Cuarrer VI. I. What is meant by “making the thoughts sin- 
cere,” is the allowing no self-deception, as when we hate a bad smell, 
and as when we love what is beautiful This is called self-enjoy- 
ment. Therefore, the superior man must be watchful over himself

4

when he is alone.

2. There is no evil to which the mean man, dwelling retired,

will hot proceed, but when he sees a superior man, he instantly tries.4

when he is alone.

2. There is no evil to which the mean man, dwelling retired,

will hot proceed, but when he sees a superior man, he instantly tries.

6. Ox HAVING THE THOUGHTS SINCERE, 1. 
"The sincerity of the thoughts obtains, when they 
fovd without effort to what is right and wrong, 
and, in.order to this, a man must be specially on his 
guard in his solitary moments, B E is taken 
as if it were EH VIF, —repose or enjoyment in

one’s-sclf. . fife acc. to Choo He, is in the up.

4th tone, but the dict. makes it up. 2d. 2. Aa 
enforcement of the concluding clause in the last

paragraph. ER, up. 2d tone, the same as Ha, 
meaning BJ Heh ZA, tthe appearance of con- 
cealing. A Z Jl, p.— X refers to the su-

perior man mentioned above: the other.’ e 
z fi, him, aud noteshinself, which is its com-

envi, THE GREAT LEARNING. 231

z 
ui 
z

aly =

Sok Sat SE

SS hon 
EE 
*

Xu 
a

v 
Ld

RENNE

Pu 
=< 
"4

E 
a 
cI 
0 
zm

Een 
ze

Eno PIB L. N Wd

` a

to disguise ‘himself, concealing his evil, and displaying what is good. 
The other beholds him, as if he saw his heart and reins;-—of what 
use is his disguise? ` This is an instance of the saying What truly 
is Within will be manifested without." Therefore, the syperior'man 
must be watchful over himself when he is alone. 8 0

3. The disciple Tsing said, “What ten eyes behold, (what fen

t

hands point to, is to be regarded with reverence!”

4.

Riches adorn a house, and virtue adorns the person. 
mind 3s expanded, and the body is at ease.

The 
Therefore, the superior

man must make his thoughts sincere. l

vi

The above sith chapter of commentary explains making the thoughts

Seneere, i i 
mon signification. nl AF, ‘the lungs and 
liver, but with the meaning which we attach 
to the expression substituted for it in the trans- 
lation. The Chinese make the lungs the seat 
of rightcousness, and the liver the seat of bene-

volence. Compare A T H Biy N n8 
FF JB in tho Shoo-king, IV. vii. Sect. III. 3.volence. Compare A T H Biy N n8 
FF JB in tho Shoo-king, IV. vii. Sect. III. 3.

8. The use of fit at the beginning of this

paragraph (and extending, perhaps, over to the

next) should suffice to show, that the whole 
work is not his, as assumed by Choo He. ‘Ten’ 
is u round number, put for many, The recent 
commentator, Lo Chung-fau, refers Tsäng's ex- 
pressions to the multitude of spiritual beings, 
servants of Heaven or God, who dwell in the 
regions of the air, and are continually beholding 
men’s conduct. But they are probably only an 
emphatic way of exhibiting what is said in the 
preceding paragraph, 4. This par. is commonly 
referred to Tsing Sin, but whether correctly so 
or not cannot be positively affirmed. It is of the

same purport as the two preceding, showing 
that hypocrisy is of no use. Compare Mencius, 
VII. Pt L xxi. 4. Chang K'ang-shing explains 
n (read pwan) by S ‘large,’ and Choo He 
by x , as in the transl. The meaning is 
probably the same.—It is only the first of thesé 
parr. from which we can in any way ascertain 
the views of the writer on making the thoughts

sincere. The other parr. contain only illustra- 
tion or enforcement. Now the gist of the 1st

par. seems to be in itk, ‘allowing no

self-deception. After knowledge has been car- 
ried to the utmost, this remains to be done, and 
it is not trne that, when knowledge has been 
completed, the thoughts become sincere. This 
fact overthrows Choo He's interpretation of the 
vexed passages in what he calls the text of 
Confucius. Let the student examine his note 
appended to this chapter, and he will sce that 
Choo was not unconscious of this pinch of the 
difficulty.

IE hh EB 
OX ih

f8& A TT

pu

D

RINO

E

e

JUN

hi

Crarrer VII.

[ d

PERS RE ME

2

TIE GREAT LEARNING.

B 
I 
zy

COMM. CI vil.

nl

PERI

[d

NS

T 
zI

855 
SS

jc

inr 
da 
— T|] 
WMA

= 
LI 
ur

v 
= 
hme 
R

en 
— 
v

F 
x

\ 
d

a DBE 
2

YER ERS S| 
S34

a

RA

FH

\

— 
J

d

JE, H, |B 
I 
zy

COMM. CI vil.

nl

PERI

[d

NS

T 
zI

855 
SS

jc

inr 
da 
— T|] 
WMA

= 
LI 
ur

v 
= 
hme 
R

en 
— 
v

F 
x

\ 
d

a DBE 
2

YER ERS S| 
S34

a

RA

FH

\

— 
J

d

JE, H, |

1. What is meant by, “The cultivation of the per-

'son depends on T UNE the mind," may be thus illustrated : —If a

man be under the in

uence of passion, he will be incorrect in hi

conduct. He will be the same, if he is under the influence of terror, 
or under the influence of fond regard, or under that of sorrow and

distress. :

2, When the mind is not present, we look and do not sce; we 
hear and do not understand; we eat and do not know the taste of

what: we eat. 
3,

This is what is meant by saying that the cultivation of the per-

son depends on the rectifying of the mind.

The above seventh chapter 
and cultivating. the person.

7. ON PERSONAL CULTIVATION AS DEPENDENT 
ON THE RECTIFICATION OF THE MIND, 1. Here 
Choo He, following his master Ch'ing, would 
again alter the text, and change the second 
into N. Dut this is unnecessary. The I in 
B E is not the mere material body, but the 
person, the individual man, in contact with 
things, and intercourse with society, and the 2d

par. shows that the evil conduct in the first is a 
consequence of the mind's not being ünder con-

trol. To Oe Het, EWE, KPA Gaw, Ge

EB, the 2d term rises on the signification of 
the first, aud intensifies it. Thus, 58 is called

of commentary explains rectifying the mind

‘a burst of anger, and hie, ‘persistence in 
anger, &., &c.—I have said above that ' 
here is not the material body. Lo Chung - fan,

however, says that it is :— gn 59 £p, ‘ E d i

is the body of flesh. See his reasonings, in loc., 
but they do uot work conviction in the reader,

2. W F 1E Be this seems to be a case 
in point, to prove that we cannot tic AY) in this

work to any very definite application. Lo 
Chung-fan insists that it is ‘the God-given mo-

ral nature, but N X 4E E is evidently =work to any very definite application. Lo 
Chung-fan insists that it is ‘the God-given mo-

ral nature, but N X 4E E is evidently =

‘when the thoughts are otherwise engaged.

TIIE GREAT LEARNING.

CH. Vint, 233 
HARRI HB 
’ Ta EN

N 
i-o HOMO

Es

N 
4

> 
Ri

n:

[d

REHN 
ETN SN

Aa PNP

et

- 
aS

rur

. 
ka 
— 
e

N

H

SSNS

SATE aN Be at

E 
"d 
e

aS SEF

TSHA 
a

. 
ww 
-

SDH

Ld

HRS 
FERRE

\ 
"

}

Sino

EN 
= 
—

\ 
/

2 
805 
SH

a

Hi 
ux

NH 
SIR

E 
=

E 
a

AN

a 
t 
wv 
- 
a. 
=

2 AN b

CraPrER VIII. I. What is meant by “The regulation of one's 
family depends on the cultivation of his person,” is this:—Men are 
partial where they feel affection and love; partial where they de- 
spise and dislike; partial where they stand in awe and reverence; par- 
tial where they feel sorrow and compassion ; partial where they are 
arrogant and rude. Thus it is that there are few men in the 
world, who love, and at thé same time know the bad qualities of 
the object of their love, or who hate, and yet know the excellences of. 
the object of their hatred, |

2. Hence it is said, in the common adage, “A man does not 
know the wickedness of his son; he does not know the richness of 
his growing corn." MM A i

3. This is what is meant by saying that if the person be not 
cultivated, a man cannot regulate his family.

. Tun NECESSITY OF CULTIVATING THE FON | that man, When I see that he is virtuous, I feel

BON, IN ORDER TO THE REGULATION OF THE Far | affection for, and love him. I ought then to 
MUL¥, ‘The lesson here is evidently, that men are | turn round nud compare him with myself,

continually. falling into error, in consequence 
of. the partiality of their feelings and affections, 
How this error affects their personal cultiva- 
tion, id interferes with the regulating of their 
familics, is not specially indicated. 1. The old 
fnterpreters seem to go far astray ju their inter-

pretation, They take Z in Z 4t pra

e, and'tlie other clauses; ypretation, They take Z in Z 4t pra

e, and'tlie other clauses; y

Wars as= $94, ‘to go to,’

and pua as synonymous with ES, to compare.“

Ying:tá thus expands K'ang-shing on A

Since he is virtuous and I love him, then, if I 
cultiyate myself and be virtuous, 1 shall so be 
able in like manner to make all mbn feel,affoc- 
tion for and love me? In a similar way: the, 
other clauses are dealt with, Choo He takes 
1 " n A "3 "m 
as= fh, ‘in regard to,’ and pE (read Bei) 
as ffi ‘partial,’ *one-sided, Even his op», 
ponent, Lo Chung-fan, interprots here in the 
same way. ah Ss and the other combinations

are to be taken as if there were a im: ‘and,’

Ht rx e th bf b : Suppose I go to between them. Fix is heres= fef, proud, uu ·

COMM, CU. 1X.

234 THE GREAT LEARNING, 
» Eres

71

— » M XA

une 
*

dg 
kE

KES 
RS

FHA

—

Ein 
eS RIT

a 
SEIS pk

v 
v

-

dl 35 |

u 
S

E | 
à ENSE

DHW REN

XR 
SA 
a

v

eee ee

4 
v

Es:

Xi | TT

THUIN

oe 
ww

ENS 
STREETS! OE WHINE

DEP ELA

4

Patel

\ 
4

i: cam

, UL, yr N Y ZA fm dE.

The above eiMh chapter of commentary explains cultivating the 
person and regulating the family.

CuAPTER IX. 1. What is meant by “Tn order rightly to govern 
his State, it is nécessary first to regulate his family, Vis this:—It is 
not possible for one to teach others, while he cannot teach his own 
family. Therefore, the ruler, Without going beyond his family, 
completes the lessons for the State. There is filial piety :—there- 
with the sovereign should be served. There is fraternal submis- 
sion :—therewith elders and ‘superiors should be served. There is 
kindness :—therewith the muJtitude should be treated.

2. Inthe Annountement to K‘ang, it is said, „Act as if you were 
watching dver an infant.“ Ifa mother is re: ally anxious about it, 
though she may not hit exactly the wants of her infant, she will not 
bé Har front doing so. There néver'has been à yirl who learned to 
bring up a child, | that she might afterwards marry.ac From the loving example of one family, a whole State becomes 
loving, and from its courtesies, the whole State becomes eg

civil. $ 2. pH. — great, ‘tall; 55 Z $H.—

$ ‘the albos (richne as, abundance) of his grow- 
ing crop.’ Farmers word noted, it would ap-

being supposed to puist,—which is the Jürca of p 
AX: —it i$ shown how the virtues that secure tha

‘peay in China, so long ago, for grumbling about 
their crops.

VÀ, Ox REGULATING THE FAMILY A8 THE MEANS 
TO "HE WELL-ORDERING OF THE BTATE. I. Tiere 
te here implied the weessity of slf-cultivation to the 
rule, buth of the Va ly and of the State, and that

regulation of the fiunily, have their corresponding 
virtues in. the wider sphere of tha State, Pig 
has here gon the moral and the political mean-

Ni b x pis F. *the superior

nan uii w 4 is the government of the state.’

ing; it is

TIE GREAT LEARNING.

»

wr 
wn

> 
EET

e

BEY 
oe 
=F

Spa

4E 5 A ALI BH — — 
Jg A AL Bp Bb IC us

rano!

—

a

By 
=

PERS

zi 
“KOH

CLIE

i» 
iA

d-a

AG 
p.

while, Rs Vh ambition and perverseness of the one man, the whole 
State may be led to rebellious disorder ;—such is the nature of the 
influence. This verifies the saying, Affairs may be ruined by a 
single sentence; a kingdom may be settled by its one man.”

ud. Yaou and Shun led on the empire with benevolence, and the 
people followed them. Kéé and Chow led on the empire with 
yiolence, and the people followed them. The orders which these 
issuod were contrary to the practices which they lov ed, and so the 
péople did not follow them. On this account, the ruler must him- 
self be possessed of the good qualities, and "then. he may vequire 
them in the people. He must not have the bad qualities in himself, 
and then he may require that they shall not be in the people. Never 
has there been a man, who, not having reference to his own character 
and wishes in dealing with others, was able effectually to instruct 
them:«15. Thus we see how the government of the State depends on the 
regulation of tlie family.

lt béing once suggested to Choo He that xX

"IZ shotid be xX HE * he replied — xe 
SUAE ENIE Z K He me

* 
L d 
— 
Ld 
Ld

TS

SIRENS 
D

e 
v

N 
ty 
-

NSEHISER

E F SR

Ld 
P

EHI

8

meum

i!

E

8 
ERN

b 
8

‘to love the people, as thé second object propos- 
ed in the Grent Learning. 3 Mow certainly and 
rapidly the influence of the family extends to the

impossibility of that's being taught is just my 
taahility to teach? 2. See the Shoo-kiug, V. x. 
7. Both in the Shoo-king and here, some vcrb, 
like act, must be supplied. This par. seems de- 
signe Yo show thi it the ruler must be carried on 
“to his object by an inward, unconstrained, feeling, 
like that of the mother for her inJieut, Lo Chung-

fun insists on this as harmonizing with XR.

State, — 2 is the one family of the ruler,

and —— is the ruler. —— A „=I, the ono 
man, is a way in which the emperor spenks of 
himself; see Ana, XX. i. 5.— = E hj

n8 in Anu. II. ii. — . AK 
Ef. — on». Ann. XIU. xv. f und ak have

THE GREAT LEARNING. COMM. cn. IX.

Atto e

rs

ZEE 
BMS =| 
peo aya

EXPL. > Ekim

[ d

Thee 
TS SHIN 
SEES oe 
SEHR

go 
v 
Ser 
[d

HAIN SH

o

RRE

A

HAPHE -t Fer 
zi

H

6. In the Book of Poetry, it is said, “That peach tree, so delicate 
and elegant! How luxuriant is its foliage! This girl is going. to 
her husband's house. She will rightly order her household." Let 
the houschold be rightly ordered, and then the people of the State 
may be taught.

7. In the Book of Poetry, it is said, * They can discharge their 
duties to their elder brothers, They can discharge their duties to 
their younger brothers." Let the ruler discharge his duties to his 
elder and younger brothers, and then he may tcach the people of 
the State.8. In the Book of Poetry, it is said, In his deportment there is 
nothing wrong; he rectifies all the people of the State." Yes; when 
the ruler, as a father, a son, and a brother, is a model, then the people 
imitate: him.

9. This is what is meant by saying, “The government of his 
kingdom depends on his regulation of the family."

reference to the x, DE Gifs . in par. | as simply good.“ 6. See the She-king, I. I.

1. 4. An illustration of the last. part of the last 
paragraph, But from the examples cited, the 
sphere of influence is extended from the State 
to the empire, and the family, moreover, does 
hot intervene between the empire and the ruler. 
In A. Wr 4, dk must be understood as 
- * PL P 
referring to the tyrants, Kéé and Chow. Their 
orders were good, but unavailing, in consequence

of their own contrary example, 859 = N. Br

NP. g. ‘what is kept in one's own person,’

fie, his character and mind. Ap, —sce Ana. 
V. xi; XV. ili, Ying-ti seems to take Yo AA

Ode VI. st. 3. The ode celebrates the wife of 
king Wan, and the happy influence of their

family government, E E F. Obs.

is feminine, as in Ana. V. i. Ft ‘going 
home,’ a term for marriage, used by women. 7. 
Sce the She-king, II. ii. Ode VI. st. 3. The ode 
was sung at entertainments, when the emperor 
feasted the princes, It celebrates their virtues. 
8. See the She-king, I. xiv. Ode III. st. 8. It 
celebrates, acc. to Choo Ie, the praises of some 
Leun-tsze, or ruler. yu not four states,’

but the four quarters of the state, the whole of 
it.

THE GREAT LEARNING. 231

Hn

— 
= 
EI 
Ü

W. 
i

meats |

[ d

aigi 
*

GEES 
Ec

ASH

— 
v 
r

SR

m

thane AS 
S 
d M 
Biz

—

\ 
4

186 
Wy

Hil 
VBE bg T M . AK

The above ninth chapter of commentary explains regulating the 
family and governing the kingdom.aigi 
*

GEES 
Ec

ASH

— 
v 
r

SR

m

thane AS 
S 
d M 
Biz

—

\ 
4

186 
Wy

Hil 
VBE bg T M . AK

The above ninth chapter of commentary explains regulating the 
family and governing the kingdom.

Cnarrer X. 1. What is meant by The making the whole em- 
pire peaceful and happy depends on the government of his State,” 
is this:— When the sovereign behaves to his aged, as the aged should 
be behaved to, the people become filial; when the sovereign behaves 
to his elders, as elders should be behaved to, the people learn bro- 
therly submission; when the sovereign treats compassionately the 
young and helpless, the people do the same. Thus the ruler has a 
principle with which, as with a measuring square, he may regulate 
his conduct. i

2. What a man dislikes in his superiors, let him not display in 
the treatment of hìs inferiors; what fe dislikes in inferiors, let him

, not display in the service of his superiors; what he hates in those 
who are before him, let him not therewith precede those who are 
behind him ; what he hates in those who are behind him, let him

10. Ox THE WELL-ORDERING OF THE STATE, 
AND MAKING THE WHOLE EMPIRE PEACEFUL AND 
marry, ‘The key to this chapter is in the phrase

F4 afi 2 4. the principle of reciprocity, 
the doing to others as we would that they 
should do to us, though here, as elsewhere, it is

put forth negatively. It is implied in the ex-

pression of the last ch.— Ar By 3E. E N

2m. but it is here discussed. at length, and

shown in its highest application. The following

analysis of the chapter is translated freely from 
H2 2

the yu ES Din E 1 This ch. explains tlie

well-ordering of the State, aud the tranquilliza-

tion of the empire. The greatest stress is toanalysis of the chapter is translated freely from 
H2 2

the yu ES Din E 1 This ch. explains tlie

well-ordering of the State, aud the tranquilliza-

tion of the empire. The greatest stress is to

be laid on the phrase e measuring square. That, 
and the expression in the general commentary 
boring and hating what the people love and hate, 
and not thinking only of the profit, exhaust the 
teaching of the chap. It is divided into five 
parts. The jirst, embracing the two first para- 
graphs, teaches, that the way to make the em- 
pire tranquil and happy is in the principle of 
the measuring square. ‘The second part embraces 
three paragraphs, and teaches that the appli- 
cation of the measuring square is-scen in loving, 
and hating, in common with the people. The 
consequences of dosing and gaining are mentioned 
for the first time in the 4th par., to wind up the 
ch. so far, showing that the decree of Heaven 
goes or remains, according as the people’s hearts 
are lost or gained. The (id part embraces

t

to 
2 
oo

= 
y

Em 
A

FEN

SEO

`~ 
E 
*

m 
a

v 
Q 
E 
v

5

SN

D

v 
- 
4

Dr 
SE

e 
mpm 
Ca SSN

mS

gw 
MN 
pnt

TIE GREAT LEARNING.

COMM. ON. X.

SSS

mx

v

Fi 
guess

ERIS

= ~ 
ek

ant

S

(SE RUN:

KS 
RE

IR

hot therewith follow those who are before him; what he hates to 
receive on the right, let him not.bestow on the left; what he hates

to'receive on the left, let him not bestow on the right:—this i is what 
is called “T he principle, with which, as with a measuring square; to

regulate one's conduct." 
3.

In the Book of Poetry, it is said, “How much to be rejoiced 
in are these princes, the parents of the people!

1”

When 'd prince

loves what the people love, and hates what the people hate, their is 
he what is called the parent of the people.

4.

In the Book of Poetry, it is said, *Lofty

is that southern

hill, with its rugged masses of rocks! "Greatly distinguished are4.

In the Book of Poetry, it is said, *Lofty

is that southern

hill, with its rugged masses of rocks! "Greatly distinguished are

you, O grand- teacher Yin, the people all look up to you.” 
of kingdoins may not neglect to be careful.

Rulers 
If they deviate o a

mean selfishness, they will be a disgrace in the empire. ce

eight paragraphs, and teaches that the most im- 
portant result of loving and hating in common 
with the people is seen in making the rvot the 
primary subject, and the branch only secondary. 
Here, in par. 11, mention is again made of yain- 
tag and losing, illustrating the meaning of the 
quotation in it, and showing that to the collee- 
tion or dissipation of the people the decree of 
Heaven is attached. The fourth part consiste 
‘of five paragraphs, and exhibits the. extreme 
results of loving and hating, as shared with 
the people, or on one's own private feeling, 
and it has special reference to the sovereign's 
employment of ministers, because there is no- 
thing in the principle more important than that. 
The 19th par. speaks of gaining and losing, for 
thé third time, showing that from the 4th par, 
downwards, in reference both to the hearts of 
the people and the decreo of Heaven, the appli- 
cation or non-application of the principle of the 
megdsuring-squaye depends gn the mind of the

sovereign. The f/th part embraces the other 
paragraphs. Because the root of the evil of 
a sovercign’s not applying that principle, lies in 
his not knowing how wealth is produced, and 
employs mean men for that object, the distinc- 
tion between rightcousuess and profit is here 
much insisted on, the former bringing with, it 
all advantages, and the latter leading. to all evil, 
consequences. Thus the sovereign is admon- 
ished, and it is scen how to be careful of his vir- 
tue is the root of the principle of the measuring- 
square; and his loving and hating, in common, 
sympathy with the people, is its reality.’1. There is here no progress of thought, but 
& repetition of what has been insisted on in the 
two last chapters. In E i , the first 
characters are verbs, with the meaning which 
it requires so many words to bring out in the

translation, = Thy M. properyi ‘far

THE GREAT

M N.

4r mA +, A,

bo 
c2 
e

LEARNING.

ERE IER 
t ee 
B A B. E 
TR Er Be 
Ac ng fr p B.

Ke M. Rx, E

" 
5. In the Book of Poetry, it is said, “Before, the sovereigng of

the Yin dynasty had lost the hearts of the people, they could appear 
before. God. Take warning from the house of Yin. The great decree 
is not easily preserved.” This shows that, by gaining the people, the

kingdom is gained, and, by losing the people, the kingdom is lost.

6. 
virtue.

give him its wealth. 
for expenditure,

On this account, the ruler will first take pains about his own’ 
Possessing virtue will give him the people. 
people will give him the territory.

Possessing the 
Possessing the territory will

Possessing the wealth, he will have resources

7. Virtue is the root; wealth is the result. ;

8.

lf he make the root his secondary object, and the result his

primary, he will only wrangle with his people, and teach them

rapine.

therless ;' here, =the young and helpless.’ 4s.

real as, ande Y^ to rebel, ‘to act contrary to.’

ql ; here and throughout the ch., has refe- 
rence to office, and specially to the imperial or

highest. N id E is a verb, read 
li, ace. to Choo Ile, = E. to measure ; 4B.— 
the mechanical instrument, ‘the square.’ It hav- 
ing been seen that the ruler’s example is so influ- 
ehtial, it follows that the minds of all men are 
the same in sympathy and tendency. He has 
then only to take his own mind, and measure 
therewith the minds of others. If he act ac- 
cordingly, the grand result—the empire tranquil 
and happy—will ensue. 2. A Jengthened descrip- 
ti of the principle of reciprocity. X.—up. 3d 
tone, ‘to precede 3. See the She-king, II. ii.Ode V. st. 3. The ode is one that was sung at 
festivals, and celebrates the virtues of the

princes present. Choo He makes 1 (read 
cho, up, 3d song) au expletive. Clring's gloss, in

- 
=.

ay at M takes it as= EL, and the

5

whole is— 1 gladden these princes, the parents 
of the people.“ 4. See the She-king, II. iv. Ode 
VH, st. 1. The ode complains of the emperor

Yew qao» for his employing unworthy minis- 
ters. , fifi, rend tsi, meaning ‘rugged and 
lofty-looking.’ A=. tall? Ng read p'eih, 
as in ch. viii. e is explained in the dict. by 
E, ‘disgrace.’ Choo He seems to take it as

= 5k, ‘to kill,’ as did the old commentators, 
They say: — he will be put to death by the. 
people, as were the tyrants, Këë and Chow.“ ö. 
See the She-king, III. i. Ode I. st. G, where wo 
have H. for Ae and ER for "ZR. The ode is

supposed to be addressed to king Shing qu» 
to stimulate him to imitate the virtues of hia 
grandfather Wan. . the sovereigns of tho 
Yin dy nasty.“ The eupital of the Shang dy- 
nasty was changed to Yin by P‘wan-kang, B. C.

210

ll

Rey Sad

t 
s

m 
3

"uli 
ZB

x 
She Sas

ER

* 
Ld 
€ 
v

NS

[lio 
EN 
J

lier 
N 
NN

H. N KT

9.

THE GREAT LEARNING.

COMM. Ci. x.

EW Pe 
A. 
ie, fE,

æ 
+0

=

hi

i, i 
su) Ha 
. A

z

d= 
sull n

m i 
„ H

al

Hence, the accumulation of wealth is the way to scatter the

people; and the letting it be scattered among them is the way to

collect the people.

10. And hence, the ruler’s words going forth contrary to right, 
will come back to him in the same way, and wealth, gotten by 
improper ways, will take its departure by the same.

11. In the Announcement to K'ang, it is said, “The decree in-

deed may not always rest on us;” that is, goodness obtains the decree, 
and the want of goodness loses it.

12. In the Book of Ts‘oo, it is said, “The kingdom of Ts‘oo 
does not consider that to be valuable. It values, znstead, its good

men."12. In the Book of Ts‘oo, it is said, “The kingdom of Ts‘oo 
does not consider that to be valuable. It values, znstead, its good

men."

1400, after which the dynasty was so denomi- 
nated, PE L ab. acc. to Choo He, means

‘they were the sovercigns of the emperor, and 
corresponded to (fronted) God.“  K'ang-shing 
says :—* Before they lost their people, from their 
virtue, they were also able to appear before 
Ilenven; that is, Heaven accepted their sneri- 
fices? Lo Chung-fan makes it.— They har- 
monized with God; that is, in loving the people.“ 
K'ang-shing's interpretation is, l apprehend, 
the correct one, = as in ch. iii. 4. 6.

^ti fe qili, fit here, accord. to Choo He, is 
the ‘illustrious virtue’ at the beginning of the 
book. His opponents say that it is the exhibi- 
tion of virtue; that is, of filial piety, brotherly 
submission, Kc. This is more in harmony with

the first par. of the chapter. 8. Bh and P 
are used as verbs, — lift, Ht. *to consider slight,"

*to consider important.’ EL R. will wran- 
gle the (i e, with the) people.“ The ruler will 
be trying to take, and the people will be trying 
to hold. hii Ti,—' he will give—(i. e., lead 
the people to, —teach them)—' rapine? The two 
plhrasesz-he will be against the people, and 
well set them against himself, and against one

another. Ying-ti explains them—‘ people wran- 
gling for gain will give reins to their rapacious’ 
disposition.' 9. B ; ‘wealth being scattered,’

that is, diffused, and allowed to be só by the 
ruler, among the people. The collecting and 
scattering of the people are to be understood 
with reference to their feelings towards their 
ruler. 10. The ‘words’ are to be understood of

governmental orders and enactments. T$. read 
poi, 3f. * to act contrary to, ‘to rebel,’ that 
which is outraged being zi]. ‘what is right,’ or, 
in the first place, Fem. * the people's hearts,” 
and, in the second place, pis Ap, ‘the rulers 
heart, Our proverb—‘guods ill-gotten go ill-spent’ might be translated by ^t (Eo itn A 
E: A JF He m 11 „ but those words have a

diff. meaning in the text. 11. Sce the A‘ang 
Kaou, p. 23. ‘The only difficulty is with P. 
K‘ang-shing and Ying-tí do not take it as an 
expletive, but say it. in, or on; — The 
appointment of Heaven may not constantly rest 
on one family.“ Treating in this way, tho 
supplement in the Shoo-king, should be us.

EN

ou. x. nE GREAT LEARNING,

if

3 
E

P 
HD

e

. 
"- 
v 
Ld

N IIE 
HNA

coppie z- ear cud 
X 
=

e

— 
NN

aS ye 
Tus Sets

. 
v 
v 
v

^ 
eZ 
N

O

Eau: 
mre

\ 
"

Wi 
BH 
CORR 
> | ait 
zi

a> 
GG

i > SRS a SSE

3i

ceo 
-

» 
w

— 
EM 
NE 
TE

* N ee E. HN

13. Duke Wen’s uncle, Fan, said, «Our fugitive does not account 
that to be precious. What he considers precious, is the affection 
due to his parent.“

14. In the Declaration of the duke of Ts‘in, it is said, Let me 
havebut one minister, plain andsincere, not pretending to other abilities, 
but with a simple, upright, mind; and possessed of generosity, regard- 
ing the talents of others as though he himself possessed them, and, 
where he finds accomplished and perspieacious men, loving them in 
his heart more than his mouth expresses, and really showing him- 
self able to bear them and employ them :—such a minister will be 
able to preserve my sons and grandsons, and black-haired people, 
and benefits likewise to the kingdom may well be looked for from 
him. But if i be his character, when he finds men. of ability, to be 
jealous and hate them; and, when he finds accomplished and per- 
spicacious men, to oppose them and not allow their advancement, 
shovilie himself really not able to bear them:—such a minister

Xl as in p, 5. 12. The Book of T's'oo is found | its treasures, but on its able and virtuous min-Xl as in p, 5. 12. The Book of T's'oo is found | its treasures, but on its able and virtuous min-

in the 2l Bn. ‘National records, a collection | isters. 13. 5B 4 P * uncle Fan? that is, uncle 
purporting to be of the Chow dynasty, and, in | to Wan, the duke of Tsin, See Ann. XIV. xvi. 
rolution to the other states, what Confucius’ | Win is the T A or, ‘fugitive.’ In the early

ean Autumn’ is to Loo. The exact | part of his life, he was a fugitive, and suffored 
words of the text do not occur, but they could many vicissitudes of fortune. Once, the duke 
ensily be constructed from the narrative. An mn x A him, w 
offiger of Ts'o being sent on un embassy to | of Ts‘in (ZS) having offered to help him, when 
Tain (BB), the minister who received him asked | he was in mourning for his father who had ex- 
E „ y | belted hin, to recover Tsin, his uncle Fan gave 
about a famous girdle of Ts'oo, called EI FfF, | the reply in the text. The that in the transla- 
how much it was worth. The officer replied | tion refers to 13 [ad] getting the kingdom.’ 14.

that his country did not look on such things as | “Phe declaration of the duke of Ts‘iv’ is the last

THE GREAT LEARNING.

COMM. cn. x,

242

zb

Ex

e

E

(v 
ER 
vmi 
Sa 
S e

21 
zb 
GG

PUT 
um

€

LS 
Lad 
v 
Ca

atk 
BE

XE SESS EA

S 
ull

unb 
GG

xk

|

:

SN 
Bx 
a

e 
s

T de 
^

BS 
NNER

JU 0 U 
fs BL

anb 
GG

e

>the ae

REAL 
SH

zB

v.

[o]

NAE

will not be able to 9 iny sons and grandsons and black-haired 
people; and may he not also be pronounced dangerous fo the State?”

15. It is only the truly virtuous man, who can send away such 
a man and banish him, driving him out among the barbarous tribes 
around, determined not to dwell along with him in the Middle 
kingdom. This is in accordance with the saying, “It is only the

truly virtuous man who can love or who can hate > others.”truly virtuous man who can love or who can hate > others.”

16. To see men of worth and not be able to raise them to office; 
to raise them to office, but not to do so quickly: this is disrespect- 
ful. To see bad men and not be able to remove them; to remove 
them, but not to do so to a distance :—this is weakness.

17. To love those whom men hate, and to hate those whom men 
love ;—this is to outrage the natural feeling of men. Calamities 
cannot fail to come down on him who does so.

18. Thus we see that the sovereign has a great course fo pursue. 
He must show entire self-devotion and sincerity to attain it, and by 
pride and extravagance he will fail of it.

"hook in the Shoo-king. It was made by one of | preceding. In 12 pi z Z refers to the

the dukes of Ts‘in to his officers, after he liad m 8 :

sustained a great disaster, in consequence of ne- | bad minister, there described. The pq N. 
four E;' see the Le-ke, III. jii. 14. A f flit

glecting the advice of his most faithful minister. 
hj rh Ed =e C. N N ep ld, en

Between the text here, and that which we find 
in the Shoo-king, there’ are some differences, 
not dwell together w with him in the Middle king-

‘but they are unimportant. 15. t X is here,

nce. to Choo He and his followers, the prince 
who applies the principle of reciprocity, ex- 
pounded in the second par. Lo Chung-fan con-

tends that it is 1 ER ds *the lover of the

peuple,’ ‘The pur. is closely connected with the

dom. China is evidently so denominated, from 
its being thought to be surrounded by barbar-

ous tribes. HEfE ARE Z. see Ans.

IV. iii. 16. I have translated Gi as if it wero

THE GREAT LEARNING.

CH, x.

E 
SRA

v

N 
"

eens

Bills

[nk

Fra

e

+% 
žarne

v 
b 
*

. 
dne

d 
Ai

ENT? 
Tre

SR

C»

AL 
NENW

AREE

aep RE RN 
NER S.

Bats

FFEN

3

b

A 
KI

HH K KE pij . XCH, x.

E 
SRA

v

N 
"

eens

Bills

[nk

Fra

e

+% 
žarne

v 
b 
*

. 
dne

d 
Ai

ENT? 
Tre

SR

C»

AL 
NENW

AREE

aep RE RN 
NER S.

Bats

FFEN

3

b

A 
KI

HH K KE pij . X

119. There is a great course also for the production of wealth. 
Let the producers be many and the consumers few. Let there be 
activity in the production, and economy in the expenditure. Then 
the wealth will always be sufficient.

20. The virtuous ruler, by means of his wealth, makes himself 
more distinguished. The vicious ruler accumulates wealth, at the 
expense of his life. à;

21. Never has there been a case of the sovereign loving benevo- 
lence, and the people not loving righteousness. Never has there been 
a case where the people have loved righteousness, and the affairs 
of the sovereign have not been carried to completion. And never 
has there been a case where the wealth in such a State, collected in 
the treasuries and arsenals, did not continue in the sovereign's

i possession.

99. The officer Măng Heen said, “He who kecps horses and 
a carriage does not look after fowls and pigs. The family which

: 45. which K'ang-shing thinks should be in the 
text. Ching E (M) would substitute S. 
idle,“ instead. of . and Choo He does not 
know which suggestion to prefer. Lo Chung - 
an stoutly contends for retaining fr, and in-

,terprets it as=‘ fate,’ but he is obliged to sup- 
ply u good deal himself, to make any sense of 
the passage. See bis argument, i» luc. The

peraphrasts all explain pj? by H. ‘carly.’ 
11 up gd tone, but with a hiphil force. 3R 
is roferred to Tk 118 in last pur., and ig to 
HHN ch. fe. 17. This is spoken of theperaphrasts all explain pj? by H. ‘carly.’ 
11 up gd tone, but with a hiphil force. 3R 
is roferred to Tk 118 in last pur., and ig to 
HHN ch. fe. 17. This is spoken of the

ruler not having respect to the common feelings 
of the people in his employment of ministers, 
and the consequences thereof to himself. » 
low. Ist tone, is used as in Ana. XI. ix. 4, or 
the prep. P. This par. speaks generally of the 
primal cause of gaining and losing, and shows how 
the principle of the measuring square *nust have its 
root in the ruler's mind. So, in the H SIE The

great course is explained by Choo He as—‘ the 
art of occupying the throne, and therein culti- 
vating himself and governing others.“ Ying-t& 
says it is—'the course by which he practises filial 
Piety, fraternal duty, benevolence, and right-

eousness.“ Bs and * are here qualities of the

244 TIIE GREAT LEARNING. COMM, on. x.

S 
(v 
PS 
Rug 
a

P 
Jd

STN Hk teats e

piste 
IY

t 
= 
Pi 
Jd 
AY 
I 
i

aN

aN > 
DAT 
=}

SH

HS 
EHRT 
Ne ADH

NEA

2

XE 
25: 
—

— 
-> 
v 
2

hu

MESES HN Spam

D 
- 
r 
[ d

aay 
> 
ER

yb aeP 
Jd

STN Hk teats e

piste 
IY

t 
= 
Pi 
Jd 
AY 
I 
i

aN

aN > 
DAT 
=}

SH

HS 
EHRT 
Ne ADH

NEA

2

XE 
25: 
—

— 
-> 
v 
2

hu

MESES HN Spam

D 
- 
r 
[ d

aay 
> 
ER

yb ae

E TÉ D RE, ri . M 
keeps its stores of ice docs not rear cattle or sheep. So, the house 
which possesses a hundred chariots should not keep a minister to 
look out for imposts that he may lay them on the people. Than to 
have such a minister, it were better for that house to have one who 
should rob it of its revenues." This is in accordance with the saying: 
—"'In a State, pecuniary gain is not to be considered to be pros- 
perity, but its prosperity will he found in righteousness.” — ' 
23. When he who presides over a State or a family makes his 
revenues his chief business, he must be under the influence of some 
small, moan, man, He may consider this man to be good; but when 
such a person is employed in the administration of a State or family, 
calamities from Heaven, and injuries from men, will befal it together, 
and, though a good man may take his place, he will not be able to 
remedy the evil. This illustrates again the saying, “In a State, gain 
is not to be considered prosperity, but its prosperity will be found 
3n righteousness.”

s 
EHs 
EH

same nature, They are not contrasted as in 
Ann. XIII. xxvi. 19. This is understood by 
K‘ang-shing as requiring the promotion of agri- 
culture, and that is included, but does not ex- 
haust the meaning. The consumers are the 
salaried’ officers of the government. The eenti- 
ment of the whole is good ;—where there is 
cheerful industry in the people, and an economi- 
eal adininistration of the government, the finan- 
ces will be flourishing, 20. The sentiment here 
is substantially the same as in parr. 7, 8. The 
old interpretation is different: — The virtuous 
man uses bis wealth so as to make his person 
distinguished. He who is not virtuous, toils 
with hig body to increase his wealth” 21. This 
shows how the people respond to the influence 
of the ruler, and that benevolence, even to the 
scattering of his wealth on the part of the latter, 
js the way to permanent prosperity and wealth. 
22. Iläen was the hon. epithet, of Chung-sun

Mc ( iD, a worthy minister of Loo, under the

two dukes, who ruled before the birth of Con- 
fucius, His sayings, quoted here, were pre- 
served by tradition, or recorded in some work 
which is now lost, 2 (read hith)

an a scholar’s being first ealled to effiee, he was 
gifted by his prince with a carriage, and four’ 
horses. He was then supposed to withdraw 
from petty ways of getting wealth. The Spal 
or high officers of a State, kept ice for use in 
their funeral rites and sacrifices. N .— 
with reference to the cutting the ice to store it.

K fk Z Ei. ee Ana. XI. xvi. 23. 1n 
F f . is used as a verb. PJ F 
$Ñ, ‘considers to be good. ^ a Fil à 
5 yl ES j^ 33e Mencius, I. Pt. I. i

et piss im.

,

en. x. THE GREAT LEARNING. 945

= 
SH

w 
Ee 
s

& 
AH

eum 
.= 
SW- 
225

a

ISN 
Ft

U 
v

B

e 
[ d

EN 
ISS

E 
D 
ESet piss im.

,

en. x. THE GREAT LEARNING. 945

= 
SH

w 
Ee 
s

& 
AH

eum 
.= 
SW- 
225

a

ISN 
Ft

U 
v

B

e 
[ d

EN 
ISS

E 
D 
ES

The above tenth chapter of commentary explains the government of 
the State, and the making the empire peaceful and happy. 
There are thus, in all, ten chapters of commentary, the first four 
of which discuss, in a general manner, the scope of the principal 
topic of the Work; while the other six go particularly into an 
exhibition of the work required in its subordinate branches. The 
Jifth chapter’ contains the important subject of comprehending 
true excellence, and the sixth, what is the foundation of the attain- 
ment of true sincerity. Those two chapters demand the especial 
attention of the learner. Let not the reader despise them because 
of their simplicity. i

SSDH IREN 
PRERA 
I

SE ES 
gis Fo 
n 
+a

246

X

L3 
- 
-

s |

Pars

4

SES | ul

THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN.

F 
EE

U

| 
Tain 
SIN

EH 
BN SH

FC WERL 
Se 
DSH ik

v 
— 
Jf

v

E 
FHI 
E

8 
TH ot SH 
ENT

:

5 3L K

N 
ex

V master, the philosopher Ching, says, “ Being without inclina-

tion to either side is called cuuna; admitting of no change is 
called yune. By cuune is denoted the correct course to be pur- 
sued by all under heaven ; by yuna is denoted the fixed principle 
regulating all under heaven. This work contains the law of the 
mind, which was handed down from one to another, in the Con- 
fucian school, till Tsze-sze, fearing lest in the course of time 
errors should arise about it, committed it to writing, and delivered 
it to Mencius. The book first speaks of one principle; it nest 
spreads this out, and embraces all things; finally, it returns and 
gathers them all up under the one principle. Unroll it, and it

THE TITLE OF THE WonK.— , ‘The 
doctrine of the Menn.“ I have not attempted 
to translate the Chinese character , as toTHE TITLE OF THE WonK.— , ‘The 
doctrine of the Menn.“ I have not attempted 
to translate the Chinese character , as to

the exact foree of which there is considerable 
difference of opinion, both among native com- 
mentators, and among previous translators.

Ch'ing K'ang-shing said —n E rH Jf . 
AH SAAN FAB, ‘the Work 
is named because it records the practice 
of the non-deviating mind and of harmony.’

He takes , in the sense of , ‘to use,’

‘to employ,’ which is the first given to it in the 
Gict., and is found in the Shoo-king, I. p. 9. As

to the meaning of FH, and EU see ch. i. p. 4. 
‘This appears to have been the accepted meaning

of Aff. in this combination, till Ching E intro-

duced that of AN By ‘unchanging,’ as in the

introductory note, which, however, the dict. 
does not acknowledge. Choo He himself says

HS A thai Tf N R 
2 22 E „. » * Chung is the name

for what is without inclination or deflection, 
which neither exceeds nor comes short. Yung 
means ordinary, constant. The dict. gives 
another meaning of Yung, with special refev-

ence to the point before us. It is aida

» ‘It also means harmony; and then 
reference is made to K'ang-shing's words given 
above, the compilers not having observed that 
he immediately subjoins— f. th, ehow-

on. 1. THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN.’

247

oc HR 
F3:

fills the universe ; voll it up, and it retires and lies hid in mysteri- 
ousness. The relish of it is inexhaustible. The whole of it is 
solid learning. When the skilful reader has explored it with de- 
light till he has apprehended it, he may carry it into practice all 
has life, and will find that it cunnot be exhausted.

CuarrER I. 1. What Heaven has conferred is called THE NATURE; 
an accordance with this nature is called THe PATH of duty; the re- 
gulation of this path is called InsTRUCTION.CuarrER I. 1. What Heaven has conferred is called THE NATURE; 
an accordance with this nature is called THe PATH of duty; the re- 
gulation of this path is called InsTRUCTION.

ing that he takes Yuag, in the sense of ‘to 
employ, and not ot ‘harmony.’ Many, however, 
adopt this meaning of the term in ch. ii, and my 
own opinion is decidedly in favour of it, here 
in the title. The work then treats of the 
human mind:—in its state of chung, absolutely 
correct, as it is in itself; and in its State of kwo, 
or harmony, acting ed extra, according to its 
correct. nature,—1n the version of the work, 
given in the collection of * Memoires concernant 
Chistoire, les sciences, & c., des Chinois, vol. I, it is 
styled Juste Milieu” Remusat calls it Hin- 
variable Milieu atter Chring E. Intorcetta, and 
his coadjutors call it—‘ Medium constans vel 
sempiternum’ The book treats, they say, ‘Le 
MEDIO SEMPITERNO, sive de aurea mediocritate illa, 
quer est, ut ait Ciccro, inter nimium et parum, 
constanter et omnibus in rebus tenenda, Morrison,

character li T, says, * Chung Yung, the constant

(golden) medium.’ Collie calls it-— The golden 
medium.’ The objection which I have to all 
these names is, that from them it would appear

as if rH were a noun, and Ki a qualifying 
adjective, whereas they are co-ordinate terms.

INTRODUCTORY NOTE. F- TE Pu on 
intro. note to the X E On Tsze-sze, and

his nuthership of this work, see the prole- 
gomena DY T4 is a phrase denoting—' hea- 
ven, earth, and the four cardinal points; =the 
universe. 5 BRUN. a our ‘goad render,’ 
but us in the trauslation.—I will not here anti-

| commana,’ to order."

cipate the judgment of the reader on the eulogy 
of the enthusiastic Ching.| commana,’ to order."

cipate the judgment of the reader on the eulogy 
of the enthusiastic Ching.

1. It has been stated, in the prolegomena, that 
the current division of the Chung Yung into 
chapters was made by Choo He, as well as their 
subdivision into paragraphs. The 33 chapters, 
which embrace the work, are again arranged 
hy him in five divisions, as will be scen from 
his supplementary notes. The first and last 
chapters are complete in themselves, as the in- 
troduction and conclusion of the treatise. The 
second part contains ten chapters; the third, 
nine, and the fourth, twelve.

Par. 1. The principles of duty have their root in 
the evidenced will of Heaven, und their full exhibi-

tion in the teaching of sages. By pr. or ‘nature,’

is to be understood the nature of man. though 
Choo He generalizes it so as to embrace that of 
brutes also; but only man can be cognizant of 
the taou and keaon. 7 he defines by T. *to

But we must take it as 
in a gloss on a pass. from the Yih-king, quoted

in the dict. —in H N Hf EE BB, Mang

is what men are endowed with” Choo He also

says that PE is just . the ‘pripciple,’ char- 
acteristic of any particular nature. But this 
only involves the subject in mystery. His ex-

planation of 4 by Be ‘a path,’ seems to be

correct, though some modern writers object to 
it. —What is taught seems to be this:—To man 
belongs a moral nature, conferred on him hy 
Heaven or God, by which he js constituted a

248 THE DOCTRINE OF TIIE MEAN. COMM, CH. 1. 
R fi, iH xb KM. N n 
| HH E TE A i AR

f. J. HE 
z^Hi J. AR 
. the SEL . dE

2. The Diii may not be left for an instant. If it could be left, it

would not be the path. On this account, the superior man does not 
wait till he sces things, to be cautious, nor till he hears things, to be 
apprehensive.

3. There is nothing 1 more visible than what is secret, and nothing 
more manifest than what is minute. Therefore the superior man is 
watchful over himself, when he is alone.3. There is nothing 1 more visible than what is secret, and nothing 
more manifest than what is minute. Therefore the superior man is 
watchful over himself, when he is alone.

4. While there are no stirrings of pleasure, anger, sorrow. or joy, 
the mind may be said to be in “the state of EQUILIBRIUM, When 
those feelings have been stirred, and they act in their due degree, 
there ensues. what may be called the state of Harmony. This 
EQUILIBRIU? is the great root from which grow all the human, actings 
in the world, and this Harmony is the universal path which they all 
should pursue.

law to himself. But as he is prone to deviate 
from the path in which, according to his nature, 
he should go, wise and good men—sages—have 
appeared, to explain and regulate this, helping 
all by their instructions to walk in it.

Par. 2. The path indicated. by p Pes may

9

lie who would embody all sien of right 
end duty—exercises a most sedulous care that he 
may attain thereto. á ga is a name for a

short period of time, of which there are 30 in 
the 24 hours; but the phrase is commonly used 
for ‘a moment,’ ‘an instant? Kung Ying-ti

explains Wy Bile 3E . what may be left,

is a wrong way, which is not admissible. Bt.

never be left, aud the superior anf

low. 8d tone. K. ‘to be, or go, away from. 
If we translate the two last -clauses literally, — 
*js cautious and careful in regard to what he 
does not see ; is fearful and apprehensive in. re- 
yard to what he does not hear.—thoy will not be 
intelligible to au English reader. A question

arises, moreover, whether dt Br 8 I.

tf Wr a— Bil. ought not to be understood

passively ==‘ where he is not seen,’ ‘where he is 
not heard. They are so understood by Ying-ti,

and the X Er (1, ch. vi., is much in favour,

by its analogy, of such an interpretation. 
Par. 8. Choo Me says that [s js *a dark

place ;« that EM means ‘small snatters;’ and

that 4 is ‘the place which other men doby its analogy, of such an interpretation. 
Par. 8. Choo Me says that [s js *a dark

place ;« that EM means ‘small snatters;’ and

that 4 is ‘the place which other men do

not know, and is known only to one's-self/ 
There would thus hardly be here any advance 
from the last per. It seems to ine that the se« 
crecy must be in the recesses of one's ewn heart, 
and the minute things, the springs of thought 
and stirrings of purpose there. The full deve- 
lopment of what is intended here is probably to 
be found in all the subsequent ow about

EA or ‘sincerity.’ See py We JẸ. H l 
Ks BE i in loc.

Par, 4. This, says Choo Ie, * speaks of the 
virtue of the nature and passions, to illustrato 
the meaning of the statement that the path may 
not be left Lt is diflicult to translate the purs

cit. 1.

THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN.

NN 
E

WE

e

w 
i5

BH EAH 
Ema

[E

Mmi 
adul S ER

=

xigU ER

zx 
= 
zz

[ d

v

XS( CARES E

[ d

ate NESS

d

TNT

=

e

Bonk | xav

v 
C

T SoHE oH

O 
HN 
l

me Tena

v 
[4

S

=

5. Let the states of equilibrium and harmony exist in perfection, 
and a happy order will prevail throughout heaven and earth, and all

things will be nourished and flourish.

In the first chapter which is given above, Tsze-sze states the views

which had been handed down to him, as the basis of his discourse. 
First, it shows clearly.how the path of duty is to be traced to its 
origin in Heaven, and is unchangeable, while the substance of it 
is provided in ourselves, and may not be departed from. Next, 
it speaks of the importance of preserving and nourishing this, and 
of exercising a watchful self-scrutiny with reference to it. Fi- 
nally, it speaks of the meritorious achievements and transforming 
influence of sage and spiritual men in their highest extent. The 
wish of Tsze-sze was that hereby the learner should direct his 
thoughts inwards, and by searching in himself, there find these,

bechuse it is difficult to understand it. E Zbechuse it is difficult to understand it. E Z

is different from s in p 1. That defines; 
this describes. What is described in the first 
clause, seems to be p. ‘the nature,’ capable of

all feelings, but unacted on, and in equilibrium.

Par. 5. On this Intorcetta and his colleagues 
observe :— Quis non videt co dumtaxat collimasse 
philosophum, ut hominis naturam, quam ab origine 
sut rectam, sed deinde lapsam et depravatam passim 
Stnenses docent, ad primwvum innocentic statum re- 
ducere? Atque ita reliquas res creatas, homini jum 
rebelles, et in ejusdem ruinam armatas, ad pristinum 
qlsequium veluti revocaret, Hoc f. I. s. I. libri Ta 
Ile, hoc item hic et alibi non semel indicat. — Etsi 
autem nesciret. philosophus nos a prina felicitate

propter peccatum primi parentis excidisse, tamen et tot 
rerum que adversantur et infestc sunt homini, et ipsi- 
us nature humane ad deteriora tam prone, k ngo usu 
et contemplatione didicisse videtur, non posse koc uni- 
versum, quod homo vitiatus quodam modo vitiarat, 
connaturali suw integritati et ordini. restitui, nist 
prius ipse homo per victoriam sui ipsius, eam, quam 
amiserat, integritatem et ordinem recuperaret I 
fancied something of the same kind, before 
reading their note. Acc. to Choo He, the par. 
describes the work and influence of sage and 
spiritual men in their highest issues. The sub- 
ject is developed in the 4th part of the work, 
in very extravagant and mystical langunge. 
The study of it will modify very much our us- 
sent to the viuyws in the above passage. ‘Thera 
is in this whole chapter a mixture of senso and

ES

a 
-- 
w 
[ d 
e

250 THE DOCTRINE OF TIE MEAN. cu. n.

WF RE

A m P Kis 9] Tí

Wi HF ja JE 3E. M » E

fur rb Fay fH 
T

Ell

QS. 
Jd

—

T

-— 
T

a

= 
WERFEN

NF

c 
Jd

^,

=

Seo 
+E Ao

v

V EET UI

e

1 
T

0

ENAR | SESAME

i

i

BKE

a 
E

Sie

td

NA m P Kis 9] Tí

Wi HF ja JE 3E. M » E

fur rb Fay fH 
T

Ell

QS. 
Jd

—

T

-— 
T

a

= 
WERFEN

NF

c 
Jd

^,

=

Seo 
+E Ao

v

V EET UI

e

1 
T

0

ENAR | SESAME

i

i

BKE

a 
E

Sie

td

N

truths, so that he might put aside all outward temptations appeal- 
ing to his selfishness, and fill up the measure of the goodness

whichis natural to him.

called it,—“ The sum of the whole work."

This chapter is what the acriter Yang

In the ten chapters

which follow, Tsze-sze quotes the words of the Master to complete

the meaning of this.

CuarrEn II.

1. Chung-ne said, *The superior man embodies the

course of the Mean; the mean man acts contrary to the course of

the Mean. 
2.

“The superior man’s embodying the course of the Mean is

cause he is à superior man, and so always maintains the Mean. The 
because he is a sup , and so always t the M 
mean man’s acting contrary to the course of the Mean is because he 
is a Mean man, aud has no caution.”

mysticism,—of what may be grasped, and what

tantalizes and eludes the mind. PE acc. to

Choo Ile, = Ze H. JU, ‘will rest in their 
wn 7

positions.“ K'ang-shing explained it by na 
— will be rectified.’ ‘Heaven and Earth’ are 
here the parent powers of the universe, Thus 
Ying-tá ex pounds: — Heaven and Earth will 
get their correct place, and the processes of pro- 
duction and completion will go on according to 
their principles, so that all things will be nour- 
ished and fostered.’

CoscLubiNG note. The writer Yang, quoted 
here, was a distinguished scholar and author in

the reign. of p A. D. 1064-1085. He

was a disciple of Ch'ing Haou, and a friend

an NZ, tho

both of him and his brother, E. g 
substance ang the abstract, =the sum.the reign. of p A. D. 1064-1085. He

was a disciple of Ch'ing Haou, and a friend

an NZ, tho

both of him and his brother, E. g 
substance ang the abstract, =the sum.

2. ONLY THE SUPERIOR MAN CAN FOLLOW 
vith MEAN; THE MEAN 18 ALWAYS VIOLATING IT. 
1. Why Confucius should here be quoted by his 
designation, or marriage name, is a moot-point. 
It is said by some that disciples might in this 
way refer to their teacher, and a grandson to 
his grandfather, but such a rule is constituted 
probable on the strength of this instance, and 
that in ch. xxx. Others say that it is the

honorary designation of the sage, and = the 2 p

X. which duke Gae used in reference to

Confucius, in eulogizing him after his death, 
See the Le-ke, II. Pt. I. iii. 48. Some verb

must be understood between z F and "m

CH. I.-IV.

B 
1.

TIE DOCTRINE

Cuarter III. 
according to the,Mean! 
ple, who could practise it!”

Cuarter IV.

The Master said,

OF THE MEAN. 251 
Aj [EX ETES 
la E

M EE — a

v

P: 
RES 
Am

v

RT 
SEE

00

Nur

N 
|

AGE

dn is the virtue which is

Rare have they long been among the peo-

1. The Master said, “I know how itis that the path

of the Mean'is not walked in:—The knowing go beyond it, and the

stupid do not come up to it.

J know how it is that the path of the

Mean is not understood :—The men of talents and virtue go beyond 
it, and the worthless do not come up to it.

2. 
who can distinguish flavours.”

Ji. and I have supposed it to be mn with 
mest of the paraphrasts. Nearly all seem to be 
ngreed that rH Ji here is the same as H

„ in the last chapter. On the change of 
terms, Choo He quotes from the scholar Yew

GUD, to the effect that HH AI is said with

the nature and feelings i in view, and rH Jii. 
with reference to virtuo and conduct. 9. HA

F mi LES rp. is explained by Choo:—GUD, to the effect that HH AI is said with

the nature and feelings i in view, and rH Jii. 
with reference to virtuo and conduct. 9. HA

F mi LES rp. is explained by Choo:—

‘Because he has the virtue of a superior man, 
and moreover is able always to manage the 
chung! But I rather think that the keun-tsze 
here is specially to be referred to the same as

described in i. 2, and rg -iE H. Wang

Suh, the famons scholar of the Wei (Bp dyn- 
asty, in the Ist part of the 3d cent., quotes Jy

AZ rH W with p: before HH, of which

Choo He approves. be not introduced 
into the text, it must 1 be understood. 
. qn i is the opposite of- HK Ti 3 A nm. in 
i. 2.--This, and the ten chapters w hich follow, 
ail quote the words of Confucius with reference 
to the HH lli , to explain the meaning of the

“There is no body but eats and drinks.

But, they are few

first ch.; and ‘though there is no connection of 
composition between them,’ says Choo Ile, ‘they 
are all related by their meaning.’

3. Tux RARITY, LONG BXISTING IN Coxru- 
clus’ TIME, OF THE PRACTICE OF THE MEAN. See 
the Ana, VI. xxvi Kang-shing and Ying-tt 
take the last clause as few can practise it 
long.“ But the view in the transl. is better.

The change from 4h . E to PE El is

observable. 
4. How zr WAS THAT FEW WERE ABLE TO

PRACTISE THE MEAN. 1. * may be referred 
to the id in the first chapter; immediately 
following ha in the last, I translate it here

—‘the path of the Mean.“ Fy 721 and rey

T. are not to be understood as meaning the

truly wise and the truly worthy, but only those 
who in the degenerate times of Confucius deem- 
ed themselves to be such. The former thought 
the course of the Mean not worth their study, 
and the latter thought it not sufficiently ex-

alted for their practice. — bas, like.“ N

following Te indicates individuals of a diff, 
character, not equal to them. 2. We have here 
not a comparison, but an illustra, which mayalted for their practice. — bas, like.“ N

following Te indicates individuals of a diff, 
character, not equal to them. 2. We have here 
not a comparison, but an illustra, which may

help to au understanding of the former par, 
though it does not seem very apt. People don’t

2 "THE DOCTRINE

MAI

2

"

“a

t

HIRSIK

v

v

e

RAPS 
VSI ER SS

SSS HS 
z

b 
E

HE ET

H "P,

CHAPTER V. The Master said,

Mean untrodden! " 
CHAPTER VI.

Yo SAIS

OF THE MEAN,

CH. v.— vit. 
H Em ges 
IN » 3

ot

v 
v 
v

STON

o 
or

YA Saat Cin St

$

S

4

SEAS

n

[4

ot 
st

/ T1

73 H Ie H, o

Alas! How is the path of the

hill

d

at

The Master said, There was Shun :—He indeed

was greatly wise! Shun loved to question others, and to study their

words, though they might be shallow. 
in them, and displayed what was good.

He concealed what was bad 
He took hold of their two

extremes, determined the Mean, and employed it in his government of 
the people. It was by this that he was Shun!”

CHAPTER VII. The Master said, “Men all say, We are wise; 
but being driven forward and taken in a net, a trap, or a pitfall, 
they know not how to escape. Men all say, We are wise; but hap- 
pening to choose the course of the Mean, they are not able to keep

it for a round month.”

know the true flavour of what they eat and 
drink, but they need not go beyond that to 
learn it. So, the Mean belongs to all the actions 
of ordinary: life, and might be discerned and 
practised in them, without looking for it in ex- 
traordinary things.

5. Choo He says:—‘From not being under- 
stood, therefore it is not practised.’ Acc. to 
K'ang-shing, the remark is a lament that there 
was no intelligent sovereign to tench the path. 
But the two views are reconcileable.6. How SHUN PURSUED THE COURSE OF THE 
Mean. This example of Shun, it seems to me, 
js adduced in opposition to the knowing of ch. 
iv. Shun, tho' a sage, invited the opinions of all 
men, and found truth of the highest value in 
their simplest sayings, and was able to deter-

mine from them the course of the Mean. 3L

EE pio D $ 
d hj Yin the two extremes' are under

stood by K'ang-shing of the two errors of ex- 
ceeding and coming ahort of the Mean. Choo

He makes them the widest differences in tho 
opinions which he received.’ I conceive the 
meaning to be that he examined the answers 
which he got, in their entirety; from beginning

to end. Comp. di H an] Yi: Anna. IX. vii.

His concealing what was bad, and displaying 
what was good, was alike to encourage people 
to speak freely to him. K‘ang-shing makes the

last sentence to turn on the meaning of ^

when applied as an honorary epithet of the dead, 
Full, all-accomplished ;? but Shun was so 
named when he was alive.

7. THEIR CONTRARY CONDUCT SHOWS MEN'8B 
IGNORANCE OF THE COURSE AND NATURE OF THB

Mean. The first if is to be understood

with a general reference, — We are wise,’ i. e., 
we can very well take care of ourselves. Yet 
the presumption of such a profession is seen in 
men’s not being able to take care of themselves. 
The applica. of this illustration is then mude to

THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN. 253

CK. VIII.—X.

?

SEE AS

[d

€—

O

d

Cuarrkg VIII. The Master said, This was the manner of Hwuy: 
—he made choice of the Mean, and whenever he got hold of what 
was good, he clasped it firmly, as if wearing it on his breast, and did 
not lose it.”

Cnaprer IX. The Master said, “The empire, its States, and its 
families, may be perfectly ruled; dignities and emoluments may be 
declined ; naked weapons may be trampled under the feet ;—but the 
course of the Mean cannot be attained to.”

CuarrER X. 1. Tsze-loo asked about energy.CuarrER X. 1. Tsze-loo asked about energy.

2. The Master said, *Do you mean the energy of the South, 
the energy of the North, or the enérgy which you should cultivate 
yourself ?

the subject ia hand, the second T At being | we should say empires.’ but the Chinese know

to be Specially understood, with reference to the 
subject of the Mean. 
parts is left to be drawn by the reader for him- 
self. He read Awa, lower Bd tone, a trap for 
catching animals,’ 11 , read ke, like AS in 
Analects, XIII. x, though it is here applied to a 
month, awl not, as there, to a year. à 
8. How IIwuv nk FAST THE COURSE OF 
THe Max. Ilere the example of llwuy is 
likewise adduced, in oppos. to those mentioned 
in ch. ir. All the rest is exegetical of the first 
^d 
clause] x 43 X th, * Hwuy's play- 
ing the man? — 3 is not ‘one good point," 
eo much as any one. AS is ‘the closed fist; 
A 
28 2R— the appearance of holding firm.’ 
9. TE DItFICULTY OF ATTAINING YO TILE 
COURSE ox THE MEAN, A] the empire ;'

only of one empire, and hence this name for it.

The conclusion in both The empire is made up of States, and each State

of Families. See the Analects, V. vii; XII. xx. 
15. *level; here a verb, — 2p. 4G: ‘to bring 
to perfect order,’ 3].— a sharp, strong, wea- 
pon,’ used of swords, spears, javelins, &c. X

A| 2 
s HE „lit., cannot be canned.

10. ON ENERGY IN ITS RELATION TO TILE 
Meay. Inthe Analects we find Tsze-loo. on 
various occasions, putting forward the subject

. E 2 H 
of his valour (), and claiming, on the ground 
of it, such praise as the Master awarded to 
Hwuy. We may suppose, with the Cid inter- 
preters, that hearing Hwuy commended, as in 
ch. viii, he wanted to know whether Confucius 
would not allow that he also could, with;his force- 
ful character, seize aud hold fast the Mean. 1.

For pj I have been Cisposed to coin the term 
‘forcefulness,’ Choo He defines it correctly J}

to 
or 
>

REV 
zs 
PRA

ie ex

[ d

>

TA

O 
AH 
gius

tr

. ^

Wan

zm 
=

3.For pj I have been Cisposed to coin the term 
‘forcefulness,’ Choo He defines it correctly J}

to 
or 
>

REV 
zs 
PRA

ie ex

[ d

>

TA

O 
AH 
gius

tr

. ^

Wan

zm 
=

3.

THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN.

„To show forbearance and gentleness in teaching

M. . . HE, H.

others;

and not to revenge ,unreasonable conduct :—this is the energy of 
Southern regions, and the good man makes it his study.

4.

„To lie under arms; and meet death without regret :—this

is the energy of Northern regions, and the forceful make it their

study. í

5. “Therefore, the superior man cultivates a friendly harmony,

without being weak.—How firm is he in his energy!

He stands

erect in the middle, without inclining to either side.—1Iow firm is he 
in his energy! When good principles prevail in the government 
of his country, he does not change from what he was in retirement. 
—How firm is he in his energy! When bad principles prevail 
in the country, he maintains his course to death withot changing.

—How firm is he in his energy!“

A AS AX T the. name of strength

sufficient to overcome others.“ 2. mc -Hp

p must be—‘the energy which you should 
cultivate, not ‘which you have? If the latter 
be the meaning, no farther notice of it is taken 
in Confucius’ reply, while he would- seem, in 
the three fol. paragraphs, to describe the three 
kinds of energy which he specifies. — K'ang-

" e nt 
shing and Ting-tu say that [fy m mcans 
the energy of the Middle kingdom, the North 
being ‘the sandy desert, and the South, ‘the 
country south of the Yane-tsze, But this is 
not allowable. 3. That climate and situation 
have an influence ou character is not to be 
denied, and the Chinese notions on the subject 
may be seen in the amplification of the 9th of 
K'ang-he's celebrated maxims ( Sx hi Bill)ang- zy oik uti yh 
But to speak of thoir effects as Contucius here 
does is extravagant. The barbarism of the 
South, accord, to the interpretatiun mentioned 
above, conld not have been described by him iu 
these terms. The energy of mildness and for- 
bedrance, thus described, is held to come short

of the Mean; and therefore ay F is taken

with a low and light meaning, far short of what 
is hasin par. 5. This practice of determining 
the force of phrases from the context makes

the reading of the Ch. classics perplexing to 
a student, IG XL.—see the Ana, XIT, xiv.

4, KE ‘the lappel in front of a coat; also 1

mat,’ AT & a. ‘to make a mat of the 
leather dress CAD and weapons GM This 
energy of the North, it is said, is in excess 
of the Mean, and the 2 at the beginning of p. 5, 
therefore, those two kinds of energy being 
thus respectively in defect and excess.’ 4is 
is mp 2 ‘the appearance of being energetic.’ 
This illustrates the energy which is in exact 
accord with the Mean, in the individual's treat- 
ment of others, in his regulation of himself, and in 
relation to publie affnirs. Aq TER HUE SF: 1— 
often in the Analects, I have followed Choo 
2 . zx x epee - " OPE 
He in translating JE. Ying-tă paraphrases:

T Ill . Aiit, fh {TH H: * JIe holds

CW. XI—XII

ux. 
= == M^, 
NES HE A. j

V i

THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN, 255

T 
« 
al

i

ENE 
MI

ul

Ho NF

e 
rod 
5

v 
&

2

[d

|

mS 
EOE 
N

FR

CuarrER XI. 1. The Master said, “To live in obscurity, and 
yet practise wonders, in order to be mentioned with honour in fu- 
ture ages ;—this is what I do not do.

2. “The good man tries to proceed according to the right path, 
but when he has gone halfway, he abandons it ;—I am not able so

to stop.

8. “The superior man accords with the course of the Mean. 
Though he may be all unknown, unregarded by the world, he feels

no regret.—It is only the sage who is able for this.”

CHAPTER XII.

D

l. The way which the superior man pursues,no regret.—It is only the sage who is able for this.”

CHAPTER XII.

D

l. The way which the superior man pursues,

reaches wide and far, and yet 1s secret.

to what is upright, and docs not change, his 
virtuous conduct being all-complete. A mo- 
dern writer makes the meaning :— He does not 
change through being puffed up by the fulness 
of office.“ Both of these views go on the inter-

pretation of 3 as= ET. 
11. ONLY rug SAGE CAN COME VP TO THE 
REQUIREMENTS OF THE MEAN. 1. 3k is found

written 5 ‘to examine,’ ‘to study,’ in a work

of the Han dynasty, and Choo He adopts that 
character as the true reading, and explains ac- 
cordingly :—''l'o study what is obscure and

wrong q Ti K'ang-shing took it as

>, towards, and both he and Ying-ti ex- 
plain as in the translation. It is an objection 
to Choo He's view, that, in the next ch., B is 
given as one of the characteristics of the Mean. 
The UK I x ze in p. 3, moreover, agree 
well with the older view. 2. is here 
the same as in last ch. p. 3. A distinction is 
made between ER a here and 4k id be-

low. The former, it is said, implies endeavour, 
while the latter is natural and unconstrained

accordance. 8. #f X here has its very high-

est signification, and e] in the last clause.

she itt is said to be diff. from 3 üt. the

latter being applicable to the recluse who with- 
draws from the world, while the former may 
describe one who.is in the world, but docs not 
act with a reference to its opinion of him. It 
will be observed how Confucius-declines saying 
that he had himself attained to this highest 
style.— With this ch., says Choo He, the quo-

.tations by TSze-sze of the Master's words, to.tations by TSze-sze of the Master's words, to

explain the meaning of the first chapter, stop. 
The grent object of the work is to set forth 
wisdom, benevolent virtue, and valour, as the 
three grand virtues whereby entrance is effected 
into the path of the Mean, and therefore, at its 
commencement, they are illustrated by reference 
to Shun Yen Yuen, and TSze-loo, Shun pos- 
sessing the wisdom, Yen Yuen the benevolence, 
and Tsze-loo the valour. If one of these virtues 
be absent, there is no way of advancing to the 
path, and perfecting the virtue. This will be 
found fully treated of in the 20th chapter.’ So, 
Choo He. ‘The student forming a judgment for 
himself, however, will not see very distinctly any 
reference to these cardinal virtues. The utter-

ances of the sage illustrate the phrase A 
showing that the course of the Méan had fallen

out of ohservance, some overshooting it, and 
others coming short of it, When we want some

eed:

coru

THS 
*

N

THE DOCTRINE OF TIIE MEAN.

Cit. XII

Ji

pr 
DES:

S 
SAS

v 
V 
=

he Se HN) 
REE 
i ea

BEC Wich

Th REF E 35 ME

2. Common men and women, however ignorant, may intermed-

dle with the knowledge of it; yet in its utmost reaches, thereis that 
which even the sage "does not know. Common men and wómen, 
however much below the ordinary standard of character, can carry 
it into practice; yet in its utmost reaches, there is that which even 
the sage is not able to carry into practice. Great as heayen and earth 
are, men still find some things in them with which to be dissatis- 
fied. Thus it is, that were the superior man to speak of his way in 
all its greatness, nothing in the world would be found able to em- 
brace it, and were he to speak of it in its minuteness, nothing in the

world would be found able to split it.

3. 
the fishes leap in the deep." 
above and below. lworld would be found able to split it.

3. 
the fishes leap in the deep." 
above and below. l

precise directions how to attain to it, we come 
finally to the conclnsion that only the sage is 
capable of doing so. We greatly want teach- 
ing, more practical and precise.

12. THe course or THE MEAN REACHES FAR 
AND WIDE, BUT YET IS SECRET. With this ch. 
the third part-of the work commences, and the

first sentence,— FZ ia, go mnm m.

may be regarded as a, text. If we could deter- 
mine satisfactorily the signification of those two 
terms, we should bave a good clue to the mean- 
ing of the whole, but it is not easy to do so. 
The old view is inadmissible. K‘ang-shing 
takes qe as=f „ ‘doubly involved,’ ‘pervert- 
ed,’ and both he and Ying-tă explain :—' When 
Tight principles are opposed and disallowed, the 
superior man retires Into obscurity, and does 
not hold office.“ On this view of it, the sentence 
bh»: nothing to do with the succeeding chapters.

‘The two meanings of in the dict. are—‘ the 
free expenditure of money,’ and ‘dissipation,’ or 
'waste Acc. to Choo He, in this passage, B&B

It is said in the Book of Poetry, "The hawk flies up to heaven; 
This expresses how this way is seen

rae i th, RD indicates the wide

En H the ¢aou in practice.’ Something like 
this must be its meaning :—the course of the

‘Mean, requiring "E att to be exhibited.

Choo then defines [S a ® Be us Th ‘the

minuteness of the (aou in its nature or essence.“ 
The former answers to the what of the taau, and 
the latter, to the why, But it rather seems to

me, that the s here is the same with the Is 
E

and 151. i. 4, and that the author simply in- 
tended to say, that the way of the superior man 
reaching everywhere,—embracing all duties, 
yet had its secret spring and seat in the Hea- 
ven-gifted nature, the individual consciousnessof duty in every man. 2. Jc - DUX. 
pu Iti Ana. XIV, xviij, 8. But I confess to 
be all at sea in the study of this par. Choo 
quotes from the scholar How (5 FK, that

what the superior man fails to know, was exem- 
plified in Conf. having to ask about ceremonies,

SSeS Nl

OM, xII.— XIII. TIE DOCTRINE

fj

I

Tne

e

SA 
HEE

q

i

—

AN rj AX 
HJ ’ J »

Y Hirt

v y Hj A AS. Be 3H, 
En 
XA pA HE n [m K Os

4. The way of the superior m

ae 
So ae ROSES ht

OF THE MEAN.

= 
She SDM

Y

v

MAAE g

88

Ld

eH | | RARE

an may be found, in its simple ele-

ments, in the intercourse of common men and women ; but in its 
utmost reaches, it shines. brightly through heaven and earth.

The twelfth chapter above contains the words of Tsze-sze, and is de- 
signed to illustrate what is said in the first chapter, that “ The path 
may not be left.” In the eight chapters which follow, he quotes, in 
a miscellaneous way, the words of Confucius to illustrate tt.

CnaAPTER XIII.

man.

1. The Master said, “The path is not far from 
When men try to pursue a course, which is far from the

common indications of consciousness, this course cannot be consider-

ed THE PATH. 
9.

one axe-handle to hew the other,

and about offices, and what he fails to practise, 
was exemplified in Conf. not being on the thrune, 
and in Yaou and Shun’s being dissatisfied that 
they could not make every individual eujoy the 
benefits of their rule. He adds his own opin- 
ion, that wherein men complained of Heaven 
and Earth, was the partiality of their operations 
in overshadowing and supporting, producing 
and completing, the heat of summer, the cold 
of winter, &c. If such things were intended 
by the writer, we cun only regret the vague- 
ness of his language, aud the want of coherence in

his argument, In translating ü F BH X 
T Z. I have followed Maou Se-ho. 3. See

„In the Book of Poetry, it is said, In hewing an axe-handle, 
in hewing an axe-handle, the pattern is not far off.’his argument, In translating ü F BH X 
T Z. I have followed Maou Se-ho. 3. See

„In the Book of Poetry, it is said, In hewing an axe-handle, 
in hewing an axe-handle, the pattern is not far off.’

We grasp 
and yet, if we look askance from

the She-king, HI. i. Ode V. st. 9. The ode is 
in praise of the virtue of king Wan. x is in 
ihe sense of K 22. * brightly displayed.“ 
The application of the words of the ode does 
appear strange,

13. Tur PATH or tne MEAN is NOT FAR TO 
SEEK, EACH MAN HAS THE LAW OF IT IN HDI- 
SELE, AND IT is TO BE PURSUED WITH EARNEST

; EN

SINCERITY. l. A Z js dd m 12 A. 
—' When men practise a course, and wish to be 
far from men.“ The meaning is as in the trang- 
lation. 2. See the She-king f. xv. Ode V. st. 2. 
The object of the par. seems to be to show that

DOCTRINE OF ‘THE MEAN. g

t5 
Ct

8 TIIE

i

m

|

\

=

ta

4x

(NH 
Su

EE

^ 
a 
RUO

ot 
| 
RND 
NE

AA 
UH | BSE

F 
p

v

Ss

HAN 
SAE

> 
ae

\ 
i 
i

el ARE 
EM

| 
gg aad

DH

=

> Sit 
=

ER

b 
G 
b 
9 
m"

v

Lh 
— 
J 
KE NY 
Yy

Zub

RAPHA 
SN 
.

th, Ban 
Wr. A. Ef Jt Jr r EG Be VÀ

the one to the other, we may consider them as: apart. "Therefore, 
the superior man governs men, according to their nature, with 
what is proper to them, and as soon as they change what is wrong, 
he stops.

3. When one cultivates to the utmost the principles of his na- 
ture, and exercises them on the principle of reciprocity, he.is not 
far from the path. What you do not like, when done to yourself, 
do not do to others.4. In the way of the superior man there are four things, to not 
one of which have I as yet attained.—To serve my father, as I 
would require my son to serve me: to this I have not attained ; 
to serve my prince, as I would require my minister to serve me: 
to this I have not attained; to serve my elder brother, as I would re- 
quire my younger brother to serve me: to this I have not attained; 
to set the example in behaving to a friend, as I would require him to 
behave to me: to this I have not attained. Earnest in practising: 
the ordinary virtues, and careful in speaking about them, if, in his 
practice, he has any thing 2 defective, the superior man dares not but

SER

D 
GG

8 
N

the rule for dealing with men, according to the ; intercourse w ith the Chinese, to insist on his

principles of the Mean, is nearer to us than the 
axe in the hand is to the one which is to be cut 
down with, and fashioned after, it. The branch 
is hewn, and its form altered from its natural 
one. Not so with man. The change in hin 
only brings him to his proper state. 3. Comp,

Ana. IV. xv. 37$ isherea neuter verb, to be 
distant from.“ 4. Comp. Ana. VII. i., ii., xix.,

efal, The admissions made by Conf. here are 
important to those who find it necessary, in their

having been, like other men, compassed with 
infirmity. lt must be allowed, however, that 
the cases, as put by him, are in a measure hypo- 
thotical, his father having died when he was a 
child. In the course of the paragraph, he passes

from speaking of himself by his name (H). 
to speak of the kenn-tsze, and the change is 
most naturally made after the last ü

E 
Hf (Bf he tj nE ein the prac-

CU, XiI.—x1v. THE DOCTRINE

—N Mic 
| Eris

Mr ul

v

RE SEE AN

i 
b 
E

4

v

Et

o 
E 
w

HAD o» m

e

a 
bod 
- 
v

10 
= 
So Se

TE 
eunt 
b

it

E 
y

- 
Ld

29 2

IE AS A EB

` 
N 
21.

vy

E 
55

$ 
*

e.

D

OP TIE MEAN.

J

M

JŠ 
pus

Saat

*

=; 
ue 
Du

Asa 
MSS

`

am

TMN 
ERS 
zx,

. 
| e

Aan 
R

>10 
= 
So Se

TE 
eunt 
b

it

E 
y

- 
Ld

29 2

IE AS A EB

` 
N 
21.

vy

E 
55

$ 
*

e.

D

OP TIE MEAN.

J

M

JŠ 
pus

Saat

*

=; 
ue 
Du

Asa 
MSS

`

am

TMN 
ERS 
zx,

. 
| e

Aan 
R

>

exert himself; and if, in his words, he has any excess, he dares not

allow himself such license.

Thus his words have respect to his ac-

tions, and his actions have respect to his words; is it not just an 
entire sincerity which marks the superior man?”

E 
CuaPTER XIV.

2.

a position of wealth and honour.

does what is proper to a poor and low position.

barbarous tribes, he does what ds 
barous tribes.

1. The superior man does what is 
the station in which he 1s; he does not desire to

PUT to

go beyond this. 
v

In a position of wealth and honour, he does what is proper to

In a poor and low position, he 
Situated among 
proper to a situation among bar-

In a position of sorrow and difficulty, he does what 
18 proper to a position of sorrow and difliculty.

The superior man

can find himself in no situation in which he is not himselt. 
3. Ina high situation, he does not treat with contempt his in-

feriors.

son, minister, Xe., mentioned above, and in the 
carefulness or ordinary speech, à, e. speaking 
about those virtues. To the practice belong

the clauses cH Ar x Ab ^ HX pe 5

and to the speaking, the two next clauses, fij ;

as a final particle, — EL, ‘simply,’ ‘just.’

1. How c surerion MAS, IN EVERY VARY- 
ING SITUATION, PURSUES tit MEAN, DOING WHAT 
JB RIGHT, AND FINDING HIS N. IN HIMSELF,

1. Choo He takes 3 ag p {E ‘at present,“

now; but that meaning was made to meet the 
exigency yf the present passage, Keang-shing

takes it, as in ch. xi., an= (Fi, L Uri Maou 
vi ; toos is is view :— Efe E. 
endeavours to establish this view = 37 br.

In a low situation, he does not court the favour of his

tioe of ordinary virtues d e, the duties of a. E 8 ak ux AT x Tz.

BH fh i 
(SE AL. is theIn a low situation, he does not court the favour of his

tioe of ordinary virtues d e, the duties of a. E 8 ak ux AT x Tz.

BH fh i 
(SE AL. is the

proper station in which he has been.“ The 
meaning comes to much the same in all these

interpretations, AS fir bo dt A Pr eouap.

Ana. XIV. xxviii. 2. 1T 82 411 Tt-1T

^ Z ` 
RE B 157 1T Z 317, ‘He pursues 
the path, which ought to be pursued amid riches 
and honours.’ So, in the other clauses. FE 
{lit = self. possessing." The paraphrasts 
make it— happy in conforming himself to his 
position.“ I consider it equivalent to what is

said in ch. .— Zh F Z H )H th, 2 
J. in INS Hi. 3. 2 is explained in the

260 THE DOCTRINE

v 
wiv

i

ul S

no

i: 
H

.

DE. 
ak

NWS

MES

v

Nd

enit

v

oe

E 
um

N 
S

aS 
PART 
El

z

TRUNKS

m 
gs

OF THE MEAN. on. XIV — xv,

"s

WE 
=

Cu

v 
«^ 
p

z 
RA

[od 
Ld

Ez

p 
EE

PES 
7

V

>>

v

> 
8

SEDI 
3» 
à

ww 
hd 
ww 
v 
v

EE

JLu»

^H

Qa,

. ! 
superiors. He rectifies himself, and secks for nothing from others,

So that he has no dissatisfactions.

heaven, nor grumble against men. 
4.

Thus it is that the superior man is quiet and calm, wai

He does not murmur against

4. 
ting

for the appointments of Heaven, while the mean man walks in

dang 
5.

gerous paths, looking for lucky occurenées. 
The Master said, “In archery we have something like thd ray

of the superior man. When the areher misses the centre of the tage , 
he turns round aud seeks for the cause of his failure in himself.”

*

Cuapren XV. f. The way of the superior man may be com-

pared to what takes place in travelling, when to go to a distance we

must first traverse the space that is near, and in ascending a height, 
when we must begin from the lower ground.

2.

and children, is like the music of lutes and harps.

dict, after K'ang-shing, by E TF, to drag |.

and cling to.“ The opposition of the two clauses

makes the meaning plain, E 28 Au X. 
E x JG Nee Ana. XIV. xxxvii 4.dict, after K'ang-shing, by E TF, to drag |.

and cling to.“ The opposition of the two clauses

makes the meaning plain, E 28 Au X. 
E x JG Nee Ana. XIV. xxxvii 4.

5 ace, to K'áng-shing, Jj mY, *is equi- 
valent to peaceful and tranquil, Choo He says, 
= p 25. Hh 1l. ‘ ay means level ground. 
This is most correct, but we cannot so well ex- 
press it in, the translation. E as used here, is 
pe d2 3 thy 
often written TE p 1E up. Ist tone, and db. 
are both names of birds, small and alert, and dif-

ficult to be hit. On this account. a picture of the 
former was painted on the middle of the target,

It is said in the Book of Poetry, “Happy union with wife

When there) 
*

and a figure of the latter was attached to it in 
leather. It is not meant, however, by this, that 
they were both used in the same target. at the 
same time, For another illustration of the way 
of the superior man from the customs of preh- 
ery, see Ana., III. vii. M SRy

13. Ix Ink PRACTICE OF THE MEAN TIHÉRE 
I8: AN ORDERLY ADVANCE FROM STEP TO STEP. 
1. [E is read as, amd EX, 2. See thd She-

king, If. i. Ode IV. at. 7. 8. The olle celebrates, 
in a regretful tone, the dependence of. brethren 
on one another, and the beauty of brotherly 
harmony. Maou says: Although there may 
be the happy union of wife and children, like 
the music of lutes and harps. yet there must also 
be the harmonious concord of brethren, with 
its exceeding delight, and then may wite aud

Ch. XxV.— XVI.

THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN.

1

r2 
a

Ea A A BE 
Py zx BE fj B.

ELIO

AY HSE

is concord among brethren, the harmony is delightful and enduring. 
Thus may you regulate your family, and enjoy the pleasure of

your wife,and children.” 
3. 
tire complacence! "

The Master said, “In such a state of things, parents have en-

Cuarrtr XVI. 1. The Master said, How abundantly do spiritual 
beings display the powers that belong to them!The Master said, “In such a state of things, parents have en-

Cuarrtr XVI. 1. The Master said, How abundantly do spiritual 
beings display the powers that belong to them!

2. “We look for them, but do not see them; we listen to, but do 
not hear them; yet they enter into all things, and there is nothing 
without them.

3. „They cause, all the people in the empire to fast and purify 
themselves, and array themselves in their richest dresses, in order to 
attend at their sacrifices. Then, like overflowing water, they seem 
to be over the heads, and_on the right and left of their worshippers.

children be regulated and enjoyed. Brothers 
are near to us, while wife nnd children are 
more. remote. Thus it is, thatdrom what is near 
we proceed to what is remote.“ Ile adds that 
anciently the relationship of husband and wife 
Waa not among the five relationships of &ociety, 
because the union of brothers is from heaven, 
and that of husband and wife is from man! 3. 
This ig understood to be à remark of Contuciug 
on the ode. From wife, and children, and broth- 
ers, parents dt last are reached, illustrating how 
from what is low we ascend to what is bigl.— 
But all this is far-fetched and obscure.

16. AN ILLUSTRATION, FROM THE OPERATION 
AND INFLUENCE OF SPIRITUAL BEINGS, OF THE 
Way or TE Mean, What is said of the kwei- 
shin in this chapter is only by way of illustra- 
tion, There is no design, on the part of the 
sage, to develop his views on those beings or 
agencies. The key of it is to be found in tlie

last pur., where the Fe A Z Hi evidently

refers to N Bn 3E 15k in ch, i. This par., 
therefore, should be separated from the others, 
and not interpreted. specially of the Awet-shin. 
1 think that Dr. Medhurat, in rendering it (The- 
ology of the Chinese, p. 22)—* How grent then 
is the manifestation of their abstruseness ! 
Whilst displaying their sincerity, they are not 
to bu concealed,’ was wrong, notwithstandingthat he may be defended by the example of many 
Chinese commentators, The second clause of

par. 5,— aw Z pa E + un It. appears

altogether synonymous with the aa "RH DAS

JÉ N A in the X et 4f, ch. vi. 2, to 
which chapter we have scen that the whole of ch. 
1i. pp. 2, 3, has a remarkable similarity. However 
we may be driven to find a recondite, mystical, 
meaning for aK. in the 4th part of this work, 
there is no necessity to do so here. With regard 
to what is said of the be- it is only the 
first two paragraphs which oceusion difficulty, 
In the 8d par., the sage speaks of the spiritual 
beings that are sacrificed to. HE read chte;

sce Ana. VIL xii; The same is the subject of 
the 4th par.; or rather, spiritual beings gener- 
ally, whether sacrificed to or not, invisible them- 
selves and yet able to behold our conduct. See 
the She-king, III. iii. Ode II. st. 7. The ode is 
said to have been composed by onc of the dukes 
of Wei, and was repeated daily in his hearing 
for his admonition. In the context of the quo- 
tation, he is warned to be careful of his conduct, 
when alone as when in company. For in truth 
we are never alone, ‘Millions of spiritual be- 
ings walk the carth, and can take note of us.

TIE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN. Cit, XVI —XVvTI,

SERA, Drs A. E, re 
me Fal a

X $ 
7 Jj 
*

D 2N . JE

4. It is said in the Book of Poetry, The approaches of the 
spirits, you cannot surmise;—and can you treat them with jndiffer- 
ence?'

5. „Such is the manifestness of what is minute! . Such is the 
impossibility of repressing the outgoings of sincerity !”

Cnarrer XVII. I. The Master said, “How greatly filial was 
Shun! His virtue was that of a sage; his diguity was the imperialCnarrer XVII. I. The Master said, “How greatly filial was 
Shun! His virtue was that of a sage; his diguity was the imperial

E. 
It is often used so in the She-king. 7, read 
toh, lower 4th tone, to conjecture, ‘to sur- 
mise." if, read yih, low. 4th tone, to dislike.’) 
What now are the fwei-shin in the first two para- 
graphs. Are we to understand by them some- 
thing different from what they are in the 3d 
Dur., to which they run on from the first as the

nominative or subject of fi ? I think not.

The precise meaning of what is said of them in

Ani ^ NB. ae 
HS ng m P 1H cannot be determined. 
The old interpreters say that F -A, ‘to i

give birth to; that H[- Wr. ‘that which ; that

N fi = ^ "HBIT HER ‘there is nothing 
which they neglect;’ and that the meaning 
of the whole is— that of all things there is not 
a single thing which is not produced by the 
breath (or energy; E» of the Zwei-shin, This

is all that we learn from them. The Sung school 
explain the terms with reference to their phy- 
sical theory of the universe, derived, as they 
think, trom the Yih-king. Choo le's master, 
Ching, explains: — The kwei-shin are the ener- 
getic operations of Heaven and Earth, and the 
traces of production and transformation. The

scholar Chang (N N says: — The kwei-shin 
are the easily acting powers of the two breaths 
of nature — AN Choo He's own account is:

—' Jf we speak of two breaths, then by wei is 
denoted the efficaciousness of the secondary or 
inferior one, and by shin, that of the superior 
one, If we speak of one breath, then by shi» is 
denoted its advancing and developing, and by 
kwei, its returning and reverting, They are 
really only one thing.“ It is difticult—not to, 
say inipossible—to conceive to one's-self what 
is megut by such descriptions, And nowhere

is a final particle here, without meaning.

else in the Four Books is there an approach to 
this meaning of the phrase. Maou Se-ho is 
more comprehensible, though, after all. it mayis a final particle here, without meaning.

else in the Four Books is there an approach to 
this meaning of the phrase. Maou Se-ho is 
more comprehensible, though, after all. it may

“be doubted whether what he says is more than a

play upon words. His explanation is:—* But in 
truth, the Hel- sin are 5. In the Vih-hing

A~ 1 x 
the 2 and y are Mrd to be the kwei 
shin; T it is said—one i and one By are 
called HER Thus the kwci-shin aro the 4 y

embodied in Heaven qa X for the nourish.

ment of things. But in the text we have the 
Ad. 2 "

term (5 instead of I. because the latter is the

name of the absolute as embodied in IIenven, 
and the former denotes the same not only em- 
bodied, but operating to the nourishing of things, 
for Heaven considers the production of things 
to be (it Sco the rp Jai Bib in loc. 
Remusat translates the first par:-— Que les 
vertus des esprits sont sublimes??? is Latin vor- 
sion is:—‘ spirituum geniorumque est virtus : ea eas 
paz!’ Intorcetta renders :— spiritibus inest opera- 
tiva virtus et efficacitas, et lwe o quam prestans 
est! quam multiplex! quam sublimis ! Ina note, 
he and his friends say that the dignitary of the 
empire who assisted them, rejecting other inter- 
pretations, understood by £wei-shin here — those 
spirits for the veneration of whom and implor-

ing their help, sacrifices were instituted, jn

signifies ‘spirits,’ ‘a spirit,’ *spirit;' and .

ta ghost,’ or demon.“ The former js used for 
the animus, or intelligent soul separated from 
the body, and the latter for the anima, or ani- 
mal, grosser, soul, so separated. In the text, 
however, they blend together, and are net to he 
separately translated. ‘They are together equi-

valent to pi in par. 4, spirits, or ‘spiritual 
beings.

cu. XVM.

hae

THE DOCTRINE

2

te

XS 
OSS

pEi

. 
—

E

v

PHAS

>

A WE as 
es A 
jen ef f EC Wr

5

=

^H

v

throne; his riches were all within the four seas.

&acrifices in his ancestral temple, 
snerifices to himself.2

te

XS 
OSS

pEi

. 
—

E

v

PHAS

>

A WE as 
es A 
jen ef f EC Wr

5

=

^H

v

throne; his riches were all within the four seas.

&acrifices in his ancestral temple, 
snerifices to himself.

Eh

OF THE MEAN.

Bt

xag 
Bere

zx 
E

er

z 
ral

E

v

gg

jin 
V, * 
I.

Ad

He offered his 
and his descendants preserved the

\ 
/

fil. xL.

AN

2. “Therefore having such great virtue, it could not but be that

he should obtain the throne, that

heshould obtain those riches, that

he should obtain his fame, that he should attain to his long life.

3. 
bountiful to them, accordin 
is flourishing, 
overthrows.

4, 
prince, displayed couspicuously 
people and adjusting his officers.

ge

0

17. THE VIRTUR or FILIAL PIETY, EXEMPLI- 
FIERY IN SHUN A8 CARRIED TO TILE HIGHEST POINT, 
AND REWARDED BY II AVEN. 1. One docs not 
readily see the connection between Shun's great 
filial picty, and all the other. predicates of him 
that follow. ‘Tho paraphrasts, however, try to 
trace it in this way :—‘ A son without virtue is 
insutlicient to distinguish his parents. But 
Shun was born with all knowledge and acted 
without any effort;—in virtue, a enge. How 
great was the distinction which he thus conter- 
red on his parents. And so with regard to the

other predicate. See the H aur yu 711 
P P on this expression it is said in the

encyclopedia called Ht Hy E :— The four

cardinal points of heaven and earth are con- 
aected together hy the waters of scas, the 
earth being a small space in the midst of them.

Hence, he who rules over tho empire Ch aS) 
is said to govern all within the four seas.“ See 
1180 on Ana. XII. v, 4. The characters a

jjj are thus explained: Tsung means honour-

alle, Maor means figure. The two together 
mean the place where the figures of one's

“Thus it is that Heaven, in the production of things, is surely 
to their qualities; Hence the tree that 
it nourishes, while that which is ready to fall, it“Thus it is that Heaven, in the production of things, is surely 
to their qualities; Hence the tree that 
it nourishes, while that which is ready to fall, it

“In the Book of Poetry, it is said, ‘The admirable, amiable,

his excelling virtue, adjustin

Therefore, he received from

g his

Hea-

; xs 
ancestors are.’ Choo He says nothing on x 
Jáj FE Z: because he had given in to the

views of some who thought that Shun sacrificed 
merely in the ancestral temple of Yaou. But 
it is capable of proof that he erected one of his 
own, and ascended to Hwang-te, as his great

progenitor. See Maou’s rn he Bib in loc. 
Zi to entertain a guest; and sometimes for

X. ‘to enjoy? So we must take it here, 
‘enjoyed him ;? that is, his sacrifices. As Shun

resigned the throne to Yu, and it did not 
run in the line of his family, we must take

ie Z as in the translation. In the time of 
the Chow dynasty, there were descendants of 
Shun, possessed of the state of Ch'in quib. and

9. The K must

refer in every caso to X fihi — its place, its 
emolument,’ &e.; that is, what is appropriate 
to such great virtue. The whole is to be 
understood with reference to Shun. He died at 
the age of 100 years. The word ‘virtue,’ takes 
hore the placo of ‘filial piety,’ in the last Par.,

of course sacrificing to him.

264 TIIE

[d

NaH 
PANES HSN

AH S

(SHH

e

e 
Mis

II

RER

DOCTRINE OF

. 2. 58

THE MEAN. CH, xvir.—xvimn.

ERO 
Ld

oa 
AER

[ d

3il

Hr 
ded 
PRAE OER TR

PIN 
rs

u 
wd

ja 
œ 
— 
Ld

ae

|

N 
SERA

yi"

A E &

E 
ini:

z

ven the emoluments of dignity. It protected him, assisted him, de- 
creed him the throne; sending from heaven these favours, as it were

repeatedly.’

5. “We may say therefore that he on is greatly virtuous will 
be sure to receive the one of Heaven.’

CHAPTER XVIII.

whom it can be said ds he had no cause for grief! 
king Ke, and his son was king Woo. 
tions of his dignity, and his son n transmitted it.CHAPTER XVIII.

whom it can be said ds he had no cause for grief! 
king Ke, and his son was king Woo. 
tions of his dignity, and his son n transmitted it.

2. King Woo continued the enterprise of king Tae, 
He once buckled on his armour, and got possession

and king Wan.

The Master said, “It is only king Wán of

His father was 
His father laid the founda-

king Ke,

of the empire. He did not lose the distin guished personal reputa- 
tion which he had throughout.the empire. His dignity was the im-

acc. to Maou, because that is the root, the first 
and chief, of all virtues, 8. b and 1 (acc.

to Choo He, = . ‘thick,’ liberal’) are explain-

ed by most commentators as equally capable of 
a goud and bad application. ‘This may be said

of 3. but not of 46. and the 4E i in X 2

would seem to determine the meaning 
of both to be only good. If this be 50, then 
the last clause is only an

after-thought of the writer, and, indeed, the 
sentiment of it is out of place in the e

ZR i is best taken, with K‘ang-ching, as== JH,

and not, with Choo IIe, as merely = Jii. 4. See 
the She-king, III. ii. ode V. st. 1, where we 
have ne Ais variations of TK for X and

Bü for St K The Prince spoken of is king 
Win, NT 15 thus brought forward to confirm 
the lesson taken from Shun. That lesson, how- 
ver, is stated much too broadly in the lust par,

It is well to say that only virtue is a ealid title 
to eminence, but to hold forth the certain ntr 
tainment of wealth and position as an induce- 
ment to virtue is not favournble to morality. 
The case of Confucius himself, who attained 
neither to power nor to long life, may be adduc- 
ed as inconsistent with these teachings.

18. ON xixe Wan, kI Nd Woo, AND THB 
DUKE or chow. 1. Shun's father was bad, and 
the fathers of Yaou and Yu were undistin- 
guished. ' Yaou and Shun’s sons were both bad, 
and Yu’s not remarkable. But to Wan neither 
father nor son gave occasion but for satisfac- 
tion and fa ee King Ke was the dukeKe-lik ex Hb. the most distinguished by

his virtues, and prowess, of nll the princes of 
his time. He prepared the way for the elevation

of his family. In 4 BSE, FM. tho 
is made to refer to . 3 SE, the founda- 
tion of tlie empire, but it may us well be refer-

red to Wan himself. 2. * F. mie was tho 
duke Tan- foo a 4 the father of ko-

On. XVII.

d 
HPH

? 20 
“Lh tne

v

tae 
NS 
HOHER

S 
HN

oat

N

£ 
M 
s

{

v 
e 
z 
v

A 
A 
7

S 
7

T: 
—

» —L.

XA TE JE

THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN.

NSIS

cE

i:

269

*

(a

NENIES SSP RA 
HENAN z 
i

SMH Ho Hd 
SNE

*

N 
4 
v

= 
ple 
zz 
ca

. 50 HAT ET

perial throne. His riches were the possession of all within the four 
seas. He offered his sacrifices in his ancestral temple, and his de- 
scendants maintained the sacrifices to himself.

3. “It was in his old age that king Woo received the appoint- 
ment fo the throne, and the duke of Chow completed the virtuous 
course of Wan and Woo. He carried up the title of king to T'ae 
and Ke, and sacrificed to all the former dukes above them with the 
imperial ceremonies. And this rule he extended to the princes of 
the empire, the great officers, the scholars, and the common people. 
Was the father a great officer and the son à scholar, then the burial 
was that due to a great officer, and the sacrifice that due to a scholar. 
Was the father a scholar, and the son a great officer, then the burial 
was that due to a scholar, and the sacrifice that due to a great officer. 
The one year's mourning was made to extend only to the great officers,

lik, a prince of great eminence, and who, in the | his chief minister. Fu E . E is in the 3d 
decline of the Yin dynasty, drew to his family n 
the thoughts of the people. 46 the end of 
a cocoon’ It is used here for the beginnings 
of imperial sway, traceable to the various pro- 
genitors of king Woo, 3 is inter-tone, in which the character means—‘ to exer- 
cise the sovereign power,’ F mE pj" A^ 
Z Z. the house of Chow traced their lin-

enge, up to the emperor ga, B. C. 2182. But 
in various passages of the Shad-king, king T'ae

preted by K'ang-shing:— He destroyed the 
great Yin ; and recent commentators defend his 
view. It is uot worth while setting forth what, 
may be said for and against it. lle did not 
lose his distinguished reputation; that is, tho’ 
he proeocded against his rightful sovereign, the 
people did not change their opinion of his vir- 
tuo, 8. XE ‘when old.“ Woo was 87 
when he became emperor, and he only reigned 
7 years, His brother Tan (E.), the duke of 
Chow (nee Ana, VI. xxii: VII. v.) acted as

and king K'e are spoken of, as if the conterence 
of those titles had been by king Woo. On this

there are very long discussions. See the 11

di Bit. in loc. The truth seems to be, that 
Chow-kung, carrying out his brother's wishes 
by laws of State, confirmed the titles, and made 
the general rule about burials and sacritices

which is described, From {Uy 1e th, to the 
end, we are at first inclined to translate in the 
present tense, but the past with u reference to

THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN, cu. XVII - XI x.

266 
SUR u 
gatti 2 Hy 7 
. L b => d

a 
N 
lit

[d

1 
Ja

O

mAH

WO

— 
G 
w 
v 
v

SS 
3 i 
HES 
S Seat ae 
ut

mals asc

[

Ems 
She 
TIRES 
(V iE 
OR AR ett 
ys

| zm

ES 
N 
A

but the three years’ mourning extended to the emperor, In the 
mourning for a father or mother, he allowed no difference between 
the noble and the mean."

CHAPTER XIX. I. The Master said, How far-extending was 
the filial piety of king Woo and the duke of Chow!

2. '"* Now filial piety is seen in the skilful carrying out of the 
wishes of our fore-fathers, and the skilful carrying forward of their 
undertakings.2. '"* Now filial piety is seen in the skilful carrying out of the 
wishes of our fore-fathers, and the skilful carrying forward of their 
undertakings.

3. “In spring and autumn, they repaired and beautified the 
temple-halls of their fathers, set forth their ancestral vessels, display- 
ed their various robes, and presented the offerings of the several 
BEASONS.

4, “By means of the ceremonies of the ancestral temple, they 
distinguished the imperial kindred according to their order of de- 
scent. By ordering the parties present according to their rank, they

[ 4 
Chow-kung is more correct, The *yenr's mourn- | season. Reckoning from the spring, the names

ing is Chat principally for uncles. and it did : of the sacrifices appear to have been—]ffjiJ 
not extend beyond. the great officers, because „ 
their uncles were the subjects of the princes and or IA, T and ZK. Others, however, give

the emperor, and feelings of kindred must not pq ee, is m j 
the names as 3^] jii» LT ZK, while some

be allowed to come into collision with the rela- 
affirm that the spring sacrifice was jnti- Though

tion of governor and governed. Qn the ‘three

years! mourning,’ see Ana, XVII. xxi. 
spring and autumn only are mentioned in the 
text; we are to understand that what is kaid of

10. Wet FAR-REACHING FILIAL PIETY OF

"m B o9; aa ee pu- O Crow. I. XE the sacrifices in those seasons applies tó ali the 
is taken by Choo He as meaning—‘ universally 77 Ii i ; 
acknowledged ;’ * fur-extending' is better, and others; Wi 8i] Halls or temples of anqes- 
nccords with the meaning of the term in- other | tors, of which the emperors had seven (see. the 
parts of the work. 2. This definition of zB or | next pur.), all included in the name of N Ej-

t filial piety’ is worthy of notice. Its operation 
ceases not with the lives of parents and parents’t filial piety’ is worthy of notice. Its operation 
ceases not with the lives of parents and parents’

parents, Ae tai A ‘antecedent men? but 
English idiom seems to require the addition of 
our, B, LEAK —The emperors of China sacri- 
flecd, as they still do, to their ancestors every

RES ‘ancestral,’ or * venerable, vessels.’ Choa 
He understands by them relics, something like 
our fegalia. Ching K'ang-shing makes them, 
and apparently with more correctness, simply 
‘the sacrificial vessels." 22 K — lewer and

upper garments, with the latter of which the

on. xix, THE DOCTRIXE OP TIE MEAN. 267 
E jio, H 3t I. ET 
Wey HK » ` EJ »

i 
c

— 
cmm

.

NEARS

E

\

4

EHE 
prm

\

4 
v

239/21

distinguished the morg noble and the less. By the arrangement of 
the services, they made a distinction of talents and worth. In the 
ceremony of general pledging, the inferiors presented the cup to 
their superiors, and thus something was given the lowest to do. At 
the concluding feast, places were given according to the hair, and 
thus was made the distinction of years.

5. „They occupied the places of their fore-fathers, practised their 
ceremonies, and performed their music. They reverenced those 
whom they honoured, and loved those whom they regarded with 
affection. "Thus they served the dead as they would have served 
them alive; they served the departed as they would have served them

a 
Se 
> 
"e

M 
-

b

Je eS SERE 
=

T, d

An

had they been continued among them.

parties personating the deceased were invested. 
4. It wasan old interpretation that the sacri- 
fices and accompanying services, spoken of here, 
were not the seasonal services of every year, 
which are the subject of the prec. par., but the

grent fg and Jl sacrifices, and to that view I 
would give in my adhesion. The emperor, as 
mentioned above bad seven i. One bolongedgrent fg and Jl sacrifices, and to that view I 
would give in my adhesion. The emperor, as 
mentioned above bad seven i. One bolonged

to tho remote ancestor to whom the dynasty 
traced its origin. At the great sacrifices, his 
spirit-tablet was placed fronting the east, and 
on each side were ranged, three in a row, the 
tablets belonging to the six others, those of 
them which fronted the south being, in the geno- 
alogical line, the fathers of those who fronted 
the north. As fronting the suuth, the region

of, brilligney, the former were called W3: the 
latter, from the north, the sombre region, were 
ealled . As the dynasty was prolonged, 
and successive emperors died, the older tablets 
wete removed, and transferred to what was call- 
ed the a Ej. yet so as that one in the ig 
lino displaced the topmost Jd „and so with the

At the sacrifices, the imperial kindred 
arranged themselves as they were descended 
from a I , on the left, and froma RS. on the 
right, and thus a genealogical correctness. of

place wag maintained among them. Tho cero- 
mony of ‘general (M= St) pledgiug’ occur-

red towards the end of the sacrifice. Choo He 
takes 7 in the low. Zu tonc, saying that to 
have anything to do at those services was ac- 
counted honourable, and after the emperor had 
commenced the ceremony by taking ‘a cup of 
blessing,’ all the juniors presented a similar eup 
to the seniors, and thus were called into em-

ployment. Ying-tà takes 23 in its ordinary

tone, P FA E ‘the inferiors were the su-

periors, 1. c., the juniors did present a cup to 
their elders, but had the honour of drinking

first themselves, The 386 was a concluding 
feast.confined to the imperial kindred. 5. ee

Bi t ace, to K'ang-shiug, is ascendedfirst themselves, The 386 was a concluding 
feast.confined to the imperial kindred. 5. ee

Bi t ace, to K'ang-shiug, is ascended

their thrones ; acc. to Choo He it is ‘trod on 
ù e, occupied—their places in the ancestral 
temple.’ On either view, the statement must he 
taken with allowance. ‘The ancestors of king 
Woo had not been emperors, and their places 
in the temples had only been those of princes. 
The same may be said of the four particulars 
which follow. By ‘those whom they f. en 
their progenitors — honoured ave intended their 
ancestors, and by * those whom they loved,’ their 
descendants, and indeed ali the peopla of Choir 
government, The two concluding sentences are

THE DOCTRINE OF TIIE MEAN, cin

N.

6. By the ceremonies of the sacrifices to Heaven and Earth they 
served God, and by the ceremonies of the ancestral temple they 
sacrificed to their ancestors. He who understands the ceremonies of 
the sacrifices to Heaven and Earth, and the meaning of the several 
sacrifices to ancestors, would find the government of a kingdom as

easy as to look into his palin.!” 
CHAPTER XX.easy as to look into his palin.!” 
CHAPTER XX.

important, as the Jesuits mainly based on them 
the defence of their practice in permitting their 
converts to continue the sacrifices to their àn- 
cestore. We read in * Confucius Sinarum philoso- 
plius, —the work of Intorcetta and others, to 
which I have made frequent reference: A plu- 
rimis et clarissimis textibus Sinicis probari potest, 
légitimum predicti axiomatis sensum esse, quod ea- 
dem intentione et formali motivo Sinenses naturalem 
pietatem et politicum obsequium erga defunctos exer- 
ceant, sicuti erga eosdem adhuc superstites exercebant, 
ex quibus et ex infra dicendis prudens lector facile 
deducet, hos ritus circa defunctos fuisse mere civiles, 
tnstitutos dumtaxat in honorem. et obsequium. pa- 
ventum, etiam post mortem non intermittendum ; nam 
si quid illic divinum aguovissent, cur diceret. Confu- 
ctus—Priscos servire solitos defunctis, uti iisdem 
serviebant viventibus, ‘This is ingenious reason- 
ing, but it does not meet the fact that sacrifice 
is an entirely new clement introduced into the 
service of the dead. 6. I do not understand 
how it is that their sacrifices to God are ad- 
duced here as an illustration of the filial piety 
of king Wan and king Woo. What is said 
about them, however, is important, in reference 
to the views which we should form about the an-

cient religion of China, K'ang«shing took to 
be the sacrifice to Heaven, offered, at the winter 
solstice, in the southern suburb Aly of the im-

perial city ; and Ji to be that offered to the

Earth, at the summer solstice, in the northern. 
Choo He agrees with him. Both of them, how-

ever, add that after E am we are io under: 
stand * t ‘Sovereign Earth we * a 
++ HA 1 p This view of Jit here is

vehemently controverted. by Maou aud many 
others. But neither the opinion of the two great

commentators that = + is suppressed for the 
sake of brevity, nor the opinion of others that

1. The duke Gae asked about government.

'commentators that = + is suppressed for the 
sake of brevity, nor the opinion of others that

1. The duke Gae asked about government.

'

by nut we are to understand the tutclary deities

of the soil, affects the judgment of the sage him- 
self, that the service of one being even of God 
— was designed by all those ceremonies. See my 
* Notions of the Chinese concerning God and 
Spirits,’ pp. 50-52. The cerenionies of the an- 
cestral temple embrace the great and less fre-

quent services of the jii and 7 (see the Ann., 
III. x. XI.) and the seusonal sacrifices, of which 
only the autumnal one E) is specified here.

The old commentators take aR as— I. with

the meaning of to place,’ and interpret

‘the government of the kingdom would be as 
easy as to place anything in the palm.’ This

view is defended in the rH H8 ac. It has

the advantage of accounting better for the ay

We are to understand ‘the meaning of the sa- 
crifices to ancestors,’ as including all the uses 
mentioned in par. 4. I said above that I could 
not understand the connection between the fires 
part of this par. and the general object of the 
chapter. Taking the par. by itself, it teaches that 
a proper knowledge and practice of the duties of 
religion and filial piety would amply equip a 
ruler for all the duties of his government.

20. ON GOVERNMENT: SHOWING PRINCIPALLY 
HOW If DEPENDS ON THE CHARACTER OF THE 
OFFICERS ADMINISTERING IT, AND HOW THAT DE- 
PENDS ON THD CHARACTER OF THE SOVEREIGN 
HIMSELF. We hove here one of the fullest ex- 
positions of Confucius’ views on this subject, 
though he unfolds them only as a description 
of the government of the kings Wan and Woo. 
In the chapter there is the remarkable inter- 
mingling, which we have seen in The Great 
Learning,’ of what is peculiar to a ruler, and 
what is of universal application. From the 
concluding paragraphs, the transition is easy to 
the next and most difficult part of the Work.

THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN.THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN.

JA E. 
f N du, N. Ep En A5

2. The Master said,“ The government of Wan and Woo is dis- 
layed in the records, — the tablets of wood and bamboo. Let there 
e the men and the government will flourish; but without the men,

their government decays and ceases.”

3. “With the right men the growth of government is rapid, 
just as vegetation is rapid in the earth; and moreover their govern- 
ment night be called an ensily-growing rush.

4. „Therefore the administration of government lies in getting 
proper men. Such men are to be got by means of the rulers own 
character. That character is to be cultivated by his treading in 
the ways of duty. And the treading those ways of duty is to be 
cultivated by the cherishing of benevolence.

5. “Benevolence is the characteristic element of humanity, and the 
great exercise of it is in loving relatives. Righteousness is the 
accordance of actions with what is right, and the great exercise of

m

This chapter is found also in the Re E, but 
i ERE Hn’ . 
with considerable additions.

1. TA 9e Ana, II. xix, etal. 2. The

(so it is defined in the ya kind of bee, 
snid to take the young of the mulberry cater- 
pillar,‘and keep them in its hole, where they 
are transformed iuto bees. So, they said, docs

F were tablets of wood, one of which might 
contain up to 100 characters. The Se were 
: fij. or ships of bamboo tied together. In dt 
N

t A: Hsueh, i. e., rulers like Wiin and Woo, 
and ministers such as they had. 3. K‘ang-shing 
and Ying-tit take fk as . to exert one’s- 
self, and interpret: A ruler ought to exert

himself in the practice of government, as the 
earth exerte itaelf to produce and to nurture

dst Mi). Choo He takes fit as= Ki, 
t hasty,’ ‘to make haste.’ X id fit R.

“man’s way hastens government ;’ but the

must be taken with special reference to the 
pryeeding par., as in the translation. The old 
coum, took idi I ag the nume of an insect,“man’s way hastens government ;’ but the

must be taken with special reference to the 
pryeeding par., as in the translation. The old 
coum, took idi I ag the nume of an insect,

government transform the people. ‘Thigis in ace. 
with the paragraph, as we find it in the xe

zh, 
—X 35 i A A df M 
Ni R N E E QUE T 
yu N This view is maintained also in the

rH ii Bt: But we cannot hesitate in pro-

ferring Choo IIe's, as in the translation. The 
other is too absurd. He takes H, as if it were

n: HE - SHE. 
. go Which, as well as 9l is the name

of various rushes or sedges. 4. In the * BP

for 1E A: we have ERE A which is, 
no doubt, the meaning. By H here, says Choo

He, are intended ‘the duties of universal obli- 
gation,’ in par, 8, which, adds Maou, ure the

to 
A 
e

>H 
zA 
vM 
pcenam d

v

zg 
SEH

LRN 
SNEK 
ae NSE

ERES

mye 5

v 
*- 
U

og

II

SKN

v

.

BER

t

THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN.

R

zu 
KE

&

gem 
x

RH

it is in honouring the worthy. The decreasing measures of the love 
due to relatives, and the steps in the ‘honour due to the worthy, 
are produced by the principle of propriety.

6. * When those in inferior situations do not possess the con- 
fidence of their superiors, they cannot retain the government of the 
people. .

7. “Hence the sovereign may not neglect the cultivation of his 
own character. Wishing to cultivate his character, he may not 
neglect to serve his parents. In order to serve his parents, he may 
not neglect to acquire a knowledge of men. In order to know men, 
he may not dispense with a knowledge of Heaven.

8. “The duties of universal obligation are five, and the virtues 
wherewith they are practised are three. The duties are those be- 
tween sovereign and minister, between father and son, between hus-

ways of the Mean, in accordance with the 
nature.’ 5. th, Benevolence isways of the Mean, in accordance with the 
nature.’ 5. th, Benevolence is

man, We find the same language in Mencius, 
and in the Le-ke, XXXII. 15. This virtue is 
called Max, ‘because loving, feeling, and the 
forbearing nature, belong to man, as he is born. 
They are that whereby man is man.’ Sce the

cH B aft. in loc. . upper 3d tone, read 
shae. Yt is opposed to und means decreas- 
ing, growing less. For i BT Æ we have, 
in the Re ER, ne Ar JA 4. which would

acem to mean—‘are that whereby ceremonies 
are produced.’ But there follow the words— jl 
% EX x AS th. The ‘produced’ in the 
translation can-only=‘distinguished.’, Ying-t& 
explains Ae by y BH 6. This has crept 
into the text here by mistake. It belongs to 
pur. 17, below. We do uot flud it here in the *

sh. 7. A is here the ruler or sovereign. 
I fail in trying to trace the connection between 
the different parts of this par. He may not be 
without knowing men.'--Why? * Because,’ wo 
are told, ‘it is by honouring, and being courteott. 
to the worthy, and securing them as friends, 
that a man perfects his virtue, and is able to 
serve his relatives.’ ‘He may not be without 
knowing Heaven.’—Why ? ‘ Because,’ it is said, 
* the gradations in the love of relatives and thé 
honouring the worthy, are all heavenly arrange- 
ments, and a heavenly order, natural, necessary,

principles.’ But in this explanation, jat 
has a very different meaning from what it has 
in the previous clause. LR too, is here parents,

its meaning being more restricted than in par. h. 
8. From this down to par. 11, there is brought 
before us the character of the ‘mez,’ mentioned 
in par. 2, on whom depends the flourishing of 
‘government, which government is exhibited

in parr. 12--15, : T Z xE A tho

paths proper to be trodden by all under heavon,

TUE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN.

en. xx.

= 
LÀ 
*

= 
iad

-le 
i 
TERENAS

* 
N

A 
4

E

eis. 
ER Ser

| 
|

NS 
Se

v

| [SEDES BERE 
NESS

'

+e 
e

|

Sa es

E

0 
=

ne As

Be | RNAS 
=TUE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN.

en. xx.

= 
LÀ 
*

= 
iad

-le 
i 
TERENAS

* 
N

A 
4

E

eis. 
ER Ser

| 
|

NS 
Se

v

| [SEDES BERE 
NESS

'

+e 
e

|

Sa es

E

0 
=

ne As

Be | RNAS 
=

me

a

band! and wife, between elder brother and younger, and those

belonging to the intercourse of friends.

Those five are the duties

of universal obligation. Knowledge, magnanimity, and energy, these

three, are the virtues universally binding.

And the means by

which they carry the duties into practice is singleness.

9. “Some are born with the, knowledge of those duties; some 
know them by study; and some acquire the knowledge after a pain- 
ful fecling of their ignorance. But the knowledge being possessed, 
it comes to the same thing. Some practise them with a natural 
ease; some from a desire for their advantages; and some by strenu- 
ous effort, But the achievement being made, it comes to the same

thing.” '

the path of the Mean. Af - Am. is the 
Aunteledye necessary to choose the detailed course 
of duty. {= (x 2 P ‘the unselfish- 
ness of the heart’) js the maynaninity (so I style 
it for want of a better term) to pursue it. , 
is the viauf exergy, which maintains the per- 
nuncncg of the choice and the practice. Br

E fT Z d$ — thy iis, acc. to Ying-ti 
means-— From the various kings (H EX 
downwards, in the practising these five duties, 
and three virtaes, there has been but one me- 
thod. There has been no change in modern 
times und ancient.’ This, however, is not satis- 
factory. We want a substantive meaning, for 
——. This Choo Ho gives uy. He says:

Choo He says :— The

] 
ian

M ! 
HI] a im . — is simply sincerity ;' the 
sincerity, that is, on which the rest of the work 
dwells with such strange predication. I trans-

lato, therefore, — here by singjeness. There] 
ian

M ! 
HI] a im . — is simply sincerity ;' the 
sincerity, that is, on which the rest of the work 
dwells with such strange predication. I trans-

lato, therefore, — here by singjeness. There

seems a reference in the term to fij, ch. 1 p. 3. 
The singleness is that of the soul in the appre- 
hension and practice of the duties of the Mean, 
which is attained to by wutchfulness over onv’s- 
self, when alone. TT x I understand as in 
the second clause of the paragraph. 9. Compare 
Anz, XVI. I. 10. 24], comp. Ana. XV. ii. pt 
—up. 2d tone, ‘to force,“ to employ violent efforts. 
zZ in 901 Pdl and 1T 
Z refers to the duties of universal obligation,’

But is there the threcfold difference in the 
Knuwledye of those duties? And who are they

t

E E Ef JL JL Bp d] er Hor 
qh, E 3 Ya VW 4e = 
ail ya

=

L. fl. f cee 40 f

10. The Master said, “To be fond of learning is to be 
knowledge.

W

near to 
To practise with vigour is to be near to magnani- 
mity. To possess the feeling of shame is to be near to energ gy.

1L „He who knows these three things, knows how to cultivate 
his own character. Knowing how to cultivate his own character, 
he knows how to govern other men. Knowing how to govern other 
men, he knows how to govern the empire with all its States and 
fainilies.

12. All who have the government of the Empire with its States 
and families have nine standard rules to follow ;—viz., the cultivation 
of their own characters; the honouring Of. men of virtue and talents ; 
affection towards their relatives ; respect towards the great ministers ; 
kind and considerate treatment ‘of the whole body of officers ; deal- 
ing with the mass of the people as children ; encouraging the ‘resort 
of all classes of artizans ; indulgent treatment of men from a distance; 
and tlie kindly cherishing of the princes of the States.

who can practise them with entire ease? 10. 
Choo He observes that F E is here superrwho can practise them with entire ease? 10. 
Choo He observes that F E is here superr

fluous. In the 3 mo zh „ however, we find the 
last par. followed by— The ‘duke said, Your 
words are beautiful and perfect, but Iam stupid,

and unable to accomplish this.“ Then comes this 
par.—‘ Confucius said,’ £c. The , there-, 
fore, prove, that Tsze-sze took this chapter from 
some eexisting document, that which we have in 
the P 5 sb, or some other. Conf. words were

intended P3 encourage and stimulate ‘the duke, 
telling him that the three grand virtues might

be nearly, if not absolutely, attained to. jai Ho.

— knowing to be ashamed,’ i, e., being ashamed 
at being below ae leading to the determina- 
tion not to be so. These three things’ are 
the three things in y last paragraph, which 
make en approximation at least to the three 
virtues which connect with the discharge of 
duty attainable by every one. What connects

the various steps of the climax is the unlimited 
confidence in the power of the example of the 
ruler, which we have had occasion to point out 
80, frequently in The Great Learning. 12. 
These nine standard rules, it is to he borne ln 
mind, constitute the government of Wan and 
Woo, referred to in par. 2. Comm. arrange tho 
4th and öth rules, under the second; and the 
6th, 7th, 8th, and 9th, under the third, 80 that 
after the cultivation: of the person,” we have

here an expansion of Y and ps N. in 
‘par. B. JU B- -Á= 75. *to over The 
student will do well to understand à a after 
. BR X by the EX H here are understood 
specially the officers called Hifi. 45. and te 
the — — 2 and the — = M. who, as teachers,

and p were not styled B. t ministers,' 
or ‘servants.’ See the Shoo-king V. xxi. 5, 6.

a 7 iN Hr.» the X Hl. are understood

CH. xx.

pu

e

EE

(CE 
{a

>A

v

2

it 
u

Mi 
=

V 
4

Him

e

prn

uu 
f

N

bi

d 
— 
bins 
—

—

*

iz 
= 
m 
Ht

v 
‘= 
—

* 
—

D

X Jr Hie

THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN.

a E BS GE UL, 
A ns Bt UL Fe 
Es, K Hl f(CE 
{a

>A

v

2

it 
u

Mi 
=

V 
4

Him

e

prn

uu 
f

N

bi

d 
— 
bins 
—

—

*

iz 
= 
m 
Ht

v 
‘= 
—

* 
—

D

X Jr Hie

THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN.

a E BS GE UL, 
A ns Bt UL Fe 
Es, K Hl f

Ne

U

v

V 
= 
ir 
ras

A FRNY aad 
ae EE

dri

He Ans A

JL"

13. By the ruler's cultivation of his own character, the duties of

universal obligation ave set forth.

talents, he is preserved from errors of judgment.

tion to his relatives, there is no 
his uncles and brethren.

grumbling nor resentment amon 
By respecting the great ministers, he is 
kept from errors in the practice of government.

By honouring men of virtue and 
By showing affec- 
o 
D

By kind and con-

siderate treatment of the whole body of officers, they are led to make 
the most grateful return for his courtesies. By dealing with the 
mass of the people as his children, they ave led to exhort one another to 
what is good. By encouraging the resort of all classes of artizans, 
his resources for expenditure are rendered ample. By indulgent 
treatment of men from a distance, they are brought to resort to him 
from all quarters. And by kindly cherishing the princes of the

States, the whole empire is brought to revere him.

the six ffi —the miuister of Instruction, the 
minister of Religion, &e. Sce the Shoo-king, V. 
xxi, 7—13. 4a Ei. ine ES Ei are tlie

host of subordinate officers after the two prec.

classes, K‘ang-shing says — 88 318 $e LS

D Hg - to receive,’ to which Ving-tu adde— fil

„ being of the same body with 
them.“ Choo He brings out the force of the

term in this way —H3 aH Bx A 5 È

d Alt. im xs E P th, Be means

that he places himself in their place, and so

examines their feelings.“ Y Jit R—r is

459 
a verb, ‘to make children of,’ * to treat kindly as

children,’ M B T. R- 3k. *to 
call to come, = to encourage.’ The a Dexamines their feelings.“ Y Jit R—r is

459 
a verb, ‘to make children of,’ * to treat kindly as

children,’ M B T. R- 3k. *to 
call to come, = to encourage.’ The a D

or ‘various artizans,’ were, by the statutes of 
Chow, under the superintendence of a special 
officer, nnd it was his business to draw them out 
and forth from among the people. See the

Chow-le, XXXIX, 1-3. ZR M A. Choo

He by 125 N understands a . guests

or envoys, and travellers, or travelling mer- 
chants, JX‘ang-shing understands by them E: 
E3 2 E: 2 ‘the princes of surrounding 
kingdoms,’ i. e., of the tribes that lay beyond the 
six juh ( Bb. or feudal tenures of the Chow rule, 
But these would hardly be spoken of before the 
E 2 And among them, in the 9th rule,

would be included the , or.guests, the prin-

ces themselves at the imperial court, or their 
envoys. 1 doubt whether any others beside the

„or travelliug merchants, are intended by

the NS X. If we may adopt, however, Kang - 
shing's view, this is the rule for the treatment 
of foreigners by the government of China. 18- 
This par. describes the happy effects of observ- 
ing the above nine rules, II. by Hl are 
understood the five duties of universal obliga- 
tion. We read in the aM — About these

nine rules, the only trouble is, that sovereigns

214 THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN. cba 
"B e» du di SE y 
JU EE III. 105 Wea

—fe 
H^

*

pem 
RRE

fie, VÀ

aj

sel 
(VE

ue Bp 3n FEV) Re C 
. 37E F3; RN 
gk, oy eh Be He JJ HH

dnm pam

FIN 
FRISES

PES Ss 
TEE

Te Su 
ich

=—fe 
H^

*

pem 
RRE

fie, VÀ

aj

sel 
(VE

ue Bp 3n FEV) Re C 
. 37E F3; RN 
gk, oy eh Be He JJ HH

dnm pam

FIN 
FRISES

PES Ss 
TEE

Te Su 
ich

=

„ 14. Self. adjustment and purification, with ‘careful regulation 
of his dress, and the not making a movement contrary to the rules 
of propricty :—this is the way for the ruler to cultivate his person. 
Discarding slanderers, and keeping. himself from the seductions of 
beauty; making light of riches, and giving honour to virtue :—this 
is the way for him to encourage men of worth and talents. Giving 
them places of honour and large einolument, and sharing with them in 
their likes and dislikes:—this is the way.for him to encourage, his 
relatives to love him. , Giving them numerous officers to discharge

heir orders and commissions :—this is the way for him to encourage 
the great ministers. According to them a generous confidence; and 
making their emoluments large :—this is the way to encourage the 
hody of officers. Employing them only at the proper times, and 
making the impésts light:—this is the way to encourage the people. 
By daily examinations and monthly trials, and by making their 
rations in accordance with their lahours:—this is m eneourage 
the'classes of artizans., To escort them on their departure and mect:

f

are not able to practise them strenuously. Let; arè all the younger branches of the rulcr's kin- A 
the ruler be really able to cultivate his per-. red. AZ FI. but the-deception and

sim. then will tlie universal duties and universal 
virtues be all-complete, so that he shall be an 
example to the whole empire, with its States

and families. Those dutics will be set up ( 
Vi), and rill k hat to imitate.’ 
JI.) nd men will know what to imitate. peand families. Those dutics will be set up ( 
Vi), and rill k hat to imitate.’ 
JI.) nd men will know what to imitate. pe

2 i — A 
7k : i " * V 5, 
Fue "eang, acc. to Choo Ile, a E NA. 
* he will have no doubts us to principle.“ K'ang- 
shing explains it by zit * N. ‘his counsels 
will he good.’ This latter is the meaning, the 
worthies being those specified in the note on the 
preceding par., their sovereign's counsellors and 
guides. The addition of aH determines the X.

to be uncles. See the 8i J E, I, iv. Baas |

mistake will be in the affairs in charge, of those, 
great ministers. 2x Ri. and + nre the same,

i E * x. f 
parties. /. —as in Ana. II. xx. Ying-tt ex- 
plains it here-— They will exhort and stimulate 
one another to serve their ruler! On PA: HA

AL: Choo He says -RAL EIRA D] 
By St. N M N. CRY LA

‘The resort of all classes of artizans being eu- 
couraged, there is un intercommuniention of the 
' productions of labour, ahd an interchange’ o 
' product f labour, and an interchange’ of"

| men's services, and the hushandman and the trat. 
ficker,’ (it is this class which is designed by 2E)

!

Cit, xx. THE DOCTRINE OF TIIE MEAN. 
» 
£o.

Eni

V2 
~ 
Ct

= 
= 
2n

be 
- 
^

m 
INR

"ie

v

Ñi

= 
— 
gH 
RES 
— 
ye

I 
=A

FH

Sa

MIS SRE 
Set

125 
a Se n R E, EA 
SEETI FIT 
EAT P C^ HX A E 
Hl) I. 2. H te I RE E ql

~

RRE RI A ff L.Eni

V2 
~ 
Ct

= 
= 
2n

be 
- 
^

m 
INR

"ie

v

Ñi

= 
— 
gH 
RES 
— 
ye

I 
=A

FH

Sa

MIS SRE 
Set

125 
a Se n R E, EA 
SEETI FIT 
EAT P C^ HX A E 
Hl) I. 2. H te I RE E ql

~

RRE RI A ff L.

them on their coming; to commend the good.among them, and show 
. compassion to the imcompetent :—this is the way to treat indulgently 
men from a distance. To restore families whose line of succession’ 
has been broken, and to revive States that have been extinguished ; 
to reduce to order States that are in confusion, and support those 
which are in peril; to have fixed times for their own reception at court, 
and the reception: of their envoys; to send them away after liberal 
treatment, and welcome their coming with small contributions :—this 
is the way to cherish the princes of the States. 
15. “All who have the government of the empire with its States 
and families have the above nine standard rules. ‘And the means 
by ‘which they' are carried into practice is singleness. 
16. "In all things success depends on previous preparation, and 
without such previous preparation there is sure to be failure. If 
what is to be spoken be previously determined, there will be no

*hre niding to one another. Hence the resour: | portant, attention to inward purity and to dress,

" 1 "HH , 
dos for expenditure are sufficient. ; I Suppose | seems strange enough to a western render. i 
that Choo felt a want of some mention of agri- : E i 
i throughout, =‘ to encourage, ‘to stimulate in a

culture in connection with these rules, and 
tthonght'to find a place for it hee Maou would friendly way.“ I have translated iu n aftor 
make -= and H- Wr. See the the 2 Sp which srys 19) iu Xu EL x

3 The up. x is the youn; and

s" ik Bit. in loc. Comp. also Ke 1 x.

12. K'ang-shing understands as mean-

ing 3& E]. ‘frontier kingdoms,’ but the usage 
of the phrase is against such an interpretation.

14, After * T^ ft x. we have in the

A BE DAL TS K. The duko:12. K'ang-shing understands as mean-

ing 3& E]. ‘frontier kingdoms,’ but the usage 
of the phrase is against such an interpretation.

14, After * T^ ft x. we have in the

A BE DAL TS K. The duko:

anid, How are these rules to he practised?’ and. 
thon follows this parz preceded by XL "2 E 3;

* Confucius said.’ N Jj PX HE. comp. ch. 
xvi 3. The blending together, as equally im-

the 2d the verb, just the reverse of the phrase 
iu fits previous occurrences, ‘The use of "m in

rofereuce to the prince’s treatment of the offi- 
cers is strange, but. the translation gives what 
appears to be the meaning. Kang-shing explain- 
ed :— Making large the emolument of the loyal 
and sincere ;’ but, according to the analogy of alt

— : 
the other clauses, ik and fa must be descrip- 
tive of the ruler. zs B. —comp. Ana. I. v.

For EL ER we have iu the E ah, fü W,

NS 
-1 
[n]

THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN.

E 
4 
iut 
tel

ai Se 
SFr

oa 
SB 
te 
Y

= 
X

E est

"RR

DES 
STA 
4 
WM

: . 4 Fy PM, 
ZEE EXE

stumbling. If affairs be previously determined, there will be no 
difficulty with them. If one's actions have been previously deter- 
mined, there will be no sorrow in connection with them. If princi- 
ples of conduct have been previously determined, the practice of 
them till be inexhaustible. ; ,

17. When those in inferior situations; do not obtain the con- 
fidence of the sovereign, they cannot succeed in governing the peo- 
ple. There is a way to obtain the confidence of the sovereign ;—if 
one is not trusted by his friends, he will not get the confidence of his 
sovereign. There is a way to being trusted by one's friends ;—if one 
is not obedient to his parents, he will not be true to friends. There 
is a way to being obedient to one's parents;—if one, on turning his

which K'ang-shing explains by WE „ ‘rations 
allowed by government.’ See Morrison, char. 
Jj. Choo He follows K'ang-shing in this, but

BÆ and not [^1 is to

be substituted here for èwhich K'ang-shing explains by WE „ ‘rations 
allowed by government.’ See Morrison, char. 
Jj. Choo He follows K'ang-shing in this, but

BÆ and not [^1 is to

be substituted here for è

‘to weigh,’ ‘to be according to.“ The trials and 
examinations, with these rations, show that the 
artizans are not to be understood of such dis- 
persed among thé people, but as collected under 
the superintendence of the government, Am- 
bassadors from foreign countries have been re- 
ceived up to the present century, according to 
the rules bere prescribed, and the two last re- 
gulations are quite in harmony with the moral 
and political superiority that China claiins over 
the countries which they may represent. But in 
the case of travellers, and travelling merchants, 
passing from one state to another, there were 
anciently regulations, which may be adduced 
to illustrate all the expressions here. See the

rH Ji sit and the Hd Rd in loc. 712 Xi 
WH: H Jas Eee Ana. xx. i. Y. 15. We

naturally understand Br A 11 Z 44 "ur

I agree with Maon, that

, up. 8d tone,

th, as meaning—‘the means by which they 
are carried into practice is one and the same.’ 
‘Then this means will be the 22 or previous

preparation' of the next. par. This is tlie inter- 
pretation of K‘ang-shing and Ying-ta, who take 
the two parr. together. But acc. to Choo He, 
‘the one thing’ is sincerity, as in par. 8. 16. 
The ‘all things’ is to be understood with rete- 
rence to the universal duties, the universal vir4 
tues, and the nine standard rules. 17. The ob- 
ject of this par. seems to be to show that the 
singleness, or sincerity, lies at the basis of that 
previous preparation, which is essential to $uc- ` 
cess in any and every thing. The steps of the 
climax conduct us to it as the mental state, 
necessary to all virtues, and this sincerity is 
again made dependent on the understanding of 
what is good, upon which point see the next

chapter. N jb P L. ace. to Ling- tn, F 
FRAEZ E a not get the mindchapter. N jb P L. ace. to Ling- tn, F 
FRAEZ E a not get the mind

—pleased feeling—of the sovereign,’ We use 
‘to gain,’ and ‘to win,’ sometimes, in a similar 
way. 18. Premare (Not, Lin, Sin, p. 156) says t—

$ ak Ae est in obstracto, et Sk 2 A

est in eon»

Cn. xx.

Ag Sr N 
> 
*

* 
N

Jb

THE DOCTRINE OF TIIE MEAN.

E

(Nr aN Se e

ul

nk 
M gone 
>

e

GENS 
(va

thoughts in upon himself, finds a want of sincerity, he will not be

obedient to his parents. 
‘rity 
not attain sincerity in himself.

There is a way to the attainment of since- 
in one’s-self ;—if a man do not understand what is good, he will

18. “Sincerity is the way of Heaven. The attainment of since- 
rity is the way of men. He who possesses sincerity, is he who, without 
an effort, hits what is right, and apprehends, without.the exercise of 
‘thought ;—he is the -sage who naturally and easily. embodies the 
right way. He who attains. to sincerity, is he who: chooses what is

good, and firmly holds it fast. 
19.

„To this attainment there are requisite the extensive study

of what is good, accurate inquiry about it, careful reflection on it, 
the clear discrimination of it, and the earnest practice of it.

20.

„The superior man, while there is any thing he has not

studied, or while in what he has studied there is any thing he can- 
not understand, will not intermit hislabour. While thereis any thing

creto. This is not quite correct. For ak ＋ which Maou says IK. Mr pce 4

. is in the concrete, as much as the other, and is 
said, below, to be characteristic of the sage. ah 
21 is the quality possessed absolutely. a 
x 2 is the same acquired. The way of Hea- 
ven, —this, acc. to Ving-tä, = the way which 
Heaven pursues,’ Choo He explains it XH

Z AS SK, ‘the fundamental natural course 
of heavenly principle.” Maou says —1 3 
ud. E 1:37 AA dU 
EX , this is like the accordance of na-

ture in the Mean, considered to be THE PATH, 
having its root in Henven.“ We might acquiesceture in the Mean, considered to be THE PATH, 
having its root in Henven.“ We might acquiesce

in this, but for the opposition of AZ: on

the chapter in the

D 3 "nn 
YA TS 3H. Kik. N A th — as is 
like the cultivation of the path in the Mean, 
considered to be THE PATH, having its comple- 
tion from man.’ But this takes the second and 
third utterances in the Work as independent 
sentiments, which they certainly are not. Ido 
not see my way to rest in any büt the old inter- 
pretation, extravagant as it is.—At this point, 
EAS censes to be the same 
with that before us, and diverges to another 
subject. 19. There are here described the dif- 
ferent processes which lead to the attainment of

sincerity. The gloss in the fiti snys that ‘the 
five x all refer to the what is good in the last ch.,

the five universal duties, and the nine standard 
rules beiug included therein, Rather it seems

t5

zt

NEES

Vu 
bz 
unb 
GG

xa

x.

=A

THE DOCTRINE OF TNE MEAN.

-SEFER 
IAS 
S 
s

CH. XX.—XXI.

A 
am 
Ix

sev 
ber:

ae 
zx

=

ceo

E 
SN

- 
* 
p

SN 2 
> 
Ei

E 
=

rr 
M

v- | 
( t

ENS 
au 
.

TOR

EE

l

he has not inquired about; or any thing in’ what he has inquired’ 
about which he does not know, helwill notintérmit his labour. While 
there is any thing which he has not reflected,on, or any thing in 
what he has reflected on which he does not apprehend, he will not 
intermit his labour. While there is any thing which he has not 
discriminated, or his discrimination is not clear, he will not intermit 
his labour. If there be any thing which he has not practised, or his 
practice fails in earnestness, he will not intermit his labour. If 
another man succeed by one effort, he will use a hundred efforts. 
If another man succeed by ten efforts, he will use a thousand.

21.

“Let aman proceed in this way, and, though dull, he will

surely become intelligent ; though weak, he will surely become

strong.”21.

“Let aman proceed in this way, and, though dull, he will

surely become intelligent ; though weak, he will surely become

strong.”

> > t - ! . Pe s : LAN L4 
CuaPrER XXI. When we have intelligence resulting from sin- 
cerity, this condition is to be ascribed to nature; when we have:

1111 tat;

- sincerity resulting from intelligence, this condition, is 
, . . * 1

V a 
to me, that the Li acc. to the idiom pointed 
out several times in the Analects, simply inten- 
sifies the meaning of the diff. verbs, whose regi- 
men it is. , 20. Here we have the determination 
which is necessary in the prosecution of the 
above processes, and par. 21 states the result of 
it. Choo He makes’ a pause at the end of the 
first clause in each part of the par., and inter- 
prets thus :— If he do not study, well; But if 
he do, he will not give over till he understands 
what he studies, and so on. But it seems more

natural to carry the supposition in A over the 
whole of every part, as in the translation, which

moreover substantially agrees with Ying-ti’s 
interpretation.—Here terminates the third part

of the Work. It was to illustrate, as Choo He 
told us, how ‘the path of the Mean cannot be 
left? The author seems to have kept this point 
before him in chapters xiii—xvj., but the. next

to. be ascribed’

i hou

three are devoted to the one subject of filial’ 
Piety, aud the 20th, to the general subject ‘of. 
£overnment. Some things are said worthy of 
being remembered, and others which require ar 
careful sifting ; but, on the whole, we do not find , 
ourselves advanced in an understanding of the 
argument of the Work.,21. Tur RECIPROCAL CONNECTION OF 8IN- 
CERITY AND INTELLIGENCE. With this chap.» 
commences the fourth part of the Work, which, ' 
as Choo observes in his concluding note, is an: 
expansion of the 18th par. of the prec. chapter. 
It is, in a great measure, a glorification of thé! 
sage, finally resting in the person of Confucius; ' 
but the high character of the sage, it is main- 
tained, is not unattainable by others. Ile real-' 
izes the ideal of humanity, but by his example'! 
and lessons, the same ideal is brought within ' 
the reach of many, perhaps of all. The ideal of 
humanity,—the perfect character belonging to 
the sage, which ranks him on a level with Hea -

Ch. XXI.— XXII.

—

A

= 
H B 
yt 
yl

4 . 
a 
Aa

-N

i

zl 
— Fa

N

des

to instraction,

TIE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN

E en ETE

279 
per 4 
* Ae, WA 
Au HH P N

. 
damar

MU

N

d 
ER

dg | gon

m Gill! 
IE

[d

penta

p given the sincerity, and there shall be the intel

ligence; given the intelligence, and there shall be the sincerity.

ni

The c above is “the twenty-first chapter.

Tsze-sze takes up in it, and

€] discourses From, the subjects of “the way of Heaven” and “the

way of men,” mentioned in the preceding chapter,

The twelve

chapters that follow: are all from Tsze-sze, repeating and illustrat

ing the meaning of this one. 
CuavrER. XXII.

It is only he w ho is possessed of the most com-

plete sincerity that can exist under heaven, who can give its full

vihis indicated by Bw. and we havo no sin- 
gle term in English, which can be considered 
as the complete equivalent of that character. 
The Chinese themseives had great difficulty in 
arriving gt that- definition of it which is now

generally acquiesced in. In the JY y 4111 (quo-

ted in the HER Fp ip. xvi. D), we are told

that ‘the Han scholars were all ignorant of its 
meaning. Under the Sung dynasty, first came

za FR É who defined it by ^-^ it free- 
dam fram all deception. After hitu, ik 4h Hithat ‘the Han scholars were all ignorant of its 
meaning. Under the Sung dynasty, first came

za FR É who defined it by ^-^ it free- 
dam fram all deception. After hitu, ik 4h Hi

said that it meant SED ceaselessness, Then,

one of the Ch'ing called it fit W, Jreedom 
Fran all moral error ; and finally, C Choo He added 
to this the positive element of ia is B. truth and

reality, on which the definition of E] was com-

plete, Remusat calls it—la perfection, and ‘la 
perfection. morala’ — Jntoreetta. and his friends 
call it—vera solidaque perfectio. Simplicity or 
singloness of soul seems to be what is chiefly 
x jntended hy tho term ;—the disposition to, and 
capacity 0, w hat is good, without any deterio- 
rating ch mnt, with no defect of intelligence, or 
intromiss 9 i of selfish thoughts. This belongs 
‘to Heayen, to Heaven and Earth, and to the

sage. Men, not naturally! sages, may, by cul- 
tivating the intelligence of what is good, raise 
themselves to this elevation, p and ae carry 
us back to the first chapter, but the terms 
have a different force, and the longer I dwell 
upon it, the more am I satisfied with Choo Hes '

pronouncement in his f 5s X. that PE i is here

p Zr , ‘possessing from nature, ^and Zt-8t

Z, ‘learning it, and therefore I have trans-

lated E Z by—‘is to be ascribed to. When, 
however, he makes a difference in the connec- 
tion between the parts of the two elauscs e

bU gj A 9j ELI IR and explains Ej, 
Ej fik 2 9j. Hj Gul aj A ZR e «sin

cerity is invariably intelligent, and intelligence 
muy arrive at sincerity,’ this is not dealing fair- 
ly with his text.bU gj A 9j ELI IR and explains Ej, 
Ej fik 2 9j. Hj Gul aj A ZR e «sin

cerity is invariably intelligent, and intelligence 
muy arrive at sincerity,’ this is not dealing fair- 
ly with his text.

Here, at the outset, I may observe that, in this 
portion of the Work, there are specially the three 
tollowing dogmas, which are more than ques- 
tionable:— 1st, That there are some men—sages 
naturally in a state of moral perfection; 2d, 
That the same moral perfection is attainable by 
others, in whom its development i is impeded by 
their material organizatiun, and tho influcuce of

CH. XII.

THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN.

K. H KL II A. A. 2

deyelopment to his nature. Able to give its full development to. his 
own nature, he can do the same to the naturé of other men. Able 
to give its full development to the nature of other men, hé can Live 
their full development to the natures of animals and things. Able 
to give their full development to the natures of creatures and things, 
he can assist the transforming and’ nourishing powers of Heaven and 
Earth. Able to assist the transforming and neurishing powers ‘of 
Heaven and Earth, hé may with Heaven and Earth form a ternion.

external things; and 3d, That the understand- 
ing of what is good will certainly lead to such 
moral perfection.

22. THE RESULTS OF SINCERITY; AND HOW THE 
POSSESSOR OF IT FORMS A TERNION WITH HEA- 
VEN AND Eartn. On Kh ah Choo He 
says that it denotes ‘the reality of the virtue of 
the sage, to which there is nothing in the world 
that can be added.’ This is correct, and if we

were to render—‘ It is only the most sincere man

under heaven,’ the translation would be wrong. 
F4 means simply ‘to exhaust,’ but, by what 
processes and in what way, the character tells

us nothing about. The ‘giving full develop-'under heaven,’ the translation would be wrong. 
F4 means simply ‘to exhaust,’ but, by what 
processes and in what way, the character tells

us nothing about. The ‘giving full develop-'

ment to his nature,’ however, may bé understood 
with Maou, as pursuing THE PATH in accord- 
ance with his nature, so that what Heaven has 
‘conferred on him is displayed without short- 
coming or let. The ‘giving its development 
to the nature of other men’ indicates the suge's 
helping them, by his example and lessons, to 
perfect themselves, ‘His exhausting the nature 
of things,’ i e, of all other beings, animate and 
inanimate, is, acc. to Choo He, ‘knowing them 
completely, and dealing with them correctly,“ 
80, add the paraphrasts, ‘that he secures their 
prosperous increase and development according 
to their nature. Here, however, a Buddhist idea 
appears in Choo He's commentary. He says: 
Ihe nature of other men and things (—ani- 
mals) is the same with my nature,’ which, it 
is observed in Muou's work, is the same with 
the Buddhist sentiment, that *& dog has the 
nature of Buddha,’ and with that of the philo- 
sopher Kavu, that ‘a dog's nature is the same

LESS E PEE n 
ven and Earth’ take the place here of the sin- 
gle term Heaven,’ in ch. xx. par. 18. On this

as a man’s? Maou himself illustrates the tex- 
hausting the nature of things, by reference to 
the Shoo-king IV. iii. 2, where we ure told that 
under the first sovereigns of the Hen dynasty, 
‘the mountains and rivers, all enjoyed tranquil- 
lity, and the. birds and beasts, the fishes! and 
tortoises, all realized the happiness of their 
nature.’ It is thus that the sage assists Heaven 
and Earth. K‘ang-shing, indeed, explains this 
by saying:—' The sage, receiving Heaven's 
appointment to the imperial throne, extends 
every where a happy tranquillity,’ Evidently 
there is a reference in the language to the

mystical paragraph in the 1st chapter—

len-

Ying-ta& observes :—It is snid above, sincerity ismystical paragraph in the 1st chapter—

len-

Ying-ta& observes :—It is snid above, sincerity is

‘the way of Heaven, and here mention is made

also of Earth. The reason is, that the reference 
above, was to the principle of sincerity in its 
spiritual and mysterious origin, and thence the 
expression simple,—The way of Heaven; but 
here we have the transformation and nourishing 
seen in the production of things, and henve 
Earth is associated with Heaven.“ This is not 
very intelligible, but it is to bring out the idea of

a ternion, that the great, supreme, ruling, Power

is thus dualized. K is ‘a file of three,’ and I 
employ *ternion,' to express the idea, just as we 
use ‘quaternion,’ for a file of four. What iz it but 
blasphemy, thus to file man with the eupreme 
Power?

en Rd es THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN.

ae 
e

D 
v

|

— 
— 
Kati 
15

INL 
PS

=! 
XE 
— 7 
x 
VIT "aur 
Nb

— x

a 
8 
3

—— =| 
RETI

v

SU

EEN

dipl

^ 
v

Ei 
Es

— 
—

a 
v 
* 
4

＋ 
: 
=t . rp X 
pu ik JH Hy BA N. » 
CHarrer XXIII.. Next to the above is he who cultivates to the 
utmost the shoots of goodness y sth From those he can attain 
to the possession of sincerity, Mhis sincerity becomes apparent. 
From being apparent, it becomes manifest. From being manifest, 
it becomes brilliant. Brilliant, it affects others. Affecting others, 
they are changed by it. Changed by it, they are transformed. It 
is only he who is possessed of the most complete sincerity that can 
exist under heaven, who can transform. " 
CHAPTER XXIV. It is charagteristic of the most entire sincerity 
to be able to foréknow. When a nation or family is about. to flourish, 
there are sure to be happy omens; and when it is about to perish, 
there are sure to be unlucky omens. ` Such events are scen in the 
milfoil and tortoise, and affect the movements of the four limbs.

12 
uzb 
GG

e 
zy

23. Tux WAY OF MaN;—TUE DEVELOPMENT 
OF PERFECT SINCERITY IN THOSE NOT. NATURAL-

LY POSSESSED or IT. dt xX: * the next, or12 
uzb 
GG

e 
zy

23. Tux WAY OF MaN;—TUE DEVELOPMENT 
OF PERFECT SINCERITY IN THOSE NOT. NATURAL-

LY POSSESSED or IT. dt xX: * the next, or

this next,’ referring to the É ak 9j A

ot ch. xxi. uli js defined by Choo He 
1 x ong buf, n part. K‘ang-shing explains 
tit: by 7^ ^^ Z A. very small matters."

*Maou defines it by n. ta corner,’ and refers

;to Aua. VIL viii, SL — [09 2 YA — RE 
„ as A sentiment analogous to the one in I

i IN 2 n J

Hii . There is difficulty about the term. It 
properly means ‘erooked,’and with a bad applica- 
v tion, like (ei. often signities deflection from what 
jin straight and right Yet it cannot have a bad 
meaning here, for if it have, the phrase,— 
: E54 "ub will be, in the connection, unintelligi- 
ble. One writer uses this comparison :— Put à 
stone on a bamboo shoot, or where the shoot

embrace such.

would show itself, and it will travel round the 
stoue, and cume out crookedly at its side, So it is 
with the good nature, whose free development 
is repressed, It shows itself in shoots, but if 
they be cultivated and improved, a moral con- 
dition and influence may be attained, equal to 
that of the sage, i A i pes 
20. Pua ENTIRE SINCERITY CAN FOREKNOW, 
ES IEL id is the quality in the abstract, 
‘while EJ ax at the end, is the entirely sincer 
individual, —the sage, by nature, or by attain-

Quent, i Wt ‘lucky omens.’ In the dict,

* — fe za m 
[1 is used to define ña- yE may be used 
also of inauspicious omens, but here it cannot 
Distinguishing between the two 
torms, Ying-tà says that unusual appearances

. of things existing in a country are KE and ap-

pearances of things new are ïa. h RK BE ure 
‘unlucky omens,’ the former being spoken of 
t prodigies ot. plants, and of strangely dressed 
boys singing ballads,’ and the latter of prodi-

THE DOCTRINE

Wk Ci ELE dodi 
ETE Pa

OF TIE MEAN, CH, XXIV.--XXX

[EE EE 
BS Lala

ih K

l ih e

When calamity or happiness is about to come, the good shall cer-THE DOCTRINE

Wk Ci ELE dodi 
ETE Pa

OF TIE MEAN, CH, XXIV.--XXX

[EE EE 
BS Lala

ih K

l ih e

When calamity or happiness is about to come, the good shall cer-

nl be foreknown by him, and the evil also.

T herefore the in-

dividual possessed of the most complete sincerity is like a spirit., |

C€narrEn- XXV.

1. Sincerity is that whereby self-completion. is

effected, and % way is that by which man must direct himself. 
9 Sincerity i is the end and reins of things; without sinderity

there would be nothing. On thi

:ount, the superior man regards

the attainment of sincerity as the most excellent thing.

3. The possessor of sincerity

does not merely accomplish: the

self. completion of himself. With this quality he completes other men

and things also.

gious animals. The subject of the verbs A !

and FUE is the events, not the omens. For the 
milfoil and tortoise, see the Yih-king, App. I. x1. 
They are there called ef, spiritual things.

Divination by the milfoil was called 4 that

by the tortoise was called P. They were 
used from the highest antiquity. See the Shoo- 
king, II. ii, 18; V. iv. 20-30. HE. *four 
limbs, are by K'ang-shing interpreted of the 
feet of the tortoise, each foot being peculiarly 
appropriate to divination in a particular season. 
Choo He interprets them of the four limbs of 
the human body. an Di must be left as in-

definite in the translation as it is in the text.— 
The whole chapter is eminently absurd, and 
gives a character of ridiculousness to all the 
maguiloquent teaching about ‘entire sincerity.’ 
The toreknowledge attributed to the sage,—tlie 
mate of ileaven,—is only a guessing by means 
of augury, sorcery, and other follies.25. How FROM SINCERITY COMES BELF-COM- 
PLETION, AND THE COMPLETION OF OTHERS AND 
or tuincs. I have had difficulty i in translating 
this chapter, because it is difficult to under- 
stand it. We wish that we had the writer be- 
fore us to question him; but if we had, it is not 
likely that he would be able to afford us much 
satisfaction. Persuaded that what he denom- 
juates sineerity is a figment, we may not won- 
der at the extravagance of its predicates. 1.

The completing himself shows his perfect virtue.

All the commen. of the Sung school say, that

FIR i is here KR at 2 122 * the Henven-con- 
ferred nature,' and that iB i is Z PE zi.

*the path which is in accordance with the na-

ture.“ They are probably correct, but the difi- 
culty comes when we go on with this view of

ak to the next par. 2. I translate the expan- 
sion of this in the H iis : All that fill up

' the space between heaven d earth are things

op. They end and they begin again; they

begin and proceed to an end; every charge be- 
ing accomplished by sincerity, and every phe- 
nomenon having sincerity unceasingly in it. So

far as the mind of man ( A Zz NY) is cop; 
cerned, if there be not sincerity, then every 
movement of itis vain and false. How can an 
unreal mind accomplish real things ? Although 
it may do something, that is simply .equiv alent 
tonothing. Therefore the superior man searches 
out the source of sincerity, and examines the 
evil of insincerity, chooses what is good, and 
firmly holds it fast, so seeking to arrive at the 
place of truth and reality.' Maou's explanation 
is: Now, since the reason why the sincerity of 
spiritual beings is so incapable of being repress- 
ed, and why they foreknow, is because they entor 
into things, and there is nothing without them: 
shall there be anything which is without the 
entirely sincere man, whoisasaspirit?' I havé 
given these specimens of commentary, that the

cu. xxv.—-XXVI.

^

Palla

— 
E 
C

SR

M

SEE 
Eri 
>R 
E

:

—

.cu. xxv.—-XXVI.

^

Palla

— 
E 
C

SR

M

SEE 
Eri 
>R 
E

:

—

.

151

THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN.

lat 
Hj, E. N

EL CN 
fie

ML

Hi

The completing other men and things shows his knowledge. Both these 
are virtues belonging to the nature, and this is the way by which a 
union is effected of the external and internal. Therefore, whenever 
he—the entirely sincere man—employs them,—that is, these virtues,—

their action will be right. 
CHAPTER XXVI. I.

ceaselesssness.

2. Not ceasing, it continues long.

itself.

3. Evidencing itself, it reaches far.

Jarge and substantial. 
brilliant.

Hence to entire sincerity there belongs

Continuing long, it evidences

Reaching far, it becomes

Large and substantial, it becomes high and

4. Large and substantial;this is how. it contains all things. 
High and brilliant; —this is how it overspreads all things. Reach-

ing far and continuing long;—this is how it 
5. Solarge and substantial, the individua

„ all things. 
possessing it is the co-

equal of Earth. So high and brilliant, it makes him tlie coequal of 
eaven. So far-reaching and long- continuing, it makes him infinite.

render may, if he can, by means of them, gather 
some apprehensible meaning from the text. 8.

Ihave translated Jy Jy by —‘complete other men

and things also,’ with a reference to the account 
of the achievements of sincerity, in ch. xxii, On

Ef pod Ah iy Zi do

En paraphrases;—* Now both this perfect

virtue and knowledge are virtues certainly and 
originally belonging to our nature, to be referred 
for their bestowment to Heaven ;—what distinc- 
tion is there in them of external and internal?’ 
—All this, s0 far as I cun see, is but veiling 
ignorance by words without knowledge.26. A PARALLEL BETWEEN THE SAGE POB- 
S8ESSED OF ENTIRE SINCERITY, AND HEAVEN AND 
EARTH, SHOWING THAT THE SAME QUALITIES 
BELONG TO THEM. The first six parr. show the^ 
way of the sage; the next three show the way 
of Heaven and Earth; and the last brings the 
two ways together, iu their essential nature, in 
a passage from the She-king. The doctrine of 
the chapter is liable to the criticisms which have 
been made on the 22d ch. Aud, morcover, there 
is in it asad confusion of the visible heavens 
and earth with the immaterial power and rea- 
son which govern them; in a word, with God,

1, Because of the f ‘hence,’ or therefore,

4 THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN. en. xxvi.

N 
Qo

B

a 
SS

SN 
l SS

tM eaa | =|

* 
ww 
v 
(d

d b

No

. RNO

AfA 
IS

22

*

v

REM

RUBENS 
MERE

Se

a. 
-- 
-

v

V.

sd

v 
[d 
v

x

EE a a 
RE

mp 
Ms

PASH 
=

BALAI US BSB

6. Such being its nature, without any display, it becomes, mani- 
fested ; without any movement, it produces changes; and without 
any. effort, it accomplishes its ends.

7. The way of Heaven and Earth may be completely declared 
in one sentence.— They are without any doubleness, and so ‘they 
produce things in a manner that is unfathomable.

8.. The way of Heaven and Earth is large and substantial: high 
and brilliant, far-reaching and long-enduring. | E

9. The heaven now before us is only this bright nng spot; 
but when viewed in its inexhaustible extent, the sun, moon, stars; 
and constellations of the zodiac, are suspended i in it, ‘and all things 
are overspread by it. The earth before us is but a handful of 
soil; but when regarded in its breadth and thickness, it sustains 
to illustrate the unfathomableness of Heaven 
and Earth in produeing things, showing how 
it springs from their sincerity, or freedom from 
doubleness. 1 have already observed how it is 
only the material heavens and earth which are 
presented to us. Aud not only s9;—we havomountains, seas, and rivers, set forth us acting 
with the sume unfathomableness as those entira

a3

Choo He is condemned by recent writers for 
making a new chapter to commence here, Yet 
the matter is sutliciently distinct from that of 
the preceding one. Where the takes hold of 
the text above, however, it is not casy to discover.

The gloss in the 4hi f anys that it indicates

a conclusion from all the preceding predicates 
about sincerity, ES E] ia to be understood, 
now in the abstract, and now in the concrete. 
But the 6th paragraph seems to be the place 
ta bring out the personal idea, as I have done. 
ET without bounds, our infinite. Surely 
it is strange—passing strango—to apply that

term in the description of any created being.

7. What I said was the prime idea in Shy, viz, 
* simplicity, ‘singleness of soul,’ is very conspi- 
cuous here. N 45 H pea i — 2S ia the 
subst. verb. It surprises us, however, to find

Heaven and Earth called ‘things, at the same time 
that they are represented as by their entire sin-

cerity producing all things, 9. This par. is said

and error in such ö:

bodies and powers. The Tx says.on this: 
— The hills and waters are what Heaven and 
Earth produce, and that they should yet be able 
themselves to produce other things, shows still 
more how Heaven and Earth, in the producing. 
of things, are unfathomable.’ The gonfusion

farg very

lamentable, The use of ZZ E in the several 
clauses here perplexes the student. On Mm

Ha ZZ ze Choo He says—ItV 47 K.

JE in = =F x ‘This is speaking of in —heg⸗ 
ven — as it appears in one point.’ In the rH Ji

sit in loc., there is an attempt to make this

ex

ie eee: THE DOCTRINE OF TIE MEAN. 28

|

x 
alte 
NA Ba 
lO 
vem 
7 
AI.

NH 
|E

=! [y An 
A MATS 
PEN í

NN 
iv

x 
M)

v

[HET

v

zZ 
=I

EN 
a AP

ERU ER 
5

nA 
SHEER EN

~ 
- 
-

S 
e Ho 
x

SN 
DINH

v

HAER

HS

‘we 
^ 
e

gH 
ES

[ d 
* 
— 
- 
w

E 
cr 
2 
pa

I BSS 
Be

luk

\ 
/

3

p:

X 
h

Mi

~ 
w 
w 
[ d

M 
4v

zZ 
=I

EN 
a AP

ERU ER 
5

nA 
SHEER EN

~ 
- 
-

S 
e Ho 
x

SN 
DINH

v

HAER

HS

‘we 
^ 
e

gH 
ES

[ d 
* 
— 
- 
w

E 
cr 
2 
pa

I BSS 
Be

luk

\ 
/

3

p:

X 
h

Mi

~ 
w 
w 
[ d

M 
4

i mre emt

m

e

2

0 ZU UN l. 78. 1 * Ne

monntains like the Hwa and the Loh, without feeling their weight, 
and contains the rivers and seas, without their leaking away. The 
mountain now before us appears only a stone; but when contem- 
plated in all the vastness of its size, we see how the grass and trees 
are produced on it, and birds and beasts dwell on it, and precious 
things. which men treasure fip are found on it. The water now 
before us appears but a ladleful; yet extending our view to its 
unfathomable depths, the largest tortoises, iguanas, iguanadons, 
dragons, fishes, and turtles, are produced in them, articles of value 
and sources of wealth abound in them. :

10. It is said in the Book of Poetry, “The ordinances of Heaven, 
how profound are they and unceasing!” The meaning is, that it is 
thus that Heaven is Heaven. And again, * How illustrious was it, the 
singleness of the virtue of king Wan!” indicating that it was thus 
that king Wan was what he was. Singleness likewise is unceasing.

[x

out by a definition of Z — 2 e th, zy HE AS —there are five peaks, or X. worship- 
Ay aye. ‘ . is overplus, meaning & small | ped in China, the western one of which is called 
overplus,' H H i Ji —comp. the Shoo- 2 . (low. 3d tone) FR Here, paid wo 
king, 13. In that pa s, as well as here, many Are to understand by each term a particular 
take fit as meaning the planets, but we need mountain, Bee the fR ae and "pi pli 
not depart from the meaning of "stars" gene- in loc. In the $Ë BB. the Yellow river, aud

rally. Ik is applied variously, but usod along | that only, is understood by inj. but both it and

with the other terms, it denotes the conjunc- D A i 
tions of the sun and moon, which divide the ifj must be taken generally. 4 rend Neuen,with the other terms, it denotes the conjunc- D A i 
tions of the sun and moon, which divide the ifj must be taken generally. 4 rend Neuen,

circumference of the heavens into twelve parts, | lower Ist tone, is in the dict, with ref. to this

THE DOCTRINE OF TIIE MEAN. Cit. XXVI

i 1T. Fe X. N

Caseret XXVII 1. How great is the path proper to the sage!

2. Like overflowing water, it sends forth and nourishes all things, 
and rises up to the height of heaven.

3, All complete is its greatness! It embraces the three hun- 
dréd rules, of ceremony, and the three thousand rules of demeanour. 
4. It waits for the proper man, and then it is trodden.

5. Hence it is said, “Only by perfect virtue can the perfect 
path, in all its courses, be made a fact.”

6. Therefore, the superior man honours his virtuous nature, and 
maintains constant inquiry and study, seeking to carry it out to its

“> 
= EM 
CHA 
7

1 ^ 
passage, defined by E. ea place, a small 
plot. In the z iB Bib 55 is defined as

4t mx *the first-produced of the 
chelonia ;’ S e as B Sh 2 E *the chief

of scaly animals; as being a ‘kind of

2 as being a kind of HE while the 1 
has scales like a fish, feet like a dragon, and is 
related to dne i’ By H are intended pearls 
and valuable shells; by 
See the She-king, IV. i. Bk. I. Ode, II. st. 1. The 
attributes of the ordinances of Heaven, and the 
virtue of king Win, are here set forth, as sub- 
stantially the same. = fine and pure,’ 
*unmixed. The dict. gives it the distinct 
meaning of.*ceaselessness, quoting the last

clause nere, —fili jk F . as if it were de-

finition, and not description.

27. THE GLORIOUS PATH OF THE SAGE; AND 
HOW THE SUPERIOR MAN ENDEAVOURS TO ATTAIN 
TOIT. The chapter thus divides itself into two 
parts, one containing five parr., descriptive of

the HH A or SAGE, and the other two, des-

criptive of the Ó , OF superior man, which 
tro appellations are to be here distinguished.the HH A or SAGE, and the other two, des-

criptive of the Ó , OF superior man, which 
tro appellations are to be here distinguished.

1. This bar., says Choo He, ‘embraces the two 
that follow.’ They are, indeed, to be taken as

, fish, salt, &c. 10.

exegetical of it. 3B. it is said, is here, as every:

where else in the work (see the Ra y+. in loc).

‘the path which is in acc. with the nature? The 
student tries to believe so, and goes on to par. 
2, when the predicate about the nourishing af

all things puzzles and confounds him. 2. Ti 
is not here the advorb, but= E, reaching to.’

3. By ia f we are to understand the great-' 
er and) more! rv principles of. propriety, 
‘such, ysayg the. WE El f ae capping, marriage,

mourning, and sacrifice ;"and by 25 fi aro 
intended all the minuter observances of those.

The former are also $c na. nd 8E and IE. 
ít ; the latter, ili nd. and EE [ See the

, in loc. 300 and 8000 are round num- 
bers. Reference is made to these rules and their 
minutia, to show how, in every one of them,. 
as proceeding from the sage, there is a principle, 
to be referred to the Heaven-given nature. 4. 
Comp. ch. xx. 2. In * Confucius Sinarum Philoso- 
phus) it is suggested that there may be here a 
prophecy of the Saviour,’ and that the writer 
may have been under the influence of that 
spirit, by whose moving the Sibyls ‘formerly | 
prophesied of Christ.’ There is nothing in the

text to justify such a thonglit. 5. Bib t ‘to con- 
geal;’ ien Ke ‘to complete, aud E. to

287

CH, XXVIL—XXVIIL THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN,

P 
sion

md 
iM

v

5 
SEE

bf

os

[ d 
d

[ d

In Zi 7. 
Sa

v

\ 
de

=>

SIENAI

v 
v

ERAH

ak 
Hm: RENS 
mss 
d 
gat 
"

t 
tasm 
4

4

N

Be ER y E EEP 
sion

md 
iM

v

5 
SEE

bf

os

[ d 
d

[ d

In Zi 7. 
Sa

v

\ 
de

=>

SIENAI

v 
v

ERAH

ak 
Hm: RENS 
mss 
d 
gat 
"

t 
tasm 
4

4

N

Be ER y E EE

breadth and greatness, so as to omit none of the more exquisite and 
minute points which it embraces, and to raise it to its greatest 
height and brilliancy, so as to pursue the course of the Mean. He 
cherishes his old knowledge, and is continually acquiringnew. He 
exerts an honest, generous, earnestness, in the esteem and practice 
of all propriety. E. o

7. Thus, when occupying a high situation; he is not proud, and 
in a low situation, he is not insubordinate. When the kingdom is 
well-governed, he is sure by his words. to rise; and when it is ill- 
governed, he is sure by his silence to command forbearance to him- 
self. Is not this what we find in the Book of Poetry,—“ Intelligent. 
is he and prudent, and so preserves his person ?”

CHAPTER XXVIII. I. The Master said, Let a man who is ig-, 
norant be fond of using his own judgment, let a man without rank 
be fond of assuming a directing power to himself; lét à man who is 
living in the present age go back to the ways of antiquity ;—on the 
persons of all who act thus calamities will be sure to come."

SHINE

O

ivt

\ 
4

1 
TE 
HEER

[ d

ET

28. AN ILLUSTRATION OF THE SENTENCE IM 
THE LAST CHAPTER—‘IN A LOW SITUATION HE 18 
NOT INSUBORDINATE. There does seem to be a 
connection of the kind thus indiented between 
this chapter and the last, but. the principal ob-

. il 
fix? The whole par. is merely a repetition of 
the prec. ond, in other words. 6. iü in both

cases here, = H ‘to proceed from, or ‘by.’ It is

said correctly, that Ti ^a] E— fia JS 
* the first sentence, — Pf (s p im zi nj

Bh, is the brains of the whole paragraph.’ i:

ik in FA 3jp—See Ana, II. xr 7. This de-

scribes the superior man, largely successful in 
pursuing the course indicated in the prec. par.

I H.—See the She-king, III. 
iii Ode VI. st. ö.

=ik in FA 3jp—See Ana, II. xr 7. This de-

scribes the superior man, largely successful in 
pursuing the course indicated in the prec. par.

I H.—See the She-king, III. 
iii Ode VI. st. ö.

=

ject of what is said here, is to prepare the way 
for the eulogium of Confucius bclow,—the eulo- 
gium of him, a sage without the throne. 1. The 
different elauses here may be understood gene- 
rally, but they have a special reference to the 
general scope of the chapter. "Three things are 
required to give law to the empire: virtue (in- 
cluding intelligence); rank; and the right time. 
m is he who wants the virtue; is he who

wants the rank; and the last clause describes

288

THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN.

|

=) 
ae

NPH |

E 
v

S 
Ew

^

Eg

er

AHA

TEM

tl

SiT

` 
* 
v 
w

zi

1

~ 
—

d

e

mE 
RUO

= 
A

RINN E

2 
IE

XE 
m

HN 
ö

Ld

ONE SEGUE 
USER

PER

hus

= 
ININE 
ene

== | 
He

N

X |

Ae Whe Wes IE K FB, 
2. To no one but the emperor does it belong to order cere-

monies, to fix the measures, and to determine the characters.

3. Now, over the empire, carriages have all wheels of thé same 
size; all writing is with the same characters; and for conduct there 
are the same rules,

4. One may oceupy the throne, but if he have not the proper 
virtue, he may not dare to make ceremonies or music. One may 
have the virtue, but if he do not occupy the throne, he may not pre- 
sume to make ceremonies or music.

5. The Master said, *I may describe the ceremonies of the Hea 
dynasty, but Ke cannot sufficiently attest my words. I have learned 
the ceremonies of the Yin dynasty, and in Sung they-still continue. 
I have learned the ceremonies of.Chow, which are now used, and I

l

follow Chow."l

follow Chow."

the absence of the right time.—In this last 
clause, there would seem to be a sentiment, 
which should have given course in China to the 
doctrine of Progress. 2. This, and the two 
next parr. are understood to be the words of 
+. Tsze-sze, illustrating the prec. declarations 
of Confucius. We have here the imperial 
prerogatives, which might not be usurped. 
*Ceremonies! are the rules regulating religion 
and society; ‘the measures’ are the prescribed 
forms and dimensions of buildings, carriages,

clothes, &c.; X is said by Choo He, after 
1 
K‘ang-shing, to be = 7 , ‘the names of the

characters,’ But X is properly the form of 
the character, representing, in the original char- 
acters of the language, the JE: or figure of the 
object denoted. The character and name toge- 
ther are styled sr and E is the name ap-

propriate to many characters, written or printed. 
X. in the text, must denote both the form aud

sound of the character. Er *to discuss,' and

; to examine, but implying, in each case, 
the consequent ordering and settling. There 
isa long and culogistic note here, in * Confucius 
Sinarum Philosophus; on the admirable unifor- 
mity secured by these prerogatives throughout 
the Chinese empire. Tt was natural for Roman 
Catholic writers, to regard Chinese uniformity 
with sympathy. But the value, or, rather, no 
value, of such a system in its formative influence 
on the charaeters and iustitutions of men may 
be judged, both in the empire of Chinn, and in

the church of Rome. 3. A, ‘now,’ is eaid 
with reference to the time of Tsze-sze. ‘Tho 
par. is intended: to aecount for Confucius’ nob 
giving law to the empire. It was not the timo.

cu. xxix, THE DOCTRINE OF TIIE MEAN. 289

PHÉRN 
PA 
Aka 
A 
H

S

v

COEUR 
oe

N 
RE 
ail

v

UE

Ah We, &

CnarTER XXIX. 1. He who attains to the sovereignty of the 
empire, haying those three important things, shall be able to effect 
that there shall be few errors under his government.v

UE

Ah We, &

CnarTER XXIX. 1. He who attains to the sovereignty of the 
empire, haying those three important things, shall be able to effect 
that there shall be few errors under his government.

2. However excellent may have been the regulations of those

. of former times, they cannot be attested. Not being attested, thev 
cannot command credence, and not being credited, the people would 
not follow them. However excellent might be the regulations made 
by one in an inferior situation, he is not in a position to be honour- 
cd. Unhonoured, he cannot command credence, and not being 
credited, the people would not follow his rules. |

3. Therefore the institutions of the Ruler are rooted in his own 
character and conduct, and sufficient attestation of them is given by 
the masses of the people. He examines them by comparison, with 
those of the three kings, and finds them without mistake. He sets

ain 
3

— —

Hih. ‘the rut of a wheel.“ 4. je 4 hut we 
must understand also ‘the measures,’ and ‘char- 
acters” in par. 2. This par, would seem to 
reduce most emperors to the condition of rois 
uinecnts, 5. See the Ana. III. ix. xiv., which 
"hapters are quoted here; but in regard to what 
is said of Sung, with an important variation.

The par. illustrates how Confucius himself Fy

k f N 4%: occupied a low station, without 
"being insubordinate.’

29. AN ILLUSTRATION OF THE SENTENCE IN 
TUE XXVJITH. CHAPTER-— WHEN HE OCCUPIES A 
MEH SITUATION, HE is NOT PROUD ;" OR RATHER,. 
THE BAGE AND nis INSTITUTIONS SEEN IN THEIR 
ErFEcT AND ISSUE, 1, Different opinions have 
obtained as to what is intended by the = if,

* three important things. K'ang-shing says they

are — E Z nd. ‘the ceremonies of the 
threc kings, è e., the founders of the three dy-

nastics, Hen, Yin, and Chow. ‘This view we may 
sutely reject. Choo He makes them to be the 
imperial prerogatives, mentioned in the last 
chapter, par. 2. 
correct. But I incline to the view of the com-mentator Luh qe Bg of the T'ang dynasty, 
hat they refer to the virtue, station, and time,

This view may, possibly, be

which we have seen, in the notes on the last ch., 
to be necessary to one who would give law to 
the empire. Maou mentions this view, indicat.

ing his own approval of it. is used as a 
verb, to make few. Ile shall be able to effect 
that there shall be few errors,’ i. e, few errors

among his officers and people. 2. By E To

E and ^ EK. K'ang-shing understands

‘sovereign’ aud ‘minister,’ in which, again, we 
must pronounce hinr wrong, The translation 
follows the interpr. of Choo IIe. it being under- 
stood that the subject of the par. is the regula-

tions to be followed by the people. E t ＋ 
having a reference both to time and to rank,

R v 4 must have the same. "Thus there 
is in it an allusion to Confucius, and the way is 
still further prepared for his eulogium. 3. By

HY is intended tlie E Kh E: in par.

1,—the emperor-sage, By i must be intended

all his institutions and regulations. Attesta- 
tion of them is given by the masses of the peo- 
ple? f. e., the people believe in such a ruler, 
and follow his regulations, thus attesting their 
adaptation to the general requirements of hu- 
manity. ‘The three Kings, as mentioned above,

THE DOCTRINE OF TIIE MEAN. cit. xxix;

a 
=H 
A 
gum 
S

ni 
>

N Pal EINE

ld

38 94 
Ni

Ni 
v

SHOUTS 
Sth

=! 
—

zi

RE

Ed

ga 
NRE >

Tene

BA 
z! 
=

1

SIHH E

EXHI 
Medo 
HE 
EE

= 
SHS

bu 
(m 
w 
r

H 
FA

` 
t 
v

V 
~ 
.- 
v,

S 
HS

DA ; E 
E TN, g, BX Seb, [i 
them up before heaven and earth, and finds nothing in. them con- 
trary to their mode of operation. He presents himself with them 
before spiritual beings, and no doubts about them arise. He is pro- 
pared to wait for the rise of a sage, a hundred ages after, and has 
no misgivings.4. Mis presenting himself with his institutions before spiritual 
beings, without any doubts about them arising; shows that he knows 
Heaven. His being prepared, without any misgivings, to wait for 
the rise of a sage a hundred ages after, shows that he knows men.

5. Such being the case, the movements of such a ruler, Wustrat- 
ing hus institutions, constitute an example to the empire for ages. 
His acts are for ages a law to the empire; His words are for ages 
a lesson to the empire. Those who, are far from him, look longingly 
for him; and those who are near him, are never wearied with hiin.

6. It is said in the Book of Poetry,—“ Not disliked there, not 
tired of here, from day to day and night to night, will they per-

im

Pm 
= 
m 
-

are the founders of the three dynastics, viz., the 
grent Yu, Lung, the Completer, and Win "and 
Woo, w ho are so often joined together, and

spoken of as one. n and should be 
reud in the low. $d tone. I “hardly know what

to make of zE E K hh. Gligo, j in his 2 
Mire FEAE . . al 
31 8E PAUL. m BU SU. ASA Tg AB,

‘Hegven and Earth here simply mean right 
reason, The meaning is—I sct up my institutions 
here, and there is nothing in them contradic- 
tory to right reason.’ This, of course, is ex- 
plaining the text away. But who can do any-

thing better with it? I interpret r2] un . 
jill with ref. to sacrificial institutions, or the 
"

general trial of a sovereign’s institutions by the 
efficacy of his sacrifice, iu being responded to hy 
the various spirits whom he worships. This is

the view of a IIo He-chen (uj tie, Hf), and !

is preferable to any other I have met with. 
N. —eomparo

ICM S] 1 
TP YA te N f N N 
Meneius, II. Pt. I. ii. 17. 6. Sce the She-king, 
IV. i. Bk. IL Ode III. st. 2. It is a great descent

to quote that ode here, however, for it is only 
praising the feudal princes of Chow. dk 2 
‘there,’ means their own States; and 1k JU 
‘here,’ is the imperial court of Chow. For Hy

the She-king has Txthe She-king has Tx

CH, XXIX,—XXX. THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN. 991 
2 = 2 mg V 
We B s t o3 ff xx e 
: 4 i 2 [se Ws

— 
-

S| 
N 
Ts

v 
od 
-€ 
v 
4

85 
X 
n 
=

MEI 
Ss

v

arD

HEE

ESHAAN 
.

Ar SS

eem 
d

1 F, PS n VW

* TE N XX H..

RS » 7 . o » 
petuate their praise.” Never has there been a ruler, who did not 
realize this description, that obtained an early renown throughout 
the empire. |

Cuavryg XXX. 1. Chung-ne handed down the doctrines of 
Yaou and Shun, as if they had been his ancestors, and elegantly dis- 
played thé regulations of Wan and Woo, taking them as his model. 
Above, he harmonized with the times of heaven, and below, he was 
conformed to'the water and land.

2. He may be compared to heaven and earth, in their support- 
ing'and containing, their overshadowing and curtaining, all things. 
He may be compared to the four seasons in their alternating pro- 
gress, and to the sun and moon in their successive shining.

3. All things are nourished together without their injuring one 
another. The courses of the seasons, and of the sun and moon, are 
pursued without any collision among them. The smaller energies

80. Tun kuLocivM or CowNrUctUS, AS Tnm | were very remote. Was not the true reason

XEAU-IDEAL OF THE PERFECTLY SINCERE MAN, 
THE SAGE, MAKING A TERNION Witit HEAVEN 
AND Eantit, 1. Aits —See ch. ii. The va- 
rious predicates here are explained by K‘ang- 
ahing, aud Ying-tá, with reference to the ‘Spring 
and Autumn, making them deseriptive of it, 
but such a view will not stand examination.

In translating tlte two first-clauses, I have fol- 
lowed the cditor of the ZME who says —NH 
ML. PURI uU S., W 
di ROSA 8 S muf 
hij di it is observed that in what he handed

down, Confucius began with Yaou and Shun, 
becuuse the times of Fuh-he and Shin-nungdown, Confucius began with Yaou and Shun, 
becuuse the times of Fuh-he and Shin-nung

this, that he knew of nothing in China more 
remote than Yaou and Shun? By ‘the times 
of heaven’ are denoted the ceaseless regular 
movement, which appears to belong to the 
heavens; and by the ‘water and the land,’ 
we are to understand the earth, iu contradistine- 
tion from heaven, supposed to be fixed and un- 
| moveable. Zk, ‘astatute,’ ‘alaw;’ here used

asa verb, ‘to take as a law. , ‘to 
follow,’ to accord with.“ The scope of the par. 
is, that the qualities of former sages, of Heaven, 
and of Earth. were all concentrated in Con- 
fucius. 2. Au read as, and N. git. 
* eA

read ts dh. VAS, ‘successively, * alternatingly."

THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN. en. XX X.—xxxi

ak

v

SNEER

^ 
| Ea 
ELO:

E H ML, E KR YA S LEA

aro like river currents; the greater energies are seen in mighty trans- 
formations, It is this which makes heaven and earth so great. 
CHAPTER XXXI. I. It is only he, possessed of all sagely quali- 
ties that can exist under heaven, who shows himself quick in appre- 
hension, clear in discermnent, of far-reaching intelligence, and, 
all-embracing knowledge, fitted to exercise rule; magnanimous 
generous, benign, and mild, fitted to exercise forbearance; impul- 
sive, energetic, firm, and enduring, fitted to maintain a firm hold; 
self-adjusted, grave, never swerving from the Mean, and correct, 
fitted to cominand reverence; accomplished, distinctive, concentra-

tive, and searching, fitted.to exercise discrimination. 
2. All-embracing is he and vast, deep and active as.a fountain, 
sending forth in their due seasons his virtues.

This describes,’ says Choo He, ‘the virtue of 
the sage.“ 3. The wonderful and mysterious 
course of nature, or—as the Chinese conceive, — 
of the operations of Heaven and Earth, are des- 
cribed to illustrate the previous comparison of 
Confucius.31. THE EULOGIUM ON CONFUCIUS CONTINU- 
Ep. Choo He says that this chapter is an ex- 
pansion of the clause in the last paragr. of the 
preceding, —*'l'he smaller energies are like river 
currents.“ Even if it be so, it will still have 
reference to Confucius, the subject of the preced- 
ing chapter. K‘ang-shiny’s account of the first

paragraph is :— ri fifa pea Im KK. 8 "p 
UER Ib ROLE AH 
it m fi Hin It describes liow no one,

who has not virtue such as this, can rule the 
empire, being a lamentation over the fact that 
while Confucius had the virtue, he did not have 
the appointment; that is, of Heaven, to occupy 
the throne. Maou's account of the whole chap- 
ter is:—‘ Had it been that Chung-ne possessed 
dhe empire, then Chung-ne was a perfect sage. 
Beihg a perfect suge, he would certainly have 
been able to put forth the greater energies, and 
the sinallcrenergies, of his virtue, so as to rule tlie 
world, and show himself the coequal of Heaven

and Earth, in tlie manner here described. Con- 
sidering the whole chapter to be thus descrip- 
tive of Confucius, I was inclined to translate in 
the past tense,—‘ It was only he, who could,’ &c. 
Still the author has expressed himself so in- 
definitely, that I have preferred translating the 
whole, that it may rend as the description of 
the ideal man, who found, or might have found,

his realization in Confucius. 1. f£ Kh 2E

H, —oce ch, xxi, H here takes the place of

BY. Collie translates :—‘It is only the most

HOLY man.“ Remusat:—' Jt n'y a dans lunivers 
qu'un SAINT, qui... So the Jesuits :—* Hic commem- 
orat et conmendat summe SANCTI virtutes But ho- 
diness and sanctity are terms which indicate the 
humble and pious conformity of humancharacter 
and life to the mind and will of God. The Chinese

idea of the is far enough from this.

pa,- ys ai vA H Rs, * the approach

of the honourable to the mean is called din.’ It 
denotes the high drawing near to the low, toidea of the is far enough from this.

pa,- ys ai vA H Rs, * the approach

of the honourable to the mean is called din.’ It 
denotes the high drawing near to the low, to

influence and rule. 2. ju o ‘an abyss, u 
spring,’ equal, ace. to Choo He, RR II 
AR . * still and deep, and having a root. Ay

on. XXXI.—XxXxXH. - THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN. 993 
EI = EA 
— ^ 
aix X. Babe 7o

RSS

xb 
gu

TSA EN 
ri S Sess S x0

Summ 
Meats 
SNS

NE 
8

V 
A

9285

VERN

U

i 
NR

zuo

3n 
MNES:

z 
EKRE 
.

Xd. 
a

v 
Ld

DES 
HS

HN

AN

EG 
zN 
=

è UNS

3. AlLembracing and vast, he is like heaven. Deep and active 
as x fountain, he is like the abyss. He is seen, and the people all 
reverence him; he speaks, and the people all believe him; he acts, 
and the people all are pleased with him. Therefore his fame over- 
spreads the Middle kingdom, and extends to all barbarous tribes. 
Wherever ships and carriages reach ; wherever the strength of man 
penetrates; wherever the heavens overshadow and the earth sustains; 
wherever the sun and moon shine; wherever frosts and dews fall:— 
all who have blood and breath unfeignedly honour and love him. 
Hence it is said, —* He is the equal of Heaven.”

UmarrzR XXXII. 1. It is only the individual possessed of the 
most entire sincerity that can exist under heaven, who can adjust

WH rA t always,'—or, in season-— puts them BR. in the k ge . X. 15, as representa-

forth,’ the x ‘them,’ having reference to the 
qualities described in par. 1. 3. K. the is

secn ;'—with reference, says the WE: to*the

speaks ;'—with reference to his ‘instructions, de- 
clarations, orders.“ He acts ;’—with reference 
to his ceremonies, music, punishments, and acts 
of government. 4, This par. is the glowing 
expression of grand conceptions. the gen- 
eral name for the rude tribes south of the Mid- 
dle kingdom. E is another name for the

M. or rude tribes on the north. The two stand

tives of all barbarous tribes. p. read chuy, 
low. 3d tone, ER. *to fall.’M. or rude tribes on the north. The two stand

tives of all barbarous tribes. p. read chuy, 
low. 3d tone, ER. *to fall.’

82. THE EULOGIUM or CONFUCIUS concLyp- 
Ep. ‘The chapter,’ says Choo He, ‘expands the 
clause in the last par. of ch. xxix., that the 
greater energies are seen in mighty transforma- 
tions. The sage is here not merely equal to 
Heaven:—he is another Heaven, an indepen- 
dent being, a God. 1. and ái are pro- 
cesses in the manipulation of silk, the former 
denoting the first separating of the threads, and 
the latter the subseguent bringing of them to-

gether, according to their kinds. X ^ Z

here, like 7 HK, Ana, III. v. and like PY JA the great invariabilities of the woridy

294

E 4 X tii IN E

—

—

THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN.

Cn. XXXUL—KXXNL

E. GW H 
x ā HE

Ht De mM, Ay 
wa UR AA

5 pu f. já Ju

2 
aH fj

Wm 
7 5. X X 
AS

= Y2777 
Bis Pf, LARES

-L.

79

Oil, M R An II.

the great invariable relations of mankind, establish the great fim- 
damental virtues of humanity, and know the transforming "and nur 
turing operations of Heaven and Earth;—shall this individual have

any being or any thing beyond himself on which he depends?

9. Call him man in his ideal, how.earnest is he! 
Call him Heaven, how vast is he!

abyss, how deep is he!

Call him an

3. Who can know him, but he who is indeed quick in apprehen- 
sion, clear in discernment, of far-reaching intelligence, and allem. 
bracing knowledge, possessing all heavenly virtue P.

CHAPTER XXXIII. I.

explained of the x i and JL AK, in ch. 
xx. 8, 12. XA Rte: great

root of the world ;’ evidently with reference to 
the same expression in ch. i. 4. is taken as

emphatic AZ Bk SZ iz dy iH iil N. 
N m b. ‘he has an intuitive apprehen-

sion of, and agreement with, them. It is not 
that he knows them merely by hearing and see-

ing.’ kE aig A mise This is joined bysion of, and agreement with, them. It is not 
that he knows them merely by hearing and see-

ing.’ kE aig A mise This is joined by

Kang-shing with the next par, and be inter- 
prets it of the Master’s virtue, universally af- 
freting all men, and not partially deflected, 
roaching only to those near him or to few. 
Clioo He more correctly, as it seems to me, takes 
it as— fe ta 3e ‘to depend on. I translate 
the expansion of the clause which is given in 
«Qonfucius Sinarum Philosophus’ — The perfectly 
holy man of this kind therefore, since he is 
such and so great, how can it in any way be, 
that there is any thing in the whole universe, 
on which he leans, or in which he inheres, or on 
which he behooves to depend, or to be assisted 
by it in the first place, that he may afterwards 
operate?’ 2. The three clauses refer severally

to the three in the prec. paragraph. AZ is vir- 
tuous humanity in all its dimensions and capa- 
cities, existing perfectly in the sage. Of Ja I

o not know what to say. The old Comm. in- 
terprot the second and third clauses, as if there

were a ka before ji and X agaiust which

It is said in the Book of Poctr ; “Over

Choo He reclaims, and justly. In the Xd Fd

AB

e read — FA AS fit = 
FE Be, SL ME Ka J Be M,

m

LY TEM 
a

ae

*

en e 
(citer Be

UR

Vert eH 
TNR

z a

2 n

lr BIB 
n

My

E nh (s 1 N K. * Heaven and man aroAB

e read — FA AS fit = 
FE Be, SL ME Ka J Be M,

m

LY TEM 
a

ae

*

en e 
(citer Be

UR

Vert eH 
TNR

z a

2 n

lr BIB 
n

My

E nh (s 1 N K. * Heaven and man aro

not originally Two, and man is separate from 
Heaven only by his having this body. Of their 
secing and hearing, their thinking and revolv- 
ing, their moving and acting, men all say—/t 
w from ME. Every one thus brings out his 
SELF, and his smallness becomes known. But 
let the body be taken away, and all would be 
Heaven. How can the body be taken away? 
Simply by subduing and removing that self- 
having of the ego. This is the taking it away. 
That being done, so wide and great as Heaven 
is, my mind is also so wide and great, and pro- 
duction and transformation cannot be separated 
from me. Hence it is said How vast is his 
Heaven? Into such wandering mazes of mys- 
terious speculation are Chinese thinkers con- 
ducted by the text:—only to be lost in them. 
As it is said, in par. 3, that only the sage can 
know the sage, we may be glad to leaye him.

on. XxxIII. THE DOCTRINE

RS

23» Nr oum 
/ J 
xm Wr E ZH

rm

è 
Ane 
TE

VES ERNST

it $m 
T 4823 E A,

OF THE MEAN.

T

oo

4H

v

a>

:

EN RAR

Esa REOR

Ld

2

E 
SEEN > 
2.

-

SON WET L

Se 
w4 hv 
SS

,

all, ui

è

AW H i

lier embroidered robe she puts a plain, single garment," intimating .

a dislike to the display of the elegance of the former.

Just so, it is

the way of the superior man to prefer the concealment of his virtue, 
while it daily becomes more illustrious, and it is the way of th

mean man to seek notoriety, while he daily goes more and mere ‘to 
ruin. It is characteristic of the superior man, appearing insipid, 
yet never to produce satiety ; while showing a simple negligence, yet 
to have his accomplishments recognized; while seemingly plain, yet

to be discriminating. 
near.

lle knows where the wind proceeds from.

He knows how what is distant lies in what is

He knows howto be discriminating. 
near.

lle knows where the wind proceeds from.

He knows how what is distant lies in what is

He knows how

what is minute becomes manifested. Such an one, we may be sure,

will enter into virtue.

2. It is said in the Book of Poetry, Although the fish sink and 
lie at the bottom, it is still quite clearly seen." Therefore the supe-

33. TUE COMMENCEMENT AND THE COMPLE- 
TN OF A VIRTUOUS Course. The chapter is 
understood to contain a summary of the whole 
Work, and to have a special relation to the first 
chapter. There, a commencement is made with 
Seaven, us the origin of our nature, in which 
ure grounded the laws of virtuous conduct, 
This ends with Heaven, and exhibits the pro- 
gr s of virtue, advancing step by step in man, 
till it is equal to that of High Heaven. There 
are eight citations from the Book of Poetry, 
but to make the passages suit his purpose, the 
author allegorizes them, or alters their meaning, 
at his pleasure. Origen took no more license

with the scriptures of the old and new Testa- 
ment than 'l'sze-sze and even Confucius himself 
do with the Book of Poetry. I. The first requi- 
sito in the pursuit of virtue is, that the learner think 
of his own improvement, and do not act from a regard

to others. ay . sco the She-king, I. v. Ode 
III. st. I., where we read, however, E gk

— —

X. BK and Zul} are synonyms. BE (up. 3d

tone) RZ is a gloss by Tsze-sze, giving 
the spirit of the passage. The ode is understood 
to express the condolence of the people, with the 
wife of the duke of Wei, worthy of, but denicd,

the affection of her husband. uF Zz id. 
ay A Ld seems here to correspondthe affection of her husband. uF Zz id. 
ay A Ld seems here to correspond

exactly to our English way, as in the transla- 
tion, AY ER, —the primary meaning of Wy is 
2 2 . 2 
8j. ‘bright, displayed.“ I YR, ‘displayed- 
like,’ in opp. to Ra ER. *concealed-like." ^at 
125 x 3e — what is distant, is the nation to 
be governed, or the family to be regulated; 
what is zear, is the person to be cultivated. ^ 
M Z B the wind is the influence exerted 
upon others, the source of which is onc's own

296 THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN. CH. XXXIHI.

Ex 
=

ati ee DAS A 
H MIO è DA 1H. v! A

FI, rij BE B 8150 AA . 
N ^H H. H Be XE Hf

OY Noe 
as 
ERESHID

FA 
I S8

%

t, £k $5, 22 13

` rior man examines his heart, that there may be nothing wrong there, 
and that he may have no cause for dissatisfaction with himself. 
That wherein the superior man cannot be equalled is simply this,— 
his work which other men cannot see.

3. It is said in the Book of Poetry, “ Looked at in your apart- 
ment, be there free from shame, where you are exposed to the light 
of heaven." "Therefore, the superior man, even when he is not 
moving, has a feeling of reverence, and while he speaks not, he has the 
feeling of truthfulness.

4. It is said in the Book of Poetry, “In silence is the offering 
presented, and the spirit approached to; there is not the slightest 
contention." "Therefore the superior man docs not use rewards, and 
the people are stimulated to virtue. He does not show anger, and 
the people are awed more than by hatchets and battle-axes.

5. It is said in the Book of Poetry, What needs no display is

virtue. » 2 To EH, —comp. ch. i. 3. U

H ? 
Hid it may be granted to such an one, Hid

455v

He, was the north-west corner of ancient apart- 
ments, the spot most sccret and retired. ‘The 
single punes, in the roofs of Chinese houses, go 
new by the name, the light of heaven leaking 
in Gap through them. Looking at the whole

Stanza of the ode, we must conclude that thereStanza of the ode, we must conclude that there

beiug in the sense of 2 2. The superior man 
going on to virtue, is watchful over himself, when

he is alone. sy „see the She-king, II. iv. 
Ode VIII. st. 11. The ode appears to have 
been written by some officer who was bewailing 
the disorder and misgovernment of his day. 
This is one of the comparisons which he uses; 
—the people are like fish in a shallow pond, un- 
able to save themselves by diving to the bottom. 
The application of this to the superior man, 
dealing with himself, in the bottom of' his soul, 
so to speak, and thereby realizing what is good

and right, is very far-fetched. A ‘the will,’

is here , ‘the whole mind, the self. 8. 
We have here substantially the same subject as 
in the last par. The ode is the same which is 
quoted in ch. xvi. 4, and the citation ie from

the same stanza of it. E Hay acc. to Choo

„

is reference to the light of heaven, and the in- 
epection of spiritual beings, as specially con- 
nected with the spot intended. 4. The result of 
the processes described in the two preced. parr,

By H. —see the She-king, IV. iii. Ode II. st. 
i ng 152 
2, wheré for Z& we have d. t read as, 
and A. The ode describes the imperial wor- 
ship of T'ang, the founder of the Shang dynasty. 
'The first clause belongs to the emperor's act 
and demeanour : the second to the effect of these 
on his assistants in the service, They were

awed to reverence, and had no striving among 
themselves. 'The GRE were anciently given 
by the emperor to a prince, as symbolic of his 
investiture with a plenipotent authority to pun-

TIE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN. 297

ch. xxxn.

att

[e SEEN CE L 
— SES 
=

m 
Sue

— 
w 
v.

s

AD m 
ee

o

er 
EL

im 
zB

[d

FUIN SEAS

E

z 
Lx 
N

NE 
DERE

v

* 
bz 
= 
A 
Ld 
v

" 
Bios

AM, T. 
virtue. All the princes imitate it." Therefore, the superior man 
being sincere and reverential, the whole world is conducted to a state 
of happy tranquillity.* 
bz 
= 
A 
Ld 
v

" 
Bios

AM, T. 
virtue. All the princes imitate it." Therefore, the superior man 
being sincere and reverential, the whole world is conducted to a state 
of happy tranquillity.

6. It is said in the Book of Poetry, “I regard with pleasure 
your brilliant virtue, making no great display of itself in sounds and 
appearances.” The Master said, “ Among the appliances to trans- 
form the people, sounds and appearances are but trivial influences. 
It is said in another ode, ‘His virtue is light as a hair.“ Still, a 
hair will admit of comparison, as to its size. ‘The doings of the 
San pune Heaven have neither sound nor smell. —Tliat is perfect 
virtue.

The above is the thirty-third chapter. — Tsze-sze having carried his 
descriptions to the extremest point in the preceding chapters, turns 
bach in this, and examines the source of his subject; and then

€

<n 
4

Ex] | |b] IR

PB HOP PCRS

ish the rebellious and refractory. The By is

described as a large-handled axe, eight catties 
in weight. I call it a battle axe, because it 
was with one that king Woo despatched the 
tyra, $ Chow. 5. The same subject continued.

FE] .—sce the She-king, IV. i. Bk. I. Ode 
IV. st. 3. But in the.Sho-king we must trans-

late.— There is nothing more illustrious than 
the virtue of the sovereign, all the princes will

follow it? 'lsze-sze puts another meaning on 
the words, and makes them introductory to

the next par. must here be the JÈ

T of ch. xxix. Thus it is that a con-

stant shuttle of terms seems to be going on, and 
the subject before us is all at once raised to a 
higher, and inaccessible platform. 6. Virtue

in its highest degree and influonce, ay Zoe

the She-king, IH. i, Ode VII. st. 7. The ‘J’ 
is God, who announces to king Wän the reasons 
why he had called him to execute his judg- 
ments. Wän's virtue, not sounded nor cmbla-

zoned, might come near to the P H of lastzoned, might come near to the P H of last

par., but Confucius fixes on the X to show 
its shortcoming. It had some, though not larga 
exhibition, He therefore quotes again from III. 
iji. Ode VI. st. 6, though away from the original 
intention of the words. But it does not satisfy

him that virtue should be likened even to a 
hair. He therefore finally quotes IIT, i. Ode I. 
st. 7, where the imperceptible working of Hea-

ven (=), in producing the overthrow of

the Yin dynasty, is set forth as without somut 
or smell. That is his highest conception of the 
nature and, power of virtue.

398

LS 
I

tà

EN 
E

p 
NN 
AN AS

THE DOCTRINE Of THE MEAN. ch. XENI.

NIA 
AI.

v

EE IET

Te 
EM

WA

Js DS 
again from the work of the learner, free from all selfishness, amel 
watchful over himself when ke is alone, he carries out his deserip- 
tion, till by easy steps Jie brings it to the consummation of the 
whole empire t'anquillized by simple and sincere reverentialness. 
He farther eulogizes its mysteriousness, till he speaks of tt at last 
as without sound or smell. He here takes up the sum of his whole 
Work, and speaks of st in a compendious manner. Most deep 
and earnest was he in thus going agam.over his ground, admon- 
ashing and instructing men: stell the learner not do luis utmost 
in the study of the Work? uw '

INDEXES.

INDEX I.

OF SUBJECTS IN TIIE CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

A

Ability, various of Conf., IX. vi.

Able officers, eight, of Chow, XVIII. xi.

Abroad, when a sou may go, IV. xix.

Accomplishments come after duty, I. vi— 
blended with solid excellence, VI. xvi. E

Achievement of government, the great, XIII. ix.

Acknowledgment of Conf. in estimating him- 
self, VII. xxxii.

Acting heedlessly, against, VII. xxvii.

Actions should always be right, XIV. iv.—of

Conf. were lessons and laws, XVII. xix. 
Adaptation for government of Yen Yung, &c., 
VI. i.—of 'l'sze-loo, &c., VI. vi. 
Admiration, Yen Yuen’s, of Conf. doctrines, IX.

x.Conf. were lessons and laws, XVII. xix. 
Adaptation for government of Yen Yung, &c., 
VI. i.—of 'l'sze-loo, &c., VI. vi. 
Admiration, Yen Yuen’s, of Conf. doctrines, IX.

x.

Admonition of Conf. to Tsze - loo, XI. xiv.

Advanced years, improvement difficult in, XVI. 
xxvi.

Adversity, men are known in times of, IX. xxvii.

Advice against useless expenditure, XI. xiii.

Age, the vice to be guarded against in, XVI. vii.

Aim, the chief, I. xvi.

Aims, of Tsze-loo, Tsiing-sih, &c., XI. xxv.

An all-pervading unity, the kuowledge of, Conf. 
aim, XV. ii.

Anarchy of Conf. time, III. v.

Ancient rites, how Conf, cleaved to, III. xvii.

Aucients, their slowness to speak, IV. xxii.

Antiquity, Cont. fondness for, VII. xix.—decay 
of the monuments of, III. ix.

Anxiety of parente, IL. vi.—of Conf, about the 
training of his disciples, V. ii.

Appearances, fair, are suspicious, I. iii., & XVII. 
xvii.

Appellations for the wife of a prince, XVI. xiv.

Appreciation, what conduct will insure, XV. v.

Approaches of the unlikely, readily met by 
Conf., VII. xxviii.

Approbation, Conf., of Nan Tung, XI. v.

Aptitude of the Neun-tsze, II. xii.

Archery, contention in, III. vii.—a discipline 
ot virtue, III. xvi.

Ardent and cautious disciples, Conf. obliged to 
be content with, XIII. xxi.

Ardour of Tsze-loo, V. vi.

Art of governing, XII. xiv.

Assent without reformation, a hopeless case, 
EX. xxiii.

Attachment to Conf. of Yen Yuen, XI. xxiii.

Attainment, different stages of, VI. xviii.

Attainments of Hwuy, like those of Conf., VII.

x.

Attributes of the true scholar, XIX. i.

Auspicious omens, Conf. gives up hope for want 
of, IX. viii. 1

Avenge murder, how Conf., wished to, XIV. 
Xxii.

B

Bad name, the danger of a, XTX. xx.

Barbarians, how to civilize, IX. xiii.

Becloudings of the mind, XVI. viii.

Bed, manner of Conf. in, X. xvi.

Benefits derived from studying the Odes, XVII. 
ix.

Benevolence, to be exercised with prudence, VI. 
xxiv.—and wisdom, XII. xxii.Bed, manner of Conf. in, X. xvi.

Benefits derived from studying the Odes, XVII. 
ix.

Benevolence, to be exercised with prudence, VI. 
xxiv.—and wisdom, XII. xxii.

Blind, consideration of Conf, for the, XV. xli;

Boldness, excessive of Tsze-loo, VII. x.

Burial, Conf. dissatisfaction with Hwuy'e, XI. 
x.

Business, every man should mind his own, 
VIII. xiv., & XIV. xxvii.

C

Calmness of Conf. in danger, VII, xxii.

Capacity of Mang Kung-ch“ö, XIV. xii,

Capacities of the superior and inferior man, XV, 
XXXIII.

Careful, about what things Conf. was, VII. xii.

Carriage, Conf. at and in his, X. xvii.— Conf. 
refuses to soll his, to assist a needless expen- 
diture, XI. vii

Caution, advantages of, IV. xxiii.—repentance 
avoided by, I. xiii in speaking, XII. iii., 
and XV. vii.

Ceremonies and music, XI. i.—end of, I. xii.— 
impropriety in, III. x.—influence of in govern- 
ment, IV. xiii—regulated according to their 
object, III. iv.—secondary and ornamental, 
III. viii.—vain without virtue, III. iii.

Character (s), admirable, of Tsze-yu, &c., XV. 
vi.— differences in, owing to habit, XVII. ii.— 
different, of two dukes, XIV. xvi.—disliked 
by Conf, and Tsze-kung, XVII. xxiv.—how

_ Conf. dealt with different, XX. xxi.—how to 
determine, IT. x.—lofty, of Shun and Yu, VIII. 
xviii—of four disciples, XI. xvii.—of Kung-

300

shuh Wan, XIV. xiv.—of Tan-t‘ae Méen-ming, 
VI. xii.—various elements of in Conf., VII. 
xxxvii.—what may be learnt from, IV. xvii.

Characteristics, of perfect virtue, XIII. xix.—of 
ten disciples, XL ii.

Claimed, what Conf., VII. xxxiii.

Classes of men, in relation to knowledge, four, 
XVI ix.—only two whom practice cannot 
change, XVII. iii.

Climbing the heavens, equalling Conf. like, 
XIX. xxv.

Common practices, some indifferent and others 
not, IX. iii.

Communications to be proportioned to suscep- 
tibility, VE. xix. .

Comparison of Sze and Shang, XI. xv.

Comparisons, against making, XIV. xxxi.Communications to be proportioned to suscep- 
tibility, VE. xix. .

Comparison of Sze and Shang, XI. xv.

Comparisons, against making, XIV. xxxi.

Compass and vigour of mind necessary to a 
scholar, VIII. vii.

Compassion, how a criminal-judge should cher- 
ish, XVIII. xix.

Complete man, of the, XIV. xiii.—virtue, I. 
xiv., and VI. xvi.

Concealment, not practised by Conf. with his 
disciples, VII. xxiii.

Concubines, difficult to treat, XVII. xxv.

Condemnation of Tsang Woo-chung, XIV. xv. 
—of Conf. for seeking employment, XIV. xli.

Penton, only virtue adapts a man to his, IV.

Conduct that will be everywhere appreciated,

XV. v

Confidence, enjoying, necessary to serving and 
to ruling, XIX. x

Connate, Conf. knowledge not, VII. xix.

Consideration, of Conf. for- the blind, XV. xli.—

. & generous, of others, recommended, XVIII.

X.

Consolation to Tsze-new, when anxious about 
his brother, XII. v.

Constancy of mind, importance of, XIII. xxii.

Constant Mean, the, VI. xxvii.

Contemporaries of Conf. described, XVI. xi.

Contention, the superior man avoids, III. vii.

-Contentment in poverty of Tsze-lop, IX. xxvi. 
of Conf. with his condition, vu xi.—of the 
officer King, XIII. viii.

Contrast of Hwuy and Tsze, XI. xviii.

Conversation, with Chung-kung, XII. ii.—with 
''aze-chang, XII. vi; vii.: XX. ii.—with Tsze- 
kung, XIV. xviii.—with Tsze-loo, XIV. xiii.; 
xvii—with 'lsze-new, XII. iii .—with Yen 
Yuen, XII. i.

Countenance, the, in filial piety, I. viii.

Courage, not doing right from want of, IT. xxiv.

Criminal judge, should cherish compassion, 
XIX. xix.

Culpability of not reforming known feu, XV. 
xxix.

D

Danger, Conf. assured in time of, IX. v.

Dead, offices to the, I. ix.

Death, Conf. evades a question about, XL xi. 
—how Conf. felt Hwuy’s, XL viii.; ix.—with- 
out regret, IV. viii.

Declined, what Conf, to be reckoned, VII.

2 xxxiii.

Defects of former times become modern vices, 
XVII. Zri.

SUBJECTS IN THE ANALECTS. :

INDEX I.Declined, what Conf, to be reckoned, VII.

2 xxxiii.

Defects of former times become modern vices, 
XVII. Zri.

SUBJECTS IN THE ANALECTS. :

INDEX I.

Defence, of himself by Conf., XIV. xxxvi.—of 
his own method of teaching, by Tsze-hea, 
XIX xii.—of Tsze- loo, by Conf., XI. xiv.

Degeneracy, of Conf. age, VI. xiv.—instance of, 
XV. xxv.

Delusions, how to discover, XII. x.; xxi.

Demeanour of Conf., X. i., to v.; xiii.

Departure of Conf., from Loo, XVIII. iv.—from 
Ts'e, XVIII. iii.

Depreciation, Conf. above the reach of, XIX. 
xxiv.

Description of himself as a learner, by Conf. 
VIL. xviii.

Desire and ability, required in disciples, VII. 
viii.

Development of knowledge, II. xi.

Differences of character, owing to habit, XVII. 
ii.

Dignity, necessary in a ruler, XV. xxxii.

Disciples, anxiety about training, V. xxi.

Discrimination of Conf. in rewarding officers, 
VI. iii—without suspiciousness, the merit 
of, XIV. xxxiii.

Dispersion of the musicians of Loo, XVIII. xi.

Distinetion, notoriety not, XII. xx.

Distress, the superior man above, XV. i.

pee mission, Conf. assurance of a, VII. xxii.:

. v. 
Doctrine of Conf. admiration of, IX. x. 
Drs of Conf. affected by disappointments, 
II. v.

Dress, rules of Conf., in regard to his, X. vi.

Dying counsels to a inan in high station, VIII. 
iv.

Dynasties, Yin, Hea, and Chow, VIII. iv.: III.

xx.— in and Hea, III. ix. Chow, &., III. 
ere rules exemplified in the ancient, 
—eight able officers of the Chow, XVIII. xi.— 
three worthies of the Yin, XVIII. i.—the 
three, X V. xxiv.

E

Earnest student, Hwuy the, IX. xix.

Earnestriess in teaching, of Conf., IX. vii.

Egotism, instance of freedom from, VIII. v.

Eight able officers of the Chow dynasty, XVIII. 
xi.

Emolument, learning for, II. xviii.—shameful 
to care only for, XIV. i.

End the, crowns the work, IX. xxi.

Enjoyment, advantageous and injurious sources 
of, XVI. v.

Equalled, Conf. cannot be, XIX. xxv.

Error, how acknowledged by Conf., VII. xxx.End the, crowns the work, IX. xxi.

Enjoyment, advantageous and injurious sources 
of, XVI. v.

Equalled, Conf. cannot be, XIX. xxv.

Error, how acknowledged by Conf., VII. xxx.

Essential, what is, in different ser vices, III. xxvi.

Estimate, Conf. humble of himself. VII. ii.; iii.: 
IX. xv.: XIV. xxx.—of what he could do if 
employed, XIII x.

Estimation of others, not a man's concern, 
XIV. xxxii.

Example, better than force, II. xx.—govern- 
ment efficient by, &c., XII. xvii. ; xviii. ; xix. ; 
—the secret of rulers’ success, XIII. i—*va- 
lue of, in those in high stations, VIII. ii.

Excess and defect equally wrong, XI. xv.

Expenditure, against useless, XI. xiii.

External the, may be predicated from the in- 
ternal, XTV. v.

Extravagant speech, hard to be made good, 
XIV. xxi.

INDEX I.

E

Fair appearances are suspicious, I. iii., & XVII. 
xvii.

Fasting, rules observed by Conf., when, X. vii.

Futher's vices, no discredit to a virtuous son, 
VI. iv.

Faults of men, characteristic of their class, IV. 
VII.

Feelings, need not always be spoken, XIV. iv.

Fidelity of his disciples, Conf. memory of, XI. ii.

- Filial piety, I. xi.: IV. xix.; xx.; xxi.—argu- 
ment for, II. vi.—cheerfulness in, II. viii.— 
the foundation of virtuous practice, I. ii.—of 
‘Meen Tsze-keen, XI. iv.—of Ming Chwang, 
XIX. xviii—reverence in, IL. vii.—seen in 
care of the person, VIII. iii.

Firmness of superior man, based on right, XV. 
xxxvi.

Five excellent things to be honoured, XX. ii. 
—things which constitute perfect virtue, 
XVII. vi.

Flattery of sacrificing to others’ ancestors, II. 
XXIV.

Food, rules of Conf. about his, X. viii.

Foreknowledge, how far possible, II. xxiii.

Forethought, necessity of, XV. xi.

Formalism, against, III. iv.

Former times, Conf. pfeference for, XI. i.

Pun youth, Cont. employment of a, XIV. 
xlvii.

Foundation of virtue, I. ii.

Four bad things, to be put away, XX. ii.— 
classes of men in relation to knowledge, 
XVI. ix.Pun youth, Cont. employment of a, XIV. 
xlvii.

Foundation of virtue, I. ii.

Four bad things, to be put away, XX. ii.— 
classes of men in relation to knowledge, 
XVI. ix.

Frailties from which Conf. was free, IX. iv.

Fraternal submission, I. ii.

Friends, rule for choosing, I. viii, & IX. xxiv. 
—trait of Conf. in relation to, X. xv.

Friendship, how to maintain, V. xvi.—Tsze- 
chang's virtue too high for, XIX. xvi.

Friendships, what, advantageous and injurious, 
XVI. iv.

Frivolous talkers, against, XV. xvi.

Funcrat rites, Conf. dissatisfaction with Hwuy’s,

XI. x —to parents, I. ix.

Furnace the, and the S. W. Corner, of a house, 
III. xiii.

G

Gain, the menn man's concern, IV. xvi.

Generosity ot Pih-e and Shuh-ts'e, V. xxii.

Glib-tongued, Conf. not, XIV. xxxiv.

Glibnoss of tongue and beauty, esteemed by the 
age, VI. xiv.

Glossing faults, a proof of the mean man, XIX. 
viii. -

Gluttony and idleness, case of; hopeless, XVII. 
xxii.

God, address to, XX. i.

Golden rule, expressed with negatives, V. xi: 
XV. xxiii.

Good fellowship of Conf., VII. xxxi.

Good, learning leads to, VIII. xii

Good man, the, XI. xix.—we must not judge a 
man to be, from his discourse, XI. xx.

Governing, the art of, XII, xiv.—without per- 
sonal effort, XV. iv.

Government, good, scen from its effects, XIII.

SUBJECTS IN THE ANALECTS.

301

xvi.—good, how only obtained, XII. xi.—may 
be conducted efficiently, how. XX. ii.—moral 
in its end, XII. xvii.—principles of, I. v.— 
requisites of, XII. vii. i 
Gradual progress of Conf. II. iv.—communi- 
cation of his doctrine, V. xii. 
Grief, Conf. vindicates his for Hwuy, XI. ix, 
Guiding principle of Conf., XVIII. viii.

II

Happiness of Conf. among his disciples, XI. xii. 
of Hwuy in poverty, VI. ix.

Haste, not to be desired in government, XIII. 
Xvii. N 
Heaven, Conf. rested in. the ordering of, XIV. 
xxxviii.—knew him, Conf. thought that, XIV. 
xxxvii.—no remedy for sin against, ILI. xiii.Haste, not to be desired in government, XIII. 
Xvii. N 
Heaven, Conf. rested in. the ordering of, XIV. 
xxxviii.—knew him, Conf. thought that, XIV. 
xxxvii.—no remedy for sin against, ILI. xiii.

Ilesitating faith, ‘'sze-chang on, XIX. ii.

High aim proper to a student, VI. x.—thinga, 
too much minding of, XIX. xv.

Home, Conf. at, X. xvi.—how Conf. could be 
not at, XVII. xx.

Hope, Conf. gives up, for want of auspicious 
omens, IX. viii.

Hopeless case, of gluttony and idleness, XVII. 
xxii.—of those who assent to advice without 
reforming, IX. xxiii.—of those who will not 
think, XV. xv.

House and wall, the comparison of a, XIX. xxiii.

Humble claim of Conf. for himself, V. xxvii.— 
estimate of himself, VII. ii.; iii.: IX. xv.: 
XIV. xxx.

Humility of Conf., VII. xxvi.

Hundred years, what good government could 
effect in a, XIII. xi.

I

Idleness of Tsae Yu, V. ix.—case of, hopeless, 
XVII. xxii.

Ignorant man's remark about Conf., IX. ii.

Impatience, danger of, XV. xxvi.

Imperial rites, usurpation of, III. i.; ii.; vi.

Improvement, self, IT. xviii.—difficult in ad - 
vanced years, XVII. xxvi.

Inécompetency, our own, a fit cause of concern, 
XV. xviii.

Inditference of the officer King to riches, XIII. 
viu.

Indignation of Conf. at the usurpation of im- 
perial rites, III. i.; ii. —at the support of us- 
urpation and extortion by a disciple, XI. xvi. 
—at the wrong overcoming the right, XVII. 
xviii.

Inferior pursuits, inapplicable to great objecta, 
XIX. iv.

Instruction, how a man may find, VII. xxi.

Instructions to a son about government, XVIII. 
x.

` Insubordination, worse than ‘meanness, VII.

xxxv.—different causes of, VIII. x. 
Intelligence, what constitutes, XII. vi. 
Intercourse, character formed by, V. ii.—of

Conf. with others, traits of, X. xi.—with

ethers, different opinions on, XIX. iii. 
Internal, the, not predicable from the external,

XIV. v. 1 
Ironical, admonition, XIII. xiv.

JConf. with others, traits of, X. xi.—with

ethers, different opinions on, XIX. iii. 
Internal, the, not predicable from the external,

XIV. v. 1 
Ironical, admonition, XIII. xiv.

J

Jealousy of others’ talents, against, XV. x.; iii. 
Joy of Conf. independent of outward, circum- 
stauces, VII. xv. 
Judgment of Conf. concerning Tsze-ch‘an, &c., 
zn V. x.—of retired worthy, on Conf., XIV.

K

Keun-tsze, See Superior man.

Killing, not to be talked of by rulers, XII. xix.

Knowing and not knowing, II. xvii.

Knowledge, disclaimed by Conf, IX. vii.— 
four classes of men in relation to, XVI. ix. 
not lasting without virtue, XV. xxxii.— 
of Conf. not connate, VIII. xix.—sources of 
Conf., XIX. xxii.—subserves benevolence, II. 
xxii.

L

Lament over moralerror added to natural de- 
fect, VIII. xvi.—sickness of Pih-new, VI. 
viii.—persistence in error, V. xxvi.—rarity of

. thelove of virtue, IV. vi.—the rash reply of 
Tsae Go, III. Xxi.—the waywardness of men, 
VI. xiv.—of Conf, that men did not know 
him, XIV. xxxvii.

Language, the chief virtue of, XV. xl.

Learner the, I. i.; xiv.—Conf. describes himself 
as a, VII. xviii.

Learning and propriety combined, VI. xxv., & 
XII. xv.—Conf. fondness for, V. xxvii.— 
different motives for, XIV. xxv.—end of, II. 
xviiii—how to be pursued, VI. xi, & VIII. 
xvii.—in order to virtue, XIX. vi.— necessity 
of, to complete virtue, XVII. viii.—quickly 
leads to good, VIII. xii.—should not cease or 
be intermitted, IX. xviii.—substance of, I. vii. 
—the indications of a real love of, XIX. v.— 
the student’s workshop, XIX. vii.

Lesson, of prudence, XIV. ix.—to parents and

ministers, XIV. viii,—to rulers, VIII. x.—to

Tsze-loo, XIII. i.

Lessons and laws, Conf. actions were, XVI. 
xix.

Libation, pouring out of, in sacrifice, IIL x.

Life, human, valued by Conf., X. xii.— without 
uprightness, not true, VI. xvii.

Likings and dislikings of others, in determining 
a man's character, XIII. xxiv, & XV. xxvii. .Life, human, valued by Conf., X. xii.— without 
uprightness, not true, VI. xvii.

Likings and dislikings of others, in determining 
a man's character, XIII. xxiv, & XV. xxvii. .

Literary acquirements, useless without practical 
ability, XIII, v.

Litigation, how Tsze-loo could settle, XII. xii, 
—it is better to prevent, XII, xiii,

Love of virtue rare, IV. vi., & IX. xvii.

Love to learn, of Conf, V. xxvii—of Hwuy, 
XI. vi.—rarity of, VI, ii.

Loving and hating aright, IV. iii,

M

Madman, the, of Ts‘oo, XVIII, v. 
Man, in relation to principles of duty, XV. 
Xx viii.

`

SUBJECTS IN THE ANALECTS.

INDEX J.

Manhood, the vice to be guarded against in, 
XVI. vii.

Manner of Conf. when unoccupied, VIL iv.

Marriage-making, Conf. in, V. i.

Mat, rule of Conf. about his, X. ix.

Maturing of character, rules for, VIL. vi.

Mean man, glosses his facts, XIX. viii. See 
Superior man. j

Meanness of Wei-shang, V. xxiii.—not so bad 
as insubordination, VIT. xxxv.

Mercenary officers, impossible to serve along

with, XVII. xv.

Merit of Kung-shuh Win, XIV. xix.—of Kwan 
Chung, XIV. xvii.; xviii.—virtue of conceal- 
ing, VI. xiii.

Messenger, an admirable, XIV, xxvi.

Military affairs, Conf. refuses to talk of, XV. i.

Minding too much high things, XIX. xv.

Minister, the faithful, XV. xxxvii.

Ministers, great and ordinary, XI. xxiii.— 
importance of good and able, XIV. xx.—must 
be sincere and upright, XIV. xxiii.—should 
be strict and decided, XIV. viii.

Mission of Conf., Yen Yuen's confidence in, XI. 
xxii.

Model student, fond recollections of a, IX. xx.

Moral appliances to be preferred in govt., II. iii.,

Mourners, Conf, sympathy with, VII. ix.; & X. 
xvi.

Mourning, three years for parents, XVII. xxi. 
—government how carried on in time of, XIV. 
xliii—the trappings of, may be dispensed 
with, XIX. xiv.

Murder of the duke of Ts‘e, XIV. xxii.Mourning, three years for parents, XVII. xxi. 
—government how carried on in time of, XIV. 
xliii—the trappings of, may be dispensed 
with, XIX. xiv.

Murder of the duke of Ts‘e, XIV. xxii.

Music, and ceremonies, vain without virtue, ITT. 
iii. — effect of, VIII. viii.—effect of on Conf., 
VII. xii.—influence of, in government, XVII. 
iv.—of Shun and Woo compared, III. xxv.—on 
the playing of, III. xxiii.—service rendered to, 
by Conf., IX. xiv.—the sound of instruments 
does not constitute, X VIT. xi.

Musicians of Loo, the, dispersion of, XVIII. ix.

Music-master, praise of a, VIII. xv.

Name, danger of a bad, XIX. xx.—without 
reulity, VI. xxiii.

Names, importance of being correct, XIII. iii.

Narrow-mindedness, Tsze-eliang on, XIX. ii.

Natural-duty, and uprightness iu collision, 
XIII. xviii.—ease in ceremonies to be prized, 
I. xii—qualitics which are favourable to vir- 
tue, XIII. xxvii.

Nature of a man, grief brings out the real, XIX. 
xvii. :

Neighbourhood, what constitutes the excellence 
of a, IV. i.

Nine subjects of thought to the superior man,

XVI. x. 
Notoriety, not true distinction, XII. xx.

0

Ode, 052 the Chow-nan and Shaou-nan, XVII. x.— 
the Awan-ts‘eu, III. xx.—the Yung, III. ii.— 
Pih-kivei, X. v.—of Ch'ing, X V. x.—the Nga, 
IX. xiv.: XVII. xviii.

Odes, the study of the Book of, XVI. xiii, &

INDEX I.

XVII. ix.; x.;—quotations from the, I. xv.; 
III. xviii. ; IX. xxvi. ; XII. x.—the pure design 
of the, II. ii.

Office, declined by Tsze-k een, VI. vii.—desire 
for, qualified by self-respect, IX. xii.—Conf., 
why not in, II. xxi.—when to be accepted, and 
when to be declined, VIH. xiii.

Officers, classes of men who may be styled, 
XIII. xx.—mercenary, impossible to serve 
with, XVII. xv.—personal correctness essen- 
tial to, XIII. xiii.—should first attend to their 
proper work, XIX. xiii.

Otlicial notifications of Ch'ing, why excellent, 
XIV. ix.

Old knowledge, to be combined with new acqui- 
sitions, II. xi.Otlicial notifications of Ch'ing, why excellent, 
XIV. ix.

Old knowledge, to be combined with new acqui- 
sitions, II. xi.

Old man, encounter with an, XVIII. vii.

Opposing a father, disapproved of, VII. xiv.

Ordinances of Heaven ngcessary to be known, 
XX. iii.

Ordinary people, could not understand Conf., 
XIX. xxiii.—ordinary rules, Conf. not to be 
judged by, XVII. vii.

Originator, Conf. not an, VII. i.

P

Parents, grief for, brings out the real nature ofa 
man, XIX. xvii.—how a son may remonstrate 
with, IV. xviii.—should be strict and decided, 
XIV. viii.—three years’ mourning for, XVII. 
xxi.—their years to be remembered, IV. xxi.

People, what may and what may not be attain- 
ed to with the, VIII. ix.

Perfect virtue, caution in speaking, character- 
istic of, XII. iii.—characteristics of, XIII. 
xix.—estimation of, V. xviii., &. VI. xx.—five 
things which constitute, XVII. vi.—how to 
attain to, XII. i.—not easily attuined, XIV. 
vii.—wherein realized, XII. ii.

Persistence in error, lament over, V. xxvi.

Perseverance proper to a student, VI. x.

Personal attainment, a man’s chief concern, I. 
xvi, & XIV. xxxii.—conduct, all in all to a 
ruler, XIII. xvi.— correctness, essential to au 
oflicer, XIII. xiii.

Fere the chief virtue of language, XV. 
xl.

Pervading unity, Conf. doctrine a, IV. xv.—how 
Conf. aimed at, XV. viii.

Phonix, the, IX. viii, & XVIII. v.

Picty, sce Filial.

Pity of Conf. for misfortune, IX. ix.

Plans, what is necessary to concord in, XV. 
xxxix.

Poetry, benefits of the study of the Book of, 
VIII. viii, & XVII. ix.; X.—and music, ser- 
vice rendered to by Conf. IX. xiv.

Reena titles, on what principle conferred,

. xiv. i

Poverty, happiness in, VI. ix.—harder to ‘bear 
aright than riches, X1V. xi.—no disgrace to 
a scholar, IV. ix.

Practical ability, importance of, XIII. v.

Practice, Conf. zeal to carry his principles into, 
XVII. v. .Practical ability, importance of, XIII. v.

Practice, Conf. zeal to carry his principles into, 
XVII. v. .

Praise of the house of Chow, VIII. xx.—of the 
music-master Ch'e, VIII. xv.—of Yaou, VIII. 
xix.—of Yu, VIH. xxi, K

Praising and blaming, Conf. correctness in, XV. 
xxiv.

SUBJECTS IN THE ANALECTS.

303

Prayer, sin against Heaven precludes ITI. xiii.— 
Conf. declines, for himself, VIL. xxxiv.

Precaution, necessity of, XV. xi.

Preliminary study, necessity of to governing, XI.

. Xxiv.

Presumption, &c., of the chief of the Ke family, 
XVI. i—and pusillanimity conjoined, XVII. 
XII.

N against, II. xvii.— Conf. dislike of,

. xi.

Pretentiousness of Conf. time, VII. xxv.

Prince, and minister, relation of, III. xix.— 
Conf. demeanour before a, X. ii.—Conf. de- 
meanour in relation to, X. xiii.

Princes, Conf. influence on, I. x.—how to be 
served, III. xviii.

Principles, agreement in, necessary to concord 
in plans, XV. xxxix.—and ways of Yaou, 
Shun, &c., XX. i.—of duty, an instrument in 
the hand of man, XV. xxviii.

Prompt decision good, V. xix.

Propriety, und music, influence of, XVII. iv.— 
combined with learning, VI. xxv., & XII. xv.— 
effect of, VIII. viii.—love of, facilitates go- 
vernment, XIV. xliv.—necessary to a ruler, 
XV. xxxii.—not in external appurtenances, 
XVII. xi.--rules of, I. xii. : III. xv.—rules of, 
necessary to be known, XX. iii.—value of the 
rules of, VIII. ii.

Prosperity aud ruin of a country, on what de- 
pendent, XHI. xv., & XVI. ii.

Prowess conducting to ruin, XIV. vi.

Prudence, a lesson of, XIV. iv.

Pursuit of riches, against, VII. xi.

Pusillanimity and presumption, XVII. xii

Q

Qualifications of an officer, VIII. xiii. 
Qualities that are favourable to virtue, XIII. 
xxvii.—that mark the scholar, XIII. xxviii.

R ,

Rash words cannot be recalled, IIT. xxi.

Readiness of Conf. to impart instruction, VII. 
vii.—of speech, V. iv., & XVII. xiv.

Reading and thought, should be combined, II. 
xv., & XV. xxx.R ,

Rash words cannot be recalled, IIT. xxi.

Readiness of Conf. to impart instruction, VII. 
vii.—of speech, V. iv., & XVII. xiv.

Reading and thought, should be combined, II. 
xv., & XV. xxx.

Rebuke to Yen Yew, &c., XVI. i.

Receptivity of Hwuy, II. ix. & XI. iii.

Reciprocity, the rule of lite, XV. xxiii.

Recluse, ‘T'sze-loo’s encounter with a, XVIII. 
vii.

Recluses, Conf. and the two, XVIII. vi.

Recollection of Hwuy, Conf. fond, IX. xx.

Reflection, the necessity of, IX. xxx.

Regretful memory of disciples’ fidelity, XI. ii.

Relative duties, necessity of maintaining, XII. 
xi. :

Remark of an ignorant man about Conf., IX. ii.

Remonstrance with parents, IV. xviii.

Repentance escaped by timely care, I. xiii.

Reproof to Tsze-loo, XI. xxiv.

Reproofs, frequent, warning against the use of, 
IV. xxvi.

Reputation not a man's concern, XV. xviii.

Resentments, how to ward off, XV. xiv.

Residence, rule for selecting a, IV. i.

804

Respect, a youth should be regarded with, IX. 
xxii.—of Conf. for men, XV. xxiv.—of Conf. 
for rank, IX. ix.

Retired worthy's judgment on Conf., XIV. xlii.

Reverence for parents, II. vii.

Riches, pursuit of, uncertain of success, VII. xi.

Right way, importance of knowing the, IV. viii.

Righteous and public spirit of Conf., XIV. xxii.

Righteousness the Keun-tsze's concern, IV. xvi. 
—is his rule of practice, IV. x.

Root of benevolence, filial and fraternal duty*is 
the, I. ii.

Royal ruler, a, could, in what time, transform 
the empire, XIII. xii.

Ruin and prosperity dependent on what, XIII. 
xv, & XVI. ii.

Rule of life, reciprocity the, XV. xxiii.

Ruler, virtue in a, II. i. $

Rulers, a lesson to, VIII. x.—personal conduct 
all in all to, XIII. xvi.—should not be occu- 
pied with what is the proper business of the 
people, XIII. iv.

Ruling, best means of, IT. iii.

Running stream, a, Conf. how affected by, IX.

xvi.

Sacrifice, Conf. sincerity in, III. xij.—the great, 
III. x.; xi.—wrong subjects of, II. xxiv.Ruling, best means of, IT. iii.

Running stream, a, Conf. how affected by, IX.

xvi.

Sacrifice, Conf. sincerity in, III. xij.—the great, 
III. x.; xi.—wrong subjects of, II. xxiv.

Sagehood, not in various ability, IX. vi.

Scholar, attributes of the true, XIX. i.—his aim 
must be higher than comfort, XIV. iii.

Self-cultivation, I. viii, & IX. xxiv.—a man's 
concern, IV. xiv.—4 characteristic of the 
Keun-tsze, XIV. xlv.—Conf. anxiety about, 
VII. iii.—steps in, I. xv.

Self-examination, I. iv. i

Selfish conduct causes murmuring, IV. xii.

Self-respect should qualify desire for office, IX.

xii.

Self-willed, Conf. not, XIV. xxxiv.

Sequences, of wisdom, virtue, and bravery, IX. 
xxviii.

Servants, difficult to treat, XVII. xxv. t

Shame of caring only for salary, XIV. i.

Shaov, a name of certain music, III. xxv.

Sheep, the monthly offering of a, III, xvii.

Shoo-king, quotation from, II. xxi. XIV. xliii. 
—compilation from, XX. i.

Silent mourning, three years of, XIV. xliii.

Simplicity, instance of, VIII. v.

Sincerity, cultivation of, I. iv.—necessity of, II. 
xxii.—praise of, V. xxiv.

Slandering of T’sze-loo, XIV. xxxviii.

Slowness to speak, of the ancients, IV. xxii.— 
of the Keun-tsze, IV. xxiv.

Small advantages not to be desired in govern- 
ment, XIII. xvii.

Social intercourse, qualities of the scholar in, 
XIII. xxiii.

Solid excellence blended with ornament, VI. xvi.

Son, a, opposing his father, against, VII. xiv.— 
Conf. instruction of his own, XVI. xiii.

Sources of Conf. knowledge, XIX. xxii.

Specious words, danger of, XV. xxvi.

Speech, discretion in, XV. vii.

Spirit of the times, against, III. xviii.

Spirits, Conf. evades a question about serving, 
XI. xi.—of the land, altars, of, III. xxi.

Stages of attainment, VI. xviii.—of progress, 
ditfcrent persons stop at different, IX. xxix.

SUBJECTS IN THE ANALECTS.

INDEX I.

States of T's'e and Loo, VI. xxii.

Strange doctrines, II. xvi.

Strength, not a fit subject of praise, XIV. xxxv.SUBJECTS IN THE ANALECTS.

INDEX I.

States of T's'e and Loo, VI. xxii.

Strange doctrines, II. xvi.

Strength, not a fit subject of praise, XIV. xxxv.

Student's proper work, XIX. xiii.

Stupidity of Ning Woo, V, xx.

Subjects, avoided by Conf. VII. xx.—of Conf. 
teaching, VII. xxiv. See Topics.

Submission of subjects, how secured, II. xix.

Substantial qualities, nnd accomplishments, in 
the Keun-tsze, XII. viii.

Sun and moon, Conf. iike the, XIX. xxiv.

Superficial speculations, against, XV. xvi.

Superior and mean man, II. xii; xiii; xiv; IV. 
xi; xvi: VI. xi: VII. xxxvi; XVI. viii.—dif- 
ferent air and bearing of, XIII. xxvi.— 
different in their relation to those employed 
by them, XIII. xxv.—different manners of, 
XIII. xxiii —different tendencies of, XIV. 
xxiv.—how to know, XV. xxxiii.—opposite 
influence of, XII. xvi.

Superior man, above distress, XV. i.—changing 
appearances of, to others, XIX. ix.—cleaves 
to virtue, 1V. v.—does not conceal, but 
changes, his errors, XIX. xxi.—firmness of, 
based on right, XV. xxxvi.—four character- 
istics of, V. xv.—is righteous, courtcous, 
humble, and sincere, X V. xvii.—more in deeds 
than in words, XIV. xxix.—nine subjects of 
thought to, XVI. x.—rule about his worda and 
actions, IV. xxiv.—self- cultivation, character- 
istic of, XIV. xlv.—tulents and virtues of, 
VIII. vi.—thoughts of in harmony with his 
position, XIV. xxviii.—truth the object of. 
XV. xxxi.—various characteristics of, XV. 
XX.; xxii. ; xxiii.—wishes to be had in remem- 
brance, XV. xix.

Superiority of Hwuy, VI. ii.; v.

Superstition of Tsang Wan, V. xvii.

Supreme authority ought to maintain its power, 
XVI. ii.

Susceptivity of learners, teachers to be guided 
by, VI. xix.

Swiftness to speak, incompatible with virtue, 
XVII. xiv.

Sympathy of Conf. with mourners, VIT. ix.— 
with sorrow, LX. ix.

T

Talents, men of, scarce, VIII. xx.—worthless 
without virtue, VIII. xi.

Taxation, light, advantages of, XII. ix.Sympathy of Conf. with mourners, VIT. ix.— 
with sorrow, LX. ix.

T

Talents, men of, scarce, VIII. xx.—worthless 
without virtue, VIII. xi.

Taxation, light, advantages of, XII. ix.

Teacher, qualification of a, II. xi.

Teaching, effect of, X V. xxxviii.—Conf. carnest- 
ness in, 1X. vii.—Conf. subjects of, VII. xxiv. 
—graduated method of, XIX. xii.—necessary 
to prepare the people for war, XIII. xxix xxx.

Temple, Conf. in the grand, XIII. xv., & X. xiv.

Thieves made by the example of rulers, XII. 
xviii.

Think, those who will not, the case of, hopeless, 
XV. xv.

Thinking without reading, fruitless, XV. xxx.

Thought and learning, to be combined, II. xv.

Three, errors of speech, in the presence of the 
great, XVI. vi—families, of Loo, III. ii.— 
friendships advantageous, and three injurious, 
XVI. iv.—sources of enjoyment, id. id, X VI. 
v.—things of which the superior man stands 
in awe, XVI. viii—years’ mourning, XIV. 
xliii: X VII. xxi.—worthies of the Yin dynas- 
ty, XVII. i.

INDEX I.

"Thunder, Conf. how affected by, X. xvi.

Topics, avoided by Conf., VII. xx.—most com- 
mon of Conf., VIT. xvii.—scldom spoken on 
by Conf., IX. i.

Traditions of the principles of Wan and Woo, 
XIX. xxii. ]

Training of the young, I. vi.

Transmitter, Conf. a, VIL. i.

Trappings of mourning may be dispensed with, 
XIX. xiv.

Treatment of a powerful, but unworthy officer 
by Conf., XVIL i. : Í

True men, paucity of in Conf. time, VII. xxv.

Truthfulness, necessity of, I. xxii.

Two classes only whom practice cannot: change, 
XVII. iii.—recluses, Conf. and the, XVIII. vi.

U

Unbending virtue, V. x.

Unchangeableness of great principles, II. xxiii.

Unity of Cont. doctrine, TV. xv., & XV. ii.

Unmannerly old man, Conf. conduct to an, 
XIV. xlvi.

Unoccupied, Conf. manner when, VII. iv.

Unworthy man, Conf. responds to the advances 
of an, XVII. vii.Unmannerly old man, Conf. conduct to an, 
XIV. xlvi.

Unoccupied, Conf. manner when, VII. iv.

Unworthy man, Conf. responds to the advances 
of an, XVII. vii.

Uprightness, and natural duty in collision, 
XIII. xviii.—meanness inconsistent with, V. 
xxiii.—necessary to true virtue, VI. xvii.

Usurped rites, against, ULL i; ii; vi.

Usurping tendencies of the Ke family, XIII. 
xiv. :

Utensil, Tsze-kung an, V. iii—the accomplished 
scholar not an, II. xii.

Y

Valour subordinate to righteousness, XVII. 
xxiii. i

Various ability of Conf., IX. vi.

Vice, how to correct, XII. xxi.

Vices, of a father, no discredit to a good son, 
VI. iv.—which youth, manhood, and age have 
to guard against, XVI. vii.

Village, Cont. demeanour in his, X. i.; x.

Vindication, Conf, of himself, VI. xxvi.—of 
Conf. by Tsze-loo, XVIII. vii.

Virtue, alone adapts a man for his condition, 
IV. ii—and not strength a fit subject of 
praise, XIV. xxxv.—ceremonies & music vain 
without, III. iii.—complete, T. i—contentment 
with what is vulgar injures, XVII. xiii.— 
devotion of the Keun-tsze to, IV. v.—excceding,

SUBJECTS IN'THE ANALECTS.

305

of T'ae-pih, VIII. i.—few really know, XV. 
iii—how to exalt, XII. x.; xxi.—in concealing 
one’s merit, VI. xiii— influence of, II. i.— 
knowledge not lasting without, XV. xxxii.— 
leading to empire, XIV. vi.—learning, neces- 
sary to the completion of, XVII. viii.—learn- 
ing leading to, XIX. vi.—love of, rare, IV. vi.: 
IX. xvii; XV. xii—natural qualities which 
favour, XIII. xxvii.—not far to seek, VII. 
xxix.—the highest, not easily attained, and 
incompatible with meanness, XIV. vii.—the 
practice of, aided by intercourse with the 
good, XV. ix.—to be valued more than life, 
XV. viii.—true nature and art of, VI. xxviii. 
—without wealth, &., XVI. xii.

Virtues, the great, demand the chief attentio 
XIX. xi. - 
Virtuous men, not left alone, IV, xxv.—only

can love or hate others, IV. iii.

Vocation of Conf., a stranger's view of, III. xxiv.Virtues, the great, demand the chief attentio 
XIX. xi. - 
Virtuous men, not left alone, IV, xxv.—only

can love or hate others, IV. iii.

Vocation of Conf., a stranger's view of, III. xxiv.

Vulgar ways and views, against contentment 
with, XVII. xiii.

War, how a good ruler prepares the people for, 
XIII. xxix.; xxx. `

Warning to Tsze-loo, XI. xii.

Waywardness, lament over, VI. xv.

Wealth without virtue, &., XVI. xii.

. the virtuous will, preserves from,

. iv.

Wife of a prince, appellations for, XVI. xiv.

Will, the virtuous, preserves from wickedness, 
IV. iv.—is unsubduable, IX. xxv.

Wisdom and virtue, chief elements of, VI. xx. 
—contrasts of, VI. xxi: IX. xxviii.

Wishes, different, of Yen Yuen, &c., V. xxv.— 
of Tsze-loo, &c., XI. xxv.

Withdrawing from public life, different causes 
of, XIV. xxxix.—of Conf., XVIII. v.; vi—of 
seven men, XIV. xl. .

Withdrawing from the world, Conf. proposes, 
V. vi.—Conf. judgment on, XVIII. viii.

Words, the force of, necessary to be known, 
XX. iii. !

Work, a man’s, is with himself, XIV. xxx.

Workshop, the student's, XIX. vii.

Y 
Young, duty of the, I. vi.—should be regarded 
with respect, IX. xxii.

Youth, the vice to be guarded against in, XVI. 
vii.

— LLL LA 
— —

INDEX II.

OF PROPER NAMES IN THE CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

«S Names in Italics will be found in their own places in this Index with additional references.

CH ax» CH’.

Ch‘ae, surnamed Kaou, and styled Z'sze-kaou, a 
disciple of Conf., XI. xvii. 3

Chang, Tsze-chang, XEX. xv.; xvi.

Ch'ang-tseu, a worthy of Ts‘oo, XVIII. vi.

Chaou, a prince celebrated for his beauty of 
person, Vf. xiv.

Chaou, one of the three families which governed 
the state of Tsin, XIV. xii.

Ch‘aou, the hon. epithet of Chow, duke of Loo, 
B. C. 540—509, VII. xxx.

Che, the Music-master of Loo, VIII. xv.: XVIII. 
ix. ;

Ch‘ih, surnamed Kung-se, and styled Tsze-hwa, 
a disciple of Conf., V. vii; VI. iij: XI. xxv. 
em the state of, V. xxi: VII. xxx: XI. ii.:Che, the Music-master of Loo, VIII. xv.: XVIII. 
ix. ;

Ch‘ih, surnamed Kung-se, and styled Tsze-hwa, 
a disciple of Conf., V. vii; VI. iij: XI. xxv. 
em the state of, V. xxi: VII. xxx: XI. ii.:

el. 
Ch'in Kang, Tsze-k‘in, a disciple of Conf., XVI.

xiii.

Ch'in Shing, or Chan Hang, an officer of Keen, 
duke of Ts‘e, XIV. xxii.

Chin Wan, an officer of Tse, V. xviii.

Ch'ing, the State of, XV. x.

Choo-chang, a person who retired from the 
world, XVIII. viii. :

Chow dynasty, IL. xxiii: III. xiv.; xxi: VIII. 
XX.: XV. x.: XVI. v.: XVIII. xi: XX. i.

Chow, the last emperor of the Yin dynasty, 
XVIII. i: XIX. xx.

Chow Jin, an ancient historiographer, XVI. i.

Chow-kung, or the duke of Chow, VII. v. 
VIII. xi: XI. xvi.: XVIII. x. :

Chuen-yu, a small territory in Loo, XVI. i.

Chung-hwüh, an officer of Chow, XVIII. xi.

Chung-kung, the designation of Yen Yung, a 
disciple of Conf, VI. i.; iv.: XI. ii.: XII. ii.: 
XIII. ii.

Chung-mow, a place in the state of Tsin, XVII. 
vii.

Chung-ne, Confucius, XIX. xxii.—xxv.

Chung-shuh Yu, the name as K‘ung Wan, XIV. 
xx.

Chung Yew, styled Tsze-loo, a disciple of Con- 
fucius, VI. vi: XI. xxiii: XVIII. vi.

Chwang of Peen, XIV. xiii.

E

E, a small town on the borders of the State of 
Wei, III. xxiv.

E, a famous archer, B. C. about 2150., XIV. vi.

E-yih, a person who retired from the world, 
XVIII. viii. 3

E Yin, the minister of Tang, XII. xxii,

F

Fan Ch'e, by name Seu, and designated 'Tsze- 
ch'e a disciple of Conf., IL v.: VI. xx: XII. 
xxi.; xxii: XIII. iv.; xix.

Fan Seu, the name as Fan Ch'e, XIII. iv.

Fang, a city in Loo, XIV. xv.

Fang-shuh, a musician of Loo, XVIII. ix.

G

Gae, the hon. title of Tseang, duke of Loo, B. c. 
498—467, II. xix.: III. xxi.: VI. ii.: XII. ix. 
Gan Ping, posthumous title of Gan Ying, prin-

cipal minister of Ts‘e, V. xvi.

Han, the river, XVIII ix.

Hea dynasty, II. xxiii.: III. ix. xxi: XV. x.

Hen HE name of Yuen Sze, a disciple of Conf.,

i.cipal minister of Ts‘e, V. xvi.

Han, the river, XVIII ix.

Hea dynasty, II. xxiii.: III. ix. xxi: XV. x.

Hen HE name of Yuen Sze, a disciple of Conf.,

i.

Hwan, the three great families of Loo, being 
descended from duke Hwan, are called the 
descendants of the three Hwan, II. v. notes 
XVI. iii.

Hwan, the duke of Ts'e, mc. 683—642, XIV. 
xvi. xviii. i f

Hwan 'T'uy, a high officer of Sung, VII. xxii.

Hwuy, Yen Hwuy, styled Tsze-yuen, a disciple 
of Conf., II. ix. V. viii.: VI. v.; ixe IX. xix.: 
XI. iii.; x.; xviii; xxii. :

Hwuy of Lew-hea, posthumous title of Chen 
Hw, an officer of Loo, XV. xiii: XVIII. ii.;

viii.

Joo Pei, a man of Loo, XVII. xx.

Kan, the Master of the band at Loo, XVIII. ix.

Kaou-tsung, the hon. epithet of the emperor 
Woo-ting, p.c. 1323—1263., XIV. xliii.

Kaou-yaou, a minister of Shun, XII. xxii.

Ke, a small state in which sacrifices to the em- 
perors of the Hea dynasty were maintained 
by their descendants, III. ix.

Ke, a small state in Shan-se, XVIIT. i.

Ke family, the family of Ae Nang of Loo, III. i. 
. vis VI. vii: XI. xvi: XVI. i.: XVIII. iii.

INDEX II.

Ke Iwan, or Ke Sze, the head of the Ke family 
in the latter days of Conf, XVIII. iv.

Ke K'ung, the hon. epithet of Ke-sun Fei, the 
head of one of the three great families of Loo, 
IL xx.: Vl. vi: XL vies XIII. xvii; xviii 
xix.: XIV. xx.

Ke-kwa, an officer of Chow, XVIII. xi.

Ke Loo, the same as 7'sze-lov, V. xxv.: XI. ii.; 
xi. e, XIII. xiv: XVI. i.

Ke-sun, the same as Ae Kang, XIV. xxxviii; 
XVI. i.

Xe-suy, an officer of Chow, XVIII. xi.

Ke Tsze-jen. a younger brother of the Ke fami- 
ly, XI. xxiii.

Ke Wan, posthumous title of Ke IIang-foo, an 
officer of Loo, V. xix.

KXér-neih, a worthy of Ts‘oo, XVIII. vi.

Kéen, a duke of Tste, XIV. xxii.

Keu-foo, a small city on the western borders of 
Loo. XIII. xvii.

Ken Pih-yuh, the designation of Keu Yuen, an 
officer of the State of Wei, XIV. xxvi: XV. 
VI.

Keach, the name of a village, XIV. xlvii.Ken Pih-yuh, the designation of Keu Yuen, an 
officer of the State of Wei, XIV. xxvi: XV. 
VI.

Keach, the name of a village, XIV. xlvii.

Keuch, a musician of Loo. XVIII. iv.

Kew, brother of the duke Hwan of ‘Ts‘e, XIV. 
xvii. ; xviii.

Kew, Confucius! name, XIV. xxxiv.: XVIII. vi.

Krew, the name of Xea Yer, a disciple of Conf., 
V. vii: VI. vi: XI. xvi; xxi.; xxiii; xxv.: 
XVI. i. `

Kih Tae sings an oflicer of the State of Wei, 
XIJ. viii.

King, a duke of Tse, XII. xi: XVI, xii.: 
XVHI. iii.

King, a scion of the ducal family of Wei, XIII. 
viii.

Kung. Confucius, IX. ii.; XIV. xii, ; XVIII. vi.

Küng-Ch'ó, Mäng Nung-ché, XIV. xiii.

Kung-ming Kea, XIV. xiv.

Kang-pih Leaou, a relative of the duke of Loo, 
XIV. xxxviii.

Kung-se Hwa, Tsz-hwa, a disciple of Conf., 
VII. xxxiii: X]. xxi. ; xxv.

Kung-shan Fih-jaou, a confederate of Yang 
Ho, XVII. v.

Kung-shoh Win, an officer of the State of Wei, 
XIV. xiv. xix.

Kung-sun Ch'aou, of Wei, XIX. xxii.

Kng Win, posthumous title of ‘T'sze-yu, an 
oflicer of Wei, V. xiv.

Kung-yay Chung, the son-in-law of Confucius, 
. i. .

Kwan Chung, by name E Woo, chief minister 
to the duke Ilwan of Ts'e, Be. 683—640., 
Il. xxii: XIV. X.; xvii ; xviii. : te

Kwang, the name of a town, IX. v ; XI. xxii.

L

Laou, surnamed Kin. and styled Tsze-k‘ae or 
T'sze-chang, a disciple of Confucius, IX. vi.

. Le, the name of Tang, founder of the Shang 
dynasty, XX. i.

Le, a son Confucius, who died early, XI. vii.

Lenon, a musician of Loo, XVIII. ix.

Lin Fang, styled "sze-k*ew, a man of Loo, sup- 
posed to have been a disciple of Confucius, III. 
iv. vi.

Ling, a duke of Wei, XIV. xx.: XV. i.

Loo, ilie native State of Conf, II. v. note; III.

PROPER NAMES IN THE ANALECTS.

3097

xxiii: V. ii.: VI. xxii: IX. xiv: XL xiii: 
XLI. vii.: XIV. xv.: XVIII. iv.; vi.; x.

M

Mäng Che-fan, named Tsih, an officer of Loo,

» XL,

Mang Chwang, the head of the Mäng family, an- 
terior to Conf. time, XLX. xviii.M

Mäng Che-fan, named Tsih, an officer of Loo,

» XL,

Mang Chwang, the head of the Mäng family, an- 
terior to Conf. time, XLX. xviii.

Mang E. the posthumous title of Jfang-sun, the 
head of the Ming family, II. v.

Mang family, one of the three great families of 
Loo, XVIII. iii.: XIX. xix.

Ming King, honorary title of Chung-sun Ts‘ed, 
son of Ming Woo, VIII. iv.

Ming Kung-ch‘d, the head of the Aang or 
Chung-sun family, in the time of Confa XIV. 
xii.

Miing-sun, named Ho-ke, the same as Marg ,

M. v.

Ming Woo, hon. title of Che, the son of Ming 
E, IT. vi.: V. vii.

Min, the music-master of Loo, XV. xli.

Min, Mín 7 Sze-K*cen, XI. xii.

Min, 'I'sze-k*een, named Sun, a disciple of Conf., 
VI. vii.: XI. ii.; iv.; xiii.

Mung, the eastern, the name of a mountain, 
XVI. i.

Nan-kung K‘wth, supposed to be the same as 
Wan Yung, XIV. vi.

Nan-tsze, the wife of the duke of Wei, and 
sister of prince Chaou, VI. xxvi.

Nan-yung, 2 disciple of Cont., V. i.: XT. v.

Ngaou, the son of Han Tsuh, (B.e. 2100), XIV.

vi. 
Ning Woo, hon. ep. of Ning Yu, an officer of 
Wei, V. xx.

P

Ping. an ancient worthy, VII. i.

Pe, a place iu the state of Loo, VI. vii.: JI.

' xxiv.: XVI. i.: XVII. v.

Pe-kan, an uncle of the tyrant Chow, XVIII. i.

Le Shin, a minister of the state of Ching, XIV. 
IX.

Peen, the name of a city, XIV. x.

Peen, a city in Loo, XIV, xiii.

Peih Heih, commandant of Chung Mow, in the 
State of Tsin, XVII. vii.

Pih family, XIV. x.

Pih-e, hon. epithet of a worthy of the Shang

dynasty, V. xxii.: VII. xiv,: XVI. xii: XVIII. 
viii.

Pih-Kwöh, an officer of Chow, XVIII. xi.

Pih-new, the denomination of Tsae Kang, sur- 
named Yen, a disciple of Conf., VI. viii: XI. 
11.

Pih-t&, an officer of Chow, XVIII. xi.

Pih-yu, the eldest son of Conf, XVI. xiii: 
XVIL x.

S

Seang, a musician of Loo, XVIII. ix. 
Sër, the State of, XLV. xii.

308

Séen, an officer under Kung-shith Win, XIV. 
xix.

Shang, name of Tsze-heu, a disciple of Conf., 
III. viii.: XI. xv.S

Seang, a musician of Loo, XVIII. ix. 
Sër, the State of, XLV. xii.

308

Séen, an officer under Kung-shith Win, XIV. 
xix.

Shang, name of Tsze-heu, a disciple of Conf., 
III. viii.: XI. xv.

Shaou, the music of Shun, III. xxv.: VII. xiii.

Shaou wih, minister of duke IIwan's brother, 
Kew, XIV. xvii.

Shaou-léen, a person belonging to one of the 
barbarous tribes of the Eust, who retired from 
the world, XVIII. viii.

She, a district in the State of Ts‘oo, VII. xviii.: 
XIII. xvi.

She-shuh, named Yew-keih, an officer of Ch‘ing, 
XIV. ix.

Shili-mun, one of the frontier passes between 
Tse and Loo, XIV. xli.

Shin Ch'ang, styled Tsze-chow, a disciple of 
Conf., V. x.

Show-yang mountain, in Shan-se, XVI. xii.

Shhth-hea, an officer of Chow, XVIII. xi. +

Shüh-sun, one of the three great families of 
Loo, II. v., note.

Shoh-sun Woo-shith, a chief of the Shüh-sun 
family, XIX. xxili.; xxiv.

Shhh-ts'e, hon. epithet of a worthy of the Shang

+ dynasty, V. xxii: VII. xiv.: XVI. xii: 
XVIII. viii.

Bhinih-yay, an officer of Chow, XVIII. xí.

Shun, the emperor, VI. xxviii: VIII. xviii; xx. 
XII. xxii.: XIV. xlv.: XV. iv.: XX. i.

Sin, Tsang-sin, a disciple of Confucius, IV. xv.: 
XL xvii.

4 
Sung, a State in which sacrifices. to the em-

perors of the Hea dynasty were maintained 
by their descendants, III. ix. VI. xiv.

Sze, the name of Zsze-chang, a disciple of Conf., 
XI. xv.; xvii.

Ssze-ma New, named Kang, a brother of fIwan 
']'uy, and a disciple of Confucius, XII. iii; 
iv.; v. :

T

T&-heang, the name of a village, IX. ii.

Tae mountain, on the border between Loo and 
Ts'e, III. vi.

T‘ae-pih, the eldest son of king Tae, and grand- 
father of Wàn the founder of the Chow dy- 
nasty, VIII. i.

Tan-t'ae Méé-ming, styled Tsze-yu, a disciple 
of Conf., VI. xii.

"uuu, the dynastie name of tlie emperor Yaou, 
VIII. xx.

Tung, the founder of the Shang dynasty, XII. 
xxii: XX. i.

Tang, the State of, XIV. xii."uuu, the dynastie name of tlie emperor Yaou, 
VIII. xx.

Tung, the founder of the Shang dynasty, XII. 
xxii: XX. i.

Tang, the State of, XIV. xii.

Teen, the name of Tsang Sth, father of Tsing 
Sin, and a disciple of Conf., Xl. xxy.

Ting, the posthumous epithet of Sung, 
of Loo, III. xix. XIII. xv.

To, an officer of the state of Wei, styled Tsze- 
yu, VI. xiv: XIV. xx.

Tsae Go, by name Yu, and styled Tsze-go, a 
disciple of Conf., III. xxi: VI. xxiv: XI. ii. 
XVII. xxi.

Tsae Yu, a disciple of Conf., who slept in the 
day time, the same as the prec, V. ix.

'Ts*ae, the State of, XL ji: XVIII. ix.

Tsang Sih, named Teen, the father of Tsing 
Sin, and a disciple of Conf., XI. xxv.

Tsang stn, styled Tsze-yu, a disc iple of Conf., 
1. iv.: ix IV. xv. VIII. iii. evii; XII. xxiv: 
XIV. xxviii.: XIX. xvi.—xix.

prince

PROPER NAMES IN THE ANALECTS.

INDEX II.

Tsang Wan, the honorary title of Tsang-sun 
Shin, a greut officer of Loo, V. xvii: XV. xiii.

Tsang Woo-chung, an officer of Loo, XLV. xiii; 
xv.

Ts‘e, the State of, V. xviii: VI. iii.; xxii: VII. 
xiij: XIV. xxii: XVI. iii.: XVIII. iii; iv.; ix.

T:é5-yu, the designation of one Luh ‘ung, of 
TSO, who feigned himself mad to escape 
public service, XVIII. v.

Tseih, IIow-tseih, the minister of agriculture 
to Yaou and Shun, XIV. vi.

Tseih-teaou K‘ae, styled 'Tsze-jó, a disciple of 
Conf, V. v.

Tsin, the State of, XIV. xvi. XVII. ix.

‘T'so-k‘ew Ming, an ancient man of reputation, 
V. xxiv.

Ts'oo, the State of, XVIII. v.; ix.

Ts‘uy, a great officer of Ts‘c, V. xviii.

Tse, the name of Z'sze-kung, a disciple of Conf., 
I. xv: III. xvii: V. viii; ix; VI. vi: XIV. 
xxxi: XV. ii.: XVII. xxiv.

Tsze-ch‘an, named Kung-sun K'eaou, the chief 
minister of the state of Ching, V. xv; XIV. 
ix.; x.

Tsze-chang, the designation of Chuen- sun Sze, 
a disciple of Conf., II. xviii; xxii: V. xviii: 
XI. xix.: XII. vis xiv.; Xx Fh, xliii.: XV.Tsze-chang, the designation of Chuen- sun Sze, 
a disciple of Conf., II. xviii; xxii: V. xviii: 
XI. xix.: XII. vis xiv.; Xx Fh, xliii.: XV.

v.; xli: XVII. vi. XIX. iş diş jii: XX. ji. 
Tsze-fuh King-pih, an once of Loo, XIV. 
xxxviii: XIX. xxiii.

Tsze-hea, the designation of Puh Shang, a dis- 
ciple of Conf., I, vii: II. vi: III. viii: VI. 
xi: XI. ii.: XII. v.; xxii: XIII. xxvii; xxviii: 
XIX. iii.—xv.

Tsze-hwa, the designation of Kung-se, named 
Chih, a disciple of Conf., VI. iii.

"T'sze-kuou, the designation of (Ide, a disciple 
of Conf., XI. xxiv.

Tsze-kung, the designation of Twan-muh 752, 
a disciple | of Cont, I. x; xve II. xiii.: III. 
xvii: V. iii.; viii: xi; xii; xiv: VI. xxviij.: 
VIL sive IX. visxih: XI. ii.; xii.: xv.: XII. 
vii; viii; x.; xxiii.: XIII. XX4 xxiv. XIV. xviii; 
XXX. ; xxxi ; xxxvii.: XV. ii.; v.; xxiii; XV II. 
xix; xxiv: XIX. xx.—xxv. P

Tsze-loo, the designation of Chung-yew, often 
named simply Yew, a disciple of Confucius,

II. xvii: V. vi; vii; xiii.; Xxxv.: VI. xxvi: 
VII. x4 xxxiv.: IX. xi; xxvi: X. xvii: NI. 
xii.; xiv.; xxi. xxiv.; XXV.: NIE xii.: XIII. i.;

iii; xxviii. : XIV. xiii.; xvii.; xxiii; xxviii.; xli.; 
xlv.: XV. i: XVII. v.; vii; xxiii XVIII. vi; 
vii.

Tsze-sang Pih-tszo, VI. i; VII. xviii.

Tsze-se, the chief minister of Ts“, XIV. x.

"Tuze-ts'écn, the designation of Pcib Puh-ts'e, a 
disciple of Conf., V. ii.

Tsze-wan, surnamed Tow, and named Kuh- u- 
t‘vo, chief minister of 7:00, V. xviii. |

Tsze-yew, or Yen Yew, the designation of Len 
Yen, a disciple of Cont, II. vii; Vl. xii: XI. 
i: XVII. ive XIX. xii.

Tsze-yu, g minister of the state of Ch'ing, XIV.

ix. 
Tung-le, XIV. ix. 
W

Wan, the king, VIII. xx.: IX. v.: XIX. xxii.

Wan, a duke of Tsin, XIV. xvi.

Wan, a riser dividing the states of Tse und 
Loo, Vl. vii.

INDEX II.

W Ken, a grent officer of Wei, III. LT

xx.

We-shang Mow, XIV. xxxiv.

Wei, the State of, VII. xiy.: IX. xiv: Xu, iiis 
vit; vili; Ex: XIY. xx; xlii: XV. i: 
xxii.INDEX II.

W Ken, a grent officer of Wei, III. LT

xx.

We-shang Mow, XIV. xxxiv.

Wei, the State of, VII. xiy.: IX. xiv: Xu, iiis 
vit; vili; Ex: XIY. xx; xlii: XV. i: 
xxii.

Wei, one of the three families, which governed. 
the State of Tsin, XIV. xii.

Wei- shang Kaon, V. xxiii.

Wei,'d small State in Shan-se, XVEHLi

Woo, the State of, VII. xxx.

Woo, the founder of the Chow dynasty, VIH. 
xx4 XIX. xxii.

Woo, the niusic of king Woo, III. xxv.

Woo, a musician of Loo, XVIII. ix.

Woo-ma K'e, VII. xxx.

Won-shing, the. name, ofa eity in Pe. VI. xii; 
XVIII. iv.

Yang, a musician of Loo, XVIII. ix.

Yang Foo, a disciple of Tsöng-sin, XIX. xix.

Yang Ifo, or ¥ang Hoo, the pr incipal minister’ 
of the Ke family, XV AH. i.

Yaou, the emperor, MI. xxviii.: VIII. xix.: 
XIV. Xiv.: XX. i. 1

Yellow river, lt ix,

Yen, Yen Yew, VI. ii.: XVII. iv.

Yen Huy, styled "sze-yuen, h disciple of Yuen. e named Hen, a

Cont, VI. ii.: XI. vi.

PROPER NAMES IN THE ANALECTS.

309

Yen-loo, the father of Hwy, XI. vii.

Yen Pih-nei, named Tsze King, a disciple of 
Conf., XI. ii.

Yen Lew, named New, and designated Tsze- 
geto, a disciple of Conf., III. vi: V. vii: VI. 
iii: VII. iv.: XI. ii; xii.; xxi; xx. XIII. ix. ; 
xiv.: XVI. i.: XIX. xii.

¥en Yuen, named luis, and sisle Teze yuen, 
w disciple of Conf, V. XXY.: VII. IX. x. i 
xx. XI. d.i ; vi; vila; xix.; xxii. XII. i.: 
NV. x

Yew, Chung Yol; styled T: $26-loo, a disciple of 
Conf., H. xvii? V. vi. ; vii: VE vi: IX. xi; 
xxvi.: XI. xii; xiv. ; xvii. j xx.; xxi.; 4 xxi

XII. xii. ; XIII. iii.: XV. ii: XVI. i. XVI.

viii. 
Yew 155 styled TSzerjs, and Tsze-yew, a disciple 
of Conf., L. ii.; xii; xiii: XII. ix. 1

| Yin dynasty; II. ‘xxiii: III. Sm xxi: VIII. xx: ;

XV. X.: XVIII. i.

[Xu € the emperor, VIII. xviii, ; ; xxi.: XIV. yi.:

ru, Wie “dynastic name of the emperor, Situs, 
VIII. xx. l 
u, the historiographer of Wei, XV. vi.

! Yu, Ine Go, XVII. xxi. 
"|| Yusehung, or Woo-chung, VIII. i. note. : XVIII.ru, Wie “dynastic name of the emperor, Situs, 
VIII. xx. l 
u, the historiographer of Wei, XV. vi.

! Yu, Ine Go, XVII. xxi. 
"|| Yusehung, or Woo-chung, VIII. i. note. : XVIII.

viii. 
Yuen Jang, a follower, of Laou-tsze, XIV. xlvi. 
disciple of Conf,

Yen Kew, Yor Yew, VI. x XI xxiii.: XIV. Ker hen Xung, styled Chung-kung, n disciple

xiii. .

of Conf., V. iv.: VI. i.

"s

INDEX HE

OF SUBJECTS IN THE GREAT LEARNING.

A

Ability and worth, importance of a Ruler ap- 
preciating and using, comm. x. 14, 16.

Analects, quotations from, the. comn., iv.; x. 15.

Ancients, the, illustrated illustrious virtue how,

text, 4. 
E

Empire, the, rendered peaceful and happy, tett, 
5: comm., x.

; F

Family, regulating the, tert, 4, 5.: comm., viii

ix.

Heart, the rectification of the, text, 4, 5.1 comm.,

I

Illustration of illustrious virtue, text, 1, 4:

comm., i.

Kings, why the former are remembered, comm., 
iii, 4, 5. ; : 
Knowledge, perfecting of, text, 4, ö.: comm., v.

L

Litigations, it is best to prevent, comm, iv.

M

Master, the words of the, quoted, comm, iii. 2; iv.

Measuring square, principle of the, comm., x. 
Middle kingdom, the, co., x. 15, 
Mind, rectitying the, tert, 4, 6 : comm., vii,

0

Odes, quotations from the, comm., ii. 3 ; iii.; ix. G, 
7, 85 x. 8, 4, 5. 
Order of steps in illustrating virtue, text, 3, 4, 5.

P

Partiality of the affections, comm. viii. 
Passion, influence of, comm, vii. 
People, renovation of the, text, I.; comm. ii. 
Perfecting of knowledge, the, text, 4, ö.; comm. v. 
Person, the cultivation of the, text, 4, 5, 6: 
comm. Vii; vili. 
R

Renovation of the people, the, tert, 1; comm., ii.

Resting in the highest excellence, zert, 1, 2: 
comm, iii.

Noot, the, and branches, tert, 3; comm. iv.—cul- 
tivation of the person tlie, text, 6.—virtue tho, 
comm, X. G, 7, 8.

Secret watchfulness over himself, characteristic 
of the superior man, comm. vi. 1.

Shoo-king, the, quotations from, comm, i. J, 2, 3; 
ji. 2; ix. 2.; x. 11, 14.Secret watchfulness over himself, characteristic 
of the superior man, comm. vi. 1.

Shoo-king, the, quotations from, comm, i. J, 2, 3; 
ji. 2; ix. 2.; x. 11, 14.

Sincerity of the thoughts, text, 4, 5.; comm. vi.

State, the government of the, text, 4, 5 : comm, 
ix; x. .

Steps by which virtue may be illpstrated, tert, 
4, 5. :

Superior man, character of the, comm. ii. 4,

Superior, and mean man, comm, vi.

Y

Virtue, illustrious, text, comm. ii.—tlie root, comm.

x. 6, 7, 8. 
Wealth a secondary object with n ruler, eon. 
X. Ty &c.

—ꝓ——ññ U— —— tes

INDEX IV.

OF PROPER NAMES IN THE GREAT LEARNING.

C

Ching. the philosopher, Zntroductory note: comm., 
V., vole.

Chow, the State of, comm. ii. 3.

Chow, the tyrant, comm. ix. 4.

Confucius, Concluding note to text.

F 
Fan, the uncle of duke Win, comm., x. 18. 
Lg 
K 
K'ang, hon. epithet of Fung, brother of king 
Woo, comm., i. 1 ; ii. 2; ix. 2; x. II.

K'e, the name of a river. comm., iii. 4. 
Kis, the tyrant, comm., ix. 4.

M

Mang Hétn, hon. epithet of Chung-sun Mex, a 
«Worthy minister of Loo, comm., x. 22. 
Mencius, Concluding note to text.

S

Shun, the emperor, comm., ix. 4.

T

‘ae Ki, the second emperor of the Shang dy- 
nasty, comm., i. 2.

Tang, the emperor, comm., ii. 1.

Tsing, the philosopher, concluding note to text: 
comm., vi. 3.

Ts‘in, the State of. comm., x. 14.

Ts‘oo, the State of, com., x. 12.

W

Wan, the king, comm., ili. 3. 
Y

Yaou, the emperor, comm., i. 3; ix. 4.

Yin dynasty, comm., x. 5.

Yin, an ancient officer mentioned in the She- 
king, comm., x. 4.

INDEX V.

OF SUBJECTS IN THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN.

A

Analects, quotations from the, iii.; xxviii. 5.

Ancestors, worship of, xviii, 2, 8; xix.

Antiquity, the regulations of, cannot be attested, 
xxviii. 5 ; xxix. 2. :

Archery, illustrative of the way of the superior 
man, xiv. 5.

Benevolence, to ‘be cherished in treading the 
path of duty, xx. 4, 5. 
Burial aud mourning, xviii, 3.

CArchery, illustrative of the way of the superior 
man, xiv. 5.

Benevolence, to ‘be cherished in treading the 
path of duty, xx. 4, 5. 
Burial aud mourning, xviii, 3.

C

Ceremonies, music, &c., can be ordered only by 
the emperor, xxviii, 2,3, 4.

Common men and women may carry into prac- 
tice the Mean in its simple elements, xii. 2, 4.

Completion of every thing effected by sincerity, 
xxv,

E

Emperor, certain exclusive prerogatives of the, 
xxviii. 2, 3, 4.

Emperor-sage, the, described, xxix.

Equilibrium, the mind in a state of, i. 4, 5.

Eulogium of Conf., xxx.; xxxi.; xxxii.

F

Fame of Conf. universal, xxxi. 4.

Filial picty, of Shun, xvii.—of king Woo, and 
the duke of Chow, xix.

Five duties of universal obligation, xx. 8.

Forcefulness, in its relation to the practice of 
the Mean, x. :

Four things to which Conf. had not attained,

Kili. 4. 
G

Government, easy to him who understands sa- 
erificial ceremonies, xix, C.- dependent on the

312 SUBJECTS IN THE DOCTRINE OF TIE MEAN. INDEX V.

character of the officers, and ultimately on 
that of the sovercign, xx.

II

Harmony. the mind in a state of, i. 4, 5.— com- 
bined with firmness, in the superior man, x, 
5

Heaven, rewarding filial picty in the case of 
Shun, and virtue in the case of Win, xvii.— 
Confucius the equal of, xxxi. 3.

Heaven and Earth, order of, dependent on the 
equilibrium and harmony of the human mind, 
i. 5.—the perfectly sincere man forms a ter- 
nion with, xxii.—Conf. compared to, xxx. 2.

I

Instruction, definition of, i. 1. 
Insubordination, the evil of, xxviii. : 
Intelligence, how connected with sincerity, xxi.

K

Knowledge of duties come by in three differ- 
ent ways, xx. 9.

Lamentation that the path of the Mean was 
untrodden, v. 
Law to himself, man a, xiii.

: M

Man has the law of the Mean in himself. xiii,Lamentation that the path of the Mean was 
untrodden, v. 
Law to himself, man a, xiii.

: M

Man has the law of the Mean in himself. xiii,

Mas, only the superior man can follow the, ii, 
l.—the rarity of the practice of the, iii. 
how it was that few were able to practise 
the, iv.—how Shun practised the, vi.—men's 
ignorance of the, shown in their conduct, vii. 
—how Hwuy held fast the course of the, viii. 
—the difficulty of attaining to the, ix.—on 
forcefulness in its relation to the, x:—only 
the sage can come up to tlie requirements of 
the, xi. 8. —the course of the, reaches far and 
wide, but yet is secret, xii—common men 
and women may practice tho, xii, 2.—orderly 
advauce in the practice of the, xv.—Conf. 
never swerved from the, xxxi. J.

Middle kingdom, Conf, fame overspreads the,

xxxi. 4. 
N

Nature, definition of, i. 1. 
Nine standard rules to be followed in the go- 
vernment of the empire, xx. 12, 13, 14, 15.

0

Odes, quotations from tbe, xii, 3; xiii. 2 ; xv. 2; 
xvi. 4 ; xvii. 4 ; xxvi ; xxvii. 7 ; xxix. 6 ; xxxiii, 
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

P

Pussions, harmony of the, i. 4.

Paru of duty, definition of. i. 1.—may not be 
left for an instant, i. 2.—is not far to seck, 
xiii.

Praise of Win and Woo, aud the duke of Chow, 
xviii.; xix.

Preparation necessary to success, xx. 16.

Principles of duty, have thgr root in the evi- 
denced will of Heaven, i. 1. —to be found in 
the nature of man, xiii.

Progress in the practice of the Mean, xv.

Propriety, the principle of, in relation to the 
path of duty, xx. 5.

R

. Reciprocity, the law of, xiii. 8, 4.

Righteousness, chiefly exercised in honouring 
the worthy, xx. 5.

Sacrifices, to spiritual beings, xvi. 3.—insti- 
tuted by Woo, and the duke of Chow, xviii. 
2. 3.—t0 Heaven and Earth, xix. 6.—to an- 
cestors, xviii, xix. .

Sage, n, only can come up to the requirements 
of the mean, xi. 3.—naturally and easily em- 
bodies the right way, xx. 18.—the glorious« 
path of, xxvii.—Conf. a perfect, xxxi. 1.Sage, n, only can come up to the requirements 
of the mean, xi. 3.—naturally and easily em- 
bodies the right way, xx. 18.—the glorious« 
path of, xxvii.—Conf. a perfect, xxxi. 1.

Seasons, Confucius compared to the four, xxx. 
2, 3.

Sceret watchfulness over himself characteristic 
of the superior man, i. 3.

Sclf-examination practised by the superior man, 
xxxiii. 2.

Sincerity, the outgoing of, cannot be repressed, 
xvi. 5.—the way of Heaven, xx. 17, 18.—how 
to be attained, xx. 19.—how connected with 
intelligence, xxi.—the most complete, neces- 
sary. to the full developement of the nature, 
xxii.—developement of, in those not naturally 
possessed of it, xxiii.—when entire, can fore- 
know, xxiv.—the completion of every thing 
effected by, xxv.—the possessor of entire, is 
the co-equal of Heaven and Earth, and is an 
infinite, and an independent being, —a God, 
xxvi; xxxii. 1.

Singleness, necessary to the practice of the rela- 
tive duties, xx. 8.—necessary to the practice 
of government, xx. 15, 17.--of king Wän's 
virtue, xxvi. 10.

Sovereign, a, must not neglect personal and re- 
lative duties, xx. 7. y

Spirit, the perfectly sincere man is like a, 
xxiv. .

Spiritual beings, the operation and influence of, 
xvi—the emperor-sage presents himself be- 
fore, without any doubts, xxix. 3, 4,

Steps in the practice of the Mean, xv.

Superior man is cautious, and watchful over 
himself, i. 2, 5.—only can follow the Mean, ii. 
2.—combines harmony with firmness, x. 5.— 
tho way of, is far-reaching and yet sceret, xii. 
—distinguished by entire sincerity, xiii, 4.— 
in every variety of situation pursues the 
Mean, and fnds his rule in himself, xiv.— 
pursue$ his course with determination, xx. 
20. 21.—enudenvours to attain to the glorious 
path of the sage, xxvii. 6, 7,— prefers con- 
cealment of his virtue, while the mean man 
see ks notoriety, xxxiii, 1,

íl

‘Ke, 4 smod State in which sacrifices were main-íl

‘Ke, 4 smod State in which sacrifices were main-

INDEX VL ' SUBJECTS IN THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN. 313 
T Three hundred rules of ceremony. and three 
thousand rules of demeanour, xxvii. 3. 
Three kings, the;founders of the three’ dynas- |. : V i 
tics; xxix. ð. Virtue in its highest degree and influence,

Three virtues, wherewith the relative duties xxxiii. 4, 5, 6. 
B isto Mi] 
nre practised, xx. S. Virtuous course, the éommencement and com-

Three things, important to a sovereign, xxix. 1. pletion of a, xxxiii.

——— Ü

INDEX VI.

OF PROPER NAMES IN THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN,

C PE M 8

* P 4 2 22 * y 
Ching, the philosopher, Zntroductory note. Shun, the emperor, vi; xvii. 1; xxx. I. . 
Chow dyunsty, xxviii. 5. Sung, n state in which sacrifices were main-

x

Chow, the duke of, xviii. 3; xix. tained to the emperors of the Yin dynasty, 
Chung-ne, designation of Conf., ii. 1; xxx. I. xxvn, o. 
Confucian school, Zutrodactory note. + T

G pe, the luke, Tan-foo, who received from

_ Gne, thè duke of Loo, xx. 1. Woo the title of king, xviii. 2, 3.

Tsze-loo, a disciple of Conf., x. 1. 
II : "I'sze-sze,, Introductory note . concludinj! notes to 
; ` . chapters, i. xii; xxi xxxiii, 
Hen dynasty, xxviii. 5. `: ; . 
Hw, the name of a mountain, xxvi. 9. ` W 
wuy, à disciple of Conf., viii. à ! 2n 2 
| Win, the king, xvii. 4 ; xviii; xx. 2: xxvi. 10:

/ : K xxx. I.

i Wou, the King, viii; xix.; xx. 2: xxx. 1.

tained to the emperors of the Hen dynasty, Y 
1 xxviii. 5. i : ` « 
de > 4; AY | * 
z a i ES ho CASES frum Woo the X aod, the-envjóror, E. 4. 
: 85 27 Oe Yin dynasty, xxyiii. 5. 1 
; M Volt, the name of a mountain, xxvi, 9. 
‘ : j | Yung, a distinguished scholar, A.D. 1064—1085, 
Mencius, Introductory note. Concluding note to ch. i,

INTENDED ALSO TO HELP

A. stands for Analects; G.L.t, for The Great Learning, text; 
mentary; D.M., jor The Doctrine of the Mean,

yh 
yi

—

san

E

shang

chang rals.

INDEX VIL

OF CHINESE CIIARACTERS AND PIIRASES ;A. stands for Analects; G.L.t, for The Great Learning, text; 
mentary; D.M., jor The Doctrine of the Mean,

yh 
yi

—

san

E

shang

chang rals.

INDEX VIL

OF CHINESE CIIARACTERS AND PIIRASES ;

TOWARDS THE FORMATION OF

A DICTIONARY AND COXCORDANCE

FOR TIIE CLASSICS,

C. L. c., for The Great Learning, come

In the references to the Analects, books. are

separated by a colon, und chapters of the sume book by a semicolon.

TILE lst RADICAL -—.

(1) 5 A., II. i.: IV. vi.

2; xviii, 2: VI. ix. xxii: et alibi, sepe. G. L. 
€,x.13. D. M., viii; ; Ni. 4; xxvi. 7, 9. (2) 
One and the same. DAM., xvi.; xd (3) 
Siugleness,—sincerity. D. M., xx. 8, 15. 
(4)Aunity. A., IV. xv. 1: XV. ii. (5) 
Adverbially, by one effort. D. M., xx. 
20. (6) Asa verb, to unite in one. A.,

XIV. xvii, 2. (7) — N., the one 
man, a designation of the emperor. A., 
XX. i. 5. G. L. o., ix. 3. (8) —...—-, 
partly, now. . now. A., XIV. xviii. 2.

Seven. A., II. iv. 6: XI. xxv. 5, 7, 10; 
XIII. xxix: XIV. xl.

(1) Three. A., I. xi: II. ii.; iv. 2: III. 
ii: ct alibi, sepe. D.M., xviii. 3; xx. 8, 11; 
xxvii. 3; xxix. 1. (2) Adverbially, 
thrice. A,, V. xviii. 1: VIII. i.: X. xviii. 2.

Into three parts. A., VIII. xx. 4. But ==

Te A., I. iv., on three points. (3) —,

— . ye, disciples. A., III. xxiv.: 
Vil. xxiii; ] IX. xi. 8: XI. x. 3; XVII. iv. 
4. (4) — —. „ three kings; ie. the 
founders of the three great dynasties. D. 
M., xxix. 3. (5) = Fh. the name of a 
tower. A., III. æxii. 2. (6) N. A, 
XVIII. ix. 2, the band-master at the 
third meal.

Up. 3d tone. Thrice. A., V. XIX.: XI. 
ve XVIII. ii.

(I) IIe, she, it, this, that, which is 
above, with the corresponding plu- 
A., I. ii. 1; III. xxvi: et sepius. 
G. L. C., x. 1, 2, 20. D.M, xiv. 3; 
etal, (2) Adverbially upwards, A.

XIV. xxiv. xxxvii. 2. (In these instances 
some tone it low. 20 tone). D.M, xviii.

3; xxx. 1. (3) XE in or on the 
above of.... A., VI. vii: IX. xvi. D. M.,XIV. xxiv. xxxvii. 2. (In these instances 
some tone it low. 20 tone). D.M, xviii.

3; xxx. 1. (3) XE in or on the 
above of.... A., VI. vii: IX. xvi. D. M.,

xvi. 3. (4) ER v. above, below, in op- 
position, applied to heaven and earth. A.,

VII. x. DM, xi. 3. (5) H. L. .

* 
shang 
chang

^ 
hea 
hsia

chang

xX

puh 
pu

H.

ts‘eay 
eh‘ich

it 
she 
shih

HR the grass, when the wind is upon it.

„XII. xix. (0) Lif. God, the most 
uii God. G. L. c., x. 5. D. Ml., xix. 6.

Up. 2d tone.“ To ascend ; proceeding up-

wards, utr. A., VI. xix.; VII. vii.

Anciently, upper 2d tone. Ile shie, it,

this, that, which is below, with the cor- 
responding plurals; both positive, and 
superlative. A., IX. iii. 2: X. ii. 1: XVI. 
ix. G. L. G., x. 2, 20. D.M., xiv. 3; xix.

4; xx. 6,17; xxix. 2. (2) J. P. sco 
on BS (3) A or v, in or 
on the beneath of. . . A., XII. xxii. 1:

XVII. xi. 1. () X Ys, the world, 
the empire. A., III. xi.; peel IV. x.: 
ctal G. I. r. 4, B: C, viii, I; ix. 4; x. 1, 
4. D. I., i. 4; X. i.: etal (5) Oceurs in

the proper name Ji U aS ni A., XV. 
xiii: XVIII. ii.; viii. 1, 3. 
A verb, low. 3d tone, To descend. A,

III. vii: V. xiv: et al. (2) VJ P. 
downwards. A., VI. xix. (3) T ^ 
to humble one’s-self to others. A., XII. 
xx. 5

* A au old man. A. XVIII. vii. 1.

Not. Passim.

M oreover; and moreover. A., II. iii. 2; 
VI. iv.: VII. xv: VIII. xi; xiii, 3: IX. 
xi. 3: XI. xxv; 4: XVI. i. 4, 17: XVIII. 
vi. 3. D. M., xv. 2; xxvi. 7.

(1) Au age, & generation. A., II.

xxiii, I. 2: VI. xiv: XIII. xii: XVI. 
i. 8; ji. 1; ii. D. M., XL i; xxviii. 
1! xxix, 3, 4. (2) To all ages. D.M,

xxix. 5. (3) i {If =after death. A., 
XV. xix. G. L. o., iii. 5. (4) EU li.

interrupted generations; ., famitice

|

INQEN VIL

Kec 
ch iu

1 
ping

* 
ko

rH

ch ung

r?

chung

nae 
nai 
A 
kew 
chiuinterrupted generations; ., famitice

|

INQEN VIL

Kec 
ch iu

1 
ping

* 
ko

rH

ch ung

r?

chung

nae 
nai 
A 
kew 
chiu

whose liue of succession has heen broken. 
A. XX. i. 8. D. M., xx. 14. (5) Tue 
world. A., XIV. xxxiv.: XVIII. vi. 3. 
G. L. c., xi. 3. (6) {It N. as a proper 
name. A., XIV. ix.

(1) A hilloek, A. XIX. xx. (2) The

name of Confucius. Used by himself, 
A., V. xxviii. VIL xxiii. xxx. 3; xxxiv. 
et al. D. XI., xlii. 4. Applied to him 
contemptuously. A., XIV. xxxiv. 1: 
XVIII. vi. 2, 3. 
surname. A., V. xxi. x

Properly written 1. Together, along- 
side. A., XIV. xlvii. 2: XIX. xvi. G. 
L. o., x. 22. D. M., xxx. 3,

TIE 2» RADICAL. |.

— A N. one man. G. L. o., x. 18.

The middle. (1) Hf, and ZE or .

, in, in the midst of. A., II. xviii. 2: 
V. i, 1; VIL xve X. xvii. 2: XV. xxis 
XVI. i. 4, 5. (2) The heart. G. L. o., vi. 
2. (3) The Mean. A., VI. xxvii: XX. 
i. 1. D. I., i 4, 5; ii. 1, 2: et passim. (4)

rH Es. the Middle kingdom, China. 
G.L.c., x. 15. D. M. xxxi. 4. (5) HAS, 
midway, halfway, A., VI, x. (0 N A 
mediocre men. A., VI. xix. (7) HH PY,

to stand in the middle of the gateway, 
A., X. iv. 2. (8) 1T to walk in 
the Mean, to act entirely right, A., XIII, 
xxi. Comp. D. M., xxxi, I. (9). "m m. 
the name of a place. A., XVII. vii. 2.

Up. 3d tone. To hit the mark; hitting

the mark; exact. A., XI. xiii. 3; xviii, 
2: XIII. iii, 6: XVIII. viii. 3, 4. G. U.. 
c., ix. 2. DM, i. 4; xx. 18.

TIE 30 RADICAL, y. 
(1) To count as chief or principal. A.,

I. viii, 21 UL xvi.: IX. xxiv.: XII. x, 
(2) A master, president. A., XVI. i. 4.

THE 4 u RADICAL J.

To be. fE 75. . or Bd, is it 
not. As VI. i. 3: XIV. xxxiv.l: XVI. 
i, 3.

Long, for along time. A., III. xxiv.: 
IV. ii.: et al. D.M, iii; xxvi. 2, 4, à, 8. 
After a long time. A., V. xvi,

(1) A particle of interrogation. Found 
alove; preceded by another interrog, 
part. ; prec. by P A., I. i.; iv.: II. 
vii; vii; xvii; VI. xxviii: VII. xiv. i. 2:

(3) Part of a double :(1) A particle of interrogation. Found 
alove; preceded by another interrog, 
part. ; prec. by P A., I. i.; iv.: II. 
vii; vii; xvii; VI. xxviii: VII. xiv. i. 2:

(3) Part of a double :

CHINESE CHARACTERS

AND PHRASES. 2

et al, che. G. L. c., iil, 2. (2) A particle 
of exclamation. A., VI. v.: VIII. xviii, 
5; xix. 1, 2: IX. xx. : c al D. M., xvi. 3; 
xxvii. 2. Foll, by n giving emphasis, 
A., III. xiv: VIL xxix.:etal. Prec. by zb. 
A., XII. xxii. 5: XIV. xlii, 1, 2. (3) 
Partly interrog., partly exclam. In this 
usage it is sometimes preceded by n 
Ay; it is often prec. by H.; and by 2 
immed. before it. A., II. xxi. 2: III. vii. 
xi: IV. vi. 2: V. xviii. 1, 2: et al, sape, 
G. L. c., iv. 1; vi. 3. D. A,, lii; xv. 2; xvi, 
2; xviii. 2; xix. 2: et al. (4) As a pre- 
position, after verbs and adjectives. in, 
to, Ke. A., I. x. 2: II. xvi: VIII. iv. 8; 
XVIII. x; et al, sepe. G. L. O., ix. 4; x. 
6. D. XI., i. 2; vii; xiv. 1, 2, 5: et al., se. 
(5) Than, in comparison. A., XI. xxv. 2:

XVII. xxii: XIX. xxv. D. XI, i. d, . 
P. (6) ER P, how. A, IV. v. 2. 
(7) Observe E f P,. A., VI. Xii.

and . IE M2, XI. xviii. 1. 
aN A 
,Up. 1st tone. Joined with fA. An 
exclamation, D. M., xxvi. 10.

(1) Of. A., I. ii. 2; v.; xi. L: et passim, 
G. L. r., 1, 4; c, iii. 1: et passim, D. X. 
ii, 2; vii: et passim, In the construct

state, the regent follows the Z and the

regimen precedes, They may bo respec- 
tively a nown, a phrase, or a larger 
clause. (2) Him, her, it, them. A, T. 
vii: XIV. xviii, 1; xix. 2: ef passim. So, 
in G. L., and D.M. (3) It is often difficult 
to find the antecedent to „ and it

scems merely to give a substantive force 
to the verb. A, II, xiii: III. xxiii: 
XVII. ix. 6: XV.2, 8: et sope. D. M., xx,

18, 19, 90:et %. (4) AR xL G. L. o, 
viii. 2; x. 13, as in (2), but TH Z and 
fit Pos are more like our use of imper- 
sonal verbs. G. L. o., ix. 1. A., IV. vi. 3. 
(8) Where Z comes in u sentence with 
de it is generally transposed. G. L. r., 7.A., IV. vi. 8:etal. So. BE 227 A A,

D. M., vii.: / /. All negative adverbs 
seem to exert this attractive force. (6)

[d Rl, it is called. DM, i. 1. G. Lo. 
vil AQXVLxi2:etal E I is 
different, and cames under (2). So, BE

T. A. XIX, xxiii. 2. (7) Obs, the idiom 
iu A., VI. iii. 8: XI. vii. 1, 2; xxv. 11:

xvuLii (8) X ju. bow. A, 
III. xix: XI. xix. : et d. (9) OE Z, 
died with, or for, him. A., XIV, xvii, 1,

Ed

shing carriages, boats.

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

ao EZ HE, An XIV. xlii.8, (11) 
=}, in regard to. G. L. O., viii. 1. (12) 
=F, this, G. L. O., ix, 6. (18) As a

verh. To go, or come, to. A., V. xviii. 2: 
XIII. xix: et al (14) Part of a man's 
name. A. VI. xiii.

To mount, to ride; spoken of itara, 
A, V. vi: VI. iii. 2:

ch'eng XV. x. 2; xxv.

He

shing v.: V. vii. 2, 3: et al. 
cheng A team of 4 horses.

kew 
chiu

7L

kew 
chi 
AE 
Kein 
chi

t

a 
Şeh

Low. 3d tone, (1) A carriage. A., I. 
G. L.o., x. 22 (2)

A., V. xviii. 2. 
THE 5ru RADICAL, E.

Nine. A., VI. iii. 3: VIII. xxi, 3: XVI. 
JL [OR the nine rude tribes on the

east, A., IV. xiv. JL £t. the nine 
standard rules of govt. D. M., xx. 12, 15.

Up. Ist tone. To collect. A., XIV. 
xvii. 2.

To beg. A., V. xxiii,east, A., IV. xiv. JL £t. the nine 
standard rules of govt. D. M., xx. 12, 15.

Up. Ist tone. To collect. A., XIV. 
xvii. 2.

To beg. A., V. xxiii,

(1) A particle used at the end of sen- 
tences. Sometimes it might be dispensed 
with, and at others it is felt to be neces- 
Sary, not only to the euphony and strength 
of the style, but also to give clearness 
and definiteness to the meaning. A,, I. 
ji. 1; viii, 2: X. i.; ii. 1, 2 ; lii. 1, 2, 3, 4, 
b: et, passim. So also in G. L., and D.M. 
It closes also the diff. clauses in a long 
predicate, where we might use the“; in 
English. D.M., xxv. 8: etal (2) It is 
used after proper names, after some ad- 
verbs, and after a clause, in the first 
member of a sentence, and may be con- 
strued asas fo, the Latin quoad. A., T. 
x. J, 2; xv. 8: VII. xxv. 1: XI. vi; xii. 
3; xiv. 2; xv. xvi. 1; xvii. 1, 2, 3, 4: et 
pussim. So, in G.L, and D.M. In 
these cases it is followed at the end of 
the sentence, by another particle, —itsolt,

ES M · P. (8) As correlate of E,

in explanation of terms. G. L. c., iii +; 
vi. 1; x. 7. D. M., xxv. A. III. viii. 3: 
XII. xvii: et ul, sue. (4) At the end of

sentences, we find „ sometimes 
preceded by A sometimes not, In

these cases, may often be explained

as imparting a participial or adjective 
power to other characters, but not so al- 
ways. A., V. xxvi; VI. ii.: VIL xix: et

sabe. So, in G.L, and D.M. (5) th,

E in the first inember of a sentence,

resuming a previous word, and followed 
by an explanation or account of it. A. 
J. ji. 2. J). M., i. 2, 4: c ., sape (lid

INDEX VII.

P, interrog. A., III. xxii. 1: V. xvii: 
VI. xxv. (7) As a final, it appears Él. 
followed by other particles — 44, Bil

WA UTE WH ab:

(1) To confound; unregulated; con- 
fusion, insurrection. A., VII. xx.: VIII. 
li.; x.; xiii. 2: X. viii.4: XV. xxvi.: XVII. 
viii, 3; xviii; xxii: XVIII. vii. 5. 4E 
B , to raise 1 or insurrection,(1) To confound; unregulated; con- 
fusion, insurrection. A., VII. xx.: VIII. 
li.; x.; xiii. 2: X. viii.4: XV. xxvi.: XVII. 
viii, 3; xviii; xxii: XVIII. vii. 5. 4E 
B , to raise 1 or insurrection,

A., I. ii. 1. G. L. r., 7: c., ix. 3. D. M., xx. 
14. (2) To put in oilers uble to govern. 
A., VIII. xx. (3) The name ofa c certain 
part ina SERE service. A., VIII. xv.

THE € eru RADICAL. ] :

(1) I, me my. A., III. viii, 3: VI.

xxvl.; viii. 8: et /. D. M., vii; xxxiii. 6. 
(2) Name of a aome of Conf. A., V. 
ix. 1, 2: XVIL xxi.

(1) An affair, pon ; business, A., I. 
v.; xiv.: III. viii. 2; xv: XV. j. 1: et al, 
sepe, G. L. r., 3: C., ix. 3; x. 20. D.M, 
xix, 2; xx. 16. „ having trouble- 
some affairs. A. II viii. Having an af- 
fair wid, A., XVI. i. 2. E H. to 
pursue business. A., VIII. v.: XVII. i. 
2. xL 9L to manage business, A., XIII.

xvii. (2) Labours; the resulte of labour, 
A., XII. xxi. 82 XV. ix: XIN. vii. D. 
M. xx. HM. (3) To serve. A. IX. xv.

D.M., xix. 4: et passim, (4) iy EH

H 2 is probably N NE. 
what difficulty has he in practising be-

nevolence? so that it may be classed un- 
der (I). A. VI. xxxiii. 1.

THE Tru RADICAL. —.

(1) Two. 
2: et al. (2)

In, on, to, from. 
XX. i. 3: f/. G. L. o., iii. 2: 
M., xvii. 4: et al.

(1) Says, saying; gen., in quotations, 
A., II. xxi, 2: IX. vi. 4: XIV. xliii. 1: 
XIX. ii. vin. 4. ER Zs often in d. 
L., and D.M. Observe A., XVIL vi. 
(2) Closing a sentence, and apparently 
s=su. A., VII. xviii. 2 ; xxxiii.

Five. D. M, xx 8. A., IL iv. 1, 4: 
XX. ii. 1: et al.

A., III. xiv.; XII. vii. 3; ix.

Lm see — (3). 
A., II. iv. 1; xxi, 2: 
et al. D.

I. Spy, the name of a village. A., 
Vil. xxviii.

' INPEX VII.

Jt

tsing

ehing

dii

wang

A well, A., VI. xxiv. 1.

Up. 3d tone. Frequently. A., XVII.

i ond fi. =the band-master at the second 
meal A., XVIII. ix. 2. :

THE sr RADICAL, L.' INPEX VII.

Jt

tsing

ehing

dii

wang

A well, A., VI. xxiv. 1.

Up. 3d tone. Frequently. A., XVII.

i ond fi. =the band-master at the second 
meal A., XVIII. ix. 2. :

THE sr RADICAL, L.

(1) The dead. D.M., xix. 5; xx. 2. 
(2) To perish, to go to ruin. DM. xxiv; 
xxxiii. 1. (3) To cause to perish. A. 
VI. viii. (4) Notat home. A., XVII. i.

1. T Na fugitive. G. L. c., x. 12.

Used as fit. not having, being without. 
A., III. v.: VI. ii.: VII. xxv. 3: XI. vi: 
XII. v. 1: XV. xxv: XVII. xvi. 1: XIX. 
ii; v.

ju pi y? a disciple of Conf. A, XVI. Jur 
ean HT 
I xiii. 1,5. The same as f$. tE 
* (1) Intercourse, to have intercourse shih 
keaou with. A., I. iv.; vii; V. xvi: XIX. iii. l 
chino G. L. b., iii. 3. D. M., xx. 8. (2) To give, 
ht to bestow. G. L. C., x. 2. ta 
ZR Also; even then. A, I. xii, 2; xiii: HI, 
f NEN 3 i GI N 
yh — xxii 3: V. xi; xxiv: et sape, G. I. O., V 
y! iv 9.. ii. 2 in 
iv. 9, 13, 22. D. M., xii. 2: et al. AR pM 
aes P, is it not? But the meaning of 4& 
also may often be brought out. A., Li. iae 
1, 2, 3: XX. ii. 3: et al. tai

AX. To offer, present. A., X. v. 2.

heang

hsiung T

ling

A

Jin 
jéu

THE orn RADICAL. A.

(1) A man. other men, man,=human-

ity. A, I. i. 8; iv.; v.; x. 2: c passim. So, 
in G. L., and D. M. (2) As opposed to

R. meaning officers. D. I., xvii. 4. A.,

XI. xxiv. 3. (3) Ta A playing the

man, the style of man. A., E. ii.: VIII. 
xviii, 2. Obs. A AE, NX, XF. 
A. Gio, ii. 3. ( pp A, the 
mean man, opp..to z Y^ passim, (8)

En N, the sage. A, VIL xxv: XVI. 
viii. 1, 2: XIX, xii. 2. D.M, xii. 2; xvii. 
1; xx. 18; xxvii. 1; xxix. 8, 4. (6) PH 
Jo disciples. A., IV. xv. 2: VII. xxviii. 
1: et al. (7) . A all tl e people, the | 
masses, A., XVI. ii. 3. G. L. v. 6. D. II.,

xvii, 3. (8) fe A the good man.

,

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

317

A. VIL, xxvi 2: etal. (9) N N. the 
complete man, A., XIV. xiii, (10) it

N. a woman. A., VIII. XX. 3. (11)

X A the designation of the wife of,

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

317

A. VIL, xxvi 2: etal. (9) N N. the 
complete man, A., XIV. xiii, (10) it

N. a woman. A., VIII. XX. 3. (11)

X A the designation of the wife of

the prince of a State. A. XVI xiv. 
(13) Used in designations of officers, like

our word man in huntsman, dj N.

the border-warden, A., III. xxiv, 1T

* the manager of foreign intercourse. 
A., XIV. ix.

Is found passim, (1) Benevolence. (2) 
Perfect virtue.

(1) Now; the present, modern, time. 
Sepe. (2) Used logically, by way of in- 
ference. A., XI. xxiii. 1: XVI. i, 8, 12. 
D. FI., xxvi. 9.

According as. A., XI. xiii, 2.

To take—to be in—office, A., V. 5; 
xviii.: XV. vi, 2: XVII. i. 2: XVIII. vii. 
5: XIX. xiii.

Other, another, A., V. xviii, 2: X. xi. 
1: XVI. xiii, 3: XIX. xviii; xxiv. 
G.L.c., x. 13.

A measure of eight cubits, 
xxiii. 3.

A., XIX.

(1) Instead of, alternate, D. M., xxx.

2, (2) A dynasty. ft. the three

dynasties ;—11en, Shang, and Chow. A.,

Hi. xiv, — AK. A., XV. xxiv. 2. 
(1) To order. A., XIII. v: XX, ii. 3.

G. L. o., ix. 4. (2) Excellent. D. M., xvii. 
4. (3) Specious, insinuating. A., I. iii:

V. xxiv, (4) “> Fr, designa, of the 
chief minister of ‘I's‘oo. A., V. xviii. 1. 
(D. To do. A., II. x. 1. Rarely found

in this sense. 7 A., XI. xxv. 3. (2) By, 
with. according to, and perhaps other 
English prepositions. G.L.c., ix. 5. D. Al., 
xviii 3; xx. 4. A., J. v.: II. i.; iii. 1, 2;

v. 3: et passin. To this belong f JA. 
therefore, that by which ; Rt Jy. hence; 
4d JA. whereby ;—whicli are found 
passin. (3) To take. This use is analo-

gous to the preced., but the 94 precedes

the verb, and is often followed by it, 
without an intervening ol ject, as in

week opis ge. PEAS i 
VA VI Hil, ee. pA Fi, to take 
to be. to consider, to be considered. Ex- 
amples occur passin. We may refer to 
: J .

it the use of 9 sometimes at the 
beginning of a sentence, considering,

— 
—

318 CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES. INDEX VH.it the use of 9 sometimes at the 
beginning of a sentence, considering,

— 
—

318 CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES. INDEX VH.

take it that. (4) To; so as to. G. L. r., 
6: C., x. 18. D. XI., x. 3; xxvii. 6. 7; xxix. 
3, 4, 6. A., II. ii; ix : III. xxiii: VII. 
1, 2; et passim. Sometimes we might 
translate in these cases by —and thereby.

But not so in such cases as WB. a

E ATT Ke. (5) It is often found 
after T. H LA. may, may be. (6)

To use, to be used. A, III. xxi,: X. xvi. 
2: XIII. xiv: XVIII. x. (7) The follow- 
ing instances are peculiar. G. L.., iii. 
5. D. M., xxxiii. 6. A., XIV. xiv. 2: 
XV. xxx.: XIX. xxv. 4: XX. i. 3.

ö fü To look up to A., IX. x. 1: XIX, xxi. 
gang

Low. 1st tone, JE f£ a man's name, 
Jin A., XVI. i. 6. 
jén

(1) An office, a charge, A., VIII. vii. 
Jin 1,2. D. XI., xx. 14. (2) To repose trust 
zen in. A., XVII. vi. 1: XX. i. 9.

E — (1) To attack by imperial authority. 
a A., XVI. i. 1. 4; ii. 1. (2) To boast. A., 
fa V. xxv. 3: VI. xiii: XIV. ii. 1. (3) To

cut down, or out. D.M, xiii. 2. G. L. C.,

x. 22. 
Tk 4k te simple and upright. G.L.c., 
new =x. 15.

hsiu 
{H qt Fr, the minister of the great T'ang. 
e A., XII. xxii. 6.

th To lie at the bottom. D. M., xxxiii. 2.

p

fu

ift The second of three; the second of 
^

chung brothers. Enters very commonly into 
designations, as in that of Confucius. 
D. M., ii.; xxx. A., XIX. xxii; xxiii; 
xxiv.; xxv. Of others. VI. i. 2, 3; iv: XL 
ji. 2: XII. ii.: XIII. ii — III. xxii. 1, 2, 3: 
XIV. x. 3; xvii. 1, 2: xviii, 1, 2.—V. xvi. 
—V, xvii: X V.'xiiL.—XIV. xiii; xv.— 
XIV. xx. 2.— XVIII. viii. 1, 4.—XVIII. 
xi. A surname. A, VI. vie XI. xxiii: 
XVIII. vi.

Af The eldest of brothers. Enters into

p^ designations. A., XVI. xiii: XVII. x.—

pi XIV. xxvi: XV. vi. 2.—II. vi: V. vii.— 
V. xxi: VII. ix. 2: XVI. xii: XVIII. 
viii.— VI. i. 2.—XVIII. xi. óis,—XI1V. 
xxxviii: XIX. xxiii. 2.—VIII. i. 1.—VI. 
viii: XI. dH. 2. A surname. A., XIV. x.&. A^ fH. see A. 
dp] Like to, as. A., X. l. 1; iv. 8, 4. D. M., 
aie xv. 5. 
820 1 
T. Position, status. A., IV. xiv.: X. iv, 3, 
wel 5: et al. DM, XIV. 1,8; er d. FEM

A E Heaven and Earth get their 
Places. D. M., i. 5.

TK

ning

h

peih 
pi

tft

yih 
yi

Pa

sze 
shih

Da

sze 
shih

kue 
lai

e 
Idleness. A., XVI. v.

To aid. D. M., xvii, 4.

What, what kind of, how. A., II. v. 3; 
vii; xv. xxii. 1: XVII. v. 2; ix.; xix. 2, 
3: et sape. G. 1. O., vi. 2. (2) an iq, 
generally with Z between. What, im- 
plying difficulty, indignation, or surprise. 
Other words are found, also between the 
an and ^. and then the phrase=what 
has...... to do with...... ? G. L. c., x. 22. 
A., III. xviii: IX. v. 2; xiii. 2; xxiii: et

sape, (3) 4nf An, what as? what do

you think of? how can it be said? A, 
I. xv. 1: V. iii; xvii. 1, 2: et sepe. (4) 
nf . gen., but not always, will have 
no difficulty. A., VI. vi: VII. ii: XIII.

Xii. er al. (5) uf fd. gen. why. A.,

VI. xxiv: IX. xv.: XIV. xxvi, 2; xxiv.: 
et al.

(1) To make, produce. G. L. o., ix. 8. 
A., I. ii. 2: XI. xiii. 2. To do. A., VII. 
xxvii, (2) To lay the foundation of, to 
be a maker or author. A., VII. i. DM., 
xviii. 1. (3) To make, to be. A., XIII. 
xxii. (4) To be begun. A., III. xxiii. 
(5) To rise, arise. A., IX. ix: X. xvi. 4; 
xviii, 2: XI. xxv. 7: XIV. xl.

Glib-tongued. A., V. iv. 1,2: VI. xiv.: 
XI. xxiv, 4: XIV. xxxiv. 1, 2: XV. x. 6: 
XVI. ir.

A surname, A., XVII. vii, 1, 2,

A row of pantomimes. A, III. i.

Up. 3d tone. To send on a mission; to 
be commissioned. A., VI. iii. 1: XIII. v.; 
xx: XIV. xxvi. 1, 2.

Up. 2d tone. (1) To cause. G. L. c., iv, 
D. M., xvi. B. A., II. xx: HE xxi: XVIII. 
vi. 1; vii. 4; X.: et . (2) To employ; to 
be employed. G. L. O., x. 22. D. M., xx. 
14. A., V. vli. 2, 3, 4: VI. vi; vii: et al 
(3) To treat, behave to. G. L. c., ix. 1; 
X. 2. A, II. xix: V. xv. (4) Supposing 
that. A., VIII. xi.

To accord with. D. M., xi. 3. A., VIL

vi. 3.To accord with. D. M., xi. 3. A., VIL

vi. 3.

(1) To come. A., I. i. 2: et al. (2) To 
encourage, induce to come. D.M. xx. 
12. 18. A. xvi. i. II, 12: XIX. xxv. 4. 
(3) Coming, future. A., IX. xxii: XVIII. 
v.: J. xv. 3.

INDEN VII.

fiL Straightforward, bold. iL (UR A.,

kun X. ii. l: XI. xii. 1.

t To be by, in attendance on. A., V. 
„% xxvo X. xii. 2: XI. xii. 15 xxv. 1: XVI.

shih vi.

Afi} Stupid. A. VIII. xvi. 
Cung s

To contemn; be contemned. A., XVI.

vii. 2: XVIT. vi.

n

woo 
wn 
4p (1) 5 . precise. A., X. i. 2. (2) 
pen [ti E with specious airs, A., XVI. 
ien BH AYP 1 E 
iv. t 
AK To wear at the girdle, A., X. vi. 8. 
pet 
T'E To watch over, preserve, protect. G. 
pem Ta b. ix. 2; x. 13. P. I. xvii. 1, 4; xviij. 
pao  2:xxvii. 7. (2) To undertake, be secu- 
rity for. A., VII. xxviii. 2. 
43 (1) Sincere, sincerity ; to believe, to be 
sin — believed in. A., I. iv.; v.; vi; viii. 2: et 
hsin sepe. G. L. C., iii. 3; x. 17. D.M, xx. 14.

17; xxix. 2; xxxi. 3; xxxiii. 3. (2) An 
agreement. A, I. xiii. (2) Truly, true. 
A., XII. xi, 8: XIV, xiv 1. (4) fis 
2. to show them sincerity. A., V. 
xxv. 4.

EX Re. the "princes, a prince, of the 
empire. PD. I., xviii. 3; xx. 13, 13, 14. 
A., XI. xxvii. 1: XIV. xvii. 2; xviii. 2: 
XVI. ii. 
^H A vessel used in sacrifice. A., XV. i. 1. 
(soo

B

how 
hou

tsu

TE To wait for, D.M., xiv. 4; xxix, 3, 4, 
sz A., X. xiii. 4: XI. xxv. 5.

87

4H. All of two or more. A., XIV. vi,

keu

chit

fà To grant, allow. G. L. o., x. 13,

pe

pei * 
1 (1) To act contrary to, be insubordi- 
pei nate. GL. C., X. I. D. I., xxvii. 7. (2)

54 Imprópriety. A., VIII. iv. 3.

{í wf () To incline on one side, D.M., x. 5. 
e — (2) To depend on. D.M, xxxii. 1. (3) 
| — To be close by, attached to. A, XV. v. 3.

Wearied. A., VII. ii; xxxiii: et al. 
ceuen 
chiian \

18 To lend. A., XV. xxv.

t 
chieh

Ait (1) Principles of righteous conduct. 
t DOM, xxvi 3. A., XVIII. viii 3. (2)

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES,

31918 To lend. A., XV. xxv.

t 
chieh

Ait (1) Principles of righteous conduct. 
t DOM, xxvi 3. A., XVIII. viii 3. (2)

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES,

319

Degrees, as of comparison. D.M., xxxiii. 
6. (3) The invariable relations of so- 
ciety. A., XVIII. vii. 5.

7 Dimples. A., III, viii. 1.

seen

chien

ili d) To bend. or lie, down. A., XIII.

yen xix. (2) Name of one of Conf. disciples. 
A., VI. XIi.: XVII. iv. 3, 4.

Tig Partial, perverse. A., IX. xxx. 1.

preen

pien

{BR To approach to. D.M. xxxiii. 4.

kih

ko 7

4H (RES, urgent. A., XIII. xxviii.

sie

szü

ffij Mew A,, VIII. ü. 2.

tow

ton

Al] By the side. A,, VII. ix. XI. xü.

tsih

ts

To hand down, as a teacher, 
chen xij. 2. Observe A, I. iv.

A., XIX.

chan 
Falling. D. II., xvii. 3. 
ing l 
ching 
52 To disgrace. G. L. c., x. 4. 
luh 
lu 
Ait All-complete, equal to every service, 
pe A., XIII. xxv; XVIII. x.

G To hurt, to be hurtfully excessive. A.,

shang III. xx.: XIX. xxiv. A f if, what 
harm is there in that? A., XI. xxv. 7. 
BE To act as driver of a carriage. A.,

ph XIII. ix. 7. 
po

1j]

heen 
chien

Be 
seen 
hsien

Dignified. G.L.c., iii. 4.

A man’s name. A., XIV, xix,

To judge, calculate. A., XI. xviii. 2: 
XIX. xxxiii.

Parsimonious, thrifty, A., TIT. iv. 3: 
xxii. 2: VII. xxv. IX. iii. 1.

m 
kien 
chien 
fn 
ien

To ruin, overturn, G. L. c., ix. 8.

320 CHINESE CHARACTERS 
tie A scholar. A., VI. xi.

joo

ju

S (1) Deportment, G. L. o., ix. 8. (2) 
GLc,x5. (3) I fH. 
rules of ceremony. Jk fk. rules of

deportment. D. M., xxvii.3. G. L. b., iii. 
4. (4) The name of a place. A., III. 
xxiv.

Abundant, more than adequate.

Example.

A.,

Au XIV. xii; XIX, xiii, Té . D.M., 
xxvii. 3. -

ae Certain ceremonies to expel evil influ-

no ences. A., X. x. 2.

[i 111 E. stern., dignifled-like, A,

yen XIX. ix: XX. ii. 2.

THE 10r: RADICA. JL.

Sincerely. A. XX. i. 1.

yun

jun

, Au elder brother, NL 95. elder and

heung younger brothers. A brother. A. II.[i 111 E. stern., dignifled-like, A,

yen XIX. ix: XX. ii. 2.

THE 10r: RADICA. JL.

Sincerely. A. XX. i. 1.

yun

jun

, Au elder brother, NL 95. elder and

heung younger brothers. A brother. A. II.

hsiung xxi. 2: V. i. 2: XII. v. 1, 4: et al. Obs · 
A. XIII. vii. G. L. C., iv. 7, 8. D. M., xiii. 
45; xv. 2. j

pj? (1) First, former, before, A., II. xiii.:

seen K. xiii. 1: et al. So, in G.L. and D.M.

hsien AF £. the ancient kiuge. A. I. xii, I.

=a former king. A., XVL i. 4. (2)

Ancestors. D.M., xix, 6. Comp.

3f, A. XI. i. (s) MA, elders, IL, viii:

XIV. xlvii.2. (4) To make first, or chief.

A., VI. xx. XIL xxi, 3: XIII. ii, (5) N

x A., XIII. i. To give an example

to.

Up. 3d tone.

To precede. Quickly.

75

sien G. L. o., x. 2, 15.

hsien

p (1) To be able, to attain to. G. L. o., i. 
Kuh I, 2; x. 5. (2) To subdue. A., XII. i. 1. 
k'o (3) The love of superiority. A., XIV.

ii.

3 (1) To escape, avoid, 
mün i, 2: et al. 
míen done with. A. XVII. xxi. 6. 
pU A., XVI. i. 7.

sze 
hsi

On ae 2 apprehensive aud cautious, 
king A., VIII. iii. 
ching

A., II. iii. 1: V,

A rhinoceros,

(2) To dispense with, have |

AND PIIRASES.

INDEX VII.

TUE 1ra RADICAL. A.

To enter, G. L. c., x. 1. D. M., xiv 2.

A., III. xv.: et al. "ns A. abroad, at

home. A., I. vi: IX. xv. 3. But in A.,

XIX. " Ht JA =t pass and repass.

A fi 'U, to enter into virtue; D. M., 
xxxiii. 1.

Within, internal, internally. py Hf

„ the within of—that which is

w thin—-the four sens; te, the empire. 
D.M., xvii. 1: et al... Precedes the verb, 
internally. A., IV. xvii: et al. Obs. 
A., X. xvii. 7. As a verb G. L. C., x. 7, 
to make the internal, . e., of primary im- 
portance.

Two. D. M., vi. 
vii.

A., III. xxii. 3: IX.

THE 12mm RADICAL. N.

Eight. A, II. i; XVIII xi,

(1) dran A., VI. vii. (2) Just. A.,

XX. (3) A duke, dukes. D. II., 
xviii. 3. 2 III. ii: et al. It often occurs 
jn connection with the name and country 
of the noble spoken of. It enters also(1) dran A., VI. vii. (2) Just. A.,

XX. (3) A duke, dukes. D. II., 
xviii. 3. 2 III. ii: et al. It often occurs 
jn connection with the name and country 
of the noble spoken of. It enters also

into double surnames. 2 HY, Ay 
XIV. xiv, 1,2:-—AL| Lf, XVI. N 
pu, VII, xxxiii; XI, xxi; xx. v.: 2

I. A, V.i.1. Obs, AY A., XIII,

ping

yiii XIV. xvii; xviii: —J AL, A., 
xiv. xiv, —— 4 „ A., xxxviii; A^ 
JR A., XIX, xxii; PAS Pj. the palace

gate. A., X. iv. 1. PN in the prince's 
A., X. viii. 8. 
A., II. iv. 5: et al.

temple,

Six.

A particle of exclamation, O! how!

Much used in poetry. G. L. C., iii. 4. A., 
III. viii. 1: XVIII. v. 1. In G. L. c., x. 
13, quoted from the Shoo-king, it appears

for N

Together with, sharing with. A., V. 
xxv. 2: IX. xxix. I. 
Up. 2d tone. To move towards, 
II. i.: X. xviii. 2. 
Wenpons of war, 
XIV. xvii. 2.

A.

A., XII. vii. 1, 2:

INDEX VII. CHINESE CHARACTERS AND ‘PHRASES, 
8 
dt The third personal pronoun, in all gen- 
ke ders, numbers, aud cases; the; that. | chuh 
ch'i — Lassi ch'u 
jt (1) HR B. an ordinary minister. A., 
u z iu 9x3— 
chi XI. xxiii, 4, (2)= fH. ull. G. L. C., x. 4. 
t A classic, a canon. a H, G. L. c., 
teen i. 3. 
tien 
F Le A., XI. xxi,,=to have more 
kien than one man's ability. 
chien

THE 13ru RADICAL, J.

A surname. B A., III vi.

VII. xiv.: et al; the same as BER. Ay

VI. x.: et al. n 4H 2F. A., XL ii. 2.

Ovserve, IH. -F, A. VI. iii: XIII. iv.

7]

tuotu 
tao 
JJ 
jin 
jeu

.

yen

ni Repeated, twice. A., XV. xix: X. xi. | AR 
tene 1. fun 
tsai ten

(1) A cap of full dress or ceremony. A., 
méen VIII. xxi: IX. iii. 1; ix: X. xvi. 2: XV. 
mien x. 4. (2) The name of a music-master. 
A., XV. xli. 1, 2.

THE 1411 RADICAL, m>,

tséé 
ch'ieh

hing

Abo A kap. A,X. vi. 10: XX. il. 2. hsing 
kwan 5 lj 
kuan A 
ae Up. 3d tone. Capped, i.e., young men es 
Awan about 20. A., XI. xxv. 7. i) 
kuan le 
22. " —

Zt Great, chicf. Ed 5E. the prime min- li

ch'ung ister. A., XIV. xliii. 2.

THE 151m RADICAL. /.Zt Great, chicf. Ed 5E. the prime min- li

ch'ung ister. A., XIV. xliii. 2.

THE 151m RADICAL. /.

UK lee. GLo.x22. A., VIII. ii.

ping U 
ia ^ at a double surname, A., V. i. b. 
yay i pich 
yd | ‘il 
KE To congeal; to settle and complete. | che 
yin 9 chih

D. M., xxvii, 5, i o^ 2t.

THE 16ru RADICAL. JL.

ES

taou 
tao

RI 
tsih 
tsé

All at commencement of clause. D. 
M., xx. 12, 15, 16; xxxi. 4.

Jan

THE 17ra RADICAL. II.

xr xj Ih. mourning clothes. A.,

It eu, Xvi. B. 
haiung

X.

321

(1) To go, or come, forth. A., III. 
xxiv: IV. xv.; xxi: et ul. To go beyond. 
Hi . beyond the family, G. L. C., ix. 
1. Hi = H „beyond three days. A., 
X. viii, 8. Hl A. sce on N. (2) To 
put forth. D. M., xxxi. 2. A, VIII. iv. 
3: IX, viii: XV. xvii, I M. to give. 
A. XX. il. 2. HB ZZ, to put outside, 
A., X. vi. 3.

THE 1811 RADICAL, J}.

A knife. A., XVII. iv. 2.

A sharp weapon. D. M., ix.

+ 
^

(1) To divide; to be divided, A., VIII. 
xx.4: XVL i 12. (2) To distinguish. 
A., XVIII. vii. 1.

(1) To cut. G. L. o., iii. 4. A., I. xv. 2.

(2) Eurnestly. A., XIX. vi. yj y]. 
earnest, A., XIII. xxviii.

(1) Punishment. A., II, iii, 1: IV. xi.: 
V. i. 2: XIII. iii. 6. (2) To imitate. D.M, 
xxxiii. 5.

A rank (as of office), A., XVI. i. 6.

(1) To sharpen. A, XV. ix. J.. 
sharpness of speech. A., XVII. xviii. 
e Gain, profit ;—ratherin a mean sense. 
iL. x. 22, 23. A., IV. xii: et al, 
Beneficial arrangements; profitableness ; 
profitable. G. I C., iii. 5; x. 14, 22, 23. 
A., IX. i. XX. ii. 2. (3) To get the 
benefit of. G.L.c., iii. 5. To benefit. A., 
XX.ii.2. To desire. A., iv. ii.

Up, 4th tone. To discriminate, to dif- 
ference. D. M., xxxi. 1. A., IL vii: XIX. 
xii. 2.

l 
To determine, fix. D. M., xxviii, 2.

Down to. A., XVI. xii.Up, 4th tone. To discriminate, to dif- 
ference. D. M., xxxi. 1. A., IL vii: XIX. 
xii. 2.

l 
To determine, fix. D. M., xxviii, 2.

Down to. A., XVI. xii.

(1) Then; denoting either a logienl con- 
sequence or sequence of time. Passim. 
JR Hi, so then, well then. A., III. xxii, 
8; XI. xv. 3; xxiii, 5. — Mj,—Rj 
partly, partly. A., IV. xx. (2) A rule, a 
pattern. PD. M., xiii. 2. (3) To make a 
pattern of, to correspond to. A., VIII. 
xix, 1.

323 CHINESE

T 
tsen A. IX. x. 1: X 
clrien Formerly. A., XVII. iv 4. 
hand., D. M., xx. 16; xxiv. 
G. L. C., iii. 5. 
ra] Yirm, firmness, 
kaug x.: et al. 
SB Tocut. A., X. vii. 3: XVII. iv. 2. 
ko

(1) Before, the front. 
iti, 2: XV. v. 3. 
(3) Before- 
(4) Former.

D. M., xxxi I. A., V.

ko

Fill To make first. A., XIV. ix. 
chwang

ch‘uang

THE 19ra RADICAL, yi

Strength, power; opportunity ; strongly, 
strenuously. D.M. xx. 10; xxxi. 4. A., 
li I. vi; vii: VII. 20: et al.

Achievement, work done. A., VIII. xix.

kung 2: XVII. vi: XX. i. 9. D. II., xx. 9.

ni To add, A., XIII. ix. 8, 4. To come

kea upon, affect. IV. vi. To do to. V. xi. To

chia lay upon. X. xiii, 3; to have in addition. 
XI. xxv. 4.

dil Up. 2d tone, supposed to be for I. if.

kea A., VII. xvi.

chia

I/ — Tohelp. A., XI. iii.

tsoo

chu

55 eh an. changing-like, spoken of the

pó countenance. A., X. iii. 1; iv. 3; v. 1.

po

5 Valour, physical courage; bold. D.M.,

uyng xx. 8, 10. A., II. xxiv. 2: XIV. v.; xiii; 
xxx.; et al.

th To exert onc's-self, use effort, D. M.,

meen xiii, 4; Xx. 9, 18. A., IX. xv.

mien

EJ To move, as a neuter verb, PD. M., xx,

tung 14; xxix 5; xxxiii, 3. A., XII. i. 2. $f 
E put the wise are active. A., VI. | 
xxi. Obs. H) fe JU Ag. D. M., xxiv, 
(2) To move, excite; as an active verb. 
D.M, xxiii; xxvi 6. A., VIII. iv. 3; 
XV, xxxii, 8, Hih T X. to stir up 
hostile movements. A., XVI. i. 13.

35 ‘To attend toearnestly, as the chief thing,

mov Gi. L. C., x. 23. A., I. ii. 2: VI. xx.

mu35 ‘To attend toearnestly, as the chief thing,

mov Gi. L. C., x. 23. A., I. ii. 2: VI. xx.

mu

55 To exceed, surpass. A., VI. xvi: X.

shing viii. 4.

slieng $

5 Up. lst tone, To be able for. A., X.,

a v. 1. 2 HS, to transform the violent.

A., XIII. xi.

CHARACTERS AND PHRASES,

G.L.c., x. 2. 
(2) | luon 
lao

INDEX VII.

a (1) Toil, toiled, toilsome, A., IT, viii.: 
routes yr se [ . : :

IV. xiii; VIU, i. ^j x to toil for

the people. XIII. i. Comp. XIV. viii,

(2) Merit. A., V. xxv. 3... (3) To make

to labour.. A., XIX. x XX. ii. J, 2. 
Laborious, accustomed to toil,

XVIII. vii. 1.

A.,

W

kin

ch'in

55% (1) To encourage, advise. D.M., xx.

k'cuen 14. (2) To rejoice to follow, to exhort

chrtian one another to good, ie., to be advised, 
D. II., xx. 13; xxxiii. 14. A., II. xx.

THE 20 u RADICAL, ^j.

Aj A ladle, a ladleful. D.M., xxvi, 9.

chó

cho

Jf O) Donot;—prohibitive, P. II., xiii, 
with 3. A., I. viii. 4: /. (2) Not ;—nega- 
wu tire, or the prohibition indirect. A., VI.

iv: XII. ii.: XIV. viii. 
A gourd. A., XVII. vii. 4.,

Gd

piaou

pao 
TUE 215r RADICAL. B

To transform; to be transformed. Ap-

1t

hwa plied, to the operations of Heaven and

hua Earth, and of the sage. D. XI., xxii; 
xxiii; xxx. 3; xxxii. I; xxxiii. 6.

AU The north, northern, D.M., x. 2, 4.

ph A., II. i.

pei

THE 220 RADICAL [_.

(2 
A., IX. v. I. XI.

[E (1) To rectify, A., XIV, xviii. 2. 
"wang The name of a State. 
k'uang xxii.

Vf ^ A case, a casket, A., IX. xii.

THE 230 RADICAL. T-

un pE ER a common man. A, IX. xxv, 
preih pu X pui A., XIV. xviii, 3.

pi 
To conceal, A., V. xxiv,

AS 
neth 
ni 
{ita 
Ke 
ch'ü

Classes, classified. A. XIX, xii. 2.

THE 247u RADICAL. -]-.

Ten, G. L. O., vi. 3. A., II. iv. I, 2, & d,

5. 6: etal. Advorbially, at ten times, by

shih 
ton efforts. D. M., xx. 20.

INDEX VII.

A thousand, G. L. C., iii, 1. D. M., xx. 
ts‘ceen 20. A., I. v.: et al. 
chien

(1) To ascend, go up. A., III. vii.: et ul.shih 
ton efforts. D. M., xx. 20.

INDEX VII.

A thousand, G. L. C., iii, 1. D. M., xx. 
ts‘ceen 20. A., I. v.: et al. 
chien

(1) To ascend, go up. A., III. vii.: et ul.

shing (2) Fo grow up, as grain. A., XVII. 
ghéng xxi. 3.

SP. Half, a half. D. M., xi. 2. A., X. vi. 6.

pwan

pun

D: Low, as ground. D. M., xv. 1. H

ve E . he abased himself to— lived in

pel Daa low, mean house. A,, VIII. xxi. 
The end, completion. A., XIX. xii, 2.

tsuh

tsu 1 .

E A. [^p uprightly, loftily. A., IX. x.

ch. .

cho

[72] (1) The south, southern, G. L. o., x. 4.

NUN

D. M., x. 2, 3, A., XIII. xxii. 1. pe THT,

the face to the south, the position of tlie 
emperor, or of a prince. A., VI. i. I: XV.

iv. (2) JE Bj. 43 (read shaou, and 
not chaon as in the translation.) , the

titles of the two first books in the She- 
king, Pt. I. A., XVII. i. (3) A surname.

A., V. i. 2: XI. v. FE, a double 
surname, but supposed to be the same 
man as the preceding. A., XIV. vi. ig

F. 8 duchess of Wei. A., VI. xxvi.

Extensive, large, extensively. D. M.,

xxvi. 3, 4, 5, 8: et al, e VI. xxv. et al. 
Asa verb, to enlarge. A., IX. ii.

THE 26r: RADICAL. P.

Td The name of a place. A., XIV. xiii, 
peen 
pien ; 
il To prognosticate, A., XIII. xxii, 3. 
chen 
chan 
THE 261 RADICAL, IJ. 
fé, (0) Lofty, bold. A, XIV. iv. (2) 
wei Perilous, tottering. D.M., xx. 14. A., 
VIIL xiii. 2: et ul. 
Al 
To roll up. A. XV. vi. 2. 
keuen 
chüan

Low, lst tone. A small plot. 
kenen xxvi. 9.

D.M,

ch:üan

Ell To go to, approach. A., XIII. XXI x.: 
tseih XIX. ix.

chi

CHINESE CHARACTERS: AND PHRASES.

Jn

king 
ching

HR 
how 
hou

323

A noble, high officer. A., IX. xv.

THE 271. RADICAL.. r~.

Thick, A., x. vi. 7. D.M. xxvi. 9:

Metaphorically, liberal, generous, in high 
style, substantial. G.L.r.. 7. D. M., xxvi. 
2s 5, 8. A,Lix.1: XI. x. 1, 2: XV.

v. Ax. to depart with liberal 
PME D. M., xx. 14. By JB, D. M., 
xxvii. 6.

A surname, 
iii. 3.

A, XIV. xli, A., VI.v. Ax. to depart with liberal 
PME D. M., xx. 14. By JB, D. M., 
xxvii. 6.

A surname, 
iii. 3.

A, XIV. xli, A., VI.

Low. 8d tone. Your good, careful, peo- 
ple. A., XVII. xiii.

Up, $d tone. To dislike, be wearied

with, reject. D.M, x. 4: etal. A, VI. 
xxvi: VII. ii.: e£ al.

Up. 2d tone, far N. the appearance 
of concealing. & L. c., vi. 2. 
(1) Diguified, stern. A. VII. xxvii.:

XIX.ix;x. (2) Tooppress. A., XVII. 
xii. (3) To keep the clothes on, from 
above the waist, in crossing a stream. A,; 
XIV. xlii. 2.

THE 2811 RADICAL. Z.

To go away from, leave, A., XVI, iii: 
XVIII. i.; ii.: VI. v. 1, 2.

Up 2d tone. To put away, dispense 
with. D. M., xx. 14. A., III. xvii. 1:

et al. 
One of three; forming a ternion. D.

M. xxii. A., XV. v. 3. (2) Read also 
sin. The name of one of Conf. disciples. 
A., IV. xv.: XI. xvii.

THE 29m RADICAL. N.

Moreover, further; —continuing a nar- 
rative by the addition of further partic- 
ulars. G. L. c., II. i. A., III. xxv. et al 
And so ;—~a consequence from what pre- 
cedes. A., IX. vi. 2: XIII. ix. 3, 4.

To come to, attain to; coming to. D. 
M., iv. 1; xxviii, 1: xxxi, 4; xxxiii. 2. 
A., v. xi; xX. : et al, us Coming to. 
and, but. D. II., xii. 2, 4: xviii, 3; xx.

4; xxvi, 2. "A K. by the time it came 
to. A, XI. xxv. 4, 5. 
(1) A friend, friends.

IX. xxiv.: et al, , Combined with 
N., XIII. 4; xx. 8, 17.

A., I. viii. 3: 
M. v. 
A., I. iv.; vii: c£

324

Jan

75

show 
shou

koo 
ku

Hj) 
* O 
k'ou

J

chaon 
chao

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

al, Friendship. A., XII. xxiii: XVI. iv. 
Friendly with, to make friends of. A., V. 
xxiv: XV. ix. (2) Brotherly regard. 
A., IL xxi. 2.

(1) To be, or act, contrary to.

ix. 4. PD. II., ii. A., XII. xvi. (2) To 
turn round, on or to; to return. A., IX. 
xiv; XVIII. vii. 4. D. M., xiv. 5. E 
Šk to turn round on and examine 
one's-self. D. M., xx. 17. Observe A., 
VII. viii, JL h name of an ancient 
stand for cups. A., III. xxxii. 3. (3) 
To repeattone, for f] A., IX. xxx. 1. (5) ZZ 
N. a man's name. A., VI. xiii.

To take, to get. D. M., xx. 4. A., V. 
ji, Obs, V. v. VI. xxviii.: etal IN. 
what application enn it have? A. III. ii.

, assuming the appearance of 
virtue. A., XII. xx. 6. 
Up. 3d tone. To marry a wife. 
VII. xxx. 3.

G. L. c.,

A.,

A father's younger brother. In enume-

rating brothers, not the oldest nor the 
youugest. Used in surnames and desig- 
nations. A., XIV. xx. 2 —XIX. xxiii; 
xxiv. XIV. xiv. 1; xix-—V. xxii: 
VII. xiv. 2: XVI. xii: - XVIII. ix. 3. 
-—XIV. ix. XVII. viii. 1, 2.—: XVIII. 
xi. bis.

To receive. D. M., xvii. 4, 5, xviii. 2, 
A., X. xi. 2: et al. To acquiesce in. A., 
II. xviii: 2. to be intrusted with. A., 
XV. xxxiii.

THE 30rit RADICAL. [J

The mouth. G. L. c., x. 13. A., XVII. 
xviii H An- smartnesses of speech. 
A., V. iv. 2.

Antiquity. G. L. r., 4. D. M.. xxviii, 1, 
A., III. xvi.: et al. ay the ancients ; 
anciently, A., IV. xxi: XVII. xvi. I.

(1) To tap, strike A., XIV. xlvi, (2).

To inquire about. A., IX. vii.

To call, summon, A., VIII. iii.: et al.

Read sh«ou, pz Bj see Hj 4 m,

a name. A., XIV. xviii. 
These, G. L. o., x. 3.

The right, on the right hand. G. L d., x. 
D. M., xvi. 3. A., X. iii. 2. Obs. X. vi.

A, VII. xxxi. (4) Up. Ist

*

she 
shih

al

kó 
ko

An

ming

INDEX Vil.

(1) An historiographer. A., XV, xxv; 
(2) A clerk, a scrivener. A, V.xvi.

(1) Always in the phrase 7H Bl; the 
officers, A., VIII. ii. 1: xx. ii. 3. (2) 
E] 45. a double surname. A., XII. iii;

iv; v. (3) 1] ne. the minister of 
Crime. A., VIT. xxx. '

May. Passim. As in English, the may 
may represent possibility, ability, liberty, 
or moral power, so with the char, Ay . It 
is found continually in the combination

[ri JA nay (seldom, if ever, can), where[ri JA nay (seldom, if ever, can), where

we can’t assign much distinctive force to 
the Hl. Fy thy, is concessive, but does 
not indicate entire approval. A., I. xv. 
1: II. xxii; VI. i. 2: et al, HY 32. how- 
ever, is more concessive, A., V. xixe 
VII. xxv. 1, 2: et al. Obs. A., XIV. xxii. 
b: XVIII. viii. 5: XIX. iii.

Each, every one. A., IV. vii: V. xxv.

1: IX. xiv.: XI. vii. 2; xxv. 7, 8.

(1) Name, names; to name, A., IV. v. 
2: VIII. xix: XIII. iii. 2, 5, 7: etal (2) 
Fame, reputation. D.M, xvii. 2 ; xviii.

25 xxx. 4, AER A A., IX. ii.

To unite, assemble ; united ; a collection, 
D. M., xv. 2; xxv. 3. A., XIII. viii: NIV. 
xvii. 2.

(1) The same, D. M., xxviii, 3. A., 
III. xvi: et al. Together with. A., XIV. 
xix. As a verb, to be together in, to

share. D. M., x. 14; xx. 14. (2) Applied

how 
hou

a 
keih 
chi 
d 
keun 
chün

to a certain imperial audience. A., XI. 
xxv. 6, 12. !

(1) Sovereign, a sovereign. A., III. 
xxi: XX. i. 3. (2) Used throughout the 
G.L. for Íh, afterwards.

Fortunate, Ee FY, the first day of 
the month. A., X. vi. 11.

A ruler, a sovereign. Passim. . H. 
Ruler and minister, the relation between. 
Sepe. 121 E A: Ay zs designa- 
tions of the wife of the prince of a State. 
A., XVI. xiv. pis . see on J. 
NAH. Le. C. L. o, ii. 3. see A.

Niggardly, stingy, A., VIII. xi.: XX. 
ii. 3.

A negation, not, 
wrong. A. VI. xxvi.

G.L.m, 7, to do

INDEX VII.

54 The name of a State. A. VII. xxx. 2. 
wo 
wa 
m I. Passim, In a few cases, y. Very 
woo rarely plural. Almost always in the 
wu — nominative, 
T „Jo tell, report, announce to. A., I. xv. 
kuou 3: II. v. 2; XIV. Xx. 2,3, 4, 5. . 
kao a i: 1

the reporters. A., XIV. xiv. 2. 
E — To inform respectfully, A., III. xvii, 
Kuh 1: XII. xxiii. 
ku

Taste, flavours. A., VII. xiii, D. M.,

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

ES

we jv. 2. G. L. O., vii. 2.

wei

JE i) Catholic, A., II. xiv. (2) Explain- |-Taste, flavours. A., VII. xiii, D. M.,

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

ES

we jv. 2. G. L. O., vii. 2.

wei

JE i) Catholic, A., II. xiv. (2) Explain- |-

d ed by FB, A, XX. i. 5. (3) To ‘assist, 
give charity to, syn. with Hy. A., VI. iii, 
2. (4) Name of the Chow dynasty or of 
its original sent, Sepe. Ja A the

duke of Chow. | Sepe, 5 ft. a man's

name, A., XVI. i. 6. Jal 8j. one of the 
Books of the She-king, XVII. x. 1.

mE Br WP, alas, A., III. vi. 1

huo

hu

(ij — (2) To order, direct; what is appointed,

ming spoken of what Heaven appoints,—the 
empire, our nature, and generally. G- 
I. C., i. 2; ii. 3, 5, 11. D. II., i. 1; xiv. 4; 
elal A., II. iv. 4: VI. ii.; viii: IX. i.: 
et d. (2) Spoken of a sovereign’s order- 
ing; a commission. A., VIII. vis X. iii. 
4; xiii. 4: XIII. xX. 1: XVI. ii. 1: XX. 
1. 2. (8) Life. BY (Gy, to devote lite. 
A., XIV. xiii. 2: XIX. i. (4) Govt. noti- 
fications. A., XIV. ix. (5) Messages 
between host and guest. p tii to 
convey such messages. A. XIV. xlvii. 
1. XVII. xx.

i Used for 2 man, Disrespectful, G.

ming Le., x. 16.

AI Harmony, harmonious; natural ease,

ho affable. D.M, i. 4, 5; x.; xv. 2. A., I.

‘ho Xii. 1, 2: XIII. xxiii: XVI. i. 10: XIX. 
xxv. 4.

T Low, 3d tone, To accompany in sing-

ho lug. A., VIL xxxi. 
sho 
^ 
3$ 
Lew 
chin

In

shin 
shen

To blame, A., III. xxi, 2.

To smile at. A., XI, xxv, 4, 8, 9.

yu 
yü

=

shen 
shan

Ho! Oh! A., xXx. i. I.

(1) Sorrow, sorrowful, to feel sorry.

G. L. c., viii. 1. D. I., i. 4. A., III. xxvi: 
et . (2) Hon. epithet of a duke of Loo. 
D. M., xx. 1. A, III. xix: et al

A particle of exclamation, expressing 
admiration or surprise. (1) It is often 
at the end of sentences. G. L. C., x. 13. 
D.M., xxvii. 3. A. III. xxii 1: eful 
(2) It is often used at the close of the 
first clause of a sentence, the subject ex- 
claimed about following. D.M., x. 5: 
xxvii. 1. A, III. iv. 2: V. ii.: et . (3) 
It often closes an interrogative sentence,being preceded by 4q. a5. P,. and

other interrog. particles, tho' the 3E is

itself sometimes more exclamatory than 
interrogative. A., II. x. 4; xxii: VIII. 
xv. IX. vii: et al.

Wise, prudent, D. M., xxvii, 7.

(I) mE He. a kind of tree. A., IX. 
xxx. I. (2) A designation of the emperor 
Yaou. A., VIII. xx. 2.

To weep, wail. A., VII. ix. 2: XI. ix. 
1.

Only. Sepe. It stands at the beginning

of the sentence or clause to which it be- 
longs, such instances as A., IT. vi.; D. M., 
xxxiii. 2, being only apparent exceptions, 
Observe. A., VIL xxviii. 2.

Low, 2d tone. Yes, A., IV. xv. ].

(1) To ask, to ask about, to investigate; 
a question. Passim. (2) To inquire for, 
to visit. A., VI. viii: VIII. iv. 1. To 
send a complimentary inquiry. A., X. 
xi. 1.

To open out; to uncover. 
VIII. iii.

A., VII. viii;

Simply, only. G. L. O., x. 13.

(1) To instruct, G. L.., ix. 4. (2) 
To understand, be conversant with. A., 
IV. xvi.

Good; the good: —in both numbers, and 
all persons. Passim. (2) Skiful: nbili- 
ty. D.M,xix.2. A., V.xvi: VII. xxxi: 
et al. (3) As u verb, to consider, or make 
good. G. L. 2., x. 23. A., XV. ix.

To smell. A., X. xviii, 2.

326 
X Joy, joyful, to be joyful. D. M., i. 4. H ] 
he A. IV. xx: V. vi; xviii 1: XVI. xiii. 5: | Lin 
‘hsi XIX. xix. k'uén 
ogi * * 3 Ut

na ur BR, sighingly. A., IX. x. 1: XI. 
wei XXV. 7.

H. To mourn, mourning; mourning clothes, [á]

sang D. A., xviii. 8. A. III. iv. 3; x: VI. 8: 
XVII. xxi. 1, 5, 6: et al.

2 Up. 3d tone. To lose. G. L. c., x. 5. 
sung To lose office, a throne. A., III. xxiv.: 
XIV. xx. 1. 2. (2) To let be lost, to de- 
stroy. A., IX. v. 8; XI. viii: XIII. xv. 4. i 
5.

Es Hs taut . 00 
Ig Pg ^B how distinguished! G. L. o., 175 
heuen iii. 4. ` 
hsüan l E] 
SE . Admirable. D.M., xvii, 4. To com- 
kea mend, honour. D. M., xx. 14. A., XIX. 1 
chia iii. * HiEs Hs taut . 00 
Ig Pg ^B how distinguished! G. L. o., 175 
heuen iii. 4. ` 
hsüan l E] 
SE . Admirable. D.M., xvii, 4. To com- 
kea mend, honour. D. M., xx. 14. A., XIX. 1 
chia iii. * Hi

4 i A i wð 
PÈ pÉ PÉ, alas! A,, III. vi. i 
woo 
wu 
ux Coarse, rude. A., XT, xvii. 4. 
ngan ' 
an 
. (i) To taste. A., X. xi. 2; xiii. 1. (2) 
cſi ang Name of the autumnal sacrifice. D. M., 1.

xix. 6. (2) Indicates the present com- t'u. 
plete and past tenses, being oftem joined 
with 5e. A., III. xxiv: VIII. v.: et al,

" (1) A vessel, a tool. D. M., xix. 3. A., 
ke XV. ix. Metaphorically. A. II. xii.: V. 
chi iii, (2) Capacity, calibre. A., III. xxii. | {o0

1. (3) To use according to capacity. | t'u 
A., XIII. xxv. 
Wet An exclamation of grief; of contempt.

e A., XI. viii: XIX. xii. 2: XIII. xx. 4. ; 
i wel 
Jg Severe, dignified, G. L. O., vi. 3. ph 
yen : Hit

fe

THE 3isr RADICAL, [7]. = 
Four. Sepe. Four things. A., VII. 
xd xxiv.: IX. iv. pu p4. the four parts 
of the State. G. L. o., ix. 8. BR,

the barbarians on the four sides of the

empire, G. L. o., x. 14. yu aa, the ne

four limbs. D. M., xxiv. A., XVIII. vii.

pu flo A. XVIII. ix. 3.

(1) As a preposition, Because of, tak-

ing occasion from, D. M., xvii. 3. A., 
XX. ji. 2. (2) As a verb. ‘To follow, 
succeed to. A., II. xxiii. 2: XI. xxv. 4. 
To rely on. A., I. xiii.

LE The name of Conf. favourite disciple.

med See PRB]. A., VL tis XI. 4

keun 
chün

4

iso

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

INDEX VIL

(1) Distressed, reduced to straits. D,

M,xe9. A., XX. i. I. JEA 
come with wine. A., IX. xv. (2) Stu- 
pidity and the feeling of it. P. M., xx, 
16. A., XVI. ix.

(1) Firm, strong. A., I. viii: XVI. i. 
8. ? XV. i. 3. (2) Obstinate, obstinacy, 
A., IX. iv.: XIV. xxxiv. 2. (3) Mean, 
niggardly. A., VII. xxxv. (4) Firmly, 
D.M., xx. 18. (5) Certainly, indeed. D. 
M., xxxii. 3. A., IX. vi. 2: XIV. xxxviii. 
I: XV. i. 3; xll. 3.

A gardener, A., XIII, iv. 1.

, over»

The name of an officer. A., XIV, xx,

2.A gardener, A., XIII, iv. 1.

, over»

The name of an officer. A., XIV, xx,

2.

A State, Passim. , the Mid-

dle kingdom. D.M., xxvii. 4: et al. Only 
in-this phrase is the term used for the

empire, zm pa x Ep one of the 
largest States, equipping 1,000 chariots. » 
A., I. v.: et al. Fi Eip to administer a 
State. A., IV. xiii.

(1) To think, imagine. A., VII. xiii. 
(2) A map. A, IX. viii.

THE 832p RADICAL, +-

(1) The ground, ground, earth, D. M.,

xxvi 9. A., V. ix. 1. (2) IK E. wa- 
ter and land. D.M., xxx. I. (3) Com- 
fort. A., IV. xi.

A precious stone, differently shaped, 
used as a badge of authority. A., X. v. 
1: XI. v.

(1) The earth, the ground. D.M., xx.

3. A., IX. xviii: XIX. xxii. 2. (2) Any

particular country. A., XIV. xxxix. 2. 
(3) Throughout the Doctrine of the Mean, 
it occurs constantly as the correlative of

Te heaven, the phrase X Hh being 
now the component parts, and now the 
great powers, of the universe.

(1) To be in, to consist in, depend on,

the where and wherein following, Passim. 
(2) To be present. G. L. O., vi. 2. A., 
XI. xxi. (3) To be in life. A., I. xi:

IV. xix. {E is followed not unfrequently

by de Hn, 2 with words intervening.

Observe A., XIX. xxii. 2: XX. I. 5. 
Level An equally adjusted state of

society. A., XVI. i. 10. Asa verb; to 
adjust, keep in order. D. M., ix.

To sit. A., X. vii, 2; ix. l: et al.

INDEX VII.

JH Broad and level, Satisfied. A., VII.

tan xxxv.

34 An enrthen stand for cups, Xx 4 
teen A, III. xxii. 3.

tien

At

In the name of a place. jit DR A,

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES,

327

many cases these two meanings are 
united. A., XII. xx: XV. viii: et al.

(3) A gilly. HH 755 Z +. a groom, 
(4) ML fifi. Criminal judge. A., XVIII. 
ji: XIX. xix.

Vigorous, in manhood. A., XVI. vii.

eh‘ing MI. xii: XVII. iv. chang 
chéng chuang x 
Jj; Boundaries, territory. A, XVI. i. 4. . Once. D.M, xvii 2. 5. . one 
"m f gi and all., G. L. r, 6. 
yü yi iVigorous, in manhood. A., XVI. vii.

eh‘ing MI. xii: XVII. iv. chang 
chéng chuang x 
Jj; Boundaries, territory. A, XVI. i. 4. . Once. D.M, xvii 2. 5. . one 
"m f gi and all., G. L. r, 6. 
yü yi i

To hold, keep hold of, D.M, vi.; xiii, E Longevity, long-lived. D.M.. xvii. 2. 
chi show A., VI. xxi.

Qi etal, A, VI. viii: VIL xi: et al. t 
me to maintain the rules of propriety. 
A., VII. xvii. iJ “ip. to practise char-

to man-

shou

jotering, A., IX. ii. 2.

age business. A., XIII. xix. $3 ám

to grasp the govt. of a State. A, XVI. ii. 
To nourish. D. M., xvii. 3.

"ut (1) The hall or principal apartment. 
tang ascended to by steps, A., III. iis X. iv. 
4: XI, xiv, 2. (2) Af. A, exuberant; 
an imposing manner. A., XIX. xvi. 
Firm, hard. A., IX. x. 1; XVII. vii, 8.

THE 3511 RADICAL, X.

(1) Name of an ancient dynasty, D. M., 
xxviii. 5, A., II. xxiii, 2: et al, pel 
Jai the founder of the Hea dynasty.

A., UI. xxi, 1. (2) Great. EH . a 
name of China. A., III. v. (3) Used in 
a man's name. A., XVIII. xi. (4) F 
. the designation of one of Conf. dis- 
ciples. A. I. vii: et al, sape.

keen THE 36mm RADICAL, 47 
chien

Hi To be able, to endure. A., VI. ix. a The evening. A., IV. vii, 
Kan seth

ah The name of an ancient emperor, A., hei 
yaou VIIL xix.: XX. i. 1. Coupled with Shun. Bh (1) Without, beyond, external. G. L. o., 
Yao G. L., ix. 4: et al. wae vi. 2. D. M., xiv.1; xxv. 3. (2) As a 
EM To revenge, recompense, return. D.M., | wai verb. To make secondary. G. L. o., x. 8. 
paou K. 3; xx. 19. A., XIV. xxxvi. 1, 2, 3. BÀ, Early ?=from day to day. D. M., 
poo suh — xxix,6.

VE A road, the way. D. M., xi. 2. A. XVII. su 
Md i.1; xiv. E Many, much. A., II. xviii. 2: IV. xii:

t VII. xxvii: . ? XIX. xxiv. v

[at To fall, be fallen, A., XIX. xxii, 2. o be xxvii: et al. X mx. 1, where

ES Z di only; and D.M.. xxvi. 9, where 
s u it=a little.t VII. xxvii: . ? XIX. xxiv. v

[at To fall, be fallen, A., XIX. xxii, 2. o be xxvii: et al. X mx. 1, where

ES Z di only; and D.M.. xxvi. 9, where 
s u it=a little.

3E (1) To shut up, as a screen, A., III. 1E ; Q) Night. A., IX. xvi.: XV. xxx. D. 
sth xxii. 3. (2) An unemployed condition. Sk M., xxix, 6. (2) MN. a man's desig- 
sae P. u., x. 5 yeh R > :

ne. M., x. 5. „ nation. A., XVIII. xi. 
Tu To be ruined. A., XVII. xxi, 2. * To dream. A., VII. v. 
Awue mun 
huni adus :

N z

H3 A man's name, A, XIV. xlvi. THE 37TH RADICAL, X. 
jang

THE 23» RADICAL. I.

(1) A scholar, A., IV. ix. VIII. vii:

etal. (2) An officer. D. M., xiii. 3; xx. | tae 
13, 14. Ay XIII. XX. I; xxviil- et ul. In tai

Great; greatly. Passim. XX. see

X. |

Up. 3d tone, with aspirate, Excessive.

A., VI. i. 3. Used for N. D. M., xviii,

*

*

tcen firmament.

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

JIeaven. (1) The material heaven, or

D.M., xii. 3; xxvi. 5: et al.

tien A., XIX. xxv. 3. (2) More commonly, the

char. stands for the supreme, governing, 
Power, the author of maus nature, and 
orderer of his lot. G. L. O., i. 2. P. M., i. 
1; xiv. 3; xvii. 3, 4; xx. 7. 18 ; xxxii. l, 
2,2:xxxiü, 6. (E. FE). A. IL iv. 4: 
III. xiii. 2; xxiv. V. xii. 3: VI. xxvi.: VII. 
xxii: VIII. xix. 1: IX. v. 3; vi. 2; xi. 2: XI. 
viii: XII. v. 3: XIV xxxvii.2: XVI. viii. 
1,2: XVII. xix. 8: XX. i. 1. (3) In the 
Doctrine of the Mean (not in the Ana-

lects), we find the phrase X ah of

very frequent occurrence. sometimes de- 
noting the material heavens and earth, 
but more frequently as a dualization of 
nature, producing, transforming, complet-

ing, i. 5; xii. 2, 4: xxii: et al. (4) X 
, a designation of the emperor. G. L. 
T, 6. D.M, xvii. 1: etal, A., III. ii:

XVL ii (5) X NN, see T.

(1) XI. one of the ancestors of the 
Chow dyo. D. M., xvili. 2, 3. (2) Ik 
, title of a high officer. A., IX. vi.XVL ii (5) X NN, see T.

(1) XI. one of the ancestors of the 
Chow dyo. D. M., xvili. 2, 3. (2) Ik 
, title of a high officer. A., IX. vi.

1,3. (3) * Hf, grand Music-master. 
A., III. xxiii: VIII. xv: XVIII. dx. (4) 
N HB. the title of a Book of the Shoo- 
king, G. L. o., ii. 2.

(1) An individual man, [JU Jc. a 
common man, A., IX. xxv. XIV. xviii.8. 
With Bl». fellow. A., XIX. vii: XVII.

Xv. * hi, husband and wife. D. M., 
xii. 2, 4; xx. 8. A., XIV. xviii. 3. (2) 
K E a general name, applicable to 
all the ministers or officers at a court. 
D.M, xviii. 3. A., V. xviii. 2: X. ii. |:

et al, sepe, (3) X A title of the wife 
of the prince of a State. A., XXVI xiv. 
(4) RY- master, my, our, your, mas · 
ter, applied often to Confucius, but not

confined to him. A., I. x. 1, 2: III. xxiv.: 
IV. xv. 2; et al, sepe.

Low. Ist tone. (1) An initial particle,

which may generally be rendered by 
now. D. M., xix. 2; xxxii. I. A., VI.

xxviii 2: IX. xvi: et al., sepe. (2) A 
final particle, with exclamatory force. 
D. M., v.; xvi. 5. A., VI. vili; xxv: VII.“ 
x. 1: VIII. iii. 1: et al., sepe. (3) Neither 
at the begin. nor end of sentences and 
clauses, as a kind of demonstrative. P. 
M., xxvi. 9. A., XI. ix. 3; x. 3; xiii. 3; 
Xx. 2, 4: etal. (4) After some verbs, as 
a prep., between them und their regimen. 
G. L. c., x. 16. A., XVI. i. 9: XVII. ix; 
xxi. 4.

*

yauu 
yao

shih

*

e 
i

hao

bi

haou 
hao

INDEX VII,

R N. exuberant in foliage. G. L. c.,

ix 6. N N 7t. pleased-like, A., 
VIL. iv.

To lose, to fail of or in, G. L. c., x. B, 
11,18, D. N., viii; xiv. 5; xviii. 2. A., 
I. xiii.: IV. xxii: et al, spe.

(1) Tosquat upon the heels. A., XIV.

xlvi. (2) A name denoting rude and 
barbarous tribes, appropriate to those on

the East of China, of whom there were 
nine tribes. A., IX. xiii. 1. It is generally

associated with JK. A., III. v.: XIII. 
xix, D. M., xiv. 2. yu Be, G. L. o., x.the East of China, of whom there were 
nine tribes. A., IX. xiii. 1. It is generally

associated with JK. A., III. v.: XIII. 
xix, D. M., xiv. 2. yu Be, G. L. o., x.

15. (3) As a posth. title. A., V. xxii.: 
et al. (4) Part of a name. A., XVIII. 
viii. 1, 4.

To perform, as music, D. M., xix. 5. 
To present, approach (but the mean. is 
doubtful), D.M., xxxiii. 4.

To run away, flee, A., VI, xii.

Why, how, what. A., II. xxi. I. 2: III. 
ii: VIL xviii? 2: XI. xiv: XIII. iii. 1, 3; 
v.: XIV. xx, 1, 2. E 2 „from whom. 
A., XIV. xxi.

Rapine; to take away, carry off. G. L. o., 
x. 8. A., IX. xxv: XIV. x. 8: XVII. 
xviii, pa Ay fe. cannot be carried 
from his principles. A., VILE vi.

Wasteful, extravagant, A., III. iv. 3:

VII. xxxv.

The south-west corner of an apartment, 
A, III. xiii. 1.

THE 3671 RADICAL, X.

X. girls, concubines. A., XVII.

4%, female musicians. A.,

xxv. zuz 
AW?

XVIII iv.

For Ny. You, both nom. and obj. A., 
II. xvii: et al.

A slave. A., XVIII. i.

Good, goodness, excellence. G. L. o., vi. 
1. A., XIX. xxiii. 2.

Up. 3d tone. To love, like, be fond of.

Passim, Ha pis x Jis the loving, :

i. e., the friendly. meeting, of two princes. 
A., III. xxii. 3.

INDEX VII.

hn

joo 
ju

UR

yaou

it 
sing 
hsing

(1) As, and may often be rendered as |

when, as if. Passim, We find pi i. 
such, so; with the synonyms, in Ar. and

An FL. pa not as, but sometimes 
meaning—there is nothing like, the best 
thing is to. We have also RE Yn. and

ng An» may be compared to. (2) H. 
In this sense, it is often followed by

(3) Ui yr. and {af pi see on ^u] 8

(4) After adjectives, it like, or our 
termination jy. See many instances in 
the Ana. Bk. X. (5) Or. A, XI. xxv. 10.

(6) Obs. U HE E. A., XIV. xvii 2.

Prodigies, inauspicious appearances of 
plants, &c. D. M., xxiv.

A wife, D. M., xv. 2. A., XVI. xix.

Up. 3d tone. To give to to wife, A., 
V. i. 1,2: XL v.

The beginning; at first; to begin. G. L.Prodigies, inauspicious appearances of 
plants, &c. D. M., xxiv.

A wife, D. M., xv. 2. A., XVI. xix.

Up. 3d tone. To give to to wife, A., 
V. i. 1,2: XL v.

The beginning; at first; to begin. G. L.

T.. 8. D. M., xxv. 2. A., I. xv. 8: III. 
viii. 3; xxiii. V. ix. 2: VIII. xv; XIII. 
viii; XiX. xii. 2.

A surname, the patronymic of a family

or clan, A., VII. xxx, 2. B PE, a 
designation for the mass of the people. 
D.M., xx. 18, 14. A., XII. ix. 4: XII. 
xiv.; xx. 1, 5.

Majestic. A. VII. xxxvii: XX. ii, 1, 
2. ‘fo fear; to be feared. D. I., xxxiii.

4. A., I. viii, 1. Vi fie seo (i. G.

l.c. ii. 4. D. M., xxvii.

EIS kip husband and m D. M., xii. 
2, 4; xx. 12. A., XIV. xviii, 8. Ji 
A a woman. A., VIII. xx. 8.

To flatter, pay court to. A., III. xiii, 
1.

To be jealous. G. L. C., x. 14.

To marry, be married to. Spoken of l 
the woman. G.L.c, ix. 2.

-

THE 3%ru RADICAL, I.

(1) A son, G. L., c., viii, 2; ix. 2, 8. 
D. M. xiii. 4; xv. 2; xviii. 1, 3: xx. 1. 
A., III. xv: VI. iv.: et al, sepe, But in 
same instances, it is as much child as 
sum (2) À daughter, a young woman.

A., XIV. xxii. 3, 4, 5

ls un

he«ou. 
hsiao

i

mang 
ning

sun

' and others.

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES. 329

G.L.c, ix. 6. A., V. i. 1, 2: VII. xxx. 2.

(a play on the term): XL v. * T 
A. XVII. xxv. (3) Asa verb, to treat as 
children. D.M., xx. 12, 13. (4) Every- 
where applied to Confucius. the Muster. 
(5) It tollows surnames and honorary 
epithets. (6) Jt enters often into the 
designations of the disciples of Confucius, 
(7) In conversations=you,

Sir, the gentlemen, =F. ye, my

disciples, my friends. (8) Chiefs, officers, 
(9) A title of no-

bility, viscount, A., XVIII. . (10) -F-

Jg, descendants, Sape. (11) a+.

Passim. Generally, the superior man, 
with a moral and intellectual significance 
ot varying degree. Often ga ruler. Some- 
times, the highest style of man, the saga,

(12) R F. the emperor; see on X.

5 ACE iA(12) R F. the emperor; see on X.

5 ACE iA

MF ise b. TAF K. 
(1) Very. PD. M.; xxxiii. 2. (2) A sur-

name, That of Confucius. XL F. 
Possim, JL N. A., XIV. xli; xlii. 1, 
yL * F. A., V. xiv.

To be preserved, to be alive, to con- 
tinue, to be. D. M., xix. 5; xxii; xxviii. 
5. A., VIII. iv. 3.

Filial piety, to be fi Ps 
vi: vil; viii; xx.; xxi. 
et al., sape;

(1) The eldest, A., VII. iii. 2. (2) A 
surname, that of one of the three families 
of Loo. A. II. v. 2. (ñfi. JK); XIX. 
xix.—II. v. 1.—XTIX.xviii.-— VIII. iv.—II. 
vis V. viis XVIII. iii. VI. xiiin—XIV. 
xii; xiii.— G. L. o., x. 22.

(1) Fatherless, an orphan. 
A., VIII. vi. 
IV. xxv.

The youngest. Used in designations, 
A., XVIII. xi. A surname, that of one of 
the three families of Loo. A., III. i. GE

FO) et al: NIV, xxxviii: XVI, i. 13. 
zx : XVIII. iii (48) A

CF Je XVIII. ii (45). ZE t 
^ A., II xx: x i: XI. vis XII. 
xvii; xvii. xvx, zx HR, A., XI. 
xxiii.: EE Ay hg iv. The

disciple Tsze-loo was & . A., V. xxv.: 
et al.

(1) A grandson, Td descendants.

—

A., II. v. 1, 2; 
; xxii; xxviii 5:

G.L.c., xi, 
(2) Solitary, alone. A,

G. L. o., x. 14. D.M, xvii. 1: xviii. 2. A., 
XVI. i. 83 ili. (2) Used in double sur- 
names. ‘Ay SIX. xxiji; xxiv. —ÓÀX1V.

330

xxxviii: XVI. i. 13.—II. v. 2.—III. xiii.:

XIV. xx. 2.—XIX. xxii. 
Up. 3d tone, used for YR. Complai-

sant, docile, obedient. A., VII. XXxv.:

sun 
XIV. iv.: et al.

Bh Who? which? D.M, xxxi. 3. A. 
shuh III. xv.; xxii. 3: et al, sepe. What? A., 
shu III. i.

ft To learn; learned; learning. G. L. r., 
AP I. D.M. xx. 9, 10, 19, 20. A, I. i. 1; 
hsio vi; vil; vili. xiv.: et al., sepe.

35 A., surname, A., XVII. xx.

joo i

ju

Be Unlucky omens of prodigious animals. 
ne D. M, xxiv.

nich

THE 40:1 RADICAL.

ZR To keep, to maintain, D. M., vii. A., 
show VIII. xiii, 1: XV. xxxii. 1, 2, 3: XVI. i. 
shou 12.

2 (1) A condition of entire tranquillity. 
gan G. Lir., 2. A, XVI. i. 10. (2) Without 
an any effort. D. M., xx. 9. A., III. xxxvii.2 (1) A condition of entire tranquillity. 
gan G. Lir., 2. A, XVI. i. 10. (2) Without 
an any effort. D. M., xx. 9. A., III. xxxvii.

(3) Comfort, at ease. A. I. xiv: XVII - 
xxi 4, 5. (4) To rest in. A,, II. x. 3: 
IV. ii. (5) To give rest to. A., V. xxv. 
4: XIV. xlv: XVI. i. 11. (9) An inter- 
rogative, how, where. A., XI. xxv. 10.

The name of a State, D.M., xxviii, 5. 
A., III. ix.: VI. xiv, 
Complete. A., XIII. viii.

S

2 
à

ru

g 
8 
E

(i) Honourable, pertaining to one's an-

cestors, A Jj the ancestral temple, 
D. M., xvii, 1: etal. A, X. i. 2: et al.

Ray D. M., xix. 3. .. kindred. 
A., XIII. xx. 2. (2) To follow as master. 
A., I. xiii. (3) 155 d an ancient em- 
peror, A., XIV. xliii.

An officer of government, D.M., xx. 
14. A. III. xxii. 2: XIV, xliii, 2: XIX. 
xxiii. 8: XX. i. 6.

Determined, settled, G. L. r., 2. D. M., 
xx. 16. A., XVI. 7. To settle. G. L. c., 
ix. 3.

(1) Right, what is right. D. M., xx. 5; 
xxv.8. (2) Reasonable, to be expected. 
A., XIX. xxii. 4. (3) Asa verb, to re-

gulate, discharge duty to. G.L.c., ix. 6, 
7. D. M., xv. 2; xvii. 4.

Strangers, guests. Be A., V. vii.

P3

Kuh 4: XIV. xx. 2.

k‘o : 
Vf A house. A., XIX. xxiii. 2. Ef E, 
kung VIII. xxi.

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

Es

shih

}

5

yung

z}

2 2 
es

ay

$F 
=.

BS

= 
Ei 
=:

B dn

> 
& 
a

INDEX VII.

(1) An apartment, the inner roomsof a 
house. D. M., xxxiii. 3. A., IX. xxx.: 
XI. xiv, 2; xix, So, Ed , A., XIX. 
xxiii. 2. (2) A family. A., V. vii. 3: 
VI. xii, XIII. viii. So E XX, DM, 
xv, 2. Á . the ducal house. A., 
XVI. ii. (3) FH . a house, A., 
VIII. xxi.

Injury, to injure, G. L. o., x. 22. D. M., 
xxx. 3. A., II. xvi.: XV. viii.

(1) Governor or commandant, of a town.

A., V. vii. 8: VI. iii. 3; vii: xii: XI. 
xxiv: XIII. xvii. (2) Head minister to a 
chief. A., XIII. ii. (2) NE, a pre- 
mier. A., XIV. xliii. (4) The surname 
of one of Conf. disciples. A., V. ix.: et 
al.

Feasting. A., XVI. v.Feasting. A., XVI. v.

(1) The family. G. L. r., 4, 6: c., viii, 
1. 8: ix. 1, 3, 5. . N,, the houschold,

c., ix. 6. ZR D.M,xv.2 (2) A 
family, the name for the possessions of 
the chiefs in a State. G.L.c., x. 22, 23. 
D. M., ix; xx. 11, 12, 15; xxiv. A., III. 
ji: V. vii. 3: XII. ii; xx. 3, 6, 6: XVI i. 
10: XVII, xviii; XIX. xxv. 4. (3) K 
. apartments. A., XIX. xxiii. 2.

(1) To bear, admit. A., X. iv. 1. (2) 
Forbearance, to forbear, G.L, x. 14. 
D. M., xxxi 1. A., XIX. iii. To com- 
mand forbearance. D. M., xxvii. 7. (3) 
Deportment, A. VIII. iv. 8: X. vi. 1. 
ZN É a placid appearance, A., X. v. 
2. (4) HE Z easy, unconstrained, 
(5) A name. A, V. i. 2: XI. v.

(1) To stop over night. A., XIV. xli.: 
XVIII. vii. 3. To keep over night. A, 
X. viii. 8: XII. xii. 2. (2) Asleep and 
perching. A, VII. xxvi.

To commit to one's charge. A., VIII. 
vi.

Concentrative, D.., xxxi. I. 
`v

Rich, riches, G. L. o., vi. 4. DM, xvii, 
1; xviii 2. A., I. xv. 1: er d. Metaph, 
A. XII. xxii. 5. To enrich. A., XIII. 
ix. 3, 4: XX. i. 4. Often joined with H-

Cold, wintry, A., IX. xxvii,

INDEX VIIL

(1) To examine, to study; studious, D.

chi N., vi; xxxi. 1. A, II. x. 3: ef al. To

chen look after. G. I. c., x. 22. (2) To be 
displayed. P. M., xii, 3, 4. n

i (1) Few, to make few. G. L. C., x. 19. 15

kra D. M., xxix. 1. A, II. xviii. 2: VIII. v.:

kun

aad. (2) pel ay zt. a designation of 
the wife of the prince of a Stute. A., 
XVI. xiv.

After Aid with intervening worde, than,

ning so and so it is better to. G. L. o., x. 22. 
A., III. iv. 3; xii. 1: et al. 
TE To sleep, be in bed. A., V. ix.: X. viii, 
iin ; , nts „ 
chin 9; xvi. 1: XV. xxx, Pa K. sleeping | Faou 
dress. A., X. vi. 6. Shaoy (i) Full. A, VIII. v. (2) Fruit. A., 
shih IX. xx. 1. (3) Really. G. L. o., x. 14. Q 
45 Generous, magnunimous. D. M., x. 3; Jj 
k'wan xxxi 1. A., III. xxvi; XVII. vi: XX. | shaou 
k‘nan i. 9. shao 
aie Yo examine accurately, discriminate. hy 
shn D.M,xx.19. A, XX. i. I. shang 
shén 
SR A name. A., XIV, xxxviii, 
leaou 
lino 
TÉ Precious; precious things; a jewel, G. 
paou Loc, x. 12, 13. D. II., xxvi. 9. A., XVII. J 
pao i. 2.

THE 4lsr RADICAL, .

Archery. D. M., xiv. 5. A., III. vii;

2

shay xvi: IX. ii. 2: XIV. vi. Rend shih A.,

shó VII. xxvi, to shoot with an arrow and 
string.

8t To dislike, be disliked, D.M., xvi, 4;

y xxix. 6. P

yi she

i 
yg. (1) Shall, will, to be going to, to be about shih

tséung to. D. M., xxiv. A., III. xxiv: XVI. i. 1, 
chingo 6: et ul. (2) yg- n, a sage, or there. 
abouts, A., IX. vi. 2. (3) YY. iy, to

act as internuncius. A., XIV, xlvii, 1; 
XVIL xx,

(1) Alone, unassisted. A., XIII. v, 
(2) Assuming, presuming, 2 Hi, D.

„ Xx viii. 1.

(1) Honourable in dignity. D.M., xvii,

chin

Bi

chuen 
chuan

cd 
iun 2; xviii. 2. (2) To honour. D.M, xix. 
5; xx. 5, 8, 13, 14: etal A., XIX. iil: B 
XX. ii. 1, 2. H 
2 wa 
ay To reply to, in reply, Spoken of an chi 
tuy inferior answering a superior. Passim, 
tui The only ease where we can conceive of

an equality between the parties is A., 
XVIII. vi. 3.

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PIRASES.

331

THE 425 RADICAL, Ih.

Small, smallness; in small matters, D. 
M., xii, 2; xxx. 3. A., I. xii. 1: II. xxii: 
etal. Sape. N. see on X. ap 
. my little children. my disciples. A.,

V.xxi: VIII. iii.: XI. xvi. 2: XVII. ix. 
We, the disciples. A., XVII. xix. 2. 
The disciples. A, XIX. xii I, a little

child, A, XX. i. 3. APA, h A. 
designations of the wife of tlie prince of 
a State. A., XVI. xiv.

(1) Alittle, A, XIII. vin. (2) AY 
Biff. the assistant musie-muster. A., 
XVIII. ix, 5, (8) “ay iif, A name. A., 
XVIII, xviii. 1, 3.

Up. 3d tone, Young, youth. 
xxv. 4; IX. vi. 3; ix: XVI. vii.

A., V.Up. 3d tone, Young, youth. 
xxv. 4; IX. vi. 3; ix: XVI. vii.

A., V.

(1) To esteem, A., XVI. vi: XVII, 
xxiii. To add to, esteem above. A, IV, 
vi. 1. To place over. D. M., xxxiii. 1. 
(2) Still, likewise. G. L. C., x. 14. (3) 
Pray, let it be. D. M., xxxiii. 3.

THE 43» RADICAL, Jp. 
" A to blame men, D. M., xiv, 8.

A., XIV. xxxvii. 2. Occasions for blame. 
A., IV. vi. ;

(1) To approach to. A., I. xiv: XVI,

i.6, (2) To complete, for the good of, 
A., III. xix.

THE 44 Tu RADICAL NH.

Corpse-like, A., X. xvi. 1.

A cubit. A., VIII. vi.

4h pon Confucius.’ D. M., ii, 1; xxx. 
i. A., XIX. xxii; Xxili.; xxiv.; xxv.

(1) To correct, T F, good cor-

rector, designation of the chief minister

of Ts'oo, A., V. Xvili. 1. (2) (UR. an

ancient. minister. A., XII. xxii, 6. (3)

Ei A. an aucient minister, grand- 
teacher. G. L. C., x. 4. '

(1) To dwell in, to reside, G. L. o., vi. 
2. D. M., xxvi. 9. A., II. i.: et al., sepe, 
With a reference to privacy. A., X. vi. 
7; vii. 2; xvi. 1: XI. xxv. 3: XIII. viii: 
et ul. (2) Metaphorically, applied to 
situations, virtues. D. M., x. 8, 4 ; xxvii. 
7. A., III. xxvi: et al., saps. (3) To

332

A

uh 
wu

Hr

pug

Ja

of

hn

li 
2

te

li

Ll

shan

"2 
15 un 
tsu:

ts “ng xxvii. 6.

hij 
ping 
r NS Dd 
1413 
FE 
ftu 
isui

Jil

eh'uen xvi. 
(n

IN

chow 
chou

T.

hung

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES,

keep. A., V. xviii. (4) To sit down.

As XVII. viii.2. (5) Comfort. A., XIV. 
. JER Or F the economy of a family.

" XIII. viii.

G. L. c., vi. 4. D. M., xxxiii,

**

tso 
i house,

Up. 24 tone. A., XX.

ii. 1. b£ SA AC to keep in the breath, 
A., X. iv. 4. 
Often, nensis A., V. iv. 2: NI.

xvili. 1, 2. `

To put away.

r5 
AK

woo 
: wu 
(1) To tread on. A., VIII. iii.: X. iv, 2. 
(2) The name of the emperor Trang. A., 
XX. i. 3. 
THE 46ru RADICAL, III.

(1) A hill, mountain, mountains, G, 
Le. x. 4. DML, xxvi. 9. A., V.xvii.: VI. 
iv.; xxi: X. xviii.J. A mound, A., IX.(1) A hill, mountain, mountains, G, 
Le. x. 4. DML, xxvi. 9. A., V.xvii.: VI. 
iv.; xxi: X. xviii.J. A mound, A., IX.

xviii, (2) AR i the name of a moun- 
tain, A. III. vi. (3) AA ME a double

surname, A., XVII. v. 
Lofty, great. G. L. O., i. 3; x 
xxvii. 2.

. 5. D. M.,

To exalt; to honour and obey, D. M.,

A. XII. x.; xxi. I, 3.

The fall of a mountain. Metaph., down- 
falls, to be ruined. A., XVI. i. 12: 
XVII. xxi. 2.

119 d: an officer of TSG. A., V. xviii,

The name of a mountain. D. M., xxvi. 
9. ;

zu Hit Hp X how majestic! A., VIII.

AS

Feaou 
ch‘iao

heang the name of a village.

INDEX VII.

(1) The left, on the left. G. L.., x. 3.

P. M., xvi. 3. A., XIV. xviii. 2. JE

Zi £F. to move the left arm or the 
right, A., X. iii, 2. (2) JE fr a don-

ble surname. A., V. xxiv. Sume make 
Æ alone to be the surname,

A., I. iii.: III. 
XVII. xvii.

Fine, artful, specious. 
viii. 1: V. xxiv: XV. xxvi:

(1) A wizard, a witch. A., XIII. xxii. 
(2) AL I5. a double surname, A., VII. 
XXX. 2, 3. "

THE 49:1 RADICAL, H.

Self, Himself, yourself, & plural. Purs- 
sim, Observe X E, XIV. xlii. 2. Used 
for fili. G. L. C., vi. 2,

(1) To stop, end. D. II., xi. 2; xxvi. 10. 
A., XVII. xxii: XVIII. v. 1. In the

phrase A 15H, not to be able to stup, 
what is the result of necessity. As Be s

2,3. (2) 1 from, resign.

xvii. 1. (3) . x P. and Bx:

de it is all over. A., V. xxvi: 18

vii: XV. xii. (4) m t. often follow- 
ed by Re, and stop, and nothing more, 
D. M., xxv. 3. A, VI. v: VIII. xx. 3: 
XII. vi: et al. (5) th, E H. X. 
and fe, all serve to give emphasis 
to the statement or assertion which has 
preceded. A., I. xiv. xv. 3: II. xvi. l: 
III. viii. 3: et al, supe, (6) Indicates the 
past, or present complete tense. A, 
VIII. x.: XVIII. vii. 5.

(1) A Jane, A, VI. ix, (2) E AK, 
A iX

sis xix. 1. 
"Un init G.L 4 hsiang 1 
"uM * ecipitous. .L. C., X. 4. ve 7 — T 
jt Pre d E Yielding. A., IX. xxiii, 
sur

THE 47ri RADICAL, A(1) A Jane, A, VI. ix, (2) E AK, 
A iX

sis xix. 1. 
"Un init G.L 4 hsiang 1 
"uM * ecipitous. .L. C., X. 4. ve 7 — T 
jt Pre d E Yielding. A., IX. xxiii, 
sur

THE 47ri RADICAL, A

A stream, streams, A., VI. iv.: IX. 
Jil Jib» fl wing streams, river-

il

she

currents. J). Al., XXX. 3. shih 
2,500 families, HH II. a neighbour- th 
hood. A., XV. v. 2. poo 
pu 
THE 4871 RADICAL. T. i 7 
10 
; ; > hsi 
A mechanic, an artizan, A., XV. xix, 777 
a IJ. the various artizans, D.M, e A 
xx. 12, 13. 14. A., XIX. vii. I. uu

THE sor RADICAL. III.

A brin: the market-place. A., X.

viii. 5: XIV. xxxviii. 1.

(1) Linen-cloth, A., X. vii, 1. (2)

To be displayed. D:M., xx. 2.

(1) Few, rarely. A., V. xxii: XVI. ii. 
(2) To stop, pause. A., XL xxv. T.

Children, D. M., xv. 2.

INDEX VIT.

5 Silk. A., XVII. xi,

pa

pu

Ait) dan. A., XX. i. 3. L. AR, see

te . 
ü E (2) An emperor, ap Hit, The

Canon of the emperor, name of a portion 
vf the Shoo-king. G. L. C., i. 3. 
1 
fih

A commander, general. A., IX. xxv.

shine

shuni

Fi Tolead on, A, XII. xvii. G. L. o., ix. 4,

vilt

Kit

fill (1) The multitude, the people. G. L. c.,

ve X. 5. (2) A host, properly of 2,500 men.

szü fan p A., XI. xxv. 4 (3) A teacher. 
As II. xi: VII. xxi.: XV. xxxv: XIX. 
xxii, 2. (1) -£ hij. the chief criminal 
judge. A., XVIII. ii: XIX. xix. (5)

D fip Bk wis Je 1 The grand music

master. All. xxxiii.: VIII. xv.: XVIII. 
ix. 1. yy [am the assistant do, A., 
XVIII. ix. 5. fyfj alone. A., Xv. xli. 
1,2. (6) The grand-teacher, one of the 
highest oM cers. G. L. o., x. 4. (7) The 
nume of one of Conf. disciples. A., XI. 
xv: XVII. iii. 
A mat. A., J. ix.; xii: XV. xli. 1.

14

Jh 
seth 
thsi 
pie 
up* 
fae

tai

W.

7j Constant, regular. 
chang XIX. xxii. 2.

Wit A curtain, curtain-shaped. 
wei 9.

irs To curtain, overspread. D.M., xxx, 2. 
iuou

tao

A sash. A, V. vii. 4,

G. I. c., X. x. A,

A., X. vi.

THE 51s RADICAL, sx

(1) To seek for, with a view to. A?irs To curtain, overspread. D.M., xxx, 2. 
iuou

tao

A sash. A, V. vii. 4,

G. I. c., X. x. A,

A., X. vi.

THE 51s RADICAL, sx

(1) To seek for, with a view to. A?

II. xvi. 1. (2) A shield. FX. 
shields and speurs, war. A., XVI. i. 13. 
(3) Hk FE, an uncle of the tyrant Chow, 
A., XVIII. 1. (4) The name of a band- 
master of Loo. A., XVIII. ix. 2.

(1) A state of perfect tranquillity ; to 
bring to, or be brought to, such a state. 
G. L. r., 6, C, X. 1. P. M., xxxili, 5. (2) 
Level. A., IX. xviii, ZE, the 
whole life. A., XIV. xiii. 2. (3) An. hon. 
epithet. A., V. xvi.

kan

pug

1 
nien

E3

hing 
hsing

CUINESE CHARACTERS AND PIIRASES. 333

A year, years, the year. 
3. A., I. xi: et al, sepe.

D. M., xviii.

Luck, fortunate, fortunately.

xiv.4. A., VI. Has xvii: 
XI. vi.

D. J., 
VII. xxx. 3:

THE 5?» RADICAL. f.

Young. A., XIV. xlvi: XVIII. vii. 5.

(1) What is small, - mildly. A., IV.

xviii. (2) Influence, what may he ex- 
Pn from, A., XIII. XV. I, 3. 4, 5. (3)

ji Jie x. perhaps, peradventure, J). II., 
aan 
xxix. 6.

TNE 53» RADICAL. J.

To arrange in order. D. M., xix. 4.

A treasury. 
1.

G. L. C., 21, A., XI, xiii.

The court of a house. 
xii. 2, 3.

t.. ` - 
Measures. D.M, xxviii, 2. i ye.

the laws. A. XX. i. 6.

A., III. i.: XVI.

To surmise, conjecture. D. I., xvi. 4.

An arsenal. G. L. o., x. 21,

(1) Numerous. A., XIII. ix. 2, 3. Jie

R. the numerous, the masses of (—the 
common) . D. Al., xx. 12, 13; xxix. 
3. (2) Jit AS Je and Jie P, perhaps, 
near to. D. M., xxix. 6. A., JI. xviii. I.

(1) Ordinary. PD. M., xiv. 4. (2) Use,

. D. Al., 
viii; ix; xi. 3; xxvii.

course, In thc phrase—FH A

fi. 1, 2; iii; vii; 
6. A., VI. xxvii.

(1) The hon, name of one of the chiesf 
of the Ke family. A., X. xi. 2: XIV. xx: 
II. xx. VI. vii: AM vi: XII. xvii; xviii; 
(3) HE un „title of a book in the 
Shoo-king. 6.1.6, i. 1; li. 2; ix. 2; x. 
10.

A measure for grain, containing about 
120 English pints. A. VI. iii. J.

xix.

834

fitA measure for grain, containing about 
120 English pints. A. VI. iii. J.

xix.

834

fit

lien 
lien 
Ji 
sow 
sou

Je 
Kew 
chiu

yj A temple. Inthe phrases— inl jij, 
menou p, M, xix, 3. 2 Ja DAL, xvii, 1; 
miao : PELA 
xviii. 2; xix. 4, 6. A., XI. xxv. 6, 11: 
XIV. xx, 2: XIX. xxiii, 3, Fe Jag. A, 
III. xv.: X. xiv. 
75 (1) To stop short. D. M., xi. 2. A., 
VI. Xx. (2) To fail, to cause to fail, put 
aside. D. M., xx 16. A., XIV. xxxviii 
2: XV, xxii: XVIII. vii. 5. % EH]. 
fallen States. (3) To be out of office. 
A,, V. i. 2: XVII. viii. 4: XX. i. 6.

E Broad, expanded, Spoken of the earth, 
wang D. M., xxvi. 9. Of the mind. G. L. c., vi. 
kuang4. D. M., xxvii. 6.

Modesty, reserve. A., XVII, xvi. 2. 
To be concealed. A., II. x, 4.

A stable, A, X. xii.

‘

THE m RADICAL. X.

aE BE. the court of a sovereign, A,, 
ting X. i. 2. 
qz To set up. D. M., xxix, 3. 
keen 
chien 
THE 5jtu RADICAL, Ff.

77 
y 
yl

To play at chess, A., XVII. xxii.

THE 561 RADICAL. .

To shoot with an arrow having a string

yh attached to it. A., VII. xxvi.

yi

X The cross bar in front of a carriage ; to 
shih bow forward to that bar. A., X. xvi. 3. 
AX To commit parricide or regicide. A., 
she V. xviii, 2; XI. xxiii. 6: XIV. xxii 1, 2. 
shih

THE 5714 RADICAL. H.

4f H. the designation of one of Conf. 
disciples. A,, VI. i. 2, 3; iv.: et al. 
To condole with mourners. A., X. vi.

10.

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PIIRASES,

INDEX VII.

(1) Not, D. M., viii; xi. 1, 2: etal,

feh A., III. viz V. viii. 8: VI. xxv: XII. xv.

fu (2) 950 p a man's unine. A., XVII. 
v.

JA Large in mind. A., VIII. vii. To en- 
hwang large. A. XV. Xxvili.: XIX. ii. 
huang

* (1) A younger brother. Hy, elder 
te and younger brothers, a brother; sce on

ti X. RE Dt the same, D. M., xx. 8, 
13. A, XI. iv. (2) Used for ip, the 
duty of u younger brother. A., I. ii. 1; 
XIV.xlvi G. L. o., ix. I; x. 1. (3) DE

„a youth. A., I. vi: IL viii. Ati X. RE Dt the same, D. M., xx. 8, 
13. A, XI. iv. (2) Used for ip, the 
duty of u younger brother. A., I. ii. 1; 
XIV.xlvi G. L. o., ix. I; x. 1. (3) DE

„a youth. A., I. vi: IL viii. A

disciple, disciples. A., VI. ii.: VII. xxxiii.: 
VILL ili. IX. ii. 2: XI. vi. 1.

ay Stringed instruments; prop. the strings 
héen of such. A., XVII. iv. I. The same as 2 
haien 9»

"E (1) HA and F Ble, the designation

chung of one of Conf., disciples. A., IV. xviii. 
1; xxiii, 1: V. xviii. XIX. xv.; xvi: et al., 
sape, (2) Ae ve a man's name, A., 
XVIII. viii. 1.

mp Energy, forcefulness.

k'ëung 4, 5. Strong, energetic.

ch'iang xxxi. 1.

941 Will using strenuous effort. D. BI.,

keang xx. 9.

chiang

me

mi

D. M., x. 1, 2, 3, 
D. M., xx. 21;

More, still more. A., IX. x. 1.

THE 50 ru RADICAL, $.

To appear, be manifested, G. L. o., vi. 
D. M., xxiii, 1,

X 
hing 2 
hsing

Elegant, accomplished, G. L. c., x. 14.

To lose their lenves. A., IX. xxvii.

teaou 
tiao

M

122 equally blended. A, VI. xvi, 
pn

2 An ancient worthy, called E [2 by 
png Conf. A., VII. i. 
peng

THE Gorm RADICAL, 7.

1s That, that man, he, him, A., XIV. x. 
ne 2: XVI. i. 6. G. L. C., iii. 4; x. 4, 22. 725 
2 there. „D. M., xxix. 6.

INDEX VII.

ft (1) To go, going. A., IX, xviii; XVII, 
wang da ve VII. I. 2: XVIII. ii. 1. DM. xx.

14. im ft. and onwards, A., III. x. 
(2) The gone, the past. A., I. xv. 3: III.

xxi. 2: VIL xxviii. 2: XVIII. v.

IE AEA: punitive military expeditions. 
-ching A., XVI. ii.

chen

TE (1) To wait, wait for. A., IX. xii: 
ne XIII. ii. 1. D.M, xxvii. 4. (2) To treat. 
tui A, XVIII. iii.

f E Yo imitate, follow as a model. D. M., 
bh xxx. I.

lü .

1$ (1) Asa noun, That which is after, 
e the back. Sepe. JE {f A., IX. x. I.

Preceded by . A., XIV. xxii. 4. 5: 
et al. A successor. A., XIV. Xv. (2) 
As an adjective. D. M., xi. 1: et al. 1$lü .

1$ (1) Asa noun, That which is after, 
e the back. Sepe. JE {f A., IX. x. I.

Preceded by . A., XIV. xxii. 4. 5: 
et al. A successor. A., XIV. Xv. (2) 
As an adjective. D. M., xi. 1: et al. 1$

JE 11 A., IX. v. 8, k A, A., IX. 
xxii. (3) As an adverb, Afterwards. 
Sepe. Often follows PAS and itn: (4) 
Asaverb. To come after, fall behind, 
make an after consideration. A., III. 
viii, 2: VI. xiii; xx: XI. xxii; xxv. 8: 
XII. xxi. 3: XV. v. 3; xxvii: XVIII. vii. 
1.

1E

king

ching

4E A

4 (1) To attain to, to be found. G. L. r., 
th 2. P. M., xx. 18, 20. (2) To get, with 
an objective following. Scene. Without 
an objective, getting, anything as gain 
to he got. A., XVI. vii. x. I: XIX. i. 
(3) The auxiliary can often followed by

Wn. Sepe. (4) Followed by an adjec- 
tive, and often in the question dij £u 
e can bee=can be considered. A,, IV.

i: V. x.; xviii, 1, 2: et al. (5) AAN. 
could not but. A., VII. ü. 3. (0) 2

14. to be himself, D. M., xix. 2. 
(1) On foot. A., XI. vii. 2. (2) Vainly,

A short, cross, path. A., VI. viii,

too Without cause. A., XVII. v. 3. (3) Pis- 
tu ciple, associate. A., XL xvi. 2: XVIII. 
vi. 3, 4. 
{E To move towards, A., VII. iii.: XII. 
se X. I. 
hsí 
1t To follow; to act according to. G. L. o., 
cs · un ix. 4; x. 2. D. M., xxviii. 5; xxix. 2. A.

II. iv. 6; xii: et al, sape. $t R. to 
be engaged in govt. Generally, in a 
subordinate capacity,—A., VI. vi: XIII. 
xiii; xx. 4: XVIII. v. 1. But not subor-

dinate in—A., XX. iiw]. (t 8. to be

CIIIN ESE CHARACTERS AND PIIRASES.

335

engaged in affairs, to act. A., VIII. v. 
1: XVIL i. 2.

Up. 3d tone. Proceeding on. A., III.

tsung xxiii.

tit Low. 3d tone. To be in close attend-

1939 ance on. Always te Hm or ti jt 
F. A,, III. xxiv; V. vie XI. ii. 1: di:

XV. i 2.

1t HE BS, naturally and easily. D. M.,

sung xx. 18.

mp To drive a carriage. A. II. v. 2: IX,

yu ii. 2.

yü

4 (0) To make good. A., I. xiii. (2) To

Jih report a commission. A. X. iii. 4. (3)1t HE BS, naturally and easily. D. M.,

sung xx. 18.

mp To drive a carriage. A. II. v. 2: IX,

yu ii. 2.

yü

4 (0) To make good. A., I. xiii. (2) To

Jih report a commission. A. X. iii. 4. (3)

fu To return to. A., X. iv. ö: XII. i. 1. (4)

To repeat. A., XI. v.

GF Again, A., VI. vii: VII. v. As a verb.

Jow A., VII. viii.

fou

48 (1) 112 41fü B. by orderly method,

seen A., IX. x. 2. (2) Tethered. A., X. v. I.

sun

ok (1) That which is minute, minute, D.

we l., i. 3; xvi. 5; xxvi. 6; xxxiii. 1. Re-

wei duced. A., XVI. iii. (2) A negative par-

ticle, if uot. A, XIV. xxviii. 2. (3) 
Tk F. tlie viscount of the State Wei. 
A, XVIII. i. (4) $y A, a double 
surname. A., V. xxiij.—XIV. xxxiv.

(GX () To be evidenced. D.M. xxvi. 2, 3.

ching (2) To attest, be attested. D. I., xxviii. 
chéng 5; xxix. 2, 8. A., III. ix.

Virtue, virtuous, Passin, Energy,

f 
tth influence. D.M 4 Xvi. 1. A, XII. xix. 
to 
K — (D To remove. A., III. ii, (2) Per- 
chë vading, with reference to a law of tithe.

A., XII. ix. 2, 3. 
(1) To seek. D. M., xix. 4. (2) To

A'eaou copy anothers and pretend that it is 
one's own; to pry out. A., XVII. xxiv. 2.

THE 61sr RADICAL, .

The heart, the mind :—denotes the men- 
Is not found

sin tal constitution generally.

shin in the Chung Yung. G. L. r., 4, ö: c. vi. 
4; vii. 1, 2, 3; ix. 2; x. 14. A., II. iv. 6: 
VI. v.: XIV. xlii, 1: XVII. xxii; XX. i. 
8, 7.

77 * Must, used as an auxiliary; often

peih will certainly, would certainly. Some-

pi times also with no verb following. Pas-

sim, I^ th, what must,=what is ne-

cessary is. ...... Sometimes conditionally,

G. L. o., iv. 1. A, III. vii: VI, vii; xxviiiz 
r

wan 
900

VII x. 3; XIII. iii, 2; xxi,

Z 
je» 
gue 
jen 
tih 
ti 
* 
EU 
the 
chih

^n 
A

he

chi

A 
A 
wang

is 
chung

chih

JU 
neem 
nien

hwüh 
iu

The distressed, distress.

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES,

M 
Til. V. no

arbitrary predeterminations. A.. IX. iv. 
To bear, forbear, A., III. i.: XV. xxvi.chih

JU 
neem 
nien

hwüh 
iu

The distressed, distress.

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES,

M 
Til. V. no

arbitrary predeterminations. A.. IX. iv. 
To bear, forbear, A., III. i.: XV. xxvi.

To be wrong, in error. G. L. o., ix, 8.

The will aim. G.L.c., iv. 1. D.M, 
xix. 2; xxxiii. 3. A., I. xi: et ul., sepe. 
p +, the determined scholar. A., 
XV. viii. `

[EA 2 dread, caution, D. M., ii. 2

E Jig. dread, e . DM, ii. 2.

To forget, be forgotten. A., VII. xviii. 
2: XII. xxi. 3: XIV. xiii, 2: XIX. v. 
G.L.c. iii. 4, 5.

(1) Self-devotion, generous siucerity.

Often in combination with 423. G.L.c., 
x. 18. D. XI., xiii. 3; xx. 14. A., iv. xv. 
2: V. xxvii: et al. (2) Faithful, loyal: 
A., I. iv.; viii. 2: II. xx: III. xix.: V. 
xviii. 1: XII. xxiii: XIV. viii: XV. v. 2: 
XVI. x.

Anger, to be angry. A., XII. xxi, 3: 
XVI. x. XVII. xvi. 2. G. Lc. vii. i.

To dislike, A., IX. xxvi. 2.

To think of, kcep in mind. A., V. xxii,

(1) 2 15-2. E. suddenly. A.,

IX. Xx. (2) In names. 432.

xvii, 4h 22. A. XVIII. xi.

To be ashamed, modest. A., XIV, xxi.

A., XIV.

Auger, to show anger. A., VI. ii. D.

M., i4 ; xxxiii, 4.

(1) To think, to think of ; thought,

thoughts, thinking. D. M., xx. 7, 18, 19, 20. 
A., II. ii.; xve IV. xvii: et al, sape. (2)

A., final particle, D.M., xvi. 4. (3) jii 
A. a Cisciple of Conf. A., VI. iii. 3.

46 tf 7t. pleased-like. A., X. iv. 
5: XIII. xxviii.

A, VI. iii, 2.

it 
sing 
hsing

yuen 
yüan

wue 
kuai

Te

hung 
eng

kung

Ti

AY 
shoo 
shu

‘NL 
sc ith 
io 
Ile. 
ch'e 
ch'ih

y 
4j 
seun 
hsin

A 
ij 
luruy 
"hut 
AA 
seth 
hsi 
As

kung

INDEX VII,

G. I. O, x. 16, J). 
*

The nature (of man). 
Ma i. I; xxiz xail; xxv. 2; xx il. b. 
V. xii: XVII. ii.

(1) To murmur against. be murmured 
Resentment, in thought. word, 
D. Al., xiv. 2; xx. 13. A. IV. 
(2) What

A., XIV.

against, 
or deed. 
xii: V. xxibs et ul, soip. 
provokes resentment, injury. 
xxxvi. 13.

Extraordinary things. A., VII. Xx. D. 
M, xi. I.A., XIV.

against, 
or deed. 
xii: V. xxibs et ul, soip. 
provokes resentment, injury. 
xxxvi. 13.

Extraordinary things. A., VII. Xx. D. 
M, xi. I.

(1) Constantly: constaney, G. L. c., x. 
19. A., VII. xxv. 2, 3: XIII. xxii. I, 2. 
(2) [ii du. an officer of ‘Tse, A., XIV. 
xxii. 2.

To be afraid of. to be in danger of. A, 
V. xiii: VIII. xvii: XVI. i. 13: XIX. iv. 
ZU MB, G. L. o. vii. 1. D.M, i. 2.

The principle of reciprocity, making our 
own feelings the rule for our dealing with 
others, Aw IV. xv. 2: XV. xxii. G. L. C., 
ix. 4. D.M, xiii. 3.

To commiserate, treat compassionatoly. 
G. L. o., x. 1.

Shame, a sense of shame, what is shame-

ful, to be ashamed of. D.M., xx. 10. K., 
I. Xii. II. iii. 1, 2: IV. ix. xxii V. xiv.; 
xxiv: VIII. xiii. 3: IX. xxvi. 1: XIII. 
xx. XIV. i.; xxix. I.

Reverently careful. G. L. o., iii, 4. 155

Ji Hy, simple-and-sincere-like. A., 
X. i. 1. 
To regret, to repent, have occasion. for

repentance. D.M., xi. 3. A., II. xviii.

2: VII. x. 3. 
(1) To breathe, A., X. iv. 4. (2) To 
stop, cease, D.M., xx. 25 xxvi. I, 2.

To revere, be reverential, sedate, reve- 
rence. D. M., xxxiii. 5. A, I. xiii: V. 
xv.; xxiv.: VII. xxxvii: VIII. ii: XII. v. 
4: XIII. xix: XVI. x. —toomolest, A,, 
XIX. xxv, 1. PAS p. he made himself 
reverent. A., XV. iv.

Contrary to right, eontradictory, to 
collide, G.L.c, x. 10. D. M., xxix. 3; 
XXX. 3.

Reaching far. D. M., xxiv, 3, 4, 6, 8.

To be grieved, anxious, about, A., I. 
xvi: III. xxiv.: IV. xiv: XII. v. 4 ; xviii: 
XIV. xxxii: XVI. i. 10: XVII. xv. 2. 3. 
Jab EE, Gases vi. 1. Il Ik. distress 
and diilieudy. PD. II., Xiv. 2.

INDEN ‘VIL

3h

dong

ching

Wy 
hwo 
*huo

AU 
y 2 
101

n 
jt

Aveny 
thui

eunINDEN ‘VIL

3h

dong

ching

Wy 
hwo 
*huo

AU 
y 2 
101

n 
jt

Aveny 
thui

eun

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES. 337 
A man's nume. A., XVII. xx, = To love. G. I.. . „viii, 1; x. 15. D.M. 
gue ix. 5. &.. I. v.: vis HE xvii, 2 2: III. x. 
ai 2; xxii. 1: XIV. viii; XVII. iv. 3. Love. 
Unable to explain one's-sclf, A, VII. A., XVII. xxi. 6. 
vii. x To be angrily discomposed, dissutisfae- 
Sincerity, the real state of a case, G. wan tion. A., I. i. 3: V. xviii. 1: NV. i. 3. 
I.. d. iv. A., XIII. iv. 3: XIX. xix. ven 
i jua Ashamed, D.M, xxxiii, 3. 
(1) To be deceived, deluded, bras Fuel 
DMa xx. 13. A., XII. X. I. 2: xxi 1,3; Nuri 
XIV. xxxviii. (2) 'To doubt, lave mis- 5 To slander, slanderous statements. A., 
givings. D.., xxix. 3. 4. A, II. iv. 3: | % XIL vi: XIV. xxxviii. 1. 
VII. xxvi; IX. xxvii: NL xxi: NIV. | SUL 
Xxx. 4i To be careful about, cautious, cauti- 
ii P, alas! A., IX. xx. XII. viii, shin ously. Sometimes followed by the pre- 
H . shen

A particle, generally initial, but some- 
times in n clause. 
hardly be translated. 
A., II. xxi. 2. Often its=ouly, especially 
when medial. G. L. C., x 12. D. I., 
xviii, I; xxxiii. 5. A., IV. iii; VII. x. 1: 
XIX. xii, 2

e Kr simple. A., VIII. xvi,

Sometimes it can 
G. . C, iii. I; x. 1.

Favours, A., IV. xi, Kind, benefi- 
cent; kindness, A., V. xv: XIV. x. 1 
XVI. vi. XX. ii. 1, 2.

(1) Wickedness, what is bud. G. L. c., 
viii. 1, 2. D. XI., vi. A., IV. iv.: V. xxii: 
etal (2) Bad, disagreeable, spoiled. 
G. I. c., vi. 1. A., IV. ix: VIII. xxi: X. 
viii. 2

To dislike, to hate, 
1; x. 2, 3, 13, 14, 16.

G. L. o., vi. 1 ; viii, 
D.M, & A., sepe

Up. Ist tone. How, A., IV. v. 2.

Indolent, 
viii. 1. 
Fault, error,

A., IX. xix. Rude G. L. c.,

A., XVI. vi.

To be superior to. A., V. viii 1: XI. 
Rv. 2. $

diy Moy Ar. pleased-like, A., X. v. 3.

The e G. L. r., J, 5: C., vi. I, 4. 
TIE i ih no foregone conclusions, A., 
IX. iv.

Ignorant, stupid; stupidity. A., II. ix: 
V. xX. XI. xvi 1: XVII. di: viii. 35The e G. L. r., J, 5: C., vi. I, 4. 
TIE i ih no foregone conclusions, A., 
IX. iv.

Ignorant, stupid; stupidity. A., II. ix: 
V. xX. XI. xvi 1: XVII. di: viii. 35

XVI. 2. D. I. iv. 1; xil, 2; xx. 21; xxviii. 
J. *

Hi 
E 
ten 
yim 
pun 
AR 
lh 
li 
Be 
ser 
t'zü

sen 
tstno

k 12

fen 
th

pu 
liy

tung 
ph 
x

man

. 
la 
lü

p 
H 
tsang 
tying

yg 
yew

yu

positions . and W. G. L. c., vi. 1, 2; 
x. 4. 6. D. II., i. 2. 3; xx. 19. A., I. ix.; 
xiv. Ht. xviii, 2: VII. xii: VHL ii: XIX. 
xxv. 2

Attentive, careful, A., VIII. xvi,

fij Tu, cautiously reverent, G. L. o., 
ili. 4.

Kindness, to be kind. G. L. C., iii, 3; 
ix. 1. A., II. xx.

Shrewdness. A., XV. xvi.

Passions, lusts. A., V. v.

1 entirely sincere, D. M., xiii. 4.

Cherished evil. A., XII. xxi. 1, 3.

To show excessive grief. A., XI. ix. 1, 
2, 3.

To be heedless, disrespectful. A., VIII. 
iv. 3: XX. ii. 2. Without urgency. A., 
XX. ii. 3.

To deliberate carefully.

XV. xi. Be anxious about. A., XII. 
xxv. What men are anxious about. A., 
XVIL. viii. 3.

To bo hated, disliked,

G. L. r., 2. A.,

A., V. iv. 2.

*

To feel sorrow or anxiety; to be anxi-

ous about; sorrow, enuse of sorrow. G. 
L. q., vi. 1. D. M., xviii. 1. A., II. vi:

VI. ix. : Mi ji; xvii. 2: IX. xxviii: 
XII. iv. 1, 2; v. 1: XIV. xxx: XV. xi; 
xxxi: XVI. i. 8, 18.

538

Tj

tan

15

1000

wu 
usi 
fun 
fen

Kg

ying 
¹ 
Arar 
han 
sg 
A 
heen 
hsien

pi 
hwae 
*huai

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES,

To fear, shrink from. A, I. viii. 4; 
a n 7 niu " 
IX. xxiv, E. 2 to be cautious. D.

M. ii. 2. 
ME N. with a sigh. A., XVIII, vi. 4.

To be eager. A., VII. viii. BS HY.

A., VII. xviii. 2.

Ik

yo 
wo

Th

keue

A., XTX, xii, À 
chieh

To answer,

To be dissatisficd or displeased with, 
D.M, xi. 2. A., V. xxv. 2.

(1) An example. E XL to display 
elegantly after a pattern. D. M., xxx. 1. 
@) The name of one of Conf. disciples.

„XIV. i. . 
11 2d tone. Illustrious. D. M., xxvii.

4. 
(1) The bosom, the embrace. A., XVII.

ts*eih 
ch'i„XIV. i. . 
11 2d tone. Illustrious. D. M., xxvii.

4. 
(1) The bosom, the embrace. A., XVII.

ts*eih 
ch'i

2k

xxi. 6. (2) To keep in the breast. A., Hho- 
XV. vi. 2: XVII. i. 2. (3): To cherish, gt 
Hi

think of. A., IV. xi: XIV. iii. To re- 
gard. D. M., xxxiii. 6. (4) To cherish 
kindly. A., V. xxv. 4. D. M., xx. 12, 
13, 14.

chen 
chan

ES A postbumous title, A., II. v. I. 
€ 
i Kt 
Hg To fear, bo apprchensive, A., IV. xxi.: he 4 
ku VIL x. A IX. xxviii: XII, ix.1,2: XIV. E 
chü " a 
Fe xu JU MB, D. M., i. 2. G. L. o., vii. Pe 
j ‘hu 
Hit To be angry. hit, G. L. o., vii, 1, 
ch'e 
ch'ih 
THE 62» RADICAL, 2 . 
X 5 
X A spear. Tr X. to move shields | na. 
ko and spears, to stir up war. A., XVI. i. BR 
13. le 
PE Military weapons, D. M., xviii. 2. gl li 
aod to go to their weapons, be employed pn 
Jung te b ant A., XIII. xxix. so 
JA, (1) To complete, perfect, be completed: 
ehing the completion. G. L. c., ix. 1. D. M., xviii. 
ch'eng 8: xxv, 1, 2: et al. A,, VII. x. 3: VIII. 
viii. 3: et al, sape. * N. on to the 
termination, with reference to a perfor- 
mance of music. A., III. xxiii. 
11. & that are done. A, III. xxi. 2. 
Wach , to make one's name good. A., 
V.v.2. But otherwise in A., IX. ii. 
N E- complete so far. A., V. xxi, 
1 X. a complete man. A., XIV. 
show 
shou

xiii. 1, 2, 2 ra a grown up man

INDEX VII.

A., XIV. xlvii. 2. N H,. achieved, 
D.M., xv. 9: et al. (2) An honorary title.

A., XIV. xxii. I. 
HE db no

(1) I, me, my. Passim.

egotism. A., IX. iv. (2) F FE. the

designation of one of Conf. disciples. A., 
III. xxi. 1: VI. xxiv: XI. ii. 2; XVII. 
xxi. 1, 6.

(1) To guard against, A., XVI. vii. 
To be careful, 7 KH. D.M, i. 2. (2) 
To notify, warn. A., XX. ii 3.

(1) Some one, some persons. 
xx. 9. A., II. xxi, 1: XII. xi.; xv.; xxii. 2 
et al, sepe. (2) Porhaps. A. Il. xxiii 
2: XI. xxv. 8: XII L-xxil. 2: XVII. xvi.. 
1: XIX. xxiii. 4.

To grieve deeply. A, III. iv. 3. X 
JR. to be in great distress. A., VIII, 
xxxvi.

Disgrace.

DM,To grieve deeply. A, III. iv. 3. X 
JR. to be in great distress. A., VIII, 
xxxvi.

Disgrace.

DM,

A., V. i. 2.

(1) To fight, fighting, war, A., VIT. 
xii: XIII. xxx, (2) To fear, dread. ink 
BH, A., WL xi. 1: Me Rig, VIL ii.

To be in sport, A., XVIII. iv. 4.

An interjection. bMS. G. L. o., iii. 5.

THE 635 RADICAL, F.

A door. A., VI. xi: XVII. xx.

LN

(1) Perverse, perverseness, (21 » 
G. L. o, ix. 3. MN, A., XVII. xvi. 
(2) Reaching to. D. M., xii. 3.

(1) A place. A., II. i: IX. xiv. (2

What, that which, the case and gender 
depending on the rest of the sentence.

Passim, fur B. nothing, fit Ar x

everything ; variously sed, G. L. o, zi. 
4; vi. 2. A., X. vi. 8: XVII. xv. 3. 
Used also in . A.,

VI. xxvi. (3) BEA. whereby, Passim,

M alone, Bp EI. A., XIII. ii. e.

THE Gr RADICAL. .

The hand, hands. G. L.o, vi. 3. A.,

VI. viii: VIII. iti: IX. xi. 3: XIII. iii. 6. 
The arm. A., J. iii. 2.

INDEX VIL CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PIIRASES. 339

E. (1) To arrange, place, DM, xxv. 3. 
too A. XIII. ii. 6. (2) To put by, give 
tsu over. D. XI., XX. 20.

$e R , the name of a recluse, A, 
wee XVUL v.

Talents. abilities. A., VIII. xi; xx. 8: 
twae IX. x. 3. XI. vii. 2; xiii. 1,2. 
ts'ai 
Tk To support. A., XVI. i. 6. 
Soo 
f

u

2 (1) To assist, as at a sacrifice, D.M.,

ching Xvi. 3. A., XII. ii. (2) To receive, —in

chéng order. A., XIII. xxii. 2.

JJf To break off, to settle, A., XII. xii, 1.

eh

chó

pi (1) Or. D. M., x. 2. A., I. x. 1. (2)

yi But. A., VII. xxxiii: XIX. xii. 1. Fol-

Y! lowed by M A., XIII. xX. 8: XIV. 
xxxiii. 1,

Ability, skill, G. L. C., x. 14.

75] To display, publish, D. M., vi, 
yang

H To bow to, A., III. vii: VII, xxx. 2: 
yh K. ili. 2; v. 1.

To cover over; be concealed, G. L. c., 
zen vi. 2. D. M., xvi. 5.

) To hold up the clothes in crossing 
Ke through water. A., XIV. xlii. 2.

TE To drag and hold, to contemn. D.M.,

he yuen xiv. 3.

ch ih yiian) To hold up the clothes in crossing 
Ke through water. A., XIV. xlii. 2.

TE To drag and hold, to contemn. D.M.,

he yuen xiv. 3.

ch ih yiian

ji To oppose, outrage, C. L. o., x. 17. 18 To diminish, be injurions. A., II. xxiii. 
pub eu 2: XVI. iv.; v.

10

E The name of a music-master, A., VIII.

4E To oppose, put away. A., XIX. iii, de Xv. XVIII. ix.

chi :

275 II 
z Ds E To remove, put away. A., X. viii, 6, 
Jii To draw, Ti flt to draw the girdle it ^ P y : 
to across. A., X. xiii. 3. chô

H To point to. G. L. O., vi. 3. A., III. xi.: 
che KX. xvii, 2,

chih

48 E 28, the appearance of holding

eu n firm. D. M., viii. 
cliüan

Be Cherished purposes. A., XI, Xxv. 7. 
chon

dit To shake, PRAY. master of the hand- 
po drum. A, XVIII. ix. 4.

To choose, D. M., vii; viii; xx. 18, 
isih A., IV. i: VII. xxi; xxvii: XX. ii. 2.

Hs A trap. D. M., vii.

FF To bow, pay one's respects, perform

pae obeisance. A., IX. iii, 2: X. xi 1, 2:

p XVII. i.

Jt To fold the hands across the breast. A.,

kung XVIII. vii. 2.

T To hold up, sustain, D. I., xx. 14;

cke XXX. 3. A., XVI. i. 6. ^

elvih

dire To contain, D. M., xxvi. 9.

whin

chén

i (1) To give to, entrust, A., X. v. 1:

4 " n . .

pil XIII. v. 1. (2) To give up. Té dj 
A., XIV. xiii. 3.

N To try. pe wh, to try—ie., to put

g'un the hand into—boiling water. A., XVI. 
xi. 1.

E The palm. D.M, xix, 6, A., III. xi.

chang

Ji To sweep, A., XIX. xii, 1,

ILU i

aid

diz A handful, D. M., xxvi, 9.

R : pu tn. 
Es To styike, ux EE, to play on the 
keih musical stone. A., NIV. xlii. 1.

PR To grasp firmly. A., VII. vi. 2,

j| To receive visitors officially, A., X. 
pin dil. 
ls Jh feb a man's name. A., XVII. v.

fR To steal,—on some temptation, A.,

jing XIII. xviii. 1.

dos (1) To hold up, as the clothes. A., X.

shë iv. 4. (2) To unite, —as several offices in

she one person. A. III. xxii. 9. (3) To bu 
pressed, straitened. A., XI. xxv, de

840

gir

kue

kai

BX

kung

2

Jung

Ux

Jang 
E%

chingshë iv. 4. (2) To unite, —as several offices in

she one person. A. III. xxii. 9. (3) To bu 
pressed, straitened. A., XI. xxv, de

840

gir

kue

kai

BX

kung

2

Jung

Ux

Jang 
E%

ching

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

THE 66rn RADICAL. $.

To alter, to change. Both active and 
neuter. D.M., xiii. 2. A,, I. viii. 4; xi: 
V. ix. 2: VI. ix.; VII. jii; xxi. (here it 
1708 aio avoid): IX. xxiii; xxiv. XI. 
xili. 2: XV. xxxi; XVII. xxi. 3. Obs. 
A., XIX. xviii.

To assail,=toreprove, A., XI. xvi, 2: 
XII. xxi. 3. Sto study. A,, II. xvi.

(1) To drive, put, away G.L. c., x. 15: 
A., XV. x. 6. (2) To indulge, give 
license to. A., XVIII. viii. 4. (3) A 
nane. A., III. iv.; vi.

Up. 2d tone. To accord with; having 
regard to. A., IV. xii.

Government ; the principles of govern- 
ment; a vus charge. Passim, -—laws.

cheug A., II. ili. 1. Fa EX: to administer

e 
2 
koo 
ku

f

min

Keuon 
chiao

yuo 
ao

RE

paie

psi

government, as supreme or subordinate.

A., II. i.; xxi, 1: XII. xix, fit K. fo

be engaged in govt, as subordinate. A,, 
VI. viz XIII. xiii. 1; xx. 4: XVIII. v. I. 
Except, perhaps, A., XX. ii. 1.

(1) Therefore. Passim, We have fre-

quently H M. with the same meaning, 
but perhaps a little more emphasis. Obs.

A., III. ix. where is at the end of the 
clause, because, that's the cause. (2) 
Old, what is old. A., II. xi: XVIII. x. 
D.M., xxvii. 6.

To be earnest and active, earnest acti-

vity. A., I. xiy: IV. xxiv. J: V. xiv: 
VII. xix.: XVI. vi: XX. i. 9. . 
the idea of intelligence. A., XII. i. 2

As a verb, to hasten, produce quickly: 
D. M., xx. 3.

To teach, instruct. G.L.c., ix. 1, 6, 7.

D.M, x. 3. A. II. xx.: VII. xxiv. VIII. 
jx. 4: XIII. ix. 4; xxix: XV. xxxviii.:

XX. ii. 3. N . uninstructed, | A, 
XIII. xxx. M tion. D.M., i. 1; ' xxi. 
To stop, to save from. A., III. vi.

Ix 4 5, arrogant and rude, G. L. o., 
viii. 1.

(1) Gone, spoiled, as meat. A., X. viii.

2. (2) n] H, minister of crime. A., 
VIT. xxx.Ix 4 5, arrogant and rude, G. L. o., 
viii. 1.

(1) Gone, spoiled, as meat. A., X. viii.

2. (2) n] H, minister of crime. A., 
VIT. xxx.

To spoil; spoiled,—spoken of clothes, 
A., V. xxv. 2; IX. xxvi. `

To presume, to dare. D.M. xiii, 4; 
xxviii, 4. A., V. viii. 2: VI. xiii: e£ al, 
sept. E how dare I?—2an expres-

leen 
lien

pa

wan 
wen

INDEX VIL

sion of humility. A., VIT. xxxiii. 1. In 
the lst person, often=our allow me. 
A., XI. xi.; xxi. 1: XII. xxi. 1: XIII. xx. 
2, 3. Obs. A, XX. i. 3. Hi. 
presumptuous. A., XVII. xxiv. 1.

To scatter, disperse, G. L. c., x. 9. To 
be scattered, disorganized. A. XIX. xix.

Liberal, generous, great. D.M., xxvii. 
6; xxx. 3.

(1) To reverence, to respect ; to be rever- 
ential, cherish the feeling of reverence. 
Passim. To be reverenced. D. l., xxxi. 
1. In reference to business. A., I. ve 
VI. i. 3: XIII. xix: XV. xxxvii: XVI. x. 
HL [d to be filled with awe and 
reverence. G. L. C., viii. 1. (2) An bon- 
orary epithet. A., VIII. iv.

(1) Some, several. A., VII. xvi: XIX.

xxiii, 3. (2) KE di. the determined

time. A., XX. i. I. 
Frequently. A., IV. xxvi.

To ingather. Applied to imposts. G. 
L. c., x. 21. D. XI., xx. M. A., XI. xvi.

,

THE 67r RADICAL. x

(1) The characters of the language. D. 
M. xxviii. 2, 3. A., XV. xxv. (2) Re 
cords, literary monuments, A., III. ix. 
(3) Literature, polite studies. A., hs via 
VI. xxv: VII. xxiv.; xxxii: IX. x. 2: XL 
ii. 2: XII. xv.; xxiv: XVI. i. n (4) 
Accomplished, accomplishments, ele- 
gance, P. AI, xxxi. 1; xxxiii 1... A., HI. 
xiv: V. xiv: VI. xvi: XII. viii, 1, 3: 
XIV. xiii. 1; xix. 2. (5) The cause of

truth, A., IX. v. 2, 3. (6) Ff.

elegant manners and discourses; elegant 
institutions. A., V. xii: VIII. xix. 2. 
(7) Used as the honorary epithet. heeom- 
ing in effect the name. D. M., xviii. oe 2, 
3: et al. G.. I.. „ iii. 3. A., IX. v. 2: 
XIX. xxii. 2.— A., XIV. xvi.—A. V. xiv. 
A., V. xvii: XY. xiii.—A., V. xviii. 2. 
AD V. xix.—A., XIV. xiv.; xix. Usedalso in the name P . A., V. xviii,

Low. 3d tone. To gloss. A., XIX. viii.

Accomplished. . G. L. o., iii, 4. 3E PA 
A., V. xx. 1.

THE 68r RADICAL. =f.

A peck, A., XIII. xx. 4.

INDEX VII.

a

tz

Jr

sin 
hein

Tn 
tuan

Zr

Jang

woo 
wu

hit

she 
shih

Ji

she 
shih

76i

che 
ch‘ih

ik

leu 
lü

THE Gorn RADICAL, .

(1) This, these. Passim. Its antecedent 
js often a clause. (2) Forthwith. A., 
J. X. I; xvili. 1: XIV. xlii. 2, and per- 
haps some other places.

To renovate. G. L. c., iii, 1. New, what 
is new. G. L. C., iii 2. 3. D. ., xxvii. 6. 
A., II. xi: V. xviii: XVII. xxi. 3.

Up. 30 tone. [Ef Est ^. plain and

sincere, G. L. C. x. 14.

THE Zorn RADICAL, FF.

(1) A region, regions. D.M., x. 2, 3, 4.

A., I. i. 2; xx. i. 3. Jj; the four 
quarters,-=all parts of the empire, or of a 
State. D. M., XX. 13. A., XIII. iv. 3: 
XX. i. 6. Any quarter. A., XIII. v.; 
xx. A settled definite place. A., IV. 
xix. (2) Tablets of wood. D. M., xx. 2.

3) An art, the way. A., VI. xxviii. 3. 
(4) Right rules. A., XI. xxv. 4. (5) 
Squue. A., XI. xxv. 5. 11. (6) To 
compare. A., XIV. xxi. (7) Then. A, 
XVI. vii. (S) Used in a designation. 
A., XVIII. ix. 3.

Passim, Its proper meaning is in, at, on, 
in regard to place. But after many 
verbs and adjectives we must translate 
by other prepositions, as /rom, to, &c. 
After the possessive Pus it=in relation

to. With adjectives it forme the com- 
parative degree, andz=than, D. M., xxxiii. 
4. A., XI. xvi. 1: XIX. xxv. I. Observe

RK F „ A., X. xv. leon me, be it 
mine.

An exclamation, 
M., xxvi. 10.

G. L. O., iii. 8, 5. D.

(1) To give, do, use. D. M., xiii, 3, 4. 
A., II. xxi. 2: XII. ii.: XV. xxiii. G. L. o., 
x. 12. (2) To make u display of. A., V. 
xxv. d.

Up. 3d tone. To confer on, so as to

reach to. D.., xxxi. 4: A., VI. xxviii. 
1. There is not much appreciable differ- 
ence between the char. in this tone and 
the last.

For ijf], to treatremissly, A., XVIII. 
X.

(1) A body of 500 solidiers, fit heFor ijf], to treatremissly, A., XVIII. 
X.

(1) A body of 500 solidiers, fit he

fi nd forces. A., XI. xxv. 4: XIV. 
xx. 2: XV. i. 1. (2) All, general. D. M.,

Xix. 4. (3) The name of a sacrifice. A.,

III. vi. 
The circle of relatives. A., XII, xx. 2.

CIHNESE CHARACTERS AND PIIRASES.

jih

PA

H 
che

chih

341

THE 71sr RADICAL, X.

(1) A particle of past time, - have, hav- 
ing, having been. D. XI., XV. 2; xxvii. 7. 
A., III. x4 xxi 2: IX. v. 2; x. 3: et ul., 
sepe. (2) Used udverbially. That done, 
S then, by-and-by. A., XIV. xlii. 2. (3)

Used for fi or SE ke, Rations. D. 
M., xx. 14.

THE 7?» RADICAL. H !

(1) The sun. D. M., xxvi, 9; xxx. 2; 
xxxi. 4. A., XIX. xxi.; xxiv. (2) A day, 
days. G. L. C., ii. 1. A., II. ix.: IV. vi. 2: 
VII. ix. 2: et , sepe. (3) Adverbially. 
Daily, D. M., Xx. 14; xxxiii. 1. A., I. iv. 
On some days. A., VI. v. H H 3 
every day. G. L. C., ii. 1.

What is pleasant, spoken of food. A. 
XVII. xxi. 5.

EL An elder brother. D. M., xx. 8. Fh

kwán 
k‘uén

yj

ming

hsi

.

sing 
hsing

AF

chun

, brothers; the younger branclies of

one's relatives, generally. D. M., xx. 13. 
A., XI. iv.

(1) Clear, illustrious, brilliant; clearly. 
G. L. r., I, 4: C., i. 2. P. M., xx. 19, 20; 
xxiii.; xxvi. 3, 4, 5, 8; xxvii. 6: xxx. 2; 
xxxiii. 6. A, XVI. X. (2) To illustrate. 
G. L. r., 1, 4: C., i. I, 3, 4. (3) Intelligence, 
intelligent. D. M., xx. 21; xxi; xxvi. 7; 
xxxi 1; xxxii. 3. A, II. vi. (4) To 
understand. D. M., iv. 1; xix. 6. (5) To 
purify; purification; clean. D. I., xvi. 
$;xx.14, A, X. vi. 1. (6) A H, 
next day. A, XV. i. 1; XVIII. vii. 4. 
(7) PAS HH, as a double surname, A., 
XIV. xiv. In names. A., V.xxiv.—A., 
VI. xii.

(1) To change. A., I. vii: XVIII. vi. 
3,4. (2) The name of the Yih classic. 
A., VIL xvi.(1) To change. A., I. vii: XVIII. vi. 
3,4. (2) The name of the Yih classic. 
A., VIL xvi.

Low. 3d tone. (1) Easy, easily. A., 
VIII. xii: XIII. xv. 2; xxv: XIV. xi; 
xliv.: XVII. iv. 3. Easily preserved, G.L. 
C, X. 5. Ensc,==calmness, tranquillitz. 
D.M., xiv. 4. (3) Minute attention to 
observances. A,, III. iv. 3.

Formerly. $F 34, A. VIII. v. XVI- 
i. 4: XVII. iv. 3; vii. 2.

A star, stars. A., II. i. D. X., xxvi, 9.

The spring. A., XL xxv. 7, D. M., 
xix. 3.

342

In (I) Bright; to be clearly seen; clearly. 
chaon Ay XX. i. 3. D. M., xxvi. 4; xxxiii. 2. 
chuo (2) 1 2 the tablets in the ancestral 
temple, acc. to the order of precedence. 
D.M, xix. 1. (8) Hon. ep. of a duke of 
Loo. A. VII. xxx.

(1) This, these, Passim, It often re- 
sumes a previous clause, and often con- 
Shih tains the copula,—this is. pui

ZH. thus, such. FERS FE Ji. 
therefore, Also E Hi, A., V. xxii. 
(2) To be. A., IX. xxx. I: XI. xx: XVI. 
1.8, 4, 7: et al. (8) Right. A., XVII. 
ir. 4. (4) 2 . all. GL, 6.

A., XVI. vii. D.M.

T

she

(1) Time, times,

WE

she xxx. I. Opportunity. A, XVII. 1. 2. 
shih (2) The seasons. D. M., xxx. 2. A. XIX. 
iii. Seasonal. D. M., xix. 3. A., X.

viii. 2: XVIII. 2. (3) Seasonably, at 
proper times. D.M., xx. 14; xxxi. 2. 
A., XIV. xir. 2. VJ WE, A., I. v. (4) 
Always. D. M., ii. 2; Xxxv. 3. A., I. i. 1. 
(5) To time, watch. A., XVII. i. 1. 
The name of a State. A., XIV. xvi.ea 
Tarn 
chin 
2 (1) Late. A., XIII, xiv. (2) A sur- 
go» nume. A,, V. xvi. 
un 
zi The daytime ; adverbially. A., V. ix. 
chow 1: IX. xvi. 
chou 
N The morning. E FA, style of a gate- 
an keeper. A., XIV. xli. 
chen 
f Designation of one of Conf. disciples. 
seih A, XI. xxv. 1. 
hsi 
AR Leisure. A., XIV. xxxi, 
hea 
hsia 
E Warm weather, A., X. vi. 8. 
shoo 
slut 
i An hon. epithet. A., XII. xi. XVI. xii.: 
P XVIII. iii. EHE „an hon, designation, 
ME A., XIV. xxxviii: XIX. xxiii, 2. 
3k (1) Violence, oppression, GLa. ix. 4. 
poo A., VIII. iv. 3: XX. ii. 3. (2) To attack, 
pao or strike, unarmed. A., VII. x. 3. 
He Calculated and represented. A., XX. 
bih d. I. 
hi

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PIIRASES.

INDEX VIL

THE 730 RADICAL. H.

Al

gud

yüch

To speak, to say, saying, Passin Gen- 
erally, the nominative is expressed, but 
not always, and then Fy =it is said, D. 
M., xxvii. ö; et al. Sometimes it=numely- 
D. M., xx. 8, 12; et al. E » means 
ing, for it says. D. I., xxvi. 10.

(2) Bent, A, VIL xv. (2) Shoots,

| Hi

Freun what is small. D. M., xxii.

chit A

Hi To change, A., XIX. xxi,

Lang

kéng

= (1) To write, A., XV. v. 4. Writing,

shoo writings, books. D. M., xxxvii. 3. A.,

shu Xl. xxiv. 3: XIV. xliii. l. (2) Tue Shoo-

' king, or classic of History. A,, II. xxi.

2: VIL xvii. (2) 4% ze the name of 
a Book. G. L., x. II.

te The surname of one of Conf, principal

tsdng disciples, and of his father. G. L. b., vi.

tseng 3. A., I. iv.: et al, supe. A., XI. xxv. I,

.

f Low. ist tone. A conjunction, —tlien, 
tsang but. A., II. viii: III. vis XI. xxiii. 2. 
ts'éng

Qr (1) To associate with, A., XII. xxiv,

wuy (3) Interviews of the pere with the

hui emperor. A., XI. XXV. 6, 12.

THE 741m RADICAL. AH. 
H (1) The moon. D.M., xxvi. 9; xxx. 2; 
yee Xxxi. 4. A., XIX. xxi; xxiv. (2) A 
yüeh month, months. DM., vii. A., VI. v.

VII. xiii: X. vi. 11: XIII. x: XVII. i. 2 
Monthly, from month to month. D. M. 
xx. 1d. A., XIX. 5.

(1) To have, possess, Follow-VII. xiii: X. vi. 11: XIII. x: XVII. i. 2 
Monthly, from month to month. D. M. 
xx. 1d. A., XIX. 5.

(1) To have, possess, Follow-

ed by AH. he who possesses, they who

Passim.

have, But sometimes the A is omitted, 
as in A., I. xiv: VIII. iv: XX. i. 1: 
et al. In this sense it nòt only governs 
nouns, but is used as an auxiliary to verbs, 
both active and passive, (2) ‘The im- 
personal substantive verb, there is, there 
was. Passim. In very many instances, 
it is difficult to say whether the character

is used thus, or as in 1, A Z: and 
the negative X at the end ol 
sentences, are to be observed. G. L. r., A. 
I. ii. 1: IV. vi. 3: et al, y £ =thero 
is no difficulty. A., IV. xiii: etal Bui 
this not always. A., VII. ii: et ,. Obs 
A., XIX. ii. (3) The ere of one of 
Conf. disciples, As J. zi. 1; xii; xiii: 
XII. ix. 1, 2. The name of another. Ås 
IH. vi: VII. xiv. et al, sepe,

INDÉX VII.

#7 
yew 
yu

ni A fellow-student;a friend; friends, A.,

POW J. i. 2. n X. sce under X.

Low. 3d tone. 
vi. 6.

And. A., II. iv. 1: X.

péng ,. d 
n D To wear, A., II. xix: XV. xd 
Jul — Metaph, D. M., viii. Clothes. D.M.,

fu Xvi. 3; XX. 14. A., VIII. xxi: X. vi. 2,

1b:etal.. (2) To submit. A., XIII. iv.

3: XVI. i. 11, 12. Hk Hz, to serve,

A., VIII. xx. 4. B 3 2%, to undergo 
the labour. A., II. viii. n F jik-

appy. a surname, A., XIV. xxxviii. 
XIX. xxiii. 2.

YU] Mow. D.M, xiii. 4. 
hwo 
ha 
H The imperial Z. A., XX. i. 3. 
elin 
chèn i 
39 The first day of the moon. A., III. xvi, 
2 1. 
vy To look towards, admiring and expect:

ut nj img, D.M, xxix. 5. A., XIX. ix: XX. 
ji. 2. Sto compare ond u-self to. A., V. 
viii. 2. 
i (1) Morning, in the morning. A., IV. 
chaon viii: XII. xxi. 3. (2) A name. A., VI. 
chao xiv. 
N (1) The court. A., V. vii. 4: XIV.

chuon xxxviii; XIX. xxiii. 1. (2) To be in court, 
chao appear in court. A., X. ji. 1; vi. i.: XIV.chuon xxxviii; XIX. xxiii. 1. (2) To be in court, 
chao appear in court. A., X. ji. 1; vi. i.: XIV.

xxii, 2. BH aj. to retire from court, 
A., X. xii: XIII. xiv. (3) To hold a 
court, give audience. D. M., xx. 14. A., 
XVIII. ir. (4) Court, as au adjective, 
A., X. X. ii.; xiii 3. (5) A name. A., 
XIX. xxii.

By *(1) A fixed time. A., XX. ii, 3. (2)

ke A. name. A., VIL xxx. 2, 3.

ch 
2 A round year. D. M., xviii, 3. A., 
di XVII. xxi, 1, 2. ri H. a round month. 
M., vii. 
* N. a round year. A., XIII. x. 
Yd 
chi

TUE Törn RADICAL. JX.

X ()) Trees, D.M, xxvi 9. A, XVII.

mnh ix. 7: XIX. xii. 2.

mu |. (3) Wooden. A., III. xxiv. 
Simple, plain. Ay XIII. xxvii

(4)

(2) Wood. A. V.ix.

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PIIRASES.

As

pun 
pen

^ 
N 
shuh 
shu

Ak

lin

He

tung

843

Not yet, Passin We may sometimes

translate hy not, but the force of the «t 
is always to be detected. It is joined 
with ue. A., III. xxiv.: VI. xii: VII. 
vii; ix.: IX. xxx. 2. Its power, in com- 
mon with other negatives, to attract 
Z to itself, and make it precede the 
verb which governs it, is to be noted. ti.

L. r., 7: C., ix. 4. A., I. ii. 2: V. v. x.; xiii: 
et al,

(1) The end, the product, result, in opp.

to . tke root. G. L. r., 3, 7: 6, x. 7. 
(2) Small, trivial. D.M., xxxiii. G. A., 
XIX. xii. 1. (3) In old age. P. II., xviii, 
3. (4) Not, do not. A. IX. x. 3; Xxiii.: 
XIV. xlii. 3: XV. xv: XVIL v.

The root; what is radical, eisentiil;

L.. T., 3, 6, 71 C., iv.; v.; X. 7. DM, i. 4; 
xxxii. 1. A., I. ii. 2: XIX. xii 1. What 
is first to be attended to. A., III. iv. 1. 
To be rooted. D.M., xxix. 3.

(1) Vermillion colour. A., XVII. xviii, 
(2) A surname. A., XVIII. viii.

Rotten. A., V. ix. 1.

To plaster. A., V. ix. 1.

The name of a State. A., III. ix. D. M., 
xxviii, 5.

A staff, A., XIV, xlvi: XVIII. vii. 1.

I ik A those who carried staves, A.,

X. x. 1. 
(1) To bind, gird. A., V. vii. 4. (2) 
A bundle of dried flesh. A., VII. vii.

A surname, A., III. iv. 1; vi,A staff, A., XIV, xlvi: XVIII. vii. 1.

I ik A those who carried staves, A.,

X. x. 1. 
(1) To bind, gird. A., V. vii. 4. (2) 
A bundle of dried flesh. A., VII. vii.

A surname, A., III. iv. 1; vi,

(1) The east, eastern. A., XVII. v. 3. 
To turn to the east. A., X. xiii. B. (2) 
Wi SF 5e a mountain. A., XVI i. 4.

N W, a place. A., XIV. ix, 1.

** So-and-so. A., XV. xli. 1. 
mow 
mou 
4 The pine tree. A., III. xxi, 1: IX, 
sung xxvii. 
Crooked, used metaphorically. A., II.

ix: XII. xxii. 8, 4. With verbal force.

wand

P

vhin

A-, XVIII. ii. 
To use ns a pillow. A., VII. xv.

sarg Ay VI. i. 2. 
tix: XII. xxii. 8, 4. With verbal force.

wand

P

vhin

A-, XVIII. ii. 
To use ns a pillow. A., VII. xv.

sarg Ay VI. i. 2. 
t

244 CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PIIRASES. INDEX VU. 
$f Qualities, D.M, xvii. 3. In A., V. ME A raft. A., V, vi. 
tsue Yi, the meaning is uncertain. foo 
ts'ai fu 
I & — (I) Determined, decided, A., VI. vi.: 2 A bridge. A., X. xviii. 2. 
ivo XIV. xii, 3. FL HN. Ay XVIL xxiv. Hung 
(2) To carry into effect. A. XIII. xx. 8. | 4, m ; £ 
(3) Really. D.M., xx. 21. ; Small pillara, supporting the rafters of 
Ad The cypress tree, A., III. xxi. 1: IX. eds a house. A.V.xvii. 
15 n zE To abandon, throw away, neglect. . A., 
: A cage for wild beasts. A., XVI i. 7. shen M rud = XIII. xix; xxx.: XVII. xiv. 
puo Pe An inner coffin. A., XI. vii, 2, 
zc (1) Gentle, mild, D.M. x. 3; xxxi, I. ial 
jw To treat gently. D. M., xx. 12, 13, 14. PUE 
Soit (2) Weak. D.M, xx. 21. (3) Mild, HE An outer coffin, A., XI. vii, I, 2. 
: soft, in a bad sense. A., XVI. iv. ho 
; To be split; divisions, A, XVI. i. 12. ko 
Jr RN fiir pid the aspen plum, A., IX. xxx. 
hsi te 1. 
fi] ^ Ansxehandle, D.M; xiii. 3, ti 
to Wi A surname, A,XIL viii. 
AJ Ty T. the name of a place. A., XV. E 
lew — xiii: XVIII. ii.: viii. 1, 3. , 
lu zi A name. A., V. x. 
#5 4. one who keeps roosting, | ^' "" . 
se or hanging, about. A., XIV. xxxiv. 1. A To stick in the ground. A., XVIII. 
hsi chili vii. 1. 
mon. the appearance of being fright- Tg The very utmost, asa noun and adverb. 
leuk ened. A, III. xxi. 1. keith G. L. o., ii. 4. D. M. xxvii. 2, 6. 
li chi 
JE To enter into altercation, A., VIII. v. i — The name of a State. G. L. C., x. 11. 
keaou 7800 A., XVIII. ix. 2; v. 
chiao ts‘u 
AN Name of one of Conf, disciples. A., a Glorious, A., XIX. xxv, 4. 
chae XI. xvii. 1. yung 
. ch'ai Jung . 
jT& (1) ? To investigate. G. L. r., 4, 5. dt (1) Music, Sepe. Ec female musi- 
kih (2) To come to, approach. D.M., xvi. | %% cians. A, XVIII. iv. (2 ^ fm ff 
ko . (3) To become correct. A., II. ii. 2. yo Grand 5 "v A p Be 
He The peach tree, G. L.., ix. 6. oft, Pleasure, joy; to rejoice in, feel joy. 
t dou loh Sape. = 
t'ao ló 
At The last emperor of the Hea dynaaty, E To find pleasure in. A., VI, xxi; XVI. 
keč i E Jy " 2: 
ido baie ix, 4. AE n a re- gaou v. Af 2 G. L. C., vii. 1. 
cluse. A., XVII. vi. 1, 3. pes . 
ik To flourish, as a tree. D. M., xvii. 3. El (1) Trees, vegetation. P. M., xx, 3. 
tsue shoo (2) A screen. A., 1III. xxii. 3. 
tani shu 
— — SA 4 H 2 
Jii (i) ya Av a famous dulce of TS. A., p . A spring, source of influence, G. L.. c., 
Awan XIV. xvi; xvii; xviii. (2) A surname. P ix. 3. 
huan A. VII. xij, (3) =ý, the three prin- A wdghit — A. XX. i. G. To 
4 no 2 - 212 > 5 ag shad, I. U. J 
Ze * N e a keuen weigh. A., IX. xxix] The exigency of tho 
Bye He appy. à double surname. | chüan times, asif determined by weighing. A+XVIII. viii. 4.

INDEÁ' VIL

5 12 
3 
tuh 
tu

A coffer, a repository, A., XVI. i. 7,

THE 0 RADICAL, NX.

x ( Next in order or degree. P. M., xxiii,

Wwe ix. In A, XIV. xxxix. 2, 3,4, EE R 
-— * 
only some. (2) N. in moments of 
huste. 
AR (1) To desire, to wish. G. L. r., 4. A., 
yeh II. ii. 6: III. x; xvii. 1: et al, sepe. (2) 
yü

To be covetous,= er. A., XII. xviii. 
XIV. ii.; xiii, In A., XX. i. 1, 2, BK is 
distinguished from fr

a To deccive, impose upon; to be deceived.

ke G. L. b., vi. I. A., VI. xxiv: IX. xi. 2:

cha XIV. xxiii.

BA To sing, A., VII. v. 2; xxxi: XVII. 
ko iv.; xxs XVIII. v.

99 To sigli, with tlie iden of admiration.

tun A., IX. x. 1: XI. xxv. 7.

THE ru RADICAL, IE.

(1) To rest; where to rest. G. L. r., 1,

che 2: C., lii. 1, 2, 3. (2) To stop, desist. D. 
chin M., xiii. 2. A., IX. xviii; xx: XI. xxiii.

3: XIL xxiii: XVI. i. 6: XIX. xiv. (3) 
To detain, A., XVIII. vii. 3. 
JE (1) To rectify, to adjust; be rectificd, 
ching G. L. r., 4, 5: c, vii. 1, 3; ix. 8. D. M., 
chéng xiv. 8. A., I. xiv.: VIII. iv. 3: et al, swepe. 
(2) Correct, correctness, correctly. G. L. 
€, vii. 1. D.M, xxxi. I. A., X. viii. 3; 
ix; xii. 1; xvii. 1: In these examples, 
correct. square, straight, A., XIII. iii. 
J, 6; vi: XIV. xvi. (3) Just, exactly. 
A., VII. xxxiii Observe A., XVII. x. 
JE Vp. Ist tone. The bull's oye in a target.

ching D.M., xiv. 5.

cheng

HL, This. Sepe. Hy II. thus. Ge,

tsxe ix. 3. D.., xvi 5; xxvi. 6; xxviii. 1.

izü {E i. here. D. M., xxix. 6. The 
character does not occur in the Analects,

at (1) The honorary epithet of the first em-

"oo peror of the Chow dynasty. D-M., xviii.

wu 12,8. Heal, sepe. The name of his

music. A., III. xxv. (2) The hon. ep. of 
others. A., XIV. xiii; xv. A., V. xx.— 
A., II. vi: V. vii A, XIX. xxiii; xxiv. 
(3) A name. A, XVIII. ix. 4. (4) M 
I. name of a place. A., VI. Xii. XVII.

iv.

1; A., VH. xxvii: XIII. xx. 2, 3: XVL ·

CHINESE CIIARACTERS AND PII RAS ES.

wi

su ur 
sui 
1 
kwei 
kuci

fuiv.

1; A., VH. xxvii: XIII. xx. 2, 3: XVL ·

CHINESE CIIARACTERS AND PII RAS ES.

wi

su ur 
sui 
1 
kwei 
kuci

fu

tae 
t'ai

ch pi

2

tvan.

11

pin

E 
AL 
sha 
sha

|

shae 
shai

345

The year, years, 
1. 2.

A., IX. xxvii: XVII.

(1) To return. . A., V. xxii: XI. xxv.

7. (2) To revert to. A, I. ix.: XII. i. 1. 
(3) To turn to. D. I., xx. 13. To flow

to. A., XIX. xx. ES uo to turu to in

heart. A., XX. i. 7. (4) To turn to, de- 
pend on. A., X. XV. I. (5) To present. 
A, XVII. i. 1: XVIII. iv. (6) Sto bo

married. G. L. o., ix, 6. (7) = fap 
see on —.

THE 7811 RADICAL, Z7.

To die; death; the dead. D.M., x. 4, 5; 
xix. 5. A., II. v. 3: IV. viii: XI. vi; 
vii. 1, 2; viii: ix.; x.: Xl; Xii. 2; xxii: of 
al, sape. 1$ 4t E-T a future mortal, 
A., IX. v. 3.

Dangerous; — both what is perilous, 
and being in peril. G. L. c., x. 3. A, II. 
xv xviii. 2: XV. Xx 6: XVIII. v. 1.

To be largely produced; to be amassed. 
D. I., xxvi. 9. A., XI. xviii. 2.

Vicious, violently bad. A., XIII. xi.

To coffin,=to bury. A., X. xv. 1.

A.

To kill. A., XII. xix: XIV. xvii. 1; 
xviii. 1: XV. viii: XVIII. vii. 3: XX. i. 
2. ==Capital punishments. XIII. xi.

Gradually decreasing, D. M., xx. 5. 
A., X. vi. 9.

THE 79:1 RADICAL.

The name of a dynasty. G. L.. o., x. v. 
D.M, xxviii. 5. A., II. xxiii. 2: e al.

Up. 3d tone. To bring up the rear 
A., VI. xiii. i

(1) To blame excessively, revile, A., 
XV. xxiv: XIX. xxiv. (2) To be broken, 
A., XVI. i. 7.

Determined and enduring. D. M., xxxi, 
1. A., VIII. vii. 1: XIII. xxv.

THE 8071 RADICAL. IE.

Do not, do not do, do not have, &c. 
G. L. C., vi. 1; x. 2. A., VI. iii. 4: IX. 
xxiv: XI. xxv. 2: XII. xxiii, In A., IX. iv.; 
it is taken as-- fil, the simple negative,

but its ordinary meaning may be retain- 
ed. i

346

FF

A mother. A, VI. ii. 1. X I, a

iwo parent. parents. G. L. c., x. 3. D. M., xv.

mu  2;xvii. 3. A.. I. vii: II. vi: IV. xviii; 
xix; xxi: NL iv: XVII. xxi. 6: XVIII. 
ii. ‘

fe ^ Every. A, UL xv. X. xiv.

meiiwo parent. parents. G. L. c., x. 3. D. M., xv.

mu  2;xvii. 3. A.. I. vii: II. vi: IV. xviii; 
xix; xxi: NL iv: XVII. xxi. 6: XVIII. 
ii. ‘

fe ^ Every. A, UL xv. X. xiv.

mei

THE 81sr RADICAL. Lk.

To compare, be compared. A., VII. i

pe

pi

EE Low. 3d tone. (1) To follow. A., IV. 
, pe x. (2) Partizanly. A, II. xiv. (3)

PI Joined with H within, by the time of. 
A., XI. xxv. 4, 5

THE 82» RADICAL. . 
The hair, a hair. D. M., xix. 4; xxxiii, 
moo 6. 
mao —C

THE 82» RADICAL. N.

FE A family, Follows surnames, and de-

she notes particular individuals. A., III. i.:

shih et u. — A., III. xxi.—A., XIV. X.— A., 3. 
—A. III. xxii —A., XIV. xli; xlii.—A., 
XIX. xix.

E (i) The people, the multitude, Passim. 
min (2) = A: man, men, A., VI. xx: XV. 
xxxiv. And perhaps in some other 
places, as D.M., iii. A., VI. xxvii: XVI. 
ix: XVII. xvi. 
THE sern RADICAL. €.

Sa Breath. A, X. iv. 4. fp SA blood 
ke and breath, =the physical powers. A., 
chi XVI. vii, AY it FA Ze niankind,

D. M., xxxi. 4. Observe Et Si A., 
VIII. iv. 3, and I Sgt, A., X. viii. 4. 
THE ssru RADICAL. K. 
Water. D. M., xxvi 9; xxx. I. A., 
shwuy VI. xxi: VII. xv.: XV. xxxiv. 
shui ` 
R To perpetuate, perpetual. D. M., xxix.

A., XX. i. 1. 
Universally, A., I. vi.

yung 6.

YL

fan

N (1) To seek for; also to ask, request. 
kew G.Lc, ix. 2, 4. P. M., xiii. 4; xiv. 8, 5. 
ohiu A., I. X. I, 2; xiv: IV. xiv: et al, supe.

o ) The name of one of Conf. disciples, 
a V. vii. 3: VL vi. x.: el al, sa pe.

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

INDEX VII.

TX The name of a stream. A., VI. vii. 
wan 
wen 
yr The name of a stream. A, XI. xxv. 7. 
e

i 
Yk I Ex; to bathe, A., XIV. xxii. 2. 
mith 
mu

(1) To die, be dead. A., I. xi: IX. v.

mih 2. XA E, after death, G. L. c., iii. 5. 
A. XV. xix. (2) To exhaust, be ex- 
hausted. A., XVII. xxi, 3. Hu a.

A., X. iv. 5. I H. A. XIV. x. 3. 
iif it in danger, in confusion. A., 
. v. 3.

pe 
yy Rivers, a river D.M., xxvi, $. A.. 
4A., X. iv. 5. I H. A. XIV. x. 3. 
iif it in danger, in confusion. A., 
. v. 3.

pe 
yy Rivers, a river D.M., xxvi, $. A.. 
4

ho VII. x. 3. The river, ie., the Yellow river. 
A., IX. viii: XVIII. ix. 3.

xa To regulate, manage, govern. bris

che 4: C., ix. I, 5; x. 1. D. M., xiii. 2; xix.

chh 6, 11, 14, 17. A., V. vii. 2; : XIV. xxii, 2.

72 Tò be regulated, to be well governed,

che G. L. I., 5, 7. A, VIII. xx. 1: XV. iv,

chih

xd S YH , the designation of a recluse,

tsen A., XV il, vi. 1, 2,

chit

Jih To sell. A., IX. xii. Retailed. A., X,

koo viii. 5.

ku

» Low. 3d tone, To be obstructed, in-

"e applicable. A., XIX. iv.

ni f

N A fountain, a spring. D. M., xxxi, 2, 3.

es en

elviian

k (1) A model; to imitate. G. L. C. ix. 8.

J DM, xxix. 5. (2) Law-like, =strict ;

fa laws. A., IX. xxiii: XX. i. 6.

E^ (1) A dignificd ease, A., VII. xxv. 3.

e Oppos. to BE, A., XIII. xxvi: XX. ii. 1,

2. (2) Arrogant. A, IX.iii.2. Coup- 
led with Ig, G.Lo., x. 18. 16) HE

„ the name of a mountain, A., III. vi. 
AR fü hon. designation pf an ancient

w xe A., VIII. i. . Sm. name of 
a Book in the Shoo-king. G. L. o., x. 14. 
VE vta to overflow, D. N., xxxi. 4.

X.

yang VE a 
swelling waters, grandly. 
xxvii.2. A., VIII. xv.

; the appearance of vast 
D.M, xvi. 3 H

INDEX VII.

35

shue

shai 
»

To sprinkle, A., XIX. xii. 1.

LI

A water channel, a ditch. 35 it. 
heué, A., VIII. xad. — ^ 
hsiich 
US 
n 
tsin 
chin

9 
sit 
hsich 
T» 
ONG 
lew 
liu

R ford. A., XVIII. xi, 1, 2, .

To leak. D.M., xxvi. 9.

*

(D Flowing, a current. D. M., xxx. 3, 
(2) Weak, unstable. D.M., x. 5. (3) To 
banish. Ke Jit» G. L. o., x. 15. (4) 
A,

. pot u low-lying situation. 
XVII. xxiv. 1: XIX, xx.

ni WE, vast. P. II., xxxil. 2.

AA

hao

iF To float, floating. A., V. via VII. xv.

fow

fou * *

uu To wash. A, XI. xxv. 7., V H.

yuh to bathe. A., XIV. xxii. 2,

yi’

f$ The sea, sens. D.M., xxvi. 9. A., V.AA

hao

iF To float, floating. A., V. via VII. xv.

fow

fou * *

uu To wash. A, XI. xxv. 7., V H.

yuh to bathe. A., XIV. xxii. 2,

yi’

f$ The sea, sens. D.M., xxvi. 9. A., V.

hae via XVII. ix. ö. QU jg. nanio for 
the empire, the world. D.M., xvii, 1; 
xviii. 2. A., XII. v. 4: XX. i. 1,

ix To soak, A., XII. vi.

tsin

chin

Y it The approach of a superior; to govern,

e preside over. A, XV. xxxii 2, 3.

To steep in muddy water. A., XVII. 
neč vii. 3.

The name of a stream. G. L. o., jii. 4.

Insipid. D.M., xxxiii. 1, 
Licentions. A., III. xx.: XV. x. 6.

Deep, A, VIII. iii; XIV, xlii, 2.

Ti Pure, purity, A., V, xviij. 2: XVIII. 
ting viii, 4.

ching

Dil ) A gulf, an abyss; deep, the deep. 
yuen P. M., xii. 3; xxxi. 2,3; xxxii. 2. A., 
yüun VIII. iii. (2) The name of Conf, favou- 
rite disciple, A. V. xxv.: VIL xii: et al, 
supe.

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES,

817

Ve Shallow, A., XIV, xlii. 2

ts'een

ch'ien

i (1) Benign, unpretending. A., VII,

wan xxxvii: XVI. xs: XIX. ix. DOM. xxxi,

wen 1; xxxiii. 1. (2) To cherish, know tho- 
roughly. A, II. xi. D.M. xxvii, 6.

pia (1) To ramble, to seek recreation. A.,

zu VII. vi. 4. (2) F- , the desig. of 
one of Couf. disciples. A, II. vii: IV. 
xxv.: et al, sepe.

BiU To fathom, AU. unfathomable, D,

tih NI., xxvi. 7, 9.

ts‘

Hj (Œ Boiling water, A, XVI, xi. (2) 
tang Name of the flret emperor of the Shang

dynasty, G. L. C., ii. 1. A., XII. xxii. 6, 
2 "The name of a State. A., XIV. xii. 
tüng 
têng 
` Y

92 the appearance of an inunda- 
tion tion. A., XVIII. v. 3.

tao ` À 
it it ia a double surname, A, V. v,

is‘eth

cha

in At 35. the name of a recluse. Ay 
neth XVIII. vi. .

ni '

Xt ¥ ic to overflow. D. M., xxxi. 4.

yh c

yi

pL Great, all-embracing, D. M., xxxi. 2, 3.

p'oo j

pu

5 ‘To leak; IE: Vi the part of a house 
130 open to the light of heaven. D. M., xxxiii. 
ou 8,

p A ditch, js yit. A., VIII. xxi. NM 
15 Wi A., XIV, xviii, 3.

TR The name of a river. A, XVIII. ix. 4. 
han

Dp A ditch, js yit. A., VIII. xxi. NM 
15 Wi A., XIV, xviii, 3.

TR The name of a river. A, XVIII. ix. 4. 
han

D

ES To purify, pure, A, VII. xxviii. 2:

P2331

keé XVIII. vii. 5.

chieh

7529 To soak, moisten, enrich, adorn, G. L. o., 
jun vi. 4. A., XII. vi: XIV. ix.

D (1) To extinguish; be extinguished, 
med

A, XX. i. Z. (9) N BA. a name, 
A, VI. xii. 
To dive, sink. P.M. xxxiii. 2.

mich

TE

is‘eon

chien 
5

XM. .

a double surname, A, VI

35

yen

24

uno 
wu

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PIIRASES.

To help, benefit. A., VI. xxviii. 1.

A ditch. VIE Wi, A. XIV. xviii, 3.

A bank, the winding and curving of a Ags 
ie L7

river's banks. G. L. C., iii. 4.

To overflow, exceed due bounds. A., 
XV. i. 3.

To pour out a libation. A., III. x.

THE 86ru RADICAL. &.

Fire, A, XV. xxxiv. GY k, to

change the fire,’ i.c, to get fire in all the 
diffi, ways. A., XVII. xxi. 3.

Violent. A., X. xvi, ö. 
I.q. J, calamity, P. M., xxviii, 1 
. Ye PE 2 .M., 3 . 1.

A final particle. Passim. (I) It is 
found at the end of clauses, when the 
mind expects the sequel. G. I.. o., vii. 2. 
D. VI., xi. A; xiij. 4. A., V. xxiii: VI. vii. 
et ul, sepe, (2) It is found at the end 
of sentences, and gives a liveliness to the 
style. D.M. x. ö; xiv. 2. A, f. xiv: 
IV. xvii: et al, sepe. (3) It is found 
often at the end of correlative clauses 
and sentences. G. L. C., viii. 1; x 13. D. 
M, i. 5; xii 2; xxvi. 9. A, VIII. xiii. 
3: XL xxiv. 3: XIII. xx. 2: ea. (4) 
Observe D. M., xxix. 2. A., V. xii.

Up. Ist tone. An interrogative parti- 
cle, generally best translated by how. It 
is placed at the beginning of the clause 
to which it belongs, unless where ano- 
ther particle, or the nominative, immedi- 
ately precedes, D.M, xxxii. I. A., II. 
x. J: III. xxii. 2: IV. i.: V. Ii.; iv. 25 x.; 
xviii. 1, 2: et al, sepe.

No, not, to be without, not to have.,No, not, to be without, not to have.,

Passin. Joined to verbs, adjectives, and 
nouns, It is often followed by Hf. As; 
III. vii: IX. ii. 1: etaL The í 
sometimes be understood. A., XX. iii. 
1, 2, 3: etal. fE... P. a strong aífir- 
mation, often with Bn between. G. L. c., 
ii, 4: vi. 2: ot al. Ho N Alk. A. 
VIL i. 1. HETY.... P., MME Sa... 
, 'orms of int rrogation. A., IX. vi. 
2: VI. i. 3: cd Opposed to . stand-

must

INDEX VII.

ing absolutely, the state of being with- 
out. A., IX. xi. 2: VIII. v. I. So file 
x there 18 not it, opposed to TH Z. 
G. L. o., ix. 1. Observe fit gu 23. it

is of no use doing so. A., XIX. xxiv. 
To be burned. A., X. xii.

Jun

fen

AR (1) So. A, III. xiii. 2: VI xxiv. VIII. 
ja o xx. 3: XIV. xiii. 2. yes. A., XV. ji. 2;

Jan — x4 3: XVII. vii, 3: XVIII. vi. 3. YR 
Hij, so then, well then, E Hj. se

but. A. III. xxii, 3: XI. xiv. 2; xxiii. 5: 
XIX. XV. (2) To ba right. A., Vl. i 4. 
(3) YR 1e and afterwards, A., VI. 
xvi: IX. xiv; xxvii etal (4) Added 
to adjectives, forming adverbs. G.L.c., 
vi. 2. D. XI., xxxiii. J. A., Ve xxi: IX. 
X. I, 2: XX. ii. 2: XIX. dx et /. -O. 
A., VIII. xxi.: XI. xii. 25 XIV. vi. J. (5)

YR, name of a member of the Zs 
family. A. XI. xxiii.

jfa A Jia T, how glorious, A., VIII. 
hwan xix. 2.

huan

Hg To enlighten, to shine on. D.M., xxxi. 
cham 4.

chao

lb ^ Bright. G. L. o., Hi. 2.

he r

hsi

lb Cooked, to cook. A., X. xiii, 1,

shith

shu

715 (1) A feast. D. M., xix. 4. (2) Easy 
yen and unoccupied. A., VII. iv.

. $5 WER, to obtain fire by boring, or 
suy friction. A., XVII. xxi. 3.

sui

THE 87m RADICAL, Z5.

5r To wrangle, to strive. G. L. O., x. 7. 
tsăng D. II., xxxiii. 4. A., III. vii: XV. xxi. 
tsóng

xy 
ka

wei

Todo, to make, G. L. C., vi. 2; x. 18. (1)

D. M., xi. I; xiii, 1; xvi. I. A., III. xxvi.: 
XIV. xv.; xvii: XIX. iv.; xv.; Xvi. etal, 
sepe. Sto be in charge of, to administer, 
to govern, D.M., xx. 12, 15. A., II. i.: 
IV. xiii: XI. xxv. 4, 5: XIII. ili. ]; xi:et al. {iy F why. A., VIII. xxiv.: 
XIV. xxxiv; xxxvii. 2. (2) To be. G. 
L. c., Xx. 5. D. M., vie xvi. 1. A., I. ji. 
2; Xii.: VI. ii.; iii. 3; vil; xi; Nile ef al, 
sape. At the beginning of clauses, it 
may be often translated hy who is. D. 
M. xxii; xxiii; ed al (3) Before nouns

id 
INDEX vir.

^o 
fu

BH 
4

wh

‘half of, with a view to, because; to be

of relation, and others, it. to play. ns, to

N

show ouc's-self to be. G. E Cs HL 3; in. pan 
8. D. II., viii. 2. A,, I. ii. : XIII. xv. je 
2, 3, 4s et al, (4) 98a 5. with or 2 
without intermediate words, "o take to yu 
I. Sto regard us, to consider, to have to

Mi , to use to make. G. L. r., 6; x. 11, 12, 
21. 22. D.., xviii. 1. A., II. viii: III. 
XIV. ji. 1, 2; iii; xiii. 
1, 2; xix, 2: et al, sepe. Sometimes T3 
js found alone, without the N. A. IX.

i, 2: XIX. ii: NI. xxiv. 3: et gl. Obs. 
A., XII. viii; XIII. v.: XIX. xxiv. Obs. 
also A Z Z N. A., XVIII. i., and the 
same idiom fi in other places.

Low. 3d-tone, For, because of, in be-

viib;xvilb; xxiv:

Æ

NEw 
niu

pis

mow

for. D. M., xix. 4. ? A,, I. iv.: III.

xvi; xxii, 2: VI. iii. 1: vitz VII. xiv. 1, | „. 
2: Kl. ix. 3; xvi. 1: XIII. xviii, 2: XIV. 242 
xxv. XV. xxxix. laou

Rank, dignity, D.M., ix.; xix. 1. jt 
MOW

THE 88mm RADICAL. X. mou 
A fatl zi; AU E : 4 
ather, Sepe. ms X BR pi wuh

wu 
4h 
"d

li

uncles and cousins. D.M., xx. 13. So

. Ji A., IX. xv. X. TL parents,

a parent. sape. To be—play—the father.

A., XII. xi. 1, 2. XX. see A

Up. 20 tone. 1 nume of a place. 
A., XIII. xviii, 
KR

THE 89r RADICAL. X.

(1) You, your. G. L. o., x. 4. D. M.,

xv.2; xxxii. 3. A., III. xvii. 2: V. xi., 
xxv. j: et al, sape. (2) After adjectives; 
making adverbs. A., IX. x. 8: XI. xxv. 
4: XVII. iv. 2. (3) A final particle,

synonymous with H, simply, just. D.

jun

JE

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

k'euen 
ch'üan

AL

349

Tables of population. A., X. xvi. 3.

A window, A., VI. viii,

THE 93» RADICAL, 2E.synonymous with H, simply, just. D.

jun

JE

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

k'euen 
ch'üan

AL

349

Tables of population. A., X. xvi. 3.

A window, A., VI. viii,

THE 93» RADICAL, 2E.

(1) A cow, an ox, the cow kind. A., 
VI. iv.: XVII. iv. 2. G. L. C., Xx. 21. (2)

4H E, the designation of one of the

disciples, A., VI. viii: XI. il. 2. Bl 
E 2F. a disciple of Conf, A., XII.

iii.; iv.; v.

rH a. the name of a place. — A, 
XVII. vii. 2. 
Surname of one of Conf, disciples. A.,

IX. vi. 4.

The male of animals, translated victim. 
A., XX. i. 3.

A thing, things, 115 n. all things. 
= unimals and things. D.M., xxii. men 
and things. D.M., xxv. 2, 3.

FA 2E, a brindled cow. A., VI. iv.

THE 94ra RADICAL. X

A dog. A., II. vii: XII. viii, 3.

(1) To offend, be offended, against. A., 
zi. 1: VIII. v. To withstand to the face.

A., XIV. xxiii, (2) tj uncle Fan, 
G.L.c., x. 13.

Ardent, ambitious, extravagant, extra-

2 n — sre ang vagance. A., V. xxi: VIII. xvi: XIII. 
M, xii, 4. A., X. i. 2. Z R3: 80, | k'uangxxi 1: XVII. viii. 3; xvi 2. A mad- 
just. A., VII. xviii. 2: xxxiii. man. A., XVIII. v. 1. 
M The name of the northern barbarians. 
TUE 90rn RADICAL, A : 105 b ES barbarous tribes, D. M., xiv. 2. 
R i

A., III. v.: XIII. xix.

Wi A wall,

2,8. Ë d a Screen in a 
2] Hi s i. 13.

iséan xxiii,

fans. 
chiag rince's court. 
p

THE 91sr RADICAL. x.

A splinter, a half. A., XII. xii.

Ji 
r 
een 
Prien

A., V. ix. 1: XVII. x: XIX.

Ap (1) To be familiar with, A., X. xvi. 2.

neck (2) To be disrespectful to. A., XVI. 
hsia vii. 2. 
UIN A fox. A., IX. xxvi, 1: X., vi. 4, 7.

hao 
hu

48

benen

Cautious and decided, A,, XIII. xxi.

[chüan 
i

ža If. the appearance of luxuriance. 
e G. L. G., iii. 4,

i

Ju Fierce. A., VIL xxxvii: XX. ii, 1, 2. 
mang

méng

Jig (1) As, G. Lo. ir. A., V. xvili, 2: 
yew VII. xxxii: XI. X.; xv.: XII. viii. 3; xiii 
yuo XVII. x.; xii; XIX. xxv. 3. (2) Still,i

Ju Fierce. A., VIL xxxvii: XX. ii, 1, 2. 
mang

méng

Jig (1) As, G. Lo. ir. A., V. xvili, 2: 
yew VII. xxxii: XI. X.; xv.: XII. viii. 3; xiii 
yuo XVII. x.; xii; XIX. xxv. 3. (2) Still,

yet. D. XI., xii. 2: xiii. 2; xxxiii. 6. A., 
VI. xxvii. 1: VIII. xvii: XII. ix 8: 
XIV. xxxviii. 1; xlv: XV.xxv. 11: XVII. 
xxii: XVIII. v. 1; XIX. xxv.

Litigations. A., XIL xil,

(1) Only. A, XII. xii, (2) Alone,

A, XVI. xiij. 2,3. EE Jf) the being 
alone. G. L. o., vi. 1, 2. P. M., i. 3. 
Í To obtain; acquisition, A., VI. xx, To

nwo obtain the confidence of, to gain. D. M.,

huo x. 6, 17. 18 JE, to sin, offend against, 
A., III. xiii 2.

FER (1) Used for E, wise men, A., III. ix.

heen (2) An honorary epithet. G. Lic, x. 22.

hsien

ER Wild animals, D. M., xxvi 9. A.,

show XVII. ix, 7 :XVIII. vi. 4. 
shou

THE 95r RADICAL, Iz.

zz Dark-coloured, A, X. vi 10: XX. i.

heuen 3. 3 
hsiian

ZA () To follow, accord with. D. I., i. 1.

(2) f, hastily, A., XI. xxv. 4,

THE 9614 RADICAL, N.

suh 
hs

a

(1) A gem, gems, A., IX. xii.! XVI. i.

yh 7: XVII. xi. (2) 4ü . a designation. 
A., XIV. xxvi: XV. xi. 2.

E ) A king, Kings. G. L. o., di 5. A.,

wary XIII, xii, E, the former kings, 
A., I. xii. 2. A former king. A., XVI. 
i. 4. (2) Æ IR. a double surname, 
A., III. xiii: XIV. xx. 2.

E Low. 3d tone. To exercise true, king-

wang ly authority. D. M., xvii. 3; xxix. 1.

iH É. to carry up the title of king to.

D.M, xviii. 3.

Distinctive, discriminating, 
le XXXxi. I; xxxiii. I.

En

D.M.,

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PIIRASES,

INDEX VII.

To cut, as jewels of gems. G. L. o., iii,

chó 4. A., I. xv. 2. t

clio

A A harp, or lute, D.M, xv. 2.

kun

ch'in

X (1) Stern, majestic. G. L. c., iii. 4. (2) 
sth Thie harpsichord. A., XI. xiv. I; xxv. 7: 
ene XVII. xx. i, AE, D.M, xv. 2. 
Juli A gemmed vessel, used in sacrifice, 
hen WIRE A» V. i

3j Same as the above,

hoo

hu

THE 97: RADICAL. N.

A gourd, 2 N. A., XVII. vii. 4.3j Same as the above,

hoo

hu

THE 97: RADICAL. N.

A gourd, 2 N. A., XVII. vii. 4.

Ha Supposed to be instead of JA. A., X. 
viii. 10. . 
Bi, A calabash, A., VI. ix. 
pieuou 
piao ‘ 
TUE born RADICAL. ff.

Sweet, to enjoy as sweet or pleasant. 
kun A., XVII. xxi. 5. j 
it Excessive, to an exceeding degree. A., 
ae VIL va xxviii. 2 VIII. x. XV.xxxiv, PE

J^ more important than, A., XIX. 
XX.

THE 100m RADICAL, 4E.

(1) To produce, to be produced. G. L. c.,

sing X.18. D.M., xvii. 3; xx. 5; xxvi. 7, 9. 
shéng A., I. ii. 2: VII xxii; XVII. xix. 3. (2) 
To be born. D. M., xx. 9; xxviii- 1. A.,;

VII. xix. EE dn Fab T, born with 
knowledge. A., XVI. ix. VI. xvii. (3)

To live. A., VI. xvii: XII. x. 2: XVII.

xxi. 6. The living, when living. D.M.,

xix. 5. A., II. v. 81 X. xiii. J. Life. A,

JI. x.: XII. v. 3: XV. viii: XIX. xxv. 4.

JL LE, elders. A., II. viii: XIV. xlvii, 
2. 16 . a youth, A, IX; xxii, 2p. 
4 , the life-time. A.) XIV. xiii, 2, (4) 
4 4. „a double surname, A., XIV.

xxxiv.— V. xxiii.

fiz - n the designation of a statesman

s of Conf. time, As V. xv; XIV. ix; x. 
ch'au a

INDEX VII.

THE list RADICAL, Fi.

Hi (1) To use: to employ (in office), toex- 
Yung pend. G. Lw., fi. J; x. 18. D. I. vi ; xxviii,

1. Ej f; DAL, xxxviit. 5. A, I. v5 xii, |,

1: VII. x.: XIII. iv. 2: et al, H. why

use ? of what use is? A., V. Iv. 2: XII. 
ix. XVI. i. 6: XVII. iv. 2. (2) Y

H= V. thereby. A., V. xxii,

A sername. A., V. XX.

t

ning 
THE 10?» RADICAL, IUE

(1) From, proceeding from. A., XII. i. 1,

HH

n Br d ,motives, A., II. x. 2. —by, to 
proceed by. to follow. A., I. xii. 1: VI. 
xii; xv: VIII. ix: IX. x. 3. (2) The 
nume of Tsze-loo, one of Conf. disciples. 
A., IL xvii; V. vi; vii: ef al., sepe. 
fik pH. A. VI vis VI. xxiii; XVIII. 
vi. 3. 
(1) To repeat. D.M, xvii. 4. (2) rH 
shin Vile 
ee FH pi easy-like, A., VII. iv. (3)

A surname, A., V. x. 
IH e , the name of a Book in the 
Kei — Shoo-king. G. L. C., i. 2.

chia

A To respect. A., IX, xxii, B DraA surname, A., V. x. 
IH e , the name of a Book in the 
Kei — Shoo-king. G. L. C., i. 2.

chia

A To respect. A., IX, xxii, B Dra

wei G. L. O., viii. 1. To reverence. D.M. xx. 
13. To stand in awe of. A., XVI. viii. 
1,2: XX. ii. 2. To be put in fear. A., 
IX. v.: XI. xxii. NEL

mp To transgress what is right. A., VI.

pwan xxv: XII. xv. To rebel. A., XVII. v.;

pan vii. 2.

xz Tu breed, nourish. G. L. c., x. 21. A., 
cheuh X. xiii. 1.

ch'u

HA. Aname. A., XIV. xxxiv,

mow

nou

ilt To mark off by a line, to limit one's- self. 
fed A., VI. x.

hun *

(1) Different (follow, by and j^» 
e A., I. x. 2: XI. xxv. 7: XII. x. 3: et al.

1 =Other. A, XVI. xiv. (2) Strange, 
ya extraordinary. A., II. xvi: XI. xxiii. 2. 
th (1) To undertake, sustain. A., XV. 
tang xxxv. (2) Asa preposition, iu, in regard 
„, to. A., X. vi. 3: XIX. xii.

M The imperial domains. G. L. o., iii. 1. 
he X :

chi

CHINESE CILARACTERS AND PHRASES.

351

p A boundary, a limit. $k Hip bound-

Liang less. D. M., xxvi. 5. 
chiang

THE 103» RADICAL, E.

(1) Distance—in feeling. A., IV. xxvi,

(2) Coarse. A., VII. XV.: X. viii. 10: 
XIV. x. 3.

To doubt, doubtful points, D.M., xxix. 
e 8, 4. A, II. xviii. 2: XII. xx. 6: XVI. x.

THE 10 1ru RADICAL, J^.

A chronic illness; spoken of the mind,

kew dolorous, dissatisfied. D.M., xx. 16; 
chiu xxxiii. 2. A., XII. iv. 2.

Pe (1) Sickness, to be sick, ill. A., II. vi.:

tsek VI. viii: VIII. iii; iv.: X. xiii. 3: XVII.

chi xx. Spoken of conduct. A., XVII. xvi.

P, A., VII. xxxiv; et al. (2) To

dislike. A., VIII. x: XIV. xxxiv. 2:

XV. xix: XVI i. 9. Ji TE to ve 
jealous. G. L. o., x. 19. (3) Actively, 
hastily, G.L.c, x. 18. A., X. xvii. 2.

(1) Severe sickuess, 'lo become sick,

A., IX. xi. 2; XV. i 2. M 3j A., 
VH. xxxiv: IX. xi. 1. (2) To be soli- 
eitous about. distressed about. A., VI.

xxviii, 1: XIV. xlv: XV. xviii.

ping

TUE 1031 RADICAL. JS,

o

To ascend, D. M., xv. 1,xxviii, 1: XIV. xlv: XV. xviii.

ping

TUE 1031 RADICAL. JS,

o

To ascend, D. M., xv. 1,

tang 
teng 
$e To send forth, Sto produce, D. M., 
fă xxvii, 2. Passive, to be put, to go, forth.

PD. M., i. 4. Impulsive. 
So, 58 n. A., VII. 
help out. A., VII. viii. 
to illustrate. A., II. ix. 
trious. G. L. o., x. 20. To increase. G. 
L. o. I. 20. :

D.M., xxxi. 1. 
xvii, 2, =To 
==To set forth,

THE 106m RADICAL. EJ.

White. A., XI. v.: XVII. vii. 3.

pih naked, applied to weapons. P. M., ix. 
pai

i A hundred, D. M., xxvii, 8; xxix. 8, 4, 
pih A., II. ii.: et al. all, used as n round 
pal number for the whole of a class, ü

IE, DAL, xx. 12, 13. A, XIX. vii.

H ADM xxx in. 5. H [Hb A.

To make illus- .

II. xxii.2. Ef H, A., XIV. xliii 2: 
XIX. xxii. 3. Ff Jf. A., XVII. xix, 
8. H WE, the people. D.M., xx. 13, 
M. A., XII. ix. 4:etal Ey Fe LZ

Be a house of 100 chariots, the higliést 
oflicer in a State. G. L. C., x. 22. A., V.

vii. 3 fH X fr. authority over

100 1 large State. ps VIII. vi.

10 I SR, Seeking display. D. M., xxxiii,

n th 1, 
ty All. At the commencement of clauses, 
kena with reference to preceding statements.

chieh If it have a noun with it. the noun always 
precedes. G. L. r., 0; C., 1, 4. D. XI. i. 4; 
vii. A., II. vii. 1: VII. xvii: XI. ii. 1: 
et ul, sepe.

E Great, august. E Ee St Jew ii most 
Awning great and sovercigu S E „ XX. 
huang 3. 
Clear, distinct, A., III. xxiii. 
Lkeaou 
chiao , 
THE 107i RADICAL, . 
The hides of animals. A piece of skin 
pe  orleather. A., III. xvi. 
pi 
THE 1081 RADICAL. III. 
Z4 Ful. A, VIL XV. 3. To fill A, 
ying VIII. xv. 
fut (I) To add to; more. A. II. xxiii. 2; 
yi I. jj 1. X j. 1: X i9. 2^ 
yi VL iii, 1: XI. xvi. 1: XIII. i2. d 
, one who has made progress. A.,

XIV. xlvii. 1, 2. 
fitable. G.L.c, vi. 2. 
XVI. iv.; v.

Why not? A., V. xxv. 1: XII. ix. 2.

(2) Of advantage, pro- 
A., XV. XXX:

ho 
BX

sino 4. D. M., XVI. i. 8. 
14. A. VIII. xx. 3:

Complete, abundant, rich. G. L. c., iii.

p? AR. D M., xx.Why not? A., V. xxv. 1: XII. ix. 2.

(2) Of advantage, pro- 
A., XV. XXX:

ho 
BX

sino 4. D. M., XVI. i. 8. 
14. A. VIII. xx. 3:

Complete, abundant, rich. G. L. c., iii.

p? AR. D M., xx.

8 4.

YE “Robbing; a thief. C. Lic, x. 22. A. 
taou XII. xviii: XVII. xii; xxiii.

tao

E To carry out, give full development to; 
tsin completely. G.L.c., iv. PD. M., xiii. 4; 
chin xxii; xxvi. 7; xxvii 6. A.. III. xviii;

xxy. VIII. xxi. 
fs To inspect, to view. G. L. C., X. 5. A. 
Jen III. xiv.

ehieu

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PITRASES.

INDEX VIT.

N. to push a boat on the dry

P 
tang fad: A., XIV. vi. 
n A bathing tub. G. L. c. i. 1. 
pwan x 
n an 
3 Used te Js A, a kind of rush. D. M., 
hho xx. 3. 
lu 
THE 109rr RADICAL, H. 
H e The eye., G. Lic., vi. 3. A., III.

muh viii. (2) An index, steps, processes, 
mun A, xin 3.

Uy The blaek and white of the eye well 
pan defined. A., III. vili. 1.

ia Upright, straight-forward, A., II. xix. 
chili VI. xvii; VIII. ii. xvi: et al, sepe.

Ne ; to pursue the straight path,

` d l igl l 
A., XV. xxiv. 2: XVIII ji. justice. 
A., XIV. xxvi. ?

m Mutually, one Dok

seang A. XV. xxxix: XVII. ii.

hsiang

AP Up. 3d tone. (1) To be observed: D.

seang M., xxxiii. 3. (2) To assist. A. III. ii.

Renny TO? act us minister to. A., XIV. xviii. 
: XVI. i. 12. (3) An assistant at

ees S See. XI. xxv 6. (4)

To lead, guide, as the blind. A., XV.

xli. 3.

To examine, inspect, 
xxxiii. 2. A., I. iv.: II. ix: IV. xvii.:

D.M., xxx. 3.

D. M., xx. 4; 
XII.

SF

sing 
Ising iv. 2. 
. H 
Hz To be deceived. D. M., xx. 13. 
henen 
bsüan

m All, used absolutely, G.L.c., ix. 1; x.

chung 5. A., T. vie VI. xxviii. 1: et al, sepe. 
Followed By a noun. À.,ILi. Many, 
in opp. to jae G.L.c., x 19. A, XX. 
ii.

To look askance, PD. M., xiii. 2.

I

e

i

Her To see D. II., i. 2. 
100

tu *

Intelligent, perspicacious. D. M, xxxi,

A$

Ju 1.

Jui 
ys To look to. G. L. C., iii, 4, With reve- 
chen rence. G. L. O., x. 4. A., IX. x. 1, ys 
chanI

e

i

Her To see D. II., i. 2. 
100

tu *

Intelligent, perspicacious. D. M, xxxi,

A$

Ju 1.

Jui 
ys To look to. G. L. C., iii, 4, With reve- 
chen rence. G. L. O., x. 4. A., IX. x. 1, ys 
chan

Jill. ^. XX. ii. 2 
pS Blind. A., IX. ix. X, xvi, 2. blind 
Foo ness. A., XVI. vi. $

ku

INDEX Vii.

TUE 110: RADICAL, T

T To show compassion to. D.M., xx. 1,

ae , XIX. Be FA, Gc. vili. L 
5 A „XIX. xix. a Lignin d. stern dig- 
nity. A., XV. xxi; XVIII. xvi. 2.

TIE 11108 RADICAL, .

(1) An arrow, A, XV. vi. (2) FE 
2 , to swenr, protest. A., VI. xxvi.

A final particle, found passim. It gives 
definiteness and decision to statements, 
und is peculiarly appropriate to a terse, 
conversational style. Where the lust 
clause of a sentence or paragraph com- 
menecs with Hij, SUF, or FAP: the final

: e^ ; 
Character is nearly always e It is

used also after |

B. and mn B. and

before the particles of exclamation,—

9 P, and uk.

To know, to understand,

Ani

Passim.

che Sometimes to acknowledge. i.e, to know

chi, and approve or employ. A., I. i. 3: IV. 
xiva VIII. xvi: XI. xxv. 3: et al, sepe. 
= knowledge. PD. I. r., 4, 3.

Ff Up. 2d tone, used for Ay. Wisdom,

che — wise, to be wise. D.M, iv.; vig vi; xx.

chih 8, 10; xxv. 3; xxxi. 1; xxxii. 3. A., TY. 
ji di: V. xvii; xx XVII. i. 2; ill.; viii. 
3; xxiv. 2; xxv. 2: et al.

Xl The instrument the square ; used meta-

ken — phorically. G. L. c., x. I, 2. A., II. iv,

chü 6. : : `

Short. A., VI. ii. X. vi ö: XI. vi.

lwan

tuan

40 Ilow much more (or less). D. XI., xvi.

chin 4.

chen

A Bold, firm. D. N., x. 5,

OR

chiao

THE 11211 RADICAL, H.

re

(1) A stone, a rock, D.M, xxvi, G.

Sh J. O., x. 4. (3) Ay PR. the name of a 
place. A., NIV, xli.

AY To split open. D. M., xii, 2

pro

fit

MU 
: N 
i Our man; with

11. fS the appearance of a worthless 
B, etupid-like, A,, XIII. 
xx. 2: XIV. xlii. 2,

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES,

563

pt To file, or plane; to polish. G.L.c,, iii, 
tso 4. ASQ I. Xv. 211. fS the appearance of a worthless 
B, etupid-like, A,, XIII. 
xx. 2: XIV. xlii. 2,

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES,

563

pt To file, or plane; to polish. G.L.c,, iii, 
tso 4. ASQ I. Xv. 2

111 Grent,—in size. G. . C., viii, 2.

shih ]

y To grind, G L. c. iii 4. A., I. xv. 2: 
mo XVII. vii. 3.

figs A thin stone, to become thin, A., XVII. 
lin vii. 3.

pig An instrument of music, a ringing 
Ei, stone. HEY ARE, A, XIV. xlii. I.

THE 1125 RADICAL, M.

R Used synonymously with Jig. D. M.,

she — xix. 6. A. III. xi.

shih

he, To sacrifice to. D.M., xviii. 3; xix, 6, 
BA FE £x, sacrifices, D. M., xvi. 9.

nit The altars of the spirits of the land, 
ae A, III. xsiz XI. xxiv. 3. pt BR T

Br a minister in direct connection with 
the emperor. A., XVI. i. 4. In D. M., 
xix. 6, ït is said to be the place of 
sac PR. to the Earth.

The spirit, or spirits of the earth. A.,

ke VII. xxxiv. Read che. Just, only. A,

chi XII. x. 3

mH nd jill. to hand down as if from his 
= —

tsoo ancestors. D. ., xxx. I.

tau

A spirit, spirits. DM., xvi. 4; xxiv. 1, 
M A., III. xii. 1, m Di , spiritual beings, 
spirits. D. M., xvi. 1; xxix, 3, 4. A., VI.

xx: VIII. xxi: XI. xi. ET no

the spirits of the upper and lower worlds,

A., VIL xxxiv. 
WE a [i2 happy omens, DAL, xxiv. 
fs'eang ' 
ehtiang 
mi nu fitz. =the priest To, A, VI. xiv; 
chuh XIV. xx. 2. 
chu 
21 To sacrifice, to sacrifice to, offered in 
tse sacrifice. D. I., xiii. 3. A., IL v. 3; 
chi — xxiv. ] : III. xiii. t: X. viii. 5, 10; xiii, 23" 
xv. B: XII. i: XIX. 1. A sacrifice, sacri- 
fices. A., III. xii, 1; XX. i. 8. aK jill, 
D.M., xvi. 3. 
Je Emolument, revenue, D. M., ix; xvii, 
th 2, 4; xx. 14. A., II. xviii. 1,2: XV. xxxi;

lu XVI. iii; xx, i. 1, 
15 
ho

huo

Calamity, unhappiness, PD. M., xxiv,

e 
i 
— 
[m 
lin

D

cking A., XVII. xxiv. 1. 
ch'eng probation, to praise.

CHINESE

A surname. A.: XIV. ix, ji

See Jr. 2 
tseth 
Happiness, D. M., xxiv. chi

To oppose, to meet. A., V. iv. 2.e 
i 
— 
[m 
lin

D

cking A., XVII. xxiv. 1. 
ch'eng probation, to praise.

CHINESE

A surname. A.: XIV. ix, ji

See Jr. 2 
tseth 
Happiness, D. M., xxiv. chi

To oppose, to meet. A., V. iv. 2.

The great, imperial, sacrifice. D. M.,

xix. 6. A., III. x; xi. 
The fitness or propricty of things; rules 
of propriety ; ceremonies. Passin.

To pray. A., III. xiii, 2: VII. xxxiv,

THE 11414 RADICAL. [A].

The founder of the Hea dynasty. A, 
VIII. xviii. xxii: XIV. vi: XX. i. 2.

(1) Birds. D.M, xxvi. 9. (2) Y 
; the designation of onc of Confucius? 
disciples. A., I. x.; XIX. xxv.

THE 11571 RADICAL, N. 
Private. A., X. v. 3. H. T. his

privacy, ic, his conduct in private. A, 
II. ix. 
The flowering of plants.

he

4S

D

A., IX, xxi,

The name of a measure of grain. A., 
IV. iii. 1. 
The season of autumn. D. M., xix. 3.

A class, degree. A., HI, xvi.

The name of a State. A., XVIII. ix,

2. z Hr, name of a Book in the 
Shoo-king. G.L.c, x.*14.

To remove, be changed, A, XVII. iii,

D. M., xx. 14.

Rations.

To call. A., XVI. xiv. To speak of.

To spenk of with ap. 
A., VIII. i; XIII.

XVI. xii.

xx. 2: XIV. xxxv: XV. xix;

CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

i to. 
clréng

22 . 
Eung mity, in want.

k'eung XX, 16; xxvi, 9, inexhaustible, 
ch‘ung exhausted, reduced to extremity. A.,

2

E 
k*wei 
k‘uei

TS 
chieh

Bi, 
tsaou 
tsau

INDEX VII

Up. 3d tone. According to, eqnivalent 
D. M., xx. M.

(1) The altars of the spirits of tho

grain. A., XI. xxiv, 3. mt f a 
Br. A., XVI i. 4. see [in (2) A min-

ister of Yaon and Shin. A, XIV. vi. 
Paddy; good rice. A., XVII. xxi, 4.

To sow seed ; husbandry. A., XIII. iv. 
1, 2: XIV. vi.

(1) Grain, A., XVII. xxi, 3. ES, 
the five kinds of grain, A., XVIII. v. 1,

(2) zemolument. A, XIV. i. (3) 
Good. A., VIII. xii.

(1) Grave; profound. D. M., xxvi. 10 
. G. Lo, iii, 3, A, III. ii (2) 
I . the order in which the tablets of

ancestors, and their descendants, were 
arranged in the ancestral temple. D,, 
M., xix. 4.

TUE 1161 RADICAL, .ancestors, and their descendants, were 
arranged in the ancestral temple. D,, 
M., xix. 4.

TUE 1161 RADICAL, .

Empty. 2 Z Amn. empty-like, A,

kiung IN. vii.

To he reduced to extre- 
A., XI. xviii. 1. 
To perforate; dig through, A, XVII.

Up. 3d tone

ch‘uon xii, 
chẽuan

4h * a designation. A., XVIII. xi,

Stopt up, unobservant of propriety. 
A., XVII. xxiv.

"To climb over a wall. So, Choo IIe.

Ay XVII. xii,

755. D. M., 
To he

To exhaust.

dany

N J. HE

XV. i. 2; XX. i. 1.

To peep, Ad. to take a view. A., 
XIX. xxiii. 2.

(1) To steal. A. XII. xviii.; XV. xiii,

(2) Private; an expression of humility, 
Sto venture. A., VII. i.

The fire-place; the furnace. A., III. 
xiii. I.

INDEX VII.

Tn 7mm RADICAL. II. 
aL (1) To stand. D.M., x. 5. A, V. vii. 
Rih 4: X. iii. 2; iv. 2; x. 2; xvii. 1: et al 
li (2) To establish; to be established. D. 
AI., xx. 13, 16; xxxii. 1. A,, I. ii. 2: II. 
iv. 2: IV. xiv: VII. xxviii. 2: XIX. xxv. 
4: et c. 
Fx (1) To display, be displayed. D.M., 
chany xx. 6; xxxi; xxxii. 1. (2) X xb 
elegant ways and manifestations, As 
V. oxi VIII. xix. JI d, complete 
. : 2 
and accomplished, A., V. xxi. (3) ar 
Hi: name of a cap of ceremony. A., 
XI. xxv. 6. 
Xt Fit J. a youth, a lad. A., VII. 
jung xxviii. 1: XT. xxv. 7: XIV. xlvii. 1. 
38 To exert to the utmost. A., I. vii: IX. 
Rud X8. To exhaust. A., IX. vii. 
ehich ý 
11 (1) A beginning or end, extremities, 
: is Dosen Ni n : 
s an P. bl. vi. A. IX. vii. xir hin to make

a beginning. D. M. xii. 4. (2) Doctrines. 
A., II. xvi. (3) The name of a robe of 
ceremony. A., NI. xxv. 6.

THE 11811 RADICAL. 4f.

To smile to laugh, A., III. viii. 1: 
XIV. xiv. 1, 2: XVII. iv. 2.

> 
2 8 
Sè

(1) A class; degrees. D.M. xx, 5. (2) 
A step of a stair. A., X. iv. 5.

$

To reply. A., XIV. iv.

(1) A tablet of bamboo. D. M., xx. 2. 
(2) To whip. A. VI. xiii.

Sets

ts.> 
2 8 
Sè

(1) A class; degrees. D.M. xx, 5. (2) 
A step of a stair. A., X. iv. 5.

$

To reply. A., XIV. iv.

(1) A tablet of bamboo. D. M., xx. 2. 
(2) To whip. A. VI. xiii.

Sets

ts.

* U ^ 
diy A bamboo vessel, 2f- 1i Z ^ 
shaow men who are mere utensils, A., XIII. 
shao xx.4. 
11 To reckon, take into account. A., 
swan XII. xx. 4. 
hsüan

Sa 
fi (1) A division, what is regularly de- 
UO fined. DM, i. 4. A., XVIII. vii. 5. 
chich (2) An emergency; a decisive time. A.,

VIII. vi. (3) To regulate. A., I. ii. 2. 
Sto economize. A., I. v. To discrimi- 
nate. A., XVI. v. (4) The capitals of 
Pillars. A., V. xvii. E

A surname, 17 R. A., III. xxii, 2, 
3. A fift, A., III. xxii 1, 2, 8: XIV. 
Xx. 3; xvii, 1g 2; xviii. 2, 3.

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PIIRASES.

355

At The name of a State, A., XVIII. i. 1. 
[^h 
chi 
4 Liberal. D.M,.xvii.3. Firm and sin- 
th cere; firmly and sincerely, D. M., xx. 19,

tu 20; xxxiii. 6. A., VIII. xiii. 1: XI. xx. 
XV. v. 2: XIX. ii.; vi.

ER A small round bamboo basket. A., 
tan VI. ix. What is said of it there, in the 
note, is wrong.

TC A basket for carrying earth, A., IX. 
re xviii.

kuci

fi (1) Hasty. A., V. xxi. (2) An easy 
kien negligence. A. VI. i. 2, 3. D. M., xxxiii.

chien 1. (3) To examine. A. XX. i. 3. 
5 A sacrificial vessel, for holding fruits 
and seeds. A, VIII. iv. 2.

THE 119r RADICAL. .

Rice in the husk, A., VI. iii, 1, 3. 
Srevenue. A., XII. xi. 3.

(1) Rice finely cleaned, A., X. viii. I. 
(2) Minute, exact. D. M., xxvii. 6.

Excrement.=dirty, A., V. ix. 1.

Aid Provisions. A, XV. i. 2. 
leang 
liaug

THE 12011 RADICAL, Xe

IL A name. A., XIV. xvii. 1; xviii. 1.

(1) To bind, to restrain. A., VI. xxv.:

% XX. x. 2: XII. xv. na X^. to use re- 
straint, be cautious. A., IV. xxii. (2) 
Straitencd. A., VII. xxv. 3. Poverty, 
Straitened circumstances. A., IV. ii.

II. Red. A., X. vi. 2.

hung

Xj Epithet of the last emperor of the Shang 
chow

dynasty. A., XIV. xx. DAE XJ. G. L.

cliou B 
C., ix. 10.II. Red. A., X. vi. 2.

hung

Xj Epithet of the last emperor of the Shang 
chow

dynasty. A., XIV. xx. DAE XJ. G. L.

cliou B 
C., ix. 10.

an () Silken, made of silk. A., TX, iii. 1. 
shun (2) Harmonious. A., III. xxiii. (3) 
ch'un Singleness. D. M., xxvi. 10.

To make to enter. D. M., vii To

A., XX. ii. 3.

n

n present.

uu

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PIIRASES.

White. A., X. vi. 4. The plain ground,

^

$00 before colours are laid on. A., III. viii.

su 1,2. In D.M. xiv. 1, 2, it seems to mean 
—the present condition.

He For FT to inquire into, D. M., xi. 1.

sth

hoi

Be Reddish, purple. A., X. vi. 2: XVII.

tsze xviii

tszü

ll Small, minute. A., X. viii 1.

sc

hsi

¥, if A sash or girdle, with the ends hang-

shin ing down. A., X. xiii. 3: XV. v. 4.

shen

7 Xl Of adecp purple colour, A., X. vi. 1.

kun

() An end. ARES Gx, 3. D.

chung M., xxv. (2) To be brought to a con- 
elusion, to succeed. D.M., x. 20. To 
“come to an end, to terminate. A., XX.

X

tsené 
chüeh

chich

700

se 
psieh

keaou 
chiao

jl

heuen 
bsüan

i.1. (3) Death, the dead, Ai KK to 
LR

attend carefully to the funeral rites to 
parents. A., I. ix. (4) Perpetual, D.M., 
xxix. 6. Perpetually. A., XVII. xxvi. 
ý% w never, G. L. C., iii, 4. 4 
ap the whole day. A., II. ix: XV. xvi; 
xx: XVII. xxxii, x Ép, all one’s 
life, continually. A. IX. xxvi. 3: XV.

xxiii. ZK ft x ip the space of a

meal. A., IV. v. 3. ; 
To be broken off. D. M., xx. 14. A., 
XX. i. 7. Sto be without. A., IX. iv.

To be exhausted. A., XV. i. 2. EH fa, 
to cut one’s-self off from, A., XIX. xxiv. 
D Xi smartnesaes of speech, A., V. 
iv. 2 
VETT 
ip B=

bonds, fetters, A., V. i. 1

Rude, rudeness. A., VIII. ii: XVII.

viii. 3.

The colouring- ornamental portion —of

a picture. A., III. viii. 1.

Made of a fine texture. A., X. vi. 3. 
A., X. vi 3.

Of a coarser texture.

To use a nei. A., VII. xxvi.

hsich

2 
Ling 
ching ¥

HE

wet

ve

gi 
ch 
ch'o

4» 
H1 
lun

PRA 
1 
Seu 
hsü 
"I 
i 
tseih 
ch'i

471Of a coarser texture.

To use a nei. A., VII. xxvi.

hsich

2 
Ling 
ching ¥

HE

wet

ve

gi 
ch 
ch'o

4» 
H1 
lun

PRA 
1 
Seu 
hsü 
"I 
i 
tseih 
ch'i

471

men 
mien 
4M. 
fit 
(sung

124

Az 
tsung 
At 
isow 
tsou

£0 
Jis 
luy 
lui

id

tsze 
tszü

33 
UD 
mew 
miu

he 
hsi 
vt 
MN 
letiou 
liao

y 
612 
hwuy 
hui

yih 
yi

INDEX VII.

(1) A string or strap, attached to a 
carriage. A, X. xviii. y (2) To make

happy. A., XIX. M 
a zi i. tlie

To measure, 
principle 1 d. Lo., x. I, 2.

a Standard.“ invariable rules. D.M,, 
As a verb, see 
A, XIV, xvii,

m e 15; xxxii. 1.

ii i (2) To strangle.

6 particle, initial, but, only, and used

as the copula. G. L. o., ii. 3; x. 4. D.M,, 
xxvi. 10. A., III. ii.

S a member of the Ming family. 
A., XIV. xii.; xiii.

£x fiij to adjust, D.M., xxxii, 1.

The end of a cocoon; a beginning; an 
enterprise. D.M., xviii. 2. 
vn AEI 2 2 
Tv ll Y ^ T 
i HL, bright aud unceasing. G. L. c., 
jii. 3.

1H her, the twittering of a bird, G. 
Le., iii. 2.

D To let go, not to restrict. A., IX. 
vi. e Although. A., IX. xi. 3. l 
fh E. attended to their several

duties. A., XIV. xliii. 2. 
Of a puce colour. A., X. vi. 1.

A., V.

A black rope. w 3 fi yu bonds,

i. 1.

Of a black colour, A., X. vi. 4: XVII. 
vii. 3.

Error, mistake. D. M., xxix. 3. Low. 
3d tone.

To bo hung up, suspended, D. M., xxvi.

9. A. XVII. vii. 4

A name. A., XVIII. ix, 2,

To paint, lay on various colours. 
III. viii. 2.

Ay

To draw out, unfold, A., IX. xsiti. 
n . 
ve an, flowing on, drawn out, spoken 
of music. A. III. xxiii.

INDEX VII.

iat Up. 2d tone. Quilted with hemp. A., 
wan IX. xxvi. 1. 
wen

wie P y 
112 To connect, continue. D. I., xix, 2;

ke K ii zee

che X. M. A., II. xxiii. 2: XX. i. 7. EA ar 
to make the rich more rich. A., VI. iii. 
2

7 . 222

ape To continue, D. M., xviii, 2.

tsican

tsuan

THE 12151 RADICAL. AB.

De

Iv ud 
chiteh

A name. A., XVIII, ix. 2.

THE 122» RADICAL. lx].

E Labour lost. A., II. To lose, he

XV,7 . 222

ape To continue, D. M., xviii, 2.

tsican

tsuan

THE 12151 RADICAL. AB.

De

Iv ud 
chiteh

A name. A., XVIII, ix. 2.

THE 122» RADICAL. lx].

E Labour lost. A., II. To lose, he

XV,

wang without. A., VT. xvii. To be entrapt, 
befvoled. A., VI. xxiv.

ZÉ seldom, A., IX. i

hen

JIE A net, for catching fish, D. M., vii.

kuo

ku

3E A crime; offence, A., V. i. 1: XX. i.

tun k

tu 3. 35 JE to offend against, A., III. 
xiii. 2

e To punish, Jh] 5j EJ Punishments; as

T distinguished, E is a fine. A., XIII. 
jii. 6.

ti To cease; to give over. A., IX. x. 3.

pa

THE 122» RADICAL, E.

A sheep, or goat. G. L. c., Xx. 22. A.,

yang III. xvii. 1, 2: XII. viii. 3: XIII. xviii. 
= € © Goodness, excellence, beauty, excellent

quality. G. L. C., viii. 1. A., I. xii. 1 
IV. i.: VI. xiv: VIII. xi; xxi: XII. xvi: 
XIII. viii: XIX, xxii. 3. I. BS, the 
five excellent qualities of government. 
A., XX. ii Beautiful, elegant. A., 
111. viii; xxv» IX. xii.

(1) A lamb, or kid. A., X. vi. 4, 11,

(2) F , the designation of one of 
Conf. disciples. A., XI. xxiv.

Shame, disgrace, A., XIII. xxii, 2.

45. (D A flock, n class; all of a class. D. 
M. xx. 12, 13. A., XV. xvi: XVIII. vi. 
chain 4. (2) Sociable, to be sociable. A, XV. 
xxi: XVII ix, +

CHINESE CITARACTERS

ts'ériig wards,

AND PIIRASES.

357

(1) What is right, righteousness, G. L. 
C. X. 22, 23. D.M.. xx. 5. A. I. xiii: 
II. xxiv. 2: et passim. (2) Meaning. D. 
M, xix. 6.

Soup. A., X. viii. 4.

THE 124mm RADICAL. .

A surname. A., XIV. ix.

A famous archer of antiquity. A.,

XIV. vi.

To practise. A, I. i. 1; iv. By prac- 
tice, A. XVIII. ii.

To fly round, or backwards and for- 
A., X. xviii. 1.

cliiang

fu To be united, in concord. D. I., xv. 2. 
Be $a. applied to music. A., III. xxiii, 
XM Wings, 2 In, wing-like. A. X 
yh iii. 3; iv. 5. `

yi

kuou

k‘ao

A 
chay 
clio

TILE 19319 RADICAL. D.fu To be united, in concord. D. I., xv. 2. 
Be $a. applied to music. A., III. xxiii, 
XM Wings, 2 In, wing-like. A. X 
yh iii. 3; iv. 5. `

yi

kuou

k‘ao

A 
chay 
clio

TILE 19319 RADICAL. D.

(1) Old, to be old; the old. G. L. c. x., 
1. A., V. xxv. 4: XIII. iv. 1: XIV. xlvi: 
XVI. vii: XVIII. iii. Oldage. A., VII. 
xviii. 2. To treat as old. G. J. C., x. 1. 
(2) A chief officer. A., XIV. xii.

To examine, D. M., xxix, 3. To ex- 
amine and determine. D. M., xxviii. 2.

(1) He (or they) who; this (or that), 
these (or those), who (or which). It is 
put after the words (verbs, adjectives, 
nouns), and clauses to which it belongs. 
G. L. r., 4: C., x. 4, 9, 18. 19, 21, 23. A., 
XIX. Hbi iv.; Xii. 2; xxii. 2: et passim. 
(2) It stands at the end of the first mem- 
ber of a clause or sentence, when the 
next gives a description or explanation 
of the subject of the other, terminated 
generally by the particle 4h but not 
always. G. L. C., vi. E; vii. 15 ix. I: x. 7. 
D.M, xix. 2; xxv. 1 3. A, XII. xvi. 
et al, sape. (3) 1.17 ＋ together, at the

end of the first mealen of a sentence, 
resume a previous word, and lead on to 
an explanation or account of it. UD. II., i. 
2, 4; Xx. 3. A., XII. xx. 5, 6. The case

in d XI. xxv. 10, is different. (4) G 
4th, often oceurs at the end of sentences,

preceded, tho sometimes not, by Aik 
G. L. c., ix. 2; x. 20. D. M., xxix. 6. A.,

XVIII. vii. 4: XIX. xvii: et al, S . 
In all these cases the proper meaning of

T. as in case (1) is apparent. But (5) 
we find it where that can hardly be 
traced, and where sometimes we might 
translate it by one or thut, and at other 
times by so, such a thing, with a ——. but 
there are cases where it cannot be trans- 
lated. G. L. r., 7: c., ix. 4. A., VI. ii: xii. 
XI. vi: XII. viii. 2, 3: XVI. i. 5; xiii. 
4: XVII. vis XIX. xxv. 4. (6) It forms 
adverbs with rg and rz A., XVII. 
vii. 2: xvi. etal. Observe A., IX. xvi: 
III. x.

THE 126 ru RADICAL, fff-THE 126 ru RADICAL, fff-

A conjunction. (1) And. G. 
uh L. r., 2, 5: C., ix. 2, 4, 6, 75 8. D. M., i. 4; 
íi. 2; xx. 6, 9, 14. 17. A., I. i. I; ii. 2; 
iv.; v.; vi; vii: xii. 2r al, sepissime, 
(2) And yet. G. L. 7. 7: G., iii. 2; vii. 2; 
X. 13, 14. D.M. xxxiii. A 3,4: et al. sapis- 
sime. The *and yet’ is often nearly, or 
altogether, but. A., II. xiv : VII. xxvi: 
XIII. XX.; xxvi: et al, sepe. It may 
often be translated by if. A., III. xxii 
3: VII. xi; xxv. 1, 2; xxx. 2; xxxi. etal. 
(3) It is used idiomatically, or for the 
rhythm, after adverbs. A., XI. xxv. 4: 
XIV. xx. 1; xlii. 2: XVII. iv. 2: et al.

ØR M. A., XIX. xv. 1. (4) After fH 
and before a verb, it forms the passive 
of that verb. A, VIII. i: XIX. xxiv, 
xxv.8: etal, (5) Sor. A, XII. i. 1.

ONT! A "m f&. henceforth, both

now and hereafter. A. VI. iii. (7) It

is often followed by . B w B

RR. D.M, xxv. 3. A, TE xv. 2: XIV.

xlv.: et al. (8) Used for Y „you, D. M., 
ix. 2. (9) A., IX. xxx. 1, a mere ex-

Pe . it B wi- A., XVIII.

THE 12711 RADICAL, Fe.

Passim,

EH To plough; to do field-work, A., XV. 
käng xxxi: XVIII. vi. 1.

kéng 
Fh Two together, A., XVIII. vi. I. 
gow | 
18 To cover the scod, A., XVIII. vi. 3. 
yew 
yu 
THE 128ra RADICAL. H.

(1) The ear. A., IT, iv, 5: VIII. xv.

wh (2) A final particle, simply. A., XVII.

iv. 4. (3) An expletive. A. VI. xii.

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PIIRASES.

INDEX VII.

Yielding pleasure, D.M., xv. 2.

XL

tan

d

pug 
mm

The sending of envoys to one another, 
or to court, by the princes of the empire. 
D.M., xx. 14.

A Intelligent, perspicacious, G. L. C., x.

shing 11. D.M. xxxii. 3. Sage, possessing 
shéng the highest knowledge aud excellence.

i AB a sage. PD. II., xi. 3; xxxi, 1. 
A., Vl. xxviii. 1: VII. xxxiii; IX. vi. 1, 2.shing 11. D.M. xxxii. 3. Sage, possessing 
shéng the highest knowledge aud excellence.

i AB a sage. PD. II., xi. 3; xxxi, 1. 
A., Vl. xxviii. 1: VII. xxxiii; IX. vi. 1, 2.

He a collect, be collected. G. L. c., x. 9. 
ane mA fi, to collect imposts. G. L. o., x. 
chũ 
22. A. XI. xvi. 1. 
Ri] To hear; to become acquainted with by 
wan n : k s 
wan report, Passim, NE im xX fi]. to 
hear and not understand. G.L.c., vii. 2. 
D. M., xvi. 2 
Bg Low. 3d tone, To be heard of, notoriety. 
wan A., XII. xx. 3, 4, 6. 
wén 
Ha Quick in apprehension. D.M., xxxi. 1; 
tsung xxxii.3. To hear distinctly. A. XVI. 
x.

JE A sound. D.M, xxxiii. 6. A, XVII. 
. pow A., XV. x. 6: XVII.

shing iv. 1 
HE A fame, D.M, xxxi. 4.

shéng xviii,

HE To 13 to listen to. G. L. o., iv.: vii. 2. 
ting D. M., xvi. 2. A., V. ix. 2: XII. i. 2;

xiii: XVI. X.: XVII. xiv. ie N. to 
receive instructions from. A., XIV. xliii, 
2.

THE, 129m RADICAL, ge.

(1) To expose a corpse. A., XIV.

xxxviii.1. (2) Unrestrained. a disregard 
of smaller matters. A. XVII. xvi. 2. 
(3). A shop, a stall for goods. A. XIX. 
vii.

TIIE 13011 RADICAL,

Flesh, ment. A., VII. xiii.: X. viii, 2,

juh 4, 8; xv. 2. 
jou 
H. not equal to, degenerate, worth- 
seaow less. D. M., iv.; xii. 2. 
hsiao 
HT The liver, ELLE his lungs and 
kan d =his inward thoughts. G. c., 
vi. 
jigs a name, A., XVII. vii, 1, 2. 
heih 
hsi 
Ji j  Thelungs Sec above, 
pee

INDEX VH.

[5] 'To be nourished, D.., i 5; xxx. 8. 
A To To pentia D.M, xxii, XH AU.

[zl , tke tranforming and nourishing of 
Jleaven and Earth. D.M, xxvii 2 ; xxxii. 
1

fi i p pili + c=, earnestly sincere

chun , was his perfect humanity, D.M, xxxii. 
chén 2.

Il rat. A, VI. iii. 2

Ju

J5 The shoulder, A., XIX. xxiii. 2,

kien

chien

JE At ease, Some say, corpulent, G.L. 
pwan C., vi. 4.

pan

Kz The arm, A., VII. xv.

Awang

kuang

HE The leg below the knee, the shank, 
hing A., XIV. xlvi.

hsing

why!

HE To be able; can. As the auxiliary,

It is often used absolutely ;—pan

Kz The arm, A., VII. xv.

Awang

kuang

HE The leg below the knee, the shank, 
hing A., XIV. xlvi.

hsing

why!

HE To be able; can. As the auxiliary,

It is often used absolutely ;—

D.M, iii.; ix.; xi. 3; xiii. 4. A., 
XL xxv. 6: XIV. xxx« ef al, The able, 
competent. D.M., xx. 14. A. 4 II. xx. : 
et al. =the having power, ability. A., 
VIII. v.: IX. vi. 1, 2, 3: et al.

{7 (1) Dried slices of flesh. A., VII. vii.

sew (2) To cultivate. In G.L.c., and D.M.,

hsiu Passim. ti Ey E B f (ee to cultivate

one's-self, D repair. D. M., xix. 3. To 
reform. A. XII. xxi. 1, 2. "To restore.

A., XX. i. 6. f$ Gif A, XIV. ix.

Dried meat, A., X. viii. 1,

nang passim. 
nêng to can.

(1) The skin, A., XII. vi. (2) A name. 
A. XIX, xix.

The breast. ` IR 
breast. D. M., viii.

Raw, undressed meat.

jg. to wear on the

A., X. xiii, I.

Minced, cut small. A., X. viii, 1.

THE 181sr RADICAL. Hi.

E A minister; the correlate of pig G. 
chin Tae, x. 14, 22. D. M., xiii. 4; xx. 8, 12,

chin 13, 14. A., III. xix. et Serpe. X Hl. 
D. M., xx. 12, 13. A., XI. xxiii, 1: XVIII

CHINESE CIARACTERS AND PHRASES.

ai 
7j P 
tsang

8

ih

J 
chow 
ch‘ou

kA

zE 
kaou 
kao

ES

che 
ehih

*

che 
chill

359

x FAR DM, . 12. 13. N. Ei,

A., XI. xsi 3. Ir HI., A., XVI. i. 
To play —be—the minister. B B. Ay

XIL xi. 2, 3. A BR, GL, iii. 3.

(1) Good, thoroughly good. A., IX. 
xxvi.2. 3. (2) A surname. A., V. xviii: 
XV. xiii, —

To oversee; to draw near to, on the

part of a superior. Spoken of govern- 
ment. D. M., xxxi. I. A., II. xx: VI. i.

8. BE BE, a. III. xxvi. bin SE A. 
VILx.3. Be pk A, VIII. iii, 5

K fifj, A. VIII. vi.

THE 132» RADICAL, É-

(1) From, as a preposition. G.L.r., 6; 
C, xiv. 23. P. II., xv. 1; xvii. 45 xxi. 1; 
xxviii. 1. A., I. i 2: IV. xvii: etal, 
sape. As a noun, the origin, source. D. 
M, xxxiii, l. (3) Self, of all persons.

Generally joined with verbs, 2 M.Generally joined with verbs, 2 M.

H f$. &e,, self-use, self-cultivation 
Kc. G. I. o., i. 4; iii. 4; vi. 1. D.M., xiv. 
2; xxv.1, 3. A., XII. xxii. 1: XIV. 
xviii. 2; xxx. 2.

Smell, a smell. G. L. c., vi. 1. 
xxxiii. 6. A., X. vii. 2.

D. M.,

t 5 p]. an ancient statesman. A., 
xil; xxii. I. 
N

THE 133» RADICAL,

zx

E

(1) To come, to arrive at; sometimes

Sto. till. G. .. C., x. 22. D.M., xxxi. 4. 
A., VIII. aes 25 Xxix.: IX, viii: XVIII.

vii, 4. Tir fit Er Ẹ, a man will 
do anything bad. G.L.c, vi 2. A, 
XVII. xv. 3. ZR . down to; to come 
to, as to. GL, 6. A., II. vii: III. 
xxiv: V. xviii. 2 VI. xii; xxii: VII. 
xii: VIII. xii. 1. (2) Most, making the 
superlative degree. G. I. r., 1; c. iii. 4. 
DAL, xxi; xxiii; XXiv.; xxvi. 1; xxvii. 
5; xxxi. 1; xxxvi. 1l. A. VIII. i.; xx. 4: 
XIII. iv. 3. (3) The highest degree; to 
exist in the highest degree. G. L. C., v 
D.M, iii.; xii. 2, 4; xix. 5; xxxiii. 6. A. 
VI. xxvii. To become complete, G, 
Lr, 5.

(1) To carry to the utmost, to per- 
fection. G. L. ., 4 DM, i. 5; xxiii; 
xxvii. 6. A., VIII. xxi; XIX. iv.: vii. 
E it. to exert one’s-self to the utmost.

360

o^ * 
yu 
yü

Bit

FN 
yu

yü 
Fe. 
hing 
hsing

CIIINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES,

A. XIX. xvii. To be carried to per- 
fection, A., XIX. xiv. Observe 25

Jj A. XX. il. 3. (2) $$ AV, BY

fe to devote one's person, life, A., I. 
vii: XIX. i. 
WE ES, a surname. A., VI. xii, 
THE 13471 RADICAL. a

(1) 2 ga, an instant. D. X.,

(2) 101 da. the name of a small State.

A, XVI. i. 
Low. 2d tone. (1) With. along with; 
to be with, to associate with. G. L. o., 
iii. 3; x. 15. DM. xxii 1; xxiii. A, I. 
iv.; vli; xv. 3: et passin, (2) And. A, 
IN. i; ix: XI. xxiii. 2, 4, 6: et al. Some- 
times it must be, translated by or. A.,

XL. xv. : et al. (3) Followed by E aud

by BY P. than, Gl, x. 22. A, 
IV. iv. 8; xiii. 1: VII. xxxv: IX. xi. 3.: 
XVIII. vi. 3. (4) To give to. A. I. x. 
1: V. xxiii: VI. jii, 1, 3. 4. XX. ii.XL. xv. : et al. (3) Followed by E aud

by BY P. than, Gl, x. 22. A, 
IV. iv. 8; xiii. 1: VII. xxxv: IX. xi. 3.: 
XVIII. vi. 3. (4) To give to. A. I. x. 
1: V. xxiii: VI. jii, 1, 3. 4. XX. ii.

3. (5) To grant, concede to, allow. A, 
V. viii. 2: VII. xxviii, 2: XI. xxv. 7. (6)

To wait for. A., XVII. i. 2, N T 
RE a. (7) Observe Hil EE. A 
X. ; Bg fii xS FFS 5 IX. xxiii, 
4. 
E X Bit gi A XIII vi. 4. 
(1) Low. 1st tone. A final particle, 
sometimes interogative, sometimes of ad-

' miration, and sometimes of doubt or hesi-

tancy. As interrogative, it gencrally 
implies that the answer will be in the 
afliymative. As indicating doubt or he- 
sitancy, we find it preceded by other 
final particles. It is followed also hy 
other particles of exclamation. ID. M., vi; 
X. 2; xvii l; xxvi 7. A. I ii. 2; x. 1, 
2; Xv. 2: etal, passin. Observe A., V. 
ix. 1, 2: XII. xxviii, 2. (2) Git (lif, the 
ara s 
appearance of dignity and satisfaction. 
A. X. ii. 2.

Low, 3d tone, Sharing in: concerned 
with. D.M, xii. 2. A., III. xii.2: VIII. 
xviii: IX. v. 8: XIII. xiv.

(1) To rise. A., XV. i. 2. Sto become.

G. L. c., ix. 33 x. I. So, followed by .

A., VIII. ii. 2. To be produced. D.M., 
xxvi 9. To be aroused, stimulated. A,, 
VIII. viii. 1: XVII. ix. 2. (2) To flour- 
ish. D. I., xxiv. A., XIII. iii. 6. To 
make to flourish ; to raise. 
7. A., XIII. xv. 1, 9: XX. i. 7.

(1) To raise; employ, promote, G. L. C., 
x. I. D. M., xx. 14. A. II. m XX. 
XII. xxii, 3, 4, 6: XIII. ii. XV.

15 255

D.M., xxvii.

BE

shun

Ane 
pd 
woo 
wu

shih 
shé

vun 
yün

INDEX VIT,

xxii: XX. i. 7. To present: set forth (in 
discourse). A. VII viii Passive, to be 
established, DML, xx. 2. (2) To rise. 
A., X. xviii. I.

Old G..., ii. 3. A., V. xviii, l;

xxii.: XI. xiii. 2: XVII. xxi. 3. Wis, 
z-old friends or ministers. A.n V 111. i

2; XVIII. x, iG JE sce AD.

THE 13571 RADICAL, Hf.

The tongue. A., XII. viii, 2.Old G..., ii. 3. A., V. xviii, l;

xxii.: XI. xiii. 2: XVII. xxi. 3. Wis, 
z-old friends or ministers. A.n V 111. i

2; XVIII. x, iG JE sce AD.

THE 13571 RADICAL, Hf.

The tongue. A., XII. viii, 2.

Up. 2d tone, for T. (1) To rojert. 
A. VI. iv. To neglect. A., XIII. ii. 2. 
To leave unemployed. A., VII. x. To lay 
aside. A., XI. XXV. 7. Lo omit: decline. 
A. XVI. i. 9. (2) To cease; give over. 
Ay IX. xvi.

economy. G. L. o., x. 19.

THE 136m: RADICAL. Jak.

An ancient emperor, D. X., vi.: xvii, I.

A., VIII. xviii: etal FE Tip, 
ix.4. DOM, xxxi I. A, VII. 
XVI. xlv.

(1) Pautomimes, A., III. i.: XV. x. 5. 
(2) ae SE, =the rain altars, A., XI. 
xxv. 7: XII. xxi. I.

G. L. q., 
xxviii:

THE 1371 RADICAL, Jj.

A ship, a boat, D. M., xxxi 4. A, 
XIV. vi.

THE 139m RADICAL. É

(1) Colour, appearance, especially as

variously seen in the countenance; the 
countenance, G. L. c., vi. 1; pe M.. xxxiii. 
6. A., I. iii.: IL. viii.: V 2xvili: et ul. sepe.

YR É A., VIII. iv. 3. X. v. 2: XVI.

vi. 1 , to give the proper finish.

(2) Beauty, ad the desire for its enjoy- 
ment. DM., xx. 14. A, I. vii: IX. 
xvii: XV. xii: XVI. vii.

THE 140 n RADICAL. yup.

In some copies for iz 'To weed, A, 
XVIII. vii. 1.

JNDEX VII.

nr Grain springing, or growing up. G.

nme don. Lech viii. 2. A., IX. xxi.

mino

4] (1) If, if indeed. G. L. O., ii. 1. DAL,

kaw xxvii. 5; xxviii 4; xxxii. 3. A.; IV. iv.:

kou VIE xxx. 3: et el... (2) Improper, irregu- 
lar. A., XIII. iii. 7. (3) Indicating in- 
diference. A., XIII. viii.

Ae (J) As, as if. G. L. o., x. 14. A,, VIII.

jo v. (2) As, like. equal to. A. I. xv. J:

je XIII. xv. I. 4; xii: XVIII. iii.; vi. 2

(3) Such as, —this. A., V. ii.: XI. xii. 
2: NIV. vi. Observe A., VII. xxxiii. 
(4) ‘The name of one of Conf. disciples. 
A. XII. ix.

JE Weak, soft. A., XVII. xii,

Jin

Jau

zh This, A., IX. v. 2.

ka de

5 -tt

Ww (1) Grass. A., XII. xix. Ei . 
tstuou grasses and trees, plants. P. I., xxvi. 
tsiao 9. A., XVII. ix. 7: XIX. xii. 2. (2) AJin

Jau

zh This, A., IX. v. 2.

ka de

5 -tt

Ww (1) Grass. A., XII. xix. Ei . 
tstuou grasses and trees, plants. P. I., xxvi. 
tsiao 9. A., XVII. ix. 7: XIX. xii. 2. (2) A

rough copy. ET fil] to make the first 
copy. A. XIV. ix.

A cadet of the ducal family of Wei. A., 
XIII. viii.

5n]

king 
ching 
Tj Lower 8d tone, To hear, carry. A., 
ho XIV. xlii. 1.: XVIII. vii; L.

DIA (1) Grave; gravity, dignity. D. M., 
€ ucang xxxi. I. A., II. xx: XI. xx: XV. xxxii. 
chuang 2. 3. (2) An hon. epithet. A. XIV.

Xiii.—A., XIX. xviii.

ES Ex fy, smilingly. A., XVII. iv. 2.

heen

-bda 2 :

11 n X. the name of a small city of

keu LOO. A, XIII. xviii.

chit

Si (1) Not, G. L. o., viii. 1. D. I., xii, 2.

<

ma A., VI. xv. et al. sepe, E N occurs 
as a strong affirmative. D. M., iv. 2; 
xxxi. 3, 4. The power of . like other 
negatives, to attract immediately to itself 
the object of the verb following, is to be 
noted. IJ). M., vii. A., IV. xiv: XIII. 
xv. 4, 5: XIV. xviii. 3. It stands some- 
times without a preceding noun, and = 
no one. A., XIV. xxxvii. 1: et al So, 
in the passive. D.M., i. 3. (2) fii È, 
has no predetermined objection. (3) ? 
perhaps. A. VIII. xxxii.

ED jsed. ET. ze !

EL Used for Ar Biff, the last month

ae of spring. A., XI. xxv. 7.

M

Su Im SE calamities. GL 17, 23

Aà * calamities. G. L. C., x. 17, 23.

tsue

tui

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

hwa

choo 
chu

tsung

tiao

mung 
méng

as A bamboo basket.

. 961

Vegetables, edible herbs. A., X. viii. 
10.

(1) J.q. 1. Flowers. A., IX. xxx. I. 
(2) A^ pt aE, and X HE, one of

Conf. disciples. A., VI. iiis VH. xxxiii 
XE xxi; xxv.

Lower 3d tone. Name of the most 
western of the five mountains. DM, 
xxvi. 9.

Poor, sparing. A., VIII. xxi,

Ten thousand, EU $r, all things. D. 
3 
jr the myriad regions, i. e., throughout 
the empire. A., XX. i. 3.

To display. G. L. c., vi. 2. To become 
manifest, the beiug displayed. P. J., 
xxiii.; xxxiii. I.To display. G. L. c., vi. 2. To become 
manifest, the beiug displayed. P. J., 
xxiii.; xxxiii. I.

To bury ; to be buried; a burial, D.M., 
3. 3. A, II. v. 3: IX. xi. 3: XI. x. 1,

N., i. 5; xxvi. 9; xxvii. 2; xxx. 3.

Timid, timidity. A., VIII. ii. 
Tq. NK. Green. G. L. c., iii, 4.

(1) The conjunction for. D. M., xxvi.

10. A., XVI. I. 10. (2) An introductory 
hypothetical particle. A, IV. vi. 3: VII. 
xxvii. (3) =as a rule. A., XIII. iil. 
4: XVI. ii. 1.

Leaves, foliage. G. L. C., ix. 6.

The name of a state. 
XIII. xvi; xviii. 
A kind of rush,

A., VII. xviii;

D. M., xx. 3.

zd D luxuriant, G. L. o., ix. 6. 
The milfoil. D. M. xxiv.

A., XVIII. vii. 1. 
The name of a mountain. A., XVI. i.

4.

(1) The name of a State. A., XI. ii. 1:

XVIII. ix. 2. (2) The nuno of a largo 
tortolsc. A., V. xvii,

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PIIRASES.A., XVIII. vii. 1. 
The name of a mountain. A., XVI. i.

4.

(1) The name of a State. A., XI. ii. 1:

XVIII. ix. 2. (2) The nuno of a largo 
tortolsc. A., V. xvii,

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PIIRASES.

362 
fli (1) To cover, to comprehend, A. II. 72 
pe ii. (2) To cover, to becloud ; to hide, choo 
pi keep in obscurity. A., XVII. viii. 1,2: | ch'u 
XX. i. 3. 
$t A straw basket, A., XIV. xlii. 1. 
kwei 1 
kuei heu 
yi ie she yi hsii 
2 I (I) Large. PT D a ^ how. vast! ju: 
tang A., VIII. xix. I. (2) Dissipation of DES 
mind. A. XVII. viii. 3. Wild license. | 7% 
yü 
A., XVII. Xvi. 2. (3) 97 2. easy and 
composed, A., VII. XXV. ? should 
here be read tangy. duy 
BE The name of a State. A., XIV. xii. K 
4% keaou 
sič chiao 
hsich p 
Y Thin. A., VIII iii. =neglected. G.L. 
1 3 Suu 
po T, 7. yi 95 A coming xim m a 55 
contributions, D.M., xx. 14. 55 EE EA 
requiring little from. A., XV. xiv. man 
ze 21 . 
jh n: Ha a screen. A., XVI. i, 13. 
Sectou 
lisiao . 
773 To present an offering in sacrifice. D. 
tsien M., xix. 3. A., X. xiii. 1. 
chien 
Dus To decease ;—spoken of a prince. A., 1 5 
hung XIV. xliii. 2. 
ek (1) To store away, to keep. G. L. o., ix. 
ts‘ang 4. A., IX. xii. To keep retired. A., VII. 
x. i- (2) A surname. K., XIV. xiii; 
xv. fT 
JE Low. 3d tone. Things to be treasured. | , ing 
28% D.M., xxvi. 9. hsing 
à (1) The polite arts, A., VII. vi. 4. (2) 
ES 
e Having various abitity and arts. A., VI. 
i vi: IX. vi. 4: XIV. xiii. 1. 
X Physic. A., X. ki. 2. 
ye 
yo . à 
772 Duckweed. A., V. xvii. 
isuou 
tsao 
[xe 1 " 222 
HT Ginger. A., J. viii. 6 
keung 
chiang

A surname. A., XIV. xxvi.: XV. vi. 2.

fi

hing 
THE 141se RADICAL, JË.

AS

A tiger. A, VIL x. 3: XII. viii. s J, 
XV. Ii. 7 (i 
Cruelty, oppression, A., XX. ii, 3. hang 
on

we

INDEX VII.

Up. 2d tone, a verb. To dwell in; to 
occupy. A., IV i.; ii.; v., E iE to 
dwell in retirement. A.; XIII. xix. 
XVII. xxi. 5.

Empty. A., VII. xxv. 3: VIII. v.

(1) The accepted surname of Shun,Up. 2d tone, a verb. To dwell in; to 
occupy. A., IV i.; ii.; v., E iE to 
dwell in retirement. A.; XIII. xix. 
XVII. xxi. 5.

Empty. A., VII. xxv. 3: VIII. v.

(1) The accepted surname of Shun,

A., VIII. æX. 3. (2) iE fili, for afit, 
A, XVIII. viii. 1, 4. 
THE 142p RADICAL. Hi.

The igunnadon. D. M., xxvi. 9.

I4. H. Early. D. M., xxix, 6,

(1) The barbarians of the south. E id 
Zn. barbarians, generally. D. M., xxxi,

4. A., XV. v. 2 EE 1$ the twitter- 
Ju 
ing of a bird. G. L. C., jii. 2.

THE 143b RADICAL. fit.

Blood, J LAIR ah s=all men.

D. M., xxxi. 4. Tim. T RIE FE =the

animal passions, physical powers. Ay 
XVI. vii.

THE 1441 RADICAL. H

(1) To go; walk. D. M., xv. I. A., 
VI. xii; X. iv. 2; xiii. 4: et al. Applied 
to the movements of the sun and moon. 
PD. M., xxx. 2, 3: et al. Sto depart; take 
onc's leave. A, XV. i. 1: XVIII. ii.: 
etal, (2) To do, practise ; to be practised. 
D. M., iv.; xi. 1; xii. 2: et al, sepe. A., 
II. xiii; xviii. 2; xxii: et al, sepe. To 
act, absolutely, as a neuter verb. D.M., 
xi. 2; xiv. 1, 2; xx. 105; xxix. 5; xxxi. 3. 
A., I. vi; xii. 2: et al, sepe. Sto com- 
mand. A. VII. x.2. To undertake the 
duties of office. A., VIL x. I. TE» 
the conduct of one's-self. A., V. xix. 
XIII. xx. Jj fT ; À, VH. 
xxxii. Sto succeed. A., XX. i. 6: XII. 
vi: et al.

Low. 3d tone, Conduct, actions ;—a 
noun, D. II., xiii 4: xx. 16. A., I. xi: 
II. xviii. 2: IV. xxiii: e£ et als sepe.

Low, 3d tone, {ft ÍT bold-like. A., 
XI. xii. 1

A yd: A., XV. v. 3.

The name of a Binte; A, VIL xiv.: 
IX. xiv.: ec ad.

INDEX VII. 
THE 1457 RADICAL. &.

Clothes, a garment. P. II., xviii. 2. 
e A., IV. ix.: X. iii. 2; vi. 4, 65; vii, 1: xxii. 
12. X Ws. A., VIII. xxi. se , where 
ive denotes the clothes for the lower 
part of the body. D.M., xix. 3. A., IX.

ix. 
c Up. 3d tone. To wear, A., V. xxv.

2 2: VI. iii. 2: IX. xxvi: XVII. xxi. 4

Tr Tlonorary cpithet of a duke of Loo. D.

ANS

ge M xx. A,, II. xix.: et al.

ai :ix. 
c Up. 3d tone. To wear, A., V. xxv.

2 2: VI. iii. 2: IX. xxvi: XVII. xxi. 4

Tr Tlonorary cpithet of a duke of Loo. D.

ANS

ge M xx. A,, II. xix.: et al.

ai :

NE Also written HE. (1) The lappe! in

Jin front of n coat, buttoning on the right

Jen — breast. A., XIV. xviii. 2. (2) To sleep 
on, make a mat ot. D.M., x. 4.

Fe Yo wear outside. A., X. vi. 3.

pean D

Pino

xt To decay, decline. A., VII. v.: XVI.

shwae vii: XVIII. v.

ahuai

Td Mourning clothes, with the edges either

txtny R d (ik FE EUNT " A

eid unhemmed (Bie E), or frayed dr 
i. A., IX. ix: X. xvi, 5.

FL Sleeves. A., X. vi. 5.

me :

mi

9n BE pra dishevelled hair. A., XIV.

pe — xviii. 2.

pei

10 ^ Arobe. A, IX. xxvi.

pace '

puo

3X. To cut and shape clothes ;—used meta-

tue phorically. A., V. xsi.

ts‘ai

zu " D.M i

Fer Genorous. D. M., xxxi, 1,

yu

yü

zy Fur garments, A., V. xxv. 2: VI. iii,

Tuo 2: X. vi. 4, 5, 10. 
chiu

ake, are 
Tue lower garments, AM fe A, IX.

thang ix: X. vi. 9. 
shang

d 
eg E un 3 M huie 
chiang? back. fo íi to carry on the back, 
A. XIII. iv. 3.

suk Undress, A., X. vi. 2, 5; xvi. 2.

Bae

lisieh

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

A cloth in which infants are strapt to

363

FE A name. A., XVIII. ix. 5. 
seung 
hsiang 
chen 
be 
As 
shih 
hsi

tfs An. evenly adjusted. A., X iii, 
2.

To follow, accord with. D. I., xxx. L

THE M6rn RADICAL. If.

AX DE: a double surname, A., VII.

se xxxiii: XI. xxi.; xxv.

hsi

BE, ragreement. A., XIV. xxiii, 2. 
Do 1 g t. A, XIV.

yanu (2) To force. A., XIV. xv.

yao

^ni To overthrow, D. I., xvii. 8. A. XVII. 
fuk — xvid. To throw down, as carth on the 
fu ground. A., IX. xviii.

m Low. 3d tone, To overspread, cover, 
fow D. M., xxvi. 4, 9; xxx. 2; xxxi. 4.

fou

THE H7r4 RADICAL, N.

To "n Passim. ni ffn X N to

kien see and not perceive. G. L. o., vii. 2. D.

chien M. xvi. 2. Before other verbs, forming 
the passive voice. D. M., xi. 3. A., XVII. 
xxvi.

H - (1) To be manifest. D. II., i. 3; xxiv.;kien see and not perceive. G. L. o., vii. 2. D.

chien M. xvi. 2. Before other verbs, forming 
the passive voice. D. M., xi. 3. A., XVII. 
xxvi.

H - (1) To be manifest. D. II., i. 3; xxiv.;

heen xxvi. 6; xxxi. 3. A., VIII. xiii. 2: XV.

hsien i.3. (2) To have an interview; to in- 
troduce. A., III. xxiv: VIL xxviii. 1. 
XV. xli: XVI. i. 2: XVIII. vii. 3.

nt To observe, to look at. G. L. o., vi. 2, 3,

she D.., xiii. 2. A., II. x. 1: XII. i. 2:

shih

xvl. x. N m A Ad, C. L. o., vii. 
2 DM, xi. 2. PS A / Id. to

throw a dignity into his looks. A., XX. 
i. 2. Vo visit to see. A., X. xiii. 8. Lo 
regard, look upon. A, XI. x. 3. To 
require, look for. A, XX. ii. 3. 
XN (1) To love, show affection to. G. I. o., 
sein iii. 5. D.M. xix. ö; xx. 5, 13, 14; xxx. 
ch'in 4. (2) To approach to, seek to be in- 
timate with, A., I. vi; xiii, FE xl m 
. 
proper persons to be intimate with. (3) 
Personal, onc's-self. A., XVII. vii. * 
a S. did not use his fingers, A., X. 
xvii. 2. (4) Relatives. D.M, xx. ö. 14, 
14. A., VIII. ii. 2: XVIII. x: XX. i. ^, 
(5) Parents, a parent, G. L. c., X. 13. 1), 
II., xx. 7, 17. A., XII. xxi. 3: XIX. xvi.

(8) Said to be used for EUR G. L. r., i. 
To have an interview and audience. 
A., X. v. 3.

364

4 To look at: to mark. A., I. xi: II. x. 
kwan 2: III. x.; xxvi: IV. vii: V. ix. 9: VIII.

Kuan yj XII. xx. 5: XIX. ir. BE fi H 
ial. the odes may be used for purposes 
of self-contetplation. A., XVII. ix. 3. 
5 To apprehend, JJ Tt Ah one who 
keó is of quick apprehension. 
chio 
TIIE 14821 RADICAL, fij. 
5A born; horned. A. VI. iv. 
kið 
chio 
flf A drinking vessel, made with corners, 
koo A., VL xxiii. l 
ku i 
THE 140 RADICAL. = 
= (1) A word, words; a saying, a sentence, 
ven G. I. o., ix. 3; x. 9. D. M., via xiii 4; xx.6; xxvi. 7; xxvii. 7: xxxiii. J. A,, I. iii.; 
xii; Nive II. ii; xiil: et al, passin. Yo 
speak; to speak of; to tell. D.M. xxix. 
5; xxxi. 3; xxxiii. 3. A., I. vii; xv. 3: 
II. ix.; xviii. 2: et al passim. zzmeaning. 
D. J., xii, 8. (2) Tbe surname of 22 
NEC os a 
M. one of Conf. disciples, A., XIV. 
xii. 2.

To expose people's secrets. A., XVII.

BF

hed xxiv. 2.

chieh

Ee] (I) To punish, A, XIV. Xxii. 2. (2)

tu ay tij: to examine and discuss. A.,

XIV. ix.

£7) Words spoken slowly and cautiously,

ja A., XII. iii. 2, 3.

jou

Fil] ‘To rail at, slander. A., XVII. xxiv.

shan

El To entrust, bo entrusted, with. A.,

tö VIII. vi.

t'o

BA Litigations. G. L. o., iv. A., XII. xiii,

sung = to accuse, A., V. xxvi.

G4 Slow in speaking. A., IV. xxiv, Modest.

nuh A., XIII. xxvii.

nü

zl To set forth, display. D. M., xix. 3.

shë

she

Fi „ Deceitful. A., IX. xi. 2. Deceit. A.,

eha XVII. xvi. 2. Deception, attempts to 
dete ve. &., XIV. xxxiii.

ik To sing. A., XL xxv. 7.

gig

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

R 
she 
shih

she

shing

INDEX VII.

(1) To try, examine. D. II., xx. 14. A., 
XV. xxiv. (2) To be used, have official 
employment. A., IX. vi. 4.

A collection of Prayers of Eulogy. 
VH. xxxiv.

A,

To reprove. A., V. ix. 1.

The Book of Poetry; the pieces in the 
B. of P. A., I. xv. 3: II. ii: III. viii. 
3: VII. xvii: VIII. viii. 1: XIII. v.: 
XVI. xiii, 2. ö: XVII. ix. 1, 2. Erg f 
EN V sepe. -

To speak; to speak of. D.M. xii, 2. 
A., VII. xxs X. viii. 9. Words, sayings. 
A., IN. xxii: XII. i. 2; d: XVI. xi. ], 2.

Low. 3d tone. To speak to; to tell. 
A.M. xxiii: VI. xix: IX. xix: XIII. 
xviii. 1: XVII. vhi, 2: XIX. xxiii.

To make, he made, sincere; sincerely.

G. I. r, 4,5: d., vi. I, 2, 4. In the Doe-

cli- Eng trine of the Mean, the term has a mysti-

ay 
‘all 
aug 
HA 
5, 
shuo

lie 
yüch

hao 
Kao - 
E 
ibl 
huy 
hui

ii 
E]

she

shih

1G. I. r, 4,5: d., vi. I, 2, 4. In the Doe-

cli- Eng trine of the Mean, the term has a mysti-

ay 
‘all 
aug 
HA 
5, 
shuo

lie 
yüch

hao 
Kao - 
E 
ibl 
huy 
hui

ii 
E]

she

shih

1

cal significance. VM. Xvi. 5; xx. )7, 
)8; XXL; Xxii.: xxiii; xxix.; xxv. 1, 2, 3; 
xxvi. I; xxxii. J. Really, sincerely. G. 
Lic. ix. 2 A., XII. x. 3. True. A., 
XIII. xi.

To repeat; lium over, 
XIII. v.

(1) To speak cf ; the speaking (what is 
said) D.M., xxviii. 5. A. If], xxi 
XII. viii. 2: XVII. xiv. (2) Meaning. 
A., III. xi, '

For Nr. To be pleased; pleased 
with; a matter of pleasure, D. M., xxxi. 
3. A., I. i. 1: V. v.: VI. x.; xxvi: IX. 
xxiii: XI iij: XIII. xvi. 2; xxv: XVII. 
v. 2.

! Il

To enjoin upon; instructions, B Ris 
the name of a Book jn the Shoo-kingr. 
G. I. U., i. J; ii. 2; ix. 2; x. 10.

To instruct; teach, A., II. xvii: VII. 
ii.; vii; xxxiii: XIV. viii.

A., IX. xxvi. 3.

9. 
2

To declare solemaly ; an oath, AR UE, 
the name of a Book in the Shoo-king. 
G. L. c., x. 14.

Who, whom. A., VI, xv: VII. x. 2;

ru IX. xi. 2: XI. ix. 8: XV. xxiv: XVI. i.

shui 7: XVIII. vi. 2, 3, 4: XX. ii. 2.

E The appearance of being bland, yet pre- 
t * er ad . ve

yin cise. Ay X. ii. 2: XI. xii.

en

5 To flatter; flattering, A., I. xv. 1: II.

chen xxive III. xviii.

chau

INDEX VIE

PE This, or to examine, G. L. o., i, 2,

SAC

shih

TE. Li ore

ak To forget. G. I. c., iii. 4.

Aaen

lisinut

Sip "wav:

fi A nume. A., XIV. ix.

shin

shén

SN "

EA A common saying, a proverb. G. L. o., 
y K viii. 2

jii To request; to beg. In the first per-

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES,

365

III. v. (7) aH 2 the princes of tlie 
empire, a prince. I). Al., xviii. 3; xx 12, 
13, n A., XI. xxv. 110: XIV. xvii. 2; 
xviii, 2: XVI. ii.

‘To remonstrate with, reprove, A., III. 
xxi. 2: IV. xviii; XVIII. i.; v. 1: XIX. 
x.

To plan: plan about ; plans, 
VII. x. 3: VIII. xiv: XIV. xxvii.: 
xxvi; xxxi.; xxxix: XVI. i. 18.‘To remonstrate with, reprove, A., III. 
xxi. 2: IV. xviii; XVIII. i.; v. 1: XIX. 
x.

To plan: plan about ; plans, 
VII. x. 3: VIII. xiv: XIV. xxvii.: 
xxvi; xxxi.; xxxix: XVI. i. 18.

Enrnestly careful, P. II., xiii; 4. A., 
J. vi: X. i. 2. To give attention to. A., 
XX. i. 6.

chien

"m 
"A

mow 
mou 
zu 
HE 
Vin 
chin

A., I. iv.: 
XV.Enrnestly careful, P. II., xiii; 4. A., 
J. vi: X. i. 2. To give attention to. A., 
XX. i. 6.

chien

"m 
"A

mow 
mou 
zu 
HE 
Vin 
chin

A., I. iv.: 
XV.

LN ing son, sometimes merely a polite way of AW r R ; 
ch. ing expressing a purpose. A., HT xxive Mi iin To know, become acquainted with. A., 
iii: VII. xxxivz XI. vii. 1: XII. i. 2; shi — XVII. ix. 7 
D , ry 218 
2 XIII. i. 2: ir. 1: NIV. xxii. 2: XVII. vt Zr. Up. 3d tone. To remember. A., VII 
A o delude; impose on. Ay XIX, xxi. ele“ ji; xxvii: XV. ii. I: XIX. xxii. 2 
wo 2. chih 
wu | zit To ci b VIL iii 
a - Hi 9 Giscourse about, A., . iii 
HS To lead on. A., IX. x. 2. 1 
yew chinng 
yu S Tovilify, A., XIX. x. 
uM Sincere, A., XVI. Simple and uA : 
„„ eG. pany 
kant sincere, A., XIV. xviii. 3: xxxvi. zm Crafty. A., XIV. xvi, 
zd. eu 
l Merc 1 In the phrase PERR chüch 
eung A. xliii. l. £u. Fy Zt. selfonior . 4 
linug r . | idt i ult self-enjoyment. G.L.c., vi. 1. 
E T dd "EST 
il : 1 say "ii A., es 1: Es 5 ch'ich 
wet . vilis 1: e£ al, sape. (2) To say o apg TA “IT wt 
III. i; xv.: NNV XVIII. viii. J. 4: ef 175 2 Slander, A., XII. v1. 
sapi. (3) To call ; to he called. G.L c, | fs 
iv.; v.; vi. I, 2; vii. L 3; vii 4 8; ix. H chen 
33 X. 1, 15 17, 22. 23. DAL, d. 4; xxi Zy: ify r wi A., XIII. 
A, J. vii; xi. ; Xiv.: ef A, sa pe. Observe 24 i 1 . A 
es E ching xviii. 1. 
the idiom, Z aH. Pata: x.2, 3. D. | eheng 
e 1 xxvii 7. A., I. xv. rre xii, px To compare; a comparison, A., VI. 
= - 4 "ey 
2. HP BEAD dira i7" hat | pre vil. 3. Ay Hi, may be cumpared to, 
is meant? A. TII. viii, 1; xiii. 1: IV. | pl NE 
xv. 2: XX. di. 1, 2, 3: Y al, supe. A., II. i.: IX. xviii. Er Aff, is like to. 
z^ L HA 7 tare d le ie. 3 M. 
ninj Es discourse, discuss, A., XL xx: A., XVII. xii: XIX. xii. 2 5 , let 
317 XIV. ix. me compare it. A, XIX. xxviii. 2 
DE () Ohi j yes. A» VII. xiv. 1: XVIII. Fk HRenown; to pr raise, B. BI., xxix, 6, Read 
05 i2. (2) A promise. A., XII. xii. 2. yu in theglow, Ist tone, with tho samo menn- 
: " . yü ing. ds XV. xxiv. 
RS (1) As a preposition, —in, to, from, &c., di To discourse with. to discuss, A., IV. 
Choo and sometimes cannot be translated. G. 8 ix: XVI. ii. 3. To discuss and settle, ta 
chu Lie, ix. 4; x. 15. P. I., vii; xii 37 | arennum 15 J. xxviii. 2 
/. A., 1. xv. 3: III. xia V. xi.; xxiii: - DM D ORE DON ay 2 
XVII. i. I; iv. 3; vii. 2: et . (2) As To read, study. A., XI, xxiv, 3. 
1 „„ S^ IT iye 
5 es E 
II. xxxiv: IX. xii: XI. xxi: XII. xi. 3: « 
ini Mie ; Vif To change; changes. D. II., x. 5; xxili.; 
etal (3) Apparently INL this. A, | — 
ten xxvi 6. A, VI. xxii: X. vii. ie xvi, 2, 
VI. xxviii. 1: XIV. xiv... (4) Not merely pien 1. 5: XIX. ix. 
oue ull. P. M., xx. 13. A., II. xix. Xll. | "ux x . ; 
exii. 3, 4. (5) Obse +t z T ule Courteous, humble. G. L. C., ix. 3. A., 
ä Su servo E jap A ng XL xxv. 10. "To decline, viel. Ay VII. 
x. 2; nnd eX ENS A., XVII. xii: XIX. a XV. xxxv, i i the complaiganee 
xii 2. (6) al E. a name of China. A., of propriety. Ay IV. Alii. 
2 g Ísfr Slander, =slanderers. D.M. xx. 14.

THE 151sr RADICAL, T.

À wooden vessel. in common use, and

*. raich, ia 
tow at sacrifices, xx E. A., VIII. iv. 3. 
tou — T h

AW F. A. XV. i. I. 
+H How. A. VII. xxxiii: IX. xxx.: XIV. 
ue xiv. 2; xviii, 3. Followed by ie, 1i,

AE, and SÉ. A., XVII. v. 3; vi. 4:

XVIII. vi. 8: XIX. xxv. 
THE 1352». RADICAL, . 
A small pig. G. L. o., x. 22. A., XVII.

1. 1. 
Preparation beforehand, D. M., xx. 16.

THE 152» RADICAL. .

Tj

A leopard. A., XII. viii. 3.

p'aou

pao z 
The barbarous tribes of the north, 2

nih

Mf. D.M., xxxi, 4. A., XV. v. 2.

Aspect, demennour. A., VIII. iv. 3:

mink

Be

maas XVI. x. JA 2. to use a ceremonious

ni manner. A., X. xvi. 2.

$6 The badger, =badger’s fur, A., IX. 
höh — xxvi X. vi. 7. 
hsio

THE 164m RADICAL, H. 
oN 
74 Correct and firm. A., XV. xxxvi. 
*

ching 
chen

41 To carry on the back. A., X. xvi, 8: 
foo XIII. iv. 8. 
fu

Hf Wealth. G. L. c., x. 6, 7, 9, 20, 21, 23. 
ius HE JH „ means of expenditure, D. M., 
xx. 18. sources of wealth. D.M. xxvi.

9. 
EH — ti. one of Confucius’ disciples. 
`~ — * 
ung A., I. x. 1, 2; xv. I, 2: IL xiii: et. al, 
sepe

* Poor, being in a poor condition; poverty.

pm P. Al., xiv. 2. A- I. xv. I: IV. v. 1: VIII.

x.: NHL 3: NIV. xi: XV. xxxi: XVI. i. 
10.

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PIRASES.

kuan

BX 
urh

E 
shang

pu 
FL 
kea 
ehia

INDEX VII.

Goods. G. L. c., x. 10. A., XI. xviii, 2. 
Riches D. XI., xx. 14. Articles of value, 
D. I, xxvi. 9.

To covet, desire. A., XX. il. I, 2. 
G. L. C., ix. 3.

To go through, pervade. A., IV. xv. 
1: XV. ii. 3. It is difficult to assign its 
meaning in XI. xiii. 2.

To A., VL ji. 1. 
A 8 without doubleness. D.M., 
xxvi. 7.

To require from. A., XV. xiv,

To

be ambitious.

repeat; repeated,To A., VL ji. 1. 
A 8 without doubleness. D.M., 
xxvi. 7.

To require from. A., XV. xiv,

To

be ambitious.

repeat; repeated,

(1) Noble, being in an honourable con- 
dition, Associated with E, D.M., xiv, 
2. A. IV. v. 1: VII. XV.: VIII. xiii. 8: 
XIV. v. 3. Contrasted with He. DM, 
xviii. 8; xix. 4. Excellent, valuable. A., 
J. xii. 1: IX. xxiii. (2) To esteem noble. 
D. M., xx. 14. A., VIII. iv. 3.

(1) Extended, reaching far and wide,

DN. xii. 1. (2) To expend largely. A.,

XX. ii. 1, 2. 
The name of a city. A., VI. vii: XI. 
xxiv.: XVI. i. 8: XVII. v.

To injure; injury. A., XI. xxiv, 2: 
XX. ii. 3. An injurious disregard of 
consequences. A., XVII. viii. 3. A 
pest. A., XIV. xlvi. Thieves or injurers. 
A., XVII. xiii.

To reward, D. M., xxxiii, 4. A., XII. 
xviii.

A price. A., IX, xii, In up. 2d tone, 
A name. A., III. xiii; XIV. XX. - A., 
XIV. xiv.

(I) As an adjective, admirable, virtu” 
A., VI. ix. XII I. ii. D» 
2: et al. As a now, E aud 1K EL 
worthies, men of talents and virtue. G. 
L. c., x. 16. D. M., iv. xix. 4; xx. 5, 8, 
13, 14. A., I. vii: IV. xvii: XV. ix: et 
alL,sepe. Asa verb, to treat as a Men. 
G. L. c., iii. 5. A., I. vii. (2) To surpass, 
bo better than. A., XL xv. 1: XVII. 
xxiii. XIX. xxiii, 1 : xxv, L.

A guest, a visitor, A., X. ij, 4: XII. 
i 4 . A. v. vii, 4: XIV. xx. 2.

(1) To give; bestow. A., X. xiii. 1. 
Gifts. An XIV. xviii. 2. (2) The name 
of P BH) one of Couf, d'sviples, A., 
I. xv. 3: HE. xvii, 2: e£ «d., xg

ous aud talented.

INDEX VII.

& (1) Mean, in a mean condition, D.M.,

bern xix. J; xxviii. J. A., IX. vi. 3. Associat-

Chien od with T. DM, xiv. 2; A. IV. Ya 
vill. xiii, 3. Contrasted with I. D. 
XI., xviii. 3; xix. 1. As a verb. to con- 
sider mean, G. I. C., viii. I. D. M., xx. 
14. (2) "2 fli one of Conf, disciples. 
A., V. ii.

To bestow; gifts. A., XX. i. 4.

Pm

lai

ut military levies, A., V. vii, 2,

foo

fu

ME X eds : :

H (1) Substantial. solid ; substautial qua-To bestow; gifts. A., XX. i. 4.

Pm

lai

ut military levies, A., V. vii, 2,

foo

fu

ME X eds : :

H (1) Substantial. solid ; substautial qua-

chili lities. A. XII. xx. 5: VI. xvi: XII. viii. 
]. 3. Sessential. A. XV. xvii. (2) 
To appear. present one’s-selt, beture, D. 
M. xxix. 3, 4.

To assist. D.M, xxii.

Tt

tsan

THE 155ta RADICAL. JR.

() 3h F. an infant, G. .. O., ix. 2. 
(2) The name'of Tsze-hwa, one of Conf. 
disciples. A., V. vii. 4: VI. iii. 2: XI. 
xxi; xxv. 6, 11.

‘To pardon; forgive. A., XIII. ii. 1:

shay XX. i. 3.

shé

Hh N. how distinguished! G. L, o., 
b iii. 4. 2 Jg greatly distinguished,

G. L. o., x. 4.

THE 1561 RADICAL. K.

To assist, bring out one's meaning.

iti

ke A,, III. viii. 3. 
ch'i

711 A great family of the State of Tsin. 
chan A., XV. Xii.

chao

X] re walk quickly. A, IX. ix: X. in.; 
teen iv. 5. A., XVI. xiii. 2, 3: XVIII. v. 2. 
ch · ü

THE 157Tu RADICAL. Jj

(1) The feet A., VIII. iii: X. iii. 1:

iv. 3; v. I: XIII. iii. 6. (2) Sufficient, to 
be sufticient ; fit. G. I.. b., ix. 8; x. 19. D. 
M. xiii. 4: Xx. 14; xxvii. 7; xxviii. 5: 
xxxi. I. A. II. ix.: III. ix.: IV. vi. 2; ix

ot ul., supe, 4B A R. to secure suf-

ficieut for the people. &., JI. xxv. ö.

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES. 307 . 
P Up. 3d tone. Excessive. A., V. xxiv. 
tsen 
chü 
p^ To stumble. D, X., xx. 16.

m ‘ 
chieh 
nm To tread on. A., XI. xix, to occupy. 
st ,n D.M. xix. 5. 
chien ; 
n BAY Hg to move reverently. A., X. 
tseth iv. 5; vi. 2. 
chi 
Be 
BRR MOD 
tsuh 
tsu i 
1150 To step over; transgress. A., II. iv. 6: 
yu XIX. xi.; xxiv. 
yü 
ja o 1 BX, the road. A., IX. xi. 3. 
15 (2) * Me one of Conf. disciples. D.

II., x. 1. A., V. vi; vii.; xii; xxv. 2, 4: 
et al., sepe. as ha tdem, A., M XXV. 
XLi2;xi: XVI. i2. (9 XH ja 
the father of Yen IIWuy. A., XI. vii. 1.

To trample on. D.M., ix. To tread

taon (the path of virtue). A., XV. xxxiv. 
tao

Bs Toleap. D.M, xii. 3.

7

yo

Ea yis Uis the feet dragging along. A., 
suh . v. 1.

AsitTo trample on. D.M., ix. To tread

taon (the path of virtue). A., XV. xxxiv. 
tao

Bs Toleap. D.M, xii. 3.

7

yo

Ea yis Uis the feet dragging along. A., 
suh . v. 1.

Asit

i Hurricd; rashness. A., XVI. vi. 
tsaou

tsao

HG The legs bending under. A, X. iii, 1; 
* iv. 3.

ch'io

THE 1581m RADICAL. Ép.

(1) The body. A., X. vi. 6: XV, vlii. 
(2) One's own person, the person. G. L. I., 
4, 5, 6; c., passim DMa xiv. 5; xx. 
4, 7, 11. 32, 13, 14. 17; et al A., I. iv.; 
vii: e? al. In some cases, we might trans-

late by body. (3) A Ep, all one’s life, 
continually. A., IX. xxvi. 3: XV. xxiii.

(1) The body, A., X. iv. 1, 4; v. 1: 
XX. i. 1. (2) lu one’s own person. A,, 
IV. xxi; VII. XXxii.: XIII. xviii; XIV. 
vie XV. xiv; XX. i. 3.

n

kung

368

chün

Hih 
kwel 
kuei 
yné

yüeh

tsue 
tsni 
iaj 
Joo 
fu 
12

King

ching

2 1e 
e

i

t

yu 
yü

Uf

chud 
chüeh

[73 
L^ 
Pit 
pi

18s 
Ae 
po 
pi

pean 
pien

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

THE 159 RADICAL. Wi.

A carriage, D. Al., xxviii, 3; xxxi, 4. 
A., M. xxii; V. xxv. 2: X. xv. 2; xvii. 1, 
2: XI. vii, 1: XIV. xvii. 2.

Anarmy, zz 1, the forces of a great 
State. A., VII. x, 2: IX. xxv. H BR, 
A., XIV. xxii: XV. i. 1.

The rut of a wheel, Ssize, standard. 
D. M., xxviii. 3.

An arrangement for yoking the horses 
in a light carriage. A, II. xxii.

A state carriage. A., XV. x. 3.

Light. D. N., xxxiii. 6.

(1) To contain. D. M., xii, 2; xxvi. 4, 
9; xxx. 2; xxxi. 4. (2) Business, doings. 
D. II., xxxiii. 6.

To assist. A, III. xxiv.

E

Light. A., V. xxv. 2: VI. iii. 2.

The cross bar for yoking the oxen in a 
large carriage. A., II. xxii.

(1) A carriage. A., XV. v. 3: XVIII. 
vi. 2. (2) Tr. a name. A., XVIII.

V.

To desist, stop. A., XVIII. vi. 3.

THE 16011 RADICAL. 3E.

(1) Partial, perverse. G. L. o., viii, 1; 
X. 4. (2) Specious. A., XI. xvii. 8: 
XVI. iv.

A aovereign ; applicable to the emperor

In the Ana. only

as well as the princes. 
A., III.

of the princes, D.M, xxxiii. ö. 
ii.A aovereign ; applicable to the emperor

In the Ana. only

as well as the princes. 
A., III.

of the princes, D.M, xxxiii. ö. 
ii.

Lo. nya To escape; withdraw from. 
D.M. vii. A. XIV. xxxix. 1, 2, 3, 4: 
XVIII. v. 2; vi. 3.

Iq. Ay, ine qn, may be compared 
to. DAL, xv. 1; Xxx. 2.

To diseriminate; to discover. D. M., 
xix, J; xx. 19, 20. A., XII. x. I; xxi. I.

nung 
néng

shith 
shu

me 
mi 
12 
eib oli 
kuo 
chuy 
chui

tsn 
chin

tsaih

i ehi

INDEX VH.

(1) Language; speech, G. I.. o., iv. A.,

XV. xl. B ipm words and tones, 
A, VIII. iv. 3. FA T. fje to frame

excuses for. A., XV1.i. ® (2) To re- 
fuse, decline. D.M. ix. A., VI. iii. 3; vii: 
XVII. xx.

THE 16181 RADICAL. fre.

'The constellations of the zodiac, D.

M., xxvi. 9. JU be the north pole star. 
A, II. i.

A husbandman. A., XIII. iv. 1.

Disgrace; to disgrace. A., I. xiii.: IV. 
xxv: XII. xxiii: XIII. xx: XVIII. viii. 
2, 3.

THE 1620 RADICAL. à

Sudden. A., X. xvi. 5. 
Wide of the mark. A., XIII. iii. 3.

To be near to. G. L. r., 3. D. M., xx. 
10; xxix. 5. A., I. xiii: e. Nehr nuss. 
DM. xxxii. 1. In what is near, ies 
one’s self. A., VI. xxviii. 3: XIX. vi.

To meet. D. M., xx. 14,

To transmit; carry forward. D. M., 
xviii. 1; xix. 2; xxx. 1. A. VII. i: 
XVII. xix. 2. To be hauded down to 
posterity. D. M., xi. 1. A., XIV. xl,

To leave to error. A., XVII. i. 2.

Anime. A, XIV. vi.— I i. A. 
XVIII. xi.

To go back in thought, and act accord- 
ing to what may be required. D. I., 
xviii.J. A., I. ix. To go iorward in the 
same way. A., XVIII. v.

To advance, go forward, A., VI. xiii: 
VII. xxviii. 2: IX. xviii; xxe X. iii. 8; 
iv. 5: XIII. xxi: XIX. xii, Actively. to 
call, to urge, forward. A. III. xxx. 2:

xps Jp is ME Jc l. 
$e 3E XI. I. 1, 2.

Footeteps, A., XI. xix.

INDEX VIL CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES. 369xps Jp is ME Jc l. 
$e 3E XI. I. 1, 2.

Footeteps, A., XI. xix.

INDEX VIL CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES. 369

f To anticipate, A., XIV. xxxiii, 
17 in 
ni 
3K To escort, send away in a compliment- 
suny ary manner. D.M., xx. 14. A., X. xi. I. 
xit dy. r. To drive out. G. L o., x. 15. 
ping 
ii To unloose, Sto relax, A., X. iv. 5. 
chiny 
ch'èng 
8 a Me at 3 : 
xh To make, xd Ji to make a begin- 
tsaon hing. D.M, xii. 4. 
tsuo

» —, . 
154 X Ju in urgency and haste. A., 
twaou IV. v. 8. 
ts'uo 
iili To reach to. D. N., xxxi, 4. Reaching 
tuny every where, universal. A., XVII. xxi. 
6. N il]. not to get through, or for- 
ward. G. L. C., x. 14.

suh xvii. 1: XIV. xlvii. 2.

35 To come to, to reach to. G. L. o., x. 17. 
fae DUM, xix. 4. A, IV. xxii: XVI. iii.

PI To pass be passing—on, A., IX. xvi.: 
she XVII. i. 2. HW ir th, may be made

to go to. A., VI. xxiv. 
BB (1) Jo retire, withdraw; A, II. ix: 
tuy VII. xxviii. 2; xxx. 2: X. iii. 4: XII. 
tui xxii. 4: XVII. xiii. 2, 9, 5: XIX. xii. 1. 
To return from. A, X. xii: XIII. xiv. 
1. (2) To remove. G. L. o., x. 16. To 
repress, A., XI. xxi. 
3K (1) Jo retire from the world into ob-

yb seurity. A., XVIII. viii. 1: XX. i. 7. (2) 
» — W We a man’s name. A, XVIII. viii.

8 (1) Accomplished, having had its, or 
suy ^ their, course. A., III. xxi. 2. (2) Then, 
sui — accordingly, A., XV. i. I.

il To meet. A., XVII. i. 1: XVIII. vii. 1.

Mi To ramble, A., XII. xxi. 1, With a 
yew bad meaning. * YE idleness and 
snuntering. A., XVI. v. To go abroad. 
A., IV. xix. 
Al To go beyond, transgress; to be wrong. 
ko I. NI. iv. A., V. vi. XI. xv. 1, 3: XIV. 
kuo xiv. 2: XIX. viii. A transgression, error, 
fault. G. L. c., Xx. 16. D.M, xxix. J. A, 
l viri. 4: IV. viis V. xxvi: ef al , sape. 
al? Up. Ist tone. To go, or pass by. A., 
ko IX. ix; X. iv. 8: NIV. xli: XVI. xiii. 2 
kuo 3: XVIII. v. I; vi. 1.

3 Quick ; rapidly, quickly. A., XIII.

— 
ii 
taou 
tav3 Quick ; rapidly, quickly. A., XIII.

— 
ii 
taou 
tav

Anciently, lower 2d tone. (1) À road, 
a path. A, IX. xi, 3: XVII. xiv, EH*

nq , Midway. A, VI. x. Very often 
with a moral application, the path as 
of the Mean, in the Doetrine of the 
Mean, et al; the course or courses, the 
ways proper to. — Sometimes, it=the 
rizht way, what is right and true. A, 
IV. v.; viii; ix: et al (2) Doctrine, 
principles, teachings. A., IV. xv. 1 : V. 
vi; VI. xv: XIV. xxxviii: XV. xxviiiz 
, J. dif. sit 
et al., supe. H . principled; 1n HE 
unprincipled :—sometimes spoken of in- 
dividuals, A., I. xiv.; but generally des- 
eriptive of the State of a country, as well 
or ill-governed. D.M., xxvii. 7. A., III. 
xxiv: XVI. ii. 1, 2, 8: et al, supe. 
Anciently (as now), low. 3d tone. (1) 
To proceed by. D. I., xxvii. 6. (2) To 
say, to mean. G.L.c, iii. 4; x. 5, 11. To 
say, to speak to. A., XII. xxiii. 1. (The 
transl., and note, making 3-3, are 
wrong): A. XIV. xxx. 2: XVI. ö. (3) 
To govern, administer, ig., at. A. I. 
v.: II. iii. 1, 2. (4) To lead on, or for- 
ward. A, XIX. xxv. 4. This also in 
the note is incorrectly said to be for

j 
ar

(1) To reach to. D. M., xviii, 8. A., 
XIV. xxiv; xxviii. 2. To carry out. A., 
XVI. xi. 2: VI. xxviii. 2: XIII. xvii. 
(2) Intelligent; to know. A. VI. vi: X. 
xi. 2: XII. xxii. 2: XIII. v.: XV. xl. (8) 
Universal, reaching everywhero. D. Al., 
i. 4; xix. 1; xxvii. (4) Distinguished, 
notorious, A., XII. Xx. 1, 2, 4, 3. (5) Uf 
X. a man's name, A., XVIII. xi, X 
AS the name of a village. A., IX. ii.

(1) To oppose. G. L. o., x. 14. A., II. 
v. 1, 2; ix.: IX. iii. 2: XIII. xv. 4, 5. To 
net contrary to. A., IV. v. 3: VI. v.: 
XII. xx. 6. (2) To be distant from. D. 
M. xiii. 3. To leave. A., V. xviii. 2. 
(3) ‘Yo abandon a purpose. A., IV. xviii.To be at a distance, to become distant. 
G. I. C., ix. 2. D. M., xiii. 1, 2, 8; xv. 1. 
A., XII. xxii. 6: XVII. ii. Distant, toa 
distance; from a distance. D.M. xx. 12, 
13, 14; xxvi. 3. A., I. i. 2; ix.: IV. xix. ; 
xxixe VIII. vii. 1, 2: IX. xxx. 1, 2: XIII. 
xvi. 2: XV. xi; XVI. i. 11. 12: XIX. iv. 
What is remote. D.., xxxiii. 1. =for- 
seeing. A., XII. ri. Observe i x. 
D. M., xxix. 5. A., XVII. ix. 6.

Up. 8d tone. To put away to a dis- 
tance; to keep one's-self at a distance 
from. G. L. o., x. 16. D. AMI, xx. 14. A., 
I. xiii: VI. xx; VIII. ir. 3: XV. xk. 6; 
xiv; XVI. xiii 0: XVII. xx. ö.

370 
101

CHINESE

To go. procecd, to. A., VI. iii, 2: IX.

shih xxix: XIII. ix. 1: XVIII. ix. 1. 2.

* To have the mind set on anything. A., 
tech IV. x.

ti i

SHE I4. A To withdraw, lie hid, from. 
tm D. II., xi. 3.

Ja To transfer, remove. A., VI. ii: X. 
ts cen vii. 2.

chien

IE EST 2, the name of one of Confucius’ 
ane disciples ; ig. Xu ZA. A., II. v. 2, 8:

VI. xx.: XII. xxi 5; Xxli.: XIII. iv.; xix.

11 To neglect, be neglected, A., VIII. ii. 
wei 2. Observe D. M., xvi. 2. 
35 To choose, select. A., XII. xxii, 6, 
gelten 
haian

i To follow, to observe, A., xi. 2. 
tsun

à Near. What is near, D.., xv. 1. 
urh Observe A., XVII. ix, 6. shallow.

D.M, vi. 
THE 10 RADICAL. .

E. A eity or town. A., V. vii. 3: XIV. x.

ih u

Ai 8. A hamlet. A., V, xxvii, If &,. 
the city or town of P'een. A, XIV. x.3.

F A country, a State. G. L. o., ii. 3. A.,

Pang I. x. 1: III. xxii, 3: et sepe, FS 2e a 
State embracing the families of its high 
Oflicers, A., XIX. xxv. 4: et al, FM 
the imperial domain. G. L. C., iii. 1.

R The imperial sacrifice to Heaven, D. 
keaou M., xix. 6. 
chino . 
AK Depraved. A., II. ii. 
siuy 
hsieh 
715 RR P, how complete and e 
yuh Ay III. xiv.R The imperial sacrifice to Heaven, D. 
keaou M., xix. 6. 
chino . 
AK Depraved. A., II. ii. 
siuy 
hsieh 
715 RR P, how complete and e 
yuh Ay III. xiv.

yu 
$i (1) A village, A, XVII. xiii. Joined 
heung with ‘he . A., VIL iii. 4. X. i. I: XIII. xx. 
. 
2. $i yt villagers, A., X. x. 1,2: 
XII. xxiv, 
a place. A, VIL xxviii. 
Hip Up. 3d tone. Formerly. A., XII. xxii. 
heung 4.

hsiang

vil Mean; lowness, A., VIII. iv. 3: IX. 
1 "

pe vig: XIV. xl 2. WE Ae Ay IX.

vii: AVIL xv.

CHARACTERS AND PIIRASES.

(2) H Hh the name of

INDEX VII.

` + 
A neiahbour. neighbours. A., IV. xxiv.:

lin V. xxiii A neighbourhood. A., VI. iii. 
ER Iq, E.. In some editions, G. L. o., 
Kew iii. 2.

ch'in

55 The name of a State. A., XV. X 6; 
ching XVII. xv.

clréng ^ 
m

trino

The native city of Confucius. A., xv.

| tsou `

THE 1647 RADICAL, pg-

To appear before. G. L. o., x. ö. Tobe

Hl.

pre the co-equal of. D. II., xxvi. 5; xxxi. 4.

ff Wine; spirits, A., II. viii: IX. xv. :

tsew X. viii. 4, 5; x. 1.

chiu

/ To pledge,—in drinking, D.M., xix, 4.

chow

chou

dii Sauce, pickle. A., X. viii, 3,

tseang

chiang

pg AE BY to be a doctor. A., XIII. xxii- 
€

Dn Vinegar. A., V. xiii,

he

bsi

THE 160 RADICAL, Ht.

(1) A village, or neighbourhood. A.,

bo AV. . PERL a, viii 4. JHL 
A. XV. v. 2. (2) A measure of length, 
of 360.paces.  Anciently, 18974 Eng. 
feet; nowzz1826 feet. G. L. o., iii. 1. A. 
VIII. vi. (3) Eu Ht, the nume of a 
place in Ch'ing. A., XIV. ix.

Heavy, what is heavy, A., VIII. vii. 
chung 1,2. To feel; to he heavy. PD. XI., xxvi. 
9. Grave. A., I. vii. 1. Earnest, 
great. D.., xx. 13. To make large. 
D.M., xx. 14. To attach importance to.“ 
A., XX. i. 8.

Rude, uncultivated. A., VI. xvi XIII.

it

pr

wy 3

Ad iii, 4. ty. A A, XI. i, I.

dit Measures of capacity. A., XX. i . 
leung oc. limit, A., X. viii 4. pa

liang 
2 = Ht , not to know one’s own capacity,

A., XIX. xxiv.

INDEX VII.

TUE 167m RADICAL. gy.

<Pdit Measures of capacity. A., XX. i . 
leung oc. limit, A., X. viii 4. pa

liang 
2 = Ht , not to know one’s own capacity,

A., XIX. xxiv.

INDEX VII.

TUE 167m RADICAL. gy.

<P

Metal Sarms. D. M., x. 4. 
Vin 
chin 
Ek An axe, a hatchet, Ek 4 p D. M., 
juo xxxiii. 1. Í 
fu 
HE A battle-axe. See above. 
UL 
yuch 
2e A measure containing 61 shing, A., 
fo VI. ili. 1. 
fu t 
sf 
To angle. A., VII. xxvi. 
tortor 
tino 
FI ^ Embroidered clothes. D.M., xxxiii. 1. 
kin A,, XVII. xxi. 4. 
chin

$5 
ming I. 
111 Alternatingly. D. M., xxxii,

To engrave; be engraved, G. L. c., ii.

it To set aside, A., II. xix,: XII. xxii, 3,

tso 4.

tsu 
aie AR fly [jj while it was yet twanging; 
isang spoken “of the sound of a harpsichord.

këng A., XI. xxv. 7.

GE

toh A., III. xxiv.

to

gt To bore; to penetrate, A., IX. x. 1.

—

terran AX M A re poy

tenai $ 118. o bore wood to procure fire. A. 
XVII. xxi. 3. i

1217 A bell. A., XVII. xi.

chung

THE 168ru RADICAL. R.

jé (1) Long. A, X. vi. 5. te fff, the

chang Long treasury. H., XI. xiii, J. (2) Said 
of time. A. IX. ii. 1 A., VII. 
xxxvi, (3) R III. „a recluse, A.,

XVIII. vi. AM iA je a disciple, and 
Son-in-law, of MA A., V. i.

(1) Up. 2d tone. Old. A., XI. xxv, 2. 
Grown up. A, XIV. xlvi: XVII. vii. ö. 
(R . Elders. G.L.c, ix. 1: X. 2. 
To treat as elders should be treated. G.

Le, X. 2. (2) To preside over, high in 
station. G. n C x. 23.

Low, Sd tone. More than.

F

chang

Je

chany G.

A.; X, vi.

AX $$. a bell with a w goden clapper.

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PIIRASES. 371

THE icon RADICAL. Pf.

(D A doo a gate. A., II. xxii. 8: VI. 
xiii: XII. ii.: XIV. xlii. Spoken by Conf. 
of his door, ùes his school. A., XI. ii. 1: 
XIV. i. rH PH. to stand in the mid- 
dle of the gate way. A., X. ix. 2. PH

R. aiscipies A., IV. xv. 2: VIL 
xxviii: IX. xi: XL x. 1, 2; xiv. 2: XIX. 
ii; ii. So, PH yf y A., VIL. uis 
IX.ii.9. (2) fü In. the name of a 
place, or barricr-pass. A., XIV. xli.

A, XIX,

PY

MURR. aiscipies A., IV. xv. 2: VIL 
xxviii: IX. xi: XL x. 1, 2; xiv. 2: XIX. 
ii; ii. So, PH yf y A., VIL. uis 
IX.ii.9. (2) fü In. the name of a 
place, or barricr-pass. A., XIV. xli.

A, XIX,

PY

MUR

Pd A boundary, or fending line, 
hien Ki. 
hsien

Dj

hien 
hsien 
d 
kien 
chien

At leisure; retired. G. L. c., vi. 2.

An interval, Used as a preposition,

following its regimen, with

between. A., IV. v. 3: XI. xxv. 4;

. XVIII. iii. 3 [n]. during an inter- 
mission of sickness. A., IX. xi. 2.

fie]

x before it,

Up.3d tone. To find a crevice or flaw.

Lan As VIII. Xia XL iv. 
chien 
pij The threshold. A., X, iv. 2. 
yih 
yi 
15 il BR, secret, concealed. D.M., 
gau — XXxiii. 1. 
un

(1) To ist aside, exercise reserve, A.

ba

%%, II. xviii.

t 2. pAn A. XIII. ii. 4. 
(2) E AZ, a blank left in the writing. 
A., XV. xxv. (2) The name of a village,

A, XIV. xlvii.

Bal Ri

£, the first ode in the She-king,

bil

Awan A., III. xx. VIII. xv. 
kuan `

pi The name of one of Conf, disciples. A., 
kue V. v. 
k‘ai

Tue surname of one of Conf, disciples, 
min A, VI. viis XI ii.; iv.; xii; xiii.

THE lors RADICAL, If

The nune of a city in Loo. A., XIV.

Jung XV. 
lE The steps, or staircase, on the enst, 
mE Ra uus

372

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

Ft it fa to increase one's wealth. A., [er

foo XI. xvi. 1. 
fu

DF A pit-foll. DM, vii

tsing :

ching i

5155 (1) Narrow. A., VI. ix. (2) Rude, 
low uncultivated; rudeness. A., IX. xiii. 2.

low

(1) To descend, A., X. iv. 5. (2) To 
keung surrender (act.). A. XVIII. viii. 2, 8. 
chiang

(1) A mound. A., XIX. xxiv. (2) To

fing insult. D. M., xiv. 3.

Ig zit Ie, the shed, where the emperor 
gan spent his three years of mourning. A. 
an — XIV. xliii. 1.

pi (1) To arrange; display; exert, D.M,, 
chin xix.8. A., XVI. i. 6. (2) The name of 
chien a State. A,, V. xxi: VII. xxx.: XI. ii.: XV.

i (3) pis (lion, ep. 2 an officer 
of Tete. A, XIV. xxii, [BH X (hon. 
ep.), another officer of Ts'e, A., V. xviii. 
2. NW TT. isci "ETi (3) pis (lion, ep. 2 an officer 
of Tete. A, XIV. xxii, [BH X (hon. 
ep.), another officer of Ts'e, A., V. xviii. 
2. NW TT. isci "ET

9] JU e disciple of Conf., i. T 
F. A. XVI. xiii.

The arrangement of the ranks of an

pj

chin army, tactics. A., XV. i. 1. 
clien 
Ia © Bf to a pit. fall. D. M. vii. (2) 
Àóen To be made to fall into. A., VI. xxiv. 
hsien

= Re Hl. the family-ministers belong- 
pet ing to the officers of a State. A., XVI.

ii.

KE A corner. G. L. o., i2. A., VII. viii. 
yu 
yü 
n (I) n Js. a disciple of Tsing Sin, 
yung who was made criminal judge of Loo. A.,

XIX. xix. (2) ü B. the name of a

mountain, A., XVI. xii. (3) G H.

the name of an usurping oflicer of Loo.

A, XVII. i. (4) Name of an assistant

music-master of Loo. A., XVIII. ix. 5. 
To fall, D. M., xxxi. 4,

BR

chuy .

chui 4

1530 EA IVa. minister of Shun. A., XII. 
vou xxii. 6. i

yao

2 Steps of a stair. A, X. iv. 5; x. 2: 
keae XV. xli. I: XIX. xxv. 3.

chich

héen 
hsien

r 
ny 
sul

Ix

tse 
chi

yin

narn

INDEX VII.

Dangerous, difficult, places. 1T .

to walk in dangerous paths. D. M., xiv.

4. . 
z

XVII. xi.

„ an officer of Chow, A.,

A conjunction. A., VIII. xx. 3.

Secret; what is secret. D. M., i. 8; xii.

1. To keep secret, conceal, D. M., vi. 
A, VII. xxiii: XIII. xviii. 2. To live in 
obscurity. D.M. xi. 1. A. VIII. xiii, 
2: XVI. vi; xi. 2: XVIII. vi. 4; viii. 4.

THE 172» RADICAL. IE.

A pheasant. A., X. xviii. 2.

l

The female of birds. Mé FE, a hen- 
pheasant. A., X. xviii, 2.

(1) Frequently. A., VII. xvii, (2) The

name of the odes in the second and third 
Parts of the She-king. A., IX. xiv: 
XVII. xviii.

„ the name of the first ode in 
the She-king. A., III. xx: VIII. xv.

(1) The name of an ode in the She-

king. A., III. ii. (2) The name of one 
of Conf. disciples, Nan Yung, styled 
Chuvg-kung. A. V. iv.: VI. i.: XII. zi.(1) The name of an ode in the She-

king. A., III. ii. (2) The name of one 
of Conf. disciples, Nan Yung, styled 
Chuvg-kung. A. V. iv.: VI. i.: XII. zi.

Although. G. L. o., ii. 3; ix. 2; et al, 
D. M., xxviii. 4; xxxiii. 2. A., I. viis VI. 
ix.: IX. iii. 2: et al, sepe. It is often fol- 
lowed by an adjective, without a verb, 
and may be translated even, even tn the case 
of. Observe A., VI. xxiv.; and 1X. xviii.

To settle, A., X. xviii, 1.

Fowls, a fowl,’ G. L. o., x. 22. A., 
XVII. iv. 2: XVIII. vii. 3.

To be scattered; dispersions. A., XVI. 
i. 12.

Low, 3d tone. To go away from; to 
be left. D. M., i. 2.

Difficult ; to be difficult; difficulty. A., 
II. viii: VI. xiv: VII. xxv. 3; xxviii, 1: 
VIII. xx. 2: XII. iii. 3: XIII. xv. 2, 3: 
et al. What is difficult. A., VI. xx« 
SIV. ii. 2: XIX. xv.

Low, 3d tone, Trouble, calamity, A.,

XVI. x. ER ME, DM, xiv. 2.

INDEX VII.

(1) To carve. A., V, xix. 1. (2) Part 
teaou of a double surname. A., V. v. 
tiao ; 
THE 1725 RADICAL. jjj. 
ER The name of a gacrifice to pray for 
ye rain. They danced about the altars. 
yi Hence aE EE? rain-altars A., XI. 
xxv. 7: XII. xxi. . 
se Clouds, a cloud. A., VII. xv. 
yun 
yün 
fü Thunder. A, X. xv. 6. 
lu 
là 
i8 Hoar-frost, D. M., xxxi, 4. 
shwang 
shuang

Es Dew, D.M., xxxi. 4. 
00 
lu

To exorcise authority over men by 
strength ; to make to have such authority.

a 
P gs XIV. xviii. 2.

EE * (hon. ep.) Zw a duke of Wei. 
ia A, XIV. xx: XV. A

THE 17471 RADICAL. FF.

Calm and unperturbed; tranquil. G.

tsung L. r., 2. A., VI. xxi. 
cheng

THE 175v RADICAL. JẸ.

Not. Sepe. It very often stands at 
the beginning of the clause. or member 
to which it belongs, and = it is not that 
. ; if not, &c. =whatiscontrary to. D.

JF

fei

M, xx 14 A, XVII. i. 2. JE N.

An affirmation. 
D. M., xxxiii, 4. 
f f + 1

not but. 
Not:

A, VI. x.

THE 176: RADICAL. mi.

1

The face, 1: Hp ‘the face to the

meen south; the position of a sovereign. A.An affirmation. 
D. M., xxxiii, 4. 
f f + 1

not but. 
Not:

A, VI. x.

THE 176: RADICAL. mi.

1

The face, 1: Hp ‘the face to the

meen south; the position of a sovereign. A.

mien VI. i. 1: XV. iv. ie [rij the face to- 
wards a wall. A., XVII. x. 
TUE 177m RADICAL. M.

The portions of armour, made of lea- 
ther. D. I., x. 4.

ko

CHINESE CIIARACTERS AND PII RASES.

373

To bend. Hig Hi, A, X. iv. 4 v. i.

A whip. A., VII. xi.

H 
chit

3 I3. 75 „a bare hide, a hide with the 
hair taken off. A., XII. viii. 3.

THE 1781 RADICAL. N.

To store up, to keep. A., IX. xii,

THE 180r RADICAL. E.

The music of Shun. A., III. xxv.: VII. 
shaou xiii: XV. x. 5. 
shao

THE 18181 RADICAL, fj.

To be obedient to, in accordance with, 
D. AI. xx. 17. A. II. iv. 5: XIII. iii. 5. 
To have complacence. D. XI., xv. 13.

(1) A Ji, a short time, au instant.

IR

shun

eli D. M., i. 2. (2) * ZA, one of Conf, 
disciples, ig. "T SÉ. A., XIII. iv. 2.

iB Praise songs, The name of the last

sung Part of the She-king. A., IX. xiv.

pa To desire; to wish; tolike. D.M, xiii.

yuen 3; xiv. 1. A., V. xxv. 2, 3, 4: XI. xxv.

yüan 6.

Yi () p ff. the countenance. A.

yen VIII. iv. 3: T. iv. 5: XVI. vi. (2) The

yen surname of Conf. favourite distiple. See

t and ul:

A., XI. viii.

EH LH iS IIwuy's father.

are 1051 E the name of a small Stute.

chuen A,, AVI, i.

chuan

Xü Sorts, classes, A., XV, xxxviii.

hys 7 
Mi, 
' y f

10 T0 fal; fallen. A, XVLi.6. E ili. 
teen in peril. A, IV. v. 3.

tien

ee To contemplate. G.L.c,i.2. To have 
koo — regard to. I). M., xHi.4. 1% turn the 
ku bead round to look. A. X. ili. 4; xvii.

2. 7

En To be manifest ; illustrious. B. M., i. 
Aven 3; Xvi. 5; xvili. 2; xxvi. 1; xxxiii I. Obs. 
hsien xxxiii ö.

374

hal 
Jug

feng

ghih

^F 
fü 
penu 
pno 
Az 
1 
yung

geng 
ER 
ye 
y ü

fx 
LUI 
nei

CIIINESE

THE 182» RADICAL. M.

A., X. 
To enjoy the breeze; 
A., XI. xxv. 7.

The wind. D. M., xxxiii. I. 
xvi. 5: XII. xix. 
to take the air.

THE 183» RADICAL. JE. ,fx 
LUI 
nei

CIIINESE

THE 182» RADICAL. M.

A., X. 
To enjoy the breeze; 
A., XI. xxv. 7.

The wind. D. M., xxxiii. I. 
xvi. 5: XII. xix. 
to take the air.

THE 183» RADICAL. JE. ,

To fly. D.M, xii. 3.

' THE 1847 RADICAL. fr.

(1) To eat, G. L. o., vii. 2. D.M. iv

2. A., I. xiv. etal. sape. Sto consume, 
G. L. C., x. 19. sto enjoy. A. zo xi. 3.

To be caten. A, XVII. vii, 4. $4 Kr 
8 IH »a@mieal’s time. A., IV. v. 3. 
food.

2

D. II., xix. 3. A., IV. ix: VIII. 
xxi: X. vii. 2: ct ul (2) An eclipse.

A., XIX. xxi. 
(J) Rice; food generally. A., IT. viii;

VI. ix; VIL xv.: X. viii. 1, 2, 4. 10: XIV. 
x. 3. (2) To give food to; to feast. A, 
XVIII. vii. 3.

To drink. D.M,

As a noun. A. VI. ix: VIII. xxi 
Up. 3d tone, To give to drink. A., 
i

iv. 3. A., X. x. 1.

III. vii.

Meat over done. X E A f T. he

did not ent anything that was over-done. 
A., X. viii, 2. (This clause has slipt out 
of the translation. 7

(1) to eat, Aik Hir Di 1 „A., VII. xv.; 
XIV. xX. 3. In those instances, perhaps 
{iff =for food. Tu taste. A., X. xiii, 2.

c» gi ii, — fii PY fiio ee BS, 
LI yu. A., XVIII. ix. 
To ornament. A., X. vi. 1. Obs. (5

fili AC A, XIV.

To cat to the the full: 
XVII. xxii.

üt A., I.

xiv.: VII. ix:

To nourish ; to bring up. G. L. C., ix. 2. 
A., V. xv. to have about one; 
age, A., XVII. xxv,

Low. 32 tune, To naurish, to support | 
a superior. A., TI. vii.

That which is over. Jt Py TY , the others, 
A. II. xviii 2: VI. v.: "aun xi. Super- 
1 ait ae Fr EY a 
abundant. A., m fi ER having 
excess. J. XI., xiii, 4.

(1) Hunger, want. A., XV. xxsi. (2) 
Rotten, gone, Ay X. viij. 2; spoken of ' 
fish,

to man-

E

CHARACTERS AND PIIRASES.

INDEX VIT.

ex JIunzry. = to die of famine. A., 
go XVI. xii. 1.

n 
fi Rice sour, or with a bad odour. A., X.

e viii, 2

i 
f" PA 3É. the sheep offered at the inan- 
he guration of the new moon. A,, III. xvii. 
ehi 1.

WE Provisions, A., X. xvi, 4. HE (m. 
tsin to set before one’s elders. A., II. viii. 
ehuani 
f" PA 3É. the sheep offered at the inan- 
he guration of the new moon. A,, III. xvii. 
ehi 1.

WE Provisions, A., X. xvi, 4. HE (m. 
tsin to set before one’s elders. A., II. viii. 
ehuan

>l: 
fi? $e #, rice injured by damp, A., X.

e xiii. 2 . ,

i 
fit A famine ;—specifically of the grain 
JP crop. A., a ix. fit git, a famine.

A., XI. xxv.

n" A. famine; HMM of vegetables, 
kin 1 15 
chin Sce 2 l 
f To present; anything presented. A., 
kwa NX. xi. 2; xv. 2. 
kuci d 
zx To enjoy; to accept a sacrifice, D. M.,

heung xvii. I; xviii. 2. 
hsiang

THE 18 RADICAL, Tj.

TT i B. the name of a mountain. A,, 
show XVI. xii. 1.

show

PI Upper 3d tone. The direction of the 
show head. A., X. xiii, 3.

shou

THE 187m RADICAL, JD.

(1) A horse, horses. G. L. C., x. 22. A,

mt II. vii: V. xviii. 2; xxv. 2: VI. iii. 2; 
ma iii.: X. xil; Xxx. 2: XV. xxv.: XVI. xil.

1. (2) tj Hio a double surname. A. 
XH, iii.; iv.; v. AV. I. also a double 
A., VII. xxx.

715 inf: to attempt to cross a river

surname,

WE 
25

pring without using a buat. A., VII. x. 3. 
i] A team of four horses, A., XII. viii, 
ste 2: XVI. xii. 
SZ 
1115 The yoking of: a carriage. A., X. xiii, 
he th 4, 
chia :

—i "M D 
Be Red. Spoken of a calf to be sacrifieed: 
siny Ay VI. iv,

i hang

INDEX VII.

La

de - 
bou Ma XXVII. 7. 
chiag xxvi: XIV. xi:

ns 
ku 
chri

[a "un 
chien

EA

kwa 
kun

Bý

pron 
pien

w

te 
ti

NEN 
n3] 
kuo

kao

je 
tu

2

tow 
tou

A

t · i 
kuci

l

pAn

wei

To be proud; pride, G.L.c,x.18. D.

A., I. xv: VIII. xi: XIII. 
XVI. v: XX. ii. 1, 2. 
To drive, D. M., vii.

A horse that could go 1, 000 le in a day, 
= a good horse. A; XIV. xxxv.

J. S the designation of one of Conf. 
disciples. A., VI. vii: XI. ii.; iv.; xiii.

ZE ER, the name of an officer of the 
Gee dy má A, XVIIL xi.

The name of a town. A., XIV. x. 8.

TIE 18811 RADICAL, ry.ZE ER, the name of an officer of the 
Gee dy má A, XVIIL xi.

The name of a town. A., XIV. x. 8.

TIE 18811 RADICAL, ry.

(1) The body. G. L. c., vi. 4. II. 
the four limbs. D. II.; xxiv. A, XVIII. 
vii. J. (2) As a verb. To treat with 
consideration. D. I., XX. 12, 13. To 
enter into, be incorporate with. D. I., 
xvi. 2.

TUE 1897 RADICAL. f

(1) High, D.M, (Sv xxv bes 3, 4, 5. ea 8; 
xxvii. 6. A., IX. X. 1. (2) & BI m, the 
hon, epithet of the emperor p E A.,

T 
XIV, xliii, A name. (3) tik D 327 lap 
Ay V. xxiji. 
THE 100 ru RADICAL. EZ.

The hair. A., XIV. xviii, 2.

THE 19181 RADICAL, Pg.

To contend; quarrelsomeness. 
XVI. vii.

THE 194m RADICAL. B.

Manes, the spirit or spirits of the de-

parted, A., II. xxiv: XL xi, pass 
spiritual bugs sometimes exclusively 
names. DM. xvi; xxix. 3, 4. A., VI. 
xx.: VIII. xxi.

The name of a great family. A., XIV, 
xii.

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PIIRASES.

375

T fit a high officer of Sung, an ene-

tuy my of Conf. A., VII. xxii. 
tui. 
TIIE 195ru RADICAL. 44 
Hi C) A Aish, fishes, fish, DM, xii. 3; 
yee 
yi xxvi. 9. A., X. viii. 2. (2) ff J. un 
historiographer, A., XV. vi. (2) tati UE 
the designa. of Conf. sou. A., XVI. xiii. 
1: XVIII. x. 
[At (1) Dull, blunt. A., XI. xvii. 2. (2) 
ioe The name of a wa A., III. xxiii: V. 
u

ii: VI. xxiiy et al. d T A. A., XVIII. 
X.

Up. 2d tone. Few, rare; seldom. €.

fi

seen ie. Vili, 1. D. II., iii.; iv. 2. A., J. ii.

hsien 1; iii.: IV. xxii: VI. xxvii; XV. Iii. 
XVII. xvii.

Me An oſfecr of Wei. A. VI. xiv. XIV

to — xxii. i

fip The name of Confucius’ son. A., XI.

le vii. 2: XVI. xiii. 2, 3. 
THE 196m RADICAL, fi. 
A., VUL

A bird, birda, G. L.. e 25

neam iv.: IX. viii: XVII. ix. 7: XVIII. vi. h 
uiao

. A fabulous bird, the phenix, X., IX. 
Jang viii. Applied to Confucius. A., XVIII. 
feng vi. L

pr (1) The ery of a bird, A., VIII. iv. 2. 
miny (2) To sound, to beat. A., XI. xvi. 2. 
75 A kind of hawk. P. II., xii, 3.

yun

yüanpr (1) The ery of a bird, A., VIII. iv. 2. 
miny (2) To sound, to beat. A., XI. xvi. 2. 
75 A kind of hawk. P. II., xii, 3.

yun

yüan

i Used as = the bull's eye in a target. 
Kuh DM, xiv. 5.

ku

THE 198ru RADICAL, Ih.

A fawn. A., X. vi. 4.

THE 200mm RADICAL. ff.

Hemp; = linen, A., IX. iii, 1.

1

ma

TUE 201sr RADICAL, if. 
iit Yellow, G. L. C., ili. 2. A., X. W. 1. 
hwang 
huang

316 
THE 9?0?p RADICAL. .

Black. Fy R. the black-haired peo- 
G. L. C., x. 14.

koo 
ku

fe ple, = the one

THE 30?» RADICAL. FH.

Ep To be silent, silence. D.M., xxxvii. 7. | tnou 
mik A,, VIL ii. Vao 
nio

th | — To be dismissed from office, A., XVIII.

n

% il. JA 
ch'u ise 
I The name of ee: one of Conf. dis- chi 
tea ciples. A, XI. xxv. 7.

tien

770 m: A village. A., IX. ii: XIV. xlvii,

tuny S Bee, A. vr i. 4. X. i. 1. (2)

AE As VII. d. school, pupils. A., 
. 7 715 we, among us. A.,

V. xxi. 
XIII. xviii. il, 2. (3) A partizan, parti- e 
zanly. A, VII. xxx. 2: XV. xxi. em 
i Jin 
g- 
TILE Wiru RADICAL. . isze 
tzü

An apran, belonging to the emperor's 
dress at sacritices. A. VIII. xxi,

Tj

che

THE 203r RADICAL, jih. cháh

A large tortoise, D. M., xxvi, 9.

iit 
10 HE

y ton 
yüan fun

i 
HiU A turtle. D.M., xxvi, 9. 
pet i 
pieh 
Tui An iguana. D.M, xxvi, 9. . f 
b kuei

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

.

INDEX VII.

TUE 207m RADICAL. fb

(1) A drum, drums. A., XI. xvi, 2

XVII. xi. (2) Drum-mnster. A., XVIII. 
ix. 3. (3) To strike: to play on. D.M., 
xv. 2. A., XI. xxv. 2. Anviently, for the

third of these senses the character pb 
was used.

A kind of hand-drum. Ki e 75, to 
shake the hand-drum. A., XVIII. ix. 4

THE 21071 RADICAL: .

(1) To regulate. G. L. r., 4, 5:c., viii.

To give uniformity to. A., 
To equal; be equal with. A., 
EG. The name of a State. Ay

1, 2;ix.1, 5. 
II. iii. 1, 2.

IV. xvii. 
V. xviii. 2: VI. iii. 1, 2; xxii: VII. xiii; 
XII. xi.: VE xi XVIII. iii; iv.; ix.1, 2;ix.1, 5. 
II. iii. 1, 2.

IV. xvii. 
V. xviii. 2: VI. iii. 1, 2; xxii: VII. xiii; 
XII. xi.: VE xi XVIII. iii; iv.; ix.

—XIV. xvi; (3) In N 
I, it is the hon. epithet. A., V. xxii. 
VIII. xiv. 2: XVI. xii.: XVIII. viii. 1, 2

To fast; religious adjustment, D.M,,' 
xvi.3; xx. 14; xxxi. 1. A., VII. xii: X. 
vii. 1, 2; viii. 10.

The lower edge of a garment. A., X. 
iv. 4. Eu E in mourning. A., IX. 
ix. X. xvi. 2.

THE 211mm RADICAL. Py

xvii; xviii,

The teeth. A. XIV, x. 3. Used for 
years, age. D.M, xix. 4.

THE 21211 RADICAL, 35 BE

A dragon, dragons, D. I., xxvi, 9.

THE 2132 RADICAL. fk

A tortoise. D. M., xxiv, A., XVI. i, 
7.

END OF VOL. i,

00058144

i HAA a

Digitized with financial assistance from the 
Government of Maharashtra 
on 15 June, 2016

TY m * 
à WI HW) aly 
Nic M 1 E

!

¥ j 
TNN)

- ^ jt 
ME belii T à n 
1 Ne, 7 Am a yi^ 
iud ^ Bt ees "i — 99 ES jah

"EV A