and the 
DTniirecsal Chuxeh

'Vln&nir Solovyev, the Rtisska 
fjilitlrer whoin the philoeopher 
9cc«lfecv anid the thecdogian Bidi- 
caleov have both teoogniaed as 
Sieir Master, is little kiiown to 
English readets, althou^ his re- 
cently published TAe AUamm^ of 
Xjom aroused considerable interest.

The present work is a translation 
of Kmssu $t rEglise UntPirse/U 
which Solovyev wrote originally 
in French for fear of the Tsarist 
censorship. It comprises (i) an 
introduction to the social im- 
plmdons of the Faith of the Incar- 
nation and the social effects of 
heresy, (ii) an enquiry into the 
religious conditions of the Russian 
Church, (iii^ a plbi — ^remarkable 
from a Russian Orthodox — ^for the 
recognition of the place of the 
Fqpacy in the polity of Christen- 
doan, and (iv) a spiritual ** outline 
trf history”, applying the Trini- 
tarian di^logy and the author’s 
own doctrine of sopbia to the 
£KiCs is and social development of

I JS. net

flPft 26 1975 
m\\ APR U 1979

;\PR 1 1980

MAjNOV 2 6 1980

MAf OCT 3 0 1911

RUSSIA AND THE UNIVERSAL CHURCH

By the same Author

THE MEANING OF LOVE

2^1.9 68-13B52

‘^olov’ ev

Russia? nnd the Universal church

t

t , t

Kansas city

public library

: ' K 1 .'.ill 1)*,’ I'* f . : (V '1 y

•HI f)f .‘Srdt itl ,(1 of III f If y c if ; 
f’l'* fHf Hf t lir>t C ; ^ , H ‘

( h HH'/* .,)! ( •' I • {:f ; M ,

i' If h: ! l-'f > Mv (r >( [ ,i: !•• I r

.‘II b; K fi'- f : till t f - 1

or utfHT li^r uy H it' ri rK 
cht f kf 1 0 it Gil c tf .1 >

VLADIMIR SOLOVYEV

RUSSIA AND THE 
UNIVERSAL CHURCH

DATE DUE

Printed in Great Britain by 
Robert MacLehose and Company Ltd 
The University Press Gla^ow 
for Geoffrey Bles Ltd 
52 Doughty Street London fV.C. j

First Published 1948

TRANSLATED BY HERBERT REES

CONTENTS

rAG£

INTRODUCTION 7

PART ONE

THE STATE OF RELIGION IN RUSSIA AND THE 
CHRISTIAN EAST

CHAPTER

I. The Russian legend of St. Nicolas and St. Cassian. Its

APPLICATION TO THE TWO SEPARATED CHURCHES 39INTRODUCTION 7

PART ONE

THE STATE OF RELIGION IN RUSSIA AND THE 
CHRISTIAN EAST

CHAPTER

I. The Russian legend of St. Nicolas and St. Cassian. Its

APPLICATION TO THE TWO SEPARATED CHURCHES 39

II. The question of the raison d'etre of Russia 43

III. The true Orthodoxy of the Russian people and the

pseudo-Orthodoxy of the anti-Catholic theologians 46*

IV. Russian dissent. The relative truth of the Raskol.

Mgr. Philaret of Moscow and his conception of the Uni- 
versal Church 51

V. Critical observations on the Russian Slavophils and their

IDEAS CONCERNING THE ChURCH 56

VI. Religious freedom and ecclesiastical freedom 59

VII. I. S. Aksakov on the ofhcial Church in Russia 62

VIII. Relations between the Russian and Greek Churches.

Bulgaria and Serbia 68

IX. The fulfilment of a prophecy. C^saropapism in action 73

X. The design to establish a quasi-Papacy at Constantinople 
OR Jerusalem 79

PART TWO

THE ECCLESIASTICAL MONARCHY FOUNDED BY 
JESUS CHRIST

I. The Rock of the Church 85

II. The primacy of St. Peter as a permanent institution. The

THREE Rocks of Christendom 91

III. ‘Peter’ and ‘Satan’ 96

IV. The Church as a universal society. The principle of love 99

V. The keys of the Kingdom 103

VI. The government of the Universal Church. The centre of

UNITY

105

PAGE

CHAPTCK

Vn. The monarchies foretold by Daniel. ‘Roma’ and ‘Amor’ 109

Vni. The ‘Son of Man’ and the ‘Rock’ i 14

DC. Ancient and modern witness to the primacy of Peter i 16

X. The Apostle Peter and the Papacy 120

XI. Pope St. Leo the Great on the primacy 125

XII. St. Leo the Great on papal authority 128

XIII. The approval of St. Leo’s ideas by the Greek Fathers. The

‘robber-council’ of Ephesus 133

XIV. The Counch op Chalcedon 140

PART THREE

THE .TRINITARY PRINCIPLE AND ITS SOCIAL 
APPLICATION

I . The Divine Trinity rationally deduced from the idea of

Being 147

II. The three Divine Hypostases and the proper signihcation

OF THEIR NAMES 1 52I . The Divine Trinity rationally deduced from the idea of

Being 147

II. The three Divine Hypostases and the proper signihcation

OF THEIR NAMES 1 52

III. The Divine Essence and its threefold manifestation i 56

IV. The Soul of the World; the Principle of Creation, Space,

Time and Mechanical Causality 160

V. The Higher World. The Freedom of Pure Spirits 166

VI. The three main Stages of the Cosmogonic Process i 70

vn. The threefold Incarnation of the Divine Wisdom i 74

VIII. Messianic Man and the Chaos of Mankind. The primitive

elements of Trinitary Society i 79

IX. The Messianic Preparation among the Hindus, the Greeks

AND THE Hebrews 187

X. The absolute sovereignty of Christ. The social trinity.

Priesthood and fatherhood 195

XI. Kjngship and sonship. Prophecy. The three Sacraments

of the Pjghts of Man 203

XII. The four Sacraments of the Duties of Man 21 1

6

INTRODUCTIONPriesthood and fatherhood 195

XI. Kjngship and sonship. Prophecy. The three Sacraments

of the Pjghts of Man 203

XII. The four Sacraments of the Duties of Man 21 1

6

INTRODUCTION

A hundred years ago France, the vanguard of humanity, set out to 
inaugurate a new era with the proclamation of the Rights of 
L Man. Christianity had indeed many centuries earlier conferred 
upon men not only the right but the power to become the sons of God 
— €S(OK€v avrols i^ovaiav reKva 0 €ov ycveadai (John i. 12). But the 
new proclamation made by France was far from superfluous, for this 
supreme power of mankind was almost entirely ignored in the social life 
of Christendom. I am not referring so much to particular acts of injustice 
as to the principles which were recognised by the public conscience, ex- 
pressed in the laws of the time, and embodied in its social institutions. It 
was by legal statute that Christian America robbed the Christian negroes 
of all their human rights and ruthlessly abandoned them to the tyranny 
of their masters who themselves professed the Christian religion. In God- 
fearing England it was the law which condemned to the gallows the man 
who stole food from his rich neighbour to save himself from starvation. 
Lastly, it was the laws and institutions of Poland and of ‘Holy* Russia 
which allowed the feudal lord to sell his serfs like cattle.^ I do not presume 
to pass judgment on the special circumstances of France, nor to decide 
whether, as distinguished writers more competent than myself declare,^ 
the Revolution did this country more harm than good. But let us not 
forget that if each nation in history works more or less for the whole 
world, France has the distinction of having taken a step of universal sig- 
nificance in the political and social sphere.Though the revolutionary movement destroyed many things that 
needed to be destroyed, though it swept away many an injustice and 
swept it away for ever, it nevertheless failed lamentably in the attempt to 
create a social order founded upon justice. Justice is simply the practical 
expression and appheation of truth; and the starting-point of the revolu- 
tionary movement was false. The declaration of the Rights of Man could 
only provide a positive principle for social reconstruction if it was based 
upon a true conception of Man himself. That of the revolutionaries is

^ I am not forgetting that in 1861 Russia made am^ds by freeing the serfs.

* See, among recent pubUcations, the remarkable work of G. dc Pascal, Rholu-- 
tion ou Evolution: Centenaire de ijSg (Paris, Saudax).

7

well-known: they perceived in Man nothing but abstract individuality, 
a rational being destitute of all positive content.7

well-known: they perceived in Man nothing but abstract individuality, 
a rational being destitute of all positive content.

I do not propose to unmask the internal contradictions of this revolu- 
tionary individualism nor to show how this abstract ‘Man’ was suddenly 
transformed into the no less abstract ‘Citizen*, how the free sovereign 
individual found himself doomed to be the defenceless slave and victim 
of the absolute State or ‘Nation*, that is to say, of a group of obscure 
persons borne to the surface of pubhc life by the eddies of revolution and 
rendered the more ferocious by the consciousness of their own intrinsic 
nonentity. No doubt it would be highly interesting and instructive to 
follow the thread of logic which connects the doctrines of 1789 with the 
events of 1793. But I believe it to be still more important to recognise 
that the npwrov tItevSos, the basic falsehood, of the Revolution — the 
conception of the individual man as a being complete in and for himself 
— that this false notion of individualism was not the invention of the 
revolutionaries or of their spiritual forbears, the Encyclopaedists, but was 
the logical, though unforeseen, issue of an earlier pseudo-Christian or 
semi-Christian doctrine which has been the root cause of all the anomalies 
in the past history and present state of Christendom.Men have imagined that the acknowledgment of the divinity of Christ 
relieves them of the obligation of taking His words seriously. They have 
twisted certain texts of the Gospel so as to get out of them the meaning 
they want, while they have conspired to pass over in silence other texts 
which do not lend themselves to such treatment. The precept ‘Render 
to Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, and to God the things that are 
God’s* is constantly quoted to sanction an order of things which gives 
Caesar all and God nothing. The saying ‘My Kingdom is not of this 
world’ is always being used to justify and confirm the paganism of our 
social and political life, as though Christian society were destined to belong 
to this world and not to the Kingdom of Christ. On the other hand the 
saying ‘All power is given Me in heaven and earth’ is never quoted. Men 
are ready to accept Christ as sacrificing Priest and atoning Victim; but 
they do not want Christ the King. His royal dignity has been ousted by 
every kind of pagan despotism, and Christian peoples have taken up the 
cry of the Jewish rabble: ‘We have no king but Caesar!’ Thus history has 
witnessed, and we are still witnessing, the curious phenomenon of a 
society which professes Christianity as its religion but remains pagan not 
merely in its life but in the very basis of that life.

This dichotomy is not so much a logical non sequitur as a moral failure. 
That is obvious from the hypocrisy and sophism which are characteristic 
of the arguments commonly used to justify this state of affairs. ‘Slavery

88

and severe hardship,* said a bishop renowned in Russia thirty years ago, 
‘are not contrary to the spirit of Christianity; for physical suffering is not 
a hindrance to the salvation of the soul, which is the one and only end 
of our religion.* As though the infliction of physical suffering by a man 
on his fellow-men did not imply in him a moral depravity and an act 
of injustice and cruelty which were certainly imperiling the salvation of 
his soul! Granted even — though the supposition is absurd — ^that a Chris- 
tian society can be insensible to the sufferings of the oppressed, the 
question remains whether it can be indifferent to the sin of the oppressors.Economic slavery, even more than slavery properly so called, has found 
its champions in the Christian world. Society and the State, they maintain, 
are in no way bound to take general and regular measures against 
pauperism; voluntary almsgiving is enough; did not Christ say that there 
would always be the poor on earth? Yes, there will always be the poor; 
there will also always be the sick, but does that prove the uselessness of 
health services? Poverty in itself is no more an evil than sickness; the evil 
consists in remaining indifferent to the sufferings of one’s neighbour. 
And it is not a question only of the poor; the rich also have a claim on 
our compassion. These poor rich! We do everything to develop their 
bump of acquisitiveness, and then we expect them to enter the Kingdom 
of God through the imperceptible opening of individual charity. Besides, 
it is well known that authoritative scholars see in the phrase ‘the eye of 
a needle* simply a literal translation of the Hebrew name given to one 
of the gates of Jerusalem {negeh-ha'-hhammath or khur--ha-khammath) which 
it was difficult for camels to pass through. Surely then it is not the in- 
finitesimal contribution of personal philanthropy wliich the Gospel en- 
joins upon the rich, but rather the narrow and difficult, but nevertheless 
practicable, way of social reform.This desire to limit the social action of Christianity to individual 
charity, this attempt to deprive the Christian moral code of its binding 
character and its positive legal sanction is a modern version of that ancient 
Gnostic antithesis (the system of Marcion in particular) so often anathem- 
atised by the Church. That all human relationships should be governed 
by charity and brotherly love is undoubtedly the express will of God and 
the end of His creation; but in historic reality, as in the Lord’s Prayer, 
the fulfilment of the divine will on earth is only reaUsed after the hallow- 
ing of God’s Name and the coming of His Kingdom. The Name of God 
is Truth; His Kingdom is Justice. It follows that the knowledge of the 
truth and the practice of justice are necessary conditions for the triumph 
of evangelical charity ill human society.

In truth all are one; and God, the absolute Unity, is all in all. But

9In truth all are one; and God, the absolute Unity, is all in all. But

9

this divine Unity is hidden from our view by the world of evil and illu- 
sion, the result of universal human sin. The basic condition of this world 
is the division and isolation of the parts of the Great Whole; and even 
Man, who should have been the uxiifying rationale of die material uni- 
verse, finds himself split up and scattered over the earth, and has been 
unable by his own efforts to achieve more than a partial and unstable 
unity, the universal monarchy of paganism. This monarchy, first repre- 
sented by Tiberius and Nero, received its true unifying principle when 
‘grace and truth’ were manifested in Jesus Christ. Once united to God, 
the human race recovered its own unity. But this unity had to be three- 
fold to be complete; it had to realise its ideal perfection on the basis of a 
divine fact and in the midst of the life of mankind. Since mankind is 
objectively separated from the divine unity, this unity must in the first 
place be given to us as an objective reality independent of ourselves — the 
Kingdom of God coming amongst us, the external, objective Church. 
But once reunited to this external unity, men must translate it into 
action, they must assimilate it by their own efforts — the Kingdom of 
God is to be taken by force, and the men of violence possess it. At first 
manifested for us and then by us, the Kingdom of God must finaUy be 
revealed in us in all its intrinsic, absolute perfection as love, peace and 
joy in the Holy Spirit.Thus the Church Universal (in the broad sense of the word) develops 
as a threefold union of the divine and the human: there is the priestly 
union, in which the divine element, absolute and unchangeable, pre- 
dominates and forms the Church properly so called (the Temple of God) ; 
there is the kingly union, in which the human element predominates and 
which forms the Christian State (the Church as the living Body of 
God) ; and there is lastly the prophetic union, in which the divine and the 
human must penetrate one another in free mutual interaction and so form 
the perfect Christian society (the Church as the Spouse of God).

The moral basis of the priestly union, or of the Church in the strict 
sense of the word, is faith and religious devotion; the kingly union of the 
Christian State is based on law and justice; while the element proper to 
the prophetic union or the perfect society is freedom and love.

The Church, in the narrower sense, represented by the hierarchy, re- 
unites mankind to God by the profession of the true faith and the grace 
of the sacraments. But if the faith communicated by the Church to 
Christian humanity is a living faith, and if the grace of the sacraments is 
an effectual grace, the resultant union of the divine and the human cannot 
be limited to the special domain of religion, but must extend to all 
Man’s common relationships and must regenerate and transform his

10

social and political life. Here opens up a field of action which is man's 
own proper sphere. The divine->human action is no longer an accom- 
plished fact as in the priestly Church, but a task awaiting fulfilment, the 
task of making the divine Truth a reality in human society, of putting 
Truth into practice; and Truth, expressed in practice, is^ called Justice.Truth is the absolute existence of all in unity; it is the univer^ sohd- 
arity which exists eternally in God, but which has been lost by the 
natural man and recovered in principle by Christ, the spiritual Man. It 
remains for human activity to continue the unifying work of the God- 
Man by contesting the world with the contrary principle of egoism and 
division. Each single being, whether nation, class, or individual, in so 
far as it asserts its own individuahty in isolation from the divine-human 
sum of things, is acting against Truth; and Truth, if it is alive in us, must 
react and manifest itself as Justice. Thus having recognised the universal 
solidarity, the All-in-One, as Truth, and having put it into practice as 
Justice, regenerate Man will be able to perceive it as his inmost essence 
and to enjoy it fully in the spirit of freedom and love.All are one in the Church through the unity of hierarchy, faith, and 
sacraments; all are made one in the Christian State through Justice and 
law; all must be one in natural charity and free co-operation. These 
three modes or rather degrees of unity are inseparably connected. In 
order to impose that universal solidarity which is the Kingdom of God 
on nations and classes and individuals, the Christian State must believe 
in it as absolute Truth revealed by God Himself. But the divine revelation 
cannot be made directly to the State as such, that is to say to a natural 
humanity outside the sphere of the divine operation: God has revealed 
Himself, He has entrusted His truth and His grace to an elect humanity, 
that is to the Church, sanctified and organised by Himself If the State, 
itself the product of human agencies and historic circumstances, is to 
bring mankind under the sway of absolute Justice, it must justify itself 
by submission to the Church which provides the moral and religious 
sanction and the actual basis for its work. It is equally clear that the 
perfect Christian society or the prophetic union, the reign of love and 
spiritual freedom, presupposes the priestly and kingly union. For the 
divine truth and grace cannot fully control the moral being of mankind 
nor effect its inner transformation unless they first have an objective force 
in the world, unless they are incarnate in a religious fact and upheld by 
law, unless, that is, they exist as Church and State.

Since the priestly institution is a fact, and the brotherhood of perfect 
freedom is an ideal, it is the middle term especially— the State in its re- 
lation to Christianity — ^which determines the historic destiny of mankind.

IIII

The State exists in order to protect human society against evil in its 
external and public form — that is, against manifest evil. The true social 
good being the solidarity of the whole, universal justice and peace, social 
evil is simply the violation of this solidarity. The actual life of mankind 
shews a threefold violation of that universal solidarity which is justice: 
justice is violated, firstly, when one nation attacks the existence or freedom 
of another, secondly, when one social class oppresses another, and thirdly, 
when an individual by committing a crime openly revolts against the 
social order.

As long as there existed in the history of mankind several separate 
States, absolutely independent of one another, the immediate task of 
each in the sphere of foreign policy was confined to maintaining this 
independence. But the ideal or rather the instinct of international solida- 
rity persisted throughout human history, and found its expression either 
in that tendency to universal monarchy which culminated in the ideal 
and the historic reality of the pax Romana, or (among the Jews) in the 
religious principle which affirmed the natural unity and common origin 
of the whole human race, of all the sons of Adam {hene-Adam ) — a con- 
ception afterwards completed by the Christian religion which added to 
this natural unity the spiritual fellowship of all those who are regenerate 
and made sons of the second Adam, the Christ {bene-Mashiah),This new ideal was realised, however incompletely, in medieval 
Christendom, which despite its turbulent condition did as a rule regard 
any war between Christian peoples as a civil war and therefore as a sin 
and a crime. The modern nations, having shattered the papal monarchy 
which was the foundation of this imperfect but genuine unity, have had 
to substitute for the ideal of Catholic Christendom the fiction of the 
European balance of power. On all hands it is recognised, whether 
sincerely or not, that the true objective of international politics must be 
universal peace.

Two equally obvious facts, then, are to be noted: first, that there 
exists a general consciousness of the solidarity of mankind and a desire 
for international unity, for the pax Christiana or, if you will, the pax 
Humana; secondly, that this unity does not exist in fact, and that the first 
of the three problems of society is as far from being solved at the present 
day as it was in the ancient world. The same is true of the other two 
problems.

Universal sohdarity implies that each element of the sum total — each 
nation, society or individual — not only has the right to exist but possesses 
in addition a peculiar and intrinsic worth which forbids its being treated 
as a mere means to the general well-being. The true positive conception

T2T2

of justice can be expressed in the following formula each particular 
being, whether collective or individual, has always a place to itself in the 
universal organism of the race. This positive justice was unknown to the 
ancient State; the State protected itself and maintained the social order 
by exterminating its enemies in war, reducing its labouring class to a 
condition of slavery, and torturing or killing its criminals. Christianity, 
regarding every human being as of infinite worth, was boimd to bring 
about a complete change in the character and action of the State. The 
ills of society remained the same, in their threefold form: international, 
civil, and criminal; the State as before had to fight evil in these three 
spheres, but the specific objective and the methods of the struggle could 
not remain the same. It was no longer a matter of defending a particular 
social group; this negative aim was replaced by a positive task; universal 
solidarity had to be estabhshed in the face of national differences; there 
had to be a reaction against class-antagonism and individual egoism in 
the name of true social justice. The pagan State had to deal with the 
enemy, the slave and the criminal; the enemy, the slave and the criminal 
had no rights. But the Christian State has only to deal with the members 
of Christ, whether suffering, sick or corrupt; it must pacify national 
hatreds, mend the iniquities of society, and correct the vices of individuals. 
In it the foreigner has a right to citizenship, the slave a right to freedom, 
and the criminal a right to moral regeneration. In the city of God there 
is no enemy or foreigner, no slave or proletarian, no criminal or convict. 
The foreigner is simply a brother from a far country; the proletarian is 
an unfortunate brother who needs succour; the criminal is a fallen brother 
who must be helped up.It follows that in the Christian State three things are absolutely ruled 
out: first, wars inspired by national selfishness, or conquests which build 
up one nation upon the ruins of another (for the prime objective of the 
Christian State is universal solidarity or the pax Christiana); next, civil 
and economic slavery which makes one class the passive instrument of 
another; and lastly, vindictive punishment, especially capital punishment, 
inflicted by society upon the guilty individual in order to make him a 
buttress of public safety. By committing a crime the individual shews 
that he regards society simply as a means to, and his neighbours as the 
instrument of, his own selfishness. But this injustice must not be countered 
with the further injustice of belittling the crimmars own human dignity 
and of reducing him to the level of passive instrumentality by a punish- 
ment which leaves no room for his amendment or regeneration.

In the purely human order, the sphere of temporal relations, it was the 
duty of the State to give expression to that absolute solidarity of each

T3

individual with the whole universe which the Church represents in the 
spiritual order by the unity of her priesthood, her faith and her sacra- 
ments. Belief in this unity had to precede its realisation in practice; 
before becoming Christian in fact, the State had to accept the Christian 
faith. This first step was taken at Constantinople; it sums up the whole 
Christian achievement of the Second Empire.The Byzantine transformation of the Roman Empire, begun by Con- 
stantine the Great, continued by Theodosius and finally achieved by 
Justinian, produced no more than a nominally Christian state. Its laws, 
its institutions, and a good deal of its public morality, all retained un- 
mistakable characteristics of the old paganism. Slavery continued to be 
legal; and crimes, especially political misdemeanours, were punished by 
law with an exquisite cruelty. This contrast between professed Chris- 
tianity and practical savagery is aptly personified in the founder of the 
Second Empire; Constantine believed sincerely in the Christian God, 
paid honour to the bishops and discussed the Trinity with them; yet he 
had no scruple about exercising the right of a pagan husband and father, 
and putting Fausta and Crispus to death.

So glaring a contradiction between faith and life, however, could not 
last long without some attempt at reconciliation. Rather than sacrifice 
its actual paganism, the Byzantine Empire attempted in self-justification 
to pervert the purity of the Christian idea. This compromise between 
truth and error lies at the heart of all those heresies (often devised by the 
imperial power and always, except in certain individual instances, favoured 
by it) which distracted Christendom from the fourth century to the 
ninth.The fundamental truth and distinctive idea of Christianity is the perfect 
union of the divine and the human individually achieved in Christ, and 
finding its social realisation in Christian humanity, in which the divine 
is represented by the Church, centred in the supreme pontiff, and the 
human by the State, This intimate relation between Church and State 
implies the primacy of the former, since the divine is previous in time 
and superior in being to the human. Heresy attacked the perfect unity 
of the divine and the human in Jesus Christ precisely in order to under- 
mine the living bond between Church and State, and to confer upon the 
latter an absolute independence. Hence it is clear why the emperors of 
the Second Rome, intent on maintaining within Christendom the ab- 
solutism of the pagan State, were so partial to all the heresies, which were 
but manifold variations on a single theme: —

Jesus Christ is not the true Son of God, consubstantial with the Father; 
God has not become incarnate; nature and mankind remain cut off from

14

divinity^ and are not united to it; and consequcndy the human State may 
lightly keep its independence and supremacy intact. Constantius and 
Valens had indeed good reason to support Arianism.

The humanity of Jesus Christ constitutes a person complete in itself, 
and is united only by a relationship to the Word of God. From which 
follows the practical conclusion that the human State is a complete and 
absolute entity, acknowledging no more than an external relationship to 
religion. This is the essence of the Nestorian heresy, and it becomes clear 
why on its appearance the Emperor Theodosius II took it under his 
protection and did all he could to uphold it.The humanity in Jesus Christ is absorbed by His divinity: here is a 
heresy apparently the exact opposite of the preceding. Nothing of the 
sort; if the premiss is different, the conclusion is exaedy the same. If 
Christ’s human nature exists no longer, the Incarnation is simply a past 
event, nature and humankind remain utterly outside the sphere of the 
Divine. Christ has borne away to heaven all that was His and has aban- 
doned the earth to Caesar. It was an unerring instinct which moved the 
same Theodosius, regardless of the apparent inconsistency, to transfer 
his favour from vanquished Nestorianism to the new-born Monophys- 
itism, and to bring about its formal adoption by a quasi-oecumenical 
council, the * robber-council’ of Ephesus. And even after the authority 
of a great Pope had prevailed over that of a heretical council, the em- 
perors, more or less abetted by the Greek hierarchy, did not cease to 
attempt fresh compromises. The henoticon of the Emperor Zeno (which 
caused the first prolonged rupture between East and West, the schism 
of Acacius) and the unprincipled intrigues of Justinian and Theodora 
were followed by a new imperial heresy; Monothelitism maintained that 
there is no human will or activity in the God-Man, that His human 
nature is purely passive, entirely controlled by the absolute fact of His 
divinity. This was, in effect, to deny human freedom and energy; it was 
that fatalism or quietism which would give human nature no share in the 
working out of its own salvation; for it is God alone Who operates, and 
the whole duty of the Christian consists in passive submission to the 
divine fact which is represented in its spiritual aspect by the unchanging 
Church and in its temporal aspect by the sacred power of the god Caesar. 
Maintained for more than fifty years by the Empire and the whole 
Eastern hierarchy with the exception of a few moiAs who had to seek 
refuge at Rome, the Monothelite heresy was condemned at Constanti- 
nople in 680, only to make room before long for a new imperial com- 
promise between Christian truth and the spirit of Antichrist.The intimate union of the Creator and the creature is not confined in

15

Christian belief to the rational being of Man; it includes also his corporeal 
bring and, through the latter, the material nature of the whole universe. 
The compromise of the heretics tried in vain to abstract in principle from 
the divihe-human unity, first, the very substance of Man’s being, at one 
time by declaring it absolutely separate from the Divinity (in Nes- 
torianism), at another by making it vanish completely into the latter 
(in Monophysitism) ; secondly, it tried to abstract human will and 
activity, the rational being of Man, by absorbing it into the divine opera- 
tion (in Monothelitism) ; there only remained, thirdly, the corporeal 
nature, the external being of Man and, through him, of the whole of 
Nature. The denial to the material and sensible world of all possibiHty 
of redemption, sanctification and union with God; that is the idea at the 
root of the Iconoclastic heresy.The resurrection of Jesus Christ in the flesh has proved that bodily 
existence is not excluded from the union of the human and the Divine, 
and that external and sensible objectivity can and must become the real 
instrument and visible image of the divine power. Hence the cult of holy 
images and relics, hence the legitimate belief m material miracles wrought 
by these sacred objects. Thus in declaring war on the images the Byzan- 
tine Emperors were not attacking a reUgious custom or a mere detail of 
worship so much as a necessary and infinitely important appHcation of 
Christian truth itself. To claim that divinity cannot be sensibly expressed 
or externally manifested, or that the divine power cannot employ visible 
and symbolic means of action, is to rob the divine incarnation of all its 
reality. It was more than a compromise; it was the suppression of Chris- 
tianity. Just as in the previous heresies under the semblance of a purely 
theological dispute there lay hidden a grave social and political issue, so 
the Iconoclastic movement under the guise of a ritual reformation 
threatened to shatter the social organism of Christendom. The material 
realisation of the Divine, signified in the sphere of religious worship by 
holy images and relics, is represented in the social sphere by an institution. 
There is in the Christian Church a materially fixed point, an external 
and visible centre of action, an image and an instrument of the divine 
power. The apostolic see of Rome, that miraculous ikon of universal 
Christianity, was directly involved in the Iconoclastic struggle, since all 
the heresies were in the last resort denials of the reality of that divine 
incarnation, the permanence of which in the social and poUtical order 
was represented by Rome. It is indeed historically evident that all the 
heresies actively supported or passively accepted by the majority of the 
Greek clergy encountered insuperable opposition from the Roman 
Church and finally came to grief on this Rock of the Gospel. This isi6

especially true of the Iconoclastic heresy; for in denying all external 
manifestation of the divine in the world it was making a direct attack 
on the raison d'itre of the Chair of Peter as the real objective centre of 
the visible Church.

The pseudo-Christian Empire of Byzantium was bound to engage in 
decisive combat with the orthodox Papacy; for the latter was not only 
the infallible guardian of Christian truth but also the first realisation of 
that truth in the collective life of the human race. To read the moving 
letters of Pope Gregory II to the barbarous Isaurian Emperor is to realise 
that the very existence of Christianity was at stake. The outcome of the 
struggle could not be in doubt; the last of the imperial heresies went the 
way of its predecessors and with it the circle of theoretic or dogmatic 
compromises which Constantine’s successors had attempted between 
Christian truth, and the principle of paganism was finally closed. The era 
of imperial heresies was followed by the emergence of Byzantine ‘ortho- 
doxy’. To understand this fresh phase of the anti-Christian spirit we 
must revert to its origins in the preceding period.Throughout the history of the great Eastern heresies, extending over 
five centuries from the time of Arius to that of the last Iconoclasts, we 
constantly find in the Empire and Church of the East three main parties 
whose alternating victories and defeats form the framework of this 
curious evolution. We see in the first place the champions of formal 
heresy, regularly instigated and supported by the imperial court. From 
the religious point of view, they represented the reaction of Eastern 
paganism to Christian truth; pohtically, they were the declared enemies 
of that independent ecclesiastical government founded by Jesus Christ 
and represented by the apostolic see of Rome. They began by conceding 
to Caesar, whose proteges they were, unbounded authority not only in 
the government of the Church but even in matters of doctrine^' anti when 
Caesar, impelled by the orthodox majority of his subjects ^d by the 
fear of playing into the hands of the Pope, ended by betraying his own 
creatures, the leaders of the heretical party sought more solid support 
elsewhere by exploiting the separatist and semi-pagan tendencies of the 
various nations which were free, or were aiming at freedom, from the 
Roman yoke. Thus Arianism, the religion of the Empire under Con- 
stantius and Valens but abandoned by their successors, claimed the 
allegiance of the Goths and Lombards for centuries; Nestorianism, be- 
trayed by its champion Theodosius II, was for a time welcomed by the 
Eastern Syrians; and Monophysitism, thrust out from Byzantium in 
spite of aU the efforts of the Emperors, finally became the national re- 
ligion of Egypt, Abyssinia and Armenia.

B 17B 17

i\x me opposite extreme to this heretical party, trebly an ti-Christi^^ 
in its religious doctrine, its secularism, and its nationalism we find the 
absolutely orthodox Catholic party engaged in defending the purity of 
the Christian idea against all the pagan compromises and in championing 
free and world-wide ecclesiastical government against the onslaughts o 
Caesaropapism and the aims of national separatism. This party could not 
count on the favour of earthly powers; of the higher clergy it induded 
only individuals here and there. But it relied on the greatest religious 
force of those times, the monks, and also on the simple faith of the mass 
of devout believers, at least in the central parts of the Byzantine Empire. 
Moreover, these orthodox Catholics found and recognised in the central 
Chair of St. Peter the mighty palladium of religious truth and freedom. 
To indicate the moral weight and ecclesiastical importance of this party, 
it is enough to say that it was the party of St. Athanasius the Great, of 
St. John Chrysostom, of St. Flavian, of St. Maximus the Confessor and 
of St. Theodore of the Studium.But it was neither the dedared heretics nor the genuinely orthodox 
who controlled for many centuries the destinies of the Christian East. 
The decisive part in the story was played by a third party which, although 
it occupied an intermediate position between the other two, was dis- 
tinguished from them by more than mere verbal subtleties; it had a clearly 
defined aim and pursued a well-considered policy . The great majority o 
the higher Greek clergy belonged to this party, which we may call semi- 
orthodox or rather ‘orthodox-anticatholic . These priests held firmly to 
orthodox dogma, either from theoretical conviction or from force of 
habit or from devotion to the common tradition. They had nothing in 
principle against the unity of the universal Church, provided only that 
the centre of that unity was situated in their midst; and since in point of 
fact this centre was situated elsewhere, they preferred to be Greeks rather 
than Christians and accepted a divided Church rather than the Church 
unified by a power which was in their eyes foreign and hostile to their 
nationality. As Christians, they could not be Caesaropapists in principle, 
but as patriotic Greeks first and foremost, they preferred the Byzantine

Caesaropapism to the Roman Papacy.

Unluckily for them the Greek autocrats distinguished themselves for 
the most part as the champions or cveii as the authors of heresy; and 
what they found still more intolerable was that the rare occasions when 
the Emperors took orthodoxy under their protection were exa^y the 
occasions when the Empire and the Papacy were in accord with one 
another. To disturb this accord and to attach the Emperors to orthodoxy 
while weaning them firom Catholicism was the chief aim of the Greek

i8

hierarchy. In pursuit of this aim they were ready, despite their sincere 
orthodoxy, to make sacrifices even on questions of dogma.i8

hierarchy. In pursuit of this aim they were ready, despite their sincere 
orthodoxy, to make sacrifices even on questions of dogma.

Formal and explicit heresy was regarded with horror by these pious 
gentlemen, but when it pleased the divine Caesar to offer them his own 
version of orthodox dogma, they did not scrutinise it too closely. They 
preferred to receive a revised or incomplete formula at the hands of a 
Greek Emperor rather than accept the truth pure and intact from the 
mouth of a Pope; they were glad to see Zeno’s henoticon replace the dog- 
matic epistle of St. Leo the Great. In the six or seven successive episodes 
in the history of the Eastern heresies the policy of the pseudo-orthodox 
party was always the same. When heresy in its first flush of victory was 
being thrust upon them with violence, these prudent people, having a 
pronounced distaste for martyrdom, gave way, though unwillingly. 
Thanks to their passive support, the heretics were able to convene general 
assemblies as large as, or even larger than, the true oecumenical councils. 
But when the blood of confessors, the fidelity of the mass of the people, 
and the threatening authority of the Roman pontiff had compelled the 
imperial power to forsake the cause of error, these unwilling heretics 
returned en masse to orthodoxy and, like the labourers hired at the eleventh 
hour, received their full pay. The heroic confessors seldom survived the 
persecutions, and it was the worldly-wise who enjoyed the victory of 
Truth. They formed the majority in the orthodox councils, as they had 
previously in the heretical conventions; and though they could not refuse 
concurrence to the Pope’s representatives when he sent them a precise 
and definite formulation of orthodox dogma, though at the first they 
even expressed their concurrence with more or less sincere enthusiasm, 
the evident triumph of the Papacy soon brought them back to their pre- 
vailing sentiment of jealous hatred toward the apostolic see, and they 
proceeded to use all the efforts of a determined will and all the resources 
of an astute intelligence to counterbalance the success of the Papacy, to 
rob it of its rightful influence and to set up in opposition to it an unreal 
and usurped authority. The Pope had been useful in dealing with heresy; 
but once heresy was done with, what need was there of the Pope? Could 
not the patriarch of the old Rome be replaced by the patriarch of the 
new? Thus each triumph of orthodoxy, which was always the triumph 
of the Papacy, was invariably followed at Byzantium by an anti-Catholic 
reaction into which the sincere but short-sighted champions of orthodoxy 
were also drawn. This separatist reaction would last until a new heresy, 
more or less favoured by the imperial power, supervened to disturb 
orthodox consciences and remind them of the advantage of a genuine 
ecclesiastical authority.1919

When official Arianism, having reigned supreme in the Eastern Empire 
for half a century, failed in the attempt to invade the Western Church, 
and a Spaniard came to Constantinople with the blessing of the Roman 
and Milanese pontiffs to restore orthodoxy there, the decisive part 
played by the Papacy in the great struggle and in the final triumph of the 
true doctrine of the Trinity did not fail to arouse the jealousy of those 
prudent members of the Greek hierarchy who, having been semi-Arians 
under Constantius and Valens, had now become completely orthodox 
under Theodosius. Gathered in the year 380 in an assembly which a 
great saint of the period, Gregory the Theologian, has described in familiar 
words, they constituted themselves an oecumenical council without more 
ado, as though the whole of Western Christendom did not exist; they 
wantonly replaced the Nicene profession of faith, the common standard 
of universal orthodoxy in East and West, with a new formula of purely 
Eastern origin, and they crowned their uncanonical proceedings by con- 
ferring on the bishop of Constantinople, a mere suffragan of the arch- 
bishop of Heraclea, the dignity of first Patriarch of the Eastern Church, 
in despite of the apostolic sees of Alexandria and Antioch which the great 
Nicene council had confirmed in their rights. If the sovereign pontiffs 
had been ordinarily as ambitious as some like to represent them, if, indeed, 
the defence of their lawful rights had been dearer to their hearts than the 
preservation of universal peace, nothing could have prevented the separa- 
tion of the two Churches in the year 3 8 1 . But the generosity and Christian 
spirit of Pope Damasus succeeded in averting that disaster. He recognised 
that the creed of Constantinople was as orthodox as that of Nicaca and 
that the additional article on the Holy Spirit was justified in view of 
the new heresy of the Pneumatomachi, who held the Third Person of 
the Trinity to be a creature begotten by the Son and thus denied the 
procession of the Spirit from the Father. The Pope therefore approved 
the dogmatic act of the Greek council in his own name and in that of 
the whole Latin Church and thereby gave it the authority of a true oecu- 
menical council; the usurpation of the patriarchate by the see of Con- 
stantinople was ignored.But the Papacy played an even greater part in the history of the chief 
Christological heresies during the fifth century than in the Arian struggles 
of the fourth. Most of the Greek bishops, forming our third party, were 
shamefully compromised by their passive acquiescence in the robber- 
council of Ephesus at which the great body of orthodox prelates were 
obliged not only to see St. Flavian done to death before their eyes, but 
also to sign an heretical profession of faith. In contrast to this criminal 
weakness the Papacy appeared in all its moral power and majesty in the

2020

person of St. Leo the Great. At Chalcedon the great number of Greek 
bishops who had taken part in Dioscorus* robber-council were obliged 
to beg forgiveness of the legates of Pope Leo, who was hailed as the 
divinely inspired head of the Universal Church. Such homage to justice 
and truth was too much for the moral mediocrity of these corrupt 
prelates. The anti-Catholic reaction followed immediately at the very 
same council. After enthusiastically applauding the Pope’s dogmatic 
epistle as ‘the very words of the blessed apostle Peter’, the Byzantine 
bishops attempted to substitute for this apostolic utterance an ambiguous 
formula which left the door open to heresy.^ Foiled in this attempt, they 
chose a different ground for their anti-Catholic activities, and in an 
irregular session of the council they asserted the imperial patriarch’s 
primacy of jurisdiction over the whole East, and his equality with the 
Pope. This act, aimed against the sovereign pontiff, had nevertheless to 
be humbly submitted by the Greeks for the ratification of the Pope him- 
self, who quashed it completely. Thus, in spite of all, the council of 
Chalcedon has its place in history as an outstandmg triumph for the 
Papacy. But the orthodox anti-Catholics could not rest content with 
such an outcome, and this time the reaction was decisive and persistent. 
Pure orthodoxy being too Roman for them, they began to flirt with 
heresy. The patriarch Acacius favoured the Emperor Zeno’s henoticon, 
which was a compromise with Monophysitism; he was excommunicated 
by the Pope and has the unhappy distinction of giving his name to the 
first formal schism between East and West. But the main circumstances 
of this anti-Cathohe reaction prevented its development into a definite 
cleavage. In the schism of Acacius the semi-orthodox party were dis- 
credited by the concessions they had to make to undisguised heresy, con- 
cessions which not only did violence to the rehgious convictions of the 
faithful but did nothing to meet the demands of the heretics. The latter, 
emboldened by the henoticon which they had rejected with contempt, 
proceeded to set the whole of Egypt ablaze and threatened to separate it 
from the Empire. On the other side the orthodox monks, exasperated by 
the treachery of the prelates, were stirring up discord in Syria and Asia 
Minor; and even in Constantinople itself the monk who pinned the bull 
of excommunication issued by the Pope on to the cope of the schismatic 
patriarch was applauded by the crowd.To prolong such a state of affairs was not good pohey; and urged by 
the imperial government, the successors of Acacius shewed themselves

^ This melancholy episode is somewhat glozcd over in the acts of the council, 
but it stands out quite clearly in the account of the Church historian Evagrius.

21

more and more conciliatory. At length under the Emperor Justin I peace 
was concluded between the Churches to the advantage and honour of 
the Papacy. The Eastern bishops, in order to prove their orthodoxy and 
gain admission to the communion of the Roman Church, were obliged 
to accept and sigh without reservation the dogmatic formula of Pope 
Hormisdas, that is, to recognise implicitly the supreme doctrinal authority 
of the apostolic see.^ But the submission of the Greek prelates was not 
sincere; they were still meditating an entente with the Monophysites 
against the see of Peter. Despite their underhand intrigues, however, the 
power of the Papacy was demonstrated afresh — as the liturgical books 
of the Greco-Russian Church record — when Pope St. Agapitus, who 
had come to Constantinople on a political mission, deposed on his own 
personal authority a patriarch suspected of Monophysitism, set up an 
orthodox patriarch in his stead and compelled all the Greek bishops to 
sign anew the formula of Hormisdas.Mean while Justinian’s forces were victorious in Africa and Italy; Rome 
was recovered from the Ostrogoths and the Pope was once again de 
facto the subject of the Byzantine Emperor. In these circumstances and 
under the influence of his wife’s Monophysitc tendencies Justinian changed 
his attitude to the head of the Church. The anti-Catholic party seized the 
reins and Pope Vigilius, a prisoner at Constantinople, was fated to bear 
the brunt of a triumphant reaction. The supreme Teacher of the Church 
maintained his own orthodoxy but as sovereign Head of the government 
of the Church he found himself deeply humiliated; and soon afterwards 
a bishop of Constantinople thought himself powerful enough to usurp 
the tide of CEcumenical Patriarch.

This bishop, ordiodox in his doctrine and an exemplary ascetic in his 
private life, fulfilled the ideal of the great anti-Catholic party. But a new 
imperial whim was sufficient to dispel the illusion of this precarious 
orthodoxy. The Emperor Heraclius thought he saw in Monothelitism 
the means of reuniting the orthodox with the moderate Monophysites 
and thus restoring peace to the Empire, consolidating the Greek religion 
and freeing it once for all from the influence of Rome. The higher clergy 
throughout the East welcomed this idea unreservedly. The patriarchal 
sees were occupied intermittently by a series of more or less fanatical 
heretics, and Monothelitism became for half a century the oflicial religion 
of the whole Greek Empire as Semi-Arianism had been in the time of 
Constantins. A few monks, the heroic champions of orthodoxy, headed

^ John, the patriarch of Constantinople, wrote to the Pope: ‘Prima salus est quia 
in sede apostolica inviolabilis semper catholica custoditur religio* (Labbe, ConciL 
viii. 451, 2).

22

by St Maximus the Confessor, took refuge at Rome; and once again 
the apostle Peter strengthened his brethren.22

by St Maximus the Confessor, took refuge at Rome; and once again 
the apostle Peter strengthened his brethren.

A long succession of Popes from Severinus to St. Agatho met the 
heresies of the Emperors with an unflinching opposition and one of 
them, St. Martin, was dragged by soldiers from the altar, was haled' 
like a criminal from Rome to Constantinople and from Constantinople 
to the Crimea, and finally gave his life for the orthodox faith. At length 
after fifty years* struggle religious truth and moral power won the day. 
The mighty Empire and its worldly clergy surrendered once again to a 
poor, defenceless pontiff.At the council of Constantinople, the sixth oecumenical council, the 
apostolic see of Rome was honoured as an authority that had remained 
untainted by error; and the Greek bishops received Pope Agatho’s pro- 
nouncement with a repetition of the acclamations with which the fathers 
of Chalcedon had formerly hailed St. Leo the Great. But once again it 
was not long before this momentary enthusiasm was followed by a 
powerful reaction. While the true heroes of orthodoxy, such as St. 
Maximus the Confessor, could not find words strong enough to extol 
the pre-eminence and achievements of the Roman see, the orthodox 
anti-Cathohes, though profiting by its achievements, were too jealous of 
its pre-eminence to give it recognition. In their humUiation and irritation 
at the long list of heretics and heresiarchs who had defiled the see of 
Constantinople and whom the council was bound to anathematise, the 
Greek bishops revenged themselves by inventing the heresy of Pope 
Honorius and foisting it upon the good-natured Roman legates. Not 
content with this, they re-assembled some years after the council in the 
imperial palace at Constantinople {in TruUo); for this convention they 
claimed oecumenical authority on various absurd pretexts either by 
representing it, contrary to the evidence, as the continuation of the sixth 
council or alternatively — such is the usual dupUcity of falsehood — by 
reckoning it as the conclusion of the fifth and sixth councils under the 
outlandish title of ‘Quinisext*. The object of these absurd deceptions 
came out clearly in certain canons promulgated by the fathers of the 
Trullan council, which condemned various disciplinary and ritual usages 
of the Roman Church. There ready made were the grounds for schism; 
and if schism did not follow then and there, two centuries before Photius, 
we have only to thank the Iconoclast Emperor, Leo the Isaurian, who at 
that moment came on the scene to upset the well-laid plans of the ortho- 
dox anti-Catholics.Here was the most violent, as it was the last, of the imperial heresies; 
and with its emergence all the indirect and disguised denials of the

23

Christian idea were exhausted. After the condemnation of the Iconoclasts, 
the fundamental dogma of Christian orthodoxy — the perfect union of 
the Creator and the creature — ^was defined in all its aspects and became 
an accepted fact. But the seventh oecumenical council which achieved 
this task in 787 had been assembled under the auspices of Pope Adrian I 
and had taken a dogmatic epistle of that pontiff as guide to its decisions. 
It was again a triumph for the Papacy; it could not then be ‘the triumph 
of Orthodoxy*; that was postponed till half a century later when, after 
the comparatively feeble Iconoclastic reaction brought about by the 
Armenian dynasty, the orthodox anti-Catholic party finally succeeded 
in 842 in crushing the last remnants of the imperial heresy without the 
help of the Pope, and in includmg it with all the others under a solemn 
anathema.^ Indeed Byzantine orthodoxy might well triumph in 842; 
the great Photius, its light and glory, was already making his appearance 
at the court of the devout Theodora, the Empress who caused the massacre 
of a hundred thousand Paulician heretics; before long he would be 
mounting the throne of the cecumemcal patriarchs.The schism initiated by Photius in 867 and consummated by Michael 
Cerularius in 1054 was closely connected with the ‘Triumph of Ortho- 
doxy’ and was the complete realisation of the ideal which the orthodox 
anti-Catholic party had dreamed of since the fourth century. Dogmatic 
truth having been once defined and all the heresies finally condemned, 
they had no further use for the Pope; nothing remained but to crown 
the work by a formal separation from Rome. Furthermore it was this 
solution which best suited the Byzantine Emperors; for they had come to 
see that it was not worth while rousing the religious passions of their 
subjects by doctrinal compromise between Christianity and paganism and 
thus throwing them into the arms of the Papacy, when a strict theoretical 
orthodoxy could very well be reconciled with a political and social order 
which was completely pagan. It is a significant fact, and one that has not 
been sufficiently observed, that from the year 842 not a single imperial 
heretic or heresiarch reigned at Constantinople, and the harmony between 
the Greek Church and State was not once seriously disturbed. The two 
powers had come to terms and had made their peace, bound to one 
another by a common idea: the denial of Christianity as a social force 
and as the motive principle of liistorical progress. The Emperors per- 
manently embraced ‘Orthodoxy’ as an abstract dogma, while the ortho- 
dox prelates bestowed their benediction in saecula saeculorum on the

^ The memory of this event is perpetuated by a feast bearing the title ‘The 
Triumph of Ordiodoxy*, on which the anathema of the year 842 is repeated.

' 24

paganism of Byzantine public life. And since ‘sine sanguine nullum 
pactum*, a magnificent hecatomb of one hundred thousand Paulidans 
sealed the alliance of the Second Rome with the ‘Second Church*.paganism of Byzantine public life. And since ‘sine sanguine nullum 
pactum*, a magnificent hecatomb of one hundred thousand Paulidans 
sealed the alliance of the Second Rome with the ‘Second Church*.

This so-called ‘orthodoxy* of the Byzantines was in fact nothing but 
ingrown heresy. The true central dogma of Christianity is the intimate 
and complete union of the Divine and the human without confusion or 
division. The logical consequence of this truth — to confine ourselves to 
the sphere of practical human existence — is the regeneration of social and 
political life by the spirit of the Gospel, in other words the Christianisation 
of society and the State. Instead of this synthetic and organic union of 
the Divine and the human, the two elements were in turn confused or 
divided, or one of them was absorbed or suppressed by the other. To 
begin with, the Divine and the human were confused in the sacred majesty 
of the Emperor. Just as in the confused thought of the Arians Christ was 
a hybrid being, more than man and less than God, so Caesaropapisni, 
which was simply political Arianism, confused the temporal and spiritual 
powers without uniting them, and made the autocrat something more 
than the head of the State, without succeeding in making him a true 
head of the Church. Religious society was separated from secular society, 
the former being relegated to the monasteries, while the forum was 
abandoned to pagan laws and passions. The dualism of Nestorius, con- 
demned in theology, became the very foundation of Byzantine Ufc. Or 
again, the religious ideal was reduced to bare contemplation, that is, to 
the absorption of the human spirit in the Godhead, an obviously Mono- 
physite ideal. The moral life, on the other hand, was robbed of its practical 
force by the inculcation of the supreme ideal of passive obedience and 
blind submission to power; that is to say, of an ideal of quietism which 
was in reality the denial of human will and energy, the heresy of the 
Monothelites. Finally, an exaggerated asceticism attempted to suppress 
the bodily nature of man and to shatter the living image of the divine 
incarnation — a logical though unconscious application of the Iconoclastic 
heresy.This profound contradiction between professed orthodoxy and prac- 
tical heresy was the Achilles* heel of the Byzantine Empire. There lay 
the real cause of its downfall. Indeed it deserved to fall and still more it 
deserved to fall before Islam, For Islam is simply sincere and logical 
Byzantinism, free from all its inner contradiction. It is the frank and full 
reaction of the spirit of the East against Christianity; it is a system in 
which dogma is closely related to the conditions of life and in which 
the belief of the individual is in perfect agreement with the soaal and 
political order.

25W e have seen that the anti-Christian movement which found expression 
in the imperial heresies had in the seventh and eighth centuries issued in 
two doctrines, of which one, that of the Monothclites, was an indirect 
denial of human freedom, and the other, that of the Iconoclasts, was an 
implied rejection of the divine phenomenality. The direct and explicit 
assertion of these two errors was of the essence of the Moslem religion. Islam sees in Man a finite form without freedom, and in God an infinite 
freedom without form. God and Man being thus fixed at the two opposite 
poles of existence, there can be no filial relationship between them; the 
notion of the Divine coming down and taking form, or of the human 
ascending to a spiritual existence is excluded; and religion is reduced to a 
mere external relation between the all-powerful Creator and the creature 
which is deprived of all freedom and owes its master nothing but a bare 
act of * blind surrender’ (for this is what the Arabic word islam signifies). This act of surrender, expressed in a short formula of prayer to be in- 
variably repeated day by day at fixed hours, sums up the whole religious 
background of the Eastern mind, which spoke its last word by the 
mouth of Mohammed. The simplicity of this idea of religion is matched 
by a no less simple conception of the social and political problem: Man 
and the human race have no real progress to make; there is no moral 
regeneration for the individual and therefore a fortiori none for society; 
everything is brought down to the level of a purely natural existence; the 
ideal is reduced to the point at which its realisation presents no difficulties. Moslem society could have no other aim but the expansion of its material 
power and the enjoyment of the good things of the earth.25

The simplicity of this idea of religion is matched 
by a no less simple conception of the social and political problem: Man 
and the human race have no real progress to make; there is no moral 
regeneration for the individual and therefore a fortiori none for society; 
everything is brought down to the level of a purely natural existence; the 
ideal is reduced to the point at which its realisation presents no difficulties. Moslem society could have no other aim but the expansion of its material 
power and the enjoyment of the good things of the earth. The spread of 
Islam by force of arms, and the government of the faithful with absolute 
authority, and according to the rules of an elementary justice laid down 
in the Koran — such is the whole task of the Moslem state, a task which 
it would be difficult not to accomplish with success. Despite the tendency 
to verbal falsehood innate in all Orientals as individuals, the complete 
correspondence between its beliefs and its institutions gives to the whole 
of Mohammedan society a distinctive note of truth and sincerity which 
the Christian world has never been able to achieve. Christendom as a 
whole is certainly set upon the path of progress and transformation; and 
the very lofiiness of its ideal forbids us to judge it finally by any one of 
its various phases, past or present. But Byzantinism, which was hostile 
in principle to Christian progress and which aimed at reducing the whole 
of religion to a fact of past history, a dogmatic formula, and a Hturgical 
ceremonial — this anti-Christianity concealed beneath the mask of ortho- 
doxy was bound to collapse in moral impotence before the open and 
sincere anti-Christianity of Islam. It is interesting to observe that the new

2626

religion, with its dogma of fatalism, made its appearance at the precise 
moment when the Emperor Heraclius was invenung the Monothelite 
heresy, which was the disguised denial of human freedom and energy. 
It was hoped by this device to strengthen the official religion and to 
restore Egypt and Asia to the unity of the Empire. But Egypt and Asia 
preferred the Arab declaration of faith to the political expedient of Byzan- 
tium. Nothing would be more astonishing than the ease and swiftness 
of the Moslem conquest were no account taken of the prolonged anti- 
Christian policy of the Second Empire, Five years were enough to reduce 
three great patriarchates of the Eastern Church to the condition of his- 
torical relics. It was not a matter of conversion but simply of tearing off 
the mask.

History has passed judgment upon the Second Empire and has con- 
demned it. Not only did it fail in its appointed task of founding the 
Christian State, but it strove to make abortive the historic work of Jesus. 
Christ. Having attempted in vain to pervert orthodox dogma, it reduced 
it to a dead letter; it sought to undermine the edifice of the pax Christiana 
by attacking the central government of the Universal Church; and in 
public life it supplanted the law of the Gospel by the traditional policy 
of the pagan State. The Byzantines believed that true Chnstianity meant 
no more than guarding the dogmas and sacred rites of orthodoxy without 
troubling to Christianise social and political life; they thought it lawful 
and laudable to confine Christianity to the temple while they abandoned 
the market-place to the principles of paganism. They had no reason to 
complain of the result; they were given their wish. Their dogma and tlreir 
ritual were left to them; it was only the social and political power that 
fell into the hands of the Moslems, the rightful heirs of paganism.The vocation to found the Christian State which the Greek Empire 
thus refused was transferred to the Romano-German world of the Franks 
and Allemanni. It was transferred to them by the only Christian power 
that had the right and duty to do so, by the power of St. Peter, the 
holder of the keys of the Kingdom. Observe the coincidence of dates. 
The foundation-stone of the future Empire of the West was laid by the 
baptism and anointing of the Frankish king Clovis in 496, just when, 
after several fruitless attempts at agreement, it seemed that the schism 
of Acacius would mean the final severance of the whole of Eastern 
Christendom from the CathoHc Church. The coincidence of the year 
754 is even more remarkable; at the very moment when, with every 
appearance of oecumenical authority, a great Iconoclastic council at Con- 
stantinople was approving the last and most violent of the imperial 
heresies, directed especially against the Roman Church, Pope Stephen

2727

was anointing the father of Charlemagne at Reims — or was it at St. 
Denis? Who will say? — ^with these words: ‘Quia ideo vos Dominus per 
humditatem meam mediante S. Petro unxit in reges ut per vos sua sancta 
exaltatur Ecclesia et princeps apostolorum suam recipiat justitiam\ The 
Carolingian dynasty was bound to the Papacy by a direct filial relation- 
ship. The Pope, says an old chronicle, ‘per auctoritatem apostolicam jussit 
Pippiiium regem fieri*. This act together with its inevitable consequences, 
the conquest of Italy by the Franks, the donation of Pepin, and the crown- 
ing of Charlemagne as Roman Emperor, was the real and immediate 
cause of the separation of the Churches. By transferring the imperial 
sceptre to a Western barbarian the Pope became doubly a foreigner and 
a foe to the Greeks. All that was needed to rob him of any support at 
Constantinople was that the Emperors should once for all renounce their 
heretical tendencies, and the union of all the ‘Orthodox’ under the standard 
of anti-Catholicism would be complete. The event was not long delayed; 
the ‘Triumph of Orthodoxy* and the schism of Photius were the answer 
of B^'Yantium to the crowning of CharlemagneThis was no matter of a dispute in theology or of a rivalry between 
prelates. It was simply the refusal of the old Empire of Constantine to 
give place to the new Western power born of the close alliance of the 
Papacy with the Frankish kingdom; everything else was secondary or 
by way of excuse. This view of the matter is confirmed by the fact that 
after Photius* death the schism took no effect for a century and a half— 
exactly the period when Western Christendom, newly organised, seemed 
on the verge of collapse, when the Papacy was subservient to a degenerate 
oligarchy and had lost its moral and religious prestige, and when the 
Carolingian dynasty was consumed with internal strife. But no sooner 
was the imperial power restored under the energetic government of 
the German kings, no sooner was the see of St. Peter again occupied 
by men of apostolic character, than the anti-Catholic movement at 
Constantinople broke forth with violence and the schism was consum- 
mated.

The Franco-German Empire made sincere attempts to fulfil the task 
imposed upon it by its dignity as a Christian state. Notwithstanding its 
vices and its disorders, the new society of the W est possessed one enormous 
advantage over the Byzantine Empire, namely the consciousness of its 
own evils and a profound desire to be rid of them; witness the innumer- 
able councils summoned by popes, emperors and kings to effect moral 
reforms in the Church and to bring the condition of society nearer to 
the Christian ideal. These reforms were, indeed, never fully successful, 
but the point is that they did occupy men’s minds and that there was a

28

refusal to accept iii principle a contradiction between truth and life after 
the manner of the Byzantine world, which had never been concerned to 
harmonise its social conditions with its faith and had never undertaken 
any moral reformation; its councils had only been interested in dogmatic 
formulae and in the claims of its hierarchy.But in giving Charlemagne and Otto the Great, St. Henry and St. 
Louis their due, we are bound to confess that, taken all m all, the medieval 
monarchy (whether under the fictitious form of the Roman Empire or 
under the real form of a national dynasty) did not fulfil its mission as a 
Christian State, nor succeed in definitely modelling society on the Christian 
ideal. Those great sovereigns themselves were far from grasping the 
social and political problem of Christianity in all its bearings; and even 
their ideal, for all its imperfection, proved too exalted for their successors. 
It was the policy of the Emperor Henry IV and of King Philip the Fair, 
not that of their saintly predecessors, which formed the general rule; it 
was their policy that paved the way for the reformation of Luther and in 
time bore fruit in the French Revolution. The German Empire, brought 
to the birth by the Roman See, broke the bonds of its parentage and set 
itself up as the rival of the Papacy. Thus was taken the first and most 
momentous step on the path of revolution. Such rivalry between father 
and son could not form the organic basis of a social order. The German 
Empire, by exhausting its strength in an anti-Christian struggle lasting 
through two centuries and by attacking the very basis of Catholic unity, 
forfeited not only its supremacy among the nations but its very right to 
that supremacy. Disregarding this fictitious Roman Empire, the states of 
Europe proceeded to constitute themselves complete and absolutely in- 
dependent units; and once again it fell to the Papacy, while warding off 
the attacks of the German Empire, to assume the great task which that 
Empire was unworthy and unable to discharge.It is not our present concern to praise or to justify the historical achieve- 
ment of a Hildebrand or an Innocent III. Among historians of the present 
generation they have received not only vindication but encomium from 
such distinguished Protestant writers as Voigt, Hurter and Neander. In 
what the great medieval popes achieved (beyond the purely spiritual 
sphere) for the culture of the European peoples, the peace of nations and 
the good order of society, there is all the greater merit inasmuch as in 
this work they were fulfilling a function which did not properly belong 
to them. Zoology and medicine tell us of cases in which a young and 
vigorous organism, accidentally injured in one of its essential organs, 
transfers its function for the time being to another organ in good con- 
dition, which is known as a ‘vicarious organ’ [organe vicariant, vikarirendes

29

Organ). The imperial papacy or papal empire of Innocent III and Innocent 
IV was such a ‘vicarious organ’. But this could not continue indefinitely. 
It needed men of exceptional quality to deal with the details of a vast 
and complicated political administration while keeping them all the 
while subordinate to the universal and spiritual goal. In succession to 
popes who had raised politics to the height of moral activity, there in- 
evitably followed many more who degraded religion to the level of 
material interests. If Protestant historians have extolled the high achieve- 
ments of the papal empire, its rapid decay is recorded by the greatest of 
Catholic writers, who in immortal lines calls upon a second Charlemagne 
to put an end to the fatal confusion of the two powers in the Roman 
Church (Dante, Inferno, xix; Purgatorio, vi, xvi).Indeed, if we consider the political and social condition of Europe 
towards the close of the Middle Ages we must admit that the Papacy, 
robbed of its secular organ and obliged to combine the two functions, 
was unable to give to the society which it had governed a genuinely 
Christian organisation. International unity — the pax Christiana — was non- 
existent. The nations were given up to fratricidal wars, and only 
by a supernatural intervention was the national existence of France 
saved.

The social constitution of Europe, based on the relationship between 
victors and vanquished, always retained this anti-Christian character of 
inequality and oppression. The predominance in public life of a pride of 
blood which created an insurmountable barrier between noble and serf, 
and of a spirit of violence which made every country the scene of civil 
war and plunder, in addition to a penal code so barbarous as to seem 
diabolically inspired — where in all this can the features of a truly Christian 
society be recognised?

For lack of an imperial power genuinely Christian and Catholic, the 
Church has not succeeded in establishing social and political justice in 
Europe. The nations and states of modem times, freed since the Refor- 
mation from ecclesiastical surveillance, have attempted to improve upon 
the work of the Church. The results of the experiment are plain to see. 
The idea of Christendom as a real though admittedly inadequate unity 
embracing all the nations of Europe has vanished; the philosophy of the 
revolutionaries has made praiseworthy attempts to substitute for this 
unity the unity of the human race — ^with what success is well known. 
A universal militarism transforming whole nations into hostile armies 
and itself inspired by a national hatred such as the Middle Ages never 
knew; a deep and irreconcilable social conflict; a class struggle which 
threatens to whelm everything in fire and blood; and a continuous lessen-

3030

ing of moral power in individuals, witnessed to by the constant increase 
in mental collapse, suicide and crime^ — such is the sum total of the pro- 
gress which secularised Europe has made in the last three or four cen- 
turies.^

The two great historic experiments, that of the Middle Ages and that 
of modem times, seem to demonstrate conclusively that neither the 
Church lacking the assistance of a secular power which is distinct from 
but responsible to her, nor the secular State relying upon its own re- 
sources, can succeed in establishing Christian justice and peace on the 
earth. The close alliance and organic union of the two powers without 
confusion and without division is the indispensable condition of true social 
progress. It remains to enquire whether there is in the Christian world 
a power capable of taking up the work of Constantine and Charlemagne 
with better hope of success.

The profoundly religious and monarchic instinct of the Russian people, 
certain prophetic events in its past history, the enormous and compact 
bulk of its Empire, the great latent strength of the national spirit in con- 
trast to the poverty and emptiness of its actual existence — all this seems 
to indicate that it is the historic destiny of Russia to provide the Universal 
Church with the poUtical power which it requires for the salvation and 
regeneration of Europe and of the world.

Great tasks cannot be accomplished with small means. It is not a matter 
of religious compromise between two hierarchies, nor of diplomatic 
negotiations between two governments. It is primarily a moral and in- 
tellectual bond that must be forged between the religious conscience of 
Russia and the truth of the Universal Church; and in order to commend 
to our reason the truth of a principle of which the historical realisation 
is foreign and even repugnant to us, we must seek the ultimate ground 
of this truth in the fundamental idea of Christianity.In the first part of my work, the critical and controversial section, I 
have tried to shew what Russia actually needs if she is to fulfil her 
theocratic mission; in the second I have expounded in the light of theo- 
logy and history the basis of the universal unity estabUshed by Christ, 
the monarchical government of the Church; in the third I have set out

^ I am speaking here of the general result; that there has been progress in cert^ 
directions is unquestionable. We need only mention the mitigation ®f^® ^verity 
of penal legislation and the abohtion of torture. The gain is considerable, but can 
it be regarded as secure? If class war were to break out one day with all the fury 
of a long restrained hatred, we should wimess remarkable happenings. Events of 
ill-omen, acts of Mezentian barbarity, have already taken place between Pans and 
Versailles in 1871.

31

to relate the idea of theocracy (the social Trinity) to the thcosophic idea 
(the divine Trinity).^

This work is an abridgment of a larger work in the Russian language 
at which I have been working for seven years but which has not been 
allowed to appear in my own country; the first volume, published in 
1887 at Agram in Croatia, was banned hy the Russian censorship. In tliese 
circumstances it seemed to me more practical to epitomise my work and 
address it to a wider pubhc.^ I firmly hope to see the day when my 
country will enjoy that blessing which is her primary need — religious 
freedom. But in the meantime I thought that I ought not to keep silence, 
and it seemed that to publish in French would be the most effectual 
means of making the truth heard.In the two first parts of my work I have suppressed or reduced to a 
minimum all those topics on which I could only repeat what has been 
better said by others. For details concerning the state of rehgion and of 
the Church in Russia I am glad to be able to refer my readers to the 
third volume of M. Anatole Leroy-Beaulieu’s well-known work V Empire 
des Tsars. The W estern reader will also find useful and interesting infor- 
mation in the Rev. Fr. Tondini’s book Le pape de Rome et Jes papes des 
Eglises orientates.

By way of bringing this too lengthy preface to an end, here is a parable 
which will perhaps bring out more clearly my general point of view and 
the purpose of the present work.

A great architect, setting out on a voyage to distant parts, called his 
pupils and said to them: ‘You know that I came here to rebuild the 
principal sanctuary of the country which had been destroyed by aii 
earthquake. The work is begun; I have sketched the general plan, the 
site has been cleared and the foundations laid. You will take my place 
during my absence. I will certainly return, but I cannot tell you when. 
Work, therefore, as though you had to complete the task without me.

^ In order to support my argument I have been obliged in places to introduce a 
literal translation of certain passages of the Bible. I have thought it right to add 
the Hebrew text, not in order to parade my knowledge which is quite elementary, 
but to justify my rendering which imght appear quamt and arbitrary. Since there 
is no absolutely binding rule for the transcription of Hebrew words into Latin 
characters, I have endeavoured to suit my spelling to French pronunciation, while 
avoiding typographical complications. [In the present translation the author’s 
transcription has been adapted to conform to the recognised English transenption 
ofHebrew.-Tr.] & b F

* We recall to our readers the pamphlet Videe russe which for the same reasons 
M. Solovyev published in Paris in 1888.— B/.* We recall to our readers the pamphlet Videe russe which for the same reasons 
M. Solovyev published in Paris in 1888.— B/.

32

Now is the time for you to apply the teaching that I have given yon. I 
trust you, and I am not going to lay down all the details of the work. 
Only observe the rules of our art. I am leaving you the solid foundations 
of the Temple which I have laid and the general plan that I have traced; 
that will be sufficient if you are faithful to your duty. And I am not 
leaving you alone; in spirit and in thought I will be always with you/ 
With these words he led them to the site of the new church, showed 
them the foundations and handed them the plan.After his departure, his pupils worked in complete harmony and almost 
a third of the building was soon raised. As the work was vast and ex- 
tremely complicated, the first companions were not enough and new 
ones had to be admitted. It was not long before a serious dispute arose 
between tliose who were in charge of the work. Some of them main- 
tained that of the two things left them by their absent Master — ^thc 
foundations of the buildmg and its general plan — only the latter was 
important and indispensable; there was nothing, they said, to prevent 
them from abandoning the foundations already laid and building on 
another site. When their companions violently opposed this idea, they 
went further and in the heat of the argument actu^y declared (contrary 
to what they themselves had often maintained before) that the Master 
had never laid nor even indicated the foundations of the Temple; that 
was merely an invention of their opponents. Many of the latter, on the 
other hand, in their anxiety to maintain the importance of the foundations, 
went to the opposite extreme and declared that the only thing that really 
mattered in the whole work was the foundation of the building which 
the Master had laid, and that their proper task consisted simply in preserv- 
ing, repairing and strengthening the already existing part of the building, 
without any idea of finishing it entirely, for (they said) the completion 
of the work was reserved exclusively for the Master himself at the time 
of his return. Extremes meet, and the two opposing parties soon found 
themselves agreed on one point, that the building was not to be com- 
pleted. But the party which insisted on preserving the foundations and 
the unfinished nave in good condition plunged into various secondary 
activities for that purpose and displayed indefatigable energy, whereas 
the party which thought it possible to abandon the original foundation 
of the Temple declared, after vainly attempting to build on another site, 
that there was no need to do anything at all; the essential thing in the ^t 
of architecture, they maintained, was theory, the contemplation of its 
classic examples and meditation on its rules, not the carrying out of a 
definite design; if the Master had left them his plan of the Tcinple. it 
was certainly not with the object of getting them to work together onc 33

its actual construction but simply in order that each one of them by study- 
ing this perfect plan might himself become an accomplished architect. 
Thereupon the most zealous of them devoted their lives to meditating 
on the design of the ideal Temple and learning and reciting by heart every 
day the explanations of that design which some of the early companions 
had worked out in accordance with the Master's instructions. But the 
majority were content to think of the Temple once a week, and the rest 
of the time was spent by each of them in attending to his own business.There were, however, some of these dissentients who from a study 
of the Master's plan and of his own original explanation of it perceived 
clear indications that the foundations of the Temple had actually been 
laid and could never be changed; among other remarks of the great 
architect they came across the following: ‘Here are the impregnable 
foundations that I have laid myself; it is upon them that my Temple must 
be built if it is to be proof for ever against earthquake or any other 
destructive force.' Impressed by these words, the good worken resolved 
to give up their quarrel and to lose no time in joining the guardians of 
the foundations, in order to assist them in their work of preservation. 
There was, however, one worker who said: ‘Let us admit our mistake; 
let us be just and give due honour to our old associates; let us rejoin 
them around the great building which we began but to our shame 
abandoned and which to their incalculable credit they have guarded and 
kept in good condition. But above all we must be faidiful to the Master's 
conception. He did not mean these foundations which he laid to remain 
untouched; he meant his Temple to be built upon them. Therefore we 
must all unite to complete the building upon the existing foundations. 
Shall we have time to finish it before the Master's return or not? That is 
a question which he did not see fit to answer. But he did tell us explicitly 
to do everything to continue his work; and moreover he added that we 
should do more than he had done.' This worker's appeal seemed strange 
to most of his compamons. Some called him an idealist, others accused 
him of pride and presumption. But the voice of conscience told him 
clearly that his absent Master was with him in spirit and in truth.As a member of the true and venerable Eastern or Greco-Russian 
Orthodox Church which does not speak through an and-canonical synod 
nor through the employees of the secular power, but through the utter- 
ance of her great Fathers and Doctors, I recognise as supreme judge in 
matters of religion him who has been recognised as such by St. Irenaeus, 
St. Dionysius the Great, St. Athanasius the Great, St. John Chrysostom, 
St. Cyril, St Flavian, the Blessed Thcodoret, St Maximus the Con&ssor,

34

St. Theodore of the Stadium, St. Ignatius, etc. etc. — namely, the Apostle 
Peter, who lives in his successors and who has not heard in vain our 
Lord's words: *Thou art Peter and upon this rock I will build My 
Church*; ‘ Strengthen thy brethren*; Teed My sheep, feed My lambs*.O deathless spirit of the blessed Apostle, invisible minister of the Lord 
in the government of His visible Church, thou knowest that she has need 
of an earthly body for her manifestation. Twice already hast thou em- 
bodied her in human society: in the Greco-Roman world, and again in 
the Romano-German world; thou hast made both the Empire of Con- 
stantine and the Empire of Charlemagne to serve her. After these two 
provisional incarnations she awaits her third and last incarnation. A whole 
world full of energies and of yearnings but with no clear consciousness 
of its destiny knocks at the door of universal history. What is your word, 
ye peoples of the word? The multitude knows it not yet, but powerful 
voices issuing from your midst have already disclosed it. Two centuries 
ago a Croatian priest announced it with prophetic tongue, and in our 
own days a bishop of the same nation has more than once proclaimed it 
with superb eloquence. The utterance of the spokesmen of the Western 
Slavs, the great Krishanitch and the great Strossmayer, needs only a 
simple Amen from the Eastern Slavs. It is this Amen that I come to speak 
in Ae name of a hundred million Russian Christians, in full and firm 
confidence that they will not repudiate me.

Your word, O peoples of the word, is free and universal Theocracy, 
the true solidarity of all nations and classes, the application of Christianity 
to public life, the Christianising of politics; freedom for all the oppressed, 
protection for all the weak; social justice and good Christian peace. Open 
to them therefore, thou Key-bearer of Christ, and may the gate of history 
be for them and for the whole world the gate of the Kingdom of God!

35

PART ONE

THE STATE OF RELIGION IN RUSSIA 
AND THE CHRISTIAN EAST

I

The Russian legend of St. Nicolas and St. Cassian. Its 
application to the two separated Churches35

PART ONE

THE STATE OF RELIGION IN RUSSIA 
AND THE CHRISTIAN EAST

I

The Russian legend of St. Nicolas and St. Cassian. Its 
application to the two separated Churches

A popular Russian legend tells how St. Nicolas and St. Cassian were 
once sent from Paradise upon a visit to the earth. On their journey 
L they met a poor peasant who had got his waggon, with a load of 
hay upon it, stuck deep in the mud and was making fruitles^s efforts to get 
his horses on.

‘Let’s go and give the good fellow a hand,* said St. Nicolas.

‘Not I; I’m keeping out of it,* replied St. Cassian, ‘I don’t want to get 
my coat dirty.*

‘Well, wait for me,* said St. Nicolas, ‘or go on without me if you like,’ 
and plunging without hesitation into the mud he vigorously assisted the 
peasant in dragging his waggon out of the rut.

When he had finished the job and caught his companion up, he was all 
covered in filth; his coat was tom and soiled and looked like a beggar’s 
rags. St. Peter was amazed to see him arrive at the gate of Paradise in this 
condition.

‘I say! Who ever got you into that state?* he asked.

St. Nicolas told his story.

‘And what about you?* asked St. Peter, turning to St. Cassian. ‘Weren’t 
you with him in this encounter?*

‘Yes, but I don’t meddle in things that are no concern of mine, and I was 
especially anxious not to get my beautiful clean coat dirty.

‘Very well,* said St. Peter, ‘you, St. Nicolas, because you were not 
afraid of getting dirty in helping your neighbour out of a difficulty, shall 
for the future have two feasts a year, and you shall be reckoned the greatest 
of saints after me by all the peasants of Holy Russia. And you, St. Cassian, 
must be content with having a nice clean coat; you shall have your feast- 
day in leap-year only, once every four years.*

We may well forgive St. Cassian for his dislike of manual labour and 
the mud of the highroad. But he would be quite wrong to condemn his

39We may well forgive St. Cassian for his dislike of manual labour and 
the mud of the highroad. But he would be quite wrong to condemn his

39

companion for having a different idea of the duties of saints towards man- 
kind. We may like St. Cassian*s clean and spotless clothes, but since our 
waggon is still deep in the mud, St. Nicolas is the one we really need, the 
stout-hearted saint who is always ready to get to work and help us.

The Western Church, faithful to the apostolic mission, has not been 
afraid to plunge into the mire of history. After having been for centuries 
the only element of moral order and intellectual culture among the bar- 
barous peoples of Europe, it undertook tlie task not only of the spiritual 
education of these peoples of independent spirit and uncivilised instincts 
but also of their material government. In devoting itself to this arduous 
task the Papacy, like St. Nicolas in the legend, thought not so much of 
the cleanliness of its own appearance as of the urgent needs of mankind. 
The Eastern Church, on the other hand, with its solitary asceticism and 
its contemplative mysticism, its withdrawal from political life and from 
all the social problems which concern mankind as a whole, thought chiefly, 
like St. Cassian, of reaching Paradise without a single stain on its clothing. 
The Western Church aimed at employing all its powers, divine and 
human, for the attainment of a universal goal; the Eastern Church was 
only concerned with the preservation of its purity. There is the chief 
pomt of difference and the fundamental cause of the schism between the 
two Churches.It is a question of a different ideal of the religious life itself The re- 
hgious ideal of the separated Christian East is not false; it is incomplete. 
In Eastern Christendom for the last thousand years reHgion has been 
identified with personal piety, ^ and prayer has been regarded as the one 
and only religious activity. The Western Church, without disparaging 
individual piety as the true germ of all rehgion, seeks the development of 
this germ and its blossoming into a social activity organised for the glory 
of God and the universal good of mankmd. The Eastern prays, the 
Western prays and labours. Which of the two is right?

Jesus Christ founded His visible Church not merely to meditate on 
heaven, but also to labour upon earth and to withstand the gates of hell. 
He did not send His apostles into the solitude of the desert, but into the 
world to conquer it and subject it to the Kingdom which is not of this 
world, and He enjoined upon them not only the innocence of doves but 
also the wisdom of serpents. If it is merely a question of preserving the 
purity of the Christian soul, what is the purpose of all the Church's social 
organisation and of all those sovereign and absolute powers with which

^ In old Russian the word ‘piety* (blagochestie) was ordinarily used to express 
‘orthodoxy*, and the expression ‘pious belief* {blagochestivaya vera) was used instead 
of ‘orthodox belief*.

40

Christ has armed her in giving her final authority to bind and to loose on 
earth as well as in heaven?40

Christ has armed her in giving her final authority to bind and to loose on 
earth as well as in heaven?

The monks of the holy mountain of Athos, true representatives of the 
isolated Eastern Church, have for centuries spent all their energies in 
prayer and the contemplation of the uncreated light of Tabor.^ They are 
perfectly right; prayer and the contemplation of uncreated things are 
essential to the Christian life. But can we allow that this occupation of 
the soul constitutes the whole Christian hfe? — for that is what wc must do 
if wc try to put the Orthodox East, with its pecuhar character and special 
religious tendencies, in the place of the Universal Church. We have in the 
East a Church at prayer, but where among us is the Church in action, 
asserting itself as a spiritual force absolutely independent of the powers of 
this world? Where in the East is the Church of the living God, the Church 
which in every generation legislates for mankind, which establishes and 
develops the formulation of eternal truth with which to counteract the 
contmually changing forms of error? Where is the Church which labours 
to re-mould the whole social life of the nations m accordance with the 
Christian ideal, and to guide them towards the supreme goal of Creation 
— free and perfect union with the Creator?The advocates of an exclusive asceticism should remember that the 
perfect Man spent only forty days in the wilderness; those who contem- 
plate the light of Tabor should not forget that that light appeared only 
once m the earthly life of Christ, Who proved by His own example that 
true prayer and true contemplation are simply a foundation for the life of 
action. If this great Church, which for centuries has done nothing but 
pray, has not prayed in vain, she must shew herself a livmg Church, 
acting, struggling, victorious. But we ourselves must will that it be so. 
We must above all recognise the insufficiency of our traditional religious 
ideal, and make a sincere attempt to reahse a more complete conception 
of Christianity. There is no need to invent or create anything new for 
this purpose. We merely have to restore to our religion its Catholic or 
universal character by recognising our oneness with the active part of the 
Christian world, with the W^est centralised and organised for a umversal 
activity and possessing all that we lack. W^c are not asked to change our

1 By certain physiological or psychological processes which are summed up 
among us under the name of cerebral acuon’ (umnoye delanie) the hermits of 
Athos achieve a state of ecstasy in which they experience unique sensations and 
claim to see the divine light which manifested itself at the Transfiguration of our 
Lord. The curious thmg is that this phenomenon is regarded as an eternal, sub- 
sistent reahty. In the fourteenth century furious controversy arose in the Greek 
Church over the inquiry mto the real nature of the light of Tabor and its relation 
to the essence of the Godhead.

4141

nature as Easterns or to repudiate the specific character of our religious 
genius. We have only to recognise unreservedly the elementary truth that 
we of the East are but a part of the Univenal Church, a part moreover 
which has not its centre within itself, and that therefore it behoves us to 
restore the link between our individual forces upon the circumference and 
the great universal centre which Providence has placed in the West. There 
is no question of suppressing our religious and moral individuahty but 
rather of crowning it and inspiring it with a universal and progressive life. 
The whole of our duty to ourselves consists simply in recognising ourselves 
for what we are in reality, an organic part of the great body of Christen- 
dom, and in aflSrming our spiritual sohdarity with out Western brethren. 
This moral act of justice and charity would be in itself an immense step 
forward on our part and the essential condition of all further advance.

St. Cassian need not become a different person or cease to care about 
keeping his clothes spotless. He must simply recognise that his comrade 
has certain important qualities which he himself lacks, and instead of 
sulking at this energetic worker he must frankly accept him as his com- 
panion and guide on the earthly voyage that still lies before them.

42

The question of the raison d’etre of Russia42

The question of the raison d’etre of Russia

B ut at this point I am interrupted by the familiar cry of my 
countrymen: ‘Let no one speak to us of our needs, of our short- 
comings, least of all of our duties towards the decadent West! 
It has had its day! We have no need of it and no obligation towards it. 
We have in the East everything that we need. In (sic) Oriente lux?- The 
true representative and crowning achievement of Christianity is Holy 
Russia. What have we to do with the old Rome in her decay, when wc 
are ourselves the Rome of the future, the third and last Rome?* The 
Eastern Church has fulfilled her great historic task in Christianising the 
Russian people, that people which has identified itself with Christianity 
and to which belongs the whole future of mankind.^ This view would 
reduce the ultimate historical objective of Christianity and the raison d*etre 
of the human race to the existence of a single nation. But to accept such an 
assertion would involve the formal denial of the very notion of a Univer- 
sal Church. It implies a reversion to ancient Judaism, with the difference 
that the unique part played by the Jewish people in the designs of Provi- 
dence is attested by the word of God, whereas the exclusive importance 
of Russia can only be maintained on the word of certain Russian propa- 
gandists whose inspiration is far from infaUible.

Moreover since the ideas of our inspired patriots on the subject of the 
grounds of religious faith are by no means settled or clear, we must get 
on to more general ground and examine their claims from a purely 
natural and human point of view.

For the last forty or fifty years the patriots of Russia have been en- 
gaged in the fanatical repetition, with variations in every key, of one 
invariable phrase: Russia is great and has a sublime mission to fulfil in the 
world. In what exactly this mission consists and what Russia must do,^ The title of a poem dedicated by a well-known poet to the late M. Katkov.

* This was the name given to Muscovy by certam Greek and Russian monks 
after the fall of the Byzantine Empire.

43

what we ourselves must do, to fulfil it is always left undefined. Neither 
the old Slavophils nor their present-day descendants nor M. Katkov him- 
self have said anything definite on that subject.^ They have talked of 
‘light from the East*, but it does not appear that this hght has as yet en- 
hghtened their understanding or clarified their outlook. We may perhaps 
be allowed therefore, while acknowledging the patriotic sentiments of 
these worthy gentlemen, to put to them plainly the question which they 
attempt to evade, the great question for our national conscience: How is 
Russia to justify her existence in the world?For centuries the history of our country was moving towards a single 
objective, the formation of a great national monarchy. The union of the 
Ukraine and of a part of White Russia with Muscovite Russia under the 
Tsar Alexis was a decisive moment in this historic work; for that union 
put an end to the dispute for primacy between the Russia of the North and 
that of the South, between Moscow and Kiev, and gave a real meaning to 
the title of ‘Tsar of all the Russias*. From that moment there was no 
longer any doubt of the success of the arduous task which the archbishops 
and princes of Moscow had undertaken since the fourteenth century. And 
by the logic of Providence it was the son of this very Tsar Alexis who 
went beyond the work of his predecessors and boldly put the further 
question: What must Russia do now that she is united and has become a 
powerful State? To this question the great Emperor gave the provisional 
reply that Russia must go to school with the civilised peoples of the West 
and assimilate their science and culture. That was indeed all that we 
needed for the moment. But this solution, simple and clear as it was, 
became more and more inadequate as the young society of Russia made 
progress in the school of Europe. The question then arose: What was she 
to do after her years of apprenticeship? The reformation of Peter the 
Great introduced Russia to die workshop of Europe in order to teach her 
how to handle all the tools of civihsation, but it ignored those higher prin- 
ciples and ideals which guided the use of these tools. Consequently, though 
that reformation gave us the means of asserting ourselves, it did not reveal 
the ultimate aim of our existence as a nation. If it was justifiable to ask, 
What must barbarian Russia do? and if Peter was right in replying, She 
must be reformed and civilised; it is no less justifiable to ask, What must 
Russia do now that she has been reformed by Peter the Great and his 
successors? What is the aim of Russia to-day?The Slavophils must be given credit for having reaHsed the extent of 
the problem; but they have done nothing to solve it. Reacting against the

^ The Pan-Slav politicians would have Russia destroy the Austrian Empire in 
order to form a Slav confederacy. And what then?

44

nebulous and barren idealism of Pan-Slavism, harder-headed patriots have 
in our time declared that it is not necessary that a nation should entertau) 
a definite ideal or pursue any higher aim for mankind, but that it is quite 
enough that it should be independent and should enjoy institutions suited 
to its national genius and sufficient power and prestige to defend its 
material interests in the affairs of this world; for a good patriot it is enough 
to desire this much for his country and to labour to make her rich and 
powerful. All of which amounts to saying that nations live by their daily 
bread alone; and this is neither true nor desirable. The peoples of history 
have lived not rfierely for themselves but for the whole of mankind; by 
imperishable achievements they have purchased the right to affirm their 
nationhood. That is the distinctive mark of a great people, and the 
patriotism which does not realise the price it must pay is a poor patriotism 
indeed.

No one asks what is the historic mission of the Ashanti or of the 
Eskimos. But when a Christian nation as vast and populous as ours, which 
has existed for a thousand years and is materially equipped to play a part 
in world history, asserts its rank as a great Power and claims an hegemony 
over other nations of the same race and a decisive influence in international 
politics, then it may well be asked what its real claims are to such a part 
in lustory, what prmciples or ideals it is contributmg to the world, and 
what it has done or has still to do for the good of mankind as a whole.But to answer these questions, we are told, is to anticipate the future. 
True, if we were concerned with a nation still in its infancy, the Russia of 
Kiev in the days of St. Vladimir, or the Muscovite Russia of Ivan Kalita. 
But modern Russia, which for the past two hundred years has played a 
continuous part on the stage of world history and which at the beginning 
of this century measured its strength against the greater part of Europe — 
this Russia ought to have some clear consciousness of its present tendencies 
and its future aims. Granted that the fulfilment of our historic mission 
belongs to the future, yet we must at least have some conception of that 
future; there must be in the Russia of to-day the hving seed of its future 
destinies.

Little is achieved by those who are at a loss what to do next. Our 
ancestors of the fifteenth century saw clearly the future for which they 
were striving — the Empire of all the Russias. It surely cannot be that we, 
for whom diat supreme goal of their endeavours is already an accom- 
plished fact, have a less clear conception of our own future than they had 
of theirs. Nor can we imagine that that future will be realised without 
our co-operation in thought and action.

45

The true Orthodoxy of the Russian people and the pseudo- 
Orthodoxy of the anti-CathoUc theologians45

The true Orthodoxy of the Russian people and the pseudo- 
Orthodoxy of the anti-CathoUc theologians

T he distinctively religious character of the Russian people as well 
as the mystical tendency exhibited in our philosophy, our htera- 
ture^ and our arts seem to indicate for Russia a great rehgious 
mission. Moreover, when our patriots are pressed to state what it is that 
constitutes the supreme vocation of our country, or the Russian ‘idea’, 
as it is called nowadays, they have no choice but to appeal to religion. 
According to them Orthodoxy, or the religion of the Greco-Russian 
Church, in contrast to the religious bodies of the West, constitutes the true 
basis of our national being. Here, to begin with, is an obvious vicious 
circle. If we ask how the separated Eastern Church justifies its existence 
we are told: By having formed the Russian people and provided its 
spiritual nurture. And when we enquire how that people justifies its 
existence the answer is: By belonging to the separated Eastern Church.^ Our best modem writers have been impelled by a religious idealism which 
has proved stronger than their aesthetic vocation to abandon the too restricted 
sphere of literature and to appear with varying success as morahsts and reformers, 
apostles and prophets. The untimely death of Pushkin debars us from deciding 
whether the religious tendency shewn m his most finished productions was deep 
enough to become in time predommant in his thought and to make him quit the 
domain of pure poetry, as happened with Gogol (m Correspondence with my jriends)^ 
with Dostoyevski (in An authors diary) and with Tolstoy (in My Confession, My 
Religion, etc.). It seems that the Russian genius does not discover in poetic expres- 
sion its final objective or the medium suited to the embodiment of its essentially 
rehgious ideal. If Russia is called to convey her message to the world, that message 
must sound forth not from the dazzling regions of art and Hteramre nor from the 
proud heights of philosophy and science, but only from the sublime and lowly 
peaks of religion. My Russian and Polish readers will find a detailed proof of this 
thesis in the second edition of my work La Question nationaJe en Russie, the last 
chapter of which has been translated into Polish by M. B^oni and published as 
a pamphlet entitled Russia and Europe.

4646

We are brought to this impasse by the difficulty of really dedding what 
we mean by this ‘Orthodoxy’ of which we would claim the monopoly. 
This difficulty docs not exist for those folk who arc really orthodox in all 
good conscience and in the simpHdty of their heart. When questioned 
intelligently about their reUgion, they will tell you that to be Orthodox 
is to be baptised a Christian, to wear a cross or some holy image on your 
breast, to worship Christ, to pray to the Blessed Virgin most immaculate^ 
and to all tlic saints represented by images and rehes, to rest from work on 
all festivals and to fast in accordance with traditional custom, to venerate 
the sacred office of bishops and priests, and to participate in the holy 
sacraments and in divine worship. That is the true Orthodoxy of the 
Russian people, and it is ours also. But it is not that of our militant 
patriots. It is obvious that true Orthodoxy contains nothing pardcularist 
and can in no way form a national or local attribute separating us in any 
sense from the Western peoples; for the greater part of these peoples, the 
Cathohe part, has precisely the same religious basis that we have. What- 
ever is holy and sacred for us is also holy and sacred for them. To indicate 
only one essential point: not only is devotion to the Blessed Virgin — 
one of the characteristic features of Catholicism — generally practised 
by Russian Orthodoxy,^ but there are even special miraculous images vene- 
rated in common by Roman Catholics and Russian Orthodox (for 
example, the holy Virgin of Czestochowa in Poland). If piety’ is indeed 
the distinctive characteristic of our national genius, the fact that the chief 
emblems of that piety are common to us and the Westerns compels us to 
recognise our oneness with them in what we regard as the most essential 
thing of all. As regards the profound contrast between the contemplative 
piety of the East and the active religion of the Westerns, this contrast 
being purely human and subjective has nothing to do with the divine 
objects of our faith and worship; so &r from being a good reason for 
schism it should rather bring the two great parts of the Christian world 
into a closer and mutually complementary union.But under the influence of that evil principle which is constantly at work 
on earth, this diflference has been abused and twisted into a division. At 
the moment when Russia was receiving baptism from Constantinople, 
the Greeks, though still in formal communion with Rome after the tem-

^ ‘Most immaculate’ or * slUimmaLCuhtc (pseneporochnaya) is the epithet regularly 
added to the name of the Blessed Virgin in our liturgical books, being the trans- 
lation of the Greek TrayrdficupLos and other kindred words.

* By this term I do not exclude the ‘old believers’ properly so called, whose 
diflerences with the State Church are not concerned with the true object of re- 
ligion.

47

porary schism ot Fhotius.^ were already strongly imbued with national 
particularism which was fostered by the contentious spirit of the clergy, 
the pohtical ambitions of the emperors and the disputes of the theologians. 
The result was that the pearl of the Gospel purclused by the Russian 
people in the person of St. Vladimir was all covered with the dust of 
By2antium. The bulk of the nation was uninterested in the ambitions and 
hatreds of the clergy and understood nothing of the theological quibbles 
which were their fruit; the bulk of the nation received and preserved the 
essence of orthodox Christianity pure and simple, that is to say, faith and 
the hfe of rehgion formed by divine grace and expressed in works of piety 
and charity. But the clergy, recruited in the early days from the Greeks, 
and the theologians accepted the disastrous inheritance of Photius and 
Cerularius as an integral part of the true religion.

This pseudo-Orthodoxy of our theological schools, which has notlung 
in common with the faith of the Universal Church or the piety of the 
Russian people, contains no positive element; it consists merely of ar- 
bitrary negations produced and maintamed by controversial prejudice:‘God the Son does not contribute in the divine order to the procession 
of the Holy Spirit.'

‘The Blessed Virgin was not immaculate from the first moment of her

existence.’^

‘Primacy of Jurisdiction does not belong to the see of Rome and the 
Pope has not the dogmatic authority of a Pastor and Doctor of the 
Universal Church.'

Such are the principal negations which we shall have to examme in due 
course. For our present purpose it is enough to observe m the first place 
that these negations have received no sort of religious sanction, and do not 
rest on any ecclesiastical authority accepted by all the Orthodox as bindmg 
and infaUible. No oecumenical council has condemned or even passed 
judgment on the CathoHc doctrines anathematised by our controversial- 
ists; and when we are offered this new kind of negative theology as the

^ The final rupture which did not occur till later, in 1054, was nothing in fact 
but a mere event without any kmd of legal or bindmg sanction. The anathema of 
the legates of Pope Leo IX was not aimed against the Eastern Church, but solely 
agamst the person of the patriarch Michael Cerularius and against ‘the parmers of 
his folly* (folly obvious enough, to be sure); and on the other hand, the Eastern 
Church has never been able to assemble an oecumenical council which, even 
according to our own theologians, is the only tribunal competent to pass judg- 
ment on our differences with the Papacy.

*Thus these theologians blinded by hatred have the temerity to deny the 
manifest belief of the Eastern Church, both Greek and Russian, which has never 
ceased to declare the Blessed Virgin to be all-immaculate, immaculate par excellence.

48true doctrine of the Universal Church, we can sec in it only an extravagatit 
imposture originating cither in ignorance or in bad faith. In the second 
place, It is obvious that this false Orthodoxy is no more adequate than true 
Orthodoxy as a positive basis for the ‘Russian idea'. Let us try to substi- 
tute real values for this unknown quantity called ‘Orthodoxy’ over which 
a pseudo-patriotic press is always working up an artificial enthusiasm. According to you the ideal essence of Russia is Orthodoxy, and this 
Orthodoxy which you especially contrast with Catholicism amounts in 
your view simply to the divergences between the two professions of faith. The real religious basis which is common to us and the Westerns seems to 
have no more than a secondary interest for you ; it is the differences between 
us to which you are really attached. Very well then, substitute these 
specific differences for the vague term ‘Orthodoxy’ and declare openly 
that the religious ideal of Russia consists in denying the Filioque, the Im- 
maculate Conception, and the authority of the Pope. It is the last point 
that you are chiefly concerned with. The others, you know well, are only 
pretexts; the Sovereign Pontiff is your real bugbear. All your ‘Ortho- 
doxy’, all your ‘Russian idea’ is at bottom, then, simply a national protest 
against the universal power of the Pope. But in the name of what? Here 
begins the real difficulty of your position. This bitter protest against the 
monarchy of the Church, if it is to win men’s minds and hearts, should 
be justified by some great positive principle. You should confront the 
form of theocratic government of which you disapprove with another and 
better form. And that is exactly what you cannot do. What kind of ecclesir- 
astical constitution would you confer upon the Western peoples? Are you 
going to extol conciliar government and talk to them of oecumenical 
councils? Medice, cur a teipsum.48

Are you 
going to extol conciliar government and talk to them of oecumenical 
councils? Medice, cur a teipsum. Why has not the East set up a true cecu- 
menical council in opposition to those of Trent or the Vatican? How are 
we to explain this helpless silence on the part of Truth when faced with 
the solemn self-assertion of Error? Since when have the guardians of 
Orthodoxy become mean-spirited curs diat can only bark from behind a 
wall? In point of fact, while the great assemblies of the Church continue 
to fill a prominent place in the teaching and life of Catholicism, it is the 
Christian East which has for a thousand years been deprived of this im- 
portant feature of the Universal Church, and our best theologians, such 
as Philaret of Moscow, themselves admit that an oecumenical council is 
impossible for the Eastern Church as long as she remains separated from 
the West. But it is the easiest thing in the world for our self-styled Ortho- 
dox to confront the actual councils of the Catholic Church with a council 
that can never take place and to maintain their cause with weapons that 
they have lost and under a flag of which they have been robbed.

49

D49

D

The Papacy is a positive principk, an actual institution, and if Eastern 
Christians believe this principle to be false and this institution to be evil, 
it is for them to create the organisation which they desire to see in the 
Church. Instead of doing so, they refer us to antiquarian traditions, though 
they admit that they can have no relevance to the present situation. Our 
anti-Cathohes have indeed good reason for going so far afield in search of 
support for their thesis; the fact is that they dare not expose themselves to 
the ridicule of the whole world by declaring the synod of St. Petersburg 
or the patriarchate of Constantinople to be the real representative of the 
Universal Church. But how can they talk of appealing after all this time 
to oecumenical councils when they are obliged to admit that they are no 
longer feasible? Such beating of the air is only a complete revelation of the 
weakness of this anti-Cathohe Orthodoxy. If the normal organisation and 
proper constitution of the Universal Church requires oecumenical coun- 
cils, it is obvious that the Orthodox East, fatally deprived of this essential 
organ of Church life, possesses no longer a true Church constitution or a 
regular Church government. During the first three centuries of Christian- 
ity the Church, cemented by the blood of the martyrs, convoked no 
world-wide councils because she had no need of them; the Eastern Church 
of to-day, paralysed and dismembered, is unable to convoke them though 
she feels her need of them. Thus we are placed in a dilemma: either we 
must admit, with our extreme sectarians, that since a certain date the 
Church has lost her divine character and no longer actually exists upon 
earth; or else, to avoid so dangerous a conclusion, we must recognise that 
the Universal Church, having no organs of government or representation 
in the East, possesses them in her Western half. This will involve the re- 
cognition of a historical truth now admitted even by the Protestants, 
namely that the present-day Papacy is not an arbitrary usurpation but a 
legitimate development of principles which were in full force before the 
division of the Church and against which that Church never protested. 
But if the Papacy is recognised as a legitimate institution, what becomes 
of the ‘Russian idea’ and the privilege of national Orthodoxy? If we can- 
not base our rehgious future on the official Church, perhaps we can find 
deeper foundations for it in the Russian people.50

IV

Russian dissent. The relative truth of the Raskol, Mgr, Philaret 
of Moscow and his conception of the Universal Church

I f wc wish to state Orthodoxy in terms of the Russian national ideal, 
logic compels us to seek the true expression of that ideal among our 
native sects and not within the domain of the official Church, whose 
origin is Greek and whose organisation, given her by Peter the Great, is 
Teutonic. Deprived of any specific principle or practical independence, this 
‘Ministry of ie Spiritual Affairs of the Orthodox Communion* can only 
reproduce the imperial clericaHsm of Byzantium modified by the easy- 
going good nature of our own people and the Teutonic bureaucracy of 
our administration. Apart from the particular causes which produced the 
Raskol,^ and which have only a historical importance, it may be con- 
fidently asserted that the reason for the persistence of this schism within 
the nation is the obvious inadequacy of Russian Church government 
coupled with its exaggerated pretentions. This Church ‘estabhshed* by the 
Tsar, though totally subservient to the secular power and destitute of all 
inner vitaUty, none the less makes use of the hierarchical idea to assume 
over the people an absolute authority which by right belongs only to the 
independent Universal Church founded by Christ. The emptiness of these 
claims, sensed rather than consciously recognised, has driven one section 
of our dissenters to fruitless attempts at constituting a Russian OrthodQX 
Church independent of the State, while another and larger section has 
quite frankly declared that the true Church has completely disappeared 
from the world since the year 1666, and that we are living under the 
spiritual rule of Antichrist resident at St. Petersburg. It is plain why the 
advocates of the ‘Russian idea* take good care not to look too closely into 
the Raskol nor to seek this elusive ‘idea* in that quarter. A doctrine which^ The generic name of raskol (schism) is in use among us to denote esped^y 
those of the dissenters who separated from the official Church over the question 
.of rites and who are also cslUcq starovery (old believers). The separation was finally 
consummated in the years 1666— 1667, when a council assembled at Moscow 
anathematised the old rites.

5151

affirms that die Russian Church and monarchy arc subject to the absolute 
rule of Antichrist and which postpones all hope of a better state of affairs 
to the end of the world, obviously does not harmonise very well with an 
extravagant patriotism which represents Russia in her present condition 
as the second Israel and the chosen people of the future. Nevertheless it is 
of interest to note that it is precisely those who would have Russia under- 
take a religious mission all her own, namely the Slavophils, who are com- 
pelled to ignore or to depreciate the one historical phenomenon in which 
the religious genius of the Russian people has shewn a certain originality. 
On the other hand, in some of our liberal and radical ‘Westernising’^ 
circles our national Protestantism, in spite of the barbarous forms it 
assumes, finds ready champions who imagine that they discern in it the 
promise of a better future for the Russian people. We ourselves, having 
no reason either to belittle or to over-estimate this typical phenomenon 
of our religious history, are able to view it more objectively. We do not 
underrate the great part played in the rise of the Raskol by the profoundest 
ignorance, ultra-democratic tendencies, and the spirit of revolt. We shall 
not therefore look to it for any higher truth or any positive religious ideal. 
Nevertheless we are bound to note that there has always been a spark of 
the divine fire in this crude and even senseless incitement of the passions 
of the mob. There is in it a burning thirst for religious truth, a compelling 
need for a true and living Church. Our national Protestantism aims its 
shafts at a partial and imperfect manifestation of ecclesiastical government 
and not at the principle of the visible Church. Even the most advanced 
section of our ‘old believers* regard an actual organised Church as so 
necessary that, because they are robbed of it, they believe themselves to be 
already under the rule of Antichrist. Allowing for the ignorance which 
leads diem to mistake Russia for the whole world, there is to be found 
at the bottom of all these queer errors the idea or the axiom of a Church 
independent of the State and closely bound up with the whole intimate 
social life of the people — a free, powerful and living Church. And if our 
dissenters see the official Church, whether Russian or Greek, without in- 
dependence or vitahty, and declare that therefore she is not the true 
Church of Christ, they are at least consistent in their error.The negative truth implied in the Raskol remains unassailable. Neither 
the bloody persecutions of past generations nor the oppression of a 
modem bureaucracy nor the official hostihty of our clergy has done any- 
thing to meet the unanswerable contention that there exists no truly 
spiritual government in the Greco-Russian Church, But this is as far as the

^ This is the name (m Russian, Zapadniki) given to the literary party opposed 
to the Slavophils and attached to the principles of European .civilisation.

52

truth of our national Protestantism goes. As soon as the old believers* 
abandon this simple denial and claim to have discovered some outlet for 
their religious instincts or to have realised their ideal of the Church, they 
fall into obvious contradictions and absurdities which make them an easy 
target for their opponents. It is not dfficult for the latter to meet the 
Popovtsy^ by proving that a religious society which has been for genera- 
tions derived of the episcopate and which has only partially recovered 
this fundamental institution by entirely uncanonical proceedings cannot 
be the genuine continuation of the ancient Church and the sole guardian 
of the Orthodox tradition. It is no less easy to establish in answer to the 
Bespopevtsj^ the proposition that the reign of Antichrist cannot be of in- 
definite length, and that logically these dissenters should repudiate not 
only the Church of the present day but also that of former times which in 
their opinion was destroyed in the year of grace 1666; for a Church against 
which the gates of hell have prevailed cannot have been the true Church 
of Christ.The great historical importance of the Raskol with its thousands of 
martyrs is the witness which it bears to the depth of religious sentiment 
among the Russian people and to the lively interest aroused in them by 
the theocratic conception of the Church. If it is on the one hand a matter 
for great joy that the majority of the populace has remained faithful to the 
official Church which, despite the absence of any lawful Church govern- 
ment,® has at least preserved the apostolic succession and the validity of 
the sacraments, it would on the other hand have been deplorable had the 
entire Russian people been content with this official Church such as it is; 
that would be a convincing proof that there was no religious future to be 
hoped for. The vehement and persistent protest of these millions of 
peasants gives us an earnest of the future regeneration of our Church life. 
But the essentially negative character of this religious movement is a suffi- 
cient proof that the Russian people, just like every other human power 
left to its own resources, is incapable of realising its highest ideal. All these 
aspirations and tentative movements towards a true Church indicate no

^ A moderate party which by unlawful means is now in possession of a priest- 
hood and even, since 1848, of an episcopate, whose centre is at Fontana Alba in 
Austria.

* A radical party which holds that the priesthood and all the sacraments with 
the exception of Baptism have been completely non-existent since 1666.

® All our bishops are nominated in a manner absolutely forbidden and con- 
demned by the third canon of the seventh CEcumcnical Council, a canon which in 
the eyes of our own Church can never have been abrogated (for lack of subsequent 
oecumenical councils). We shall have to return to this subject later.

5353

more than a passive capacity for religion which needs an act of moral re- 
generation coming from a higher source than the purely national and 
popular element if it is to be effectively realised in a conaete organic form.

We may grant that the official Church ruled by a civil servant is nothing 
but a State institution, a minor branch of the bureaucratic administration; 
but the Church conceived by our dissenters would at the most be a merely 
national and democratic Church. It is the idea of the Universal Church 
which is lacking on both sides. The article of the Creed concerning the 
one, holy, catholic and apostolic Church, though sung at every Mass and 
recited at every Baptism, remains as much a dead letter for the ‘old 
Orthodox* as for the ‘ruling Church*. For the former the Church is the 
Russian nation — ^in its entirety up to the time of the patriarch Nikon, and 
since his time in that section of it which has remained faithful to the old 
national rite. As for the theologians of the official Church, their ideas on 
the subject are as vague as they are inconsistent. But the feature which is 
constant among all their variations and common to them all in spite of 
their differences is the absence of a positive faith in the Universal Church. 
Here, to confine ourselves to a single writer who is worth a host of others, 
is the theory of the Church expounded by Archbishop Philaret, the able 
Metropolitan of Moscow, in one of his most important works‘The true Christian Church includes all the particular Churches which 
confess Jesus Christ “come in the flesh**. The doctrine of all these religious 
societies is fundamentally the same divine truth; but it may be mingled 
with the opinions and errors of men. Hence there is in the teaching of these 
individual Churches a distinction of greater and less purity. The doctrine 
of the Eastern Church is purer than the rest, indeed it may be recognised 
as completely pure, since it does not link the divine truth to any human 
opinion. However as each religious communion makes exactly the same 
claim to perfect purity of faith and doctrine, it does not behove us to 
judge others but rather to leave the final judgment to the Spirit of God 
Who guides the Churches.*

Such is the opinion of Mgr. Philaret and the majority of the Russian 
clergy agree with him. The breadth and conciliatory nature of this view 
cannot conceal its essential defects. The principle of unity and universality 
in the Church only extends, it would seem, to the common ground of 
Christian faith, namely the dogma of the Incarnation. This truly funda- 
mental faith in Jesus Christ, the God-Man, is not regarded as the living 
and fruitful seed of a further development; the theologian of Moscow 
would rather sec in it the final unity of the Christian world and the only 
unity which he considers necessary. He is content to ignore the divergences 
^ Conversation of an inquirer and a believer on the truth of the Eastern Church.

5454

that exist in the Christian religion and declares himself satisfied with the 
purely theoretical unity thus obtained. It is a unity based on a broad but 
hollow indifference, implying no organic bond and requiring no efectivc 
fellowship between particular Churches. The Universal Church is reduced 
to a logical concept. Its parts are real, but the whole is nothing but a sub- 
jective abstraction. Even if it has not always been thus, if the Church in 
her entirety was once a living body, yet that body is to-day a prey to 
death and dissolution; it is only the existence of the separate parts that is 
actually manifest before our eyes, while their substantial unity has 
vanished into the realm of the unseen world.This idea of a ‘dead Church* is not merely the logical conclusion which 
we believe to be impHcit in the propositions advanced by our renowned 
theologian; he has laboured to describe to us the Universal Church as he 
conceived it under the form of a Hfeless body made up of heterogeneous 
and distinct elements. He has even been inspired to apply to the Church 
of Christ and to the stages of its historical existence the vision of the great 
idol recorded in the book of Daniel. The golden head of the idol is the 
early Christian Church; the chest and arms of silver signify ‘the Church 
growing in strength and extent* (the age of the martyrs); the brazen 
stomach- is ‘the Church in prosperity* (the triumph of Christianity and the 
age of the great doctors). Finally the Church of the present, ‘the Church 
in its divided and fragmentary condition*, is represented by the two feet 
with their toes, in which clay is mingled with iron by the hands of men. 
To accept this ill-omened symbol seriously would mean the denial of the 
one, infallible and impregnable Church of God founded to last for all 
generations. The author perceived as much, and in subsequent editions of 
his work he erased the whole of this allegory; but he found nothing to put 
in its place. It must, however, be confessed that in limiting the appHcation 
of this symbol to the official Greco-Russian Church the distinguished re- 
presentative of that institution displayed both acumen and impartiality. 
Iron and clay mixed by the hand of man — ^violence and impotence, and 
an artificial unity which needs only a shock to reduce it to powder: no 
simile could better depict the actual condition of our established Church.

55

V

Critical observations on the Russian Slavophils and their 
ideas concerning the Church55

V

Critical observations on the Russian Slavophils and their 
ideas concerning the Church

/\ rdibishop Philaret inadvertendy laid bare the real condition of the 
/-A separated Eastern Church. The Slavophils have attempted to con- 
JL ceal her nakedness under the transparent veil of an idealistic theory 
of the Church ‘in its free and living unity founded on divine grace and 
Christian charity*. Their doctrine, in so far as it envisages the Church in 
general terms as a moral organism, is perfecdy true, and they must be 
given credit for having insisted in theory upon its essential and indivisible 
unity which has been so completely ignored by our official theologians 
and our dissenters. On the other hand, those who consider that the Slavo- 
phils in expounding the positive conception of the Universal Church con- 
fine themselves too much to vague generalisations will find this same con- 
ception of the Church much more fully and clearly developed by certain 
Cathohc writers, especially by the famous Mohler in his admirable work. 
Die Symbolik der christlichen Kirche.^

The Church is One is the title given by Khomyakov, the leader of the 
Slavophil group in Russia, to a small volume of dogmatic theology which 
though insignificant in itself deserves notice as the only attempt on the 
part of the Slavophils to fix and systematise their theological ideas. The 
unity of the Church is determined by the unity of the divine Grace which, 
if it is to work within men and transform them into a Church 6{ God, 
demands from them fideUty to a common tradition, brotherly charity and 
that free consent of the individual conscience which is the de&ite guaran- 
tee of the truth of their faith. It is on this last point especially that the 
Slavophils insist in their definition of the true Church as ‘the spontaneous, 
inward synthesis of unity and freedom in charity*.What objection can there be to such an ideal? Is there any Roman 
Catholic who on being shewn the whole of mankind or a considerable

^ This work is commended and frequently quoted in the Prcelectiones theologicce 
of the official dogmatic theologian of the Latin Church, the late Fr. Perronc, 
professor at the Collegium Romanum and member of the Society of Jesus.

56

section of it inspired with divine love and brotherly charity, having but 
one heart and one soul and abiding thus in a free and wholly interior unity 
— is there, I ask, any Roman CathoHc who would wish to impose upon 
such a society the external and binding jurisdiction of a public religious 
authority? Do any papists believe that the Seraphim and Cherubim need 
a Pope to govern them? And, on the other hand, is there any Protestant 
who, if he saw the actual attainment of final truth through ‘the perfection 
of charity’, would still insist on the exercise of private judgment?The perfectly free and inward union of men with the Godhead and 
with one another — that is the supreme goal, the haven tbwards which we 
steer our course. Our Western brethren are not agreed among themselves 
as to the best method of reaching it. Cathohes beheve that it is safer to 
cross the sea together in a large and seaworthy vessel built by a famous 
master, navigated by a skilful pilot and equipped with all that is necessary 
for the voyage. Protestants, on the contrary, claim that it is for each one 
to construct a cockle-shell to his own liking that he may pursue his un- 
certain course with greater freedom. This latter opinion, however mistaken, 
is at least arguable. But what is to be said to these self-styled Orthodox 
who maintain that the best way of reaching harbour is to pretend that you 
are there already, and who think that in this respect they have the advan- 
tage of their Western brethren? The latter, it must be admitted, have never 
suspected that the great problem of rehgion was capable of so simple a 
solution.The Church is one and indivisible; yet it may at the same time comprise 
various spheres, not to be separated but to be clearly distinguished from 
one another. Otherwise it would be impossible to understand the past or 
present history of religion or to do anything for the religious future of 
mankind. Absolute perfection can only belong to that higher part of the 
Church which has already once for all appropriated and assimilated the 
fullness of the divine grace — the Church triumphant or the realm of 
Glory. Midway between this divine sphere and the purely earthly ele- 
ments of visible humanity stands the divine-human organism of the 
Church, invisible in its mystical power and visible in its present manifes- 
tation, sharing equally in the perfection of heaven and in the conditions 
of material existence. This is the Church, properly speaking, and it is with 
her that we are concerned. She is not perfect in the absolute sense, but she 
must possess all the necessary means of secure progress towards the su- 
preme ideal — the perfect unity of the whole creation in God — ^in spite of 
countless obstacles and difficulties, through the struggles, temptations and 
weaknesses of men.

Here below, the Church has not the perfect unity of the heavenly king-

57Here below, the Church has not the perfect unity of the heavenly king-

57

dom, but neverdieless she must have a certain real unity, a bond at once 
organic and spiritual which constitutes her a concrete institution, a living 
body and a moral individual. Though she does not include the whole of 
mankind in an actual material sense, she is nevertheless universal in so far 
as she cannot be confined exclusively to any one nation or group of 
nations, but must have an international centre from which to spread 
throughout the whole universe. The Church here below, though she is 
founded pn the revelation of God and is the guardian of the deposit of 
faith, does not therefore enjoy absolute and immediate knowledge of all 
truths; but she is infallible^ fhat is to say, she cannot be mistaken when at 
a given moment she defines such and such a religious or moral truth, the 
explicit knowledge of which has become necessary to her. The Church 
on earth is not absolutely firee, since she is subject to the conditions of 
finite existence; but she must be sufficiently independent to be able to carry 
on a constant and active struggle against the powers of the enemy and to 
prevent the gates of hell from prevailing against her.

Such is the true Church on earth, the Church which in spite of the im- 
perfection of her human element has received from God the right, the 
power and all the required means to raise and guide mankind towards its 
appointed end. Were she not one and universal, she could not serve as the 
foundation of the positive unity of all peoples, which is her chief mission. 
Were she not infalUble, she could not guide mankind in the true way; 
she would be a blind leader of the blind. Finally were she not independent, 
she could not fulfil her duty towards society; she would become the in- 
strument of the powers of this world and would completely fail in her 
mission.The essential and indispensable characteristics of the true Church are, it 
seems, settled and clear enough. Nevertheless our modem Orthodox, 
after confusing the divine and the earthly aspects of the Church in their 
nebulous reasonings, are quite prepared to identify this muddled ideal with 
the present-day Eastern Church, the Greco-Russian Church as we see it. 
They affirm it to be the one and only Church of God, the true Universal 
Church, and they regard other communions as nothing but anti-Christian 
associations. Thus while accepting in theory the idea of the Universal 
Church, the Slavophils deny it in fact and reduce the world-wide character 
of Christianity to one particular Church which in other respects is far from 
corresponding to the ideal which they themselves uphold. According to 
their notion, as we have seen, the true Church is ‘the organic synthesis of 
firecdom and unity in charity*, and it is in the Greco-Russian Church, 
they say, that we are to look for this synthesis! Let us try to take them 
seriously and see what there is in the idea.

58

VI

Religious freedom and ecclesiastical freedom58

VI

Religious freedom and ecclesiastical freedom

I n the sphere of rehgion and of the Church, two very different things 
may be understood by the word ‘freedom*: first, the independence of 
the ecclesiastical body^ both the clergy and the faithful, in relation to the 
external power of the State, and secondly, the independence of individuals 
in matters of rehgion, that is to say, the concession to everyone of the 
right to belong openly to such and such a rehgious body, to pass freely from 
one of these bodies to another, or to belong to none and to profess with 
impunity any kind of rehgious belief or opinion whether positive or nega- 
tive.^ To avoid confusion we will call the former ‘ecclesiastical freedom' 
and the latter ‘rehgious freedom*.^ Every Church takes for granted a 
certain number of common behefs, and anyone who does not share these 
behefs cannot enjoy the same community of rights as the believers. The 
power to take action by spiritual means against unfaithful members and 
definitely to exclude them from the community is one of the essential attri- 
butes of ecclesiastical freedom. Religious freedom does not come within the 
particular province of the Church except indirectly; it is only the temporal 
power of the State which can directly admit or restrict the right of its 
subjects to profess openly all their individual rehgious behefs. The Church 
can only exert a moral influence to induce the State to be more or less 
tolerant. No Church ever regarded with indifference the propagation of 
strange beliefs which threatened to rob her of her faithful children. But 
the question remains: What weapons should the Church employ against 
her enemies? Ought she to confine herself to spiritual means of persuasion, 
or should she have recourse to the State and avail herself of its material^ We are not concerned here with a third kind of freedom, that of the various 
cults recognised by the State. A certain freedom for the cults in their status 
is imposed by the force of circumstances upon an Empire such as Russia, which 
numbers more than 30,000,000 subjects outside the ruling Church.

* The expressions commonly used in the latter sense, such as freedom of con- 
srience' or necdom of profession of faith* should be rejected as mexact; conscience 
is always free and no one can prevent a martyr from confessing his faith.

59

weapons, constraint and persecution? The two methods of struggle against 
the enemies of the Church are not mutually exclusive. Those who have 
the necessary equipment can distinguish between intellectual error and 
bad faith and, while bringing persuasion to bear on the former, can guard 
against the latter by depriving it of the means of doing harm.^ But there 
is one essential condition if the spiritual struggle is to be even possible, 
namely that the Church herself should enjoy ecclesiastical freedom and 
should not be reduced to subservience to the State. A man who has his 
hands tied cannot defend himself by his own efforts, but is compelled to 
rely on the assistance of others. A State Church totally subject to the 
secular power and owing its continued existence to the favour of the 
latter has renounced its spiritual authority and can only be defended suc- 
cessfully by material weapons.^In past times the Roman Catholic Church, which has always enjoyed a 
measure of ecclesiastical freedom and has never been a State Church, has 
encountered her enemies with the spiritual weapons of instruction and 
preaching and at the same time has authorised Catholic States to use the 
temporal sword in the name of religious unity. To-day there are no longer 
any Catholic States; the State in the West is atheist, and the Roman Church 
continues to exist and to prosper in sole reliance upon the spiritual sword, 
upon her moral authority and upon the free proclamation of her prin- 
ciples. But how can a hierarchy that has committed itself to the temporal 
power and thereby admitted its own lack of spiritual power, exert that 
moral authority which it has renounced? Our present established Church 
has espoused the interests of the State to the exclusion of all else, in order 
to receive in return the guarantee of its existence against the menace of 
dissent. Since the aim is a purely material one, the means are bound to be 
of the same character. The measures of constraint and violence prescribed 
by the Imperial Penal Code are in the last resort the only weapons of 
defence with which our ‘State Orthodoxy' can meet either dissent at home

^ Wc admit this distinction in theory {in abstracto) but wc are far from recom- 
mending it as a practical policy.^ Wc admit this distinction in theory {in abstracto) but wc are far from recom- 
mending it as a practical policy.

* Even our ecclesiastical writers admit as much with considerable naivet^. For 
instance in a series of articles in the Orthodox Review {Pravoslavnoye Obozrenie) on 
the struggle of the Russian clergy against the dissenters, the aumor, M. Chisty- 
akov, after exposing the exploits of Pitirim, the bishop of Nijni-Novgorod, whose 
zeal was invariably supported by the troops of the vice-governor Rzhevski, 
reaches the conclusion mat the famous missionary owed all his success to the help 
of the secular power and to the right of bringmg the dissenters by force to listen 
to his preaching {Prav, Obozr,^ October 1887, p. 348). Similar admissions can be 
found in the same Review (of the year 1882) with regard to contemporary missions 
among the pagans of Eastern Siberia.

60

or religious bodies from without which would dispute its authority over 
the souls of our people. If in recent times the representatives of the clergy 
have made certain attempts to coimter the sectarians by means of semi- 
public discussions,^ the lack of good faith which is only too evident in 
these conferences (in which one side is bound to be in the wrong whatever 
happens, and is able to say only what its opponents permit) has merely 
had the effect of shewing up the moral impotence of an established 
Church which is too accommodating to the powers that be to win respect 
and too ruthless in its spiritual claims to win affection. And yet this is the 
Church that is to exemplify for us the free union of human consciences in 
the spirit of charity !The Slavophils in their anti-Catholic propaganda have laboured to con- 
fuse ecclesiastical with religious freedom. Since the Cathohe Church has 
not always been tolerant, and since she does not admit the principle of 
indifference in religious matters, it is only too easy to declaim against the 
despotism of Rome without mentioning the great prerogative of ecclesi- 
astical freedom which Catholicism alone of all Christian commimions has 
always maintained. But when it comes to our own case, nothing is gained 
by the confusion of these two freedoms since it is clear that we possess 
neither. No one has expounded this melancholy truth with greater power 
or conviction than the late I. Aksakov, the last notable representative of 
the old school of Slavophils. We need not quote more than a few out- 
standing passages from his writings.^

^ I refer to the ‘conversations {sobesedovanya) with the old believers’ at Kazan, 
at Kaluga, and especially at Moscow, Despite the irksome conditions of these dis- 
cussions and the absence of the leaders of the Raskol, the representatives of the 
official Church did not always have it their own way. A paper named ‘The Moscow 
Voice* {Golos Moskvy), which had the courage to publish in 1885 the shorthand 
reports of these conferences, has had reason to repent of its rashness. It no longer 
exists.

2 For a long time Aksakov was persecuted by the Russian Government for the 
frankness of his criticisms. Only m his last years did he share with Katkov the 
privilege of free speech —a privilege which was peculiar to these two men and 
has not survived them.

61

VII

L S. Aksakov on the official Church in Russia61

VII

L S. Aksakov on the official Church in Russia

T he general aide-de-camp’s shoulder-knots (Achselband) with 
which Mgr. Irenaeus, archbishop of Pskov and member of the 
Holy Synod, was decorated in the reign of Paul I are a symbol of 
the relations between Church and State in Russia. It should cause no sur- 
prise to see this secular, not to say military, decoration upon the arch- 
bishop’s cassock; it merely proves that the fundamental conception of our 
ecclesiastical constitution has been consistently developed ever since the 
time of Peter the Great.

‘As is well known, the Russian Church is governed by an administrative 
council called a Spiritual Conclave or Holy Synod, whose members are 
nominated by the Emperor and are presided over by a civil or military 
official, the High Procurator of the Holy Synod, who has complete con- 
trol of the government of the Church. The dioceses, or eparchies', are 
nominally ruled by bishops nominated by the Head of the State on the 
recommendation of the Synod, that is, of the High Procurator who may 
subsequendy depose them at pleasure.

‘The various degrees in the clerical hierarchy have been recorded in the 
“List of Ranks” and made to correspond exactly with the various military 
grades. A metropolitan is equivalent to a marshal (“full general” accord- 
ing to the Russian expression), an archbishop to a divisional general (or 
“lieutenant-general”), and a bishop to a brigade general (or “major- 
general”). Priests may with a little keenness reach the rank of colonel. 
Paul I was only being consistent in bestowing mihtary decorations on the 
dignitaries of the Church.‘Are such things unimportant details or matters of purely external sig- 
nificance? On the contrary, it is these outward features that reflect the 
inner condition of our Church. Enrolled in the service of the State, the 
servants of the altar regard themselves as the employees and agents of the 
secular power. If the latter rewards the services of the clergy with lay

^ I. 3. Aksakov Complete Works, vol. iv, p. 119. * ibid., p. 120.

62

decorations it is because the clergy themselves covet these rewards.^ The 
Synod of St. Petersburg from its earliest years insisted upon its character 
as an imperial institution and never friled to quote the temporal power as 
the true source of its authority. In all its early official acts it repeats over 
and over again that * ‘command has been given” {poveleno) by the sovereign 
to everyone, “to persons of every rank, ecclesiastics and laity, to r^ard 
the Synod as an important and powerful body” and in no way to dis- 
parage “the dignity bestowed upon it by His Majesty- the Tsar”. It is easy 
to see that the element of temporal authority from which the Synod 
thought to draw its strength was bound inevitably to prevail over every 
other element in its composition and to dominate completely this hybrid 
institution which, though declaring itself to be an organ of the secular 
power, none the less claimed the authority of an ecclesiastical council.* 
The dignity bestowed upon it by His Majesty the Tsar was to be dis- 
paraged by no one — excepting His Majesty. And it was thus that the High 
Procurator Yakovlev obtained an imperial order severely forbidding the 
Synod to carry on direct correspondence with anyone whatsoever; all 
communications (“every document” according to the Russian expres- 
sion) concerning Church affairs were to be transmitted to the Procurator.‘Thus our Church on its administrative side has the appearance of a kind 
of huge bureau or chancellery which brings to the task of feeding Christ’s 
flock all the methods of German bureaucracy with all its inherent official 
insincerity.* When once the government of the Church is organised as a 
department of the secular administration and her ministers are reckoned 
as civil servants, there is little to prevent the Church herself from being 
transformed into an agency of the secular power and undisguisedly enter- 
ing the service of the State. With ‘‘the rights and privileges of fiscal ad- 
ministration (kaznay* which Russian law grants to the Estabhshed Church 
the fiscal (kazenny) element has penetrated deep into her life. Outwardly 
all that was done was to introduce the necessary discipline into* the 
Church; actually she was robbed of her soul. The ideal of a truly spiritual 
administration was replaced by that of a purely formal and external dis- 
cipline. It was not a question merely of the secular power but principally 
of the secular way of thinking which found its way mto the heart of our 
Church administration and gained such a hold upon the minds and souls 
of our clergy that they have well nigh lost all notion of the true and living 
meaning of the Church’s mission.’*

This statement is supported by a whole collection of tracts and pro- 
posals for Church reform sent to Aksakov by the ‘intelligentsia and pro- 
gressives’ among our clergy and all without exception marked by the 
^ ibid., p. I2I. * ibid., p. 122. • ibid., p. 124. * ibid., pp. 125, 126.

6363

same anti-religious secularism.^ ‘Some suggest that the enthusiasm of 
preachers should be revived by a new system of official rewards in the 
shape of special decorations. Others insist that the State must formally 
guarantee the lower clergy protection against the power of the bishops. 
Others believe that our religious future depends upon an increase in the 
ecclesiastical revenues; they would therefore have the State grant the 
Churches the monopoly of certain branches of industry. Some even 
suggest the introduction of a scale of charges for the administration of the 
holy sacraments. . . , Some go so far as to assert that our religious life is 
not sufficiently regulated by the government, and they demand a new 
code of laws and rules for the Church. And yet in the present Imperial 
Code there are more than a thousand articles regulating the supervision of 
the Church by the State and defining the duties of the police in the sphere 
of religious belief and practice. The secular administration is declared by 
our Code to be the upholder of the dogmas of the established religion and 
the guardian of good discipline in the holy Church.* We see this guardian, 
with sword raised, ready to deal sternly with any offence against this 
Orthodoxy which owes its establishment not so much to the aid of the 
Holy Spirit as to that of the penal laws of the Russian Empire.^‘The High Procurator of the Synod, as the responsible head of the 
Church, presents to the Emperor an annual report on the state of that in- 
stitution. In form and style there is no difference between this report and 
those of other ministries, for instance the Ministry of Transport. Its con- 
tents are divided and subdivided in the same way; only instead of such 
tides as “Highways**, “Railways**, “Navigable Rivers**, the report of the 
High Procurator contains the headings: “Maintenance and spread of the 
faith’*, “Pastoral activity**, “Manifestations of religious feeling, of devo- 
tion to the sacred person of His Majesty**, etc.*^ The report for the year 
1866, analysed by Aksakov, concludes in the following characteristic 
manner: ‘The Russian Church, infinitely indebted for her prosperity to 
the august solicitude of the Sovereign, has embarked upon a new year of 
her existence with renewed strength and greater promise for the future.*^ 
The Church has renounced her ecclesiastical freedom; and the State in 
return has guaranteed her existence and her position as the established 
Church by suppressing religious freedom throughout Russia. ‘Where 
there is no living inward unity,* says Aksakov, ‘outward uniformity can 
only be maintained by violence and deception.*^ These are harsh words 
from a patriotic Russian; but they are none the less true. The precarious

^ ibid., p. 126. * ibid., p. 84. ^ ibid., p. 75.

* ibid., p. 77. ® ibid., p. 100.

64^ ibid., p. 126. * ibid., p. 84. ^ ibid., p. 75.

* ibid., p. 77. ® ibid., p. 100.

64

and uncertain unity of our Church rests upon nothing but deception and 
violence practised by, or at least under the aegis of, the government. From 
the forged decrees of a fictitious council against an imaginary heretic^ up 
to the recent falsifications in the translation of the decrees of the (Ecu- 
menical Councils pubhshed by the Ecclesiastical Academy of Kazan, the 
whole activity of our Church, both in propaganda and in defence, is 
simply a series of deceptions carried out in complete security, thanks to 
the watchful protection of the ecclesiastical censorship which forestalls 
every attempt at exposure. As for the use of violence in religious matters, 
it is recognised in theory and developed in detail in our Penal Code. Any 
person bom in the estabhshed Church or converted to Orthodoxy who 
embraces another reHgion, even though it is Christian, incurs a criminal 
charge and must be tried before the courts on the same footing as counter- 
feiters and highwaymen. Whoever induces anyone to leave the established 
Church, even if only by persuasion without any constraint or violence, 
is deprived of civil rights and deported to Siberia or thrown into prison. 
Such severity is by no means a dead letter with us; Aksakov had the 
opportunity of observing it at work in the cruel persecution of a Protes- 
tant sect in Southern Russia.‘To stifle with imprisonment the thirst for religion, for lack of anything 
wherewith to satisfy it, to answer with imprisonment the genuine desire 
for faith and the questionings aroused m the religious mind, to use im- 
prisonment as an argument for the truth of Orthodoxy — this is to under- 
mine the whole of our rehgion and to surrender to victorious Protestant- 
ism. Such weapons of defence and such methods of establishing orthodox 
truth must soon supersede and destroy all pastoral zeal, and must stamp 
out every spark of true rehgion. The stringent orders issued by the 
ecclesiastical officials compelling the clergy under threat of fines to estab- 
lish schools can never introduce real popular religious instruction; and we 
hope that it will not seem too sceptical to suggest that the recent ukase 
wliich grants to priests engaged in the work of popular education the right 
to the Cross of St. Anne of Ae 3rd class and to the rank of knighthood will 
not succeed in raising up new Apostles.

^ I refer to the decrees of the imaginary council of Kiev in 1157, in which all the 
opinions of the ‘old behevers* of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries were 
imputed to Martin the Armenian, a heretic of the twelfth century, who in fact 
never existed. This imposture was so crude and improbable that even our ecclesi- 
astical schools were for a time ashamed of it. But latterly the recrudescence of 
official obscurantism has brought about the revival of this invention of Bishop 
Pitirim (u. the article already quoted from Prau. Obozr., October 1887, pp. 306, 
307» 314).

^ Aksakov, ibid.) p. 72.

E

65^ Aksakov, ibid.) p. 72.

E

65

And yet it is a fact that the penal laws are absolutely essential to the 
maintenance of this ‘established Church*. The sincerest champions of that 
Church, such as the historian Pogodin whom our author quotes, admit 
that, if religious freedom were once introduced into Russia, half the 
peasants would go over to the Raskol and half the upper classes, especially 
the women, would become Catholics. ‘What does such an admission 
imply?* asks Aksakov. ‘That half the members of the Orthodox Church 
belong to her only in name; that they arc kept within her fold only by 
the fear of temporal penalties. This is what our Church has come to! It 
is a dishonourable, depressing and monstrous state of affairs, this riot of 
sacrilege in the sacred precincts, of hypocrisy ousting truth, of terror in 
place of love, of corruption under the guise of outward order, of bad faith 
in violent defence of the true faith! What a demal, within the Church 
herself, of her own vital principles, of all that justifies her existence, that 
falsehood and unbelief should reign where everything should live and 
move and have its being in truth and faith ! And yet the gravest danger is 
not that the evil has spread among the faithful but that it has been legalised, 
that this state of affairs in the Church has been established by statute and 
that such an anomaly should be the inevitable outcome of the standard 
accepted by the State and by the whole of our society.^‘Generally speaking, among us in Russia, in Church affairs as in all 
other matters it is outward decorum that must be preserved at all costs; 
and with that our love for the Church, our idle love, our indolent faith, 
IS satisfied. We readily shut our eyes and, in our childish fear of scandal, 
attempt to blind ourselves and everyone else to all that great evil which 
under the veil of respectability is eating like a cancer into the living core 
of our religious organism.^ Nowhere else is truth regarded with such 
horror as in the domain of our Church administration; nowhere else is 
there greater servility than in our spiritual hierarchy; nowhere is the 
“salutary falsehood** practised on a larger scale than in the place where all 
falsehood should be held in detestation. Nowhere else are there admitted 
on grounds of policy so many compromises which lower the dignity of 
the Church and rob her of her authority. The root cause of it all is the 
lack of a sufficient faith in the power of truth.® And the most serious part 
of it is that though we are aware of all these evils in our Church we have 
come to terms with them and are content to live at peace. But such a 
shameful peace, such dishonourable compromise, can never promote the 
true peace of the Church; in the cause of truth it signifies defeat if not 
betrayal.^

‘Our Church, if we are to take the word of her champions, is a huge

^ ibid., p. 91. ® ibid., p. 42. ® ibid., p. 35. ibid., p. 43.

66‘Our Church, if we are to take the word of her champions, is a huge

^ ibid., p. 91. ® ibid., p. 42. ® ibid., p. 35. ibid., p. 43.

66

but wayward flock, shepherded by the officers of the law who with the 
lash force the straying sheep into the fold. Does such a picture correspond 
to the true conception of Christ’s Church? If not, she is no longer the 
Church of Christ. What is she then? A State institution which can be 
used in the interests of the State for moral discipline. But it must not be 
forgotten that the Church is a domain the moral basis of which admits 
of no change, a domain in which disloyalty to the very principle of her 
life cannot go unpunished, in which a lie is a lie not to men but to God. 
A Church diat is unfaithful to Christ’s covenant is the most barren and 
anomalous phenomenon in the world; she stands condemned already by 
the word of God.^ A Church which is a department of State, that is, of a 
“kingdom of this world”, has renounced her mission and will inevitably 
share the fate of all the kingdoms of this world.* She has no intrinsic reason 
for existence; she has doomed herself to impotence and death.*

‘The Russian conscience is not free in Russia; religious thought re- 
mains paralysed; the “abomination of desolation” stands m the holy place; 
the breath of mortality banishes the life-giving Spirit; the sword of the 
Spirit, which is the word of God, is left to rust and its place is taken by 
the sword of the State, while in the Church’s precincts are seen, not the 
angels of God watching over the faithful in their going out and coming 
in, but the officers of the law and inspectors of police—as guardians of 
Orthodoxy and directors of our consciences.We have not forgotten that the Slavophils see in our Church the one 
true Church of Christ and the living synthesis of freedom and unity in the 
spirit of charity. And this is the conclusion reached by the latest represen- 
tative of that party after an impartial enquiry into the state of the Church: 
‘It is the spirit of truth, the spirit of charity, the spirit of life, the spirit of 
freedom, of whose invigorating breath the Church of Russia stands in 
need’.®

Thus, according to the unimpeachable testimony of an eminent Russian 
Orthodox and patriot, our national Church has been deserted by the Spirit 
of Truth and Charity and is not the true Church of God. In order to escape 
from this inevitable conclusion we have a habit of recalling for the 
moment the other Eastern Churches, to which otherwise we do not give, 
a thought. W^c do not belong, we say, to the Russian Church but to the 
Orthodox and (Ecumenical Church of the East. It will be readily under- 
stood that the champions of the separated Eastern Church desire nothing 
better than the ascription to her of a real and positive unity. It remains to 
be seen whether she possesses this unity in any effective sense.

1 ibid., pp. 91, 92. * ibid., p. ill. ® ihid., p. 93-

< ibid., pp. 83, 84. ® P- 1^7-

67

VIII

Relations between the Russian and Greek Churches, 
Bulgaria and Serbia1 ibid., pp. 91, 92. * ibid., p. ill. ® ihid., p. 93-

< ibid., pp. 83, 84. ® P- 1^7-

67

VIII

Relations between the Russian and Greek Churches, 
Bulgaria and Serbia

T he Eastern Church is not a homogeneous body. Among the 
various nations of which it is composed the two most important 
have given it their names; its official title is the Greco-Russian 
Church. This national duahsm (which, it may be remarked in passing, is 
singularly reminiscent of the two feet of clay of which Archbishop 
Philaret speaks) suggests a concrete form in which to put the question of 
our ecclesiastical unity. We are concerned to discover what the real living 
bond is which umtes the Russian and the Greek Churches and makes of 
them a single moral organism. We are told that the Russians and the 
Greeks possess a common faith and that that is the main thing. But we 
must enquire what is meant in this case by the word ‘faith' or ‘religion' 
(pera). True faith is that which possesses our whole soul and is seen to be 
the moving and guiding principle of our entire existence. The profession 
of one and the same abstract belief, having no influence upon conscience 
or life, constitutes no corporate bond and cannot truly unite anyone; it 
becomes a matter of indifference whether or not anyone possesses this 
dead faith in common with anyone else. On the other hand, unity in real 
faith inevitably becomes a living and active unity, a moral and practical 
solidarity.

If the Russian and Greek Churches give no evidence of their soHdarity 
by any vital activity, their ‘unity of faith' is a mere abstract formula pro- 
ducing no fruits and involving no obhgations. A layman interested in 
rehgious questions once asked that distinguished prelate, the metropolitan 
Philaret,^ what could be done to revive the relations between the Russian 
Church and the Mother Church. ‘But on what grounds are relations be- 
tween them possible?' was the reply of the author of the Greco-Russian^ The reader must not be surprised to come across this name constantly in our 
writings; he is the only really notablfe character produced by the Russian Church 
in the nineteenth century.

68^ The reader must not be surprised to come across this name constantly in our 
writings; he is the only really notablfe character produced by the Russian Church 
in the nineteenth century.

68

Catechism. Some years before this curious conversation, there occurred 
an incident which gives us an insight into the truth of the words of the 
wise archbishop. William Pahner, a distinguished member of the Anglican 
Church and of the University of Oxford, wished to join the Orthodox 
Church. He went to Russia and Turkey to study the contemporary situa- 
tion in the Christian East and to find out on what conditions he would be 
admitted to the communion of the Eastern Orthodox. At St. Petersburg 
and at Moscow he was told that he had only to abjure the errors of Pro- 
testantism before a priest, who would thereupon administer to him the 
sacrament of Holy Chrism or Confirmation. But at Constantinople he 
found that he must be baptised afresh. As he knew himself to be a Chris- 
tian and saw no reason to suspect the vaHdity of his baptism (which inci- 
dentally was admitted without question by the Orthodox Russian 
Church) he considered that a second baptism would be a sacrilege. On 
the other hand, he could not bring himself to accept Orthodoxy according 
to the local rules of the Russian Church since he would then become 
Orthodox only in Russia while remaining a heathen in the eyes of the 
Greeks; and he had no wish to join a national Church but to join the 
universal Orthodox Church. No one could solve his dilemma, and so he 
became a Roman Catholic.^ It is obvious that there are questions on which 
the Russian Church could and ought to negotiate with the Mother See, 
and if these questions are carefully avoided it is because it is a foregone 
conclusion that a clear formulation of them would only end in a formal 
schism. The jealous hatred of the Greeks for the Russians to which the 
latter reply with a hostility mingled with contempt — that is the fact which 
governs the real relations of these two national Churches in spite of their 
bemg officially in communion with one another. But even this official 
unity hangs upon a single hair and all the diplomacy of the clergy of St. 
Petersburg and Constantinople is needed to prevent the snapping of this 
slender thread. The will to maintain this counterfeit unity is decidedly not 
inspired by Christian charity, but by the dread of a fatal disclosure; for on 
the day on which the Russian and Greek Churches formally break with 
one another the whole world will see that theCEcumenical Eastern Church 
is a mere fiction and that there exists in the East notliing but isolated 
national Churches. That is the real motive which impels our hierarchy to^ A note at the end of this volume gives certain historical details on the question 
of second baptism in the Grcco-Russian Church. These facts, with which no 
doubt Palmer was acquamted, could only confirm him in his final resolve not to 
seek umvcrsal truth in a quarter where the basic mystery of our religion has been 
made an instrument of national politics. [Che note referred to is missing from all 
the editions of Solovyev’s work which I have been able to consult. — Tr,\

69

adopt an attitude of caution and moderation towards the Greeks, in othet 
words to avoid any kind of dealings with them.^ As for the Church of 
Constantinople which in its arrogant provincialism assumes the tide of ‘the 
Great Church’ and ‘the CEcumenical Church’, it would probably be glad 
to be rid of these Northern barbarians who are only a hindrance to its 
Pan-Hellenic aims. In recent times, the patriarchate of Constantinople has 
been twice on the point of anathematising the Russian Church;^ only 
purely material considerations have prevented a spht. The Greek Church 
of Jerusalem, which is in fact completely subservient to that of Constanti- 
nople, depends on the other hand for its means of subsistence almost en- 
tirely upon Russian charity. This material dependence of the Greek clergy 
on Russia is of very long standing, and does in fact form the only actual 
basis of Greco-Russian unity. But it is clear that this purely external link 
is incapable of fusing the two Churches into a single moral organism 
endowed with unity of Hfe and action.This conclusion will be further strengthened if we take into considera- 
tion the national Churches of lesser importance which, being under the 
jurisdiction of the patriarch of Constantinople, were formerly part of the 
Greek Church but became autocephalous as the various small States re- 
gained their political independence. The relations of these so-called 
Churches to one another, to the metropolitan see of Byzantium and to 
the Russian Church are almost non-existent. Even such purely official and 
conventional relations as are maintained between St. Petersburg and Con- 
stantinople are not, as far as I am aware, estabhshed between Russia and 
the new autocephalous Churches of Rumania and Greece.

The case of Bulgaria and Serbia is worse still. It is well known that in 
1872 the Greek patriarchs with the consent of the Synod of Athens ex- 
communicated the whole Bulgarian people for reasons of national policy. 
The Bulgarians were condemned for their ‘phyletism’, that is to say, their 
tendency to subject the Church to racial and national divisions. The accusa- 
tion was true; but this phyletism which was heresy among the Bulgarians 
was orthodoxy itself among the Greeks. The Russian Church, while 
sympathising with the Bulgarians, wished to rise above this poHtical

^ It IS also the only practical reason for our still retaining the Julian calendar in 
defiance of the sun and the stars; no change could be made without entenng mto 
negotiations with the Greeks, which is just what our clerical circles most dread.

2 In 1872, when the Synod of St. Petersburg refused to associate itself openly 
with the decisions of the Greek council which excommunicated the Bulgarians; and 
m 1884, when the Russian Government requested the Porte to nominate two 
Bulgarian bishops in dioceses which the Greeks regard as entirely under their 
jurisdiction.

7070

quarrel. But she could only do so by speaking in the name of the Universal 
Church, which she had no more right to do than the Greeks. The Synod 
of St. Petersburg, therefore, instead of making a clear pronouncement, 
merely sulked at the Byzantine hierarchy and, on receiving the decisions 
of the council of 1872 with a request for its approval, refrained from 
answering one way or the other. Hence arose a state of affairs which had 
never been foreseen or rather had been thought impossible, according to 
the canons of the Church. The Russian Church remained in formal com- 
munion with the Greek Church and in actual communion with the Bul- 
garian Church without any explicit protest against the canonical act of 
excommunication which separated these two Churches or any appeal, 
even if only for form’s sake, to an oecumenical council.

A complication of the same kind rose with Serbia. The atheist govern- 
ment of this little kingdom promulgated ecclesiastical laws which estab- 
lished the hierarchy of the Serbian Church on a basis of compulsory 
simony, since all sacred offices were to be purchased at a fixed tariff; the 
metropolitan Michael and the other bishops were arbitrarily deposed and 
a new hierarchy was created in defiance of canon law. This hierarchy was 
formally repudiated by the Russian Church and repHed by purchasing the 
support of the patriarch of Constantinople. It was now ‘the Great Church* 
which found herself in communion with two Churches which were out 
of communion with one another.It need hardly be added that all these national Churches are simply State 
Churches entirely without any kind of ecclesiastical freedom. It is easy to 
imagine the disastrous effect which such an oppression of the Church can 
produce upon the religion of these unfortunate countries. The rehgious 
indifference of the Serbs is as well known as their mania for using Ortho- 
doxy as a pohtical weapon in their fratricidal struggle against the Catholic 
Croats.^ As regards Bulgaria, Mgr. Joseph, the exarch of that country 
and a witness of unimpeachable authority, revealed the distressing state of 
religion among his people in an allocution delivered at Constantinople in 
1885 on the feast of St. Methodius. ‘The mass of the people,* he said, ‘are 
cold and indifferent, while the educated classes are definitely hostile to 
everything sacred; it is only fear of the Russians that prevents the abohdon 
of the Church in Bulgaria.** There is no need for us to shew that the re- 
ligious condition of Rumania and Greece is essentially the same as that 
of the Serbs and Bulgarians. In a report presented to the Emperor of

^ For the views on this subject of a Slavophil writer who has lived long in

Serbia the reader is referred to the article by P. K ^ky in Aksakov’s periodical

Russ (1885, No. 12).

* This sermon was reproduced in full m Katkov’s paper, the Moscow Gazette,

71

Russia by the Procurator of the Holy Synod and published last year, the 
rehgious and ecclesiastical condition of the four Orthodox countries of 
the Balkan peninsuk is painted in the darkest colours. It could not in fact 
be worse. But what is really surprising is the explanation given in the 
oflScial document. The one and only cause of all these evils, according to 
the ruler of our Church, is the constitutional regime! If that is so, then 
what is the cause of the deplorable state of the Church of Russia?

72

IX

The fulfilment of a prophecy, Caesaropapism in action72

IX

The fulfilment of a prophecy, Caesaropapism in action

G eorge Samarm,^ a friend of Aksakov and like him a prominent 
member of the Slavophil party or group, in a letter on the subject 
of the Vatican Council wrote as follows: ‘Papal absolutism has 
not killed the vitality of the Catholic clergy; this should give us food for 
thought, for some day or other we shall hear promulgated the infallibility 
of the Tsar or rather that of the Procurator of the Holy Synod, for the 
Tsar is of comparatively no importance. . . . When that day comes shall 
we find a single bishop, a single monk or a single priest who will protest? 
I doubt it. If anyone protests it will be a layman, your obedient servant 
or Ivan Sergeyevich (Aksakov), if we are still m this world. As for our 
unfortunate clergy, whom you think deserving of pity rather than blame 
(and perhaps you are right), they will be dumb.*

It was a happy chance that brought these words to my notice, for I 
know few prophecies of the kind which have been fulfilled so exactly to 
the letter. The proclamation of Caesaropapist absolutism in Russia, the 
profound silence and absolute submission of the clergy and finally the 
solitary protest of a single layman — it has all come about exactly as 
Samarin foresaw.

In 1885 an official document emanating from the Russian Government* 
declared that the Eastern Church had resigned its authority and placed it 
in the hands of the Tsar. Few people noticed this significant utterance.^ Yury (George) Fedorovich Samarin (d. 1876), an ardent disciple of Khomya- 
kov, whose brilliant qualities he lacked, but whom he surpassed in learning and 
critical acumen, deserved well of Russia for the very active part he played in the 
emancipation of the serfs in 1861. Apart from that, his cultured intelligence and 
remarkable talent remained almost entirely unproductive, as so often happens in 
Russia. He left behind him no works of importance and as a writer chiefly dis- 
tmguished himself by controversial writings against the Jesuits and the Germans 
of the Baltic provinces. The letter from which we quote was addressed to a Russian 
lady (Mme A. O. Smirnov) and is dated 10/22 December 1871.

* Regulations for State examinations in the Faculty of Laws.

73

Samarin was already dead some years. Aksakov had only a few mondis 
to live; nevertheless he published in his periodical Russ the protest of a 
lay writer who incidenti^y did not belong to the Slavophil group. This 
solitary protest, neither authorised nor supported by a single representa- 
tive of the Church, only served by its isolation to throw into relief the 
deplorable state of religion in Russia.^ Indeed, the Caesaropapist manifesto 
of the officials of St. Petersburg was merely the explicit admission of an 
established fact. It is undeniably true that the Eastern Church has abdicated 
in favour of the secular power; the only question is whether it had the 
right to do so and whether, having done so, it could still represent Him 
to Whom all power has been given in heaven and earth. Whatever 
violence may be done to the Gospel passages concerning the eternal powers 
left by Jesus Christ to His Church, they will never yield any mention of 
the right of surrendering those powers into the hands of a temporal 
authority. The authority which claims to take over the Church’s mission 
on earth must have received at least the same promise of stabjHty.We do not believe that our prelates have willingly or deliberately sur- 
rendered their ecclesiastical authority. But if the Eastern Church has in 
the course of events lost that which once belonged to her by divine right, 
it is clear that the gates of hell have prevailed against her and that therefore 
she is not the impregnable Church founded by Christ.

Nor do we wish to hold the secular government responsible for the 
anomalous relation of the Church to the State. The State has been justified 
in maintaining its independence and supremacy in regard to a spiritual 
authority which only represented one particular national Church in sepa- 
ration from the great Christian community. The declaration that the State 
should be subject to the Church can only refer to the one, indivisible and 
universal Church founded by God.

The government of a separated national Church is only a historical and 
purely human institution. But the Head of the State is the lawful repre- 
sentative of the nation as such, and a body of clergy which aims at being 
national and nothing more must, whether they like it or not, recognise 
the absolute sovereignty of the secular government. The sphere of national 
existence can include within itself only one single centre, the Head of the

^ Note to Russian readers. I did not sign the article in question (‘State philosophy 
in the University curricula*, Russ, September 1885), because I beheved myself to 
be expressing the general feelings of Russian society. This was an illusion and I 
can now assert my sole claim to this vox clamantis in deserto. But it must not be 
forgotten that besides what is called ‘society* there are m Russia twelve to fifteen 
million dissenters who did not wait for the year 1885 to make their protest against 
the Caesaropapism of Moscow and St. Petersburg.

7474

State. The hierarchy of one particular Church can only claim to exercise 
over the State the sovereignty of apostolic authority in so far as it in fact 
forms the link between the nation and the universal, that is the inter- 
national, Kingdom of Christ. A national Church that does not wish to 
be subject to ^e absolute authority of the State, that is to say, to surrender 
its existence as a Church and become a department of the civil adminis- 
tration, must needs possess a real point d*appm outside the confines of State 
and nation. With these it is connected by natural md historical ties; but as 
a Church it must belong to a wider social group with an independent 
centre and a world-wide organisation of which the local Church can only 
constitute a single individual member.The leaders of the Russian Church could not rely on their religious 
metropolis in the struggle agamst the overpowering despotism of the 
State; for the Mother See was itself no more than a national Church which 
had been long subservient to the secular power. It is not ecclesiastical firec- 
dom but Caesaropapism which we have inherited from Byzantium, where 
this anti-Christian principle had developed unhmdered ever since the 
ninth century. The Greek hierarchy, having repudiated the powerful sup- 
port which it had possessed hitherto in the independent centre of the 
Universal Church, found itself completely abandoned to the mercy of the 
State and its despot. Before the schism, each time that the Greek Emj^erors 
encroached upon the spiritual domain and threatened the freedom of the 
Church, her spokesmen— whether it was St. John Chrysostom, 0r St. 
Flavian, or St. Maximus the Confessor, or St. Theodore of tlie Stimum, 
or the patriarch St. Ignatius — turned to the international centre ofifcris- 
tendom and appealed to thejudgment of the sovereign pontiff; andjthey 
themselves fell victims to brute force, yet their cause, the cause o||xuth 
and justice and freedom, never failed to find at Rome a resolute chaiipion 
who ensured its ultimate triumph. In those days the Greek Chur cy was, 
and knew herself to be, a livmg part of the Universal Church, ^sely 
bound to the whole by the common centre of unity, the apostoli^hair 
of Peter. This relation of salutary dependence upon a successor i>f the 
supreme Apostles, God’s pontiff, this purely spiritual, lawful and hinour- 
able relation, gave place to a worldly, unlawful and humiliating suliection 
to the power of mere laymen and unbelievers.This is not simply an accident of history; it is an instance of the logic 
of events which inevitably robs any merely national Church of its inde- 
pendence and dignity and brings it under the yoke of the temporal power, 
a yoke which may be more or less oppressive but is always ignominious. 
In every country which has been brought to accept a national Church the 
secular government, be it autocratic or constitutional, enjoys absolute

75

authority; the ecclesiastical institution only figures as a special Ministry 
dependent on the general State administration. In such a case it is the 
national State which is the real complete entity, existing by itself and for 
itself; the Church is only a section, or rather a certain aspect, of this social 
organism of the body politic, only existing for itself in the abstract.

Such enslavement of the Church is incompatible with its spiritual dig- 
nity, its divine origin and its universal mission. On the other hand, reason 
demonstrates, and history confirms the conclusion, that it is absolutely 
impossible for two powers and two governments, equally sovereign and 
independent and confined to the same territory, to exist for long side by 
side within the bounds of a single national State. Such a dyarchy inevit- 
ably produces an antagonism which can only end in a complete triumph 
for the secular government since it is this which really represents the 
nation, whereas the Church by its very nature is not a national institution 
and cannot become one without forfeiting the true reason for its existence.We are told that the Emperor of Russia is a son of the Church. That is 
only what he should be as head of a Christian State. But if he is to be so 
in actual fact, then the Church must exercise an authority over him; she 
must possess a power that is independent and superior to that of the State. 
With the best will m the world the secular monarch cannot be truly the 
son of a Church of which he is at the same time the head and which he 
governs through his officials.

The Church in Russia, deprived of any point d*appui or centre of unity 
outside the national State, has mevitably come to be subservient to the 
secular power; and the latter, acknowledging no authority upon earth 
superior to itself, recognising no one from whom it may receive rehgious 
sanction, that is to say, a partial delegation of the authority of Christ, has 
just as inevitably engendered an anti-Christian despotism.

If thi national State asserts itself as a complete and self-sufficient social 
organism it cannot belong as a living member to the universal body of 
Christ. And if it is outside that body, then it is not a Christian State and 
is only reviving the ancient Caesarism which was aboHshed by Christianity.

God assumed manhood in the person of the Jewish Messiah at the 
moment when Man was assuming godhead in the person of the Roman 
Caesar. Jesus Christ did not attack Cxsar or dispute his authority; He 
spoke the truth about him. He said that Caesar was not God and that 
Caesar’s power was external to the Kingdom of God. The rendering to 
Caesar of the money that he coins and to God of all the rest, that is what 
is called nowadays the separation of Church and State, a separation which 
is essential as long as Caesar remains pagan but impossible as soon as he 
becomes Christian. A Christian, be he king or emperor, cannot remam

7676

outside the Kingdom of God and set up his own authority against God’s. 
The supreme commandment: ‘Render to God the things that are God’s’ 
is necessarily binding upon Caesar himself if he would be a Christian. He 
too must render to God what is God’s, and to God belongs, above all, 
supreme and absolute power upon earth; for if we would understand the 
words about Caesar which our Lord addressed to His enemies before His 
Passion, we must complete them with that other more solemn utterance 
after His Resurrection. To His disciples, the representatives of His Church, 
He said: ‘All power is given to Me in heaven and on earth’ (Matt, xxviii. 
1 8). This is an expHcit and decisive passage which cannot honestly be in- 
terpreted m more than one way. Those who really believe in Christ’s 
words will never recognise a State as an absolutely independent and 
sovereign temporal power, separate from the Kingdom of God. There is 
only one power upon earth and that belongs not to Caesar but to Jesus 
Christ. The words about the tribute-money have already robbed Caesar 
of his divinity; this new utterance robs him of his despotic authority. If 
he wishes to reign upon earth he can no longer do so in his own right; 
he must receive his commission from Him to Whom all power is given 
upon earth. How then is he to obtain this commission.^Jesus Christ, in revealing to men the Kingdom of God which is not of 
this world, gave them all the necessary means of realising this Kingdom 
in the world. Having affirmed in His high-pnestly prayer that the final 
aim of His work was the perfect unity of all, our Lord desired to provide 
an actual organic basis for this work by founding His visible Church and 
by giving it a single head in the person of St. Peter as the guarantee of its 
unity. If there is in the Gospels any delegation of authority, it is this. Jesus 
Christ gave no sanction or promise whatsoever to any temporal power. 
He founded only the Church, and He founded it on the monarchical 
power of Peter: ‘Thou art Peter, and on this rock I will build My Church’.

The Christian State, therefore, must be dependent upon the Church 
founded by Christ, and the Church itself is dependent upon the head 
which Chnst has given it. In a word, it is through Peter that the Christian 
Caesar must share in the kingship of Christ. He can, possess no authority 
apart from him who has received the fullness of all authority; he cannot 
reign apart from him who holds the keys of the Kingdom. The State, if 
It is to be Christian, must be subject to the Church of Christ; but if this 
subjection is to be genuine, the Church must be independent of the State, 
it must possess a centre of unity outside and above the State, it must be in 
truth the Universal Church.

It has latterly begun to be realised in Russia that a merely national 
Church, left to its own resources, is bound to become a passive and worth-

77

less instrument of the State, and that ecclesiastical independence can only 
be ensured by an international centre of spiritual authority. But while the 
necessity of such a centre is admitted, attempts have been made to bring 
it into being within the boundaries of Eastern Christendom. This plan to 
create an Eastern quasi-Pope is the last anti-Catholic ambition left for us 
to examine.

78

X78

X

The design to establish a quasi-Papacy at Constantinople 
or Jerusalem

T his preconceived determination that at all costs the centre of the 
Universal Church shall be situated in the East indicates at the very 
outset a spirit of local egotism and racial hatred that is more likely 
to breed schism than to establish Christian imity. Would it not be better 
to put prejudice aside and look for the centre of unity where it is actually 
to be found? If it is not to be found anywhere, it is surely childish to 
attempt to invent it.Once it is granted that such a centre is necessary to the normal life of 
the Church, it cannot be supposed that the divine Head and Founder of 
the Church did not foresee this necessity, or that He left the indispensable 
basis of His work to chance circumstances or human caprice. If facts 
compel us to admit that the Church cannot act freely without an inter- 
national centre of unity, we must also frankly confess that the Christian 
East has been deprived of this essential organ for the last thousand years 
and cannot therefore alone constitute the Universal Church. Surely during 
so long a period the Universal Church must have manifested her unity 
elsewhere. That there is nothing serious or practical in this hybrid notion 
of finding a central government for the Universal Church somewhere in 
the East or of setting up an Eastern antipope is sufficiently shewn by the 
inability of its advocates to agree on the following question, even when 
put as a mere theoretical plan or a pious aspiration: On which of the dig- 
nitaries of the Eastern Church is this uncertain task to devolve? Some are 
in favour of the ‘CEcumenical Patriarch* of Constantinople; others would 
prefer the see of Jerusalem, ‘the Mother of all the Churches*. If we here at- 
tempt briefly to do justice to these pathetic utopias, it is not because of 
their intrinsic importance which is absolutely nil, but simply out of regard 
for certain estimable writers who in desperation have sought to substitute 
these imaginary notions for the true ideal of the reunion of the Churches.

If the centre of unity does not exist by divine right, then the Church 
of the present day (which they regard nevertheless as a complete orgamsm)

79If the centre of unity does not exist by divine right, then the Church 
of the present day (which they regard nevertheless as a complete orgamsm)

79

must create for herself, after a life of eighteen centuries, that upon which 
her very existence depends. It is as if a human body, all complete but for 
the brain, were to be expected to manufactmre this central organ for itself. 
However, since the general absurdity of the theory is not apparent to our 
opponents, we must go into their schemes in detail.In conferring the primacy of jurisdiction upon one of her pastors the 
Church may guide her choice either by the facts of religious history 
attested by ecclesiastical tradition or by purely political considerations. In 
order to lend an air of religious sanction to their national ambitions, the 
Greeks of Byzantium have asserted that their Church was founded by the 
apostle St. Andrew to whom they give the title of protokletos (first-called). 
The legendary connection between this apostle and Constantinople, even 
if it were well estabhshed,^ could not confer any ecclesiastical prerogative 
on the imperial city, since neither Holy Scripture nor the tradition of the 
Church attributes to St. Andrew any kind of primacy in the apostolic 
college. The apostle could hardly communicate to his Church a privilege 
which he did not possess himself; and at the CEcumenical Council of 
Chalcedon in 451 the Greek bishops, desiring to attribute to the see of 
Constantinople primacy in the East and second place in the Universal 
Church after the bishop of ‘Old Rome*, carefully avoided any appeal to 
St. Andrew and based their proposal solely on the pohtical eminence of 
the imperial city (fiamXevovaa ttoXls). This argument, which is ulti- 
mately the only argument for the claims of Byzantium, cannot in fact 
justify them eidier in the past or in the future.^ If the pre-eminence of the 
‘ruling city* carries with it ecclesiastical primacy, then the ancient city of 
Rome, which no longer enjoyed this pre-emmence, should have forfeited 
her leading place in the Church. Yet so far was anyone from daring to 
question her position that it was to the Pope himself that the Greek 
bishops camt with their humble request that he would deign to approve 
the conditional and partial primacy of the Byzantine patriarch. As far as 
the situation to-day is concerned, what is to be done if the primacy belongs 
by right to that patriarch who is installed at the residence of the Orthodox 
Emperor, seeing that there is neither Orthodox Emperor at Constantinople 
nor patriarch at St. Petersburg? Or supposing this difficulty were over- 
come and Constantinople became again the ruling citjr of the Orthodox 
world and the residence of an Eastern Emperor, whether Russian, Greek^ It was the town of Patras which was hallowed by the martyrdom of St. Andrew 
and had the honour of originally possessing his relics.

* We shall have to consider later this first great instance of Byzantine Caesaro- 
papism; in any case it has nothing to do with the infallible authority of the dog- 
matic decrees formulated by the Council.

80

or Grcco-Russian—still for the Church it would be merely a return to the 
Cassaropapisni of the Second Empire. Wc know as a fact that the usurped 
primacy of the imperial patriarch was fatal to the freedom and authority 
of the Church in the East. It is clear that those who would escape the 
Caesaropapism of St. Petersburg by removing it to Constantinople are 
merely jumping out of the frying-pan into the fire.Jerusalem, the hallowed centre of the national theocracy of the Old 
Testament, has no claim to supremacy in the Universal Church of Christ. 
Tradition calls St. James the first bishop of Jerusalem. But St. James had 
no kind of primacy m the ApostoHc Church any more than St. Andrew 
and could not therefore communicate any special privilege to his see. 
Besides for a long tim^ he had no successor. At the approach of Vespasian’s 
legions the Christians deserted the condemned city which m the following 
century lost even its name. At the time of its restoration under Con- 
stantine, the see of St. James was subordinate to the jurisdiction of the 
metropolitan archbishop of Caesarea in Palestme, just as up to 381 the 
bishop of Byzantium was subordinate to the metropolitan of Heraclea in 
Thrace. Even after this, Jerusalem was for a long time a patriarchate only 
in name, and when she finally obtained independent jurisdiction she took 
the last place among patriarchal sees. To-day the ‘Mother of all the 
Churches’ is reduced to a coterie subservient to Phanariot phyletism and 
pursuing an exclusively national policy. If Jerusalem is to become the 
hierarchical centre of the Universal Church, then the Pan-Hellenist clique 
must be dispossessed and a new order of tlimgs created ex nihilo. But even 
if such an achievement were within the bounds of possibility, it is obvious 
that it could only be brought about by Russia at the price of a definite 
rupture with the Greeks. And then what would become of the Universal 
Church for which Russia is to provide ready-made an independent centre 
of authority? There would no longer exist a Greco-Russian Church; and 
the new patriarch of Jerusalem would be in reality only the patriarch of 
all the Russias. Certainly the Bulgarians and Serbs would do nothing to 
further the independence of the Church, and so we should have come 
back to a national Church with a hierarchy whose acknowledged leader 
could be no more than a mere subject and servant of the State.The manifest impossibility of finding or creating in the East a centre of 
unity for the Universal Church makes it imperative for us to seek it else- 
where. First and foremost toe must recognise ourselves for what we are in reality, 
an organic part of the great body of Christendom, and affirm our intimate solidarity 
with our Western brethren who possess the central organ which we lack. This 
moral act of justice and charity would be in itself an immense step forward on our 
part and the essential condition of all further advance.

81

F

PART TWO

THE ECCLESIASTICAL MONARCHY 
FOUNDED BY JESUS CHRIST

A ndrew, Simon Peter’s brother, was one of the two who had heard 
/-A what John said and had followed Jesus. He first found his brother 
JL X Simon and said to him: We have found the Messiah (which 
means, the Anointed). And he brought him to Jesus. Jesus having looked 
upon him said: Thou art Simon, the son of Jona; thou shalt be called 
Cephas (which means, Rock)’ (John i. 40-42).The Greco-Russian Church, as we have seen, claims the special patron- 
age of St. Andrew. The blessed apostle, inspired by goodwill towards 
his brother, brings him to the Lord and hears from the divine lips the 
first word of Simon’s future destiny as the Rock of the Church. There is 
no indication in the Gospels or in the Acts of the Apostles that St. Andrew 
ever felt any envy towards St. Peter or questioned his primacy. It is be- 
cause we would justify the claim of Russia to be the Church of St. Andrew 
that we shall try to imitate his example and to conceive the same spint of 
goodwill and religious harmony towards the great Church which is 
especially connected with St. Peter. This spirit will preserve us from local 
or national egotism, the source of so much error, and will enable us to 
examine the dogma of the Rock of the Church in the light of the very 
essence of the revelation of the God-Man, and so to discern in that reve- 
lation the eternal truths which this dogma expresses.

I

The Rock of the ChurchI

The Rock of the Church

I t would take too long to investigate here or even to enumerate all the 
existing doctrines and theories about the Church and its constitution. 
But anyone who is concerned to discover the plain truth about this 
fundamental problem of positive reHgion must be struck by tlie ease with 
which Providence has ordained that the truth may be learned. All Chris- 
tians are in complete agreement on one point, namely that the Church 
was founded by Christ; the question is how and in what terms He founded 
It. Now there is in the Gospels only one solitary text which mentions the 
founding of the Church in a direct, explicit and formal manner. This 
fundamental text becomes more and more clear as the Church itself 
grows and develops the permanent features of its organic structure; and 
nowadays the opponents of the truth can generally find no other way out 
but that of mutilating Christ’s creative word in order to adapt it to their 
own sectarian standpoint.^

‘Jesus Christ, having come into the district of Caesarea Philippi, asked 
His disciples: Who do men say that I, the Son of Man, am? And they 
answered Him: Some say, John the Baptist; others, Elijah; others again, 
Jeremiah or one of the prophets. He said to them: And who do you say 
that I am? And Simon Peter answered and said: Thou art the Christ, Son 
of the living God. And Jesus answered and said to him: Blessed art thou, 
Simon Bar-Jona, for it is not flesh and blood which have revealed it to 
thee, but My Father Who is in heaven. And I say to thee that thou art 
Peter and upon this rock I will build My Church and the gates of hell 
shall not prevail against it. And I will give thee the keys of the Kingdom 
of Heaven. And whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in 
heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in 
heaven* (Matt. xvi. 13-19).The union of the Divine and the human, which is the goal of creation, 
was accomphshed individually (or hypostatically) in the unique person of

^ Thus the text in question is mutilated even in the Orthodox Catechism of 
Mgr. Philarct of Moscow.

85

Jesus Christ, perfect God and perfect Man uniting the two natures in a 
perfect manner without confusion and without division*.^ The historic 
work of God enters henceforward upon a new stage. It is no longer a 
matter of a physical and individual unity but of a moral and social imion. 
The God-Man desires to unite humanity with Himself in a perfect union. 
The human race is steeped in error and sin. How shall He set about it? 
Is He to approach each human soul separately and unite it to Himself by 
a purely interior and subjective bond? He answers, No: OlKoSofirjao) rqv 
cKKXrjalav fiov. ‘I will build My Church.* It is a real objective work of 
which we are here told. But will He allow this work to be subject to all 
the divisions natural to the human race? Will He unite Himself to in- 
dividual nations as such by giving them independent national Churches? 
No, He does not say: I will build My Churches, but: My Church, rrjv 
€KKXriaLav fjLov. Mankind united to God must form a single social 
structure and for this unity a solid basis must be found.Any genuine union is based on the mutual interaction of those who are 
united. The act of absolute truth which is revealed in the God-Man (or 
the perfect Man) must meet with the response of imperfect humanity in 
an act of irrevocable adherence which links us to the divine principle. God 
mcarnate does not desire that His truth should be accepted in a passive 
and servile spirit. In His new dispensation He asks of mankind a free act of 
recognition. But at the same time this free act must be absolutely true and 
infallible. Therefore there must be established in the midst of fallen 
humanity a single fixed and impregnable point on which the constructive 
activity of God may be directly based, a point at which human freedom 
shall coincide with divme Truth in a composite act absolutely human m 
its outward form but divinely infallible in its fundamental character.

In the creation of the individual physical humanity of Christ the act of 
the divine Omnipotence required for its realisation only the supremely 
passive and receptive self-surrender of feminine nature in the person of the 
Immaculate Virgin. The building up of the social or collective humanity 
of Christ, of His universal body, the Church, demands less and at the same 
time more than that: less, because the human foundation of the Church 
need not be represented by an absolutely pure and sinless individual, since 
there is no question in this case of creating a substantial and individual 
relation, or a hypostatic and complete union, between two natures, but 
simply of forging a living moral bond. If, however, this new link (the 
link between Christ and the Church) is less intimate and fundamental than 
the previous link (that between the Word of God and human nature in 
the womb of the Immaculate Virgin), it is humanly speaking more 
^ Formula of Pope St. Leo the Great and of the Council of Chalcedon.

8686

positive, and of more fer-rcaching influence: more positive, because this 
new bond between the Spirit and the Truth demands a virile will to re- 
spond to God’s revelation and a virile intelligence to give a definite form 
to the truth which it accepts; moreover, this new link is of wider scope 
because, forming as it does the creative foundation of a collective entity, 
it cannot be confined to a personal relationship but must be extended 
through time as a permanent function of the society so formed.

It was necessary therefore to find in mankind as it is such a centre of 
active coherence between the Divine and the human, which might form 
the base or rock-foundation of the Christian Church. Jesus in His super- 
natural foreknowledge had already pointed out this rock. But in order 
to show us that His choice was free from all suspicion of arbitrariness. 
He begins by seeking elsewhere the human response to revealed truth. He 
turns first of all to general public opinion; He wishes to see whether He 
cannot be recognised, accepted and acclaimed by the opinion of the mob, 
the voice of the people: Quern dicunt homines esse Filium Hominis? For 
whom do men take Me? But Truth is ever one and the same, whereas the 
opinions of men are many and conflictmg. The voice of the people, which 
some claim to be the voice of God, only answered the question of the 
God-Man with its own erroneous and discordant opinions. There is no 
bond possible between Truth and such errors; mankind cannot enter into 
relation with God by the way of popular opmion; the Church of Christ 
cannot be founded on democracy.Having questioned popular opinion and failed to find there man s re- 
sponse to divine truth, Jesus Christ turns to His chosen, the college of 
the Apostles, that first of all oecumenical councils: Vos autem quern me esse 
dicitis? And for whom do you take Me? But the Apostles are silent. The 
moment before, when asked for the opinions of men, the twelve all spoke 
together: why do they leave the word to one of their number when it is 
a question of asserting divine truth? Possibly they are not quite agreed 
among themselves; possibly Philip does not perceive the essential relation 
of Jesus to the heavenly Father; possibly Thomas is doubtful of the Mes- 
sianic power of his Master. The last chapter of St. Matthew tells us that 
even on the Galilean mountain, whither they were summoned by Jesus 
after His resurrection, the Apostles did not shew themselves unanimous 
and firm in their faith: quidam autem dubitaverunt (Matt, xxviii. 17).

If it is to bear unanimous witness to the pure and simple truth, the 
council must be in absolute agreement. The decisive act must be an entirely 
individual act, the act of a single person. It is neither the multitude of the 
faithful nor the apostolic council but Simon Bar-Jona alone who answers 
Jesus. Respondens Simon Petrus dixit; Tu es Filius Dei vivi. He replies for all

8787

the Apostles, but he speaks on his o^ responsibility without consulting 
them or waiting for their consent. When the Apostles had repeated a 
moment before the opinions of the crowd which followed Jesus they had 
only repeated what were errors; if Simon had only wished to voice the 
opinions of the Apostles, he would possibly not have reached the pure and 
simple truth. But he followed his own spiritual impulse, the voice of his 
own conscience; and Jesus in pronouncing His solemn approval declared 
that this impulse for all its individual character came neverdieless from His 
heavenly Father, that it was an act both divme and human, a real co- 
operation between the absolute Being and the relative subject.The fixed point, the impregnable rock has been discovered whereon to 
base the divine-human activity. The organic foundation of the umversal 
Church is found in a single man who, with the divine assistance, answers 
for the whole world. It is fixed neither upon the impossible unanimity of 
all believers nor upon the inevitably hazardous agreement of a council, but 
upon the real and living unity of the prince of the Apostles. And hence- 
forward every time that the question of truth is put to Christian human- 
ity, it will not be from the voice of the masses nor from the opinion of 
the elect that the fixed and final answer will come. The arbitrary opinions 
of men will only give rise to heresies; and the hierarchy separated from its 
centre and abandoned to the mercy of the secular power will refrain from 
speaking or will speak through such councils as the robber-council of 
Ephesus. Only in union with the rock on which it is founded will the 
Church be able to assemble true councils and define the truth by authori- 
tative formulas. This is no mere opinion; it is a historic fact of such im- 
pressiveness that on the most solemn occasions it has been averred by the 
Eastern bishops themselves for all their jealousy of the successors of St. 
Peter. Not only was the wonderful dogmatic treatise of Pope St. Leo the 
Great recognised by the Greek Fathers of the fourth oecumenical Council 
as a work of Peter, but it was also to Peter that the sixth Council attri- 
buted the letter of Pope Agatho, who was far from having the same 
personal authority that Leo had. ‘The head and prince of the Apostles,* 
declared the Eastern Fathers, ‘fought with us . . . The ink (of the letter) 
was plain to see and Peter spoke through Agatho {Kal fieXav i(f>aLv€ro, 
Kal Si* 'Ayadatvos 6 Uirpos €<f>diyy€To)'^Otherwise, if apart from Peter the umversal Church can expressly de- 
clare the truth, how are we to explain the remarkable silence of the 
Eastern episcopate (notwithstanding that they have kept the apostolic 
succession) since their separation firom the Chair of St. Peter Can it be 
merely an accident? An accident lasting for a thousand years! To those 
Man^, CortciL xi. 658.

88

anti-Catholics who will not see that their particularism cuts them off from 
the hfe of the universal Church we have only one suggestion to make: Let 
them summon, without the concurrence of the successor of St. Peter, a 
council which they themselves can recognise as oecumenical! Then only 
will there be an opportunity of discovering whether they are right.

Wherever Peter does not speak, it is only the opinions of men that find 
utterance — and the Apostles are silent. But Jesus Christ did not commend 
the vague and contradictory opinions of the mob nor the silence of His 
chosen disciples; it was the unwavering, decisive and authoritative utter- 
ance of Simon Bar-Jona upon which He set the seal of His approval. 
Clearly this utterance which satisfied our Lord needed no human ratifica- 
tion; it possessed absolute vahdity etiam sine consensu Ecclesice} It was not 
by means of a general consultation but (as Jesus Christ Himself bore 
witness) with the direct assistance of the heavenly Father that Peter for- 
mulated the fundamental dogma of our religion; and his word defined 
tlie faith of Christians by its own inherent power, not by the consent of 
others — ex sese, non autem ex consensu Ecclesice.In contrast to the uncertain opinions of men, the word of Peter repre- 
sents the stabihty and unity of the true faith; in contrast to the narrow 
national ideas of the Messiah to which the Apostles gave utterance, his 
word expresses the Messianic idea in its absolute and universal form. The 
idea of the Messiah which had sprung from the soil of Jewish national 
consciousness is already in the visions of the post-exilic prophets growing 
too large for these limits. But the true meaning of these mysterious and 
enigmatic visions was hardly divined by the inspired writers themselves, 
while Jewish public opinion remained exclusively nationalistic and could 
see no more m Christ than a great national prophet such as Ehjah, Jere- 
miah or John the Baptist or at the most an all-powerful dictator, liberator 
and leader of the chosen people such as Moses or David. This was the 
highest idea which the mob which followed Jesus held of Him; and we 
know that even His chosen disciples shared these popular notions up to 
the end of His earthly life (Luke xxiv. 19-21). Only in Peter’s confession 
does the Messianic idea emerge freed from all its nationalistic trappings 
and invested for the first time in its final and universal form. ‘Thou art 
the Christ, Son of the living God.’ Here is no question of a national king 
or prophet; the Messiah is not a second Moses or David. Henceforward 
he bears the unique name of Him Who, though He is the God of Israel, 
is none the less the God of all the nations. ♦

Peter’s confession transcended Jewish nationahsm and inaugurated the

^ ‘Even without the consent of the Church,* the formula of the last Council, 
that of the Vatican.

89Peter’s confession transcended Jewish nationahsm and inaugurated the

^ ‘Even without the consent of the Church,* the formula of the last Council, 
that of the Vatican.

89

Universal Church of the New Covenant. This is yet one more reason why 
Peter should be the foundation of Christendom and why the supreme 
hierarchical authority, which of itself has ever maintained the universal or 
mtemational character of the Church, should be the true heir of Peter and 
the actual possessor of all those privileges conferred by Christ upon the 
prince of the Apostles.

90

The primacy of St, Peter as a permanent institution. 
The three Rocks of Christendom

\ nd I say to thee that thou art Peter . . / Of the three attributes repre- 
% sented in this crucial passage as belonging by divine right to the 
JL jL prince of the Apostles — (i) the call to be the foundation of the 
Church by the infallible confession of the truth, (2) the possession of 
the power of the keys, (3 ) the power of binding and loosing — it is only the 
last that he shares with the other Apostles. All Orthodox Christians^ arc 
agreed that the apostohc power of binding and loosing was not conferred 
upon the Twelve as private individuals or in the sense of a temporary 
privilege, but that it is the genuine source and origin of a perpetual priestly 
authority which has descended from the Apostles to their successors in the 
hierarchy, the bishops and priests of the Universal Church. But if this is 
true, then neither can the two former attributes connected particularly 
with St. Peter in a still more solemn and significant manner be individual 
or accidental prerogatives the less so, in that it was with the first of these 
prerogatives that our Lord expressly connected the permanence and 
stability of His Church in its future struggle against the powers of evil.If the power of binding and loosing conferred on the Apostles is not a 
mere metaphor nor a purely personal and temporary attribute, if it is on 
the contrary the actual Uving germ of a universal permanent institution 
comprising the Church’s whole existence, how can St. Peter’s own special 
prerogatives, announced in such explicit and solemn terms, be regarded 
as barren metaphors or as personal and transitory privileges? Ought not 
they also to refer to some fundamental and permanent institution, of which 
the historic personality of Simon Bar-Jona is but the outstanding and 
typical representative? The God-Man did not establish ephemeral institu-

^ And, among non-Orthodox, all writers who are m good faith; for instance, 
the eminent Jewish thinker Joseph Salvador in his book fisus-Christ et son oeuvre.

* This conclusion is wholeheartedly accepted by the notable Jewish writer 
already referred to. He sees in the primacy of Peter the keystone of the edifice of 
the Church as designed and founded by Christ Himself.

9191

tions. In His chosen disciples He saw, through and beyond all that was 
mortal and individual, the enduring principles and types of His work. 
What He said to the college of the Aposdes included the whole priestly 
order, the teaching Church in its entirety. The sublime words which He 
addressed to Peter alone created in the person of this one Apostle the un- 
divided sovereign authority possessed by the Universal Church through- 
out the whole of its life and development in future ages. The fact that 
Christ did not see fit to make the formal foundation of His Church and 
the guarantee of its permanence dependent on the common authority of 
all the Apostles (for He did not say to the apostolic college: ‘On you I 
will build My Church’) surely goes to shew that our Lord did not regard 
the episcopal and priestly order, represented by the Apostles in common, 
as sufficient in itself to form the impregnable foundation of the Universal 
Church in her inevitable struggle against the gates of hell. In founding 
His visible Church Jesus was thinking primarily of the struggle against 
evil; and in order to ensure for His creation that unity which is strength 
He crowned the hierarchy with a single, central institution, absolutely inr 
divisible and independent, possessing in its own right the fullness of 
authority and of promise: ‘Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build 
My Church: and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it’.All arguments in support of the supreme central authority of the Um- 
versal Church would in our view have but little weight if they were only 
arguments. But they rest upon a divine-human fact which remains essen- 
tid to the Christian faith despite all the artificial interpretations by which 
men have attempted to suppress it. It is not for us to demonstrate the 
abstract necessity of an institution to which Christ has given a hvmg 
actuality. The arguments of Eastern theologians demonstrating that die 
whole hierarchical system is essential to the Church would not suffice to 
convince us, were it not for the origmal fact recorded in the Gospels, 
namely the choice of the twelve Aposdes to teach all nations to the end 
of time. Similarly, when we wish to prove that an indivisible centre is 
essential to this same hierarchy, it is the fact of the special choice of Peter 
to serve as a human point d*appui for the divine truth in its constant 
struggle against the gates of hell — it is the fact of this unique choice which 
provides a firm foundation for all our arguments.

If ‘the Church’ is taken to mean the perfect union of mankind with 
God, the absolute reign of love and truth, then there is no place in the 
Church for any power or authority. All the members of this heavenly 
Kingdom are priests and kings and, as such, equal with one another, and 
the one and offiy centre of unity is Jesus Christ Himself. But it is not in 
this sense that we speak of the Church, for it is not in this sense that Christ

92

spoke of it. The perfect Church, the Church triumphant, the kingdom of 
glory — all this impHes that the power of evil and the gates of hell are 
finally vanquished, and yet it is to contend with the gates of hell that 
Christ builds His visible Church and gives it a centre of unity which is 
human and earthly, though always divinely assisted.If we would avoid the two opposite pitfalls of blind materialism and 
ineffectual idealism, we must admit that the needs of actual existence and 
the demands of the ideal coincide and harmonise in the order established 
by God. In order to shew forth in the Church the ideal of harmony among 
men, Jesus Christ founded as the prototype of concihar government the 
college or original council of the twelve Apostles equal with one another 
and united by brotherly love. In order that this ideal unity might be 
effectually realised in every age and place, that the council of the hierarchy 
might always and everywhere prevail over discord and gather up the 
multiplicity of private opinions into umform pubhc decrees, that discus- 
sion might issue in the hving manifestation of the unity of the Church, 
secure from the hazards to which the assemblies of men are exposed — in 
a word, that His Church might not be built upon shifting sands, the divine 
Architect revealed the firm impregnable Rock of ecclesiastical monarchy 
and set up the ideal of unanimity while basing it upon an actual living 
authority.

Christ, we are told, is the Rock of the Church. That is true; no Chris- 
tian has ever disputed it. But it is hard to see the reasonableness, even if 
we admit the sincerity, of those who in their zeal to defend Christ from 
an imaginary insult persist in ignoring His express will and in repudiating 
the order which He established in so expheit a manner. For He not only 
declared that Simon, one of His Apostles, was the Rock of His Church, 
but in order to impress this new truth more forcibly upon us and to make 
it more evident and striking. He gave to Simon a distinctive and per- 
manent name derived from this very call to be the Rock of the Church.We have here, then, two equally indisputable truths: Christ is the Rock 
of the Church, and Simon Bar-Jona is the Rock of the Church. But the 
contradiction, if there be one, does not stop here. For we find this very 
Simon Peter, despite the fact that he alone received from Christ this 
unique prerogative, declaring in one of his epistles that all the faithful are 
living stones in the divine-human building (i Pet. li. 4, 5). Jesus is the one 
and only Rock of the Church; but, if we are to believe Jesus, the prince 
of the Apostles is the Rock of His Church excellence; and again, ifwc 
would believe Peter, every true behever is the Rock of the Church.

Confronted with the apparent inconsistency of these truths, it is enough 
for us to observe their actual agreement in logic. Jesus Christ, the unique

93Confronted with the apparent inconsistency of these truths, it is enough 
for us to observe their actual agreement in logic. Jesus Christ, the unique

93

Rock of the Kingdom of God on the purely religious and mystical plane, 
sets up the prince of the Apostles and his permanent authority as the funda- 
ment^ Rock of the Church in the social order for the Christian com- 
munity; and each member of this community, united to Christ and abid- 
ing m the order estabhshed by Him, becomes an organic individual 
clement, a hving stone of this Church whose mystical and (for the time 
being) invisible foundation is Jesus Christ, and whose social and visible 
foundation is the monarchical power of Peter. The essential distinction 
between these three factors only serves to throw into stronger relief the 
intimate connexion between them in the Church’s actual existence, in 
which Christ, Peter, and the multitude of the faithful each play an essen- 
tial part. The notion of such a threefold relationship can appear incon- 
sistent only to those who presuppose such inconsistency by interpreting 
the three fundamental factors in an absolute and exclusive sense which is 
entirely inappropriate to them. What they forget is that the expression 
‘rock [i.e, foundation) of the Church’ is a relative expression, and that 
Christ can only be the Rock of the Church in that definite union of Him- 
self with mankind which forms the Church; and since this union is 
primarily brought about in the social order through a central point of 
contact which Christ Himself associated with St. Peter, it is obvious that 
these two Rocks — the Messiah and His chief Apostle — so far from being 
mutually exclusive, are simply two inseparable factors in a unique re- 
lationship. As regards the rock or stones of the third order — the multitude 
of the faithful — though it is said that each beUever may become a living 
stone of the Church, it is not said that he may do so by himself or in 
separation from Christ and the fundamental authority set up by Him.The foundation of the Church, speaking in general terms, is the union 
of the Divine and the human. This foundation (the Rock) we find in 
Jesus Christ inasmuch as He unites the Godhead hypostatically with sin- 
less human nature; we find it also in every true Christian inasmuch as he 
is united to Christ by the sacraments, by faith and by good works. But 
is it not clear that these two modes of union between the Divine and the 
human (the hypostatic union in the person of Christ, and the individual 
union of the believer with Christ) are not in themselves sufficient to con- 
stitute the specific unity of the Church in the strict sense of the word — 
that is, as a social and historic entity? The incarnation of the Word is a 
mystical fact and not a social principle; nor does the individual religious 
life provide an adequate basis for Christian society; man may remain 
alone in the desert and live a life of hohness. And yet if in the Church, 
besides tho mystical life and the individual hfe, there exists the social hfe, 
this social life must have a definite form based upon a unifying principle

94

peculiar to itself. When we maintain that this specific principle of social 
unity in the Church is in the first place neither Jesus Christ nor the mass 
of the faithful but the monarchical authority of Peter, by means of which 
Jesus Christ has willed to unite Himself to man as a social and political 
being, we find our opinion confirmed by the remarkable fact that only in 
the case of the prince of the Apostles has the attribute of being the Rock 
of the Church carried with it the title to a distinctive and permanent 
name. He alone is the Rock of the Church in the special and strict sense of 
the term, that is to say, the unifying basis of the historic Christian society.Three times only in the whole of sacred history recorded in the two 
Testaments did it happen that the Lord Himself changed a man’s name. 
When Abraham by an act of unlimited faith vowed himself to the Hving 
God, God changed his name and pronounced him to be the father of all 
believers (‘father of the multitude*). When Jacob in that mysterious 
struggle pitted the whole spiritual energy of man against the living God, 
God gave him a new name which marked him out as the direct parent of 
that pecuhar and unique rice which has striven and still strives with its 
God. When Simon Bar-Jona, the descendant of Abraham and Jacob, 
combined in himself the powerful initiative of the human soul and the 
infaUible assistance of the heavenly Father in the affirmation of the divine- 
human truth, the God-Man changed his name and set him at the head of 
the new believers and the new Israel. Abraham, the type of primitive 
theocracy, represents humanity in devotion and self-surrender to God; 
Jacob, the type of the national theocracy of the Jews, represents humanity 
beginning its struggle with God; and lastly Simon Peter, the type of uni- 
versal and final theocracy, represents humanity making its response to its 
God, freely avowing Him and cleaving to Him in mutual and indissoluble 
adherence. That boundless faith in God which made Abraham the father 
of all believers was in Peter united to that active assertion of the power 
of man which distinguished Jacob-Israel; the prince of the Apostles re- 
flected in the earthly mirror of his soul that harmony between the Divine 
and the human which he saw brought to perfection in his Master; ^d 
he became thereby the first-born and principal heir of the God-Man, the 
spiritual father of the new Christian race, the foundation-stone of that 
Universal Church which is the fulfilment and perfection of the refigion 
of Abraham and of the theocracy of Israel.

95

'Peter and 'Satan95

'Peter and 'Satan

I t was not Simon’s apostleship that involved his change of name, for 
the change, though already predicted, was not made at the time of 
the choice and solemn sending forth of the Twelve. All with the 
single exception of Simon retained their own names in the apostleship; 
none of them received from our Lord a new and permanent title of 
wider or higher significance.^

Apart from Simon, all the Apostles are distinguished from one another 
solely by their natural characteristics, their individual qualities and des- 
tinies as well as by the varieties and shades of personal feeling shown 
towards them by their Master. On the other hand, the new and significant 
name which Simon alone receives in addition to the apostleship shared by 
all, indicates no natural trait in his character, no personal affection felt for 
him by our Lord, but refers solely to the special place which the son of 
Jona is called to fill in the Church of Christ. Our Lord did not say to him: 
Thou art Peter because I prefer thee to the others, or because by nature 
thou hast a firm and stable character (which, incidentally, would hardly 
have been borne out by the facts), but: Thou art Peter and upon this rock 
I will build My Church.Peter’s confession, which by a spontaneous and infalhble act of alle- 
giance established the bond between mankind and Christ and founded the 
free Church of the New Covenant, was not just a piece of characteristic 
behaviour on his part. Nor can it have been a casual and momentary 
spiritual impulse. For is it conceivable that such an impulse or moment of 
enthusiasm should involve not merely a change of name for Simon as for 
Abraham and Jacob in times past, but also the prediction of that change 
long previously as something which would infalhbly come about and 
which held a prominent place in our Lord’s plans? Was there in fact any 
part of the work of the Messiah more solemn than the foundation of the 
Universal Church which is expressly connected with Simon under his

^ I am not speaking of surnames or of casual, incidental epithets such as that of 
Boanerges, given to John and James.

96

new name of Peter ? Moreover the notion that the fint dogmatic decree of 
St. Peter came from him merely in his capacity as an individual human 
being is totally excluded by the direct and explicit witness of Christ: It is 
not flesh and blood which have revealed it to thee, but My Father Who 
is in heaven.This confession of Peter’s is then an act sui generis^ an act whereby the 
moral being of the Apostle entered into a special relationship with the 
Godhead; it was this relationship which enabled human utterance to 
declare infallibly the absolute truth of the Word of God and to create an 
impregnable foundation for the Universal Church. And as though to re- 
move all possible doubt on the subject, the inspired record of the Gospel 
at once goes on to shew us this very Simon, whom Jesus has just declared 
to be the Rock of the Church and the key-bearer of the Kingdom of 
Heaven, forthwith left to his own resources and speaking — with the best 
intentions in the world no doubt, but without the divme assistance — under 
the influence of his own individual and uninspired personality. ‘And 
tliereafter Jesus began to shew His disciples that He must needs go to 
Jerusalem and suffer much at the hands of the elders and the scribes and 
the chief priests and be put to death and rise again the third day. And 
Peter, taking Him aside, began to rebuke Him, saying: Far be it from 
Thee, Lord; this shall not happen unto Thee. And tummg about He said 
to Peter: Get thee behind Me, Satan, thou art an offence unto Me, for 
thou understandest not that which is of God, but that which is of men’ 
(Matt. xvi. 21-23).

Are we to follow our Greco-Russian controversialists in placing this 
text in opposition to the one before it and so make Christ’s words cancel 
one another out? Are we to believe that the incarnate Truth changed His 
mind so quickly and revoked in a moment what He had only just an- 
nounced? And yet on the other hand how are we to reconcile ‘Blessed’ 
and ‘Satan’? How is it conceivable that he who is for our Lord Himself 
a ‘rock of offence’ should yet be the Rock of His Church which the 
gates of hell cannot shake? Or that one who thinks only the thoughts of 
men can receive the revelation of the heavenly Father and can hold the 
keys of the Kingdom of God?There is only one way to harmonise these passages which the inspired 
Evangelist has with good reason placed side by side. Simon Peter as 
supreme pastor and doctor of the Universal Church, assisted by God and 
speaking in the name of all, is the faithful witness and infalhble exponent 
of divine-human truth; as such he is the impregnable foundation of the 
house of God and the key-bearer of the Kingdom of Heaven. The same 
Simon Peter as a private individual, speaking and acting by his natural

97

G

powers and merely human intelligence, may say and do things that are 
unworthy, scandalous and even diabolical. But the failures and sins of the 
individual are ephemeral, while the social function of the ecclesiastical 
monarch is permanent. "Satan' and the ‘offence* have vanished, but Peter 
has remained.

98

IV

The Church as a universal society. The principle of love

S ince the existence of every human society is determined by its ideals 
and institutions, it follows that social progress and well-being depend 
primarily on the truth of the predominant ideals of the society and 
on the good order which prevails in its administration. The Church as a 
society directly willed and founded by God must possess these two 
qualities to an outstanding degree: the religious ideals which she professes 
must be mfallibly true; and her constitution must combine the greatest 
stability with the greatest capacity for action in any direction desired.

The Church is above all a society founded on Truth. The basic truth of 
the Church is the union of the Divine and the human in the Word made 
Flesh, the recognition of the Son of Man as the Christ, the Son of the 
living God. Therefore in its purely objective aspect the Rock of the 
Church IS Christ Himself, Truth incarnate. But if she is to be actually 
founded on the truth, the Church as a human society must be united to 
this truth in a definite manner.Since in this world of appearances truth has no existence which is 
directly manifest or externally necessary, man can only establish contact 
with it through faith which links us to the interior substance of things and 
presents to our intelligence all that is not externally visible. From the sub- 
jective point of view, then, it may be asserted that it is faith which con- 
stitutes the basis or Tock* of the Church. But what faith, and on whose 
part? The mere fact of a subjective faith on the part of such and such a 
person is not sufficient. Individual faith of the strongest and most sincere 
kind may put us in touch not only with the invisible substance of Truth 
and the Sovereign Good but also with the invisible substance of evil and 
falsehood, as is abundantly proved by the history of religion. If man is to 
be truly linked by faith to the desirable object of faith, namely, absolute 
truth, he must be conformed to this truth.

The truth of the God-Man, that is to say, the perfect and living union 
of the Absolute and the relative, of the Infinite and the finite, of the 
Creator and the creature — this supreme truth cannot be hmited to a his-

99

toric fact, but revcak through that fact a universal principle which con- 
tains all the riches of wisdom and embraces all in its unity.99

toric fact, but revcak through that fact a universal principle which con- 
tains all the riches of wisdom and embraces all in its unity.

Since the objective truth of faith is universal and the true subject of 
faith must be conformed to its object, it follows that the subject of true 
religion is necessarily universal. Real faith cannot belong to man as an 
isolated individual but only to mankind as a complete unity; and the in- 
dividual can only share in it as a living member of the universal body. But 
since no real and living unity has been bestowed on the human race in 
the physical order, it must be created in the moral order. The limits of 
natural egoism, of finite individuahty with its exclusive self-assertion, 
must be burst by love which renders man conformable to God Who is 
Love. But this love which is to transform the discordant fragments of the 
human race into a real and living unity, the Universal Church, cannot be 
a mere vague, subjective and ineffectual sentiment; it must be translated 
into a consistent and definite activity which shall give the inner sentiment 
its objective reahty. What then is the actual object of this active love? 
Natural love, which has for its object those beings who are nearest to us, 
creates a real collective unity, the family; the wider natural love which 
has for its object all the people of one country or one tongue creates a 
more extensive and more complex, but equally real, collective unity, the 
city, state or nation.^ The love which is to create the religious unity of the 
human race, or the Universal Church, must surpass the bounds of nation- 
ality and have for its object the sum total of mankind. But since the active 
relationship between the sum total of the human race and the individual 
finds no basis in the latter in any natural sentiment analogous to that 
which animates the family or the fatherland, it is (for the individual sub- 
ject) inevitably reduced to the purely moral essence of love, that is, to the 
free and conscious surrender of the will and the individual egoism of 
family or nation. Love for one’s family or for one’s country are primarily 
natural facts which may secondarily produce moral acts; love for the 
Church is essentially a moral act, the act of submitting the particular will 
to the universal will. But the universal will, if it is to be anything more 
than a fiction, must be continually reahsed in a definite being. The will 
of all humanity is not a real unity, since all men are not in direct agree- 
ment with one another; some means of harmonising them must therefore 
be found, that is to say, one single will capable of unifying all the others. 
Each individual must be able to unite himself effectively with the whole 
of the human race (and thus give positive witness to his love for the^ The fact of dwelling in the same country or speaking a common language is 
not sufficient in itself to produce the unity of the fatherland; that is impossible 
without patriotism, that is to say without a specific love.

100

Church) by linking his wW to a unique will, no less real and living than 
his own, but at the same time a will which is universal and to which all 
other wills must be equally subject. But a will is inconceivable apart from 
one who wills and expresses his will; and inasmuch as all arc not directly 
one, we have no choice but to unite ourselves to all in the person of one 
individual if we would share in the true universal faith.Since each individual man cannot be the proper subject of universal 
faith any more than can the whole of mankind in its natural state of 
division, it follows that this faith must be manifested in a single individual, 
representative of the unity of all. Each individual, by taking this truly 
universal faith as the criterion of his own faith, makes a real act of sub- 
mission to, or love for, the Church, an act which makes him conformable 
to the universal truth revealed to the Church. In lovmg all in one in- 
dividual (since it is impossible to love them otherwise) each one shares 
in the faith of all, defined by the divinely assisted faith of a single indi- 
vidual; and this enduring bond, this unity so wide and yet so stable, so 
living and yet so unchanging, makes the Universal Church a collective 
moral entity, a true society far more extensive and more complex but no 
less real than nation or state. Love for the Church is manifested in a con- 
stant adherence to her will and her hving thought represented by thepublic 
acts of the supreme ecclesiastical authority. This love which is originally 
nothing but an act of pure morality, the fulfilment of a duty on principle 
(obedience to the categorical imperative, according to the Kantian ter- 
minology) can and must become the source of sentiments and affections 
no less strong than filial love or patriotism. Those who agree with us in 
founding the Church upon love and yet see world-wide ecclesiastical 
unity only in a fossilised tradition which for eleven centuries has lost all 
means of actual self^xpression, should bear in mind that it is impossible 
to love with a living and active love what is simply an archaeological 
relic, a remote fact, such as the seven oecumenical councils, which is ab- 
solutely unknown to the masses and can only appeal to the learned. Love 
for the Church has no real meaning except for those who recognise per- 
petually in the Church a living representative and a common father of all 
the faithful, capable of being loved as a father is loved in his family or the 
head of the state in a kingdom.It is of the nature of truth to draw into a harmonious unity the manifold 
elements of reality. This formal characteristic belongs to the supreme 
truth, the truth of the God-Man, which embraces in its absolute unity all 
the fullness of divine and human life. The Church which is a collective 
being aspiring to perfect unity must correspond to Christ the one Being 
and Centre of all beings. And inasmuch as this interior and perfect unity

101

of all is not realised, inasmuch as the faith of each individual is not yet 
in itself the &ith of all, inasmuch as the unity of all is not directly mani- 
fested by each, it must be'brought about by means of a single individual.

The universal truth perfectly realised in the single person of Christ 
draws to itself the faith of all, infallibly defined by the voice of a single 
individual, the Pope. Outside this unity, as we have seen, the opinion of 
the masses may be mistaken and the faith even of the elect may remain in 
suspense. But it is neither false opinion nor a vacillating faith, but a definite 
and infallible faith which unites mankind to the divine truth and forms 
the impregnable foundation of the Universal Church. This foundation is 
the faith of Peter hving in his successors, a faith which is personal that it 
may be manifest to men, and which is (by divine assistance) superhuman 
that it may be infallible. We shall not cease to challenge those who deny 
the necessity of such a permanent centre of unity to point to any hving 
unity in the Universal Church apart from it, to produce apart from it a 
single ecclesiastical act which concerns the whole of Christendom, or to 
give without appealing to it a decisive and authoritative reply to a single 
one of the questions which divide the consciences of Christians. It is of 
course obvious that the present successors of the Apostles at Constanti- 
nople or at St. Petersburg are imitating the silence of the Apostles them- 
selves at Cxsarea Philippi.To summarise shortly the foregoing reflexions: The Universal Church 
is founded on truth affirmed by faith. Truth being one, true faith must 
be one also. And since this unity of faith has no present and immediate 
existence among the whole mass of believers (for in rehgious matters all 
are not unanimous) it must reside in the lawful authority of a single head, 
guaranteed by divine assistance and accepted by the love and confidence 
of all the faithful. That is the rock on which Christ has founded His 
Church and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.

102

V

The keys of the Kingdom102

V

The keys of the Kingdom

I t seems as if Jesus wished to leave no possible doubt as to the intent 
and bearing of His words regarding the rock of tlie Church. He 
therefore completed them by explicitly committing the power of the 
keys and the supreme government of His Kingdom to that fundamental 
authority of the Church which He established in the person of Simon 
Peter. ‘And I will give thee the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven.* And 
here we must first of all clear up a contradiction which our ‘orthodox* 
controversialists ascribe to Jesus Christ. In order to ehminate as far as 
possible the distinction between Peter and the other Apostles it is asserted 
that the power of the keys is nothing else but the power of binding and 
loosing; after saying ‘I will give thee the keys*, Jesus is supposed to have 
repeated the same promise in other words. But in speaking of keys the 
words ‘shut* and ‘open* should have been used and not ‘bind’ and ‘loose*, 
as in fact (to confine ourselves solely to the New Testament) we read in 
the Apocalypse: *0 exojv t^v KXelha rod Aavhh, 6 avoiywv Kal 
ovBcls #cA€t€t, Kal kX€L€l Kal ovSels dvocyei, (He who has the key of 
David, who opens and no one shuts, and shuts and no one opens — ^Apoc. 
hi. 7.) A room, a house or a city may be shut and opened, but only par- 
ticular beings or objects situated within the room or house or city can be 
bound and unbound. The Gospel passage in question is a metaphor, but 
a metaphor is not necessarily an absurdity. The symbol of the keys of the 
Kingdom (of the royal dwelling — heth-ha^-melek) must necessarily represent 
a wider and more general authority than the symbol of binding and loos- 
ing.The special power of binding and loosing having been bestowed upon 
Peter in the same terms as those in which it was conferred later on the 
other Apostles (Matt. xvih. 18), it is plain from the context of the latter 
chapter that this lesser power only concerns individual cases (‘if thy 
brother sin against thee*, etc.), which is in entire agreement with the sense 
of the metaphor used in the Gospel. Only personal problems of conscience 
and the direction of individual souls fall under the authority to bind and

103

loose which was given to the other Apostles after Peter; whereas the power 
of the keys of the Kingdom conferred solely on Peter can only refer to the 
whole of the Church (if we are to follow not only the exact sense of our 
text but general Biblical analogy) and must denote a supreme social and 
political authority, the general administration of the Kingdom of God 
on earth. The life of the Christian soul must neither be separated from 
the organisation of the Universal Church nor confused with it. They are 
two different orders of things though closely interconnected.Just as the teaching of the Church is no mere compound of personal 
behefs, so the government of the Church cannot be reduced to the direc- 
tion of individual consciences or of private morality. Founded on unity 
of faith, the Universal Church as a real and living social organism must 
also display unity of action sufficient to react successfully at every moment 
of her historic existence against the combined attacks of those hostile 
forces which would divide and destroy her. Unity of action for a vast and 
complicated social organism implies a whole system of organic functions 
subordinate to a common centre which can set them in motion in the 
direction desired at any given moment. As the unity of the orthodox 
faith is finally guaranteed by the dogmatic authority of a smgle individual 
speaking for all, so unity of ecclesiastical action is necessarily conditioned 
by the directing authority of a single individual bearing sway over the 
whole Church. {But in the One Holy Church, founded upon truth, govern- 
ment cannot be separated from doctrine; and the central and supreme 
power in the ecclesiastical sphere can only belong to him who by divinely 
aided authority represents and displays in the religious sphere the unity of 
true faith.

This is why the keys of the Kingdom have been given to none other 
than him who is by his faith the Rock of the Church.

104

VI

The government of the Universal Church. The centre of unityThis is why the keys of the Kingdom have been given to none other 
than him who is by his faith the Rock of the Church.

104

VI

The government of the Universal Church. The centre of unity

T he Church is not only the perfect union of mankind with God in 
Christ, but it is also the social order established by the Divine Will 
in which and through which this union of the Divine and the 
human may be accomplished. Founded on eternal Truth, the Church is 
not only the perfect Life (in the future) but it has also always been in the 
past and still is m the present the Way which leads to this ideal per- 
fection. Man’s social existence upon earth cannot be excluded from the 
new union of the human and the Divine which is accomplished in Christ. 
If the elements even of our material Hfe are transformed and sanctified in 
the sacraments, how can the social and political order, which is an essential 
form of human existence, be left a prey to the warfare of selfish ambitions, 
the clash of murderous passions and the conflict of erroneous opinions? 
Since man is essentially a social being, the ultimate aim of the working of 
God in mankmd is the creation of a perfect universal society. But it is not 
a creation ex nihilo; for the materid of the perfect society is given us, 
namely society in its imperfect state, mankind as it is; and this is neither 
excluded nor suppressed by the Kingdom of God but drawn into the 
sphere of the Kingdom, to be regenerated, sanctified and transfigured. 
The rehgion which seeks to bind man’s individual bemg to Christ is not 
content with an mvisible and purely spiritual communion; it desires that 
man should communicate with his God throughout his entire being, even 
by the physical act of feeding. In this mystical but real communion the 
matter of the sacrament is not simply destroyed and annihilated, it is 
transubstantiated, that is to say, the interior and invisible substapee of the 
bread and wine is lifted into the sphere of Christ’s ascended bodily nature 
and absorbed by it, while the phenomenal reahty or outward appearance 
of these objects remains without sensible change that they may act in the 
given conditions of our physical existence and so estabhsh a link between 
that existence and the Body of God. So also must the collective, common 
life of mankind be mystically transubstantiated while retaining the 
‘species’ or outward forms of earthly society, and these very forms must105

be duly ordained and consecrated to serve as the actual foundation and 
visible instruments of the social activity of Christ in His Chinrch.

The ultimate aim of the work of God in mankind, regarded from the 
Christian standpoint, is not the manifestation of the divine power — that 
is the Moslem conception — but the free, mutual union of mankind with 
God. And the proper means of accomplishing this work is not the hidden 
operation of Providence guiding individuals and nations by unknown 
ways to uncomprehended ends; such a purely and exclusively super- 
natural operation, though always necessary, is not sufficient in itself. 
Moreover, since the actual historic union of God and Man in Christ, Man 
must himself play a positive part in his appointed destiny and as a social 
being communicate in the life of Christ. But if mortal men here below 
are actually to have a real share in the invisible and supernatural govern- 
ment of Christ, then that government must assume visible and natural 
social forms. Some social institution, whose origin, end and powers are 
divine, while its means of action are human and adapted to the needs of 
historic existence, is essential to represent and minister to the perfection 
of divine grace and truth m Jesus Christ that this perfection may operate 
in, and co-operate with, imperfect human nature.If the Church is to guide the common life of mankind towards the goal 
of divine love, and to direct pubhc opinion on the road to divine truth 
she must possess a universal government divinely authorised. This govern- 
ment must be clearly defined so as to be recognisable to all, and permanent 
so as to form a standing court of appeal; it must be divine in substance so 
as to be finally binding upon the religious conscience of every instructed 
and well-intentioned person, and it must be human and imperfect in its 
historic manifestation so as to admit the possibility of moral resistance and 
allow room for doubts, struggle, temptations and all that constitutes the 
merit of free and genuinely human virtue.

Though the supreme authonty of the Church may admit of various 
administrative forms according to differences of time and place, yet if it 
is to form the primary basis of union between the social conscience of 
mankind and the providential government of God and to share in the 
divine Majesty while adapting itself to the realities of human life, it must 
always as the centre of unity preserve its purely monarchical character. 
If the supreme authority of the Universal Church were vested solely in 
the collective administration of a council, the unity of her human activity 
linking her to the absolute unity of divine truth could only be based on 
one of two things: either on the perfect imanimity of all its members, or 
else on a majority of opinions, as in secular assemblies. The latter sup- 
position is incompatible with the mjyesty of God, Who would be obliged

io6io6

constantly to accommodate His will and His truth to the chance con- 
vergences of human opinion and the interplay of human passions. As for 
unanimity or complete and permanent harmony, such a condition of ihc 
social conscience could, by its intrinsic moral excellence, undoubtedly 
correspond to the divine perfection and infallibly manifest the action of 
God in mankind. But while the pohdcal principle of a majority vote 
comes short of the dignity of God, unfortunately the ideal principle of 
immediate, spontaneous and permanent unanimity is equally far in ad- 
vance of the present state of man. That perfect unity which Jesus Christ 
in His high-priestly prayer held up before us as the final objective of His 
work cannot be assumed as the present and obvious starting-point of that 
work. The surest way never to achieve the desired perfection is to imagine 
that It is already achieved.

Conscious unanimity and solidarity, brotherly love and free agreement, 
such is the universally accepted ideal of the Church. But the difference 
between an idle dream and the divme ideal of unity is that the latter has 
an actual foundation (the hos fjLOL ttov otw of social mechanics) from 
which to gain ground little by little on earth and to achieve gradual and 
successive conquests over all the powers of discord. A real and mdivisible 
principle of unity is absolutely necessary to counteract the deep-seated and 
active tendency to division in the world and even in the Church itself. 
The principle of that universal reHgious unity of grace and truth, which is 
eventually to become the very essence of the life of each individual be- 
liever and the perfect and indissoluble bond between him and his neigh- 
bour, must none the less in the meantime have an objective existence and 
act everywhere under the ‘species* of a visible and definite social authority.The perfection of the one universal Church consists in the harmony and 
unanimity of all its members; but its very existence amid actual dis- 
harmony requires a unifymg and reconciling power immune from this 
disharmony and in continual reaction against it, asserting itself above all 
divisions and gathering to itself all men of goodwill, denouncing and con- 
demning whatever is opposed to the Kingdom of God on earth. Whoever 
desires Aat Kingdom must desire the only way that will lead mankind 
collectively to it. Between the hateful reality of the disharmony reigning 
in this world and the longed-for unity of perfect love in which God reigns 
there is the necessary road of a jundical and authoritative unity linking 
human fact to divine right.

The perfect circle of the Universal Church requires a unique centre, not 
so much for its perfection as for its very existence. The Church upon 
earth, called to gather in the multitude of the nations, must, if she is to 
remain an active society, possess a definite universal authority to set against

107

national divisions; if she is to enter the current of history and undergo 
continual change and adaptation in her external circumstances and re- 
lationships and yet preserve her identity, she requires an authority essen- 
tially conservative but nevertheless active, fundamentally unchangeable 
though outwardly adaptable; and finally if she is set amid the frailty of 
man to assert herself in reaction against all the powers of evil, she must be 
equipped with an absolutely firm and impregnable foundation, stronger 
than the gates of hell.Now we know on the one hand that Christ foresaw the necessity of 
such an ecclesiastical monarchy and therefore conferred on a single in- 
dividual supreme and undivided authority over His Church; and on the 
other hand we see that of all the ecclesiastical powers in the Christian 
world there is only one which perpetually and unchangingly preserves its 
central and universal character and at the same time is specially connected 
by an ancient and widespread tradition with him to whom Christ said: 
Thou art Peter and upon this rock I will build My Church and the gates 
of hell shall not prevail against it. Christ’s words could not remain without 
their effect in Christian history; and the principal phenomenon in Chris- 
tian history must have an adequate cause in the word of God. Where then 
have Christ’s words to Peter produced a correspondmg effect except in 
the Chair of Peter? Where does that Chair find an adequate cause except 
in the promise made to Peter?

The hving truths of rehgion do not compel the reason in the manner of 
geometrical theorems. Moreover it would be unsafe to assert that even 
the truths of mathematics are unanimously accepted by everyone for the 
sole reason of their intrinsic proof; they meet with general acceptance 
because no one is concerned to reject them. I am not so simple as to hope 
to convince those who are influenced by other motives more powerful 
than the search for rehgious truth. In setting out the general proofs of the 
permanent primacy of Peter as the foundation of the Universal Church, 
my only aim has been to assist the intellectual task of those who deny this 
truth not from personal or emotional reasons, but from unconscious error 
and inherited prejudice. In pursuance of this aim I must now, while keep- 
ing my eyes always fixed on the briUiant searchlight of the Biblical record, 
embark for a moment on the dark and uncertain domain of universal 
history.

io8

VIIio8

VII

The monarchies foretold by Daniel, 'Roma' and 'Amor

T he historic hfe of mankind began with the confusion of Babel 
(Gen. XI.) ; if will end in the perfect harmony of the New Jerusalem 
(Apoc. xxi.). Between these two extreme limits, described in the 
first and last books of Holy Scripture, takes place the evolution of universal 
history of which a symbolic representation is given us in the sacred book 
which may be regarded as transitional between the Old and New Testa- 
ments, the book of the prophet Daniel (Dan. ii. 31-36).Since mankind on earth is not, and was never meant to be, a world of 
pure spirits, it needs for the expression and development of the unity of 
Its inner life an external social organism which must become more cen- 
trahsed as it grows in extent and diversity. Just as the life of the mdividual 
human soul manifests itself by means of the organised human body, so the 
collective soul of regenerate humamty, the invisible Church, requires a 
visible social orgamsm as the symbol and instrument of its unity. From 
this point of view the history of mankind presents itself as the gradual for- 
mation of a universal social entity or of the one Cathohe Church in the 
broadest sense of the term. This work is inevitably divided into two mam 
parts : (i ) the outward unification of the nations of history, or the formation 
of the universal My of mankind by the efforts, more or less unconscious, of 
earthly powers under the invisible and indirect action of Providence, and 
(2) the vivifying of this body by the mighty breath of the God-Man and 
Its further development by the combmed action of divme grace and more 
or less conscious human forces. In other words we have here on the one 
hand the formation of natural universal monarchy and on the other the 
formation and development of spiritual monarchy or the Universal 
Church on the basis and m the framework of the corresponding natural 
organism. The first part of this great work constitutes the essence of 
ancient or pagan history; the second part mainly determines modem or 
Christian history. The connecting link is the history of the people of 
Israel who under the active guidance of the Hving God prepared the 
setting, both organic and national, for the appearance of the God-Man

109

Who is both the spiritual principle of unity for the universal body and 
the absolute centre of history.109

Who is both the spiritual principle of unity for the universal body and 
the absolute centre of history.

While the chosen nation was preparing the natural body of the indi- 
vidual God-Man, the Gentile nations were evolving the social body of 
the collective God-Man, the Universal Church. And since this task 
allotted to paganism was achieved by purely human efforts guided only 
indirectly and invisibly by divine Providence it was bound to proceed by 
a series of attempts and experiments. Previous to any effective universal 
monarchy we see the rise of various national monarchies claiming umver- 
sality but incapable of achieving it.After the Assyrio-Babylonian monarchy, the head of gold, denoting the 
purest and most concentrated despotism, comes the monarchy of the 
Medes and Persians represented by the breast and arms of silver whicli 
symbolise a less unmitigated, less concentrated, but on the other hand 
much more extensive despotism, embracing the whole scene of contem- 
porary history from Greece on the one side to India on the other. Next 
comes the Macedonian monarchy of Alexander the Great, the brazen belly 
engulfing Hellas and the East. But despite the fruitfulness of Hellenism 
in the sphere of intellectual and aesthetic culture, it proved impotent in 
practical affairs and incapable of creating a political framework or a 
centre of unity for the vast multitude of nations which it penetrated. In 
administration it took over without any essential alteration the absolutism 
of the national despots which it found in the East; and though it imposed 
the unity of its culture on the world which it conquered, it could not 
prevent that world from splitting into two great semi-Hellenised national 
States, the Helleno-Egyptian kingdom of the Ptolemies and the Helleno- 
Syrian kingdom of the Seleucids. These two kingdoms, at one moment 
engaged in bitter warfare, at another precariously alHed by dynastic mar- 
riages, were well symbolised by the two feet of the colossus in which the 
iron of primitive despotism was mingled with the soft clay of a decadent 
culture.Thus the pagan world divided between two rival powers, with Alex- 
andria and Antioch as their two political and intellectual centres, could 
not provide an adequate historic basis for Christian unity. But there was 
a stone — CapitoU immobile saxum — a little Italian town, whose origin was 
hidden among mysterious legends and prophetic portents, and whose real 
name even was unknown. This stone hurled forth by the providence of 
the God of history smote the feet of clay of the Greco-barbarian world of 
the East, overthrew and crushed to powder the impotent colossus, and 
became a great mountain. The pagan world was given a real centre of 
unity. A truly international and universal monarchy was established, em-

IIO

bracing both East and West. Not only was it far more extensive than the 
greatest of the national monarchies, not only did it include far more 
heterogeneous national and cultural elements, but it was above all power- 
fully centralised, and it transformed these varied elements into a positive, 
active whole. Instead of a monstrous image made up of heterogeneous 
parts, mankind became an organised and homogeneous body, the Roman 
Empire, with an individual living centre in Caesar Augustus, the trustee 
and representative of the united will of mankind.But who was this Caesar and how had he come to represent the living 
centre of humanity? On what was his power based? Long and painful 
experience had convinced the nations of East and West that continual 
strife and division were a curse and that some centre of unity was essential 
to the peace of the world. This vague but very real desire for peace and 
unity threw the pagan world at the feet of an adventurer who succeeded 
inreplacmg beliefs and principles by the weapons of his legions and his own 
personal courage. Thus the unity of the Empire was based solely on force 
and chance. Though the first of the Caesars seemed to deserve his fortune 
by his personal genius, and the second justified his to a certain extent by 
his calculated piety and wise moderation, the third was a monster and was 
succeeded by idiots and madmen. The universal State which should have 
been the social incarnation of Reason itself took shape in an absolutely 
irrational phenomenon, the absurdity of which was only heightened by 
the blasphemy of the Emperor’s apotheosis.

The Divine Word, individually united to human nature and desiring 
to unite socially with Himself the collective being of Man, could not take 
either the confusion of an anarchic mass of nations or the autocracy of a 
tyrant as the starting-point of this union. He could only unite human 
society with Himself by means of a power founded upon truth. In the 
social sphere we are not directly and primarily concerned with personal 
virtues and defects. We believe the imperial power of pagan Rome to 
have been evil and false, not merely because of the crimes and follies of 
a Tiberius or a Nero, but mainly because, whether represented by Caligula 
or Antonine, it was itself based on violence and crowned with falsehood. 
The actual Emperor, the momentary creature of the praetorians and the 
legionaries, only owed his power to crude, blind force; the ideal, deified 
Emperor was an impious fiction.Against the false man-god of poHtical monarchy the true God-Man set 
up the spiritual power of ecclesiastical monarchy founded on Truth and 
Love. Universal monarchy and international unity were to remain; the 
centre of unity was to keep its place. But the central power itself, its char- 
acter, its origin and its authority — ^all this was to be renewed.

Ill

The Romans themselves had a vague presentiment of this mysterious 
transformation. While the ordinary name of Rome was the Greek word 
for ‘Might’, and a poet of decadent Greece had hailed her new masters 
by that name: *Pwfia, dvydrqp **Apr}os — yet the citizens of theEternal City beheved that they discovered the true meaning of her name 
by reading it backwards in Semitic fashion: amor; and the ancient legend 
revived by Virgil connected the Roman people and the dynasty of Caesar 
in particular with the mother of Love and through her with the supreme 
God. But their Love was the servant of death and their supreme God was 
a parricide. The piety of the Romans, which is their chief claim to glory 
and the foundation of their greatness, was a true sentiment though rooted 
in a false principle, and it was just that change of principle that was neces- 
sary in order that the true Rome might be revealed based upon the true 
rehgion. The countless triads of parricidal gods must be replaced by the 
single divine Trinity, consubstantial and indivisible, and the imiversal 
society of mankind must be set up, not on the basis of an Empire of Might, 
but on that of a Church of Love. Was it a mere coincidence that, when 
Jesus Christ wished to announce the foundation of His true universal 
monarchy, not upon the servile submission of its subjects nor upon the 
autocracy of a human ruler, but upon the free surrender of men’s faith and 
love to God’s truth and grace, He chose for that pronouncement the 
moment of His arrival with His disciples at the outskirts of Caesarea 
Philippi, the town which a slave of the Caesars had dedicated to the genius 
of his master? Or again was it a coincidence that Jesus chose the neigh- 
bourhood of the Sea of Tiberias for the giving of the final sanction to diat 
which He had founded, and that under the shadow of those monuments 
which spoke of the actual ruler of false Rome He consecrated the future 
ruler of true Rome m words which indicated both the mystical name of 
the Eternal City and the supreme principle of His new Kingdom: Simon 
Bar-Jona, lovest thou Me more than these?But why must true Love, which knows no envy and whose unity 
implies no exclusiveness, be centred in a single individual and assume for 
its operation in society the form of monarchy in preference to all others? 
Since here it is not a question of the omnipotence of God, which might 
impose truth and justice upon men from without, but rather of the Divine 
love in which man shares by a free act of adherence, the direct action 
of the Godhead must be reduced to a minimum. It cannot be entirely 
suppressed since all men are false and no human entity, either individual 
or collective, left to its own resources, can maintain itself in constant and 
progressive relationship to the Godhead. But the fruitful Love of God 
united to the Divine Wisdom quae in superjluis non abundat, in order to

1 121 12

assist human weakness while at the same time allowing human forces full 
play, chooses the path along which the unifying and life-giving action of 
supernatural truth and grace on the mass of mankind will encounter the 
fewest natural obstacles and will find a social framework externally con- 
formable and adapted to the manifestation of true unity; and the path which 
facilitates union between the Divine and the human in the social order 
by forming a central unifying organ within humanity itself is the path of 
monarchy. Otherwise the creation afresh each time of a spontaneous unity 
on the chaotic basis of independent opinions and conflicting wills would 
require each time a new, direct and manifestly miraculous intervention of 
the Godhead, an activity ex nihilo forced upon men and depriving them 
of their moral freedom. As the Divine Word did not appear upon earth 
in His heavenly splendour but in the lowhness of human nature, as to-day 
in order to give Himself to the faithful He assumes the lowly appearance 
of material ‘species’, so it was not His will to rule human society directly 
by His divine power but rather to employ as the normal instrument of 
His social activity a form of unity already in existence among men, 
namely, universal monarchy. Only it was necessary to regenerate, spiri- 
tuahse and sanctify this social form by substituting the eternal principle of 
grace and truth for the mortal principle of violence and deception; to re- 
place the head of an army, who in the spirit of falsehood declared himself 
to be a god, by the head of all the faithful who in the spirit of truth 
recognised and acknowledged m his Master the Son of the living God; 
to dethrone a raving despot who would fain have enslaved the human 
race and drained the blood of his victim, and to raise up in his stead the 
loving servant of a God W^ho shed His Blood for mankind.In the borders of Caesarea and on die shores of die Sea of Tiberias Jesus 
dethroned Caesar— not the Caesar of the tribute-money nor the Christian 
Caesar of the future, but the deified Caesar, the sole absolute and indepen- 
dent sovereign of the universe, the supreme centre of unity for the human 
race. He dethroned him because He had created a new and better centre 
of unity, a new and better sovereign power based upon faith and love, 
truth and grace. And while dethroning the false and impious absolutism 
of the pagan Caesars Jesus confirmed and made eternal the universal 
monarchy of Rome by giving it its true theocratic basis. It was in a certain 
sense nothing more than a change of dynasty; the dynasty of Julius Caesar, 
supreme pontiff and god, gave place to the dynasty of Simon Peter, 
supreme pontiff and servant of the servants of God.

VIII

The 'Son of Man and the 'Rock*

T he interpretation given in our last chapter helps to explain why 
the prophetic vision of the great pagan powers, which is as com- 
plete and exact as such a vision could be, makes no mention of the 
greatest power of all, the Roman Empire. It was because this Empire was 
not a part of the monstrous colossus doomed to destruction but was the 
abiding material framework and mould of the Kingdom of God. The 
great powers of the ancient world were merely passing figures upon the 
stage of history; Rome alone lives for ever. The rock of the Capitol was 
hallowed by the stone of the Bible, and the Roman Empire was trans- 
formed into the great mountain which in the prophetic vision sprang from 
that stone. And what can that stone itself mean except the monarchical 
power of him who was called the Rock par excellence and on whom the 
Universal Church, the mountain of God, was founded?The image of this mysterious stone in the book of Daniel is usually 
applied to Jesus Christ Himself It is noteworthy, however, that though 
Jesus made considerable use of the prophet Daniel in His preaching, yet in 
speaking of His own person He did not borrow from the prophet the 
symbol of the stone but another title which He used almost as His own 
name: the Son of Man. It is this very name which He employs m the 
crucial passage of St. Matthew: Quern dicunt homines esse Filium Hominis? 
Jesus is the Son of Man seen by the prophet Daniel (Dan. vii. 13) whereas 
the stone (Dan. ii. 34, 35, 45) does not directly denote Jesus but rather the 
fundamental authority of the Church, to the first representative of which 
this symbol was applied by the Son of Man Himself: Et ego dico Hbi quia tu 
es Petrus.

The context of the prophecy of Daniel directly confirms our view, for 
it speaks of a Kingdom coming firom God but nevertheless visible and 
earthly, destined to conquer, destroy and replace the great pagan Empires. 
The appearance and triumph of this fifth Kingdom, which in a parallel 
passage is called ‘the people of the saints of the Most High* (Dan. vii. 18, 
27) and which is obviously the Universal Church, are symbolically repre-seated by this stone which, after breaking the feet of the colossus, becomes 
a great mountain and fills the whole earth. If then the stone mentioned 
by Daniel directly denoted Christ it would follow that it was Christ 
Himself Who became the ‘great mountain', or in other words the univer- 
sal monarchy of the Church, to which the pagan Empires gave place. But 
why should we go out of our way to attribute to the truly inspired author 
of this wonderful book such confused and incongruous imagery, when 
there is all tlic time a clear and harmonious interpretation not only open 
to us but absolutely forced upon us by the comparison between these 
prophetic passages and the corresponding passage of the Gospel? Both in 
Daniel and in St. Matthew we find the Son of Man and the Rock of the 
Church. Now it is absolutely certam that the Son of Man, whether in the 
prophetic book or in the Gospel, denotes one and the same Person, the 
Messiah; the analogy demands therefore that the Rock of the Church 
bears in both passages the same sense. But in the Gospel the Rock is 
obviously the prince of the Apostles — tu es Petrus; hence the ‘stone’ of the 
prophet Daniel must equally foreshadow the onginal trustee of monar- 
chical authority in the Universal Church, the rock which was taken and 
hurled not by human hands but by the Son of the living God and by the 
heavenly Father Himself revealing to the supreme ruler of the Church 
that divme-human truth which was the source of his authority.There is a further remarkable coincidence to be noted. It was the great 
king of Babylon, the typical representative of false universal monarchy, 
who saw in a mysterious dream the chief representative of true universal 
monarchy under the significant image of a stone which was to become 
his actual name. Moreover he saw the complete contrast between the two 
monarchies: the one beginning in the head of gold and ending in feet of 
clay which crumble to dust, the other beginning in a little stone and end- 
mg in a huge mountain which filled the world.

Ancient and modern witness to the primacy of Peter

G ranted that Jesus Christ established in the person of St. Peter a 
central sovereign authority over the Church; it is still not clear 
how and for what purpose this authority could have passed to 
the Roman Church and the Papacy.* This is the reply which sincere Ortlio- 
dox have been compelled by the evidence to make to us. In other words, 
they admit that the stone was shaped by no human hand, but they shut their 
eyes to the great mountain which has grown out of it. And yet the pheno- 
menon is amply explained m Holy Scripture by similes and parables which 
are familiar to everyone, though for all that none the better understood.

Though the transformation of a stone into a mountam is only a symbol, 
the transformation of a simple, almost imperceptible seed into an in- 
finitely larger and more complicated organism is an actual fact. And it is 
by just this fact that the New Testament foretells and illustrates the de- 
velopment of the Church, as of a great tree which began in an imper- 
ceptible gram of seed and to-day gives ample shelter to the beasts of the 
field and the fowls of the air.Now even among Catholics we meet with ultra-dogmatic spirits who, 
while justly admiring the vast oak tree which covers them with its shade, 
absolutely refuse to admit that all this abundance of organic forms has 
grown from a structure as simple and rudimentary as that of an or- 
dmary acorn. According to them, though the oak arose out of the acorn 
yet the acorn must have contained in a distinct and discernible form, if not 
every leaf, at least every branch of the great tree, and must have been not 
only identical in substance with the latter but similar to it m every detail. 
Whereupon ultra-critical spirits of the opposite school set to work to 
examine the wretched acorn minutely from every angle. Naturally they 
discover in it no resemblance whatever to the entwining roots, the stout 
trunk, the leafy branches or the tough corrugated fohage of the great tree. 
‘What humbug!* they exclaim, ‘the acorn is simply an acorn and can 
never be anything else; it is only too obvious where the great oak and all 
its characteristics came from. The Jesuits invented it at the Vatican Council; 
we saw it with our own eyes — in the book of Janus.*

ii6ii6

At the risk of appearing a free-thinker to the extreme dogmatists and 
of being at the same time labelled a Jesuit in disguise by the critics, I must 
ai&rm die unquestionable truth that the acorn actually has a quite simple 
and rudimentary structure and that though all the component parts of a 
great oak cannot be discovered in it yet the oak has actually grown out 
of the acorn without any artificial stimulus or infringement of the laws of 
nature, but by its own right, nay even by divine right. Since God, Who 
is not bound by the limitations of time and space and of the mechanism of 
the material world, sees concealed in the actual germ of things all their 
future potentiahties, so in the htde acorn He must not only have seen but 
ordained and blessed the mighty oak which was to grow from it; in the 
grain of mustard seed of Peter’s faith He discerned and foretold the vast 
tree of the Cathohc Church which was to cover the earth with its 
branches.

Though Peter was entrusted by Jesus Christ with that universal sovereign 
authority which was to endure and develop within the Church through- 
out its existence upon earth, he did not personally exercise this authority 
except in a measure and m a form suited to the primitive condition of the 
Apostohc Church. The action of the prince of the Apostles had as little 
resemblance to modem papal administration as the acorn has to the oak; 
but this does not prevent the Papacy from being the natural, logical and 
legitimate development of the primacy of Peter. The primacy itself is so 
marked in the historical books of the New Testament that it has never 
been disputed by any theologian of good faith, whether Orthodox, 
rationahst or Jew.^ We have already cited the emment Jewish writer^ The same sincerity is not usually found in Protestant writers. The best among 
them, however, admit the fact of the primacy though they make fruitless attempts 
to interpret it according to their liking. Take, for instance, the words of M. de 
Pressens^ {Histbire des trois premiers sikles du Christianisme, ist ed., vol. i. pp. 358- 
360): ‘Throughout these early years the Apostle Peter exercised a predominant 
influence; the part which he played at this date has been adduced as a proof of his 
primacy. But on closer exammation of the evidence it is clear that all he did was 
to develop his own natural gifts (!) purified and enhanced by the Spirit of God.* 
‘Moreover St. Luke’s record lends no colour to any notion of a hierarchy. Every- 
thing m St. Peter’s behaviour is natural and spontaneous. He is not official president 
of any kind of apostolic college.’ (M. de Pressens6 is obviously confusing the 
accident of a more or less pronounced official status with the substance of primacy.) 
‘He only acts on the advice of his brethren* — accordmg to Protestant ideas, it seems, 
advice excludes authority — ‘whether in the choice of a new Apostle or at Pente- 
cost, before the people or before the Sanhedrin. Peter had been the most humihated 
of ^ the first Cmistians, hence the reason that he was promoted the most rapidly.* 
With this kind of facetiousness Protestantism seeks to evade expficit texts of Holy 
Scripture after declanng Senpture to be the one and only source of religious truth.

II7II7

Joseph Salvador as an unbiassed witness to the historical foundation of the 
Church by Jesus Christ and to the outstanding part allotted to Peter in its 
foundation. A writer equally free from Cathohc bias, David Strauss, the’ 
well-known leader of the German school of critics, has found himself 
compelled to defend the primacy of Peter against Protestant controver- 
sialists whom he accuses of prejudice.^ As regards the representatives of 
Eastern Orthodoxy we cannot do better than quote once more our one 
and only theologian, Philaret of Moscow. For him the primacy of Peter 
is ‘clear and evident’.^ After recalling the fact that Peter was entrusted by 
Christ with the special task of confirming his brethren (Luke xxii. 32), 
that is to say, the other Apostles, the famous Russian prelate contmues 
thus: ‘In point of fact, although the Resurrection of our Lord had been 
announced to the women who came bearing spices, this did not confirm 
the Apostles in their faith in the event (Luke xxiv. ii). But when the 
Risen Lord had appeared to Peter, the other Apostles (even before the 
appearance to them all together) declared with conviction: The Lord is 
risen indeed and hath appeared to Simon (Luke xxiv. 34). Fmally, 
when it is a question of filling the gap left in the Apostohc band by the 
apostasy of Judas, it is Peter who is the first to draw attention to the fact 
and to take the decisive step; when the moment arrives, just after the 
descent of the Holy Spirit, for the solemn inauguration of the preaching 
of the Gospel, “Peter standing up . . when the foundations of the Chris- 
tian Church are to be laid among pagans as well as among Jews, it is Peter 
who gives Comehus baptism and thus, not for the first time, fulfils the 
utterance of Christ: Thou art Peter, etc.'^In bearing this witness to the truth, the eloquent doctor of the modern 
Russian Church is but the echo of the stiU more eloquent doctor of the 
ancient Greek Church. St. John Chrysostom long ago anticipated and 
triumphantly refuted the objections to the primacy of Peter which are 
made even to-day on the ground of certain incidents in the record of the 
Gospel and of the Apostohc Church, such as Simon’s denial in the High 
Priest’s palace, his relations with St. Paul, and so forth. We refer our 
Orthodox readers to the arguments of the great (Ecumenical Doctor.^ No

^ Vie de Jisus (tr. Littr^, Pans 1839), vol. 1. part 2, p. 584; cf p. 378.

* Sermons and Addresses of Philaret, Metropohtan of Moscow (1873 etc.), 
vol. ii. p. 214.

^ ibid.

^ The Greco-Russian Church, as is well known, specially attributes this tide 
to three anaent Fathers: St. Basil of Caesarea, sumamed the Great, St. Gregory 
Nazianzen, sumamed the Theologian, and St. John Chrysostom. They have a 
feast in common on January 30 in our calendar.

I18

papist could assert more forcibly and insistently the primacy of power 
(and not merely of honour) which belonged to Peter in the Apostolic 
Church. The prince of the Apostles, to whose care all were committed 
by Christ (arc auroff irdvras iyxeipiadets:) had, according to this saintly 
writer, the power of nominating a successor to Judas on his own 
authority, and if on this occasion he called in the assistance of the other 
Apostles it was by no means of obligation, but simply of his good pleasure 
that he did so.^Holy Scripture tells us of the primacy of Peter; his right to absolute 
sovereign authority in the Church is attested by Orthodox tradition; but 
no one possessed of any historical feeling or indeed of any ordinary com- 
mon sense would expect to find legally defined powers taking effect 
according to fixed rules in the primitive Church, not only of the period 
when ‘the multitude of believers had but one heart and one soul* but also 
long after. There is always the temptation to expect to find in the acorn the 
branches of the oak. The real and living seed of the supreme authority of 
the Church which we discern in the prince of the Apostles could only be 
displayed in the primitive Church by practical leadership on the part of 
Peter in every matter which concerned the Universal Church, and this 
is what we actually find in the Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles. ^

Since there are actually critics who do not recognise the personality of 
St. Paul in his epistles, there will always be some who will not observe 
the outstanding part played by St. Peter in the foundation of the Church. 
We will not stay longer to refute them but we will pass on to the objection 
raised against the succession of Rome to the position of the Galilean 
fisherman.

^ Works IX. 27, 30-31.^ Works IX. 27, 30-31.

® Those of our Orthodox readers who find neither the authority of saintly 
Fathers such as John Chrysostom nor that of Russian theologians such as Mgr. 
Philaret sufficient to convmce them of Peter’s unique place m New Testament 
history will perhaps be amenable to what may be called statistical proof Since it 
occurred to me that none of Jesus* intimate disciples had so considerable a claim 
to a prominent place as St. John, the beloved Apostle, I counted up the number of 
times that John and Peter are mentioned respectively in the Gospels and Acts, and 
found the proportion to be about i to 4. St. Peter is mentioned by name 171 times 
(114 in the Gospels and 57 in the Acts), St. John only 46 times (38 times m the 
Gospels, including the instances where he refers to himself mdircctly, and 8 times 
in the Acts).

X

The Apostle Peter and the Papacy

T he Aposde Peter possesses the primacy of power; but why should 
the Pope of Rome succeed to this primacy?* We must confess our 
entire inabiUty to understand how such a question can be taken 
seriously. Once it is admitted that there is in the Universal Church a fun- 
damental supreme authority estabhshed by Christ in the person of St. 
Peter, then it must follow that this authority is in existence somewhere. 
And it seems to us that the obvious impossibihty of discovering it any- 
where else but at Rome is at once a sufficient reason for supporting the 
Catholic contention.Since neither the patriarch of Constantinople nor the Synod of Si. 
Petersburg claims or can possibly claim to represent the rock of the Uni- 
versal Church, that is to say the real and fundamental unity of ecclesias- 
tical authority, there is no choice but either to abandon all idea of such a 
unity and accept a state of division, confusion and bondage as the normal 
condition of the Church, or else to acknowledge the claims and actual 
vahdity of the one and only existing authority which has always shown 
itself to be the centre of ecclesiastical unity. No amount of argument can 
overcome the evidence for the fact that apart from Rome there only exist 
national churches such as the Armenian or the Greek church, State 
churches such as the Russian or Anglican, or else sects founded by in- 
dividuals, such as the Lutherans, the Calvinists, the Irvingites, and so forth. 
The Roman Cathohe Church is the only church that is neither a national 
church, nor a State church, nor a sect founded by a man; it is the only 
church in the world which maintains and asserts the principle of universal 
social unity against individual egoism and national particularism; it is the 
only church%vhich maintains and asserts the freedom of the spiritual power 
against the absolutism of the State; in a word, it is the only church against 
which the gates of hell have not prevailed.

‘By their fruits ye shall know them.* In the sphere of refigious fellow- 
ship the fruit of Catholicism (for those who have remained Catholics) is 
the unity and freedom of the Church; the fruit of Protestantism for its

120120

adherents both in the East and in the West is division and bondage: 
division chiefly in the West and bondage in the East. Think and say what 
you will of the Roman Church or of the Papacy; we ourselves are very 
far from seeing or expecting to find in either the achievement of perfection 
or the realisation of the ideal. We are aware that the rock of the Church 
is not the Church itself, that the foundation is not the same as the building, 
nor the way the same as the goal. All that we are maintaining is that the 
Papacy is the sole international and independent ecclesiastical authority, 
the only real and permanent basis for the Churches universal activity. That 
is an indisputable fact and in itself compels us to acknowledge the Pope to 
be the sole trustee of those powers and privileges which St. Peter received 
from Christ. And since the universal monarchy of the Church was not to 
eliminate the universal monarchy of the political world but to transub- 
stantiate it, was it not natural that the visible seat of the two correspond- 
ing monarchies should remain the same? If, as has already been said, the 
dynasty of Juhus Caesar was in a certain sense to give place to the dynasty 
of Simon Peter, if Caesarism was to yield to Papacy, it was surely to be 
expected that the Papacy should take up its abode in the existing centre of 
the universal Empire.The transference to Rome of the supreme ecclesiastical authority estab- 
lished by Christ in the person of St. Peter is a patent fact attested by the 
tradition of the Church and justified by the logic of circumstances. As re- 
gards the question of the formal manner in which the authority of Peter 
was transmitted to the bishop of Rome, that is a historical problem which 
for lack of documentary evidence can hardly be scientifically solved. Wc 
believe the Orthodox tradition which is recorded m our liturgical books 
to the effect that St. Peter on his arrival at Rome definitely fixed his sec 
there and before his death personally nominated his successor. Later times 
saw the Popes elected by the Christian community of the city of Rome 
until the present mode of election by the college of Cardinals was defi- 
nitely estabhshed. Furthermore, as early as the second century we have in 
the writings of St. Irenaeus unimpeachable evidence that the Church of 
Rome was already regarded by the whole Christian world as the centre 
of unity, and that the bishop of Rome enjoyed a permanent position of 
supreme authority, though the forms in which this authority found ex- 
pression were bound to vary with the times, becoming more defimte and 
imposing in proportion as the development of the whole social structure 
of the Church became more intricate and diversified.

‘In fact’ (to quote a historian of the critical rationalist school) ‘in 196 
the chosen heads of the churches were attempting to create ecclesiastical 
unity; one of them, the head of the Roman Church, seemed to claim the

121121

r6le of executive authority within the community and to assume the 
position of sovereign pontiff.*^ But it was not merely a question of execu- 
tive aiithority, for a little further on the same author makes the following 
admission: ‘Tertullian and Cyprian appear to hail the Church of Rome 
as the principal church and in a certain degree the guardian and keeper of 
the faith and of genuine tradition’.^

In the early days of Christianity the monarchical authority of the Uni- 
versal Church was but a seed scarcely visible but nevertheless pregnant 
with life; by the second century this seed has visibly developed, as the acts 
of Pope Victor testify; in the Aird century the same wimess is borne by 
the acts of Pope Stephen and Pope Dionysius, and in the fourth by those 
of Pope Julius I.* In the following century we already see the supreme 
authority and monarchical power of the Roman Church growing like a 
vigorous sapling under Pope St. Leo I; and finally by the ninth century 
the Papacy is already the mighty and majestic tree which covers the Chris- 
tian world with the shadow of its branches.That is the great fact, the main fact, the mamfestation and fulfilment in 
history of the divine utterance: Thou art Peter. This broad fact is the out- 
come of divine law, while particular facts regarding the transmission of 
the sovereign power, the papal elections and so forth concern the purely 
human side of the Church and have no more than a secondary interest 
from the religious point of view. Here again the Roman Empire, fore- 
shadowing as it does in a certain sense the Roman Church, may provide 
us with an analogy. Since Rome was the undisputed centre of the Empire, 
the individual who was proclaimed Emperor at Rome was immediately 
recognised as such by the whole world without any question as to whether 
it was the Senate or the praetorians or the votes of the people which had 
raised him to the purple. In exceptional cases, when the Emperor was 
elected by the legions outside Rome, his first concern was to hasten to the 
imperial city, without whose support his election would be regarded by 
everyone as only provisional. The Rome of the Popes became for umver- 
sal Christendom what the Rome of the Caesars had been for the pagan 
world. The bishop of Rome was by his very office the supreme pastor and 
doctor of the whole Church. There was no need to trouble about the 
method of his election; that depended on circumstances and conditions of 
the moment. There was usually no more reason for doubting the legality 
of the election of the bishop of Rome than that of the election of any 
other bishop. And once his election to the episcopate was recognised, the

^ B. Aub^, Les chritiens dans V Empire Romain, de la Jin des Antonins au milieu du 
troisihne sihcle^ p. 69.

*ibid., p. 146.

122^ B. Aub^, Les chritiens dans V Empire Romain, de la Jin des Antonins au milieu du 
troisihne sihcle^ p. 69.

*ibid., p. 146.

122

head of the central church and the occupant of the Chair of St. Peter was 
ipso facto in possession of all the rights and powers which Christ conferred 
upon the rock of the Church. There were exceptional instances where 
doubt might be felt about the election; antipopes are not unknown to 
history. But just as the usurpers Demetrius and Peter III in no way robbed 
the Russian monarchy of its lawful authority, so the antipopes provide 
no argument against the Papacy. Any apparent abnormahty in the history 
of the Church belongs to the human ‘species* rather than to the divine 
‘substance* of the religious society. If by some chance adulterated or even 
poisoned wine were used in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, would this 
sacrilege have the slightest effect on the validity of the Sacrament itself?In maintaining that the bishop of Rome is the true successor of St. 
Peter and therefore the impregnable rock of the Church and the steward 
of the Kingdom of Heaven, we are putting on one side the question 
whether the prince of the Apostles was ever personally in Rome. This 
fact is attested by the tradition of the Church both in the East and in the 
West, and we ourselves feel no doubt in the matter. But if there are Chris- 
tians in good faith who are more susceptible than ourselves to the specious 
arguments of Protestant scholars, we have no wish to dispute the matter 
with them. We might even admit that St. Peter never went personally to 
Rome, and yet at the same Ume from the rehgious point of view maintain 
a spintual and mystical transmission of his sovereign authority to the 
bishop of the Eternal City. The history of early Christianity supplies us 
with a striking instance of an analogous relationship. St. Paul had no 
natural link whatever with Jesus Christ; he was not a witness of our Lord s 
hfe on earth nor did he receive his commission in any visible or public 
fashion; nevertheless he is recognised by all Christians as one of the greatest 
Apostles. His apostolate was a public ministry in the Church and yet its 
origm, in his relation to Jesus Christ, is a mystical and miraculous fact. 
Now if a phenomenon of a supernatural order formed the original link 
between Jesus Christ and St. Paul and made the latter a chosen vessel and 
the Apostle of the Gentiles, though at the same time this miraculous com- 
mission did not prevent his further activity from being subject to the 
natural conditions of human life and historic circumstances, then similarly 
that original relationship between St. Peter and the See of Rome which 
created the Papacy might well depend upon a mystical and transcendental 
act, which would in no way deprive the Papacy itself once constituted of 
the character of a normal social institution acting under the ordinary con- 
ditions of earthly life. The mighty spirit of St. Peter, guided by his 
Master’s almighty Will, might well seek to perpetuate the centre of 
ecclesiastical unity by t akin g up his abode in the centre of poHtical umty123

already formed by Providence and thus making the bishop of Rome heir 
to his primacy. According to this theory (which, let us remember, would 
become necessary only if it were conclusively shewn that St. Peter did not 
go to Rome) the Pope would be regarded as the successor of St. Peter in 
the same spiritual and yet absolutely real sense in which, mutatis mutandis, 
St. Paul must be recognised as a true Apostle chosen and sent by Jesus Christ 
though he had no knowledge of Him except in a miraculous vision. St. 
Paul’s apostleship is attested by the Acts of the Apostles and by the Epistles 
of St. Paul himself; the succession of the Roman primacy from St. Peter 
is attested by the unbroken tradition of the Universal Church. For an 
Orthodox Christian the latter evidence is intrinsically of no less value than 
the former. Of the manner in which the foundation rock of the Church 
was removed from Palestine to Italy we may well be ignorant; but that it 
was actually so removed and established at Rome is an incontrovertible 
fact, the rejection of which would involve the denial not only of sacred 
tradition but of the very history of Christianity.The point of view which ranks fact lower than principle and lays greater 
emphasis on a general truth than on the external certainty of material 
phenomena is by no means peculiar to ourselves; it is the opinion of the 
Orthodox Church herself. Let us quote an example in order to make our 
meaning clear. It is absolutely certain that the first oecumenical council of 
Nicaea was summoned by the Emperor Constantine and not by Pope St. 
Silvester. Nevertheless the Greco-Russian Church in the office of January 
2, in which she celebrates the memory of St. Silvester, has accorded to 
him special praise for having summoned the 318 Fathers to Nicaea and 
promulgated the orthodox dogma against the blasphemy of Arius. This 
is no mere historical error — the history of the first council was well known 
in the Eastern Church — but rather the expression of a general truth far 
more important for the religious conscience of the Church than material 
accuracy. Once the primacy of the Popes was recognised in principle, it 
was natural to ascribe to each Pope all the ecclesiastical acts that took 
place during his pontificate. Thus with the general fundamental rule of 
the life of the Church in mind rather than the historical details of a 
particular event, the Easterns assigned to St. Silvester the privileges and 
duties which were his according to the spirit, if not the letter, of Christian 
history. And if it is true that the letter killeth but the spirit giveth life, 
they were right.

124

XI

Pope Sl Leo the Great on the primacy124

XI

Pope Sl Leo the Great on the primacy

T his is not the place to set forth the whole historical development of 
the Papacy or to quote the copious testimony home by Orthodox 
tradition to the lawfulness of the papal sovereignty in the Universal 
Church. In order to demonstrate the historical basis of our argument to 
those of our readers who are not familiar with Church history, it will be 
enough to dwell upon a single epoch memorable in the history of the 
Papacy, an epoch which is sufficiently primitive to command the respect 
of our Orthodox traditionalists and which at the same time stands re- 
vealed in the broad daylight of historical knowledge and documentary 
evidence and so presents no obscurity or ambiguity in its essential outlines. 
The epoch in question is the middle of the fifth century, the period when 
the Roman Church had so worthy a representative in Pope St. Leo the 
Great.

It is interesting for us to note the conception which this Roman pontiff, 
who is also a recognised samt of the Greco-Russian Church, had of his 
own authority and how his assertions were received m the Eastern part of 
the Church.In one of his sermons, after reminding his hearers that Christ is the only 
pontiff in the strict sense of the word, St. Leo continues thus: ‘Now He 
has not abandoned the care of His flock; and it is from His supreme and 
eternal authority that we have received the abundant gift of apostolic 
power and His succour is never absent from His work. . . . For that firm- 
ness of faith which was commended in the prince of the Apostles is per- 
petual, and as that which Peter believed on in Christ endures, so does that 
which Christ established in Peter endure also (et sicut permanet quod in 
Christo Petrus credidit, ita permanet quod in Petro Christus instituit), . . . The 
dispensation of the truth therefore abides; and the blessed Peter persever- 
ing in the strength of the Rock wherewith he has been endowed has not 
abandoned the reins of the Church which he received. . . . Thus if we act 
or decide justly, if by our daily supplications we obtain aught of the mercy 
of God, it is the work and the merit of him whose power lives and whose

125

authority prevaik in his sec/ And speaking of the bishops gathered at 
Rome for the feast of St. Peter, St. Leo says that they have desired to 
honour by their presence ‘him whom they know not only to preside in 
this see (of Rome) but also to be the primate of all the bishops.*^In another sermon, after expressing what may be called the fundamental 
truth of the Church, that in the sphere of the inner life of grace all Chris- 
tians are priests and kings, but that difiercnces and inequahties are neces- 
sary in the outward structure of the mystical body of Christ, St. Leo goes 
on to say: ‘And yet out of the whole world Peter alone is chosen to 
be set above the assembly of all the nations, above all the Apostles and all 
the Fathers of the Church, to the end that though among God's people 
there are many priests and many pastors, yet all might be duly governed 
by Peter, being ultimately governed by Christ. Behold, dearly beloved, 
how great a share (magnum consortium) in His own power was bestowed 
by the will of God upon this man, and if God willed that the rest of the 
Apostles should share aught in common with him, yet it was through him 
that He bestowed whatever He did not withhold from the others. . . . And 
Isay unto thee: that is to say, as My Father has revealed unto thee My God- 
head so I make known to thee thy pre-eminence; that thou art Peter: that 
is to say, though I am the inviolable Rock, though I am the Corner-stone 
Who have made both one, though I am the Foundation other than which 
none can be laid, yet thou also art the Rock strengthened by My might 
and so sharing in common with Me that which I possess by My own 
power. ‘The power of binding and loosing was handed on to the other 
Apostles also and through them to all the rulers of the Church; but not 
for nothing was a smgle individual entrusted with what belongs to all. . . . 
Peter is fortified with the strength of all and the assistance of divine grace 
is so ordered that the stabihty bestowed by Christ on Peter is conferred 
by Peter on the Apostles.As Peter shares in the sovereign authority of Christ over the Universal 
Church, so the bishop of Rome who occupies the see of Peter is the living 
representative of this authority. ‘Peter does not cease to preside in his see 
and his consortium with the Eternal Pontiff never fails. For that steadfast- 
ness with which he was endowed, when he was first made the Rock, by 
Christ Who is Himself the Rock, has passed to his successors, and wherever 
any stability is manifest it is beyond doubt the might of the supreme 
Pastor which is in evidence. Could anyone consider the renown of blessed 
Peter and yet be ignorant or envious enough to assert that there is any 
part of the Church which is not guided by his care and strengthened by 
^ Works (ed. Mignc, Pans 1846 etc.), i. 145-7.

* ibid ., 149. ^ ibid ., 15 1-2; cf. 429-32.

126

his succour?'^ ‘Though every individual pastor tends his flock with a 
special care and knows that he must give account of the sheep committed 
to his charge, nevertheless we alone must share the anxiety of all and our 
responsibility includes the governance of each individual. For since the 
whole world has recourse to the see of the blessed Apostle Peter, and since 
that love towards the Universal Church which was enjoined upon him by 
our Lord is expected of our administration also, therefore the greater our 
responsibility towards all the faithful, the heavier is the burden which 
weighs upon us?*^

The renown of St. Peter is to St. Leo’s mind inseparable from the re- 
nown of the Roman Church, which he calls ‘the holy nation, the chosen 
people, the priestly and royal state, which has become the head of the 
world through the blessed Peter’s holy see.’® ‘He, the chief of the apostohe 
band, was appointed to the citadel of the Roman Empire that the light of 
the truth which was being revealed for the salvation of all the nations 
might spread more effectually from the head itself throughout the whole 
body of the world.^ ibid,, 155 - 6 . 2 ibid., 153 . ® ibid., 423 . ^ ibid., 424 .

127

XII

St, Leo the Great on papal authority

B elieving as he did that the supreme authority of Peter resided per- 
manently in the Roman Church, St. Leo could not regard himself 
otherwise than as ‘the ruler of the Christian world'^ responsible for 
the peace and good order of all the Churches.^ Constant attention to this 
huge task was for him a religious obhgation. ‘The demands of religious 
duty {ratio pietatis)^ he writes to the African bishops, ‘require that we 
should make every effort to ascertain the exact state of affairs with that 
solicitude which, according to the divine command, we owe to the Uni- 
versal Church. . . . For the stabihty and order of the Lord’s whole house- 
hold would be disturbed if there were lacking in the head aught of which 
the body had need.’® The same ideas are found expressed in a more de- 
veloped form in his letter to tjie bishops of Sicily: ‘We are urged by divine 
precepts and apostolic exhortations to keep a loving and active watch over 
the state of all the Churches and if there is anything deserving of blame 
we must be dihgent to warn the culprit either against the rashness of 
ignorance or the presumption of self-aggrandisement. Constrained by the 
Lord’s utterance which urged upon blessed Peter the mystical injunction 
thrice repeated that he who loves Christ should feed Christ’s sheep, we 
are bound by reverence for his see, which by the abundance of divine 
grace we occupy, to avoid the peril of sloth so far as we may, lest the con- 
fession of the holy Apostle, whereby he declared himself the Lord’s dis- 
ciple, be required of us in vain. For he who is negligent in/eeding the 
flock so repeatedly entrusted to him is proved to have no love for the 
Chief Shepherd.’^In his letter to St. Flavian, the patriarch of Constantinople, the Pope 
assigns to himself the task of preserving the Cathohc faith intact by cutting 
off all dissensions, of warning by his own authority [nostra auctoritate) the 
champions of prror, and of fortifying those whose faith is approved.®

^ The designation given him in the Constitution of the Emperor Valentinian 
III; V, Works i. 637.

® ibid,, 664. ® ibid., 646. * ibid., 695-6. ® ibid., 733.

128

when the Emperor Theodosius II attempted to plead with St. Leo on 
behalf of the archimandrite Eutyches who was the author of the Mono- 
physite heresy, the sovereign pontiff rephed that Eutyches could secure 
pardon if he recanted the opinions condemned by the Pope, with whom 
lay the final decision in questions of dogma. ‘What the Catholic Church 
believes and teaches on the mystery of the Lord’s incarnation is contained 
fully in the letter sent to my brother and fellow-bishop Flavian.’^St. Leo did not admit that the oecumenical council had any power of 
decision on a dogma already defined by the Pope.^ In the instructions 
which the Pope gives to his legate the Bishop Paschasinus he points to his 
dogmatic epistle to Flavian as the complete and final definition of the true 
fairfi.® In another letter to the Emperor Marcian, St. Leo declares himself 
instructed by the Spirit of God to teach and impart the true Cathohe 
faith.^ In a third letter to the Emperor, he states that he has only asked for 
the summoning of a council in order to restore peace in the Eastern 
Church,® and in the letter addressed to the council itself he says that he 
only accepts it ‘so that the rights and dignity belonging to the see of the 
blessed Apostle Peter be respected’, and he urges the Eastern bishops ‘to 
abstain entirely from the rashness of impugning the divinely inspired 
faith’ as he has defined it in his dogmatic epistle. ‘It is not permitted,’ he 
writes, ‘to defend that which it is not permitted to believe, since in our 
letters sent to Bishop Flavian of blessed memory we have already with the 
greatest fullness and lucidity (plenissime et lucidissitne) expounded the true 
and pure faith concerning the mystery of the incarnation of our Lord 
Jesus Christ in accordance with the authoritative record of the Gospels, 
the words of the Prophets and the teaching of the Apostles.’® And m the 
following words St. Leo informs the Gaulish bishops of the result of the 
council of Chalcedon: ‘The holy Synod, adhering with religious unani- 
mity to that which had been written by our unworthy hand and rein- 
forced by the authority and merit of my lord the blessed Aposde Peter, 
has cut off from the Church of God this shameful abomination (the 
heresy of Eutyches and Dioscorus).’But it is well known that, besides this result which the Pope approved, 
the council of Chalcedon was marked by an act of a different kind. In an 
irregular session, the Eastern bishops subject to the patriarch of Constan- 
tinople promulgated the famous twenty-eighth Canon by which they con- 
ferred upon their metropolitan the primacy of the East to the prejudice 
of the patriarchs of Alexandria and Antioch. It is true that they themselves 
declared the Canon to be provisional and humbly submitted it to the 
1 ibid., 783. * ibid., 918: Letter to the Emperor Marcian. ® ibid., 927.

® ibid., 930. ® ibid., 932. ® ibid., 937“9- ^ 987.

1

129judgment of St Leo, who repudiated it with indignation and seized this 
fresh opportunity of defining his conception of the hierarchy and the 
extent of his own authority. In his letter to the Emperor, he observes in 
the first place that the claims of the patriarch of Constantinople are based 
upon political considerations and have nothing in common with the 
primacy of St Peter which is of divine institution. ‘Secular things stand 
upon a different footing from things divine; and apart from the one Rock 
which the Lord has laid for a foundation no building can be stable. . . . Let it suffice him* (the patriarch Anatolius) ‘that he has obtained the 
bishopric of so great a city with the aid of your piety and the support of 
my favour. He should not disdain the royal city, even though he cannot 
change it into an apostolic see; and let him on no account hope to succeed 
in exalting his own position at the expense of others. . . . Let him remem- 
ber that it is to me that the government of the Church has been entrusted. I should be responsible if the rules of the Church were infringed through 
my acquiescence (far be it from me!) or if the will of a single brother had 
more weight with me than the common good of the Lord's whole house. ‘The agreements of the bishops which are contrary to the holy canons of 
Nicaea ... we declare to be null and void, and by the authority of the 
blessed Apostle Peter we annul them completely by a general decree.*^ In 
his reply to the petition of the bishops of the fourth council, the Pope 
confirms his approval of their dogmatic decree (formulated on the lines of 
his own letter to Flavian) as well as his annulment of the twenty-eighth 
Canon.129

‘The agreements of the bishops which are contrary to the holy canons of 
Nicaea ... we declare to be null and void, and by the authority of the 
blessed Apostle Peter we annul them completely by a general decree.*^ In 
his reply to the petition of the bishops of the fourth council, the Pope 
confirms his approval of their dogmatic decree (formulated on the lines of 
his own letter to Flavian) as well as his annulment of the twenty-eighth 
Canon. ‘Your Holiness will be able,* he writes, ‘to appreciate the reverence 
with which the Apostolic Sec observes the rules of the holy Fathers, by 
reading my writings in which I have rejected the claims of the bishop of 
Constantinople; and you will understand that I am, with the help of the 
Lord, the guardian of the CathoHc faith and of the decrees of the Fathers.*® 
Although St. Leo, as we have just seen, did not think an oecumenical 
council necessary in the interests of dogmatic truth after the definitions 
contained in his letter, yet he considered it very desirable for the peace of 
the Church; and the spontaneous and unanimous adherence of the council 
to his decrees filled him with joy. In such a voluntary unity he saw the 
ideal relationship within the hierarchy. ‘The merit of the priesdy office,* 
he writes to Theodoret, bishop of Cyrus, ‘gains great lustre where the 
authority of those in command is so maintained that the liberty of those 
under obedience appears in no way diminished.*^ ‘The Lord has not 
allowed us to suffer harm in the person of our brethren, but what He had 
already laid down through our ministry He subsequently confirmed by 
the irrevocable assent of the whole brotherhood to show that it was indeed 
^ ibid., 995 . ® ibid., 1000 . ® ibid., 1027 sqq. * ibid., 1048 .

130130

from Himself that ‘*thc dogmatic act” proceeded which was fint promul- 
gated by the chief of all sees and then received by the judgment of the 
whole Christian world so that in this also the members might be in agree- 
ment with the head.*^

The learned Theodoret, as is well known, had been accused of Nes- 
toiianism but had been exculpated at the council of Chalcedon; he him- 
self, however, regarded this Judgment as only provisional and applied 
to the Pope for a final decision. St. Leo pronounced him orthodox *in the 
name of our blessed God Whose invincible truth has shown thee to be 
clean from all stain of heresy according to the judgment of the Apostolic 
See*; and he adds: ‘We acknowledge the exceeding care of blessed Peter 
for us all, who not only has confirmed the judgment of his see in the 
definition of the faith, but has also vindicated those who were unjustly 
condemned*.^But while he recognised in voluntary agreement the ideal of ecclesias- 
tical unity, St. Leo clearly distinguished in this unity the element of 
authority from the element of deliberation, the decision of the Holy See 
from the consent of the oecumenical council. The ideal of the Church re- 
quires such consent on the part of the whole brotherhood; the life of the 
Church is incomplete without an entire unanimity; but even this universal 
consent has no real basis and can produce no result without the decisive 
action of the central authority, as the history of the Church abundantly 
proves. The last word in all questions of dogma and the final confirmation 
of every ecclesiastical act belongs to the see of St. Peter. Hence in his letter 
to Anatolius, the patriarch of Constantinople, regarding a cleric of that 
city, Atticus, who was to recant his heretical opimons and submit himself 
to the judgment of the fourth council, St. Leo draws an essential distinc- 
tion between his own part in the decisions of the oecumenical council and 
the part played by the Greek patriarch: ‘He* {i.e. Atticus) must promise 
to maintain in all points the definition of faith of the council of Chalcedon 
to which your charity has assented and subscribed and which has been con- 
firmed by the authority of the ApostoHc See*.®

The fundamental principle of Church government could not be better 
formulated than by drawing St. Leo*s distinction between the authority 
which confirms and the charity which assents. It is assuredly no mere 
primacy of honour that the Pope claims in these words. On the contrary , 
St. Leo allows a complete equality of honour among all bishops; from 
that point of view all were for him brethren and fellow-bishops. It was on 
the other hand the distinction of power which he explicitly asserted. The 
brotherhood of all does not exclude for him the authority of one. In a 
^ ibid. ^ 1046-7. ^ ibid., 1053. ^ ibid., 1147.

131131

letter to Anastasius, bishop of Salonica, on certain matters which ‘have 
been entrusted to his brotherly care by the authority of the blessed Apostle 
Peter'^ he sums up the conception of the hierarchical principle thus: ‘Even 
among the blessed Apostles, there was side by side with an equality of 
honour a distinction of authority; and though all were equally chosen, 
nevertheless pre-eminence was given to one over the others. On the same 
principle distinction is made between bishops, and the mighty design of 
Providence has ordered it that all may not claim every prerogative but 
that in each province there should be someone possessing primacy of juris- 
diction' (hterally: ‘prime judgment’) ‘over his brethren; and again that 
those presiding in the larger cities should receive a wider responsibUity, 
that through them the care of the Universal Church might ultimately 
rest upon the one see of Peter and that no part should anywhere be sepa- 
rated from the head. *2

The ultimate warrant and sanction of this ‘mighty design of Providence’ 
consists, according to St. Leo, in the fact that the one head of the Church, 
with whom the rights and obhgations of all are bound up, does not owe 
his power to the ordinance of man or to the accidents of history but re- 
presents the mipregnable rock of truth and justice laid down by the Lord 
Himself as the foundation of His social structure. It is no mere considera- 
tion of expediency but the ratio pietatis which is invoked by him who has 
received the government of the whole Church e divina institutione.^

^ ibid., 668. ^ ibid., 676. ® ibid., 646.

132

XIII

The approval of St. Leo's ideas by the Greek Fathers. 
The yobber-counciV of Ephesus^ ibid., 668. ^ ibid., 676. ® ibid., 646.

132

XIII

The approval of St. Leo's ideas by the Greek Fathers. 
The yobber-counciV of Ephesus

I n the writings and acts of Leo I we see no longer the germ of the 
sovereign Papacy but the Papacy itself exhibiting the full extent of its 
powers. To mention only the most important pomt, the doctrine of 
m£zUihi]ity ex cathedra is here proclaimed fourteen centuries before Pius IX. 
St. Leo asserts that the authority of St. Peter’s Chair is of itself sufficient 
to resolve a fundamental question of dogma, and he does not ask the 
oecumenical council to define the dogma but to assent, for the sake of the 
peace of the Church, to the definition given by the Pope who is by divine 
right the lawful guardian of the true Cathohc faith. If this thesis, which 
was merely developed by the Vatican council in its Constitutio dogmatic a de 
Ecclesia Christie is a heresy as our own theologians have claimed, then Pope 
St. Leo the Great is a declared heretic or rather a heresiarch, since never 
before had this thesis been affirmed so exphcitly, so forcibly or so insistently.Let us see then the kind of reception which the Orthodox Church gave 
to the authoritative assertions of Pope St. Leo; for this purpose we will 
take the acts of those Greek councils which were contemporary with this 
Pope and read the documents.^ We find first of all a remarkable letter from 
the bishop Peter Chrysologus to the archimandrite Eutyches. When St. 
Flavian the patriarch of Constantinople had m conjunction with his synod 
condemned Eutyches, archimandrite of one of the monasteries of the 
Greek capital, for heresy and had appfied to the Pope for confirmation of 
the sentence, Eutyches following the advice given him at the Emperor’s 
court, where he had many influential patrons, attempted to win certain 
orthodox bishops to his side. The following is the reply he received from 
one of them, Peter Chrysologus: ‘Above all we advise you, venerable 
brother, to adhere with the greatest confidence to the writings of the 
blessed Pope of the city of Rome; since the blessed Apostle Peter who lives 
and presides in his own see gives to those who seek it the truth of the faith. 
As for us, our anxiety for peace and for the faith forbids us to decide 
^ Mansi, Concil, vols. v., vi. and vii.

133

causes which concern rehgion without the assent of the bishop of Rome.

Peter Chrysologus, though a Greek and writing to a Greek, was never- 
theless bishop of Ravenna and therefore half Western. But a few pages 
further on we find the same doctrine from the representative of the metro- 
pohs of the East, Flavian, a saint and confessor of the Orthodox Church. 
On the heresy of Eutyches he writes thus to the Pope: ‘The whole question 
needs only your single decision and all will be settled in peace and quiet- 
ness. Your sacred letter will with God’s help completely suppress the 
heresy which has arisen and the disturbance which it has caused;^ and so’, 
he continues, ‘the convening of a council which is in any case difficult will 
be rendered superfluous.*Next to the saintly patriarch of Constantinople should be quoted the 
learned bishop of Cyrus, Theodoret, who has been beatified by the Greek 
Church. ‘If Paul the herald of the truth and the trumpet of the Holy 
Spirit,* he writes to Pope Leo, ‘had recourse to the great Peter . . . we, 
simple and humble as we are, ought all the more to hasten to your apos- 
tolic throne to receive at your hands healing for the wounds which afflict 
the Churches. For the primacy belongs to you for every reason. Your see 
is adorned with every sort of privilege and above all with that of faith; to 
which the divine Apostle bears sufficient wimess when in addressing the 
Church of Rome he exclaims: “Your faith is spoken of in the whole 
world”. ... It is your see which possesses the tombs of the fathers and 
doctors of the truth, Peter and Paul, enlightening the souls of the faithful. 
That divine and thrice blessed pair appeared in the East and shed their 
rays abroad; but it was in the West that they chose to be delivered from 
this life and it is from thence that they now illumine the whole world. 
They have shed manifest lustre upon your throne and that is the crown 
of your blessings . ’3 ‘As for me I have only to await the sentence of your 
apostolic see. And I beg and beseech your Holiness to give me, who am 
unjustly accused, access to your lawful and just tribunal; give but the word 
and I hasten to receive from you my doctrine in which I have only desired 
to follow in the Apostles’ footsteps'.^

These are no mere empty words or rhetorical phrases addressed to the 
Pope by the representatives of orthodoxy. The Greek bishops had cause 
enough to cling to the supreme authority of the Apostolic See. The 
‘robber-council of Ephesus’ had just given them ocular demonstration of 
what an oecumenical council without the Pope could be like. It is instruc- 
tive to recall the circumstances of that occasion.Since the fourth century, that part of the Church which was mainly 
Greek in culture had suffered from the rivalry and continual strife of two 
^ Mansi, Concil, v. 1349. * ibid., 1356. * id., vi. 36, 37. * ibid., 40.

134134

central sees, the ancient patriarchate of* Alexandria and the new one of 
Constantinople. The outward fluctuations in this struggle depended 
mainly on the attitude of the Byzantine court; and if we look into the 
causes which influenced the attitude of the secular power to the two 
ecclesiastical centres of the East we note a remarkable fact. A priori it 
might be supposed that the Byzantine Empire had from the political point 
of view three lines of action from which to choose: she might support the 
new patriarchate of Constantinople as her own creation always within her 
control and unable to achieve any permanent independence; or else im- 
perialist Byzantium might wish to avoid the necessity of repressing cleri- 
calist tendencies at home and, in order to rid herself of a rather too close 
and irksome connexion, she might prefer to have the centre of ecclesias- 
tical administration somewhere farther off and yet within her sphere of 
influence; she might, with this end in view, incline to support the patri- 
archate of Alexandria which satisfied both these conditions and besides 
could claim on traditional and canonical grounds a relative primacy over 
the East; or lastly, the imperial government might choose to maintain an 
even balance between the rival sees by favouring now one and now the 
other according to political circumstances. It is clear, however, that 
actually none of these courses was chosen. When ample allowance has 
been made for individual coincidences or purely personal reactions it must 
still be recognised that there was a general motive dictating the policy of 
the Byzantine Emperors in the struggle between the great sees of the East; 
but the motive lay outside the three political considerations just indicated. 
If the Emperors varied m their attitude to the two patriarchates, alter- 
nately giving first one and then the other their support, this variation had 
nothing to do with the balance of power; the Byzantine court invariably 
supported, not the one of the two rival prelates who was least dangerous 
at the moment, but the one who was in the wrong from the religious or 
moral point of view. It was enough for a patriarch, whether of Constanti- 
nople or of Alexandria, to be a heretic or an unworthy shepherd of his 
flock, and he was assured of the active protection of the Empire for a con- 
siderable period, if not for the rest of his career. And conversely, a saint 
or a champion of orthodoxy who ascended the episcopal throne either in 
the city of Alexander or in that of Constantine might count at once upon 
the hatred and persecution of the imperial court and often upon nothing 
short of martyrdom.This invincible tendency of the Byzantine government towards injus- 
tice, violence and heresy and its ineradicable antipathy to the worthiest 
representatives of the Christian hierarchy was quick to shew itself. 
Scarcely had the Empire recognised the Christian religion before it was

135135

already persecuting St. Athanasius, the light of orthodoxy. The whole of 
the long reign of Constandus, the son of Constantine the Great, was taken 
up with the struggle against the renowned patriarch of Alexandria, while 
the heretical bishops of Constantinople were backed by the Emperor. Nor 
was it the power of the see of Alexandria which was intolerable to the 
Christian Caesar, but the moral greamess of its occupant. Half a century 
later the position was revened and the see of Constantinople was occupied 
by a great saint, John Chrysostom, while the patriarchate of Alexandria 
had fallen to Theophilus, a man of the most contemptible character; but 
the court of Byzantium favoured Theophilus and used every means in its 
power to bring about Chrysostom’s downfall. It may be said, however, 
that it was merely the independent character of the great Christian orator 
which made him suspect in imperial circles. Yet not long afterwards the 
Church of Constantinople was ruled by Nestorius, a personality of an 
equally courageous and independent character; but since he possessed the 
additional qualification of being a determined propagator of heresy, he 
received every encouragement from Theodosius II and could count on the 
Emperor’s unfailing support m his struggle against St. Cyril, the new 
patriarch of Alexandria and the rival of the great Athanasius, if not m 
personal character, at least in his zeal for orthodoxy and his theological 
abihty. We shall see before long why the imperial government did not 
succeed in upholdmg the heretic Nestorius and bringmg about the fall of 
St. Cyril. Shortly afterwards the position was again reversed: the patri- 
archate of Constantinople had in St. Flavian a worthy successor of John 
Chrysostom, and the see of Alexandria was now held by a second Theo- 
philus, one Dioscorus, nicknamed ‘the Pharaoh of Egypt’. St. Flavian was 
a gentle and unassuming person; Dioscorus’ character, on the other hand, 
was stained with every wickedness and was distinguished mainly by an 
inordinate ambition and a despotic temper to which he owed his mck- 
name. From the purely political pomt of view it was obvious that the 
imperial government had nothing to fear from St. Flavian, while the 
domineering ambitions of the new ‘Pharaoh’ might well arouse justifiable 
apprehensions. But St. Flavian was orthodox, and Dioscorus had the great 
merit of favouring the new heresy of Monophysitism. That alone was 
enough to ensure him the support of the Byzantine courti and an oecu-^ A curious fact and one which strikingly confirms our theory of the partiality 
of the Byzantine Emperors for heresy as such is that the same Emperor Theodosius 
II, who had favoured the Nestonan heresy and had seen it condemned by the 
Church in spite of his efforts, became subsequently the enthusiastic supporter of 
Eutyches and Dioscorus who held the view diametrically opposite to that of 
Nestorius though no less heretical.

136136

menical council was summoned under imperial auspices to give official 
sanction to his cause. Dioscorus had everything in his favour: the support 
of the secular arm, a well-disciplined body of clergy brought with him 
from Egypt and blindly devoted to him, a mob of heretical monks, a con- 
siderable following among the clergy of the other patriarchates, and lastly 
the cowardice of the majority of the orthodox bishops who dared not 
offer open resistance to a heresy which enjoyed the favour of ‘the sacred 
majesty of Divus Augustus’. St. Flavian was condemned unheard, and his 
fall must have involved the collapse of orthodoxy throughout the Eastern 
Church — ^had that Church been left to her own resources. But there was 
outside that Church a religious and moral authority with which the 
‘Pharaohs* and the Emperors had to reckon. Though in the struggle be- 
tween the two Eastern patriarchates the Byzantme court always took the 
side of injustice and heresy, yet the cause of justice and orthodoxy, whether 
maintained by Alexandria or Constantinople, never failed to find vigorous 
support in the Apostolic See of Rome. The contrast is indeed striking. It 
is the Emperor Constantius who ruthlessly persecutes St. Athanasius; it is 
Pope Juhus who takes his part and defends him against the whole East. 
It is Pope Innocent who makes energetic protest agamst the persecution of 
St. John Chrysostom and after the death of the saint takes the first step 
towards the rehabilitation of his memory m the Church. Again, it is Pope 
Celestine who backs St. Cyril with all the weight of his authority in his 
courageous struggle against the heresy of Nestorius and its pohtical cham- 
pions; and there can be no doubt that without the aid of the Apostolic See 
the patriarch of Alexandria for all his energy would not have succeeded in 
overcoming the combmed forces of the imperial power and the greater 
part of the Greek clergy. This contrast between the pohey of the Empire 
and that of the Papacy may be observed right through the history of the 
Eastern heresies which were not only invariably supported but sometimes 
even invented by the Emperors, as the Monothelite heresy was by the 
Emperor Heraclius and the Iconoclastic heresy by Leo the Isaurian. But 
we must pause at the fifth century over the struggle of the two patri- 
archates and the instructive history of the ‘robber-council* of Ephesus.Repeated experience had proved that in the quarrel between the two 
princes of the Eastern Church, the Western Pope showed no bias or par- 
tiahty, but invariably gave his support to the cause of justice and truth. 
Accordingly the tyrant and heretic Dioscorus could not count on Rome 
for the same assistance that his predecessor St. Cyril had received. His plan 
was to secure primacy over the whole Eastern Church by the condem- 
nation of St. Flavian and the triumph of the Egyptian faction, more or less 
Moiiophysitc, of which he himself was the leader. Realising that there was

137

no hope of the Pope's consent being given to such a plan, he resolved to 
achieve his object without the Pope or if necessary in spite of him.137

no hope of the Pope's consent being given to such a plan, he resolved to 
achieve his object without the Pope or if necessary in spite of him.

In 449 a council which was oecumenical in its composition assembled at 
Ephesus. The whole Eastern Church was represented. The legates of Pope 
St. Leo were also present but were not allowed to preside over the council. 
Dioscorus, guarded by the imperial officers and attended by his Egyptian 
bishops and a mob of clerics armed with staves, presided like a king hold- 
ing court. The bishops of the orthodox party were cowed and silent. ‘All 
of them,' we read in the Russian Martyrology (life of St. Flavian), ‘loved 
darkness rather than hght and preferred falsehood to truth, desiring rather 
to please their earthly king than the King of Heaven.’ St. Flavian had to 
submit to a farcical trial. Some of the bishops threw themselves at Dios- 
corus* feet and implored his indulgence for the accused. They were 
roughly handled by the Egyptians amid deafening cries of ‘Hack asunder 
those who would divide Christ!’ The orthodox bishops were given tab- 
lets on which nothing was written and to which they were compelled to 
put their signatures, knowing that a heretical formula would be imme- 
diately inscribed upon them. The majority signed without a murmur. A 
few desired to sign with certain reservations, but the Egyptian clergy tore 
the tablets from their hands, breaking their fingers with blows from their 
staves. Finally Dioscorus rose and in the name of the council pronounced 
sentence of condemnation agamst Flavian, who was deposed, excom- 
municated and handed over to the secular arm. Flavian tried to protest, but 
Dioscorus* clerics fell on him and handled him so roughly that he died 
within two days.When injustice, violence and falsehood thus reigned supreme in an 
oecumenical council, where was the infalHble and inviolable Church of 
Christ.^ It was present and moreover gave proof of its presence. At the 
moment when St. Flavian was being done to death by the brutalities of 
Dioscorus’ minions, when the heretical bishops were loudly acclaiming 
the triumph of their leader, while the orthodox bishops stood by trembling 
and silent, Hilary, the deacon of the Roman Church, cried: ‘Contradici- 
tur!*^ At that moment it was certainly not the cowering silent crowd of 
orthodox Easterns which represented the Church of God. All the im- 
mortal power of the Church was concentrated for Eastern Christendom in 
that simple legal word spoken by the Roman deacon: contradicitur. We 
are accustomed to find fault with the distinctively juridical and legalistic 
character of the Western Church; and no doubt the principles and formu- 
lae of Roman law do not hold good in the Kingdom of God. But the 
‘robber-council’ of Ephesus was an express vindication of Latin justice.

^ Mansi, vi. 908.

138

The contradicitur of the Roman deacon was the symbol of principle against 
fact, of right against brute force, of unshakeable moral stability against 
viaorious wickedness on the one hand and cowardice on the other; it 
was, in a word, the impregnable Rock of the Church against the gates of 
heU.

The murderers of the patriarch of Constantinople did not dare to touch 
the deaconof the Roman Church. And in the short space of two years the 
contradicitur of Rome had changed ‘the most holy oecumenical council of 
Ephesus* into ‘the robber-council of Ephesus’, had ousted the mitred 
assassin, decreed the canonisation of his victim, and brought about the 
assembling of the true oecumenical council of Chalcedon under the presi- 
dency of the Roman legates.

139

XIV

The Council of Chalcedon139

XIV

The Council of Chalcedon

T he central authority of the Universal Church is the impregnable 
foundation of social justice because it is the infallible organ of re- 
ligious truth. Pope Leo had a twofold task to accomphsh: he had 
not only to re-establish in the Christian East the moral order which had 
been subverted by the misdeeds of the patriarch of Alexandria, but also to 
confirm his Eastern brethren in the true faith which was threatened by the 
heresy of Monophysitism. The distinctive truth of Christianity, the truth 
of the God-Man, was at stake. The Monophysites, in asserting that the 
humanity of Jesus Christ was entirely absorbed by His divinity and that 
therefore after the incarnation He was God alone, were reverting, un- 
consciously no doubt, to the inhuman God of Eastern paganism, the God 
Who devours all that He has created and is nothing but an abyss un- 
fathomable to the human spirit. Their assertion was ultimately a disguised 
denial of any permanent revelation or incarnation, but it took shelter 
behind the great theological reputation of St. Cyril, who in vindicating 
against Nestorius the unity of the person of Jesus Christ had let fall from 
his pen an inaccurate phrase: Mia <I>vgi,s tov Ocov Aoyov (jeaapKOjfjLcvr) 
(one incarnate nature of God the Word). And just because the denial of the 
faith was so disguised it was necessary to fmd a new formula to express in 
clear and precise terms the truth of the Divine Humanity. The whole 
orthodox world was awaitmg such a formula from the successor of St. 
Peter. Pope Leo himself was profoundly aware of the importance of the 
question. ‘Jesus Christ, the Saviour of mankind,’ he says, ‘in founding the 
faith which recalls the wicked to righteousness and the dead to life, in- 
stilled into the minds of His disciples the exhortations of His teaching and 
the marvels of His works that the one Christ might be acknowledged both 
as the Only-begotten of God and as the Son of Man. For one belief with- 
out the other was of no avail to salvation, and it was equally perilous to 
behevc the Lord Jesus Christ to be God alone and not Man, or to be Man 
alone and not God* — since the former belief places Him out of reach of 
our infirmity and the latter makes Him unable to effect our salvation —140

‘but both were to be confessed, for just as true humanity existed in the 
Godhead, so true Divinity existed in the manhood. In order therefore to 
confirm them in their most wholesome (saluberrimam) knowledge of this 
faith, the Lord had questioned His disciples: and the Apostle Peter, sur- 
passing the things of the body and transcending human knowledge by the 
revelation of the Spirit of the Father, beheld with the eyes of his mind the 
Son of the living God and acknowledged the glory of the Godhead be- 
cause he did not look merely at the substance of flesh and blood. And 
Christ so approved the sublime faith of Peter that He pronounced him 
blessed and endowed him with the sacred stability of the inviolable Rock 
on which the Church should be built to prevail against the gates of hell 
and the laws of death; so that m the decision of all causes nothing shall be 
ratified in Heaven but that which has been estabhshed by the judgment of 
Peter.Claiming, as he does, that the primary function of the authority of the 
Church — that of asserting and defining Christian truth — belongs for all 
time to the Chair of St. Peter which he occupies, Leo considers it his 
duty to combat the new heresy by expounding anew the confession of the 
Apostle. In penning his famous dogmatic episde to Flavian he regards 
himself as the inspired mterpreter of the prince of the Apostles; and the 
whole orthodox East regarded him in the same light. In the Leimonarion^ 
of St. Sophronius, patriarch of Jerusalem in the seventh century, we find 
the following legend: When St. Leo had written his epistle to St. Flavian 
the bishop of Constantinople against the impious Eutyches and Nestorius 
he placed it upon the tomb of the chief Apostle Peter and with prayers, 
vigils and fasts he entreated the sovereign Apostle in these words: ‘If in the 
frailty of human nature I have been guilty of error, do thou, to whom 
Jesus Christ our Saviour, Lord and God has entrusted this throne and the 
whole Church, supply every defect in what I have written and remove all 
that is superfluous.’ After forty days had elapsed, the Aposde appeared to 
him while he was praymg and said: ‘I have read and corrected it’. And, 
taking up his epistle from the tomb of blessed Peter, Leo opened it and 
found it corrected by the Apostle’s hand.®

This epistle, truly worthy of such a reviser, defined with wonderful 
clearness and vigour the truth of the two natures in the one person of 
Christ and thenceforth left no place in the Church for the two opposite 
errors of Nestorius and Eutyches. The fact that St. Leo’s epistle was not

' Works (cd. Migne), i. 309.

2 A kind of chrestomathy composed of edifying stories.

® V. the life of St. Leo the Pope in the Russian Martyrology.

141' Works (cd. Migne), i. 309.

2 A kind of chrestomathy composed of edifying stories.

® V. the life of St. Leo the Pope in the Russian Martyrology.

141

read at the robber-council of Ephesus was die main reason urged for the 
quashing of the decrees of the pseudo-council. Though Dioscorus had 
succeeded in coercing the entire gathering of Eastern bishops into con- 
demning St Flavian and putting their names to a heretical document, he 
encountered unexpected opposition when he ventured on open rebellion 
against the Pope. For the latter, on receiving from his legates news of what 
had passed at Ephesus, at once convened a council of Latin bishops at 
Rome, and with their unanimous approval condemned and deposed 
Dioscorus. The ‘Pharaoh* who had returned to Alexandria in triumph 
attempted to outwit the Pope; he was soon to realise that it was no mere 
empty self-aggrandisement with which he was confronted but a living 
spiritual authority which claimed the allegiance of the Christian con- 
science throughout the world. The pride and effrontery of the usurping 
bishop were shattered upon the true Rock of the Church; employing all 
his customary methods of violence he succeeded in compelling only ten 
Egyptian bishops to lend their names to the condemnation of Pope Leo.^ 
Even in the East this futile insult was universally regarded as an act of m- 
sanity, and it proved the final undoing of the Egyptian ‘Pharaoh*.The Emperor Theodosius II, the champion of the two opposite heresies 
and the patron of both Nestorius and Dioscorus, had just died, and with 
the accession of Pulcheria and her nominal consort Marcian there began a 
short phase during which the imperial government, apparently from re- 
ligious conviction, ranged itself decisively upon the side of truth. In the 
East this alone was enough to restore courage to the orthodox bishops and 
to enlist on the side of the true faith which the new Emperor professed aU 
those who had only sided with heresy to please his predecessor. But the 
orthodox Emperor himself had little confidence in these pliant prelates. 
For him, supreme authority in matters of faith belonged to the Pope. ‘In 
all that concerns the Catholic religion and the faith of Christians’ we read 
*in a letter of his to St. Leo, ‘we have thought it right to approach m the 
first place your Holiness who is the overseer and guardian of the divine 
faith tc crqv dyicoo-vyrjv emarKOTrevovaav /cat dpxovaav rrjs deias: 
TTioTco)?)’.® According to the Emperor's view, it is by the Pope’s 
authority (aou avOevrovvro^) that the forthcoming council must banish 
all impiety and error from the Church and establish perfect peace 
among all the bishops of the Catholic faith.® And in another letter which 
follows close upon Ae first the Emperor asserts again that the duty of the 
council will be to acknowledge and expound for the East what the Pope 
has decreed at Rome.^ The Empress P^cheria uses the same language in 
her assurance to the Pope that the council ‘will define the Catholic belief 
^ Mansi, vi. 510. ® ibid., 93. ® he. cit. * ibid., 100.

142

by your authority {aov avdevrovvros), as Christian faith and piety 
require'.^142

by your authority {aov avdevrovvros), as Christian faith and piety 
require'.^

When the oecumenical council had assembled at Chalcedon in 451 under 
the presidency of the Roman legates, the bishop Paschasinus, who was 
the principal legate, rose and said: ‘We bear instructions from the blessed 
and apostolic bishop of the city of Rome, who is the head of all the 
Churches, forbidding us to admit Dioscorus to the deliberations of the 
council*.^ And the second legate Lucentius explained that Dioscorus was 
already condemned for having usurped judicial powers and having 
assembled a council without the consent of the Apostolic See, a thing 
which had never happened before and was forbidden {onep ovSenore 
yiyov€v oi 5 Se cfov y^viaQaC)? After considerable discussion, the Em- 
peror’s representatives announced that Dioscorus would not sit as a 
member of the council but would appear as an accused man, since he had 
incurred accusation on fresh counts subsequently to his condemnation by 
the Pope.^ Judgment upon him was withheld until after the reading of the 
Pope’s dogmatic epistle which was hailed by the orthodox bishops with 
shouts of: ‘Peter has spoken by the mouth of Leo!’® In the following ses- 
sion several clergy of the Church of Alexandria presented a petition 
addressed ‘to the most holy Leo, beloved of God, universal archbishop and 
patriarch of great Rome, and to the holy oecumenical council at Chalce- 
don’. It was a bill of accusation against Dioscorus who, the complainants 
alleged, after ratifying heresy in a council of brigands and murdering St. 
Flavian, ‘attempted a still greater wickedness’, the excommunication of 
the most holy and sacred Apostolic See of great Rome.® The council did 
not think itself competent to pass fresh judgment on a bishop whom the 
Pope had already judged, and it was proposed that the Roman legates 
should pronounce judgment on Dioscorus.’ Accordingly they did so, 
havmg first enumerated all the crimes of the patriarch of Alexandria, in 
these terms: ‘The most holy and blessed archbishop of great and old 
Rome, Leo, through us and the holy council here present, and together 
with the thrice blessed and most glorious Apostle Peter who is the Rock 
and base of the Catholic Church and the foundation of the orthodox 
faith, has deprived the said Dioscorus of episcopal status and expelled him 
entirely from his priestly office’.®The solemn recognition of the Pope’s supreme authority at the council 
of Chalcedon was sealed by the letter of the Eastern bishops to Leo, in 
which they impute to him the merit of all that had been done at the 
council. ‘It is you,’ they wrote, ‘who through your legates have guided 
^ ibid., loi. * ibid., 580-1. ® ibid., 645. ® he. cit.

® ibid., 972. ® ibid., 1005-9. ’ ibid., 1045. ® ibid., 1048.

143

and ruled {rjy^ijuovtvts) the whole gathering of the Fathers, as the head 
rules the members {d>s icc^oAi) fxeXwv), by shewing them the true mean- 
ing of the dogma. It is clear that to reject the supremacy and doctrinal 
authority of the Roman See as usurped and false involves not merely a 
charge of usurpation and heresy against a man of the character of St. Leo 
the Great; it means accusing the oecumenical council of Chalcedon of 
heresy and with it the whole Orthodox Church of the fifth century. This 
is the conclusion that emerges unmistakably from the authentic evidence 
which the reader has had set before him.

^ ibid., 148 .

144

PART THREE

THE TRINITARY PRINCIPLE AND ITS 
SOCIAL APPLICATION

I

The Divine Trinity rationally deduced from the idea of Being^ ibid., 148 .

144

PART THREE

THE TRINITARY PRINCIPLE AND ITS 
SOCIAL APPLICATION

I

The Divine Trinity rationally deduced from the idea of Being

T he true Church — the Temple, Body and mystical Spouse of God 
— ^is, like God Himself, one. But there is unity and unity. There is 
a negative, solitary and barren unity, which is limited to the ex- 
clusion of all plurality. This unity is mere negation, which logically pre- 
supposes what it denies and appears as the beginning, arbitrarily arrested, 
of an indeterminate number. For there is nothing to prevent the reason 
from admitting several simple and equal unities and then multiplying 
them to infinity. And if the Germans are right in naming such a process 
‘evil infinity’ {die schlechte Unendlichkeit),^ the simple unity which is its 
which is not opposed to plurality and does not exclude it, but in the serene 
enjoyment of its own superiority dominates its opposite and subjects it to 
its own laws. Evil unity is void and nothmgness; true unity is that of the 
one being which contains all in itself This positive and pregnant unity, 
principle may well be described as ‘evil unity’. But there is a true unity 
while always remaining itself above all limited and manifold reality, in- 
cludes, determines and reveals the living powers, the uniform reasons and 
the varied quahties of all that exists. It is with a confession of this perfect 
unity, producing and embracing all, that the Christian Creed begins: in 
mum Deum Patrem omnipotentem {jravroKpaTopa).

This characteristic of positive unity (uni-totality or uni-plenitude) be- 
longs to all that is, or must be, absolute of its kind. Such is in Himself God 
Almighty; such ideally is the human reason which is able to comprehend 
everything; such, lastly, must be the true Church which is essentially 
universal, that is to say, embraces mankind and die whole world in its 
living unity.Truth is one and unique in the sense that there cannot be two truths 
absolutely independent of one another, still less contrary to one another.

^ In German schlecht (evil) and schlicht (simple) arc really one and the same 
word, a fact which gave Hegel his opportunity for the pun which has had such 
a success in Germanic philosophy. Aristotle had indeed already expounded the 
same idea, without the play upon words.

147

But in virtue of this very unity, the one truth, incapable of containing 
within itself anything limited, arbitrary or exclusive, or of being partial 
or incomplete, must comprise within a logical system the reasons of all 
that exists and must suffice to explain everything. So too is the true 
Church one and unique in the sense that there cannot be two true 
Churches independent of one another, still less in conflict with one an- 
other. But for that very reason the true Church, as the umque orgamsation 
of the divine-human life, must embrace in an actual system all the fullness 
of our existence and must define all the duties of man, meet all his true 
needs and answer to all his aspirations.

The actual unity of the Church is represented and secured by the eccle- 
siastical monarchy. But since the Church, being one, must therefore be 
universal, that is to say, must embrace all in a determinate order, the 
ecclesiastical monarchy cannot remain barren but must engender all tlic 
powers that go to make up human society in its fullness. And if the 
monarchy of Peter, considered as such, affords us a reflexion of the divine 
unity and at the same time a real and indispensable basis for the progressive 
unification of mankind, we shall see also in the further development of the 
social powers of Christendom not only a reflexion of the immanent 
fecundity of the Godhead, but also a real means of linking the totality of 
human existence to the fullness of the divine life.In saying that a hving being is, we inevitably ascribe to it at once unity, 
duality and trinity. There is unity because we are dealmg with a single 
being. There is duality because we cannot affirm that a being is, without 
at the same time affirming that it is something, that it has a determmate 
objectivity. The two fundamental categories of all being are diercfore 
(i) its existence as a real subject, and (2) its objective essence or its idea 
(its raison d*etre). Finally, there is trinity: the subject of the living being is 
linked in three different ways to its essential objectivity; it possesses it in 
the first place by the very fact of its existence, as its own intimate nature 
or actuality; it possesses it in the second place in its activity which is neces- 
sarily the manifestation of this substance; finally it possesses it in the 
awareness or enjoyment of its own being and activity, in that return upon 
itself which proceeds from existence manifested in activity. The presence 
of these three modes of existence, successively if not simultaneously, is 
absolutely essential to the constitution of a living being. For if it goes 
without saying that activity and awareness imply the real existence of a 
given subject, it is no less certain that a reality entirely incapable of either 
would be, not a living being, but an inert and lifeless thing.

There can be no question that, considered in themselves, the three 
modes of being just indicated have a quite positive character. As a really

148There can be no question that, considered in themselves, the three 
modes of being just indicated have a quite positive character. As a really

148

existing subject is more dun a logical abstraction, so an acting and con- 
scious subject is more than inert matter or blind force. But in the natural 
order, among all created beings, the constituent modes of complete exis- 
tence arc never found in their pure form; they are inseparable from certain 
limitations and negadons which profoundly modify their positive charac- 
ter. Indeed, if the created living being enjoys real existence, it never 
possesses it as an absolute and primary fact; its reality derives from an 
external cause, it is not self-contained. So too the proper activity of a 
created being is never purely, simply and solely the manifestation of its 
inner being, but it is necessarily determined by the concurrence of cir- 
cumstances and the influence of external stimuli, or at least complicated 
by the logical possibility of an alternative manifestation. Finally, the self- 
consciousness of the created being, proceeding from a contingent existence 
and an externally determined activity, does not depend on the bemg itself 
in either its quality, quantity or duration. Thus the finite being, neither 
existing primarily in itself, nor acting solely by itself, cannot return com- 
pletely upon itself, but always needs some external complement.In other words, finite existence never contains within itself its own 
raison d*etre\ and in order finally to justify or explain the fact of this 
existence, it must be linked to absolute Being, or God. In asserting that He 
exists, we must necessarily attribute to Him the three constituent modes 
of complete being. Since real existence, action and enjoyment are in 
themselves purely positive attributes, they camiot be lackmg in absolute 
Being. If He exists, He exists not merely in the mind but in reality; if He 
is a reahty. He is no dead or inert reahty, but a bemg manifesting itself by 
its own activity; if He acts, it is not as a blind force, but as consciously 
aware of His being and taking pleasure in its manifestation. Deprived of 
these attributes. He would not be God but a lower nature, less than man. 
But for the very reason that God is God, that is to say, absolute and 
supreme Being, the three constituent modes of complete being can only 
be attributed to Him in their essential and positive character, apart from 
any idea that is not bound up with the notion of Being itself but relates 
only to the mode of contingent being. Thus the real existence which be- 
longs to God cannot accrue to Him from any external cause, but is a 
primary and irreducible fact. God exists in Himself and by Himself. The 
reality He possesses is in the first place altogether from within ; it is an abso- 
lute substance. So too the proper action or essential manifestation of God 
cannot be either determined or modified by any external cause, but is 
simply the pure and perfect (that is, completely adequate) reproduction of 
His own being. His unique substance. This reproduction cannot be either 
a new creation or a division of the divine substance; it cannot be created

149149

because it exists from all eternity, it cannot be divided because it is not a 
material thing, but pure actuality. God, possessing it in Himself, manifests 
it for Himself, and reproduces Himself in a purely interior act. By this act 
He arrives at the enjoyment of Himself, that is, of His absolute substance, 
not only as existing, but ako as manifested. Thus the complete existence of 
God does not require Him to go outside Himself, nor does it set Him in 
any external relationship; it is perfect in itself, and does not involve the 
existence of anything outside itself.In the three constituent modes of His being, God is in unique relation 
to His own substance: (i) He possesses it in Himself, in His ‘first act* 
(absolute fact). (2) He possesses it for Himself, in manifesting or produc- 
ing it from Himself in His ‘second act* (absolute action). (3) He possesses 
it in returning upon Himself, in rediscovering in it, in a ‘third act*, the 
perfect unity of His being and His manifestation (absolute enjoyment). 
He cannot enjoy it without having manifested it, and He cannot manifest 
it without having it in Himself Thus these three acts, states or relation- 
ships — here the terms coincide — ^indissolubly bound together, are dif- 
ferent but equal expressions of the entire Godhead. In manifesting His 
intimate nature or in reproducing Himself by Himself, God has no inter- 
mediary and submits to no external action which might modify His re- 
production or render it incomplete; that which is produced is therefore 
completely equal to that which produces, in every respect except in so far 
as one produces and the other is produced. And as die whole Godhead is 
contamed in its reproduction, so is it wholly contained in the enjoyment 
proceeding from that reproduction. This enjoyment, being contingent 
upon no external condition, cannot be an accidental state inadequate to 
the absolute being of God; it is the direct and complete outcome of the 
divine existence and action. God, as enjoying, proceeds from Himself as 
producing and produced. And as the third term, that which proceeds, is 
determined only by the two first, which are entirely equal to one another, 
it must also be equal to them in every respect except in so far as it pro- 
ceeds from them and not vice versa.These three acts are not separate parts of the divine substance; no more 
can they be successive phases of the divine existence. If the idea of a ‘part* 
implies space, that of a ‘phase* imphes time. In excluding these two forms 
of created existence, we must affirm that the absolute substance is con- 
tained in the three modes of divine existence, not only without division, 
but without succession. This implies three relative subjects or hypostases 
in the absolute unity of the divine substance. Indeed, if the three modes of 
absolute existence could be successive, then a single subject would suffice, 
a single hypostasis might be found successively in three difierent relation-

150150

ships to its substance. But absolute Being, being unable to change in time, 
is not susceptible of a successive evolution; the three constituent modes of 
its complete existence must be in it simultaneous or co-etemal. On the 
other hand, it is clear that one and the same subject or hypostasis cannot 
affirm itself simultaneously as not manifested, as manifested and as pro- 
ceeding by its manifestation. It is therefore necessary to admit that each of 
the modes of divine existence is always represented by a relatively distinct 
subject; that it is eternally hypostatised and that consequendy there are in 
God three co-etemal hypostases. This necessity can be presented from 
another point of view. Since God in the first mode of His existence, as 
neither produced nor manifested but reproducing and manifesting Him- 
self, is necessarily a genuine subject or hypostasis, and since the second 
mode of divine existence, God as reproduced or manifested, is completely 
equal to the first in every respect except the specific difference in their 
mutual relationship, it follows that if the first is an hypostasis, the second 
must also be an hypostasis. For the only relative difference that dis- 
tinguishes them does not refer to the notion of an hypostasis, but to that 
of producing or being produced. Thus if the one is an hypostasis that 
produces, the other is an hypostasis that is produced. The same reasoning 
applies completely to the third mode of Divine existence, which proceeds 
from the two former, inasmuch as God through the accomplishment of 
His manifestation returns upon Himself in the absolute enjoyment of His 
manifested being. In removing from this last relationship all notion of 
time or of a successive process we are led inevitably to admit a third 
hypostasis, co-eternal widi the other two and proceeding from both as 
their unity and final synthesis, thus closing the circle of the Divine life. 
Enjoyment in God (God as enjoying) cannot be unequal to His action or 
His primordial reality; if, then, the latter are distinct hypostases, the former 
must be also.The trinity of hypostases or subjects in the unity of absolute substance 
is a truth given us by Divine Revelation and the infallible teaching of the 
Church. We have seen that this truth imposes itself upon the reason and 
can be logically deduced from the admission that God is, in the positive 
and complete sense of this term. Divine Revelation has not only taught 
us that there are three hypostases in God, but it has also designated them 
by specific names. We shall complete the foregoing argument by shewing 
that these names are not arbitrary, but that they correspond perfectly to 
the trinitary idea itself.

II

The three Divine Hypostases and the proper signification 
of their namesII

The three Divine Hypostases and the proper signification 
of their names

G od possesses positive and complete existence. He is the living 
God Life means reproduction. Reproduction or generation is 
supreme causality, de proper action of a complete and living 
being. In this perfect caussihty, the productive cause must in the first place 
contain in itself its product or effect, for otherwise it could only be an 
occasional cause, and not the true cause of the product. This first phase 
of absolute life, in which the living effect seems absorbed in the unity of 
the primordial cause, is only a necessary supposition of the second, that 
of actual production, in which that which produces distinguishes itself in 
act (actu) from its product, and effectively engenders the latter. But we 
have already established the fact that since absolute Being can of necessity 
have no other secondary cause associated with it and hmiting its produc- 
tive action, its immediate product must be strictly adequate to it. Thus 
the eternal process of the divine life cannot stop at the second term, the 
differentiation or reduplication of absolute Being as producer and pro- 
duced. Their equahty and their substantial identity mean that the manifes- 
tation of their actual^ and relative difference (in the act of generation) must 
inevitably issue in a new manifestation of their unity. And this unity is no 
mere repetition of that primordial unity in which the absolute cause in- 
cludes and absorbs its effect in itself. Since the latter, as actually manifested, 
appean as the equal of that which produced it, they must of necessity enter 
into a reciprocal relationship. As this reciprocity is not to be found in the 
act of generation (in which the generator is not in turn generated, and 
pke versa) it neceskrily demands a new act determined at one and the 
same time by the fint cause and by its consubstandal product. And since 
it concerns a relationship which is essential to the Divine Being, this new 
act cannot be an accident or a transient state but is eternally substantive or 
hypostatic in a third subject proceeding from the two first and represent- 
ing dseir actual, living unity in the same absolute substance.After this explanation, it will be easily seen that the names. Father, Son

15a

and Holy Spirit, given to the three hypostases of absolute Being, fiu fifom 
being metaphori^, find in the Divine Trinity their proper and complete 
application, whereas in the natural order these terms can only be uacd in 
an imperfect and approximate sense. And first, as regards the two former 
terms, when we speak of ‘father* and ‘son* we mean to convey no other 
idea but that of an absolutely intimate relationship between two hypos- 
tases of one and the same nature, which are essentially equal to one an- 
other, but of which the former gives, without receiving, existence, while 
the latter receives, without giving, it. The fether, qud father, is distinct 
from the son only by having produced him, while the son, qt4a son, is 
distinct from the father only by being produced by him.This is all that is contained in the idea of paternity as such. But it is 
clear that this determinate idea, so clear and distinct, cannot be applied 
in its purity and entirety to any class of created beings that we know: not 
in its entirely, for in the natural order the father is only a partial, cause of 
the existence of the son, and the son derives his existence only pardy from 
the father; not in its purity, because besides the specific distinction of 
having given and received existence there are between fathers and sons 
in the natural order countless individual differences, quite foreign to the 
mere idea of paternity and filiation. To discover the true application of 
this idea we must rise to the level of absolute Being. There we have seen 
the relation of paternity and filiation in its purity, for the Father is the sole 
and unique cause of the Son; in its entirety, for the Father gives all exis- 
tence to the Son, and the Son has in Himself nothing but what He receives 
from the Father. There is between them an absolute distinction as regards 
the act of existence, and an absolute unity in all the rest. Being two, they 
can unite in an actual relationship and in common produce a new mani- 
festation of absolute substance; but since this substance belongs to theni in 
common and without division, the product of their reciprocal action can 
only be the explicit affirmation of their unity emerging from and over- 
coming their actual difference. And as this synthetic unity of the Father 
and the Son, manifested as such, cannot be represented either by the 
Father as such or by the Son as such, it must necessarily be substantiated 
in a third hypostasis to which the name of ‘Spirit’ is entirely applicable 
from two points of view. First, it is in this third hypostasis that the Divine 
Being, by its inner reduplication in the act of generation, achieves the 
manifestation of its absolute unity, returns upon itself, affirms itself as 
really infinite, possesses itself and enjoys itself in the fullness of its con- 
sciousness. Now this is the specific characteristic of the spirit (in its interior, 
metaphysical and psychological sense) in so far as it is distinguished from 
the soul, the intel%ence, and so forffi. Again, since the Go^ead attaim153

its interior completion in its third hypostasis, it is particularly in the latter 
that God possesses the liberty to act outside Himself and to set in motion 
an external medium. But it is precisely this perfect liberty of action or 
movement that characterises the spirit in the external or physical sense of 
the word, irveOfm, spiritus, that is to say, breath or respiration. Since 
neither this perfect self-possession nor this absolute liberty of external 
action can be found in any created being, it may reasonably be asserted 
that no being of the natural order is spirit in the full sense of the word, 
and that the only spirit properly so called is that of God, the Holy Spirit.

While it is essential to admit three hypostatised modes in the inner de- 
velopment of the Divine life, it is impossible to admit more. In taking as 
our starting-point the fullness of existence which necessarily belongs to 
God, we are obliged to add that it is not enough for God to exist simply 
in Himself but that He must manifest this existence for Himself, and tliat 
even that is not enough unless He can enjoy His existence, thus manifested, 
in affirming the dominance of His absolute identity and unchangeable 
unity over the very act of His inner reduplication. But granted this last 
affirmation, this perfect enjoyment of His absolute being, the immanent 
development of the Divine life is completed. To possess His existence as 
pure act in Himself, to manifest it for Himself in absolute actuality, and 
to have the perfect enjoyment of it — this is all that God can do, without 
going outside His inner being; if He does anything else, it is no longer in 
the sphere of his immanent life, but outside it, in a subject which is not 
God.Before passing to this new subject, let us note that the trinitarian de- 
velopment of the Divine life, eternally substantiated in the three hypos- 
tases, far from modifying the unity of absolute Being, or the supreme 
Monarchia, is simply its full expression, and that for two essential reasons. 
The divine Monarchia is expressed in the first place by the indivisible unity 
and indissoluble bond between the three hypostases which have no exis- 
tence at all in a separate state. It is not only that the Father never is without 
the Son and the Spirit, just as the Son never is without the Father and the 
Spirit, nor the Last without the Two Former, but it must also be admitted 
that the Father is not the Father or first principle, except in so far as He 
begets the Son and is with Him the cause of the procession of the Holy 
Spirit. The Father is only a distinct hypostasis, and that the first, with 
and for the whole Trinity. He could not be the absolute cause if He did 
not have in the Son His absolute effect, and find in the Spirit the reci- 
procal and synthetic unity of cause and effect.

It is the same, mutatis mutandis, with the two other hypostases. On the 
other hand, in spite of this mutual dependence or rather hy reason of it,

154It is the same, mutatis mutandis, with the two other hypostases. On the 
other hand, in spite of this mutual dependence or rather hy reason of it,

154

each of the three hypostases possesses the absolute fuUness of the divine 
being. The Father is never lunited to existence in Himself or to absolute 
and primordial reality {actus purus); He translates this reality into action, 
He acts and He enjoys, but He never does so alone — He acts always 
through the Son, and He enjoys always with the Son in the Spirit. The 
Son on His part is not only absolute action or manifestation; He also has 
being in Himself and enjoyment of this being, but He has them only in 
His perfect unity with die two other hypostases: He has both the self- 
subsisfence of the Father, and the enjoyment of the Holy Spirit. Lasdy 
the Latter, as the absolute unity of the Two Former, is necessarily what 
They are, and possesses in act (actu) all that They have, but with Them 
and through Them.Thus each of the three hypostases has absolute being, and has it com- 
pletely: in reahty, in action and in enjoyment. Each is therefore true God. 
But as this absolute fullness of the divine being belongs to each only in 
union with the other two and in virtue of the indissoluble bond which 
unites them, it follows that there are not three Gods. For the hypostases 
must be isolated in order to be counted; but none of them, isolated from 
the others, can be true God, since it cannot even be in such a condition. 
It is permissible to represent the Holy Trinity as three separate Beings since 
no other representation is possible. But the impotence of the imagination 
is no argument against the truth of the rational idea, which is clearly and 
distinctly recognised by pure thought. In truth there is only one indivisible 
God, reahsing Himself eternally in the three hypostatic phases of absolute 
existence; and each one of these phases, constandy finding itself internally 
completed by the two others, contams and represents the entire Godhead, 
is true God through unity and in unity, not through exclusion or in 
separation.

This effectual unity of the three hypostases derives from the unity of 
their principle; and this is the second reason for the divine Monarchia, or 
rather a second aspect of it. There is in the Trinity only one first cause, the 
Father, and thence arises a determinate order which makes the Son onto- 
logicaUy dependent upon the Father, and the Holy Spirit upon the Father 
and the Son. This order is based upon the trinitary relationship itself For 
it is clear that action implies reality, and enjoyment implies both.

155

The Divine Essence and its threefold manifestation155

The Divine Essence and its threefold manifestation

G od is. This axiom of faith is confirmed by philosophic reason 
which, in accordance with its own nature, seeks such a necessary 
and absolute being as should contain in itself its own raison d^etre, 
explain itself by itself and suffice to explain all the rest. Starting from this 
fundamental idea, we have distinguished in God the threefold subject 
which is imphed by complete existence, and the objective essence or 
absolute substance possessed by this subject under three different relation- 
ships, in pure or primordial act, in secondary or manifested action and in 
a third act of perfect self-enjoyment. We have shewn that these three re- 
lationships cannot be founded on any division of parts or succession of 
phases (two conditions equally incompatible with the idea of Godhead), 
and that therefore they imply in the unity of the absolute essence the 
eternal existence of three relative subjects or hypostases, consubstantial and 
indivisible, to which the sacred names of the Christian revelation — Father, 
Son and Spirit — are eminently appropriate. It now remains to define and 
name the absolute objectivity itself, the unique substance of the divine 
Trinity.

It is one; but since it cannot be one thing among many, a particular 
object, it is universal substance or ‘all in unity*. Possessing it, God possesses 
all in it; it is the fullness or absolute totality of being, antecedent and 
superior to all partial existence.This universal substance, or absolute unity of the whole, is the essential 
Wisdom of God (Khocmah, i 7 o<^ta). Possessing in itself the latent poten- 
tiahty of all things, it is itself possessed by God and under a threefold mode. 
It says itself: Jahveh qanani reshith darco, qedem miphealau, meaz — Dominus 
possedit me capitulum vine suae, oriens operationum suarum, ab exordio. And 
again: Meholam nissacti, merosh, miqadme arets — Ah aeterno ordinata sum, a 
capite, ah anteriorihus terrae} And in order to complete and explain this 
threefold manner of being, it adds further: Vaehieh etslo, amon, vaehieh 
shaashouim yarn yom — et eram apud eum {scilicet Dominum— Jahveh) cuncta 
^ Prov. viii. 22-23.

156

componenSf et delectabar per singulos dies.^ Ah aeterno eram apud eum — ^Hc 
possesses me in His eternal being; a capite cuncta cemponens — in absolute 
action; antequam terra fieret delectabar---^in pure and perfect enjoyment. In 
other words, God possesses His unique and universal substance or His 
essential wisdom as eternal Father, Son and Holy Spirit. Having thus one 
and the same objective substance, these three divine subjects are consub- 
standal.

Wisdom has told us in what her action consists — ^it consists in ‘compos- 
ing the whole* {eram cuncta componens). She goes on to tell us in what her 
enjoyment consists: mesakheqeth lephanav becol heth; mesakheqeth bethebel 
artso, veshahashouhai eth-bene Adam — ludens coram eo omni tempore; ludens in 
universe terrae ejus, et deliciae meae cum filiis homini ^ — ‘rejoicing always 
before Him, rejoicing in the terrestrial world, and my delights with the 
sons of Man*. What then is this rejoicing of the divine Wisdom and why 
does she find her supreme delight in the sons of Man?God possesses the totaHty of being in His absolute substance. He is one 
in the whole, and He has the whole within His unity. This totality im- 
plies plurality, but a plurality reduced to umty, actually unified. And in 
God Who IS eternal this unification is also eternal; in Him indeterminate 
multiplicity has never existed as such, has never been produced in act (actu) 
but is found from all eternity subjected and reduced to absolute unity 
under its three indivisible modes: unity of simple being, or unity in itself 
in the Father; unity of being, actively manifested in the Son, Who is the 
direct action, the image and Word of the Father; and lastly, unity of 
being, penetrated by a complete enjoyment of itself m the Holy Spirit 
Who is the common heart of the Father and the Son.

But if the eternally actual state of absolute substance (in God) is to be 
all in unity, its potential state (outside God) is to be all in division. This is 
indeterminate and anarchic plurality, the Chaos or to dir^ipov of the 
Greeks, the German schlechte Unendlichkeit, the tohu va bohu of the Bible. 
This antithesis of the Divine Being is from all eternity suppressed and 
reduced to that state of pure potentiality by the very fact and the first act 
of the divine existence. Absolute and universal substance belongs in fact to 
God, He is eternally and primordially all in unity; He is, and that is enough 
for Chaos not to exist. But that is not enough for God Himself Who is 
not merely Being but perfect Being. It is not enough to affirm that God 
is; it must also be possible to say why He is. To subsist from the begmning, 
to suppress Chaos and to contain all in unity by the act of His omni- 
potence — that is the divine fact that demands explanation. God cannot 
rest content with being in fact stronger than Chaos, He must be so by right.

1 ibid., viii. 30. * ibid., viii. $0,31.

1571 ibid., viii. 30. * ibid., viii. $0,31.

157

And to have the right to conquer Chaos and reduce it eternally to nothing- 
ness, God must be more true than it He displays His truth by confronting 
Chaos not merely with the act of His omnipotence, but with a reason or 
an idea. He must therefore distinguish His perfect totality from the chaotic 
plurality, and to each possible manifestation of the latter He must reply, 
in His Word, by an ideal manifestation of true unity, by a reason shewing 
the intellectual or logical impotence of the Chaos that would assert itself. 
Containing all within the unity of absolute Omnipotence, God can also 
contain all within the unity of the universal idea. The God of might must 
also be the God of truth, the supreme Reason. To the pretensions of the 
infinitely manifold Chaos He must oppose not only His being pure and 
simple, but also a whole system of eternal ideas, reasons or truths, each one 
of which, linked with all the others by an indissoluble bond of logic, re- 
presents the triumph of determinate unity over anarchic plurality, over 
the Evil Infinity. The chaotic tendency of every particular being to assert 
itself exclusively as though it were the whole is condemned as false and 
unjust by the system of eternal ideas which assigns to each a definite place 
in the absolute totality, thus displaying, alongside the truth of God, His 
justice and His equity.But the triumph of reason and truth is still not enough for the divine 
perfection. Since the Evil Infinity or Chaos is an essentially irrational 
principle, the logical and ideal manifestation of its falsity is not the proper 
means to reduce it inwardly. Truth is manifested, light is shed, but the 
darkness remains what it was: et lux in tenehris lucet, et tenebrae earn non 
comprehenderunt. Truth is a reduplication and a separation, it is a relative 
unity, for it affirms the existence of its contrary as such, in the act of dis- 
tinguishing itself from it. And God must be absolute unity. He must be 
able to embrace in His unity the opposite principle itself, in shewing Him- 
self superior to it not only by truth and justice but also by goodness. The 
absolute excellence of God must be manifested not only in opposition to 
Chaos but also for Chaos, in giving it more than it deserves, in making it 
share in the fullness of absolute existence, in proving to it not merely by 
objective reason but by an inner living experience the superiority of the 
divme plenitude over the empty plurality of the Evil Infinity. The God- 
head must be able to meet every manifestation of rebellious Chaos not 
only with an act of force suppressing the contrary act, not only with a 
reason or an idea convicting it of falsity and excluding it from true being, 
but also with a grace penetrating and transforming it and so drawing it 
back to unity. This threefold unification of the whole, this threefold vic- 
torious reaction of the divine principle against potential Chaos is the inner 
eternal manifestation of the absolute substance of God or of the essential

158158

Wisdom which, as wc have seen, is ‘all in unity*. Strength, truth and 
grace; or power, justice and goodness; or again reality, idea and life — all 
these relative expressions of absolute totality are objective definitions of 
the divine substance corresponding to the Trinity of hypostases which 
possess it eternally. And the indissoluble bond between the three Persons 
of the supreme Being is necessarily manifested m the objectivity of their 
unique substance, of which the three principal attributes or qualities are 
mutually bound up with one another and are equally inseparable from the 
Godhead. God could not penetrate the Chaos by His goodness, if He did 
not distinguish Himself from it by truth and justice, and He could not 
distinguish Himself from it or exclude it from Himself if He did not 
contain it in His power.

139

IV

The Soul of the World; the Principle of Creation, Space, Time 
and Mechanical Causality

W e can now understand the significance of the joy of the eternal 
Wisdom of which she tells us in Holy Scripture. She ‘rejoices* 
in summoning up before God the countless possibihties of all 
existences outside the Godhead and in reabsorbing them in her omni- 
potence, her absolute truth and her infinite goodness. In this joy of His 
essential Wisdom, God one and threefold, in suppressing the power of the 
possible chaos, illuminating its darkness and penetrating its depths, is in- 
teriorly aware of Himself and proves to Himself from all eternity that He 
is more powerful, truer and better than any possible being outside Himself 
This rejoicing of His Wisdom shews Him that all that is positive belongs 
to Him in fact and by right, that He possesses eternally m Himself an in- 
finite treasure of all real powers, all true ideas, all gifts and all graces.In the two first essential qualities of Godhead, God might limit Himself 
to His immanent manifestation,^ the eternal rejoicing of His Wisdom; as 
One almighty, just and true. He might well rest content with triumphing 
in Himself over anarchic existence in the inner certainty of His absolute 
superiority. But that does not satisfy grace and goodness. In this third 
quality, divine Wisdom cannot rest content with a purely ideal object, 
she cannot stop short at a reahsation that is only potential, a mere enjoy- 
ment. If in His power and truth God is all. He desires in His love that all 
should be God. He desires that there should be outside Himself another 
nature which may progressively become what He is from all eternity — 
the absolute whole. In order to arrive itself at the divine totahty and to 
enter with God into a free, reciprocal relationship, this nature must be 
separated from God and at the same time united to Him; separated by its 
actual basis which is the Earth, and united by its ideal culmination which 
is Man. It is supremely in her vision of the earth and of Man that the 
eternal Wisdom unfolds her rejoicing before the God of the Future: 
mesakheqeth bethebel artso, veshahashouhat eth-bene Adam.

^ immanent in relation to God, transcendent in relation to us. 
i6o

We know that the possibility of chaotic existence, eternally contained 
in God, is eternally suppressed by His power, condemned by His truth 
and absorbed by His grace. But God loves Chaos in its nothingness and 
wills that it should exist, for He is able to draw rebellious existence back 
to unity and fill the infinite void with His superabundant life. God, then, 
gives Chaos its freedom; He refrains from acting against it by His omni- 
potence in the first act of the Divine Being, in the element of the Father, 
and thus causes the universe to emerge out of its nothingness.Unless we would repudiate the very notion of Godhead, we cannot 
admit outside God any existence in itself, real and positive. What is outside 
Godhead can therefore only be the Divine transposed or reversed. And 
this is what we primarily see in the specific forms of finite existence which 
separate our world from God. This world is in fact constituted outside 
God by the forms of Extension, Time and Mechanical Causahty. But 
these three conditions have nothing real and positive about them; they 
are simply a negation and transposition of divine existence in its principal 
categories.We have distinguished in God (i) His absolute objectivity, represented 
by His substance or essence which is the whole in one indivisible unity; 
(2) His absolute subjectivity or His interior existence, represented in its 
totality by three inseparable hypostases, mutually conditioning and com- 
pletmg one another; (3) lastly. His free relativity or relationship with 
what is not Himself, represented first by the joy of the Divine Wisdom, 
and then by Creation (and, as we shall subsequently see, by the Incarna- 
tion). The general characteristic of the Divine Being in these three cate- 
gories or aspects is its autonomy, its perfect aseity, the absence of any 
external determining factor. God is (i) autonomous in His objective sub- 
stance, for, being all in itself, it cannot be determined by anything; (2) He 
is autonomous in His subjective existence, for it is absolutely complete in 
Its three co-etemal and hypostatic phases, which possess in their umty the 
totality of being; finally (3) He is autonomous in His relationship to what 
is not Himself, for this other is only determined to exist by a free act of 
the Divine Will. Thus the three categories indicated are merely different 
forms and expressions of the divine autonomy. And it is on that account 
that in the terrestrial world, which is simply the reverse image of Godhead, 
we find the three corresponding forms of its heteronomy: Extension, 
Time and Mechanical Causality, (i) If the objective and substantial ex- 
pression of the divine autonomy is ‘all in unity', omnia simul in uno, the 
heteronomous objectivity of Extension consists on the contrary in the fact 
that every part of the world outside the Godhead is separate from all the 
others; it is the subsistence of each one outside the whole, and of the whole

161

L161

L

outside each one — it is the opposite of totality. Thus our world, in so far 
as it is composed of extendi parts, represents the divine objectivity re- 
versed. (2) So too, if the subjective autonomy of the divine existence finds 
its expression in the equal actuality and the close and indissoluble bond 
be^een the three terms of this existence which complete, without suc- 
ceeding, one another, the heteronomous form of Time presents us on the 
contrary with an indeterminate series of moments challenging one another’s 
existence. Each of these moments, in order to enjoy actuality, must ex- 
clude all the others, and all of them, instead of completing one another, 
suppress and supplant one another without ever attaining the totality of 
existence. (3) Finally, as the creative liberty of God is the final expression 
of His autonomy, so the heteronomy of the world outside God is com- 
pletely manifested in Mechanical Causality, in virtue of which the out- 
ward action of a given being is never the direct effect of its inward act, but 
must be determined by a chain of material causes or conditions indepen- 
dent of the agent itself.The abstract principle of Extension is that two objects, parts of the 
whole, cannot occupy the same place at the same time, and similarly a 
single object, a single part of the whole, cannot be in two different places 
at once; this is the law of division or of objective exclusion between parts 
of the whole. The abstract principle of Time is that two interior states of 
a subject (states of consciousness, according to modem terminology) can- 
not coincide in a single actual moment, and similarly a single state of con- 
sciousness cannot be maintained as actually identical in two different 
moments of existence; this is the law of the perpetual disjunction of the 
interior states of every subject. Finally, according to the abstract principle 
of Mechanical Causality, no act or phenomenon is produced spon- 
taneously or of itself, but is entirely determined by another act or pheno- 
menon, which is itself simply the effect of a third, and so on; this is the law 
of the purely external and occasional relationship between phenomena. It 
is easy to see that these three principles or laws express but one general 
urge, tending to disintegrate and dissolve the body of the universe and to 
deprive it of all inner coherence and of all solidarity between its various 
parts. This urge or tendency is the very basis of Chaos, that is, of Nature 
outside the Godhead. An urge implies a will, and a will impUes a psychical 
subject, that is to say, a soul. Since the world which this soul strives to 
produce — the whole disintegrated, disjointed, and only held together by 
a purely external bond — is the opposite or reverse of the divine totahty, 
the soul of the world itself is the opposite or antitype of the essential Wis- 
dom of God. This world-soul is a creature, the first of all creatures, the 
materia prima, the true substratum of our created world. In fact, since

162162

nothing can have any real and objective existence outside God, the world 
outside the Godhead can only be, as we have said, the divine world sub- 
jectively transposed and revencd: it is simply a false aspect or illusory 
representation of the divine totality. But even this illusory existence im- 
plies a subject putting itself in a fiJse relationship and producing in itself 
the distorted image of truth. Since this subject can be neither God nor His 
essential Wisdom, a distinct subject or world-soul must be admitted as the 
principle of Creation properly so called. As a creature, it does not exist 
eternally in itself, but it exists from all eternity in God, in the state of pure 
potenti^ty, as the latent basis of the eternal Wisdom. This potential 
future Mother of the world outside the Godhead corresponds, in its com- 
plete ideality, to the eternally actual Father in the Godhead.As pure indeterminate potentiality, the world-soul has a twofold and 
variable character (rj dopLaros Bvas): it can will to exist for itself out- 
side God, it can take the false point of view of chaotic and anarchic exis- 
tence, but it can also abase itself before God and, by freely attaching itself 
to the Divine Word, bring all Creation back to perfect unity and identify 
itself with the eternal Wisdom. But to do this, the world-soul must first 
enjoy real existence in distinction from God. The eternal Father therefore 
created it by restraining the act of His omnipotence which suppressed 
from all eternity the blind desire for anarchic existence. This desire, be- 
coming act, revealed to the world-soul the possibility of the opposite 
desire, and thus the soul itself received an independent existence, chaotic 
in its immediate actuahty, but capable of changing into the opposite. 
Having conceived Chaos and given it a reality relative to itself, the soul 
conceives the desire for deliverance from this discordant existence of aim- 
less and irrational agitation in an abyss of darkness. Drawn hither and 
thither by blind forces striving with one another for exclusive existence, 
rent asunder, disintegrated, reduced to a countless multitude of atoms, the 
world-soul feels a vague but profound desire for unity. By this desire it 
attracts the action of the Word (the Divine as acting or as manifested) 
which reveals itself to it at die beginning in the general, indeterminate idea 
of the universe, the world as one and indivisible. This ideal umty, realising 
itself upon the basis of chaotic extension, takes the form of unlimited 
space or immensity. The whole, reproduced, represented or imagined by 
the soul in its state of chaotic division, cannot cease to be the whole or lose 
its unity completely; and since its parts do not wish to complete or pene- 
trate one another in a positive and living totality, they are compelled, 
while mutually excluding one another, nevertheless to remain together, to 
co-exist in the formal unity of indefinite space, a form which is entirely 
external and void of the objective and substantial totality of God. But the163

soul is not content with external immensity; it wishes also to experience 
the interior totality of subjective existence. This totahty, eternally trium- 
phant in the Divine Trinity, is for the chaotic soul suppressed by that in- 
determinate series of mutually exclusive and indifferent moments which 
is called Time. This false infinity which enchains the soul constrains it to 
desire the truth; and to this desire the Divine Word replies by the sugges- 
tion of a new idea. By its action upon the soul the supreme Trinity is re- 
flected in the stream of indefinite duration under the form of the three 
times. In seeking to realise total actuahty for itself, the soul is compelled to 
fill up every given moment of its existence by the more or less indistinct 
memory of a past without beginning and the more or less vague expec- 
tation of a future without end.

And as a deep unchangeable foundation for this changing relationship 
there are the three principal states of the soul itself, its three modes of re- 
lationship to the Godhead, fixed for it under the form of the three times. 
The condition of its primordial absorption in the unity of the eternal 
Father, its eternal subsistence in Him as pure potentiality or mere possibility, 
is henceforward defined as the Past of the soul; the condition of separation 
from God by the blind force of chaotic desire makes up its Present; and 
the return to God, the new reunion with Him, becomes the aim of its 
aspirations and efforts, its ideal Future.As upon the anarchic division of extended parts the Divine Word 
establishes for the soul the formal unity of space, and as upon the basis of 
the chaotic succession of moments it produces the ideal trinity of time, so 
upon the basis of mechanical causahty it manifests the concrete soUdarity 
of the Whole by the law of universal attraction bindmg together by an 
inner force all the scattered fragments of chaotic reahty to form a single 
compact and solid body, the primal materialisation of the world-soul, the 
original base of operation for the essential Wisdom.

Thus, through the blind and chaotic struggle which imposes upon the 
soul an existence indefinitely divided in its parts, exclusively successive in 
its moments and mechanically determined in its phenomena; through the 
contrary desire of the soul itself aspiring to unity and totahty; and through 
the action of the Divine Word in answer to this desire — by the united 
operation of these three agents, the lower world, that is the world outside 
the Godhead, receives its relative reahty or, in Bibhcal phrase, the foun- 
dations of the earth are laid. But in the idea of Creation the Bible, like 
theosophical reason, makes no distinction between the lower and the 
upper world, between the earth and the heavens.

Thus we have seen how the eternal Wisdom called forth the possi- 
bilities of irrational and anarchic existence in order to confront them with

164

the corresponding manifestations of absolute power, truth and goodness. 
These divine reactions, which arc nothing but a play* (jeu)^ in the im- 
manent life of God, become real principles of being when the anti-divine 
potentialities which provoke them cease to be pure potentialities. Thus to 
the creation of the lower or chaotic world necessarily corresponds the 
creation of the upper or celestial world: Bereshith bar a Elohim eth hasham^ 
maim v eth haarets,

^ Prov. viii. 31.

165

V

The Higher World. The Freedom of Pure Spirits^ Prov. viii. 31.

165

V

The Higher World. The Freedom of Pure Spirits

B ereshith — cV dpxjj or better, iv — in principio, seu potius,^ Prov. viii. 31.

165

V

The Higher World. The Freedom of Pure Spirits

B ereshith — cV dpxjj or better, iv — in principio, seu potius,

in capitulo: To suppose that the opening words of Genesis are only 
an intermediate adverbial expression, like our modern phrase, *in 
the beginning*, and so forth, would be entirely to misunderstand not only 
the genius of the Hebrew language but also the general spirit of the 
ancient East. When the Hebrew language uses a substantive, it takes it 
seriously, that is to say, it has in mind an actual being or object denoted 
by this substantive. Now it is undeniable that the Hebrew word reshith, 
here translated dp;^, principium, is a genuine substantive of feminine 
gender. The corresponding masculine is rosh, caput, head. The latter term 
is used by Jewish theology pre-eminently to denote God, the supreme 
and absolute Head of all that exists. But what, from this point of view, 
can reshith be — the feminine of rosh? To answer this question we need not 
turn to the ingenuities of the Cabbalists. The Bible is there to give us a 
decisive solution. In chapter 8 of the Proverbs of Solomon already quoted, 
the eternal Wisdom, Khocmah, tells us (t'. 22): Jahveh qanani reshith darco 
— Jahveh possessed me as the (feminine) beginning of His way. It is then 
the eternal Wisdom which is the reshith, the feminine principle or head 
(source) of all being, just as Jahveh Elohim, the triune God, is its rosh, its 
active principle or source. Now, according to Genesis, God created the 
heavens and the earth in this reshith, in His essential Wisdom; which means 
that this divine Wisdom does not only represent the essential and actual 
uni-totality of the absolute being or substance of God, but also contains 
in itself the unifying principle of the divided and disintegrated being of 
the world. Being the accomplished unity of the whole in God, it becomes 
also the unity of God and of existence outside the Godhead. It is thus the 
true rationale and end of Creation — the principle in which God created 
the heavens and the earth. While it exists substantially and from all^ According to the Hexapla of Origen, the word bereshith was thus translated 
by Aquda, the celebrated doctor to whom the Talmud apphes the words of the 
psalm: ‘Thou art fairer than the children of men*.

i6<5i6<5

eternity in God, it realises itself effectively in the world and is successively 
incarnate therein, in drawing it back to an ever more perfect unity. At the 
beginning it is reshith, the pregnant notion of absolute unity, the unique 
principle which must unify all; at the end it is malkhouth (fiaaiAeia, 
regnum)f the Kingdom of God, the perfect and completely realised unity 
of the Creator and the creature. It is not the soul of the world; that is only 
the instrument, the medium and ground of its realisation, which it ap- 
proaches by the action of the Word and gradually raises to an ever more 
complete and real identification with itself. The soul of the world, con- 
sidered in itself, is the indeterminate subject of Creation, equally accessible 
to the evil principle of Chaos and to the Word of God. The Khocmah, 
the Divine Wisdom, is not the soul, but the guardian angel of the 
world, overshadowing all creatures with its wings as a bird her little ones, 
in order to raise them gradually to true being. It is the substance of the 
Holy Spirit Who brooded over the dark waters of the forming world. 
Ve rouakh (feminine) Elohim merakhepheth al pene kamtnatm. But let us 
follow the order of the sacred record: Bereshith bara Elohim eth hasham- 
maim v eth haarets. No research is needed to discover the meaning of the 
last word: haarets, earth. The inspired writer goes on at once to explain; 
ve-haarets haiethah tohu va bohu: and the Earth was Chaos. But if by the 
Earth, in the BibHcal account of Creation, we are to understand Chaos or 
the lower universe outside the Godhead in its chaotic condition, it is clear 
that the expression hashammaim, the heavens, which the sacred text puts 
in close relation to the earth as the opposite pole of Creation, indicates the 
upper universe or the invisible world of the divine reactions, established 
or realised distmctly as a counterbalance to chaotic existence.This invisible world is not without reason denoted in Hebrew (as in Old 
Slavonic) by a word of dual number, rendered as plural in Western lan- 
guages. This dual answers to the primordial division of the divine world. 
We know that the efficient cause of Creation Trjs yeveaecos) is

the act of will by which God refirains from suppressing by His omni- 
potence the potential reahty of Chaos, or ceases to react against this 
potentiality by the special power of His first hypostasis, limiting Himself 
to reaction by the second and third — by justice and goodness, truth and 
grace. Since the first hypostasis of the Most Holy Trinity, the Eternal 
Father, refrained from reacting against the possible Chaos in His specific 
quality, that is, from suppressing it by His omnipotence, and since this was 
the prime condition or efficient cause of Creation (for which reason God 
the Father is pre-eminently the Creator of the world) it foUo’v^ that to 
constitute the sphere of divine reactions to Chaos, we have only die spe- 
cific manifestations of the other two hypostases; and this faa imposes a

167

primordial duality on the invisible universe. We have (i) a system of the 
immediately creative reactions of the Word, which form the ideal or in- 
telligible world properly so called, the sphere of pure intelligences, objec- 
tive ideas and divine thoughts hypostatised; and (2) a system of reactions 
of the Holy Spirit, more concrete, subjective and living, forming the 
spiritual world, the sphere of pure spirits or angels.It is in the creative sphere of the Word and the Holy Spirit that the 
divine substance or essential Wisdom is determined and appears in its 
proper character as the luminous and heavenly being separated from the 
darj^ess of earthly matter. The proper sphere of the Father is absolute 
light, light in itself, having no relation with darkness. The Son or the 
Word is as light manifested, the white ray which lights up external objects, 
not by penetration, but by reflexion from their surface. Finally the Holy 
Spirit is the ray which is refracted by the non-divine medium and breaks 
up and creates in this medium the heavenly spectrum qf the seven prim- 
ordial spirits like the colours of the rainbow.

The pure intelligences which form the world of ideas are absolutely con- 
templative, impassible and changeless beings. Like stars fixed in the firma- 
ment of the invisible world, they are above all desire, all will and therefore 
all freedom. Pure spirits or angels have a subjective existence more com- 
plete or more concrete. Beside intellectual contemplation, they know 
affective and volitional states and have movement and freedom.But the freedom of pure spirits is quite different from that which we 
experience. Not being subject to the objective limitations of matter, space 
and time, nor to all the mechanism of the physical world, the angels of 
God have the power to determine their destiny by a single interior act of 
their will. They are free to declare themselves for God or against Him; 
but as by their nature (inasmuch as they are immediate creatures of God) 
they possess from the first a superior hght and force, they act with a full 
awareness and complete effectiveness and cannot go back on their actions. 
By virtue of the very perfection and greatness of their freedom they can 
exercise it only once for all in a single decisive act. The inner decision of 
their will, encountering no external obstacle, produces instantaneously all 
its consequences and exhausts their freedom of choice. The pure spirit 
which freely decides for God enters immediately into possession of the 
divine Wisdom and becomes as it were an organic and inseparable member 
of the Godhead; love towards God and volimtary participation in the 
divine action are from henceforward its nature. On the other hand, the 
spirit which decides to the contrary can never revoke its decision. For it 
made the decision in perfect knowledge of what it was doing, and it can 
only have what it desired. It desired separation from God because it had

168168

conceived an aversion for Him. Since this aversion could have no sort of 
motive — ^for in God can be found no shadow of evil whatsoever to justify 
or explain a feeling of hostility towards Him — this hostility is purely and 
simply an act of the spiritual will» having its whole reason in itself and 
subject to no modification; it becomes the very nature or essence of the 
fallen angel. Being, as it is, absolute master of itself, independent of any 
external and temporal cause or circumstance, the will against God is 
necessarily eternal and irrevocable. It is an infinite abyss into which the 
rebel spirit is immediately hurled and from which it can spread its rebellion 
throughout the material chaos, the physical creation, right to the confines 
of the divine world. It knew well, in deciding against God, thai it would 
not lack a sphere of action; for the Divine Will had already called forth 
from the void the world-soul, in awakening in it the chaotic desire, the 
basis and material of all Creation. This world-soul is an indefinite and in- 
determinate principle {dneipov Kai dopiarov), and it will always im- 
part this character in a certain degree to all that issues from itself. Thus 
there will be a vast no-man’s-land remaining in suspense between God and 
His adversary and providing the latter with the means by which to nourish 
its hatred, practise its rebellion and prolong its struggle. Its existence there- 
fore will not be inert and vacuous, it will have an abundant and varied 
activity, but the general direction and inner quality of all its activity are 
predetermined by the primordial act of will which separated it from God. 
To undo this act and to return to God is for it an absolute impossibility. 
The contrary teaching of Origen, condemned by the Church, shews that 
that lofty and gifted mind had but a poor conception of the essence of 
moral evil, a fact which incidentally he proved in another connexion by 
seeking deliverance from evil passions by means of a purely material and 
external process.169

VI

The three main Stages of the Cosmogonic Process

I n the thought of God the heavens and the earth, the upper and the 
lower world, were created together in a single principle which is sub- 
stantial Wisdom — the absolute unity of the Whole. The union of 
heaven and earth, founded in principle (reshith) at the beginning of the 
work of creation, must be realised in fact by the cosmogonic and historical 
process culminating in the complete manifestation of this unity in the 
Kingdom of God (malkhouth). This union as actually realised imphes a 
preliminary separation, manifesting itself in the chaotic existence of the 
Earth, an empty and barren existence plunged in darkness (khosheh) and 
the abyss (tehom). This abyss had to be filled, this darkness had to be 
illumined, this barren womb had to be made fertile, and finally by the 
united action of both worlds a being had to be produced, half of heaven 
and half of earth, capable of embracmg in its unity the totality of Creation 
and of uniting it to God by a free and living bond, by the incarnation in 
a created form of the divine eternal Wisdom.The cosmic process is the successive unification of the lower or earthly 
world, originally created in a chaotic and discordant condition — tohu pa 
bohu. In this process, as revealed in the sacred record of Genesis, we see two 
principles or productive factors, the one absolutely active, God through 
His Word and Spirit, and the other partly co-operating by its own 
-strength in the divine order and plan and bringing them to realisation, and 
partly providing simply a passive and material element. For instance it is 
said of the creation of plants and animals: vatomer Elohim: tad*sheh haarets 
deshe heseb mazriah zerah, etc., et dixit Deus: germinet terra herbam viventem 
et facientem semen, etc.: and then: vattotseh haarets deshe heseb maz'riah zerah 
leminehou, etc. — et produxit terra herbam viventem et facientem semen juxta 
genus suum. And further: vatomer Elohim: totse haarets nephesh hatah leminak, 
etc. dixit quoque Deus: producat terra animam viventem in genere suo. It 
is clear then that God does not directly create the various manifestations 
of physical life, but that He simply determines, directs and ordains the 
productive force of this agent called earth', that is, earthly nature, primal

170170

matter, the soul of the lower world. This soul is in itself simply an indeter- 
minate and inordinate force, but capable of aspiring to divine unity and 
desiring reunion with the heavens. It is upon this desire that the Word 
and Spirit of God act by suggesting to the inconscient soul ever more 
perfect forms of union between the heavenly and the earthly and im- 
pelling it to realise them in the medium of the lower world. But since the 
soul of this world is in itself an imdefined duality {dopvaros Bvas), it is 
also a prey to the action of the anti-divine principle which, having failed 
to constrain the higher Wisdom, besets its lower antitype, the world-soul, 
forcing it to remain in chaos and discord and, instead of realising the union 
of heavens and earth in harmonious and regularly ascending forms, to 
produce inordinate and fantastic monsters. Thus the cosmic process is on 
the one hand the peaceful meeting, love and marriage of the two agents, 
the heavenly and the earthly, while on the other it is a mortal struggle 
between the Divine Word and the lower principle for the possession of 
the soul of the world. It follows that the work of creation, being a doubly 
complicated process, can only advance in a slow and gradual manner.The Bible has just formally told us that it is not the direct work of God; 
and the sacred record is amply confirmed by the facts. If the creation of 
our physical world had emanated directly and exclusively from God Him- 
self, it would be an absolutely perfect work, a calm and harmonious pro- 
duction not only as a whole but in each of its parts. But the reality is far 
from corresponding to such an idea. It is only from His own point of view 
which includes all {kol asher hasah) in a moment of vision — sub specie 
aetemitatis — that God can pronounce creation perfect — toh mead, valde bona. 
As for the various parts of the work considered in themselves, they deserve 
from the mouth of God only a relative approval or none at all. In that, as 
in all the rest, the Bible is in accord with human experience and scientific 
truth. If we consider the terrestrial world as it is and especially its geological 
and palaeontological history, so well documented in our days, we find 
depicted there a laborious process determined by heterogeneous principles 
which do not achieve a firm and harmonious unity except after much time 
and great effort. Nothing could bear less resemblance to an entirely perfect 
work issuing directly from a single divine artificer. Our cosmic history is 
a long and painful parturition. We sec in it clear signs of internal struggle, 
of shocks and violent convulsions, blind gropings, unfinished sketches of 
unsuccessful creations, monstrous births and abortions. Can all these ante- 
diluvian monsters, these palaeozoa — the megatherium, the plesiosaurus, 
the ichthyosaurus, the pterodactyl and so forth — form part of the perfect 
and direct creation of God? If all these monstrous species were tob tneod 
[valde bona), why have they completely disappeared from our earth to

171

make room for more successful, harmonious and balanced forms of life?171

make room for more successful, harmonious and balanced forms of life?

Creation is a gradual and laborious process; that is a Biblical and philo- 
sophical truth as well as a fact of natural science. The process, implying 
imperfection as it does, also implies a definite progress consisting in a 
more and more profound and complete unification of material elements 
and anarchic forces, in the transformation of chaos into cosmos, that is to 
say, into a living body capable of serving for the incarnation of the divine 
Wisdom. Without going into the details of cosmogony, I will only in- 
dicate the three principal concrete stages of this unifying process.' We have already mentioned the first, determined by universal gravita- 
tion, which makes the lower world a relatively compact mass and creates 
the material body of the universe. There is the mechanical unity of the 
whole. The parts of the universe, while remaining external to one another, 
are nevertheless held together by an indissoluble chain, the force of attrac- 
tion. In vain they persist in their egotism; it is belied by the insuperable 
attraction which impels them towards one another, the primordial mani- 
festation of cosmic altruism. The soul of the world achieves its first realisa- 
tion as universal unity and celebrates its betrothal with divine Wisdom. 
But, roused by the creative Word, it aspires to a more perfect unity; and 
in this aspiration it frees itself from the ponderable mass and transforms its 
potentiality into a new subtilised and ratified material called ether. The 
Word takes possession of this idealised material as the proper medium of 
its formative action; projects imponderable fluids into all the parts of the 
universe; envelops all the members of the cosmic body in a network of 
ether; manifests the relative differences of these parts and places them in 
fixed relationships, and thus creates a second cosmic unity more perfect 
and more ideal, the dynamic unity realised by light, electricity and all the 
other imponderables, which are simply modifications or transformations 
of one and the same agent. The characteristic of the agent is pure altruism, 
an unlimited expansion, a continual act of self-giving. However perfect 
in itself the dynamic unity of the world may be, it merely envelops the 
material mass in all its parts; it does not take inward possession of them, 
or penetrate them to the depth of their being and so regenerate them. The 
soul of the world, the earth, sees in the luminous ether the ideal image of 
its heavenly beloved, but does not in reality unite with it. Nevertheless it 
aspires always towards this union, and will not confine itself to the con- 
templation of the heavens and the shining stars, to immersion in the fluid 
ether; it absorbs the light, transforms it into living fire and as the fruit of 
this new union produces from its loins every hving soul in the two king- 
doms of plants and animals. This new unity, the organic unity, with in- 
organic matter and the etheric fluids as its base and medium, is the more172

perfect in that it forms and governs a more complicated body by a more 
active and universal soul. In the plants Ufe is objectively manifested in its 
organic forms; it is felt by the animals in its movements and subjective 
effects; and lastly it is comprehended by man in its absolute principle.

The Earth which, originally void, formless and plunged in darkness, was 
to be gradually enveloped by light, and given form and diversity; which, 
in the third epoch of cosmic growth, had only vaguely felt and confusedly 
expressed, as in a dream, its creative potentiahty in the forms of vegetable 
hfe, those first combinations of the dust of earth with ihe beauty of the 
heavens; which for the first time in this plant-world emerges from itself 
to meet the heavenly influences, then separates from itself in the free 
movement of the four-footed animals and rises above itself in the airy 
flight of birds; the Earth, after diffusmg its hving soul in countless species 
of vegetable and animal life, finally concentrates and returns upon itself 
and assumes the form which enables it to meet God face to face and to 
receive directly from Him the breath of spiritual life. Here Earth knows 
Heaven and is known of it. Here the two terms of Creation, the Divine 
and the non-Divine, the higher and the lower, become one in reality, are 
actually united and enjoy that union. For true self-knowledge is impossible 
except by a real union, since perfect knowledge must be reahsed, and real 
union must be conceived in idea to be perfect. For this reason the supreme 
union, that of the sexes, is called ‘knowledge* by the Bible. The eternal 
Wisdom, which is in principle the unity of all, and entirely the unity of 
opposites — a free and reciprocal unity — ^finds at last a subject in which 
and through which it can realise itself completely. It finds it and rejoices. 
‘My delight,* she says — my supreme delight — ‘is in the sons of Man.*

173

VII173

VII

The threefold Incarnation of the Divine Wisdom

£ h formavit Futurus Deorum*hominem — puhis (sic) ex humo — vajitser 
Jahveh Elohim eth haadam haphar min haadamah: If the earth in general 
signifies the soul of the lower world, the dust of the earth indicates 
the state of abasement or helplessness of this soul when it ceases to assert 
and exalt itself in the .blind desire of an anarchic existence, when repelling 
all lower suggestions and abandoning in perfect humihty all resistance or 
antagonism to the heavenly Word, it becomes capable of understanding 
its truth, of uniting itself to its activity and of establishing in itself the 
Kingdom of God. This state of humihation, this absolute receptivity of 
earthly Nature is objectively marked by the creation of Man {humus — 
humilis — homo) ; the sensitive and imaginative soul of the physical world 
becomes the rational soul of humanity. Having attained an interior union 
with the heavens, contemplating the inteUigible light, it can include by 
consciousness and reason all that exists in an ideal unity. Ideally an uni- 
versal being in his rational potentiaUty as the image of God, Man must 
become effectively like God by the active reaUsation of his unity in the 
fullness of Creation. Child of the earth by the lower life which it gives 
him, he must give it back transformed into hght and hfe-givihg spirit. If 
through him, through his reason, earth is raised to heaven, through him 
also, through his activity, the heavens must descend and fill the earth; 
through him all the world outside the Godhead must become a single 
living body, the complete incarnation of the divine Wisdom.In man alone the creature is perfectly, that is freely and reciprocally, 
united to God, because, thanks to his two-fold nature, man alone can 
preserve his freedom and remain continually the moral complement of 
God, while achievifig an ever completer union with Him by a continuous 
series of conscious efforts and deliberate actions. There is a marvellous 
dialectic in the law of life of the two worlds. The very supernatural per- 
fection of the freedom enjoyed by a pure spirit, the absence of all external 
limitation, means that this fi:eedom, manifesting itself completely, is ex- 
hausted in a single act; and the spiritual being loses its freedom by reason

174

of the very excess of freedom. On the other hand, the hindrances and 
obstacles presented by the external medium of the natural world to the 
realisation of our interior acts, the limited and conditional character of 
human freedom, make man freer than the angels in that he is allowed to 
retain his freewill and exercise it continually, and to remain even after the 
Fall an active co-operator in the divine work. It is for this reason that 
eternal Wisdom does not find her delight in the angels but in the sons of 
Man.Man exists primarily for the interior and ideal union of earthly poten- 
tiality and divine act, of the Soul and the Word, and secondarily for the 
free realisation of this union in the totahty of the world outside the God- 
head. There is therefore m this composite being a centre and a circum- 
ference, the human personality and the human world, the individual man 
and the social or collective man. The human individual, being in himself 
or subjectively the union of the divine Word and earthly nature, must 
begin to reahse this union objectively or for himself by an external re- 
duplication of himself. In order really to know himself in his unity man 
must distinguish himself as knowing or active subject (man in the proper 
sense) from himself as known or passive object (woman). Thus the con- 
trast and union of the divine Word and earthly nature is reproduced for 
man himself in the distinction and union between the sexes.The essence or nature of man is completely represented by individual 
man (in the two sexes) ; his social existence can add nothing to it; but it is 
absolutely necessary for the extension and development of human exis- 
tence, and for the actual realisation of all that is potentially contained in 
the human individual. It is only through society that man can attain his 
final end, the universal integration of all existence outside the Godhead. 
But natural humanity (Man, Woman and Society), as it emerges from the 
cosmic process, contains within itself only the possibility of such mtegra- 
tion. The reason and consciousness of man, the affections and instinct of 
woman, and finally the law of solidarity or altruism which forms the basis 
of all society, these are but a foreshadowing of the true divine-human 
unity, a seed which has yet to sprout, blossom and bear its fruit. The 
gradual growth of this seed is accomphshed in the process of universal 
history; and the threefold fruit which it bears is: perfect Woman, or 
nature made divine, perfect Man or the God-Man, and the perfect Society 
of God with men — die final incarnation of the eternal Wisdom.

The essential unity of the human being in Man, Woman and Society, 
determines the indivisible unity of the divine incarnation in humanity. 
Man properly so-called (the masculine individual) contains already in him- 
self in poteruia the whole essence of man; it is only in order to realise that

175175

essence in actuality that he must, first, reduplicate himself or render his 
material side objective in the personality of Woman, and secondly, mul- 
tiply himself or render objective the universality of his rational being in a 
plurality of individual existences, organically bound together and forming 
a corporate whole — human Society. Woman being only the complement 
of Man, and Society only his extension or total manifestation, there is 
fundamentally only one human being. And its reunion with God, though 
necessarily threefold, nevertheless constitutes only a single divine-human 
being, the incarnate whose central and completely personal mani-

festation is Jesus Christ, whose feminine complement is the Blessed Virgin, 
and whose universal extension is the Church. The Blessed Virgin is united 
to God by a purely receptive and passive union; she brought forth the 
second Adam, as the earth brought forth the first, by abasing herself in 
perfect humility; there is therefore here, properly speaking, no reciprocity 
or co-operation. And as for the Church, she is not united to God directly 
but through the incarnation of Christ of which she is the continuation. It 
is then Christ alone Who is truly the God-Man, the Man Who is directly 
and reciprocally (that is, actively) united to God.It was in the contemplation in His eternal thought of the Blessed Virgin, 
of Christ and of the Church that God gave His absolute approval to the 
whole Creation when He pronounced it to be tob meod, valde bona. There 
was the proper subject for the great joy which the divine Wisdom ex- 
perienced at the thought of the sons of Man; she saw there the one pure 
and immaculate daughter of Adam, she saw there the Son of Man par 
excellence, the Righteous One, and lastly she saw there the multitude of 
mankind made one under the form of a unique Society founded upon love 
and truth. She contemplated under this form her future incarnation and, 
in the children of Adam, her own children; and she rejoiced in seeing that 
they justified the scheme of Creation which she offered to God: et justifi- 
cata est Sapientia a jiliis suis (Matt. xi. 19).

Mankind reunited to God in the Blessed Virgin, in Christ and in the 
Church is the realisation of the essential Wisdom or absolute substance of 
God, its created form or incarnation. In truth, it is one and the same sub- 
stantial form (designated by the Bible as semen mulieris, scilicet Sophiae) 
which realises itself in three successive and permanent mamfestations, dis- 
tinct in existence but indivisible in essence, assuming the name of Mary 
in its feminine personahty, of Jesus in its masculine personality, and re- 
serving its proper name for its complete and universal appearance in the 
perfect Church of the future, the Spouse and Bride of the divine Word.

This threefold realisation in mankind of the essential Wisdom is a re- 
ligious truth which Orthodox Christendom professes in its doctrine and

176This threefold realisation in mankind of the essential Wisdom is a re- 
ligious truth which Orthodox Christendom professes in its doctrine and

176

displays in its worship. If by the substantial Wisdom of God we were to 
understand only the Person of Jesus Christ, how could all the texts of the 
Wisdom Books which speak of this Wisdom be applied to the Blessed 
Virgin? Moreover this application, which has been made from the earliest 
times in the Offices of the Latin Church as well as of the Greek Church, 
has in our own days received doctrinal sanction in the Bull of Pius IX on 
the Immaculate Conception of the Most Holy Virgin. On the other hand, 
there are texts of Scripture which Orthodox and Cathohe doctors apply 
sometimes to the Blessed Virgin, sometimes to the Church; for instance, the 
passage in the Apocalypse concerning the Woman clothed with the sun, 
crowned with the stars, and with the moon beneath her feet. Finally, there 
can be no doubt as to the close link and complete analogy between the 
individual humanity of Christ and His social humanity, between His 
natural Body and His mystical Body. In the sacrament of Communion the 
personal Body of the Lord becomes in a mystical but real manner the 
unifying principle of His collective Body, the community of the faithful. 
Thus the Church, human Society made divine, possesses fundamentally 
the same substance as the incarnate Person of Christ or His individual 
Humanity; and since this latter has no other origin or substance than the 
human nature of the Blessed Virgin, the Mother of God, it follows that 
the organism of the divine^human incarnation, having in Jesus Christ a 
smgle active and personal centre, possesses also m its threefold manifesta- 
tion one single substantial basis, namely the corporal nature of the divine 
Wisdom, as both latent and revealed in the lower world; it is the soul of 
the world completely converted, purified and identified with Wisdom 
itself, as matter identifies itself with form in a single concrete and Hving 
being. And the perfect reahsation of this divine-material substance, this 
semen mulieris, is glorified and resurrected Humanity, the Temple, Body 
and Spouse of God.The truth of Christianity, under this positive aspect — the complete and 
concrete incarnation of Godhead — has particularly attracted the rehgious 
soul of the Russian people from the earliest times of their conversion to 
Christianity. In dedicating their most ancient churches to St. Sophia, the 
substantial Wisdom of God, they have given to this idea a new expression 
unknown to the Greeks (who identified So<f>la with the Aoyog), While 
closely linking the Holy Wisdom with the Mother of God and with Jesas 
Christ, the religious art of our ancestors distinguished it clearly from both 
and represented it under the form of a distinct divine being. It was for 
them die heavenly essence clad in the appearance of the lower world, the 
luminous spirit of regenerate humanity, the Guardian Angel of the Earth, 
the final appearance of the Godhead for which they waited.

177

M

Thus, side by side with the individual human form of the Divine — the 
Virgin-Mother and the Son of God — the Russian people have known and 
loved, under the name of St. Sophia, the social incarnation of the God- 
head in the Universal Church. It is this idea, revealed to the religious con- 
sciousness of our ancestors, this truly national and yet absolutely universal 
notion, that we must now expound in reasoned terms. It is for us to 
formulate the hving Word which old Russia conceived and which new 
Russia must declare to the world.

178

VIII

Messianic Man and the Chaos of Mankind, The primitive 
elements of Trinitary Society178

VIII

Messianic Man and the Chaos of Mankind, The primitive 
elements of Trinitary Society

\ s the intermediary between heaven and earth, Man was destined to 
be the universal Messiah who should save the world from chaos by 
-Z A. uniting it to God and incarnating the eternal Wisdom in created 
forms. This mission involved Man in a threefold ministry; he was to be 
priest of God, king of the lower world, and prophet of their absolute 
union: priest of God in sacrificing to Him his own arbitrariness, the 
egoism of humanity; king of the lower world of Nature in subjecting it 
to divine law; prophet of the union of the two in aspiring to the absolute 
totahty of existence and in reahsing it progressively by the continuous co- 
operation of grace and freedom, in regenerating and reforming Nature 
outside the Godhead until its universal and perfect integration is achieved 
(i] arroKardcnraaLs rwv Trdurojp). Submission to God, and the domina- 
tion of Nature for its own salvation: these two phrases sum up the Mes- 
sianic Law. Man rejected it because he preferred to achieve the goal 
directly, by himself, in violation of the order laid down by the divine 
reason. He wished to unite himself arbitrarily to the lower world of 
Nature, in virtue of his own desire, thinking by this means to possess him- 
self of an unconditional sovereignty, an absolute autonomy equal to that 
of God. He would not subordinate his kingship to his priesthood; and 
consequently he became incapable of satisfying his true aspirations and of 
fulfilling his prophetic mission. His mordinate desire to unite himself to 
Nature was bound to result in his subjection to it; and as an inevitable 
consequence he could not escape contracting the distinctive features of the 
material world apart from the Godhead, and being transformed to its 
image and likeness. Now we know that the essential character of Nature 
outside God is expressed first by indeterminate plurahty in space, or the 
infinite division of parts; secondly by indeterminate change in time, or the 
infinite disjunction of moments; and thirdly, as the result of this double 
division, by the transformation of all causality into mechanism. It is true 
that this potentiality of infinite disintegration and universal discord, which179

is the essential characteristic of Chaos, is hmited in creation by the action 
of the unifying Word which on this chaotic foundation constructed the 
cosmos. But in the lower Nature (before the appearance of Man) the 
foundation of Chaos is not suppressed; it persists like fire beneath the 
ashes, a prevailing tendency ready to awaken at every opportunity. It is 
in this potential form that fallen Man has contracted the disorder, becom- 
ing thereby what is wrongly called natural humanity but is in fact chaotic 
humanity. In this human mass we distinguish clearly the three fundamen- 
tal characteristics of Nature apart from God. The infinite disintegration 
of material parts in space is translated into human terms by the indeter- 
minate and anarchic plurality of co-existing individuals; to the infinite 
disjunction of moments in time corresponds, in the life of mankmd, the 
indeterminate succession of generations which vie with one another for 
actual existence and in turn supplant one another; and finally the material 
mechanism of the physical world is transferred to mankind under the form 
of that heteronomy or rule of fate which subjects the will of Man to the 
force of circumstances and his inner being to the dominating influence of 
external environment and temporal conditions.We know, however, that the Fall of Man could only postpone and not 
annul his vocation. The salutary obstacles of Space, Time and Mechanical 
Causality, while separating him from his supreme end, at the same time 
saved him from absolute and final frustration, (i) The indeterminate 
plurality of individuals — which is, considered in itself, a declension — is the 
prime condition of human salvation; for although a part of this great 
number may by fresh crimes aggravate original sin and propagate it more 
widely, there always remain some righteous ones to mitigate the effects of 
evil and to prepare the means of future salvation. Thanks to this indeter- 
minate multiplicarion, Abel is replaced by Seth and Saul makes room for 
David. (2) The indefinite succession of generations is a second condition 
of salvation; none disappears without leaving something to facilitate the 
work of its -successors and to elaborate some more perfect historic form 
which may better satisfy the true aspirations of the human soul. Thus what 
could not be revealed in Eve or Tamar or Rahab or Ruth or Bathsheba, 
was one day revealed in Mary. (3) Finally the heteronomy of our existence 
is a third condition of salvation, no less indispensable than the former two. 
For if the will of Man, both good and bad, was immediately efficacious, 
there would be an end of Mankind and of Creation. The fratricide Cain 
would in that case be plunged immediately into the depths of Hell before 
he had built a town and founded ancient civilisation; the good Seth would 
'have ascended to Heaven or at least to Paradise with his brother Abel 
before he had begotten the ancestors of Jesus Christ; and the lower world,

180

tlic Earth, robbed of its centre of unity and action, would have reverted to 
the sad condition of tohu va hohu in which it was before the Creation. And 
there would have been no one to give joy and delight to the eternal 
Wisdom.If then our subjection to the conditions of the material world is a conse- 
quence of the Fall and a penalty of sin, we sec that this penalty is a blessing 
and this necessary consequence of evil is a necessary means of absolute 
good.

As the chaotic earth could not escape the cosmogonic action of the 
Word, which transformed it into a balanced, enlightened and living 
world, so the chaos of mankind, created by the Fall of Eden, had to be 
subjected to the thcogonic operation of the same Word, which aims at 
regenerating it into a spiritual humanity really unified, enlightened by 
divine truth, and hving with an eternal Hfe. The form of the Messianic 
Man, rejected by the first Adam, was not entirely destroyed in natural 
humanity, but simply reduced to the state of latent potentiahty; thus it 
remained as a living seed — semen muUeris (id est Sophiae ) — realising itself 
partially and progressively, and finally incarnate in the second Adam. This 
thcogonic process, the creation of trinitary Man, Messianic Man or God- 
Man, through Whom the divine Wisdom becomes incarnate throughout 
the whole universe, presents, in the order of time, three main stages: (i) 
the series of Messianic anticipations in natural humanity' or in the human 
chaos — before Christianity; (2) the appearance of the individual Messiah 
in the person of Jesus Christ; (3) the Messianic transformation of the whole 
of mankind, or the development of Christendom.Before Jesus Christ, mankind lacking a real centre was simply a potential 
organism; in fact, there were only separate organs: tribes, states and 
nations, some of whom aimed at universal domination. This was already 
an anticipation of future unity. But in each of these disjointed parts of 
mankind, whether or no it aspired to supplant the whole under the form 
of a universal monarchy, there had been from the beginning a certain 
realisation in the social sphere of the Messianic or trinitary form tending to 
represent in more or less restricted limits the totality of human existence.

This trinitary form has a broad foundation in the being of Man. All 
human existence is made up of three principal terms: the accomphshed 
&cts preserved by the tradition of the past, the actions and tasks imposed 
by the needs of Ae present, and the aspirations towards a better state de- 
termined by a more or less perfect ideal of the future.

There is an obvious analogy, but also an essential difference, between 
these constituent modes of human existence and the corresponding modes 
of Divine existence (to say nothing of the hypostatic character of the

181

latter). The broad reason for this difierence is that in God, as absolute 
Being, the first mode determines the second completely, and the two to- 
gether completely determine the third, in which the Divine Being finally 
possesses itself and completely enjoys itself Man, on the other hand (to 
mention here only the third mode of his subjective existence), cannot 
actually possess the totality of existence, which is for him only a more or 
less distant future. This future ideally anticipated cannot be the object of 
a proper enjoyment, but only of an aspiration.In our material or animal life, this trinitary form already exists, but it is 
there a natural symbol rather than a reality. The accomphshed fact is here 
represented by the past generation, the fathers or ancestors; the actuaHty 
is the present generation, the men of to-day; finally, the natural aspirations 
towards the future are incarnate in the children, the future generation. It 
is clear that the trinitary form has here a purely relative and fundamentally 
illusory character: natural life strives to give permanence to the relation- 
ship but never succeeds in doing so, and each generation in turn passes 
through the state of Future, Present and Past, to disappear into nothingness 
and oblivion. Each generation desires to possess complete actuality, but 
since each has an equal right to this possession none can obtain it effec- 
tively; and after vain attempts to stem the torrent of temporal existence, 
all are in turn engulfed in it. But this continual succession of generations 
docs not exhaust all human existence; this is only animal humanity. Be- 
sides this there is social humanity, which has never been confined 
to material actuality or content merely to pursue and maintain the 
actual fact of existence. Human society, even at the lowest stages of its 
development, has always coupled facts with principles, reahties with ideas.The actuality of the present moment is never for human society a 
purely mechanical sequence in time, a mere postea to its past, or a purely 
mechanical and temporal antecedent, a mere antea to its future. This 
actuality is always linked to the two other terms by an inner spiritual bond 
which fixes the past and the future and which, if it does not stem the 
torrent of material existence, at least confines it to a definite channel and 
transforms the Evil Infinity of natural time into a system of historical 
development. In every human society, however barbarous it may be, 
above and beyond the material interests of the moment, there is a religious 
tradition and a prophetic ideal The past, instead of being ruthlessly sup- 
planted in the manner of those savages who kill and eat their aged parents, 
is preserved with a filial piety as the basis and abiding sanction of the 
present; and the future, instead of being conceived as a pitiless fate or sac- 
rificed to the flames of egoism like the children that were consumed in the 
blazing statue of Moloch, is appealed to and invoked as the true end and

182182

rationale of the present, its joy and crown. Thus at the head of every 
human society we see a trinity, more or less differentiated, of governing 
classes partly linked, but never identified, with the threefold natural re- 
lationship of the successive generations. There are in the fint place the 
^priests or sacrificers, corresponding to the fathers, the older generation; 
indeed, originally in the life of tribes and scattered clans, priestly functions 
were performed by the fathers of families and the domestic hearth was the 
principal altar. Nevertheless even in this primitive state the father stood for 
more than the particular fact of natural fatherhood; he was linked by his 
priestly dignity to the absolute fact of the Divine Fatherhood, to that 
eternal Past which precedes and conditions all existence. In contrast to the 
animals, material generation had in the person of human fathers become 
a social institution and an act of religion. And if the living father was a 
priest, the mediator between the present and the past, the dead ancestor, 
re-entering the invisible world, became merged in the absolute past itself, 
the eternal Godhead, and became an object of worship. Ancestor-worship 
is in fact a universal element in religion.^ Thus the ministry of the imme- 
diate past, of the living fathers, the priests, linked the present existence of 
mankind to a vaguer and more remote past, to the mysterious facts pre- 
ceding our existence and determining it with an absolute necessity. In the 
second place, we see the class of warriors who by their strength and daring 
guaranteed to society its actual means of existence and met the pressing 
needs of the given moment. This class was naturally drawn mainly from 
the sons of famihes, the present generation. And although the older 
generation also took part in military enterprises,* it was not Priam or 
Nestor, but rather Hector and Achilles who commanded the warriors, 
while duly yielding place to the older men whenever it was necessary to 
obtain the favour of the gods by sacrifices. Thus the relation between these 
two main classes of Society roughly corresponds to the relation between 
the two generations, the present and the past, of natural life. But if this 
analogy were extended, if the future of the social organism were also to 
find itself solely or mainly represented by the future generation, the child- 
ren who supplant their forebears, to be themselves supplanted by their off- 
spring, and so on, then the existence of Society would be confused with the 
Evil Infinity of natural life, there would be no history, no progress, but^ This thesis has been expounded in our own time with a certain degree of exagger- 
ation by M. Fustel de Coulanges in his CiV/ antique, and in a much more exagger- 
ated form by Mr. Herbert Spencer in Sociology. It is not difficult to separate the 
important element of truth in their ideas from the mistaken conclusions which, 
especially in the English thinker, are the product of a too narrow and limited 
point of view.

183

simply a continuous and fruidess change. This is not so in fact. In every 
society there has been from the earhest times, besides the priests and the 
warrion, a dass made up of every age, sex and condition, who anticipated 
the future of man and satisfied the ideal aspirations of the society in which 
they lived. In the hfe of nature the third term, instead of being the true 
unity of the first and second, is fundamentally a mere repetition of them. 
The future generation represents the future only in an illusory and ephem- 
eral manner, as one member of an indeterminate series is worth no more 
than another. In the order of natural succession the new generation super- 
vening upon the older is not in itself more advanced or nearer the ideal of 
perfection. It is on this account that true social progress, independently of 
the infinite succession of generations, demands that there be real represen- 
tatives of the future, men who are in fact more advanced in the spiritual 
hfe, capable of satisfying the aspirations of their contemporaries and of 
confronting a given society with its ideal in the degree to which it can 
grasp it and they themselves can realise it. To these men of the ideal future 
I give the general name of prophets. The word is commonly understood to 
signify one who foretells the future.Between the fortune-teller and the true prophet there is much the same 
dificrence as there is between the chief of a gang of robbers and the lawful 
sovereign of a great state, or between the father of a primitive family 
sacrificing to the shades of his ancestors and the Pope bestowing his bless- 
ing urbi et orbi and opening Heaven to the souls in Purgatory. But apart 
from this difference, which concerns the extent of their respective jurisdic- 
tion, there is also another distinction to be drawn. The future may be fore- 
told not merely in words but also in action by a partial anticipation of 
states and relationships which do not form part of the present condition 
of humanity. This is prophecy in the proper sense, which moreover pre- 
sents undefined modifications and gradations. Thb African witch-doctor 
for example, has or claims to have the power of bringing rain or fine 
weather at his good pleasure. This superior power of the human will over 
the forces and phenomena of material nature is an attribute of humanity 
in so far as it is perfectly united to the creative and omnipotent Godhead. 
Such a union, which is, generally speaking, foreign to our present con- 
dition, is simply the ideal goal, the remote future, to which we aspire; and 
the exercise of a power proper to this future state is an anticipation of the 
future, or a prophetic act. But true prophecy is not that of the sorcerer. He 
does not possess, and is not even aware of, the religious and moral con- 
ditions of supernatural power; if in fiict he exercises this power, it is only 
in apurely empirical manner. But even in the case where this magicalpower 
is nothing but a fraudulent pretence, it is none the less an anticipation,

184184

though only in desire and aspiration, of a higher state, an ideal future re- 
served for Man. And if we turn from the African witch-doctor to a true 
Christian wonder-worker such as St. Francis of Assisi, we find in his 
miracles the same power of the human will over the forces of external 
nature which the magician of a savage tribe possesses or claims to possess. 
In both cases the power is limited; for the miraculous power of even the 
greatest saints has never been constant in its duration or universal in its 
application. But the great difference is that the saint is aware and in pos- 
session of that which is for Man the supreme inner condition of super- 
natural power, namely moral union with the Godhead. Thus his power, 
based on his moral superiority, is a faithful and direct, even though feeble 
and limited, reproduction of the divine Ommpotcncc which is no blind 
force but the logical consequence of the intrinsic and essential perfection 
'of Absolute Being. In so far as the saint shares in this perfection, he shares 
also in the divine power and affords us an anticipation of our final state, 
which is not only real but internally true, perfect in itself, though exter- 
nally incomplete.Let us now compare, in quite another sphere of prophecy, the great 
sage of Greece with a Hebrew nabi, Plato in his Republic gives us the ideal 
of human society organised on the principles of justice and reason. It is 
the anticipation of a future which was partly realised by the society of 
medieval Europe.^ Plato was therefore a prophet, but in the sense in which 
the African witch-doctor is a wonder-worker; he did not possess, and was 
not even aware of, the true conditions under which his ideal must be 
realised. He did not understand that for the equitable and rational organ- 
isation of social life human justice and reason arc not suflScient; nor that 
the ideal of a just and wise society conceived by a philosopher still has to 
be made fruitful by a corresponding moral action on the part of society 
itself. Society is in fact dominated by evil; if it is to be organised in accor- 
dance with the ideal of the good, it must be saved and regenerated. But 
abstract meditation will not save it. For all its anticipation of social truths 
the Platonic idealism did not possess the way to its realisation and could not 
give life to the conception of it. That is the great difference between the 
philosophic prophecy of the Greeks and the rehgious prophecy of the 
Hebrews. The Israehte nabi to whom the truth was revealed by a personal 
relationship to the living God of history anticipated the ideal future not by 
abstract thought but with his heart and soul. He cleared the way, he 
awakened the Hfe. In his prophecies there was, as in Plato, an ideal of a 
perfect society; but this ideal was never dissociated from the inner con-

^ On the analogy between the Platonic and the Christian Republics, see among 
others Ranke in his Universal History-

185^ On the analogy between the Platonic and the Christian Republics, see among 
others Ranke in his Universal History-

185

dition which decennined its realisation, the free and active reunion of man- 
kind with Gk>d. The true nebiim knew well that this union was only to be 
accomplished by means of a long and complicated divinc-human process, 
a process of mutual action and concurrence between God and Man; and 
not only did they know this as a general principle, but they knew and 
proclaimed at each given moment what mankind in its provisional central 
organ, the Jewish nation, must do in order to co-operate effectively in 
furthering the divine-human work. Their action was complete, since on 
the one hand they pointed to the absolute goal in the distant future, and on 
the other they indicated the effectual means of leading mankind towards 
that goal at the present moment Thus, in uniting all human anticipations 
of the ideal future under the general name of prophecy, we are not ignor- 
ing the vast and essential difference which separates not merely wizards 
and sorcerers but also the loftiest intellects of uninspired humanity from 
the true prophets of the living God.

i86

IX

The Messianic Preparation among the Hindus, the Greeks 
and the Hebrewsi86

IX

The Messianic Preparation among the Hindus, the Greeks 
and the Hebrews

At the dawn of history, every father of a house is a priest or sacrificer, 
each son of the house is a warrior on an equal footing with all his 
JL jL fellows and owing obedience only to temporary chiefs. But as the 
unit of society is extended and organised, particular priests begin to collect 
into a single body forming a specifically reHgious fellowship, a clergy 
more or less concentrated in the person of a chief priest or pontiff; at the 
same time the active part of the population tends to establish and organise 
itself under the orders of a sovereign who is not only the mihtary leader 
in time of war, but also the head of society in peace time in all the affairs 
and practical questions raised by a more complex social hfe. When society 
is no longer merely a family and its manifold interests are no longer 
directly harmonised by natural kinship and by the obvious necessity for a 
rigid sohdarity, conflicts and struggles arise and some impartial authority 
becomes necessary for the estabhshment of social equflibrium. Thus the 
main function of the sovereign in peace time is that of judge, as we see in 
all primitive states. To lead the nation on the field of battle and to decide 
its disputes in time of peace are the two main needs which the original 
institution of monarchy had to fulfil.

While the disintegrated and scattered elements of the spiritual and 
natural body of humanity were thus re-assembling under the action of the 
historic Word into the partial unities of rudimentary churches and states, 
the soul of mankind, repeating at a higher level the stages of the cosmo- 
gonic process, was developing its efforts to enter into an ever more inti- 
mate union with the Spirit of the eternal Wisdom.In India the soul of mankind, manifesting itself first through the intu- 
itions of the saints and sages of ordiodox Brahmanism, then through the 
teaching of the orthodox sage Kapila, founder of the Sankhia philosophy, 
and finally through the new rehgion of Buddha Sakyamum, recognised 
and loved the Absolute primarily in its negative form as the opposite of 
existence outside the Godhead, or the nature of the world. For the first

187

rime the soul of mankind became profoundly aware of the vanity of 
material life and conceived an overwhelming disgust for this hfe of illu- 
sion, which is in fact death rather than life in so far as it devoun itself 
continually and never achieves stal^ty or satisfaction.

But disgust with false life did not reveal the true. The human soul as 
manifested in India, while asserting with perfect certainty and admirable 
power that the Absolute is not to be found in material life, that it is not 
identical with Nature and the world, was unable to discover or to say 
where it is to be found or what it is. But instead of recognising this in- 
ability and seeking its causes, the wisdom of India asserted its own im- 
potence as the final word of truth and pronounced that the Absolute is to 
be found in Nothingness, that it is non-existence. Nirvana.For a moment India through its sages had acted as a national organ of 
the universal soul of mankind, in perceiving the vanity of natural cMstencc 
and firecing itself from the bonds of blind desire. The thought and feeling 
that possessed Buddha and his disciples when they affirmed that the Abso- 
lute is not anything, that it is none of all the things that exist in Nature, 
was in fact a universal act of the soul of mankind, which was bound to pass 
riirough this negative truth before conceiving the positive idea of the 
Absolute. But the wisdom or rather the folly of the East consists in taking 
a relative and provisional discovery for complete and final truth. The fault 
is not that of the human soul but that of the soul of these sages and of the 
nations that adopted their teaching. In halting at a necessary but lower 
stage in the universal process, these nations did not check the progress of 
history but remained themselves outside the progressive movement of 
humanity away from its immersion in a barbarous particularism. The 
universal soul forsook them and went to seek among other nations the 
spiritual organs for new modes of union with the Divine essence. Through 
the inspired sages, poets and artists of Hellas it perceived and loved the 
Absolute, not as the Nothingness of Buddhism, but as the Idea and the 
ideal world of Plato, an eternal system of intelhgible truths reflected here 
below in the sensible forms of Beauty.The idealism of Greece was a great truth, more positive and complete 
than the nihilism of India. Yet it was not the complete and final truth, so 
long as the ideal world was considered in its purely theoretic and aesthetic 
aspect, so long as it was simply contemplated apart from reality and hfe 
or realised exclusively in the superficial forms of plastic beauty. If the ideal 
world is truer than die material world, it cannot be powerless against it. 
It must penetrate it, subdue it fi:om within and regenerate it. The intelh- 
gible hght of the higher world must be transfused into the moral and 
practical life of the lower world; the divine will must be accomphshed on

i88

earth as it is in heaven. The Word of God is not only the sun of truth, of 
which the reflexion is seen m the troubled stream of natural life; it is also 
the beneficent angel who descends into the stream to purify its waters and 
to open up beneath the sand and slime of human passions and errors the 
well of hving water springing up into eternity. The wisdom of the Greeks 
like that of the Hindus was content to call a final halt at the stage of truth 
which it had reached. The last utterance of the Hellenic wisdom, the Nco- 
Pktonic philosophy, insisted even more than Plato himself on the purely 
theoretic or contemplative character of the practical Hfe. The true sage, 
according to Plotinus, must be a stranger to any practical aim, any activity, 
any social interest. He must flee the world in order first to raise himself by 
abstract meditation to the intelhgible world and then to be absorbed in 
ecstasy by the nameless abyss of absolute unity. The Proteus of human 
errors is fundamentally one identical being, and this identity reveals itself 
especially in the ultimate conclusions of systems which are to all appearance 
diverse in origin. Thus the final absorption in the unnamable Absolute of 
Neo-Platonism is indistinguishable, except in words, from the Buddhist 
Nirvana.If the two great Aryan nations confined themselves in the last resort to 
this negative revelation of the Absolute, the positive revelation created for 
itself a national organ in the Semitic people of the Hebrews. The religious 
life and history of mankind were concentrated in this unique people be- 
cause it alone sought in the Absolute the living God, the God of history; 
the positive future of humanity was prepared and revealed in this people 
because it alone saw in God not only Him Who is but also Him Who will 
be, Jahveh, the God of the Future. Salvation came of the Jews and could 
come only of them because they alone understood true salvation — ^not ab- 
sorption in Nirvana by moral and physical suicide, not the abstraction of 
the mind into pure idea by a theoretic contemplation, but the sanctifica-t 
don and regeneration of the whole being and existence of Man by a living 
activity, both moral and religious, by faith and works, by prayer, labour 
and charity.

While the Hindus and the Greeks stopped at partial aspects of the God- 
head which they were foohsh enough to take for the whole, thus trans- 
forming truth into error, the Hebrews had received by means of their 
revealed religion the living germ of the divine Essence in its complete and 
final truth; not that this Essence was manifested to them in an instant in all 
its absolute perfection: on the contrary, its manifestations were gradual 
and very imperfect, but they were real and true. They were no distant re- 
flexions or scattered rays of the divine idea illuminating the mind of an 
isolated sage — they were substantial manifijstations of Divine Wisdom

189

itself, produced by the personal action of the Word and the Holy Spirit 
and addressed to the whole nation as a social entity. The Divine Wisdom 
did not only enter into the intelligence of the Israelites; it took possession 
of dieir hearts and souls, and at the same time appeared to them in sensible 
forms.We see in fact in the Old Testament a twofold series of divine manifes- 
tations: the phenomena of the subjective consciousness by which God 
speaks to the soul of His righteous ones, the Patriarchs and Prophets, and 
the objective appearances by which the divine power or glory [shekhinah) 
manifests itself before all the people, concentrated upon material objects 
such as the Altar of Sacrifice or the Ark of the Covenant. This twofold 
process of moral regeneration and external theophany was bound to attain 
its goal; these two theogonic currents inevitably met and coincided in the 
creation of an individual being who, absolutely holy and pure in body and 
soul, could not only morally but also physically incarnate God in himself 
and could unite in one being Jacob and the Stone of Bethel, Moses and the 
Ark of the Covenant, Solomon and his Temple.All peoples, or nearly all, have had in their religions the notion of a 
divine woman and a divine man, of a Virgin-Mother and a Son of God 
coming down to earth to struggle against the forces of evil, to suffer and 
to conquer. But there can be no question that only in the womb of the 
Jewish people have these universal ideas taken bodily fotm and been 
actually hypostatised m the two historic persons of the Virgin Mary and 
Jesus Christ. This unique phenomenon implies a unique history, a prepa- 
ration or special education of this people. Even the rationalists should be 
forced to this conclusion. And indeed, apart from all miraculous facts in 
the proper sense of the term, there is in the social and political sphere a 
general fact which distinguishes the history of the people of Israel and 
gives it an essential pre-eminence over the two great nations which by their 
original and creative genius seemed called to play a leading part in the 
destinies of mankind. Whereas the national development both of the 
Hindus and of the Greeks followed the path of ensis and revolution and 
issued in purely negative results, the development of the Hebrew people 
was on the whole brought about along organic and evolutionary lines and 
issued in a positive result of immense and universal significance, namely 
Christianity. On the one hand we see only distorted and truncated adum- 
brations of trinitary Man or of the Messianic form; on the other we find 
the three real elements of social Messianism in their normal and harmoni- 
ous relationship, foreshadowing and preparing the appearance of the true 
personal Messiah.

In India the priestly caste of the Brahmins, representative of the religious

190In India the priestly caste of the Brahmins, representative of the religious

190

tradition, of the sacred and inviolable past, aimed at retaining its own 
exclusive supremacy and exerted in actual life the oppressive power of a 
ruthless legjJism, suppressing all possibihty of free spiritual movement or 
social progress. But when priests aspire to direct government of the world, 
they inevitably succumb to a fatal dilemma: either they govern in reality, 
entering into the material details of secular actuality, and thus compromise 
their religious prestige, lower their -«acrcd dignity and in the end lose their 
authority in the eyes of the masses and with it all their power; or else, 
while retaining direct control of society, they desire to remain true priests, 
and accordingly their government loses its sense of reality and, being un- 
able to meet the lawful needs of those whom they govern, they either ruin 
society if it remains loyal to them or are deprived and supplemented by 
the active part of the nation. In India the priestly caste was obliged to sur- 
render a large part of its control to the warrior class, but what it retained 
was enough to arrest the free development of the national life. This 
struggle was complicated by the increasing activity of the third of the 
social orders,^ the sages, who were diverging more and more from the 
orthodox teaching and traditional disciplhie and finally came into open 
conflict with the Brahmins. The mihtary or royal class was divided in the 
struggle, but ultimately sided with the representatives of tradition; and the 
Hindu prophets, the sages of Buddhism, were cruelly persecuted and even- 
tually expelled from India. If on the one hand the negative wisdom of 
Buddhism, bitterly opposed to the present and to the past, was nothing 
but an empty and barren utopianism, the priesthood and the monarchy, 
on the other hand, by uniting against the new movement of thought and 
stamping it out with violence, robbed India of all freedom and deprived 
her of all possibihty of historic progress. Despite the superiority of the 
Aryan race and the great qualities of her national genius, India has thence- 
forth remained an impotent slave, yielding without resistance to every 
master who has claimed her.The rise of Indian culture is marked by the predominance of the priestly 
caste representative of the past and of the common tradition; the begin- 
nings of the history of Greece, on the other hand, are characterised by the 
dominance of the active part of society, the warriors, the men of self- 
assertive, self-displaying and adventurous violence. Though the superiority 
of this element of society was at first eminently favourable to the progress 
of all human activities, the crystallisation of the military class in cities or 
states did not fail subsequently to become a menace and a hindrance to the

^ It goes without saying that the division into castes in India is a local phe- 
nomenon, not to be confused with the three governing classes found in ever\" 
society.^ It goes without saying that the division into castes in India is a local phe- 
nomenon, not to be confused with the three governing classes found in ever\" 
society.

free movement of the nadonsJ spirit, and in fact determined its revolu- 
tionary character. A society which is centred in a single purely political 
body inevitably degenerates into a condition of despotism, whatever its 
form of government may be. The men of the present, the practical men 
who govern absolute states, whether republics or monarchies, disbelieve 
in the past and fear the future. Moreover, though they are themselves de- 
void of true piety or true faith, they tolerate the representatives of religious 
tradition as hamiless or even useful on condition that they remain inactive; 
they assign an honourable place to an official priesthood, not only as a 
means of controlling the blind mob but also as an ornamental coping- 
stone to the structure of the omnipotent State. But they have an implac- 
able hatred for any free and spontaneous movement of religion, for any- 
thing that opens new horizons to the soul of Man or tends to advance him 
in any way towards his ideal future. The Athenian government, for all its 
democratic character, could do nothing but banish Anaxagoras and poison 
Socrates in the name of the Fatherland, that is, of the absolute State. Under 
such circumstances, the progressive movement of religious and philoso- 
phic thought is inevitably brought to a rupture with the powers of the 
present and the tradition of the past, with the State and the State religion. 
Thought becomes cosmopolitan; while Socrates and Plato despised the 
Athenian democracy, Aristotle despised all the repubfican constitutions of 
the Greek cities and preferred the semi-barbarous monarchy of the Mace- 
donians, until at last the Cynic and Stoic philosophers repudiated all idea 
of Fatherland or State, and declared themselves indifferent to all public 
concerns. The independence and political organisation of Hellas were 
destroyed by a philosophy and a philosophical religion which raised noth- 
ing upon the ruins of the Fatherland.This antagonism between the present existence of the nation, as repre- 
sented by the Greek republics, and the higher thought, the future of the 
nation, as represented by the idealism of the Greeks, this struggle between 
Philosophy and the State was fatal to both. The State lost the reason for 
its existence, and the ideal of the philosophers failed to achieve any con- 
crete or living realisation. The State, content to rely solely upon violence, 
perished by violence; and Philosophy, too contemptuous of reality, re- 
mained an abstract and impotent ideal. Justice demanded that it should be 
so. Any more positive outcome of the national life was not only as 'im- 
possible for the Greeks as for the Hindus; it would not have been desirable. 
Since the two highest conceptions which inspired the genius of these two 
nations — ^the Indian pessimism with its Nirvana, and the Greek idealism 
with its absorption in the Absolute — were neither of them the full and 
final truth, they had neither the power nor the right to achieve a per-

192

manent and harmonious realisation. A nihilist pessimism creadn^ a social 
organisation, a contemplative idealism capable of modifying things as they 
are — these are contradictions in terms. And if, despite this intrinsic con- 
tradiction, these two imperfect national ideas had been given stability and 
permanence by an external equilibrium of social forces, mankind would 
not have profited in the least. There would merely have been three Chinas 
instead of one.If the history of the Hebrews bore a different character and produced 
other fruits, it was because the national life of Israel was based upon a re- 
ligious principle that was complete in itself and capable of organic develop- 
ment. This principle was manifest in the trinitary form of the Jewish 
theocracy in which the three social powers, ranging themselves in a normal 
and harmonious relationship, foreshadowed and prepared the Kingdom 
of the true Messiah. We are not forgetting the unfaithfulness of the Jewish 
people and their repeated efforts to shatter the trinitary form of the Mosaic 
theocracy. We know well that King Saul massacred the priests of Jahveh 
at Nob, and that succeeding kings, both at Samaria and in Jerusalem, per- 
secuted and put to death the true prophets. But these facts, which arc only 
too certain, must not prevent us from recognising three undeniable truths 
of history: (i) that the idea of trinitary theocracy, that is of the organic 
co-operation and moral harmony between the three powers governing a 
complete society — that this idea, quite unknown to both Hindus and 
Greeks, was always present to the mind of Israel; (2) that this idea, at the 
most solemn crises of Jewish history, took form and was cScctively 
realised; (3) that the representatives of national progress, the men of the 
future, the men who made history — ^in a word, the prophets — ^never 
entered upon the path of pure revolution; while they scourged with their 
inspired words the misdeeds of the priests and princes of the nation, they 
never repudiated in principle the priesthood of Aaron or the kingship of 
David.Moses, the greatest of the prophets, did not assume the priestly power, 
which he left to Aaron, nor the mihtary leadership, which he bestowed on 
Joshua. Nor did he claim any exclusive exercise of the prophetic power, 
which he imparted to the seventy representatives of the people, uttering 
the prayer that all the Israelites might receive the gift of prophecy. So too 
David, the supreme instance of the theocratic king, was the restorer and 
champion of the priesthood. He would do nothing without consulting 
the infallible oracle (the Urim and Thummim) which belonged to the 
office of the High Priest; and at the same time, though himself a prophet 
by a personal endowment, he bowed to the moral authority of public 
prophecy. The history of Old Testament theocracy reaches its culmination

N 193

— the complete differentiation and perfect harmony of the three powers — 
when, towards the end of David’s reign, his son Solomon is raised to the 
throne and anointed king by the high priest Zadok and the prophet Na- 
than. And when, after the fidlures and downfall of the kings of Judah and 
their rivals of Ephraim, the cream of the people, punished by the fall of 
Samaria and Jerusalem and the captivity of Nineveh and Babylon, re- 
turned to the Holy Land to re-estabUsh the society of Jahveh under the 
protection of Persia, we find the prophet Zechariah insisting upon the 
trinitary formula of the re-estabhshed Aeocracy, upon solidarity and har- 
mony between Ae pries Aood in Ae person of Joshua, son of Josedek, and 
Ae temporal princedom in Ae person of Zerubbabel, son of Shealtiel — 
between Ae two powers to which he, Ae prophet, was Ae living bond of 
union and inspired peace-maker.The children of Israel never forgot Aat Society is Ae body of Ae perfect 
Man, who is of necessity trinitary: priest of Ae Most High, king of Ae 
ear A and prophet of Ae union between Ae human and Ae Divine. This 
unique people anticipated and prepared Ae coming of Ae God-Man, not 
only by Ae insight of its seers, but by Ae constitution of its society, by Ae 
very fact of its trinitary Aeocracy.

It is well known Aat Ae sacred anointing of sovereigns was among Ae 
Hebrews Ae common prerogative of priests, kings and prophets. Thus Ae 
supreme Anointed One (Ae MessiA or Christ) was to unite in Himself 
Ae three powers. And in fact He Ad reveal Himself as Ae absolutely pure 
and holy Priest or sacrificer, by offering to Ae Heavenly FaAer Ae com- 
plete sacrifice of His manhood; as true King of Ae world and of material 
Nature which by His resurrection He rescued from Ae law of deaA and 
conquered for eternal life; and finally, as perfect Prophet, by shewing to 
men, in His ascension into Heaven, Ae absolute end of Aeir existence, and 
by giving Aem, in Ae sending of Ae Holy Spirit and the founding of Ae 
Church, Ae strengA and means necessary for Ae attainment of Aat end.

194

X

The absolute sovereignty of Christ The social trinity. 
Priesthood and fatherhood

/Vs God in His Trinity of Persons possesses absolutely the fullness of194

X

The absolute sovereignty of Christ The social trinity. 
Priesthood and fatherhood

/Vs God in His Trinity of Persons possesses absolutely the fullness of

/—V His divine substance, His heavenly Body or His essential Wisdom, 
A. so too the God^an in the trinity of His Messianic powers pos- 
sesses completely the Universal Church, His divine-human Body, at once 
heavenly and earthly, the perfect Spouse of the incarnate Word. ‘All 
power has been given unto Me in heaven and earth.’ This universal power 
is not the omnipotence of God; that belongs eternally to the Word and so 
cannot be given to him. The power here referred to is the Messianic power 
of the God-Man, a power that does not relate to the universe outside God 
as such, but to the universe reunited to God, co-operating with Him and 
mcarnatmg in time His eternal essence. If the fullness of this power belongs 
by right to Christ and only to Him, since He alone could merit it, the 
exercise of this divine-human power demands the free submission and the 
hving co-operation of mankind itself. The action of Christ is therefore 
determined here by the progressive development of humanity, drawn by 
degrees into the divine-human sphere, assimilated to the mystical Body of 
Christ and transformed into the Universal Church.If God, that is to say, Christ in glory, had wished to impose His truth and 
His will upon men in a direct and supra-natural manner, if He had wished 
to save the world by force, He could well have done so; just as before His 
glorification He could have asked His heavenly Father to send Him a 
legion of angels to protect Plim from the servants of Caiaphas and the 
soldiers of Pilate. In that case the history of the world would have been 
soon completed, but it would not have achieved its goal; there would have 
been no free co-operation between Man and God, no true union and per- 
fect concurrence between the creature and the Creator; and mankind itself 
in losing its freedom of choice would have been assimilated to the physical 
world. But the Divine Word did not become incarnate on earth in order 
to sanction materialism. Since that incarnation, the freedom of Man re- 
mains assured; the Universal Church has a history. It was necessary that

195

Christ should ascend to the heavens and govern the Church by means of 
human ministers to whom He might delegate the moral and juridical full- 
ness of the three Messianic powers, without thereby imparting to them the 
immediate efficacy of His omnipotence which would have restricted the 
firecdom of men. In a word, we know that in founding the Church Christ 
delegated His powers to her; and in doing so he followed what we may 
call the trinitary scheme, ratio Trinitatis.The Trinity of God is the evolution of absolute Unity which contains 
in itself all the fullness of Being, unfolding itself in three hypostatised 
modes of the divine existence. We know that in the Trinity absolute Unity 
is secured: (i) by the ontological primacy of the first hypostasis which is 
the original cause or principle of the two others, but not vice versa; (2) 
by the consubstantiality of all three, ensuring the indivisibility of their 
being; and (3) by their perfect solidarity which does not permit of their 
acting separately. The social trinity of the Universal Church is the evolu- 
tion of the ecclesiastical monarchy which contains in itself all the fullness 
of the Messianic powers, unfolding itself in the three forms of Christian 
sovereignty. As in the Godhead, the unity of the Universal Church is 
secured : (i) by the absolute primacy of the first of these three powers, the 
pontificate, which is the only sovereignty directly and immediately insti- 
tuted by God and therefore de jure the cause and necessary condition of the 
two others; (2) by the essential community of these three powers as in- 
cluded within the same Body of Christ and sharing the same substance of 
rehgion, the same faith, tradition and sacraments; (3) by the moral soli- 
darity or community of aim which for aU three can be nothing but the 
coming of the Kingdom of God, the perfect manifestation of the Univer- 
sal Church.The religious community and moral solidarity of the three sovereign 
powers under the absolute primacy of the universal pontificate, such is 
the supreme law, the ultimate ideal of social Christendom. But though in 
God the trinitary form of unity exists in actuality firom all eternity, in the 
Church it is only gradually realised. Hence there is not only a difference, 
but even a certain contrast between the Divine Trinity and the social 
trinity. The primary datum of the Divine existence is absolute Unity, of 
which the Trinity is the direct, perfect and therefore eternal unfolding. 
The primary datum of the Church is, on the contrary, the indeterminate 
plurality of natural, fallen humanity. In the Divine Being the Trinity is 
the form by which absolute Unity extends and unfolds itself; in the social 
being of the human race the trinity is the form by which the indeterminate 
plurality of partietJar elements is reduced to a synthetic umty. Thus the 
development of the Church is a process of unification within an ideally

196196

constant but actually variable relationship between de jure unity and de 
facto plurality, a process which involves two ihain operations: the pro- 
gressive centralisation of the given ecclesiastical body, and the unif^g 
and synthetic action of the centralised Church which aims at the incorpor- 
ation of the whole of mankind into itself. The hypostases of the Divine 
Trinity are absolutely simple in themselves and their trinitary relationship 
is perfectly pure and immediate. The sovereign powers of the trinitary 
society of the Universal Church are neither simple in themselves nor in the 
conditions in which they must be realised. They are not simple in them- 
selves, for they are only relative centres of a collective whole. The mode 
of their realisation is complicated not only by the indeterminate plurality 
of the human medium in which they must manifest themselves, but also 
owing to the fact that the perfect Messianic revelation finds in natural 
humanity only partially successful attempts at unification, upon which the 
imifying work of the Church must be grafted. While ^s materially 
assists the divine-human operation, it also imparts to it a less pure, regular 
and harmonious character. The chaos which is only veiled by the physical 
creation still asserts its claims not only in the history of natural humanity, 
but also in the history of Religion and of the Church.The aim of the divine-human work is to save all men equally, to trans- 
form the whole world into a royal and prophetic priesthood, a society of 
God in which men find themselves in direct relation to Christ and have 
no need of sun (that is, of a special priesthood), of moon (that is, of a 
special kingship), or of stars (that is, of prophecy as a public function). 
But to attain this end, it is not enough to define it. It is only too obvious 
that the mass of men do not individually and subjectively possess piety, 
justice and wisdom in sufficient measure to enter into direct contact with 
the Godhead or to invest each individual with the character of priest, king 
and prophet. Hence it is necessary that these three Messianic attributes 
should be given objective and organic form in pubfic and social life, and 
should be permanently differentiated in the universal organism in order 
that Christ may have specific organs of His activity as Priest, King and 
Prophet. The people of Israel said to Moses at the foot of Sinai: *We 
cannot endure the presence of Jahveh, we shall all die. Go thou in our 
stead to speak with Jahveh, and thou shalt bring back all that he shall say 
to thee for us; so shalt thou be a mediator between us and the Most High, 
that we may hve’. And the Lord said to Moses: ‘What this people have 
said, they have well said*. And by the command of Jahveh, Moses not only 
acted personally as a mediator between the Godhead and the people, but 
also, in declaring that the people had been called to be a priestly kingdom 
(malkhouth cohaniin)^ he founded, as we have seen, the three powers through

197197

which Jahvdli was to exercise His social activity in Israel. The human 
mediator of the Old Testament thus foreshadowed the divine-human 
Mediator of the New Covenant. Jesus Christ, whUe preaching the King- 
dom of Heaven which is within us, grace and truth, and proclaiming the 
perfect unity of love and freedom as the supreme law of His Church, none 
the less proceeds to organise the ecclesiastical body and to bestow upon it 
a central organ by the method of a special choice. All must be com- 
pletely equal, all must be one, and yet there are only twelve Apostles to 
whom the power of Christ is delegated, and among them there is only 
one op whom this power is conferred completely and absolutely.We know that the principle of chaotic existence, of existence, that is to 
say, apart from the Godhead, is manifested in the life of natural humanity 
by the indeterminate succession of generations, in which the present 
hastens to supplant the past, only to be itself continually supplanted by an 
illusory and transient future. The parricidal children, becoming fathers, 
cannot but beget a new generation of parricides, and so on to infinity. 
Such is the evil law of mortal life. Therefore if mankind is to be re- 
generated and given true life, its past must above all be stabilised by the 
organisation of a permanent fatherhood. Purely human society already 
allots to the transitory fatherhood of natural life three distinct functions: 
the father produces and sustains the existence of the child by begetting it 
and providing for its material needs; he guides the moral and intellectual 
development of the adolescent by educating it; finally he remains for his 
grown son the hving and venerable memory of his past. The first relation- 
ship is for the child one of complete dependence; the second lays upon the 
adolescent the duty of obedience; the third only demands filial piety, a free 
sentiment of veneration and a mutual friendship. If, in family life, father- 
hood is seen under these three successive aspects, in the regenerate social 
life of the whole human race it assumes them simultaneously. For there 
are always individuals and nations that have yet to be begotten to spiritual 
life, and have yet to receive the elements of religious nurture — ^nations and 
individuals in moral and intellectual infancy; others, like adolescents, must 
in every age develop their spiritual powers and faculties with a certain 
freedom, but none the less must be constantly watched over and guided 
in the true path by the authority of a father, which shows itself at this stage 
mainly as an educative and teaching authority. Finally, there are always, 
if not whole nations, at least individuals who have reached spiritual 
maturity, and the more conscious and free they are, the greater is the 
veneration and filial piety they feel for spiritual fatherhood.From another point of view, there is bound to be an hierarchical gra- 
dation in spiritual fatherhood in proportion to the extent of the social

198

units .whirh it embraces. We know that the Church is natural humanity 
transubstantiated. Now natural humanity is constituted on the analogy of 
a living body. A physical body is a complex unity made up of relatively 
simple units of different degrees in a complicated relationship of sub- 
ordination and co-ordination. The main degrees of this physical hierarchy 
are three in number. The lowest degree is represented by the relatively 
simple units, the elementary organs or organic elements of the body. In 
the middle degree we find the limbs of the body and its organs properly 
so called, which are more or less composite. Finally, all these members and 
organs are subordinate to the unity of the whole body controlled by a 
central organ. Similarly in the political organism of natural humamty, 
which was to be regenerated by Christianity, relatively simply units — 
tribes, clans, rural communities, small states — were umted in composite 
collectivities more or less subdivided, nations at different stages of develop- 
ment, provinces of varying extent; finally all the provinces and nations 
were united in the universal monarchy, governed by a umque social organ, 
the city of Rome, a city which concentrated in itself the whole world and 
was at once urbs et orbis.This was the organism which was to be transubstantiated by Chris- 
tianity. The body of histone humanity was to be regenerated in every part 
in accordance with the order of its composition. And since Christ estab- 
lished a spiritual fatherhood as the basis of this regeneration, that father- 
hood had to take form in accordance witli the given variations in the forms 
of society. There were therefore three degrees in the spiritual fatherhood 
or the priesthood: each primary social community or village, transub- 
stantiated into a Church, received a spiritual father or priest; and all these 
priests together formed the lower clergy or the priesthood properly speak- 
ing. The provinces of the Empire, transubstantiated into eparchies or 
dioceses of different orders, each formed a large family with a common 
father in the person of the archiereus or bishop, the immediate father of the 
priests under him and through them of all the faithful of his diocese. But 
all the spiritual social units of this second order represented by the epis- 
copate, the particular Churches of cities, provinces and nations governed 
by prelates of all degrees (simple bishops, archbishops, metropoHtans, 
primates or patriarchs) are only members of the Universal Church which 
must itself be manifest as a higher unit embracing all these members. The 
mere juxtaposition of its parts is not in fact enough to constitute a living 
body. It must possess a formal unity or substantial form which definitely 
embraces in actuality all the particidar units, the elements and organs of 
which the body is composed. And if the particular spiritual families which 
between them make up mankind are in reality to form a single Christian

199199

&inily, a single Universal Cliurch, they must be subject to a common 
£itherhood embracing all Christian nations. To assert that there exist in 
reality nothing more than national Churches is to assert that the members 
of a body exist in and for themselves and that the body itself has no reality. 
On the contrary, Christ did not found any particular Church. He created 
them all in the real unity of the Universal Church which He entrusted to 
Peter as the one supreme representative of the divine Fatherhood towards 
the whole family of the sons of Man.

It was by no mere chance that Jesus Christ specially ascribed to the first 
divine hypostasis, the heavenly Father, thac divine-human act which made 
Simon Bar-Jona the fint sociJ father of the whole human family and the 
infallible master of the school of mankind. ‘It is not flesh and blood which 
have revealed it to thee, but My Father Who is in heaven.' God the Holy 
Trinity is as indivisible in His action ad extra as in His mner life. If St. Peter 
was divinely inspired, it was by God the Son and God the Holy Ghost 
as much as by God the Father, and since it was a matter of inspiration it 
might have seemed more appropriate to make special mention of the 
Holy Spirit Who spake by the prophets. But it is just here that we sec the 
divine reason which governed every word of Christ, and the umversal 
significance of His utterance to Peter. For it was not a matter of asserting 
that in thfjg particular instance Simon had been inspired from above; that 
was as possible for him as for any of his fellows. But it was a matter of 
establishing in his favour the unique institution of universal fatherhood in 
the Church, the image and instrument of the divine Fatherhood; and 
therefore it was above all to the heavenly Father that the supreme reason 
and sanction fgr this institution was to be referred.It is hard to leave the pure air of the Gahlean mountains for the polluted 
atmosphere of the Dead Sea, Our anri-CathoHc controversialists, while 
admitting that the Church of the parish or of the diocese needs its priest 
or bishop, its visible father, the human organ of the divine Fatherhood, 
will hear nothing of a common father for the whole Universal Church. 
The only head of the Church, they say, is Jesus Christ. And yet they see 
no reason why a parish or a diocese should not be governed by a visible 
minister; every Orthodox is ready to see in each bishop or priest a vicar of 
Jesus Christ, though he cries Blasphemy! when Catholics give this title to 
the first of the patriarchs, the successor of St. Peter. But do these Orthodox 
schismatics in fact recognise Jesus Christas Head of the Church ? If He were 
really for them the sovereign Head, they would obey His words. Is it 
obedience to the Master that drives them into rebellion against the steward 
that He has Himself appointed? They arc ready to allow Christ to act 
through His ministers in any given part of His visible Kingdom, but they

200

appear to think that He exceeded the limits of His power and abused His 
rights in giving to Peter the keys of the whole Kingdom. It is as though 
an English subject, while allowing the Empress of India the right of 
nominating a governor at Madras and a magistrate at Bombay, were to 
dispute her appointment of the Viceroy at Calcutta.But, it may be said, the Universal Church in her entirety goes beyond 
the bounds of earthly humanity; she includes the saints in Paradise, the 
souls in Purgatory and even, adds Khomyakov, the souls of those yet im- 
bom. We doubt whether the Pope is much concerned to extend his juris- 
diction over the souls of the unborn. But, speaking seriously, we are not 
dealing with the Universal Church in its absolute and eternal totality^, but 
in its relative and temporal totality, with the visible Church in each given 
moment of its historic existence. For the Church, as for the individual 
man, there is the invisible totality or the soul, and the visible totality or the 
body. The soul of man surpasses the limits of earthly existence, it survives 
the physical organism, and in the world of spirits it thinks and acts without 
the medium of a material brain; but if anyone were to draw from that the 
conclusion that in his earthly existence man can get along without brains, 
the conclusion would hardly be granted, except perhaps in his own case!There is another a priori argument used to evade the necessity for a uni- 
versal fatherhood. Since the principle of fatherhood represents tradition, 
the memory of the past, it is thought to be enough for the Church to shew 
true spiritual fatherhood by guarding tradition and preserving the memory 
of its own past. From this point of view spiritual fatherhood would be re- 
presented solely by the great departed ancestors of the rehgious society, 
the Fathers of the Church. But why not extend this logic to particular 
Churches? Why are not the faithful of a parish content to find this spiritual 
fatherhood in the historic memory of the first founders of their parish 
church? Why do they also need a living spiritual father, a permanent 
parish priest? And why does it not completely satisfy the inhabitants of 
Moscow to have a sacred tradition, a pious remembrance of the first rulers 
of their Church, the holy metropolitans Peter and Alexis? Why do they 
also want a hving bishop as a perpetual representative of this ancient tra- 
dition? To relegate the spiritual fatherhood of the Church to the past in 
the proper sense of that which has only an ideal existence for us is to mis- 
conceive her very essence and raison d'etre. The barbarous ancestors of 
mankind knew better: they recognised the survival of ancestors and even 
made them the main object of their worship, but for the continual main- 
tenance of that worship they required that the dead ancestor should always 
have a living successor, the soul of the family, the priest or sacrificer, the 
permanent intermediary between the invisible divinity and their actual life.

201201

Without a single father common to the whole human family, the 
earthly life of the sons of Adam must remain subject to division of every 
kind, and unity will have only an ideal existence upon earth. Real unity 
will be driven back to heaven like the legendary Astraea; and Chaos will 
reign upon the earth. In that case Christianity would have failed; for it is 
in order to unify the lower world, to draw the earth out of chaos and unite 
it with the heavens, that the Word was made flesh. The docetic Christ of 
the Gnostics, a phantom Christ, would be more than sufficient to found 
an invisible Church. But the real Christ has founded a real Church upon 
earth and has based it upon a permanent fatherhood universally diffused 
throughout all the parts of the social organism, but actually concentrated 
for the whole body in the person of the common father of all the faithful, 
the supreme pontiff, the elder or presbyter par excellence, the Pope.

The Pope as such is directly the father of all the bishops and, through 
them, of all the priests. Thus he is father of fathers. There is no question 
that the Pope is the only bishop to be called not only ‘brother* but also 
‘father* by other bishops from the earliest times; and it was not only in- 
dividual bishops that recognised his paternal authority, but gatherings of 
the whole episcopate as impressive, for instance, as the Council of Chal- 
cedon.But this fatherhood of the Pope in relation to the teaching Church or 
the clergy does not belong to him absolutely. Not only bishops but all 
priests are under certain aspects the equals of the Pope. The Pope has no 
essential pre-eminence over a simple priest in the ministry of the sacra- 
ments, with the exception of Holy Order in which he has no privilege 
above that of any other bishop. It is for this reason that the Pope calls the 
bishops not only his sons but also his brothers, and is called brother by 
them. Thus within the hmits of the Church properly speaking the Pope 
has only a relative fatherhood, not fully analogous to the Divine Father- 
hood. The essential characteristic of the latter is that the Father is such in 
an absolutely unique manner, that He alone is Father, and that the Son and 
the Spirit, while partaking in the Godhead, do not partake in the Divine 
Fatherhood in any manner or degree. But the bishops and priests — the 
whole teaching Church — share more or less in the spiritual fatherhood of 
the Pope. Fundamentally there is no essential difference between this 
spiritual fatherhood or priestly power in the Pope and the same power as 
it is in the bishops; just as the power of the episcopate is the relative full- 
ness of the power of the priesthood, so its absolute fullness is found in the 
Papacy.

202

XI

Kingship and sonship. Prophecy. The three Sacraments of the 
Rights of Man202

XI

Kingship and sonship. Prophecy. The three Sacraments of the 
Rights of Man

I f the Papacy, after the manner of the Divine Fatherhood, must beget 
a second social authority, it is not that of the bishops who are fathers 
themselves, but an essentially filial authority, the representative of 
which is in no way and in no degree a spiritual father; just as in the Trinity 
the eternal Son is Son in the absolute sense and in no sense possesses father- 
hood. The second Messianic power is Christian kingship. The Christian 
king, prince or emperor is pre-eminently the spiritual son of the supreme 
pontiff. If the unity of the Church^ is centred and realised in the supreme 
pontiff, and if there is a relation of sonship between the Christian State as 
such and the Church, this relationship must exist really and, so to speak, 
hypostatically between the head of the State and die head of the Church. 
It belongs to the science of history to examine in the past, and to the 
opportunism of pohtics to decide for the present, the relations between 
the Church and the pagan State. But as regards the Christian State it is 
unquestionable that it represents the second Messianic power, the King- 
ship of Christ, and that it is as such begotten in principle by the first, the 
universal fadierhood.The positive mission of the Christian State is to incarnate the principles 
of the true religion jn the social and political order. These principles are 
represented and preserved by the Church (in the narrower sense of the 
word), the rehgious society based upon that spiritual fatherhood which is 
centred in the Pope, organised in the episcopate and priesthood, and re- 
cognised by the piety of the body of the faithful. The Church in this sense 
is the fundamental religious fact and the one way of salvation opened to 
mankind by Christ. But Christ in His work as in His Person makes no 
distinction between the way, the truth and the hfe. And if for us the truth 
is based upon the teaching of the Church and the spiritual hfe upon the

^ [‘L'£tat\ which occurs here m all the French editions, would appear to be a 
printer*s error. — Tr.]

203

sacraments, it must not be forgotten that the foundations exist not for 
themselves but for the whole structure. True and living religion is not a 
speciality, a separate domain, a secluded comer of human existence. Re- 
ligion, being the direct revelation of the Absolute, cannot be one thing 
among many: it is all or nothing. The recognition of it implies its intro- 
duction into every sphere of intellectual and practical life as the supreme 
controlling principle, and the subordination to it of all political and social 
interests.

For Christ is not only Priest but also King; and His Church must com- 
bine a royal authority with her pricsdy character. While reconciling fallen 
human nature to God through the perpetual Sacrifice, while regenerating 
and raising men by the ministry of spiritual fatherhood, the Church must 
also prove the fruitfulness of this fatherhood by bringing the entire 
collective life of man into fellowship with God.In order to save the world which ‘lieth in the evil one’, Christianity 
must mingle with the world; but in order that the human representatives 
of the divine fact, the earthly guardians and instruments of transcendent 
truth and absolute holiness, may not compromise their sacred dignity in 
the practical struggle against evil, nor forget heaven in their desire to save 
the earth, their political action must be indirect. As the divine Father acts 
and manifests Himself in creation through the Son, His Word, so too the 
Church of God, the spiritual fatherhood, the universal Papacy, must act 
and manifest itself externally by means of the Christian State, dirough tlie 
Kingship of the Son. The State must be the political organ of the Church; 
the temporal sovereign must be the ‘Word’ of the spiritual sovereign. In 
this way, the question of supremacy between the two powers is solved: 
for the more each is what it should be, the greater is their mutual equality 
and freedom. When the State, confining itself to the exercise of secular 
power, asks and receives its moral sanction from the Church, and the 
latter, while asserting its own supreme spiritual authority, entrusts its ex- 
ternal action to the State, there is an intimate bond between the two, a 
mutual dependence, and at the same time all conflict and oppression of the 
one by the other is excluded. When the Church guards and expounds the 
law of God, and the State devotes itself to the carrying out of that law by 
the transformation of the social order m accordance with the Christian 
ideal and the creation of practical conditions and external means for realis- 
ing the divine-human life in the whole range of earthly existence, then it 
is clear that aU conflict of principles and interests must vanish to give place 
to a peaceful division of labour in the common task.But if this mutual dependence of Church and State, in which stands 
their true freedom, is an essential condition of realising the Christian ideal

204

upon earth, it surely becomes clear that this very condition of harmony 
and unity between the two powers exists only in idea and is unrealised in 
positive religion or in practical politics. The hierarchical Church, resting 
principally upon sacred tradition, regards religious truth mainly as an 
accomplished fact and stresses chiefly the primary datum of revelation. 
From this point of view the incarnation of Christ, the reality of the God- 
Man, the fundamental principle of the true religion, is primarily an his- 
toric event, a fact of the past linked to the present, so to speak, suh specie 
praeteriti by a series of other religious facts regularly produced in an un- 
changeable order established from the beginning once for all, the tradi- 
tional teaching reproducing the depositum jidei, the apostolic succession 
being transmitted in a uniform manner. Baptism and the other sacraments 
being signified by invariable formulae, and so on.^ This traditional prin- 
ciple, this unchanging and determinate character, is absolutely essential to 
the Church in the narrower sense; it is her native element. But if she con- 
fines herself to this element alone and, resting satisfied with her superior 
origin, refuses to take account of anything outside it, she makes way for 
that absolutism of the State which regards rehgion as a thing of the past, 
venerable but irrelevant, and so thinks itself justified in absorbing all the 
living present in the politics of temporal interests.‘I am unity,' says the Church, 1 embrace all nations in a single universal 
family.* ‘Well and good,* replies the State, ‘let all the nations of the earth 
be united in the mystical and invisible order; I am not opposed to the 
communion of saints nor to the unity of Christian souls in a single faith, 
a single hope, a single love. But real hfe is not like that. There the sovereign 
nation is supreme; its own self-interest is the ultimate goal, its principle is 
material power, and war is its instrument. Therefore divide Christian souls 
into hosde armies, and they have only to slaughter one another upon 
earth in order to realise the more speedily their mystical union in 
heaven.*

‘I represent the unchangeable truth of the absolute past,* says the 
Church. ‘Exactly,* replies the semi-Christian State, ‘I only ask for the re- 
lative and shifting sphere of practical life. I venerate sacred archaeology; 
I reverence the past so long as it is content to be past for good and all. I 
do not lay a finger on dogmas or sacraments, provided that there is no 
meddling with tlie secular matters of the moment which are my undis- 
puted sphere: the schools, science, social education, domestic and foreign 
aflairs. I stand for justice: suum cuique, A divine institution has nothing to

^ The real presence of Christ in the Holy Eucharist is, of course, a living actu- 
ality, but essentially mystical and so without direct and obvious influence upon 
the practical and social existence of earthly humanity.

205

do with all these purely human things. The heavens to God, the temple to 
the priest — ^and all the rest to Caesar!’205

do with all these purely human things. The heavens to God, the temple to 
the priest — ^and all the rest to Caesar!’

But what is to remain for Christ, both God and Man, Priest and King, 
the Lord of heaven and earth? This egoistic justice, this anti-Christian 
divorce between the two worlds, can only be justified by a logic which 
stops short at the relative and abstract duahty of the spiritual and the 
secular, the sacred and the profane, and makes no mention of the third 
term, the absolute synthesis of the Infinite and the finite, eternally accom- 
plished in God and finding its accompUshment in mankind through Christ. 
It is the very spirit of Christianity that is here ignored, that harmony of 
the whole, that union which is both necessary and free, unique and 
manifold, the true future which fulfils the present and brings the past to 
hfe.The Church and the State, the pontiff and the prince, at present distinct 
from and hostile to one another, can find their true and final unity only m 
this prophetic future of which they themselves are the necessary premises 
and conditions. Two different powers, if they are to achieve unity, must 
have a single goal which they can reach only in co-operation, each acting 
m accordance with its own character and with the means at its disposal. 
Now the common goal of the Church and the State, of the priesthood and 
the kingship, is not truly represented by either of the two powers taken 
alone or in its specific element. From this point of view each has its own 
peculiar goal regardless of the other. If the Church’s only task is to main- 
tain the religious tradition, she can carry it out alone without help from 
the State. If the State has only to defend its subjects against the enemy and 
to maintain external order through its law-courts and pohee, it is fully 
competent to do so without calling in the aid of the Christian Church. 
But Christ did not unite the Divine and human in His individual person, 
only to leave them disunited in His social body. As Priest, King and 
Prophet, He has given Christian society its absolute form in the trini- 
tary monarchy. Having founded the Church upon His Priesthood and 
sanctioned the State by His Kingship, He has also provided for their unity 
and their unified progress by leaving to the world the free and hving 
activity of His prophetic spirit. And as the Priesthood and the Kingship 
of the God-Man reveal His divine nature through the medium of human 
instruments, so it is with His prophetic office. A third principal ministry 
must therefore be admitted in the Christian world — the synthetic unity of 
the first two, offering to Church and State the perfect ideal of deified 
Humanity as the supreme goal of their common activity.Nothing has succeeded in exhausting or stifling the spirit of prophecy 
in the universal Body of Christ. It blows where it hsts, and speaks to the

206Nothing has succeeded in exhausting or stifling the spirit of prophecy 
in the universal Body of Christ. It blows where it hsts, and speaks to the

206

whole world, to priests, kings and peoples. To the guardians of tradition it 
says: ‘It is no dead and hfeless tradition that has been entrusted to you; the 
revelation of the hving God and of His Christ cannot be a closed and sealed 
book. Christ is no mere fact of past history; He is above all the principle 
of the future, of free movement and true progress. You have the deposit 
of faith; is it so much capital to be locked in a chest or buried in the 
ground? If you are faithful ministers of the Lord, you will not imitate 
that too cautious servant of the Gospel parable; you will not reduce the 
teaching of Christ to a closed system. Remember that in that teaching, 
which is His truth, Christ is also the hving principle and the cornerstone. 
Make Christian dogma, then, the firm but broad basis, the unchanging 
and yet hving principle, of all philosophy and science; do not relegate it 
to some remote sphere, indifferent or hostile to human thought and know- 
ledge. Theology is mdeed the science of God, but the God of Christian 
theology is umted to mankind by an indissoluble union, and the theology 
of the God-Man cannot be separated from the philosophy and science 
of men. You are orthodox in your profession of faith, you repudiate both 
the heresy of Nestorius and iat of Eutyches; be orthodox, then, in the 
apphcation of your faith. Express the truth of Christ in terms of the 
Christian intellect, distinguish but do not separate His natures, preserve 
in your ideas and your teaching the interior, organic and living union 
between the Divine and the human, without confusion and without 
division. Beware of slipping into Nestorianism and admitting the exis- 
tence of two sciences and two truths complete in themselves and inde- 
pendent of one another. Do not on the other hand attempt, in Mono- 
physite fashion, to suppress human truth, philosophic reason and the facts 
of natural science and history; do not exaggerate their importance, but 
do not reject their decisive witness to Christian dogma; that is an un- 
reasonable sacrifice which incarnate Reason does not ask of you and 
cannot accept.‘But it is not only the absolute principle of knowledge which is en- 
trusted to you, the fatliers of regenerate humanity, but also the principle 
of social order. And here again, as true Orthodox, you have the royal road 
to follow between two opposite heresies, the false hberalism of Nestorius 
and the false pietism of the Monophysites. The former would make a final 
separation between Church and State, sacred and profane, as Nestorius 
separated the humanity from the divinity in Christ. The latter would 
absorb the human soul in the contemplation of the Divine and would 
abandon the mundane world, its states and nations, to their fate; this is the ^ 
apphcation to society of Monophysitism which merges the human nature 
of Christ into His divinity. But you, orthodox priests, who have in the

207

true dogma of Christ’s Person the infalhble expression of that &ee and 
perfect union, will always maintain the intimate bond which links the 
human State to the Church of God, just as the Manhood of Christ is in 
Him linked to the Word of God. To the absolutism of the State, which 
tends to paganism and godlessness, you will not oppose an absolute cleric- 
alism, self-contained and complacent in its isolation; you will not combat 
error with a half-truth, but you will uphold that absolute social truth 
which demands alongside the Church a Christian State, the Kingship of 
Christ, the image and instrument of the divine Sonship, as you yourselves 
are the image of the eternal Fatherhood. You will never submit to the 
secular power, for the Father cannot be subject to the Son; but neither will 
you attempt to enslave it, for the Son is free.'Pontiffs and priests, you are the ministers of the sacraments of Christ. 
In revealed dogma, Christ is the principle of all truths or of the whole 
truth. For truth is fundamentally one, as it is infinitely manifold in its 
material content, and threefold in its constituent form — theological, philo- 
sophical and scientific— just as Christ is one in His hypostasis, infinitely 
manifold inasmuch as He contains and manifests the ideal cosmos, and 
threefold inasmuch as He unites the divine substance not only with the 
rational soul of Man but also with his material and bodily nature. So in 
the holy sacraments Christ is the principle of life, of the whole of hfe, not 
only spiritual but also bodily, not only individual but also social. You, 
sacrificing priests, were created to plant within humanity the mystical yet 
real seed of divine-human life; you sow within our nature the seed of 
matter made divine, of a heavenly corporeity. The beginning of this work, 
the first source of supernatural life within the body of earthly humanity, 
must be an absolute fact surpassing human reason, a mystery. But there is 
nothing hid which shall not be revealed; the mystical elements implanted 
in human nature by the grace of the sacraments through your ministry 
must germinate, grow and display themselves in visible existence, in the 
social life of mankind which they progressively transform into the true 
body of Christ. This work of sanctification does not therefore belong only 
to the priesthood; it demands also the co-operation of the Christian State 
and of Christian society. What the priest initiates in his mysterious rite, 
the secular prince must continue by his legislation and the faithful people 
must consummate in its life.’The prophetic spirit of Christianity will say then to the Christian princes 
and peoples: ‘The Church gives you the mysteries of life and happiness; 
it is for you to reveal them and to take pleasure in them. You have Bap- 
tism, the Sacrament or Mystery of Uherty, The Christian redeemed by 
Christ is above all a free man. The eternal and absolute principle of this

208

freedom is conferred by sacramental grace and cannot be destroyed by 
the external relationships or the social condition of Man. But in the Chris- 
tian world can these external relationships be allowed to remain in con- 
tradiction to the gift of God? The baptized Christian retains his freedom 
even if he is a slave, but should he be a slave in a Christian society? Banish, 
therefore, Christian kings and peoples, the last traces of pagan degrada- 
tion, suppress slavery and servitude in all its forms, direct or indirect, for 
they are all the negation of Baptism — a negation which, for all its inability 
to destroy interior grace, none the less hinders its external reahsation. Our 
God is no hidden God; and if He has revealed Himself and become incar- 
nate, it is certainly not His will that the contradiction between the visible 
and the invisible should be perpetuated. Do not then allow Man, whom 
the hving God has set at liberty, to be driven back into servitude to dead 
things, into slavery to machines.‘You have Confirmation, the Sacrament or Mystery of equality. The 
Church of Christ communicates to each Christian without distinction the 
Messianic dignity, which the first Adam forfeited and the second restored, 
by bestowing upon each the sacred anointing of sovereigns. We know 
that the perfect condition of society which is foreshadowed by this sacra- 
ment (the state of malkhouth cohanim — regnum sacerdotale) cannot be im- 
mediately realised; but do not you mighty ones of the earth forget on 
your part that that is the true goal of Christianity. By maintaining at all 
costs from selfish motives the mequahties of society, you will justify the 
envious and bitter reaction of the disinherited classes. You profane the 
Sacrament of Holy Chrism if you turn the Lord^s anointed into rebelhous 
slaves. The law of God has never sanctioned inequahties of birth or for- 
tune, and if in your impious conservatism you raise what is only a tran- 
sitory circumstance to the dignity of an absolute and eternal principle, 
upon your own heads will be the sins of the people and all the blood of 
revolutions.

‘And you, Christian people, remember that the Church in bestowing 
upon you the Messianic dignity in Confirmation, in making each one of 
you the equal of priests and kings, has conferred upon you not an empty 
mockery of a title but a real and permanent grace. It is for you to profit 
thereby; for by virtue of this grace each one of you can become an instru- 
ment of the Holy Spirit in the social order. Beside the priesthood and the 
kingship there is in Christian society a third sovereign ministry, that of 
prophecy, which depends neither on birth nor on pubHc election nor on 
sacred ordination. It is validly conferred upon each Christian by Confir- 
mation and can be lawfully exercised by those who do not resist divine 
grace but use their freedom to co-operate with it. Thus every one of you

209

o209

o

who will can by divine right and through the grace of God wield sovereign 
power as truly as Pope or Emperor.’^

Is it the fault of Christianity that this supreme right which it offers 
to the world is sold by the mass of mankind to Satan for a mess of 
pottage?

The equality in sovereignty which belongs by right to every Christian 
is not an equality without distinction. All have an equal dignity, each has 
an infinite value in the eyes of all; but all have not the Scanie function. The 
unity of Christian people, founded upon the divine-human fatherhood, is 
the unity of an ideal family. The perfect moral equality between the 
members of such a family does not exclude the dutiful recognition by the 
sons of the primacy and authority of their father, nor the distinction of one 
from another by a difference of vocation or of character. Genume and 
positive equahty, like true liberty, is manifested and realised in that soli- 
darity or fraternity which makes many to be as one. The Baptism into 
hberty and the Confirmation in equality are crowned by the great Sacra- 
ment of Communion, the fulfilment of the prayer of Christ ‘that they 
may all be one, as I am one with Thee, My Father’. In bringing about the 
unity of all His disciples in a single communion Jesus Christ did not mean 
to stop short at national frontiers; He extended His brotherhood over all 
the nations. If this mysterious communion of the divine Body is genuine 
and real, we become by the real partaking of it brothers without distinc- 
tion of race or nationality; and if we slaughter one another in the name of 
so-called national interests, we are — not metaphorically but in actual fact 
— fratricides.^ It goes without saying that the prophetic ministry can have no outwardly 
binding character, since its exercise is. solely determined by inward and purely 
spiritual conditions. As the representative in human society of the absolute ideal, 
the Christian prophet would be inconsistent and untrue to his mission if he were 
to employ means suited only to an imperfect state of society.

210

XII

The four Sacraments of the Duties of Man

T he three Sacraments of Baptism, Confirmation and Communion, 
by making all Christians the free, equal brethren of one another, 
and all the sons of God, incorporated in His only Son Jesus Christ, 
bestow upon them Messianic dignity and sovereign rights. Man has the 
right to be the son of God, for it was for this that God created him. But 
because he is only by right, and not immediately in fact, the son of God, 
Man has also the privilege of making himself in reality what ideally he is 
already and of realising the principle of his being by his own act. Thus 
the duties of Man flow from his sovereign rights as the conditions which 
he must fulfil in order to exercise his sovereignty.Since Man is, to begin with, a son of God only in principle, his first duty 
is to recognise that he is not so in fact, to recognise the vast distance be- 
tween what he is and what he ought to be. This is the negative condition 
of all positive progress, the supreme duty of Man, the duty of humihty, 
marked by the Church in the Sacrament of Penance and Confession. 
Protestantism, as though to ensure in advance the impenitence of its ad- 
herents, has rejected this sacrament. But more to blame than the Protes- 
tant heretics arc those false Orthodox who would confine the duty of 
humility to individuals and would leave the units of society, states and 
nations, without hope of repentance, to their vanity, pride, egoism, and 
fratricidal hatred. Such was not the attitude of the prophets of the Old 
Testament, who called upon cities, nations and rulers of states to repent. 
Nor was it the attitude of that unique prophet of the New Testament who 
in his letters to the angels of the Churches upbraided them for the pubUc 
vices and sins of their communities.

At the root of all human evil, all sins and crimes both individual and 
social, lies a weakness, a radical infirmity which does not allow us to be in 
reahty sons of God. It is the chaotic principle, the primordial basis of all 
created being. Reduced to impotence (or to* pure potency) in Man, but 
roused anew by the fall of Adam, it has become the basic clement of our 
limited and self-centred existence which, clinging to its infinitesimal frag-

2II2II

ment of true being, desires to make this fragment die one and only centre 
of die universe. This self-centred assertion which isolates and separates us 
from the true divine totality can only be destroyed by love. Love is the 
power which makes us inwardly surpass the confines of our given exis- 
tence, reunites us to the Whole by an indissoluble bond and, by making 
us in reality sons of God, causes us to share in the fullness of His essential 
Wisdom and in the enjoyment of His Spirit. The task of love is the in- 
tegration of Man and, through Man, of sH created existence. A threefold 
union is to be achieved by (i) the reintegration of the individual Man by 
uniting him in a true and eternal union with his natural complement, 
Woman; (2) the reintegration of social Man by the reuniting of the in- 
dividual to the human collectivity in a fixed and stable union; (3) the 
reintegration of universal Man by die restoration of his intimate and living 
union with the whole of nature, which is the organic body of humanity.

Man is inwardly separated from Woman by the desire of possessing her 
externally in the name of a blind and irrational passion. The two are re- 
united by the power of true love which identifies their two lives in their 
absolute substance eternally fixed in God, and only admits the material 
relationship as an ultimate consequence and external realisation of this 
mystical and moral relationship. It is love at its most concentrated and 
most concrete, and therefore at its deepest and most intense, the true basis 
and general type of every other love and every other union. The word of 
God has ordained and blessed it, and the Church perpetuates this blessing 
in the Sacrament of Marriage which makes true sexual love the first posi- 
tive basis of the divine-human integration. For it is this sanctified love 
which creates the true individual elements of the perfect society, the in- 
carnate Sophia.But in order to constitute social Man, the individual element, reinte- 
grated by true Marriage, must be reunited to the fixed collective form. 
The individual is inwardly separated from society by the desire for pre- 
eminence and external domination in the name of his own personality. 
He re-enters the unity of society by the moral act of renunciation, the 
subordination of his will, his own interests, his whole ego to the will and 
the interests of a superior being recognised as such. If married love is 
essentially a co-ordination of two equal though different existences, social 
love is bound to express itself by a definite subordination of social units of 
different orders. Here it is not the brutal egoism of Man which must be 
shattered by an intense emotion impelling it to identification with another 
being; that has already been done by sexual love. It is the individual 
existence which must be linked to a general hierarchy whose gradations 
are defined by the formal relation existing between the whole and its parts

212

of greater or less significance. The perfection of social love cannot then 
consist in an intensity of subjective feeling, but in its conformity with 
objective reason which tells us that the whole is greater than any of its 
parts. The obligation of this love is therefore infringed and the realisation 
of social Man is hindered, not only by mere egoism, but also chiefly by 
that particularism which draws distinctions between the interests of lower 
groups, to which we are more immediately attached, and those of higher 
and more extensive groups. When a man separates his love for the family, 
the trade union, the social class or the political party to which he belongs 
from his love for his country, or when he is ready to serve the latter with- 
out regard to mankind as a whole or the Universal Church, he is putting 
asunder what God has joined in one, and is becoming an obstacle to the 
integration of social Man.The type and basic reality of this integration are given in the ecclesias- 
tical hierarchy formed by the Sacrament of Order. It is the triumph of 
social love, for no member of this order functions or acts for himself or 
in his own name; each one is ordained and invested by a superior repre- 
senting a wider social unit. Here, from the humblest priest up to the Pope, 
the servant of the servants of God, all are absolutely free, as far as their 
sacred ministry is concerned, from self-asserting egoism or isolated par- 
ticularism; each one is simply a distinct organ of a united social whole, the 
Universal Church.But the reintegration of mankind cannot stop short at social Man. The 
law of death divides the Universal Church itself into two parts, the one 
visible upon the earth, the other invisible in the heavens. The dominion of 
death is established. The heavens and the earth are separated by Man's 
desire for immediate and material enjoyment of earthly reality and finite 
existence. Man desired to experience or taste everything by external sen- 
sation. He desired to unite his heavenly spirit to the dust of the earth by 
a superficial union of mere contact. But such a union could not last; it was 
bound to end in death. In order to reunite the spirit of humanity to 
material humanity and to conquer death, Man must be linked to the 
Whole, not by the sensible surface of his being but by its absolute centre 
which is God. Universal Man is reintegrated by divine Love which not 
only raises Man to God, but by identifying him inwardly with the God- 
head causes him to embrace in It all that is, and thus unites him to every 
single creature by an indissoluble and eternal union. This love brings down 
divine grace into earthly nature and triumphs not only over moral evil 
but also over its physical consequences, sickness and death. Its work is the 
final resurrection. And the Church, which teaches this resurrection in her 
revealed doctrine, formulated in the last article of her creed, foreshadows

213

and inaugurates it in the last of her sacraments. In face of sickness and the 
danger of death, Extreme Uncdon is the symbol and pledge of our immor- 
tality and of our future integrity. The cycle of the sacraments, like the 
cycle of universal Ufe, is completed by the resurrection of the flesh, the 
integration of the whole of humanity, the final incarnation of the divine 
Wisdom.

214

THE MEANING OF 
LOVE

by

Vladimir Solovyev

This is the first English translation 
of a book that has long been 
famous on the continent of Europe.214

THE MEANING OF 
LOVE

by

Vladimir Solovyev

This is the first English translation 
of a book that has long been 
famous on the continent of Europe.

There are frequent references to it 
in the writings of Nicolas Berdyaev. 
For instance, in The Destiny of Man 
(p. 304) Berdyaev writes : “ The 
meaning and the purpose of the 
union between man and woman is 
to be found not in the continuation 
of the species or in its social im- 
port, but in personality, in its 
striving for the completeness and 
fullness of life and its longing 
for eternity. (See Solovyev’s The 
Meaning of Lope, the best book that 
has ever been written on the sub- 
ject.)”

And again in Slavery and Freedom 
(p. 229) Berdyaev praises The Mean- 
ing of Love as the most remarkable 
of all Solovyev’s writings, as it goes 
beyond the limits of impersonal 
platonism, and for the first time in 
the history of Christian thought 
connects eros, love, not with the 
race but with personality.

“ This translation of one of the 
most famous treatises produced by 
Russian mystical philosophy is 
an invaluable addition to the 
material available to English scho- 
lars . ’ ’ — Theology,

2nd impression. 5^. net.

142 354