THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE 
OF  AVICENNA

AMS  PRESS

NEW  YORK

ReP,o,l„ce,l  in-  /.c-i-;i.,.ss„.Ji   of  the  Trusts  of  the  Unt.sh  .11».*-.

A  physician  and  his  patient.

From  an  early  .Persian  MS.     (Add.  27.261.  f.  371b)

"  \  "Teat  sage— a  reader  of  ancient  books,  Greek,  Persian,  Latin, 
Arabian,  and  Svriac  ;  and  skilled  in  medicine  and  astronomv,  both 
with  respect  to  their  scientific  principles  and  the  rules  of  their 
practical  applications  ;  he  was  experienced  in  all  that  bealeth 
and  hurteth  the  bodv  ;  conversant  with  the  virtues  of  every  plant, 
dried  and  fresh,  the  baneful  and  the  useful.  He  was  versed  in  the 
wisdom  of  the  philosophers,  and  had  compassed  the  whole  range 
of  medical  science  and  other  branches  of  the  knowledge-tree.

Uth   Xiglil '—Hiirton;  Lane.)

Library  of  Congress  Cataloging  in  Publication  Data

Avicenna,   980-1037-

A  treatise  on  the  Canon  of  medicine  of  Avicenna.

Original  work  has   title:      al-Qanun  fi  al-tibb.

Bibliography:     p.

1.     Medicine,   Arabic.      I.     Grmier,   Oskar  Cameron,   tr,

II.      Title.'    [DEEM:     WZ290  A957q  bk.    1  ^W^ 
E128.3-A9732    1973  610  73-12409

ISBN:  0-404-11231-5

U    7

-d-  .J  i.J

H\/

Reprinted  from  the  edition  of  1930,  London 
First  AMS  edition  published  in  1973 
Manfuactured  in  the  United  States  of  America

AMS  PRESS  INC.

NEW  YORK,  N.  Y.   10003

PREFACE

The  purpose  of  the  present  treatise  is  two-fold  :

(i)  To  furnish  a  translation  of  the  First  Book  of  the 
Canon  of  Medicine  of  Avicenna.  The  section  on  Anatomy 
has  been  omitted  in  favour  of  the  first  half  of  the  Be  viribus 
cordis.  This  assists  in  the  second  object  of  this  treatise.  Dis- 
tinctively large  type  is  used  for  the  translation.(2)  To  present  a  study  of  its  mystical  philosophy  {tas- 
sawuf),  especially  showing  where  this  and  modern  biological 
knowledge   are    reciprocally   illuminative.

The  words  of  the  late  Prof.  E.  G.  Browne  may  be  quoted 
here  :  "  Even  if  we  rate  the  originality  of  Arabian  medicine  at 
the  lowest,  I  venture  to  think  that  it  will  deserve  more  careful 
and   systematic  study."

Furthermore,  the  Thomistic  philosophy  of  human  nature 
is  specially  discussed,  and  its  applicability  to  the  Medicine 
of  the  future   is   definitely  enunciated.

A  grateful  acknowledgment  is  made  to  the  School  of 
Oriental  Studies,  London  Institution  (University  of  London) 
for_  signal  help  in  the  acquisition  of  the  Arabic,  Persian,  and 
Chinese  essential   to  the  purposes   of  the  treatise.

O.  Cameron   Gruner. 
London,   Becember,    1929.

v

CONTENTS

A.     The  Treatise

page

Preliminary  Thesis:     The   Canon  of  Medicine  in  relation  to

modern  thought    -        -        -        -        -        ",".."        "         *

I.  The  intellectual  culture  contemporary  with  Avicenna

(a)  In  the  central  Saracen  empire,  (b)  In  the 
western  Saracen  empire,  (c)  Among  the 
Chinese.

II.  The  knowledge  presented  by  the  Canon,  as  compared

with  that  of  to-day  (§  7-1 8)     "        "        "        "        "       ,;  5

(a)  The  Canon  is  a  precis,    (b)  The  word      Canon. 
(V)   The   word   "  knowledge."      (d)   Mystical 
insight.

III.  The  basic  difference  between  the  Canon  and  Modern 
Medicine  (§  19-22)    -----"""  8

IV.  Special  differences  between  the  Canon  and  Modern 
Medicine  (§  23-37)    --------        1°IV.  Special  differences  between  the  Canon  and  Modern 
Medicine  (§  23-37)    --------        1°

(a)    Conceptions  .known   to   Avicenna  ;     not   now 
recognised,   (b)  Conceptions  known  to  modern 
medicine,  but  not  to  Avicenna.     (c)  Know- 
ledge   common    to    Avicenna    and    modern 
medicine. 
V        Of  interest  to  the  Scholar  (§  38)    -        -        -        -        \

VI.     Brief  survey  of  the  Intention  of  this  treatise  ($  40-44)      19 
The  doctrine  of  Matter  and  Form  (§  55-108)  39

Death  and  Destiny  (§  11 1-1 1 5)      -------       I2

The  Humours  (§  116,  117)        "      "        "        '        "        "        "        "       ?, 
The  basis  of  Anatomy  in  the  Canon  Q  1 18-127)  -        -        -      ±03

The  doctrine  of  the  Breath  (§  136-150)         ------     12.,

Scholastic  psychology  (§  155-165)  -  -    I39.H3

Coloured  Plate  representing  the  corporeal  and  psychical  Faculties  facing  p.  143

The  Bath-house  (§  198,  199)   '        :        "        ~        "        "        "        "     Ifc

Expiative  causes  of  Disease  (§  201)        -        -        -        -        "        '       P

Chinese  sphygmology  (§  208-224,  234,  235)-        -        -        -        '     20J>

Table  of  Terminology  relative  to  the  Pulse  (Latin,  Arabic,  Chinese)   facing  p.  289 
The  doctrine  of  the  pulse  (§  218-220,  225-230,  231-233)  -     293-308 
Urinalysis,  ancient  versus  modern  (§  238-239)     -        -        -  349

Dietetics  (§  195,  248-253)        ------        '    219'4\4

Ornamental  Plate,  with  special  portraits  -  /<"»»£  P-  553

Concluding  Survey  (§  267-300)      -        -        -        -        "        -    _    "     553

•    Plate  :  Rembrandt,  "  The  Raising  of  Jairus'  daughter  '  -  facing  p.  567

Appendix:    I.      Progress;    II.     Facts-Knowledge-Truth     -      569•    Plate  :  Rembrandt,  "  The  Raising  of  Jairus'  daughter  '  -  facing  p.  567

Appendix:    I.      Progress;    II.     Facts-Knowledge-Truth     -      569

ri  HI.     The  Materia  Medica  of  the  Canon        -        -     57*

References  -----------     573

vi

CONTENTS  vii

B.     The  Translation  page

Introductory  words  (1-5)          - -        -  22

BOOK  I

.     PART  I

Thesis  I.        Definition  and  Scope  of  Medicine  (6-18)  -  25

Thesis  II.       Cosmology  (19-25)        -       -       -       -       -   '    -  34

Thesis  III.     The  Temperaments  (26-66)        -       -       -       -  e7

Thesis  IV.     The  Humours  (67-113)         -       .       .       .       .  ?6

Thesis  V.      Anatomy  (114-135)        -       -       -       -       -       -  93

Thesis  VI.     General  Physiology  (136-173)          -       -       -  107

Psychology  (174-183)   -       -       -       -       -       -  135

PART  II

Disorders  of  Health

Thesis  I.      Definition  of  Terms  (191-230)    -       -       -       -  156

Thesis  II.     The  Causes  of  Disease.     Etiology  (231-451)  173 
A. — Unavoidable  Causes         -        -        -        -        _        _        -17s

(i)  Extracorporeal.

The  influence  of  seasonal  changes  on  the  body        -  183 
Climate  :    (a)  Latitude,  (5)  Altitude,  (c)  Mountains, 
(d)  Seas,  (<?)  Winds,  (/)  Soil,  (g)  Marshes

(305-332)     ■  -        -       -       -       -       _       .       .  I9S

(ii)    Corporeal.      Causes    unavoidable    because    physio- 
logical.        ------....  2IO

Dietetics  (347-360)        -        -        -        -        -        _        -214

The  various  kinds  of  drinking  water  (361-392)        -  221

B. — Facultative  Causes  of  Disease         -        -"                -        -  230

Balneology  (400-414)    -------  232

Thesis  III.     The  Evidences    of    Disease.B. — Facultative  Causes  of  Disease         -        -"                -        -  230

Balneology  (400-414)    -------  232

Thesis  III.     The  Evidences    of    Disease.

Semeiology  (452-677)       --------  2=57

Sphygmology  (515-602)  --------  283

Urinoscopy  (603-674)       --------  323

The  Alvine  Discharge  (675-677)    -        -        -        -        -        -  353

PART  III

The  Preservation  of  Health  (678-904^        -       -       -       .  ?e7 
Dietetics  (759-814,  855-859)  -       -      '-       -       -       -     394,432

PART  IV

The  Treatment  of  Disease  (905-1085)  -----  460

BOOKS  II-V.     Brief  List  of  Contents        -       -       -       -  532

Translation  of  "  De  Viribus  Cordis  "  (168-173,  1086-1130)  123  K2a

Index        -              °'  ?„t

5/9

PRELIMINARY  THESIS

The  Relation  between  the  Canon  of  Medicine  of  Avicenna

and  Modern  Thought

CONSIDERATIONS  are  not  wanting  which  entitle 
the  Canon  of  Medicine  of  Avicenna  to  an  esteemed 
position  in  modern  thought.  In  the  first  place,  there 
is  the  outstanding  intellectual  culture  of  the  Saracen 
Empire  during  the  period  of  history  to  which  Avi- 
cenna belongs.  Secondly,  in  the  case  of  much  of  his 
teaching,  it  may  be.said  that  the  difference  from  ours 
is  largely  only  that  his  speech  is  alien,  and  is  apt  to  be 
misunderstood.  In  these  days,  the  great  complexity  of  the  language 
with  which  we  express  our  scientific  thought  corresponds  with  the 
intricacy  of  the  instruments  wherewith  facts  are  elicited.  Thirdly, 
many  of  the  advances  of  modern  times  offer  the  solutions  to  the  very 
theorems  and  propositions  of  former  times.  Finally,  ideas  are  to  be 
found  in  his  work  which  provide  suggestions  for  useful  research  in 
the  future.§  I .  The  importance  of  idea  over  material  achievement  is  not 
to  be  forgotten.  The  achievements  of  any  age  are  subject  to  decay 
with  the  lapse  of  centuries,  but  the  ideas  which  gave  rise  to  them 
remain  living  through  all  cycles.  Therefore  to  propose  a  real  place 
for  Avicenna  in  modern  thought  is  not  to  propose  a  return,  as  it  were, 
to  old  architecture,  or  the  costumes  of  long  ago.  It  is  rather  to 
render  accessible  to-day  the  picture  which  he  painted,  and  so  enable 
it  to  renew  its  still  vital  message.  It  is  to  play  over  again  the  music 
which  he  expressed,  and  enable  perhaps  one  or  two  to  rejoice  in  it. 
And  this  without  obscuring  the  issue  by  discussing  nationality,  or 
schoolsof  thought,  or  evolution  of  ideas,  or  technical  methods.

If  it  appear  to  some  a  fault  that  the  master  appears  to  have  used 
passages  from  other  works,  and  this  without  full  acknowledgment, 
it  should  be  remembered  that  after  all  a  painter  may  use  pigments 
which  someone  else  has  manufactured,  and  is  allowed  even  to  employ 
other  persons  (usually  pupils)  to  execute  certain  portions  of  his 
picture.  Indeed,  even  after  his  decease,  it  is  not  improper  that  some 
may  have  been  entrusted  with  the  delicate  task  of  touching  up  faded 
portions  of  the  canvas  which  he  bequeathed.

I  B

2  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINEI  B

2  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

The  place  for  Avicenna  in  modern  thought  is  gained  when  it  is 
agreed  that  he  shall  be  viewed  as  one  who  entered  this  world  entrusted 
with  a  ■mission  independently  to  express  for  that  age,  by  means  of 
those  various  tools  which  he  then  found  in  it,  the  wisdom  which  is 
unchanging  and  impersonal.  So  also  there  is  the  need  to-day  that 
this  same  wisdom  should  be  re-expressed  for  this  age  by  means  of  the 
new  data  which  lie  to  our  hands.

I

The  Intellectual  Culture  Contemporary 
with  Avicenna   •

§  2.  (a)  Intellectual  Culture  in  the  Central  Saracen  Empire. 
Carra  de  Vaux,  in  his  monograph  "  Avicenne,"  13  furnishes  particu- 
larly striking  comments,  as  follows  (p.  156)  : —

"  The  more  we  investigate  the  enormous  literary  output  of  the 
Arabian  empire,  and  come  into  intimate  appreciation  of  the  master 
minds  of  the  middle  epoch  and  of  antiquity,  the  more  we  become 
aware  of  their  sincerity.

"  We  should,  we  think,  offer  our  salutations  to  these  great 
personalities  of  that  day,  whose  works  and  lives  were  equally 
encyclopaedic.   ...

"  Our  own  times  do  not  show  more  worthy  figures  ;  we  com- 
placently assume  that  there  are  no  more  worthy  than  ourselves 
because  science,  so  greatly  developed  to-day,  cannot  be  held  all 
within  one  single  head.  That  may  be.  But  it  is  only  right  to  admit 
that  science  has  less  unity  and  harmony  to-day  than  formerly  it  had  ; 
that  it  is  less  pure  than  it  was  under  the  grand  peripatetic  discipline. 
Our  attitude  towards  that  is  neither  humble  nor  sincere."  In  these  days  we  are  concerned  too  much  to  have  our  name 
blazoned  forth  than  to  grasp  a  great  extent  of  science.  We  are 
more  anxious  to  uphold  the  profession  than  to  have  a  passion  for 
study  ;  we  seek  titles  and  reputation  rather  than  real  knowledge  ; 
and  in  order  to  appear  more  specialistic  than  our  ancestors  we  expose 
ourselves  to  the  judgment  of  posterity  as  having  smaller  minds, 
and  fettered  souls."

§  3.  (b)  As  to  the  state  of  civilization  in  the  western  Saracen 
empire,  we  have  the  very  illuminating  description  of  Ameer  Ali  in 
his  "  The  Spirit  of  Islam  "  2  (p.  392)  : —

"  The  Arabs  covered  the  countries  where  they  settled  with 
networks  of  canals.  To  Spain  they  gave  the  system  of  irrigation  by 
flood-gates,  wheels  and  pumps.  Whole  tracts  of  land  which  now  lie 
waste  and  barren  were  covered  with  olive  groves,  and  the  environs 
of  Seville  alone,  under  Moslem  rule,  contained  several  thousand  oil- 
factories.  They  introduced  the  staple  products,  rice,  sugar,  cotton, 
and  nearly  all  the  fine  garden  and  orchard  fruits,  together  with  many 
less  important  plants,  like  ginger,  saffron,  myrrh,  etc.  They  opened 
up  the  mines  of  copper,  sulphur,  mercury,  and  iron.  They 
established  the  culture  of  silk,  the  manufacture  of  paper  and  other

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  3THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  3

textile  fabrics  ;  of  porcelain,  earthenware,  iron,  steel,  leather.  The 
tapestries  of  Cordova,  the  woollen  stuffs  of  Myrcia,  the  silks  of 
Granada,  Almena,  and  Seville,  the  steel  and  gold  work  of  Toledo, 
the  paper  of  Salibah,  were  sought  all  over  the  world.  The  ports  of 
Malaga,  Carthage,  Barcelona  and  Cadiz  were  vast  commercial 
emporia  for  export  and  import.  In  the  days  of  their  prosperity,  the 
Spanish  Arabs  maintained  a  merchant  navy  of  more  than  a  thousand 
„r!Pf-  They  had  factories  and  representatives  on  the  Danube. 
With  Constantinople  they  maintained  a  great  trade  which  ramified 
from  the  Black  Sea,  and  the  eastern  shores  of  the  Mediterranean,  into 
the  interior  of  Asia,  and  reached  the  ports  of  India  and  China,  and 
extended  along  the  African  coast  as  far  as  Madagascar.In  the  midst  of  the  tenth  century,  when  Europe  was  about  in 
the  same  condition  that  Caffraria  is  now,  enlightened  Moors,  like 
Abul  Cassem,  were  writing  treatises  on  the  principles  of  trade  and 
commerce       In  order  to  supply  an  incentive  to  commercial  enterprise, 
and  to  further  the  impulse  to  travel,  geographical  registers,  gazetteers 
and  itineraries  were  published  under  the  authority  of  Government 
containing  minute  descriptions  of  the  places  to  which  they  related, 
with  particulars  of  the  routes  and  other  necessary  matters.      Travellers 
like  Ibn  Batuta  visited  foreign  lands  in  quest  of  information,  and 
wrote  voluminous  works  on  the  people  of  those  countries,  on  their 
fauna  and  flora,  their  mineral  products,  their  climate  and  physical 
features    with  astonishing  perspicacity  and  keenness  of  observation. 
The  love  of  learning  and  arts  was  by  no  means  confined  to  one 
sex.      The  culture  and  education  of  the  women  proceeded  on  parallel 
lines  with  that  of  the  men,  and  women  were  as  keen  in  the  pursuit  of 
literature  and  as  devoted  to  science  as  men.     They  had  their  own 
colleges  (for  instance,  at  Cairo,  established  in  684  A.M.  by  the  daughter 
of  the  Mameluke  Sultan  Malik  Taher) ;  they  studied  medicine  and 
jurisprudence,    lectured   on   rhetoric,    ethics,    and   belles-lettres   and 
participated   with   the   stronger   sex   in   the   glories    of   a   splendid 
civilization.     The  wives  and  daughters  of  magnates  and  sovereigns 
spent  their  substance  m  founding  colleges  and  endowing  universities 
in  establishing  hospitals  for  the  sick,  refuges  for  the  homeless,  the 
orphan  and  the  widow."§4-  .0)  Cordova,  the  most  celebrated  western  university  of 
the  Empire  at  the  time  of  Avicenna.— This  is  well  known  as  an 
instance  of  ^  the  high  degree  of  culture  of  the  day.  Ameer  Ali,2 
speaks  of  that  wonderful  kingdom  of  Cordova,  which  was  the 
marvel  of  the  middle  ages,  and  which  when  all  Europe  was  plunged 
m  barbaric  ignorance  and  strife  alone  held  the  torch  of  learning 
and  civilization  bright  and  shining  before  the  western  world." 
1  he  greatness  of  the  city  is  indicated  by  its  population,  which  is  given 
by  Haeser26  (1.  662)  as  300,000,  and  by  Campbell12  (p.  57)  as  one 
million  ;  and  by  the  library  of  "  about  200,000  "  volumes.  To  see 
the  city  to-day,  traversed  as  it  can  be  from  wall  to  wall,  within  half 
an  hour  on  foot,  and  to  read  of  an  extent  of  "  24  miles  one  way,  and 
six  m  the  other  "  (Ameer  Ali\  p.  517)  shows  that  the  word  "  king- 
dom     conveys  a  truer  idea  of  its  greatness.     To  read  of  "  innumer-

4  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE4  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

able  libraries,  3,800'  mosques,  60,000  palaces  and  mansions,  200,000 
houses  inhabited  by  the  common  people,  700  baths,  80,000  shops, 
besides  hostels  and  serais  "  is  to  wonder  how  so  much  can  have  come 
to  be  now  represented  by  so  little.*  Nevertheless  the  grand 
mosque"  alone,  which  is  still  at  any  rate  externally  intact  (and 
interiorly  is  still  surely  one  of  the  wonders  of  the  world  despite  its 
mutilation)  stands  sponsor  for  the  rest  ;  and  no  doubt  many  ot 
the  existing  imposing  buildings— now  devoted  to  very  different 
USeS-_stand  for  the  palaces  and  mansions.  As  to  the  literary 
treasures,  these  have  been  traced  at  least  in  part  from  Spain  to  J?ez, 
as  shown  by  Home"  (p.  32,  6i),  with  the  Roud  El  Qartas  as  his 
authority  ;  and  he  then  points  to  years  of  pilfering  from  the  library 
of  the  great  mosque  of  El  Karouiyan  at  Fez,  as  having  scattered  these 
works  for  ever  out  of  ken.5  t  A  studv  of  the  street  names,  and  even  the  place  names  ana 
current  dialect  in  "  Moorish  Spain  "  to-day  also  confirms  the  story 
of  past  greatness.  But  the  mystical  knowledge  displayed  in  the 
dispositions  of  the  decorative  designs  and  their  poetic  inscriptions 
on  the  walls  of  the  Alhambra  halls,  state-rooms,  and  private 
apartments  can  leave  no  doubt  of  unsurpassed  artistic  power,  where 
every  sense-impression  was  deliberately  drawn  on.  Lights  and 
shadows,  and  colours  changing  with  the  hours  of  the  day  ;  musical 
effects  of  simultaneous  diversity  of  disposition  of  flowing  water 
perfumes  ;  courting  of  the  prevailing  breezes  ;  interior  architectural 
form  ;  and  furnishings,  animate  and  manufactured— all  these  were 
combined  for  the  achievement  of  a  perfect  representation  of  (divine, 
over  and  above  human)  Beauty.8  6.     (d)  Among  the  Chinese.     The  bearing  of  Chinese  philoso- 
phical thought  on  the  subject  of  Avicenna  lies  in  the  fact  that  we  here 
meet  with  a  notable  example  of  intimacy  of  relation  between  world- 
conception    and    Medicine.     The   writings    which   are   so   carefully 
studied  to-day  by  so  many  sinologists  were   extant  at  the  time  ot 
Avicenna,  and  are  still  held  in  the  highest  esteem  by  Chinese  thinkers. 
The  modern  Chinese  philosopher  is  supposed  to  say  to  the  Westerner 
(Somerset  Maugham54):   "  What  is  the  reason  for  which  you  deem 
yourselves  our  betters  ?     Have  you  excelled  us  in  arts  or  letters  ? 
Have    our    thinkers    been    less    profound    than    yours  ?     Has    our 
civilization  been  less  elaborate,  less  complicated,    ess  refined  than 
vours  ?     Why,  when  you  lived  in  caves  and  clothed  yourselves  with 
skins, 'we   were   a   cultured   people.   ..."     The   attitude  towards 
western  learning  so   displayed   may   be   blamed  by   many     bu.  is 
certainly  praised  by  those  who  have  studied  the  philosophy  most 
deeply.     As  long  ago  as  1876  we  read  conclusive  evidence  (by  Sir 
Henry  Howarth35)  that  much  of  our  vaunted  civilization  actually 
came    from    that    ancient    race.     If    some    students    discuss    their 
philosophy    with    a    certain    cynicism    (Forke23),_  others    (Bruce  ^ 
Wilhelm101)  see  into  the  justice  of  their  conceptions.     As  Uarus 
remarks  :    "We  need  not  be  blind  to  the  many  errors  and  absurdities

*  "  Every  dwelling-place,  even  if  it  has  been  blessed  ever  so  long,  will  one 
day  become  a  prey."— (Old  saying  quoted  by  Ameer  Ah,1  p.  125.)

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  5*  "  Every  dwelling-place,  even  if  it  has  been  blessed  ever  so  long,  will  one 
day  become  a  prey."— (Old  saying  quoted  by  Ameer  Ah,1  p.  125.)

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  5

of  the  ancient  occultism  to  understand  and  grant  the  truth  that 
underlies  its  system."  These  words  are  exactly  applicable  to  the 
Canon  of  Medicine  of  Avicenna.

It  should  be  added  that  errors  and  absurdities  are  apt  to  be  ascribed  to  ancient 
authors  which  really  arose  from  misunderstandings  and  ignorance  on  the  part 
even  of  contemporary  pupils.  The  subsequent  generations  perpetuated  the  errors 
and  even  m  these  days  the  attempt  to  represent  the  real  meaning  of  ancient  texts 
by  translations  exposes  one  to  unexpected  extraordinary  pitfalls.  Our  idiom  is 
so  diverse  from  the  technical  Chinese.

II

The  Nature  of  the  Knowledge  Presented 
by  the  Canon

§  7-  (a)  The  Canon  is  a  precis,  and  not  a  sum-total  of  Avicenna's 
knowledge.  Numerous  passages  occur  in  the  Canon  which  show 
that  this  is  the  case,  that  it  is  a  series  of  notes  or  skeleton  outlines  of 
thought  not  too  lengthy  to  be  memorized  by  his  students  (5)— much 
as  they  would  memorize  the  Quran.  Thus  :  (2)  "  to  the  full  extent 
necessary,  and  yet  with  apt  brevity,"  (16)  *'  do  not  place  in  medicine 
what  does  not  belong  to  it,"  (34)  "  having  discussed  the  equable 
temperaments  sufficiently,"  (80)  "  I  purposely  omit  reference  to 
certain  other  problems  relative  to  the  fluids  of  the  body  "  :  '*  just  as 
much  as  is  necessary  to  enable  you  to  practise  medicine  intelligently  " 
Many  passages  also  refer  to  others  of  his  own  works  for  further 
details  to  avoid  confusing  the  purely  medical  issue  of  the  Canon 
Ihese  (philosophical)  works  are  gradually  becoming  more  widely 
known.  J"  Generally  speaking,  the  saying  of  the  saints  and  sages  are 
terse,  presenting  only  the  germs  of  truth  ;  these  are  developed  by 
later  teachers  and  then  expanded  and  added  to.  We  must  see 
to  it,  however,  that  we  get  at  the  original  meaning  of  the  saints 
and  sages."      (Chu  Hsi10,  p.  168.)

™  +  •"  ^°°k^^ar!  ??ly  T°rds'  and  the  valuable  part  of  words  is  the  thought  therein 
C°fSf d-  .J1"*  bought  has  a  certain  bias,  which  cannot  be  conveyed  in  words 
yet  the  world  values  words  as  being  the  essence  of  books.  But  though  the  world 
values  them,  they  are  not  of  value  ;  as  that  sense  in  which  the  world  values  Them 
13  no\^e  ****  "^h  they. are  valuable."      (Chuang  TZu,   Giles  trans    I.  i7o?

,-=  „„  !       i  To  3ay  a  W°Ik  1S  the  Product  °f  tte  age  in  which  an  author  lives'

s  certainly  often  an  error,  for  it  is  to  confuse  the  person's  insight  with  the  tools

(the  language  at  his  command)  available  to  express  himself  with.     Similarly  to  work

out  the  relation  between  a  literary  work  and  the  religious  belief  of  theauthoras

ame'fanacv  wRnT  "  tV'p  ^  ^^  ISlamlC  SCienCe  and  the  Koran  carries  tte 
f^eXlaCy  ^t*  rt;  Jh*  Prophet  says  every  soul  when  born  is  a  faithful  follower  ; 
it  is  afterwards  that  he  becomes  unfaithful  "—which  is  to  sav  that  the  form  of  re^

tSf  £  thl 1S  a  SeC?*da^  ^plantation,  whereas  the  spirit  6f  a  sincere  life^can  be 
traced  to  the  original  being.tSf  £  thl 1S  a  SeC?*da^  ^plantation,  whereas  the  spirit  6f  a  sincere  life^can  be 
traced  to  the  original  being.

=  =+»  Avic«ma;s  medicine,  like  Indian  medicine,  has  been  traced  to  the  Greek 
system  But  it  has  been  proved  that  the  great  works  of  Charaka  and  Susruta 
were  available  m  Arabic,  under  the  title  of  Kitab-Shawshura-al-Hindi  from  the 
seventh  century  (''Ayurveda,"  1924,  i.  x  ;  and  see  also  Weber,  Hist  '  of  Indian 
Lit.).— Similarly,  the  view  that  the  Chinese  borrowed  their  philosophy  of  the  five 
elements  from  the  Turks  has  been  sufficiently  disposed  of  byFor^  fp  °  4*  2S 
—It  is  beside  the  purpose  of  this  treatise  to  take  up  such  questions.

6  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

S  o  The  common  notion  that  progress  or  stagnation  in  secular  knowledge 
has  alausaTrelat™hip  with  (a  cert^a)  religion  is  typically  voiced  -  ^^ 
on  "  Medicine  and  the  Church,"  bySir  Farquhar  Buzzard"3  (1927  ■  ine  comment 
to  make  is  ''toft  loosed  nan  propter  hoc."  The  advances  in  the  science  of  medicine 
as  ki  all  other  sciences  are  surely  a  part  of  the  (divine)  plan  for  mankind  ;  whereas 
?L  col  ateral  abandonment  of  Religious  fundamentals  remains   a  human  respon-

sibilitv.

8  10  (6)  The  word  "  Canon"  (Qanun).— Equivalent  words: 
code  of  laws  ;  series  of  principles.  Tao  ^  (cf.  Forke2*).  Prin- 
ciple is  defined  as  "something  antecedent,  which  exercises  a  real 
positive  influence  upon  the  consequent  "  =  Causes  (four  kinds,  13)-

Reasons.  _  .  1     .     u~

In  view  of  this  it  is  clear  that  the  Canon  is  not  properly  to  be 
regarded  as  an  "  encyclopaedia  "  of  the  knowledge  of  the  time,  or 
to  be  contrasted,  for  instance,  with  the  now  classical      Osier.  _811  U)  The  word  "  knowledge."  Knowledge  is  not  simply 
an  assemblage  of  "  facts  "  ;  nor  is  it  to  be  made  synonymous  with 
«  truth  "—certainly  not  Absolute  Truth,  of  which  all  human 
knowledge  falls  short  (see  diagram  in  Appendix),  although  one  single 
word  is  capable  of  containing  or  implying  all  knowledge,  as  in 
mathematics  a  single  term  may  be  equated  with  an  infinite  number  ot 
terms  summed  together.  But  even  the  mathematical  sciences  can 
only  afford  approximate  truth  (Hume,  quoted  by  Maher50  :  p.  238). 
We  may  recall  the  words,  "  if  he  attain  to  all  knowledge,  he  is  far 
off  still"  (a  Kempis95,  ii.  n).

S  12.  Facts,  as  S.  Thomas81,  (1.  S3)  explains,  are  what  our 
intellect  regards  external  objects  as,  and  as  we  judge  of  them  only 
in  terms  of  our  sense-organs,  these  objects  may  be  different.  God 
knows  them  as  they  are.  Our  intellect  depends  on  our  imagination, 
and  that  depends  on  our  senses,  and  our  senses  only  convey  discrete 
fragments  which  we  gather  into  one  continuous  impression  regardless 
of  intervening  points."  We  live  as  it  were  in  a  network  only  the 
nodes  of  which  are  evident  to  the  senses.  _

S  1 *.  (d)  Mystical  Insight.— There  is  a  distinction  between 
knowledge  gained  in  the  ordinary  manner  and  that  gained  by 
"mystical  insight"  {Kashf).  The  writer  of  Gulshan-i-Raz^  (couplet 
299,  p.  30)  advises  his  readers  to  follow  this,  saying  :

And

"  Straightway  lift  yourself  above  time  and  space,  ^

Quit  the  world  and  be  yourself  a  world  for  yourselt.

"  The  moment  we  are  enlightened  within, 
We  go  beyond  the  voidness  of  a  world  confronting  us

s         y  —Seng-ts'an,  quoted  by  Susuki,"  p.  i8>"  The  moment  we  are  enlightened  within, 
We  go  beyond  the  voidness  of  a  world  confronting  us

s         y  —Seng-ts'an,  quoted  by  Susuki,"  p.  i8>

As  this  "  opens  up  all  of  a  sudden  a  world  hitherto  undreamed  of  it 
is  an  abrupt  and  discrete  leaping  from  one  plane  of  thought  to 
another"  (ib.  p.  200).

"  Real  science  is  seeing  the  fire  directly, 
Not  mere  talk,  inferring  the  fire  from  the  smoke. 
Your  scientific  proofs  are  more  offensive  to  the  wise 
Than  the  urine  and  breath  whence  a  physician  inters.

—(p.  306.)

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  7

"  Man  looks  at  the  -surface  of  the  ocean.  Yet  he  is  so  small  that  he  cannot 
even  be  compared  to  one  of  its  drops,  limited  as  he  is  in  intellect  and  in  his  know- 
ledge. It  is  only  to  those  who,  having  just  touched  creation,  bow  to  God  forgetting 
their  limited  self,  that  God  has  remained.  These  through  whom  God  has  spoken 
are  the  only  beings  who  have  been  able  to  give  any  truth  to  the  world."33— (Rose-

anvrlun,     ISt    ed.,     120.)

§  14.  "  The  mind  is  not  like  a  horizontal  door  which  has  to  be 
made  larger  by  force.  You  must  clear  away  the  obstructions  arising 
from  creaturely  desire,  and  then  it  will  be  pure  and  clear  with  no 
limit  to  its  knowledge.  Heng  Ch'u  said  :  "  When  the  Mind  is 
enlarged  it  can  enter  into  everything  throughout  the  universe  " 
Chu  Hsi10  (i.  182).     "  He  who  praises  God  knows  about  Him."This  attitude  towards  Nature  is  to  be  claimed  for  Avicenna,  on 
the  plain  evidence  of  his  other  writings,  including  the  "  Al  Naj'at  " 
which  appropriately  appears  in  the  Arabic  version  of  the  Canon 
printed  at  Rome  in  1593,  and  of  the  Libellus  on  the  powers  of  the 
heart4  (real  authorship  disputed)  which  Arnold  of  Villanova  trans- 
lated into  Latin  (ca.  1235-13 12) — arfff  is  included  in  the  Latin 
edition  of  the   Canon,    1595.

The  acquisition  of  knowledge  by  this  process  demands  nothing 
more  than  a  keen  observation  of  the  life  around  us,  and  was  as  much 
within  his  reach  as  ours.      Such  knowledge  is  not  too  restricted  to 
one  period  of  history,  one  language,  or  to  one  or  two  universities. 
And  if  it  should  seem  that  because  our  civilization  is  so  different 
his  opportunities  were  much  less,  we  may  pause  to  reflect  that  the 
difference   between   our   age   and  his   is   chiefly  one   of  mechanical 
appurtenances  and  phraseology  ;    and  that  even  to  this  day  we  need 
not  travel  far  (e.g.,  the  old  streets  of  Cordova  and  Granada,  or  more 
definitely,  to  northern  Africa)  to  see  much  the  same  sort  of  scenery 
as  he  wasaccustomed  to,  much  the  same  sort  of  life  as  is  drawn  in  the 
"  1001  Nights."     In  any  case,  what  is  human  life,  at  bottom,  but  a 
matter  _  of  buying   and   selling,    receiving   and   giving,    seizing   and 
relinquishing,  constructing  and  demolishing,  acquiring  learning  and 
losing  it,_  seeking  power  and  breaking  it,  bidding  and  forbidding, 
covenanting  and  comminating,  giving  in  marriage  and  seeking  to 
obtain  in  marriage,  birth  and  death.§  15.     The  significant  phrase   "seeing  into  one's  own  Nature"    (Hui-neng  • 
busuki,"  p.  203,  m  which  most  admirable  work  occur  many  passages  by  way  of 
explanation)  gives  a  graphic  description  of  that  which  gives  Avicenna  his  superiority 
lhe  Canon  is  simply  the  medical  garb  in  which  the  one  Truth  is  expounded.     It  is

for  us  also  to  perceive  it  in  whatever  idiom    it   might  be  described Western

Eastern — Islamic,  Confucian  or  Buddhist,  e.g.

It  would  then  seem  as  if  the  mind  were  now  able  to  float  as  it  were  round  'all 
the  concepts  man  has  ever  given  to  the  world,  or  round  all  the  most  familiar  events 
of  one  s  daily  life,  and  perceive  clearly  that  which  can  never  be  set  forth  in  words 
We  should  then  also  quote  the  words  (given  in  ib.,  p.  223,  in  reference  to  satori— 
enlightenment)  I  perceive  of  it  that  it  is  something,  but  what  it  is  I  cannot  per- 
ceive.    Only  meseems  that,  could  I  conceive  it,  I  should  comprehend  all  truth."

§  16.  Further  than  this,  to  find  that  some  of  the  statements  in 
the  Canon  are  certainly  erroneous,  and  that  modern  investigations 
have  placed  us  at  an  infinitely  greater  advantage,  does  not  invalidate 
the  work  as  a  whole.  Its  possibilities  for  suggesting  thoughts  of 
real  value  to-day  are  more  realized  the  more  one  reads  "  between 
the  lines,"  and  the  present  treatise  does  not  claim  to  exhaust  them.

8  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

"  Let  not  the  authority  of  the  writer  offend  thee   whether  he  be 
of  title  or  great  learning,  but-let  the  love  or  pure  truth  entice  thee  to

read  "  (a  Kempis95,  i.  5)-

„  t     •   -K+-  ,-n+n  eternal  truths  —A  person  may  (a)  glimpse  them,  (6)  under-

♦     H  §tnL  modlStely    (?)TrSeSS  then?  fairly  thoroughly.     But  m  describing„  t     •   -K+-  ,-n+n  eternal  truths  —A  person  may  (a)  glimpse  them,  (6)  under-

♦     H  §tnL  modlStely    (?)TrSeSS  then?  fairly  thoroughly.     But  m  describing

denied  bv  persons  being  told  of  them,  tor  because  in  urcu  iuiu        y

capacities  of  the  higher.

Ill

The  Basic  Difference  Between  "  The  Canon  " 
and  Modern  Medicine

The    Canon  treats   of

I.  Speculative  "  Medicine." 
Certain  fundamental  principles 
(Cosmology,  psychology,  meta- 
physics)

II.  Practical  Medicine. .

A.  Application  of  I  to  the  study 
of  (i)  health,  (ii)  disease  (ten- 
dency, predisposition,  threshold 
stage,  declared  disease,  (iii)  ces- 
sation of  life.

Modern  Medicine  consists  of

B.  Actual  treatment  of  "  disease  " 
by  (i)  regimen,  (ii)  drugs,  (iii) 
operative  interference.

A.  Principles       of      Medicine 
Theory  :  The  application  of  the 
facts     of    chemistry,     physics, 
anatomy,    biology  to   the   sys- 
tematic description  of  innumer- 
able   "  diseases  "    classified    as 
far  as  possible  on  the  basis  of 
the  microbic  theory. 
Symptomatology.     Etiology. 
Diagnosis.

B.  Practice  of  Medicine..

(a)  Laboratory  work.

(b)  Therapeutics,  pharmacol- 
ogy and  dietetics.

(c)  Surgery.

(d)  Gynaecology  and  Obstetrics.

(e)  State  Medicine  :    Hygiene 
in  all  its  branches.

(/)  Psychological       Medicine:

Treatment  of  insanity. 
(g)  Legal  medicine,' etc.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  9(e)  State  Medicine  :    Hygiene 
in  all  its  branches.

(/)  Psychological       Medicine:

Treatment  of  insanity. 
(g)  Legal  medicine,' etc.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  9

Modern  medicine  is  based  on  the  conception  of  the  universe  as 
a  conglomeration  of  dead  matter  out  of  which,  by  some  unexplainable 
process,  life  may  become  evolved  in  forms.  To  Avicenna  the  whole 
of  the  universe  is  the  manifestation  of  a  universal  principle  of  life, 
acting  through  the  instrumentality  of  forms.  Or,  again,  in  modern 
medicine,  the  forms  are  the  source  of  life  ;  to  Avicenna  they  are  the 
product  of  life.  Space  itself  is  an  aspect  of  the  one  life  (Hartmann, 
on  Paracelsus,  28a,  p.  217).

§  19.  In  this  way  the  difference  between  Avicenna's  conception 
of  "  principles,"  and  that  of  modern  medicine  is  easily  shown.  To 
the  school-boy  "  science  "  would  consist  of  (a)  "  bookwork," 
(0)  laboratory  work,  which  his  teachers  would  insist  is  the  basis  of  (a). 
Similarly,  the  medical  curriculum  begins  with  lectures,  though  these 
are  more  and  more  inclined  to  become  laboratory  demonstrations  ; 
and   goes   on  to  laboratory  and  hospital   work.

§  20.  In  short,  Avicenna's  medicine,  and  all  ancient  medicine,  is 
intimately  bound  up  with  philosophy,  to  wit,  that  of  human  nature — 
a  philosophy  which  proves  to  be  virtually  identical  with  "  modern 
scholastic  philosophy,"  no  doubt  partly  because  the  Quranic  account 
of  the  origin  of  Man  tallies  with  the  Christian.§  21.  Modern  Medicine,  on  the  other  hand,  assuming  the  title 
and  rank  of  a  positive  science,  emphatically  discards  and  excludes 
it.  Hence  we  read  :  "  the  physiologist  "  (said  Burdon  Sanderson) 
"  can  pursue  philosophy  if  he  has  a  turn  for  it,  but  must  understand 
that  the  moment  he  enters  the  field  of  philosophy  he  leaves  his  tools 
behind  him  "  ;  or  "  it  is  unfortunate  that  the  limitations  of  scientific 
thought  were  often  ignored  by  men  of  science  in  their  writings  .  .  . 
the  result  diverts  those  who  know,  but  befogs  the  unsuspicious 
reader  who  will  probably  put  the  blame  on  his  intelligence  "  (Ed. 
Hughes36).

"  According  to  Positivism,  science  cannot  be  as  Aristotle 
conceived  it,  the  knowledge  of  things  through  their  ultimate  causes, 
since  material  and  formal  causes  are  unknowable,  final  causes  (are) 
illusions,  and  efficient  causes  (are)  simply  invariable  antecedents, 
while  metaphysics  under  any  form  is  illegitimate  "  (Sauvage,17,  xii. 
313).  Or,  expressed  more  boldly,  "  philosophy  "  is  considered  to  be 
the  exact  antithesis  of  the  truth  which  modern  medicine  gives  us, 
and  is  therefore  inherently  inadmissible  to   medicine.The  ignorance  which  accounts  for  this  attitude  is  only  met  by 
insisting  on  proper  definitions  of  terms.  The  following  apply  here  : 
Philosophy  is  "  the  science  which  is  concerned  with  first  causes  and 
principles  ;  it  is  the  profound  knowledge  of  the  universal  order,  and 
the  duties  which  that  order  imposes  on  man  (Mercier,  Logique, 
1904;  de  Wulf17  :  xii.  26).  Again,  philosophy  is  the  true  perception 
and  understanding  of  cause  and  effect. — Metaphysics  is  "  that 
portion  of  philosophy  which  treats  of  the  most  general  and  funda- 
mental principles  underlying  all  reality  and  all  knowledge  "  (Maher56, 
p.  520). — Psychology  is  "  the  science  which  treats  of  the  soul  and  its 
operations  " — rand,  therefore,  clearly,  must  be  the  real  foundation  of 
Medicine.

IO

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

8  22  It  is  in  modern  scholastic  philosophy  that  the  student 
finds  ample  exposure  of  the  fallacy  in  positivism  and  its  cognates 
enabling  him  to  detect  the  difference  between  false  and  true,  expressed 
with  enough  force  of  logic  to  satisfy  the  most  meticulous  This 
queen  of  all  the  sciences  amply  proves  positivist  science  (including 
Medicine)  to  be  incomplete  knowledge  when  taken  alone,  ifte 
knowledge  of  movement  or  change  must  be  supplemented  by 
mathematical  and  metaphysical  view-points.  (Cf.  Merciei ■»  pp 
,q  36;  and  especially  Wundt17  :  xu.  et  35).  Such  men  as  Albertus 
Magnus  and  Roger  Bacon  were  convinced  of  the  necessity  of  linking 
the  sciences  with  philosophy17  (xii.  38).  rMruPaWhen  medicine  has  in  this  way  become  ennobled  it  reaches 
its  highest  degree  of  perfection,  in  that  it  penetrates  to  the  very 
depths  of  reality56  (p.  9),  admitting  this  knowledge  to  need  even 
then,  a  further  complement  to  make  it  complete— namely,  knowledge 
in  relation  to  God  ("  Christian  wisdom  ")•

"  Sapientia  est  scientia  qua  considerat  ^f^f^^T"  E 
Sapientia  causas  primas  omnium  causarum  considerat  (In- Met  I;^ts2.  ^ 
cofnoscit  causam  altissimam  simphciter,  qua  est  Deus  ^ci^r  sapiens  ampL^ter 
in  miantnm  ner  regulas  divinas  omnia  potest  judicare  et  ordmare  (bum.  ineoi. 
TT  I a  £  art  if)  "  Non  acquiritur studio humano,  sed  est  deursum  scendens 
Ubid'  V)  "Cum  homo  per  res  creatas  Deum  cognoscit,  magis  videtur  hoc 
Stinere  ad  scientiam  ad  quam  pertinet  formaliter,  quam  ad  sapientiam  ad  quam 
?ert  nef  materianter  et  e  converso  cum  secundum  res  divinas  judicamus  de  rebus 
Create   nTagis  hoc  ad  sapientiam  quam  ad  scientiam  pertinet  (,&.  q.  9,  a.  2,  ad  3).

As  St.  Thomas81  said  in  his  day,  "  they  think  that  nothing  exists 
besides  visible  creatures  "  (C.G.,  ii.  3,  1-P-  5)[N.B-  Creatures 
are  (a)  animate,  (*)  inanimate]  ;  "  they  think  that  things  P«>ceed  not 
by  the  divine  will  but  by  natural  necessity  "  (ib.).  So  even  m  those 
days  time  and  fortune  were  expended  on  researches  which  sound 
philosophy  would  have  shown  to  be  inherently  futile.We  mav  reflect  for  instance  on  the  reiterated  search  for  a  location  of  the  soul, 
which  tLpToneerC  anatomists  prosecuted,  and  also  on  the  commonly  repeated 
Innouncement  to  successive  students  of  anatomy  that  the  pineal  gland  is  now  no 
lonTer^egarded  as  the  site  of  the  soul.  There  is  the  sub-conscious  suggestion  to  the 
stafent  that  scientific  research  has  effectively  disposed  of  the  medieval  behef  m 
S  soul,  whereas  history  only  proves  that  the  revolt  against  the  precise  te a chmgs 
„f  +nP  Council  of  Trent16  d  S45-1563  necessarily  came  to  naught.  J. he  ver>  aenni 
•    tion  of 9'  soul  '■  whichlhis  council  laid  down  makes  a  search  for  its  location  ludicrous.

IV

Special    Differences    between   the    Canon    and    Modern

Medicine

A.     Conceptions   known    to    Avicenna  ;     not   now   recognized.

823      There  are  four  main  conceptions  belonging  to  the  Canon, 
but   not   recognized    by   modern    Medicine.     To   use    S     Thomas 
words83  84  (i.  32  ;    art.   I  ;    p.  270)  they  can  be  shown  to  be      not 
impossible "  ;    that  is,   the   discoveries  of  modern  science  do   not 
abrogate  them.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  i  r

These  conceptions  are  relative  to  (a)  the  nature  of  the  human 
being  as  a  whole,  (b)  the  constitution,  (c)  the  "  breath,"  (d)  the 
"  elements."  Each  of  these  is  dealt  with  in  some  detail  under  the 
corresponding  sections  of  the  Canon,  but  some  of  the  salient  points 
are  suitably  referred  to  at  this  stage.

§  24.  (a)  The  conception  of  the  nature  of  the  human  being  as  a 
whole. — The  varieties  of  views  on  this  point  which  people  in  every 
country  and  race  exhibit  both  in  conversation  and  in  literature, 
numerous  though  they  are,  are  capable  of  classification  under  one  of 
three  headings  :(i)  The  first — the  Platonic  view — regards  the  human  being 
as  "  soul  within  a  body,"  while  admitting  "  soul  "  to  be  indefinable, 
and  beyond  the  power  of  location.  This  view,  widely  supposed  to  be 
"  Christian,"  is  well  known  as  "  pagan  "  to  students  of  folklore.

(ii)  The  second — the  scientific  or  rationalistic  and  modern  view- 
takes  the  physical  body  as  the  fundamental,  seeing  in  it  the  outcome 
of  known  or  at  least  knowable  forces.  The  facts  of  anatomy, 
physiology,  etc.,  convey  their  own  inevitable  conclusions.  This 
view  makes  its  immediate  appeal.  From  the  first  lesson  the  pupil 
is  able  to  feel  a  grasp  of  some  tangible  knowledge,  whereas  the 
alternative  third  view  entails  a  long  study  before  the  intricacies  of 
abstract  philosophy  can  be  mastered.  The  difference  between 
experience  and  •"  poring  over  books  "  is  only  too  obvious.  The 
possibility  of  interweaving  the  two  methods  is  not  on  the  horizon.

In  its  answer  to  "  religion,"  this  scientific  view  has  no  objection  to  raise  to 
its  votaries  retaining  a  private  belief  in  the  Platonic  view,  if  their  temperament 
demands  it.  But  this  "  pious  belief  "  must  not  be  allowed  to  vitiate  procedure 
when  scientific  research  is  undertaken.

This  modern  conception  regards  the  body  as  an  aggregate  of 
"  spare  parts  "  which  are  "  assembled  "  well,  or  ill  ;  can  be  repaired, 
or  remedied.  According  as  the  assembling  is  good  or  bad,  and 
according  to  the  "  fuel,"  so  is  there  health,  or  susceptibility  to 
infection  by  organisms.  The  kind  of  assembling  is  a  matter  partly 
heredity  and  partly  of  environment.The  following  remarks  in  a  review  on  a  recent  article  in  Science — by  Lillie— 
may  be  quoted  from  the  Times,  Oct.  24th,  1927,  p.  19.  They  present  the  idea  in 
technical  language  : —

"Physiology  finds  the  organism  to  be  a  nexus  of  physicochemical  determina- 
tion ;  differing  only  from  non-living  systems  in  its  complexity.  .  .  .  Speaking  of 
freewill,  one  argument  against  '  indeterminism  '  is  that  '  the  energy  balance  sheet 
of  a  man  shows  us  there  is  no  creation  of  energy  within  the  bodv  '  To  assume 
will-power  '  we  conflict  with  Newton's  first  law.'  .  .  .  The  ultraniicroscope  alone 
suggests  indeterminism,  and  even  this  may  be  only  because  we  do  not  know  enough 
about  Browman  movement,  etc.  Protoplasm  is  a  '  heterogeneous  system  '  In 
heredity  submicroscopical  units  determine  the  details  of  inheritance— but  an  event 
originating  in  an  ultramicroscopic  particle  can  spread  to  the  whole  cell  or  organism 
On  this  view,  a  human  action  appearing  entirely  spontaneous  and  voluntary  to  the 
actor  and  spectator  would  exhibit  itself  as- a  succession  of  mechanically  determined 
events  capable  of  study  and  prediction  in  all  its  microscopic  details  But  traced 
inwards  it  would  ultimately  resolve  itself  into  certain  ultramicroscopic  events  in 
the  interior  of  the  nerve-cell."  But  *'  even  the  freedom  of  the  ultramicroscopic 
particle  may  be  no  more  than  a  subtler  kind  of  determinism  beyond  the  reach  of 
present  analysis.        §64  contradicts  these  remarks.

It  may  be  noted,  in  passing,  that  the  doctrine  of  vitalism  is  really  only  another 
form  of  rationalism,  as  will  appear  when  the  scholastic  doctrine  is  duly  investigated

12

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE12

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

S25  The  third  view— scholastic,  Thomistic— presented  by 
modern  scholastic  philosophy,  has  the  Aristotelian  basis,  its 
soundness  is  best  appreciated  by  careful  study  prolonged  until  the  pre- 
valent inadequate  and  illogical  conceptions  of  the  universe  are  clearly 
exposed  Briefly,  the  view  is  expressed  in  the  words  :  the  human 
being  is  a  material  body  vivified  by  a  life-principle,  the  two  together 
constituting  the  rational  human  soul."  As  S.  Thomas  "says  :  It  is 
not  my  soul  that  thinks,  or  my  body  that  eats,  but  I  that  do  both 
fp  zO.  In  other  words,  again  :  The  body  and  soul  form  one 
complete  whole-one  "single  being  ^  (p.    S3);    56  (P-.302,  306).

It  is  this  view  which  underlies  the  whole  Canon,  and  is  expounded 
in  connection  with  the  corresponding  parts  of  the  text.^  It  is  this 
vie w  that  makes  the  ancient  work  fal  1  in  line  with  the  most  modern 
Its  consequences  are  far-reaching.  The  external  configuration  of  the 
body,  including  the  physiognomy,  is  a  reflection  of  the  functional 
capacity  of  the  internal  organs  and  general  make-up  of  the  individual. 
The  character,  talents,  physical  form,  shape  of  individual  features 
general  development,  and  indeed  every  detail  of  the  physique,  length 
of  limbs,  of  fingers,  cutaneous  markings,  contour  of  the  eyes  and 
ears,  etc,  are  all  part  and  parcel  with  the  functional  conformations 
of  the  viscera,  and  the  mental  characters  ;  a  study  of  the -visible  will 
inform  of  the  nature  of  the  internal  conformation.     (Ci.  107)8  26  The  idea  that  from  a  study  of  external  features  and  general  habit  one 
should  deduce  conclusions  as  to  functional  capacities*  is  generally  opposed  by 
academic  Medicine  ;  as  is  voiced  by  F.  v.  Muller  1921,  quoted  by  Kolle,  Mitt. 
Ggeb  Tied  1926  40,  371)  when  he  says  "  we  must  steadfastly  avoid  drawing  any 
fell-reaching  conclusions  about  the  functional  behaviour  of  the  organism  from  a 
studv  of  the  external  characters  of  the  body."  .

7 While  it  may  be  urged  that  the  external  features  are  usually  misread,  it  may 
also  be  admitted  that  even  the  customary  "  physical  examination  of  a Patent 
does  not  vield  uniform  results  when  practised,  as  it  neces  sari yis  by P™sof 
varying  talent.  Surely,  the  remedy  is  to  exert  greater  care,  ^e  may  for  instance 
observl  how  a  skilled  weaver  will  detect  the  site  of  a  flaw  ^  the  set-up  of  a 
loom  by  a  mere  glance,  whereas  a  novice  discovers  it  only  after  laborious  search.866  §  On  the  other  hand,  the  biochemical  tests  for  functional  capacity  of  organs— 
so  much  the  vogue,   and  so  much  exploited,  and  so  duly  impressive  on  patients 
and  their  friendf-are  clearly  inadequate  in  the  light  of  the  scholastic  doctrine, 
ft  is  true  that  the  attempt  to  force  the  intangible  to  yield  to  mathematical  formute 
rules,  and  weights  and  measures   (as,  for  instance,  in  blood-cholesterol  analyses) 
is  sincere  enough,  to  judge  by  the  time,  energy  and  money  expended  so  freely 
But  what  is  to  be' the  verdict  once  it  is  realized  that  the  anatomical  organs  are ,  not 
functionally  discrete  or  amenable  to  distinctive      specific     tests  ?     A   u^  appreci 
ation  of  the  intimacy  of  relation  inherent  in  the  conception  of  the  human    being 
ins°sted  on  here  suffices  to  show  the  futility  of  those  labours  and  studies   whether 
made  upon  man  or  upon  the  various  orders  of  animals  taken  instead.

More  than  this,  there  is  the  conception  that  the  internal  organs 
belong  to  one  another  beyond  the  anatomical  limits.  The  heart,  to 
anatomy,  is  a  circumscribed  organ  ;  to  Avicenna  it  is  part  of  a  force 
occupying  the  whole  body.  "  Man's  heart  is  both  corporeal  and 
incorporeal  "  (Chu  Hsi10,  i.  p.  162).  So,  again,  the  liver  is  simply 
;a  visible  portion  of  a  "  liver  "  whose  operation  pervades  the  whole

*  The  relation  between  character  and  physique  was  scientifically  studied  by 
the  Chinese  450  B.C.      (Cf.  Wieger.)

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  i3*  The  relation  between  character  and  physique  was  scientifically  studied  by 
the  Chinese  450  B.C.      (Cf.  Wieger.)

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  i3

body.*  Or,  to  combine  modern  with  ancient  knowledge,  the  physical 
heart,  the  arterial  vessels,  and  the  sympathetic  nervous  system, 
including  the  connections  between  this  and  the  sensorium  and  that 
which  corresponds  to  the  "  sensitive  soul  "  in  its  emotional  aspect, 
for  instance — all  this  is  one  great  composite  ;  and  its  state  is  also 
reflected  in  many  subtle  indications  which  offer  themselves  to  the  keen 
observer  of  the  patient.

The  modern  research  on  diseases  of  the  brain  and  insanity  is  based  on  the 
assumption  that  the  material  brain  is  the  source  of  all  nervous  activities,  which 
are  correlated  with  definite  biochemical,  physicochemical  and  even  structural 
changes  in  brain  substance.  Mental  disease  is  the  outcome  of  similar  changes. 
The  Platonists  would  consider  mental  disease  as  apart  from  the  "  soul."  The 
Thomistic  view  leads  to  much  more  subtle  conclusions,  capable  of  lasting  influence.

(jy)    The  doctrine  of  "  the  constitution."(jy)    The  doctrine  of  "  the  constitution."

§  27.  The  term  "  constitution  "  conveys  different  ideas  to 
different  minds.  The  laity  regard  the  term  as  synonymous  with 
"  temperament  "  or  "  make-up,"  at  least  in  part,  and  consider  a 
description  of  a  patient  as  having  a  nervous  temperament,  a  delicate 
constitution,  etc.,  quite  adequate.  With  this  goes  the  conviction 
among  the  lay  that  the  medical  curriculum  leaves  the  graduate  fully 
able  to  "  understand  his  constitution  "  whereas  in  actual  fact  the 
subject  is  never  discussed.  The  study  of  physique  is  quite  superficial, 
and  is  admittedly  made  solely  to  establish  a  diagnosis  of  specific 
"  diseases."  Hence  the  term,  in  conversation,  is  actually  nothing 
more  than  platitudes.

To  modern  medicine,  regarding  the  body  as  corporeal,  constitu- 
tion is  a  matter  of  physique,  resistance  to  disease,  mode  of  reaction 
to  various  stimuli  (including  psychic  stimuli).  Classifications  of 
varieties  of  constitution  on  this  basis  are  afforded  by  various  writers 
in  all  countries — e.g.,  a  classification  into  athletic,  leptosomic  and 
dysplastic  ;  into  arthritic,  endocrine,  lymphatic,  asthenic,  infantilistic, 
chlorotic,  etc.  (Current  medical  journals).

In  the  Canon,  Avicenna  establishes  "  constitution  "  in  terms  of 
humours,  temperaments  (hot,  cold,  dry,  moist)  and  "  elements  " 
(whose  proportions  are  set  for  every  individual. — 47).  If  we  go 
further,  and  apply  to  this  term  the  method  which  Rumi  37  (p.  169),  the 
great  Persian  sage  demanded  of  students  of  the  Quran,  we  shall  not 
regard  a  patient's  constitution  as  understood  until  we  have  studied 
the  matter  much  more  intimately."  Know  the  words  of  the  Koran  are  simple, 
But  within  the  outward  sense  is  an  inner  secret  one. 
Beneath  that  secret  meaning  is  a  third, 
Whereat  the  highest  wit  is  dumbfounded. 
The  fourth  meaning  has  been  seen  by  none 
Save  God,  the  Incomparable  and  All-sufficient. 
Thus  they  go  on,  even  to  seven  meanings,  one  by  one, 
According  to  the  saying  of  the  Prophet,  without  doubt."

*  Cf.    Paracelsus,    de   viribus   membrorum    (Hartmann,    p.    219). Moreover,

each  individual  "  is  a  member  of  the  great  organism  of  the  world  "  .  .  .  "  not 
a  separate  being  isolated  from  Nature."  (lb.  p.  51).  Individual:  human  world  : 
one  leucocyte  :  one  human  being.

I4  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

"  I  know,"  said  Tawaddud,  the  lady  most  learned,  "  the  sublime 
Koran  by  heart  and  have  read  it  according  to  the  seven,  the  ten, 
and  the  fourteen  modes  "  (438th  Arabian  night).  _

Therefore  to  draw  a  lesson  for  our  study  out  of  these  indications, 
we  shall  see  that  the  aim  in  view  is  to  formulate  a  person's  constitu- 
tion out  of  a  number  of  components,  none  of  which  must  be  omitted 
from  the  series .  To-  express  the  whole  picture  many  modern  aspects 
must  be  studied— histological,  biochemical,  psychological^  without 
neglecting  factors  (metaphysical,  etc.)  accepted  by  the  ancients  but 
almost  forgotten  to-day.  For  instance,  the  past  events  in  the 
ancestral  history  of  the  patient  must  be  included,  and  all  the  factors 
coming  into  play  even  from  the  time  of  quickening  may  not  be  over-

°°  The  insight  afforded  by  the  true  conception  of  the  nature  of  the 
human  being  in  this  way  leads  us  on  to  an  understanding  ol 
individual  constitutions  which  should  be  amply  satisfactory.

(/)    The  doctrine  of  "  the  breath."(/)    The  doctrine  of  "  the  breath."

8  28  This  subject  is  discussed  in  the  course  of  the  text  (§  136). 
The  term  "  breath  "  found  in  Eastern  writings  is  taken  as  the  exact 
equivalent  of  Avicenna's  conception,  and  is  understood  properly 
only  when  the  "  elements  "  are  understood  (see  §^73).

Equivalent  terms  :  life-principle  ;  hayat  ;  Sj-=-  ;  the  breath 
of  life;  virtus  vitalis  ;  spiritus  ;-  vitality  ;  Hu  (in  Persian  mys- 
ticism*) •    Ch'i  M,  J    nafas  (also  used  for      sou1,        individuality    ).

It  may  be  conceded  that  many  of  these  words  are  used 
synonymously  with  much  confusion  in  consequence.  Thus  the  old 
doctrine  of  vitalism,  supported  by  vitalists,  is  not  the  antithesis  of, 
but  strictly  speaking,  another  form  of  rationalism.  In  Paracelsus 
we  read  "  the  first  matter  of  the  elements  is  nothing  else  than  lite.  .  ._ . 
The  soul  of  the  elements  is  the  life  of  all  created  things.  .  .  .  There  is 
aeain  a  difference  between  the  soul  and  the  life.  Fire  _  if  it  lives 
burns  But  if  it  be  in  its  soul,  that  is,  in  its  element,  it  lacks  all 
power  of  burning  "  (Opera  ii.  264).  Errors  of  this  kind  are  avoided 
by  a  careful  study  of  the  scholastic  philosophy.

(d)   The  doctrine  of  "  the  elements."(d)   The  doctrine  of  "  the  elements."

§  29.  This  is  fully  entered  into  at  the  end  of  the  corresponding  chapter  in 
the  transia ^  «  j*"^  universe  in  terms  of  four,  or  five,  elements  has  been 
found  among  alf  peoples.  To  argue  in  favour  of  the  doctrine  almost  compels  an 
attempt  at  harmomlation  of  its  different  forms  (Aristotelian,  Indian,  Persian, 
ChS  for  S  •  Suppose  a  number  of  people  each  set  out  to  paint  one  certain 
landscape^ that  each  is  of  different  nationality  ;  that  each  is  restricted  to  a  certain 
limited  number  of  pigments  ;  that  each  is  a  true  artist.  The  final  picture  presented 
bv each  wiU  be  striking  and  inspiring.  But  it  would  be  out  of  place  to  begin  and  com- 
Sre  stick  with  stick  fnd  stone  with  stone.  If  we  understand,  we  shall  learn-from 
each  Th™dern  futurist  may  excite  ridicule  in  his  attempts  to  depict  a  landscape 
jn  terms  rf^ychic  forces,  which  he  claims  to  discern,  but  to  the  mind  of  a  student

*  Hu  in  Chinese,  p£,  is  not  the  exact  equivalent,  through  being  used  more 
for  the  act 'of  expiration— unless  there  is  a  mystical  sense  attached  to  the  term.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  1S

his  work  would  have  a  'different  effect.     These  varying  forms  of  one  conception 
are  amenable  to  intelligent  understanding.      (Cf.  note  to  20.)THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  1S

his  work  would  have  a  'different  effect.     These  varying  forms  of  one  conception 
are  amenable  to  intelligent  understanding.      (Cf.  note  to  20.)

§  30.  Carus15  (p.  34)  writes  :  :."  An  explanation  of  the  universe  which  derives 
all  distinctions  between  things,  conditions,  relations,  etc.,  from  differences  of  mixture 
must  have  appeared  very  plausible  to  the  ancient  sages  .  .  .  even  to-day  Western 
scientists  of  reputation  attempt  to  explain  the  universe  as  a  congeries  of  force- 
centres,  acting  either  by  attraction  or  repulsion  in  analogy  to  positive  and  negative 
electricity.  On  the  ground  of  this  fact  the  educated  Chinese  insist  with  more  than 
a  mere  semblance  of  truth  that  the  underlying  idea  of  the  Chinese  world-conception 
is  fully  borne  out  and  justified  by  the  results  of  Western  science."  Elsewhere  the 
intimacy,  in  fact  unity,  between  this  philosophy  and  everyday  life  (Forke  23  pp 
239,  269)  is  referred  to  as  the  justification  for  so  often  quoting  Chinese  thought  in 
expounding  Avicenna.

B.      Conceptions  known  to  modern  medicine  ;    but  not  to  Avicenna. 
§  31.     Among  the  most  important  of  these  are  :B.      Conceptions  known  to  modern  medicine  ;    but  not  to  Avicenna. 
§  31.     Among  the  most  important  of  these  are  :

(a)  the  anatomy  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  (b)  the  rate  of 
that  circulation,  (c)  The  details  found  in  Quain's  anatomy  ;  the 
microscopic  anatomy  ;  such  complexities  as  form  the  theme  of 
Bayliss'  Physiology.  These  details  might  be  expressed  as  those  of 
"  the  _  mechanics  of  the  body."  (d)  Interactions  in  the  tissues: 
chemical  and  cellular  metabolism,  (e)  In  pathology — the  microbic 
theory  ;  the  endless  and  always  increasing  number  of  "  diseases  " 
the  laboratory  diagnosis  of  dysfunction  of  organs  ;  (albuminuria  was 
of  course,  unknown)  ;  symptoms  as  evidences  of  disordered  reflexes. 
if)  In  treatment  :  the  use  of  antisera  and  specific  anti-substances  of 
organisms  ;  hypodermic  medication  ;  complex  drug  treatment  has 
passed  out  of  vogue.      Surgery.

§  32.  Considerations  which  suggest  that  these  instances  of 
ignorance  are  not  as  grave  as  is  supposed,  and  do  not  invalidate  the 
standing  of  ancient  medicine  in  regard  to  actual  practice  :

Ad  (a).  Circulation  of  a  kind  was  propounded  in  the  case  of 
the  "  breath,"  the  elements,  and  the  body-fluids,  though  not  along 
anatomical  channels.  The  Chinese  recognized  a  process  of  "  revolu- 
tion," a  succession  of  cyclical  changes,  an  ebb  and  flow.  Indeed  it 
is  suggested  in  Duhalde20  (p.  184)  that  the  Chinese  knew  of  the 
circulation  of  the  blood  itself  some  hundred  years  B.C.Wieger  (p.309,  on  Su-Wen),  discussing  whether  the  Chinese  knew  of  the  cir- 
culation of  the  blood  twenty  centuries  before  Harvey  or  not,  decides  truly  that 
_  their  knowledge  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood  in  the  human  microcosm  was 
intuitive,  not  experimental,  conjectured  in  imitation  of  the  circulation  of  the  vital 
principle  m  the  universal  microcosm,  in  which  they  believed  They  guessed  the 
fact  and  they  never  verified  it.  .  .  .  During  more  than  twenty  centuries,  the  how 
of  the  guessed  circulation  never  worried  their  mind.  The  yfn-yang  circulates 
m  a  ring,  the  five  agents  do  the  same,  the  blood  the  same.     That  is  all  .  .  .*'*

Ad(b).  The  rapidity  of  the  changes  was  certainly  not  realized. 
The  Chinese  apparently  believed  that  the  circulation  was  completed 
only  fifty  times  in  one  day  (there  is  however  room  for  fallacious 
translation).

Lest  there  should  be  over-satisfaction  with  ourselves,  it  may  be  suggested 
that  the  rapidity  of  the  movement  of  the  lymph  was  not  realized  before  about  1908,

*  But  if  a  doctrine  which  is  common  to  Taoism  and  esotericism  (that  of  micro- 
cosm and  macrocosm)  is  allowed  to  be  valid,  the  words  "  intuitive  knowledge  '* 
cannot  be  made  synonymous  with  "  conjecture,"  "  guess  "

l6  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

and  is  perhaps  notfully  re^^y^n  Y^^^^^^^^^

«  ISh'leal      ^cfflScrf  Sieria  (c£.  Arch.  Exp.  Med    19**33) 
3S  not  reafed     the  exttence  of  a  circulation  of  nerve-impulses  is  not  yet  admitted.«  ISh'leal      ^cfflScrf  Sieria  (c£.  Arch.  Exp.  Med    19**33) 
3S  not  reafed     the  exttence  of  a  circulation  of  nerve-impulses  is  not  yet  admitted.

Ad  (V>  The  capillaries  of  the  liver  are  referred  to  in  83  ; 
in  the  body  in  general  in  85-  True,  what  Avicenna  calls  capillaries, 
are  large?Aan  those  -we  see  with  the  microscope.  But  he  knew  that 
the  bklod  passes  from  large  trunks  into  the  liver,  traverses  capil- 
laries "  in  the  liver,  and  re-emerges  by  large  trunks.

Ad  (d\  Interactions  in  the  tissues  were  conceived  of  as- 
taking  place  with  an  ebb  and  a  flow  (which  is  correct)  ;  lymph, 
exudes  into  the  tissue-spaces.  Interactions  take  a  considerable 
tfme  (true).     Digestion  goes  on  within  the  blood-vessels  m  various

P^W^Fermentation"  was  the  counterpart  of  bacterial 
growth  as  we  know  it.  The  term  is  used  ^^P^^1^ 
text  re  ex  78  79).  Diseases  were  regarded  chiefly  as  parts  oi  a 
pTLssflnd  there  were  but  few  processes  (which  ^  quite  ^ 
nine  processes  :  see  §  172).  Urinalysis  was  carried  out  in  order  to 
assess  the  functional  state  of  the  liver  (605).  QlinprioritvS  «       Ad  (f).     Modern  medicine  claims  its  title  to  superiority 
bv  its  successes    and  judges  the  medicine  of  the  past  by  its  failures.  ■ 
B'ut  whaTwouid  theJ  judgment  be  if  this  method  were  reverse^ 
Suppose  we  accepted  the  verdict  of  those  among  the  laity— not  so  tew 
-who  are  dissatisfied  with  their  experiences  of  orthodox  medicine 
and  have  turned  to  the  "  unqualified  "  of  one  kind  or  another  ?  or 
tTot^Totecountries  who  prefer  their  native  doctors  sti  1     or  even 
those   Europeans   who   have   experienced  triumphant  success   from 
native  doctors,  after  modern  methods  had  failed  ?     After  all    the 
ancient  medicine  is  still  practised  from   Cairo  to   Calcutta    and  a 
medicine  not  very  different  holds  sway  through  the  Far  East       ihe 
Ste   Sir   Charles   Pardy   Lukis   (Ind.   Med.   Services)   is   quoted   as 
sayine  '' Many  of  the  empirical  methods  of  treatment  adopted  by 
hakims  are  of  the  greatest  value,   and  there  is  no  doubt  whatever 
thatTheir  ancestors,  ages  ago,  knew  many  things  which  are  nowadays 
beine  brought  forward  as  new  discoveries  (Ayurveda,  1924,  2, 1.  i>

gDrug-tgreatment.-The  complexity  of  P™™f™**™% 
times  has  -iven  place  to  simple  and  short  ones,  and  the  tendency  is 
to  dTscard  them  altogether.  But  the  reasons  for  the  ancient  method 
are  given  in  the  Canon,  and  Avicenna  s  &°™  ?!*m^^^ 
on  a  careful  consideration  of  the  constitution  , of  ^^^^ 
as'  of  the  patient  and  his  idiosyncrasies.  Thus,  certain  ingredients 
wol  Kwed  or  disallowed  in  a  given  ^*™^e 
according  to  the  nature  of  the  particular  Patlentk  ™f Jf"^?? 
or  absence,  and  the  amount,  of  nardus,  ginger,  fennel-seed,  anise,

•  misaddress,  ■■  ^^^^^^i'^^T^^l^^

"  modest  standpoint  "  can  surely  hardly  be  saxd  to  be  really  Generai•  misaddress,  ■■  ^^^^^^i'^^T^^l^^

"  modest  standpoint  "  can  surely  hardly  be  saxd  to  be  really  Generai

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  17

piper,  cyperus  rotundus,  must  be  according  to  the  season,  and  the 
age  of  the  patient  "  89  (p.  91). ,

§  34.  Hartmann28  (Chinesische  Heilmethoden,  Munch,  Med. 
Woch.,  1927,  June  3rd,  935)  describes  the  accuracy  of  native 
diagnosis  (from  the  pulse,  §204)  as  "disconcerting,"*  and  describes 
certain  forms  of  treatment  (auto-chemotherapy,  Bier  treatment)  as 
being  practised  in  a  manner  only  different  in  outward  appearance 
from  the  technique  which  we  pride  ourselves  as  being  absolutely  the 
"  latest."  "  No  wonder,"  he  says,  "  that  the  Chinese  are  proud  of 
their  art,  considering  how  long  they  have  known  that  which  we  have 
only  recently  discovered. "f

§  35.  The  cynical  mind  cannot  be  upheld  which  passes  off  the 
reputed  successes  during  the  Middle  Ages  as  coincidences,  and  over- 
looks the  modern  crowded  out-patient  departments  as  evidences  of  the 
limitations  of  our  current  therapy  and  theory  ;  nor  can  the  sceptic 
be  much  noticed  who  denies  miraculous  cures  rather  than  admit 
scientific  theories  to  be  in  any  sense  inadequate.§  36.  Nevertheless,  it  is  obvious  that  the  principles  of  the  Canon 
could  not  be  taught  over  a  hospital  bed  or  in  the  out-patient  depart- 
ment. It  is  true  that  they  cannot  cater  for  the  wholesale  require- 
ments of  the  hospital  or  clinic.  It  should  be  clear  to  the  candid  that 
our  modern  technique  does  not  avail  for  1 00  per  cent,  of  cases  ;  for 
those  who  do  not  benefit  at  least  an  experiment  with  other  systems 
of  treatment  should  not  be  denied.  If  the  fault  is  laid  at  the  feet  of 
over-strenuous  routine  work,  the  more  leisured  may  yet  find  an 
advantage  in  a  system  which  puts  the  details  of  a  person's  constitution 
in  all  its  aspects  into  the  forefront,  where  there  is  no  question  of 
teaching  it  either  to  classes  or  even  to  possibly  indifferent  individuals. 
The  words  of  Paracelsus  may  be  recalled,  where  he  says  :  "  the 
doctor  who  loves  his  art  does  not  undertake  twenty  cases  but  five, 
knowing  that  no  one  person  can  conscientiously  treat  more  than  a 
certain  number.  No  one  person  could  ever  make  the  whole  world 
sound."

C.  Knowledge  common  to  Avicenna  and  Modern  Medicine. 
§  37.  A  perusal  of  the  text  of  the  Canon  will  show  many 
passages  which  apply  quite  well,  without  explanation,  in  these  days. 
Thus,  the  following  may  be  specified  :  the  close  relation  between 
emotions  and  physiological  states  (shown  to  be  even  closer  than 
modern  research  has  realized)/ — The  classification  of  people  into 
sanguine,  phlegmatic,  bilious,  saturnine,  frigid,  "hot." — The 
physiology    of  sleep,    and    how   posture    may   remedy   insomnia. —

*  The  same  wonder  at  their  practice  is  recorded  in  a.d.  1253,  when  the  friar 
William  of  Rubuck  visited  their  country.*  The  same  wonder  at  their  practice  is  recorded  in  a.d.  1253,  when  the  friar 
William  of  Rubuck  visited  their  country.

\  These  words  can  be  fully  endorsed,  if  only  from  a  study  of  the  Chinese  classic 
on  the  pulse98  (80  volumes),  discussed  under  the  heading  of  "  The  Pulse  "  in  the 
present  treatise  (§  208).  Among  other  ancient  Chinese  medical  works  (first  seen  by 
the  present  writer  in  the  very  extensive  collection  in  the  Library  of  M'Gill  University, 
Montreal)  reference  may  be  made  to  the  astonishing  accuracy  of  representations 
of  medicinal  and  other  plants,  and  the  almost  dramatic  representations  of  various 
diseased  states  in  the  i"  tsung  chin  ch'un  by  Hung  Chou — extant  in  Avicenna's  time. 
This  work  was  reprinted  between  1904  and  1924,  and  an  older  edition  is  in  the 
Library  of  the  School  of  Oriental  Studies  (London  Institution).

C

l8  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINEC

l8  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Choice  of  location  for  dwellings. -The  choice  of  a  good  drinking- 
water.-Health  resorts.     Climatic  influences  on  health  and  dlness 
Plethoric    maladies.-Dietetics.-Hydrotherap.-^egimmal     reat 
ment— The  uses  of  counter-irritation.— Bier  treatment.—  i  he  intro 
Action  of  remedies  into  the  urethra.-The  use  o  vagina 1  tampans  - 
The  use  of  anaesthetics  by  the  mouth  (medicated  wines  .    scopola 
i^e^  -Testing  the   strength   of  a   drug  by   animal   experiment 
(Vol.  5  j.-The  treatment  of  iSsanity  by  malaria  (228)  -The  fo  lowing 
oaraeraphs  are  interesting  among  many  others  :  106,  115,  Abb. 
P       ITdoubt  the  great  difference  between  the  ancient  and  modern 
is  one  of  outlook,  which  accounts  for  the  ^^^^^^ 
which   appeared  interesting   and  even   important  in  those   days   is 
passed  over  by  modern  physiology  and  pat hology      Eadi  cenW 
Ls  its  own  interest.     T%£^^^^*^  tW 
^Tu^TdL.™^,  fSS  all  kint  come  to  be  out  of  date, 
but   the    epithets    "right,"    "wrong"    do    not    apply.     The    more 
carefully  we  observe  modern  science  the  more  evident  does  it  become 
that  iustTts  terminology  and  subject  of  conversation  is  different. 
Things  are  seen  from  new  angles,  and  things  only  surmised  at  then  are

amenable  to  tangible  description  now.  qi  restive

Tn  fact  there  occur  moments,  even  at  this  day,  when  suggestive

thoughts  migh    be  drawn  from  the  Canon,  to  help  in  studying  the

Sdual,  tf dious,  or  baffling  case    especially  whe«  the  p^£»

far  distant  from  the  laboratories  and  appliances  of  modern  medicine.

V 
Of  Interest  to  the  Scholar.Sdual,  tf dious,  or  baffling  case    especially  whe«  the  p^£»

far  distant  from  the  laboratories  and  appliances  of  modern  medicine.

V 
Of  Interest  to  the  Scholar.

8  38.  The  present  translation  is  based  on  the  Latin  versions 
published  at  Venice  in  1608  and  i595,  support ed  ^  a  stucly  °f  the 
Arabic  edition  printed  at  Rome  in  1 593  and  the  Bulaq  edition

It  is  true  that  as  E.  G.  Browne^  p.  34)  pointed  out,  the  Latin 
Oanun  swarms  with  barbarous  words  which  are  not  merely  tran-

S^Sn  many  cases  ^^.^^^^^£"^3 
of  Arabic  originals,"  and  that  Hirschberg  and  Lippert  regard 
the  Latin  as  almost  unintelligible  though  they  admit  he  slav  sh 
adherence"  of  the  Latin  to  the  Arabic  Campbell  (p. ■  £39) 
states  that  there  was  a  "  society  of  translators  at  To  edo  about 
ino  AD,  "whose  method  of  translating  from  Arabic  to  Latin 
was  to  put  the  Latin  equivalent  over  the  Arabic  words,  dis- 
retard°ngPSe  sense  of  the  original."  It  is  true  that  m  many  passages 
thf obscurity  is  similar  to  the  effect  which  would  result  if  one  were  at 
this  day  to  render  idiomatic  French  word  ^  word ^nto  a^hsh.

It  is  important  to  point  out  that  the  Latin  of  Volume  I  is  very 
different  from  that  of  Vols.  III-V  ;  so  different  that  th< ;tra^on 
must  have  been  the  work  of  different  persons.  While  the  criticisms 
Se  justified  with  regard  to  these  three  volumes,  they  do  not  apply  to

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  I9

the  first  whose  Latin  is  very  close  to  the  Arabic,  and  hardly  to  be 
improved.  The  difficulty  really  is  that  the  Arabic  itself  is  so  con- 
densed that  the  meaning  can  only  be  clearly  represented  in  English 
by  the  use  of  many  more  words,  whether  to  help  out  the  meaning 
itselt,  or  to  make  a  presentable  reading._  It  may  well  be  said,  as  did  E.  G.  Browne6  fp.  26,  27)  ■  "  he  who 
judges  Arabian  Medicine  only  by  the  Latin  translation  wili  inevitably 
under-value  it  and  do  it  a  great  injustice.  Indeed  it  is  difficult  to 
resist  the  conclusion  that  many  passages  in  the  Latin  version  of  the 
yanun  of  Avicenna  were  misunderstood  or  not  understood  at  all  bv 
the  translator  and  consequently  can  never  have  conveyed  a  clear  idea 
to  the  reader.

T,     §39-     The  following  aids  to  clearness  have  been  utilized,     (a) 
The  study  of  Avicenna's  other  works,  and  of  contemporary  philo- 
sophical writings,   m  the  existing  translations,     (b)   The  study  of 
various  Latin  terms  as  understood  by  modern  scholastic  philosophy 
m  its   exposition  of  the   mediaeval   nomenclature.     (A   The  use  of 
modern  terms  when  there  is  no  reasonable  doubt  of  their  referring  to 
the  same  idea,  though  the  literal  term  in  the  Latin  is  obsolete      The 
careful    study    of   the    original    Arabic    has    here    been    of   special 
importance    for  words  in  the  Latin  version,   which  are  evidently 
technical    there,    become    merely    colloquial    when   translated    into 
English,  whereas  in  the  Arabic  version,  such  words  at  once  take  on 
their  proper  character  in  the  Arabic-English  and  Persian-English 
dictionaries      (d)  The  use  of  tabulation  of  the  matter.     There  are 
instances  where  this  proves  possible  without  omitting  even  a  single 
Arabic   word.     (,)    The    use    of  paraphrase    for    certain   passage 
These  are  marked  (p).     A  certain  freedom  of  rendering  has  been 
inevitable  m  view  of  the  importance  of  bringing  the  full  meaning  of 
the  text  to  the  reader  s  notice  without  subjecting  him  to  the  need  ofori|Sal  A    b?    *°n  PaSSagC  after  paSSage~as  is  requisite  with  the

VI

§  40.     The  main  purpose  of  this  treatise  will  now  be  seen  to 
centre  m  the  idea  that  in  the  ancient  philosophy  there  is  material 
capable  of  useful  application  to-day.     The  selection  of  the  work  of 
Avicenna  is   not  intended  to  provide  an  apologium  for  that  one 
author,    but   is    specially    appropriate  for   these    reasons  :     (i)    his 
acknowledged    excellence  ;      (ii)    his    greater    accessibility    among 
mediaeval   medical   writings  ;     (iii)   a   certain   indefinable   charm   of 
expression  peculiar  to  himself.     But  above  all,  (iv)  the  fact  thaThis 
central  theme  is  a  conception  of  the  nature  of  the  human  being  really 
identical    with   that   of   Thomistic   philosophy,    and   in   theie    days 
specially  stressed  and  developed  by  «  modern  scholastic  philosophy  '' 
As  these  are  related,  so  might  Avicenna  be  related  to  a  modern

2Q  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

,he°  wa  Mercier"  "  we  do  not  regard  the  Thomistic  philosophy 
kWar^tXm  wLht^  ^her  arid"  (footnote,

P'  3  With  Maher  ■««"...  resuscitate  and  "  (apply  to  Medicine) 
«  Wa  p^ycho'logy  that  has  already  survived  four  and  twenty 
centuries,  Ed  has  Ed  more  influence ;  on human  though and  human

(S3)  &££J^n*^^c1w#     "  —  "Se 
Crudely  expressed  or  perhaps  faultily  explained,  ,t  rs  our  pnvlege

under  4d1fferlnt°gatbs  are  not  obliged  to  accord  the* .garbs  an  ^

SnfldentThatX  Zt  S^Xurtsire^not  so  intangMe 
as  at  first  appeared.

"  I  deemed  life  was  tranquillity  and  rest, 
I  find  it  but  a  never-ending  quest ;

And  I,  who  sat  in  q^de  and  Pea^  „        (Shamshad.-) 
Toil  on  a  journey  that  shall  never  cease.  (And  I,  who  sat  in  q^de  and  Pea^  „        (Shamshad.-) 
Toil  on  a  journey  that  shall  never  cease.  (

••  Why  should  the  Cosmos  turn  its  wheel  of  worlds 
If  not  to  search  for  Thee  eternally  ? 
Why  should  the  tireless  Sun  arise  each  morn

If  not  to  look  for  Thee  ?  "  *■

At  last  I  found  Thee  hidden  in  my  arms  (Zauq.»)

Within  my  breast !  v.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

21

§  43.  That  which  is  spread  before  us,  beneath  the  unceasing 
surge  and  change  of  the  crowded  life  of  the  thoroughfares  of  great 
cities,  as  well  as  beneath  the  panorama  of  Nature  herself,  was  surely 
understood  by  those  who  insisted  "  there  is  no  second  Cause,"  and  by 
Chu  Hsi11  in  saying  "  the  innumerable  laws  (of  Nature)  all  proceed 
from  one  source"  (p.  137).  In  this  the  thought  is  not  pietistically  of  a 
Creator,  .but  of  a  living  Reality  met  (passively  or  receptively)  or 
encountered  (actively  or  contestingly)  by  us  all  at  all  times.  That 
Reality  must  be  understood  before  we  handle  the  problem  of  our 
patient  with  real  efficacy.§  44.  In  the  intention  of  this  work,  then,  there  comes  into 
consideration  that  greater  Art  of  Medicine— not  an  ethical  Hippo- 
cratic  ideal,  but  something  of  the  divine— an  Art  as  real  to  Avicenna, 
philosopher,  poet,  musician,  the  worker  among  the  great  and  the 
small,  aware  of  the  dramatic  in  Life,  as  it  should  be  to  us.  So  we 
step  out  of  the  world  of  the  modern  critic,  the  scholar,  and  the  medical 
historian,  indeed  of  modern  medicine  itself,  into  one  in  which  we 
stand,  as  it  were,  hand  in  hand,  with  the  great  Master  of  the  East— 
almost  with  his  very  eyes  gazing  upon  and  scrutinising  this  ever  open 
book  of  Life  of  ours — divested  of  the  false  notions  of  "  progress  "  and 
"time."  His  language  is  thus  no  longer  alien— and,  incidentally, 
he  lives  again  !

Introductory   Words

N  the  first  place  we  render  thanks  to  Allah,  for

1  the  very  excellence  of  the  order  of  His  creation,

and    the    abundance    of   His    benefits.       His

Ih^     and    tne     aDunuancc    ui    n«     — 
#\^>  mercies  are  upon  all  the  prophets.  _

fc  J  2.      In  the  next  place,  I  may  say  that  _  it

ifiLi  is  at  the  request  of  one  of  my  very  special 
friends,*  one  whom  I  feel  most  bound  _  to 
consider,  that  I  prepare  this  book  on  Medicine  setting 
forth  its  general  and  particular  laws  to  the  full  extent 
necessary,  and  yet  with  apt  brevity.3  My  plan  is  to  deal  with  the  general  aspects  of  each  of 
the  two  divisions  of  medicine— the  speculative  and  the  practical 
Then  I  shall  treat  of  the  general  principles  applicable  to  the 
diagnosis  of  the  properties  of  the  simples,  following  this  with  a 
detailed  account  of  them.  Then  I  shalHake  upthe  disorders 
which  befall  each  individual  member,  beginning  with  an  account 
of  its  anatomy,  and  that  of  its  auxiliary.  The  anatomy  of  the 
several  members  and  their  auxiliaries  is  dealt  with  in  the  first 
book.  Having  completed  the  account  of  the  anatomy,  I  shall 
show  how  the  health  of  the  member  is  to  be  maintained.

4  This  subject  being  completed,  I  proceed  to  ageneral 
discourse  about  general  diseases -their  causes,  the  signs  by 
which  they  are  recognized,  and  the  modes  of  treatment.  After 
this,  I  pass  on  to  the  special  diseases  and  will  point  out  in  as 
many  cases  as  possible-(i)  the  general  diagnosis  of  their 
characters,  causes  and  signs,  (ii)  the  special  diagnostic  features,

^^SmiSi^^ i  ?A  in  oils  hanging  in  a,  ante- 
haU  ^J^J^W  other  headings  *£*££■«£  —Seud

letters  are  taken  from  the  1608  edition  in  Latin,  the  1523  edition  of  Haly  Abbas, 
and  various  mediaeval  illuminated  books.

22

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  23

(iii)  the  general  rules  of  treatment,  (iv)  the  special  methods  of 
treatment  by  {a)  simples,  (^.compounded  medicines.

I  include  specially  designed  tables  under  the  subject  of 
simples  to  enable  you  to  survey  the  facts  rapidly  as  to  the  adju- 
vants for  treating  disease  by  simples.I  include  specially  designed  tables  under  the  subject  of 
simples  to  enable  you  to  survey  the  facts  rapidly  as  to  the  adju- 
vants for  treating  disease  by  simples.

Compounded  medicines,  and  their  adjuvants,  and  how  to 
mix  them  I  have  deemed  it  best  to  consider  separately  in  a 
"  Formulary."  This  it  is  my  intention  to  compose  after  the 
special  subjects  are  dealt  with.  Disorders  not  confined  to  one 
member  are  described  in  this  book  ;  the  cosmetics  are  spoken, 
of  ;  and  the  knowledge  set  forth  in  previous  books  is  assumed.. 
Allah  helping  me  to  complete  this  volume,  the  formulary  will! 
be  added  to  it.

5.  Every  follower  of  my  teachings  who  wishes  to  use 
them  profitably  should  memorize  most  of  this  work,  even  though 
he  do  not  quite  understand  it  all.

It  is  my  intention  to  prepare  further  volumes  if  Allah 
should  prolong  my  life  still  further,  and  if  circumstances  prove 
propitious.

Scheme  of   Contents

Book  I.      General^  matters  relative  to  the  science  of  medicine.

1.  The  definition  and  scope  of  medicine.     Health.

2.  The  classification  of  diseases  ;   their  general  causes  and

symptoms.

3.  The  preservation  of  health  and  regiminal  treatment.

4.  The  classification  of  the  modes  of  treatment  in  general. 
Book  II.      Materia  medica.

Book  III.      Special  "pathology  "  (Medical  and  Surgical). 
Book  IV.      Special  diseases  involving  more  than  one  member.

The  cosmetic  art. 
Book  V.      Formulary.

CONTEXTS  OF  BOOK  I* 
Part  i  comprises  six  theses  : —

The  definition  of  medicine.     The  topics  of  medicine. 
The  imponderable  elements. 
The  temperaments  and  constitutions. 
The  fluids  of  the  body,  and  how  they  arise.

The   members    (bones,"  muscles,   nerves,   arteries,    veins)     (=   tissues   and 
organs).  '     vThe   members    (bones,"  muscles,   nerves,   arteries,    veins)     (=   tissues   and 
organs).  '     v

6.     The  faculties  of  the  body:    vegetative,   sensitive,   vital.     The  power  of 
locomotion.     The  functions  and  operations  of  the  body 
Part  2  comprises  three  theses  :—  y'

1.     Ill-health  :

(a)  Causes,  symptoms.

(b)  States  of  the  body  ;    types  of  disease.

(c)  Disorders  of  configuration.

*  The  Latin  text  is  abridged  here.

24  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Id)  Loss  of  continuity.

(e)   Diseases  of  the  composition.

if)   Disfigurements.    ,

'(g)  The  phases  or  cyles  of  disease.

2.  The"  causes  of  disease  :

(a)  Atmospheric,  seasonal,  winds,  localities  ,    the  sun. 
(&)  Vegetative  functions. 
(c)   Food  and  drink.

'"       B  gnumittion'of  the  causes  of  each   of  the  corporeal  conditions.

3.  Thi  Ivfden^es  of  Ul-health  in  (a)  the  pulse,  (6)  the  urine,  (c)  the  feces. 
Part  3  comprises  five  theses  : —       ,.,,_,      ,-u^   „^i

dietetics,  fatigue. 
?:     llSn^p^rfafe  to  the  various  constitutions  and  habits  of  body.

5-     ^  Arfepitome  giving  the  regimen  in  special  circumstances  of  life.

Part  4.     The  treatment  of  disease.  .

*  4  (There  are  263  chapters  in  all.)

K-

$&$&&

In  the  nams  of  Allah,  the  Merciful,  the  Clement.

BOOK  I

w-n  K.Yh^eVer  ht  mastere?  the  first  book  of  the  Qanun,  to  him  nothing 
w  11  be  hidden  of  the  general  and  fundamental  principles  of  medicine  "— 
Chahar  Maqala.7

Part   I

THESIS  I

i.     The  Definition  of  "  Medicine  "Part   I

THESIS  I

i.     The  Definition  of  "  Medicine  "

EDICINE  (6)  is  the  science  by  which  we 
learn,  (V)the  various  states  of'the  human 
body,  (i)  in  health,  (ii)  when  not  in  health, 
(b)  the  means  by  which,  (i)  health  is  likely 
to  be  lost,  and  (ii)  when  lost,  is  likely 
tobe  restored  to  health.  In  other  words, 
it  is  the  art  whereby  health  [the  beauty  of 
the  body — long  hair,  clear  complexion, 
fragrance  and  form  (Chahar  Maqala)]  is  conserved  and 
the  art  whereby  it  is  restored,  after  being  lost.

7.  Although  some  divide  "  medicine  "  into  a 
speculative  (theoretical)  and  a  practical  (applied)  part,  you 
have  assumed  that  it  is  wholly  speculative  "  because  " 
you  say  "  it  is  pure  science."  But  truly  every  science  has 
both  a  speculative  and  a  practical  aspect.  Philosophy 
has  a  speculative  and  a  practical  side.  So  has  medicine. 
The- difference  between  the  two  need  be  explained  only 
m  the  case  of  medicine.     Thus

25

26  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

When  in  regard  to  medicine,  we  say  that  practice  proceeds 
from  Theory,  we  do  not  mean  that  there  is  one  division  of 
meScne  by  which  we  know,  and  another,  distinct  therefrom 
"y  which  we  act.  We  mean  that,  these  two ^aspects  be  ong 
together-one  deals  with  the  basic  principles  of  knowledge  he 
other  with  the  mode  of  operation  of  these  principles  (with  n  the 
body)  The  former  is  theory  ;  the  latter  is  applied  knowledge.. 
8  "  Theory  "  of  medicine  is  that  which,  when  mastered, 
gives  us  a  certain  kind  of  knowledge,  apart  from  any  question 
of  treatment.  Thus  we  say  that  "  there  are  three  forms  of  fever 
and  nine  -nsntutions.^  ^.^  ^  ^  ^  ^  wh;physician  carries  out,  but  is  that  branch  of  medical  knowledge 
^ch,  when  acquired,  enables  one  to  form  an  omn  on  upon 
which  to  base  the  proper  plan  of  treatment.     Thus  it  is  sad 
"for  inflammatory  Vi,  the  first  agents  to  employ  are mfegt 
dants,  inspissants.'and  repellants  ;    then  we  temper  these  with 
nToUmcants  ;    and,    finally,    when    the    process"    sutadmg 
resolvent    mollificants    will    accomplish    the    rest       But   it  the 
SeTed  focus  contains  matter  which  depends  for  its expulsion 
on  the  integrity  of  the  principal  members,  such  treatment  is 
not  applicable/  Here  J  theory  guides  to  an  opinion,  and  the 
ooinion  is  the  basis  of  treatment.  .

P      Once  the  purpose  of  each  aspect  of  medicine  is  understood 
you  can   become  skilled  in   both,   even   though  there  should 
never  c6me  a  call  for  you  to  exercise  your  knowledge10.     Another    thing— there    is    no    need    to    assert    mat 
<<  there  are  three  states  of  the  human  body-sickness    heakh 
.  and  a  state  which  is  neither  health  nor  disease        The  first  two 
cover   everything.      Careful   consideration   of  the   subject  will 
mike  it  clelr to  the  physician  either  that  the  threefold  grouping 
Tunnecessary  or  th£  "he  group  which  we  reject  is  unnecessary 
The   first   two    states    really   cover    everything.      ^aremi 
consideration  will  convince  the  physician  that  the  third  state  is 
dual— on  the  one  hand  an  infirmity,  and  on  the  other  a  habit  or. 
body    [some   ugliness    of  form,    for   instance]    or    a   condition 
which  cannot  be  called  strict  health  although  the  actions  and 
functions  of  the  body  are  normal.     One  must  -t  risk  definmg 
"  health  "  in  an  arbitrary  fashion,  and  include  in  it  a  condition 
which  does  not  belong  to  it  (/>.).

'       However  we   do   not   propose  to   argue  this   matter   out, 
because   a    disputation    of   that   kind    does    not   really    further

medicine.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  2y

,  .  §  &  J0&nniti*s"-  "5unayn  ibn  Ishaqal-'Ibadi  (E.  G.  Browne',  p.  i47)_ 
defines  Medicine  as  the  science  which  informs  us  about  the  states  of  the  human 
body  m  health,  or  when  it  debates  :from  health  ;    how  to  retain  health  ;    how  to

rtJgctJ-lJ.   XL.

It  is  concerned  with  the  following  : —

i.  That  which  is  integral  in  the  nature  of  the  human  being.     The  seven 
a n^   +t         f         Wealthy  human  being-four  being  material,  essential, 
and  three  formal.     The  four  'accidental"   notes 
2.  -That  which  is  apart  from  the  nature  of  the  human  bein<* 
3-   Ihe  preternatural  or  abnormal,  to  which  belong  the  d?seases    their 
causes  and  signs.  'and    Definition   of  Medicine  as   a  Profession;   the

§  46.     The   Scope 
motives    underlying.

1.  Medicine  as  an  exterior  Life  or  Career.

(a)  The  pursuit  of  a  science.  Medicine  may  J^e  taken  up  as  a  science  in  itself 
for  the  sake  of  science-namely,  that  science  which  treats^  of  the  prevention  or 
cure  of  disease  '  .  This  work  entails  the  study  of  cognate  sciences.  Lovl  of  know- 
ledge may  be  the  chief  motive  ;  that  is,  it  is  an  intellectual  pursuit ;  though  othlr 
motives  may  be  associated.  muugu  umw

_  Many  branches  of  medical  science  are  separated  off  as  distinct  pursuits-exter- 
nal, internal  state,  psychological,  pathological,  legal,  medicine,  eta  As  a  Career 
it  may  be  orthodox  that  is  obedient  to  the  laws  about  practice,  etc.  ;  in  which  case 
it  is  also  obedient  so  ely  to  the  microbic  theory  of  disease-or  unorthodox  in  varioul 
degrees  through  following  different  "  systems,"  many  of  which  are  unauthorised 
and  lead  to  some  form  of  illegal  practice.  y  unauthorized,

If  Medicine  be  regarded  as  concerned  with  the  nature  and  constitution  of  man 
(as  a  matter  of  the  first  importance  in  learning  how  to  maintain  health  aS I  al  W?JS 
the  distresses  of  ill-health) ,  it  is  defined  virtually  in  the  same "wa" ^as  A^cenna  and 
conforms  also  to  modern  scholastic  philosophy.  In  this  case  the  practitioner 
would  centre  his  attention  on  the  individual,  the  patient  himself,  rather  than  on  some

S^^^tST and  above  the  disease  or  infection ;  the  const=

to  jx^&g^*^  arL     ^  SClentifiC  aSP6Ct  iS  hSre  ™de  subadiatyS^^^tST and  above  the  disease  or  infection ;  the  const=

to  jx^&g^*^  arL     ^  SClentifiC  aSP6Ct  iS  hSre  ™de  subadiaty

t  -t,  P  Ij  itS  P5.imary.  motive,  this  form  of  pursuit  is  of  course  the  pursuit  of  a  live- 
lihood, and  medicine  1S  a  form  of  commercial  life.  Its  success  would  tw,  it 
measured  by  the  bank  balance.  Admittedly  this  is  seldom  of M^ Tdegree  called 
wealth.  After  a  long  life  of  hard  work,  such  a  one  might  grieve  at  his  lack  of s„™ 
did  he  not  simultaneously  have  motive  (ii).  For  thlse  ^ords  tht  appl^  " "The 
only  compensation  which  medicine  offers  to  wealth  is  the  spiritual  pleasure  of 
sacrifice  that  solemn  sweetness  which  floods  our  being  when  weTee  the  frurt  6f  our 
pain.  The  dependence  of  the  soul  on  the  Creator,  brings  our  obligation  to  Him in 
dealing  with  those  under  our  care.  This  is  what  makes  the  weary  dispensarv  cUrfic 
blossom  with  a  fullness  of  solace  surpassing  all  expectations"  frlST^

(11)  Pursuit  primarily  for  humanitarian  motives— the  alleviation  of  sufferino- 
especially  of  physical  pain  ;  and  of  various  disabilities.  (The  actual  cure  0S 
is  often  supposed  to  be  within  human  scope,  though  an  impartial iud™t 
motteT    7  m°dlfy  SUCh  ^  idea')     Preveilt-e   ^Icme  is   teS  ^Tame§  47-  2.  Medicine  as  an  interior  Life.  Motives  in  the  strict  sense 
am1vJa)  "  W°rldly  moijves  "—pursuit  as  a  means  of  satisfying  a  certain  egoism  or 
bSnesT  °n  Part  °f  the  d0Ct°r  himS6lf  °r  °f  MS  relations  =  P-rsuit  as  S  or 
a-  ^-\bl  AsaJorm°i 'devotion  to  Fellow-man.  Philanthropy,  (i)  The  relief  of  ™ in 
disability,  suffering,  etc.  _  (11)  Socio-political  motives-theWts  of leSlatton^nd 
research  :  sanitary  medicine  ;  state  medicine.  Industrial  medicine  OrganiTation 
of      team      work  both  for  research  and  the  <<  panel."     The  devrtion  if  more  ?S

28  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Man  in  the  abstract,  the  individual  not  receiving  personal  contact,  as  he. does

Under(c)  'As  a  form  of  devotion  to  God.  ..      means  of  studving  God  both

in  ^^t^S^^t^^I^tt^^  the  purpose  or  God

^li)  The  pursuit  of  practice  («)  as  a  penance  <* ^£$^^  S£ 
cell  of  your  heart "     So,  Avicenna the  Sufi  seemgtox  J  V,  m perfection

is  a  disciplinary  (Massignon  »  11.  51 5)-  <£ /^  all  and  God  leads  each  according 
»  Every  soul  is  on  the  way  to  ^^f^'^  g76) .  This  is  the  practitioner's 
to  the  means  He  selects  as  best       ^nquery       p.  97  J  ^^  fee  tQ  ac^      e

"  unitive  way."     To  achieve  one  s ^Vf*  ^ ew  „  ^  ^  rf  ^  Lord

tMf  desire.     (C)  A  means  of  realizat  on  of  «ie  love  01  „  being

is  the  beginning  of  wisdom      (Medicine  as  a      r     g  x  will>  but  through

elusion    under  this  title)-culminating,    not   tbroug      p  every  organ

divine  will,  in  a  consciousness  of  the  Hes^M  £oUection  may  finally  become 
and  tissue,  so  that  the  state  (  Hal  )  ot  r  cthat  expiation  may  be  accom- 
actual.     (d)  A  means  of  expiation      It  is  P°^w  £ithout  his  being  aware

plished  through  the  instrumentality  o the >  P^an^  .g  released  ^plished  through  the  instrumentality  o the >  P^an^  .g  released  ^

of  the  fact.  He  may  be  the  ^^^o™  On  theP  other  hand,  he  may  fulfil 
nesses  arising  from  causes  indicated  m§  19*     on  are  t_  f       n  him

a  deeper  intention,  especially  whe*  °°™ s*£ J^  of  eXpression,-he  may  become 
the  devotion  of  God  to  man  may  become  capable  otp  ^  ^  ^.^  of        d

the  vehicle  of  God's  intention.     As  the .mas iter :  j  ^  one  Qr  two

heard  from  among  the  sea  of  musicians  and  is  on  y ^ab de  ac         y^  utterance  of  t^at

individual  in  one  generation.  ,  it  of  medicine  as  an  art  receives  a ^dual

§  48 .     This,  the  highest  aim  of  the  pursuit _oi 1  patients,  benefiting

reward  •  the  subtle  intangible  but  *^^£f^Sby  the  spirit  of  divine  love

them  unknowingly  ;   the  f  »c  J^  /Xof  absolute  realities-into  that 
whereby  is  imparted  the  gift  of  *m*gW  intone  realms  o  ^      ft  of

which  underlies  deeply  the  appearance    of  this  ^^  |hereby  t^e  for  whom 
ability  to  counsel  the  P^ents  along  ^eroad^t too^;  ^  ^     Neither

this  counsel  is  intended  shall  Proc^  fj^as  ™ft      Yet  the  former  may  recognize 
physician  nor  patient  may  be  consc  ous  o E  this ■  &£.  related  to

tbe  sa^S^^S|SiS   ^  "fS  S-2S&  ffif 
J^'^^SS^SS^^^^  -ks  of  the  day  need  evoke

n°  SigAs°Ibneur'l-Farid  (..,.  xr8.-r.35)  «-^^^S^w^b?S  da^ 
power  of  lifting  oneself  *f^^^Z^^£tox  above." 
task  becomes  transformed      all  br™^?  ^u*    -n^nds,  and  in  great  cities      In 
§  49.     In  these  days,  mass-production  oi  an  m™  5  ^  ^^

those  days,  individual  craftsmanship  and ^artistr^ ;  m  seel  ^.^^  ■  all  its 
days,  the  organization  of  mod^t1m^b.  0f  the  highways,  with  a  certain  scorn 
fofffis^ted^^e^^a^d8^  leisur.efy  solitude,  in  which  could  be—^^hl^^^ma, i  steppe  ^^S^ 
lanes,  and  in  our  wayfaring  find  ourselves  back .^  those^ ti  hiirfgain  a  glimpse

and  forgotten  seer,  stay  quiet* ^  ^^^^"truth  is  abiding  and 
of   Something  which  nothing   else  can  reveai,

irresistible.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  29

2.     The  Subject-Matter  of  Medicine

11.  To  medicine  pertains  the  (study  of  the)  human  body 
— how  its  health  is  maintained;  how  it  loses  health.  To  know 
fully  about  each  of  these  we  must  ascertain  the  causes  of  both 
health  and  sickness.

12.  Now  as  health  and  sickness  and  their  causes  are 
sometimes  evident  to  the  senses  and  sometimes  only  perceived 
by  means  of  the  evidence  afforded  by  the  various  symptoms, 
we  must  m  medicine  gain  a  knowledge  of  the  symptoms  of  health 
and  sickness.

It  is  a  dictum  of  the  exact  sciences  that  knowledge  of  a  thing 
is  attained  only  through  a  knowledge  of  the  causes  and  the  origins 
of  the  causes. — assuming  there  to  be  causes  and  origins.  Con- 
sequently our  knowledge  (of  health  and  sickness)  cannot  be 
complete  without  an  understanding  both  of  symptoms  and  of 
the  principles  of  being.

Symptoms :  the  word  includes  our  modern  "  signs  "  and 
"  symptoms."  Principles  of  being:  this  is  the  topic  of  scholastic 
metaphysics.  Only  through  a  knowledge  of  causes  /—compare 
the  following  : —

"  It  is  impossible  to  know  a  thing  perfectly  unless  we  know  its 
operation  ;  since  from  the  mode  and  species  of  its  operation  we 
gauge  the  measure  and  quality  of  its  power,  while  the  power  of  a 
thing  shows  forth  its  nature  :  because  a  thing  has  naturally  an 
aptitude  for  work  according  as  it  actually  has  such  and  such  a 
nature."  Now  the  operation  of  a  thing  is  twofold,  as  the  Philosopher 
teaches  (9  Metaph.,  D.8,  viii.  9)  ;  one  that  abides  in  the  very  worker 
and  is  a  perfection  of  the  worker  himself,  such  as  to  sense,  to  under- 
stand, and  to  will  ;  and  another  that  passes  into  an  outward  thing 
and  is  a  perfection  of  the  thing  made,  that  results  from  it,  such  as  to 
heat,  to  cut  and  to  build."     (Contra  Gent.81,  ii.  1).

13.  There  are  four  kinds  of  "  cause  "  (of  health  and  sick- 
ness) : —

1.  The  material  cause — namely,  the  human  subject  in  a 
state  of  health  or  disease.  The  immediate  subject  is  :  the 
members  and  the  breath.  The  more  remote  is  :  the  humours. 
The  most  remote  is  :  the  (imponderable)  "  elements."  The 
humours  and  the  elements  are  composites,  and  they  are  liable

3o  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

to  vary.     But  though  they  are  subject  to  a  variation  of  com- 
position and  change  they  show  a  certain  constant  unity  to  which 
they  converge— namely,  a  unity  of  "constitution      or.  of     form 
ThecoSItitution  is  in  relation  to  the  "change"  ;  whereas  the 
"  form  "  is  related  to  the  "  composition.  .       .

2."    The  efficient  causes  are  such  as  change  or  maintain  the 
states  of  the  human  body.    Namely  :—

Extrinsic:    the  air  and  affiliated  agents:

extrinsic      iocaHt.eS)  countries>  habitable  regions  and  the  like  :

comestibles,  potables,  and  the  like. 
Intrinsic  :     movement  and  its  opposite— repose  of  body  and  mind  ; 
including  sleep   and    its    opposite-the  waking  state; 
evacuation  of  secretions  and  excretions  ;  and  its  opposite 
— retention  thereof :the  changes  at  the  different  periods  of  lite  • 
occupations  ;    habits  and  customs  : 
descent  (race,  nationality). 
Agents  affecting  the  human  body  by  contact,  whether  contrary  to

nature  or  not.

n       The  formal  causes  :    the  constitutions  ;    the  composi- 
tions ;   the  faculties  proceeding  from  the  constitutions.

8  <o  Costaeus,  the  Annotator  of  the  Canon  (1608  ed.)  passes 
on  to  speak  of  health  as  a  "  harmony  of  the  composite,  the  formal 
cause  ofthe  human  body."  Galen  also  defined  temperament  as  he 
formal  cause  of  the  human  body.  It  is  exactly  here  that  we  find  the 
S  between  theology  and  rationalism,  for  the  former  defines  the 
formarcause  of  the  human  being  to  be  what  is  called  "  the  rational

S  U  The  refutation  of  the  statements   is   adequately  made  by  S.

Thomas84  (lxiii),  thus  : —  .

"  Harmony  cannot  move  a  body  or  govern  it,  as  neither  can  a 
temperament.  A  harmony  and  a  temperament  also  admits  oi 
de?rPees  The  notion  of  harmony  rather  befits  qualities  of  the  body 
than  the  soul  ;  thus  health  is  a  harmony  of  the  humours  ;  strength  is 
a  harmony  of  muscles  and  bones  ;  beauty  is  a  harmony  of  limb  and 
colour  .  Harmony  may  mean  either  the  composition  itself  or

the  principle  of  composition.  Now  the  soul  is  not  a  composition, 
because  then  every  part  of  the  soul  would  have  to  be  the  composition 
nf  the  parts  of  the  body.  .   .  .  "  (1,  p-  166).  _

Just  as  the  mediaeval  physicians  fell  into  the  rationalistic  error 
so  ably  and  thoroughly  exposed  throughout  the      Contra  Gentiles 
when  they  "  freed  "  themselves  from  stereotyped  teaching,  so  withm0deThetephCyskS  and  chemical  facts  which  were  discovered  in  the 
nineteenth  century  appeared  finally  to  controvert  both  the  statement 
of  the  Canon  and  those  of  the  scholastic  metaphysicians  ;    but  it  is

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  3I

gradually  becoming  clear  to  more  and  more  thinkers  that  this  is  not 
the  case.

4.  The  final  causes  :  the  actions  or  functions.  A  know- 
ledge of  these  presupposes  a  knowledge  of  the  faculties  and 
the  breaths  (which  are  the  subjects  of  the  faculties)  as  we  shall 
show.

14.  These  then,  are  the  subjects  which  pertain  to 
medicine.  Familiarity  with  them  gives  one  insight  into  how  the 
body  is  maintained  m  a  state  of  health,  and  how  it  becomes  ill. 
A  full  understanding  of  how  health  is  conserved,  or  ill-health 
removed  depends  on  understanding  the  underlying  causes  of 
each  of  these  states  and  of  their  "instruments."  For  example— 
the  regimen  m  regard  to  food,  drink,  choice  of  climate,  regula- 
tions regarding  labour  and  repose,  the  use  of  medicines,  operative 
interference.  r

Physicians  treat  of  all  these  points  under  three  headings, 
as  will  be  referredto  later— health,  sickness,  and  a  state  inter- 
mediate between  the  two.  But  we  say  that  the  state  which  they 
call     intermediate"  is  not  really  a  mean  between  the  other  two/  c  u  i  ,  N°7  that  WC  have  enumerated  these  groups  of  causes 
(of  health  and  sickness)  we  may  proceed  to  discuss  whatever 
Medicine  has  to  say  concerning  (a)  the  elements  ;  (b)  the  con- 
stitutions ;  (,)  the  fluids  of  the  body  ;  (d)  the  tissues  and  organs 
—simple  and  composite  ;  (*)  the  breaths  and  their  natural, 
sensitive  and  vita  faculties  ;  (/)  the  functions  ;  (g)  the  states  of 
the  body— health,  sickness,  intermediate  conditions  ;  and 
[h)  their  causes— food,  drink,  air,  water,  localities  of  residence 
exercise,  repose,  age,  sex,  occupation,  customs,  race,  evacuation' 
retention  The  external  accidents  to  which  the  body  is  exposed 
from  without  ;  (i)  the  regimen  in  regard  to  food,  drink 
medicines  ;  exercises  directed  to  preserving  health  •  (f)  the 
treatment   for    each    disorder.  8  W

16.  With  regard  to  some  of  these  things  there  is  nothing  a 
physician  can  do,  yet  he  should  recognize  what  they  are,  and  what 
is  their  essential  nature— whether  they  are  really  existent  or  not. 
tor  a  knowledge  of  some  things,  he  depends  on  the  doctor  of 
physical  science  ;  in  the  case  of  other  things,  knowledge  is 
derived  by  inference  [reasoning].  One  must  presuppose  a 
knowledge  of  the  accepted  principles  of  the  respective  sciences 
of  ongins,_in  order  to  know  whatever  they  are  worthy  of  credence 
or  not  [criteriology]  ;  and  one  makes  inferences  from  the  other 
sciences  which  are  logically  antecedent  to  these.  In  this  manner 
one  passes  up  step  by  step  until  one  reaches  the  very  beginnings

32  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

of  all  knowledge-namely,    pure  philosophy ;    to   wit,    meta-32  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

of  all  knowledge-namely,    pure  philosophy ;    to   wit,    meta-

PhyS  Hence,  if  a  doctor  undertakes  the  proofs  of  the  existence 
of  the"  elements  "  and  the  "  constitutions  and  their  deriva- 
tive^ from  medicine  itself  he  errs,  for  medicine  cannot  make 
tnTse  things  dear,  belonging  as  they  do  to  the  domain  of  natural 
science.

8  a       In  reeard  to  this  last  sentence  note:     "  It  is  not  the

GentIn1,refe™el)to  the  same,  note  also  the  following  passage  by 
t     t?-Vk?    ?T      "  (v     io<V     "motions,   molar  and   molecular,

of  Latin  and  Greek,  it  will  be  found  necessary        . ,m the  .    e»j  « 
rel?ion  to  insist  upon  a  ^S^*  HteS^  ^

ability."

17.  List  of  what  the  physician  aims  at  having  a  clear 
notion  of  ;  what  each  is,  and  whether  the  non-manifest  actually 
exist  or  not^  ^^    ^  ^  ^  ?  there  ?

In  what  modes  are  they  ?  What  are  they  ?   How  do  they  arise 
2.     The  temperaments  and  constitutions.    What  are  tney  .

^e&ftbbod,     Do  they  exist?   How  many

ate  ^^  The  members  and  the  sense-organs.     [The  science  of

anat77']The  faculties.    Do  they  exist  ?   How  many  are  there  ? 
•        6.     The  functions.      [The  science  of  physiology.]

7       The  breaths.     Do  they  exist  ?   How  many  are  there  . 
Where*  are  they?    What  changes  in  state  do  ^ey  undergo 
What  are  the  causes  of  retardation   (lagging)  of  the  breath  .

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  33

(Or  :    the  changes  in  the  affective  faculties  ;   and  the  cause  of 
their  persistence.)  ,

8.     The  causes.     How  many  are  there  ?THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  33

(Or  :    the  changes  in  the  affective  faculties  ;   and  the  cause  of 
their  persistence.)  ,

8.     The  causes.     How  many  are  there  ?

18.  The  physician  must  also  know  how  to  arrive  at 
conclusions  concerning  (i)  the  causes  of  illnesses  and  the  indi- 
vidual signs  thereof  ;  (2)  the  method  (most  likely  to)  remove 
the  disorder  and  so  restore  health.  Wherever  they  are  obscure, 
he  must  be  able  to  assign  to  them  their  duration,  and  recognize 
their  phases.

D

p-

8

R^g

^lip

THESIS  II.     THE  ELEMENTS

LEMENTS.  19.  The  elements  are  simple 
bodies.  They  are  the  primary  components 
of  the  human  being  throughout  all  its  parts, 
as  well  as  of  all  other  bodies  in  their  varied  and 
diverse  forms.  The  various  orders  of  beings 
depend  for  their  existence  on  the  intermixture 
of  the  elements.

Elements  •    Equiv.  :   cosmic  elements  ;   imponderable  elements  ; 
primordialessenc.es;   first-principles;  elementary  principles  ;  grades

of  radiance.  I(  ^,n+t„„  »  u1lt

It  is  important  to  note  that  these  dements  are  not      ^er,     but

have  only  a  virtual  existence,  as  explained  more  fully  below  (§  73  -

309)'"  Formae  elementorum  sunt  in  mixto  virtute,  non  actum  motu.83 
(76.  4.  4.  m.)

"I  am  in  water,  and  earth,  and  fire,  and  air.  _(

These  four  around  me,  yet  of  these  four  I  am  not

(Shamsi  Tabriz,68  1.  235,  5,  p.  im.)

A  difference  must  therefore  be  observed  between  them  and  the 
literal  earth,  water,  air  and  fire.

Each  of  the  latter,  it  must  be  noted,  contains  all  four  elements 
imponderable  elements,  the  correspondingly  named  element  being

merely   preponderant  (cf.  §  143).  00„OA  .Each  of  the  latter,  it  must  be  noted,  contains  all  four  elements 
imponderable  elements,  the  correspondingly  named  element  being

merely   preponderant  (cf.  §  143).  00„OA  .

Simple    bodies.-That    is,    simple    m    the    scholastic    sense 
indivisible.     "  Simplicity  is  that  quality  in  virtue  of  which  a  substance 
has  neither  constitutive  nor  quantitative  parts      (Mercier,5    11.  523)-

20  Natural  philosophy  speaks  of  four  elements  and  no 
more.  The  physician  must  accept  this.  Two  are  light,  and  two 
are  heavy.  The  lighter  elements  are  Fire  and  Air  ;  the  heavier 
are  Earth  and  Water.

Four  elements  and  no  more.-In  Chinese,  Buddhist  and  Ayur- 
veda philosophy  there  are  five.  In  theosophy  also  a  fifth,  named 
"ether''  is  given.  The  alchemists  gave  three.  Aristotle  discussed 
a  fifth  saying  "  the  heaven  is  not  of  the  nature  of  the  four  elements, 
but  is  Sf  I  fifth  body,  existing  over  and  above  these  "-quoted  by 
S.  Thomas  84  (68.  i.  p.  218).  These  various  statements  are  not 
actually  mutually  contradictory  (cf.  §  29).

34

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  35

Light  :      equivalents  :  weak,     male    (because    conferring    or

inceptive),  positive,   active.  Heaven.

Heavy :  equivalents  :  strong,  female  (because  recipient), 
negative,    passive.     Earth.

Heaven  is  man,   and  earth  woman  in  character  ; 
.  .Whatever  heaven  sends  it,  earth  cherishes. 
When  earth  lacks  heat,  heaven  sends  heat ; 
When  it  lacks  moisture  and  dew,  heaven  sends  them."

(Mesnavi,57  p.  161.)(Mesnavi,57  p.  161.)

21.  The  Earth.  The  Earth  is  an  "  element  "  normally 
situated  at  the  centre  of  all  existence  (see  scheme  in  §  54). 
In  its  nature  it  is  at  rest,  and  all  others  naturally  tend  towards  it 
at  however  great  a  distance  away  they  might  be.  This  is  because 
of  its  intrinsic  weight.  It  is  cold  and  dry  in  nature,  and  it  appears 
so  to  our  senses  as  long  as  it  is  not  interfered  with  by  extraneous 
agencies,  and  obeys  its  own  peculiar  nature.  It  is  by  means  of 
the  earthy  element  that  the  parts  of  our  body  are  fixed  and  held 
together  ■  into  a  compacted  form  ;  by  its  means  the  outward 
form  is  maintained.

"  The  Earth  is  the  warp  and  weft  of  thy  body." — (Mesnavi,5'  p.  41.)

"  Earth  "  is  understood  in  respect  of  its  principal  property  of 
dryness^4  (69,  i.  p.  234)."  The  Earth  is  the  warp  and  weft  of  thy  body." — (Mesnavi,5'  p.  41.)

"  Earth  "  is  understood  in  respect  of  its  principal  property  of 
dryness^4  (69,  i.  p.  234).

22.     The   Water.      The   Water   is    a   simple   substance 
whose  position  in  nature  is  exterior  to  the  (sphere  of  the)  Earth, 
and  interior  to  (that  of)  the  Air.     This  position  is  owing  to  its 
relative  density.     In  nature  it  is  cold  and  moist.     It  appears  so 
to  our  senses  as  long  as  there  are  no  influences  to  counteract  it. 
Its  purpose  in   (the  world  of)  creation  lies  in  the  fact  that  it 
lends   itself  readily   to    dispersion,    and   consequently   assumes 
any  shape  without  permanency.     In  the  construction  of  things, 
then,  it  provides  the  possibility  of  their  being  moulded  and  spread 
out  and  attempered.    Being  moist,  shapes  can  be  readily  fashioned 
(with  it)  and  as  easily  lost  (and  resolved).    Dryness,  on  the  other 
hand,  permits  forms  to  be  assumed  only  with  difficulty,  and  they 
are  resolved  with  similar  difficulty.    When  dryness  and  moisture 
alternate,  the  former  is  overruled  by  the  latter,  and  thus  the  object 
is  easily  susceptible  of  being  moulded  into  a  form  ;   whereas  if 
the  moisture  were  overruled  by  dryness,  the  form  and  features  of 
the  body  would  become  firm  and  constant.     Moisture  serves  to 
protect  dryness  from  friability  ;   dryness  prevents  moisture  from 
dispersing.

36  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE36  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

"  Verily  the  likeness  of  this  present  life  is  no  other  than  as  water 
which  we  send  down  from  lieaven,  and  wherewith  the  produce  of 
the  earth  is  mixed,  of  which  men  eat,  and  cattle  also,  until  the  earth 
hath  received  its  vesture  and  is  adorned.  The  inhabitants  thereof 
imagine  that  they  had  power  over  the  same,  but  our  command 
cometh  unto  it  by  night  or  by  day,  and  we  render  it  mown  (as  reaped 
seed-produce:  Woking  trans.),  as  though  yesterday  it  had  not 
abounded  with  fruits."     Quran,  x.  24.     (p.  5h  Gulshan .*.)

Again,  more  specific  still,  Quran  18.  45-  shows  that  Water 
enters  into  the  plants,  and  only  as  long  as  it  is  there  do  they  hve. 
"  The  parable  of  the  life  of  this  world  :  like  water  which  We  send 
down  from  the  cloud  so  the  herbage  of  the  earth  becomes  luxuriant 
on  account  of  it  "  :  (Woking  trans.)  "  min  assama  fa  khatalatabihi 
.  .  "  mingled  with— or,  as  one  may  paraphrase  (cf.  the  sevenfold 
interpretation  of  the  Quran)  :  "  water  is  the  channel  of  life  ;  and 
note  that  the  water  came  from  the  cloud,  to  which  it  was  itself  drawn 
by  the  solar  heat  !  ,

"  Water  has  especially  a  life-giving  power,  since  many  animals 
originated  in  water,  and  the  seed  of  all  animals  is  liquid. _  Also  the 
life  of  the  soul  is  given  by  the  water  of  baptism'  84  (ib.^74,  m,  p.  273). 
"  Augustine  holds  '  water  '  to  mean  '  formless  matter.  .  t       „Water  may  be  understood  here  in  the  sense  of  radical  moisture 
f Paracelsus),  which  is  absolutely  essential  to  life,  "  H20  "  being  thus 
as  it  were  an  instrument  or  substrate.  The  plant  cannot  shoot  out 
leaves  fiowersandfruitwithout.it;  so  man  cannot  thrive  without  this 
radical  moisture,  or  innate  moisture.  Moreover,  on  this  view  the 
moisture  is  conserved  by  a  medium  which  has  (  material  humidity 
—a  concept  which  brings  us  to  the  domain  of  chemistry.

The  watery  nature  may  be  called  "  fluid  nature      ;    pliability  ;

So,  in  the  Chinese  conception,  Forke23  (p.  271)  explains,  that 
the  "  fluid  "  of  water  is  yang,  and  its  substance  yin;  the  fluid  ot 
earth  is  yang,  and  its  "  substance  "  yin  ;  whereas  the  fluid  ot 
fire  is  Yin,  and  its  "  substance  "  Yang.  Yin  is  here  understood  in 
a  procreative  sense,  Yang  in  a  destructive  sense.

23.  The  Air.  Air  is  a  simple  substance,  whose  position 
in  nature  is  above  the  sphere  of  Water,  and  beneath  that  of  Fire. 
This  is  due  to  its  relative  lightness.  In  nature  it  is  hot  and 
moist,  according  to  the  rule  which  we  have  given.  Its  effect, 
and  value,  in  (the  world  of)  creation  is  to  rarefy,  and  render 
things  finer,  lighter,  more  delicate,  softer,  and  consequently 
better  able  to  move  to  the  higher  spheres.

See  also  under  "  atmospheric  air  "  (264).

The  air-"  element,"  entering  into  the  "  breath,"  is  that  which 
enables  us  to  stretch  and  contract,  and  also  makes  possible  the 
involuntary  movements  throughout  the  body.38

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  3?

24.     The  (sphere  of  the)  Fire.

"  Ignis  est  causa  omnium  ignitorum." — (St.  T.,81  iii.  46.)THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  3?

24.     The  (sphere  of  the)  Fire.

"  Ignis  est  causa  omnium  ignitorum." — (St.  T.,81  iii.  46.)

Fire  is  a  simple  substance,  which  occupies  a  position  in 
nature  higher  than  that  of  the  other  three  elements— namely 
the  hollow  of  the  sublunary  world,  for  it  reaches  to  the  (world  of 
the)  heavens.  All  things  return  to  it.  This  is  because  of  its 
absolute  lightness.  In  nature  it  is, hot  andjLry.  The  part 
which  it  plays  m  the  construction  of  things  is  that  it  matures, 
rarefies,  refines,  and  intermingles  with  all  things.  Its  penetra- 
tive power  enables  it  to  traverse  the  substance  of  the  air  •  by 
this  power  it  also  subdues  the  sheer  coldness  of  the  two  heavy 
cold  elements  ;  by  this  power  it  brings  the  elementary  properties 
into  harmony.

=-h„  T^e  d}SeTe^9e  between  the  "  element  "  fire,  and  fire  as  usually  understood  is 
caXrides  ^t^  ^  io\™^,  **  "  material  "' fire,  and^esfcanl  llkl 
canthandes    urtica    as      essential'    fire.     Or,  as  stated  under  "air,"  there  is  a

"s^LntW'^^aterial3"^1106      °f  **     JUSt  aS  "^"  iS  "  radical  '*  «

25.  The  two  heavy  elements  enter  more  into  the  con- 
struction of  the  members  (and  fluids  of  the  body,  Costaeus),  and 
contribute  to  repose.  The  two  light  elements  enter  more  into 
the  formation  of  the  breaths  and  contribute  to  their  movement 
as  well  as  to  the  movement  of  the  members— always  remember- 
ing that  it  is  the  form  that  is  the  motor  (and  not  the  breath. 
Ihe  form  initiates  the  breaths  and  through  them  moves  the 
organs  of  the  body  and  the  limbs.)    So  much  for  the  elements.

o-^c=-"Elemenja  subtiliora  predominantur  in  mixta,  secundum  virtute  •  sed 
grossiora  secundum  quantitatem."— (Sum.  Theol.,"  71,  i,  2m  ■    91    1    cTm  )o-^c=-"Elemenja  subtiliora  predominantur  in  mixta,  secundum  virtute  •  sed 
grossiora  secundum  quantitatem."— (Sum.  Theol.,"  71,  i,  2m  ■    91    1    cTm  )

inteniJence^^iS/.    ^  n0urisMnS  flame  wM<*  imP^ts  heat,  life,"  sense  and

§52.     "  It  is  the  form  that  is  the  motor  and  not  the  breath    "

In  this  sentence  is  contained  the  crux  of  the  whole  subject  "  Form  " 
used  m  the  scholastic  sense,  has  a  subtly  specific  meaning  when 
applied  to  the  human  being.    This  meaning  is  gone  into  in  the  accom-

Par,ng-IXpOSition'  Briefly>  the  form  when  associated  with  the 
solid  fluid,  and  gaseous  components  (earth,  water,  air)  of  the  "body" 
is  called  a  "living  human  being,"  and  it  accounts  for  the  continual 
movement  of  the  "  breaths  "  (life-principle)  which  manifests  to  the 
onlooker  that  that  human  being  really  is  living.

§  "S3-  Position  in  nature.— If  the  names  of  the  elements  are  taken 
as  synonymous  with  the  corresponding  words  describing  mundane 
nature,  it  is  evident  that  earth  (land)  is  higher  than  "  water  "  ;  and 
that  _  air  is  above  both.  The  fire  (solar  heat)  is  above  all  But 
mystically  speaking  there  is  such  a  relation  apart  from  the  P-eo- 
graphical  one.  s

3  8  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

S  54.     In  the   following   ^*\<***$^  pUaT^tolema? et°c.) 
accord^  to  the  ^^i^^^^SJSy  due  to  the  stand-

Lmetfmes  sdentinc-by  the  several  schools  of  thought.

SCHEME  OF  THE  POSITION  OF  THE™-  "  WORLDS  "  AS 
CONCEIVED  BY  THE  ANCIENTS.

The  Vacuum.     Al-Khala  ;   la  Khala  wa  la  Mala.     »  Neither  vacuum  nor  plenum  »

Elev£ihGHeBaver 'TheSmpyrean.     The  seventh  heaven  of  S.  Thomas,".  »  wholly

luminous  "  (68,  p.  228).  .       ,!.„„,.„  j+  originates  the  motions  of  the

Ptolemy's  Empvyan  ninth  heaven  ,luminous  "  (68,  p.  228).  .       ,!.„„,.„  j+  originates  the  motions  of  the

Ptolemy's  Empvyan  ninth  heaven  ,

'^SrS^SSS'ta  «  ix4.lar.tie,  ol  moment 
B(tSttH!r  "S    Zodiacal  e =£-    ^"Tol  t^te^veS 
to,  Mag  *tot  of  the  ted  rtars  ^^  „

above  it."     Raghib.  quoted  m  Woking  transit  yuran  us  „84

^  ^k\    Bht'    S^^^^el.     Formed  from  the

Flfth'  Ma^ofrel  (  T^S^ver  by  Azrael.     Formed  from  the

Fourth  ThSn^^rderoleTg'lsrafil.     Formed  from  the  light  of

Third  VenQusb  SlS.     The     world     of     similitudes.     Formed     from

Second       MeSrf1  Sef^med  from  Flkr  (reflection). 
! IT  Moon   'Whitejthen  silver.    Made  from  Aether.

"  The  heaven  of  the  moon."     Jill62  (?-."2) 
(Here  comes  "  the  horizon  between matter  and  spirit.      ) 
Sublunary  world  :»  The  "  world  of  growth  and  decay. 
Fourth  Interspace  (Furja').     The  Human  Kingdom.

Fourth  Elemental  Sphere.     Igneous  sphere,     rvre.  {  the

Divided  by  Rabanus  into  an  upper  region,  the  fiery  heaven,  ana 
Olympian  heaven. 
Third  Interspace.     The  Animal  Kingdom.

Third  Elemental  Sphere.     Aerial  sphere.     Air.  heaven,  and  a  lower,

Divided  by  Rabanus  into  an  upper  region,  the  etnereai 
the  aerial  heaven. 
Second  Interspace.     The  Vegetable  Kingdom.

Second  Elemental  Sphere.     Aqueous  sphere       Wate^d  w       aided  by  A.  and  F.). 
First  Interspace.     The  Inorganic  World  (chiefly  E    ana  w .  , 
It  ETemePntal  Sphere.     Terrestrial  sphere      Earth 
Jili  refers  to  seven  limbos  of  the  earth"  (p.  124).

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Explanatory  Extension  of  Thesis  II

i.     Preliminary  remarks. 
sidered  <££&2$*  °'  ^^  ^  f°m  '     <»>   C°-idered  statically  ;     (6)  Cou-THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Explanatory  Extension  of  Thesis  II

i.     Preliminary  remarks. 
sidered  <££&2$*  °'  ^^  ^  f°m  '     <»>   C°-idered  statically  ;     (6)  Cou-

(6)  Co3nsid^red  d^icallv.imP°nderable   ^^  :       <a>    C°nsidered    statica%  • 
4-     Application  of  the  doctrine  to  biochemistry,  histology,   etiology,  etc.

i.     Preliminary  Remarks

_  §55.  Thesis  II  is  the  foundation  of  the  whole  Canon,  but  so 
entirely  has  the  doctrine  and  world-conception  of  Avicenna  been 
superseded  by  modern  scientific  teaching  that  the  whole  of  his  work 
may  be  said  to  fall  with  it.

The  fact  that  for  millions  of  intelligent  people  this  world- 
conception  (scheme  of  things,  theory  of  life,  Weltanschuung)  is  an 
intense  reality  m  their  daily  lives  (Forked  p.  239)  does  not  usually 
signify,  and  yet  even  a  training  in  Western  universities  does  not 
dispose  them  to  abandon  it.

So  too,  the  daily-recited  Breviary  still  contains  the  Benedicite 
opera  omnia,  m  which  the  four  "  elements  "  sing  their  praise,  just 
as  for  S.  Francis  in  his  Song  of  the  Sun  they  were  an  instruction 
for  us  to  do  likewise.

Their  immediate  dependence  for  existence  upon  the  continuously 
exercised  will  of  the  Creator  is  spoken  for  both  by  S.  Thomas  Aquinas, 
in  the  West  and  by  the  Persian  Sage  in  the  East.  "  Even  air,  water 
earth,  and  fire  draw  their  sustenance  from  Him,  both  winter  and 
summer  (Mesnavi).  As  the  mighty  servants  of  God  ("  to  us  they 
seem  lifeless,  but  to  God  living,"  Mesnavi,"  p.  zS)  they  offer  Him 
praise  (Quran)  and  service  (Mesnavi).

The    modern    world-conception   sets    out   that   the    universe    is 
composed  of  chemical  elements  grouped  into  compounds,  aggregatedThe    modern    world-conception   sets    out   that   the    universe    is 
composed  of  chemical  elements  grouped  into  compounds,  aggregated

still  SstS"S  Vary"f  fr°m  ^  SlZG  °f  VaSt  nebula  to  the'smlllJ  but 
still  vast  suns,  down  to  the  fragments  of  dust  beneath  our  feet  • 
whereas     he  modern  scholastic  philosophy  sees  in   our  space-time

iTea  of°"hyea  ^T  ^  tl^1  ^'  &nd  all°WS  that  the  ^d«t 
idea  of     heaven  beyond  the  blue  "  evidenced  understanding  and  not

oSficTtion  °rt'  thG  d°Ctrine  Under1^  Avicenna  if  capaHe

4o  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

2.    The  Doctrine  of  "  Matter  "  and  "  Form  " 
A.     Considered  Statically

8  56.  Inanimate  matter,  in  a  state  of  rest,  is ;  the -outcome  of 
two  principles,  neither  of  which  exists  apart  from  the  other  These 
are  :  the  principle  of  inertia,  or  passivity  ;  the  principle :  of  activity. 
The  former  receives  the  scholastic  term  primary  matter  con- 
veniently abridged  to  m.  It  is  the  "  material  cause  of  a  thing. 
The second  principle  is  termed  "form,"  "formal  cause  ;  con- 
veniently abridged  to  /.     It  is  non-material.

»  Man  is  the  result  of  the  combined  operation  of  heaven  and  earth,  of  the 
union  of  two  principles  "      (Li  Ki  *',  vn.  3-  I)-

Every  object  has  its  /,  but  every  /  is  not  corporeal,  for  while 
some/'s  are  intrinsically  dependent  on  matter,  others  can  exist  apartEvery  object  has  its  /,  but  every  /  is  not  corporeal,  for  while 
some/'s  are  intrinsically  dependent  on  matter,  others  can  exist  apart

romma  er  ^^.^  indifferent  and  undetermined;  it  will  take 
an  infinite  number  of  active  principles  /.  But  as  soon  as  a  given  m 
has "akfn  a  given/,  it  ceases'to  be  indifferent,  for  it  has  become  »f 
The  union  of  m  and  /  results  in.  a  concrete  object—  matter,  _  as 
oXaSy  understood/  In  other  words  it  is  said  that  wher, ^receives 
f  a  physical  or  corporeal  substance  (object)  appears  /  1 i  said _to 
^'in-to/m  "  m  ;  whe'n  that  has  happened  we  have  mf"  substantia^ 
form,"  the  physical  substance,  "  in-formed  matter  So  /  is  called 
the™'  formal  cause  "  of  a  thing.  /  is  also  called  a  determining 
principle."  It  "  perfects  "  or  completes  m.  So,  we  say,  when  m 
fs  completed  by  /  a  physical  substance  appears."  /is  also  called 
«'  essential  form"     Correspondingly,  it  is  said  to  give  rise  to  mf

^''/imparts' distinctive  nature  to  m  and  fixes  the  character  and 
properties  and  activities  resulting  from  the  union.  /  provides  the 
"  deep  intrinsic  reason  "  for  mf.

mfmf',mf",mf"  .  .  ■  mf  would  represent  as  many  diiterent

objects,' whether  living  or  non-living.  ^w,Va1

8  k      mf,  then,  stands  for  the  following  concepts  :   (1)  physical

substance,  corporeal  substance.     <<  Corporeal  "because  evident ^to

our  senses.     "  Substance"  because  viewed  in  its      state      state—

inactive    stationary.     Every  chemical  substance  is  a  different  mf.

(2) ' '  nature  "      Here  it  is  viewed  in  reference  to  its  powers  of  activity.

(J)  "  essence  "  •  here  we  describe  what  it  is,  and  say  what  distinguishes

one  mf  from  another,  from  all  other  mfs.     In  other- words    it .has(J)  "  essence  "  •  here  we  describe  what  it  is,  and  say  what  distinguishes

one  mf  from  another,  from  all  other  mfs.     In  other- words    it .has

-transcendental    properties  "-being,    essence,    unity,  _  distinction

from  other  beings,  truth,  and  good.     Every  object  is  a  being.    Every

object  is  a  «  creature."     Every  object  perceptible  by  our  senses  is  a

material  being.     (4)  "  Constitution.'^     Here  we  study  mf  from  the

point  of  view  of  how  it  came  into  being.         _         _

8  <Q  Every  object  has  three  causes  for  its  existence  :  material, 
formal  and  efficient.  That  which  brings  about  the  union  of  m 
(mSeiai  cause)  and/  (formal  cause)  is  called  tne  "  efficient  cause  '< 
There  is  another  cause  called  the  "  final  cause  "-namely  the  reason 
for  its  existence,  the  reason  for  its  creation.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  4i

§  60.  As  soon  as  mf  exists,  certain  qualities  become  manifest 
to  our  senses,  by  which  we  are  enabled  to  form  a  mental  image  of  the 
object— over  and  above  the  "transcendental  properties"  just 
referred  to.  These  qualities  are  called  "  accidents,''.  In  the  formula, 
we  represent  them  by  the  italic  a.  A  concrete  object  is  therefore 
represented  more  accurately  by  the  symbol  mf.a,  the  dot 
showing,  that  mf  forms  one  essence.  To  be  more  exact,  then,  the 
different  objects  around  us  would  be  represented  by  the  formula?  mf  a 
mf.'a',  mf."a",  mf.'"a"'  .   .   .   mf.»a\

§61.  A  further  scholastic  term  is  introduced  if  we  say  that 
"  when  mf  ('  potentiality  ')  becomes  '  actuality,'  it  is  mfa."— This  is 
another  way  of  saying  that  until  a  substance  actually  exists,  it  has  no 
"  accidents,"  or  "  qualities."§  62.  The  same  symbol — mf.a — stands  equally  for  a  chemical 
atom,  a  chemical  compound — inorganic  or  organic — however 
complex  ;  for  a  whole  mineral  ;  for  a  histological  "  cell  "  (microbe, 
protozoan,  cell-colony,  simple  or  complex),  for  a  whole  plant  or 
animal,  or  for  a  human  being  as  a  whole.  Any  object  in  the  universe 
—water,  stone,  tree,  mountain,  herb,  sun— can  be  represented  by 
this  same  symbol.  Every  object  is  a  "  creature  "  in  the  Thomistic 
sense.  Every  object  is  "  in-formed  "  matter.  The  differences 
between  them  all  depend  on  the  /.

§  63.  "  Human  nature  "  is  "  informed  matter,"  bearing  certain 
properties  or  marks,  and  endowed  with  "existence."  Each  organ 
m  the  body  is  "informed  matter."  Every  tissue  is  "in-formed 
matter."  The  blood,  the  lymph,  the  urine,  etc.,  are  each  of  them 
"m-formed  matter."  Every  microscopic  cell  of  which  the  tissues 
are  composed  is  merely  "in-formed  matter."  So  also  is  every 
chemical  entity  which  composes  the  cells,  and  the  whole  person  also 
is  just    "informed   matter."§64.  In  the  case  of  a  living  human  being  there  is  this  complica- 
tion that  each  particle  of  matter  of  which  he  is  composed  is  represented 
by  mf.a,  and  the  body  itself,  as  a  whole,  is  representable  by  mf.a.  To 
picture  the  whole  person  more  satisfactorily  we  should  employ  a  capital 
letter — say  M—to  stand  for  the  actual  matter  of  the  body  ;  and  the 
human  "  form  "  would  be  representable  by  another  capital  letter  F 
for  the  human  "  form  "  differs  from  all  other  forms.  Hence  the 
human  being  is  symbolized  by  MF,  rather  than  by  mf.f  or  mf+f— 
both  of  which  would  be  inaccurate.  M=n.mf.a.  When  death  occurs, 
MF  becomes  M  and  F ;  M  becomes  n.mfa  again— simply  a  collec- 
tion of  chemical  inanimate  substances.  MF  stands  for  "a  human 
soul."  F  is  not  "  soul."  F  does  not  exist  without  M  in  the  first 
instance,  but  after  death  it  does  exist  without  M.  However,  the 
great  and  important  fact  is  that  at  the  time  of  death  Fis  no  more  like 
F  at  birth  ;    being  different,  it  is  correct  to  symbolize  it  as  F'.

_  The  object  of  life  is  not  to  alter  one's  character,  but  to  control  it  so  that  the 
passions  never  come  to  light.  It  is  not  for  us  to  try  and  "  add  a  cubit  to  our  stature  " 
(Mt.  6,  27)  but  to  direct  our  unchangeable  "  character  "  into  the  very  highest  al- 
truistic direction.  The  object  of  life  is  to  prevent  the  character  from  determining 
the  form  of  one  s  actions.     See  §164  i v.  s

42  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE42  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Many  of  the  laws  operating  in  the  non-living  substance  mf.a 
also  occur  in  MF,  though  every  separate  MF  follows  its  own  laws. 
The  laws  peculiar  to  the  chemical  substances  of  which  the  body  is 
composed  necessarily  apply  in  MF,  as  well  as  those  pertaining  to 
his  being  a  particular  MF.  The  mere  fact  of  MF  being  altogether 
more  elaborate  than  its  component  n.mf.a's  (which  together  make  M) 
does  not- abrogate  the  applications  belonging  to  those  component

mfs a  fact  which  is  often  overlooked.     Rationalism,  for  instance,

assumes  that  because  the  lower  are  still  present,  the  higher  must 
simply  be  a  variety  of  them.

"  In  the  living  conscious  being,  this  qualitative  determining  factor  (the  germinal 
principle)  takes  a  still  higher  form,  its  range  of  activity  is  wider,  its  power  of 
applying  directing,  and  disposing  of  the  energy  stored  in  the  organism  is  more 
varied  and  more  flexible,  but  it  cannot  alter  the  quantity  of  the  capital  funded 
in  the  self-moving  machine.  If,  then,  it  be  the  quality  of  the  forces  distributed  m 
the  nervous  system  which  the  directive  power  of  the  soul  immediately  determines, 
the  liberation  and  control  of  a  man's  physical  activity  by  his  thoughts  and  volitions 
need  not  necessarily  conflict  with  even  the  most  rigid  fulfilment  of  the  law  of  the 
constancy  of  the  quantity  of  energy."  (From  P.  Couailhac  La  Liberie  et  la  con- 
servation de  l'Energie,  Paris,  1897,  Livre  iv.  ;   quoted -by  Mfher5,  p.  523)-"  If  an  angel  or  a  demon  set  a  barrel  rolling  down  a  hill  by  even  a  slight  push 
the  action  of  such  a  spirit  would  involve  the  invasion  of  the  system  of  the  material 
universe  by  a  foreign  energy.  But  this  is  not  the  way  the  soul  acts,  according  to 
the  philosophy  of  S.  Thomas  and  Aristotle.  Here  the  soul  is  part  of  the  living 
being  a  component  principle  capable  of  liberating  and  guiding  the  transformation  of 
energies  (it  selects  and  stores  up)  in  the  constitution  of  the  material  organism  which 
along  with  its  compounds  goes  to  form  a  single  complete  individual  being.    (Maher    ,

P'  4    A°uin   not  in  virtue  of  its  rationality  is  the  forma  animale   but  through  the 
vegetative  and  sentient  faculties.     (Aristotle,  quoted  m  »  ix.  239)P'  4    A°uin   not  in  virtue  of  its  rationality  is  the  forma  animale   but  through  the 
vegetative  and  sentient  faculties.     (Aristotle,  quoted  m  »  ix.  239)

8  6s  There  is  an  important  passage  on  "  matter  in  the  Summa  TheoL- 
(O  8s  Art  1  p  185-6)  which  brings  out  the  distinction  between  the  ponderable 
and  the  imponderable  :  the  interested  reader  should  really  study  the  whole  section 
of  the  Summa,  on  the  "  Understanding."-"  Matter  is  twofold  common  and .«gn ate 
or  individual  ;  common,  such  as  flesh  and  bone  ;  and  individual  as  this  flesh  and 
these  bones.  The  intellect  therefore  abstracts  the  species  of  a  natural  thing  from 
the  individual  sensible  matter,  but  not  from  the  common  sensible  matter.  .  . 
Mathematical  species,  however,  can  be  abstracted  by  the  intellect  ^om  sensible 
matter,  not  only  from  individual,  but  also  from  common  matter  ,  not  ^com- 
mon intelligible  matter,  but  only  from  individual  matter.  .  Forn^ble  ^natLu  is 
corporeal  matter  as  subject  to  sensible  qualities,  such  as  being  cold  ox  hot  hard  or 
soft  and  the  like  ;  while  intelligible  matter  is  substance  as  subject  to  quantity. 
Now  itTs  manifest' that  quantity  fs  in  substance  before  other  sensible  qualities  are. 
Hence  quantities,  such  as  number,  dimension  and  figures,  w  "ch  are  the  term  ma 
tions  of  quantity,  can  be  considered  apart  from  sensible  quahtie '  ^^  ev£ 
abstract  them  from  sensible  matter.  .  .  .  But  some  things  can ;be  abstracted  ev.n 
from  common  intelligible  matter,  such  as  being,  unity,  power  act  and  thebke  ,  all 
these  can  exist  without  matter,  as  is  plain  regarding  immaterial  things.

B.     Considered  Dynamically.     Change

"  The  kettle  is  silent,  though  it  is  boiling  all  the  while."     (Mesnavi"   p.  261.)B.     Considered  Dynamically.     Change

"  The  kettle  is  silent,  though  it  is  boiling  all  the  while."     (Mesnavi"   p.  261.)

8  66  It  is  natural  to  consider  the  objects  of  the  material  world 
as  being  in  the  first  place  stationary  ;  that  is,  in  a  state  of  static  being. 
But  actually  they  all  undergo  change,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest 
There  is  movement  either  in  the  object  itself,  or  at  the  instance  ot 
some  other -object.  Hence  we  now  consider  the  dynamic  changes 
in  mf.a.,  MF.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  43

§67.  Changes-  are  of  two  kinds — "  substantial  change," 
'\M£idmtjd^Qhm,g£-''  The  example  of  the  1ormeTTs~the  chemical 
change  occurring  in  the  course  of  chemical  reactions,  mf.a  becomes 
mf.'a' .  The  example  of  J^dejntajLjG&ajj^is,  for  instance,  when 
water  becomes  steam  ;  when  a  person  or  plant  grows  ;  when  a  person 
becomes  emaciated,  or  an  object  shrinks  in  size.

§  68-.  The  nature  of  substantial  change  is  most  important  in 
regard  to  physiology  and  pathology.  The  first  step  is  associated 
with  a  disappearance  of  the  old/,  the  process  called  "corruption" 
by  the  scholastics  ;  in  modern  words,  "  disintegration."  There 
is  then  a  new  /' — the  new  "  form,"  whose  appearance  is  called 
"  generation."*

§  69.  From  the  point  of  view  of  the  causes  at  work,  there  are 
three  steps — an  external  agent  or  m£terialj:ajise,,axeceptiye  function, 
whereby  the  old  m  receives  a  newTT^ncfthe  efficient  cause  which 
brings/'  into  union  with  m.  ~       ~~~§  70.  In  the  view  of  modern  science,  of  course,  the  properties  of  "  water  " 
for  instance,  appear  at  the  moment  when  the  H,  and  O  meet  and  unite  ;  the  ap- 
pearance of  NaCl  and  H30,  again,  is  adequately  explained  simply  from  the  union 
of  NaOH  and  HC1  in  appropriate  proportions.  But  Thomistic  science  perceives 
the  need  of  something  further.  The  water-molecule,  or  complex  of  molecules  is 
something  more  than  the  two  H  atoms  linked  to  oxygen,  and  this  something  is  the 
inert  principle  of  matter  m,  which  releases  the  old  /  and  accepts  the  new  f1.  As 
Rahilly  explains,  a  molecule  or  a  complex  of  molecules  such  as  an  organism,  presents 
not  only  "  colligative  or  summational  properties,  but  also  indiscerptible  specific 
qualities  of  the  whole  which  cannot  be  distinctively  predicated  of  or  portioned  out 
among  the  parts."  "  We  must  therefore  conceive — not  imagine  ! — a  spatially 
complex  and  disparate  aggregate  as  being  in  some  fundamental  sense,  one  "  being. "f

§  71.  The  causes  of  substantial  change  (the  efficient  causes)  in 
inanimate  "  beings  "  are  the  well-known  familiar  extrinsic  "forces 
of  nature  "  ;  but  in  the  case  of  living  beings,  the  efficient  causes  are 
the  intrinsic  '^faculties  "  which  they  possess.  Some  of  the  latter 
account  for  changes  of  substance,  while  others  have  to  do  with  a 
change  of  position — locomotion  ;  and  others  again  excite  a  move- 
ment in  the  mind.§  72.  In  the  human  being,  the  immediate  efficient  cause  of  an 
outwardly  visible  act  consists  of  the  muscles  and  nerves  ;  behind  that 
is  the  more  remote  efficient  cause — the  sensuous  appetition  or  desire  ; 
and  behind  that  is  the  sensuous  cognition,  which  is  an  integral 
property  of  MF—a  passive  act,  itself  a  "  faculty."  Behind  that, 
peculiar  to  the  human  being,  is  the  all-important  final  cause.  This  is 
philosophically  described  as  "  the  means  by  which  perfection  of  life 
is  reached  "—whether  that  "perfection"  be  relative  or  absolute, 
whether  the  interests  of  the  physical  body  are  served,  or  the  intellectual 
life,  or  whether  the  highest  perfection  (i.e.  of  soul)  is  the  goal  in  view- 
where  MF  uses  M  as  the  "  innocent  creature  of  God,"  in  order  to 
attain  true  perfection.

*"  God  is  an  Abaser  and  an  Exalter.      Without  these  two  processes  nothing

comes   into   being."     Mesnavi57,    p.    300.

•f Rahilly,  appendix  to  "  Modern  Scholastic  Philosophy""

In  animalibus   quae  movent  seipsa  est  magis  quaedam  colligatio  partium

quam  perfecta  continuatio     (St  Thomas,  In  VIII.     Physic.   1.  7).

44  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

3.    The  Doctrine  of  Imponderable  Elements 
A.     Considered  statically 
§73.     (1)  Relation  of  the  imponderable  elements  to  "  matter" 
and  "  form."-— Bo  the  elements  belong  to  "  primary  matter  "  or  to

"  form  "  ?"  form  "  ?

This  problem  was  discussed  in  so  masterly  a  fashion  by  St. 
Thomas  that  his  words  are  still  applicable  and  unsurpassable.  _  His 
perfect  understanding  of  the  nature  of  matter  is  combined  with  a 
precision  of  explanation  which  should  satisfy  every  student       ihe 
following  quotations  may  be  made  :   "  By  the  words  earth  and  water 
(in  Gen.  i.Wimary  matter  itself  is  signified  "  and  not  literal  water  or 
earth  (Augustine**,  p.  194,  S.  T.  66,-   1).      "  The  ancient  materia 
philosophers  maintained  that  primary  matter  was  some  corporeal 
thing  in  act,  as  fire,  air,  water,  or  some  intermediate  substance 
(ib.    p.    192)    "  Corporeal     matter    was    impressed    with   the    sub- 
stantial form  of  water,  and  with  the  substantial  form  of  earth 
(p.  231)  "  The  power  possessed  by  water  or  earth  of  producing  all 
animals  resides  not  in  the  earth  and  water  themselves,  but  in  the 
power  originally  given  to  the  elements  of  producing  them  from 
elemental  matter  "  (ib.  71,  i,  p.  251).

In  the  note  to  19  it  is  seen  that  the  four  elements  cannot  be 
assigned  to  literal  matter.  But  they  cannot  be  assigned  to  "  form  " 
either,  as  they  have  no  being  until  literal  matter  has  itself  come  into 
being.  Hence,  while  the  chemical  elements  are  mf,  the  imponderable 
elements  are  neither  m  nor  /,  for  they  are  inseparable  from  mf,  and 
the  primary  qualities  of  a  thing  do  not  appear  until  it  exists — that  is, 
till  m  and  /have  become  mf.—"  The  two  exist  because  of  the  one, 
but  hold  not  even  to  this  one  "  (Seng-ts'an,  in  Susuki91,  p.  184)— 
words  used  in  another  connection,  but  equally  applicable.§74.  "Humidity"  says  Paracelsus83  (ii.  264)  is  not_  an 
element  of  water,  or  burning  an  element  of  fire.  An  element  is  not 
to  be  defined  according  to  body,  substance,  or  quality.  What  is 
visible  to  the  eyes  is  only  the  subject  or  receptacle."  .  .  .  Fire 
which  burns  is  not  the  element  of  fire  as  we  see  it  .  .  .  the  element  of 
fire  can  be  present  in  green  wood  no  less  than  in  fire.  .  .  .  Whatever 
grows  is  of  the  element  oLfilsj2ULiS_aso^

fixed  i"s  of  the'7elemenLol.,,earth,  Whatever  jiQurisJbfi&JsJixanjJie 
element' of  air, 'and  whatever  "consumes  is  from  the  element  of  water. 
GrowthJ^elang^Ji3„J:he^iem£rlL.Q£~fir.-e,',  (Cf.  "innate  heat"  §  140) 
""Where  that  element  fails,  there  is  no  increment.  Except  the 
element  of  earth  supplied  it  there  would  be  no  end  to  growth.  This 
fixes  it;  that  is  to  say,  it  supplies  a  terminus  for  the  element  of  fire. 
So,  also,  unless  the  element  of  air  were  to  act,  no  nutrition  could  be 
brought  about  "  (Cf.  oxygen)  "  By  the  air  alone  all  things  are  nour- 
ished. Again,  nothing  can  be  dissolved  or  consumed  unless  the 
element  of  water  be  the  cause.  By  it  all  things  are  mortified,  and 
reduced  to  nothing  "  (ib.  266).  "  The  invisible  elements  need  to  be 
sustained,  nourished  and  increased  by  some  visible  thing,  and  at 
length  they  perish  with  them."      In  other  words,  the  "  elements  "

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  4S

only  exist  as  long  as  there  is  mf.  "  Both  are  interdependent  and 
related,  though  their  activity  goes  on  without  waste  or  loss."

Each  invisible  attracts  to  itself  its  own.     Stones  come  forth  from  the 
strong  spirit  of  the  earth  "  (ib.  li.  279).Each  invisible  attracts  to  itself  its  own.     Stones  come  forth  from  the 
strong  spirit  of  the  earth  "  (ib.  li.  279).

1lVh+JuTC^PasfSes'.1ofteii  supposed  to  be  meaningless,  become  intelligible  in  the 
light  of  Thomistic  philosophy,  though  according  to  biographers,  Paracelsus  would  not 
have  wished  to  appear  to  subscribe  to  that.

§  75-  The  imponderable  elements  must  not,  however,  be  con- 
fused with  "  accidents  "  (a).  "  Primae  quatuor  qualitates  non  sunt 
habitus  e  ementorum  "  (S.  T.™,  49,  4,  1).  These  primary  qualities 
torm  the  link  between  the  object  and  our  own  consciousness,  for  our 
knowledge  of  the  universe  is  really  simply  a  knowledge  of  those 
9u^llt.les  (^at^coH^moist^dry)  with  that  of  secondary  qualities 
(subtility,  thicknessTBghtness,  heaviness,  rarity,  density,  translucence 
opacity,  brilliance,  dullness,  etc.).  "  Sensible  matter  is  corporeal 
matter  as  subject  to  sensible  qualities,  such  as  being  cold  or  hot,  hard 
or  soft,  and  the  like  "  (ib.  Si,  85,  i,  p.  186).

§  76.  So  all  the  concrete  objects  of  this  world— from  the  granite 
mountain  to  the  microscopic  protozoon-— are  related  to  one  another 
in  virtue  of  the  imponderables.  And  in  virtue  of  the  same,  they  are 
related  to  extra-mundane  objects  (sun,  moon,  stars).  "  The  matter 
of  the  heavenly  bodies  and  of  the  elements  agree  in  the  character  of 
potentiality  "  (ib.  84,66,2,p.  199).  Since  matter  cannot  exist  without 
them,  the  human  body  itself  must  also  manifest  them.§  72:     (2)  The  analogy  between  the  four  elements  and  vibration- 
rate.     The._eArth,eIe^^  a  sIowl vibration- 
rate,  the  wa^e£^dement„.,Kii.lI.,.a„moj:fi.,,r.apid  rate,  and"  the  remaining 
elements  with  still  quicker  vibration  rates,  "the  slower  rates  are 
coarser^"    and   the    more   rapid   ones    are    "    finer."     Hence     as 
Avicenna  says,  the  earth  and  water  are  "heavy"  and  the  others 
are      light."     The  meaning  of  the  imponderable  elements  is  made 
more  intelligible  through  the  idiom  of  modern  science.     But  in 
making  such  an  analogy  we  must  avoid  the  common  error  of  equating 
things  capable  of  being  analogized  with  the  same  thing.     To  compare 
»c     1  »™ent^  "  with  vibrati°n-rate,  is  to  compare  them  with  light. 
•  £  v'  i_    ^f?lance>"  "  spirit,"  "  breath  "  have  all  been  compared 
with  light  (    lux  ").     But  to  pass  on  to  indentify  them  in  any  sense 
with       lux   perpetua,"    and   then   with    "Universal    Intellect"    is 
indefensible,   yet  even   modern   thought  is   not   immune   from  the 
ffi      y,„  Paracelsus?2  explains   "element"   as   "spirit"   (meaning 
form,    no  doubt),  which  ' '  lives  and  flourishes  "  in  the  visible  objects 
of  Nature      as  the  soul  in  the  body"  ..."  not  indeed,"  he  explains, 
that  it  is  of  precisely  the  same  essence  as  a  soul,  but  it  corresponds 
with  a  certain  degree  of  resemblance.     There  is  a  difference  between 
the  elemental  and  the  eternal  soul.  .   .  .  For^ie^rstjnatter.QLthe 
eiement§JJLi^

J  h£  soul  of  ^elements  is  iheJife-of  alLxreatedihingi  "  (ii.  264) 
Averrhoes  said  "  of  all  things  the  soul  is  most  like  light."

The  perfect  reasoning  in  dealing  with  these  errors,  which  is  given

46

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINEThe  perfect  reasoning  in  dealing  with  these  errors,  which  is  given

46

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

by  S    Thomas  in  «  Contra  Gentiles  »  should  be  studied  by  all  who

are  inclined  to  award  the  last  word  to  scientific  theories  _

are  ^clmea  t  f-.fhe  doetrine.-Tte  application  of  the

doctrJe  to  til  suCject-matterif  Medicine  is  simple  when  th, =  element 
are  represented  by  their  corresponding  "  tendencies.       A  few  ot  the 
relays  are  showl  in  tabular  form,  by  way  of -illustration.     Thus  :-

1

Corres-

Name

of 
Ele- 
ment.

Ten- 
dency.

Corres- 
ponding 
system.

Excre- 
tion.

Special 
Sense.

Operation

in

body.

Type

of 
mind.

ponding

mental

state.

Earth

Spread-

Skeletal

Faeces

Touch

Gives 
shape

Mental 
torpor

Obstinacy. 
Fear.

Water

ing

Droop- 
ing

Down-

Muscular

Urine

Taste

Nutrition

Lympha- 
tic

Submis- 
sive

Affec- 
tionate.

Fire

ward 
Rising

Liver. 
Blood.

Sweat

Smell

Digestion 
Physical 
move- 
ments

Optimistic

Anger  ; 
irate   Vex- 
ation  (and 
weeping)

Air

To  and 
fro

Vascular 
Cutan-

Saliva

Hearing

Respira- 
tion

Cheerful

Humour

Aether

Still- 
ness

eous 
Nervous. 
The  hair

Semen

Vision

Reason- 
ing

Reflective

Sadness

8  7Q      The  correspondence  between  body  and  mind    in  virtue 
8  79-      ine  "J      pF    i  ole  beine  by  the  "  elements,"  is  specially 
of  the  pervasion  ot  trie  wnoie  Demg  uy  mv.  >  r    H  .u

elaborated     in    a    particularly    interesting  manner,    by  Chu   Hsi 
t   2 12  where  the  five  elements  are  taken  as  the  < '  physical     counter- 
(p.2i4),wne^tnen  „  (1  righte0usness,  reverence,

$£do£  sincTrity^whS  arePpresent  in  all  beings,  JUst  as  are  the

elements.

§80.     The  Buddhist  exposition of Jhe humar i  being  as fl co-P-d ^ five 
elements-"  ^^er,"'  sensation         ^g^  action,  ^  ^  yelements.

§80.     The  Buddhist  exposition of Jhe humar i  being  as fl co-P-d ^ five 
elements-"  ^^er,"'  sensation         ^g^  action,  ^  ^  y

£|eSSbUsS ^intn^of  rSS  between qbody  and  mind  is  sought  after, 
in  all  periods  of  history.

ment,^r°eUther'nin  SfSXtion  of  the  creature  differs  in  the 
degree  of  ts  clearness  and  translucence.  When  the  ether  win  which 
^individual  is  endowed  is  clear  and  translucent  .  .  .but  neither 
the  indrvidual   s  ena  crea,urely  desire  is  un-

P  7i  hEante  overcome  and  got  rid  of,  and  then  we  have 
avoidable  ,   but  rtcan  be ^™m  g  indlvidual  is  endowed

^"and  S  tt*e  beclouding  with  creaturely  des.re

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  47

to  such  an  extent  that  it  cannot  be  shaken  off,  and  we  have  the  foolish 
and  degenerate  "  (Chu  Hsi  10,  i.  117).THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  47

to  such  an  extent  that  it  cannot  be  shaken  off,  and  we  have  the  foolish 
and  degenerate  "  (Chu  Hsi  10,  i.  117).

§  82.     (4)    Associated  factors.     Since    the    primary    qualities 
belong  to  the  elements,  the  laws  of  action  and  "  passion  "  apply 
Various  aspects  of  this  law  are  described  by  the  terms  :   strength- 
weakness  ;      jelal-jemal     (Persian)  ;     qada-qadr     (Arabic).      These 
determine  the  phenomena  of  human  life,  and  therefore  call  for  con- 
sideration under  the  dynamic  aspects  of  the  doctrine.     Statically 
they  are  significant  to  the  physician  because  they  reveal  themselves  in 
variations  of  functional  capacity  of  organs.     With  the  dominance 
ot  the  several  elements  we  may  expect  corresponding  vigour  of  the 
several  systems  of  the  body— e.g.  the  nutritive  faculty,  and  the  liver- 
function  ;   renal  functions,  etc.     The  emotional  make-up,  character 
and  even  talents  for  art,  crafts,  literature,  politics,  etc.,  attitude  towards 
life  m  general—all  these  are  "  coloured  "  by  the  dominant  "  element  " 
The  study  of  the  patient's  features,  gestures,  voice,  posture,  hands 
acquires   an  added  meaning,   as  informing  about  the  strength  or 
weakness  of  the  several  systems  and  faculties— to  a  degree  which  is 
not  so  very  inferior  to  the  information  afforded  by  the  expensive 
instruments  of  modern  clinical  research.

See  also  under  "  destiny."     (§§  in- 115)See  also  under  "  destiny."     (§§  in- 115)

"  Strength  is  the  manifestation  of  the  positive  ether,  and  weakness 
of  the  negative.  Each  of  these  again  is  either  positive,  and  then 
good,  or  negative,  and  then  <  evil.'  Strength  when  good  is 
righteous  straightforward,  resolute,  majestic,  firm  ;  when  evil  harsh 
proud,  soft,  irresolute,  and  false.  The  Mean  (the  ideal)  is  the  main- 
tenance of  these  principles  in  equilibrium."     Bruce10,  p.    m.

B.      Considered  Dynamically.

"  T^  5Ve  feme!lts  move  unceasingly,  succeeding  one  another  in  predomin- 
ance, m  turn,  though  all  always  exist  simultaneously  "     (Li  Ki«,  vih\ I {,3).

"  The  earthy  sign  (of  the  Zodiac)  succours  the  terrestrial  earth 
ihe  water  sign   (Aquarius)   sends  moisture  to  it 
The  wmdy  sign  sends  the  clouds  to  it, 
To  draw  off  unwholesome  exhalations' 
The  fiery  sign  (Leo)  sends  forth  the  heat  of  the  sun 
Like  a  dish  heated  red-hot  in  front  and  behind     ' 
The  heaven  is  busily  toiling  through  the  ages, 
Just  as  men  labour  to  provide  food  for  women' 
And  the  earth  does  the  woman's  work,  and  toils 
In  bearing  offspring  and  suckling  them."

Mesnavi"

^  §  84u  T  ^  ™ovement  °f  the  elements  is  mutually  opposite 
(Sum.  Theol."  66  ;  p.  i97).  Change  is  continually  talcing  place 
within  the  human  being.  This  change  is  either  cyclical  or  pro- 
gressive. The  former  characterizes  the  ordinary  phenomena  of 
physiology,  and  the  latter  manifest  as  "  growth  "  The  cyclical 
changes  of  physiology  (in  its  biochemical  aspect)  may  be  described 
in  terms  both  of  the  chemical  elements  and  of  the"  imponderable 
elements.     To  do  so   by  the  pictorial  title   of  "  the  dance  of  the  '

48  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE48  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

elements  "  is  at  once  to  bring  up  the  atmosphere  of  the  East,  and  the

very  scenery  of  Avicenna's  mind.

"  All  the  four  elements  are  seething  in  this  caldron  (the  world), 
None  is  at  rest,  neither  earth  nor  fire  nor  water  nor  air 
Now  earth  takes  the  form  of  grass    on  account  of  desxre, 
Now  water  becomes  air,  for  the  sake  of  this  affinity.

•  ■■  By  way  of  unity,  water  becomes  fire  ;

Fire  also  becomes  air  in  this  expanse,  by  reason  of  love. 
Se  elements  wander  from  place  to  place  hke  a  pawn, 
Sr  tne  sake  of  the  king's  love,  not,  like  you    for  pastime.  _

Shamsi  Tabriz"  (p.  330).Shamsi  Tabriz"  (p.  330).

The   changes    are   the   important  things  ;— not  the   things   in 
themselves  for  matter,  after  all,  only  exists  in  virtue  of  the  ceaselessly 
acWcreat  ve  power  of  God.     Did  He  withhold  the  power,  at  tha 
fns  aft  the  matter  would  cease  ;    it  has  no  reality  apart  from  His 
n  entiU      S  would  not  be  a  case  of  the  world  being  «  destroyed 
St  one  of  "  ceding  to  be."     We  are  apt  to  be  deceived  by     matter 
and  devote  our  thoughts  to  this  instead  of  to  the  changes  ;    and 
nerhaos  the  "  moment  of  nascence  "  (§  91)  is  even  more  important 
San  the  chang'Themselves.     The  greatnessof  the  ancient  «  Book 
of  Changes  "  (Yi  King)  is  due  to  the  recognition  of  this  principle. 
°       S8?    The  advantage  of  this  simile  is  that  it  brings  out  not  only 
movement  of  a  certain  orderly  kind,  but  also  rhythm  and  W; 
Ze  tTouaht  being  of  such   primitive  native   dances  m  which  the 
action  requires  only  two  dancers  (male  and  female    of  course)  who 
a  e?n  the  presence  of  many  spectators.     Each  dancer  performs 
entire^  different  movements,  and  the  two  never  come  tnto  actual 
cfntact      The  movements  are  harmonized  by  the  music    which  is 
~  iZ  1?  as  characteristic  and  essential  as  either  of  the  performers.

Further  tt  will  be  clear  that  the  feelings  of  the  dancers  themselves 
do  not  concern  the  watchers  ;  behind  their  emotions  there  is  the  real 
meamnt  of  the  dance,  and  whether  the  dancers  discern  that  or  not 
tTe  observer  should  strive  to  discern  it.  There  may  _  be  special 
affinities  or  attractions  between  the  dancers  of  the  minuet;  but 
Stfer  their  pleasure,  their  displeasure,  their  steps,    nor  the  music,^    Moreterthe^kill  of  the  dancers  is  not  always  of  the  same 
degree      Irtistic    genius    may    produce    greater    pkasure    in    the

1.  we   K,!t  there  is  something  greater  even  than  skill. 
^Ts?     The hphen0rna  of^hysiology  and  pathology  may  be 
view  d  as  a  serie's  of  changes  of  analogous  character th e  cy de  o 
changes   in   chemical    elements,    tissue-cells,    and    other   rhythmic 
phenomena  being  studied  without  neglecting  the  conception  of  the

imPT8rabF:otThentdoctrine  of  matter  and  form  it  is  clear  that 
with  the  changes  from  one  chemical  compound. to  another  m Mfce 
bourse  of  the  cyclical  phenomena,  there  is  a  dropping  of  *e  form- 
Also,  the  imponderable  elements  rearr ange  an d  blend  in to  new 
modes  at  the  same  time.  As  the  author  of  Gulshan-i-Raz  (lines 
250-255  and  footnote)  says  :

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  49

"  The  elements',  water,  air,  fire  and  earth,

Have  taken  their  station  below  the  heavens  ;

Each  serving  diligently  in  its  own  appointed  place,

Before  or  behind  which  it  never  sets  its  foot.

Though  all  four  are  contrary  in  their  nature  and  position,

Still  one  may  see  them  ever  united  together.

Inimical  are  they  to  each  other  in  essence  and  form,

Yet  united  into  single  bodies  by  fiat  of  necessity. 
•  From  them  is  born  the  three-fold  kingdom  of  Nature."Inimical  are  they  to  each  other  in  essence  and  form,

Yet  united  into  single  bodies  by  fiat  of  necessity. 
•  From  them  is  born  the  three-fold  kingdom  of  Nature."

_  §  8.7.  To  present  a  simple  example,  for  illustration — Glucose, 
for  instance,  would  be  described  as  WA2F±,  each  letter  representing 
the  corresponding  imponderable  element.  When  this  substance 
is  broken  up  into  alcohol  and  C02,  by  the  dispersal  of  the  "  cohesive 
force  between  the  three  elements  (e.g.,  by  the  influence  of  an  "  op- 
posite "  :  the  yeast-ferment),  two  portions  of  WF2  result,  the  "  air  " 
having  escaped,  and  the  "  fire-water  "  of  the  aborigines  being  left 
behind.     This  may  be  represented  pictorially  thus  :

The  germination  of  seeds  may  be  described  in  similar   terms 
lnus,  it  would  be  said  that  the„ethereal  undulations  from  the  sun 
penetrate  the  loosened  earth  round  the  seeds,  and'byTheir  successive 
shocks  affect  the  particles  of  matter  composing  the  germinal  centre  of 
me  seed.     The  readjustments  of  atoms  and  compounds  with  oxygen 
result  in  the  generation  of  vital  energy.     The   "  earth  "   (mineral 
substances,  arid  remnants  of  animal  and  vegetable  matter)  mingled 
with  ^  water      (moisture)  forms  the  factor  of  "  heavy  elements  "  (20) 
I  he      air      (its  oxygen  content),  "  fire  "  (solar  heat),  and  "  aether  " 
(sunlight)  make  up  the  factor  of  "  light  elements."     The  two  series 
together  affect  the  starch  in  the  seed,  bring  about  its  change  into 
glucose   whereby  the  seed  swells  until  the  plumule  emerges,  and  the 
rootlets  begin  to  penetrate  the  soil  in  search  of  "  water  "  and  "  earth  " 
while  the  leaves  expand  to  take  in  the  "  air,"  and  "  aether  "  by  the 
aid  of      fire.  y§88.  Expressed  in  another  way,  there  has  been  a  change  of 
vibration-rate.  Or  we  might  regard  the  imponderable  elements  as 
compulsorily  riding  upon  the  chemical  elements  during  their 
metabolic  interchanges,  although  the  fire,  water,  earth  or  air  cannot 
De  thought  of  as  retaining  a  sort  of  identity  throughout.  It  would 
De  better  to  use  another  idiom  :  the  noumenal  is  coterminous  with 
JM.xMnome.nal.  Or,  comparing  it  with  wave^ri^olTTtTr^ If  ' 
tnere  were  two  superimposed  curves.  When  the  two  curves  tally 
every  dip  of  one  meets  a  dip  in  the  other.     The  imponderable  dips

5o  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE5o  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

down    a*  it  were   into  the  world  of  matter,  illuminating  the'1  ocean 
of  pnysicaf  matter"  according  to  the  mode  (in tensity  o -bration^ 
in  which  it  touches  the  lower  curve.     A    each .rue  o the  wave   the 
former  returns  into  the  metaphysical      ocean,      and  in  doing  so, 
the  nhvsical  matter  returns  to  (momentary)  inactivity. 
^    PTh    Sealing  down  and  building  up  of  substance,  in  the  coupe 
of  metabolism,  is  the  same  as  the  scholastic      corrup  *°^Km- 
tegration),  and  "generation"  (reconstruction)      a^  ^concurrent 
with  the  changes  in  the  imponderable  elements      l*J™^*™ 
nrocess  is  thought  of  in  their  terms,   whereas  to  the  physiologist 
Se  process  is  worked  out  in  terms  of  the  ^f^2l£rT^g 
So   in  Chinese  philosophy,  we  are  introduced  to  the  alternating 
openfng  and  closngP  operations  of  Nature,  which  are  controlled  by 
the   "Law,"    as  thl  pivot  controls  the  opening  and  closing  of  a 
door  "(p    U4).     (Cf    with  urooj-nasool  in  Sufic  philosophy.) 
d°°  §  4P"   Hence  le  find  that  Thesis  III  is  ™*%0*^g™™ 
consideration  of  the  imponderables,  under  the  title  of      tempera- 
men    "It  I   the   action   and    "passion"    between  the   opposes 
whkh  results  in  "  temperament."     This  conception  carried  through 
Hi  aspects  of  man  provides  the  explanation  of  the  diversity  which^^S-JaW^s^^I^r&re  is  one  and  the  same 
princtpt  whiJhllf  prevailing  in  the  attempered  ^ementary  par- 
ticles is  equipoise  of  temperament,  if  produced  in  ^aUones 
excellent  and  delightful  intervals,  if  apparent  m  the  gestures  is 
Sace  if  found  in  fanguage  is  eloquence,  if  produced  m*e  human 
limbs'  is  beauty  (<  Though  their  beauty  charm  thee  Quran  Sura 
•>*  v  s2Y  if  in  the  qualities  of  the  soul  equity.  Of  this  pnncipie  me 
Soul  is  enamoured  and  in  search,  whatever  form  it  may  take,  whatever 
dress  a"ume  "  (Verses  625-630  of  Gulshan-i-Raz  ;  many  other  pas- 
saees  in  this  poem  are  equally  applicable).  _

This  therefore  forms  the  introduction  to  Thesis  III.

4-

Applications  of  the  Doctrine

(a)    To  biochemistry.

8  00      Starting  with  the  conception  of  matter  so  far  detailed, 
bothlSciy  "^dynamically,  and  applying  the .dynamic ^aspec * 
of  the  imponderable  elements  designated  as  a      dance      *  e  may  pro 
ceed  to  trace  the  chemical  elements  and  compoun d     th^f  the 
VwSv    entering  as  they  do  in  the  form  of  solid  and  fluid  articles  01

tically  the  whole  of  this  time  they  are  combined    but :  at  the  actual 
moments  of  chemical  interchange  they  become  free  or      nascent 
tVip  moments  when  f  becomes  /  .

8  7      may  be  {aid  that  that  moment  of  nascence  is  the  focus 
or  the  whole  purpose,  of  the  cycle  of  changes  which  occur  in  the

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  518  7      may  be  {aid  that  that  moment  of  nascence  is  the  focus 
or  the  whole  purpose,  of  the  cycle  of  changes  which  occur  in  the

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  51

body — anabolic  and  katabolic.  That  one  moment  is  the  opportunity 
for  vital  actions  to  actualize.  That  moment  finds  its  location  in 
this  or  that  histological  unit  or  tissue-element,  which  itself  is,  in  a 
certain  real  sense,  itself  the  actualization  of  that  moment  ! .  This 
moment  achieved,  they  become  bound  once  more  and  steadily 
descend  the  ladder  of  metabolism  until  they  are  found  once  more 
outside  the  body.  To  quote  from  a  deep  thinker  of  the  early 
Victorian  age  :  "Nitrogen,  like  a  half-reclaimed  gipsy  from  the 
wilds,  is  ever  seeking  to  be  free  again,  and,  not  content  with  its 
own  freedom,  is  ever  tempting  others  not  of  gipsy  blood  to  escape 
from  their  thraldom"  (Religio  Chemici,78  p.   149).§  92.     At  this  same  vital  moment  of  the  cycle,  there  is  a  change 
of  the  pivot  of  function  in  the  substances  concerned.     All  the  sub- 
stances with  which  the  subject  of  metabolism  deals  belong  to  the 
£aib2a^2mEoujids_,  whose  structure  is  well  known  to  be  described 
with  the  terms  straight  chain,  double-chain,  ring-compounds,  etc. 
With  these  forms  of  "  skeleton  "   are  associated  the  various  "'side- 
chains  "  which  are  to  the  others  as  the  limbs  to  the  body.     All  the 
familiar  groups  of  biochemistry  (paraffins,  primary  and  secondary 
alcohols,  aldehydes,  acids,  amides,  ketones,  ethers,'  sulphonic  acids, 
albumoses,    leucins,    purins,    diaminoacids,    sugars,    etc.)    may    be 
thought  of  as  presenting  a  sort  of  individuality  which  depends  more 
on  the  side-chains  than  on  the  skeletons,  and  yet  the  radicles  of  which 
these  side-chains  are  composed  owe  their  character  more  to  stereo- 
chemical  position   or  other  relations  than  to  the  elements   which 
belong  to  them.     With  change  of  formula  there  is  no  doubt  a  change 
of  physical  state  (colloid,   crystalloid),   of  electrical  reaction  and  so 
forth.     But  the  fact  of  change  (Cf.   §  83)  is  still  more  important, 
even  than  the  change  of  personality  or  individuality  (so  to  speak). 
The  pivot  of  function   changes  from  one  element — carbon,   e.g. — 
to  _  another   (nitrogen,   sulphur,   phosphorus,   e.g.).     The   important 
thing  is  that •froim..hemg,,£aEhQn-centric,_ the  physlolo.gical...pjacesses 
,.are„ ,.. nitrogen-xentric,     sulpho-centric,  ...phpspho-centric.       Or,     uni- 
centricity  gives  place  to  duo-centricity  (e.g.'  sulpho-ferro-centric),  or 
perhaps    multi-centricity   (e.g.    in    albumen),    because   the    function 
cannot  pass  on  to  a  new  pivot  unless  two  or  more  other  elements  have 
come  into  special  association.For  instance,  in  oxy-centricity,  a  compound  constructed  on  the 
straight-chain  skeleton  (-C-C-C-C-)  may  become  oxycentric,  because 
the  new  basis  is  -C-C-C-  (formation  of  anhydrides,  esters,  etc.). 
Here  the  important  thing  is  that  the  centre  of  function  is  -O-  and 
no  longer  -C-.  In  nitro-centricity,  the  change  is  associated  with  the 
appearance  of  -C-N-C-,  the  centre  of  function  being  now  -N-,  which 
is  important.  In  sulpho-centricity,  a  compound  with  a  group 
-C-^-OsH  (thio-ethers,  allyls,  etc.)  may  arise  ;  this  is  quasi-patho- 
logical for  the  human  body,  and  however  insignificant  the  -5-  mav 
be  to'  the  chemist  maybe  it  is  evident  to  the  senses  in  virtue  of  a 
distinctive  odour.  Such  compounds  as  sulphocyanides,  taurocho- 
lates,  indoxylsulphates,  melanin,  various  mucins,  lardaceous  sub- 
stances, hair,  and  the  horny  skin  have  an  importance  of  their  own,

52  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

and  some  of  them  form  the  links  between  nitro-centric  and  sulpho- 
centric  compounds.  In  phospho-centricity,  the  dominance  of  the 
phosphorus  atom  is  the  culmination  of  the  purpose  of  the  metabolic 
change.  So  the  author  of  Religio  Chemici  (p.  1 49)  said  ' '  phosphorus 
is  in  the  active  condition  at  the  centres  of  vital  action  and  in  the 
passive  (allotropic)  state  at  the  outlying  points."  In  the  case  01 
lecithin,  there  are  variations  of  centricity.  Its  nitrogen,  phosphorus, 
or  hydroxyl  may  be  dominant  according  to  the  metabolic  circum- 
stances, and  the  subsequent  linkages  and  fate  of  each  successive 
derivative  is  according  to  those  circumstances.Other  elements  may  come  to  form  important  pivots  of  function, 
under-jnore  or  less  exceptional  conditions  (e.g.,  arsenic,  silicon,  etc.). 
(§93  )  It  is  clear  then,  that  we  can  watch  the  metabolic  processes 
fromTfiechemical  side  as  a  sort  of  pageant  or  procession.  But  if  we 
view  it  as  the  chemist  does,  according  to  syntheses  and  analyses, 
oxidations  and  reductions,  and  according  to  the  intermediateproducts 
which  he  discovers  when  he  arrests  that  pageant,  as  one  might  stop 
a  dance  in  order  to  be  sure  that  a  certain  individual  was  present  or 
not,  we  mav  easily  come  to  conclusions  quite  at  variance  with  the 
living  truth."     Stop  the  dance,  and  the  illusion  is  destroyed,      i  he  lite

Vi3.s  crone  !

'"■""" Theliving  cell  does  not  necessarily  follow  the  programme  of  the 
laboratory.  Indeed  it  might  be  doubted  whether  any  substances  as 
such  ever  appear  except  at  the  end.  The  actual  process  might  well  be 
like  a  shuffling  of  cards,  whereby  the  order  of  the  cards  is  altered 
and  the  order  or  relative  position  is  the  important  thing.  On  the 
anabolic  side  there  is  always  the  face  ;  on  the  katabohc  side  there  is 
always  the  back.  Between  the  two  there  are  always  the  same  atomic 
personalities  which  remain  as  it  were  in  the  same  room  but  change 
about  to  receive  different  ranks  with  respect  to  one  another

Each  element  may  be  traced  through  its  various  phases,  through 
compound  after  compound,  its  behaviour  being  modified  by  the  side- 
chains,  and  its  importance  alter  e^-sojhjtns^rthas<i^^alpiJ^lsax„. 
with  the  otheli~aritrWie^

servienFlo "another  'element  whi^Ja^.^j^M^ssumedj^^V^SM 
posffibnT""Eacrirtufir receives  homage  from  its  fellows  ;  each  enjoys 
a  brief  reign  upon  the  throne.servienFlo "another  'element  whi^Ja^.^j^M^ssumedj^^V^SM 
posffibnT""Eacrirtufir receives  homage  from  its  fellows  ;  each  enjoys 
a  brief  reign  upon  the  throne.

§  94  Such  is  the  chemistry  of  life,  viewed  mystically,  it  is  an 
incessant  movement.  Interchanges  proceed  continually,  and  not 
only  in  one  substance  at  a  time,  but  in  a  thousand  at  a  time  ;  not  one 
element  only  (C,  H,  N,  O,  S,  P)  but  all  of  them  simultaneously— 
not  necessarily  one  ruler,  but  sometimes  co-rulers,  in  the  various 
substrates  of  action  ;  not  all  at  the  same  rate,  but  at  different  rates 
and  with  different  rhythms.  .

8  95  (b)  In  histology.— These  pictures  of  biochemical  pro- 
cesses must  be  linked  up  with  what  we  actually  see  with  the  naked  eye 
and  with  the  microscope.  Morphological  changes  are  all  mani- 
festations of  the  unseen  or  invisible  biochemical  cycles.  JNot 
"structure  first,  then  function."  Not  "function  first,  then  struc- 
ture "     The  two  are  inseparable  both  in  time  and  place.     Hence,

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

53THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

53

however  exact  his  histological  knowledge,  the  physician  must  hold 
clearly  before  him  the  activities  which  only  the  mind  can  hold  and 
piece  together  and  watch.  The  histological  appearance  shows  us  the 
processes  arrested  at  a  particular  moment  when  some  group  is 
dominant  and  another  "  recessive."  Its  very  appearance  is  artificial, 
the  produce  of  reagents  acting  upon  a  dead  "  fixed  "  protoplasm  ; 
a  reaction  between  complex  dyes  and  the  chemical  substances 
produced  by  the  fixatives.  That  which  appears  to  be  the  permanent 
substrate  for  functions,  a  definite  scaffolding,  is  quite  otherwise. 
In  the  picture  given  of  the  dance  of  the  elements  in  the  body,  the 
"  skeleton  "  seems  a  base  from  which  side-chains  arise  and  give 
purchase  for  the  "  dancing  "  element  ;  but  as  a  matter  of  fact  the 
skeleton,  the  side-chain,  and  the  element  are  mutually  necessary. 
The  whole  structure  is  altering  the  whole  time.  So  with  the  tissue. 
The  change  of  chemical  substances  entails  a  change  from  solid  to 
colloid,  colloid  to  fluid,  fluid  to  gas  or  back  to  colloid  ;  and  while  so 
doing  they  becomeperceptible  under  the  microscope  as  cell-substance, 
cell-fluid,  cell-juice,  tissue-juice  ;  fluids  aggregate  and  condense  into 
"  cells  "  (colloid  phase)  ;  cells  constantly  dissolve  or  "  splay  out  " 
into  fluid,  or  undergo  partition  from  larger  and  larger  particles  into 
submicroscopic  and  finally  into  visible  microscopic  particles,  or  else 
undergo  partition  into  "  supernatant  fluids  "  of  simpler  chemical 
composition.  In  the  course  of  these  changes  solids  and  the  like 
separate  out  ;  and  these  last  are  usually  but  faultily  regarded  as 
products  of  metabolism  comparable  to  the  goods  manufactured  in  a 
factory.  The  appearance  of  granules  rather  than  fluid,  or  precipitate 
rather  than  solution  in  the  tissue,  depends  on  the  kind  of  elements 
concerned  (mineral  atoms,  ordinary  atom-groups),  and  the  direction 
of  interchange.      See  §  125.Some  examples  of  the  steps  of  the  cycle  towards  visibility  :

Fluid    phase.

Colloid  phase. 
Cell-substance

Submicroscopic 
character.

Microscopic- 
appearance.

Fate.

Homogeneous 
"  humour  "

Spongioplasm

Tissue  cell 
as  a  whole

Excretable 
substance    and 
protein    deriv- 
atives.

Abnormal 
humour."

Atrabilious 
humour

Less  colloidal

Coarse  part- 
icles   (insol- 
uble)

Inexcretable 
without 
medicam  entous 
aid.

Tissue-fluid

Serum-protein

Aminoacids

Bioplasm  ; 
occasional 
crystalline 
deposit

Urea,  etc.

Sulphur

Colloid  Sulphur 
potentially 
excretable 
phase.

Larger  parti- 
cles of  Sulphur

Cell-granules, 
cell-wall

Sulphur 
derivatives  ; 
sulphonic 
acids,    etc.

54  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

8  06  It  is  not  possible  to  prepare  a  fully  exact  correlation  be- 
tween the  carbon,  nitrogen, .  phosphorus,  and  sulphur  series  and 
structure  seen  under  the  microscope.  Bro^as^x^^c^SS^ 
series  is  related  to  the„ceU-subslanc.e.;  the  nitrogen  an3  jjtospjwrus 
sSrleT'a7e"ais^iated  with  the  nuclearjtructure.  CertanTEnds  o. 
cells  are  associated  more  with  some  elements  than  with  others 
Moreover  one  must  always  bear  in  mind  that  the  movement  is  all 
through  the  cell,  all  through  the  whole  histologic^  unit,  Ine 
fulfilment  of  the  functions  of  such  a  unit  implies  the  simultaneous 
movement  of  all  the  elements  concerned,  and  each  cycle  proceeds  at  a8  Q7  It  is  less  easy  still  to  present  a  picture  of  the  movement  in 
a  whole  tissue  in  these  terms.  Only  here  and  there  does  some  product 
emeree  which  is  identifiable  by  the  physiologist  and  biochemist. 
Endless  intermediate  steps  and  changes  find  their  concrete  expression 
in  the  one  product  which  we  perceive  as  some,  detail  of  cell-structure 
under  the  microscope.  We  may  trace  various  isolated  substances  in 
certain  parts  of  certain  cells  of  the  body,  and  yet  are  not  able  to 
dogmatize  about  them,  because  in  the  process  of  hfe.m  the  tissue 
there  is  a  constant  flow  of  matter,  the  visible  becoming  invisible, 
and  then  again  visible.  That  is,  the  visible  food  material  taken  in, 
the  invisible  changes  and  interchanges  of  elements  and  atom  groups 
(the  "  metabolism  ")  and  their  changing  pivots  of  function  ;  and  the 
finally  visible  product  of  excretion.  If  there  be  a  range  of  variation 
froi/a  "  normal  "  in  the  steps  of  this  "  dance  »  there  is  at  least  no 
doubt  that  ill-health  comes  of  a  change  of  rhythm  when  the  toot- 
falls  "  are  out  of  time,  or  some  of  the  "  steps  "  omitted

8  q8  It  is  clear  that  if  the  changes  in  the  imponderable  elements 
should  chance  to  fail  to  run  concurrently  with  the  breaking  down  and 
building-up  of  substance  (the  scholastic  corruption  or  disintegration 
and  generation  or  reconstruction),  this  would  also  mean  a  break  in  the 
rhvthm  :  the  wave-motion  would  not  be  symmetrical,  to  use  the 
S  simile;  and  the  body  would  be"  ill ."  But  il :  may -be 
added,  in  passing,  that  the  varying  dispositions  exhibited  by  people 
are  the  manifestations  of  lack  of  perfect  symmetry  and  synchronism 
perfect  symmetry  would  show  among  other  things  as      a  cheertul1Sp08Soo°n  The  histology  of  an  organ  is  the  visible  sum  total  of 
chemical  units,  with  the  atom"  groups  of  ponderable  tots 
successively  formed  in  the  cells  and  tissues.  These  constitute  the 
stage  and  scenery  of  the  metaphysical  "  dance  "-that  of  the  im- 
ponderable elements  which  interweave  and  complete  the  picture  of  the 
living  processes.  But  to  understand  the  picture  itself,  and  seeits 
meaning,  brings  us  to  questions  which  must  be  deferred  at  this  point.

§  ioo.  The  wonderful  insight  into  the  processes  taking  place  in Jae human 
body  which  is  afforded  by  the  conception  of  macrocosm  ^  ™"t 
used  by  the  alchemists  of  old,  and  still  rightly  used  by  many  thinkers,  is  sufficient 
justification^  ^  .^  &  ^^  of  ^  beingS;  composed  of  hundreds

of  units  which  have  aggregated  for  a  relatively  few  moments^    We ,  may ^cal it 
simply  "  a  crowd,"  or  we  may  specify  and  say  what  kind  of  a  crowd.     As  one  watches

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  55

it,  people  come  up  to  it  ; .  others  leave  ;  others  walk  by  without  deviating  their 
steps.     Perhaps  in  five  minutes.it  has  all  dispersed.

What  of  it  ?  What  was  its  purpose  ?  What  was  its  effect  ?— here  or  perhaps 
elsewhere  ?  Perhaps  it  is  subversive  of  order,  anarchical,  pathological  ■  perhaps 
it  is  simply  mechanical,  obstructive,  congestive.Such  may  be  observed  under  the  microscope,  but  we  call  the  components 
cells  or  perhaps  excretory  products  or  foreign  bodies.  To  some,  such  analogising 
is  fanciful  and  useless.  But  that  Avicenna  found  this  method  of  enquiry  vastlv 
productive  and  helpful  there  is  no  doubt.  As  a  faithful  Moslem,  too,  he  would 
realize  the  voice  of  the  Quran,  saying,  "  these  things  are  to  you  for  a  sign."  Words 
belonging  not  only  to  the  moral  law,  but  also  to  the  law  of  Nature  in  all  its  ramifica- 
tions— for  the  Artificer  and  the  Lawgiver  are  one.

§  i oi.  By  the  time  we  have  grasped  these  several  aspects  and 
associated  them  with  the  chemical  aspect  of  life,  we  have  formed  a 
nearer  approximation  to  the  true  picture  of  life  at  that  moment  of 
time.  But  it  has  already  passed  on  to  something  different  !  How- 
ever, there  is  no  way  of  keeping  pace  with  that  except  by  under- 
standing the  cycle  of  changes  in  each  and  every  case.  Cycles  of 
incipience,  of  growth,  of  maturation,  of  decay.  The  reason,  or 
cause   of  the  change,  is  to  be  understood  before  one  can  keep  pace.§  1 02.  The  causes  at  work  in  the  dance  of  the  imponderable 
elements. — The  mutual  attraction  and  repulsion  which  underlies  all 
change  is  to  be  foundTrnheTe^iFTn  the  imponderable  elements,  as  it 
were  by  definition.  The  active  and  passive  qualities  of  the  separate 
elements  come  into  play  when  they  are  compounded,  and  (because 
they  necessarily  occur  in  the  same  "geographical"  spot,  and  are 
only  separable  by  mental  analysis)  they  have  to  do  even  with  physical 
state  (solid,  fluid,  colloid,  gaseous)  and  form  (granular,  amorphous, 
crystalline)  and  physical  property  (solubility  and  insolubility  ; 
positive  or  negative  electrical  charge).  Hence  they  may  be  said  to 
affect  the  direction  of  movement,  whether  to  less  colloid  state,  or 
more  colloid,  to  differentiation  or  de-differentiation,  clearness  or 
sharpness  of  reaction,  or  to  confused  state.

§  103.     This    doctrine    may    be    brought    beside    the    Chinese 
principle  of  Yang  and  Yin.

To  the  Yang  principle  belong  the  ideas  :  anterior,  south,  rising,  fecundating 
expanding,  growth,  advancing,  strength,  order,  heat,  motion,  cheerfulness,  life.

To  the  Yin  principle  belong  :  posterior,  north,  falling,  breeding,  contracting 
decay,   retarding,   weakness,   confusion,   cold,   rest,    anger,   death.

In  relation  to  the  body  :  Yang  belongs  to  the  breath,  the  head,  the  speech 
the  eyesight,  exhaling  ;  the  shape  of  the  body.  Yin  belongs  to  the  blood,  the  feet' 
the  vital  force,  silence,  inhaling  ;    the  "  body  "  itself.

Yang  is  active,  flowing,  fullness,  straigtitness,  music.  Yin  is  passive,  tending 
to  inertia,  emptiness,  crookedness  of  form,  ceremonial.

There  are  relations  between  yang  and  yin,  and  hardness  or  softness  and  the 
organs  of  the  body.      (Forke23,  216).There  are  relations  between  yang  and  yin,  and  hardness  or  softness  and  the 
organs  of  the  body.      (Forke23,  216).

"  When  the  ether  has  the  proportions  of  the  yin,  and  the  vang  correct  and  & 
harmonious,  there  is  perfection  of  the  ether,  and  it  is  equally  permeable  by  all  "1 
five  elements,  as  in  the  case  of  man.  When  the  proportions  are  unequal,  there  is 
imperfection  of  the  ether,  the  manifestation  of  the  elements  is  unequal,  as  in  the 
case  ofjammals." — Bruce,10  footnote:  i.   115.

§  104.  The  idea  of  Yang  and  Yin  swinging  as  a  pendulum 
may  add  to  our  conception  of  life.  The  rocking  of  the  cradle  has  the 
subtle  purpose  of  throwing  the  yang  and  yin  into  rhythm,  and  the

At-

56  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

movement  of  the  infant's  breath  into  rhythm,  which,  once  started, 
will  continue  for  at  least  an  hour  or  two      (See  698.)

S  105  Urooj :  NasooL™  Rise  and  Fall.  The  anabolic 
process  belongs  to  the  former  ;  the  katabolic  (formation  of  "  effete  " 
substances,  their  removal  from  tissues  and  organs—whether  by 
deposition  in  tissues,  as  atheroma,  or  by  discharge  from  the  body) 
belong  to  the  latter.  These  terms  in  Persian  mysticism  emphasize 
the  fact  of  changes  and  movements  running  in  cycles.  Each 
individual  has  his  own  characteristic  cycle  of  changes  ;  the  move- 
ment of  the  '"'  breath  "  goes  by  cycles.  The  life  as  a  whole  shows  its 
cycle  being  sometimes  75  years,  sometimes  more,  more  often  much 
less  '  In  addition  there  are  the  smaller  cycles— waxing  and  waning 
of  vital  force  in  a  certain  rhythm  peculiar  to  the  person,  and  carrying 
with  it  susceptibility  or  resistance  to  infection,  and  the  like.S  106  Other  principles  :  these  would  be  expressed  as  laws, 
which  can'be  classified  into  various  groups— those  belonging  to  nature 
in  general  ;  those  belonging  to  human  nature  ;  those  belonging  to 
our  conceptions  of  life,  health,  and  disease.  Law  of  qa#  and  qadr  ; 
construction  and  destruction  ;  of  distribution  ;  of  interdependence  ; 
of  intention  ;  of  compulsory  visibility  (discontinuous  functions,  etc)  ; 
of  desires.     Note  §  82.

S  107  Cause  of  synchronism  :  namely  between  the  two 
dancers  in  the  simile  ;  these  dancers  being  the  material  element  and 
the  imponderables  respectively.  This  lies  in  the  conception  of 
"  breath  "  or  "  life-principle,"  with  its  cycles.

S  108  (d)  Extramundane  and  extracorporeal  influences  on  the 
human  body  "in  virtue  of  the  common  content  of  the  "  four  elements ." 
'  That  there  are  definite  extracorporeal  influences  on  the  meta- 
bolic workings  of  the  human  body  should  now  be  intelligible.  The 
effect  of  heat,  cold,  wet  climate,  dry  climate  is  well  enough  known  but 
is  widely  ignored,  as  evidenced  by  elaborate  researches  into  chronic 
articular  "  rheumatism  "  being  apparently  made  in  every  direction

but  this.  .  ,

To  go  further,  and  agree  with  the  ancients  that  epidemics  and 
the  like  had  relation  to  planetary  influences,  is  not  necessary  ;  nor  is 
it  necessary  to  dismiss  their  possibility  off-hand.  It  is  not  safe  to 
argue  that  there  is  no  relation  between  the  planets  and  stars  and  lite 
on  this  earth  simply  because  some  relation  once  thought  to  be  true  is 
now  discredited.  If  the  whole  universe  is  one  organic  whole,  there 
cannot  but  be  some  relation.  _  .The  relation  between  seasonal  irregularities  and  the  interactions 
of  the  ' '  elements ' '  is  referred  to  by  Forke23  (p.  298,  footnote),  m  show- 
ing how  the  Chinese  associated  each  season  with  the  dominance  of  a

given  element.  .  ,

According  to  the  influences  prevailing  at  the  time  ot  birth,  so 
is  the' endowment  of  the  person  born  "  with  such  an  ether."     L. 
"  toward,  the  disposition  is  bright  and  good  ...  if  untoward,  not 
Chu    Hsi10,    85.     In   time,    and    with    constant    self-culture,       the 
inequality  of  etherial  endowment  will  of  itself  disappear."     ib.,  86.

26.

THESIS  III

i.     The  Temperaments

EMPERAMENT  is  that  quality  which  results 
from  the  mutual  interaction  and  interpassion 
of  the  four  contrary  primary  qualities  residing 
within  the  (imponderable)  elements.

There  is  a  fight  between  the  qualities  ;  a 
combat  (Costaeus'  annotation).  "  The  temper- 
ament is  something  set  up  by  contrary  qualities 
as  a  kind  of  mean  between  them. ' '  (S.  Thomas, S2 
Ixiii.  p.  165,  where  "  complexio  "  is  rendered 
temperament   '  as  it  is  throughout  the  present  work.)

"  How  strange  that  the  elements  should  be  so  contrary, 
And  yet  be  forced  to  live  together."

Gulshan-i-Raz,25  p.  26.

27.  _  These  elements  are  so  minutely  intermingled  as 
each  to  lie  in  very  intimate  relationship  to  one  another.  Their 
opposite  powers,  alternately  conquer  and  become  conquered 
until  a  state  of  equilibrium  is  reached  which  is  uniform  through- 
out the  whole.  It  is  this  outcome  that  is  called  "  the  tempera- 
ment." r

"  Elementum   aliquod   oportet  predominari  in  omni  mixto  "  83 
49,  o,  1.  m  ;    79,  2,  2m.

"  This  is  a  drawn  battle."     (Costaeus  18.)"  Elementum   aliquod   oportet  predominari  in  omni  mixto  "  83 
49,  o,  1.  m  ;    79,  2,  2m.

"  This  is  a  drawn  battle."     (Costaeus  18.)

shownns^er™cfJfn  T^^  the  h6ading  °f  this  Page'  four  transparent  discs  are 
snown  superposed.     The  discs  represent  the  primary  qualities      The  tinted  se?-

SSi  KSirt^  eleme^S-  *">  C6n^  rinS  — ks  off^helupef- 
different  tintf  c^T  +  gether  •?•  °nS  temP«ament."  As  each  disc  revolves, 
,'  ^2     -+l       ST®  mt°  new  P0S1tions,  and  thus  represent  different  temperaments

oi^^^ofc^efi1VidUA)S---The  lateral  ^  S6rVe  to  reca11  principles

The  initial  letter  is  taken  from  a  French  manuscript  of  the  twelfth  century.

57

58  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

28  Inasmuch  as  the  primary  powers  in  the  aforesaid 
elements  are  four  in  number  (namely,  heat,  cold,  _  moisture, 
dryness),  it  is  evident  that  the  temperaments  in  bodies  under- 
going  generation   and   destruction   (ana-,    kata-bolism)    accord

with  these  powers.  .     .

30  A  simple  rational  classification  is  into  two  modes  : 
(a)  Equable  or  balanced.  Here  the  contrary  qualities  are  present 
to  exactly  equal  degrees  of  potency— neither  of  them  being  in 
excess  or  deficiency.  This  temperament  has  a  quality  which  is 
exactly  the  mean  between  two  extremes,  (b)  Inequable  or  un- 
balanced. Here  the  quality  of  the  temperament  is  not  an 
exquisitely  exact  mean  between  the  contraries,  but  tends  a  little 
more  to  one  than  to  the  other.  For  example,  to  hot  more  than  to 
cold  ;    to  moist  more  than. to  dry  ;    or  contrariwise.

"  One  or  other  proves  victorious."     (Costaeus.)  ...,,."  One  or  other  proves  victorious."     (Costaeus.)  ...,,.

"  Fire,  water,  earth,  and  air,  the  four  elements  of  which  bodies 
are  compounded,  lose  their  individual  qualities  m  the  compound 
bodies,  and  equipose  (equity)  is  what  unites  them  into  homogeneous 
compounds."     (Lahiji,25  p.  61).  -,

''  When  ...  the  elements  attain  equilibrium,  the  beams  ot  the 
spirit  world  fall  upon  them."     {lb.,  couplet  615.)

"When  it  is  said  that  the  nature  of  a  man  or  thing  is  hot  and  ot 
another  is  cold,  such  statements  include  both  the  physical  element 
and  the  immaterial  principle  with  which  they  are  endowed.       Cnu

'  The  idea  of  "  balance  "  may  be  applied  to  a  variety  of  phenomena 
in  health  and  disease-both  of  body  and  mind.  Lack  of  balance 
brings  sickness,  and  explains  death.  Examples  :— atony  ;  hyper- 
tonicity  ;  hyperacidity  ;  excessive  trichosis  ;  the  various  phenomena 
nowadays  ascribed  to  loss  of  balance  in  the  domain  of  endocrine 
secretions,  and  hormones.  The  body  may  be  too  cold  (subnormal 
temperature)  ;  the  mind  may  be  "  cool  ;  the  heart  may  be  too 
"  warm."  There  may  be  inadequate  repose  after  mental  activity, 
leading  to  loss  of  mental  balance.  There  is  dynamic  balance  as  well 
as  static  balance.31  (It  is  to  be  noted  that)  a  temperament,  as  understood 
by  Medicine,  is  never  strictly  equable  or  strictly  inequable. 
The  physician  should  abide  by  the  philosopher  who  is  aware 
that  the  really  "  equable"  temperament  does  not  actually  exist 
in  the  human  being  any  more  than  it  exists  in  any  member. 
Moreover  the  term  "  equable,"  used  by  doctors  in  their  treatises, 
does  not  refer  to  weight  but  to  an  equity  of  distribution,  it  is 
this  distribution  which  is  the  primary  consideration— whether 
one  is  referring  to  the  body  as  a  whole,  or  only  to  some  individual

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  59

member  ;  and  the  average  measure  of  the  elements  in  it,  as  to 
quantity  and  quality,  is  that  which  (standard)  human  nature 
ought  to  have — both  in  best  proportion  and  in  equity  of  distribu- 
tion.

As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  mean  between  excess  and  deficiency 
of  qualities,  such  as  is  characteristic  of  man,  actually  is  very 
close  to  the  theoretical  ideal.

The  fact  that  temperament  is  concerned  with  the  primary  qualities  and  not 
with  secondary  ones  should  enable  one  to  avoid  the  idea  of  weight  (pondus)  in  regard 
to  the  subject.  In  the  annotation  of  the  1608  edition  there  is  a  reference  to  Aver- 
rhoes,  as  agreeing  with  this  point.  However,  if  one  realises  that  the  "  elements  "  are 
"  imponderables,"  it  becomes  self-evident  that  Avicenna's  dissertation  is  correct,  and 
that  he  himself  quite  realised  the  attitude  claimed  for  him  in  this  treatise.

32.  Eight  varieties  of  equipoise  :• — Human  beings  show 
eight  varieties  of  equable  temperament.  Equipoise  of  this  kind 
does  not  occur  in  animals,  nor  do  these  even  approach  to  the 
equable  state  we  describe  for  man.See  also  §  109  and  the  quotations  there  given,  which  insist  on  the  fundamental 
difference  between  man  and  animals.

The  eight  varieties  are  as  follows  : —

A.  In  relation  to  beings  other  than  man.  (i)  the  equability 
of  temperament  seen  in  man  as  compared  with  other  creatures  ; 
(ii)  that  which  is  found  in  different  human  beings  ;  (iii)  that  which 
is  taken  in  relation  to  external  factors,  such  as  race,  climate, 
atmosphere  ;  (iv)  one  taken  in  comparison  with  the  tempera- 
ment of  extremes  of  climate.

B.  In   relation   to   the   individual  himself.

(v)  as  compared  to  another  person  ;  (vi)  as  compared  with 
the  states  of  one  and  the  same  person  ;  (vii)  as  compared,  one 
member  with  another  ;  (viii)  as  compared  with  the  states  of 
one  and  the  same  member  at  different  times.

33.  We  now  discuss  each  of  these  modes  in  turn.

i.  Equability  of  temperament  as  found  in  man  taken  in 
comparison  with  that  of  other  animals.  The  range  is  too  wide 
to  be  comprehended  in  one  definition,  although  there  are  certain 
definite  limits,  upper  and  lower,  beyond  which  one  cannot  pass 
without  the  temperament  ceasing  to  be  a  human  one.

ii.  This  is  one  which  is  between  the  two  extreme  limits  of 
the  range  of  temperament  shown  by  a  person  throughout  his 
life  {p) — namely  that  shown  at  the  period  of  his  life  at  which 
growth  has  reached  its  limit.  This,  of  course,  is  not  the  equilib- 
rium referred  to  at  the  outset  of  this  chapter  as  only  theoretical, 
and  practically  never  found  in  practice — though  approximating

60  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE60  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

closely  to  that.  Such  a  person  is  so  near  to  approximate  equa- 
bility  only  as  far  as  corresponds  to  the  co-equation  of  his  members, 
or  the  interchanging  contra-action  of  his  hot  members  (e.g.  heart), 
with  his  cold  ones  (e.g.  brain)  ;  moist  ones  (e.g.  liver)  with 
dry  (e.g.  bones).  Were  all  these  of  equal  influence,  the  resulting 
condition  would  be  very  near  to  one  of  ideal  equability,  though 
not  so  as  regards  each  individual  member,  except  in  the  case 
of  the  skin  itself,  as  will  be  explained  later.  In  regard  to  the 
breaths  and  principal  organs,  the  temperament  cannot  possibly 
approximate  to  this  exquisite  equability  ;  it  oversteps  this  m 
the  direction  of  heat  and  moisture.  The  heart  and  the  breath 
are  the  root  of  life,  and  they  are  both  very  "  hot  "—indeed  to 
excess.  For  life  itself  depends  on  the  innate  heat,  and  growth 
depends  on  the  innate  moisture.  Indeed  the  heat  is  present  in 
and  maintained  or  "  nourished  "  by  moisture*

In  the  case  of  the  principal  organs,  of  which  there  are  three, 
as  we  shall  show  in  the  appropriate  place— the  brain  is  cold,  but 
its  coldness  does  not  modify  the  heat  of  the  heart  and  liver. 
The  heart  is  dry  or  nearly  so,  yet  its  dryness  does  not  alter  the 
moisture  of  the  brain  and  liver.  Neither  is  the  brain  absolutely 
and  entirely  cold,  nor  the  heart  absolutely  and  entirely  dry.  The 
heart  is  dry  compared  with  the  other  two  ;  and  the  brain  is 
"  cold  "  compared  with  the  other  two.iii  The  limits  of  the  third  mode  are  narrower  than  those  or 
the  first,  although  still  quite  wide.  This  is  a  special  equability 
peculiar  to  the  race,  climate,  geographical  position  or  atmosphere. 
The  Hindus,  in  health,  have  a  different  equability  to  the  Slavs, 
and  so  on.  Each  is  equable  in  regard  to  their  own  race,  but  not 
in  regard  to  others.  So  if  a  Hindu  were  to  develop  the  tempera- 
ment of  a  Slav  he  would  probably  fall  ill,  and  might  even  die. 
So,  too,  if  the  temperament  of  a  Slav  should  come  to  be  that 
of 'the  Hindu,  for  the  state  of  his  body  is  contrary.  So  it 
seems  that  the  various  inhabitants  of  the  earth  have  received 
a  temperament  appropriate  for  the  conditions  of  their  particular 
climate,  and  in  each  case  there  is  a  corresponding  range  between 
two  extremes.  -

iv.  The  fourth  mode  is  one  which  is  a  mean  between  the 
two  limits  of  the  range  of  the  climatic  temperament.  It  is  more 
attempered  than  the  temperaments  of  the  third  mode.

v.     The  fifth  mode  presents  a  much  narrower  range  than  the 
first  or  third  mode.     It  is  the  temperament  peculiar  to  each

*  Fire    "feeds    on"    air.     So    innate    heat    consumes    the    innate    moisture 
(Costeus18).

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  61

separate  person,  in  that  he  is  alive,  and  also  in  health.  It  shows 
a  range  between  two  extremes. — upper  and  lower.  One  must 
realize  that  every  individual  person  has  a  temperament  entirely 
peculiar  to  himself,  and  it  is  impossible  for  any  other  person  to 
have  an  identical  temperament,  or  even  to  approximate  thereto.

vi.  -The  sixth  mode  is  intermediate  between  those  two 
limits.  When  the  person  has  this  mode  of  equability  of  tempera- 
ment it  will  be  the  most  suitable  for  him.vi.  -The  sixth  mode  is  intermediate  between  those  two 
limits.  When  the  person  has  this  mode  of  equability  of  tempera- 
ment it  will  be  the  most  suitable  for  him.

vii.  ^  The  seventh  mode  is  the  equability  of  temperament 
characteristic  for  each  of  the  several  members  of  the  body,  for 
each  is  different  from  the  other.  In  the  case  of  bone,'  the 
equable  temperament  has  dryness  more  than  other  qualities  ; 
in  the  case  of  the  brain,  moistness  is  more  conspicuous  ;  in 
the  case  of  the  heart,  warmth  ;  in  the  case  of  the  nerves,  coldness. 
Here  also  there  is  a  range- — upwards  or  downwards — consistent 
with  equability,  but  less  than  in  the  before-named  modes.

vin.  The  eighth  mode  is  that  form  of  equable  temperament 
which  is  proper  for  each  given  member.  When  it  has  this  par- 
ticular temperament  it  is  in  the  best  state  possible  to  it.

34.  When  we  study  the  matter  we  find  that  of  all  beings, 
man  is  most  near  to  the  ideal  equable  temperament.  Of  all 
races  of  men,  those  who  live  in  countries  within  the  equinoctial 
circle,  away  from  mountains  and  seas,  approach  the  ideal  equable 
temperament  more  closely  than  others,  and  those  living  in  other 
countries.  It  is  asserted  that  the  more  nearly  overhead  the  sun 
is  [i.e.  in  the  torrid  zone],  the  greater  does  the  temperament  of 
the  people  deviate  from  the  ideal  equability.  But  this  is  false,  for 
when  the  sun  is  overhead  it  is  less  harmful,  and  alters  the  atmos- 
phere less  there  than  it  does  with  us,  or  less  for  those  at  greater 
latitudes  than  for  us — though  of  course  we  do  not  have  it 
overhead.In  the  case  of  peoples  living  in  the  equinoctial  zone,  the 
states  of  the  body  are  in  all  cases  more  like  the  ideal  ;  the 
atmosphere  in  these  regions  exerts  no  evident  deleterious 
effects,  but  is  always  in  harmony  with  their  temperaments. 
We  have  already  (elsewhere)  expressed  our  agreement  with 
this  opinion.

In  the  case  of  peoples  living  in  the  fourth  climate,  they  are 
more  attempered.  The  sun's  rays  are  not  overhead  long  enough 
to  scorch  them,  but  are  not  as  oblique  as  in  the  second  and  third 
zones  of  the  earth.  Such  people  are  not  exposed  to  cold  from 
great  obliquity  of  the  sun's  rays,  as  occurs  in  the  case  of  peoples 
living  at  the  extreme  edge  of  the  fifth  climatic  zone.

62  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE62  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

35  It  has  already  been  stated  that  the  chief  organs  do  not 
approach  closely  to  the  ideal  equability  of  temperament.  Of 
all  members  the  flesh  comes  nearest  to  the  ideal  ;  the  skin 
comes  next,  for  it  is  hardly  affected  by  attempered  water 
(i  e  water  prepared  by  mixing  equal  parts  of  snow  water  and 
boiling  water).  It  may  be  that  the  flesh  is  so  well  attempered 
because  the  heat  of  the  breath  and  blood  within  it  is  balanced 
by  the  coldness  of  the  nerves.  And  there  is  also  the  fact  that 
it  is  not  subject  to  the  influence  of  the  body  itself,  for  the  fact 
that  drier  and  moister  elements  are  equally  present  in  it  accounts 
for  it  being  well  attempered.  We  know  too  that  its  absence  of 
sensation  is  another  reason  why  it  is  not  subject  to  the  influence 
(of  the  body).  It  is  only  subject  to  intrinsic  factors,  or  dissimilar 
qualities.  For,  as  we  know,  when  things  have  a  common  origin, 
but  are  opposite  in  nature,  mutual  interaction  results,  whereas 
a  thing  is  not  affected  by  anything  whose  quality  is  similar  to

itself  (j>).  .      ,         r   ,itself  (j>).  .      ,         r   ,

36  The  most  attempered  part  of  the  skm  is  that  of  the 
hands  "  The  most  attempered  part  of  the  skin  of  the  hands  is 
that  of  the  palms  and  soles.  The  most  attempered  part  of  the 
skin  of  the  palms  of  the  hands  is  that  of  the  finger-pulps.  The 
most  attempered  part  of  the  skin  of  the  finger-pulp  is  that  of  the 
index  The  pulp  of  the  tip  of  the  index-finger  is  the  most 
sensitive,  and  that  of  the  other  finger  tips  is  more  sensitive  than 
other  parts,  because  they  judge  of  the  nature  of  tactile  qualities. 
There  must  be  a  lessening  of  sensitiveness  from  the  middle 
outwards  in  order  that  one  can  perceive  a  deviation  from  equa- 
bility.

"  The  more  the  organ  of  touch  is  reduced  to  an  equable  com- 
plexion, the  more  sensitive  will  be  the  touch."  (S.T.,84  76,  5  ;  p.  44, 
trans.)

37.  In  saying  a  medicine  is  of  equable  temperament,  we 
do  not  use  this  expression  in  the  absolute  sense,  because  that 
would  be  an  impossibility.  Nor  do  we  mean  that  it  is  attempered 
correspondingly  to  the  human  temperament,  for  in  order  to  be 
that  the  medicine  would  have  to  be  actually  composed  of  human 
substance.  We  mean  this— that  when  the  medicine  is  exposed 
to  the  action  of  the  innate  heat  within  the  human  body,  its  quality 
will  not  over-reach  either  of  the  limits  (of  equable  temperament) 
proper  to  the  human  being.  Consequently  it  will  not  produce 
an  effect  beyond  those  limits.  Therefore,  in  regard  to  its  actions 
within  the  human  body  it  is  attempered,  of  equable  temperament.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  63THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  63

Similarly,  when  'we  say  a  drug  is  hot  or  cold,  we  do  not 
mean  an  absolute  heat  or  coldness  of  substance,  or  that  it  is 
hotter  or  colder  in  substance  than  is  the  human  body.  Otherwise 
it  would  imply  that  the  drug  has  a  temperament  like  that  of  man — 
equable.  What  we  mean  by  the  statement  is  that  through  the 
drug  hotness  or  coldness  comes  to  the  body,  in  a  degree  over  and 
above  that  degree  of  heat  or  cold  which  is  in  the  body  already. 
Consequently  a  medicament  may  be  at  the  same  time  cold — ■ 
that  is,  compared  with  the  human  body< — and  hot — that  is, 
compared  with  the  body  of  a  scorpion  ;  it  may  be  at  the  same 
time  hot — that  is,  compared  with  the  human  body — and  cold' — 
that  is,  compared  with  the  body  of  a  serpent.  More  than  that,  a 
medicament  may  be  hotter  towards  the  body  of  Peter  than  it  is 
to  the  body  of  Paul.  It  is  important  to  know  this  when  choosing 
medicines  with  the  object  of  altering  the  temperament.  One 
must  take  care  not  to  employ  a  medicament  which  from  its  very 
nature  could  not  have  the  effect  desired.

38.  Now  that  we  have  explained  the  subject  of  equable 
temperament  sufficiently  we  pass  on  to  consider  the  inequable 
temperaments  ("  intemperaments"  dyscrasias).

They  are  classified  according  to  race,  individual,  and  organs. 
There  are  eight  variants,  all  of  which  agree  in  being  contrary 
to  the  eight  equable  temperaments  named  above.

(A)  the  simple  types  show  a  deviation  from  the  normal 
equipoise  only  in  respect  of  one  contrary.

(B)  the  compound  types  show  a  deviation  from  the  normal 
equipoise  in  respect  of  two  contraries  at  once.

39.  A.      The  simple  intemperaments  are  as  follows  : —(B)  the  compound  types  show  a  deviation  from  the  normal 
equipoise  in  respect  of  two  contraries  at  once.

39.  A.      The  simple  intemperaments  are  as  follows  : —

(a)  where  it  is  an  active  contrary  quality  which  is  in  excess  : 
(i)  hotter  than  it  should  be,  not  moister  or  drier.

Hot  intemperament. 
(ii)  colder  than  it  should  be,  not  moister  or  drier. 
Cold  intemperament. 
(P)  where  it'  is  a  passive  contrary  quality  which  is  in  excess  : 
(iii)  drier  than  it  should  be,  but  not  hotter  nor  colder.

Dry  intemperament.

(iv)  moister  than  it  should  be,  but  not  hotter  nor

colder.     Moist  intemperament.

These  four  intemperaments  are  only  temporary,  for  when

too  hot,  the  body  becomes  drier  than  it  should  be  ;    when  too

cold,  the  body  becomes  moister  than  it  should  be,  by  assuming

extraneous  moisture  ;  when  much  too  moist,  coldness  supervenes

more  rapidly  than  dryness  would.     If  the  dryness  be  not  very

64  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

great,  the  body  may  remain  in  that  temperament  for  a  con- 
siderable time,  though  ultimately  it  will  become  colder  than 
it  should  be.

It  will  be  clear,  then,  that  equipoise  and  health  depend 
more  upon  heat  than  upon  cold.

So  much  for  the  four  simple  intemperaments.

40.  The  compound  intemperaments.  The  four  compound 
intemperaments  are  those  in  which  there  is  a  departure  from 
equability  in  respect  of  two  contraries.  Thus,  the  temperament 
may  be  at  the  same  time  hotter  and  moister  than  it  should, 
hotter  and  drier  than  it  should,  colder  and  moister  than  it 
should,  colder  and  drier  than  it  should.  Obviously  it  cannot 
be  simultaneously  hotter  and  colder,  or  drier  and  moisten41.  Each  of  these  intemperaments  is  further  subdivisible 
into  two  forms  (thus  making  sixteen  intemperaments).  {a) 
Those  apart  from  any  material  substance — (qualitative  ;  formal). 
Here  the  temperament  is  altered  only  in  regard  to  one  quality, 
because  the  fluid  pervading  it  has  the  same  quality  as  that 
towards  which  the  body  is  being  changed  as  a  whole.  Yet 
it  does  not  do  so  unless  it  be  in  virtue,  e.g.,  of  heat  (in  fever) 
or  cold  (extraneous  cold).

(b)  Those  in  which  some  material  substance  is  concerned 
(material).  Here  the  body  is  only  affected  by  the  quality  of 
the  intemperament  in  virtue  of  the  increased  amount  of  some 
particular  body-fluid.  For  instance,  the  body  is  cooled  by 
vitreous  serous  humour  ;  heated  by  leek-green  choleric  humour.

42.  Examples  of  the  sixteen  intemperaments  are  given 
in  the  third  and  fourth  volumes.

43.  Intemperaments  in  which  some  material  substance  is 
concerned  occur  in  two  modes  :  a  member  may  be  pervaded 
bv  the  material  substance  entering  from  without,  or  it  may  be 
pervaded  by  the  material  substance  which  has  reached  the 
tissues  of  the  body  and  fails  to  get  out  through  the  orifices  of 
the  channels  or  from  the  cavities  of  the  body.  Such  retention  of 
material  may  be  the  beginning  of  the  formation  of  an  inflam- 
matory mass.

This  completes  the  chapter  on  intemperaments.

44.  The  physician  is  again  reminded  that  he  must  seek 
an  explanation  of  the  deepei  intricacies  of  this  subject  m 
[esoteric]  philosophy,  for  they  are  not  self-evident.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

65

#

The  Temperament  of  the  Several  Members 
45.THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

65

#

The  Temperament  of  the  Several  Members 
45.

LLAH  most  Beneficent  has  furnished  every 
animal  and  each  of  its  members  with  a 
temperament  which  is  entirely  the  most  ap- 
propriate and  best  adapted  for  the  perform- 
ance of  its  functions  and  passive  states. — 
The  proof  of  this  belongs  to  philosophy 
and  not  to  medicine.

"  An  artificer  produces  divers  works  of  art.  (S.  Thos,84 
65,  p.  186.)

"  Every  creature  exists  for  its  own  proper  art  and  per- 
fection."    {lb.,  p.  184.)

46.  In  the  case  of  man,  He  has  bestowed  upon  him  the 
most  befitting  temperament  possible  of  all  in  this  world,  as  well 
as  faculties  corresponding  to  all  the  active  and  passive  states 
of  man.  Each  organ  and  member  has  also  received  the  proper 
temperament  requisite  for  its  function.  Some  he  has  made 
hotter,  others  colder,  others  drier,  and  others  moister.

§  109.  "  The  human  body  is  the  most  noble  of  all  lower  bodies, 
and  by  the  equability  of  its  temperament  is  most  like  the  heaven 
which  is  free  from  all  contrariety."82  (i.  70,  p.  178  trans.)

"  He  gave  each  thing  its  limits  and  all  things  their  disposition." 
(ib.,  ii.  26,  p.  49.)

"  God  makes  man  after  one  type  and  a  horse  after  another  ; 
the  types  of  things  are  manifold  in  the  divine  mind."  (ib.,  i.  54, 
p.  118).

"  Lord,  Thou  hast  ordered  all  things  in  number,  weight  and 
measure."     (Wisd.   xi.   21.)

"  There  is  diversity  and  inequality  in  things  created — not  by 
chance,  not  as  a  result  of  diversity  of  matter,  not  on  account  of 
certain  causes  or  merits  intervening,  but  from  God's  own  intention  ; 
in  that  He  willed  to  give  the  creature  such  perfection  as  it  was  possible 
for  it  to  have."82     (ii.  xlv,  p.  108)We  may  also  quote  from  the  Chinese. — "  All  beings  possess  the 
five  imponderables,  but  only  man  has  them  in  perfect  balance  as  the 
constitution  of  his  Nature."  "  That  which  differentiates  man  from 
the  brute  is  his  possession  of  the  Mean  or  Equilibrium,  that  perfect 
balance  of  the  elements  in  the  constitution  of  his  Nature  of  which 
Tzu-Ssu  teaches  in  his  famous  classic — the  Doctrine  of  the  Mean." 
(Chu  Hsi,11  214,   217.)

"In  the  life  of  men  and  other  creatures,  the  Nature  with  which 
they  are  endowed  differs  from  the  very  beginning  in  the  degree  of

66  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

its  perfection.     But  even  within  the  differing  degrees  of  perfection 
there  is  the  further  variation  in  respect  of  clearness  andtranslucence."

(ChuHsi,10i.,  p.  57-)  :,.,..     J     ,      •  *    ■  i    '    ■     •   i

"  When  the  ether  received  is  limited,  the  immaterial  principle 
received  is  also  correspondingly  limited.  Thus,  the  physical  constitu- 
tion of  dogs  and  horses  being  as  it  is,  their  functions  are  correspond- 
ingly limited  in  their  range,"  (#.,  p.  6o.)  "  Man  receives  the  ether 
in  its  perfection,  and  the  ethical  principle  permeates  it  completely 
and  without  impediment  ;  while  in  the  case  of  other  creatures,  m 
which  it  is  imperfect,  the  ethical  principle  is  impeded  and  un- 
intelligent. He  receives  the  ether  of  the  universe  in  its  perfection, 
and  therefore  possesses  moral  and  intellectual  faculties."  (p.  67.) 
"  In  birds  and  animals,  though  they  possess  the  Nature,  it  is 
restricted  by  the  corporeal  element,  which  creates  an  impenetrable 
barrier"  10  (p.  61.)

47 o      In  order  of  degree  of  Heat.

1.  The  Breath  is  the  hottest,  and  the  heart  in  which  it

arises.

2.  The  Blood.    Though  this  is  generated  in  the  liver,  it47 o      In  order  of  degree  of  Heat.

1.  The  Breath  is  the  hottest,  and  the  heart  in  which  it

arises.

2.  The  Blood.    Though  this  is  generated  in  the  liver,  it

derives  more  of  its  heat  from  the  heart  than  from 
the  liver,  the  two  organs  being  in  continuity.

3.  The  liver,  which  may  be  looked  upon  as  concentrated

blood.

4.  The  "  flesh,"  which  would  be  as  hot  as  the  liver  were

it  not  for  the  nervous  tissue  (cold  temperament  !) 
which  pervades  it.

5.  The   muscles   which   are   cooler  than   the   "  flesh  "

because  of  their  tendons  and  ligaments,  as  well  as 
the  nerves.

6.  The  spleen.    The  faex  of  the  blood  makes  this  colder.

7.  The  kidneys  contain  relatively  less  blood.

8.  The  walls  of  the  arteries.     These  are  warm  in  spite

of  the  nerve  substance  present,  because  they  receive 
heat  from  the  blood  and  the  breaths  within  them.

9.  The  walls  of  the  veins,  which  owe  their  heat  to  the

blood  alone. 
10.  The  skin  of  the  palms  and  soles. 
48,      In  order  of  degree  of  Coldness.

1 .  The  coldest  thing  in  the  body  is  the  serous  humour.— 
2.  Next  in  degree,  the  hairs. — 3.  The  bones. — 4.  The  Carti- 
lage.— 5.  The  ligaments.— 6.  Tendon.— 7.  The  membranes. 
8.  The  nerves. — 9.  The  spinal  cord. — 10.  The  brain. — 11. 
Fat. — 12.  The  oil  of  the  body. — 13.  The  skin.

(In  general,  organs  rich  in  blood  are  of  hot  temperament  ; 
those  poor  in  blood  are  of  cold  temperament. — Aegineta.)

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  67

49.     In  order  of  degree  of  Moisture.

1.  The  serous  humour  is  the  most  moist  constituent  of

the   body. —  2.  The    blood. —  3.    The    oil. — 4.    The    fat. —

5.   The    brain. — 6.  The    spinal    cord. — 7.  The    breasts  and

testicles. — 8.  The  lung. — 9.  The  liver. — 10.  The  spleen. —5.   The    brain. — 6.  The    spinal    cord. — 7.  The    breasts  and

testicles. — 8.  The  lung. — 9.  The  liver. — 10.  The  spleen. —

11.  The  kidneys. — 12.   The  muscles. — 13.  The  skin.

The  order  here  given  is  that  of  Galen,  but  in  the  case  of

the  lung  the  moisture  is  not  inherent  in  its  nature  but  is  derived

from  the  nourishment  which  comes  to  it.     The  lung  is  fed  by  a

very  "  hot  "  blood,  because  there  is  much  bilious  humour  in  the

blood  going  to  the  lung.    A  great  excess  of  moisture  accumulates

in  the  lung  from  the  gaseous  products  of  the  whole  body  as  well

as  from  the  materials  which  flow  down  to  it  from  the  "  head."

In  actual  fact  the  liver  is  intrinsically  moister  than  the  lung, 
whereas  the  lung  is  as  it  were  constantly  sprinkled  with  moisture  ; 
it  is  the  fact  that  the  moisture  lingers  in  it  that  makes  it  so  soft 
(to  the  feel).

One  should  conceive  of  the  states  of  the  serous  humour 
and  blood  in  a  similar  way.  The  serous  humour  is  moist  in  that 
it  is  as  it  were  sprinkled  with  moisture.  In  the  case  of  the  blood 
the  moisture  interpenetrates,  pervades,  and  grows  through  its 
very  substance.  It  is  true  that  the  serous  humour,  watery  in 
nature.,  generally  possesses  much  more  moisture  in  itself  than 
the  blood  does.  And  if  the  digestive  changes  in  the  blood  proceed 
inadequately  it  loses  not  a  little  moisture — namely,  the  moisture 
of  the  naturally  watery  serous  humour,  which  has  become  part 
of  the  blood.  As  we  shall  see  later,  the  normal  serous  humour 
is  nothing  more  than  imperfectly  digested  blood. 
50.      In  order  of  Dryness.1.  The  driest  thing  in  the  body  is  the  hair,  for  this  comes 
from  the  ethereal  element  carrying  up  with  it  the  material 
dispersed  to  it  from  the  rest  of  the  body,  which  is  then  left 
behind  in  the  hair  as  pure  fumosity.

2.  The  bone.  This  is  the  hardest  of  all  the  members. 
It  is  however  moister  than  hair,  because  bone  is  derived  from  the 
blood,  and  its  fume  is  dry,  so  that  it  dries  up  the  humours 
naturally  located  in  the  bones.  This  accounts  for  the  fact  that 
many  animals  thrive  on  bones,  whereas  no  animal  thrives  on 
hair— or  at  least  it  would  be  a  very  exceptional  thing  if  hair 
ever  did  provide  nourishment.  Some  think  that  bats  can  digest 
hair  and  live  on  it.  The  proof  that  bone  is  moister  than  hair  is 
that  when  equal  weights  of  bones  and  hair  are  distilled  in  a  retort, 
more  water  and  oil  will  flow  and  less  "  faex  "  will  remain.

68

3-

4-

5- 
6.

7- 
...8.

9-

io.

1 1.

12.

7W.E  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Cartilage.

Ligaments.

Tendon.

Serous  membranes.

Arteries.

Veins.

Motor -nerves.

Heart.

Sensory  Nerves.

Skin.

The  motor  nerves  are  colder  and  drier  at  the  same  time, 
and  are  therefore  in  equipoise.  The  sensory  nerves  are  colder 
but  not  drier  in  proportion,  and  are  probably  very  nearly  in 
equipoise,  since  their  coldness  is  not  very  far  distant  from  that  of 
the  motor  nerves.

§  no.  Link  between  soul,  passions,  temperament.  S.Thomas84 
writes  (ii.  63,  p.  166)  :  "  The  soul  rules  the  body,  and  curbs  the 
passions  that  result  from  the  temperament.  For  by  temperament 
some  are  more  prone  than  others  to  desire  or  anger,  and  yet  refrain 
more   from   these   things."

3.     The  Temperaments  belonging  to  Age 
Sex,  Place  of  Residence,  Occupation 
51.     There  are  four  periods  of  life.

Period.

Title.3.     The  Temperaments  belonging  to  Age 
Sex,  Place  of  Residence,  Occupation 
51.     There  are  four  periods  of  life.

Period.

Title.

Name.

Years   of  age.

I.

II.

III.

IV.

The  period  of  growth. 
The  prime  of  life. 
Elderly  life.

Decrepit  age.

Adolescence. 
Period  of  beauty. 
Period  of  decline. 
Senescence. 
Senility.

Up  to  30. 
Up  to  3  5  or  40. 
Up  to  about  60.

To   the   end   of

life.

In  the  third  period,  the  best  vigour  has  passed,  and  the 
intellectual  power  begins  to  decline.

In  the  fourth  period,  vigour  and  intellectual  power  both 
obviously  decline.

52.     The  First  Period  of  Life.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

69

Sub- 
division

Name.

First. 
Second.

Third.

Fourth. 
Fifth.

Infancy 
Babyhood.

Childhood.

Juvenility. 
"  Puberty." 
Youth.

Distinctive    Characters.

The  period  before  the  limbs  are  fitted  for

walking. 
The  period  of  formation  of  teeth.    Walking

has  been  learnt,  but  is  not  steady.    The

gums  are  not  full  of  teeth. 
The   body  shows   strength  of  movement.

The  teeth  are  fully  out.    Pollutions  have

not  yet  appeared. 
The  period  up  to  the  development  of  hair

on  the  face  and  pubes.    Pollutions  begin. 
The  period  up  to  the  limit  of  growth  of  the

body   (to   the   beginning  of  adult  life).

Period  of  athletic  power.on  the  face  and  pubes.    Pollutions  begin. 
The  period  up  to  the  limit  of  growth  of  the

body   (to   the   beginning  of  adult  life).

Period  of  athletic  power.

The  temperament  during  the  whole  of  this  period  of  life 
is  almost  equable  as  regards  "  heat,"  but  "  moisture  "  is  in 
excess.  There  has  been  not  a  little  controversy  among  older 
writers  about  the  degree  of  heat  during  the  period  of  juvenility 
as  compared  with  that  of  youth.  Some  argue  that  the  heat  is 
greater  in  the  former  than  the  latter,  and  that  this  accounts  for 
their  growth,  and  for  the  fact  that  their  natural  functions  of 
appetite^  and  digestion  are  greater  in  vigour  and  persist  longer. 
This,  it  is  considered,  is  due  to  a  condensation  of  the  innate  heat 
derived  from  the  sperm.53.      Others  argue  that  the  innate  heat  of  youth  is  far 
greater  than  that  of  juvenility,  because  (a)  their  blood  is  much 
more  plentiful  and  is  thicker. — evidenced  by  the  frequency  with 
which  nose-bleeding  occurs  ;    (F)  their  temperament  approaches 
that  of  bile,  whereas  that  of  juvenility  approaches  that  of  serous 
humour. ^     (The   evidence   of  an   undue   proportion   of  bilious 
humour  in  a  temperament  is  (i)  that  the  diseases  in  such  a  person 
are  "  hot  " — e.g.  tertian  fever  ;   (ii)  the  vomitus  is  bilious  ;   (iii) 
other  facts.)    (c)  The  movements  of  the  body  are  more  energetic 
m    youth  ;     and    bodily    movement    requires    plentiful    innate 
heat,      (d)  Digestion   is   better  and  more  vigorous  ;    and  this 
entails  expenditure  of  heat.     The  signs  of  a  vigorous  digestion 
are  :_    absence  of  feeling  of  nausea  ;    absence  of  fermentative 
vomiting  ;   absence  of  crudity  or  aversion  to  food.     These  occur 
in  juveniles  when  their  digestive  power  is  disturbed,     (e)  The 
appetite  is  less  in  youth  than  in  juvenility.      This  shows  that  the 
innate  heat  is  greater,  for  the  appetite  is  better  in  a  cold  tempera- 
ment.    A  dog's  appetite  is  often  accounted  for  by  cold  tempera-

70  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

ment.  (f)  The  process  of  growth,  greater  in  juveniles,  requires 
adequate  moisture  rather  than  heat,  (jf)  The  diseases  to  which 
juveniles  are  liable  are  usually  cold  and  moist  ;  and  when  fevers 
occur  in  them,  they  are  pituitous.  If  vomiting  occurs  it  is  usually 
serous.

These  then  are  the  two  theories  and  the  facts  on  which  they 
are  based.These  then  are  the  two  theories  and  the  facts  on  which  they 
are  based.

54.  Galen  s  teaching. — Galen  is  opposed  to  both.  In 
his  opinion  the  heat  is  actually  the  same  in  each.  The  difference 
is  that  in  puberty  its  quantity  is  great  but  its  acuity  is  less.  In 
youth  the  heat  is  less  in  quantity  but  greater  in  acuity.  As  he 
says — let  us  imagine  first  a  single  measure  of  "  heat,"  or  a  subtle 
body  of  unit  heat,  penetrating  into  an  abundance  of  moist 
substance — as  it  might  be,  water.  Then  imagine  a  unit  of 
heat  penetrating  into  a  small  bulk  of  stone.  The  heat  in  the 
water  would  then  be  large  in  quantity  but  soft  in  quality,  whereas 
the  heat  in  the  stone  would  be  less  in  amount  but  of  great  acuity. 
This  is  analogous  to  the  state  of  affairs  in  regard  to  the  heat  of 
juvenility  and  of  youth.55.  Juveniles  derive  their  (innate)  heat  from  the  sperm, 
which  is  very  "  hot."     This  initial  innate  heat  is  being  steadily 
used  up,  but  the  loss  is  made  up  by  the  progressive  growth  ; 
indeed  it  is  more  than  made  up. — But  during  the  period  of  youth, 
there  is  nothing  to  make  good  such  loss  of  innate  heat.     On  the 
contrary,   the   degree  of  innate   moisture   is   lessening   both   in 
quantity  and  quality, — this  being  the  mechanism  by  which  the 
innate  heat  remains  at  a  constant  level  up  to  senescence.     Ulti- 
mately, the  moisture  is  in  too  small  a  proportion  to  enable  the 
innate  heat  to  be  maintained  constant.     During  all  this  period 
there  is  no  corresponding  growth. — At  the  outset  of  life,  the 
innate  moisture  suffices  for  the  two  requirements — maintenance 
of  innate  heat  ;    growth.     But  there  comes  a  time  when  one  or 
other  or  both  must  fail.      Innate  heat  must  be  adequate  to  enable 
growth  to  take  place,  yet  the  basis  of  growth — innate  moisture — 
is  failing.     So  how  can  growth  possibly  continue  ?     It  is  clear 
then,  that  growth  must  cease,  for  it  cannot  be  that  the  innate  heat 
should  be  sacrificed.     This  is  "  the  tongue  of  the  case  "m  (iii. 
347)  during  the  period  of  youth.     (/>.)

56.  As  regards  the  second  theory — that  during  juvenility 
growth  is  in  virtue  of  moisture  rather  than  in  virtue  of  heat  ■ — This' 
cannot  be  true  because  moisture  (m)  is  the  material  cause  of 
growth  and  m  does  not  unfold  or  construct  itself  ;  it  is  not  a  self- 
created  "  being  "  ;   it  only  changes  in  virtue  of  a  formative  power

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  71THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  71

(/)  acting  upon  it.  As  a  matter  of  fact  this  formative  power  is  F — 
the  "  soul,"  or  "  nature  " — -that  which  is  in  the  decree  of  Allah 
('umr-i-Allah).  This  "  nature  "  requires  an  instrument  where- 
with to  work,  and  this  instrument  is  the  innate  heat.

57.  So,  when  people  assert  that  the  voracious  appetite  of 
juveniles  proceeds  simply  from  their  cold  temperament,  this 
also  is  wrong.  A  morbid  appetite  due  to  coldness  of  tempera- 
ment cannot  result  in  good  digestion  and  nutrition.  As  a 
matter  of  fact  the  digestion  during  the  age  of  juvenility  is  usually 
of  the  very  best.  Growth  of  the  body  as  a  whole  implies  that 
more  food  is  being  assimilated  than  is  used  up.  When  digestion 
is  faulty,  the  cause  is  either  (a)  gluttony,  eating  food  voraciously 
or  inordinately  ;  or  (b)  errors  of  diet — partaking  of  a  diet  badly 
designed  and  including  articles  of  food  which  are  unwholesome, 
or  moist  in  temperament,  or  in  excess  ;  (c)  neglect  of  the  move- 
ment of  the  bowels  and  other  emunctories,  whereby  effete  matters 
accumulate  and  become  knit  together  in  them  (which  is  an 
indication  for  purging) — (d)  other  emunctories  :  the  lungs 
especially  need  ' '  purgation ' '  by  making  the  respiration  deeper  and 
quicker  ;  although  its  power  is  never  as  great  as  it  sometimes  is 
in  the  second  period  of  life.

This  completes  Galen's  teaching  about  the  temperaments 
of  juvenility  and  youth.

58.  One  must  also  bear  in  mind  that  the  innate  heat  of 
the  body  begins  to  fail  after  the  prime  of  life,  because  the  ambient 
air  dries  up  the  moisture  of  the  body. — and  the  moisture  is  m  of 
of  the  body.*The  innate  heat  also  helps  to  dry  up  this  moisture.  So 
also  does  the  effort  involved  in  the  performance  of  the  corporeal 
and  emotional  activities  inevitably  associated  with  life.

59.  Drying  up  of  the  moisture  is  also  aided  by  the  failure 
of  the  "  nature  "  to  withstand  the  steadily  and  silently  increasing 
dissipation  of  the  faculties.  All  the  faculties  of  the  body  are 
finite  in  duration,  as  is  well-known  to  natural  science.  So  also 
the  innate  heat  is  not  being  replaced  for  ever.  Even  were  the 
innate  heat  infinite  in  duration  and  always  bringing  about  its 
changes  in  the  body,  so  as  to  maintain  a  renewal  equal  to  the 
loss,  the  fact  that  the  loss  is  increasing  steadily  day  after  day 
inevitably  leads  to  a  limit  beyond  which  the  loss  could  not  be 
made  good.  A  fixed  state  of  dryness  would  be  bound  to  come. 
How  much  sooner  would  not  this  time  arrive  did  both  factors 
contribute  simultaneously  towards  it  ?

*  The  body  is  admittedly  95  per  cent,  water  1

7i  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

60.  We  see-  then  that  the  m,  the  moisture  of  the  body, 
must  inevitably  come  to  an  end,  and  the  innate  heat  become 
extinguished — and  the  sooner  if  another  contributory  factor  to 
its  destruction  be  present  ;  to  wit,  the  extraneous  excess  of 
humour  arising  out  of  imperfect  digestion  of  food.  _  This 
extinguishes  the  innate  heat  (a)  by  smothering  it,  enclosing  it, 
and  (b)  by  providing  the  contrary  quality.  This  extraneous 
humour  is  called  the  "  cold  serous  humour."61.  This  is  the  death  of  "nature  "  to  which  every  person  is 
destined,  and  the  duration  of  life  depends  on  the  original  tempera- 
ment, which  retains  a  certain  degree  of  power  to  the  end  by 
fostering  its  intrinsic  moisture.  This  is  the  person's  appointed 
end,  and  the  diversity  of  temperaments  accounts  for  the  different 
durations  of  each  one's  life.  These  are  the  natural  terms  of 
life.  (There  are  of  course,  also,  premature  deaths,  brought 
about  through  other  causes,  though  even  these  are  also  in  accor- 
dance with  Divine  Decree.)

"  All  things  have  We  created  after  a  fixed  decree."     (Q.  54,  49.)

"  The  four  elements  are  as  birds  tied  together  by  the  feet  ; 
Death,   sickness   and   disease  loose  their  feet  asunder. 
The  moment  their  feet  are  loosed  from  the  others, 
The  bird  of  each  element  flies  off  by  itself. 
The  repulsion  of  each  of  these  principles  and  causes 
Inflicts  every  moment  a  fresh  pang  on  our  bodies. 
That  it  may  dissolve  these  composite  bodies  of  ours, 
The  bird  of  each  part  tries  to  fly  away  to  its  origin  ; 
But  the  wisdom  of  God  prevents  this  speedy  end, 
And  preserves  their  union  till  the  appointed  day."

Mesnavi,  "  p.  162.

§  ill.  The  "  death  of  nature  "  may  also  be  explained  on  the 
basis  of  urooj  and  nasool  (§§  105,  137),  for  when  the  positive  and 
negative  phases  in  the  cycle  of  the  elements  and  of  the  breath  clash — 
that  is,  enter  the  phase  of  kemal  (Persian  term)  the  bodily  functions  all 
cease.  The  kemal  phase  may  be  reached  long  before  the  allotted 
span.§  112.  The  presence  of  this  phase,  and  its  probable  duration 
before  death  actually  occurs,  may  be  discerned  in  practice,  if  the  lav- 
be  understood.  This  fact  throws  a  significant  light  on  the  state- 
ments in  the  Chinese  work  on  the  pulse,98  where  the  time  of  death 
is  foretold  from  the  study  of  the  pulse  and  other  factors—assigning 
not  a  number  of  hours,  or  days,  but  a  particular  period  in  the  lunar 
cycle.  Chu  Hsi,11  in  ascribing  the  varying  fortunes  of  individuals 
during  their  life  to  differences  of  endowment  of  Ether  (p.  217) 
betrays  a  knowledge  of  the  cyclical  changes  pertaining  to  body  and 
mind,  as  well  as  to  the  outer  world  at  large.

§  113.      It   would   be   fallacious   to   argue   from  this  that  skil-

THE    CANON  OF  MEDICINE  73

ful  prognostication  of  this  kind  .  would  render  medical .  treatment 
superfluous.  The  value  of  realizing  these  phases  lies  in  the  under- 
standing with  which  measures  are  applied  in  order  to  tide  over  the 
patient  during  the  dangerous  period  of  inertia  of  vitality,  breath  or 
other    factors.  '

This    would   not    dispense   with   the   constant   sense    of  "fiat 
voluntas.  Tua,"  both  on  the  part  of  the  lay  and  of  the  professionThis    would   not    dispense   with   the   constant   sense    of  "fiat 
voluntas.  Tua,"  both  on  the  part  of  the  lay  and  of  the  profession

Quotations  from  the  Chinese,  for  instance,  in  whom  the  con- 
ception or  belief  in  Fate  is  vivid  and  almost  dominant,  brings  no 
conviction  to  those  many  who  claim  to  have  no  belief  in  Fate  whatever 
Nevertheless  a  few  proverbs  may  be  quoted,  as  expressing  the 
conception  usefully  :  "  there  is  a  day  to  be  born,  and  a  time  to  die  "  • 
"before  life  has  been,  death  has  been  appointed."  "In  the  beginning 
it  was  decided  whether  one  should  have  long  or  short  life  •  whether 
one  should  have  honour  or  poverty."  "  The  swallow  living  in  the 
hall  does  not  know  the  great  building  is  about  to  be  burned  "  "  t± 
physician  may  cure  disease,  but  he  cannot  heal  Fate."  "  The  lucky 
physician  sees  the  patient  at  the  end  of  the  disease  ;  the  unlucky 
physician  sees  the  patient  at  the  beginning  of  the  disease." 
(Plopper,76,  chap,  xi.)

No  doubt  where  a  possibility  of  "  destiny  "  is  to  be  admitted  for 
one  iorm  of  circumstance,  the  application  of  the  same  principle  to 
many  details  of  human  life  is  not  so  readily  conceded;  That  it  i«s 
allowable  for  much  more  than  is  customarily  accepted  will  be  credible 
when  the  existence  of  occult  and  inscrutable  chains  of  causes  or 
attractions  operating  together  is  realized.Fate  is  supposed  by  some  to  be  blind  ;  by  others  to  be  the  decree 
of  a  far-off  Potentate.  It  is  neither.  It  is  the  manifestation  of  a 
series  of  combinations  of  conditions  which  by  "  natural  "  courses 
of  sequences  operate  in  the  individual  human  life.  Everyone  shares 
in  the  weaving  of  his  own  web.  The  web  is  a  by-product  in  some 
great  scheme  which  we  need  not  question.  Fate  ceases  to  signify 
for  such  as  rise  into  the  Scheme  itself.  For,  to  them,  their  life  is  as 
the  throwing  of  the  stone  unerringly  into  the  bull's-eye  •  the  inter- 
vening events,  the  debris,  what  of  them  ?

§114.  Rather  than  criticize  severely  the  idea  of  the  length  of  in- 
dividual human  lives  being  preordained,  Anwari25  rightly  asks  (p.  54)

"  If  destiny  be  not  the  arbiter  of  mundane  affairs, 
Wherefore  are  men's  states  contrary  to  their  wishes  ?  "

"  Who,  then  can  say,  '  I  am  an  individual,  independent  and  free 
1  can  think  what  I  wish,  and  I  can  do  what  I  wish  '  ?  You  are  not 
doing  what  you  wish  .  .  .  thinking  what  you  wish  !  There  are 
various  thoughts  around  you  in  the  form  of  men  and  animals,  who 
influence  your  mind  and  feeling  and  thought ;  you  cannot  escape 
them.  .  .  .  There  is  always  some  person  stronger  than  you  and 
always  someone  weaker  than  yourself.  .  .  .  Our  lives  are  tied 
together  and  there  is  a  link  in  which  we  can  see  one  current  running 
through  all."     Rosegarden,38  1st  ed.,  p.  52.

§115.     No   doubt   "destiny"    is   often   supposed   to    negative

74  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE§115.     No   doubt   "destiny"    is   often   supposed   to    negative

74  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

"freewill"  which  is  so  much  insisted  on  as  man's  prerogative. 
Destiny  belongs  to  the  body,  freewill  to  the  soul.  Or,  to  be  more 
accurate  it  is  our  Will  which  is  important  and  not  the  body,  or  its 
length  of  life  Or,  to  be  still  more  accurate,  by  employing  the 
algfbraic  symbols  already  fixed  on-we  are  born  MF ;  from  that 
moment,  with  each  further  reception  of  (feeding  on)  sights  and  sounds 
oTSher'  sense-impressions,  we  become  MF'  But  the  purpose  of 
human  life  has  been  shown  to  rise  quite  beyond  this,  and  our  goal  is 
toTecome  MF"  before  we  die.  In  each  case  M  goes  into  corruption, 
but  the  position  of  F'  and  F"  is  vastly  different

»  The  voices  of  Nature  are  the  mother  of  the  soul     _    *     is  the 
outcome  of  a  consistent  usage  of  <<  freewill  "  by  the  Will  m  a  certain 
direction-namely  supernatural,  combined  also  with  a      feeding 
(to  use  the  same  term  as  above)  on  supernatural  impressions.To  quote  from  theology,  in  which  domain  we  are  brought 
"supernatural"  does  not  refer  to  superstitions  evil  practices,  and 
hypothetical  experiences  ;  it  is  a  term  used  in  the  sense  of  super- 
natural grace  "  The  ordinary  human  being  is  body  plus  rational 
soul  in  the  natural  order  ;  but  it  has  been  intended  that  he  shall  be 
body  Plus  rational  soul  in  the  natural  order  plus  soul  in  the  super- 
natural order  (Irenaeus).  "  There  should  be  no  clash  between  the 
natural  order  and  the  supernatural,  for  both  own  God  for  their 
Author  and  one  great  function  of  grace  is  to  supernatural^  the 
rTtural'life  of  man  by  the  love  of  Christ."  (O.  R.  Vassall-Phillips 
r  SS  R  98  o  ^i  12)  Wherein  lies  the  importance  tor  a  proper 
attitude  by  the  physician  towards  his  patient,  in  regard  to  the  serious 
moments  of  life  (among  others),  when  deceit,  equivocation,  and 
concealment  of  the  gravity  of  the  malady  are  to  be  deprecated.

62  To  sum  up,  the  equable  temperament  of  the  period 
of  juvenility  and  youth  is  "  hot,"  whereas  that  of  the  last  two 
periods  of  life  is  "  cold."  The  body  in  juvenility  is  additionally 
of  a  moist  (equable)  temperament,  in  that  growth  is  proceeding  ; 
the  moistness  is  shown  by  the  softness  of  their  bones,  nerves  and 
other  members,  and  by  the  fact  that  at  this  age  it  is  not  going  to 
be  long  before  the  semen  and  ether  will  come  to  manifestation. 
Old  persons  and  those  in  the  "  decrepit  "  age  are  not  only  colder 
but  drier  in  temperament.  This  is  evidenced  by  the  hardness 
of  their  bones,  the  roughness  of  their  skin,  and  the  long  time  which 
has  elapsed  since  they  produced  semen,  blood,  and  the  vaporai 
(ether)  breath.  .  ,  ,Theory  1ualit3  is  in  equiPoise  durmg  Juvenlllty  and  7°^ 
but  the  airy  and  aqueous  quality  is  more  abundant  m  juveniles. 
In  old  persons  and  in  the  decrepit,  the  earthy  element  is  more 
predominant  than  in  the  other  ages.  This  element  is  most 
marked  during  the  decrepit  age.

THE   CANON   OF  MEDICINE  J5

p.  i62JEarth  ^^  t0  ^  6arth  °f  the  h0dy[    retum  to  thy  root."     (Mesnavi,  «

_  The  temperament  of  youth  is  nearer  to  equipoise  than  that 
of  juveniles^  but  compared  with  them,  its  temperament  is  dry  • 
compared  with  the  third  and  fourth  periods  of  life,  the  tempera- 
ment of  youth  is  moist.  v

The  temperament  of  the  decrepit  period  is  drier  than  in 
youth  and  that  of  the  third  period  of  life  in  regard  to  the  single 
members,  but  more  moist  than  either  in  regard  to  extraneous 
moisture.  °

63.     Temperament  in  Relation  to  Sex.

[p^im^^oi^^^^&mm&Im,^  t*hat  is  ,  h 
female  is  smaller  than  the  male.  The  female  is  also  mister 
The  coldness  of  temperament,  as  well  as  the  habit  of^Iyin^at 
home  and  taking  so  little  exercise,  accounts  for  the  accumulation 
of  excrementitious  matters  in  the  female.  Their  "  flesh  "  is 
more  fine  in  ''substance"  (texture)  than  that  of  the  male,  though 
the  flesh  of  the  male  is  more  rarefied  in  virtue  of  that  which  is 
admixed  with  it.  The  denseness  of  male  flesh  renders  permeation 
through  its  veins  and  nerves  more  difficult.

P^T64a  T*™ament  in  Regard  to  Geographical 
««rZ7'  , e  temPf/mentfiSoister_in  the  peoples  inhabiting 
northerly  countries,  ccJdexin  those  living  in  southerly  countrief

to*  Iemperament    in    Regard    to    Occupation  —

1  he  temperament  i^moisterjn  those  who  follow  a  maritime 
occupation  ;    others  are  contrary.to*  Iemperament    in    Regard    to    Occupation  —

1  he  temperament  i^moisterjn  those  who  follow  a  maritime 
occupation  ;    others  are  contrary.

66.     The  Signs  of  the  Temperaments  are  discussed  under 
the  general  and  special  signs  and  symptoms.

THESIS  IV.     THE  HUMOURS

UMO  URS  :  Fluids  of  the  body.  §  1 16.  The  word 
"humour"  does  not  now  bear  the  sense  which 
formerly  made  it  an  exact  equivalent  of  humor. 
In  German,  "  Saft  "■would  still  apply,  but  "juice" 
is  unsuitable  for  the  present  translation.  The  term 
"  fluids  of  the  body"  has  been  selected  though 
requiring  some  qualification.  Thus,  the  humour 
named  "  sanguineous  "  (72),  or,  simply,  "  blood  "  is  not  to_  be 
regarded  as  identical  with  the  fluid  drawn,  say  by  venesection, 
and  studied  before  or  after  clotting.  The  phlegma  is  not  properly 
represented  by  either  "  phlegm,"  "  mucus,"  or  "  lymph,  though 
having  some  resemblances  to  each.  "  Serous  humour  has  been 
preferred  to  the  older  "  phlegmatic  humour."  Similarly,  yellow 
bile  "  in  the  Canon  may  not  be  restricted  to  the  fluid  in  a  normal 
gall-bladder  ;  and  "  black  bile  "  cannot  be  made  synonymous  with 
(black)  pathological  gall-bladder  contents.Furthermore,  it  should  be  said  that  the  "  humours  are  quasi- 
material.  In  many  passages  of  the  Canon  it  would  seem  that  when 
"  matter  "  is  spoken  of,  in  connection  with  disease,  humour  is 
often  meant,  and  particularly  a  morbid  humour.  But  it  is  also  clear 
that  behind  the  humour  there  is  what  Paracelsus  would  call  an 
"  essence,"  or  "  radical  humour,"  which  itself  governs  the  nature  of 
the  humour  and  whether  or  not  it  is  going  to  become  morbid.  On 
such  a  view  health  depends  on  the  maintenance  of  the  essential 
humour  in  a  state  of  purity.  ..-,,,     r

Again,  we  may  say  that  the  blood  is  the      salt  principle      ot 
the  body,   the  serous   humour  the   "  sweet  principle,"   the  bilious 
humour  the  "  bitter  principle,"  and  the  atrabilious  humour  the     sour 
principle  "  of  the  body.     According  as  one  or  other  of  these  is  pre- 
dominant in  a  person,  so  is  his  constitution  or  temperament.     In 
addition  to  this,  the  view  of  the  nature  of  a  humour  may  be  extended 
by  suggesting,  for  instance,  that  fatty  acid  is  an  essential  of  choleric 
humour,  whereas  neutral  fat  is  an  essential  of  sanguineous  humour  ; 
that  sulpho-centric  substances  are  an  essential  of  atrabilious  humour. 
§  117.     The  idea  belonging  to  the  doctrine  of  the  humours  is 
not  affected  by  biochemistry  or  cytology,  any  more  than  the  theory  of 
"  four  elements  "  is  really  affected  by  modern  chemistry.     To  retain 
the  idea  is  to  claim  a  practical  value  in  drawing  a  distinction  between 
"  humours  "  and  the  body-fluids.     In  101  Avicenna  speaks  of  the' 
blood  as  a  product  of  the  liver,  the  material  for  its  manufacture  bemg 
derived  almost  directly  from  the  food  itself.     As  to  the  blood-cells,

76

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  n76

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  n

had  he  known  of  them  he  might  justly  still  regard  them  as  incidentals  •

as  forces  accresced_ for  a  time,  and  always  changing  in   substance.'

After  all    they  are  importations  into  the  blood  ;    whatever  tissue  be

their  real  source,  whether  their  origin  is  local  or  widespread,  they

are  not  the  real  trouble  in  anemia.     Remedies  will  increase  their

numbers,  but  do  not  touch  the  real  disorder.     From  Avicenna's  point

of  view,  it  might  be  said  that  the  glamour  of  the  revelations  of  the

microscope  has  only  diverted  attention  from  the  real  "  sanguineous

humour      and  its  ultimate  sources  and  similar  subtleties,  therebv

leading  treatment  away  to   "  attacks  "  on  the  red  and  white  cell

forming  organs      For  the  blood  is  itself  living— not  a  mere  chemical

conglomerate.     Hence  m  this   field  there  is  a  need  for  reverting  to

the  old  paths     The  constant  endeavour  also  to  reduce  everything  to

terms  of  cellular  individualities,  as  opposed  to  one  single  complex—

the  human  being,  the  one  single  MF—  inevitably  carries  errors  in  its

When  S.  Thomas  wrote  "  Health  is  a  harmonv  of  the  humours  " 
[banitas  est  quaedam  harmonia  humorum)  81-?2  (ii  64  p  166)  he 
was  so  near  the  truth  as  to  maintain  his  place  even  in  these  days  of 
excessively  refined  details  of  knowledge.

1.— What  a  Body-Fluid  (Humour  :    Akhlat)  is,  and  how 
many    Kinds     there    are.

67;>  A  body-fluid,  or  "humour"  is  that  fluid  moist 
body      into  which  our  aliment  is  transformed.67;>  A  body-fluid,  or  "humour"  is  that  fluid  moist 
body      into  which  our  aliment  is  transformed.

Healthy,  or  "  good  "  humour  (whether  present  in  the  ali- 
ment in  a  pure  state  or  admixed)  is  such  as  has  the  capacity  for 
becoming  transformed  into  actual  body-substance,  either  by 
itself  or  in  combination  with  something  else.  In  short  it  is 
that  which  replaces  the  loss  which  the  body  substance' (con- 
tinually) undergoes.

wl-+1n  Jf0m  tlie, above  definition,  it  is  clear  that  "  body-fluid  "  is  not  synonymous 
with     humour.         Urine,  too,  though  a  fluid,  is  not  a  humour.— In  a  sense   b^dv 
fluids  are  the  meeting-places  between  various  opposed  forces  or  elements  and  S 
chemical  composition  is  the  mode  in  which  such  forces  or  element  are  expressed 
paragrlpr6'  ***  ^"^  does  not  <^m  to  the  wording^  IT, above

68  The  residue  from  such,  the  "  superfluity,"  is  called 
unhealthy  or  bad  '  humour.  This  is  contrary  in  capacity  to 
the  former,  and  is  only  exceptionally  convertible  into  good 
humour.  It  is  proper  that  it  should  be  expelled  from  the  body 
instead.  J

w  o  +ThS  familiarPhrases /'  good-humoured,"  "bad-humoured"  of  modern  con 
versation  may  not  have  the    same   significance  to  the   speakers   as  ?hev  had Tn 
Shakespeare's  day,  but  retain  their  value.  Y     ad  1Q

7  8  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

69.  Some  of  the  fluids  are  primary  ;   some  are  secondary. 
The  -primary  fluids   of,  the   body  are  :    the   sanguineous

humour,   the   serous   humour,    the   bilious    humour,    and   the 
atrabilious   humour.

The  secondary  fluids  of  the  body  are  : —

(a)  non-excrementitious  :

i.  located  at  the  orifices  of  the  minutest  channels 
near  the  tissues,  and  thus  irrigating  them.The  secondary  fluids  of  the  body  are  : —

(a)  non-excrementitious  :

i.  located  at  the  orifices  of  the  minutest  channels 
near  the  tissues,  and  thus  irrigating  them.

ii.  permeating  the  tissues  like  a  dew  and  capable 
of  being  transformed  into  nutriment  as  required.

iii.  an  almost  congealed  fluid.

iv.  a  fluid  existent  among  the  tissue-elements  from 
birth.

(b)  excrementitious.     "  Superfluity."     Forms  of  the  re- 
spective primary  fluids.

70.  As  regards  the  non-excrementitious  fluids,  these 
have  not  yet  been  subjected  to  the  action  of  any  of  the  simple 
members  ;  not  till  they  reach  the  tissues  for  which  they  are 
destined,  are  they  changed.     (j>).

Of  the  four  varieties  above  named,  the  second  moistens 
the  tissues  according  to  the  requirements  which  active  move- 
ments entail,  and  it  comes  into  play  if  there  is  anything  likely  to 
dry  up  the  tissues.  The  third  variety  forms  a  nutriment 
which  will  be  changed  into  the  substance  of  the  tissues, 
whether  to  the  extent  of  entering  into  their  temperament, 
or  to  the  extent  of  changing  into  their  very  essence,  thereby 
attaining  an  entire  likeness  to  the  member.  The  fourth  type 
accounts  for  the  continuous  identity  of  the  member  or  of  the  body 
throughout  life  ;  it  arose  with  the  sperma.  It  is  however  true 
to  say  also  that  the  semen  (bojJajr^^^ 
humours.

71.  The    Four    Body-Fluids    or    Humours    Proper.

i.  The  sanguineous  humour,  the  most  excellent 
of  all.

2.  The  serous  humour.

3.  The  bilious  humour  (lit.  "  red  bile  ").

4.  The  atrabilious  humour  (lit.  "  black  bile  ").

72.  The   Sanguineous   Humour.2.  The  serous  humour.

3.  The  bilious  humour  (lit.  "  red  bile  ").

4.  The  atrabilious  humour  (lit.  "  black  bile  ").

72.  The   Sanguineous   Humour.

In  nature  (that  is,  considered  dynamically)  the  blood  is  hot 
and  moist.  In  character  it  either  conforms  to  its  nature  or  it 
does  not.    That  is  (we  may  say)  it  is  "  normal  "  or  "  abnormal."

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  79

Normal "  blood  "  is  red  in  colour,  has  no  unpleasant  odour, 
and  has  a  very  sweet  taste.

When  blood  is  abnormal,  it  is  either  (a)  because  the  good

temperament    has    become    intrinsically   altered    or   vitiated' ■

i.e.  has  become  colder  or  hotter  ;   but  not  from  admixture  with 
any  foreign  matter,  or  (b)  because  an  unhealthy  body-fluid  is 
admixed  with  it.    "This  may  happen  (i)  by  an  unhealthy  fluid 
corning  to  it  from  without,  penetrating  it  and  so  causing  decom- 
position in  it,  or  (ii)  by  a  putrescent  change  in  a  portion  of  itself 
— the  rarefied  product  becoming  bilious  humour,  and  the  denser 
product  becoming  atrabilious;  either  one,  or  both  together,  may 
remain  in  the  blood.     Abnormal  blood  of  type  (i)  is  named 
according  to  (a)  that  which  is  admixed  with  it — whether  serous 
humour,  or  atrabilious,  or  simply  bilious  fluid.     That  of  type  (ii) 
is  named  according  to  (b)  its  colour  and  wateriness — sometimes 
it  is  turbid,  sometimes  attenuated,  sometimes  very  dark  from 
much  blackness,   sometimes  pale,  (c)  taste  and  odour — bitter, 
salt,  or  sour.

§H7«     "  Blut  ist  ein  ganz  besondrer  Saft."§H7«     "  Blut  ist  ein  ganz  besondrer  Saft."

The  blood  may  well  be  regarded  as  comprising  :  sanguineous 
humour,  corpuscles,  the  canalicular  system  of  the  whole  body,  and 
the  tissue-elements  abutting  thereon  ;  that  is,  as  including  the 
lymphatic  channels  and  their  floating  cellular  population.  In 
addition,  there  are  the  blood-forming  centres,  which  are  the  meeting- 
point  of  two  vitalities— the  livingness  of  the  blood  and  the  livingness 
of  the  tissues.  The  hsemopoietic  centres  are  foci  disseminating 
vital  force,"  as  also  are  the  endocrines,  the  abdominal  ganglia,  etc. 
The  energies  so  well-known  as  chemical,  physical,  osmotic,  etc.',  are 
not  primary,  but  conversions  from  the  living  force  of  these  centres. 
When  the  blood  changes,  or  its  cell-formula  changes,  it  is  because  the 
vital  force  is  changing  its  mode  :  instead  of  radiating  in  one  way,  it  is 
disintegrating  in  other  ways,  and  it  involves  some  one  organ  more 
than  usual.  The  balance  of  action  on  organs,  and  the  balance  in 
interchange  now  ceases  to  be  "just,"  and  the  organ  or  organs 
concerned  therein  are  then  apt  to  receive  the  brunt  of  the  physician's 
attention.

73.     The  Serous  Humour.

In  nature,  this  is  cold  and  moist.  We  describe  a  normal 
form  and  an  abnormal.

Normal  ("  sweet  ")  serous  humour  is  such  as  is  capable  of 
transformation  into  blood  at  any  time,  seeing  that  it  is  in  fact 
an  imperfectly  matured  blood.  It  is  a  sort  of  "  sweet  "*  fluid 
which  is  not  in  too  cold  a  state;   that  is,  it  is  cold  compared  with

*  We  may  note  that  it  is  still  correct  to  call  a  discharge  "  sweet."

8o  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE*  We  may  note  that  it  is  still  correct  to  call  a  discharge  "  sweet."

8o  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

the  blood  and  bilious  humour,  but  hardly  at  all  cold  compared 
with  the  body  as  a  whole. }  A  "  sweet  "  serous  humour  may 
change  into  one  which  is  insipid,  and  abnormal,  as  we  shall 
describe  presently.  This  happens  when  there  is  normal  blood 
admixed — as  occurs  often  in  catarrhal  exudates  or   discharges,

and  saliva.

Sweet  serous  humour  (lymph)  has  no  special  locus  or  recep- 
tacle in  the  body,  any  more  than  the  two  bilious  humours  have. 
Yet  the  serous  humour  resembles  blood  closely  in  this  that  it  is 
equally  necessary  for  all  tissues,  who  receive  it  along  with  the

blood.

The  tissues  absolutely  require  serous  humour  for  two  reasons

— one  being  essential,  and  the  other  accessory.

The  essential  function  is  two-fold  :  (a)  that  it  should  be 
near  the  tissue  (cells)  in  case  they  should  be  deprived  of  their 
habitual  nutriment  (viz.,  healthy  blood)  by  reason  of  retention 
of  the  material  in  the  stomach  or  liver  from  some  cause.  This 
material  is  normally  acted  upon  by  the  vegetative  faculties,  which 
change  and  digest  it  and  are  themselves  maintained  thereby. 
The  transformation  of  lymph  into  blood  is  achieved  by  the  innate 
heat.  Alien  heat  would  only  putrefy  the  material  and  decompose 
it.  This  kind  of  relationship  does  not  obtain  in  the  case  of  the 
two  bilious  fluids,  because  neither  of  them  turns  into  blood  at  any 
time,  as  the  serous  humour  does,  under  the  influence  of  the 
innate  heat  ;  but  they  resemble  the  serous  humour  in  under- 
going putrefaction  and  decomposition  under  the  influence  of

"  alien  "  heat.*  ."  alien  "  heat.*  .

(b)  it  must  be  admixed  with  sanguineous  humour  before  it 
can  reach  and  nourish  tissues  of  lymphatic  temperament.  When 
the  serous  humour  is  present  in  the  blood  for  subserving  nutri- 
tion, it  must  be  in  definite  proportion  before  it  reaches  the  parts 
to  be  nourished  ;  e.g.  the  cerebrum.  It  is  the  same  in  the  case 
of  the  two  bilious  humours.

The  accessory  junction  is  that  of  moistening  the  joints  and 
tissues  and  organs  concerned  in  movement,  for  otherwise  the 
heat  of  the  friction  of  the  movement  would  produce  dryness  of 
their  surfaces.     This  function  is  within  the  range  of  necessity.

*  For   "alien  heat"  we  should  now  read   "bacterial  infection."

74. 
Sweet.

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE 
Table  of  Forms  of  Serous  Humour. 
i.  Normal.

ii.  Abnormal

A. — Arranged  according  to  the  Taste.

No.

Description.

Sweet.

2

Salt.

3

Acid  or  Sour

4

Bitter

5

Insipid.

Remarks.

(i)  Outcome  of  action  of  the  vegetative 
faculties  ;

(ii)  Due  to  admixture  with  blood.

Due  to  admixture  with  bile,  "  bilious 
serous  humour."

(i)   Intrinsic  in  origin  ;

(ii)  due  to  admixture  with  acrid  atra- 
bilious humour.

(i)  From  undue  infrigidation  ;

(ii)  from  admixture  with  atrabilious 
humour.

Attenuated  serous  humour.

Temperament.

Hot  and  moist.

Hot  and  dry. 
Cold  and   dry^

Cold  and  moist

B- — Arranged  according  to  Essential  Nature.

No.

6 
7

9 
io

Description.

Watery.

Excrementitious 
or  Mucilaginous. 
Crude.

Vitreous. 
Calcareous.

Remarks.

Attenuated    serous    humour.      This    may   be    salty   if

there  arise  m  it  some  sort  of  putrescence 
A  superfluity  of  foreign  nature,   and   evident  as  such

to  the  senses  as  a  mucilaginous  material. 
This  is  a  subvariety  of  the  preceding ;    to  the  sensesto  the  senses  as  a  mucilaginous  material. 
This  is  a  subvariety  of  the  preceding ;    to  the  senses

it  appears  to   be  the   same   as   the   preceding    but

actually  is  different.  --  6'

Glasslike  in  texture  ;    taste  sometimes  sour,  sometimes

absent. 
Opaque  white.     Denser  than  the  "  crude  "  form 
ihe  attenuated  part  has  been  dispersed  ;     that  which

is  denser  than  all  the  others  therefore  lingers  too

long  m  the  foramina  and  joints.

the  same  order  as  the. Latin  text,  though  including  all  the  information  therein  )

The  abnormal  forms  of  serous  humour  (see  also  74). 
75.  Salty  serous  humour  (No.  2  in  table),  is  warmer,  drier 
and  lighter  than  any  of  the  others.  It  is  salty  because  oxidized 
earthy  matters  of  dry  temperament  and  bitter  taste  are  admixed 
with  the  watery  (nearly  or  quite  insipid)  "moisture,"  in  equal 
proportions  I  say  "equal  "  (i.e.  in  potency,  not  weight.  Tr  ) 
because  ii  the  earths  were  in  excess,  the  taste  would  be  bitter 
rather  than  salt  The  same  sort  of  process  accounts  for  the  origin 
or  the  salts  in  all  the  salty  waters  found  in  Nature.

76.     Salts   may    be  obtained   artificially   also,   by   boiling- 
ashes,  soap  ashes,  or  chalky  matter,  etc,  in  water.      Then  strain.

82  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

The  salt  will  then  separate  out  from  the  water,  either  at  once,

or  on  standing.  .  rr...82  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

The  salt  will  then  separate  out  from  the  water,  either  at  once,

or  on  standing.  .  rr...

77  Attenuated  serous  humour  (No.  5,  6)  is  similar,  lnis 
may  be'insipid  or  have  only  a  slightly  salt  taste.  This  taste 
results  from  the  admixture  with  an  equal  amount  of  oxidized 
bile,  which  is  dry  and  bitter  ;  and  the  resultant  heating 
salty  fluid  is  called"  bilious  serous  humour.  Though  Galen 
believed  that  this  kind  of  serous  humour  owed  its  saltiness  to 
admixture  with  putrescence  or  wateriness,  my  teaching_  is  _  that 
the  putrescence  makes  it  salty  by  setting  up  oxidation  m  it,  in 
consequence  of  which  an  "ash"  becomes  admixed  with  the 
moisture.  Aquosity  by  itself  is  insufficient  to  render  serous 
humour  salty;  some  other  factor  must  be  present,  either  as  well 
or  on  its  own  account.

78  Serous  humour  (No.  4)  becomes  Utter  if  (1)  atra- 
bilious humour  (which  is  bitter)  be  admixed  with  it,  or  (11)  too 
much  infrigidation  takes  place,  whereby  the  taste  changes  from

sweet  to  bitter.

The  process  consists  in  a  congealing  and  degradation  of  the 
watery  element  into  something  dry,  and  therefore  earthy  m 
character.  The  degree  of  heat  is  too  small  to  ferment  it  and 
make  it  sour.  A  strong  heat  would  completely  alter  it  (into 
something  else  altogether).79  Sour  or  acid  (No.  3).  As  in  the  case  of  sweet  humour 
there  are  two  forms— one  where  the  sourness  is  intrinsic  m 
oriein  •  and  one  where  it  is  introduced  from  without.  In  the 
second'case  it  is  acrid  atrabilious  humour  that  is  the  extraneous 
factor  We  shall  speak  of  it  later.  When  the  sourness  is 
intrinsic,  it  is  comparable  with  the  change  that  takes  place  when 
the  other  juices  go  sour.  In  other  words,  it  is  sour  because  the 
humour  has  fermented  and  then  gone  sour.

80.     No.  6.    See  under  No.  2.    (No.  7  and  8  are  described

in  the  table.)  \  ■    a

81  The  vitreous  kind  of  serous  humour  (No.  9)  is  dense 
and  clos'elv  textured,  and  resembles  glass  in  viscosity  and  weight. 
It  is  sometimes  sour  to  the  taste  and  sometimes  tasteless.     _

When  a  humour  like  this  is  closely  textured  and  insipid, 
it  either  is  "  crude,"  or  changes  into  a  crude  serous  humour 
The  vitreous  humour  was  originally  a  watery  humour,  and 
"  cold  "  •  and  remained  so  without  undergoing  putrescence, 
or  having  any  other  thing  admixed  with  it.  All  this  time  it  is  not 
manifest  to  the  senses.  It  becomes  evident  only  when  it  thickens 
in  texture,  and  develops  coldness.

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

83

3.     The  Bilious  Humour.

In  nature  this  is  hot  and  dry.     It  also  occurs  in  a  normal 
and  an  abnormal  form.THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

83

3.     The  Bilious  Humour.

In  nature  this  is  hot  and  dry.     It  also  occurs  in  a  normal 
and  an  abnormal  form.

82.  Natural  bilious  humour  is  the  "  foam  "  of  blood.  It 
is  bright  red  in  colour.  It  is  light  and  pungent.  The  redder  its 
colour  the  hotter  it  is.  It  is  formed  in  the  liver,  and  then  pursues 
one  of  two  routes— either  it  circulates  with  the  blood,  or  it 
passes  on  to  the  gall-bladder.  The  part  which  passes  into  the 
blood-stream  subserves  two  purposes— Q)  it  enables  the  blood 
to  nourish  those  certain  tissues  or  organs  which  need  the  presence 
of  a  suitable  amount  of  bilious  humour  in  a  dispersed  form  :  as 
holds  in  the  case  of  the  lung,  (ii)  a  mechanical  one.  It  attenuates 
the  blood  (i.e.,  diminishes  its  surface  tension  !)  and  thus  enables 
blood  to  traverse  the  very  minutest  channels  of  the  body.

The  part  which  passes  to  the  gall-bladder  subserves  two 
purposes  :  (111)  the  removal,  in  this  form,  of  a  certain  portion 
of  the  effete  matter  of  the  body.  In  so  doing  it  nourishes  the 
walls  of  the  gall-bladder.

_  (iv)  a  dual  function  {a)  it  cleanses  the  food-residues  and 
viscous  serous  humour  from  off  the  walls  of  the  bowel,  (b)  it 
stimulates  the  muscles  of  the  (lower)  intestine  and  anus,  thereby 
enabling  them  to  perceive  when  it  is  necessary  to  go  to  stool.

83.  Any  obstruction  to  the  flow  of  bile  from  the  gall- 
bladder through  the  duct  into  the  intestine  is  liable  to  cause  colic.

84.  Types  of  Bilious  Humour.

Group

Variety.

No.

Description.

Site.

Origin.

Quality.

A

Normal.

Clear  and  pure

Liver ;  blood

Foam  of  blood.

Hot.

B

Abnormal 
by  ad- 
mixture 
with  alien 
substance.

1

Citron-yellow

Liver.No.

Description.

Site.

Origin.

Quality.

A

Normal.

Clear  and  pure

Liver ;  blood

Foam  of  blood.

Hot.

B

Abnormal 
by  ad- 
mixture 
with  alien 
substance.

1

Citron-yellow

Liver.

The    alien    sub- 
stance is  attenu- 
ated serous 
humour 
(added  to  A).

Less  hot.

2

Vitelline-yel- 
low,  colour  of 
egg  yolk.

Liver.

Dense  (coagulat- 
ed) serous  humour 
added  to  A.

Less  hot.

3

Oxidised  bile, 
type  b.    It  is 
ruddy-yellow, 
not  transpar- 
ent, resembles 
blood,  but  is 
tenuous. 
Various  other 
colours  may 
appear  in  it.

Liver  ;  blood

Simple  admixture 
with    atrabilious 
humour.

Less  de- 
leterious 
than  4

4

Oxidised 
bile,  type  a.

Gallbladder.

Spontaneous 
Oxidation         of 
bile  =  attenuated 
part  +  ash.  But 
this  ash  does  not 
separate  out.

More

deleterious 
than  3.

84

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Group.

Variety.

No.

Abnormal 
by   inter- 
nal change 
of  sub- 
stance.

Description.

Hepatic  form.    Liver.

Site.

Origin.

Leekgreen 
bile. 
Gastric  type  a

Mildew  or 
verdigris 
green  bile. 
Gastric  type  b

Stomach.

Stomach.

Oxidation  of  at- 
tenuated part  of 
blood.  The  denser 
part  of  the  blood 
separates  out  as 
atrabilious 
humour.

Quality.

Oxidation  of 
vitelline  bile.

Mod. 
toxic.

Less 
toxic.

Intense  degree  of 
oxidation  of  vitel- 
line bile  till  all 
moisture  is  lost.

v.  hot,

extremely

toxic.Quality.

Oxidation  of 
vitelline  bile.

Mod. 
toxic.

Less 
toxic.

Intense  degree  of 
oxidation  of  vitel- 
line bile  till  all 
moisture  is  lost.

v.  hot,

extremely

toxic.

No.  7  is  possibly  derived  from  No.  6  by  an  increase  in  the 
degree  of  oxidation,  whereby  all  the  moisture  is  dried  up.  1  he 
fact  of  becoming  too  dry  accounts  for  the  whitish  colour  For 
we  know  that  when  heatTs  applied  to  a  moist  substance  it  firs 
turns  black,  until  all  the  moisture  has  vanished,  and  after  that  the 
bTaSness  changes  into  whiteness.  When  the .moisture ils ^  ess 
than  half  and  half,  whiteness  begins  to  be  visible  Th^.^ 
s  first  charred  and  finally  becomes  a  white  ash.  Heat  apphed ^ 
a  moist  body  makes  it  black  ;  applied  to  a  dry  body  it  makes  rt 
wSte.  Cold  applied  to  a  moist  body  makes  it  white,  and  appUed 
to  a  dry  body  makes  it  black.  _  Such  is  our  opinion  about  the 
Wkp-reen  and  verdigris-green  biles.

gVerdigris-green  form  of  bile  is  both  hotter  and  more 
depraved,  aid  more  deadly  than  all  other  kinds  of  bile.  It  must 
therefore  be  classed  as  one  of  the  toxic  substances.

4-

The  Atrabilious  Humour.

85  This  is  cold  and  dry  in  nature.  There  is  a  natural 
or  normal  form  of  this  effete  substance,  and  also  an  abnormal  or 
morbkl  form      ^^  ^  ^  ^  „  ^  „?  or  sediment  of  good

KlooH  an  effete  matter.  In  taste  it  is  between  sweetness  and 
bitterness.  I  arises  in  the  liver  and  then  divides  into  two 
portTons,  one  of  which  enters  the  blood,  and  the  other  goes  to 
the  ^leen.  ^.^  ^^  .^  ^  bl     d     bserVes  two

™;.    {a)  Intakes  parts  in  the  nourishment  of  those ,  mem be 
which  need  a  trace  of  atrabilious  humour  to  complete  their

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  85™;.    {a)  Intakes  parts  in  the  nourishment  of  those ,  mem be 
which  need  a  trace  of  atrabilious  humour  to  complete  their

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  85

temperament.    Ex.-:  the  bones,    (b)  It  bestows  stamina,  strength 
and  density  and  consistence  upon  the  blood.

88.  The  portion  which  passes  to  the  spleen  is  such  as  is 
no  longer  of  any  use  to  the  blood.  Its  primary  use  as  regards  the 
body  as  a  whole  is  that  it  clears  the  body  of  so  much  effete 
matter.  ..Its  use  in  regard  to  one  special  organ  is  that  it  supplies 
nourishment  to  the  spleen.  Its  secondary  use  is  that  by  travelling 
to  the  mouth  of  the  stomach  by  a  sort  of  milking  movement,  {a) 
it  gives  it  tone  and  makes  it  tighten  up  and  thicken,  (b)  its 
bitterness  irritates  (tickles)  the  mouth  of  the  stomach  and  sets 
up  a  sense  of  hunger  and  so  arouses  the  appetite.

89.  You  must  remember  that  the  part  of  the  bilious 
.k\LSfiur  which  passes  to  the  gall-bladder  is  something  no  longer 
needed  by  the  blood,  and  that  the  part  which  emerges  from  the 
gall-bladder  is  something  no  longer  needed  by  that  either.  It 
is  much  the  same  with  the  atrabilious  humour.  That  part 
which  goes  to  the  spleen  is  such  as  is  no  longer  needed  by  the 
blood,  and  that  part  which  emerges  from  the  spleen  is  such  as  is 
no  longer  needed  by  the  spleen.

And  besides  that,  just  as  the  bilious  humour,  in  passing 
through  the  intestine,  arouses  peristalsis  and  so  helps  to  get 
food  away  from  the  stomach,  so  the  atrabilious  humour  passing 
from  the  spleen  arouses  appetite  and  leads  to  the  drawing  in  of 
food  down  into  the  stomach.

Wherefore  thanks  be  to  Allah  the  best  Artificer  of  all 
things,  and  unending  the  praise.Wherefore  thanks  be  to  Allah  the  best  Artificer  of  all 
things,  and  unending  the  praise.

90.  The  abnormal  form  of  atrabilious  humour  is  not  a 
sort  of  precipitate  or  "  faex  "  ;  it  is  really  a  form  of  oxidized 
material,  or  ash  formed  from  an  oxidation  of  the  commingled 
bilious  humour.  Thus,  when  moist  things  are  admixed  with 
earthy  ones,  the  earthiness  separates  out  (1)  as  a  sediment. 
This  is  exemplified  in  the  case  of  the  blood,  of  which  normal 
atrabilious  humour  is  a  sediment.  (2)  as  an  ash,  or  oxidation- 
product.  In  this  case  the  rarefied  portion  disperses  and  the 
dense  portion  remains  behind.  This  is  exemplified  in  the  humours, 
of  which  excrementitious  atrabilious  humour  is  the  segregate.

91.  _  Blood  is  the  only  body-fluid  which  yields  a  precipitate 
of  this  kind.  Serous  humour  does  not  do  so  because  of  its 
viscosity;  it  behaves  like  oil.  Bilious  humour  does  not  do  so 
because  it  is  attenuated  and  is  deficient  in  earthy  matters,  and  it  is 
also  constantly  moving.  This  is  because  the  blood  separates 
out  only  very  little;  nothing  which  needs  attention;  besides,  if  a 
substance  should  separate  out,   it  would  soon    putrefy   or    be

86  THE   CANON   OF  MEDICINE

expelled  from  the  body.  If  it  putrefied,  the  attenuated  part 
would  disperse,  and  the  denser  part  remain  behind.  It  .is  this 
denser  unprecipitated  part  that  is  the  oxidized  atrabilious 
humour.

The  abnormal  atrabilious  humour  is  hotter  and  lighter  than  the 
natural  form,  and  it  has  in  itself  a  strong  penetrative  power  of  moving 
from  the  upper  parts  to  the  lower,  and  also  a  destructive  action 
(Joannitius).

92.  Excrementitious  atrabilious  humour  is  of  four  kinds  :92.  Excrementitious  atrabilious  humour  is  of  four  kinds  :

(a)  the  ash  derived  from  bilious  humour.  This  is  bitter.  The 
difference  between  this  and  oxidized  bilious  humour  is  that  m 
the  latter  the  ash  is  only  admixed,  whereas  in  the  other  the 
ash   separates    out   after   dispersal   of  the   attenuated   portion  ;

(b)  the  ash  derived  from  the  oxidation  of  serous  humour.  The 
ash  becomes  salty  if  the  serous  humour  is  too  attenuated  and 
watery;  otherwise  the  ash  is  acid  or  bitter  ;  (c)  the  ash  derived 
from  the  oxidation  of  sanguineous  humour.  This  is  salty  and 
faintly  sweet  ;  (d)  the  ash  derived  from  normal  atrabilious 
humour.  If  this  humour  be  attenuated,  the  ash  will  be  very 
acrid,  like  vinegar.  That  is,  when  vinegar  (and  the  like)  is 
sprinkled  upon  the  earth  it  "  boils  "  and  acquires  an  acrid  odour, 
so  that  flies  and  insects  of  all  kinds  shun  it.  If  the  atrabilious 
humour  were  dense  the  ash  will  have  less  acrimony  and  be  only

slightly  bitter.

93.  There  are  three  kinds  of  morbid  atrabilious  humour  :■ — ■ 
(i)  Oxidised  bilious  humour,  whereby  the  attenuated  portion 
is  removed.      There  are  two  varieties  of  this.

94  Injurious  Actions.  (2)  Sero-atrabilious  humour  is  less 
injurious  and  acts  at  a  slow  rate.  (3)  Choleric-atrabilious  humour 
is  more  injurious,   and  undergoes  decomposition  very  readily.

(a)  This  form  is  more  amenable  to  treatment  than  the  other.(a)  This  form  is  more  amenable  to  treatment  than  the  other.

(b)  There  is  another  form  which  is  more  acrid,  and  more  in- 
jurious. Still,  if  treatment  be  begun  more  early,  it  will  be  more 
quickly  amenable  thereto,  (c)  A  third  form  effervesces  less 
when  dropped  upon  earth  and  penetrates  the  tissues  less  easily, 
and  is  more  slowly  destructive.  On  the  other  hand  it  is  very 
difficult  to  disperse,  or  mature  or  treat  by  any  remedial  measures.

•     These  then  are  the  several  kinds  of  normal  and  excrementi- 
tious humours.

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  87

95.  Galen  regards  the  blood  as  the  only  normal  body-fluid, 
for  he  considers  that  all  others^  are  excrementitious  and  quite  use- 
less. But  if  the  blood  were  the  only  nourisher  of  the  various 
organs  of  the  body,  it  would  be  as  much  as  saying  they  are  all 
alike  in  temperament  and  nature.  Bone  would  not  be  harder 
than  flesh  were  it  not  for  the  hardness  in  the  atrabilious  humour 
present  in  the  blood.'  Brain  would  not  be  softer  than  the  flesh 
were  it  not  for  the  presence  in  the  blood  of  the  soft  serous  humour 
which  nourishes  the  brain.  So  we  conclude  that  in  the  blood 
there  are  other  humours,  which  leave  it  (in  the  various  organs).96.  Moreover,  we  see  how  when  blood  is  withdrawn 
into  a  vessel,  it  contracts  and  allows  various  portions  visibly  to 
separate  out-^foanaj^the  yellow  bile),  ajtm;bicl^aex.(the  atra- 
bilious humour),  a  2HLlifeS»£gg=2iii££_j(the' serous  humour), 
an.d  ajraterjJS^T&e  aquosityj,  which  passes  out  through  the 
urine.  One  does  not  count  the  aquosity  among  the  body-fluids 
because  it  is  not  a  nutrient,  even  though  it  is  true  it  is  taken 
in  as  drink.  Its  purpose  is  to  dilute  the  aliment  and  enable  it  to 
permeate  the  tissues.  A  humour,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a  nutrient, 
derived  from  both  food  and  drink.  By  the  word  "  nutrient,"  I 
mean  that  which  is  assimilable  into  the  likeness  of  the  human 
body. — a  complex  substance,  and  not  a  "  simple  "  body.  Water, 
of  course,  is  a  "  simple  "  body.

*  *  *-

97.  Some  think  that  strength  of  body  depends  on  abun- 
dance of  blood  ;  that  weakness  is  associated  with  paucity  of 
blood.  But  it  is  not  so.  It  is  rather  this,  that  the  state  of  the 
body  determines  whether  the'  nutriment  will  be  beneficial  to  it 
or  not.

Others  again,  believe  that  whether  the  humours  be  increased 
or  lessened  in  amount,  the  maintenance  of  health  depends  on 
the  preservation  of  a  certain  quantitative  proportion  between  the 
several  humours,  one  to  another,  peculiar  to  the  human  body. 
But  that  is  not  exactly  correct.  The  humours  must,  besides  that, 
maintain  a  certain  constant  quantity.  It  is  not  a  matter  of  the 
composition  of  one  or  other  humour,  but  of  (the  body)  itself  ; 
but  the  proportions  which  they  bear  one  to  another  must  also  be 
preserved.

98.  I  purposely  omit  referring  to  certain  other  problems 
relative  to  the  humours,  because  they  pertain  to  philosophy  and 
not  to  medicine.98.  I  purposely  omit  referring  to  certain  other  problems 
relative  to  the  humours,  because  they  pertain  to  philosophy  and 
not  to  medicine.

Tentatively  to  draw  up  correlations  between  modern  biochemical  data  and  the 
humours  as  above  described  would  not  be  quite  a  useless  exercise.  From  the 
description,  it  is  clear  that  any  given  sample  of  blood  contains  :    (i)  all  four  normal

88  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

humours  •  (2)  a  certain  proportion  of  immature  humours— that  is,  under-oxidised 
Stive 'products  (3)  excrementitious  humours-the  tissue-wastes  or  effete 
substances5  th ^by-products  of  complete  oxidation.  In  diseased  states,  it- may 
also  contain  (4)  certain  depraved  humours,  including  (a)  over-oxidised  products; 
(h)  nutref active  substances  of  various  kinds. 
(6)  putretactiv  ^ejLardjafc^M^^^

serum-albumen  neutrafSt~piS5^  and  the  salts  concerned  m  maintaining  tiieacid- 
base  equiHbriSm  ;      *  jabSdaJita bilia^umour  :      ^ig^e^s    choig^ 
and   perhaps   lecithin "  and  .  v^aMUlite-aadS.  I     ta^SS&i^gaJuasySffi  •    neutral 
Shlfrnfes^iCaSQSounas-wnen  in  colloidal  form,  ^am.-.mufipads, 
suipnur  &  glycogen,  animal  gum,  soaps,  various  salts      To  (3)  .     the

non-J^n-Sli-grlup  (urea,  ammonta.  creatinin,  etc.)     To  (4)  :    the  products 
of  bacterial  °rowth,  various  auto-intoxications,  diamines,  etc. 
°f  b   To  complete  the  correlations,  some  idea  should  be  formed  as  to  the: morphol- 
ogical place  to  which  the  substances  are  severally  to  be  assigned,  as  doubtless  the 
humou?s  occup7blood-corPuscles  and  other  particulate  components  of  the  blood.

2.     The    Mode   of   Origin    of   the   Fluids   of   the   Body.2.     The    Mode   of   Origin    of   the   Fluids   of   the   Body.

99  Aliment  undergoes  a  certain  amount  of  digestion 
during  the  act  of  mastication.  The  lining  of  the  mouth  being 
continuous  with  that  of  the  stomach,  there  is  as  it  were  one 
continuous  digestive  surface.  When  that  which  has  been 
masticated  comes  in  contact  with  it,  a  certain  change  at  once 
takes  place  in  it— namely  under  the  influence  of  the  saliva, 
whose  action,  in  virtue  of  the  innate  heat  within  it,  is  digestive. 
That  is  how  it  is  that  when  wheat  is  masticated  it  procures  the 
maturation  of  furuncles  and  abscesses,  but  has  no  such  effect 
when  simply  rubbed  with  water,  or  even  if  boiled  with  water.  _

Some  assert  that  the  sign  which  shows  us  that  rood  _  is 
already  beginning  to  be  altered  after  mastication  is  that  prior 
to  this  act  there  is  neither  odour  nor  taste  in  it.

100.  Once  the  aliment  has  entered  the  stomach,  true 
digestion  goes  on— not  so  much  by  reason  of  the  heat  of  the 
stomach  as  by  reason  of  the  heat  of  the  enveloping  members—

namely  :

On  the  right :   the  liver.  _  .

On  the  left :  the  spleen.    This  not  warm  in  virtue  o  f  its  own

substance,  but  in  virtue  of  its  blood-supply. 
In  front :    the  omentum,  whose  fat  easily  retains  heat  and

reflects  it  on  to  the  stomach. 
Above  :    the  heart,  which  warms   the  diaphragm  and   so

warms  the  stomach.

101       The  first  stage  of  digestion  yields  the  essence  of  the

aliment,  which,  in  many  animals,  becomes  "  chyle  "by  the  help  of

admixture  with  the  fluid  which  one  has  consumed.     I  he  chyle

is  of  the  consistence  of  a  ptisan  (broth),  that  is,  as  thick  as  soddenadmixture  with  the  fluid  which  one  has  consumed.     I  he  chyle

is  of  the  consistence  of  a  ptisan  (broth),  that  is,  as  thick  as  sodden

^  C1Q2       The  portion  of  this  chyle  which  is  thus  diluted  is 
drawn  from  the  stomach  into  the  intestines,  and  then  is  caused

THE   CANON   OF  MEDICINE  89

to  enter  into  the  roots  of  the  mesenteric  vessels  which  are  found 
all  along  the  intestinal  tract.  These  vessels  are  slender,  and  firm. 
Having  entered  these  channels  the  nutriment  passes  into  the 
portal  vein,  enters  the  gateway  of  the  liver,  and  then  travels 
along  finer  and  ever  finer  divisions  until  it  comes  to  the  capillaries 
(lit.,  the  very  fine  hair-like  channels),  which  are  the  ultimate 
sourse  of  the  vena  cava  emerging  from  the  convexity  of  the  liver.

The  passage  of  the  nutriment  through  these  very  narrow 
channels  could  not  take  place  were  it  not  admixed  with  water 
consumed  in  excess  of  the  strict  requirements  of  the  body.

By  being  distributed  over  the  whole  liver  in  this  way,  the 
chyle  is  exposed  to  the  digestive  function  of  the  whole  organ, 
and  the  function  of  the  liver  is  thus  accomplished  most  vigor- 
ously, energetically,  and  speedily.  The  change  of  nutriment  into 
blood  is  now  complete.

103.  The  various  products  and  by-products  of  digestion 
up  to  this  point  may  be  tabulated  as  follows  (p)  :

Table  of  Digestive-products.

(a)  In  healthy  digestion —

(i)   the  blood  itself, 
(ii)    By-products  :

(a)  a  foam  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .      the  bilious  humour.

(b)  a  sort  of  precipitate the  atrabilious  humour.

(b)  In  unhealthy  digestion —

(iii)   By-products  :

(c)  An  oxidation  product,  where  digestion  is  carried  too  far  :

1.  Attenuated  portion     ..  ..      morbid   bilious   humour.(b)  In  unhealthy  digestion —

(iii)   By-products  :

(c)  An  oxidation  product,  where  digestion  is  carried  too  far  :

1.  Attenuated  portion     ..  ..      morbid   bilious   humour.

2.  Dense  portion  .  .  .  .      morbid  atrabilious  humour.

(d)  A    product    when    digestion    is    not

carried  far  enough  .  .  .  .      serous  humour.

104.  As  long  as  it  stays  in  the  liver,  the  blood  which  the 
liver  forms  is  more  attenuated  than  it  should  be,  because  the 
wateriness  is  in  excess,  for  the  reason  already  given.  But  when 
the  blood  leaves  the  liver  the  excess  of  water  is  removed,  for  it  is 
taken  to  the  renal  vessels,  and  so  provides  the  kidneys  with  the 
quantity  and  quality  of  the  blood  best  suited  for  their  nutrition. 
The  "  fat  "  of  the  blood  nourishes  the  kidneys,  and  the  super- 
fluous wateriness  and  a  certain  degree  of  sanguineous  material 
passes  down  to  the  bladder  and  so  away  from  the  body.

105.  The  good  blood  ascends  into  the  superior  vena  cava, 
and  its  subsequent  course  is  into  smaller  and  smaller  veins  : 
and  finally  into  the  finest  hair-like  channels.  Having  reached 
these  hair-like  channels  it  "  sweats  out  "  through  their  orifices 
and  bathes  the  tissues,  according  to  the  decree  of  Allah.

9o  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

106.     Table' of  the  Causes  of  Humours.

Name  of 
Cause.

Blood.

Bilious 
Humour

1 
Serous 
Humour.

Atrabilious 
Humour.

Material 
Cause.

Those  parts  of 
the    solid     and 
fluid       aliment 
which     are     of 
equable       tem- 
perament.

The"  attenuated 
hot,  sweet,  oily 
and    sharp    by- 
product  of    ali- 
ment.

The    dense   hu- 
mid, viscid,  cold 
by-product      of 
the  aliments.

The  very  dense 
by-product       of 
the        aliments, 
very  deficient  in 
moisture,  and  ex- 
ceeding in  heat.

Formal 
Cause.The  very  dense 
by-product       of 
the        aliments, 
very  deficient  in 
moisture,  and  ex- 
ceeding in  heat.

Formal 
Cause.

Exact  and  good 
digestion.

Digestion  verg- 
ing on  excess.

Imperfect 
digestion.

Pre'cipitati  ve 
tendency,     pre- 
venting the  flow 
or  dispersal.

Efficient 
Cause.

Attempered 
heat.

Attempered 
heat,    for    nor- 
mal bilious  hu- 
mour ('■  foam  '). 
Undue  heat,  for 
abnormal     bili- 
ous humour. 
Site:  liver

Feeble  heat.

Medium      heat  ; 
i.e.,    a   heat     of 
oxidation  which 
surpasses        the 
limits     of    equi- 
poise.

Final 
Cause.

To  nourish  the 
body.

Primary  :

nutrition  ;

attenuation  of

blood. 
Secondary  : 
cleansing  bowel 
wall ;  desire  for 
stool    (see    82).

Primary       and 
Secondary  pur- 
poses named  in 
73.

Primary         and 
secondary     pur- 
poses  named  in 
87. 
Nutrition. 
Inspissation   of

blood. 
.  Nourishment  of

spleen. 
Tone  to  stom- 
ach. 
Aid     to     appe- 
tite.

107.  Further  details  regarding  the  efficient  causes  : 
i.  Action  of  heat  and  cold.  One  must  not  forget  that  the 
most  fundamental  agents  in  the  formation  of  the  humours  are 
heat  and  cold.  When  the  heat  is  equable,  blood  forms  ; 
^hSTheaTis  in  excess^  bnipus^h^mo^r  jorjm;  when  in  great 
excess,  so  thlToxidation  occurs,  &hllmm„]m££^$S^ 
When  the  cold  is  equable,  ser^^Jmrnour^  forjns,,,.;  when  cold . 
is  in  excess,  so  that  congelation  becomes  dominant,  atrabilious

humour  forms.  .  .

II  The  faculties.  There  is  also  a  proportionate  relation 
between  the  active  and  passive  faculties  (which  has  to  be  con- 
sidered in  thinking  of  the  formation  of  the  humours).

III.  The  temperaments.  One  must  not  get  the  idea  that  every 
temperament  gives  rise  to  its  like  and  never  to  its_  opposite.  A 
temperament  often  gives  rise  to  its   exact  opposite,  indirectlyTHE   CANON   OF  MEDICINE  91

(of  course)  ;  it  cannot  do  so  directly.  A  cold  and  dry 
temperament  may  give  rise  to  visible  moisture,  though  this 
would  not  be  beneficial,  but  would  indicate  that,  the  digestion  is 
feeble.  A  person  with  such  a  temperament  would  be  thin,  with 
supple  joints,  and  hairless  skin,  cold  to  the  touch,  the  surface 
veins  narrow,  and  he  would  be  gentle  and  apprehensive  (timid) 
in  nature.  He  would  be  like  the  old  person,  who  makes  too  much 
serous  humour  and  is  cold  and  dry  in  temperament.

108.  Circumstances  which  make  the  atrabilious  humour 
■plentiful.

(1)  Immoderate  degree  of  heat  in  the  liver.

(2)  Weakness  of  the  spleen.

(3)  A  degree  of  cold  sufficient  to  be  congelative  and  cause 
marked  and  long-continued  constriction.

(4)  The  existence  of  various  long-standing  or  often  repeated 
diseases  whereby  the  humours  are  reduced  to  ash.

When  the  atrabilious  humour  is  plentiful,  it  lodges  (not 
literally,  but  virtually)  between  the  liver  and  stomach,  with  the 
result  that  the  formation  of  blood  and  healthy  fluids  is  interfered 
with,  and  less  blood  is  formed.

109.  Third  digestion. — The  blood  and  that  which  circulates 
with  it  undergoes  a  third  digestion  in  the  blood-vessels.109.  Third  digestion. — The  blood  and  that  which  circulates 
with  it  undergoes  a  third  digestion  in  the  blood-vessels.

This  is  a  truth  worth  noting.  The  tissue-foods  carried  by  the  blood,  and  the 
tissue  wastes  discharged  into  it,  undergo  treatment  within  it,  which  is  only  efficient 
if  certain  salts  and  acid  bases  are  present  ;  otherwise  conversion  of  such  substances 
into  available  form  fails  to  occur  ;  and  deposition  in  various  tissues,  fascia,  and 
joints,  and  even  in  the  vessel-walls  (atheroma,  e.g.)  and  nerve-sheaths  occur  with  ill 
effect.  These  deleterious  substances  may  be  thought  of  as  composed  of  particles 
too  large  to  permeate  the  ("  invisible  ")  pores  of  the  tissue-boundaries  referred  to, 
and  the  pathological  condition  of  "  obstructions  "  which  looms  so  largely  in  the 
Canon  here  finds  its  raison  d'etre.

110.  Fourth  digestion.  When  the  nutriment  has  reached 
the  various  members,  giving  each  its  appropriate  "  element," 
a  fourth   digestion   takes   place.

111.  The  fate  of  the  residues.  The  residues  from  the  first 
digestion  (namely  that  in  the  stomach) — pass  out  by  way  of  the 
intestines  as  excrement.  Those  from  the  second  digestion 
(namely,  in  the  liver)- — pass  out  chiefly  by  the  urine,  though 
some  go  to  the  spleen  and  gall-bladder.  The  residues  from 
the  other  two  digestions  are  discharged  partly  by  the  skin  as 
insensible  perspiration  and  external  sordes  ;  partly  through 
visible  orifices — the  nostrils  and  ears  ;  partly  through  the  invisible 
orifices   scattered   over   the   whole   body  ;    sometimes   through

92  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

unnatural  channels'  in  the  form  of  inflammatory  matter  ;    some- 
times as  appendages  like  the  hair  and  nails92  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

unnatural  channels'  in  the  form  of  inflammatory  matter  ;    some- 
times as  appendages  like  the  hair  and  nails

If  the  body-fluids  become  attenuated,  they  are  readily 
dispersed  and  discharged  from  the- body,  especially  when  the 
pores  dilate.  The  loss  of  such  fluids  produces  great  weakness, 
not  only  by  the  fact  of  the  loss  but  also  by  the  dispersion  and  loss 
of  breath  which  (necessarily)  occurs  simultaneously

112  Lastly,  it  must  be  clearly  understood  that  not  only 
the  causes  of  origin,  but  also  the  causes  of  movement  of  the 
humours  must  be  taken  into  consideration.

Exercise  and  heating  agents  set  in  motion  the  sanguineous 
humour,  the  bilious  humour,  and  even  the  atrabilious  humour 
(which  is  strengthened  thereby).  Repose  sets  the  serous  humour 
in  motion  and  strengthens  it.  Repose  also  strengthens  some 
kinds  of  atrabilious  humour.

Even  imagination,  emotional  states  and  other  agents  cause, 
the  humours  to  move.  Thus,  if  one  were  to  gaze  intently  at 
something  red,  one  would  cause  the  sanguineous  humour  to 
move.  That  is  why  one  must  not  let  a  person  suffering  from 
nose-bleeding  see  things  of  a  brilliant  red  colour.

"  Wer    iov,  and  oassions  of  a  like  nature  are  accompanied 
by  a  change  in  the  body."     (Sum.  Theol.  75,3!    P-  ".  trans.)"  Wer    iov,  and  oassions  of  a  like  nature  are  accompanied 
by  a  change  in  the  body."     (Sum.  Theol.  75,3!    P-  ".  trans.)

The  temper  of  a  cow  frequently  determines  the  quantity  of  the 
milk  it  yields,  if  it  gives  milk  at  all.  But  under  the  influence  of  such 
passions  as  anger,  rage,  fury,  the  milk  changes  m  quality,  and 
develops  noxious  or  poisonous  properties.  Even  the  flesh  may 
become  poisonous  if  the  animal  suffered  intensely  or  protractedly 
either  mentally  or  physically.  Overdriven  cattle  may  thus  yield  meat 
which  contains  toxic  substances  injurious  to  the  human  consumer 
(Lindasy,48  ii.  270,  etc.).

Effects  of  colours  on  bodily  functions.-^   and  yellow  are

injurious  to_the  eye.  ^^}M,^^^S£jmmB^^^^^ 
"wfeTed  lighlstlmulaterrr^  Morning  light  aids  nutrition.  Colours 
vary  in  their  effect  according  to  their  intensity.  Conversely,  dark- 
ness benefits  various  conditions  ;  it  helps  to  induce  inactivity  and 
sleep  (Pereira152  ;    Babbit  151).

Li-ht  in  another  sense  has  an  effect  on  the  emotions  :  for  instance,  the  light 
of  intelligence  converts  fear  (earth  element)  into  caution,  affectum  (water  element) 
into  benevolence.

113  This  completes  all  we  propose  to  say  at  present  about 
the  humours  and  their  mode  of  formation.  There  are  other 
aspects  of  the  subject  whose  discussion  and  justification  pertain 
to  the  philosopher.

(See  also  the  composite  Chart  at  the  end  of  the  Volume.)

r

THESIS  V.     THE   MEMBERS

i.   What-  a    Member    is    and    what    are    its    Components

114.  The  members  of  the  body  are  derived  primarily 
from  the  commingling  of  the  humours,  just  as  the  humours  are 
derived  primarily  from  the  commingling  of  the  aliments,  and 
the  aliments  are  primarily  composed  of  commingled  "  elements  "115  There  are  simple  members  and  compound  members 
I  he  simple  members  are  those  whose  structure  is  homogeneous 
throughout,  so  that  their  name  describes  them  in  all  parts  • 
e.g.  flesh,_  bone,  nerves,  and  the  like*  The  compound  members 
are  those  m  which  one  and  the  same  word  is  not  a  correct  descrip- 
tion of  all  the  parts.    For  instance,  in  the  case  of"  hand  "  "  face  "

"v?  T"     ^e  ^  iSun0t  "  faCG  "  ;    a  Part  of  the  h^d  is  not 
hand.        Ihese  members  are  called  "  instrumental  "  because

they  are  the  instruments  whereby  the  passions  and  actions  of 
the  mind  (    soul  ")  are  achieved.

Table  of  the  Members.

Auxiliary  Organ 
Afferent

Principal 
Organ

Sense  Organs       Lung

Immediate

Auxiliary  Organ

Efferent

Remote 
Auxiliary.  Organ 
(Elementary

Tissues)

V

BRAIN

(Animal 
breath)

V

Nerves

V 
HEART

(Vital 
breath)

V

Arteries

Stomach

AND

Intestine 
Veins

LIVER

(Natural 
breath)

Constituents  of 
Humours

V 
REPRODUCT- 
IVE GLAND

V  v

Gall-bladder,  Ducts  and

Spleen,  Kidney  Genital  Adnexa

V  v

Bones,  Cartilages,    "\ 
Ligaments,  Muscles,  I  "  Flesh 
Fasciae,   Tendons,     |       Fat 
Membranes  I

V

Intestinal 
Tract

parts.

Equivalent  to  the  modern  term  Element,

93

ary  tissues.     Cf.   "  homoi

lomenous  '

94  THE  CANON   OF  MEDICINE

116.     The  Simple  Members  (the  "  elementary  tissues.") 
"Simple":      Cf.    the'  scholastic    sense— homogeneous  ;      in- 
divisible.    (See  §  19.)

i .  The  bone.    This  is  sufficiently  hard  to  form  the  founda- 
tion of  the  body  as  a  whole,  and  provide  the  purchase  needed  for

its  movements.i .  The  bone.    This  is  sufficiently  hard  to  form  the  founda- 
tion of  the  body  as  a  whole,  and  provide  the  purchase  needed  for

its  movements.

2.  The  cartilage.  Being  softer  than  bone,  this  can  be  bent, 
and  yet  it  is  harder  than  all  the  other  members.  It  was  made  for 
the  purpose  of  providing  a  cushion  between  the  hard  bone  and 
the  soft  members,  so  that  the  latter  should  not  be  injured  when 
exposed  to  a  blow  or  fall,  or  compression.  This  is  shown  m  the 
case  of  the  shoulder-blade  and  the  bones  over  the  praecordia, 
and  the  ribs  ;  and  in  the  case  of  the  epiglottis  and  xiphisternum. 
In  the  case  of  joints,  it  prevents  the  tissues  from  being  torn  by 
the  hard  bone.  It  gives  a  purchase  for  a  muscle  to  obtain  ex- 
tension in  places  where  there  is  no  bone  to  give  attachment  or 
support  (for  instance  the  muscles  of  the  eyelids),  and  also  gives 
attachment  to  muscles  without  being  too  hard  for  them  (for  • 
instance,  the  epiglottis).  _  .

3.  The  nerves.  These  are  structures  arising  from  the  brain 
or  spinal  cord.  They  are  white,  soft,  pliant,  difficult  to  tear,  and 
were  created  to  subserve  (a)  sensation,  (b)  movement  of  the

limbs.  .  .limbs.  .  .

4.  The  tendons.  These  form  the  terminations  of  the 
muscles.  They  resemble  nerves  in  appearance.  They  are 
attached  to  movable  members,  and  when  the  muscles  contract 
and  relax,  the  parts  to  which  the  tendons  are  attached  move  to  and 
fro.  "They  may  sometimes  broaden  when  the  muscle  expands, 
and  then  become  narrow  again  on  their  own  account,  lengthening 
and  shortening  apart  from  the  lengthening  and  shortening  of  the 
muscle.  Sometimes  this  is  through  the  intervention  of  ligaments. 
The  upper  part  of  the  muscle  is  called  "  flesh  "  ;  that  which 
"leaves  the  flesh  and  passes  to  the  joint,  bringing  the  two  close 
together,  is  the  "  tendon."

5.  The  ligaments.  These  structures  have  the  appearance 
and  feel  of  nerves.  They  are  of  two  kinds  :  true  and  false.  The 
latter  extends  to  the  muscle.  The  former  does  not  reach  as  far 
as  the  muscle,  but  simply  joins  the  two  ends  of  the  bones  of  a 
joint  firmly  together.  This  false  ligament  has  not  the  feel  of 
ligament,  and  is  not  painful  when  moved  or  rubbed.  The 
auxiliaries  of  the  ligaments  are  the  structures  attached  to  them, 
as  has  been  explained.

"IT

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  95

6.  The  arteries.  These  structures  arise  from  the  heart. 
They  are  hollow,  elongated,,  fibrous,  and  of  ligamentous  con- 
sistence. _  Their  movements  consist  in  expansion  and  contrac- 
tion, which  distinguishes  them  from  the  veins.  They  were 
created  in  order  to  enable  the  heart  to  be  ventilated,  fuliginous 
vapour  to  be  expelled  therefrom,  and  the  breath*  distributed 
by  their  means  to  all-parts  of  the  body.7-_  The  veins.  These  resemble  arteries  except  in  so  far  as 
they  arise  from  the  liver  and  do  not  pulsate.  Their  purpose  is 
to  carry  the  blood  away  from  all  parts  of  the  body.

«,*  Jit3/*16  *+?  ftf^  wTl^T^  r6ad  "  t0  a11  Parts  of  the  body-"  As  we  know, 
the  belief  was  that  blood  left  the  heart  to  all  parts  of  the  body,  and  also  left  through 
the  veins  to  all  parts  of  the  body.  The  arteries  carried  the  breath.  The  veins 
earned  the  aliment.  The  heart  therefore  drove  blood  away  from  it  on  both  sides 
the  distribution  into  minute  capillaries  was  known  for  both  series  of  vessels  But  it 
did  not  seem  to  occur  that  the  two  flows  were  in  opposite  directions,  and  that  as  much 
went  out  of  the  heart  as  came  into  it.  The  conviction  that  the  two  quantities  were  not 
ITt  +TaS  f  real  reason  f?r  n°t  going  on  to  the  truth  of  the  literal  circulation 
At  bottom,  it  was  the  equality  of  the  two  quantities  which  Harvey  had  to  prove 
in  order  to  establish  the  fact  of  the  circulation.)  P

8.  The  membranes.  These  structures  are  formed  of 
extremely  minute  interwoven  filaments  which  are  extremely 
delicate.  Their  object  is  {a)  to  form  the  external  covering  for 
other  structures  and  thereby  (b)  preserve  the  form  and  outline 
of  these  structures,  (c)  to  support  the  members,  (d)  by  means  of 
their  fibres  to  bind  together  the  nerves  and  ligaments  with  the 
members  ;  for  instance  they  hold  the  kidneys  in  position,  (e)  to 
impart  sensation  to  members  which  are  themselves  insensitive, 
since  by  providing  a  sensitive  covering  they  enable  the  member 
to  be  aware  of  anything  befalling  it.  For  instance  :  the  lung, 
the  liver,  the  spleen,  the  kidney  ;  all  of  which  are  in  themselves 
insensitive^atjdjg^^  werTtHare  not  a^HleSbBae,oyerJ:hjm,t_  A  flatulent  distension  or  an  inflammatory 
deposit  in  the  organ  is  felt  by  us  only  because  the  enclosing 
membrane,  being  stretched,  feels  it  ;  or,  in  the  case  of  an 
inflammatory  mass,  is  aware  of  the  weight.

9.  The  flesh.  "  Flesh  "  includes  muscles,  fasciae,  tendons, 
ligaments,  connective-tissues,  and  so  forth  all  together.  Flesh 
is  that_  which  fills  up  the  spaces  left  within  the  members,  thus 
imparting  firmness  and  solidity.

117.  In  every  member  there  is  a  natural  faculty  (the 
vegetative  faculty)   which  subserves   its  own-  nutrition.      This

*  Nowadays  we  would  say  "  oxygen  *'  instead  of  "  breath  " 
their  ^erfton^TcovelS  (""  *****  "*  ^  ^^  to'tou<*  ***  ^  ™

9  6  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

faculty  is  the  power  by  which  attraction,  retention,  assimilation, 
union  with  nutriment,  and expulsion  of  effete  matter  are  secured. 
Members  may  therefore  be  classified  accordingly.  But  besides 
that,  some  members  possess  a  further  faculty  which  passes  from 
them  to  another  member,  while  others  have  not  sucha  faculty. 
Other.. members  again  have  still  another  faculty  which  passes 
into  them  from  another  member,  and  some  have  not  such  another

faculty.

The  following  associations  may  therefore  be  assumed  : — 
(a)  receiving  and  also  giving  a  faculty. 
{b)  giving  and  not  receiving. a  faculty.

(c)  receiving  and  not  giving  a  faculty.

(d)  neither  giving  nor  receiving  a  faculty.(c)  receiving  and  not  giving  a  faculty.

(d)  neither  giving  nor  receiving  a  faculty.

118.  There  can  be  no  doubt  about  the  existence  of  the 
first-named.  All  agree  that  the  brain  and  the  liver  each  receive 
their  power  of  life,  natural  heat,  and  breath  from  the  heart,  and 
that  each  of  them  is  also  the  starting-point  of  another  faculty 
which  it  sends  out  to  other  organs.  But  there  is  a  disagreement 
about  the  second.  Thus  in  the  relation  betweenthe  brain  and 
sensation,  is  sensation  confined  to  the  (literal)  brain,  ornot  ?_  In 
the  relation  between  the  faculty  of  nutrition  and  the  liver,  is  it 
integral  in  the  liver,  or  not  ?

119.  Then,  too,  in  regard  to  the  heart.  There  is  a  great 
disagreement  between  the  philosophers  and  the  physicians.  The 
great  Philosopher  said  that  the  heart  is  a  member  which  gives 
and  does  not  receive  ;  that  it  is  the  first  root  of  all  the  faculties 
and  gives  the  faculties  of  nutrition,  life,  apprehension,  movement, 
to  the  several  other  members, — whereas  physicians  (and  some 
of  the  ancients)  considered  these  faculties  to  be  distributed  among 
several  members  (the  faculty  of  nutrition  in  the  liver  ;  of  vital 
power  in  the  heart  ;  the  mental  faculties  in  the  brain)  ;  and  that 
hence  there  can  be  no  such  thing  as  a  member  giving  without 
receiving.  However  plausible  the  physicians  are,  careful  con- 
sideration shows  that  the  argument  of  the  Philosopher  is  much 
nearer  the  truth."  There  are  the  minds  of  the  cells  of  the  liver,  and  the  liver-mind— the  mind 
that  regulates  the  activities  of  the  liver-cells.  Above  the  liver-mmd  and  above 
the  stomach-mind  and  the  heart-mind  is  the  general  physical  mind  ;  and,  above  that 
general  physical  mind,  and  also  above  the  intellectual  mind  is  a  higher  mind  still. 
There  is  a  hierarchy  and  kingdom  within  us." — (Miles,135,  p.  92).

120„  As  to  the  third  association,  we  consider  that  there 
can  be  no  doubt  about  the  fact  that  some  members  receive  and 
do  not  give.  Thus,  the  flesh  receives  the  power  of  sensation  and 
life,  but  has  not  the  power  of  imparting  another  faculty  in  return.

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  97THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  97

121.  As  to  the  fourth — there  is  also  a  disagreement  both 
among  physicians  and  among  philosophers.  On  the  one  hand 
it  is  thought  that  the  non-sentient  bone  and  flesh  and  the  like 
could  not  continue  to  live  unless  these  powers  were  residing  in 
them,  and  that  therefore  they  do  not  need  to  receive  ; — that  the 
power  provided  by  the  aliments  conveyed  to  them  is  adequate, 
and  that  therefore  they  neither  furnish  a  power  for  another 
member  nor  does  another  member  furnish  them  with  a  power. 
The  opposite  opinion  is  that  the  powers  in  those  members  are 
not  residing  in  them,  but  are  formed  in  the  liver  and  heart  ; 
and  when  they  reach  these  members,  they  come  to  rest  within 
them.  There  is  no  means  of  deciding  between  the  two  views 
by  argument  but  the  inability  to  do  so  is  no  hindrance  in  practice. 
As  to  the  first  of  these  two  views,  one  must  realize  that  it  does 
not  matter  whether  the  heart  be  the  source  of  sensation  and  volun- 
tary motion  in  the  brain,  or  not  ;  whether  the  source  of  the 
nutritive  faculty  be  in  the  liver,  or  not.  It  is  of  no  significance 
whether  the  brain  has  in  itself  the  source  of  the  powers  of  the 
soul,  or  whether  these  powers  only  come  by  way  of  the  heart. 
In  any  case  it  is  only  a  relation.  If  the  liver  is  the  starting-point 
of  the  nutritive  faculty,  that  too  is  only  in  relation  to  other 
members.Then  as  to  the  second  of  the  two  views,  one  must  realize 
that  it  does  not  matter  whether  the  natural  faculty  in  a  member 
like  bone  is  innate  in  it  in  virtue  of  its  temperament,  or  whether 
it  arose  in  the  liver  first,  or  whether  neither  is  true.  One  must  ■ 
rather  realize  that  the  faculty  could  not  be  there  at  all  were  it 
not  for  the  liver,  and  that  therefore  if  the  path  were  obstructed 
the  bone  would  cease  to  receive  the  necessary  nutriment,  and 
its  functions  would  cease — exactly  as  holds  in  the  case  of  move- 
ment when  some  nerve-connection  with  the  brain  is  severed. 
There  is  the  natural  faculty  in  the  bone  as  long  as  its  tempera- 
ment is  maintained.

122.  The  whole  discrepancy  is  removed  by  regarding 
some  members  as  principal  or  vital,  some  as  auxiliary,  and  some 
as  neither  vital  nor  auxiliary.

123.  Classification  of  Members  into  Principal  (or,  Vital) 
and  Auxiliary.

The  principal  (or,  vital)  organs  are  those  in  which  the 
primary  faculties  of  the  body  arise- — i.e.  the  faculties  necessary 
either  to  the  life  of  the  individual  or  to  the  life  of  the  race.

"  In  thej  body  is  a  part  which  being  sound  the  rest  is  sound,  and  which  being 
unsound,  the  rest  is  unsound.     And  this  is  the  heart."     (Burton  :    Night  80).

H

9  8  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

The  principal  organs  necessary  for  the  life  of  the  individual

are  three  in  number  :  .  .  .    ,

'i—The  heart,   the  source  or  starting-point  ot  the  vital

power,  or  innate  heat.  ,  „      ,  •  .-  a

Y       2  __The  brain,  the  seat  of  the  mental  faculties,  sensation  and

movement.  .  .  .      c      u-

3— The  /iw,  the  seat  of  the  nutritive  or  vegetative  faculties.Y       2  __The  brain,  the  seat  of  the  mental  faculties,  sensation  and

movement.  .  .  .      c      u-

3— The  /iw,  the  seat  of  the  nutritive  or  vegetative  faculties.

The  organs  concerned  in  the  maintenance  of  the  life  ot  the 
race  are  :    the  three  just  named,  and  :

,__The  generative  organs,  some  of  which  are  essential  and 
others  auxiliary.  The  essential,  function  is  that  of  forming 
generative  elements  ;  the  auxiliary  functions  are  those  ot 
giving  the  masculine  and  feminine  form  and  temperament. 
These  functions  are  inseparable  from  the  race,  and  yet  play  no 
part  in  the  essence  of  life.  _

The  aa^/wry  members  are  of  two  kinds  :  (a)  preparative, 
(^  purely  or  absolutely  auxiliary.  The  former  come  into 
operation  before  the  principal  members  can  come  into  play. 
The  purely  auxiliary  members  come  into  operation  after  the 
principal  members  have  functioned.  This  is  conveniently  shown 
in  the  following  table  :

Preparative  member.

Lung.

Stomach.

Liver,  with  other  nutri- 
ent members  and  the 
guardians   of  the 
breath.

Testis  or  ovary.

Member  subserved.

Heart.

Liver.

Auxiliary  member.

Aorta.

Brain.

Generative  organs.

Veins.

Nerves.

Penis  and  erectile  tis- 
sues  (and  ducts.)

Female  organs  car- 
rying the  semen  to 
the  site  of  concep- 
tion. Uterus  as  per- 
fector  of  the  virtue 
of  the  semen.

*  These  are  the  "  adnexa.

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  99Female  organs  car- 
rying the  semen  to 
the  site  of  concep- 
tion. Uterus  as  per- 
fector  of  the  virtue 
of  the  semen.

*  These  are  the  "  adnexa.

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  99

124.  Classification  of  the  members  according  to  action.-— 
Galen  classified  the  members  into  those  which  effect  an  action 
(e.g.  heart),  those  which  assist  the  action  (e.g.  lung)  and  those 
which  achieve  both  (e.g.  liver).  But  for  my  part,  I  consider  as 
"  action  "  that  particular  kind  of  action  by  means  of  which  a  given 
member  accomplishes  the  maintenance  of  the  person's  life  or 
the  perpetuation  of  the  species.  Thus,  the  heart  gives  rise  to 
the  breath.  Action  is  assisted  when  one  member  is  prepared 
for  receiving  the  action  of  the  other  member,  thereby  completing 
the  process  either  of  giving  life  to  the  individual,  or  of  propagating 
the  race.  Thus,  the  lung  prepares  the  air.  The  liver  carries  out 
the  first  digestion  so  far  as  to  prepare  for  the  third  and  fourth 
digestion.  The  more  perfectly  the  liver  functions  in  regard  to 
the  second  digestion,  the  more  likely  is  the  blood  so  made  to 
be  adequate  for  nourishing  the  tissues.  Hence  in  this  respect 
the  liver  effects  an  action  ;  and,  in  so  far  as  the  liver  assists  in  ac- 
complishing a  further  action,  so  it  is  preparative  for  that  action.

125.  Classification  of  the  members  according  to  their  origin. — 
Some  members  take  their  origin  from  the  semen  :    namely,125.  Classification  of  the  members  according  to  their  origin. — 
Some  members  take  their  origin  from  the  semen  :    namely,

members  composed  of  like  parts,  except  the  flesh  and  the  fat. 
Other  members  come  from  the  blood :  namely  the  flesh,  and  the 
fat.  Other  members  come  from  both  male  and  female  "sperm."* 
According  to  the  teaching  of  philosophy,  the  process  of  genera- 
tion may  be  compared  with  the  processes  which  take  place  in  the 
manufacture  of  cheese.  Thus  the  male  "  sperm  "  is  equivalent 
to  the  clotting  agent  of  milk,  and  the  female  "  sperm  "  is  equiva- 
lent to  the  coagulum  of  milk.  The  starting  point  of  the  clotting 
is  in  the  rennet  ;  so  the  starting-point  of  the  clot  "  man  "  is  in 
the  male  semen  ("  We  made  the  life-germ  a  clot  "■ — Q.23.14). 
Just  as  the  beginning  of  the  clotting  is  in  the  milk,  so  the  begin- 
ning of  the  clotting  of  the  form  of  man  lies  in  the  female  "  sperm." 
Then,  just  as  each  of  the  two — the  rennet  and  the  milk. — enter 
into  the  "  substance  "  of  the  cheese  which  results,  so  each  of  the 
two — male  and  female  sperm — enters  into  the  "  substance  " 
of  the  "  embryo."

*  The  word  "  Sperma "  is  here  really  more  exact  than  "  semen." 
Semen  =  x  +  sperm.  Therefore  it  is  not  incorrect  to  speak  of  a  "  female  sperm." 
Note  that  only  a  portion  of  the  spermatozoon  enters  into  the  new  human  being, 
and  not  all  the  ovum.Paracelsus  wrote  that  the  "  sperm  "  is  not  the  visible  seminal  fluid  of  man, 
but  rather  a  semi-material  principle  contained  therein,  or  an  "  aura  seminalis," 
to  which,  the  semen  serves  as  a  vehicle  (De  generatio  hominis  :  Hartmann,  «,  p.  72). 
In  another  place  he  says  "  the  matrix  attracts  the  seed  of  both  persons,  mixed  with 
the  semen,  and  afterwards  expels  the  semen,  but  retains  the  sperm.  Thus  the 
seed  comes  into  the  matrix.  The  matrix  does  not  merely  mean  the  womb  of  a 
woman  ;  the  whole  body  of  the  woman  is  a  mother,  a  matrix." — (De  morbo.  matric).

ioo  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Galen  gives  a  contrary  account.  He  considers  that  each  of 
the  sperms  has  both  a  coagulative  power  and  a  receptive  capacity 
for  coagulation  ;  so  he  says  that  the  coagulative  power  is  stronger 
in  the  male  than  it  is  in  the  female,  but  the  receptive  capacity 
for  coagulation  is  stronger  in  the  female  than  the  male.

But  the  real  truth  of  the  matter  is  expounded  in  our  own 
works  dealing  with  the  fundamental  principles  of  natural  science.

126.  Relations  between  the  jemale  menstrual  blood  and  the 
embryo.

i.  During  pregnancy,  the  blood  which  is  otherwise  dis- 
charged from  the  female  at  the  time  of  menstruation  becomes 
nutriment  (for  the  embryo)  in  three  ways.  One  portion  is 
changed  into  the  likeness  of  the  substance  of  the  sperm  and  the 
members  derived  therefrom.  This  is  the  nutriment  which 
enables  growth  to  take  place.  Another  portion  is  not  nutriment 
of  that  kind,  but  is  capable  of  being  aggregated  into  the  material 
which  fills  up  the  interstices  in  the  principal  members  and 
becomes  flesh  and  fat.A  third  portion  is  effete  material,  and  not  utilizable  for 
either  of  the  two  preceding  purposes.  It  remains  in  the  same 
situation  until  the  time  of  birth,  and  is  then  expelled  with  the

infant.

After  birth,  the  blood  which  the  liver  of  the  infant  makes 
takes  the  place  of  the  maternal  blood.  So  it  arises  from  an  organ 
which  itself  was  formed  out  of  the  maternal  blood.

127.  The  flesh  of  the  infant  is  derived  from  the  gross 
blood,  congealed  by  heat  and  dryness  [cf.  the  fact  that  a  moderate 
degree  of  heat  coagulates'  egg-white].  The  fat  of  the  infant  is 
derived  from  the  aquosity  and  unctuosity  of  the  blood,  which 
cold  has  congealed  and  heat  dispersed.

128.  Repair  of  damaged  members. — {a)  Members  derived 
from  the  sperm.

Should  a  loss  of  continuity  arise  in  the  members  derived 
from  the  sperm,  restoration  can  only  occur,  and  then  only  in  a  few 
of  them,  and  if  the  individual  is  spare  in  habit,  and  has  not  passed 
the  age  of  juvenility.  These  members  are  :  the  bones,  the  small 
branches  of  veins  ;  medium-sized  veins  and  arteries.  For  when 
disseverance  occurs  in  such  members  as  bone  and  nerves,  they 
will  not  grow  again.

(b)  Members  derived  from  the  blood.

If  the  members  which  are  derived  from  the  blood  are 
damaged,  they  are  renewed  out  of  like  substance.    E.g.  the  flesh.

(c)  Members  derived  from  both  blood  and  sperm.

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  101

If  the  member  which  is  damaged  arises  both  from  blood 
and  sperm,  then,  as  it  is  not  very  long  since  the  sperm  was  there, 
it  will  be  reconstructed  (Ex.;  the  teeth  at  the  age  of  juvenility) 
unless  meanwhile  the  blood  has  undergone  a  change  of  tempera- 
ment.    In  that  case  re-construction  would  not  take  place.129.  Sensation  and  movement  is  sometimes  conveyed  to  a 
member  through  one  single  nerve,  sometimes  through  several 
nerves.     In  each  case  the  nerve  is  the  source  of  the  power.

130.  The   membranes   which   cover  the   internal  organs. ■

These  all  arise  either  from  the  pleura  or  the  peritoneum.  Those 
members  in  the  thorax,  which  derive  their  covering  from  the 
pleura,  are  :  the  diaphragm,  the  veins  and  arteries  ;  the  lung. 
These  organs  in  the  abdomen  are  covered  from  the  peritoneum 
which  covers  the  muscles  of  the  abdominal  wall.

"  •  *  '  *  r

131.  Texture  of  members.  All  members  are  either  fleshy 
in  texture  or  fibrous  (like  the  flesh  found  throughout  muscles), 
or  are  devoid  of  fibrous  texture  (e.g.  liver).  Fibrous  texture 
goes  with  power  of  movement. — voluntary  in  the  case  of  voluntary 
muscles  ;  involuntary  in  the  case  of  the  uterus  and  veins.  Com- 
pound movements,  like  that  of  deglution,  depend  on  the  direction 
of  the  fibres  being  various. — longitudinal,  oblique,  transverse. 
The  longitudinal  fibres  produce  in-drawing  ;  the  oblique  fibres 
expel  or  force  onwards  ;   the  transverse  fibres  grip  and  hold.Even  where  a  member  has  only  one  coat,  as  is  true  in  the 
veins  and  bladder,  there  are  still  three  kinds  of  fibres  which  inter- 
weave one  with  another.  Members  which  have  two  coats  have 
the  cross  fibres  externally,  and  the  others  on  the  inner  side. 
The  longitudinal  fibres  tend  towards  the  inner  surface.  The 
purpose  of  this  arrangement  is  that  in-drawing  and  expulsion 
should  not  occur  simultaneously,  whereas  there  is  no  objection 
to  the  acts  of  in-drawing  and  holding  and  gripping  occurring 
together— except  in  the  case  of  the  intestines,  where  much 
retention  is  disadvantageous,  whereas  in-drawing  and  expulsion 
are  all-important.

132.  Hollow  (tubular)  members  which  contain  substances 
different  from  their  walls  have  sometimes  one  coat,  sometimes 
two.    The  presence  of  two  coats  serves  the  following  purposes  :

(i)  to  provide  the  necessary  strength  to  the  Walls,  so  that 
there  is  no  risk  of  the  proper  power  of  movement  failing  at  any 
time.    Ex.:  arteries.

io2  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

(2)  to  ensure  that  the  contents  shall  not  dissipate  or  escape. 
One  coat  would,  not  suffice  to  retain  so  tenuous  a  substance 
as  the  breath  which  the  arteries  contain  ;  and  it  would  make  the 
risk  of  rupture  or  severance  in  injuries  too  great,  m  which  case 
death  would  be  very  liable  to  occur  because  the  blood  would  then 
drain  out.*    This  is  a  very  great  danger.

(3)  where  there  is  a  demand  for  vigorous  suction  and  ex- 
pulsion, it  is  beneficial  to  have  a  separate  instrument  available 
for  the  performance  of  both  actions  rather  than  to  distribute  both 
powers  over  the  one  coat.  This  applies  in  the  case  of  the  stomach 
and  intestines.(4)  where  each  coat  of  a  member  subserves  its  own  action  ; 
or  each  action  requires  its  own  particular  temperament.  Thus, 
in  the  case  of  the  stomach,  there  is  a  need  of  a  power  of  sensation 
(which  can  only  exist  in  a  tissue  containing  nerves)  and  also  a 
power  to  execute  the  movements  of  digestion  (for  which  a  fleshy 
tissue  is  needed).  Hence  each  need  is  supplied  by  its  own  coat— 
the  nerve-containing  tissue  for  the  power  of  sensation  ;  the 
fleshy  coat  for  the  power  of  executing  the  movements  entailed 
in  the  work  of  digestion.  Nature  made  the  inner  coat  capable  of 
sensation,  and  the  outer  coat  fleshy.  The  operation  of  sensation 
requires  actual  contact  with  the  nervous  tissue,  as  is  true  m  the 
case  of  the  sense  of  touch  ;  but  the  movements  necessary  to  enable 
digestion  do  not  require  contact  of  the  material  to  be  digested 
with  the  fleshy  walls.

133.  Certain  members  (e.  g.  the  flesh)  have  a  temperament 
so  near  to  that  of  blood  that  the  latter  needs  to  undergo  little 
change  in  order  to  subserve  nutrition.  Consequently  there  is 
no  need  for  apertures  or  for  spaces  or  cavities  in  these  members, 
wherein  to  retain  nutrient  material  pending  its  transformation 
into  their  own  substance.  In  such  members  the  nutrient  at  once 
becomes  identical  with  their  substance.134.  But  other  members  (e.g.  the  bones)  have  a  tempera- 
ment which  is  very  different  from  that  of  the  blood.  Therefore 
before  these  can  be  nourished,  the  blood  must  needs  undergo  a 
series  of  successive  transformations  before  becoming  like  tothem 
in  substance.  That  is  why  spaces  were  made  in  which  nutriment 
can  be  retained  long  enough  to  enable  the  conversion  to  take 
place.  This  is  true  in  the  case  of  the  femur  and  humerus.  In  the 
case  of  the  lower  jaw  bone  numerous  apertures  are  seen  scattered 
through  it.     In  this  way  more  nutriment  can  be  accommodated

*  Note  this  proof  that  Avicenna  knew  the  arteries  contain  blood.

THE   CANON   OF  MEDICINE  103

than  is  necessary  for  the  moment,  and  the  transformation  into 
their  own  likeness  can  take  place  little  by  little.

135.  Lastly,  strong  members  expel  their  waste  matters 
into  the  adjacent  weaker  members.  Thus  the  heart  to  the  axilla  ; 
the  brain  to  the  tissues  behind  the  ears  ;   the  liver  to  the  groins.

§  i_i8.  The  next  four  subsections  of  the  text  are  omitted.  They 
deal  with  the  anatomy  of  the  bones,  muscles,  nerves  and  blood- 
vessels, and  are  naturally  inadequate  in  comparison  with  modern 
Anatomy.Ancient  anatomy  has  been  criticized  for  allowing  as  a  basis  the  dissections', 
of  monkeys  and  other  animals,  apparently  overlooking  the  important  factor  of 
circumstance,  m  order  to  give  the  impression  of  lack  of  acumen  in  those  days  But 
in  our  days,  ability  and  acumen  being  taken  for  granted,  it  is  considered  allowable 
to  base  conclusions  m  the  domain  of  physiology  and  pathology  upon  laboratory 
reactions  obtained  from  the  same  kinds  of  animals.  Some  workers  are  alive  to  the 
possible  insufficiency  of  data  so  obtained,  but  make  a  virtue  of  necessity  This 
may  also  be  claimed  for  Avicenna.

Avicenna  was  seeking  to  express  a  certain  truth  in  these  sub- 
sections as  well  as  in  other  parts  of  the  Canon,  and  it  is  profitable 
to  abstract  it  and  develop  it  further  in  the  light  of  modern  knowledge. 
The  following  are  some  of  the  considerations  in  mind.§119.  The  variations  of  anatomical  structure  which  are 
observed  throughout  the  animal  kingdom  are  the  expression  of  the 
differing  nature  and  requirements  of  the  respective  animal-types. 
But  in  dealing  with  comparative  anatomy  it  is  usual  to  regard 
evolution  as  the  essential  factor,  and  a  false  meaning  to  the  phenomena 
is  thereby  instilled.  We  speak  of  animals  as  "  higher  "  and  "  lower  " 
for  convenience,  but  strictly  all  are  equal,  because  "  each  creature 
has  such  perfection  as  it  was  possible  for  it  to  have."  (St.  Thomas,82 
p.  108),  and  its  place  is  in  accordance  with  the  "  end  "  for  which  it  was 
brought  into  being,  the  word  "  end  "  bearing  the  scholastic  sense. 
The  proper  use  of  the  theory  of  evolution  in  comparative  anatomy,  like 
that  of  Ehrhch's  theory  in  regard  to  immunity,  is  that  it  enables 
many  discrete  facts  to  be  memorized.  To  raise  either  to  the  dignity 
of  truth  "  necessitates  an  overlooking  of  the  fundamental  properties 
of  the  nature  of  being.

120.

Deformities.  These  may  be  explained  on  an  evolution- 
ary basis,  using  the  ideas  of  "  reversion,"  "  atavism,"  etc.  When  the 
individual  is  studied  in  regard  to  his  "  end  "  (in  the  scholastic  sense) 
a  different  conception  comes  to  light.  But  as  this  brings  in  the 
question  of  events  belonging  to  the  category  of  morals  ("  to  the  third 
and  fourth  generation  "),  the  problem  is  at  once  evaded.  Such  a 
conception  would  not  be  vitiated  by  the  existence  of  deformities 
among  animals.

121.

-  The  intimate  structure  of  the  body  is  always  changing

although  the  anatomical  structures  appear  to  remain  unchanged.

io4  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE121.

-  The  intimate  structure  of  the  body  is  always  changing

although  the  anatomical  structures  appear  to  remain  unchanged.

io4  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Hence  it  is  possible  to  see  in  these  structures'  merely  a  locus  for  the 
various  faculties  and  functions  pertaining  to  the  physical,  mental 
and  emotional  life  of  the  individual.  Compared  with  his  existence 
in  the  scheme  of  things,  the  anatomical  details  are  mere  "  moments 
musicales."

To  take  a  special  example,,  one  might  regard  the  blood-forming  centres  as  the 
(momentary)   point  of  meeting  of  two  vitalities.     (Cf.   §147.)To  take  a  special  example,,  one  might  regard  the  blood-forming  centres  as  the 
(momentary)   point  of  meeting  of  two  vitalities.     (Cf.   §147.)

§  122.  Relation  between  structure  and  function.  This  formed 
the  subject  of  a  classic  in  medical  literature — that  in  which  Galen 
regards' anatomy  as  the  expression  of  the  4>va-i,s.  Such  a  teleo- 
logical  view  is  not  in  favour  to-day,  and,  indeed  mistakes  (as 
Galen  did)  the  root  principle  emphasized  in  these  pages.  To  use  the 
symbolism  given  in  §  56,  64,  M  is  not  the  "  expression  "  of  F.  In 
associating  structure  with  function  this  must  always  be  remembered. 
The  examples  available  for  Avicenna,  striking  as  they  seemed  to 
him,  are  surpassed  by  those  possible  through  modern  knowledge. 
Thus,  harmonious  succession  of  events,  both  in  time  and  place,  is  to  be 
discerned  throughout  the  body.  The  output  of  the  various  digestive 
juices,  separately  achieved,  yet  co-ordinated  as  to  time  is  also 
co-ordinated  as  to  place.  The  output  of  bile,  for  instance,  is  fitful— 
sometimes  a  delicate  trickle,  sometimes  in  spurts,  sometimes  m  larger 
quantities  ;  and  this  in  co-ordination  with  the  activity  of  the  muscular 
bundles  beneath  the  membranes  which  secrete  the  digestive  fluids— 
in  which  both  nervous  and  vascular  variations  play  an  intimate  part. 
Out  of  many  other  instances,  the  following  may  be  given.  The- 
adrenal  vein  joins  the  inferior  vena  cava  at  a  given  point,  in  order  to 
secure  that  the  adrenal  secretion  shall  enter  the  blood  in  time  to 
receive  the  activating  substances  supplied  for  it  by  the  liver  before 
it  becomes  exposed  to  the  oxygen  contributed  by  the  respiration  ; 
for  otherwise  the  activation  would  be  nullified.      (Cf.  Sajous149.)§  123.      Transcendence  of  organs,  fluids,  and  the  like,  beyond 
anatomical  boundaries. — This  has  already  been  referred  to  in  the 
opening  chapter.     Thus  (a)  "heart"  includes  the  arterial  system 
and   something   more;     "liver"   includes  the   venous   system   and 
something  more  ;  "  brain  "  similarly  goes  beyond  the  organ  within 
the  cranium  to  the  cutaneous  nerve-endings.    This  is  why  a  "  function 
test  "  for  a  given  organ  is  never  satisfactory,     (b)  Vascular  channels 
and  tissue  spaces  are  simply  demarcations  of  fluids  from  adjoining 
tissues.     The  river  exists  because  there  is  water  to  flow,   and  in- 
cidentally is  an  "  anatomical  feature  "  of  the  country,serving  various 
purposes.     Its  presence  is  the  indication  of,  and  continues  only  as 
long  as,  certain  incessant  changes  occur  in  Nature  at  large.      To  use 
other  words,  the  vascular  channels  are  the   materialization  of    the 
stream  of  blood  ;    or,  the  current  of   "  life  "  made  the  blood-vessels 
become  demarcated.      (c)  The  humours  of  the  body  circulate  also  in 
the  subtle  fashion  suggested  thus  :     the  sanguineous  humour  is  not 
only  in  the  blood  vessels  but  also  in  lymph  channels _:     the  serous 
humour  moves  in  the  connective-tissue  spaces  as  well  as  in  anatomical 
lymphatics,  and  appears  also  in  the  form  of  the  "  eau  de  constitution  "

THE   CANON   OF  MEDICINE  105THE   CANON   OF  MEDICINE  105

(Vallery-Radot141)  of  ■  the  tissues  :  the  bilious  humour  may  be 
followed  in  the  track  of  cholesterin  (and  other  constituents.)  The 
constant  loss  of  hair,  nails,  teeth,  should  also  be  recognized  as  being 
part  of  the  constant  separation  of  "  superfluities."  (Cf.  Paracelsus29). 
(d)  If  we  realize  that  tissue-spaces  and  cavernous  tissues  are  forms  of 
channels,  it  will  be  clear  that  the  whole  body  is  really  an  aggregate 
of  "  tubes  .'.'  of  some  sort.  It  may  then  be  said  further,  that  disease 
always  starts  from  tubes, — namely  when  their  lumina  are  blocked  or 
when  their  "  walls  "  become  semipermeable  or  quite  impervious.

§  124.  Anatomical  structures  depend  for  their  existence  on 
chemical  structure.  Water,  for  instance,  may  be  said  to  come  into 
visibility  in  the  form  of  an  anatomical  structure.  Conversely,  other 
substances  are  only  visible  as  long  as  they  are  not  yet  an  integral  part 
of  the  living  substance  of  the  body,  and  others  are  visible  because 
they  have  ceased  to  be  such.

As  soon  as  microscopic  visibility  is  attained,  the  visible  thing 
has  ceased  to  be  "  living."  Stability  of  form  entails  the  stagnation 
of  certain  substances,  and  also  implies  that  they  have  been  rejected 
from  the  cycle  of  life  in  order  to  provide  the  substrate  or  platform  or 
points  d'appui  for  the  actual  living  substance  (i.e.,  the  life-principle)  to 
manifest  its  faculties  during  a  certain  (often  limited)  period  of  time. 
Cf.  §  121.§  125.  Histology  (i.e.  microscopic  anatomy)  and  function. 
From  the  preceding  consideration,  when  a  tissue  is  observed  through 
the  miscroscope,  the  thought  should  be  "  that  is  the  spot  where  this 
or  that  substance  has  emerged  into  visibility  at  this  moment."  This 
conception   is   specially   applicable   to   the   case   of  the   blood-cells.

Cf.  §  95-99-Cf.  §  95-99-

§  126.  Anatomy  as  the  expression  of  strengths  and  weaknesses. 
It  is  clear  that  the  relative  development  of  different  parts  of  the  body, 
from  head  to  foot,  reveals  its  physical  strengths  and  weaknesses. 
Where  one  part  is  strong,  another  is  compensatorily  weak.  But  it  is 
less  obvious,  and  less  realized,  that  anatomical  conformations  are  also 
revelations  of  strengths  and  weaknesses  of  mental  make-up.  Here 
also,  the  strength  of  one  feature  goes  with  deficiency  of  some  other. 
The  root  principle  of  jelal  and  jemal  already  referred  to  (§  82)  holds 
good  throughout,  and  in  a  multitude  of  directions.  Mental 
capacities  and  activities  affect  the  vegetative  processes  just  as  do  the 
emotions,  for  their  influence  lasts  throughout  life.  As  S.  Thomas 
says  :  (a)  "  every  operation  of  the  sensitive  soul  belongs  to  the 
composite  "  (S.T.,  75,  3,84p.  10).  (b)  "  There  are  certain  operations 
common  to  the  soul  and  the  body,  such  as  fear,  anger,  sensation,  and 
so  forth  ;  for  these  happen  by  reason  of  a  certain  transmutation  in  a 
determinate  part  of  the  body,  which  proves  that  they  are  operations 
of  the  soul  and  body  together  "  (C.G.,  ii.  57,  82  p.  139).  (/)  "  We 
find  in  the  intellective  appetite,  which  is  the  will,  operations  specifi- 
cally similar  to  those  of  the  sensitive  appetite,  differing  in  this,  that  in 
the  sensitive  appetite  they  are  passions,  on  account  of  its  connection 
with  a  bodily  organ,  whereas  in  the  intellective  appetite  they  are  pure 
operations.     For  just  as  by  the  passion  of  fear  which,  in  the  sensitive

io6  THE   CANON   OF  MEDICINE

appetite,  one  shuns  a  future  evil,  so  without  passion,  the  intellective 
apoetite  has  a  like  operation  "  (ib.,  82  90,  p.  190).io6  THE   CANON   OF  MEDICINE

appetite,  one  shuns  a  future  evil,  so  without  passion,  the  intellective 
apoetite  has  a  like  operation  "  (ib.,  82  90,  p.  190).

"  §  127.  From  all  this  it  is  clear  that  much  is  to  be  learned  from 
external  anatomy  (head,  face,  hands,  joints,  skin  markings,  etc.)  as 
to  the  strength  and  weakness,  not  only  of  the  body  as  a  whole,  but  of 
the  several  organs  in  particular.  Were  the  study  of  internal  anatomy 
combined  with  the  external,  the  associations  would  be  more  appre- 
ciated. The  "case"  is  not  really  finished  when  a  "handful"  of 
viscera  has  been  studied  in  the  autopsy-room  or  even  in  the  labora- 
tories attached  thereto.  The  remaining  "shell"  passes  on  into 
oblivion  bearing  its  wonderful  secrets  with  it,  for  its  language  is  such 
that  however  loudly  it  "  speak,"  there  are  few  with  ears  to  hear,  and 
perhaps  none  with  ability  to  interpret.

THESIS  VI 
The  Faculties  of  the  Body

.„        "  LlFE  appears  through  various  operations  in  different  degrees  of  living  things  " 
(S.  Thomas,  S.  Th.  q.  76,  art.   1).  ■  06

1.   General  Discourse  about  the  Several  Kinds  of  Faculty

gl^' ACULTIES    (136)    are    to    be    distinguished   from

^  zj    functions.        The    difference    is     that    the    former

originate  the  latter.      But  as  each  function  depends

on  its  own  special  faculty  they  can  be  treated  together.

Faculty  :  the  name  of  a  property  whereby  the  phenomenon  of  life  is  mani- 
fested.      Function  :    actualized  potentiality.

Faculty  =power  =potentiality.  Faculty  is  not  force  ;  it  i  s  potential  power  ;  it 
is  static.     Power  is  the  faculty  in  a  state  of  activity  ;    it  is  dynamic.

The  tout  ensemble  of  faculties  is  "  the  soul."The  tout  ensemble  of  faculties  is  "  the  soul."

The  tout  ensemble  of  functions  is  "  life."     See  §  150.

Weakness  of  faculty  corresponds  to  "  hypof unction."  Plethora  of  faculty 
corresponds  to  "  hyperfunction  ".

137.  There  are  three  kinds  of  faculty,  and  therefore  of 
functions  proceeding  therefrom.  Namely,  the  vital  (haywaniat)  ; 
the  natural  [taby  'yat)  and  the  animal  (nafsaniat).

§  128.  These  three  terms,  derived  from  the  Latin  version,  only 
properly  express  the  meaning  of  the  Arabic  if  they  are  taken  in 
their  original  sense.  The  third  term  is  rendered  "  psvchical  "  by 
some  translators,163  but  is  open  to  objection  because' its  modern 
usage  does  not  sufficiently  correspond  to  the  idea  of  nafsaniat.

Other  words  are  preferred  in  the  course  of  the  present  trans- 
lation. The  familiar  "  vitality  "  is  convenient  for  the  first  term. 
The  words  "  vegetative  "  and  "  sensitive,"  employed  in  the 
Dominican  translation  of  the  Summa,8*  are  satisfactory  renderings 
for  the  other  two  terms,  and  are  to  be  understood  strictly  in  the 
Thomistic  sense.  The  term  "natural"  is  reverted  to  in  551  for 
reasons  there  given.

The  variations  in  scope  exhibited  by  these  and  allied  terms  are 
conveniently  indicated  in  the  following  table.

107

io8

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

§  129.     Analysis  of  certain  Terms   applied   to  living  things  : — i.e.,  Beings

ENDOWED     WITH     "  LlFE."

A.

B.

C.

Vegetable.

Animal.

Human.

I.  Distinctive

quality.  • 
1 .  In  Modern

.

Vegetative.

Sentient.

Rational ;    intellec-

language.

Organic.

(Lower)  mental

tual,  Higher  men-

powers.

tal    life,     Psychic

Organo- vegetative

powers.

(Martinet)

2.  Platonic  term.

Nutritive.

Appetitive.

Rational.

3.  In  Avicenna.5

Vital.'

Natural. '

Animal. 5

Ratiocinative

faculty.tal    life,     Psychic

Organo- vegetative

powers.

(Martinet)

2.  Platonic  term.

Nutritive.

Appetitive.

Rational.

3.  In  Avicenna.5

Vital.'

Natural. '

Animal. 5

Ratiocinative

faculty.

4.  Scholastic

Vegetative  (life  or

Sensitive    "(life    or

Rational     (life     or

terms.

soul).

soul). 
Sensuous 
(Necessarily     im- 
plies       "  appeti- 
tion,"84  78,  i.  p. 78)

soul).

II.  These  terms  are

based  on —

.(a)    the    faculties

pertaining  to  each 
(i)  Pre-modern

Plants    have    only

Animals  have  also

Human  beings  have

thought.

nutrition,  growth,

sensation         and

also     intellect     or

and  reproduction.

movement.

intelligence.

(ii)  Modern

But     modern     re-

But some  animals

But  this  is  not  so

thought.

search  (cinemato-

exhibit    intellec-

for some  races  of

graph,  etc.)  shows

tual  powers  often

men,  and  in  some

sensory   and  mo-

supposed   to    be

cases  of  disease  of

tor  powers.

purely  human.'

the  brain.

(iii)  In  terms  of

Unconscious  life.

Subconscious     life

Fully  conscious  life

Consciousness.

and     lower     con- 
scious life.

(6)     On    essential 
manifestations

As

As  "  nature."

As  sensation.move-

As  capacity  for  ab-

" breath"'

ment,  and  cogita-

stract concepts.

(3.  Avicenna).

tive  power.'

(c)  On  fundamen-

Effected by  means

Effected  by  means

Is     effected     apart

tal  causes.

of      a     corporeal

of  a  corporeal  or-

from   a   corporeal

(4.    Scholastic

organ,  in  virtue  of

gan,  but    not    in

organ  or  quality.

basis.)

a  corporeal  qual- 
ity.

virtue  of  a  qual- 
ity. 
Deals   with   parti- 
culars.

Deals  with  univer- 
sal 81    (78,    i.    p.

(d)  on  theological 
considerations.

78).

Mortal.

Mortal.

Immortal  :    {a)   ab-

solutely   (Scholas-

tic view)  ;  (6)  con-

ditionally     (some

creeds).

III.  Chief  organ 
concerned. 
1.  In  modern78).

Mortal.

Mortal.

Immortal  :    {a)   ab-

solutely   (Scholas-

tic view)  ;  (6)  con-

ditionally     (some

creeds).

III.  Chief  organ 
concerned. 
1.  In  modern

All  vegetative-  or-

Nervous system

Brain  (Grey  matter

thought.

gans  equally  im- 
portant         (Bio- 
chemical process- 
es in  general).

(automatic   and 
central) .

of  cortex.)

2.  Platonic.

Liver.

Heart.'

Brain.

3.  Avicenna.

Heart.8

Liver  (and  Gonads)

Brain.

4.  Scholastic.

All  viscera. '

Nervous      system,

No  material  organ.

No    special    organ

but  also  the  whole

because      "  life  "

"  being."

belongs  to  all.

THE   CANON   OF  MEDICINE  ic9

Notes  on  points   arising  out  of  this  table  :

1  Boundaries  of  the  Three  Kingdoms  : — These  are  admirably  set  out  in  Chahar 
Maqala7  :  "When  the  vegetable  kingdom  was  produced,  God' gave  it  the  four  forces 
and  the  three  faculties.  When  the  animal  kingdom  was  produced,  God  added 
two  more  faculties— that  of  perception  (with  five  external  senses  and  five  internal 
senses),  and  of  movement.  When  the  human  kingdom  was  produced,  God  added 
a  capacity  for  abstract  concepts  (intelligence)."

2  Ayicenna's  division  :     this  is  determined  by  medical  requirements.2  Ayicenna's  division  :     this  is  determined  by  medical  requirements.

3  Vital  faculty. — This  is  not  specifically  mentioned  bv  S.  Thomas,  because 
implied  in  the  word  "  life."  He  refers  to  it  thus  :  "  The  vital  operation  . 
whereby  something  is  shown  to  be  living  "84  (liv.  2.  p.  44).  "  Life-principle  "  has 
a  wider  scope  than  implied  in  "  vital  faculty  "  : — "  The  vital  principle  is  the  '  form  ' 
or  determining  principle  of  the  living  being.  Coalescing  with  the  material  factor  it 
constitutes  the  living  being.  It  unifies  the  material  elements  into  one  individual. 
It  holds  them  together  ...  as  a  mass  of  chemical  compounds,  many  of  them 
most  complex  and  in  very  unstable  equilibrium,  constantly  undergoing  change  and 
tending  to  dissolution  into  simpler  and  more  stable  compounds.  W;hen  life  ceases, 
the  process  of  disintegration  sets  in  with'  great  rapidity.  The  function,  then,  of 
this  active  informing  principle  is  that  of  a  unifying,  conserving,  restraining  char- 
acter, holding  back,  as  it  were,  and  sustaining  the  potential  energies  of  the  organism 
in  their  unstable  condition." —     (Maher17,  p.  427).

1  Natural  faculty.— i.e.,  "  pertaining  to  the  .'  nature.'  That  is,  (a)  the  mere 
fact  of  living  at  all,  (b)  powers  in  common  with  laws  of  Nature  in  general.  Compare 
the  term  "natural  science,"  "  natural  philosophy  "  (used  before  the  present  era) 
applied  to  the  modern  chemistry,  physics  and  their  subdivisions.  The  ancients 
recognised  that  physiological  phenomena  in  regard  to  the  "  natural  "  life  were 
kin  to  those  of  our  chemistry  and  physics.Note  also  the  meaning  of  "  nature  "  in  :  "the  natural  appetite  is  that  in- 
clination which  each  thing  has,  of  its  own  nature,  for  something.  Wherefore  by 
its  natural  appetite  each  power  desires  something  suitable  to  itself."81  (p.  78).

5  Animal  faculty. — The  word  "animal"  really  denotes  simply  "a  thing 
with  an  anima  "  ;  hence  man  is  an  animal.  But  different  people  among  all  nations 
use  the  word  (in  their  own  language)  entirely  vaguelv,  and  thus  give  rise  to  perennial 
confusion  of  thought  when  applying  it  in  daily  life.  The  following  meanings  are 
assigned  to  it  :

(i)  Generally  or  collectively,  it  refers  to  the  presence  of  life  :  e.g.,  anima-te  ; 
in-anima-te.

(")(  Specifically  or  particularly,      (a)  indefinitely  as  (a  ')  "  soul  "  (a")  "  mind  " 
{a"')    "spirit"    (quaecumque   substantia   invisibles  "83 — i.    41,    3,    4).      (b)    More 
definitely  =  4>vxv  =  lower  soul,  as  opposed  to  animus,  the  higher  soul,  whose  seat 
is  the  "  heart,"  the  centre  of  cognitive  and  emotional  life.17     (xiv.  153).     See  Si  so 
1.51.  '  x  3  '

6  Manifestation  as  "  breath  "  ;  or,  by  means  of  the  breath.  See  §  161.  Breath 
=  spiritus,  which  is  defined  by  S.  Thomas  as  "  an  instrument  of  the  soul,  tenue, 
lucidum,  calidum,  ex  puriore  sanguine"  (i.  41.  3.  4).  cf.  preceding  note,  under 
"  spirit."

7  S.  Thomas  recognized  such  powers  in  animals  :  "  Cogitative  and  memorative 
powers  are  not  distinct,  but  the  same,  yet  more  perfect  (in  man,  that  is)  than  in  other 
animals."84     (78.  i.  p.  90).8  The  heart. — In  the  platonic  view  it  is  the  chief  organ  of  the  appetitive  soul  ; 
in  Avicenna  it  is  that  of  the  breath.  See  §§  136-141.  But  this  would  make  the  ap- 
petitive soul  equivalent  to  the  vital  faculty,  which  it  is  not.       Another  objection

■  to  the  platonic  view  is  explained  by  S.  Thomas82     (p.  145).

_  §  130.  "  Only  three  powers  or  parts  of  the  soul  are  commonly 
assigned — namely,  the  i^g^He_soul,  th^^n^rivg^ouj^and^thi^ 
-a3li£nal_joul.  .  .  .  There  are  five  generaTof  powers  of  "th'e^soul — 
the  vegetative,  the  sensitive,  the  appetitive,  the  locomotive,  and  the 
intellectual^  Of  these,  three  are  called  souls,  and  four  are  called 
modes  of  living."  .  .  .  The  reason  of  this  diversity  lies  in  the  various 
souls  being  distinguished  accordingly  as  the  operation  of  the  soul 
transcends  the  operation  of  the  corporeal  nature  in  various  ways  ;   for

no  THE   CANON   OF  MEDICINEno  THE   CANON   OF  MEDICINE

the  whole  corporeal  nature  is  subject  to  the  soul,  and  is  related  to  it  as 
its  matter  and  instrument.  There  exists,  therefore,  an  operation 
of  the  soul  which  so  far  exceeds  the  corporeal  nature  that  it  is  not  even 
performed  by  any  corporeal  organ  ;  and  such  is  the  operation  of  the 
rational  soul.  Below  this,  there  is  another  operation  of  the  soul, 
which  is  indeed  performed  through  a  corporeal  organ,  but  not  through 
a  corporeal  quality,  and  this  is  the  operation  of  the  sensitive  soul  ; 
for  though  hot  and  cold,  wet  and  dry,  and  other  such  corporeal 
qualities  are  required  for  the  work  of  the  senses,  yet  they  are  not 
required  in  such  a  way  that  the  operation  of  the  senses  takes  place 
by  virtue  of  such  qualities  :  but  only  for  the  proper  disposition  of  the 
organ.  The  lowest  of  the  operations  of  the  soul  is  that  which  is 
performed  by  a  corporeal  organ,  and  by  virtue  of  a  corporeal  quality. 
Yet  this  transcends  the  operation  of  the  corporeal  nature  ;  because 
the  movements  of  bodies  are  caused  by  an  extrinsic  principle,  while 
these  operations  are  from  an  intrinsic  principle  ;  for  this  is  common 
to  all  operations  of  the  soul,  since  every  animate  thing,  m  some  way, 
moves  itself.  Such  is  the  operation  of  the  vegetative  soul;  for 
digestion  and  what  follows  is  caused  instrumentally  by  the  action  of 
heat,  as  the  Philosopher  says."— Sum  Theol.  83  Q.  78,  art.  1  : 
Trans.,84  p.  75,  76.138.  Many  philosophers,  and  all  physicians  who  follow 
Galen,  consider  that  each  faculty  has  its  own  principal  member, 
which  forms  its  storehouse,  and  from  which  its  functions  emerge. 
On  this  view  the  rational  faculty  resides  in  the  brain,  and  its 
functions  proceed  from  the  brain.     (Cf.  §  130).

139.  The  natural  or  vegetative  faculty  is  twofold,  and  in- 
cludes (i)  the  nutritive  faculty,  which  is  concerned  with  the  welfare 
and  preservation  of  the  individual,  and  secures  nourishment  to 
it  to  the  end  of  life.  This  faculty  resides  in  the  liver,  and  its 
functions  emerge  therefrom,  (ii)  the  reproductive  faculty,  which 
ensures  the  propagation  of  the  race.  This  subserves  the  process 
of  generation,  and  separates  the  substance  of  the  sperm  from  the 
humours  of  the  body  and  fashions  the  new  body  according  to  the 
decree  of  Allah.  The  seat  of  this  faculty  is  the  generative  organs, 
and  its  functions  proceed  from  them.

140.  The  vital  faculty  preserves  the  integrity  of  the 
breath,  and  is  the  vehicle  of  sensation  and  movement,  and  makes 
the  breath  able  to  receive  these  impressions  (of  sensation  and 
movement),  and,  having  reached  the  brain  makes  it  capable  of 
imparting  life,  and  then  spreads  in  every  direction.  The  seat 
of  this  faculty  is  the  heart,  and  its  function  proceeds  from  this. 
(See  162-167).

141.  Now  the  great  philosopher  Aristotle  believes  that 
the  heart  is  the  source  of  all  these  functions,  though  they  are

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  m141.  Now  the  great  philosopher  Aristotle  believes  that 
the  heart  is  the  source  of  all  these  functions,  though  they  are

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  m

manifested  in  the  several"  principal  organs.  But  physicians  still 
keep  to  the  opinion  that  the  brain  is  the  chief  seat  of  sentient 
life,  and  that  each  sense  has  its  own  distinct  member  whereby 
it  manifests  function.  But  if  physicians  thought  over  the  whole 
matter  as  thoroughly  as  they  should,  they  would  take  Aristotle's 
view_  instead.  They  would  find  that  they  have  been  only  re- 
garding appearances  instead  of  realities,  taking  non-essentials 
for  essentials.  (Cf.  119,  165).  The  establishment  of  this  truth 
is  for  the  philosopher  and  natural  scientist,  and  not  for  the  doctor 
as  doctor.  But  the  latter,  looking  on  members  as  being  initiators 
of  the  faculties  instead  of  as  their  manifestation — thus  despising 
or  ignoring  philosophy— fails  to  see  which  things  are  prior, 
and  accordingly  overlooks  the  proper  basis  for  the  treatment  of 
diseases,  and  for  the  remedying  of  bodily  defects  (p).

"  There  i  s  in  the  body  no  one  beginning,  but  all  parts  are  alike  beginning  and 
end  ;    for  a  circle  has  no  beginning."     (Hippocrates)-.

I  12

THE   CANON   OF  MEDICINE

2.  The  Natural  Faculties

142.  The  natural  faculties  are  divisible  into  two  groups  : 
(a)  dominant  or  directing,  .(b)  subservient  or  obedient.

The  dominant  faculties  are  twofold  :  (i)  concerned  with  the 
preservation  of  the  life  of  the  individual  ; — the  nutritive  faculty 
and  the  augmentative  faculty  (power  of  growth),  (ii)  concerned 
with  the  preservation  of  the  race  : — the  generative  faculty  ;  and 
the  formative  or  plastic  faculty.

i3i-

Classification   of  the  Natural  Faculties.

General 
purpose.

Dominant

facultyi3i-

Classification   of  the  Natural  Faculties.

General 
purpose.

Dominant

faculty

(hadima)

Subservient

faculty

Khadama.

Synonyms.

Quali- 
ties.

Element

Corres- 
ponding

Mental 
process.

:     /

d  '■■ 
o

'-£  i 
'C  j

-t->   !

3  : 
pi

O 
m

Nutritive  -g 
(ghazia)    B  ( 
(143)      "g  S

3  !

3

c

o 
xi

:    \

i.  Attractive 
Jadhiba 
(147)

Apposition.

Presentation

Prosthesis.

Hot  and 
dry.

Fire.

Percep- 
tion.

ii.  Retentive 
Masika  (148)

Agglutinative

Adhesion.

Prosphysis.

Cold  and 
dry.

Earth

Memory.

The 
Individual

iii.  Alterative

Hadima

(149)

Transforma- 
tive.

Assimilative- 
poietic

(e.g.    haemo- 
poietic).

Hot  and 
moist.

Air.

Cogitation

iv.  Expulsive 
Dafi'a 
(150)

Propulsive 
Expeditive.

Cold  and 
moist.

Water

Expres- 
sion.

Augmenta- 
tive 
(namia) 
(143)

Auxetic.

Plastic.

Incremental.

Acquisi- 
tion

of    know- 
ledge.

The  Race.

Generative 
(muwaliida) 
(145) 
(i)  in  the 
strict  sense 
(2)  primary 
transforma- 
tive faculty 
(mughayyara1

The  mascu- 
line factor. 
(Tr.)

Aether

Creative 
and Inven- 
tive facul- 
ties.

Informative 
(masawwira) 
(145)

Plastic. 
Operates  in 
utero.     The 
feminine 
factor  (Tr.)

Construc- 
tive 
faculties.

THE   CANON   OF  MEDICINE  113

143.  The  faculties  pertaining  to  the  preservation  of  the  life 
of  the  individual.

The  nutritive  faculty  is  that  whereby  the  aliments  are 
transformed  into  the  likeness  of  the  thing  nourished,  thereby 
replacing  the  loss  incidental  to  the  process  of  life.The  nutritive  faculty  is  that  whereby  the  aliments  are 
transformed  into  the  likeness  of  the  thing  nourished,  thereby 
replacing  the  loss  incidental  to  the  process  of  life.

The  augmentative  faculty  is  that  whereby  the  increase  in 
size  of  the  body  in" all  directions  in  just  proportion  is  secured. 
This  is  brought  about  by  means  of  the  substances  derived  from 
the  aliments.  The  nutritive  faculty  is  subservient  to  this 
augmentative  faculty  in  so  far  as  it  enables  the  preparation  of  the 
requisite  substances  from  the  aliments,  but  growth  will  not  occur 
unless  more  is  supplied  than  is  lost.  However  the  supply  of 
more  substances  than  are  lost  does  not  necessarily  produce 
growth.  Growth  implies  an  increase  in  all  directions  in  the 
proper  proportions.  To  become  fat  or  obese  with  advancing 
years,  after  being  slim,  is  not  growth.  It  is  not  growth  unless 
the  increase  is  in  all  dimensions  and  in  natural  proportions, 
so  as  to  culminate  in  a  state  of  perfection  of  growth.  Adiposity, 
for  instance,  is  not  a  perfection  of  growth  before  adult  age, 
any  more  than  it  is  a  perfection  for  the  figure  to  be  very  slim  after 
maturity  to  a  greater  degree  than  natural.144.  There  are  three  special  functions  in  the  process  of 
nutrition,  (i)  the  apposition  of  the  altered  material,  namely, 
the  blood,  or  a  humour  which  is  potentially  like  the  tissue  to  be 
nourished.  If  this  process  is  defective,  as  may  happen  in  disease> 
there  is  "  atrophy,"  which  is  a  defect  of  nutrition,  (ii)  agglutina- 
tion'— a  later  stage.  Here  the  nutriment  apposed  to  the  tissue 
is  now  fully  united  up  to  it,  and  made  a  part  of  it.  This  may  be 
lacking  owing  to  disease,  and  then  occurs  what  is  called  "  fleshy 
dropsy."  (iii)  true  assimilation — a  stage  still  further  where  that 
which  has  been  made  into  a  part  of  a  member  becomes  absolutely 
like  it  m  all  respects,  in  essence  and  colour.  This  fails  in  such 
conditions  as  leprosy  and  vitiligo,  in  which  cases  the  first  two 
functions  are  achieved,  but  not  the  third.

These  three  procedures  are  the  work  of  the  transformative 
power.  This  is  really  a  single  faculty,  though  distributed  among 
the  respective  members.  For  in  every  member  this  faculty  is 
corresponding  to  its  temperament,  and  so  transforms  the  aliment 
into  the  likeness  (ad-similis)  of  that  member  ;  in  each  case  it 
differs  from  that  which  transforms  aliment  into  the  likeness  of 
the  various  other  members  (or  tissues).  So  (we  may  say)  the 
transformative  faculty  of  the  liver  ramifies  throughout  the  whole 
body.

ii4  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINEii4  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

145.  The  faculties  pertaining  to  the  preservation  of  the  race. — ■ 
The  generative  faculty  is  two-fold,  (i)  That  which  gives  rise  to  the 
male  and  female  "  sperm,"  the  reproductive  units,  (ii)  the  forma- 
tive power  (i.e.,  in  the  male  element)  which  separates  from  one 
another  the  various  faculties  in  the  sperm  and  rearranges  them  in 
such  a  way  that  each  member  (and  tissue)  receives  the  tempera- 
ment appropriate  to  it— thus,  to  nerve,  its  distinctive  tempera- 
ment ;  to  bone,  its  distinctive  temperament.  The  one  "  sperm," 
apparently  homogeneous,  opens  out  in  all  these  directions.  This 
is  called  the  primary  transformative  faculty.

The  informative  or  plastic j : acuity  (lit.  as  in  making  a  sculpture 
painting)  is  that  (in  the  female  element,  Tr.)  whereby,  subject  or 
to  the  decree  of  Allah,  the  delineation  and  configuration  of  the 
members  is  produced,  with  all  their  cavities,  foramina,  positions 
and  relations  to  one  another,  their  smoothness  or  roughness,  and 
so  on' — all  being  controlled  up  to  the  final  limits  of  their  natural 
growth  (dimensions).  Subservient  to  this  faculty,  in  regard  to 
that  part  of  the  nutriment  which  serves  for  the  preservation  of 
the  species,  are  the  nutritive  faculty  and  the  power  of  growth.§  132.  From  the  annotations  by  Costaeus  :  reproduction  implies  a  plastic 
faculty  ;  and  that  implies  transformative  power,  and  that  depends  on  the  four 
qualities.  Growth  cannot  occur  without  nutrition  ;  nutrition  cannot  occur  without 
agglutination  or  assimilation  ;  agglutination  cannot  occur  without  apposition  ; 
assimilation  cannot  occur  without  transformation  ;  transformation  cannot  occur 
without  retention  ;  and  retention  cannot  occur  without  affinity.  Each  successive 
step  entails  the  removal  and  excretion  of  the  products  and  by-products  of  the 
preceding  steps,  for  these  are  hindrances  to  reproduction,  nutrition  and  growth.

3.  The  Faculties   Subservient  to  the  Natural  Faculties

(Vegetative  Life)

146.  Vegetative  Life  (i.e.  the  natural  faculties)  is  sub- 
served by  four  faculties  :  attractive,*  retentive,  transformative,t 
expulsive.

147.  The  attractive  faculty  was  created  so  that  the  body 
could  draw  to  itself  whatever  nutriment  is  required  for  its 
preservation.  The  longitudinal  fibres  in  an  organ  form  the 
instrument  used  for  the  purpose.  The  liver  attracts  the  chyle 
from  the  stomach  by  sucking,  as  it  were,  the  purer  parts  thereof 
by  way  of  the  mesenteric  veins.

148.  The  retentive  faculty  was  made  so  that  the  material 
so  drawn  in  could  be  held  (in  position)  during  the  time  that  the

*  The  word  attractive,  in  the  original,  is  primarily  with  the  thought  of  the 
attraction  of  (female)  beauty  and  has  a  peculiarly  appropriate  application  in 
consequence.

■f  "  Ferment  "  actions  of  the  body  belong  here.

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  u5■f  "  Ferment  "  actions  of  the  body  belong  here.

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  u5

alterative  (transformative)  faculty  is  engaged  in  preparing  sound 
nutritive  substances  from  it.  The  instrument  employed  for  this 
are  the  oblique,  and  in  part,  the  transverse  fibres.  (In  the  case 
of  the_  liver,  the  chyle  is  retained  in  it  long  enough  to  enable  the 
sanguificatory  power  to  act  upon  it.)

149.  The  alterative  or  transformative  faculty  is  that  which 
alters  the  material  attracted  and  held  by  these  two  powers.  It 
transmutes  the  material  from  its  former  state  until  it  has  become 
worked  up  into  a  temperament  such  as  enables  it  to  become 
efficient  nutrient  material.  This  process  is  "  digestion  '-'  in  the 
strict  sense.

At  the  same  time  it  produces  a  change  in  the  superfluities 
so  that  they  can  be  easily  discharged  from  the  member  containing 
them.  This  process  is  called  "  maturation."  By  its  means  three 
things  happen  :  (i) — the  texture  of  the  superfluities  becomes 
attenuated,  when  it  is  inspissation  that  hinders  expulsion  ; 
(2). — the  texture  of  the  superfluities  becomes  thickened,  when  it  is 
attenuation  that  prevents  their  discharge  ;  (3) — the  superfluities 
are  entirely  broken  up,  if  it  be  viscidity  that  hinders  expulsion. 
It  is  a  mistake  to  use  the  terms  "  digestion  "  and  "  maturation  " 
as  synonymous.150.  The  expulsive  faculty  is  that  whereby  the  superfluities 
from  digestion  are  expelled.  Superfluities  are  such  as  are 
unsuitable  as  nutriment,  or  are  in  excess  of  requirements  (and 
therefore  "  superfluous  ").  By  means  of  this  faculty,  the  waste 
matter  is  expelled  into  the  bladder  as  urine,  and  other  excreta 
through  their  several  appropriate  organs  and  apertures.  Where 
there  are  no  orifices,  the  wastes  are  transferred  by  this  faculty 
from  noble  to  less  noble  organs  ;  from  hard  structures  to  soft 
ones.  And  if  there  is  a  diversion  of  waste  matter  from  the  proper 
route,  the  expulsive  faculty  cannot  remove  as  much  as  otherwise.

151.  Inter-relations  between  the  faculties  and  the  qualities. — - 
These   four   natural   faculties   are   subserved   by  the  four

primary  qualities — heat,  cold,  dryness,  moisture.  Strictly 
speaking,  heat  is  the  underlying  factor  in  all  the  subservient 
faculties.

152.  Action  of  cold. — While  cold  aids  all  four  faculties 
it  does  so  indirectly  and  not  directly — except  in  so  far  as 
it  is  the  contrary  of  all  the  faculties.  For  all  the  facul 
ties  act  in  virtue  of  movement,  which  is  shown  not  only  as 
attraction  and  expulsion,  but  even  in  the  transformative 
process  (digestion  proper)  ;  for  the  latter  consists  in  the 
separation  of  gross  and  aggregated  particles  from  one  another,

n6  THE   CANON   OP  MEDICINEn6  THE   CANON   OP  MEDICINE

and  in  the  condensation  together  of  the  finer  and  separated 
particles.  The  movements  of  dispersion  and  aggregation 
are  simultaneous.  Movement  is  also  concerned  indirectly 
in  the  retentive  faculty,  because  the  transverse  muscular 
fibres  come  into  play.  Coldness  enfeebles,  stupefies,  and  morti- 
fies, and  hinders  this  faculty  in  all  its  functions  ;  yet,  indirectly, 
it  helps  it  by  fixing  the  fibres  in  the  position  referred  to._  There- 
fore it  is  not  directly  concerned  with  the  faculties  ;  it  simply 
causes  their  instruments  to  be  in  a  state  which  will  help  their 
functions  to  be  maintained.

Coldness  aids  the  expulsive  faculty  (i)  by  preventing  the 
dispersal  of  the  gases  which  favour  peristalsis,  (2)  by  keeping  the 
particles  of  the  aliment  coarse,  (3)  by  its  astringent  action  upon  the 
transverse  muscular  fibres.  In  these  ways  coldness  renders  the 
instruments  of  the  faculty  in  an  appropriate  state.  Evidently, 
then,  it  only  helps  the  faculty  indirectly.  Did  it  act  directly,  it 
would  obstruct  and  weaken  the  movements.

153.  Action  of  dryness. — Dryness  is  directly  instrumental 
in  the  functions  of  two  faculties. — namely  the  alterative  and  re- 
tentive. It  is  auxiliary  in  the  case  of  the  other  two— the  attractive 
and  expulsive.  This  is  because  dryness  delays  the  movement  of 
the  breath,  enabling  it  to  take  on  with  it  those  faculties  which  it 
has  encountered  with  a  vehement  impact.  It  also  prevents  the 
moisture  present  in  the  substance  of  the  breath  or  its  instrument 
from  flowing  away.  Dryness  helps  the  retentive  faculty  because 
it  favours  (muscular)  contraction  (i.e.  upon  the  contents  of  the 
organ).     The  transformative  faculty  needs  moisture  (and  not

dryness).dryness).

154.  Comparative  relations  between  the  qualities  and  the 
j 'acuities. —If  one  compares  the  degree  of  active  and  passive 
quality  requisite  for  the  various  faculties,  one  finds  that  the 
retentive  faculty  needs  more  dryness  than  heat.  This  is  because 
more  time  is  required  for  a  movement  to  come  to  rest  than  is 
needed  to  start  a  contractile  movement  of  the  transverse  fibres.

155.  Heat  is  necessary  for  movement,  and  it  takes  only  a 
short  time  to  produce  its  effect,  so  that  the  remainder  of  the  time 
is  occupied  in  holding  the  material  and  coming  to  a  state  of  rest. 
This  explains  why  the  temperament  of  juveniles  tends  to  moist- 
ness,  for  their  digestive  power  is  weaker.

156.  The  attractive  faculty  needs  more  heat  than  dryness 
because  the  chief  feature  of  attraction  is  movement,  and  move- 
ment demands  heat.  The  organs  concerned  must  move  rather 
than  be  at  rest  and  contracted  (for  which  dryness  is  needed).

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  117

Not  that  much  movement  is  required  for  this  faculty,  though  at 
times  violent  activity  becomes  necessary.  Attraction  is  brought 
about  (a)  by  an  attractive  faculty — as  when  a  magnet  attracts 
iron,  (F)  by  heat,  as  when  oil  is  drawn  up  in  a  lamp. — Some 
physicists  assert  that  the  last-named  is  really  an  example  of  filling 
up  of  a  vacuum.

Heat  increases  the  power  of  the  attraction  exerted  by  the 
attractive  faculty.Heat  increases  the  power  of  the  attraction  exerted  by  the 
attractive  faculty.

157.  The  expulsive  faculty  requires  less  dryness  than  the 
attractive  and  retentive  faculties,  because  there  is  not  the  need 
of  the  muscular  contraction  requisite  for  retention,  nor  for  the 
apposition  necessary  for  attraction  ;  nor  a  need  to  maintain 
contraction  upon  an  object  until  the  next  stage  of  the  process 
is  reached.  Nor  is  there  a  need  for  repose  ;  but,  on  the  contrary, 
there  is  a  need  of  movement,  and  also  a  small  amount  of  inspissa- 
tion — -just  enough  to  ensure  that  degree  of  compression  and 
expulsion  which  is  necessary  to  make  the  contracted  viscus  an 
instrument.  Lastly,  whereas  the  retentive  faculty  requires  a  long 
period  of  time  and  the  attractive  power  only  a  short  period — 
namely  that  necessary  to  bring  one  thing  in  contact  with  another — 
so  there  is  less  need  of  dryness.158.  The  transformative  faculty  requires  more  heat  than 
the  other  three.  It  does  not  need  dryness  but  moisture,  for  by 
moisture  the  nutrients  are  rendered  fluid  and  so  become  able  to 
enter  the  pores  and  become  moulded  into  the  conformation  of  the 
channels  to  be  traversed.  But  one  must  not  suppose  that  because 
moisture  aids  digestion,  juveniles  (whose  temperament  is  moist) 
can  digest  hard  or  indigestible  foods.  This  can  be  done  in 
youth,  but  here  the  reason  is  not  to  be  found  in  their  moisture  ; 
it  is  because  at  that  period  of  life  the  "nature"  is  similar  to  that 
of  the  foods  in  question.  Foods  of  hard  nature  are  not  appropriate 
for  the  juvenile  temperament  (which  is- soft),  and  therefore  their 
transformative  faculty  cannot  cope  with  such  food  ;  their 
retentive  faculty  cannot  hold  it,  and  their  expulsive  faculty  rapidly 
expels  it.  In  the  case  of  youth,  on  the  other  hand,  such  hard  food 
is  quite  suitable  for  nourishment.

n8  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

159.     The   following   brief  .table   gathers   together   these 
points  :

Attractive  Faculty. 
Retentive  Faculty. 
Alterative  Faculty. 
Expulsive  Faculty.

Duration  of  muscular 
contraction.

Quite  short 
Long  ;    continued. 
Continued. 
Momentary.

Amount  of  longitudinal 
movement  achieved.

Marked. 
Moderate. 
None. 
Considerable,  but

superadded  from

without.

The  alterative  faculty  needs  liquefaction  and  commingling

of  substances.

160.  So   the  various   faculties   make  use  ot   these  tour 
qualities  in  diverse  ways  and  to  different  extents.of  substances.

160.  So   the  various   faculties   make  use  ot   these  tour 
qualities  in  diverse  ways  and  to  different  extents.

si«  Thus,  the  attractive  faculty  is  not  equal  in  degree  in  all  organs.  Heat 
is  stronger  in  the  liver  than  in  the  stomach  and  intestines,  m  arteries  than  m  veins 
The  livfr  at  one  time  is  hotter  (and  therefore  the  attractive  faculty  is  greater)  than 
It  another  So  also  in  the  case  of  the  stomach.  Hence  if  the  stomach  is  empty 
and  the  liver  is  hot,  the  stomach  will  draw  out  the  serous  humour  ^le  from  the 
liver  Tust  as  a  strong  person  can  take  something  out  of  the  hands  ot  a  weak 
plrson  if  he  wants  to,  or,  on  another  day,  the  weak  person  is  the  stronger*  (Cf. 
Galen,  Daremberg, ls  ii.  p.  3°7)-

"  The  operation  of  the  vegetative  principle  is  performed  by  means  of  heat, 
the  property  of  which  is  to  consume  humidity."— (Sum.  Theol."  75,  P-  »i-)

4.  The  Vital  Faculty.

161.  The  power  which  the  members  receive  before  they 
can  acquire  the  capacity  for  the  faculties  of  sensation  and  move- 
ment, and  for  accomplishing  the  various  functions  of  lire,  is 
called  the  "vital  faculty."  Closely  related  to  this  (subject) is 
(that  of)  the  "  breath,"  and  therefore  also  of  the  emotions  of 
fear  and  anger,  because  they  coincide  with  the  expansion  and 
contraction  of  the  breath,     (/>.)

8  1 34.  Vital  faculty  =  virtus  vitalis  =  vitality  =  innate  heat  == 
"  spirits  "  (corporeal,  vital,  natural,  animal)  =  breath  (which  is  its 
manifestation)  =  Spirit  =  "  refined    form    of   bodily   substance    or*  There  is  a  striking  parallel  to  this  passage  in  the  "  It'ung  cheng  mo  "  (circa 
ad  10.56)  on  page  25  of  the  subdivision  "  Mo  Chueh  Chih  Chang  :  referring 
to  the  changing  dominance  of  the  types  of  "  breath  "  in  the  various  organs  per- 
ceptible by  a  study  of  the  pulse.  The  author  states  :  "  it  is  just  hke  the  case  of  the 
Hng  of  Wu,  who  obtained  the  supremacy  over  the  dominion  of  Chu,  and  then  ne- 
Sected  his  own  defences.  The  king  of  Yu  seized  the  advantage  of  his  unprotected 
state,  and  in  turn  obtained  the  possession  of  his  territories.

THE   CANON   OF  MEDICINE  n9

fluid  believed  to  act  as  a  medium  between  mind  and  the  grosser 
matter  of  the  body."1?  (xv.  220)  =  "  a  kind  of  very  subtle  body 
which  penetrates  all  parts  of  the  material  body  and  infuses  them  like 
the  essence  of  a  rose,  oil  in  sesame,  butter  in  milk  "  (Motazelite  view  13)

Cf.  §  118,  §  136;   and  see  167-173.

In  part  it  corresponds  to  "  life  principle,"  and  also  in  part  to 
"substantial  form."  But  it  is  not  the  "  soul  "  ;  it  is  one  of  the  powers 
of  the  soul ;  the  soul  is  a  "  bundle  of  life  "  ;  i.e.,  a  bundle  of  faculties 
and  powers  which  complete  the  material  body.  Soul:  body:: 
vibration  :    atom.

162.  We  now  proceed  to  enlarge  this  brief  statement. 
On  the  one  hand  there  are  bodies  of  dense  substance. — the  organs 
and  tissues — which  are  derived  from  the  dense  particles  of  the 
humours  of  the  corresponding  temperament  ;  and  on  the  other 
there  is  the  "  breath,"  derived  from  the  rarefied  attenuated 
particles  of  the  humours  of  corresponding  temperament.163.  Physicians  regard  the  liver  as  the  seat  of  manufacture 
of  the  dense  part  of  the  humours,  and  the  hearts  that  of  the  rarefied 
part.     Really  speaking,  as  soon  as  the  breath  and  the  appropriate 
temperament  meet,  the  vital  power  comes  into  being,  and  thus 
all  the  members  are  rendered  capable  of  receiving  all  the  other 
faculties  (of  the  soul) — sensitive  and  otherwise.     The  sensitive 
faculties  do  not  appear  in  the  breath  and  members  until  this  vital 
power  has  come  into  being,  and  so  even  should  the  sensitive 
faculties  in  a  given  member  be  lost,  life  will  remain  in  the  part 
until  the  vital  power  has  forsaken  it.    Does  one  not  find  in  prac- 
tice, how  a  limb  is  devoid  of  sensation  from  paralysis  (whether 
as^  a  result  of  2.  temperament  which  renders  it  incapable  of  re- 
ceiving sensation  or  showing  movement,  or  because    of  some 
obstruction  to  the  current  from  the  brain  and  nerves  into  the 
limb)  yet  continues  to  live  ?    and  does  one  not  find  that  a  limb 
which  has  lost  the  vital  power  loses  also  sensation  and  movement, 
dies,  and  undergoes  putrescence  and  decomposes  ?    That  shows 
that  the  power  which  renders  a  member  living  is  still  there  even 
in  the  paralysed  member,  so  that  sensation  and  movement  would 
return  again,  could  the  obstruction  be  removed.     In  fact,  the 
intact   possession   of  this  vital   power   makes   the  limb   always 
ready  to  receive  the  attributes  in  question.    That  which  obstructs 
these  attributes  does  not  interfere  with  the  power  of  receiving 
vital  breath  ;    the  member  itself  is  not  dead.Further,  it  is  not  the  nutritive  faculty  that  prepares  a  member 
for  receiving  sensation  and  motion.  It  is  not  the  nutritive 
faculty  that  is  fundamental  for  the  life  of  a  member.  One  cannot 
say  that  a  member  perishes  as  soon  as  the  nutritive  faculty  is

120  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

abolished.  The  statements  just  made  about  a  paralysed  limb 
apply  equally  to  the  nutritive  faculty.  For  sometimes  the 
nutritive  faculty  ceases  in  a  member  and  still  the  member 
continues  to  live.  Sometimes  the  nutritive  faculty  is  unimpaired 
and  nevertheless  the  member  tends  towards  death.

Then  again,  if  it  be  the  nutritive  faculty  which  provides  the 
power  of  sensation-  and  movement,  should  not  plants  also  share  m

these  powers  ?

164  Hence  it  is  clear  that  there  is  something  else  preparing 
(the  members  for  these  powers),  something  akin  in  temperament 
to  itself— and  this  something  is  the  vital  faculty.  This  is  that 
faculty  which  appears  in  the  breath  at  the  very  moment  at  which 
the  breath  develops  out  of  the  rarefied  particles  of  the  humours 
As  the  philosopher  Aristotle  says,  from  that  moment  the  breath 
receives  its  first  beginning  and  all  the  other  faculties  flow  out 
from  it.  Not  that  the  activities  of  these  faculties  are  directly 
derived  from  the  breath,  any  more  than  the  sensation  (as  doctors 
agree)  proceeds  from  the  animal  breath  in  the  bram  until  the 
serase-impression  has  passed  the  crystalline  lens,  or  the  tongue 
or  the  other  sense-organs.  It  is  when  the  particular  portion  ot 
the  breath  reaches  the  appropriate  parts  of  the  bram  that  it 
becomes  impressed  with  the  temperament  of  the  bram  and  there- 
by becomes  adapted  for  the  operations  of  the  faculties  proceeding

from  and  reposing  in  it.  ,  j     .•from  and  reposing  in  it.  ,  j     .•

The  same  applies  in  the  case  of  the  liver  and  reproductive

organs.  ,  .        ^1

165  The  opinion  of  physicians  differs  from  this.  Iney 
state  that  unless  the  temperament  of  the  breath  becomes  altered 
in  the  brain  the  breath  is  not  capable  of  responding  to  the  soul 
(anima,  nafs),  the  source  of  sensation  and  movement.  But  they 
admit  that  the  initial  temperament  of  the  breath  plays  a  part  in 
enabling  it  to  receive  the  primary  vital  faculty.  The  same  thing 
holds  for  the  liver,  and  other  principal  members.  From  this 
point  of  view,  however,  there  would  have  to  be  a  separate  soul 
(anima)  for  every  kind  of  action;  the  soul  would  have  to  be  really 
an  aggregate  of  various  souls,  instead  of  being  one  single  agent 
from  which  the  several  faculties  emanate.

6nt.  Scholastic  argument  against  such  a  conclusion.—"  If 
man  is  to  be  understood  as  three  or  two  (souls)  using  a  body,  it 
follows  that  man  is  not  one  thing,  but  two  or  three  for  he  is  three 
souls  or  at  least  two.  And  if  this  be  understood  of  the  intellective 
soul  only,  so  that  the  sensitive  soul  be  understood  to  be  the  body  s 
form,  and  the  intellective  soul,  using  the  animated  and  sensified 
body,  to  be  a  man,  this  would  again  involve  absurdities,  namely  that

e

e

THE   CANON   OF  MEDICINE  121

man  is  not  an  animal,. but  uses  an  animal ;  and  that  man  does  not. 
sense  but  uses  a  sentient  thing.  And  since  these  statements  are 
inadmissible,  it  is  impossible  that  there  be  in  us  three  souls  differing 
in  substance,  the  intellective,  the  sensitive,  and  the  nutritive." 
(S.  Thomas  82  p.  144).If  the  primary  temperament  helps  the  breath  to  receive  the 
primary  faculty,  then  the  vital  powers,  the  breath  and  the 
faculties  are  hs  perfection.  The  primary  vital  faculty  is  not 
sufficient  by  itself  to  enable  the  breath  to  respond  to  the  other 
faculties,  but  needs  an  appropriate  temperament  first.  The 
physicians  also  claim  that  this  faculty,  besides  paving  the  way 
for  "life,"  itself  initiates  the  movement  of  the  attenuated 
spiritual  substance  (the  breath,  that  is)  towards  the  various 
members  (organs),  and  is  the  agent  which  brings  about  the  con- 
traction _  and  expansion  of ■  respiration  and  pulse.  In  that  it 
assists  life  it  is  "  passion  "  ;  in  that  it  assists  the  activity  and 
functions  of  mind  and  pulse  it  is  "  action."

166,,  _  The  vital  faculty  resembles  the  natural  faculties  in 
that  its  actions  are  beyond  the  scope  of  the  will.    It  resembles  the

animal  (sensitive)  faculties  in  carrying  out  contrary  actions ■

namely,  it  dilates  and  contracts  at  one  and  the  same  time,  effecting 
two  contrary  movements  at  once.animal  (sensitive)  faculties  in  carrying  out  contrary  actions ■

namely,  it  dilates  and  contracts  at  one  and  the  same  time,  effecting 
two  contrary  movements  at  once.

167.      The  diverse  use  of  these  terms  in  philosophy  and 
medicine. — When   the   ancients   use  the  word  "  soul  "  (nafs), 
they  refer  to  the  earthly  or  corporeal  soul,  the  perfection  of  the 
corporeal  body,  which  is  its  instrument  ;   the  source  of  all  those 
faculties  upon  which  the  movements  and  various  bodily  opera- 
tions depend.    The  natural  faculty,  in  medicine,  thus  corresponds 
to  the  "  animal  "  faculty  in  philosophy.     The  soul  (nafs)  is  not 
understood  in  this  sense  but  is  "  the  power  which  originates 
understanding  and  voluntary  movement."     The  natural  faculty, 
in  philosophy,   means   "  every  faculty  from  which   any   bodily 
function   proceeds."      But   this   is   not  the   "animal  faculty" 
of  medicine  but  a  natural  faculty  of  a  higher  order  than  that 
named  "  natural  "  in  medicine.     So,  if  natural  faculty  is  defined 
as  "  that  which  is  concerned  in  nutrition  whether  for  the  preserva- 
tion of  the  individual  or  of  the  race,"  then  another,  and  third 
term  would  be  required  to  represent  this  other  faculty.     Anger, 
fear,  and  similar  emotions  are  passions  of  this  same  faculty' 
and  admittedly  arise  from  the   senses,  the  judgment  and  the 
apprehensive  faculties.

The  proof  of  the  existence  of  this  third  faculty,  and  of  its 
being  single  or  multiple,  is  a  question  for  natural  science,  which 
is  part  of  philosophy.

122

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Expressed  in  another  form, 
Term  in  Philosophy

Corresponding  term

in  Medicine 
Scope  of  term

Corporeal  Soul

(  =  lower  reason) 
Animal  Faculty

Seat  of  movement, 
action,  operations

Natural  FacultyCorresponding  term

in  Medicine 
Scope  of  term

Corporeal  Soul

(  =  lower  reason) 
Animal  Faculty

Seat  of  movement, 
action,  operations

Natural  Faculty

(Higher)  natural

Faculty 
Seat  of  passions 
and  starting  point 
of  '  apprehension.'

Animal  Faculty

Natural  Faculty

Vegetative 
Functions

The  important  subject  of  the  "breath"  needs  further  elucidation  at  this 
point  The  conWty  oAhe  ■■  Canon"  is  therefore  here  interrupted  by  introducing 
?he  opening  passage  of  "  De  viribus  cordis,"  and  an  explanatory  extension.

THE  BREATH 
Its  Origin,  Forms,  Sources,  and  Relation  to  the  Being

168.

I.     THE    ORIGIN    OF    THE    BREATH.

•J  created  the  left  side  of  the  heart, 
A  and  made  it  hollow  in  order  that 
'~"J?Lj&  it  should  serve  both  as  a  store- 
house of  the  breath  and  as  the

seat  of  manufacture  of  the  breath.  He  also 
created  the  breath  to  enable  the  faculties  of  the 
^  "  soul  "  to  be  conveyed  into  the  corresponding 
f^^^l  members.  In  the  first  place  the  breath  was  to 
t^==^  be  the  rallying-point  for  the  faculties  of  the  soul, 
and  in  the  second  place  it  was  to  be  an  emanation  into  the 
various  members  and  tissues  of  the  body  (whereby  these  could 
manifest  the  functions  of  those  faculties).169.  Now  He  produced  the  breath  out  of  the  finer  particles 
of  the  humours,  and  out  of  igneity  ;  and  at  the  same  time  pro- 
duced the  tissues  themselves  (the  visible  body)  out  of  the  coarser 
and  terrene  particles  of  these  humours.  In  other  words,  the 
breath  is  related  to  the  attenuated  particles  as  the  body  is  related 
to  the  coarser  particles  of  the  same  humours.  Just  as  the 
humours  are  intermingled  to  produce  a  temperamental  "  form," 
whereby  the  members  of  the  body  are  enabled  to  receive  a  physical 
appearance,  impossible  were  they  separate  ;  so  the  attenuated 
portions  of  the  humours,  being  intermingled  into  a  temperamental 
form,  enable  the  breath  to  receive  the  powers  of  the  soul — 
impossible  were  the  humours  separate.

170.  The  beginning  of  the  breath  is  as  a  divine  emanation 
from  potentiality  to  actuality  proceeding  without  intermission 
or  stint  until  the  form  (lit.  preparation,  state)  is  completed  and 
perfected.  Each  member,  though  derived  from  the  self-same 
substance  of  the  humours,  nevertheless  has  its  own  particular 
temperament— for  the   proportional   quantities   of  the   (denser

123

i24  THE   CAN0N  0F  MEDICINE

portions  of  the)  humours  and  the  form  of  their  commixture  are 
peculiar  to  each  member.  Similarly,  although  derived  from 
the  same  attenuated  portions  of  the  humours,  nevertheless 
each  of  the  three  breaths,  (natural,  animal  and  vital)  has  its  own 
particular  temperament,  for  the  proportional  quantities  of 
the  more  attenuated  portions  of  the  humours,  and  the  manner 
of  their  commixture  are  peculiar  to  each  breath.171 .  Although  the  body  consists  of  several  members,  there 
is  one  from  which  they  all  originally  arose.  As  to  what  this 
member  actually  was,  there  are  various  opinions.  The  fact 
remains  that  one  member  necessarily  came  to  light  before  other 
members  could  arise  out  of  it/  Exactly  the  same  is  true 
in  the  case  of  the  breaths.  There  is  one  single  breath  which 
accounts  for  the  origin  of  the  others  ;  and  this  breath,  according 
to  the  most  important  philosophers,  arises  in  the  heart,  passes 
thence  into  the  principal  centres  of  the  body,  lingering  m  them 
long  enough  to  enable  them  to  impart  to  it  their  respective 
temperamental  properties.  Lingering  in  the  cerebrum  it  receives 
a  temperament  whereby  it  is  capable  of  receiving  the  faculties 
of  sensation  and  movement  (sensitive  faculties);  m  the  liver,  it 
receives  the  faculty  of  nutrition  and  growth  (vegetative 
faculties)  ;  in  the  generative  glands  it  acquires  a  temperament 
which  prepares  it  for  receiving  the  faculty  of  generation  (re-

172.  The  foundation  or  beginning  of  all  these  faculties 
is  traceable  to  the  heart,  as  is  agreed  upon  even  by  those  philoso- 
phers who  think  that  the  source  of  visual,  auditory  and  gustatory 
power  lies  in  the  brain.

173.  Some  philosophers  consider  that  the  breath  is  made 
able  to  receive  these  faculties,  and  so  be  perfected,  in  other 
members  (than  those  named).  Thus,  visual  power  results  from 
the  union  of  the  temperament  of  the  breath  with  the  moist 
temperament  of  the  crystalline  lens  ;  that  the  auditory  power 
results  from  the  union  thereof  with  the  temperament  of  the 
auditory  nerve  ;  that  gustatory  power  is  produced  by  the 
mediation  of  the  moist  temperament  afforded  by  the  soft 
spongy    sub-lingual    glands.Others  reject  this  view  and  consider  that  the  breath  carries 
the  faculties  from  the  brain,  and  receives  nothing  from  the 
temperament  of  the  member  to  which  it  travels,  as  nothing  is 
necessary  to  perfect  it.  The  member  itself  is  an  instrument  well 
adapted  for  the  action  of  the  vegetative  faculty,  and  contributes 
nothing  of  its  own  essence.

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

125

Other  philosophers  have  claimed  that  the  breath  acquires 
all  its  powers  in  the  heart,  emerging  therefrom  in  a  state  of  per- 
fection ;   hence  the  liver  and  brain  do  not  add  to  It.

However,  a  careful  enquiry  into  the  truth  shows  that  all  such 
views  are  untenable.  The  only  possible  view  is  that  the  breath 
obtains  the  perfection  of  the  given  faculty  in  that  member  which 
is  the  instrument  of  such  faculty.

The  continuation  of  the  translation  of  Be  viribus  cordis  is  resumed  at  1053.

Explanatory  Extension  of  the  Subject  of  "  The  Breath."

§  136.  Synonyms.—"  The  breath  of  life  "  (Gen.  2  7  •  Quran 
32-9)  Souffle  de  vie;  Ruach  (Heb.)  ;  Ruh  (Persian,  Arabic)- 
Hu  (Sufi)  ;  Ch'i  (Chinese  )  ;  Prana  (Hindu)*  ;  Hauch  (German)  • 
Spirit  (as  a  translation  of  "  spiritus,"  for  which  "  breath  "  is  the  better 
equivalent:  see  §  134,  and  §  129,  footnote;  spiritus  is  the  Latin 
translation  of  the  Arabic  nafs).

Primordial  aura  (Bruce,11  p.  101)  ;  "ether"  ;  vivifying  prin- 
ciple ;    vital  fluid  ;    vital  (cosmic)  force.

Definition  :  that  which  binds  the  vegetative  and  sensitive  life 
into  one  connected  whole.  It  is  common  to,  and  like  in,  all  living 
things.  &Definition  :  that  which  binds  the  vegetative  and  sensitive  life 
into  one  connected  whole.  It  is  common  to,  and  like  in,  all  living 
things.  &

"  Thatwhich  centres  in  the  cardio-pulmonarv centre. "(Baraduc.110) 
"  It  is  a  subtle  vapour  which  rises  from  the  blood,  diffuses  itself 
to  the  remotest  arteries,  and  resembles  the  sun  in  luminositv      fCh 
M.7  p.  8.)  y'     K

Negative  definition. — "  Breath  "  is  not  "  respiration,"  "  breath- 
ing," drawing  in  breath.  Therefore  it  is  not  the  equivalent  of 
anhelitus,  nafas,  anfas,  Atem.

The  expression  "  he  breathed  his  last  "  actually  describes 
the  departure  of  the  "  breath,"  but  there  are  two  events  taking 
place  simultaneously,  and  the  literal  respiration  is  only  one  of 
them.

It  is  not  "  soul  "  =  anima.  The  latter  is  the  Latin  translation 
of  the  Arabic  ruh  in  various  passages.

It  is  not  "  vitality,"   for  this  is  the  manifestation  of  breath.

*  The  Hindu  system  of  physiology  recognises  five  breaths  as  supporting  the 
body.  They  are  :  Prana  (the  air  inhaled),  Apana  (has  a  downward  course).  Samana 
(essential  to  digestion),  Udana  (has  an  upward  course,  or  passes  into  the  head) 
Vyana  (pervades  the  whole  body  and  moves  in  various  directions,  transverse  and 
otherwise  ;  therefore,  equivalent  to  the  "  breath  "  of  the  present  section.)  But 
Prana  mcludes  the  rest,  ordinarily  speaking.— E.  A.  C,  Kaviratna,  Charaka  Samhita

126  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE126  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Vitality  stands  for  the  vegetative  soul.  Thus,  enfeebled  vitality 
means  lessening  of  the  ability  of  the  vegetative  soul  to  accomplish 
some  or  all  of  its  faculties.— Therefore  it  is  not  "life."  ("  Allah  made 
life  to  be  in  breath."  Night  913,  Burton,  10i  v.  422).— It  is  not  the 
"  vital  air  "  of  the  18th  century  chemists.  It  is  not  even  vital 
faculty  "  It  is  not  amenable  to  either  physical  or  chemical  methods 
of  investigation.  It  is  not  a  force  at  all,  and  therefore  not  analogous 
to  electricity,  magnetism,  heat,  etc,  though  in  the  course  of  its 
activity  it  manifests  all  such  phenomena.

Breath  is  not  "  individuality."

Description  by  analogy.  Being  immaterial,  and  representing 
a  notion  foreign  to  Western  thought,  breath  is  almost  indefinable, 
whereas  to  the  Eastern  mind  there  seems  little  difficulty  in  the  con- 
ception Analogies— such  as  to  flame,  a  pendulum,  a  ladder  or  lift 
to  a  higher  plane  of  being,  a  chain  linking  the  three  aspects  of  the  soul, 
to  lio-ht,  to  vibrations,  and  so  on— are  necessarily  misleading.

&By  picturing  the  breath  as  a  sort  of  aura  pervading  the  body, 
with  a  polarity  correspondent  with  the  cosmic  ether  (its  source,  whence 
it  individualized  into  the  human  being),  the  conception  of  orientation 
fin  time  and  space)  becomes  feasible.  Angle  of  incidence  is  then  to 
be  considered,  both  in  regard  to  every  direction  of  space  and  to  time 
of  day.     Thus  an  infinite  variety  of  constitution  m  these  respects

becomes  obvious.  ,  .     .  •       j    •becomes  obvious.  ,  .     .  •       j    •

Rl37—T/ie  substance  of  the  breath.— -This  is  mentioned  in 
several  passages  in  the  Canon.  Though  immaterial,  the  breath  needs 
a  material  basis  or  substrate.  The  substance  is  described  as  twofold  : 
(a)  an  aqueous  vapour,  in  the  case  of  healthy  breath,  as  occurs  when 
the  humours— the  source  of  the  substance  of  the  breath  (169)— are 
healthy  (b)  A  fuliginous  vapour,  like  the  mist  of  the  early  morning 
landscape,  if  the  breath  be  unhealthy— namely  because,  superfluities 
are  present  in  the  humours.  i

A  more  tangible  idea  of  the  substance  of  the  breath  is  furnished 
by  taking  it  as  partly  consisting  of  oxygen,  for  the  functions  of  oxygen 
in  the  body  are  the  same  as  those  attributed  to  the  breath  which  it 
carries.  Thus  to  quote  L.  S.  Beale,  "  oxygen  is  necessary  to  dis- 
integrate the  soft  formed  material  and  combine  with  some  of  its 
constituents."— That  is,  breath=mf,  where  m  is  oxygen.

In  the  Hindu  system,  there  are  ten  substrates  for  the  life-breaths.— Charaka,  i. 
402. — But  these  are  anatomical.

The  "  primordial  substance  "  of  Chinese  philosophy,  the  ground 
of  all  phenomena,  physical  and  psychical,  fulfils  the  theory  of  the 
breath.  It  is  invisible  and  intangible,  but  manifests  as  matter  (solid, 
fluid  gaseous),  as  psychic  existence,  and  as  spiritual  existence.  This 
substance  agrees  with  "  breath  "  in  showing  cyclical  changes,  passing 
from  energy  to  inertia,  from  activitv  to  passivity,  incorporeahty  to 
corporeality.  The  incorporeal  is  "  the  rule  of  existence  implanted  in 
every  living  being"  ;  and  "  Li"  is  the  Nature  implanted  by  the 
Decree.  This  principle  of  activity  appears  in  modernist  philosophy 
as  "  mind."     (Cf.  Bruce,11  p.  109.)

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  127THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  127

§  138.  The  const-ant  activity  of  the  Breath.  Were  the  breath 
not  in  constant  activity,  the  body  would  be  "  dead.'5-  The  activity 
consists  of  (i)  changes  in  quality,  (ii)  movement  from  place  to  place. 
Actually,  both  occur  simultaneously,  but  description  would  be  im- 
possible without  taking  each  form  separately.

(i)  Changes  in  quality.  This  is  a  rhythmic  waxing  and  waning 
in  intensity. ;  a  change  from  a  strong  phase  to  a  weak  one,  and  back 
to  a  strong  one  ;  a  change  from  positive  to  negative  ;  an  ebb  and 
flow;  a  condensation  or  concentration  ("  inspissation ■")  and  an 
expansion  or  rarefaction  (attenuation  ").  In  the  one  phase  there  is 
attraction  of  energy  from  without,  symbolized  by  inhaling  air  ;  in 
the  other,  there  is  repelling  of  energy  from  within,  symbolized  by 
exhaling  air.

These  phases  of  movement  are  represented  by  the  terms  jelal 
jemal  (Persian)  ;  jalal,  jamal  (Arabic)  ;  shiva,  shakti  (Urdul  ; 
Yin  and  Yang  (Chinese);23  masculine,  feminine;  active,  passive; 
etc.  The  rise  is  called  Urooj  in  Persian  terminology,  and  the  fall', 
Nasool  ;  it  isa  rise  from  no  intensity  (incipience)  to  great  intensity  ; 
there  is  a  period  of  maximum  intensity  (maturation)  and  a  fall  from 
thence  to  no  intensity  (decay,  defervescence,  decline).This  cycle  of  the  breath  is  continuous,  but  varies  in  rate — hourly 
two-hourly,  twice-daily,  daily,*  weekly,  monthly,  seasonal.  Accord- 
ing to  its  changes,  so  does  the  feeling  of  well-being  of  the  person 
change ;  according  to  its  changes,  so  are  there  differences  of  bodily 
vigour  in  one  and  the  same  person.  Every  family,  every  race  has  its 
type  of  "  breath."  Wherever  we  turn  in  living  Nature  we  can  see  the 
traces  or  signs  of  this  "  pulse  of  life  "—in  vegetable  life,  in  animal 
life,  even  the  greater  range  of  human  history  itself,  the  rise  and  fall 
of  nations,  the  rise  and  fall  of  pandemics  ;  the  solar  and  planetary 
cycles— all  show  the  traces  of  this  activity,  though  no  doubt  many 
would  consider  the  connection  with  "  breath  "  very  intangible  in 
these  instances.

The  explanation  of  this  activity.  This  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact 
of  the  cyclical  changes  in  the  imponderable  elements,  for  the  two 
phenomena,  as  already  suggested,  are  part  and  parcel  of  the  same 
phenomenon.  Thus,  breath,  conceived  as  a  vibration  rate,  is  now 
slow,  now  quick,  now  coarse,  now  fine.  The  range  and  changes  of 
vibration  from  "  earth  "  (slow,  coarse)  to  "  ether  "  (quick,  fine),  and 
back,  as  has  been  intimated,  are  associated  with  changes  of  activity 
of  the  breath.  These  elements  are,  as  it  were,  the  points  d'appui  of 
the  breath,  and  they  constitute  an  "  immaterial  "  circulatory-system.§  139- — Relation  of  breath  to  temperament  and  the  emotional 
character.— So  close  is  the  relation  between  "  breath,"  "  imponder- 
able _  elements  "  and  "temperament"  that  description  of  the  one 
readily  lends  itself  to  being  a  description  of  one  or  both  the  others  If 
we  trace  changes  in  "  earth,"  "  water,"  etc.,  we  are  at  the  same  time 
tracing- changes  in  the  activity  of  the  "  breath,"  and  we  use  words 
which  apply  to  both  "  temperament  "  of  the  old  sense,  and  emotional 
character  as  spoken  of  to-day.  Dominance  of  "  water  "is  as  much  as 
*  Chloride-retention  has  a  cycle  of  three  or  four  days  (Vallery-Radot  "'p.  308).

128  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

to  say  "  the  breath  remains  in  the  '  water  '  phase  over  a  longer  period 
of  time  than  in  other  phases— in  this  person."  It  also  goes  with 
"  jemal  "  type  of  character/the  exact  form  of  manifestation  varying 
according  to  other  factors  in  the  "  make  up  "—e.g.,  quiet  endurance, 
silent  submission  to  pain,  ardour  of  aesthetic  emotion,  keen  sense  of 
beauty,  love  of  certain  kinds  of  music,  certain  colours,  flowers,  etc. 
(Note,- then,  how  intimate  this  idea  of  "  constitution  "  becomes.)

The  construction  of  a  graph  to  represent  possible  variations  may 
be  helpful,  as  long  as  its  essentially  schematic  character  is  realized.

■*?

i*7K

C

sN"

■9-

A

r

3*

r$

u

•tf

•O

V-

The  dotted  area  represents  the 
supposed  temperament  used  in  the 
sense  of  26,  sqq.  If  it  were  ideal,  it 
-would  be  an  exact  square.

Note  the  necessity  for  four  scales. 
Reflection  on  this  diagram,  in  the  light 
of  the  text,  should  bring  out  many 
points  which  otherwise  require  lengthy 
description.  Strictly,  no  doubt,  the 
diagram  would  be  improved  if  it  could 
be  conceived  in  "  solid  form."Diagram  of  a  Person's  Temperament.

To  give  another  illustration — dominance  of  "  fire."  The 
following  are  its  modes  :  (i)  the  vibration-rate  of  the  "  breath  " 
remains  longer  in  the  "  fiery"  phase  than  in  other  phases  and  in 
other  persons*;  or,  weeks  elapse  before  it  reaches  its  climax  (kemal 
stage)  ;  (2)  the  temperament  is  "  fiery,"  ;  (3)  the  person  is  called  "  of 
hasty  disposition,"  "  hot-tempered,"  he  is  "  prone  to  anger  "  ;  (4)  the 
climax  of  the  fire-element  may  be  reached  suddenly  :  e.g.,  persons  of 
"explosive"  temperament  or  disposition;  the  blood  '"  boils  "  ; 
(S)  the  associated  character  is  of  jelal  type,  taking  different  forms 
according  to  the  manner  in  which  the  patient  reacts  to  the  circum- 
stances of  life:  e.g.  (a)  possession  of  great  physical  strength, 
(b)  pugilistic  power,  (c)  courageous  in  danger,  (d)  irascible  char- 
acter, (e)  originality  of  thought,  (f)  ambition, _{g)  a  person  with 
unshakable  gentleness,  despite  opposition  (e.g.,  in  some  "  saints  "), 
(h)  proneness  to  enthusiastic  beneficent  arts,  (i)  zealous  char- 
acter, (7)  cruelty  of  certain  kinds  (other  cruel  persons  are  called 
"  cold-blooded  "),  (k)  strong  desire.  The  whole  range  of  human 
activity  can  be  drawn  on  for  opposite  examples.

.  So  also  a  slow  rhythm  of  breath  goes  with  tranquillity  of  mind, 
and  a  liking  for  poetry  and  music.  A  moderate  rhythm  goes  with  an 
active  mind,  keen  to  accomplish.  A  quick  rhythm  goes  with  energy, 
forcefulness,  and  activity  to  a  degree  liable  to  lead  to  confusion  of 
mind  and  premature  exhaustion  of  the  body.§  140.  Relation  of  quality  of  breath  to  will-power.  The  will- 
power should  dominate  the  breath.  But  it  cannot  do  so  consciously 
if  the  individual  is  ignorant  of  the  existence  of  "  breath  "  ;  persons  of 
vigorous  will-power  will  dominate  it  unconsciously.     It  would  be

*  The  ."  ira  "  type,  where  "  ira  "  is  not  simply  the  passion  (anger),  but  a 
definite  jelal-type.

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  129

easy  to  see  that  dominance  of  will-power  by  the  breath  should  be  very 
common,  with  the  corollary  that  actions  supposed  to  be  initiated  by 
the  personality  are  really  quasi-automatic.

The  will-power  may  be  used  to  "  develop  the  breath  "  ;  that  is, 
the  way  the  breath  flows  through  the  body,  through  the  various 
(nerve)  centres.

§  141..  (b)  Relation  to <  "  innate  heat."  The  subject  of  innate 
heat  is  very  prominenfin  the  pages  of  the  Qanun  ;  it  is  closely  linked 
with  "  vitality  "  (popular  sense  of  the  word)  (  e.g.,  "  enfeebled 
vitality,"  "  has  very  little  vitality  "  ;  "  full  of  '  vim  '").  The  close 
relation  to  "  breath  "  is  expressed  by  saying  that  as  the  breath  wanes 
(nasool  phase),  the  innate  heat  lessens  ;  as  the  innate  heat  is  restored 
in  the  course  pf  nutritive  processes,  so  the  breath  "  waxes  "  (urooj 
phase) ._  The  rate  of  waxing  and  waning  of  the  innate  heat  varies  with 
the  individual  and  shows  a  relation  with  the  similar  phases  of  activity 
of  the  breath.  Innate  heat  is  expended  simultaneously  with  "  breath," 
and  at  the  same  time  comes  that  indefinable  phenomenon — real 
enough  nevertheless— called  "  atmosphere,"  "  personality,"  "  radi- 
ance," "  aura."This  subject  bears  on  the  theory  regarding  the  appearance  of 
pathological  changes  in  the  humours.  Normally,  the  innate  heat 
is  the  agent  which  separates  normal  effete  matters  from  healthy 
humpurs.  But  in  disease — that  is,  when  the  cycle  of  the  breath  is 
not  in  harmony  with  the  process  of  formation  of  the  humours- 
injurious  effete  matters  (acrid,  conosive,  etc.)  appear  as  by-products 
of  the  abnormal  humoral  state  ;  the  latter  being  the  result  either  of  a 
change  in  the  innate  heat  or  of  a  conflict  between  this  and  "  foreign 
heat  "  (i.e.  bacterial  products  :   485  :    §  283).

§  142.  (c)  Relation  to  metabolic  changes  spoken  of  (§  83") 
under  the  picturesque  title  "  dance  of  the  elements."  The  picture  of 
imponderable  elements  dipping  down  into  the  world  of  ponderable 
elements  (or,  to  be  precise,  the  individual  human  being),  and  entering 
into  the  changes  of  metabolism  expressed  as  changes  of  pivot  of 
function  from  C  to  O,  or  H,  or  N,  or  S,  or  P  in  compound  after 
compound,  and  break-down  into  C02or  H20,  etc,  or  as  formation  of 
tissue  cells  and  their  subsequent  necrobiosis,  etc. — all  this  is  com- 
pleted by  the  view  of  the  breath,  passing  from  phase  to  phase,  from 
strong  to  weak,  not  merely  in  one  organ,  but  in  every  particle  of  the 
whole  being.  With  the  ascending  phase  of  the  breath  come  the 
formation  of  increasingly  complex  substances,— "  generatio  "  ; 
with  the  descending  phase,  goes  the  disintegration  into  simpler  sub- 
stances— "corruptio."  Viewed  as  life-principle,  we  may  think  of  the 
breath  as  controlling  the  vegetative  faculties  of  the  soul,  which  are 
associated  by  an  intimate  mutual  relationship.In  this  connection,  the  observation  may  be  here  noted  that 
change  of  electric  potential  arising  from  the  metabolism  of  the  salts 
is  necessary  to  the  formation  of  active  (as  opposed  to  inert)  fat  in  the 
body.

Hence  physiological  action— that  is,  anatomy  in  motion — is  not 
merely  a  question  of  the  behaviour  of  C,  H,  O,  N,  S,  P,  in  the  various

i3o  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

side-chains,  etc.  It  is  a  sum  of  potentialities  possessed  by  the  separate 
imponderables  and  by  their  varying  combinations,  in  the  particular 
individual  at  any  given  time.  The  common  denominator  or^  collec- 
tive formula  which  represents  this  sum  adequately  is  necessarily  very 
complex,  and  yet  it  is  really  essential  that  it  be  elucidated  before  one 
could  be  said  truly  to  grasp  the  real  basis  of  a  person's  ill -health, 
or  intelligently  work  out  the  fundamental  bases  of  prognosis.

5  143.  (i'i)  The  activity  of  movement. — The  second  mode  of 
activity  of  the  breath  consists  of  a  cyclical  movement,  a  movement  in 
place,  a  movement  comparable  with  a  circulation.  During  the 
course  of  this  movement,  the  breath  comes  successively  into  relation 
with  the  several  tissues  and  organs,  one  after  the  other  until  it  re- 
appears at  the  starting-point.

The  movement  may  be  anti-clockwise  as  well  as  clockwise  in  the 
various  parts  of  the  body.The  movement  may  be  anti-clockwise  as  well  as  clockwise  in  the 
various  parts  of  the  body.

But  there  are  two  paradoxes  here.  Firstly,  there  is  no 
period  of  time  when  the  breath  can  be  said  to  have  passed  a  given 
point.  It  is  not  like  an  object  going  round  and  round,  like  e.g.,  an 
imaginarv  drop  of  blood.  The  breath  is  all  through  the  body  all  the 
time.  It'  is  more  as  if  there  were  a  series  of  lights  m  an  electric 
circuit,  and  they  burning  the  whole  time,  but  the  intensity  is  changing 
successively  from  point  to  point.  The  breath  is  always  in  the  great 
centres  of  the  body  (the  "  chakras,  pranas  "),  but  it  is  brightest  in  the 
liver  at  one  moment,  and  the  brain  at  the  next  and  so  on— yet 
following  a  certain  order.*  .

§  144.  Secondly,  the  circulation  has  no  anatomical  boundaries. f 
Not  only  this,  but  it  is  flowing  left-sidedly  or  right-sidedly.  This  is 
transparently  non-anatomical.  Many  would  reject  the  possibility 
and  even  an  attempt  at  proof  would  be  unsatisfying.  The  justifica- 
tion for  the  statement  that  the  breath  is  now  left-sided,  now  right- 
sided,  flowing  down  each  side  separately,  depends  on  subtle  observa- 
tions which  are  beyond  the  scope  proposed  for  this  work.  It  will 
suffice  to  suggest  just  this  :  the  peculiar  attitudes  adopted  by  all 
creatures  (animals  as  well  as  men)  during  sleep  ;  when  standing  or 
sitting  ;  when  exercising  or  at  repose  ;  also  the  different  moods 
shown  by  a  given  individual — these  and  similar  phenomena, 
carefully  watched,  furnish  adequate  indications  of  the  truth  of  the 
statement.  There  is  also  a  circulation  along  such  intangible 
"  channels  "  as  the  temperaments  of  the  organs.§  145.  However,  there  is  an  actual  relation  to  anatomical 
organs  as  well.  There  is  no  ambiguity  about  this.  The  passage  of 
the  breath  from  liver  to  brain,  from  heart  to  tissues  is  orderly,  and 
deliberately  specified  not  only  in  the  Qanun  but  in  the  De  viribus 
cordis,  lest  the  unwary  should  be  misled  by  the  faulty  ideas- of 
Avicenna's  predecessors  and  contemporaries.  The  heart  as  the 
centre  of  life,  and  the  seat  of  formation  of  the  breath,  is  no  mere

*  This  was  realized  also  by  the  Chinese  physicians  as  shown  in  the  Classic  on  the 
Pulse    (vol.    lxxx,  p.  28)  .

f  Possibly  this  idea  underlies  the  seemingly  impossible  Chinese  statement :  the 
blood  is  inside  the  vessels,  the  *  spirits '  outside."

THE    CANON  OF  MEDICINE  131

fancy.  To  speak  of  the  flow  of  the  breath  through  the  major  organs 
"  awakening  "  each  "  centre  "  in  turn  (cerebral,  thoracic,  digestive, 
genital)  and  then  necessarily  reaching  the  lesser  organs  (including  the 
tissues  and  cellular  elements)  is  to  give  a  true  picture  of  life.  To 
insist  also  that  in  meeting  the  "centres"  the  breath  is  altered;  that 
it  receives  ;  and  then  proceeds  in  that  altered  or  renewed  form  to  the 
lesser  tissues,  is  to  fulfil  the  great  law — the  law  of  giving  and  receiv- 
ing ;  both  together  ;  simultaneous  ;  balanced  in  degree.  Both  are 
true.  To  omit  one  is  to  speak  inaccurately  because  one  represents 
only  in  part.§  146.  Application  to  physiological  histology. — As  has  been  sug- 
gested, physiological  histology  is  microscopic  anatomy  in  motion. 
It  is  the  blackboard  on  which  can  be  demonstrated  the  reality  of 
the  truths  of  the  scholastic  conceptions.  So,  in  studying  the  tissues 
microscopically  we  must  remember  to  introduce  the  conception  of  the 
flow  of  the  breath  through  the  tissue-spaces,  the  juice-canals,  which 
are  also  the  channels  of  the  breath.  Synchronous  with  this  flow 
there  is  an  attenuation  of  cell-substance  into  fluids  ;  and  a  disinte- 
gration of  complex  chemical  substances  into  simpler  ones.  At  the 
same  time,  one  must  say  "  the  change  in  the  breath  is  attenuation 
and  aggregation  of  such  substances."

Substances  pass  from  the  colloid  to  the  fluid  state  ;  from  the 
colloid  to  the  crystalloid  state  ;  from  complex  to  simple  ;  and  vice, 
versa.  They  pass  by  _  aggregation  from  fluids  into  cell-substance 
("  assimilation  ").  It  is  all  one  single  process.  That  which  we  see 
with  the  aid  of  the  microscope  is  the  "visible  "  manifestation  of 
cyclical  changes  in  atom-groups,  of  carbon,  hydrogen,  oxygen, 
nitrogen,  sulphur,  phosphorus,  etc.  The  excrescence  which  we  can 
see  on  the  nuclear  contour  of  the  leucocytes,  for  instance,  is  this 
dominance  of  the  several  chemical  elements — whether  the  change  be 
the  outcome  of  "  attenuation  "  or  of  "  aggregation."  Not  onlv  this 
but  the  excrescence  of  the  nucleus  is  also  the  effect  of  the  change  in 
the  breath  which  at  different  times  belongs  to  different  chemical 
elements,  and  so  to  different  morphological  histological  appear- 
ances.

The  conception  of  the  blood-forming  centres  as  the  meeting- 
point  of  two  vitalities  has  already  been  suggested  (§  121).The  conception  of  the  blood-forming  centres  as  the  meeting- 
point  of  two  vitalities  has  already  been  suggested  (§  121).

§  147.  Application  of  the  conception  to  pathology,  (a)  Disease 
as  the  result  of  interference  with  the  freedom  of  flow  of  breath,  not 
only  round  the  body,  but  also  away  from  the  body  altogether. — It 
is  clear  that  an  actual  obstruction  in  a  tissue  (whether  it  can  be  seen 
with  the  naked  eye,  or  felt  with  the  hand,  or  whether  it  is  in  so  minute 
a  channel  that  the  microscope  is  needed  to  demonstrate  it)  prevents 
the  flow  of  tissue-fluids  and  is  the  forerunner  of  a  morbid  condition — a 
"  disease."  But  it  exerts  this  effect  primarily  because  the  flow  of  the 
breath  is  obstructed  and  its  rhythm  degraded.  Could  the  two  series  of 
events  occur  independently,  the  fact  is  that  the  former,  the  material 
obstruction,  would  not  suffice  to  set  up  such  a  morbid  condition.

The  following  are  useful  concrete  examples  of  diseases  produced 
in  this  way  :

I32  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

The  dire  effects  produced  by  hysterectomy  in  young  persons, 
once  in  much  vogue  for  instance  for  severe  dysmenorrhea  ;  and  the 
persistent  ill-health  which  appears  when  it  is  done  in  older  persons 
round  the  prime  of  (child-bearing)  life.  The  explanation  is  to  be 
found  in  the  destruction  of  the  "channels"  of  the  breath— the 
severance  of  non-medullated  nerve-fibres,  and  even  the  actual  removal 
of  important  nerve-ganglia.  This  indefinable  vital  component  of  the 
being  which  must '"'  circulate,"  goes  so  far,  and  then  finds  a  void,  and 
its  activity  is  turned  back  on  itself ;  there  is  a  revulsion  ;  and  the 
patient  is  aware  of  a  great   distress  which  nothing  will   (or   can)

relieve.  .  .  crelieve.  .  .  c

(ii)  Jejunal  ulcer  following  gastro-enterostomy,  or  excision  ol

gastric  ulcer.  '         .

(b)  Disease  as  a  result  of  disturbance  in  the  rhythm  of  the  breath. 
A  change  of  rhythm,  or  an  ataxy  of  the  breath,  would  suffice  to 
initiate  a  loss  of  immunity  to  bacterial  agents.  Since  there  must  also 
be  an  outflow  of  breath,  any  associated  interference  with  its  current 
would  have  the  effect  of  holding  back  any  of  the  isolated  micro- 
organisms which  are  always  to  be  found  in  the  tissues.*

In  this  way  the  organisms  would  have  time  to  develop  into  active 
colonies.     Structural  organic  changes  then  appear  in  the  body.

When  Paracelsus  said  that  "  life-principle  may  decompose  and 
become  a  strong  poison,  furnishing  life  to  innumerable,  invisible 
(i.e.,  microscopic)  existences,  by  which  infectious  diseases  are  caused, 
he  was  not  speaking  foolishly.29  (p.  155)-

(c)  Loss  of  balance  between  the  normal  qualities  of  the  breath  and 
the  functions  of  the  body  may  initiate  disease.

(d)  The  relation  between  the  intracorporeal  cycles  of  the  breath 
and  the  cycles  in  the  outer  world  is  a  factor  for  consideration  in  regard 
to  the  study  of  bacterial  cycles  in  Nature,  outside  the  bodies  of  animals 
and  other  human  beings.  .(e)  Sudden  recovery  from  incurable  diseases  should  be  intelligible 
in  view  of  the  nature  of  the  breath.  Remembering  the  existence  of 
polarity,  and  a  point  of  penetration  into  the  corporeal  being,  and 
considering  the  fact  that  in  disease  there  is  a  distortion  of  the  shape 
of  the  breath,  it  is  not  difficult  to  conceive  that  some  outer  force  or 
power  breaks  through  and  restores  the  polarity  to  normal,  in  which 
event  the  sick  person  would  be  once  more  in  proper  relation  to  bis 
terrestrial  conditions,  and  be  freed  from  the  interference  (analogous 
to  the  interference  of  light)  which  has  previously  occurred  in  the 
activity  of  the  breath.  The  event  of  such  a  revulsion  occurring  at 
all  whether  the  subsequent  physical  recovery  be  instant  or  only 
reached  by  gradual  stages,  would  bring  the  case  within  the  category 
of  miraculous  cure.  .

S  148  —Changes  of  quality  of  activity  of  the  breath  are  simul- 
taneous with  its  movement  from  place  to  place  within  the  body.— 
The  two  aspects  of  the  activity  of  the  breath  must  be  considered 
simultaneously,  for  they  are  not  actually  separate.     Thus,  to  sum  up,

•  This  fact  was  again  called  attention  to  recently  by  Sir  Charles  Ballance. 
(October,  1929;    Lancet,  1929,  324-)

THE   CANON   OF  MEDICINE  133•  This  fact  was  again  called  attention  to  recently  by  Sir  Charles  Ballance. 
(October,  1929;    Lancet,  1929,  324-)

THE   CANON   OF  MEDICINE  133

we  picture  the  breath  circulating  from  nutritive  organs  to  those 
of  the  sensitive  life,  awakening  as  it  does  so  the  lower  passions 
(the  nutritive  =  "  appetite  "  ;  the  reproductive  ==  "  desire  "  :  see 
•§  160 ;  and  then  the  higher  (the  emotions,  the  "  atmosphere," 
the  "  inspiration  ").  The  faculties  of  each  organ  are  "  activated  " 
as  the  breath  traverses  them  ;  their  vitality  augments,  and  the 
breath  itself  concurrently  receives  something  from  each  "  centre." 
The  "  natural  "  breath  is  the  phase,  then,  when  the  breath  is  con- 
sidered in  regard  to  the  natural  or  vegetative  processes  of  the  body, 
and  is  ''located  "  in  the  liver,  and  is  associated  with  venous  blood'. 
The  "  vital  "  breath  is  the  phase  when  it  is  located  in  the  heart,  and 
is  associated  with  arterial  blood.  The  "animal"  (or  sensitive) 
breath  is  associated  with  the  nerve -fibres.  Yet  there  are  not  three 
breaths,  but  one  breath — "  not  three  souls  but  one  soul."  And  the 
"  breath  "  is  not  the  "  soul."

The  changing  activities  of  breath  are  associated  with  changes  in 
the  composition  in  regard  to  the  cosmic  elements  ;  with  changes  in 
chemical  composition.  Movement  of  quality  (type,  rate,  primary 
quality)  goes  with  movement  in  regard  to  place.

The  expressions  "a  matter-of-fact  person";  an  "emotional 
person  "  ;  a  "  neurotic  person,"  in  the  light  of  the  considerations 
presented  at  such  length,  are  seen  to  be  capable  of  interpretation  in 
terms  of  corresponding  types  of  "  breath,"  which  are  dominant  in 
the  given  individual  (§  138).§  149.  All  these  changes  have  been  analogized  with  a  "dance." 
The_  breath  is  the  controller  of  both  aspects  of  the  dance.  It  is  the 
music  of  the  dance  which  holds  the  dancers  together.  When  the 
music  ceases  the  dance  ceases,  or  degrades  into  a  meaningless 
disorder. _  And  the  ceasing  of  the  dance  is  '  death' ;  and  the 
degradation  is  the  subsequent  decomposition  processes.

The  player  of  the  music,  and  the  movements  of  the  two  dancers 
should  blend  harmoniously  to  make  the  perfect  dance.  What  if  there 
be  inattention  on  the  player's  part  ?  What  if  he  should  not  corres- 
pond to  the  capacities  and  capabilities  of  the  dancers  ?  What  if  the 
giving  and  receiving  between  the  music  and  the  dancers  should  fail 
at  any  moment  ?  Surely,  then  there  is  di'sease.  Whatever  modern 
medicine  has  to  say  about  etiology,  this  fact  remains  at  the  root  of  the 
phenomena  of  all  disease.  In  health,  the  dancers  depend  on  the 
player,  and  their  dance  is  so  perfect  that  they  always  respond  to  his 
tune.  But  there  comes  the  time  when  the  (hidden  !)  Improvisor  of 
the  music  cries  out  "  Halt  !  "

I34  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

§  i5o.—  The  following  repetition  of  some  of  the  important  facts  so  far  discussed 
is  iustifiable  for  still  greater  precision.

j  Abbreviations  :  a,  animal ;  6,  breath  ;  B,  body  as  a  whole  ;  C  vital  centres 
(heart,  liver,  brain,  gonad)  ;  /,  faculty;  h,  heart;  j,  vegetative  ;  I  life  ;  i, 
life-principle  ;  w,  mind  ;  «,  natural ;  r,  rational ;  s,  sensitive  or  sentient,  or  sensuous  , 
5,  soul  in  the  Platonic  sense  ;    sp.,  spirit,     v,  vital.

(a)   General  Statements  : —

7_  exhibits  jf,  sf,  rf,  and  vf. 
But     L  is  not  the  same  as  ;/,  sf,  rf,  and  vf ;    or  the  same  as  (;.s.)  /.(a)   General  Statements  : —

7_  exhibits  jf,  sf,  rf,  and  vf. 
But     L  is  not  the  same  as  ;/,  sf,  rf,  and  vf ;    or  the  same  as  (;.s.)  /.

L  is  not  =  jf+sf+rf+vf.

L  is  not  the  same  as  S.

S  is  not  the  same  as  L  ;    or  m;    or  sp.

S  includes  L,  b,  jl,  si,  rl,  vf.

b  is  not  I,  or  L,  though  almost  equivalent  to  I.

I  implies  b.  „     .       _     ,  ,    ,    .     , .  .

of  (Avicenna)  belongs  within  the  domain  of  sf  and  rf  (scholastic).

jl  (scholastic)  comprises  vf  and  nf  together  (Avicenna)

si  (scholastic)  comprises  vf,  nf,  and  some  af  (Avicenna).

si  (scholastic)  is  equivalent  to  nf.  vf.  {af—rf)  (Avicenna).

rl  (scholastic)  comprises  vf,  nf,  af  (Avicenna).

rl  (scholastic)  includes  jl  and  si  (scholastic).

(b)  Special  Statements.

(i)  The  three  chief  views  of  the  nature  of  a      person      are  : 
Modernist,  or  scientific  or  rational :  ^  +  "?-  „         c  ,  D

Popular  or  Platonic.  f  and  B,  or  &+£.

Aristotelian.  S.B.,  orSX-B.

(ii)  The  scholastic  view  may  be  thus  expressed  :  „      .       ,       x        »»

"  Nature  "  is  L.B.  ;    the  '*  vegetable  nature  "  is  jl.B  ;    the       animal  nature 
is  jl.sl.B  ;  "  human  nature  "  is  jl.  si.  rl.  B.  .

(iii)    Comparing    the    description   given  by  Avicenna,   with   that  given   by 
S.  Thomas,  we  have  :

Avicenna  (&.«/■  aD-  B  (Q

S.  Thomas  -f-B  ;  or  (;/,  5/,  rl)  B

5.     The    Animal    Faculties    (Sensitive    Life)

174.  The  animal  faculties  comprise  those  of  (a)  perception 
(b)  locomotion.  The  former  comprises  (i)  external  senses,  (ii) 
interior  senses.     Each  of  these  exhibit  five  faculties."  Now  the  '  Perceptive  faculty  '  (Mudrika)  is  subdivided  into  ten  branches 
five  of  which  are  called  the     External  Senses,'  and  five  the  '  Internal  Senses  '     TW 
former  are  Touch,  Taste,  Sight,  Hearing,  and  Smell  "— (Ch   M ')

These  faculties  may  be  also  designated  faculties  of  the  lower  mind   or  lower"

+A  ," +AuSustfe  says  that  the  higher  reason  is  that  which  is  intent  on  the  con- 
templation and  consultation  of  things  eternal  ...  but  he  calls  the  lower  reason 
that  which  is  intent  on  the  disposal  of  temporal  things.  Now  these  twc^namely 
eternal  and  temporal-are  related  to  our  knowledge  in  this  way,  that  one  of  them 
is  the  means  of  knowing  the  other."  (. .  p.  r  I2) .^The  whole  subject  is  to  be  found 
treated  in  a  masterly  manner  in  this  and  adjoining  sections  of  that  work.

175„_  A  division  of  external  senses  into  eight  is  obtained 
by  regarding  "  touch  ''  as  including  four  senses  in  itself,  for  this 
is  performed  by  more  than  one  organ.  Thus  the  tongue  not  only 
tastes  but  has  a  sense  of  touch.    This  view  follows  the  philosopher.

4  JtT  StTeS  are,£°*  fu£ther  discussed  in  the  Canon.  The  following  quotation 
from  Chahar  Maqala  (E.  G.  Browne's  translation')  may  be  therefore  addld4  JtT  StTeS  are,£°*  fu£ther  discussed  in  the  Canon.  The  following  quotation 
from  Chahar  Maqala  (E.  G.  Browne's  translation')  may  be  therefore  addld

Hearing  is  a  sense  located  in  the  nerve  which  is  distributed  about  the  auditorv 
meatus,  so  that  it  detects  any  sound,  which  is  discharged  against  it  by  undulations 
of  the  air  compressed  between  two  impinging  bodies,  that  is  to  say,  two  bodies  striking 
against  one  another,  by  the  impact  of  which  the  air  is  thrown  into  waves  and  becomef 
the  cause  of  sound,  m  that  it  imparts  movement  to  the  air  which  is  stetionarT'n 
the  auditory  meatus  comes  into  contact  with  it,  reaches  this  nerve,  and  gives  rise 
to  the  sensation  of  hearmg.-S^  is  a  faculty  located  in  the  opt  c  nerve  which 
discerns  images  projected  on  the  crystalline  humour,  whether  of  figures  orTolid 
bodies,  variously  coloured  through  the  medium  of  a  translucent  substance  which 
extends  from  it  to  the  surfaces  of  reflecting  bodies—Smell  is  a  faculty  locatelin  a 
protuberance  situated  m  the  fore  part  of  the  brain,  and  resembling  tte  nipjle  0 
the  female  breast,  which  apprehends  what  the  air  inhaled  brings  to  it  of  odours 
mingled  with  the  vapours  wafted  by  air-currents,  or  impressed  up^on  it  by  diffusionJrT^  °+d0n^C J?°dy-r  •  K  1S  really  a  very  delicate  ^nd  of  taste.  The  sense  of 
taste  detects  soluble  nutriments  in  those  objects  which  come  in  contact  with  the 
tongue,  discriminating  between  sweet,  bitter,  sharp,  sour,  etc.  The  sense ™ 'touch 
is  distributed  throughout  the  skin  and  flesh  of  the  animal,  the  nerves  Serebv 
perceiving  and  discerning  anything  which  comes  in  contact  with  them— such  as  the 
four  primary  qualities:  dryness,  moisture,  heat  and  cold;  and  the  secondary 
qualities    of   roughness,    smoothness,    harshness,    softness  beconaary

^  *  ,  sounds>  the  five  tastes,  the  five  colours,  are  simply  manifestations  nf 
the  five  elements  (cf   Forks-,  p.  m,       ••  Your  t&s^  3^^™    youi hea?Lg

etc.— these  are  the  elements  ;     so  say  not  they  exist  not  !  "  wearing,

176.     The  Interior  Senses.. —

There  are  five  groups  of  interior  faculties  :  the  composite 
the  imagination,  the  apprehensive  or  instinct,  the  retentive  or

-35

136  THE   CANON   OF  MEDICINE

memory,  and  the  ratiocinative.    The  first  two  are  taken  together 
by  the  physician,  but  not  by  the  philosopher.

177.  The  'Composite  sense  (  =  Common  sense:  Hiss-i-mushtarik) 
is  that  which  receives  all  forms  and  images  perceived  by  the  ex- 
ternal senses,  and  combines  them  (into  one  common  mental 
picture).

Site  :     Anterior  Ventricle  of  Brain  (Ch.  M.)Site  :     Anterior  Ventricle  of  Brain  (Ch.  M.)

The  sensations  of  sight,  smell,  touch,  afforded  by  an  object 
are  conjoined,  and  the  qualities  perceived  by  the  different  senses 
become  gathered  into  one  single  percept.  This  faculty'  exists  in 
virtue  of  the  fact  that  all  sensation  and  muscular  action  are  two 
aspects  of  one  process.  With  the  exercise  of  every  sense-organ  there 
goes  an  exercise  of  muscular  action,  and  the  latter  cannot  occur 
without  at  the  same  time  arousing  muscular  sensations,  because 
sense-organs  for  muscular  senses  are  everywhere  present  along  the 
fibres  of  which  the  muscles  are  composed.

178.  Imagination. — (Phantasy.)  This  preserves  the  per- 
cepts of  the  composite  sense  after  they  have  been  so_  conjoined, 
and  holds  them  after  the  sense-impressions  have  subsided.  The 
common  sense  is  the  recipient  and  the  imagination  is  the  pre- 
server.   The  proof  of  this  belongs  to  the  philosopher.

The  chief  seat  of  the  activities  of  these  two  faculties  is  the 
anterior  part  of  the  brain.

§151.  Regarded  from  the  scholastic  point  of  view,  the  imagina- 
tion maybe  distinguished  into  (a)  sensuous,  (b)  rational,  ox  intellectual 
The  former  is  equivalent  to  Avicenna's  term,  for  it  concerns  itself 
with  natural  objects.  The  second  form  is  concerned  with  ideas,  is 
creative  or  productive,  and  manifested  as  "  invention  "  (artistic, 
mechanical,  scientific,  etc),  whereas  sensuous  imagination  is  simply 
reproductive.  But  in  both  cases  the  faculty  is  defined  as  "  the  power 
of  forming  mental  images  or  representations  ("  phantasms  ")  of 
material  objects  apart  from  the  presence  ofthelatter  "  (Maher,  p.  163).Source  of  the  images  :  (a)  the  sensations,  emotions  and  actions  of  the  body  ; 
(b)  trains  of  thought,  which  are  chiefly  on  the  higher  plane  of  rational  life  ;.  (e)  the 
intellect  ;  {d)  other  external  influences,  such  as  other  minds,  whether  human  or 
angelic.

The  difference  from  "  common  sense  "  is  that  the  latter  only 
deals   with  objects   while  present.

179.  The  Cogitative  Faculty. — The  faculty  which  medicine 
calls  cogitative  is  taken  in  two  senses  in  philosophy..  It  is  regarded 
sometimes  as  "imaginative  faculty''  [mutakhayyal :  animal] 
and  sometimes  as  "  cogitative  faculty"  [mutafakkira  :  human].

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  137

In  the  view  of  the  philosopher,  the.  former  is  where  the  appre- 
hensive faculty  (q.v.)  comes  into  play,  and  the  latter  is  where 
reason  controls  or  decides  that  a  given  action  is  advantageous. 
There  is  also  the  difference  that  the  imagination  deals  with  sense- 
form  percepts,  whereas  the  cogitation  uses  the  percepts  which  have 
been  stored  in  the  imagination  and  then  proceeds  to  combine 
and  analyse  them,  and  construct  quite  different  images  :  e.g. 
a  flying  man,  an  emerald  mountain.  The  imagination  does 
not  present  to  you  anything  but  what  it  has  already  received 
through  the  sense-organs,    (p.)

The  seat  of  this  faculty  is  in  the  mid-portion  of  the  brain.

It  combines  or  separates,  as  the  mind  selects,  those  particular  percepts  which 
are  stored  in  the  imagination.

It  is  clearer  to  place  the  cogitative  faculty  into  the  higher  "  plane  "  of  rational' 
life.  It  really  belongs  partly  to  the  intellectual  imagination,  and  partly  to  the 
rational  faculty,   the   understanding.180.  The  apprehensive  faculty. — This  faculty  is  the  in- 
strument of  the  power  called  instinct  in  animals.  ^Animal 
prudence."*)  By  it,  for  instance  an  animal  knows  that  a  wolf  is  an 
enemy,  and  the  kid  distinguishes  its  dam  as  a  friend  from  whom 
he  need  not  flee.*  Such  a  decision  is  not  formed  by 
the  reasoning  powers,  but  is  another  mode  of  apprehension. 
Friendship  and  enmity  are  not  perceived  by  the  senses,  nor  do  the 
senses  comprehend  them  ;  and  they  are  not  perceived  by  the 
reason  either.  Man  employs  the  same  faculty  on  very  many 
occasions  exactly  as  does  an  irrational  animal.

Apprehensive  faculty  v.  imagination. — The  former  executes 
a  judgment  ;    the  latter  simply  stores  sense-perceptions.

Apprehensive  faculty  v.  cogitative  faculty.- — The  former  relates 
to  one  single  act  ;  the  latter  does  not  make  a  judgment,  but 
opens  the  way  to  a  series  of  discursive  processes  and  decisions. 
The  cogitative  faculty  is  concerned  with  the  synthesis  and 
analysis  of  sense-impressions  whereas  the  apprehensive  faculty 
makes  a  judgment  on  the  super-sensuous  ideas  in  the  particular 
sense-percepts.  The  cogitative  faculty  is  concerned  with  forms 
perceived  by  the  senses  ;  the  apprehensive  faculty  deals  with 
derivatives  therefrom  ("  suprasensuous  forms.") 
^  ]  Some  writers  however  call  the  apprehensive  faculty  "  cogita- 
tive "  as  a  matter  of  convenience,  saying  that  the  terms  are 
unimportant  as  long  as  one  understands  the  things  themselves 
and  the  primary  differences  between  them.

*Or,  as  a  child  distinguishes  between  a  spotted  rope  and  a  serpent,  and  dis- 
covers the  suprasensual  ideas  existing  in  particular  percepts.     (Ch.  M.').

138  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE138  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

§  1 52.  Clearly,  the  apprehensive  faculty  of  the  text  covers  both 
"lower  reason"  and  "reason"  as  ordinarily  understood.  The 
former  is  also  called  "  instinct."  The  difference  between  the  two  is 
easily  defined  in  theory,  but  difficult  to  apply  in  practice.  _  Instinct  is 
"the  sense  of  what  makes  for  the  well-being  of  the  individual." 
"  Concrete  relations  are  perceived  without  an  abstract  conception 
being  formed.  Instinct  therefore  differs  from  reason  in  the  absence 
of  abstract  universal  knowledge.  At  either  end  of  the  scale,  the 
external  manifestations  are  clear  and  absolute."50

§153  Instinctive  actions  may  be  described  as  highly  complex  reflexes, 
the  movements  being  spread  over  a  (variably)  long  time-period,  and  appearing 
after  a  (variably)  long  interval.     Thus  we  have  :

(a)  sensory  stimulus— >lower  nerve-centres — immediate  reflex  movement; 
(6)  the  stimulus  of  a  perception— >higher  nerve-centres — >a  series  of  com- 
plex movements. 
(a)  need  never  reach  consciousness  ;  (&)  goes  on  without  a  consciousness  of  the  general 
(not  "  particular  ")  end  or  purpose  of  the  movements.

While  the  subject  of  instinct  is  always  discussed  in  regard  to  the  actions  of 
animals    it  should  be  admitted  that  nine-tenths  of  our  daily  actions  really  belong 
exactly 'to  the  same  plane  or  order.       The  use  of  the  expression  "  lower  reason 
enables  a  vast  number  of  particular  instances  of  animal  behaviour  to  be  classified 
along  with  many  similar  actions  performed  by  man,   perhaps   especially  during

childhood.  .  .      ,    .  .  ,    ,  .childhood.  .  .      ,    .  .  ,    ,  .

Much  of  the  difficulty  about  instinct  versus  reason  m  animals  is  avoided  in 
this  way.  It  is  also  to  be  noted  that  while  speech  and  language  exist  in  various 
orders  of  creatures,  articulate  speech  occurs  in  man  alone  (Bock114).  Animals  can 
express  their  own  emotions  to  one  another,  and  can  understand  our  speech  m  that  it 
conveys  emotion.  But  that  is  different  from  the  reasoning  processes  which  scholastic 
philosophy  limits  to  man.

181.  The  apprehensive  faculty  need  not  be  considered 
much  by  the  physician  because  disorders  in  it  are  always  conse- 
quent on  disorders  in  the  prior  faculties  of  imagination,  and 
memory,  as  we  shall  show  later  on.  It  is  only  necessary  to  consider 
those  faculties  the  disturbances  of  whose  functions  bring  on 
disease.  It  is  enough  to  know  that  the  lesions  in  one  which  are 
interfering  with  the  other  arise  in  the  temperamental  state  of  the 
member  or  in  depravity  of  its  constitution.  For  on  this  know- 
ledge depends  the  selection  of  the  remedy  and  how  to  guard 
against  the  disease.  Not  to  know  about  tne  state  of  a  faculty 
which  is  affected  only  indirectly  is  of  less  moment  compared 
with  accurate    knowledge   about   a  faculty    which    is    affected

directly.

182.  The  Retentive  Faculty.  Memory  (Hafiza,  Dhakira). 
The  power  of  memory  is  as  it  were  a  treasury  or  repository  for 
those  supra-sensuous  ideas  discovered  by  the  apprehensive 
faculty,  just  as  the  imagination  is  the  treasury  or  repository  for 
the  sense-impressions  of  forms  and  sensible  images  (formed  by 
the  common  sense).  The  seat  of  this  faculty  is  in  the  posterior 
region  of  the  brain.

THE   CANON   OF  MEDICINE

l29THE   CANON   OF  MEDICINE

l29

The  philosopher  discusses  whether  apprehension  and 
memory  are  to  be  taken  together  or  separately.  Is  apprehension 
merely  a  treasury  of  reflection  ?  To  the  physician  this  problem 
is  irrelevant  because  the  same  noxa,  be  it  an  intemperament  or  a 
depraved  constitution,  would  affect  both  and  in  either  case  the 
seat  of  disease  would  be  in  the  same  region  of  the  brain.

The  apprehensive  faculty  :  memory  :  :  common  sense  :  imagination.  But  the 
composite  sense  preserves  forjns,  and  memory  preserves  ideas — the  ideas  discovered 
by  judgment  (Wahm).     (Ch.M.7).

§  154.  In  scholastic  philosophy,  the  memory  is  two-fold — 
sensuous  and  rational.  Sensuous  memory  is  the  power  of  retaining, 
reproducing-  and  recognizing  the  representations  of  past  experiences, 
and  of  referring  an  event  to  its  place  in  time.  The  concrete  obiects 
of  memory  under  this  category  are  :  memory  of  size,  form,  position, 
weight,  sounds,  rhythm,  scent,  colour,  faces,  persons  and  of  certain 
events.  The  degree  of  capacity  for  memory  in  regard  to  each  of  these 
varies  widely,  producing  various  "  types,"  such  as  auditory,  visual, 
motor,   etc.

The  memory  of  emotional  states  is  called  "  affective  "  memory.

Rational  memory,  the  power  of  recollection,  reminiscence,  the 
power  of  active  recall,  volitional  memory. — This  is  restricted  to  man 
(Maher,50  p.   180).

183.  There  is  still  one  more  faculty  distinguishable  in  the 
mind,  namely,  the  ratiocinative  ;  the  understanding.  Physicians 
do  not  concern  themselves  with  this  any  more  than  they  do  with 
the  cogitative  faculty,  and  for  the  same  reason.  They  only  study 
the  operations  of  the  four  other  faculties.§  155.  Charts  devised  in  order  to  co-ordinate  various  ter- 
minologies  applied  to  the  sensitive   and   rational  faculties.

u 
bo

is 
o

5.     Ratiocinative  Faculty

3 .    Cogitative 
Faculty

3 .     Apprehension

4.     Memory

2.     Imagination

1.     The  Common  Sense

I.     Avicenna.

•a

is

o

5.     Thinking

a

0

+>

>>

ft

u

0

V

O

t-i

0

0

Ah

(=5

CO

Tt-

2.     Imagination

1.

The   Common  Sense

II.    Arabic  (Nt.  449).

140

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

III.     (Modern)  Sufi"

Thouj

m

O

'0 
tn

a

O 
O

c/)

0 
'0

a 
0 
0

p

C/5

jht  (of  Goqj

Reasoning

Heart :    .

sirr  ;   qalb  ;   ruh

Insight

Intelligence  (caql)

Higher 
Will ; 
Attention 
Hamm

Concentrating  power

Volition

CO   0

s-B.

3  0

cdW

r1  0 
:£.

0

1 — '

rt-

Judgment

"  The  Watcher  "

Wahm

Reflection 
Cogitative  faculty 
Fikr

1— i

3-

0°

Conduct

Ideation

Asso

Sense- 
memory

ciation  of  I< 
Instinct

leas 
Emotion

Per- 
cep- 
tion

Phan- 
tasy   : 
Khayal

Imagin- 
ation

Musaw- 
wira

Memory 
(of  ideas) 
Dhakira

Memory 
Hafiza

Lower

Will

Nafs

Perception

Stereognosis

V    Modern139

Perception 
Mndrika

(Psychiatric)

IV.

Jili62  (]

p.  r-v

a

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

141

w

Understanding 
,        Intellect 
Power  of  thought

Supra- 
sensuous.

Imagination

Sensuous

Reason

Instinct

Supra- 
sensuous

Memory

Sensuous

The  Common  Sense

Perception141

w

Understanding 
,        Intellect 
Power  of  thought

Supra- 
sensuous.

Imagination

Sensuous

Reason

Instinct

Supra- 
sensuous

Memory

Sensuous

The  Common  Sense

Perception

VI.  Scholastic60 
Note. — These  and  innumerable  other  views  regarding  the  faculties  of  the 
"  mind  "  are  partly  accounted  for  by  difference  of  purpose  in  view.  In  ancient 
medicine,  everything  was  related  to  the  cosmic  elements  ;  in  modern  medicine 
anatomy  is  all-important.  In  regard  to  mental  diseases,  cortical  structure  (strata 
of  types  'of  nerve-cell)  is  naturally  a  basis  of  interpretation.  Many  modern  text- 
books of  psychology  consider  principles  of  education  of  the  young.  Moral  phil- 
osophy has  another  object  in  view.  Eastern  mystics  regarded  the  matter  in  terms 
of  the  problem  of  attaining  elevation  of  the  soul  to  God.  Standard  modern  Catholic 
teaching  envisages  all  such  aspects,  without  making  clear  the  links  between  "  theoreti- 
cal "  faculties  and  the  actual  microscopic  anatomy  and  histological  physiology 
of  the  human  body.  But  these  links  are  the  essential  interest  in  this  treatise,  and 
are  outlined  in  the  special  chart  described  and  discussed  in  §§  157  sqq.

6.     The  Power  of  Locomotion

184.  This  power  is  that  which  contracts  and  relaxes  the 
muscles  whereby  the  members  and  joints  are  moved,  extended 
or  flexed.  This  power  reaches  the  limbs  by  way  of  the  nerves  and 
there  are  as  many  forms  of  power  as  there  are  of  movement. 
Each  muscle  has  its  own  peculiar  purpose  and  it  obeys  the  decree 
of  the  composite  sense.

§  156.  That  the  soul  is  endowed  with  a  locomotive  faculty  is  simply  an 
ultimate  fact.  Our  life-long  experience  assures  us  that  mind  and  body  do  interact 
but  how  we  cannot  tell.     (Maher  220).The  skeletal  system  is  the  instrument  of  animal  life.

Movement  occurs  in  plants,  but  so  slowly  that  it  was  not  positively  discerned 
till  recent  years,  and  is  not  a  "  locomotion  "  (see  §  128).

7.     The  Functions  (of  the  Body)

185.  Some  of  the  functions  are  carried  out  by  one  single 
faculty  ;  others  by  two  together.  The  former  is  exemplified 
by  digestion,  the  latter  by  the  appetite  for  food,  where  there  is 
(1)  the  vegetative  faculty  of  attraction,  (2)  the  faculty  of  sensation 
located  at  the  mouth  of  the  stomach.  The  faculty  of  attraction 
is  achieved  by  a  contraction  of  the  longitudinal  fibres  which 
draw  the  object  inwards  and  extracts  from  the  humours  that 
which  is  required.  The  faculty  of  sensation  enables  the  organ 
to  be  aware  of  the  acridity  of  the  atrabilious  humour,  for  this 
it  is  which  excites  appetite.     In  saying  that  this  one  function

1 42  THE   CANON   OF  MEDICINE

is  achieved  by  two  faculties  together,  one  relies  on  the  fact  that 
a  nocument  befalling  the, faculty  of  sensation  destroys  that 
"  desire  "  which  is  called  hunger  and  appetite.  Even  the  need 
of  nutriment  does  not  account  for  "  desirei"186.  The  function  of  swallowing  is  another  instance  of  a 
dual  faculty' — that  of  attraction  and  that  of  propulsion.  The 
faculty  of  attraction  is  achieved  by  the  longitudinal  fibres  at  the 
orifice  of  the  stomach  and  oesophagus  ;  that  of  propulsion  is 
achieved  by  the  voluntary  muscles  of  swallowing.  Loss  of  either 
power  renders  deglutition  very  difficult  ;  even  retarded  activity, 
without  actual  loss,  renders  the  act.  difficult.  Every  oneknows 
that  lack  of  appetite  for  a  substance  makes  swallowing  difficult. 
If  a  thing  is  repugnant,  and  yet  we  wish  to  swallow  it,  our  appetite 
and  power  of  attraction  is  so  frightened  away  that  the  function  of 
voluntary  deglutition  is  made  difficult.

187.  The  function  of  transmission  of  nutriment  along  the 
alimentary  tract  is  achieved  by  the  faculty  of  propulsion  forwards 
of  the  portion  containing  the  nutriment.  It  is  associated  with  the 
faculty  of  attraction  exerted  by  the  succeeding  portion.

188.  The  discharge  of 'waste  matters  is  also  a  two-fold 
function.  Sometimes  both  sensitive  and  vegetative  faculties 
initiate  the  function  simultaneously.

189.  In  some  cases  a  faculty  is  associated  with  a  quality. 
Thus  cold  holds  material,  and  also  arrests  the  flow  of  humour  (or 
intestinal  contents^  either  absolutely  by  repressing  its  formation 
or  relatively  by  driving  it  back.  Cold  restrains  by  (i)  congealing, 
the  material  (rendering  its  particles  closely  aggregated),  or  (2) 
narrowing  the  pores.  Incidentally  it  has  a  third  action — (3) 
that  of  obliterating  innate  heat  (which  is  concerned  with  the 
faculty  of  attraction).190.  Heat.  Heat  attracts  by  the  ways  already  mentioned. 
Heat  and  the  urge  occasioned  by  (relative)  vacuum  first  attracts 
the  attenuated  matter,  and  later  the  denser  matter.  The  vegeta- 
tive faculty  of  attraction  only  attracts  the  things  most  appropriate 
for  it,  or  things  whose  nature  it  is  to  be  attracted.  Consequently 
it  might  happen  that  the  denser  (more  concentrated)  matter,  being 
more  suitable  and  appropriate,  and  responsive,  is  attracted  first.

Mouth     . .

Stomach  . .

Small  Intestine

Liver

Choicest  ingredients

completely  become

BLOOD  (SANGUINEOUS  HUMOUR)

(Through  S.V.C.,  liver,  to  heart  and  general  blood-stream

(THIRD  DIGESTION)

Watery  residues

Bile  (q.v.)

Normal  Blood

to

Tissues

(FOURTH  DIGESTION)

becomes

Living  Substance

I 
The  Residues  of  3rd  and  4th 
Digestion,  "Wastes,"    " 
go  to: —

1.  Kidney  (Urine)

2.  Skin:    insensible   perspira-

tion, hair,  nails,  sordes  of 
lips  and  skin

3.  Tissues:  obesity,  fibrosis  of

conn.  tiss. ;  neuritis  (Beale,

P-  59)

4.  Seminal  fluid  (both  sexes)

5.  Nasal  mucus,  earwax

Watery  part

Urine

Abnormal

Because

admixed  with

unhealthy

n>

o 
C

tr 
c

3 
o

c

03

3 
(TO 
g

5" 
re 
o 
d 
w

tr 
c

o 
c

ttf

c

a

a

GTQ

c

o

c

c

sr 
c

p 
cr

3 
w 
c

3" 
a 
o

e 
c

Because  of 
internal  change

Decom- 
position (or 
putre- 
scence of 
some  nor- 
mal con- 
stituents)

V

2 
»

■0  3 
8g.

6  2

o

D-D.

tOrt

Oxidation

2  s  3

»

a

re 
a.

o

c

V

c 
3

o

c

2! 
o

Normal   .

I 
Subserves 
Nutrition

CT

5' 
d

w

V 
C

3

o

e

tr  re

re

x

»  >0

0

M

3

01

rt

a.

tr

<-+

ft

0

cr

3'

0

3

0

p

p.

0

cr

CT

com

o

a

o 
n.

V 
Tissues 
Joints

V

0   s

5"?

Blood

Printed  by  The  Westminster  Press,  W.g

VEGETATIVE       LIFE     Ouwus

Large  Intestine

BY-PRODUCTS

normal

Sediment,  or 
Precipitate  of  blood

WASTESV

0   s

5"?

Blood

Printed  by  The  Westminster  Press,  W.g

VEGETATIVE       LIFE     Ouwus

Large  Intestine

BY-PRODUCTS

normal

Sediment,  or 
Precipitate  of  blood

WASTES

The  non-utilisable  surplus.

Non-assimilable.

Is  exposed  to  undue  heat.

Accumulates  to  over-flowing,

and  then  encounters  the

expulsive  faculty

TERRENE  or  ATRABILIOUS  HUMOUR 
(cold  and  dry)

1

Undergoes

internal  change

(i.e.  oxidation)

w

1

Normal  derivate

1 
Products

1 
excrementitio  us

1  .

.morbid

X

o

>-:

3

CD

1

Y

of 
oxidation

atrabilious 
humour

atrabilious 
humour

1

Goes  to

of  fluids 
admixed  with

1

1

|

i

1

3

i.  Spleen  ;  thence  to

-w*_-»

^— — ^

Attenuated       Attenuated

s:

cardiac  sphincter

blood

1

0

>ur

portion  of 
Blood

bile

o

(81) 
2.  Blood:

(a)  imparting  vis-

1

V 
The  Ash

CO*

a  to-

m  unhe; 
carried 
It  is  "<

CO

CO

c

3

cidity

of

§1"

a

00

>

I

5*

(b)  to  the  bones, 
giving  them

1

■     a>

°>  ft  <"^

1        1        II

3  2  cr 
ft      "^

(_n

Q\

c

0

0

stamina

^          W           tO    IH

w-P

P

3

a.

>

co

3*

P

>

CO

co

(c)  to  hair  and 
nails 
3.  Serous   Humour, 
mixing  with  it  and

Oxidise 
Serous

atrab 
Bilious

("chc 
Norma]

P   n

CD    M-

P    ST"

Co    ST

•     CTQ

*~d  co

5:i

S

P

>§

making  it  (a)  sour,

d  blood 
humour  (" 
ilious  hum 
humour 
)leric  atrab 
I  atrabiliou

5  r*

p  a

3' 
a 
Cu

o

CO

tr

l-t

to

o 
c

(b)  bitter

c?S

3  "<! 
O  -"--

a

c 
3

o

c

«■+

(a

CO

sero- 
our")

ilious 
s  hum

0  3

*■*■  g.

p

2  S2.

3  •?.

•^  re

'

3

*-i

3"

o

0  tr

c  c

P

i*

ile"

D.

"  3 
0

CT

1°

ous 
78)

re*

5"

c

0'

CO

~2

ING  SOURCE  AND  FATE  OF  THE  FOUR  HUMOURS

Unhealthy  digestion

ncomplete

Carried  too  far

(Decomposition)

Oxidative  by-products

Non-nutritious  Non-utilisable  Residue

Excrement

Attenuated

Dense

See  "Leek-green  bile"Unhealthy  digestion

ncomplete

Carried  too  far

(Decomposition)

Oxidative  by-products

Non-nutritious  Non-utilisable  Residue

Excrement

Attenuated

Dense

See  "Leek-green  bile"

See  "morbid  atrabilious  humour"

rmal  (77)

Foamy  part  of  blood

(subtile,  and  acrid  power)

BILIOUS  HUMOUR

(hot  and  dry)

Because  of 
Internal  change

3.

p

f-t- 
5' 
3

O

a.

to

p

3

0-

o 
o

p

CTQ

re  a

a  3

"  rt

0  i

CO

CO

»

s

o

■*

o

as

p

^i

o

3

p

O

a.

p.

o

o 
3

o  £* 
o  2

<w  »

t-     rt-

P*5'

3

S

O

3

W 
o

«§

9

s

o 
c

3- 
C

3 
o 
c

Normal  Bile

Pure ;  unadulterated ;

"Clear"

(Formed  in  Liver)

subserves  nutrition

to 
Blood

(gives  it

"fibre"; 
diminishes 
its  surface

tension. 
Therefore

red  cells

less  viscid

and  traverse

capillaries

better)

to  Small

Intestine

(cleanses  its

mucosa  of

viscid  and

other 
matters)

to 
Lung

to 
General 
Tissues

V

to

Anal

Muscles

(Stimulates

defecation)

Q 
o 
o>

tri

3

CL.

3

o 
c

Abnorma

Because 
contaminated  with

is  also

a 
Waste

serous  humour

normal 
atrabilious  humour

attenuated

O

dense 
V 
i.  Vitelline  bile 
(thick,  like  egg- 
yolk)  "Fiery"

y

oxidises  to 
;.  Leek-green    bile 
(94)  in  stomach

y

oxidises  to 
7.  Verdigris  or 
mildew-green 
bile

V 
becomes 
Ash 
("choleric  atra- 
bilious humour": 
q.v.)

Y

3.  "Red  bile"

("bitter  serous

humour" :  78)

CHART  SHOWINC

Mouth

Food  and  Drink 
(FIRST  DIGESTION)

Stomach  .

Small  Intestine

Utilisable  part  (True  Pabulum)

Chyle,  diluted  with  fluids 
of  the  meal

Incorrrj

Liver

Through  mesenteric  veins,

portal  vein,  to

Liver

(The  liver  swells)

(SECOND  DIGESTION)

via  Sanguificatory  Power

Sei

Watery  residues

)UR) 
blood-stream

Bile  (q.v.)

Less  choice  ingredients

of  the  Food 
SEROUS  HUMOUR 
(Cold  and  moist)

I

Abnormal

Normal

-I 
Subserves 
Nutrition

Abnormal  ("i

Because

admixed  with

unhealthyBile  (q.v.)

Less  choice  ingredients

of  the  Food 
SEROUS  HUMOUR 
(Cold  and  moist)

I

Abnormal

Normal

-I 
Subserves 
Nutrition

Abnormal  ("i

Because

admixed  with

unhealthy

Because  of 
internal  change

V

in

a

o 
C

Ui

c

3 
o

c

a

tr 
C

o

w

o'

c

CO

P* 
C

3

o

c

tr

c

3 
o

o 
c

W

V

c

3 
o 
c

Decom- 
position (or

putre- 
. scence  of 
some  nor- 
mal con- 
stituents)

WP

p

p

a

P

P

(TO

UQ

p

C

c

p

13

»i

cd

CD

o

O

C

e

£

c

»

2    CD

2.0-

o

c

S*  o 
o

°  a

gOQ

Oxidation

cr

Id

CD

X

P  T3

o

P

CD

<-+

0-

tr

(-f

CD

O

o*

5'

o

p

o

p

D-

CD

7

cr

CD

o

3  1

ft,      hyl            i~

td

o* 
o

V

Tissues 
Joints

pa

p  p 
<?  L,

co  (JQ

r+    P

CO

p  p

C  3 
o  p.

Because 
admixed  with

2

o* 
o 
o-

2

o"

e

w

tr 
c

3 
o 
c

tr 
C

V

Blood

O-

&3

o 
c

CO

tr

c

3 
o 
c

ordinary 
(contains 
salts :  75)

I 
putresces

V 
2.  Scz/ty

serous 
humour

(light)

H' 
S;

o  c 
c  <"

»"1     CO 
-CD

O 
C

Beca

internal

5

Co

o

s

S

v;

p 
tr

CD

<!

CD 
5'

P*

o

P* 
5'

to

S?

v 
n

.0

O

to

The  Correlation  of  the  Various  Faculties.

(Summary  and  extension  of  Thesis  VI.)

§  158.  The  correlation  between  the  various  faculties  with  the 
mter-connections  between  the  visible  bodily  organs  is  usefully 
indicated  by  means  of  a  suitable  map  or  chart.§  158.  The  correlation  between  the  various  faculties  with  the 
mter-connections  between  the  visible  bodily  organs  is  usefully 
indicated  by  means  of  a  suitable  map  or  chart.

The  following  considerations  are  necessary  in  studying 
the  accompanying  map.  (1)  There  are  no  actual  boundaries  between 
the  faculties,  even  in  the  case  of  the  discrete  viscera.  The  internal 
senses  are  "  merely  diverse  aspects  or  phases  of  a  single  sensuous 
faculty  (Maher,50  p.  96)  as  Aristotle  perceived.  To  name 
departments  "  of  the  mind,  it  must  therefore  be  constantly  remem- 
bered, is  simply  to  help  the  memory,  and  assist  analysis  of  the  various 
mental  operations.  (2)  Subdivision  of  faculties  into  "  animal  "  and 
human  "  is  to  be  avoided.  (3)  The  enumeration  of  mental  faculties 
given  by  phrenology  is  not  vitiated  by  the  fact  that  phrenolookal 
charts  are  not  anatomically  correct.  (4.)  Since  the  strength  ofone 
faculty  involves  a  corresponding  weakness  of  some  other,  even  the 
very  existence  of  the  faculty  may. be  virtual.

§159.     Brief.  Description  of  the  Chart. 
Six  discrete  "  planes  "  are  represented,  and  are  named  according 
to  certain  terms  selected  from  those  used  in  various  classifications 
1  he  vertically  placed  plane  serves  to  indicate  a  close  relation  between 
this  and  each  of  the  horizontal  ones.Plane  I.— This  refers  to  the  vegetative  life,  and  shows  the  various 
organs  and  their  mter-connections,  as  well  as  their  relations  to  the 
superposed  planes.  Connection  with  the  lower  extremity  of  the 
vertical  plane  indicates  the  existence  of  "  unconscious  appetition  " 
in  this  sphere  of  life.  This,  the  so-called  "natural  appetite,"  is 
defined  as  the  inclination  towards  a  thing  which  is  in  concord  with 
its  nature,  without  any  knowledge  of  the  reason  why  such  a  thing 
is  appetible  "»  (I,  656).  It  is  inherent  in  the  nature  of  "  beine  " 
on  this  plane.  fe

.  Appetite  is  (a)  natural  (hunger,  thirst,  sleep,  exercise,  sex)  lb)  sensitive  (reflex

nrt  ret^UC)Cll°ZL  T^  tW°  *%*"  ^  °n  °^ic  coniitionTwhich  are 
not  regulated  by  reason.  The  sensitxve  appetite  is  under  the  control  of  the  will 
and  can  be  strengthened  or  checked  thereby.1'  (i.  656).  Appetite  in  the  sen Z  of 
sinful  deS1re,  belongs  to  another  aspect  of  the  subject.  APPetlte<  m  the  sense  of

Plane   II  —  This   refers   to   the  sensitive   life.       Sensitive  life 
comprises  the     power  to  know  "  (i.e.,  the  faculties  already  discussed

143

i44  THE   CAN0N   0F  MEDICINE

in  176-183  of  the  Canon,  and  shown  in  the  charts  in  §  155),  and  -the 
"power  to  love  "(=  "  appetition  "  =  "the  power  of  loving  that 
which  is  the  good  for  the  individual"  =  appetitive  faculty  =  desire). 
The  power  to  know  is  represented  by  Plane  II  and  the  power  to  love  is 
represented  by  the  lower  part  of  the  vertical  plane.  ..Both  find 
their  realization  in  organs  depicted  on  Plane  I."Lower"  is  used  as  equivalent  to  "animal"  (as  opposed  to  human)  Scholastically 
it  is  the  antonvm  of  "  higher."  "  Reason,"  again,  is  made  equivalent  to  instinct 
because  popularly  the  latter  word  is  taken  to  be  the  same  thing  as  automatism. 
In  scholastic  philosophy  the  phenomenon  of  instinct  is  appraised  properly.  Hence 
"lower  reason  "  comes  to  be  applicable  for  a  certain  series  of  phenonena  for  that 
which  scholasticallv  is  called  instinct  is  that  which  m  modern  life  is  called  lower 
reason  "  The  word  reason  should  however  be  applied  strictly  to  those  higher 
operations  which  scholastics  define  with  masterly  precision.

Coincident  with  the  mental  representation  of  the  thing— whether 
it  be  good  or  evil  for  the  individual— there  is  an  agreeable  or  dis- 
agreeable passive  state  of  consciousness,,  and  this  is  called  an 
"emotion."  Emotions  are  subdivided  into  "  concupiscible  and 
"  irascible  "  The  former  imply  attraction  or  repulsion,  and  are  : 
love,  hatred  ;  desire,  abhorrence  ;  delight,  sadness.  The  latter 
concern  the  sense  of  self-preservation.  They  are  :  hope  oi  ac- 
quiring an  object  which  it  is  difficult  or  dangerous  to  obtain  ; 
despair  of  so  doing  ;  fear  of  a  threatening  evil  or  danger,  with 
impulse  to  flee  ;    courage,    when  there  is  an  impulse  to  remain  ;

anger.  .  ,.     .

The  objects  of  each  of  these  emotions  are  :  concrete  objects, 
whether  inanimate  or  living ;  muscular  activity  ;  experience 
(excitement,  adventure)  ;  emotion  itself.  For  example,  there  may  be 
fear  of  hunger,  cold,  lack  of  necessaries  of  life  (clothing,  etc  )  ;  ot 
illness;  of  death  ;  of  punishment,  of  reproaches,  of  tears  ;  of  loss  of 
prestige  or  reputation,  of  being  misjudged  or  considered  eccentric  ;fear  of  failure.  .  _,

Planes  III  and  IV  together  refer  to  the  rational  lite,  iney 
appear  separated  in  order  to  bring  out  the  idea  of  active  and  passive 
intellect  They  stand  for:  the  "  power  to  think."  The  vertical 
plane  belongs  with  these  two  planes  as  representing  "  the  power  to

W1  '  The  power  to  think,  or  Understanding,  is  regarded  as  two-fold— 
speculative  and  practical.  The  former,  under  the  influence  of  the  will 
produces  the  act  of  contemplation,  the  object  in  question  being  purely 
ideal  (poetry,  music,  art,  refinement,  taste).  It  sees  resemblances 
sees  the  "  simolicitv  "  of  creation,  and  makes  even  the  most  thorough 
difference  seem  quite  secondary  and  insignificant.  It  includes 
foresight,  research,  "  wisdom."  The  practical  understanding,  under 
the  influence  of  the  will,  and  by  the  use  of  the  physical  body,  accom- 
plishes  constructive  work.

"The  power  to  will,  or  "  rational  appetite,"  precedes  voluntary 
movement.     The  inclusion  of  the  terms   "  attention,"   '   conscious- 
ness," "  heart,"  "  ego,"  on  the  vertical  plane,  is  for  convenience  and 
•  does'  not  imply  synonymity  in  every  respect.

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

H5

Plane  V,  as  representing  the  "  supernatural  "  life,  is  only 
introduced  for  completeness,  and  its  relation  with  the  "  lower  " 
planes,  though  intimate,  is  purposely  not  specified.  Its  necessity  was 
perceived  by  Jili  (taken  as  a  representative  of  Islamic  mysticism,  by 
Nicholson62)  when  he  discusses  the  "  perfect  "  or  "  ideal  "  man,  and 
some  of  its  features  appear  in  the  chart  representing  his  views  (§155). 
The   subject  belongs   primarily  to   theology.

§  160. — Details  regarding  the  Emotions.§  160. — Details  regarding  the  Emotions.

(1)  It  will  be  seen  that  there  is  no  separate  account  of  the 
Emotions  in  the  Qanun.  They  are  only  referred  to  incidentally, 
except  in  the  chapter  on  the  Pulse  (601)  which  describes  the  effect  of 
five  particular  emotional  states  on  the  Pulse.

(2)  While  classification  of  the  emotions  is  unsatisfactory  as 
Mali-5"  --■   '         '    ■"       '      •  "  -       ■    •  J'

er

points  out,  the  short  list  given  by  Avicenna  is  convenient 
in  practice,  because  every  patient  may  be  regarded  as  fundamentally 
governed  bygone  or  other,  the  others  being  relatively  unimportant.

In  this  section  such  emotions  as  aesthetic  and  moral  feeling  are 
not  considered.  The  self-regarding  emotions  are  referred  to  under 
"  Ego  "  (§  164,  IV).

(3)

Emotions  and  Their  Correlations.

1.

II.

III.

IV.

V.

Latin  name

Gaudium

Laetitia

Tristitia

Ira

Timor

Arabic  name

Surtir

Lazzat

Gham

Ghadab

Faz1

Chinese  name

Hsi

Ai1

Ai

Nu

Chii

Translation

Joy

Delight 
Concupiscence*

Sorrow

Anger 
Hatred*

Fear

Corresponding 
Element  : 
Sufic 
Chinese}

Aether 
Fire

Air 
Earth

Earth

Metal

Fire 
Wood

Water 
Water

Corresponding 
phase  of  breathf

Jelal

Jemal

Jemal

Jelal

Jemal

Dominant 
Humour 
corresponding

Sanguineous

Sanguineous

Atra- 
bilious

Bilious

Serous

(4)  Relation  between  the  emotions  and  the  "  elements." — There 
is  not  a  strict  relation  between  individual  emotions  and  individual 
elements.  As  has  been  explained,  all  the  elements  occur  together, 
though  one  may  be  said  to  be  more  frequently  dominant  than  another.

*  The  Chinese  speak  of  seven  chief  emotions,  concupiscence  and  hatred  being 
the  two  additional  ones.  Instead  of  "delight,"  "liveliness,"  and  "love"  are 
equivalents  of  "  ai4  "f  In  theosophical  language  this  relation  is  expressed  by  saying  that  emotions 
belong  to  the      astral  "  plane.29  (p.  167).

I  Su-Wen  (Forke23;      Wieger141).

L

I46  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

The  same  applies  to  the  phases  of  the  "  breath  "-the  degree  of 
vitality.  Every  emotion  goes  through  three  phases  of  activuy- 
risfngf  acme,  falling,-as  do  the  types  of  breath  Hence  different 
words  are  required  to  describe  each  emotion  according  as  it  is  weak, 
strong,  balanced,  pure  or  mixed.     (See  §139,  §  164,  11;).

This  complexitv  is  illustrated  by  the  following  mstance-the 
relation- between  "anger"  and  «>«.»--"  Fire  varies  from  dull 
smouldering  to  a  red-heat,  and  so  to  flame— flicker,  lambient,  gentle 
pTle  uriZ  sudden  flare  continued  light  of  different  degrees  of 
fnteAsitt,  fierce  burning,  ferociousfire.  The  phrases  :  one's  blood  bois, 
he  flared  up,-and  so  on,  are  graphic  enough.  Actually  the  vessels 
engorge,  the  muscular  power  is  intercepted  the  mind  becomes 
confused  ;  the  bile  is  set  in  motion,  and  may  be  expelled  from  the 
gall-bladder,  leading  to  relief  (bodily  as  well  as  mentally),  or  enters 
the  blood  more  freely,  engendering  heat  and  increasing  both  the 
acid  and  the  bitter  throughout  the  body.  Whether  a  person  is 
irascible,  or  is  difficult  to  rouse  to  anger,  whether  the  passion  will 
smoulder  (and  hence  show  as  a  resentment,  and  spirit  o ve •ngeance) 
will  depend  on  whether  the  humours  are  mixed  or  whether  one  or 
other  is  definitely  preponderant  in  the  resting  stateAn  angry  person  gives  out  a  definite  atmosphere  a  feeling  of 
beine  "on  edge."  The  effect  on  bystanders  depends  on  their 
dominant  emotional  state  ;  in  some  it  provokes  quarrelsomeness  m 
others  perplexity  owing  to  the  discovery  that  the  person  is  unapproach- 
able Silence  and  appropriate  interior  exercises  are  indicated. 
Angry  words  produce  mental  "  sores  "  ;  they  may  heal,  or  they  may 
be  kept  goingf  or  they  may  be  re-opened,  or  become  incurable.

An  outburst  of  anger  may  be  provoked  by  a  clash  of  interests. 
Thest vary  widelv.  Thus,  two  wills  may  clash  ;  the  function  of  one 
organ  ma  clash  with  that  of  another  (e.g.  menstrual  irritability  or 
outbSrste  of  temper);  clash  of  duty  with  self-wilL  The  intensity  of 
the  outburst  is  according  to  the  principle  of  jelal-jemai.

Anger  may  be  manifested  as  a  "  liver-storm  (variable  dura- 
tion^  "storms  "  from  stagnation  in  connective-tissue  spaces  (longer 
duStion)  "^erve-storms  "  (short  duration),  "  mind-storms  (lead- 
ing to  criminal  acts).     These  phenomena  may  come  onu«.

CO  Physical  effects   of  emotional  disturbance,- 1  he   ettect   01. 
anger  on  bodily  functions  has  been  referred  to.     Fear  may ^manifest 
as  lastric  trouble,  indigestion,  constipation.     Panic-fear  may  provoke 
dLSSa    and  polyuria.     The  blood  becomes  flooded  with  toxins, 
and  the  kidneys  are  taxed  in  consequence.

The  blood-state  is  altered  during  the  sway  of  emotions  (Cf.  1090.) 
The  blood-cell  formula  may  also  alter.

The  humoral  formula  changes  during  emotional  phases  but there 
is  no  rigid  relation  to  be  assigned.  Those  given  in  the  table  are  not 
absolute.

Analysis  of  a  total  emotional  process.  -Viewed  as  a  complex  process,  the  following 
compote^St  considered  fn  «^^^^^^^-      :  }  £  ^Analysis  of  a  total  emotional  process.  -Viewed  as  a  complex  process,  the  following 
compote^St  considered  fn  «^^^^^^^-      :  }  £  ^

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  147

process  along  motor  nerves  (b),  (iii.)  bodily  commotion  caused  by  ii.  -f  b  ;  this 
reaches  consciousness  through  sensory  nerves  (c).  Psychically,  the  emotion  is 
made  up  of  i  +  ii.  +  iii.  ;  physically  it  comprises  a  +  b  +  c.     (After  Maher, 5  °,  p.  446) .

§  161. — Details  concerning  some  of  the  Faculties  and 
Phenomena  pertaining  to  Rational  Life.

The  term  "Mind"  is  variously  defined.  It  is  taken  as  synony- 
mous with  (a)  intellect  ;  (b)  intelligence  ;  (c)  consciousness,  conscious 
intelligence  ;  (d)  the  nervous  system  ;  (e)  the  brain  (thus,  behaviour- 
ists employ  "  mind  "  for  "  brain  "  from  a  dislike  of  the  materialistic 
sound  of  that  word156)  ,  (/)  the  entire  psychical  being.  It  is  defined 
as  (i)  a  sum-total  of  the  mental  processes  (Howell's  Physiology)  ; 
(ii)  that  which  thinks,  feels  and  wills  ;  (iii)  "  the  terminus  of 'an 
evolutionary  progress  from  reflex  and  tropism  by  way  of  memory  and 
imagination  to  intellect  and  reason  "  ;  (iv)  "  mind  is  to  be  interpreted 
in  biological  terms,  as  an  organism,  an  organ  of  adjustment, 
a  structural  fabric  "  (Purposive  school  of  psychology).156  "  Mind  " 
is  analogized  with  a  room,  in  which  the  soul  lives  ;  with  a 
mirror  which  reflects  every  thought  coming  into  it.  The  purpose  of 
this  analogy  is  to  illustrate  differences  between  individuals  just  as 
there  are  different  kinds  of  rooms,  styles  of  decoration,  coloured 
windows.The  scholastic  definition  of  the  mind  is  that  it  is  the  proximate 
principle  of  understanding,  and  designates  rational  life  as  opposed 
to  sense-knowledge.  Mind  is  not  a  special  power  over  and  above 
the  memory,  intelligence,  and  will,  but  is  a  potential  whole  comprising 
these  three.  It  includes  all  those  powers  which  in  their  operation  are 
entirely  removed  from  matter  and  from  material  conditions.  (St. 
Thomas,  Quaestiones  Disputatae,  De  Veritate,  x.  1  ;  and  ad  12  ; 
Sum.  Theol.  77,  a.  5.)

Activity  of  mind. — This  may  be  considered  in  three  aspects  : 
mobile,  rhythmic,  and  chaotic.  The  former  is  shown  in  gentleness, 
generosity,  gratitude,  goodwill,  easy-going  disposition.  Rhythmic 
activity  is  shown  in  reason  and  logic  ;  in  business-like  character  ; 
moderation  in  love  and  hate,  likes  and  dislikes.  Chaotic  activity  is 
shown  in  intolerance,  suspicion,  imprudence.

A.  The  Intellect.  (Plane  III,  IV). — The  active  intellect  is  defined  as  the 
power  of  abstracting,  whereby  the  object  obtained  by  the  senses  (the  image  stored 
in  the  imagination)  is  disengaged  from  its  individual  conditions  and  rendered  in- 
telligible. It  "  abstracts  from  the  representations  of  concrete  things  or  qualities, 
the  typical  ideal  essential  elements,  leaving  behind  the  material  and  particular  "" 
(I.  74),  "  manipulating  them  like  algebra  without  immediate  reference  to  the  con- 
crete."    It  considers  things  apart  from  quantity,  quality,  place,  and  time.Relation  of  intellect  to  corporeal  organs. — intellect  is  a  function  of  the  mind 
alone  ;  it  is  not  exerted  by  means  of  any  organ  (Maher50,  p.  239,  240).  Intellectual 
activity  depends  extrinsically,  or  per  accidens,  on  the  organic  faculties,  as  the  school- 
men said  (ib.  p.  241).     Intellect  is  a  spiritual  faculty.

Whereas  sensations  of  touch,  or  phantasms  of  colour  are  possible  only  to 
a  soul  that  informs  a  body,  and  can  only  be  elicited  by  modification  of  an  animated 
system  of  nerves,  intellectual  judgments  are  not  the  results  of  a  stimulus  of  a  sense- 
organ,  but  are  products  of  purely  spiritual  action.  "  The  inferior  mode  of  mental 
life  is  awakened  by  the  irritation  of  sentient  nerves,  the  superior  activity  is  due  to  a 
higher  reaction  from  the  unexhausted  nature  of  the  mind  itself  ;  and  the  ground 
for  this  reaction  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  same  indivisible  soul  is  the  root  of  both 
orders  of  faculties."  (ib.  p.  242).

i48  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

B.  Perception.  Imagination. — These  are  shown  on  both  the  II  and  the  III 
plane.      (Cf.  §  155)-  "

C.  Concepts  v.  Images. — The  formation  of  concepts  must  be  distinguished  from 
that  of '  phantasms,  or  images.  the  concept  is  a  representation  of  objects  of  a 
class  ;  the  image  pictures  only  one  particular  colour,  shape,  size,  etc.  The  concept 
is  fixed,  immutable,  and  has  no  relation  to  time.  The  image  is  unstable,  contingent, 
and  fluctuates.  The  concept  represents  the  nature  or  essence  in  an  abstract  con- 
dition, "  ignoring  or  prescinding  all  accidental  individualising  conditions."  "  The 
image' reproduces  the  object  clothed  with  these  concrete  determinations."     (lb.  p.

237).237).

D.  Thought. — This  cannot  be  called  a  "  sensation,  "as  shown  by  the  question 
raised  by  Balmez  (quoted  in  Maher,  p.  243)  :  "  Is  the  perception  of  the  difference 
of  the  smell  of  the  rose  and  that  of  the  pink  a  sensation  ?  If  we  answer  that  it  is 
not,  we  infer  that  the  judgment  is  not  the  sensation  transformed,  for  it  is  not  even  a 
sensation."

The  mechanism  of  thought. — "  The  external  objects  stimulate  the  senses  and 
effect  a  modification  of  the  sensuous  faculties."  The  result  is  a  sensuous  percipient 
act.  "  A  sensuous  phantasm  arises  in  the  imagination.  The  intellect  now  acts 
and  abstracts  the  essence,  thereby  generating  the  concept  which  expresses  (the 
essence  of  the  object.  This  abstract  concept  is  then  viewed  by  '  reflection  '  as 
capable  of  representing  any  member  of  the  class.  A  formally  universal  idea  is  now 
constituted  "s0  (p.  311).  "  By  comparison,  reflection  and  generalization,  the  idea 
is  elaborated  till  we  attain  to  the  distinct  and  precise  concepts  or  ideas  which  accurate 
science  demands"  (Maher17  :  vii.  633).E.  Reasoning. — This  is  defined  as  a  process  in  which  a  succession  of  cognitive 
acts  representing  the  various  "  notes  "  of  a  thing  are  unified,  through  relations 
being  established  between  them.  It  is  the  opposite  process  to  intuition.  By 
intuition,  one  single  act  conveys  all  that  can  be  known  of  a  thing.  The  faculty 
of  reason  seeks  new  and  differential  characteristics.  The  most  minute  differences 
are  essential.  It  includes  :  discerning  power,  sense  of  discrimination,  classifying 
power,  sense  of  proportion  ;  observing  power  for  (a)  things,  to  see  analogies  and 
resemblances  between  them  ;  (b)  persons  :  e.g.,  character  reading  ;  (c)  ideas,  which 
link  this  faculty  to  that  of  the  intellect.  It  also  includes  the  attributes  of  order- 
liness, method,  sense  of  absurdity,  and  therefore  merriment,  humour,  wit,  sarcasm, 
ridicule  ;  curiosity,  mimicry,  character-interpretation  as  by  actors  ;  arguing,  and 
reasoning  power  pure  and  simple.

F.  Intuition,  or  intuitive  knowledge. — This  term  is  variously  used.  In  the 
present  volume  it  is  intended  to  refer  to  a  particular  kind  of  knowledge  obtained 
through  the  use  of  the  intellect,  as  applied  to  many  of  the  topics  of  medicine. 
That  which  is  called  esateric  knowledge,  or  "wisdom,"  may  be  included  under  this 
heading.  Foresight,  so-called  mystical  interpretation,  insight  are  obtained  by  the 
nse  of  the  intellect  influenced  by  mature  experience.     In  medicine,  as  well  as  in  daily

life,  we  may

"  Look  with  spirit-eyes,  and  lo  !  shall  see 
Glory  in  everv  leaf  o'erwaves  the  head."

(Night  94  ;  Burton  ii.  39).

"  The  spirit  of  faith  is  the  habit  of  seeing  everything  in  God,  and  God  in 
everything."  Fr-  Plus.(Night  94  ;  Burton  ii.  39).

"  The  spirit  of  faith  is  the  habit  of  seeing  everything  in  God,  and  God  in 
everything."  Fr-  Plus.

From  the  Scholastic  point  of  view,  the  following  are  proper  propositions  :

(1)  All  knowledge  begins  in  the  data  furnished   by  sense-experience.

(2)  Primarv  principles  are  known  by  intuition.

(3)  Abstraction  and  discursive  reasoning  are  the  instruments  wherewith 
we  discern  the  nature  of  the  data  of  sense-experience,  their  laws  and  causes.  Through 
these  two  servants  of  intuition  the  mind  gains  a  scientific  and  philosophical  knowledge 
of  things  (Sum.  Theol.  i.  58,  a.  3  ;  II-IIa.  49,  a.  5,  ad  2m.).  Through  the  same  two 
servants  of  intuition  we  arrive  at  the  notion  of  immaterial  beings  and  of  God  Him- 
self" (i.  12)  »  (1,  84-88).

(4)  "  Concepts  and  reasoning,  therefore,  are  in  themselves  inferior  to  intuition  ; 
but  they  are  the  normal"  (i.e.,  usual,  or  most  widespread)  "processes  of  human 
knowledge."

"  For  the  Schoolmen,  the  intuitive  act  of  intellectual  knowledge  is  hy  its 
nature  the  most  perfect  act  of  knowledge,  since  it  is  an  immediate  apprehension 
of  and  contact  with  reality  in  its  concrete  existence,  and  our  supreme  reward  in  the 
supernatural' order  will  consist  in  the  intuitive  apprehension  of  God  by  our  intelli-

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  I49

fT^L  l^  ^fic  vision      But  in  °«  present  conditions  of  earthly  life  our  know- 
ledge must  of  necessity*  make  use  of  concepts  and  reasoning  "  (Sauvage-  vii  ,  p   8  J.fT^L  l^  ^fic  vision      But  in  °«  present  conditions  of  earthly  life  our  know- 
ledge must  of  necessity*  make  use  of  concepts  and  reasoning  "  (Sauvage-  vii  ,  p   8  J.

§  162.  Occult  Phenomena  and  Powers.— I.  Common 
usage  applies  the  term  "  occult  "  to  such  phenomena  as  psychic 
power  healing  power,  thought-reading,  telepathy,  clairvoyance, 
crystal-gazing,  fortune-telling,  discernment  of  the  future,  interpreta- 
tion of  dreams  and  visions,  medium-ship,  character-delineation 
£•&•  palmistry)  divination,  magic,  sorcery,  hypnotism,  obsession, 
willing  another  who  is  at  a  distance  to  perform  some  desired 
personal  service.  Such  phenomena  are  studied  in  theosophy 
hermetic  science,  astrology  (and  medical  astrology),  spiritualism' 
Christian  science,  and  also  figure  in  new-thought  movements  and 
many  other  revivals  and  elaborations  of  ancient  pagan  pursuits  « 
(11.  19;    xi.  199.)  F

charlatISveatShen  fJ?*"  Case*  therf, is  the  suspicion  of  trickery,  deception,  fraud, 
charlatanry,  the  term  occultism"  is  quite  properly  applied  in  an  entirelv 
different  manner,-namely,  to  the  investigation,  by  the  useof  reason and  loSc

human  SL(l-eThedfn%n0t/elf"e.Vident)  CaUS6S  ^  efects  °Perative  i*  ordmf ry 
human  affairs.  The  events  of  one's  own  daily  life,  and  those  of  one's  fellows  are 
all  natural  sequences  of  previous  behaviour:  This  is  not  realized  and^vrong 
conclusions  are  apt  to  be  drawn-such  as  ascribing  good  or  ill  fortune  to  "fate  " 
or  an  extramundane  agency,  or  to  the  deliberate  ilLill  of  othen Better  know 
ledge  of  such  a  subject  would  enable  one  to  avoid  misjudging  others T  and  to  heTp 
them  better,  by  realising  that  every  soul  has  his  own  way  to  |o  and  his  own  manne? 
of  proceeding  on  that  way,  toward  the  one  final  goal  of  all.  mannerII.  Occult  phenomena  in  the  common  meaning  of  the  term 
are  (a)  true,  (b)  false.  The  latter  are  achieved  by  deception,  or 
illusion,  charlatanry,  or  may  be  evidence  of  self-deception,  or  of 
disease  (hysteria,  neurasthenia,  mental  disorder,  insanity)  The 
former  belong  to  two  categories  :  (i)  Impersonal;  that  is,  explicable 
according  to  physical  laws,  though  at  present  only  imperfectly 
understood.  Such  phenomena  manifest  sometimes  in  inanimate 
objects,  sometimes  m  organized  beings— animal  or  human  (in  virtue 
of  their  possession  of  a  receptive  nervous  system).  (2)  Personal. 
(i;  Natural;  that  is,  manifested  in  human  "nature"  (a)  actively 
—in  the  case  of  phenomena  of  the  kind  referred  to  in  8  163  •  (6) 
passively— m  which  case  the  phenomena  manifested  in  one  person 
originate  m  another  or  in  numerous  others  (e.g.  crowd-psychology) 
°rumJ  supernatural  "  beings,  (ii)  Supernatural  agencies  :  (^so- 
called  disembodied  spirits  ;  (b)  angelic  beings— good  and  beneficent, 
or  bad  and  malevolent,  evil,  satanic  ;    (c)  the  Supreme  Being

Hi.  The  word  "  supernatural  "  has  another  application  which 
is  properly  and  accurately  explained  only  in  Catholic  philosophy  (see 
Cuthbert,"'  p  28,  sqq.  ;  Poulain,"*,  chap  vi  ;  Vassall-Phillips"  • 
etc).  Ordinarily  the  human  being  lives  a  "  natural  "  life,  however 
cultured  unse  fish  altruistic,  pious,  virtuous.  He  may  live  a 
supernatural  life,  by  entering  a  "  state  of  grace,"  so  that  the 
human  nature  is  transcended  (super),  as  indicated  by  Plane  V  in  the

very  oi^niJZ^  ^^^y^^  ^  ***  f°r  them  at  ^  ^  *ere  was

i5o  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Chart.     While  living  such  a  life,  phenomena  may  become  manifest 
(e.g.  visions,  revelations)  which  must  not  be  confused  with  those  called

"  occult."  !-Chart.     While  living  such  a  life,  phenomena  may  become  manifest 
(e.g.  visions,  revelations)  which  must  not  be  confused  with  those  called

"  occult."  !-

IV.  Emotional  states  as  a  basis  of  occult  phenomena. — Strong 
emotional  states  may  impress  places  and  things  sufficiently  to  affect 
other  persons  in  the  absence  of  the  original  impressor.  Obsessions 
and  haunted  places  are  accounted  for  in  this  way.  "  A  place  or 
thing  such  as  a  weapon  or  article  of  furniture,  almost  anything  in  fact 
which  has  plaved  a  part  in  events  that  aroused  very  intense  emotional 
activity  on  the  part  of  those  who  enacted  them  becomes  itself  satur- 
ated as  it  were  with  the  emotions  involved.  So  much  so  that  it  can 
influence  people  of  exceptional  sympathetic  powers  and  enable  them 
to  observe  the  original  events  more. or  less  perfectly  as  if  they  were 
enacted  before  them.  Thus  in  some  cases  the  person  will  see  the 
occurrence  as   if  taking  place    before  his    eyes."     (Pater,146;     cf.

Benson.157)

V.  Occult  powers  natural  to  human  beings. — Some  ot  the 
powers  enumerated  in  the  previous  section  are  inherent  in  the  human 
organization.  They  remain  latent,  or  they  develop  more  or  less 
unwittingly  as  life  advances,  or  they  are  developed  by  suitable 
training.  In  a  few  persons  they  are  naturally  so  decided  as  to 
constitute  a  special  talent,  which  may  have  been  inherited..  The  possession  of  psychic  powers  (clairvoyance,  telepathy,  thought-reading 
etc )  is  sometimes  looked  on  as  evidence  of  special  favour,  or  "  spirituality, 
or  of  superiority  (being  a  "  very  advanced  soul  ")  to  be  emulated.  Such  powers 
are  taken  as  evidence  of  sainthood  in  Islam «  and  among  Buddhists32.  In  the 
case  of  Christian  saints,  such  phenomena  are  regarded  as  incidental,  and  not  a 
criterion  of  sanctity.  Not  only  is  there  no  relation  between  the  presence  or  absence 
of  such  powers  and  the  virtue  of  the  individual,  they  are  attainable  apart  therefrom.

VI.  The  basis  in  the  human  constitution  upon  which  such 
powers  depend  is  fivefold  :

(i)  The  vital  faculty  (161  ;  §  134)  :  vitality        . .  . .     Vegetative  Life.

(2)  Instinct  (180  ;  §  153) Sensitive     Life.

(3)  The  emotional  make-up  (159,  16411)  :  .  .

(The  scholastic  concupiscible  and  irascible  phenomena)    Sensitive     .Lite.

(4)  The  imagination  Sensitive     Life.

(5)  The  reasoning  powers  ;  deductive  logic         . .  •  •     Rational      Lite.(4)  The  imagination  Sensitive     Life.

(5)  The  reasoning  powers  ;  deductive  logic         . .  •  •     Rational      Lite.

§  163.  The  following  powers  are  specially  pertinent  to  medicine: 
(i)  Ability  to  read  character. — Fundamentally,  this_  is  the 
instinctive  discernment  of  friend  from  foe.  It  exists  from  infancy, 
and  is  to  be  observed  among  domestic  animals.  With  the  develop- 
ment of  reason,  the  consciousness  becomes  more  and  more  aware  of 
the  attractions  and  repulsions  produced  by  another  individual, 
whether  actually  present  or  only  thought  of.  As  life  proceeds.the 
contact  with  relations,  friends,  acquaintances,  and  strangers,  leads 
to  better  knowledge  of  character,  though  perhaps  nothing  more  than 
a  form  of  "  worldly  wisdom."  The  reasoning  power  may  be  deliber- 
ately brought  to  bear,  since  delineation  of  character  is  amenable  to 
rule,  and  can  be  studied,  and  taught  to  others*

*  The  Chinese  sought  to  establish  a  relation  between  character  and  physique 
as  long  ago  as  450  u.c.     (Wieger,  144).

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  jSI

As  mbusiness,  so  in  medicine,  it  is  a  subject  worthy  of  attention. 
Indeed  it  is  always  imprudent  to  neglect  it.

(ii)  Telepathy.  Thought-reading.— -These  depend  on  the  first 
three  of  the  above-named  powers,  and  not  on  reason.  They  cannot 
be  learned  from  books,  and  the  experience  cannot  be  taught  to 
others.  _  The  most  striking  examples  of  genuine  powers  of  this  kind 
are  furnished  between  (a)  parent  and  offspring,  when  there  is  intense 
mother  love  ;  (b)  persons  between  whom  there  is  special  friendship  ; 
(V)  husband  and  wife,  when  there  have  been  years  of  unbroken 
mutual  understanding.Since  they  are  powers  inherent  in  human  nature,  they  may  be 
developed  gradually  by  concentration  and  will-power,  exerted— not 
over  others,  but  over  oneself.     (Cf.  P'u.  Sung-Ling.153)

(in)  Healing  power. — (a)  Involuntary.  Success  or  failure  in  the 
handling  of  many  cases  in  ordinary  practice  is  usually  ascribed  to 
the  concrete  methods  employed  or  the  appliances  used.  Yet  it  is 
often  thought  that  the  personality  of  the  doctor  (whether  he  be 
specialist  or  not)  has  at  any  rate  something  to  do  with  the  efficacy  of 
the  treatment.

•  a  The  following  factors  contribute  :  inspiring  confidence,  the  bodily  state  being 
influenced  through  the  emotions  ;  possession  of  great  vitality,  which  favourably 
influences  a  debilitated  state  through  the  vegetative  powers,  even  apart  from  actual 
personal  contact ;  will-power  even  if  used  unconsciously  has  a  bracing  effect  on  the 
pat-ient ;  psychic  power,  even  when  the  owner  is  unaware  of  it,  may  directly  influence 
1  jOCume  and  hormonic  (e-&-)  activities  beneficially,  and  the  vegetative  life  in  general 
A  disharmonious  person  will  actually  drain  vitality  from  a  weakly  person. 
The  mother's  touch  takes  away  the  bodily  pain  of  her  little  boy.

(b)  Voluntary.— Among  the  laity  there  is  sometimes  a  deliberate 
attempt  made  to  develop  so-called  specific  psychic  healing  powers, 
through  healing  circles,  and  the  like  (theosophy,  Christian  science^ 
etc.)._  The  fact  that  such  practice  is  at  the  expense  of  exact  anatomical  and  physio- 
logical knowledge  and  is  exalted  above  medical  training,  cannot  but  arouse  condem- 
nation. Medicine  herself  is  not  a  little  responsible  for  the  rising  up  of  "  healers  " 
m  her  lack  of  appreciation  of  the  insistent  reality  to  many  patients  of  the  sufferings 
which  she  cannot  explain  or  find  a  physical  basis  for.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the 
psychics  "  possessed  genuine  powers,  they  would  not  lose  them  by  going  through 
the  proper  doors  of  the  medical  curriculum,  and  their  patients  would  be  the  gainers.

(c)  Miraculous  healing. — By  this  term  is  meant  supernatural 
intervention  apart  from  human  instrumentality.

_  Of  this  it  might  be  said  that  Medicine  would  not  suffer  by  candidly  acknow- 
ledging its  occurrence  through  her  leading  voices.  Not  to  do  so  exposes  her  to 
disrepute  m  the  minds  of  those  who  have  experienced  the  cures,  or  have  personally 
met  with  such  cases.  Though  ignorance  in  various  forms  (prejudice,  intolerance 
party  spirit)  is  inevitably  in  her  ranks,  it  should  not  be  chargeable  to  Medicine 
herself.

.„       "  The  sectarian  thinks  that  he  has  the  sea  ladled  into  his  private  pond  " 
(lagore,  Fireflies,  209).  e

§  164.    Lists  of  Terms  applicable  to  Mental  Faculties

and  Affections 
Individuals  may  be  described  in  terms  of  a  series  of  "  notes  "— 
the  physique,  the  emotional  make-up,  the  temperament,  or  disposition,

i52  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

the    character,    and   the   talents    or    intellectual    capacities.     These 
together  make  up  the  "  individuality."i52  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

the    character,    and   the   talents    or    intellectual    capacities.     These 
together  make  up  the  "  individuality."

The  following  lists  under  each  "  note  "  do  not  attempt  complete- 
ness, and  some  of  the  descriptive  words  might  be  placed  equally  under 
other  headings  than  those  given.

I.     Physique.— (i)  General.— Robust,     spare,     wiry;      strong     or     delicate

("constitution");    good  or  deficient  amwH-'<?»»  cla^si-

(ii)  Special.— Classified  according  to  the  nine  systems  of  Dr.  Abbott  s      classi 
fication      or  according  to  such  types  as  these   (Stanton* -)-vege tative    thoracic 
glandular    muscular,    osseous,   nervous,    etc.     Basis:    features   of  the  face       siz- 
and  shape  S  head,  hands,  fingers,   feet,  etc.     Throughout,  it  is  necessary  also  to 
speci  y  the  qualities'  of  strength  and  weakness  in  their  degrees  (i.  si ight  or  minimal 
2    moderate  ;    3,  normal,  average,  mean,  or  "  equable     ;    4,  well-marked  ,    5,  *ery

"^T^MOxToNT^MAKB-UP.-Classification  according  to  the  five  headings 
of  the  table  in  §  160.  Basis:  the  character  and  phase  of  the  breath  ;  the  degree 
of  vitality  •  the  dominant  imponderable  element ;  the  dominant  humour  To 
draw  up  a  formula  to  represent  the  emotional  make-up  conveniently  for  clinical 
wotI  the  initial  letters  of  the  (Latin)  names  of  the  emotions  may  be  used,the  dominant 
Amotion  being  expressed  by  a  capital  letter.  Degrees  of  intensity  are  indicated 
bv  index  Lurls  drawn  up  as  in  the  preceding  paragraph.  For  example,  a  Timor  - 
pison  mfght  be  represented  by  ^formula  g*  1-  tr*  i>  T*  ;    an      Ira  "-person  mightbe  ^^^^l^cRiMiiK  of  the  Several  EMoxioNS.-These  are  arranged 
alphabetically,  and  not  according  to  order  of  severity.  In  some  cases  the  words 
apply  also  to  mental  states   or  attributes  sometimes  associated   with  the   given

emOti70^:tyblissful,  buoyant,  ecstatic,  enraptured,  enthusiastic,  entranced,  exalted,

^^iS^affectionate,  amorose,  cheerful,  contented,  eager,  excited  gay 
inquisitive  lively,  love  of  (a)  objects  (collecting  spirit),  (6)  wealth  m  various  forms  , 
(°)qopposrte  sex  ;    pleasure  ;    sentimentality  ;    sympathetic.     (Some  of  these  convey

MeaS  !=te<achJng  S^ffictiL,  anguish,  anxiety,  bitterness,  ^en^arted, 
chagrin  cheerless,  dejected,  depressed,  despondent,  discontented  displeased, 
^quieted,  distressed,  fretting,  gloom,  grief    infelicitous,  ^^■1^^S.

S^^r^^nT^seSei  ^olSd^^^S^  ^d^

tribUlt^  ^^o^^^^^^s,  bellicose,  ^ter,  boiling  bold, 
bristling  cantankerous,  capricious,  captious,  caustic,  choleric,  churlish,  contentious, 
contary  cross,  cynical,  daring,  desperate,  displeased  easily  ofi ended, ^asperfed, 
exceptions  excitable,  fierce,  fiery,  fractious,  fuming,  furious,  hasty,  having  hatred, 
topeCus  indignant,  infuriate,  irate,  irritable,  irritated,  jealous,  passionate .peevish, 
petted,  petulant,  pugnacious,  quarrelsome,  querulous  rabid  ragi ng  ^lentless, 
resentful,  severe,  shrewish,  sore,  storming,  sulky,  sullen,  suspicious,  tart,  testy, 
vengeful,  vexed,  vindictive,  violent,  virulent   wrathful.  _         o.    ,    ,    ,     hrow.Fear :  afraid,  aghast,  alarmed,  anxious,  apprehensive,  astounded  brow- 
beaten, cowardly,  cowed,  coy,  craven,  daunted,  despairing,  despondent,  £ffident, 
discouraged,  dismayed,  disquieted,  dreading,  envious,  *f*-^^\^XI' 
fearful  fidgetv  flinching,  flurried,  frightened,  fussy,  gentle,  harassed,  hesitating, 
hoSedrhlr/or-struck,  Irresolute,  irritable,  jealous,  mistrusting,  . ^^ous  panic- 
stricken  penitent,  perturbed,  pious,  pusillanimous,  quailing,  quaking  quavering, 
fepentantP  restless,  Scared,  scrupulous^  shrinking  shuddering,  sh y  : ;kulking  sty 
solicitous,  startled,  suspicious,  temperate,  terrified,  terror-struck,  timid,  timorous, 
trembling,  trepidation,  unmannered,  weak-hearted,  whining,  worrying.

Moods.  Moodiness.  Disposition.  "  Moods  are  the  waves  rising  in  your 
heart  "  They  are  due  to  the  changes  in  the  breath  from  hour  to  hour  or  day  tc .day 
The  rate  of  change  varies  in  different  persons.  When  the  change  ^comparatively 
frequent,  the  person  may  be  described  as  moody,  -changeable.  Tms  character 
may  occur  more  at  some  periods  of  life  than  others  in  the  same  perso n ;  Thus 
it  is  more  frequent  at  puberty  and  during  youth.  It  is  possible  to  rise  above  the 
cycle  of  moods,  by  the  exercise  of  self-restraint.  Moods  change  with  surroundings 
(places  and   people).

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  i53THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  i53

III.     Temperamental  type,  or  disposition.— Basis  :  the  humoral  formula 
This  is  expressed  outwardly  m  differences  of  (a)  texture-varying  solidity  of  the 
tissues  of  the  body  ;    (b)  development  of  the  various  parts  of  the  body  •     (c)  rate 
of   activity   of   (i)    vegetative  processes-nutrition,   waste,   formation  of'  germinal 
cells,  etc     (u)  expenditure  of  nervous  energy  ;    (d)  tonicity  of  muscles  and   nerves 
The  words  descriptive  of  temperament  often  apply  also  to  II.     Examples  ■     aggres- 
sive, amiable,  austere,  buoyant,  capricious,  cheerful,  chilling,  churlish;  complfcent 
conservative    courageous,  depressed,  despondent,  discontented,  energetic     enthusi- 
astic, excitable,  fastidious,  forbearing,  fretful,  forward,   gushing,  harassed    impetu- 
ous   indolent,  intolerant    irascible,  irritable,  jealous,  malicious,  moody,  obstinate 
petulant,   querulous,    rebellious,    reckless,    remorseful,    ruffled,    secretive    spiteful 
stubborn,  submissive,  suspicious,  taciturn,  tranquil,  tyrannical,  uncompromising 
unforgiving,  verbose,  vindictive,  zealous.  P  mg'

Many  of  these  terms  also  apply  to  the  description  of  II  and  IV 
It  is  worth  noting  that  among  these  types  there  are  many' which  are  sun- 
posed  to  be  evidence  of  high  human  aspirations,  and  yet  strictly  belong  to  the 
•  l^er  mind.  Hence  it  has  been  very  truly  said  :  "  Those  sweet  affections  which 
incline  the  heart  to  God  .  .  .  come  from  the  sensitive  temperament,  or  bodily  dis 
position  rather  than  from  the  solid  piety  of  reason,  and  are  carnal  rather  than 
STL  (Las^ "•)•-"  Things  that  are  apparently  of  the  highest  order  in  know- 
ledge and  art  and  sentiment  are  not  things  of  the  spirit,  but  things  of  the  sensel^ai^orthft^^cSr Aqumas  and  in  the  modern  rfsearches  inTe>

IV      Character.— This  is  really  a  collective  term,  since  all  the  other  "  notes  "

contribute  to  it      The  terms  which  describe  character  may  be   groujed  under

sensuous,  intellectual,  moral,  and  aesthetic  groups,  or  under  the  five  subdivisions

""£  f     Ufi  *ermmol°gy   (Ego,   Memory,   Mind,    Heart,   Conscience)      Many

rou     afonem°re  ^  comPOIlent'  and  therefore  do  not  belong  strictly  to  one

Ego  :  Positive:  acquisitive,  amative,  approbative,  artful,  artless  avaricious 
arrogant  boastfu.  churlish,  domineering,  gluttonous,  grasping,  grouching  inquteTtivI' 
jealous,  lewd  licentious,  loud,  obdurate,  obstinate,  puinlcious,  SquXlsome' 
sociable,  superstitious  vain,  voluptuous,  worldly.  Negative  :  abstem  ous  apathetic' 
hasty    indolent,  indulgent,  miserly,  shy,  timid,  unselfish,  weak  pathetic,

pm.ft,"?.;  Positive  :  accessible,  adaptable,  affable,  altruistic,  ardent,  benevolent 
contemplative,  emotional,  charming,  compassionate,  facetious,  fascinating  frivolous 
gay,  harmonious,  hospitable,  lively,  peaceable,  philanthropic,  sincere  Ste 
tranquil.— Negative  :  tepid,  meek,  lenient.  ^    '  '    falmPie.

,.„„«  ConJdence  •'  PositiveJ  ascetic,  austere,  blameless,  brave,  conscientious 
conservative,  courageous,  diligent,  exacting,  fastidious,  humble,  industrious  perl 
severing,  scrupulous,  sensitive,  strong-willed,  thorough,  truthful  well-balanced 
Negative:  deceitful,  defiant,  flippant,  impetuous,  impulsive,  imprudent  mafc tons' 
pusillanimous,  resentful,  slow,  treacherous,  unforgiving,  ungrateful  unsociaMe' 
untruthful,  vindictive.     (The  moral  sense  may  be  absent)  unsociable,Mind  Agnostic  ambitious,  brusque,  censorious,  cunning,  enterprising 
foreseeing,   intellectual,    loquacious,    methodical,    opinionated,    orderly    piauslblf'

?nner1t;CA;oPre]UdlCed'  ^^  "^^  S&titiC&1-  S^PtiC'  seri°^,  StUtef  SuM  e' 
superstitious,  uncompromising.  '   auuulc'

It  should  be  noted  that  character  is  ^)  native  and  unalterable 
(whatever  some  educationists  say)  ;  (b)  capable  of  being  fashioned  by 
the  will  of  the  person  himself  or  by  that  of  the  persons  amongst 
whom  he  lives.  To  have  a  "  strong  character  "  is  considered  the 
highest  ideal  by  many  ;  (b)  is  therefore  much  advocated.  But  this 
idea  is  not  necessarily  true.  Animals  have  character  in  that  different 
kinds  of  ego  are  as  it  were  personified  in  them.    (cf.  Paracelsus^,  p.  209)

Character  is  necessarily  intimately  related  to  physique 
emotional  type  and  temperamental  type.  Hence  character  de- 
lineation is  possible  from  a  close  study  of  those  aspects.

The  skeletal  system  (bones,  joints,  ligaments,  muscles,  etc.)  is   ' 
the   expression  of  the   character  of  the   cerebral   nervous   system. 
ine  viscera  are  the  expression  of  the  character  of  the  vegetative

I54  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

system.     Hence  it  happens  that  the   usual   autopsy  discusses  the

least  important  part  of  the  "  case."     (See  §127.)

Interests  Ex.  :  personal  interests  :  the  preservation  of  one's  life  and 
health  and  general  welfLe  ;  interests  of  the  family  ;  of  the  social  circle,  etc. 
Tr,+prp=d-c;  manifested  in  the  usa  of  the  various  talents.  ,  .     ,         ,j_

htUV      t™  -These    are   best  classified   according   to   the   subject-matter 
to  which  the  mind  is  directed  ;    though  they  may  be  classified  according  to  the

faCU%LTaSd'  constructiveness;    architecture,  etc.  ;    technologyfaCU%LTaSd'  constructiveness;    architecture,  etc.  ;    technology

Scientific  :    all  branches  of  learning  ;    mathematics,  sciences,  logic,  analytical

tilents  ■    calculating  powers.    Domestic  science.    Administration.

^       intelUauat:    til  branches  of  knowledge      Philosophy,,  history,  sciences

JEsthetic:     arts    and    crafts,    music,    sculpture     designing,    painting,    poetry,

literary  art,  dramatic  art ;  wit ;  women's  crafts  of  all  kinds  ;  poise. 
Imaginative  :   originality  ;    inventiveness.

Moral  :   perseverance,  concentratmg-power,  law.  noA~„n<nr  ■

Other    talents:     language;     intuitive    perception;      foresight;      pedagogy,

rhetoric;    vocal.  ,  ,    „A

Social :    domestic  interests  ;    love  of  children    of  home.  ,

Political.      Military.      Sport    (athletics,    acrobatic    art,    adventuresomeness) .

Commercial  life.    Agriculture,  Husbandry.  Ttmieht

Much  overlapping  is  necessarily  present  m  preparing  such  a  list      It  mignt

be  extended  to  mcPudf  all  the  subjects  taught  in  universities,  and  schools  of  all

kinds,  for  persons  of  all  ages.

S  165      Interactions  between  the  various  aspects  of  the  Soul.

I.  Intellect.— Acts  on  vegetative  life  via  emotions.     (Effect  of  emotions  on 
bodily  functions  :   §  §  139,160)

IS  (tffegtauZlife  :   physical  desires,  sense-impressions,  especially  in  dream

(M  s£iHv,%  ^psShical  desires,  either  in  oneself  or  from  others.     The

imagination  influences  it  in  hypnosis. 
(c)  The  will  :■    compelling  attention  or  forcibly  diverting  attention. 
8  Other  wills  :    ditto,  includes  angelic  ^intelligences  as  well  as :  ^man

II.  Reason.— Acts  on  vegetative  life  vi&  the  emotions,  with  their  desiresII.  Reason.— Acts  on  vegetative  life  vi&  the  emotions,  with  their  desires

aQd  feisracted  on  by  sensitive  life.     Emotions  strongly  affect  the  reason  in  people 
of  certain  ^Positions  life_effecting  exterior  actions.

Acts  on fens^ve  life.     Through  sensuous  cognition  it  acts  °n  the  emotions 
feeds  or  starves  or  fails  to  starve  the  sensitive  appetite,  and  so  acts  m  the  same

^J^Z^^^^^^^^^  aid  of  bodily  mechanism  it

l6adS  A^n^S^  r^^^P-duc-es  acts  of  Judgment,  or  worship,

or  contemplation.  .       ,,

Acts  on  the  intellect  :    "  concentration.

Acts  on  the  memory  :   "  recollection,"  watchfulness.  ronrKved

Acts  on  itself :   brings  perseverance  in  the  performance  of  a  design  conceived

and  elaborated  by  the  intellect.

^'™  l&^aTSnen  this  propounds  to  the  will  what  is  the  greatest  good  ;

^Trr^ir^fol  in  nullifying  will  to  good,  and ^sing 
will  to  evil  So  also,  fear  of  another  person,  fear  of  an  idea,  fear  of  a  thing  ^ssions 
hinder  the  judgment,  and  so  affect  the  will.     Emotions  can  be  sublimated  by  mter-

^W  vfTpMile  :  this  acts  directly  on  the  will.  If  the  objects  * .both 
appetite  and  will  coincide,  the  will  is  strengthened  ,  otherwise  it  is  ^^ 
"The  passions  modify  the  organic  conditions  and  this  influences  al ?  ^gmtive 
faculties,  and  their  intensity  may  prevent  the  mind  from  applymg  itself  to  the 
higher  operations  of  the  intellect  and  will      ("  9,  10,  77  I        *•.  P-65<>)-

Vegetative  life  :   the  corporeal  state  affects  the  will  „„.,..,.„

Environment  :     circumstances    of  life,    personal  atmosphere    of   neighbours,

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  i55

etc.  ;   presence  of  persons  of  strong  will,  all  interfere  with  or  modify  the  actions  of 
the  (patient  s)  will.  JTHE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  i55

etc.  ;   presence  of  persons  of  strong  will,  all  interfere  with  or  modify  the  actions  of 
the  (patient  s)  will.  J

Diseases  of  the  Will.— Inconstancy,  irresolution  (lack  of  energy),  impulsiveness 
(excess  of  energy  ;    excitability),  and  "  mortal  sin  "  (domain  of  moral  philosophy).

IV.  Practical  Application.— The  fact  that  feelings,  im- 
aginations and  thoughts  influence  the  character  is  of  the  greatest 
practical  importance,  but  by  using  the  will-power  to  control  them  all, 
one  becomes  also  master  of  one's  life  and  "  fate."  Each  emotional 
"  note  "  has  its  own  effect  on  body  and  mind,  and  can  be  over- 
ruled by  the  will.  The  influence  of  the  imaginations  is  implied  in 
the  phrases  ' '  looking  on  the  bright  (or  dark)  side  of  things . ' '  Cheer- 
ful, gloomy,  constructive,  destructive,  upright,  deceitful  thoughts  all 
affect  the  sum-total  of  the  conduct,  the  attitude  of  the  mind  towards 
others,  and  can  all  be  over-ruled  by  the  will.

"  If  the  endowment  is  great  in  one  direction,  it  is  at  the  expense 
of  some  corresponding  defect  in  another  direction,  as  when  tender- 
hearted men  are  lacking  in  judicial  faculty,  while  men  in  whom  the 
judicial  faculty  is  prominent  tend  to  be  tyrannical"  (Chu  Hsi,1"  p.  59). 
The  study  of  all  such  interactions  as  are  suggested  by  the  lists 
of  synonyms  above  given  affords  a  better  idea  of  what  constitutes 
ideal  "  balance  "  in  regard  to  the  various  components  of  the  human 
being.  A  more  graphic  and  tangible  idea  is  at  the  same  time 
obtainable  in  this  way  of  much  of  the  subject-matter  of  ethical  and 
moral  philosophy.  To  assign  a  distinct  place  for  it  in  the  domain  of 
Medicine  is  not  to  disown  the  precedence  of  religion.THESIS  I.     DISORDERS  OF  HEALTH

i.     Definition  of    the  Terms  *.     Cause,  Disease,   Symptom

191.  Cause. — The  word 
"  Cause/'  in  medical  works, 
refers  to  that  which  initiates  a 
given  state  of  the  human  body, 
or  maintains  a  fixity  of  such  a 
state.

§  1 66.  It  is  to  be  noted,  says  Costasus,  that  the  term  cause  does  not  refer  to 
"  efficient  "  cause,  for  disease,  not  being  a  definite  entity,  does  not  require  an  efficient 
cause.  In  other  words,  disease  is  not  in-formed  matter. — This  applies  equally 
in  modern  thought.  If  the  changes  of  disease  are  modified  biochemical  reactions, 
they  cannot  be  considered  in  terms  of  matter  and  form.  But  formal  causes,  and 
substantial  causes,  as  well  as  the  differences  between  qualities  and  dispositions, 
tendencies,  passive  and  active  states,  and  fixed  morbid  conditions,  are  all  better 
understood  under  the  precise  thought  of  modern  scholastic  philosophy. — A  cause 
may  be  understood  as  anything  which  effects,  or  assists,  or  maintains,  or  imparts  a 
(morbid)  function,  whether  actively  or  passively — morbid,  because  this  part  of 
the  Canon  is  concerned  with  disease.

Human  body.  Not  an  animal  body.  The  teaching  to  be  presented  does  not 
necessarily   apply  to   veterinary  medicine.

Fixity  of  state. — Note  that  some  states  are  labile,  and  others  are  stable  or  fixed. 
Labile  states  are  more  or  less  easily  curable,  but  fixed  states  are  very  difficult  to 
resolve  or  cure.

State. — We  must  distinguish  carefully  between  cause,  disposition,  state,  habit, 
symptoms.State. — We  must  distinguish  carefully  between  cause,  disposition,  state,  habit, 
symptoms.

192.  Disease. — This  is  an  abnormal  unnatural  state  of  the 
human  body,  in  virtue  of  which  injurious  effects  result.  This 
injurious  effect  is  the  beginning  of  the  disease.  Such  an  ab- 
normal state  is  either  (a)  an  intemperament,  or  (b)  an  abnormal 
composition  (see  2055  231.).

§  167.  It  may  be  noted  that  on  this  view  the  state  is  primary, 
and  the  disease  secondary.  To  the  modern  view,  the  disease  comes 
first,  and  the  state  is  its  result.  The  state  is  "  the  reaction  to  the 
causal  noxious  agent."  Such  a  state  is  (i)  detrimental  to  the  body, 
(a)  by  an  "  aggressive  "   action  upon  the  tissues  by  the  agent,  (b)

156

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  157

as  an  unfortunate  by-effect,  producing  degenerations  of  various 
kinds  and  degrees — sometimes  mechanically  (pressure  on  parts, 
interference  with  vascular  supply) — sometimes  incidentally,  in  the 
form  of  late  toxic  actions  of  the  microbic  poisons,  (ii)  beneficial  to 
the  body — though  indirectly,  since  it  is  certainly  damaged  in  the 
process — as  tending  to  destroy  the  invading  organisms  or  at  least 
neutralizing  the  poisonous  products.

In  Avicenna's  view,  however,  both  agent  and  state  are  equally 
important.  One  cannot  speak  of  a  "  reaction,"  any  more  than  one 
would  say  (for  instance)  that  sodium  carbonate  is  a  reaction  to 
hydrochloric  acid.  Unless  both  substances  are  there,  there  is  no 
reaction.     So,  without  an  abnormal  state,  there  is  no  malady.

Note  also  that  "  poisoning  "  ("  intoxication  ")  is  not  a  disease.Note  also  that  "  poisoning  "  ("  intoxication  ")  is  not  a  disease.

§  168.     The    following    classification    of   words    often    used    indifferently    for 
"  disease,'    as  if  they  were  really  synonymous,  will  help  to  a  more  precise  usage. 
A- — Terms   bearing  primarily  a  general  sense.

Ill-health  :  not  used  specifically  ;  there  may  or  may  not  be  a  diagnosable 
"  disease."

Illness  :  the  state  of  being  ill ;  sickness.  Vaguely  used  for  anything 
from  slight  disability  to  a  fatal  condition.  More  definite  in  meaning 
than  "  ill-health."  &

Malady  :  (lit.  ill  condition  ;  male  habitus).  A  synonym  for  "  an  illness," 
appearing  in  polite  literature  for  conditions  not  necessarily  organic 
or  for  conditions  which  have  not  been  diagnosed,  and  yet  may  prove

IcLlcLJ..

Ailment.  This  may  be  some  definite  morbid  condition,  or  simply  implv 
discomfort  (possibly  short  of  actual  pain).  Literally,  is  synonymous 
with  "  a  sickness,"  "  an  illness."

Disorders,  in  general,  (cf.  198.)  This  term  is  used  still  more  specifi- 
cally,  as   a  rule.     See  under  B.

Disease  (Morbus.  Marad)  in  general.  This  word  is  technical,  whereas  the 
other  words  have  a  more  popular  application.

B- — Terms  bearing  a  special  sense,  whether  used  in  that  manner  or  not. 
(i.)      Any  condition  in  which  an  organic  lesion — some  macro- 
scopic change  in  the  body — is  present,  is      -  "  disease  " 
This  word  implies  a  more  or  less  serious  disturbance,  and 
even  suggests  the  risk  of  death.     The  lesions  present 
often  determine  the  distinctive  name  of  each  separate 
disease.       Where  the  etiology  is  still  unknown,  the

disease  may  be  provisionally  named  ...  "sickness"disease  may  be  provisionally  named  ...  "sickness"

(ii.)  Conditions  in  which  there  is  not  necessarily  any  organic 
lesion,  or  where  such  a  lesion  has  not  been  detected. 
These  conditions  do  not  receive  distinctive  names  ;  are 
not  necessarily  serious  ;  are  probably  not  fatal.  The 
name  of  each  condition  originally  bore  a  distinct 
meaning :

(a)  arising  out  of  the  temperament   -  "  distemper  "*

(b)  arising    out    of    the    disposition    or    state.     Now

means    simply   "  not   fit  "  ;       or,    vaguely,    "  ill-

health."  ----...         "indisposition."

(c)  implies  involvement  of  bodily  functions.     May  be

sub-classified  according  to  the  "system"  in- 
volved. .  Or,  vaguely,  means  simply  "  some- 
thing is  out  of  order."  ---..  "disorder" 
(a)  implies  involvement  of  the  nerves,  or  nervous 
system.  (I.e.,  almost  equivalent  to  "  functional  " 
as  opposed  to  "  organic  "  (Lat.  passio).  Implies 
a  certain  amount  of  pain   -          -          -                                       "  ,ifffi-tioK  "

*  Now  only  applied  to  a  specific  disease  in  veterinary  surgery.

i5«

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

(e)  A  condition  in  which  pain  is  the  chief,  feature, 
whether  general,  or  in  some  special  region  ;  but 
the  pain  is  presumably  not  very  severe.  Sub- 
classification  according  to  the  region  or  organ

"  complaint."

193.  Symptom.  This  is  a  phenomenon  consequent  upon 
this  non-natural  state  of  the  body.  Some  symptoms  are  entirely 
abnormal  phenomena,  like  the  pain  of  colic.  Others  are  (ex- 
aggerations) of  a  natural  phenomenon,  like  the  intense  flush  on 
the  cheeks  seen  in  peri-pneumonia.§  169  A  lengthy  discussion  about  what  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  symptom  is 
here  given  by  Costasus.  He  shows  that  the  word  "  symptom  "  is  derived  from  the 
Greek  to  indicate  something  which  occurs  simultaneously  with  the  disease  producing 
it  He  also  discusses  the  exact  meanings  of  the  terms  :  weakness,  impaired  func- 
tion loss  of  function,  abolition  of  function,  "  affections,"  preternatural  excretions 
and  retentions  (cf.  "  retained  "  placenta).  The  question  is  also  raised  as  to  whether 
a  given  symptom  is  directly  due  to  the  disease,  or  is  indirect,  or  is  collateral,  or  is  m 
no  real  relation  to  the  disease.

Avicenna's  brief  statement  really  covers  all  these  points.  As  regards  our 
modern  ways  of  thinking,  one  gathers  together  all  the  phenomena  which  are  ever 
found  to  occur  in  a  case  of  a  given  disease,  and  we  simply  arrange  them  as  far  as 
possible  into  the  immediate  effects,  the  remote  effects,  and  those  phenomena  whose 
nature  is  not  absolutely  certain— thev  may  be  caused  by  the  disease  ;  they  may  be 
sequels  ;  or  they  may  be  concurrent  because  some  other  morbid  condition  is,  or 
happens  to  be,  simultaneously  present.

194.  A  short  table  of  examples.

Example   of   a   cause.

Decay  ;  putrescence.

Fulness  of  lacrymal  sacs  from

developmental  error. 
Acrid  "  flux."

Example    of    its 
corresponding  malady.

Fever.

Obstruction  of  uvea.

"  Ulcer  "  in  lung.

Example  of  the 
corresponding  symptom

Thirst,  headache. 
Loss  of  vision.

Flushed  cheeks  ;  curved 
nails.Fever.

Obstruction  of  uvea.

"  Ulcer  "  in  lung.

Example  of  the 
corresponding  symptom

Thirst,  headache. 
Loss  of  vision.

Flushed  cheeks  ;  curved 
nails.

195.  id)  The  difference  between  "  symptoms  "  and  "  signs." 
We  speak  of  a  symptom  in  regard  to  its  own  intrinsic  character, 
or  in  relation  to  that  to  which -it  belongs.  A  "  sign  "  is  that 
which  guides  the  physician  to  a  knowledge  of  the  real  essential 
nature  of  the  disease.

It  is  asked  :  Are  symptoms  to  disease  as  shadow  is  to  object  ?  The  answer  is, 
that  the  two  are  associated  but  are  not  inseparable.  In  other  words,  the  symptom 
is  a  (scholastic  symbolism,  of  §56,  sqq.)  and  not  m.f.  The  term  "  "  symptom 
refers  to  many  phenomena,  some  of  which  are  really  the  direct  consequence  of  the 
disease,  while  others  are  only  indirectly  its  result.  This  question  would  never 
arise  were  it  not  for  the  custom  of  supposing  "  diseases  "  are  entities  of  some  kind.

(b)  One  disorder  may  originate  a  second.  Thus  colic  pro- 
duces syncope,  or  paralysis,  or  spasms  and  convulsions.

Costseus  says  :  To  the  patient,  "  colic  "  is  "  pain."  The  distension  is  the 
cause  of  the  pain.     The  pain  interferes  with  or  even  arrests  the  vitality  ot  the  part,

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  159

and  in  that  sense  produces  the  syncope.  Pain  is  :  the  contact  of  disordered 
disorganised  function  upon  the  consciousness.  It  is  a  form  of  "  touch."  The 
consciousness  "  touches  "  the  impaired  function.  "  Paralysis  "  is  "  loss  of  the 
faculties  of  movement  and  sensation."  "Convulsions"  =  "depravity"  of  the 
faculties   of  movement  and   sensation.

There  is,  therefore,  a  certain  literal  truth  in  the  general  statement.There  is,  therefore,  a  certain  literal  truth  in  the  general  statement.

(c)  A  symptom  may  be  the  cause  of  a  disorder.  Thus,  violent 
pain  causes  the  suffering  of  colic,  and  syncope  is  the  effect  of  the 
pain.  The  violent  pain  of  an  inflammatory  mass  is  due  to  the 
descent  of  the  matters  to  that  spot.

Costseus  adds  :  Pain  interferes  with  the  "  breath,"  and  may  even  arrest  it. 
In  consequence,  a  "  refrigeration  of  the  heart  "  takes  place.  That  is,  the  tempera- 
ment of  the  heart  becomes  below  normal  in  regard  to  "  cold."  But  this  is  a  disease. 
This  change  of  temperament  accounts  for  the  syncope.

Descent  of  matter  (inflamm.  exudate)  as  a  cause  of  pain. — The  acridity  and 
similar  qualities  of  the  exudate  do  actually  irritate  the  nerve-endings,  and  therefore 
produce  pain  in  addition  to  that  due  to  tension.

(d)  A  symptom  may  be  at  the.  same  time  a  malady.  Thus 
headache  is  an  effect  of  fever,  but  may  also  last  so  long  as  to 
amount  to  a      disease."

§  170.  Costasus  adds  :  Pain  such  as  headache  may  simply 
be  a  symptom,  that  is,  evidence  of  an  "  intemperamental  state,"  or 
"  solution  of  continuity."  But,  to  the  patient,  it  is  the  thing  ;  it  is 
the  malady. — Little  does  it  concern  the  patient  that  there  is  an 
underlying  cause  to  be  treated  if  the  practitioner  proves  unable  to 
relieve  his  pain.

Further,  persistent  pain  impairs  vitality  ;  in  this  sense  a  pain  is 
a  disease.Further,  persistent  pain  impairs  vitality  ;  in  this  sense  a  pain  is 
a  disease.

§  171.  Symptoms  are  still  confused  with  diseases  in  our  text- 
books. Thus,  "jaundice  "  appears  amongst  the  diseases,  instead  of 
being  placed  separately  along  with  a  number  of  other  characteristic 
symptoms,  such  as  ascites,  which  is  not  taken  as  a  specific  disease 
even  by  the  lay.  Originally,  symptoms  were  explained  in  terms  of 
changes  of  quality  and  the  like.  This  theoretical  explanation  was 
abandoned  owing  to  a  degradation  of  (metaphysical)  knowledge. 
The  symptoms  then  became  "  diseases."  The  diseases  were  then 
investigated,  and  found  to  be  more  numerous  than  the  symptoms 
(which  was  already  understood).  Subdivisions  were  then  made,  and 
particular  diseases  specified  and  defined,  and  the  multiplicity  of 
causation  emphasized.  The  exact  succession  of  processes  revealed 
by  the  microscope  and  biochemistry  was  elucidated.  These  succes- 
sive procedures  are  ihe  evidence  of  "  advance  "  and  "  progress."  All 
the  while  the  fact  is  overlooked  that  the  same  processes  occur  in  every 
''  disease,"  and  that  when  the  whole  subject,  treated  from  pathology, 
is  reduced  to  its  least  common  multiple  that  range  reveals  itself  as 
much  the  same  as  that' of  ancient  lore.     Cf.  also  §  173.

(<?)    One    and   the    same    thing   may    be    at   once    "  disease" 
"  symptom  "  and  "  cause."     Considered  in  relation  to  the  present,

160  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE(<?)    One    and   the    same    thing   may    be    at   once    "  disease" 
"  symptom  "  and  "  cause."     Considered  in  relation  to  the  present,

160  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

it  is  "  disease"  -/considered  in  relation  to  the  past,  it  is  "  cause"  ; 
considered  in  relation  to  the  future,  it  is  'symptom.'  —Ex- 
amples :  the  fever  of  consumption  is  the  sign  of  ulceration  of  the 
lung.  Considered  in  itself,  it  is  the  disease.  Considered  in  its 
effect,  it  is  the  "  cause  "  of  gastric  weakness.  Again,  the  head- 
ache which  fever  gives  rise  to  (in  those  cases  where  fever  causes 
headache)  (esp.  "meningeal  disease)  may  remain  behind  (after 
the  subsidence  of  the  fever)  and  be  itself  the  "  disease."  To 
particularize,  the  malady  itself  sets  up  inflammation  of  the 
meninges,  and  this  sets  up  headache.

2.     The  States  of  the  Human  Body.     The  Types  of

Disease* 
196,     There  are  three  states  of  the  human  body,  according

to  Galen  : —  .

(i)  Health— -a  state  in  virtue  of  which  the  human  body 
presents  that  particular  temperament  and  configuration  whereby 
all  its  functions  shall  proceed  unembarrassed.

(ii)     Disease — a  state  which  is  exactly  contrary  to  (1).(ii)     Disease — a  state  which  is  exactly  contrary  to  (1).

(iii)  A  third  state  which  is  neither  health  nor  disease. 
There  are  three  variants  of  this  :— (a)  the  health  is  not  perfect 
and  yet  there  is  no  actual  illness.  Ex.  :  the  state  in  old  persons, 
and  in  juveniles,  and  in  those  convalescent  from  illness.  _  (b) 
Both  states  occur  simultaneously  in  the  same  member  :  either 
in  two  quite  different  respects  (as  when  the  temperament 
of  a  person  is  normal,  but  there  is  compositional  abnormality  ; 
or  in  two  respects  which  are  related  to  one  another  (as  when  a ' 
person  is  healthy  in  form,  but  there  is  error  in  size  or  position  of 
a  member  ;  he  may  be  healthy  in  regard  to  two  passive  qualities, 
but  not  in  regard  to  two  active  ones),  (c)  Both  states  occur  in 
one  person,  but  at  different  times  of  the  year  (as  when  a  person 
is  well  in  winter  but  ill  in  spring).

197.  Some  disorders  are  simple,  and  others  compound. 
The  simple  disorders  are  where  there  is  (i)  one  single  kind

of  intemperament,   (2)  an  isolated  abnormality  of  configuration.

The  compound  (composite,  compositional)  disorders  are 
where  there  are  two  or  more  kinds  together,  which  together 
appear  as  one  single  malady.

198.  The  simple  disorders  comprise  three  groups  : —

1.  'Disorders  of  Temperament. — In  this  case  the  members 
affected  are  formed  of  similar  parts,  but  the  temperament  is

*  Costajus  believes  that  Chapter  I  of  the  original  should  come  in  here,  the 
present  chapter  being  the  real  opening  of  this  Thesis.

T

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

161*  Costajus  believes  that  Chapter  I  of  the  original  should  come  in  here,  the 
present  chapter  being  the  real  opening  of  this  Thesis.

T

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

161

depraved.  The  term  is  not  used  unless  the  disorder  is  primarily 
in  these  essential  parts,  and  then  applies  even  if  composite 
members  are  affected  secondarily  [i.e.,  temperamental  disorders 
are  distinguished  from  compositional  (205)].

Disorders  of  temperament  may  actually  occur  in  any 
compound  members  one  may  think  of,  provided  these  are 
formed  of  homologous  tissues.

There  are  sixteen  kinds  of  disorders  of  temperament,  as  has 
been  already  stated.     (41).

2.  _  Disorders  of  Configuration.  The  members  affected  are  the 
locomotive  organs  (the  instruments  whereby  actions  and  functions 
are  performed).     These  organs  are  formed  of  similar  parts.

3.  Solution  of  Continuity  and  Dislocation.  The  members 
affected  have  similar  parts.  It  occurs  in  organs  which  are 
instruments.  The  disorder  is  one  in  which  the  function  of  being 
an  instrument  is  interfered  with.  Such  a  solution  of  continuity 
occurs  at  a  joint  ;  here  we  see  that  the  separate  members  which 
go  to  make  up  the  joints  are  not  affected.  The  same  thing 
applies  in  the  case  of  nerves,  bones,  veins.

Any  malady  which  depends  on  any  of  these  three  groups  is 
named  accordingly.

3.     Disorders  of  Configuration.

199.      These  are   comprised  in   four  main   groups  : (i)

Errors  of  development  (malformations),     (ii)    Errors  in  bulk, 
(iii)  Errors  in  number,      (iv)  Displacements.

(i)  Errors  of  Development.

Group.

1.  Errors  in  form. 
Here  the  form  is 
changed  from  its 
natural  grace,  to  an 
extent  which  impairs 
its  utility.

2.  Errors  in  passages.

Subvarieties.

Deviation   from   a   natural 
straightness.2.  Errors  in  passages.

Subvarieties.

Deviation   from   a   natural 
straightness.

Straightness  of  a  naturally

curved  line. 
Squareness     where     there

should  be  roundness. 
Rotundity      where      there

should  be  squareness.

Examples.

Too  wide.

Too  narrow.

Occlusion.

Head  broad  and  round,  with 
ossified  sutures  to  an  ex- 
tent hindering  mental 
power.

Curved  shinbones  ;  genu 
valgum ;    clubfoot.

Pupils  congenitally  elongate 
or  slit-like  or  small.

Great  rotundity  of  abdo- 
men.

Wide  pupils ;  varices ; 
aneurysms ;  the  dilated 
blood-vessels    in    pannus.

Small  pupils  ;  narrowed 
eyes  ;  stricture  of  trachea 
or  bronchi ;  stricture  of 
oesophagus.

Of  venous  orifices,  e.g.,  in 
liver.     Atresia  (Tr.).

I  62

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Group.

3.  Errors    in    cavities 
or  sacs.

4.  Errors  of  surfaces.

Subvarieties.

Too    large    (distended). 
Too  small  (contracted) .

Obstructed  and  overfull. 
Emptied.

The  normal  roughness  re- 
placed by  smoothness.

The  normal  smoothness  be- 
comes rough.

Examples.

Scrotum.

Contracted  stomach ;  con- 
tracted cerebral  ven- 
tricles in   epilepsy.

Obstruction  in  cerebral  ven- 
tricles   in    apoplexy.

Cardiac  cavities  emptied  of 
blood  by  reason  of  ex- 
cessive joy  or  extreme 
pain.

At  the  orifice  of  the  stomach; 
also  in  lienteric  diarrhoea. 
Trachea ;      fauces      (hoarse- 
ness) .

(ii)  Errors  in  bulk,  {a)  Increase  :  as  in  elephantiasis, 
unduly  large  penis  (priapism)  ;  macroglossia.  The  disease 
which  befel  Nicomachus,  whose  body  became  so  huge  that  he 
could  not  be  moved,  (b)  Decrease  :  shortness  of  tongue  so  that 
it  cannot  reach  the  other  parts  of  the  mouth  _  (tongue-tie). 
Atrophied  and  wasted  members  ;    general  "  decline."*(iii)  Errors  in  number.  (a)  Increase  :  (a)  in  normal 
organs_additional  teeth  ;  supernumerary  fingers  ;  (0)  en- 
tirely abnormal — warts,  calculus,  enlarged  glands,  (b)  Decrease : 
(a)  in  normal  organs — congenital  absence  of  a  finger  ;  (0) 
accidental — loss  of  a  finger  through  amputation  (accidental  or 
surgical).

(iv)  Displacements,  (a)  Displacement  from  the  proper 
anatomical  position.  (a)  Replaceable  :  e.g.^  hernia  of  the 
intestine  ;  tremor  (which  occurs  through  a  quite  unnatural  to 
and  fro  involuntary  movement).  if)  Not  replaceable  :  e.g., 
fixation  of  a  joint  in  a  new  position,  as  in  gout  where  joints  are 
hardened  (ankylosed).  (b)  Displacement  from  the  normal 
position  in  regard  to  neighbouring  anatomical  structures. 
This  results  in  their  being  too  near  together  or  too  far  from  one 
another.  In  such  a  case  one  part  cannot  move  towards  another 
as  it  should  ;    for  instance,  adjoining  fingers  cannot  touch  one

*  Decline. — Dhebul. — The  term  refers  to  a  condition  in  which  the  body  seems 
to  wither  or  fade  away  without  obvious  reason,  or  in  spite  of  taking  food.  The  term 
refers  primarily  to  the  causeless  losing  of  flesh  by  horses,  whereby  they  come  to  be 
in  an  iU-conditioned  state.  The  same  word  would  apply  to  the  wilting  of  cut 
flowers  or  the  withering  of  plants  from  lack  of  water,  or  from  reduction  of  their 
vitality  to  such  a  point  that  they  will  not  imbibe  water  any  more  ;  that  is,  they 
cannot  be  "  re-vived."  Such  a  condition  in  man  is  noted  by  the  laity,  but  is  only 
referred  to  in  medicine  when  its  pathological  basis  is  visualised  ;  as,  for  instance, 
in  wasting  from  tabes  mesenterica,  or  tabes  dorsalis.

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  163THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  163

another.  Or,  one  part  cannot  be  moved  away  from  another, 
either  at  all,  or  only  with  very  great  difficulty.  For  instance,  in 
the  case  of  joints  flabby  because  of  paralysis,  or  in  the  case  of  the 
eyelids.  There  may  be  a  difficulty  in  opening  the  hands  or  in 
opening  or  raising  the  eyelids.

§  172.  Museum-    classification     of    errors     of     development. 
(Abbott,105  p.  xv.)

1.  Foetal  structures  normally  not  persistent.

2.  Incomplete  development.

3.  Reduction  in  size  (hypoplasia).

4.  Reduction  in  number  (subdactylism,    etc.).

5.  Persistent  foetal  structures.

6.  Excess  of  size.

7.  Excess  in  number.

8.  Malposition  ;     aberrant  structures.

9.  Anomalies    due   to   foetal   disease.

4.      Solution  of  Continuity.

200.  The  following  members  may  undergo  solution  of 
continuity.

1.  The  skin  (and  the  flesh  beneath  it)  :  as  excoriation, 
scarification,  wounds.  If  pus  is  not  formed  or  discharged,  it  is 
called  a  wound  ;  if  a  discharge  of  pus  is  present,  it  is  called  an 
"  ulcer."  The  presence  of  pus  is  due  {a)  to  effete  matters 
("  superfluities  ")  being  discharged  at  that  spot  ;  for  the  reason 
that  it  is  weak,  (b)  The  tissue  is  not  able  to  digest  all  the 
nutriment  which  is  brought  to  it,  the  excess  being  changed  into 
pus.

The  terms  "  wound/'  "  ulcer  "  may  also  be  applied  to 
solution  of  continuity  in  places  other  than  skin  and  flesh.

2.  Bone.  A  fracture  into  two  parts,  large  or  small  ;  or 
longitudinally  in  the  form  of  a  fissure.

3.  Cartilage.  The  fracture  may  be  in  any  of  these  three 
ways.

4.  Nerve.  Transverse  section  from  incised  wounds  ; 
longitudinal,  and  over  a  short  distance,  as  "  scission."  Longi- 
tudinal and  also  extensive — in  a  contusion.4.  Nerve.  Transverse  section  from  incised  wounds  ; 
longitudinal,  and  over  a  short  distance,  as  "  scission."  Longi- 
tudinal and  also  extensive — in  a  contusion.

5.  Muscle.  If  near  the  ends,  or  in  the  tendon  :  attrition. 
If  transverse  :  severance,  or  incision.  If  longitudinal,  but  small 
in  extent,  with  the  formation  of  a  deep  hollow,  it  is  called 
cavitation.  If  multiple,  with  the  appearance  of  several  swellings 
and  hollowings,  it  is  attrition  with  contusion.  If  the  solution  of 
continuity  is  in  the  belly  of  the  muscles,  it  is  called  attrition  or 
incision,  or  contusion,  whatever  be  the  direction  of  the  injury.

i64  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

6.  Arteries  and  Veins.  When  these  undergo  solution  of 
continuity,  they  are  "  opened."  If  the  injury  is  transverse,  it  is 
an  incision  ;  if  longitudinal,  it  is  called  fission.  They  may  be 
punctured  (perforation).  There  may  be  a  partial  solution  of 
continuity,  whereby  the  blood  escapes  into  the  surrounding 
tissue-spaces,  until  their  pressure  arrests  its  further  progress  ; 
this  is  called  an  aneurism.

7.  Membranes  (including  the  diaphragm)  :    disruption. 
Note   that   not   every   member   can   undergo   solution   of

continuity  with  impunity.     For  instance,   in  the   case  of  the 
heart,  death  ensues.  .

201.  If  one  of  two  parts  of  a  composite  member  be 
separated°  from  the  other,  such  that  there  is  no  actual  injury  to 
either,  it  is  called  a  dislocation.  A  nerve  may  be  twisted  out  of 
place,  and  this  is  also  called  a  dislocation.      It  is  also  called  a

contorsion.

202.  When  a  solution  of  continuity  occurs  where  there 
are  foramina,  it  may  widen  them.  When  it  occurs  in  a  place 
where  there  are  no  foramina,  such  may  come  into  existence.203.  Any  solution  of  continuity,  whether  it  be  in  the  form 
of  an  ulcer  or  the  like,  will  heal  quickly  if  the  temperament  of  the 
member  be  good.  But  if  the  temperament  be  not  good,  healing 
may  be  delayed  for  a  long  time.  Healing  is  specially  delayed  in 
persons  with  dropsy,  or  cachexia,  or  suffering  from  lepra.

204.  If  wounds  are  tightly  bandaged,  they  may  end  in  a 
very  deep  ulcer.  Ulcers  appearing  in  summer  may  last  on  into 
winter,  and  exhaust  the  strength.

Resolution  of  continuity  is  referred  to  in  detail  later.

5.      Composite  Diseases.

205.  Definition. — By  the  term  "  composite  diseases  "  we 
mean — not  that  several  diseases  are  conjoined — but  that  a 
number  of  morbid  states  concur,  and  out  of  them  there  emerges 
one  single  disease.  This  is  exemplified  by  cutaneous  swellings 
of  inflammatory  nature  (including  boils,  pustules).  Boils  are 
small  inflammatory  masses,  and  ordinary  inflammatory  masses

are  large  boils.

The  following  kinds  of  morbid  state  go  together  to  make 
up  an  inflammatory  mass*  :  (1)  a  disorder  of  temperament,  this 
being  associated  with  matter  ;  (2)  a  perversion  of  form  ;  (3) 
unhealthy  configuration — one  never  meets  with  an  inflammatory 
deposit  without  there  being  disfigurement,  change  of  size,  and

*  Hence  the  popular  name  for  a  local  inflammatory  condition—"  gathering."

THE   CANON   OF  MEDICINE  165

there  is  often  displacement  as  well  ;  (4)  loss  of  continuity. 
This  is  the  necessary  accompaniment  of  the  discharge  of  super- 
fluities into  the  tissue-spaces,  penetrating  as  they,  do  into  them  all, 
and  separating  one  from  the  other  in  order  to  make  space  for 
themselves.206.  Site. — Swellings  occur  in  soft  members,  and  some- 
times also  in  bone,  in  which  case  the  cavities  in  the  bone  widen 
and  the  exudate  accumulates  in  them.

It  is  not  surprising  that  a  tissue  which  can  accommodate 
nutrients  should  also  accommodate  waste  materials  if  these 
should  by  chance  penetrate  into  it,  or  should  form  in  it.

207.  Causation. — (a)  The  primary  cause  may  not  be 
evident,  the  corporeal  change  showing  that  material  has  been 
removed  from  one  tissue  to  another  (at  a  lower  level).  This  is 
called  a  "  catarrh."  (F)  The  material  cause  from  which 
boils  and  other  inflammatory  swellings  arise  may  be  immersed 
within  other  humours,  without  being  deprived  of  its  own  harm- 
ful qualities.

Good  humours  may  be  discharged  either  by  natural 
processes  (as,  for  instance,  in  the  case  of  women  at  the  times  of 
parturition  and  lactation),  or  by  unnatural  processes  (as  when 
good  blood  is^  lost  through  a  wound).  The  bad  humours, 
however,  remain  and  continue  to  be  harmful  ;  Nature  then 
expels  them.      If  the  discharge  is  by  the  skin,  pustules  form.

208.  Classification  of  Swellings. — Swellings  may  be  classi- 
fied according  to  the  different  kinds  of  matter  of  which  they 
are  made  up  ;  namely  according  to  the  six  kinds  of  material 
cause — the  four  humours,  wateriness,gas.

There  are  both  hot  and  cold  inflammatory  swellings.  But 
the  fact  of  their  being  hot  does  not  say  they  are  derived  from 
bilious  humour  or  blood.  Any  material  intrinsically  of  hot 
nature,  or  any  material  which  has  become  hot  because  of  putre- 
faction, can  give  rise  to  a  hot  inflammatory  mass.Swelling  =waram=apostema=tumour  (used  in  a  general  sense)  ;  any  "  lump  " 
or  excrescence  or  protuberance.  Intumescence,  tumefaction,  new-growth,  nodosities 
— these,  are  special  kinds  of  swelling.  In  most  passages  an  inflammatory  swelling  or 
mass  is  meant  ;  waram  or  apostema  is  translated  accordingly.  It  may  be  noted 
that  an  apostema  is  more  likely  to  be  coloured,  and  to  feel  warm  to  the  touch, 
whereas  a  swelling  which  can  be  called  a  tumefaction  is  colourless  and  does  not  fee' 
warm;    that  is,  it  is  a  "  cold  "  swelling.  (211).

209.  While  it  is  possible  to  subdivide  these  swellings 
according  to  the  humours  concerned,  it  is  better  to  use  special 
names  in  special  cases.  Thus,  a  mass  derived  purely  from  the 
blood  is  called  "  phlegmon  "  ;   one  derived  solely  from  bilious

1 66  THE   CANON   OF  MEDICINE

humour  is  called  "erysipelas."  When  the  origin  is  compound, 
or  dual,  a  double  name  is  allotted.  Thus,  phlegmon  erysipela- 
todes,  if  phlegmon  is  the  chief  feature  ;  erysipelas  phlegmonodes, 
if  the  erysipelas  is  the  chief  feature.  When  a  collection  of  actual 
fluid  has  gathered,  it  is  named  an  "  abscess."  This  may  occur 
in  lymph-nodes  (axilla  ;  behind  the  ears  ;  in  the  groins)  which 
are  then  nothing  but  "  corrupt  "  matter  ;    and  this  is  called  a  •

"bubo."  ,        ,

210.  Hot  Swellings.— The  following  are  the  phases  of

the  hot  swellings  :"bubo."  ,        ,

210.  Hot  Swellings.— The  following  are  the  phases  of

the  hot  swellings  :

i.  The  onset.  The  humour  makes  its  way  to  the  surface, 
and  increases  in  size,  until  the  cavity  is  so  distended  as  to  be 
evident,  ii.  The  rise  :  the  size  and  tension  increase,  hi.  The 
acme  :  the  height  of  the  malady,  and  stationary  period,  iv.  The 
decline  :  .  (a)  stage  of  softening  from  digestion  of  the  contents 
and  resolution  or  (b)  maturation  into  pus*  ;  or  (c)  a  conversion 
into  a  hard  or  indurated  mass.

211.  Cold  Swellings  (lit.  "  swellings  which  are  not  hot  "):

1.  Composed  of  atrabilious  humour  :

i.     induration  (generally  autumnal), 
ii.     cancerf  (generally  autumnal), 
iii.     glandular  :    scrofulous,  other  nodules  and  nodosities.

2.  Composed  of  serous  humour  :

i.     lax. 
ii.     soft  glands  ;    and  winter  swellings.

3.  Composed  of  watery  fluid  :    e.g.,  dropsy,  hydrocephalus  ;

hydrocele,  and  the  like.

4.  Composed  of  gases  :    tumefaction  ;    puffiness  ;    distension.

Puffiness.  This  stands  for  tahabbuj  (Rome  edition),  or  tahayyuj  (Bulaq)  ; 
cachexia  (Venice  edition)  =  tumefaction.  The  Latin  glossary  explains  that  it  is 
meant  specially  as  that  which  results  from  liver  disorder  ;  when  it  appears  in  the 
limbs  it  has  a  different  origin.  The  puffiness  of  the  eyes  from  lack  of  sleep  or  from 
too  much  sleep  is  also  different.212.  The  difference  between  the  glandular  form  _  and  the 
other  two  kinds  of  atrabilious  swellings.  The  former  is  either 
quite  loose  within  the  tissues  among  which  it  lies,  and  is  therefore 
easily  moved  to  and  fro  by  the  finger  ;  or  there  is  adhesion, 
simply  to  the  skin  (as  in  strumous  swellings).  The  other  two 
kinds  of  swelling  are  intermingled  with,  and  interfused  with, 
the  substance  of  the  tissues  among  which  they  lie.

*  Note  that  pus  is  only  one  kind  of  "  matter."  _  .

f  Cancer  appears  in  the  Canon  as  a  disease  associated  with  change  in.  the 
atrabilious  humour.  Therefore  one  condition  for  the  production  of  this  disease 
is  the  entry  of  S  into  the  metabolic  cycle  in  a  pathological  manner  (cf.  §  147)-

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  167

213.  The  difference  between  cancerous  swelling  and  indur- 
ation. The  latter  is  a  slumbering  silent  mass  which  destroys 
the  sensation  (so  that  the  part  is  numb),  and  is  painless,  and  sta- 
tionary. It  may  produce  weakness  of  the  part.  A  cancerous 
swelling  progressively  increases  in  size,  is  destructive,  and 
spreads  roots  which  insinuate  themselves  amongst  the  tissue- 
elements,  It  does  not  necessarily  destroy  sensation  unless  it 
has  existed  for  a  long  time,  and  then  it  kills  the  tissues  and 
destroys  the  sensation  in  the  part.  It  would  seem  that  indura- 
tions and  cancerous  swellings  differ  less  as  to  substance  than  in 
the  inseparable  accidental   qualities.*

214.  The  hard  swellings  arising  from  atrabilious  humours 
are  usually  hard  from  the  outset.  They  are  often  autumnal. 
They  often  become  "  indurations,"  especially  if  there  be  san- 
guineous humour  present. — The  same  sort  of  change  may  take 
place  in  the  swellings  arising  out  of  serous  humour.215.  Swellings  arising  out  of  serous  humour.  These  are 
of  two  varieties.  They  are  either  diffuse  or  circumscribed 
(nodular).  The  difference  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  latter  form  is 
discrete  among  the  surrounding  tissues,  whereas  the  other  form 
is  intermingled  with  them,  and  is  therefore  not  discrete,  but 
diffuse.  Swellings  formed  of  serous  humour  often  arise  in 
winter  (the  rainy  season,  or  time  of  stormy  weather).  (Even)  if 
they  are  "  hot,"  they  are  white  in  colour.

216.  The  difference  between  soft  glands  and  "  ganglia." 
The  latter  are  more  adherent  to  the  surrounding  tissues  ;  they 
feel  nodular  to  the  touch  ;  they  always  slip  back  to  the  original 
position  after  manipulation  ;  but  they  may  be  dispersed  by  cer- 
tain strong  medicaments,  without  compression,  and  then  dis- 
appear permanently.  They  are  often  produced  by  toil.  The 
application  of  a  very  heavy  weight  such  as  lead  may  disperse 
them.

217.  Swellings  arising  out  of  serous  humour  vary  in 
consistence  according  to  the  density  of  the  contained  fluid. 
They  may  be  soft,  thin,  lax,  or  hard,  or  resemble  the  atrabilious 
type  of  swelling,  or  resemble  the  gaseous  form.  Tenuous  serous 
humour  flows  down  along  the  course  of  the  nerve-fibres,  and 
so  reaches  the  muscles  beneath  the  epiglottis  and  larynx.

218.  Watery  swellings.  Examples  :  dropsy,  hydrocele, 
hydrocephalus,  and  such-like.      [Cysts.]

219.  Gaseous  swellings.  These  are  of  two  different  kinds: 
tumefaction  ;    inflation.     These  differ  both  in  essence  and  in

*  Hence  some  cases  of  "  Induration  "  may  have  been  what  is  now  called 
"  scirrhus."

Z68  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE*  Hence  some  cases  of  "  Induration  "  may  have  been  what  is  now  called 
"  scirrhus."

Z68  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

mode  of  commixture.  In  tumefaction,  the  gas  is  intimately 
mixed  with  the  substance  of  the  tissue.  In  inflation  it  is  aggre- 
gated'tense,  tumescent,  and  discrete  from  the  substance  of  the 
tissue.     The  former  feels  soft  ;    the  latter  feels  more  or  less

220.  Papular  swellings.  These  show  the  same  subdivi- 
sions as  inflammatory  swellings  in  general.  They  are  formed  of 
(i)  blood  or  sanguineous  humour  (true  pustules)  ;  (2)  purely  ot 
bilious  humour  :  miliaria,  sudamina,  certain  forms  of  eczema  ; 
(3)  both  serous  and  atrabilious  humour  (morbilh,  myrmecia, 
clavus,  scabies,  warts,  and  the  like)  ;  (4)  watery  fluid  (bullae, 
vesicles)  ;   (5)  gaseous  material  (emphysema).  _

The  points  of  distinction  which  apply  in  regard  to  the  kinds 
of  pustules  will  be  adequately  dealt  with  in  the  fourth  Book, 
should  Allah  be  willing  for  its  accomplishment.

6.  Disfigurements

221.  There  are  some  states  which  are  not  "  disease,"  but 
are  classed  as  such.  These  are  conditions  in  which  the  beauty 
of  the  form  of  the  body  is  impaired,  either  in  respect  of  hairiness, 
colour,  odour,  or  form.

1 .  Affections  of  the  hair.  Alopecia  ;  stumpmess  ;  scanti- 
ness ;  shortness  ;  scission  ;  fineness  ;  coarseness  ;  curliness  ; 
lightness  ;    colour-changes,  such  as  greyness.

2.  Affections  in  which  there  is  an  abnormal  colour  of  the  body. 
i.  Due  to  an  intemperament  :

(a)  material  :  jaundice. 
\b)  non-material  :

(1)  very  cold  intemperament  :   chalkiness  ;

(2)  very  hot  intemperament  :   citron-yellowness, 
ii.  Due   to   extraneous   agents  :    scorching   sun,    extreme

cold  ;    much  exposure  to  wind  ;(2)  very  hot  intemperament  :   citron-yellowness, 
ii.  Due   to   extraneous   agents  :    scorching   sun,    extreme

cold  ;    much  exposure  to  wind  ;

iii.  The  presence  of  unnatural  colours  in  the  skin  :  [a) 
brought  into  the  skin  (vitiligo  nigra),  (b)  arising  in  it  (freckles,

iv.   Relics  after  the  healing  of  scars  :    pock-marks  •    old

ulcers.  ,  r

1    Affections  associated  with  bad  odours  ;    Ex.  :    rcetor  or

the  mouth,  or  objectionable  odour  of  the  whole  or  of  portions

of  the  body.  .    .

■     4.  Disfigurements.     Ex.  :      Great    emaciation  ;     excessive 
bulk  ;   undue  thinness  and  fatness.     (Malformations.)

"  Excessive  corpulence  and  excessive  leanness  are  especially  worthy  of  con- 
demnation "  (Charaka-Samhita155 :    i.  233).

THE   CANON   OF  MEDICINE  169

7."    The  Stages   of  Disease

222.  Many  diseases  show  four  stages — onset,  increment 
acme,  and  decline.    These  are  distinct  from  the  phases  of  health'

In  speaking  of  "  time  of  onset,"  and  "  increment,"  we  do 
not  wish  to  convey  the  idea  that  there  are  two  extremes  during 
which  a. state  of  disease  is  indiscernible.  Each  stage  can  be 
detected  by  the  senses,  and  each  has  its  own  characteristic  signs.

1.  The  "  onset  "  is  that  period  of  time  during  which  the 
disease  is  becoming  manifested,  and  its  characters  are  commenc- 
ing to  develop.     There  is  no  evident  change  in  degree.

"  ****?*  "  djpase  belongs  here  ;   "  occulta  "  as  compared  with  the  other  three 
stages,  which  are      declared,"  "  visibilia."

c  M1  2-  The,  "  i^ement  "  is  the  period  during  which  the  degree 
or  illness  is  hourly  becoming  more  and  more  decided.c  M1  2-  The,  "  i^ement  "  is  the  period  during  which  the  degree 
or  illness  is  hourly  becoming  more  and  more  decided.

3-  The  "  acme  "  is  that  period  during  which  all  the 
characters  of  the  illness  have  become  manifest,  and  remain  so. 
.4-  The  "decline"  (defervescence  ;  terminal  stage)  shows 
abating  of  the  signs  of  illness  ;  and  the  further  this  period 
advances,  the  more  nearly  is  there  freedom  from  the  symptoms 
of  the  diseases.  r

These  stages  may  be  applied  both  to  the  illness  as  a  whole 
and  m  regard  to  each  of  its  component  attacks  or  paroxysms' 
In  regard  to  the  whole  course  of  the  disease,  they  are  called 
"  general  "  ;  in  regard  to  each  of  the  attacks  which  occur 
m  its  course,  they  will  be  called  "  special  "  or  "  particular  "  or 
"  individual  "  phases.

8.      Concluding  Remarks   on   Morbid   States 
223       Diseases  are  named  :    (1)  according  to  the  member 
affected  (e.g.  pleurisy,  pneumonia,  sciatica,  podagra,  nephritis 
arthritis,  ophthalmia,  etc.)  ;    (2)  according  to  the  chief  symptom 
(epilepsy,     spasm,    tremor,    paralysis,    palpitation,     cephalalgia 
otalgia,    cardialgia,    odontalgia,    neuralgia;  etc.      (3)   From  the 
originating  humour  (e.g.  atrabilious  disorder)  ;   (4)  from  resem- 
blances to  animals  which  the  disease  produces  (e.g.  leontiasis 
elephantiasis,  satyrism)  ;   (5)  from  the  first  historical  example  of 
the    disease  ;      Telephic    ulcer— Telephus,    son    of    Hercules 
wounded  by  Achilles'  spear,  but  healed  by  its  rust  ;    Chironia 
ulcer— Chiron,  the  first  who  successfully  treated  ulcers  medically 
(6)  according  to  the  substance  and  essential  nature  of  the  disease 
— fever,  inflammatory  swelling-.224.      Galen    classified    diseases    into  :     (a)    manifest     or 
evident  to  the  senses  ;   (b)  hidden,  or  internal  :  (i)  easy  to  recog-

I?o  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

nize  (e.g.  gastric  pains,  lung  pains)  ;  (ii)  difficult  to  recognize 
because  not  evident  to  any  of  the  senses  (e.g.  diseases  of  the  liver 
or  of  the  air  passages  within  the  lung)  ;  (in)  only  discernible 
bv  careful  judgment  (disorders  of  the  urinary  passages).

'      225       Diseases  may  occur  in  single  members  or  in  more  . 
than  one*.     In  the  latter  case  there  are  the  following  possible 
relations  :   (i)  association  by  natural  connections  ;  ex. :   stomach 
and  brain,  which  are  associated  through  nerves  ;    the  uterus 
and  breast  which  are  connected  by  the  veins.

(ii)  •  One  member  is  the  channel  for  the  other.      1  hus,  the 
groin  is  the  natural  channel  for  inflammation  to  travel  into  the 
leg     The  weaker  of  two  of  so  related  members  will  take  up; 
the  excrementitious  matters  from  the  stronger  ;    for  instance, 
the  axillary  region  from  the  heart.  #

(iii)   Simple  contiguity  ;    e.g.  the  neck  and  the  brain.(iii)   Simple  contiguity  ;    e.g.  the  neck  and  the  brain.

(iv)  One  member  initiates  the  function  of  another.  *or 
instance,  the  diaphragm  is  concerned  in  the  drawing  of  air  into 
the  lungs  (v)  One  member  is  the  servant  of  another  ;  thus 
the  nerves  serve  the  brain,  (vi)  Some  third  member  is  associated 
with  two  related.organs.  Thus,  the  brain  is  related  to  the  kidney, 
and  both  these  organs  are  related  to  the  liver  (Disease  m  one 
is  likely  to  have  deleterious  effects  on  the  others.)  (vn)  Vmous 
circles  Disorder  of  the  brain  affects  the  activity  of  the  stomach 
and  impairs  the  digestion  ;  consequently  the  stomach  supplies 
morbid  vapours  and  imperfectly  digested  aliment  to  the  brain 
so  increasing  the  disorder  of  the  brain.  Hence  from  the  original 
illness,  the  malady  spreads  and  continues,  and  runs  in  a  circuit.

226.     There  are  the  following  six  degrees,  ranging  from.

health  to  disease  :

i.  Blameless  health. 
1.  Not  absolute  health.

7    A  state  neither  of  health  nor  of  disease,  as  people  assert. 
%  Potential  illness  ;    where  the  body  is  on  the  verge  of 
illness.

5.  Slight  ill-health.

6.  Declared  disease.

227  Diseases  are  curable  or  incurable.  A  curable 
disease  i°s  one  which  offers  no  resistance  to  treatment.  An 
incurable  disease  is  one  in  which  there  is  some  impediment  to 
complete  cure,  so  that  whatever  the  doctor  applies,  the  desired 
effec?  is  not  reached.  For  instance-headache  which  is  due  to 
"  rheumatism."  A  disease  is  more  likely  to  be  curable  whenthe 
temperament,  the  age,  and  the  season  are  in  proper  relation..

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  i7iTHE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  i7i

If  not,  there  must  be  a  serious  causal  agent  at  work.  One 
can  only  hope  to  cure .  or  5 disperse  the  diseases  of  one  season 
during  the  contrary  season.

228.  Some  diseases  turn  into  new  ones,  and  so  themselves 
disappear.  This  is  very  satisfactory.  One  disease  becomes  the 
medicament  for  curing  another.  Thus,  quartan  malaria  often  cures 
epilepsy  [cf.  G.P.I.]  also  podagra,  varices,  and  arthralgias. 
A  spasmodic  disease  may  be  cured  by  scabies,  pruritus,  and 
furunculosis.  A  certain  type  of  diarrhoea  is  cured  by  inflam- 
mation of  the  eyes.  Lienteria  cures  pleurisy.  Bleeding  piles 
removes  atrabilious  disorders,  including  sciatica,  renal  and 
uterine  pain.

But  the  passage  from  one  disease  to  another  may  be  a  serious 
matter.     For  instance,  when  an  empyema  spreads  'into  the  sub- 
stance of  the  lung  ;    when  meningitis  becomes  lethargia. 
229.      Transmission  of  disease  from  -person  to  person.

A.  Transmission  by  infection,  (i)  From  one  house  to  an 
adjoining  one.  Here  belong,  lepra,  scabies,  variola,  pestilential 
fever,  septic  inflammatory  swellings  and  ulcers  ;  (ii)  from  a  house 
m  the  wind-track  to  another  ;  (iii)  when  one  person  gazes 
closely  at  another  (e.g.  ophthalmia)  ;  (iv)  fancy  :  e.g.  when  a 
person's  teeth  chatter  because  he  thinks  of  something  sour  ; 
(v)  such  diseases  as  phthisis,  impetigo,  leprosy.

B.  Hereditary  transmissions*  Vitiligo  alba  ;  premature 
baldness  ;    gout  :    phthisis  •    lepra.

Place  in  Family  as  a  factor  in  the  causation  of  disease  {Lancet,  1928).

C.  Racial  transmission.

D.  Endemic  transmission.  The  sweating  sickness  of 
Angha  ;  elephantiasis  in  Alexandria  ;  aurigo  in  Apulia  • 
endemic  goitre,  and  many  the  like.  'C.  Racial  transmission.

D.  Endemic  transmission.  The  sweating  sickness  of 
Angha  ;  elephantiasis  in  Alexandria  ;  aurigo  in  Apulia  • 
endemic  goitre,  and  many  the  like.  '

230.      Do  not  forget  that  weakness  of  members,  and  a  frail 
body  may  supervene  upon  intemperaments.

§173.  This  classification  of  the  types  of  disease  still  holds  good  to-dav 
^trpXTog^alVndS^  dlferent'  b6CaUSe  n°W  made  more  definite^  in  accord 
~t  ^  S°mt confusion  as  t0  the  scope  of  the  various  terms  still  exists  even  in  the  minds 
a°irt^aSenW5h0  are  n°  lo^  students.  Clinical  and  pathological  conceptions  d"  not 
"^fLt  "  P  a  +°n  the  °ne  hand'  there  is  an  underlying  endeavour  to  specify 
rl,S''  and+  *?  seParate  out  new  entities  in  accordance  with  variations  in  the 
? ™  i  manifestations  In  pathology,  the  distinction  between  general  and  special 
is  more  clearly  adhered  to,  and  the  latter  is  described  as  much  as  possible  according 
to  the  former— which  is  proper.  s

„i  -^  JeSard  t0  an  actual  case  before  us,  however,  the  pathology  cannot  be 
elucidated  at  once  ;  the  clinical  manifestations  therefore  receive  the  chief  con- 
sideration. But  such  manifestations  are  limited  in  range,  are  of  general  character 
(universal,  not  particular),  and  should  rank  with  genera  in  natural  history  the 
pathological   character    or   process   would    furnish   the   specific   name.    Clinically,

1 72  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE1 72  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

diseases  naturally  comprise  swellings,  deformities,  discolorations  displacements, 
ulcerations,  various  solutions  of  continuity,  aches  and  pains,  and  the  like.  Patho- 
logically, there  are  only  four  main  groups  of  lesions— inflammations,  new-growths, 
nutritional  changes  (degenerations  and  hypertrophies),  and  errors  of  development. 
(The  short  list  presented  by  Avicenna  is  not  a  real  fault,  when  considered  from 
such  a  point  of  view.)  If  such  a  system  cannot  be  allowed  either  by  'academic 
medicine  or  the  laity  (who  insist  on  a  "  name  "  for  a  disease  )  it  has  at  least  the 
advantage  of  enabling  one  to  visualize  from  the  first  what  is  important  to  the  patient 
and  to  concentrate  on  it.  .

The  opposite  procedure— that  which  rules  the  day— is  that  of  describing 
diseases  in  all  their  forms  and  types,  typhoid  fever  being  awarded  the  crown  The 
literature  is  always  receiving  reports  on  new  types  of  disease.  This  method  has  the 
advantage  of  being  capable  of  unlimited  extension,  for  the  number  of  types  is  (as 
should  be  obvious)  exactly  the  same  as  the  number  of  individuals  affected  thereby. 
In  other  words,  all  these  types  are  simply  the  expressions  of  the  individual  s  make-up 
and  have  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the  infective  organism,  except  m  so  far  as  it 
varies  in  virulence  (i.e.,  in  the  composition  of  its  "  excreta  ").  ^

The  idea  that  treatment  cannot  be  correct  unless  the  disease  is  correctly 
named  is  also  very  widely  spread,  and  has  the  same  effect— that  of  blinding  the  mmd 
to  the  real  simplicity  of  truth.  The  unknowing  abhors  simplicity  ;  he  ever  seeks  to 
"  improve  " — that  is,  to  introduce  more  and  more  complexity.

'W1'

THESIS  II.— THE  CAUSES  OF  DISEASE 
ETIOLOGY'W1'

THESIS  II.— THE  CAUSES  OF  DISEASE 
ETIOLOGY

"Correlation,  adverse  or  absent  or  excessive,  between  time,  mental  faculties 
and  objects  of  the  senses,  constitute  in  brief  the  threefold  causes  of  disease  affecting 
either ^the  body  or  mind." — (Charaka-Samhita1*6,  i.  5.)

"  If  the  activity  of  the  life-principle  takes  place  in  a  harmonious  and  regular 
manner,  unimpeded  by  any  obstacles,  such  a  state  is  called  '  health.'  If  its  activity 
is  impeded  by  some  cause,  and  if  it  acts  abnormally,  or  irregularly,  such  a  state  is 
called     disease.     — (Paracelsus",  p.  181.)

i.     Definition   of  Terms

281.  There  are  three  groups  of  causes 
of  those  states  of  the  body  which  have  been 
referred  to  as  :  health,  disease,  a  state 
intermediate.  These  groups  are  :  (i) 
Primitive,  or  extra-corporeal  causes.  These 
befall  the  body  from  without  (trauma,  heat, 
cold).  (2)  Antecedent  causes.  These  befall 
the  body  from  within  (repletion,  starvation). 
(3)  Conjoined  causes.  Here  disease  is  pre- 
sent only  as  long  as  two  causes  occur  at  the  same  time.  When 
either  is  absent,  the  diseased  state  comes  to  an  end  (e.g.  sepsis, 
in  fevers).

The  primitive  causes  are  extra-corporeal  ;  namely  :  (a) 
from  exterior  agents,  such  as  blows,  exposure  to  very  hot  air, 
use  of  hot  or  cold  viands  ;  (b)  from  the  mind,  which  is  here 
considered  as  distinct  from  the  body.  Here  belong  the  causes 
of  states  of  anger,  fear,  and  the  like.

Other  examples  :  privation  of  food,  shelter,  covering  ;    environment  (monotony 
solitude,  restraint,  neglect,  subjection,  and  their  opposites).      These  are  predisposing

C3/QS6S.C3/QS6S.

Resemblances. — The  primitive  causes  resemble  the  ante- 
cedent in  that  there  is  a  certain  intermediate  condition  between 
each  and  the  three  states  of  the  body  named  above.  The 
primitive  causes  sometimes  resemble  the  conjoined,  in  that  there 
is  no  intermediate  condition  between  them  and  the  three  states 
of  the  body.  The  antecedent  and  conjoined  causes  resemble 
one  another  in  both  being  corporeal,  or  humoral  ;  that  is,  either 
temperamental  or  compositional.

173

I74  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Differences.— The  antecedent  differ  from  the  primitive 
causes  in  being  corporeal ,  and  in  requiring  an  intermediary 
between  them  and  the  bodily  state.  Such  an  intermediary  is 
not  necessary  in  the  case  of  the  primitive  causes.— The  conjoined 
causes  differ  from  the  primitive  in  being  corporeal,  but  without 
an  intermediary  between  them  and  the  bodily  state.  An  inter- 
mediary may  occur,  but  is  not  essential  in  the  case  of  the  primitive 
causes.— The  antecedent  differ  from  the  conjoined  causes  in 
that  with  the  former  the  state  does  not  become  immediately 
manifest,  but  only  after  a  number  of  other  intermediate  causes 
have  come  into  operation,  these  being  nearer  to  the  state  than 
are  the  antecedent  causes.

The  above  groupings  of  causes  are  the  expression  of  a  mode  of 
thought  now  foreign  to  us.  We  seek  more  practical  statements  and 
rightly  But  when  he  thinks  of  causes,  Avicenna  goes  back  to 
fundamentals.  This  patient  is  before  him,  and  the  illness  owes  its 
origin  to  external  factors  which  that  patient  cannot  escape— the 
atmosphere,  the  weather,  the  climate,  the  drinking-water,  the  soil 
over  which  he  lives  and  works  ;  or  to  factors  operating  within  the 
body,  producing  aberrations  in  the  physiological  processes.The  external  factors  naturally  fall  under  the  categories  of  the 
four  elements  (five,  if  we  include  "  aether,"  represented  by  sunlight), 
and  the  memory  is  securely  aided  by  thinking  of  each  in  turn.— 
The  internal  factors  are  classified  according  to  the  qualities— heat, 
cold,  moisture,  dryness.  These  also  serve  as  aids  to  memory  since 
many  aberrations  in  physiological  processes  amount  to  disturbances 
in  these  several  qualities  in  the  different  parts  of  the  body.

Changes  of  vitality  as  causes  of  disease  are  not  here  specified 
because  they  are  secondary  to  the  other  causes  It  is  true  that 
disease  is  evidence  of  loss  of  vitality,  of  loss  of  radiance  of  the 
"  breath  "  but  this  is  the  effect  of  "  antecedent  causes— repletion 
with  humours  ;  depletion  of  humours  ;  and  these  again  can  be 
traced  back  to-interactions  of  qualities  and  changes  in  the  proportions 
of  the  "  elements."

The  following  table  is  added  for  clearness  : |

Name  of 
Cause.

i.  Primitive.

2.  Antecedent.

3.  Conjoined...

Nature.

Non-corporeal.

(1)  Corporeal  (i.e., 
a  humour).

(2)  Temperamental.

(3)  Compositional.

Corporeal.

Relation  to 
bodily  state.

May  be  direct, or  may 
only  be  through  an 
intermediate  state

Is  indirect,  via  an  in- 
termediate state.

Examples.

Solar  heat. 
Violent  exercise. 
Heating    articles    of 
food  (e.g.,  garlic). 
Sadness.

Wakefulness.    Blows. 
Cataract.      Fever.

Direct ;  immediate.

Suffusion  of  the  orbits. 
Lachrymation. 
Repletion  in  fever.

Blockage  of  an  aper- 
ture by  a  humour.

Blindness  from  ob- 
struction of  the  optic 
nerve .

Sepsis  with  fever.

T

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

l1SBlockage  of  an  aper- 
ture by  a  humour.

Blindness  from  ob- 
struction of  the  optic 
nerve .

Sepsis  with  fever.

T

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

l1S

232.  Essential  causes  are  such  as  pepper,  which  warms  ; 
opium,  which  cools.  Accidental  causes  are  such  as  cold  water, 
which  warms  because  it  closes  the  pores  of  the  skin,  and  hence 
the  heat  is  retained  ;  hot  water,  which  cools  because  it  opens 
the  pores  and  liberates  the  heat  ;  scammony  which  cools  by 
expelling  the  calefacient  humour.

An  essential  cause  is  one  which  alters  the."  nature  "  ;   that  is,  that  on  which 
the  primary  qualities  of  the  body  (heat,  cold,  moisture,  dryness)  depend.

233.  ^  It  does  not  follow  that  a  causal  agent  will  alter  the 
body  even  if  it  reaches  it.  Before  the  agent  can  act  one  of  three 
conditions  must  be  fulfilled,  (i)  The  agent  must  be  powerful 
enough  ;  (2)  the  preparatory  power  of  the  body  must  be  ade- 
quate ;  (3)  there  must  be  an  appropriate  time-factor.  The  agent 
must  be  exposed  to  the  causative  agent  long  enough  for  the 
latter  to  act.  The  states  of  the  causes  vary  in  their  results.  One 
single  causal  agent  may  give  rise  to  quite  different  diseases  in 
different  persons,  or  at  different  times.

The_  Time-factor.— The  time  occupied  before  a  given  agent  can  produce  its 
effect  varies  with  different  individuals,  just  as  some  persons  have  a  long  digestive 
time-factor  and  others  a  short  one.  This  was  spoken  of  very  long  ago  (Charaka155 
ii.  793)  ;  the  lesson  being,  in  the  case  of  digestion,  that  the  number  of  meals  per 
day  should  depend  on  the  time-factor  and  not  on  popular  custom

A.      UNAVOIDABLE  CAUSES  OF  DISEASE

(i)  Extracorporeal

2.      The  Atmospheric  Air  and  its  Influence  within  the

BodyA.      UNAVOIDABLE  CAUSES  OF  DISEASE

(i)  Extracorporeal

2.      The  Atmospheric  Air  and  its  Influence  within  the

Body

■  IR  (234)  is  an  element  which  is  in  our  body  and 
in_  our  breath  (ruh).  It  is  also  continually 
being  contributed  to  the  breath.  It  is  the 
agent  which  modifies  the  breath,  not  simply  as 
element,  but  in  virtue  of  its  constructive  and 
attempering  nature.

235.  We  have  made  it  clear  already,  and 
emphasize  it  again  here,  that  the  term  "  breath  "  is  not  synonymous 
with  what  philosophers  (and  theologians)  term  "  soul"

236.  There  are  two  processes  whereby  the  breath  reaches 
its  attempered  state  from  the  air — namely  depuration  and  ven- 
tilation. Ventilation  is  the  means  whereby  the  temperament  of 
the  breath  is  modified  in  respect  of  the  undue  warmth  which  is

i76  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

usually  the  effect  of  condensation  and  imprisonment  of  the  breath. 
(By  temperament  we  mean  that  relative  temperament  which  has 
been  denned  for  you.)  This  attempering  is  attained  by  means  of 
the  air  drawn  in  at  the  lungs  and  the  pores  of  the  skin,  and  by 
means  of  the  distribution  of  that  air  through  the  arteries  by  means 
of  their  pulsation.237.  Compared  with  the  temperament  inherent  in  the 
breath,  the  air  around  us  is  very  much  cooler  than  it  is  compared 
with  the  temperament  arising  from  the  imprisonment  or  con- 
densation of  the  breath.  When  the  outer  air  enters  the  breath, 
it  drives  it  on  and  mingles  with  it,  and  so  prevents  its  trans- 
formation into  the  astringent  fire-element  ;  for  such  a  transform- 
ation would  render  the  temperament  of  the  breath  faulty  and 
unfitted  for  receiving  the  impressions  of  the  sensitive  soul 
(i.e.  for  maintaining  life),  and  would  interfere  with  the  dispersal 
of  the  moist  vapour  of  the  substance  of  the  breath.

238.  Depuration  is  the  process  going  on  during  expiration, 
and  by  it  the  separation  of  the  fuliginous  vapour  in  the  breath  is 
secured.  The  fuliginous  vapour  is  to  the  breath  what  superfluous 
humour  is  to  the  body,  and  it  is  expelled  (as  bad  air).  During  in- 
spiration, the  air  enters  into,  pervades,  and  aerates  the  breath  ; 
during  expiration,  the  breath  is  purified  into  the  air.  (In  this  way 
the  temperament  of  the  breath  is  maintained.)

239.  When  the  air  is  first  drawn  in,  it  necessarily  cools 
the  breath,  but  after  the  air  attains  the  quality  of  the  breath, 
through  continued  contact  with  its  heat,  it  ceases  to  be  an 
adjuvant,  and  is  superfluous.  Hence  new  air  is  needed,  and 
when  breathed  in  supplies  the  place  of  the  other.  The  old  air 
must  be  expired  in  order  to  give  place  for  the  new,  and  at  the 
same  time  remove  with  it  the  superfluities  of  the  substance  of 
the  breath*

240.  As  long  as  the  air  is  attempered  and  pure,  and  has  no 
substances  admixed  which  would  be  contrary  to  the  temperament 
of  the  breath,  health  will  come  and  remain.  Otherwise  the 
contrary  occurs.241.  The  air  is  liable  to  natural  as  well  as  non-natural 
changes,  and  may  even  undergo  preternatural  changes.  The 
natural  changes  are  those  of  the  seasons.  At  every  season  the 
air  changes  to  a  new  temperament.

*  It  appears  that  the  idea  of  gaseous  interchange  within  the  lung  was  not 
grasped  What  we  know  as  "  residual  air  "  comes  to  be  what  Avicenna  speaks  of 
as  "breath  "  (ruh).  Hence  the  description  in  the  text  is  right  m  idea,  but  lacking 
in  exactitude.

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  I?7

/Mn^iUS  le markS  J^*  the  air  is  different  in  character  (a)  at  the  seasons  of  the 
year  (6 1  at  the  changes  of  the  moon,  (b  >)  at  the  rising  and  setting  of  the  stars  A^inerpf

(fl)    NATURAL    MUTATIONS

3.     The  Influence  of  the  Seasons  on  the  Atmosphere

242._  _  The  word  "  Season  "  has  a  different  meaning  for 
the  physician  than  for  the  astronomer.  According  to  the 
astronomer,  there  are  four  seasons,  which  are  reckoned  according 
to  the  position  of  the  sun  in  the  zodiac.  According  to  the 
physician,  spring-time,  in  temperate  climates,  is  the  time  when 
warm  clothes  are  less  necessary,  and  yet  no  precautions  are 
required  against  heat.  The  trees  begin  to  leaf  at  this  season. 
It  is  the  time  of  flowers  and  leaves,  and  the  beginning  of  the 
formation  of  fruits.  To  be  more  exact,  it  is  the  portion  of  the 
year  between  (or  about,  or  slightly  before,  or  slightly  after) 
the  vernal  equinox  and  that  at  which  the  sun  has  reached  the 
middle  of  Taurus.

Autumn  is  the  opposite  portion  of  the  year  in  our  latitude.§

§  This  chapter  is  taken  by  Andreas  de  Alpago  Bellunensis  as  the  nmnf  +w 
Avicenna  was  a  native  of  Persia,     (cf.  footnote  to  369).  eUUnenSls  as  the  Proof  that§  This  chapter  is  taken  by  Andreas  de  Alpago  Bellunensis  as  the  nmnf  +w 
Avicenna  was  a  native  of  Persia,     (cf.  footnote  to  369).  eUUnenSls  as  the  Proof  that

_  It  is  the  time  of  change  of  colour  in  the  leaves,  and  the 
beginning  of  their  fall  from  the  trees.

later  ^  ^^  C°UntrieS  SPrin£  ma^  come  sooner  and  autumn

The  summer  and  winter,  from  the  point  of  view  of  medicine 
are  the  portions  of  the  year  remaining— and  the  interval  between 
spring  and  autumn  is  much  shorter  than  that  between  autumn 
and  spring.

Summer  is  the  whole  of  the  hot  season,  and  winter  the  whole 
of  the  cold  season  It  is  the  season  opposite  to  summer,  beincr 
less  or  greater  m  duration  according  to  the  latitude.*  &

"  weak"Taesonsnd  "^  "*  ^  "  Str0ng  "  SeaSOnS<  S^  and  autumn  are  the

243.  The  temperament  of  spring  is  equable,  and  not  hot 
and  moist  as  some  think.  The  proof  of  this  rests  with  natural 
philosophy.

The  temperament  of  summer  is  hot,  because  the  sun  is

*  This  passage  is  slightly  rearranged.

N

i78  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINEThe  temperament  of  summer  is  hot,  because  the  sun  is

*  This  passage  is  slightly  rearranged.

N

i78  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

nearly  vertical,  over  our  heads,  at  this  period.  The  power  of 
the  rays  of  the  sun  may  be. thought  of  as  being  concentrated  in 
summer  because  instead  of  being  refracted  they  form  only  a 
very  acute  angle,  or  are  reflected  back  along  the  line  of  incidence 
itself.  The  effect  is  different  according  as  the  solar  ray  is  axial, 
like  the -axis  of  a  column  or  pyramid  (in  which  case  the  ray  is 
thought  of  as  coming  from  the  centre  of  the  sun  into  an  exactly 
opposite  spot  on  the  earth's  surface),  or  is  oblique.  The  axial 
rav  is  stronger  because  its  impression  is  added  to  by  the  incoming 
rays  from  all  other  points.  The  oblique  rays  are  the  weakest 
(because  in  this  case  rays  from  other  points  do  not  join  and  add 
to  them).  In  summer  we  are  exposed  to  rays  almost  or  quite 
axial.  This  is  the  longest  season  in  our  (southerly)  climes.  In 
winter  the  rays  are  nearly  circumferential  (tangential,  oblique).

244  In  summer  the  light  is  very  intense,  and  yet  the  sun 
is  more  distant  from  the  earth,  for  the  sun  is  on  the  increase 
However,  I  discuss  the  subject  of  the  distance  or  nearness  of 
the  sun  in  the  astronomical  section  of  my  book  on  mathematical 
philosophy.  The  proof  of  the  intensity  of  the  heat  and  of  the 
lio-ht  of  the  sun  is  set  forth  in  my  book  on  natural  philosophy.

b  245  Influence  of  summer.  Summer  makes  the  air  hot  and 
dry,  because  (i)  its  great  heat  disperses  the  water  vapour  ; 
(2)  it  attenuates  the  "  substance  "  of  the  air,  and  makes  it  more 
like  "  fire  "  ;  (3)  there  is  little  in  the  air  at  this  season  to  separate 
out  as  rain  or  dew.  .246.  Influence  of  winter.  Winter  makes  the  air  cold 
and  moist,  for  contrary  reasons.

247=  Influence  of  autumn.  In  autumn,  the  heat  subsides 
and  the  cold  is  not  yet'at  its  greatest  because  we  live  at  a  latitude 
where  the  rays  are  between  the  equatorial  axis  already  referred 
to  and  the  circumference.  That  is  why  the  temperament  of  the 
air  is  between  hot  and  cold,  but  not  between  moisture  and  dryness. 
When  the  sun  has  rendered  the  air  dry,  how  could  there  remain 
behind  in  the  air  any  humectants  which  would  counteract  the 
source  of  desiccation  ?

248.  A  state  of  the  air  tending  towards  coolness  is  not 
like  one  tending  to  moisture,  because  the  change  to  cold  is  only 
slight,  whereas  the  change  to  moisture  is  further.  The  change 
towards  moisture  which  coolness  induces  is  not  as  easily  effected 
as  one  towards  dryness,  which  heat  induces.  The  latter  is  facili- 
tated by  heat  because  heat  itself  is  a  drying  agent.  Coldness  is 
not  a  humectant.  Humectation  is  facilitated  by  a  certain  degree 
of  heat  provided  there  is  some  substance  present  which  possesses

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  179

a  certain  degree  of  coldness.  A  certain  amount  of  heat  allows 
evaporation,  but  does  not  disperse  (water  vapour)  ;  and  there 
is  a  certain  amount  of  cold  which  is  inadequate  for  bringing  about 
inspissation,  cohesion,  or  union.249.  Consequently,  the  state  which  enables  the  air  of 
spring  to  remain  at  the  same  degree  of  moisture  as  in  winter  is  not 
like  the  state  which  enables  the  air  of  autumn  to  remain  at  the 
same  degree  of  dryness  as  in  summer.  The  moisture  of  the  air 
in  spring  is  attempered  by  heat  as  much  as  the  dryness  of  air 
in  autumn  is  not  modified  by  cold.  Moisture  and  desiccation, 
therefore,  are  alike  in  regard  to  the  action  of  "  habit  "  and 
privation  but  not  in  regard  to  the  action  of  their  respective 
contraries.  For,  in  this  case,  desiccation  is  simply  "  destruction 
of- moist  substance  "  ;  but  humectation  is  not  "  destruction  of 
dry  substance,"  but  "  acquisition  of  moisture."

250.  In  speaking  here  of  air  as  being  "moist"  or  "dry" 
we  do  not,  of  course,  refer  to  "  form  "  or  "  natural  quality." 
Such  a  question  is  remote  from  our  present  purpose.  In  calling 
air  "  moist  "  we  mean  that  much  aqueous  vapour  is  admixed 
with  it,  or  that  its  density  has  reached  that  of  aqueous  vapour. 
In  calling  air  "  dry,"  we  imply  (i)  that  the  aqueous  vapour 
formerly  present  has  been  dispersed,  or  (ii)  that  the  air  has 
become  rarefied  or  attenuated  until  it  comes  to  resemble  the 
substance  of  Fire,  or  (iii)  an  air  with  which  earthy  vapours 
(which  resemble  Earth  in  being  dry)  are  admixed.

251.  Consequently,  the  moisture  in  the  atmosphere 
which  remains  over  from  the  winter  is  lessened  in  spring  bv  a 
certain  amount  of  heat  accruing  to  it  by  the  fact  that  the  sun  is 
approaching  the  middle  of  the  heavens,  and  coming  to  be  nearly 
overhead.  But  the  dryness  which  remains  over  from  the  autumn 
does  not  encounter  any  moisture  from  the  approaching  coldness 
of  the  winter.252.  Further,  would  dry  things  become  moist  as  quicklv 
in  cold  air  as  moist  ones  would  become  dry  in  hot  air,  supposing 
the  ratio  between  the  cold  and  coldness  to  be  about  the  same  as 
that  between  heat  and  hotness  ?  Obviously  there  would  be  a 
difference.

253.  A  third  and  better  argument  is  that  moisture  cannot 
remain  longer  in  hot  air  than  in  cold  unless  it  were  continually 
being  reinforced  by  further  additions  of  watery  vapours.  Dry- 
ness, however,  needs  not  such  continual  emanation  for  its  main- 
tenance.

254.  The  reason  why  moisture  disappears  from  bodies

i8o  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

exposed  to  the  air,  or  from  the  air  itself,  unless  there  is  a  continual 
reinforcement  with  further  moisture,  is  that  air  is  only  cold  in 
comparison  with  our  body/  It  is  not  sufficiently  cold  in  the  places 
we  inhabit  to  enable  the  moisture  to  be  dispersed  from  the 
atmosphere.  It  is  the  power  of  the  sun  and  the  stars  which 
disperses  it.  Consequently,  though  the  supply  of  _  moisture 
ceases,  the  dispersal  goes  on  until  a  state  of  dryness  is  rapidly 
reached.

255.  The  atmosphere  in  spring.  In  spring,  there  is  more 
loss  by  dispersal  than  by  evaporation.  The  reason  is  (i)  there 
is  little  heat,  and  that  is  dispersed  widely  in  the  atmosphere  ; 
(2)  much  heat  is  shut  up  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth.  Hence 
rarefied  vapours  are  continually  being  breathed  out  towards  the 
earth's  surface.*256.  The  atmosphere  in  winter.  During  winter  the  amount 
of  heat  concealed  within  the  earth  is  very  great — as  is  proved  in 
treatises  on  natural  science — whereas  there  is  only  a  negligible 
amount  of  heat  in  the  atmosphere.  So  there  are  two  factors  which 
together  contribute  to  moisten  the  air — sublimation  and  con- 
densation. This  is  the  more  so,  because  the  substance  of  the  air 
in  winter  is  so  cold  that  it  becomes  more  dense,  and  adaptable 
for  evaporation.

257.  In  spring,  attenuation  (dispersion)  in  the  atmosphere 
exceeds  evaporation.  There  is  much  less  heat  concealed  in  the 
earth.  This  is  clear  from  the  fact  that  something  suddenly 
comes  to  the  earth's  surface  at  this  timet  which  is  more  potent 
than  the  evaporating  or  the  rarefying  agent.  This  great  access 
of  material  delays  the  evaporating  process,  and  brings  the 
(moisture)  longer  into  contact  with  the  abundant  atmospheric 
heat  ;  and  this  completes  the  dispersion  of  the  moisture.

This  is  the  chief  explanation  of  the  fact  that  the  vernal 
air  fails  to  retain  the  bulk  of  the  winter  moisture,  and  that  the 
autumnal  air  fails  to  retain  the  bulk  of  the  summer  dryness — ■ 
apart  from  other  reasons  over  and  above  what  we  have  named.

Furthermore,  there  is  not  enough  material  to  replace  what 
has  been  sublimated  and  rarefied.  The  result  is  that  the  nature 
of  spring  necessarily  tends  to  an  equipoise  between  moisture  and

*  Note  the  accuracy  of  this  conception.

The  fancy  or  j  est  that  summer -heat  and  winter-cold  are  the  result  of  the 
greatness  of  the  boiling  of  '  Hell '  (i.e.,  the  interior  of  the  earth)  makes  a  breathing 
twice  a  year,  expiring  in  summer  and  inspiring  in  the  winter  "  (Night,  487,  Burton) 
may  be  here  recalled.  .  ,,t  "  The  vapours  of  the  sky  descend,  and  vapours  rise  up  out  01  the  eartn  ^ 
(in  spring).     "The  two  co-operate  in  the  work  of  renascence  of  vegetable  hie 
(Li  Ki,  IV,  i.  14).

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  181

dryness,  as  much  as  it  does  to  one  between  heat  and  cold.  Still, 
one  cannot  deny  that  in  spring  there  is  at  first  a  tendency  to 
a  certain  degree  of  moisture.  But  in  spring  the  moisture  is 
nearly  at  equipoise,  just  as  in  autumn  the  dryness  is  nearly  at 
equipoise.  Even  if  there  is  in  autumn  not  an  exact  equipoise 
between  heat  and  cold,  it  will  not  be  far  from  that,  because  in 
autumn  the  periods  of  the  day  just  before  and  just  after  noon  are 
like  those  in  summer.  The  autumnal  air,  you  see,  is  very  dry, 
and  can  readily  become  warm  and  fire-like,  summer  having 
already  disposed  it  to  be  so.  But  the  nights  and  morning  hours 
in  autumn  are  frosty,  owing  to  the  obliquity  of  the  sun's  rays,  and 
also_  because  the  tenuous  matter  in  it  is  well  disposed  to  undergo 
infrigidation.Spring  air  has  these  two  qualities  in  almost  exact  equipoise, 
because  its^  air  does  not  take  up  the  heat  and  cold  which  the 
autumnal  air  so  easily  receives.  That  explains  why  the  autumn 
night  is  not  very  different  from  the  autumnal  day.  And  if 
anyone  should  ask  for  why  is  an  autumn  night  colder  than  a 
spring  night,  as  one  would  expect  the  atmosphere  to  be  then 
hotter,  because  it  is  so  attenuated — he  may  have  the  reply  that 
extremely  attenuated  air  becomes  hot  or  cold  more  quickly, 
exactly  as  does  extremely  rarefied  water.  For,  if  vou  heat 
water>  and  then  wish  to  freeze  it,  it  will  do  so  more  quickly  than 
cold  water  would,  because  the  cold  penetrates  more  easily 
between  the  particles  separated  from  one  another  by  the  pre- 
ceding heat.

258.  _  The  human  body  is  not  as  sensitive  to  the  cold  of 
spring  as  it  is  to  that  of  autumn,  because  in  spring  the  body 
passes  from  a  coldness  to  which  it  is  already  acclimatised,  to  an 
increasing  warmth.  In  autumn,  the  reverse  is  the  case,  for 
after  being  relaxed  by  the  summer  heat,  the  body  is  suddenly  hit 
by  cold  ;  this  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  autumn  approaches  winter, 
whereas  spring  recedes  from  it.

259.  Change  of  seasons  has  to  do  with  the  kind  of  diseases 
peculiar  to  each  climate.  Consequently  the  prudent  physician 
will  carefully  study  his  own  climate  (atmospheric  conditions 
day  by  day  and  month  by  month)  and  country  in  order  the 
better  to  treat  the  diseases  and  maintain  his  patient's  health  by 
an  appropriate  mode  of  life,  and  (in  order  the  better  to  choose) 
the  regiminal  measures  appropriate  to  that  climate  and 
country.260.  Sometimes  one  day  of  a  season  is  like  some  one  day 
of  another  season  ;    and  sometimes  it  is  not.      Some  days  in

1 82  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

winter  are  spring-like  ;  some  spring  days  are  summer-like  ; 
some  days  in  autumn  are  hot  and  cold  during  the  course  of  a 
single  day.

§  174.  The  changes  which  the  seasons  produce  on  the  human 
body  are  ascribed  in  this  chapter  at  least  in  part  to  the  changes  which 
the  seasons  produce  in  the  ground  itself.  We  are  introduced  to 
the  idea  of  "  ground-air,"  "  ground- water,"  "  ground-fire  (mod. 
ground-temperature).  That  which  the  Canon  here  hints  at  is 
found  to  be  entirely  accurate  in  the  light  of  modern  investigations.

8  175  Movement  of  ground-air.  In  the  interstices  of  the 
soil  there  is  an  abundance  of  "  vapour,"  which  moves  in  and  out  of 
the  earth  into  the  atmosphere,  as  the  ground-water  moves  up  and 
down.  We  may  rightly  picture  the  earth  as  a  huge  lung.  It 
exhales  ground-air  into  the  air  we  breathe,  and  if  the  former  is 
humid,  owing  to  a  high  ground-water  level,  the  exhaled  air  will  be 
"  damp  "  •  if  the  temperature  of  the  earth  be  low,  the  exhaled  air 
will  be  cold  ;  if  the  ground-air  be  polluted  the  air  we  breathe  will 
become  fouled.  The  conception  of  the  earth  as  a  lung  is  given  in 
almost  those  very  words  by  Avicenna  (255).§  176.  Movement  of  ground-water.  The  ground-water  may 
move  merely  up  and  down,  or  it  may  travel  horizontally  even  to  great 
distances.  Its  height  varies  with  the  rains,  the  season,  the  nature 
of  the  rock  beneath,  the  character  of  the  subsoil,  and  the  presence  of 
vegetation  (crops,  undergrowth,  woodland,  forestland).  The  move- 
ment up  and  down  may  be  compared  with  tidal  movements.  The 
"waters  under  the  earth"  move,  as  do  the  seas.  Clearly,  then, 
floods  and  droughts,  swampland  and  gravelly  land,  all  have  wide 
effects.  The  interference  with  vegetation'  also  alters  natural  con- 
ditions, whether  beneficially  or  detrimentally  to  human  welfare. 
Lane-Notter  (Enc.  Brit.  25,  p.  348),  states  that  it  has  been  estimated 
that  an  acre  of  cabbages  will  absorb  from  the  land,  and  transpire 
from  its  leaves  more  than  ten  tons  of  water  per  day,  when  the  weather 
is  fine.  The  destruction  of  trees  arrests  the  upward  movement  of 
ground-water,  which  previously  was  carried  high  up  into  the  air 
as  if  by  so  many  chimneys,  and  so  affects  other  places  at  considerable

c\\  sf3.11.CGS

§177.  Practical  bearing  of  these  facts.  Innumerable  living 
things  pass  the  whole,  or  part  of  their  lives  in  the  ground-water. 
They  are  carried  along  with  it,  both  to  the  surface,  and  horizontally 
underground,  possibly  to  great  distances.  The  following  groups 
may  be  specified  :  (1)  Bacteria.  These  are  derived  from  (a)  the 
earth's  surface  from  refuse  in  the  neighbourhood  of  habitations,  from 
excreta,  trade-effluents,  slaughter-houses,  (b)  deeper  strata:  cess- 
pools, which  do  not  necessarily  filter  off  the  organisms.  (2)  Protozoa. 
(3)  Moulds  and  spore-bearing  organisms  generally.  (4)  Inverte- 
brates of  many  orders.These   all   flourish   according  to   the  presence   of  putrefactive

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  183

matters  in  the  soil  (vegetable  or  animal),  according  to  the  ground- 
temperature,  and  according  to  degrees  of  anaerobic  state  (which  has 
to  do  with  cycles  of  development).

"  The  earth,  is  a  great  stomach,  in  which  everything  is  dissolved,  digested  and 
transformed,  and  each  being  draws  its  nutriment  from  the  earth;  an  I  elch  living 
being  is  a  stomach  that  serves  as  a  tomb  for  other  forms,  and  from  which  new  form! 
spring  into  existence."— (Paracelsus,  Paramirum"    p.  205.)

Organisms  gain  access  to  the  human  body  (a)  directly  from  the 
surface  soil,  from  the  drinking  water,  from  insufficiently  cleansed 
vegetable  foods,  m  partly  decayed  vegetables  or  vegetables  which  have 
become  stale  m  the  markets,  from  the  inhalation  of  infected  dust 
(especially  the  dust  of  earth  pulverised  by  being  parched  in  times  of 
drought),  (J,)  indirectly,  by  contamination  of  food  by  insects  whose 
larvae  infest  the  soil  to  an  extraordinary  extent ;  by  use  of  vegetables 
infected  by  invertebrates  which  themselves  harbour  pathogenic 
organisms.  b§  178.  Diseases  associated  with  ground-water.  Damp  soil 
favours  putrefaction,  with  ultimate  pollution  of  the  air  Phthisis  is 
favoured  m  such  localities.  When  the  soil  is  actually  wet,  from  the 
rising  of  the  ground-water,  typhoid  epidemics  have  been  noted 
(Pettenkofer).  Fleas  on  rats  which  burrow  into  soil  polluted  by 
plague-infected  ground- water  become  infected  themselves. 
n  1 J  :  l9'r  Diseases  associated  with  variations  of  earth-temperature 
Cold  soil  favours  bronchitis  and  other  chest  complaints  Warm  soil 
favours  the  multiplication  of  certain  organisms— those  which 
flourish  best  at  certain  temperatures,  and  anaerobically.  ^Favoured 
by  admixture  of  the  soil  with  manure.)  ^

§  180.  The  subject  is  therefore  plainly  of  importance  both  in 
regard  to  the  study  of  pandemics,  epidemics  and  endemic  diseases 
and  m  regard  to  the  daily  condition  of  the  individual  patient,  the 
progress  of  his  disease,  and  even  the  exact  form  which  a  disease  takes 
in  his  case.  As  Avicenna  says,  the  practitioner  would  benefit  by 
noting  the  successions  of  weather-changes,  the  type  of  the  season  and 
the  seasonal  cycles,  especially  interpreted  in  terms  of  movements  of 
the  water,  air,  and  "  fire  "  in  the  earth.

4.      The  Influence  of  Seasonal  Changes  on  the  Body 
261.      When  a  season     is    harmonious*  for  a  person    of 
healthy  temperament,  it  is  appropriate  for  him,  but  not  so  if  the

x,  cct  "  !ia™onious-''— Cf.  "  conformity  with  the  laws  of  nature  '*  (Li  Ki  »  VI 
Pl  535)'  +t£  case  the  season  is  considered  as  the  variable,  and  the  human  tem-x,  cct  "  !ia™onious-''— Cf.  "  conformity  with  the  laws  of  nature  '*  (Li  Ki  »  VI 
Pl  535)'  +t£  case  the  season  is  considered  as  the  variable,  and  the  human  tem-

perament the  constant.  But  it  may  be  noted  that  the  whole  of  our  life  is  a  matter 
of  conformity  with  the  laws  of  nature,"  from  highest  to  lowest.  If  the ''Govern- 
ment conforms  in  all  respects,  thus  exhibiting  the  Great  Conformity— requiring 
moSlHr^mdS  a+f  Ma16r  wills~and  if  each  individual  in  turn  conforms!  the  E? 
I°S  inSn,ie^eal  State-  rhe*PP^°K  ^  regard  to  the  incidence  of  Leal 
m  the  individual  being  is  very  wide,  and  this  section  of  the  Canon  becomes  sue-

fsScIaVo0nwinthS1t:       reStmg  "^  Whm  *"  QaSSiC  jUSt  1uoted  is  «Sd L

l84  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

person  is  of  unhealthy  temperament.  But*  if  deviation  from 
equipoise  be  marked,  then  the  season  will  be  harmonious  or  not 
correspondingly,  but  the  person  may  become  debilitated.? 
When  a  season  is  appropriate  for  a  person  of  unhealthy  tempera- 
ment, the  contrary  holds.

262  When  the  nature  of  two  seasons  at  the  commence- 
ment is  opposite  to  that  at  their  termination,  and  yet  the  altera- 
tion from  the  mean  is  not  great  (because  not  of  long  duration), 
as,  for  example,  when  a  southerly  winter  is  followed  by  a  norther- 
ly spring  the  second  season  will  be  more  beneficial  to  the  human 
body  than  the  first,  and  will  attemper  the  body.  This  is  because 
the  northerly  spring  is  opposite  in  action  to  the  southerly  winter. 
If  the  winter  be  very  dry  and  the  spring  very  wet,  the  latter 
modifies  the  dryness  of  the  former.  But  if  the  spring  is  not 
very  humid  and  does  not  last  long,  then  its  modifying  moistening 
influence  will  not  be  deleterious.  _   _     .263  A  single  seasonal  change  is  less  injurious  to  lite  than 
are  repeated  changes— supposing  the  change  m  question  is 
liable  to  prove  mortal,  and  not  one  which  reverses  a  previous

264  Among  the  temperaments  of  the  atmosphere  one 
that  is  hot  and  moist  is  more  favourable  to  putrefactive  pro-

cesses.

265  Atmospheric  changes  are  common  in  some  regions, 
especially  in  the  depths  of  the  valleys  ;  they  are  only  rare  on 
hills  and  high  mountains.  .

266  It  is  better  when  seasons  are  normal  in  character  ; 
it  is  better  that  summer  should  be  hot  and  the  winter  cold  ;  so 
with  each  season.  If  seasons  are  not  normal  in  character, 
serious  maladies  will  arise.

267  If  all  the  seasons  in  one  year  are  of  uniform  quality 
(for  instance,  wet,  dry,  hot,  cold,  all  through  the  year)  it  is  a  bad 
year  ■  there  will  be  many  diseases  in  conformity  with  the  quality 
of  the  year.  The  subsequent  seasons  will  be  fortunate,  lr  a 
single  season  can  arouse  much  illness  of  corresponding  type,  how 
much  the  more  will  not  a  whole  year  arouse  ?  _

268  A  person  of  phlegmatic  temperament  is  liable  to 
develop  epilepsy,  paralysis,  apoplexy,  trismus,  convulsions  and

the  like,  in  a  cold  season.

269  A   person   of  choleric   temperament   may   develop 
delirium5S  mania,  acute  fevers,  acute  inflammatory  swellings  tn  a

*  i.e.,  Taking  the  human  nature  as  the  variable,  and  the  laws  of  nature  as  the 
constant^  ■  ^  non_proportional  season  would  make  a  very  non-equable  person  weak.

'F

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  185

hot  season.      How  much  the  worse  would  it  not  be  if  the  character 
of  that  season  persisted  throughout  a  whole  year  ?'F

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  185

hot  season.      How  much  the  worse  would  it  not  be  if  the  character 
of  that  season  persisted  throughout  a  whole  year  ?

270.  _  With  a  premature  winter,  winterly  diseases  come  on 
early.  _  With  a  premature  summer,  summer  diseases  arise  early. 
The  diseases  of  the  corresponding  season  will  change  accord- 
mgty-     .

271.  An  unduly  prolonged  season  predisposes  to  many 
illnesses,  especially  in  the  case  of  summer  and  autumn.

272.  Note  that  the  effects  of  the  changing  seasons  are  not 
due  to  the  season  itself,  but  to  the  quality  which  is  changed  along 
with  them,  for  this  exerts  a  marked  effect  upon  the  states  of  the 
body.  A  change  from  heat  to  cold  in  the  course  of  a  single  day, 
produces  a  change  in  the  body  accordingly.

273.  A  rainy  autumn  followed  by  a  temperate  winter  (not 
without  some  cold,  and  yet  not  too  cold,  considering  the  geo- 
graphical region)  is  more  healthy.  A  rainy  soring  followed  by 
a  moderately  rainy  summer  would  be  more  likely  to  be  healthy.

See  also  581,  where  the  effect  of  the  seasons  on  the  pulse  is  discussed.

5.     The  Properties  of  Healthy  Air

274.  The  substance  of  the  air  is  good  when  (i)  it  is  not 
contaminated  with  extraneous  matter,  such  as  the  vapours  [from 
marshes  or  lakes,  or  from  canals  or  open  sewers  :  Aegineta  ; 
or  the  gaseous  products  from  chemical  works,  etc.  :  modern]' 
or  smoke  and  soot.*  (2)  It  is  open  to  the  sky  [i.e.  not  shut  in 
by  high  mountains:  Aegineta;  and,  generally,  is  able  to  circulate 
freely  round  us  :  Nash].  (3)  Is  not  confined  in  caves  [cf. 
Grotto  del  Cane],  or  between  high  walls,  or  shut  up  in  houses  (or 
m  underground  cisterns).275.  Once  a  putrefactive  process  has  begun  in  the  air,  it  is 
more  likely  to  continue  if  the  air  is  free  and  exposed  than  when 
it  is  enclosed  and  concealed.  Except  for  that,  it  is  better  that 
air  should  be  free  and  exposed.

276.  Healthy  air  remains  clear  unless  there  be  admixed 
with  it  vapours  from  lakes  or  from  stagnant  and  deep  waters  or

marshy  lands,  or  from  places  where  potherbs  are  cultivated

especially  cabbages  and  herb  rocket  ;  or  where  certain  resinous 
trees  or  trees  of  bad  temperament  (box,  yew)  grow,  or  where  nuts 
or  figs  grow,  or  where  there  are  offensive  odours  and  evil-smelling

*  °n<r  may  aiSo  add:    germ-laden  dust,  or  particles  of  saliva  and  exhaled 
particles  of  moisture  charged  with  possibly  pathogenic  microbes.     Note  that  ex-

of  Ht^^T  a^S  °'5  I"  C!nt-  °f  °rganic  imP»riti^  which  are  much  more  a  source 
of  disease  than  the  carbon  dioxide  gas  produced  by  respiration.

l86  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

winds.      In  short,  the  air  remains  clear  if  healthy  winds,  coming

from  high  or  level  ground,  blow  over  the  district.

Such  air  is  not  retained  deep  in  the  earth.  It  becomes 
warm  quickly  after  sunrise,  and  becomes  cold  quickly  after  the 
sun  has  set.  The  air  found  confined  within  the  walls  of  recently 
built  houses,  is  not  likely  to  be  healthy,  as  the  air  is  not  quite  dry 
owins  to  the  lime  in  the  walls.

Air  is  good  when  it  does  not  interfere  with  one  s  breathing 
or  cause  the  throat  to  contract.  .  .

277  You  have  already  learnt  that  changes  occur  in  the  air 
which  are  (i)  in  accord  with  its  nature,  (2)  contrary  to  its  nature 
(preternatural),  (3)  neither  the  one  nor  the  other.  _Of  the  changes  in  the  atmosphere  which  are  not  in  accord 
with  its  nature,  these  are  either  contrary  to  or  not  contrary  to  it. 
Sometimes  the  changes  run  in  cycles,  sometimes  not  ;  they  may 
occur  at  certain  seasons  ;   they  may  be  periodic,  and  sometimes

n0t"   It  is  more  healthy  if  the  seasons  accord  with  the  nature  of 
the  atmosphere,  for  otherwise  illnesses  come  about.

S  181  The  effects  of  the  different  climates  (hot,  cold,  damp, 
drv)  on  the  body,  and  the  diseases  associated  with  each  are  given  by 
various  ancient  writers,  but  the  statements  often  *?  *7™<*  ™* 
one  another.  It  is  sufficient  to  consider  the  possibility  that,  apart 
Tom  infective  agents,  the  temperature  and  humidity  of  a  region 
afferts  the  nutrition  of  the  body,  the  vigour  of  the  body  and  is 
accompanied    by    liability    of   certain    organs    to    disease    (gastric,

^^uS£tf  thefts  been  studied  in  modern  times  in  its 
relation  to  liability  to  induce  disease  The  average  normal  re  ative 
humiditv  is  75  per  cent.  ;  excess  of  moisture  makes  the  air  leei 
chSy      Mists  are  detrimental  because  they  absorb  the  warming  rays

°f  ^Stagnant  air  produces  "  stuffiness,"  for  instance  in  rooms.  This, 
is  due  to  the  air  heated  by  the  skin  remaining  close  to  the  skin  and 
preventing  the  latter  from  cooling.  The  surface  circulation  fads  to 
receive  its  proper  stimulus   in  consequence.123     (p.    120.)The  following  passage  in  the  Su-wen  is  of  interest  :  Huang 
Ti  asked  in  what  dinner  cold  and  heat,  dryness  and  moisture,  wind 
and  fire  operated  on  man,  and  how  they  produced  the  transformation 
of  all  things  "  Ctii  Po  replied  :  "...  the  Five  Fluids  come  for- 
ward in  turn,  and  each  of  them  takes  precedence  once.  When  they 
lonot  keep  in  their  proper  spheres  there  is  disaster  when  they  do, 
everything  is  well  ordered,"  etc.     (Forke,23  p.  250-252.)

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  187

6.      The  Influence  of  the  Changes  in  the  Quality  of  the 
Atmosphere  ;  the  Diseases  incident  to  the  Several  Seasons 
and  Kinds  of  Weather

278.  Hot  atmosphere.  A  hot  atmosphere  disperses  the 
breath  and  has  a  relaxing  effect.  A  moderate  degree  of  heat 
induces  redness  by  drawing  blood  to  the  surface  of  the  body. 
A  great  degree  of  heat  results  in  a  yellow  colour  because  it  breaks 
down  (the  components  of)  the  blood  which  has  been  drawn  to  the 
cutaneous  vessels.  It  also  evokes  sweating,  diminishes  the 
amount  of  urine,  impairs  the  digestion  and  induces  thirst.

Cold  atmosphere.  A  cold  atmosphere  has  a  constricting 
effect.  It  strengthens  the  digestion,  and  increases  the  amount 
cf  urine.  The  reason  for  the  latter  is  that  it  causes  the  humours 
to  become  imprisoned,  so  that  only  a  small  portion  of  them  can 
become  resolved  into  sweat.  Another  reason  is  given  presently. 
Cold  induces  constipation  because  the  anal  muscles  remain 
tightly  contracted  and  the  rectum  does  not  respond  to  the  call  of 
the  intestines  ;  hence  the  faeces  linger  long  in  the  intestines 
instead  of  descending  (out  of.  the  sigmoid),  and  their  watery 
constituent  is  re-absorbed  and  passes  into  the  urine.Moist  atmosphere.     This  has  a  softening  effect  on  the  skin, 
and  renders  the  body  moist  as  a  whole.

Dry  atmosphere.  This  has  a  drying  effect  on  the  skin,  and 
renders  it  rough  and  dusky.

279.  Fogs. — Foggy  air  has  a  depressing  effect  on  the  mind, 
and  disturbs  and  confuses  the  humours.  This  kind  of  air  is  not 
the  same  as  "  dense  "  air,  for  the  latter  is  dense  in  substance, 
whereas  foggy  air  is  so  because  the  particles  with  which  it  is 
mingled  are  coarse  (nearly  or  actually  visible).  The  sign  of  such 
an  air  is  that  stars  of  small  magnitude  are  scarcely  seen  through 
it,  and  even  the  brilliance  of  the  planets  is  reduced  to  the  lumino- 
sity of  fixed  stars.  Murky  air  is  produced  (when  it  is  very  cold) 
by  the  presence  of  much  fuliginous  vapour,  and  of  smoke,  or  by 
absence  of  good  winds.

This  will ^  suffice  about  this  subject  for  the  present  ;  we 
shall  return  to  it  later  in  speaking  of  preternatural  changes  in  the

air

280.  The  Seasons.  Every  season  has  its  own  proper 
characteristics.  The  characters  occurring  at  the  end  of  one 
season,  and  the  diseases  associated  with  this,  agree  with  those 
occurring  at  the  beginning  of  the  next  season.

1 88  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Changes' which  Spring  produces  in  the  Body.1 88  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Changes' which  Spring  produces  in  the  Body.

281.  When  the  temperament  of  the  spring  conforms  to 
type,  it  is  a  very  healthy  season  ;  its  temperament  corresponds  to 
that  of  the  breath  and  of  the  blood,  although  the  fact  of  its  being 
in  equipoise,  as  already  explained,  makes  it  tend  towards  the 
tenuity  and  enervating  character  of  hot  air,  and  also  towards 
moisture.  It  renders  the  skin  ruddy  by  drawing  the  blood  to  the 
surface  to  a  moderate  degree,  and  yet  it  does  not  effect  that  degree 
of  dispersal  of  the  breath  which  an  over  hot  summer  does.

At  this  season  of  the  year,  the  humours  of  the  body,  hitherto 
stagnant,  bestir  themselves  and  circulate.  Chronic  disorders  are 
therefore  met  with.  In  persons  of  atrabilious  temperament  the 
atrabilious  humour  comes  into  activity.  Persons  who  have  over- 
fed during  the  winter  without  taking  much  exercise,  so  that  the 
humours  are  redundant,  are  liable  to  spring-time  diseases 
because  these  immature  humours  now  become  active  and  dis- 
seminated (through  the  tissues).

A  spring  which  is  prolonged  without  losing  its  attempered 
character  will  be  followed  by  few  diseases  in  summer.

282.  The  diseases  of  spring.  Nosebleeding,  effusion  of 
blood,  fermentation  in  the  atrabilious  humour  or  in  the  bilious 
humour.  Inflammatory  deposits  ;  carbuncles  ;  anginas  (which 
may  be  of  severe  type);  abscesses  of  various  kinds.  Varicose 
veins  may  "  burst,"  there  may  be  haemoptysis,  and  a  cough 
becomes  increasingly  troublesome  especially  if  the  early  part  of 
spring  be  winterly..  Those  persons  who  have  such  disorders, 
and  most  of  all,  phthisis,  will  be  in  a  worse  state.

[Bronchitis,  Bronchopneumonia,  Influenza.    In  early  spring  :    Measles.][Bronchitis,  Bronchopneumonia,  Influenza.    In  early  spring  :    Measles.]

In  persons  of  a  phlegmatic  constitution,  the  season  of  spring 
brings  movement  of  the  serous  humour,  and  there  is  a  tendency 
to  apoplexy,  paralysis,  and  joint  trouble.  Such  disorders  are 
more  likely  to  arise  if  there  be  any  vigorous  corporeal  or  psychic 
movement  (emotion),  or  if  calefacient  articles  of  food  are  included 
in  the  diet,  for  all  these  enhance  the  effect  of  the  atmosphere  at 
this  season.

The  most  efficient  means  of  averting  maladies  incident 
to  spring  :  venesection  ;  purgation  ;  semi-starvation,  or  res- 
triction of  food,  increasing  the  fluids  (especially_  syrups),  but 
reducing  the  intoxicating  liquors,  and  even  then  taking  them  only

diluted.

283.  Relation  to  periods  of  life.  Puberty  and  the  time  ot 
life  thereabout  are  benefited  by  spring-time.

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  189

Changes  which  Summer  produces  in  the  Body.

284.  In  summertime*  :the  humours  are  dispersed  ;  the 
faculties  and  natural  functions  are  impaired  owing  to  the  exces- 
sive dispersion.  The  bloodf  and  serous  humour  are  diminished 
in  amount  ;  the  bilious  humour  increases  in  amount  ;  and 
towards  the  end  of  the  summer,  the  atrabilious  humour  increases 
in  amount  as  a  result  of  the  dispersion  of  the  attenuated  matters, 
whereby  the  heavier  particles  stay  behind  in  increasing  amount! 
This  is  why  old  persons  and  those  of  similar  nature  feel  stronger 
in  summer.

The  colour  of  the  body  becomes  citron-yellow  as  a  result  of 
the  dispersal  of  that  which  the  summer  heat  draws  out  of  the 
(surface)  blood.The  colour  of  the  body  becomes  citron-yellow  as  a  result  of 
the  dispersal  of  that  which  the  summer  heat  draws  out  of  the 
(surface)  blood.

285.  Effect  of  Summer  on  the  course  of  diseases. — In  summer- 
cime  diseases  show  shorter  stages.  For,  on  the  one  hand,  in 
robust  persons,  the  warm  air  helps  to  disperse  and  mature 'the 
disease-matter,  and  also  discharges  it  from  the  body.  On  the 
other  hand,  in  weakly  persons,  the  atmospheric  heat  only 
adds  to  their  weakness  by  its  relaxing  influence.  The  sick 
person  will  therefore  lose  his  strength  and  die.  Further- 
more, if  the  summer  be  hot  and  dry,  illnesses  are  quickly  broken 
up  ;  whereas  if  it  be  wet,  the  humours  becomes  glutinous  in 
character,  the  stages  of  the  diseases  are  prolonged,  and  recovery 
is  delayed.  In  that  case  the  disease  comes  to  be  of  long  duration. 
For  instance,  a  simple  ulcer  may  become  obstinate,  may  spread, 
and  may  deepen.  Dropsy  and  lienteric  diarrhoea,  and  looseness 
of  the  bowels  are  liable  to  occur.  This  is  all  because  of  the  flow  of 
redundant  humours  downwards  from  the  upper  parts  to  the  lower.288.  Diseases  specially  associated  with  the  hot  season.  If 
very  hot  :  tertian,  continued,  and  burning  fevers  ;  emaciation  -y 
pains  in  the  ears  ;  ophthalmia.  If  cupping  be  not  done  \ 
erysipelas  is  common  ;  also  furunculosis/  (These  are  of  like 
nature  to  summer.)  If  spring-like  :  mild  benign  fevers,  in 
which  the  tongue  and  fauces  do  not  become  rough  and  harsh, 
and  there  is  no  dryness  of  skin.  This,  is  because  the  sweating 
continues  m  plenty,  especially  at  the  crisis.  For  the  heat  and 
moisture  co-operate  with  it — and  the  former  resolves  the  humours, 
the  latter  softens  the  skin  and  opens  the  pores. 
_  _  If  southerly  :  deaths  are  frequent.  Variola,  morbilli,  and 
similar  serious  diseases  are  common.

August  £  in  Se'fembef  °Und  ^^^  1S  hiShest  ^  to  <*  <*eg.  F.  at  the  end  of 
+  The  blood  is  **  thin  "  in  summer  ;    "  thick  "  in  autumn.

1 9o  THE  CANOH  OF  MEDICINE

If  northerly  :  this  is  favourable  to  health.  If  diseases 
arise,  they  are  diseases  of  "  expression  "  ;  that  is,  disease-matter 
is  caused  to  circulate  by  the  action  of  the  innate  heat  as  well  as  by 
the  exterior  heat  ;  then,  being  exposed  to  the  cold  atmosphere, 
it  is  expressed  from  the  body.  This  occurs  in  rheumatisms, 
catarrhs,  and  their  sequelae.

If  northerly  and  also  dry  :  this  is  beneficial  for  persons  ot 
phlegmatic  constitution,  and  also  for  women.  Persons  of  bilious 
constitution  are  liable  to  develop  eye-trouble,  acute  fevers  of  long 
duration,  and  diseases  due  to  the  oxidation  of  an  excess  of  bilious 
humour  (which  has  accumulated  in  such  persons),  and  diseases 
arising  from  a  redundance  of  the  atrabilious  humour.

rSummer  diarrhoea,  and  bowel  diseases,  and  enteric]rSummer  diarrhoea,  and  bowel  diseases,  and  enteric]

f™  That  the  frequency  of  disease  in  hot  weather  is  to  be  partly  ascribed 
to  the§  multiplication  of  flies  under  the  favouring  influence  of  the  ground  heat  a^ 
warm  air  was  of  course  not  known  in  Avicenna  s  time  On  the  other  hand  the 
c?us™  of  souring  of  milk  in  hot  weather  is  still  not  understood,  and  the  incidence  of 
some  febrile  conditions  is  parallel.

Changes  which  Autumn  produces  in  the  Body. 
287  e  The  autumn  season  brings  many  diseases  for  these 
reasons  :*  (i)  there  is  exposure  to  a  hot  sun  by  day,  and  the 
nights  are  cold.  (2)  The  humours  are  vitiated  by  the  following  : 
(i)  abundance  of  fruits  in  the  dietary,  (ii)  bad  articles  of  diet, 
(iii)  dispersion  of  attenuated  matter,  leaving  dense  particles 
behind  and  these  then  undergo  oxidation,  (iv)  in  summer  the 
fermenting  humours  pass  to  the  skin  and  the  natural  faculties 
can  be  brought  to  bear  on  them  so  as  to  disperse  and  expel 
them  •  but  in  autumn,  the  cold  atmosphere  causes  the  humours 
to  be  thrown  back  into  the  interior  parts,  where  they  accumulate 
and  are  (as  it  were)  imprisoned.  (3)  The  vigour  of  the  body 
has  been  impaired  by  the  preceding  summer.288,  In  autumn,  the  blood  is  much  less  in  amount  because 
this  season  is  contrary  in  temperament  to  the  blood.  Conse- 
quently it  cannot  help  blood  to  form,  and  that  which  the  summer 
has  alreadv  dispersed  is  not  replaced.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
bilious  humour  becomes  relatively  increased  during  the  summer, 
and  predominates  during  autumn.  The  atrabilious  humour  is 
more  abundant  at  the  end  of  summer  because  of  the  oxidation _  or 
the  humours  during  summer,  and  this  produces  ash-like 
residues,  which  tend  to  sediment  under  the  influence  of  the

autumnal  cold.

289.  List  of  autumnal  diseases  and  disorders.  (1)  Severs  : 
composite  ;  quartan— due  to  abundance  of  atrabilious  humour 
and  the  agent  already  described  ;    associated  effects —enlarge-

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  191

ment  of  the  spleen,  oliguria  (the  urine  only  passes  drop  by  drop 
owing  to  the  temperament  ofthe  blood  being  diverse — between 
heat  and  coldness),  dysuria  (partly  because  the  urine  only  comes 
drop  by  drop),  lienteria  (because  the  cold  drives  the  -rarefied 
portions  of  the  humours  into  the  interior  parts  of  the  body)  ; 
simple  hectic  fever  ;  this  is  more  severe  during  this  season 
because  it  is  desiccant  in  character.

[Scarlet  fever  :    diphtheria.]

(ii.)  Diseases  of  the  individual  organs. — Skin  :  impetigo, 
excoriating  scabies  ;  "  canker";  pustules  (especially  if  the 
autumn  be  dry  and  the  preceding  summer  was  hot).— '-Throat  : 
acute  "  choleric  "  angina.(Cf.  the  corresponding  disease  in  spring,  in  this  case  due  to  serous  humour 
the  reason  of  the  difference  of  humour  in  the  two  forms  lies  in  the  fact  that  the 
season  preceding  in  each  case  favoured  the  prevalence  of  that  humour,  and  it  is  this 
that  constitutes  the  "  soil  "  upon  which  the  anginal  infection  thrives.)

Lung  :  Autumntide  is  harmful  for  persons  suffering  from 
phthisis  and  chronic  pulmonary  affections.  If  a  person  had  such 
a  disease  latent  in  him  at  the  onset  of  autumn,  he  would  show  the 
signs  of  it  at  the  end  of  the  season.  Brain  :  apoplexy  ;  mental 
disease  is  common  because  the  bilious  humour  is  unhealthy  and 
atrabilious  humours  are  admixed  with  it.

\_Intestinal  tract :  diarrhoea,  etc.]

(lii.)  Pains  :  in  the  joints  ;  sciatica  ;  pains  in  the  back 
and  hips  (due  to  the  stagnation  and  subsequent  imprisonment 
of  the_  insoluble  parts  of  the  humours  which  summer  brought 
into  circulation).

Worms. — These  multiply  because  digestion  is  deficient, 
and  there  is  lack  of  expulsive  action.

290 .  Autumn  is,  so  to  speak,  the  foster-mother  for  the 
disorders  left  by  the  summer-time.  Autumn  is  more  healthy 
if  the  weather  be  very  damp  and  rainy,  and  is  more  unhealthy 
if  the  weather  be  dry.

291.  Relation  to  Periods  of  life. — The  first  part  of  autumn 
is  to  some  extent  beneficial  for  old  people,  but  the  last  part 
is  very  injurious  for  them.  (In  the  first  place  there  is  the  cold, 
in  the  second  place  there  is  the  residue  of  the  oxidation  of 
humours  of  summer-time).

Changes   which   Winter  produces  in  the  Body.

292.  Winter  is  a  help  for  digestion,  because  the  cold 
weather  as  it  were  embraces  the  innate  heat  and  fosters  it,  and 
makes  it  more  concentrated  and  less  prone  to  dispersion.That  is  why  fruits  are  scarce,  and  why  people  feel  the  need

4-t

4.4.

1-1

4-0

192  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

only  of  light  aliments,  and  take  little  exercise  after  a  good  meal, 
and  gather  together  in  warm  places.

293.  In  winter  there  is  much  sediment  in  the  urine,  as 
compared  with  the  summer,  and  the  amount  passed  is  greater. 
The  bilious  humour  is  lessened  in  winter  because  it  is  cold,  and 
the  day  is  short  and  the  nights  long.  The  insoluble  portions  of 
the  humours  are  more  confined.  During  the  winter,  therefore, 
the  diet  should  include  more  incisive  and  more  attenuant  aliments.

294.  The  disorders  of  wintertime.  These  are  chiefly 
phlegmatic  in  character.  The  serous  humour  is  _  plentiful  at 
this  period.  Thus,  it  is  very  often  present  in  vomited  matter  ; 
inflammatory  foci  are  usually  of  a  whitish  colour  in  winter- 
time ;  coryza  is  common,  and  begins  when  the  autumnal  air 
is  changing.  Less  common  are  :  pleurisy,  pulmonary  ^inflam- 
mations, hoarseness  and  sore  throat.  Less  common  still  are  : 
pains  in  the  chest,  side,  back  and  loins  ;  nervous  disorders 
(chronic  headache);  especially  apoplexy;  epileptic  seizures). 
In  all  these  cases  the  serous  humours  are  aggregated  and  con- 
fined,   besides   being  increased  in   amount.

295.  Relation  to  Periods  of  Life. — Winter  is  inimical  to 
old  persons  and  to  those  akin  to  them  in  nature.*  Middle- 
aged  persons  are  likely  to  be  in  health  in  this  season.

§  1:83. The  following  curves  showing  the  seasonal  variations

in  the  character  of  the  blood  (red  cell  content  ;  haemoglobin)  as 
made  out  by  modern  investigations,  are  of  interest  in  connection  with 
the  above  (280-295).

M   Cells

1       1 1 * • \      1 ;      !       '         —M   Cells

1       1 1 * • \      1 ;      !       '         —

Jan.  Fck.    PU.  Ap.    My  Ju»i  T.I,    fl-j-  Stf.  Oil-.  «>*.  i«.

A

A.  Curve  showing  the  variations  in  red  cell  count  in  the  same  person  through- 
out the  year.  1-12,  the  successive  months  of  the  year  ;  3.9-4-8-  number  of  million  red 
cells  per  c.mm.

B.  Curve  showing  the  variations  in  hasmoglobin  content  from  month  to  month. 
! — 12,  as  in  A  :  78 — 88,  percentage  of  hasmoglobin.  (From  Lippincott,  Journ. 
Lab.  Clin.  Med.,  1927,  679.)

*  Note  that  in  winter  the  ground  temperature  is  lowest — 41  deg.  F.  at  end  of 
February.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  193

7.     The  Influences  of  Seasonal  Sequences 
(Seasonal  Cycles)

296.  When  a  northerly  spring  follows  a  southerly  winter, 
the  summer  will  be  very  hot,  and  waters  will  accumulate,  various, 
matters  being  carried  on  from  the  spring  into  the  summer. 
Hence  in  the  following  autumn,  there  will  be  an  increased 
death-rate  among  adolescents  ;  and  dysentery  and  intestinal 
ulcers  and  tertian  fever  will  be  frequent.

297.  If  the  winter  was  extremely  rainy,  those  due  to 
give  birth  in  the  spring  will  be  liable,  to  abort,  but  if  they  carry 
to  full  time,  the  offspring  will  be  weakly,  or  suffer  from  a  fatal 
or  dangerous  illness.  Men  are  liable  to  eye  diseases  and 
haemorrhages.  Old  persons  are  liable  to  catarrhs  which  pass 
down  into  the  interior  organs  ;  indeed  they  may  meet  with 
sudden  death  from  a  sudden  obstruction  to  the  flow  of  the  breath' 
through  channels  which  have  become  overfull.298.  If  the  spring  is  rainy  and  southerly,  following  upon 
a  northerly  winter,  there  will  be  many  cases  of  acute  fever  in 
the  summer,  and  there  will  be  eye  affections,  nose-bleeding, 
looseness  of  the  bowels.  Most  of  these  depend  on  the  flow 
of  serous  humour — imprisoned  during  the  winter — passing 
down  into  the  interior  organs  and  then  caused  to  move  on  by 
the  heat.  This  is  specially  so  in  persons  of  moist  tempera- 
ment, like  women.     Sepsis  and  septic  fevers  are  also  common.

299.  Should  the  summer  become  rainy  at  the  time  of 
the  rising  of  the  dogstar,  followed  by  northerly  wind,  there  is 
a  prospect  of  good  health  and  of  the  resolution  of  illnesses. 
Such  a  season  is  worse  for  women  and  for  juveniles,  for  if  they 
escape  these  illnesses,  they  run  the  risk  of  being  afflicted  with 
quartan,  because  the  humours  become  oxidised,  and  a  sediment 
or  ash  results,  upon  which  dropsy,  pains  in  the  spleen,  and  weak- 
ness of  the  liver  supervene.  Such  risk  is  only  slight  in  old  per- 
sons or  in  persons  susceptible  to  cold.

300.  If  the  autumn  after  a  dry  and  northerly  summer 
is  rainy  and  southerly,  it  disposes  people  to  suffer  from  head- 
ache, cough,  sore  throat,'  and  coryza  in  the  winter.

If  the  autumn  after  a  dry  and  southerly  summer  be  rainy . 
and  northerly,  there  will  be  many  cases  of  headache,  rheumatism, 
coughs,  sore  throat,  in  the  winter.

If  the  autumn   after  a  southerly  summer   be   northerly, 
the  prevailing  diseases  are  those  of  "  expression  "   (see   286) ' 
and  of  congestion  of  humours,  as  already  stated.

o

i94  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINEo

i94  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

301 .  If  both  autumn  and  summer  were  southerly  and 
wet,  humours  will  multiply  so  that  the  diseases  of  expression 
will  appear  in  winter  which  we  have  enumerated  (294),  and  it 
will  not  be  long  before  the  disease-matter  becomes  coherent, 
aggregated^  and  imprisoned  ;  for  not  only  are  the  humours 
plentiful  but  there  are  no  vapours  to  expedite  them  away  from 
the  body.  This  produces  a  risk  of  septic  diseases.  The  winter 
will  not  fail  to  bring  out  many  disorders  because  of  this  very 
cohesion  of  the  undue  amount  of  morbific  matter.

If  both  autumn  and  summer  are  dry  and  northerly,  the 
winter  will  be  beneficial  to  a  person  for  whom  moisture  is 
injurious,  and  also  to  women.  Such  persons  will,  however, 
be  liable  to  dry  eye-affections,  prolonged  catarrhs,  acute  fevers, 
and  mental  disorders  with  depression.

302.  A  cold  and  rainy  winter  produces  burning  of  the

urine.

303 .  A  very  hot  and  dry  summer  produces  the  following 
disorders  in  the  following  season :  anginas  (pernicious,  and  non- 
malignant)  ;  anginas  which  produce  a  discharge  (these  may- 
burst  externally  or  internally),  anginas  which  do  not  produce  a 
discharge ;  variola ;  morbilli  (both  these  last  two  are  favourable)  ; 
eye-affections  ;  mental  depression  ;  difficult  micturition  ;  reten- 
tion of  the  menses  ;  retention  of  the  expectoration  ;  haemoptysis.

304.  If  a  .dry  spring  follows  a  dry  winter,  this  is  bad. 
The  trees  and  herbage  are  liable  to  decay  and  they  are  injurious 
to  the  animals  which  feed  on  them  ;  and,  in  turn,  to  the  human 
beings  which  feed  on  them.§  1 84.  A  bnormal  quality  of  the  seasons.  This  idea  is  developed 
in  an  interesting  manner  in  the  Chinese  Classic  "Li  Ki  "47  (VI)  as 
showing  the  consequences  in  terms  of  weather  (storms,  floods, 
droughts,  hurricanes,  etc.),  and  in  regard  to  the  prospects  in  the 
crops  (maturing  too  soon,  maturing  too  late  to  yield  any  produce, 
diseases  of  crops,  or  infections  by  various  larvae,  or  insects),  as  well  as 
the  possibility  of  pestilential  outbreaks,  or  the  prevalence  of  such 
diseases  as  bronchitis,  rheumatism,  skin  diseases,  general  ill-health 
(debility).  Flourishing  of  certain  objectionable  weeds  among  the 
grain  or  cereals.

§  185.  Seasonal  cycles  have  to  do  with  the  sequences  of  develop- 
mentnoted  among  the  very  low  forms  of  life  in  Nature,  e.g.,  the  growth 
of  various  orders  of  fungus  (saprophytic,  parasitic,  non-pathogenic, 
sub-pathogenic,  and  pathogenic)  in  various  types  of  soil,  or  landscape, 
depends  on  the  existence  of  cold,  cold  and  wet,  warmth,  warmth  and 
wet,  warmth  and  dryness,  as  they  are  traced  through  their  various 
cycles  (basidium,  with  basiodiospores,  mycelium  with  gametes,  and 
-  secidiospores,  uredospores  and  teleutospores).     The  cyclical  changes

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  195THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  195

which  result  in  the  apparent  transformation  of  one  "  specific  " 
micro-organism  into  another  "  specific "  schizomycete  require 
investigation  in  the  open  field  of  Nature.  Bacteriology  may  be  said 
to  have  been  imprisoned  in  the  doctrine  of  immutability  of  species, 
which  is  only  upheld  within  the  limitations  of  artificial  culture-media 
and  inoculation  experiments  in  warm-blooded  animals.  Many  of  the 
types  so  familiar  in  human  bacteriology  may  be  looked  on  as  terminal 
phases  of  cycles,  capable  of  being  maintained  at  the  same  rank  for 
almost  indefinite  periods.  The  remaining  nine-tenths  of  the  cycle  are 
unknown,  from  inability  to  cause  the  types  to  re-enter  it  artificially.

(f)  incidental    mutations 
8.      Climate

305.  We  now  proceed  to  complete  the  discourse  about 
the  other  changes  in  the  quality  of  the  atmosphere,  not  preter- 
natural and  yet  not  natural.  That  is,  changes  dependent  on  the 
celestial  factors  as  well  as  on  terrestrial  ones.

306.  Celestial  factors. — The  changes  dependent  on  celes- 
tial bodies,  such  as  the  stars,  are  thus  :— if  many  luminous 
stars  rise  in  one  region  of  the  sky,  and  the  sun  approaches 
towards  that  region,  the  people  living  directly  or  nearly  directly 
under  the  sun's  rays  are  exposed  to  greater  heat.  But  if  the 
rays  are  oblique,  the  heating  effect  is  lessened.  The  effect 
of  a  vertical  position  of  the  rays  on  the  head  is  not  nearly  so 
great,  unless  they  continue  vertical  for  some  time,  and  are 
direct.  (Joannitius  says  :  the  rising  and  setting  of  the  stars 
alters  the  nature  of  the  atmosphere  because  when  the  sun  ap- 
proaches them  or  they  it,  the  air  becomes  hotter.  Under 
contrary  conditions,  the  air  becomes  colder).§  186.  Solar,  planetary  and  stellar  influences  on  man,  and 
their  relation  to  disease.— The  subject  may  be  summarized  as  follows. 
{A)  Genuine  influences. —(a)  Solar.  Modern  observations  (Abbe 
Moreux),  voiced  by  H.  W.  Newton  (Quart.  Journ.  Royal  Meteorolog. 
Soc,  1928),  show  that  the  existence  of  planetary  influences  on 
this  earth  is  only  ridiculed  by  the  ignorant.  The  observation 
of  sun-spots  shows  that  there  is  a  relation  to  the  character  of  the 
weather  in  certain  regions,  a  relation  to  the  development  of  earth- 
quakes, and  also  a  relation  to  mental  states.  This  authority 
traces  an  eleven-year  cycle  of  change  both  in  the  earth's  magnetic 
changes  and  in  the  sun-spot  cycle.  The  sun-spots  are  described 
as  tornadoes  of  white  hot  gas,  and  affect  both  ultra-violet  ray 
activity  and  electric  radiations.  He  also  suggests  that  there  may 
be  another  cause  concerned  which  controls  both  solar  storms  and 
terrestrial  magnetic  storms.

i96  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

(The  relation  may  be  made  more  tangible  by  suggesting  that 
after  all  there  are  actual  flames  of  fire  emerging  from  the  sun  and 
extending  in  a  tenuous  and  yet  real  form  right  across  space  into  our 
own  atmosphere,  with  inevitable  effects  both  in  inorganic  and 
organized  worlds.  Hence  to  suggest  a  relation  between  sickness, 
suicide,  and  crime  and  solar  storms  or  even  planetary  disturbances- 
is  not  new  and  cannot  be  lightly  set  aside).  .(b)  Solar  and  lunar.  Everyday  experience  shows  that_  the 
atmospheric  conditions  vary  according  to  the  time  of  day  and  night. 
The  bearing  of  this  on  health  has  therefore  been  seen  from  the 
earliest  times  (Ayurveda,  1924,  Aug.  ;  p.  53)-  (c)  Planetary  rise 
and  setting,  lunar  phases,  positions  of  stars  and  constellations 
(Arcturus,  Pleiades,  etc.)  are  all  data  for  the  study  of  the  progress  oi 
the  seasons.  Hence  two  kinds  of  cycles  come  to  notice— the  cycle 
of  climatic  changes,  with  an  apparent  relation  to  health  and  disease, 
both  in  cattle  and  in  man  ;  (ii)  the  cycle  of  extra-terrestrial  changes. 
Naturally  the  observers  of  ancient  times,  who  were  so  convinced  ot  the 
unity  of  the  visible  universe,  sought  to  reduce  to  rule  certain  coinci- 
dences in  these  cycles.  Even  if  their  association  is  irregular  or  only 
discernible  from  generation  to  generation  the  subject  would  invite 
study.     Even  nowadays  it  is  unsafe  to  decide  that  there  is  nothing  at

all  to  study  in  it.  .

^87 (B)  Fictitious  relations. — {a)   Symbolical,   permissible,all  to  study  in  it.  .

^87 (B)  Fictitious  relations. — {a)   Symbolical,   permissible,

but   superfluous,     (i)    Stars    may   be    spoken   of   as    "  healthy  '     or 
"  unhealthy,"    "  propitious  "  or  "  unpropitious  '     (Cantica,  1.   104  ; 
Costaeus  Annotations  to  Avicenna),  as  a  convenient  abbreviation  tor 
a  more  or  less  complex  group  of  concomitant  climatic  conditions, 
(ii)  The  names  of  planets,  or  constellations  may  be  used  to  represent 
certain  types   of  mental   constitution    (Modern    astrology)        lhus, 
combativeness  (fiery  temper),  ambition  and  pride,  love  and  desire, 
melancholy,  dreaminess,  intelligence  and  wisdom.    These  are  seven 
types  assigned  to  as  many  planets.     Again,  the  term     astral      may 
be  claimed  appropriate  because  common  to  the      stars       and  the 
"  astral   form  "    of  man.     The   same   idea   occurs   in    Paracelsus 
(Hermetic   writings,   ii.    291),   where   he   speaks   of  the   senses   and 
intelligence  and  wisdom  of  the  offspring  being  its      sidereal  body, 
and  derived  "  from  the  stars."     Such  usage  of  names  implies  that 
there  is  some  specially  "  deep  "  learning  being  propounded  which  is 
denied  to  the  ordinary  student,  who  has  not  been  initiated  into  the 
inner  circle  of  some  cult— hermetic,  rosicrucian,  theosophicai,  and 
the  like      The  fact  is,   however,   that  the  phenomena  of  the  so- 
called  "  astral  plane  "  are  those  of  the  "  sensitive  life  "  of  scholastic 
psychology  ;    careful  and  thorough  study  of  this  will  show  that  the 
other  obscurities  are  superfluous,     (b)  Fallacious.— Those  who  take 
the  symbology  of  (ii)  to  be  literally  correct  are  "  of  the  erring  people 
(O  6  78)      The  poet  voiced  this  error  in  his  words  :  "  A  moon  which 
Wights  you  if  you  dare  behold  "  (Night  34,  annotated  by  Burton,  m*'  3I  But  in  these  days  it  is  easier  to  fall  into  the  error  of  supposing 
that  there  is  no  relation  whatever  between  this  world  and  sun,  moon,

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  197

and  stars,  than  to  mistake  purely  terrestrial  relations  for  the  trans- 
cendent.

307.  Terrestrial  factors,  {a)  Latitude  ;  (b)  Altitude. — 
High  or  low  ;  {c)  Mountainous  regions  ;  (d)  Maritime  countries  ; 
(e)  Exposure  to  winds  ; .  (J)  Nature  of  soil.307.  Terrestrial  factors,  {a)  Latitude  ;  (b)  Altitude. — 
High  or  low  ;  {c)  Mountainous  regions  ;  (d)  Maritime  countries  ; 
(e)  Exposure  to  winds  ; .  (J)  Nature  of  soil.

{a)  Influence     of    latitude     on     Climate. — If    the     country 
in  question  be  between  the  Tropic  of  Cancer  and  that  of  Capri- 
corn, the  summer  will  be  hotter  than  in  a  country  further  from 
the  torrid  zone.     The  countries  within  the  equinoctial  zone  ap- 
proach equipoise,  for  while  the  vertical  incidence  of  the  sun's 
rays  does  not  make  much  impression,  the  fact  of  this  position 
being  maintained  for  several  hours  enhances  their  effect.     The 
heat  is  greater  at  the  middle  of  the  eighth  hour  (the  evening) 
than  at  noon.     Consequently,  when  the  sun  is  at  the  end  of 
Cancer,  or  in  the  beginning  of  Leo,  it  is  hotter  than  it  is  at  the 
end  of  its  course.      When  the  sun  passes  from  the  tropic  of 
Cancer  to  a  place  of  less  declination,  its  heat  is  greater  than  when 
it  has  not  yet  reached  the  tropic  of  Cancer  but  is  at  the  same 
declination.     In  the  countries  in  the  equinoctial  zone,  the  sun 
is  only  vertical  for  a  few  days,  and  beyond  that  becomes  rapidly 
oblique.      For    the    declination    increases    much    more    rapidly 
towards  the  two  poles  than  it  does  in  the  tropics.     Yet,  in  the 
tropics,  there  is  hardly  any  movement  perceptible  to  the  senses 
during  any  three  or  four  days,  so  long  does  the  sun  linger  ; 
and  all  that  time  the  heat  is  continuous.      Hence  one  may  con- 
sider that  countries  whose  latitude  approaches  complete  declina- 
tion are   hotter  than   all   others,   and  next  to  these   countries 
lying  within  fifteen  degrees  on  either  side  towards  the  two  poles. 
In  the  equinoctial  line  the  heat  is  not  so  very  excessive  as  it  is 
in  those  countries  which,  are  within  the  tropic  of  Cancer,  and 
countries  which  are  still  further  north  are  still  colder.This  concludes  what  must  be  discussed  in  regard  to  the 
latitudes  of  countries,  supposing  them  to  be  alike  in  all  other 
respects.

(b)  Influence  of  the  altitude  of  a  country  ^  whether  high  or  low. — ■ 
Lowlands  are  hotter,  highlands  are  colder.  The  strata  of  air 
nearer  to  the  earth  round  here,  where  we  live  (Persia)  are  hotter 
because  the  sun's  rays  are  more  powerful  ;  the  rays  are  more 
oblique  on  the  highlands,  which  are  therefore  colder.  This  is 
explained  in  the  work  on  natural  philosophy.  Low-lying  places 
take  up  more  heat,  and  are  therefore  hotter.

(c)  Influence    of  mountains    on   the   climate    of  neighbouring

198  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

country. — The  climate  of  mountainous  countries  from  the  point 
of  view  of  residence,  is   discussed  in  325.198  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

country. — The  climate  of  mountainous  countries  from  the  point 
of  view  of  residence,  is   discussed  in  325.

High  mountains  influence  the  climate  in.  two  ways  :  (i) 
they  reduce  the  power  of  the  solar  rays  on  the  country,  and  afford 
protection  from  them  ;  (ii)  they  serve  as  a  wind-screen.  The 
former  holds  good  when  the  mountains  are  on  the  northerly 
aspect  of  those  countries  which  are  in  the  north.  As  the  sun 
runs  its  course  across  such  a  northerly  country  its  heat  is  re- 
flected from  the  mountains,  and  so  the  country  is  warmed  in 
spite  of  its  being  in  the  north.  The  same  applies  when  the 
mountains  are  in  the  west,  leaving,  the  country  exposed  on  the 
east.  If  the  mountains  are  in  the  east,  the  heat  which  the 
country  receives  is  less  than  when  they  are  in  the  west,  because  as 
the  sun  rises,  hour  by  hour  passes  before  its  direct  rays  reach  the 
country,  and  by  the  time  they  fall  vertically  upon  it,  the  sun  is 
already  about  to  wane,  and  the  heating  quality  of  its  rays  de- 
clines (J>).  When  the  mountains  are  on  the  west,  however, 
the  rays  are  more  vertical  with  every  hour.

(ii)  Windscreens. — A  northerly  cooling  wind  may  be 
screened  from  a  country  by  a  mountain-range,  in  which  case  a 
southerly  warming  wind  gains  the  advantage.  If  a  country- 
lies  between  two  mountain  peaks  the  force  of  the  winds  across  it 
will-  be  much  greater  than  if  it  were  entirely  flat.  For  when 
air  enters  a  narrow  channel  it  usually  goes  on  blowing  without 
ever  stopping,  just  as  water  and  the  like  would.  Natural 
science  furnishes  the  explanation  of  this.Countries  whose  climate  is  rendered  mild  by  mountains  are 
exposed  to  some  winds,  and  protected  from  others.  If  exposed 
on  the  east  and  north,  they  are  protected  on  the  west  and  south. 
(d)  The  influence  of  the  sea  on  maritime  countries.  The 
atmosphere  in  such  countries  is  always  more  humid.  If  the 
sea  is  on  the  north  side  of  the  country,  that  will  help  to  make 
the  country  cool,  for  the  prevailing  north  wind  is  cold  in  character, 
having  come  over  the  face  of  the  water.  If  the  sea  is  on  the 
south  side  of  the  country,  a  heavy  southerly  climate  prevails, 
especially  if  a  mountain  range  intervenes  between  the  sea  and 
the  country.

If  the  sea  is  on  the  east  side,  the  climate  will  be  more 
humid  than  when  it  is  on  the  west  side,  because  the  sun  will  not, 
cease  increasing  the  evaporation  of  water  as  it  rises  in  the  heavens, 
whereas  this  would  not  be  the  case  if  the  sea  were  on  the  west. 
To  sum  up,  proximity  of  the  sea  makes  the  climate  of  a 
country  damp,  and  if  there  are  no  mountains  to  prevent  constant

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  199

winds,  the  air  is  less  liable  to  undergo  putrefactive  change. 
Were  there  no  winds  (because. of  an  intervening  mountain-range) 
the  air  would  be  liable  to  undergo  putrescence  (of  the  organic 
matters  suspended  in  it),  and  the  humours  of  the  inhabitants 
would  also  tend  to  undergo  putrescence.

Hence  it  is  clear  that  it  is  better  for  the  prevailing  wind 
to  be  northerly  •  it  is  next  best  if  the  wind  is  easterly  ;  then 
westerly,  and  it  is  worst  if  the  prevailing  wind  is  southerly.(e)  The  influence  of  winds,  (i)  On  all  countries  in  general. 
In  most  countries  a  southerly  wind  is  hot  and  moist.  It  is  hot 
because  of  the  sun's  rays,  and  it  is  moist  because  usually  the  sea 
is  to  the  south,  and  the  strong  heat  of  the  sun  on  the  equatorial 
seas  disseminates  water  vapours  which  become  carried  on  by 
the  winds.     This  is  why  southerly  winds  are  relaxing.

The  northerly  winds  are  usually  cold  because  they  have 
traversed  mountains  and  snow-clad  territories  ;  they  are  also 
dry  because  very  little  water-vapour  is  admixed.  This  is  because 
there  is  very  little  evaporation  of  water  on  the  north,  and  there 
are  no  seas  intervening.  On  the  contrary,  they  usually  traverse 
frozen  waters  and  desert  places.

Easterly  winds  are  between  cold  and  hot  in  character  ; 
they  are  drier  than  westerly  winds,  because  there  is  less  sea  in 
the  north-east  than  in  the  north-west,  and  we  live  in  the  north.

Westerly  winds  are  moist  in  quality  because  they  traverse 
seas  and  the  sun,  passing  over  the  seas,  'warms  them  and  evap- 
orates the  water  ;  but  since  the  movements  of  the  sun  and  the 
winds  are  in  contrary  directions,  the  evaporation  is  not  as  great 
as  it  is  in  the  case  of  the  easterly  winds.  Added  to  this  is  the 
fact  that  easterly  winds  are  strongest  at  the  beginning  of  the  day, 
and  the  westerly  winds  blow  strongest  at  the  close  of  the  day. 
That  is  why  the  westerly  winds  are  not  as  hot  as  the  easterly, 
and  more  inclined  to  be  cold.  The  easterly  winds  are  hotter, 
and  yet,  comparing  both  east  and  west  with  the  south  and  north 
winds,  they  are  temperate.Sometimes  the  character  of  winds  varies  in  a  given  territory 
as  a  result  of  other  factors.  It  is  sometimes  an  advantage,  in 
some  countries,  for  the  south  winds  to  be  cooler,  as  happens  when 
there  is  a  snowclad  mountain  range  on  the  south  ;  these  winds 
are  cooled  in  passing  over  the  mountains.  When  a  country 
is  enclosed  in  burning  deserts,  the  northerly  winds  are  hotter 
than  the  south  winds.

The  simooms*  are  of  two  varieties:    (i)  those  which  have

*  Simoom,  "  the  poison  wind,"  from  Samn,  poison,  venom.     (Burton,  iv.  36.)

2oo  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

traversed  very  hot  deserts  ;  (ii)  winds  like  a  sort  of  smoke, 
producing  strange  "  terrifying  "  atmospheric  effects  simulating 
flames  of  fire.  They  are  heavy  and  sultry.  A  sort  of  kindling 
and  combustion  occurs  in  them  whereby  the  light  part  is  separ- 
ated and  the  heavy  part  (in  which  the  burning  fieriness  remains) 
sinks  down  to  the  lower  strata.  All  these  are  powerful  winds. 
That  is  why  wise  philosophers  believe  them  to  arise  in  the  upper 
parts  of  the  atmosphere,  although  the  material  basis  is  from 
below.*  But  the  movement,  the  blowing  and  whirling,  begins 
in  the  upper  regions  of  the  atmosphere.  This  is  the  usual 
explanation,  and  its  proof  is  to  be. found  in  my  book  on  natural

philosophy.

(it)  The  special  climatic  characters  of  the  several  countries. 
This  subject  is  deferred  to  a  later  chapter  (318).

(/)  The  soil.-f  Countries  present  varied  characters  accord- 
ing to  the  dominant  kind  of  soil  The  following  varieties  of  soil 
may  be  enumerated  :  clay,  chalk,  sandy  (humus),  rocky,  or 
stony,  miry  or  slimy,  muddy,  evil-smelling.  The  characters 
vary  according  to  the  mineral  content.Each  kind  of  soil  has  its  own  effect  both  on  the  atmosphere 
and  on  the  water.

This  statement  contains  an  important  truth.  Certain  spas  and  health- 
resorts  (Carlsbad,  Bath,  Droitwich,  Baden,  Bourbonne-les-Bams,  Is ancy  Wiesbaden) 
owe  their  virtue  not  merely  to  the  chemical  composition  of  the  water  which  is  taken 
by  the  patients,  but  also  to  the  locality  itself.  The  radiations  which  pass  outwards 
„at  those  parts  of  the  earth  produce  a  beneficent  influence  upon  them  as  they  walk 
over  the  ground.

8  1 88  The  soil  mav  be  described  as  the  breakdown  products  of 
rocks  or  rock-formations  of  various  kinds.  Different  kinds  of  soil 
differ  in  the  size  of  their  particles  :  coarse  sands  show  particles  from 
o  1-0.2  mm.  in  diameter;  fine  sands  0.5-0.05  mm.;  silts  have 
particles  varying  from  0.04  to  0.004  mm.  in  diam.  A  sod  composed 
of  the  four  groups  (sand,  clay,  chalk,  humus)  is  called  "  loam  if 
good  for  crops,  and  is  then  specified  as  clay  loam,  or  sand  loam, 
according  to  the  dominance  of  clay  and  sand  respectively.  _  It  is  the 
size  of  the  particles  which  determines  the  movements  or  circulation 
of  air  and  water  through  the  soil.  The  amount  of  humus  determines 
the  fertility  in  regard  to  micro-organisms,  whether  beneficial  to 
vegetation,  or  whether  pathogenic  to  man.  The  presence  of  4 
per  cent,  of  moisture  in  soil  is  the  optimum  for  processes  of  decom- 
position in  it.     Cold  wet  soils  favour  diphtheritic  infection  (Lane-

Notter).  ^     r       ,      ,,.  ,    ^  .,

Gravel  soil  is  sought  after  as  favourable  for  dwellings  ;    but  it

*  The  lower  strata  are  near  "  earth,"  and  the'  highest  strata  of  this  worldGravel  soil  is  sought  after  as  favourable  for  dwellings  ;    but  it

*  The  lower  strata  are  near  "  earth,"  and  the'  highest  strata  of  this  world

^t  'ThfsoilmUbll  described  as  elementary  substance  with  which  are  intermingled 
the  decaying  remains  of  animal  and  vegetable  matter.

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  201

it  be  befouled  by  polluted  waters,  micro-organisms  then  flourish  more 
easily  than  in  other  soils,  and  it  becomes  more  inimical  to  health.

§  189.  The  inorganic  elements  in  plants  are  really  very  finely  powdered  stones 
(limestone,  iron-stone,  magnesium-stone,  potash-stone,  etc.),  which  have  entered 
into  a  condition  of  food-substance  under  the  influence  of  light  and  heat,  and  life  — ■ 
(Gilbert.)

(g)  Misty  districts  and  marshes.  Joannitius  refers  to  these, 
saying  that  where  there  is  decomposition  in  such  regions, 
-diseases  and  various  plagues  befall  man.(g)  Misty  districts  and  marshes.  Joannitius  refers  to  these, 
saying  that  where  there  is  decomposition  in  such  regions, 
-diseases  and  various  plagues  befall  man.

§  190.  The  factors  on  which  the  climate  of  a  place  depends,  in 
modern  thought,  are  as  follows:  (1)  the  earth  heat :  the  range  in  this 
is  41-63  F.  in  England.  When  hot,  the  earth  reflects  ultra-violet 
rays  (2)  the  radiant  energy  of  the  sun.  "  Sun-power,"  which  is 
reflected  from  the  sky  and  sea  and  earth.  The  rays  are  classified  as 
visible,  ultra-violet  (actinic  or  chemical),  and  infra-red.  The  ultra- 
violet rays  are  arrested  by  smoke,  mists,  window-glass.  (3)  The 
cooling  power  of  the  air.  This  depends  on  the  rate  of  movement  of 
the  air,  as  currents  artificially  induced,  or  wind  ;  the  amount  of 
humidity  ;  the  actual  temperature  of  the  air.  Cold  air  tries  the  heart 
and  chest,  more  heat  having  to  be  produced  ;  hot  air  tries  the  diges- 
tive organs  and  kidneys,  because  of  the  difficulty  of  getting  rid  of  the 
superfluous  heat.  (4)  Altitude.  The  air  is  thin  or  rare  at  high 
altitudes.      (5)  Ventilation  of  the  dwelling-house.

To  these  must  be  added  :  prevalent  winds  ;  proximity  to  sea  ; 
scenery ;  nature  of  the  ground — whether  rocky  (cold  and  dry), 
fertile  (hot  and  moist),  muddy  (cold  and  moist)  ;  whether  porous  or 
impermeable  ;    water-holding  or  not ;    actual  chemical  composition.

(c)    impressions  produced  by  other  changes  in  the

atmosphere

9.      The    Effect    of    Unfavourable    Changes    in   the   Air

which  are  Contrary  to  its  Ordinary 
Nature(c)    impressions  produced  by  other  changes  in  the

atmosphere

9.      The    Effect    of    Unfavourable    Changes    in   the   Air

which  are  Contrary  to  its  Ordinary 
Nature

IR  (308)  may  be  changed  in  (1)  substance, 
(2)  qualities. — The  substance  may  become 
depraved  apart  from  any  increase  or  de- 
crease in  some  of  the  intrinsic  qualities. 
Such  an  air  is  named  "  pestilential."*  One 
must  remember  that  putrefactive  processes 
can  occur  in  the  atmosphere  just  as  they 
do  in  stagnant  water.

*  Though  we  now  know  that  "  pestilential  "  air  is  so  because  it  is  germ-laden, 
that  does  not  render  this  chapter  "  out  of  date."  The  general  principles  remain 
the  same.  At  the  present  day  it  is  assumed  that  the  air  is  always  contaminated 
from  without — from  the  dust,  e.g.,  on  the  ground  that  sunlight  destroys  germ- 
life.       However,  facts  speak  otherwise  in  open  Nature.

202  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE202  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

309.  By  the  'word  "  air  "  we  do  not  mean  the  simple  {impon- 
derable) element,  but  the  .atmosphere  around  us.  Were  the 
atmosphere  absolutely  pure,  the  word  "  air  "  might  be  used 
synonymously.  But  elemental  substances  cannot  putresce  ; 
they  can  only  change  from  one  to  another  (as  "  water  "  which 
changes  to  "  air,"  e.g.),  and  they  do  this  by  a  change  either  in 
quality  or  in  substance.  The  word  "  air  "  in  this  chapter,  therefore, 
as  "  atmosphere,"  is  a  composite  substance,  with  spatial  relations, 
composed  of  true  (elemental)  air,  watery  vapour,  terrene  particles 
(both  of  which  form  fogs  and  clouds,  and  smoke),  and  fiery 
particles — all  together.  In  the  same  zvay,  when  we  speak  of 
"  sea  "  as  "  water,"  "  lakes  "  as  "  water,"  and  so  on,  we  do  not 
mean  elemental  water,  but  a  composite  substance,  in  which 
"  water,"  though  predominant,  is  mixed  with  air,  earth,  and  fire.

This  carries  the  reader  back  to  19-25,  and  the  comments  thereon.  The  writ- 
ings of  the  Chinese  philosophers  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  European  alchemists  on  the 
other  may  be  interpreted  accordingly,  as  Avicenna  would  have  done.  Examples 
of  "  earth  "  :  soil,  metals,  naked  creatures  ;  "  water  "  :  spring  water,  ram  water, 
ditch-water,  lake  water  ;  the  sea  ;  millet ;  shellfish  ;  "  fire  "  :  wood,  oil,  stones, 
lightning,  the  glow-worm,  will-o'-the-wisp,  trees,  flowers,  beans,  feathered  creatures. 
Seemingly  there  is  very  little  in  common;  Forke-3  (p.  275,  276)  discusses  the 
subject,  at  the  same  time  referring  to  writings  by  Agrippa  von  Nettesheim.310.,  The  air  so  present  in  water  may  undergo  putrescence, 
with  degradation  of  its  substance,  just  as  the  stagnant  water  in 
pools  decomposes,  with  degradation  of  its  substance.

311,  Air  generally  becomes  pestilential  from  putrefactive 
changes  towards  the  end  of  summer  and  during  autumn.  _  The 
symptoms  which  such  air  produces  in  the  human  body  will  be 
referred  to  later.

312,  Change  in  primary  qualities.  Heat  or  cold  may  become 
insupportable  by  destroying  the  crops  and  the  fecundity  oi 
nature.  This  change  may  be  in  the  same  direction  as  the  quality 
of  the  season  (for  instance,  the  summer  may  become  fiercely  hot), 
or  it  may  be  in  the  contrary  direction  (for  instance,  a  spell  of  very 
cold  weather  may  arise  during  the  summer  season).

313,  Effect  on  the  human  body.  Changes  in  the  character 
of  the  atmosphere  produce  changes  in  the  human  body. 
Putrescence  of  air  induces  septic  changes  in  the  body-fluids, 
beginning  with  the  pericardial  fluid,  because  this  is  exposed  to 
it  first.  .  .

Hot  atmosphere.  Great  heat  in  the  air  renders  the  joints 
flaccid  and  causes  the  humours  to  disperse.  There  is  increase 
of  thirst,  dispersion  of  the  breath,  failing  vigour  and  digestion, 
all  because  the  innate  heat  is  the  instrument  used  by  the  vegetative

'"\^W — '

THE  CANON   OF  MEDICINE  2o3'"\^W — '

THE  CANON   OF  MEDICINE  2o3

soul.  A  citron-yellow  appears  in  the  skin  because  the  sanguineous 
humour  becomes  dissipated  and  loses  its  red  colour,  while  at 
the  same  time  the  bilious  humour  increases  in  amount  relatively 
to  the  other  humours.  The  heart  becomes  warmer  (over  and 
above  the  innate  heat),  so  that  the  humours  flow  and  undergo 
decomposition,  and  in  that  state  they  enter  the  interspaces  of 
the  body  and  the  weaker  members.  This  is  therefore  not 
beneficial  to  persons  in  health.  The  following  diseases  are 
(however)  benefited  by  this  change  :  dropsy,  palsy,  cold  catarrhs 
tetanus,  and  certain  (humid)  spasmodic  conditions.  '

Cold  atmosphere.  This  drives  the  innate  heat  into  the 
interior  organs,  unless  the  air  has  sufficient  driving  force  itself 
to  penetrate  them.  This  would  be  morbific.  Cold  atmosphere 
does  not  interfere  much  with  the  circulation  of  the  humours 
or  imprison  them.  But  it  favours  catarrh,  and  is  weakening  to 
the  nerves.  It  has  a  very  injurious  effect  on  the  trachea.  If  the 
atmosphere  is  not  so  cold,  it  strengthens  the  digestion  and  all 
the  interior  functions,  and  improves  the  appetite.  On  the  one 
hand  it  is  more  beneficial  to  a  healthy  person  than  a  very  hot 
atmosphere,  and  on  the  other  hand  it  is  detrimental  to  nerve- 
function.  It  closes  the  pores  and  causes  matters  within  the  bones 
to  pass  outwards  to  the  surface.

Moist  atmosphere.  A  moist  atmosphere  benefits  many  tem- 
peraments. It  improves  the  colour  and  makes  the  skin  clear 
and  soft.  The  pores  remain  open.  However,  it  favours  septic 
processes.  r

Dry  atmosphere.     A  dry  atmosphere  has  contrary  effects.Dry  atmosphere.     A  dry  atmosphere  has  contrary  effects.

A  dry  climate,  with  warm  soil,  where  the  sun  power  is  good  and 
the  cooling  power  is  moderate  (e.g.  places  with  pine  forests  and 
sheltered  valleys)  is  beneficial  for  chest  cases.— Dry  uplands  in 
places  where  there  are  not  periods  of  unsettled  weather,  and  not  near 
the  sea,  are  beneficial  for  rheumatic  cases.123

Choice  of  food  according  to  climate. — For  hot  climates  •  no 
meat ;  use  vegetable  oils  instead  of  animal  fats.  For  cold  climates- 
meat,  animal  fats.  For  dry  climates  :  fruits  are  needed.  For  wet 
climates  :    sugar  is  needed.123  (p.  1076).

Note  that  the  weather  affects  animals  as  well  as  man.      Cold   hot 
damp,     dry    weather,     thunderstorms,     affect    domestic     animals  ^ 
(11.  307.)

10.      The  Influence  of  the  Winds   on  the  Body

In  dealing  with  the  changes  in  the  atmosphere,  we  have 
discussed  the  characters  of  the  various  winds.  We  now  proceed 
to  deal  with  them  from  another  point  of  view.

2o4  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

314.  The  North  Wind  braces  and  hardens  the  body  ;  it 
prevents  the  flow  of  visible  excretions  ;  k  closes  the  pores, 
strengthens  the  digestion,  causes  constipation,  increases  the 
urine,  and  makes  septic  pestilential  atmosphere  healthy.  If 
the  south  wind  precedes  the  north,  the  south  wind  excites  mucous 
discharges,  but  the  following  north  wind  drives  these  fluids 
inwardly.  A  discharge  may  appear  externally.  Hence  a  catarrh 
[-al   exudation]  may  become  abundant,  and  chest  troubles  are

common.

Diseases  liable  to  occur  when  the  north  wind  prevails  : 
neuritic  pains,  pains  in  the  side  of  the  chest,  in  the  joints,  in  the 
bladder  and  uterus  ;  difficult  micturition  ;  racking  cough  ; 
shivering  attacks.315.  The  South  Wind  is  relaxing  for  the  strength  ;  it 
opens  the  pores  ;  makes  the  humours  agitated  and  confused, 
so  that  they  move  from  within  outwards  ;  the  senses  become 
heavy  ;  it  induces  sleepiness.  It  is  one  of  the  causes  of  breaking 
down  of  ulcers,  and  makes  them  itch.  It  causes  diseases  to 
relapse,  and  debilitates.  It  produces  itching  in  podagra.  It 
excites  migraine  attacks.  It  causes  fevers  to  become  septic. 
It  does  not,  however,  induce  sore  throat.

316.  The  East  Wind. — If  east  winds  prevail  towards 
.  the  end  of  the  night,  and  in  the  early  part  of  the  day,  they  will 
.  have  already  been  modified  by  the  sun,  being  made  more  rarefied

and  less  humid.  They  are,  therefore,  drier  and  lighter  in  nature. 
But  if  they  occur  at  the  close  of  the  day,  and  at  the  beginning 
of  the  night,  the  reverse  is  the  case.  On  the  whole,  east  winds 
are  more  beneficial  to  health  than  are  westerly  ones.

317.  The  West  Wind. — If  west  winds  prevail  at  the  end 
of  the  night  and  in  the  early  part  of  the  day,  the  atmosphere  will 
not  have  received  the  heat  of  the  sun,  and  is  therefore  denser 
and  more  heavy.  If  they  occur  at  the  end  of  the  day  and  at  the 
beginning  of  the  night,  the  reverse  holds  good.

1 1.     The  Influence  of  Places  of  Residence  on  the  Human

Body

In  a  previous  section  we  have  considered  the  characters 
of  certain  inhabited  regions.  We  now  consider  _  them  from 
another  point  of  view,  in  more  detail,  without  troubling  to  avoid 
some  repetitions.

318.  Characters  upon  which  the  effect  of  habitable  regions 
on  -people  depends.

i.     Whether  high  or  low-lying.

T

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  205

2.  Type  of  adjoining  country  (mountainous,   maritime, 
open  or  sheltered).i.     Whether  high  or  low-lying.

T

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  205

2.  Type  of  adjoining  country  (mountainous,   maritime, 
open  or  sheltered).

3.  State  of  soil  (clayey,  muddy,  mineral,  damp,  marshy). 
_  4.     Whether  the  water  is  plentiful  or  scarce,  stagnant  or

flowing.

5.  ■  Local  factors  (trees,  mines,  cemeteries,  dead  animals, 
putrescent  pools).

6.  Purity  or  impurity  of  the  atmosphere.

As  we  have  also  learnt,  the  temperament  of  the  air  is  revealed 
by  the  latitude  of  a  territory,  its  elevation  or  lowness,  proximity  of 
mountains  and  seas,  the  prevailing  winds,  the  kind  of  soil..

In  short,  whenever  the  air  becomes  quickly  cold  after 
sunset,  and  quickly  warms  after  sunrise  (we  know  it)  is  attenu- 
ated. If  the  opposite  is  the  case,  the  nature  of  the  atmosphere 
is  the  contrary.

The  most  harmful  of  all  kinds  of  air  is  that  which  con- 
tracts the  heart  and  hinders  inspiration,  and  makes  breathing 
difficult.

We  now  discuss  each  kind  of  locality  in  turn.

319.  Hot  countries.  The  hair  becomes  dark  or  black  and 
frizzly,  and  becomes  gathered  into  tight  clumps  like  pepper- 
flowers  ;  the  digestion  is  weakened.  Old  age  comes  on  early, 
owing  to  the  great  dissipation  of  breath,  and  the  draining  away 
of  the  bodily  moisture.  This  is  seen  in  the  land  of  the  blacks 
(Ethiopia,  Abyssinia).  Persons  who  reside  in  such  countries : 
become  aged  at  thirty,  are  timid  (as  the  breath  is  so  much  dis- 
persed), and  the  body  becomes  soft  and  dark.320.  Cold  countries.  Persons  who  go  to  live  in  cold  coun- 
tries become  robust  and  stronger,  and  bolder  and  more  coura- 
geous. The  digestion  improves.  If  the  climate  is  also  damp 
the  people  will  become  obese  and  fleshy  and  coarse.  The  veins 
will  not  show  under  the  skin  of  the  hands,  and  the  joints  are 
indistinct  in  outline.     The  body  becomes  pale  and  delicate.

321.  Damp  wet  countries.  Here  the  summer  is  not  very 
warm,  nor  the  winter  very  cold.  People  living  in  humid  coun- 
tries have  beautiful  faces  with  soft  smooth  complexions.  They 
soon  get  tired  with  exercise.  They  are  liable  to  develop  pro- 
tracted fevers,  with  looseness  of  the  bowels  and  menorrhage. 
Piles,  which  are  common,  often  bleed.  Septic  ulcers,  fistulas,  and 
aphthous  and  pustular  stomatitis  are  common  ;  also  epilepsy.

322.  Here  the  summer  is  very  hot  and  the  winter  very 
cold.  People  who  live  in  dry  climates  develop  a  dry  tempera- 
ment.    The  skin  becomes  dry  and  dusky  as  a  result  of  the  great

2.o6  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

dryness  and  roughness  of  the  atmosphere.      The  brain   soon 
becomes  dry  in  temperament.

323.  Residence  in  rocky  and  exposed  places.  The  climate 
in  such  places  is  very  hot  in  summer,  and  very  cold  in  winter. 
The  body  becomes  hardened  and  sturdy,  very  hairy,  strong, 
with  large  prominent  joints.  Dryness  rules  in  such  persons  ; 
they  are  very  wide-awake,  and  resist  bad  habits,  are  pertinacious, 
warlike,  skilful  in  the  arts,  and  are  energetic  in  character.

324.  Residence  in  high  altitudes.  People  residing  in  high 
altitudes  are  healthy,  strong,  and  capable  of  much  physical 
work  ;   they  are  long-lived.

High,  altitudes  are  beneficial  for  nerve  cases,  but  unfavourable  for  heart  cases.High,  altitudes  are  beneficial  for  nerve  cases,  but  unfavourable  for  heart  cases.

325.  Residence  in  mountains  and  snow-clad  places.  People 
living  in  such  places  resemble  those  living  in  cold  countries, 
being  of  great  stature,  strong,  fierce,  and  given  to  toil,  for  the 
seasons  vary  much.  These  countries  are  windy,  the  winds  being 
good  as  long  as  the  snow  lasts,  but  unhealthy  when  it 
melts,  especially  if  there  should  be  mountains  to  screen  off  the 
winds.     In  this  case,  the  place  becomes  hot  and  damp.

326.  Residence  in  low-lying  countries.  The  air  is  very  damp  ; 
and  in  summer  is  sultry,  without  modification  by  winds.  The 
inhabitants  are  therefore  unhealthy  and  debilitated,  liable  to  be 
depressed  and  gloomy  in  disposition.  The  climate  is  unfavour- 
able to  the  functions  of  the  liver.  Water  is  plentiful,  and  not 
cold,  especially  if  it  is  stagnant,  lagunal  or  marshy.  The  air  is 
then  unhealthy,  as  you  already  know.

327.  Residence  in  maritime  regions.  .The  heat  and  cold 
of  these  regions  is  modified  by  their  moisture  ;  hence  injury  is 
resisted,  and  the  body  is  inreceptive  for  whatever  would  otherwise 
invade  it.  As  regards  moisture  and  dryness,  no  doubt,  such 
regions  tend  to  be  damp.  If  the  country  faces  the  north  and  has 
no  protection  against  north  winds  (the  sea  being  on  that  side, 
and  the  country  being  low),  the  climate  will  be  more  temperate. 
If  it  faces  to  the  south,  the  climate  will  be  hot  and  insalubrious 
(morbific).

Maritime  places  are  beneficial  for  nerve  cases.Maritime  places  are  beneficial  for  nerve  cases.

328.  Residence  in  northerly  countries.  Persons  who  live  \n 
the  north  resemble  in  character  those  who  live  in  cold  countries 
with  cold  seasons.  Diseases  of  "  expression  "  (288)  and  those 
due  to  confinement  of  the  humours  in  the  interior  parts  are 
liable  to  occur.  Digestion  is  usually  good.  Such  persons  are 
long-lived.

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  207

The  repletion  with,  and  the  lack  of  dispersion  of,  the  humours 
predisposes  to  epistaxis  and  rupture  of  varicose  veins.  Ulcers 
readily  heal  owing  to  the  vigour  of  the  body  and  the  purity  of 
the  blood  ;  the  external  conditions  are  also  favourable  to  healing, 
because  there  is  nothing  to  relax  or  moisten  (the  tissues).  The 
fact  that  the  innate  heat  is  plentiful  in  such  people  prevents 
epilepsy  from  occurring,  but  if  fits  should  occur  they  will  be 
correspondingly  severe,  for  it  would  have  to  be  a  very  powerful 
agent  to  bring  on  such  fits  at  all  in  these  regions.

The  great  degree  of  heat  in  the  heart  makes  such  persons 
leonine  (wolfish)  in  disposition.The  great  degree  of  heat  in  the  heart  makes  such  persons 
leonine  (wolfish)  in  disposition.

Effect  on  the  female  sex.  Menstruation  is  defective  owing  to 
constriction  of  the  channels  and  the  absence  of  the  stimulus  to 
menstrual  flow  and  to  relaxation  of  the  channels.  Some  assert 
that  this  makes  the  women  sterile;  that  their  wombs  do  not  open. 
But  this  is  contrary  to  experience  ;  at  any  rate  as  regards  the 
Germans  [Turks,  Parthians — in  other  readings].  My  opinion 
is  that  the  great  amount  of  innate  heat  makes  up  for  the  absence 
of  the  stimulus  to  flow  and  to  dilate  the  channels.  Abortion, 
it  is  said,  is  rare  amongst  women  in  these  climates,  and  this  fact 
further  supports  the  opinion  that  their  vitality  is  great.  However, 
parturition  is  not  easy  because  the  organs  in  question  remain 
hard  and  will  not  open  easily.  If  abortion  should  occur,  it  must 
be  ascribed  to  the  cold.  The  milk  will  be  scanty  and  thick, 
because  the  cold  prevents  the  blood  from  flowing  easily  enough 
to  the  breasts.

When  the  vitality  is  impaired,  people  in  these  regions 
(especially  parient  women)  are  liable  to  develop  puerperal 
tetanus,  and  wasting  diseases,  because  the  difficult  labour  makes 
them  strain  so  much,  and  consequently  risk  tearing  the  veins 
in  the  chest,  and  the  nerve  and  muscle-fibres.  The  former 
leads  to  pulmonary  ulcers;  and  the  latter  to  spasmodic  affections. 
Another  effect  of  the  excessive  straining  during  parturition  is 
ventral  hernia..  As  regards  the  age  of  puberty  (in  these  countries)  :  hydro- 
cele arises,  but  disappears  as  the  persons  grow  older.  Female 
slaves  are  liable  to  develop  ascites  and  hydro-uterus  ;  but  these 
also  pass  away  as  they  grow  old.  Ophthalmia  is  rare,  but  is 
severe  when  it  does  occur.

329 .  Residence  in  southerly  countries.  The  climatic  features 
in  these  cases  are  those  of  hot  countries  and  climates.  The  pre- 
vailing winds  are  not  beneficial  to  health.

The    waters    are    usually    salty    and    sulphur-containing-.

20<:

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Moist  humours  accumulate  in  the  head  in  people  living  in  these 
regions,  as  that  is  an  effect  of  the  south  ;  they  pass  downwards 
and  render  the  intestines  loose.  The  limbs  are  weak  and 
flabby  ;  the  senses  are  dulled  ;  the  appetite  for  food  and  drink 
is  enfeebled  ;  and  the  lack  of  heat  and  weakness  of  the  stomach 
accounts,  for  the  fact  that  wine  is  readily  intoxicant.  Ulcers  heal 
and  soften  slowly.     "  .

Effect  on  the  female  sex  :  Menstruation  is  profuse  and  is 
arrested  with  difficulty.  Pregnancy  is  rare.  Abortion  is  fre- 
quent,  simply  because  illness  is  so  frequent.

Effect  on  the  male  sex  :  There  is  a  liability  to  severe  diar- 
rhoea ;  bleeding  of  piles  ;  humid  ophthalmia.  But  these  are 
quickly  recovered  from.  Persons  over  fifty  years  of  age  are 
liable  to  paralysis,  which  follows  on  catarrhal  conditions.  At  all 
ages  there  is  a  tendency  to  asthma,  spasmodic  diseases  (tetanic 
spasm,  epilepsy),  because  there  is  this  tendency,  for  serous 
humour  to  accumulate  in  the  head.Both  sexes  are  liable  to  develop  fever  in  which  heat  and  cold 
occur  simultaneously.  Prolonged  fevers  come  on  in  the  winter, 
and  are  nocturnal.  Acute  fevers  are  rare  because  of  the  liability 
to  diarrhoea,  so  that  the  more  attenuated  part  of  the  humours  is 
continuously  dispersed.

330.  Residence  in  easterly  countries.  When  a  district  is 
exposed  to  the  east,  and  is  sheltered  (by  trees)  on  the  west,  it  is 
healthy  and  the  climate  is  good.  This  is  because  the_  sun  is 
high  over  it  in  the  early  part  of  the  day,  thus  rendermgthe 
atmosphere  clear.  The  purified  air  passes  on  and  gentle  winds 
blow  over  it  in  advance  of  the  rising  sun,  their  direction  being 
corresponding.

331.  Residence  in  westerly  countries.  When  a  district  is 
exposed  on  the  west,  and  is  sheltered  (by  trees)  on  the  east,  it  does 
not  receive  the  sun  till  late  in  the  day,  when  the  rays  are  already 
oblique.  Hence  the  air  never  becomes  rarefied  or  dry,  but  re- 
mains dense  and  humid.  The  prevailing  winds  are  westerly  and 
nocturnal.  The  climate  of  such  places  is  therefore  as  of  damp 
countries,  and  the  residents  have  a  moderately  hot  and  heavy 
temperament.  The  climate  is  heavy  because  the  air  is  heavy. 
Were  it  not  for  that,  the  climate  would  be  spring-like  in  nature.

Such  districts  are  not  as  healthy  as  easterly  ones,_  and  they 
tend  to  become  more  unhealthy.  Some  say  that  this  kind  of 
country  is  spring-like  in  its  character,  and  very  healthy  com- 
pared with  other  kinds  of  country.  But  to  my  thinking  the 
climate  has  very  bad  characters,  and  this  is  because  the  sun's  rays

THE   CANON   OF  MEDICINE  209THE   CANON   OF  MEDICINE  209

do  not  reach  them-  until  they  are  no  longer  strong  enough  to 
warm  the  atmosphere  ;  and  then  the  sun  sets  at  once,  and  a  cold 
night  then  suddenly  sets  in.  As  the  air  is  of  humid  tempera- 
ment in  such  countries,  the  inhabitants  are  liable  to  have  husky 
voices,  especially  in  autumn  ;  for  they  are  prone  to  catarrhs  from 
stagnation  of  the  serous  humour.332.      How  to  choose  a  place  of  residence,  and  what  type  of 
house  should  be  selected.     The  choice  of  a  place  of  residence 
depends  on  :  (1)  the  soil  (see  307f)  ;  (2)  position — whether  high 
or  low-lying  (atmospheric   pressure,  see  307b)  ;    (3)    whether 
exposed  or  sheltered,  bare  or  covered  with  trees  or  woodlands  or 
forests  (forests  harbour  moisture  and  foster  the  decay  of  vegeta- 
tion) ;    (4)  the  water-supply — its  quality,  whether  the  water  is 
covered  in  (artificially)  or  exposed  to  the  air,  whether  concealed 
or  deep,  marshy,  whether  thick  or  limpid,  whether  flowing  from 
a  height  or  running  over  stones  ;    whether  salty  or  "  crude  ''  ;. 
(5)  the  prevailing  winds — whether  exposed  to  or  sheltered  from, 
the  sun  ;   whether  salubrious  or  not  ;   fresh  (cold)  and  bracing 
or  dry  and  sultry  (having  blown  over  wide  tracts  of  land),  or 
moist  ;     whether    cold    and    healthy  ;     (6)    the    neighbouring 
country  (maritime,  marshy,  presence  of  lakes  ;   mountainous,  or 
flat  ;  rich  in  minerals  or  not ;  forests,  jungles,  etc.)  ;  (7)  whether 
the   ground  air  is   pure  and  healthy,   impure  and  unhealthy, 
making  the  natives  prone  to  illness  ;      what  sort  of  illnesses 
prevail  ;     (8)  whether  the  natives  are  robust,  have  a  good  ap- 
petite   and   digestion,    and   are    accustomed   to    food   of  good 
quality  ;    (9)  the  construction  of  house  :    whether  with  large, 
roomy    or    with    narrow    entrances  ;     good    ventilation,    wide 
chimneys.     Do  the  doors  and  windows  face  east  and  north  ? 
One  must  be  specially  careful  to  arrange  to  have  the  easterly 
winds  able  to  enter  the  house  and  see  that  the  rays  of  the  sun  can 
enter  all  day,  because  the  sun's  rays  render  the  air  pure.One  should  be  close  to  plenty  of  sweet  running  water,  open 
to  the  sky,  frozen  in  winter,  and  warm  in  summer,  as  all  this  is. 
favourable  to  health.  Nearness  to  stagnant  water  and  that,  to- 
which  light  has  no  access  is  unfavourable.

(10)  Amount  of  light  ;  temperature  (hot,  warm,  cold)  ;. 
rainfall — average  humidity  of  the  atmosphere  (see  249).

§  I91  ■  Type  of  house.  The  importance  of  this  is  well-known,  but  not  as  often 
practically  attended  to.  Overcrowding  of  houses  is  well-known  to  be  a  source  of  con- 
tinual illness  and  loss  of  working  capacity,  yet  only  very  slowly  remedied.  It  is  not 
sufficiently  realized  that  the  befouling  of  the  air  through  lack  of  air-space  between 
the  houses  is  as  dangerous  as  close  contact  with  the  organic  emanations  from  the 
human  body;  Such  emanations  cling  to  walls,  floors,  furniture,  fomites,  and 
foster  the  multiplication  of  infective  organisms.  The  relation  between  mouldy 
walls  and  phthisis  was  insisted  by  Nash136  (p.  52).

P

2io  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

We  have  now  discussed  the  atmosphere  and  the  geo- 
graphical influences  sufficiently.  We  now  proceed  with  the 
corporeal  factors.

(ii).      Corporeal  Causes   unavoidable  because 
Physiological.

12.     The  Influence  of  Exercise  and  Repose.

8  IQ2  There  are  three  kinds  of  Movement  :— (i)  Local ;  successive  and 
continuous  reception  of  new  positions  in  space  ;  here  belong  exercise,  gymnastics, 
batmng °  (2)  In  quahty  :  alteration  ;  this  consists  in  the  reception  of  new  qualities  ; 
(3)  In  Quantity  (increase  or  diminution).  A  certain  amount  of  matter  is  acquired 
or  lost.     (Mercier"  2,  517).333 .  The  effect  of  exercise  on  the  human  body  varies 
according  to  (i)  its  degree  (strong,  weak)  ,  amount  (little,  much), 
and  according  to  (ii)  the  amount  of  rest  taken,  (in)  the  movement 
of  the  humours  associated.

334.  All  degrees  of  exercise  (strong,  weak,  little,  or 
alternating  with  rest)  agree  in  increasing  the  innate  heat.  It 
makes  little  difference  whether  the  exercise  be  vigorous  or  weak 
and  associated  with  much  rest  or  not,  for  it  makes  the  body  very 
hot  and  even  if  exercise  should  entail  a  loss  of  the  innate  heat  it 
does  so  only  to  a  small  amount.  The  dissipation  of  heat  is  only 
gradual,  whereas  the  amount  of  heat  produced  is  greater  than  the 
loss  If  there  be  much  of  both  exercise  and  repose,  the  effect 
is  to  cool  the  body,  because  the  natural  heat  is  now  greatly 
dispersed,  and  consequently  the  body  becomes  dry.  It  the 
exercise  entail  the  handling  of  certain  material,  that  material 
usually  adds  to  the  effect  of  the  exercise,  though  often  there  is  a 
lessened  effect.  For  instance,  if  the  exercise  be  in  the  course 
of  performing  the  fuller's  art,  there  would  result  an  increase  or 
coldness  and  moisture.  If  the  exercise  be  in  the  course  of  the 
performance  of  the  spelter's  art,  there  would  be  more  heat  and

cLrvncss

335  Repose  always  has  (a)  a  cooling  effect,  because  (i)  the 
envigorating  life-giving  heat  passes  away,  and  (n)  the  innate  heat 
is  confined.  It  has  (b)  a  choking  and  moistening  effect,  because 
of  the  lack  of  dispersal  of  waste  matters.

13.      Conditions  Associated  with   Sleep  and  Vigilance.13.      Conditions  Associated  with   Sleep  and  Vigilance.

336  The  effect  of  sleep  is  very  similar  to  that  produced 
by  repose  ;  that  of  vigilance  is  very  similar  to  that  produced  by 
exercise.     In  each  case  we  must  consider  certain  properties.

337  Sleep  (i)  strengthens  all  natural  junctions  (digestion 
of  the  food  and  the  elaboration  of  the  digestive  products  into

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

21  I337  Sleep  (i)  strengthens  all  natural  junctions  (digestion 
of  the  food  and  the  elaboration  of  the  digestive  products  into

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

21  I

good  blood),  by  aggregating  the  interior  heat  and  by  relaxing  the 
sensitive  faculties.      (These  are  in  abeyance,  in  sleep).      It  does 
so  because  it  renders  the  channels  of  the  (mind-)  breath  moist  and 
relaxed.     (2)   It  makes  the  substance  of  the  breath  turbid,   and 
prevents  the  exit  of  the  vital  breath  (so  that  the  vital  heat  accumu- 
lates  in   the  interior   parts).     (3)   Sleep  removes  all   types   of 
lassitude    (821)    and  -  it    restrains   strong   evacuations.      If  then 
followed  by  appropriate  exercise  (gymnastics),   the  power  of 
running  is  increased  unless  (effete)  matters  accumulate  which 
only  the  skin  can  remove.     (4)  Sleep  sometimes  helps  to  expel 
these  effete  matters,  in  that  it  imprisons  the  interior  heat  and 
procures   the   dissemination  of  the   nutrients   throughout  the 
body,  and  the  expulsion  of  the  effete  matters  which  are  under 
the  skin,  as  well  as  of  those  which  are  deep  in  the  interior  parts 
of  the  body.      These  innermost  matters  push  on  those  which 
are  in  front  of  them  in   successive  waves,   until  they  finally 
reach    the    subcutaneous    tissues    and    are    thence    discharged 
from  the  skin.     The  same  action  is  achieved  by  wakefulness 
to  a  still  greater  degree,  but  in  this  case  the  effete  matter  is 
removed  by  dissipation,  whereas  sleep  removes  it  by  inducing 
sweating.       (5)   Sleep   induces  sweating.       It   does  this   by  a 
process  of  overcoming  the  effete  matter,  and  not  by  a  process  of 
continuous    dispersal   of  attenuated   matter.      When   a   person 
sweats  heavily  during  sleep,  without  obvious  cause,  nutrients 
accumulate  in  excess  of  the  bodily  requirements  ;    when  sleep 
encounters  matter  adapted  for  digestion  and  maturation,  it  turns 
it  into  the  nature  of  blood  and  warms  it,  and  in  consequence 
innate  heat  is  engendered,  and  travels  through  and  warms  the 
whole  body.        (6)  If  there  are  hot  bilious  humours,  and  the 
period  of  sleep  is  prolonged,  the  body  grows  warm  by  extraneous 
heat.     (7)   If  at  the  time  of  sleep  the  stomach  is  empty,  the 
sleep  will  exert  a  cooling  effect,  in  that  it  disperses  the  heat.    If  at 
the  time  of  sleep  there  is  a  humour  not  amenable  to  the  digestive 
power,  the  sleep  will  exert  a  cooling  effect  because  of  that  to 
which  this  humour  gives  rise.Factor   associated   during  the   time    of 
sleep.

Effect  on  body.

Profuse  sweating.

Gastric  contents  digestible.

Hot  bilious  humour. 
Empty  stomach  (fasting) 
Indigestible  humour.

Accumulation  of  nutrients. 
Completion  of    digestion  and   blood- 
formation  :  formation  of  innate  heat. 
Formation   of   extraneous   heat.' 
Cooled ;    heat    is    dispersed. 
Cooled  ;  expansion  of  heat.

212  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

8  193.     Aetius  adds:  .

Among  the  good  effects  of  sleep  are  :  forgetfulness  of  mental  sufferings,  rectifi- 
cation of  the  distracted  powers  of  reason  ;    relaxation  of  contracted  tissues

The  best  time  for  sleep  is  after  a  meal ;  it  should  end  when  the  food  is  digested 
(shown  by  percussion  over  the  stomach),  after  which  the  bowels  should  be  emptied.

The  best  time  for  sleep  during  the  24  hours  is  the  night,  because  the  humidity 
and  drowsy  stillness  of  night  contribute  to  perfect  digestion.  The  worst  time  is 
the  day-time,  because  in  that  case  one  does  not  sleep  long  enough  to  enable  the  di- 
gestion of  the  food  to  be  completed.  The  result  is  acidity,  flatulence,  gurgling 
in  the  bowels.

338.  The  waking  state  acts  in  the  contrary  way  in  all  these^ 
respects.  If  it  occur  to  an  excessive  degree,  the  temperament  of 
the  brain  changes  to  a  certain  dryness,  with  weakening  and  con- 
fusion of  the  reasoning  power,  oxidative  changes  in  the  humours 
and  acute  illnesses  resulting.  An  excessive  degree  of  sleep,  on 
the  other  hand,  exerts  an  opposite  effect,  for  it  dulls  the  powers  of 
the  mind,  induces  heaviness  of  the  head  and  a  cold  intempera- 
ment.  This  is  owing  to  the  hindrance  of  resolution  which  such 
sleep  brings  about.339.  The  waking  state  (i)  disperses  the  matter,  and  so 
increases  the  appetite  and  sense  of  hunger  ;  (2)  disperses  the 
digestive  power,  and  so  impairs  digestion.

During  the  waking  state  the  body  becomes  hot  exteriorly,  cold  and  dry 
interiorly  (Joannitius).

Insomnia  (lit.  tossing  about  in  bed),  a  state  between  watch- 
fulness and  sleep,  is  bad  for  all  the  bodily  states.

340 .  Undue  somnolence  entails  an  imprisonment  of  the 
innate  heat,  and  makes  the  body  become  cold  exteriorly.  This 
is  why  so  many  blankets  are  needed  to  keep  the  limbs  warm 
during  sleep,  which  are  not  required  in  the  waking  state.

The  indications  furnished  by  somnolence,  and  its  various, 
aspects,  and  states,  will  be  fully  dealt  with  in  subsequent  volumes,. 
Allah  willing.

14.     The  Influence  of  Perturbations  of  Mind.

.341.  Changing  states  of  mind  (nafs),  and  the  associated 
"  motions  "  of  the  breath  are  either  interior  or  exterior,  sudden, 
or  gradual.

When  there  is  coldness  interiorly,  it  moves  outwards  with  the 
breath  ;  hence  if  the  breath  were  suddenly  dispersed,  the  cold- 
ness becomes  excessive,  and  both  exterior  and  interior  cooling 
occur,  which  may  be  followed  by  syncope  or  even  death.

When  there  is  coldness  exteriorly,  and  heat  interiorly,  the 
coldness  moves  inwards  with  the  breath.

342.  Great  confinement  of  the  breath,  with  both  exterior 
and  interior  cooling,  results  in  severe  syncope  and  even  death.

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

213

Movement  of  the  breath.

Direction.

Associated  emotion.

Sudden  and  forcible 
•Gentle  and  gradual 
Sudden    and    forcible. 
Gentle  and  gradual.

Expansibn. 
Contraction

Outward 
Outward 
Inward. 
Inward.

Anger.

Delight  and  moderate  joy.

Fear,  terror.

Gloom     ("  contracted

heart  ")  mental  de

pression.Expansibn. 
Contraction

Outward 
Outward 
Inward. 
Inward.

Anger.

Delight  and  moderate  joy.

Fear,  terror.

Gloom     ("  contracted

heart  ")  mental  de

pression.

343.  Confinement  and  dispersal  of  breath  only  occur 
suddenly  ;  _  languishing  of  breath  only  develops  by  degrees. 
By  "  languishing  "  I  mean  a  slowly  progressive  confinement  or 
coarctation  of  the  breath.  When  I  say  "the  nature  declines,"* 
I  refer  to  a  gentle,  gradual,  step  by'  step  dispersal  of  the  vitality.

344.  If  two  motions  of  the  mind  occur  simultaneously, 
the  breath  may  move  in  two  directions  (contraction  within  itself, 
and  enlarging)  at  once.  This  happens  (1)  when  there  is  fear, 
dread,  and  anxiety  about  the  future.  (2)  when  anger  and  gloom 
occur  simultaneously.  The  two  opposite  movements  may  pro- 
duce a  sense  of  shame,  because  there  is  first  the  confinement  of 
the  breath  in  the  interior  parts,  and  after  that  the  power  of 
reason  returns,  and  resolution  appears,  allowing  the  contracted 
breath  to  expand  again,  and  bring  heat  to  the  surface.  The  skin 
now  becomes  red.345.  Influence  on  the  body  of  mental  disturbances  of  a  different 
category.  The  state  of  the  mind  of  the  parents  affects  the  body 
of  the  offspring  ;  as  for  instance,  phantasies.  As  a  rule,  it  is 
some  natural  object  which  impresses  the  body.  For  instance, 
some  image  of  a  boy  pictured  by  both  parents  at  the  time  of 
conception  may  be  realised  in  the  infant  when  born  ;  or  the 
infant's  breath  may  have  a  "  colour  "  very  like  the  colour  seen 
(mentally)  by  the  mother  whilst  the  seminal  fluid  was  flowing 
into  her  at  coitus,  or  by  the  father  during  the  time  of  this  flow.f 
Many  persons  hate  to  believe  such  things,  and  suppose  they 
can  understand  the  states  of  the  body  without  having  realised  the 
fundamental  state.  The  physician  who  seeks  wisdom  does  not 
deny  these  and  allied  things.

*  See  footnote  to  199  (ii).

f  Superficially,  the  suggestion  that  conception  is  synchronous  with  coition 
would  seem  an  instance  of  mediaeval  ignorance.  Costaeus,  in  annotating  on  the 
passage,  accepts  the  opinion  that  a  strong  desire  on  the  part  of  either  parent  to  see 
self  or  partner  repeated  and  reproduced  is  capable  of  securing  that  the  conception  shall 
yield  a  child  in  whom  the  desire  is  ultimately  realized.  Favourable  patency  of 
the  internal  ducts  (cervix,  etc.),  whether  anatomically  or  emotionally,  in  association 
with  voluntary  control  of  supposedly  purely  involuntary  muscular  tissue,  are  co- 
operative factors  whereby  the  above  suggestion  is  not  error  but  sometimes  fact.  The 
law  of  jelal  and  jemal  plays  an  important  part  which  is  ultimately,  in  due  time, 
manifested  by  the  sex  of  the  product  of  conception.      Thus  when  the  male  is  jelal

2i4  THE  CANON   OF  MEDICINE2i4  THE  CANON   OF  MEDICINE

346.  Other,  instances  of  the  influence  of  the  phantasy  on 
the  bodily  state  :  (a)  a  movement  of  the  mind  which  is  intent  on 
considering  red  things  induces  a  corresponding  state  of  readiness 
for  a  movement  of  the  sanguineous  humour.     [Exanthems  may 
be  associated  with  such  a  movement  of  sanguineous    humour 
(Costaeus)].     (b)    energetic    character  :     eating   acrid   things  : 
hardening  of  the  -teeth,     (c)  introspective  character  :    dwelling 
on  aches  and  pains  in  the  limbs  :   aches  and  pains  in  the  limbs, 
(d)  timid  character  :    fearing  lest  some  imagined  event  should 
happen  :     change   of  temperament    corresponding.     [Fear   of 
catching  a  certain  complaint  :    actually  developing  the  disease 
(Costaeus)].     (e)  hopeful  disposition  :  rejoicing  in  the  thought 
of  something  one  would  like  to  realise  :  change  of  temperament 
corresponding.

DIETETICS

K,     The  Influence  of  Food  and  Drink.

"  Most  illnesses,  even  those  which  lead  the  sufferer  to  the  specialist,  arise 
solely  from  long-continued  errors  of  diet  and  regimen."

347.  Food  and  drink  influence  the  body  in  regard  to  (a) 
quality;  {b)  material  composition  ;  {c)  "  substance  "  as  a  whole.

It  is  essential  to  define  each  of  these  three  terms  exactly.

(a)  Influence  in  regard  to  quality. — Heating  and  cooling 
food  and  drink  respectively  make  the  body  hot  in  virtue  of 
their  own  heat  ;  cold  in  virtue  of  their  own  coldness  ;  and 
yet  these  qualities  do  not  become  an  integral  part  of  the  body.(F)  Influence  in  regard  to  material  corn-position. — The  food 
and  drink  in  this  case  change  from  their  own  nature,  so  as  to 
receive  the  "  form  "  of  one  or  other  of  the  human  members 
(tissues)  ;  and  the  matter  of  which  the  food  is  composed  receives 
the  "  form  "  of  the  member,  without  losing  its  own  dominant 
primary  quality  right  through  the  whole  process  of  digestion

the  product  is  female,  and  vice  versa, — the  jelal  or  jemal  relating  not  only  to  physical 
affection,  but  to  "anguish  of  love  "  ;  and  the  physiological  cycles  in  the  two  organisms 
have  also  to  do  with  the  chances  of  conception.  The  subject  is  dealt  with  more 
particularly  in  the  fourth  Book,  in  a  form  which  is  only  apparently  obsolete.

The  belief  that  maternal  mental  states  affect  the  growing  embryo,  both 
physically  and  psychically,  is  natural,  though  rejected  by  some  physicians.  It  is 
a  valuable  saying  that  "  we  can  control  the  attributes  and  thoughts  of  the  offspring 
and  give  it  a  far  more  valuable  inheritance  thereby  than  by  any  material  fortune."" 
It  applies  as  an  admonition  to  both  parents.

"  The  woman  produces  an  offspring  like  that  being  upon  whom  her  thoughts 
dwell  at  the  time  of  conceiving." — (Charaka-Samhita,  ii.  704.)

By  contemplating  on  beautiful  scenes  of  nature,  beautiful  pictures,  pious 
persons,  etc.,  the  mother  contributes  to  make  her  child  beautiful  and  virtuous 
and  possessed  of  other  desirable  qualities  (ib.  745)

The  whole  subject  bears  on  the  causation  of  deformities,  or  malconforma- 
tions  (496).

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  2i$The  whole  subject  bears  on  the  causation  of  deformities,  or  malconforma- 
tions  (496).

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  2i$

to  the  end  of  assimilation.  Thus,  the  temperament  of  lettuce  is 
colder  than  that  of  the  human  body,  and  yet  lettuce  becomes 
blood,  and  is  thus  capable  of  being  converted  into  tissue.  The 
temperament  of  garlic  is  hotter  than  that  of  the  human  body  and 
it  also  becomes  blood.

_(7)  Influence  in  regard  to   "substance"   as  a  whole. The

specific  "  form."— This  is  an  action  according  to  what  food 
is  in  itself,  as  apart  from  its  four  primary  qualities,  and  apart 
from  whether  it  becomes  like  the  tissues  or  not,  or  apart  from 
whether  the  body  becomes  like  to  it  or  not.  Matter  does  not 
enter  into  action  in  virtue  of  its  quality  of  action.  But  action 
ensues  in  virtue  of  its  matter  when  the  matter  is  changed  by  a 
transforming  faculty  in  the  body,  from  the  substance  it  originally 
possesses,  and  (i)  first  renews  whatever  has  been  used  up  in 
the  body,  and  so  (2)  increases  the  innate  heat  in  the  blood. 
Then  (3)  the  effect  of  the  primary  qualities  which  remain 
in  the  food  after  that  comes  into  play..348.  Action  occurs  in  virtue  of  the  substance  when  the 
"  form  "  of  its  "  species  " — resulting  from  its  temperament 
(for  the  elementary  components  are  intermingled,  and  one 
single  thing  emerges  therefrom) —is  made  ready  for  receiving 
the  species  ;  a  certain  "  form  "  is  now  super-added  over  and 
above  the _ form  possessed  by  the  primary  qualities.  But  this 
"  form  "  is  neither  (1)  the  primary  qualities  of  the  matter, 
nor  (2)  the  temperament  proceeding  from  those  primary  qualities. 
This  "  form  "  is  that  perfection  which  the  pattern  of  the  ailment 
receives  according  to  its  capacity,  and  its  capacity  is  the  out- 
come of  its  temperament.  Example  :  the  attractive  faculty 
of  the  magnet  ;  the  nature  inherent  in  the  various  species  of 
plants  and  animals  (the  nature  emerging  from  the  temperament). 
Nor  is  this  "  form  "  (3)  any  of  the  simple  temperaments  by  them- 
selves, for  it  is_  not  hotness,  moistness,  dryness,  or  coldness, 
either  alone  or  in  combination.  Really  speaking,  it  is  some- 
thing comparable  with  colour,  odour,  or  intellect,  soul,  or  some 
other  "  form  "  imperceptible  by  the  senses.

349.  The  "  form  "  which  arises  after  the  temperament 
has  formed  may  ^be  perfected  by  passive  action.  In  this  case 
the  "  form  "  =  "  passive  property."  But  it  may  also  exhibit 
active  perfection.  In  this  case  "  form  "  =  "  active  property  " 
(active  principle).  This  active  property  may  be  exerted  upon 
a  human  being,  or  it  may  not.

350.  Any  property  may  produce  an  effect  on  the  human 
body  which  is  either  desirable  (useful,  harmonious)  or  undesir-

2i6  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE350.  Any  property  may  produce  an  effect  on  the  human 
body  which  is  either  desirable  (useful,  harmonious)  or  undesir-

2i6  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

able  (inharmonious).  Such  an  effect  is  not  entirely  derived 
from  its  temperament  ;  it  is  also  derived  from  the  specific 
"  form,"  over  and  above  the  temperament.  Hence  we  speak  of 
such  an  effect  as  derived  from  the  substance  as  a  whole  (that  is, 
the  "  specific  form  "),  and  not  from  any  of  the  primary  qualities 
or  from  a  temperamental'  intermingling  of  the  qualities,  .bor 
instance,  the  action  of  peony  in  annulling  epileptic  seizures  is 
desirable.  The  action  of  aconite  in  destroying  human  sub- 
stance "  is  an  instance  of  undesirable  action.

*  *  *

351.  Returning  from  our  digression,  then,  when  we  say 
that  a  substance  which  is  eaten  or  is  introduced  hypoder- 
micallv  (e.g.  by  inunction)  is  "hot"  or  "cold,"  we  mean 
not  only  that  it  is  so  virtually  (not  actually),  but  that  it  is  virtually 
hotter  or  colder  than  are  our  bodies.

352       "  Power"  "potentiality"  is  a  term  with  two  kinds

of  meaning,      (a)  It  may  be  used  in  reference  to  the  action  of  the

'  innate  heat  of  the  body  upon  it.     As  soon  as  the  potentiality

encounters  the  action  of  the  innate  heat  it  submits  to  that,  and  so

becomes  act.

(b)  The  word  potentiality  may  also  be  considered  inreterence 
to  its  utility  or  advantage  to  the  body.  Thus  we  say  that 
sulphur  is  hot  in  potentiality  ("  virtually  hot  ").

353.  When  we  say  that  a  thing  is  hot  or  cold,  we  may  mean 
that  one  of  the  four  imponderables  is  dominant  in  its  tempera- 
ment ;    and  we  do  not  refer  to  the  effect  which  it  has  on  our

bodies.  ■,•■•.  u       abodies.  ■,•■•.  u       a

354  We  may  say  that  a  certain  medicine  has  such  ana 
such  a  potentiality,  thereby  meaning  its  utility  or  otherwise  to 
the  body.  Thus,'  a  scribe  who  has  stopped  writing  still  has  the 
■potentiality  for  writing.  So  we  say  that  aconite  has  a  destruc- 
tive potentiality.  In  the  one  case,  there  is  no  act  till  after  the 
body  has  become  evidently  changed.  In  the  other,  the  action 
occurs  at  once,  from  the  mere  presence  of  the  agent  {e.g.  viper 
poison),  or  some  time  later,  after  it  has  undergone  some  certain 
change  in  quality  (e.g.  aconite).  _  ,

(c)  Between  these  two  potentialities  there  is  a  third. — that 
of  poisonous  medicaments.

*  *  *

355  e  There  are  four  orders  of  medicaments — whether  eaten, 
or  taken  °in  the  fluid  state,  or  whether  given  by  inunction.

i„  The  first  degree.  The  action  of  the  quality  ot  a 
medicament  on  the  body  is  imperceptible  to  the  senses.     Thus,

THE   CANON   OF  MEDICINE  217

a  warming  or  cooling  effect  is  not  perceived  by  the  senses  unless 
it  is  given  repeatedly,  or  in  larger  dose.

2.  .  The  second  degree.  A  greater  degree  of  action,  without 
perceptibly  interfering  with  the  functions  of  the  body  or  changing 
their  natural  course  (excepting  incidentally,  or  because  given  in 
large  doses).

3.  The  third  degree.  There  is  evident  interference  with 
function,  but  not  markedly  enough  to  produce  breakdown  or 
death  of  tissue.

4.  The  fourth  degree.  Destruction  or  death  of  tissue  is 
produced.  This  is  the  degree  produced  by  poisons.  A  poison 
is  lethal  in  all  respects  (that  is,  in  all  parts  of  its  "  substance  ").§  194-  (Another  classification  would  be  (a)  medicaments  which  produce 
change  without  destruction  of  function  or  tissue,  (6)  those  which  actually  destroy 
function  or  tissue.  In  each  case  there  are  two  degrees— one  imperceptible  to  the 
senses,  the  other  plainly  evident.— This  is  Galen's  grouping.  The  grouping  into 
four  degrees  still  survives  in  the  classification  of  burns.)  .

Substances  which  are  definitely  poisonous  may  be  classified  into  four  groups 
as  follows  :  ^

(i)  Corrosives.  These  produce  immediate  and  violent  irritation.  Ex  • 
mineral  acids,  alkalis,  corrosive  sublimate.

...  T/  (-)  {quants  :  (a)  Metallic,  such  as  lead,  copper,  arsenic,  phosphorus  ; 
(b)  Vegetable,  such  as  drastic  purgatives  (aloes,  colocynth,  croton  oil)  ;  (c)  Animal 
such  as  canthandes.  This  group  produces  effects  which  simulate  natural  disease 
such  as  gastric  and  intestinal  disease,  peritonitis,  abdominal  catastrophe.

_  (3)  Neurotics.     Ex.  :    hydrocyanic  acid  and  the  cyanides,  opium,  strychnine 
aconite,  belladonna.

(4)  Gaseous,  (a)  Irritant :  halogens,  ammonia  ;  (6)  Anaesthetics  ;  (c)  Coal- 
gas,    carbon  monoxide,    etc.

There  is  another  group  classifiable  under  355,  1  and  2,  exemplified  by  common 
salt,  whicn  is  injurious  or  even  toxic  in  cases  of  kidney  disease  (iai,  p.  390)  ;  and  by 
those  foods  against  which  some  persons  have  idiosyncrasies,  or  "  protein  sensitive- 
ness     (shell-fish,  fruits,  etc.).

356.     Fate  of  medicaments  taken  into  the  body.

A.— They  are  changed  by  the  body  (passive  change). 
(1.)    The  body  itself  is  not  changed  nor  restored  to  health 
(a)  Medicament  changed  into  the  likeness  of  the  body  -  pure  nutriment

{b)  Medicament   changed,    but   not   into   the   likeness{b)  Medicament   changed,    but   not   into   the   likeness

,..  ,  ^  of  the  body     ------         attempered  medicine.

(11.)  The  body  itself  is  also  changed  (active  action). 
(a)  Change  in  medicament  produces  change  in  body, 
and  interferes  with  or  even  arrests  function. 
(a)    the  change  is  into  the  likeness  of  the  body    -        medicinal    food. 
(ft)  not  into  the  likeness  of  the  bodv   -  -  -  pure    medicine

(6)  The   change    in  the   body   continues    till   life   is

destroyed        ------    venomous  medicine.

B.—  Ihey  are  not  changed  at  all  by  the  body,  but  they 
produce  a  (deleterious)  change  in  the  body  (active 
action  on  the  body)  -  pure  poison.

Ad.  B. — In  saying  a  medicament  is  "  not  changed  by  our 
body  "  we  do  not  mean  that  it  does  not  induce  a  formation  of 
heat  in  the  body  by  affecting  the  innate  heat,  for,  as  a  matter  of 
fact,  most  poisons  only  act  on  the  body  in  that  way,  thereby

2i8  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

producing  warmth.  We  mean  that  its  "  form  "  is  not  changed, 
and  that  in  consequence  its,  power  continues  to  influence  the  body 
until  the  latter  has  destroyed  the  "  form."  For  instance,  if  the 
nature  of  the  medicament  be  hot,  its  nature  reinforces  its  pro- 
perty of  dispersing  the  breath.  Examples  :  viper  venom  ; 
aconite.  Again,  if  the  medicament  be  cold,  its  nature  rein- 
forces its  property  by  congealing  or  enfeebling  the  breath. 
Ex.  :    scorpion  venom,  hyoscyamus  (or,  hellebore).Ad.  A.  La. — Anything  that  is  nutritious  will  eventually 
change  the  temperament  of  the  body,  and  in  a  natural  manner. 
It  warms  the  body  because  when  it  becomes  blood  that  is  the 
natural  effect  ;  and  the  body  becomes  warmer.  Lettuce  and 
gourds  warm  in  this  way.  So  in  saying  "  warm  "  we  do  not 
mean  "  warm  the  '  form,'  ".  but  "  warm  that  which  arises  out  of 
its  own  intrinsic  quality — the  '  species  '  remaining."

Ad.  A.  ii.  a. — Medicaments  which  are  foods  are  altered  by 
the  body  first  in  quality,  and  later  in  "  substance."  This  change 
in  quality  may  be  in  respect  of  heat,  so  that  the  medicament 
warms  (e.g.  garlic)  ;  or  it  may  be  in  respect  of  cold,  so  that  the 
body  becomes  cold  (e.g.  lettuce).  Afterwards,  when  the 
digestion  and  conversion  into  good  blood  has  been  completed, 
the  medicament  produces  warmth  to  the  same  extent  to  which  it 
has  added  to  the  volume  of  the  blood,  thereby  increasing  the 
"  substance  "  of  the  innate  heat.  How  could  it  do  otherwise 
than  furnish  heat  when  it  has  itself  been  made  hot,  and  its  cold- 
ness thereby  abstracted  ?But  even  after  the  medicament  has  been  changed  in  sub- 
stance there  still  remains  some  of  its  innate  quality  (some  hot, 
some  cold).  There  is  some  of  the  coldness  of  the  lettuce  left  in 
the  blood  which  has  been  made  from  the  lettuce,  and  there  is 
some  of  the  heat  of  the  garlic  left  in  the  blood  which  the  garlic 
has  given  rise  to.  This  holds  good  for  a  certain  period  of  time. 
357.  Some  nutrient  medicines  are  medicinal  in  quality 
rather  than  nutrient,  and  others  are  nutrient  rather  than  medi- 
cinal. Some  of  the  latter  are  more  like  the  "  substance  "  of 
blood  in  nature  (e.g.  wine,  egg-yolk,  meat-juice),  and  others  are 
less  so  (e.g.  bread,  meat)  and  others  are  entirely  different  to  the 
substance  of  the  blood  (medicinal  foods).

Food  changes  the  state  of  the  body  both  in  quality  and 
quantity.      Changes  in  quality  have  been  discussed.

358_  Changes  in  quantity  are  in  two  directions.  Either  the 
nutriment  increases  in  the  body  until  there  is  an  aversion  to 
food  ;    obstructions   therefore   arise,   and   putrescence   results.

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

219

Or  it  diminishes  in  amount  until  the  body  wastes  away,  and  the 
tissues  dry  up.

An  increase  in  amount  of  nutriment  is  always  cooling  in 
effect  unless  decomposition  supervenes  in  it,  so  giving  rise  to 
warmth.  This  warmth,  due  to  putrescent  changes,  is  extran- 
eous ;  for  such  changes  [in  the  superfluous  nutriment]  are  the 
means  by  which  extraneous  heat  [as  opposed  to  innate  heat] 
enters  the  body.

359.      Classification   of   Food-Stuffs.

(This  passage  is  arranged  in  tabular  form).

Texture  of 
nutriment.

Nutritious 
quality.

Name  of  Aliment.

Notes.

Attenuated 
(i.e.,  produce

Rich.

Meat  juice,  wine. 
Eggs  (raw  or  lightly

cooked). 
Pottage.Texture  of 
nutriment.

Nutritious 
quality.

Name  of  Aliment.

Notes.

Attenuated 
(i.e.,  produce

Rich.

Meat  juice,  wine. 
Eggs  (raw  or  lightly

cooked). 
Pottage.

These  are  considered  rich 
in  nutriment  because 
most  of  their  substance 
is  utilized  by  the  body.

attenuated 
blood).

Poor.

Potherbs. 
Juleb.

Fruits  (matian,  pome- 
granates, and  the  like).

These  are  attempered  in 
substance  and  quality.

Dense 
(i.e.,  thicken 
the  blood).

Rich.

Hard-boiled  eggs  ;    veal.

Poor.

Cheese,  salted  meat, 
egg-plant  and  the  like.

These  are  considered  poor 
in  nutriment  because 
only  a  small  portion  of 
them  becomes  blood.

360,,     Arranged  according  to  Quality  of  Chyme.

1.  Making  good  chyme  :    egg-yolk,  wine  ;    meat-juice,  are  highly  nutritious  :

they  are  attenuated.

Lettuce,  matian,  and  pomegranate  are  feebly  nutritious.  These 
are  attenuated.

Boiled  eggs,  year-old  lamb  are  highly  nutritious.  These  are  dense 
m  texture.

2.  Making  bad  chyme:   newly-killed  meat  of  sucklings,  pheasant,  partridge

lung  ;    these  are  highly  nutritious,  and  attenuated.

Radish,  mustard,  and  many  other  kitchen-herbs  ;  these  are   nutrit- 
ious, and  attenuated.

Veal,  duck,  horseflesh  ;  these  are  highly  nutritious,  and  dense  in 
texture.

Salt  meat  is  feebly  nutritious  and  dense  in  texture.

It  will  be  easy  to  find  the  foods  which  occupy  an  inter- 
mediate position  between  the  attenuated  and  densely  textured 
foods.

§  195-  _  The  study  of  food  should  include  the  following  aspects.

(1)  Digestibility.     This  depends  on  the  density  or  tenuity  of

texture  of  the  food-stuff,  as  well  as  on  the  materials  with  which  it  is

220  THE   CANON   OF  MEDICINE(1)  Digestibility.     This  depends  on  the  density  or  tenuity  of

texture  of  the  food-stuff,  as  well  as  on  the  materials  with  which  it  is

220  THE   CANON   OF  MEDICINE

associated.  Thus  the  more  fat-content,  or  fat-addition  (from  foods 
combined  with  it),  the  less  digestible,  because  the  less  permeable. 
Again,  digestibility  may :  be  completely  removed  by  so  simple  a 
procedure  as  taking  certain  liquids  (among  -them,  pure  water)  at 
an  unsuitable  time  after  digestion  has  begun,  or  liquids  which  are 
incompatible  with  certain  foods  before  digestion,  or  in  a  state  of 
partial  digestion.  Avicenna's  conception  of  the  gastric  contents  as  a 
"broth"  or  "emulsion"  is  legitimate,  and  if  these  contents  are 
"  torn  off"  the  mucosa  by  foods  or  fluids  taken  after  the  digestion 
of  the  meal  has  got  under  way,  the  whole  process  may  stop  beyond 
power  of  renewal.  The  same  holds  good  for  the  process  in  the  small 
intestine.  This  idea,  ruling  in  the  Canon,  can  be  verified  by  anyone 
in  his  daily  experience. — Palatability  has  to  do  with  digestibility.

(2)  Assimilability.  This  depends  on  the  kind  of  chyme  which 
will  result.(2)  Assimilability.  This  depends  on  the  kind  of  chyme  which 
will  result.

(3)  Ntitritive  value.  This,  according  to  the  Canon,  will  depend 
on  the  kind  of  "  humour  "  which  the  food  yields  ;  how  much  residue 
it  leaves  (therefore,  whether  constipating  or  relaxing).  Thus  we 
have  the  classification  of  foods,  according  as  they  (1)  enrich  the  blood : 
cereals  ;  dairy  produce,  such  as  soft  boiled  eggs,  milk  ;  fieshmeat  ; 
fowl  ;  certain  vegetables.  (2)  Enrich  the  serous  humour  :  mutton, 
pork,  one-year  lamb,  the  potherbs  atriplex  and  purslane.  (3)  In- 
crease the  amount  of  bile  made,  or  excite  a  flow  of  bile  :  chicken, 
fish  with  few  scales  and  agile  in  habits,  the  potherbs  garlic,  mustard, 
nasturtium.  (4)  Increase  the  amount  of  atrabilious  humour  : 
goatflesh,  newly-killed  meat,  cabbage,  lentils.  In  each  class  there 
would  be  subdivision's  according  to  the  digestibility— whether 
digestible  within  two  hours,  or  four  hours,  or  later.(4)  Physiological  value.  This  is  a  more  general  aspect,_in  that 
the  other  aspects  contribute  to  its  assessment.  The  old  division  of 
foods  into  proteins,  carbohydrates,  fats,  salts,  water  is  not  necessarily 
to  be  rejected  in  favour  of  the  modern  division  of  foods  according  to 
energy-values,  heat  values,  and  "  accessory  factors."  Chemical 
analysis  of  foods  suffers  from  the  fallacy  that  the  substances  so  found 
do  not  exist  as  such  in  the  food — a  statement  based  on  the  same 
principle  as  will  be  discussed  more  carefully  under  the  subject  of 
"  drugs."  Moreover,  were  these  substances  present  as  such,  they 
certainly  do  not  circulate  in  the  body,  or  function  in  the  tissue  cells 
in  the  chemical  form  found  under  artificial  conditions.  Physiological 
values  may  be  assessed  according  to  whether  an  ash  is  left  in  the 
tissues  after  oxidation  or  not.  Thus,  body-building  foods  leave 
an  ash,  heat  generating  foods  do  not.  The  important  matter  is  the 
formation  of  ash,  because  of  the  risk  of  this  lingering  in  the  body,  or 
even  becoming  firmly  imprisoned  in  its  tissues.  Foods  may  also  be 
studied  in  regard  to  their  depurative  properties,  according  to  their 
alkalinity  or  aciditv,  etc.     See  also  768,  773,  795,  and  §§  248-252.

Thus  there  are  other  considerations  than  the  popular  ones  of 
work-production,  and  the  practical  objects  which  rule  properly  only 
in  the  management  of  domestic  animals.

i6.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  221

The  Various   Kinds   of  Drinking  Water.

ri~  J,    '4  i

\k  -  J%1

.=>  ":■■  -i 
*  ■,  :r    ,  \

'         2.    ~  *  '  V: 
-   '    ■       C-     .".I

-""  .-.  <     ;!

','■1 
.-;.     ;-  '._1i

■/.  Sr-yj-

4ri~  J,    '4  i

\k  -  J%1

.=>  ":■■  -i 
*  ■,  :r    ,  \

'         2.    ~  *  '  V: 
-   '    ■       C-     .".I

-""  .-.  <     ;!

','■1 
.-;.     ;-  '._1i

■/.  Sr-yj-

4

iNote  the  very  great  importance  which  the  Moors  attached  to  proper  water- 
supply.  Having  been  accustomed  to  the  life  of  the  desert,  they  appreciated  the  value 
of  water  better  than  any  other  peoples.

361.  Water  is  the  only  one  of  the  elements  which  has  the 
special  property  of  entering  into  the  composition  of  food  and 
drink — not  that  it  is  itself  nutriment  (although  it  will  by  itself 
prolong  life  for  some  time),  but  rather  that  it  enables  the  aliment 
to  penetrate  into  the  human  body  and  permeate  and  purify  its 
substance.

We  do  not  wish  to  imply  that  water  does  not  nourish  at  all, 
but  we  mean  that  it  is  not,  as  nutriment  is,  potential  blood  giving 
rise  ultimately  to  tissue-substance.  As  an  elementary  sub- 
stance, it  is  not  changed  in  state  in  such  a  way  as  to  become  able 
to  receive  the  "  form  "  of  blood  or  of  tissue.  This  can  only 
occur  with  a  true  compound.

362,  _  Water  is  really  a  "  substance  "  which  helps  to  make 
aliment  fluid  and  attenuated,  so  that  it  can  flow  easily  into  the 
blood-vessels  and  out  of  the  excretory  channels.  Nutrition 
cannot  be  effected  without  ic  ;  it  is  the  handmaid  of  nutrition.

There  is  much  to  be  said  as  to  the  part  played  by  water  in  the 
economy.     Though    apparently    simple,    its    chemical    structure    is

222  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINEThere  is  much  to  be  said  as  to  the  part  played  by  water  in  the 
economy.     Though    apparently    simple,    its    chemical    structure    is

222  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

complex.  It  is  a -mixture  of  units  of  varying  molecular  complexity, 
each  unit  being  called  a  "  hydrone."  The  number  of  molecules  of 
hydrone  and  polyhydrones; constantly  vanes,  even  at  steady  tempera- 
tures, so  that  equilibrium  regarding  them  is  easily  disturbed  The 
foreign  matter  always  present  in  the  water  of  Nature  is  essential  to 
life,  assimilation  being  only  possible  in  virtue  of  such  constituents. 
Apart  from  this,  water  is  essential  to  metabolism— absorption, 
digestion  (enzyme  action  depends  on  it),  osmosis,  temperature 
regulation,  the  maintenance  of  the  salt  concentration  of  the  blood 
at  a  constant  level.  The  necessary  reservoir  of  water  in  the  tissues 
is  furnished  by  the  muscular  tissues,  and  their  depletion  has 
serious  consequences  (502,  §  274-279.),  and  their  repletion  entails 
important  interference  with  the  physiological  functions.  It  may  be 
noted  however,  that  the  idea  that  plentiful  consumption  of  water 
"  flushes  "  organisms  out  of  the  body  is  not  reliable.  (Hemmeter, 
Med.  Rec,  May  22,  1920.)

363  The  various  kinds  of  water  differ  (1)  not  merely  in 
the  substance  of  aquosity,  ■  but  (2)  in  admixed  matters,  (3)  their 
own  individual  dominant  primary  qualities.  .111363  The  various  kinds  of  water  differ  (1)  not  merely  in 
the  substance  of  aquosity,  ■  but  (2)  in  admixed  matters,  (3)  their 
own  individual  dominant  primary  qualities.  .111

364  The  best  water  is  that  from  springs,  provided  they 
arise  in  places  uncontaminated  by  extraneous  qualities.  _  Waters 
from  rocky  places  are  only  good  if  they  are  not  admixed  with 
earthy  matters  of  putrescible  nature  which  might  cause  the 
water  to  putresce.  Spring  water  from  thx  open  ground  is 
healthier  than  water  from  a  rocky  place,  provided  it  is  flowing. 
But  not  all  flowing  water  is  good  ;  it  must  be  also  exposed  to  the 
sun    and    winds.      Water    acquires    nobility    from    the    region

whence  it  flows.  ,whence  it  flows.  ,

365  Stagnant  water  is  not  as  bad  in  quality  when  exposed 
to  the  air'as  when  it  is  deep  underground.  Yet  running  water  is 
not  necessarily  exposed  to  the  air  ;  it  is  only  so  when  it  breaks 
out  from  underground  and  flows  out  over  the  soil.  Note,  too 
that  water  running  over  soil  is  more  wholesome  than  that  which 
runs  over  stones,  because  the  soil  cleanses  it  by  filtering  off  the 
admixed  extraneous  matters  in  a  way  which  stones  do  not  .but 
the  soil  must  be  open  to  the  sky  ;  it  must  not  be  fetid  or  boggy 
or  nitrous,  or  the  like,  for  should  a  large  volume  of  water  flow 
rapidly  over  such  soil,  the  admixed  matters  would  pass  into  its 
own  nature.  If  the  direction  of  the  flow  were  eastwards,  and 
in  summer,  it  would  then  be  reputed  as  better  m  quality,  especi- 
ally the  further  away  from  its  source  it  is  collected.  Such  water 
readily  becomes  warm  or  cold  in  the  body.  The  next  best  water 
is  that  which  runs  northwards.  Such  water  passes  slowly 
through  the  stomach  and  is  indigestible,  and  becomes  warm  or 
cold  in  the  body  only  slowly.     Water  which  runs  westwards  or

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  223

southwards  is  bad,  especially  if  the  winds  are  southerly  at  the 
time.  ;.

366.  Water  which  comes  from  high  regions  and  has  other 
good  qualities  is  more  healthy.  It  is  sweet,  as  it  were..  It  will 
not  bear  being  mixed  with  wine  except  in-  small  amount,  and 
unless  the  wine  is  light.  It  quickly  becomes  cold  and  quickly 
warm  because  its  "  substance  "  is  attenuated.  That  is  why  it  is 
cold  in  winter  and  warm  in  summer.  It  is  tasteless  and  has  no 
odour.  It  passes  out  rapidly  as  urine,  because  whatever  there 
is  in  it  which  requires  digestion  is  rapidly  digested  and  dispersed.367.  You  must  note  that  the  quickest  way  of  assessing  the 
quality  of  a  water  is  by  its  weight.  Light  water  is  healthier  in  all 
respects.  The  weight  may  be  ascertained  by  measure  or  by 
means  of  the  following  procedure.  Soak  a  linen  cloth  of  like 
weight  in  each  of  two  waters  to  be  tested.  Dry  thoroughly. 
Weigh.  The  water  belonging  to  the  cloth  which  is  lighter  "is 
the  more  satisfactory.

The  characters  of  pure  water,  therefore,  are:  (i)  Aspect:  limpid,32  clear, 
pellucid,  "  diaphana."83  (2)  Taste:  tasteless,  or  "sweet,"32  pleasant  to  drink, 
and  refreshing.  (3)  Odour  :  none.  (4)  Touch  :  soft,  or  gentle32 ;  cool.33  (5)  Other 
properties  :  weight  (367)  ;  vegetables  boil  quickly  in  it ;  the  place  from  which  it 
is  obtained  is  neither  too  hot  nor  too  cold  ;  "  fertilizing  "  and  "  calm  "  (Honen32, 
P-  633)  ;   passes  out  of  the  body  quickly  (366).368.  Purification  of  water.  Bad  water  may  be  purified  by 
sublimation  and  distillation.  If  that  is  not  feasible,  boiling  will 
suffice,  for  boiled  water,  as  the  learned  know,  is  less  likely  to 
cause  inflammation  and  passes  more  rapidly  through  the  body. 
Ignorant  persons  believe  that  when  water  is  boiled  the  attenuated 
part  is  dispersed,  and  that  therefore  it  is  made  denser  ;  hence 
they  think  it  is  better  not  to  boil  water.  But  as  you  know,  the 
very  nature  of  "  water  "  means  that  its  particles  are  alike  in 
attenuation  and  density.  It  is  pure,  simple  [in  the  scholastic 
sense],  and  will  not  thicken  by  boiling  except  in  virtue  of  a  cold 
quality  being  dominant  in  it,  and  of  earthy  particles  beino- 
plentiful  in  it,  which,  although  extremely  minute,  are  not  easily 
separated  out  or  precipitated.  They  are  not  plentiful  enough 
to  break  the  continuity  of  the  water  and  are  too  small  to  separate 
out  by  standing.  Hence  they  are  bound  to  remain  admixed 
with  the  substance  of  the  water.  Boiling  removes  the  density 
which  the  quality  of  coldness  produced  ;  the  particles  of  water 
are  then  forcibly  rarefied  and  the  substance  of  the  water  becomes 
more  and  more  rare,  until  the  heavy  earthy  particles  hitherto 
suspended  burst  loose  and  fall  down  and  sink  to  the  bottom. 
A  nearly  quite  pure  water  remains  behind.

224  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE224  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

369.  That  which  has  been  separated  by  the  distillation  is 
like  (or  very  nearly  like)  in  texture  to  that  which  remains  behind, 
for  the  particles  of  the  water  which  has  been  distilled  off  are  of  the 
same  tenuity  as  the  particles  of  that  which  remains.  The 
process  of  boiling  does  not  attenuate  or  rarefy  water  directly  ; 
it  does  so  only  because  it  allows  the  cold  quality  to  aggregate, 
after  which  the  admixed  matter  settles  out.  The  proof  of  this  is 
that  if  a  thick  water  be  left  to  stand  for  a  long  time,  hardly 
anything  settles  out  of  it,  but  as  soon  as  one  boils  it  there  is  an 
abundant  precipitate  and  the  water  becomes  light  and  clear, 
because  the  boiling  has  made  it  rarefied.  So,  too,  have  you  not 
noticed  that  the  waters  of  such  a  big  river  as  the  Jihon  *  especially 
if  collected  a  long  way  from  its  source,  are  very  muddy  at  the 
time  but  in  a  short  time  suddenly  clarify  by  sedimentation,  and 
if  you  pour  off  the  clear  water  and  leave  that  standing,  practically

nothing  settles  out  of  it  ?  ....         „,

370       Some  people  praise  Nile  water  very  highly.      I  hey

enumerate  four  virtues  in  it  :    (i)  the  length  of  time  which  has

elapsed  since  it  left  its  source  ;  (2)  the  good  character  of  the  soil

of  the  countries  through  which  it  travels  ;  (3)  the  fact  that  it  runs

from  due  south  to  due  north,  so-that  a  continual  rarefaction  of  its

waters  is  taking  place  ;   (4)  the  incredibly  enormous  volume  of

the  water  pouring  into  it.from  due  south  to  due  north,  so-that  a  continual  rarefaction  of  its

waters  is  taking  place  ;   (4)  the  incredibly  enormous  volume  of

the  water  pouring  into  it.

371.  If  one  should  pour  bad  water  every  day  from  one 
vessel  to  another,  one  would  see  as  much  deposit  on  the  last  day 
as  on  the  first.  There  is  so  little  deposit  during  a  day  that  it 
never  clarifies  properly.  The  reason  is  that  the  admixed  earthy 
particles  easily  separate  out  from  rarefied  matter,  for  that  is  free 
of  heaviness,  viscosity  or  oiliness,  but  not  so  easily  from  dense 
matter.  Boiling  increases  the  rarefaction  and  so  do  the  shaking- 
movements  incident  to  ebullition.

Commendable  Waters.

372  Rain  water  is  the  best  of  waters,  especially  when  it 
falls  during  summer  or  during  a  thunderstorm.      [Others  say  theCommendable  Waters.

372  Rain  water  is  the  best  of  waters,  especially  when  it 
falls  during  summer  or  during  a  thunderstorm.      [Others  say  the

*  The  river  Jihon,  or  Oxus  (modern  Amu  Darya),  is  one  of  the  great  rivers  of 
Central  Asia  It  runs  through  the  country  of  Khorasan,  between  Samarcand  and 
thfcounlry  called  Bactria,  as  stated  in  the  Glossary  to  the  Venice  edition  of  the 
Canon  Arising  in  the  enormous  glaciers  of  the  mountamous_  ranges  between  East 
Skestan  and  Afghanistan,  and  receiving  important  tributaries  from  the  northern 
slopes  of  the  Hindu  Kush,  it  emerges  into  open  country  being  here  bounded  by 
Bokhara  on  the  north.  It'varies  frSm  1.000  yards  to  a  mile  in  width  in  t^s  region 
and  the  stream  flows  from  7.\  to  5  miles  an  hour.  It  empties  into  the  Sea  of  Aral 
So ereat  a  ri£r  would  naturally  be  prized  by  the  Persians,  who  regarded  it  as  the 
eaull  of  the  NUe  The  fact  that  the  great  trade  route  of  Central  Asia  from  Khorasan 
to  China  ioined  this  river  in  the  above-mentioned  region  made  it  well-known  to 
Avicera,3Zugh  virtullly  unknown  to  Europe  until  2oo  years  later,  when  Marco 
Polo  and  his  companions  entered  this  country.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  22  $THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  22  $

rain  which  falls  in  the  spring,  and  that  which  falls  during  winter 
are  best,_  then  that  which  falls  during  the  fruit  season,  whereas 
that  which  falls  in  summer  is  worst.]  Rain  falling  during 
stormy  weather  is  very  polluted  and  impure  in  nature,  for  at  this 
time  the  violent  winds  agitate  those  clouds  whence  the  rain  comes. 
373. .  Rainwater  readily  undergoes  putrescence  in  spite  of 
being  called  laudable:  This  is  because  if  is  so  rarefied  that  cor- 
ruptible terrene  matter  and  air  quickly  act  upon  it  and  set  up 
decomposition  in  it;  the  humours  of  the  body  therefore  undergo 
putrescence,  and  obstructions  arise  in  the  chest  and  the  voice 
becomes  husky.

374.  Some  say  that  the  reason  for  the  putrescence  is 
that  rain  water  is  formed  from  the  vapours  which  evaporate  off 
from  various  kinds  of  moisture.  But  were  this  the  case,  rain 
water  would  not  be  laudable  but  uncommendable,  and  that  is  not 
so.  The  real  reason  is  that  the  substance  of  rain  water  is  very 
rarefied  and  tenuous,  and  when  a  substance  is  tenuous  it  has 
more  receptivity  (and  is  therefore  liable  to  putrescence).  But  if 
boiled  promptly,  this  risk  of  putrescence  is  lessened.  (Aegineta 
adds  :  rain  water  is  very  light,  sweet  and  limpid  ;  it  is  tenuous 
because  it  has  been  drawn  up  by  the  heat  of  the  sun,  and  there- 
fore only  the  lightest  particles  of  sea-water,  lake-water  enter  into 
it).     Rain  water  is  soft  to  the  touch.375.  Well  tvater  and  water  conveyed  along  aqueducts. 
These  are  of  bad  quality  as  compared  with  spring  water,  because 
they  are  confined  and  have  been  exposed  to  earthy  matter  for  a 
long  time,  and  consequently  cannot  help  being  to  some  extent 
putrescent.  For  in  the  process  of  being  drawn,  they  are  shaken 
up  by  the  power  entailed  (that  is,  by  the  mechanical  contrivances 
used)  or  by  the  influence  of  gravity  rendered  possible  by  the 
slope  of  the  channel.  Of  such  waters  those  which  are  conveyed 
by  leaden  pipes  are  more  harmful,  because  they  acquire  certain 
properties  from  the  lead,  and  this  makes  them  liable  to  bring  on 
a  form  of  dysentery.

376.  Snow  water  and  water  from  melted  ice.  These  are 
coarse  m  texture.  When  pure  and  free  from  admixture  with 
deleterious  substances,  such  water  is  good  and  healthy  ;  it  is  also 
useful  for  cooling  water,  either  by  placing  such  water  in  it,  or  by 
adding  it  to  the  water.  There  is  little  difference  in  the  visible 
character  of  these  two  kinds  of  water  ;  but  they  are  denser  in 
texture  than  other  kinds  of  water  [because  the  finest  particles  are 
squeezed  out  by  the  freezing  (Aegineta)].  This  kind  of  water 
is  harmful  for  persons  suffering  from  neuritis.     Boiling  renders

226  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

such  water  wholesome.  If  ice  water  be  made  of  bad  water  or  if 
the  snow  has  attracted  some  bad  property  from  the  places  upon 
which  it  has  fallen,  it  would  be  better  to  use.  water  free  of  such 
injurious  admixture.

River  water  was  preferred  before  others  by  Rhazes  ;  Aetius  preferred  Nile 
water  to  all  others  (see  370).

Spring  water  :  the  qualities  vary  according  to  whether  the  water  comes  from 
north,  south,  east  or  west  (Hippocrates) .

Non-Commendable  Waters.Spring  water  :  the  qualities  vary  according  to  whether  the  water  comes  from 
north,  south,  east  or  west  (Hippocrates) .

Non-Commendable  Waters.

377.  Marshy  water  :  This  is  of  worse  quality  than  well 
water  because  it  stays  a  long  time  putrefying  in  the  channels  of 
the  decomposing  earth,  and  diffuses  out  and  moves  up  very 
slowly,  and  then  not  by  its  own  power,  for  it  is  so  rich  in  (alluvial) 
matter.  Moreover,  it  only  occurs  in  decomposing  decaying 
earth.  Well-water  on  the  other  hand  is  cleansed  by  contact 
with  that  which  separates  out  from  it  and  by  the  gases  which 
bubble  up  out  of  it,  thereby  keeping  it  in  constant  (molecular) 
movement.  Well-water  does  not  remain  in  a  confined  state  long 
and  does  not  linger  in  the  channels  and  openings  of  the  earth.

.  378.  Stagnant  water  :  Water  in  reedy  marshes.  This  is 
unhealthy  and  heavy,  especially  if  in  exposed  situations,  for  these 
do  not  become  cold  in  winter  unless  and  only  in  so  ^  far  as  snow 
happens  to  fall  on  them.  They  therefore  give  rise,  in  the  body, 
to  serous  humour.  In  summer,  the  sun  makes  them  hot  and  so 
they  putresce  and  then  they  will  give  rise,  in  the  body,  to  bilious 
humour.  There  are  three  reasons  why  they  cause  disease  : 
(i)  their  inspissated  character  ;  (2)  admixture  with  earthy 
matter  ;   (3)  dispersion  of  their  subtile  particles.379.  The  following  are  the  diseases  liable  to  develop  after 
drinking  such  water  :  (a)  diseases  of  the  spleen.  These  result 
in  heaping  up  of  the  viscera  and  stretching  of  the  peritoneum — ■ 
the  belly  being  hard  and  tense  ;  wasting  of  the  arms,  legs  and 
neck — for  the  nutrition  fails  because  of  the  state  of  the  spleen 
despite  the  excessive  appetite  and  thirst  ;  constipation  ;  vomit- 
ing is  difficult  to  induce,  (b)  dropsy  :  from  retention  of  the 
water,  (c)  inflammatory  deposits  in  the  lung  and  spleen,  (d) 
"dysenteric  ailments,  with  the  result  that  the  hands  and  feet 
become  dry,  and  the  liver  becomes  enfeebled  and  nutrition  is 
impaired,  '  (e)  quartan  fevers  (in  summer),  (f)  piles,  varices, 
lax  swellings  of  inflammatory  nature,  insanity  (especially  in 
winter).

380.  The  effect  of  such  water  on  women.     Conception  and 
parturition  are  both  difficult.     The  offspring  will  be  male  and

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  227

will  be  liable  to  develop  inflammatory  masses  and  then  waste 
away. — Moles  are  liable  to  occur  because  impregnation  is  often 
faulty  ;  the  offspring  is  found  to"  have  rupture. — Varicose  veins 
and  ulcers  of  the  leg  ;  these  heal  with  difficulty.  The  appetite 
increases  and  there  is  constipation  leading  to  intestinalulceration. 
Quartans  are  common.

381.  Effect  on  old  persons.  "  Ardent  "  fevers  occur,  as 
accords  with  the  dryness  of  their  nature,  and  of  the  stomach.

382.  All  stagnant  waters,  from  whatever  source,  are 
injurious  to  the  stomach.382.  All  stagnant  waters,  from  whatever  source,  are 
injurious  to  the  stomach.

383.  Channel  water.  This  is  very  like  stagnant  water,  but 
is  healthier  because  it  does  not  linger  so  long  in  one  spot.  If  it 
is  not  actually  flowing,  this  was  because  of  some  heaviness  in  it. 
In  many  of  these  waters  (i.e.  including  water  in  aqueducts,  water 
in  irrigation  channels)  there  is  a  certain  stypticity,  and  they 
quickly  warm  the  interior  organs.  Hence  they  are  not  utilisable 
in  cases  of  fever  or  for  persons  in  whom  the  bilious  humour  is 
predominant.  They  are  more  applicable  for  cases  of  disease 
where  the  treatment  is  to  foster  retention  and  maturation,

384.  Waters  containing  metallic,  substances.  These  are 
injurious,  though  in  some  cases  there  is  a  certain  value  in  them. 
Thus,  ferruginous  waters  impart  strength  to  the  internal  organs, 
prevent  stomach  trouble,  and  stimulate  the  appetite.  They 
resolve  the  spleen  and  are  beneficial  for  those  who  cannot  cohabit 
properly.

Waters  containing  salts  of  ammonia  are  aperient,  and 
carminative.  They  may  be  either  swallowed  as  a  drink  or  given 
as  an  enema,  or  used  in  a  sitz-bath.

Waters  containing  alum  suppress  excessive  menstruation 
and  haemoptysis  and  the  bleeding  of  piles.  But  they  render 
persons  who  are  liable  to  take  fevers  still  more  liable  to  develop 
them.

385.  Waters  in  which  leeches  live.      These  are  injurious.

386.  Salt  water.  This  makes  the  body  dry  up  and 
become  wasted.  Its  abstersive  power  makes  it  first  laxative, 
and  afterwards  constipating — because  dry  in  nature.  It 
decomposes  the  blood  and  so  gives  rise  to  pruritus  and 
"  scabies."387.  Acetous  water,  added  to  rain  water  which  has  to  be 
consumed  arrests  putrefactive  changes  in  the  water  and  provides 
immunity  from  such  ill-effects.

388.  Milky  water  gives  rise  to  calculus  and  obstructions. 
Hence  one  should  make  use  of  diuretics  after  it.      In  fact,  one

228  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

should  take  diuretics  after  drinking  any  coarse  and  heavy  waters, 
because  they  linger  in  the  bowel.  Fatty  and  sweet  things  (e.g. 
theriacs)  are  also  correctives  for  such  water.  The  fact  that 
milky  water  brings  on  constipation  makes  it  of  value  for  some

persons.

389.  Cold  water. — Water  which  is  only  moderately  cold 
is  more  healthy  than  all  others,  because  it  stimulates  the  appetite 
and  strengthens  the  stomach.  Nevertheless  it  weakens  the 
nerves  and  is  harmful  for  cases  of  inflammatory  disease  in  the 
interior  organs.

[Very  cold  water  should  be  taken  after  food  and  then  only 
in  small  quantity  (Aegineta).]

390.  Tepid  water  incites  nausea.

Warm  water  (that  is,  water  which  is  a  little  warmer  than  tepid 
water),  taken  on  an  empty  stomach,  is  cleansing  both  to  stomach 
and  intestines.     But  it  has  a  weakening  effect  on  the  stomach  if

taken  often.

Hot  water  is  beneficial  for  the  following  conditions  :

(a)  Head  :  "  cold  "  headache  ;  inflammation  of  the  eye  ; 
parotitis,  quinsies;  "  dry  "  gums  ;  postauricular  inflammations. 
Mental  conditions — epilepsy  and  "  melancholia."

(b)  Chest  :  asthma,  solutions  of  continuity  in  the  thorax  ; 
ulcers  of  the  diaphragm.

(c)  General  :  rheumatic  pains.  Diuresis.  It  relieves 
painful  micturition.

(d)  Female  ailments  :   it  evokes  menstruation.(c)  General  :  rheumatic  pains.  Diuresis.  It  relieves 
painful  micturition.

(d)  Female  ailments  :   it  evokes  menstruation.

Hot  water  interferes  with  digestion  and  makes  the  food 
swim  about  in  the  stomach.  It  does  not  quench  thirst.  It  may 
lead  to  dropsy,  and  hectic  fever,  and  emaciation.

Very  hot  water  is  of  great,  value  in  colic  ;   it  also  disperses

flatulence.

391.  Aerated  waters  :    these  are   useful   for   certain   in-

temperaments.

When  various  kinds  of  water,  good  and  bad,  are  com- 
mingled, their  effect  varies  according  to  which  proves  dominant.

392.  Correction  of  impure  water  :  The  correction  of  impure 
water  is  specially  referred  to  under  "  regimen  for  travellers  " — 
see  891.

Note  also  the  following,  from  Aegineta:  (i)  add  decoction  of  chick-peas; 
(2)  boil  wild  carrots  with  some  small  fish  and  fennel ;  (3)  beet,  gourds,  salts  and 
diluted  wine.  Marshy,  saltish  and  bituminous  water  should  be  strained,  -betid 
smelling  waters  should  be  boiled  or  mixed  with  wine.  _

When  good  and  bad  waters  are  mingled,  the  stronger  dominates.

Other  matters   relative  to  water    and  its   properties    and

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  229

modes  of  action  will  be  discussed  in  the-  chapter  on  "  Water  as 
one  of  the  simples  "  in  Book  II — Allah  permitting.THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  229

modes  of  action  will  be  discussed  in  the-  chapter  on  "  Water  as 
one  of  the  simples  "  in  Book  II — Allah  permitting.

17.  The  Results  of  Retention  and  Evacuation.* 
393.  The  following  are  the  causes  of  retention  of  waste 
matters  :  (1)  weak  expulsive  faculty,  (2)  unduly  strong  retentive 
faculty  :  the  latter  occurs  in  (a)  weakness  of  digestive  power,  so 
that  aliments  remain  too  long  in  the  stomach,  the  natural  reten- 
tive faculty  holding  them  back  till  they  are  sufficiently  digested, 
(b)  narrowness  and  (V)  obstruction  of  the  channels,  (d)  coarseness 
or  viscidity  of  the  waste  matters.  The  former  holds  in  the  case 
of  (a)  superabundance  of  the  waste  matters,  so  that  the  expulsive 
faculty  cannot  deal  with  them,  (b)  insufficient  informing  sense  for 
defecation,  this  act  being  aided  by  voluntary  effort.  The  result 
may  be  that  the  effete  matter  is  (compensatorily)  removed  to 
other  parts  of  the  body  by  the  action  of  the  vegetative  faculties. 
Thus  jaundice  follows  [gall-stone]  colic  ;  the  colic  depends  on 
the  retention,  the  jaundice  is  the  compensatory  evacuation. 
Again,  at  the  crisis  of  a  fever,  there  may  be  retention  of  urine 
and  faeces,  and  a  critical  evacuation  occurs  elsewhere.394.  Diseases  consequent  upon  retention  of  waste  matters. — ■ 
(i)  Compositional  :  constipation,  diarrhoea  or  laxity  of  the 
bowels,  spasmus  humidus  and  the  like  ;  inflammatory  processes  ; 
furuncles,  (ii)  Intemperaments  :  septic  conditions  ;  imprison- 
ment of  the  innate  heat,  or  mutation  of  this  into  igneity.  There 
may  be  so  marked  a  coarctation  that  the  innate  heat  is  extin- 
guished altogether,  and  coldness  of  the  body  supervenes,  with 
the  transference  of  too  much  moisture  to  the  surface  of  the  body, 
(iii)  General  conditions  :  tearing  or  rupture  of  Jocular  spaces  and 
crypts.

When  repletion  (as  from  great  plenty  during  fertile  years) 
develops  after  a  long  period  of  inanition  (as  from  times  of  great 
famine,  in  barren  years),  it  is  one  of  the  most  effective  causes  of 
such  illnesses.

395. — The  causes  of  the  evacuation  {depletion)  of  matters 
which  jire  normally  retained.  (1)  Vigorous  expulsive  faculty, 
{2)  defective  retentive  faculty,  (3)  unfavourable  quality  of  the 
matter:  (a)  too  heavy,  because  superabundant,  (b)  too  distending 
owing  to  flatulent  action,  (c)  corrosive  and  acrid  in  quality, 
(d)  attenuation  of  texture  making  it  too  mobile  and  too  easily 
expelled,  (4)  widening  of  the  excretory  channels.  This  occurs 
in  the  case  of  the  seminal  flow.     It  also  occurs  if  they  are  torn

*  Cf.,  repletion  and  depletion  (442,  497,  502).

23o  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

longitudinally  or  transversely,  or  because  their  orifices  become 
too   patent  (in    epistaxis)  ,  from   either   extraneous   or   interior

causes.23o  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

longitudinally  or  transversely,  or  because  their  orifices  become 
too   patent  (in    epistaxis)  ,  from   either   extraneous   or   interior

causes.

396.— -The  possible  effects  of  evacuation  ot  this  type  are_ : 
(i)  The  temperament  becomes  cold,  because  the  matter  is 
lost  which  would  otherwise  increase  that  which  maintains  the 
innate  heat.  (2)  The  temperament  becomes  hot,  if  the  evacuated 
material  is  cold  in  temperament,  like  serous  humour  or  mucus. 
(fl  The  temperament  becomes  equable  like  blood,  if  there  is 
undue  accumulation  of  the  heating  bilious  humour,  so  that  the 
heat  becomes  superabundant.  (4)  The  temperament  becomes 
dry.  This  is  always  intrinsic  in  origin.  (5)  The  temperament 
becomes  moist  in  a  manner  analogous  to  that  mentioned  m 
regard  to  accidental  increase  in  the  body-heat.  Namely,  either 
the  evacuation  of  desiccant  body-fluid  has  not  been  too  great,  or 
the  innate  heat  is  too  scanty,  with  the  result  that  the  aliment  is  not 
adequately  digested,  and  serous  humour  becomes  relative  y 
increased.  But  a  moist  temperament  of  this  kind  is  unfavourable 
to  the  maintenance  of  the  innate  heat,  and  foreign  heat  will  not 
serve  as  a  substitute  for  innate  heat,  because  of  the  difference  of

its  nature.  "

397*  The  effect  of  excessive  evacuations  on  the  members 
of  the  body.—- (1)  Coldness  and  dryness  of  their  substance  and 
nature  ensue,  even  though  they  receive  extraneous  heat,  and 
moisture  beyond  their  need.  (2)  Diseases  :  obstruction  of  the 
vessels  due  to  undue  dryness,  and  narrowing  of  the  veins. 
Convulsions  and  tetanic  spasms  may  therefore  arise.

398.  When  retention  and  evacuation  are  equally  matched, 
and  occur  at  the  proper  times,  they  are  beneficial,  and  maintain 
the  health.398.  When  retention  and  evacuation  are  equally  matched, 
and  occur  at  the  proper  times,  they  are  beneficial,  and  maintain 
the  health.

8  106  Venery.  Coitus.— Galen  placed  this  in  the  first  rank  among  the  obli- 
gatory causes  of  disease,  but  most  physicians  group  it  partly  under  exercise,  and 
-Dartlv  under  "evacuations"   (excretions).

P  It  causes  "  dryness  "  of  the  body  ;  weakens  the  vegetative  faculties  m- 
frigidateE ^usually) Sometimes  the  concomitant  emotional  excitement  entails 
a  heating  effect.     (Joannitius).

Having  now  given  a  general  description  of  the  obligatory 
causes  of  disease,  we  proceed  to  the  facultative  causes.

•    B.    18.     FACULTATIVE  CAUSES  OF  DISEASE.

We  now  come  to  causal  agents,  not  necessarily  injurious,

to  which  the  body  is  not  inevitably  exposed.     They  cannot  be

classified  either  as   natural   or  as   contrary  to   nature.      They

influence  the  body  from  without.    Excluding  the  atmosphere,  to

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  231

which  one  is  necessarily  exposed,  such  agents  are  referred  to  as 
baths,  friction,  and  the  like.,

399.  Influences  on  the  human  body  from  without  act 
in   these   ways  :

I.  By  penetration  into  the  body  (400-414)

(a)  Attenuated  matter  in  the  pores  enters  the  body  by  its 
own  penetrative  power.

(b)  The  tissues  themselves  draw  it  in  through  the  pores.

(c)  One  of  these  factors  assists  the  other.

II.  The  primary  quality  of  the  agent  itself  is  able  to 
produce  a  change  in  the  body.  (415-431.)  There  are  three 
aspects  of  such  a  quality  :

(i)  It  may  be  actual,  e.g.,  an  epitheme  of  cooling 
character  ;     a  plaster  which  is  calefacient.

(ii)  It  may  be  potential.  Here  the  innate  heat  stirs  up 
the  power  into  actuality.

(iii)  A  specific  property.(ii)  It  may  be  potential.  Here  the  innate  heat  stirs  up 
the  power  into  actuality.

(iii)  A  specific  property.

III.  Things  acting  in  both  ways  (a)  producing  a  harmful 
effect  both  externally  and  internally.  (P)  Harmful  when  applied 
externally,  but  not  when  taken  internally  ;   and  vice  versa.

Example  of  an  agent  which  affects  the  body  when  applied 
externally,  but  harmless  when  taken  by  the  mouth  :  onions 
applied  as  a  plaster  cause  ulceration  ;  as  food,  they  are  harmless. 
Example  of  an  agent  of  a  contrary  kind  :  white  lead.  This  is  a 
virulent  poison  when  swallowed,  but  is  harmless  when  applied 
as  an  ointment.

Explanation  of  this. — (1)  When  a  substance  like  onions  is 
taken  as  food,  the  alterative  faculty  breaks  it  up  and  changes  its 
temperament  into  a  weaker  one,  until  it  is  too  weak  to  exert  a 
harmful  influence.  Hence  there  is  no  internal  ulceration. 
(2)  When  taken  as  food,  such  a  substance  is  usually  admixed 
with  other  foods.  (3)  Its  power  is  broken  by  being  submerged 
in  the  other  moist  substances  present  in  the  alimentary  canal. 
(4)  A  substance  applied  externally  can  be  kept  in  one  spot,  but 
when  it  is  within  the  stomach  it  is  kept  moving  about.  (5)  A 
substance  applied  externally  is  usually  applied  very  tightly  and 
closely,  whereas  within  the  body  it  is  only  just  in  contiguity 
without  any  adhesion.  (6)  When  a  substance  is  taken  internally, 
its  own  natural  power  determines  the  quick  accomplishment  cf 
digestion  and  quickly  expels  the  excess  lert  after  the  bulk  has 
been  converted  into  good  blood.

The  reason  why  the  action  of  white  lead  is  different  is  that

2 32  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINEThe  reason  why  the  action  of  white  lead  is  different  is  that

2 32  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

white  lead  is  of  gross  nature  and  is  made  of  coarse  particles. 
Hence  it  cannot  penetrate,  into  the  channels  of  the  body  from 
without,  and  even  if  it  did  enter  the  skin  it  would  not  reach  as  far 
as  the  channels  of  the  breath  or  the  principal  organs.  Taken  in 
by  the  mouth  the  matter  is  different,  for  then  its  poisonous 
nature  is  at  once  brought  out  by  the  influence  of  the  innate 
heat  upon  it.  Such  an  interaction  could  not  take  place  ex- 
ternally.

We  shall  probably  refer  to  these   considerations  again,  in 
the  Book  of  Simples.     (Book  II).

BALNEOLOGY 
I

19.     Baths.     Friction.      Exposure  to  the  Sun.

§  197.     Points  Relative  to   Water-Baths.

The  bath-rooms  :    temperature  of  the  air  in  the  different  rooms  (temperate,  warm,

hot,  cool)  ;    mural  decorations. 
The  bath-man. 
The  bath  itself  :

Quantity  of  water  :   full  to  immersion  ;    partial ;   sitz,  etc.

Temperature  of  water  :    hot,  tepid,  cold.

Duration  of  stay  in  the  bath  :   long,  short,  medium.

Kinds  of  water  employed.

Intrinsic  quality  (cooling,  moistening,  etc.) 
The  person  bathing  :  relation  to  food  :  fasting  or  hungry  ;  immediately  after  a  meal ; 
soon  after  a  meal ;    at  the  end  of  the  first  stage  of  digestion.

State  of  the  skin  :  dry,  moist ;   dropsical.

State  of  the  humours  and  their  quality  (cold,  immatured).

Frequency  of  bathing.

Season  for  open-air  bathing. 
Effects  of  the  bath  :

On  respiration.

On  pulse.

On  innate  heat.

On  the  strength  (relaxing  effects  ;   syncope;   impotence).

On  the  humours  :    helping  maturation  ;    drawing  to  surface  ;    diverting  super- 
fluities to  different  parts.On  the  strength  (relaxing  effects  ;   syncope;   impotence).

On  the  humours  :    helping  maturation  ;    drawing  to  surface  ;    diverting  super- 
fluities to  different  parts.

On  the  quality  of  the  body  ;    dry,  cold,  moist.

On  the  general  nutrition  :    making  the  body  thin,  stout,  or  weak.  _ 
Special  purposes  of  the  bath.     Treatment  of  hectic  fevers  ;    for  affections  of  the 
stomach  and  spleen,  etc.

400o  Some  say  that  bath-houses  should  be  ancient  fine 
buildings,  with  vaults  and  arches,  and  roomy,  airy,  spacious 
galleries,  and  furnished  with  sweet  water.  Others  mention  that 
the  bath-men  should  arrange  the  degree  of  heat  to  suit  the  tem- 
perament of  the  bather.

§  198.— The  bath-house,  the  hammam,  of  Arabian  life,  agrees  in 
manner  with  that  described  among  the  ancients  (e.g.  the  Romans).

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  233§  198.— The  bath-house,  the  hammam,  of  Arabian  life,  agrees  in 
manner  with  that  described  among  the  ancients  (e.g.  the  Romans).

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  233

In  Lane's  notes  to  the  "  Arabian  Nights,"  he  gives  the  following 
description  : — "  The  public  bath  comprises  several  apartments,  with 
mosaic  or  tessellated  pavements,  composed  of  white  and  black 
marble,  and  pieces  of  fine  red  tile,  and  sometimes  other  materials. 
The  inner  apartments  are  covered  with  domes,  having  a  number  of 
small,  round,  glazed  apertures,  for  the  admission  of  light.  The 
first  apartment  is  the  disrobing  room  (mas lakh,  or  stripping-place  : 
Burton).  (Tepidarium,  because  the  air  is  tepid.)  In  the  centre  of  this 
is  a  fountain  of  cold  water.  Next  the  walls  are  wide  benches  or  plat- 
forms, encased  with  marble.  These  are  furnished  with  mattresses  and 
■cushions  for  the  higher  and  middle  classes,  and  with  mats  for  the 
poorer  sort.  The  inner  division  of  the  building  occupies  nearly  a 
square  :  the  central  or  chief  portion  of  it  is  the  principal  apartment,  or 
hararah,  which  generally  has  the  form  of  a  cross.  In  its  centre  is  a 
fountain  of  hot  water,  rising  from  a  base  encased  with  marble,  which 
serves  as  a  seat.  One  of  the  angles  of  the  square  is  occupied  by  the 
ante-chamber  of  the  hararah.  A  second  angle  has  the  fire  and  the 
boiler  over  it.  A  third  angle  has  a  small  chamber,  containing 
a  tank  of  warm  water  fed  by  a  spout  in  the  dome  (cf.  calidarium). 
The  fourth  angle  has  two  taps  side  by  side,  one  hot,  one  cold.  A 
small  trough  is  beneath,  and  before  that  is  a  seat  (cf.  frigidarium). 
The  inner  apartments  are  heated  by  the  steam  rising  from  the 
fountain  and  tanks  and  by  the  contiguity  of  the  fire.  The  chamber 
of  the  first-named  angle  is  not  as  hot  as  the  hararah,  and  has  a 
door  intervening.  This  chamber  is  used  for  disrobing  in  cold 
weather."  In  their  atmosphere,  the  four  apartments  of  the  Hammam 
represent  the  four  seasons — Autumn  and  Summer,  and  Winter  and 
Spring.".     (Night  452).

"  The  bather  enters  the  hararah  wearing  wooden  clogs,  a  large 
napkin  round  the  loins,  a  second  round  the  head  like  a  turban, 
a  third  over  the  chest,  and  a  fourth  covering  the  back.  The  attendant 
removes  the  towels  except  the  first,  and  proceeds  to  crack  the  joints 
of  his  fingers  and  toes,  and  several  of  the  vertebrae  of  the  back  and 
neck  ;  kneads  his  flesh,  and  rubs  the  soles  of  his  feet  with  a  coarse 
earthen  rasp,  and  his  limbs  and  body  with  a  woollen  bag  which 
covers  his  hand  like  a  glove.  After  which  the  bather  plunges 
into  the  tank.  He  is  then  thoroughly  washed  with  soap  and  water, 
and  fibres  of  the  palm-tree,  and  shaved,  if  he  wish  it,  in  the  fourth 
chamber.  Then  he  returns  to  the  antechamber,  and  here  he  gener- 
ally reclines  upon  a  mattress,  and  takes  some  light  refreshment, 
while  one  of  the  attendants  rubs  the  soles  of  his  feet,  and  kneads 
the  flesh  of  his  body  and  limbs,  previously  to  resuming  his  dress. 
During  this  period  of  rest,  a  pipe  and  a  cup  of  coffee  is  often  taken. 
The  operations  in  the  antechamber  are  the  '  restorative  friction  ' 
of  the  text  and  of  Greek  and  Roman  baths.  Before  the  dress  is 
resumed,  oils  or  ointments  are  rubbed  in,  and  fragrant  powders 
sprinkled  on  the  skin."

234

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Rooms  in  the  private  baths  of  the  Alhambra  Palace,  (a)  The  Sultan's  bath. 
Through  the  archway  on  the  left  is  seen  (6)  the  Calidarium.  The  "  rest-room  "  of 
the  same  suite  is  shown  as  an  "  initial  "  to  751.§  199- — 'Sir  Thomas  Arnold,  in  his  recently  published  work, 
"  Painting  in  Islam,"107  (1928,  p. 88)  quotes  some  medical  authors 
who  speak  of  the  propriety  of  mural  decorations  in  the  rest-room. 
(a)  The  ideal  bath  "  should  contain  pictures  of  high  artistic  merit 
and  great  beauty,  representing  pairs  of  lovers,  gardens,  beds  of 
flowers,  fine  galloping  horses  and  wild  beasts,  for  pictures  such  as 
these  are  potent  in  strengthening  the  powers  of  the  body,  whether 
animal,  natural,  or  spiritual."  (b)  "  All  physicians,  sages,  and  wise 
men  are  agreed  that  the  sight  of  beautiful  pictures  gladdens  and 
refreshes  the  soul,  and  drives  away  from  it  melancholic  thoughts 
and  suggestions,  and  strengthens  the  heart  more  than  anything 
else  can  do,  because  it  rids  it  of  all  evil  imaginings."  (c)  "  Beau- 
tiful pictures  in  bright,  cheerful  colours.  These  they  divide  into 
three  kinds  since  they  knew  that  there  are  three  vital  principles 
in  the  body — the  animal,  the  spiritual  and  the  natural.  Accordingly 
they  painted  pictures  of  each  kind,  so  as  to  strengthen  each  one  of 
these  potentialities  ;  for  the  animal  power  they  painted  pictures 
of  fighting  and  war  and  galloping  horses,  and  the  snaring  of  wild 
beasts.  For  the  spiritual  power,  pictures  of  love  and  of  reflection 
of  the  lover  on  his  beloved,  and  pictures  of  their  mutual  recrimina- 
tions and  reproaches,  and  of  their  embracing  one  another  ;  and 
for  the  natural  power,  gardens  and  beautiful  trees  and  bright  flowers." 
(d)  "  When  in  a  beautiful  picture  harmonious  colours  such  as 
yellow,  red  and  green,  are  combined  with  a  due  proportion  in  their 
respective  forms,  then  the  melancholy  humours  find  healing,  and  the 
cares  that  cling  to  the  soul  of  man  are  expelled,  and  the  mind  gets 
rid  of  its  sorrows,  for  the  soul  becomes  refined  and  ennobled  by  the 
sight  of  such  pictures."THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  235

401.  Natural  action  of  the  bath.  The  air  of  the  bathroom 
has  a  warming  action,  the ,  water  of  the  bath  has  a  moistening 
effect  on  the  body.  The  first  change  in  the  body  is  to  cool  and 
moisten  ;  the  second  is  to  warm  and  moisten  ;  the  third  is  to 
make  the  body  warm  and  dry.  It  is  useless  to  listen  to  those  who 
assert  that  water  taken  internally  does  not  moisten  the  interior 
tissues.

402.  Changes  and  later  effects  of  the  bath.  These  are  (a) 
accidental,  (b)  essential.

1.  Cold  air  bath. — This  disperses  the  innate  heat  greatly, 
and  so  dries  the  substance  of  the  tissues.  It  disperses  the  natural 
(normal)  fluids  very  greatly,  though  it  increases  the  extraneous 
fluids.

2.  Very  hot  water  bath. — The  pores  close  ;  there  is  goose- 
flesh.  The  moisture  does  not  enter  the  body,  and  there  is  not 
much  dispersal  of  the  innate  heat.  But  the  water  sometimes  adds 
to  the  warmth  of  the  body  and  sometimes  cools  it.  To  have  the 
former  effect,  the  water  must  be  very  hot.

3.  Subtepid  bath. — This  cools  and  moistens  the  body.  As 
the  water  cools  down,  the  air  of  the  bathroom  becomes  less 
warm,  and  the  effect  of  the  cooling  in  both  directions  to  which  the 
body  is  now  exposed  is  to  contract  the  abdominal  viscera.

Cold  bath.— When  taken  while  fasting,  it  imparts  warmth  and  moisture      If 
taken  after  a  meal,  it  will  make  the  body  cold,  and  remove  moisture

_  Hot  bath.— When  taken  while  fasting,  it  is  attenuant  and  refrigerant  and  does 
not  impart  moisture  If  taken  after  a  meal,  the  bath  is  heating  and  moistens  the 
body. — (Hippocrates.)Warm  bath.— This  relieves  lassitude,  is  soothing,  and  has  a  warming  and 
softening  effect.  It  dispels  plethora,  and  removes  flatulence  from  wherever  it  may 
have  lodged  It  favours  sleep,  and  promotes  digestion.— (Haly  Abbas.)  It  opens 
the  pores  It  induces  plumpness  of  the  body.  It  is  beneficial  for  all— men,  women 
young,  old,  rich,  poor.  The  best  time  for  it  is  before  food,  and  after  exercise  — 
(Aegmeta.)

403.  _  The  frequent  use  of  such  a  bath  will  have  a  refrigerant 
effect.  This  is  because  (i)  water  is  fundamentally  cold  in  nature, 
and  even  warming  of  it  will  not  ensure  continuance  of  the 
"  accidental  "  (scholastic  significance)  heat,  the  natural  quality 
remaining,  and  this  natural  coldness  enters  the  body  and  makes  it 
cold,  (ii)  Whether  hot  or  cold,  water  is  still  "  wet,"  and  wets  the 
body  (interiorly),  so,  imparting  much  moisture,  it  binds  the 
innate  heat  even  to  the  degree  of  extinction.*  Consequently 
the  body  becomes  cold.

Such  a  bath  may  have  a  warming  effect  if  (a)  the.  aliment 
previously  taken  has  not  yet  digested,  (b)  there  is  a  cold  humour

*  As  water  quenches  fire.

236  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

present  in  the  body  which  is  not  yet  completely  matured.  For 
the  bath  will  help  the  digestion  of  the  aliment,  and  the  maturation 
of  the  humour.  ■  .

404  Sw/*  0/  j&»  <tf  /^  /«»*  0/  /£*  bath.— If  the  skin  be  dry 
at  the  time  of  the  bath,  dropsy  or  relaxed  conditions  would  be 
benefited.  If  the  skin  be  moist  to  commence  with,  the  bath  will 
have  a  moistening  effect.405  Duration  of  stay  in  the  bath. — Dryness  results  it  the 
person  stay  a  long  time  in  the  bath.  This  is  partly  because  of  loss 
of  water  by  the  sweating  and  with  the  dispersal  of  the  breath  so 
induced.  'A  short  stay-in  the  bath  will  produce  a  moistening 
effect,  if  the  skin  be  wiped  dry  before  sweating  begins^

406  Relation  to  meals.— To  enter  a  bath  fasting  will 
render  the  body  extremely  dry,  and  make  the  person  thin  and 
debilitated.  To  enter  the  bath  after  a  heavy  meal,  on  the  other 
hand,  will  make  a  person  stout,  by  drawing  the  humours  towards 
the  subcutaneous  tissues.  Moreover  it  removes  the  obstructions 
by  transferring  the  undigested  aliment  from  the  stomach  to  the 
tissues.  To  enter  the  bath  at  the  moment  when  the  first  digestion 
has  ended  and  before  a  sense  of  hunger  returns  is  beneficial  and 
produces  a  medium  degree  of  stoutness.407  Special  therapeutic  uses.  Bath  treatment  of  hectic  fever. 
—If  the  bath  is  taken  for  a  moistening  effect  the  person  should 
be  entirely  immersed  in  the  water,  unless  he  is  too  enfeebled  or 
his  strength  will  not  allow  of  it.  The  air  of  the  room  should  be 
temperate— neither  hot  nor  cold,  but  gently  moist.  The  water 
of  the  bath  should  be  thrown  freely  about  in  order  to  disseminate 
the  water-vapour  through  the  air  and  so  fill  the  air  with  moisture 
The  duration  of  the  bath  should  not  be  long.  The  patient  should 
be  lifted  out  of  the  water  and  rubbed  down  gently,  himself 
making  no  exertion  ;  and  he  should  be  laid  at  once  on  the  couch 
(in  the  bathroom^  and  there  be  anointed  with  oil  (to  increase  the 
moisture  of  the  skin  and  retain  in  the  pores  the  aquosity  which 
has  already  gained  entry  into  the  skin,  thus  fixing  it  within  the 
skin^  using  cool  perfumed  oil.  He  should  then  he  in.  the 
tepidarium  (the  disrobing  room)  for  an  hour  until  the  respiration 
subsides  to  the  customarv  rate.  After  that,  he  is  anointed,  robed, 
and  taken  into  a  room  (dining-room,  1595  ed.)  where  he  may 
receive  a  small  draught  compounded  of  humectants,  such  as 
barley  water  and  asses'  milk.  .

'  Disadvantages.— Such  patients  should  not  stay  too  long  in 
the  bath,  as  there  is  a  risk  of  syncope,  because  it  renders  the  heart 
"  hot  "   (and  therefore   disperses  the  "  breath  ")  and  sets  the

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

237THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

237

bilious  humour  in  motion  ;  it  produces  nausea  ;  and  other  ill- 
effects.  It  causes  morbific  matters  to  gravitate  into  the  debilitated 
organs.  It  has  a  relaxing  effect  and  is  injurious  for  the  nerves. 
It  disperses  the  innate  heat.  It  removes  the  appetite  for  solid 
food.     It  weakens  the  power  of  sexual  intercourse.

[Aegin'eta  says :    natural  baths  are  largely  desiccant  and  calefacient,  and  are 
therefore  good  for  people  of  humid  and  cold  temperament].

408.  Action  of  baths  in  virtue  of  mineral  constituents  in  the 
water. — Waters  of  this  kind  occur  in  nature,  or  may  be  repro- 
duced artificially.  They  are  all  strongly  resolvent  and  attenuant. 
They  make  the  tissues  flabby,  and  prevent  humours  from  passing 
into  abscesses.  They  are  beneficial  for  the  guineaworm  and 
"  Indian  vein."

Mineral  Baths  in  the  Middle  Ages12  (p.  270).

Aluminous  waters  [Alum=MgS04+FeS04:  "hair-alum," 
according  to  Adams74]  benefit  cases  of  haemoptysis,  melaena, 
menorrhage,  procidentia  ani  or  uteri,  repeated  causeless  mis- 
carriage, cachexias,  undue  sweating,  causeless  vomiting.  They 
have  a  cooling  and  drying  effect.

Bitter  waters  have  a  heating  and  drying  effect.

Bituminous  waters  ("judaic  waters  ")  occasion  fulness  of 
the  head.  The  person  must  therefore  not  immerse  his  head  in 
the  bath  or  stay  too  long  in  it.  They  render  the  temperament 
warmer,  especially  that  of  the  uterus,  bladder  and  colon.  They 
are  all  harmful  and  heavy.  [They  soothe  if  persevered  with: 
Aegineta.]

23 8  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Chalky  waters  have  a  cooling  and  drying  effect.

Copper-containing  waters  are  beneficial  for  the  mouth, 
tonsils  and  uvula  ;  for  relaxed  ocular  tissues  ;  for  humid 
affections  of  the  ears.Copper-containing  waters  are  beneficial  for  the  mouth, 
tonsils  and  uvula  ;  for  relaxed  ocular  tissues  ;  for  humid 
affections  of  the  ears.

Ferruginous  waters  are  beneficial  for  the  stomach  and 
spleen.  .  (They  should  be  entered  gradually  so  as  to  allow  the 
impression  of  the  water  to  sink  deeply  into  the  body  while  it  is  in 
a  relaxed  state  :   Aegineta.)

Medicinal  baths,  prepared  with  laurel  leaves,  stavesacre, 
juniper  berry.

Nitrous  (=Na2COs:  Adams74)  baths  and  saline  baths  are 
beneficial  for  the  head  and  chest  when  humours  are  constantly 
flowing  into  them  ;  for  wateriness  of  the  stomach,  for  dropsy,  for 
swellings  left  after  diseases,  and  for  collections  of  phlegm.

Aerated  waters,  ferruginous  and  saline  waters  are  beneficial 
for  diseases  depending  on  coldness  and  moisture,  for  pains  in 
the  joints,  for  podagra.  They  benefit  relaxed  persons,  asthma, 
renal  disease,  carbuncles,  ulcers  ;  they  are  very  beneficial  in 
cases  of  fracture.

Sulphur  baths.  These  soothe  and  warm  the  nerves  and 
relieve  pain,  lassitude  and  convulsions.  They  cleanse  the 
surface  of  the  skin  from  furuncles  and  old  bad  ulcers  and  purple 
marks  ;  they  benefit  pannus,  vitiligo,  lepra.  They  disperse 
morbific  matters  descending  into  the  joints,  the  spleen  and  the 
liver.  They  are  beneficial  for  the  womb  when  unduly  hard. 
They  reduce  the  tone  of  the  stomach  and  banish  the  appetite.

409.  Thermal  baths. — Persons  desiring  to  use  thermal 
baths  should  bathe  quietly,  gently,  and  allow  the  waters  to  play 
gently  over  the  relaxed  body  ;  laving,  not  splashing  ;  and  in  this 
way  the  interior  organs  are  benefited.

The  subject  of  baths  will  be  considered  further  in  Part  III, 
and  again  when  discussing  the  use  of  cold  water  as  a  drink.The  subject  of  baths  will  be  considered  further  in  Part  III, 
and  again  when  discussing  the  use  of  cold  water  as  a  drink.

2,0.     The  Influence  of  Sunbaths  ;   Sandbaths  ;   Oilbaths  ;

Showerbaths.

41 0„  Immersion  in  hot  sand,  oil  baths,  spraying  of  water 
over  the  face  ;  standing  or  running  or  walking  rapidly,  or 
jumping  in  the  heat  of  the  burning  sun — all  these  are  powerful 
agents  for  removing  superfluities,  and  for  producing  sweating, 
dispersing  flatulence,  and  lax  swellings  and  dropsies.     They  are

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  239

beneficial  for  asthma,  for  orthopnoea.  They  invigorate  the  brain 
(whose  temperament  is  cold)  and  relieve  inveterate  "  cold  " 
headache.

If  the  seat  of  the  bath  is  dry,  and  the  floor  is  left  wet,  the 
bath  will  benefit  cases  of  sciatica,  lumbar  pain,  uterine  obstruc- 
tion.    It  has  a  cleansing  effect  on  the  womb.

411.  Sun-baths. — One  must  not  remain  too  long  in  the 
sun,  or  else  the  body  will  become  dry,  thick,  and  hard,  as  the  sun 
acts  like  a  cautery  upon  the  pore's  of  the  skin,  and  obstructs  the 
outflow  of  the  insensible  perspiration.  The  sun  burns  the  skin 
more  if  one  stands  still  in  it,  than  if  one  moves  about,  and 
so  it  inhibits  the  dissipation  of  the  sensible  perspiration  still 
more.412.  Sea-sand  baths,  in  the  sun, — These  are  more  efficient 
for  drying  the  humours  lodged  in  the  skin.  Such  a  bath  may  be 
used  in  various  ways  :  one  may  sit  on  the  sand,  or"  bury  oneself  in 
it,  or  sprinkle  it  over  the  body.  In  whatever  way  it  is'  employed, 
the  same  beneficial  effect  is  experienced  in  all  the  above-named 
diseases.  If  the  sand  is  sprinkled  over  the  body,  little  by  little,  it 
removes  pains  and  other  effects  of  insolation.  In  the  end,  there 
is  an  extremely  marked  drying  effect  on  the  body.

413.  Oil-baths. — These  are  beneficial  in  lassitude  and 
for  persons  suffering  from  long-standing  cold  fevers,  especially 
if  there  are  pains  in  the  nerves  and  joints  ;  for  convulsions  ;  for 
spasmodic  diseases  ;  for  suppression  of  urine.  The  oil  must  be 
made  hot  outside  the  room.  These  baths  are  more  beneficial 
for  the  above  conditions  if  the  flesh  of  the  jackal  or  hyssna  is 
boiled  in  iL  If  made  as  described,  it  will  be  an  efficient  remedy 
for  joint-pains  and  podagra.

Aetius  gives  :  add  a  fifth  part  of  heated  oil  to  the  water.  Such  a  bath  is  highly 
anodyne  ;  it  relieves  lassitude  and  nervous  pains.  Uses  :  for  prolonged  fevers  • 
for  convulsions  ;    for  retention  of  urine.  '

414*  Shower-baths,  Douching,  Spraying. — If  water  be 
sprinkled  on  the  face  (or  over  the  body)  it  restores  the  vigour  of 
the  breath,  when  that  has  been  lost  by  dyspnoea  and  by  the 
inflammatory  changes  in  hot  fevers.  .This  sprinkling  is  especially 
beneficial  for  syncope,  if  rose  water  or  vinegar  be  used.  It 
may  restore  the  appetite.  They  are  injurious  to  persons  suffering 
from  catarrhs  or  "  cold  "  headaches."He  swooned  away,  and  the  Wazir  sprinkled  rose  water  on  him  till  the 
Prmce  came  to  himself."— Night,  720  ;    Burton,  iv.  408.

Douching  with  emollient  herbs  is  referred  to  in  719,  732.

24o  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

II

The  Agents  which  alter  the  Several  Qualities  of  the

Body.

i.  Calefacients.

2.  Refrigerants.

3.  Humectants.

4.  Desiccants.

5.  Agents  causing  changes   of  form.

6.  Agents  causing  obstructions  of  channels.

7.  Agents  which,  open  up  the  channels.

8.  Agents  causing  roughness.

9.  Mollificants.

10.  Agents  causing  displacements  of  parts.

11.  Agents  preventing  apposition  of  parts.

12.  Agents  preventing  expansion  of  parts.

13.  Agents  causing  abnormal  movements.

14.  Causes  of  numerical  increase.

15.  Causes  of  numerical  decrease.

16.  Causes  of  loss  of  continuity.

1 7.  Causes  of  ulceration.

18.  Causes  of  inflammatory  swellings. 
19-26.     The  subject  of  pain.

27.  Agents  producing  retentions  or  evacuations.

28.  Causes  of  over-repletion.

29.  Causes  of  debility  ;    asthenia  ;  lack  of  vigour  in  members.

415. — I.      Calefacients.

(i)  Outward  heat  in  various  forms  :  summer  heat ;  artificial 
heat ;  baths  of  moderate  temperature  (the  heating  effect  is  produced 
by  both  air  and  water)  ;    calefacient  plasters  or  local  applications.

(ii)  Heat  produced  by  movement.  Exercise,  but  not  in  excess  ; 
gymnastic  exercise  which  is  not  too  vigorous  or  beyond  the  right 
measure  and  duration  ;  moderate  friction  ;  light  massage  with  the 
hands  on  the  limbs  ;  dry  cupping  (wet  cupping  is  infrigidant  because 
it  removes  heat  from  the  body).

(hi)  Heat  introduced  b'y  the  mouth.  Adequate  supply  of  nutri- 
ment •/  hot  aliments;  hot  or  heating  medicaments  (i.e.  via 
oxidation  within  the  body.)(hi)  Heat  introduced  b'y  the  mouth.  Adequate  supply  of  nutri- 
ment •/  hot  aliments;  hot  or  heating  medicaments  (i.e.  via 
oxidation  within  the  body.)

(iv)  Heat  arising  from  emotional  states  :  anger,  gloom  in  a 
degree  less  than  would  cause  infrigidation  ;  moderated  joy.  Also 
sleep  and  wakefulness  in  moderate  degree.

(v)  Heat  derived  from  putrefactive  processes.  This  is  neither 
the  innate  heat  nor  derived  from  combustion.  The  warming _  from 
the  innate  heat  is  less  in  degree  than  that  from  combustion  ;  it  can 
occur  apart  from  putrefaction  and  prior  to  a  septic  state.  In  the 
case  of  putrefaction  the  heat  from  the  foreign  source  lingers  in  the 
body  after  the  agent  giving  rise  to  it  has  left  the  body.  This  heat 
unites  with  the  moisture  of  the  humours  and  alters  their  temperament 
(in  respect  of  moisture)  in  such  a  manner  that  it  will  no  longer 
respond  to  the  temperament  of  the  natural  breath.  The  difference 
between  digestion  and  putrefaction  is  that  in  the  case  of  digestion 
the  heat  and  moisture  which  are  present  in  matter  are  altered  ; 
that  is,  instead  of  being  accordant  with  the  original  temperament, 
they  are  now  accordant  with  another  different  one  (J>).

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  241

In  oxidation,  moist  substance  is  separated  from  dry  by  sub- 
limation and  evaporation,  the  dryness  going  into  the  residue.

In  the  process  of  simple  calef action,  the  humours  simply  become 
warmer  without  losing  their  natural  breath.

(Galen's  classification  into  five  groups  is  represented  by  i,  ii, 
iii,  iv  and  v  of  the  above  list.)(Galen's  classification  into  five  groups  is  represented  by  i,  ii, 
iii,  iv  and  v  of  the  above  list.)

(vi)  The  state  of  the  body.  When  there  is  sclerosis  (takathuf) 
of  the  surface,  the  body  tends  to  become  hot  because  the  breath 
(lit.. the  steam,  bakhr)  is  held  in  or  imprisoned.  When  there  is 
rarefaction  (takhalkhal)  within  the  body,  it  becomes  warm  because 
the  "  breath  "  (bakhr)  then  expands  throughout  the  body.

The  above  section  has  been  partly  rearranged.  The  sub-headings  are  intro- 
duced, as  usual,  for  the  sake  of  clearness.

Sclerosis. — This  refers  to  the  thickening  of  the  skin,  which  occurs  after  long 
exposure  to  the  weather  ;   it  becomes  harsh,  coarse,  and  presumably  less  pervious.

Steam. — Horses  "  steam  "  when  they  have  been  hard-worked.  The  exhaled 
air  appears  like  "  steam."  The  urine  and  shed  blood  steam  when  they  leave  the  body. 
This  steam  is  the  substance  of  the  breath,  so  that  it  is  permissible  to  translate  the 
word  accordingly.  This  steam,  which  pervades  organs  and  tissues  and  tissue- 
spaces  and  cavities,  is  the  visible  manifestation  of  the  breath.

It  is  natural  to  think,  then,  that  if  the  skin  is  so  hardened  that  it  will  not  let 
this  vapour  out,  the  latter  will  accumulate  in  the  body  and  make  it  hot,  as  happens 
after  severe  exercise  until  the  body  "  cools  down."  It  is  also  natural  to  reason 
that  if  the  vapour  is  able  to  expand  owing  to  laxity  of  the  connective  tissues,  it  will 
impart  a  sense  of  glow  to  the  body  ;   for  everyone  has  experienced  it.

Rarefaction. — When  this  term  is  applied  to  the  skin  it  refers  to  a  condition 
opposite  to  "  sclerosis  "  ;  the  skin  is  unduly  soft,  supple,  and  is  evidently  relaxed 
instead  of  tight.These  considerations  apply  to  sub-heading  5  of  416.     See  also  838.

§  200.  In  modern  language,  the  warmth  of  the  body  depends  on 
the  relation  between  heat  loss  and  heat  gain.  Heat  enters  the  body 
from  (a)  the  external  air  or  surroundings  :  warm  air  of  summer, 
artificially  warmed  air  in  winter,  baths ;  (b)  heat  derived  from  (i)  food 
and  drink,  (ii)  exercise,  (iii)  toxic  action  of  foreign  matter  (sepsis, 
drugs);  (c)  heat  fostered  by  preventing  heat  loss:  clothing,  sleep; 
(d)  local  heat  (fomentations,  etc.)  ;     (<?)  emotional  influence.

Heat  is  lost  from  the  body  by  (a)  excreta  :  urine,  faeces,  skin 
action,  exhalation  by  the  air  expired ;  (b)  external  conditions : 
cold,  wet.

Note  that  baths  vary  in  their  effect.  An  ordinary  hot  bath 
(105°  F.)  renders  the  body  warm;  a  brief  immersion  has  a  different 
effect,  a  long  continued  immersion  is  depressant.

416.      2.     Refrigerants.

1 .     Artificial  cold ;  this  is  a  refrigerant  in  act,  as  it  is  cold  itself. 
.  2.     Potential  refrigerants.     Thus,  when  the  body  is  hot  at  the 
time  of  exposure  to  the  agent,  its  heat  becomes  dissipated.    Thermal 
waters.

3.  Calefacients.  (a)  Excessive  :  very  hot  air,  thermal  waters, 
hot  plasters  and  fomentations  (which  disperse  the  innate  heat  by

R

24 2  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

relaxing  the  body)  ;  ■  (b)  moderate  :    staying  too  long  in  the  bath  ; 
(c)  agents  at  present  hot  but  becoming  cold  later.

4.  Excessive  exercise  :  this  disperses  the  innate  heat  unduly. 
Excessive  repose  aggregates  and  strangles  the  innate  heat,  thereby 
having  an  infrigidant  effect.4.  Excessive  exercise  :  this  disperses  the  innate  heat  unduly. 
Excessive  repose  aggregates  and  strangles  the  innate  heat,  thereby 
having  an  infrigidant  effect.

5.  Certain  bodily  states,  (a)  Great  rarefaction  relaxes  the 
body  and.  disperses  the  innate  heat ;  (b)  extreme  spissitudestrangles 
the  'innate  heat ;  (c)  excessive  retention  (has  the  same  action)  ;  (d) 
undue  evacuation  from  the  body,  which  destroys  the  material  basis 
of  the  innate  heat  and  disperses  the  breath,  and  allows  the  effete 
matters  to   become  obstructions.

6.  Mental  states  :  great  gloom,  too  much  fear  ;  too  much  joy  ; 
great  delight.

7.  Aliment.     Excess  of  food  and  drink  ;    cold  aliments  ;    too  . 
little  food  ;    refrigerant  medicines.

8.  Mechanical  causes  :  tight  bandaging  of  limbs  for  some 
time,  which  prevents  the  innate  heat  reaching  them.

9.  Crudity  ;    the  opposite  of  putrefaction.

(Galen's  classification  was  :    4,   1,  3a,  $b,  insufficient  food.)

417.  3.      Humectants.

External  :    baths,  especially  if  taken  after  a  meal.

Diet  :  food  taken  to  excess  ;  humectant  articles  of  food  ; 
humectant  medicaments.

Retention  of  that  which  should  be  evacuated.

Evacuation  of  desiccant  humour.

Repose  and  sleep.

Joy  in  moderation.

Infrigidants  (these  cause  the  humours  to  be  retained)  ;  cale- 
facients  (slight  degree  of  warmth  causes  the  humours  to  move).

418.  4.     Desiccants.

External  :  cold  congeals  the  humours  and  prevents  the  tissues 
from  attracting  nutritive  material  ;  it  also  constricts  the  channels  of 
the  body,  and  so  causes  them  to  be  blocked  ;  in  consequence  nutrient 
material  cannot  reach  it.

Great  heat  disperses  moisture.  Hence  too  frequent  hot  baths 
have  this  effect.

Bathing  in  styptic  waters  has  a  desiccant  effect.Great  heat  disperses  moisture.  Hence  too  frequent  hot  baths 
have  this  effect.

Bathing  in  styptic  waters  has  a  desiccant  effect.

Diet  :   insufficient  food  ;    dry  aliments  ;    desiccant  medicaments.

Violent  evacuations  ;    coitus.

Exercise.

Wakefulness.

Frequent  emotional  disturbance.

419.  5.     Agents  causing  deformity.

Some  of  these  agents  come  into  play  from  the  beginning  of  life, 
because  of  a  defect  in  the  formative  power  of  the  sperm.     Others

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  243

come  into  force  later  in  life — namely  at  parturition,  during  the  act 
of  traversing  the  maternal  passages.  Others  operate  after  birth 
(tight  binders  and  wrappings).  Others  operate  in  infancy,  before 
the  limbs  are  hard  enough  to  enable  the  infant  to  walk  (letting  the 
baby  fall  ;    blows).

Diseases  which  characteristically  produce  deformities  :  leprosy, 
paralysis,  .nerve-lesions,  phthisis.

Excessive  deposition  of  fat ;  an  excessive  degree  of  emaciation 
(due  to  inflammation,  or  malposition,  or  from  the  coalescence  of 
ulcers).

420.  6.     Agents  causing  obstruction  of  the  channels.

(i)  Foreign  bodies  in  a  channel  :  '  calculus,  (ii)  Too  great  a 
quantity  of  material  in  a  channel  :  loading  with  faeces',  (iii)  Altera- 
tion in  quality  of  material  :  grossness,  viscosity,  leech-like  coagula 
of  blood,  (iv)  Formation  of  matter  within  the  channels,  whether 
removable  therefrom  or  becoming  fixed  therein,  (v)  Obliteration 
of  the  orifices,  (a)  by  cicatrisation  after  healing  of  an  ulcer  ;  (b)  by 
formation  of  new  tissue  (e.g.  proud  flesh,  fleshy  warts)  ;  (c)  by  com- 
pression by  an  inflammatory  mass  in  the  vicinity ;  (d)  by  the 
astringent  effect  of  great  cold  or  dryness  (styptics)  ;  (e)  by  unduiy 
marked  retentive  power;    (/)  by  tight  bandaging.Obstructions  are  common  in  winter,  because  that  is  the  season 
when  effete  matters  are  largely  retained,  and  because  the  cold  itself 
has  an  astringent  effect.

421.  7.      Agents  which  open  up  the  channels.

Channels  become  dilated  either  from  lack  of  retentive  power 
or  from  an  excessive  action  of  the  expulsive  facultv.     For  example 
holding    the    breath.     Medicines    which    are    relaxing,    hot,    moist' 
aperient  and  detergent.  '  '

In  short,  all  agents  contrary  to  Group  6.

422.  8 .      Agents  producing  harshness  of  the  body.

.  A  medicinal  agent  may  render  the  body  harsh  by  its  sharpness 
(acidity),  like  vinegar  and  acetous  waste  matters  ;  or  by  dispersion 
(like  halcyonium= coral)  and  acrid  waste  matters  ;  or  by  styptic 
action  (which  produces  roughness  because  'it  is  dry  ;  ex.  :  bitter 
substances).

Infrigidants  have  this  effect,  by  inspissation.

Terrene  substances  sprinkled  over  a  limb  like  a  dusting-powder 
may  exert  such  an  effect.

423.  9.     Mollificants.

(Fatty  or)  glutinous  substances  act  in  virtue  of  their  viscidity  ; 
agents  which  mildly  disperse  the  humours  by  attenuating  them! 
cause  them  to  flow,  whilst  at  the  same  time  they  carry  off  the  dense 
particles  of  matter  in  the  apertures  on  the  surface  of  the  member.

244  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

424.  io.      Agents  which  produce  displacements  and  luxations.244  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

424.  io.      Agents  which  produce  displacements  and  luxations.

Displacements  of  parts  are  produced  (i)  by  extension — a  force 
dragging  on  the  member  and  pulling  upon  it  until  it  is  dislocated  ; 
(2)  by  some  unexpected  violent  movement,  aided  by  the  throwing 
of  the  whole  weight  of  the  body  upon  the  member  (e.g.  luxation  of 
the  foot)  ;  (3)  by  some  laxity  or  moistness  in  a  part.  This  happens 
in  tearing,  in  corrosion,  or  septic  change  or  destruction  of  the  sub- 
stance of  a  ligament  or  nerve — e.g.  in  elephantiasis,  sciatica.

425.  1 1 .     Agents    ,  which    prevent    parts     from     becoming

apposed. 
Here  belong — congenital  factors  ;    grossness  ;    viscosity  ;    loose- 
ness of  joints  ;    dryness  of  humour  in  a  joint ;    spasm  ;    ulcers  which 
are  only  partially  healed  ;     calculus.

426.  12.      Agents  which  prevent  parts  from  expanding.

Here  belong — congenital  factors,  coarseness,  spasm,  cicatrisation 
after  healing  of  ulcers.

427.  13.      The  causes  of  abnormal  movements.

(1)  Dry  intemperament  may  cause  weakness  (e.g.  dry  tremor) 
or  spasm  (e.g.  dry  hiccoughs,  or  spasm).  (2)  Effete  matters  which 
heat,  or  cool  the  surfaces  of  the  muscles.  (3)  Interception  of  the 
power  which  should  have  access  to  a  member  owing  to  some  form  of 
obstruction.  (4)  Nocumental  effete  matter  acting  in  virtue  of  its 
coldness  (e.g.  rigor),  or  in  virtue  of  pricking  property  (e.g.  shivering), 
or  in  virtue  of  interference  with  the  innate  heat,  making  it  either 
scanty  or  submerged,  so  that  the  surfaces  of  the  muscles  become  cold, 
and  gaseous  matter  forms  which  seeks  to  be  dispersed  or  expelled. 
(Ex.  :   jerkiness,  jactitation.)In  such  nocumental  matter,  further,  gaseous  matter  may  be 
deficient.  This  gives  rise  to  the  desire  to  stretch  oneself.  Or, 
gaseous  matter  may  be  in  excess  ;  and  in  this  case,  if  the  matter  be 
quiescent,  one  form  of  lassitude  arises  ;  if  the  matter  be  mobile, 
other  forms  of  lassitude  will  arise,  which  we  shall  describe  later  (821). 
If  the  nocumental  character  of  the  matter  be  more  decided,  shivering 
ensues.  If  very  strong,  rigors  and  spasmodic  contractions  come  on. 
Should  such  matter  which  is  held  back  in  the  muscles  be  gaseous, 
jactitation  or  pulsatile  movements  arise.

428.    14.      Causes  of  increase  in  size  of  body.

Abundant  supply  of  aliments ;  great  vigour  of  attractive 
faculties  acided  or  not  by  friction  or  by  calefacient  plasters  (e.g. 
plaster  of  pitch  and  the  like).  A  powerful  formative  faculty  will 
increase  both  the  size  and  the  number  of  tissue-components  :  e.g. 
proud  flesh,  supernumerary  fingers.  If  pathological  material*  be 
formed,  tumours,  ganglia,  "  atheromas,"  steatomas,  and  warts  will 
form.     (Costaeus,   quoting  Galen.)

~Y

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

H5

15.      Causes  of  numerical  decrease.

(1)  Congenital:  matter*  lessened  in  amount;  faulty  or  defective 
formative  power.  (2)  Acquired  :  lack  of  nutrition  during  lactation 
or  later  ;  direct  injury — cutting  wounds,  blows,  mechanical  destruc- 
tion of  tissue  ;  frostbite  ;  internal  causes — eroding  ulcers,  septic 
processes.

429.    16.      Causes  of  loss  of  continuity.429.    16.      Causes  of  loss  of  continuity.

(1)  Intrinsic  :  Pathological  body-fluids,  having  a  consuming, 
burning,  moistening,  relaxing,  drying  or  cleaving  action.  Fluids 
which  pierce  and  force  themselves  into  tissues  and  stretch  them  apart. 
Gaseous  matters  also  may  force  their  way  into,  and  stretch,  tissues. 
In  each  of  these  cases,  the  effect  produced  depends  on  (a)  the  force 
of  movement,  (b)  the  abundance  of  the  fluid  or  gas,  (c)  the  greatness 
of  the  expulsive  power.

Similar  in  action  to  these  are  :  vociferation,  leaping  exercises  ; 
opening  of  abscesses.

(2)  Exterior.  Traction  by  a  rope  or  weight ;  incision  by  a 
sword  ;  burning  by  fire  ;  contusion  by  a  stone  ;  rupture  of  a  sac 
by  contusion  ;  perforation  by  an  arrow  ;  punctured  wounds  (scorpion 
wounds)  ;    bites  by  a  mad  dog,  a  viper,  or  a  human  being.

430„    17.     Agents  producing  ulceration.

The  rupture  of  an  inflammatory  mass  ;  of  a  pustule  ;  of  an 
abscess.     The  bursting  out  of  an  ulcer.

431.    18.      The  causes  of  inflammatory  swellings.

Causes  relative  to  the  material  in  a  member  :  superabundance 
of  the  four  humours  ;    aquosity  ;    gaseous  matter.431.    18.      The  causes  of  inflammatory  swellings.

Causes  relative  to  the  material  in  a  member  :  superabundance 
of  the  four  humours  ;    aquosity  ;    gaseous  matter.

Causes  in  regard  to  the  condition  of  a  member.  (1)  Expulsive 
power.  (2)  Weak  retentive  faculty,  which  disposes  it  towards  har- 
bouring waste  matters.  This  varies  with  (a)  the  nature  of  the  organ 
or  tissue  (e.g.  the  skin  is  so  created)  ;  (b)  the  texture  of  the  member 
(the  looseness  of  the  flesh  behind  the  ears,  in  the  neck,  axilla,  and 
groin  is  favourable — -to  deposition  of  matter)  ;  (c)  the  width  of  the 
passages  and  orifices — too  great  and  too  narrow  respectively  ; 
(d)  low  position  of  outlet ;  (e)  small  outlet,  so  that  the  food  residues 
cannot  get  away.  Some  nocument  may  impair  the  power  to  digest 
the  food  material  coming  to  the  part.  Blows  may  cause  the  matter 
to  be  retained  in  a  member.  Lack  of  exercise  may  prevent  matters 
from  being  dispersed  as  they  usually  would  be.  Too  much  heat 
in  a  particular  region  may  attract  inflammatory  processes — whether 
it  be  the  natural  heat  of  the  flesh  or  an  unnatural  heat  (causing  pain) 
or  heat  produced  by  excessive  exercise,  or  by  some  calefacient  agent.

Inflammation  may  follow  fracture,  if  the  limb  has  also  been 
contused  or  crushed  or  stretched  when  setting  the  bone-ends.

*  i.e.,  humours.

246

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Inflammations  often  occur  in  connection  with  the  teeth,  as  food 
may  collect  in  them,  undergo  infusion,  and  so  become  putrefied. 
This  may  lead  to  an  abscess.

19-26.      The  subject  of  pai.

ain.

These  separate  Chapters  are  here  gathered  into  one,  with  the  following  sub- 
divisions' : —

General  discussion  of  the  causes  of  pain.

Theory  of  the  nature  of  pain.ain.

These  separate  Chapters  are  here  gathered  into  one,  with  the  following  sub- 
divisions' : —

General  discussion  of  the  causes  of  pain.

Theory  of  the  nature  of  pain.

List  of  the  types  of  pain,  and  the  explanation  of  each.

Agents  which  alleviate  pain.

The  effect  of  pain  on  the  body.

The  causes  of  pleasurable  sensations.

How  movement  brings  on  pain.

How  depraved  humours  evoke  pain.

How  gaseous  substances  produce  pain.

1.

ii.

iii.

iv.

v.

vi.

vii.

viii.

ix.

432.    General  discussion  of  the  causes  of  pain.

AIN  is  one  of  the  unnatural  states  to  which  the 
animal  body  (as  a  sensitive  and  living  thing)  is 
liable.  We  begin  with  a  general  discourse 
about  it.

Pain  is  sensation  produced  by  something 
contrary  to  the  course  of  nature,  and  this 
sensation  is  set  up  by  one  of  two  circumstances 
(a)  a  very  sudden  change  of  the  temperament  ;  or  the  _  bad 
effect  of  a  contrary  temperament,  (b)  a  solution  of  continuity.In  saying  "  the  bad  effect  of  a  contrary  temperament  "  we 
mean  :  the  substance  of  the  members  of  the  body  has  a  constant 
temperament,    and    then    a    foreign    temperament    of   contrary 
character  (hotter  or  colder)  supervenes.     The  sensitive  faculties 
become  aware  of  the  change  ;   this  is  "  pain."     The  law  is  that 
there  is  no  pain  save  as  the  sensation  of  contrariety  produced  by  a 
contrary  thing.     A  temperament  which  is  constantly  unhealthy 
does  not  produce  pain,  or  arouse  any  sensation.     That  is  to  say, 
if  the  temperament  residing  in  the  substance  of  the  members  is 
bad,  it  destroys  the  original  temperament  so  that  the  member  is 
as  if  it  had  always  had  this  unhealthy  temperament  ;  consequently 
it  neither  produces  pain  nor  is  aware  of  it.     The  reason  is  that 
before  sensation  can  occur,  the  sense  organ  must  become  affected 
by  that  which  is  sensed.     But  in  this  case  the  condition  persists. 
There  is  no  change.     So  there  is  no  pain.     Suffering  will  only 
occur  if  some  contrary  enters  which,  is  able  to  alter  the  tempera- 
ment to  one  not  previously  present.

That  is  why  a  person  suffering  from  hectic  fever  does  not 
suffer  as  much  as  one  who  has  a  one-day  or  a  tertian  fever,  despite

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  247

the  fact  that  the  heat  of  the  first  is  greater  than  that  of  the  others. 
In  the  case  of  hectic  fever  the  heat  is  persistent  and  situated  in  the 
substance  of  the  principal  members  ;  in  the  case  of  tertian,  the 
heat  comes  from  a  hot  humour,  and  so  reaches  those  members 
which  retain  their  natural  temperament.  Should  the  humour 
recede,  the  natural  temperament  will  continue  in  the  member,  the 
heat  not  being  fixed  in  it  unless  the  fever  become  hectic.No  inequable  intemperament  persists  in  a  member  except 
according  to  a  certain  rule.  Such  a  state  may  arise  during  the 
best  of  health.  Thus,  should  a  person  plunge  into  a  bath  in 
winter,  and  lave  himself  with  tepid  water,  he  would  shiver  ; 
which  shows  that  it  is  harmful.  For  the  primary  quality  of  the 
body  is  far  from  that  of  the  water,  and  indeed  contrary.  After- 
wards, however,  it  is  beneficial  and  produces  subjective  satisfac- 
tion. The  cold  influence  lessens  step  by  step  until  no  longer 
evident  to  the  senses.

But  suppose  the  person  were  to  sit  in  the  bath-house 
another  hour,  the  water  would  make  his  body  hotter.  And  yet  in 
spite  of  that,  if  this  same  tepid  water  of  the  above  bath  were 
suddenly  thrown  over  him  unexpectedly,  shivering  would  result 
and  the  water  would  seem  cold  to  him.

If  we  study  such  things  carefully,  it  will  be  clear  that  though 
unhealthy  inequable  intemperaments  form  one  of  the  groups  of 
causes  of  pain,  yet  not  every  one  of  such  intemperaments  actually 
does  so.  A  hot  temperament  is  in  itself  able  to  cause  pain,  and 
so  can  a  cold  one  ;  but  a  dry  temperament  causes  pain  only 
secondarily,  and  a  moist  one  is  painless.  For  heat  and  cold  are 
both  active  qualities  ;  dryness  and  moisture  are  passive.  So  that 
in  one  case  the  impression  on  the  body  is  active,  in  the  other  it  is 
passive.

Dryness  is  a  cause  of  pain  secondarily,  if  another  kind  of  ■ 
agent  comes  into  play,  as  e.g.,  loss  of  continuity.     Dryness  itself 
may  be  a  cause  of  loss  of  continuity,  in  virtue  of  its  power  of 
producing  great  constriction  of  a  channel.433.  Theory  of  the  nature  of /pain.  According  to  Galen,  all 
this  can  be  reduced  to  the  one  essential  thing — loss  of  continuity 
and  nothing  more.  A  hot  thing  only  causes  pain  by  breaking 
continuity  of  a  part  ;  a  cold  thing  also  only  causes  pain  by 
breaking  the  continuity  of  function  or  of  a  part  ;  it  exerts  such  an 
astringent  and  aggregating  effect  that  the  particles  are  drawn 
together  towards  a  certain  place  and  agglutinated  ;  and,  in 
consequence  separated  off  from  their  surroundings.  In  some  of 
his  writings,  he  seems  to  hold  the  opinion  that  all  sensibles  are

248  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

deleterious  from  the  very  fact  that  in  order  to  experience  a 
sensation  there  must  be  a  cleavage  of  particles  one  from  another- 
agglutination  of  some  entailing  cleavage  of  others  ; ;  the  fact  o 
cleavage  accounting  for  the  sensation  called  pain.  A  black 
obiect  which  gives  a  painful  impression  to  the  sense  of  sight  does 
so  because  its  blackness  is  due  to  an  extremely  close  aggregation 
of  particles  ;    whiteness  is  due  to  the  particles  being  widely

A  bitter,  salt,  or  sour  thing,  which  gives  a  painful  impression 
to  the  sense  of  taste,  does  so  because  such  things  produce  vigorous 
dispersion  of  particles.  Pungent  things  do  so  because  they 
aggregate  ver/vigorously,  and  are  therefore  no  doubt  followed 
bl  dispersion.  So  too,  with  odours  ;  and  sounds-where  the 
movement  of  the  air  impinging  in  the  external  auditory  meatus 
gives  rise  to  a  painful  sensation.  _  .To  explain  it  according  to  my  own  view  :— It  is  the  trans- 
mutation of  the  temperament  of  a  part  which  determines  the 
presence  of,  and  the  kind  of,  pain  lft^g  *^^^ 
there  is  loss  of  continuity  or  not.  This  is  best  proved  by  Natural 
Science,  but  the  following  brief  explanation  may  be  given  here. 
We  mav  therefore  say  : —

Pain  occurs  in  a  member  which  is  of  homogeneous  structure. 
Solution  of  continuity  cannot  occur  except  in  members  wh^W 
not  of  homogeneous  structure.  Pain  occurs  in  states  of  the  body 
where  there  is  no  loss  of  continuity  of  particles.  Hence  loss  .f 
continuity  is  not  a  condition  on  which  the  appearance  of  pain 
depends.  An  intemperament  will  produce  it.  Cold  produces 
pain  if  it  constricts  and  agglutinates  particles,  and  the  part  is 
cold  throughout  its  substance  ;  solution  of  continuity  does  not 
occur  at  the  site  of  infrigidation  but  at  the  distal  parts  of the 
infrigidated  places.  Again,  pain  is  the  sensation  of  a  sudden 
impression  by  the  contrary  qualities.  It  is  the  fact  that  they  are 
contrary,  that  accounts  for  the  pain.  .  ,,

Does  one  not  observe  how  a  person  who  experiences  cold  to 
a  degree  enough  to  alter  the  temperament  will  sense  thechange 
in  his  temperament  and  also  feel  pain  without  there  being  any 
question  of  loss  of  continuity?  where  indeed  such  a  loss  is 
impossible  ?  It  is  clear  then  that  a  sudden  change  of  tempera- 
ment will  cause  pain  just  as  loss  of  continuity  does  Pain 
Souses  heat,  and  affects  the  innate  heat,  and  this  makes  the  pain 
greater^still.^  ^  ^.^  ^  f  g  &  s        thing

which  provokes  the  sensation  of  pain.     But  it  is  not  really  pain.

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  249

It  is  a  sum-total  of  .things  which  are  undergoing  spontaneous 
breakdown.which  provokes  the  sensation  of  pain.     But  it  is  not  really  pain.

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  249

It  is  a  sum-total  of  .things  which  are  undergoing  spontaneous 
breakdown.

A  doctor  ignorant  of  all  this,  and  striving  to  relieve  the  pain, 
may  make  wonderful  mistakes,  and  fail  in  his  object.

434.  List  of  the  types  of  pain  and  the  explanation  of  each. 
There  are  fifteen  kinds  of  pain*  (rearranged  alphabetically)  :

I.

Boring

6.

Heavy  pain.

11.

Relaxing.

2.

Compressing.

7-

Incisive.

12.

Stabbing.

3-

Corrosive.

8.

Irritant.

*3-

Tearing.

4-

Dull.

9-

Itching.

14.

Tension.

5-

Fatigue-pain.

10.

Pricking.  '

i5-

Throbbing

1.  Boring  pain.  The  cause  of  this  pain  is  the  retention 
of  gross  matter  or  of  gas  between  the  tunics  of  a  hard  and  gross 
member  (e.g.,  the  colon)  and  so  continually  goading  it  and 
tearing  its  parts  asunder,  boring  into  the  interstices  like  a 
gimlet.

2.  The  pain  of  compression.  This  is  produced  by  fluid  or 
gas,  when  it  is  confined  in  too  small  a  space  in  a  member,  and  so 
compresses  or  squeezes  the  tissues.

3.  Corrosive  pain  proceeds  from  the  presence  of  material 
between  the  muscle-fibres  and  their  sheaths,  stretching  it  till  it 
breaks  not  only  the  continuity  of  the  membrane,  but  also  that  of 
the  muscle  therewith.

■  4.  Dull  pain.  The  cause  is  threefold  :  (1)  the  tempera- 
ment may  be  too  cold  ;  (2)  occlusion  of  the  pores  so  that  the 
breath  (of  the  sensitive  faculties)  which  should  come  to  the 
member  cannot  do  so  ;  (3)  overfulness  of  the  (locular  spaces  or) 
cavities.5.  Fatigue-pain.  This  is  produced  (1)  by  undue  toil — 
laborious  toil,  (2)  by  a  humour  which  produces  tension  (in 
tensive  lassitude),  (3)  by  a  gaseous  substance  which  produces 
inflative  lassitude,  (4)  a  humour  of  biting  properties  (ulcerative 
lassitude).  These  pains  may  arise  out  of  various  composite 
states,    as    has   already    been    stated  in   the   appropriate  places.

*  In  regard  to  the  kinds  of  pain,  it  is  of  interest  here  to  recall  the  eight  hinds 
of  pain  inherent  in  hiiman  lije,  given  in  the  Nirvana  Sutra  :  (i)  Birth  pangs  (Shoku  : 
Japanese;  jatir-duhkham  :  Sanskrit);  (2)  The  pains  of  age  (Roku  :  jara-duhkham)  ; 
(3)  The  pains  of  disease  (Byoku  ;  vyadhi-duhkham)  ;  (4)  The  pain  of  death  (Shiku  ; 
marana-duhkham)  ;  (5)  The  pain  of  parting  with  loved  ones  or  things  (Aibetsuriku ; 
priyaviprayoge-duhkham) ;  (6)  The  pain  of  meeting  with  what  one  dislikes  (Onzoeku  ; 
apriya  samprayoge-d)  ;  (7)  The  pain  of  not  obtaining  what  one  seeks  (Gufutokku)  ; 
(8)  The  pain  of  the  five  elements  ;  that  is,  the  body  itself  produces  pain  (Goonjoku). 
(The  Sanskrit  of  the  last  two  terms  is  length}'). — Ishizuka's  notes  to  Honen.  " 
p.  446.

25o  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Lassitude  as  a  result  of  several  combined  states,  is  called  in 
flammatory    lassitude,    which   is    a    composite    of  tensive   and 
ulcerative  lassitude  (see  824). -Lassitude  as  a  result  of  several  combined  states,  is  called  in 
flammatory    lassitude,    which   is    a    composite    of  tensive   and 
ulcerative  lassitude  (see  824). -

6.  Heavy  pain.  In  this  case  there  is  an  inflammatory 
process  in  an  insensitive  member  such  as  the  lung,  the  kidney  or 
spleen.  The  weight  of  the  inflammatory  deposit  drags  on  the 
tissues  and  surrounding  sentient  fascia  and  on  its  point  of 
attachment.  As  the  member  is  dragged  on,  the  fascia  and  its 
point  of  attachment  experience  the  sensation.  The  cause_  of 
the  Dain  may  be  that  a  sentient  member  has  had  its  sensation 
destroyed  bv  the  disease,  so  that  the  weight  is  felt,  but  actual 
pain  cannot' be  felt  any  longer  (e.g.,  cancer  at  the  mouth  of  the

stomach).  .

7.  Incisive  pain.     This  proceeds  from  a  humour  or  sour

quality.  .  -

8.  Irritant  pain.  This  is  produced  by  a  certain  type  ot 
change  in  the  humours  (harshness,  roughness).

9.  Itching  pain.    This  is  produced  when  a  humour  is  acrid,

sharp,  or  salt.  .

10.  Pricking  pain.  The  agent  producing  this  is  material 
similar  to  that  which  causes  boring  pain  ;  it  is  retained  in  an 
organ  of  similar  type  (to  that  which  is  the  seat  of  boring  pain) 
for  a  time  and  then  ruptures  it.  1    •       •

1 1 .  Relaxing  pain  proceeds  from  matters  accumulating  in 
and  stretching  the  belly  of  a  muscle— not  its  tendon.  It  is  only 
called  relaxing  if  the  belly  of  the  muscle  is  more  lax  than  the 
nerve,  tendon,  or  enveloping  membrane.12.  Stabbing  pain.  This  is  the  result  of  transverse 
stretching  in  membranes,  as  if  their  continuity  were  being 
separated,  by  a  humour.  It  may  be  an  equal  or  an  mequal 
sensation.  In  the  former  case,  all  the  members  of  the  body  are 
uniformly  affected.  In  the  latter  case,  there  are  four  possibilities  : 
(1)  Inequality  in  hardness  or  softness  between  the  tissue  with 
which  the  membrane  is  covered  and  the  membrane  itself.  Ex. : 
the  clavicle  or  costal  pleura  ;  in  a  case  of  inflammatory  process 
travelling  from  the  pleura  towards  the  upper  parts  of  the  chest, 
the  pain  is  felt  in  the  collar-bone,  (ii)  Inequality  of  movement 
of  the  component  parts  (e.g.,  the  diaphragm  and  the  p  eura  or 
peritoneum  over  it),  (iii)  Inequality  of  nature  between  the  parts 
and  the  member,  (iv)  Unequal  distribution  of  nocument  among 
the  parts  and  the  member  affected,  in  that  it  affects  one  and  not

another.  .  .  .  c

13.  Tearing  pain.     Proceeds   from   the   interposition   ot

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  251

humour  or  gas  between  bone  and  periosteum,  or  from  cold  which 
strongly  constricts  the  periosteum.

14.  Tension  pain.  This  is  produced  by  a  humour  or  gas 
stretching  the  nerve-fibres  or  muscle  fibres  asunder.

15.  Throbbing  pain.  The  cause  is  a  hot  inflammatory 
process.  A  cold  inflammatory  process,  of  whatever  type,  is  either 
hard  or  soft,  but  sets  up  no  pain  unless  it  changes  into  a  hot 
inflammation.  Throbbing  pain  arises  in  a  hot  inflammatory 
process  if  the  adjoining  member  is  sentient,  and  has  pulsating 
arteries  round  it.  A  member  which  is  healthy  does  not  sense 
their  movement,  because  they  are  deeply  situated,  but  their 
pulsation  sets  up  pain  as  soon  as  an  inflammation  arises  in  the 
member.435.  Agents  which  alleviate  pain.  There  are  three  groups 
of  agents  which  alleviate  pain  :  (1)  Some  contrary  to  the  cause  of 
pain — which  removes  the  cause.  Ex.  :  anethum,  linseed,  made 
into  a  poultice  and  applied  over  the  painful  place.  (2)  Any 
agent  which  counteracts  the  acrimony  of  the  humours,  or  soothes, 
induces  sleep,  or  dulls  or  soothes  the  sensitive  faculties  and 
lessens  their  activity.  Ex.  :  inebriants,  milk,  oil,  aqua  dulcis, 
etc.  (3)  An  agent  which  infrigi dates  and  dulls  the  sensation  in 
the  painful  part.  Ex.  :  all  narcotics  and  somniferous  drugs. 
The  first  of  the  three  is  the  most  certain.

This  subject  is  referred  to  again  at  the  end  of  Part  IV.

436.  The  effect  of  pain  on  the  body.  Pain  dissipates  the 
bodily  strength  and  interferes  with  the  normal  functions  of  the 
organs.  The  respiratory  organs  are  inhibited  from  drawing  the 
air  in,  and  consequently  the  act  of  breathing  is  interfered  with, 
and  the  respiration  becomes  intermittent,  or  rapid,  or  altogether 
unnatural  in  rhythm.

The  organs  are  first  made  hot,  then  cold  ;  this  is  because 
some  of  the  breath  and  vitality  is  dispersed  and  escapes.

437.  The  causes  of  pleasurable  sensations.  The  agents  which 
produce  pleasurable  sensations  fall  into  two  groups.  (1)  Where 
an  intemperament  suddenly  becomes  equable  and  the  senses 
become_  aware  of  the  change.  (2)  Where  there  is  a  sudden 
restoration  of  the  natural  continuity.Sensation  depends  on  sudden  change,  whether  painful  or 
pleasurable.  Pleasurable  sensation  is  to  sense  harmoniously  ; 
and  this  act  of  sensation  is  performed  by  the  sensitive  faculties. 
It  is  a  passive  act.  One  experiences  pleasure  or  pain  according 
as  the  sensation  is  harmonious  or  disharmonious.  The  fact  that 
the  sense  of  touch  is  the  most  elementary  (crude)  of  all  these

252  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

senses  accounts  for  it  retaining  the  harmonious  or  disharmonious 
impress  longer.  When  that  which  comes  to  the  sense  of  touch 
is  harmonious  with  nature,  the  pleasurable  sensation  is  greater  ; 
and  if  the  agent  is  disharmonious,  the  painftd  sensation  is  greater 
than  would  be  the  case  with  the  other  faculties.

438.  How  movement  brings  on  pain.  Movement  and 
exercise  induce  pain  when  nerves  are  stretched  thereby,  or  when 
muscles  become  contused  or  lacerated  thereby.

439.  How  depraved  humours  evoke  pain.  Depraved 
humours"  evoke  pain  either  by  reason  of  their  qualities  (for 
instance,  acridity),  or  by  reason  of  their  being  abundant  (thereby 
stretching  the  fibres  of  a  tissue  of  making  the  organ  heavy)  ;  or 
for  both  reasons  together.

440.  How  gaseous  substances  produce  pain.  Accumulations 
of  gas  may  become  painful  when  they  cause  a  part  to  be  greatly 
distended.  Gases  may  accumulate  in  (a)  hollow  viscera  (e.g.,  m 
the  stomach  :  gastrectasis)  ;  (b)  the  membranes  over  organs,  or 
nerves  (e.g.,  colicky  pain  from  stretching  of  the  nerves  of  the 
intestinal  wall)  ;  (c)  the  sheaths  of  muscles,  serous  membranes, 
or  periosteum  ;  (d)  the  subcutaneous  tissues  (the  place  between 
the  muscles  and  the  loose  fascia  or  skin);  (e)  internal  members 
(e.g.,  the  muscles  of  the  thorax).  _Gas  may  be  dispersed  rapidly,  or  only  after  a  time.  This 
depends  on  the  amount,  and  whether  coarse  or  fine,  and  whether 
the  member  itself  is  dense  or  rarefied  in  structure.

27.     Agents  which  bring  about  Retention  or  Discharge.

441.  It  is  easy  to  know  the  causes  of  retention  or  discharge 
if  one  ponders  well  over  what  has  already  been  said  about  reten- 
tions and  evacuations.  The  reader  should  therefore  turn  back 
and  carefully  re-read  what  has  been  written  about  it.

28.     The  Causes  of  Over-Repletion  (Plethora).

Plethora.—  '  Passive  congestion  "  is  over-repletion  with  blood  ;  it  is  associated 
with  stasis.— "  Active  congestion"  is  the  equivalent  of  waram,  _  apostema.  — 
Oedema  is  over-repletion  with  lymph  (serous  humour)  ;  it  is  associated  with. stasis 
in  the  lymphatic  channels  or  serous  cavities.  The  practical  result  is  that  the  chan- 
nels cannot  drain  or  empty  within  the  available  time.— Hypertension  is  a  form  of 
plethora.— Corpulence  is  over-repletion  with  fat,  namely  in  the  connective-tissue 
spaces.  One  practical  result  of  this  is  that  supervening  disease  produces  greater 
affliction  than  otherwise,  as  was  written  in  the  Charaka-  (i.  236)  .-Plethora  of  the 
connective  tissue  spaces  with  a  mucoid  change  m  the  fluid  may  produce  the  appear- 
ance of  obesity.  This  peculiar  change  is  met  with  in  the  female  sex  ;  it  fluctuates 
in  degree  from  time  to  time,  and  may  appear  or  disappear  within  a  few  days.

Intestinal  stasis  is  over-repietion  of  the  large  intestine.  -,,+,,+

It'  may  be  noted  that  the  effect  of  stasis  anywhere  is  to  interfere  with  that

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  253It'  may  be  noted  that  the  effect  of  stasis  anywhere  is  to  interfere  with  that

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  253

flow  of  breath  which  is  essential  to  health,  or  even  life.  The  breath  is  "  choked  " 
or  "  strangled."  The  faculties  are  also  at  a  disadvantage,  for  their  free  operation 
is  conditional  on  free  flow  of  breath  through  aU  parts  of  the  body  —In  modern 
terms,  oxidative  processes  are  retarded  or  arrested.

442.      The  causes  are  extrinsic  and  intrinsic.

1.  Extrinsic  (primitive),  (a)  A  dietary  (fluids  as  well  as 
solids)  which  gives  rise  to  much  moisture  beyond  the  heeds  of  the 
body  ;  matter  accumulates  in  the  body,  and  interferes  with  the 
action  of  the  emunctories.  (3)  Taking  baths  frequently,  especially 
after  meals,  (c)  Repose  ;  ceasing  to  take  exercise  ;  ceasing  to 
secure  the  usual  evacuations.  These  prevent  the  resolution  of 
material  in  the  body,  (d)  Improprieties  in  eating  and  drinking  ; 
depraved  regimen.

2 .  Intrinsic,  (i)  Lack  of  digestive  power,  so  that  the  aliments 
are  not  completely  utilized,  (ii)  Feebleness  of  expulsive  faculty, 
(iii)  Undue  vigour  of  retentive  faculty,  so  that  humours  are 
caused  to  linger  in  the  body,  (iv)  Narrowing  of  the  excretory 
channels.

29.      The  Causes  of  Asthenia  and  Debility  of  a  Member.

443.  Weakness  may  affect  (i)  the  body  of  the  member 
itself  ;  (ii)  the  breath,  which  conveys  power  to  it  ;  (iii)  the  faculty 
of  the  member.443.  Weakness  may  affect  (i)  the  body  of  the  member 
itself  ;  (ii)  the  breath,  which  conveys  power  to  it  ;  (iii)  the  faculty 
of  the  member.

(i)  The  following  produce  weakness  in  the  member  itself : 
{a)  A  persisting  intemperament,  especially  a  cold  one. 
For  even  though  the  member  receive  some  heat,  the  cold  in- 
temperament produces  an  effect  like  stupor  in  it,  because  it 
breaks  up  the  temperament  of  the  breath— just  as  happens  when 
a  person  stays  too  long  in  the  bath,  and  especially  when  such  a 
procedure  brings  on  syncope.  A  dry  intemperament  has  an 
inspissating  effect,  and  acts  by  preventing  the  faculties  from 
functioning  in  the  member.  A  moist  intemperament  relaxes  and 
obstructs.

(b)  One  or  other  of  the  composite  diseases.

(c)  The  most  important  in  all-in  man)  is  neither  nocument, 
nor  malady,  nor  pain.  It  is  an  attenuation  of  texture  in  the  peri- 
pheral nerve-fibres  of  the  member,  for  both  vegetative  and 
voluntary  actions  depend  for  their  achievement  on° these  fibres 
in  all  their  ramifications.  The  retentive  power  which  is  necessary 
to  secure  efficient  digestion  depends  on  the  condition  of  these 
fibres  in  the  stomach.

(ii)  Weakness  of  the  breath  itself.  This  will  occur  if  it  be  of 
bad  temperament.     There  may  also  be  dissipation  of  the  breath,

254  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

after  an  evacuation  corresponding.      It  is  also  weakened  by  an 
abnormal  mode  of  depletipn.

(iii)  Weakness  of  the  faculty.  This  depends  on  the  number 
of  actions  and  the  number  of  times  they  are  repeated.  The  breath 
is  dispersed  at  the  same  time.  Moreover  loss  of  breath  accom- 
panies every  agent  which  produces  asthenia.444.  The  causes  of  asthenia  may  be  classified  in  another 
way,  so  as  to  include  the  remote  causes  with  them — the  causes 
of  causes.  We  then  consider  (i)  causes  of  intemperament  ; 
(ii)  causes  arising  from  decomposition  changes  in  the  air,  in 
water,  and  in  the  aliment  •  (iii)  causes  which  cause  the  breath  to 
escape,  or  become  confused,  or,  as  it  were,  shaken  up.  Nothing 
disturbs  the  breath,  or  causes  it  to  escape  as  effectively  as  does  a 
bad  smell,  such  as  the  fetor  from  putrid  water,  or  the  presence 
of  poisonous  vapours  in  the  air,  or  in  the  body.  [Under  such 
circumstances,  the  instinctive  action  is  immediately  to  "  hold  the 
breath."]

445.  Evacuations  as  a  cause  of  weakness.  For  instance,  loss 
of  blood  ;  diarrhoea,  especially  of  thin  attenuated  fluid  ;  the 
sudden  withdrawal  of  copious  dropsical  effusions  by  paracentesis  ; 
the  opening  of  a  large  abscess  with  sudden-  withdrawal  of  much 
pus — whether  the  opening  is  by  nature  or  by  surgical  inter- 
ference ;   excessive  sweating  ;   severe  exercise.

446.  Severe  fain  disperses  the  breath  and  may  alter  its 
temperament.  The  chief  kind  of  pain  likely  to  have  this  effect  is 
that  from  distension,  or  incisive  pain — especially  in  the  pit  of 
the  stomach.  Any  pain  in  the  region  of  the  heart  will  disperse 
the  breath.

447.  Fevers  should  also  be  included  among  the  causes  of 
asthenia.  They  act  either  by  dispersing  the  breath,  or  by  loss  of 
blood,  or  through  producing  a  change  of  temperament.

448.  Widening  of  the  pores  often  aids  in  producing 
asthenia.     Long  continued  semi-starvation  has  the  same  effect.448.  Widening  of  the  pores  often  aids  in  producing 
asthenia.     Long  continued  semi-starvation  has  the  same  effect.

449.  Weakness  in  one  member  or  in  a  part  of  a  member 
may  cause  weakness  of  the  whole  body,  as  is  seen  in  the  case  of 
defective  function  of  the  cardiac  orifice  of  the  stomach,  which 
produces  general  weakness  of  the  body.  Or,  if  a  person  suffers 
severely  from  some  cardiac  or  cerebral  trouble,  shortness  of 
breath  rapidly  supervenes  on  very  slight  provocation.

450.  Further,  a  cause  of  weakness  may  be  that  one  has 
endured  many  illnesses.

451.  When  one  member  is  weaker  than  another  from 
birth,  or  when  it  is  by  nature  weaker  in  itself  (e.g.,  the  lung,  or

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

255

brain),  then  it  is  receptive  for  matters  which  the  stronger  mem- 
bers reject  or  discard,  or  eliminate.  The  brain  would  suffer  in 
this  way  were  it  not  for  its  position,  whereby  nothing  comes  to  it 
which  it  cannot  tolerate,  even  its  virtues  cannot  persist  there.

END     OF     THESIS     II.

C.     Retributive  or  Expiative   Causes  of  Disease.END     OF     THESIS     II.

C.     Retributive  or  Expiative   Causes  of  Disease.

§  201.  The  idea  that  illnesses  were  a  form  of  "  judgment  "  or 
punishment,  or  retribution  for  misdeeds,  was  formerly  widespread, 
but  is  not  regarded  seriously  in  modern  Medicine.  In  the  case  of  all 
peoples  who  hold  the  Buddhist  belief  in  karma,  this  ancient  idea 
holds_  good  because  every  event,  good  or  bad,  in  the  individual  life 
is  believed  to  be  the  outcome  of  events  in  a  past  life — whether  in  this 
particular  existence  or  in  a  previous  incarnation.  Wherever  the 
theosophical  teachings  hold,  the  same  view  would  be  held.  Moreover, 
in  Islam  there  is  no  difficulty  in  the  idea  because  "  there  is  no  second 
cause,"  and  as  is  written  in  the  Mesnavi,  in  speaking  of  Izrail,  the 
angel  of  death,  God  is  said  to  "  operate  by  disease  and  sickness,  and 
men  will  not  look  for  any  cause  beyond  these  diseases  " — in  virtue  of 
the  truth  of  text  (Quran  56,  84)  "  He  is  nearer  to  you  than  ye  are  ; 
yet  ye  see  Him  not."

Ghazzali,  in  his  "  Alchemy  of  Happiness  "  says  :  "illness  is,  so  to  speak,  a 
cord  of  love  by  which  God  draws  to  Himself  the  saints  concerning  whom  He  has 
said,  '  I  was  sick  and  ye  visited  Me  not.'  Illness  itself  is  one  of  those  forms  of 
experience  by  which  man  arrives  at  the  knowledge  of  God.  As  He  says  '  sick- 
nesses themselves  are  My  servants,  and  are  attached  to  My  chosen.'  "During  mediaeval  Christian  times  pandemics  were  regarded  as 
the  manifestations  of  divine  wrath,  and  the  incidence  of  illnesses  is 
sometimes  still  explained  in  similar  terms  in  modern  Christianity,  the 
microbic  and  other  tangible  causes  of  disease  being  taken  simply  as 
the  instruments  whereby  the  event  is  achieved.     (Cf.  §  113.)

As  in  the  case  of  the  idea  of  "  fate  "  and  "  destiny,"  the  subject 
is  apt  to  be  viewed  incorrectly.  Illnesses  are  sometimes  evident 
warnings  ;  sometimes  they  belong  to  the  category  of  expiation, 
whether  in  relation  to  others  or  to  the  victim  himself.  In  any  case, 
diseases  may  be  regarded  as  in  some  way  connected  with  that 
experience  of  life  which  the  sufferer  has  himself  to  undergo.  In 
Thomistic  terms,  such  would  be  the  "  final  cause  "  of  disease.

In  the  life  of  Saint  Lydwine  of  Shiedam,124  we  read  how  a  cele- 
brated physician,  Godfried  de  Haga,  endorsed  and  deferred  to  "  the 
divine  law  that  every  malady  is  an  expiation  ;    that  if  God  does  not

256  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

regard  the  expiation  as  satisfied,  the  course  of  the  illness  cannot  be 
altered  by  the  art  of  medicine.  Cure  cannot  result  from  his  treatment 
unless  his  intervention  coincides  with  the  completion  of  the  expiation 
which  has  been  imposed  on  the  patient  by  his  Lord."  *

In  modern  times  this  belief  is  manifested  as  a  conviction  in  the 
pastoral  instructions  to  the  Catholic  medical  man  that  he  is  not 
entitled  to  continue  his  ^ministrations  on  a  patient  gravely  ill  unless 
his  (Catholic)  patient  has  fulfilled  his  spiritual  duties  within  a  certain 
number  of  days  of  the  onset  of  the  severe  symptoms."Hay  muchos  decretos  eclesiasticos  que  prohiben  a  los  medicos 
visitar  mes  de  tres  veces,  si  el  enfermo  no  se  ha  confesado." — • 
(Vilariho,  142,  p.  645.)  _

The  following  advice  to  the  patient  himself  is  less  narsn  to 
appearance  :  "  first  when  thou  feelest  any  indisposition,  accept  it 
as  a  dispensation  of  the  love  of  My  Heart.  .  .  .  Afterwards,  unite 
thy  sufferings  with  Mine.  ...  If  thy  infirmity  increases  offer  to 
Me  thy  body  as  a  living  victim.   ..."  (Arnold,  xvi)

This  teaching  leaves  no  room  for  doubt  about  the  true  answer 
to  the  oft-aired  question,  "  should  the  doctor  tell  ?  "  (his  patient  that 
his  illness  is  likely  to  prove  mortal).

*  It  was  subsequent  to  the  named  physician's  life-time  that  Paracelsus  wrote  the 
words  actually  quoted,  adding  "  when  the  time  for  redemption  has  come,  the  patient 
will  then  find  the  physician  through  whom  God  will  send  him  relief."  Paracelsus 
classified  the  causes  of  disease  under  five  headings  :  those  arising  in  morbid  states 
of  the  body  ;  those  belonging  to  the  category  of  poisons  (intoxications)  ;  those 
arising  from  "  astral  "  origins  ;  spiritual  causes  (passions,  disordered  thoughts, 
morbid  imagination)  ;  and  retributive.  =8a  (p.  199,  221).

THESIS  III.     THE  EVIDENCES  OF  DISEASE

i.     General  Remarks  about  Symptoms  and   Signs

"  The  science  of  the  diagnosis  of  disease  by  internal  symptoms  is  founded  upon 
six  canons  :  (i)  the  patient's  actions,  (2)  the  waste  of  the  body,  (3)  the  nature  of  the 
pain,  (4)  the  site  of  the  pain,  (5)  swelling,  (6)  the  effluvia  given  off  by  his  person." — 
Night  45 1."1"  A  physician  who  is  a  man  of  understanding  looketh  into  the  state  of  the  body 
and  is  guided,  by  the  feel  of  the  hands,  according  as  they  are  firm  or  flabby,  hot  or 
cool,  moist  or  dry." — Night  450.

452.

Y  means  of  the  symptoms  and  signs  of  the  three 
main  states  of  the  body  (health,  illness,  neutrality), 
we  obtain  information  as  to  the  present,  the  past 
and  the  future  of  the  patient's  state.  Knowledge 
of  his  present  state,  says  Galen,  is  of  advantage 
to  the  patient  alone,  showing  him  what  he  must 
do  ;  knowledge  of  the  past  is  advantageous  to 
the  physician  alone,  as  proving  him  to  excel  in 
his  art,  so  that  his  advice  becomes  worthy  of  respect  (because 
reliable)  ;  knowledge  of  the  future  serves  both  purposes — it 
is  advantageous  to  the  patient  because  it  guides  him  along  the 
road  he  should  follow,  and  it  is  advantageous  to  the  physician 
in  showing  him  to  excel  in  his  art.

The  signs  belonging  to  the  first  category  are  called  "  demon- 
strative "  ;  those  of  the  second  category  are  "  commemorative  "  ; 
those  of  the  third  are  named  "  prognostic."

453.  The  signs  of  health,  (i)  Those  which  denote  an 
equable  temperament.  These  are  referred  to  in  494.  (2)  Those 
which  denote  equability  of  the  composite  :  (a)  substantial  : 
creaturely  form,  position,  quantity,  number  ;  (F)  accidental  :. 
comeliness,  beauty  ;  (c)  final  :  (i)  that  is,  fulfilling  functions  ^ 
(ii)  fulfilled  function.

Every  organ  is  healthy  whose  functions  are  adequately 
performed.

257  S

258  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINEEvery  organ  is  healthy  whose  functions  are  adequately 
performed.

257  S

258  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

The  evidences  that  the  functional  state  of  the  principal  organs 
is  adequate  is  shown  by,  studying  their  activities.  Thus  the 
state  of  the  brain  is  shown  by  the  state  of  the  voluntary  power 
of  movement,  by  the  state  of  the  sense-organs,  by  the  acts  of 
judgment ;  the  state  of  the  heart  by  pulse  and  respiration  ;  the 
state  -of  the  liver  by  the  character  of  the  excreta  and  urine. 
(If  the  urine  appear  like  the  washings  of  fresh  meat  it  shows  that 
there  is  deficient  liver-function.)

454.  The  signs  of  disease.  i  Some  signs  are  pathognomonic 
of  disease — thus  :  rapid  pulse-rate,  in  fever,  itself  indicates 
fever.  2  Other  signs  indicate  the  position  of  the  disease.  Thus 
a  hard  pulse  denotes  diaphragmatic  pleurisy  ;  undulant  pulse 
denotes  inflammation '  in  the  substance  of  the  lung.  3  Other 
signs  indicate  the  cause  of  the  disease.  For  instance,  the  signs  of 
plethora,  or  of  depraved  states  in  their  various  forms.

4.  Some  symptoms  are  essential  to  the  illness,  as  they  begin 
and  end  with  it.  (For  instance,  acute  fever,  piercing  pain, 
dyspnoea,  cough  and  serrine  pulse— essential  to  pleurisy.) 
Other  symptoms  show  no  time-relation  of  this  kind  ;  they  some- 
times coincide  with  the  disease  and  sometimes  not  (e.g.  headache 
in  fever).  Other  symptoms  appear  only  towards  the  close  of  the 
illness — as  for  instance,  the  symptoms  of  crisis,  of  maturation, 
of  delayed  maturation  ;  the  signs  of  death.  These  symptoms 
are  often  associated  rather  with  acute  illnesses.5.  Other  symptoms  concern  the  state  of  the  members. 
Some  of  them  are  discernible  by  the  special  senses — colour, 
hardness,  softness,  heat,  cold,  and  the  like.  Others  are  dis- 
cernible by  all  senses  together — the  form  of  the  member,  its 
position  (posture,  attitude),  its  size,  its  movements,  or  stillness. 
Some  symptoms  point  to  an  interior  state,  as  when  tremor  of  the 
lower  lip  reveals  nausea.  Changes  in  measure  and  number 
reveal  internal  states  ;  for  instance,  shortness  of  fingers  denotes 
small  liver.

'  6.  Morbid  states  are  discernible  by  the  special  senses.  Thus 
a  black  or  yellow  colour  of  the  excrement  reveals  a  morbid  state. 
Black  or  yellow  jaundice  of  the  whole  body  reveals  an  obstruction 
in  the  biliary  passages.

7.      States  manifested  to  the  sense  of  hearing. — Eructations 
reveal  gastrectasis,  and  defective  digestive  power.

'  8.     Odours  and  tastes  also  enable  one  to  become  cognisant 
of  morbid  states.

9.      Other  visible  evidences  ;  curved  nails  denote  ulceration

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  259

in  the  bronchi,  phthisis  and  "  hectic."     Redness  of  the  cheek- 
bones suggests  inflammatory  deposit  in  the  lung.THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  259

in  the  bronchi,  phthisis  and  "  hectic."     Redness  of  the  cheek- 
bones suggests  inflammatory  deposit  in  the  lung.

455.      10.      Movements  (gestures,  postures,   attitudes'). — The 
states  of  the  body  are  revealed  by  its  movements,  or  absence  of 
movement.      (i)   Motionlessness  of  the  body  as   a    whole — in 
apoplexy,-  epilepsy  (coma),  syncope,  palsy.     (2)  Unusual  move- 
ments :      shivering,"   tremor,     twitching,     sneezing,     yawning, 
stretching,  cough,  trembling,  spasms  (especially  note  in  which 
member    this    begins)  ;     (i)    some    of   these    are    physiological 
(hiccough)  ;    (ii)  others  are  symptomatic  (convulsion  or  spasm, 
tremor)  ;  (iii)  some  are  voluntary  (tossing  about  in  bed  ;  turning 
from  side  to  side)  ;  (iv)  others  are  partly  voluntary,  partly  involun- 
tary  (cough,    micturition,    defecation)  ;     in   some   of  these   the 
voluntary  is  overruled  by  the  involuntary  (cough),  while  in  others 
the  voluntary  overrules  the  involuntary  (micturition  and  defeca- 
tion, occurring  too  slowly  owing  to  interference  by  the  will)  ; 
(v)  involuntary  movements.       Some  of  these  are  evident  to  the 
senses  (e.g.  shivering),  others  are  not  (e.g.  quivering,  jactitation). 
These    movements   vary  (a)  in  regard    to   their  nature  ;    thus, 
cough  is  intrinsically  more  energetic  and  powerful  than  quiver- 
ing; (/?)  in   extent  :  thus,  the  act  of  sneezing  entails  the  use  of 
more  muscles   than   the  act  of  coughing  does  ;    coughing  is 
accomplished  simply  by  the  movements  of  the  chest,  sneezing 
entails  movements  of  the  head  as  well  as  of  the  chest;  (y)  in 
degree  of  associated  mental  anxiety.     Dry  hiccough  is  associated 
with  a  greater  degree  of  mental  anxiety  than  the  movement  of 
coughing,  though  the  latter  is  more  vigorous,  being  reinforced 
by  the  natural  faculty.     In  some  cases  the  movement  is  aided  by 
an  essential  primary  instrument  ;   thus,  defecation  is  aided  by  the 
abdominal  muscles  ;   in  other  cases  the  aid  is  extraneous  :    thus, 
the  natural  act  of  coughing  may  be  aided  by  the  atmosphere; 
(s)  in  origin.  These  movements  vary  (a)  according  to  the  member 
(cough,  nausea)  ;    (b)  according  to  the  faculties  involved  (jacti- 
tation originates  in  the  vegetative  faculties  ;   the  act  of  coughing 
originates  in  the  sensitive  faculties) ;   (c)  according  to  the  humour 
concerned  (thus,  cough  proceeds  from  an  excretion  ;    twitching 
from  a  gaseous  agent).These  are  all  evidences  of  conditions  in  the  members  and 
are  chiefly  external  in  character.  Some  of  them  reveal  internal 
conditions  ;  as,  for  instance,  redness  of  the  cheeks  is  a  sign  of 
pulmonary  inflammation.

There  are  also  (internal)  evidences  of  external  conditions, 
and  to  discern  these  a  perfect  anatomical  knowledge  is  necessary.

26o  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

456.  One  must  have  a  proper  knowledge  of  : —

(i)  the  essential  structure  of  each  member  ;  whether  fleshy 
or  not  ;  what  is  its  normal  form.  One  must  know  (a)  whether 
the  swelling  for  instance  is  according  to  the  proper  form  of  the 
member  or  not;  {b)  whether  it  is  proportioned  or  not;  (c) 
whether-  it  is  possible  for  anything  to  be  retained  within  the 
given  member  or  not;  (d)  whether  that  which  is  within  (e.g. 
jejunum)  can  escape;  (<?)  whether  there  can  be  retention  in 
and  also'  escape  from  the  member  ;  (/ )  what  the  material  is 
which  can  be  retained  in  it  or  discharged  from  it.

(ii)  Its  site.  From  this  one  judges  whether  pain  or  swelling 
is  actually  in  the  part  or  at  some  distance  from  it.

(iii)  Its  relations.  By  this  knowledge  one  judges  whether 
pain  is  arising  per  se  or  reflexly  from  the  surroundings,  or  whether 
the  matter  in  an  inflammatory  mass  arose  in  it  or  has  entered 
into  it  from  neighbouring  parts.  If  it  be  a  "  superfluity  "  which 
escapes,  is  this  the  matter  itself  or  is  the  affected  member  merely 
the  channel  by  which  the  matter  finds  egress  from  the  body  ?

(iv)  How  to  decide  whether  the  discharge  could  have  come 
from  the  supposedly  affected  member  or  not.

(v)  The  normal  function  of  a  member. — From  inter- 
ference with  function  one  recognizes'  the  diseased  state.(v)  The  normal  function  of  a  member. — From  inter- 
ference with  function  one  recognizes'  the  diseased  state.

This  is  the  purpose  of  the  study  of  anatomy.  And  a  knowledge 
of  anatomy  is  also  necessary  to  enable  the  doctor  to  control 
diseases  involving  the  interior  organs.

457.  The  study  of  the  significance  of  the  symptoms  of 
internal  diseases  should  follow  the  following  six  headings  :

i.  Interference  with  function.  The  functions  have  already 
been  described  in  regard  to  their  qualities  and  degrees.  The 
indications  here  are  primary  and  constant.

2.  The  discharges.  The  indications  here  are  constant  but 
not  primary.  They  are  constant  in  that  they  are  always  associated 
with  morbid  states.  They  are  not  primary  because  they  denote 
maturation,  or  interference  with  maturation.

These  are  neither  primary,   nor 
constant.

3 .  Pain

4.  Swelling 
$ .   Altered  p  osition 
6.    Special  symptoms 
458.     Details  about  these  headings.

1 .  Interference  with  function.  When  a  function  does  not 
proceed  normally,  it  shows  that  the  agent  at  work  is  attacking  the 
faculty  itself,  and  the  loss  of  function  is  secondary  to  disease  of

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  261

the  organ  subserving  that  function.  There  are  three  ways  in 
which  function  is  interfered  with  :  {a)  impairment  (e.g.  failing 
eyesight,  near  sight,  digestion  impaired  in  rate  or  degree)  ;  (b) 
alteration  (as  when  the  eye  sees  that  which  is  not  there  or  per- 
ceives incorrectly  ;  when  the  stomach  digests  food  wrongly 
and  causes  it  to  decompose)  ;  (c)  destruction  (as  when  there  is 
entire  loss  of  vision;    entire  loss  of  digestive  power).

2.     Significance  of  discharges  and  retentions.

A.  Retention    of  that    which    is    normally    discharged  : 
retention  of  urine  or  feces.2.     Significance  of  discharges  and  retentions.

A.  Retention    of  that    which    is    normally    discharged  : 
retention  of  urine  or  feces.

B.  Abnormal  discharge  :

(i)  From  the  substance  of  a  member

(a)  itself  diagnostic  :  Ex.  :  when  a  piece  of 
cartilaginous  tissue  is  coughed  up  ;  this  is  a 
proof  of  deep  ulceration  in  the  air-passages  ;

(b)  diagnostic  by  reason  of  its  dimensions  or 
amount  :  passage  of  flakes  in  dysentery  ;  if 
they  are  large  flakes,  the  ulcer  is  in  the  large 
intestine  ;  if  fine  fragments,  the  ulceration  is 
in  the  small  intestine  ;

(c)  colour  of  the  discharge.  If  urinary  sediment 
is  red,  it  shows  the  disease  is  in  the  fleshy 
organs  such  a.s  the  kidney  ;  if  white  it  shows 
the  disease  is  in  a  muscular  organ  like  the 
bladder.

(ii)  Not  from  the  substance  of  a  member  :

{a)  entirely  unnatural.  Thus  healthy  humours 
or  blood  should  not  be  discharged  at  all  ;

(b)  abnormal  in  quality.  Thus  depraved  blood 
may  be  discharged  physiologically,  or  not  ;

(c)  abnormal  in  substance  ;    e.g.  calculus  ;

00  abnormal  in  quantity  :  e.g.  polyuria,  oliguria,

excess  of  fecal  discharge,  paucity  of  feces  :

(a)  abnormal    in    quality  :     black    feces,

black  urine  ; 
(/?)  discharge  by  unsuitable  or  unnatural 
channels  :    e.g.  passage  of  feces  by 
the  mouth  in   cases  of  strangulated 
hernia.

3.     Significance  of  pain.

{a)  Its  site  :   If  right-sided,  examine  the  liver  ;  if  left-sided 
the  spleen.  '

262  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE3.     Significance  of  pain.

{a)  Its  site  :   If  right-sided,  examine  the  liver  ;  if  left-sided 
the  spleen.  '

262  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

(b)  Its  type,  which  reveals  its  cause  (see  434  ;  ^ancLthe 
doctrine  of  causes).  Severe  pain  indicates  inflammation  in  a 
non-essential  member,  or  in  a  member  which  has  lost  sensation, 
but  has  become  greatly,  distended  by  foreign  matter.  Incisive 
pain  shows  that  the  diseased  material  is  sharp,  acid  or  acrid.

4...   Significance  in  regard  to  inflammations.

{a)  As  to  essence  :  erysipelatous  inflammation  denotes 
bilious  humour;  "  scirrhus  "  (induration)  denotes  atrabilious 
humour.

(b)  As  to  position  :    whether  on  the  right  side  or  the  left

(liver,   or  spleen).

(c)  As  to  shape  :  a  moon-shaped  swelling  in  the  right 
hypochondrium  points  to  the  liver  ;  an  elongated  swelling 
refers  one  to  the  overlying  muscles  (rectus  and  adnexa).

5.  Significance  of  site  and  relations.

The  site  may  be  self-evident.  The  relations  vary  in  sig- 
nificance according  to  the  morbific  agent.  Thus  a  lesion  in 
the  fingers  may  result  from  injury  to  the  brachial  plexus  in  the

neck.

6.  Significance  of  special  symptoms  :  e.g.  of  wasting,  of 
black  tongue,  burning  fever.neck.

6.  Significance  of  special  symptoms  :  e.g.  of  wasting,  of 
black  tongue,  burning  fever.

Joannitius  gives  a  rather  different  classification  of  symptoms  and  signs, 
though  summarizing  from  the  same  text.  It  may  be  said  that  every  classification 
is  a  matter  of  personal  convenience.  There  is  not  necessarily  any  principle  involved, 
for  the  subject  comprises  so  great  a  variety  that  a  strictly  logical  classification  serves 
no  special  purpose.  In  some  cases  symptoms  are  characteristic  of  a  cause,  m  others 
of  an  error  of  function,  in  others  of  a  special  disease.  To  adhere  consistently  to  one 
rule  of  classification  necessarily  entails  the  relegation  of  some  symptoms  which  are 
important  in  actual  practice  to  a.  subsidiary  or  insignificant  position  in  the  list.

Hence  it  may  be  said  that  Avicenna's  classification  will  hold  gcod  as  well  as 
any.  The  student  obtains  his  knowledge  from  his  own  experience,  and  not  from 
memorizing  a  given  list.

§  202 .  The  following  list  of  simple  ailments,  or  evidences  of  disease,  may 
be  offered  at  this  point. 8  5  ,      .  .     .

Pain. — The  first  evidence  of  disease  or  ill-health.  Its  localization  is  very  signi- 
ficant, and  charts  depicting  its  possible  sites  and  their  meaning  are  of  great  use. 
Thus,' headache  is  very  commonly  simply  a  sign  of  indigestion  (gastric  or  intestinal) 
or  constipation.  The  type  of  pain  is  most  important.  Thus  pain  in  the  abdomen, 
relieved  by  pressure,  suggests  gaseous  distension  due  to  abnormal  fermentation  of 
food,  whereas  pain  increased  by  pressure  suggests  inflammation.Abnormal  discharges. — Abnormal  in  quantity  (increased  or  diminished),  such 
as  diarrhoea,  polyuria  ;  abnormal  in  quality,  such  as  nose-bleeding,  hemoptysis, 
expectoration,  nasal  discharge,  salivation  ;  abnormal  in  manner,  such  as  incontinence.

Abnormal  acts. — Vomiting,  Coughing,  Hiccough,  Eructations,  Yawning, 
Sighing,  Shivering,  Sleepiness,  Insomnia,  Altered  gait,  Altered  posture  (from  palsy, 
exhaustion,  collapse),  Tremors,  Twitchings,  Convulsions,  etc.

A  bnormal  subjective  sensations. — In  special  senses  :  floating  specks  before  the 
eyes  in  dyspepsia  ;  ringing  in  the  ears  in  cases  of  nervous  debility,  or  after  certain 
drugs,  or  from  wax  ;  bitter  taste  in  dyspepsia  ;  dizziness  arising  from  nerve  derange- 
ment,' or  circulatory  errors.  In  general  :  nausea,  palpitation,  throbbing,  laboured 
breathing  ;  altered  appetite,  thirst  ;  sense  of  lassitude  or  asthenia  ;  irritability  ; 
loss  of  memory.  .

Outward  signs. — Discoloured  or  "  heavy  "  eyes.  Offensive  breath  m  indi- 
gestion and  constipation.     Wasting  or  obesity.     Hot  and  dry  skin  in  fevers,   or

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  263

states  of  mental  excitement,  or  from  excess  of  salt  in  the  diet.     Cold  sweating  from

exhaustion,    etc.     Altered    colour    of    skin.     CEdema    of    skin.     Skin-eruptions. •

Signs  derived  from  examination  of  the  mouth  :  Pale  tongue  and  gums  from  blood- 
deficiency  ;  bleeding  gums  from  excess  of-  salt  in  diet  and  other  causes ;  coloured 
line  on  gums  in  metallic  poisonings  ;  coated  tongue  in  digestive  disturbances  ; 
loosened  teeth  from  errors  of  diet,  or  the  use  of  adulterated  foods,  etc.

2.     The  Distinction  between  the  Disease  in  itself  and  its

Secondary  Effects2.     The  Distinction  between  the  Disease  in  itself  and  its

Secondary  Effects

459.  Diseases  may  affect  a  member  primarily,  or  only 
secondarily.  Thus,  a  disease  of  the  stomach  may  become  associ- 
ated with  one  in  the  head.  Hence  it  is  necessary  to  distinguish 
between  the  two  conditions,  as  being  respectively  primary  and 
secondary.  To  do  this,  note  which  arises  first,  and  then  note 
which  of  the  two  morbid  conditions  persists.  The  former  is 
judged  to  be  primary;  the  one  which  develops  later  is  considered 
to  be  secondary.  Conversely,  the  disease  is  secondary  which 
comes  after  the  first,  and  ceases  when  the  first  is  relieved.

460.  Errors  may  arise,  however,  because  a  primary  disease 
may  escape  the  senses  (being  painless)  at  first,  and  its  effect  may 
not  become  manifest  till  after  the  secondary  disease  has  appeared. 
Moreover  the  primary  disease  may  not  be  able  to  be  perceived 
until  after  the  secondary  one  has  developed,  and  so  one  is  liable 
to  regard  the  secondary  one  as  primary,  and  overlook  the  real 
root  of  the  disease.

461.  To  guard  against  this  mistake,  the  physician  must 
know  the  anatomical  inter-relations  of  the  organs,  and  also  the 
several  affections  which  each  member  may  show.  Some  of  these 
are  evident  to  our  senses,  others  are  not.  He  must  also  avoid 
giving  a  definite  diagnosis  of  the  root  of  the  disease  until  he  has 
had  time  to  consider  the  possibility  of  some  of  the  states  being 
secondary  or  not.462.  Therefore  the  physician  will  diligently  question  the 
patient  in  order  to  discover  signs  indicative  of  the  various  affec-" 
tions  which  can  possibly  occur  secondarily  in  the  neighbouring 
or  related  organs.  If  these  are  not  painful  (tender),  the  patient 
is  unaware  of  them,  and  the  various  signs  and  symptoms  may  be 
only  distantly  related  in  his  mind.  He  cannot  know  the  relation 
between  remote  symptoms  and  the  real  root  of  the  disease.  The 
wisdom  of  the  physician  alone  can  determine  this.

483.  It  is  easier  if  one  recalls  the  various  points  to  memory 
under  the  heading  of  hindrances  to  function.  If  these  are  prior 
in  time,  the  malady  is  secondary.

464.      Some  affections  of  organs  are  usually  secondary  to

264  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

others.  Thus  an  affection  of  the  head  is  usually  secondary  to 
one  or  other  of  the  morbid  states  of  the  stomach.  The  converse 
is  only  very  rarely  true.

All  the  signs  of  the  primary  and  secondary  temperaments 
will  be  set  forth  in  a  general  way  now,  leaving  the  signs  of  each 
special  .organ  to  its  appropriate  place.  The  visible  signs  of  a 
composite  disease  are  detected  by  the  senses,  but  the  internal 
symptoms  of  the  body  as  a  whole  cannot  be  described  in  a  general 
way  except  with  difficulty— with  the  exception  of  the  signs  of 
plethora,  of  obstructions  in  passages,  of  inflammatory  masses, 
and  of  loss  of  continuity.  It  is  best  to  describe  all  these  together 
when  we  describe  them  under  their  specific  organs.

3.     The  Diagnostic  Signs  of  the  Temperaments.

465.  Signs  from  which  the  variety  of  the  temperament  is 
discernible. — These  can  be  arranged  under  ten  groups.

I.      the  feel  of  the  patient465.  Signs  from  which  the  variety  of  the  temperament  is 
discernible. — These  can  be  arranged  under  ten  groups.

I.      the  feel  of  the  patient

By  means  of  the  touch  one  notes  whether  the  feel  of  the 
patient  corresponds  to  health  in  temperate  climes  and  temperate 
atmosphere.  If  it  corresponds,  the  temperament  is  equable. 
If  the  physician  is  himself  healthy  in  temperament  and  finds  the 
patient  cold  or  hot,  softer  or  harder  or  rougher  than  normal, 
and  this  is  not  to  be  explained  by  the  state  of  the  atmosphere  or 
of  a  previous  cold  water  bath,  or  some  other  contingency  render- 
ing the  body  soft  or  rough,  though  normal— he  then  knows  the 
finding  is  due  to  an  intemperament.

466.  The  state  of  the  finger-nails  should  be  noticed. 
Softness  or  dryness  of  the  nails,  not  due  to  an  extraneous  agent, 
informs  one  of  the  state  of  the  temperament.  These  qualities 
are  not  in  themselves  a  sufficient  criterion.  There  must  be  signs 
of  balance  between  heat  and  cold.  For  (a)  heat,  by  its  resolving 
effect,  would  modify  hardness  and  roughness  of  feel,  and  make 
the  patient  seem  to  be  attempered  and  his  nature  seem  soft  and 
moist.  Or,  (b)  cold — i.e.  the  opposite — by  reason  of  the  great 
congelation  and  inspissation  it  induces,  would  make  the  softness 
of  feel  in  an  attempered  person  seem  hard,  and  give  the  im- 
pression that  his  nature  was  dry.  For  instance,  take  snow  and 
the  sun.  Snow  congeals  and  causes  coagulation  ;  the  sun  causes 
aggregation  of  particles.  Many  persons  with  a  cold,  tempera- 
ment are  soft  to  the  feel,  and  also  spare  in  habit  owing  to  the 
presence  of  much  crudity  in  them.

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  265

II.       THE    STATE    OF    THE    MUSCLES,     FLESH    AND    FATTHE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  265

II.       THE    STATE    OF    THE    MUSCLES,     FLESH    AND    FAT

467.  Plentiful  muscular  development  denotes  moist  tem- 
perament, and  warm  temperament  if  the  muscles  are  firm. 
Scanty  muscular  development  with  very  little  fat  shows  that  the 
temperament  is  dry.  Oiliness  and  fat  always  denote  cold  tem- 
perament, and  the  muscles  are  then  also  flabby.

If  at  the  same  time  there  is  constriction  of  the  veins  and  lack 
of  blood,  and  if  there  is  weakness  from  lack  of  food  (because 
there  is  too  little  blood  to  enable  it  to  furnish  the  requirements 
of  the  tissues),  this  shows  that  this  temperament  is  inborn  and 
habitual.  But  if  these  other  signs  are  absent,  it  shows  the 
temperament  to  be  an  acquired  one.

488.  Lessening  of  the  amount  of  oil  and  fat  in  the  sub- 
cutaneous tissues  always  indicates  a  hot  temperament,  because 
the  substance  of  oil  and  fat  is  the  oiliness  of  the  blood,  and  that 
is  derived  from  cold.  Hence  these  things  are  less  plentiful  in 
the  liver-region,  and  more  plentiful  over  the  intestines.  There  is 
not  more  oil  and  fat  over  the  heart  than  over  the  liver,  except 
as  to  matter  ;  it  is  not  temperament  or  "  form  "  which  ac- 
counts for  this  ;  it  is  simply  that  the  "  nature  "  of  the  heart 
depends  for  its  maintenance  on  the  presence  of  such-like 
"  matter."

Congelation  of  oil  and  fat  over  the  body  is  greater  or  less 
according  as  the  heat  is  more  or  less  in  degree.

If  the  body  is  fleshy,  and  the  amount  of  fat  and  oil  not 
great,  the  temperament  is  hot  and  moist.If  the  body  is  fleshy,  and  the  amount  of  fat  and  oil  not 
great,  the  temperament  is  hot  and  moist.

If  the  body  is  very  muscular,  and  there  is  much  oil,  but 
little  fat,  this  denotes  excessively  humid  temperament.  If  ex- 
tremely^  fleshy,  this  denotes  superfluity  of  moisture  and  cold. 
It  is  evidence  that  the  body  has  become  cold  and  moist.

469.  The  more  spare  the  body  is  in  habit,  the  more  likely 
is  it  to  be  cold  and  dry  ;  or  (less  likely)  hot  and  dry  ;  or,  dry, 
for  such  a  body  is  attempered  as  to  heat  and  cold.  Or,  hot, 
because  such  a  body  is  attempered  as  to  moisture  and  dryness.

III.       THE    HAIR

The  points  to  note  are  :  rate  of  growth  ;  amount  ;  fine- 
ness or  coarseness  of  texture,  straightness  or  curliness,  colour.

470.  Rate  of  growth.  Slow  growth,  or  absence  of  growth, 
without  evidence  of  lack  of  blood — denotes  extremely  humid 
temperament.  More  rapid  growth  denotes  a.  less  humid  tem- 
perament, rather  tending  to  dryness.     (Heat  and  coldness  of

266

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

temperament  are  shown  by  other  signs  — given  above — than  the 
hair.)  ;

If  the  temperament  is  both  "hot  and  dry  the  hair  grows  much 
more  rapidly,  and  the  individual  hairs  are  numerous  and  coarse. 
Abundance  of  hair  means  heat,  coarseness  much  fumosity. 
Hence  the  hair  is  more  plentiful  in  youthful  persons  than  at 
puberty,  as  the  humours  of  the  latter  are  vaporose,  not  fumose.

The  opposite  characters  denote  the  respective  contraries.The  opposite  characters  denote  the  respective  contraries.

471.  Form  of  the  hair.  Curly  hair  :  denotes  hot  and  dry 
temperament.  It  may  be  that  there  is  tortuosity  of  the  minute 
channels  and  pores  :  and  this  cannot  change  even  if  the  tempera- 
ment changes.  But  the  two  primary  causes  would  change  if 
the  temperament  changed.  Straight  hair  denotes  cold  and  moist 
temperament.

472.  Colour  of  the  hair.

Colour

Black.

Brown. 
Tawny  and  red.

Very  fair. 
Grey.

Corresponding 
temperament.

Hot.

Cold. 
Equable.

Cold  and 
very  moist. 
Cold  and 
very  dry.

Remarks.

In   such    cases    oxidative    processes    are   in 
excess  of  the  mean  (Joannitius).

There  is  an  excess  of  "  unburnt  heat,"  so 
that  the  hairs  always  grow  red  (J). 
Hence  the  proneness  to  anger  (a  form  of 
"  heat  ").

Note  how  plants  lose  their  dark  or  green 
colour  when  dried,  and  become  grey  or 
white.  In  man,  this  change  is  produced 
towards  the  close  of  desiccant  diseases.

473.  Cause  of  grey  hair.  Aristotle  stated  that  hair  turns 
grey  because  it  takes  on  the  colour  of  serous  humour.  (Joan- 
nitius ascribed  it  to  decomposition  changes  in  the  serous  humour 
occurring  in  old  age  ;  greyness,  he  says,  means  excess  of  atra- 
bilious humour.)  Galen  ascribed  it  to  a  mustiness  accompanying 
the  nutriment  supplied  to  the  hair,  which  retards  its  movement 
and  penetration  into  the  pores  (of  the  hair)  (i.e.  hair-sac).

As  a  matter  of  fact  there  is  little  difference  between  the 
two  views,  because  the  whiteness  of  the  serous  humour  is 
physically  due  to  the  same  cause  as  the  whiteness  of  the  mustiness. 
The  subject  really  belongs  to  physics.474.  Observation  also  shows  that  atmosphere  and  geo- 
graphical situation  affects  the  hair.  One  would  not  expect  to 
find   the  hair  red  (which  denotes  equable  temperament)  in  a

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

267

black  person  even  though  his  temperament  were  equable  ;  nor 
would  one  expect  to  find  black  hair  (which  denotes  hot  tempera- 
ment) in  a  Slav,  even  though  his  temperament  were  hot.

475.  Relation  of  character  of  the  hair  to  the  age.  In  puberty 
the  hair  is  as  in  northern  countries  ;  in  youth,  as  in  southerly- 
countries  ;  after  the  age  of  fifty  it  is  between  the  two.  Abund- 
ance of  the  hair  at  puberty  reveals  the  future  temperament.  As 
the  person  grows,  it  precedes  the  formation  of  atrabilious  humour, 
and  in  the  elderly  person  it  shows  that  atrabilious  humour  is 
actually  present.

IV.        THE    COLOUR    OF    THE    BODY

476.     Colour.

Pallor.

Yellowish.

Ruddiness.

Sub-ruddiness.

Dark  Brown.

Brown.

Colour  of  Egg- 
plant fruit* 
Chalky.

Leaden.

Grey  and  white. 
Ivory  White.

Temperament.

Cold.

Hot.

Hot.

Hot.

Extremely 
cold.

Hot.

Cold  and 
dry. 
Cold.

Cold  and 
moist.

Cold. 
Cold.

Accompanying  features.

Lack  of  blood.

Lack  of  blood  ;   increase  of  bilious  humour.

Abundance  of  blood ;  sanguine  or  bilious 
temperament.

Dominance  of  bilious  humour.  Occasionally 
it  denotes  lack  of  blood,  provided  there  is 
no  bilious  humour  present  in  the  blood, 
as  is  the  case  in  convalescents.

This  is  because  sanguineous  humour  is 
dominant,  and  there  is  deficient  coagul- 
ability of  the  blood  and  it  darkens  and 
alters  the  colour  of  the  skin  at  the  same 
time  [Joannitius  ascribed  blackness  to  the 
atrabilious   humour].

The  heat  is  such  as  follows  upon  pure  atra- 
bilious humour.The  heat  is  such  as  follows  upon  pure  atra- 
bilious humour.

Serous  humour  in  excess  (J.  ascribes  white- 
ness to  the  serous  humour).

Atrabilious  humour  is  only  slightly  in  excess. 
This  is  because  there  is  a  trace  of  green  in 
the  whiteness  ;  the  latter  depends  on  the 
serous  humour  and  moistness  of  tempera- 
ment. The  greenness  depends  on  con- 
gelative  change  in  the  blood,  for  this  tends 
to  a  blackness  which,  mingled  with  serous 
humour,  produces  a  greenish  tint.

Serous  humour  in  excess,  and  the  choleric 
humour  scanty.

477.     Co/our  of  the  eyes.

It  is  not  easy,  but  it  is  possible,  to  assess  the  temperament 
of  the  brain  from  the  colour  of  the  eyes.

*  Egg-plant ;    brinjall ;    solanum  melongena,  or  black  brinjall.     The  colour 
is  a  purple-black.     The  fruit  is  referred  to  as  a  colour  in  Night  357  :     "  a  flabbv 
nose  like  a  bnnjall  "  (Burton).     "  The  vegetable  is  held  to  be  exceedingly  heating 
and  thereby  to  breed  melancholia  and  madness  "  (ib  ).

268  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

The  following  details  are  from  Joannitius  : 
Black  :     due   to  :     smallness..  of   crystalline    lens  ;     setting   of  the

crystalline  lens  too  far  back  ; ^abundance  of  aqueous  humour  ;

turbidity  thereof;  uvea  redundant;    peculiarity  of  the  visible

"  breath  "  (scanty,  or  confused). 
Brown  :    due  to  the  contraries  of  the  above — crystalline  lens  large

or  further  forward  ;    paucity  of  albugineous  humour  ;    clearness

of  this  ;    deficient  quality  of  uvea  ;    the  visible  breath  plentiful

or  clear. 
Intermediate  colours  (black  and  brown  mixed).     The  visible  breath

varies  in  amount  and  clarity. 
Grey  :   visible  breath  less  plentiful.

478.      Changes  of  Colouror  clear. 
Intermediate  colours  (black  and  brown  mixed).     The  visible  breath

varies  in  amount  and  clarity. 
Grey  :   visible  breath  less  plentiful.

478.      Changes  of  Colour

Change  to  yellow  (yellowish-white)  :  suspect  disorder  of 
the  liver.

Change  to  yellowish-black  :   suspect  disorder  of  the  spleen.

Change  to  yellowish-green  :  suspect  piles  (this  does  not 
always  hold  good  (marginal  reading).  These  suggestions  only 
apply  for  the  moment  when  the  change  of  colour  takes  place.

479.      Colour  of  the  Tongue

It  is  not  easy  to  assess  the  temperament  of  the  stomach  and 
intestines  and  veins  from  the  colour  of  the  tongue,  any  more 
than  it  is  to  assess  the  temperament  of  the  brain  from  the  colour 
of  the  eyes.

There  may  be  two  different  colours  simultaneously  in  two 
members,  in  consequence  of  a  disease.  Thus,  the  tongue  may 
become  white  and  the  countenance  dusky.  This  occurs  in 
jaundice,  when  this  is  due  to  an  intense  acridity  of  the  bilious 
humour.

480.      Extraneous  causes  of  Colour  Change

Cold  climate  (e.g.  in  Scotchmen),  hot  climate  (e.g.  negroes). 
Emotional  changes  :    fear,  rage,  sadness,  etc.

V.        THE    FORM     OF    THE    MEMBERS

481.  Hot  temperament  :  big  broad  chest  ;  large  limbs  ; 
no  narrowing  or  shortening  of  the  hands  or  feet  ;  conspicuous 
full  veins.;  big  strong  pulse  ;  the  muscles  round  the  joints  large 
(for  growth  and  the  form  of  composite  structures  requires  heat).

Cold  temperament  :  the  contraries  of  aU  the  above.  The 
natural  faculties  and  the  formative  faculty  are  impaired  by  cold, 
so  that  the  natural  functions  are  not  perfectly  carried  out.

T

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  269T

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  269

Dry  temperament  :  roughness,  curvature  of  form  ;  joints 
conspicuous.  Adam's  apple  prominent.  Nasal  cartilages  con- 
spicuous ;    nose  of  medium  size.

Moist  temperament  :   the  contraries.

Joarmitius  adds:  fleshiness  (excess  of  heat  and  moisture  in  the  tem- 
perament) •;■  Fatness  (excess  of  moisture  and  intense  coldness);  Leanness  (hot 
temperament,  and  mtense  dryness)  ;  Delicate  build-cold  and  very  dry  •  Massive

balan^d  humours^7  m°1St'  ^  ^^  C°ld  ^  Very  m°iSt ;    Justness  of  form— well- 
VI.      RAPIDITY  WITH  WHICH  MEMBERS  RESPOND  TO  HEAT  AND  COLD

482.  If  a  member  becomes "  hot  "  rapidly  and  easily, 
it  shows  that  it  is  hot  in  temperament,  because  change  in  the 
direction  of  its  own  temperament  is  more  readily  undergone 
than  m  the  opposite  direction.  Similarly,  if  the  member  behaves 
in  the  contrary  way,  it  will  be  of  cold  temperament.483.  Some  assert  that  it  is  otherwise,  because  we  know 
(they  say)  that  a  thing  only  reacts  to  its  contrary  and  not  to  its 
like.  But  if  that  were  the  case,  it  would  follow  that  a  thing  would 
react  more  strongly  to  its  like.  But  the  reply  to  this  is  that  two 
things  are  only  really  alike  when  one  does  not  interact  with  the 
other;  we  then  know  that  their  respective  qualities  are  of  like 
"  species  "  and  "  nature."  Of  two  things  A  and  B,  if  B  is 
less  hot  than  A,  we  cannot  speak  of  it  as  being  "  like  A."  As 
long  as  one  of  the  two  is  hotter,  they  cannot  be  called  ""alike." 
One  is  cold  compared  with  the  other.  So  an  interaction  (on  the 
part  of  the  body)  is  possible.  B  would  be  cold  compared  with  A 
— not  hot.  B,  too,  may  react  with  something  else  which  is  colder 
than  itself  [say  C]  besides  reacting  with  "  cold  "  [say  D].  C  or 
D  may  enhance  the  intrinsic  quality  of  B,  according  as  they  are 
stronger  than  B  or  not.  It  is  easier  for  it  to  change  towards  that 
which  enhances  this  quality  of  B,  or  neutralizes  the  opposite 
quality  of  B,  on  condition  that  the  new  causative  agent  harmonizes 
with  A  and  B,  and  neutralizes  the  temperamental  nature  (p).

Therefore  it  is  clear  that  when  the  nature  is  of  hot  tempera- 
ment heat  will  not  show  any  action  on  it  until  the  influence  of 
the  contrary  cold  has  first  been  removed  ;  and  this  is  achieved 
by  preventing  the  calefaction  (which  tends  to  be  produced  by  a 
hot  temperament)  from  becoming  greater.  The  result  is  that 
if  both  events  occur  simultaneously,  and  the  inhibiting  agent  is 
destroyed,  they  will  mutually  help  one  another  in  producing 
heat,  and  the  two  qualities  will  thus  reach  an  acme.When  the  body  is  exposed  to  foreign  heat,  however,  the 
balance  of  temperament  is  likely  to  be  destroyed.     The  innate

a7o  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

heat  of  the  body  is  all-important  for  resisting  this  We  depend 
on  our  innate  heat  for  the  neutralization  of  "  hot_  poisons,  and 
for  their  expulsion  and  for  the  dissolution  of  their  substance.

484  The  innate  heat,  therefore,  is  the  instrument  ot 
(human)'"  nature  "  for  combating  the  injurious  action  of  extra- 
neous or  foreign  heat.  By  its  means,  the  breath  gets  rid  of  it, 
expels  it,  disperses  it,  and  oxidizes  its  material  basis  (m).  further, 
it  combats  the  injurious  action  of  foreign  cold,  expelling  it 
"  by  contrary."  Coldness  has  not  this  power.  It  is  only  the 
contrary  to  coldness— i.e.  foreign  heat— which  can  combat  or 
repress  it.     Coldness  cannot  combat  extraneous      cold.       ine

innate;  heat  does.innate;  heat  does.

485  Innate  heat  is  that  which  protects  the  natural  humours 
from  being  overruled  by  foreign  calorific  agents.  If  the  innate 
heat  is  strong,  the  natural  faculties  are  able  to  work  through  it 
upon  the  humours,  and  so  effect  digestion  and  maturation,  and 
so  maintain  them  within  the  confines  of  the  healthy  state.  The 
humours  move  according  to  its  ministration.  Extraneous  or 
foreign  "  heat  "  cannot  interfere  with  this  movement  and  so 
they  do  not  undergo  putrefactive  decomposition.  If  the  innate 
heat  is  feeble,  the  natural  faculties  are  harassed  m  the  regulation 
of  the  humours.  For  the  instrument— the  intermediary  between 
the  natural  faculties  and  the  humours— is  enfeebled.  Stagnation 
sets  in  and  foreign  heat  now  finds  the  humours  no  longer  opposed 
to  its  action.  It  overcomes  them.  It  utilizes  them  m  its  own 
way,  and  imparts  a  foreign  movement  to  them  ;  and  the  result 
is  what  is  known  as  "  putrefaction."  _  ,

486  Hence  it  is  clear  that  the  innate  heat  is  the  instrument 
of  all  the  faculties,  whereas  coldness  can  only  help  them  second- 
arily That  is  why  one  speaks  of  "  innate  heat,  but  not  ot 
"  innate  cold  "  ;  and  why  that  which  is  proportionate  to  heat 
is  not  comparable  with  cold.

S  2o3      This  passage  is  evidently  an  attempt  to  explain  the  nature  of  bacterial

The  following  may  be  amplified  accordingly  . 
i      The  meaning  of  innate  heat. 
2      The  nature  of  "  foreign  heat,      foreign  cold. 
■x      The  meaning  of  the  term  "  hot  poisons

a      The  meaning  of  hot  and  cold,   as  relative  terms.  .-,,,„

ti)   JnnatThel^ This   term,   particularly  m  ^J^'^£"£^

<•     -^\;L'      Th^  word  describes  a  complex  concept.     Though  regarded  as  vagueti)   JnnatThel^ This   term,   particularly  m  ^J^'^£"£^

<•     -^\;L'      Th^  word  describes  a  complex  concept.     Though  regarded  as  vague

known  and  freely-accepted  data  belong  to  it.  material

(2)   The  nature  of  "  foreign  heat  Joreigncoia.        xuc=!     .,    substance

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  271

stance,  which  as  we  know  undergoes  lysis  in  the  course  of  the  immunising  processes 
of  the  body.  The  "  heat  "  refers  to  what  we  know  as  the  bacterial  toxins  which 
act  upon  the  thermogenic  centres,  and  produce  numerous  other  effects  oh  the 
tissues.  The  word  "heat"  thus  comprises  two  things.  The  pyrexia  produced 
by  bacterial  invasion  may  be  theoretically  distinguished  from  the  innate  heat,  but 
practically  speaking  the  rise  of  temperature  is  generally  admitted  to  be  part  of  the 
so-called  defensive  mechanism  against  infections.  The  destruction  of  the  bacteria, 
and  of  their  products  by  anti-substances — these  events  are  comprised  in  the  words 
"  dispersing  the  foreign  heat."  After  all,  both  bacteria  and  products  are  "  dis- 
persed."    We  are  only  being  told  the  same  fact  in  different  language.

In  the  case  of  foreign  cold,  here  the  organisms  and  products  differ.  But  if 
the  temperature  becomes  subnormal,  the  immunizing  process  is  not  ascribed  to  the 
lowered  temperature.  Recovery  from  the  infection  still  depends  on  the  "  innate 
heat  "  or  "  vitality  " — that  is,  a  series  of  processes  of  immunization  which  take 
place  whether  the  patient  develops  fever  or  not.Avicenna  considers  that  the  formation  of  septic  products  is  more  likely  if  there 
is  not  much  pyrexia,  on  the  ground  that  in  such  a  case  the  bacteria,  as  we  should  say, 
meet  with  less  resistance,  and  are  enabled  to  produce  those  decompositions  of  the 
body  fluids  which  we  know  to  take  place  readily  as  soon  as  the  vitality  of  a  part 
is   lowered.

(3)  The  meaning  of  the  term  "  hot  poisons."  Clearly  the  word  poison  must  be 
understood  as  covering  both  bacterial  agents  and  their  products.  The  toxic  products 
may  produce  rise  of  temperature,  and  are  therefore  reasonably  called  "  hot  "  ; 
others  do  not  have  this  effect.

(4)  The  meaning  of  hot  and  cold,  as  relative  terms.  In  this  passage  a  thing  is 
hot  or  cold  according  to  its  effect  on  the  bodily  sensations,  or  its  effect  on  the  heat 
centres  of  the  body.  Taken  in  its  literal  or  surface  meaning,  of  hot  temperature, 
cold  temperature,  the  passage  is  of  course  pedantic  and  useless.  It  should  be  evident 
that  the  words  "  hot  "  and  "  cold  "  cannot  possibly  have  meant  literal  heat  and 
cold.

VII.        SIGNS     DERIVED    FROM    SLEEP    AND    WAKEFULNESS

The  sensitive  faculties  make  use  of  these  things  frequently, 
in  a  manner  corresponding  to  the  primary  qualities.  Thus  we 
say  that  in  the  wakeful  state  the  body  is  the  instrument  of  the 
soul.

487.  If  there  is  equipoise  between  sleep  and  wakefulness, 
it  means  that  the  temperament  (especially  of  the  brain)  is  equable. 
If  sleep  dominates,  it  denotes  a  cold  and  moist  temperament 
(of  the  brain),  whereas  if  wakefulness  dominates,  it  shows  a  dry 
and  hot  temperament  (especially  in  the  brain).A  strong  inclination  to  sleep  denotes  debility — a  loss  of  tone  of  the  muscular 
power.  Histologically,  sleep  depends  on  a  break  in  the  ideation-zone  of  the  cerebral 
cortex  ;  if  there  is  a  break  in  the  layer  below  that,  the  sleep  will  be  that  of  stupor 
or  coma.  The  break  in  this  situation  is  marked  in  amentia  and  dementia. — Wake- 
fulness, or  insomnia,  denotes  :  poisons  circulating  in  the  blood,  powerful  sensory 
impulses  (pain),  or  powerful  emotions.

VIII.     SIGNS     DERIVED    FROM    THE    STATE    OF    THE    FUNCTIONS*

488.  Equable  temperament  :  the  activities  of  the  body 
proceed  fully  and  perfectly  and  naturally.

Hot    temperament  :      there    is     over-activity,     exaggerated

*  Functions  may  be  weakened,  exalted,  depraved,  obstructed  in  their  action 
or  abolished.

272  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

activity.     Rapid  growth  of  stature  ;    increased  rate  of  growth 
of  hair  ;    early  eruption  of  the  teeth.

Cold  temperament  :  the  activities  lessen  and  become  sluggish 
and  delayed,  but  a  hot  temperament  may  cause  weak  and  sluggish 
activity  though  only  if  a  deviation  from  the  natural  course  is 
associated  with  weakness.489.  Many  natural  functions  may  slow  down  or  lessen 
owing  to  heat.  Thus  in  the  case  of  sleep,  sometimes  there  is 
insomnia  or  lack  of  sleep  from  the  effect  of  the  heat  of  a  hot 
temperament.  Similarly  some  of  the  natural  states  may  be 
intensified  by  cold.  Thus,  again,  in  the  case  of  sleep,  though  this 
is  not  strictly  the  outcome  of  natural  functions,  but  only  an  effect 
conditional  upon  some  causal  agent.  For  the  necessity  for 
sleep  for  life  and  health  is  not  absolute  ;  (a)  it  enables  the  breath 
to  separate  off  from  its  impeding  factors — the  fatigue-substances; 
(b)  there  is  need  for  a  recumbent  posture  after  a  meal  ;  (c)  one 
cannot  achieve  two  (contrary)  things  at  the  same  time.  _  Hence 
the  need  for  sleep  is  simply  some  impotency.  It  is  not  included 
in  "  natural  necessity."  And  if  its  exclusion  be  "  natural  "  in 
the  sense  that  it  is  inevitable,  this  is  only  because  the  word  "  natu- 
ral "  is  here  used  for  "  the  inevitable."  One  word  is  being  made 
stand  for  two  things.  But  the  most  accurate  application  of  the 
term  is  to  "  equable  temperament,"  for  it  is  this  upon  which 
equability  of  functions  and  their  final  completion  depends. 
To  use  the  term  in  regard  to  the  four  qualities — heat,  coldness, 
dryness,  moisture— is  only  hypothetical  (takhminl).

490.  Among  the  "  strong  "  ("  jelal  ")  actions  which  denote 
a  hot  temperament  are  :  powerful  voice  ;  harsh  or  coarse 
voice  ;  rapid  way  of  talking  ;  constantly  talking  ;  anger  ; 
rapid  gestures  ;  blinking  of  the  eyelids.  Before  deducing  a 
hot  temperament  from  these,  one  must  make  sure  there  is  no 
local  cause  for  them,  and  that  they  are  not  confined  to  one 
particular  member.IX.      SIGNS   DERIVED  FROM  THE  EXPULSIVE  FACULTY  AND  FROM  THE 
QUALITY    OF    DISCHARGES

491.  The  temperament  is  hot  :  (i)  if  the  waste  matters 
are  retained  ;  (2)  if  the  faeces,  urine,  sweat,  etc.,  are  strong  in 
odour,  acrid,  of  normal  colour,  and  show  the  normal  degree  of 
oxidation  and  maceration — in  the  case  of  matters  which  normally 
undergo  such  changes.

If  the  signs  are  contrary,  the  temperament  is  cold.

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

273

X.        SIGNS     DERIVED'    FROM    THE    STATES     OF    THE     MIND,     DURING

ACTION    AND    PASSION

"  Every  expression  is  the  sign  of  a  state  of  mind  ;   that  state  is  as  the  hand, 
and  the  expression  is  the  instrument." — (Mesnavi, 5S  p.  29).

492.        -  •    Evidence.

Name  of  Temperament  corresponding.

Hot.

Dry.

1

Concupiscible        2

3

—     (Shameless)  * 
Excitable 
Lively 
Vivacious

Infatuation  ;  love- 
passion.

aspect

1

Irascible                 2

3

Duration

Hopefulness 
Courage  ;  temerity  J 
Easily  provoked  to

anger 
Short

Brooding

Anger  lasts  some  time

Long*

Intellectual  power

Good

Imaginative

Mental 
capacity

Power  of  observa- 
tion

Good

—

Capability 
Talent

Good 
Conspicuous

Memory  good

Moral  aspects

Stern

Virility  of  morals  and

manners 
Diligence 
Much     flexibility     of

opinionj

Gentle

Ego  faculty

Love  of  good  opinion 
Not  easily  perturbed 
or  downcast

Takes  things  to  heart

Movements  and  gestures

Rapid

Dreams

Of  warming  oneself  at 
a  fire  ;  sitting  in  the 
hot  sunf

Cold  temperaments  show  the  opposites  to  those  given  for 
hot  temperaments  ;   moist,  the  opposites  to  those  given  for  dry.

The  whole  of  the  above,  or  at  any  rate  the  major  part  of  it, 
refers  to  the  congenital  or  innate  temperament.  Now  we  refer 
to  acquired  temperaments  ("  intemperaments  ").The  whole  of  the  above,  or  at  any  rate  the  major  part  of  it, 
refers  to  the  congenital  or  innate  temperament.  Now  we  refer 
to  acquired  temperaments  ("  intemperaments  ").

*  In  the  case  of  the  moist  temperament,  the  duration  of  emotional  disturbance 
is  short.

f  In  the  case  of  a  cold  temperament,  the  dreams  are  of  being  in  the  cold,  out 
in  the  snow,  or  of  being  immersed  in  cold  water.

In  short,  the  character  of  the  visual  images  in  the  dream  is  related  to  the  char- 
acter of  the  dominant  humour,  partly  because  the  dream  varies  with  the  state  of  the 
"  breath  "  at  the  time.

%  These  represent  negative  or  weak  aspects.

T

274

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

493.       EVIDENCES   OF  THE

FOUR  PRIMARY  INTEMPERAMENTS

Evidence.

Hot.

-Cold.

Moist.*

Dry.

Morbid  states  to 
which  there  is  a 
tendency

Inflammatory 
conditions    be- 
coming febrile.

Loss  of  vigour.

Fevers   related 
to  the  serous 
humour.

Rheumatism.

Lassitude.

Functional 
Power

Deficient  energy.

Deficient  diges- 
tive power.

Difficult 
digestion.

—

Subjective 
sensations.

Bitter   taste   in

mouth. 
Excessive  thirst. 
Sense    of   burning

at  cardiac  orifice.

Lack    of    desire 
for  fluids.

Mucoid  saliva- 
tion.

Sleepiness.

/  Insomnia. 
\  Wakefulness

Physical  signs.

Pulse    extremely 
quick    and    fre- 
quent ;  approach- 
ing   the    (weak) 
type  met  with  in 
lassitude.

Flaccid  joints.

Diarrhoea 
Swollen 
eyelids

Rough  skin. 
Spare  habit

(acquired  not

inborn) .

Foods  and

Calefacients  are 
all  harmful.

Infrigidants  are 
all  harmful.

Moist   articles 
of  diet  are 
harmful.

Dry  regimen 
harmful.

medicines.

Infrigidants 
benefit.

Calefacients 
benefit.

Humectants 
benefit,  f

Relation  to 
weather 
(i.e.,  season).

Worse  in  summer.

Worse  in  winter.

Bad  in  autumn

4.     The  Evidences   of  Equable  TemperamentCalefacients 
benefit.

Humectants 
benefit,  f

Relation  to 
weather 
(i.e.,  season).

Worse  in  summer.

Worse  in  winter.

Bad  in  autumn

4.     The  Evidences   of  Equable  Temperament

(i.e.,  the  evidences  of  symmetry,  beauty  of  form,  and  good    conformation.)

494.  In  addition  to  the  signs  of  normal  temperament 
already  given,  there  are  :

1.  To  the  feel,  the  body  imparts  sensations  mean  between 
hotness,  coldness,  dryness,  moisture,  softness,  hardness.

The  skin  feels  moist  and  warm,  and  has  a  beautiful  smooth  and  elastic  surface. 
The  complexion  is  clear.

2.  In  colour,  the  body  shows  a  balance  between  whiteness 
and  redness.

3.  In  build,  the  body  is  neither  bulky  nor  spare,  though 
on  the  whole  inclined  to  be  bulky.  (Robust  Habit  of  Body.7) 
Tallness  and  straightness  of  stature  ;    quick  growth.

4.  The  veins  of  the  skin  are  neither  prominent  nor  sub- 
merged ;    they  are  separated  and  spread.

*  The  signs  of  moist  intemperament  include  those  of  the  cold. 
f  Hot  water,  rarefied  oils  are  beneficial  to  the  dry  temperament  and   are 
avidly  taken  up.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  275.

5.  The  hair  is  neither  profuse  nor  sparse,  thick  nor  thin, 
curly  nor  straight,  black  nor  white.  During  puberty  they  tend 
to  a  tawny  shade  rather  than 'black,  in  youth  they  tend  to  black- 
ness.     [Full  hair  where  hair  should  be.]

6.  Equally  inclined  for  sleep  and  for  wakefulness.

Sleep  quiet,  uninterrupted,  and  followed,  on  waking,  by  cheerfulness,  and  a 
contented  mind.

7.  Agreeable  dreams  arousing  hopefulness,  with  fragrant 
perfumes  and  alluring  voices,  visions  and  agreeable  com- 
panionship.7.  Agreeable  dreams  arousing  hopefulness,  with  fragrant 
perfumes  and  alluring  voices,  visions  and  agreeable  com- 
panionship.

8.  Mental  faculties  :  vigour  of  imagination,  intellectual 
power,  and  memory.  Emotions  balanced  between  excess  and 
deficiency — e.g.,  between  courage  and  timidity,  between  anger 
and  patience,  between  sternness  and  clemency,  between  vacilla- 
tion and  perseverance.

9.  Perfection  in  all  functions  (185).

Therefore  no  conscious  feeling  of  digestion,  or  discomfort  of  any  kind. 
Micturition  painless,  the  urine  not  feeling  hot,  having  an  odour  neither  sweet  nor 
sour,  amber-coloured,  and  forming  no  deposit.  Defecation  without  soiling  the  skin, 
the  fasces  firm,  but  not  hard. — The  appetite  according  to  genuine  hunger,  and  for 
natural  foods  ;  thirst  only  for  water. — Mouth  closed  when  breathing.  Adaptability 
to  climate  and  to  season  (Ch.  M.').

10.  Movements  of  the  limbs  deft.     (Skilful.)

495.  A  person  with  such  a  temperament  will  have  a  happy 
expression,  will  be  lovable  and  contented,  moderate  in  desire 
for  food  and  drink,  possessing  a  good  gastric  digestion,  good 
hepatic  and  venous  digestion,  and  good  alterative  and  assimila- 
tive power  all  through  the  tissues.  The  waste  matters  will  be 
moderate  in  amount  and  will  be -discharged  through  the  proper 
channels.

5.     The   Indications  afforded   by  Congenital 
Mal-conformation  of  the  Body.

(i.e.,   asymmetry,   misproportion,   unshapeliness,   ugliness,  and  the  like.)5.     The   Indications  afforded   by  Congenital 
Mal-conformation  of  the  Body.

(i.e.,   asymmetry,   misproportion,   unshapeliness,   ugliness,  and  the  like.)

496.  In  brief,  there  is  non-uniformity  of  temperament 
among  the  members  ;  or,  perchance,  the  principal  members 
depart  from  equability  and  come  to  be  of  contrary  temperament, 
one  deviating  towards  one,  another  to  its  contrary.  If  the 
components  of  the  body  are  out  of  proportion,  it  is  unfortunate 
both  for  talent  and  reasoning  power.  Thus,  (1)  a  tall  person 
with  a  large  abdomen  and  short  face  and  round  head,  and  short 
fingers'  ;  (2)  a  person  of  small  stature,  with  small  head,  much 
flesh  in  the  face  and  forehead,  and  even  in  the  neck  and  feet — 
the  face  like  the  full-moon  ;   the  jaws  rounded  and  massive.

276  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Similarly,  (3). if  the  head  and  forehead  were  round,  but  the 
face  very  round  (long,  marginal  reading),  and  the  neck  very 
thick,  and  if  the  eyes  are  sluggish  in  movement.  Such  persons 
would  be  the  very  last  of  people  to  be  classed  as  in  good  health.

6.     The  Signs  of  Plethora

497.  Regarding  plethora  there  are  two  aspects.  There  is 
the  plethora  in  regard  to  the  cavities,  tubes,  and  juice  canals  ; 
and  there  is  the  plethora  in  regard  to  power  or  strength  (vitality).1 .  Plethora  of  the  channels  of  the  body  consists  of  an  undue 
amount  of  humours  or  of  breath.  These  may  be  healthy  in 
quality,  and  merely  superabundant  in  quantity,  so  that  the 
channels  are  overdistended  and  overfilled.  In  such  a  _  case 
movements  become  dangerous,  the  vascular  channels  running  a 
risk-  of  rupture,  followed  by  a  flux  towards  the  regions  where 
there  is  back-pressure,  and  choking  of  these  parts  may  occur, 
with  subsequent  apoplexy  or  epilepsy.  To  relieve  such,  the 
local  plethora  must  be  rapidly  relieved  by  venesection.

2.  Plethora  of  strength  of  faculties.  In  this  case  the  error 
is  not  in  quantity  of  humours,  but  in  unhealthiness  of  quality, 
whereby  the  faculties  are  embarrassed,  and  they  become  inefficient 
for  the  processes  of  digestion  and  maturation.  A  person  who 
is  in  this  state  is  in  danger  of  putrefactive  disorders.

498.  Speaking  in  general  the  signs  of  plethora  of  the  first

type  are  :

Objective  :  red  face  ;  full  veins  ;  tightness  of  skin  ; 
sluggish  movements  (gestures)  ;  full  pulse.  High-coloured 
urine  ;   dense  urine  ;   scanty  appetite.

Subjective  :  sense  of  weight  in  the  limbs  ;  weak  vision  ; 
dreams  in  which  there  is  a  sense  of  weight — as  when  one  dreams 
one  is  unable  to  move,  or  is  carrying  a  heavy  weight,  or  cannot 
give  utterance  to  words.  This  kind  of  dream  may  be  compared 
with  that  associated  with  attenuation  of  humours,  or  where  the 
humours  are  moderate  in  amount  for  here  one  dreams  one  is 
flying  through  the  air,  or  moving  at  a  great  speed.The  modern  term  "  hypertension"  is  covered  by  the  old  term  of  plethora  or 
repletion.  The  correspondence  is  verified  by  some  of  its  symptoms.  Thus,  hemor- 
rhagic phenomena  occur — in  the  nose,  retina,  cerebrum,  meninges,  labyrinth,  the 
skin  ;  and  as  hematuria  and  hsemetemesis  simulating  organic  disease.  Hyper- 
tension causes  fatigue  of  the  heart  shown  by :  dyspnoea,  palpitation,  quick  pulse, 
anginal  attacks,  nocturnal  pseudo-asthma,  bruit  de  galop141  (p.  348).

499,  The  signs  of  plethora  in  respect  of  faculties  :  Heaviness ; 
sluggishness;  loss  of  appetite  (these  are  also  present  in  the  pre- 
ceding type).  Disinclination  for  exertion.  Sense  of  burden- 
someness.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

277

If  the  plethora  of.  the  faculty  is  unaccompanied  by  plethora 
of  humours,  the  veins  are  not  as  distended,  and  the  skin  is  not 
as  tense,  or  the  pulse  as  full  and  large,  or  the  urine  as  gross 
(dense)  or  as  red  in  colour.  There  is  no  lassitude  except  after 
undue  movement  and  exercise  and  activity.  The  dreams  consist 
of  sensations  of  itching,  stinging,  burning,  and  of  fetid  odours. 
Which  of  the  humours  it  is  which  is  dominant  in  such  cases 
is  discerned  by  the  signs  which  now  follow.  But  in  the  case  of 
plethora  of  faculty,  illness  ensues  before  all  its  signs  are  manifest.

7.      The  Evidences   which   show  which   of  the  Humours 
500.  is  Dominant

o

o  £

C3  «

+  s

Is

KS

I   I

R  w  S

■Cd

<u  bo  bfl— . 
1j3Pft

■noora

S     >

s  °  .

,Q  o  -

5  £

0)5 
to  o

T3   <D

>a  mi*  £

a -a

.1

a  -3     ■*£  ."S

p.  ft 
&ft

*0 +3

S3

o  >^ 
n

t=op<o    . 
^  «  g  o

o  o^  §    . 
T3  «  C   "     '

8'8-f. 
s.U_g

QJ^H

6is

>     3  ^ B     ~

tj   f^  tn   ^  ^         >

§    o

o  3 
2  >

I    I       I

p<><    <

1 1    I

•s    So  o^  §    . 
T3  «  C   "     '

8'8-f. 
s.U_g

QJ^H

6is

>     3  ^ B     ~

tj   f^  tn   ^  ^         >

§    o

o  3 
2  >

I    I       I

p<><    <

1 1    I

•s    S

■h«J5J    S 
[      r    C|4J    tC

1  §1  §  „-

w  >■,  o  o 
c  a>  O  C

£  :  :

II 
1-S

o  a 
o  " 
OK

M-S  3  is  -a  2  5

CSflo  o-°  £~

278  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

501.     Additional  remarks  :

The  age  of  the  patient  gives  a  clue  to  the  kind  of  humour 
likely  to  be  dominant.

Excess  of  sanguineous  humour  is  shown  by  signs  akin  to 
those  of  plethora,  and  some  of  the  signs  given  are  accounted  for 
by  simple  plethora.

When  the  atrabilious  humour  is  in  excess,  the  blood  is 
dusky  and  heavier  than  normal.  Atrabilious  humour  is  seldom 
in  excess  in  pale  and  slight  persons.

One  or  two  of  the  data  given  (under  general  physique  ;   on  the  hair  ;   the  sur- 
face veins)   are  from  Rhazes.

Note  the  patient  at  rest  (in  repose)  and  in  activity  (gestures,  attitude 
Note  that  the  signs  of  his  temperament  are  accentuated  when  he  is  ill.     I  lie 
type  of  reaction  to  infection  is  determined  by  his  temperament.

Signs  of  Obstruction  (to  the  flow  of  the  Humours) 
502.

^M^^^S  BSTRUCTION   is   known   to   be   present  if 
%r,rm£l?^m^^    there    are    sjgns     indicative    of    accumulation 
V  of  matters,   and   the    patient   experiences   the 
I"  sensation    of    fullness    throughout    the    body 
-^  without    there     being     any    of    the    signs    of 
general  plethora.If  the  obstructions  are  in  those  channels 
through  which  much  fluid  is  bound  to  flow,  there  is 
a  feeling  of  weight  or  heaviness.  Thus,  in  hepatic 
obstructions,  the  material  from  the  aliments  cannot  enter  the 
oro-an,  and  therefore  accumulates  and  is  retained,  so  as  to 
produce  a  much  greater  "encumbrance"  than  an  inflammatory 
swelling  would.  The  difference  from  the  latter  consists  in  the 
great  heaviness  and  the  absence  of  fever.

Obstructions  in  other  channels  do  not  lead  to  such  a 
sensation  of  heaviness,  but  only  one  of  overfullness  and  of 
stretching  and  tenseness.

503.  Obstruction  in  venous  channels  causes  the  skin  to 
become  tinged  with  yellow,  since  the  blood  does  not  then  gain 
access  to  the  surface  (layers  of  the  skin).

The  subject  of  "  obstructions  "  is  capable  of  great  expansion.

(i)  The  symptoms  differ  : —

(a)  With  each  of  the  humours.     Thus,  serous  humour  obstruction  is  manifested

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  2?9

as  cedema  of  the  glottis  oedema  of  the  lung,  nasopharyngeal  hypersecretion  oedema 
of  the  kidney  tissue,  of  the  blood  itself  ;  vomiting,  diarrhoea,  headache  (too  much 
cerebrospinal  fluid),  convulsions  ;  delirium,  coma,  Cheyne-Stokes  respiration 
amaurosis.  ■  -  r      ■        >

(b)  With  the  different  substances.  Thus  in  nephritis,  obstruction  of  the 
channels  in  the  skin  prevents  the  wastes  leaving  the  body  by  that  route,  with  conse- 
quent manifestation  as  arthritis,  anginas,  otitis,  etc.

(c)  _  With  the  atom  groups.  Thus  obstruction  to  the  outlet  of  nitrogen 
(azotaemia)  manifests  as  hypertension,  vomiting,  diarrhoea,  sialorrhcea  stomatitis 
parotitis,  retinitis,  anaemia,  of  plasmatic  type  ;  arthralgia  ;  fibrillar  tremors  ;  coma  : 
loss  of  appetite  for  meats.Viewing  diseases  in  this  way,  the  important  thing  is  to  find  both  site  of  obstruc- 
tion, and  substance  or  atom-groups  concerned.

(ii)  The  symptoms  may  be  monosyndromic  or  polysyndromic  (Vallerv- 
Kadot, 1"  p.  296-299.)  \  j

(iii)  Obstruction  to  the  flow  of  "  breath." 
x  ^  (iv).Jhe  "pores"  which  may  become  obstructed  vary  in  size  from  that 
of  the  orifices  of  the  body  down  to  the  smallest  channels,  whether  visible  to  the 
naked  eye  or  only  with  the  microscope,  or  whether  sub-microscopic  or  "  ultra- 
microscopic.  The  pores  vary  in  shape  and  consistence,  resilience,  elasticity  dis- 
tensibility.  Fluids  may  traverse  them  in  both  directions,  but  when  there  is  ob- 
struction, they  may  be  able  to  pass  only  in  one  direction  or  not  at  all.

9.     The  Signs  of  Gaseous  Distension 
504.  _  Gaseous  distension  is  recognized  (1)  by  means  of 
pain  experienced  in  the  sentient  members.     This  is  because  the 
gasos  produce  a  severance  of  continuity  in  the  tissue-elements  ;

(2)  by  the  movements  which  take  place  in  the  sentient  members  •

(3)  by  sound  ;    (4)  by  touch.

1.  The  pain  of  stretching  is  a  sign  of  gaseous  distension, 
especially  if  the  painful  tissues  are  soft  to  the  touch.  The  evi- 
dence will  be  complete  if  the  pain  afterwards-  ceases,  for  this 
could  not  occur  without  there  being  a  loss  of  continuity.  In 
members^  like  bone  or  glandular  tissues,  gaseous  distension  is 
not  manifested  by  pain,  even  if  such  distension  arises  in 
bones  which  have  been  fractured  (unless  the  skin  has  been  torn 
by  the  fractured  ends).

2.  The  movements  which  point  to  gaseous  distension  are  : 
fidgeting,  tossing  about  (peristalsis).  They  are  produced  by  the 
gaseous  materials  making  their  way  through  the  organs  out  of 
the  body.3.  Noises  may  be  produced,  e.g.,  gurglings,  rumblings. 
These  may  be  evoked  by  manual  compression,  percussing — as 
is  done  for  distinguishing  between  dropsy  (ascites)  and  tym- 
panites.

4.  Touch  enables  one  to  distinguish  between  distension 
with  gas  and  other  nodular  swellings.  Gaseous  distension 
stretches  the  part  and  yields  to  pressure.  That  is  not  the  case 
with  fluid  distension  (liquid,  viscous,  mucoid).

^  505,      The  difference  between  inflation  and  gaseous  dis- 
tension is  not  in  substance  but  in  form.     The  form  or  shape,

28o  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

of  the  distended  area  is  different  when  standing  or  lying  down 
and  manipulation  will  alter  its  position.

10.

The  Evidences  of  Solid  Swellings

506  The  presence  of  external  tumours  is  easily  demon- 
strated "to  the  sense  of  sight.  Deeply  placed  inflammatory 
swellings  are  revealed  by  accompanying  fever,  as  well  as  by  a  sense 
of  heaviness,  if  the  affected  member  be  devoid  of  sensation,  or  of 
stabbing  pain  as  well  as  heaviness  if  the  member  be  sentient. 
Interference  or  hindrance  to  function  and  movement  of  a  part 
affords  a  further  sign  of  the  presence  of  a  "  tumour."  A  certain 
degree  of  intumescence  of  the  overlying  part  is  a  very  important 
sign  of  an  inflammatory  mass,  if  sensation  has  access  to  it.

Cold  swellings  are  not  accompanied  by  pain.Cold  swellings  are  not  accompanied  by  pain.

507  It  is  difficult  to  describe  the  signs  of  tumours  in  a 
general  manner.  Even  if  one  could  do  so  it  would  be  at  the 
expense  of  wearisome  words.  That  is  why  it  is  simpler  to  defer 
details  to  the  special  chapters.  It  will  suffice  for  the  present  to 
say  that  wherever  heaviness  and  not  pam  are  perceived,  and  the 
signs  of  dominance  of  the  serous  humour  are  present,  this  leaves 
no  doubt  about  the  swelling  being  of  pituitous  nature.

If  there  are  signs  of  dominance  of  the  atrabilious  humour, 
and  the  swelling  is  hard  to  the  touch,  it  will  be  an  atrabilious  mass, 
because  induration  is  pre-eminent  among  the  signs  of  this  form

of  swelling.  .

508  Inflammatory  swellings  in  muscular  organs  are 
extremely  painful,  and  fever  is  intense  ;  the  nerves  are  stretched 
early  (causing  the  pain)  and  there  is  delirium.  Such  swellings 
interfere  with  the  movements  of  contraction  and  expansion.509  Swellings  in  any  of  the  inward  parts  of  the  body 
cause  the  abdominal  wall  to  become  wasted.  If  they  are  in- 
flammatory and  undergo  suppuration  and  track  outwards,  they 
cause  extremely  severe  pain,  with  fever  ;  the  tongue  becomes 
very  rough,  and  there  is  great  wakefulness,  and  the  symptoms 
become  more  and  more  severe— notably  the  sense  of  heaviness  and 
weight  and  stiffness  in  the  affected  part.  Induration  and  tension 
becSme  evident.  Sudden  emaciation  of  the  body,  with  hollow- 
ness  of  the  eyes  may  develop.  But  when  the  process  of  sup- 
puration has  attained  maturity,  fever  is  high,  pam  lessens,  the 
pulse  softens,  throbbing  subsides,  and  itching  replaces  the  pam. 
If  there  was  much  redness  and  induration,  the  redness  lessens, 
and  the  induration  is  less  noticeable.  Pressure  on  neighbouring 
organs  lessens,  and  all  the  causes  of  pain  subside,  along  with

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  281

the  great  sense  of  heaviness.  When  finally  the  abscess  bursts 
there  is  a  rigor  (produced  by  the  acridity  of  the  sanious  matter)  ; 
fever  increases  again  (because  of  the  movement  and  discharge 
of  the  pus),  and  the  pulse  becomes  "  empty,"  unequal,  weak, 
infrequent,  small,  broad,  and  slow.  There  is  loss  of  appetite  ; 
often  the  extremities  grow  warm.

The  pus  may  also  be  discharged  through  ordinary  routes  — 
the  expectoration,  the  vomit,  the  urine,  or  the  fasces.

510.  The  following  signs  after  the  bursting  of  an  abscess 
are  good  :  subsiding  fever,  easy  breathing,  return  of  strength, 
quick  evacuation  of  pus  through  its  proper  channels.511.  Sometimes,  however,  in  deep  abscesses,  pus  passes 
from  one  member  to  another  ;  and  this  transference  is  sometimes 
beneficial,  sometimes  detrimental.  It  is  beneficial  when  it  passes 
from  a  principal  member  to  a  subordinate  one  ;  as  for  instance, 
when  it  passes  from  the  brain  to  the  tissues  behind  the  ears,  and 
from  the  liver  to  the  groins.  It  is  detrimental  if  it  passes  from 
an  ignoble  organ  to  a  noble  one,  or  to  a  weaker  or  less  resistant 
organ,  as  for  instance  when  pleurisy  involves  the  heart  or 
lung.

512.  The  passage  of  latent  or  hidden  inflammation  and 
abscesses  and  eruptions  to  higher  or  lower  regions  affords  (dis- 
tinctive) signs.  If  they  pass  downwards,  this  is  shown  by  difficult 
breathing  and  other  respiratory  trouble,  and  tightness  of  the 
chest.  There  is  a  burning  sensation  beginning  below  and  passing 
to  the  upper  parts.  There  is  heaviness  in  the  region  of  the 
clavicle  ;  and  headache.  Evidence  may  also  be  obtained  from 
the  clavicle  and  forearm.

If  it  should  pass  upwards,  and  the  brain  become  involved 
in  inflammation,  it  is  a  bad  and  very  grave  sign.  But  if  the 
inflammation  passes  into  the  loose  tissues  behind  the  ears,  there 
is  hope  of  recovery.

Epistaxis  is  a  good  sign  in  such  a  case,  as  it  is  in  all  inflam- 
mations of  the  internal  organs.

A  more  careful  account  of  all  kinds  of  swelling  will  follow 
later,  at  the  same  time  as  we  deal  with  the  morbid  states  of  the 
several  internal  organs.

11.      The  Evidences   of  Loss  of  Continuity

513.  Loss  of  continuity  in  a  visible  member  is  readily 
evident  to  the  senses.  In  the  case  of  interior  organs,  loss  of 
continuity  is  shown  by

282

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

(i)   Pain — boring,  stabbing,  tearing.282

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

(i)   Pain — boring,  stabbing,  tearing.

(2)  Especially  if  there  is  no  fever.

(3)  Often  there  is  the  flow  of  some  humour — such  as  [a) 
hemoptysis  ;  (b)  effusion  into  a  roomy  cavity  of  the  body  ; 
(c)  outburst  of  purulent  matter  :  in  the  cases  where  loss  of  con- 
tinuity-follows the  maturation  of  an  abscess,  with  bursting  of 
the  abscess.  If  the  suppurative  process  has  matured,  the  fever 
will  subside  and  the  pus  be  discharged,  and  the  sensation  of 
heaviness  and  pain  will  subside.  Otherwise  the  pain  would  in- 
crease, and  the  other  symptoms  become  more  severe.

(4)  In  some  cases,  loss  of  continuity  is  revealed  by  complete 
luxation  of  the  member,  or  partial  displacement  from  its  proper 
position  (e.g.  hernia).  .  ,

(c)  Diversion  of  discharges  from  normal  to  other  channels, 
or  into  some  cavitv,  which  has  itself  been  produced  by  the  break 
of  continuity.  Ex.  :  traumatic  rupture  of  the  intestines,  whereby 
the  fecal  contents  cease  to  leave  the  body;  (false  aneurysm).

(6)  In  some  cases,  the  existence  of  loss  of  continuity  escapes 
detection  by  these  general  signs.  Special  signs  peculiar  to  each 
member  must  then  be  utilized  ;  such  as  :  loss  of  sensation; 
inability  to  retain  the  fluids  normally  entering  the  part;  rigid  or 
fixed  position  resulting  from  displacement  of  the  part  fromits 
proper  position  ;  lack  of  rigidity  ;  inability  to  retain  relation 
to  another  member  from  which  it  has  become  displaced.  _      _514  Prognosis.  As  you  are  aware,  both  loss  of  continuity 
and  the  "presence  of  (inflammatory  swellings)  are  more  grave 
when  thev  occur  in  very  sensitive  fibromuscular  members. 
In  fact,  such  loss  of  continuity  may  prove  fatal  from  syncope 
or  spasm.  The  syncope  is  due  to  the  violence  of  the  pain  ; 
the  spasms  are  due  to  the  irritation  of  the  nerves  in  which  the

parts  are  so  rich.  .      .  .

Next  in  severity  comes  loss  of  continuity  near  joints, 
because  restoration  can  only  be  slow  considering  the  undue 
mobility  of  the  parts,  and  the  fact  that  spaces  are  opened  up  in 
and  round  the  joints,  and  matters  readily  flow  into  these  spaces.

We  now  proceed  to  expound  the  subjects  of  the  Pulse  and 
the  Urine,  as  affording  general  evidence  of  morbid  states.

THE  PULSE

"It  is  necessary  to  enquire  diligently  into  the  properties  of  the  pulse  for 
diagnosis  and  for  the  use  of  drugs." — Duhalde. 20

"  Every  important  variety  of  pulse  revealed  by  the  sphygmograph  was  re- 
cognized, described,  and  named,  before  the  Christian  era.  ...  We  count  the  beats, 
and  note  their  force  and  volume  to  ascertain  the  strength  of  the  sufferer  and  the 
effect  upon  him  of  the  disease.  .  .  .  Many  of  the  indications  obtained  from  the  pulse 
do  not  depend  on  a  knowledge  of  the  circulation  at  all."*  Broadbent,  ".The  Pulse  " 
1890,   p.   32.

515.^  Definition.  The  pulse  is  a  movement  in  the  heart 
and  arteries  (the  receptacles  of  the  breath)  which  takes  the  form 
of  alternate  expansion  and  contraction,  whereby  the  breath 
becomes  subjected  to  the  influence  of  the  air  inspired.In  modern  language,  "it  is  the  change  of  shape  from  the 
flattened  condition  impressed  on  the  vessel  by  the  finger  which  the 
artery  assumes  under  the  distending  force  of  the  blood  within  it, 
which  constitutes  for  us  the  pulse."     (Broadbent,  ib.  p.  20.)

The  subject  of  the  pulse  may  be  considered  (i)  generally, 
(ii)  in  regard  to  each  of  the  several  diseases.  We  defer  the  latter 
till  abater  period  when  we  speak  of  the  diseases  themselves. 
At  this  stage  we  discuss  the  subject  generally.

516.  Description. — Every  beat  of  the  pulse  comprises 
two  movements  and  two  pauses.     Thus,

expansion   :  pause   :  contraction    :  pause.

One  movement  could  not  pass  at  once  into  another  in  an 
opposite  direction.  There  must  be  a  boundary  or  "  limit  of  an 
act,"  as  is  expounded  in  the  work  on  natural  science.

Many  doctors  consider  that  it  is  impossible  to  perceive  the 
movement  of  contraction.  Others  are  able  to  perceive  it — as 
"  strength  " — if  the  pulse  is  strong  ;  as  "  degree  of  expansion  " 
in  a  large  pulse,  as  "  great  resistance  "  in  a  hard  pulse,  and,  in  a 
slow  pulse,  by  the  long  period  of  time  occupied  by  the  movement.

Galen  also  says  :  "  For  many  years  I  was  doubtful  about 
clearly  discerning  the  movement  of  contraction  by  touch,  and  I 
shelved,  the  question  until  such  time  as  I  should  learn  enough  to 
fill  the  gap  in  my  knowledge.    After  that,  the  doors  of  the  pulse

*  The  following  section  on  Sphygmology  is  therefore  not  obsolete,  but  of  real 
value  to  the  modern  practitioner.

283

284  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE*  The  following  section  on  Sphygmology  is  therefore  not  obsolete,  but  of  real 
value  to  the  modern  practitioner.

283

284  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

were  opened  to  me.  Whoever  should  study  these  things  as  I 
did  will  perceive  that  which  I  perceived  [as  it  were,  a  brilliant 
light  shining  suddenly  out  from  behind  total  darkness.  Whoever 
allows  these  words  to  be  true  and  not  fabulous  will  benefit  very 
greatly  ;  despair  will  not  touch  him  or  frighten  him  from  the 
pursuit  of  his  study,  even  though  he  makes  no  progress  for 
many  years."]  Nevertheless  there  are  conditions  in  which  this 
movement  cannot  be  perceived.  .

517.  Reason  for  feeling  the  pulse  at  the  wrist.  (i)  it  is 
readily  accessible  ;  there  is  little  flesh  over  it  ;  (2)  the  patient  is 
not  distressed  by  exposing  this  part.

§  204.  This  reason  is  important  in  the  East  where  the  doctor 
may  not  expose  a  female  patient  in  any  way.  This  interdiction 
accounts  for  the  extraordinary  erudition  attained  in  the  art  of  feeling 
the  pulse,  for  instance  in  China.  "  The  old  Chinese  doctors  are 
remarkably  good  diagnosticians.  Although  the  study  of  the  patient 
is  restricted  to  the  examination  of  the  two  radial  pulses,  and  noting 
the  state  of  the  eyes  and  tongue,  the  diagnosis  is  disconcertingly 
accurate."  (Hartmann.28)  [(

William  of  Rubruk,  a  Franciscan  friar  (1253)  recorded  :  ihe 
Cathayans  ...  are  first-rate  artists  in  every  kind,  and  their  phy- 
sicians have  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  virtues  of  herbs,  and  an 
admirable  skill  in  diagnosis  by  the  pulse  "  (quoted  in  Encycl.  Brit., 
vi.  189,  by  Prof.  Giles,  who  also  states  "  the  variations  of  the  pulse 
have  been  classified  and  allocated  with  a  minuteness  hardly  credibleP'  2Eusebius  Renaudot148  (p.  209),  in  1733,  wrote  :  "  They  are  so 
sure  of  the  disease  that  they  tell  all  the  precedent  symptoms  to  a 
nicety."

(3)  The  artery  runs  in  a  straight  course  (which  is  no  small 
help  towards  accuracy  of  diagnosis  :    Galen).

(4)  The  distance  from  the  heart  is  not  great.

§  205  The  heart  and  arteries  all  pulsate  with  the  same  rhythm, 
so  that  any  artery  can  be  used  for  feeling  the  pulse.  But  most  arteries 
are  embedded  in  flesh  and  cannot  be  distinctly  felt.  The  order  of 
clearness  is  :   wrist,  soles,  behind  ears,  along  arms.

Arteries  within  bones  cannot,  of  course  be  felt ;  nor  can  arteries 
be  made  use  of  which  have  other  bodies  in  front  of  them  except  m 
emaciated  persons,  where  for  instance  the  aorta  or  limb  arteries 
become  palpable  for  the  first  time.

518.  Technique  in  feeling  the -pulse.  (1)  The  position  of  the  hand. 
If  the  palm  be  turned  upwards  the  pulse  will  appear  wider,  less 
high  and  less  long,  especially  in  thin  persons.  If  the  hand  be 
oalm  down,  the  pulse  seems  higher,  longer  and  narrower.

THE   CANON   OF  MEDICINE  285THE   CANON   OF  MEDICINE  285

§  206.  (2)  If  the  patient  be  a  male,  use  the  left  hand  :  if  a 
female,  the  right.93  This  ancient  Chinese  idea,  that  the  pulse  of 
one  side  has  a  different  significance-to  that  of  the  other,  is  also  met 
with,  in  a  different  form,  in  recent  literature.  Thus,  Tones  (see  Bibl.) 
states  that  the  pulse  at  the  right  wrist  informs  of  the  state  of  the  con- 
stitution, or  vitality,  and  that  of  the  left  wrist  informs  of  the  local 
disease,  and  the  real  and  true  condition  of  the  patient.  He  further 
states  that  when  both  pulses  are  fully  strong  and  regular,  after  an  ill- 
ness, the  patient  is  nearly  well.— Baraduc,110on  the  basis  of  biometric 
observations  of  an  elaborate  kind,  asserts  that  reactions  obtained 
with  the  right  hand  belong  to  changes  in  the  physical  or  material 
vitality  of  the  body,  whereas  those  obtained  with  the  left  hand  belong 
to  the  psychic  vitality.— These  statements  are  of  interest  in  relation 
to  the  ancient  Chinese  idea.

(3)  The  position  of  the  observer's  hand.— This  must  be  adapted 
according  to  the  position  of  the  patient.  The  middle  finger  must  be- 
placed  exactly  at  the  junction  of  carpus  with  lower  end  of  radius.. 
The  other  two  fingers  are  now  allowed  to  rest  upon  the  artery,  one 
on  either  side  (ib.).  The  index  finger  should  be  nearest  the  heart.. 
(Broadbent,  p.  39.)

(4)  Emotional  state  of  the  patient.  The  pulse  should  be  felt 
at  a  time  when  the  patient  is  not  in  a  state  of  excitement  or  anger, 
or  affected  by  exertion,  or  under  the  influence  of  the  emotions, 
or  in  a  state  of  satiety  (which  renders  the  pulse  heavy),  or  of 
hunger  ;  nor  must  it  be  a  time  when  usual  habits  are  neglected 
or  new  ones  are  being  formed.§  2°7-  (5)  The  state  of  the  observer.  The  observer  must  be  in  a 
calm  state  of  mind.  He  must  be  very  attentive  and  free  from  the 
least  distraction  of  thought.  The  body  must  be  tranquil,  and  the 
posture  at  ease.  The  respirations  should  thus  be  unimpeded  and 
regular.     His  own  state  of  health  should  be  good  (Duhalde.20).

Comparison  with  a  normal  pulse  is  thus  possible.

§  208.      (6)   Other   instructions  given   in   the    Chinese    system    of  Sphyemoloey 
The  instructions  for  feeling  the  pulse  include  the  following  :    first  apply  the 
fingers  gently,  touching  the  skin  very  lightly  at  the  three  places  corresponding  to 
the  three  fingers— named  C  (for  cubitus,  or  lower  end  of  radius),  G  for  "  gate  "and 
W  (for  wrist),  the  successive  fingerpulps  being  in  contact  with  those  three  places 
J.  he  character  of  the  pulse  is  now  noted  in  reference  to  the  vital  organs.

s    !  .M.Thf  next  ~  ep  is  to  apply  the  fingers  a  little  harder,  but  not  hard  enough  to 
feel  the  bone.     The  attention  should  now  be  directed  to  the  state  of  the  pulse  at  G 
J.  he  third  step  consists  m  applying  pressure  till  the  bone  can  be  felt,  and  then  making 
tests  with  a  view  to  deciding  on  the. state  of  each  of  the  five  main  organs  &

If  the  wrist  be  long,  the  fingers  need  not  be  readjusted  ;  but  if  short  readjust- 
ment of  the  fingers  must  be  made  several  times,  moving  to  juxtapositions  each  time

J- he  attention  must  not  be  allowed  to  wander  from  the  search  in  question— 
the  five  vital  organs  and  the  six  viscera.  The  sensation  imparted  to  each  finger  is 
noted  for  the  purpose.  Great  exactitude  must  be  observed.  The  observation 
will  evidently  occupy  a  considerable  period  of  time."  Fine  though  these  distinctions  are,  the  sedulous  physician  will  perceive 
and  remember  them."

A  copy  of  one  of  the  numerous  diagrams  in  the  work  quoted  is  here  appended 
substituting  a  translation  for  the  actual  accompanying  text.*

*  For  guidance  in  the  translation  of  this  passage  and  many  parts  of  the  work 
quoted,  grateful  thanks  may  be  here  expressed  to  Prof.  J.  P.  Bruce  and  Mr.  Li.

286

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

^^Mj$r

err;  *|iie  -hr*

wp

( Superficial  pressure,  to  learn  state  from 
1         loin  to  ankle.

*-Deep  pressure  :    from  heart  to  head. 
f  Superficial :   stomach,  oesophagus. 
\Deep  :  spleen. 
( Superficial :  chest. 
\  Deep  :  lungs  to  head.

The  left  side  is  studied  with  reference 
to  the  state  of  the  heart,  small  intestine, 
liver,  bile,  kidney.

The  right  side,  with  reference  to  the 
lung,  large  intestine,  spleen,  stomach, 
generative  system.

1  Wrist  :  heart,  small  intestine. 
T   ,,    Gate  :  liver,  bile. 
lJiit\  Cubit:  (medium  pressure)  :  kidney 
^    and  bladder. 
I  Wrist  :  lung,  large  intestine. 
_.  ,.     Gate  :  spleen,  stomach.  _

Rl6ht  \  Cubit  :      heart    and    three    vital 
^     centres. 
This  is  the  classical  and  authoritative 
statement.

w

The  following  conditions  are  emphasized  in  this  Chart :  (i)  It  is 
summer  :  (2)  the  time-factor  (including  time  of  day)  is  5,  "  j  (3)  J"1  1S 
excessive  at  Ch'uan,  small  on  the  right  side  ;   (4)  Yang  is  small  on  the  lelt

o

W

W 
H

a 
o

en

d 
a; 
W

H

side.  The  pulse  corresponding  to  this  is  at  the  right  "  cubit "  :  full  or 
heavy;  fine  or  small ;  and  it  is  not  responsive  (to  the  "  ether  ").  Another 
time-factor  is  9,  5,  9,  11.

o

w

K 
H

"   Q 
tn  H

H  H

Pa 
O

H 
.J

o

<!

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

^7o

w

K 
H

"   Q 
tn  H

H  H

Pa 
O

H 
.J

o

<!

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

^7

§  209.  Some  noteworthy  theoretical  considerations  arising  out 
of  the  Chinese  work  may  be  added  as  applicable  to  the  Arabian 
conceptions,  without  attempting  to"  outline  their  full  system.

We  must  study  the  subtler  aspects  of  the  nature  of  the  human 
being  by  invading  the  domain  of  "  occult  "  science  (by  some  con- 
sidered to  be  forbidden),  if  we  are  to  understand  the  real  position  not 
only  of  the  great  Chinese  work,  but  also  that  of  the  Canon  itself. 
With  such  a  key,  many  of  the  passages  acquire  an  entirely  new  aspect 
and  value.  The  expansion  and  retraction  of  "  the  breath  "• — so 
important  in  regard  to  the  subject  of  the  nature  of  the  pulse,  respira- 
tion and  other  periodic  movements — are  part  and  parcel  with 
diurnal  and  other  changes  in  what  is  called  the  "  cosmic  ether." 
By  working  out  the  formulae  embodying' the  behaviour  of  the  human 
vibrations,  using  biometric  methods,  Baraduc110  makes  concrete  that 
which  is  usually  passed  over  as  unauthenticated  and  apocryphal.

The  interpretation  of  the  pulse  depends  on  the  interpretation  of 
the  body  itself.  The  latter  follows  "  world-conception  "  rather  than 
concrete  anatomy.  The  natural  phenomena  of  the  patient  harmonize 
with  those  of  nature  in  general,  and  the  two  must  be  taken  con- 
jointly.According  to  the  classical  style — ■"  the  two  ideas — '  urge,' 
'  change  ' — how  important  they  are  !  "  They  provide  the  key  to 
physiological  processes,  and  also  to  the  understanding  of  the  pulse. 
They  represent  something  deeper  than  our  modern  idea  "  forces  of 
Nature  "  ;  they  are  over  and  above  the  ordinary  course  of  Nature,  as 
expressed  in  the  Latin  "  praeternaturalis."  These  two  ideas  provide 
the  purpose  of  study  as  the  physician  sits  with  his  hand  on  the  pulse, 
and  his  mind  stilled  for  no  small  period  of  time.*  The  relation  between 
the  root  factors  of  life  and  those  of  the  patient  is  to  be  elucidated  ; 
and  they'  find  their  expression  in  terms  of  functional  activity  of  the 
several  organs  of  the  body.  Hence  this  science  of  sphygmology  pays 
regard  to  the  seasonal  variations,  the  age,  the  sex,  the  personal 
constitution,  the  dominant  '  element,'  its  phase  (rise  or  fall\  and 
especially  the  character  of  the  vital  force— active,  passive,  negative, 
positive  (see  Figure).  It  aims  at  forming  an  opinion  as  to  whether 
the  illness  is  slight  or  deep-seated,  easily  curable  or  incurable,  fatal 
or  not,  and  if  fatal  in  how  long  a  time.

The  permutations  and  combinations — the  five  tsang  pulses, 
the  six  fu  pulses,  the  seven  pyau  pulses,  the  eight  li  pulses  and  the 
nine  tau  pulses — all  these  afford  ample  scope  towards  a  system  which 
may  encounter  ridicule  but  is  too  rich  in  minutia;  to  be  lightly  put 
aside.For,  quoting  Broadbent  again  :  "  It  is  impossible  to  examine 
with  attention  a  large  number  of  pulses,  whether  among  the  healthy 
or  the  sick,  without  being  struck  by  the  extraordinary  diversity  of 
frequency,  size,  character,  tension,  and  .  force  met  with.  This 
diversity  prevails  quite  independently  of  disease  in  both  sexes  and 
with  all  ages,  especially  in  regard  to  diameter  of  vessel  and  tension

*  See  Frontispiece.

288  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

and  force  of  pulse.  .  .  .  Taking  everything  into  account,  there  must, 
when  we  compare  the  small,  short  compressible  pulse  of  one  man  with 
the  large,  firm  and  long  pulse -of  another  be  great  differences  in  the 
velocity  and  energv  of  the  movement  of  blood  through  the  capillaries 
in  different  individuals,  and  clearly  there  are  great  differences  in  the 
circulation  of  the  same  person  at  different  times.  .  .  .  The  fact  that 
such  differences  are  compatible  with  health  and  vigour  is  conclusive 
evidence  that  nutrition  and  functional  efficiency,  even  of  the  nerve- 
centres,  are  not  in  such  close  relation  with  and  intimate  dependence 
upon  the  blood-supply  as  we  are  sometimes  apt  to  suppose."The  endless  diversity  in  the  pulse  is  not  an  incident,  it  is  funda- 
mental ;  the  ancients  sought  to  reduce  it  to  a  science  because  they 
frightlv)  believed  there  was  a  law  underlying  this  diversity.  This 
goes  with  the  fact  that  the  various  organs  of  the  body  actually  vary 
greatly  from  the  standards  adopted  by  the  pathological  anatomist. 
The  amount  of  blood  discharged  from  the  heart  at  each  beat  is  very 
different  in  various  persons.  The  state  of  health  is  as  it  were  some- 
thing over  and  above  the  ordinary  physiological  mechanisms  so  fully 
expounded  in  modern  textbooks.  The  attempt  to  reduce  nutrition  to 
mechanical  laws  is  an  attempt  to  bind  to  mechanics  that  which  is 
beyond  mechanics.

Hence  the  studv  of  the  Chinese  system,  and  of  their_  world- 
conception  affords  additional  justification  not  only  for  contending  that 
corporeal  form,  corporeal  phenomena,  and  mental  phenomena- 
features,  contours,  build,  mannerisms,  talents— all  belong  together  and 
are  mutually  illuminative,  but  also  for  proceeding  to  the  formulation 
of  these  associations  and  inter-relations.

If  in  so  doing,  a  Medicine  is  built  up  in  which  disease  takes  a  very 
minor  place,  and  "  soil  "  (a  rather  tiresome,  though  expressive  word) 
a  first  place,  which  it  is  the  object  of  the  physician  to  elucidate  and 
continuously  realize,  It  will  at  least  be  a  guide  to  something  approach- 
ing universality  of  application,  and  cease  to  attempt  multi-specific 
therapy.S  210  The  idea  that  different  sensations  can  be  imparted  to  adjoining  fingers 
by  one  and  the  same  pulse  may  be  discussed  briefly  here.  It  must  be  assumed 
that  there  are  potential  waves  of  different  lengths  passing  along  the  artery  at  the 
same  time.  Long  waves  reach  one  finger,  but  not  another.  The  long  sweep  of  an 
artery  can  actually  be  seen  in  thin  subjects.  The  waves  usually  thought  of  are  the 
short  ones  induced  by  the  force  of  the  impacts  of  the  heart  wall  on  the  blood.  Long 
tos  consist  of  changes  of  tension  in  a  spiral  direction,  and  careful  concentrative 
observation  will  allow  such  an  accession  to  be  felt  _  .  ,

S  2ii  The  relation  between  pulse  and  special  organs  is  not  to  be  regarded  as 
fanciful  when  one  obvious  instance  alone  will  justify  it— the  influence  upon  cardiac 
activity'  and  force  of  beat  which  the  state  of  the  stomach  exerts         _

8  212  The  frequency  of  missed  beats,  and  the  number  of  misses  compared 
with  number  of  respirations,  exemplifies  another  very  widely  neglected  aspect  of

8*2 1^  The  names  given  to  pulses  are  of  interest,  but  it  is  difficult  to  assign 
Chinese  terms  to  particular  Arabic  or  Latin  names.  It  will  suffice  to  present  the 
following  comparisons  of  pulse-types  with  natural  objects,  and  human,  actions

Natural  objects  :  Blade  of  small  onion,  solid  within  ;  stone  bullet  shot  out  of  a 
crossbow;  drop  of  water  ;  down;  drum-head;  grate  in  a  passage  ;  hole  in  a  flute; 
filament  of  hair  ;  scattered  leaves  ;  a  pestle  ;  pills  ;  a  silk  thread  ;  the  handle 
of  a  staff  or  spear  ;   untwisted  string  ;   worn-out  cloth.

Table  or  Terminology

A.^ — General  Terms. 
(Arranged  in  pairs  of  opposites.)

-

Sec-

ft .

o  ° 
O

tion

in

trans.

"(i)

521

522

(2)

523

(3)Table  or  Terminology

A.^ — General  Terms. 
(Arranged  in  pairs  of  opposites.)

-

Sec-

ft .

o  ° 
O

tion

in

trans.

"(i)

521

522

(2)

523

(3)

524

(4)

525

(5) 
(6) 
(7)

526 
527 
528

(?)

529

(9)

(10)

530 
533

Term  used.

Long-Short

Broad-Slender

Deep-Elevated

Large-Small

Thick-Slender

Strong-Weak

Swift-Slow 
(Rapid-Sluggish) 
Hard-Soft 
(Compressible- 
Incompressible) 
Full-Empty 
Hot-Cold

Hurried-Infrequent 
Brisk-Sluggish 
"  Dense  "-"  Rare  " 
Equal-Unequal 
(Regular-Irregular) 
Orderly-Disorderly 
Rhythmic-

Arhythmic

Term  in  Latin 
Text.

Longus-Curtus

Latus-Strictus

Profundus-Elevatus

Magnus-Parvus

Grossus-Subtilis

Fortis-Debilis

Vehemens*-Imbecillus

Validus*-Languidu.s

Velox-Tardus

Durus-Mollis 
Lenis*

Plenus- Vacuus

Calidus-frigidus

Frequens-Rarus

Continens-Resolutus

Spissus  f-Lassus

Aequalis-Biversus

Ordinatus-Inordinatus 
Pondus-arrythmus

Term  in  Bulaq 
Text.

Tawil'-qaslr*

'  arid  "-day  yiq'

munkhaff  ad  5-mushrif  •

'azlm'-saghir8

ghalizs-daqiq10

qawi'^-da'if13

sari' 1  '-bati' 1  * 
salb '  '-layyin x «

mumtali' '  '-khali 1  • 
harr^-barid30 
mutawatir  *  J-mutaf  awut  * ' 
mutadarik  •  '-mutakhalkhil  *  * 
mutakaflif  *  5-mutarakhi  *  •§ 
mustawi  *  '-ikhtilaf a  * 
(mukhtaf) 
Muntazim  "-mukhtalif so 
Wazn-arda'1-wazn s  1

Term  in 
Chinese  Text.}

ch'ang-tuan

ch'eng-fu 
ta-hsiao

li-jao 
hung

k'uai-ch'ih

shih-juan 
(Ke)

man-kung  (hsti)

chieh(?)-huan(?)

mi  (chin)-san 
jun-k'ou

ting-tai

*  Synonymous  words  occurring  in  older  Latin  editions.

§  These  synonyms   all   appear   together   in  the   one   (Bulaq)   text.chieh(?)-huan(?)

mi  (chin)-san 
jun-k'ou

ting-tai

*  Synonymous  words  occurring  in  older  Latin  editions.

§  These  synonyms   all   appear   together   in  the   one   (Bulaq)   text.

t  In  the  Latin  the  term  "  spissus  "  is  often  used  as  the  opposite  of  "  rarus. 
In  the  Arabic,  the  latter  is  mutafawut,  to  which  mutawatir  is  opposite.  In  the 
passages  in  which  spissus  is  used,  the  Arabic  is  often  mutawatir  and  not  mutakaSif. 
There  is  actually  a  slight  difference  between  frequens  and  sdissus,  for  the  former 
has  the  thought  of  an  abrupt  rise  in  the  pulse-beat,  according  to  group-number  2, 
whereas  spissus  conveys  the  idea  of  beats  very  close  together.  Rarus  may  be  taken 
as  the  counterpart  of  either  thought :  if  it  means  a  leisurely  rise,  it  is  in  accordance 
with  group-number  3  ;  if  it  means  "  spaced,"  this  is  also  the  idea  m  mutafawut. 
The  Arabic  distinguishes  the  two  ideas  of  rarus,  by  using  mutarakhi  for  sluggishness.

The  words  rapid,  hurried,  brisk— slow,  sluggish,  leisurely,  rare,  and  the  words 
frequens,  spissus,  velox—  rarus,  tardus,  languidus,  are  apt  to  be  misleading,  and  it 
is  difficult  to  avoid  inconsistency,  both  in  the  Latin  and  the  English,  for  m  some 
cases  one  word  conveys  a  better  idea  of  a  shade  of-  meaning,  and  in  others  another, 
whichever  Arabic  term  is  employed.

'B. — Distinctive  Terms. 
(Arranged  alphabetically.)

Term  used-

Section

in

trans.

Bounding

Chord-like

Continuous

Creeping

Dicrotic

Failing

Flickering

h      Formicant 
i      Harsh

540,  571 
549 
538

541,  572

546,  560

547,  568

545

k 
i

m 
n 
o

P 
1

Intermittent

Jerking

Mouse-tail

Recurrent 
Spasmodic 
Swooning

Thrilling 
Wiry

Synonym.

Undulatory

Unbroken 
Vermicular

Fading,  falling

Recurrent

Term  in 
Latin  Text.

Term  in 
Bulaq  Text.

542,  572Mouse-tail

Recurrent 
Spasmodic 
Swooning

Thrilling 
Wiry

Synonym.

Undulatory

Unbroken 
Vermicular

Fading,  falling

Recurrent

Term  in 
Latin  Text.

Term  in 
Bulaq  Text.

542,  572

543,  565

538 
539

544,  567

538 
548,  569 
567,  600

548,  570

1548

Serrate,

sawing 
Interrupted 
Gazelle 
Decurtate

Tense 
Recurrent

mouse-tail 
Trembling 
Twisted

Undosus,  fluctuosus 
Chordosus 
Continuus 
Vermicularis 
Bispulsans  ;  dicrotus 
Cadens  in  medio

Reciprocus  ;     mesalius 
pulsus  inclinatus 
(Rhazes) 
pulsus  innuens   (Haly

Abbas) 
Formicans 
Serrinus,  serratus

Intersectus

Dorcadissans  ;  gazellans 
Cauda   soricina  ;    murus

innuens 
Reditivus 
Spasmosus 
Cauda  reditiva 
Syncopizans 
Tremulus 
Retortus

Al  mawja*18 
Mutawattir35 
Muttasil" 
Aldudi3' 
Dzuwa  qar'aina' 
Al  waqi'  fi'l-

wasat37 
Musalli"§

Al  namli" 
Minshariy10

Munqata' - ' 
Al  ghazali13 
Zanabul'l  far'3

'aid11

Mutashannuj 4  5 
Ghashiya16.

Hung  (?) 
Hsien

Wei

Term  in

Chinese

Text.J

Murta'ish" 
Multawi18

Se

Chan  Hsieh

Ts'u

Fu

Chin

Fu,  jao,  tai  (?)

Tung  (?) 
Hsi

*  Lit.  a  fast-going  she-camel,  whose  girth  slips  through  the  inequality  of   the 
motion  of  the  fore  and  hind  feet.

§  Lit.  the  third  horse  in  a  race.

J  Some  of  the  Chinese  equivalents  here  gi 
others    are    only    approximately    correct.     This 
sphygmology  is  different,  as  indicated  in  §209. 
prove  to  be  more  exactly  representative  of  the 
It  is  of  interest  that  the  "  water-hammer  pulse  : 
(tan  she,  or  yen  tau),  but  does  not  appear  to  be  7

given  are  free  of  ambiguity,  whereas

is    because    the    basis    of    Chinese

Dual  terms  also  exist  which  may

types  given  in  part  B  of  the  Table.

e  "  is  described  in  the  Chinese  work

:  represented  in  the  Qanun.

CH>     ■SS     "^?     "S~    '^3~    '^r^  -SIS"    "(F^   "£3"  "S5"    <^^  'SSe  "  is  described  in  the  Chinese  work

:  represented  in  the  Qanun.

CH>     ■SS     "^?     "S~    '^3~    '^r^  -SIS"    "(F^   "£3"  "S5"    <^^  'SS

5£  "2S.  ^r         v^        J=5,         -^*,      ,«>2,  5^,        -^J.        -^>        <=£^      v^g^

1  4<  -r  «  1    i^^^j^H

HMMil

?^>

<=3-    <=J-    <=£•    >£*,  ^s^  .  S^  s2>  v£>  -c&  ■<±J'

3

£    $

4  "O"^  ^'-^  "\_"\  ^  *J '  nJ

-S-    c^    S3    <=*-    crU-    v£3  n^j,   v2£   -S3-  ^3,  -^J^  <=S-

n 
<

b 
2;

s

w 
g

s

o 
o

o

of 
cr: 
lie 
sv 
si

To  face  />age  289

THE   CANON   OF  MEDICINE  289

Actions  seen  in  nature  :  .a  bird  pecking;  a  bubbling  spring;  the  branches 
of  a  willow  tree  in  a  gentle  zephyr  in  spring  ;  drops  of  water  dripping  through  a 
crack  in  the  roof  ;  frisking  fish  ;  f  eathers;  agitated  by  the  wind  ;  a  bird  flying  low  ; 
liquid  being  constantly  gulped  down ;  rolling  of  thunder ;  scattered  leaves ; 
swimming  on  the  surface  of  water  ;  the  pace  of  a  toad  embarrassed  by  weeds  ;  water 
simmering  in  a  kettle  over  a  fire  ;  waves  running  into  one  another.

Human  actions  :  Throwing  earth  over  an  object  ;  going  by  stealth ;  the 
strokes  of  a  knife-point ;  a  knife  scraping  bamboo  ;  puffing  and  blowing  in  going 
upstairs  ;    turning  back.

§  214.  Ayurvedic  Sphygmology . — Sarangadhara  gives  eight  or  nine  verses 
showing  how  to  examine  the  pulse,  and  gives  the  characteristics  belonging  to  derange- 
ments of  Vayu,  Pitta  and  Kapha  singly  or  in  combinations.  But  this  interesting 
subject  is  necessarily  not  dealt  with  here.

519.  Ten  features  in  the  pulse.  We  say  that  there  are  ten 
features  in  the  pulse  from  which  we  are  able  to  discern  the 
states  of  the  body.     Some  group  them  under  only  nine  headings.(1)  Amount  of  diastole  ;  estimated  in  terms  of  length, 
breadth,  and  thickness.

(2)  Quality  of  impact  (lit.  knocking  at)  imparted  to  the 
finger  of  the  observer  at  each  beat.

(3)  Duration  of  time  occupied  in  each  movement.

(4)  Consistence  of  the  artery  (resistance  to  the  touch).

(5)  Emptiness  or  fullness  of  the  vessel  between  the  beats 
(modern  :    compressibility).

(6)  The  feel — whether  hot  or  cold.

The  remaining  features  concern  several  beats  :

(7)  Duration  of  time  occupied  by  the  pauses.

(8)  Equality  or  inequality  of  force  in  successive  beats.

(9)  Regularity  or  irregularity  ;  orderliness  or  disorderliness. 
Presence  of  intermissions.

(10)  Metre  ;    rhythm  ;    harmony  ;'  measure  ;    accent.

§  215.  Additional  points  :  frequency,  or  number  of  beats  per  minute  ;  number 
of  beats  to  each  respiratory  movement  (inspiration  plus  expiration  ;  mode  of  rise, 
mode  of  fall,  and  kind  of  pause  at  C.G.  and  W.  as  one  tests  from  skin  to  bone  and 
back  ;  the  number  of  beats  which  occur  before  there  is  an  intermission  (an  inter- 
mission is  almost  certain'  to  occur  in  everyone)  ;  the  comparison  of  the  patient's 
pulse  with  one's  own,  or  with  that  of  a  person  of  definitely  equable  temperament ; 
the  comparison  of  the  pulse  with  that  which  should  be  present  at  a  given  season.

DETAILS

520.  (1)  Amount  of  Expansion. — The  kind  of  -pulse  in. 
terms  of  the  three  dimensions  :  length,  breadth  and  thickness. 
There  are  nine  variations  in  regard  to  one  dimension  alone,  and 
these  are  called  "  simple,"  and  there  are  nine  compound  varieties.§  216.  Broadbent  remarks  ("  Pulse,"115  p.  7  footnote)  that  the^classificationof 
pulses  according  to  length,  breadth  and  thickness  is  superfluous.  "  Deserting  the 
path  of  observation,  Galen  did  not  see  that  a  cylindrical  tube  would  expand  equally 
in  all  directions,  and  that  there  could  not  be  any  difference  between  its  breadth  and 
depth.  .  .  .  The  permutations  and  combinations  of  large,  moderate  and  small  pulses, 
to  the  number  of  27  varieties  of  pulse — an  over-refinement  on  purely  theoretical  or 
transcendental  grounds,  which  led  to  extreme  confusion."

U

290  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

§  217.  A  careful  consideration  of  the  text  of  the  Canon,  in  conjunction 
with  the  Chinese  writings,  suggests  that  something  more  was  in  mind.  One  is 
dealing  with  waves,  not  with  cylindrical  tubes  merely.  There  is  a  subtle  distinction 
between  breadth  and  thickness.  Every  tiny  portion  of  an  artery  is  fluctuating 
continuously  both  in  health  and  disease  in  virtue  of  its  vasomotor  endowment ; 
and  it  is  this  that  is  sought.  Here,  as  in  so  many  matters  in  regard  to  the  living 
being,  the  simple  mechanistic  conception  leads  to  error  (and  to  scepticism  about  the 
existence  of  unthought-of  detail).  It  is  possible  in  the  physiological  laboratory  to 
reduce  the  (experimental)  animal  into  something  very  nearly  a  mechanism,  or 
actually  into  a  mechanism,  and  in  that  way  secure  results  which  triumphantly 
prove  the  contentions  offered  ;  but  the  living  human  being  with  the  full  possession 
of  all  his  faculties  constitutes  a  very  different  "  proposition."  Moreover,  observa- 
tions on  the  more  subtle  vibrations,  as  by  biometric  study,  go  to  suggest  that  there 
may  be  reason  in  the  ideas  in  question  (cf.  Baraduc110).521  o  The  simple  pulses  are  :  the  long,  the  short  and  the 
mean  ;  the  broad,  the  slender  and  the  mean  ;  the  deep,  the 
elevated  and  the  mean.

The  long  pulse  is  one  which  is  longer  than  normal.  This 
is  the  type  appropriate  to  a  person  of  equable  temperament  or 
else  approximating  to  this.  The  difference  between  the  natural 
and  the  equable  has  been  already  made  plain.  ^

The  short  pulse  is  contrary  to  the  preceding.

The  mean  between  these  two  extremes  completes  the  first

group  of  three.     The  remaining  six  can  be  understood  on  the

same  lines.

Short  pulse  :  Impact  sudden  ;  acme  momentary ;  subsidence  of  wave  abrupt, 
dicrotic  wave  present ;    artery  large  ;   tension  low.

Long  pulse  :  Impact  deliberate  ;  acme  persisting  ;  subsidence  of  wave  gradual ;

artery  contracted.

Normal  pulse  :    impact  sudden,  acme  moderately  high  ;    subsidence  of  wave

gentle  ;    tension  moderate.

522.  As  regards  the  compound  pulses,  some  have  received 
distinctive  names  and  some  have  not.  A  pulse  which  is  increased 
both  in  length  and  breadth  as  well  as  in  depth  is  called  "  large." 
When  all  these  dimensions  show  diminution,  it  is  a  "  small  " 
pulse.     The  moderate  pulse  is  the  mean  between  these  two.

A  small  pulse  may  seem  to  be  a  large  one  in  a  wasted  subject ;  hence  the  pulse 
may  be  palpable  in  arteries  in  which  it  is  not  usually  felt.  The  aorta  may  be  felt. 
A  pulse  may  seem  small  because  carelessly  felt  in  a  person  with  a  thick  wrist.

A  pulse  which  is  increased  both  in  breadth  and  depth  is 
called  "  thick  "  ;  one  which  is  diminished  in  these  two  dimen- 
sions is  called  "  slender."  The  medium  pulse  is  the  mean 
between  the  two.5230  (2)  Quality  of  impact.  The  varieties  are  three  : 
strong — this  resists  the  finger  during  expansion  ;  weak' — the 
opposite  character  ;    and  the  intermediate.

Strong  or  violent  pulse. — Impact  strong  ;  acme  high  ;  artery  incompressible. 
Occurs  temporarily  in  emotional  states,  or  after  the  bath.  It  is  habitual  in  persons 
of  passionate  nature  (Aeg).

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  291

Weak  or  feeble  pulse.— Impact  faint ;  acme  low  ;  artery  between  beats  is 
compressible.  J

524.  (3)  Duration  of  cycle.  There  are  three  variants  : 
rapid  or  short  or  swift — where  the  movement  is  completed  in  a 
short  space  of  time  ;  slow  or  sluggish  or  long — the  contrary  ; 
and  the  intermediate,  or  moderately  quick  pulse.

525.  (4)  Consistence  of  artery.  There  are  three  variants: 
soft  or  easily  compressible  ;  hard,  firm  or  incompressible  ;  and 
one  of  moderate  compressibility.

526.  (5)  Fullness  or  emptiness.  The  full  (high)  pulse  seems 
to  be  overfull  of  humour  and  gives  the  impression  that  it  needs 
liberating.  The  empty  (low)  pulse  is  contrary  in  character. 
There  is  an  intermediate'  between  the  two.

Empty  pulse:  the  artery  feels  as  if  it  contained  bubbles  of  air,  so  that  the 
Sflutf'T  °n  an  Smpty  plaCe  (AeSineta)-     (Chinese  simile  :    "the  hole  in

527.  (6)  The  feel  of  the  pulse.      Hot,  cold  or  intermediate.

528.  (7)  Duration  of  pause.  Hurried  ("  dense  "),  where 
the  period  between  the  two  successive  beats  is  short  ;  sluggish 
C'  rare  "),  where  the  period  is  prolonged.  And  there  is  a  mean. 
This  period  of  time  is  recognized  from  the  contraction-period,  but 
if  contraction  cannot  be  perceived  it  is  estimated  from  the 
period  between  two  expansions.  In  this  case  it  is  reckoned 
from  the  times  of  the  two  extremes.529.  (8)  Equality  or  inequality.  This  is  reckoned  according 
as  the  successive  pulses  are  similar  or  dissimilar,  there  being  a 
difference  of  size  (large  or  small),  strength  (strong  or  weak), 
swiftness_  (rapid  or  slow;  prompter  sluggish),  hardness  or  soft- 
ness, until  it  happens  that  the  second  expansion  of  the  first  pulse 
is  overtaken  by  the  first  of  the  next  (due  to  excess  of  innate  heat), 
or  is  weaker  than  the  next  (excess  of  weakness).

If  desired,  one  could  expand  this  discourse  and  consider 
the  equality  or  inequality  in  regard  to  the  three  variants  in  the 
other  features  of  the  pulse  already  named.  But  it  is  sufficient 
to  consider  them  only  in  regard  to  strength.

Regular  ("  equal  ")  pulse  in  the  strict  sense  is  one  which 
is  regular  m  all  these  respects  ;  if  it  is  regular  only  in  one  feature, 
it  is  so  specified.  Thus  we  speak  of  a  pulse  as  regular  ("  equal  ") 
in  strength  or  regular  in  speed.  In  the  same  way  a  pulse  is  irregu- 
lar either  in  all  respects  or  only  in  one.

Equal  pulse  :    this  is  always  regular 
OTlH     ^n,eC1Ual  Pulse  is  n°t  altogether  irregular.     Supposing  it  to  have  no  equality 
and  yet  to  preserve  a  certain  period,  such,  e.g.,  as  to  extent  of  diastole  if  there  are 
two  great  and  one  small,  then  again  two  great  and  one  small,  and  so  on  such  a  pudse

2 92  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

is  unequal  but  regular.  ■  If  it  not  only  had  no  equality,  but  also  no  order  in  its  in- 
equality, such  a  pulse  would  be  not  only  unequal,  but  also  irregular. — So,  too,  with 
the  other  kinds.  ."  Not  only  may  an  inequality  in  the  time  of  motion  take  place  in  regard  to  one 
pulsation  in  one  part  of  an  artery,  but  also  in  regard  to  the  strength  of  the  power  ; 
not  so,  however,  in  regard  to  the  extent  of  dilation  (for  it  is  impossible  that  the  same 
pulse  in  the  same  place  should  be  great  and  small  at  the  same  time),  nor  in  regard 
to  the  other  kinds  of  pulses.  But  in  different  places  different  parts  of  an  artery 
may  exhibit  a  double  inequality  in  one  pulsation.  For  the  motion  may  continue 
constant,  and  be  swifter-  at  one  finger,  and  slower  at  another  ;  or  it  may  intermit, 
and  one  finger  may  perceive  it,  and  another  not.  And  also,  in  regard  to  the  extent 
of  the  diastole,  the  same  inequality  becomes  apparent  in  different  places."

Irregular  pulse. — Sometimes  there  is  altogether  an  irregularity,  observing  no 
periods  whatever.  Sometimes  there  is  regularity  as  to  periods,  but,  having  no 
continued  order,  they  may  in  this  respect  be  called  irregular,  but  in  so  far  as  they 
observe  a  certain  period  regularly,  they  are  regular  as  to  their  periods.  E.g.,  two 
great,  two  small,  three  great,  three  small,  and  so  on.     (Aegineta,  after  Galen.)

530.  (9)  Orderliness  or  disorderliness.  There  are  two  forms  : 
the  pulse  may  be  irregularly  orderly  or  irregularly  disorderly. 
The  orderly  pulse  maintains  orderly  succession.  This  occurs 
in  one  of  two  modes.  The  orderliness  is  absolute,  where  there 
is  every  feature  maintained  ;  or  cyclical,  where  there  are^two  or 
more  irregularities  which  keep  on  repeating  in  cycles,  as  if  there  - 
were  two  cycles  simultaneously,  or  superposed,  so.  that  the 
original  order  reappears.In  this  way  it  becomes  evident  that  the  tenth  feature  belongs 
here,  in  a  certain  sense  ;  so  that  those  who  restrict  the  features 
to  nine  instead  of  ten  are  justified.

531.  For  one  must  now  see  the  musical  character  of  the  pulse. 
For  in  the  art  of  music  sounds  are  juxtaposed  in  orderly  relations 
of  loudness  and  softness  which  keep  on  repeating  at  regular 
intervals  ;  rates  of  utterance  vary — some  sounds  coming  close 
to  one  another,  and  others  being  further  apart  ;  the  attack 
may  be  abrupt  or  gentle,  sharp  or  dull.  The  notes  may  be 
sounded  clearly  or  be  indefinite  ;  they  may  be  strong  or  weak  ; 
the  volume  may  be  full  or  "  thin."  The  rhythm  of  the  sequence 
of  the  sounds  may  be  regular  or  irregular.

In  feeling  the  pulse,  all  these  features  are  also  to  be  met  with. 
The  intervals  between  the  beats,  or  the  successions,  may  be 
harmonious  or  inharmonious.  So,  too,  the  irregularities  may  be 
orderly  or  disorderly.  It  is  orderly  when  there  is  a  proper 
relation  of  strength  and  weakness.     It  is  disorderly  if  there  is  not.

All  this  belongs  to  the  question  of  order  and  regularity.  _

532,  Galen  indeed  discussed  the  metre  of  the  pulse,  or  its 
rhythm  along  the  lines  of  musical  nomenclature.  Thus  we  would 
have  double  time,  three-four  time,  common  time,  four-five  time, 
five-six  time,  and  so  on.  For  those  who  have  a  sensitive  touch 
and  a  keen  sense  of  rhythm,  with  a  training  in  the  musical  art,

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  293THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  293

such  minutiae  of  observation  could  be  correlated  in  the  mind. 
I  am  surprised  to  think  how  many  of  such  relations  could  be 
perceived  by  the  sense  of  touchy  and  yet  I  am  confident  that  it 
can  be  done  if  one  is  habituated  to  the  use  of  it,  and  can  apportion 
metre  and  beats  of  time.  On  the  other  hand,  since  these  varia- 
tions all  belong  to  inequality  and  disorderliness  it  is  not  necessary 
to  define  them  particularly.

The  analogy  between  pulse  and  musical  time  is  found  in  the  Chinese  work 
as  well  as  in  Avicenna.  The  fact  that  they  compare  certain  beats  with  those  pro- 
duced on  particular  musical  (stringed)  instruments  shows  that  they  had  something 
in  mind  like  that  suggested  above.  The  Kin  pulse  is  so  named  after  a  musical 
instrument  of  that  name  ;  another  pulse  is  compared  with  the  vibration  of  the 
thirteen  stringed  instrument  named  Tseng.

533.  (10.)  Metre.  Even  if  the  preceding  details  cannot  be 
perceived,  at  least  the  relation  between  period  of  expansion  and 
period  of  pause  can  be  appreciated,  as  well  as  the  relation  be- 
tween the  total  duration  of  beat  and  the  total  duration  of  pause. 
Under  this  heading,  then,  we  place  :  first  total  period  of  pulse  : 
next  total  period  ;  period  of  expansion  :  period  of  pause  ; 
period  of  expansion  plus  period  of  pause  :  period  of  contraction 
plus  period  of  pause  ;  period  of  expansion  :  period  of  contrac- 
tion. A  relation  of  period  of  expansion  :  period  of  contraction  ; 
or,  period  of  first  pause  :  period  of  second  pause,  is  not  important.534.  Metre  (rhythm,  "  beat,"  accent)  is  good  (eurhythm) 
or  bad  (arhythm)  according  to  the  musical  analogy.  There  are 
three  kinds  of  arhythm  :  (i)  pararhythm,  where  the  beat  is  altered 
only  slightly,  and  temporarily.  Ex.  :  where  the  adult  has  a 
metre  which  is  only  natural  in  youth  ;  where  a  child  shows  a 
rhythm  proper  to  an  adult,  (ii)  Heterorhythm.  This  is  a  change 
greater  in  degree.  Ex.  :  where  a  youth  has  a  metre  proper  to 
an  old  man.  (iii)  Etrhythm.  Here  the  change  is  to  something 
altogether  different,  as  where  the  metre  does  not  conform  to 
the  human  type  at  all.  A  great  change  of  metre  denotes  great 
change  of  bodily  state.

§  218  Relation  between  beats  to  musical  time  may  be  equally 
exemplified  from  Arabic  poetry,  for  the  richness  of  the  poetic  metres 
gives  a  simple  and  ample  parallel.  Cadences,  pauses  (corresponding 
to  intermissions  of  beat)  of  various  lengths  produced  by  the  words 
and  phrases  and  intonations  belonging  to  emotional  expression 
being  natural  sequences  with  evident  relations  to  physiological 
variations.  A  short  passage  of  poetry  may  sometimes  be  sufficient 
basis  for  a  correct  impression  of  the  whole,  but  it  is  better  to  ,hear 
the  whole.  So,  in  feeling  the  pulse,  much  may  be  learnt  from 
the  observation  of  the  beats  for  a  minute  or  two,  and  yet  it  is  better  to 
study  a  long  series  of  beats  in  order  to  be  sure  there  is  no  inter-

294  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

mission  at  all.    This  thought  is  applied  in  Chinese  sphygmology .  (See

§  229)-

§  219.     Rhythmical  successions   of  words — musical  rhythm- —294  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

mission  at  all.    This  thought  is  applied  in  Chinese  sphygmology .  (See

§  229)-

§  219.     Rhythmical  successions   of  words — musical  rhythm- —

• — effects  on  emotional  state  and  on  physiological  processes.- — The 
effect  of  words  uttered  in  rhythm  resembles  that  of  musical  suc- 
cessions of  sounds.  The  different  forms  of  rhythm  which  are 
adopted- in  different  kinds  of  poetry  have  each  their  own  effect 
on  the  emotional  state,  and  tend  to  produce  in  the  brain  all  the 
concomitants  of  the  emotional  state  which  they  themselves  belong  to. 
Therefore  the  reciter  is  able  to  produce  specific  effects  on  the  minds 
of  his  hearers.  For  this  reason,  the  idea  of  rhythm  and  cadence  can 
be  pursued  both  in  Arabian  poetry  and  in  Arabian  music ;  and  it  can  be 
pursued  with  respect  to  both  aspects  of  aesthetics  in  any  country  or 
language,  though  some  languages  are  more  potent  in  their  influence, 
according  as  they  are  intrinsically  more,  or  less,  musical.We  may  note  that  as  the  rhythm,  whether  of  words  or  musical 
notes,  evokes  an  influence  on  the  pulse-rate  in  the  course  of  their 
effect' on  the  ear  itself — both  internal  ear  and  the  ear  of  the  mind- 
so  the  emotional  effect  will  be  produced  even  though  the  hearers  are 
not  purposely  or  specially  receptive.  This  emotional  effect  may  be 
inevitable,  or  it  may  be  deliberate.  To  quote  from  numerous 
passages  in  the  "  Nights,"—"  touched  with  it  a  masterly  touch,  at 
once  exciting  to  sadness  and  changing  sorrow  to  gladness  .  .  . 
went  on  to  sing  ...  to  many  and  various  modes,  till  our  senses 
were  bewitched,  and  the  very  room  danced  with  excess  of  delight 
and  surprise  "  (163)  ;  "  meseemed  the  doors  and  the  walls  and  all 
that  was  in  the  house  answered  and  sang  with  him  "  (688)  ;  "  played 
a  measure  which  made  all  hearts  yearn  "  (37)  (Burton,  ii.  291  ; 
iv.    322  ;    i.    337).When  the  effect  is  deliberately  sought,  it  is  stronger  the  more 
thoroughly  worked  out  the  principle  is — which  explains  why  some 
composers  meet  with  more  response  than  others,  and  why  some 
compositions  are  considered  more  perfect  or  attractive  than  others. 
Yet  a  great  composer  may  still  be  in  ignorance  of  why  that  par- 
ticular music  should  meet  the  need  ;  he  may  be  guided  by  the 
effect  which  the  thought  of  the  particular  music  has  on  his  ■  own 
organization  ;  or  he  may  even  work  according  to  stereotyped  lines 
elaborated  by  theoretical  developments  and  studies,  without  having 
even  "  intuitive  "  feelings  of  his  own.  (Cf.  Frederick  Corder,  158, 
p.  7).  Music,  the  composer,  the  listener — all  three  show  the  same 
possible  aspects  :  the  purely  artistic,  the  emotional,  the  scientific  or 
intellectual  ;  and,  more  rarely,  the  inspirational  and  the  celestial. 
The  number  of  listeners  whom  he  will  attract  depends  on  the  type 
of  music  which  the  composer  employs.  In  this  way,  for  some 
the  pleasure  is  in  the  stirring-up  of  desire  to  accompany  the  music 
with  the  bodily  movements  of  various  dances  ;  for  others  the  pleasure 
is  through  the  feelings  ;  for  others  it  is  through  the  intellect  (e.g. 
the  fugue)  ;  for  others  it  is  through  some  glimpse  of  the  Abstract 
Truth  which  such  music  renders  possible,  even  though  they  under- 
stand  not   what  it   is   doing.      But  the  last-named   does   not  need

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  295

music  in  the  ordinary,  sense  of  the  word  (i.e.,  instrumental);  it 
is  that  of  which  it  has  been  said  :  "  The  music  of  God  is  everywhere 
for  those  whose  hearts  are  open  to  -hear  it."We  may  also  note  that  it  is  not  only  the  pulse-rate  and  the 
manner  of  the  pulse  beat  which  is  influenced  by  the  musical  rhythm  ; 
the  effect  pervades  the  body*,  because  all  the  vibrations  which  belong 
to  the  secretions  and  excretions,  and  to  the  nervous  system  throughout 
are  affected,  and  tend  to  harmonize,  each  in  their  own  way — -the 
successive  waves  becoming  set  so  that  all  reach  the  same  phase  at 
some  same  moment  which  recurs  every  so  often.  The  movements 
belonging,  for  instance,  to  the  emergence  of  secretory  granules  from 
a  salivary  or  peptic  cell,  or  an  adrenal  cell,  alter  in  rhythm  during 
the  time  the"  music  lasts — and  possibly  for  some  time  after.  That 
these  movements  are  essential  in  the  vital  phenomena  is  easily 
verified  by  studying  such  cells,  e.g.,  in  invertebrata,  with  the  ultra- 
microscope,  or  even  by  studying  saliva  itself.

§  220.     Additional  remarks  on  Rhythm.

Let  a  and  c  represent  the  heart-sounds,  and  b,  d  the  pauses.  The  ratio  b  jd  is 
remarkably  constant,  whatever  the  number  of  beats  per  minute.  Exercise,  excite- 
ment, fever,  etc.,  increase  the  rate,  yet  do  not  alter  this  ratio.

The  normal  rhythm  is  ab\c\d  ;    that  is,  "  triple  time."

Double-time  is  ab  fed  ;  where  the  sound  is  "  tick-tack,"  5  is  the  same  length 
as  d  (for  instance,  owing  to  shortening  of  d).  Such  is  what  occurs  in  palpitation  or 
tachycardia.If,  however,  b  becomes  long,  it  shows  that  the  peripheral  resistance  is  greater. 
If  a  is  stronger,  b  is  longer.  If  the  time  is  still  triple,  it  necessarily  implies  that  the 
pulse-rate  is  slower.  But  if  this  rhythm  now  becomes  double-time,  it  shows  that  the 
resistance  is  too  great  for  the  heart,  and  that  the  heart  is  dilating  or  dilated.  This 
happens  for  instance  in  chronic  renal  disease,  or  acute  renal  dropsy  associated 
with  myocardial  change.

Four-time. — i.  abjcjdjdj.  The  contraction  is  quick,  the  resistance  is  low. 
This  occurs  in  fever  or  in  excitement.  This  rhythm  tends  to  return  to  triple  by 
shortening  of  c  to  :  abejdjdj.     The  pulse  is  short.

Such  a  pulse  may  follow  on  a  double-time  pulse  ;  for  instance  in  chronic  renal 
disease.     The  prognosis  is  then  grave.

A  similar  effect  is  produced  if  the  cardiac  contraction  is  not  completed  either 
because  the  muscle  is  too  weak  or  the  resistance  too  high.  To  find  such  a  pulse 
forewarns  the  physician  of  cardiac  asthenia  forty-eight  hours  beforehand.

2.  aajbjcjd.  This  is  met  with  where  the  systemic  and  the  pulmonary 
pressure  are  not  equal.  The  former  may  be  too  high  from  renal  disease  ;  the  latter 
may  be  too  high  from  pulmonary  or  bronchial  disease.  Where  the  heart  is  hyper- 
trophied,  such  a  rhythm  denotes  failing  heart.

The  second  "  a  "  is  not  usually  loud,  but  it  may  be  as  loud  as  the  first  "  a." 
In  such  a  case  one  could  feel  both  ventricles  beating  separately  over  the  apical 
region,  ab  \c  jc  jd  may  appear  simply  by  holding  the  breath.  It  may  also  appear  in 
mitral  stenosis,  in  bronchitis  with  emphysema,  in  pericarditis,  in  pleural  effusion 
and  in  cases  of  cerebral  tumour.Five-time:  a  jb  jc  jc  \d ;  djbjcjcjd;  ajbjcxjejd;  or  ajbjcjc^jd.  These  are 
all  variants  of  "  bruit  de  galop."  The  problem  to  solve  in  each  patient  is  :  which 
is  the  source  of  the  second  c  ?  Is  it  the  pulmonary  valve  ?  The  causes  are  the  same 
as  of  the  preceding.  Pulsus  bigeminus  :  db  jcld  j  jab  jed  j  jab  jc1d,  etc.,  in  the  case  of 
the  heart,  but  db  jed  jab  jed  j  jab  jed  j  etc.,  in  the  pulse  at  the  same  time.  This  type 
is  found  in  mitral  stenosis  under  treatment.  Another  form  :  ab  jed  j  jab  jed  j  jab  jed  j  j 
etc.,  in  the  case  of  the  heart  and  ab  jed  jd  jd  j  jab  jed  jd  jd  j  in  the  case  of  the  pulse. 
This  type  is  found  in  more  advanced  cases,  and  in  cases  of  epileptiform  attacks. 
It  simulates  alternate  action  by  the  two  ventricles.  Pulsus  trigeminus  ; 
ab  jed  j  job  jee  jd  j  jab  jd  jd  j  j

*  Bearing  on  this  is  a  recent  paper  by  Swale  Vincent  and  J.  H.  Thompson  : 
"  the  effects  of  music  upon  the  human  blood  pressure."    (Lancet,  March  9,  1929,  534.)

296  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Some  heart-beats  are  too  weak  to  reach  the  wrist ;  or,  in  some  cases  too  little 
blood  enters  the  heart.  The  pulse  may  therefore  be  irregular  though  the  heart  is 
regular ;   or  the  pulse  may  be  moire  irregular  than  the  heart.

2.     The  Regular  and  the  Irregular  Pulse

535.  Some  say  that  irregularity  (dissimilarity)  of  the  pulse 
applies-  to  a  succession  of  beats  or  to  any  individual  beat.  But 
when  the  irregularity  is  in  the  individual  beat  the  various  com- 
ponents are  diverse, — whether  in  the  various  places  where  one 
applies  one's  fingers,  or  only  at  one  particular  point  of  appli- 
cation.536.  When  the  irregularity  is  in  regard  to  several  pulsa- 
tions there  may  be  a  regular  succession  of  events.  This  begins 
with  one  pulsation  and  there  is  a  change  to  a  greater  or  lesser, 
following  on  regularly  step  by  step  until  a  maximum  or  minimum 
is  reached,  after  which  there  is  a  break,  and  the  original  cycle  is 
resumed.  Or,  the  beats  continue  at  the  same  level  for  a  time, 
and  there  is  then  an  intermission  and  the  original  cycle  is 
resumed.

The  whole  cycle  may  show  only  one  irregularity  or  it  may 
show  two  or  more.  In  this  case,  it  is  as  if  there  were  two  cycles, 
distinct  from  one  another,  and  yet  keeping  to  one  order,  so  that 
the  whole  seems  to  be  just  one  single  cycle.

The  irregularity  may  consist  in  the  occurrence  of  a  pause 
when  one  expects  a  beat,  or  in  the  occurrence  of  a  beat  in  the 
middle  of  a  pause.

537.  When  the  irregularity  refers  to  several  components 
of  one  single  pulsation,  this  may  be  in  regard  to  relative  position 
or  to  movement.  And  as  there  are  six  components  there  will  be 
corresponding  irregularities  :  (a)  expansion  swift  or  sluggish  ; 
(b)  premature  or  delayed  expansion  ;  (c)  strength  or  weakness  ; 
(d)  largeness  or  smallness.  All  of  this  may  be  orderly  and  regular 
or  may  vary  by  exaggeration  or  by  deficiency — in  two  components 
or  in  three  or  in  four.

This  may  all  be  worked  out  for  oneself.

538.  Irregularity  of  the  pulse  in  one  section*  is  shown  as 
an  intermitting  or  as  a  recurrent  or  as  a  continuous  pulse.

The  intermitting  pulsef  :  one  component  is  separated  from 
the  next  only  by  a  short  interval  and  a  pause  is  interposed 
in  another,  so  that  the  two  extremes  of  the  pulsation  vary  in  swift- 
ness, sluggishness,  and  the  like.*  Juz'  :    a  section  of  the  Quran.  .

t  Intermitting  pulse  :  a  smaller  beat  occurs  after  one  or  more  great  pulsations  : 
sometimes  even  the  smaller  beat  is  wanting.     Intercurrent   pulse:      this  is  the

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  297

The  recurrent  pulsef  :  here  a  large  pulse  becomes  small  in 
one  component  and  then  becomes  slowly  large  again.  In  this 
case  there  may  be  two  kinds  of  pulse  passing  into  one  another, 
so  that,  for  instance,  one  pulse,  by  its  irregularity,  comes  to  appear 
like  two,  or  two  pulses  come  to  appear  like  one.  Opinions 
about  this  differ.

"  When  the  radial  artery  is  completely  closed  by  one  or  more  fingers  till  the 
direct  pulse  is  arrested,  a  feeble  and  retarded  beat  can  be  felt  in  the  distal  part  of 
the  vessel.  This  is  because  the  blood-pressure  is  low,  and  the  arteries  are  relaxed, 
and  the  force  of  the  heart  strong."  116  ((p.  52.)

The  continuous  pulse  is  one  in  which  the  expansion  is  con- 
tinual and  unbroken.  There  is  a  steady  increase  from  slowness 
to  swiftness,  and  from  swiftness  to  slowness  ;  from  equality 
to  inequality ;  from  largeness  to  smaller,  and  so  on.  There  is 
no  break  in  the  change,  for  it  is  continuing  the  whole  time. 
Sometimes  there  is  more  irregularity  in  regard  to  some  of  the 
components  and  sometimes  there  is  less.

§  221.     Brief   summary  : —

Variations  in  rate  of  expansion  :  Sudden  ;  deliberate  ;  second  expansion  quick  ;  ■ 
or  slow  ;    first  sudden  and  then  tardy,  or'  vice  versa.

Rate  of  fall  or  contraction  of  the  vessel  :    abrupt,  or  gradual  and  gentle.

Variations  of  degree  of  expansion  :  large,  small,  moderate  ;  forceful  or  feeble  ; 
alike  in  every  beat  or  unlike.Variations  of  degree  of  expansion  :  large,  small,  moderate  ;  forceful  or  feeble  ; 
alike  in  every  beat  or  unlike.

Variations  of  duration  of  expansion  :  first  short,  then  long,  or  vice  versa  ; 
momentary  ;    persisting  ;    or  mean.

Variations  of  duration  of  pause  :  first  short,  then  long,  or  vice  versa.  Pause 
'when  there  should  be  a  beat  ;   beat  when  there  should  be  a  pause.

Variations  of  size  of  successive  beats  or  between  the  beats  :  first  diminished  and 
then  increased  ;  first  increased,  then  diminished.  The  size  of  the  artery  between 
the  beats  informs  of  the  constant  pressure  in  the  artery.  To  ascertain  it,  rolfthe  artery 
transversely  between  the  beats  ;  it  should  not  be  palpable  between  the  beats  unless 
the  skin  is  soft  and  flexible  and  thin.  Inability  to  feel  the  pulse  between  the  beats 
means  low  tension  ;   if  easy  to  feel,  the  tension  is  high.

Variations  in  successive  beats  :  the  fourth  beat  may  be  irregular  in  one  or  other 
respect,  or  the  fifth  or  the  sixth  or  the  seventh.  Every  beat  may  be  different 
(irregular  disorderliness).

3.     The  Varieties  of  Irregular  Pulse  which  have  received

Distinctive  Names

539.  Gazelle  Pulse  :  [Syn.  :  goatleap  pulse  ;  modern 
"'jerking"  ;  "pulsus  bisferiens  "].  The  expansion  is  inter- 
rupted and  occupies  a  longer  time  than  usual  and  remains  at  a 
•certain  height  and  is  succeeded  by  a  swift  increase  to  the  full 
height.

t>j

Just  before  the  wave  begins  to  subside  a  second  heat  is  felt  (Broadbent) — "  a 
•swifter  spring  than  before"  (Aegenita) — The  two  phases  of  the  one  beat  are  unequal.

opposite.     When  we  are  expecting  an  interval  of  rest,  a  supernumerary  pulsation 
•occurs.     (Aeg.)opposite.     When  we  are  expecting  an  interval  of  rest,  a  supernumerary  pulsation 
•occurs.     (Aeg.)

These  two  pulses   denote  impairment  of  the  cardiac  power,  the  degree  being 
greater  in  the  intermittent  than  in  the  recurrent.

29 8  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Cause  :  febrile  heat.  If  the  commencement  of  the  diastole  is  feeble,  and  there 
is  increase  in  velocity  towards  the  end  and  beginning  of  the  systole,  this  shows  that 
putrefaction  is  prevailing,  nature ,  hastening  on  the  discharge  of  the  fuliginous 
superfluities  But  if,  on  the  other  hand,  the  commencement  of  the  systole  is  feeble, 
and  the  speed  is  towards  the  diastole,  this  means  that  heat  is  prevailing.    _

In  fever  cases,  such  a  pulse  is  accompanied  by  density,  and  sometimes  by 
largeness,  if  the  artery  is  not  too  rigid.     (Aeg.)

(This  pulse  is  characteristic  of  pericarditis.)

540.  Undulatory  ["  bounding  "  (modern)  ;  "  like  rolling 
waves  "].  The  irregularity  is  in  respect  of  largeness  and  small- 
ness  of  artery,  of  degree  of  rise,  and  of  breadth,  and  in  the  position 
of  the  beginning  of  the  beat  (whether  too  soon  or  too  late),  and 
also  in  softness.  It  is  not  very  small  ;  it  has  a  certain  breadth, 
recalling  the  movement  of  waves,  which  follow  upon  one  another 
in  orderly  fashion  and  yet  vary  in  the  extent  of  upward  rise  and 
downward  fall,  and  in  swiftness  and  slowness.

Aegineta  says  :  "  The  whole  artery  is  not  expanded  at  once,  but  first  under  the 
first  finger  then  under  the  second  and  so  on  ;  like  a  series  of  waves.  The  wave  may 
be  carried  on  straight  or  obliquely  ;  it  may  be  high  but  short,  low  but  long,  broad  or 
narrow,  unequal  in  speed  and  force."  _Rhazes  says  :  "  It  is  one  which  in  breadth  takes  up  much  space  of  the  finger  , 
with  this  it  is  soft  and  full,  but  there  is  not  much  rise  or  fall  ^one  rise  seems  to  join 
to  another  until  it  resembles  waves,  one  following  the  other.

541.  Vermicular  [modern  "  creeping  "].  This  resembles 
the  preceding,  but  is  small,  soft,  feeble,  and  very  hurried. 
The  closeness  of  the  beats  causes  it  to  be  mistaken  for  a  swift 
or  rapid  pulse.

The  feel  is  that  of  a  worm  wriggling.  It  is  a  weak  form  of  the  undulatory 
nulse  The  size  of  the  artery  is  not  of  the  same  inequality  at  all  times.  I  here 
are  waves  of  pulsation,  the  whole  artery  not  being  distended  at  the  same  time 
(Broadbent).     See  572.

542.  Formicant  Pulse.  This  is  the  smallest,  most  feeble 
and  hurried  of  all  the  pulses.  [It  is  not  a  quick  pulse, 
though  apparently  swift.  (Aeg.)]  It  differs  from  the  vermicular 
pulse  in  the  great  ease  with  which  upward  rise,  anteposition  of 
beat  or  postposition  is  perceived.  Irregularity  of  breadth  is  not 
discernible.  [It  is  a  weak  form  of  vermicular  pulse  ;  and  allied 
in  character  to  the  "  hectic  "  pulse.]

543.  Serrate  Pulse.  This  [modern  "  harsh  "]  pulse  resem- 
bles the  undulatory  in  the  inequality  of  the  various  components 
of  the  beat — upward  rise,  breadth,  anteposition  and  postposition. 
It  differs,  however,  in  appearing  harder,  and  in  its  components 
being  of  unequal  hardness.  This  pulse  is  quick,  hurried,  hard. 
The  irregularity  is  in  respect  of  size  of  expansion,  of  hardness 
and  of  softness  (see  565).

544.  Mousetail.  There  is  progressive  inequality  of  the 
components — from  decrease  to  increase,  from  increase  to  de-

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  299544.  Mousetail.  There  is  progressive  inequality  of  the 
components — from  decrease  to  increase,  from  increase  to  de-

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  299

crease.  This  may  apply  to  several  beats  or  only  to  one  beat  or 
only  to  a  part  of  a  beat.  The  inequality  is  in  respect  of  volume, 
or  of  slowness  (changing  to  swiftness),  or  of  weakness  (changing 
to  strength).

The  artery,  says  Aegineta,  feels  swollen  to  the  index  finger,  and  very  slender  to 
the  last  finger.  _  He  speaks  of  a  •"  failing  or  swooning  myurus,  where  the  smallness 
ol  the  last  beat  is  maintained  ;  and  of  a  recurrent  myurus,  where  the  pulse  resumes 
its  original  amplitude."

545,  Recurrent  [modern  "  flickering  "  pulse].  This  passes 
from  minuteness  to  a  certain  volume,  and  then  fails  progressively 
until  it  reaches  its  former  minuteness.  It  is  like  two  myuri 
placed  together  end  to  end.

"  Your  first  finger  feels  it  small,  your  middle  finger  feels  it  large  and  swelled 
and  your  little  finger  feels  it  small ;    the  expansion  is  only  slight."— (Aegineta )    '

Cause  :  weakness  of  arterial  wall,  and  wasting  of  the  tissues  round  the  artery 
bigmficance  :  extreme  debility  ;  wasting  from  unresolved  inflammation  or  any  other

cause.Cause  :  weakness  of  arterial  wall,  and  wasting  of  the  tissues  round  the  artery 
bigmficance  :  extreme  debility  ;  wasting  from  unresolved  inflammation  or  any  other

cause.

546.  Dicrotic.  Doctors  are  divided  in  opinion  about  this 
pulse.  Some  regard  it  as  a  single  beat  in  which  antecession  and 
post-position  are  unequal  ;  others  regard  it  as  a  double  pulse, 
one  beat  following  the  next  too  quickly  to  give  time  for  the  second 
to  produce  full  expansion.  However,  the  presence  of  two  beats 
does  not  make  two  distinct  pulses.  A  pulse  which  makes  a  partial 
expansion  and  then  resumes  it,  would  not  be  dual.  It  would 
only  be  dual  if  the  artery  were  to  fill  first,  and  then  pause  and  then 
contract  and  again  refill  ;  but  otherwise  it  would  virtually  be  a 
jerking  pulse.

§  222.  _  As  regards  the  dicrotic  pulse,  some  have  regarded  it  as  a  wave  reflected 
from  the  periphery,  but  it  is  really  the  elastic  recoil  of  the  aorta  that  accounts  for  it 
It  is  most  distinct  if  the  peripheral  resistance  is  low.  The  semilunar  valves  form  the 
fulcrum  of  the  rebound  (Broadbent,  p.  26).

^  •  P?  firSt  ^Sat  of  the  Pulse  is  larSe<  the  artery  rismg  strongly  to  the  finger  • 
then  it  stops  and  recedes  ;  the  second  beat  is  small.  The  artery  is  as  if  repelled  at 
the  first  beat  and  then  trembles  a  little,  and  then  quickly  resumes  its  beat  but  less 
strongly,  and  at  too  short  an  interval.

547.  Fading  or  falling  pulse.  Here  there  is  a  pause  in  the 
middle  of  the  pulsation,  as  there  is  in  the  gazelle  pulse.  But  in 
the  gazelle  pulse  the  second  beat  begins  before  the  first  is  finished; 
in  the  falling  pulse  the  first  beat  is  completed  before  the  second 
begins.548.  The  spasmodic,  thrilling  and  twisted  pulse.  The  latter 
is  compared  with  a  twisted  thread  ;  there  is  here  an  irregularity 
between  the  precession  and  the  later  parts  of  the  pulsation,  both 
in  position  and  in  breadth.

The  spasmodic  (or  "tense  ")  pulse  suggests  that  the  artery  is  being  stretched 
and  dragged  and  pulled  by  its  extremities  like  a  cord  (Aeg).

t*  Tht  "l t1hrilling  ".(modern  term),  or  tremulous  pulse  is  hard,  quick  and  frequent. 
It  suggests  the  quivering  of  arrows  thrown  with  great  force  (Aeg.).

3oo  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

549  The  chord-like  pulse  feels  like  a  twisted  cord  (or  sinew), 
and  is  similar  to  the  thrilling  pulse.  But  in  the  chord-like  pulse 
the  expansion  is  less  conspicuous  ;  the  departure  from  regularity 
of  position  of  rise  is  less  evident  ;  but  tension  is  evident  ;  the 
twisting  is  sometimes  only  in  regard  to  one  portion  of  the  pulsa- 
tion. The  two  kinds  of  pulse  are  really  equally  common,  and 
equally  liable  to  occur  in  "  dry  "  diseases.

All  the  above  are  simple  pulses.

550  The  varieties  of  compound  pulse  (that  is,  where  there 
is  more  than  one  form  of  inequality  or  irregularity  at  once)  are 
almost  innumerable.  In  any  case  they  have  received  no  special 
names.

Additional  NotesAdditional  Notes

s,,,  t  The  pulse  is  visible  under  the  following  circumstances  :  when 
the  radial  artery  follows  an  abnormal  course,  immediately  under  the  skin  ;  when 
the  Sat  ent  is spare  and  the  skin  is  thin  ;  when  the  tension  is  very  high,  and  the 
SoodSessels  arPe enlarged  and  tortuous;  and  (entirely  pathologically)  m  aortic 
Sgu«rtation^here  the  artery  is  empty  and  collapsed  between  the  beats  and  the 
Wood  rushes  in  with  extreme  suddenness  and  violence,  especially  if  the  hand  is 
Sed  Such Tpulse  may  be  audible  as  well,  and  at  the  same  time  there  is  conspicu- 
ous throbbing  ofPthe  carotids  and  temples  and  facial  artery.  The  tension  is  here  very 
low  indeed.  ,,       -,

Visibility  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Qanun  ;    and  whether  the      empty      pulse 
vw=  o+  cii  with  the  "  Corriean"  or  not,  is  not  clear.     It  seems  hardly 
l^ffi»  ^   **£  should^ot  have  been  observed,  even  though  they 
could  not  know  its  explanation.

S-724  2  Hectic  pulse.  This  occurs  in  marasmus  and  phthisis,  I  tie 
components  do  no?  vary  greatly.  The  pulse  suggests  "  being  entangled  and  never 
geS  free  »  becaule  thestateof  disease  is  actually  diffused  throughout  the  body. 
fh£  pulse  therefore  agrees  with  the  Chinese  type  named  like  a  toad  embarrassed 
by  weeds."     This  may  be  simply  a  form  of  the      thrilling"  pulse.

S225      3      Pulse-rate.     (Broadbent, " s,  etc.)S225      3      Pulse-rate.     (Broadbent, " s,  etc.)

Increased  pulse-rate. -^Lowexed  resistance  quickens  the  pulse  rate.  Diurnal 
variatiZ T  the  Cse-rate  is  greater  in  the  evening,  and  slower  m  the  early  morning. 
The  fact  of  theater  explains  the  following:  morning  headache;  tendency  to 
depression  of "spirits  ;  to  awake  tired;  the  tendency  to  asthmatic  attacks  and 
epfleptic  fits  (tte  blood-pressure  is  now  minimal).  Posture  :  the  erect  posture  adds 
e?At  beats  to  the  minute.  Emotions  :  the  rate  is  increased  by  fear  (the  force  is 
fSe)  and  anger  (force  violent)  ;  the  explanation  is  that  the  tension  is  increased 
bv  the  emotion!  Exercise  :  at  first  the  rate  is  increased  as  well  as  the  force  and 
The  pulse  becomef"  vehement."  The  explanation  is  threefold-(«)  nervous 
factors  (6)  musclar  action  drives  more  blood  to  the  heart  and  fills  up  the  right  side  ; 
the  hearths  to  beat  quickly  and  strongly  to  get  it  through ^the dung, ^  accumula- 
tion of  blood  in  the  lungs  produces  breathlessness  and  panting,  hood  .  tne  rate 
S^ncreased  after  food  and  the  vessels  are  relaxed.  Drugs,  etc.:  stimulants 
nrrease  the  rate  and  cause  greater  relaxation  of  the  vessels  ;  alcohol  and  ether 
belonfto  this  fate^ry  Thef  lower  the  peripheral  resistance  by  acting  on  the  cen- 
^iwuslS^d  also  stimulate  the  heart  directly;  nitrites  increase  pulse- 
rate  and  at  the  same  time  cause  great  relaxation  of  the  artery.  Pungent  essential 
oils  and  ammonia  increase  the  rate  and  through  the  peripheral  nerves  relax  the 
Vessels  Belladonna  and  atropin  also  increase  the  rate.  External  warmth  :  slight 
increie  of  rate  and  slight  relaxation  of  the  vessels.  Respiratory  movements-czuse 
irregularities.

'  sz,6      Increased  pulse-rate  in  relation  to  morbid  states  : —'  sz,6      Increased  pulse-rate  in  relation  to  morbid  states  : —

These  diseases  in  which  the  rate  is  increased,  show  the  same  rate,  even  m 
repose  but  exertion  makes  the  rate  increase  inordinately,  out  of  all  proportion. 
Emotional  disturbance  has  the  same  effect.

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  301

In  pyrexia  :  the  rate  rises  according  to  the  degree  of  fever,  but  chiefly  according 
to  the  effects  on  the  system  and  according  to  the  patient's  reaction  to  the  disease 
The  peripheral  resistance  falls.  The  force  may  be  increased  (sthenic  fever  :  pulse 
frequent,  sudden,  vehement,  large,  short,  dicrotous)  or  diminished  (pulse  weaker 
less  sudden,  less  large,  dicrotous).  Towards  the  end  of  the  illness,  the  weaker  the 
patient,  the  greater  the  rate  ;  even  a  few  beats  more  per  minute  are  serious  In 
septic  fevers  (septicaemia  :  modern  term)  a  quick  rate  forewarns  of  shock,  and  a 
fatal  issue  (in  puerperal  cases).     A  "  racing  "  pulse  is  a  danger  sign.

Among  special  fevers  :  scarlet  fever  is  characterized  by  a  very  quick  pulse- 
rate    (120-200).  -  ■/  •>   u  .r

§  227.  Specially  quick  pulse-rates. — In  young  people :  overstrain  from 
athletics;  the  "irritable  heart"  (the  blood-pressure  is  high).  In  older  people- 
sudden  single  acts  of  excessive  exertion  (sudden  dilatation  of  the  heart).  Special 
cases  :  paroxysmal  tachycardia  :  due  to  flatulence,  emotions,  gout ;  gastric  trouble 
The  pulse  is  frequent,  short,  variable  in  fulness  and  strength,  not  vehement,  occasion- 
ally irregular.  The  heart-sounds  are  confused  and  short, .  and  cannot  be  analysed. 
May  arise  suddenly  from  a  fright  or  sudden  noise,  or  violent  emotion.(In  this  condition  the  motion  of  the  blood  is  not  accelerated.  It  is  a  vibratory 
alternation  of  pressure  with  little  onward  movement.  The  left  ventricle  is  not 
dilated._  It  may  be  that  the  ventricle  is  not  expanding  properly.  Cf.  auricular 
fibrillation  ;  auricular  flutter.  This  form  of  pulse  must  be  among  those  described 
by  the  Chinese,  but  certain  identity  has  not  been  reached).

The  quick  pulse  of  "  Graves'  disease"  might  be  included  here. 
Middle-aged  and  elderly  women  :   here  the  occurrence  of  throbbing  aorta  may 
be  referred  to,  though  it  is  not  a  true  "  quick  pulse  "  ;   it  arises  from  lack  of  tone  in 
the  aortic  wall.

§  228.  Decreased  pulse-rate.  Increased  resistance  slows  down  the  pulse 
Habitually  low  pulse-rate  (bradycardia)  forewarns  of  the  risk  of  cramp  when 
swimming.  In  this  category  belong— the  slower  rate  of  jaundice  ;  of  fatty  degener- 
ation of  the  heart  (not  often  met  with  here)  ;  the  special  pulses  :  pulsus  bigeminus 
and  pulsus  trigeminus  :    heart-block.

§  229.      4.     Intermissions.     Irregularity.

On  the  one  hand  there  is  a  variation  of  force  between  successive  beats  ;  on 
the  other  hand  there  is  a  drop  of  a  beat,  or  an  interposition  of  a  beat.

Intermissions  may  be  habitual  or  constant,  the  person  being  unconscious  of 
it  except  during  exercise  or  excitement.  It  is  accentuated  when  the  body  is  fatigued 
or  the  disposition  is  nervous.     The  patient  is  conscious  of  it  during  pyrexia.

Occasional  intermissions  are  produced  in  shock  ;  in  hypochondriasis  after  the 
use  of  tobacco  ;  in  fatty  degeneration  of  the  heart.  In  these  cases  the  heart  itself 
is  beating,  though  hurriedly  and  imperfectly.Irregularity  is  habitual  in  mitral  regurgitation,  where  it  is  produced  by  the 
variations  of  pressure  dependent  on  breathing.  Inspiration  forces  blood  into  the 
left  ventricle,  expiration  sucks  it  out  of  the  left  auricle.  A  similar  occurrence 
is  found  when  _  the  heart  is  dilated,  and  under  nervous  conditions.

Irregularity  is  occasional  as  a  result  of  flatulence  of  the  colon,  or  stomach 
which  disturbs  the  action  of  the  diaphragm  ;    as  a  result  of  tobacco. 
Irregularity  is  usually  more  serious  than  intermission.

Rules  in  regard  to  intermission  found  in  Chinese  textbooks  : — Omission  of 
one  beat  after  forty  shows  a  lack  in  one  of  the  five  "  noble  "  organs  :  "  death  will 
follow  m  four  years,  in  spring."  If  there  are  no  intermissions  within  fifty  beats,  the 
health  is  perfect.  But  if  there  is  an  intermission  then,  it  has  a  similar  significance 
to  the  preceding  and  shows  "  death  will  follow  five  years  later."    (See  §  218.)

Other  rules  cannot  be  presented  without  also  discussing  the  theory  of  the 
relation  between  pulse-type  and  physiological  value  of  the  several  organs  Thus 
an  intermission  of  one  in  12,  or  19,  or  26  (and  so  on),  beats  differs  in  significance 
according  as  the  pulse-type  is'  "  heart,"  "  lung,"  "  liver,"  "  kidney,"  and  so  on.— 
After  all,  such  a  classification  is  justified,  and  it  should  be  easily  understood  that 
intermissions  under  such  circumstances  might  have  distinct  significances.§  23°-  5-  Relation  of  pulse-rate  to  respiration-rate.  In  the  Chinese  works 
this  form  of  observation  replaces  our  own  habit  of  estimating  the  number  of  beats 
per  minute,  and  also  the  number  of  respirations  per  minute.  In  health  there  should 
be  four  beats  to  one  respiration  ;  five  beats  in  the  same  period  is  allowable  as  consis- 
tent with  health.  But  over  five  is  pathological,  and  eight  beats  is  a  bad  prognostic 
™f?'  reductl0n  to  three  or  two  is  pathological  and  a  reduction  to  two  is  a  bad  sign 
When  death  is  imminent  there  may  be  only  one  beat  to  two  respirations.  Full 
details  are  stated  to  be  given  in  "  the  book  of  eighty-one  difficulties  "

3o2  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

4.     The  Pulse  designated  as  "  Natural."

551.  Each  of  the  above-named  varieties  (of  pulse)  neces- 
sitates a  distinction  into  "  increased  "  and  "  diminished."  And 
that  which  is  "  natural  "  among  them  is  the  "  equable  "  pulse, 
except  in  the  case  of  the  strong  sort.  For  (here)  the  "  natural  " 
pulse  is  excessive  as"  to  strength.  But  in  other  cases,  the  increase 
is  in  natural  proportion  to  the  increase  in  force,  so  that,  for  ex- 
ample, as  it  becomes  greater,  it  is  "  natural  "  for  it  also  to  be 
forcible.

As  for  the  sorts  (of  pulse)  in  which  there  is  no  possibility 
of  increase  and  diminution,  in  such  cases  the  "  natural  "  pulse 
is  the  one  which  is  even  (equable),  regular  (orderly),  and  of  good

rhythm  (weight).*

Paraphrase.rhythm  (weight).*

Paraphrase.

Amongst  all  the  varieties  of  pulse  which  have  now  been  des- 
cribed, there  are  two  classes,  (i)  Those  which  show  degrees  of 
qualities  :  namely,  increase  above,  and  diminution  below,  a  "  mean." 
(See  521-528).  (ii)  Those  which  do  not.  Thus,  a  dicrotic 
pulse  cannot  be  more,  or  less,  or  intermediately  dicrotic  ;  an  ir- 
regular, pulse   cannot   show   a   "  mean  "    irregularity.

The  "  natural  "  pulse  in  the  first  group  is  one  which  shows  a 
mean  quality  in  respect  of  every  feature  except  that  of  strength  (523) 
for  the  natural  pulse  is  strong  (forcible).

The  "  natural  "  pulse  in  the  second  group  is  one  which  is 
uniform,  regular  (orderly),  and  eurhythmic.

This  rendering  brings  out  the  real  meaning  of  the  word  "  natural  " — tabi'yya. 
It  is  not  synonymous  with  "  normal,"  but  refers  strictly  to  "  the  nature  "-—i.e., 
the  state  of  the  vegetative  soul,  when  in  health.  (<  ;j

In  short,  a  pulse  which  is  "  mu'tadil  "  is  not  therefore  necessarily  "  normal  ; 
still  less  is  it  necessarily  "  natural."

A  pulse  may  be  (a)  natural  and  normal,  (6)  not  natural,  yet  not  abnormal, 
(c)  not  natural,  and  also  abnormal.

5.      The   Factors   concerned    in   the   Production    of   the

Pulse 
552.  The  factors  concerned  in  the  production  of  the  pulse 
are  (i)  essential  and  integral  in  the  constitution  of  the  pulse. 
These  are  called  "  contentive  "  factors  ;  (ii)_  non-essential  : 
comprising  two  groups,  (a)  inseparable — that  is,  if  they  were 
altered,  the  type  of  the  pulse  would  be  altered  ;    {b)  separable  ;*  It  may  be  noted  that  the  close  resemblance  between  the  Latin  version  and  the 
corresponding  passage  in  Galen  makes  it  seem  as  if  Avicenna  had  simply  introduced 
a  translation  into  Arabic  from  Galen.  But  in  the  Greek  the  natural  pulse  is  simply 
a  mean  between  extremes,  and  is  so  called  presumably  because  usual  m  health; 
whereas  with  Avicenna  this  is  not  so  ;  he  speaks  of  a  distinct  kind  of  pulse,  and  is 
truly  consistent  to  his  usage  of  the  term  "  nature  "—the  outcome  of  the  great 
thesis  "the  body  is  a  unity  "—throughout  his  physiology,  pathology,  and 
sphygmology.

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  303

that  is,  a  change  may  be  produced  in  them  without-  affecting 
the  type  of  the  pulse.

There  are  three  contentive  factors  :

1.  The   (vital)   power   of    the   heart,    producing   the

expansion.

2.  The  elasticity  of  the  artery.

3.  The  resistance,  or  urge.

The  last-named  is,  in  Avicenna,  taken  to  be  a  question  of  the  degree  of  innate 
heat,  and  its  relation  to  heat-loss  ;  not  a  question  of  peripheral  resistance  as  a  factor 
m  producing  blood-pressure.

The  influence  of  the  three  factors  varies  with  the  non- 
essential factors  which  may  be  associated  with  them  at  the  given 
time.

553.  List  of  non-essential  factors  :

1.  Natural  (i.e.  pertaining  to  the  nature) — Age  (manhood, 
youth)  ;  temperature  of  air  (hot  seasons  ;  hot  localities)  ;  tem- 
perament (hot  temperament).

2.  Non-natural  :  exposure  to  very  hot  atmosphere  ;  use 
of  hot  baths  ;  vigorous  exercise  or  gymnastics  ;  influence  of 
food  and  wine  ;    influence  of  calefacient  medicines.2.  Non-natural  :  exposure  to  very  hot  atmosphere  ;  use 
of  hot  baths  ;  vigorous  exercise  or  gymnastics  ;  influence  of 
food  and  wine  ;    influence  of  calefacient  medicines.

3.  Preternatural  :  emotional  states  ;  secretiveness  (hiding 
anger,  concealing  the  fact  of  having  taken  a  heating  medicine 
in  spite  of  the  physician's  enquiry)  ;  cunning  persons  who  easily 
conceal  matters  relative  ;  habits  of  the  patient  ;  "  hot  "  in  tem- 
peraments ;  decompositions  occurring  in  the  fluids  (in  the 
stomach  or  tissues).

6.     The  Effect  of  the  Contentive  Factors  upon  the

Pulse

554.  Large  Pulse.  If  the  arterial  wall  is  at  the  same  time 
yielding,  and  the  vital  power  is  strong,  and  the  resistance 
excessive,  the  pulse  will  be  large.  The  resistance  is  the  chief 
factor  in  the  production  of  a  large  pulse,  for  should  the  power 
fail,  the  pulse  will  naturally  weaken  ;  and  if  the  arterial  wall 
were  also  hard,  and  the  resistance  lowered,  the  pulse  would  be 
even  smaller.

An  unyielding  artery  will  also  make  the  pulse  small.  But 
the  difference  between  a  small  pulse  due  to  inelastic  artery  and 
one  due  to  weakness  is  that  in  the  former  the  pulse  is  hard  and 
not  weak  or  short  or  low  as  in  the  latter.

Low  resistance  also  makes  a  small  pulse,  but  it  is  not  weak. 
Weakness  is  the  chief  cause  of  all  three  forms  of  small  pulse. 
Granted  the  power  is  constant,  lack  of  hardness  of  the  artery

3o4  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

has  more  effect  than  lack  of  resistance,  for  there  is  nothing  to 
prevent  the  artery  from  expanding.

The  temperament  has  not  much  influence  unless  the  resist- 
ance be  lowered.The  temperament  has  not  much  influence  unless  the  resist- 
ance be  lowered.

If  the  resistance  be  great  and  the  power  strong,  and  the 
artery  inelastic,  the  pulse  becomes  swift.  The  swiftness  makes 
up  for  lack  of  size  of  pulse.  But  if  the  power  be  not  adequate, 
and  the  pulse  is  therefore  unable  to  become  large,  and  therefore 
not  swift,  it  necessarily  becomes  brisk,  and  this  briskness  makes 
up  for  the  lack  of  volume  and  swiftness.  Several  beats  of  this 
kind  would  become  equivalent  to  the  effect  of  one  adequately 
large  beat,  or  of  two  swift  beats.

555.  It  is  like  a  man  wishing  to  carry  a  very  heavy  weight  ; 
if  he  is  able  to  do  so,  he  will  carry  it  in  one  journey,  though  with 
difficulty  ;  or  he  may  divide  it  into  two,  thus  making  each 
journey  more  easily  ;  or,  if  he  cannot  manage  even  that,  he  will 
divide  the  load  into  many  portions,  and  carry  each  one  as  leisurely 
or  as  quickly  as  he  wishes.  He  need  not  rest  himself  between 
the  journeys,  though  he  may  choose  to  linger.  But  if  he  were 
very  weak,  he  would  stop  and  rest  awhile  between  the  loads, 
and  as  he  becomes  tired  with  the  journeys  would  perform  them 
more  slowly.

556.  If  the  vital  power  be  strong,  and  the  artery  responsive, 
and  the  resistance  moderate,  the  effect  of  the  power  would  be 
to  make  the  pulse  more  swift  and  of  greater  volume.  But  if  the 
resistance  were  greater,  there  would  be  briskness  as  well  as  large 
volume  and  swiftness.

557.  The  factors  which  go  to  make  a  large  pulse  also  go 
to  make  a  long  pulse,  if  rise  and  fall  are  hindered  in  any  way. 
For  instance,  a  hard  artery  cannot  widen,  and  tough  flesh  and 
skin,  especially  if  the  tissues  be  wasted,  prevents  the  artery  from 
rising  to  the  finger.Variants  of  Large  Pulse,   and  their  causes   (Aeg.)  :—

Large  and  also  soft :    hot  baths.

Large  and  also  hard  :    hot  intemperament,  especially  if  there  is  dryness  of  the

system. 
Large  and  mean  between  hard  and  soft :    massage  ;    exercise. 
Large  and  vehement :    wine  ;    anger. 
Large   and  unequal:    concealing  anger;    deceiving  the  doctor  m  regard  to

definite  questions,  as  to  possibility  of  heating  factors. 
Large  and  also  a  hasty  contraction  :    putrefactive  changes  in  humours.      _ 
Large  and  also  quick  and  dense  :    increase  of  heat  in  the  heart  from  various

causes.  .  ,       .    .  ,

Large  only  in  appearance  :    emaciated  state  of  the  tissues  at  the  wrist.

558o      The  Causes  of  Pulses  bearing  Distinctive  Names 
Broad  Pulse.     Emaciation  may  make  a  pulse  appear  broad.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  305

Emptiness  of  vessel  also  makes  a  pulse  appear  broad, 
because  the  two  walls  come  into  apposition.  A  very  soft  artery 
gives  the  same  effect.

Causes  of  broad  pulse  :    redundance  of  humidity  from  natural  causes  or  from 
external  causes,  such  as  a  soft  artery  (Aeg.).

559.  Hurried  pulse.  The  causes  of  a  hurried  pulse  are  : 
weakness  ;   great  resistance  ;   heat.

560.  Sluggish  -pulse.  The  causes  of  a  sluggish  pulse  are  : 
power  relatively  greater  than  resistance  ;  great  coldness  due  to 
resistance  ;   great  loss  of  vital  power  ;    approach  of  death.-561.  Feeble  pulse.  The  causes  of  feeble  pulse  are  :  loss  of 
natural  power  by  lack  of  food  ;  emaciation  ;  excessive  discharges; 
insomnia  ;  too  much  exercise  ;  solicitude  ;  morbid  change  in 
the  humours  ;  movement  of  the  humours,  especially  into  a  very 
sensitive  member,  or  into  a  member  which  is  in  relation  with  the 
heart;  any  source  of  intemperament  ;  pain  (producing  syncope) ; 
sadness,  grief  and  other  mental  states  or  cares  ;  any  factor 
whereby  the  vitality  is  markedly  depressed.  (Note  also  :  age, 
season,  locality  ;    temperament.)

Cause  of  change  from  feeble  pulse  to  strong  pulse  :  la)  when  the  vitality 
becomes  strong  again,  after  being  enfeebled  from  lack  of  food,  wakefulness  im- 
m?  ^  ®vacuatl0ns «  grief>  cares,  syncope,  or  any  cause  of  intemperament. 
(d)  When  humours  are  matured  ;  when  noxious  substances  are  excreted  when  there 
is  passion,  when  an  intemperament  is  rectified  ;  also  after  use  of  certain  foods 
of  wines ;     after  exercise.     (Aeg.)  '

562.  Hard  pulse.  The  causes  of  hard  ("  tense  ")  pulse 
are  :  dryness  of  the  arteries  and  great  stretching  of  the  arteries  ; 
intense  cold.^  The  pulse  may  become  very  hard  at  the  crisis  of 
an  illness  owing  to  the  intensity  of  the  conflict  between  the  person 
and  his  disease,  for  all  the  members  are  implicated.  (This  pulse 
is  usually  also  small,  quick,  and  sometimes  frequent.)

Hard  pulse  must  be  distinguished  from  a  strong  pulse.     The  latter  is  usually 
also  large,  swells  up  and  strikes  the  finger  forcibly.     A  hard  pulse  cannot  be  large 
for  the  artery  is  unyielding  ;   a  hard  pulse  is  also  small,  quick,  and  sometimes  dense' 
(Aeg.)Causes  of  hard  pulse  :  hardness  of  artery;  this  is  due  to  immoderate  cold 
dryness,  or  tension  of  inflammation,  or  spasm.     (Aeg.)

Cause  of  strong  pulse  :  the  force  of  natural  vitality,  associated  with  hardness 
of  the  artery   (Aeg.).

563.  Soft  pulse.  The  causes  of  soft  pulse  are  :  "natural" 
agents  with  an  emollient  action,  such  as  aliments  (more  abundant 
diet  ;  liquid  food).  Morbid  states  which  tend  to  emollient 
effect  :  e.g.  dropsy,  sleepy-sickness,  coma,  disorders  arising  from 
or  m  a  serous  humour.  Mental  states,  such  as  hilarity.  Agents 
which  are  neither  "  natural  "  nor  morbid  :  e.g.  bathing  (to- 
excess).

3o6  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Other  causes  (Aeg.). :  humid  state  of  artery  due  to  (a)  preternatural  causes  : 
coma,  lethargy,  dropsy,  affections  related  to  the  serous  humour.  (6)  Non-preter- 
natural causes  :  more  liquid  food,  much  sleep,  a  more  abundant  diet,  immoderate 
baths  ;    hilarity.

564.  Irregular  pulse.  If  the  vital  power  be  maintained,  the 
cause  will  be  heaviness  [in  substance]  of  the  food,  or  of  some 
humour.-  If  the  vital  power  be  weak,  it  shows  a  contest  between 
causative  agent  [of  "the  illness]  and  the  tissues.  Other  causes  : 
(a)  overfullness  of  the  vessels.  This  would  be  remedied  by 
venesection.  (  b)  Viscidity  of  the  blood.  In  this  case  the  breath 
becomes  choked  in  the  vessels.  This  form  of  pulse  is  especially 
liable  to  occur  when  the  breath  is  also  imprisoned  in  the  cardiac 
region — etg,  by  an  over-full  stomach,  which  produces  this  effect 
very  rapidly  ;   or  by  anxiety  ;   or  by  pain.

If  the  stomach  contain  depraved  humour,  the  irregularity 
increases  until  cardiac  tremor  comes  on,  and  a  thrilling  pulse 
(tachycardia  !)  results.If  the  stomach  contain  depraved  humour,  the  irregularity 
increases  until  cardiac  tremor  comes  on,  and  a  thrilling  pulse 
(tachycardia  !)  results.

If  the  irregularity  is  orderly,  it  betokens  lesser  constitu- 
tional injuries  ;  if  disorderly,  it  shows  that  there  are  more 
serious  constitutional  defects  to  deal  with.

565.  Harsh  -pulse.  This  pulse  shows  a  varying  consistence 
of  the  artery  which  is  produced  by  changes  in  the  composition 
of  the  (circulating)  humours,  whereby  decomposition  products, 
"  crudities,"  or  products  of  maturation  diffuse  through  the  vessel 
wall  and  affect  its  mode  of  expansion.  Inflammatory  deposits  in 
fibro-muscular  organs  (e.g.  diaphragm,  pleura  :  "Rhazes)  also 
render  the  pulse  harsh.

If  the  harshness  be  slight,  it  shows  that  the  inflammation  is  mild  ;  if  more 
marked,  it  means  that  the  case  is  severe  and  dangerous,  with  a  danger  of  empyema 
or  tuberculous  change  (Aeg.).     See  543.

566.  Dicrotic  pulse.  Vital  power  is  strong  ;  the  artery  is 
hard  ;  the  resistance  is  considerable.  The  artery  does  not  at 
once  yield  to  the  force.  It  suggests  a  person  wishing  to  sever 
something  at  one  blow,  but  failing  to  do  so  until  helped  out,  for 
instance  by  a  sudden  dire  need  to  achieve  it.  (Significance  : 
approaching  crisis).567.  Mousetail.  Such  a  pulse  is  produced  when  the^ vital 
power  is  weak,  as  a  person  who  ceases  manual  labour,  or  is  re- 
suming it  after  a  rest.  If  it  is  constant,  it  shows  that  the  loss  of 
power  is  greater.  However,  as  long  as  the  pulsation  is  mousetail 
in  type  (and  the  similar  forms)  it  shows  that  there  is  some  vitality 
left.  But  it  is  apt  to  pass  on  to  the  terminal  mousetail,  then  to 
continuous  mousetail,  and  finally  end  in  the  grave  "  recurrent 
mousetail  "  ("  swooning  "  pulse).

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  .307

Recurrent  mousetail  means  :  (a)  failing  vital  powers,  with  a  greater  or  less 
■degree  of  prostration  ;  (6)  weak  power,  which  is  still  struggling  on  in  face  of  the 
•odds  (Aeg.).

568.  Fading  or  falling  pulse.  The  vital  power  is  enfeebled 
or  waning,  and  inadequate.  It  is  also  produced  by  a  sudden 
change  in  the  "  nature  "  and  in  the  mind.

569.  ■  •  The  spasmodic  or  tense  pulse.  This  is  produced  when 
there  are  non-natural  movements  in  the  vital  power  or  when  the 
artery  is  itself  unhealthy.

Significance  :  inflammatory  changes  at  the  nerve-origins  (meningitis,  acute 
epilepsy).  It  can  be  felt  after  death  has  taken  place,  while  the  body  is  still  warm 
{Aeg.).

570.  Thrilling  pulse.  Here  the  vital  power  is  strong  ;  the 
artery  is  hard  ;  the  resistance  is  great.  Without  these  conditions 
it  cannot  arise.

It  denotes  inflammation  in  fibro-muscular  tissues  which  are  well  supplied 
with  nerves.  A  strong  expansion  is  required,  with  adequate  vital  power.  The 
hardness  of  the  artery  prevents  adequate  expansion.^571,  Undulatory  pulse.  This  usually  means  chiefly  a  lack 
of  vital  power,  expansion  being  hardly  achieved,  if  at  all,  and 
then  only  little  by  little.  If  the  artery  is  soft,  this  would  itself 
suffice  to  produce  the  effect  of  waves,  even  though  the  power 
were  not  much  reduced.  A  soft  and  moist  artery  does  not  respond 
to  an  impact,  and  does  not  allow  every  part  to  be  expanded  ; 
whereas  a  dry  and  hard  artery  does — dryness  being  responsive 
to  impact  and  tremor.  An  artery  which  is  both  hard  and  dry 
will  transmit  expansion  at  once  ;  the  soft  and  moist  artery  will 
only  do  so  at  the  beginning  of  the  pulsation,  expansion  and  alter- 
ation of  form  of  the  vessel  subsiding  suddenly  so  that  the  other 
fingers  do  not  perceive  any  movement.

The  beats  are  indistinct ;  the  dicrotic  waves  blend.  At  the  same  time  the  first 
cardiac  sound  disappears.

Significance  :  crisis  approaching  by  sweat  (Rhazes,  Halv  Abbas),  or  by 
bowels  ;  humid  affections  like  sudden  dropsy,  lethargy,  peripneumonia'  (Aeg  )  • 
typhoid  fever  ;   and  malaria  ;    extreme  cardiac  asthenia  (Broadbent).

572.  Vermicular  and  formicant  pulse  are  produced  by  great 
weakness,  and  so  the  pulse  is  sluggish,  the  intervals  between 
the  beats  are  short,  and  the  components  are  unequal.  This  is 
because  the  artery  is  unable  to  expand  at  once,  but  onlv  little 
by  little.    (See  541.)

Significance  :  sudden  loss  of  vital  power  due  to  excessive  haemorrhage  diar- 
rhoea, cholera,  etc.     Failing  life  (Galen).

In  the  formicant  pulse  the  powers  of  life  are  at  a  still  lower  ebb  than  in  the  case 
of  the  vermicular  pulse  (Aeg.).

Chinese  simile:    to  a  silk  thread  (§214).

3o8  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINEChinese  simile:    to  a  silk  thread  (§214).

3o8  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

573.  Pulse  of  faulty  rhythm.  If  this  occurs  during  a  time  of 
repose,  it  is  due  to  an  increased  resistance.  If  it  occurs  during 
exercise,  there  is  an  increased  -weakness  (of  vital  power)  or  de- 
ficient degree  of  resistance.  The  pulse  of  exercise  produced  by 
swiftness  of  expansion  is  something  different  to  this.

The'  duration  of  the  pause  is  lessened  in  old  age.     Equality  between  expansion 
and  pause  denotes  a  normal  temperament  of  the  body.     It  occurs  m    early  life 
If  the  pause  is  greater  in  duration  than  the  expansion,  the  temperament  is  hot 
(e.g.,  adult) .     If  the  pause  is  less  than  the  expansion,  it  shows  that  the  temperament

iS  COlChangetof  rhythm  changes  the  rate  and  frequency  of  the  pulse.     (Aegineta.)

The  causes  of  full,  empty,  hot  and  cold,  deep  (high)  and 
low  pulses  are  evident.

Full  Pulse  is  produced  by  plethora  from  food  or  wine  ;  or  any  mere  abundance 
of  fluid-intake  ;  empty  pulse  is  produced  by  lack  of  nourishment,  or  undue  dis- 
charges The  pulse  Jells  warm  (af  if  there  is  great  heat  in  the  heart-the  rest  of  the 
bodv  being  cold  ;  (b)  if  the  artery  is  in  a  sort  of  spasmodic  state  ;  (c)  m  catalepsy, 
and  in  persons  who  are  becoming  comatose.     (Aegineta,  quoting  Archigenes.)§2,j  The  influence  of  low  resistance  upon  the  pulse.  Ihere  is  a  sudden 
impact ;  the  acme  is  brief  ;  the  subsidence  rapid  and  the  dicrotic  wave  «  present 
As  it  subsides  quickly  under  the  fingers  it  is  called  hurried  If  at  the  same  time  the 
heart  beat  is  forcible,  the  pulse  is  '<  full  and  bounding '-large  sudden  impact 
vehement  ;  artery  easily  flattened.  If  the  heart  is  beating  feebly,  the  artery  is 
narrow  ;  the  pulse  is  small,  easily  compressed  ;  the  impact  is  not  sharp  and  there- 
•  fore  the  fingers  must  be  applied  very  lightly  in  order  to  be  able  to  feel  the  pulse. 
An  extreme  degree  of  this  kind  of  pulse  constitutes  the  running  pulse,  bphyg- 
mographic  variants  are  :    hyperdicrotic,   and   "  anacrotic       (which  is  a   form  ol

' '   &7\  yell©       )

Clinical  causes  of  low  resistance  :  (a)  congenital,  (b)  transient :  after  a  hot 
bath  in  fatigue,  in  exhaustion  ;  after  a  meal,  especially  a  hot  meal ;  lack  of  nitro- 
genous aliments  ;  alcohol,  (c)  Emotional :  anxiety,  depression  (d)  Morbid  states  : 
obesity  fever;  flatulence;  constipation;  sleeplessness;  headache;  nervous, 
conditions  ;    chlorosis  ;    fatty  degeneration  of  heart.  .

Other  facts— A  low  resistance  occurring  in  a  person  with  a  high  tension  is- 
a  bad  sign  ;  a  person  suffering  from  habitual  constipation,  and  having  a  low  blood- 
pressure?  should  not  be  given  purgation,  much  less  mercurial  purgation.8  2^2  The  influence  of  high  resistance  (high  tension)  on  the  pulse.  This 
depends  on  the  force  of  the  heart.  The  pulse  is  full  between  the  beats  ;  the  artery 
feels  like  a  tendon  or  the  vas  deferens  ;  or  is  even  visible  under  the  skin  lhe 
arterv  is  large  or  small.  It  may  be  thrown  into  a  curve  ;  there  may  be  nodosities- 
along  the  artery.  The  wave  is  gradual ;  lasts  too  long  ;  subsides  too  slowly  ;  seems- 
weak  but  is  more  plain  when  one  presses  harder.     There  is  no  dicrotism.

A  variant  called  "  virtual  tension,"  is  where  the  artery  is  large  and  full  be- 
tween the  beats  ;  moderate  pressure  does  not  make  the  pulse  seem  stronger  ;  it  is. 
compressible  •  the  impact  is  sudden,  the  acme  is  short,  and  the  subsidence  is  sudden. 
Such  a  pulse  shows  that  the  heart  is  unable  to  cope  with  the  resistance.

Clinical  causes  :  excitement  ;  exertion  ;  external  cold  (which  drives  the  blood 
from  the  surface)  ;  migraine;  early  meningitis  ;  early  acute  nephritis  (the  water 
cannot  get  out  through  the  kidney)  ;  plethora  ;  presence  of  certain  waste  products, 
in  the  blood  which  cause  the  small  vessels  to  contract.

§233.  Types  of  pulse  and  various  conditions  (modern). 
Sleeplessness.— Two  types  of  pulse,  (a)  Impact  gradual ;  acme  long  ;  may  sub- 
side suddenly  ;  artery  large  or  small ;  full  between  beats,  and  usually  not  easily 
compressible.  It  may  be  weak  and  yielding.  The  condition  m  this  respect  depends. 
on  the  state  of  the  heart.  (6)  Impact  sudden  ;  acme  short ;  artery  full  between 
the  beats  •  low  tension.  A  sleepless  person  with  such  a  pulse  will  be  able  to  sleep 
readily  in  the  daytime  ;  he  may  be  able  to  sleep  sitting  up  though  unable  to  do  so. 
lying  down.     The  pulse  is   unstable.THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  309

Emotional  excitement.— -Impact  strong ;    rate  increased. 
Fevers : —

Catarrhal.  The  pulse  varies  according  to  the  degree  of  obstruction  to  the 
pulmonary  circulation  (bronchitis,  e.g.).

Pneumonia.  Pulse  frequent,  large,  vehement,  dicrotic,  not  short,  not  com- 
pressible. The  pulse  can  be  felt  with  the  third  finger  after  pressing  hard  with  the 
index  finger,  because  the  pulsation  goes  round  the  radial  arch.  When  the  lungs 
become  engorged  more  and  more,  the  artery  is  small,  the  beat  is  weak,  but  the  heart 
itself  is  very,  forcible,  working  hard  to  get  the  blood  round  the  lungs  Violent 
heart  action  and  weak  pulse  4     (Venesection  indicated  !)

Diphtheria.  At  first  the  pulse  is  weak  and  small  especially  if  the  heart  is 
affected.     The  heart  rhythm  is  abjcjdjd  or  ab  jc  jd  jd  jd  Id.

Erysipelas.     Large,  soft,  very  dicrotic  ;    tends  to  become  undulating.

Septicaemia.     Artery  small ;    pulse  rate  140-200  ;    beat  sharp  ;   compressible  ■ 
tick-tack  "heart.     The  pulse  varies  much  in  different  cases.

Pyaemia.  Pulse  frequent,  and  sharp,  apart  from  the  degree  of  pyrexia  The 
pulse  is  that  of  shock.

Acute  rheumatism.  The  character  of  the  pulse  varies  with  the  degree  of  in- 
flammation in  the  joints,  etc.

Inflammation  of  serous  membranes.  First,  small,  long,  frequent,  hard,  full 
between  beats  ;  not  easily  compressible.  Later — shock  :  very  small,  weak  'com- 
pressible ;  "  wiry  "  or  *'  thready  "  pulse  due  to  the  filling  up  of  the  abdominal  vessels. 
These  characters  are  more  noticeable  with  peritonitis  than  -with  pleurisy.

Cerebral  conditions : —Cerebral  conditions : —

Tumour.  Rate  slow  ;  artery  full  between  beats.  Later  on  the  impact  is 
very  weak,  and  the  acme  short ;  the  artery  small ;  the  artery  empty  between  beats 
{denoting  feeble  heart  and  relaxed  arteries).

Coma.     The  pulse  varies  with  the  state  of  the  heart.

Convulsions.  Impact  strong  ;  rate  increased  ;  tension  lowered  ;  the  blood- 
pressure  is  sometimes  increased,  sometimes  low.

Epilepsy.  Low  tension  is  a  bad  sign  ;  if  a  high  pressure  is  present  and  con- 
tinues, the  case  is  tractable.     The  tension  is  always  high  in  senile  cases.

Meningitis.  Early  cases  show  the  "  hesitating  "  pulse  ;  the  force  is  not 
■quite  constant ;  the  time  is  not  quite  regular.  The  impact  is  deliberate,  the  acme 
long  ;  the  artery  is  contracted.  The  rate  is  slow.  Later  on,  the  rate  becomes 
■quick;    there  is  no  tension  (owing  to  compression  of  the  brain).

7.     The  Effect  of  Age  and   Sex  on  the  Pulse

574.  Male  Sex.  The  pulse  is  larger  and  much  stronger, 
because  the  vital  power  and  the  resistance  are  both  marked.  The 
pulse  is  slower  and  more  sluggish  than  in  women  because  the 
degree  of  resistance  is  so  great.

If  the  vital  power  is  maintained,  and  the  pulse  is  brisk,  it 
must  needs  be  swift.  Swiftness  comes  before  briskness.  Hence 
the  pulse  of  males  is  slow,  and  is  necessarily  also  sluggish.575.  Late  childhood  (7-14).  The  pulse  is  softer  because  the 
temperament  is  moist  at  this  period.  It  is  weaker  and  more  brisk 
because  the  innate  heat  is  abundant.  The  vital  power  is  not  great, 
for  growth  has  not  yet  become  complete.  Considering  the  small 
size  of  the  body  at  this  age,  the  pulse  is  large.  This  is  because 
the  artery  is  very  soft  and  the  resistance  strong,  and  the  vital 
power  is  not  small — considering  the  small  bulk  of  the  body  (at 
this  age).  Compared  with  the  pulse  of  adult  life  the  pulse  at 
this  age  is  not  large  but  quick  and  more  brisk  (due  to  the  resist- 
ance).    This  is  because  at  this  period  of  life  there  is  a  greater

3io  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

aggregation  of  •"  fumosities,"*  consequent  on  eating  so 
often  and  so  liberally — -wherefore  more  frequent  evacuation 
becomes  called  for  and  "  ventilation  "  of  the  innate  heat  is 
desirable.

576.  Early  adult  life  (2 1-35).  The  pulse  is  large,  not  very 
swift—indeed  inclined  to  be  slower  and  less  brisk  ;  the 
tendency  is  to  become  sluggish.  At  the  beginning  of  this 
period  of  life  the  volume  of  the  pulse  is  greater  ;  and  at  the 
middle  of  the  period  it  is  stronger.  The  innate  heat,  as  we  have 
stated,  is  about  the  same  in  adolescents  and  in  young  adults  ;. 
there  is  therefore  about  the  same  resistance  in  each.  The  vital 
power  is  greater  at  this  period,  and  the  greater  volume  of  pulse 
therefore  "compensates  for  the  lack  of  swiftness^  and  frequency. 
Vital  power  is  the  main  reason  for  the  pulse  being  large  at  this 
time  of  life.  The  resistance  is  next  in  importance,  and  the  state 
of  the  arterial  wall  is  the  contributory  factor.577.  Elderly  persons.  The  pulse  is  here  smaller  because 
of  the  weakness  of  the  vital  power  ;  the  swiftness  is  lessened 
both  because  of  this  and  because  of  the  lessened  resistance.  Such 
a  pulse  is  therefore  more  sluggish.

578.  Old  age.  In  advanced  years  of  life,  the  pulse  becomes 
small,  sluggish,  slow.  If  it  be  also  soft  this  is  because  of  extra- 
neous, and  not  natural,  humours.

§  234.  From  the  Chinese. — In  the  male  sex,  the  pulse  at  W  should  be  more 
brisk  than  at  C  ;  in  the  female  sex  it  should  be  more  brisk  at  C  than  at  W.  From 
deviations  of  normal  character  of  the  pulse  in  women  one  may  become  aware  of 
menstrual  errors  ;  of  the  presence  or  not  of  pregnancy,  and  the  size  of  the  pregnancy. 
The  C  pulse  is  noted  for  these  purposes,  and  the  right  arm  is  used. — The  exact 
details  required  for  diagnosis  require  the  application  of  the  special  nomenclature 
of  pulses  which  is  richer  in  variety  and  subtlety  than  that  of  the  list  of  §  213.

A  °e  Bloom  of  life  :  pulse  firm  and  full ;  persons  of  nurture  may  show  a 
slow  thini  even  soft,  pulse,  uniform  at  C,  W,  and  G  ;  if  not  uniform,  such  a  pulse 
is  a  sign  of  shortness  of  life.

Old  age  :  the  pulse  is  slow  and  weak.  Some  old  men  have  the  pulse  of  long 
life  "—strong,  firm,  fairly  swift,  not  skipping.  (The  presence  of  a  skipping  or 
hesitating  character  would  show  that  the  strength  of  the  person  is  outward,  and 
that  life  would  not  reach  an  extreme  length.)

8.     The  Pulse  in  the  Various  Temperaments

579.  Hot  temperament.  The  resistance  is  great.  If  the 
vital  power  and  artery  correspond,  the  pulse  will  be  large.  But 
if  one  of  them  do  not  correspond,  the  pulse  will  vary  in  the  manner 
already  described.If  the  heat  is  not  due  to  an  intemperament,  but  is  natural, 
the  vital  power  will  be  very  strong,  and  the  heat  increases.  But 
one  must  not  suppose  that  the  increase  of  innate  heat,  to  however

*  Dukhani ;  lit.  smoke  or  mist.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  311

great  an  extent,  will  lessen  the  vital  power.  For,  on  the  contrary, 
the  power  of  the  breath  becomes  greater,  and  the  mental  qualities 
show  more  boldness.

If  the  heat  arises  from  intemperament,  the  greater  the 
degree  of  heat,  the  greater  the  weakening  of  vital  power.

Cold  temperament.  The  pulse  is  reduced  in  breadth,  and  so 
becomes  small,  slow  and  infrequent  (sluggish).  If  the  arteryis  soft, 
the  pulse  increases  in  width,  and  also  becomes  slow  and  infre- 
quent. But  if  the  artery  be  hard,  the  breadth  will  lessen.  The 
weakness  produced  by  a  cold  intemperament  is  greater  than  that 
produced  by  a  hot  intemperament  because  the  heat  of  the  latter, 
for^  instance,  is  then  more  correspondent  (i.e.  in  slowness  or 
activity)  than  is  the  innate  heat.

Moist  temperament.     The  pulse  is  here  soft  and  wide.

Dry  temperament.  The  pulse  becomes  hard  and  wiry. 
If  the  vital  power  be  strong  and  the  resistance  great,  the  pulse 
will  become  dicrotic,  or  spasmodic,  or  thrilling.

These  remarks  will  suffice  in  regard  to  the  relation  between 
the  several  temperaments  and  the  simple  types  of  pulse.  The 
effect  on  composite  pulses  can  be  worked  out  from  the  principles 
already  explained.580.  It  may  happen  that  a  person  may  have  a  dual  tem- 
perament, one  side  being  cold  and  the  other  hot.  The  pulse  will 
then  be  different  on  the  two  sides,  according  to  the  heat  and  cold 
respectively.  In  the  one  case  it  will  be  like  the  pulse  in  hot 
temperament  ;  in  the  other  like  that  in  cold  temperament. 
From  this  we  learn  that  the  expansion  and  contraction  of  the 
pulse  is  not  merely  an  effect  of  the  ebb  and  flow  of  cardiac  action, 
but  there  is  also  an  expansion  and  contraction  of  the  arterial 
wall  itself.

9.      The  Effect  of  the  Seasons  on  the  Pulse

581.  Spring.  The  pulse  is  equable  in  all  respects  except 
in  strength,  which  is  above  the  mean.

Summer.  The  pulse  is  quick  and  brisk,  because  of  the  re- 
sistance. It  is  small  and  weak  because  the  vital  power  is  dispersed 
by  the  dispersal  of  the  breath  (which  in  its  turn  is  due  to  domin- 
ance of  undue  external  atmospheric  heat).

Winter.  The  pulse  is  more  sluggish,  slow,  weak,  and 
therefore  small.  This  is  because  the  vital  power  is  lessened. 
In  some  people  the  heat  is  retained  interiorly  and  aggregated 
together,  thus  making  the  vital  power  stronger.  This  is  espec- 
ially so  if  the  temperament  is  hot,  for  then  the  external  cold  is

3i2  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

overruled  and  prevented  from  passing  inwardly,  as  would  other- 
wise occur.  1-13i2  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

overruled  and  prevented  from  passing  inwardly,  as  would  other- 
wise occur.  1-1

Autumn.  The  pulse  is  unequal  and  tends  to  a  certain  weak- 
ness. ~The  inequality  is  due  to  the  frequent  changes  of  tem- 
perament which  occur  during  this  season  owing  to  the  fluctu- 
ations of  temperature.  The  temperament  is  now  hot,  now  cold 
accordingly.  The  weakness  is  due  to  two  causes  :  (a)  a  contrary 
temperament  always  renders  the  injurious  effect  of  a  nocument 
greater  than  a  similar  but  equable  temperament  would,  even 
though  that  be  a  morbid  one  ;  (b)  autumn  is  a  season  antagonistic 
to  life  because  at  this  period  the  innate  heat  is  lessened  and  dry- 
ness dominates.

At  periods  between  the  seasons,  the  pulse  corresponds  to

the  adjoining  season.

The  pulse  at  each  season  also   has  its   own   appropriate

rhythm.

§  235.      The  following  details  from  the  Chinese  work  are  tabulated  for  con- 
venient survey  : —

Month  and  Season.

Dominant

element

(Chinese  name)

First

Spring

Second

Spring

Third

Fifth

Fourth

Summer

Fifth

Summer

Sixth

Fifth

Seventh

Autumn

Eighth

Autumn

Ninth

Fifth

Tenth

Winter

Eleventh

Winter

Twelfth

Fifth

mu

mu

t'u

huo

huo

t'u

chin

chin

t'u

shiu

shiu

t'u

Type  of  Pulse.

Tremulous  :  long.

Moderately  slow  :  strong  :  hard. 
Superficial :  strong  :  "  scattered.

Mod.'  slow  :    strong  :    hard. 
Superficial ;  short  ;  brisk.

Mod. 'slow:    strong:    hard. 
Deep  :  soft  :  slippery.

Mod.  slow  :    strong  :    hard.Mod.'  slow  :    strong  :    hard. 
Superficial ;  short  ;  brisk.

Mod. 'slow:    strong:    hard. 
Deep  :  soft  :  slippery.

Mod.  slow  :    strong  :    hard.

If  the  pulse  proper  to  one  season  is  met  with  during  a  different  season  this 
is  usually  to  be  regarded  as  morbid,  and  may  betoken  a  long  or  a  short  or  a  fatal 
illness  according  to  the  particular  inversion.  The  autumn  type  m  spring  ;  the 
winter  type  in  summer  ;    the  summer  type  in  autumn,  are  grave  signs

It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  third,  sixth,  ninth,  and  twelfth  months  form  a  fifth 
season,  and  are  not  counted  under  the  corresponding  season.  These  months  there- 
fore correspond  to  those  named  in  Avicenna  periods  between  the  seasons  The 
pulse  changes  are  definitely  specified  in  the  above  table,  though  only  spoken  of 
generally  in  the  Canon.

10.      The  Effects  of  Locality  on  the  Pulse

582.     Some  regions  are  temperate  and  vernal  ;    some  are

hot  and  aestival  ;    some  are  cold  and  winterly  ;   some  are  dry

and   autumnal.      The   character   of  the  pulse   will   follow   the

statements  made  in  regard  to  seasonal  influences  upon  the  pulse.

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  3I3

ii.  The' Effects  of  Food  and  Drink 
583.  Aliments  (lit.  substances  entering  the  body  from  with- 
out) alter  the  condition  of  the  pulse  according  to  their  quality 
and  quantity,  (a)  By  quality,  one  refers  to  the  calefacient  or 
mirigidant  nature  of  the  substance  in  question,  which  has  a 
corresponding  effect  upon  the  pulse,  (b)  As  regards  quantity— 
if  the  amount  of  aliment  is  moderate,  the  pulse  shows  an  increase 
of  volume,  swiftness  and  frequency,  owing  to  the  increase  of 
vital  power  and  innate  heat  resulting  ;  this  change  in  the  pulse 
lasts  a  considerable  time.If  the  amount  be  unduly  great,  the  pulse  will  become 
irregular  and  disorderly,  because  the  burden  of  the  food  overrules 
the  vital  power  ;  any  overloading  renders  the  pulse  irregular. 
Archigenes  thought  that  the  swiftness  of  the  pulse  exceeded 
the  frequency,  as  long  as  the  excess  of  food  existed.  When  the 
excess  came  to  be  less,  the  pulse  would  show  an  orderlv  irregu- 
larity. J         6

If  the  amount  be  unduly  small,  the  pulse  becomes  irregular 
both  in  volume  and  swiftness.  In  this  case  the  duration  of  the 
change  would  be  short  because  so  small  an  amount  of  food 
would  be  rapidly  digested.

If  the  vital  power  is  weakened,  whether  the  amount  of  food 
taken  be  small  or  large,  the  pulse  corresponds  in  smallness  and 
slowness  until  the  digestion  of  the  meal  is  completed.

If  the  natural  (vegetative,  digestive,  maturative)  faculty  be 
strong,  the  pulse  will  be  equable.

584.  Effect  of  wine  on  the  pulse.  Wine  has  a  notable  effect 
on  the  pulse,  in  that  if  taken  plentifully,  being  attenuated  in 
nature,  it  gives  rise  to  an  irregular  pulse,'  but  not  to  so  great  an 
extent  as  other  similarly  nutrient  aliments.  This  is  because  its 
substance  is  too  rare,  attenuated,  and  light.  Being  in  actuality 
cold,  wine,-  like  other  cold  things,  lessens  the  pulse-rate  and 
makes  it  slow  and  infrequent  in  proportion  to  the  rapidity  with 
which  it  enters  the  body.  Once  it  has  become  warmed  bv  the 
body  the  initial  effect  passes  off.The  heating  effect  of  zvine.  The  heating  effect  which  wine 
produces  is  not  very  different  from  that  of  the  innate  heat,  for 
wine  is  rapidly  distributed  through  the  body,  especially  if  taken 
warm,  and  _  it  undergoes  rapid  dissipation  or  resolution.  If 
taken  cold,  it  exerts  an  injurious  effect  on  the  pulse  of  a  kind  not 
shared  by  other  cold  articles  of  food,  for  the  latter  become  warm 
only  gradually  and  do  not  reach  the  blood  as  quickly  as  does

3i4  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

wine,  and  they  are  therefore  warm  when  they  do  so.  But 
wine  is  absorbed  so  quickly  that  it  has  to  be  warmed  by  the 
blood  itself,  and  this  constitutes  a  noxa  for  such  persons  as  are 
sensitive  to  cold.  This  injurious  effect  is  not  as  great  in  degree 
if  the  wine  is  taken  warm,  because  the  natural  faculty  then 
counteracts  it  by  breaking  it  up,  distributing  it  through  the  body 
and  finally  dispersing  it.

The  cooling  ejject  of  wine.  Wine  has  a  cooling  effect  when 
it  causes  the  natural  power  to  fail,  so  that  the  pulse  loses  its 
strength  before  the  wine  has  become  broken  up,  distributed  and

dispersed.  .       .

Such  is  the  manner  in  which  the  use  of  wine  in  quantity

produces  a  heating  or  a  cooling  effect.  _

585.  When  we  study  the  question  of  how  the  use  of  wine 
can  make  the  pulse  strong,  other  factors  must  be  considered. 
Its  own  intrinsic  character  invigorates  healthy  persons  ;  it 
enhances  the  vital  power  by  securing  a  rapid  accession  to  the 
"  substance  "  of  the  breath.Although  the  heating  and  cooling  effects  above  explained 
are  injurious  to  most  persons,  there  are  some  whose  temperament 
is  suited  bv  it.  Cold  things,  for  instance,  are  tonic  for  persons  of 
hot  intemperament.  For,  as  Galen  truly  said,  the  juice  of  pome- 
granate is  strengthening  for  persons  of  hot  intemperament  ; 
honey-wine  is  tonic  for  those  of  cold  temperament.  _

Wine  may  therefore  be  considered  to  be  hot  in  nature,  in 
that  it  is  tonic  for  persons  of  hot  temperament  ;  cold  in  nature 
in  that  it  is  tonic  for  those  of  cold  temperament.  Still,  this 
question  is  aside  from  our  purpose.  We  are  concerned  with  the 
fact  that  is  speedily  accedes  to  the  breath,  as  an  intrinsic  property  ; 
and  that  from  that  point  of  view  it  is  always  invigorating.

The  pulse  becomes  stronger  if  either  the  invigorating  effect 
is  exerted  or  the  warming  effect.  It  becomes  weaker  if  neither 
occurs.  By  warming  the  body  the  resistance  [i.e.  the  blood- 
pressure]  is  increased  ;  by  cooling  the  body  the  resistance  is 
diminished.  But  the  usual  action  is  that  the  pulse  becomes 
stronger.  Moreover,  resistance  [blood-pressure]  is  never  in- 
creased without  rendering  the  pulse  more  swift.

588,  Water.  Water  has  a  similar  invigorating  effect  to 
wine,  because  it  is  the  means  by  which  the  aliment  is  enabled 
to  permeate  all  through  the  body.  But  as  it  induces  cold 
rather  than  warmth,  it  does  not  increase  the  resistance  as  much 
as  does  wine.

THE   CAN  ON  OF  MEDICINE  315

12.     The  Effect  of  Sleep  and  the  Act  of  Waking  on  the

Pulse

587.  The  characters  of  the  pulse  during  sleep  vary  according 
to  the  stage  of  sleep  and  the  state  of  digestion.Pulse

587.  The  characters  of  the  pulse  during  sleep  vary  according 
to  the  stage  of  sleep  and  the  state  of  digestion.

At  the_  beginning  of  sleep,  the  pulse  is  small  and  weak, 
because  the  innate  heat  is  then  in  process  of  retracting  and  with- 
drawing inwardly,*  instead  of  expanding  and  travelling  to  the 
surface.

588.  Difference  between  the  "  heat  "  in  the  first  stage  of 
sleep  and  that  produced  by  exercise. — During  the  time  of  sleep, 
the  innate  heat  is  withdrawn  inwards  by  the  vegetative  faculty 
in  order  to  procure  the  digestion  of  the  aliment  and  the  matura- 
tion of  effete  substances.     The  heat  is  therefore,  as  it  were,

■  mastered  and  forced  into  service.  The  pulse  is  therefore  more 
slow  and  sluggish  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  contraction  and 
imprisonment  of  the  heat  in  this  region  means  a  local  increase 
of  heat.  For,  in  amount,  this  local  heat  is  not  so  much  as  exists 
during  the  waking  state,  with  its  associated  movements  and 
exercise._  Thus,  exercise  .is  apt  to  create  undue  heat  and  "  inflam- 
mation "  up  to  an  intemperamental  degree,  whereas  there  is 
only  z  moderate  aggregation  of  heat  when  the.  innate  heat  is 
imprisoned,  and  so  "  inflammation  "  is  less  feasible.  You  know 
that  this  is  so,  because  of  the  fact  that  exercise  makes  breathing 
laboured  (forced),  and  hurried,  incomparably  more  than  when  the 
innate  heat  is  constricted  and  imprisoned  by  some  other  agent 
similar  to  sleep.  For  instance,  to  be  submerged  in  tepid  water 
brings  about  such  an  imprisonment  of  innate  heat,  and  produces 
rapid  respiration,  yet  not  nearly  to  the  extent  produced  by  toil 
and  exercise.  Careful  consideration  shows  that  nothing  increases 
the  heat  as  much  as  these  do.  But  it  is  not  the  mere  exercise 
which  accounts  for  this,  as  if  resting  would  bring  about  a  ces- 
sation of  heat  production.  It  is  rather  that  the  heat  produced 
by  exercise  simply  moves  on  the  breath  to  the  exterior  parts, 
as  long  as  generation  of  the  breath  takes  place.

589.  During  the  stage  of  sleep  following  the  completion 
of  digestion,  the  pulse  becomes  stronger.  This  is  because  vital 
power  is  added  to  by  the  digested  aliment.  The  heat  which  had 
passed  to  the  inward  parts  now  returns  towards  the  surface  in 
order  to  regulate  the  nutrients  passing  thither,  and  also  returns 
towards  its  source.    This  fact,  and  the  fact  that  the  temperament

*  i.e.,  into  the  abdominal  viscera,  in  whose  veins  the  blood  has  now  collected.

3i6  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE*  i.e.,  into  the  abdominal  viscera,  in  whose  veins  the  blood  has  now  collected.

3i6  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

is  made  hotter  by  the  products  of  nutrition  explains  why  the  pulse 
becomes  of  increased  volume,  and  the  arterial  wall  is  softer 
because  of  the  addition  of  the"  appropriate  nutrients.  There  is 
no  increase  in  swiftness  and  briskness  along  with  the  increase 
of  volume,  because  mere  increase  of  volume  does  not  alter  blood- 
pressure  (lit.  increase  the  resistance)  either  directly  or  indirectly  ; 
that  is,  by  restoring  the  factors  which  directly  raise  the  blood- 
pressure  (lit.  increase  the  resistance). 
r  *  *  *

The  thought  underlying  this  passage  may  be  expressed  as 
follows  : — The 'person  is  supposed  to  have  gone  to  sleep  shortly 
after  completing  his  meal.  The  body-heat  is  now  concentrated 
round  the  digestive  organs  in  order  to  render  digestion  possible. 
The  surface  of  the  body  becomes  cold.  Later,  when  the  first 
digestion  is  accomplished,  the  products  are  distributed_  to  the 
various  parts  of  the  body.  The  heat  now  leaves  the  interior 
parts  (i.e.  the  splanchnic  system),  and  may  be  pictured  as 
passing  to  the  surface  again,  whence  it  had  come  (mabda'),  so  as 
to  be  ready  to  receive  these  digestive-products.  Once  more 
does  it  preside  (lit.  regulate,  tadblr),  or  brood  over  them  so  as  to 
render  possible  the  further  (third  and  fourth)  digestion  which 
they  are  about  to  undergo  in  this  new  situation.

The  pulse  is  strengthened  by  two  factors  :  (a)  the  access  of 
body-heat  which  has  now  left  the  abdomen ;  (b)  the  food-products. 
The  latter  affect  the  pulse  in  two  ways  :  (i)  indirectly,  by  making 
the  temperament  more  hot  ;   (ii)  directly,  by  making  the  arterial

wall  soft.wall  soft.

The  person,  it  will  be  borne  in  mind,  is  supposed  to  be 
still  sleeping.  If  he  continues  to  sleep,  the  pulse  will  change 
in  the  manner  next  to  be  described  ;  if  he  awakes,  the  conditions

also  change,  and  the  pulse  alters  as  described  below.

*  *  *

590.  If  sleep  continues  after  the  completion  of  digestion, 
the  pulse  again  becomes  weak  owing  to  the  aggregation  of  innate 
heat  and  the  choking  of  the  vital  power  by  the  undue  prepon- 
derance of  those  effete  substances  which  now  await  evacuation  by 
channels  only  possible  during  the  waking  state — namely  exercise, 
and  the  insensible  perspiration.

591.  If  the  body  were  fasting  when  sleep  began,  and  there 
is  nothing  awaiting  digestion,  the  temperament  would  tend  to- 
wards coldness,  and  consequently  the  pulse  would  not  only 
remain  small,  slow  and  sluggish  but  would  become  more  so.

592.  The  act  of  waking  has  certain  effects  on  the  pulse.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  3n

When  a  sleeping  person  awakes,  the  pulse  steadily  gains  volume 
and  swiftness  until  it  "reaches  the  natural  state  fVthat  person. 
But  if  the^  wakening  is  sudden,  the  change  in  the  pulse  will  be 
sudden  ;  it  will  become  rapidly  weak,  because  the  act  of  waking 
overrules  the  vital  power.  The  previous  large  volume  will 
reappear  later,  and  the  pulse  will  become  quick,  brisk  and 
irregular  (up  to  "thrilling").  The  quasi-violent  movement 
introduces  great  heat.  The  sudden  stirring  up  of  the  vital  power 
to  meet  the  sudden  change  accounts  for  the  irregularity  and 
trembling  of  the  pulse.  _  However,  the  pulse  does  not  remain 
long  m  this  condition  ;  it  rapidly  becomes  regular  again. 
Seemingly  potent  though  the  agent 'is,  its  duration  is  so  short 
that  all  trace  of  its  effect  is  soon  lost.13.       The    Pulse    during    (rigorous)    Athletic    Exercise

Note  :  the  word  "  Exercise  "  includes  (a)  athletic  sports  of  all  kinds  :  running 
endurance  tests,  sprinting,  gymnastics  of  all  kinds,  military  exercises,  laborious 
manual  or  physical  work  ;  (b)  work  in  the  fields  ;  (c)  necessary  exercise  and  walking 
exercise  taken  for  health's  sake  and  recreation  ;    (d)  mental.

593.  _  At  the  outset,  as  long  as  the  exertion  is  moderate, 
the  pulse  is  large  and  strong.  This  is  because  the  innate  heat 
increases,  and  is  strong.  The  pulse  is  also  swift  and  brisk.  This 
is  because  the  resistance  becomes  greatly  increased  by  the 
exertion.

(The  pulse  is  frequent,  strong,  and  the  artery  is  moderately  contracted  :  115)

594.  As  exertion  continues  and  increases,  even  if  it  be 
intense  for  only  a  short  time,  the  pulse  weakens,  and,  with  the 
dispersal  of  the  innate  heat,  becomes  small.  The  pulse  remains 
swift  and  brisk  for  two  reasons  :  (1)  the  degree  of  resistance 
(i.e.  blood-pressure)  is  further  increased  ;  (2)  the  vital  power 
progressively  fails  until  it  is  insufficient.  After  this,  the  swiftness 
steadily  and  progressively  lessens  ;  and  the  briskness  increases 
correspondingly  to  the  lessening  of  vital  power.

(Violent,  but  not  excessive  exercise,  renders  the  pulse  frequent,  strong  sudden 
vehement,  large,  short,  dicrotous  :  * 1 5)

Still  further  prolongation  of  the  exertion  weakens  the.  pulse 
until  it  becomes  formicant  and  very  brisk.

(Exhaustion  produces  a  frequent,  sudden,  short,  not  vehement,  very  dicrotous 
pulse.  It  is  large  unless  the  heart  is  very  weak.  Fatigue  makes  the  pulse  slightly 
slow;    the  force  is  diminished,  the  arteries  are  relaxed.115)595.  Finally,  if  the  exercise  has  been  carried  on  to  an 
extremely  excessive  extent,  it  leads  to  a  state  akin  to  death,  acting

3i 8  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

like  all  resolvents— that  is,  it  renders  the  pulse  vermicular,  very

brisk,  slow,  weak  and  small.^

14.     The  Effect  of  Bathing  on  the  Pulse

596,  (1)  Hot  bath.  If  one  bathes  in  hot  water,  the  first 
effect  is  to  make  the  pulse  strong  and  raise  the  pressure.  When 
the  bath  has  brought  about  a  dispersal  of  the  vital  power,  the 
pulse  becomes  weak.  Galen  says  it  is  small,  slow  m  beat  and 
sluggish.  But  while  agreeing  that  it  is  weak  and  small  ;  we 
say  that  the  hot  water  acts  first  by  increasing  the  interior  heat 
of  the  body,  like  any  extraneous  heat,  i.e.  only  temporarily. 
After  a  while  the  water  resumes  its  cooling  effect* — its  natural 
quality.  This  cooling  effect  may  persist.  As  long  as  its  action 
as  extraneous  heat  holds  the  field,  the  pulse  becomes  swift  and 
brisk.  But  when  its  own  natural  character  is  resumed,  the  pulse 
will  be  slow  and  sluggish.  If  the  incidental  quality  (of  being  hot) 
lead  to  so  much  loss  of  strength  that  syncope  is  imminent,  the 
pulse  becomes  slow  and  sluggish.

(2)  Cold  baths.  If  the  cold  reaches  to  the  interior  parts, 
the  pulse  becomes  weak,  small,  sluggish,  slow.  If  it  does  not  do 
so  but  has  the  effect  of  aggregating  the  innate  heat  in  the 
interior,  the  volume  of  the  pulse  will  increase  as  the  power 
increases,  and  the  swiftness  and  briskness  decrease.

(3^  Bathing  in  natural  thermal  waters.    If  these  have  desiccant 
properties,  the  pulse  becomes  harder  and  its  volume  diminishes 
If  they  impart  warmth,  the  swiftness  increases.  _  If  they  dispel 
the  vital  power  the  pulse  will  come  to  be  as  described  above.15.     The  Pulse  in  Pregnancy

597.  The  resistance  is  specially  great  in  pregnancy,  because 
the  foetus  shares  in  the  mother's  respiration.  Both  mother  and 
embryo  have  their  own  resistance  (blood-pressure),  and  there  is 
as  it  were  a  double  respiration.  Nevertheless  there  is  no  doubt 
about  the  fact  that  the  vital  power  is  neither  increased  nor 
lessened,  except  to  a  degree  consistent  with  a  slight  lassitude 
proceeding  from  the  mere  weight  of  the  foetus.  Hence  the  in- 
crease of  resistance  overrules  the  moderate  amount  of  vital 
power,  and  the  pulse  is  made  of  greater  volume  and  becomes 
swift  and  brisk.

8  «6  The  Chinese  say  :  a  pulse  at  C  which  is  constantly  superficial  (or 
"  swimming  "for  deep  in  an  Otherwise  healthy  woman,  with  arneuorrho^,  b<^ 
pregnancy?  so  also  a  high  strong  C  pulse  ;    a      slippery      pulse  at  C  is  a  certain

*  On  the  nervous  system.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  319

sign.     An  overflowing  and  high  or  deep  and  full  pulse  at  the  left  C  goes  with  a  male 
pregnancy  ;  a  superficial  and  high  pulse  at  the  right  C  betokens  a  female  pregnancy.

A  number  of  other  rules  are  given,  the  changes  in  the  character  of  the  pulse 
during  the  successive  months  of  pregnancy  being  specified.  Thus,  first  month  : 
W  pulse  small,  C  pulse  brisk.  Third  month  :  pressure  with  the  finger  makes  the 
pulse  seem  to  disperse.  Sixth  month  :  pressure  does  not  alter  the  typical  character. 
Seventh-eighth  month  :  full,  hard,  strong  pulse  betokens  a  good  labour.  A  deep 
and  slender  pulse  forewarns  of  difficult  labour.

Death  of  the  foetus  makes  the  pulse  long  and  tremulous.Death  of  the  foetus  makes  the  pulse  long  and  tremulous.

If  the  C  pulse  is  continually  small,  weak,  and  sharp,  and  the  nature  is  cold,  \ 
with  a  tendency  to  shiverings,  pregnancy  will  never  be  possible.

16.     The  Pulse  in  Pain

598e  Pain  changes  the  character  of  the  pulse  according  to 
(1)  its  intensity  ;  (2^  its  duration  ;  (3)  its  situation — whether 
the  member  affected  is  a  vital  one  or  not.

At  first,  pain  stirs  up  the  vital  power,  making  it  resist  and 
counteract  the  pain  ;  at  the  same  time  the  cause  of  the  pain 
increases  the  heat  of  the  body.  The  pulse  is  therefore  of  large 
volume,  swift  and  very  brisk,  the  effort  entailed  in  immobilizing 
the  body  [the  reflex  effect  of  the  pain]  accounting  for  the  volume 
and  swiftness.  When  the  pain  becomes  less  unbearable  in  one 
or  other  of  the  ways  we  have  already  explained,  the  pulse  steadily 
declines  in  fullness  until  it  has  lost  its  size  and  swiftness  ;  but 
these  features  are  replaced  by  very  marked  briskness  and  small- 
ness  of  beat,  and  hence  the  pulse  becomes  formicant  and  ver- 
micular.

If  pain  becomes  more  and  more  severe,  it  makes  the  pulse 
sluggish  and  finally  extinct.

17.      The  Pulse  in  (Inflammatory)   Swellings

599.  The  formation  of  certain  swellings  is  associated  with 
fever,  either  because  of  their  size,  or  because  they  affect  some 
vital  organ.  The  pulse  varies  with  the  changes  induced  in  the 
body  as  a  whole  by  the  fever,  as  we  shall  explain  in  its  proper 
place.

Afebrile  swellings  alter  the  pulse  of  the  member  itself,  from 
their  very  nature.  The  pulse  in  the  rest  of  the. body  may  be 
altered  secondarily — not  because  they  are  swellings,  but  because 
they  produce  pain  (and  restrict  movement.  Aeg.).In  sthenic  fever,  the  pulse  is  frequent,  sudden,  vehement,  large,  short, 
dicrotous.  In  asthenic  fever  it  is  frequent,  sudden,  not  vehement,  large  (unless  the 
heart  is  weak),  short,  and  very  dicrotous.  In  peritonitis,  the  arteries  are  extremely 
contracted.     (Broadbent.)

600.  When  an  inflammatory  mass  causes  a  change  of  the 
pulse,  it  does  so  either  according  to  (1)  kind  of  swelling,  (2)  its

32o  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

phase,  (3)  its  bulk,  (4)  the  organ  in  which  it  occurs,  (5)  associated

effects.  .,,,,,

1.  Relation  to  variety  of  mass,  {a)  If  '  hot,_  the  pulse 
becomes  harsh,  and  coarsely,  and  then  finely  thrilling  ;  swift, 
brisk.  (b)  If,  however,  there  is  an  antagonistic  humectant  agent 
at  work,  the  pulse  ceases  to  be  harsh  and  becomes  undulatory. 
It  is  also  always  tremulous — coarse  or  fine  tremor — and  swift 
and  brisk.  Not  only  are  there  agents  which  will  alter  a  hard 
pulse,'  but  there  are  also  agents  which  make  a  harsh  pulse  more 
decided,  (c)  If  the  mass  be  soft,  the  pulse  is  undulatory. 
(d)  If  very  cold,  the  pulse  becomes  slow  and  sluggish,  (e)  If 
hard,  the  harsh  pulse  becomes  still  more  harsh.

When  abscess  formation  comes  on,  the  pulse  ceases  to  be 
harsh  and  becomes  undulatory.  This  is  because  suppuration 
goes  with  moisture  and  softness.  The  pulse  also  becomes 
irregular  owing  to  the  weight  of  the  mass,  and  the  rate  of  brisk- 
ness lessens  owing-  to  the" fact  that  heat-formation  ceases  with 
maturation  of  the  pus.2.  Relation  between  phase  of  inflammatory  process  and 
character  of  pulse.  The  larger  the  "  hot  "  inflammatory  mass 
becomes,  the  more  harsh  does  the  pulse  become.  The  hardness 
and  tension  in  the  mass  increases  steadily,  and  as  the  pain  in- 
creases, tremor  appears  in  the  pulse.  At  the  acme,  all  the 
features  of  the  pulse  become  more  marked,  except  those  depend- 
ing on  force  ;  the  force  of  the  pulse  lessens  and  the  briskness 
and  swiftness  increase.  If  the  acme  is  prolonged,  the  swiftness 
lessens  and  the  pulse  becomes  formicant.  After  the  swelling 
subsides,  whether  by  natural  processes  or  by  surgical  interference, 
the  pulse  becomes  strong  in  proportion  as  the  tension  in  the 
swelling  lessens  ;  and  the  pulse  ceases  to  be  thrilling  because 
the  pain  ceases  with  the  fall  of  tension  in  the  tissues.

3.  Relation  between  bulk  of  inflammatory  ^  mass  and  the 
pulse.  A  large  mass  denotes  marked  inflammation  ;  the  pulse 
becomes  larger  in  all  respects,  and  each  beat  is  prolonged. 
When  the  mass  is   only  small,  the  pulse  is  smaller  and  more

sluggish.

4.  Effect  of  the  position  in  the  body.  When  the  inflam- 
matory process  is  situate  in  an  organ  or  tissue  rich  in  sensory- 
nerves,  the  pulse' becomes  hard,  and  approaches  the  "harsh" 
type.  If  the  organ  is  rich  in  blood-vessels,  there  is  an  increase 
in  size  of  the  pulse,  and  in  force  ;  and  it  is  very  irregular.  If 
arteries  predominate — as  in  the  spleen  and  lung — the  volume 
is  not  maintained  unless  the  force  is  maintained  as  well.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  321

When  it  is  situate  in  moist  soft  members  (like  the  brain 
and  lung)  the  pulse  becomes  undulating.THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  321

When  it  is  situate  in  moist  soft  members  (like  the  brain 
and  lung)  the  pulse  becomes  undulating.

5.  Effect  of  secondary  results  of  inflammation.  An  inflam- 
matory mass  in  the  lung  has  a  choking  effect,  and  hence  the  pulse 
becomes  thrilling  •  in  the  liver,  atrophy  is  produced  and  the 
pulse  becomes  like  that  found  in  wasting  diseases  ;  in  the  kidney, 
strangury  is  produced,  and  there  is  suppression  of  urine,  which 
alters  the  pulse  accordingly.  In  members  which  are  rich  in 
sensory  nerves  (stomach,  diaphragm),  the  pulse  becomes 
spasmodic  and  swooning.

18.     Effect  of  various  Emotional  States*  on  the  Pulse

601.  Anger.  Anger  stirs  up  the  vital  power  and  causes 
the  breath  (ruh)  to  expand  all  at  once.  Hence  the  pulse  is  large, 
rises  high,  is  swift  and  brisk.  It  is  not  necessarily  irregular 
because  the  passion  does  not  change — unless  there  is  fear  present 
as  well,  in  which  case  anger  would  prevail  at  one  time,  and  fear 
at  another.  Irregularity  may  also  occur  if  shame  is  associated, 
for  the  intellect  warns  the  person  to  be  silent  and  not  yield  to 
the  same  evil  as  did  the  person  who  has  excited  one  to  anger.

Excitement  apart  from  anger.— The  pulse  is  frequent,  strong,  and  the  artery 
is  moderately  contracted. — Note  also  the  modern  observation  that  "  excitement 
always  increases  the  blood-concentration,  sometimes  by  as  much  as  10  per  cent  "" 
(Barbour  and  Hamilton,  Journ.  Am.  Med.  Assoc,  1927,  p.  91).

Delight.      Here  the  movement  is   gradual  and  outwards. 
The  pulse  does  not  become  as  speedy  and  brisk  as  in  the  case  of 
anger,  but  its  volume  is  adequate  for  the  resistance,  and  therefore 
the  pulse  is  slow  and  infrequent.Joy.  The  pulse  is  similar  to  the  preceding,  because  usually 
large  in  volume,  and  soft  ;    it  becomes  slow  and  infrequent.

Grief.  Here  the  heat  is  extinguished,  or  choked,  nearly  to 
obliteration,  and  the  vital  power  is  weakened.  Hence  the  pulse 
is  small,  weak,  sluggish  and  slow.

Fear.  If  of  sudden  origin,  the  pulse  becomes  quick, 
irregular,  disorderly.  If  the  state  is  prolonged,  or  more  or  less 
habitual,  having  begun  insidiously,  the  pulse  varies  with  the 
varying  shades  of  anxiety.

Love.— "  Now  the  lover's  pulse  is  variable  and  irregular,  especially  when  he 
sees  the  object  of  his  affections,  or  hears  her  name,  or  gets  tidings  of  her.  In  this 
way  one  can  discover,  in  the  case  of  the  one  who  conceals  his  love  and  the  name  of 
his  beloved,  who  is  the  object  of  his  passion.  .  .  ."— (Dhakhira-i-Khwarazm-shahi, 
Book  vi.  Guftar  1,  Juz'  2,  ch.  3  ;    E.  G.  Browne's  translation,'  p.  89.)

*  Nafsaniat.     See  §  160  hi,  iv,  and  174  sqq.

322  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

19.     Brief  Summary  of  the  Changes  produced  by  Agents

ANTAGONISTIC   TO    THE   NATURE    OF   THE   PuLSE322  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

19.     Brief  Summary  of  the  Changes  produced  by  Agents

ANTAGONISTIC   TO    THE   NATURE    OF   THE   PuLSE

602.  When  the  pulse  is  changed  by  such  agents,  it  is 
either  (1)  because  of  an  intemperament  ;  and  you  know  the  effect 
of  each  of  these  upon  the  pulse  ;  or  (2)  by  confining  the  vital 
power,  whereby  the  pulse  becomes  irregular.  If  the  restriction 
be  unduly  great,  the  pulse  becomes  also  disorderly  and  arhythmic 
The  degree  of  confinement  varies  with  the  amount  of  morbid 
material,  whether  there  be  an  inflammatory  mass  or  not.  Or, 
(3)  by  dispersal  of  the  vital  power,  whereby  the  pulse  becomes 
weak.  Here  belong  such  agents  as  :  severe  pain,  affections  of 
the  mind  which  produce  a  profound  loss  of  vital  power,  severe 
or  protracted  diarrhoea.

8  2^7  Pulse  in  convalescence  from  acute  disease  :  the  rate  is  normal  or  slightly 
slow  -the  force  of  the  heart  is  diminished  and  the  arteries  are  relaxed  The  force 
of  the  heart  and  the  arterial  tone  increase  as  convalescence  advances.     (Broadbent,

P'  5I  The  "  renal  pulse  "  :    the  frequency  is  normal  or  slightly  diminished.     The 
force  of  the  heart  beat  is  increased.     The  arterioles  are  contracted  (ib.).

THE  URINE

i.      General  Remarks

Precautions  necessary  in  Collecting  the  Urine,  before 
Forming  an  Opinion  as  to  its  Character

603.  i.  It  must  be  collected  in  the  early  morning*  ;  it 
must  not  have  been  kept  over  from  the  night  before.f

2.  The  person  must  not  have  taken  either  food  or  drink 
before  passing  it.2.  The  person  must  not  have  taken  either  food  or  drink 
before  passing  it.

3.  _  The  previous  food  must  have  been  free  from  colouring 
agents  like  crocus  and  cassia  fistula  (these  render  the  urine  lemon 
yellow  or  ruddy),  and  from  potherbs  (which  make  the  urine  a 
greenish  tint),  and  from  salted  fish  (which  renders  the  urine  dark), 
and  from  intoxicating  wines  (which  tend  to  render  the  colour 
of  the  urine  similar  to  themselves).

4.  The  patient  should  not  have  been  given  an  agent  which 
expels  some  humour  (a  cholagogue  or  phlegmagogue)  by  the 
urine.

5.  Physiological  state.  The  patient  should  not  have  under- 
taken severe  exercise  or  toil,  or  be  in  a  praeternatural  mental 
state  ;  for  in  each  case  the  colour  of  the  urine  may  alter.  E.g., 
fasting,  wakefulness,f  toil,  anger,  dread — for  all  these  cause  the 
urine  to  become  more  lemon-yellow  or  redder  in  tint.  Coitus 
also  alters  the  urine,  rendering  it  oily.  Vomiting  and  defecation 
alter  both  colour  and  texture  of  the  urine.  The  same  happens 
if  the  urine  is  kept  standing  a  while.  This  is  why  some  advise 
urine  not  to  be  left  standing  more  than  six  hours  before  exam- 
ination, for  otherwise  the  significance  is  altered  ;  the  colour 
changes;  the  sediment  goes  partly  into  solution  ;  and  the 
density  increases.  Personally  I  think  that  such  changes  begin 
within  an  hour.

6.  The  whole  of  the  urine  should  be  collected  into  one

*  Because  digestion,  whose  efficacy  the  urinoscopy  determines,  will  then  have 
had  time  to  be  completed  in  a  normal  person.

f  The  patient  must  have  slept  through  the  night.

323

324  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

single  vessel  lest  anything  should  be  spilt  out  of  it  ;  one  should 
allow  it  to  settle  before  scrutinizing  it.323

324  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

single  vessel  lest  anything  should  be  spilt  out  of  it  ;  one  should 
allow  it  to  settle  before  scrutinizing  it.

7.  The  urinal  must  be  clean.  For  instance,  alkanna  will 
impart  its  colour  to  the  urine  ;  this  is  a  dye  used  by  some 
people  for  tinting  their  skin  and  finger-nails.

8..  The  vessel  used  for  the  specimen  must  be  clean,  and 
the  previous  sample  must  have  been  rinsed  out  of  it.

9.  The  material  of  which  the  vessel  is  made  should  be 
clear  white  glass  or  crystal.

10.  The  urine  must  not  be  exposed  to  the  sun  or  wind 
or  freezing  cold,  until  the  sediment  has  separated  out  and  the 
various  characters  have  properly  developed.  The  settling  is  not 
immediate  even  if  the  digestive  processes  are  normal.

11.  The  sample  must  be  inspected  in  a  light  place  where 
the  rays  do  not  fall  directly  upon  it,  as  otherwise  the  brilliant 
light  would  interfere  with  the  colours  and  give  rise  to  erroneous 
deductions.

12.  The  nearer  one  holds  the  sample  to  the  eye,  the  denser 
does  it  appear.  The  further  away  it  is,  the  clearer  does  it  seem. 
In  this  way  one  can  distinguish  urine  from  other  fluids  brought 
to  the  doctor  in  a  falsified  state.

604„  There  is  little  advantage  to  be  derived  from  the  study 
of  the  urine  in  childhood,  and  still  less  in  infancy,  because  their 
nourishment  consists  solely  of  milk,  and  the  very  little  colouring 
matter  there  is  in  the  urine  is  lost  to  view  ;  their  "  nature  "  is 
also  very  feeble  in  view  of  the  fact  that  they  pass  so  much  time 
in  sleep,  which  abolishes  the  evidences  of  digestion.805o  The  first  and  foremost  object  of  observing  the  urine 
is  to  form  an  opinion  about  the  state  of  the  liver,  the  urinary 
passages  and  the  blood-vessels.  The  various  disorders  of  these 
organs  are  revealed  by  it.  But  the  most  precise  information 
to  be  obtained  is  that  concerning  the  functional  capacity  of  the 
liver.

Inspection  of  Urine,     (tafsira.)

The  name  "  tafsira  "  is  given  to  "  inspection  "  because  it  "  explains  "  (tufassir) 
and  makes  manifest  to  the  physician  ;  it  is  an  indication  or  guide  (dalll)  to  the 
patient's  condition.*

606,  The  following  are  the  points  to  observe  in  a 
sample  of  urine  :

1.  quantity    (665)

2.  odour        (645)

*  Diet,  of  the  Technical  Terms  used  in  the  Sciences  of  the  Mussulmans  1I8,  and 
Browne  ',  p.  142.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  325

3.  colour  •  (609)

4.  foam  (649)

5.  texture  (627):

6.  clearness  (632)

7.  sediment  (652)

Some  persons  add  other  two  :  the  feel  and  the  taste,  but 
we  reject  them  as  objectionable.

By  colour  we  understand  the  various  shades  of  colour 
perceived  by  the  sense  of  sight — whiteness,  darkness,  inter- 
mediate shades.

By  texture  we  refer  to  the  coarseness  or  fineness.

By  clearness  or  turbidity  we  refer  to  the  ease  or  otherwise 
with  which  light  traverses  it  (translucence).

607.  There  is  a  difference  between  texture  and  trans- 
lucence, for  a  urine  may  be  coarse  and  yet  as  .clear  as  egg-white 
or  liquid  fish-glue  ;  and  a  rarefied  urine  may  be  turbid  (e.g. 
turbid  water  is  more  rarefied  than  white  of  egg).608.  Turbidity  depends  on  the  presence  of  certain  vari- 
ously coloured  particles — opaque  or  dark,  or  tinted  with  other 
colours  which  are  imperceptible  to  the  sense  of  sight  and  yet  are 
impervious.  Sediment  differs  from  turbidity  in  that  the  particles 
are  readily  visible  to  the  eye,  whereas  particles  cannot  reallv  be 
distinguished  in  the  case  of  turbidity.  Sediment  appears  imme- 
diately after  the  passage  of  the  urine  ;  turbidity  does  not  clear 
up  on  standing.  Turbidity  differs  from  coloration  in  that  the 
latter  pervades  the  whole  substance  of  the  urine,  whereas  tur- 
bidity is  less  intimately  admixed.

1.     The  Significance  of  the  Colour  of  the  Urine

609o  The  degrees  of  yellowness.  Among  the  shades 
of  yellow  colour  are  :  (1)  straw-yellow  ;  (2)  lemon-yellow;* 
{3)  orange-yellow  ;  (4)  flame-yellow,  or  saffron-yellow  ;  that 
is,  a  very  deep  yellow  ;  (5)  clear  reddish-yellow.  All  except 
the  first  two  denote  a  hot  in  temperament,  in  degrees  varying 
with  the  amount  of  exercise,  pain,  fasting,  and  abstinence  from 
water.  The  fourth  variety  denotes  predominance  of  the  bilious 
humour.

[Variants  of  (i).     If  the  urine  is  plentiful  also,  it  shows  that  a  crude  humour 
is  being  excreted  by  the  urine.     If  there  is  also  a  sediment  which  is  white,  smooth,

*  Lemon-yellow  (utruj). — Orange-yellow  (narahja). — Reddish-yellow  (shuqrat). 
— The  latter  is  the  yellowish  colour  of  a  chestnut  horse. — Another  yellow,  with  a 
areddish  shade,  is  called  jujube  colour  (unnabi)  ;  this  is  not  in  the  text,  though 
■enumerated  with  dyers'  colours  (cf.  Night  933).

326  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE326  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

equable  and  plentiful,  it  shows  that  the  digestion  is  good.  If  thicker,  and  a  sediment 
is  present,  it  shows  that  the  digestion  is  not  altogether  bad.  If  gritty,  scaly,  fur- 
furaceous,  with  black,  livid,  green  or  fetid  sediment,  this  shows  entire  lack  of  diges- 
tive function  (Aegineta).]  :-

610.  II.  The  degrees  of  redness,  (i)  rose-red  or  roseate  ; 
(2)  very  dark  red  ;  (3)  purple  red,  which  has  a  brilliance  about 
it  like  a  certain  rose  ;  (4)  smoky  red  or  dull  red.  All  these 
denote  dominance  of  the  sanguineous  humour,  for  dullness, 
of  colour  points  that  way.  A  flame-yellow  shows  the  presence 
of  more  "  heat  "  than  dull  red  because  it  shows  there  is  bilious 
humour  in  it,  and  this  is  hotter  than  sanguineous  humour.

The  urine  tends  to  saffron-yellow  and  flame-yellow  in  acute 
maladies  described  as  "  burning  "  ;  but  if  the  urine  is  at  all 
inclined  to  be  clear,  it  shows  a  certain  degree  of  "  digestion," 
namely  that  this  process  has  actually  begun,  but  its  products 
have  not  yet  appeared  in  the  substance  of  the  urine.

611. '  Deepening  of  colour  from  lemon-yellowness  towards 
a  flame-yellow  shade  shows  that  the  innate  heat  is  steadily- 
increasing.  The  colour  then  ceases  to  be  yellow,  and  attains  a 
pure  clear  red.  If  the  urine  now  begins  to  clarify  it  shows  that 
the  (pathological)  heat  is  beginning  to  subside.In  acute  diseases  of  a  haemorrhagic  character,  the  urine 
may  be  tinged  with  blood  without  any  evident  rupture  of  blood- 
vessels having  occurred.  This  would  indicate  an  _  excessive 
plethora.  A  gradual  loss  of  blood  by  the  urine,  associated  with 
a  bad  odour,  is  a  sign  to  be  dreaded  because  it  informs  us  that 
there  is  haemorrhage  proceeding  from  congested  parts.  The 
prognosis  is  still  worse  if  the  urine  becomes  thinner  and  more 
offensive  in  odour.

612.  Admixture  of  the  urine  with  blood  may  be  a  good 
sign — namely  in  acute  composite  fevers — for  it  shows  that 
crisis  is  about  to  take  place,  and  recovery  will  follow.  The  only 
exception  is  if  the  urine  becomes  suddenly  transparent  (its  colour 
becoming  normal,  i.e.)  before  the  crisis  is  due.  Such  a  phenome- 
non would  be  a  forerunner  of  a  relapse.  But  thin  urine  appearing 
before  the  crisis  may  be  equally  unfavourable  unless  the  change, 
has  been  gradual  and  progressive.

613.  In  jaundice,  if  the  urine  becomes  of  a  deeper  red 
until  it  is  nearly  black,  and  its  stain  on  linen  can  no  longer  be 
removed,  it  is  a  good  sign  ; — the  better  the  deeper  the_  red.. 
But  if  the  urine  becomes  white  or  slightly  reddish,  and  the  jaun- 
dice is  not  subsiding,  the  advent  of  dropsy  is  to  be  feared.

Fasting  is  among  the  conditions  which  render  the  urine- 
high-coloured  and  of  marked  acridity.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  327Fasting  is  among  the  conditions  which  render  the  urine- 
high-coloured  and  of  marked  acridity.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  327

614.  III.  The  degrees  of  green  colour,  (i)  A  colour 
approaching  that  of  pistachios*  ;  (2)  the  colour  of  verdigris  ; 
(3)  rainbow  green  ;  (4)  emerald  green  ;  (5)  leek-green.  The 
first  denotes  a  cold  intemperament,  as  do  all  things  the  shade 
of  whose  green  is  not  (2)  or  (5).  These  (2,  c)  denote  extreme 
combustion,  but  (5)  is  not  as  unhealthy  as  (2).  If  it  should  be 
met  with  after- physical  labour  it  denotes  "  spasm."  A  green- 
coloured  urine  in  adolescence  points  to  the  same  condition.

Rainbow  green  usually  denotes  an  extremely  cold  intem- 
perament. In  this  respect  it  comes  next  to  (1).  Some  say 
that  it  shows  that  poison  was  present  in  the  fluid  taken  as  drink, 
and  that  if  there  be  a  sediment  present  there  is  a  hope  of  recovery; 
if  no  sediment,  death  is  likely  to  take  place.  Verdigris  green 
colour  of  urine  forewarns  of  death  (destruction  of  innate  heat).

615.  IV.  The  degrees  of  blackness.  (1)  Dark  urine  ap- 
proaching blackness,  through  a  saffron  colour.  This  occurs  in 
jaundice,  for  instance.  It  denotes  (a)  denseness  and  oxidation  of 
the  bilious  humour  ;  (b)  atrabilious  humour  derived  from 
bilious  humour  ;  (c)  jaundice.  (2)  Deep-brown-black.  This 
shows  the  presence  of  sanguineous  atrabilious  humour.  (3) 
Greenish-black.  This  shows  the  dominance  of  pure  atrabilious 
humour.

(Speaking  generally)  dark  or  black  urine  denotes  (a)  extreme 
oxidation  ;  (J?)  great  cold  ;  (c)  extinction  of  the  innate  heat 
(i.e.  death)  ;  {d)  crisis  ;  (e)  evacuation  whereby  the  effete  sub- 
stances from  the  atrabilious  humour  are  expelled.616.  (The  details  about  each  of  these  are  :)  (a)  dark  urine 
due  to  extreme  oxidation  is  recognized  by  its  causing  scalding,  and 
being  previously  yellow  or  red.  The  sediment  is  discrete  (not 
coherent),  not  homogeneous,  discontinuous,  not  very  dark, 
but  tending  to  a  saffron,  lemon-yellow,  or  dark  brown."  If  the 
colour  of  the  sediment  tends  to  be  lemon-yellow,  it  strongly 
suggests  jaundice.

(b)  When  darkness  of  the  urine  is  due  to  great  cold,  the 
urine  would  previously  be  tending  to  a  green  tint  or  a  livid  tint. 
The  sediment  is  here  slightly  coherent,  and  looks  dry,  and  is 
more  purely  black  in  colour.  If  a  dark  urine  is  also  very  offensive, 
it  shows  that  the  temperament  is  hot.  If  it  be  odourless,  or  has 
only  a  slight  odour,  it  shows  that  the  temperament  is  cold.  This 
is  because  no  odour  emanates  from  urine  unless  the  innate  heat 
overrules  the  cold.

*  Cf.  the  passage  in  Night  933  :    "  I  can  dye  various  kinds  of  green,  such 
as  grass  green,  olive  green,  pistachio  green,  parrot  green."     (Burton,  v.  483.)

328  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

(c)  When  darkness  of  urine  is  due  to  extinction  of  the  innate 
heat  this  is  recognized  by  the  dispersion  of  vitality.       _328  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

(c)  When  darkness  of  urine  is  due  to  extinction  of  the  innate 
heat  this  is  recognized  by  the  dispersion  of  vitality.       _

(d)  When  the  darkness  arises  from  a  critical  change  in  a  tever 
("  critical  polyuria")  one  of  the  following  conditions  may  be 
supposed  :  the  termination  of  a  quartan  fever  ;  the  resolution 
of  a  splenic  disease  ;  the  termination  of  a  fever  associated  with 
the  atrabilious  humour  ;  the  termination  of  a  fever  prevailing 
by  night  and  by  day  ;  subsidence  of  pains  m  the  back  and 
womb  ;  retained  menses  ;  retained  blood  in  a  case  of  piles—both 
the  latter  two  occurring  especially  when  nature  is  assisted  by  art. 
It  occurs  in  women  in  whom  the  menses  are  retained,  because  the 
effete  matters  of  the  blood  cannot  be  disposed  of  by  nature  This 
is  shown  in  the  urine  by  its  being  watery  previously.  VV  hen  the 
effete  matters  are  finally  discharged  from  the  body,  the  urine  at 
the  same  time  becomes  very  abundant.  ^

617  Prognosis.  If  at  the  critical  periods  the  urine  do  not 
become  dark,  it  is  an  ominous  sign,  especially  in_  acute  diseases 
the  more  so  if  at  the  same  time  (a)  the  quantity  ol  urine  be  small 
(for  scanty  urine  is  evidence  that  the  humour  has  already  become 
destroyed  by  oxidation)  ;  (b)  the  sediment  be  coarse-textured  ; 
the  coarser,  the  more  depraved  ;    the  finer,  the  less.

Dark  urine  is  a  good  sign  in  acute  diseases.  _    _Dark  urine  is  a  good  sign  in  acute  diseases.  _    _

If  the  urine  is  limpid  [as  well  as  dark]  and  a  deposit  is 
suspended  in  it  at  different  layers,  this  denotes  cephalalgia,  wake- 
fulness, deafness,  mental  confusion.  If  the  urine  is  secreted 
only  by  drops,  and  a  sediment  forms  slowly,  and  the  odour  is 
pungent,  and  there  is  fever— all  this  would  be  strong  evidence 
of  the  above.  But  when  there  is  wakefulness,  deafness,  delirium, 
and  headache— such-urine  would  show  that  epistaxis  is  pending.

Dark  or  dull  red  urine  which  is  passed  after  drinking  wine 
of  that  colour  or  after  taking  certain  medicines  need  cause  no 
alarm.     The  wine  has  simply  passed  unchanged  through  the

°  Dark  urine  may  be  evidence  of  renal  calculus.  As  Rufus 
says  "  black  urine  is  good  in  infirmities  of  the  kidneys  and  in 
stone  in  the  bladder,  and  also  in  maniacal  cases,  for  they  are 
diseases  proceeding  from  gross  humours.  But  it  is  a  grave  sign 
in  acute  diseases":  On  the  other  hand,  he  says  that  blacK  urine 
is  a  bad  sign  in  diseases  of  the  kidneys  and  bladder  if  at  the  same 
time  it  is  extremely  scalding.  Therefore  one  must  take  all  such 
signs  into  consideration.  .    .

When  dark  urine  occurs  in  aged  persons,  it  is  not  a  good 
sign  because  in  such  persons,  as  you  know,  it  can  only  denote

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  329

great  destruction  oftissue.    In  puerperal  women,  the  appearance 
of  dark  urine  is  premonitory  in  convulsions.

In  brief,  the  appearance  of  dark  urine  is  serious  at  the  onset 
of  fevers  as  well  as  at  their  close,  if  there  is  neither  crisis  nor  any 
abatement  of  symptoms  at  the  same  time.618.  White  urine.  The  word  "  whiteness  "  is  applied 
in  two  ways  :  mere  translucence,  as  the  laity  calls  anything  which 
is  translucent  "  white."  Thus,  clear  glass,  clear  crystal,  are 
"  white."  Translucence  implies  absence  of  all  colour.  Such 
urine  is  "  thin  "  and  translucent.  Secondly,  there  is  true  white- 
ness, like  that  of  milk  or  parchment.  Such  urine  is  not  trans- 
lucent.

Whiteness  in  the  first  sense  shows  that  the  intemperament 
is  altogether  a  cold  one,  and  that  digestion  is  good.  If  the  urine 
be  at  the  same  time  coarse,  it  shows  that  the  serous  humour  is 
abundant.  A  urine  which  is  white  in  the  second  sense  is  neces- 
sarilv  coarse. 
'619.

Variety  of  Whiteness.

(a)  Mucilaginous.

(b)  Waxlike.

(c)  Greasy,  soapy.

(d)  Musty  whiteness  :

(i)  Tinted  with  blood  and  pus.

(ii)  Not  tinted  with  blood.

(e)  Semen-like  :

(i)   Critical  in  form.

(ii)  Not   critical  in   form    and    no 
inflammation.

(iii)  Continuous  throughout  a  fever. 
{/)   Lead-white  ;  no  sediment. 
(g)  Milk-white  ;  in  acute  diseases. 
(h)  Previously  coloured  ;  in  acute  fevers.

(i)  Sudden  change  from  red  to  white  in 
the  course  of  a  fever.

(j)  Whiteness  persisting  in  a  person  ap- 
parently healthy.

(k)  Whiteness  like  buttermilk,  in  acute 
fevers.

Significance.

Excess    of    serous    humour,    and    crude

humour. 
Liquefaction  of  adipose  tissue. 
Liquefaction  of  serous  humour  ;    or  it

may  denote  diabetes,  active  or  latent.

Ulcers     discharging    into     the    urinary

passages. 
Great    excess    of    crude    non-matured

matter  ;    vesical  calculus.

Crisis    in    an    inflammation    arising    in

serous  humour. 
Diseases  associated  with  vitreous  serous

humour. 
Seminal  emission. 
Forewarns  of  apoplexy  and  palsy.

The    fever   will   soon   become    quartan

Bad.serous  humour. 
Diseases  associated  with  vitreous  serous

humour. 
Seminal  emission. 
Forewarns  of  apoplexy  and  palsy.

The    fever   will   soon   become    quartan

Bad.

Ominous.

This  shows  that  bilious  humour  has 
descended  to  some  member  about  to 
develop  an  inflammation  (e.g.,  the 
abdomen,  or,  which  is  worse,  the  head) .

The  patient  will  become  delirious.

Absence  of  digestion  (esp.  in  the  venous 
system  :    Ch.M.')  ;    and  in  diabetes. 
Fatal  issue  ;    or  wasting.

620.      When   the   intemperament   is   hot   because   of  the 
dominance  of  the  bilious  humour,  the  urine  may  appear  white

33o  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

[contrary  to  expectation].  When  the  intemperament  is  cold 
because  of  dominance  of  ,the  serous  humour,  the  urine  may 
appear  red  [contrary  to  expectation].  If  the  bilious  humour 
passes  down  the  urinary  passages  without  being  admixed  with 
the  urine,  the  latter  remains  white.  Hence  it  is  necessary  to 
study  white  urine  with  care.  For,  if  its  colour  were  brilliant, 
and  'if  the  deposit  is  plentiful  and  coarse,  and  the  urine  itself  is 
rather  thick,  it  shows  that  the  whiteness  arises  from  a  cold 
intemperament,  with  predominance  of  the  serous  humour. 
Again,  if  the  urine  be  not  clear  and  bright,  and  there  is  not  much 
deposit,  and  if  the  whiteness  tends  to  a  brownish  tint,  it  shows 
that  there  is  bilious  humour  concealed  therein.  Whiteness  in 
the  course  of  an  acute  disease,  the  signs  of  recovery  being 
present,  with  no  fear  of  maniacal  delirium,  and  the  like,  indicates 
that  the  bilious  humour  has  passed  outby  some  other  channel, 
such  as  the  intestine,  causing  constipation.Brilliant.— Arabic  ;  mushriq  ;  Latin:  clarus.— This  term 
describes  the  colour-effect  produced  in  urine  by  the  presence  ot 
bile-pigment  (as  shown  by  its  use  in  the  next  paragraph,  where  it 
is  evidently  equivalent  to  our  "  dichroic  ").  Other  equivalents  are  : 
bright,  shining,  refulgent,  lustrous,  luminous.  In  this  passage 
Avicenna  seeks  to  warn  the  reader  that  a  urine  is  not  necessarily 
free  of  "  bilious  humour  "  because  it  happens  to  be  very  pale  (white).

Brilliance,  however,  may  be  taken  as  evidence  of  health,  tor 
when  metabolism  proceeds  quite  normally,  the  urine  assumes  a 
peculiar  clear  shining  colour  when  viewed  in  the  light.  In  this  case, 
we  may  think  of  the  various  stages  of  catabolism  proceeding  without 
the  formation  of  irregular  intermediate  substances,  or  by-products. 
The  moments  of  nascence  (§91)  are  "  sharp  "  throughout.621  If  urine  is  red  in  the  course  of  "  cold  "  maladies, 
it  means'one  of  four  things— (1)  that  there  is  severe  pain  which 
disperses  the  bilious  humour  (ex.  :  colic  without  the  signs  ot 
inflammation)  ;  (2)  there  is  so  much  serous  humour  in  the 
bileducts  as  to  give  rise  to  obstruction  there,  and  the  bilious 
humour  is  in  conseqiience  diverted  from  the  intestine  into  the 
urinary  passages.  (3)  Hepatic  insufficiency,  especially  m  regard 
to  separating  off  water  from  the  blood,  as  occurs  in  cold 
dropsy.  The  urine  comes  to  look  like  the  washings  of  raw  meat. 
(A  Some  form  of  putrefactive  process  in  the  veins  subsequent 
to  obstruction  in  the  ducts  ;  here  the  serous  humour  in  the 
vessels  undergoes  a  change  of  colour.  The  urine  is  rendered 
watery,  and  the  sediment  is  of  a  kind  already  described- 
faint  in  colour,  and  not  refulgent.  _  The  presence  ot  bilious 
humour  renders  a  colour  refulgent  (i.e.  dichroic).

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  33  t

622.  Urine  is  often  white  at  the  onset  of  a  disease,  and 
becomes  dark  and  offensive  in  odour  later.     So  it  is  in  jaundice.

623.  Urine  becomes  White  after  a  meal,  and  remains  so 
until  digestion  is  nearly  completed.  It  then  begins  to  assume 
colour.

624.  During  the  waking  state,  the  urine  is  white—partly 
because  of  dispersal  of  the  innate  heat — but  it  is  not  refulgent. 
It  tends  to  be  dusky  if  there  is  an  associated  defective  digestion.

625.  Prognosis.  A  red  colour  is  better  than '  a  watery- 
white  one,  in  the  case  of  acute  diseases.  But  a  white  colour  'is 
better  if  intrinsic — not  due  to  wateriness.625.  Prognosis.  A  red  colour  is  better  than '  a  watery- 
white  one,  in  the  case  of  acute  diseases.  But  a  white  colour  'is 
better  if  intrinsic — not  due  to  wateriness.

Redness  due  to  blood  is  not  as  dangerous  as  redness  due 
to  bilious  humour.  Redness  from  bilious  humour  is  not  as 
serious  if  the  bilious  humour  is  quiescent  ;  it  is  very  ominous 
if  it  begins  to  move  about.

Red  urine  is  very  bad  in  the  case  of  renal  disease  because  it 
is  a  sign  that  there  is  a  "  hot  "  inflammatory  process  there.  If 
it  occurs  m  diseases  associated  with  (intense)  headache,  it  por- 
tends delirium.

When  a  urine  begins  to  turn  red  in  an  acute  disease,  and 
stays  so,_  without  forming  a  sediment,  it  is  an  ominous  sign 
because  it  points  to  an  inflammatory  swelling  in  the  kidneys. 
If  such  urine  becomes  turbid,  and  stays  so,  it  points  to  an  inflam- 
matory mass  in  the  liver,  with  lack  of  innate  heat.

Unusual  coloration  of  the  urine,  produced  by  eating  saffron  or  cassia  fistula 
must  be  borne  m  mind  ;   tricksters  may  alter  their  urine  thus  ( Alsaharavius) .

So  much  for  the  simple  colours  of  the  urine.

626.      The  compound  colours  of  the  urine.

(i)  Like  raw  meat  washings  (i.e.  blood-stained  water). 
This  means  hepatic  insufficiency  due  to  plethora  of  blood  or 
to  any  form  of  intemperament,  resulting  in  deficient  digestive 
power  and  dispersal  of  the  vitality.  Were  the  vital  power 
adequate,  it  would  show  that  there  is  plenty  of  blood,  even  to 
great  excess  ;  and  in  such  a  case,  the  secretory  power  would  be 
hardly  adequate  for  dealing  with  it.(2)  Oleaginous.  Oily.  The  fat  of  the  bodv  is  being  destroyed. 
The  appearance  is  like  a  lemon-yellow  tinged  with"  the  green- 
ness of  the  mistletoe  growing  on  larches.  It  is  called  oleaginous 
because  it  is  viscid  and  translucent,  and  also  has  the  lustre  of  fat, 
and  shows  a  certain  brilliance  or  refulgence  in  spite  of  a  certain 
opacity.  It  is  not  a  good  sign  in  many  states,  "not  to  say  it  is 
bad.     For  it  shows  there  is  neither  maturation,  nor  a  change  for

332  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

the  better.  In  rare  cases  it  indicates  the  critical  evacuation  of 
unctuous  matter,  but  for  it  to  mean  this  alleviation  must  follow. 
If  such  urine  be  also  fetid  and  scanty  m  amount,  it  is  a  very 
ominous  sign.  It  is  also  serious  if  it  be  admixed  with  material 
like  meat  washings,  as  might  happen  in  the  course -of  dropsy, 
phthisis,  .and  intestinal  obstruction.  ...  ,    .

If  oleaginous  urine  replaces  a  black  urine,  it  is  a  good  sign. 
But  if  such  a  urine  appear  on  the  fourth  day  of  an  acute  disease 
it  forewarns  of  the  patient's  death  on  the  seventh  day.  (\ery 
dark  oily  urine  forewarns  of  collapse  and  death.    Theophilus)

<  In  brief,  there  are  three  kinds  of  oleaginous  urine  (i)  All 
fat,  throughout.  (2)  Fat  only  in  the  lower  part  (3)  Fat  m  the 
upper  layers.  The  first  is  oleaginous  only  in  colour  ;  it  occurs 
in  phthisis,  hectic  fever,  and  wasting  diseases,  especially  at  their 
outset  The  second  is  oleaginous  only  in  substance.  itie 
third  is  oily  in  both  respects— e.g.  m  diseases  or  the  kidney, 
at  the  acme  and  termination  of  phthisis.

h)  Purple  {-black).  This  is  a  very  bad  sign.  It  means 
oxidation  of  both  bilious  and  atrabilious  humourh)  Purple  {-black).  This  is  a  very  bad  sign.  It  means 
oxidation  of  both  bilious  and  atrabilious  humour

(a)  Ruddy  colour  admixed  'with  a  tinge  of  blackness.  1  ius 
occurs  in  composite  fevers  and  in  fevers  arising  from  gross 
superfluities.  If  it  clarifies,  and  the  darkness  settles  down  from 
the  surface,  it  denotes  an  inflammatory  .mass  in  the  lung.

3.  The  Signs  afforded  by  the  Density^ Quality,  Clearness 
or  Turbidity  of  the  Urine 
627.     Urine  may  be  tiansparent  or  opaque,  or  intermediate 
in  density.

T,c  ..Hp„itv»  here  spoken  of  is  not  the  equivalent  of  "specific 
grav^/?7thouJh  many "f  4e  sSemTnts  in  the  text  would  apply  equally  even  m 
the   modern   sense.  ,  h     the  morning   and  evening  urine

I  need  for  depurative  foods  (greens,  acid  fruits).

TRANSPARENT    (LIMPID)    URINE

628  Whatever  be  the  state,  a  urine  of  limpid  consistence 
denotes  :  (a)  deficient  digestion  (lack  of  maturation)  ;  {p) 
venous  congestion  ;  (0  renal  insufficiency  (for  the  kidneys 
Inly  separate,  out  fine  matter,  or  if  they  attract  other  matter, 
they  fail  to  discharge  it  until  it  has  been  rarefied  or  rendered  capa- 
ble7of  excretion  ;  \d)  excessive  fluid-intake  ;  (e)  a  very  cold  or 
a  dry  intern perament.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  233

When  it  occurs  in  the  course  of  an  acute  illness,  it  denotes 
deficient  digestive  power, .  and  inability  to  complete  digestion 
(absence  of  maturation  :  cf.  above).  It  may  indicate  that  the 
weakness  of  the  other  faculties  is  so  marked  that  they  cannot 
influence  water  at  all,  and  hence  it  passes  through  the  body 
unchanged.629.  Prognosis.  It  is  worse  for  urine  to  be  very  transparent 
at  puberty  than  in  adolescence,  because  during  the  former  period 
of  life  urine  is  naturally  more  opaque  than  in  adolescence.  Being 
more  moist  in  their  temperament,  their  bodies  attract  moisture 
more  readily,  and,  in  addition,  moisture  is  essential  for  their 
growth.  Hence,  if  acute  fevers  arise  during  the  age  of  puberty, 
the  urine  is  decidedly  abnormal  if  it  is  transparent  ;  and,  should 
it  continue  of  that  character,  it  would  be  a  very  ominous  sign. 
Should  it  continue  and  favourable  symptoms  should  not  appear, 
and  should  the  vitality  not  be  maintained,  it  would  be  a  sign 
that  an  abscess  is  forming  below  the  liver.

630.  If  urine  continue  to  be  transparent  for  a  long  time 
without  any  variation  in  a  person  otherwise  healthy,  should  he 
experience  pain  one  will  know  that  an  inflammatory  mass  is 
forming  in  the  situation  of  the  pain.  The  pain  is  usually  lumbar 
when  the  urine  is  of  this  character,  and  that  is  the  usual  site  for 
an  abscess.

If  there  is  no  localized  pain  in  such  a  case,  but  a  general 
pain  and  heaviness,  this  points  to  the  widespread  formation  of 
small  pustules.

If  the  urine  is  transparent  at  the  crisis  of  an  illness,  contrary 
to  rule,  it  forewarns  of  a  relapse.

OPAQUE    (THICK)    URINEIf  the  urine  is  transparent  at  the  crisis  of  an  illness,  contrary 
to  rule,  it  forewarns  of  a  relapse.

OPAQUE    (THICK)    URINE

831.  If  the.  urine  is  very  opaque,  it  shows  that  maturation 
has  failed  to  take  place  ;  or,  more  rarely,  it  denotes  the  matura- 
tion of  "  gross  "  humours,  such  as  occur  at  the  height  (status) 
of  humoral  fevers,  or  after  the  opening  of  abscesses.  In  acute 
fevers,  the  appearance  of  opaque  urine  is  usually  a  bad  sign, 
though  not  as  bad  as  a  persistently  transparent  urine.  The  fact 
that  urine  is  opaque  shows  that  there  is  a  certain  degree  of  diges- 
tion proceeding,  because  digestion  adds  to  the  opacity  of  urine 
to  a  certain  extent,  and  shows  that  there  is  some  power  of  expul- 
sion (of  effete  matter).  But  it  is  a  bad  sign  in  so  far  as  it  denotes 
the  breakdown  of,  and  abundance  of,  humours,  and  that  the 
evacuation  of  the  separated  materials  is  hindered.

334  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

To  ascertain  which  of  the  two  is  dominant,  notice  whether 
improvement  or  increased  weakness  follows.

Prognosis.  When  opaque'  urine  is  passed  in  the  course 
of  fevers,  it  is  a  less  serious  sign  if  it  be  poured  out  quickly  and 
plentifully.  When  excreted  slowly  it  denotes  a  redundance  of 
the  (serous,  Ch.M.7)  humours  and  an  enfeebled  vitality.  A  sign 
which  is  still  less  serious  is  that  a  urine  of  medium  density  should 
go  with  a  simultaneous  improvement  in  the  general  condition.

A  very  dense  urine  sometimes  denotes  that  digestion  is  unduly  excessive 
(Ch.  M.').

When  the  urine  is  transparent  in  an  acute  illness,  and  then 
becomes  thick,  and  there  is  no  improvement  in  the  condition  of 
the  patient,  it  denotes  colliquation  [of  tissues].Persistent  opacity  of  urine  in  a  presumably  healthy  person 
forewarns  of  fever  should  headache  and  mental  confusion  arise. 
Opaque  urine  also  occurs  after  excessive  evacuations,  after  the 
opening  of  an  abscess,  or  owing  to  ulcers  in  the  urinary  passages.

Transparent  and  opaque  urine  cannot  both  denote  lack  of 
digestion  (maturation)  unless  there  is  an  intermediate  degree  of 
density  associated  with  the  maturation.  Dense  substances  are 
rendered  thin  or  limpid  by  the  process  of  digestion,  and  the  urine 
changes  from  transparency  to  opacity.

CLEARNESS    AND    TURBIDITY

632.  Thick  urine,  as  has  been  already  stated,  is  sometimes 
clear  and  translucent,  sometimes  turbid  and  opaque  ;  and  yet 
there  is  a  marked  difference  between  thick  and  limpid  translucent 
urine.  When  the  former  is  shaken,  it  does  not  easily  break  up 
into  little  portions— it  only  forms  large  portions  ;  and  the  par- 
ticles move  slowly  ;  and  if  it  makes  a  foam,  its  foam  is  composed 
of  numerous  bubbles  which  do  not  coalesce  for  a  long  time.  Such 
a  urine  is  the  outcome  of  an  adequate  digestion  of  the  serous 
humour,  or  of  the  vitelline  bilious  humour  (if  there  be  any  tint 
suggestive  of  yellowness  in  it)  ;  or  of  the  resolution  of  vitreous 
serous  humour  (if  there  be  not  any  tint  of  yellowness  in  it). 
The  last-named  variety  is  often  found  in  the  urine  of  epileptics.But  a  well-coloured  transparent  urine  owes  its  colour  not 
to  digestion  but  to  admixture  with  bilious  humour.  For  other- 
wise digestion  would  be  supposed  to  affect  only  the  "  substance  " 
until  a' mixture  of  colours  had  been  brought  about,  whereas  the 
process  of  digestion  effects  a  change  of  "  substance  "  first,  and 
of  colour  secondarily.  Digestion  concerns  "  substance,"  not 
"  colour."     Hence  if  a  transparent  urine  is  yellow,  and  there  is

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  335

no  abatement  of  the  acute  illness,  that  is  a  bad  sign,  for  it  shows 
the  digestive  faculties  are  (dormant.

_The^appearance  of  alternating  redness  and  yellowness  in  a 
limpid  urine  points  to  inflammatory  changes  dependent  on  toil. 
If  it  be  limpid  and  shows  scale-like  objects  in  it,  and  if  the  bladder 
is  healthy,  that  is  a  sign  of  oxidation  of  the  serous  humour.

In  brief,  a  thick  urine  in  acute  febrile  states  may  denote 
predominance  of  various  humours,  and  at  the  same  time  point  to 
colliquative  processes  (in  the  body).  Should  such  processes 
persist  during  the  whole  phase  of  a  disease,  the  urine  would 
become  more  opaque  (denser,  thicker).

Lastly,  turbid  urine  denotes  earthiness  as  well  as  the  presence 
of  gas _ and  wateriness.  For  when  these  qualities  are  combined, 
turbidity  is  the  result.  -When  they  are  separated  again,  the  urine 
becomes  clear.

633,      The  following  three  states  should  be  noted

i.  The  urine  is  clear  at  the  time  of  passing,  and  then 
becomes  opaque.  This  shows  that  maturation  is  difficult  ;  that 
the  matter  (of  the  food)  has  not  yet  succumbed  to  the  vegeta- 
tive powers  ("  nature  ").  It  may  denote  colliquation  in^  the 
tissues.2.  The  urine  is  opaque  when  passed,  but  then  becomes 
clear.  The  coarse  matters  settle  and  separate  out.  This  shows 
that  the  vegetative  powers  ("  nature  "fhave  already  overcome 
the  material  (of  the  food)  and  matured  it.  The  clearer  it  grows, 
the_  greater  the  amount  of  sediment,  and  the  more  rapidly  the 
sediment  falls,  the  more  complete  is  the  digestion.

3.  A  state  between  the  above  two.  In  this  case  the  vege- 
tative powers  improve,  as  long  as  the  vitality  is  maintained.  It 
shows  that  maturation  is  not  progressing  to  completion.  Rut 
if  the  vitality  is  not  maintained,  it  would  mean  that  the  matura- 
tive  processes  are  not  likely  to  reach  completion.  Should  this 
condition  persist  a  long  time  without  the  feared  symptoms  (of 
loss  of  vitality)  appearing,  then  it  is  likely  that  headache  will 
develop,  for  it  shows  that  there  is  much  gas  formation.

In  modern  language  we  should  say  : —

Urine  which  is  clear  when  passed,  but  is  turbid  on  standing ;  if  acid,  the  deposit 
SinLU  rat^s' wh!ch  fe  *<*  soluble  in  the  cold  ;  or  (b)  bacterial  decomposition, 
stellar  and  triple  phosphates  separating  out.— We  should  heat  the  specimen 
also  ,    a  cloud  m  an  acid  urine  would  be  albumen  _

brine  which  is  turbid  when  passed  or  becomes  turbid  on  standing  ;  if  alkaline 
the  deposit  is  earthy  phosphates  (magnesium  and  calcium).  It  is  met  wrS 
after  a  rich  protein  meal  or  vegetable  meal.  Such  a  urine  may  become 
cloudy  on  heating,  from  the  deposition  of  (calcium)  phosphates,  which  are 
soluble  again  if  acetic  acid  be  added.  F

336  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

It  is  a  better  .sign  for  a  clear  urine  to  become  turbid  than 
for  it  to  remain  turbid  for  several  hours  after  being  passed.336  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

It  is  a  better  .sign  for  a  clear  urine  to  become  turbid  than 
for  it  to  remain  turbid  for  several  hours  after  being  passed.

Urine  may  become  turbid  ^because  of  loss  of  vitality,  apart 
from  expulsion  of  "  the  nature."

If  urine  is  watery  when  voided,  and  remains  so,  it  shows  that 
digestion  has  entirely  ceased.

634,     Good  signs

(a)  Opaque  urine  easily  voided,  whose  sediment  falls  easily  : 
when  occurring  in  palsy,  etc.

(//)  Urine  opaque  when  voided  but  then  becoming  trans- 
parent and  plentiful.

(c)  Limpid  plentiful  urine  following  upon  thick  turbid 
urine  or  thick  and  scanty  urine.

(d)  Opaque  turbid  urine  passed  at  a  slow  rate,  and  then 
becoming  suddenly  abundant  and  easy  to  void.  (This  means 
that  recovery  is  about  to  take  place,  whether  it  be  an  acute  fever 
or  any  other  plethoric  disorder,  or  a  plethora  about  to  manifest 
as  actual  disease).     But  this  kind  of  urine  is  rarely  met  with.

635.  If  the  urine  is  of  natural  colour,  and  its  opacity  be 
great,  it  is  evident  that  much  (effete)  matter  is  passing  through, 
and  that  there  is  no  hindrance  to  their  outflow.  But  it  is  usually 
a  bad  sign  because  it  shows  that  the  humours  are  superabundant, 
and  the  vitality  deficient.     Such  a  urine  is  scanty  and  difficult

to  void.  .  .     .

Opaque  urine  is  a  good  sign  if  it  occurs  at  the  crisis  in 
"  splenic  "  diseases  and  "  mixed  "  fevers,  in  which  the  emunctory 
powers  cannot  come  into  play,  or  equipoise  be  restored.

Lastly, .  turbid  urine  denotes  that  the  humours  are  over- 
abundant and  that  the  vegetative  powers  are  inadequate  for  their

digestion.Lastly, .  turbid  urine  denotes  that  the  humours  are  over- 
abundant and  that  the  vegetative  powers  are  inadequate  for  their

digestion.

636.  Diagnostic  points.  Opaque  urine,  with  a  sandy  sedi- 
ment, denotes  calculus.  Opaque  urine,  with  pus,  a  bad  odour, 
and  scaly  particles  separating  out,  denotes  rupture  of  an  abscess. 
A  thick  urine,  with  the  clinical  evidences  of  an  inflammatory 
mass  or  of  an  ulcer  in  the  bladder,  kidney,  liver  or  chest,  shows 
that  there  is  an  abscess  about  to  burst.

If  the  urine  prior  to  that  were  like  the  washings  of  raw  meat, 
it  would  show  that  there  is  unhealthy  blood  flowing  from  the 
liver  ;  and  if  the  faeces  were  also  similar,  it  would  show  there  is 
an  inflammatory  mass  in  the  interior  of  the  liver.  If  prior  to 
this  there  was  shortness  of  breath,  with  a  dry  cough,  and  a 
stabbing  pain  in  the  chest,  then  one  knows  that  an  abscess  has

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  337

ruptured  which  arose  in  the  chest  or  (round  the)  aorta.     If  the 
pus  is  "  mature,"  it  is  satisfactory.THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  337

ruptured  which  arose  in  the  chest  or  (round  the)  aorta.     If  the 
pus  is  "  mature,"  it  is  satisfactory.

637.  Discharge  of  urine  resembling  pus  may  benefit  a 
person  who  takes  no  exercise  and  lives  in  an  unhygienic  manner. 
It  clears  the  whole  body,  and  removes  the  laxity  resulting  from 
the  lack  of  exercise.  It  may  be  that  there  are  obstructions  in 
the  liver  andadnexa,  and  when  the  obstructions  are  removed, 
the  urine  which  is  voided  is  dense  owing  to  the  matter  which 
passes  out  with  it.  Such  "  matter  "  is  not  "  pus."  It  is  only  pus 
if  it  appears  m  the  urine  after  the  bursting  of  an  abscess  ;  the 
urine  is  then  not  only  thick  but  dark.  If  at  this  time  there  be 
pain  m  the  left  side,  then  one  knows  that  the  abscess  was  in  the 
spleen.  If  the  pain  is  in  the  upper  part  of  the  abdomen,  one  knows 
the  abscess  was  m  the  stomach.  The  usual  site  for  the  abscess 
is  m  the  hver  and  in  the  urinary  organs.

638.  Turbid  urine  often  denotes  loss  of  vitality  ;  coldness 
dominates  m  the  temperament  as  much  as  if  the  whole  body 
were  exposed  to  external  cold.

839.  Turbid  urine  of  the  appearance  of  poor  wine,  or  of 
chick-pea-water,  may  occur  during  pregnancy,  and  may  be  met 
with  m  persons  with  long-standing  internal  "hot"  inflam- 
matory masses.

640.  Urine  which  has  the  extremely  turbid  appearance  of 
asses  urine  or  the  urine  of  other  cattle,  arises  from  the  very 
marked  agitation  which  is  going  on  in  the  humours,  especially 
the  serous  humour,  a  certain  amount  of  heat  coming  into  play 
so  as  to  set  up  that  agitation.  Hence  this  kind  of  urine  is  a  fore- 
runner of  headache  or  [coryzalj  catarrh  in  the  head.  If  it  persists, 
it  forewarns  of  lethargia.641  If  the  urine  resembles  the  colour  of  some  member 
for  some  time,  it  forewarns  that  disease  is  about  to  arise 
there.

642.  Some  say  that  if  the  lower  layers  of  the  urine  show  a 
powdery  or  nebulous  appearance,  it  means  that  the  illness  will 
be  of  long  duration  ;  and  that  if  it  persists  throughout  the  whole 
illness,  it  presages  death,  or  the  formation  of  "  crude  "  serous 
humour,  which  is  distinguished  from  pus  by  its  fetor.

643.  If  the  urine  separates  into  several  layers,  the  more 
there  are  the  stronger  is  the  natural  faculty,  and  the  more  open 
are  the  pores.  '  r

644.  Threads  floating  in  the  urine  denote  that  it  was  passed 
immediately  after  completing  coitus.

338  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

4.     The    Signs    derived    from   the    Odour   of   the   Urine

645.  Some  people  assert  that  no  sick  person  ever  passes  a 
urine  which  has  a  healthy  odour.  But  we  say  that  if  the  urine  is 
quite  odourless,  it  denotes  (a)  a  cold  intemperament  ;  (b)  exces- 
sive "  crudity  "  ;  (c)  extinction  of  the  innate  heat,  in  the  case 
of  acute  diseases.

648,  Fetid  odour.  A  fetid  odour,  with  signs  of  maturation  lii 
the  urine  indicates  ulcers  in  the  urinary  passages,  or"  scabies." 
These  are  identified  from  their  own  signs.  If  with  the  fetid  odour, 
there  are  no  signs  of  maturation,  the  cause  of  the  odour  may  be 
merely  putrefaction.Such  a  urine,  in  acute  fevers,  without  disease  in  the  urinary 
organs,  is  a  bad  sign.  If  it  is  present  in  acute  fevers,  and  there  is 
a  tendency  to  acridity,  it  denotes  putrefaction  in  humours  which 
are  of  a  cold  nature,  when  there  is  a  predominance  of  the  extra- 
neous heat.  .  - 
If  such  a  urine  appears  in  acute  diseases,  it  forewarns  or 
'  death  by  extinction  of  the  innate  heat  and  predominance  of  the 
pyfT"? n cons  cold.

'647,     Sweetish  odour.     This  denotes  predominance  of  the 
sanguineous  humour.     If  also  very  fetid,  a  predominance  of  the

bilious  humour.

648,  Putrid  odour.  If  this  tends  to  sourness  it  shows 
predominance  of  the  atrabilious  humour.

An  extremely  fetid  odour  of  the  urine  which  continues  in 
<;pite  of  seeming  health  denotes  (a)  that  a  fever  arising  from 
putrefaction  is  coming  on  ;  (b)  expulsion  of  retained  putrescent 
matters.  The  latter  will  show  whether  the  case  may  be  expected 
to  recover.  If  a  fetid  urine  appears  in  an  acute  illness,  and  then 
suddenly  ceases  to  be  fetid,  without  subsidence  of  the  symptoms, 
it  shows  a  destruction  of  vitality.

A  moderately  fetid  urine  denotes  defective  digestion  :  Haly  Abbas.

Offensive   odour  may  be  ammoniacal,   as  in  alkaline  fermentation      Sweet

odour  may  be  "  fruity  »  or  like  new-mown  hay  in  diabetes.  Specific  odours  result 
from  the  use  of  certain  drugs.     (Modern.)

5.     The  Indications  afforded  by  the  Foam  on  Urine

649,  Foam  arises  from  the  moisture  and  the  gases  forced 
into  the  urine  as  it  is  passed  into  the  urinal.  The  vapour  which 
leaves  the  body  with  the  urine  doubtless  adds  to  the  consistence 
of  the  urine,  especially  if  gases  predominate  in  it,  as  occurs  in 
cases  of  obstructions.     The  urine  then  shows  many  bubbles.THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  339

850.  One  notices  the  following  points  in  regard  to  the 
foam  :

(1)  Colour  :   it  is  dark  or  reddish  in  jaundice.

(2)  Size  of  bubbles  :  large  ones  indicate  viscidity.

(3)  Number  of  bubbles  :  if  numerous  it  denotes  viscidity 
and  much  gas.

(4)  Rate  of  bursting  of  the  bubbles  :  if  slow,  it  indicates 
viscidity,  and  coarse  glutinous  humour.

651.  Prognosis.  Hence  if  small  bubbles  persist  in  a  speci- 
men, in  cases  of  kidney  disease,  it  shows  that  the  illness  will  be 
of  long  duration.

In  brief,  viscous  humours  in  the  course  of  kidney  diseases 
are  of  bad  omen  ;  they  show  that  the  humours  are  depraved, 
and  cold  in  temperament.

The  significance  of  small  bubbles  has  already  been  stated.

6.      The   Indications   derived   from   the  Divers   Kinds   of

Sediment

852.  Definition.  In  the  first  place  one  must  specify  the 
meaning  of  the  term  "  sediment."  It  is  not  "  that  which  sinks 
to  the  bottom  of  the  vessel."  It  is  "  that  whole  substance  (denser 
in  essence  than  wateriness)  which  separates  out  from  the  wateri- 
ness — regardless  of  whether  it  settles  down. or  not,  floats  or  not, 
sinks  or  not."

Therefore  we"  may  say  that  there  are  various  characters 
pertaining  to  the  sediment— its  "  structure,"  its  quantity  and 
quality,  the  arrangement  of  its  components,  its  position,  duration, 
and  mode  of  permixture.

I.       STRUCTURE

[Structure  ;  consistence  ;  texture.;  essential  substance  ; 
matter  ;  jawhar.]

A.        NATURAL    SEDIMENTSI.       STRUCTURE

[Structure  ;  consistence  ;  texture.;  essential  substance  ; 
matter  ;  jawhar.]

A.        NATURAL    SEDIMENTS

853.  A  sediment  is  natural,  laudable,  evidence  of  normal 
digestion  and  maturation,  when  it  is  white,  sinks  to  the  bottom 
of  the  vessel,  when  its  particles  are  in  continuity  [i.e.  not  discrete], 
uniform,  and  all  alike.  In  contour  it  is  rounded.  It  is  light, 
homogeneous,  delicate,  like  the  deposit  which  forms  in  rosewater.

Its  relation  to  the  maturation  of  the  various  matters  of  the 
whole  body  is  comparable  to  that  to  the  maturation  of  pus. 
But  whereas  it  is  white,  light,  and  of  homogeneous  nature  and 
delicate  in  the  former,  in  the  case  of  pus  it  is  coarse.

34o  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

654.  A  sediment  betokens  good  digestion  even  though 
devoid  of  colour  and  homogeneity  *  But  ancient  physicians 
considered  that  homogeneity  was  a  more  important  test  than 
colour.  A  homogeneous  deposit — even  though  not  altogether 
white,  or  even  if  reddish  in  tint — is  a  better  sign  than  a  deposit 
which  is  white  but  not  homogeneous,  and  composed  of  coarse 
particles.  The  sediment  may  or  may  not  assume  the  same  colour 
as  the  urine.  If  it  does  not,'  it  is  better  that  it  should  be  white, 
next  best  red,  then  lemon-yellow  or  saffron-yellow,  and  the  least 
good  is  that  it  should  be  like  arsenicum  in  colour,  or  of  a  colour 
like  that  of  lentils.

However,  I  counsel  you  not  to  regard  what  others  say.  1 
say  that — whiteness  does  not  necessarily  have  a  relation  to  the 
state  of  digestion  ;  homogeneity  is  always  related  to  the  (efficiency 
of)  maturation.  A  thorough  mingling  of  gaseous  constituents 
will  produce  a  white  effect.If  a  sediment  presents  an  unhealthy  appearance,  it  is  more 
favourable  that  it  should  be  discrete  than  continuous.

655.  Good  sediments  resemble  pus  and  crude  serous 
humour  when  they  are  tenuqus.  But  pus  is  different  in  possessing 
fetor,  crude  serous  humour  is  different  in  (rendering  the  deposit) 
compact  and  not  homogeneous.  A  good  sediment  differs  from 
both  because  it  is  finely  textured  and  light.

656.  One  would  not  expect  to  find  such  a  deposit  in  a  person 
who  is  healthy  ;  it  occurs  in  the  sick  person  because  mattersare 
kept  back  in  his  blood-vessels,  and  they  undergo  (putrefactive) 
breakdown  if  they  cannot  be  subjected  to  maturation.  In  health, 
the  blood  need  not  necessarily  contain  a  humour  which  ought  to 
be  removed,  but  if  there  were  such  a  humour  present,  it  would 
be  better  if  it  were  disposed  of  by  way  of  the  faeces  (the  indi- 
gestible excess  in  the  aliments)  than  if  it  emerge  by  way  of  the 
urine  as  a  sediment — whether  such  humour  have  undergone 
maturation  or  not.  .

In  thin  persons,  the  sediment  of  the  urine  is  scanty  and  it 
sinks  down  differently  according  to  the  state  of  health,  especially 
if  the  persons  are  accustomed  to  exercise  or  to  practise  laborious

arts.

The  sediment  is  abundant  only  in  obese  persons  ana  in  those

of  bad  habits.

657o  Hence  one  does  not  expect  to  find  as  much  sediment 
in  sick  persons  who  are  lean  as  in  those  who  are  stout.     For

*  The  general  significance  of  a  sediment  is  that  there  is  an  excess  of  soluble 
or  insoluble  toxic  substances  in  the  blood.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  34I*  The  general  significance  of  a  sediment  is  that  there  is  an  excess  of  soluble 
or  insoluble  toxic  substances  in  the  blood.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  34I

disease  in  the  former  often  resolves  without  any  sediment  forming 
at  all.  At  most  there  may  be  a  tiny  particle  floating  or  swimmin^ 
in  it.  _  In  other  cases  the  sediment  falls  immediately  after 
micturition  unless  there  is  good  maturation—in  which  case 
very  little  deposit  is  to  be  expected.

B.  _    ABNORMAL    SEDIMENTS

658  Varieties,  (i)  Flaky  or  squamous  ;  (2)  fleshy  ;  (>>) 
fatty;  (4)  mucoid  or  slimy;  (5)  purulent  (ichorous) ;  (6)  hair-like- 
(7;  resembling  pieces  of  yeast  infused  in  water  ;  (8)  sandy  or 
gritty  ;    (9)  cineritial  ;    (10)  hirudiniform.

i.  Flaky  or  squamous.  This  is  composed  of  laro-e  red  or 
large  white  particles.  They  are  usually  supposed  to  cSme  from 
the  urinary  organs.  If  white,  they  come  from  the  bladder 
(ulceration,  desquamation,  erosions)  ;  if  red  or  fleshy,  they  come 
from  the  kidney.  If  brown  or  dark  coloured,  or  like  the  scales 
of  fishes,  they  are  a  very  bad  sign,  worse  than  all  which  we  have 
named.  They  suggest  the  shedding  of  mucous  linings.  Parti- 
cles from  the  bladder  or  kidneys  may  not  be  of  moment  ;  in 
fact  if  vesical  they  are  a  sign  of  recovery.  Some  say  that  can- 
thandes  causes  white  flakes  to  appear,  which  are  like  the  mem- 
brane within  eggs  ;  these  dissolve  when  the  specimen  is  shaken 
and  impart  a  reddish  tint  to  the  urine.  This  would  be  evidence 
of  healing  and  recovery.Another  form  resembles  the  scrapings  from  intestines  • 
the  particles  being  less  broad  and  of  dense  consistence  If 
reddish  coloured  it  is  called  orobeal  [or  tare-like  or  grumous] 
sediment  ;  otherwise  it  is  called  furfuraceous.  The  former 
recalls  the  appearance  of  decorticated  orobs  [ervum  ervilial,  and 
are  reddish  ;  this  indicates  the  presence  of  oxidized  particles* 
which  are  derived  from  {a)  the  liver,  (b)  the  kidney,  or  (c)  blood. 
When  they  come  from  the  kidney,  the  particles  are  more  con- 
tinuous and  fleshy,  whereas  in  the  other  cases  they  are  more 
friable  When  the  colour  is  decidedly  yellowish  (one  knows 
that)  theyare  of  renal  origin  ;  if  dusky  red  (that)  they  are  of 
hepatic  origin.  But  sometimes  particles  of  hepatic  origin  may 
resemble  those  of  renal  origin.

Another  form,  more  strictly  scaly,  consists  of  small  bodies

l!rL  S  °r  huUs  °f  Srain-     Such  a  sediment  denotes  (i)

bladder  trouble,  or  (11)  grave  colliquative  disorder  of  the  system 
as  a  whole.    We  diagnose  (i)  bladder  trouble  if  (1)  there  is  itching

*  The  mineral  constituents  which  are  attached  to  the  organic  substance  in 
Sl^^SST"*17  <**«*  (*>  Partly  oxidized  and  V^Toj££t^

342  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE*  The  mineral  constituents  which  are  attached  to  the  organic  substance  in 
Sl^^SST"*17  <**«*  (*>  Partly  oxidized  and  V^Toj££t^

342  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

at  the  root  of  the  penis,  and  (2)  the  urine  is  fetid  especially  if 
O)  pus  is  passed  first.  Such  a  state  is  more  probable  if  (4)  there 
are  other  evidences  of  maturation  in  the  urine,  (5)  if  the  veins 
over  the  bladder  are  healthy,  and  there  is  no  macula  there  We 
diagnose  (ii)  liquefaction  of  humour  if  there  is  fever  weakness, 
difficulty  of  micturition,  and  the  sediment  is  brownish  m  colour. 
Another  form,  in  which  the  deposit  is  like  coarse  particles 
of  barley  flour  may  mean  one  of  four  things  :  (1)  oxidation  of 
the  sanguineous  humour— if  there  is  a  tendency  to  redness  ; 
(ii)  colliquative  changes  in  the  membranes  and  their  components 
—if  it  be  white;  (iii)  local  bladder  disease— m  a  few  cases.  I  he 
difference  between  this  and  the  others  is  readily  made  out  from 
what  has  already  been  said  ;  (iv)  oxidation  of  the  b  ood,  especi- 
ally in  the  spleen.— Here  the  colour  tends  to  be  black.

"     Squamous  deposits  other  than  those  of  vesical  or  renal 
and  ureteral  origin,  occurring  in  acute,  diseases,  have  a  grave

significance.  ,        1      1

■  2  Fleshy  sediments.  These,  as  you  already  know  are- 
usually  of  renal  origin.  They  are  not  so  if  the  flesh  is  healthy 
and  there  is  no  breakdown  in  the  body.  If  the  evidences  of 
complete  digestion  are  present  in  the  urine,  it  shows  that  the 
blood-vessels  are  healthy.  For  the  urine  can  show  evidence  of 
maturation  even  if  the  kidneys  are  diseased,  seeing  that  this 
process  begins  "  above  "  the  kidneys.<?  Fatty  sediment.  This,  like  the  preceding,  denotes 
colliquative  processes  in  the  body.  It  is  more  serious  if  it  resem- 
bles u  ^old  water  "  in  appearance.  There  are  two  chief  types— 
either  ft  is  abundant  and  discrete  (this  being  derived  from  the: 
renal  fat)  :  or  scanty  and  admixed  (this  being  derived  from  the 
fat  of  a  more  distant  place).  There  is  no  fever,  in  the  former  case. 
A  white  particle  like  a  pomegranate  seed  may  be  seen  m 
the  urine.  This  will  be  derived  from  the  renal  fat. .  It  denotes 
that  a  sanious  ulcer  has  formed,  especially  in  the  urethra,  especi- 
ally if  the  sediment  sinks  promptly.  ("In  ardent  fevers,  it 
forewarns  of  death."    Hippocrates.)  .

.  4  Mucoid  sediment.  This  denotes  an  unnatural  humour, 
which  is  too  plentiful  within  the  body  and  passes  out  either  by 
the  urinary  tract,  or  a  critical  hip-gout,  or  joint  pains. 
The  distinction  between  them  is  made  by  the  symptoms— whether

they  abate  or  not.

'  "  A  dense  humour  may  become  rarefied  and  tenuous,  and  a 
laudable  sediment  results.  Therefore  in  the  course  or  acute 
disease,  one  must  not  depend  on  a  laudable  sediment  appearing

THE  CANON  OF-  MEDICINE  343

before  the  time  when,  maturation  (of  the  disease)  is  due,  or  before 
its  signs  have  appeared.  It  may  denote  that  there  is  a  very  cold 
mtemperament  of  the  kidneys.— ~(A  very  mucoid  and  abundant 
sediment  appearing  at  the  end  of  an  attack  of  gout  or  arthritis, 
is  a  good  sign).5.  Ichorous  sediment..  This  differs  from  a  crude  sediment 
in  being  fetid.  It  is -preceded  by  the  evidences  of  abscess.  Its 
particles  easily  aggregate  and  separate  again.  It  may  be  very 
thoroughly  mingled  with  the  water  ;  it  may  separate  out 
quickly  from  the  water.  A  crude  sediment,  however,  is  both  tur- 
bid and  thick.  It  does  not  readily  aggregate,  nor  separate  easily. 
The  urine  is  not  fetid.     The  signs  of  abscess  do  not  precede.

6.  _  Hair-like  sediment.  This  is  produced  by  the  coagulation 
of  any  internal  humour,  which  has  been  exposed  to  the  innate 
heat  on  its  way  from  the  kidney  to  the  bladder. '  It  is  sometimes 
white,  sometimes  red.  It  clots  in  the  kidney.  The  clots  may  be 
as  long  as  the  palm  of  the  hand.

7-_  A  sediment  having  the  appearance  of  yeast  soaked  in 
water,  is_  evidence  of  gastric  and  intestinal  weakness  and  of  de- 
praved digestion  (often  due  to  milk  and  cheese  having  been  taken).

8.  Sandy  or  gritty  sediment  ("  Gravel").  This  is  always  a 
sign  of  calculus  whether  in  process  of  formation  or  actually, 
formed,  or  in  process  of  solution.  If  red  coloured,  it  shows  it- 
comes  from  the  kidneys  ;  if  white,  it  shows  the  origin  is  in  the 
bladder.

A  gritty  sediment,  where  there  are  large  particles  like  those 
of  ground  grain,  is  a  bad  sign  in  fevers  (Hippocrates).

9.  Cineritial  sediment.  This- is  a  sign  that  serous  humour 
or  pus  has  altered  in  colour  through  long  stagnation  and  breaking 
up  of  its  particles.  It  may  be  that  it  is  due  to  having  undergone 
oxidation.10.  Hirudiniform.  The  sediment  is  of  the  (appearance  and) 
colour  of  leeches.  If  well  mingled  with  the  urine,  this  denotes 
hepatic  insufficiency.  If-less  closely  intermingled  with  the  urine, 
it  denotes  a  trauma  in  the  urinary  passages  which  breaks  their 
continuity.  If  discrete,  it  shows  that  the  lesion  is  in  the  bladder 
or  in  the  penis.  This  subject  is  carefully  dealt  with  in  the  third 
volume,  under  the  heading  of  "  haematuria."

The  appearance  of  bodies  like  red  leeches  in  the  urine, 
associated  with  evidences  of  disease  in  the  spleen,  denotes  a 
destructive  disease  in  that  organ.  (It  would  seem  that  strings  of 
blood  clot  are  here  referred  to,  in  which  case  nowadays  we  should 
think  of  a  villous  tumour  in  the  bladder.    Tr.)

344  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Note,  that  in  diseases  of  the  bladder,  there  is  generally  not 
much  bleeding  because  the  blood-vessels  are  few  in  number, 
are  slender,  and  are  deeply  situated  in  its  wall.

II.       QUANTITY    OF    SEDIMENT

659.  According  as  the  sediment  is  abundant  or  scanty 
so  the  degree  of  the  efficient  cause  is  great  or  small.  This  has 
been  explained  under  the  previous  heading.  (It  is  more 
abundant  in-gross-living  persons  than  in  those  who  are  temperate. 
It  is  less  abundant  in  active  persons  than  in  those  leading  a 
sedentary  life  ;  hence  it  is  liable  to  be  more  abundant  in  females 
than  males,  children  than  adults.)

III.       QUALITY    OF    SEDIMENT.       COLOUR.       ODOUR

660.  Black  sediment  :  this  is  a  bad  sign,  as  in  the  degree 
already  shown  in  617  ;  but  it  is  not  so  bad  if  the  supernatant  fluid 
is  not  black."  (Haly  Abbas  says  it  is  a  fatal  sign  if  it  comes  on 
after  being  intensely  red.)Red  sediment.  This  shows  dominance  of  sanguineous 
humour  (sanguineous  plethora)  ;  it  occurs  in  fasting  ;  and  when 
digestion  is  imperfect.  If  it  continues  to  be  present  for  a  long 
time  it  denotes  inflammation  of  the  liver.

Yellow  :  this  denotes  great  heat,  because  it  is  produced  by 
bilious  humour.     It  may  also  show  an  insidious  disease.

Green  colour  i  this  has  the  same  significance  as  black  sedi- 
ment. #

White  colour  :  this  is  sometimes  good,  sometimes  bad. 
That  is,  when  it  is  mucoid,  ichorous,  or  foamy  ;  because  this 
shows  that  the  urine  is  not  a  completed  secretion.

Odour.  The  indications  from  the  odour  have  already 
been  given  in  describing  the  other  characters.

IV.       CONSTITUTION,    COHERENCE   AND    CONSISTENCE    OF    PARTICLES

661.  Softness  and  homogeneity  of  the  sediment  which  is 
otherwise  laudable  is  more  healthy  than  when  met  with  in  a 
urine  otherwise  not  laudable.  Discreteness  of  particles  points 
to  flatulence  and  impaired  digestion.

v.       POSITION

662„  A  laudable  sediment  may  swim  like  a  cloud  or  nube- 
cula ;  may  float  on  the  surface  ;  or  be  suspended  in  the  middle 
layers  (which  shows  that  maturation  has  proceeded  further  than

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  345

in  the  first  variety.).  If  it  is  rugose  or  fimbriate  and  tends  to 
sink,  it  is  better  ;  if  it  sinks  to  the  bottom  it  is  a  sign  of  still 
more  advanced  maturation.in  the  first  variety.).  If  it  is  rugose  or  fimbriate  and  tends  to 
sink,  it  is  better  ;  if  it  sinks  to  the  bottom  it  is  a  sign  of  still 
more  advanced  maturation.

When  the  sediment  is  not  laudable— it  is  more  satisfactory 
when  it  is  light  and  rises  to  the  upper  layers  ;  or,  if  in  the  course 
or  an  acute  fever,  it  is  black  ;  when  the  humour  is  serous  or 
atrabilious,  it  is  more  satisfactory  when  it  is  like  a  cloud  than  for 
it  to  sink  to  the  bottom  ;  the  fact  of  its  being  like  a  cloud  shows 
it  is  tenuous,  unless  by  chance  gas  is  making  it  rise.

If  the  sediment  sinks  below  the  surface,  but  not  right  to  the 
bottom  it  is  more  satisfactory.  It  is  heat  which  makes  it  rise  or 
float  ;  or  it  is  gas  which  carries  it  upwards. 
m  If  a  sediment  made  of  coarse  discrete  particles  should  float, 
it  shows  it  is  light.  A  fine  sediment,  especially  if  heavy,  will 
sink  lower.  J

If  the  sediment  remains  suspended  as  a  nubecula  right 
through  an  illness  from  its  beginning,  it  shows  that  crisis  will 
come  with  suppuration.

A-r  ubecula  or  suspended  sediment  may  never  appear  in  an 
illness  if  the  person  be  slender,  as  we  have  stated.A-r  ubecula  or  suspended  sediment  may  never  appear  in  an 
illness  if  the  person  be  slender,  as  we  have  stated.

A  sediment  which  is  between  a  cloud  and  an  enaeorema— 
made  of  particles  suspended  or  floating  in  the  middle  layers  like 
a  spider  s  web  (or  opaque  like  a  thin  pancake— Rome  edition) 
is  an  ominous  sign.  (Such  particles  may  appear  like  the  specks 
of  oil  which  one  sees  in  cooled  broth  ;  or  like  hairs.)  But  even  a 
nubecula  may  be  an  anxiety,  though  it  be  the  beginning  of  a 
change  for  the  better.  It  sinks  to  the  middle  layers  and  ul- 
timately to^  the  bottom.  In  that  case  it  is  not  a  bad  sign.  But 
if  a  "  bad  "  sediment  appears  after  this,  it  is  certainly  ominous.

VI.       TIME    OCCUPIED    IN    SEDIMENTATION

663.  If  the  sediment  settles  rapidly,  it  is  a  good  sign, 
showing  that  maturation  is  correct.  If  it  settles  slowly,  it  is  not 
good,  for  it  shows  deficient  or  absent  maturation,  according  to 
its  amount.  .

VII.        FORM

664.  The  significance  of  this  has  been  described  in  making 
mention  of  passing  blood  and  fat  with  the  urine.

7.     .Signs  relative  to  the  Daily  Quantity  of  Urine     '

_       665.      Generally   speaking,    oliguria   means    weakness    of 
vitality.     If  the  amount  is  less  than  the  fluid  consumed,  it  points

346  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

to  great  loss  by  diarrhoea  or  to  a  tendency  to  dropsy.  Polyuria 
sometimes  means  colliquation,  and  the  discharge  of  fluid  effete 
matters  from  the  body  by  the  urine.to  great  loss  by  diarrhoea  or  to  a  tendency  to  dropsy.  Polyuria 
sometimes  means  colliquation,  and  the  discharge  of  fluid  effete 
matters  from  the  body  by  the  urine.

To  assess  these  correctly,  one  must  note  the  state  of  the 
vitality,  as  follows  :  if  the  urine  be  of  bad  colour,  it  is  a  bad  sign; 
but  the  more  plentiful  it  is,  the  more  likely  is  recovery  to  take 
place.  If  the  quantity  excreted  fails,  the  illness  will  increase,  just 
as  applies  in  regard  to  dark  or  coarse  urine.

666.  Variation  of  quantity.  It  is  a  bad  sign  if  the  urine  is 
at  one  time  abundant,  at  another  scanty,  at  another  suppressed. 
It  shows  that  there  is  a  hard  conflict  between  the  vitality  and  the 
disease.  A  plentiful  urine  in  an  acute  illness,  occurring  without 
any  abatement  of  symptoms,  and  associated  with  copious  sweats, 
shows  hectic  fever  and  may  be  followed  by  convulsions.

The  quantity  of  night  urine  (9  p.m.  to  7  a.m.)  should  equal  that  passed  in  two 
hours  during  the  day.     If  greater,  it  denotes  arterial  disease  (Comne,  B  M  J     1922 
p.   107 1).     Vallery-Radot  states  that  the  day-urine  is  normally  thrice  the  night 
urine.141

667.  A  scanty  urine,  passed  involuntarily,  drop-by-drop 
in  acute  diseases,  indicates  cerebral  disease,  affecting  nerves  and

ixru.scJ.es,

If  a  fever  subside  and  there  are  other  signs  of  recovery, 
one  may  predict  epistaxis.     Otherwise  delirium  will  ensue  and

death  is  likely.

When  a  person  is  in  apparent  health,  if  the  amount  of  the 
urine  is  diminished  and  it  is  tenuous  in  character,  and  if  that 
condition  persists,  and  if  there  is  a  sense,  of  heaviness  and  pain 
in  the  loins,  this  shows  that  there  is  a  hard  inflammatory  swelling

in  the  kidney.  _  .in  the  kidney.  _  .

668.  When  the  urine  is  increased  in  a  case  of  colic,  this  is 
a  good  sign,,  especially  if  it  be  white  and  easily  voided.

8.     Description  of  Normal  Healthy  Urine

669.  The  following  are  the  characters  of  healthy  urine  : 
A  medium  consistence  ;  a  delicate  tint,  tending  to  straw-yellow; 
if  there  be  any  sediment  it  is  white,  light,  homogeneous,  and  has 
a  rounded  contour  ;  the  odour  should  be  moderate,  neither 
offensive,  nor  altogether  absent.  :

Some  say  that  if  a  urine  of  this  kind  appear  suddenly  at 
the  end  of  the  acme  of  an  illness,  health  will  be  restored  the 
following  day.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  347

9.     Variations  according  to  Age

^670,  Infancy.  The  urine  tends  to  the  characters  of  milk, 
considering  the  food  and  their  moist  temperament.  Hence  it  is 
nearly  colourless.

Childhood.  The  urine  is  thicker  and  coarser  than  in 
adolescents,  and  more  turbid.    This  has  already  been  mentioned.

Adolescence.     The  urine  tends  to  igneity,  and  homogeneity.

Later  life.  The  urine  tends  to  be  white  and  tenuous,  but 
it  may  be  coarse  ("  thick  ")  because  of  the  effete  matters  which 
are  now  being  evacuated  to  a  greater  extent  by  way  of  the  urine.

Decrepit  age.  The  urine  is  whiter  and  still  more  tenuous. 
A  similar  coarseness  to  that  of  the  preceding  may  occur,  but  this 
is  rare.  If  the  urine  becomes  very  thick,  it  intimates  liability 
to  develop  calculus.

10.     Variations  according  to   Sex10.     Variations  according  to   Sex

671..  Women.  The  urine  is  always  thicker,  whiter  and 
less  pellucid  than  in  males.  The  reason  is  fourfold  :  In  women 
there  is  feebleness  of  digestion  ;  abundance  of  effete  matters  ; 
width  of  emunctory  channels  ;  material  discharged  by  way  of 
the  uterus,  which  draws  similar  material  down  the  urinary 
passages  also.

Men.  When  the  urine  is  shaken,  it  becomes  turbid  and 
the  turbidity  ascends  to  the  surface,  though  occasionally  it 
remains  throughout  the  whole  bulk  of  the  urine.  When  the 
urine  in  women  is  shaken,  it  does  not  become  turbid  because 
the  particles  are  barely  discrete,  and  there  is  usually  a. circular 
foam  on. top.  Even  if  such  urine  becomes  turbid,  it  does  so 
only  to  a  light  extent.

If  male  and  female  urine  be  mingled,  a  filamentous  network 
forms  at  once.  (Filaments  also  appear  in  male  urine  if  passed 
immediately  after  intercourse.)

672.  Pregnancy.  The  urine  is  clear  and  there  is  a  surface 
cloud.  The  colour  may  approach  that  of  chick-pea  water,  or 
be  yellow  with  a  bluish  or  iridescent  tint  in  it.  In  either  case 
there  is  a  sort  of  "  tinted  cotton  "  in  the  midst  of  it.  Occasionally 
there  are  granules  present,  which  rise  and  fall.  If  the  iridescence 
("  rainbow  tint  ")  be  quite  distinct,  it  is  a  sign  that  conception  is 
beginning.  _  When  it  gives  place  to  redness,  it  shows  that  im- 
pregnation is  completed,  especially  if  the  urine  becomes'  turbid 
on  being  shaken.

34 8  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Puerperium.  The  urine  is  often  dark,  as  if  there  were  a 
sootiness  or  shoemaker's  black  in  it.

ii.      The  Urine  of  Animals  and   its   Difference  from

Human  UrinePuerperium.  The  urine  is  often  dark,  as  if  there  were  a 
sootiness  or  shoemaker's  black  in  it.

ii.      The  Urine  of  Animals  and   its   Difference  from

Human  Urine

673.  It  is"  often  desirable  for  a  doctor  to  know_  something 
about  the  urine  of  animals,  so  that  when  he  is  tricked  by  a 
patient,  he  can  quickly  and  truly  discern  it,  difficult  though  it  be

to  do  so.

Asses.     Some  say  that  the.  urine  is  like  clarified  butter  as

to  turbidity  and  coarseness.

Beasts  of  burden.  The  urine  is  similar  to  the  preceding, 
but  clearer.  The  upper  middle  part  of  the  urine  is  clear,  while 
the  lower  middle  part  is  turbid.

Sheep.  The  urine  is  (nearly)  colourless,  with  a  yellowish 
tendency  approximating  that  of  man.  But  it  has  either  no 
"  body  "  and  the  sediment  is  fatty,  or  it  is  like  oil-lees.

The  better  the  quality  of  the  food,  the  clearer  is  the  urine.

She-goats.  The  urine  is  like  human  and  sheep  urine,  but 
it  has  no  "  body,"  or  sediment  ;  and  is  clearer  than  sheep  urine.

12.     Fluids  resembling  Urine,   and   how  to  Distinguish

Them

674.  Acetous  syrup  and  all  fluids  compounded  of  water 
and  honey,  water  and  figs  ;  fluids  coloured  with  saffron  and  the 
like — in  all  these  the  nearer  one  holds  them  to  the  eye  the  clearer 
do  them  seem,  and  the  further  they  are  held  from  the  eye,  the 
more  opaque  do  they  become.     Urine  is  the  opposite.

The  foam  on  hydromel  is  yellow.

The  sediment  from  fig-water  or  from  herbal  decoctions 
lodges  on  the  sides  of  the  glass  and  not  in  the  middle.  It  has  no 
definite  contour,  and  does  not  move  its  position.The  sediment  from  fig-water  or  from  herbal  decoctions 
lodges  on  the  sides  of  the  glass  and  not  in  the  middle.  It  has  no 
definite  contour,  and  does  not  move  its  position.

So  much  suffices  for  the  description  of  the  states  of  the  urine. 
The  individual  varieties  are  discussed  in  the  volume  which  deals 
with  the  special  diseases.     (Book  IV.)

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

>  238.     Tabular   summary    of  the   preceding  Section.

349

1.  First  stage  of

Digestion. 
Good.

Moderately  good.

Absent.

Excessive.

2.  Maturation  stage  :

Normal

Difficult.

Quite  absent.

3.  Completed.

Aspect,  etc.

Urine  plentiful,

rather  opaque. 
Mod.  fetor.

Watery,  .limpid.

Very  thick.

Opaque  first,  then 
clear.

Clear  first,  then

opaque. 
Opaque. 
Clear  ;  denser.

Digestion  of 
Humours.

1.  Immaturity  in

general.

2.  Serous  humour.

3.  Vitreous  serous

humour.

4.  Vitelline  bilious

humour.

Turbid.

Opaque  or  dense 
Foam  persists. 
Plentiful.

Dense.

Oxidation  of 
Humours.

1.  Sanguineous.

2.  Serous.

Gross  humours  matur- 
ing.

Cold  humours  putre- 
fying.

Fasting  State.

Intemperaments. 
1.  Hot.

2.  Cold.

Limpid.

Thick,  opaque. 
Offensive  odour.

Very  acrid.

3.  Dry.

Dark.  Offensive.

White,  turbid, 
limpid.

No  odour. 
Limpid.

Colour.

White.

Pale  ;  or  yellowish 
(bil.  hum.).

White.

Tends  to  be  dusky.

Colour  appears.

Deposit..

White.

Foam  persists 
yellow.

Homogeneous.

Round    contour,

red. 
Gritty,scaly,black,

green,  or  livid.

White,  homogene- 
ous,   delicate, 
sinks  to  bottom.

Discrete  particles, 
sinks  slowly.

Rapid,    propor- 
tional   to    com- 
pleteness of 
digestion.

Mucoid.

Powdery,

compact,  not 
homogeneous.

Tends  to  red. 
Mucoid.

High.

White,  if  heat  due 
to  dominance  of 
bilious  humour.

Red  if  serous  hum- 
our is  obstruct- 
ing bile  ducts.

Other  colours.compact,  not 
homogeneous.

Tends  to  red. 
Mucoid.

High.

White,  if  heat  due 
to  dominance  of 
bilious  humour.

Red  if  serous  hum- 
our is  obstruct- 
ing bile  ducts.

Other  colours.

Coarse  particles 
like  barley  flour.

Scale-like   bodies 
float  in  it ; 
cineritial.

Red.

35°

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Vitality  : —

Deficient,  because  of  cold  inteni-

perament. 
Weak. 
Innate  heat  too  great.

Innate  heat  increasing. 
Innate,  heat  subsiding. 
Innate  heat  extinguished.

Functional  activity  of  Organs. 
Liver-inflammation .

Splenic  disease. 
Renal  inflammation.

Venous  congestion. 
Stone  in  bladder.

Special  diseases  : 
Obesity.

Puerperal  convulsions. 
Fevers  just  before  crisis. 
Fevers  at  other  times,  etc.

At  the  crisis.

Turbid.

Oliguria.

Colour  deepens  to  red-yellow. 
Odoriferous.

Colour  deepens  to  flame  yellow. 
The  urine  clarifies.

Urine   dark   or   black ;     in   acute   diseases   it 
becomes  colourless.

Turbid,  red  urine  ;  sediment  orobeal  or  tare- 
like,  or  dusky  red,   or  hirudiniform.

Sediment  hirudiniform.

Red  urine  ;  no  deposit  if  grave  ;  otherwise 
orobeal,  or  fleshy,  and  yellowish.

Limpid  urine.

Dark.

Urine  abundant.

Urine  dark.

Urine  may  become  thin  and  transparent.

Opaque  urine  :     depends  on  which  humour  is

responsible  and  on  outcome  of  illness. 
Polyuria  ;     dark,  or  black.

Corresponding

table  from

a  modern

textbook.

(J.    K.   Watson,   p.   156.)

Disease.

Quantity.

Colour.

Odour.

Deposit.

Additional 
Modern 
Facts.

Acute  Gout

Diminished

High

Urates 
abundant

Acute  Nephritis

Diminished 
or  absent

Blood- 
stained

Blood  casts 
urates  occ.

Urea  diminished 
Albumin

Chronic  Cystitis

No  change

Turbid

Offensive

Mucoid  pus

Alkaline

Chronic

Nephritis

Increased

Pale

Scanty

Albumin  varies 
Tube-casts

Diabetes  mell.

Increased

Pale

Sweet

Urea  incr. 
Glucose 
Diacetic  acidTurbid

Offensive

Mucoid  pus

Alkaline

Chronic

Nephritis

Increased

Pale

Scanty

Albumin  varies 
Tube-casts

Diabetes  mell.

Increased

Pale

Sweet

Urea  incr. 
Glucose 
Diacetic  acid

Fevers,  general 
and_special

Diminished

High 
Turbid

Urates

Urea  incr. 
Albumin,  blood, 
tube-casts

Gastric  Catarrh

Normal

High

Urates 
Oxalates  or 
Phosphates

Heart  and  Lung 
.  Disease

Diminished

Dark

Urates

Albumin

Jaundice

Normal

Frothy 
Greenish- 
brown

Varies

Bile  present

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  351

§239.  Considerations  arising  out  of  this  section. — For  the 
detection  of  changes  in  the  composition  of  the  urine,  the  ancients 
were  restricted  to  the  evidence  afforded  by  its  colour,  odour,  and  what 
may  be  called  its  "  texture  "  (though  this  term  applies  usually  to 
solid  substances).  The  evidence  was  apt  to  be  fallacious  because 
wide  differences  of  composition  may  produce  similar  appearances, 
etc.,  and  differences  of  appearance  do  not  always  denote  noteworthy 
changes  of  composition.On  the  other  hand,  the  limitations  in  the  utility  of  these  simple 
observations  were  balanced  by  the  relatively  vague  conception  of 
the  bodily  functions.  The  whole  outlook  on  disease  was  lacking  in 
detail  without  being  basically  incorrect.  Thus,  many  diseased  states 
were  ascribed  to  defective  digestive  processes,  a  fact  often  overlooked 
to-day  in  the  counter-attraction  afforded  by  the  study  of  diseased 
conditions  which  are  not  so  ascribable.  To  say  that  the  whole  body 
is  concerned  in  digestion  is,  broadly  speaking,  correct,  especially  if  we 
realize  that  the  term  digestion  covers  what  we  call  metabolism.  In 
the  Canon,  digestion  is  viewed  in  two  aspects  :  (1)  that  which'  begins 
■in  the  alimentary  canal  and  ends  in  the  liver  :  (2)  that  which  is  called 
"  maturation,"  which  concerns  the  digestive  products  in  their  course 
through  the  body  and  ending  in  the  tissues.  If  such  maturation  is  not 
completed,  surplus  substances  appear,  and  may  undergo  sedimenta- 
tion. The  phenomena  of  disease  are  attributable  to  this  defective 
'maturation.  Consequently,  the  business  of  diagnosis  and  prognosis 
comes  to  be  a  matter  of  assessing  the  efficiency  or  otherwise  of 
maturation.

The  study  of  the  urineis  therefore  directed  to  this  assessment,  -its 
different  physical  properties  being  noted,  both  in  health  and  under 
yanous_  unhealthy  conditions.  Translucence,  opacity,  separation  out 
into  visibility  of  various  substances,  the  appearance  of  gaseous  matter 
(in  foam),  and  changes  in  odour — all  these  are  interpreted  in  the  light 
of  the  two-fold  division  of  digestion  above  referred  to  :  that  cul- 
minating in  the  liver,  and  that  culminating  in  the  tissues.This  basis  of  study  is  reasonable,  and  it  is  not  right  that  they 
should  have  been  superseded  as  is  the  case  in  modern  times.  We  are 
armed  with  a  knowledge  of  innumerable  chemical  details  about 
the  substances  met  with  in  metabolism  and  nutrition  in  general. 
We  have  within  our  reach  the  very  answers,  in  vastly  improved 
detail  and  accuracy,  to  the  selfsame  questions  which  were  para- 
mount to  Avicenna.  But  this  technical  laboratory  knowledge 
tends  to  be  sterile.     Urinalysis  informs  us  of  the  presence  of  ab-

352  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

normal  substances,  and  of  the  amount  both  of  these  and  of  normal 
urinary  constituents.  By  their  means  we  reach  conclusions  about 
the  functional  capacity  of  various  organs,  and  decide  whether 
organic  renal  disease  is  present  or  not.  But  this  is  insufficient. 
In  the  first  place,  these  organs  belong  really  only  to.  one  system— 
the  nutritive  ;  and  in  the  second  place,  the  illness  has  proceeded 
to    another    phase^  before   the    information  from    the    analysis    is

Moreover,  the  clinician  has  already  taken  up  his  tale  before 
the  laboratory  work  can  possibly  reach  completion,  so  that  those 
whom  he  instructs  naturally  receive  the  impression  that  such  work 
is  parenthetical,  if  not  purely  ritualistic.  The  clinical  aspect  of 
the  case  is  discussed  on  its  own  merits,  as  might  be  done  with  a 
museum  specimen  which  is  possibly  unusual,  or  with  some  topic 
for  a  connoisseur.  The  pathological  aspect  of  the  case,  again, 
has  a  different,  and  separate  interest.  _It  is  not  enough  to  combine  these  different  aspects.  Functional 
activities,  morbid  states,  and  clinical  manifestations  must  centralise 
in  the  patient,  and  they  do  so,  not  because  he  happens  to  exhibit 
them  all,  but  because  they  are  one  unity— himself.  The  organs 
whose  capacity  has  been  assessed  are  the  gateways  of  entrance  and 
departure  ;  the  crafts  of  the  body— its  real  life— proceed  in  the  tissues, 
which  are  the  analogues  of  streets,  houses,  shops,  plazas  and  bazaars. 
There  are  also  the  gateways  of  the  senses,  and  these  are  direct 
routes  into  the  audience-chamber  of  the  presiding  sultan  himself. 
But  he  is  not  a  separate  being..  He  is  in  every  member  of  the 
community— organs,  tissues,  sense-organs.  Equity  reigns  through- 
out, and  must  be  considered  as  much  as  the  invaders  of  his  domain. 
'  So  if  we  visualize  in  a  practical  form  everything  that  is  relevant, 
we  must  not  forget  the  dynamic  aspect  of  the  matter.  Changes 
are  going  on  hour  by  hour,  and  the  laboratory  cannot  keep  pace 
with  them.  Consequently,  we  shall  in  the  end  make  use  of  the  self- 
same data  which  Avicenna  relied  on  entirely,  and  we  learn  from  him 
to  scrutinize  the  urine— not  merely  to  find  such  things  as  albumen, 
blood  or  pus  and  casts— but  deliberately  to  know  :(i)  Is  there  any  in- 
sufficiency in  the   digestive   processes   in  the   pre-hepatic  stages  ?

(2)  If  not",  is  there  any  hepatic  insufficiency,  and  in  what  direction  ?(2)  If  not",  is  there  any  hepatic  insufficiency,  and  in  what  direction  ?

(3)  If  so,  or  if  there  is  trouble  in  the  tissues  at  large,  arising  out  of  an 
abnormal  condition  of  one  or  more  of  the  "  humours  "—which  is  at 
fault  >  In  what  way  is  it  at  fault  ?  Is  it  entirely  morbid  or  not  ? 
What  decree  as  well  as  kind  of  defect  is  there— in  modern  chemical 
terms  ?  &(4)  What  is  the  degree  of  vitality  of  the  patient  (Avicenna 
included  "  innate  heat  "  in  this)  ?  is  the  vitality  increasing,  or  failing,

or  inactive  ? recovery  from  illness,  or  its  duration,  or  succumbing  to

illness  is  often  primarily  a  matter  of  vitality.     (5)  Other  questions.

Such  fundamental  questions  the  modern  practitioner  (even  in 
cities^  can  still  answer  from  the  simple  data  used  of  old,  and  combine 
themwith  the  intimate  study  of  the  pulse,  to  realize  the  nature  of  the 
processes  in  the  organs  and  tissues  of  the  sick  from  day  to  day,  and 
feel  himself  actually  armed  with  that  real  insight  into  the  state  of  the

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  353

particular  patient  which  relatives  and  friends  sometimes  incorrectly 
assume  him  to  have.

Changes  in  the  urine  were  further  studied  in  those  days  to  decide 
on  the  presence 'or  absence  of  inflammatory  states  in  general  on 
febrile  conditions  in  general,  and  to  draw  a  relationship  between 
•these  changes  and  certain  symptoms,  such  as  headache,  pains  in 
various  parts  of  the  body,  palsies.  In  such  cases,  the  character  of 
the  urine  reveals  the  "nature  of  the  pathological  changes  in  the 
humours,  out  of  which  the  disease  has  arisen.

THE  ALVINE  DISCHARGETHE  ALVINE  DISCHARGE

675.  The  following  are  the  characters  to  note  :  the  quan- 
tity ;_  the  consistence  ;  the  colour  ;  the  form  or  shape  ;  and 
the  time  occupied  in  the  passage  of  food  through  the  bowel.

i .  Quantity.  If  greater  than  the  amount  of  food  taken, 
the  reason  lies  in  abundance  of  humours  ;  if  smaller  in  amount, 
the  reason  lies  in  deficient  amount  of  humours,  or  in  a  retention 
of  the  food  in  the  caecum  or  colon  (in  which  case,  it  is  the  first 
step  to  obstruction).  The  reason  may  also  be  that  the  expulsive 
power  is  insufficient.

2.  Consistence.  Moist  excrement  denotes  defective  diges- 
tion or  obstruction  of  some  form  ;  weakness  of  the  mesentery, 
so  that  it  does  not  absorb  sufficient  water  from  the  food;  fluxion 
from  the  head  ;  some  constituent  of  the  diet  which  causes  the 
dejection  _  to  be  moist.  If  the  faecal  matter  is  both  moist  and 
viscid,  this  shows  that  there  is  colliquation  in  the  tissues.  Fetor 
is  then  present.  It  usually  denotes  an  excess  of  depraved  and 
viscous  humours  ;  and  the  fetor  is  then  very  great.  It  may 
denote  the  presence  of  viscous  and  "  hot  "  constituents  in  the 
food,  with  defective  digestive  power.

Frothy  faecal  matter  indicates  an  admixture  with  flatulent 
vapours,  or  exposure  to  great  (innate)  heat.

Dry  stool  results  from  (a)  severe  toil  ;  (£)  dispersal  of  innate 
heat  ;  (c)  polyuria  ;  (d)  igneous  heat  ;  (e)  dry  aliments  ;  (/)  a 
long  delay  in  the  intestines — as  will  be  explained  in  the  appro- 
priate chapter.  When  the  faecal  matter  is  both  moist  and  hard, 
the^  dryness  is  due  to  (i)  undue  delay  in  the  intestines  due  to 
moisture  which  cannot  escape  ;  (ii)  lack  of  bile,  which  serves 
to  help  on  the  excrement.

2A

354  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE2A

354  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

If  there  has' been  no  delay,  and  there  is  no  evidence  of 
moisture  in  the  intestines,  it  shows  that  there  is  a  continual 
dispersion  of  sanious  and  pungent  effete  matter  from  the  liver 
into  the  intestine,  until  the  latter  has  taken  it  all  up.

3.  Colour.  The  normal  colour  is  ruddy,  owing  to  the 
presence  of  a  slight  fieriness.  If  this  colour  is  more  marked, 
it  shows  that  the  bile  is  plentiful.  If  less  marked  it  indicates 
defective  maturation  of  the  food.

White  stool  points  to  obstruction  in  the  biliary  passages, 
and  goes  with  jaundice.  If  there  is  also  offensive  sanious  material 
present  it  shows  that  an  inflammatory  mass  has  ruptured.

A  healthy  person  who  does  not  take  exercise  often  passes  a 
morbid  sanious  matter  which  acts  as  a  purgative  and  produces  a 
satisfactory  evacuation.  For  by  this  means  laxity  of  the  tissues 
is  avoided  (tarahhul,  the  swelling  of  the  flesh,  in  horses),  which 
lack  of  exercise  is  liable  to  produce,  as  we  have  already  explained 
when  speaking  of  the  urine.

Unduly  red  colour  of  stool  at  the  acme  of  a  disease  often 
denotes  maturation  ;    it  often  points  to  a  depraved  constitution.Unduly  red  colour  of  stool  at  the  acme  of  a  disease  often 
denotes  maturation  ;    it  often  points  to  a  depraved  constitution.

The  significations  of  dark-coloured  or  black  stool  are  similar 
to  those  of  dark  or  black  urine.  It  means  (a)  marked  oxidation  ; 
(b)  maturation  of  a  disease  due  to  atrabilious  humour  ;  (c)  an 
aliment  which  colours  it  ;  (d)  a  medicament  which  procures  the 
discharge  of  the  atrabilious  humour.  The  first  is  unfavourable  ; 
the  second  is  merely  a  staining  from  admixture  with  black  bile  ; 
this  cannot  be  clearly  discerned  from  colour  alone,  but  only  by 
its  acridity,  bitterness  and  the  churning  out  of  earthy  matter 
from  it.  Moreover,  among  its  peculiar  properties  is  this, — 
that  it  glitters  (is  self-luminous).  The  fact  of  black  bile  leaving 
the  body,  whether  it  be  by  the  stool  or  by  the  vomit,  is  a  bad  sign.

Finally,  the  discharge  of  pure  atrabilious  humour  per  anum 
is  usually  a  sign  of  impending  death.  But  the  exit  of  black 
chyme  is  beneficial  because  it  shows  that  the  tissues  are  active  in 
oxidation,  and  their  moisture  is  used  up.

Blackness  of  stool  also  denotes  admixture  with  blood,  in  cases  of  disease  of 
the  liver,  intestinal  ulcer,  or  rupture  of  vessels  (Aegineta).

Green  stool.  This  denotes  extinction  of  the  innate  heat. 
The  colour  is  due  to  the  verdigris-green  type  of  bile.

Dark-coloured  or  "  livid  "  stool.  This  also  denotes  extinction 
of  the  innate  heat  ;  coldness  ;  considerable  mortification  in 
the  interior  organs.     It  is  a  bad  sign.

Parti-coloured  stool.  This  is  a  bad  sign.  Reference  to  this 
is  made  in  Book  IV.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  355

_     Fatty  stool.     This  is  met  with  when  the  fat  of  the  body  is 
being  dissolved  out.THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  355

_     Fatty  stool.     This  is  met  with  when  the  fat  of  the  body  is 
being  dissolved  out.

_        Glutinous  stool.    In  this  case'other  tissues  as  well  as  the  fatty 
tissue  are  being  liquefied.     It  is  a  very  grave  sign.

Purulent  stool.  The  pus  comes  from  the  liver,  or  stomach, 
or  bowel.  '

Intensely  yellow  stool  ;  when  occurring  at  the  beginning  of 
a  disease  it  is  due  to  bilious  humour.  If  at  the  acme,  it  is  useful 
m  that  it  purges  the  body  (of  undesirable  substances).

Unusual  colours  in  the  stool,  and  the  various  colours  which 
have  a  bad  significance  are  spoken  of  in  the  special  volume.

4-.  Form  or  shape.  If  the  faeces  are  bulky  like  those  of  a 
cow  it  is  because  of  flatulence,  or  gaseousness.

5'  u    ^ME     OCCUPIED     IN     PASSAGE     THROUGH     THE     BOWEL

When  the  faeces  are  passed  out  too  rapidly  it  is  a  bad  sign  •"  it 
shows  that  there  is  an  excess  of  bile  in  the  gall-bladder,  and  also 
a  weakness  of  the  retentive  power.

A  delay  in  the  passages  of  faecal  matter  through  the  body 
denotes  a  feeble  digestion,  coldness  of  the  intestines,  abundant 
moisture  ;    taking  too  much  sleep  ;    flatulence.

The  Characters  of  Normal  Stool

676.  The  stool  should  be  (i)  coherent  ;  (2)  homogeneous 
throughout  the  water  and  the  solids  being  intimately  admixed  ; 
(3J  soft  and  honeylike  m  consistence  ;    (4)  easily  evacuated  ;u  c  Ct°  r  tendmS  to  yellow  (if  ^e  colour  should  resemble 
that  of  the  food  it  would  mean  indigestion)  ;  (6)  of  not  very 
offensive  odour,  yet  not  odourless  ;  (7)  of  a  quality  which  is 
neither  sharp  nor  biting  ;  (8)  it  should  emerge  inaudibly, 
neither  with  gurgling,  nor  flatus,  nor  creaking,  nor  foamy  ; 
(9)  passed  at  the  time  customary  to  the  healthy  person  ;  (10)  in 
bulk  nearly  equal  to  that  of  the  food  consumed.

Note  that  neither  homogeneity  nor  softness  is  necessarily 
a  laudable  character  m  faeces.  These  characters  may  be  the  result 
of  violent  maturation  throughout  the  body,  or  of  oxidation  or 
co  liquation.  In  such  cases,  these  features  would  be  unfavour- 
able signs.

Note,  too,  that  a  consistence  which  is  tending  to  tenuity 
is  not  favourable  unless  there  is  no  rumbling  or  discharge  of 
flatus  at  stool  ;  it  should  not  then  emerge  bit  by  bit.  But  one 
must  also  be  sure  it  is  not  being  discharged  in  that  form  owing 
to  the  admixture  of  some  irritant  which  prevents  cohesion

356

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

677  Many  authors  proceed  from  the  discussion  of  urine 
and  faeces  to  other  excretions,  including  the  sweat.  I  consider 
it  more  appropriate  to  deal  with  these  under,  their  appropriate 
headings  in  the  volume  on  special  diseases.

THE   EXPECTORATION 
(From  Aegineta  ;  Haly  Abbas) 
§24o.       The    expectoration    denotes    some    affection    in    the    organs    of 
respiration.  .

Consistence.

Colour.

Quality.

Thin  and  scanty.

Moderate  ;  homogen- 
eous, white, 
unctuous.

Thick. 
Indefinite.

Cause.

Attenuated  humour. 
Attenuated  humour.

Density  of  humour.

Black  or  dark. 
Yellow,  golden,

frothy,  thin. 
Intense  yellow,

golden,  frothy. 
Green.

Verdigris  green.

White.

Red.    ,

Odour.

Mode  of 
expectoration.Density  of  humour.

Black  or  dark. 
Yellow,  golden,

frothy,  thin. 
Intense  yellow,

golden,  frothy. 
Green.

Verdigris  green.

White.

Red.    ,

Odour.

Mode  of 
expectoration.

Intense  heat. 
Deficient  maturation

Presence  of  green 
bile.

Serous  humour. 
Sanguineous  humour

Disease.

Fetid.

Easy. 
Difficult.

Not  fully  developed.

Acme  of  a  disease; 
maturation  of  mor- 
bid substances  is 
complete.

Is  declining.

Failure  of  maturation.

Outlook  grave. 
Outlook  not  entirely 
bad.

Bad  significance. 
Fatal  sign.

Putrefaction.

Lung  ;    air-passages.

Good  sign. 
Bad  sign.

Any  colour  other  than  that  of  blood  is  a  sign  of  a  bad  intemperament  produced 
by  pathological  heat.     Admixture  with  colours  is  intermittent.

ssmmmmmms

— many  ounces  a  day  in  some  cases.

The  Sweat  .         .

"  -P sterns  iudee  much  by  the  state  of  the  perspiration,  especially  m  horse-

v.  488.)

Menstrual  Fluid 
This  may  be  mentioned  as  being  one  of  the  excretions, 
usually  only  noted  in  relation  to  lochia!  discharge.

Its  characters  are

Part    III 
THE  PRESERVATION  OF  HEALTH

Preface

I.    On  Nutrition

CONTENTS

PAGE 
"         358 
363

II.    The  Regimen  appropriate  for  the  various  Periods 
of  Life         -

381

III.  The  Regimen  for  the  Aged       -

IV.  The  Regimen  appropriate  for  Various  Intemperaments 
V.    The  Regimen  appropriate  for  Changes  in  the  Climate

and  Seasons         ----___

VI.    The  Regimen  appropriate  for  Travellers,  Seafarers,

and  those  living  in  Hot  and  Cold  Countries     -      446

432 
437

443

357

PREFACE

On  the  Causes  of  Health  and  Disease  ;    the  Necessity  of

Death.and  those  living  in  Hot  and  Cold  Countries     -      446

432 
437

443

357

PREFACE

On  the  Causes  of  Health  and  Disease  ;    the  Necessity  of

Death.

678,  In  the  first  part  of  this  book  it  was  stated  that 
Medicine  comprises  two  parts,  one  theoretical,  and  one  practical, 
though  both  are  really  simply  speculative  science.  That  which 
is  specially  named  "  theory  "  relates  to  the  formation  of  opinions 
and  .the  showing  of  the  evidence  upon  which  they  are  based, 
without  reference  to  the  mode  of  acting  upon  them.  Thus  this 
part  deals  with  the  temperaments,  the  humours,  the  faculties  ; 
and  with  the  forms,  the  symptoms,  and  the  causes  of  disease. 
That  which  is  specially  named  "  practical  "  relates  to  the  mode  of 
acting  upon  this  knowledge,  and  the  prescription  of  a  regimen. 
For  instance,  it  is  that  part  of  Medicine  which  helps  us  to 
understand  how  the  health  of  the  body  is  to  be  maintained  in  this 
or  that  state,  and  by  what  means  we  can  heal  the  diseases  with 
which  the  body  is  afflicted.  "  Practical  "  does  not  refer  to  the 
performance  of  surgical  operations.  It  is  the  art  which  teaches 
us  in  what  way  to  procure  healing — the  "  healing  "  art.

Having  expounded  in  the  first  and  second  parts  of  this  work 
the  various  matters  pertaining  to  this  theoretical  part  of  Medicine, 
we  now  proceed  to  the  study  of  the  two  subjects  pertaining  to  the 
practical  part — dealing  with  them  in  a  general  manner.

The  two  parts  which  belong  to  the  practical  side  of  Medicine 
are  (i)  The  science  of  regulating  the  healthy  body,  so  as  to 
maintain  it  in  health.  The  science  of  hygiene.  (2)  The  science 
of  ruling  the  sick  body  so  as  to  enable  it  to  return  to  a  state  of 
health.      The  science  of  healing.In  this  part  then,  the  third,  we  write  down  fully  how  the 
health"  is  to   be  maintained.

358

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  359

679.  The  human  being  takes  its  origin  from  two  things — : 
(1)  the  male  sperm,  which  plays  the  part  of  "  factor  "  ;  (2)  the' 
female  sperm  [menstrual 'blood],  which  provides  the  matter.

Each  of  these  is  fluid  and  moist,  but  there  is  more  wateriness 
and  terrene  substance  in  the  female  blood  and  female  sperm, 
whereas  air  and  igneity  are  predominant  in  the  male  sperm.  It  is 
essential  that  at  the  outset  of  the  congelation  of  the  two  com- 
ponents there  should  be  moisture,  even  though  earth  and  fire  are 
found  in  the  product.  The  earth  provides  the  firmness  and 
rigidity  ;  the  fire  provides  the  maturative  power.  These  give 
the  coagulum  ("  He  created  man  from  a  clot  " — Q.  96,  2)  a 
certain  hardness  or  firmness.  But  this  hardness  is  not  as  great 
in  degree  as  that  possessed  by  a  stone  or  metal  [or  glass].  For 
these  are  either  not  soluble  at  all  or  only  soluble  to  a  degree 
imperceptible  to  our  senses,  however  long  one  exposes  them  to' 
solvents.  Were  the  hardness  comparable  to  this,  the  product 
of  conception  would  never  suffer  injury  however  long  or  however 
persistently  a  solvent  were  applied.  But  that  is  not  so.  The 
fact  is  contrary.

680.  Our  bodies  are  exposed  to  injury  from  two  directions 
— one  exterior  and  one  interior.  The  interior  source  of  injury 
is  the  dissipation  of  the  moisture  from  which  we  are  created,  and 
this  dissipation  proceeds  in  an  orderly  manner.  The  second 
source  is  the  putrefactive  breakdown  and  metamorphosis  of  the 
humour,  into  a  form  such  that  the  fermentative  phenomena  of 
life  are  no  longer  able  to  proceed.The  second  source  of  injury  differs  from  the  first  in  that 
dryness  is  here  introduced  in  virtue  of  depravity  of  humour  ; 
and  this  dryness  continues  neutralizing  the  moisture  of  the  body 
until  the  "  form  "  ceases  to  have  a  capacity  for  life.

Finally,  the  putrefactive  breakdown  disperses  the  vitality, 
because  it  first  destroys  the  moisture  and  then  disperses  it,  and 
simply  dry  ash  is  left  behind.

681.  Hence  we  see  that  these  two  sources  of  destruction 
[of  the  living- product  of  conception]  are  different  from  those 
arising  from  other  causes — such  as,  freezing  cold,  torrid  heat, 
grave  forms  of  loss  of  continuity,  various  maladies.  But  it  is  in 
regard  to  the  first  two-named  sources  of  destruction  that  we  find 
the  more  important  factors  relative  to  the  question  of  the  pre- 
servation of  health.

Each  of  them  takes  origin  from  extrinsic  and  intrinsic 
agents.  The  extrinsic  agents  are,  e.g.,  the  atmosphere,  which  is 
a  solvent  and  putrefacient.      The  intrinsic  agents  are,  e.g.,  the

360  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

innate  heat,  which:  is  the  agent  within  us  through  which  moisture 
is  dispersed  :  the  extraneous  heat  generated  within  us  from  the 
aliments,  and  through  other  'agents  which  cause  putrefactive 
changes  in  the  [native]  moistures.

All  these  agents  mutually  aid  one  another  in  rendering  the 
body  dry.  And  yet  it  is  true  that  our  perfection  and  soundness 
and  the  power  to  perform  our  various  actions  depend  on  a  due 
degree  of  dryness  of  the  body.  But  the  degree  of  dryness 
becomes  relatively  greater  and  greater  until  we  die.  Hence 
this  dryness  is  inevitable.682.  If  we  were  at  the  outset  essentially  composed  of 
moisture,  heat  would  have  to  overcome  it  or  else  the  heat  would 
be  choked  by  it.  Therefore  the  heat  continues  to  exert  its  own 
effect, — that  is,  it  produces  more  and  more  desiccation.  But 
whatever  degree  of  dryness  there  might  be  at  the  outset  (of  life), 
it  reaches  equilibrium,  and  remains  so  until  the  limit  of  equili- 
brium in  regard  to  dryness  is  reached.  The  heat  remaining 
constant,  the  dryness  is  now  [relatively]  greater  than  before  ; 
for  the  "  matter  "  is  less,  and  hence  holds  more.  Hence  it  is  not 
difficult  to  understand  that  the  dryness  passes  on  beyond  the 
stage  of  equilibrium,  and  goes  on  steadily  increasing  until  the 
whole  of  the  moisture  of  the  body' is  consumed.  Therefore  (we 
may  say)  that  the  innate  heat  is  the  cause  of  its  own  extinction,  for 
it  is  itself  the  reason  for  itax>wn  "  matter  "  being  consumed.  We 
may  compare  it  to  the  flame  of  a  lamp  ;  the  light  goes  out  when 
all  the  "  matter  "  has  been  used  up.

As  the  dryness  increases,  the  innate  heat  diminishes.  The 
loss  continues  unceasingly  till  death,  and  the  moisture  which  is 
lost  is  not  restored.     The  loss  goes  on  more  and  more.683.  The  dryness  (of  the  body)  is  increased  in  two  ways  : 
by  lessening  of  the  power  of  receiving  "  matter  "  ;  by  lessening 
of  the  native  moisture  resulting  from  dispersal  of  the  (innate) 
heat.  The  heat  becomes  more  feeble  because  dryness  pre- 
dominates in  the  substance  of  the  members,  and  because  the 
innate  moisture  becomes  relatively  less.  The  innate  moisture 
is  to  the  innate  heat  as  the  oil  of  a  lamp  is  to  the  flame.  For  there 
are  two  forms  of  moisture  in  the  flame  :  water,  which  holds  its 
own,  and  oil,  which  is  used  up.  So,  in  a  corresponding  manner, 
the  innate  heat  holds  its  own  in  respect  of  the  innate  moisture, 
but  is  used  up  pari  passu  with  increase  of  extraneous  heat,  due, 
e.g.,  to  defective  digestion,  which  is  comparable  with  the  aqueous 
moisture  of  the  flame.  As  the  dryness  increases,  the  innate  heat 
lessens,  and  the  result  is  natural  death.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  361

684.  For  the  reason  why  the  (human)  body  does  not  live 
any  longer  than  it  does  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  initial  innate 
moisture  holds  out  against  being  dispersed  both  by  the  alien 
heat  and  by  the  heat  in  the  body  itself  (both  that  which  is  innate 
and  that  derived  from  bodily  movement).  And  this  resistance 
is  maintained  as  long  as  the  one  is  weaker  than  the  other,  and  as 
long  as  something  is  provided  to  replace  that  which  has  been  thus 
dispersed — to  wit,  from  the  aliment.  Furthermore,  as  we  have 
already  stated,  the  power  or  faculty  which  operates  upon  the 
aliment  in  order  to  render  it  useful  in  this  way  only  does  so  up  to 
the  end  of  life.685.  Therefore  we  may  say  that  the  art  of  maintaining  the 
health  is  not  the  art  of  averting  death,  or  of  averting  extraneous 
injuries  from  the  body  ;  or  of  securing  the  utmost  longevity 
possible  to  the  human  being.  It  is  concerned  with  two  other 
things — (a)  the  prevention  of  putrefactive  breakdown  ;  (b)  the 
safeguarding  of  innate  moisture  from  too  rapid  dissipation,  and 
maintaining  it  at  such  a  degree  of  strength  that  the  original 
type  of  constitution  peculiar  to  the  person  shall  not  change  even 
up  to  the  last  moment  of  life.

•  _  This  is  secured  by  a  suitable  regimen,  namely  {a)  one  which 
will  ensure  the  replacement  of  the  innate  heat  and  moisture  which 
are  dispersed  from  the  body  as  exactly  as  possible  ;  and  (b)  a 
regimen  which  will  prevent  any  agents  which  would  lead  to  a 
rapid  dessication  from  gaining  the  upper  hand — excluding  agents 
which  produce  a  normal  desiccation  ;  (c)  one  which  safeguards 
the  body  from  the  development  of  putrefactive  processes  within 
it  and  from  the  influence  of  alien  heat  (whether  extraneous  or 
intrinsic).

_  For  all  bodies  have  not  the  same  degree  of  innate  moisture 
and  innate  heat.    There  is  a  great  diversity  in  regard  to  them.

_  686.  ^  Moreover,  every  person  has  his  own  term  of  life, 
during  which  the  desiccation'  inevitable  to  his  temperament 
(constitution)  and  the  degree  of  innate  heat,  and  of  innate 
moisture  can  be  withstood.687.  _  Nevertheless,  factors  may  arise  which  assist  desicca- 
tion, or  are  injurious  in  some  other  way.  For  which  reason,  many 
assert  that  the  former  are  natural  causes  of  death,  whereas  the 
latter  are  accidental.  And  under  this  view,  the  art  of  maintaining 
health  consists  in  guiding  the  body  to  its  natural  span  of  life  by 
paying  attention  to  whatever  things  conduce  thereto.  There  are 
two  faculties  to  be  fostered  by  the  doctor  in  striving  for  this 
object  :   (1)  the  nutritive  faculty,  whereby  that  is  replaced  which

3 62  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

is  constantly  being  lost  to  the  body — namely  earthiness  and 
aquosity  ;  (2)  the  sensitiye  faculty  (animal  faculty) — that  is,  the 
pulsatile  faculty  which  is  concerned  with  the  replacement  of  that 
which  is  lost  to  the  body  by  the  breath — namely  "  air  "  and 
igneity.  And  since  aliments  are  only  potentially  like  the  thing 
nourished,  an  alterative  faculty  had  to  be  created  so  that  they 
could  be  changed  actually  into  the  likeness  of  the  thing  nourished. 
In  this  way  the  aliment  becomes  effective.

The  instruments  and  channels  necessary  for  this  had  to  be 
created  also — namely  the  means  by  which  material  is  attracted, 
expelled,  retained,  and  digested  (sequence  by  sequence,  turn  by

turn).

688.  Therefore  we  may  say  that  the  essential  considera- 
tions in  the  art  of  preserving  the  health  consist  in  maintaining 
equilibrium  between  all  these  various  concomitant  factors.  But 
there  are  seven  matters  concerning  which  special  care  must  be 
expended  to  ensure  just  proportion  :

(1)  Equilibrium  of  temperament.

(2)  Selection  of  the  articles  of  food  and  drink.

(3)  Evacuation  of  effete  matters.

(4)  Safeguarding  the  composite.

(5)  Maintaining  the  purity  of  the  air  respired.(2)  Selection  of  the  articles  of  food  and  drink.

(3)  Evacuation  of  effete  matters.

(4)  Safeguarding  the  composite.

(5)  Maintaining  the  purity  of  the  air  respired.

(6)  Guarding  against  extraneous  contingencies.

(7)  Moderation  in  regard  to  the  movements  of  the  body 
and  the  motions  of  the  mind,  with  which  may  be  included  sleep 
and  wakefulness.

689.  From  all  these  considerations  you  will  now  perceive 
that  there  is  no  single  fixed  limit  to  which  equilibrium,  or  health  is 
to  be  assigned.  None  of  the  temperaments  enters  into  it. 
Health  and  equilibrium  vary  (in  range)  from  time  to  time.  That 
is  to  say,  it  is  a  state  comprised  within  two  limits.

We  therefore  begin  by  discussing  first  the  regimen  appro- 
priate to  the  period  of  infancy,  in  which  the  temperament  is 
continuously  at  one  extreme  of  equilibrium.

THESIS  I

•  .  ON   NUTRITION

i.    The  Regimen  in  Infancy — the  Period  from  the  Moment 
of  Birth  to  the  Commencement  of  Weaning.

PECIAL  chapters  discuss  the  regimen  dur- 
ing pregnancy  and  the  period  when  par- 
turition approaches.

690  Treatment  of  the  Cord.  Many- 
wise  physicians  state  that  when  an  infant  of 
equable  constitution  is  born,  the  umbilical 
cord  should  be  severed  four  fingers'  breadth 
from  the  umbilicus  after  it  has  been  well  but 
gently  tied  with  a  clean  woollen  ligature,  so  as  to  inflict  no  pain 
and  that  an  oiled  cloth  should  be  placed  upon  it.  To  help  the 
separation  of  the  cord,  apply  equal  parts  of  the  following  • 
turmeric,  dragon's  blood,  Persian  gum,  caraway,  sweet  scented 
moss,  myrrh.     These  are  ground  together  and  applied.691.  Treatment  of  the  skin.  Then  one  should  hasten  to 
harden  the  surface  of  the  skin  by  the  use  of  slightly  salted  water 
until  the  cord  has  desiccated.  The  best  agents  to  employ  for  this 
purpose  are  shadanaj  (a  stone,  shaped  like  a  lentil  or  bloodstone), 
bitter  costus,  sumach,  fenugreek,  and  origanum.  But  the  nose 
and  mouth  must  not  be  exposed  to  such  agents.

_  The  reason  for  hardening  the  body  in  this  way  is  that  every- 
thing hot,  cold,  or  rough  is  injurious  to  the  sensitive  infant's  skin, 
and  so  it  needs  to  be  hardened  against  all  things  of  that  kind  which 
will  come  m  contact  with  it.  Hence,  if  the  process  of  salting 
has  to  be  repeated,  so  do.

Such  treatment  is  the  more  indicated  if  there  are  sordities 
or  there  is  much  humidity.

After  this,  the  body  should  be  laved  in  tepid  water,  the 
nostrils  thoroughly  cleansed  with  the  fingers,  whose  nails  are  cut 
short,  and  a  little  oil  should  be  instilled  into  the  eyes.     The  anal

363

364  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

orifice  should  be  caused  to  move  by  manipulation  of  its  vicinity 
by  means  of  the  little  finger,  so  that  it  may  open.  Care  should 
be  taken  that  nothing  cold  conies  in  contact  with  it.^

After  the  cord  has  separated — which  should  be  in  three  or 
four  days— the  stump  should  be  treated  with  a  measure  of  bone- 
ash  or  powdered  lead  oxide  in  wine.

692.  Binding  the  Infant.  In  doing  this  the  limbs  must  be 
handled  very  gently.  Every  part  should  be  moulded  according 
to  its  appropriate  form — making  wide  that  which  should  be  wide, 
slender  that  which  should  be  slender,  doing  all  as  gently  as 
possible  between  the  tips  of  the  fingers.  This  should  be  done 
many  times.

The  eyes  must  be  carefully  wiped  with  a  silken  band.The  eyes  must  be  carefully  wiped  with  a  silken  band.

The  bladder-region  should  be  pressed  to  help  the  exit  of  the 
urine.  After  this,  stretch  out  the  hands  towards  the  knees. 
Bind  the  head,  fitting  as  it  were  a  cap  to  the  head.

693.  Sleeping-quarters.  The  infant  must  be  placed  in  an 
airy  room,  with  not  too  cool  air.  The  room  should  also  be  shady, 
or  even  slightly  gloomy  so  that  the  eyes  are  not  likely  to  receive 
direct  light.  While  sleeping  the  head  should  be  at  a  higher  level 
than  the  rest  of  the  body,  and  someone  should  watch  lest  any  part 
of  the  body  (neck,  limbs,  back)  should  get  into  a  twisted  position.

694.  Bathing  the  Infant.  In  summer  time  it  should  be 
bathed  with  suave  tepid  water.  In  winter  the  water  should  be  on 
the  warm  side.

The  best  time  to  wash  the  infant  is  after  a  long  sleep,  but  it 
may  be  desirable  to  wash  it  twice  or  three  times  in  the  day.

In  winter,  the  infant  should  not  be  washed  unless  its  body 
becomes  ruddy  and  warm  thereby.  After  taking  it  from  the  bath, 
take  care  none  of  the  water  gets  into  its  ears.

695 „  The  way  to  hold  the  infant  while  washing  it :  take  it 
by  the  right  hand,  and  hold  it  so  that  the  left  arm  is  over  its  chest 
and  not  over  its  belly.  After  the  laving,  the  palms  and  soles 
should  be  gently  raised  (up  and  down).  It  should  be  gently 
wiped  dry  with  soft  cloths.  Then  turn  it  down  on  to  its  belly, 
then  back  on  its  back,  rubbing  gently  all  the  while,  pressing  and 
moulding  [and  singing  gently  to  it, — Ch.M.],  then  back  on  its 
belly  to  apply  the  binder.  Afterwards  instil  sweet  oil  into  its 
nostrils,  and  bathe  the  eyes  and  lids.

2.    The  Regimen  during  Lactation  and  Weaning.2.    The  Regimen  during  Lactation  and  Weaning.

698,     The  following  is  the  mode  in  which  the  feeding  of 
the  infant  is  to  be  arranged.     Whenever  possible,  the  mother's

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  36$

milk  should  be  given  and  by  suckling.  For  that  is  the  aliment  of 
all  others  most  like  in  substance  to  the  nutrient  material  which  the 
infant  received  while  in  the  womb — the  menstrual  nutrients  of 
the  mother.  It  is  these  which  are  changed  into  milk  after 
parturition,  and  such  milk  is  better  adapted  for  the  infant.

Macrobius  (Saturn,  v.  n)  gives  the  following  reasons  why  the  healthy  mother 
should  suckle  her  child.  "  Just  as  the  strength  and  nature  of  the  semen  goes  to 
fashion  the  likeness  of  the  bodv  and  mind,  so  the  natural  dispositions  and  properties 
are  conveyed  by  the  milk.  And  it  is  not  only  in  man  that  this  is  noticed  It 
occurs  m  cattle  also.  For  it  is  easily  shown  that  when  young  goats  are  brought  up 
on  sheep's  milk,  their  hairs  become  softer,  and  when  lambs  are  brought  up  on  goat's 
milk  the  wool  becomes  harder."

Experience  shows  that  merely  to  place  the  mother's  nipple 
into  the  infant's  mouth  is  a  great  help  towards  removing  whatever 
is  hurtful  to  the  infant.

697.  "  It  should  suffice  for  the  infant  to  suck  the  breast 
twice  or  thrice  in  the  day  at  first,  and  it  should  not  be  allowed 
to  take  too  much.  It  is  best  to  wait  till  the  [disturbance  in  the] 
temperament  of  the  mother  has  subsided  somewhat  before  the 
infant  is  given  the  breast.  It  may  be  give  a  little  honey  first,  and 
the  breast  later.The  milk  which  the  boy  sucks  should  be  drained  away  two 
or  three  times  in  the  morning,  before  presenting  the  nipple, 
especially  if  there  be  any  spots  in  the  milk.  Sourish  or  otherwise 
defective  milk  should  not  be  given  while  the  nurse  is  fasting.

698.  Besides  this  there  are  also  two  other  things  to  be  done 
to  help  to  strengthen  the  constitution  :  gentle  (rocking)  move- 
ments ;  humming  music  or  some  old  song,  or  prattling  to  the 
infant,  as  is  customary  while  placing  the  babe  into  it's  cradle. 
How  much  these  two  practices  are  to  be  employed  may  be  judged 
[individually]  ;  the  movement  is  for  the  benefit  of  the  body,  and 
the  music  is  for  the  benefit  of  the  mind.

§  240a. — Some  idea  of  the  cradle-songs  actually  used  in  the  days 
of  Avicenna  may  be  formed  from  the  instances  recorded  by  Fox- 
Strangeways  in  his  work  on  the  Music  of  Hindostan  (pp.  62-68). 
The  words  of  Rama's  lullaby  may  be  quoted  :  "In  Ayodhya,  the 
land  of  kings,  It  was  Vishnu's  self  That  was  born  on  the  lap  of 
Kaushalya.  Little  babe,  sleep  upon  my  knee  ! — For  the  cradle  is 
wrought  of  gold,  And  a  Child  therein,  Of  the  whole  world  the  Lord 
and  Master,  sleeps.  Little  babe,  sleep,  sleep,  upon  my  knee  !— - 
In  the  hand-hold  of  Kaushalya  Is  the  cradle-cord,  And  the  cord  is 
the  thread  of  Bodhana  (=  Knowledge).  Little  babe,  sleep  upon 
my  knee.- — And  the  Devis  (=  angelic  beings)  are  strewing  flowers 
From  the  highest  heaven,  And  with  each  flower  a'  blessing  on  the 
Child.     Little  babe,  sleep  upon  my  knee  !  "

366

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Another  illustration  may  be  quoted  to  show  the  beautiful  spirit

in  these  lullabies.     In  singing  such  words  over  her  babe,  the  mother366

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Another  illustration  may  be  quoted  to  show  the  beautiful  spirit

in  these  lullabies.     In  singing  such  words  over  her  babe,  the  mother

must  surely  create  an  atmosphere  around  it  which  is  for  the  benefit

of  its  mind  :

"  Baby  mine,  light  of  my  eyes, 
Here    in.    thy    cradle    bright    with    flowers 
Through  sunny  hours  I  bring  thee  sleep, 
I  rock  thee  and  sing  thee  to  sleep 
Oh  the  wings  of  my  melodies  .  .  . 
Srinangam    island    rises    fair 
Where  the  divided  Kaveris  meet 
I  lay  thee  down  there  at  His  feet, 
At   Srlranga   raja's   feet 
Full  sure  of  His  tender  care  .  .  . 
The    golden    nails    no    longer    move 
On  which  my  baby's  cradle  swung  ; 
The'  song  is  sung  ;     my  ship  is  borne 
Safe  home,  my  ship  is  borne 
Safe  on  the  ocean  of  love.  .  .  ."

JUf

'«l=yo

7-      -^-V-y     :

nJl

f-f^f

Htm^tr^^M

j-^j

Vix

J  v3  J  v  3  y  *—  y—  •*-  -^

^1S

699.  Inability  to  nurse  the  Child.  If  there  be  anything  to 
prevent  the  mother  from  giving  milk  to  the  babe — for  instance, 
owing  to  her  weakness  or  to  the  defective  quality  of  her  milk,  or 
because  it  runs  too  quickly,  a  wet-nurse  should  be  selected 
according  to  the  following  rules  :  (i)  age  ;  (2)  form  or  phy- 
sique ;  ( 3)  personal  character  or  habits  ;  (4)  the  shape  of  the 
nipples  ;  (5)  the  quality  of  the  milk  ;  (6)  the  interval  of  time 
which  has  elapsed  since  her  parturition  ;    (7)  characters  of  her

own  child.  .....

Having  found  a  wet-nurse  in  whom  the  requisite  conditions 
are  fulfilled,  she  must  be  provided  with  nourishing  foods  such  as 
are  given  in  708,own  child.  .....

Having  found  a  wet-nurse  in  whom  the  requisite  conditions 
are  fulfilled,  she  must  be  provided  with  nourishing  foods  such  as 
are  given  in  708,

700.  The  characters  of  a  good  wet-nurse.  (1)  The  age 
should  be  between  25  and  35,  because  during  this  period  there  is 
youth  and  health  and  perfection.  (2)  Form  and  physique.  The 
colour  should  be  good,  the  neck  strong,  the  chest  strong  and 
broad,  the  flesh  muscular  and  firm,— neither  very  fat  nor  very 
spare,  the  proportion  of  the  fat  in  the  flesh  being  moderate. 
(3)  Personal  character  and  habits.  These  should  be  good  and 
praiseworthy.  She  should  be  only  slowly  aroused  by  the  bad 
passions  of  the  mind,  such  as  anger,  gloom,  fear,  etc.  For  all 
these  injure  the  constitution  and  may  change  the  milk  or  pass  into

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  36yTHE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  36y

it,  or  even  prevent  -its  secretion.     It  is  for  this  reason  that  some 
people  reject  a  nurse  who  is  stupid.    Besides  this,  if  the  character 
be  not  good,  she  will  riot  trouble  herself  over  the  infant  or  caress 
it  enough.     (4)  Shape  of  nipples.     They  must  be  firm  in  con- 
sistence and  large,  but  not  too  large.     [On  the  one  hand  large 
nipples  hurt  the  infant's  gums  and  impede  deglutition,  and  on  the 
other  they  will  hold  more  milk  than  the  infant  can  take,  and  some 
is  then  left  behind  to  undergo  decomposition,  therefore  being 
injurious  at  the  next  feed.    If  the  nipples  are  too  small,  the  infant 
cannot  take  hold  of  them,  and  there  will  not  be  sufficient  milk  : 
Aetms.]      Therefore  the  consistence  should  be  between  hardness 
and  softness.     (5)  Quality  of  milk.     The  consistence  must  be 
between  coarse  and  fine  ;  the  colour  white  (not  dusky,  greenish, 
yellowish   or   ruddy)  ;     the   odour   good,    without   acridity   or 
pungency  -;  the  taste  sweetish  (without  any  bitterness,  saltinesss, 
or  acridity).    The  quantity  should  be  of  a  certain  amount.   It  must 
be  homogeneous.    It  must  not  be  thin,  watery,  nor  very  thick  or 
cheesy  ;   nor  must  there  be  any  discrete  particles  in  it.     There 
should  not  be  much  foam.

701 .  Tests.  The  consistence  may  be  tested  by  allowing 
the  milk  to  run  over  the  finger-nail.  If  it  flows  easily,  it  is  thin  ; 
if  it  does  not  flow  over  the  inclined  nail,  it  is  thick.  Again' 
pkce  some  in  a  glass  vessel,  and  drop  a  little  myrrh  into  it,  and 
stir  the  two  together.  The  aquosity  and  the  degree  of  caseity 
are  then  evident.  The  milk  is  laudable  and  attempered  if 
the  watery  part  and  cheesy  part  are  equal.Should  there  be  some  special  need  to  prepare  such  a  milk, 
we  should  prepare  it  partly  from  the  mother,  and  partly  from 
the  wet-nurse.  From  the  mother  because  it  is  better  not  to 
give  thick  milk  of  unhealthy  odour  until  it  has  been  allowed  to 
stand  exposed  to  the  air  for  a  while  ;  and  because  it  is  best 
not  to  give  very  warm  milk  to  the  fasting  infant.

7Q2,  Diet.  If  her  milk  is  thick,  the  wet-nurse  should 
take  oxymel  ;  and  a  decoction  of  attenuants  such  as  wild  r.^r-, 
joram,  hyssop,  thyme,  savory,  origanum  montanum,  and  the 
like  should  also  be  included  in  the  menu.  A  little  radish  may 
be  added  [old  pickle  in  vinegar  and  honey  :  Aeg.].  Vomiting 
should  be  induced  with  hot  oxymel  to  get  rid  of  the  phlegm, 
(Suitable)  work  before  meals  will  help  to  thin  the  milk.  [Fre- 
quent baths  :    Aetius.]

If  the  wet-nurse  be  of  hot  intemperament  she  should  take 
acetous  syrup,  and  a  light  wine  should  be  taken  either  at  the 
same  time  or  separately.

368  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

703.  If  her  milk  is  thin,  one  should  instruct  the  nurse  to 
rest,  and'avoid  exercise  or  work,  and  she  should  be  given  foods 
which  thicken  the  blood.  If  there  is  no  contra-indication,  one 
might  allow  her  sweet  wine.  [The  following  are  also  recom- 
mended :  strong  soups  or  broths  (Aeg.),  a  gruel  prepared  with 
fennel  ;.  green  dill  boiled  in  a  ptisan  with  fine  bread,  pork-flesh, 
flesh  of  kids,  or  of  tender  birds :  Aetius.]    Allow  plenty  of  sleep.704.  If  the  milk  is  scanty,  one  should  ascertain  the  cause  : 
e.g.  is  it"  an  abnormal  temperament  affecting  the  whole  body, 
or"  the  breast  itself?  To  determine  which  it  is  one  employs 
the  indications  given  in  preceding  chapters.  If  palpation  of 
the  breasts  shows  them  to  be  unduly  hot,  the  diet  should  consist 
of  such  things  as  barley  water,  spinach,  and  the  like.  If  there 
are  signs  of  coldness  of  temperament  in  the  breasts,  and  of 
obstructions,  or  inadequate  attractive  power,  the  diet  should 
include  attenuated  aliments  tending  to  a  warm  nature  ;  and 
cupping  instruments  should  be  applied  beneath  the  breasts, 
taking  care  not  to  press  much  on  the  breast.  Carrot  seed  is 
also  beneficial,  and  the  carrot  itself  is  also  very  good  for  such 
a  condition.  .

Should  the  cause  be  that  the  nurse  has  been  previously 
insufficiently  fed,  she  should  be  given  a  broth  made  with  barley, 
bran  and  legumes,  and  such  as  the  following  should  be  intro- 
duced :  fennel  roots,  and  seeds,  and  dill,  and  nigella.  Others 
say  that  the  udders  of  sheep  and  goats  should  be  eaten  with 
the  milk  therein  contained,  as  being  helpful  in  virtue  of  that 
which  is  of  like  nature  or  property  in  such  foods.  Others  have 
recommended  the  administration  of  an  "  ounce  "  of  tree-worms 
or  dried  earth-worms  in  barley  water  for  several  days,  saying 
they  have  found  it  excellent  for  the  purpose.  So  also  the 
expressed  juice  of  the  heads  of  salted  fish,  taken  in  dill  water.705.  List  of  Galactogogues.  (i)  One  ounce  of  butter  from 
cow's  milk  placed  into  a  vessel  of  good  wine  ;  taken  as  a  drink. 
(2)  sesame  ground  up  in  a  fine  mill  and  mixed  with  wine  ;  taken 
as  a  drink.  (3)  An  emplastrum  or  liniment  applied  to  the  breasts, 
prepared  with  the  faex  of  balsam  of  nard  and  asses'  milk  and  oil. 
(4)  Take  one  ounce  of  the  interior  parts  of  bnnjal  (egg-plant;, 
this  being  dissolved  in  wine,  by  stirring  ;  it  is  taken  as  a  drink, 
(c)  The  following  is  a  powerful  medicament  :  dill  seed,  three 
ounces  ;   seed  of  blue  melilot*  (or,  lot  tree),t  of  leek,  one  ounce

*  Melilot :  a  sort  of  clover./  The  blue  melilot  or  '  curd  herb  *  gives  the  odour 
and  flavour  to  Schabzieger  cheese,  the  dried  flowers  being  used

t  The  lot  tree  :  pyrus  aria,  or  white  beam-tree  (apple  tribe)  (Lmdley  and 
Moore) . 1 3  -

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  369

of  each  ;  clover  seed  and  fennel  seed,  two  ounces  of  each  ;  mix 
the  whole  into  a  drink  with  fennel  juice,  honey  and  butter. 
[(6)  (Aegineta)  :  broom  leaves  taken  in  dark-coloured  wine  or 
in  a  ptisan  ;  sweet  gith  (melanthium),  and  the  root  and  seed  of 
carrots  soaked  in  warm  water.  Aegineta  warns  that  such  reme- 
dies are  weakening  to  the  body).]  (7)  Massaging  the  breasts 
frequently  with  bland  hands  renders  the  secretion  of  milk 
plentiful.706.  Anti-galactogogues.  If  the  milk  is  injuriously  abun- 
dant, or  has  accumulated  because  it  is  unable  to  escape  owing 
to  the  presence  of  some  form  of  obstruction,  or  because  the  milk 
is  too  thick,  one  may  reduce  the  quantity  secreted  (1)  by  reducing 
the  amount  of  food  ;  (2)  by  employing  those  articles  of  diet 
which  contain  but  little  nourishment  ;  (3)  by  applying  a  (dis- 
cutient)  plaster  over  the  chest  and  breasts,  composed  of  caraway 
in  vinegar  or  white  clay  in  vinegar,  or  of  lentils  boiled  in  vinegar  ; 
this  is  followed  up  by  a  draught  of  salted  water  ;  (4)  by  eatine 
mint.  J  &

If  the  milk  has  an  unpleasant  odour,  the  remedy  is  to  give 
as  a  drink  a  fragrant  wine  ;  and  as  food,  foods  of  pleasant  odour.

707.  (6)  Rules  regarding  the  period  of  time  which  has 
elapsed  since  the  wet-nurse  was  herself  confined. — The  birth 
should  have  been  recent,  namely  i-|  months  at  least  (two  months, 
if  the  child  was  a  male)  ;  the  birth  should  have  occurred  at  the 
proper  date  and  not  premature  ;  nor  should  there  be  a  historv 
of  habitual  premature  births.

708.  Regimen  of  wet-nurse.

Diet  :  the  aliments  should  consist  of  food  giving  good 
chyme.  For  example,  foods  such  as  wheat,  frumenty,  lamb,  kid 
of  goats,  which  are  not  putrescent  or  have  hard  flesh.  Lettuce, 
almonds,  filbert-nuts.  Mint.  Potherbs  which  are  deleterious: 
herb-rocket,  mustard,  mountain  balm— for  they  cause  the  blood 
to  undergo  decomposition.  [Aegineta  also  advises  against 
desiccative,  salt,  acrid,  acid,  sour,  bitter  and  heating  articles  of 
food  ;  foods  having  an  offensive  smell  ;  very  fragrant  things  ; 
condiments  ;    alcohol.]Exercise.  This  should  be  moderate.  [Aetius  says  :  woik 
with  the  hands  and  shoulders,  milling,  weaving,  carrying  the 
child  about  in  the  arms.  '    '

Personal  :  cleanliness  of  person  (Aetius).]  The  wet-nurse 
should  not  allow  coition,  for  this  disturbs  the  menstrual  blood 
and  diminishes  the  quantity  of  milk  and  alters  its  composition, 
as  shown  by  change  of  odour.     Moreover  she  might  become

2B

37o  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

pregnant,  in  which  case  there  would  be  a  dual  unpropitious 
influence — to  the  wet-nurse  herself  in  that  whatever  is  attenuated 
in  the  blood  enters  into  the  nutriment  of  the  embryo,  and  to 
the  embryo  in  that  it  loses  as  much  from  the  mother's  aliment  as 
passes  on  to  form  milk.

709.  During  the  whole  period  of  lactation,  especially 
the  first  lactation,  it  is  advisable  to  have  some  of  the  milk  drawn 
off  to  encourage  and  facilitate  its  flow  ;  this  is  also  aided  by 
massage,  otherwise  the  delicate  organs  of  suction  will  be  injured 
and  weakened.  It  is  a  help  to  anoint  with  a  little  honey  each 
time  before  the  infant  is  nursed  ;  and  a  little  wine  may  also  be 
added.  It  should  not  be  allowed  to  take  much  milk  at  one  time. 
It  is  better  to  feed  little  and  often,  at  small  intervals.  For  it 
may  happen  that  after  becoming  satiated  with  the  whole  of  the 
contents  of  the  breast  the  infant  suffers  from  distension,  and  very 
much  flatulence,  and  the  urine  becomes  white  [too  watery,  Aeg.] 
In  such  a  case,  the  best  thing  is  to  stop  the  nursing,  allowing  the 
infant  to  go  hungry  for  some  time,  and  it  should  be  meanwhile 
put  to  sleep  till  digestion  has  had  time  to  be  completed.  [It  is 
unduly  sleepy  if  over-fed.]At  first,  the  infant  is  allowed  the  breast  three  times  only  in 
the  day.      Should  it  be  necessary  to  feed  it  on  the  first  day,  it . 
would  be  better  for  someone  else  than  the  infant's  mother  to  do 
so,  as  we  have  explained.

Should  the  wet-nurse  develop  an  intemperament  or  a 
painful  malady,  or  have  diarrhoea,  or  be  constipated,  someone 
else  should  give  milk  until  she  is  better.  The  same  applies  if 
it  be  necessary  to  administer  to  her  some  medicine  which  has  a 
decided  potency  or  quality.

The  infant  is  laid  to  sleep  after  feeding,  but  its  cradle  must 
not  be  rocked  vigorously  as  otherwise  one  would  churn  the  milk 
in  its  stomach.     The  rocking  must  be  quite  gentle.

It  is  good  for  the  infant  to  cry  a  little  before  the  feed.

710*  Duration  of  lactation.  Normally  this  is  two  years. 
When  something  additional  to  milk  is  required,  such  addition 
should  be  made  step  by  step.     Weaning  must  not  be  abrupt.

"He  committed  the  child  to  the  nurse,  and  he  drank  milk  two 
years,  after  which  they  weaned  him,  and  he  grew  up,  and  throve, 
and  walked  upon  the  floor."     (Night  250).

After  the  first  two  teeth  have  appeared,  a  progressively 
stronger  aliment  is  to  be  considered.  Hard  things,  however, 
must  not  be  allowed.     At  first,  bread  is  given  which  the  nurse

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  371

has  masticated.  Afterwards,  bread  softened  with  honey  water, 
or  dilute  wine  or  with  milk.  This  is  followed  by  a  little  water,' 
or  even  a  little  wine  in  the  water.  It  must  not  be  allowed  to 
take  food  to  repletion.  Should  indigestion  or  flatulence  occur, 
and  should  the  urine  become  white,  all  food  is  stopped  for  a 
while,  at  least  until  it  has  been  anointed  in  the  bath.711.  Weaning.-  In  weaning  the  infant  from  milk,  the 
aliment  must  consist  of  articles  which  can  be  sucked  up  ;  and 
the  replacement  of  milk  by  "  acorns  "  of  bread  and  sugar  should 
be  gradual.  Soft  meats  may  be  given.  If  the  infant  per- 
sistently seek  for  the  breast,  crying  for  it,  the  best  thing  is  to 
prepare  a  paste  to  apply  to  the  breast,  made  of  four  ounces  of 
myrrh  and  smoothly  ground  pennyroyal.

712.  Regimen  up  to  Dentition.  To  sum  up,  we  may  say 
that  the  regimen  of  the  infant  is  to  be  humectant,  corresponding 
to  its  temperament  at  this  period,  for  this  is  necessary  both  for 
nutrition  and  growth.  The  infant  is  also  to  be  exercised  gently 
correspondingly  to  the  needs  of  nature,  and  especially  during  the 
later  period  of  infancy.

[The  word  "  exercise  "  includes  lulling  with  music  and  singing  lullabies  • 
exercises  are  to  be  followed  by  gentle  rubbing  ;  and  after  that  comes  the  bath' 
which  must  not  be  cold.     (Aegineta.)]

When  the  child  begins  to  creep  about,  it  must  not  be 
allowed  to  make  strenuous  efforts,  or  be  encouraged  to  walk  or 
sit  erect  before  the  natural  desire  to  do  so  appears  ;  otherwise 
there  may  be  injury  done  to  its  legs  and  back.  When  it  first 
sits  up  or  creeps  over  the  ground,  it  is  best  to  place  it  upon  a 
smooth  skin,  to  prevent  injury  by  roughness  in  the  floor.  Bits 
of  stick  or  any  objects  able  to  pierce  or  cut  the  skin  must  be  kept 
out  of  its  way.  Care  must  be  taken  that  it  does  not  fall  off  some 
elevated  place.713.  Hygiene  of  Dentition.  When  the  canine  teeth  are  about 
to  appear,  the  infant  must  not  be  allowed  to  chew  at  anything 
hard  lest  the  material  from  which  these  teeth  need  to  be  made 
should  become  dissolved  by  the  processes  of  mastication.  The 
gums  should  be  rubbed  with  hare's  brain  and  cock's  fat,  as  this 
will  _  help  ^ their  eruption.  After  the  appearance  of  the  teeth, 
the  infant's  head  and  neck  should  be  rubbed  with  oil  which  has 
been  shaken  up  with  hot  water  [to  cleanse  it],  and  a  little  of  the 
same  oil  may  be  instilled  into  the  ears.

As  soon  as  the  infant  is  able  to  bite  with  its  teeth,  it  will 
show  this_  by  trying  to  bite  its  own  finger.  It  should  then  be 
given  a  stick  of  not  too  dry  liquorice  root  or  inspissated  Spanish

372  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

juice  to  chew  at,  for  this  will  be  beneficial  at  this  period  and  will 
prevent  ulcers  from  forming  in  the  gums  and  dull  the  pam  [and 
irritation  of  teething].  The  gums  may  also  be  rubbed  with  salt 
and  honey  to  relieve  the  pain.

When  the  teeth  are  fully  out,  the  infant  may  be  given  a 
stick  of  liquorice  or  root  of  liquorice  (not  too  dry)  to  bite  at. 
When  the  canines  are  fully  out  it  is  good  also  to  rub  the  neck 
with  some  form  of  sweet  oil.  Later  still,  when  the  infant  begins 
to  talk,  its  teeth  should  be  rubbed,  especially  at  their  bases.

3.      Concerning  the  Diseases  of  Infancy3.      Concerning  the  Diseases  of  Infancy

714.  The  chief  mode  of  treating  infants  is  by  controlling 
the  wet-nurse.  If  there  should  be  any  suspicion  of  plethora  of 
blood  in  her,  bleeding  or  cupping  should  be  done.  If  there  be 
plethora  of  some  other  humour,  that  must  be  drained  also. 
When  it  is  necessary  to  bind,  or  to  loosen  the  bowels,  or  to  pre- 
vent the  ascent  of  vapours  to  the  head,  or  to  rectify  the  respiratory 
organs,  or  to  correct  an  intemperament,  the  method  of  treating 
this  is  by  way  of  the  food  "and  drink  [of  the  nurse].  If  it  becomes 
necessary  [for  the  nurse]  to  procure  plentiful  evacuation  by  the 
bowel,  or  if  this  occurs  spontaneously  ;  if  emesis  needs  to  be 
procured,  or  if  vomiting  occurs  spontaneously,  it  is  best  to  give 
the  infant  to  someone  else  to  nurse  during  that  period.

715*        DISORDERS    DURING    DENTITION

Inflammation  ■  of  the  gums  (gingivitis)  may  occur  during 
dentition.  Inflammations,  may  also  occur  in  the  ligamentous 
structures  round  the  mandibles,  causing  trismus.  In  such 
cases  one  should  gently  press  the  parts  with  the  finger  and  rub 
in  one  of  the  oils  named  in  the  section  dealing  with  the  eruption 
of  the  teeth,  or  honey  which  has  been  well  mixed  with  oil  of 
chamomile,  or  with  turpentine  oil.  One  may  also  pour  warm 
water,  in  which  chamomile  and  dill  have  been  boiled,  over  the 
top  of  the  head  from  a  height.    (Cf.  414.)

For  burning  fain  in  the  gums  apply  oil  and  wax  as  an  epitheme 
or  use  salted  flesh  which  is  a  little  "  high."For  burning  fain  in  the  gums  apply  oil  and  wax  as  an  epitheme 
or  use  salted  flesh  which  is  a  little  "  high."

TAegineta  advises  rubbing  the  gums  frequently  with  the  finger  alone  or  anointed 
with  fowl-grease,  while  the  infant  is  in  the  bath.  When  the  teeth  are  just  about  to 
show  anoint  the  head  with  sweet  oil  and  drop  some  into  the  ears.  He  recommends 
the  amount  of  food  to  be  increased,  and  advocates  warm  baths.  For  itching  of  the 
gums,  he  says  the  flesh  of  an  old  pickle  will  relieve.]

Diarrhoea.  This  is  specially  apt  to  arise  during  dentition. 
Some  account  for  it  as  due  to  the  sucking  in  by  the  infant  of

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  373

salty  sanious  effete  matters  from  its  own  gums  along  with  the 
milk.  ^  But  it  is  possible  that  this  is  not  true  ;  that  the  real 
cause  is  an  interference  with  the  natural  faculty,  so  that  digestion 
is  imperfect  and  pain  results.  It  is  just  this  that  hinders  diges- 
tion in  feebly  constituted  infants.

Cf.  Modern  teaching  :  "  Vomiting  and  diarrhoea  must  always  be  looked  upon 
as  due  to  some  cause  other  than  dentition,  particularly  to  improper  feeding  — 
Elder  and  Fowler. lso  °'If  it  is  only  slight,  you  will  not  be  asked  to  treat  it.  If 
the  parents  are  afraid  it  will  become  injurious,  leading  to  wasting, 
one  would  treat  by  applying  rose-seed,  caraway,  anise,  and 
celery  (parsley-)  seed  [sprinkled  on  wool  :  Aeg.]  to  the  abdomen, 
or  apply  a  plaster  prepared  with  caraway  and  roses  infused  in 
vinegar,  or  with  frumenty  boiled  in,  vinegar.  Should  this  fail, 
use  a  sixth  part  of  a  dram  of  goat-cheese  in  .cold  water,  taking 
care  to  prevent  curdling  of  the  milk  in  the  infant's  stomach 
by  replacing  the  milk  for  that  day  with  the  soft  yolk  of  an  egg, 
or  with  morsels  of  bread  boiled  in  water,  or  ground  wheat  boiled 
in  water.      [Hot  desiccants  may  be  used  :    Aeg.]

Constipation  during  dentition.  The  treatment  is  by  a  sup- 
pository made  with  well-cooked  honey,  or  with  pennyroyal,  or 
with  iris-root  (in  the  natural  state  or  after  scalding).  A  little 
honey  may  be  given  in  the  food.  As  much  oil  of  turpentine 
as  makes  the  bulk  of  a  chick-pea  may  be  gently  rubbed  over  the 
abdomen  ;  or  olive-oil  ;  or  some  ox-bile  may  be  applied  over 
the  thigh  or  over  the  navel.  Or  maidenweed  (bakhuri  maryam) 
may  be  applied.  [Or  the  abdomen  may  be  anointed  with  mint 
pounded  in  honey  :    Aeg.]

716.     Convulsions  during  dentition.     This  is  generally  due 
to  fermentative  changes  in  the  digestion,  aided  by  nervousness,  " 
especially  if  the  baby  is  over-fat  and  humid  in  constitution.    The 
treatment  is  to  use  oil  of  iris,  lily,  alkanna,  or  mallow.      [Aetius 
advises  against  figs  and  acid  foods.]Grave  convulsions  during  dentition  ;  "  tetanus."  This  is 
treated  by  water  in  which  cucumber  [or  heliotrope]  has  been 
boiled  ;  or  by  oil  of  violets  admixed  with  oil  of  cucumber  [or 
oil  of  privet  :    i.e.  calefacients  :    Aeg.].

If  there  is  reason  to  suppose  that  the  convulsions  are  due 
to  dryness,  because  they  develop  after  fevers,  or  after  severe 
diarrhoea,  and  because  they  gradually  become  more  pronounced, 
then  the  joints  should  receive  an  inunction  with  violet-oil  (alone 
or  beaten  up  with  a  little  white  wax),  and  violet-oil  may  be  applied 
to  ^the  head.  The  same  things  should  be  employed  vigorously 
if  "  dry  "  tetanus  develop.

374  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

To  the  lay  mind,  all  forms  of  gastro-intestinal  catarrh,  skin  eruptions  and 
nervous  phenomena  (particularly  convulsions)  are  attributed  to  dentition.  '  Beyond 
admitting  that  there  is  usually  some  congestion  of  the  gums,  with  exaggerated 
salivation,  some  loss  of  appetite,  restlessness,  temporary  rise  of  temperature,  and 
general  uneasiness,  Elder  and  Fowler  {loo.  cit.)  teach  that  these  various  phenomena 
depend  chiefly  on  rickets,  and  nutritional  errors.  There  is  however  something 
to  be  said  for  the  lay  view.

After  the  teeth  have  appeared,  Aegineta  recommends  the  infant  to  be  allowed 
to  bite  at  a  piece  of  nearly  dry  decorticated  iris  root.  Butter  and  honey  should 
also  be  inuncted.717.  Incessant  crying^  with  loss  of  sleep.  The  mouth  is 
constantly. whimpering.  [The  causes  of  persistent  crying  are  : 
heat  ;  cold  ;  fleas  ;  gnats  ;  hunger  ;  thirst  ;  retained  urine — 
for  which  give  melon-seed  and  julep  to  both  nurse  and  child  ; 
retained  faeces — for  which  give  the  nurse  laxatives,  herbs,  olive 
oil,  prunes  :  Haly  Abbas.]  For  this  condition  it  is  necessary 
to  make  it  sleep  if  possible,  by  giving  poppy  bark  and  seed, 
and  oil  and  lettuce  and  apply  poppy  oil  to  the  temples  and  vertex. 
If  this  does  not  suffice  prepare  the  following  medicament  :  Take 
bugle  seed,  juniper  berry,  white  poppy,  yellow  poppy,  linseed, 
celandine  seed,  purslane,  plantain  seed,  lettuce  seed,  fennel  seed, 
aniseed,  caraway  ;  some  of  each  is  roasted  little  by  little  ;  then 
all  are  rubbed  together.  Add  one  part  of  fried^  fleawort  seed 
which  is  not  powdered.  Mix  the  whole  with  a  like  amount  of 
sugar  and  give  two  "  drams  "  as  a  potion.

If  it  is  desired  to  make  it  still  stronger,  one  should  add  an 
amount  of  opium  equal  to  a  third  part  of  it  or  less.

718.  Night-terrors.  These  are  often  due  to  over-repletion 
with  food,  which  undergoes  putrefactive  change.  The  stomach 
is  aware  of  this.  An  injurious  effect  passes  on  from  the  sensitive 
faculty  to  the  formative  and  imaginative  faculties,  wherefore  the 
terrifying  visions  arise.  It  is  necessary  therefore  to  see  that  the 
stomach  is  not  full  at  bed-time  ;  honey  should  be  given  the 
infant  to  lick,  and  in  this  way  it  will  digest  that  which  is  in  the 
stomach  and  displace  it.

719.  Water  on  the  Brain.  This  is  discussed  under  the 
heading  of  diseases  of  the  head.719.  Water  on  the  Brain.  This  is  discussed  under  the 
heading  of  diseases  of  the  head.

Inflammation  in  the  brain.  Siriasis.  There  is  pain  in  the 
eyes  and  the  throat,  and  the  face  becomes  yellow.  [The  body  is 
dry  ;  the  fontanelles  are  depressed,  the  orbits  sunken  :  Aeg.] 
Hence  the  brain  must  be  rendered  cool  and  moist  by  the  use  of 
cortex  of  cucumber,  parings  of  gourd,  juice  of  garden  nightshade, 
and  especially  purslane  juice,  and  rose  oil  with  a  little  vinegar, 
and  rose  oil  with  egg-yolk.     Each  of  these  is  constantly  changed.

720.  Affections  of  the  mouth.  Aphthous  stomatitis. 
Aphthae.      Thrush. — Aphthae   are   plentiful   when   the   lining

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  31$

membrane  of  the  tongue  and  mouth  is  too  delicate  to  bear 
touching,  even  by  the  wateriness  of  the  milk,  for  it  is  this  that 
is  injurious  to  it,  and  gives  rise  to"  the  aphthae.  The  condition 
is  worse,  and  dangerous  to  life,  if  they  remain  immature  and 
black  like  charcoal.  The  condition  is  more  favourable  if  they 
are  white  or  yellow.  The .  treatment  is  to  employ  some  such 
gentle  medication  as -is  described  in  special  treatises  on  the 
subject.  Sometimes  triturated  violets  are  sufficient  by  them- 
selves ;  sometimes  they  need  mixing  with  roses,  a  little  saffron 
and  carob-bean.  Or,  again,  lettuce-juice,  nightshade  juice, 
purslane  juice  [and  endive-juice]  may 'suffice.  If  treatment  is 
still  resisted,  use  bruised  liquorice  root.

Galen  advised  cooling  astringent  washes  if  the  mucous  membrane  is  red  • 
more  refngerant  washes  if  it  is  yellow  ;  detergents  if  it  is  white  anT  according  to 
Alsaharavms,  a  .powder  of  myrtle,  saffron,  and  sugar.  The  strongest  dlscutifnts 
(sandarach,  rose-'od)  are  needed,  if  the  mucous  membrane  is  H       disc^ientsWhen  aphthae  are  associated  with  boils  in  the  gums  it  is 
beneficial  to  use  myrrh,  gall,  frankincense  bark,  thoroughly 
ground  up  and  mixed  with  honey.  An  acetous  rob*  of  mulberries 
and  a  rob  of  unripe  grapes  may  suffice.  Sometimes  it  is  advan- 
tageous to  bathe  the  gums  with  honey-water  and  wine  (or,  syrup 
and  honey)  and  follow  this  up  with  some  of  the  desiccatives  we 
have  named.

If  a  stronger  (astringent)  medicament  is  required,  use  the 
leaf-veins  and  bark  of  pomegranate,  and  pomegranate  blossoms 
and  sumach,  six  drams  of  each  ;    galls,  four  drams  ;    aniseed 
two  drams.     Rub  them  together  and  thoroughly  powder  them 
up.     Then  dust  this  upon  the  gums.

721.  The  eye.  Prominence  of  the  eyes.  Apply  juice  of 
boxthorn  made  with  milk  ;  then  bathe  with  water  in  which 
chamomile  and  mountain  balm  have  been  boiled.

_       Whiteness  over  the  pupils,   due  to  much  crying,  is  treated 
with  nightshade  juice.

If  the  eyelids  are  affected  with  blepharitis,  owing  to  constant 
crying,  treat  this  also  with  nightshade  juice.

722.  The  ear.      Watery  discharge  from  the  ears.     This  is 
due  to  an  undue  degree  of  moisture  in  the  body,  especially  in 
the  brain.    An  ointment  is  prepared  with  wool-fat,  honey,  wine 
and  a  little  alum,  or  nitre  or  saffron.     This  is  then  introduced 
into  the  ears  with  a  syringe.     Or  it  may  suffice  to  dip  wool  into

ZA°UI  W17e'  °r  int°  wIne  to  whIch  a  littIe  saffron  has  been 
added,  and  place  this  in  the  ears.

Lit.  juice  made  thick.

37 6  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINEZA°UI  W17e'  °r  int°  wIne  to  whIch  a  littIe  saffron  has  been 
added,  and  place  this  in  the  ears.

Lit.  juice  made  thick.

37 6  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Earache.  This  may  be  due  to  flatulence,  or  to  undue 
moistness.  It  is  to  be  treated  by  juice  of  boxthorn,  origanum, 
salt,  white  sugar,  lentils,  myrrh,  colocynth  seeds  and  cedar 
[or,  savin]  seeds.  Any  of  these  should  be  digested  in  oil  and 
instilled  drop  by  drop.  ,

723.  Disturbance  of  the  breathing.  Difficulty  oj 
breathing.  Anoint  the  roots  of  the  ears  and  tongue  with  oil. 
It  would  also  be  very  helpful  to  press  the  tongue  down  so  as  to 
cause  the  infant  to  vomit.  Warm  water  may  also  be  dropped 
into  the  mouth  drop  by  drop,  and  a  little  linseed  and  honey  be

given  it  to  suck.  .  .     .

Abnormal  snoring.  This  is  noticed  when  the  infant  is  in 
very  deep  sleep.  Give  linseed  ground  up  in  honey,  or  ground 
caraway'  in  honey,  to  lick.

Snorting,  says  Aegineta,  is  due  to  improper  food  The  stom ach  beco mes 
loaded  with  phlegh.  A  linseed  linctus  is  to  be  glven,  or  honey.  If  that  does  not 
suffice  to  stop  it,  vomiting  is  induced  as  above  nreredine  since  the

(Laryngismus  stridulus  may  correspond  to  this  and  the  preceding,  since  xne 
laryJSmlsTs^pt  to  occur  during  sleep,  and  is  aggravated  by prying  .whereas 
stridor  may  disappear  under  both  tliese  conditions.  The  question  of  adenoids 
would  also  come  to  mind).

Constant  sneezing.  This  may  be  a  sign  of  cerebral  disorder. 
In  such  a  case  this  must  be  treated,  cooling  the  inflammation, 
by  inunction  with  infrigidant  juices  and.  oils.  If  there  be  no 
inflammation,  some  mountain  balm  may  be  insufflated  into  the 
nostrils.Loss  of  voice  in  infants  is  due  to  constipation.  Give  cabbage-juice  by  the 
mouth  or  rectum  (Aeg.).

724  Cough  and  Coryza.  Some  people  advise  for  this  that 
the  infant's  head  should  be  laved  in  plenty  of  warm  water  and 
that  plenty  of  honey  should  be  smeared  over  the  tongue.  After 
that,  the  root  of  the  tongue  should  be  depressed  to  enable  the 
infant  to  expel  the  abundant  phlegm  by  vomiting,  which  will 
secure  recovery.  Small  doses  of  the  following  demulcents  may 
also  be  given  daily  in  new  milk  :  gum  arabic,  gum  tragacanth, 
quince  seed,  liquorice  juice,  brown  sugar.

725.  Digestive  disturbance.  Weakness  of  the  stomach. 
The  abdomen  should  be  anointed  with  musk  and  rose  or  myrtle 
water.  Give  a  drink  containing  quince  juice  and  a  little  clove 
or  nutmeg,  or  three-eighths  of  a  dram  of  nutmeg  with  a  small 
quantity  of  quince-juice.  .

Severe  vomiting.  This  may  be  treated  with  three  grams 
of  clove.    A  plaster  containing  weak  anti-emetics  may  be  applied

over  the  stomach.

Hiccough.     For  this  administer  coco-nut  with  sugar.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  377

726.  Flatulent  distension.  The  treatment  has  already  been 
given  in  the  section  on  diseases  of  the  head.  The  following 
very  useful  measure  may  be  here  mentioned.  Take  equal  parts 
of  origanum,_  castoreum  and  caraway.  Rub  them  up  and  mix 
together.     Give  the  weight  of  three  barley  grains  in  a  draught.

Colic.  The  infant  writhes  and  cries.  Hot  water  appli- 
cations should  be  made  to  the  abdomen,  using  also  plenty  of 
warm  oil  and  a  little  wax.Colic.  The  infant  writhes  and  cries.  Hot  water  appli- 
cations should  be  made  to  the  abdomen,  using  also  plenty  of 
warm  oil  and  a  little  wax.

Griping.  This  is  due  to  cold.  Beneficial  for  this  condition 
is  the  following  •:  three  drams  of  each  of  nasturtium  and  caraway; 
grind  them  together.  Pass  through  a  sieve.  Intersperse  them 
with  old  cow  butter.     Give  as  a  draught  with  cold  water.

727.  Prolapsus  ani.  Give  pomegranate  bark,  fresh  myrrh, 
inner  rinds  of  acorns  (or,  chestnuts),  dried  roses,  burnt  horn' 
alum  of  Yamen,  nails  of  goats,  pomegranate  blossoms  (unopened) 
and  nails  of  fowls.  Take  equal  parts  and  thoroughly  boil  them 
together  in  water  until  all  their  virtue  has  come  out.  Then  give 
as  an  enema,  tepid.

[Aegineta  advises  applications  of  tepid  brine  or  salt  water.     In  modern  words  • 
give  astringent  enemata.]

728.  Hernia.  When  a  child  cries  very  much,  a  swelling 
may  form  in  the  groin  or  navel.  This  is  a  hernia.  Some  advise 
that  it  should  be  rubbed  with  cardamon  (bishop's  weed)  and 
sprinkled  with  egg-white,  a  thin  bandage  being  applied  tightly 
over  the  place.  Others  advise  burnt  bitter  lupin,  as  an  infusion 
in  wine  and  myrrh,  placed  over  the  part.  Stronger  remedies 
are  :  hot  styptics  (astringents),  such  as  myrrh  ;  cypress  bark  ; 
cypress  fruit  ;  aloes  ;  acacia  fruit.  [Compresses  of  alum,  galls, 
etc.  :    Aetius.]     See  also  the  special  chapter  on  the  subject.

729.  Formation  of  an  inflammatory  mass  between  the  throat 
and  stomach  [=  retro-pharyngeal  abscess?].  This  sometimes 
spreads  to  the^  muscles  and  cervical  vertebrae.  The  treatment 
is  to  cause  the  infant's  bowels  to  act,  using  a  suppository.  After 
that,  give  mulberry  rob  and  the  like.An  inflammatory  mass  may  form  in  the  navel,  especially 
after  the  cord  has  separated.  In  this  case  one  should  use  Celtic 
spice  and_  turpentine  ;  dissolve  them  in  rape-seed  oil.  They 
may  be  given  internally  or  applied  as  a  plaster  over  the  navel.

730.  Worms.  Round  worms  are  very  injurious  when  they 
arise  in  the  small  intestine.  Thread-worms  are  usually  round 
the  anus.  Flat  worms  are  rare.  Round  worms  are  treated  with 
absinthe  water  (wormwood  of  Pontus),  of  which  a  little  is  given 
m  milk,  according  to  its  concentration.     It  may  be  necessary

378  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

to  apply  a  plaster  over  the  abdomen,  made  up  of  Kabul  rice, 
myrobalan,  ox-bile,  and  colocynth  pulp.  To  treat  threadworms 
take  one  part  of  each  of  elecampane  and  madder  [chelidonium  ; 
a  kind  of  cucumber  :  (other  readings)]  ;  add  sugar  equal  in 
bulk  to  the  whole.     Give  as  a  draught  with  hot  water.

731.  Disorders  of  the  Skin. — [Aegineta  gives  the  follow- 
ing advice  : — (i)  Attend  to  the  diet  of  the  wet-nurse.  Give  sweet 
articles  of  food.  (2)  Attend  to  the  diet  of  the  child  ;_  (a)  this 
should  not  be  too  rich  or  too  spare;  {b)  avoid  constipation:  add 
a  little  honey  to  the  food;  or,  should  this  prove  inadequate,  add 
turpentine  to  the  bulk  of  a  chick-pea;  (c)  avoid  looseness  cf  the 
bowels:  add  millet  to  the  food.]'

Furunculosis.  Pimples  forming  all  over  the  body.  If  they 
are  ulcerating  and  black  it  is  a  fatal  sign.  If  they  resemble 
aphthae,  it  is  also  mortal,  especially  when  they  spread  out.  If 
they  are  white,  it  is  more  hopeful.  If  red,  it  is  also  more  hopeful. 
If  they  come  out  freely,  it  is  a  better  sign.The  treatment  in  all  cases  consists  in  using  fine  desiccants 
dissolved  in  the  bath-water,  such  remedies  as  rose,  myrtle, 
mastic-leaves,  tamarisk,  and  their  respective  oils  being  boiled 
in  the  water.  [Other  remedies  recommended  by  Alsaharavius  : 
lotions  of  marjoram,  mint,  centaury  ;  ointments  of  spuma 
argenti,  ceruse,  armenian  bole,  sulphur,  mercury,  almonds.]

If  the  furuncles  are  healing,  they  should  be  left  alone  until 
they  are  mature  ;    and  they  are  then  treated.

If  they  are  ulcerated,  they  need  an  ointment  of  ceruse.  They 
may  need  bathing  with  honey-water  and  a  little  nitre,  as  one  does

aphthae.

If  they  scab  over  it  will  be  necessary  to  use  something 
stronger.  One  therefore  bathes  them  with  aqueous  borax  mixed 
with  milk,  to  enable  it  to  be  borne.

If  they  become  vesicular,  they  should  be  steamed,  and  have 
water  poured  over  them  in  which  myrtle  and  rose  and  bogrush 
(schoenus),  quinsywort-  (asperula)  and  the  (young)  leaves  of  the 
mastic  tree  have  been  boiled.

For  vesicular  eruptions,  Rhazes  advises  :  (i)  decoction  of  dates  and  figs  with 
fennel-water  ;  (2)  when  the  rash  is  fully  out,  give  rose-water  baths,  myrtle-water 
baths,  and  then  rub  the  skin  with  oil  of  roses.

Intertrigo.  Apply  ground  myrtle  as  a  dusting  powder,  or 
use  powdered  liquorice  root  [or  iris  root]  ;  or  finely  ground-up 
.rose  or  galangale,  or  barley  flour,  or  lentil  flour.

Pruritus.— Foment  and  anoint  with  refined  oil,  in  which  a  little  wax  has  been 
melted  (Aeg.).  Correct  the  acrimony  of  the  mother  s  milk  (Alsaharavius^  Stop 
all  sweets  and  salts  in  the  mother's  diet,  because  they  inflame  the  blood.  Immerse 
the  child  in  a  bath  of  mallows,  pearl  barley,  fenugreek,  gourds,  etc.  (Rhazes).

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  379THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  379

732.  Fevers.  In  this  case  it  is  best  to  treat  the  nurse 
by  giving  her  such  remedies  as  pomegranate  juice  mixed  with 
oxymel  and  honey  and  succus  citruli,  and  a  little  camphor  and 
sugar  [or,  acetous  syrup  of  pomegranate  and  honey  and  cucumber 
juice,  with  a  little  camphor  and  sugar].  Then  induce  sweating 
by  using  fresh  reeds,  which  are  squeezed  so  that  their  juices  can 
be  applied  to  the  head  and  feet,  covering  these  parts  therewith.

4.     The  Regimen  from   Infancy  to  Adolescence

733.  The  great  principle  here  is  the  inculcation  of  control 
of  the  emotions.  One  should  take  care  that  they  do  not  give  way 
to  anger  and  fear,  or  be  oppressed  by  despondency,  or  suffer 
from  sleeplessness.  They  should  therefore  be  allowed  that  which 
is  pleasing  and  appetizing  and  one  should  avoid  giving  them 
anything  arousing  disgust.

There  are  two  useful  objects  attained  in  this  way.  The  first 
is  that  the  mind  grows  from  its  very  start  accustomed  to  favour- 
able emotions,  and  develops  a  fixed  habit  for  good.  The  second 
is  that  the  body  is  also  benefited.  For  just  as  bad  habits  of  thought 
supervene  on  intemperament  of  the  body,  so  also  a  physical 
intemperament  may  be  traced  to  habits  of  mind  which  are 
contrary  to  the  ideal.

Anger  is  a  strong  calefacient.  Despondency  is  a  desiccant. 
Torpor  relaxes  (retards)  the  sensitive  faculties,  and  causes  the 
constitution  to  tend  towards  the  phlegmatic  type.  Therefore 
in  safeguarding  the  emotions  the  health  of  the  mind  and  body 
are  at  the  same  time  maintained.734.  When  the  child  awakes,  it  should  first  have  a  bath. 
He  should  then  be  allowed  to  play  for  an  hour.  Then  he  should 
have  his  breakfast.  Then  he  should  be  left  to  play  for  a  long  time. 
Then  he  should  have  another  bath.  Then  he  should  have  a 
hearty  [light  :  Aeg.]  meal,  but  he  must  not  be  allowed  to  drink 
water  with  his  meal,  because  otherwise  insufficiently  digested 
chyle  will  become  absorbed  and  disperse  all  over  the  body.

735.  At  the  age  of  six,  he  may  be  given  tuition  by  a  master 
[who  is  of  mild  and  benevolent  disposition  :  Aeg.],  who  will 
teach  him  step  by  step  and  in  order  [cheerfully,  without  con- 
straint].' He  should  not  be  compelled  to  stay  continuously  in 
school  [Relaxation  of  the  mind  contributes  to  the  growth  of 
the  body  :  Aeg.]  At  this  age,  bathing  and  rest  should  be  less 
frequent,  and  the  exercise  before  meals  should  be  increased.

Wine  must  not  be  allowed.  This  is  specially  true  if  the 
temperament  is  hot  and  moist,  because  the  injurious  effect  of

38o  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

wine — namely  the  generation  of  bilious  humour,  as  is  seen  in 
topers — readily  influences  the  child.  The  advantage  in  wine  is 
that  it  excites  the  secretion  of  urine,  thus  removing  the  bilious 
humour  with  it,  and  that  it  moistens  the  joints.  Neither  of  these 
effects  are  necessary  at  this  age,  because  his  bilious  humour  is 
not  so  plentiful  as  to  need  helping  out  of  the  body,  nor  do  the 
joints  need  moistening.  He  should  therefore  be  allowed  as 
much  sweet  limpid  water  to  drink  as  he  wishes.This  is  the  programme  up  to  thirteen  years  of  age.  Care 
is  daily  exercised  towards  lessening  the  humidities,  and  increasing 
the  dryness  of  the  tissues,  and  hardening  the  body.  [Grammar  is 
taught  now  :    Aeg.]

The  rule  therefore  is  to  allow  light  exercise,  and  to  avoid 
whatever  entails  toil,  between  boyhood  and  adolescence.  After 
this  age,  the  regimen  is  that  usual  for  maintaining  the  health 
(in  early  manhood).

From  14-21,  use  gymnastic  exercise  to  strengthen  the  body  and  prevent 
indulgence  in  carnal  desires.  Wine  should  be  allowed  sparingly.  Pursue  mathe- 
matics and  begin  philosophy  (Aegineta).

We  may  therefore  pass  on  to  the  subject  of  exercise,  first 
discussing  the  essentials  for  the  regimen  of  young  adults,  and 
the  subject  of  gymnastic  exercise.

THESIS  II

THE      REGIMEN      PROPER      FOR     THE      PHYSICALLY

MATURED.

§  241.— The  Right  Use  of  Adult  Life.

How  happy  is  he  who  takes  advantage  of  earlv  days,  and  pays  his  debt  (to  God)—

Those  days  when  he  has  power,  health,  energy  of  heart,  and  strength  ■

That  state  of  youth,  like  a  verdant  and  fresh  garden,  yielding  produce  and  fruit

unstintingly ; 
The  springs  of  strength  and  eager  desire  flowing,  and  the  soil  of  the  body  verdant

through  them.

Masnavi, "  p.  107.unstintingly ; 
The  springs  of  strength  and  eager  desire  flowing,  and  the  soil  of  the  body  verdant

through  them.

Masnavi, "  p.  107.

The  real  object  of  conserving  the  energies  of  the  body  lies  in 
the  attainment  of  spiritual  development.  The  actual  bodily  occu- 
pation is  itself,  if  we  will  it  so,  the  practical  means  of  that  attainment. 
The  energy  of  will  to  associate  this  means  of  worship  with  the 
subjugation  of  the  vices  inherent  in  our  frailty  must  be  employed 
during  the  early  years  if  we  are  not  to  find  ourselves  in  old  age 
powerless  to  advance  along  the  critical  stages  of  the  journey  to  the 
only  true  Goal.  This  principle  underlies  the  idea  of  "  right 
Regimen."

The  soil  of  the  "  body  "  and  the  "  desires  "  having  been  consistently  tilled 
and  purified  and  tended,  the  coming  of  old  age  cannot  but  also  reveal  spiritual 
blossoms  full  of  delight  for  others.     "  Do  not  then  wait,"  says  the  Masnavi 
x  "till

The  soil  becomes  barren,  dry  and  poor  :

Never  do  fine  plants  grow  from  barren  soil ;

When  the  water  of  energy,  and  the  water  of  eager  desire  cease

He  derives  no  benefit  from  himself  or  from  others  ;

The  eyebrows  hanging  over  like  a  crupper-strap  ;

The  eyes  watery  and  dim  ;

The  face  through  old  age  like  the  back  of  a  lizard  ;

The  articulation  and  taste  defective,  and  the  teeth  useless  ;

The  day  late,  the  ass  lame,  and  the  road  long  ;

The  workshop  (i.e.,  the  physical  body)  gone  to  ruin,

And  the  work  disorganized,

The  roots  of  a  bad  nature  fixed  firmly  in  him,

And  the  power  to  tear  them  up  diminished."

{Ibid.,  107-8.)

A  picture  admirable  of  the  state  of  affairs  in  old  age  ;    and  also 
full  of  significance  in  regard  to  the  well-being  of  the  soul

381{Ibid.,  107-8.)

A  picture  admirable  of  the  state  of  affairs  in  old  age  ;    and  also 
full  of  significance  in  regard  to  the  well-being  of  the  soul

381

3 82  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

i .    The  General  Regimen  for  the  Athletic  Age.   Collective 
Discourse  "upon  Bodily  Exercise

736.

INCE  the  regimen  for  maintaining  health 
consists '  essentially  in  the  regulation  of 
(i)~  exercise,  (2)  food,  and  (3)  sleep,  we  may 
begin  our  discourse  with  the  subject  of 
(gymnastic)  exercise.  We  may  define  exer- 
cise as  voluntary  movement  entailing  deep 
and     hurried    respiration.

Once  we  direct  the  attention  towards 
regulating  exercise  as  to  amount  and  time,  we  shall  find  there  is 
no  need  for  such  medicaments  as  are  ordinarily  required  for 
remedying  diseases  dependent  on  [abnormal]  matters,  or  diseases 
of  temperament  consequent  upon  such.  This  is  true  provided 
the  rest  of  the  regimen  is  appropriate  and  proper.737.  We  know  that  this  must  be  so  when  we  reflect  how, 
in  regard  to  nutriment,  our  health  depends  on  the  nutriment 
being  appropriate  for  us  and  regulated  in  quantity  and  quality. 
For  not  one  of  the  aliments  which  are  capable  of  nourishing  the 
body  is  converted  into  actual  nutriment  in  its  entirety.  In  every 
case  digestion  leaves  something  untouched,  and  nature  takes 
care  to  have  that  evacuated.  Nevertheless,  the  evacuation 
which  nature  accomplishes  is  not  a  complete  one.  Hence  at 
the  end  of  each  digestion  .there  is  some  superfluity  left  over. 
Should  this  be  a  frequent  occurrence,  repetition  would  lead  to 
further  aggregation  until  something  measurable  has  accu- 
mulated. As  a  result,  harmful  effete  substances  would  form 
and  injure  various  parts  of  the  body.  When  they  undergo 
decomposition,  putrefactive  diseases  arise.*  Should  they  be 
strong  in  quality,  they  will  give  rise  to  an  intemperament  ;  and 
if  they  should  increase  in  quantity  they  would  set  up  the  sym- 
ptoms of  plethora  which  have  already  been  described.  Flowing 
to  some  member,  they  will  result  in  an  inflammatory  mass,  and 
their  "  vapours  "  will  destroy  the  temperament  of  the  substantial 
basis  of  the  breath.

That  is  the  reason  why  we  must  be  careful  to  evacuate 
these  substances.

Their  evacuation  is  usually  not  completely  accomplished 
without  the  aid  of  toxic  medicines,  for  these  break  up  the  nature 
of  the  effete  substances.     This  can  be  achieved  only  by  toxic

*  Bacterial  infections.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  383*  Bacterial  infections.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  383

agents,   although  the  drinking  of  them  is  to  a  certain  extent 
deleterious  to  our  nature.      As   Hippocrates  says,    "medicine 
purges  and  ages."  '  More  than  this,  the  discharge  of  superfluous 
humour  entails  the  loss  of  a  large  part  of  the  natural  humidities 
and  ot  the  breath,  which  is  the  substance  of  life.     And  all  this 
is  at  the  expense,  of  the  strength  of  the  principal  and  auxiliary 
members,  and  therefore  they  are  weakened  thereby.     These  and 
other  things  account  for  the  difficulties  incident  to  plethora 
whether  they  remain  behind  in  the  body  or  are  evacuated  from  it' 
Now  exercise  is  that  agent  which  most  surely  prevents  the 
accumulation  of  these  matters,  and  prevents  plethora.    The  other 
forms  of  regimen  assist  it.     It  is  this  exercise  which  renews  and 
revives   the  innate  heat,   and  imparts  the   necessary  lightness 
(airiness  !)  to  the  body.     For  it  causes  the  subtile  heat  to  be 
increased  and  daily  disperses  whatever  effete  substances  have 
accumulated  ;    the  movements  of  the  body  help  to  expel  them 
conveying  them  to  those  parts  of  the  body  whence  they  can 
readily  leave  it.     Hence  the  effete  matters  are  not  allowed  to 
collect  day  after  day,  and  besides  this,  as  we  have  just  said 
exercise  causes  the  innate  heat  to  accresce,  and  keeps  the  joints 
and  ligaments  firm,  so  as  to  be  always  ready  for  service,  and  also 
free  from  injury.     It  renders  the  members  able  to  receive  the 
nutriment,  m  being  free  from  accumulated  effete  matters    Hence 
it  renders  the  attractive  faculty  active,  and  resolves  fibrosis  in 
the  tissues,  rendering  the  members  light,  and  the  humidities 
attenuated,  and  it  dilates  the  pores  of  the  skin.To  forsake  exercise  would  often  incur  the  risk  of  "  hectic  " 
because  the  faculties. of  the  members  are  impaired,  inasmuch 
as  the  deprivation  of  movement  prevents  the  access  to  them  of 
the  innate  breath.  And  this  last  is  the  real  instrument  of  life 
lor  every  one  of  the  members.

§  242.— Value  of  Exercise.— (i)  It  hardens  the  organs 
and  renders  them  fit  for  their  functions  ;  (2)  It  results  in  a  bitter 
absorption  of  food,  aids  assimilation,  and,  by  increasing  the  innate 
heat,  improves  nutrition.  (3)  It  clears  the  pores  of  the  skin.  (4) 
tL'ph^que  Sub3tanceS   through   the  l^gs.     (5)  Strength^

Vigorous  exercise  invigorates  the  muscular  and  nervous  system.

384  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

2.     The  Various  Forms  of  Exercise.

738.  There  "are  two  main  forms  of  exercise  : 
(a)  that  pertaining  to  the  ordinary  human  under- 
takings ;  (b)  that  which  is  undertaken  for  ^  its 
own  sake,  namely  for  the  advantage  accruing 
from  its  pursuit,  [i.e.,  sports,  athletics,  gym- 
nastics, etc.]

There  are  differences  between  the  two  forms.

, One  is  strong  and  powerful,  the  other  weak  and

:  ight  ;  one  is  speedy,  the  other  slow.  Athletics  implies  strenuous 
exertion,  combining  swiftness  with  energy.  Recreative  exercise, 
undertaken  for  relaxation,  implies  leisurely  movements.  There 
are  all  grades  between  these  extremes,  and  there  is  a  mean 
between  them  [called  moderate  exercise].

739.  List  of  the  forms  of  exercise,  (i)  Strenuous  forms. 
Wrestling  contests.  Boxing.  Quick  marching.  Running. 
Jumping  over  an  object  higher  than  one  foot.  _  Throwing  the 
iavelin.  Fencing.  Equitation,  or  horsemanship.  [Hunting  : 
Galen,  Rhazes.]Equitation  "strengthens  the  body,  especially  the  stomach,  more  than  any 
other  mode  of  exercise.  It  clears  the  organs  of  special  sense,  and  renders  them 
more  acute.     But  it  is  most  inimical  to  the  chest  "  (Antyllus).

The  mental  excitement  of  hunting  is  good  for  many  diseases.

Clapping  the  two  hands  alternately  before  and  behind,  with 
a  quick  motion  while  standing  on  tip-toes.  [Dancing  (Oribasius), 
Swimming  (ib)].  These  are  special  forms  of  individual  athletic 
exercises.

Dancing,  said  Hippocrates,  is  beneficial  for  amenorrhoea,  and  has  been  used 
for  procuring   abortion.

Swimming  in  the  sea.— This  has  a  warming  effect,  and  strengthens  the  body, 
and  renders  it  thin.  It  is  beneficial  for  dropsy,  skin  eruptions,  elephantiasis  But 
it  may  be  injurious  for  the  head  and  nerves.  The  body  must  be  rubbed  with  oil 
first.     (Oribasius.)

(ii)  The  following  are  recreative  or  milder  modes  of  exercise. 
Swaying  or  swinging  to  and  fro,  as  when  being  carried  in  a  litter. 
Standing  or  reclining  in  small  boats.  Fishing.  Sailing.  ''  Ges- 
tation " — that  is,  being  driven  in  horse-carriages,  or  carried  on 
camels,  or  in  palanquins,  or  a  horse-litter.

{Military  exercises'].  Among  the  more  vigorous  exercises 
are  those  performed  by  soldiers  in  camp,  in  military  sports. 
Pleth-running — where  a  man  runs  on  the  campus  from  end  to 
end  (a  sixth  of  a  stadium),  to  and  fro,  lessening  the  distance  each 
time  until  finally  he  comes  to  stand  in  the  middle.  Combat  with 
one's  shadow.     Exercise  with  the  leatherbag  [which  is  filled  with

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  385THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  385

flour  or  sand,  and  hung  to  the  level  of  the  person's  navel  ;  then 
pushing  it  forwards  as  far  as  it  will  go,  the  athlete  runs  rapidly 
backwards  to  escape  its  recoil  :    Oribasius].     Long  jumping 
High  jumping.    Play  with  a  large  ball  [inflated  skins  or  leather]. 
Play  with  a  small  wooden  ball  on  horseback  [i.e.,  polo].

^     j  "J1*-,  took  the  bat  -from  the  SaSe  and  grasped  it  firmly  •     then    mounting

sWkrt  S?r  ?vbaU  b^  Mm  fnd  gall°Ped  after  *  til1  he  reached  it  when  nl 
rPa^  lr  „  hlt  ^^l-n'iP^111  S^PPmg  the  bat-handle  the  while  ;  and  he 
ceased  not  maUmg  the  ball  till  his  hand  waxed  moist  and  his  skin,  perspiring  im- 
bibed the  medicme  from  the  wood."     (Night  4,  Burton  i.  42).  P^pirmg,  im

Stone-throwing.  Lifting  heavy .  stones  or  weights,  either 
while  standing,  or  carrying  them.  Cricket  (tibtab).  [Scaling 
ropes  _  (Aeg.).  Digging  (Aeg.)].  Running  galloping  horses 
round  m  a  circle.  [Leaping  with  a  weight  on  the  shoulders, 
which  exercises  the  spine  :    Galen.]740..  There  are  various  forms  of  wrestling.  For  instance, 
in  one  form,  one  of  the  wrestlers  grasps  the  other  and  holds  him 
by  the  tips  of  the  hands.  The  other  tries  to  get  loose  from  his 
opponent.  In  another,  .one  wrestler  grips  the  right  hand  of  his 
opponent,  and  takes  the  left  hand  with  his  left,  the  two  facing  one 
another;  then  the  one  raises  the  other  up  into  the  air,  and  turns 
him  round,  sometimes  in  the  bent  position,  sometimes  in  the 
upright  position.  (See  drawing  at  head  of  this  section.)  Again, 
the  two  wrestlers  may  press  against  one  another  breast  to  breast! 
Again,  one  holds  the  other  by  the  neck  to  pull  him  to  the  ground. 
Or,  one  may  twist  and  press  with  his  feet,  twisting  his  legs 
round  his  opponent,  or  turn  heel  to  heel.  Various  other  move- 
ments of  that  kind  are  in  vogue  among  wrestlers.

Exercises  involving  swiftness.  Interchanging  places  with 
a  partner  as  swiftly  as  possible,  each  jumping  to  and  fro,  either  in 
time  [to  music]  or  irregularly.  Another  exercise  is  carried  out 
with  two  stakes.  The  man  jumps  backwards  repeatedly  without 
moving  his  position,  and  plunges  the  two  stakes  on  either  side, 
one  pace  apart,  causing  the  one  on  the  right  to  go  to  the  left,  and 
the  one  on  the  left  to  go  to  the  right.  This  is  to  be  done  as 
swiftly  as  possible.

Exercises  involving  vigour  and  swiftness  should  alternate 
with  mild  exercises,  or  with  rest.  The  manner  of  the  exercises 
should  also  be  diversified,  so  that  they  are  not  always  performed 
in  the  same  way.

741.  There  is  an  exercise  which  is  appropriate  for  each 
individual.  Gentle  exercise  (e.g.,  swinging  :  rocking  in  a 
swing)  is  beneficial  for  those  who  are  debilitated  by  fevers,  and

2C

3 86  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE2C

3 86  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

are  convalescent,  and  can  neither  walk  nor  sit.  Also  for  those 
weakened  by  a  draught  of  hellebore  and  the  like.  Also  for  those 
whose  diaphragm  has  been  rendered  enfeebled  by  disease.  When 
it  is  done  gently,  it  tends  to  induce  sleep,  and  disperse  flatulence, 
relieves  various  disorders  of  the  head  (e.g.,  stupor,  forgetfulness)

provokes  the  appetite,  and  favours  movement  of  the  bowels.

To  ride  in  a  litter  [horse,  camel,  palanquin,  etc.]  is  appro- 
priate for  those  afflicted  with  semitertian  fever,  composite  fevers, 
phlegmatic  fevers,  those  who  are  dropsical,  or  have  gouty  pain, 
or  renal  disorder.  For  this  form  of  exercise  renders  (effete) 
matter  in  a  condition  favourable  for  excretion,  and  may  be  made 
gentle  for  the  feeble,  more  vigorous  for  the  more  vigorous. 
Greater  movement  is  produced  in  the  humours  by  riding  m  a 
carriage,  but  when  doing  so  one  should  face  backwards,  because 
this  is  better  when  the  eyesight  is  weak,  and  it  is  an  advantage 
to  have  the  shadow  in  one's  face.

Fishing.— The  absence  of  mental  and  bodily  excitement  is  good  for  certain 
conditions  (Aetius).

Boating  and  Sailing.— To  go  out  in  a  small  boat,  or  in  a 
larger  sailing  vessel  is  beneficial  for  lepra,  dropsy,  apoplexy, 
dilatation  of  the  stomach  and  coldness  of  the  stomach.  For  if  the 
person  is  near  the  shore  he  is  incited  to  vomit,  and  then  when  that 
subsides, 'the  stomach  is  benefited.  But  to  go  on  the  high  seas  is 
more  efficient  for  clearing  up  such  disorders  as  we  have  named, 
because  the  mind  is  diverted  by  successive  gladness  and  misery, 
and  the  organs  of  nutrition  receive  benefit  in  proportion  to  the 
exercise  of  the  body  itself.742.  Each  member  should  be  exercised  in  a  manner 
appropriate  for  itself,  (i)  The  hands  and  feet.  The  proper  way  to 
exercise  these  is  obvious,  (ii)  The  organs  of  respiration,  and  the 
muscles  of  the  chest.  These  may  be  exercised  in  various  ways. 
(a)  By  singing  and  "  vociferation."  The  voice  is  sometimes  deep, 
sometimes  loud,  sometimes  abrupt,  sometimes  used  in  all  modes 
in  one  exercise.  By  this  means  the  condition  of  the  mouth, 
uvula,  lips,  tongue  is  improved.  The  muscles  of  the  neck  are 
improved  in  appearance.  The  colour  of  the  skin  is  improved. 
The  chest  is  expanded.  (J?)  Exercises  in  which  the  expiration  is 
forced  and  the  breath  is  held,  [i.e.,  the  so-called  Yogi  exercises.] 
These  benefit  the  whole  body,  because  they  open  up  and  purify 
the  channels,  including  those  of  the  breath.

As  shown  in  §  123,  144,  the  channels  here  referred  to  are  not  necessarily  the 
anatomical  .and  histological  ones.

Aetius  adds  that  such  exercises  attenuate  the  blood.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  387

However,  to  use  a  loud  voice  for  a  long  time  is  injurious 
because  by  continuing  it  vigorously  too  much  air  is  taken  in, 
which  is  itself  harmful,"  and  by  continuing  it  too  long,  air  must 
be  expelled  unduly,  and  this  also  is  harmful.  Therefore  the  rule  is 
to  begin  gently,  by  reading  aloud,  speaking  more  and  more  loudly 
up  to  a  certain  point  and  then  allowing  the  voice  to  sink  by  degrees. 
If  the  time  occupied  in  this  exercise  is  moderate,  it  is  very  help- 
ful, but  if  the  time  is  too  long,  there  is  risk  of  injury  to  health.[Reading  aloud  in  a  high  tone  helps  to  remove  redundant  humours  through 
the  skm.  Reading  m  a  moderate  tone  helps  the  insensible  perspiration  throughout 
the  body,  attenuates  effete  matters,  and  gets  rid  of  saliva,  mucus  and  phlegm  by 
coughing.  Frigid  people  should  read  aloud  frequently  because  of  its  warming 
effect.  This  method  of  exercise  requires  control  and  judicious  management  if  the 
system  is  full  of  depraved  humours,  or  if  the  stomach  is  loaded  with  crudities,  because 
otherwise  noxious  gaseous  substances  are  distributed  all  over  the  body.

Ritual :   First  empty  the  bowels  ;   then  anoint  the  body  ;  then  sponge  the  face 
and  lower  parts  with  water.     The  tone  of  the  voice  should  be  moderate  at  first,  and 
the  person  should  walk  about  while  speaking.     Then  a  louder  tone  should  be  used 
and  verses  should  be  repeated  several  times  (Aeg.).]

(iii)  Vision  is  exercised  by  inspecting  minute  objects,  and 
sometimes  by  arranging  that  they  are  only  poorly  illuminated.

(iv)  Audition  is  exercised  by  listening  to  faint  sounds,  or 
sometimes  to  loud  ones.

(v)  Exercises  appropriate  to  each  individual  member  will  be 
referred  to  when  we  speak  of  the  maintenance  of  the  health  of 
each  organ  in  the  special  volume.

Among  the  modern  books  which  describe  suitable  exercises  of  the  above 
kinds,  that  by  Eustace  Miles  may  be  here  noted  (see  Bibliography) .

13  3Among  the  modern  books  which  describe  suitable  exercises  of  the  above 
kinds,  that  by  Eustace  Miles  may  be  here  noted  (see  Bibliography) .

13  3

743.  Whatever  the  exercise,  one  must  ensure  that  its 
vigour  or  heating  effect  is  not  likely  to  affect  some  weak  member 
directly.  Such  a  member  should  only  bear  the  brunt  of  the 
exercise  secondarily.  For  instance,  a  person  with  varicose  veins 
should  not  use  an  exercise  in  which  the  feet  are  much  used.  He 
should  substitute  an  exercise  which  employs  the  upper  parts  of  the 
body— the  neck,  the  head,  and  the  hands.  In  this  way  the  brunt 
of  the  effect  of  the  exercise  is  borne  first  by  the  upper  parts,  and 
by  the  feet  last.

The  exercise  must  be  modified  if  the  person  is  debilitated. 
If  he  is  robust  it  should  be  made  vigorous.  '

You  realize  now  that  every  member  has  its  own  peculiar 
form  of  exercise.  That  the  exercise  for  the  eye  is  to  gaze  upon 
something  delicate  ;  that  the  exercise  to  strengthen  and  expand 
the  chest  is  vocal,  and  consists  of  graduated  singing  exercises. 
Similarly  with  the  teeth  and  the  ear.  Every  member  is  con- 
sidered in  this  way  in  the  chapter  specially  devoted  to  it.*

*  This  and  other  references  in  the  original  text  are  retained,  though  actuallv 
the  subsequent  volumes  of  the  Canon  are  not  dealt  with  in  the  present  treatise.  '

3 88  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

3.    The  Best  Time  for  Commencing  Exercises.    The  Proper 
Duration,  and  other  Rules.3 88  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

3.    The  Best  Time  for  Commencing  Exercises.    The  Proper 
Duration,  and  other  Rules.

744.  The  time  to  choose  for  beginning  exercise  is  when 
the  body  is  free  from  impurities  in  the  internal  organs  and  blood- 
vessels, so  that  there  is  no  risk  of  unhealthy  chyme  being  dis- 
persed through  the  body  by  the  exercise.  Yesterday's  food 
should  have  passed  both  gastric  and  hepatic  digestion,  and  also 
intravascular  digestion, — the  time  for  the  next  meal  now  ap- 
proaching, as  can  be  ascertained  by  examining  the  urine  as  to  its 
substance  and  colour.

S24*  The  urinary  signs  of  the  proper  time  for  undertaking  exercise 
are  specified  in  Aegineta.— The  urine  should  be  deep  yellow,  because  this  shows  that 
the  digestion  has  long  since  been  completed.  If  the  urine  is  moderately  pale  it 
shows  that  the  digestion  has  only  just  been  completed.  An  evacuation  of  the 
bowels  is  here  indicated.  If  the  urine  be  watery,  it  shows  that  there  is  still  some 
undigested  chyme  in  the  stomach.

If  it  is  some  time  before  the  next  meal  is  due,  and  there  is  a 
need  for  more  nutriment,  and  the  urine  shows  "  igneity  "  (i.e.,  is 
high-coloured),  the  natural  yellowness  having  now  passed  off,  it 
indicates  that  exercise  at  this  time  would  be  detrimental,  namely 
by  exhausting  the  strength.

For  this  reason,  some  people  say  that  when  vigorous  exercise 
has  to  be  undertaken,  it  is  best  that  the  stomach  should  not  be 
quite  empty  :  that  there  should. still  be  a  little  food,  and  that  this 
should  be  substantial  in  winter,  and  light  in  summer.Moreover,  it  is  better  to  choose  a  time  for  exercise  when  one 
is  not  hungry,  and  when  one  is  hot  and  moist  rather  than  cold  and 
dry.  But  the  best  time  is  when  the  state  is. between  the  two. 
Exercise  in  a  man  of  hot  and  dry  temperament  may  lead  to  illness, 
and  he  will  benefit  by  avoiding  it  at  such  a  time.

745.  It  is  necessary,  then,  for  a  person  who  is  about  to  take 
exercise  that  he  should  first  get  rid  of  the  effete  matters  of  the 
body  by  way  of  the  intestines  and  bladder.  Should  friction  be 
used  in  preparation  for  exercise,  with  the  object  of  helping  the 
bowels  and  opening  the  pores  of  the  skin,  it  should  be  earned 
out  with  a  rough  towel,  and  be  followed  by  inunction  with  sweet 
(perfumed)  oil  made  warm  by  being  held  in  the  hollow  of  the 
palm.  This  inunction  is  done  according  to  rule  until  the  limbs 
show  a  florid  blush  ;  the  massaging  should  not  be  too  forcible, 
nor  the  penetration  too  great.  It  is  done  with  the  hands,  which 
pass  over  many  various  positions  in  order  to  ensure  that  every 
part  of  the  muscular  system  has  been  dealt  with.  When  com- 
pleted, the  massage  is  stopped  and  exercise  may  begin.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

389

746.  Relation- to  seasons.  In  spring,  the  best  time  for 
exercise  is  round  midday,  and  it  should  be  done  in  a  moderately 
warm  room.  In  summer,  the  exercise  should  be  done  earlier. 
In_  winter,  it  should  be  delayed  till  vespers,  but  there  are  other 
objections  to  doing  so.  Consequently,  in  winter,  the  place  used 
should  be  made  moderately  warm,  to  enable  the  exercise  to  be 
carried  out  at  a  time- when  the  aliment  is  digested'and  the  effete 
matters  have  been  expelled._747.  Amount  of  exercise.  Three  things  must  be  taken  into 
consideration,  '  (1)  The  colour.  As  long  as  the  skin  goes  on 
becoming  florid,  the  exercise  may  be  continued.  After  it 
ceases  to  do  so,  the  exercise  must  be  discontinued.  (2)  Move- 
ment. Exercise  may  be  continued  as  long  as  the  movement  is 
moderated..-  (3)  The  condition  of  the  members.  Exercise  must 
not  be  continued  after  they  show  any  puffmess.  Should  the 
insensible  perspiration  lessen  and  the  visible  sweating  stop,  the 
exercise  must  stop.  Should  the  action  of  the  skin  have  ceased, 
one  applies  a  strongly-diaphoretic  oil  as  an  inunction,  especially 
if  the  exercise  were  one  which  exerted  the  breathing.  (Restorative 
friction  and  massage  will  be  needed  :    Aeg.)

748.  At  the  conclusion  of  the  first  day's  exercise,  you  will 
know  the  degree  of  exercise  allowable  ;  and  when  you  know  the 
amount  of  nourishment  the  person  can  bear,  do  not  make  any 
change  in  either  on  the  second  day.  Arrange  that  the  measure 
of  aliment,  and  the  amount  of  exercise  shall  not  exceed  the  limit 
ascertained  on  the  first  day.

4.      Friction.      Massage.      Shampooing

"  Abu  Sir  came  to  him  and  rubbed  his  body  with  the  bag-gloves,  peeling 
from  his  skin  dirt-rolls  like  lamp-wick,  and  showing  them  to  the  King,  who  rejoiced 
therein  .  .  .  after  which  thorough  washing,  Abu  Sir  mingled  rose-water  with  the 
water  of  the  tank,  and  the  King  went  down  therein.  When  he  came  forth  his 
body  was  refreshed,  and  he  felt  a  lightness  and  liveliness  such  as  he  had  never 
known  m  his  life."  (Night  935).     (Burton,  v.749.  Varieties,  {a)  Hard 
Friction :  this  stretches  and 
contracts,  and  braces  the 
body,  (b)  Soft  Friction  has 
a  relaxing  effect,  (c)  Re- 
peated friction  diminishes 
the  fat  of  the  body. 
(d)   Moderately  hard  fric-

Friction  (massage)  before  (left)  and  after  (right)  tion    increases    the    bulk   of 
the    bath.       From    a    woodcut     of   date    1533     .         .       ,

(Martin52,  p.   171).  the     body.

39o  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Combination  of  these  will  give  nine  varieties  ["  much  and  hard,  much  and  soft, 
much  and  moderate  ;  little  and  hard,  little  and  soft,  little  and  moderate  ;  moderate 
and  hard,  moderate  and  soft,  moderate  and  moderately  hard"  (Aegmeta).]

(e)  Rough  friction.  This  is  done  with  rough  towels.  It  draws 
the  blood  rapidly  to  the  surface.  (/)  Gentle  friction.  This  is 
done  with  the  palm  or  with  soft  towels.  It  draws  the  blood 
together  and  retains  it  in  one  member.

The  object  of  friction  is  to  render  thin  persons  heavier,  and 
heavy  persons  thinner  ;  to  brace  flabby  persons,  and  to  modify 
those  who  are  not  pliable  enough  (giving  tone  to  the  body).  _

(g)  Friction  as  a  preparatory  to  athletics.  The  friction 
begins  gently,  and  then  becomes  more  vigorous  as  the  time 
approaches  for  the  exercise.(g)  Friction  as  a  preparatory  to  athletics.  The  friction 
begins  gently,  and  then  becomes  more  vigorous  as  the  time 
approaches  for  the  exercise.

(h)  Friction  as  a  sequel  to  athletics — Restorative  friction. 
This  produces  repose.  Its  object  is  to  disperse  the  effete  matter 
formed  in  the  muscles  and  not  expelled  by  the  exercise.  It 
causes  them  to  disperse  and  so  removes  fatigue  [the  feeling  of 
lassitude].  Such  friction  is  soft  and  gentle,  and  is  best  done 
with  oil  [or  perfumed  ointments  :  Aeg.].  It  must  not  be  hard, 
or  heavy,  or  rough,  because  that  would  roughen  the  members. 
Young  men  would  be  hindered  in  growth.  But  for  adults  it  is 
less  harmful.

750.  It  is  less  detrimental  to  err  on  the  side  of  hardness 
than  on  that  of  softness,  because  it  is  easier  to  correct  undue 
dispersal  [of  effete  matters]  than  to  prepare  the  tissues  (by  soft 
friction)  for  the  reception  of  effete  substances.  On  the  other 
hand,  hard  and  rough  friction  to  an  excess  in  youths  is  a  hindrance 
to  their  growth.

You  will  learn  about  this  under  the  heading  of  "  the  proper

time  for  friction."     For  the  present  it  will  suffice  to  say  that

restorative  friction  should  be  begun  vigorously  at  first,  and  with

oil  ;    that  then  it  should  be  moderated,  but  not  stopped,  until

all  roughness  has  gone.     It  is  best  that  many  persons  should  do

it  together.     The  person,  having  been  rubbed,  now  stretches

out  his  massaged  limbs  to  help  to  expel  the  effete  matters  from

them,  and  a  broad  bandage  or  binder  is  applied  over  the  regions

to  which  the  muscles  concerned  belong.     He  should  hold  his

breath  as  long  as  he  can,  while  relaxing  his  abdominal  muscles  ;

he  should  at  the  same  time  make  his  thoracic  muscles  tense,_  ifbreath  as  long  as  he  can,  while  relaxing  his  abdominal  muscles  ;

he  should  at  the  same  time  make  his  thoracic  muscles  tense,_  if

he  can.     Finally,  he  makes  his  abdominal  muscles  tense  again.

In  this  way  the  intestines  are  given  a  certain  amount  of  restorative

friction,     One  may  pause  to  take  breath  between  the  exercises  ;

or  sometimes  restorative  massage  may  be  given  in  the  middle

of  the  exercise.    Thus,  it  may  be  omitted  or  resorted  to,  according

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  391

to  whether  the  exercise  is  to  be  prolonged  or  not.  A  person  who 
desires  restorative  friction  does  not  need  much  preliminary 
friction,  unless  there  is  something  about  his  condition  with  which 
he  is  not  satisfied.  If  he  does  not  desire  restorative  friction  he 
will  undergo  more  thorough  preliminary  friction.  If  fatigue 
should  be  experienced,  inunction  with  oil  will  be  employed,  as 
we  have  stated.  If  he  should  experience  a  sense  of  dryness,  the 
friction  will  be  increased  until  the  natural  mean  condition  is 
attained.

Friction  without  massage  (compression)  is  beneficial  if 
sleep  is.  due,  because  it  cheers  the  body  and  prevents  humid, 
matters  from  flowing  into  the  joints.  '

5.     On   Various  Uses  of  the  Hot  Bat

h

751.  For  the  type  of  person  whose 
regimen  we  are  discussing,  a  bath  which 
induces  resolution  is  not  required,  be- 
cause his  body  is  inwardly  pure.  A  person 
does  not  need  the  bath  except  in  order  to 
derive  a  gentle  warmth  from  it,  and  a 
moderate  amount  of  moisture.  That  is 
why  such  persons  should  not  stay  long 
in  it.If  such  persons  employ  a  full- 
length  (copper)  bath,  they  should  stay 
in  it  only  until  the  colour  of  the  skin  be- 
comes red,  and  the  skin  becomes  puffy  ;  they  should  leave  it 
as  soon  as  dispersal  (of  humours)  begins.  The  surrounding 
air  should  be  moistened  by  a  sweet-water  spray.  The  actual 
washing  should  now  be   quick  and  the  bath  left  quickly.

A  person  should  not  go  into  the  bath  immediately  after 
exercise.     He  should  rest  properly  first.

752.  The  forms  of  bath  have  already  been  referred  to, 
and  are  dealt  with  again  in  another  place.  At  this  point  we 
should  state  that  all  who  propose  to  bathe  should  pass  through 
the  successive  rooms  of  the  bath-house  according  to  rule,  and 
not  linger  in  the  hot  room  long  enough  to  cause  harm;  they 
should  stay  long  enough  in  the  rest-room*  to  give  time  for  the 
dispersal  of  the  effete  substances,  otherwise  there  is  a  risk  of 
weakness  which  will  interfere  with  alimentation  and  leave  a 
susceptibility  to  the  causes  of  septic  fevers.

*  The  inset  depicts  the  interior  of  the  rest-room  of  the   Sultan's  private  baths 
at  the  Alhambra  Palace.

■3  9  2  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

753  A  person  who  wishes  to  become  stout  should  take 
his  bath  'after  a  meal,  if  he  is  not  likely  to  develop  obstructions 
in  consequence.  If  he  is  of  hot  temperament,  he  may  guard 
against  the  formation  of  obstructions  by  drinking  oxymel.  It 
he   is   of  cold  temperament,   he   should  take   pennyroyal  and

capsicum.  ,     .

If  it  is  desired  to  reduce  fat,  and  to  procure  the  resolution 
of  the  humours,  the  person  should  bathe  while  fasting,  and  stay

a  long  time  in  the  bath.  ,    ,  •  »       t-a  long  time  in  the  bath.  ,    ,  •  »       t-

754  Precautions  regarding  food  and  drink.  lo  ensure 
against  impairment  of  health  the.  bather  should  wait  till  after 
the  gastric  and  hepatic  digestions  are  both  completed.

Where  there  is  any  risk  of  the  bilious  humour  undergoing 
fermentative  decomposition,  and  one  wishes  to  bathe  fasting, 
the  aliment  should  be  attenuant.  But  a  person  of  hot  tempera- 
ment' in  whom  the  bilious  humour  is  plentiful,  should  not  enter 
the  hot  chamber  at  all.  The  best  things  for  such  persons  to 
take  are  :  bread  soaked  with  the  juice  of  fruits  or  rose-water. 
Cold  drinks  should  not  be  taken  either  while  in  the  bath  or 
when  leaving  it,  for  the  pores  are  now  open,  and  coldness  would 
speedily  enter  and  pass  towards  the  principal  organs  and  damage 
their  functional  capacity.  Articles  which  are  very  heating 
("hot")  should  also  be  avoided,  especially  water— because 
thereby  there  is  a  risk  of  the  warmth  penetrating  rapidly  to  the 
principal  organs  and  this  predisposes  to  wasting  and  hectic. 
Further,  such  persons  should  take  care  not  to  leave  the  bath 
suddenly,  or  to  uncover  the  head,  thus  exposing  the  body  to 
cold.    If  it  is  winter,  the  body  should  be  well  covered  with  towels.

755.  A  person  suffering  from  fever  should  avoid  the  bath 
at  the  febrile  period.  The  same  applies  to  a  person  suffering 
from  any  form  of  loss  of  continuity,  or  from  inflammation.

756.  From  the  above,  therefore,  it  will  be  clear  to  you  that 
baths  have  the  following  effects  :  warming,  cooling,  humectant, 
desiccant,  beneficial,  harmful.756.  From  the  above,  therefore,  it  will  be  clear  to  you  that 
baths  have  the  following  effects  :  warming,  cooling,  humectant, 
desiccant,  beneficial,  harmful.

Beneficial  effects  :  the  induction  of  sleep  ;  aperient  action; 
abstergent  action  ;  resolvent  action  ;  digestive  ;  drawing  nutri- 
ment to  the  surface  of  the  skin.  But  the  resolvent  effect  only 
occurs  if  that  is  desired  ;  the  excretory  effect  occurs  only  through 
the  natural  channels.  Baths  are  beneficial  for  constipation  and 
for  removing  lassitude.

'  Injurious  effects.  The  heart  is  weakened  if  the  person  stay 
too  long  in  the  bath.  The  bath  produces  syncope  and  nausea, 
and  sets  stagnant  humours  in  circulation,  and  disposes  them  to

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  393

undergo  putrescence,  and  to  pass  down  into  the  weaker  members, 
with  consequent  inflammatory  deposits  in  both  internal  and 
external  members.

6.      On  Ablution  with   Cold  Water

§  244:  It  may  be  noted  that  ablution  with  cold  water  constitutes  part  of  the 
ritual  of  Mohammedan  prayer,  and  imparts  a  sense  of  cleanliness  besides  helping 
to  preserve  the  physical  health.

The  medicinal  use  of  affusion,  cold  sponging,  and  cold  packs  will  be  thought 
of  under  the  present  heading.

Whereas  hot  water  is  debilitating,  cold  water  is  strengthening.  The  addiction 
to  the  hot  baths  of  the  Hammans  in  Turkey  has  been  held  by  some  Mussulman 
writers  to  have  been  detrimental  to  the  virility  of  the  race.757.  This  form  of  ablution  is  only  beneficial  if  all  the  proper 
rules  are  observed,  and  if  the  age  of  the  person,  his  physique 
and  build,-;  are  suitable,  and  the  season*  is  appropriate  (i.e.  the 
summer).  The  contra-indications  are  :  nausea,  or  a  feeling 
of  satiety  associated  with  indigestion  ;  vomiting  ;  or  diarrhoea  ; 
or  want  of  sleep  ;  or  nasal  catarrh.  The  person  must  not  be 
at  the  age  of  boyhood,  nor  at  old  age.  [Therefore  he  must  be 
in  the  prime  of  life.]  The  moment  chosen  for  the  ablution 
should  be  one  at  which  the  body  is  light  and  the  movements 
appropriate.

Ablution  with  cold  water  following  upon  one  with  hot  water. 
— The  object  of  this  is  to  make  the  external  parts  stronger,  and 
to  retain  the  natural  heat.  For  this  purpose  the  water  used 
should  not  be  very  cold,  but  of  a  medium  temperature.758.  Ablution  with  cold  water  after  exercise. — Here  the 
preparatory  friction  should  be  more  vigorous  than  usual.  The 
customary  inunction  with  oil  is  employed  as  well  before  the 
exercise,  which  must  be  less  vigorous  than  usual.  The  exercise 
completed,  the  person  plunges  into  the  cold  water  tank,  so  as 
to  harden  all  the  members  at  once.  He  stays  in  the  cold  water 
in  proportion  to  his  lightness,  and  as  long  as  he  can  without 
shivering  ensuing.  Then,  having  come  out  of  the  water,  let 
him  be  rubbed  as  we  have  described  (i.e.  till  the  skin  is  red), 
and  let  him  take  more  food  than  drink.  The  time  which  elapses 
before  the  natural  colour  returns  to  the  skin  must  be  noted, 
because  if  the  colour  returns  rapidly,  the  duration  of  the  cold 
bath  was  reasonable,  whereas  if  there  is  delay,  it  shows  that  the 
stay  in  the  water  was  too  prolonged.  In  this  way  the  person 
will  know  the  proper  duration  of  the  bath  for  the  future.

*  It  has  been  a  widespread  belief  that  the  atmosphere  in  springtime  affects 
open  waters,  so  that  it  was  healing  and  strengthening  to  bathe  out  of  doors  at  this 
time.     (Martin,52,  p.   n).

394  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Should  the  person  wish  to  re-enter  the  water  after  the 
friction,  and  after  regaining  his  colour  and  normal  heat,  he  must 
on  this  occasion  enter  the  water  gradually,  and  on  a  hot  summer's 
day  before  the  hottest  part  of  the  day,  and  when  no  wind  is 
blowing.  He  must  not  do  so  when  in  a  state  of  lassitude  after 
coitus,  or  after  a  meal  which  has  not  had  time  to  digest,  or  after 
emesis,  or  after  evacuation  of  the  bowels,  or  after  gastro-enteritis, 
or  insomnia,  or  if  the  body  or  stomach  be  enfeebled.Cold  bathing  should  not  be  done  after  exercise  except  in 
the  case  of  the  very  robust.  Even  then  the  rules  which  we  have 
given  should  be  followed.  To  use  cold  baths  in  the  ways  we 
have  named  drives  the  natural  heat  suddenly  into  the  interior 
parts,  and  then  invigorates  the  strength,  so  that  the  person 
should  leave  the  bath  twice  as  strong  as  when  he  entered.

§  245 . — Sea-bathing. — Modern  advice  follows  the  same  rules 
as  above.  Namely,  do  not  enter  the  sea  too  soon  after  a  meal,  or 
if  not  feeling  quite  fit.  There  is  otherwise  a  risk  of  cramp.  The 
sea  should  not  be  entered  in  the  early  morning  unless  one  is  very 
healthy. — To  enter  the  sea  too  often  in  the  day  (more  than  twice) 
has  a  decidedly  weakening  effect.  The  best  time  to  bathe  in  the 
sea  is  the  warm  afternoon,  two  hours  after  a  meal.  The  proper 
thing  to  do  after  the  bathing  is  to  rest — not  to  run  about  on  the  sands. 
(Remember  sharks.)

7.     The  Regimen  in  regard  to   Food  and  Drink 
(Comestibles  and  Potables.)

"  The  stomach  is  the  house  of  disease  and  diet  is  the  head  of  healing  ;  for  the 
origin  of  all  sickness  is  indigestion,  that  is  to  say,  corruption  of  the  meat  m  the 
stomach"   (Night    452).

§  246— Meal-times, — Burton  (vi.  111)  mentions  "breakfast" 
(Arab,  futur)  which  is  eaten  immediately  after  the  dawn-prayer,  except 
in  Ramazan.  This  is  a  substantial  meal  of  bread  and  boiled  beans, 
eggs,  cheese,  curded  milk  and  the  pastry  called  fatirah,  followed  by 
coffee  and  a  pipe.— Lane159  (i.  169)  mentions  "dinner"  as  being 
taken  after  the  noon-prayer,  and  states  that  a  single  meal  may  be 
taken  before  noon  instead  of  these  two  meals.  The  principal  meal  is 
supper,  which  is  taken  after  the  sunset  prayers.759.  In  seeking  to  maintain  health  care  must  be  taken 
that  the  essential  basis  of  the  meal  is  not  in  medicinal  nutrients 
like  potherbs,  fruits,  and  such-like.  For  things  which  are 
tenuous  in  character  over-oxidize  the  blood,  and  those  which 
are  dense  render  the  blood  phlegmatic,  and  the  body  heavy.

The  meal  should  include  :  (i)  flesh,  especially  kid  of  goats,

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  395

veal,  and  year-old  lamb  ;  (2)  wheat,  which  is  cleaned  of  extra- 
neous matter  and  gathered  during  a  healthy  harvest  without 
ever  having  been  exposed  to  injurious  influences  ;  (<fi  sweets 
of  appropmto  temperament  ;  (4)  fragrant  wine  of  good  quality. 
Any  other  lands  of  food  can  only  be  regarded  as  a  sort  of  medica- 
ment or  preservative.

The  more  nutritious  fruits  are  :  figs,  grapes  (ripe  and  sweet), 
dates  from  countries  and  regions  in  which  they  are  indigenous! 
But  if  superfluity  arises  after  partaking  of  these  fruits,  speedy 
evacuation  should  be  procured.

760.  -In  winter  the  food  should  be  hot  ;  in  summer  cold 
or  only  sightly  warm.  A  food  should  not  be  served  either  hot 
or  cold  if  it  is  likely  to  be  spoiled  thereby.

761  A  person  should  not  eat  unless  hungry.  Nor  should 
he  delay  his  meal  until  the  appetite  has  passed  off.  This  rule 
does  not  apply  m  the  case  of  the  fictitious  appetite  met  with  in 
drunkards  or  the  subjects  of  nausea.  If  fasting  be  continued, 
the  stomach  will  fill  up  with  putrescent  humours.Nothing  is  worse  than  to  eat  to  repletion  during  a  time  of 
plenty  after  having  been  in  a  state  of  starvation  during  a  time 
or  famine  and  vice  versa.    But  the  transition  period  is  the  worse 
*or  we  often  see  many  people  who  lack  food  at  a  time  of  famine' 
and  eat  to  repletion  when  a  fertile  year  comes,  with  fatal  result! 
Irf-eat  repletion  is  very  dangerous  in  any  case,  whether  in  regard 
to  food  or  to  drink.     For  how  often  do  not  people  over-eat 
the  bod1*?1  thC  C°nSecluent  choking  of  the  channels  of

762.  _  An  error  in  eating  or  drinking  any  of  the  medicinal 
,  nutrients  is  to  be  corrected  according  to  the  digestion  and 
maturation  thereof,  and  the  person  must  be  protected  from  the 
intemperament  which  is  likely  to  arise.  To  effect  this,  one  takes 
the  con  rary  substance  until  the  digestion  is  completed.  Thus 
if  the  aliment  was  cold  (e.g.  cucumber,  gourd),  temper  it  with 
its  opposite  (e.g.  onions,  leek).  If  the  aliment  was  hot,  temper  it 
with  the  opposite  (e.g.  cucumber,  purslane).  If  the  aliment 
is  binding  take  some  food  which  will  open  and  evacuate, 
and  then  fast  for  a  suitable  period.  A  person  in  this  state— 
and  this  is  true  for  all  who  wish  to  maintain  their  health— should 
not  partake  of  food  until  there  is  a  definite  appetite,  and  unless 
trie  stomach  and  upper  small  intestine  have  emptied  themselves 
of  the  previous  meal.     For  there  is  nothing  more  harmful  to

396  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE396  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

the  body  than  to  superpose  aliment  upon  incompletely  digested 
food.  There  is  also  nothing  worse  than  nauseative  indigestion, 
especially  when  this  is  the  result  of  bad  foods.  _  For  if  these 
are  gross,  the  following  symptoms  and  illnesses  arise  :  pains  m 
the  joints,  in  the  kidneys  ;  dyspnoea,  podagra,  indurative  en- 
largement of  the  spleen  and  liver,  illnesses  in  which  the  serous 
or  ^atrabilious  humours  are  concerned.  If  the  foods  were 
attenuated,  then  acute  fevers,  malignant  fevers,  and  grave  acute 
inflammatory  disturbances  would  develop.

However,  it  is  sometimes  really  necessary  to  give  a  food 
or  a  substance  like  food,  on  the  top  of  another  food,  by  way  of 
medicine.  For  example,  if  one  has  taken  sharp  and  salty  nutri- 
ents, one  may  further  take  humectant  aliments  which  have  no 
flavour,  before  the  former  have  digested  completely.  The, 
chyme  by  which  the  body  is  nourished  is  then  rectified.  This 
is  a  suitable  measure  for  cases  of  this  kind,  and  the  use  of  exercise 
is  not  indicated.

The  contrary  holds  good  in  the  case  of  those  who  partake 
of  gross  foodstuffs  and  afterwards  admix  with  them  something 
which  is  speedily  digested  and  acrid  in  taste.

763.  A  small  amount  of  movement  or  activity  after  a  meal 
allows  the  food  to  descend  to  the  fundus  of  the  stomach,  especially 
if  after  this  there  is  a  desire  to  sleep.  Mental  excitement  or 
emotion  ;    vigorous  exercise  ;    these  hinder  digestion.

764.  In  winter,  feebly  nutrient  foods,  like  pot-herbs,  are 
not  to  be°partaken  of.  The  aliments  should  be  stronger  and  more 
solid  in  texture — such  as  cereals,  legumes,  and  the  like.  In 
summer,  the  contrary  is  true.765.  The  quantity  of  food  taken  at  a  meal. — Mo  meal 
should  be  bulky  enough  to  completely  satisfy  the  appetite.  One 
should  rise  from  the  table  while  some  appetite  or  desire  for  food 
is  still  present.  For  such  remnants  of  hunger  will  disappear 
in  the  course  of  an  hour.  Custom  is  to  be  regarded  in  this 
regard,  for  a  meal  is  injurious  when  it  brings  heaviness  to  the 
stomach,  and  wine  is  injurious  when  it  exceeds  moderation, 
and  swims  in  the  stomach.

If  one  ate  to  excess  one  day,  one  should  fast  the  next,  and  a 
longer  sleep  should  be  taken  in  some  place  which  is  neither  hot 
nor  cold.  If  sleep  refuse  to  come,  one  should  take  gentle  walking 
exercise  and  allow  neither  rest  nor  recumbent  position.  A 
little  pure  wine  should  be  taken.  Rufus  says,  "  Walking  after 
a  meal  is  grateful  to  me,  for  it  gives  a  good  preparation  for  the 
evening  meal."

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  397

A  short  sleep. after  a  meal  is  useful  ;  one  should  lie  first 
on  the  right  side,  then  on  the  left,  and  finally  turn  back  again  to 
the  right  side.  If  the 'body'' be  covered  with  a  number  of  wraps 
and  the  neck  be  raised,  this  will  aid  digestion.  The  limbs  should 
slope  downwards  and  not  upwards.The  standard  size  of  the  meal  depends  on  usage  and  vigour. 
A  normally  robust  person  should  take  as  much  as  will  not  produce 
a  sense  of  heaviness,  or  a  sense  of  tightness  of  the  hypochondria. 
There^  should  be  no  subsequent  rumbling  in  the  stomach,  or 
splashing  of  the  food  on  bodily  movement.  Nausea  should  not 
be  experienced,  nor  a  canine  appetite,  nor  loss  of  appetite,  nor 
great  disinclination  for  exertion,  nor  sleeplessness.  The  taste 
of  the  food  should  not  repeat  in  the  eructations.  If  the  taste 
of  food  lingers  in  the  mouth  a  very  long  time  after  the  meal 
it  shows  that  the  latter  was  too  heavy.

766.  Indications  that  the  meal  was  moderate  :  the  pulse 
does  not  become  full  ;  the  breathing  does  not  become  shallow. 
The  latter  only  occurs  if  the  stomach  is  compressing  the  dia- 
phragm, thus  making  the  inspirations  shallow  and  short.  The 
pressure  to  be  met  by  the  heart  increases  after  a  large  meal,  and 
as  the  force  of  the  heart  does  not  diminish,  the  pulse  becomes 
large  and  full.

A  person  who  experiences  a  sense  of  heat  and  flushing 
after  a  meal  should  not  take  a  whole  meal  at  one  sitting,  but 
partake  of  the  food  in  small  portions  at  short  intervals  to  avoid 
the  effects  of  repletion — such  as  shivering  followed  by  a  sense 
of  heat  like  that  in  a  sthenic  fever.  This  is  due  to  the  heating 
effect  of  the  food.

A  person  who  cannot  digest  the  amount  of  food  appro- 
priate^ for  him  should  increase  the  number  of  articles  of  diet, 
but  diminish  the  quantity.

A  person  of  atrabilious  constitution  needs  a  diet  which  is 
very  humectant  but  not  very  heating.

A  person  of  choleric  constitution  needs  a  diet  which  is 
humectant  and  infrigidant.A  person  of  choleric  constitution  needs  a  diet  which  is 
humectant  and  infrigidant.

A  person  who  generates  hot  inflammable  blood  needs 
feebly  nutritious  articles  of  food,  which  are  cold.  One  who 
generates  phlegmatic  blood  needs  feebly  nutritious  articles  of 
diet  which  are  hot  and  attenuant.

767.  The  order  in  which  the  components  of  a  meal  are  to 
be  taken. — A  person  who  is  desirous  of  maintaining  his  health 
needs  to  be  watchful  of  this  matter.  Thus,  one  should  not 'take 
a  tenuous  food,  which  is  rapidly  digested,  after  taking  a  very

398  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

nutritious  dish  which  is  slowly  digested.  An  exception  to  this 
rule  has  been  named  above.  The  reason  is  that  the  first  article 
of  food  will  be  digested  first  an'd  therefore  float  over  the  other, 
unable  to  enter  the  blood.  Consequently  it  ferments  and  decom- 
poses, and  in  addition  sets  up  decomposition  of  the  food  next 
taken.  .The  reverse  order,  therefore,  is  the  one  to  adopt,  so 
that  the  labile  food  will  pass  on  with  the  other  into  the  intestine, 
and  then  undergo  complete  digestion.

Fish  and  similar  articles  of  food  should  not  be  taken  after 
laborious  work  (or  exercise),  because  they  undergo  decom- 
position and  then  decompose  the  humours.

Some  persons  may  be  allowed  to  eat  an  article,  of  food  in 
which  there  is  a  styptic  property  as  a  preparatory  to  the  actual

meal.

768.-;  Idiosyncrasies.  Some  persons  have  an  idiosyncrasy 
of  the  stomach  in  which  the  foods  leave  it  very  rapidly,  and  do 
not  stay  in  it  long  enough  to  undergo  gastric  digestion.  This 
explains  the  necessity  for  taking  the  idiosyncrasy  of  the  stomach 
and  its  temperament,  into  consideration  [along  with  other  factors 
when  drawing  up  a  dietary].There  are  some  persons  in  whom  tenuous  food,  instead  of 
being  digested  quickly  as  it  should,  undergoes  decomposition 
in  the  stomach,  whereas  less  rapidly  digestible  foods  are  digested 
more  readily.  The  stomach  of  such  a  person  is  designated 
igneous.  But  other  persons  are  exactly  the  opposite.  Therefore 
the  rules  to  be  given  must  be  adapted  to  the  peculiarity  of  each

(patient).

769.  The  countries  in  which  people  live  have  also  their  own 
natural  properties,  which  are  distinct  from  the  ordinary  rule. 
This  must  also  be  borne  in  mind,  and  a  test  must  be  made  to  ascer- 
tain what  the  rule  should  be.  Thus,  a  food  which  is  often  used, 
though  injurious  to  a  certain  degree,  may  be  more  appropriate 
for  a  given  individual  than  a  food  which  he  does  not  often  take, 
though  its  character  is  good.

"  The  best  food  of  every  people  is  that  which  grows  where  they  live  :  oats— 
that  is,  porridge— for  Highlanders  ;  wheat  for  the  centre  of  Europe  ;  rice  for  the 
swamps  of  the  Far  East;  etc.  But  in  these  days  of  easy  and  quick  transport, 
any  foods  can  be  obtained  in  any  part  of  the  world,  and  peoples  are  enabled  to 
partake  of  foods  unnatural  for  them."123  (p.   1077).

770.  Then  again,  there  is  a  food  which  is  to  be  regarded 
as  appropriate  to  everyone's  physique  and  temperament.  To 
change  from  such  a  diet  would  prove  injurious  and  detrimental

to  him.

Good  and  laudable  foods  may  be  injurious  to  some.     They

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  399

should  therefore  avoid  them.  But  persons  who  are  able  to  digest 
"  bad  "  foods  should  not  be.deceived,  because  (for  all  they  know) 
they  will  some  day  give  rise  to  bad  humours  and  the  consequent 
obstinate  ailments.Good  food  may  often  be  allowed  liberally  in  the  case  of 
persons  in  whom  the  humours  are  unhealthy,  so  long  as  diarrhoea 
from  intestinal  weakness  does  not  supervene  in  consequence. 
But  if  the  person  be  of  spare  habit,  and  liable  to  have  the  motions 
loose,  the  diet  should  consist  of  moist  aliments,  because  they 
are  digested  quickly,  even  though  it  is  a  fact  that  such  persons 
can  tolerate  various  heavy  foods,  and  are  less  liable  to  be  affected 
adversely  by  intrinsic  noxae,  and  are  more  susceptible  to  the 
antagonistic  influence  of  extraneous  noxae.

771.  -"An  active  person  accustomed  to  take  much  flesh- 
meat  needs  frequent  bleeding.  A  person  inclined  to  be  frigid  in 
temperament  should  drink  substances  which  cleanse  the  stomach, 
intestines  and  the  (mesenteric)  veins — including  confections  of 
spices  and  myrobalan  electuary.

772.  ^  It  is  a  bad  practice  to  combine  nutrients  of  diverse 
character  in  one  meal  and  so  prolong  it.  For  by  the  time  the 
last  portion  has  entered  the  stomach,  the  first  portion  is  already 
digested,  and  therefore  the  various  contents  of  the  stomach  are 
not  all  at  the  same  stage  of  digestion.773.  Palatability.  One  should  remember  too  that  aliment 
is  best  which  has  the  most  agreeable  flavour,  for  the  walls  of  the 
stomach  and  the  retentive  faculty  jointly  apply  themselves  better 
to  a  food  of  good  substance,  and  the  efficiency  of  the  retentive 
power  is  assisted  when  the  principal  members  all  mutually 
concur — the  temperament  of  one  being  not  more  divergent  from 
that  of  another  than  natural.  That  is  the  requisite  condition. 
The  conditions  are  not  fulfilled,  for  instance,  if  the  temperaments 
are  not  normal,  or  alike  in  the  respective  members.  Thus,  the 
temperament  of  the  liver  may  differ  to  an  unnatural  extent  from 
that  of  the  stomach.

Among  noxious  influences  arising  from  the  taste  of  aliments 
is  that  if  very  gross  aliments  are  tasty,  a  person  may  be  tempted 
to  eat  too  freely  of  them.

774.  In  taking  successive  satiating  meals,  it  is  best  for  a 
person  to  take  only  one  on  one  day  and  two  on  the  next  (mornino- 
and  evening).  But  one  must  not  be  too  strict  in  this  rule,  for  if 
a  person  is  accustomed  to  have  two  meals  a  day,  and  then  takes 
only  one,  he  will  be  weakened  and  his  (digestive)  faculty  will 
suffer.    A  person  of  weak  digestion  should  take  two  meals  a  day,

4oo  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE4oo  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

lessening  the  amount  partaken.  On  occasion  he  may  eat  once 
a  day.  A  person  who,  is  accustomed  to  take  one  good  meal  a  day 
will,  on  resuming  the  habit  of  two  meals  a  day,  suffer  from  weak- 
ness, lack  of  energy,  slackness.  If  he  should  take  no  food  at 
bedtime,  he  will  feel  weak  ;  and  if  he  should  take  a  late  meal 
he  will-  not  be  able  to  digest  it,  and  will  have  acid  eructations, 
nausea,  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  loose  bowels  and  become  moody, 
or  irritable.  This  is  because  he  has  put  into  the  stomach  some- 
thing to  which  it  is  not  accustomed,  and  so  he  is  liable  to  show 
some  of  the  symptoms  which  befall  a  person  whose  aliment  is  not 
fully  digested. — And  these  you  are  now  acquainted  with.

775.  Among  the  symptoms  arising  when  a  person  does  not 
take  a  late  meal  are  :  subjective  sensations  at  the  cardiac  orifice 
of  the  stomach,  gnawing  pains,  a  sensation  of  a  void  in  the 
stomach'  so  that  all  the  interior  organs  and  intestines  feel  as  if 
they  were  suspended,  and  therefore  all  clumped  together.  He 
passes  scalding  urine,  and  the  faeces  produce  a  burning  sensation 
as  they  are  passed.  There  may  be  a  feeling  of  cold  mthe  ex- 
tremities owing  to  the  bilious  humour  being  poured  out  into  the 
stomach  and  irritating  it  and  making  it  congested.  This  is  more 
likely  in  persons  of  bilious  temperament,  and  in  those  who  have 
bilious  humour  in  the  stomach  but  not  to  an  undue  extent  in  the 
rest  of  the  body  ;  these  suffer  from  loss  of  sleep,  and  keep  turning 
over  from  one  side  to  the  other  [in  bed].776.  Persons  then  in  whom  the  bilious  humour  is  apt  to 
accumulate  in  the  stomach  should  take  their  meals  divided, 
thereby  taking  the  food  quickly  ;  the  meal  is  taken  before 
bathing.  In  other  persons  exercise  should  be  taken  first,  then 
the  bath,  and  then  the  meal.  The  meal  should  not  precede  the 
bath  in  these  cases.  If  circumstances  demand  that  the  meal  be 
taken  before  the  exercise,  the  food  should  consist  of  bread  only, 
and  to  an  amount  no  greater  than  can  be  easily  digested.  As  it 
is  necessary  that  the  exercise  should  not  be  gentle  if  taken  before 
food,  so  it  is  necessary  that  the  exercise  should  be  mild  and  gentle 
if  it  is  taken  after  the  meal.

When  the  appetite  is  depraved  so  that  it  prefers  sharp- 
tasting  things  to  sweet  or  unctuous  things,  nothing  is  better  than 
to  procure  emesis  with  such  as  oxymel  with  radish  after  fish.

777,  A  person  who  is  stout  should  not  eat  at  once  after  a 
bath,  but  should  wait  and  take  a  little  nap.  He  is  best  advised 
to  take  only  one  meal  in  the  day.

778.  One  should  not  go  to  sleep  immediately  after  a  meal, 
with  the  food  still  swimming  in  the  stomach,  and  one  should,  as

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  4oi

much  as  possible,  abstain  from  much  exercise  after  a  meal,  lest 
the  food  pass  into  the  blood  before  it  is  sufficiently  digested,  or 
glide  out  of  the  stomach  without 'being  digested  at  all,  or  under- 
goes decomposition,  since  the  exercise  disturbs  the  gastric 
temperament.779.  Nor  should  much  water  be  drunk  after  a  meal,  for  it 
causes  the  food  to  leave  the  coats  of  the  stomach  and  float  about 
One  should  wait,  and  not  drink  fluids  until  the  food  has  left  the 
stomach— which  is  evidenced  by  the  sensation  of  lightness  in 
the  upper  part  'of  the  abdomen.  However,  if  there  were  urgent 
thirst  one  may  take  a  modicum  of  cold  water  through  a  straw 
and  the  colder  it  is  the  less  one  will' require.  Such  an  amount 
would  soothe  the  stomach  and  keep  the  food  together.

"Neither  drink  (water)  immediately  after  leaving  the  Hammam  nor  after 
eating  (except- it  be  after  the  lapse  of  fifteen  minutes  for  a  young  man  and  forty 
for  an  old  man),  nor  after  waking  from  sleep  "  (Night  452)  Y

l^hter  Jn,?^  ^  IZ^f  ^  etting'  and  then  drink>  the  drink  *s  sweeter  and 
I  8^J^  f  digestible  to  him  than  at  another  time,  and  there  ascends  to  him

a  pleasant  fragrance  and  a  penetrating,"  as  quoth  the  poet  :  "  Drink  not  upon  thy 
food  m  haste  but  wait  awhile,  else  thou  with  halter  shalt  thy  frame  toXknesI 
lead:  And  patient  bear  a  little  thirst  from  food,  then  drink."     (Night  451;    Burton)

780.  To  sum  up' — if  a  person  must  drink,  it  is  better  only 
to  take  so  small  an  amount,  at  the  end  of  the  meal  (not  during 
the  meal),  as  will  spread  over  and  moisten  the  food,  and  therefore 
not  be  injurious.

To  go  to  sleep  while  thirsty,  is  beneficial  to  cold  and  moist 
temperaments,  but  is  injurious  to  those  in  whom  the  temperament 
is  too  warm,  because  of  the  bilious  humour  (being  too  plentiful). 
The  same  is  true  as  regards  going  to  sleep  while  fasting.Bilious  humour  comes  to  predominate  in  persons  who  fast 
and  therefore  flows  into  the  stomach.     Therefore  when  they  eat 
any  food  it  decomposes,  and  the  same  symptoms  occur  in  them, 
whether  asleep  or  awake,  as  when  food  corrupts.     And,  further- 
more, there  is  loss  of  desire  for  food.

781 .  When  there  is  loss  of  appetite  for  food  something  needs 
to  be  given  to  counteract  this  and  relax  the  bowels.  For  this 
purpose  something  mild,  like  prune,  should  be  given,  or  some- 
thing which  does  not  suggest  nausea,  like  a  laxative  fruit-juice 
(manna).  Meals  may  be  resumed  after  the  appetite  has  returned. 
Those  whose  tissues  are  moist  in  virtue  of  natural  humidity  are 
liable  to  speedy  aperient  action,  and  are  in  consequence  not  able 
to  fast  as  long  as  those  whose  tissues  are  dry  in  virtue  of  only 
a  small  (degree  of  natural)  humidity  :— unless  the  latter  should 
be  rich  in  humidities  other  than  those  inherent  to  the  substance 
of  the  tissues,  for  these  are  proper,  good  and  receptive,  and  in

4o2  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

consequence  the  natural  faculty  is  able  to  change  them  com- 
pletely into  (true)  nutriment.  _

782  To  take  wine  after  a  meal  is  very  unsatisfactory,  tor 
it  is  rapidly  digested  and  enters  the  blood  quickly  and  carries  food 
on  into  the  blood  before  it  is  properly  digested.  Obstructions 
and    decompositions     [in    this    imperfectly    digested    aliment

ultimately]  arise.    "

Sweet  things  readily  produce  obstructions  [in  the  channels 
of  the  bodyl  because  the  attractive  faculty  draws  them  mtothe 
blood  before  they  have  been  properly  digested.  Obstructions 
culminate  in  various  diseases,  of  which  dropsy  is  one.Heaviness  of  the  air  or  water,  especially  that  of  summer- 
time, favours  the  decomposition  of  food.  In  this  case,  then,  it  is 
not  harmful  to  take  a  tempered  wine  after  a  meal,  or  hot  water  in 
which  xylaloes  and  mastic  have  been  boiled.  .     u  ,       „        ,

783  If  a  person  whose  alimentary  tract  is  hot  and 
strong,  should  eat  heavy  food,  it  will  give  rise  to  flatulence  m  the 
stomach  and  fermentative  ailments.

When  a  person  takes  a  tenuous  article  of  food  upon  an  empty 
stomach,  the  latter  contracts  on  it,  and  if  he  then  takes  something 
heaw  the  stomach  abandons  the  tenuous  food  and  ceases 
digesting  it,  and  it  undergoes  putrescence  in  consequence.  I  his 
would  be  avoided  by  allowing  an  interval  of  time  to  elapse 
between  the  two  kinds  of  food.  Under  these  circumstances  it  is 
best  to  take  the  heavy  food  slowly,  because  then  the  hold  which 
the  stomach  has  on  the  tenuous  food  is  not  broken.S2A7  The  principle  is  that  the  food  should  be  held  close 
to  the  mucous  membrane  all  the  time.  This  is  what  is  done  by  the 
«  attractive  faculty."  The  stomach  "  holds  "  the  food  close  to 
its  mucosa  as  a  mother  holds  the  babe  to  her  breast  ;  the  pylorus 
keeps  tightly  closed  until  it  is  time  for  the  gastric  contents  to  pass  on, 
on  the  sf  me  principle  as  applies  in  the  case  of  the  os  uten  which  does 
not  open  until  it.  is  time  for  the  uterus  to  evacuate  itself  ,  or  in  the 
case  of  the  bile-papilla,  which  remains  tight  until  the  time  comes  for 
bilo  *o  be  passed  into  the  duodenum.  The  gall-bladder  also  keeps 
(tonxally  and)  accurately  applied  to  its  contents  m  a  similar  way. 
In  each  case  the  retentive  faculty  operates  until  the  expulsive  faculty 
is  called  upon,  and  vice  versa.  Modern  physiology  regards  it  all  as 
mechanical,  comparing  everything  to  the  test-tube  experiments  ;  but 
it  is  actually  vital-one  might  almost  say  purposive— it  is  as  much 
purposive  as  the  grasp  with  which  the  coelenterate  holds  its  prey     ^

Once  a  gap  is  allowed  to  intervene  between  the  food     attracted 
or  grasped  by  the  mucosa,  then  digestion  stops  and  the  food  particles 
clump  up  and  swim  about  in  bits  in  the  fluid,  and  then  putrefy. 
One  might  picture  the  normal  process  as  one  of  apposition  to  the

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  403THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  403

mucosa  as  the  limpet  shell  is  affixed  to  the  rock  ;  that  fluid  may  be 
allowed  to  separate  off  the  film  of  food  from  the  mucosa  by  mis- 
management, and  that  when  it  does  so  at  one  spot,  the  whole  film 
will  peel  off,  and  folds  up  or  breaks  up.  Once  this  has  done  it  is 
hopeless  to  restore  it  again  to  its  previous  position,  and  "  indigestion  " 
is  definitely  the  fate  of  that  meal.

784. '  When  a  -state  of  over-repletion  exists  in  regard  to 
some  meal,  whether  as  a  result  of  exercise  (which  causes  undue 
hunger),  or  because  a  draught  has  been  taken  as  well,  then  there 
will  be  a  need  for  rapid  emesis.  If  this  should  fail,  or  one  cannot 
vomit,  .the  person  should  sip  hot  water  until  the  repletion  is 
displaced  and  sleep  supervenes.  The  person  should  therefore  lie 
down  and  (compose  himself  to)  sleep.  Let  him  sleep  as  long  as 
he  will. — But  should  this  not  suffice,  or  should  he  be  unable  to 
go  to  sleep,  .;reflect  whether  the  natural  course  of  events  is  likely 
to  save  you  from  procuring  emesis.  If  so,  good.  If  not,  assist 
the  natural  power  by  any  gentle  laxative,  such  as  myrobalan 
electuary,  confection  of  roses,  or  origanum  prepared  with  sugar 
or  honey  ;  or  by  the  use  of  such  things  as  cumin,  spiced  candies, 
asphodel  and  cabbage  ptisan.It  is  not  as  bad  to  be  repleted  with  wine  as  with  solid  food. 
785.  Among  the  (aperient)  remedies  which  are  suitable 
after  food  are  :  aloes  to  the  bulk  of  three  chick-peas  ;  or  half. a 
drachm  of  aloes,  half  a  drachm  of  mastic,  and  a  sixth  of  a  dram  of 
nitre.  Mild  remedies  are  :  turpentine  resin  to  the  amount  of 
two  or  three  chick-peas  ;  nitre  in  equal  quantity,  or  less,  if 
necessary.  Another  much  praised  remedy  is  to  use  an  epitheme 
with  wine  (821,  839).

If  none  of  these  remedies  succeed,  let  the  patient  sleep  for 
a  long  time,  and  abstain  from  food  for  a  whole  day.  Then,  if  he 
feels  better,  let  him  bathe,  and  place  a  hot  blanket  over  the 
abdomen,  and  see  that  the  aliments  are  tenuous.

If  the  food  is  still  not  properly  digested,  in  spite  of  all  these 
measures,  and  heaviness,  distension,  and  lack  of  energy  are 
experienced,  you  may  know  that  the  veins  are  already  over- 
charged with  effete  matters.  Bulky  and  unneeded  nutriment, 
even  were  it  digested  in  the  stomach,  would  hardly  undergo  the 
proper  changes  in  the  veins,  and  so  would  remain  "  crude  " 
within  them,  and  stretch  them,  even  to  bursting  point.  This  is 
the  explanation  of  the  lack  of  energy,  the  heaviness,  the  desire  to 
stretch. oneself  and  the  yawnings.  The  treatment  in  such  a  case 
consists  in  securing  the  release  of  the  superfluities  from  the 
blood  vessels.

4o4  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

'  -  If  these  are  not  the  symptoms,  but  there  is  only  a  transient 
weariness,  followed  later  by  another  form  of  weariness,  this 
should  be  treated  in:the  manner  to  be  described.  .  '786.  If  a  person  should  be  very  advanced  in  years,_and  his. 
body  does  not  derive  as  much  benefit  from  the  food  as  it  did  when 
he  was  young,  and  if  his  aliments  become  simply  effete  matters, 
then  he  should  not  eat  as  much  as  he  used  to  do.

787.  If  a  person  is  accustomed  to  a  heavy  diet  and  then 
lightens  it  by  the  use  of  attenuant  foods,  the  new  food  material 
is- unable  to  keep  the  channels  (of  the  body)  as  full  as  before. 
So,  on  resuming  the  heavy  foods,  obstructions  are  brought  about..

788.  Heating  foods.  The  injurious  effects  of  heating  or 
calefacient  foods  can  be  corrected  by  the  use  of  syrup  containing 
acetic  acid,  especially  when  made  with  seeds,  for  then  the  syrup- 
is  mora  efficient.  If  honey  is  used  however,  the  simple  syrup 
will  suffice.  The  injurious  effect  of  "  cold  "  foods  is  corrected 
by  the  use  of  hydromel,  and  its  syrup,  and  caraway.

789.  Heavy  and  Light  Foods.  To  correct  aliments  which 
are  heavy,  a  person  having  a  hot  temperament  should  use  acetous 
syrup  made  of  strong  seeds  ;  a  person  with  a  cold  temperament 
should  use  a  little  capsicum  or  peppermint.Tenuous  foods  are  better  for  the  health,  but  less  valuable  for 
the  vegetative  faculties  and  strength.  Heavy  foods  have  the 
opposite  value.  Hence,  for  a  person  in  need  of  a  tonic,  aliments 
which  make  strong  chyme  are  necessary,  and  such  as  antagonize 
the  hunger-feeling.  But  they  should  not  be  taken  in  greater 
quantity  than  can  be  digested.  Heavy  foods  are  better  borne 
by  those  who  take  plenty  of  exercise  or  are  accustomed  to  heavy 
work.  Probably  the  deep  sleep  which  this  favours  helps  the 
digestion.  But  on  the  other  hand  they  lose  much  by  sweating. 
And  as  their  livers  seize  whatever  of  the  aliment  has  not  yet 
digested  fully,  this  paves  the  way  for  fatal  illnesses  towards  the 
end  of  life,  or  at  the  beginning  of  life,  the  more  so  because  they 
trust  in  their  digestive  powers  too  much.  This  power  is  really 
due  to  the  deep  sleep  which  is  customary,  and  that  is  lost  by

old  age.

790.  Fruit.  Fresh  fruit  is  only  good  for  those  who  carry 
out  hard  work,  or  take  much  exercise,  or  for  persons  with  plenty 
of  bilious  humour,  or  during  the  height  of  summer.  Fruit 
should  be  taken  before  a  meal, — namely,  for  instance,  chrysomela, 
mulberries,  melons,  peaches,  and  prunes.  But  it  is  better  to 
regulate  oneself  by  using  other  articles  of  food  than  these,  for 
they  render  the  blood  too  watery,  and  so  it  is  apt  to  ferment.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  '405THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  '405

Hence  the  juices  of  fr.uits,  unless  taken  at  a  seasonable  time,  pave 
the  way  for  putrefactive  processes.  So,  too,  any  food  which  comes 
to  burden  the  blood  with  '' crude  "  humour  has  this  effect, 
though  it  is  true  that  sometimes  such  a;  food  may 'be  beneficial 
(e.g.,  cucumber  ;  c.  anguinalis).  That  is  why  people  who  make 
use  of  such  aliments,  even  though  they-are  primarily  infrigidant, 
are  likely  to  develop  febrile  diseases.

You  will  also  realize  that  it  is  when  watery  humour  is  not 
dispersed,  but  lingers  in  the  blood-vessels,  that  it  usually  becomes 
toxic.  However,  when  exercise  is  taken  before  such  aquosities 
have  become  aggregated,  and  exercise  is  taken  immediately 
after  eating  the  fruit,  these  aquosities  will  disperse  and  the  noxious 
effect  of  the  fruits  is  thereby  lessened.

Note  too  that  the  presence  of  "  crude  "  serous  humour  or  of 
wateriness  in  the  blood  prevents  the  nutrient  part  of  the  food 
from  adhering  to  the  tissues,  some  of  the  nutritive  value  of  the 
food  being  lost  in  consequence.

_A  person  who  partakes  of  fruit  must  (therefore)  take 
walking  exercise  afterwards,  and  then  eat  something  which  will 
cause  the  (aquosities)  to  flow  out.

791,,  Aliments  which  give  rise  to  (1)  wateriness  .;  (2) 
"  crude,"  raw,  immature  humour  ;  (3)  gross  humour,  and  bilious 
humour,  give  rise  to  febrile  diseases.  This  is  because  (1)  the 
watery  parts  permit  putrescence  to  occur  in  the  blood  ;  (2) 
viscous  gross  substances  close  the  orifices  (of  the  juice-canals)  ; 
and  (3)  the  (increase  of)  bilious  humour  adds  to  the  heat  of  the 
body,  and  renders  the  blood  sharp.Bitter  pot-herbs  are  sometimes  very  advantageous  in 
winter-time,  just  as  tasteless  herbs  are  beneficial  in  summer-time. 
792.  Correctives  of  unwholesome  foods.  If  a  person  is 
bound  to  partake  of  unwholesome  aliments,  he  should  do  so 
seldom  and  sparingly,  and  should  counteract  their  action  by 
combining  with  them  something  of  contrary  effect.  Thus,  if  a 
certain  sweet  food  is  injurious,  he  may  counteract  it  by  a  sour 
aliment  like  vinegar,  and  pomegranate,  and  an  acetous  syrup 
prepared  with  sour  wine  and  quince  and  the  like,  and  also  by 
procuring  evacuation.  Should  it  be  a  sour  aliment  that  is 
injurious  to  him,  he  may  follow  it  up  with  honey,  or  old  wine, 
taking  this  before  the  maturation  and  digestion  of  the  former  are 
complete.  If  it  be  an  oily  aliment  that  is  injurious,  this  can  be 
corrected  by  (a)  pungent  articles,  like  chestnut,  myrtle-seeds, 
carob  bean  of  Syria,  the  fruit  of  the  sidr  tree,  medlar  ;  (b)  bitters, 
such  as  conserved  elecampane  ;  (c)  salt  and  sharp  substances,  like

4o6  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

capers,  onions,  garlic  [that  is,  articles  usually  belonging  to  the 
second  course  of  a  meal],  and  other  contraries.

793.  If  the  body  is  in-  a  state  of  repletion  by  unhealthy 
humours,  this  state  may  be  counteracted  by  a  liberal  allowance 
of  commendable  attenuant  aliments.  If  the  body  is  one  which  is 
easily  purged,  moist  and  easily  digested  food  should  be  made 
use  of.

Galen  says  that  a  humid  article  of  food  is  nutrient  when  it 
is  separated  from  all  other  qualities,  and  is  as  it  were  tasteless 
— being  neither  sweet  nor  sour,  bitter  nor  acrid,  pungent 
nor  salt.

794.  A  heavy  food  which  is  divided  up  into  small  portions 
will  be  better  borne  than  one  which  is  taken  solid.794.  A  heavy  food  which  is  divided  up  into  small  portions 
will  be  better  borne  than  one  which  is  taken  solid.

If  .dry  aliments  be  taken  plentifully,  the  strength  will  fail 
and  the  colour  will  fade,  and  the  "  nature  "  become  dry.

Fatty  food  produces  lack  of  energy  and  vim,  and  creates  a 
false  appetite.  "  Cold  "  food  produces  lack  of  vim  and  is 
infrigidative  (or,  attenuant).  Sour  food  has  the  same  effect  as  old 
age  ;  it  dries  the  body  and  makes  it  lean.  Sharp  and  salt  food  is 
injurious  to  the  stomach.     Salt  food  is  bad  for  the  eyesight.

If  an  appropriate  aliment  is  oily,  and  is  followed  by  an 
uncommendable  aliment,  the  latter  will  decompose  it.

Viscous  aliment  experiences  delay  in  passing  through  the 
intestine.  Citrul  [a  species  of  cucumber]  passes  down  the 
intestine  more  rapidly  if  the  rind  is  taken  as  well  than  if  first 
peeled.  Bread  also  passes  down  more  quickly  if  the  crust  be 
taken  as  well  than  if  it  be  deprived  thereof  by  crumbling  it 
through  a  sieve.

If  a  fatigued  person,  -who  is  accustomed  to  a  mild  regimen, 
should  take  heavy  foods — as  for  instance,  a  dish  of  rice  with 
soured  milk — after  a  long  fast,  it  will  come  about  that  his  blood 
becomes  sharp  in  quality  and  as  if  ebullient.  Hence  reducing 
regimen  would  be  indicated  (e.g.,  blood-letting),  though  only  to 
a  moderate  extent.  A  similar  remedy  is  applicable  when  a  person 
is  angry.*

Note  too,  that  sweet  aliment  accelerates  the  "  nature  " 
before  the  food  is  matured  and  digested,  and  the  blood  is  tainted 
in  consequence.Note  too,  that  sweet  aliment  accelerates  the  "  nature  " 
before  the  food  is  matured  and  digested,  and  the  blood  is  tainted 
in  consequence.

795.  Incompatibilities  between  foods.  Certain  rules  must 
be  noted  in  regard  to  combining  various  articles  of  food.  Indian 
observers  and  others  have  long  taught  that  (i)  milk  must  not  be 
taken  with  sour  foods  ;   (2)  fish  must  not  be  taken  with  milk' —

*  Quick-tempered  ;  the  bilious  humour  easily  becomes  dominant  or  astir.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  4o7

for  in  that  case  chronic  ailments  such  as  leprosy*  may  develop; 
(3)  Pulse  must  not  be  taken  with  cheese  or  radishes  or  with  the 
flesh  of  flying  birds ;  (4)  a  polentaf  of  barley-meal  should  not 
follow  on  a  dish  of  rice  made  with  soured  milk^  ;  (5)  eatables 
should  not  have  oil  added,  or  oil  which  has  stood  in  a  brass 
vessel  ;  (6)  fleshmeat  should  not  be  taken  when  it  has  been 
roasted  over  live  coals-  (with  certain  herbs).

_  796.  Courses  of  a  meal.  To  have  several  courses  to  a  meal 
is  injurious  in  two  directions  :  (*)  the  rate  of  digestion  is  diverse, 
for _  the  part  that  digests  more  speedily  is  admixed  with  a  part 
which  is  not  yet  digested  ;  (b)  a  person  may  eat  too  much  of  one 
dish._  Already  in  ancient  times,  too,  persons  who  had  been  ex- 
ercising themselves  avoided  this  error,  being  satisfied  to  partake 
of  meat  alone- in  the  morning,  and  bread  alone  at  supper-time. 
During:  the  summer  it  is  best  to  take  the  (main)  meal  at  an 
hour  when  the  temperature  is  cooler.

During  a  period  of  fasting  the  stomach  sometimes  fills  with 
unhealthy  humours.During  a  period  of  fasting  the  stomach  sometimes  fills  with 
unhealthy  humours.

Note  further  that  when  meat  is  roasted,  and  taken  with 
onions  and  eggs  [a  special  recipe  '  kabab'§],  it  is  very  nutritious  ; 
but  it  is  slow  in  passing  through  the  intestines,  and  lingers  in  the 
caecum.  _  White  soup  [a  Syrian  dish  containing  rice,  honey, 
onions]  _is  nourishing,  and  when  onion  is  added  it  dispels 
flatulencies  ;   if  onions  are  omitted,  borborygmi  arise.

Some  people  consider  that  grapes  are  good  to  take  after 
roasted  meats  ;  but  the  contrary  is  really  the  case  ;  they  are  very 
bad  indeed.  So  too,  is  a  dish  containing  dates,  figs,  and  the  like. 
But  (dry)  pomegranate  seeds  are  good.

Fowl. — The  flesh  of  partridge  is  dry  and  constipating  ; 
but  that  of  chicken  is  moist  and  relaxing  to  the  bowels.  Roast 
fowls  are  better  if  they  have  been  prepared  (stuffed)  in  the  belly 
of  a  kid  or  lamb  (see  §  25 1)  because  that  preserves  their  moisture. 
Chicken-broth  tempers  the  humours  strongly  ;  more  so  than 
fowl-broth,  though  the  latter  is  more  nutritious.

Ti,„/Tw0-k£dl2f  J,eProfy  are  distinguished  by  the  Arabs  :— baras  and  juzam. 
The  former  is  white,  and  the  other  "  black."  The  latter  is  leprosy  of  the  joints 
Both  are  ascribed  to  dietetic  errors,  especially  fish-eating,  and  milk-drinking.  (Burton' 
111.370).     The  term  used  m  the  present  passage  is  juzam

_  t  Polenta  =sawiq  =ptisane  (Lane).  This  is  native  frumenty  and  green 
gram  (mostly  barley),  toasted,  powdered,  mixed  with  dates  or  sugar  and  eaten 
on  journeys  when  cooking  is  impracticable.  It  is  carried  in  a  meal-sac  (Burton 
iv.  491).  v  '1  Soured  milk.  This  is  milk  artificially  soured.  It  is  eaten  with  rice  and  is 
a  component  of  salatah,  cucumber  salad.  (Burton,  iv.  132;  who  adds,  "  all  nomads 
who  live  on  milk  never  take  it  fresh.")

§  Kabab._       This  is  mutton  or  lamb  cut  into  small  squares  and  grilled  on 
skewers.       It  is  the  equivalent  of  our  "  roast  meat."     (Burton,   iv.    154)

4o8  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Kid  of  the  goats  is  better  when  cold  than  when  warm 
because  the  steam  quiesces  it.  The  flesh  of  Iamb  is  better  when 
hot  because  its  unsatisfactory"  odour  is  thereby  dispersed

Meat  boiled  in  water  and  vinegar  [a  Persian  dishj  should 
be  served  hot,  and  then  needs  no  saffron  in  it.  But  if  served 
cold  saffron  must  be  introduced.

Honey  confections  may  be  made  with  dates  or  wheat  flour 
(sweetmeats);  but  they  are  unhealthy  because  they  cause 
obstructions. and  evoke  thirst.

Bread'  is  an  unsatisfactory  food  when  it  does  not  digest, 
more  so  than  (flesh-food)  when  it  does  not  digest.

8.     Rules  Concerning  the  Use  of  Water  and  Wines.

797  Water*  is  more  suitable  for  attempered  constitutions 
when  it  is  moderately  cold,  than  when  it  has  been  cooled  by  the 
addition  of  snow,  especially  if  the  snow  were  not  pure  Even 
with  good  snow  there  remains  the  objection  that  that  which 
passes  out  from  it  is  harmful  to  the  nerves  and  the  organs  of 
respiration  and  all  the  internal  organs  Moreover  a  person 
cannot  tolerate  it  unless  he  is  very  full-blooded,  and  it  will  do 
harm  sooner  or  later,  even  after  the  lapse  of  years.

Certain  empirics  assert  that  one  must  not  mingle  well-water 
with  river-water,  except  by  taking  the  one  after  the  other  has 
passed  out  of  the  stomach.  .Certain  empirics  assert  that  one  must  not  mingle  well-water 
with  river-water,  except  by  taking  the  one  after  the  other  has 
passed  out  of  the  stomach.  .

We  have  already  spoken  about  the  properties  and  choice  of 
waters  and  how  to  '  correct  them  when  bad.  Addition  with 
vinegar  rectifies  unhealthy  waters.

798  True  and  False  Thirst.  One  should  remember  that  it 
is  very  harmful  to  drink  water  while  fasting,  or  after  exercise,  or 
after  the  bath,  especially  when  either  of  these  was  carried  out  on 
an  empty  stomach.  It  is  also  harmful  to  gratify  the  false  thirst  of 
the  night,  like  that  from  which  drunkards  or  topers  suffer,  or 
when  the  vegetative  power  strives  to  accomplish  digestion  in  the 
face  of  a  preceding  satiety  with  water.  If  the  thirst  be  very 
urgent,  the  water  should  be  such  as  has  been  exposed  to  cool  air, 
and  rinse  out  the  mouth  with  cold  water.  If  this  is  not  effective, 
some  water  may  be  taken  out  of  a  vessel  with  a  narrow  mouth 
This  is  sometimes  agreeable  to  a  toper,  who  would  not  be  hurt 
by  drinking  while  fasting.     If  a  person  cannot  avoid  drinking

"         *  ■■  The  usual  beverage  at  meals  is  water,  which  is  dru-k  from ^oolmg,  porous 
^^e^sw^  ^  or

^Tdeiictus  shSis  made  of  a  conserve  of  sugar  and  violet-flowers.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  4o9

while  fasting,  let  him  take  water  ;  especially  if  he  has  been  taking 
exercise.  In  this  case,  let  him  first  drink  wine  diluted  with  hot 
water.  .  ..  .while  fasting,  let  him  take  water  ;  especially  if  he  has  been  taking 
exercise.  In  this  case,  let  him  first  drink  wine  diluted  with  hot 
water.  .  ..  .

_  False  thirst  is  relieved  by  going  to  sleep  without  quenching 
it  with  fluid.  For  during  sleep  the  natural  power  disperses  the 
matter  which  is  the  cause  of  the  thirst,  and  it  does  this  more 
effectively  if  the  thirst  was  not  yielded  to  by  a  draught.  To 
attempt  to  allay  false  thirst  by  a  draught,  is  to  interrupt  the 
digestive  power,  and  the  false  thirst  will  return  later  because  the 
humour  giving  rise  to  it  is  still  there.  When  there  is  false  thirst, 
water  should  not  be  taken  rapidly  and  greedily,  but  through  a 
straw.

799.  It  is  bad  to  drink  much  cold  water.  If  it  is  very 
imperative  to  .do  so,  defer  it  till  after  a  sufficient  meal.

Tepid  water  evokes  nausea.  Water  warmer  than  that,  if 
drunk  frequently,  weakens  the  [tone  of  the]  stomach.  But  when 
taken  infrequently,  it  washes  out  the  stomach  and  opens  the 
bowels.

Wine. 
Lane169  describes  as  the  usual  "wine"  a  preparation  made  by 
using  dry  grapes  or  dry  dates  in  water  to  extract  their  sweetness  ; 
this  is  allowed  to  ferment  slightly  until  it  acquires  a  little  sharpness 
or  pungency.     It  was  not  kept  after  the  third  day.       (i,  293).  ■

Wine  at  parties  was  rather  thick,  and  required  straining  before 
use.  This  was  because  the  wine  was  cured  in  vessels  whose  interior 
had  been  coated  with  pitch  (ib.  p.  299.)Virtues  of  Wine. — "  As  to  the  advantages  that  be  in  wine- 
it  strengtheneth  the  viscera  and  banisheth  care,  and  moveth  to 
generosity  and  preserveth  health  and  digestion  ;  it  conserveth  the 
body,  expelleth  disease  from  the  joints,  purirleth  the  frame  of  corrupt 
humours,  engendereth  cheerfulness,  gladdeneth  the  heart  of  man 
and  keepeth  up  the  natural  heat ;  it  enforceth  the  liver  and  removeth 
obstructions,  reddeneth  the  cheeks,  cleareth  the  brain  and  deferreth 
grey    hairs."     (Night    452  :     Burton).

800.  White  light  wine  is  best  for  those  who  are  in  a 
heated  state,  for  it  does  not  cause  headache.  But  sometimes  it  is 
humectant.  It  may  relieve  a  headache  when  that  is  due  to  heat 
in  the  stomach.

Instead  of  a  light  white  wine,  one  may  use  a  wine  which  has 
been  clarified  by  infusing  honey  or  bread  in  it,  especially  if  this  is 
done  two  hours  before  the  wine  is  required.

Heavy  wine,  if  it  is  sweet,  is  best  for  a  person  who  wants  to 
put  on  weight  and  become  strong.  But  he  must  beware  of 
developing  obstructions.  Old  red  wine  is  best  for  a  person  of 
cold  phlegmatic  constitution.

4io  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

801  It  is  -bad  to  drink  wine  after  any  of  the  various  dishes, 
for  the  reason  we  have  already  explained.  It  should  not  be  taken 
till  after  digestion,  the  food  having  passed  into  the  small  intestine. 
To  drink  wine  upon  food  forming  bad  chyme,  either  during  the 
meal  or  before  it  has  digested,  is  bad  because  it  causes  the  bad 
chyme  to  be  absorbed  and  pass  into  the  remote  parts  of  the  body. 
The  same  is  true  if  wine  is  taken  after  fruit,  especially  melons.It  is  better  to  begin  with  a  small  amount  than  a  large  one. 
To  take  two  or  even  three  glassfuls  [  =  |  pint,  according  to  Lane] 
upon  a  meal  is  not  hurtful  to  anyone  accustomed  thereto,  or  to  a 
healthy  person  who  has  been  bled.

802  Wine  is  beneficial  for  persons  with  a  predominance 
of  bilious  humour,  because  it  gets  rid  of  the  excess  of  this  by 
provoking  the  urine.  It  is  good  for  persons  of  humid  tempera- 
ment because  it  brings  humidities  to  maturity.  The  better  its 
aroma  (bouquet)  and  taste,  the  more  beneficial.

Wine  is  also  very  efficient  in  causing  the  products  of 
digestion  to  become  disseminated  through  the  body.  It  cuts 
phlegm  and  disperses  it.  It  separates  off  the  bilious  humour  and 
draws  it  on  into  the  urine.  It  renders  the  atrabilious  humours 
more  mobile  and  able  to  leave  the  system.  It  counteracts  the 
harmful  influence  of  this  atrabilious  humour  by  contrariety,  and 
it  breaks  up  all  entanglements  without  the  necessity  of  extraneous

'  The  varieties  of  wine  have  been  already  enumerated  in  the

proper  place.  r    .

803  Wine  does  not  readily  inebriate  a  person  of  vigorous 
brain,  for  the  brain  is  then  not  susceptible  to  ascending  harmful 
gaseous  products  nor  does  it  take  up  heat  from  the  wine  to  any 
degree  beyond  what  is  expedient.  Therefore  it  renders  his  mental 
power  clearer  than  before  ;  other  talents  are  not  affected  in  such 
an  advantageous  manner.    The  effect  is  different  on  persons  who

are  not  of  this  calibre.  .

A  person  who  is  weak  in  the  chest,  to  the  extent  that  winter- 
time is  trying  to  the  breathing,  cannot  [wisely]  take  much  wineare  not  of  this  calibre.  .

A  person  who  is  weak  in  the  chest,  to  the  extent  that  winter- 
time is  trying  to  the  breathing,  cannot  [wisely]  take  much  wine

804  A  person  who  wishes  to  take  much  wine  should  avoid 
taking  much  food  beforehand,  and  the  components  of  the  meal 
should  include  diuretics.  If  he  should  become  replete  with  food 
or  wine,  he  should  procure  emesis  and  take  hydromel  (  =  honey 
and  water);  then  procure  emesis  again  ;  then  wash  out  the 
mouth  with  vinegar  and  honey,  and  apply  cold  water  on  the  face.

805  If  wine  has  an  injurious  effect  on  the  body  and  is  heat- 
ing to  the  liver,  the  diet  should  include  some  dish  containing  for

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  411

instance  the  juice  of  .(sour)  unripe  grapes,  and  the  like,  and  the 
articles  of  food  which  are  generally  served  with  the  wine  after 
the  end  of  a  meal  (dessert)  should  include  such  as  pomegranate, 
and  tart  things  like  citron.

If  the  wine  is  liable  to  go  to  the  head,  one  should  take 
less  and  take  it  dilute  and  clarified.  After  the  meal,  he  should 
take  such  as  quince  with  his  wine.

If  the  harmful  effect  of  wine  consists  in  being  heating  to 
the  stomach,  the  dessert  should  include  toasted  myrtle-seeds  ; 
and  one  should  suck  a  few  camphor  lozenges  and  other  astringent 
and  acrid  things.

Harmful  action  of  wine.

Remedy.

Heats  the  body  and  the  liver 
Goes  to  the  head 
Heating  to  stomach 
Cooling  to  stomach

Bitter   fruit,   e.g.,   unripe  grape-juice  ;    the

dessert  should  be  pomegranate  ;     citron. 
Take  the  wine  dilute  and  clear  ;    as   dessert,

cydonia. 
Toasted  myrtle  seeds  ;    suck  a  few  camphor

lozenges  ;      astringents  ;      acrid  things. 
The  dessert  should  include  galangale,  cloves,

orange-peel.cydonia. 
Toasted  myrtle  seeds  ;    suck  a  few  camphor

lozenges  ;      astringents  ;      acrid  things. 
The  dessert  should  include  galangale,  cloves,

orange-peel.

808.  As  you  know,  old  wine  is  like  a  medicine.  It  is  only 
feebly  nutritious.  New  wine  clogs  the  liver  and  produces  a 
hepatic  "  dysentery  "  by  giving  rise  to  much  gas.

The  best  wine  to  take  is  that  which  is  clear,  white,  tending 
to  a  red_  tinge,  of  good  bouquet,  and  neither  tart  nor  sweet  in 
taste,  neither  old  nor  new.

A  good  drink  which  is  widely  known  is  made  as  follows: 
take  three  parts  of  marjoram,  and  one  of  water.  Mix  well. 
Boil  to  a  fourth.

"  and  the  host  set  before  him,  in  vessels  of  gold  and  silver  and  crystal,  raisin-wine 
boiled  down  to  one-third  with  fruits  and  spices."     (Night  415,  Burton).

807.  If  a  gnawing  feeling  come  on  after  taking  wine, 
take  pomegranate,  cold  water  and  syrup  of  absinthe  next  morning. 
Enter  the  bath  after  partaking  of  a  small  meal.

Wine  which  is  thoroughly  diluted  softens  the  stomach, 
makes  it  humid  and  allays  thirst.  Diluted  wine  intoxicates 
quickly  because  the  watery  constituent  takes  it  quickly  into  the 
blood.

808.  The  wise  person  will  avoid  drinking  wine  when  fast- 
ing or  .before  the  limbs  have  been  refreshed  in  warm  water,  or 
after  vigorous  exercise  ;  for  both  these  entail  a  strain  on  the 
brain  and  nerves,  and  render  a  person  liable  to  develop  cramp  and

4i2  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

amentia  ;    they  produce  either  actual  illness' or  at  least  undue

heat.

809.  Intoxication.  Frequent  intoxication  breaks  down  the 
constitution  of  the  liver  and  brain,  weakens  the  nerves,  and  tends 
to  produce  diseases  of  the  nervous  system,  apoplexy,  and  sudden

death.death.

When  wine  is  taken  to  excess  it  is  changed,  m  the  case  of 
some  persons,  into  a  bad  kind  of  bilious  humour  ;  or,  in  the  case 
of  others,  into  pure  vinegar.  In  both  cases,  the  changes  in  the 
stomach  aire  very  injurious.

Some  persons  claim  that  it  is  an  advantage^  to  become 
intoxicated  once  or  twice  a  month,  for,  they  say,  it  allays  the 
animal  passions,  inclines  to  repose,  provokes  the  urine  and  sweat, 
and  gets  rid  of  effete  matters.

The  most  detrimental  of  the  effects  of  wine  is  that  upon 
the  brain.  That  is  why  .those  who  are  not  strong  in  that  way 
should  take  but  the  very  least  amount  of  wine,  and  diluted.

Treatment.  If  called  to  a  person  who  has  drunk  wine  to 
excess,  emesis  should  be  procured  as  speedily  as  possible. 
Failing  that  he  may  drink  a  considerable  quantity  of  water,  with 
or  without  honey.  When  emesis  has  been  procured,  he  should 
bathe  in  a  full  length  bath.  Then  he  should  be  thoroughly 
rubbed  with  oil,  and  left  to  go  to  sleep.

810.  To  give  wine  to  youths  is  like  adding  fire  to  a  fire 
already  prepared  with  matchwood.  Young  adults  should  take  it 
in  moderation.    But  elderly  persons  may  take  as  much  as  they  can

tolerate.

Wine  is  borne  better  in  a  cold  country  than  in  a  hot  one.tolerate.

Wine  is  borne  better  in  a  cold  country  than  in  a  hot  one.

811 .  If  a  person  wishes  deliberately  to  take  his  fill  of  wine, 
he  must  take  no  food,  or  anything  sweet.  The  [Persian]  "  white 
broth  "  [made  of  meat,  onions,  butter,  cheese,  etc.]  may  be 
allowed  ;  also  grated  bread  steeped  in  broth  made  with  fat  meat 
cut  into  pieces.  He  should  have  an  inunction.  He  should 
avoid  physical  labour  or  exercise.  Then  after  the  meal,  when 
he  wishes  to  drink,  he  should  accompany  it  with  almonds,  salted 
lentils,  and  a  condiment  prepared  with  salted  capers.

It  is  an  advantage  to  include  in  the  menu  cabbage  boiled 
with  meat  ;  olives  boiled  in  water,  and  the  like.  For  this  con- 
duces to  drinking  more  wine.  Anything  which  lightens  the 
fumes  of  the  wine  is  also  helpful — for  instance  the  seeds  of 
■Syrian  beet  ;  cummin,  dry  rue,  pennyroyal,  Nabathean  salt, 
cardamoms  ;  and  more  particularly,  any  aliments  which  are 
viscous .  and  glutinous,  for  they  aggregate  the  fumes  (e.g.  oily,

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  413

sweet  and  viscous  articles  of  food)  and  prevent  inebriety  in  spite 
of  drinking  so  much  wine,  by  restraining  the  rapidity  with  which 
the  wine  enters  the  blood.

Inebriation  is  rapid  (1)  when  there  is  weakness  of  the  brain, 
(2)  when  there  is  an  abundance  of  humours  ;  (3)  when  the  wine 
is  strong.;  (4)  when  the  food  is  scanty  ;  (5)  when  the  regimen 
is  itself  depraved  ;  (o~)  when  the  wine  is  taken  continuously  (for 
a  long  time).

When  the  cause  of  the  ready  inebriation  is  weakness  of  the 
brain,  the  remedy  is  to  use  the  epithemes  named  in  the  chapter 
on  catarrh,  and  give  sedatives,  and  avoid  fluids.812.  _  The  following  syrup  averts  inebriety  :  one  part  of 
juice  of  white  cabbage;  one  part  of  juice  of  unripe  pomegranate,  a 
half-part  of  vinegar.  Simmer.  Take  one  ounce  before  taking  the 
wine.  The  following  is  another  remedy  :  pills  containing  salt, 
rue,  black  cummin.  Eat  pill  by  pill.  The  following  is  another.— 
Take  seeds  of  Syrian  beet,  cummin,  peeled  bitter  almond, 
pennyroyal,    absinthe,    Nabathean     salt,    cardamom,    dry    rue.

A  person  who  is  not  afraid  of  a  "  hot  "  mixture,  may  take 
two  drams  by  weight  in  a  draught  with  cold  water,  fasting.

813.  Agents  which  restore  from  inebriety.  Let  the  person 
take  water  and  vinegar  several  times  one  after  the  other,  or  whey- 
water  and  junket.  Let  him  sniff  at  camphor  and  sandalwood. 
Put  cold  repercussives  over  his  head,  such  as  rose  oil  and  wine- 
vinegar.

The  treatment  of  inebriety  is  discussed  in  the  special  part.

"  He  said  :  '  arouse  him,  O  Sahim.'  So  he  made  him  smell  vinegar  and 
frankincense  ;  and  he  cast  the  Bhang  from  his  nostrils  and  opened  his  eyes  "  (Night 
649).  To  this,  Burton  remarks  :  "  acids  have  ever  been  and  are  still  administered 
as  counter-inebriants,  while  hot  spices  and  sweets  greatly  increase  the  effect  of 
Bhang,  opium,    henbane,  datura,  etc."

814.  Anaesthetics.  If  it  is  desirable  to  get  a  person 
unconscious  quickly,  without  his  being  harmed,  add  sweet- 
smelling  moss  to  the  wine,  or  lignum  aloes.814.  Anaesthetics.  If  it  is  desirable  to  get  a  person 
unconscious  quickly,  without  his  being  harmed,  add  sweet- 
smelling  moss  to  the  wine,  or  lignum  aloes.

If  it  is  desirable  to  procure  a  deeply  unconscious  state,  so 
as  to  enable  the  pain  to  be  borne  which  is  involved  in  painful 
applications  to  a  member,  place  darnel-water  into  the  wine  ;  or 
administer  fumitory,  opium,  hyoscyamus  (half-dram  dose  of  each) ; 
nutmeg,  crude  aloes-wood  (4  grains  of  each).  Add  this  to  the 
wine,  and  take  as  much  as  is  necessary  for  the  purpose. — Or,  boil 
black  ■  hyoscyamus  in  water,  with  mandragore  bark,  until  it 
becomes  red.     Add  this  to  the  wine.

4 14  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Burton,104  (ii.478),  commenting  on  the  word  tabannuj  (hemp), 
which  is  an  "  anaesthetic  "  adds,  "  anaesthetics  have  been  used  in 
surgery  throughout  the  East  for  centuries  before  ether  and  chloroform 
became  the  fashion  in  the  civilized  West."     (Night  263.)§  248.  Strictly  speaking,  instructions  on  diet  to  the  patient 
should  rest  upon  practical  acquaintance  with  the  culinary  art^  as 
having  a  prior  place  over  the  questions  of  forbidding  and.  allowing 
such  and  such  articles  of  food,  food  values,  and  the  like.  The 
form  in  which  a  given  article  in  the  dietary  is  to  be  given  is  of  real 
importance,  and  the  combinations  into  which  the  foods  enter  require 
notice  at  least  to  the  same  extent  as  is  done  with  the  ingredients 
of  a  medicinal  prescription.  Mutual  decompositions  occur  with 
foodstuffs  either  before  or  after  ingestion.  Interactions  may  render 
the  "  composite  "  indigestible,  or  non-palatable,  or  actually  harmful  ; 
the  use  of  too  little  of  one  ingredient  in  a  recipe  or  of  too  much  should 
be  prevented  ;  the  temperature  to  which  the  mixture  is  exposed 
—the  rate  at  which  that  temperature  is  reached,  whether  too  quickly 
or  too  slowly — whether  it  is  maintained  steadily  or  whether  through 
some  mismanagement  the  "  mixture  "  was  allowed  to  cool  noticeably 
in  the  midst  of  the  operations — all  such  details  call  for  considera- 
tion both  as  to  a  possible  explanation  of  persistent  gastro-intestinal 
trouble,  and  as  to  guiding  the  management  of  any  ailment  in  any 
system  or  organ.The  displacement  of  materia  medica  from  its  ancient  throne  is 
partly  to  be  ascribed  to  a  cessation  of  attention  to  detailed  knowledge 
about  herbs*  and  the  part  which  horticultural  skill  and  care,  as 
well  as  climatic  conditions  and  geographical  factors  play  in_  the 
production  of  efficacious  remedies ;  it  is  also  ascribable  to  entirely 
insufficient  attention  to  the  preparation  of  the  recipes — for  these 
originally  were  exacting  as  to  manner  of  compounding  ;  and  both 
these  types  of  indifference  rest  upon  a  scepticism  as  to  the  possibility 
of  such  details  being  of  the  least  importance.  In  the  absence  of 
knowledge  on  these  points,  the  decriers  of  the  use  of  drugs,  and  of 
complex  prescriptions   speak   unjustifiably.

So,  again,  in  the  matter  of  the  preparation  of  the  invalid's 
food,  or  the  dietary  for  the  chronic  ailment,  it  is  reasonable  to  plead 
for  that  care  whose  real  importance  is  every  day  proved  by  those 
who,  having  the  means,  will  desire  their  meals  from  some  one  chef 
in  preference  to  some  other.

§  249.  In  the  whole  of  the  preceding  chapter  Avicenna  is 
referring  to  a  cuisine  which  is  foreign  to  us.     Perhaps  of  all  European

*  It  has  proved  impracticable  to  include  in  this  volume  a  translation  of  the 
second  Book  of  the  Qamm,  which  deals  with  this  subject,  and  provides  a  text  capable 
of  thorough  expansion  and  adaptation  to  modern  requirements.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  415THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  415

countries,  Spain  offers  the  nearest  approach  to  his.  Those  who  have 
been  in  the  East,  and  have  enquired  into  the  practical  details  in 
their  cookery  recipes — not  merely  such  as  may  be  available  in  written 
form,  but  also  such  as  are  actually  carried  out  in  well-to-do  estab- 
lishments or  by  the  humbler  housewife,  (for  in  this  country  also 
there  is  much  difference  between  "  Beeton  "  and  actual  practice) 
are  more  easily  able  to  follow  Avicenna's  nomenclature.

§  250.  Very  little  research  suffices  to  convince  the  enquirer 
of  the  very. great  scope  of  this  subject.  Interesting  as  it  is,  it  would 
therefore  lead  too  far  to  attempt  proper  discussion  in  these  pages. 
It  must  suffice  to.  insist  that  the  names  of  foods  and  dishes  which 
Avicenna  gives  bear  a  different  meaning  to  those  same  names 
with  which  we  are  familiar.  Confusion  would  only  be  prevented 
by  giving  the  names  in  the  original  language.  Many  of  the  words 
are  Persian  ;  some  of  the  dishes  are  Syrian  ;  others  are  Indian. 
§  251.  Arabian  Dishes.— The  following  notes  from  Lane 
and  Burton  -will  serve  to  show  the  type  of  dishes  which  may  be 
regarded  as  characteristically  Arabian."  Among  the  more  common  dishes  are  the  following  : — Lamb 
or  mutton  cut  into  small  pieces,  and  stewed  with  various  vegetables, 
and  sometimes  with  peaches,  apricots,  or  jujubes,  and  sugar ; 
cucumbers  or  small  gourds,  or  the  fruit  of  the  black  or  white  egg- 
plant, stuffed  with  rice  and  minced  meat,  etc.  ;  vine-leaves  or 
pieces  of  lettuce-leaf  or  cabbage-leaf,  enclosing  a  similar  composi- 
tion ;  small  morsels  of  lamb  or  mutton  roasted  on  skewers,  called 
kabab.  (796).  Fowls  simply  roasted  or  boiled,  or  boned,  and 
stuffed  with  raisins,  pistachio  'nuts,  crumbled  bread,  and  parsley  ; 
and  various  kinds  of  pastry  and  other  sweets.

"  The  repast  is  frequently  commenced  with  soup,  and  is  gener- 
ally ended  with  boiled  rice,  mixed  with  a  little  butter,  and  seasoned 
with  salt  and  pepper  ;  or,  after  this,  is  served  a  water-melon  or  other 
fruit,  or  a  bowl  of  a  sweet  drink  composed  of  water  with  raisins, 
and. sometimes. other  kinds  of  fruit,  boiled  in  it,  and  then  sugar,  and 
with  a  little  rose-water  added  to  it  when  cool.  The  meat,  having 
generally  little  fat,  is  cooked  with  clarified  butter,  and  is  so  thoroughly 
done  that  it  is  easily  divided  with  the  fingers.  A  whole  lamb, 
stuffed  in  the  same  manner  as  the  fowls  above  mentioned,  is  not  a 
very   uncommon    dish.     (Lane,159    Nights,    i.    171.)"They  brought  him  .  .  .  dishes'" of  poultry  besides  other 
birds  and  brewises,  fritters  and  cooling  marinades."  (Night  415, 
Burton).  .  .  .  "  a  mess  of  cooked  pomegranate  seed."  (Night,  712. } 
"  A  very  common  kind  of  pastry  is  a  pancake,  which  is  made 
very  thin  (662),  and  folded  over  several  times  like  a  napkin  ;  it  is 
saturated  with  butter,  and  generally  sweetened  with  honey  or  sugar  ; 
as  is  also  another  kind  which  somewhat  resembles  vermicelli." 
(Lane.)

'Adaslyah  :  soup  of  yellow  lentils,  made  by  boiling  them  in  water  till  nearly 
dissolved,  and  then  adding  vinegar,  coriander,  and  salt.

Faturat:  junket :  a  light  food  for  early  breakfast,  of  which  the  Fatlrah-cake 
was  a  favourite  item.      (Burton,  vi.  160.)

4i6  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Fruits.— Almond,  almond-apricot,  apple,  apricot,  banana,  bergamot  pear, 
bitter  orange  blood-orange,  cherry,  citron,  date,  fig,  grape,  hazelnut,  jujube,  lemon, 
lime,  lote  mulberry,  olive8  peach/plum,  pomegranate,  quince,  ^d°ck,  su^^ie, 
sweet-orange,    sycamore-fig,    walnut,  -  water-melon.     (Lane,    i.    301,     Burton,    v.

28l~28Hisrimtyah.-A  broth  of  kid's  flesh,  lamb,  and  fowl  seasoned  with  hisrim,  the 
iuice  expressed  from  the  grape  while  unripe.

Tamar-  palm-pith  eaten  with  sugar  (Burton,  v.  284).

KuZ  'af-^FdC  "  Cake"  ;  bun.  A  special  sweet  cake  eaten  with  dates  and 
sherbets.     (Burton,   iv.   394.)

I Sir  verrnicelli  cake  ;  a  favourite  dish  of  wheaten  flour  worked  some- 
what finer  than  our  vermicelli,  fried  with  samn  ■  (butter  melted  and  clarified)  and 
Twettened  wrth  honey  or  sugar.  It  may  be  sweetened  with  bees'  honey  N  lght  989)  m 
preference  to  the  frequently  used  various  syrups.     (Burton,  vi.  150.)IS.-AceidPminSd(7fl9eimeat,  dressed  with  vinegar  and  honey  or  with 
„HH  svriiTi      Raisins   a  few  figs  and  chiches  were  sometimes  added      (i^ane,  1.  435.)

Ti* -A  cake  or  bun,  the  size  of  the  palm  of  the  hand  with  two  long 
cuts  and  sundry  obhque  crosscuts,  made  of  leavened  dough,  glazed  with  egg  and 
dSfiedbTtter  and  flavoured  with  spices  (cinnamon,  curcuma,  artesmisia,  prunus 
Salat  and'sundry  aromatic  seeds-specified  by  Lane  as  aniseed,  mgella,  absin- 
thium (Artemisia  arborescens)  and  camphor,  etc.     (rxignts,  v.  509.)

YT£r-St7wSee  Implicated  broth  prepared  from  rice  and  meat.    (Burton,

1V'  ^zlrdak  —A  rice  dish.     Rice  dressed  with  honey  and  saffron  (ib.  p.  385). 
Zirbaj.—A  sour  meat  dish  similar  to  sikbaj  (above).

§  252.  The  following  scheme  serves  to  distinguish  differences 
often  overlooked  in  the  popular  dictionary  definitions  :—

Word.

Definition.

1  Aliment         -        -        -  Palatable   food-material.     Raw   foods    often  in  their

1.  Aiimenx  natural   state    (Diet,    syn :       tood,    nourishment)

=  15  +  non-nutrient,  22  6  and  c.

2  Article  of  food      -        -  The  ingredients   of   a  "  dish."     They  are  sometimes

2.  Article  01  iooq  ^  sometimes  prepared  or  manufactured.      Any

"  foods  "  obtainable  at  the  various  shops.

3.  Beverage       -       -        -  Any  agreeable  liquor  for   drinking   (Diet.) 
4      Diet        -        -       -        -   («)  2  ;     (b)  exact  order  and  No.  of  8.

c'     Diet-drink  -        -  A    medicated    liquor     (Diet.)

6      Dietarv  -        -        -  A  course   of   diet  ;      allowance   of   provisionsI(Dict.)

A  list  of  2. 
7.     Dietetics        -       -        -  A  science  dealing  with  4,  2,  etcA  list  of  2. 
7.     Dietetics        -       -        -  A  science  dealing  with  4,  2,  etc

Rules  for   regulating   diet   (Diet.) 
R      Dishes  -        -  The  product  of  a  recipe  as  served  on  the  table,  whether

8-     DlShSS  "  cooked  or  raw  (e.g.,  salad  dish,  etc.),  2,  4.

/-General  terms  for  anything  not  immediately  harmful. 
9.     Drinkables  -  '  Not  necessarily  harmless  after  leaving  the  stomach.

10.     Eatables         -  I  Not  necessarily  nutritious.

•H       Food  .        -        -  A  general  term  for  anything  which  *'  being  digested

U-     F°°d  nourishes   the  body"    (Diet).     Syn.   for  literary

style  ;        food-material ;        aliment ;        nutrient ; 
provisions — but    only   so    applicable   loosely.

12.  Food-stuffs  -        -  (a)  9,  2  (6)  1  it  .    „

13.  Food-material      -        -  Scholast.  :      a   special   ex    of       materia  „

14.  Meal       -        -        -        -  A  course  or  series  of  dishes—    taken  at  one    ume.

1^      Nutrient        -        -        -  The  actual  nutritive  substances  of  which  9,  10,  11,  21

15.  Autrienr.  ^  ^^      potential  nutriment.

Nutriment     -        -        -  The  nutritive  subs,  which  enter  the  blood  (i.e.,  sep.  ott

by  digestion  in  stomach).;

16

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  4I?

17.  Nutritive  substance     -  The  chem.  subs,  known  to  biochemistry-

Proteins,    CHO,    fats,    salts    as    general    groups-

18.  Potables        -       -        .  Same^sT^3'    glUC°S6'    ^    ™   ^^   SubS"        '

19.  Ptisan  -       -        -  A  special  form  of  beverage,   medicinal.

20.  Provisions  -        -  Roughly,  2,  3  ;     more  exactly,  2  as  found  in  certain19.  Ptisan  -       -        -  A  special  form  of  beverage,   medicinal.

20.  Provisions  -        -  Roughly,  2,  3  ;     more  exactly,  2  as  found  in  certain

aPSl 
oo      wCt?alS'  ^  "       "        "  Same  as  17  '    i-e-'  certain  special  forms  of  2 
22.     Waste  matters      -        -  («)    Eifete    matters   if  after    metabolism;     ' (6)   Non- 
nutrient  substances  of  1,  2,  10,  .&c.  ;     (c)  entirely 
indigestible;   .-.  never  absorbed.

§  253       Some  of  the  preceding  may  be  grouped  as  follows  :— 
2  =n  (12)  +  n'  (12')  or  n  (13).

12  chemically  contains  aminoacids,  carbohydrates,  hydro- 
carbons, salts,  and  metaphysically  the  four  '"'elements  " 
2  are  taken  (a)  raw  (milk,  eggs,  salads,  fruits)  ;

(b)  prepared  in  some  way  (i.)  dairy  products, 
.:  confectionery,    bakery ;     (ii.)    groceries,

spices,    condiments  ;      (iii.)    flesh   food  ; 
fish;    fowl;  (iv.)  vegetables  ;  pot-herbs; 
(v.)  special   dishes  =  8. 
8  contribute  to  make  14. 
After  the  meal   has   been  taken,   the   food   material   becomes 
(a)  nutriment— nutritious  to  a  varying  degree  ;  (b)  effete  substances, 
or  wastes.

After  circulating  these  are  classified  as  (a)  true  nutrients; 
[p)  excrementitious  substances  (products  of  metabolism  which  are 
no  longer  of  use  to  any  tissue).

9.      On  Sleep  and  the  Waking  State.

815.  The  causes  of  natural  sleep  and  of  lethargy,  and 
their  opposite  states— the  waking  state,  and  insomnia;*  their 
effects  ;  the  remedial  measures  applicable  when  they  are  baneful  ; 
the  significance  of  each  ;  and  all  other  points  about  them— all 
these  have  been  dealt  with  in  brief  in  the  appropriate  place 
(336-340).    The  special  treatment  will  be  discussed  later.816.  Physiological  effects  of  sleep.  At  the  present,  we  may 
say  that  sleep  in  moderation  (i)  assists  the  vegetative  faculties 
in  their  functions,  and  (2)  brings  the  sensitive  faculties  into 
repose  and  in  so  doing  (3)  renews  and  restores  them,  and  thereby 
(4)  arrests  the  dissipation  of  the  breath  (the  vital  power).  Hence 
(1)  the  digestion  of  the  food  in  the  several  stages  we  have  named 
is  accomplished.  Sleep  also  (3)  remedies  the  weakness  due  to  the 
dispersal  of  the  breath  (vital  power)  in  various  ways;  namely,

of  h^5e»Plm^?  °aUSe(l bI  j°T-~"  Nor  did  slumber  visit  him  for  the  excess 
of  his  joy.  —(Night  779  ;    Burton.)

2E    •

4i8  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

by  bodily  fatigue,  by  coitus,  by  anger  or  violent  emotional  dis- 
turbance, and  the  rest.     >        _

Furthermore,  a  moderated  amount  of  sleep  brings  about  an 
equilibrium  in  regard  to  quantity  and  quality  of  the  humours, 
and  therefore  it  has  a  humectant  and  warming  action,  which  is 
specially  advantageous  for  the  aged,  who  need  their  moisture 
preserving  and  renewing.  That  is  why  Galen  said  "  every  night 
I  partake  of  a  little  packet  of  herbs — lettuce  combined  with 
aromatics  ;,  the  former  because  they  induce  sleep,  the  latter 
because  they  rectify  the  coldness  of  the  lettuce."  And  he  said, 
"  I  am  now  careful  to  obtain  sleep  because  I  am  an  old  man,  and 
the  humidity  which  sleep  brings  is  beneficial  to  me."

817.  This  then  is  the  way  to  obtain  sleep.  And  if  a  bath  be 
taken  after  the  digestion  of  the  meal  has  been  completed,  and 
plenty  of  hot  water  is  poured  over  the  head,  this  will  be  an 
additional  help.  A  still  more  efficient  method  will  be  mentioned 
under  medicaments.818.  Conditions  to  observe  regarding  sleep.  Healthy  per- 
sons should  pay  attention  to  the  subject  of  sleep  :  it  must  be 
moderate,  properly  timed,  and  excess  must  be  avoided.  And  on 
the  other  hand  they  must  avoid  the  injury  resulting  to  mental  and 
all  other  faculties  from  remaining  awake  too  long.

However  a  person  is  often  driven  to  keep  awake,  and  re- 
frain from  sleep  owing  to  a  dread  of  syncope  and  loss  of  strength.

The  best1  sleep  is  that  which  is  deep  ;  and  that  which 
occurs  after  the  food  has  passed  on  from  the  upper  part  of  the 
intestine,  and  after  the  flatulences  and  eructations  which  may  have 
followed  have  subsided  ;  for  to  sleep  on  this  is  detrimental  in 
many  ways,  though  the  person  himself  may  not  know  of  it  ;  it 
keeps  him  turning  from  side  to  side  in  his  sleep  ;  it  hinders 
digestion  ;  and  it  does  injury.  For  this  reason,  if  the  passage  of 
the  food  out  of  the  stomach  is  delayed,  he  should  take  a  walk  for 
a  little  while,  and  then  retire  to  sleep.

It  is  also  bad  to  go  to  sleep  on  an  empty  stomach,  as  this  is 
weakening.  It  is  bad  to  go  to  sleep  after  repletion,  before  the 
food  has  left  the  stomach,  because  sleep  cannot  be  deep  under 
such  circumstances,  and  the  sleeper  will  keep  turning  from  one 
side  to  the  other  all  the  time.  For  when  the  natural  faculties  are 
busy  with  the  work  of  digestion  at  a  time  when  it  is  accustomed 
to  be  asleep,  the  fact  of  being  prevented  from  waking  up  is 
disturbing  to  the  natural  faculties  ;  so  they  become  dulled  and 
the  process  of  digestion  is  disorganized.

It  is  also  bad  to  go  to  sleep  during  the  day,  for  in  this  case

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  4i9It  is  also  bad  to  go  to  sleep  during  the  day,  for  in  this  case

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  4i9

illnesses  depending  on  humidity  and  catarrhal  states  are  brought 
about  ;  the  colour  of  health  passes  off,  the  spleen  becomes  heavy, 
the  nerves  lose  their  tone  ;  lack  of  vim  and  a  poor  appetite  are 
noticed,  and  inflammatory  conditions  and  fevers  often  appear.

Among  the  reasons  for  the  injurious  effects  are  :  liability  to 
sudden  interruption  of  the  sleep,  whereby  the  natural  faculties 
become  dulled.

Among  the  good  qualities  of  sleeping  by  night  are  that  it 
should  be  continuous  and  deep.  If  a  person  is  accustomed  to 
sleep  during  the  day,  he  should  not  suddenly  discard  this  custom, 
but  do  so  gradually.

Burton10 '  explains  the  following  :  Aylulah,  or  "  beauty-sleep  "  :  slumbering 
after  morning  prayers,  causing  heaviness  and  idleness.  Ghaylulah  :  dozing  about 
9  a.m.,  which  leads  to  poverty  and  wretchedness.  Kaylulah,  or  "  forty-winks," 
about  noon  ;  'the  mid-day  siesta  praised  by  the  Prophet.  Qaylulah  :  sleeping 
before  evening  prayers.  Faylulah  :  slumbering  after  sunset.  The  last  two  were 
held  to  be  highly  detrimental  (i.  461,  footnote).

819.  Posture  in  sleep.  The  best  way  to  sleep  is  to  begin 
on  the  right  side,  and  then  turn  round  to  the  left.  If  one  begins 
by  lying  face  downwards,  it  greatly  helps  the  food  to  digest,  for 
by  this  posture  the  innate  heat  is  conserved  and  magnified.It  is  a  bad  practice  to  sleep  on  the  back.  It  courts  the 
development  of  grave  maladies  like  apoplexy,  paralysis,  and 
nightmare,  because  the  effete  matters  then  tend  to  accumulate 
in  the  tissues  of  the  back,  where  they  are  held  and  prevented  from 
entering  the  natural  channels — which  are  in  front,  like  the 
nostrils  and  palate.  Persons  who  are  accustomed  to  sleep  on 
their  backs  often  become  debilitated,  for  their  muscles  and 
members  become  weakened  ;  also  because  one  side  cannot 
alternate  with  the  other,  seeing  that  such  persons  quickly 
return  to  the  supine  position,  the  back  being  more  powerful  than 
the  sides.  The  consequence  is  that  such  persons  sleep  with  their 
mouth  open,  for  the  muscles  which  keep  the  jaws  closed  are  too 
weak  to  maintain  them  in  that  position.

A  special  chapter  is  given  on  this  subject  in  the  Special 
Part.

10.      On    Certain   Matters  left   over  to   a  Later   Place.

820.  We  leave  over  till  later  the  discussion  of  coitus  and 
its  constitution,  and  the  measures  to  be  taken  to  correct  errors 
in  this  function,  though  strictly  they  belong  to  this  place.  It 
is  reserved  to  the  Special  Part.

At  this  point  also,  one  would  discuss  the  agents  for  pro- 
curing evacuation  of  the  bowel,  and  how  to  deal  with  any 
antagonistic  influences  towards  them.     We  reserve  this  subject

42o  THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE

to  the  section  dealing  with  treatment  and  the  chapter  on  purga- 
tives. However,  we. may  say  here  that  a  person  who  wishes  to 
maintain  his  health  should  procure  evacuations  by  the  bowel, 
the  urine,  the  sweat,  and  the  sputum.

We  shall  also  explain  how  one  may  assist  and  regulate 
the  menstrual  flow  of  women,  in  order  that  you  may  become 
familiar  with  this.We  shall  also  explain  how  one  may  assist  and  regulate 
the  menstrual  flow  of  women,  in  order  that  you  may  become 
familiar  with  this.

ii.     How  the  Members  may  be  Strengthened.    How  Weak

Persons  may  be  Made  Stronger.    How  to  Gain  Flesh,

and  Increase  the  Size  of  the  Body.

821.  Members  (limbs)  which  are  weakly  and  undersized 
may  be  strengthened  and  caused  to  grow  and  develop  during 
the  period  of  growth,  up  to  the  final  limit  for  growth,  by  the 
use  of  a  suitable  degree  of  massage  and  of  a  suitable  form  of 
exercise,  steadily  persisted  in.  Also  by  the  use  of  pitch  plaster 
(see  871 )  An  exercise  consisting  of  holding  the  breath  [accord- 
ing to  proper  rules]  is  also  effective,  especially  for  the  respiratory 
organs  (thorax,  lungs).For  instance,  let  us  suppose  the  legs  to  be  underdeveloped  ; 
the  person  takes  a  short  running  exercise  ;  then  a  certain  amount 
of  massage  is  given  ;  then  a  plaster  of  pitch  is  applied.  Next  day 
the  running  exercise  is  prolonged  a  little,  but  the  amount  of 
massage  remains  the  same  as  on  the  first  day.  On  the  third  day, 
the  massage  given  is  to  the  same  extent  as  before,  but  the  exercise 
is  still  further  lengthened,  taking  care  to  stop  short  of  distension 
of  the  vessels,  for  this  would  show  matters  are  lodging  in  them 
which  might  be  antecedent  to  some  inflammatory  process  or 
repletion  specifically  met  with  in  them  :  varices,  and  elephanti- 
asis being  an  instance  of  such.  Therefore,  should  there  be  any 
suspicion  of  anything  of  that  nature,  shorten  the  exercise  to 
the  original  degree,  reduce  the  massage  ;  enjoin  rest  in  the 
recumbent  position  ;  raise  the  affected  member.  Thus,  if  the 
persons  have  a  wasted  (lit.  dried  up)  leg,  raise  it  by  the  foot,  and 
apply  massage  from  its  distal  towards  its  proximal  end.

To  car?y  this  method  out  for  parts  related  to  the  organs  of 
respiration— the  thorax,  for  example— we  proceed  to  apply  a 
bandage  to  the  lower  parts,  making  it  moderately  tight,  and  of 
uniform  breadth.  Then  we  instruct  the  patient  to  exercise  his 
arms,  and  to  breathe  as  deeply  as  possible,  uttering  a  loud  sound 
the  while,*  light  massage  being  applied  as  well.

*  This  may  be  assumed  to  be  a  singing  exercise,  a  sustained  note  being  pro- 
duced for  as  long  as  possible  at  each,  breath.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  42 1

This  subject  will  be  fully  discussed  in  the  Special  Part 
on  Beauty  Culture,  if  Allah  will.

12.      On  the  Lassitude  following  Exercise.THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  42 1

This  subject  will  be  fully  discussed  in  the  Special  Part 
on  Beauty  Culture,  if  Allah  will.

12.      On  the  Lassitude  following  Exercise.

822.  There  are  three  kinds  of  lassitude,  and  we  may  add 
a  fourth.  There  are  two  modes.  The  three  varieties  are  : 
the_  Ulcerose,  the  Tensive,  and  the  Inflammative.  The  fourth 
variety  which  we  add  is  the  Desiccative  or  Arefactive.

823.  Ulcerose  lassitude.  This  is  a  form  in  which  the  subject 
experiences  the  sensation  of  ulcers  upon  the  body  or  in  the  depths 
of  the  skin._  The  deeper  the  sensation  the  greater  is  the  lassitude. 
The  sensation  may  be  evoked  by  contact  with  the  skin  ;  or  it 
may  be  evoked  by  movement.  Sometimes  it  gives  rise  to  the 
sensation  of  pricking  with  needles,  with  a  dread  of  movement, 
and  the  subject  lies  extended  because  of  the-  weakness  of  his 
shoulders  and  arm-pits.  If  the  degree  of  lassitude  is  still  greater, 
there  is  a  goose-skin.  When  it  is  still  greater,  tremors  and  fever 
appear.The  cause  of  this  kind  of  lassitude  consists  in  an  abundance 
of  tenuous  and  pungent  effete  matters,  a  liquefaction  of  the  flesh 
and  fat  in  consequence  of  the  over-vigorous  exercise,  and,  lastly, 
the  presence  of  depraved  humours  in  the  vessels,  which  results 
in  changes  in  the  blood,  whereby  it  loses  its  healthy  character  ; 
these  abnormal  products  pass  into  the  skin  and  affect  it.  This 
form  of  lassitude  is  the  lesser  evil  which  such  substances  produce. 
If  they  should  become  mobile,  goose-skin  will  result.  If  they 
move  about  still  more  actively,  tremors  result.  Sometimes 
the  pungent  humours  detach  themselves  from  the  others,  leaving 
the  "  crude  "  humours  in  the  vessels.  Sometimes  the  "  crude  " 
humours  are  situated  in  the  flesh.

824.  Tensive  lassitude.  A  person  in  a  state  of  tensive 
lassitude  has  the  sensation  of  the  body  being  broken,  of  heat, 
of  tension  or  being  in  a  stretched  condition,  and  has  a  dread  of 
moving  himself  or  straightening  his  back  from  the  bent  position. 
This  is  specially  the  case  when  the  condition  follows  physical 
labour.  [Cf.  the  pain  of  severe  lumbago  and  myalgia.]  This 
condition  arises  from  the  retention  of  waste  matters  in  the 
muscles  which  are  otherwise  in  themselves  normal  ;  it  is  not 
due  to  acridity  or  gaseous  matters  in  them.  The  fibres  are 
separated  from  one  another,  and  there  is  a  state  of  lightness  or 
heaviness.  This  is  often  the  result  of  want  of  sleep.  When  not 
associated  with  want  of  sleep,  the  case  is  different  and  more 
serious.     Here  the  muscle  fibres  are  stretched  lengthways.

422  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE422  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

825.  Inflammative  lassitude.  Here  the  body  is  hotter 
than  usual.  The  part  is  as  if  distended,  being  swollen,  and  of 
corresponding  colour.1  Distress  is  felt  when  the  part  is  touched, 
or  when  he  tries  to  move,  for  this  brings  out  the  tension  or 
stretching  [which  is  like  the  sensation  in  an  inflamed  or  bruised 
tissue  :..  Aeg.].  The  deep-seated  pain  is  called  ostalgia.  The 
cause  is  abundance  of  waste  matters  in  the  muscles.

826.  Desiccative  lassitude.  This  is  a  state  wherein  one  feels 
a  sensation  of  being  dried  up  in  an  unusual  degree.     It  follows

(a)  undue  exercise,  the  chyme  being  normal  ;  (b)  twisting  the 
body  back  sharply  ;  (c)  sometimes  it  is  owing  to  dryness  or 
atmosphere  ;  (d)  deficient  nutrition  ;  (e)  fasting  too  much. 
[There  is  great  disinclination  for  any  movement  :    Aeg.j

827.  '  The  two  modes  of  lassitude,  {a)  That  following  exer- 
cise.    This  is  less  serious.      It  is  rectified  by  suitable  measures

(b)  Spontaneous.  This  is  a  forerunner  of  illness.  Special 
measures  must  be  used  for  its  cure.

These  two  forms  or  modes  may  be  combined,  the  matters 
which  give  rise  to  each  being  present  together,  both  those  which 
arise  spontaneously,  and  those  which  result  from  exercise.828.  Regimen.  The  regimen  for  the  simple  form  is  known 
to  you.  That  for  the  compound  form  entails  the  following  rules  : 
In  the  first  place  pay  most  attention  to  avoid  the  danger  of  the 
condition  by  dealing  with  the  underlying  cause.  There  may  be 
three  sources  of  danger:  severity,  the  nobility  (of  the  organ),  and 
the  substance  involved.  If  two,  or  three  are  concurrent,  the 
condition  is  more  serious  unless  the  one  of  them  which  outstays 
the  other  is  more  potent  and  therefore  overrules  them.  For 
instance,  inflammative  lassitude  is  more  severe,  and  the  ulcerose 
form  is  nobler  ;  but  if  the  substance  underlying  the  ulcerose 
is  far  from  equilibrium  and  from  the  natural  course,  it  forms  a 
restraining  influence  over  the  two  modes  of  the  inflammative 
lassitude,  in  virtue  of  this  nobility  and  strength,  and  takes 
precedence  over  it.  But  if  the  relation  be  not  so  very  remote, 
the  inflammative  lassitude  would  take  the  precedence.

13.      Stretching  and  Yawning

829.  Stretching  comes  on  when  effete  substances  have 
accumulated  in  the  muscles.  For  this  reason  the  desire  to  stretch 
oneself  is  often  experienced  after  sleep.

If  these  humours  become  superabundant  they  give  rise  to 
goose-flesh  and  trembling  and  shivering.  If  they  increase 
to  a  still  greater  degree,  fever  develops.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  423

Yawning  is  really  a  form  of  stretching,  when  this  takes 
place  in  the  muscles  of  the  jaws,  lips  and  chest.  Should  it  arise 
without  any  apparent  reason  in '  a  person  seemingly  healthy, 
and  not  at  an  appropriate  time,  and  to  an  unusual  degree,  it  is 
bad.  In  such  a  case,  it  is  best  when  it  comes  on  at  the  end  of 
digestion,  because  then  it  is  due  to  the  effete  substances  being 
expelled.  ■     -Stretching  and  yawning  may  be  due  to  external  cold,  to 
thickening  of  texture  of  the  skin  (see  839,  ii),  whereby  exit 
of  certain  humours  becomes  restricted  ;  to  being  awakened 
from  sleep  before  it  has  finished  ;  to  postponing  the  evacu- 
ations.

Moderately  diluted  wine  is  good  for  this  condition,  pro- 
vided there  is  no  contra-indication.

14.     On  the  Treatment  of  Lassitude  following  Exercise 
(The  First  Mode  of  Lassitude)

830.  We  may  say  that  the  chief  object  to  be  attained  in 
treating  lassitude  is  to  prevent  it  from  being  followed  by  many 
diseases,  including  fevers.830.  We  may  say  that  the  chief  object  to  be  attained  in 
treating  lassitude  is  to  prevent  it  from  being  followed  by  many 
diseases,  including  fevers.

Ulcerose  lassitude  is   dealt  with  by  reducing  the  amount  of 
exercise  if  that  be  the  cause.     If  at  the  same  time  there  is  an 
over-abundance  of  humours,  they  need  to  be  expelled.     If  there 
be  a  transient  sensation  of  nausea  and  satiety,  these  effects  are 
counteracted  by  fasting,   evacuation  through  the  bowels,  and 
dispersal  of  the  humours  in  the  subcutaneous  tissues*  by  the  use 
of  plenty  of  light  massage,  carried  out  with  oil  devoid  of  astrin- 
gency.     Exercise  is  then  resumed.     On  the  first  day  the  nour- 
ishment should  consist  of  the  usual  quality  of  foods,  in  lessened 
amount.     On  the  second  day  the  diet  should  consist  of  humec- 
tants.     If  the  vessels  be  patent,  and  there  be  "  crude  "  serous 
humour   in  the  mesentery,  friction   may  help  to  "  mature  "  it, 
especially  if  one  could  bring  the  virtue  of  calefacient  medicines 
(digestives)  to  bear  on  it.    Very  good  (calefacients)  are  :  willow 
oil,  ol.  anethi  ;    oil  of  chamomile  ;    and  the  like.     A  decoction 
of  beet-roots  in  oil,  prepared  in  a  double-vessel  ;    ointment  of 
mallow-roots  ;    oil  of  the   roots  of  cucumber   asininus  and   of 
bryony  ;    oil  of  sweet-scented  moss  ;    and  any  oil  in  which  the*  Of  the  total  humours  of  the  body  a  certain  proportion  reaches  the  sub- 
cutaneous tissues,  and  may  become  stagnant  in  that  situation.  They  require 
dispersal,  and  the  agents  used  for  such  purpose  are  called  "  discutients."  Possibly 
some  of  these  agents  were  what  are  now  called  diaphoretics.  But  it  must  be  re- 
membered that  the.  theory  supposes  the  existence  of  matters  which  are  discharged 
either  in  fluid  or  in  gaseous  form,  the  exit  being  by  different  "  pores  "  in  each  case.  -

424  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

latter    (moss)    has    been    incorporated.       [Galen    recommends 
discutients  and  restorative  exercise.]

831.  Tensive  lassitude.  The  object  in  view  in  treating  this 
is  to  relax  the  indurated  tissues  by  means  of  a  _  little  _  gentle 
massage  with  oil  heated  in  the  sun  ;  tepid  baths  in  which  the 
patient  stays  a  considerable  time  ;  or,  better,  to  take  the  bath 
once  or  twice  a  day,  followed  each  time  by  an  inunction  ;  _  com- 
plete rest.  If  it  becomes  necessary  to  procure  an  abstersion  of 
the  vessels,  or  if  the  oil  of  the  inunction  has  become  dried  up, 
repeat  the  inunction  and  administer  moist  foods  in  only  small 
amount.  It  is  more  important  that  the  amount  should  be  small 
in  this  case  than  in  that  of  ulcerose  lassitude.  Exercise  is  suffi- 
cient to  disperse  this  kind  of  lassitude,  and  cleanse  out  [the  sub- 
stances which  cause  it].

If  tensive  lassitude  have  arisen  simply  by  the  presence  of 
gross  superfluities,  these  must  be  evacuated.  If  it  has  arisen 
from  flatulencies,  it  is  dispersed  by  the  use  of  such  as  cummin, 
caraway,  anise.832.  Inflammatory  lassitude.  There  are  three  aims  m 
treatment  of  this  condition  :  to  relax  the  tense  parts,  to  cool 
the  heated  parts,  and  to  remove  the  superfluities.  These  are 
achieved  by  the  use  of  plenty  of  tepid  oil,  by  vigorous  light  mas- 
sage, by  a  prolonged  stay  in  a  bath  of  tepid  water  (on  the  warm 
side),  and  by  sufficient  repose  [and  by  repeated  inunction:  Aeg.].

833,  Aref active  lassitude.  First  day  :  the  normal  regimen 
for  maintaining  health  is  to  be  continued,  save  that  the  bath- 
water should  be  hotter,  because  very  hot  water  has  a  contracting 
effect  upon  the  skin.  This  action  is  not  as  detrimental  as  that 
of  cold  water,  for  in  this  case  there  is  a  risk  of  the  cold  pene- 
trating into  the  body,  already  dry.  The  cause  of  the  wasting 
(wrinkling,  shrivelling  of  the  skin)  may  also  lie  in  the  fact  that 
the  skin  is  usually  relaxed  (see  818).

The  second  day  of  the  restorative  treatment  consists  in 
the  use  of  gentle  restorative  exercise  of  a  light  character.  The 
bath  should  be  carried  out  in  the  same  way  as  on  the  first  day, 
and  the  patient  should  then  plunge  into  cold  water,  to  make  the 
skin  shrivel,  and  to  reduce  perspiration  to  a  minimum.  In  this 
way  the  skin  keeps  moist.  For  water  will  come  in  contact  with 
the  body  as  soon  as  there  is  sufficient  heat  in  it  to  counteract 
the  dryness  of  the  skin.  And  these  two  factors  mutually  assist 
one  another  in  combating  the  injurious  effect  of  the  cold.  The 
injurious  effect  is  greater  if  the  person  comes  quickly  out  of  the 
water  into  which  he  has  plunged.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  425THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  425

834.  Those  affected  with  lassitude  need  wholesome  food, 
which  must  contain  little  moisture,  and  should  be  taken  at  the 
end  of  the  first  morning  hour.  Friction  may  be  given  on  a 
later  occasion,  towards  evening.  The  supper  must  then  be  taken 
later  still.

The.  removal  of  superfluities  from  the  body  must  also  be 
procured,  using  massage  with  sweet,  or  willow  oil  [cf.  the  modern 
ol.  betulae,  or  oil  of  wintergreen].  The  abdominal  muscles 
are  not  touched  unless  lassitude  is  present  in  them.  In  that 
case,  give  light  inunction  and  increase  the  amount  of  such  food 
as  is  not  too  heating.

835.  One  should  take  care  that  exercise  should  stop  short 
of  producing  any  sign  of  lassitude.  Then  proceed  to  reversion 
exercise  in-order  to  draw  matters  towards  the  skin  by  the 
moderate  amount  of  movement.  Having  reached  the  skin, 
massage  _  during  the  time  of  resting  between  the  exercises  will 
finally  disperse  these  substances.

836.  A  person's  condition  is  the  guide,  as  regards  bathing. 
If  the  bath  should  induce  tremor,  the  last  degree  of  lassitude  has 
been  reached.  How  much  more  is  this  true  if  fever  comes  on 
after  the  bath  !  In  such  a  case  the  bathing  must  be  stopped, 
and  recourse  must  be  had  to  evacuation  [of  various  kinds]  and 
the  rectification  of  the  temperament.

As  long  as  the  water  is  moderately  hot,  and  the  bathing 
produces  none  of  these  adverse  symptoms,  one  knows  that  it  is 
beneficial  to  bathe.As  long  as  the  water  is  moderately  hot,  and  the  bathing 
produces  none  of  these  adverse  symptoms,  one  knows  that  it  is 
beneficial  to  bathe.

837.  If  there  were  non-matured, humours  in  the  vessels, 
the  first  measure  to  take  would  be  to  apply  whatever  was  suitable 
for  the  lassitude,  and  the  next  would  be  to  endeavour  to  make  the 
crude  humours  mature  and  become  attenuated,  and  then  to 
expel  them.  If  they  were  plentiful,  order  rest  ;  forbid  exercise. 
For  rest  is  the  great  digestive.  Avoid  bleeding  because  by  this 
means  both  pure  and  crude  matters  are  expelled.

It_  is  injurious  to  procure  purgation  before  maturation. 
There  is  no  harm  in  inducing  diuresis.  But  avoid  drugs  which 
are  very  heating,  for  otherwise  the  crude  humour  would  be  caused 
to  diffuse  throughout  the  body,  and  facilitate  its  action.

838.  Diet  :  include  pepper,  capers,  ginger,  vinegar  of 
capers,  vinegar  of  garlic,  vinegar  of  spurge,  and  dried  dates, 
and  the  well-known  confections  (i.e.  of  quince,  apples,  prunes, 
etc.),  according  to  measure.

The  appearance  of  a  sediment  in  the  urine  informs  us  that 
maturation  has  occurred.     One  may  now  order  wine  to  complete

426  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

the  maturation  and  to  procure  diuresis.     The  wine  must  be 
delicate  and  clear,  and  must  not  excite  vomiting.

15.      On  other  States  which   may  Follow  upon  Exercise

839      We  may  first  speak  about  the  states,  and  then  pass

on  to  the  subject  of  the  regimen  applicable  for  lassitude  of

autogenous  origin.839      We  may  first  speak  about  the  states,  and  then  pass

on  to  the  subject  of  the  regimen  applicable  for  lassitude  of

autogenous  origin.

([)  Rarefaction  of  the  skin  (turgescence,  tumescence,  relax- 
ation,flaccidity,  the  opposite  of  (ii).  Very  often  this  is  the  result 
of  insufficient  massage,  and  of  bathing.  The  treatment  consists 
in  dry  friction,  tending  slightly  to  rough  friction,  using  an 
astringent  oil  for  the  purpose.  _    _

(ii)  Thickening  of  the  skin  (induration,  constriction,  tightness, 
tenseness,  shrivelling,  sclerosis,  corrugation  ;  see  829).  This 
may  be  the  result  of  (a)  cold,  (*)  an  astringent  bath,  (c)  over- 
abundance of  effete  matters,  (d)  thickening— and  aggregation— 
of  coarse  particles  of  effete  matters,  (*)  change  m  the  effete 
matters  Tor  immatured  humours]  in  the  direction  of  viscidity 
in  consequence  of  which'  they  cannot  pass  through  the  pores  of 
the  skin,  and  so  block  them  ;  (  /)  exercise,  for  this  draws  the 
humours  out  from  the  deeper  (or  remote)  tissues  if  no  other 
cause  for  this  has  previously  been  in  operation  ;  (g)  residence 
in  a  dusty  place  ;    (h)  the  use  of  rough  and  vigorous  frictionWhen  it  is  due  to  cold  and  astringency,  the  colour  of  the 
skin  is  pale  [because  it  is  stretched  hard  and  tight],  and  the 
bodily  warmth  returns  only  slowly  ;  sweating  is  delayed.  The 
skin  becomes  red  again  on  resuming  exercise.— Such  cases  should 
be  treated  thus  :  the  stay  in  the  cold  room  of  the  bath  must  be 
very  short,  and  the  water  must  not  be  very  cold;  then  go  into 
very  hot  water  ;  turn  the  patient  from  side  to  side,  then  on  to 
the  belly,  then  on  to  the  back.  The  slab  on  which  he  lies  the 
while  must  be  of  medium  heat.  Do  this  until  perspiration  sets 
in  Then  anoint  with  thin  [sweet  :  Aeg.]  oils  of  a  hot  and 
resolvent  character  [oil  of  dill,  of  black  poplar":    Aeg. J.

Cases  due  to  exercise  are  distinguished  by  the  absence  of 
the  above-named  sign.  The  skin  is  discoloured  by  sweat  and 
sordities.  Such  cases  are  treated  by  getting  rid  of  such  super- 
fluities as  may  be  present,  and  then  carrying  out  a  bath  and 
inunction  regimen  of  resolvent  character.

■  Cases  due  to  exposure  to  fine  dust,  or  due  to  the  use  of  too 
much  rough  friction,  are  much  more  in  need  of  the  bath  than  of 
inunction  with  oils.  Soft  friction  is  to  be  employed  both  before 
and  after  the  bath.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  427THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  427

(iii)  Rarefaction  of  the  skin  may  be  associated  with  weakness 
(asthenia).  This  may  be  ,the  result  of  (a)  excessive  exercise, 
especially  if  subsequent  massage  were  insufficient  ;  (b)  over- 
indulgence in  coitus  ;  (c)  too  frequently  repeated  baths.  The 
treatment  of  such  cases  therefore  consists  in  the  use  of  restorative 
exercises,  and  of  dry  friction,  for  which  an  astringent  oil  is  used 
in  order  to  obtain  a  hardening  effect.  The  diet  should  include 
humectants  in  small  amount,  which  are  moderately  calefacient 
or  moderately  infrigidant  or  slightly  inclined  to  be  "  hot."

The  same  sort  of  treatment  is  used  for  asthenia,  wakefulness,, 
sadness,  "  dryness  "in  the  nerves  (or  the  state  which  follows  on. 
anger)..  In  such  cases,  if  the  patient  finds  the  digestive  process 
of  the  food  is  depraved,  the  reversion  exercises  are  not  good  ;. 
indeed  no -exercises  are  to  be  recommended.

When  the  cause  of  the  weakness  is  an  over-indulgence  in 
baths,  in  eating  and  drinking,  and  inactivity,  the  patient  suffers 
from  undue  humidity  in  the  tissues  (especially  the  tongue), 
and  the  activity  of  the  limbs  is  impaired.  Should  this  depend 
on  some  antecedent  cause,  the  special  treatment  for  that  will 
become  necessary.

In  the  case  of  any  other  causes  which  we  have  named — 
wine,  undue  inactivity,  undue  moistening  effect  of  the  bath  — 
the  best  thing  to  do  is  to  anoint  the  body,  use  vigorous  exercise, 
employ  rough  dry  friction  without  oil,  or  a  massage  with,  the 
aid  of  a  small  amount  of  a  calefacient  oil.

When  a  person  experiences  undue  dryness  of  the  skin 
of  the  hands,  this  belongs  to  the  category  of  arefactive  lassitude. 
The  treatment  is  the  same  as  for  that  condition.When  a  person  experiences  undue  dryness  of  the  skin 
of  the  hands,  this  belongs  to  the  category  of  arefactive  lassitude. 
The  treatment  is  the  same  as  for  that  condition.

16.     The  Treatment  of  Lassitude  of  Spontaneous  Origin 
(The  Second   Mode  of  Lassitude)

840.  The  ulcerose  state  is  recognized  when  the  humour 
upon  which  it  depends  is  within  or  without  the  vessels.  The 
humour  is  shown  to  be  within  the  vessels  by  (1)  the  urine  being 
.  fetid,  (2)  the  nature  of  the  previous  diet  :  for  some  articles  of 
diet  give  rise  to  an  undue  proportion  of  superfluous  matters 
in  the  blood  ;  some  articles  of  diet  give  rise  to  too  few  super- 
fluous matters  ;  or  these  matters  are  expelled  too  speedily  ;  or 
medicinal  treatment  may  become  necessary  for  them  ;  (3)  the 
character  of  the  fluids  taken  :    if  wine,  whether  clear  or  thick.

From  all  such  data  one  comes  to  the  conclusion  that  the. 
site  is  within  the  vessels  ;  if  they  are  not  found,  the  condition 
is  extravascular.

428  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

841.  In  cases  where  the  lassitude  from  superfluities  is 
of  extrinsic  origin,  and  the  vessels  are  unobstructed,  it  is  sufficient 
to  carry  out  reversion  '(restorative)  exercises,  and  follow  the  regi- 
men, to  an  increased  degree,  which  we  have  indicated  for  cases 
of  ulcerose  lassitude  due  to  exercise.  But  if  the  case  belongs 
to  the  other  group,  one  should  not  order  exercise,  but  inactivity, 
sleep,  fasting.  Then,  towards  each  evening,  the  abdomen 
should  be  anointed  with  oil,  followed  by  a  bath  in  moderately 
hot  water,  if  his  condition  is  such  that  he  will  stand  the  bath.842.  The  diet  should  be  of  the  character  already  stated : 
one  which  makes  good  chyme,  fluid  or  semi-fluid  [lit.  able  to 
be  sucked,  e.g.  through  a  tube  or  spout],  not  viscid,  and  not 
particularly  nutritious. — Examples  of  such  foods  are  :  barley, 
frumenty,  game  (provided  it  is  delicate),  syrupus  acetosus  with 
honey,  mead,  light  white  wine.  A  wine  which  is  matured  and 
diuretic  need  not  be  forbidden,  but  to  begin  with  one  would 
prefer  to  administer  a  wine  which  is  slightly  sour  or  rather 
yellow.     Afterwards  one  changes  to  a  white  and  light  wine.

843.  If  this  regimen  proves  ineffective  it  will  show_  that 
the  excess  of  humour  present  needs  evacuation.  Should  it  be 
the  sanguineous  humour,  do  a  venesection  [or  scarify  the  ankles : 
Aeg.].  Otherwise,  procure  purgation,  making  your  choice 
between  them  according  to  the  proportion  of  sanguineous 
humour  which  you  judge  to  exist.  But  take  care  not  to  do  either 
if  the  vitality  is  low.

844.  To  ascertain  the  kind  of  humour  concerned,  one 
considers'  the  character  of  the  urine  and  sweat  ;  and  the  ten- 
dency towards  sleep  or  wakefulness.  It  is  a  bad  sign  if  sleep  is 
banished  in  spite  of  a  good  regimen.845.  If  one  has  ascertained  that  there  is  a  deficiency  ot 
good  blood  in  the  body,  and  that  the  immature  acrid  humours 
are  in  excess,  one  must  not  bleed  the  patient  or  purge  [or  let 
him  bathe  (Aeg.)],  but  procure  complete  rest.  Order  attenuant 
foods  and  fluids  ;  avoid  any  fluid  nourishment  which  is  cale- 
facient,  but  choose  such  as  has  a  sharp  or  biting  _  or  incisive 
quality  :  e.g.  syrupus  acetosus,  with  honey  [acid  wines,  capers 
with  vinegar  and  honey  :  Aeg.].  If  it  be  necessary  to  increase 
the  power  of  the  attenuants,  put  a  little  pepper  into  the  food,  and 
into  the  barley-water  [especially  as  there  is  generally  hypogastric 
flatulence  :  Aeg.].  Cumin  and  pepper  may  be  needed  to  coun- 
teract the  immaturity  of  the  humours  (i.e.  acrid  matters  which 
have  not  been  properly  digested) —administering  them  either 
before  or  after  a  meal,  or  at  bedtime,  according  as  seems  best

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  429

to  you.     The  dose- is  a  small  tablespoonful.     Pennyroyal  is  not 
so  good,  for  it  is  over-heating.

846 .  Now  if  one  is  absolutely  certain  that  the  immature 
humours  are  not  in  the  vessels  but  in  the  tissues  (lit.  roots  of  the 
members)  one  orders  massage  ;  laxative  oils,  especially  in  the 
mornings  ;  heating  drinks — whose  heat  passes  to  the  skin  ;  a 
long  rest  ;  then  a  -moderately  hot  bath.  Prescribe  pennyroyal 
fearlessly,  whilst  being  sure  to  give  it  before  meals  and  exercise.847.  If  it  be  necessary  to  aid  the  gastric  digestion  before  a 
meal,  do  not  give  a  strongly  penetrative  remedy  like  pennyroyal, 
but  choose  cumin  and  pepper  in  small  dose.  Quince  may  also* 
be  used.  One  could  administer  more  of  the  latter,  if  one  decides 
that  the  extraneous  heat  of  the  body  would  not  be  much  greater 
in  degree  by  giving  it.  Beneficial  remedies  :  inunction  with  oil 
of  chamomile,  of  aniseed,  of  sweet  marjoram,  etc. — whether 
given  alone  or  combined  in  wax.  Their  action  is  increased  by 
resin,  alone  or  with  twice  its  volume  of  its  oil.848.  When  one  has  ascertained  that  the  immature  humout  s 
are  in  the  vessels,  and  at  the  same  time  outside  them,  one  would 
become  more  anxious.     Do 'not  lessen  your  efforts  in  conse- 
quence.    If  there  be  as  much  within  as  without,  first  aim  at 
procuring  the  maturation  of  the  humour  ;    pepper  may  be  used 
for  this  purpose.     To  that,  if  one  wishes,  one  may  add  parsley, 
and  an  equal  weight  of  anise.     In  this  way  a  greater  degree  of 
diuresis  will  be  procured.     Or,  if  one  so  desire,  one  may  admix 
with  it  a  little  pennyroyal,   and  at  the  same  time  lessen  the 
amount  of  cumin  and  pepper.     These  are  lessened  step  by  step 
until  at  last  there  remains" simply  nothing  but  pure  pennyroyal. 
As  soon  as  the  (foreign  matter)  in  the  vessels  has  become  digested, 
and  has  passed  on  out  of  them,  one  has  to  deal  with  that  which 
is  exterior  to  them.     Pennyroyal  will  be  useful  for  this  purpose, 
whereas  it  was  impeditive  at  first.     Where  the  two  conditions 
occur  concurrently  one  must  take  special  care  not  to  attract 
the  impure  matter  forcibly  towards  the  surface  of  the  body,  or 
to  the  interior  organs  either.     Hence  one  should  not  risk  pro- 
ducing emesis  too  soon,   or  purging  before  the  humours  are 
rendered'tenuous,  and  have  been  "  cut  "  and  matured.    Exercise 
is  also  not  ordered.

"  The  old  woman  ceased  not  to  .  .  .  ply  him  with  ptisanes  and  diet-drinks 
and  make  him  savoury  broths  till,  after  the  twelvemonth  ended,  his  life  returned 
to  him."   (Night  325,  Burton.)

849.  When  the  lassitude  has  passed  away,  and  the  colour 
of  the  skin  is  more  healthy,  and  the  urine  normal  ("  mature  "),

430  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE849.  When  the  lassitude  has  passed  away,  and  the  colour 
of  the  skin  is  more  healthy,  and  the  urine  normal  ("  mature  "),

430  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

plenty  of  massage  -is  given  and  exercise  in  small  amount.  One 
considers  whether  there  is  any  chance  of  a  relapse,  for  in  that  case 
one  would  pause  in  these  measures.  If  it  appears  that  a  relapse 
will  not  occur,  the  customary  life  with  regard  to  bathing,  in- 
unction, massage,  exercise,  is  gradually  resumed.  Finally  the 
strength  of  the  ointments  used  is  brought  back  to  the  customary.

If  a  relapse  is  threatening,  with  a  sensation  like  that  of 
ulcerose  lassitude,  the  regimen  must  be  taken  up  again.  If  the 
relapse  threatens  without  that  sensation  of  ulcerose  lassitude, 
the  treatment  is  by  reversion-exercise.

If  the  signs  are  ambiguous,  and  the  sensation  of  lassitude 
is  not  marked,  order  rest.

850.  The  cause  of  tensive  lassitude  is  :  repletion  without 
depravity- of  the  humour.  If  the  temperament  is  unhealthy, 
order  venesection  and  an  attenuant  regimen.  In  the  type  of 
person  of  which  we  speak,  the  treatment  is  by  attenuants  and  a 
certain  amount  of  incisives  ;  after  that  one  helps  the  cure  by 
using  appropriate  agents.851=  Inflammative  lassitude.  _  Treat  by  venesection.  The 
choice  of  vein  depends  on  the  part  most  affected  with  lassitude, 
or  the  part  in  which  the  condition  began;  if  it  be  the  head,  use 
the  cephalic  vein  ;  if  the  chest  or  back,  use  the  basilic  vein;  if 
the  other  members  are  chiefly  affected,  or  there  is  no  distinction 
of  priority,  bleed  from  the  median  vein  of  the  arm.  It  may  be 
necessary  to  bleed  on  the  second  or  even  the  third  day.  On  the 
first  day,  one  bleeds  as  soon  as  the  lassitude  appears,  otherwise 
the  condition  may  become  established.  The  proper  time  to 
bleed  on  the  second  or  third  day  is  sunset.

852.  Diet.  On  the  first  day  barley  water  alone,  or  juice  of 
frumenty  as  long  as  there  is  no  fever.  If  there  is  fever,  give  barley 
water  alone.  On  the  second  day  give  a  cooling  or  attempered 
oil  like  almond  oil.  On  the  third  day  give  a  "  salad  "  made  with 
lettuce  or  cucumber  (or,  members  of  the  gourd  family),  or  garden 
mallow  [or,  "  beet  "  :  Aeg.]  or  sorrel  [in  cold  broth  :  Aeg.], 
and  give  rock  fish  in  white  broth  (i.e.  a  special  dish  or  recipe) 
and  forbid  drinking  [cold  :  Aeg.]  water  as  much  as  possible 
during  this  day.

If  by  the  third  day,  the  patient  feels  nausea,  or,  if  he  has 
an  appetite  but  the  stomach  cannot  digest  the  food,  let  him  have 
mead,  or  a  light  white  wine,  or  an  attempered  white  wine.  After 
the-  evacuations,  take  care  not  to  give  a  great  deal  of  food  all  at 
once,  for  undigested  food  will  be  drawn  into  the  blood.  This 
is  due  to  three  factors:    (i)  when  there  is  not  much  food,  the

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  43iTHE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  43i

stomach  greedily  holds  it,  and  its  retentive  power  is  antagonistic 
to  the  attractive  power  of, the  liver.  When  food  is  plentiful, 
the  stomach  is  not  greedy  of  it,  and  then  its  expulsive  power 
helps  the  attractive  power  of  the  liver.  The  same  holds  good 
with  each  receptacle  in  turn  in  regard  to  that  which  comes 
next  into  play  ;  (ii)  when  there  is  much  in  the  stomach,  it  does 
not  get  digested  as  well  ;  (iii)  the  presence  of  plenty  6f  food 
means  that  there  will  be  much  nutriment  for  the  blood,  and  the 
vessels  [greedily  absorb  the  chyle  before  it  is  digested  :  (Aeg.) 
and  they]  themselves  are  incapable  of  digesting  it.

17.      Concerning  the    Regimen   in   the    Cases    where  the 
Temperament  of  the  Body  in  Defective

853.  i  _The  temperament  (constitution)  of  the  body  may  be 
defective  either  from  some  deleterious  influence,  or  from  the 
natural  course  of  events  beginning  from  birth.  In  the  former 
case  the  temperament  was  appropriate  for  a  certain  length  of  time, 
until  persistent  faulty  regimen  has  produced  a  change  which 
itself  remains  persistent.  In  the  latter  case  the  defective  con- 
stitution has  been  present  from  the  outset  (of  conception).

In  the  first  group  of  cases,  the  error  is  in  quantity  or  in 
quality,  and  the  nature  of  the  case  is  revealed  by  a  study  of  the 
form  of  the  body  [physiognomy  in  the  wide  sense  ;  see  also 
Kuhne128].  The  remedy  is  to  have  recourse  to  the  corresponding 
contrary.  .  °

The  second  group  of  cases  shows  a  depravity  of  the  state  of 
the  body,  m  that  there  is  a  change  either  in  the  original  con- 
stitution, or  in  the  course  of  advancing  years  of  life.

We  therefore  begin  the  subject  by  going  into  the  regimen 
or  old  age.We  therefore  begin  the  subject  by  going  into  the  regimen 
or  old  age.

THESIS  III

i.     General  Remarks  on  the  Regimen  of  Old  Age

854.  In  brief,  the  regimen  appropriate  for  old  people 
consists  in  giving  those  forms  of  aliment,  drink,  and  baths  which 
render  the  body  warm  and  moist  (i.e.  moistening,  calefacient 
food  ;  warm  or  hot  soft  water  baths).  There  should  be  plenty 
of  sleep,  and  the  time  spent  on  the  couch  should  be  llberal— - 
more  than  is  legitimate  for  adults.  The  flow  of  urine  should  be 
continually  assisted  by  diluents  ;  the  mucus  should  be  helped  out 
of  the  stomach  by  way  of  the  bowels  and  urine.  The  nature 
is  too  soft,  and  this  needs  correcting.

Massage  :  massage  with  oil,  moderated  both  in  quantity 
and  quality  so  as  to  fall  short  of  occasioning  lassitude,  is  beneficial.

Exercise  :  Walking  or  horse-riding  is  taken  after  the  mas- 
sage. The  choice  depends  -on  which  is  too  fatiguing.  If  both 
forms  of  exercise  are  fatiguing,  repeat  the  massage  once  or  twice

Sleep:  the  air  of  the  room  :  some  pleasantly  redolent 
aromatic  should  be  used  to  perfume  die  air  which  is  breathed, 
using  one  which  is.  moderately  "  hot."

After  sleep,  the  body  should  be  anointed-  with  oil  in  order 
to  stimulate  the  sensitive  faculties.  After  this  the  horse-riding 
or  walking  exercise  may  be  taken.

2.     The  Food  for  Old  Persons2.     The  Food  for  Old  Persons

855.  Food  should  be  given  in  small  amounts  at  a  time. 
There  may  be  two,  or  three,  meals  a  day,  divided  up  according 
to  the  digestive  power,  and  according  to  the  general  condition— 
whether  robust  or  weakly.  In  the  latter  case,  at  the  second  or 
third  hour  they  may  partake  of  well-baked  bread,  and  honey. 
At  the  seventh  hour  after  the  bath,  they  may  partake  of  some  one 
or  other  of  the  foods  we  shall  name  later,  which  are  laxative 
in  action.    At  bed-time,  some  laudable  nutriment  may  be  allowed.

When  they  are  robust,  old  persons  may  have  a  rather  more 
liberal  supper,  as  long  as  they  avoid  any  gross  aliment  which  is 
likely  to  give  rise  to  atrabilious  or  serous  humour,  and  avoid  all 
hot,  sharp,  or  desiccative  foods,  such  as  dishes  made  with  vinegar,

432

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  433

salt  or  hot  aromatics,  seasoning,  pickles,  etc.     These  may,  how- 
ever, be  allowed  as  medicaments.

Should  some --article  of  food  in  the  first  group  have  been 
taken  which  should  have  been  avoided — such  as  salted  foods, 
egg-plant,  dried  salted  animal-game-meat,  fish  with  tough  flesh' 
smoked  fish — then  this  must  be  counteracted  with  water-melon, 
and  cucumber.

Should  one  of  the  other  group  have  been  wrongly  taken — 
dishes  made  with  vinegar,  salt  and  strong  aromatics  (like."  fish- 
jelly,"  dishes  'with  pickles,  savouries)  the  remedy  is  to  use  the 
contraries,  and  select  only  attenuant  articles  if  one  knows  that 
there  are  superfluities  in  the  body.

When  the  bowels  have  been  opened,  give  humectant  foods, 
followed  by -slightly  attenuant  foods,  as  we  shall  explain.  [Olive 
oil  may  be;  given  before  the  meal]When  the  bowels  have  been  opened,  give  humectant  foods, 
followed  by -slightly  attenuant  foods,  as  we  shall  explain.  [Olive 
oil  may  be;  given  before  the  meal]

For  persons  who  like  and  can  digest  milk,  it  is  beneficial. 
One  knows  that  it  is  well-borne  if  it  does  not  cause  fullness  over 
the  liver  and  epigastrium,  or  itching,  or  pain.  Milk  is  good  for 
old  persons  because  it  is  nutritious  and  humectant.  Goats'  and 
asses'  milk  are  best.  Asses'  milk  is  recommended  because 
among  its  properties  is  this  that  it  is  not  cheesy,  and  it  passes 
quickly  through  the  intestines,  especially  if  salt  and  honey  have 
been  added  to  it.  However,  one  must  be  sure  that  the  pasturage 
is  free  of  pungent  herbs,  or  sharp  or  bitter  herbage  and  marsh- 
mallows,  or  very  salty  herbs.

856,  Potherbs  and  fruits  specially  suitable  for  old  persons  : 
beets,  celery  [which  is  good  for  persons  with  a  gouty  tendency 
or  tendency  to  calculus  :  Aeg.]  ;  also  a  little  leek,  which  may 
be  dished  up  with  tasty  aromatics  to  help  digestion  ;  also  olive 
oil  [and  pickles,  olives,  damascenes  seasoned  with  salt  :  Aeg  1 
This  is  specially  chosen  to  take  before  the  meal,  in  order  to 
obtain  a  laxative  effect.  It  is  also  an  advantage  to  partake  of 
such  at  bedtime,  for  they  dispose  one  to  sleep.

Ginger,  which  is  really  a  medicine,  is  a  good  condiment 
for  old  persons.  And  there  are  various  other  medicines  which 
may  be  taken  as  heating  confections  made  with  liquid  extracts, 
taking  them  in  sufficient  amount  to  be  warming  without  causing 
indigestion  or  being  desiccative.  It  is  essential  that  the  nutrients 
should  be  humectant,  without  any  likelihood  of  exerting  a  drying 
effect,  and  that  they  should  be  calefacient  and  help  digestion.857.  Among  the  foods  which  may  be  enjoyed  are  such  as 
are  laxative,  and  congenial  to  the  elderly  body— namely,  game- 
birds    boiled   with   water   and   salt   and   flavoured  nicely   with

2F

434  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

condiments,  and  served  with  oil  ;  polypody  root,  which  has  been 
placed  in  chicken-broth  or  beet-broth,  or  in  cabbage  broth.

Articles  of  food1  which  have  a  laxative  action,  appropriate 
for  elderly  persons.— For  summer  :  figs  and  prunes  ;  for 
winter  :  dried  figs  cooked  in  water  and  in  honey.  They  must 
be  taken  before  food,  to  have  the  laxative  effect.  [Ripe  figs  are 
preferable,  unless  they  cause  unpleasant  symptoms  in  the  right 
hypochondrium  :    Aeg.]

858  If  the  individual  has  the  peculiarity  of  being  one  day 
loose,  and  the  next  bound,  solvent  food-stuffs  may  be  omitted. 
If  the  bowels  are  loose  one  day,  and  bound  for  two  days,  it  will  be 
sufficient  to  take  such  articles  of  food  as  cabbage  water,  and  a 
(Persian)  ptisan  of  barley  containing  bastard  saffron,  or  turpentine 
aum,  to  the  amount  of  one,  two  or  three  hazel-nuts.  All  these 
have  the  property  of  relaxing  the  bowels,  and  cleanse  the  interior 
organs  without  harm.  Another  good  medicine  is  one  compounded 
of  the  kernel  of  bastard  saffron  and  twice  its  amount  of  dried 
figs      The  dose  is  the  size  of  a  nut  ;    take  in  a  draught.859  Purgation  in  elderly  persons.  Another  good  remedy 
is  an  oil  enema,  for  it  empties  the  bowel  as  well  as  lubricates 
the  bowel-walls,  especially  if  sweet  oil  is  used  for  the  purpose. 
The  rectum  may  simply  be  lubricated  with  oil.  Strong  clysters 
must  be  avoided  because  they  dry  the  intestine.  A  moist  unctu- 
ous clyster  is  very  beneficial  in  cases  where  the  bowels  have 
been  constipated  for  several  days.

There  are  also  other  remedies  for  procuring  gentle  motions, 
and  we  shall  specify  these  in  the  formulary.

[Avoid  aloetic  pills.     Strong  purges  make  the  constipation  worse.     Aeg.]

The  evacuations  in  old  and  decrepit  persons  must  be 
procured  with  as  little  depression  as  possible,  for  it  is  greatly 
to  their  advantage  to  have  the  bowels  opened  gently.

If  phlegm  is  engendered  in  the  stomach,  remove  it  by  appropriate  remedies^

and  thel  atSonce  resume  the  diluent  diet,    ^^i^!  tZ^LlJ     (l^f 
accumulate,  remove  them  by  diuresis,  and  give  oil  before  the  meals,     (^eg.)

3.  Wine  for  Elderly  Persons 
880  The  wine  which  is  best  for  elderly  persons  is  old, 
red,  with  warming  effect,  and  diuretic.  New  and  white  sweet 
wine  should  be  avoided,  unless  a  bath  is  taken  after  a  meal  at 
which  such  wine  is  taken,  and  unless  there  is  thirst  In  that 
case  it  is  allowable  to  take  white  wine  which  is  light  without 
much  bodv  in  it,  thus  taking  the  place  of  plain  water.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  435

Elderly  persons  must  shun  sweet  wines  which  are  likely  to 
prove  oppilative  [but  wines  prepared  with  honey  may  be  allowed 
even  in  cases  where  gout  is  threatened  :    Aeg.].

4.     The  Removal  of  Obstructions  in  Old  Persons4.     The  Removal  of  Obstructions  in  Old  Persons

861.  Obstructions  are  very  liable  to  result  from  the  use 
of  white  wine.  These  may  be  cleared  by  the  use  of  pennyroyal, 
capsicum,  and  by  sprinkling  pepper  on  the  wine.  Onions  and 
garlic  may  be  taken  for  the  same  purpose,  if  the  person  is  accus- 
tomed to  take  them.

Theriac  is  also  good,  especially  if  the  obstruction  is  recent.

These  remedies  are  to  be  followed  by  a  bath,  by  oil,  and 
such  aliments  as  meat-broth  with  frumenty  and  barley.  Mead 
is  beneficial  both  when  there  are  actual  obstructions  or  they  are 
merely  threatened,  and  is  useful  for  averting  joint-troubles.  If 
there  is  a  sensation  of  a  block  in  a  given  member,  or  if  there 
is  a  premonition  of  such,  one  should  combine  some  diuretic 
remedy  with  it,  like  celery  seed.

In  cases  where  the  (ureter  or)  urethra  is  blocked  by  a  cal- 
culus something  stronger  is  advisable,  like  parsley.

For  obstruction  in  the  lung,  use  hyssop,   maidenhair,  cassia 
wood,  and  the  like.

5.      Massage  for  Elderly  Persons

862.  Massage  must  be  moderate  in  amount  and  quality  ; 
feeble  or  tender  parts  must  not  be  touched.  Between  the  times 
of  massage,  the  parts  may  be  rubbed  with  rough  tov/els  (binders), 
or  with  the  bare  hands  [i.e.  without  oil],  in  order  to  ensure  that 
the  members  concerned  shall  not  become  enfeebled.

6.     Exercise  in   Old  Age

863.  The  factors  to  consider  in  regard  to  exercise  in  old 
age  are  :  (1)  the  different  bodily  states  [of  different  people]  ; 
(2)  the  sequelae  likely  to  arise  from  their  ailments  ;  (3)  their 
previous  habits  in  regard  to  exercise.For  if  towards  the  end  of  life  the  body  is  still  equable  it 
will  be  right  to  allow  attempered  exercises.  If  one  part  of  the 
body  should  not  be  in  a  first-rate  condition,  then  that  part  should 
not  be  exercised  until  the  others  have  been  exercised.  For 
instance,  if  an  ailment  begin  in  the  patient's  head  (like  vertigo, 
or  epilepsy),  or  if  there  is  catarrh  [nose,  throat,  etc.],  or  there  is  a 
liability  to  suffer  from  the  ascent  of  "  vapours  "  to  the  head  and

43 6  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

brain- — then  the  exercise  should  not  entail  bending  the_  head 
down  ;  the  exercise  should  be  of  walking,  running,  horse-riding, 
and  other  exercises  involving  the  lower  parts  of  the  body.  On 
the  other  hand,  if  the  ailment  were  in  the  feet,  the  exercise  should 
employ  the  upper  limbs  :  for  instance,  rowing,  throwing 
weights,  lifting  weights.  If  the  ailment  be  in  the  trunk  (spleen, 
liver,  stomach,  intestines)  the  extremities  should  be  exercised, 
supposing  there  is  no  contra-indication.  If  the  ailment  is  in  the 
chest,  the  lower  limbs  should  be  exercised.  If  the  ailment  is 
in  the  kidneys  and  bladder,  only  the  upper  limbs  may  be  exer- 
cised. In  these  cases  the  exercises  are  not  to  be  graduated 
strictly,  as  if  the  members  were  -to  be  strengthened.  In  this 
respect  the  exercising  differs  from  that  for  other  periods  of 
life.  In  early  old  age  the  same  principles  apply  as  for  ordinary 
old  age./  In  other  periods  of  life  the  weaker  members  are  pro- 
gressively strengthened    by  the  adoption  of  exercises  for  the

purpose.purpose.

"The  exercise  of  members  is  sometimes  allowable  in  the 
infirm,  sometimes  not.  Thus  it  is  not  permissible  if  the  members 
are  "  hot  "  or  "  dry,"  or  if  there  are  matters  (in  the  body) 
which  might  be  drawn  down  into  the  limbs  by  the  exercises, 
and  fail  to  undergo  resolution  in  them  in  consequence.

THESIS  IV

The  Regimen  Appropriate  for  Cases  where  the 
Temperament  is  Not  Normal

i.  On  the  Rectification  of  Hot  Intemperament 
864.  We  may  say  that  in  .the  case  of  a  hot  intemperament 
(i.e.  bilious  habit  or  disposition),  either  there  is  an  equilibrium 
wu  tWx°  Passive  qualities,  or  there  is  either  dryness  or  moisture 
When  the  two  passive  qualities  are  balanced,  the  degree  of  heat 
will  come  to  a  limit  ;  it  will  never  be  predominant,  for  that  would 
lead  to  dryness.  If  dryness  is  associated  with  the  heat,  the 
intemperament  may  be  maintained  over  a  long  period  of  time 
whereas  if  the  heat  is  associated  with  moistness,  the  in- 
temperament will  be  of  short  duration  because  the  moisture 
becomes  predominant  and  obliterates  the  "  heat."  However 
the_  heat  sometimes  comes  to  predominate  and  obliterate  the 
moisture,  producing  desiccation.  Consequently,  the  condition 
of  a  person  whose  temperament  shows  a  preponderance  of 
moisture  will  become  improved  towards  the  attainment  of  adult 
life,  and  then  become  equable,  whereas  later  in  life  the  extraneous 
moisture  begins  to  increase  and  the  bodily  heat  to  diminish.

Therefore  we  may  summarize  the  principles  upon  which 
the  management  of  persons  with  hot  intemperament  is  to  be 
conducted  m  these  two  intentions  :  (i)  to  restore  equilibrium- 
(2)  to  conserve  the  existing  state  of  health.To  secure  the  first,  a  patient  needs  training  during  the 
early  years  of  life,  the  "  passions  "  being  subdued  in  a  willing 
obedience  to  orderly  discipline  during  all  that  time.  Unless  the 
discipline  is  orderly  there  will  be  a  liability  to  illness.  This 
intention  is  also  gained  the  more  easily  if  care  be  taken  that  the 
aliment  is  appropriate  for  their  particular  intemperament  because 
in  this  way  the  health  recovered  is  also  conserved.

865.  Individuals  with  a  hot  intemperament  who  are 
attempered  m  respect  of  the  two  passive  qualities,  are  nearly 
normal  m  health  at  the  commencement  of  life,  so  that  this  kind 
of  intemperament  makes  the  teeth  erupt  early  and  the  hair  grow

437

438  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

quickly  ;  such  children  will  be  ready  of  speech,  clear  in  utter- 
ance, and  quick  walkers.  As  they  grow  older,  the  hotness 
becomes  dominant,-  dryness  -increases,  and  the  temperament 
"  biting "  [sharp-tempered].  Bilious  humour  is  formed  to 
excess  in  many  of  such  individuals  [as  they  grow  older].  ^

Accordingly,  the.  regimen  during  the  early  years  is  the 
same  as  that  of  attempered  constitutions,  and  as  the  temperament 
changes  the  regimen  must  be  correspondingly  changed,  seeking 
to  provoke  the  urine,  and  help  the  choleric  humour  put  of  the 
body  either  by  the  bowel,  or  by  emesis  [and  by  the  urine].  For 
if  nature  (i.e.  the  action  of  the  bowels)  alone  does  not  suffice 
to  get  rid  of  the  excess  of  humour,  emesis  by  mild  remedies  may 
help  to  do  so — using  such  as  plenty  of  warm  water,  either  alone 
or  with  wine.  The  action  of  the  bowels  is  secured  by  the  use  of 
such  things  as  conserve  of  violet,  confection  of  tamarinds,  manna, 
and  Persian  manna.

Exercise  should  be  lightened.Exercise  should  be  lightened.

Food  :    only  allow  such  as  yields  good  chyme.

868.  Baths  :  if  these  are  necessary,  they  may  be  taken  daily 
or  every  third  day.  But  in  that  case  nothing  heating  should  be 
allowed  (in  the  food).  If  the  bath  be  taken  after  a  meal,  and  it 
does  not  cause  distension  or  heaviness  over  the  liver  or  epigas- 
trium, there  need  be  no  anxiety.  But  if  such  symptoms  should 
arise,  an  aperient  should  be  given.  For  instance,  infusion  of 
absinthe  ;  a  mixture  containing  aloes,  anise,  bitter  almond,  and 
oxymel.  The  bathing  after  food  should  also  be  stopped  [and  the 
diet  should  be  light,  with  deobstruents  and  viscid  articles  of  food 
(Galen)].  These  aperients  are  to  be  given  at  the  end  of  the  first 
stage  of  digestion,  and  before  the  second  stage  is  completed. 
But  there  should  be  a  certain  interval  of  time  between  the  aperient 
and  the  next  meal — namely  the  interval  between  the  morning 
exercise  and  the  time  for  the  bath.  Inunction  with  oils  is  required, 
and  a  light  white  wine  should  be  given.  Cold  water  has  a  useful 
(weakening  ;     strengthening  :     marginal   reading)   influence.

All  these  suggestions  apply  specially  to  those  whose  tem- 
perament has  been  hot  and  dry  from  birth.*

*  Galen  adds  :  "If  bile  passes  down  plentifully,  good  ;  but  if  it  regurgitates 
into  the  stomach,  vomiting  will  become  inevitable,  and  tepid  water  should  be 
taken.  Exercises  should  be  done  before  meals  ;  and  they  must  be  slow  and  gentle 
in  character.

Gymnastics  are  not  required  by  persons  of  very  hot  temperament  ;  walking 
exercise  is  enough.       The  baths  may'be  taken  after  a  meal  in  such  cases.Gymnastics  are  not  required  by  persons  of  very  hot  temperament  ;  walking 
exercise  is  enough.       The  baths  may'be  taken  after  a  meal  in  such  cases.

If  the  temperament  is  hot  and  dry,  the  regimen  should  be  diluent  (succulent 
food — bathing — avoid  much  or  strenuous  exercise).

During  the  summer,  the  bath  should  be  taken  early,  and  repeated  after  (the 
main)  meal.     Cold  drinks  may  be  allowed.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  439

867.  Those  who  have  a  hot  and  moist  temperament  show 
a  tendency  to  (abnormal)  decompositions  in  the  various  matters 
which  also  tend  to  descend  into  the  limbs.  Such  persons  should 
take  exercise  of  a  kind  which  will  favour  dispersal  (of  humours), 
but  is  mild  enough  not  to  prove  over-heating.  A  degree  of 
activity  likely  to  cause  "  ebullition  "  in  the  humours  must  be 
avoided.

A  person  who  is  not  accustomed  to  much  exercise  should 
eschew  it.  Exercise  should  be  taken  after  the  bowels  have  been 
evacuated.  Baths  should  be  taken  before  the  meal.  Care  should 
be  taken  to  get  rid  of  all  superfluities  (quickly). 
_  When  spring  approaches,  moderation  should  be  observed 
m  bloodletting  and  purgation.

2.      The  Rectification  of  a   Cold   Intemperament

888.  There  are  three  kinds  of  cold  intemperament.  (i) 
When  there  is  a  balance  between  the  two  passive  (qualities),  the 
intention  is  to  produce  more  innate  heat  by  means  of  (a)  hot 
aliments  which  are  moderately  moist  and  dry;  {b)  calefacient 
inunctions;  (c)  large  electuaries;  {d)  evacuation  of  the  corres- 
ponding humours;  (e)  baths  likely  to  induce  sweating;  ( f) 
exercises  contributory  to  sweating.

(2)  At  some  periods  such  persons  may  be  attempered  in 
regard  to  humidity,  and  yet  it  sometimes  happens  that  the 
coldness  gives  rise  to  humidities.(2)  At  some  periods  such  persons  may  be  attempered  in 
regard  to  humidity,  and  yet  it  sometimes  happens  that  the 
coldness  gives  rise  to  humidities.

(3)  In  those  individuals  in  which  there  is  dryness  as  well  as 
the  cold  intemperament,  the  regimen  should  be  prescribed  as 
for  old  age.

Aegineta  adds  :  "the  dry  kind  is  the  worst,  because  this  is  the  form  char- 
acteristic of  old  age.  Warming  agents  and  diluents  are  needed  (namely,  moderate 
exercise ..moist  heating  food,  heating  wines,  plenty  of  sleep).  The  bowels  should 
be  emptied  daily.       Venerv  should  be  avoided.

The  moist  kind  is  "  bad,"  because  there  is  a  liability  to  rheumatic  affections 
Here  avoid _  bathing,  and  take  light  exercise  often,  and  'make  use  of  moderately 
calefacient  inunctions.  y

If  the  temperament  is  dry,  avoid  :  tiring  exercise,  exposure  to  the  sun  ■  pro- 
longed wakeful  state  ;  cares  ;  venery.  '  y  . 
_  If  the  temperament  be  humid^  more  exercise  is  necessary,  and  the  digestion 
in  the  stomach  needs  assistance,  and  also  the  urinary  secretion.  Rheumatic  and 
plethoric  complaints  are  liable  to  occur.  The  bath  should  be  taken  before  meals 
and  twice  or  three  times  in  the  day.  Aperients  and  diuretics  should  be  given 
before  food.     Masticatories,   cathartics,   and   diuretic   wines   are  allowable.

3.      The  Regimen  for  Persons   prone  to   Illness

869.  _  When  persons  are  prone  to  illness,  it  is  because  of 
(1)  repletion  ;    (2)   the   presence  of  unmatured  humours.      In

44o  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

the  former,  the  quantity  requires  modification  ;    in  the  latter 
the  quality  of  the  humours  needs  modification.44o  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

the  former,  the  quantity  requires  modification  ;    in  the  latter 
the  quality  of  the  humours  needs  modification.

(i)  The  quantity  of  humours  is  modified  by  modifying  the 
amount  of  food  taken  ;  by  increasing  the  exercise  ;  by  massage 
before  the  bath  (if  the  person  is  accustomed  to-  exercise  and 
massage  ;  otherwise  these  must  be  mild)  ;  by  dividing  the  meals 
so  that  the  food  is  not  all  taken  at  one  time,  and  to  satiety.  If 
the  skin  acts  very  readily,  and  the  inducing  of  sweating  is  cus- 
tomary, this  may  be  procured.  If  the  fact  of  the  -meal  being  taken 
slowly  does  not  result  in  the  pouring  out  of  bilious  humour  into 
the  stomach,  the  meal  may  be  taken  after  the  bath.  But  if  it 
should  do  so,  the  meal  should  be  taken  before  the  bath.  In  the 
former  case,  the  proper  time  for  the  meal  is  after  the  fourth 
hour.

But  if  bilious  humour  pours  into  the  stomach,  the  meal  is 
taken  before  the  bath,  and  further,  if  there  are  symptoms  of 
congestion  in  the  liver,  those  among  the  above-named  aperients 
which  are  appropriate  to  the  temperament  are  administered. 
Should  there  also  be  symptoms  pointing  to  (congestion  in)  the 
head,  walking  about  is  of  assistance.  If  the  food  undergoes 
putrefaction  in  the  stomach,  and  then  passes  on,  no  matter  ; 
but  if  it  do  not  pass  on,  one  must  administer  cumin,  or  figs  mixed 
with  bastard  saffron  seeds.  An  electuary  of  this  is  named  [in 
the  Formulary].

4.     To  Help  Lean  Persons  to   put  on  Flesh

870.  The  chief  cause  of  emaciation,  as  we  have  said,  is  a 
dry  intemperament,  dry  mesentery,  and  dry  atmosphere.  When 
the  mesentery  is  dry,  it  will  not  absorb  nutriment,  and  this 
renders  the  degree  of  dryness  and  wasting  still  greater.Note  that  emaciation,  leanness,  or  wasting  is  here  understood  as  including 
the  condition  of  a  person  convalescent  after  a  long  illness.

Other  causes  of  lean  habit  of  body  :  attenuant  regimen,  attenuant  medicines  ; 
mental  anxiety  in  a  person  of  dry  temperament.

"  I  observed  a  youth  wasted  with  sickness,  as  he  were  a  worn-out,  dned-up 
waterskin.  And  as  I  looked  on  him,  lo  !  he  repeated  these  couplets.  .  .  ."■  (Night 
410).  The  sickness  here  referred  to  is  a  frequent  event  among  the  lovers  m  these 
tales,  being  the  effect  of  abstaining  "  from  meat  and  drink,  and  being  estranged 
from  the  solace  of  sleep"  (Night  114),  an  effect  proportionate  to  the  mental 
anxiety  arising  from  the  pain  of  parting.  The  descriptions  are  graphic  enough, 
and  are  equally  applicable  to  cases  of  wasting  from  organic  disease.

A  warm  temperament  also  predisposes  to  leanness.  Fat  persons  are  of  cold 
temperament,  and  are  therefore  benefited  if  made  "  warm."

87i„  Baths.  Before  taking  the  bath,  the  skin  is  rubbed 
with  linen  cloths  to  a  degree  between  rough  and  gentle,  until 
the  skin  becomes  red.    The  rubbing  may  then  be  more  vigorous.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  44i

After  that,  a  pitch  plaster  is  applied*  [for  three  or  four  days  : 
Aeg.].  The  object  of  the  massage  before  the  application  of  the 
pitch  plaster  is  to  prevent  the  puffing  of  the  tissues  from  subsiding 
again.  _  Exercise  is  to  be  moderate.  The  bath  follows  at  once! 
The  skin  is  dried  with  towels.  Then  massage  is  given  using 
[emollient  (H.  A.)]  oils.  Lastly,  a  meal  of  suitable  type  is  given 
[fat  meat,  pulse,  almonds,  bread  :    Haly  Abbas].

It  will  be  seen  that  in  this  regimen,  the  bath  is  taken  on  an  empty  stomachIt  will  be  seen  that  in  this  regimen,  the  bath  is  taken  on  an  empty  stomach

I  Z  \^Pn0¥d^  ^  rUl6S  reSarding  b^hing  state  that  a  person  is  ma^ftTnner 
if  he  takes  his  bath  after  a  meal,  before  the  food  has  digested.

If  the  age,  season,  and  custom  allow  of  it,  cold  [tepid  :  Aeg.] 
water  may  be  douched  over  the  person.

Sleep  should  be  encouraged.     (Haly  Abbas)

if  tw  Z°lTal  i^-~Pale  perS°5S  Wh°  are  P°orly  ^rished  would  become  stouter 
if  they  were  aroused  to  anger,  and  mental  excitement       (Aeg  )

If  only  a  part  of  the  body  is  wasted,  as  for  instance  after  fracture,  the  vital 
powers  must  be  stimulated  ;     moderate  friction  will  encourage  the  circulation  in

redH?nf ^  cWnm  W|t6r+  1tdOUChed  °ver  lt  in  sma11  quantities,  until  the  skin 
reddens  ^d  swells  Suitable  exercises  are  also  carried  out.  Pitching  may  be 
S'^ii  th%part  feels  cold,  friction  with  linen  cloths  should  be  done!  or  some 
mild  calefacient  applied,  like  thapsia  made  up  with  honey  or  wax.     (Oribasius).

The  above  regimen  is  almost  identical  with  that  which  we 
have  spoken  of  for  increasing  the  bulk  of  an  undersized  member. 
The  completion  of  the  subject  will  be  found  in  the  fourth  book, 
when  discussing  beauty  culture.

5.     How  to   Reduce  Obesity5.     How  to   Reduce  Obesity

872.  The  regimen  which  will  reduce  obesity.  (1)  Procure 
a  rapid  descent  of  the  food  from  the  stomach  and  intestines,  in 
order  to  prevent  completion  of  absorption  by  the  mesentery. 
[One  may  take  saltish  things  of  laxative  nature  :  Rhazes.]  (2) 
Take  food  which  is  bulky  but  feebly  nutritious.  (3)  Take  the 
bath  before  food,  often.  [Take  not  food  immediately  after  the 
bath,  and  a  short  sleep  ;  follow  up  the  bath  with  massage  ;  make 
a  long  stay  in  the  bath  :  Haly  Abbas.]  (4)  Hard  exercise. 
(5)  Resolvent  oils.  [Rub  in  oil  containing  root  of  wild  cucumber, 
marshmallows,  gentian,  all-heal  root,  birthwort  root,  poley,  and 
centaury  ;  volatile  ointments  ;  oil  of  dill  :  Aeg.]  (6)  Electu- 
aries :_  the  lesser  myrobalan  electuary  ;  electuary  of  lacca  ; 
"  thenac."     (7)  Take  vinegar,  and  salt,  while  fasting.

a  ■  a"  •'l-?i*chin,§ /,.', consists  in  rubbing  into  the  skin  a  preparation  made  bv  meltin°- 
dried  pitch  m  a  httle  oil,  and  warming  it  to  a  consistence  suitable.  The  skin  must 
be  shaved  first.  The  plaster  is  then  removed  before  it  has  quite  set.  It  is  ften 
warmed  again  and  re-applied.      This  is  repeated  several  times.     (Aetius)

.Bituminous  and  sulphur  baths  may  be  used  with  advantage      (Rhazes  )

442  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

The   subject  is  further   discussed  under  the   heading  of 
beauty  culture..Bituminous  and  sulphur  baths  may  be  used  with  advantage      (Rhazes  )

442  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

The   subject  is  further   discussed  under  the   heading  of 
beauty  culture.

Other  details  :  (Aeg.)  -.—Meals  :  only  one  a  day.  Drinks  :  take  a  fragrant 
draught  before  a  meal.  Wines  :  use  thin  white  wines.  Sleep  :  must  not  be 
protracted.  Baths:  use  natural  diaphoretic  waters;  if  these  are  not  available, 
add  flower  of  salt  to  a  sea-water  bath  ;  or  add  a  large  quantity  of  nitre.  Sandbaths. 
Massage  :  dry  rubbing  with. thick  towels;  rub  with  rough  salts,  such  as  nitre. 
Medicinal  Agents  :  attenuants,  that  is,  medicines  which  attenuate  the  humours  ; 
wild  rue  seed  and  tops  of  macedonian  parsley,  various  strong  diuretics,  with  or 
without  pepper,  and  with  or  without  asarabacca  and  anise  ;  also  the  other  remedies 
named  in  brackets  above.     Winter  favours  the  formation  of  flesh  and  blood.

THESIS  V

The  Changes   in  the  Atmosphere

The  Regimen  according  to  the  Seasons,  and  the  Variations

of  the  Atmosphere

873.  Spring.  At  the  onset  of  Spring  one  has  recourse  to 
bleeding.  Cathartics  are  taken  according  to  requirements  and 
custom.  Emesis  should  be  induced.  [Spring  fills  the  system 
with  humours  (Rhazes)].  Diet  :  avoid  very  heating  and  moist- 
ening meats  and  drinks  ;  use  attenuant  articles  of  food.  Exercise: 
in  moderation,  but  in  greater  amount  than  is  proper  in  summer- 
time.

Too  much  food  should  not  be  taken  at  a  time  ;  the  meal 
should  be  divided  over  a  period.  As  to  drinks,  take  diuretic 
syrups  and  robs.     Avoid  hot,  bitter,  salt,  or  sharp  things.874.  Summer.  [Summer  dissolves  the  humours  and 
weakens  the  vitality  (Rhazes).]  Eat  sparingly  of  foods.  Moderate 
the  drinks.  Moderate  the  exercise.  Take  sufficient  rest. 
Use  diuretics  plentifully.  If  emesis  is  possible,  it  is 'advisable. 
One  should  keep  in  the  shade,  under  cover.  The  food  should 
be  infrigidant.     [Avoid  wine  and  venery  (Rhazes).]

875.  Autumn  ;  the  season  when  the  weather  is  change- 
able and  unsettled.  [Autumn  engenders  bad  humours,  bilious 
and  sanguineous  (Rhazes).]  A  more  liberal  regimen  is  here 
needed,  if  health  is  to  be  preserved.  Avoid  :  desiccant  agents  ; 
sexual  intercourse  ;  drinking  much  cold  water  ;  cold  shower 
baths  ;  sleeping  in  a  cold  place  (cold  enough  to  excite  goose- 
flesh)  ;  retiring  to  sleep  on  a  full  stomach.  It  is  advisable  to 
protect  oneself  from  the  midday  heat  and  the  early  morning  cold 
breezes.  Fruits  are  to  be  avoided,  or  at  least  taken  only  in  small  • 
quantity  [they  supply  bad  chyme,  and  engender  flatulencies 
(even  figs  and  grapes  do  this)  unless  taken  before  food].  In 
bathing,  only  tepid  water  may  be  used.  [Exercise  should  be 
moderate.]

During  the  time  of  the  autumnal  equinoxes,  evacuations

443

444  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

should  be  procured  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  excrementitious 
particles  shall  not  be  held  back  in  the  system  all  winter.  Although 
for  some  persons  it  is  better  to  see  that  the  humours  are  kept  "  on 
the  move,"  it  is  usually  best  they  should  keep  in  repose.

As  the  age  advances,  emesis  must  no  longer  be  procured 
in  autumn  lest  fever  should  be  encouraged  to  develop.

Wine  must  -  be  well-diluted,  and  restricted  as  much  as 
possible.Wine  must  -  be  well-diluted,  and  restricted  as  much  as 
possible.

You  may  be  assured  that  if  the  autumn  is  a  wet  one,  there 
will  be  little  likelihood  of  the  usual  autumnal  disorders  coming  on.

876*  Winter.  There  should  be  plenty  of  physical  work. 
Eat  liberally,  if  the  prevailing  wind  is  northerly.  If  southerly, 
increase  the  exercise  but  diminish  the  amount  of  food.

Diet-.  The  bread  should  be  made  heavier  in  winter  than  in 
summer;.  The  same  applies  to  flesh-meat,  roasted  meat,  and  the 
like.  Potherbs  :  take  cabbage,  beet,  celery.  Avoid  orach, 
red  barley,  purslane,  endive.

[Aegineta  allows  acrid  potherbs,  and  states  that  heating  substances  like 
pepper,  cummin,  mustard,  rocket,  may  be  taken  liberally.  As  regards  wine,  he 
says  more  wine  may  be  taken  this  season,  using  the  strong  and  heating  kinds.]

When  the  body  is  healthy,  illnesses  are  unlikely  to  come  on 
during  the  winter.  Should  they  do  so,  however,  the  appropriate 
treatment  should  be  used,  including  purgation  if  that  is  necessary. 
Illness  will  only  arise  under  strong  provocation,  the  agents  being 
usually  of  a  "  hot  "  quality.  The  reason  is  that  the  innate  heat, 
which  is  the  determining  factor,  is  very  strong  during  the  winter, 
because  the  cold  prevents  its  dissipation,  and  collects  it  among 
the  interior  organs.  Furthermore  all  the  vegetative  faculties 
are  more  efficient  at  this  season.

Hippocrates  favoured  purgation  to  blood-letting.  He  was 
against  procuring  emesis  during  winter,  though  approving  of  it 
during  summer,  on  the  ground  that  the  humours  of  the  body 
are  now  on  the  move  whereas  in  winter  they  tend  to  stagnate. 
One  may  use  this  fact  as  a  pattern.877.  When  the  atmosphere  becomes  pestilential  in 
character,  the  body  should  be  given  a  desiccant  regimen,  and  the 
dwelling-house  should  be  constructed  so  as  to  be  able  to  be  kept 
cool  and  dry.  When  contagious  diseases  are  abroad,  the  air 
should  be  warm,  and  charged  with  agents  which  prevent  decom- 
position of  the  air.  Things  which  emit  pleasing  odours  are  good, 
especially  if  they  are  contrary  in  temperament  to  that  of  the 
atmosphere.*      Besides   this,    during  times  of  pestilence,   one

*  "  .  .  .  had  perfumed  the  place  with  musk,  and  aloes-wood,  and  ambergris." 
(Night  733.)

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  445

should  not  allow  draughts,  but  ventilation  should  be  secured 
slowly,  by  means  of  small  fans  and  ventilators.

Very  often  air  is  contaminated  from  the  soil.  In  this  case 
it  is  well  to  sit  on  couches  (instead  of  on  the  ground)  and  to  seek 
out  dwellings  on  ground  which  is  as  elevated  as  possible,  so 
that  the  winds  traverse  them.

Very'  often,  too,  the  air  itself  is  the  seat  of  the  beginning  of 
the  decomposition  changes — either  because  it  is  contaminated 
by  -adjoining  impure  air,  or  by  some  "  celestial  "  agent  of  a 
quality  at  present  unknown  to  man.  In  that  case  it  is  best  to 
retire  to  underground  dwellings,  or  to  houses  enclosed  in  walls 
on  all  sides,  or  to  caves.

Fumigations  may  be  used  to  purify  the  air  :  sedge  (or, 
galangale),  frankincense,  myrtle,  rose,  sandalwood.

During  the  time  when  pestilences,  are  about,  one  may  use 
vinegar  in  both  food  and  drinks,  for  this  preserves  one  from 
the  danger.

Other  details  will  be  discussed  in  the  special  part  of  this 
work,  in  order  to  complete  the  subject.

THESIS  VI

The  Symptoms  Premonitory  of  Diseases

878.

Symptom.Other  details  will  be  discussed  in  the  special  part  of  this 
work,  in  order  to  complete  the  subject.

THESIS  VI

The  Symptoms  Premonitory  of  Diseases

878.

Symptom.

Tremor  of  the  heart  continuing 
persistently

Nightmare,  and  vertigo  fre- 
quent.

Jerking  movements  of  the 
whole  body.

Ditto,  persisting  long  enough 
to  affect  vision  and  bodily 
movements.    Also  plethora.

Loss  of  sensation  in  the  limbs

Much  twitching  of  the  face

Face  becomes  very  red  ;  tears 
flow  ;  vision  fails  ;  head- 
ache.

Inexplicable  sense  of  gloom 
and  dread.

Face  reddens,  swells,  and 
darkens  and  keeps  so.

Body  heavy  and  relaxed  ;  veins 
prominent.

Face,  eyelids  and  limbs  slightly

tumid 
Great  stench  from  the  faeces . .

Offensive  urine 
Lassitude  and  loss  of  spirits  .  . 
Loss  of  appetite  ;  undue  ap- 
petite.

Remedy.

Evacuate  the  gross  humour

Evacuate     the     serous

humour. 
Ditto.

Ditto.

Procure  cranial  depletion.

Blood-letting  purgation,  etc.

Evacuate  the  oxidised 
humour.

Bleeding.

Treat  the  liver.

Treat  the  putrescence  in  the

vessels. 
Ditto.

Danger.

Sudden  death.

Epilepsy ;

apoplexy. 
Convulsions  ;

apoplexy. 
Ditto.

Paralysis.

Trismus.

Insanity  ;  delirium.

Melancholy. 
Lepra.

Rupture  of  a  vessel; 
apoplexy ;  sud- 
den death.

Dropsy.

Fever.

Ditto. 
Fever. 
Illness  (in  general).apoplexy. 
Ditto.

Paralysis.

Trismus.

Insanity  ;  delirium.

Melancholy. 
Lepra.

Rupture  of  a  vessel; 
apoplexy ;  sud- 
den death.

Dropsy.

Fever.

Ditto. 
Fever. 
Illness  (in  general).

In  short,  when  any  of  the  functions  are  abnormal  in  some 
way_appetite,  defecation,  urine,  sexual  desire,  sleep,  action  of 
skin,  itching,  keen  mental  faculties,  violent  temper,  unusual 
tastes,  nocturnal  pollutions— whether  the  abnormality  is  an 
increase  or  a  decrease  of  function,  or  of  quality  or  of  character, 
one  may  be  forewarned  that  some  disease  is  on  the  point  of  super- 
vening. Unusual  events  have  the  same  significance.  For 
instance,  bleeding  of  piles,  menstrual  flow,  vomiting  persisting, 
nose-bleeding,  craving  for  something,  whether  bad,  or  apparently 
good  because  in  a  way  natural.  For  this  reason  one  should  not 
abstain  from  desired  foods  or  things  unless  they  are  entirely 
bad,  and  even  then,  the  abstention  should  take  place  gradually.

446

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

447

Some  special  symptoms  denote  particular  conditions.  Thus, 
persistent  severe  headache,  and  dilation  of  the  pupil  warn  of 
cataract.  The  following  are  also  forerunners  of  the  same 
disease  :  imagining  that  there  are  bodies  like  insects,  etc.,  in 
front  of  the  face  when  one  is  sitting  still  and  motionless  ;  great 
impairment  of  vision.

The  following  are  also  noteworthy  :

Description.

Morbid   state    corresponding.

Heaviness  and  stabbing  in  right  side 
Heaviness   and   tightness   in   sacral  region  and

lumbar  region  ;   urine  abnormal. 
Colourless  stool 
Persistently  scalding  urine 
Burning  pain  in  anus  on  defecation 
Anorexia,  vomiting,  distension,  pain  in  legs 
Pruritus  ani,  not  due  to  worms    .  . 
Eruption  of  many  boils  and  pimples

Serpiginous  eczema  (ringworm)    .  . 
White  morphewSerpiginous  eczema  (ringworm)    .  . 
White  morphew

Liver  disease. 
Kidney  disease.

Jaundice.

Vesicle    or    penile    ulcers.

Dysentery.

Colic.

Piles.

Internal  imposthumes.    Rupture

of  an  abscess. 
Leprosy  ;  black  vitiligo  ;    white. 
White  vitiligo.

2.     General  Remarks  on  the  Regimen  suitable  for

Travellers*

879.  A  person  who  is  about  to  make  a  long  journey  must 
accustom  himself  to  do  without  many  things  which  are  available 
in  his  own  home,  and  must  be  prepared  for  hardships  and  pains. 
He  must  therefore  take  precautions  against  many  illnesses 
[including  fevers:  Rhazes]  to  which  he  is  exposed,  if  Allah 
will.  He  must  be  specially  careful  about  diet  and  to  avoid 
lassitude  (a  consequence  of  fatigue).

Persons  of  humid  and  phlegmatic  temperament  are  not  liable  to  develop 
fever  from  exposure.     (Rhazes.)

880.  Preliminary  Measures,  (i)  Bodily  state.  One  should 
not  set  out  upon  a  journey  when  in  a  state  of  sanguineous  or 
other  plethora.  A  purge  should  be  taken  first.  [If  the  journey 
is  likely  to  be  arduous,  a  bleeding  should  be  done  also  :  Aeg, 
— The  body  is  rubbed  with  oil  (Haly  Abbas).]  If  there  is  a  sense 
of  nausea,  due  to  indigestion,  one  should  fast,  and  then  sleep 
till  the  nausea  has  passed  off,  before  proceeding  on  one's  journey.

(ii.)  Hygiene  of  body  :     it  should  be  anointed  with  oil  (ib.) 
(iii.)  Dress  :    A  binder  should  be  worn.     This  is  at  least  five  cubits  in  length, 
and  six  or  seven  fmgers'-breadth.      This  is  applied  round  the  loins,  and  the  hollow 
of  the  ribs.     The  head  must  be  covered.     Take  also  a  staff,  as  a  help  both  in  descend- 
ing and  ascending  hills.     (Haly  Abbas).

*  The  matter  in-  this  chapter  has  been  slightly  re-arranged.

448  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE*  The  matter  in-  this  chapter  has  been  slightly  re-arranged.

448  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

(iv)  Care  of  tHe  eyes  (from  snow  and  dust)  :  Expose  them  to  the.  vapours 
produced  by  pouring  wine  on  a  heated  stone,  or  to  those  of  chamomile,  dill,  or 
marjoram,  ^azes^  ^      ^^  ^^  ^  ^^  smeared  with  calefacient  oils,  (ib.)

(vi)  Sleeping  and  Fasting.  If  it  is  necessary  to  travel  on 
without  sleeping,  the. habit  of  doing  with  little  sleep  should  be 
acquired  by  preliminary  practice.  Similarly,  if  there  is  a  likeli- 
hood of  long  fasts  and  of  long  abstinence  from  fluids,  a  habitu- 
ation to  this  should  be  made  first.  One  should  also  accustom 
oneself  to  the  kinds  of  foods  one  is  likely  to  be  able  to  obtain 
during  the  journey— foods  of  high  degree  of  nutritive  value, 
and  taken  in  concentrated  form.

Instructions  differ  according  to  the  season  of  the  year  in  which  the journey 
is  bein-  made.-In  winter,  a  purge  should  be  taken  before  starting.  The binder 
should  be  longer  than  above  stated.  The  body  is  not  to  be  anointed  at  the  stages 
in  the  journe|.-In  Summer,  the  body  must  be  covered  to  protect  it  from  the  sun. 
The  binder  is  to  be  as  stated  above.     (Aeg.)

881  Exertion.  The  exertion  which  a  journey  entails 
should  be  met  by  making  the  first  day's  work  very  little  more 
arduous  than  that   customary  ;    and  so  grade  the  exertion  day

after  day.  ,     r         ,after  day.  ,     r         ,

882.  Diet.  The  food  must  be  concentrated  and  ot  good 
substance,  and  allotted  into  rations  which  are  not  too  bulky,  so 
that  digestion  will  be  well  completed,  without  leading  to  the 
accumulation  of  effete  matters  in  the  blood.  Should  hunger 
be  very  pressing,  let  the  traveller  take  a  snack  of  a  quality 
appropriate  for  his  temperament,  and  unlikely  to  induce  thirst. 
This  rule  applies  whether  the  journey  be  by  night  or  by  day.

Rhazes  suggests  chewing  pickled  onions  en  route,  to  assuage  hunger.  Note 
that  nfght-tfme  fsgpref erred  for  travelling  across  deserts,  or  in  hot  countries  generally.

Potherbs  and  fruits  are  to  be  eschewed,  as  also  any  articles 
likely  to  engender  "  crude  "  humours,  unless  such  articles  are 
required  for  medicinal  purposes.

883  The  traveller  should  not  resume  riding  immediately  after 
a  good  meal,  because  the  food  would  then  undergo  decomposition, 
and  thirst  would  arise.  Then,  after  quenching  the  thirst, 
rumblings  and  distension  of  the  stomach  would  supervene, 
and  there  would  be  nausea  with  satiative  indigestion.  There- 
fore, instead  of  so  doing,  one  should  wait  till  the  time  for  alight- 
ing at  the  hospice,  unless  there  is  some  special  reason  for  doing 
otherwise,  as  presently  to  be  stated.  .

884  A  person  may  have  to  fast  so  long  that  the  appetite 
is  lost.  To  aid  one  in  submitting  to  this,  the  following  are  use- 
ful:  cold  foods   prepared  from  roast  livers  and-the"  like,  pills

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  449THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  449

prepared  with  viscid  "or  glutinous  substances,  strong  fluid  fats, 
almonds,  and  almond  oil.  Certain  fats  like  that  of  beef  will 
stave  off  the  feeling  of  hunger  for  a  long  time.  There  is  a  story 
of  a  man  having  swallowed  a  pound  (12  ozs.)  of  oil  of  violets 
in  which  fat  had  been  dissolved  until  the  oil  was  of  the  consistence 
of  a  plaster  ;  he  is  said  to  have  been  free  of  desire  for  food  for 
ten  days.

885.  Precautions  against  thirst.  One  may  adopt  a  similar 
plan  (to  the  preceding)  when  one  knows  one  will  have  to  suffer 
long  from  thirst.  It  is  therefore  advisable  to  inform  oneself 
of  those  medicinal  drinks  which  will  abolish  thirst,  and  are  named 
in  the  third  Book,  in  the  chapter  on  "Thirst."  A  specially 
good  medicine  of  this  kind  is  furnished  by  dissolving  three  drams 
of  purslane  seed  in  vinegar.

Avoid  any  foods  which  are  likely  to  evoke  thirst.  Namely, 
such  as  fish,  capers,  salted  foods,  sweets.

Converse  as  little  as  possible.  Make  the  rate  of  walking 
gentle.

If  there  is  a  shortage  of  water,  it  is  a  good  plan  to  add 
vinegar  to  it,  for  this  allays  thirst.

Rhazes  gives  :  "  Water  with  polenta  sprinkled  on  it,  and  a  moderate  quantity 
of  salt."     Or,  hold  cool  liquid  in  the  mouth ;  pour  cold  water  on  the  hands  and  feet.

Fatigue  ;  Lassitude.  This  must  be  treated  according  to 
the  chapter  on  that  subject.

At  the  end  of  a  journey. — Take  a  comfortable  apartment ;  do  not  go  near 
the  fire.  Rest. — Do  not  go  to  sleep  for  an  hour.  After  that,  the  bath  may  be 
taken.  Massage  is  then  given  till  the  skin  is  all  ruddy.  Then  the  traveller  may  go 
to  sleep  on  a  soft  couch.     (Rhazes).

3.      Regimen    Applicable    when    Exposed   to    Great   Heat,3.      Regimen    Applicable    when    Exposed   to    Great   Heat,

ESPECIALLY    WHEN     TRAVELLING  ;      ReGIMEN     SUITABLE

for  Those  going  to  Hot  Climates

886.  The  things  to  guard  against  are  :  asthenia,  loss  of 
bodily  vigour,  muscular  weakness  ;  insatiable  thirst  ;  sunstroke.

Therefore  the  head  [and  body  :  Aeg.]  must  be  protected 
from  the  sun.  Those  who  are  making  journeys  must  protect 
the  chest,  using  an  application  composed  of  such  things  as 
mucilage  of  fleawort  ;   purslane  juice.

Persons  about  to  journey  into  very  hot  regions  will  need 
to  take  something  like  barley-meal  cakes,  and  fruit  syrups, 
before  starting  off,  for  to  ride  on  horseback  (or  camels)  entails 
an  unperceived  loss  of  strength  and  vitality,  if  the  intestines

2G

450  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

are  empty,  with'  nothing  to  replace  the  void.  Therefore  it  is 
advisable  to  partake  of  such  things  as  we  have  named  in  small 
amount,  and  wait  awhile  to  give  them  time  to  pass  out  of  the 
stomach,  and  so  ensure  that  there  will  not  be  any  splashing 
about  of  its  contents.

•One  should  use  oil  of  rose  and  violets  on  the  journey, 
anointing  the  back  with  them  from  time  to  time.

The  injurious  effect  of  travelling  in  the  heat  may  be  alle- 
viated by  having  a  swim  in  cold  water,  but  it  is  best  not  to  plunge 
in  suddenly.  One  should  wait  a  while  and  enter  the  water 
gradually.887.  If  there  is  a  risk  of  simooms,  the  nostrils  and  mouth 
should  be  covered,  and  one  should  go  about  in  that  way.  Before 
being  exposed  to  such  a  danger,  one  may  eat  onions  with  butter- 
milk and  without  butter  ;  or,  better  still,  onions  infused  for  a 
night  in  the  milk  ;  and  one  may  eat  onions  by  themselves  as 
well,  and  take  the  buttermilk  after  them.  Before  steeping  the 
onions  into  the  buttermilk,  deep  incisions  should  be  made  into

them.

Another  remedy  is  to  make  use  of  some  fragrant  substance 
like  rose  oil,  and  the  oil  of  gourd-seeds.  The  latter  may  be 
sucked  (as  a  lozenge)  because  it  mitigates  the  ill-effects  one  fears.

888,  If  the  sun-stroke  has  already  occurred,  let  cold  water 
be  thrown  over  the  limbs,  and  lave  the  face  with  it.  Pour  cooling 
oil  like  rose  oil  over  the  head,  and   also  willow-oil,  and    cold'  juices  like  that  of  houseleek.  Then  lave.  Sexual  intercourse 
must  be  avoided.  The  rations  should  consist  of  cold  pot-herbs. 
Salted  fish  is  also  appropriate,  the  person  resting  the  while. 
Diluted  wine  is  advantageous.  If  there  is  no  fever,  milk  is  the 
best  food  of  all.  But  if  there  is  fever  (not  of  a  putrid  type, 
but  of  a  one-day  type),  sour  buttermilk  should _ be  given.  If 
there  is  thirst  after  sunstroke,  rinse  the  mouth  with  cold  water. 
Water  should  not  be  swallowed  to  repletion,  because  of  the  risk 
of  sudden  death  [from  shock]  thereby.  The  rinsing  of  the 
mouth  should  be  done  with  moderation.  If,  however,  there  is 
an  excessive  craving  for  fluids,  allow  the  patient  to  sip  a  little 
at  intervals.  Such  thirst  being  due  to  the  previous  exertions, 
let  him  rest,  and  then  drink.  But  it  would  be  better  to  take  rose 
oil  with  the  first  portion  of  water,  and  take  the  ordinary  water 
after  that.

In  brief,  when  exposed  to  heat  stay  in  a  cool  place  ;  lave 
the  feet  and  hands  with  cool  water.  If  thirsty  drink  cold  water 
by  sips.     The  food  should  be  such  as  is  readily  digestible.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  45I

4-     The   Regimen   for   those   Travelling   in   or   to    Cold 
Climates  and   Icy  Countries

#  889.  I  consider  that  it  is  a  very  fearsome  thine  to  travel 
in  the  intense  cold,  even  if  one  takes  great  care  and  protects 
oneself  by  every  possible  precaution.  So  how  much  the  more  is  it 
fearsome  if  the  person  has  made  no  preparations  at  all  ?How  many  travellers  have  taken  every  possible  precaution 
and  have  yet  died  from  the  exposure  to  cold,  and  the  cold  winds 
worse  becausethere  is  no  rain— dying  in  convulsions,  or  tetanus' 
or  were  frozen  to  death  ;  or  died  with  apoplexy,  or  died  in  the 
manner  of  persons  who  have  been  poisoned  with  opium  or 
mandragore  ?  r

And  even  if  the  condition  to  which  they  are  reduced  is  not 
fatal,  they  .often  experience  the  pangs  of  hunger,  as  what  is  called 
bulimia— the  treatment  for  which  is  described  already  in  the 
proper  place,  along  with  that  for  other  disorders  of  the  same  class. 
I  he  best  thing  to  do  is  to  plug  the  nostrils  and  other  apertures, 
and  protect  the  mouth  so  that  the  cold  air  does  not  enter  at  once 
{into  the  lungs).  The  exposed  parts  must  be  protected  in  the 
way  we  shall  describe  [in  894].

890.  When  the  traveller  in  bitterly  cold  places  has  reached 
his  haltmg-pkce,  he  should  not  approach  a  very  hot  fire  at 
once,  but  gradually  by  degrees,  beginning  with  a  slight  warmth, 
and  slowly  going  nearer  to  the  fire,  though  it  would  be  better 
not  to  do  that  at  all.  However,  even  though  the  need  of  warmth 
is  very  great  indeed,  the  approach  must  be  still  made  gradual. 
I  he  traveller  may  push  on  quickly  if  he  so  wish,  if  the 
exposure  to  cold  is  not  affecting  him  adversely,  or  depriving 
him  of  energy,  r         &

891.  Frostbite.  A  person  who  has  become  frostbitten 
must  be  attended  to  without  delay  ;  he  must  be  warmed  and  the 
vitality  restored  by  calefacient  oils,  especially  those  which  possess 
the  properties  of  theriac,  like  oil  of  lilies.When  the  traveller  has  reached  an  inn,  and  is  an  hungered 
let  him  partake  of  something  warm  ;    he  will  get  wonderfully 
warm,  with  fever-like  heat.

892.  Provisions  to  take.  Certain  kinds  of  provisions  would 
enable  the  traveller  to  endure  the  exposure  to  cold  more  easily. 
Ihus,  any  prepared  foods  containing  plenty  of  garlic,  nuts 
mustard  :  asafoetida.  "  Lactic  "  cheese  made  up  with  barley 
(meal  a  special  recipe)  may  be  added  in  order  to  impart  a  pleasing 
taste  to  the  garlic  and  nuts.  [Pickled  onions  may  be  chewed 
(Rhazes).J    Butter  is  also  a  good  thing  to  take,  especially  if  wine

452  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

be  drunk  afterwards.  Wine  should  be  taken  instead  of  water. 
One  should  take  rest  until  the  wine  has  come  to  rest  within  the 
body,  and  gives  the  sense  of  warmth*  He  may  then  mount 
and  continue  his  journey.  No  one  should  go  out  into  the  (bitter) 
cold  on  an  empty  stomach  ;    he  should  have  taken  plenty  of

nutriment.  .

Asafoetida  is  among  the  things  which  have  a  warming 
effect,  when  one  is  frozen  with  cold  ;  especially  if  wine  is  given 
at  the  same.  time.  The  initial  dose  is  one  drachm  (12=1  oz.) 
of  asafoetida  to  1  lb.  weight  of  wine.  _

893.  The  body  may  be  protected  from  injury  by  the  exter- 
nal cold  by  the  use  of  epithemes,  made  with  oil  (pitch  or  tar). 
[The  loins,  spine,  and  chest  may  be  bound  with  a  long  swathe,. 
to  protect  them  (Aeg.).]

Garlic  (as  an  epitheme,  894)  is  among  the  things  useful  for 
those  exposed  to  a  cold  atmosphere.

Care  of  the  eyes  and  feet.     (See  880.)

e.     On  Protecting  the  Limbs  from  the  Injurious  Effects

of  Cold.     FrostbiteCare  of  the  eyes  and  feet.     (See  880.)

e.     On  Protecting  the  Limbs  from  the  Injurious  Effects

of  Cold.     Frostbite

894.  The  limbs  should  first  be  rubbed  until  they  grow 
warm  Then  use  a  warm  liniment  compounded  with  pleas- 
antly smelling  oils  like  that  of  lilies,  and  oil  of  myrobalan 
(benzoin)  Syrup  of  lily  flowers  combined  with  aromatics.  if 
this  is  not  to  hand,  take  oil,  especially  oil  into  which  pepper, 
or  pyrethrum,  or  euphorbium,  or  asafoetida,  or  castoreum  have

been  placed.  ,      -,.    ,  ^    ^  ^  _

Epithemes  may  be  applied  to  the  limbs  to  protect  them

from  the  cold,  using  galbanum,  garlic,  aided  by  pix  liquida,

TOT"    1  T"l  ^1"J5  T1  Of*

The  foot-wear  must  not  be  so  tight  as  to  compress  the  feet, 
for  freedom  of  movement  is  the  best  means  of  protection  from 
cold,  whereas  restriction  of  movement  interferes  with  (the  circu- 
lation) and  makes  the  limb  cold.  It  is  also  a  good  plan  to  cover 
the  feet  with'  parchment,  and  wear  fur  over  that.

If  the  hands  or  feet  are  not  aware  of  the  surrounding  cold, 
so  that  one  does  not  take  the  proper  precautions  against  it,  it  is 
a  sign  that  the  sensation  is  already  being  lost,  and  the  frost  is 
already  exerting  its  harmful  action  upon  it.  In  such  a  case 
there  must  be  no  hesitation  in  action.  For  you  know  that  once 
the  (freezing)  cold  penetrates  into  a  member,  not  only  is  the 
innate  heat  extinguished,  but  the  very  substance  on  which  that

*  Rhazes  advises  hot  wine  as  a  drink  before  setting  out.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  453*  Rhazes  advises  hot  wine  as  a  drink  before  setting  out.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  453

heat   depends  is   destroyed   (dissolved,   tahallul).      The  tissues 
are  then  at  the  mercy  of  putrefaction.     So  there  is  an  urgent 
need  for  all  those  measures  which  have  been  discussed  in  the 
chapter  on  ulcers,  especially  the  grave  eroding  ulcers.     If  the 
degree  of  action  is  still  short  of  the  stage  of  putrefaction,  the  best 
thing  is  to  place  the  limbs  in  snow  water,  or  into  water  in  which 
figs   have   been  boiled,  or  cabbage,  or  myrtle  (i.e.,  odoriferous 
things),  or  into  dill  water,  or  chamomile  water.     All  these  are 
beneficial.     A  good  local  application  is  made  with  pennyroyal. 
Wormwood  of  Pontus,  and  betony,  and  turnip  are  also  good 
medicaments  for  the  purpose.

One  must  avoid  exposure  to  direct  heat. 
It  is  also  necessary  to  walk  about  quickly,  moving  the  feet 
and  limbs,  doing  exercises  with  these,  and  also  applying  friction, 
and  inunction.     Warm  water  may  be  poured  over  the  part  from 
a  height,  along  with  the  other  aforesaid  measures.895.     It  is  important  to  realize  that  to  allow  the  limbs  to 
be  still  and  motionless  in  the  cold  air,  without  exercising  them 
m  any  way,  is  the  surest  way  to  subject  them  completely  to  the 
intense  cold.     Some  people,  however,  actually  make  use  of  cold 
water  for  the  purpose  of  overcoming  frostbite,  taking  away  the 
ill-effects  of  the  cold  just  as  is  done  with  frozen  fruits.    For  the 
plunging  into  cold  water  has  the  effect  of  drawing  out  the  ice, 
and  of  washing  it  away,  and  melting  the  tissues  and  restoring 
them  to  a  normal  temperature,  whereas  exposure  to  heat  would 
simply  lead  to  decomposition.     However  it  be  done  is  no  par- 
ticular concern  of  the  doctor.

_  896.  If  the  extremity  begins  to  become  dark  in  colour, 
an  incision  should  be  made  into  it,  to  let  the  blood  out  of  it  ; 
the  limb  is  then  placed  into  warm  water  to  prevent  the  blood  from 
congealing  and  so  failing  to  run  out  of  the  tissues.  The  flow  is 
allowed  to  continue  till  it  stops  of  its  own  accord.  After  that  an 
epitheme  is  applied,  using  Armenian  bole  and  vinegar  blended 
together,  for  this  antagonizes  the  injury  done.  Pix  liquida  is 
also  a  good  adjuvant  to  this  both  at  the  commencement  and  at 
the  conclusion.

When  the  darkness  goes  on  to  blackness  or  greenness, 
showing  that  the  mortification  is  increasing,  no  time  must  be 
lost -in  stopping  the  process,  for  otherwise  the  healthy  parts 
adjoining  will  become  implicated  and  undergo  putrefactive 
changes  which  will  surely  spread  on  into  the  interior  organs. 
The  measures  to  adopt  under  these  circumstances  are  described 
in  the  appropriate  chapter.

454  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE454  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

6.  How  to  Preserve  the   Complexion  while  Travelling 
897.     The  face  should  be  treated  by  applying  epithemes

to  it,  which  are  prepared  with  viscid  substances,  such  as  mucilage 
of  fl'eabane,  mucilage  of  purslane,  gum  tragacanth  in  water,  gum 
arabic  in  water,  white  of  egg,  and  such  things  as  rusks  of  the 
finest  wheaten  flour  dissolved  in  water,   Chritan  lozenges.

When  the  face  is  exposed  to  biting  winds,  or  cold  or  the 
action  of  (intense)  sun,  the  measures  to  be  adopted  are  those 
given  in  the  section  on  "  Beauty  Culture."

Scented  face  powders  of  the  East  are  referred  to  by  Burton^",  who  specifies 
one  composed  of  rice-flour  or  powdered  bark  of  the  mango,  deodar  (uvana  longifoha), 
sandal-wood,  lign-aloes,  or  curcuma  (zerumbat  or  zedoana)  with  rose-flowers,  cam- 
phor, civet  and  anise-seed  (v.  257).

7.  How   to    Counteract   the   Injurious    Effects    of  the

Various  Waters,  while  on  a  Journey 
898.  The  traveller  is  more  exposed  to  illness  from  the 
diversity  °of  the  drinking  water  than  he  is  from  the  diversity  of 
foods.  Hence  it  is  necessary  to  be  particular  about  correcting 
the  bad  qualities  of  the  drinking  water,  and  expend  every  effort 
in  purifying  it.

1 .  Procure  the  rapid  passage  of  water  through  the  body

by  inducing  sweating.

2.  Boil  the  water,  for  as  we  have  already  pointed  out, 
boiling  sometimes  clarifies  the  water  and  separates  off  the  im- 
purities which  are  admixed  with  the  intrinsic  substance  of  the

water.  .water.  .

3.  The  best  measure  is  to  distil  the  water.  Ihis  may  be 
done  by  making  a  wick  out  of  twisted  wool,  one  end  of  which 
is  placed  in  the  full  vessel  and  the  other  into  an  empty  vessel. 
Water  will  then  escape  from  the  one  to  the  other  drop  by  drop. 
This  is  a  good  way  of  clarifying  water  when  it  is  necessary  to  do 
so  frequently.

Note  this  original  use  of  the  word  "  distil  "  ;  the  water  passes  from  one  vessel 
to  the  other  steadily  drop  by  drop.  When  heat  came  to  be  used,  the  water  being 
placed  in  an  alembic,  or  nowadays,  in  a  "  retort  or  still  (a  metal  retort),  the 
water  also  comes  over  drop  by  drop.  The  coming  of  the  water  drop  by  drop  gives 
the  name  to  the  process  of  distilling.  Poetically,  dew  distils  _  on  the  flowers 
(i  e  drops  of  water  appear  on  them)  ;  mercy  "  distils."  The  retort  is  the  representa- 
'  tive  of  the  "  twisted  "  wool,  the  glass  vessel  having  been  bent  to  form  the  condenser 
of  the  water  vapour.  .  .      ,    ,

It  may  be  noted  that  the  action  of  capillarity  would  ensure  the  purity  of  the 
distillate,  for  salts  will  only  travel  a  certain  distance.  Bacteria  also  will  not  ascend 
to  the  brim  of  the  vessel,  except  possibly  in  the  case  of  typhoid  bacilli.

When  the  water  is  bitter  and  altogether  unwholesome,  one 
should  boil  it,  and  add  pure  sand  to  it  while  it  is  boiling.     It  is

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  455

then  distilled  over  drop,  by  drop  by  using  the  wool  as  mentioned

above.

It  amounts  to  the  same  thing  -if  the  water  be  shaken  with 
clean  sand,  especially  when  this  material  has  been  burnt  in  the 
sun.     When  the  sand  has  settled,  the  water  will  be  harmless.4.  Drink  wine  with  the  water,  for  that  removes  such  injur- 
ious matter  as  is  of  feeble  penetrative  power.

5.  If  water  is  scarce  and  not  attempered,  it  should  be  taken 
with  vinegar,  especially  in  summer-time,  because  that  prevents 
one  from  drinking  too  much.

899.  Salty  water  :  take  vinegar  with  it,  and  syrupus 
acetosus  into  which  has  been  placed  pulse  and  various  species 
of  myrtle  and  medlar.

Aluminous- and  bitter  water  \  take  aperients  afterwards.  It. 
is  also  beneficial  to  take  wine  after  it.

Sour  water  :  take  sweet  things  and  oily  things,  mixed  with 
julep  afterwards.  Chick-pea  water,  taken  previously  to  the  water, 
will  make  it  harmless  before  one  could  wish.  The  same  is  true 
if  one  eats  chick-peas  first.

Stagnant  and  marshy  water  :  these  are  putrescent.  Do  not 
take  warm  foods  before  drinking  it.  Afterwards  take  astringents 
made  with  cold  fruits  and  potherbs,  such  as  quince,  apple,  and

sorrel.

Thick  and  turbid  waters.  Garlic  should  be  taken  after  such 
waters.  Among  the  reagents  which  will  clear  these  waters  is 
alum  of  Yamen  (of  Arabia).

900.  Other  things  which  remove  the  harmful  properties 
of  various  waters  :  onions,  because  these  act  on  them  like  a 
theriac  ;  especially  onions  and  vinegar ;  garlic  ;  and,  among  cold 
things,  lettuce.901.  Another  good  rule  in  regard  to  the  diversity  of  waters 
which  travellers  are  likely  to  encounter  is  this  :  to  carry  some  of 
the  water  from  his  home,  to  mix  with  it  the  earths  from  the  inn 
in  which  he  has  stayed  last  ;  then  carry  some  of  the  water  to  the 
inn  to  which  he  goes  next,  and  mix  that  with  the  water  he  has 
brought  ;  and  go  on  in  this  manner  until  he  reaches  his  des- 
tination. '  Similarly  he  may  take  some  of  the  clay  (sand)  from  his 
own  home,  and  use  that  to  mix  with  each  successive  specimen 
of  water,  shaking  them  with  it,  until  it  has  cleared  them.

902.  One  should  be  sure  to  pass  all  the  drinking  water 
through  a  cloth,  in  order  to  make  sure  there  are  no  leeches  or 
other  creatures  in  it,  or  any  minute  particles  of  evil  nature  sus- 
pended in  it.     [E.g.  incidentally,  minute  ova  !]

456  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

It  is  a  good  rule  also  to  take  a  sour  rob  with  one,  to  mix  with 
the  various  waters  one  is  likely  to  have  to  drink.

8.      Rules  for  Persons  Travelling  by  Sea

903.  Those  who  travel  by  sea  often  suffer  from  scotomia 
and  vertigo,  and  the  motion  brings  on  nausea  and  vomiting, 
especially  during  the  first  few  days  of  the  voyage,  _  after  which 
it  subsides.  It  is  not  wise  to  allow  nausea  and  vomiting  to  con- 
tinue longer  than  is  required  for  getting  rid  of  superfluities.* 
It  should  then  cease.

904*  Measures  to  prevent  seasickness.  It  is  justifiable  to 
endeavour  to  -prevent  sea-sickness.  Thus,  take  fruit  such  as  of 
quince,  maciana,  and  pomegranate.  Parsley  seed  made  into  a 
drink  will  prevent  nausea  as  long  as  one  lies  quite  still  ;  and 
if  one  cannot  lie  still,  it  soothes  the  sense  of  nausea.  Absinthe 
has  the  same  effect.Among  the  things  which  prevent  seasickness  are  :  nourish- 
ing the  mouth  of  the  stomach  with  tonic  acetous  substances, 
and  such  things  as  prevent  "  vapours  "  from  rising  into  the  head. 
Namely  :  Lentils  in  vinegar  (or  dried  and  boiled  with  _  a  little 
pennyroyal,  or  boiled  till  soft  and  then  triturated  and  dried  and 
kept  in  an  earthen  vessel  :  Aeg.)  ;  juice  of  sour  grapes  ;  a 
little  pennyroyal,  thyme  ;  bread  broken  up  in  weak  and  fragrant 
wine,  or  in  cold  water.     Thyme  is  sometimes  added  to  that._

The  nostrils  should  also  be  smeared  over  on  the  inside  with 
white  lead  (cosmetic)  ©i,ntment.

Persistent  Sea-Sickness.— Avoid  all  food.  Take  a  little  vinegar  and  honey 
with  water  in  which  thyme  has  been  infused,  or  pennyroyal  water  with  some  rme 
polenta  ;  or  take  some  weak  fragrant  wine,  with  fine  polenta.  Take  antibilious 
remedies.       (Rhazes).

Simple  Precautionary  Measures.— (i)  Counteract  the  disagreeable  smell  of 
the  ship  by  sniffing  at  quinces,  thyme  or  pennyroyal.  (Aeg.)  (2)  Do  not  look  at 
the  sea  (ib.)  (3)  Beware  of  the  drinking  water  (ib.)  (4)  Note  the  diet  already 
mentioned.  (5)  Have  remedies  against  vermin.  Mercury,  oil  long  birthwort 
or  wearing  wool  smeared  with  oil  or  mercury  ensures  against  lice.     (Haly  Abbas) .

*  The  first  vomitings  which  occur  at  sea  are  often  beneficial,  and  therefore 
need  not  be  interfered  with.

END    OF    PART    THREE

§  254.  When  prescribing  a  "  regimen,"  or  programme  to  be 
followed  by  the  patient,  especially  where  the  ailment  is  chronic, 
or  liable  to  become  chronic,  the  following  headings  require  to  be 
considered.I.  General. — The  conditions  regarding  Light,  Air,  the  Climate 
of  the  place,  and  the  physical  environment — place  of  residence  or 
work  ;     the  dwelling  itself.     The  season  of  the  year.

II.  _  Special. — (i)  The  age  and  sex  of  the  patient ;  (2)  The 
food,  drink,  and  necessary  evacuations  ;  (3)  Sleep  ;  (4)  Exercise  ; 
(5)  Clothing  ;'  (6)  Personal  habits  :  bathing,  smoking  ;  marital  life  ; 
(7)  Occupation  or  livelihood  ;  (8)  Mental  environment  and  social 
conditions.

As  regards  Light  :  the  importance  of  free  access  of  light  is 
well-known  but  is  often  neglected,  and  may  account  for  some 
of  the  effects  met  with  in  the  given  case.  An  excess  of  exposure 
is  equally  faulty  with  deficiency.

'  As  regards  Air — impurity  of  the  air  constantly  breathed ; 
manufacturing  towns  ;  confined  rooms,  stuffiness  of  the  bedroom 
because   too   small,    etc.

As  regards  Climate,  ample  suggestions  are  discussed  in  §181, 
188,  305-322.

The  importance  of  considering  the  Season  is  freely  discussed 
in  261-273,  280-305.  The  habits  as  regards  food,  exercise,  sleep, 
clothing,  etc.,  must  be  adjusted  according  to  the  season.

Place  of  Residence. — Here  belongs  a  consideration  of  the  nature 
of  the  soil,  of  the  water  supply,  of  the  prevailing  winds  ;  the  heating 
and  lighting  ;     the  drainage  (322).

The  dwelling  itself. — Here  we  consider  materials  of  construc- 
tion, proximity  of  other  dwellings,  the  aspect  of  the  several  rooms, 
point  of  compass  faced,  the  colour  of  the  walls  in  the  rooms,  the 
stability  of  the  window-frames  ;    type  of  fire-places  ;    cellarage,  etc.The  age  of  the  patient  is  considered  in  terms  of  the  periods  of 
life  specified  in  51.  At  each  period  there  are  certain  variations  of 
function  and  capacity  which  account  both  for  the  phenomena  of 
the  illness,  and  affect  the  efficacy  of  different  modes  of  treatment — - 
physical  and  mental.     The  sex  is  necessarily  considered.

Food  and  Drink.' — Here  it  is  desirable  that  the  physician 
should  picture  the  actual  meals  he  is  advocating.  It  is  not  enough 
to  make  out  a  dietary  in  the  form  of  a  list  of  things  allowed  and  things 
forbidden.  The  foods  must  be  combined.  The  dishes  may  often 
be  specified.  The  number  of  meals  a  day  ;  the  place  where  they 
are  eaten  ;  the  actual  time  of  day  chosen  ;  the  time  occupied  over 
the  several  meals  ;  the  quantity  taken  at  a  meal  ;  the  kind  of  cook- 
ing— all  these  things  need  watching  and  regulating.     The  whole

457

458  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

subject  of  adulteration  and  contamination  of  foods  must  be  studied  ; 
the  deleterious  effect  on  foods  produced  by  long  keeping  in  shops 
or  in  refrigerators,  etc.  ;  'artificial  ripening  of  fruits  ;  artificial 
methods  of  preserving  foods  ;     addition  of  preservative  chemicals,

etc.etc.

It  must  here  be  emphasised  that  the  idea  of  controlling  diets  by 
estimation  of  calories,  and  scientific  calculation — so  much  a  fetish 
in  many  places— overlooks  that  important  personal  factor  which 
means  so  much  for  the  ailing  and  sickly.  "  Man  is  a  living  organism, 
not  a  mechanism,  and  can  produce  a  definite  amount  of  protein 
and  carbohydrate  from  a  given  quantity  of  food.  .  .  .  In  practice 
the  value  of  a  food  depends  on  the  physical  properties  of  food- 
stuffs, but  also  on  the  assimilative-  power  of  the  digestive  organs 
and  the  personal  condition  of  the  individual  organs.  (Muther).134 
"  The  public  are  apt  to  forget  that  not  the  quantity  of  food,  but  the 
efficiency  of  the  gastric  organs  to  digest  and  assimilate  is  the  real 
criterion^' to  go  by."  (ib.)  Or,  as  has  been  wisely  said:  "  Nature 
laughs  at  our  scientific  food  values."

The  actual  composition  of  the  meal  may  be  considered  Irom 
several  aspects  :  the  list  of  all  possible  articles  which  can  be  bought ; 
the  chemical  composition  of  each  ;  the  food-value  composition  ; 
the  taste  or  palatability  ;  the  digestibility;  the  assimilabihty  ; 
incompatibilities  ;  the  effect  on  the  bowels  and  urine  ;  the  per- 
sonal idiosyncrasies  (including  anaphylactic  actions)  ;  the  relation 
to  temperature  of  the  air,  season,  age,  sex,  occupation  ;  the  mode 
of  preparation  ;  the  materials  used  for  cooking  (water,  steam, 
butter,  margarine,  fat,  olive  oil,  etc.)  Incompatibilities,  both  among 
solid  foods,  and  among  beverages,  and  between  solids  and  fluids 
taken  together  or  successively.The  action  of  the  bowels  must  be  seen- to,  and  secured,  as 
often  it  can  be,  by  the  proper  choice  of  foods  and  modes  of  cooking 
rather  than  the  random  exhibition  of  various  purges  and  aperients,

3,nci  bv  exercise.

Sleep  —Here  we  must~~go  into  :— the  time  of  retiring  to  bed  ; 
the  time  of  rising  ;  the  duration  of  sleep  ;  the  kind  of  sleeping 
apartment;  the  position  in  bed  ;  the  kind  of  bed  ;  the  bed-clothes  ; 
the  night-clothes  ;  the  nearness  to  a  meal  ;  the  quality  of  the  meal 
last  taken  ;  the  time  of  day.  (Repose  taken  during  the  day,  re- 
laxation of  the  mind  for  the  time,  from  cares,  business  worries, 
and  domestic  anxieties,  etc.)

Exercise.— Special  exercises  may  be  prescribed  :— breatmng- 
exercises,  stretching  exercises;  gymnastic  exercises;  regulate 
time  of  day,  relation  to  food,  amount  of  clothing  at  the  time.— Here 
belongs  also  the  question  of  massage  (kneading,  stroking,  pinching, 
tapping,  beating,  vibration  of  certain  parts  of  the  body  :  lower 
limbs,  upper  limbs,  breast,  abdomen,  back,  scalp,  throat,  face, 
and  so  on).     See  739,   sqq.

Clothing.— Adapted  to  the  season  ;  materials  used  next  to  the 
skin  ;     loose  or  tight ;     weight  of  materials  used.

Personal  Habits.— Prompt  attention  to  calls  of  nature  ;    clean-

THE  CANON  OP  MEDICINE  459

liness   of  skin.     Smoking.     Swimming   and   sea-bathing.     Marital 
relations  may   need  consideration.THE  CANON  OP  MEDICINE  459

liness   of  skin.     Smoking.     Swimming   and   sea-bathing.     Marital 
relations  may   need  consideration.

Occupation  or  livelihood. — This  often  proves  a  determining 
factor  if  mistakes  in  advice  are  to  be  avoided.  The  influence  which 
the  daily  occupation  has  in  the  commonest  of  our  habits  must  never 
be  disregarded.  The  occupation  entails  obedience  to  various 
rules  impossible  in  many  cases  ;  we  must  also  consider  whether 
the  occupation  is  agreeable  or  painful,  or  entails  the  repression  of 
one  or  other  psychical  wishes  or  carries  with  it  restrictions  of  an 
ethical  or  religious  or  ambitious  or  social  nature.

Mental  environment.— -This  is  provided  partly  by  the  occupation  ; 
it  also  includes  the  recreations  ;     the  domestic  side  of  life  ;     the 
social  side  of  life  ;    amusements  ;    company  ;    friendships  ;    leisure 
etc.  *

Part  IV

GENERAL    THERAPEUTICS

The  Various  Modes  of  Treatment  Applicable  to  Disease

in  General

General    discourse    on    the    Treatment    of    Disease. 
The  Treatment    of  Disorders   of  the  Temperament. 
"  Evacuant  "  and  "  derivative  "  treatment.— Purgation,  Emesis, 
Cupping,  Venesection,  Leeches.

The  use  of  Liniments  and  Sprays. 
The  treatment  of  "  obstructions." 
Minor  Surgery. 
The  relief  of  Pain. 
Selection  of  Methods.

460

I.      General  Discourse  upon  the  Treatment  of  Disease.460

I.      General  Discourse  upon  the  Treatment  of  Disease.

905.  The  subject  of 'treatment  com- 
prises three  headlines  :  that  of  the  regimen 
and  diet,  that  of  the  use  of  medicines,  and 
that  of  manual  or  operative  interference.* 
By  the  word  "  regimen  "  we  under- 
stand the  systematic  management  of  the 
several  factors  which  we  have  enumerated 
as  being  essential  to  health,  and  among 
them  diet  has  an  (important)  place.  The 
prescription  of  a  regimen  is  based  upon 
data  pertaining  to  the  qualities  of  the 
nutrients  to  be  selected,  as  well  as  those

belonging   to    the    qualities   which    determine    the    choice    of

medicines.

906.  _  Treatment  with  Food.  In  regard  to  diet,  the 
first  question  to  decide  is  as  to  the  quantity  of  each  article  of 
food  which  should  be  allowed.  Sometimes  a  given  article  of 
food  is  to  be  forbidden  ;  sometimes  lessened  ;  sometimes 
no  change  need  be  made  ;  sometimes  the  amount  taken  is  to 
be  increased.  The  physician  only  forbids  a  food,  or  all  food, 
if  he  intends  that  the  digestive  faculties  [throughout  the  body] 
shall  be  left  entirely  free  to  complete  the  maturation  of  the 
humours.  He  prescribes  a  lessened  amount  of  a  food,  if  he 
wishes  the  digestive  powers  to  be  conserved.  The  very  fact 
of  taking  nutriment  is  a  tax  on  the  digestive  faculties  ;  there- 
fore the  withdrawal  of  a  certain  amount  of  food  means  a  cor- 
responding alleviation  for  them.

The  physician  must  also  be  watchful  in  regard  to  two 
dangers — one,  that  the  natural  powers  should  become  too 
enfeebled  ;  the  second,  that  an  illness  should  become  too 
grave.

907.  How   to   reduce   the    diet. — This    may   be    achieved

*  i.e.  dietetics,  pharmaceutics,  surgery.

461

462  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE907.  How   to   reduce   the    diet. — This    may   be    achieved

*  i.e.  dietetics,  pharmaceutics,  surgery.

461

462  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

in  two  directions— it  is  lessened  either  in  amount,  or  in  quality. 
In  fact,  by  combining  these  two  ways,  one  has  a  third  method 
at  one's  disposal.  To  explain  more  exactly — an  aliment  may 
be  bulky  but  poorly  nutritious.  For  instance,  pot-herbs, 
fruits.  A  person  may  eat  plentifully  of  these  without  receiving 
much  nourishment.  On  the  other  hand,  an  aliment  may  be 
small  in  bulk,  but  highly  nutritious.  For  example,  eggs  ;  the 
testicles  of  fowls.  It  is,  for  instance,  necessary  to  lessen  the 
nutritive  value  of  food,  and  increase  its  bulk,  in  cases  where 
the  appetite  is  altogether  excessive  and  "  crude  "  humours 
enter  the  blood.  So  we  lull  the  appetite  by  filling  up  the 
stomach,  and  yet  see  to  it  that  only  a  small  amount  of  (nutritive) 
matter  enters  the  blood,  thereby  enabling  the  digestive  products 
already  in  the  blood  to  become  "  matured  "  (properly  disposed 
of).  And  there  may  be  other  reasons.  On  the  other  hand  it 
may  be  desirable  to  increase  the  nutritive  quality  without 
adding  to  the  bulk  of  the  food  ;  namely,  when  we  wish  _  to 
increase  the  bodily  strength  (vitality)  and  when  the  digestive 
power  of  the  stomach  is  inadequate.908.  Diminution  in  the  amount  of  food,  or  stopping  food 
altogether  is  usually  the  line  of  treatment  in  acute  illnesses. 
But  sometimes  we  decrease '  the  amount  of  food  in  chronic 
maladies  also,  though  not  to  the  same  extent  as  in  acute  ones. 
The  reason  is  that  in  the  case  of  chronic  maladies  it  is  more 
necessary  to  see  that  the  bodily  strength  is  maintained,  for 
we  know  that  a  long  time  will  elapse  before  there  can  be  a 
crisis  or  restoration  to  health.  So  unless  the  strength  be  main- 
tained, the  patient  will  not  hold  out  until  the  time  for  crisis 
comes,  and  he  cannot  digest  anything  which  takes  a  long  time 
to  digest.  But  in  the  case  of  acute  illnesses,  the  crisis  is  near  at 
hand,  so  we  may  confidently  expect  the  vitality _  to  hold  out 
until  that  time.  Did  we  have  any  doubt  about  this,  we  should 
see  to  it  that  the  diet  was  not  lowered  too  much.

.  It  is  not  so  necessary  to  diminish  the  amount  of  food  in  the 
earlier  stages  of  an  illness,  when  the  symptoms  are  not  very 
marked.  In  this  way  one  conserves  the  natural  powers.  But 
as  the  illness  progresses  and  the  symptoms  become  more  severe, 
so  the  amount  of  food  is  to  be  lessened  according  to  the  principles 
already  stated.  In  this  way  the  digestive  powers  are  helped 
at  the  (critical)  hour  of  struggle.

The  regimen  must  also  be  made  definitely  attenuant  during 
the  height  of  the  disease.  The  more  acute  the  malady,  and 
the  nearer  the  crisis,  the  more  attenuant  must  the  regimen  be

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  463

made,  unless  there,  should  happen  to  be  contra-indications  such 
as  we  shall  name  in  the  special  part.THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  463

made,  unless  there,  should  happen  to  be  contra-indications  such 
as  we  shall  name  in  the  special  part.

909.  Aliment  -possesses'  two  functions  besides  mere 
nutrition  ;  (a)  rate  of  penetration,  or  absorption  :  rapid  pene- 
trative power,  as  for  instance,  wine  ;  slow  penetrative  power, 
as  for  instance,  roast  meats  and  fried  meats  ;  (b)  compactness 
of  the  substance. of  the  digestive  products  in  the  blood,  and 
consequent  retention  (e.g.,  this  is  the  feature  of  the  digestive 
products  from  pork  and  veal)  ;  or  attenuation  of  substance, 
with  consequent  speedy  dispersal  (as  is  the  feature  of  the  digestive 
products  of  wine  and  figs).

We  need  to  make  use  of  an  aliment  of  rapid  penetrative 
power  when  we  wish  to  remedy  a  loss  of  vital  power,  so  as  to 
revive  it  when  there  is  not  sufficient  time  or  (digestive)  power  to 
justify  waiting  till  the  aliments  are  digested  in  their  ordinary 
course,  slow  as  that  may  be.  We  have  also  to  take  care  not 
to  take  easily  digested  food  after  food  which  is  only  slowly 
digested,  lest  the  result  of  the  mixture  be  undesirable  in  the 
way  already  explained.  We  should  also  take  care  to  avoid 
foods  of  solid  texture,  since  we  know  for  a  fact  that  these  give 
rise  to  obstructions  (in  the  ducts  and  tissue  channels  as  well 
as  in  the    intestines).

Therefore  we  will  select  highly  nutritious  foods  which 
digest  slowly,  when  we  wish  to  restore  the  strength  of  the  patient, 
and  make  him  fit  to  undertake  strenuous  exercise.  We  select 
a  feebly  nutritious  food  for  a  person  whose  pores  are  choked 
with    dense   matter.

910.     Treatment  with  Medicines.910.     Treatment  with  Medicines.

There  are  three  rules  to  follow  in  selecting  medicines  : 
(1)  selection  according  to  quality — whether  hot,  cold,  moist, 
dry;  (2)  selection  of  the  amount  to  be  given  [Dose].  There  are 
two  sub-divisions  here  :  (a)  measurement  in  terms  of  weight, 
(b)  measurement  of  its  quality — degree  of  hot,  cold,  etc.  quality, 
(3)  the  rules  relative  to  the  time  of  administration.

_  In  regard  to  (1),  the  choice  according  to  quality,  the 
decision  depends,  strictly  speaking,  upon  one's  knowledge 
of  the  type  of  the  malady  to  be  treated.  Once  one  knows  the 
quality  of  the  malady,  the  appropriate  medicine  is  that  whose 
quality  is  exactly  opposite  ;  just  as  in  the  case  of  health,  it  is 
the  like  wherewith  it  is  maintained.'

In  regard  to  (2),  there  are  two  factors  to  consider,  in 
order  to  arrive  at  an  arbitrary  measure  :  (a)  the  nature  of  the 
member,  (b)  the  degree  .of  illness.     Over  and  above  these,  are

464  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

factors  determining  the  suitability  and  fitness  of  the  remedy, 
namely,  species,  age,  custom,  season,  geographical  position, 
occupation,    strength,    physique.

911.  To  understand  the  nature  of  the  member  one  must 
know  these  four  things  about  it:  (i)  its  temperament;  (ii)  its 
construction;   (iii)  its  position  and  relations;   (iv)  its  strength.(i)  Temperament. — It  is  necessary  to  know  the  normal 
temperament  of  each  member  because  this  gives  the  clue  to 
the  degree  of  intemperament,  by  showing  to  what  extent  this 
has  departed  from  the  normal.  One  would  thus  form  an  idea 
as  to  the  amount  of  change  which  is  necessary  to  restore  the 
part  to  health.  For  example,  if  the  temperament  in  health 
were  cold,  and  the  present  (intemperament)  be  hot,  then  the 
change  from  normal  is  considerable.  A  considerable  amount  of 
infrigidation  will  be  necessary.  But  if  both  were  hot,  quite 
a  trivial  degree  of  infrigidation  might  suffice  to  restore  health.(ii)  Construction.  We  have  already  stated  that  there 
are  four  modes  of  construction  of  a  member,_  and  the  reader 
must  study  the  matter  in  that  place.  But  in  addition  it  is 
necessary  to  be  aware  that  (a)  certain  members  have  been  con- 
structed with  openings  of  easy  ingress,  with  ample  spaces 
(receptacles)  at  the  entry  and  exit  (of  the  channels)*  so  that  the 
waste  products  can  be  expelled  readily  by  (appropriate)  tenuous 
and  attempered  medicines.  There  are  others  which  are  not 
so  formed,  and  in  these  cases  stronger  medicines  become  neces- 
sary, (b)  Some  members  are  loosely  constructed,  while  others 
are  dense  in  texture.  For  the  former,  tenuous  medicine  will 
suffice,  whereas  for  the  latter  a  powerful  remedy-  is  necessary. 
The  strong  medicine  is  the  more  necessary  in  cases  where  there 
is  neither  cavity  nor  receptacle — either  interiorly  or  externally. 
Next  in  degree  of  strength  of  medicine  is  that  which  serves 
in  the  case  where  there  is  a  receptacle  in  one  of  the  two  parts  ; 
and  next  to  that  is  the  strength  of  medicine  applicable  in  the 
case  where  there  is  a  receptacle  on  both  sides.  Examples  of 
this  :  the  kidney,  which  is  dense,  firm,  brawny,  and  solid  in 
texture  ;  the  lung,  which  is  loose  in  texture  [and  obviously 
has  pervading  channels  as  well  as  an  exterior  orifice].*  These  channels  comprise  (a)  the  ordinary  anatomical  inlets  and  outlets  of 
the  bodv  •  (b)  orifices  of  ducts  which  open  into  the  alimentary  tract,  etc.,  and  are 
not  visible  exteriorly  ;  (c)  channels  of  microscopic  size  which  would  not  be  included 
in  an  ordinary  anatomical  description  ;  (d)  tissue  spaces  which  are  not  defined  by 
limiting  membranes,  but  are  traversed  by  fluid  constituents  of  the  body.  ine 
terminal  portion  of  a  duct  often  shows  an  ampullary  dilation  which  comes  under 
the  category  of  a  "  receptacle  "  in  the  text,  (e)  Expansions  of  lumen  of  this  kind 
also  occur  in  the  vascular  channels  ;    (f)  perivascular  and  peritendinous  sheaths.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  465

(iii)  Site  or  position.  One  knows  about,  the  site  when  one 
knows  the  position  and  the  relations  of  the  member.  The 
advantage  of  knowing-the  anatomical  relations  of  an  organ  is  that 
one  can  then  choose  the  part  which  will  draw  the  given  medicine, 
for  thus  one  compels  the  medicine  to  travel  in  the  desired  direc- 
tion. For  instance  :  if  there  is  pathological  matter  in  the  blood 
channels' of  the  liver,  one  will  evacuate  it  by  way  of  the  kidney  ; 
if  it  be  in  the  bile  ducts,  one  will  evacuate  by  way  of  the  intestine. 
For  the  former  is  (physiologically)  related  to  the  kidney,  and 
the  latter  to  the  intestine.

912.      There  is  a  threefold  value  in  knowing  the  position 
of  a  part.912.      There  is  a  threefold  value  in  knowing  the  position 
of  a  part.

(1)  Accessibility    or    remoteness. — If    the    organ    to    be 
reached  is  -accessible,   as  is  true  in  the  case  of  the  .  stomach, 
an  attempered  medicine   brought   to    it  will    act  on    it    (with 
certainty),  whereas  if  the  organ  be  distant,  like  the  lung,  the 
action  of  an  attempered  medicine  will  be  nullified  (because  it 
has  been  changed  by  digestion)  before  it  can  reach  the  lung 
itself^       Therefore,    a    stronger    medicine    becomes    necessary 
in  this   case.^    When  the  organ   affected  is  readily  accessible 
to  the  medicine,  so  that  the  virtues  of  the  latter  at  once  come 
into  _  play,  the  efficiency  of  the  medicine  will  be  directly  pro- 
portionate to  the  severity  of  the  malady.     But  if  the  medicine 
has  to  travel  some  distance  before  reaching  the  affected  organ, 
and  the_  malady  more  deeply  seated  than  can  be  met  by  the 
penetrative  power  of  the  remedy,   then  the  potency  must  be 
higher  than  usual.      For  instance,  the  amount  of  vinegar  needed 
is  greater  when  applied  in  a  plaster  for  sciatica.

(2)  One  must  know  what  substances  to  admix  with  medi- 
cines in  order  to  bring  them  rapidly  to  the  affected  organ. 
For  instance,  one  must  admix  diuretics  with  a  medicine  for  the 
urinary  tract  ;  and  saffron  with  medicines  intended  for  the 
heart.

(3)  One  must  know  by  what  route  the  medicine  is  to  be 
brought  to  the  affected  part.  Thus,  if  we  have  ascertained 
that  there  are  ulcers  in  the  lower  bowel,  we  inject  remedies  by 
the  rectum;  whereas  if  we  know  that  the  ulcers  are  in  the 
small  intestine,  we  give  the  remedies  as  fluids  by  the  mouth.913.  Sometimes  it  is  advantageous  to  consider  both 
situation  and  relations  to  other  organs  at  the  same  time.  This 
applies  in  the  case  where  the  whole  of  the  morbid  matter  has 
been  discharged  into  the  member,  or  when  it  is  in  process  of 
being  so  discharged.    For  as  soon  as  we  know  that  it  is  in  process

2H

AS6  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

of  descent  to  the  particular  spot,  we  may  draw  it  out  of  the  body 
altogether  by  making  use  of  the  following  four  principles  :— ■

(a)  The  rule  of  diversity  of  parts.— One  may  draw  from 
the  right  side  to  the  left  ;    from  above  to  the  parts  below.

fa)  The  rule  of  physiological  relationship. — Thus,  when 
the  menstrual  flow  is  controlled  by  applying  cupping  to  the 
physiologically  related  organ— the  breasts.

(c)  The  rule  of  directness.— Thus,  for  maladies  of  the 
liver,  venesection  is  done  in  the  right  basilic  ;  in  the  case  of 
the  spleen,  the  left  basilic  vein  is  used.  _  _

(d)  The  rule  of  distance.— The  member  into  which  the 
morbid  matters  are  drawn  must  not  be  too  near  to  the  one

If  by 'chance  the  whole  of  the  morbid  matter  has  already 
been  withdrawn,  both  sides  of  the  body  may  be  used  together. 
For  we  may,  if  we  desire,  draw  the  material  into  the  member 
itself  or  first  draw  it  into  an  adjoining  physiologically  related 
one  and  then  from  that.  For  instance,  we  open  both  saphenous 
vein's  when  treating  maladies  of  the  uterus,  and  we  open  the  one 
(median)  vein  under  the  tongue,  when  treating  double  quinsy.

When  you  wish  to  draw  morbid  matter  to  another  member 
to  that  from  which  you  are  drawing  it,  first  allay  the  pain  there. 
And  take  care  that  in  so  transferring  the  matter  you  are  not

crossing  a  vital  organ.crossing  a  vital  organ.

9I4  (iv)_The  value  of  assessing  the  power  or  strength  oja 
member  lies  in  three  directions:  (1)  it  enables  us  to  direct  the 
treatment  in  the  order  of  nobility  of  organs  Thus,  one  must 
not  use  potent  drugs  which  might  act  on  the  principal  [vital] 
organs  to  so  great  an  extent  as  to  risk  producing  a  harmful  effect 
all  over  the  body.  So,  when  it  is  necessary  to  withdraw  matter 
from  the  brain  or  liver,  one  would  not  attempt  to  do  so  at  the  same 
period  of  the  disease,  and  one  must  not  apply  mfrigidantstoo 
assiduously.  Again,  when  we  wish  to  apply  external  applications 
over  the  liver  and  at  the  same  time  introduce  resolvent  medicines, 
we  must  take  care  to  combine  astringent  drugs  of  aromatic 
character  with  them,  so  as  not  •  to  risk  interfering  with  the 
functional  capacity  of  the  organ.  The  same  rule  applies  when 
giving  fluid  remedies.  In  applying  these  rules,  the  order  of 
importance  of  the  organ   is  :      heart,   brain,   liver.  _

(2)  The  treatment  is  directed  to  an  organ  of  physio- 
logically related  function,  provided  the  organ  selected  is  not  a 
vital  one,  like  the  stomach  and  lung.  For  instance  one  does 
not  give  very  cold  water  in  cases  of  fever,  when  the  stomach

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  467

is  weak.  You  are  aware,  too,  that  to  administer  undiluted 
remedies,  which  are  relaxing  to  vital  organs  or  to  organs  closely 
related  to  them,  is  simply  to  Imperil  life.

(3)  One  takes  the  sensibility  of  an  organ  into  considera- 
tion—whether it  is  keen  or  dull.  That  is,  one  must  beware 
of  giving  drugs  possessing  injurious  (mordant,  pungent  or 
toxic)  qualities,  to  very  sensitive  organs,  or  organs  of  special 
sense — for  instance,  plants  belonging  to  the  euphorbia  group.915.  There  are  three  kinds  of  medicines  in  the  adminis- 
tration of  which  we  must  be  very  cautious.  Those  which  are 
extremely  resolvent  ;  those  which  are  cooling  ;  and  those 
which  are  contrary  in  property.  Examples  :  lead  and  copper 
salts,   and  the   like.

This,  then,  is  how  one  chooses  medicines  according  to  the 
nature  or  character  of  the  organ  to  be  treated.

916.  Choice  of  medicine  according  to  the  severity  of 
the  illness. — For  example,  when  the  degree  of  morbid  heat 
of  the  body  is  unduly  great,  it  must  be  counteracted  by  means 
of  a  medicine  of  strongly  infrigidant  character.  But  when  the 
abnormality  consists  in  a  marked  degree  of  coldness,  this  is 
met  by  exhibiting  a  strongly  calefacient  medicine.  If  the 
degree  of  abnormality  is  not  marked,  remedies  of  weaker  quality 
will  suffice.917.  Choice  of  medicine  according  to  stage  of  the  disease. — 
When  we  know  the  stage  at  which  a  disease  is,  we  adjust  the 
treatment  accordingly;      Thus,    if   an    inflammatory   focus    is 
in  the  initial  stage,   we  shall  apply  a  remedy  which  will  act 
upon  it  alone.      If  the  disease  is  near  the  terminal  stage,  we 
may  apply  a  remedy  which  will  resolve  it  (at  that  phase).      If 
the  disease  is   between  these  two  stages,   we  should  combine 
both  forms  of  remedy.      If  the   disease   be  acute,   we  should 
at  first  aim  at  attenuation  by  means  of  an  attempered  regimen  ; 
but  at  the  later  stage  we  should  seek  to  procure  attenuation.' 
In  the  case  of  a  chronic  disease,  we  should  not  aim  at  attenuant 
treatment  in  the  early  stages,  and  we  should  use  a  modified 
attenuation  at  the  later  stage,  though  it  is  true  that  an  attenuant 
regimen  disperses  many  chronic  maladies  besides  fevers.   Again, 
if  a  malady  is  due  to  active  fermentation  of  the  humours,  we 
procure    evacuation    [inch    venesection]    at    the    early    stages, 
without    waiting   for   the    "  matter  "    to   undergo    maturation. 
But  if  the  fermentation  is  only  moderate  in  degree,  we  wait 
till   maturation   is   complete   before   undertaking   the   evacuant

measures.

468  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

918.  You  can  easily  recognize  which  factors  are  favour- 
able to  the  end  in  view  (and  how  to  adapt  them  accordingly). 
Thus,  air  is  the  most  important  of  all  such,  and  one  needs 
to  take  care  that  it  shall  assist  the  action  of  the  medicinal  treat- 
ment and  not  contribute  to  an  aggravation  of  the  illness.919.  In  the  case  of  maladies  where  any  delay  in  treatment 
might  entail  a  loss  of  vitality,  or  where  one  wishes  to  do  more 
than  merely  alleviate,  we  shall  begin  with  a  strong  medicinal 
agent.  But  if  there  is  no  fear  of  such  an  eventuality,  we  may 
proceed  in  orderly  fashion,  using  a  milder  remedy  first  and  the 
stronger   one   if  that   proves  insufficient.

Further,  you  must  not  forsake  the  direct  rule  of  treat- 
ment if  you  find  that  there  is  only  a  tardy  response  to  it  ; 
and,  on  the  other  hand,  you  must  not  commit  the  fault  of  delay 
when  there  is  no  contra-indication.  In  addition,  you  must 
not  confine  yourself  to  one  single  medicinal  remedy  throughout 
the  treatment,  but  you  must  interchange  the  medicines  (all 
the  time),  because  when  (the  tissues)  are  accustomed  to  one  they 
cease  to  respond,  and  moreover,  the  same  tissue  or  member,  or 
the  body  as  a  whole,  may  react  to  one  given  medicine  atone  time 
or  phase  and  not  at  another.

920.  When  you  do  not  know  the  nature  of  a  malady, 
leave  it  to  Nature  ;  do  not  strive  to  hasten  matters.  For  either 
Nature  will  bring  about  the  cure  or  it  will  itself  reveal  clearly 
what  the  malady  really  is.

921.  Treatment  of  fain.  When  the  malady  is  accom- 
panied by  pain,  whether  the  pain  is  the  cause  or  the  effect,  as  in 
the  case  of  blows  or  falls,  the  first  thing  to  do  is  to  allay  the  pain. 
If  it  is  necessary  to  induce  a  stuporose  state,  do  not  go  beyond 
the  use  of  such  as  white  poppy.    Its  anodyne  action  is  well-known.When  the  member  is  hyper-sensitive,  nourish  it  with  such 
things  as  render  the  blood  viscid,  as  for  instance,  cooked  gram. 
If  this  is  not  sufficient,  and  there  is  no  reason  to  be  afraid  of  m- 
frigidation,  such  things  as  lettuce  may  be  used.

922.  Remember,  too,  that  among  the  advantageous 
contributory  factors  in  treatment  is  the  help  afforded  by  any- 
thing which  exalts  the  sensitive  and  vital  faculties  :  for  instance, 
joyfulness.  In  consequence,  one  sets  out  to  please  one's  patient, 
and  ever  tranquillise  him  by  anything  which  can  reasonably 
gratify  him.  Sometimes  one  may  advantageously  arouse  his 
sense  of  shame,  making  him  blush,  and  so  leading  the  sick 
person  to  avoid  what  is  harmful  for  him.  (Cf.  Anecdotes  in 
Chahar  Maqala7  p.  82,  84).

THE   CANON  OF  MEDICINE  469

A  measure  which  is  akin  to  the  preceding  is  that  of 
removing  from  one  country  to  another,  from  one  climate 
to  another.  Or  a  change  is  made  from  one  external  form  to 
another.  To  do  this,  one  particularises  the  various  forms 
and  movements  which  will  act  upon  the  given  member,  or  alter 
its  temperament.  Thus  one  may  advise  a  youth  with  disorders 
of  vision  to  avoid  very  close  writing  and  looking  at  very  bright 
objects  ;  a  person  with  squint  [wry-neck  :  alternative  reading! 
should  look  into  a  narrow  mirror  so  held  that  the  effort  of  turning 
towards  it  will  help  remedy  the  malposition  of  face,  forehead 
or  eye.

Another  rule  to  be  observed  is  to  omit  strong  measures 
of  treatment  at  the  strong  seasons,  as  far  as  possible.  For 
instance,  one  -refrains  from  violent  purging,  from  provoking 
emesis,  or  from  opening  a  part,  or  applying  cautery,  during 
summer  or   winter.923.  _  Gentle  treatment  is  to  be  applied  when  two  maladies 
are  conjoined  into  one,  such  that  contrary  measures  have  to 
be  carried  out  at  the  same  time.  For  instance,  if  the  malady 
is  mfngidant,  and  its  cause  is  warming— or  conversely— 
the  malady  is  to  be  treated  with  calefacients  and  the  cause  is 
to  be  treated  with  infrigidants.  E.g.,  fever  requires  infrigida- 
tion,  and  the  obstructions  (in  the  channels)  which  give  rise  to 
the  fever  need  the  application  of  heat.  Again,  the  indications 
in  colic  are  warmth,  mcisives,  and  attenuants  ;  but  the  pain 
to  which  it   gives  rise  needs   cold,    and  analgesics.

924.  Remember,  further,  that  not  every  case  of  plethora 
is  to  be  treated  by  its  contrary,  namely,  evacuation  (by  purging 
or  by  venesection,  e.g.)  nor  is  every  intemperament  to  be  treated 
by  inducing  a  contrary  temperamental  state.  As  a  matter  of 
tact,  a  liberal  and  good  regimen  will  often  suffice  by  itself  to 
remedy  plethora  or  intemperament.

2- — The  Treatment  of  Disorders  of  Temperament.

925.  When  an  intemperament  occurs  without  (abnormal 
unhealthy)  matter,  the  treatment  is  to  alter  it  ;  but  if  there 
is  abnormal  matter,  this  has  to  be  evacuated.  Usually  a  single 
evacuation  will  suffice  to  amend  the  previouslv  existing  in- 
temperal  state  ;  but  sometimes  it  is  not  sufficient  for  the  pur- 
pose, and  the  intemperament  will  then  require  rectification, 
after  evacuation  has  been  procured.

We  may  therefore  state  that  the  treatment  of  intempera- 
ment   comprises    several    modes    of   procedure.

47o  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINEWe  may  therefore  state  that  the  treatment  of  intempera- 
ment   comprises    several    modes    of   procedure.

47o  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

928.  An  intemperament  is  either  chronic  (longstanding), 
in  which  case  the  treatment  is  strictly  by  contrary,  and  a  complete 
cure  is  achievable  thereby  ;  or  it  appears  at  the  terminal  phase  of 
an  illness — in  which  case  the  treatment  is  by  anticipation.  _  Thus, 
treatment  by  contraries  is  instanced  by  the  giving  of  theriaca  for 
the  putrefactive  processes  associated  with  quartan  fever,  and 
of  (ice)  cold  water  to  abolish  the  fever  of  tertian  fever.  Treat- 
ment by  anticipation  is  instanced  by  the  use  of  evacuation, 
namely,  by  hellebore  in  the  case  of  quartan,  and  by  scammony 
in  the  case  of  tertian.  The  hellebore  applies  to 
atrabilious  humour  ;  the  scammony  to  bilious  humour.  Our 
object  is  thereby  to  prevent  or  forestall  the  (morbid)  changes.

927.  If  in  any  given  illness  you  are  in  doubt  as  to  whether 
heat  or  "cold  is  responsible,  and  you  therefore  desire  to  put  the 
matter-  to  the  test,  you  must  be  careful  not  to  overdo  this,  and 
not  to  be  misled  by  secondary  super-imposed  symptoms. 
You  must  note  that  the  appropriate  moment  is  the  same  for 
infrigidation  as  for  calefaction.  But  one  is  more  apprehensive 
regarding  infrigidation,  for  heat  is  the  friend  of  "  nature." 
One  is  as  apprehensive  of  moistening  as  of  dessication,  but  the 
period  during  which  the  former  is  permissible  is  longer.  More- 
over, the  state  of  moistening  and  desiccation  is  meach  case 
maintained  simply  by  fostering  the  factors  which  give  rise  to 
them,  and  they  are  modified  simply  by  re-inforcing  the  contraries 
of  those  factors.928.  Heat  is  re-inforced  by  the  agents  already  expounded 
(415).  Putrefication  of  the  passages  is  carried  out  next,  by 
procuring  the  expulsion  of  wastes,  the  removal  of  plethora, 
and  by  opening  up  obstructions.  Finally  the  heat  is  to  be  con- 
served by  preserving  a  moderate  degree  of  moisture.

Cold  is  reinforced  by  assisting  any  factors  which  bring 
it  about,  by  repressing  the  (bodily)  heat,  and  by  dispersing  the 
heat  unduly — to'  which  dryness  contributes  by  its  essence, 
and  heat  secondarily.

929.  In  treating  undue  heat  by  removing  obstructions, 
one  must  guard  against  producing  too  much  infrigidation, 
for  in. that  case  there  is  a  risk  of  rendering  the  obstruction 
still  greater  by  conversion  (of  the  matter)  into  a  stone.  One 
must  also  take  care  not  to  render  a  hot  intemperament  more 
marked.  Hence  the  treatment  by  abstergents  should  be 
entered  upon  gradually.  It  is  advantageous  to  use  an  abster- 
gent which  is  sufficiently  cooling  (e.g.,  barley  water,  and  endive). 
But  if  this  be  not  adequate,  one  makes  use  of  an  agent  which  is

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  4?I

neither  «  hot  »  nor  "cold;'  ;  and  if  this  is  inadequate,  one 
employs  an  agent  which  is,  warm  and  tenuous.  One  need 
not  be  anxious  m  making  use  of  such  a  remedy,  for  it  lends 
further  assistance  by  provoking  diaphoresis,  which  renders  the 
body  cooler,  thereby  causing  more  good  than  the  heating  effect 
can  harm;  and  anyway,  it  is  easy  to  remove  the  heating  effect 
once  the  pores  have  been  opened.930.   It  may  happen  that  the  innate  heat  is  so  much  reduced 
by  such  measures)  that  the  digestion  of  the  morbid  humours 
is  interfered  with       Yet  there  are  some  who  boldly  pursue  this 
wrongful   method   and   ignore  the  fact  that  undue   reduction 
of  the  innate  heat  means  loss  of  vitality,  which  is  specially  to  be 
expected  in   persons  much  weakened  by  illness.      This  result 
occurs  even  though  the  matter  is  rectified  in  some  other  way 
and  other  maladies  follow  on,   either  in   the  form  of  simple 
^temperaments,   or  by  arising  out  of  "  cold  "  matters  which 
are   opposite   m    quality  to  the  temperament.     When   a   cold 
mtemperament  is  established,  it  is  as  difficult  to  render  it  warm 
as  it  is  easy  to  do  when  it  is  only  beginning.        To  render  a 
cold  mtemperament  warm  at  the  outset  is  easier  than  to  render 
a  hot  one  cold  at  the  outset.      But  to  render  a  hot  one  cold  at 
the  end  of  the  process,  though  difficult,  is  nevertheless  easier 
than  to_  render  a  cold  one  hot  at  the  end  of  the  process.     The 
reason  is  that  excess  of  cold  itself  implies  complete,  or  nearly 
complete,   destruction  of  the  innate  heat  (cf.  894)._  931.  Infrigidation  is  sometimes  associated '  with  desic- 
cation sometimes  with  moistness,  and  sometimes  occurs  in- 
dependently of  either.  But  dryness  is  more  persistent,  if  associa- 
ted with  infrigidation,  and  moisture  is  more  conducive  to  the 
supervention  of  coldness.  AH  the  factors  producing  calefaction 
aid  desiccation  if  they  are  preponderant.  All  the  factors 
producing  infrigidation  aid  humectation  if  they  are  prepon- 
derant. Nothing  is  so  likely  to  have  this  effect  as  inactivity 
and  constant  use  of  the  bath,  even  the  full-length  bath.  R  e 
domestic  as  opposed  to  the  Hammam.]-We  have  already* 
made  this  known  to  you.—Dilutcd  wine  is  also  strongly  humec-

.  _  You  must  note  also  that  if  it  is  an  old  man  who  needs 
infrigidation  and  moistening,  it  is  not  enough  to  reduce  the 
temperament  to  equability,  one  must  continue  till  the  tempera- 
ment is.coM  and  moist  beyond  the  normal,  because  such  a 
temperament  is  acquired  secondarily,  though  quasi-natural  to  the 
old  person.

47  2  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

932.  Note3  too,  that  when  changing  the  quality  of  a 
temperament,  it  is  often  necessary  to  reinforce  it  by  admixing 
with  the  remedy  somethihg'of  contrary  quality.  Thus  we  give 
vinegar  with  medicines  which  are  hot  towards  a  given  member, 
because  then  their  virtues  can  penetrate  into  the  member  ; 
we  give  saffron  with  cardiac  infrigidants,  because  saffron  carries 
such  remedies  to-  the  heart.933.  Oftentimes  it  happens  that  a  medicine  which  pro- 
duces a  very  marked  change  of  temperament  does  not  have 
a  lasting  effect  ;  this  is  because  it  is  so  tenuous  that  its  action 
does  not  pass  on  to  completion.  In  this  case  we  must  admix 
with  it  something  which  will  render  it  less  tenuous  and  more 
stable,  even  though  one  risks  the  production  of  a  contrary 
effect.  Thus,  we  mix  wax  with  balsam,  and  so  on.  The  one 
remedy  is  thereby  preserved  long  enough  to  ensure  its  proper 
action  being  accomplished.

2. How    to    Determine   the    Manner   and    Moment    for

"  Evacuation."

934.  There  are  ten  indications  which  show  when  it  is 
right  to  procure  "evacuation"  [i.e.,  blood-letting,  wet-cupping, 
purgation,  enemas,  diaphoresis,  use  of  leeches,  etc.]  :

(i)  Plethora  ;  (2)  vitality  ;  (3)  temperament  ;  (^ap- 
propriate symptoms  (thus,  we  need  not  evacuate  the  bowel  m  a 
case  of  diarrhoea)  ;  (5)  habit  of  body  or  physique  ;  (6)  the  age 
of  the  patient  ;  (7)  the  time  of  the  year  ;  (8)  the  state  of  the 
atmosphere;  (9)  the  geographical  situation  ;  (10)  the  patient's 
mode  of  life  regarding  "evacuation  "  ;    and  (1 1)  his  occupation.

Evacuation  should  not  be  carried  out  when  there  are 
contra-indications  in  these  respects.

:. — Plethora.  If  the  state  is  the  opposite  of  plethora 
(vacuousness),    evacuation    is    obviously    contra-indicated.

2. Strength    of    Patient.     (Vitality).     Weakness    in    any2. Strength    of    Patient.     (Vitality).     Weakness    in    any

of  the  three  primary  faculties  is  a  contra-indication.  Neverthe- 
less, we  may  decide  to  act  in  spite  of  such  a  weakness,  if  more 
harm  is  likely  to  accrue  from  neglecting  evacuation.  This 
applies  to  the  sensory  and  motor  faculties  since  we  are  more 
anxious  to  avoid  injuring  them  if  they  are  weak.  In  fact,  the 
same  applies  with  all  the  faculties.

3. — Temperament.  Contra-indications  are  :  hot  and  dry 
temperament  ;  cold  and  moist  temperament,  in  which  there 
is  little  or  no  heat.  One  may  act  vigorously,  however,  if  the 
temperament  is  hot  and  moist.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  473

_  4. — Symptoms.  Certain  unfavourable  symptoms  are  contra- 
indications—such  as  endemic  diarrhoea  and  cramp  (spasmodic 
diseases).  „

5. — Physique  or  habit  of  body. — Excessive  leanness  or 
sparenessof  build  is  a  contra-indication,  because  the  breath 
is  so  readily  dispersed.  For  the  same  reason,  when  a  person  is 
weak  and  lean,  and_  has  much  bilious  humour  in  the  blood, 
he  must  be  treated  blandly,  and  evacuation  avoided.  The 
fliment  should  be  such  as  will  engender  good  blood,  (making 
it)  incline  to  coolness  and  moistness  of  quality.  In  this  manner 
the  temperament  of  the  humour  will  be  corrected,  after  which 
the  patient  will  perhaps  be  strong  enough  to  tolerate  evacuant 
measures.

Similarly,  one  must  not  venture  to  "  evacuate  "  a  patient 
who  is  accustomed  to  eat  sparingly  ;  or,  at  least,  one  should 
postpone  such  a  measure  as  long  as  possible.Similarly,  one  must  not  venture  to  "  evacuate  "  a  patient 
who  is  accustomed  to  eat  sparingly  ;  or,  at  least,  one  should 
postpone  such  a  measure  as  long  as  possible.

Obesity  is  a  contra-indication,  because  one  runs  the  risk 
of  making  the  frigidity  dominant,  and  of  allowing  the  flesh 
to  compress  the  vessels  up  to  occlusion,  thus  blocking  the  flow 
01  innate  heat  ;  or,  of  forcing  out  the  effete  matters  from  the 
vessels  and  driving  them  inwardly.

6-~~The  ASe  of  the  Patient.  Avoid  evacuant  measures 
when  the  fulness  of  growth  has  not  yet  been  reached,  or  when 
the  patient  is  neanng  the  end  of  decrepitude.

7. — Avoid  evacuant  measures  if  the  time  of  the  year  is 
extremely    hot    or    extremely    cold.

9. — Geographical  position.  A  southerly  country  which  is 
very  hot  is  contra-indicative,  for  persons  with  diarrhoea  are 
usually  of  hot  temperament  ("  hot-tempered.")  The  association 
or  two  adverse  conditions  [the  extraneous  heat  and  the  evacua- 
tion] is  badly  borne,  because  the  bodily  faculties  are  enfeebled 
by  dispersal  of  vitality,  and  because  the  extraneous  heat  draws 
the  matter  '  outwardly,  and  the  medicine  draws  it  inwardly. 
iking  thus  drawn  in  two  opposite  directions,  it  tends  to  remain 
where  it  is.

Avoid  evacuant  measures  in  very  cold,  northerly  countries.

10.  —Habits ;  Avoid  evacuation  when  the  habit  is  to 
have  evacuations  infrequently.

n_. — Occupation.  Avoid  evacuant  treatment  when  the 
occupation  is  one  which  in  itself  is  evacuant  in  effect,  e.g., 
bath-attendants  ;  carrying  (heavy)  loads  on  the  back  ;  all 
toilsome  or  arduous  physical  labour.

935 .      In   procuring  evacuation   there   are   five   points   to

474  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE935 .      In   procuring  evacuation   there   are   five   points   to

474  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

consider. — (i)  Removal  of  that  which  is  to  be  evacuated,  followed 
by  rest  to  the  parts,  unless  there  is  atony  (lassitude)  in  the 
receptacular  spaces,  (see  911,  footnote),  or  overheating  of  the 
blood — whether  in  the  form  of  ephemeral  fever  or  of  other 
accompanying  maladies. — Thus  there  may  be  excoriation 
of  the  mucosa,  which  brings  about  diarrhoea  ;  or  ulcers  in 
the  bladder.  Such  things  may  be  advantageous,  and  yet 
not  appreciated  as  such  by  the  patient  because  of  the  pain 
and  suffering  they  cause  him  until  the  symptorn  has  been  re- 
moved. (2)  To  choose  which  organ  is  to  be  "  evacuated  "  : 
thus  nausea  is  removed  by  emesis  ;  burning  pain  in  the  abdomen 
is  eased  by  purgation.  (3)  To-  use  as  member  of  egress  that 
which  corresponds  to  the  organ  to  be  evacuated.  Thus  for 
maladies  of  the  liver  the  right  basilic  and  not  the  right  cephalic 
must  be  used.  To  make  an  error  in  such  a  matter  might 
be  harmful.  The  member  chosen  for  the  site  of  evacuation 
must  be  less  important  ("  noble  ")  than  that  which  is  to  be 
evacuated,  lest  the  morbid  matter  pass  down  into  the  more 
important  organ.  The  channel  of  exit  should  also  be  the 
natural  one  ;  thus  for  the  blood-vessels  of  the  liver  the  urinary 
tract  ;     for  the  ducts  of  the  liver  the  intestinal  tract.

Sometimes  the  organ  to  be  evacuated  is  itself  the  one  to 
take  as  the  site  for  evacuation,  and  yet  it  is  the  seat  of  chronic  or 
acute  disease.  In  this  case  it  would  be  risky  to  induce  the 
humours  to  traverse  it,  and  they  should  be  diverted  to  another

organ  instead.organ  instead.

Sometimes  there  is  a  risk  of  superimposing  another  malady 
on  the  first,  by  inducing  a  superabundance  of  the  humours 
in  the  second  part.  For  instance,  if  the  morbid  matter  is 
drawn  downwards  from  the  eye  to  the  throat,  choking  [cedema 
of  glottis]  might  result,  and  therefore  one  must  proceed  with 
such  a  measure  carefully  and  with  gentleness.

Nature  herself  [i.e.,  the  vegetative  soul],  often  acts  on  the 
same  principle,  and  protects  a  weak  member  by  effecting  the 
evacuation  through  a  part  other  than  that  which  would  be  the 
normal  one  for  that  member.  Very  often  the  part  at  which 
the  evacuation  actually  occurs  is  quite  distant,  and  opposite 
in  position,  and  it  comes  to  be  a  matter  of  doubt  as  to  which 
member  is  being  drained  in  this  way.  Thus  the  head  may  be 
drained  by  the  anus,  or  the  leg  or  the  foot,  and  one  could  not 
say  whether  the  evacuation  is  of  the  brain  as  a  whole  or  only 
from    one    ventricle.

(4)  To  decide  on  the  proper  moment  to  evacuate.        In

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  475(4)  To  decide  on  the  proper  moment  to  evacuate.        In

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  475

chronic  maladies,  as  .Galen  rightly  says,  one  does  not  wait  for 
maturation.  You  know  what  is  meant  by  the  term  "  matura- 
tion." Therefore  one  should  give  attenuant  drinks  such  as 
water  of  hyssop,  of  thyme,  and  herb  seeds,  before  commencing 
to  carry  out  the  evacuant  treatment,  and  after  the  maturation 
stage  has  been  reached.  ,  But  in  acute  maladies,  it  is  best  to 
wait  till  the  maturation  stage  has  been  reached,  especially 
as  long  as  the  humours  are  stagnant.  Once  they  appear  to  be 
on  the  move,  one  must  hasten  to  drain  them  away,  because 
the  damage  accruing  from  their  movement  is  greater  than  that 
which  one  risks  by  evacuating  immatured  humours — especially 
if  the  humours  are  tenuous,  and  especially  if  within  vessels 
and  not  in  the  tissues  in  which  they  arise.  When  the  morbid 
humour  is  confined  to  one  particular  member,  it  will  certainly  not 
move  out  of.it  until  maturation  has  occurred  in  it,  and  its  character 
has  become  modified — as  has  already  been  explained  for  you 
in   the   proper   place.Again,  if  we  feel  doubtful  as  to  whether  the  vitality  (of 
the  patient)  will  hold  out  until  the  time  for  maturation  has 
arrived,  we  shall  proceed  to  procure  evacuation,  noting  care- 
fully whether  the  material  to  be  evacuated  is  labile  or  viscid.  In 
the  latter  case  we  must  first  render  the  material  tenuous.  And  we 
shall  know  that  it  is  viscid  by  the  fact  of  the  premonitory  dyspep- 
tic nausea  having  passed  by,  or  by  the  existence  of  tensive  pain 
under  the  hypochrondrium,  or  by  the  development  of  an  inflam- 
matory swelling  inwardly.  We  must  also  carefully  make  sure 
that  the  passages  are  patent.  Having  taken  these  precautions 
you  will  be  able  to  drain  the  morbid  matter  by  the  bowel  before 
it    has    become    purulent.

(5)  The  amount  to  be  evacuated.  This  is  judged  from  {a) 
the  quantity  of  material  already  evacuated,  (b)  the  strength 
of  the  patient,  (c)  the  symptoms  which  remain  afterwards. 
If  symptoms  should  still  remain,  we  must  either  reduce  the 
amount  of  evacuation  according  to  the  amount  already  estimated, 
or  we  consider  whether  the  symptom  is  itself  to  be  treated,  as 
would  apply  for  instance  in  the  case  of  plethoric  spasmodic 
disorders.

(The  marginal  reading  adds  that  the  quality  of  the  material 
must  be  considered,  for  it  will  not  become  mobile  until  it  has  been 
rendered  tenuous.)

936.  There  are  two  ways  of  evacuating  morbid  material 
and  eradicating  it  from  the  place  where  it  has  lodged  :.  (i)  by 
attraction  from  a  distant  place,  (ii)  by  attraction  to  a  neighbouring

476  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE476  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

place.  And  the-  most  appropriate  time  for  carrying  out  the 
treatment  is  when  there  is  no  sort  of  plethora  of  the  humours 
in  the  body,  and  they  are  not  moving  downwards  into  the  member 
to  which  there  is  attraction.

Let  us  suppose,  for  instance,  that-  there  is  a  considerable 
flow  of  blood  from  above  the  mouth  in  a  man,  or  from  piles 
in  a  woman.  To  remedy  this  we  may  proceed  to  do  one_  of 
two  things.  Either  we  draw  downwards  towards  a  neighbouring 
part  of  diverse  character  :  that  is,  we  cause  the  blood  to  flow 
down  into  the  nostrils  and  emerge  from  them,  in  the  one  case  ; 
and  provoke  the  menstrual  flow  from  the  uterus  in  the  other. 
Or  we  draw  to  a  distant  part  of  diverse  character  :  that  is, 
in  the  former  example  we  bleed  from  veins  in  the  lower  part 
of  the  body,  in  the  case  of  the  male,  and  bleed  from  vsins  in 
the  upper  parts  of  the  body,  in  the  case  of  the  female.  _

937„  When  the  attraction  has  to  be  made  from  a  distant 
part,  one  need  not  undertake  to  do  so  from  both  sides  of  the  body, 
but  just  from  that  which  is  corresponding.  Thus  if  the  material 
is  at  the  upper  end  on  the  right  side,  one  would  not  draw  it 
away  to  the  lowest  part  on  the  left  side,  but  to  the  lowest  part 
of  the  right  side  (and  indeed  this  would  be  the  most  necessary), 
or  to  the  upper  part  of  the  left  side,  supposing  there  were  as 
much  distance  between  the  two  as  there  is  between  the  humerus 
and  the  other,  and  not  a  matter  of  just  the  two  sides  of  the 
head  itself.  For  one  would  draw  morbid  material  from  the 
right  side  of  the  head  down  to  the  lower  parts  of  the  body, 
and  not  to  the  opposite  side  of  the  head.938.  Suppose  one  wishes  to  draw  morbid  material  to  a 
distant  part— then  one  first  allays  the  pain  in  the  part,  for  this 
will  itself  lessen  the  amount  of  material  by  attraction,  since 
pain  exerts  an  attracting  effect.  But  if  it  do  not  move  _  to  _  the 
part  as  soon  as  desired,  avoid  violent  measures  ;  for  while  it  is 
true  that  violence  would  procure  the  desired  -movement,  yet 
the  material  would  become  attenuated  and  not  amenable  to  the 
attracting  influence,  and  would  simply  pass  right  into  the  painful

part.  .

939.  It  may  prove  sufficient  to  draw  the  mateiial  away 
without  actually  evacuating,  because  the  very  attraction  arrests 
its  progress  to  the  desired  member.  But  even  so,  our  object 
in  securing  attraction  may  still  have  been  attained,  supposing 
that  one  would  be  satisfied  to  have  accomplished  the  attraction 
downwards  without  the  additional  evacuation.  This  is  done 
when  one  bandages  up  the  opposite  member,  or  applies  cupping-

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  477

glasses,  or  rubefacient  medicines — in  short,  any  measure  which, 
allays  pain,

940,,  Morbid  materials  are  more  readily  evacuated  when 
they  are  in  the  vessels  than  when  in  the  tissues  and  joints,  for 
sometimes  it  is  difficult  to  remove  them  thence,  and  evacuate 
them.  And  in  evacuating  them  from  such  situations  one 
inevitably  evacuates  other  things  with  them.

941.  A  person  from  whom  diseased  matter  has  been 
evacuated  must  not  partake  of  much  food  or  unhealthy  articles 
of  food  and  anything  which  has  an  indigestible  nature.  If  by 
chanceone  is  for  some  reason  obliged  to  do  so,  one  should 
do  so  gingerly  and  cautiously,  in  small  portions,  so  that  that  which 
enters  the  body  may  be  digested  and  prove  harmless  accordingly.942._  The  drawing  of  blood  is  a  special  method  of  evacuat- 
ing morbid  -humours  which  are  all  increased  equally  or  propor- 
tionately. _  It  is  not  the  removal  of  one  humour  which  is  simply 
increased  in  amount  or  has  its  own  particular  quality  destroyed.

943.  To  carry  out  evacuant  treatment  to  an  undue 
degree  is  to  bring  about  febrile  conditions.

If  the  bowels,  previously  usually  loose,  are  bound,  this 
condition  will  give  rise  to  some  other  malady,  and  it  will  be 
proper  to  treat  it  by  repeating  the  evacuation.  For  instance, 
supposing  the  discharge  of  sanious  matter  from  the  ears  or 
mucous  passages  of  the  nose  should  cease,  leading  to  vertigo,, 
then  if  the  flow  be  restored  the  vertigo  will  be  removed.

_  It  is  less  injurious  to  leave  a  little  of  the  morbid  matter 
behind  than  to  strive  to  evacuate  everything  to  the  most  minute 
fragment,  thereby  risking  a  dispersal  of  the  vitality.  Nature 
herself  often  removes  the  last  remnants.

When  the  humour  is  of  a  kind  which  necessarily  exists, 
you  need  not  be  afraid  of  how  much  blood  you  take  as  long  as 
the  sick  person  is  able  to  sustain  it.  For  sometimes  one  is  bound 
to  evacuate  (bleed)  up  to  syncope.

944.  When  the  person  is  robust,  and  the  humoral  matter 
plentiful  and  depraved,  evacuation  must  be  done  gradually. 
Further,  if  the  morbid  material  is  extremely  viscid  or  widely 
diffused,  or  admixed  with  much  blood,  it  cannot  be  emptied  at 
one  sitting.  This  is  true  in  the  case  of  sciatica,  longstanding 
arthritis,  cancer,  old-standing  skin  diseases  and  obstinate  fur- 
uncles.

945.  Remember  also  that  purgation  draws  morbid 
matters  from  the  upper  parts  of  the  body,  and  discharges  them 
below.     Purging  is,  therefore,  an  attractive  force  in  two  different478  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

directions— to  the  near  and  to  the  remote  region  of  the  body. 
It  is  most  useful  when  the.  morbid  material  is  stagnant.  There- 
fore, when  the  morbid  matter  is  either  above  or  below,  one  may- 
draw  it  to  the  opposite  direction,  away  from  the  position  in 
which  it  has  lodged.  Attraction  is  procured  by  emesis  ;  eradica- 
tion by  the  converse.

946.  Furthermore,  one  varies  the  kind  of  blood-letting 
according  to  the  positions  from  which  the  blood  is  taken  up- 
as has  been  explained.  _  .

A  person  accustomed  to  a  good  diet,  and  having 
a  healthy  digestion,  is  less  in  need  of  evacuant  measures  than

are  most  men.  .

Persons  residing  in  hot  countries  need  little  m  the  way

of   evacuant    treatment.

4._The  General  Rules  to  be  Observed  in  Procuring 
Emesis   or  Purgation,   and  their   Mode  of  Action  (upon

Morbid   States).

947.  Whenever  purgation  or  emesis  is  to  be  procured, 
the  food  sufficient  for  one  day  should  be  divided  up  into  portions 
to  be  partaken  of  in  instalments.  The  aliments  and  drinks 
are  diversified  accordingly.  For  under  the  circumstances  the 
stomach  acquires  the  desire  to  expel  what  is  in  it,  either  upwards 
or  downwards.  The  stomach  is  greedy  for  foods  that  are  not 
diversified,  and  if  no  other  food  be  taken  in  addition  it  holds 
its  contents  very  stubbornly,  especially  if  the  amount  be  only 
small.      This  must  be  borne  in  mind  by  those  who  are  naturally

"  loose.""  loose."

948.  Emesis  and  purgation  and  the  like  do  not  apply 
for  those"  who  follow  a  good  regimen.  This  is  because  a  person 
who  controls  himself  properly  will  not  need  anything  but  mild 
attention,  and  may  be  excused  even  from  exercises,  bathing, 
and  massage.  If  such  a  person  be  in  a  plethoric  state  the 
humours  concerned  will  be  healthy,  i.e.,  sanguineous.  Con- 
sequently, such  a  person  requires  not  purgation  but  blood- 
letting, if  indications  for  cleansing  the  [channels  of  the  body]

should  arise.

949.  If  both  blood-letting  and  purgation  (by  hellebore  and 
similar  violent  medicines)  are  needed,  begin  with  the  blood- 
letting, because  this  precept  of  Hippocrates  in  his  book  on 
Epidemics  is  sound.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  plethora  is 
of  phlegmatic  humours  admixed  with  sanguineous  humour, 
so  that  they  are  viscid  and  "  cold,"  one  would  begin  with  pur-

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  479

gation,    because   blood-letting  would   make   the   humours  still 
more  coarse,  and  more  viscid.THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  479

gation,    because   blood-letting  would   make   the   humours  still 
more  coarse,  and  more  viscid.

950.      In    short,    if  the    humours    are    in    balanced   pro- 
portion, _  blood-letting  is  preferable.     Then,  if  a  plethoric  con- 
dition still  persists,  purgation  is  undertaken.    If  the  humours  are 
not    in    balanced   proportion,    first    purge    the    superabundant 
humour  until  balance  is  restored,  and  then  proceed  with  the 
blood-letting.      If   the    patient    should    have    taken    medicine 
before  the  blood-letting  (which  was  an  error  on  his  part),  he 
shouM  defer  the  subsequent  blood-letting  for  a  few  days. '    If 
purgation  is  needed  within  a  short  time  after  the  blood-letting, 
the    appropriate    medicine    may    be    given    then.       Sometimes^ 
however,  the  person  who  has  (improperly)  taken  the  draught 
of  medicine,  -  instead   of  first   undergoing   a   blood-letting  will 
develop  fever  and  restlessness  before  it  can  be  done.      If  the 
restlessness  is  not  allayed  by  the  usual  remedies  (sedatives),  the 
blood-letting  should  be  done.

951.  _  Evacuant  treatment  is  not  necessary  in  every  case 
of  excessive  plethora.  It  may  be  indicated  by  the  severity 
of  the. malady,  or  by  the  quality  of  the  plethora,  rather  than  its 
degree.  (Indeed,  a  good  regimen  will  often  make  such  measures 
unnecessary  :  marginal  reading).

952.  It  may  happen  that  there  is  a  need  for  evacuation, 
but  something  intervenes  which  forms  an  adequate  substitute, 
such  as  fasting,  sleeping,  correcting  the  unhealthy  state  of  the 
temperament  which  has  been  produced  by  the  plethora.953.  Then  there  is  a  form  of  evacuation  which  itself 
serves  to  protect  one  for  instance  from  an  attack  of  gout,  or 
from _  an  epileptic  seizure  which  one  knows  will  occur  on  a 
certain  date,  especially  in  spring.  In  this  case  one  must  apply 
the  evacuant  measure  before  the  time  is  due,  choosing  the 
appropriate  method— that  is,  choosing  between  blood-letting 
and  purgation,  according  to  the  kind  of  things  to  be  evacuated 
m  the  given  malady.  It  may  be  also  wise  to  apply  desiccants 
externally,  and  to  use  absorbents  for  the  purgation  as  one  does 
in  the    case  of  those  afflicted  with  dropsy.

954.  Sometimes  the  medicine  to  be  chosen  as  puro-ative 
must  have  a  quality  corresponding  to  that  of  the  humour^to  be 
evacuated.  Thus,  scammony  is  needed  for  evacuating  bilious 
humour.  A  drug  which  is  of  a  different  quality  should  be  mixed 
with  it.  as  an  adjuvant  for  the  purgation  without  preventing 
proper  evacuation.  For  instance,  myrobalan.  Should  the  ten£ 
perament  afterwards  become  unhealthy,  one  must  just  correct  it.

48o  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

955  Emesis  should  be  procured  in  cases  where  there  is  an 
internal  inflammatory  mass,  because  such  cases  are  difficult 
to  purge.  But  if  purgation  becomes  essential,  use  such  agents 
as   pellitory,   seed  of    safflower,    apozema   of  polypody,    cassia

fistula,  and  the  like.fistula,  and  the  like.

956  Hippocrates  also  says  that  the  best  way  of  cleansing 
a  person"  of  spare  habit,  and  of  a  nature  such  that  vomiting 
easily  takes  place,  is  to  procure  emesis  ;  and  this_  should  be 
done  in  summer,  spring,  or  autumn,"  but  not  in  winter.  But 
if  he  is  of  medium  habit,  it  is  better  to  purge.  If  evacuation 
by  emesis  is  necessary,  it  is  better  to  wait  till  summer,  avoiding 
it  altogether  if  it  is  not  really  necessary.  _  ^

957  Prior  to  procuring  purgation  or  emesis,  the  numour 
to  be  evacuated  must  be  attenuated,  and  the  channels  of  exit 
must  be  widened,  and  their  outlet  opened,  in  order  to  save  the 
body  from  trouble.  The  last-named  is  achieved  by  an  aperient 
(aperitive)  regimen.  That  is,  the  patient  accustoms  himself 
to  obev  the  calls  of  nature,  and  to  maintain  the_  motions  loose. 
The  actual  medicines  for  purgation  and  emesis  are  reserved 
'ill  later.  Moreover,  it  is  difficult,  wearisome,  and  dangerous, 
to  procure  purgation  when  the  belly  is  wasted.

8  2«      Articles  of  Food  which  Increase  the  Alvine  Discharge

s    DJ'  (Aeg.)  and  Purify  the. Blood.

Mildly  aperient  foods  : — 
Soft  eggs.  .

Potherbs;      beet,  mallows,  cabbage,   sorrel.

Shellfish  soup.  .  .

U^M^rA:CtLt°te^  boiled  in  water  with  salt. 
mSree  leaves  ;    polypody  root  (oakfern),  two  drams  sprinkled  on  pickle

OT  takZth  o"  SdTock  taken  with  or  without  2  drams  of  bastard  saffron. 
Aloes  to  the  amount  of  3  chickpeas  taken  at  supper-time 
Dodder  of  thyme  in  wine,  taken  after  a  moderate  supper.

Doddef  oi  thyme'&.dram)  in  wine,  infused  in  vinegar  and  honey,  taken 
before  breakfast  in  spring  time.Doddef  oi  thyme'&.dram)  in  wine,  infused  in  vinegar  and  honey,  taken 
before  breakfast  in  spring  time.

958  An  emetic  may  be  at  the  same  time  a  purge  (a) 
when  the  stomach  is  strong  or  (b)  when  taken  during  a  state  of 
prolonged  fasting  ;  (c)  when  gastro-ententis  is  present  ;  (d)  if 
the  bowels  tend  to  be  loose  ;  (*)  when  the  patient  is  not  ac- 
customed to  emesis  ;  (/)  if  the  medicine  is  itself  actually  heavy 
(weighty)  and  passes  down  the  intestines  quickly  as  a  result

959  A  purge  will  act  as  emetic  (a)  if  the  stomach 
is  enfeebled  :  (b)  if  there  is  much  dryness  of  the  stool  ;  (c)  when 
the  medicine  is  very  unpleasant  ;  (d)  when  it  produces  nauseative 
dyspepsia.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  48i

Should  a  purgative  not  act,  or  should  it  not  remove  the 
mature  humour  by  its  action,  it  will  cause  the  humour  to  be 
distributed  throughout 'the  body;  the  result  will  be  that  other 
humours  become  changed  into  the  same  kind  of  humour,  and 
the  body  is  flooded  with  it.

980..  There  is  one  of  the  humours  which  readily  responds 
to  emesis,  namely,  the  bilious  ;  and  there  is  one  which  is  resistant 
to  emesis,  namely,  the  atrabilious.  The  serous  humour 
occupies   a   middle    position    in   this,    regard.

981.  In  the  case  of  fever,  it  is  better  to  purge  than  to 
procure  emesis.  When  the  humour  is  passing  downwards, 
as  m  a  case  of  lienteric  diarrhoea,  emesis  is  not  advantageous!

982.  Among  purgative  medicines,  that  is  most  harmful 
whichis  compounded  from  drugs  which  show  marked  variation 
in  their  rate  of  purgation  ;  for  the  result  is  simply  confusion. 
The  drug  acting  more  speedily  comes  into  play  before  the  next, 
and  sometimes  the  one  will  expel  the  other  before  it  has  come 
into  operation  at  all.983.  Should  a  person  take  some  drink  which  has  a 
purgative  action  or  is  emetic,  at  a  time  when  the  bowels  are 
emptied,  he  is  sure  to  develop  vertigo,  or  colic,  and  distress.

•  That  which  finally  is  expelled  will  leave  the  body  with  the 
greatest  difficulty.

984,_  Lastly,  as  long  as  a  given  drug  gets  rid  of  the 
superfluities,  it  will  cause  no  restlessness.  If  it  should  cause 
restlessness,  one  would  know  that  something  more  than  super- 
fluity is  being  discharged.  Moreover,  we  shall'  know  when  the 
superfluous  humours  have  actually  been  got  rid  of,  by  the  fact 
that  the  humour  lost  by  emesis  or  by  purgation  is  now  changed 
into  another  kind  of  humour.  The  cleansing  process  of  the 
body  will  have  passed  on  to  a  harmful  degree  if  the  lining 
of  the  intestines  is  beginning  to  be  lost,  .and  the  stool  is  black 
with  _  a  fetid  odour.  Also,  if  a  prolonged  sleep  follows  the 
purging  or  emesis  it  will  show  that  the  evacuation  is  complete, 
and  salutary.  Also,  if  there  is  great  thirst  after  purging  or 
emesis,  it  shows  the  purgation  i-3  maximal  and  satisfactory.

985.  Purgative  medicines  expel  humours  in  co-operation 
with  the  attractive  faculty  concerned  with  the  given  humour; 
maybe,  attracting  the  coarse  and  rejecting  the  subtle  humour! 
This  happens  in  the  case  of  expulsion  of  atrabilious  humour.

He  who  asserts  the  purgative  itself  gives  rise  to  that  which  it 
attracts,  or  that  it  attracts  first  chat  which  is  tenuous,  is  in  the 
wrong.       It  is  true  that  Galen  says  so,  yet  he  says  accurately

21

48a  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE21

48a  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

that  a  purgative  medicine  which  is  not  poisonous,  will,  if  it  _  do 
not  purpe  or  undergo  digestion,  give  rise  to  the  same  kind 
of  humour  as  it  ordinarily  attracts.  However,  an  assertion 
of  that  kind  is  hardly  relevant.  It  would  seem  that  Galen,  in 
making  this  assertion,  considers  that  there  is  an  agreement  m 
substance  between  the  attracting  drug  and  the  attracted  humour, 
and  that  that  is  why  they  mutually  come  together.  But  it  is 
not  true  to  say  so,  for  if  like  attracted  like,  then  a  larger  bulk  of 
iron  would  attract  a  smaller,  a  larger  bulk  of  gold  would  draw 
a  smaller  bulk  of  gold  to  itself.  To  discuss  this  is  not  in  the 
province  of  the   doctor.  •986.  You  should  note  that  it  is  the  humours  m  the  blood 
vessels  which  become  attracted  by  the  purgative  or  emetic. 
This  attraction  goes  on  until  they  reach  the  stomach  and  in- 
testines, which  finally  expel  them  in  virtue  of  their  own  nature 
(ie,  the  natural  expulsive  faculty).  It  is  only  rarely  that 
humours  which  are  drawn  out  by  a  purgative  should  ascend 
into  the  stomach;  if  they  did,  they  would  be  expelled  by  vomit- 
ing If  they  should  fail  to  ascend  into  the  stomach,  it  would  be 
because  of  one  of  two  reasons— either  (i)  the  purgative  medicine 
has  passed  on  speedily  into  the  intestines  ;  or  (2)  having  taken 
the  purgative  drink,  the  "  nature  "  proceeds  to  drive  it  from 
the  mesenteric  vessels  to  the  lower  parts  of  the  abdomen  and 
not  to  the  upper  parts— because  to  do  so  is  nearer  and  simpler, 
and  because  there  is  nothing  beyond,  which  will  mechanically 
impede  their  progress  [i.e.,  the  distal  parts  of  the  digestive 
tube  will  not  compress  or  block  the  proximal  partsj.  _  lhis 
indeed  will  be  evident,  considering  that  the  "  nature  "  will  act 
by  the  shortest  route  of  exit.

987,  If  the  medicine  possess  an  attractive  power  which  will 
hold  the  humour,  then  the  expulsive  power  may  still  overrule, 
assuming  that  the  drug  only  attracts  towards  the  route  indicated. 
An  emetic  is  different  in  this  respect.  For,  when  it  reaches  the 
stomach  it  lingers  there,  and  draws  the  humour  towards  itself 
out  from  the  intestines,  and  by  its  own  power  overcomes  the 
resistance  offered  by  the  natural  power  [of  peristalsis  down- 
wards]. n968o  The  humours  which  medicines  draw  outare  usually 
in  the  vessels  or  neighbouring  structures,  because  it  is  in  the 
veins  that  the  seat  of  attraction  lies.  But  medicines  also  draw 
humours  out  which  are  not  in  vessels,  e.g.,  the  lungs  ;  m  this  case 
they  are  drawn  to  adjoining  organs,  like  the  stomach  and  in- 
testines, but  not  via  the  vessels.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  483

969.  Remember,  too,  that  it  is  possible  to  draw  humours 
from  the  body  by  the  use: of  desiccant  medicines,  using- .the 
attraction,  for  instance,  by  way  of  the  nostrils.  This  applies^ 
for  instance,  in  the  case  of  dropsy.

5. —^Purgation  and  the  Rules  relative  Thereto.

970.  In  the  preceding  chapter  we  have  shown  that  the 
way  to  prepare  the  body  for  the  purgative  to  be  administered 
is  to  cause  the  pores  to  dilate  and  the  "  nature  "  to  relax.  This 
applies  specially  in  the  case  of  "  cold  "  maladies.

In  brief,  the  rule  :  "  soften  the  '  nature  '  before  purging  " 
ensures  safety  in  all  cases  except  that  of  gastro-enteritis.  In 
that  case,  n'othing  is  to  be  done,  because  the  disease  is  itself 
the  cause  of  the  superfluity  present.

971.  Something  of  an  emetic  character  must  be  admixed 
with  the  laxative  agent  to  prevent  the  latter  from  leaving  the 
stomach  before  it  has  done  its  allotted  work.  Or,  rather, 
the  two  ingredients  should  be  so  balanced  in  power  that  their 
respective  functions  shall  both  come  into  play  (in  the  right  order) 
■ — -the  purgative  action  in  the  one  direction,  the  emetic  in  the 
other.972.  People  who  lisp  are  liable  to  gastro-intestinal 
catarrh,  and  such  people  do  not  stand  strong  purges  in  conse- 
quence. All  the  same,  many  do  run  the  risk  of  gastro-enteritis 
because  of  the  materials  which  flow  down  ("  rheums  ")  from 
the  head.

It  is  dangerous  to  administer  a  purge  when  the  fecal 
matter  is  dried  up  within  the  bowels  ;  in  such  cases  it  is  best 
to  get  rid  of  it  by  means  of  an  enema,  or  by  an  emollient 
broth.

973.  Bathing  and  Purgation.  The  use  of  the  bath  for 
several  successive  days  before  purgation  is  a  good  preparative 
measure,  as  it  is  attenuant.  There  must  be  no  contra-indication, 
however.  A  small  interval  of  time  should  elapse  between  the 
bath  and  the  draught  of  medicine,  and  one  should  not  take 
a  bath  afterwards  because  the  effect  of  that  would  be  to  draw 
the  morbid  material  to  the  skin.  The  bath  is  only  of  use  for 
binding  the  bowels,  especially  during  winter  ;  for  at  that 
season  one  need  not  be  afraid  of  going  straight  into  the  first 
room .;  the  heat  will  not  interfere  with  drawing  out  the  humours, 
and  in  fact  assists  in  virtue  of  its  emollient  effect.

974.  Lastly,  one  should  not  take  the  purgative  medicine, 
while  in  the  hot  room  of  the  bath  (lit.  the  air  of  the  room  should

484  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

be  only  moderately  warm),  lest  the  medicine  should  give  rise 
to  sweating  and  a  sense  of.  oppression.  This  is  one  of  the  pre- 
cautions which  must  be  noted.

Other  adjuvants,  or  preliminary  measures,  are  :  massage 
and  the  inunction  of  oils.

Avoid  the  use  of  violent  purges  for  persons  who  are 
not  accustomed  to  take  medicine,  or  to  drink  it.Avoid  the  use  of  violent  purges  for  persons  who  are 
not  accustomed  to  take  medicine,  or  to  drink  it.

Do  not  administer  a  medicine  to  persons  who  are  in  a 
state  of  "dyspepsia  with  nausea,"  or  whose  humours  are  viscous, 
or  who  have  distension  of  the  hypochondrium,  or  inflamma- 
tion or  obstruction  [of  channels]  in  the  inward  parts.  In  _  all 
such  cases,  the  condition  must  first  be  rectified  by  ordering 
emollient  aliments,  the  bath,  rest  (in  bed),  and  by  avoiding 
anything,  likely  to  arouse  disturbance  of,  or  inflammation  in,  - 
the  humours.

Persons  who  are  accustomed  to  drink  stagnant  water, 
and  have  enlarged  spleens,  will  need  strong  aperients.

975.  Sleep  and  Purgation.  If  the  purgative  used  be 
strong,  it  is  advisable  to  take  it  overnight,  for  by  sleeping  after 
the  dose,  it  will  act  more  efficiently.  If  the  purgative  be  a 
mild  one,  it  is  better  not  to  sleep  after  the  dose,  because  the 
vegetative  faculty  would  digest  it.

Whether  the  medicine  be  strong  or  weak,  one  should 
not  go  to  sleep  when  it  is  about  to  act.

On  the  other  hand,  a  person  should  not  immediately 
begin  to  walk  about  after  taking  an  aperient.  He  ought  at 
any  rate  to  rest  [long  enough]  after  it  to  enable  the  "  nature  "  to 
embrace  it  and  insinuate  itself  into  it.  For  unless  this  insinuation 
takes  place,  the  "  nature  "  will  not  be  influenced.976.  Nauseating  Aperients.  When  a  medicine  has  a 
nauseating  odour,  one  should  make  use  of  aromatic  agents, 
in  order  to  prevent  nausea  occurring.  Examples  _  of  these 
are  :  mint,  rue,  celery,  quince,  Khurasan  earth  (Lemnian  earth  : 
marginal  reading),  sprinkling  rose  water  and  a  little  vinegar  on 
them.  If  a  person  greatly  dislikes  the  odour  of  a  medicine,  let 
him  compress  his  nostrils.  If  he  dreads  the  medicine  in  any 
case,  let  him  first  chew  a  little  tarragon  (Artemisia  dracunculus), 
or  pellitory  (pyrethrum)  to  dull  both  taste  and  smell.  If  he  is 
afraid  of  being  sick  after  it,  the  limbs  may  be  bandaged  up, 
and  an  astringent  taken  after  swallowing  the  medicine.  In 
the  case  of  pills,  some  doctors  give  them  a  coating  of  honey, 
or  boiled  honey,  or  boiled  sugar.  Another  useful  artifice  is 
to  coat  the  pills  with  wax  softened  in  a  little  oil.     Another

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  485

expedient  is  to  fill  the  mouth  with  water  or  the  like,  and  then 
swallow  the  pills  with  it.  yarious  expedients  may  be  adopted 
to  meet  various  temperaments  or  personal  proclivities,  thus 
enabling  the  patients  to  swallow  the  drug  without  being  aware 
of  it  being  a  "  medicine."

Decoctions  should  be  taken  tepid.  Pills  should  be  taken 
with  tepid  water.  "If  the  temperament  is  cold,  the  abdomen 
and  feet   should   be   kept  warm.Decoctions  should  be  taken  tepid.  Pills  should  be  taken 
with  tepid  water.  "If  the  temperament  is  cold,  the  abdomen 
and  feet   should   be   kept  warm.

977.  When  the  patient's  mind  has  become  soothed  in  this 
way,  he  should  take  graduated  exercise,  for  bodily  movement 
favours  the  action  of  the  medicine.  After  an  interval  of  time,  he 
may  take  warm  water,  but  not  enough  to  dilute  the  medicine,  or 
get  rid  of  it  or  weaken  its  strength,  unless  the  time  has  come 
to  arrest  the  aperient  action.  The  use  of  hot  water  lessens 
the  harmful  character  of  the  medicine.

If  the  patient  has  a  hot  temperament,  and  a  weak 
conformation  (of  humours),  and  a  weak  stomach,  the  medicine 
should  be  preceded  by  some  bland  tenuous  drink,  such  as 
barley  water  or  pomegranate  juice.  Or,  speaking  generally, 
the  stomach  should  contain  light  tenuous  aliment.  Otherwise 
it  is  better  to  take  the  medicine  fasting.

978.  If  the  purgative  is  given  in  summer  time,  fever  may 
develop.  Therefore  when  the  person  has  taken  the  medicine 
he  should  not  eat  or  drink  until  the  medicine  has  exerted  its 
effect.  And  if  the  action  is  delayed,  he  should  go  to  sleep 
unless  he  wishes  to  stop  its  action  altogether.

979.  If  a  person  cannot  tolerate  food  owing  to  the  stomach 
■being  in  a  "  choleric  "  state,  bile  readily  pouring  into  it,  or  if  he

has  had  a  long  extended  fast,  it  is  well  to  take  a  little  bread 
which  has  been  soaked  in  a  little  wine  after  he  has  taken  the 
(purgative)  medicine  and  before  the  bowels  have  acted  ;  this 
measure  will  help  the  action  of  the  medicine.— The  anus  should 
be  laved  with  hot  water  and  not  with  cold.980.  Some  people  assert  that  if  pills  are  to  be  adminis- 
tered with  decoctions  one  should  select  those  of  like  character. 
Thus,  if  one  orders  pills  to  expel  choleric  humour,  the  de- 
coction to  go  with  them  must  be  such  as  fumitory.  Pills 
chosen  for  expelling  the  atrabilious  humour  require  a  decoc- 
tion, for  instance  of  dodder  or  polypody,  or  the  like.  Pills 
for  getting  rid  of  serous  humour  need  a  decoction  of  such  as 
centaury.

981.  When  the  body  to  be  evacuated  is  dry  in  nature 
with  firm  flesh,  a  strong  medicine  like  hellebore  and  its  allies,

4 86.  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

will  be  needed,  taking  great  care  to  associate  it  with  unctuous 
aliments  to  exert  a  humectant  effect*.

982.  Finally,  powerful  medicines  like  hellebore  are  to- 
be  avoided  because  they  produce  convulsions  if  the  bowels  are 
empty  at  the  time,  and  also  produce  irregular  disorderly  move- 
ments in  the  moistures  if  the  bowels  are  over-loaded,  besides 
drawing  into  the  intestine  things  which  are  difficult  to  expel.  Sour 
milk  will  remove  the  harmful  influence  in  the  case  of  (purgative) 
herbs  having  poisonous  milky  juices,  like  mezereon  and  spurge 
(euphorbia  group).983.  A  medicine  often  leaves  its  odour  behind  in  the 
stomach,  making  it  appear  to  be  still  there.  The  remedy  for 
this  is  to  partake  of  a  barley  ptisan  or  barley-meal  cake,  for  this 
will  have  the  effect  of  cleansing  the  stomach,  and  is  more  efficient . 
than  any  medicinal  powder.  Moreover,  the  ptisan  is  the 
best  beverage  to  take  if  the  medicine  fails  to  act,  or  if  one 
wishes  to  make  the  action  of  the  bowels  mild  and  gentle. 
But  if  one  were  afraid  about  this,  it  would  be  better  to 
administer  mead,  or  syrup  of  honey,  or  a  solution  of  nitre  in 
water,   giving  either  a  collyrium  or  an  enema.

984.  Causes  of  failure  of  action  of  a  purgative  ;  {a)  con- 
striction of  the  passages,  due  to  (i)  the  kind  of  temperament  ; 
(2,)  some  lesion  of  the  neighbouring  parts.  Thus,  in  the 
case  of  persons  afflicted' with  paralysis  or  apoplexy,  the  passages 
of  ingress  and  egress  for  the  medicines  are  constricted,  f  and 
purgation   is  rendered   difficult   in   such   persons.

(F)  It  is  dangerous  and  unprincipled  to  give  two  purges 
on  the  same  day.  .

(c)  Affinity. — Every  purgative  medicine  which  has  a. 
specific  affinity  for  a  given  humour  will  produce  agitation  and 
confusion  (disorderly  movements,  cf.  982)  if  it  does  not  reach 
the  humour,  and  the  purgation  will  be  difficult.  The  same 
thing   happens    if  a    contrary    be    prescribed   with   it..

The  immediate  action  of  a  purgative  medicine  is  to  draw 
out  the  humour  for  which  it  has  affinity  ;  it  then  draws  out 
whatever  humour  comes  next  in  amount  and  in  degree  of  at- 
tenuation ;  and  so  on*  in  turn  with  others,  with  the  exception 
of  blood  itself.  For  the  "  nature  "  retains  and  stores  up  the 
blood  to   the  very  last.■     *  Indiscriminate-  purgation  in   dry   persons   predisposes   to   phthisis,    and  to- 
dropsy,  if  the  stomach  is  weak  ( Alsaharavhis) .

\  In  other  words,  cardiospasm  and  pylorospasm,  as  well  as  a  general  contracted 
state  of  the  intestines,  with  atony  of  the  longitudinal  coats.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  487

(d)  Remoteness  of  humour. — It  is  difficult  (for  a  medicine) 
to  draw  out  a  humour  from  a  distant  part  (of  the  body).

(e)  One  should  see  to  it  that  there  is  not  much  salt  in  the 
food,    if  one   wishes   to   take   a   purgative   medicine.

If  there  is  a  risk  of  nausea  or  faintness  after  taking  the 
purge,  it  is  well  to  take  radish-water  as  an  emetic  for  two  or 
three  days  before,   and-  to  eat  radishes.

985.  A  draught  of  medicine  may  induce  nausea,  oppres- 
sion, faintness,  fluttering  of  the  heart,  griping,  especially 
if  it  fail  to  purge  or  induce  sweating.  But  it  is  often  necessary 
to  induce  emesis  also,  and  an  astringent  is  then  unnecessary. 
Barley  water  may  be  taken  after  the  purging  because  it  removes 
the  evil  effect  of  the  medicine  and  cleanses  out  whatever  rem- 
nants may  have  been  left  behind  in  the  bowel.

986.  Persons  of  cold  temperament,  in  whom  the  serous 
humour  predominates  over  the  others,  should  follow  the  pur- 
gation by  nasturtium  which  has  been  rinsed  with  hot  water 
and  oil.

Persons  of  hot  temperament  may  take  fleawort  with  cold 
water,  oil  of  violets,   conserve  of  roses,  or  julep.

Persons  of  equable  temperament  may  take  linseed  after 
the  purging.Persons  of  equable  temperament  may  take  linseed  after 
the  purging.

987.  Undesirable  consequences  of  purgation,  (i)  Armenian 
bole  and  pomegranate  juice  remove  the  risk  of  excoriation  of  the 
intestines  by  the  purge.  After  the  medicine  has  acted,  the 
things  we  have  named  should  be  taken,  though  they  may  not 
be  retained.

(ii)  If  fever  follows  the  medicine  ("  mixture  "),  barley  water 
is  the  best  thing  to  take.  Syrupus  acetosus  should  not  be 
given  for  two  or  three  days  after  the  purging,  because  it  is 
excoriative,  and  one  must  wait  till  the  intestines  have  regained 
their  original  strength.  But  the  Hammam  may  be  entered 
on  the  second  day  after  the  purging,  for  if  there  should  happen 
to  be  any  residual  humour,  the  bath  will  get  rid  of  it.  If  you 
find  that  the  idea  of  a  bath  is  pleasing  and  that  it  is  agreeable, 
you  will  know  that  the  last  remains  of  humour  have  been  got 
rid  of,  and  nothing  more  need  be  done  ;  but  if  the  patient  does 
not  like  the  bath,  and  finds  it  sets  up  disorderly  movements 
(or  restless  feeling)  of  the  bowels,  it  shows  there  is  still  something 
to   expel.

(iii)  Remember  that  if  the  intestines  are  weak,  purgatives 
excite  an  unduly  violent  and  unduly  -prolonged  action,  so  that  a 
great   deal   of  medicine   is   needed  to   arrest   it.      The   same   is

488  THE.  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

true   for  old  persons,   in  whom  purgation  is  liable  to  be  m-

JU       Fever  and  agitation  of  the  bowels  will  follow  purgation, 
if  wine  be  taken  after  the  medicine.

(iv)  Pain  in  the  region  of  the  liver  may  follow  both  purga- 
tion and  blood-letting.     This  is  relieved  by  a  draught  of  hot(iv)  Pain  in  the  region  of  the  liver  may  follow  both  purga- 
tion and  blood-letting.     This  is  relieved  by  a  draught  of  hot

988.  Time  for  taking  purgatives.  The  time  of  rising  of 
the  greater  dog-star;  the  season  during  which  snow  still  stays 
on  the  mountains;  the  season  of  extreme  cold— are  times  when 
purgatives  should  not  be  taken..  Medicine  should  be  taken 
during  spring  and  autumn.  Spring  is  the  season  during  which 
the  snows  melt  from  the  mountain-tops.  Then  comes  the 
summer  which  is  a  period  during  which  attenuant  agents, 
should  not  be  taken.  Autumn  is  the  contrary  to  spring,  and 
is  an  appropriate  time  for  the  use  of  attenuant  agents.— If  a 
person  has  to  take  an  aperient  in  winter  he  should  at  any  rate 
make  sure  the  wind  is  in  a  southerly  direction.  Some  say  that 
the  opposite  rule  should  hold  for  summer,  but  there  is  a  difference 
of  opinion  about  this.

989  Care  should  be  taken  not  to  acquire  a  habit  ot  taking 
medicines  as  emollients  for  the  bowels,  for  it  will  prove  dis- 
advantageous in  the  end.

Strong  purgatives  depress  those  of  dry  temperament.

Exercise  should  be  avoided  after  a  mild  medicine,  lest 
its  potency  be  impaired.  Of  weak  purgatives,  the  best  are 
violets  with  sugar.  .

When  the  purgative  which  a  sick  person  requires  does  not 
act,  he  should  not  move  about  more  but  less.

Purgation  may  excite  movement  of  the  sanguineous 
humour  or  make  it  agitated,  and  give  rise  to  fever.  Blood-letting 
may   be   well   under   these    circumstances.

6, On   Excessive  Purgation,   and  the  Time   Proper   for

Using  Astringents.6, On   Excessive  Purgation,   and  the  Time   Proper   for

Using  Astringents.

990„  Thirst  is  one  of  the  indications  that  catharsis  is  to  be 
ended.  Therefore,  if  diarrhoea  (from  drugs)  persists  _  without 
any  thirst  one  need  not  be  afraid  the  action  is  excessive.

But  thirst  may  develop — not  from  undue  purgation,  or 
excessive  purgation,  but  (a)  because  the  stomach  itself  is  hot 
or  dry,  or  both  ;  for  these  conditions  soon  lead  to  thirst  ; 
(b)  because  of  the  character  of  the  medicine— it  may  be  pungently 
hot-    \c)  because  the  material  itself  is  "  hot  "—as,  for  instance,

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  489

bile.  In  the  case  of  material  of  this  kind  it  is  not  long  before 
thirst  comes  on.  The  contraries  of  these  causes  delay  the 
appearance  of  thirst.

If  therefore  you  find  that  the  thirst  is  excessive  and  the 
bowels  are  acting  freely,  you  may  apply  astringents,  especially 
if  factors  which  cause  thirst  to  develop  quickly  are  not  present. 
But_  if  these  factors  are  present  one  should  not  delay,  but  use 
astringents  as  soon  as  thirst  is  evident.

Sometimes  the  time  to  apply  astringents  is  shown  by  the 
fact  of  that  having  been  discharged  which  was  intended.  Thus 
if  the  bile  has  been  discharged  and  mucus  begins  to  emerge, 
this  shows  that  the  medicine  has  already  acted  too  much.  How 
much  more  certain  is  it  that  the  action  has  been  too  prolonged 
if  ordinary  bile  in  the  stool  has  given  place  to  the  appearance  of 
atrabilious  humour  ?  or  to  that  of  blood — which  is  still  more 
dangerous  ?

If  the  medicine  has  given  rise  to  colic,  one  should  proceed 
to  carry  out  what  is  said  in  the  chapter  on  colic.If  the  medicine  has  given  rise  to  colic,  one  should  proceed 
to  carry  out  what  is  said  in  the  chapter  on  colic.

7-— How  to  Restore  a  Person  Suffering  from  Ex- 
cessive Purgation  to  a  Normal  State. 
991.  The  exhaustion  which  arises  from  excessive  purga- 
tion is  accounted  for  by  (1)  weakness  of  the  vessels  ;  (2)  undue 
patency  of  their  orifices  ;  (3)  the  laxative  cleansing  out  the 
orifices  ;  (4)  some  unhealthy  state  of  temperament  arising  from 
the  purgation  ;    (5)  other  such.

Therefore  when  the  purgation  has  been  too  free,  bandage  up 
the  upper  limbs  and  the  lower  ones,  beginning  at  the  axillae  and 
groins  respectively.  Give  a  drink  containing  a .  little  theriac 
or  "  philonium."  If  possible,  let  the  patient  be  made  to  sweat 
in  a  bath  or  in  steam  (the  head  being  free,  the  rest  of  the  body 
under  blankets).  After  copious  sweating  has  been  produced, 
give  massage  and  let  the  patient  take  astringent  drinks.  Fragrant 
aromatic  liniments  should  be  prepared,  using  myrtle  water, 
sandalwood,  camphor  and  fruit  juices.

The  exposed  members  should  also  be  rubbed,  and  heat 
should  be  applied  in  the  form  of  dry  cupping  over  the  lower 
ribs,  and  between  the  shoulder-blades.  If  deemed  necessary,  one 
may  apply  plasters  prepared  with  roasted  bruised  barley  and 
astringent  waters  over  the  stomach  and  intestines.  Oils  may  be 
used  in  like  manner — for  instance,  quince  oil,  oil  of  mastic.

The  patient  should  be  protected  from  cold  air  because 
that  helps  out  (the  contents  of  the  bowels)  and  induces  purging  ;

49o  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINEThe  patient  should  be  protected  from  cold  air  because 
that  helps  out  (the  contents  of  the  bowels)  and  induces  purging  ;

49o  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

and  he  should  be  protected  from  over-warm  or  hot  air  because 
that  is  enfeebling.  He  should  also  be  invigorated  by  the  use  of 
fragrant  perfumes  and  by  sipping  astringents  and  by  giving 
plain  biscuits  or  rusks  soaked  in  wine  of  mild  bouquet.  But  all 
these  should  be  given  hot,  and  before  giving  them  give  bread 
with  pomegranate  juice,  and  various  kinds  of  dishes  prepared 
wi^h  roasted  barlev  meal  and  the  ground  cortices  of  white  poppy.

A  tried  formula  of  this  kind  is  as  follows  :  three_drams  by 
weight  of  nasturtium  seeds  are  toasted  and  boiled  in  butter- 
milk until  they  have  clotted.  This  drink  is  extremely  beneficial. — 
Astringent  aliment  such  as  is  made  with  the  juice  of  sour  grapes, 
and  the  like,  and  made  cold  with  snow  is  to  be  advised.  In 
addition  any  measure  which  helps  to  restrain  the  movement 
of  the  bowels— for  instance,  the  induction  of  emesis  with  warm- 
water  keeping  the  limbs  warm  with  hot  water,  and  not  allowing 
the  extremities  to  get  cold.  Faintness  may  be  averted  with 
wine  and  if  this  fails  to  have  that  effect,  narcotics  may  be  given 
as  a 'last  resource,  and  other  powerful  medicines  which  are 
noted  in  the  chapter  on  arresting  diarrhoea.

For  all  that,  it  is  far  wiser  for  the  doctor  to  anticipate 
all  such  events  by  having  ready  lozenges  and  pungent  powders 
against  any  need  for  them,  and  also  to  have  at  hand  the  appliances 
for  giving  an  enema.

g_ The  Procedure  when  a  Purge  Fails  to  Act.g_ The  Procedure  when  a  Purge  Fails  to  Act.

992  When  a  laxative  fails  to  act,  and  induces  colicky 
pains  and  abdominal  distress,  so  that  the  patient  feels  ill,  and 
uneasy,  and  suffers  from  impaired  vision,  dizziness  and  migrainous 
headache,  with  yawning  and  stretching,  one  must  have  recourse 
to  enemas,  suppositories  or  a  drink  of  2  drams— or  3  kirats— 
of  mastic  in  tepid  water.  .

The  medicine  also  sometimes  behaves  in  this  way  because 
the  patient  has  taken  astringent  drinks,  or  has  eaten  such  things 
as  quince,  apples.  Such  things  cause  tightness  of  the  cardiac 
sphincter,  allay  nausea,  and  forcibly  drive  the  medicine 
downwards   instead  of  upwards,   and  they   also   reinforce   the

natural  faculty.  ,    .     ,

If  the  enema  is  ineffective,  and  such  bad  symptons  appear 
as  rigidity,  eyeballs  moving  outwards,  or  retching,  then  blood- 
letting will  become  necessary.  _         _

Even  if  untoward  symptoms  do  not  appear  m  spite  ot  the 
purgative  failing  to  act,  it  would  still  be  well  to  do  a  blood-

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  49I

letting  in  two  or  three  days,  lest  the  morbid  humours  should 
pass  into  one  of  the  vital  organs.

9. — The  States  (Hal)  of  Purgative  Medicines.THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  49I

letting  in  two  or  three  days,  lest  the  morbid  humours  should 
pass  into  one  of  the  vital  organs.

9. — The  States  (Hal)  of  Purgative  Medicines.

993.     Some   purgative   medicines   are  very  malignant  m 
character      For  instance  :     black  hellebore,  the  yellowish  kind 
of  turbith  (which  is  not  good,  like  the  white  variety)  ;    agaric— 
the  blackish  kind  instead  of  the  white  and  pure  kind  ;  metereon 
Inasmuch  as  these  are  harmful,  if  they  are  taken  and  evoke 
bad  symptoms,  it  is  best  to  get  rid  -of  the  medicine  out  of  the 
body  as  soon  as  possible,  by  means  of  emesis  or  diaphoresis 
and  give  antidotes  such  as   (rotted)  yellow  turbith.      The  evil 
character  of  many  of  these  drugs  and  the  mental  disturbance 
they  give  rise  to,  may  be  removed  by  taking  excessively  cold 
water,  or  by  sitting  in  it.  7

Beneficial  for  this  also  are  (medicines)  which  antagonise 
the  acuity  (of  the  purge)  by  glutinosity,  unctuousness  and 
soothing  character.

994.  Some  medicines  are  compatible  with  certain  tem- 
peraments, but  not  with  others.  Thus,  scammony  will  act  only 
feebly  if  at  all  when  the  patient  is  living  in  a  cold  climate,  unless 
a  large  dose  be  administered  ;     so  this  is  usually  done  in  the

f  £  u67U  ?•  ,In  S°me  countries>  too>  one  must  introduce 
into  he  body  only  the  properties  of  the  medicine,  and  not  the 
actual  substance.

995.  _  Medicines  of  pleasing  odour  must  be  mixed  with 
purgatives  m  order  not  to  risk  loss  of  strength  in  the  members 
Cordials  are  good  adjuvants,  for  they  reinforce  the  vital  breath 
in  every  member  m  addition  to  their  action  in  virtue  of  their 
tenuous  nature  and  ease  of  penetration.Two  medicines  are  sometimes  combined,  one  of  which 
expels  its  corresponding  humour  rapidly  and  the  other  slowly 
In  this  case  the  one  will  complete  its  action  after  confining  the 
other  m  its  corresponding  humour,  and  then  impairing  its 
power.  When  in  due  time  the  second  comes  into  play,  it  does  so 
m  a  feeble  manner,  so  that  ineffective  straining  movements  occur. 
Something  must  therefore  be  admixed  to  help  and  hasten  its 
action.  Ginger. will  serve  in  the  case  of  turbith,  because  it 
does  not  dull  its  action.  You  must  learn  how  to  mix  them 
properly  in  order  to  produce  this  effect.

Besides      this    _  you     must     take     into     consideration     all 
those  principles  which  we  have  set  forth  in  speaking  of  the

492  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

properties  of  purgatives  (laxatives),  under  the  heading  of  the 
general  principles  regarding  the  use  of  simples.492  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

properties  of  purgatives  (laxatives),  under  the  heading  of  the 
general  principles  regarding  the  use  of  simples.

996.  Purgatives  act  in  virtue  of  five  kinds  of  property  : 
(a)  a  specific  resolvent  property  (e.g.,  turbith)  ;  (b)  power  of 
expression  (e.g.,  myrobalan)  ;  (c)  lenitive  property  (e.g.,  manna)  ; 
(d)  lubricant  quality  (e.g.,  mucilage  of  fleawort  ;  prunes  ; 
[liquid  paraffin !]  ;  (V)  a  certain  poisonous  character,  in  the  case 
of  the  violent  purges,  which  itself  produces  the  purgation  by 
direct  aggressive  action  upon  the  natural  faculty.  Conse- 
quently such  properties  should  be  met  by  associating  medicinal 
agents  endowed  with  the  virtues,  of  bezoar  stone  [specifically 
antidotal  for  poisons].  Bitterness,  sharpness,  pungency,  astrin- 
gency,  and  sourness  help  the  action  of  a  medicine  in  which 
that  particular  kind  of  property  is  present.  Thus,  bitterness, 
and  sharpness  help  the  resolvent  property;  pungency  and 
astringency  help  the  expression  ;  sourness  helps  the  incisive 
property  (e.g.,  of  mucus)  and  paves  the  way  for  lubrication.

997.  To  ensure  a  lubricant  action,  one  must  not  combine 
the  drug  with  one  having  expressive  power,  in  such  a  way  that 
both  properties  are  simultaneous  and  equal  ;  they  must  _  be 
arranged  so  that  the  one  property  does  not  come  into_  action 
till  after  the  other.  Thus  of  two  medicines,  the  lenitive  one 
should  be  able  to  exert  its  own  function  before  the  one  with  the 
function  of  expression  ;  the  latter  will  then  act  after  the  lenitive 
effect  has  been  produced.  The  same  principle  applies  to  the 
other  cases.

io. List,  of  Topics  Belonging  to  this  Subject  which  are

to   be  Found  Dealt  With   Elsewhere.io. List,  of  Topics  Belonging  to  this  Subject  which  are

to   be  Found  Dealt  With   Elsewhere.

998.  Purgative  and  lenitive  epithemes  and  potions, 
and  so  forth,  are  deferred  to  the  Formulary  (Book  V.)  Under 
"  Simples  "  we  give  the  rules  for  modifying  the  respective 
simples  according  to  the  age  of  the  patient  ;  how  to  assist  their 
action,  how  to  administer  them  in  fluid  form.

Pills  must  not  be  given  -if  they  have  become_  so  dry  as  to 
be  as  hard  as  stones  ;  and  they  must  not  be  given  in  a  soft  state 
lest  they  should  be  absorbed  and  held  within  the  body.  _  The 
proper  time  to  give  them  is  when  they  are  just  beginning  to 
get  dry,  and  yet  yield  to  the  pressure  of  the  fingers.

ii. — On  Emesis. 
§  256.      What  is  meant  by  emesis.— The  act  of  vomiting  may 
occur  (a)  from  errors  of  diet ;      spontaneously  (b)  from  a  diseased

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  493

condition  either  in  -  the  stomach  or  elsewhere  ;  (c)  by  deliberate 
induction.  This  chapter  is  concerned  with  the  last-named.  There 
are  two  types  of  emesis  under  this  heading  :  (a)  where  a  single 
act  of  vomiting  is  aimed  at— the  stomach  being  emptied  of  Its 
contents,  whether  food  merely,  or  contained  humours,  or  humours 
drawn  into  it  by  a  preparatory  process  of  treatment ;  (b)  where  the 
vomiting  is  to  go  on  for  a  period  of  time— for  instance,  more  than 
an  hour,  on  the  permissible  assumption  that  a  single  act  will  not 
necessarily  subside  much  sooner  than  an  hour.

(N.B. — The  text  has   been  slightly  re-arranged  in   order   to   obtain  a   more 
consecutive  picture.)

999„  Contra-indkations. — ^Meh  who  are  difficult  subjects 
for  the  procuring  of  emesis  are  :999„  Contra-indkations. — ^Meh  who  are  difficult  subjects 
for  the  procuring  of  emesis  are  :

(i)  So  by  nature  ;  contracted  chest  ;  bad  method  of  breath- 
ing ;  long,  thin  neck  ;  [prominent  chest,  Rhazes]  ;  lean  habit 
— for  in  such  persons  the  bile  should  be  adequate  ;  liability  to 
haemoptysis  ;  liability  to  throat  inflammations  [i.e.,  pharyngo- 
tonsillitis]  ;  persons  with  poor  digestion  ("  weak  stomach  ")  ; 
very  obese  subjects  ;  those  with  weakness  of  vision  ;  epileptics. 
In  such  cases  it  is  better  to  use  purges  instead.

_  (ii)  So  _  by  custom.  Such  persons  are  not  accustomed  to 
be  sick,  and  if  vomiting  be  induced  by  powerful  emetics,  the  effect 
will  not  last,  and  the  vessels  in  the  respiratory  organs  will  be 
liable   to    burst,    and   "  phthisis  "   will    develop.

Another  contra-indication. — Pregnancy  ;  for  the  menstrual 
superfluities  in  such  a  person  will  not  be  got  rid  of,  and  the  great 
exertion  entailed  in  the  emesis  may  lead  to  restlessness.  One 
must  allay  the  vomiting  (should  it  occur  during  this  period).  In 
other  cases,  vomiting  may  be  encouraged.

1000.  Objects  in  View. — [To  prevent  indigestion  after  im- 
moderate eating  ;  to  remedy  intoxication  after  immoderate  con- 
sumption of  wines  ;  to  evacuate  phlegm  or  mucus  from  the  stomach  ; 
to  lighten  the  head.     (Aeg.).]

The  immediate  intention  is  to  empty  the  stomach  alone, 
and  not  the  intestines.  The  remote  intention  is  to  relieve 
the  head  and  finally  the  whole  body  of  humours  which  are 
drawn  down  and  got  rid  of  from  the  upper  parts. — And  you 
know  that  the  emesis  has  been  beneficial  when  it  is  followed  by 
relief,  good  appetite,  good  breathing  and  normal  pulse  ;  and 
by  noting  the  condition  of  the  other  functions  of  the  body.The  treatment  of  chronic  maladies.  The  following  chronic 
maladies  are  benefited,  such  as: — dropsy,  epilepsy,  [jaundice: 
Aetius];  melancholy,  leprosy,  [arthritic  diseases :  Aetius];  gout, 
sciatica.

494  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

1001.  Procedure. — When  one  is  unaware  as  to  how  a  • 
given  person  will  respond  to  an  emetic,  one  should  first  give  a 
mild  one,  and  not  venture  on  a  strong  one  like  hellebore  and  the 
like  until  after  the  effect  of  the  former  has  been  observed. 
Should  the  first  one  not  agree,  and  it  be  still  necessary  to  ad- 
minister .an  emetic,  one  should  adopt  preparatory  measures 
in  order  to  get  him  accustomed  to  it.  Thus,  one  orders  some 
emollient  articles  of  food,  made  unctuous  and  sweet  ;  and  then 
to  desist  from  exercise,  and  then  take  oil  with  wine  ;  then  give 
good  food,  especially  if  vomiting  is  difficult  to  induce,  for  if  it 
fails  it  is  better  that  the  food  still  in  the  stomach  should  be 
good  than  bad.  The  patient  should  not  masticate  the  food 
much  which  he  is  taking  before  intending  to  procure  emesis.

1002;  Rules  regarding  the  food  to  take  after  emesis. — If  the  . 
vomiting  continues  even  after  the  contents  of  the  stomach  have 
been  emptied,  the  next  meal  should  be  postponed  until  the  patient 
is  very  hungry.  The  thirst  should  be  allayed  with  a  drink  of 
undiluted  syrup  of  apple  or  the  like,  but  not  with  julep  or 
syrupus  acetosus,  because  these  would  themselves  have  an 
emetic   effect.

An  appropriate  dish  is  the  special  one  prepared  with  fowl ; 
viz.,  first  boiled  awhile  and  then  roasted  before  the  fire.  Three 
glasses  of  wine  should  be  taken  after  it.An  appropriate  dish  is  the  special  one  prepared  with  fowl ; 
viz.,  first  boiled  awhile  and  then  roasted  before  the  fire.  Three 
glasses  of  wine  should  be  taken  after  it.

The  meal  should  be  postponed  to  midday,  and  be  pre- 
ceded by  a  drink  of  hot  rose  water  if  the  vomitus  be  unusually 
sour,  and  the  pulse  is  suggestive  of  fever.

Should  the  vomitus  be  very  dark  bile,  a  sponge  soaked 
in  hot  vinegar  should  be  applied  over  the  stomach,  and  the 
next  meal  should  consist  of  something  different  from  the  foods 
taken  to  procure  vomiting,  for  to  use  the  same  kind  of  food 
would  simply  fill  up  the  stomach  and  excite  it  to   discharge

the   food.

If  the  vomiting  has  been  copious,  the  best  thing  to  give  is 
small  birds  such  as  chickens  or  pigeons  which  are  just  beginning 
to  walk.  But  the  patient  must  take  care  not  to  eat  up  the 
leg-bones,  for  these  are  heavy  for  the  stomach,  and  will  remain 
in  it  a  long  time.

1003.  Articles  of  food,  etc.,  which  facilitate  or  induce  emesis. 
Almonds  dipped  in  honey  and  the  like  ;  barley  water  taken 
with  its  faex  and  honey  ;  fresh  pennyroyal  ;  confection  of 
bruised  beans  ;  decoction  of  radishes  ;  decoction  of  narcissus 
bulb  (Aeg.)  ;  herb  rocket  ;  cucumber  root  boiled  in  honey 
(Aeg.)  ;    green  marjoram  (Mant.)  ;    leeks  ;    meat-fat  swallowed

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  495THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  495

in  lumps  (Aeg.)  ;  oil  of  privet  (Aetius)  ;  old  pickles  [onions, 
ptisan  of  pulse  made  with  honey  ;  rocket  ;  moistened  pompion 
seeds  and  cucumber  seeds  pounded  with  honey  ;  sweet  cakes  ; 
sweet  wine  ;  tepid  drinks  ;  (Aegineta)]  ;  tepid  chamomile  -tea  ; 
water  with  butter,  and  the  like.— A  special  dish  prepared  with 
unleavened  bread,  oil,  melon,  cucumber  in  its  seeds  or  the 
roots  well  ground  up,  and  infused  in  sweetened  water  ;  soup 
made  with  radish.

A  person  may  elect  to  use  intoxicating  wine  to  procure 
emesis,  but  it  will  not  do  so  unless  a  large  quantity  be  drunk. 
Ale,  also,  may  act  as  an  emetic,  provided  it  be  combined  with 
honey,  and  is  taken  after  a  bath.  It  will  also  prove  purgative 
as  well.

A  strong  emetic  like  hellebore  should  be  taken  fasting, 
unless  there  is  some  special  contra-indication,  and  it  should  be 
taken  after  the  second  hour,  and  after  the  bowels  have  been 
emptied.

1004.  Methods  of  assisting  the  act  of  vomiting. — The  use  of 
a  feather  will  incite  the 'movement.  If  so,  good  ;  if  not,  the 
patient  should  walk  about  a  little  ;  and  if  that  fails,  he  should 
go  into  the  bath.  As  midday  approaches,  let  him  do  running 
exercises.  The  feather  with  which  vomiting  -is  induced  should 
be  anointed  with,  for  instance,  henna  oil.  [The  throat  may  be 
tickled  simply  with  the  finger,  which  should  be  smeared  with 
iris  ointment.  Aeg.]  Should  distress  in  the  stomach,  and 
spasms  arise,  let  the  patient  take  a  draught  of  hot  water,  or  of 
olive  oil,  for  that  will  either  bring  on  vomiting  or  empty  the 
bowels.

Another  way  of  helping  it  on  is  to  apply  warmth  to  the 
stomach  and  extremities,  because  this  will  induce  nausea.Another  way  of  helping  it  on  is  to  apply  warmth  to  the 
stomach  and  extremities,  because  this  will  induce  nausea.

At  the  time  of  vomiting,  it  is  a  help  to  bandage  the  eyes 
with  a  double  turn  of  bandage  ;  and  a  light  binder  may  be 
applied  round  the  abdomen.

If  the  effect  of  the  medicine  comes  on  precipitately,  the 
patient  should  keep  still,  inhale  pleasant  odours,  have  his  limbs 
rubbed  and  compressed  ;  a  little  vinegar  should  be  given  as 
a  drink,  and  he  should  chew  apple  and  quince  with  a  little 
mastic.

Moving  about  makes  vomiting  worse  ;    repose  lessens  it. 
Nausea  is  the  first  premonitory  symptom.     [Then  profuse 
salivation.]

1005.     Ill-effects  produced  by  vomiting.-    The  worst  effect 
which  may  happen  is  intense  spasm  of  the  stomach,  and  a  burning

49 6  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

in  the  stomach.  This  occurs  if  a  violent  emetic  like  hellebore 
be  taken.  It  first  produces  salivation,  after  which  a  copious 
discharge  of  watery  fluid  appears,  and  finally  a  viscid  or  slimy 
fluid.  The  colicky  pain  persists,  and  the  other  symptoms 
pass  on  to  nausea  and  distress,  which  increases.  The  bowels 
may  begin  to  act  after  the  movements  of  the  stomach  have 
quietened  down  and  the  patient  has  lain  down  to  rest.

i  006.  Ill-effects  produced  if  the  emetic  fails  to  act.  — If  vomit- 
ing does  not  occur  and  the  distress  increases,  and  distension 
occurs,  and  the  eyes  start  out,  and  get  very  red,  and  profuse 
sweating  comes  on,  and  the  voice  fails,  death  will  ensue  unless 
something    is    done.The  best  thing  to  do  in  this  case  is  to  give  an  enema, 
which  you  must  have  ready  beforehand,  and  a  dose  of  honey . 
prepared"  with  hot  water.      In  his  drink,  the  patient  should  have 
some  oil  of  antidotal  character,  like  oil  of  lilies  ;   and  this  should 
be   persevered  with  until  emesis   occurs  ;      he  will  not   choke'

with   it.

Difficulty  of  vomiting  may  arise  because  the  humours  are  too- 
tenuous.  In  such  a  case,  they  must  be  thickened,_  so  barley 
meal  is  taken  which  has  been  made  into  a  cake  with  cooked 
pomegranate   seeds.

1007.  Ill-effects  often  resulting  from  vomiting  in  any  case. 
Sordes  form  in  the  mouth  and  round  the  teeth.  Deafness  may 
come  on.  While  emesis  benefits  the  body,  it  is  injurious  for 
the  eyes  (and  see  1011.)

The  sign  that  the  cause  of  the  nauseative  satiety  is  passing 
down  away  from  the  stomach  is  that  it  is  being  expelled  by  the 
bowel  after  the  vomiting  is  over.

If  purgation  is  followed  by  vomiting,  it  shows  there  is 
something  still  to  be  expelled.

Blood-letting  must  not  be  done  consecutively  upon  emesis. 
One  should  allow  three  days  to  elapse,  especially  if  there  is 
any  heaviness  in  the  pylorus,  or  if  there  is  a  humour  lodged 
there.

1008.  Proper  time  for  procuring  emesis. — The  summer- 
time is  the  most  appropriate  season  for  inducing  emetic  treat- 
ment, and  if  a  person  had  to  undergo  a  course  of  emesis,  whose 
physique  (see  999,  i)  is  not  appropriate  for  this  kind  of  treat- 
ment,  the  summer  is  the  best  time  in  which  to  undertake  it.

•     The   best  time  of  day  in  summer  is  midday,  because  the 
air  is  then  hottest.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  497

I2- — The  Treatment  for  Arresting  Vomiting.•     The   best  time  of  day  in  summer  is  midday,  because  the 
air  is  then  hottest.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  497

I2- — The  Treatment  for  Arresting  Vomiting.

1009.  The  procedure  to  follow  in  order  to  arrest  vomiting 
is  to  rinse  the  mouth  and  to  lave  the  face  with  water,  to  which 
vinegar  or  sour  wine  has  been  added,  for  this  relieves  the  aching 
of  the  head.  A  little  mastic  may  be  taken  in  apple-water  or 
cyder.  [A  cup  of  -black  coffee  may  be  given.  Aeg.]  He 
should  abstain  from  food  and  water.  He  should  take  a  long 
rest._  The  abdomen  should  be  anointed  [or  a  mustard  plaster 
applied  over  the  epigastrium.  Aeg.]  He  may  enter  the  bath, 
and  make  his   ablutions  rapidly  and  leave  it  quickly.

If  it   is    necessary   to    give   any   food,   let   it   be  of  good 
flavour,   substantial  and  readily  digestible.

Annotations  by  Costaeus  to  this  chapter  refer  to  sea  sickness  In  this 
case,  if  much  bile  is  being  brought  up,  all  food  should  be  stopped,  or  only  the 
merest  taste  of  light  food  allowed.  If  the  vomitus  consist  of  phlegm  light  food 
may  be  allowed.  The  reason  is  that  in  the  former  case  there  are  sure  to  be  remnants 
of  the  unhealthy  humour  left  behind  in  the  stomach.  If  the  vomitus  consisted  of 
mucus  or  phlegm,  one  knows  the  stomach  is  empty,  and  one  may  consider  whether 
one  should  leave  the  stomach  devoid  of  food  or  not.

If  the  emesis  is  the  result  of  a  medicine,  food  must  not  be  taken  unless  the 
stomach  is  weak,  in  which  case  one  may  give  a  little  light  food  with  three  glasses 
of  cold  water.  °

:3- — The   Advantages    Obtained   by  (Therapeutic)

Emesis.:3- — The   Advantages    Obtained   by  (Therapeutic)

Emesis.

1010.  Hippocrates  advised  vomiting  to  be  induced  monthly 
and  for  two  consecutive  days.  On  the  second  day  the  difficulty 
of  the  first  day  is  obviated  and  that  which  has  entered  the  stomach 
is  fully  emptied.  Hippocrates  claimed  that  health  was  con- 
served thereby.     To  exceed  this  would  be  harmful.

Emesis  carried  out  in  this  way  gets  rid  of  mucus  and  bile, 
and  cleanses  the  stomach.  For  in  the  case  of  the  stomach  there 
is  no  cleansing  secretion  like  that  for  the  small  intestine — where 
the  bile  cleanses  the  mucous  membrane  as  it  passes  down  the 
bowel.

Emesis  clears  heaviness  of  the  head  ;  clears  the  vision  ; 
removes  nauseative  dyspepsia.  It  benefits  persons  in  whom 
bile  is  apt  to  pass  into  the  stomach  and  decompose  the  food. 
For,  if  vomiting  precedes  the  meal,  the  latter  will  always  enter 
the  stomach*  without  being  contaminated,  and  so  the  sense  of 
loathing  is  removed  which  proceeds  from  oiliness  of  food,  as 
also  the  depraved  appetite— namely,  the  longing  for  sharp, 
sour,    or   pungent  things.

Emesis  is. also  beneficial  for  flabbiness  of  the  body,  and  for

2K

49  8  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

ulcers  of  the  kidneys  and  bladder.  It  has  a  powerful  effect  in 
(anaesthetic)  leprosy;  in  persons  with  an  unhealthy  _  colour 
of  skin  ;  in  gastric  epilepsy,  jaundice,  asthma,  tremor,  hemiplegia. 
It  is  also  an  effective  treatment  in  cases  of  impetiginous  skin 
diseases  in  which  there  are  ulcers  covered  with  scabs.

It  should  be  procured  once  or  twice  a  month — after  a 
heavy  meal.     It  is  well  not  to  follow  fixed  time  intervals.

Emesis  is  a  great  help  for  persons  whose  temperament  is 
primarily   bilious,   and  who  are   lean   of  habit.Emesis  is  a  great  help  for  persons  whose  temperament  is 
primarily   bilious,   and  who  are   lean   of  habit.

I4. The  Evils  which  Follow  on  too  Frequent  Emesis.

1011.  To  procure  emesis  to  an  undue  degree  is  injurious 
for  the  stomach,  and  weakens  it  and  renders  it  susceptible  to 
(noxious)  matters.  It  is  prejudicial  to  the  thorax,  and  to  the 
vision,  and  to  the  teeth.  It  is  harmful  in  cases  of  long-standing 
pains  in  the  head,  except  when  these  are  due  to  gastric  disorder_ ; 
and  in  cases  of  "  epilepsy  of  the  head  "  when  the  cause  of  this  is 
not  in  the  lower  limbs.  _      ,

The  superfluity  which  explains  the  excessive  emesis  is 
injurious  for  the  liver,  the  lung,  and  the  eye  ;  and  it  may  lead  to 
rupture  of  blood-vessels.

The  custom  of  some  people  of  eating  to  excess  even  beyond 
that  which  the  stomach  will  tolerate,  and  then  procuring  emesis 
[to  enable  more  to  be  taken]  is  one  of  the  things  which  ends  in 
chronic  disorders.  Such  persons  must  be  advised  to  cease  the 
habit  of  repletion,  and  must  take  measured  amounts  of  food  and 
drink.

i$, How  to  Remedy  the  States  Incident  on  Emesis.

1012,  We    have    already    given    methods    for    arresting

vomiting.

Tightness  and  pain  under  the  hypochrondnum  are  relieved 
by  applying  upon  the  stomach-region  cloths  wrung  out  of  hot 
water,  by  the  use  of  lenitive  oils,  and  by  dry  cupping  (using

fire).  .

Persistent  Spasm  of  the  stomach  is  relieved  by  taking 
greasy,  easily  digestible  broths  ;  the  area  should  be  anointed 
with  oil  of  violets  admixed  with  oil  of  mallows  ..  [variety  not 
stated]  and  a  little  wax.

■      Hiccough  :     If  this  is  persistent,  give  a  sternutatory,  and 
sips  of  hot  water.

Hemetemesis  :    This  is  referred  to  in  the  next  chapter.■      Hiccough  :     If  this  is  persistent,  give  a  sternutatory,  and 
sips  of  hot  water.

Hemetemesis  :    This  is  referred  to  in  the  next  chapter.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  499

Lethargy,  spasmodic  diseases  (including  lockjaw),  "  cold  '' 
maladies,  loss  of  voice. — In  such  cases  bandage  up  the  ex- 
tremities tightly,  apply  a  cloth  over  the  epigastrium  wrung  out 
of  oil  in  which  rue  and  cucumber  (agrestis,  or  asininus)  have 
been  boiled,  and  administer  honey  in  hot  water  as  a  drink.

Drowsiness,  or  swooning  (trance).— This  is  treated  in  a 
similar  way,  and  the  oil  is  also  instilled  into  the  ear.

16. — Concerning  Excessive  Vomiting

1013.  Let  the  sufferer  sleep,  and  as  long  as  he  can.  The 
extremities  should  be  bandaged  in  the  same  way  as  one  does  for 
arresting  diarrhoea.  Over  the  stomach  apply  invigorating 
astringent  plasters.

If  the  vomiting  is  so  violent  that  humours  are  continually 
being  discharged  and  even  blood  comes,  milk  should  be  given, 
mixed  with  wine,  to  the  amount  of  four  glassfuls,  because  this 
antagonizes  the  evil  quality  of  the  medicine,  and  arrests  hemor- 
rhage and  soothes  the  "  nature."  If  you  wish  to  clear  the  blood 
from  the  breast  or  stomach  so  that  there  is  no  risk  of  it  clotting, 
administer  syrupus  acetosus  in  small  doses,  making  it  with  honey 
or  sugar,  and  making  it  icy  cold  by  means  of  snow.  Liq.  ext. 
purslane  taken  with  armenian  bole,  is  also  beneficial  in  some 
cases.

If  you  are  afraid  a  person  has  taken  too  much  medicine 
of  any  kind,  purgative  or  otherwise,  procure  emesis.If  you  are  afraid  a  person  has  taken  too  much  medicine 
of  any  kind,  purgative  or  otherwise,  procure  emesis.

Emetic  medicines  are  to  be  selected  according  to  their 
degrees  of  potency,  and  according  to  the  mode  of  administration 
applicable  to  each.  These  points,  and  especially  the  use  of 
hellebore,  are  dealt  with  in  the  Formulary  (Book  V)  and  under 
"  simples."

§  257.  Annotation  by  Costaeus  :  The  object  underlying  some  of  the  above 
measures  is  to  centralise  or  concentrate  the  life-breath  in  the  interior  of  the  body 
(i.e.,  round  the  solar  plexus)  and  prevent  it  from  being  disseminated  over  the  body, 
in  which  case  there  would  not  be  enough  in  the  vital  centres  to  maintain  life.

17. — On   Enemas

101 4„  The  enema  is  an  excellent  agent  for  getting  rid  of  the 
superfluities  in  the  intestinal  tract,  as  well  as  for  allaying  pains 
over  the  kidneys  and  bladder,  and  for  relieving  inflammatory 
conditions  in  these  organs  ;  for  relieving  colic  ;  and  for  drawing 
superfluities  from  the  vital  organs  of  the  upper  parts  of  the  body. 
Such  acute  superfluities  impair  the  function  of  the  liver,  and  are 
apt  to  produce  fever.

500  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Among  the  advantages  of  enemas  is  the  fact  that  by  their 
mean's  the  remnants  or  residues  of  the  evacuants  which  are  left 
behind  are  cleared  away.  ;

[Enemas  are  useful  to  relieve  constipation,  when  the  stomach  is  weak  and 
will  not  tolerate   purges.     Aeg.]

Form  of  enema  ;  the  method  of  giving  an  enema — see  the 
chapter  on  colic  in  Book  IV.

Best  posture  for  giving  an  enema. — First  lie  supine  ;  then 
turn  over  on  to  the  painful  side.Best  posture  for  giving  an  enema. — First  lie  supine  ;  then 
turn  over  on  to  the  painful  side.

Best  time  for  administration. — When  the  air  is  cold  ; 
because  heaviness,  pain,  restlessness  and  nausea  do  not  then 
supervene  ;  or,  if  present,  they  will  decrease.

The  use  of  the  bath  in  regard  to  the  administration  of 
enemas. -^-The  purpose  of  the  bath  is  to  arouse  movement  in  the 
humours,  so  that  they  may  disperse.  The  property  of  the  enema 
is  to  draw  out  gases  and  the  imprisoned  humours.  For  this 
reason  it  is  best  that  the  bath  should  not  precede  the  enema.  In 
a  case  of  intestinal  ulceration,  if  a  bath  were  necessary  to  relieve 
the  fever  or  any  other  symptom,  the  risk  which  there  is  of  the 
enema  being  retained  would  he  met  by  applying  a  poultice  of  hot 
millet  or  frumenty  over  the  epigastrium  and  umbilicus,  or  over 
the  anus  and  thigh.

§  258.     Materials  for  Making  Enemas.

If  the  humour  in  the  intestine  is  sero-mucous  :  give  beet,  decoction  of  dried 
figs,  dill,  honey,  nitre,  root  of  wild  cucumber.

If  the  enema  is  used  to  remedy  undue  dryness  :  give  marshmallows,  fenugreek, 
chamomile,  oil,  or  small  quantities  of  honey — all  of  which  are  emollients.  A  half 
hemina  of  oil  (a  half-pint)  may  be  given.     (Aeg.)

The  addition  of  honeyed  water  makes  the  mixture  more  efficient  than  plain 
water.       The  mixture  must,  of  course,  be  tepid.

Astringent  enema  :   vervain  (Celsus) .

Acrid  enema  :  sea-water  with  or  without  oil,  nitre  or  honey.  This  kind  of 
enema  is  very  drastic  and  painful.       (Celsus).

The  patient  must  resist  the  first  desire  to  go  to  stool.     (Celsus).The  patient  must  resist  the  first  desire  to  go  to  stool.     (Celsus).

§259.  The  modern  usage  is  much  more  simple.  Plain 
water,  soap-suds,  or  thin  gruel  is  the  usual  base,  and  the  amount  to 
introduce  is  from  a  half  to  three  half-pints  of  fluid.  To  either  of 
these  bases  may  be  added  one  ounce  of  castor  oil  or  glycerin,  or 
castor  oil  with  a  half-ounce  of  turpentine.  Olive  oil  is  some- 
times used  (6-10  ounces).  Half-ounce  injections  of  glycerin  are 
also  popular.

18.      On    Liniments

1015.  Liniments  are  among  those  useful  remedies  which 
reach  the  diseased  condition  itself.  They  belong  to  two  groups 
(1)  fluid,  (2)  viscid.  The  former  are  more  often  required  than  the 
latter.     If  the  viscid  variety  is  used  to  modify  the  consistence  of

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Soi

the  fluid  variety,  a  plaster  results.  The  fluid  portion  will  then 
penetrate  to  the  affected  part,  the  viscid  portion  remaining  behind. 
It  is  the  penetrant  part  which  is  beneficial.  Example :  making  a 
plaster  with  coriander  and  crushed  barley,  for  application  upon 
scrophulous  lesions.

Plasters  are  akin  to  liniments,  but  are  solid,  whereas  the 
latter  are  fluid.

Cloths  may  be  impregnated  with  liniments,  and  then  applied 
over  the  important  organs  (liver,  heart),  if  there  is  no  contra- 
indication. Cloths  impregnated  with  crude  xylaloes  are  useful, 
for  they  impart  an  agreeable  odour  which  helps  the  efficacy  of  the 
liniment.

19.— Douching  or  Spraying

1016.  Douching  [over  the  head,  usually]  is  a  method  of 
treatment  applicable  when  there  is  something  to  be  dispersed 
from  the  head  or  other  members.  It  is  also  applicable  for  the 
purpose  of  altering  the  temperamental  state  of  a  person,  when 
that  is  necessary.In  applying  the  douche  in  cases  where  superfluities  have  not 
passed  into  organs  or  members,  one  first  prepares  it  with  hot 
water,  and  afterwards  with  cold  water,  in  order  to  produce  an 
astringent  effect.  If  the  state  of  affairs  is  otherwise,  the  cold 
application  is  used  first.

Note  that  douching  over  the  head  may  be  done  from  a  jug  or  similar  vessel, 
or  in  the  form  of  a  spray  or  shower.  The  fluid  may  fall  from  a  height,  or  close  to 
the  part.  The  part  treated  may  be  the  head,  or  a  limb,  or  other  part.  The  fluid 
employed  may  be  plain  water,  or  medicated.  If  medicated,  it  may  be  mineral 
or   herbal.     If   mineral,   artificial  or   natural.

20. — On  Blood-Letting  (Venesection).

The  matter  in  this,  the  longest  chapter  in  the  whole  volume,  has  been  re- 
arranged and  partly  abridged.

1017.  Blood-letting  is  a  method  of 
general  evacuation.  It  removes  the 
excessive  quantity  of  humours  present 
in  the  blood  vessels.

1018.  General  indications.  Blood- 
letting is  only  applicable  (1)  when 
the  blood  is  so  superabundant    that  a

disease  is  about  to  develop;  (2)  when  disease  is  already  present. 
The  object  in  both  cases  is  to  remove  the  superabundant  blood, 
to  remove  unhealthy  blood,  or  both.

Cases   coming  under  the  first  category  are   such  as  the 
following:    incipient  sciatica,  podagra,  or  any  arthritic  disease

502  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINECases   coming  under  the  first  category  are   such  as  the 
following:    incipient  sciatica,  podagra,  or  any  arthritic  disease

502  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

due  to  abnormal  blood-state;  danger  of  haemoptysis  from 
rupture  of  a  vessel  in  a  rarefied  lung,  for  superabundance  of 
blood  then  makes  the  vessel  liable  to  give  way;  persons  on  the 
verge  of  epilepsy,  apoplectic  seizure,  melancholia  with  super- 
abundant blood,  pharyngo  tonsillitis,  internal  inflammatory 
masses,  "  hot  "  ophthalmia,  persons  with  piles  which  generally 
bleed  but  now  do  not;  women  who  fail  to  menstruate,  but  do 
not  show  the  two  colours  indicative  of  a  need  of  venesection, 
because  they  are  so  dusky,  or  pale,  or  greenish.  Persons  who 
suffer  weakness  from  the  hot  temperament  of  the  interior  organs. 
(In  these  cases  it  is  best  to  do  the  blood-letting  in  spring.)

Cases  of  severe  blows  and  falls  need  bleeding  for  fear  of 
an  inflammatory  mass  developing  (for  there  is  a  risk  of  causing 
the  latter  to  burst  before  it  has  matured),  provided  there  is  no 
urgency  and  not  too  much  blood  in  that  part.

Remember,  too,  that  blood-letting  is  safer  when  the  maladies 
to  be  feared  have  not  yet  befallen  the  patient.  It  must  be  avoided 
in  the  initial  stages  of  a  disease  because  it  renders  the  humours 
tenuous,  and  makes  them  become  dispersed  throughout  the 
body  and  come  to  be  admixed  with  healthy  blood.  Sometimes 
it  happens  that  the  venesection  does  not  remove  what  was  desired, 
and  it  would  have  to  be  repeated — which  would  be  enfeebling. 
Once  the  maturation  stage  has  been  passed,  the  disease  having 
passed  its  initial  stage  as  well  as  acme,  blood-letting  is  to  be  done 
unless  there  is  some  contra-indication.Phlebotomy  is  necessary  in  the  case  of  a  person  who  sweats 
profusely  from  repletion.

1019. — Contra-indications.  Age  :  Not  before  14,  or  after  70.  Young  adults 
should  be  gradually  introduced  to  it  by  beginning  with  small    blood-abstractions.

(2)  Physique  :  those  who  are  very  emaciated  ;  those  who  are  corpulent ; 
those  who  have  flabby  muscles  ;  those  whose  colour  is  white  or  yellow  ;  those  who 
have  often  been  ill. — An  exception  may  be  made  in  the  case  of  adolescents  and  old 
persons,  if  they  have  firm  muscles,  full  veins,  have  a  red  colour.(3)  Physiological  states. — The  following  are  contra-indications  :  (i.)  a  state  of 
repletion  with  food  ;  the  stomach  full  of  food  ;  the  bowels  still  loaded  with  fa;ces  ; 
a  state  of  nauseative  satiety  ;  a  state  of  sensitiveness  of  the  pylorus,  or  weakness 
of  the  sphincter.  Explanation  :  if  the  stomach  is  full,  the  effect  of  the  venesection 
will  be  to  draw  imperfectlv  digested  matters  into  the  veins  to  replace  the  loss  from 
the  vein.  If  the  bowels  are  full,  the  veins  of  the  intestines  will  suck  in  putrid  matters 
from  the  fseces.  In  the  former  case  one  waits  till  the  food  has  had  time  to  pass  on  ; 
in  the  second  case,  the  bowel  is  emptied  by  emollient  enemas.  In  the  case  of  nausea- 
tive satiety,  one  must  wait  till  it  passes  off.— (ii.)  A  state  of  fasting.  When  the 
pylorus  is  relaxed  and  the  bile  runs  into  the  stomach,  producing  gastric  pain,  per- 
sistent nausea,  vomiting,  and  a  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth  (for  by  these  signs  you 
know  of  the  condition),  beware  of  letting  blood  in  the  fasting  state,  (iii.)  Tenderness 
of  the  pylorus. — One  knows  that  this  tenderness  is  present,  because  pain  is  felt 
during  the  passage  of  acrid  substances  through  it. — (iv.)  Pregnancy. — Avoid  letting 
blood  from  a  pregnant  woman  unless  there  is  grave  necessity,  such  as  the  need  for 
arresting  haemoptysis,  and  even  then  not  unless  the  strength  is  sufficient,  (v.) 
Miscellaneous. — A  resolvent  bath  should  not  have  been  taken  shortly  before.  Coitus 
should  not  precede.  A  cold  temperament  is  a  contra-indication.  Caution  is 
requisite  in  the  case  of  persons  living  in  cold  countries.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  503THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  503

(4)  Pathological  conditions,  (i.)  Humoral.  It  is  not  necessary  to  let  blood 
every  time  you  find  the  signs  of  plethora  which  we  have  given,  or  rather  where  there 
are  signs  of  repletion  with  immatured  humours.  In  such  a  case  venesection  would 
be  very  disadvantageous,  because  blood-letting  would  incur  the  risk  of  therl  not 
maturing,  with  consequent  risk  to  the  life  of  the  patient

It  is  a  good  practice  to  let  the.  blood  of  a  patient  with  excess  of  atrabilious 
humour,  and  to  foUow  t  up  with  a  purge.  But  you  must  carefully  watch  the  colour 
to  judge  of  the  patient  s  condition,  and  also  the  tension,  because  it  is  from  the  state

So^ZZ^lT^^l^  °ne  CanbSSt  jUdS6  of  when  to  employ  venesection  < 
So  if  a  person  s  blood  is  good  and  scanty,  and  his  body  contains  many  bad  humours 
venesection  would  extract  the  good  blood  and  leave  the  bad  humours  beS' 
if  tne  amount  of  bad  blood  were  scanty  and  something  passed  down  into  a  member 
which  markedly  interferes  with  the  downward  passage  of  the  bad  blood  TX  it 
and  it  became  necessary  to  do  a  blood-letting,  one  should  only  take  a  little,  and  give 
the  patient  good  food,  repeating  the  blood-letting  after  a  few  days.  It  will  then 
be  possible  to  abstract  the  bad  blood  and  leave  the  good  behind

_  If  the  blood  contain  unhealthy  bilious  humours,  the  proper  thing  to  do  first

rest0andr!narti?ita  teim°US  laxative>  or  use  an  emetic,  or  give  sedatives  and  order_  If  the  blood  contain  unhealthy  bilious  humours,  the  proper  thing  to  do  first

rest0andr!narti?ita  teim°US  laxative>  or  use  an  emetic,  or  give  sedatives  and  order

If  the  humours  are  gross,  the  ancients  advised  the  patient  to  take  a  bath 
and  pursue  his  ordinary  occupation.  Both  before  and  after  venesection,  and  before 
any  other  form  of  depletion  is  undertaken,  he  was  to  take  drinks  of  an  attenuant 
syrupus  acetosus,  m  which  hyssop  and  thyme  had  been  boiled.  If  done  unnecessarily 
ton-ue    ete7  &         Y  ^  biU0US  hum0ur  in  motion,— shown  by  dryness  of  the

(11.)  Colic  (iii.)  When  the  disease  is  on  the  move,  neither  venesection  nor 
purgation  is  to  be  done,  because  that  is  the  time  when  rest  is  to  be  ordered  and  sleep 
is  to  be  aimed  at ;  it  is  the  time  when  the  malady  will  bestir  itself,  (iv.)  Febrile 
states.— is  ote  that  blood-letting  may  be  quite  unnecessary  in  fevers.  If  there  is 
not  much  matter  the  "nature"  will  overcome  it  unaided.  One  ascertains 
whether  this  «  likely  by  studying  the  aspect  of  the  patient,  his  age,  his  strength 
and  the  like.— When  the  fever  is  high,  or  when  there  is  inflammation,  blood-letting 
is  avoided.  Also  if  there  is  a  severe  rigor  ;  and  if  there  is  spasm  or  if  there  are 
convulsions.  In  all  such  cases,  bleeding  would  deplete  the  treasury  of  blood  with 
resultant  weakness.  Moreover,  if  a  febrile  person,  with  headache,  suddenly 
develops  a  diarrhoea,  phlebotomy,  though  likely  to  benefit  up  till  then,  has  become 
superfluous.     (See    also    1029.)(v.)  Critical  period  of  an  illness.— When  the  crisis  has  been  reached  and  it  is 
lonS  oration,  one  must  in  no  wise  remove  much  blood.  If  possible  procure 
Tfll  u,  }  f  n0t  P0SSlble-  a  sma11  blood-letting  may  be  done,  reserving  the  treasury 
oi  the  blood  for  a  subsequent  venesection  if  such  prove  to  be  necessary  and  also 
conserving  the  patient's  strength  for  undergoing  the  critical  stage.  If  a  W  time 
has  elapsed  since  the  blood-letting  was  done,  and  if  there  be  a  complaint  during  the 
winter  season  oi  a  feeling  as  if  one  is  broken  in  pieces,  one  would  just  do  a  blood- 
letting without  touching  the  mam  bulk  of  the  blood  for  the  present

(vi.)  Enfeebled  strength.— If  the  strength  is  enfeebled  by  having  much 
recourse  to  blood-letting,  it  will  result  in  the  formation  of  many  humours

1020.  The  proper  time  of  day  for  venesection. —There  are  two  occasions 
when  venesection  may  be  done  ;  there  is  the  time  of  election,  and  there  is  the  time 
ot  necessity  The  time  of  election  is  before  mid-day,  after  digestion  is  completed 
and  when  the  bowels  are  empty.  In  the  other  case,  the  need  for  the  relief  of  vene- 
section is  too  urgent  to  wait  for  the  other  favourable  conditions.  (Davs  of  election  • 
as  with  evacuants  generally  ;     q.v.— and  "  southern  "  days.)

1021.  Vessels  which  may  be  used  for  blood-letting.1021.  Vessels  which  may  be  used  for  blood-letting.

Both  arteries  and  veins  may  be  used  for  blood-letting.  But  arteries  are 
avoided  because  of  the  risk  of  not  being  able  to  staunch  the  blood,  and  if  a  small 
no  e  be  made  an  aneurism  may  result.  When  there  does  not  appear  to  be  this 
risk  the  use  of  an  artery  gives  better  results  in  some  diseases,  unless  they  are  situated 
in  the  vicinity  of  the  artery  to  be  tapped,  for  that  would  make  the  blood  thin  and 
not.  _  the  artery  to  be  selected  must  be  near  the  diseased  part  [in  the  case  of 
chrome  conditions,  m  the  opposite  region  in  acute  cases  (Aeg.)].

1022.  The  veins  of  the  upper  extremity.

,  .  .Six  °f  these  are  made  use  of  :  the  cephalic,  the  median,  the  basilic,  the  funus 
brachn  the  vein  between  the  middle  and  ring  finger  and  that  between  th.e  thumb 
and  index  finger.  The  cephalic  is  much  the  best  to  use.  The  Parts  drained  bv  these 
various  vessels  are  as  follows  :  The  cephalic  vein  drains  from  the  neck  and  parts 
above  that,  but  very  little  from  the  parts  below,  and  none  from  the  liver  and  hypo-

5o4  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE5o4  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

chondrium  or  from  the  lower  limbs.  The  basilic  vein  draws  blood  from  the  abdomen 
and  parts  below  The  median  vein  draws  blood  from  regions  intermediate  between 
those  drained  by  the  cephalic  and  basilic.  The  funis  brachii  drains  the  same  parts 
as  does  the  cephalic.  The  vein  between  the  right  middle  and  ring  finger  is  used 
for  conditions  of  the  liver.  The  left  one  is  used  for  disorders  of  the  spleen.  The  blood 
from  these  veins  readily  clots,  so  the  patient  should  put  his  hand  into  hot  water  to 
keep  the  blood  flowing  longer,  and  to  help  it  to  emerge  better  if  inclined  to  come 
out  too  scantily.     (The  incision  in  these  two  veins  should  be  longitudinal.)

The  vein  between  the  thumb  and  index  finger,  on  the  right  side  is  used  tor 
similar  purposes  as  the.  basilic.  It  is  useful  in  cases  of  chronic  hepatic  pain,  and 
very  efficient  in  disorders  of  the  diaphragm  (as  Galen  perceived).

An  artery  may  be  used  which  goes  to  the  inner  part  of  the  palm,  and  is  nearly 
as  effective.

1023.     The   veins   of  the   head.

(1)  The  frontal  veins.  These  are  between  the  two  eyebrows.  Phlebotomy 
in  this  situation  benefits  heaviness  of  the  head,  especially  occipital  heaviness  ; 
heaviness  of  the  eyes  ;   long-standing  headache.

To  make  these  veins  swell,  apply  fomentations,  and  also  a  bandage  round  the 
neck  placing  a  finger  over  the  windpipe  to  prevent  suffocation.     (Aeg.)  _

(ii)  The  supraoccipital  veins.  Bleeding  here  is  beneficial  for  megrim,  and 
ulcers  of  the  scalp.

(iii)  The  temporal  veins,  which  are  tortuous.

(iv)  The  two  veins  at  the  lachrymal  angle  of  the  eyes.  _  These  can  only  be 
rendered  visible  by  compression  of  the  neck  in  partial  suffocation.(iv)  The  two  veins  at  the  lachrymal  angle  of  the  eyes.  _  These  can  only  be 
rendered  visible  by  compression  of  the  neck  in  partial  suffocation.

Use  :     in    headache,    migraine,    chronic    ophthalmia,      pannus,     trachoma,

6P  Precaution  :  do  not  cut  deeply  lest  a  fistula  be  set  up,  by  striking  the  bone. 
Moreover  in  such  an  event  very  little  blood  will  emerge.

(v)  Three  small  post-auricular  veins,  found  at  the  point  which  the  tip  of  the 
ear  touches  when  pressed  back  against  the  hair.  One  of  the  three  is  more  conspicu- 
ous than  the  others,  and  this  is  opened  in  cases  of  glaucoma,  ulcers  of  the  ears,  neck 
and  back  of  the  head.  .     .

(vi)  The  veins  behind  the  ears  below  the  nuchal  protruberance.  Ihis  is 
beneficial  for  chronic  eye  diseases  due  to  thin  blood,  and  for  chronic  headache.    _

(vii)  The  vein  at  the  tip  of  the  nose.  It  may  be  made  obvious  by  pressing 
the  finger  upon  the  tip  of  the  nose  so  as  to  make  it  groove  into  two.  Very  little 
blood  will  come  from  it.  (Aeg.  advises  the  inside  of  the  nostrils  to  be  rubbed  with 
the  end  of  a  speculum,  or  to  be  tickled  with  a  rough  substance.)

Use  :  for  freckles,  for  dimness  of  vision,  pimples  in  the  nostrils,  itching  ot 
the  nostrils  ;   for  piles.  ,

Ill-effect :  a  permanent  serpiginous  redness  of  the  tip  of  the  nose  may  result, 
which  spreads  out  over  and  disfigures  the  face,  so  that  the  remedy  is  worse  than  the

(viii)  Labial  veins.  There  are  four.  Use  of  phlebotomy  here  :  for  ulcers 
of  the  gums  ;  aphtha?  ;  (septic)  gingivitis,  flabby  gums,  ulcers,  fissures  and  fistulas 
in  the  gums.  .  ...         ,(ix)  Sublingual  vein.  This  is  used  in  cases  of  angina,  and  tonsillar  abscess. 
Supra-- and  sub-lingual  veins  are  used  in  cases  of  heaviness  of  the  tongue  due  to 
congestion.    The  incision  must  be  lengthwise  as  otherwise  it  is  difficult  to  staunch

the  blood.  .  ,  .         ,  ,.        ,  ,

(x)  A  vein  at  the  lowest  part  of  the  lip.  This  is  opened  m  order  to  relieve  let  or 
of  the  mouth.    It  is  situate  between  the  chin  and  lower  lip.

(xi)  Veins  of  the  gums  :  these  are  opened  when  wishing  to  act  on  the  mouth 
of  the  stomach.  .

(xii)  The  jugular  veins.  The  instrument  to  use  here  is  one  with  a  sharp 
point.  Technique  :  draw  the  head  to  the  opposite  side  until  the  vein  is  stretched 
like  a  cord.  Consider  in  which  direction  the  vein  is  likely  to  slip,  and  then  make 
the  opening  accordingly.  The  incision  must  be  transverse.  (Aegineta  says  :  use 
the  concave  part  of  the  scalpel.)  ■     „■,,»      +1

Use  :  at  the  onset  of  lepra  ;  in  severe  angina  ;  m  dyspnoea,  m  hot  asthma, 
in  hoarseness  ;  in  abscess  of  the  lung  ;  in  dyspnoea  due  to  superabundance  of 
"hot"  blood;    in  diseases  of  the  spleen  and  side.

1024.     The  arteries  of  the  head.

The  following  may  be  opened,  (a)  The  temporal  arteries.  These  are  some- 
times phlebotomized,  sometimes  incised,  sometimes  drawn  out,  sometimes  cauterized. 
The  object  is  to  influence  watery  matters  in  glaucoma.     (6)  The  two  post-auricular

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  So$

arteries.    This  is  for  treating  some  forms  of  ophthalmia,  incipient  glaucoma,  pannus; 
dimness  of  vision  and  long-standing  headache.

There  is  always  the  risk  that  coagulation  will  be  very  slow.

1025.  The  veins  of  the  trunk.    -There  is  always  the  risk  that  coagulation  will  be  very  slow.

1025.  The  veins  of  the  trunk.    -

There  are  two  to  be  found  coursing  over  the  abdomen.  One  runs  over  the 
hepatic  region,  and  the  other  over  the  splenic.  The  former  is  opened  in  cases  of 
dropsy,  the  latter  in  diseases  of  the  spleen.

1026.  Bleeding  from  vessels  in  the  lower  limbs.

(i)  The. sciatic  vein.  This  vein  is  opened  in  the  region  of  the  malleolus.  The 
bandage  is  applied  above,  -  anywhere  between  the  prominence  of  the  hip  and  the 
instep.  It  will  have  to  be  applied  tightly.  The  limb  should  be  bathed  in  hot  water 
first.     The  incision  must  be  longitudinal.

Contingencies. — A  deep  artery,  or  one  difficult  to  find  :    in  this  case  use  one 
of  the  branches,  such  as  that  which  runs  between  the  little  and  second  toe. 
Value. — In  cases'  of  sciatica,  podagra,  varices,  and  elephantiasis. 
Repetition. — It  is  difficult  to  do  a  second  phlebotomy. 
_  (ii)  The  saphenous  vein.       This  is  opened  'over  the  internal  malleolus,  above 
the  instep.     It  is  more  conspicuous  than  is  the  preceding.     The  incision  must  be 
transverse.

Value. — For  emptying  the  blood  from  the  organs  below  the  liver,  and  for 
causing  the  blood  to  descend  from  upper  parts  to  lower  ones.  It  is  a  powerful  aid 
for  the  menstrual  flow.  It  opens  up  the  pores  of  piles.  While  one  would  expect 
either  vessel  to  be  equally  efficacious,  experience  actually  shows  that  the  use  of 
the  sciatic  vessel  is  more  beneficial  for  sciatic  pain.(iii)  The  popliteal  vein.  This  is  opened  behind  the  bend  of  the  knee.  It  is  as 
effective  as  opening  the  saphenous  vein.  For  exciting  the  menstrual  flow,  however 
it  is  even  more  efficient,  as  well  as  for  pain  from  piles,  and  pain  in  the  anus.

(iv)  The  vein  over  the  heel.    The  use  of  this  is  similar  to  that  of  the  saphenous 
of  which  it  is  a  branch.

(v)  The  vein  over  the  inner  toe  :  this  may  be  used  in  cases  of  sciatica  and 
uterine  disease.     (Aeg.)

In  brief,  the  veins  of  the  lower  extremity  are  used  in  cases  where  matters 
descend  from  the  head,  and  for  disorders  connected  with  the  atrabilious  humour. 
Phlebotomy  from  the  feet  is  more  weakening  than  that  from  the  arms. 
1027.  Procedure  in  blood-letting,  (a)  Pre-operative  treatment.  The  stomach 
requires  to  be  previously  fortified,  as  there  is  a  risk  of  death  otherwise.  If  the 
stomach  is  weak  and  sensitive,  give  pieces  of  bread  soaked  in  a  rob  made  with  a 
vinegar  of  good  odour.  If  the  person  is  also  of  cold  temperament  the  bread  should 
be  dipped  in  sugar  water  with  aromatics,  or  a  syrup  of  spearmint  perfumed  with 
musk.  If  bile  is  regurgitating  into  the  stomach,  induce  vomiting  with  plenty  of 
hot  water  containing  oxymel.  Then  give  the  soaked  bread,  and  do  not  delay  with 
the  operation. — It  is  disadvantageous  to  take  a  bath  prior  to  the  blood-letting, 
because  it  makes  the  skin  thick  and  soft,  and  the  operation  is  difficult  unless  the 
blood  is  thick.

(b)   Instrumentarium.

I.  Several  scalpels.

II.  A  ball  of  silk  or  thread.

III.  An  instrument  to  excite  vomiting, 
made  with  a  feather  or  of  wood.

IV.  Rabbit-hair.

V.  A  medicament  of  aloes  and  frankin- 
cense and  a  musk  electuary.

VI.  Lozenges   of  musk.IV.  Rabbit-hair.

V.  A  medicament  of  aloes  and  frankin- 
cense and  a  musk  electuary.

VI.  Lozenges   of  musk.

Some  with  broad  point,  others  with 
narrow.*  The  latter  are  best  for 
mobile  veins  like  the  jugulars.  See 
that  the  point  is  intact,  lest  you  miss 
the  vein  or  cause  pain,  or  do  injuries 
which  lead  to  sepsis.

Used  if  vomiting  is  not  spontaneous.

Used  as  styptic  in  arterial  hemorrhage. 
Used    to    keep   the    preceding   in   place.

Also  for  syncope. 
For  syncope  ;   musk  is  given  to  smell  for

the  same  purpose.

*  The. tip  should  be  long  enough  to  reach  the  vein  without  touching   other 
structures.

5o6  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

(c)  Make  the  veins  stand  out.  A  band  is  tied  round  the  limb  for  this  purpose 
The  artery  may  swell  also,  in  which  case  the  tourniquet  should  be  loosened,  and 
Jhe  swollen  yeTsel rubbed.'  If  the  swelling  ^Pf™  Z^^LttLt^l 
that  vessel  and  turn  to  the  vessel  running  over  the  elbow  On  the  other  nana,  a 
bandlgfmay  obliterate  the  arterial  pulse  and  lead  to  a  risk  of  opening  this  m  mistake 
foTthe  vdn  If  the  vein  remains  difficult  to  see,  relax  and  tighten  the  band  alter- 
nately Ind  rub  the  vein  down  and  up;  up  and  down,  using  two  fingers  for  this, 
fe  then  ?hestatioLry  finger  feels  the  blood  run  in  which  the  other  finger  forces 
down  wTtn  very XnyveinSs  this  will  need  repeating  several  times.  The ,  band  must 
be  Idapted  according  to  the  coarseness  of  the  skm,  the  amount  of  fat  and  size  of  the 
mufclef   If X  band  conceals  the  visible  part  of  the  vein,  a  mark  should  be  made

alono-  the  line  of  the  vessel,  to  enable  it  to  be  found  afterwards.

alongthehne  of  the  v  ss  ^  ^  ^  ^^   ^  d       ddlalono-  the  line  of  the  vessel,  to  enable  it  to  be  found  afterwards.

alongthehne  of  the  v  ss  ^  ^  ^  ^^   ^  d       ddl

fineer  so  as  to  leave  the  index  finger  free  to  feel  the  place  to  mcise.  Grasp  the 
We  bv  the  middle  and  not  by  its  end,  so  as  to  have  proper  control  of  the  blade. 
The  poLt  should  be  so  sharj  that  it  will  enter  the  vein  by  a  gentle  coaxing 
To  hEve  to  keep  on  poking  the  knife  about  to  find  the  vein  will  only  do  injury.  The 
JlaSLuld  have  bePen  dipped  in  oil,  and  the  area  of  skin  should  have  had  oil  gently 
rubbed  mto^t.s_on  .^  ^  ^  ^^  ,  longitudmal,  tc .render f  dotting -to* 
liVplv  The"  opening  should  be  well  above  the  level  of  the  joint.  If  made  at  the 
level!  theMooHi  not  come  out  freely,  and  the  risk  of  mmrmg  the  nerves  and 
arteries  is^great  ries  to  the  vein  opened.     Since  the  venesection

has  to  be  repeated  on  s?me  future  occasion,  the  vessel  must  not  be  unduly  injured 
J^SJd^tetog  is  likely  to  injure  it  ;  hence  a  second  <^»>g^g**£ 
aAnother  spot,  thul  averting  risk  of  inflaming  of  the  part^  (11)  InP»es  ^  °^ 
structures  When  using  the  median  vein,  the  nerve  is  m  danger,  there  maj  De 
So  nerves  irfthe  way  Hence  one  should  cut  downwards  and  lengthways  The 
^rv^mlv  he  over  the  vein,  tense  like  a  string,  and  injury  to  this,  thinking  it  is  the

mhSrek"  th^ li^T^tsoioVZle  days,  and  eVen  then  be  very  cautious

death  from  hemorrhage  will  -^^S  ^^Sffit^S 
K^^^^bS^^^^t^  veins  may  bleed  alarmingly

freely(v)  Inability  to  find  the  vein.    Do  not  keep  on  xn^attempts  to  puncture 
the  vein,  especiafly  if  the  hand As  being ^used  ^pe^a  tnal  at  ^-i^el,freely(v)  Inability  to  find  the  vein.    Do  not  keep  on  xn^attempts  to  puncture 
the  vein,  especiafly  if  the  hand As  being ^used  ^pe^a  tnal  at  ^-i^el,

it  S^tiy  -side.        _Some  ma.ntain  ^^  the  operat.on  is  legs       inful  a  the  parts 
are  made  numb  with  a  tight  bandage  for  about  an  hour  previously.

(f)  Amount  of  blood  to  be  removed.— There  is  a  proper  time 
for  arresting  the  flow  in  various  cases.  Some  persons  even  though 
febrile,  caAear  losing  five  or  six  pounds  of  blood,  whereas  others 
cannot  stand  losing  even  one  pound,  though  apparently  m  health

One   must  consider  three  points,     (*)   An  impetuous  exit   of

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

507

blood  or  a  sluggish  flow,  (b)  The  colour  of  the  blood.  It  is  per- 
missible to  go  on  drawing  blood  as  long  as  it  is  black  and  thick. 
But  if  it  turns  pale  and  is  thin,  its  flow  must  be  quickly  arrested, 
lest  dangerous  results  ensue.  It  may  be  pale  and  watery  at  first, 
so  that  one  might  think  one  should  stop  the  operation,  even  though 
one  knows  there  are  signs  of  plethora.  For  the  colour  of  the  blood 
does  not  always  correspond  to  what  would  be  expected  in  cases  of 
plethora.  The  colour  of  the  blood  is  also  misleading  when  there 
is  an  inflammatory  mass  from  which  the  blood  is  coming.  (V)  The 
state  of  the  pulse.  If  the  flow  of  blood  fails,  and  the  colour  alters, 
and  the  pulse  becomes  weak,  stop  the  bleeding.  Also,  if  yawning 
and  stretching,  hiccough,  or  nausea  come  on.  Watch  the  pulse 
if  the  colour  changes  quickly  and  the  flow  is  free,  so  as  to  be  on  guard 
against   syncope.     (See   below).A  limited  venesection  is  a  great  conserver  of  the  strength  and 
yet  it  entails  the  flow  of  tenuous  and  sometimes  clear  blood,  with 
retention  of  the  thick  and  opaque  blood.  Liberal  venesection  is 
very  liable  to  cause  syncope,  but  is  more  cleansing  ;  it  clots  more 
slowly,  but  is  more  efficient  in  those  cases  in  which  it  is  done  prophy- 
lactically,  and  in  obese  persons.  It  is  better  to  do  a  liberal  vene- 
section in  winter,  as  the  blood  does  not  clot  ;  it  is  better  to  do  a 
limited  one  in  summer,  if  it  is  needed  then  at  all.

When  the  blood-letting  is  done  to  stop  haemorrhage  by  drawing 
blood  away  from  the  site  of  bleeding  (e.g.,  epistaxis,  uterine  haemor- 
rhage, haemoptysis)  draw  only  a  small  amount,  and  employ  several 
sittings  rather  than  one  single  one,  unless  the  case  is  very  desperate. 
(Repeated  small  bleedings  would  certainly  tend  to  produce  an  auto- 
haemostatic  effect,  as  we  now  know).

(g)  Syncope. — Syncope  rarely  occurs  during  the  flow  of  blood,  unless  a  great 
amount  is  lost.  One  only  bleeds  up  to  syncope  in  cases  of  synochal  fevers,  in  in- 
cipient apoplexy,  in  extensive  angina  or  inflammatory  swellings,  or  in  cases  of 
severe  pain.  Even  in  such  cases  one  would  make  sure  the  strength  of  the  patient 
is  adequate.

The  persons  liable  to  faint  as  a  result  of  blood-letting  are  those  of  hot  tempera- 
ment, and  with  lean  and  flabby  bodies.  Those  with  equable  temperament,  and  with 
firm  flesh,  are  not  likely  to  faint  unless  a  large  amount  of  blood  is  withdrawn.  Watch 
the  pulse.The  first  blood-letting  may  be  accompanied  by  syncope  if  it  is  carried  out 
quickly  on  a  person  not  accustomed  to  it ;  therefore  emesis  should  first  be  procured 
to  guard  against  that,  and  it  may  be  repeated  at  the  time  of  the  blood-letting.

(h)  After-treatment. — (i.)  Washing  the  part. — When  washing 
the  part  the  skin  must  be  deflected  by  means  of  one's  finger,  so  that 
the  site  of  puncture  is  no  longer  over  the  aperture  in  the  vein.  Then 
wash  ;  dry  carefully  ;  apply  a  compress.  Then  allow  the  skin  to 
return 'to  its  natural  position.  (ii.)  Diet.  The  loss  of  blood  is 
replaced  by  grilled  meat,  with  its  gravy,  or  by  giving  forced-meat 
balls.  Allow  only  small  quantities,  for  the  stomach  will  not  be 
able  to  digest  much.  Light  food  should  be  given  first,  and  the  full 
dietary  only  resumed  gradually,  (iii.)  Other  points.  The  patient 
should  lie  supine.  A  resolvent  bath  must  not  be  taken.  Exercise 
must  be  avoided,  (iv.)  Suppuration  of  the  wound.  The  wound  may 
become  inflamed.     Apply  a  plaster  of  ceruse,  and  dress  with  cold,

5oS

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

have  to  be  used  if  vene-

wet  infrigidants.   .  The  other  arm  would 
section  has  to  be  repeated  subsequently.5oS

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

have  to  be  used  if  vene-

wet  infrigidants.   .  The  other  arm  would 
section  has  to  be  repeated  subsequently.

1028.  Repetition  of  venesection. — (i)  Indications  :  the  operation  may  be  re- 
peated often  if  the  humours  are  much  in  excess,  for  the  operation  sets  them  in  motion 
("  causes  them  to  boil  ").  But  if  the  blood  be  rich  in  atrabilious  humour,  the  blood- 
letting should  be  infrequent.  Though  soothing  at  the  time,  it  results  in  undesirable 
disorders,  including  apoplexy,  especially  in  old  persons,  (ii)  Proper  time-interval 
before  repeating  the  blood-letting.  This  depends  on  the  degree  of  weakness  If 
there  be  no  weakness,' it  may  be  repeated  within  an  hour,  m  which  case  the  blood 
is  prevented  from  clotting  by  applying  bread  soaked  in  oil  with  a  little  salt  over 
the  wound,  and  keeping  it  in  place  with  a  bandage.  If  much -blood  has  to  be  taken, 
wait  a  day.  Two  or  three  days  is  the  limit  for  re-opening  the  wound,  (m)  Technical 
details  regarding  the  re-opening.  Another  vein  may  have  to  be  used,  especially  if 
the  hand  was  used  previously.  The  same  place  must  not  be  used  if  a  palsy  was 
accidentally  produced  previously.  Some  force  may  be  needed  to  get  into  the  vein 
next  time.  [A  special  hammer  appears  to  have  been  used,  instead  of  using  steady 
pressure.  (Albucasis.)]  If  the  second  blood-letting  was  to  be  done  within  an  hour, 
or  during  the  same  day,  the  first  incision  should  have  been  transverse  ;  but  if  a 
day  or  more  elapse,  a  longitudinal  cut  is  best.  The  movements  of  the  fingers  will 
keep  such  an  opening  patent.  The  scalpel  should  be  narrow,  (iv)  Treatment  be- 
tween the  operations.— Sleep  hastens  clotting,  and  prevents  the  superfluities  from 
getting  into  the  blood,  because  they  pass  into  the  interior  parts  of  the  body  during 
sleep  Sleeping  on  the  side  from  which  the  blood-letting  was  done  tends  to  damage 
the  tissues.— The  strength  of  the  patient  must  be  maintained  proportionately  to 
the  amount  of  blood  evacuated.— The  bowels  must  be  kept  clear.  _1029. — Precautions  regarding  blood-letting  in  fevers,  (i)  Indications,  when 
the  fever  is  septic,  -"i."  the  inflammation  is  not  great,  the  ten  rules  already  given  are 
to  be  followed.  Not  j  the  urine.  If  the  urine  turns  thick  and  reddish,  and  if  the 
pulse  is  large,  ant-  che  face  swells,  and  the  fever  does  not  quickly  improve,  blood- 
letting may  be  done,  and  it  should  be  on  a  fasting  stomach.  But  if  the  urine  becomes 
thin  and  "  fiery,"  and  if  the  face  wastes  from  the  outset  of  the  illness,  avoid  blood- 
letting.—Blood-letting  may  be  done  during  an  apyrexial  period.— When  the  fever 
does  not  arise  from  putrefaction,  bleeding  without  depleting  the  treasury  of  blood 
will  resolve  it.  But  bleeding  may  kindle  up  a  fever,  (ii)  When  to  operate.— If  the 
indications  are  present,  take  no  notice  of  those  who  assert  it  should  not  be  done 
after  the  fourth  day  of  the  illness.  It  may  be  done  any  day,  even  after  forty  days, 
avoiding  only  the  moment  of  a  fever  paroxysm.  Otherwise  follow  the  ten  rules 
already  referred  to.  (iii)  Ouantity  to  remove.  Do  not  remove  much  blood  at  first 
in  hsemorrhagic  fevers,  and  take  plenty  at  the  stage  of  maturation,  for  this  itself 
will  often  put  a  stop  to  the  fever. — Stop  the  flow  if  you  find  the  blood  is  pale  and 
watery.  Phlebotomy  often  disperses  fevers,  and  resolves  putrefaction.— When 
the  febrile  person  is  enfeebled,  one  should  divide  up  the  venesection. — Note  that  as 
venesection  draws  contrarily,  it  has  a  constipating  effect.

21. — The  Operation  of   Cupping21. — The  Operation  of   Cupping

1030.  The  operation  of  cupping 
cleanses  the  particular  part  of  the  skin 
more  effectively  than  does  venesection. 
It  withdraws  the  rarefied  rather  than  the 
more  viscid  blood.  It  is  not  much  use 
for  persons  with  bulky  coarse  bodies, with 
thick  blood,  for  it  does  not  withdraw 
any  blood  from  them,  even  that  component  which  it  is  de- 
sirable to  withdraw.  It  only  removes  such  (matters)  as  are 
extremely  tenuous — and  even  these  only  with  difficulty.  It  also 
produces  weakness  in  the  member  to  which  the  glasses  have 
been  applied.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  509

1031.  The  proper  time  for  using  cupping-glasses. — Some 
authorities  advise  against  applying  cupping-glasses  at  the 
beginning  of  the  lunar  month,  because  the  humours  are  then  not 
yet  on  the  move  or  in  a  state  of  agitation  ;  also  against  applying 
them  at  the  end  of  the  (lunar)  month,  because  at  that  period  (of 
the  cycle)  the  humours  are  less  plentiful.  The  proper  time 
(according  to  them)  is  the  middle  of  the  month  (when  the  humours 
are  in  a  state  of  agitation)  and  during. time  when  the  moonlight 
is  increasing  (when  the  humours  are  on  the  increase  also). 
During  that  period  the  brain  is  increasing  in  size  within  the 
skull,  and  the  river-water  is  rising  in  tidal  rivers.

The  time  of  day  proper  for  using  cupping-glasses. — The  second 
and  third  hours  are  best.  One  must  take  care  not  to  apply 
cupping-glasses  after  the  bath,  except  in  the  case  of  the  blood 
being  thick.-  If  so,  the  bath  is  taken  first  ;  then  wait  an  hour  ; 
then  apply  the  cupping-glasses.1032.  Points  of  application. — (a)  Forehead  :  most  people 
have  a  horror  of  applying  cupping-glasses  here,  as  they  believe 
that  the  senses  and  intellect1  will  suffer  thereby.

Point  of 
Application.

(6)  Nape  of  neck2

(c)  Between  the 
shoulder-blades3

(d)  Over   the   two 
posterior  neck  veins '

Equivalent 
in  regard  to 
venesection.

From  median 
vein.

From  basilic  vein.

From  cephalic  vein.

Uses.

Heaviness  of  eyelids  (relieves  the  lids), 
itch  of  eyes,  fetor  of  the  mouth.

Pains  in  upper  arms  and  throat  ; 
to  relax  the  cardiac  orifice  of  the 
stomach.

(e)  The  legs

[})  Under  the  chin.

(g)  Over  the  loins.

(h)  In  front  of  thigh. 
(i)  Behind  hips.

(j)  In  popliteal  space.

{k)  Over  malleoli.

(/)  Over  loose  tissues  of 
outer  side  of  hip.

(m)  Over  the  buttocks, 
towards  the  anus.

Almost  equivalent 
to  blood-letting.

Tremor  of  head  ;  and  for  the  com- 
ponents of  the  head  (face,  teeth, 
molars,    ears,    eyes,    throat,    nose).

Cleanses    the    blood;    provokes   men- 
strual flow5.

Teeth,  countenance,  throat  : 
head  and  jaws.

cleanses

Inflammatory  masses  in  upper  part 
of  thigh, — scabies  there  ;  pustules  ; 
podagra;  piles;  elephantiasis;  blad- 
der ;  uterus  ;  pruritus  of  back 
[renal  congestion] .

Orchitis  ;  leg  ulcers.  '

Inflamm.    conditions 
buttocks.

and    ulcers    of

Aneurysm  ;    long-standing  abscesses 
septic    ulcer    of   leg    and    foot.

Retained  menses  ;    sciatica  ;  podagra.

Sciatica,  podagra ;  piles ;  inguinal 
hernia  ;  the  structures  within  the 
hip  joints.

Draws  humours  from  whole  body, 
from  head  ;  benefits  the  intestines  ; 
cures  decomposition  of  menses,  and 
thereby  alleviates  the  whole  body.

5io  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Notes.  ■

i.      Muhamad  says  that  if  placed  over  the  hollow  of  the5io  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Notes.  ■

i.      Muhamad  says  that  if  placed  over  the  hollow  of  the

occiput  they  induce  loss  of  memory  (Mgn.).

i.  There  is  a  danger  of  transmitting  forgetfulness,  for  as 
some  say,  the  posterior  part  of  the  brain  has  to  do  _  with  the 
preservation  of  memory,  and  the  cupping  enfeebles  this  faculty, 
and  the  offspring  will  suffer.  Some  say  that  cupping  over  the 
occiput  and  top  of  the  head  is  beneficial  for  insanity,  vertigo,  and 
for  preventing  the  hair  from  going  grey.  But  we  must  take  it 
that  this  effect  on  the  hair  applies  only  to  feeble-minded  people 
and  not  to  other  types  of  person,  for  in  most  cases  the  use  of 
cupping  in  this  situation  brings  premature  greyness,  and  also 
dulls  the  intellect.  But  it  is  beneficial  for  eye-diseases,  and  indeed 
this  is  its  chief  value,  namely  for  pustular  keratitis  and  staphy- 
loma. "  But  cupping  in  this  situation  is  harmful  for  cataract,  unless 
the  proper  moment  is  chosen.  It  impairs  the  activity  of  the 
intellect,  making  the  offspring  dull  and  forgetful,  with  poor 
reasoning  powers,  and  permanent  infirmity.

3.  Glasses  applied  over  the  scapulae  as  well  as  between 
them  are  beneficial  for  hsemorrhagic  diseases  of  the  chest,  and 
sanguineous  asthma,  but  are-enfeebling  for  the  stomach  and  set

up  palpitation.  .

4.  To  prevent  tremor  of  the  head  occurring,  we  move  the 
glasses  downwards  and  then  upwards  again  to  over  the  scapula, 
unless  the  cupping  is  being  done  for  haemoptysis,  m  which  case 
one  must  move  them  down  but  not  upwards  again.

5.  In  the  case  of  pale  flabby  women  with  watery  blood, 
cupping  of  the  legs  is  more  advantageous  than  a  venesection  from 
the  saphenous  vein.5.  In  the  case  of  pale  flabby  women  with  watery  blood, 
cupping  of  the  legs  is  more  advantageous  than  a  venesection  from 
the  saphenous  vein.

Note  that  the  use  of  movable  cupping-glasses  over  an  area  and  their  use 
for  joint  diseases  is  still  practised  under  the  name  of  Bier  s  treatment.

When  the  cupping  is  done  with  heat,  whether  with  or  with- 
out scarification,  it  is  more  efficient.  But  cupping  with  scarifica- 
tion is  more  efficient,  especially  in  cases  of  flatulence  (of  various 
kinds)  Cupping  without  scarification  is  more  applicable  for 
cold  swellings,  and  whenever  the  cups  are  to  be  moved  about  over 
various  places.

8260  The  distinction  between  wet  and  dry  cupping  is  not  very  evident. 
Tr,  the  mediaiS  drawings  referred  to  below,  the  use  of  scanners  with  the  cupping 
seems "uTual  It  wdl  be  clear  that  the  action  of  the  two  measures  is  quite  different, 
drv  cuPPiS  leading  to  the  formation  of  autohaemolysins,  the  wet  cupping  being 
Se  of  thlnature  of  a  "  mild  evacuation,"  a  less  drastic  procedure  than  bleeding 
ftom  a  vein-perhaps  largely  because  the  victim  did  not  see  the  blood  and  because 
the  quantify  of  blood  withdrawn  was  necessarily  hmited  m  amount.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  s.u

1033.  Some  of  the  fur-poses  in  view  in  cupping. — (i)  to  move 
materials  away  from  one  part  to  another.  Thus  menstrual  flow 
will  be  arrested  if  the  cupping  is  done  over  the  breasts.

(ii)  To  draw  an  inflammatory  process  from  deep  parts 
towards  the  surface  and  so  render  it  accessible  to  some  medica- 
ment.

(iii)  To  divert  ah  inflammatory  process  to  a  neighbouring 
and  less  important  organ.

(iv)  To  render  a  member  warm,  and  draw  blood  into  it, 
and  disperse  vapours  from  it.(iii)  To  divert  ah  inflammatory  process  to  a  neighbouring 
and  less  important  organ.

(iv)  To  render  a  member  warm,  and  draw  blood  into  it, 
and  disperse  vapours  from  it.

(v)  To  restore  a  member  to  its  proper  position  (e.g., 
inguinal  hernia).

(vi)  To  allay  pain.  Applied  over  the  umbilicus  they  relieve 
violent  colic  and  flatulent  distension  of  the  abdomen,  and  the 
uterine  pain"  due  to  movement  of  the  menstrual  fluid,  especially 
in  young  women  [e.g.,  dysmenorrhcea].

1034.  There  are  three  points  to  note  in  regard  to  wet 
cupping — {a)  the  evacuation  from  the  member  itself  ;  (b)  the 
safeguarding  of  the  basis  of  the  life-breath,  so  that  the  latter  shall 
not  leave  the  body  with  the  humour  which  is  being  evacuated  ; 
(c)  the  evacuation  must  not  be  made  from  a  vital  organ.

In  wet  cupping,  the  scarification  must  be  deep  to  ensure 
drawing  the  humours  from  the  deep  parts.

Such  cupping  must  not  be  done  over  the  breasts  themselves, 
for  fear  menstrual  flow  and  epistaxis  should  be  set  up.

If  the  region  to  be  cupped  is  covered  with  ointment  one 
should  not  delay  the  scarification.  The  first  point  of  application 
should  be  made  light  and  the  cup  removed  quickly.  As  the  part 
is  accustomed  to  the  cups,  they  may  be  left  longer.

The  site  of  the  cup  may  afterwards  develop  inflammation, 
and  thus  render  it  difficult  of  removal.  To  avoid  this  a  cloth  or 
sponge  soaked  in  tepid  or  nearly  hot  water  should  be  used  as  a 
fomentation  round  it.

Cupping  of  the  upper  parts  of  the  body  ensures  that  morbid 
materials  will  not  pass  down  into  the  lower  parts  of  the  body.Cupping  of  the  upper  parts  of  the  body  ensures  that  morbid 
materials  will  not  pass  down  into  the  lower  parts  of  the  body.

1035.  Age. — One  should  not  begin  to  apply  cupping  to 
infants  until  they  are  in  their  third  year;  cupping  should  be  quite 
unnecessary  in  the  first  year  of  life.  It  is  altogether  contra- 
indicated  after  the  sixtieth  year.

1036.  After-treatment  in  regard  to  food. — In  ordinary 
persons,  a  meal  may  be  taken  an  hour  after  the  cupping  has  been 
completed.

Persons  of  bilious  type  should  be  given  the  following  foods

5 12  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

after  being  cupped:  pomegranate  juice  with  the  seeds;  endive 
juice  with  sugar  ;   lettuce  and  vinegar.

$  ->6i      During  the  Middle  Ages,  in  Europe,  cupping  was  practised  as  part

of  the"  ritual  of  the  bath-house.       The  subject  is  very  fully  dealt  with  by  Alfred

Martin    (Jena     1906),    who   presents   numerous   illustrations    from   contemporary

literature        Though  the  practice  has  disappeared  from  our  customs,  it  has  done

so  only  comparatively  recently,  and  may  be  still  practised  among  other  peoples.

The  necessity  for  several  attendants  during  the  course  of  the  ritual  determines   its

restriction  to  public  institutions,   only  the.  very  wealthy  having  their  own  suite

for  their  own  families.       Both  sexes  were  employed  in  the  service,  which  included

most  of  the  operations  now  confined  to  the  barber  ;    women  were  chiefly  employed

for  fetching  and  carrying,  men  for  seeing  to  the  heating  apparatus.^    But  the  service

of  cupping  and  venesection  was  confined  to  men,  generally  the      bath-men,     who

specialized  in  the  work.  „,         ,,

The  rules  found  in  the  Canon  appear  to  have  been  conformed  to.       inus,  tnespecialized  in  the  work.  „,         ,,

The  rules  found  in  the  Canon  appear  to  have  been  conformed  to.       inus,  tne

association  of  cupping  with  bathing  is  found  in  the  pictures  representing  the  bather 
in  the  hot  room  or  calefactorium,  sitting  on  a  special  bench,  with  his  feet  m  a  hot 
bath  reaching  to  the  knees,  "  to  make  the  blood  watery,"  whilst  the  bath-man  is 
engaged  in  applying  the  cupping  glasses  (or  horns).

The  practice  of  cupping  in  the  ordinary  routine  of  life  was  an  expiession 
of  the  universal  desire  for  ensuring  prophylaxis  against  disease.  Concurrently  it 
was  applied  for  the  treatment  of  declared  disease,  and  this  use  survived  the  other. 
Even  in  these  days  it  is  occasionally  employed  with  advantage,  and  the  method  is 
deserving  of  much  more  attention  both  by  students  and  practitioners.§  262.  It  is  easy  to  see  how  and  why  the  subject  has  fallen 
into  discredit  and  then  disuse,  when  we  combine  the  study  of  habits 
and  customs  with  one  of  the  generally  changed  outlook  produced 
by  modern  education.  The  conclusion,  however,  that  the  subject- 
matter  of  this  section  of  the  Canon  was  inherently  erroneous  or 
superfluous  must  be  avoided.  Thoughts  run  along  parallel  lines 
with  practice,  habits,  public  opinion.  To  us,  who  live  to  see  all 
these  lines  at  once,  it  appears  as  if  one  were  integrally  related  to 
the  other.  But  even  now  we  may  not  realize  that  we  are  only 
viewing  one  small  field  of  a  whole  panorama.  It  is  necessary  to 
look  forwards  also,  for  then  it  becomes  clear  that  theories,  ideas, 
modes  of  practice,  all  really  run  along  their  own  lines,  each  justifi- 
able in  itself ;  the  people  of  one  age  seeking  to  hold  all  the  lines 
together  and  by  force  making  them  into  a  unity  which  they  cannot 
possess.  So  it  may  be  said  that  the  instruction  of  the  Canon  _  in 
regard  to  these  various  modes  of  treatment  was  sound,  and  remains 
sound,  but  the  days  of  their  usage  have  gone.

22. — About  Leeches

1037.  The  Indians  have  specified  which  leeches  are 
venomous.  One  should  beware  of  using  those  with  large  heads 
of  antimonial  and  black  colour,  or  green  colour  ;  those  with 
down  on  them,  like  eels  (snakefish),  and  those  upon  which  are 
fine  streaks  of  bright  colour,  or  chameleon-like  in  colour.  ^  All 
these  are  poisonous,  and  would  give  rise  to  inflammations, 
hemorrhage,  fever,  syncope,  paresis  of  the  limbs,  and  intractable 
ulcers.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  513THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  513

One  should  not  employ  leeches  taken  from  unhealthy 
water  or  those  whose  excrement  is  black  and  muddy,  and  whose 
movement  immediately  darkens  water,  and  renders  it  offensive 
in  smell.  Take  leeches  from  water  whose  surface  is  covered  over 
with  duckweed  and  in  which  frogs  live.  Pay  no  attention  to 
those  who-  make  out  that  leeches  are  bad  to  use  if  they  come  from 
water  in  which  frogs  live.

The  colour  should  be  greenish  (like  duckweed),  and  there 
should  be  two  longitudinal  lines  having  the  colour  of  orpiment 
and  ruddy;  they  should  be  rounded  and  liver-coloured.  One 
may  accept  leeches  which  look  like  little  locusts,  or  like  mouse- 
tails,  with  very  small  heads.  But  do  not  accept  those  with  red 
bellies  and  green  backs,  especially  if  they  were  collected  from 
running  waters.

(Aeg.  gives  :  there  are  six  rust-coloured  lines  on  the  back,  varying  from  blackish 
to  greyish  green  ;  the  under  parts  are  either  yellowish-green  with  black  spots  and 
edging,  or  brownish- orange  without  spots,  but  two  lateral  black  stripes).

A  leech  is  ill  if  the  mouth  is  soft,  if  it  is  covered  with  dirty  slime,  if  there  is 
a  skin  near  it  as  it  swims  about  in  the  water,  and  if  it  lies  coiled  up  in  tepid  or  in 
fresh   water.     (Aeg.)

1038.  The  blood  which  leeches  remove  from  the  body 
comes  from  deeper  down  than  that  obtained  by  wet  cupping.1038.  The  blood  which  leeches  remove  from  the  body 
comes  from  deeper  down  than  that  obtained  by  wet  cupping.

1039.  Procedure  of  application. — Leeches  should  be  kept 
a  day  before  applying  them,  and  they  should  be  squeezed 
[or  have  their  heads  bent  down.  Aeg.]  to  make  them  eject 
the  contents  of  their  stomachs.  If  feasible,  they  should  be 
given  a  little  lamb's  blood  by  way  of  nourishment.  The 
slime  and  debris  from  their  bodies  should  be  cleansed  off,  say, 
with  a  sponge.

1040.  Site  of  application. — The  place  where  the  leeches 
are  to  be  applied  must  be  [shaved  if  necessary  :  Aeg.,  and] 
well  laved  with  nitre-water  and  rubbed  till  red.  Dry  carefully. 
Dip  the  leeches  in  fresh  tepid  water  [a  few  drops  of  white  wine 
being  added  if  they  are  sluggish.  Aeg.],  cleanse  and  apply, 
[with  one's  freshly-washed  hand,  or  with  a  soft  towel,  or  in  a 
test-tube  called  a  "  leech-glass  " — especially  if  the  place  in 
question  is  the  palate  or  gums].  The  point  of  application  may 
be  smeared  with  clay  (or  moistened  with  sugar-water  or  milk)  or 
scratched  with  a  needle  till  blood  appears,  in  order  to  coax  them 
to  take  hold,

§  263.  The  leech  must  not  be  let  go  until  it  has  taken  proper 
hold,  as  one  can  tell  by  the  sinuous  movements  of  the  neck  and  from 
the  circumstance  that  the  head  forms  a  right  angle  to  the  body.

To  ensure  that  they  will  not  crawl  into  the  gullet,  or  nose,  or

2L

5 14  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

anus,  one  must  draw  a  thread  through  the  tail  end  from  above

down not  from  side  to  side,  otherwise  one  would  injure  the  large

blood  vessels  of  the 'animal.anus,  one  must  draw  a  thread  through  the  tail  end  from  above

down not  from  side  to  side,  otherwise  one  would  injure  the  large

blood  vessels  of  the 'animal.

Place  chosen  for  the  application.— One  must  not  apply  leeches 
to  unhealthy  skin,  or  to  places  where  there  are  subjacent  large 
vessels,  or  where  the  skin  is  very  thick  (palm  of  hand  ;  heel),  or 
in  a  situation  where  healing  would  subsequently  be  interfered  with 
because  of  pus  or  septic  matter  flowing  over  it  from  near  by.

1041.  Removal. — When  the  leeches  are  full,  and  you 
wish  to  let  them  come  off*,  sprinkle  a  little  salt  over  them,  or 
[pepper,  or  snuff],  or  ashes  or  nitre,  or  burnt  bristles,  or  flax, 
or   burnt  sponge  or   burnt  wool.     They  will  then  fall  off.

Do,  not  detach  leeches  forcibly,  or  else  there  may  be  violent

haemorrhage.  .  '

1042.  After-treatment. — After  the  leeches  have  fallen  off, 
the  place  should  be  sucked  by  cupping  it,  in  order  to  extract 
some  of  the  blood  at  the  spot  and  thereby  get  rid  of  the  toxic 
substances  left  in  the  wound.  [If  one  wishes  to  keep  the  blood 
flowing  anyway,  one  applies  warm,  dry  cloths  to  the  part, 
or  a  warm  poultice,  or  a  sponge  soaked  in  warm  water.  After 
the  bleeding  has  stopped,  apply  a  soft,  dry  compress].  _

If  the  blood  will  not  stop  flowing,  dust  the  spot  with  finely 
powdered  burnt  galls,  quicklime,  ashes,  ground-up  earthenware 
and  similar  styptics.

§  264.  [ Al  um,  cobwebs,  pitch,  gunpowder,  hydrates,  sesquioxide 
of  iron,  or  pressing  the  skin  into  the  folds  have  been  advocated.  The 
cautery  has  been  necessary  as  a  last  resource.  All  such  remedies 
should  be  at  hand.Do  not  leave  the  patient  till  the  bleeding  has  quite  stopped, 
and  if  it  is  a  child,  watch  it  the  following  night  as  well.

If  a  leech  should  have  got  loose  and  been  swallowed,  give  salt- 
water to  drink,  copiously.  If  a  leech  has  wandered  into  the  anus, 
give  a  salt-water  enema.

Do  not  use  leeches  again  if  they  have  been  applied  to  a  case  of  typhoid  fever, 
cholera,    smallpox,    or    syphilis.]

1043.  The  use  of  leeches  is  beneficial  in _  subcutaneous 
maladies  like  serpiginous  ulcers,  morphew,  impetiginous  ulcers, 
and  the  like.

Annotation  by  Costaeus  :  Leeches  are  very  effective  also  for  pleurisy  and  for 
opening  the  hsemorrhoidal  veins.

*  One  may  wish  to  detach  them  before  they  are  fall,  because  the  patient  is 
fainting  or  develops  cramps.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  515

23. — The  Retention  of  Substances  due  to  be  Discharged.

1044.  Substances  which  are  due  to  be  discharged  may 
be  retained  within  the  body  for  the  following  reasons  :  (1)  the 
material  may  be  withdrawn  from  the  part,  but  not  from  the 
body  itself  ;  (ii)  the  material  may  be  retained,  although  an 
evacuation  or  discharge  is  actually  taking  place  at  the  same 
time,  (iii)  The  retention  of  these  substances  itself  aids  evacua- 
tion. The  substances  here  meant  are  infrigidants,  styptics, 
glutinous    medicines,     caustics,     (iv.)  stricture.

(i)  Materials  are  retained  because  attracted  to  a  certain 
place,  and  no  (outward)  evacuation  occurs.  Ex.  the  application 
of  cupping  to  the  breasts,— this  relieves  uterine  haemorrhage. 
The  action  is  more  decided  if  the  pain  in  the  (diseased)  part  is 
first  relieved.(ii)  The  retention  of  substances  although  an  evacuation 
is  taking  place.  For  instance,  venesection  from  the  basilic 
vein  may  serve  to  arrest  emesis  in  a  case  of  purgation;  or 
purgation  in  a  case  of  emesis.  Or  again,  cessation  of  both  dis- 
charges if  the  sweat  is  (strongly)  provoked  at  the  same  time.

(iii)  The  retention  of  material  helps  evacuation  in  the 
case  where  one  cleanses  the  stomach  and  intestines  from  glutinous 
unhealthy  humours  by  giving  lubricant  laxatives,  using  picra;  or 
where  one  procures  a  thorough  cleansing  of  the  cardiac  orifice 
of  the  stomach  by  emesis,  for  cutting  up  of  the  material  which 
remains  behind  in  the  stomach.

Styptic  medicines  aggregate  abnormal  matter,  and  contract 
up  the  lumen  of  the  passages.

Infrigidant  medicines  clot  the  material,  and  cause  the 
orifices  to  tighten  up  and  become  narrow.

Glutinous  medicines  choke  up  the  orifices  of  the  channels 
(of  the  body),  and  if  they  are  desiccant  as  well,  and  sharp  (or  hot), 
this  action  will  be  still  more  decided.

Caustics  produce  an  eschar  or  scab,  which  stays  on  the 
orifices  of  the  passages,  and  becomes  hard  and  closes  them. 
But  the  obstruction  may  be  harmful.  The  scab  may  get  loose 
or  break,  and  the  underlying  aperture  would  thereby  become 
enlarged.  Some  caustics  have  a  styptic  action  (e.g.,  copper 
sulphate)  and  some  have  not  such  an  action  (quicklime).  The 
styptic  caustics  are  required  when  one  wants  a  firm  scab  ;  the 
others  are  used  when  one  wishes  the  scab  to  come  off  before 
long.

(iv.)  Retention  of  material  by  stricture. — There  are  twTo

5i6  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE(iv.)  Retention  of  material  by  stricture. — There  are  twTo

5i6  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

varieties.  In  one  the  foramen  is  closed  and  contracted,  so  that 
the  adjacent  parts  are  fused  together.  This  happens  for  in- 
stance when  the  artery  is  opened  in  mistake  for  the  basilic  vein 
in  doing  venesection.  The  other  is  where  the  outlet  of  a 
wound  is  blocked,  and  the  channel  itself  is  blocked,  as  when 
we    insert   rabbit    hairs    into   a   wound.

We  may  say,  in  brief,  that  if  blood  is  flowing  out  because 
the  orifices  of  the  veins  are  open,  we  must  use  styptics  to  tighten 
them  up  ;  but  if  it  is  flowing  because  of  rupture  of  the  vessel, 
glutinous  styptics  must  be  used,  like  Lemnian  earth  ;  and  if  it  is 
due  to  ulceration  (erosion),  one  must  incite  the  development  of 
granulations  by  adding  something  which  will  cleanse  away 
the  corrosive  substance.

24. — The   Treatment  of   Obstructions.

1045,  Obstructions  are  due  to  the  humours  being  thick,  or 
viscid,  or  over-abundant.  ....

If  the  humours  are  simply  over-abundant,  their  injurious 
effect  is  removed  by  evacuating  them  either  by  venesection  or 
by  purgation.  If  the  humours  are  thick,  they  must  be  rendered 
thin.     If  they  are  viscid,  and  tenuous,  incisives  are  required.You  have  now  learnt  the  difference  between  a  thick  or 
coarse  and  a  glutinous  quality  ;  it  is  the  difference  between 
melted  glue  and  clay.  Thick  or  coarse  humour  requires 
attenuation  by  a  resolvent  to  make  its  expulsion  easy  ;  viscid 
or  glutinous  humour  requires  an  incisive  which  is  able  (a)  to 
cut  its  way  between  the  fluid  and  that  to  which  it  adheres  [the 
wall  of  the  passage],  thus  parting  one  from  the  other,  and  (b) 
to  break  the  fluid  into  small  fragments, — because  glutinous 
matter  obstructs  both  by  adhesion  to  its  surroundings  and  by 
the  cohesion  of  its  particles.

I046o  In  resolving  thick  humour  there  are  two  opposite 
conditions  to  guard  against.  On  the  one  hand,  if  the  resolution 
is  not  sufficient  it  will  render  the  material  watery  and  at  the 
same  time  increase  its  volume  so  much  that  it  cannot  be  resolved 
at  all,  thereby  making  the  obstruction  greater  still.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  resolution  may  be  carried  too  far,  in  which  case 
the  attenuated  portion  will  dissipate  altogether,  leaving  the 
sediment  behind  as  a  calcareous  mass.

Therefore,  when  vigorous  resolution  is  necessary,  one  helps 
the  action  by  the  use  of  lenificant  tenuous  matter  free  of  coarse 
particles,  and  moderately  "  hot,''  for  this  will  assist  in  removing 
the  whole  of  its  obstructive  action.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  517

Obstructions  in  the  veins  are  worse  than  others.  Ob- 
structions in  the  arteries  are  still  worse.  Obstructions  in  the 
vital  organs  are  the  worst  of  all.

Therefore  it  is  better  to  combine  astringency  and  at- 
tenuation in  an  aperient,  because  the  former  will  counteract 
the  damage  which  attenuant  substance  does  to  the  member.

25 — .The  Treatment  of  Inflammatory  Swellings.25 — .The  Treatment  of  Inflammatory  Swellings.

^1047.  As  has  been  explained,  some  inflammatory  swellings 
are  "  hot,"  some  are  cold  and  soft,  and  some  are  cold  and 
hard.  Their  causes  are  either  immediate  or  remote.  Plethora  is 
a  remote  cause  ;  blows,  falls  and  bites  are  immediate  causes. 
Some  of  these  causes  may  befall  a  body  which  is  in  a  state  of 
plethora,  or  one  in  which  the  humours  are  in  balanced  proportion.

1048.  Inflammatory  swellings  due  to  remote  causes  or  to 
immediate  causes  associated  with  plethora  occur  either  in  organs 
which  are  adjuncts  to  vital  organs  (namely,  emunctory  organs)  or 
not.  If  they  are  not  present  in  such  organs,  one  must  not  at  first 
apply  any  of  the  resolvent  agents,  but  simply  relieve  the  (special) 
emunctory  organ  concerned,  if  there  is  one.  If  the  particular 
vital  organ  has  not  its  own  emunctory  the  whole  body  requires 
attention  with  a  view  to  influencing  the  affected  part  by  recoil 
[i.e.,  using  a  "  repercussive  "],  drawing  the  material  to  a  different 
organ,  and  also  introducing  an  astringent  influence.  Owing  to  a 
difference  in  the  member,  an  attraction  may  occur  for  something 
placed  in  the  opposite  side,  whether  by  using  some  appropriate 
exercise,  or  by  applying  something  heavy  over  the  part.  Thus, 
inflammatory  matter  may  often  be  drawn  away  from  the  hand  by 
keeping  something  heavy  over  the  place  for  an  hour.1049.  For  acute  inflammatory  swellings,  astringent  reper- 
cussives  must  be  purely  cold  in  temperament.  But  if  the  swelling 
is  "  cold,"  the  remedies  must  be  combined  with  something 
possessing  a  heating  property  in  addition  to  being  astringent, 
such  as  bogrush,  and  azfarut-tlb  [a  medicament  derived, 
according  to  some,  from  a  certain  species  of  oyster,  Indian 
Ocean].

During  the  stage  of  maturation  of  the  inflammation.,  the 
retentive  quality  of  the  treatment  must  be  kept  down,  and  it  must 
be  combined  with  something  resolvent.  When  the  height  has 
been  reached,  the  two  classes  of  remedy  may  be  given  in  equal 
proportions.  Then,  during  the  stage  of  declination,  the  remedy 
should  be  simply  resolvent  and  relaxing.  Cold  relaxing  remedies 
have  a  more  desiccant  effect  than  hot  ones.

5i8  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

1050.  Inflammatory  swellings  produced  by  immediate  causes 
in  a  person  who  is  not  plethoric  require  an  initial  treatment  with 
relaxant  and  resolvent  remedies,  otherwise  the  treatment  is  as

before.before.

The  inflamed  organ  may  be  the  emunctory  of  a  vital  organ, 
as  is  the  case  if  the  glands  of  the  neck  are  inflamed,  for  these  are 
related  to  the  brain  ";  or  the  glands  of  the  axilla,  which  are  related 
to  the  heart;  the  glands  of  the  groin,  which  are  related  to  the  liver. 
In  all  such  cases  one  must  certainly  not  employ  repercussives — ■ 
not  because  it  is  a  wrong  treatment  for  inflammation  in  these 
situations,  for  it  is  not  wrong — but  because  in  this  case  we  do 
not  wish  to  touch  the  inflammation  itself.  Our  aim  is  to  direct  our 
energies  to  enlarging  the  swelling  and  convey  morbid  material  to 
it  from  the  vital  organ  itself.  We  can  do  no  good  as  long  as  there 
is  disease  in  the  vital  organ,  and  our  efforts  must  be  directed 
towards  relieving  that.  Were  we  to  employ  repercussives,  we 
should  risk  returning  the  morbid  material  back  to  the  vital  organ, 
and  finally  make  its  state  so  bad  that  we  cannot  possibly  mend  it. 
That  is  why  we  aim  at  drawing  the  unhealthy  material  down  to  an 
ignoble  member,  so  relieving  the  vital  organ  of  which  it  is 
emunctory,  and  we  encourage  the  inflammatory  process  m  the 
ignoble  member,  even  to  the  extreme  of  applying  cupping  or 
calefacient  plasters  which  will  draw  the  inflammation  thithenWhen  the  inflammatory  mass  has  in  this  way  become  fluid, 
it  may  burst  of  its  own  accord,  especially  if  it  be  in  an  emunctory 
organ  ;  the  promotion  of  maturation  will  help  to  bring  about 
this  result.  Sometimes  both  maturation  and  incision  must  be 
done  together.  Maturation  is  favoured  by  the  use  of  an  agent 
which  both  obstructs  and  agglutinates,  for  in  this  way  the  heat 
of  the  part  is  maintained.  In  carrying  out  such  measures  one 
should  watch  to  see  when  the  innate  heat  is  feeble  or  the  tissues 
are  breaking  down.  At  that  moment  the  agglutinative  _  and 
oppilative  remedy  must  be  removed  and  an  aperitive  medicine 
given,  making  a  deep  incision.  After  that,  resolvent  and  desic- 
cative  medicines  are  to  be  applied  which  we  shall  specify  in  the 
Special  Part.

When  the  inflammation  is  deep-seated  it  must  be  drawn 
towards  the  skin,  even  if  to  do  so  we  must  employ  dry  cupping. 
1051  o  Hard  inflammatory  masses.  When  these  are  at  the 
end  of  the  first  stage,  the  treatment  is  to  soften  with  remedies 
which  are  "  hot  "  and  not  very  "  dry,"  because_  one  must  not 
make  it  so  dense  as  to  undergo  calcification.  The  aim  is  to  dispose 
the  mass  to  resolution,  increasing  the  resolvents  up  to  a  point,

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  519

and  if  one  is  then  afraid  that  the  dispersal  of  the  resolved  portion 
will  lead  to  calcification  in  the  residue,  the  softening  process  is 
resumed.  These  alternations  are  repeated  time  and  again  until 
the  whole  is  dispersed  by  the  alternate  softening  and  solution.1052.  Gaseous  swellings  are  treated  by  agents  which  have  a 
calefacient  effect  and  rarefy  the  (gaseous)  substance,  and  open  up 
the  pores.  This  treatment  depends  on  the  view  that  the  swellings 
are  due  to  coarseness  of  the  gaseous  particles  and  to  closure  of  the 
pores.  In  addition  one  must  take  measures  to  prevent  the 
appearance  of  the  material  from  which  the  gaseous  matter 
arises.

1053.  Inflammatory  swellings  with  ulceration. — E.g.,  vesi- 
cular or  herpetic  ulcers.  These  require  infrigidants.  If  they 
are  like  phlegmon,  they  do  not  need  emollient  treatment 
[Margin:  humectant  treatment,  unless  they  are  to  be  opened] 
but  desiccant  treatment,  because  the  secondary  state — the  ulcera- 
tion of  the  inflammatory  mass — which  one  feared  has  actually 
happened,  and  the  proper  treatment  of  ulceration  is  by  desiccants, 
not  emollients  [Mgn  :  humectants].

1054.  Internal  inflammatory  masses.  The  morbid  material 
in  such  swellings  must  be  removed  by  venesection  and  purgation. 
The  following  must  be  forbidden:  use  of  baths;  wine;  bodily 
exercise  (or  movement),  avoidable  mental  emotions,  like  anger 
and  the  like.  In  the  early  stages  repercussives  must  be  given  and 
minimum  bulk  of  food  (lit.  :  not  too  much,  "  superfluity  "), 
especially  if  the  organ  affected  be  the  stomach  or  liver.  As  the 
time  of  resolution  arrives,  one  must  not  omit  introducing 
astringents  of  agreeable  odour,  in  the  manner  in  which  we  have 
set  forth  for  you  in  preceding  pages.  This  principle  is  more 
important  for  the  liver  and  stomach  than  for  the  lung.Emollient  medicines,  or  mild  aperients,  are  to  be  given  to 
those  cases  in  which  maturation  is  taking  place,  for  they  are 
beneficial  to  inflammatory  processes.  Ex.  :  nightshade,  cassia 
fistula.  Nightshade  has  the  power  to  disperse  acute  inflammations 
in  the  internal  organs.  One  should  give  only  light  food,  and  not 
even  then  either  at  the  beginning  of  an  attack  or  during  it,  unless 
the  patient  is  very  feeble.  The  signs  of  a  collection  of  [pus] 
in  the  internal  organs,  associated  with  loss  of  strength,  indicate 
that  the  patient  is  on  the  road  to  death  unless  nutriment  is 
given  to  sustain  his  vitality.  But  the  giving  of  food  is  very  risky. 
Therefore  it  will  be  well  if  the  disease  should  resolve  of  itself, 
and  if  the  (abscess)  bursts  [i.e.,  into  the  alimentary  tract],  such 
things  as  honey-water  and  sugar-water  may  be  given  to  lave  the

52 o  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

parts,  following  them  with  remedies  which  favour  maturation  and 
are  desiccant.    Finally,  one  administers  desiccants  alone.

This  subject  is  fully  dealt  with  in  the  Special  Part  under 
the  appropriate  headings.

1055.  Internal  inflammatory  swellings  in  the_  abdomen 
may  give  rise  to  errors  in  diagnosis.  If  the  condition  is  not 
inflammation  but  rupture,  there  is  a  danger  of  perforation.  Such 
swellings  are  not  usually  in  the  omentum,  but  in  the  intestine 
itself  [e.g.,  appendix],  and  it  is  dangerous  to  give  aperients.

26.     On  Making  Incisions26.     On  Making  Incisions

1056.  When  one  decides  to  make  an  incision  or  opening 
(into  the  diseased  part)  one  should  take  into  consideration  the 
various  small  and  larger  folds  of  the  skin.  In  the  case  of  the 
forehead  however  one  would  act  otherwise,  because  an  incision 
along  the  folds  there  would  divide  the  muscles  and  cause  drooping 
of  the  eyelids.  Similar  care  must  be  taken  in  the  cases  where  the 
muscular  fibres  take  a  different  course  to  the  surface  folds.  The 
surgeon  must  therefore  know  the  anatomy  of  the  nerves,  the 
veins,  and  the  arteries,  so  as  not  to  sever  them  by  mistake.  He 
also  needs  various  drugs  for  staunching  the  blood,  plasters  to  allay 
the  pain,  and  the  appropriate  instruments  handy — namely  Galen's 
remedy;  rabbit-hair;  spider's  web;  white  of  egg;  the  cautery. 
With  such  agents  one  is  able  to  arrest  the  flow  of  blood  if  due  to  an 
accidental  injury  (by  the  surgeon),  or  whether  it  be  inevitable, 
or  the  result  of  emollient  medicines  which  provoke  haemorrhage.

Having  opened  the  abscess  and  extracted  its  contents^  one 
should  avoid  applying  oil,  or  water,  or  a  plaster  containing  oil,  or 
"  basilicon."  One  should  use  a  plaster  made  with  vitriol,  if 
something  has  to  be  applied.  A  sponge  soaked  in  astringent 
wine  may  be  applied  to  the  part.

27. — Gangrene.      Excision27. — Gangrene.      Excision

1057.  When  decomposition  occurs  in  a  member,_  whether 
involving  humoral  matter  or  not,  owing  to  some  depravity  of  the 
temperament,  and  when  wet-cupping  or  the  usually  effective 
epithemes  particularized  in  the  special  books  fail  to  benefit, 
then  one  must  remove  the  corrupt  flesh.  If  this  can  be  done 
without  the  use  of  the  cautery- iron,  so  much  the  better,  because 
that  is  injurious  to  the  nerves  supplying  the  muscles  and  .is 
dangerous  to  the  arteries.

If  this  is  unavailing,  and  the  decomposition  is  spreading

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  521

still  more  deeply  into  the  flesh.,  excision  becomes  necessary  and 
one  must  burn  the  place  with  boiling  oil  to  antagonize  the  viru- 
lence of  the  disease  and  prevent  haemorrhage.  The  flesh  will 
fill  up  again  but  the  skin  will  shrink  and  resemble  flesh  in  its 
hardness.

1058.  When  you  are  about  to  excise  the  gangrenous  part, 
cut  along  the  bones  where  the  flesh  is  adherent,  and  still  healthy, 
and  the  pain  is  greatest,  this  being  the  indication  of  the  healthy 
margin.  Any  part  that  is  boggy  and  flabby  belongs  to  the 
gangrenous  part  and  must  be  excised  with  it.1059.  Should  the  part  you  ■  propose  excising  entirely 
surround  the  bone,  involving  the  foramina  where  gangrene  is 
taking  place,  excision  and  the  use  of  a  saw  is  required.  If  you 
decide  to  do  this,  go  in  between  the  place  for  excision  and  the  site 
of  perforation  and  flesh,  to  avoid  causing  pain.  If  bone  is 
projecting  into  the  part  to  be  excised,  and  is  irreducible,  and 
there  is  a  risk  of  the  tissues  next  to  it  undergoing  gangrene  as  well, 
we  should  raise  up  and  tear  off  the  flesh  from  it,  stretching  it  by 
bandages  to  an  adjoining  part  or  using  any  device  for  the  purpose 
which  seems  best  for  the  occasion.  The  object  is  to  separate  the 
diseased  part  [and  its  fasciae]  from  the  healthy  tissue  as  far  as 
possible,  after  which  it  can  be  wholly  excised.

1060.  If  the  part  affected  is  large,  and  with  nerves,  arteries 
and  veins  in  the  vicinity  (for  instance,  the  thighbone),  and  if  the 
gangrenous  change  is  very  great,  the  doctor  should  leave  the  case 
severely  alone.

28.      The   Treatment   of   Loss    of    Continuity   (including 
Ulcers,  Blows,  Bruises,  Dislocations)28.      The   Treatment   of   Loss    of    Continuity   (including 
Ulcers,  Blows,  Bruises,  Dislocations)

1061.  Fracture.  Loss  of  continuity  in  large  members 
[e.g.,  fracture  of  a  long  bone]  is  treated  by  securing  apposition 
and  applying  bandages  in  a  suitable  manner,  as  described  in  the 
Special  Instructions  given  in  the  appropriate  Section.  The  part 
must  be  kept  at  rest.  The  diet  should  include  conglutinant  foods 
which  will  supply  chondrogenous  nutriment  to  the  seat  of  injury, 
and  bring  about  the  closure  of  the  edges  of  the  fracture  and  make 
the  bone  continuous  again.  Food  of 'this  kind  can  be  prepared 
from  the  feet  of  animals.  When  a  person  has  reached  the  prime 
of  life  there  is  no  other  way  of  procuring  reunion  of  the  bone. 
But  further  details  on  restoring  continuity  are  given  in  the  Special 
Part.

1062.^     Wounds. — There    are    three    principles    to    follow 
when  treating  loss  of  continuity  in  fleshy  tissues.     (1)  Stabilize

$22  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

the  part  which  is  insufficiently  firm,  arrest  the  bleeding,  and  if 
there  be  a  discharge, strive  to  reduce  its  amount  ;  (2)  make  the 
immobilized  part  consolidated  by  administering  appropriate 
medicines  and  suitable  articles  of  food  ;  (3)  prevent  sepsis  [lit., 
putrefaction]  as  much  as  possible.

If  all  three  cannot  be  achieved,  concentrate  on  the  two  which 
can.  You  know  from  what  has  already  been  said  how  the  arrest 
of  bleeding  is  achieved.  Consolidation  of  the  part  is  secured  by 
apposing  the  edges  of  the  wound,  and  by  applying  desiccant 
remedies  [which  tend  to  reduce  the  amount  of  discharge],  and  by 
taking  agglutinative  foods.1063.  Ulcers. — In  treating  ulcers,  the  aim  is  to  procure 
dessication,  so  that  the  exposed  surface  shall  dry  up.  Septic 
changes  are  treated  with  caustic  medicaments  such  as  yellow  or 
green  vitriol  (an  impure  copper  sulphate),  unslaked  lime, 
arsenic.  If  these  do  not  succeed,  the  cautery  may  be  needed,  and 
an  application  prepared  with  verdigris,  wax,  and  oil  ;  the 
verdigris  is  cleansing  ;  the  oil  and  wax  counteract  the  undue 
causticity  ;  and  so  we  have  a  medicine  suitably  modified  or 
attempered.

All  ulcers  are  either  simple  or  compound.  They  are  simple 
when  they  are  of  small  size  and  there  is  so  little  loss  of  substance 
that  the  margins  can  be  reunited,  the  union  being  secured  by 
seeing  that  no  oil  [or  sand  or  dirt. — Aeg.]  or  dust  gets  in  between 
the  margins  during  the  process  of  healing.  The  fact  that  the 
opposite  sides  will  meet  ensures  that  there  will  be  no  loss  of 
substance.  When  the  ulcer  is  so  large  that  the  two  sides  cannot 
be  brought  together,  and  there  remains  a  mark,  or  depression,  or 
a  gap,  which  is  full  of  sanious  matter,  there  being  already  an 
actual  loss  of  substance,  the  treatment  must  be  desiccant.

If  there  is  loss  of  substance,  then,  healing  will  necessarily 
be  by  cicatrization.  This  is  induced  in  the  first  place  by  means  of 
astringents,  and  in  the  second  by  applying  acrid  [or  escharotic] 
substances,  for  instance — yellow  and  green  vitriol  [cf.  "  red 
lotion  "],  because  these  assist  desiccation  and  the  formation  of  a 
scab  without  producing  further  corrosion,  and  consequent 
enlargement  of  the  area  of  the  ulcer.1064o  If  the  loss  of  substance  be  of  flesh,  as  happens 
with  deep  wounds,  we  cannot  hurry  the  cicatrization.  The  first 
thing  to  do  is  to  encourage  the  formation  of  fleshy  granulations, 
and  this  will  not  occur  unless  the  "  dryness  "  be  hardly  more  than 
of  the  first  degree.  One  keeps  a  look-out  for  any  conditions 
which  will  expedite  recovery.   Thus  (i)  the  state  of  the  temperament

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  523

of  the  organ  concerned  as  compared  with  that  of  the  ulcer  itself. 
— For  if  the  organ  in  question  is  very  "  moist  "  in  temperament 
and  the  ulcer  not  very  "  moist,"  a  small  amount  of  desiccation— 
namely,  to  the  first  degree — will  be  sufficient,  for  the  malady  is 
very  nearly  the  same  in  character  as  the  member  affected.  But  if 
the  member  (in  which  the  ulcer  is  situated)  is  dry  in  temperament, 
and  the  ulcer  very  moist,  desiccation  to  the  second,  and  even  the 
third  degree  will  be  needed  before  the  temperament  of  the  lesion 
can  be  restored  to  the  normal.  Cases  which  are  between  the  two 
extremes  will  need  equalization  of  the  respective  states.

One  must  also  consider  (ii)  the  temperament  of  the  body 
as  a  whole. — If  the  body  is  of  very  dry  temperament,  and  the 
diseased  member  is  more  humid  than  normal,  we  aim  to  reduce 
the  humidity  to  one  more  nearly  approaching  equipoise.  One 
applies  desiccant  remedies.  The  converse  applies  if  the 
temperament  of  the  body  were  more  humid  and  the  affected  limb 
were  drier.  If  both  the  body  as  a  whole,  and  the  affected  part 
are  increased  in  the  same  direction,  more  decidedly  dessicant 
treatment  is  indicated  if  the  excess  be  on  the  side  of  humidity, 
and  less  desiccant  treatment  if  the  excess  be  in  the  direction  of 
dryness.One  must  also  consider  (iii)  the  potency  of  the  desiccants. 
All  desiccants  promote  the  formation  of  granulation  tissue  (lit. 
flesh),  but  a  powerfully  desiccant  action  is  not  required.  All  that 
is  needed  is  to  hold  back  any  material  which  is  of  a  character 
likely  to  contribute  to  the  formation  of  granulations  in  its  passage 
down  into  the  affected  part.  Therefore  one  searches  for  a 
desiccant  agent  which  is  useful  for  promoting  cicatrization  rather 
than  the  formation  of  "  flesh,"  but  one  also  prefers  one  which  is 
abstergent  and  cleanses  away  the  sanious  matter  to  one  which 
promotes  desiccation.  The  ideal  desiccant  promotes  cicatriza- 
tion, consolidation  of  the  part  and  restoration  of  continuity.  All 
remedies  which  are  desiccant  without  any  caustic  (by-)  action 
can  be  included  among  those  which  promote  the  formation  of 
granulations.

I065„  Ulcers  in  situations  which  are  not  fleshy,  and  round 
ulcers,  cannot  be  made  to  heal  quickly.

Internal  ulcers  require  the  admixture  of  purifying  agents  like 
honey,  or  special  remedies  for  the  affected  part  (e.g.,  diuretics  for 
ulcers  in  the  urinary  passages)  with  the  desiccant  and  styptic 
preparations  needed  in  any  case.

To  promote  cicatrization  one  may  use  a  remedy  which  is 
viscous  as  well  as  astringent  or  styptic,  like  Lemnian  earth.

524  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINETo  promote  cicatrization  one  may  use  a  remedy  which  is 
viscous  as  well  as  astringent  or  styptic,  like  Lemnian  earth.

524  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

1066,  Conditions  which  prevent  the  healing  of  an  ulcer.— (i) 
unhealthy  temperament  of  the  affected  part.  One  must  endea- 
vour to  rectify  this,  (ii)  Unhealthy  temperament  of  the  blood 
supplied  to  the  part.  This  is  to  be  remedied  by  diet,  choosing 
that  which  will  produce  good  chyme,  (iii)  Undue  abundance  of 
blood  entering  the  part,  rendering  it  too  humid.  This  is  counte  r- 
acted  by  purgation,  by  a  diluent  diet,  and  exercise  as  far  as  is 
permissible,  (iv)  Disease  of  the  underlying  bone  whereby  sanious 
matter  is  constantly  (flowing  over  the  ulcer).  The  only  remedy 
for  this  is  to  deal  with  the  bone-disease  :  massage  can  help  to 
get  rid  of  the  diseased  bone,  otherwise  it  must  be  excised;  (v) 
adductive  plasters  are  often  required  for  the  treatment  of  ulcers 
to  enable  the  fragments  of  bones  and  foreign  objects  lodged  m 
the  flesh  to  be  withdrawn,  for  otherwise  they  prevent  healing;  (vi) 
more  nutritive  food  may  be  indicated,  in  order  to  provide  strength 
to  the  tissues  and  yet  the  nutriment  may  need  to  be  curtailed  in 
order  to  lessen  the  discharge  of  sanious  matter  from  the  ulcer.  So 
there  is  a  certain  difficulty  in  adjusting  these  contrary  objects, 
for  sanious  discharge  is  debilitating,  and  the  remedy  for  this  is  to 
supply  more  nutritious  food;  and  yet  to  make  the  diet  more 
liberal  entails  increasing  the  amount  of  sanious  discharge._  The 
doctor  has  therefore  to  make  his  decision  according  to  circum- 
stances,    [(vii)  Malignant  disease.     Cautery  and  excision  are

indicated.]indicated.]

1067.  Bathing. — When  an  ulcer  is  forming,  the  patient 
must  not  enter  a  bath,  or  use  hot  water,  because  this  will  attract 
matters  to  the  ulcer  which  will  lead  to  the  formation  of  an 
inflammatory  swelling.  But  when  the  ulcer  reaches  a  stationary 
stage,  and  discharges  sanious  matter  it  may  be  permissible.

1068.  If  an  ulcer  recurs  soon  after  being  healed,  it  needs 
consolidation  and  is  on  the  way  to  becoming  a  fistula.  One  must 
therefore  watch  the  discharge  very  carefully,  and  also  the  colour 
of  the  edges  of  the  ulcer.  If  the  discharge  increases  apart  from  an 
increase  in  the  amount  of  food,  it  denotes  maturation.

1069.  Dislocations* — We  speak  now  of  _  the  treatment 
when  tissues  are  torn,  as  by  dislocation.  That  is,  we  speak  of 
cases  in  which  there  is  a  loss  of  continuity  deep  down  under  the 
skin.  In  such  cases,  it  is  evident,  the  medicinal  agents  must  be 
more  potent  than  when  the  lesion  is  exposed  to  view.

These  deep  tissues  are  rich  in  blood,  and  therefore  the 
congestion  needs  relieving,   but  this  must  not  be  at  the  risk

*  Note  that  the  terms  emploved  in  the  original  text  are  indefinite.  The 
use  of  the  words  "  dislocation,"  "  contusion,"  "  sprains,"  represents  the  apparent 
intention  of  the  text,  though  the  context  is  not  consistent  therewith  throughout.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  525

of  undue  desiccant  action,  for  in  that  case  the  tenuous  parts 
would  be  dispersed,  and  the  thick  residue  would  become  a 
stone.THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  525

of  undue  desiccant  action,  for  in  that  case  the  tenuous  parts 
would  be  dispersed,  and  the  thick  residue  would  become  a 
stone.

When  we  have  procured  as  much  dispersal  as  is  necessary, 
we  apply  a  consolidative  of  desiccant  character,  to  enable  material 
to  escape,  instead  of  lodging  in  the  cavity  and  finally  giving 
rise  to  a  stone;  in  such  a  case  it  might  either  decompose  or  be 
removed  in  some  other  way,  allowing  the  continuity  to  be 
restored.

If  the  lesion  is  still  deeper,  the  place  is  scarified  to  enable 
the  medicament  to  get  in  better.

1070.  Contusions. — If  contusion  is  associated  with  loss  of 
continuity,  venesection  may  suffice.  But  if  the  dislocation  is 
associated  with  a  severe  crush,  the  latter  must  be  alleviated  first, 
with  appropriate  medicaments.  If  the  contusion  be  extensive, 
desiccants  are  used.  If  it  be  circumscribed,  like  a  stab,  it  need 
not  be  troubled  with,  unless  the  wound  is  a  poisoned  one,  or 
unless  there  is  great  pain,  or  the  nerves  are  involved,  or  if  there 
is  a  risk  of  suppuration  supervening,  or  if  aneurysm  develops.

1071.  Sprains.— A  soft  bandage  is  enough,  if  the  con- 
dition is  not  painful.  Appropriate  medicaments  are  applied 
over  the  dressing.

In  cases  of  falls  and  blows,  venesection  is  to  be  done  in  some 
part  of  the  body,  and  the  diet  must  be  light  ;  meat  and  the 
like   must   be  avoided.     Treat  with   decoctions   and   potions.

The  subject  of  loss  of  continuity  of  nerves  and  bones  is 
deferred  to  a  special  chapter  in  the  Special  Part.

29. — Cauterisation  (as  a  Therapeutic  Measure).The  subject  of  loss  of  continuity  of  nerves  and  bones  is 
deferred  to  a  special  chapter  in  the  Special  Part.

29. — Cauterisation  (as  a  Therapeutic  Measure).

1072.  Cauterisation  is  a  very  useful  method  of  treatment, 
for  (a)  it  prevents  the  spread  of  a  destructive  lesion,  and  (F) 
has  an  invigorating  effect  on  a  member  whose  cold  temperament 
we  wish  to  rectify  ;  (c)  it  breaks  up  putrefactive  matters 
imprisoned  in  a  tissue  ;    (d)  it  restrains  the  flow  of  blood.

A  cautery  is  best  made  of  gold.

The  place  to  be  cauterised  may  be  exposed  to  view,  in 
which  case  the  cautery  can  be  applied  without  more  ado  ;  or  it 
may  be  deeply  situated — for  instance,  in  the  nose,  the  buccal 
cavity,  the  anus.  In  this  last  case  a  special  appliance  becomes 
necessary  in  the  form  of  a  hollow  cannula,  enclosed  in  some 
material  like  Samian  earth  or  the  "  talc  "  of  the  Arabs,  or 
chimolean  earth  (a  red  clay)  or  the  "  magra  "  of  the  Arabs, 
soaked  in  vinegar.     Around  this,  one  places  cloths  wetted  with

52  d  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

extremely  cold  rose-water  or  certain  juices,  and  the  instrument 
is  introduced  so  that  these  coverings  make  a  little  pit  to  receive 
the  cautery,  whilst  protecting  the  tissues  around  from  injury, 
as  well  as  the  walls  of  the  meatus  down  which  the  cautery  will 
pass.  The  diameter  of  the  cautery  itself  should  be  less  than  that 
of  the  cannula,  so  that  when  dexterously  introduced,  it  will 
reach  the  exact  spot  to  be  treated  without  touching  the  sides  of 
the  cannula.The  person  applying  the  cautery  must  take  care  not  to 
expose  nerves,  or  fasciae,  or  ligaments  to  the  brunt  of  the  burning. 
For  arresting  haemorrhage,  great  heat  is  required,  with  vigorous 
cauterisation,  so  that  a  firm  thick  eschar  is  produced  which 
will  not  readily  come  off.  It  is  this  crust  forming  under  the 
eschar  which  stops  the  blood-flow,  and  therefore  if  it  became 
loose  the"  condition  would  be  worse  than  ever.

If  the  cautery  is  being  applied  to  remove  dead  flesh  (tissue), 
pain  will  show  you  when  you  have  reached  the  healthy  tissue.

If  the  cautery  is  being  applied  to  the  bone  under  the 
(dead)  flesh,  one  must  prolong  the  time  of  cauterising  the  area 
till  the   dead  matter  is  all   completely  destroyed.

If  the  cautery  is  to  be- applied  to  the  skull,  the  application 
must  be  gentle,  so  as  not  to  risk  roasting  the  brain,  or  shrivelling 
up  the  membranes  of  the  brain.  In  the  case  of  other  bones, 
there  is  no  need  to  be  so  anxious.

30. — The  Relief  of  Pain.

1073.  You  have  already  learnt  that  the  causes  of  pain 
may  be  comprehended  under  two  headings  :  (i)  sudden  change  of 
temperament  ;  (ii)  loss  of  continuity.  You  have  also  learnt  that 
the  first  of  the  headings  comprises  hot,  cold,  moist  or  dry 
intemperaments  ;  (iii)  and  the  second  occurs  apart  from  deposi- 
tion of  matter,  or  as  the  effect  of  the  presence  of  chymous, 
gaseous  or  inflammatory  exudate.

The  relief  of  pain,  therefore,  depends  on  making  use  of 
the  contraries  of  these  causes.  What  the  contrary  of  each  is, 
you  have  also  already  learnt,  and  you  have  learnt  the  way  m 
which  an  intemperament  and  inflammation,  and  gaseous  de- 
posits are  treated.When  the  pain  is  too  intense,  it  may  cause  death,  this 
resulting  in  the  first  place  from  coldness  of  the  body,  and 
secondly  from  tremor  [of  the  heart],  with  a  small  pulse,  which 
finally  fails,  thus  bringing  death.

1074.  In  brief,   pain  is  relieved  either  by  altering  the

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  527

temperament,  or  by  dispersing  the  material  which  produces  it, 
or  by  producing  insensibility.  The  last  named  destroys  the 
power. of  sensation  in  the  part  concerned.  Insensibility  of  a 
part  is  only  produced  (a)  by  making  it  very  "  cold  "  ;  (b)  by 
exposing  it  to  the  toxic  properties  which  interfere  with  its 
functions.  Agents  which  act  by  producing  relaxation,  and 
have  a  gently  soothing  effect  are  such  things  as  dill,  linseed, 
melilot,  chamomile,  celery  seed,  bitter  almond,  and  anything 
which  is  hot  in  the  first  degree,  especially  if  combined  with  a 
drug  of  glutinous  character  like  the  gum  of  prunes,  starch, 
lead  carbonate,  saffron,  gum-resin  of  cristus,  marsh  mallow, 
cardamom,  cabbage,  turnip,  and  their  decoctions,  pharma- 
ceutical adipes,  zufa-i-ratab,  and  the  oils  specified  in  the  Formu- 
lary, laxatives,  and  all  forms  of  evacuant.  Laxatives  are  to  be 
given  after  other  methods  of  evacuation  have  been  tried,  if 
evacuant  treatment  is  needed,  until  you  have  prevented  any 
further  material  from  passing  down  into  the  affected  part. 
For  it  is  just  that  that  brings  an  inflammation  to  a  head,  or  makes 
it  (burst)  open.

1075,  The  most  powerful  of  the  stupefacients  is  opium. 
Less  powerful  are  :  seeds  and  root-bark  of  mandrake  ;  poppy  ; 
hemlock  ;  white  and  black  hyoscyamus  ;  deadly  nightshade  ; 
lettuce-seed  ;     snow  and  ice-cold  water.1076,,  One  must  not  overlook  an  extrinsic  cause  of  pain, 
by  mistake.  Thus,  external  heat,  external  cold,  a  faulty  posture 
in  bed,  falls  during  epilepsy  or  during  intoxication,  etc.  Search 
for  intrinsic  causes  must  be  otherwise  made,  by  looking  for  the 
signs  of  plethora  (which  you  now  know),  or  for  the  causes  likely 
to  produce  plethora.

1077o  A  source  of  pain  which  was  at  first  external  may 
come  to  be  internal,  and  persist.  Thus,  drinking  of  icy  water 
will  cause  severe  pain  in  the  stomach  and  liver-region.  In 
such  a  case  evacuant  treatment  and  the  like  may  not  be  parti- 
cularly indicated,  and  the  use  of  a  bath,  and  a  good  sleep  after 
it  may  be  enough.  Or,  a  person  may  eat  something  heating, 
and  a  severe  headache  may  result  from  it.  For  this  it  is  enough 
to  drink  cooled  water.

i078o  Selection  of  remedies. — Sometimes  the  method  used 
for  alleviating  pain  acts  so  slowly  that  there  is  a  risk  of  its  becom- 
ing unbearable  before  the  remedy  has  come  into  effect.  Thus 
colic  may  be  cured  by  purging  the  small  intestine  of  the  material 
giving  rise  to  it,  but  this  requires  time.  On  the  other  hand 
one  may  give  relief  speedily,  but  only  at  the  risk  of  worse  harm  in

528  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE528  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

the  end.  Thus,  it  is  possible  to  apply  remedies  which  will 
in  a  case  of  colic  at  once  make  the  painful  part  insensible.  The 
doctor  is  therefore  in  a  dilemma  in  such  a  case,  and^  requires 
good  judgment  so  as  to  decide  which  is  more  harmful,  to  pre- 
serve the  strength  or  to  allow  the  pain  to  persist.  He  has  to 
decide  which  is  worse,  the  pain,  or  the  danger  liable  to  arise 
from  inducing  insensibility  of  the  part.  He  has  to  decide 
which  is  the  more  important  to  avoid,  or  which  is  the  lesser  of 
the  two  evils.  For,  should  he  allow  the  pain  to  continue, 
there  is  the  risk  of  it  increasing  so  much  as  to  prove  fatal;  and 
if  he  makes  the  part  insensible,  this  danger  is  averted  and  yet 
some  other  part  is  affected  adversely.  However,  one  may  be 
able  to  remedy  that,  and  then  if  the  pain  returns  in  consequence, 
one  may  repeat  the  process.  .

In  addition  to  all  this  one  must  select  the  stupetacient 
remedy  according  to  its  own  temperament,  and  the  ease  with 
which  it  exerts  its  effect.  One  might  administer  it  in  the  form 
of  a  compound  in  theriacs  (made  with  it),  unless  there  is  par- 
ticular need  to  secure  a  powerful  action.

1079.  Internal  medication  for  pain. — Some  members,  like 
the  teeth,  cannot  be  treated  even  by  the  local  application  of 
narcotics,  because  this  is  not  a  final  cure.  In  this  case  better 
relief  is  obtained  by  internal  remedies.  So,  in  painful  diseases 
of  the  eyes,  less  harm  would  result  this  way  than  from  local 
application  of  the  remedy.In  the  case  of  other  organs,  the  harm  done  them  by  taking  a 
draught  is  easily  rectified.     The  harmful  outcome  would  be 
increased,  for  instance,   in  a  case  of  colic,   because^  the  cold 
[the  narcotic  is  "  cold  "]  increases  the  amount  of  "  matter, 
and  solidifies  it  and  encloses  it.

1080.  Stupefacients  often  relieve  pain  because  _  they 
produce  sleep — one  of  the  factors  whereby  pain  is  relieved, 
especially  if  the  patient  is  fasting,  and  there  is  a  material  cause

of  the  pain.

Stupefacients  are  safer  when  they  are  compounded  with 
other  drugs  as  diluents  (e.g.,  theriac),  as  for  instance  "  philo- 
nium,"  aromatic  electuary  or  lozenges.  But  their  efficacy  is 
not  as  great.  The  fresh  lozenges  are  more  efficient  than  older 
ones,  and  very  old  ones  have  no  action  at  all.  Those  which  are 
between  the  two  extremes  are  intermediate  in  efficacy.

'  1081.  The  fains  of  flatulence  are  very  severe  and  are  yet 
easy  to  relieve  at  certain  times.  Sometimes  it  is  sufficient  simply 
to  pour  hot  water  over  the  part,  though  one  must  take  care  the

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

529

pain  is  not  due  to  an  inflammation  (which  simulates  the  pain  of 
flatulence)  before  doing  so.  It  would  be  a  serious  mistake, 
especially  at  the  beginning  of  (suppurative) .  inflammation  to 
administer  a  hot  water  douche  (shower).  Sometimes  such 
treatment  makes  the  condition  worse,  supposing  it  does  not 
disperse  the  gases,  or  cause  them  to  expand.

1082.  Poulticing, — Another  sort  of  remedy  for  flatulence 
is  z.  poultice.  A  poultice  may  act  better  if  it  is  combined  with  a 
desiccant  like  imllet.  Poultices  are  not  applicable  to  some 
members;   for  instance,  the  eye.     In  that  case  cloths  are  used.Some  poultices  are  made  with  hot  oil.  The  most  efficient 
poultices  are  those  made  with  flour  of  orobs  boiled  in  vinegar 
and  dried  before  use.  Weaker  ones  are  made  with  bran,  treated 
in  the  same  way.  Steamed  salt  is  burning  (scorching);  steamed 
millet  is  weaker,  and  better.  A  safe  and  easy  way  of  steiming 
a  part  is  from  boiling  water  in  a  vessel,  but  it  requires  careful 
control  to  avoid  any  of  the  mishaps  we  have  referred  to  above. 
1083*  Dry  (hot)  Cupping  comes  under  this  heading  as  a 
powerful  means  of  allaying  the  pains  of  flatulence.  By  repeating 
them  over  and  over  again  the  pain  will  be  entirely  abolished. 
But  this  is  at  the  cost  of  those  untoward  effects  we  have  already 
described.

1084„  Other  means  of  allaying  pain. — (1)  Walking  about 
gently  for  a  considerable  time.  The  movement  softens  or 
relaxes  the  tissues.  '  (2)  Fats  of  thin  consistence,  and  the  oils 
already  named.  (3)  Agreeable  music-^specially  if  it  inclines 
one  to  sleep.*  (4)  Being  occupied  with  something  very  en- 
grossing removes  the  severity  of  pain.

31. — The  Priority  of  Choice  of  Methods  of  Treatment.

1085,  When  several  mala- 
dies occur  together  we  should 
deal  first  with  that  which  fulfils 
one  of  the  following  three  con- 
ditions :

(1)  When  the  one  must  be 
cured  before  the  other  can  be 
relieved.  For  instance,  if  in- 
flammation and  ulceration  occur  simultaneously,  the  former 
must  be  attended  to  first  until  the  intemperament  on  which  it 
depends  is  remedied.  The  ulcer  will  never  be  healed  until  that 
is  put  right.     The  ulcer  is  then  treated.

*  Like  the  mother's  lullaby  to  her  child  in  pain.

2M

53o  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE*  Like  the  mother's  lullaby  to  her  child  in  pain.

2M

53o  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

(2)  When  the  maladies  are  related  as  cause  and  effect. 
Example  :  obstruction  and  fever.  The  former  must  be  treated 
first  If  the  obstruction  will  only  yield  to  a  "  hot  "  remedy, 
we  shall  not  be  able  to  cure  the  fever.  We  may  treat  phthisis 
(inflammation  of  the  lung)  with,  desiccants,  but  we  shall  not  cure 
the  fever,  because  its  cause  is  beyond  our  reach.  The  cause 
would  be  amenable  to  desiccant  treatment,  but  this  would  keep

up  the  fever.  .,11-1  fA

(3)  When  it  is  absolutely  essential  to  deal  with  one  o±  the 
maladies.  Thus  suppose  relapsing  fever  and  palsy  should 
occur  concurrently.  There  is  no  question  about  treating  the 
former,  and  venesection  is  the  proper  treatment.     But  this  will

not  cure  the  palsy.  .

The  disorder  and  the  symptom  to  which  the  malady  owes 
its  name  may  occur  together.  In  such  a  case  one  would  begin 
by  dealing  with  the  malady  itself.  But  if  the  symptom  became 
urgent,  we  should  turn  our  attention  to  it,  and  leave  the  disease 
itself  alone  for  the  time.  Thus,  in  a  case  of  colic,  we  should 
turn  our  attention  first  to  relieve  the  violent  pam,  even  though 
the  condition  causing  it  is  thereby  adversely  affected.  Again, 
we  should  postpone  a  venesection  (otherwise  indicated)  it  the 
stomach  were  in  a  feeble  state  or  if  there  were  diarrhoea,  or  it

there  were  nausea.  .there  were  nausea.  .

Sometimes  we  should  do  a  venesection  (for  instance^ 
without  hesitation  even  though  that  would  not  remove  the  whole 
trouble.  For  instance,  in  a  case  of  spasmodic  disease,  we  should 
not  empty  out  all  the  morbid  humour,  but  we  should  leave  some 
behind  rather  than  risk  losing  some  of  the  healthy  humour, 
in  the  hope  that  this  itself  would  cure  the  spasmodic  movements.

The  Seal  of  the  Work,  and  an  Act  of  Thanks.

May  this  our  compendious   discourse  upon  the   general

principles    pertaining   to    the    science   of   medicine    be   found

sufficient.

O  ur  next  task  will  be  to  compile  the  work

on  Simples,  with  the  permission  of

Allah.       May  .  He     be    our

aid,    and    Him    do    we

thank   for  all    His

innumerable

mercies.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  531

THE   END    OF   THE    FIRST    BOOK    OF

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  OF

AVICENNA    THE   CHIEF

OF       PHYSICIANS.

532  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Brief   Summary   of   the    Contents    of 
the  Remaining  BOOKS  of  the  Canon

BOOK  II.

Materia  Medica,  Pharmacology  and  Therapeutics.

PART  I.- — General  Principles.     The  temperament  or  constitu- 
tion of  drugs,  and  how  it  is  determined  (a)  by  experiment ;  (b)  by  • 
deduction.     An  account  of  all  the  actions  which  drugs  may  possess. 
The  collection   and  preservation  of  herbal   and  other  remedies.

PART  II. — The  properties  of  each  drug  taken  seriatim. — The 
properties  are  classified  under  the  following  headings  :  General 
and  detailed  description,  tests  for  purity,  qualities,  general  actions 
in  terms  of  the  subject  matter  of  Book  I  ;  special  actions  on  each 
system  of  the  body,  or  special  diseases ;  specific  actions ;  antidotal 
properties  ;      alternative   remedies   or   adjuvants.The  Latin  edition  gives  760  names,  and  the  Bulaq  gives  802  names.  But 
the  actual  number  of  remedies  is  rather  less,  because  some  of  the  items  are  simply 
cross-references,  the  same  drug  being  known  under  different  names.

The  second  part  of  "  De  viribus  cordis  "  fulfils  the  alternative  title  "  De 
medicinis  cordialibus  "  in  being  a  careful  account  of  the  medicines  acting  on  the 
heart,  arranged  on  the  same  plan  as  the  above,  and  constituting  a  useful  supple- 
ment to  the  second  Book.

The  account  of  the  individual  drugs  includes  numerous  quotations  from  various 
sources,    notably    Dioscorides.

BOOK   III.

SPECIAL  PATHOLOGY  (in  its  modern  sensej.  In  this  Book  the 
various  systems  are  taken  up,  and  the  diseases  to  which  each  is 
liable  are  discussed,  giving  etiology,  symptoms,  diagnosis,  prog- 
nosis and  treatment. .

Special  mention  may  be  made  of  the  following  Sections  : — 
1. — Head,   Eye,  Ear,   Nose,  Mouth,  Throat,  Teeth. 
2. — Chest,  Lung,  Heart. 
3.- — Alimentary    Tract :      stomach,   intestines  ;    liver,    gall-bladder    and

spleen. 
4. — Urinary  system.

5. — Conception.     Pregnancy.     The     uterus.     Diseases     of     women. 
6.— The  Muscles.     The  Joints.     The  Feet.

7. — The  following  special  subjects  :    The  intemperaments  of  the  Brain  ; 
Headache  in    all   its    aspects  ;     various   diseases   of    the    Brain. 
Epilepsy.     Paralysis. 
Note  that  the  Section  on  the  Eye  has  been  translated  into  German30    (ref.  in 
the  Bibliography),

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  533

BOOK    IV.'

_  PART  I. — Fever  (considered  in  general  terms).  One-day, 
tertian,  quartan,  septic  and  pestilential  (i.e.,  epidemic)  fevers. 
The  subject  of  Crisis.  Symptomatology  of  Fevers.  Suppuration. 
Lepra.PART  II. — Minor  Surgery:  Wounds  and  their  general  treat- 
ment.    Injuries    of  nerves.     Fractures.     Dislocations.     Ulcers.

PART  III. — Poisoning:  mineral,  vegetable,  and  animal  poisons. 
Bites  from  animals  and  man.

Part  IV. — Beauty  Culture. —The.  hair,  the  nails,  the  skin. 
Wasting.  Treatment  of  offensive  odour,  or  discoloration.  Pedi- 
culosis, etc.

BOOK  V.

The     FORMULARY. — This    is    a    collection    of  careful    recipes,

with  copious  details  on  the  proper  way  to  prepare  "  compounded  "

medicines.

This  book  was  translated  into  German  by  Dr.  Sontheimer.     (Ref.  in  the  Biblio- 
graphy).

(A  copious  index  and  glossary  concludes  the  Latin  Venetian  edition  (1595. 
1608)  of  the  Canon,  lists  of  drugs  being  given  according  to  their  action  on  the  body 
and  according  to  the  diseases  for  which  they  may  be  applied.)

Continuation  (from  173)  of  Translation  of  "  de  Viribus  Cordis."

1.     The  Nature  of  the  Breath,  and  its  Purpose.

IFE  (1086)  and  every  perfection,  and 
every  good*  for  which  creatures*  are 
destined,  comes  from  nothing  but  the 
Primal  Most  High  Truth — the  source 
„  of  all  good,  and  from  the  Strong 
~{  Desire   ever   proceeding  therefrom.

1087.    Nevertheless,  the  recipient 
thereof  requires  a  specific  capacity  for

^ ^..__.  __.  reception   of  the    good.      A   creature*

cannot  receive  indifferently.  For  instance,  wool  cannot  be  wool 
(lit.,  have  the  "form"  of  wool)  and  at  the  same  time  have  the 
characters  of  a  sword.  Water  cannot  be  water  (lit.,  have  the 
"form"  of  water)  and  at  the  same  time  receive  the  "form" 
of  human  nature.1088.  All  corporeal  bodies  may  receive  life  except  the  four 
first  principles,  and  whatever  is  of  like  nature  to  them.  For 
these  are  non-living  bodies,  and  are  also  of  negligible  bulk.  In 
fact  their  bulk  is  infinitesimal  compared  with  the  planets,  and  still 
more  strikingly  so  compared  with  some  of  the  fixed  stars.  Indeed 
it  can  be  shown  that  these  first-principles  in  their  totality  have 
not  as  much  bulk  as  a  point  compared  with  the  body  of  Saturn  ; 
how  much  less  then  are  they  when  compared  with  the  higher 
bodies  ?

1089.  Those  who  realize  the  Truth  know  the  reason  why 
these  elementary  bodies  do  not  receive  the  "  form  "  of  life. 
Even  the  simplest  of  living  beings  is  quite  different  from  them  ; 
and  the  celestial  bodies,  adapted  as  they  are  to  a  very  wonderful 
kind  of  corporeal  life,  are  very  different  from  them  also.  The 
first-principles  are  entirely  beyond  the  possibility  of  life.

*  This  word  is  used  in  the  Scholastic  sense.

534

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

535.*  This  word  is  used  in  the  Scholastic  sense.

534

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

535.

§265.  It  may  be  noted  that  corporeal  bodies  receive  life  when  they  enter  into  the 
composition  of  living  matter,  whether  of  protozoa  or  the  like,  or  of  highly  organized 
animals  and  plants.  The  author  does  .not  say  that  all  corporeal  bodies  are  "  forms 
of  life,"  as  some  have  assumed.- — The  distinction  between  matter  and  form  already 
discussed  (§§55-105)  makes  clear  that  which  is  expressed  slightly  differently  in  the 
preceding  passage.  It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  first  principles  are  really 
neither  "  matter  "  nor  "  form  "  ;  the  discussion  in  the  text  is  relevant  only  because 
the  listener  is  supposed  to  have  failed  to  realize  this.  Although  the  first-principles 
are  co-termmous  with  the  "  infinity  "  of  the  universe,  they  have  not  either  mass  or 
volume.  The  comparison  between  a  "  point  "  and  a  "world  "  is  characteristically 
mediaeval.

_  1090,  It  is  the  mingling  of  substances  in  the  compound 
bodies  which  accounts  for  their  ability  to  receive  life.  The  com- 
mingling of  the  components  so  modifies  their  contrarieties 
(cf.  20)  as  to  produce  an  ensemble  (i.e.,  the  temperament  :  cf.  27), 
in  which  all  the  various  seeming  contraries  (nothing  is  really 
absolutely  contrary  to  anything  else*)  are  blended  harmoniously. 
The  more  harmonious  the  blending,  the  more  adapted  is  the 
resultant  compound  for  being  the  vehicle,  not  merely  of  life,  but 
of  a  very  particular  kind  of  life.  Perfect  equilibrium  and  perfect 
balance  renders  possible  the  manifestation  of  the  perfection  of 
rational  life  which  celestial  beings  possess.  And  it  is  just  this 
kind  of  character  which  is  to  be  found  in  the  case  of  the  human 
breath  !1091 .  The  breath,  then,  is  that  which  emerges  from  a 
mixture  of  first-principles,  and  approaches  towards  the  likeness 
of  celestial  beings.  It  is  a  luminous  substance.  It  is  a  ray  of 
light.  J

1092.  This  accounts  for  the  fact  that  the  mind  rejoices 
when  it  looks  towards  the  light,  and  is  depressed  when  exposed 
to  darkness.  _  Light  is  in  harmony  with  the  breath.  Darkness  is 
in  discord  with  it.

3.     The  Chief  Emotions  in  Relation  to  the  Vital  Breath. 
Their   First   Causes  :    Potentiality  and  Disposition.

AGES  (1093),  and  those  physicians  who  agree 
with  them,  are  satisfied  that  joy  and  sadness, 
fear  and  anger,  are  passions  peculiarly 
related  to  the  breath  of  the  heart.  Each  of 
these  emotions  is  maintained  or  discon- 
tinued (1)  by  the  agentf  ;  (2)  by  the  per-, 
sistence  or  cessation  of  the  disposition 
exhibited  by  the  substance  of  the  patient.

*  A  typical  Sufi  conception.

f  Scholastic  sense.

536  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

1094,     Sages  perceive  a  subtle  distinction  between  poten- 
tiality, and  disposition,  as  represented  in  this  table  :

Potentiality.

1.  Pertains  equally  to  both,  contraries.

2.  One  and  the  same  person  can  be  glad  or

sad.

3.  Is  perfected  into  a  disposition.

4.  To  pass  one's  life  with  a  breath  of  sad  or

glad  potentiality  is  one  thing.

5.  Glad  or  sad  potentiality  can  harmonize

equally  with  the  breath.

6.  Potentiality    for    both    contraries    is    in-

separably inherent  in  the  breath  from 
the  very  first.

Disposition.

Does  not.

Optimism  and  pessimism  can  only 
exist  in  distinct  persons.

Is  perfection  of  potentiality  to- 
wards one  or  other  contrary.

To  pass  one's  life  with  a  breath  of 
sad  or  glad  disposition  is 
another.

Glad  or  sad  disposition  does  not.Is  perfection  of  potentiality  to- 
wards one  or  other  contrary.

To  pass  one's  life  with  a  breath  of 
sad  or  glad  disposition  is 
another.

Glad  or  sad  disposition  does  not.

Disposition  towards  a  contrary 
(emotion)  is  not  inseparably 
inherent  in  the  breath  from 
the  outset  but  may  appear 
under  the  influence  of  super- 
vening agents.

Joy,  and  the  Causes  of  Delight  and  Sadness.

'OY  (1095)  is  a  form  of  delight.  A  thing  _  is 
delightful  when  it  is  the  perfection  of  its 
corresponding  faculty.  For  instance  :  the 
perception  of  a  sweet  or  sapid  taste,  or  a 
pleasant  fragrance  ;  the  overruling  of  a 
feeling  of  anger  by  a  good  judgment  ;  the 
realization  of  some  useful  outcome  of  the 
reasoning  or  imaginative  faculty. 
-^aaa^r  1098.     There  is  a  certain  power  accruing

from  every  perfected  delight.     It  is  the  perfection  of  the  given

power  which  produces  joy.

"  Delight  is  a  perfection  of  operation  "  (Summa  contra  Gent.,  xc»,  p.  190).

"  Toy  and  delight  differ  in  aspect.  For  delight  is  caused  by  a  good  conjoined 
in  reality  while  joy  does  not  require  this  conjunction,  because  the  mere  repose  of 
the w  1  in  the  thing  willed  suffices  for  the  notion  of  joy.  Hence  delight  is  only 
in  alonjo^ned  good,  if  it  be  taken  in  its  proper  sense  ;  whereas  joy  *  in  a  separate 
good."     (ib.  p.  191.)

1097,  Some  people  have  expressed  the  opinion  that 
"  delight  "  is  really  nothing  but  "  the  departure  of  abnormal 
disposition,"  and  that  there  cannot  possibly  be  delight  where 
there  is  no  possibility  of  going  beyond  the  natural  disposition. 
This  view  has  arisen  because  there  are  some  forms  of  power  which

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  537THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  537

cannot  bring  delight  until  some  abnormal  disposition  has  first 
been  got  rid  of.  Nevertheless,  the  opinion  is  wrong  ;  it  takes  a 
thing  which  Is  per  accidens  for  a  thing^r  se — a  fallacy  of  reasoning 
which  is  mentioned  in  "  the  Definitions."

1098.  Delight  implies  attaining  a  goal,  and  the  one  who 
apprehends  it  can  only  be  aware  of  the  delight  because  he  is 
aware  of  the  change..  For  instance  (1)  in  the  case  of  touch,  it  is 
evident  that  the  quality  of  tangibility  can  only  provide  delight  as 
long  as  the  tactile  organ  continues  to  be  in  the  opposite  phase. 
Once  the  polarity  has  reached  equilibrium,  the  character  of 
the  organ  will  have  become  "  set,"  and  cannot  provide  further 
change.  From  this  time  there  ceases  to  be  any  sensation  of 
pleasure.

(2)  In  the  case  of  the  hectic  patient,  who  does  not  suffer 
from  heat  subjectively  however  high  the  body  temperature  may 
be  ;  a  patient  with  an  acute  fever  may  feel  hotter  than  the  other 
even  though  his  temperature  be  not  so  high.  This  is  because  in 
the  hectic  case,  heat  is  already  resident  in  tissues  of  corresponding 
constitution  ;  in  acute  fevers,  it  is  as  if  the  heat  flew  past,  afraid 
of  the  manner  in  which  it  may  find  the  elements  mingled  in 
the  tissues.  Doctors  rightly  consider  the  state  of  the  members 
of  a  hectic  case  as  "  bad,  though  balanced "  ;  and  in  the 
other  case  regard  the  quality  as  "  unbalanced  and  therefore 
bad."It  is  clear  then  that  pleasure  ceases  as  soon  as  one  is  accustomed 
to  the  completed  sense-perception  because  one  can  now  no 
longer  be  aware  of  the  entry  of  sense-perceptions.  The  reason 
why  pleasure  is  experienced  at  the  departure  of  an  abnormal 
disposition  is  that  one  is  now  sensitive  to  the  slightest  change 
in  the  (now)  normal  disposition.  It  is  possible  that  this  sensitive- 
ness to  change  in  the  natural  disposition  may  appear  syn- 
chronously with  the  departure  of  the  abnormal  disposition. 
People  are  then  apt  to  think  the  latter  was  the  cause  of  the  former, 
when  it  is  not  so.  The  real  explanation  lies  in  the  attainment  of 
perfect  perception.  It  is  this  that  is  the  per  se — the  intrinsic 
basis  of  delight,      (cf.  The  Theory  of  Pain :  432.)

1099.  In  other  words,  the  disposition  towards  delight 
depends  on  the  constitution  of  the  participating  breaths,  and 
on  the  degree  to  which  the  disposition  is  favourable  to  their 
presence,  always  provided  that  the  substance  of  the  breath  is 
not  diminished,  and  the  disposition  likely  to  be  favourable  is 
not  an  abnormal  one.

HOG.      Effect  of  quantity  of  breath. — Should  a  breath  with  a

53 8  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINEHOG.      Effect  of  quantity  of  breath. — Should  a  breath  with  a

53 8  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

tendency  towards  delight  be  abundant,  its  action  will  be  corres- 
pondingly powerful.  The  greater  the  quantity,  ,the  greater  its 
vigour  and  the  greater  is  the  amount  of  it  which  will  persist  at  the 
place  of  its  origin— that  is,  in  its  "  matrix."  Consequently, 
under  these  circumstances  it  will  radiate  out  in  greater  measure 
to  the  various  members,  and  produce  that  particular  state  of 
expansion  which  spells.  ]oy  and  pleasure.  For,  if  the  breath  in 
question  were  only  moderate  in  amount,  the  substrate  concerned 
would  hold  it  greedily,  and  not  allow  it  to  expand  as  freely  as 
otherwise  would  be  the  case.

1101  'Effect  of  the  quality  of  the  breath.— The  nobler  the 
character  possessed  by  it,  and  the  nobler  its  substance,  the  more 
luminous  does  it  become,  and  the  more  like  celestial  substance 
will  it  be."

§  266.  This  passage  is  characteristically  Sufic  ;  the  reference  being  to  the  effect 
of  Burification  of  the  *'  breath"  in  the  exercises  culminating  m  bhaghal  tne 
perfonal  success  and  accuracy  of  the  physician  in  his  dealing ;  with .m ^ick  bemg 
progressively  enhanced  the  more  the  purification  of  his  breath  is  secured,  lhe 
rarefaction  of  the  breath,  and  the  replacement  of  coarseness  by  fineness,  are  desir- 
able in  all,  but  come  from  experience  and  not  from  study.

1102  Such,  then,  are  the  various  points  about  the  ten- 
dency towards  pleasure  and  joy.  As  regards  sorrow  and  grief,  it 
is  just  a  question  of  the  converse.  Once  the  general  sources  of 
delight  and  pleasure  are  thoroughly  grasped,  the  sources  of  joy 
become  intelligible,  since  joy  is  a  form  of  delight.1103  By  way  of  summary,  it  may  be  said  that  when 
the  breath  residing  in  the  heart  is  plentiful  (as  it  is  when 
there  is  plenty  of  that  material  from  which  it  is  rapidly  and 
constantly  being  generated)  ;  when  it  is  balanced  in  tempera- 
ment; when  it  has  a  luminous,  beautiful  and  bright  substance- 
then  there  is  a  strong  tendency  to  joy.

When  the  breath  is  scanty  (as  occurs  in  convalescents,  in 
long-standing  illnesses,  and  in  old  persons)  ;  when  it  is  not 
balanced  in  character  (as  in  morbid  states)  ;  and  when  it  is  («) 
very  dense  and  coarse  in  substance  (as  in  melancholy  and  old 
people)— it  cannot  arouse  joy  ;  (b)  very  delicate  m  substance  (as 
in  convalescents  and  in  women),  it  will  not  allow  of  expansion; 
(c)  confused  (as  in  melancholy  people)— in  all  these  cases  there  is 
a  very  strong  tendency  to  depression,  sadness  and  grief.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Tabular  Summary.

539

Disposition 
of   mind.

Corresponding  character 
of  breath.

When  met  with

Cheerful

Quantity  :  plentiful. 
Temperament :  balanced. 
Substance   of  breath  :      brilliant,   full 
of  light.

Gloomy.

Quantity  :  scanty.

In  convalescence, 
In  prolonged    illness, 
In  old  age.

Temperament :  unbalanced.

In  disease.

Substance  :  dense  and  gross. 
Attenuated. 
Confused.

In  old  age  ;  in  melan- 
choly.

In  women  ;  during 
convalescence.

In  melancholy.

5.     The  Extrinsic  Causes  of  Delight  and  Sadness.In  old  age  ;  in  melan- 
choly.

In  women  ;  during 
convalescence.

In  melancholy.

5.     The  Extrinsic  Causes  of  Delight  and  Sadness.

1104.  When  all  the  conditions  required  for  a  given  act  are 
present,  the  slightest  agent  will  now  suffice  to  effect  the  act. 
Thus,  when  sulphur  is  used  for  kindling,  it  is  because  sulphur  is 
set  afire  by  a  moderate  amount  of  heat,  whereas  wood  cannot  be" 
made  to  burn  without  twice  as  much.  So,  when  the  mind  has  a" 
breath  whose  tendency  to  receive  the  impress  of  gladdening 
agents  is  complete,  a  slight  agent  will  suffice  to  evoke  gladness.

1105.  Action  of  wine  on  emotions  and  on  breath. — This  is 
shown  in  the  instance  of  those  who  drink  excellent  wine,  for  in 
such  persons  gladness  increases  to  such  a  pitch  that  onlookers 
wonder  how  they  can  be  jovial  without  reason.  Such  a  thing,, 
of  course,  cannot  be.  No  impression  is  possible  without  an 
impressor.

But  the  fact  is  that  when  wine  is  taken  in  moderation,  it 
gives  rise  to  a  large  amount  of  breath,  whose  character  is  balanced> 
and  whose  luminosity  is  strong  and  brilliant.  Hence  wine 
disposes  greatly  to  gladness,  and  the  person  is  subject  to  quite 
trivial  exciting  agents.  The  breath  now  takes  up  the  impression 
of  agents  belonging  to  the  present  time  more  easily  than  it  does 
those  which  relate  to  the  future  ;  it  responds  to  agents  conducive 
to  delight  rather  than  those  conducive  to  a  sense  of  beauty.  It 
also  takes  up  an  impression  from  agents  which  are  prone  to  evoke 
conjecture  rather  than  from  those  which  are  concerned  with  real 
understanding.  The  explanation  of  this  is  that  normally  the 
power  of  the  mind  brings  about  an  act  in  the  brain  such  as  will

54o  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE54o  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

expel  the  breath  (when  it  is  in  the  phase  of  having  a  mild  degree 
of  moisture)  ;  the  brain  thus  becomes  able  to  obey  the  motions  of 
the  thought  and  the  exercise  of  the  faculty  of  understanding.  In 
inebriety^  however,  there  is  a  very  great  inclination  towards 
excess  of  moisture  (which  is  incompatible  with  obedience  to  the 
understanding),  owing  to  admixture  with  ascending  and  over- 
flowing" vapours,  which  render  it  too  humid  This  moisture 
prevents  it  from  obeying  the  intellectual  faculty  and  the  ten- 
dencies of  the  thought,  except  in  respect  of  very  material  and 
corporeal  topics.  It  cannot  serve  in  respect  of  very  delicate 
spiritual  matters.  Whether  stable  or  agitated,  moisture  cannot 
take  part  in  the  formation  or  presentation  of  spiritual  affairs  ;  it 
can  only  respond  to  corporeal  ones.

1106'  Stages  in  inebriety.— -The  following  are  the  various 
steps  of  degradation  of  the  mind,  not  arranged  chronologically  : 
First  recognition  of  truth  is  impaired,  and  the  operation  of  the 
mind  is  iinperfect.  The  intellectual  power  falls  in  proportion. 
The  substrate  continues  to  attract  breath  until  the  temperament 
of  one  has  reached  up  to  that  of  the  other,  after  which  the  flow  of 
breath  of  course  comes  to  an  end.  .  (i  „.1107      The  power  of  the  mind  (which  is  in  the      heart    ) 
has  a  greater  affinity  for  joy  during  the  state  of  drunkenness  ;  the 
gladdening  things  that  come  to  it  do  not  reach  it  by  the  usual 
route  between  the  senses  and  the  phantasy  (or  even  the  cogitative 
faculty),  because  the  sensitive  faculties  have  come  into  dominance. 
The  repletion  of  the  breath  with  moisture  has  altered  its  vigour 
The  senses  now  dominate  the  inner  breath,  and  are  more  powerful 
than  the  understanding.    The  understanding  (as  for  instance  for 
geometry  and  other  exact  sciences),  meeting  as  it  does  a  breath 
which  is  so  wanton  towards  it,  readily  submits  to  the  senses 
Things  being  so,  no  wonder  that  the  conception  of  future,  of 
beauty,  of  rational  affairs,  has  become  blurred  in  the  intoxicated 
person's    mind;     the    sense-perception    of    sweet,    glad,    and 
delectable  things  prevails,  and  the  sense  of  the  present  is  very 
strong.    It  is  the  very  strength  of  this  tendency  that  accounts  for 
the  fact  that  quite  a  slight  agent  will  evoke  gladness  and  mirth. 
Onlookers  think  that  such  persons  are  jovial  without  reason. 
But  this  cannot  be  so.    As  a  matter  of  fact,  some  causative  agents 
of  joy  and  gladness  are  powerful,  while  others  are  weak  ;   some 
are  known  and  obvious,  others  are  not  known  and  occult.    Many 
of -the  latter  are  not  known,  not  because  they  occur  only  rarely  ; 
they  occur  regularly.     The  fact  is  that  we  notice  things  less 
particularly  the  oftener  we  encounter  them.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  541THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  541

_  1108.  It  is  now  necessary  to  detail  the  powerful  and 
obvious  sources  of  joy  and  gladness.  Instances  of  sources  of  joy 
are  the  following  :  (1)  gazing  upon  the  daylight,  among  cheerful 
people.  The  evidence  of  this  is  that  being  in  the  dark  makes 
them  sad.  (2)  Having  intercourse  with  those  of  like  beliefs. 
The  evidence  of  this  is  that  solitude  makes  such  people  sad. 
Gladdening  influences-  are  such  as  (1)  obtaining  that  which  is 
wished  for  ;  (2)  satisfying  an  intention  without  meeting  opposi- 
tion ;  (3)  preferring  to  do  something  peaceful  ;  (4)  confidence  ; 
(5)  the  memory  of  past  and  future  joys  and  hopes  ;  (6)  thinking 
about  ambitious  things  ;  (7)  mutual  argumentation  with  kindred 
minds ;  (8)  relief  from  pain ;  (9)  contact  with  curious  (interesting, 
unusual,  remarkable,  new)  things  ;  (10)  uplifting  of  the  mind  ; 
(n)_  meeting  friends  and  friendly  surroundings  ;  (12)  over- 
coming deception  in  small  matters  :  and  many  similar  things  to 
be  found  mentioned  in  books  of  rhetoric  and  morals.

Compare  also  the  following  :    "All  the  passions  of  the  irascible  appetite  rise 
from  the  passions  of  the  concupiscible  appetite  and  terminate  in  them  ;   for  instance 
anger  rises  from  sadness,  and  having  wrought  vengeance,  terminates  in  ioy  "  (St' 
Thomas81,  Si,  a.  2  ;    p.  330).  1   y       \     ■1109.  All  these  vary  in  different  races  according  to  their 
affections,  habits  and  ages.  None  of  them  is  invariably  absent. 
If  two  agents  usually  having  a  gladdening  effect  occur  together, 
the  effect  is  not  so  much  the  greater.  All  that  happens  is  that 
the  disposition  is  more  drawn  to  one  than  the  other.  The  effect 
of  one  only  overrules  that  of  the  other  if  the  agent  in  question  be 
very  powerful,  or,  if  it  be  weak,  only  if  it  be  very  persistently 
at  work.  (Cf.  1115.)  This  accounts  for  delight  being  able  to 
persist  during  the  state  of  inebriation,  and  for  the  fact  that  melan- 
choly persons  with  confused  breaths  keep  sad  after  agencies  pro- 
ducing a  sense  of  desolation  and  sadness — such  as  the  following: 
(1)  reflecting  that  one's  fatherland  is  distant  ;  (2)  pondering  over 
many  injuries  already  past  and  done  with  ;  (3)  hate  and  rancour  ; 
(4)  bad  health  ;  (5)  difficult  circumstances  of  life  ;  (6)  thinking 
terrible  things  are  going  to  happen  in  the  future  ;  (7)  thinking 
of  the  necessity  for  death,  which  natural  judgment  ignores 
because  of  the  obvious  fact  that  we  must  die  ;  (8)  thinking 
about  something  that  it  is  disturbing  to  meditate  upon  ;  (9)  being 
away  from  an  agreeable  occupation  ;  (10)  having  thoughts  that 
distract  from  one's  occupation  ;  (1 1)  distraction  from  that  which 
is  desired  for  and  wished  for  ;  (12)  many  other  similar  things, 
and  others  which  are  beyond  comprehension.  Things  of  this 
sort  easily  sadden  a  mind  which  is  disposed  to  become  sad.

542  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE542  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Moreover,  in  melancholy  persons,  the  vividness  of  the 
imagination  of  depressing  .things  itself  causes  them  to  appear, 
because  the  thing  whose  image  is  represented  to  the  mind  is 
already  there  in  actuality.     Hence  depression  persists.

1110.  Vividness  of  imagination  goes  with  dryness  of  the 
breath,. the  movement  of  which  the  will  has  power  to  correct 
We  find  that  the  understanding  is  drawn  away  from  rational 
actions  by  the  senses  and  by  the  phantasy,  whenever  the  character 
of  the  breath  is  perverted  ;  for  the  breath  moves  characteristically 
towards  that  direction  in  which  a  lack  of  congenial  disposition 
arises,  as  when  the  quality  of  the  breath  is  very  bad,  and  when  it 
is  confused.

6.     How  each  Emotion  tends  to  Generate  its  own  Type

of  Breath.

1111.  It  is  not  to  be  thought  that  every  agent  tending 
towards  joy  or  depression  necessarily  depends  only  on  the  quan- 
tity or  quality  of  the  substance  of  the  breath.  Other  agencies 
are  concerned.'  For  instance,  the  emotions  of  the  mind  have 
to  be  considered.  These  tend  to  one  or  other  of  the  aforesaid, 
true  though  it  be  that  they  act  through  the  agency  of  factors 
intrinsic  in  the  breath  itself  (namely,  quantity,  quality).  They 
do  this  by  modifying  the  temperamental  substrate  or  by  rectifying' 
the  breath  or  by  increasing  its  quantity.     Thus,  they  dispose

towards  joy.  .       .  ,

On  the  other  hand,  an  agent  of  opposite  sign  will  tend  to

induce  depression.

These  are  the  immediate  and  remote  external  factors.    _towards  joy.  .       .  ,

On  the  other  hand,  an  agent  of  opposite  sign  will  tend  to

induce  depression.

These  are  the  immediate  and  remote  external  factors.    _

1112.  The  intrinsic  factors  are  traceable  to  one  single 
source,  because  every  act  of  contrary  type,  if  it  be  repeated  often, 
comes  to  be  more  efficient  in  imparting  an  effect.  Every  incre- 
ment of  power  carries  with  it  so  much  more  tendency  to  the 
accomplishment  of  the  effect.  This  is  sufficiently  plain  from  a 
purely  logical  point  of  view.  A  body  which  is  very  heating  tends 
to  impart  heat  rapidly  ;  and  similarly  in  the  case  of  cold,  rare 
and  dense  bodies.  The  same  holds  good  in  the  case  of  the  internal 
potencies.  This  is  how  it  is  that  a  strong  character  is  formed  by 
repeated  practice  and  repeated  experience  of  emotions.  It  is  m 
this  way  that  moral  character  is  acquired.

Perhaps  the  reason  underlying  this  is  that  when  an  emotion 
appears,  it  often  makes  the  substance  of  the  breath  become 
conducive  ;  and  what  is  suitable  for  one  thing  is  unsuitable  for 
its  opposite .    The  oftener  it  is  repeated,  the  less  does  the  tendency

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  543

to  the  opposite  become,  for  that  which  is  conducive  to  the 
opposite,  is  expelled  little  by  little.  This  is  saying  the  same  thing 
as  logic  says.  It  would  be  tedious  to  prove  it  by  syllogism  by  an 
acceptable  and  convincing  argument  from  known  premises.

It  emerges  from  the  aforesaid  that  a  reiteration  of  being  glad 
disposes  the  breath  to  a  state  of  gladness  ;  a  reiteration  of  being 
sad  disposes  it  to  depression.It  emerges  from  the  aforesaid  that  a  reiteration  of  being  glad 
disposes  the  breath  to  a  state  of  gladness  ;  a  reiteration  of  being 
sad  disposes  it  to  depression.

1113.  Natural  enquiry  shows  the  source  of  increase  of 
gladness  to  depend  on  (1)  a  strengthening  of  the  natural  faculty  :, 
(2)  a  rarefaction  of  the  breath.  The  latter  is  due  to  the  expansion 
following  gladness.

(1)  The  strengthening  of  the  natural  faculty  is  contributed 
to  by  three  factors,  each  of  which  is  itself  a  source  of  gladness  :

(a)  the  temperament  of  the  breath  ;

(b)  over-production  of  breath  beyond  that  which  is  lost  by 
dispersal  ;

(c)  prevention  of  excessive  dispersal  of  breath.

(2)  Rarefaction  of  the  breath  is  followed  by  two  things  : 
(i)  a  tendency  towards  movement  and  expansion.     This  is

related  to  the  fineness  (rarefaction)  of  its  substance  ;

(ii)  an  attraction  to  itself  of  its  own  particular  nutriment. 
This  is  due  to  the  movement  of  expansion  towards  a  place  away 
from  the  movement  of  the  nutriment.  This  particular  attraction 
is  really  the  natural  corporeal  tendency  to  avoid  emptiness.

In  its  essence,  it  is  the  same  with  any  movement  which  in 
itself  brings  it  to  pass  that  the  latter  things  shall  take  the  place 
of  the  former.  It  is  the  outcome  of  this  law  that  very  distant 
waters  are  drawn  towards  their  primary  source,  and  that  winds 
follow  the  course  they  do.

1114.  Two  things  follow  great  depression  :  (1)  weakening 
of  natural  power  ;  (2)  concentration  of  the  breath.  The  explana- 
tion of  this  is  that  violent  condensation  and  aggregation  of  the 
breath  obliterates  the  natural  heat  and  results  in  coldness.

Two  opposites  follow  upon  this,  as  has  already  been  in- 
timated.Two  opposites  follow  upon  this,  as  has  already  been  in- 
timated.

1115.  It  is  therefore  evident  that  intense  gladness  disposes 
the  breath  to  gladness,  sadness  to  depression  ;  that  associated 
depressants  do  not  make  an  impression  on  gladness  unless  they 
are  vigorous  ;  whereas  weak  stimulants  may  and  do  impress 
themselves  thereon.

It  is,  of  course,  the  other  way  about  in  the  case  of  depressants.

544  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

7.     The  Distinction  between  Weakness  of  the  Heart  and 
Cowardice-;    Sadness  and  Their  Opposites.

1116.  Weakness  of  the  heart  and  sadness,  which  some 
people  call  "  contraction  of  the  chest  or  heart,"  are  similar  and 
yet  different.  The  same  thing  may  be  said  about  their  opposites 
(vigour  and  gladness  of  heart),  which  some  people  call  "  enlarge- 
ment of  the  chest  or  heart"  [cf.  Ps.  118,  32  ;  2  Cor.  6,  11]. 
The  difference  between  them  is  difficult  to  identify  because  so 
commonly  one  passes  into  the  other.  Most  people  think  the 
two  former  are  passive  dispositions  ;  others  think  they  are 
active.     But  there  is  an  obvious  difference  between  the  extremes

of  each.

Firstly,  not  every  weak  heart  is  associated  with  depression, 
nor  is  depression  always  accompanied  by  weak  heart.  A  vigorous 
heart  is  not  necessarily  accompanied  by  joy  ;  and  conversely.

Secondly,  the  basis  is  different  in  each.  Weakness  of  the 
heart  is  a  disposition  assumed  in  respect  of  things-evoking-dread, 
because  it  is  incapable  of  tolerating  them.  Depression  has  to  do 
with  saddening  things  and  the  heart' does  not  tolerate  them  much. 
Fear  concerns  the  body  ;    depression  concerns  the  mind.Thirdly,  there  is  a  difference  in  regard  to  the  mental  effect. 
Weakness  of  the  heart  impels  to  flight,  depression  impels  one  to 
stand  still  for  the  purpose  of  either  resisting  or  repelling.  This 
is  the  opposite  action  to  flight.  Weakness  of  the  heart  inhibits 
the  powers  of  motion,  depression  stimulates  them.  Consequently 
there  are  two  emotions  associated  with  weakness  of  the  heart  : 
(a)  that  of  threatening  injury  ;  (b)  that  of  desire  to  prolong 
movement.  In  the  case  of  depression  (oppression  of  the  chest) 
there  are  (a)  sense  of  threatening  injury  ;  (b)  no  desire  to  flee. 
In  the  event  of  there  being  a  decision  to  flee,  it  is  because  of  some 
contingent  circumstance  rather  than  because  of  an  intention  to 
give  ground.  It  is  as  likely  that  attack  and  struggle  will  be 
decided  upon  in  place  of  flight.

Fourthly,  they  differ  as  to  the  after-effects  on  the  body. 
Weakness  of  the  heart  and  escape  from  the  danger  are  followed 
by  loss  of  natural  heat,  by  cold.  Depression,  after  the  particular 
cause  has  passed  away,  is  followed  by  kindling  of  the  natural

heat.

Fifthly,  they  differ  in  regard  to  the  disposing  causes.  Too 
fine  and  too  cold  a  complexioned  breath  tends  to  weakness  of  the 
heart,  coarseness  and  hot  temperament  of  breath  tend  to 
depression.

Si

I  )

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

545

The  Relations  between  the  Various  Blood-States  and 
the  Several  Emotions  (1117).

Blood.

Effect  on  breath.

Effect   on 
emotional  state.

Plentiful,  bright,  hot.

Oxidative  processes  active  ; 
Movement  swift.

Tendency  to  anger.

Plentiful,    bright, 
attempered.

Abundance    of    clear    breath    of 
laudable     substance,     and     at- 
tempered.

Tendency  to  delight.

Bright,  watery,  cool, 
tenuous.Plentiful,    bright, 
attempered.

Abundance    of    clear    breath    of 
laudable     substance,     and     at- 
tempered.

Tendency  to  delight.

Bright,  watery,  cool, 
tenuous.

Oxidative  processes  slow  ;    breath 
heavy  ;     moves    centrifugally  ; 
less    is    formed ;      more  is  dis- 
persed.

Tendency  to  fear ; 
neither  joy  nor 
anger  ;  heart  tends 
to  be  weak.

Thick,    turbid,     over- 
hot.

Breath  turbid  ;   as  the  blood  tends 
to       "inflame,"      the      breath 
thickens,     and     fails     to     cool 
properly.

Tendency  to  sadness 
and  even  continual 
vexation.

Therefore  the 
emotion    persists.

Rarefied ;            bilious 
humour    increased.

Breath  of  intense  heat,  and  rarefied

Anger,  which  comes 
and  goes.

Ditto,  but  also  bright 
and  clear.

Joy.

Thick,  but  not  turbid 
(rarely  met  with) .

Thick,    but   not   turbid.

Not  sad,   but  stron 
and   bold.         Very 
little      anger      be- 
cause  joy   neutral- 
ises this  (i).

Thick,  not  turbid,  cold.

Thick,  cold,  not  turbid.

Timid,  dull;    upright.

Thick,  turbid,  cold.

Gloomy,  solitary ;    a 
person    of    rancour 
and      resentment ; 
anger    arises     only 
at    great    provoca- 
tion (2).

Note  1. — Joy  easily  overcomes  the  emotion  of  anger.  It 
is  sadness  that  fosters  anger.  For  anger  is  an  impulse  to  expel. 
Happifymg  things  harmonize  with  pleasure,  and  pleasure  entails 
a  tendency  to  attract  or  gather  in.  So  it  will  need  a  big  thing  to 
make  such  a  person  angry  ;  and  as  a  very  concentrated  breath 
will  result,  there  can  be  very  little  fear.Note  2.— The  anger  will  not  last  as  long  as  it  would  in  hot- 
blooded  people  (in  whom  other  like  conditions  are  associated), 
but  longer  than  it  does  in  persons  whose  blood  is  rarefied.  So  he 
comes  to  be  a  man  of  resentment,  because  the  disposition  to  hate 
implies  the  persistence  of  hurtful  images  in  the  imagination.

2N

546  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

1118.  Part  played  by  imagination  in  emotions. — The  per- 
sistence of  an  imagination  which  is  disposed  towards  taking 
vengeance  for  a  thing  is  related  to  persistence. of  anger,  although 
there  is  not  sufficient  propulsive  power  to  execute  the  vengeance. 
The  anger  is  neither  marked  enough  nor  mild  enough.  For  it 
must  be  understood  that  when  anger  ceases  quickly,  the  hurtful 
image  does  not "  persist  in  the  imagination,  but  is  quickly 
destroyed  ;   so  rancour  becomes  impossible.In  like  manner,  too  much  tendency  to  secure  vengeance  is 
countered  by  two  factors  :  rancour  and  hate.  The  one  is  due  to 
the  mind  being  wholly  impelled,  to  vengeance,  but  prevented 
from  continually  reflecting  upon  the  hurtful  conditions  by 
remembering  the  things  which  follow  upon  having  hate  fixed 
in  the  memory.  The  mind  naturally  hesitates  to  face  impending 
hurts.  Externals  tend  to  draw  away  from  internals  and  vice  versa. 
It  must  also  be  remembered  that  when  there  is  too  much 
tendency  to  vengeance  in  a  fearless  person,  the  impression  results 
as  if  the  imagination  had  already  become  possessed  of  the  thing 
desired  for.  In  aiming  at  the  realization  of  a  power,  and  hastening 
towards  it,  the  imagination  of  such  a  person  takes  it  as  actually 
handled.  The  image  is  impressed  on  the  imagination  as  if 
actually  present  ;  then  the  image  of  the  thing  in  which  the 
purposed  action  will  end  is  added  to  the  imagination,  and  the 
desire  for  it  ceases  to  be  maintained  ;  the  image  is  abolished,  and 
therefore  does  not  linger  in  the  memory.  That  is  how  it  is  that 
rancour  is  not  there.

When  the  noxa  is  big,  as  where  a  sultan  or  very  high  digni- 
tary (usually  looked  on  with  fear)  is  concerned,  then  the  urgent 
anxiety  to  gain  vengeance,  coupled  with  the  fear,_  together 
prevent  the  image  of  the  desire  from  staying  in  the  mind.  The 
result  is  that  the  picture  of  the  desire  and  of  the  noxa  are  both 
abolished  from  the  imagination,  whereas  the  image  of  the  fear 
is  so  much  the  more  dominant  to  the  mind  that  it  evokes  a  desire 
to  flee  and  not  attack.  Here  again,  the  image  of  rancour  cannot 
persist  in  the  mind.In  the  case  of  persons  under  puberty,  or  weakly  persons, 
it  is  so  easy  to  take  vengeance  on  them,  and  there  is  so  little  fear 
entertained  of  them,  that  the  vengeful  mind  pictures  the  ven- 
geance as  if  already  accomplished.  Excessive  ease  in  securing 
vengeance  makes  it  pictured  as  if  already  in  one's  hand.  _  The 
imagination  acts  not  according  to  what  is  in  the  matter  at  issue, 
but  according  to  that  which  it  pictures  to  itself.  So,  when  ease 
of  fulfilment  arouses  the  thought  that  vengeance  is  attained,  the

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  547

weak-minded  person  ..takes  it  as  actually  attained.  So  the  love 
for  it  vanishes  and  is  entirely  obliterated  from  the  mind.

Moreover,  that  the  imagination  moves  according  to  that 
which. is  represented  to  it  and  not  according  to  the  outcome  of 
things,  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  men  dislike  honey  when  it  is 
served  up  like  bilious  matter  ;  and  they  dislike  laudable  sapid 
foods  should  their  colour  be  made  like  repugnant  substances  : 
or  even  when  they  are  served  in  the  appearance  of  repugnant 
objects,  even  though  such  things  are  not  believed  to  exist  at  all.

Similarly  with  this  :  when  a  given  likeness  to  the  above- 
named  thing  is  portrayed  (either  because  of  the  intensity  of  the 
impulse  of  the  desire,  or  because  of  the  worthlessness  of  realizing 
the  desire — as  though  it  had  actually  been  attained)  it  has  the 
same  effect  as  if  it  had  been  realized  ;  therefore  there  is  no 
rancour.

From  what  has  been  said  in  the  preceding  chapter,  it  is 
evident  that  the  last-named  kind  of  temperament  is  that  which  is 
most  disposed  towards  rancour.

9.      How  the  Appropriate   Medicines   Stimulate  and 
Strengthen  the  Breath.9.      How  the  Appropriate   Medicines   Stimulate  and 
Strengthen  the  Breath.

1119.  We  can  now  understand  how  the  appropriate 
medicines  can  stimulate.  Wine,  for  instance,  restores  the 
breath  by  nourishing  it  ;  pearl  and  silk  (which  counteracts 
disagreeable  things)  supply  the  breath  with  brilliance  and 
luminosity.  Emblic  myrobalan,  amber,  and  coral  concentrate 
the  breath  or  prevent  it  from  dissipating  rapidly  ;  doronicum 
modifies  the  temperament  of  the  breath  by  giving  it  heat, 
camphor  and  rose-water  do  so  by  imparting  cold  ;  sweet  aromatics 
strengthen  the  breath  by  endowing  its  substance  with  agreeable 
and  sweet  fragrance  ;  bugloss  and  lapis  lazuli  act  by  separating 
off  black  bile  and  fumosity.  Changes  are  produced  by  adding 
or  removing  a  drug  ;  e.g.,  coral  may  be  joined  with  amber  and 
bugloss.

In  some  cases,  gladness  is  the  outcome  of  the  intrinsic 
property  of  the  drug.  This  is  so  in  the  case  of  sumbul.  In 
other  cases,  the  intrinsic  property  of  the  drug  produces  its 
effect  indirectly  by  acting  upon  one  or  other  of  the  primary 
causes  of  gladness.  Thus,  musk  and  amber  act  on  the  breath 
by  way  of  their  aromaticity.  The  juice  of  matian  (359)  gives 
rise  to  gladness  in  virtue  of  an  intrinsic  property.  But  when  used 
in  a  case  where  the  temperament  of  the  breath  is  hot,  the  stimu- 
lant  action   is   effected   by   way   of  infrigidation.     When   the

548  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

temperament  of  the  breath  is  cold,  doronicum  acts  as  stimulant 
both  in  virtue  of  its  intrinsic  property  and  by  imparting  warmth 
to  the  breath.548  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

temperament  of  the  breath  is  cold,  doronicum  acts  as  stimulant 
both  in  virtue  of  its  intrinsic  property  and  by  imparting  warmth 
to  the  breath.

1120.  In  dealing  with  all  these  drugs,  then,  it  is  necessary 
to  know  whether  the  properties  are  general  or  specific.  When 
the  property  is  general  there  is  no  need  to  make  any  modifica- 
tions in  employing  it  for  weakness  or  depression  of  the  heart. 
An  instance  of  such  an  agent  is  afforded  by  aromaticity.  On 
the  other  hand,  where  the  property  is  specific,  it  requires  modifica- 
tion, For  instance,  the  juice  or  syrup  of  matianus  is  cold, 
and  will  stimulate  one  kind  of  temperament  bat  not  another. 
If  it  be  desired  to  use  matianus  to  make  a  person  of  cold  tempera- 
ment glad,  it  is  necessary  to  counteract  its  coldness  by  a  cale- 
facient  ;  and  it  would  be  more  efficient  to  choose  a  calefacient 
which  itself  is  intrinsically  a  stimulant.  For  instance,  musk 
or  amber  is  mixed  with  syrup  of  matian,  because  they  supply 
both  warmth  and  stimulating  power.

Aromaticity  and  sweetness  are  potencies  which,  though 
opposite,  are  yet  attracted  towards  qualities  which  are  agreeable 
to  the  substance  of  the  breath.  They  supply  the  taste  and  frag- 
rance which  the  natural  and  vital  power  respectively  desire 
to  receive.

Where  two  drugs  are  of  equal  power,  the  sweeter  and  more 
aromatic  of  the  two  will  prove  a  more  efficient  adjuvant,  because 
these  properties  are  more  attractive  to  the  members  (especially 
the  liver).  Should  nutrient  properties  be  present  as  well,  the 
.  breath  is  more  rapidly  nourished  ;  and  being  medicinal  in 
character,  it  acts  more  rapidly  on  the  breath.These  indications  guide  as  to  which  drugs  to  use  to  obtain  a 
more  rapid  effect.

1121.  The  essence  of  aromaticity  lies  in  its  rarefaction  ; 
the  essence  of  sweetness  lies  in  its  concentration  and  earthiness. 
This  explains  why  aromatics  are  so  much  better  adapted  to 
feed  the  breath,  while  sweet  substances  are  better  fitted  to  nourish 
the  body.  Consequently  aromaticity  is  more  efficient  for  the 
heart  than  sweetness,  while  it  is  the  other  wav  round  in  the  case 
of  the  liver.  The  heart  is  the  matrix  of  generation  of  the 
nutriment  of  the  breaths,  whereas  the  liver  is  the  matrix  of 
generation  of  the  nutriment  of  the  body.  That  is  why  it  needs  less 
aromaticity  and  more  sweetness  to  nourish  it  than  does  the 
heart.  All  the  same,  aromaticity  is  required  by  the  liver, 
because  that  organ  is  the  matrix  of  the  natural  breath — not  a 
matrix  of  generation  of  breath,  only  a  substrate  for  the  breath

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  549

to  reside  in   (according  to  those  acquainted  with  the  truth  ; 
not  according  to  those  who  merely  speculate.)

The  natural  breath  has  a  desire  for  aromaticity  and  is 
invigorated  and  refreshed  by  such.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  the 
natural  faculties  will  also  be  invigorated  in  consequence.

10.      What    "Property"   Is,   and    How   It  Differs   from

"  Nature."

1122.  Strictly  speaking,  the  specific  "  property  "  of  a 
thing  is  the  same  as  its  "  nature."  .The  one  term  would  really 
be  defined  by  the  same  words  as  the  other.  The  specific  property 
is  the  source  of  movement  or  rest  in  whatever  things  it  occurs.Nevertheless,  there  is  a  difference  between  the  two  con- 
ceptions, in  the  same  way  as  the  particular  differs  from  the 
universal.  It  is  not  true,  as  the  laity  think,  that  the  two  terms 
belong  to  opposite  things.  The  truth  is  that  the  first-principles 
behind  all  generable  and  corruptible  substances  are  primary 
active  or  kinetic  energies,  and  occur  either  simply  in  fire,  air, 
water,  and  earth,  or  linked  to  a  composite  temperament.

1123.  There  are  two  views  about  this  :  (a)  that  the 
disposition  appears  synchronously  with  the  production  of 
physical  form  ;  {P)  that  the  disposition  is  inherent  in  Matter 
from  the  outset.  Once  matter  assumes  a  given  physical 
form,  it  can  only  assume  some  other  form  by  dispersing  the 
first  form.  That  is,  Matter  relapses  to  the  natural  power  of  the 
disposition.

1124.  Whichever  view  is  correct,  it  is  true  that  from 
such  a  physical  form  (whose  constituents  have  become  so  to  say 
blended)  there  emerges  a  power  which  could  not  have  appeared 
in  the  several  separate  constituents.  For  instance,  the  attractive 
power  of  iron  in  a  magnet  is  not  in  any  of  its  component  powers. 
It  arises  out  of  the  divine  emanation  which  pervades  all  things 
and  makes  latent  energies  kinetic.  This  happens  in  one  of 
two  ways  :  (i)  by  means  of  something  primarily  inherent  in 
matter  ;  (ii)  by  means  of  the  temperament  which  itself  disposes 
it  to  receive  the  given  power,  and  is  yet  itself  neither  power  nor 
physical  form.1125.  We  now  have  the  answer  to  the  questions,  what  is 
"  specific  property  "  ?  What  is  "  nature  "  ?  If  one  asks, 
"  Why  does  fire  burn  ?  "  one  must  needs  answer  "  because 
the  thing  burning  has  a  combustible  nature."  If  one  asks3 
"  why  does  a  magnet  attract  iron  ?  "  it  can  only  be  said,  "  it  has

55o  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

an  attractive  power  by  nature."  To  say  that  fire  burns  because 
of  heat  is  no  better  than  saying  a  magnet  attracts  iron  because 
of  having  the  power  and  nature  to  attract  iron  ;  we  may  say  the 
nature  of  the  energy  called  "  heat  "  is  to  burn  up  in  fire,  and  call 
this  "  combustible  nature,"  "  combustible  power,"  but  there 
is  no  name  for  the  other.  The  giving  of  a  name  has  not 
imparted  complete  knowledge  about  the  matter  ;  to  know 
the  name  does  not  remove  the  real  lack  of  knowledge  about  a 
difficult  phenomenon.

1126.  But  people  are  not  usually  satisfied  by  the 
preceding  answer  because  they  want  to  believe  that  every 
property  arises  out  of  the  "heat,"  "cold,"  "dryness,"  or 
"  moisture  "  of  a  body,  in  virtue  of  heaviness  or  lightness 
or  movement  or  of  any  of  the  things  which  are  obviously  really 
dependent  upon  the  components.  When  they  find  that  actions 
are  not  to  be  attributed  to  any  of  the  aforesaid,  and  that  the 
real  reason  for  an  act  is  not  apparent,  they  come  to  the  con- 
clusion that  every  one  of  the  first  beginnings  is  inscrutable. 
That  is  not  true.  Actions  proceed  either  from  natural  or  vital 
or  intellectual  or  accidental  (contingent)  properties.1127,,  We  may  pass  over  as  untrue  the  other  theories 
held  about  magnetic  force — that  it  attracts  iron  because  of  (i) 
heat  ;  (2)  cold  ;  (3)  a  spirit  residing  in  the  magnet  itself  ; 
(4)  sending  out  hook-shaped  bodies  ;  (5)  likeness  between  the 
nature  of  the  magnet  and  the  nature  of  the  iron  ;  (6)  a  vacuum 
in  the  iron.  The  fallacy  in  all  these  ideas  is  easily  seen  when  we 
reflect  on  how  a  green  twig  acquires  nutritive  properties  from 
its  constitution,  which  is  the  same  sort  of  thing  as  the  reception 
of  magnetic  properties  from  a  constitution  in  the  iron.  What  is 
not  understood  is  why  the  magnetic  power  is  so  much  greater 
in  iron  than  in  any  other  thing  ;  yet  this  ignorance  is  no  greater 
than  that  which  exists  in  reference  to  other  matters.

1128.  This  ignorance  is  in  two  directions  :  (1)  we  do  not 
know  the  initial  factors  which  go  to  produce  this  attractive  power. 
Neither  do  we  know  them  in  regard  to  any  other  force.  (2) 
we  do  not  know  why  this  body  is  more  disposed  to  take  on 
magnetic  power  than  any  other  body.  But  neither  do  we  know 
more  in  regard  to  other  phenomena.  We  are  in  exactly  the 
same  case  concerning  colours,  fragrance,  powers  of  the  mind, 
and  such  like  matters.  Of  course  we  can  say  that  all  such 
phenomena  arise  out  of  the  active  principles  originally  blessed 
by  God,  and  we  can  allow  that  the  basis _  of  the  disposition 
which  comes  from  the  particular  constitution  is  due  to  a  re-

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  5SiTHE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  5Si

arrangement  of  Matter.  But  though  we  may  guess  that  it  is  the 
proportions  of  ingredients  which  account  for  the  existence 
of  a  temperament,  it  is  quite  another  thing  to  be  definite  about 
the  absolute  proportions  of  this  commixture,  and  we  shall  be 
ignorant  of  this  as  long  as  we  live  in  this  world.  .  So  it  is  evident 
that  our  ignorance  of  the  real  causes  of  the  power  in  the  magnet 
is  not  as  remarkable  as  our  ignorance  of  the  real  causes  which 
dispose  the  corporeal  or  mental  body  to  redness  or  yellowness.

1129.  The  fact  is  that  we  take  little  interest  in  the  com- 
mon things  of  life  ;  the  mind  neglects  to  study  them  ;  so 
often  is  it  true  that  the  rare  things  are  the  ones  to  excite  admira- 
tion and  be  enquired  after  and  their  causes  speculated  about.

1130.  Conclusion. — "  Specific  property  "  is  the  "  nature  " 
met  with  in  compound  substances  after  a  characteristic  tem- 
perament (and  its  correspondingly  special  and  characteristic 
state)  has  been  initiated  in  them  out  of  the  supreme  and  limitless 
"  influence."  This  is  the  real  truth  about  "  specific  property  " 
(individuality).In  spite  of  this  being  so,  it  is  common  for  people  to  say  that 
specific  property  differs  from  "  nature  "  in  that  the  former  ap- 
pears in  complex  bodies  after  a  special  act  has  occurred  to  make 
its  nature  manifest.     On  the  other  hand,  the  "  nature  "  of  a 
thing  is  said  to  be  the  power  by  which  simple  bodies  are  operated. 
This  is  as  far  as  the  laity  and  feeble  searchers-after-truth  can  see. 
Now,  if  Fire  is  a  difficult  thing  to  make,  and  is  carried 
from  distant  places,  surely  the  laity  might  wonder  at  the  specific 
properties  of  this  more  than  of  other  things,  and  look  more 
closely  into  the  causes  of  its  specific  property  than  they  do  into 
those  of  other  phenomena  that  appear  to  be  more  remarkable. 
To  think  how  Fire  removes  visible  forms,  cannot  be  touched, 
rises  upwards,  makes  the  things  over  which  it  can  prevail  ascend, 
can  be  generated  from  a  small  quantity  in  large  amounts  within 
an  hour,  destroys  whatever  it  meets  and  transmutes  it  into  its 
own  essence,  is  not  lessened  by  however  much  is  taken  from  it  ! 
— surely  these  facts  are  more  wonderful  than  the  attraction  of 
iron  by  a  magnet,  or  than  other  specific-properties.

But,  being  so  common,  seen  so  much  every  day,  these  things 
evoke  no  admiration.  There  is  no  interest  displayed  in  seeking 
their  explanation.  The  action  of  the  magnet  seems  extra- 
ordinary and  receives  universal  wonder,  and  everyone  is  inter- 
ested -to  enquire  into  its  nature,  and  origin.

55'

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE55'

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

(This  completes  the  first  part  of  this  tractate.  The  second  part  presents  a 
classification  of  the  drugs  acting  on  the  heart,  and  a  description  in  detail  of  their 
characters  and  properties  and  uses,  and  shows  how  to  combine  them  m  the  best 
manner  appropriate  for  the -varying  temperaments  which  the  physician  is  likely  to 
meet  The  plan  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  Second  Book  of  the  Canon,  so  that  the 
two  would  be  usefully  considered  together.  But  an  attempt  to  do  this  m  this 
treatise  would  unduly  add  to  its  bulk,  for  which  reason  the  translation  necessarily 
closes  here.)

CONCLUDING  SURVEY

URING  (§267)  the  past  fifty  years,  the 
popular  imagination  has  been  stirred  by  a 
succession  of  important  discoveries  in  the 
domain  of  medicine  and  surgery.  The 
triumphs  of  the  latter  field  have  been 
spectacular  to  a  degree.  Those  of  medi- 
cine have  been  much  less  conspicuous, 
chiefly  because  the  mind  must  enquire  into 
them  before  it  can  properly  appreciate 
them.  How  much  does  not  humanity  owe  to  the  steadily  con- 
tinued researches  in  bacteriology,  and  the  painstaking  observa- 
tions which  have  revealed  the  life-cycles  of  many  of  the  parasites  to 
which  tropical  and  other  diseases  are  due  ?  and  to  the  whole  pro- 
cedure of  immunotherapy,  the  just  pride  of  scientific  as  distinct  from 
clinical  medicine,  and  the  outcome  of  all  these  researches  ?§  268.  As  compared  with  all  this,  the  speculative  subtleties  of 
former  times  appear  both  futile  and  unworthy  of  resuscitation.  But 
the  ancient  system  was  not  as  valueless  as  is  so  generally  supposed. 
Taking  as  an  adequate  criterion  the  first  book  of  the  Canon  of  Medi- 
cine of  Avicenna,  which  is  here  presented  almost  in  its  entirety,  and 
is  fairly  representative  of  the  whole  work,  we  find  in  its  pages  refer- 
ences to  many  departments  of  human  knowledge* — cosmology, 
anatomy,  physiology,  and  psychology ;  the  various  branches  of 
clinical  medicine — etiology,  semeiology,  diagnosis,  and  prognosis  ; 
the  departments  of  therapeutics — hygiene,  dietetics,  balneology,  and 
climatology,  in  addition  to  materia  medica,  pharmacology,  and  phar- 
macy. Moreover,  the  reader  is  presumed  to  be  conversant  with 
logic,  criteriology,  and  metaphysics.

§  269.  The  presence  of  obvious  literal  errors  in  the  work  must 
not  lead  us  to  commit  the  more  serious  mistake  of  overlooking  the 
fact  that  it  is  entirely  built  up  upon  a  sound  philosophy  of  human 
nature,  which  is  as  vitally  important  to-day,  though  largely  ignored,

*  Though  it  might  be  objected  that  all  these  departments  of  knowledge  are 
now  separate  sciences,  each  requiring  its  own  professorial  staff,  its  own  literature,  and 
journals,  and  that  they  are  not  mentioned  under  the  special  names  with  which  we 
are  familiar,  their  existence  in  those  days  cannot  be  denied.

553

554  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE553

554  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

as  in  former  times.  The  ancient  medicine  was  concerned  essentially 
with  the  given  patient  now  before  us  ;  whereas  now  it  is  simply  the 
science  of  diseases  which  it  is  our  duty  to  diagnose  accurately,  prevent 
if  possible,  and  treat  on  lines  capable  of  wholesale  application.  To 
Avicenna,  the  determination  of  the  constitution  of  the  patient  was 
of  the  very  first  importance,  for  on  it  depended  the  character,  course, 
and  duration  of  his  illness/and  upon  that  again  depended  the  choice

of  remedies.  .

§  270.  After  all,  from  the  patient's  point  of  view,  the  real 
object  of  consulting  a  medical  man  is  to  be  restored  to  a  state  of  well- 
being.  It  is  little  comfort  to  be  (virtually)  told  that  85-90  per  cent, 
of  cases  of  his  complaint  are  cured  by  the  treatment  adopted  in  his 
case,  only  to  find  that  he  proves  to  be  one  of  the  remaining  10-15 
per  cent,  for  whom  there  is  litle  or  nothing  to  be  done.  True,  his 
sighs  are  drowned  in  the  shouts  of  the  fortunate,  and  fail  to  reach  the 
clinical   laboratory,    surgical   wards,    consulting   room   or   research

councils.  r

If  in  the  interests  of  these  few,  chance  leads  us  to  the  pages  ot 
this  ancient  work,  it  would  seem  that  suggestions  occur  in  it  which 
enable  us  to  understand  their  plight,  and  thereby  help  them  to  under- 
stand it  also.  Even  if  the  enemy  is  not  put  out  of  action,  his  enmity 
is  less  evident  when  he  is  understood.§271.  It  has  been  the  aim  of  this  treatise  to  elaborate  Avicenna^  s 
central  theme  by  references  to  the  various  philosophies  extant  in  his 
time_Sufic,  Vedantic,  Buddhistic,  Chinese  ;  to  Persian  writings 
subsequent  to  his  time  (Rumi,  Sa'di,  Shabistan,  etc.)  ;  and  to  views 
presented  by  various  modern  philosophies,  including  western  theo-

sophy.  ,

But  these  various  directions  of  thoughts  are  not  drawn  upon  in 
order  to  elaborate  a  composite  system  after  the  fashion  of  theosophical 
eclecticism.  On  the  contrary,  readers  accustomed  to  various  modes 
of  thought  are  invited  across  a  bridge  leading  from  their  various 
starting-points,  across  the  chasm  of  modernism,  until  they  reach  the 
concise  teaching  of  Thomistic  philosophy,  wherein  all  other  aspects 
of  the  one  truth  receive  their  proportionate  places.  The  inclusion  ot 
ideas  from  writers  who  appear  to  be  altogether  m  bye- ways  may 
torment  a  few,  but  may  also  help  a  few  to  see  the  greater  thing  and 
thereafter  be  content  to  stay  upon  the  broad  highway  to  which  the 
several  paths  have  converged.*

Science  has  been  removed  from  its  usual  role  of  master,  and  has 
been  pressed  into  service  ;  and  that  service  is  to  illuminate  the 
subject  of  human  nature.  To  quote  a  recent  paper  (Altounyan, 
Lancet,  i928,ii,684)  :  "  under  the  great  swelling  flood  that  represents 
the  growing  complexity  of  modern  medicine,  let  us  not  allow  ourselves*  This  aim  is  represented  in  pictorial  form  on  the  Plate  introducing  this  survey. 
The  upper  eft^ortra?t  reproduces^  of  Avicenna  ;  the :  upper  right portrait  is  of  a 
famous  ancient  Chinese  doctor.  The  bottom  portrait  is  one  of  the  late  lnajat 
Sn  to  whom  the  author  owes  his  introduction  to  the  « subject  of £he  Canoasomc 
vears  ago  The  centre  of  the  plate  fitly  gives  a  portrait  of  bt.  I  homas  Aquinas  1  d> 
Si  M^n  taken  from  "  Dominicana,"  Marchf  1927] .  In  this  way  the  scholastic 
philosophy^  suggested  as  the  natural  end  of  varied  but  converging  hnes  of  though.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  SS5THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  SS5

to  be  submerged.  Let  us  hold  fast  to  that  great  life-saving  conception 
of  the  essential  unity  of  the  human  body.  Let  us  oppose  fearlessly 
those  currents  of  medical  thought  that  tend  to  isolate,  arbitrarily  and 
to  the  detriment  of  true  knowledge,  the  various  segments  of  this  one 
great  subject.  Let  us  welcome  all  methods,  all  discoveries,  that 
help  the  one  man  in  charge  of  the  one  patient  to  broaden  the  base  of 
his  attack,  to  widen  the  sweep  of  his  beneficent  vision."  These  words 
were  possibly  expressed  with  a  different  object,  but  apply  well  to 
the  theme  of  this  treatise.  The  old  teaching  about  "  constitution  " 
should  undergo  a  mutual  intergrowth  with  the  knowledge  of  modern 
science,  pervaded  throughout  with  the  fundamental  teaching  of 
Thomistic  philosophy,  when  there  would  emerge  the  beginnings  of 
a  possible  system,  of  modern  scholastic  medicine — -thoroughly  logical, 
plain,  free  of  mystery,  free  of  materialism,  but  not  ignoring  the  so- 
called  "  occult  "  and  metaphysical  ;  with  the  knowledge  of  the  nature 
of  the  constitution  of  the  individual  patient  as  its  central  and  dominant 
theme.*  Were  the  whole  medical  training  along  such  lines,  the  student 
would  be  able  to  approach  his  clinical  instruction  thoroughly  aware 
that  the  individuality  of  the  patient  comes  first,  and  that  the  ailment 
from  which  he  suffers  is  but  part  and  parcel  of  one  single  story,  and 
not  merely  an  accidental  superposition.  But  the  student  would 
constantly  need  guidance  to  ensure  his  over-riding  the  disregard 
or  ignorance,  if  not  actual  rejection,  of  scholastic  principles  which 
characterizes  the  concrete  modern  teaching  of  pathology  in  its 
various  departments.

IIII

§  272.  The  following  brief  survey  of  the  most  important 
teachings  of  the  Canon  reinterprets  them  under  three  headings  : 
(1)  the  general  notion  of  the  nature  of  the  human  being  ;  (2)  the 
notion  of  the  constitution  of  any  individual  when  in  health  ;  (3)  the 
notion  of  the  nature  of  the  state  of  disease.  These  together  provide 
that  clear  mental  idea  of  "  the  patient  before  me  "  which  is  essential 
before  I  can  effectively  treat  him.

(1)    The  general  notion  of  the  nature  of  a  human  being.

The  following  three  propositions  belong  to  it.:  (i)  The  human 
being  (MF)  is  composed  of  matter  and  a  principle  of  life,  the  two 
together  making  him  "  he  "  ;  or,  he  is  "  a  single  substance  endowed 
with  a  natural  tendency  to  realize  and  maintain  the  conditions  of  its 
organization." — (ii)  This  principle  of  life  comprises  three  main 
groups  of  potential  and  actual  activities — the  vegetative,  the  sensitive 
and  the  rational.  This  multipotentiality  of  the  principle  of  life 
is  represented  in  the  expression  "  bundle  of  life." — (iii)  The 
organs  of  the  body  are  the  material  manifestations  (the  actualities) 
of  the  several  potentialities.  The  vegetative  organs  belong  to  the 
"  vegetative  soul,"  the  sense-organs  and  appurtenances  belong  to  the 
"sensitive  soul."     The  intelligence  and  will  belong  to  the  rational

*  This  sketch  of  the  scope  of  medicine  on  a  scholastic  basis  purposely  excludes 
reference  to   ethical   principles.

556  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

soul,  which  has  not  literal  organs  but  acts  through  the  instrumentation 
of  the  organs  of  the  vegetative  and  sensitive  systems.  All  these 
components  belong  intimately  together  apart  from  macroscopic  or 
microscopic  boundaries.These  propositions  are  further  defined  by  the  following  negative 
statements  :  (a)  The  human  being  is  not  a  collection  of  molecules 
and  forces  ;  he  manifests  chemical,  electrical,  and  other  phenomena, 
which  are  not  causes,  but  effects,  (b)  The  organs  are  not  distinct 
from  the  powers  they  exhibit,  (c)  The  brain  is  not  the  producer  of 
thought.*  Thought  is  produced  by  the  activity  of  the  rational  soul  ; 
the  changes  in  the  brain — whether  chemical,  cytological,  or  other- 
wise, are  not  causes,  but  the  visible  effects  of  the  activity,  id)  There 
is  no  bridge  over  the  gulf  between  rational  life  and  the  vegetative- 
sensitive  life  ;  the  distinctions  are  radical,  (e)  The  life-principle  is 
not  subject  to  the  laws  of  inheritance,  those  which  govern  matter  ; 
it  is  not  divisible  into  organs,  or  parts,  or  elements.  As  soon  as  it . 
ceases  to  operate,  there  is  left  behind  the  material  body,  which 
though  apparently  the  same  is  actually  quite  different  from  the 
animate  person  recently  before  me.

(2)   The  notion  of  the  constitution  of  any  given  individual  when 
in  health.

This  notion  should  be  made  as  tangible  as  possible.  Extending 
the  remarks  of  §  27,  the  constitution  may  be  expressed  in  terms  of  a 
number  of  formulasf  to  be  taken  together — a  series  of  "  notes," 
some  of  which  are  constants,  and  others  variables.I.— The  Constants,  (a)  The  body,  (a)  General  physique 
[good,  poor;  robust,  spare;  strong,  delicate].  (b)  Dominant 
"  element  "  [Ex.  :  E2W2F5A3].  (c)  Dominant  "  humour,"  shown  in 
the  humoral  formula  [Ex.  :  S^F^A2— for  sanguineous,  serous 
(lymphatic),  bilious,  and  atrabilious]  :  this  formula  is  really  descrip- 
tive of  the"  "  temperament,"  but  the  latter  word  bears  a  different 
meaning  in  modern  popular  usage,  (d)  The  absolute  or  relative 
strength  or  weakness  (functional  capacity)  of  the  several  organs  ; 
hypo-,  hyper-function.  Example  :  V4T4M203N1G3,  for  vegetative 
(i.e.  alimentary),  thoracic  (i.e.  respiratory  and  circulatory),  muscular 
(incl.  skeletal),  osseous  (inch  genito-urinary138),  nervous  (inch  sym- 
pathetic system)  and  glandular  (incl.  haemopoietic,  endocrine,  and 
hepatic)  types.138,  (e)  The  emotional  make-up,  or  formula.  Example: 
G3L2T1I5  (gaudium,  laetitia,  timor,  ira  :    §  160,  III),  from  which  the

*  The  remarkable  actions  which  man  achieves  by  his  complicated  mechanical 
contrivances  are  distinct  from  himself,  whereas  in  the  human  being  the  mechanism 
and  the  manipulator  are  the  selfsame.  Even  when  there  is  as  grave  mechanical 
interference  with  organs  as  occurs  in  hemiplegia,  or  in  the  cortical  lesions  of  insanity, 
the  rational  soul  remains  untouched,  though  no  longer  able  to  communicate  its 
activities  to  the  outer  world.— To  quote  St.  Thomas  :  '*  the  intellect,  being  a  power 
that  does  not  make  use  of  a  corporeal  organ,  would  in  no  way  be  hindered  m  its  act 
through  the  lesion  of  a  corporeal  organ,  if  for  its  act  therewere  not  required  the  act 
of  some  power  that  does  make  use  of  a  corporeal  organ."81  (p.  177.)j  In  the  supposititious  formula?  given,  the  qualities  are  represented  by  the 
initials  of  their  corresponding  names  ;  the  quantities  are  represented  by  mdex- 
numbers  from  1  to  5,  to  stand  for  slight,  moderate,  normal,  marked,  and  very  marked 
respectively.

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  557

dominant  passion  and  its  modifiers  are  noted.  The  modern  use  of 
the  word  "  temperament  "   belongs  here.

<2W  7fiR  di^%T°e  !f  CaP+tcity  is  ?artjy  ^Plained  by  considering  the  time-factor 
(233,  768  §  247),  and  partly  as  a  fundamental  difference  (45)  AH  the  material 
brought  to  an  organ,  whether  nutritive,  or  excretory,  is  not  at  once  taken  ub  fn 
^Tlr1^  T%  a  C+ertam  ProPOTtio»  is  amoved  and  the  remainder  passes  o^  £ 
that  the  blood  has  its  composition  at  a  certain  level.  The  modern  "threshold 
values      recognize  this  fact.     The  time-factor  is  of  very  great  importance.   nreSil0iCl(B)  The  mind.  Here  comes  the  description  of  the  disposition 
the  type  of  mind,  or  mental  make-up  (§§  78,  161,  164).  Mental 
capacity  may  be  expressed  in  terms  of  the  relative  or  absolute 
strength  or  weakness  of  the  various  faculties,  enumerated  under 
talents  (which  are  simply  developments  of  particular  faculties 
above  the  average)  in  §  1 64  (V).*  The  mental  attitude  towards  things 
which  emerges  from  the  character,  is  also  to  be  noted,  for  sometimes 
this  may  explain  the  cause  of  the  illness  (e.g.  wanton  exposure  to 
infections  m  spite  of  warnings),  and  will  show  whether  the  patient  is 
suppressing  relevant  facts,  will  respond  to  treatment,  or  is  secretly 
concerned  with  some  fear  or  doubt  which  is  the  real  object  of  his 
visit  to  the  doctor.  Moreover,  knowledge  of  this  aspect  of  character 
will  safeguard  the  physician  himself,  either  by  making  him  aware 
of  the  patient's  possible  cynical  opinion  about  a  profession  he  is 
unfortunately  obliged  to  deal  with,  or,  more  important,  by  enabling 
him  to  avoid  offering  advice  which  is  palpably  foolish  to  an  intelligent 
patient.  b

II.— THE  VARIABLES,     (i)  The  degree  of  vitality.     In  the  text 
this  is  also  spoken  of  as  strength  of  innate  heat.       See  also  under

k^ath  .  §§  *36>  Hi  J  and  its  phases  and  cycles  (§§138,  209) 
W,-4£viatlons  from  the  functional  capacities  normal  to  the  individual 
(m)  The  nature  or  degree  of  "  resistance."  In  terms  of  the  Canon 
this  would  be  expressed  in  the  "  humoral  formula,"  and  in  terms  of

obstructions  "  of  various  kinds.  These  account  for  the  "  soil  " 
which  renders  declared  disease  (a)  possible,  (b)  amenable  to  alter- 
ation by  artificial  means,     (iv)  Other  cycles  (296-301,  §  138    183)Foreign  though  such  data  are  to  modern  clinical  work,  they  are 
often  actually  employed  in  ordinary  conversation,  as  when  one 
describes  a  person  as  sanguine,  or  bilious,  or  phlegmatic,  or  as  of 
saturnine  temperament.  Some  adjective  descriptive  of  the  emotional- 
make-up  is  not  infrequent  in  case-reports.  Degrees  of  vitality  are 
spoken  of,  seriously  by  the  laity,  diplomatically  by  the  practitioner 
In  so  far  as  they  provide  a  simple  means  of  codifying  tentative  know- 
ledge upon  complex  and  elusive  individual  characteristics  which  it 
is  our  duty  to  notice,  the  data  are  all  worth  consideration.

J"  '**■*  better  the  disposition  of  a  body,  the  better  the  soul  allotted  to  it  ; 
S  t tinrJ  a?P6arS  "V*1^  of  different  species  :  and  the  reason  thereof  is  thai 
some  men T  pcavedmto  matter  according  to  matter's  capacity  ;  thu£  because 
SSt  b0dl^-0f  better  disposition,  their  souls  have  a  greater  power  of 
E«  f<w ?  g-l  '  *  •  ^-S  °CCU,rS  m  reSard  to  the  lower  P°wers  of  which  the  intellect 
minora*™  ™     °Peratl°*  =     for  those  in  whom   the  imaginative,   cogitative  and

Jw    ™ J  i  F°  af6  °f  b6tter  disposition,  are  better  disposed  to  understand  "

(oum.  ineol.84  p.  203.)

558  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

(3)    The  notion- of  the  nature  of  the  state  of  disease.(oum.  ineol.84  p.  203.)

558  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

(3)    The  notion- of  the  nature  of  the  state  of  disease.

§  273.  The  vegetative  processes  associated  with  digestion  and 
absorption  of  food  may  be  first  briefly  referred  to.  As  suggested  in 
§  27,  the  picture  of  the  whole  nutritive  cycle  is  comprehended  in 
the  idea  of  the  "  liver."  We  trace  the  food-constituents  through  the 
columnar  cells  of  the  intestinal  mucosa,  across  the  areolar  tissue 
into  the  vascular  roots  of  the  portal  and  lacteal  system  ;  then  into  the 
liver-unit  itself  (comprising  phagocytic  secretary  cells,  fundal  cells, 
cubical  excretory  cells,  and  the  hepatic  arterioles  and  lymphatic 
clefts  related  to  the  sinusoids).  Then  into  the  general  blood-stream, 
and  finally  out  of  the  body  through  various  organs,  including  the 
goblet  cells  of  the  intestinal  mucosa,  the  bile-ducts,  the  pancreas, 
etc.  The  extra-hepatic  portion  of  the  cycle  is  nearly  co-terminous 
with  the  rest  of  the  body.To  complete  this  picture  we  first  remember  the  relation  between 
quality  of  food  and  quality  of  chyme  ;  then  we  consider  how  the . 
ultimate  components  of  the  food  travel  (N-compounds,  glucose, 
fat,  phosphorus,  sulphur,  iron,  and  the  like)— during  rest,  exercise, 
sleep,  etc.  :  and  according  to  the  character  of  the  diet  as  a  whole, 
the  fluids  taken,  and  the  state  of  the  bowels,  etc.  We  may  realize 
that  they  are  manifested  in  the  blood  in  the  form  of  alkaline  tide, 
viscosity,  .fibrin-content,  and  the  various  morphological  changes 
revealed  by  blood-examination.  We  picture  also  the  innumerable 
chemical  interchanges  and  physical  transformations  in  various  parts 
of  the  cycle  ;  the  formation  of  waste-substances,  and  the  factors  on 
which  the  whole  of  the  processes  depend.  (§§  88,  105).  In  brief, 
then,  our  picture  of  the  body  is  that  of  a  complex  of  tubes  and 
channels  (potential  as  well  as  actual),  which  vary  in  size  from  the 
obvious  alimentary-canal,  air-passages,  and  great  blood  vessels, 
down  to  the  finest  ramifications  of  the  latter,  the  cavernous  tissues 
(both  macroscopic  and  microscopic),  the  serous  cavities,  and  the  intra- 
cellular channels.'  All  these  form  one  continuous  labyrinthine 
system,  through  which  we  may  trace  the  ingested  food  materials, 
the  metabolic,  secretory  and  excretory  products.  As  long  as  these 
channels  are  patent  throughout,  and  as  long  as  these  various  sub- 
stances (including  the  "  breath  of  life  ")  can  flow  freely  through 
them,  and  the  vital  energy  has  a  free  play  outwards,  so  long  is  the 
body  in  a  state  of  health.But  as  soon  as  there  is  a  continued  interference  with  the  freedom 
of  movement,  even  though  it  be  merely  an  ebb  and  flow  that  is 
affected,  in  any  part  of  the  canalicular  system,  then  a  state  of  disease 
arises,  culminating  in  histological  anatomical  changes.  Hence,  when 
we  observe  a  case  of  illness,  we  may  be  sure  there  is  some  "  ob- 
struction "  in  some  channels  in  some  part  of  the  body — not  neces- 
sarily in  that  where  the  symptoms  occur.

E.g.  :  The  nasal  discharge  of  "  cold  in  the  head,"  the  bronchial  expectoration 
in  bronchitis,  the  serous  effusion  into  the  pleura,  the  respiratory  phenomena  m  an 
attack  of  asthma,  are  manifestations  in  the  respiratory  system  of  obstructions 
elsewhere.

§  274.     The  next  addition  to  the  picture  of  the  sick  person's

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  559

state  is  furnished  by  the  causes  of  the  obstruction.  Avicenna  con- 
sidered these  under  two  groups,  the  "  material  "  (i.e.  those  in  which 
"  matter "  is  concerned)  or  "  humoral  diseases,"  and  the  non- 
material.  To  the  latter  group  would  belong  cases  of  gross  obstruc- 
tion, such  as  by  compression  from  without,  or  such  as  by  obstruction 
with  calculi  ;  and  those  in  which  there  is  a  functional  disorder — 
hypo-function,  hyper-function,  dysfunction.  For  instance,  in  renal 
disease,  the  loss  of  functional  capacity  may  render  the  normal  ebb 
and  flow  of  substances  disorderly.141§  275.  The  group  of  humoral  diseases  is  predominant  in 
Avicenna's  pathology,  and  if  we  bear  in  mind  what  the  "  humours  " 
really  are,  this  position  becomes  quite  reasonable.  Perverted  meta- 
bolism is  associated  with  changes  of  physical  state  in  the  fluids  of  the 
body.  Limpid  fluids  may  become  viscid,  viscous  substances  may 
become  mobile  or  "  tenuous."  In  the  ancient  work,  these  chemical 
changes  were. thought  of,  not  in  "  equations,"  but  under  interchanges 
between  the  imponderable  elements  ;  as  being  subject  to  the  laws  of 
urooj,  nasool,  jelal,  jemal,  qada,  qadr,  the  rhythm,  phases  and  rate 
of  movement  of  the  "  breath  "  ;  and  the  fluctuations  of  degree  of 
innate  heat.  Concrete  examples  are  such  as  :  precipitation  of 
urates  in  tissues,  altered  reaction  of  tissue-juices  in  rheumatoid 
arthritis,  cardio-renal  disease,  tuberculosis  ;  variations  of  content  of 
Ca,  Na,  Mg,  etc.,  in  the  tissue-water,  so  that  the  flow  from  tissue 
to  blood  and  vice  versa  is  impeded.  (Cf.  Bechold,  xi%  Schade,137^, 
Pearson  and  Wyllie,160  and  many  other  authorities).

The  Canon  often  insists  on  the  presence  of  "  superfluities-^  as  a 
cause  of  "  obstructions  "  of  the  canalicular  system — not  only  in'the 
tangible  four  humours,  but  also  in  regard  to  the  "  Breath  "  ("  fuli- 
ginous superfluities,"  238).  In  the  latter  case,  the  substance  of 
the  breath  (i.e.  water- vapour)  ceases  to  be  "  bright,"  and  "  clear," 
and  its  odour  becomes  offensive,  and  its  freedom  of  flow  is  im- 
paired.§  276.  Finally,  adding  from  modern  knowledge,  there  are  the 
changes  in  the  fluids  of  the  body  produced  by  bacterial  or  putre- 
factive breakdown,  whether  this  begins  in  intestinal  stasis,  or  arises 
in  the  course  of  specific  bacterial  infections.  There  are  then  obstruc- 
tions not  only  in  the  old  sense,  but  in  the  form  of  the  successive 
histological  lesions  consequent — vascular,  nutritional,  and  inflam- 
matory. Materials  are  deposited  more  or  less  permanently  (irre- 
versible reactions),  as  e.g.  solid  oedema,  collagenous  tissue,  scar- 
formation,  fibrosis  and  hyalo-fibrosis,  adipose  tissue,  hyperplastic 
formations.  Loss  of  anatomical  patency  is  superadded  to  loss  of 
functional  perviousness.

§  277.  Clearly,  whereas  we  give  first  place  to  the  bacterial 
invasion,  Avicenna  gave  it  to  the  habits  of  life.  He  was  so  deeply 
impressed  by  the  obvious  fact  that  the  quality  of  food  determines 
the  kind  of  chyme,  that  the  kind  of  chyme  determines  the  quality 
and  amount  of  the  four  humours,  106,  360,  791,  §  195  (3).  The 
quality  and  amount  of  humours  determine  the  quality  and  Quantity 
of  the  waste  effete  products  (i.e.  the  superfluities).      These  affect

56°

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

the  freedom  of  flow  through  the  diffuse  canalicular  system  of  the  body. 
As  they  accumulate  in  the  stagnating  tissue-juices  they  come  to 
exercise  a  noxious  action  ;>.  they  come  to  be  beyond  the  capacity  of 
the  third  and  fourth  digestions  (tissue-digestion),  and  with  their 
stagnation  the  ever-circulating  bacteria  (taken  up  with  the  food) 
also  settle  and  multiply  and  wandering-cell  infiltrations  gather  to- 
gether. The  beginnings  of  disease  are  laid  down.  The  functional 
disturbance  has  been  succeeded  by  anatomical  lesions  (222,  226).§  278.  The  following  chart  illustrates  this  notion  of  the  nature 
of  the  state  of  disease.  The  amount  of  disease-substance  or  "  super- 
fluity "  is  plotted  out,  say  from  day  to  day,  and  shows  an  irregular 
line.  As  long  as  this  line  does  not  reach  higher  than  a  certain  level, 
say  b,  the  person  appears  to  be  in  perfect  health.  If  the  accumulation 
of  morbid  matter,  with  associated  "'  obstruction,"  is  at  a  higher  level, 
but  below  the  heavy  line  c,  he  may  feel  ill,  but  has  no  definite  lesions. 
If  the  superfluity  curve  reaches  above  c,  there  is  some  lesion  which 
can  be  definitely  diagnosed.  There  is  a  concrete  diseased  state. 
The  height  of  the  curve,  and  its  nearness  to  the  danger  level,  b, 
can  be  determined  by  the  use  of  reasoning,  aided  by  the  various 
"  indications."

jtaJre  of  \e.a-(tk

Un  ktal 'irky , 
•       sUfe  '  •

\  HI         A

I    s~feJ~e    of 
I     illness

x'   «f

..r  »

■Jf    •'"■/"yeZty

0^

r^

0^

Tc

me.

§  279.  Finally,  Avicenna  enlarges  his  view  of  humoral  disease 
by  noting  the  influence  of  many  extracorporeal  factors  (234,  sqq.) 
as  well  as  the  period  of  life,  not  to  mention  the  "  decree  of  Allah  ^ 
(61).  Thus,  one  and  the  same  kind  of  food  taken  at  the  "  warm  " 
period  of  life  in  the  "  warm  "  season  may  contribute-  more  to  the 
formation  of  a  given  humour  than  at  another.If  we  knew  the  patient's  formulae,  and  how  the  climatic  and  other 
conditions  are  likely  to  affect  it,  and  whether  they  are  compatible  or 
not  with  susceptibility  to  the  agents  at  work,  our  composite  picture 
of  the  patient's  state  would  be  of  great  value,  and  illnesses  often 
inexplicable  would  lose  their  mystery.  How  much  more  efficient 
might  not  the  treatment  be,  if  the  remedial  measures  in  contemplation 
were  selected  to  harmonize  with  them  ?

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  561

No  doubt  only  a  fanatic  would  note  the  barometer,  thermometer,  humidity, 
hours  of  sunshine,  wind-direction  and  velocity,  the  character  of  previous  seasons, 
the  clues  afforded  by  the  migrations  of  insects,  rodents,  and  birds,  the  presence  or 
prevalence  of  certain  parasites  in  a  district,  and  the  many  other  points  noted  in  191 
to  451,  before  prescribing  the  regimen  for  the  patient.  But  it  would  seem  that  some 
Eastern  physicians  of  bygone  times  conscientiously  strove  to  learn  from  such  factors.

Ill

The  Guides  to  the  Diagnosis  of  the  State  of  the  PatientIll

The  Guides  to  the  Diagnosis  of  the  State  of  the  Patient

§  280.  The  patient  before  us  is  as  a  manuscript  written  in  some 
highly  complex  language  which  it  is  our  business  to  decipher.  The 
alphabet  is  furnished  by  the  several  colours,  the  simple  observations 
of  size,  shape,  consistence,  contour,  texture,  and  the  like.  The 
vocabulary  consists  of  the  external  features  both  in  repose  and  ani- 
mation, and  of  the  physical  signs  as  taught  to-day.  The  grammar  lies 
in  the  "  general  guides  "  (sphygmology,  urinoscopy,  examination  of 
faeces  and  blood).  The  language  is  to  be  translated  into  :  states  of 
natural  (vegetative),  sensitive,  and  emotional  faculties,  functional 
capacities,  plethora,  obstructions,  solutions  of  continuity,  etc. — ■ 
that  is,  the  state  of  the  whole  composite,  in  all  aspects.  This  task 
can  only  be  accomplished  imperfectly  at  the  best,  even  by  the  most 
skilled  and  most  learned.  Our  silent  teachers,  or  guides,  the  "  indi- 
cations "  ("dalil")  always  enable  us  to  ascertain  something,  and  we 
must  perforce  be  content  with  that  on  the  present  occasion  and  be 
determined  to  use  this  experience  as  the  guide  to  better  success  on 
the  next.§  281.  One  of  the  guides  suggested  in  the  Canon  lies  in  one's 
own  state  of  health.  Properly  to  interpret  what  we  observe,  we  must 
ourselves  have  no  disharmony  of  functions  arising  from  errors  of 
diet,  no  deposit  in  the  urine,  no  weight  in  the  bowels,  no  obstructions 
in  our  own  brain,  no  mental  fatigue,  no  emotional  pre-occupation, 
no  rigid  notions  regarding  etiology  or  prognosis  ;  there  must  be 
clear  channels  for  the  breath,  and  the  breath  must  be  under  the 
control  of  the  will  ;  it  must  be  kept  pure  by  recollection,  by  devotion, 
and  observance  of  prayer.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  under  such 
conditions,  long  persevered  in,  we  are  enabled  to  receive  an  "  im- 
pression "  from  the  patient ;  we  become  aware  of  his  atmosphere, 
aura,  or  personality  in  the  form  of  an  idea  of  his  degree  and  kind  of 
vitality.  But  unless  this  impression  is  registered  rapidly,  namely 
at  the  first  approach  of  the  patient,  it  will  be  confused  and  illegible 
by  reason  of  the  mutual  inter-impression  of  one's  own  vitality  with 
his.  In  another  idiom,  we  observe  "  with  the  eye  of  a  Taoist."  In 
our  own  idiom,  we  make  use  of  sound  reasoning  power,  common 
sense,  and  a  certain  kind  of  "  intuition,"  or  "  clinical  sense."

§282.  The  guides  furnished  by  general  observation  of  the  patient  are,  in 
brief  :  (I)  External  features  in  repose  :  (a)  Colours  :  of  face,  hair,  skin,  eye  (sclerae, 
iris).  (6)  Odours  and  savours,  (c)  Form  of  the  body  (i)  as  a  whole  ;  (ii)  in  detail. — 
The  features,  the  hands,  the  limbs  ;  the  relative  proportions  (length,  breadth,  and 
thickness)  of  nose,  cheeks,  upper  lip,  lower  lip,  chin,  mouth,  ears,  orbit,  eyebrows.

20

562  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE20

562  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

forehead,  etc.  ;  the  character  of  the  neck,  shoulders,  etc.*  (II)  Features  when 
animated  :  {a)  Expression  :  gaze,  look,  facial  gestures  (vivacity,  sleepiness  ;  langmd- 
ness)  (6)  Deportment,  or  attitude  (455)  :  gestures,  carriage,  specific  acts  or  manner- 
isms, definitely  morbid  movements  or  defective  movements,  (c)  Voice  :  tone  of 
voice,  manner  of  speech  (clear,  loud,  or  the  opposites)  ;  clues  to  the  physical  and 
mental  type,  and  the  degree  of  energy  and  vitality.  (The  observation  of  the  voice 
simply  in  relation  to  the  diagnosis  of  aneurysm  is  quite  insufficient.)§283.  The  "general"  guides.  Our  use  of  these  differs 
noticeably,  from  that  revealed  in  the  Canon.  To  follow  Avicenna, 
(i)  when  one  places  the  hand  on  the  pulse,  one  absorbs  oneself  in  it, 
without  the  distraction  of  a  watch,  until  one  has  found  out  how  it 
runs — minute  after  minute.  Even  if  it  misses,  without  an  intermission 
of  the  heart,  because  the  patient  gives  a  twitch  of  the  finger  or  begins 
to  talk,  one  learns  even  from  that.  .  The  study  of  the  circulation  is 
more  than  the  study  of  the  heart's  action,  (ii)  When  one  examines 
the  urine,  even  with  all  the  apparatus  of  modern  chemistry,  we  must 
remember  that  it  is  first  and  foremost  the  guide  to  the  state  of  diges- 
tion—especially its  "  second  stage  "  (that  in  the  liver)  as  well  as  in 
the  "  third  "  stage  (that  .in  the  small  vessels).  We  are  misled  by  the 
search  for  albuminuria  and  glycosuria,  for  many  would  make  these 
abnormalities  into  diseases.  Thus,  the  number  of  persons  in  whom 
albuminuria  is  not  evidence  of  renal  disease  far  outnumber  those  in 
which  it  is  ;  the  presence  of  such  a  substance  in  the  urine  should  lead 
to  the  questions  :  is  some  substance  not  being  dealt  with  ?  if  so, 
why  ?  can  only  the  kidney  handle  it  ?  To  follow  a  useful  rule,  the 
real  trouble  is  remote.  It  may  lie  in  the  brain,  in  the  emotional  state 
(cf.  Graves'  disease,  e.g.).  Pentosuria,  cystinuria,  alkaptonuria  also 
break  the  current  ideas  about  urinalysis.162  (hi)  As  regards  the  guide 
furnished  by  the  faecal  matter,  again,  our  knowledge  is  much  greater 
than  was  Avicenna' s  and  we  do  not  apply  it  in  his  terms.  We  are 
apt  to  lose  ourselves  in  fat  analyses,  nitrogen  estimations,  occult 
blood  tests,  B.  coli  classifications.  Negative  results  in  each  case  are 
taken  to  mean  "  nothing  of  note,"  regardless  of  the  continual 
secretory  and  excretory  changes  proceeding  in  the  intestinal  mucosa, 
and  the  vitality  of  nerve-ganglia,  etc.  Essential  and  definite  derange- 
ments may  occur  without  conspicuous  deviations  from  the  restricted 
standards  usually  laid  down.§  284.  The  guide  furnished  by  an  examination  of  the  blood 
may  be  spoken  of  as  the  most  notable  modern  addition  to  Avicenna' s 
three  general  guides.  The  data  obtained  from  it— physical,  physico- 
chemical,  cytological,  serological — are  very  numerous,  but  are  lost 
more  often  than  not  by  restriction  to  the  diagnosis  of  the  various

*  Space  does  not  allow  of  any  attempt  to  furnish  precise  details  of  the  external 
signs  of  functional  capacity  of  internal  organs.  The  principle  is  exemplified  thus  : 
the  lower  part  of  the  nose  is  part  of  the  respiratory  system,  and  shares  in  the  degree 
of  development  of  the  whole  system  ;  therefore  wide  nostrils  with  well-formed  ate 
so  with  good  development  of  the  whole  respiratory  function,  whereas  narrow  delicate 
nostrils  and  small  ate  refer  the  observer  to  some  other  system  as  well-developed 
Large  mouth,  thick  lips,  large  masseters,  and  generally  well-developed  lower  part 
of  the  face  go  with  good  development  of  the  digestive  tract  throughout.  Moreover, 
development  or  capacity  above  the  average  in  one  system  denotes  relative  weakness 
and  functional  deficiency  in  another  system.— The  subject  is  extensive.'"

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  563

"  blood-diseases."  When  properly  applied,  all  the  data  obtained 
from  the  blood  inform  us  of  the  functional  state  of  all  the  organs, 
and  of  the  existence  of  the  main  groups  of  pathological  state  (§  173).

IV 
Treatment

"  The  healing  art,  as  it  is  described  in  books,  is  far  inferior  to  the  practical 
experience  of  a  skilful  and  thoughtful  physician. "(Rhazes.)IV 
Treatment

"  The  healing  art,  as  it  is  described  in  books,  is  far  inferior  to  the  practical 
experience  of  a  skilful  and  thoughtful  physician. "(Rhazes.)

"  He  went  forth  and  hired  himself  a  house  in  the  city  for  the  better  storage 
of  his  books  and  scrolls,  his  medicines  and  his  aromatic  roots.  Then  he  set  to  work 
choosing  the  fittest  drugs  and  simples."     Night  49.     (Burton.)

"  Many  are  healed  by  the  action  of  nature  without  the  art  of  medicine." 
(Summa  contra  Gent.82  ii.  75,  p.  204.)  "  Man  teaches  by  outward  ministration,  but 
God  by  inward  operation  :  even  so  the  physician  is  said  to  minister  to  nature  when  he 
heals. "(ib.  p.  205.)

§  285.  APPLICATION  of  the  principles  of  the  Canon  to  modern 
practice  would  seem  superfluous.  The  common  ailments,  especially 
those  of  minor  surgery,  are  nowadays  treated  in  stereotyped  fashion, 
which  appears  to  be  beyond  improvement.  It  is  not  with  such  cases 
that  reference  to  the  Canon  is  suggested.  It  is  the  general  principle 
which  may  be  reviewed  in  the  mind,  and  lines  of  treatment  such  as 
were  once  in  vogue  may  be  quite  usefully  applicable  in  a  few  cases 
which  do  not  well  respond  to  modern  methods.  Moreover,  the 
conscience  of  even  the  most  careful  may  not  be  altogether  clear  in 
regard  to  the  immemorial  rule  :    "  tuto,  cito,  otjucunde."

The  subject  may  be  briefly  considered  under  two  headings  : 
plan  of  treatment  ;    methods  of  treatment.

(1)    The  plan  of  treatmentThe  subject  may  be  briefly  considered  under  two  headings  : 
plan  of  treatment  ;    methods  of  treatment.

(1)    The  plan  of  treatment

§  286.  Choice  of  a  plan  of  treatment  depends  on  the  view  which 
is  taken  as  to  the  cause  of  the  illness.  It  is  no  new  or  modern  thing 
to  say  "  treat  the  cause."  The  distinction  between  new  and  old  is 
in  regard  to  the  idea  of  the  nature  of  the  cause.  In  these  days  nearly 
every  illness  is  ultimately  due  to  an  infection  or  intoxication,  and  the 
aim  of  treatment  is  to  destroy  the  one  and  render  the  other  innocuous. 
To  Avicenna,  illness  was  primarily  an  abnormal  state  of  condition, 
to  which  many  factors  contributed,  and  the  scheme  of  treatment  must 
therefore  envisage  them  all.  To  facilitate  this,  the  practitioner  of 
those  days  would  advisedly  mentally  review  the  whole  of  the  Second 
Part  (191-451).

§  287.  Indeed,  if  we  scrutinize  the  subject  more  closely,  it  will 
appear  that  Avicenna's  plan  is  after  all  very  proper.  For,  even  if 
we  could  attack  the  microbic  cause  specifically,  there  would  still 
remain  the  lesions  which  it  has  produced,  and  the  lowering  of  the 
vitality  {=  interferences  with  the  flow  of  vital  currents,  in  Paracelsus' 
idiom29).  A  condition  remains  to  be  combated  ;  the  condition  is 
uppermost  as  far  as  the  patient  is  concerned.  Even  in  those  relatively 
few  cases  in  which  the  disease  is  bound  up  with  a  particular  organ,

564

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

so  that  the  name  of  the  disease  is  according  (e.g.  gastric  ulcer, 
cerebral  haemorrhage),  it  is  the  condition  we  have  to  face,  lhe 
cause,  even  when  known,  has  done  its  work,  and  gone.S  288  It  is  true  that  many  other  interpretations  of  disease  and  corresponding 
plans  of  treatment  are  put  forward  in  various  quarters  from  time  to  time,  especially 
by  the  intellectually  anarchistic.  This  occurrence  is  partly  the  outcome  of  the 
arbitrary  attitudes  towards  patient  and  friends  sometimes  exhibited  by  some  of  the 
representatives  of  academic  medicine  and  would  be  best  met  by  frank  and  courteous 
enquiry  into  lay  opinions.  Not  everyone  subscribes  to  the  restrictions  of  medical 
ethics  and  the  patient  is  too  often  treated  as  if  illness  ipso  facto  at  once  deprives  him 
of  ordinary  intelligence.  After  all,  he  seeks  medical  help  for  a  distinct  object,  and 
remuneration  for  the  services  is  presumed,  so  that  he  is  entitled  to  go  elsewhere  at 
his  own  choice,  if  unfortunately  in  his  particular  case  the  plan  and  method  of  treat- 
ment proves  unsuccessful.  But  this  view  is  not  subscribed  to  by  those  who  assume 
that  the  whole  of  the  knowledge  needed  for.  every  case  is  comprehended  within  the 
orthodox  teaching  of  the  day,  and  that  every  individual  possesses  it.

(2)   The  methods  of  treatment

§  289.  Even  the  methods  of  treatment  set  forth  in  the  Canon 
are  still  resorted  to  at  times.  No  doubt,  we  would  do  well  to  follow 
them  more  frequently.  Thus,  systematic  purgation  is  often  called  for, 
but  not  carried  out  as  radically  as  of  old.  Cupping  is  still  of  value 
for  such  conditions  as  lumbar  myositis,  acute  (hemorrhagic)  neph- 
ritis and  those  diseases  amenable  to  autohcemolysins.  Venesection 
is  sometimes  effectively  applied  for  cases  of  high  blood-pressure, 
threatened  apoplexy  ;  it  is  incidentally  used  in  the  course  of  obtaining

blood-tests.

§  290.       Drug     1  reat-blood-tests.

§  290.       Drug     1  reat-

ment.- — The  steady  decline 
of  drug  treatment  in  modern 
medical  practice  is  evi- 
denced in  several  direc- 
tions, (a)  The  steady 
removal,  in  successive  edi- 
tions of  the  British  Pharma- 
copoeia of  herbal  remedies 
which  are  supposed  to  have 
no  action  because  labora- 
tory animals  appear  to  be 
unaffected  by  them,  {b)  The  infrequency  with  which  medicines  are 
ordered  for  hospital  patients,  (c)  The  penalization  of  panel  prac- 
titioners for  "over-prescribing."  (d)  The  desire  on  the  part  of 
many  lay  persons  to  banish  "  drugs  "  as  being      unnatural.

Inconsistencies  are  frequent.  There  is  the  strange  perversity 
which  (through  legislation)  denies  facilities  for  the  use  of  the  tew 
drugs  whose  potency  is  quite  unquestionable.  There  is  the  subter- 
fuge of  resorting  to  placebos  (which  often  cost  no  more  than  the 
bottle  containing  them).  Those  among  the  lay  who  decry  drugs  are 
pleased  to  employ  "  herbal  "  remedies.  Where  there  is  a  popular 
demand  for  the  latest  remedies,  this  is  met  by  a  never-ending  stream 
of  new  synthetic  and  other  preparations,  and  costly  manufactured 
products,  which  also  the  medical  world  submits  to.    Truly  the  mind

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  $6$THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  $6$

ever  seeks  in  the  relatively  inaccessible,  and  the  expensive,  that  which 
lies  all  the  time,  and  without  price,  at  our  feet.  It  describes  as 
"  progress  "  that  which  better  knowledge  would  render  superfluous. 
§  291 .  The  truth  is  that  we  know  far  too  little  about  the  herbal 
remedies  of  the  Canon.  To  begin  with,  we  forget  that  they  cannot 
be  efficient  without  careful  attention  to  the  conditions  of  their  culti- 
vation (soil,  climate,  season,  etc.),  the  times  proper  for  their  collection, 
the  details  of  their  preservation,  and  the  laws  governing  the  formation 
and  circulation  of  the  active  principles  during  the  life-cycles  of  the 
various  plants.  We  do  not  individually  know  how  to  identify  adulter- 
ations, whether  accidental  or  deliberate.  We  leave  to  wholesale 
manufacture  that  which  was  once  properly  undertaken  individually, 
since  personal  artistic  skill  may  be  the  real  condition  for  pharmaco- 
logical efficiency.  We  adopt  the  short  cut  of  standardization  of  drugs 
as  the  remedy  for  the  loss  of  potency  inevitable  after  neglect  of  such 
various  factors.— But  even  if  the  purity  and  potency  of  remedies  be 
granted,  by  recourse  to  the  best  sources,  they  must  be  employed  with 
deliberate  care.  As  Avicenna  shows  in  the  second  book  of  the  Canon, 
there  must  be  a  knowledge  of  the  constitution  or  individuality  of  the 
plants  which  yield  the  drug  ;  harmony  with  the  constitution  of  the 
patient  must  be  aimed  at.  Out  of  a  number  of  drugs  of  like  action, 
some  will  accord  better  with  one  person's  constitution  than  with 
another's.  One  remedy  may  soothe  and  ease  without  its  specific 
action  being  at  all  diminished,  whereas  another  performs  its  work 
harshly  and  unpleasantly  ;  another  may  be  overpowered  by  the 
personal  factor.  The  scope  of  the  subject  is  great,  and  its  study, 
with  intent  to  serious  practical  application,  should  not  require  an 
apologia."§  292. — Such  considerations  as  these  open  the  door  of  Romance.  The  discovery 
that  all  Nature  is  a  living  Whole,  always  at  work,  earnestly,  steadily,  continuously 
developing  an  idea,  would  arouse  a  new  and  intensely  absorbing  interest — that  of 
watching  the  Unseen  Worker  ;  though  His  hands  are  not  to  be  discerned,  that  which 
He  does  is  ever  proceeding  before  us  as  a  continual  motion-picture  ;  and  we  may 
become  aware  not  only  of  the  merely  superficial  fact  of  the  movements,  but  also  of  the 
purpose  unfolding.  Watching  the  medicinal  trees  and  shrubs  and  herbs  in  this  way, 
and  seeing  their  properties  by  their  forms,  and  colours  and  odours,  and  their  changes 
m  character  with  the  changes  of  the  seasons,  and  alternations  of  drought  and  plenty 
(variations  of  rate  of  growth,  of  activity  of  flowering  and  fruiting), — how  great  is  the 
wonder  of  the  work  of  Nature  !  We  note  how  substances  are  being  elaborated  into 
plants  which  we,  wanting  their  help,  know  how  to  take  at  the  crucial  moment — 
"  now  we  must  draw  the  resin  ;  now  we  must  take  these  flowering  tops,"  and  so  on. 
But  we  are  not  the  only  watchers.  The  bees  have  been  waiting,  and  the  birds,  the 
slugs,  the  ants,  the  herbivora — all  these  and  many  others  wait  to  draw  from  such 
supplies  that  which  is  applicable  to  their  several  requirements.  Nature  Herself  also 
waits  for  all  these  things  to  be  collected  from  Her  treasury.  Everything  has  been 
worked  out ;  the  interactions  are  arranged  for  ;  they  all  belong  to  the  purpose  of  the 
Designer  ;  and  He  Himself  is  waiting  for  that  over  which  He  incessantly  broods,  with 
entire  and  complete  intention.  He  too  waits  to  draw  out  of  Creation  that  which  was 
His  object  in  making  it  !§  293.  No  doubt  it  is  true  that  few  of  the  ancient  physicians  entered  fully  into 
this  inner  life  of  the  world  of  which  they  formed  a  part.  Few  even  of  those  who 
learnt  the  Qanun  by  heart  may  have  applied  it  effectively  at  all  times  and  on  all 
occasions  ;  few  may  have  meditated  sufficiently  to  consider  the  soul-life  of  the 
patient  they  were  called  upon  to  help.  But  the  Life  was  there  then,  as  it  is  here  now. 
It  could  be  read  then,  as  it  should  be  now.  The  entry  to  the  infinite  treasure-house 
of  Nature  was  not  locked  then,  and  it  is  not  locked  now.     Indeed,  the  entry  was  not

566  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE566  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

merelv  through  one  door  ;  there  was  a  portal  of  entry  on  every  side.  Doors  so  large 
StobedSniblefrom'afar;  doors  so  small  that  few  could  find  them  .but  even 
through  the  smaUest  there  was  the  same  ability  to  enter  the  treasure-hall.  Travellers 
in  those  days  might  fear  imagined  ogres,  jinn,  and  terrifying  guardians  to  counter 
talismans  ;  but  the  keys  of  safety  were  everywhere  to  hand  for  all  these  beings  were 
amenable  to  caresses-the  caresses  of  a  heart  which  approached  them  with  reverence 
and  affection  ;  asking  questions  but  never  injuring  ;  always  treating  everything 
within  the  treasury  (for  it  is  living)  as  gently  as  one  should  approach  to  watch  a 
sleeping  babe^  ^  ^  ^  ourselves  not  to  pass  these  things  by.  If  we  did  nothing 
more  than  study  the  materia  medica  of  those  days  to  see  what  products  were  avail- 
able we  should  have  ample  material  for  thought,  and  become  cognisant  of  the  links 
betweln  that  age  and  this.  The  drugs  are  still  cultivated,  and  still  used  m  the  East 
L  tie  manner  ff  the  past,  and  the  history  of  their  names  adds  to  our  understanding 
of  their  uses  While  it  is  true  we  can  supply  our  needs  through  an  order  to  the 
apothecary  based  on  information  imparted  to  us  through  various  intermediaries,  we 
may  some  day  find  that  in  doing  so  we  have  omitted  to  look  mside  the  treasure-house 
Togo  back  to  the  old  paths,  watching  Nature  and  studying  the  uses  of  the  living 
plants  is  not  to  lose  the  definite  therapeutic  effects  we  seek  Far  from  it  ;  and  there 
fs  the  added  insight  into  that  universal  Life  which  needs  transference  from  the 
inexhaustible  abundance  of  Nature  at  large  into  the  thirsting  ^£n°*  ^  P^w 
particular —It  would  then  be  not  simply  as  a  relaxation  from  the  exacting 
labours  of  the  city  that  one  would  go  abroad  into  the  country-side  It  would  be  for 
the  purpose  of  retiring  to  watch,  and  meditate  upon  the  manifestations  of  the  quiet 
Persistent  surging  life  of  creatures  below  the  level  of  man,  thereby  to  learn  something 
of  the  secret  thrfugh  which  the  equilibrium  of  health  is  to  be  restored  to  the  needy 
and  also  oneself  to  receive  from  the  fountains  of  life.S  295  Dietetic  treatment. — In  these  days,  this  form  of  treat- 
ment is  increasingly  to  the  fore.  But  whereas  modern  thought  is  in 
terms  of  food- values  and  the  like,  the  Canon  insists  (and  rightly) 
on  the  necessity  for  studying  physiological  and  psychological  incom- 
patibilities in  regard  to  each  component  of  the  diet,  and  for  selecting 
the  various  articles  of  food  according  to  their  constitution,  so  that 
they  shall  be  in  harmony  with  the  constitution  of  the  patient.

S  296  Regiminal  treatment— -The  term  "  regimen  "  has  a 
wide  range.  This  has  already  been  sufficiently  indicated  at  the  end 
of  Part  III  (§  254).  The  consideration  of  the  specific  constitution 
of  the  patient,  of  his  present  state,  and  of  the  conditions  which  are 
likely  to  arise  during  the  various  successive  phases  of  his  illness, 
must  pervade  everv  detail  of  the  prescription  of  the  regimen,  to  ensure 
that  the  correspondences  between  the  state  and  the  various  measures 
adopted  shall  throughout  be  as  harmonious  as  possible.

S  297  In  this  way,  the  great  importance  of  individual  artistry 
in  treatment  is  constantly  insisted  on,  by  contrast  with  the  prevalent 
stereotyping  of  therapeutic  methods,  whether  in  regard  to  Stater 
regulated  practice  in  its  various  branches,  or  in  the  provision  ot 
medical  relief  on  a  wholesale  scale,  or  in  the  efforts  to  subject  as  much 
as  possible  to  the  output  of  team-work.  The  atmosphere  thus  created 
helps  the  student  to  realize  that  the  last  word  has  not  been  saia  when 
the  clinician's  discourse  over  the  hospital  bed  is  ended  and  the 
protocols,  and  therapeutic  orders  have  been  set  upon  the  bedsheet.8.98      The  f oUowing  may  be  quoted  here,  from  Bauer  -  •  -  :   "  It  is  true,  there  is 
a  difference  between  the  pure  medical  science  and  the  art  of :  its  practica  1  application 
at  the  patient's  bedside.     This  art  is  somewhat  more,  indeed,  than  t^s  apphcation 
it  requires  more  than  a  complete  knowledge  of  all  scientific  details  ,   it  is  and  will  be

X    '*'  v     .  .      ,

',  ■  1  .' <  ••

tfler  Rembrandt .]

[Photo  by  E-!^'s  &  i:"!J*«

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE  567

always  an  art  which  never'will  be  transformed  into  an  exact  science,  as  the  complete 
understanding  of  one  person's  psychophysical  machinery  never  will  permit  us  to 
understand  a  second  man's  personality  just  as  well  by  a  pure  analogy,  because  of  the 
practically  infinite  variability  of  the  individual  constitution.  The  individual  analysis 
must  start  always  anew,  and  what  science  of  the  human  constitution  may  help,  is 
only  to  establish  certain  groups  of  more  or  less  pronounced  common  characteristics 
.  .  .it  will  never  replace  entirely  the  doctor's  art  to  .  .  .  take  the  individual 
particularities  of  his  patient  into  consideration  ...  in  constructing  his  diagnosis 
and  in  applying  the  fitted  treatment."

§  299.  The  clinical  handling  of  a  case  is  guided  from  time  to 
time  by  the  experience  which  has  been  concentrated  into  aphorisms. 
Like  many  ancient  medical  works,  the  Canon  abounds  in  these  also, 
and  some  of  them  will  no  doubt  be  found  among  the  modern  col- 
lections of  aphorisms  which  are  available.  In  this  way,  too,  it  may  be 
true  to  say  that  the  conduct  of  a  modern  case  sometimes  receives 
the  personal  guidance  of  the  wisdom  of  the  past.§  300.  But  the  time  has  come  to  close  the  ancient  book.  As  we 
do  so,  we  are  conscious  that  our  range  of  vision  is  widened,  and  our 
sense  of  responsibility  deepened.  We  may  pass  back  to  labour  along 
the  sick,  seeing  things  anew  in  the  light  thrown  upon  them  by  the 
company  of  the  great  Persian  Sage,  better  aware  of  our  own  short- 
comings, and  more  convinced  that  we  are  ourselves  individually 
to  gain  our  own  discernment  into  the  intimate  state  of  the  people 
with  whom  we  must  deal.  We  face  more  confidently  the  exceptions 
to  academic  lore  which  are  so  much  commoner  than  the  rule.

Deeper  insight  into  the   nature   of   man,  and   the  wider   outlook 
of  a  true  philosophy  does  away  with  notions  of  superiority  of  new 
over  old,  making  clear,  as  it  does,  the  necessity  for  combin- 
ing and  welding   the  two  into  one   corporate   whole. 
But   over  and   above    all  this,   this   ancient   work 
reminds  us  that  the   change   of  state   of  the 
patient  from  illness   to   health  is  always 
ultimately  among  the  counsels  of  the 
Divine    Physician,     who    alone 
overrules  our  ideas  of  cause 
and   effect,    when    He 
utters  the    words — 
"  I  say  unto  thee, 
'Arise'."

APPENDIX

i.    ProgressAPPENDIX

i.    Progress

Progress  is  a  relative  term.  The  common  error  is  to  assume  that  it  is  an  end  in 
itself.  Things  which  can  be  described  as  "  up  to  date,"  or  cast  aside  as  "  out  of 
date,"  do  not  belong  to  the  real  basis  of  human  life.  The  idea  of  progress  is  associated 
with  the  introduction  of  mechanical  improvements  of  all  kinds  ;  with  mass  produc- 
tion of  manufactured  articles  ;  with  the  standardization  of  existence.  In  the  domain 
of  medicine,  it  is  more  particularly  associated  with  an  increasing  knowledge  of 
concrete  facts,  with  specific  discoveries  in  etiology  and  treatment,  and  with  a  new 
nomenclature.To  illustrate  the  relative  character  of  "  progress  "  one  may  call  to  mind  that 
many  discoveries  and  inventions  are  simply  actualizations  of  ideas  previously  current 
among  thinkers,  but  perhaps  not  noticed  at  the  time,  or  even  repudiated  or  attacked 
as  heretical.  Further,  as  to  the  changes  in  nomenclature  which  occur  as  time  goes 
on  :  because  our  language  and  idiom  is  different,  many  are  apt  to  think  the  old 
statements  were  necessarily  incorrect. — In  mediaeval  books  dealing  with  materia 
medica,  they  said  for  instance  :  "  dissolved  in  vinegar,  the  action  is  so-and-so," 
whereas  we  say  simply:  "  acetum — ,  action  and  uses  :  .  .  .  " — In  chemistry,  they 
might  say  "  fire  produces  yz,"  whereas  we  say  "  on  heating  Z,  the  result  is  Y  and 
X." — In  medical  text-books  there  are  innumerable  diseases  which  are  not  mentioned 
in  old  works  ;  and  some  diseases  of  the  old  books  do  not  appear  in  modern  ones. 
This  is  partly  explained  by  the  undoubted  fact  that  we  have  diseases  which  once  did 
not  exist,  whereas  other  conditions,  very  common  in  those  days,  certainly  never 
occur  now. — The  methods  of  teaching  are  different.  In  these  days  we  convey 
information  much  more  quickly  and  readily  by  diagrams,  charts,  tables,  styles  of 
print,  not  to  mention  experiments,  and  moving-pictures.  This  fact  does  not  prove 
that  the  learning  of  those  days,  acquired  so  laboriously,  was  faulty.That  which  is  called  "  progress  "  is  also  sometimes  merely  "  fashion."  The 
search  for  an  elixir  of  life,  for  instance,  has  not  ceased  in  the  least.  The  gland 
therapy  for  restoring  youth  is  perhaps  the  most  conspicuous  of  modern  variants  of 
ancient  research.  Cupping  and  venesection  were  habitually  used  solely  with  the 
idea  of  "  keeping  fit  "  ;  they  have  given  place  to  the  vogue  of  athletics  and  sport. — 
New  treatments  for  various  conditions  are  introduced  from  time  to  time,  and  seem 
to  be  great  advances  because  they  are  often  conspicuously  successful  at  first.  How 
often  do  they  not  give  place  to  still  newer  methods,  and  perhaps  finally  pass  into 
entire  oblivion  ?    The  fashion  changes,  and  the  old  is  supplanted.

2.     Facts — Knowledge — Truth

It  is  suggested  in  §  u  that  knowledge  is  not  simply  "  acquaintance  with  an 
assemblage  of  facts  "  ;  and  that  facts  in  the  aggregate  do  not  suffice  to  constitute 
"  truth."  There  is  a  tendency  to  extol  the  acquisition  of  facts,  as  "  adding  to  the 
sum  of  knowledge,"  and  as  being  evidence  of  "  progress."  There  are  different  forms 
of  knowledge  :  human,  angelic,  divine.  The  perfection  of  knowledge  is  wisdom. 
There  are  different  forms  of  truth  :  scientific,  logical,  moral,  ontological,  philoso- 
phical, theological,  etc.  But  as  to  "  Ultimate  Truth,"  this  is  humanly  unattainable, 
as  may  be  illustrated  by  the  accompanying  diagram.

569

57©

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE569

57©

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

The  observer  and  the  thing  observed  are  shown  in  plan,  as  being  separated  by  a 
straight  semi-transparent  screen.  The  letters  A  to  I  represent  the  position  of  as 
many  observers.  For  the  purpose  of  illustration  these  are  supposed  to  be  of  different 
nationalities  and  not  necessarily  acquainted  with  one  another's  language  ;  they  also 
belong  to  different  periods  of  life  (childhood,  youth,  etc.).  The  observer  at  A  may 
be  supposed  only  to  be  able  to  see  the  part  of  the  object  marked  A  ;  the  observer  at 
B,  similarly,  may  only  be  able  to  see  the  part  marked  B  ;  and  so  on.  But  even  if 
any  of  the  observers  could  see  several  parts,  evidently  there  still  remain  some  areas 
which  are  out  of  the  range  of  vision  of  all  persons,  as  marked  K.  L,  M.  No  one  can 
comprehend  the  whole,  under  the  restrictions  given.     (Cf.  §  293.)

This  conception  may  be  applied  to  the  interpretation  of  terms  applied  even  to 
familiar  objects.  In  studying  the  Canon,  for  instance,  it  is  not  enough  to  know  the 
dictionary  equivalent  of  an  Arabic  or  Latin  word,  for  the  full  meaning  is  not  always 
adequately  conveyed  thereby.  The  word  "  Akhlaf  "  may  be  taken  as  an  example. 
It  is  rendered  humor,  humour,  body-fluid,  juice  (cf.  rutubat),  Saft.  The  impression 
conveyed  by  each  equivalent  varies  according  to  ideas  commonly  associated  with  the 
word  and  the  circumstances  under  which  we  -first  heard  it.  The  conception  of  the 
word  "  humour  "  was  necessarily  different  in  the  mind  of  the  ancient  Greek  physician, 
of  the  Hindu  sage,  of  the  erudite  philosophical  Chinese,  of  the  alchemist  of  the  Middle

A    B  C       D        E      F      G

H     IA    B  C       D        E      F      G

H     I

Ages,  of  the  characters  in  Shakespeare,  of  the  modern  laity,  of  the  student  of 
esotericism,  and  of  the  modern  bio-chemist.  But  even  if  we  could  combine  all  these 
conceptions,  there  must  remain  the  K,  L,  and  M  necessary  for  a  complete  under- 
standing.

It  has  been  said  that  we  shall  reach  Truth  by  whatever  road  we  take.  But  this 
is  not  so.  There  is  really  only  one  path  which  will  take  us  there  direct.  All  the 
others  are  devious  and  arduous,  and  in  the  end  only  bring  us  to  the  confines  of  Truth. 
We  may  trace  out  every  separate  road  as  outlined  for  us  by  as  many  separate  thinkers 
of  the  past  or  present ;  we  may  pursue  the  highway  which  modern  science  has 
opened  out  ;  we  may  decide  also  to  study  the  tracks  with  which  we  are  furnished 
by  Nature  Herself.  But  even  after  all  these  have  been  slowly  and  laboriously 
surveyed  by  (spiritual)  insight  (Kashf),  the  best  we  can  attain  is  but  the  fringe  of 
Reality.The  irregular  figure  in  the  diagram,  which  serves  to  stand  for  "  Truth  "  may 
also  be  thought  of  as  the  plan  of  a  palace  with  many  halls  and  courts.  We  may  enter 
it  through  various  portals,  marked  A  to  I,  and  we  may  leave  it  again  to  resume  our 
ordinary  duties.  At  some  other  time,  on  returning  to  the  study  of  the  contents  of 
the  various  chambers,  we  may  chance  to  find  our  way  into  some  of  the  veiled  portions 
(marked  K.  L.  M),  and  perhaps  gain  a  passing  glimpse  of  what  is  beyond.  Where- 
upon we  shall  not  only  rejoice  in  the  enchantment  of  those  unexpected  revelations, 
but  we  shall  see  the  world  around  us  with  new  eyes.  For  this  world  is  the  palace. 
Through  the  visible  things  of  this  world  we  reach  the  invisible  ;  and  through  the 
invisible  things  we  dimly  discern  the  Life  which  is  our  ultimate  goal.

"  The  face  of  all  the  world  is  changed  .  .  . 
Since  first  I  heard  the  footsteps  of  Thy  Soul."

APPENDIX  571

3.     The-  Materia  Medica   of  the  Canon

The  following  list  gives  those  of  the  Simples  discussed  in  the  Second  Book  of 
the  Canon  which  are  still  in  use.  Those  marked,  with  an  asterisk  are  Pharmacopeial ; 
many  of  the  others  are  found  in  the  Catalogue  of  Messrs.  Heath  &  Heather,  Ltd. 
(St.  Albans).

A.  Acacia  gummi,*  aconiti  radix,*  acorn,  adeps,*  agrimony,  amygdala,* 
aloe,*  alumen*  (native),  (ambergris),  ammoniacum,*  amylum*  (from  rice),  anethi 
fructus  et  oleum,*  anisi  fructus  et  oleum,*  antimonium,*  anthemidis  flores  et  oleum,* 
armenian  bole,  asafetida,*  ash-tree,  asphalt.B.  Barberry  bark,  banana,  barley,  bay- tree  and  berries,  beech-tree  (bark), 
beeswax  (cera*),  betony,  bile  (fel  bovinum*),  bistort  (black  hellebore) ,  bone-marrow, 
borax*  (impure),  bran,  brown  sugar,  brooklime,  white  bryony  root,  black  bryony  root, 
bugloss,  buttermilk.

C.  Calamint,  calamus,  calx,*  calcii  hydras,*  chamomile,  camphor,*  cane- 
sugar,  cannabis  indica,*  cantharides,*  capsici  fructus,*  carui  fructus  et  oleum,* 
cardamomi  semina,*  carrot,  cascara,  cassiae  fructus,*  castor  oil,*  catechu,*  cayenne 
pepper,  chirata,*,  chicory,  cinchonae  rubrae  cortex,*  cinnamoni  cortex  et  oleums- 
cloves  and  oil,*  cochlearia  armoracia,  cocoanut,  colchici  cormus  et  semina,* 
colocynthidis  pulpa,*  colophonium  ("  resina,"*),  conii  folia,  convolvulus  turpethum,* 
copper  and  copper  sulphate  (impure),  coral,  coriandri  fructus  et  oleum,*  cotton 
(gossypium,*  and  gossypii  radicis  cortex*),  couch-grass  (triticum),  creasotum,* 
croton  oil,*  cubebae  fructus  et  oleum,*  cucurbita  semina  praep*  (cyperus  rotundus, 
cypress-turpentine  tree  fruit).

D.  Dates,  dried  and  fresh  ;    dragon's  blood.

E.  Egg-plant,  elecampane,  elaterium,  embelia.*

jF.     Foeniculi  fructus  ;    ferrum*  ;    filix  mas*  ;    fuller's  earth.

G.  Galls,  garlic,  gelatinum,*  gentianae  radix,*  germander  ginger,*  gly- 
cyrrhizae  radix,*  gold,  grapes  (unripe),  green  vitriol,  groundpine,  gum  tragacanth.

H.  Hartstongue  fern,  hellebore,  hemlock,*  hyoscyami  folia,*  honey,  humulus 
lupulus  flowers,*  horehound,  hydrargyrum.*

/.     Iron-rust,  isinglass,  ivy.

/.     Jalapa,*  jalapae  resina,*  juniper  berries,  and  oil.*

K.     Kaolin.*

L.  Lard  (  =adeps*),  lavender,  lead  carbonate  and  oxide,  lemon,  lime  ("  calx  ") 
linseed  and  oil  (long  pepper,  lote  tree,  lupin).K.     Kaolin.*

L.  Lard  (  =adeps*),  lavender,  lead  carbonate  and  oxide,  lemon,  lime  ("  calx  ") 
linseed  and  oil  (long  pepper,  lote  tree,  lupin).

M.  Mace,  maidenhair,  marsh  mallow,  mandrake  root,  manna,  marjoram, 
meadow-sweet,  mercury  (  =  hydrargyrum*),  mistletoe,  mouse-ear,  mugwort,  myro- 
balanum,*  myrrh.*

N.     Naphtha,  nigella,  nitre,  nutmeg,*  nux  vomica*  (or,  wintercherry  ?).

0.  Oakbark,  olive  oil,*  opium,*  orange-peel,*  orangeflower  water,*  orpiment, 
oxymel*  ;    many  essential  oils.

P.  Parsley,  pearl  barley,  pearlashes,  pellitory  root,  pennyroyal,  pepper 
(confectio  piperis*),  pepper-mint  oil,*  pepsin  (tripe),  pine  resin  ("  resina,"*),  pix 
liquida,*  polygonum  root,  pomegranate  bark,  poppy  (white),  black  poplar  bark,  red 
poppy  petals  (rhoeados  petala*),  Pterocarpi  lignum,*  pyrethri  radix.*

Q.     Quicklime  (  =  calx),  quillaiae  cortex.*

i?.     Rapeseed,  rhubarb  rhizome,*  rice,  rosemary,  rue.

5.  Saffron  flowers,  sage,  sal  ammoniac  (crude),  santoninum,*  scammony  root 
and  gum,*  sealingwax,  seaweed,  sennae  folia  et  fructus,*  sesame  oil,*  sevum  prae- 
paratum,*  silver,  soapwort,  sodium  chloride,*  sorrel,  southernwood,  spearmint 
(ol.  menth,  virid.*),  sponge,  stavesacre  seeds,*  styrax  praeparatus,*  stramonii  folia,* 
sulphur,*  sunbul.

T.  Talc,  tamarindus,*  taraxaci  radix,*  thyme,  tin,  tragacanth,*  truffle, 
tumeric,  turpethum.*

V.  Valerianae  rhizoma,*  verbascum,  verdigris  (copper  acetate),  vervain, 
viola  odorifera.

W.  Walnut,  water-cress,  white  water-lily  root,  wax,  whey,  white  lead, 
willow  bark,  wormwood  (  =  absinth).

Z.     Zinci  oxidum*  (but  impure)  ;    zingiber.*

REFERENCES

•    The  numbers  correspond  to  those  given  in  the  text  when  quoting  from  this  list.Z.     Zinci  oxidum*  (but  impure)  ;    zingiber.*

REFERENCES

•    The  numbers  correspond  to  those  given  in  the  text  when  quoting  from  this  list.

i.     Ameer  Ali,  Syed  :   A  short  history  of  the  Saracens.      Macmillan  &  Co.,  Ltd. 
London,  1921.

2.  Ameer  Ali,  Syed  :    The  Spirit  of  Islam.     Christophers,  London,  1923  ;    also,

"  The  Life  and  Teachings  of  Mahommed,"  Williams  &  Norgate,  London, 
1873.

3.  Avicenna,  Danish-nama,  quoted  by  E.  G.  Browne,  ref.  6.

4.  Avicenna,  Traites  Mystiques  ;    see  Mehren.

5.  Brockelmann,  Carl.     Geschichte  der  arabischen  Litteratur.     Weimar,  1898.

6.  Browne,  E.  G.  :   Arabian  Medicine.     Cambridge,  University  Press,  1921.

7.  Browne,  E.  G.  :   Chahar  Maqala,  translation — E.  J.  W.  Gibb  Memorial,  xi,  2.

Luzac,  London,  1921.

8.  Browne,  E.  G.       A  history  of  Persian  Literature  under  Tartar  Dominion.

Cambridge  University  Press,  1920.

9.  Browne,  E.  G.  :    Literary  History  of  Persia.     Cambridge  University  Press,

1902.

10.  Bruce,   J.   P.  :    Chu  Hsi,   Philosophy  of  Human  Nature  ;    translation  and

commentary.     Probsthain's  Oriental  Series,  London,  1922.

11.  Bruce,    J.    P.:     Chu    Hsi    and  ..his    masters.     Probsthain's    Oriental  Series,

London,  1923.

12.  Campbell,  D.  :  Arabian  Medicine  and  its  influence  on  the  middle  ages.   2  vols.

Kegan  Paul,  Trench,  Trubner  &  Co.,  Ltd.,  London,  1926.

13.  Carra  de  Vaux  :  Avicenne  (Les  Grands  philosophes) .     Felix  Alcan,  Paris,  1900.

14.  Carra  de  Vaux  :   Gazali.     Felix  Alcan,  Paris,  1902.

15.  Carus,  Paul :    Chinese  thought.     Kegan  Paul,  Trubner  Co.,  Chicago,  1907.

16.  Catechism  of  the  Council  of  Trent :    trans.  J.  McHugh  and  C.   J.  Callan.

Joseph  F.  Wagner,  Inc.,  New  York,  1923.16.  Catechism  of  the  Council  of  Trent :    trans.  J.  McHugh  and  C.   J.  Callan.

Joseph  F.  Wagner,  Inc.,  New  York,  1923.

17.  Catholic  Encyclopa:dia.     (In  quoting  from  this,  the  number  of  the  volume  is

indicated.)

18.  CostEeus  :   Annotations  to  Avicenna,  in  the  Venetian  edition  of  1595,  or  1608.

19.  Daremberg:    CEuvres  de  Galien.     J.  B.  Bailliere,  Paris,  1854.

20.  Duhalde  :  Description  of  China  ;  trans,  by  Hervieu  ;  Section  on  "  The  Pulse."

1770.

21.  Dutt,  U.  Chand  :   The  materia  medica  of  the  Hindus,  compiled  from  Sanskrit

medical  works.     Thacker,  Spink  &  Co.,  Calcutta,  1877.

22.  Flagg,  P.  J.  :   The  patient's  point  of  view.     Milwaukee.

23.  Forke,   A.  :    The  world-conception  of  the   Chinese.      Probsthain's   Oriental

Series,  London,  1925.

24.  Forke,  A.  :    Chinesische  Mystik.     Karl  Curtius  Verlag,  Berlin,  W.35  ;    1922.

25.  Gulshan-i-Raz;  the  mystic  rose  garden  :  Trans,  by  E.  H.  Whinfield.     Trubner

&  Co.,  London,  1880.

26.  Ha;ser  :   Lehrbuch  der  Geschichte  der  Medizin.     Jena,  1875.

27.  Haly' Abbas  :  Liber  Regius,  Kitabul-Maliki,  Cairo  edition,  1877  ;   Latin  trans,

printed  at  Lyons  in  1523.     Also,  Kamilus-sina'a.

28.  Hartmann  :    Chinesische  Heilmethoden.     Munch.  Med.  Woch.,  1927,  935.

29.  Hartmann,  F.  :   The  Life  of  Paracelsus,  and  the  substance  of  his  teachings.

Kegan  Paul,  Trubner  &  Co.,  London  (no  date).

30.  Hirschberg  and  Lippert :    Die  Augenheilkunde  des  Ibn  Sina.     Veit  &  Co.,

Leipzig,  1902.

31.  Holmyard  and  Mandeville  :  Avicenna?,  Kitab  al-Shifa.     Paul  Geuthner,  Paris

1927.

573

574  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINELeipzig,  1902.

31.  Holmyard  and  Mandeville  :  Avicenna?,  Kitab  al-Shifa.     Paul  Geuthner,  Paris

1927.

573

574  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Honen  the   Buddhist  Saint :    trans,  by  Coates   and  Ishizuka  by  Imperial 
request.     Chionin,  Kyoto,  Japan,  1925-..      A  nn        0  n       T       ..        Tn„, 
„      Home    T.  :   "  Many  days  in  Morocco."    Phihp  Allan  &  Co.,  London,  i92> 
11'     Horten    M  :    Die  Metiphysik  Avicennas.      (Das  Buch  der  Geneesung  der 
34'  Seete     eine    philosophische    Enzyklopedie    Avicennas).     Rudolf    Haupt,

32-

33- 
34-

*6      Hughes,  Ed.  :    Lancet,  1920,  63.  .  „

,      ivrtl  •    Das  arabische  und  hebraische  in  der  Anatorme  .Vienna,  1879. 
38:     Inlyat  Khan  :   various  writings  and  saying.     Sufi  Publishing  Socxety,  South-

Leipzig    1909. 
Howarthf  Sir  Henry  :    History  of  the  Mongols,  1876-1

39

60. 
61.

Inaay"f0Khan:5""9In'an  Eastern  Rose-garden."     Sufi  Publishing    Society, 
Southampton.  •

40      ib.  :    The  Mysticism  of  Sound,     (lb.) 
41 !     ib.  :    Diwan;    Gayan.     (ib.)

4"     ^^rS^J^t^i^yS^L^     London,  x9o8 
t     jSnmtiS   (Hunayn  ibn  IshaqalVbadi)  .    Some  writings  included  m  the 
Latin  Venetian  edition  of  the  Canon,  1608.  rOTT,„^n  •   rPf    T2

45.     Leclerc,  L.  :    Histoire  de  la  Medicine  Arabe  ;    quoted  by  Campbell ,   ret.  12,

„  fi      T  e&eI5T3ameS°tnThe  Sacred  Books  of  China.     Oxford,  Clarendon  Press,  1 899. 
4         ¥&\    trans    bvS    Couvreur,  S.J.     Ho  Kien  Fou,  Catholic  Press    1913. 
%\     LlnfsayW  Ladder     Mind  in  the  Lower  Animals.    2  vols.     Kegan  Paul  &  Co.,

49  Macfe9' Campbell:    The    Romance   of  the  Human   Body.     Wells   Gardner,.

50  M.S^^S.J^'li^^Wyhuxst  Philosophical  Series.     Long-

,1  MaXam  S^Qements  :  CoUoquies  on  the  simples  and  drugs  of  India,  of  Garcia50  M.S^^S.J^'li^^Wyhuxst  Philosophical  Series.     Long-

,1  MaXam  S^Qements  :  CoUoquies  on  the  simples  and  drugs  of  India,  of  Garcia

-,'  MarTinnifreSd0?heDenufsch0es  ^JZe^i,    vergangenen    Tagen.     Eugen

53  MaSfgnot  L.1:6  La  PaSon  d'Al-Hallaj.  martyr  mystique  de  1'Islam.    2  vols.

54.  MaSSerwPas^S:     "  On   a   Chinese  Screen."     Traveller's    Library,

«      Mehr°en3M    A.  F.  :    Traites  Mystiques  d'Abou  All  al;Hosain  b.  Abdallah  b. 
55'  Sou d'Avicenne.     4  fascicule!    E.  J.  Brill,  Leyden,  1889-1899-

56  Mercfer    Cardinal  :    Manual  of  Modern  Scholastic  Philosophy.     Kegan  Paul,

57  MalSrTrans0  b^l.^H.  Whmfield.     Kegan  Paul,  Trench,  TrUbner  &  Co.,

£     Sinli^^

MoMh0suehach'i  cheng.     The  Science  of  the  Pulse  ;    printed  during  the  Ming 
FoSmnleways,   A.   H.  :     The   Music   of   Hindostan.      Oxford,   Clarendon

62.  NichoTSon"9R:  A.  :    Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism.      Cambridge  University

63.  NichoTson"9R"'A.  :    Studies  in  Islamic  poetry.      Cambridge  University  Press,

*„      Nicholson    R    A   ■    The  Kashfu'l-Mahjub  of  'Ali  b.  'Uthman  al-Jullabi  al-

64-     ""liu fX.     Grbb  Memorial  publications.  _  Luzac  &  Co.    London    191^

6  s      Nicholson     R     A.  :     The    Kitab    al-Luma     fil-Tasawwuf.      Gibb   Memorial

«.     K^r,^^^^?^^     T.  Fisher  Unwin,

fi,      NictolST'R9!7'-   The  Mvstics  of  Islam.     Bell  &  Sons,  Ltd     London,  1914. 
§•:     Nlchoffi;  R.  A'.  :    Selected  poems  from  the  Divani  Shamsi  Tabriz.       Cam-

NicSon,  R9  A.  :   The  idea  of  Personality  in  Sufism.     Cambridge  University

O'Sry,  De2Lacy  Evans  :   Arabic  thought  and  its  place  in  history.    Triibner's 
Oriental  Series,  1922.

66.

67. 
68.

69. 
70.

REFERENCES

575

71.  McNabb,  Vincent,' O. P.  :    The  Catholic  Church  and  Philosophy.       (Calvert66.

67. 
68.

69. 
70.

REFERENCES

575

71.  McNabb,  Vincent,' O. P.  :    The  Catholic  Church  and  Philosophy.       (Calvert

Series).     Burns,  Oates  &  Washbourne,  Ltd.,   1927.

72.  Paracelsus  :    Hermetic  and  alchemical  writings.     Trans,   by  A.   E.  Waite.

2   vols.     London,  1894.

73.  Paracelsus  :    summary  of  teachings.     See  under  Hartmann,  F.

74.  Paulus  Aegineta.     Trans,  by  F.  Adams,  Sydenham  Society,  London,  1846.

75.  Pegues,  R.  P.  T.,  O.P.  :    Catechism  of  the  Summa  Theologica  of  St.  Thomas

Aquinas.     Burns,  Oates  &  Washbourne,  Ltd.,  London,   1922.

76.  Plopper,   C.   H.  :    Chinese  religion  seen  through  the  Proverb.     China     Press

Shanghai,  1926."

77.  Randall,  A.  G.  :    Optimistic  Medicine.       F.  A.  Davis  Co.  Philadelphia,  1924.

78.  Religio  Chemici  :    by  G.  Wilson.     Macmillan,   1862.

79.  Rickaby,  Joseph,  S.J.  :   Of  God  and  His  Creatures.     Burns  &  Oates,  London,

1905-

80.  Rickaby,  Joseph,  S.J.  :   Moral  Philosophy.     Stonyhurst  Philosophical  Series.

Longmans,  Green  &  Co.,  1912.

81.  St.  Thomas  Aquinas  :    Summa  contra  Gentiles.      Rome,  1894.

82.  St.  Thomas  Aquinas  :    Summa  contra  Gentiles.     Dominican  translation,  1923.

Burns,  Oates  &  Washbourne,  Ltd.

83.  St.  Thomas  Aquinas  :    Summa  Theologica,  especially  Part  I,  questions  50-102.

Rome,   1894. 
-84.     Sj;  ./Thomas^  Aquinas_<;.,..„SJinjma  JTheologica.     Dominican  translation  (vol.  4), 
— ^r92'2r;""'T3*urns,  Oates  &  Washbourne,  Ltd.

85.  Sandford,   Alex.   E.  :     Pastoral  Medicine,   a.  handbook  for  C.   Clergy.     J.   F.

Wagner,  New  York,  1904.

86.  Sauter,  C.  :   Avicenna  :   Bearbeitung  der  Aristotelischen  Metaphysik.    Herder,

Freiburg  im  Breisgau,   1912.

87.  Schlimmer  :        Terminologie      Medico-pharmaceutique.       Francaise-Persane,

Tihran,   1874.Freiburg  im  Breisgau,   1912.

87.  Schlimmer  :        Terminologie      Medico-pharmaceutique.       Francaise-Persane,

Tihran,   1874.

88.  Singer,  C.  and  D.  :    The  scientific  position  of  Girolano  Fracastoro.     Annals

of  Med.  History,  1918.

89.  Sontheimer  :     Zusammengesetzte  Heilmittel  der   Araber.     Herder,    Freiburg

im  Breisgau,   1S45.

90.  Susuki,  D.  T.  :   A  brief  history  of  early  Chinese  Philosophy.     Probsthain  &  Co.,

London,  1914.

91.  Susuki,  D.  T   :    Essays  in  Zen  Buddhism.     Luzac  &  Co.,  London,  1927.

92.  Susuki  and  Carus  :    T'ai  Shang  Kan  Yin  P'ien.      Open  Court  Publishing  Co.,

Chicago,   1906.

93.  Tagore,  Sir  Rabindranath  :    Gitanjali,  and  other  works.     1920,  etc.

94.  Tanquery,  Ad.  :    Precis  de  Theologie  Ascetique  et  Mystique,  5th  ed.     Desclee

et  Cie,  Paris,  and  Rome,   1923.

95.  Thomas  a  Kempis  :    Imitatio  Christi.

96.  Vassall-Phillips,    O.R.,   C.SS.R.  :     The   supernatural  life.     Cath.    Truth   Soc.

(Do.  85.)

97.  \  onier,  Dom  Anscar,  O.S.B.  :    Life  of  the  World  to  Come.     Burns,  Oates  &

Washbourne,  1926.     The  Human  Soul.     B.  Herder,  London,  1920.

98.  Wan   K'an  t'ang  :     1056-1064   a.d.     Complete    guide  to   the    human  pulse.

80  vols.     Reprinted  at  Pekin,  1923.

99.  Whinfield  :    translations.     See  25  and  57.

100.  White  King,  Sir  Lucas  :    Tayyibat ;    Odes  of  Sa'di.     Published  by  Luzac  &

Co.,  London,  1926.

1 01.  Wilhelm,  Richard  :  I  Ging,  Das  Buch  der  Wandlungen,  aus  dem  chinesischen.

Eugen  Diederich,   Jena,   1924.

102.  Withington,  E.  T.  :    Medical  history  from  the  earliest  times.     London,  1894.

103.  Buzzard,  Sir  Farquhar.     Lancet,  1927,  1003.

104.  Burton,  Lady  :    edition  of  the  1001  Nights.     (Six  volumes.)      1S86.103.  Buzzard,  Sir  Farquhar.     Lancet,  1927,  1003.

104.  Burton,  Lady  :    edition  of  the  1001  Nights.     (Six  volumes.)      1S86.

105.  Abbott,   Maude  :     Descriptive  Catalogue   of  the  Medical  Museum   of  M'Gill

University,  Part  IV,  section  1.     Oxford,   191 5.

106.  Arnold,  Fr.  :    Imitation  of  the  Sacred  Heart,  1S46.

107.  Arnold,  Sir  Thomas  :    Painting  in  Islam.     Oxford  University  Press,  1928.

108.  Ayurvedic  writings  and  works  :    publishers  of  Ayurveda  Journal.     Calcutta.

109.  Ayurveda,  notes  on  :    Brit.  Med.  Journ.,  1923,  477-479.

no.     Baraduc  :    Les  Vibrations  de  la  vitalite     humaine.     J.   B.   Bailliere  et  Fils,

Paris,  1904 
in.     Barton  and  Castle:    British  Flora  Medica.     Chatto  &  Windus,  1877. 
112.     Beale,    Lionel    S.  :     various    works,    especially :     Bioplasm;     Microscope    in

Medicine,  How  to  Use  the  Microscope  ;    The  Liver.     187S,  1S80.

576  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

112a.  Bechold  :  Die  Kolloide  in  Biologie  u.  Medizin.     Theodor  Steinkopff,  Dresden,

113  Bfc^August :  Gedanken  eines  Arztes  iiber  die  Medicin.  IV.  Die  Seele, 
Munch.  Med.  Woch.,  1927.  684-688.  .     .

ha      Bock   Carl  •   Das  Buch  vom  gesunden  und  kranken  Menschen,  Leipzig,  1893.

ttk      Broadbent-    "  The  Pulse."     CasseU  &  Co.,  London,  1890.

116  Bullock,  t".  L.  :  Progressive  exercises  in  the  Chinese  Written  Language. 
Crosbv,  Lockwood  &  Son,  London,  1923.  .     .  •,-,«■  j-    i

n6a  CoppensJ C,  S.J.,  and  Spalding,  J.,  S.J.  :  Moral  Principles  and  Medical 
Practice.     Benziger  Bros.,  New  York,  1921

117.     Cuthbert,  Fr.,  O.S.F.C. :   God  and  the  Supernatural.    Longmans,  Green  &  Co.,

118      Dicta?ondary  of  technical   terms   used   in  the   sciences   of  the   Mussulmans.

Bibliotheca  Indica,  Calcutta,  1862.  .118      Dicta?ondary  of  technical   terms   used   in  the   sciences   of  the   Mussulmans.

Bibliotheca  Indica,  Calcutta,  1862.  .

no      Fernie:   Herbal  Simples.     John  Wright  &  Sons   Ltd     Bristol,  1914-. 
120      Fonahn    Adolf:    Zur  Quellenkunde  der  Persischen  Medizm      Leipzig,  1910 
lloa    GS*  Commentary  on  Qanun,  I.     1519.     MS.  in  India  Office  Library 
12?      Gilbert,  J.  W.  :    The  Gospel  of  health  and  healing  m  all  ages.    Philadelphia,

T22      Giles1!!   A.  :   Chuang  tzu.     Quaritch,  Ltd.,  London,  1926 
III'     Harmsworth  Home  Doctor.     Educational  Book  Co.,  1928  (six  vols.). 
124'     Huysman,  J.  K.  :   St.  Lydwine  de  Schiedam.    Kegan  Paul,  1922. 
J     t  Juns  Chin  ch'ien,  by  Hung  Chou.      General  Medicine.)

126      TackV'  Modern  Family  Doctor,"  T.  C.  &  E.  C.  Jack,  Ltd    London,  I923.  „ 
127'     Tones   Eli  M.  :   Medical  Times,  1918,  March  9  I    and      Definite  medication.

Therapeutic  Pub.  Co.  Inc.,  Boston,  Mass.,  191 1.  .

128      Kiihne   Louis  :    (a)  The  science  of  facial  expression  ;    (b)  The  new  science  of

healing     Pub  Benedict  Lust,  New  Jersey,  1917.     (From  a  German  work.) 
120      Lasance    F   X.  :    (a)  Thoughts  on  the  religious  Life  ;    (b)  Blessed  Sacrament

Book!     Benziger  Brothers,  New  York,  1907. 
iao      Lavater  :   Essays  on  Physiognomy,  1855.

'V     t  enicier  •   Tractatus  de  prima  homims  formatione.     Rome,  1909 
III'     lSv  and  Moore  :   Treasury  of  Botany.     Longmans,  Green  &  Co     1876 
i«"     MUes  Eustace  :  Self-health  as  a  habit.  J.  M.  Dent  &  Sons,  Ltd.,  London,  1923. 
tIa      Muther  :    Practitioner,  June,  1916,  613.  .

lit     NaeS-     Allgemeine    Konstitutionslehre,    in    naturwissen-schafthcher    undlit     NaeS-     Allgemeine    Konstitutionslehre,    in    naturwissen-schafthcher    und

medizinischer  Betrachtung      J.  Springer    1927. 
T3fi      Nash    t    T  :    Evolution  and  Disease.     J.  Wright  &  Sons    Bristol,  ^5- 
\fi      Roger    G    H.  :    Introduction  a  l'etude  de  la  Medicine,  Collection  de  Precis

Medicaux,  Masson  et  Cie.     Pans,  1922.

IT  Ita^n    ^O11:-  SdenTy°clhopX'o5f  face  and  form  reading.     F.  A.  Davis

I39.     Stodd^ThSnd  and  t  disorders.     H.  K.  Lewis  ft  Co.,  Ltd.,  London.

t  ,0      Swindefls  "BI9T26:'  Life  and  its  origins.     R  83,  Cath.  Truth  Society  Pamphlets. 
i£     vXry -Radot :"    Precis  de  Pathologie  Medicale,  Tom.  iv.     Masson  et    Cie,

T^3T"iS     IQ22

-,*-,      Vilarifio'  P    R     ST.:    Devocionario  de  religiosos.     Bilbao,  1924.

i«:     wStson,'  j.'  K.  :    A  Handbook  for  Nurses,  6th  ed.     Scientific    Press,  Ltd.,

i44'     WiegTrfT.Tj1':    History  of    Religious  Beliefs;    trans,  by  E.  C.  Werner.

Hsien-hsien  Press,    1927.  ,       ,    ,,      ^„„+t,  »     ,«<,       -RoIa

14,      Allen,    Charles :     "  Curious    Observations    about   the   Teeth,       1687.      Bale

Danielsson,  Ltd.,  London,  W.i. 
1,6      Pater   R.  ;   Mystic  Voices.     Burns,  Oates  &  Washbourne,  1923. 
1I7      Lalov   Louis  :    La  musique  chinoise.    H.  Laurens,  Paris.     No  date. 
Al'     RenZudot   Eusebius:    Ancient  account  of  India  and  Chma.     London,  1733 • 
4        fajous   C  E      The  internal  secretions  and  the  principles  of  medicine.     Phila-

149.

tco      Fldef^nd  Fowler:    Diseases  of  Children.     Edinburgh,  1899.

if  i!  ■  labbit    E.  D^    Principles  of  Light  and  Colour.     East  Orange,  New  Jersey,

152.     Pareha':    Materia  Medica.     Longmans  Green    1850if  i!  ■  labbit    E.  D^    Principles  of  Light  and  Colour.     East  Orange,  New  Jersey,

152.     Pareha':    Materia  Medica.     Longmans  Green    1850

t«      P'u   Sune-Ling,   Seltsame   Geschichten.     Berlin,   Ah    ttager     venag ■    M^4- 
53'  (Also  trans  to  English,  H.  A.  Giles,  Strange  Stories  from  a  Chinese  Studio.

T.  Werner  Laurie,  Ltd.,  London,  1916.)

REFERENCES  577

154.  Poulain:  The  Graces  of  Interior  Prayer.    Kegan  Paul,  Trench,  Triibner  &  Co

Ltd.,  1921.

155.  Charaka-Samhita  ;   trans,  by  K.  A.  C.  Kaviratna.     Calcutta,  1896

156.  McGonagh,  S.  :    Dominicana,  Dec,  1928,  p.  299

157.  Benson,  Mgr.  R.  H.  :   Light  Invisible,  and  other  writings.

158.  Corder,  Frederick  :   Modern  Musical  Composition.     J.  Curwen  &  Sons   Ltd

Berners  St.,  London,  W.     (No  date.)  '

159.  Lane's  translation  of  the  Arabian  Nights.     Aldus  Edition  de  Luxe,  New  York

(No  date.)

160.  Pearson  and  Wyllie  :    Recent  Advances  in  Diseases  of  Children.     Churchill

1928.

161.  Bauer,  J.  Ann.  Int.  Med.,  1928,  ii,  127.

162.  Garrod,  Sir  A.  :   The  Huxley  Lecture  on  Diathesis.     Lancet,  1927,  Nov   26

p.  1113.

163.  Meyerhof,  Max,  M.D.  :    The  book  of  the  ten  treatises  on  the  eye  ascribed  to

Hunam  ibn  ls-haq  (809-877  a.d.).     Government  Press,  Cairo,  1928.p.  1113.

163.  Meyerhof,  Max,  M.D.  :    The  book  of  the  ten  treatises  on  the  eye  ascribed  to

Hunam  ibn  ls-haq  (809-877  a.d.).     Government  Press,  Cairo,  1928.

Hubotter,  Fr.  :  Die  chinesische  Medizin.  Verlag  der  Asia  Major,  Leipzig  1920 
This  masterly  work,  to  hand  in  November,  1929,  contains  considerable  sections 
on  the  Pulse  (pp  157-193,  198-210).  The  following  lines  in  the  Preface  find  assent 
m  the  pages  of  the  present  treatise  :  "The  real  greatness  of  Chinese  Medicine  lies 
in  its  endeavour  to  unify  the  human  microcosm  and  its  disorders  and  diseases  with 
the  macrocosm,  the  heavenly  Tao.  Even  though  the  edifice  so  reared  is  really 
largely  a  castle  m  the  air,  the  basic  idea  itself  is  grand  and  infrangible  "

2P

INDEX

A  study  of  this  index  furnishes  the  best  idea  of  the  range  of  subjects  discussed 
in  the  First  Book  of  the  Canon.

The  numbers  refer  to  the  paragraphs  in  the  text.  Heavy  figures  show  that 
the  subject  is  dealt  with  in  the  text  of  the  Canon  ;  italic  figures  refer  to  the  para- 
graphs of  the  interspersed  Treatise,  commentary,  and  notes.

A

•=  Abdominal  inflammatory  masses,  treatment  of,   1055

Ablution  with  cold  water,   757  ;    after  exercises,   758,  244

Abnormal  forms  of  atrabilious  humour,   90  ;    of  serous  humour,  74

Abnormal   movements,   causes   of,   427

Abnormality  of  blood,  its  source,   72

Abnormal  sediments  in  urine,  658  (1-10) 
~Abscess  :    effect  on  pulse,   600 
-Abscess  explained,  209 
,„Abscess  of  liver,  urine  in,  636

Abundance  of  hair  at  puberty,  meaning  of,  475

Accessory  function  of  lymph,  73,  106  ;    of  bile,  82

Accidental  causes  of  disease,  examples  of,  232

Accidental  change,  6y

Accidents,  definition  of,   60

Acid  serous  humour,  two  forms  of,  79Accidental  causes  of  disease,  examples  of,  232

Accidental  change,  6y

Accidents,  definition  of,   60

Acid  serous  humour,  two  forms  of,  79

Aconite,  action  of,  350,  354,  356  B

Action  and  passion,  8g

Active  and  passive  qualities,  102

Active  principle  of  food,  349

Activity  of  cyclical  changes  in  the  breath,  explained,  138 
-Acute  inflammatory  swellings,   treatment  of,   1049

Adenoids,  723

Adi  posity  ;    see   obesity.     Hot  baths  after  meals,  for,  406

Adolescence,  51  ;    urine  in,  670 
-Adrenalin  and  its  mode  of  entry  into  the  blood,  122

Adulteration  of  urine  with  saffron,  625

Adult  life,  urine  in,  670

Aerated  water,  action  of,  391  ;    utility  of,  408

Aeration  of  breath,   238

Affectionate  disposition,  and  water   element,  78

Affusion,  757,  758

After-taste  of  purgative,  how  to  remove,  983

After-treatment,  after  leeching,  1042  ;    after  venesection,  1027,  h

Age  and  pulse,  575-578  ;    234

Aged  persons,  diet  of,  786

Age  of  patient  a  guide  to  evacuant  treatment,  934  (6)

Age  of  wet-nurse's  babe,  707

Age,  variation  of  urine  according  to,  670

Agents,  alleviating  pain,  435  ;  altering  the  qualities  of  the  body,  415-430  ;  causing 
deformity,  419  ;  causing  obstruction  of  channels,  420  ;  opening  up  channels, 
421  ;  producing  hardness  of  the  body,  422  ;  producing  displacements  and 
luxations,  424  ;    preventing  apposition,  425  ;    preventing  expansion,  426

Ailment,  definition  of  term,  168  A

Air,  see  atmosphere

579

58 o  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINEAilment,  definition  of  term,  168  A

Air,  see  atmosphere

579

58 o  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Air,  changes  of,  are  dual,.  308  ;    contamination  with  stagnant  water,  etc.,  276  ;   de- 
'  finition  of,  23,  309  ;  infections,  to  avoid,  877  ;  its  moisture  and  dryness  defined, 
250  ;    not   '  breath,'    234 ;    properties   of,    23  ;    putrefaction  in,   275 ;    versus 
'  atmosphere,'  309 
Alhambra,  secret  of,  5 
Alien  heat,  73  (see  Foreign  heat) 
Aliment,  two  functions  of,  925 
Alleviation  of  pain,  agents  for,  435 
Al  Najat  referred  to,  14 
Alterative  faculty,  149 
Altitude  and  climate,  307b 
Alum  in  water,  effect  of,  384 
Aluminous  and  bitter  waters,  antidote  for,  899  ;    diseases  benefited  by  bathing  in,

408  ;    how  to  purify  for  drinking,  876 
Ammonia  salts  in  drinking  water,  effect  of,  384 
Anabolism  and  katabolism,  142 
Anaemia,  treatment  of,  845 
Anaesthetics,   814  ;    Burton's  note,  ib.

Analgesics,  435  .

Analogy  between  changes  of  breath  and  events  of  Chinese  history,  133  ;    between

the  four  elements  and  the  vibration-rate,  77 
Analysis  of  terms  applied  to  living. beings  (table),  128 
Anatomy  as  the  expression  of  strengths  and  weaknesses,  126  ;  necessary  to  diagnosis,

456,  461  ;    proper  purpose  of,  456  ;    three-fold  value  of  knowledge  of,  912 
Anatomical  relations,  911  ;    structure,  cause  of  variation,  119 
Ancient  and  modern  medicine  compared,  19,  sqq.  ;    re  urinalysis,  239 
Ancient  anatomy,  key  to  object  of,  118Ancient  medicine  may  succeed  when  modern  methods  fail,  35  ;  still  practised,  35 
Aneurysm,  signs  of  false,  513  (5) 
\  Anger  :  .  and  the  fire  element,  78,  160  (4)  ;    and  the  atmosphere  of  a  person,  ib.  ; 
is.  calefacient,  415  ;    cause  of  outburst,  166  (4)";    effect  on  blood  arid  breath, 
1117  ;    effect  on  pulse,  601  ;    meaning  of,.  490  ;    synonyms„.j6^  (II) 
Anginas  in  autumn,  289  (i ) 
.  Anguish'  of  love,  345  (footnote) 
Animal  breath  a  phase,  148;    faculties,  174;    animal  faculties  defined,  129  (5)  ;

prudence,   180 
Ankylosis,  199  (12) 
Anorexia,  diet  in,  781 
Antecedent  causes,  231

Antigalactogogues,   706  ;    anti-inebrients,   811  ;    anti-inebrient  syrup,   812 
Aperient  foods,  785,  254 
Aphorisms,   use   of,   299 
Aphthous  stomatitis,  720 
Apoplexy  commoner  in  winter,  294

Appetite   and  breath,  148  ;    and  waking  state,  339  ;    due  to  acridity  of  atrabilious 
humour,  1 85  ;   fictitious,  761  ;   kinds  of,  159  ;    of  youth,  why  big,  57  ;  rational, 
159  ;    stimulated  by  atrabilious  humour,  88,  106 
Appetites   classified,    158 
Appetitive  faculty,  159  (II)

Appliance  for  cauterising  mucous  membranes,  1072

Application  :   of  Canon  in  modern  clinical  diagnosis,  280  ;   in  modern  treatments S5; 
in  pathology,  273  ;    of  doctrine  of  elements,  78  ;  to  histology,  95  ;    to  climate, 
180  ;    to  bio-chemistry,  90-94 
Application  of  study  of  interactions,  165  (IV)  _     _

Apprehensive  faculty,  180  ;  not  very  important  for  physician,  181  ;  versus  cogitative

faculty,  180  ;    versus  imagination,  180. 
Aqueduct  water,   375

Arab  drinks,  see  800  ;    fruits,  251  ;    sherbets,  797 
Arabian  civilisation  in  Middle  Ages  was  of  high  order,  3  ;    classification  of  facultiesArab  drinks,  see  800  ;    fruits,  251  ;    sherbets,  797 
Arabian  civilisation  in  Middle  Ages  was  of  high  order,  3  ;    classification  of  faculties

(diagram),  155  (II)  ;    meals,  251 
Arduous  labour  and  evacuant  measures,  934  (11)

Arefactive  lassitude,  833  .

Arguments  as  to  innate  heat  during  youth,  53  ;   as  to  vital  faculty  being  necessary

to  sensation,  163 
Arms,  veins  of,  for  venesection,  1022 
Aromatic  drugs,  mode  of  action,  1120 
Aromaticity  and  its  importance  to  the  heart,  1121

INDEX

3'

I

Arhythm  of  pulse,  534  ;    cause  of,  573

Arteries  contain  blood,  116  (6),  132,  37  ;    description  of,  113  (6)  ;    function  of,  116

Articles  of  food  which  help  emesis,  1003;    which  inciease  a)  vine  discharge,  254;

which  purify  the  blood,  254     >. 
Articulate  language,  versus  "  speech,"  153 
Artificer  and  lawgiver,   100 
Ash  of  atrabilious  humour,   92 
Asses'  urine,   640,   673

Asthenia  and  rarefaction  of  skin,  839  (iii)  ;    cause  of,  443 
Asthma,  classification  of  causes,  444  ;    in  southerly  countries,   329 
Astringents,  intestinal,  indications  for,   990 
Astrology,   162   (i) 
Atheroma,   explanation  of,    105

Athletic  age,  regimen  for,  736  ;    quick  pulse  after,  227 
Atmosphere,  personal,  detection  of,  281  ;    explanation  of,  141Athletic  age,  regimen  for,  736  ;    quick  pulse  after,  227 
Atmosphere,  personal,  detection  of,  281  ;    explanation  of,  141

Atmosphere,  kinds  of,  effect  on  body,  234  sqq.,  313  ;   in  spring,  255,  257  ;   in  winter, 
256  ;    natural  changes,   242  sqq.  ;    preternatural  changes,  effects  of,   308-313  ; 
varieties  of,  241  ;    and  see  "  air  " 
Atmospheric  changes,  effect  on  human  body,  312,  313  ;    regimen  for,  873-877 
Atmospheric  influences  on  body,  operation  of  ;    quoted  from  Ch'i  Po,  181 
Atrabilious  constitution,  diet  for,  766  ;    description  of,  85  ;    dreams  in,  500  ;    foods 
which  increase,  J95  (3)  ;    in  faaces,  significance  of,  675  ;    predominant  at  end  of 
summer,  288  ;    relation  to  faculties,  appetite,  and  aspect,  500  ;    signs  of  domin- 
ance, 500  ;   swellings,  212 
Atrophy,  general,  199  (ii)Attenuant,  attenuate  :  the  word  is  sometimes  loosely  used  to  describe  a  dilution 
of  a  thick  or  concentrated  solution.  A  weak  solution  is  '  attenuated.'  Some- 
times it  is  used  to  describe  a  change  of  consistence.  It  is  a  correct  term  for 
expressing  a  diminution  in  the  degree  of  cohesion  of  the  particles  of  a  substance. 
In  a  "  dense,"  or  "  thick"  fluid,  the  particles  are  close  together  and  more  or 
less  firmly  coherent.  An  agent  which  interacts  with  such  a  fluid  so  as  to  render 
the  particles  less  closely  adherent,  and  therefore  further  apart,  is  "  attenuant." 
The' consistence  alters  accordingly,  and  the  optical  properties  alter  from  opacity 
to  more  or  less  translucency.  Such  a  process  is  one  of  "  dispersal  "  (e.g.,  of  an 
inflammatory  mass),  or  "  resolution."  Cf.  275. 
Attenuated  foods,  359;  serous  humour,  description  of,  760 
y  Attitude  :    of  body  reveals  state  of  breath,  144  ;    of  a  member  reveals  its  state,

whether  healthy  or  not,  454  (5),  455 
/^Attraction,  mechanism  of,  156  ;    analogous  to  female  attraction,  146 
.'Attractive  faculty,  147  ;    achieved  by  longitudinal  fibres,  185  ;    co-operates  with 
purgative  principles,  965  ;    not  equal  in  all  organs,  133 
Augmentative  faculty,  143 
Aura,  meaning  of,  141

Autochemotherapy  in  Chinese  medicine,  36 
Autopsy  is  only  a  small  fraction  of  "  the  case,"  127

Autumn  and  the  pulse,  581  ;    definition  of,  242  ;   diseases  of,  289  ;    effect  on  body, 
287-291  ;     effect   on   atmosphere,    247  ;     regimen   appropriate   for,    875  ;     why 
it  predisposes  to  illness,  287 
Auxiliary  members,  123  y

Avicenna  knew  Indian  medicine,  8  ,/,his  medicine  is  based  on  a  definite  conceptionAvicenna  knew  Indian  medicine,  8  ,/,his  medicine  is  based  on  a  definite  conception

of  human  nature,  20  ;    his  terms  for  the  three  faculties,  I2g 
Ayurvedic  philosophy,   20  ;    sphygmology,  214

B

Babyhood,  definition  of,  52  ;    hvgiene  of,  diseases  of,  etc.,  see  "  Infants  "

Bad  effects  of  hot  bath,  407     '•  '

Balance  :     application   of   principle   of,    30  ;   K.pplication   to   character   delineation,

i6j  (IV)  ;   between  evacuation'  and  retention  constitutes  health,  398  ;   between

organs,  72  '  -:-

Bandaging,  tight,  420  f.,  416  (8)  ;  .is  dangerous,  204 
Basis  :  .  of  occult  powers  in  human  constitution,  162  (vi)  ;    of  terms  applied  to  the

three  faculties,  I2g 
Bath  attendant,  his  work,  ig8 
Bath-house,  75  (2),  244  ;    characters  of  good,  400  ;    described,  ig8,  igg  ;   rest-room

mural  decorations,  igg

582  THE  CANON  OP  MEDICINE

Bathing  in  relation  to  administration  of  enemas,  1014;  of  _  purgation  973  ;  for 
lassitude,  836  ;  in  cases  of  ulceration,  1067  ;  m  the  spring,  757,  281  ;  up  to 
age  of  is,  735;   in  infancy,  694

Baths  as  humectants,  417  ;  beneficial  effects  of  756  ;  copper,  751  ;  efiect  of  accord- 
ing to  skin-state,  402;  effect  of  the  different  temperatures,  402  ,  effect  of  . 
duration  of,  405  ;  for  cases  of  hot  intemperament,  866  ;  for  emaciation,  871  ; 
forms  of,  751  ;  full  length,  751  ;  hot,  effect  of,  on  pulse,  596  ;  injurious  effects 
of  756  '  in  winter,  object  of,  432  ;  names  of  various  kinds,  751  ;  natural 
action  of  401  ;  rules  re  cases  of  induration  of  skin,  839  (ii)  ;  rules  re  meals,  406  ; 
sometimes  warming,  sometimes  depressant,  198  ;  to  make  thin  persons  fat,  871  ; 
when  not  needed,  751  .  ,   .      ,    .„,-Bath  treatment  of  hectic  fever,  407  ;   warming  effect  of,  explained,  403

Bazaar  life,  a  picture  of  the  processes  within  the  body,  100,  239

Beauty-culture,  872,  897  ;  in  the  application  to  Truth,  89  ;  loss  of,  221  ,   -sleep,  818

Bedroom,  choice  of,  for  old  age,  854  .   .  +^c^„

Bile  arouses  desire  for  stool,  106  ;  cleanses  bowel,  106  ;  diminishes  surface  tension, 
82,  106  ;    functions  of,  82,  106  ;    how  secreted,  122

Biliary  passages,  obstruction  of,  urine  in,  621

Bilious  constitution  and  the  hot  season,  286

Bilious  humour  :   description  of,  82  ;   effect  on  dreams,  500  ;  on  rational  and  vegeta- 
tive faculty,  appetite,  aspect,  etc.,  500  ;    foods  which  increase,  195  (3)  ;  m  the 
fasting  stomach;  780  ;   predominant  in  autumn,  288  ;   set  moving  by  hot  bath,     • 
407  ;   signs  that  it  is  dominant,  500  ;    table  of  types,  84

Bilious  temperament— and  purgation,  980  ;   benefited  by  wine,  802  ;   diet  for,  766

Binder,  rules  about,  692

Biochemical  tests  sometimes  fallacious,  25

Bitter  serous  humour,  explanation  of,  77

Bituminous  baths,  effect  of,  408

Blankets,  why  more  are  necessary  m  sleep,  340

Bleeding  should  be  frequent  if  much  flesh-meat  is  taken,  771

Black  chyme,  675  (3)  ,     ,  t  a-i  k

Black  :  kinds  of,  615  ;   black  stools,  675  (3)  ;   black  urine,  meaning  of,  615 
Bleeding  in  cases  of  lassitude,  837 
"■■Blepharitis  in  infants,  721  ,  .      ...  ,    cfn  .

Blood  •   in  urine,  meaning  of,  612  ;   colour  when  atrabilious  humour  plentiful,  501  , 
foods  which  enrich,  195  (3)  ;    oiliness  of,  468  ;    purpose  of  studying,  284.     bee 
'  sanguineous  humour  ' 
Blood-forming  centres  :    what  they  are,  121,  147  .

Blood-letting;  see  Venesection  ;   also  1017  ;  in  fevers,  precautions  concerning,  1029  ,Blood-letting;  see  Venesection  ;   also  1017  ;  in  fevers,  precautions  concerning,  1029  ,

when  preferable  to  purgation,  950 
Blood-states  and  emotions,  1117

Blood-vessels  the  materialisation  of  the  blood-stream,  123 
Blushing,  a  means  of  cure,  922 
Boating,  741

Bodily  exercise,  general  discourse,  736

Bodilv  strength  does  not  depend  on  quantity  of  blood,  97

Body  :    and  soul  forms  one  single  being,  25  ;   -fluids  different  from  humours,   n7  ; 
not  a  make-up  of  spare  parts,  23  (ii) 
'Boiling  to  purify  water,  368 
Books — words — thoughts,  7 
Bone,  116  ;    very  different  from  blood,  134 
Boundaries  of  the  three  kingdoms,  129  (1) 
v  -Brain,  effect  of  wine  on,  803  ;  inflammation  of,  719  ;  not  the  source  of  activities,  2  j  , 
signs  of  functional  adequacy,  453  ;    water  on,  719 
Breakfast,  Arab,  251  ,  „„.„;-_„    ^noq.Breath,  134  ;  aeration  of,  238  ;  and  emotions,  139.  160  (4)  ;  and  passions  1093  , 
and  pulse  (in  Chinese  science),  209  ;  and  syncope,  342  ;  application  to  histology, 
146  ;  a  luminous  substance,  1091  ;  a  ray  of  light,  ib. ;  changes  of  quality,  138 
ditto,  simultaneously  with  changes  in  composition,  148  ;  choked  m  cases  01 
plethora,  442  ;  concentration  and  condensation  of,  237  ;  confinement  of,  m 
emotions,  342  ;  confused,  effect  of,  1103  ;  course  of  through  body,  171  ;  de- 
finitions of  (positive  and  negative),  136  ;  depuration  of,  236  ,  dispersed  by  hot 
■  bath  407  ;  dispersed  with  humours,  111  ;  diverse  theories  about ,  17«$ ,  ettect 
of  coarseness  of,  1103  ;  effect  of  confusedness,  in  daily  life,  1109  ;  effect  on 
emotion  varies  according  to  amount,  quality,  and  substance,  1103  ;  enect  01 
poisons  on,  356  B  ;  effect  of  scantiness,  1103  ;  effect  of  sleep  on,  337  ;  eftect 
of  strong  emotional  states  on,  1115  sqq.  ;    five,  in  the  Hindu  system,  136  ,

INDEX  583INDEX  583

fuliginous  component,  238  ;  heart  made  to  receive  it,  168  ;  how  it  begins,  171  ; 
in  Chinese  philosophy,'  137  ;  in  pathology,  147  ;  is  not  "  soul,"  235  ;  its  activity, 
138  ;  its  constitution,  is  important  to  medicine,  23  ;  languishing  of,  343  ; 
motions  of,  in  relation  to  mind-states,  341  ;  movement  in  two  opposite  direc- 
tions at  once,  344  ;  nature  of,  136  ;  not  necessary  to  movement  (argument 
from  paralysis),  163  ;  pervades  body,  136  ;  purification  of,  264  ;  quality  of, 
effect  of,  1101  ;  quantity  of,  effect  of,  1100  ;  relation  to  anatomical  organs, 
145  ;  relation  to  atmospheric  air  inhaled,  236  ;  relation  to  innate  heat,  141 ; 
to  life,  165  ;  to  metabolic  changes,  142  ;  to  cycles  of  the  outer  world,  147(d)  ; 
of  oxygen  to,  137  ;  to  temperament,  171,  139  ;  to  will-power,  140  ;  retained 
by  a  rarefaction  of  skim,  415  (vi) ;  source  in  the  finer  particles  of  the  humours,  169  ; 
state  of,  influence  on  faculties  and  talents,  1109,  1110  ;  substance  of,  is  water, 
237,  137  ;  synonyms,  28,  129  (6),  136  ;  types  of,  associated  with  blood-states, 
1117  ;  type  depends  on  the  emotion,  1111  ;  versus  organs,  re  humours,  162  ; 
weakness  of,  443  (ii)

Breathing,  difficulty  of,  in  infants,  723

Breaths,  three — natural,  animal,  vital,  170

Brevity  consistent  with  deep  knowledge,  7

Broad  pulse,  characters  of,  558

Bronchitis  in  winter,  cause  of,  179 
—Bubo,  what  it  is,  209

Bulky  stools,  675   (4)

■Bursting  of  abscess  into  sputum,  vomit,  urine,  faeces,  509

C

Cachexia  =  tumefaction  with  gas,  211  (4)

Cadence  in  Arabian  poetry,  effect  of,  219

Calcareous  serous  humour,  74

Calculus,  420,  425  ;    urine  in,  636

Calefacients,  415,  830  ;    as  refrigerants,  416  (3)Cadence  in  Arabian  poetry,  effect  of,  219

Calcareous  serous  humour,  74

Calculus,  420,  425  ;    urine  in,  636

Calefacients,  415,  830  ;    as  refrigerants,  416  (3)

Cancer,  a  condition  of,  is  entry  of  S  into  cycle,  213,  147

Cancerous  swelling,  213

Canon  :  applied  to  modern  clinical  diagnosis,  280  ;  to  modern  treatment,  285  ; 
to  pathology,  273  ;  is  a  precis,  7  ;  would  sometimes  help  in  modern  practice, 
37  ;  meaning  of  the  word,  10  ;  to  be  memorised,  7  ;  useless  for  modern  out- 
patient department  or  ward  teaching,  34  ;   written  at  the  instance  of  a  friend,  2

Capacity  for  life,  conditions  necessary  for,  1090  ;   for  rational  life,  ditto,  1090

Capillaries  of  liver,  102  ;    described  by  Avicenna,  32  (c)

Carbon-centric  v.  oxycentric  compounds,  etc.,  92

Cartilage,  functions  of,  116  (2)

Cataract,  signs  forewarning,   878

Cause,  definition  of,  191  ;  in  medicine  is  not  an  efficient  cause,  166  ;  and  malady  and 
symptom,  examples,  194  ;  of  compositional  disease,  207  ;  of  death,  61  ;  of 
delight  and  sadness,  extrinsic,  1104  ;  of  failure  of  innate  heat,  58  ;  of  humours 
(Table),  106  ;  of  increase  of  atrabilious  humour,  108  ;  of  movement  of  the 
humours,  112  ;    of  numerical  decrease,  428

Causes  :  concerned  in  the  "  dance  of  the  elements,"  102  ;  four  kinds  of,  13  ;  must 
be  understood  before  knowing  how  to  preserve  health  or  remove  ill-health,  14  ; 
of  disease,  facultative,  classification,  399  ;  of  disease,  list  of,  according  to 
Paracelsus,  199,  footnote  ;  three  groups  of,  231  ;  three  steps  in  substantial 
change,  69

Caustics,  mode  of  action,  1044

Cauterisation,  general  principles  and  objects,  1072  ;    of  skull,  precautions  in,  1072

Celestial  factors,  on  climate,  306Caustics,  mode  of  action,  1044

Cauterisation,  general  principles  and  objects,  1072  ;    of  skull,  precautions  in,  1072

Celestial  factors,  on  climate,  306

Cells  are  changing  physical  things  as  well  as  chemical,  05

Cerebral  diseases,  effect  on  pulse,  233

Chalky  waters,  baths  of,  action  of,  408

Chalybeate  waters,  384,  408

Channel  water,  383

Channels,  agents  for  opening,  421  ;   of  the  body,  911  (footnote) .     See  obstructions

Change .  (dynamic)  is  universal,  66  ;  from  one  physical  state  to  another  as  well  as 
chemical,  9s  ',  in  the  human  being,  83  ;  of  diet,  ill  effects  of,  if  from  light  to 
heavy,  787  ;  of  mode  of  vital  force  accounts  for  changes  in  organs,  72  ;  which 
the  liver  makes  in  the  blood,  104  ;  of  elements  exemplified  in  chemistry  (glucose 
to  alcohol),  87

584  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

V  Character  :    and  emotional  type  belong  together,  164  (IV)  ;    and  physique   J65(i) 
(Character        _    deHneatioI1;  /£  (i);  j6j  (i)  .   is  inherent  and  unalterable,  164. (IV)  ,

inherited    mav  depend  on  breath  of  parents,  345 
Charartersrf  goTdV^an)  milk,  700  ;  of  good  wet-nurse,  700  ;  of  inhabited  regions,

X  Characlr-ttT  S&S&'i  (IV)  ;  versus  physique  known  to  Chinese  : ?5. 
ASart :   of  mfnd,'  description  of,  159  !   of  correlation  of  faculties,  x58  ;   co-ordmatmg 
,  terminologies,  155  ;    of  Chinese  pulse,  208

A  Phperfnlness  belongs  to  air  element,  75  .    ,    _

SeSca?  changes  in  body  correspond  to  an  Eastern  court,  93  ;    exemplified,  87 
Chemical  structure  determines  anatomical  structure,  124 
Chemistry  of  life  viewed  mystically,  93,  94^^^^ny^f  kVt^'3Qo-  diagnosis  disconcertingly  accurate  36  ; 
hm  'rnoTl^rrow  from  the  Turks,  8  ;  philosopher's  view  of  Western  world,  6  ; 
studfed  chara°cTer  aTd  physique,  '163  «  (foot&te)  ;  world- conception  not  lightly

Choice  obfVr£1or'a'given  case,  290,  *9x  1120  ;  of  food  according  to  climate,  313 
sqq.  ;    of  various  methods  of  treatment  rules  for,  1051  1H.,  442

Choking  of  breath  =  retarded  or  arrested  oxidative  processes,  4*2  ,  m  plethora,  442 
(footnoted,  590

Choleric  atrabilious  humour,  94

Chord-like  pulse,  549

V  Chronic  intemperament,  treatment  of,  9<2b 
Chyme,  quality  of,  according  to  food,  360 
Chyle  taken  up  by  liver,  102

Cineritial  urinary  sediment,  658  (9)  .  rhineqp  idea  of

Circulation  long  known  of,  but  not  anatomically  visualised,  32  ,  Chinese  idea  01, 
IT  Wiegerl  ;  circulation  of  breath  not  anatomical,  144  :  '■ rate  o f  not  realised 
by  Chinfse,  32  (6)  ;   and  by  few  persons  to-day,  ^b.  ;  the  old  idea,  116

^aassmcaSon^'ofdlease  (Galenic),  224;    of  errors  of  development  (Abbott)    zp; 
/s  Classification  erOiQto  ^  >  d_  ^  .    of  ^b«ao^ngto^

121  ■    of  members  into  principal  and  auxiliary,  123  ,    of  members  according ,  iu 
finity,  117?  accordinl  to  their  origin,  125  ;    into  preparatory  and  auxiliary 
(table),  123  ;   of  temperaments,  30  ;   varies  with  personal  taste,  173 
Clay-coloured  stools,  675  (3)

%^n%9-Ml^eI?>6is^r"y:  313  (rheumatic  cases),  324  (nerve  and

heart),  327  (nerve) 
Clot,  man  created  of,  679  ;  source  of  life-germ,  1^5 
Clothing — as  part  of  regimen,  254,  rules,  254 
i^i^TSir^S™--    difference  from  inspiration,   179  ;    more

perfect  in  man  (St.  T.),  129perfect  in  man  (St.  T.),  129

effect  of,  278  ;   on  body,  313  ;   bath,  effect  on  pulse,  596  ,   countries,  enect  on 
Cold^mp^rament:  and  urine,  620  ;   odour  of  urine  in,  645  ;  of  kidneys,  sediment

in  urine,  658  (4)  ;  rectification  of,  868 
Cold  :  intense,  why  it  kills,  894  ;  relation  of,  to  faculties   152         _    classification  of 
Cold  seasons,  diseases  of,  268  ;    cold  swellings  are  painless,  506      c^ss™c™e^

211  ;   cold  temperament,  degrees  of,  in  the  various  organs,  48  (and  see     intern

perament")  .  -fond  suitable  for  771;   functions  in,  488

Cold  temperament,  foamy  urine  m,  651  ,   food  suitaoie  iot,  111  ,

purgation  in,  986  ;  regimen  for,  868  ;  signs  of,  from  form,  481 
Cold,  treatment  by,  911  .       ^n  OQQ

Cold  water,  plunging  into,  for  frostbite,  872  ;   action  of,  388 
Collective  formulae  for  body,  J42  .  „.       •       •      fi6g

Colic  due  to  biliary  obstruction,  83  ;   colic  in  babies,  726  ,   urine  m,  bbS      ; 
Colour,  abnormal,  a  sign  of  disease,  454  (6),  282 
Colour  and  movement  of  humours,  346a

INDEX  585

Colour  :    change  of  body  as  a  whole,  meaning  of,  478  ;    disfiguring — causes  of,  and

classification  of,  221  (a)  ;  indicates  the  temperamon  t,  476;    guide  for  treatment, 
476 
Colour  of  hair,  a  sign  of  temperament,  472 
Colour  of  urine  :   black,  615  ;    compound,  626  ;   grccu,  614  ;   red,  610  ;   white,  618  ;yellow,  609  ;    of  urinary  sediment,  significance,  660 
Colours  affect  the  movement  of  the  humours,  112 
Colours,  taste  for,  depends  on  breath,  13Q 
Combinations  of  dishes,  772 
Commemorative  signs,  definition,  452 
Commendable  waters,  372 
/'Common  sense  (scholastic  term),  177  ;    site  of,  177  ;    versus   magination,  151 
Complexion,  care  of,  when  travelling,  897 
Composite  disease,  definition,  205 
''Composite  sense,  177 
Compositional  diseases  due  to  retention,  394 
Compound  :    colours  of  urine,  626  ;    fracture,  431  ;    intemperaments,  classification

of,  40;    pulses,  522 
Compulsory  visibility,  law,  106,  125 
'/Conception :     and   emotional  influence   on  product,    345  ;    factors  in  production,

345,  footnote 
Conceptions  in  Canon  not  recognized  in  modern  medicine,  23  ;   in  modern  medicine

not  known  to  Avicenna,  31 
Concepts  versus  Images,  161  (c)

Conditions  requisite  before  causal  agent  effects  illness,  233 
Configuration,  disorders  of,  199 
/Conflict  between  self  and  disease,  562 
Congenital  intemperament,  853 
Conjoined  causes,  231 
/'Conscience,  list  of  adjectives  relative  to,  164  (IV) 
Consistence  of  faces  a  sign  of  disease,  675  (2)  ;   of  sediment  of  urine,  661 
Constants  and  variables  for  each  person,  270

Constipation  and  diarrhoea  alternating,  treatment  of  in  old  persons,  858 
Constipation:  due  to  drinking  stagnant  water,  380  ;  during  dentition,  715  ;  habitual,

a  sign  of  intemperament,  491  ;   produced  by  cold,  why,  278 
Constitution  :    current  ideas  on,  27  ;    formula?  descriptive  of  272(2)  ;    in  terms   of

m  and  /,  58  ;    only  known  when  numerous  factors  are  known,  2j  ;    meaning  of

term,  27  ;    not  understood  by  modern  practitioners,  27  ;    versus  "  make-up,"m  and  /,  58  ;    only  known  when  numerous  factors  are  known,  2j  ;    meaning  of

term,  27  ;    not  understood  by  modern  practitioners,  27  ;    versus  "  make-up,"

2j  ;    versus  temperament,  27  ;    view  of  Paracelsus,  183.     See  "  temperament." 
Contamination  of  air  by  noxious  trees,  vegetables,  trades,  276 
Contentive  factors  of  pulse,  552,  554,  sqq. 
Continuous  pulse,  538

Contrary  maladies  conjoined,  treatment  of,  923 
Contusions,  treatment  of,  1070 
Convulsions  :   due  to  dryness,  716  ;  teething,  716 
Cordial  medicines,  mode  of  action,  1119 
Corpulence  =  plethora  of  fat,  442 
Correction  of  intemperaments,  930,  931,  932 
Correctives  :   for  unwholesome  food,  792  ;  for  heavy  foods,  789  ;   for  repletion,  793  ;

for  wine,  805 
Correlation  :    between  modern  biochemistry  of  blood  and  humours,  98  ;    of  various

faculties,  158,  sqq. 
Corruption,  144  ;   and  generation,  68,  88,  g8 
'--Coryza  in  infants,  724 
Cosmology  :   of  Avicenna,  19-25,  268  ;   ancient,  54 
Cough  in  infants,  724 
Counter-inebriants,  813 
Courses  of  a  meal,  796 
Cradle-song,  698  ;    example,  712,  240a 
Creeping  pulse,  541 
Crisis  of  fevers,  urine  in,  238 
Criteriology  necessary  to  medicine,  16 
Critical  polyuria,  616  (d) 
Crude  serous  humour,  explanation  of,  80 
Crude  humours  in  blood-vessels,  837  ;   and  in  lassitude,  823 
Crying,  incessant,  or  persistent,  in  infants,  717 
Cuisine  of  Arabs  not  unlike  Southern  Spanish  of  to-day,  24g

586  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Cupping,  1030  :— age  limit  for,  1035  ;  breasts  for  uterine  trouble,  1044 ;—  glasses, 
pSnts  of  application,  1032  ;  time  to  use,  1031  ;  tame  of  day  for,  1031  ;  m 
middle  ages;  261  ;  purposes  in  view,  1033  ;  uses  in  various  parts  of  body,  1032  , 
versus  venesection  of  saphenous  vein,  1032  (5)Cuprous  waters,  effect  of,  408  .     .

Curability  and  incurability,  227  ;    which  diseases  are,  327  ;    depends  on  expiative

factors,  20 1 
Curly  hair  denotes  hot  and  dry  temperament,  471    _ 
Curved  nails  denote  long-standing  disease  of  bronchi,  454  (9) 
Cvcle  of  pulse,  duration- of,  524  .

Cycles,  bacteriological,  187  ;    of  breath,  105,  138  ;   planetary  versus  climatic,  194  ,

seasonal,  effect  on  body,  296-301 
Cyclical  changes  in  atmosphere,  277  ;   in  physiology,  83,  85  ;    disorder  of  pulse,  530

D

Daily  actions  largely  instinctive,  153

Damp  countries,  effect  on  body,  321

Dane?- of  elements,  83,  95,  99,14*.  *49  \    and  death,  i49  ;   and  disease,  149  :   when 
it  stops    all  ceasls,  93  ;dancers?  feelings  not  the  concern  of  composer  or  con- 
ductor, 84  „ 
Y  Dancing  causes  abortion,  739  ;  without  personal  contact,  a  type,  a 4 
^Darkness  useful  for  certain  maladies,  112 
'Dead  bodv  carries  its  secrets  with  it,  even  after  autopsy,  127,  104  (1V)

Death  duJ  to  failure  of  innate  heat,  684;    explained,  681-2;    produced  by  intense 
pain,  1073

Debility,  causes  of,  443

Debul   343  ;   199  (ii)  footnote.     See  Decline

Deception  of  doctor  by  patient,  attempted,  673

Decline,  343;  what  it  is,  221  (4).     See  Debul  ,....__        n

Decree  and  duration  of  life,  61, 111-115  :   decree  of  Allah,  56,  300

Decrepit  age,  51  ;   urine  in,  670

Deepening  of  yellow  colour  in  urine,  significance  of,  bll

Deep-seated  inflammations,  treatment  of,  1050

Deep  ulceration,  three  rules  for  treatment,  1064  .

Deformities,  scholastic  explanation  of,  120  ;    agents  which  cause,  419  ,    as  com-

DegrleT  o^dfeease^weakness,  depravity,  abolition,  or  hindrance  to  function),  488  ;

226

Delay  in  treatment,  danger  of,  918,  919DegrleT  o^dfeease^weakness,  depravity,  abolition,  or  hindrance  to  function),  488  ;

226

Delay  in  treatment,  danger  of,  918,  919

Delicate  build  of  body  denotes  cold  and  dry  temperament,  202 
ySght   depends   on  breath-type*  1099  ;     effect  on  pulse,    601;     erroneous   view 
'  regarding,  1097  ;    relative,  1098  ;    synonyms,  164  (II)

Demonstrative  signs,  definition,  452

Density  of  urine,  definition,  627,  237  a

Dentition,  disorders  of,  715  .„„„.••  «    +    t   can

Depraved  humours  as  cause  of  pain,  439  ;   injurious  effect  of,  680 
'/■Depression,  emotional,  versus  timidity,  1116 
'Depuration  of  breath,  236

Description  of  a  pulse-beat,  516

Dessicants,  418  .  .

Deiir-ration  of  obiects  in  the  air,  explained,  254  .

}<Eesire  S *  (II)  °    and  breath,  148  ;   due  to  loss  of  balance,  147  M  I   not  due  simply 
1  to  need  for  nutriment,  185  ;  the  source  of  all  life,  1086

Destiny   22,  199  ;    and  freewill,  115  \    decreed,  113,  114,  H5

B^toI^dffficXof.^primary  and  secondary  symptoms,  460  Xof  character- 
Type  is  like  reading  a  foreign  language/sSo  ;      of  inflation,  505  ;    of  nature  of 
swelling  in  terms  of  its  humour,  507

Diaphragmatic  pleurisy,  pulse  m,  454  _  ™-o+raH-ed    effect  on

•  Diarrhoea  :    as  cause  of  weakness,  445  ;    m  dentition,  715  ,    protracted,  enect  on 
pulse,  602 
Dicrotic  pulse,  546,  566,  222

INDEX  587•  Diarrhoea  :    as  cause  of  weakness,  445  ;    m  dentition,  715  ,    protracted,  enect  on 
pulse,  602 
Dicrotic  pulse,  546,  566,  222

INDEX  587

Diet :  according  to  season,  760,  764  ;  after  cupping,  1036  ;  as  mode  of  treatment 
906,  295  ;  during  evacuant  treatment,  941 ;  for  hot  countries,  886  ;  for  lassitude' 
834,  838,  842  ;  for  old  age,  855  ;  for  people  with  good  digestion,  783  ;  in  inflam- 
matory lassitude,  851  ;  in  spontaneous  lassitude,  842  ;  in  spring,  873  ■  in  winter" 
876;  of  wet  nurse,  699,  702,  708;  reducing,  907;  the. head  of  he'alin?  7*a  . 
when  travelling,  882  s'      a  '

Dietetic  errors  :    account  for  most  diseases,  347  ;    and  culinary  art,  248

Dietetics,  759-792,  248-253

Difference:  basic,  between  the  Canon  and  modern  medicine  (table),  19  ;  between 
ancients  and  moderns  is  (a)  outlook,  (6)  topic,  37  ;  between  instinct  and  reason 
152  ;  between  waters,  363  ;  forms  of  anger,  139

Digestibility  of  foods,  J95  (1)

Digestion  :  aided  by  sleep,  337  ;  better  in  winter,  292  ;  defective,  fetid  odour  in 
648  ;  defective,  urine  in,  628  ;  depraved,  urinary  sediment  in,  658  (7)  •  dig' 
turbance  of,  in  infants,  725  ;  good,  urinary  sediment  in,  653  ;  in  stomach 
theory  of,  247  ;  poor,  sign  of  moist  temperament,  473  ;  produced  by  heat  of 
members  enveloping  stomach,  100  ;  sensu  strictiori,  149  ;  urine  during,  623 
624  ;   variations  in  urinary  characters  during,  238  ;   within  blood-vessels    32  (d)

Dilated  heart  due  :   to  joy,  199  (i.  3)  ;   to  pain,  ib.

Discharges,  abnormal,  classified,  458  ;   as  sign  of  disease,  458

Discharge  of  waste  matters,  mechanism  of,  188

Discontinuous  functions,  106 
./Discussion  as  to  whether  brain  or  heart  is  more  important,  118-122

Discutients,  830Discharge  of  waste  matters,  mechanism  of,  188

Discontinuous  functions,  106 
./Discussion  as  to  whether  brain  or  heart  is  more  important,  118-122

Discutients,  830

Disease  :  a  personal  matter,  199  ;  arising  from  drinking  marshy  water,  379  ;  classi- 
fication of  the  synonymous  terms,  168  ;  compositional,  cause  of,  207  ;  definition 
of,  192,  231  ;  degrees  of,  226  ;  due  to  altered  rhythm  of  the  breath,  147  \b)  ■ 
due  to  interference  with  flow  of  breath,  147  (a)  ;  due  to  retention  of  wastes' 
394  ;  expiative,  199  ; — germs  carried  underground,  177  ;  in  one  organ  involves 
another,  225  ;  is  not  in-formed  matter,  166  ;  may  cure  disease,  228  ;  modern 
and  ancient  views  contrasted,  167,  273  ;  not  a  reaction,  167  ;  retributive,  199  ■ 
signs  of,  classified,  454  ;  stages  of,  222  ;  stages  of,  bearing  on  treatment,'  917  '• 
symptoms  and  cause  may  be  all  one  thing,  195  (e)  ;  transmission  of,  229  •' 
treatment  of,  general  rules  for,  905  - '

Diseases  :  associated  with  variations  of  earth  temperature,  179  ;  of  ground  water 
178  ;  benefited  by  cold  atmosphere,  313  ;  by  hot  atmosphere,  313  ;  causing 
deformity,  419  ;  dependent  on  direction  of  wind,  314-317  ;  following  a  very 
hot  and  dry  summer,  303  ;  number  of,  limited  in  reality,  173  ;  modification  of,  by 
summer,  285  ;  of  autumn,  289  ;  of  cold  season,  268  ;  of  expression,  286,  294 
300  ;  of  hot  season,  269,  286  ;  of  infancy,  714  ;  of  southerly  countries,' 329  '• 
of  spring,  282,  282  ;   of  winter,  294  ;   which  cure  diseases,  examples,  228

Disfigurements,  221

Dishes,  Arabian,  251

Disinclination  for  exercise,  meaning  of,  499. 
/^Disintegration,   68,  142Disfigurements,  221

Dishes,  Arabian,  251

Disinclination  for  exercise,  meaning  of,  499. 
/^Disintegration,   68,  142

/•'Dislocation,  198  (3)  ;    definition,  201  ;    treatment  of,  1069 
^  Disorderly  irregularity  of  pulse,  564  ;    pulse,  530 
./Disorders  :    of  configuration,  198;    of  imagination,  181  ;    of  temperament  defined 
198;    of  temperament,  treatment  of,  911,  925-933  '

Displacement  of  parts,  causes,  424 
/'Disposition  :    1094,  1123  ;    St.  Thomas  on  relation  of,  to  quality  of  soul,  272  (2) 
\f         footnote  ;    see  also  under  *'  character  "  ;    states  of  body  and  mind. 
/Distemper,  definition  of,  168,  B.  ii 
,  Distillation  of  water,  369,  898 
../Distinction  between  congenital  and  acquired  temperament,  467

Diurnal  variations  of  pulse,  225 
/Divergent  views  about  relation  between  temperament  and  breath,  165

Diversity  of  perfection,  intended,  109

Doctor  should  be  himself  healthy  to  feel  pulse  properly,  207

Doctrine- :  of  imponderable  elements,  73  ;  considered  statically,  73-82  ;  dynamically, 
83-89  ;    of  Mean,  109

Dominant  element  colours  all  parts  of  the  being,  82

Douches,  1016  ;  to  increase  fat,  871  ;  over  head,  1016;  with  herbs  as  showerbath, 
414

Drastic  purges,  how  to  mitigate,  993

Drawn  blood  separates  into  four  layers,  96

588  THE  CANON  OP  MEDICINE

XDreams  :    agreeable  in  enable  t-pe™  t    494  ,    ^dd^den^^^ 
'  t^^^^Z^^olS-ti-    warming  oneself,  492  ;   which

show  plethora,  examples,  498 
SSSSI^S^XU %*3fr&2b2!<'.  on  io^eys,  898-9.2  ;   ^

fication  when  travelling,  ib. 
Dropsical  swelling,  211  (3)  humour  is  dominant,  500

SS^^?^  «^^S^^' 37' 271' 1119"1121

TWs  and  pulse   225  ;   cordials,  action  of,  1119  sM

Srug,  Hst  ?f  in  Canon,  which  are  still  used,  Appendix  3

Drv  air  defined,  250  ._SS^^?^  «^^S^^' 37' 271' 1119"1121

TWs  and  pulse   225  ;   cordials,  action  of,  1119  sM

Srug,  Hst  ?f  in  Canon,  which  are  still  used,  Appendix  3

Drv  air  defined,  250  ._

Dry  atmosphere,  effect  of,  278  ;    on  body,  313

Dry  cupping  for  pain  of  flatulence,  1083

Dry  hiccough,  455

Dry  intemperament ■  rertificatron  of  .867  ^         .  part  played  by,

Dryness,  action  of,  153  ,    as  cause  01  pain,  •so*  , 
in  digestion  and  nutrition,  153

Dry  skin,  839 
>,  gy  tfmj'erlment,  degrees  of,  in  the  various  members,  50  ;    in  regard  to  purgation,  . 
f"  981  ;    signs  of,  from  the  form,  481

Dual  functions  of  bile  and  atrabilious  humour,  89

Dusty  air,  effect  on  body,  839

Dwelling,  choice  of,  254

Dynamic  aspect  of  matter  and  form,  66-72

Spenter^'from  drinking  ". lead  "-water,  875 
Dysmenorrhea,  treatment  by  cupping,  1033  (vi)

E

Ear,  diseases  of,  in  infants,  722

Earache,  in  infants,  722  „~~nnr<i    9^  ■    definition  and  characters,  21  ;

Earth:    a  lung,  17 5  •    breathes  out  ™P°£^55  J^^tio  &

dominates  in  old  persons,   62      m  w mter    heat  cone  <      firmness  and

stomach  (Paracelsus),  177  ;    not  the  literal  eartii,  73  ,    P™ 
rigidity  to  parts,  679  ;    purpose  of,  21

ISer?c^,1fe  of,  a  picture  of  life  within  the  body,  239

Ebb  and  flow,  a  law,  32  W  ,  „„.

Education  up  to  thirteen  years  of  age    733-735  Qn  ^^   708  .    of

^"disealef  SS  aTdTSd°afry,a459-464  ?

EfeSS  ^^^f  ^haritls8™  '

IISnTcauses^llt)  ^eunid!  5/;  ar'the  faculties,  7x  ;   in  the  human  being,  72  ; 
of  humours,  106 
XEgo,  types  of,  164  (IV) 
Elderlv  persons  may  take  wine,  810 
Electric  potential,  change  of,  versus  breath    142 
Elementary  bodies  have  not  capacity  for  life,  1089

Elementary  tissues,  the,  lib  functions  in  body,  78  ;    and.mentalistatesElementary  tissues,  the,  lib  functions  in  body,  78  ;    and.mentalistates

X  Elements  :    all  four  m  each    19  ,    and  functions  >W  maferial)  19  .   defined

-  78,  160  (III)  ;   and  systems  of  body  7*  >   ar  ^  .   f  j

19  •    doctrine  of,  29,  55'10li  •   fv      ,1,,  „  rmmoeony  29  ;      four,  or  five  ? 
institution  in  terms  of,  ^(^SgK'fSWi  conception  with

of  atrabihous  humour,  500 
Embryo,  source  of  nutriment,  708

INDEX  589

Emesis  :    applicable  to  thin  persons,  956  ;   articles  of  food  which  assist,  1003  ■   bye- 
effects  and  their  treatment,  1012  ;    contra-indications,  999  ;    disadvantages  of 
s.aJ°?S  on  blood-state>  H17  ;    evil  effects  of,  1011  ;    failure  of,  ill-effects 
of    1006;    food  and,  1002;    ill-effects  of,  1007;    influence  of,  on  breath-type 
l        ;„™    to  be  habltually  used  for  repletion,  1011  ;   objects  of,  1000  ;   proce- 
dure, 1001  ;    proper  time  for,  1008  ;    symptomatic  bye-effects,   1012  ■    what  is 
meant  by  the  term,  256. 
Emetics  which  are  also  purges,  958 
/.  Emotion  :    defined,  i$g

;; Emotional :  depression,  effect  of,  1114  ;  disturbance  as  desiccant,  418  •  make-up 
formula?  for,  164  (II)  ;  state  and  pulse,  518  (4)  ;  states  as  calefacient,  415  (ivf: 
states  as  basis  of  occult  phenomena,  162  (iv)  'Emotions  :  and  breath,  148  ;  341-346,  1098  ;  and  humoral  formula,  160  (5)  ■  and 
?nnoe'Jfl'  233J  chan&e  quality  of  mother's  milk,  700  ;  details  regarding,  160 
1092-1118;  effect  on  body,  345;  interact  .with  intellect,  16%  (I)-  interact 
VitiLIsason,  165  (III)  ;  interact  with  ./Will,  165  (III)?list  of,  164'  (n\'-"]Bi 
°f  words  descriptive  of,  ib.  ;.  as  refrigerants,  416  (6)  ;  objects  of,  i\q  ■  'part 
^PA  §^^gzAati°S>  1H8  ;  physical  effects  of,  160  (5)  ;  relation  to  blood- 
state  ibo  (4)  ;  relation  to  elements,  160  (4)  ;  tabulated,  160  (3)  ;  JJaeory  of 
m  relation  to  breath,  elements,  humours,  160,- 1090  sqq  '

Empty  pulse,  526 
Enaeorema,  662  (last  paragraph) 
Encumbrance  due  to  obstruction,  502 
Endemic  elephantiasis,  229  (7)  ;    endemic  goitre,  229  (D) 
.Endowments  ;    one  is  at  expense  of  another,  165  (IV) 
Environment,  kinds  of,  165  (III) 
Enemas  :    1014  ;    advantages  of,  1014  ;    best  time  for,  ib.  ;    for  old  persons    859  ;

materials  for,  258  ;    modern  usage,  250 
Environment,  kinds  of,  165  (III) 
Epilepsy,  urine  in,  632 
XEpileptic  attack  :   warded  off  by  evacuant  treatment,  953  ;   annulled  by  pasony  350 
Epistaxis  a  good  sign  in  internal  inflammations,  512

Equable :    scope   of  term  in  medicine,    31  ;    temperament,   definition    30  •    tem- 
perament, evidences  of,  494  ;   —  functions  in,  488  ;   —  what  it  is  and  what  it 
is  not,  31  .    pulse,  529 
Equal  pulse,  529 
Equilibrium,  the  ideal  mean,  82 
Equitation,  739

Equivalents  of  the  heavy  elements,  20  ;    of  the  light  elements    ib 
Erroneous  views  as  to  primary  source  of  functions,  141  ;  of  ancients  only  apparent  6 
Errors  of  development,  tables,  199  (i) 
Erysipelas,  definition,  209 
Essence,  definition,  58Essential :   causes  of  disease,  examples,  232  ;   considerations  in  the  art  of  preserving 
health,  688  5

Ether,  and  Yin  and  Yang,  103  ;    —  of  the  constitution,  81 ;    (ether  =  light) 
Ethical  principle  of  man,  log

Evacuation  :    amount  to.  go  to,  935  ;    choice  of,  eleven  factors,  934  ;    choice  of  time 
for,  935  ;   five  rules  regarding,  935  ;   of  humours,  modes  of,  936  ;   of  pathological 
matter,  395  ;    of  retained  matter,  effects  of,  396  ;    as  cause  of  weakness   445 
Every  animal  has  its  own  temperament,  45 
Evidence  of  proper  functioning  of  organs,  453 
Example  of  stage  of  cycle  towards  visibility,  g$ 
Excessive  evacuations,  effect  on  body,  397  ' 
Excrementitious  atrabilious  humour,  varieties  of,  92 
Excrementitious  :    fluids,  69   (6)  ;    —  form  of  atrabilious  humour,   90  •    —  serous

humour,  74.  See  Superfluities 
Exercise  ;  after  meals,  763  ;  amount  of,  rules  regarding,  747  ;  an  evacuant  737  ■ 
appropriate  for  elderly  persons,  863;  as  part  of  regimen  to  prescribe' 
254  :  definition  of,  593  ;  degrees  of,  334  ;  duration  of,  744  ;  effect 
on  body,  333,  334 ;  effect  on  pulse,  225 ;  excessive,  effect  of  416  (4)  • 
features  of,  in  effect  on  body,  333  ;  for  lassitude,  835  ;  for  old  age,  854  863  ' 
for.  wet-nurse,  708;  general  discourse,  736  ;  graduation  of,  748  ;  in  hot  intem- 
peraments,  866  ;  m  relation  to  meals,  776  ;  in  spring,  873  ;  lack  of,  as  cause  of 
inflammation,  431  ;  moves  the  humours,  112  ;  of  infants,  described,  712 ; 
precautions  re,  before  taking,  745  ;    regulation  according  to  season,  746  ;   rules

-p

590  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

and  regimen,   254,   747  ;    value  of,   242  ;    various  forms  of,   73'8,  739 ;    why-p

590  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

and  regimen,   254,   747  ;    value  of,   242  ;    various  forms  of,   73'8,  739 ;    why

necessary,  737 
Exhaustion  from  excessive  purgation,  remedies  for,  991 
Expansion  of  parts,  agents  which  prevent,  426 
Expiative  causes  of  disease,  201  ■    *    ,nn

Expression,  diseases  of,  286,  294,  300  ;   sign  of  state  of  mind,  492 
Expulsive  faculty,  150  ;    versus  dryness,  157 
External  anatomy,  a  guide  to  internal  function,  127 
External  and  internal  features  of  body  belong  together    25  _

>External :'  senses,  175  ;  _signs  of  hot  intemperament,  865  ;    swellings,  signs  of,  50b 
Extracorporeal  causes,  234,  sqq.

Extramundane  influences  on  human  body,  explained,  108

Extraneous  causes  of  colour  change,  480  ;    extraneous  heat  from  putrescence,  358 
Eye,  diseases  of,  in  infancy,  721  ;    colour  of,  a  guide  to  the  temperament   47/,  282.

Eye  of  Taoist :    i.e.  mystical  perception  of  the  truths  of  Nature,  281

f,  symbol  of  "  form,"  56-72 
Face-powder,  scented,  897

Factors  concerned  in  prod  action  of  the  pulse,  552  ,^0  Wfi

Factors  which  destroy  the  body,  681  ;   which  govern  the  healthiness  of  a  place,  318

Facts,  what  they  are  and  are  not,  12  ;    Appendix  2  .

Faculties  :  as  efficient  causes,  7i  ;   depend  on  flow  of  breath,  442  ;  have  not  priority,

but  relation,  121  ;   in  relation  to  formation  of  humours,  107  (II)  ;   of  generation,

145;    to  foster,  in  treating  a  case,  687;    versus  function,  136

^Faculty:     alterative    (al-mughayyira),    131,    149;     animal. .{psychical*  •)     (an-nai-

saniyya),  174  ;  attractive  (al-jadhiba),  131,  147  ;  _  apprehensive  180     cogitative,

179;     expulsive   (al-dafi' a),   131,    150;     generative    (al-muwalhda)     131,    145,saniyya),  174  ;  attractive  (al-jadhiba),  131,  147  ;  _  apprehensive  180     cogitative,

179;     expulsive   (al-dafi' a),   131,    150;     generative    (al-muwalhda)     131,    145,

growing  (auxetic)  (al-murabbiyya),  131,  143  ;    natural    al  tabiiyya),  WW2;

nutritive    (al-mughadhiyya),   131,    143;     P^rc^tive   (al-hiss)     176 ,    ffiasomng

(siyasa),  176  ;  retentive  (al-masika),  131, 148  ;  feeknid_s.of,  137  ;. vital  ^al-haya-

waniyya),  137,1297 140  ;  weakness  of  =hypof unction,  plethora  of  =hyperf  unction

136,  628

Fading  pulse,  547,  568

Faeces,  characters  of,  in  health  and  disease,  675,  67b 
Fallacious  argument  re  errors  of  diagnosis  from  external  features,  25 
False  occult  phenomena,  162  (II)  ;    false  thirst,  treatment  of    798 
Familiarity  with  things  goes  with  ignorance  about  them,  1127 
Famine  and  plenty,  ill-effects,  761 
Fat  and  oil  of  body  reveals  temperament,  468

Fat  of  blood  nourishes  kidneys,  104  ,     ,  ,

VEate      20!  ;    Chinese  proverbs  on,  xx3  ;    as  destiny,  686  .not  untrue  bu pursued 
•  too  far,  ib.  ;    explanation  of,  113  ;    life-term  fixed,  686  ;    of  food-residues,  111

Fatigue  in  travelling,  885  ;  fatigue-pam,  434  (5) 
Fatness  means  moist  and  cold  temperament,  202 
Fats,  action  of,  423

Fattening  regimen,  870  .         .  ;        ,„ „lo    anK  i0\

Fatty:   food   objections  to,  794  ;   sediment  murine,  658  (3)  ;    stods,  67  5(3) 
J'Fear  :    breath  in    344;    earth  element,  78  ;   effects  of  on  body,  346  (d)      effects  on

body  and  mind,  1116  ;   effect  on  pulse,  601 ;    objects  of,  159  I   refrigerant,  416  ,

synonyms,  164  (II)  .  ,      ,„M

/  Feeblemindedness  in  offspring  after  cupping  parents,  103^ 
'     Feeble  pulse,  523,  561

Femalt  Fn^erStrual  blood  and  embryo,  relations  between  126  ;   sperm,  part  played/  Feeblemindedness  in  offspring  after  cupping  parents,  103^ 
'     Feeble  pulse,  523,  561

Femalt  Fn^erStrual  blood  and  embryo,  relations  between  126  ;   sperm,  part  played

bv    679

Fermentation  :   in  humours,  32  (e)  ;   in  stomach  from  bad  food,  767

Ferruginous  waters,  use  of  for  baths,  408  ;   effect  on  body,  384

Fetid  odour  of  urine,  646,  648  ,       „Q,  .     •

Fevers  :    blood-letting  in,  rules  for,   1029 ;    faulty   diet  predisposes  to,   791  ,    in

infants,  732  ;   pulse  in,  233;.,  urine  m,  238 
Few  able  to  interpret  the  secrets  of  the  autopsy,  127 
Fictitious  appetite,  761 
Fidgeting,  sign  of  gaseous  plethora,  504 
Fig-water,  distinction  from  urine,  674 
Filaments  in  urine,  671

INDEX

59i

Filtration  of  water  through  sand,  898

Final  cause,  defined,  sg,  13  (4)  ;    of  disease  includes  retiibutive  causes,  201 ;    of 
humours,  106 
,)^Finger-nails,  a  sign  of  the  temperament,  466

Fire  :  and  breath,  139  ;  characters  of,  24  ;  definition  of,  24  ;  some  equivalents,  78  ; 
from  air,  237  ;  nature  of,  24  ;  penetrative  power  of,  24  ;  provides  maturative 
power  of  body,  679  ;  St.  Thomas  on,  in  Sum..  Theol.,  24  ;  78,  i.,  p.  77.  Note  : 
"  digestive  fire  "  (Charaka155)  ;    innate  heat.

First  period  of  life,  52

First  principles  have  not  capacity  for  life,  1088

First  stage  of  digestion,  101

Fishing,  a  form  of  exercise,  741

Fistula  formation,  1068

Fixed  and  bound  chemical  elements,  go

Fixed  states  of  body,  166

Flatulence  in  infants,  726

Flatulent  pain,  relief  of,  1081  ;    treatment  of  by  dry  cupping,  1083Fixed  and  bound  chemical  elements,  go

Fixed  states  of  body,  166

Flatulence  in  infants,  726

Flatulent  pain,  relief  of,  1081  ;    treatment  of  by  dry  cupping,  1083

Flesh  :  akin  to  blood,  therefore  does  not  need  spaces  or  cavities,  133  ;  description  of, 
116  (9)  ;  list  of  components,  ib.  ;  receives  but  does  not  give,  120  ;  used  synony- 
mously with  "  nature,"  "  vice,"  and  "  passibility  "  (i.e.  perception  of  pain) 
in  S.T.

Fleshiness  denotes  a  kind  of  temperament,  468  ;  denotes  hot  and  moist  tempera- 
ment, 468

Fleshy  sediment,  in  urine,  658  (2)

Flickering  pulse,  545

Flow  of  humour,  sign  of  loss  of  continuity,  513

Fluids  falsified  to  simulate  urine,  603  (12)

Fluids  of  the  body  :  circulate  in  B.V.,  C.T.  spaces,  as  "  eau  de  constitution  "  of  the 
tissues,  as  various  substances,  123  (c)  ;    versus  humours,  116

Foam  of  blood,  82  ;    of  urine,  significance,  649-651

Fcetor  as  a  "  disfigurement,"  221  (3)

Fogs,  effect  oh  mind,  279

Food  and  drink,  347-392  ;  effect  on  pulse,  583  ;  regimen,  759-814  ;  should  be  pre- 
scribed, 254

Food  :  and  emesis,  1002  ;  best  for  people,  igs,  769  ;  cycle,  in  terms  of  visibility, 
77  ;  effect  on  body,  357  ;  for  one's  physique,  770  ;  "  hot  "  and  "  cold,"meaning 
of  351,  353  ;  must  be  in  apposition  with  gastric  mucosa,  185  (1)  ;  of  the  nation 
the  best,  769  ;  quality  of,  effect  on  body,  347  (a)  ;  —  stuffs  classified,  359  ; 
substance  of,  effect  on  body,  347  (d)  ;  value  according  to  amount  of  residue, 
195  (4)-Foods  :  and  medicines  m  intemperaments,  493  ;  choice  of,  according  to  rate  of 
absorption,  909  ;  classification  according  to  humour  produced,  J95  (4)  ;  to 
quality  of  chyme,  360  ;  depurative  properties,  ig$  (4)  ;  making  bad  chyme, 
360  ;    physiological  value,  igs  ;    which  increase  alvine  discharge,  255.

Footwear,  when  travelling  in  cold  countries,  894

Forces  of  nature  =  efficient  causes,  yi

Foreign  heat,  meaning  of,  203  ;    stands  for  bacterial  action,  141,  283,  485  ;    effect 
on  temperament,  483 
/\Form    =  property  (active  or  passive),  349,  1123;    and  assimilation,  347,  348.;    is 
motor,  and  not  breath,  52  ;    is  not.  a  quality,  348,  265

Form  (/)  :    of  food,  part  played  by,  348  ;    of  medicament,  part  played  by,  356  (B) 
./Form  of  members,  and  temperament,  481

Formal  cause,  13  (3)  ;    of  humours,  106

Formicant  pulse,  542,  572 
/^Formulas  describing  the  facts  of  human  "  nature,"  150

Four  periods  of  life,  51

Fourth  digestion,  110,  277

Fracture,  best  diet  for,  1061  ;    general  treatment,  1061

Frailty,  due  to  intemperament,  230

Freckles,  221  (2)  (iii) 
'/■-  Freewill  and  destiny,  115.

Frequent  bathing,  effects  of,  403

Friction,  -  749,  750  ;  in  the  nights,  750;  objects  of,  749;  procedure  for,  750; 
restorative,  750  ;    time  for,  749  ;   wood-cut  illustrating,  749

Frontispiece  referred  to,  2og

Frostbite,  428,  894-896  ;    measures  to  remedy,  891

Frothy  stool,  675

592  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Frozen  fruits,  895  .......

Fruit :    value  of,  objections  to,  790  ;    nutritious,  759  ;    various,  m  dishes,  251 
Fuliginous  component  of  breath,  238

Full  pulse,   526 ;    causes  of,   573  .  .  .

Function  :   coterminous  with  structure,  g$  ;   hindrances  to  m  diagnosis,  463  ;   kindsFull  pulse,   526 ;    causes  of,   573  .  .  .

Function  :   coterminous  with  structure,  g$  ;   hindrances  to  m  diagnosis,  463  ;   kinds

of  interference  with,  458  ;   —  testing  via  urine,  239  ;   versus  faculty,  136 
Functional  capacity  :   of  liver,  urine  in,  621,  626  (1),  658  (1),  238  ;    of  organs,  82  ;

of  organs  is  a  time-relation,  2j2  (2)  ;    of  spleen  and  kidney,  82 
'^Functional  efficiency,  meaning  of,  re  temperament,  488

''  Functions  :    of  atrabilious  humour,  87  ;    of  body,  185  ;    of  serous  humour,  73,  106 
Furfuraceous  sediment,  658  (1) 
Furunculosis  in  infants,  731

G

Galactogogues,  list  of,  705

Gall-bladder  bile  is  effete  matter,  82

Gall-stone  colic,  393

Ganglia,  characters,  and  treatment  (by  a  blow),  216

Gangrene  :    bone  involvement  in,  treatment  of,  1059  ;    excision  of  healthy  margin,

1058  ;    from  frostbite,  treatment,  896  ;    treatment,  1057,  1060 
Garlic  and  lettuce,  fate  in  body,  356,  A,  ii,  (a) 
Gaseous  distension,  signs  of,  504  :  —  matter  in  swellings,  431  :  —  swellings,  219  ,

treatment  of,  1052 
Gastrectasis,  440 
Gazelle  pulse,  539

Generation  and  corruption,  142  ;   versus  temperament,  28 
Generation  compared  with  cheese-making,  125 
Generative  organs,  123  (4) 
'/(Gentleness,  goes  with  dry  temperament,  492 
Genu  valgum,  199  (i)

Geographical  position  a  factor  in  the  choice  of  kind  of  evacuation,  934  (9) 
Germination  of  seeds,  description  in  terms  of  "  elements,"  87 
>*  Gestures:    reveal  kind  of  humour  dominant,   501,   280,   282;    rapid,  denote    hot 
temperament,  492 
Ginger,  for  old  people,  856 
Gingivitis,   715

Glandular  swelling,  v.  ganglia,  216 
Glutinous  medicines,  effect  of,  1044  (111) 
>'Goal  of  life,  241 
"   Goats,  urine  of,  673Glandular  swelling,  v.  ganglia,  216 
Glutinous  medicines,  effect  of,  1044  (111) 
>'Goal  of  life,  241 
"   Goats,  urine  of,  673

Golf-stick  :    see  Polo,  739 
X  Good-humoured,  real  meaning  of,  68 
>Good  memory,  a  sign  of  dry  temperament,  492 
/Good  power  of  observation,  significance  of,  492 
Good  prognostic  signs  from  urine,  634 
Goose-skin,  meaning  of,  823

Gout  attack  warded  off  by  evacuant  treatment,  953 
Graduated  exercises,  748 
Grapes,  796 
Gravel,  658  (8)

Green,  shades  of,  614  ;  stools,  675  (3) 
Grey  hair,  cause  of,  473 
Grief,  effect  of,  on  pulse,  601 
Griping  in  infants,  726 
Gritty  urinary  sediment,  658  (8)

Ground  air,  movement  of,  175  ;   and  choice  of  house,  332 
Ground-water,  diseases  associated  with,  178  ;    movement  of,  176 
Growth,  3  ;    faculty  of,  143  ;    nature  of,  ib.

H

•'  Habits  a  factor  in  choice  of  mode  of  evacuation,  934  (10) 
£  Habits  and  customs  account  for  cupping,  262 
"Hematuria,-  658  (9) 
Hsemopoietic  centres,  what  they  are,  72

INDEX

593INDEX

593

Hair  :    and  nails  as  excrement,  111  ;    affections  of,  221  (i)  ;    as  guide  to  kind  of 
temperament,  470  ;    is  ether,  50  ;  —  like  sediment,  658  (6)  ;    rate  of  growth 
indicates  kind  of  temperament,  470 
Hand  :   position  of  when  feeling  pulse  :   patient's,  518  ;   doctor's,  206  (3) 
Hands  :   the  clue  to  the  state  of  the  body,  452  (heading)  ;    the  most  attempered,   36 
—Hard  inflammatory  masses,  treatment  of,  1051 
Hard  pulse,  cause  of,  557,  562 
Harmful  effects  of  evacuants,  treatment  of,  943 
Harmonious  succession  of  events,  meaning  of,  122 
s  .Harmonious,"  definition  of,  261  (footnote) 
/Harmony  between  various  forms  of  doctrine  of  elements,  29 
Harsh  pulse  :   causes,  565  ;   due  to  inflammation  in  tender  parts,  600  (4) 
Harshness  of  body,  causes  of,  422 
Hastening  treatment,  danger  of,  920 
Head,  veins  of,  for  venesection,  1023 
Headache  as  a  disease,  195  (d)  ;   lyo 
Headaches,  "  cold,"  showerbaths  for,  414 
Healing,  science  of,  678,  285,  sqq. 
Healing  :   power,  162,  I  ;   163,  iii ;   miraculous,  163,  iii.  c  ;   of  solution  of  continuity,

cause  of  delayed,  203  ;  through  vitality,  28  j 
Health  :  a  harmony  of  the  humours,  117  ;  conditional  on  pure  air,  240  ;  requires 
persistent  proper  proportions  in  humoral  formula,  97  ;  evidence  of  balance 
between  inflow  and  outflow,  398  ;  (illustrated  by  diagram  in  2j8)  ;  not  a  rigid 
state,  but  a  range,  689  ;  of  doctor  must  be  good,  207,  281  ;  preservation  of, 
essential  considerations,  688  ;  principles  of  maintaining,  685  ;  signs  of,  classified, 
453,  494  ;  healthy  air,  characters  of  274-277 
Hearing,  175Heart  :  and  arteries  the  receptacle  of  the  breath,  515  ;  is  both  corporeal  and  non- 
corporeal,  25  ;  centre  of  body,  123  ;  centre  of  life,  of  breath,  14s  ;  enlargement 
of,  1116  ;  gives  rise  to  breath,  124  ;  is  more  than  the  anatomical  organ,  123  ;  is  part 
of  a  composite,  25  ;  seat  of  formation  of  the  rarefied  humours,  163  ;  soundness 
of  body  conditional  on  soundness  of  heart,  123,  119  ;  source  of  all  faculties  of 
breath,  172  ;  source  of  all  functions  ,141  ;  meaning  of,  three  schools,  i2g  (8)  ; 
root  of  faculties,  119  ;  types  of,  164  (IV) 
Heat :  action  of,  190  ;  and  cold,  action  of  in  formation  of  humours,  107  (I)  ;  heating 
foods,  788 ;  exposure  to  great,  when  travelling,  886  ;  from  putrescence 
(extraneous),  358;  necessary  to  attractive  faculty,  156;  necessary  to  move- 
ment, 155  ;  regulation  of,  203  ;  use  of,  in  treating  disease,  911 
Heavens,  the  seven  and  the  twelve,  $4

Heaviness,  sense  of,  a  sign  of  obstructions,  502  ;    significance  of,  499 
Heavy  elements  and  light  elements,  77 
Heavy  foods,  correctives  for,  789

Hectic  fever  not  as  painful  as  tertian,  432  ;   bath  treatment  of,  407  ;   pulse  in,  224 
Hellebore,  uses  of,  926

Hemetemesis  from  protracted  emesis,  1012 
Hepatic  disease,  urinary  sediment  in,  658  (1) 
Hepatic  insufficiency,  urine  in,  621,  626  (1) 
Herbage  decays  if  dry  season  after  dry  winter,  304

Herbal  baths,  408  ;    decoctions,  distinction  from  urine,  674  ;    douching  with    414 
719,  732 
/CHeredity,  diseases  of  (errors  of  development),  199  ;  see  Malconformation 
Hernia  in  infants,  728 
Heterorhythm  of  pulse,  534Hiccough,  427,  455  ;    in    infants,  725  ;    post-emetic,  1012 
High  resistance  (of  pulse),  effect,  232  ;  clinical  causes,  232 
High  altitudes,  living  at,  324 
Hippocrates  quoted,  876,  956 
Hirudiniform  urinary  sediment,  658  (10)

Histology  :    and  function,  125  ;    application  of  doctrine  of  four  elements  to,  95  ; 
importance  of,  911  (footnote)  ;    of  an  organ  the  visible  sum-total  of  chemical 
units,  gg 
Homogeneity  of  fasces,  676  ;    of  urinary  sediment,  654 
Honey  confections  not  good,  796 
/Hope,  effect  on  temperament,  346 
xHopefulness,  meaning  of,  492

Hot :    atmosphere,  effect  of,  278  ;    on  body,  313  ;   baths,  action  of,  402  (2)  ;   baths,

2Q

594  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

bad  effects  of,  407  •;  effect  on  pulse,  596  ;  countries,  effect  of,  319  ;  explanation 
of  in  regard  to  poisons,  483  ;  food,  meaning  of,  351  ;  mtemperament,  con- 
genital 864  ■  ditto,  physical  evidences,  865  ;  ditto,  regimen  for,  864  ;  poisons, 
203  (3)  483  '  Pulse>  527  :  season,  diseases  of,  269  ;  temperament,  degrees  of, 
in  various  organs,  47  ;  ditto,  functions  in,  488  ;  ditto,  purgation  in,  977,  986  ; 
ditto,  shown  by  jelal  actions,  490  ;  ditto,  signs  from  the  form,  481  ;  water, 
action  of,  390

House  :    material  used  for,  332  ;   types  of,  choice  of,  332 
,<Human  being  :   tabulation  of  distinctive  characters,  129,  272  (2)  ;    Buddhist  view,  80 
/Human  life  always  the -same  at  bottom,  14

Humanitarian  motives  for  practising  medicine,  46  (11) 
)!Human  nature  is  in-formed  matter,  63

Humectants,  417

Humidity  of  air,  effect  of,  181  ;    choice  for  house,  '332  (10)

Humoral  :    disorders,  venesection  for,  1018  ;   formula,  272  (2)Humectants,  417

Humidity  of  air,  effect  of,  181  ;    choice  for  house,  '332  (10)

Humoral  :    disorders,  venesection  for,  1018  ;   formula,  272  (2)

Humours  :  agitated  bv  southerly  winds,  315  ;  are  quasi-material,  116  ;  as  prin- 
ciples "  of  the  body,  116  ;  definition  of,  67,  116  ;  decomposing,  cause  harsh 
pulse  565  ;  discharge  of  —  natural  and  unnatural,  207  ;  how  extracted  from 
body':  by  purgation,  966,  by  emetics,  and  by  desiccant  medicines  via  nostrils, 
969  •  immature,  remedy  for,  according  as  they  are  intra-  (848)  or  extra-  (846) 
vascular;  in  autumn,  287,  288  ;  influenced  by  wine,  802  ;  in  rainy  season,  299  ;, 
in  summer,  284  ;  in  winter,  293  ;  kind  of,  diagnosis  of,  m  lassitude,  844  ;  move 
in  spring,  281  ;  not  the  same  as  humidities  (rutuba),  Appdx.  ;  as  body  fluids, 
67  ;  oxidised  by  waking  state,  338  ;  which  are  extravascular  are  amenable  to 
purges,  968

Hunger,  185  ;    to  quell,  884

Hurried  pulse,  528  ;    cause,  559

Husky  voice,  from  drinking  rain-water,  373

Hydrocephalus,  719

Hydromel,  804  „„„        ,        .    ,     ,,

Hygiene  :  of  dentition,  713  ;  of  infancy,  690-713  ;  of  lactation,  709  ;  of  period  after 
dentition,  710  ;   science  of,  678

Hyperfunction,  136

Hypofunction,  136

Hysterectomy,  why  harmful,  147  {a)

I

Ichorous  sediment  of  urine,  658  (5)

Icy  climate,  travelling  to,  regimen  for,  889 
yildeal  temperament  in  man,  34

Ideal  underlying  :  both  the  study  and  practice  of  medicine,  292,  294,  300,  appdx.  2  ; 
Moorish  architecture,  5

Idiosyncrasies  against  food,  768

Ignorance  about  fundamental  matters,  1128,  which  are  familiar,  1127

I  King,  a  great  book,  83

Ill-effects  on  infant,  of  over-suckling,  709

Ill-health  due  to  change  of  rhythm,  97,  9<S  ,.,-.,.        ,•     ,I  King,  a  great  book,  83

Ill-effects  on  infant,  of  over-suckling,  709

Ill-health  due  to  change  of  rhythm,  97,  9<S  ,.,-.,.        ,•     ,

Illness  :   precedes  signs,  in  the  case  of  plethora  of  faculty,  499  ;   a  relation  to  radiant 
life  and  breath,  231  ;   severity  of,  a  factor  in  treatment,  916 
/ilmages,  source  of,  in  imagination  151

"'/Imagination  ■    178  ;    effect  on  emotions,  1118  ;    intellectual,  151  ;    makes  humours

'  move,  112;   position  in  chart,  161,  B  ;  rational,  151  ;  scholastic  view,  151  ;  seat

of,  178  ;   sensuous,  151  ;   versus  apprehensive  faculty,  180  ;    vivid  if  breath  dry,

1110  c   „„„

.'-Imaginative  :   facultv,  179  ;   person,  meaning  of,  492

Imponderables  foim  a  bond  throughout  nature,  76

Importance  of  soil,  re  bacteria,  209 
!•] Impressions  :    maternal,  paternal,  345  ;    on  foetus,  345

Impure  water,  purification  of,  when  travelling,  899-902

3  nability  to  nurse  baby,  699 
/Incessant  talking,  explanation  of,  490

Incisions,  rules  concerning,  1056

Incompatibilities  between  drugs  and  constitution,  291  ;  between  foods,  195  (4), 
672,  795  ;  between  foods  and  constitution,  295  ;  to  be  considered  m  prescribing 
regimen,  296

Increase  in  size  of  body,  causes,  428

Incurable  headache,  227

INDEX  595

Indigestion  the  origin  of  all-sickness,  759  ;   secondary  effects,  762 
Indisposition,  definition  of,  i6g,  B,  ii  (&) 
^Individuality,  what  it  is,  1130 
Induration,  213  ;    of  skin^  839

Inebriation  :  how  to  procure,  811  ;   cause  of  rapid,  811  ;   preventatives,  811 
Inebriety  :   agents  which  remove,  813  ;   correctives  for,  812  ;   stages  of,  in  regard  to 
mind,  1106  ;   state  of  mind  in,  1107 
/Inequable  temperament,  definition  of,  30  ;    evidences  of,.  496 
Inequality  of-  pulse-beats,  529Infancy,  definition  of,  52  ;    diseases  of,  714  ;    hygiene  of,  709,  sqq.  ;    urine  in,  670 
Infant :   bathing,  694  ;   cord,  treatment  of,  690  ;  hygiene  of,  690-713  ;   must  be  put 
on  skin-rugs  when  it  crawls,  712  ;    skin,  treatment  of,  691,  sleeping  quarters, 
693  ;    treatment  via  wet-nurse,  714 
Infant's  blood,  source  of,  127  ;   mouth  injured  by  bad  nipples,  700 
Infatuation,  meaning  of,  492 
•  -  Infection  from  soil,  zyy  :   transmission  of  disease  by,  229 
Infirmities  versus  disease,  10 
Inflammation  :   signs  of,  508 
Innammative  lassitude,  treatment,  851 
'  Inflammatory  :    masses  :    effect  on  pulse,   600  ;    four  stages   of,   210  ;     swellings  : 
causes  of,  431  ;    guides  to  treatment  of,  1048  ;   ditto,  due  to  immediate  causes, 
1050  ;    treatment  of,  1047  ;    with  ulceration,  treatment  of,  1053 
Influence  of  atmosphere  on  body,  234  sqq. 
/(.•Informative  faculty,  145 
Infrigidants,  effects  of,  1044  (iii)

Infrigidation  associated  with  desiccation,  as  factor  in  treatment,  912 
Injuries  to  which  body  is  exposed,  680 
Innate  cold,  why  non-existent,  486Infrigidation  associated  with  desiccation,  as  factor  in  treatment,  912 
Injuries  to  which  body  is  exposed,  680 
Innate  cold,  why  non-existent,  486

Innate  heat :    a  factor  in  treatment,  930  ;   and  exercise,  334  ;    and  moisture,  33,  ii ; 
and  undue  sleep,  340  ;    and  vitality,  203  ;    dispersed  by  hot  bath,  407  ;    effect 
of  bath  on,  403  ;   effect  of  repose  on,  335  ;   function  of,  484  ;   increased  by  food, 
347   (2)  ;    in  youth,  52,   53  ;    loss  of  progressive,  683  ;    part  played  by,  484  ; 
strangled  by  exercise,  and  repose,  416  (4)  ;    substance  of,  increased  by  certain 
foods,  356,  A,  ii  (a)  ;    destroyed  by  intense  cold,  894,  930  ;    versus  breath,  141 
Innocent  creature  of  God,  J2 
Insanity  and  malaria,  228 
/^Insight  into  eternal  truths,  degrees  and  modes  of,  iy  ;    versus  intuitional  knowledge, 
18  ;    Appendix  2 
Insomnia,  bad  for  bodily  state,  339  ;  meaning  of,  487 
Xlnstinct,  180,  153  ;   definition  of,  152,  180  ;    difference  from  reason,  132 
'instinctive  actions,  133  ;    character  reading,  163  (i) 
''•/Intellect,  interactions  of,  165  (I)  ;   definition  of,  161  A  ;  relation  to  corporeal  organs,

161.  A 
"Intellectual  imagination,  151

Intemperaments,  action  on  breath,  443  ;   cause  of  weakness  in,  443  ;   cause  of  pain  in, 
432  ;    classification  of,  38,  41  ;    due  to  retentions,  394  ;   from  matter,  are  two- 
fold, 43  ;  may  lead  to  asthenia,  443  ;  table  of  signs  of,  493  ;   urinary  characters, 
,,-,         238  ;    various  regimen  for,  864 
■'.'Interactions  between  various  aspects  of  soul,  165 
■"^Interests,  examples  of,  164  (IV) 
'  Interior  senses,  176 
Intermissions  of  pulse,  229  ;    Chinese  prognosis  from,  ib. 
Intermittent  pulse.  538Internal  inflammatory  masses,  treatment  of,  1054 
Internal  symptoms  can  only  be  discussed  "  specially,"  464 
Internal  ulceration,  treatment  of,  1065 
/^Interrelations  between  faculties  and  qualities,  151 
Intertrigo,  in  infants,  731

Intimate  structure  of  body  always  changing,  121 
Intoxication  :    effect  on  organs  ;    treatment  of,  809 
Intuition,  definition  of,  161,  F

Intuitive  knowledge,  scholastic  definition  of,  161  F 
Invisible  elements  and  visibilia,  74,  Appendix  2 
Involuntary  healing  power,  162  (iii) 
Inward  enlightenment,  13 
Iridescence  in  urine,  672 
Irregular  pulse,  529,  535-538,  546  ;    modern,  229  ;   Chinese,  229

20*

V,

596  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Irregularities-of  pulse,  components  of,  537

Irritability  due  to  indigestion,  774

Itching,  dreaming  of,  denotes  plethora  of  faculties,  499

J 
Jactitation,  455 ;   cause,  457  .  .

Jaundice,  due  to  stone,  393  ;  not  a  disease,  strictly  speaking,  171  ;  sign  of,  m  tongue,

479 ;   urine  in,  613,  622  .

Jelal  actions,  list  of  82;  490  ;  jelal-jemal,  345  (footnote)  ;   82,  126,  138,  1,  275 
Jerking  pulse,  539

Jili's  classification  of  faculties  ;   diagram,  155  (iv) 
Joannitius'  classification  of  symptoms  and  signs,  200 
Joint-pains,  in  autumn,  289  (iii)  ;   oil-bath  for,  413 
Joints,  loss  of  continuity  in,  prognosis  in,  514 
Joint-troubles  in  the  aged,  remedy  for,  861 
/joy,  definition  of,  1095  ;    effect    on   pulse/  601  ;    a   humectant,    417 ;    synonyms,

;/Juveniles,  temperament  of,  versus  young  adults,  158  ;    versus  old  age,  62

K 
Ka'ak  al-'Id,  251  (bun) 
Kabab,  796  (roast  meat)

Keen  observation  of  Nature  a  characteristic  of  Avicenna,  14,  292 
Kettle  silent,  66 
Kidney,  abscess  in,  637

Kidneys  nourished  by  fat  of  blood,  104  ,.-.*.  v.Keen  observation  of  Nature  a  characteristic  of  Avicenna,  14,  292 
Kettle  silent,  66 
Kidney,  abscess  in,  637

Kidneys  nourished  by  fat  of  blood,  104  ,.-.*.  v.

Knowledge  :  common  to  Avicenna  and  modern  medicine,  37  ;  perfect,  how  to  reach,

12  ;    to  be  gained  from  study  of  urine,  239  ;    what  it  is,  and  what  not,  11,

Appendix  2 
Kunafah,  251  (vermicelli  cake)

L

Labile  versus  fixed  states,  166  .

Lactation,  duration  of,  710  ;   rules  for,  696-711  ;   regimen  during,  16

Large  and  small  cycles,  J  05

Large  pulse,  causes  of,  567  ;  list  of  variants,  557

Lassitude  :  after  exercise,  treatment  of,  830  ;  arefactive,  826  ;  ditto,  treatment, 
833  •  bathing,  836  ;  bleeding,  837  ;  desiccative,  813,  826  ;  diet,  834,  838  ; 
exercise,  835  ;  forms  of,  427,  822  ;  inflammatory,  825,  851  ;  ditto,  treatment, 
832  •  in  travelling,  885  ;  regimen  for,  840  ;  sign  of  moist  mtemperament,  493  ; 
spontaneous,  treatment  of,  840  ;  tensive,  824,  831  ;  two  modes  of,  827  ;  ulcerose, 
823,  830.     In  general,  822,  434  (5)

Latent  disease,  222  .  .         .  ,

Latin  version  of  Canon  has  many  merits,  38,  but  best  understood  m  conjunction  with 
the  Arabic,  ib.

Latitude  and  climate,  307  (a)  ,■     ,  AAtn      t

X/Law  •  of  action  and. passionr<5o  ;  of  attraction  in  breath  and  nature,  1113,  of  com- 
pulsory visibility,  88,  91,  95  ;  the  pivot  of  the  opening  and  closing  operations  m 
Nature,  88

Laxative  foods  for  old  people,  857

Lead  pipes  damage  the  water,  375

Leanness  denotes  hot  dry  temperament,  202Laxative  foods  for  old  people,  857

Lead  pipes  damage  the  water,  375

Leanness  denotes  hot  dry  temperament,  202

Leeches  :  after-treatment  of,  1042  ;  areas  from  which  they  drain  blood,  10<J8  ; 
characters  of,  1037  ;  conditions  in  which  they  are  of  value,  1043  ;  in  water, 
385  ;  in  drinking  water,  879  ;  procedure  of  application,  1039  ;  removal  of, 
1041  ;   sites  of  application,  1040

Leek-green  bile,  84

Leprosy  and  fish,  795  (2)  ;  two  kinds  of,  795

Lessening  of  friction,  is  the  object  of  lymph,  73

Lethargy,  336-340,  815

Liability  to  illness,  regimen  for,  869 
,:  Lienteric  diarrhoea,  199  (i),  961  ;   in  autumn,  289  (i)

A.  Life  :  as  viewed  by  St.  Thomas,  lines  preceding  136,  161  ;  —  breath,  concentrated 
round  solar  plexus,  257  ;  compared  to  lamp,  681  ;  depends  on  innate  heat, 
33  (ii)  ;    definition,  129  (5)  ;    meaning  of,  294,  Appendix  2  ;    original  source  of,

INDEX  597

1086  ;    principle,  134  ;  "ditto,  breaks  up  into  similar  life,  14J,  (b)  ;    ditto,  cycles 
of,  loy  ;    ditto,  in  relation  to  vegetative. faculties,  142  ;    ditto,.,  versus  .vital 
..faculty,  129  ;    spent  with  sad  oF  glad  breath,  1094  ;    use  of  adult,  right,  241

Ligafnmts~difference  between  true  and  false,  116  (5)

Light  in  summer  is  intense,  244  ;    effect  on  functions,  112

Li  Ki,  56,  83,  196,  257

Limbs,  how  to  remedy  malformed,  821  ;  to  strengthen,  ib.

Limits  of  range  of  temperament,  33 
/(Link  between  soul,  passions,  temperament,  no

Liniments,  two  kinds,  1015"

Liquorice-stick,  for  teething,  713

Lisping  goes  with  liability  to  gastro-intestinal  catarrh,  972Liniments,  two  kinds,  1015"

Liquorice-stick,  for  teething,  713

Lisping  goes  with  liability  to  gastro-intestinal  catarrh,  972

List :  of  data  to  go  on  for  diagnosis  of  dominance  of  humours,  500  ;  of  drugs  in  the 
Canon  which  are  still  used,  Appendix  3  ;  of  the  four  humours,  71  ;  of  necessaries, 
17,  18  ;  qf_wor.d.s,descr.iptiyerpi_emotipns,  164  (II)  ;  of  terms  applied  to >  mental 
faculties ,  164

Literal  errors  do  not  vitiate  the  Canon,  16

Literary  treasures  of  Arabs,  their  fate,  4 
/■'Liveliness,  meaning  of,  492

Liver  :  seat  of  formation  of  dense  humours,  163  ;  signs  of  functional  adequacy,  453  ; 
state  of,  informed  of  by  urine,  605,  621,  626  (1),  658  (1),  238

Locality  :    and  pulse,  582  ;    of  residence,  effect  on  body,  318-332 
;  ILocomotion,  power  of,  184

Lodgment  of  atrabilious  humour  between  liver  and  stomach,  108

Long  pulse,  521

Loss  of  continuity,  causes  of,  428  ;    signs  of,  513 
'Loss  of  sensation  denotes  loss  of  continuity,  513

Lote  tree,  705

Lovable  disposition  with  equable  temperament,   495 
•Love,  effects  on  pulse,  601

Lower  limbs,  venesection  from,  1026

Low-lying  countries,  effect  of  on  health,  326

Lower  reason  :    definition,  J59  (ii)  ;    versus  reason,  X52

Low  resistance  (B.P.),  clinical  causes  of,  231

Lullaby,   695,   698,  712,  240a

Lumbago,   824

Lumbar  pain,  urine  in,  630

Luminosity  of  urine,  620

Luxation  of  member,  signs  of,  513  (4)

Lymph,  transformation  into  blood,  73

M

■m,  symbol  of  matter,  56-72

mfa,  and  the  laws  relative  thereto,  64

MF,  symbol  of  human  being,  64

Macrobius  on  lactation,  696

Macrocosm  and  microcosm,  100

Macroglossia,   199   (ii)

Malady  defined,  168  A  ;    versus  symptom,  examples,  194

Malaria  cures  general  paralysis,  228

Malconformation,  199Macrocosm  and  microcosm,  100

Macroglossia,   199   (ii)

Malady  defined,  168  A  ;    versus  symptom,  examples,  194

Malaria  cures  general  paralysis,  228

Malconformation,  199

Male  sperm,  part  played  by,  679

Malformations,  meaning  of,  911

Man  affected  by  meat  he  eats  ;    animals  by  herbs  they  eat,  304

Manner  of  evacuation,  rules  for,  934-946

Maritime  countries,  effect  on  inhabitants,  327

Marshes,  effect  of,  307  (9)

Marshy  water,  371  ;    how  to  make  drinkable,  876

Massage,  749-750  ;   for  lassitude,  834  ;   for  old  age,  854,  862  ;   for  ulcerose  lassitude,

830,  846  ;    of  infants  while  washing,  695  ;    of  the  breasts,  705 
IMassive.  build  shows  cold  and  moist  temperament,  202

Mass  production  versus  isolated  craftsmanship,  49 
v Mastery  over  "  fate,"  163  (IV)

Material :    cause,  13  (i)  ;    diseases,  274  (diseases  of  "  matter  ")  ;    of  humours,  106

Matrix  of  breath,   1100

598

THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Matter,  St.  Thomas  on,  '65  ;  and  form,  doctrine  of,  56-J2  ;  and  form  and  life,  1089 
(note  to),  265  ;  would  cease  if  God  stopped  doing,  83  ;  used  synonymously 
with  humours,  205  ;    six  kinds  of  :    the  four  humours,  gas  and  water,  208

Maturation,  explanation  of,  149  ;   of  abscess,  210  ;  time  of,  for  evacuation  of,  935  (4)

Meals  divided  into  portions,  766  ;   number  in  a  day,  774  ;    size  of,  765  ;   their  com- 
position, in  prescribing  regimen,  234  ;    to  be  divided  in  certain  people,  776 
Meaning  of  hot  and  cold,  in  regard  to  drugs,  37

Mediaeval  successes  not  coincidences,  but  genuine,  33

Medicaments,  four  orders  or  degrees  of,  355  ;    fate  of  in  body,  classification,  356

Medicinal  treatment,  910  ;    four  rules  for,  911Medicaments,  four  orders  or  degrees  of,  355  ;    fate  of  in  body,  classification,  356

Medicinal  treatment,  910  ;    four  rules  for,  911

Medicine  as  a  career,  46  (i)  ;  an  art  in  the  strict  sense,  44  ;  as  an  expiation,  47  (d)  ; 
as  an  exterior  life,  46  (i)  ;  as  an  intellectual  pursuit,  46  (i)  (a)  ;  as  an  interior 
life,  47  (2)  ;  cannot  furnish  proofs  for  things  in  other  domains,  16  ;  definition 
of,  6;  definition  (Joannitius),  45;  highest  aim  for  practising,  48  ;  imperfect 
without  scholastic  philosophy,  22  ;  pursuit  of  as  devotion  to  God,  47  (c)  ;  scope 
of,  as  profession,  46  ;  speculative  and  practical,  7,  678 
/  Medicines,  potentialities,  354;  selection  of, '910  ;  types  of,  in  treating.intempera- 
ments,   493  " " '" '

Members  :  covering  internal  organs,  130  ;  derived  from  sperm  heal  differently  to 
those  derived  from  blood,  128  ;  derived  from  humours,  114  ;  made  of  heavy 
elements,  25  ;    table  of,  115  ;    which  comes  hist,  171

Membranes,  functions  of  ;    are  insensitive,  116  (8) 
/Memory,  182  ;    scholastic  definition,  154  ;    sensuous,  154  ;    rational,  134

Menstrual  ;  blood  utilised  in  four  directions,  126  ;  excretion,  240  ;  flow,  regulation 
of,  820  ;    fluid,  240

Menstruation,  regulation  of,  820 
X'Mental :    anxiety,  455  ;    environment  and  regimen,  234  ;   factor  in  treatment,  922  ; 
faculties,  classification  of,  J55  (V)  ;    ditto,  in  equable  temperament,  494 ;   lists 
of  terms  of,  164  ;   processes  corresponding  to  natural  faculties,  131 ;   states  and 
pulse,  563  ;    states  and  refrigerants,  416  (6)

Mesnavi,  earth  warp  and  weft,  21  ;  heaven  is  male,  20  ;  kettle  silent,  66  ;  God  abases 
and  exalts,  68,  83,  241

Mess  of  cooked  pomegranate  seed,  25'jMesnavi,  earth  warp  and  weft,  21  ;  heaven  is  male,  20  ;  kettle  silent,  66  ;  God  abases 
and  exalts,  68,  83,  241

Mess  of  cooked  pomegranate  seed,  25'j

Metabolic  processes  as,  a  pageant  or  procession,  93

Metaphysics,  Catholic  definition  of,  22  ;    necessary  for  medicine,  31    268

Metaphysical  dance,  99  ;   ocean,  88

Metre  of  pulse,  532-534,  218-220

Microscopic   structure   not   co-terminous    with   C,  N,  P,  S,  96

Military  exercises,   739   (ii)

Milk,   cow's,   becomes  toxic   if   animal  frightened   or   exhausted,   112

Milk,  first,  to  be  drained,  697  ;  in  dietary  for  old  persons,  855  ;  of  cow  affected  by  its 
temper,  112  ;  quality  of,  changed  by  emotions,  700  ;  too  scanty,  704  ;  too 
thick,  702,  706  ;    too  thin,  703  ;    unpleasant  odour,  remedy  for,  706

Milky  water,  action  of,  388  ;    antidote  for,  899 
Y  Mind  :    kinds  of  activity  of,  161  ;    list  of  adjectives,  pertaining- to,  164  (IV)  ;    of 
brutes,  18  ;    mind-soul-spirit,  Z29  ;    of  liver-cell,  119  ;    should  be  soothed  when 
giving  purges,  977  ;    states  of,  and  breath,  341  ;    types  and  the  elements,  j8  ; 
scholastic  definition  of,  161  " -..-■•■•■■

Mineral  baths,  action  of  ;   list  of,  408

Miraculous  :   cures,  147  (e)  (explanation  of)  ;  healing,  163  (iii)  (c)

Misquotations  and  mistranslations  account  for  disrepute  of  ancients,  6

Mistletoe-green  urine,  626   i,2)

Mists  and  marshes,  effect  of,  307  (g)

Mitigation  of  after-effects  of  purgatives,  985

Modern  and  mediaeval  medicine  contrasted,  268,  269

Modern  medicine  not  free  of  failures,  55

Modern  scholastic  philosophy  of  paramount  importance  in  medicine,  40  ;    versus 
positivism  (modern  science) ,  22 
//Modern  thought  as  to  the  three  faculties,  129

Mode  of  origin  of  the  fluids  of  the  body,  99-113Mode  of  origin  of  the  fluids  of  the  body,  99-113

Moist  :  air  defined,  250  ;  atmosphere,  effect  of,  278  ;  atmosphere,  effect  on  body, 
313  ;  temperament,  degrees  of,  in  organs,  49  ;  temperament,  signs  of,  from  the 
form,  481

Moisture  :  forms  of  in  the  body,  49  ;  necessary  to  transformative  faculty,  137  ; 
purpose  of,  22  ;      =  rutubat,  which  is  not  synonymous  with  "  humour  "

Moles  (abortion),  due  to  drinking  stagnant  water,  380

Mollificants,  423

INDEX  599

Moments  musicales,  121  ' 
^  Moment,  of  nascence,  9 1  ;    to  choose  for  evacuation,  935  (4) 
A  Moodiness,  164  (II) 
\M00ds,  164  (ii) 
y  Moonlight,  effect  of,  186  B  (b) 
M  Moral  causes  of  disease,  igg 
Morbid  atrabilious  humour,  three  kinds  of,  93 
Mother  love,  power  of,  163

Movement-:-   as  cause  of  pain,  438  ;    in  plants,  difference  from  locomotion,  156  ; 
of  breath,  143  ;   kinds  of,  192  ;  of  contraction  in  artery  in  the  pulse,  516  ;  abnor- 
mal, causes  of,  427     See  '  Dynamic  ' 
Mountains,  effect  of  living  on,  325 
Mousetail  pulse,  544,  567 
Mucoid  sediment,  658  (4) 
Mural  decorations  in  bath-houses,  igg

Murky  air  as  depressant,  279  ;    difference  from  "  dense  "  air,  279 
Muscles  :   furnish  evidence  of  temperament,  467-469  ;   development  of,  shows  moist 
temperament,  467 
/'Music,  531;    effect  on  pulse  and  bodily  functions,  2ig  ;    for.,relief  .of. .pain,  1084; 
kinds  of,  219  ;    quotations  re,  219  ;   taste  for,  depends  on  breath,  139 
Musical  instruments  and  the  pulse,  532

Mutations,  incidental,  in  atmosphere,  305-307  ;    of  the  atmosphere,  242  sqq. 
;<  Mutual  interaction  and  repulsion,  483

Myalgia,  824 
//Mystical  insight,,. 13  ; .  view  of  chemistry  of  life,  93,  94

N

Names   of  disease,   basis   of,   223

Narcotics,  435Myalgia,  824 
//Mystical  insight,,. 13  ; .  view  of  chemistry  of  life,  93,  94

N

Names   of  disease,   basis   of,   223

Narcotics,  435

Natural  :  breath  a  phase,  148  ;  cure  of  disease,  920  ;  faculties  are  four,  146  ;  classi- 
fication of  ditto,  142,  131  ;    ditto  defined,  i2g  (4)  ;    pulse,  551  ;   term  of  life,  61

Nature.:,  definition  of,  56,  58  ;  of  bacterial  action,  203  ;  of  human  being,  true 
conception.,  of,,  fundamental  to  modern  medicine,  23  ;  what  it  is,  56  ;  meaning 
of,  551  5

Nature  =  the  natural  world  ;  must  not  be  overlooked,  293,  294,  Appendix  2%  like 
a  palace,  Appendix  2

Nauseating  aperients,   rules  regarding,  976

Nauseative  indigestion,  762

Ngg3;tize^e6nitio.ns..„Qi..lLhunian,jatur%"  272

Nerve  as  source  of  power  of  a  membrane,  129

Nerves  :    description  of,  116  (3)  ;    dryness  of,  839  (iii) 
'•"'Neuritis,  ice  water  bad  for,  376

Neurotic, jm.eaning  of,,  in  terms.. of  breath,  148

Nichomachus'  disease,  199   (ii)

Night :    terrors,  718  ;    travelling,  882  ;    urine,  normal  quantity  of,  666

Nile  water,  370

Nitrogen,  part  played  in  body,  gi

Nitrous  baths,  use  of,  408

Nobility  of  human  body  shown  in  its  temperament,  iog

Non-commendable  waters,  377

Non-excrementitious  fluids,  four  varieties,  69  (a)

Normal  blood,  description  of,  72

Normal  functions,  knowledge  of,  necessary  to  diagnosis,  456

Normal  stool,  characters  of,  676

Northerly  countries,  effect  of  living  in,  328

Northern  climate,  effect  on  women,  328

Notes  of  the  individual,  164,  272  (2)

Notions,  three,  for  scholastic  medicine,  269

Noxious  agent,  as  cause  of  change  of  "  state,"  167  ;  may  be  harmless  externally, 
why,  399

Nubecula,  significance  of,  662

Number  of  meals  a  day,  774  ;    of  members  which  are  diseased  together,  225Nubecula,  significance  of,  662

Number  of  meals  a  day,  774  ;    of  members  which  are  diseased  together,  225

Nutriment  changed  into  blood,  102  ;    versus  medicine  and  poison,  356'.

Nutrition,  the  faculties  subserving,  146,  sqq.

Nutritive  faculty,  definition  of,  143  ;    seat  of,  139

Nutritive  value  of  food,  igs  (3)

6oo  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

o

Obesity,  how  to  reduce,  872  ;   regimen  for,  ib.  ;   urine  in,  657

Objective  signs  of  plethora,  495

Object  of  life  not  to  alter  character,  64  ;   of  this  treatise,  40

Obsession,  162  (I)  „„„         ,    ,  ,      „„„r,4.0

Obstruction  :    of  various  humours  in  modern  language,  503  ;    of  channels,  agents

'  "-"  -clausing,  420  ;  signs  of,  502,  sqq.  ;  arterial,  worse  than  venous  1046  ;  |ssoaat^ 
with  intemperament,  treatment  of,  929  ;  due  to  excess  of  food  358  ,  due  to 
imperfect  "digestion  in  the  blood-Vessels,  109  ;  in  old  persons,  treatment  of,  961 ; 
removed  by  bath  after  meal,  406  ;   treatment  of,  1045.     274-279    _  _

Occult:  definition  of,  162  (I)  ;  phenomena,  162  ;  ditto,  emotional  basis  J62  (IV)  , 
powers  162  (I),  163  ;  ditto,  basis  of  in  human  beings,  162  (VI)  ;  ditto  m  man, 
as  a  criterion  of  sainthood,  162  (V)  ;    ditto,  natural  to  some  persons,  tb.

Occupation  a  guide  to  choice  of  evacuant  method,  934  (11)  ;    and  regimen,  254

Odours,  abnormal,  a  sign  of  disease,  454  (8)

(Edema    =  plethora  of  lymphatics,  442  ,  .    ,     ,         -,  ,.     „    WR

Offspring,  character  of,  and  maternal  impression,  345  ;    kind  of,  and  emotions,  345

Oil-baths,   value  of,  413  .      .  _  .   _..„„„„.Offspring,  character  of,  and  maternal  impression,  345  ;    kind  of,  and  emotions,  345

Oil-baths,   value  of,  413  .      .  _  .   _..„„„„.

Old  age  :  diet,. 855,  857  ;  errors  of  diet,  remedy,  855  ;  exercise  in,  854,  863  massage 
in  854,  862  ;  mental  state,  depicted,  241  ;  obstructions  m,  treatment  ot,  Sbl , 
purgation  for,  859  ;   regimen  for,  854  ;   wine  for,  860

Oleaginous  urine  (three  kinds),  626  (2)

Oliguria,  significance  of,  667

Opacity  of  urine,  persistent,  meaning  of,  631

Opaque    =  thick,  urine,  631

Opening  and  closing  operations  of  Nature,  88

Opening  up  channels,  agents  which  effect,  421

Operation  of  vegetative  soul  (St.  Thomas'  account),  130

Opium,  use  of  for  pain,  1075

Oppilations  :    see  Obstructions,  502,  sqq.

Orderly  pulse,  530  .      .

Order  of  severity  of  causes  of  loss  of  continuity,  514  0T,0,-m    ioa .

Organs  derived  from  blood,  125  ;    derived  from  both  male  and  female  sperm   124 
derived  from  semen,  125  ;    differ  in  temperament,  35  ;    functional  capacity  of, 
82  ;   round  stomach  like  fire  round  a  cauldron,  100  ;   transcend  anatomy,  25

Origin  of  all  sickness,  759  ;   of  human  being,  679

Orobeal  sediment  of  urine,  658  (i)

Ostalgia,  825  .,-.•,

Outward  form  clue  to  character,  and  functional  capacities,  25

Over-repletion,  causes  of,  442  ;    with  food,  treatment,  784

Oxidative  processes  retarded    =  choking  of  breath,  442

Oxidized  atrabilious  humour,  nature  of,  91 ;    bile,  two  types,  84

Oxus,  water  of,  360

Oxymel  syrup,  how  to  tell  from  urine,  674Oxidized  atrabilious  humour,  nature  of,  91 ;    bile,  two  types,  84

Oxus,  water  of,  360

Oxymel  syrup,  how  to  tell  from  urine,  674

y  ?alnnyaileavia0tfon°  of fSs  ;  .character^,.  in.loss  of  cengmity 513  ;   definition  of,  432    ■ 
discussion,  432  ;  due  to  gaseous  distension,  440,  504  ;  effect  on  body  436     effect 
on  respiratory  organs  and  pulse,  561-599  ;   how  it  causes  disease,  195  (c)  (note) 
impairs  vitality,  170  ;  internal  medication  for,  1079  I   nature  of,  theory  of   432 
433;  over  liver  after  purgation,  987;  relief  of,  1073  ;  ditto,  by  cupping ,1033  (vi), 
ditto,  by  music,  1084  ;  requires  treatment,  921  ;  selection  of  remedies ;  for,  1078  ; 
significance  of,  458  (3)  ;  treatment  according  to  site  of  cause,  1076,  1077  ;   types 
of,  list  of,  434;    veisus  disease,  195  (b)

Palatability  of  food,  773

Palpation  to  distinguish  gaseous  from  other  swellings,  504

Pancakes,  251  ;    urinary  sediment  resembling,  662

Papular  swellings,  varieties  of,  220

Paresis,  199  (iv)

Parturition  difficult  in  northern  climates,  328  ^    ,..,   „  ,  ,

-/Passions  :   affect-the, constitution,  700  ;  the  milk,  700  ;    and  breath,  1093,  subduing,

864

Passive  congestion,  442

INDEX  60 1

Pathological :     classification   of   disease,   advantages,    173 ;    retention   of   excreta 
causes,  1044  '

X  Perception,  localization,  chart  to,  161  (B) 
_\/Perceptive  faculty,  174

Percussion  distinguishes  between  ascites  and  tympanites,  504 
XPerfumes,  to  restore  cases  of  exhaustion,  991,  during  venesection,  1027 
Periodic  changes  in  state  of  atmosphere,  277 
Periods  of  life,  four,  51 
^Personality,  explanation  of,  141,  281Pestilential  air,  308  ;    how  produced,  311  ;    regimen  in,  877 
A  Phantasies,  effect  on  offspring,  345 
¥>  Phantasy,  178  ;    effect  on  bodily  state,  346 
Pharmaceutics,   905

Pharmacology,  modern  versus  ancient,  271 
Phases  of  disease,  222  ;   of  hot  swellings,  210 
Phenomena  of  outer  world  reveal  the  inner,  100 
Philosophy,  Catholic  definition  of,  22 
Phlegm  in  stomach  in  old  people,  859

Phlegmatic  constitution,  diet  for,  766  ;    diseases  of,  in  spring,  282 
Phlegmon,  definition,  209 
Phosphorus,  part  played  in  body,  g2 
Physical  geography  and  climate,  307  (c)

Physician  must  be  healthy,  to  detect  patient's  temperament,  465  (i) 
Physiology  is  anatomy  in  motion,  142  ;    is  rationalistic  (quotation  to  prove),  24 
Physique  a  guide  to  treatment,  934  (5) 
Picture  of  movement  in  a  whole  tissue,  gy,  26g  (3) 
Pictures  and  paintings  in  bath  houses,  igg 
Pills,  administration  of,  rules,  998 
"Pitching,"  871Pitch  plaster  a  remedy  for  leanness,  871 
Pivot  of  function,  changes  of,  92 
Place  of  residence  and  regimen,  254 
Plagues,  atmosphere  during,  regimen  re,  877 
Planetary  cycles,  138  ;    influences,  108,  186  (B  ii) 
Planets  and  mind,  186  (B)  (ii) 
Plastic  faculty,  145 
.XPlatonic  view  of  nature  of  human  beings,  24  (i) 
XPleasurable  sensations,  theory  of,  437 
Plethora  =  passive  congestion  ;  a  guide  to  evacuation,  934  ;  cause  of,  442  ;  evacuant 
treatment  not  always  needed,  951  ;  in  the  channels  of  the  body,  497,  273  ;   not 
necessarily  treated  by  evacuation,  924,  951  ;   of  faculties,  499  ;    "  overfulness  of 
the  vessels,"  564  ;    signs  of,  497 
^Pleurisy,  essential  symptoms  of,  454  (4) 
^Pneumonia,  pulse  in,  454 
Poetry,  Arabic,  and  musical  time,  218,  2ig 
Poisons  :    classification  of,  modern,  194;    of  toxicity,  J94  ;    definition  of,   355   (4)  ;

to  kidney,  but  not  poisonous  per  se,  104 
Polo,  739

Polyuria,  665  ;    critical,  616  (d) 
Positive  and  negative  ether,  82

Positivism,  objections  to,  21  ;  refutation  of  by  modern  scholasticism,  22  ;   quoted,  21 
Posture  and  pulse,  225  ;    as  evidence  of  disease,  454  (5),  455  ;   in  sleep,  819 
Potential  action  of  medicines,  354  ;    of  food,  352 
Potentiality  and  actuality,  61

Potentiality  of  food,  meaning  of,  352  ;    versus  disposition  (table),  1094 
Poulticing  for  pain,  1082 
Power  accruing  from  delight,  1096 
Practical  medicine,  meaning  of  term,  678 
Practical  understanding,  defined,  J59  (III) 
Pranas,  136

Prattling  to  the  infant,  698Prattling  to  the  infant,  698

Precautions  :    about  baths,  in  relation  to  meals,  754 ;    about  cold  bathing,  758  ; 
about  drinking-water  when   travelling,   898-902 ;     about   exercise,    743,    745 ; 
about  feeling    the  pulse,   518,   206  ;    about  purgation,   974  ;     about  resolving 
thick  humours,  1046 
Predisposition,  233

602  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Pregnancy  and  emesis,  999  ;    pulse  in,  597,  236  ;    urine  in,  672  ;    urinary  turbidity 
in,  639

Preliminary  treatment  to  purgation;  and  emesis,  973  ;   to  venesection,  1027

Premature  summer,  effect  on  incidence  of  disease,  270  ;   winter,  ditto,  270

Pre-modern  thought  in  terminology,  129

Preternatural  impressions,   atmospheric,  308-313

Prevailing  winds  and  residence,  332

Prevention  of  apposition  of  parts,  425

Primary  fluids  of  the  body,  69  '

Primitive,  or  primary  causes,  231

Principal  organs,  list  of,  123

Principles   =  "  theory  ",  19  ;   four,  applicable  to  drawing  humours  out  of  members, 
913

Procedure  in  emesis,  1001

Prognosis  from  dark-coloured  urine,  617 ;  intermissions  of  pulse,  22g  ;  opaque 
(thick)  urine,  532  ;    red  urine,  625,  white  urine,  625

Prognosis  in  cases  of  loss  of  continuity,  514  ■

Prognostic  signs,  definition,  452

Programme  of  the  Canon,  3,  4

Progress,  meaning  of  term,  discussed,  267  ;   is  relative,  Appendix  1

Prolapse  of  anus  in  infants,  727

Proof  that  arterial  wall  itself  contracts  and  expands,  580

Property  of  a  drug,  wherein  it  lies,  1122

Prophylactic  evacuation,  953

Prophylaxis  against  spring  diseases,  283

Protection  from  icy  cold,  893

Provisions  to  take  when  travelling  to  icy  countries,  892

Pruritus  in  infants,  731Prophylaxis  against  spring  diseases,  283

Protection  from  icy  cold,  893

Provisions  to  take  when  travelling  to  icy  countries,  892

Pruritus  in  infants,  731

XPsychical  faculties,  174  (see  "sensitive  life  ") 
'VPsychic  power,  162  (7),  163  (iii) 
'if  Psychology,  Catholic  definition  of,  22

Puberty  benefited  by  spring,  267  ;    definition,  52

Puerperal  convulsions,  urine  in,  238,  ;  eclampsia,  urine  in,  617  ;  tetanus  m  northern 
countries,  328

Puerperium,  urine  in,  672

Puffiness,  varieties  of,  211

Pulmonary  abscess,  urine  in,  626  (4)

Pulse,  515  onwards  ;    knowledge  of  circulation  not  necessary  for,  515  ;    accurately 
understood  in  ancient  times,  515  ;   reveals  length  of  life  (Chinese  teaching),  112  ; 
classification  of,  519,  520-538,  539-550  ;    definition  of  (Avicenna,  and  modern) 
515;    diagnosis  from  (Chinese),  204  ;    diurnal  variations  of,  225  ;    duration  of 
cycle,  524 
A  Pulse  :    effect   of  :     age  and  sex,   574,   234  ;    bathing,   596  ;    convalescence,   237  ; 
^drinking  water,  586  ;   drugs,  225  ;   emotions,  601,  225  ;   exercise,  588,  593,  225  ; 
food,  225  ;   food  and  drink,  583  ;    high  resistance,  232  ;   inflammatory  swelling, 
599  ;   locality,  582  ;   low  resistance,  231 ;    pain,  598  ;   pregnancy,  597  ;   preter- 
'"'  natural  agents,  602  ;   respiratory  movements,  225  ;   satiety  or  hunger,  518  (4)  ; 
season,  587,  235;    sleep,  587,  588;    time  of  day,  225;    various  temperaments, 
579  ;    wine,  584  .Pulse  :  feeling  the, -precautions  to  take,  518,  206,  207,  2og  ;  repose  of  body  and  mind 
essential,  209,  283  ;  missed  beats,  212  ;  musical  character  of,  531  ;  modern, 
definition  of,  515  ;  rate  versus  respiration  rate,  230  ;  rate  increased  (modern 
facts),  225  ;  specially  quick,  227  ;  slow,  228  ;  minute  classification  of  (Chinese  ; 
Giles)'  204  ;  of  both  sides  differ  apart  from  anatomy,  206  ;  technique  in  feeling 
518  ;  'ten  groups  of  features,  519  ;   tsang,  fu,  pyau,  li,  and  tau,  209

Pulse-types  :  bounding,  540  ;  broad,  558  ;  chord-like,  549  ;  creeping,  541  ;  deep, 
215;  dicrotic,  546  ;  elevated,  215  ;  extraordinary  variety  of  (Broadbent),  209  ; 
• —  because  human  body  not  a  machine,  but  ever-changing,  217  ;  factors  con- 
cerned in,  552  ;  falling,  547,  568  ;  feeble,  561  ;  formicant,  542,  572  ;  gazelle, 
539  ;  hard,  562  ;  harsh,  543,  565  ;  hectic,  224  ;  hurried,  559  ;  irregular,  564  ; 
jerking,  539  ;  large,  554  ;  mousetail,  544,  567  ;  natural,  551  ;  recurrent,  545  ; 
recurrent  mousetail,  567  ;  renal,  237  ;  serrate,  543,  565  ;  short,  215  ;  sluggish, 
560;  soft,  563;  spasmodic,  548,  569  ;  tabulated,  215  ;  tense,  562, 569  ;  thrilling, 
548,  570  ;    undulatory,  540,  571 ;    visible,  223

Pulse,  why  felt  at  wrist,  517

Pungent  things,  433

Pure  water,  characters  of  (Buddhist),  366

INDEX  603Pulse,  why  felt  at  wrist,  517

Pungent  things,  433

Pure  water,  characters  of  (Buddhist),  366

INDEX  603

Purgation  :  adjuvants  to;  977  ;  and  bathing,  973  ;  and  sleep,  975  ;  better  than 
emesis  in  fevers,  961  ;  for  young  persons  of  hot  temperament,  865  ;  general 
rules,  947,  sqq.  ;  in  elderly  persons,  859  ;  in  people  with  hot  temperament,  977  ; 
necessary  in  youth,  57  ;  of  morbid  humours,  theory  of,  945  ;  rules  relative  to, 
970  ;  to  attract  matter  from  upper  parts  of  body,  945  ;  undesirable  after-effects, 
987  ;    when  undesirable,  958-964

Purgatives  :  choice  of  according  to  temperament,  994  ;  according  to  humour  to  be 
evacuated,  954  ;  explanation  of  action  of,  996  ;  failure  of  action,  992  ;  ditto, 
causes  of,  984  ;  operate  on  intravascular  humours,  966  ;  preferably  avoided  by 
taking  sufficient  exercise  instead,  737  ;  proper  time  for  taking,  988  ;  selective 
action  on  humours,   984

Purgative  spurges,  how  to  mitigate,  982

Purge  may  act  as  emetic  also,  959

Purification  of  drinking-water,  when  travelling,  898

Purification  of  water,  368  ;    by  distillation,  898

Purposes  of  bilious  humour,   82

Pus  in  faeces,  675  (3)  ;    in  urine,  distinction  from  simulacra,  637,  655

Pustules  denote  bad  humours  emerging,  207

Putrefaction,  explanation  of,  485  ;   in  marshy  water,  377

Putrefactive  :  breakdown  of  body,  680  ;  of  matters  in  urine,  656  ;.  in  lymph,  73  ; 
disorders,  precursors  of,  497  ;    processes  as  calefacients,  415  (v)

Putrescence  is  an  extraneous  source  of  heat,  358  ;  from  excess  of  food,  358  ;  in 
blood,  72  ;   in  serous  humour,  76  ;    in  rain  water,  373,  374

Putrid  odour  in  urine,  648

Pyuria,  diagnosis  of,  sediment  of,  637,  655

Q

Qada.  and  qadr,  82,  106,  275Putrid  odour  in  urine,  648

Pyuria,  diagnosis  of,  sediment  of,  637,  655

Q

Qada.  and  qadr,  82,  106,  275

Quantity  of  faeces,  675  (i)  ;    of  food  at  a  meal,  765  ;    of  daily  urine,  665  ;    of  urine,

variation  of,  significance  of,   666 
Quality  :    of  air,  changes  of,  effect  of,  312  ;    of  atmosphere,  effect  of  changes  of,

278  ;    of  body,  agents  which  alter,  415-430  ;    of  food,  influence  of,  347  (a)  ;    of

spring  air,   257 
Quick-tempered  persons  and  the  bilious  humour,   794  (and.  footnote)

R 
/::  Racial  temperament,  33  (iii)

Rain  water,  properties  of,  372

Rainy  :   and  dry  seasons,  effect  on  body,  296-301,  273  ;   weather  and  the  formation 
of  serous  humour  swellings,  215 
,..  Rancour,  effect  on  imagination  and  blood-state,  1118

'-'  Rapidity  :    of_^geatur££U-sigjiifi.caiice_rj!f,._490  ;    of  food-passage  through  intestine  not 
grasped  till  this  century,  32  (b)

Rare  things  excite  undue  notice,  1129 
^Rarefaction  of  skin,  causes  of,  839

Rational  :   faculty,  table  showing  relations,  I2g  ;   imagination,  131  ;   life,  defined,  l$g

Reaction  of  body  to  cold  air  in  spring  and  autumn,  258

Reading  :    aloud  as  an  exercise,  742  ;    the  Koran  according  to  seven  modes,  27

Reality  beneath  unceasing  change,  43

Reasons  for  choosing  Avicenna  for  the  treatise,  40  ;    for  different  classifications  of 
faculties,    J55    (note) 
;  Reasoning  :    faculty,  interactions  of,   165   (II)  ;    definition,  161   (E)  ;    list  of  sub- 
faculties,  161  (E) 
,.  Receptacles,  911  (ii)

Receiving  and  giving  faculty,  117

Recurrent  pulse,  538,  545

Red  cheek  bones  denote  lung  disease,  454  (9),  455

Red  hair  denotes  equable  temperament,  472

Red,  shades  of,  611

Reducing  diet,  907

Red  urine  in  cold  maladies,  significance,  621  ;    piognosis,  625Red  hair  denotes  equable  temperament,  472

Red,  shades  of,  611

Reducing  diet,  907

Red  urine  in  cold  maladies,  significance,  621  ;    piognosis,  625

Refrigerants,  416

Regeneration  of  members,  128

Regimen  :    according  to  the  seasons,  873  and  876  ;   defined,  905  ;   discussion  of  full 
programme,    254 ;     for    congenitally  hot  intemperament,   864 ;    for   defective

6o4  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

temperament,  853,  864  ;  for  elderly  people,  854  ;  for  infants  up  to  dentition, 
712  r  up  to  adolescence,  733-735;  for  old  age,  854-863;  for  travellers,  879  ; 
in  lassitude,  828  ;  of  wet-nurse  (diet,  exercise,  personal),  708  ;  prescribing, 
254  ;    re  food  and  drink,  759-814

Regiminal  treatment,  2g6

Regular  pulse,  529,  535

Reinforcements  to  treatment,  928-930  ..

Relapse,  foretold  from  urine,  630  ;    of  spontaneous  lassitude,  treatment  o±    8*9

Relation  between  autumn  and  periods  of  life,  291  ;  between  faculty  and  duration 
of  muscular  contraction,  159  ;  between  "  form  "  and  change,  86  ;  between 
qualities  and  faculties,  154;  between  season  and  temperament,  Zbl-<i7d ; 
between  soul-activity  and  law  of  conservation  of  energy,  64  ;  between  structure 
and  function,  122  ;  of  breath  to  anatomical  organs,  145  ;  of  character  oi  hair 
to  age,  475  ;  of  elements  to  natural  faculties,  131 ;  of  periods  of  lite  to  winter,. 
295  ;   of  organs  and  tissues,  necessary  to  know,  456  ;   to  meals,  baths,  406

Relaxing  effect  of  summer,  285

Religion  does  not  hinder  progress  in  knowledge,  9

Remedies  for  inebriety,  813  ;   which  soothe  pain,  1074

Remote  symptoms,  distinction  from  immediate,  462

Renal :  calculus,  urine  in,  617  ;  disease,  red  urine  in,  prognosis,  625  ;  disease, 
urinary  sediment  in,  658  (i)  ;    insufficiency,  urine  m,  628Renal :  calculus,  urine  in,  617  ;  disease,  red  urine  in,  prognosis,  625  ;  disease, 
urinary  sediment  in,  658  (i)  ;    insufficiency,  urine  m,  628

Repair:    of  damaged  muscles,  128

Repercussives  for  internal  inflammatory  masses,  1054  ;    use  oi    lUbU

Repletion  as  cause  of  susceptibility  to  illness,  869  ;    in  northerly  countries,  328

Repose,  effect  of  on  body,  335  ■;    undue,  as  cause  of  repletion,  442

Reproduction,  faculties  subserving,  139,  145  .

Researches  apt  to  be  futile  if  philosophy  faulty,  22  ;  directed  to  the  curious  rather 
than  the  everyday,  1127  ;    still  hindered  by  prejudices,  Appendix  1

Residence,  how  to  choose,  332

Resolvent  medicines,  cautions  necessary  regarding,  915

Response  to  heat  and  cold,  482

Rest  strengthens  the  serous  humour,  112

Restlessness  produced  by  purgative  drugs,  964

Restorative  exercises,  829,  832,  840  ;    treatment,  833

Retained  menses,  urine  in,  616  {d)

Retention  as  sign  of  disease,  458  ;    of  wastes,  causes  of,  6V6 ; 
^Retentive  faculty,  148  ;  same  as  memory,  182

Retributive  or  expiative  causes,  201

.Retropharyngeal  abscess,  729 
)MRevelatipns  and  visions,  162  (iii) 
'   Reward  for  medicine,  46  (i)  (&)  ;   48  ;   kind  of,  which  is  certain,  48

Rhythm,  84

Riding,  when  best  not,  883

Right  use  of  adult  life,  241

Rigors,  cause  of,  427

Rob,  use  of,  antidotal  to  impure  waters,  720,  902

Rocking  of  cradle,  698  ;    to  throw  yang-yin  into  rhythm,  104  ;    Ul-enects,  /us

Rocky  exposed  places,  effect  of  residence  in,  323

Romance  of  Nature,  2g2,  Appendix  2

Roughness  of  body,  agents  causing,  422Rocky  exposed  places,  effect  of  residence  in,  323

Romance  of  Nature,  2g2,  Appendix  2

Roughness  of  body,  agents  causing,  422

Rough  skin  denotes  dominance  of  atrabilious  humour,  500 
'<:  Rule!,  five,  in  procuring  evacuation,  935  ;  f  ourjpr  .understanding.,natare  of [^mem^ 
911-914  -for  selection  of  wet-nurse,  699  ;  for  treating  children, 733  ;  re  bathing, 
403-407  re  drawing  morbid  matter  from  part  to  part,  936-939  ;  re  influence 
of  seasonal  change  on  temperament  and  vice  versa,  261-273;  re  procuring 
emesis,   etc.,   947-964,   etc.

Rupture  :    of  intestines,  signs  of,  513  (5)  ;   of  vessels  from  repletion,  497

Sadness  belongs  to  ether  element,  78  ;   see  table  in  160  (111)

Saffron  helps  cardiac  drugs,  912

Saline  baths,  use  of,  408

Salt  water,  action  on  body,  386  .      .

Salty  water,  antidote  for,  899  ;    to  purify  for  drinking,  898

Salty  serous  humour,  description  of,  75  ;   compared  with  salty  waters,  ib.

/

INDEX  605

Sandbaths,  action,  410  '  .

Sanguineous  humour  :    described,  71,  72  ;    signs  of  predominance,  500  ;    dffiamsjn,

i&.

relation  to  rational  and  vegetative  faculties,  etc.,  xb.

Satori,  mystical  insight,  15

Sawik,  251  ("meal-sack")

Scammony,  use  of,  926,  954

Scantiness  of  milk,  diet  to  rectify,  704

Scars,   disfiguring,   221   (2,  iv)  ;    from  ulcers,  426

Scheme  of  study  of  patient  (modern  and  ancient),  270  ;   of  position  of  the      worlds,

Scholastic  :  classification  of  faculties,  diagram,  155  (IV)  ;  definitions,  129  ;  medi- 
cine, 271 ;  nomenclature  considered  in  studying  the  Latin  Canon,  39  ;  philo- 
sophy alone  refutes  errors,  28,  50  ;  philosophy  often  caricatured  by  its  opponents, 
40  ;  to  be  expanded  and  not  merely  expounded,  40  ;  view  of  human  nature, 
formula,  150.     See  "  Thomistic  "Science  is  incomplete  knowledge,  22 
^Scientific  view  of  human  nature,  24   (ii) 
"""Scirrhus,   458  (4)

Scorpion — serpent — human,  37

Sea-bathing,  245  ,

Sea  •    effect  of,  on  climate,  307  (d)  ;    sea-sandbaths,  value  of,  412

Sea-sickness,  all  about,  256  ;  to  prevent,  904 ;  persistent,  904 ;  precautionary 
measures,  simple,  904

Sea- voyages,  regimen  for,   903

Seasons:  abnormal  quality  of,  186  ;  and  J.ntemp_erament,  493  ;  and  pulse,  581,235  ; 
"and  blood  284  ■  change  of,  determines  kind  of  diseases,  259  ;  change  of  influence 
on  body,  261-273,  174  ;  characteristics,  effect  of,  280-295  ;  diet  according  to, 
760  764';  effect  on  atmosphere,  245,  247;  effect  of  sun  and  moon  on,  244; 
exercise  according  to,  746  ;  food  according  to,  in  old  persons,  857  ;  influence 
on  body,  242  ;  medical  definition  of,  242  ;  modification  of  treatment  according, 
to  922  /represented  in  the  four  rooms  of  the  Hammam,  198  ;  strong,  and  weak  : 
summer    winter— spring,  autumn,  242  ;    temperament  of,   242,  sqq.

Seasonal  cycles  and  bacteria,  187  ;  effect  on  body,  296-301  ;  on  pulse,  581  ;  irregu- 
larities (according  to  Chinese),  108

Secondary  fluids,  69  .,.„„„■■,■■,,  OCo

Sediment  of  urine  defined,  652;    position  of,  662;    signs  derived  from,  652 
Selection  of  medicines,  910

Selective  action  of  purgatives  on  humours,  984 
Self-culture  and  ethereal  endowment,   108 
Senescence,  51

Senility,  51  ;    likes  summer,  284 
Sensation  in  tubular  members,  132 
A? Sensitive  faculties    =   psychical  faculties.1"     See  174 
"X  Sensitive  life,  174;    chart  of,  159  (H)  n    j       ^  ±    .na

/•^Sensitiveness  to  good  opinion,  a  sign  of  hot  and  dry  temperament,  492 
-:A  Sensuous  imagination,  151 
/'■Sepsis  common  in  spring,  298

Septicaemia,  urine  in,  621  ./•^Sensitiveness  to  good  opinion,  a  sign  of  hot  and  dry  temperament,  492 
-:A  Sensuous  imagination,  151 
/'■Sepsis  common  in  spring,  298

Septicaemia,  urine  in,  621  .

''Septic  •   changes  in  humours,  effect  of,  on  urine,  238  ;  conditions  due  to  retention,  384 
Serous  humour  :    dreams  due  to,  500  ;    appetite  in,  500  ;    aspect,  %b.  ;    foods  which

increase,  195  (3)  ;    description  of  normal,  73  ;    forms  of  (table),  74  ;    produced

by  marshy  waters,  378  ;   signs  of  predominance,  500  ;   faculties  when  dominant,

500  ;    why  it  preponderates  in  body  with  age,  60 
Sero-atrabilious  humour,  94 
Serrate  pulse,  543

Severity  of  illness  as  factor  in  treatment,  916 
'Sex  and  pulse,  574,  234  ;    variation  of  urine  according  to,  671 
Shaghal,  264 
Shampooing,  749 
Sheep,  urine  of,  673 
Shiva-shakti,  138  (i)

Shivering,   455  ;    causes  of,   427  .

Short  fingers  denote  small  liver,  454  (5)  ;    pulse,  521  ;    stature  with  massive  jaws,

denotes  inequable  temperament,  496  _

Shower-bath,  use  of,  414 ;    value  of,  414 ;    douching  head,  724 ;   with  herbs,  732 :

also  817,  894 
Shrivelling  of  skin,  833

606  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Sicbaj,  a  sour  minced  flesh-meat,  251

Sickness,  definition  of,  168  B  (i)

Sight,  faculty  of,   175

Signs  indicating  that  purgation  is  complete,  990  ;  of  air  being  bad,  276  ;  of  good 
health,  10,  240  ;  of  internal  inflammation  and  abscess,  509  ;  of  liver  disorder, 
478  ;  of  spleen  disorder,  478  ;  produced  by  inflammation  moving  up  or  down, 
512  ;  remaining  after  bursting  of  abscess,  510  ;  that  emesis  has  benefited,  1000  ; 
versus  symptom,  195  (a)

Simoomsv  307  (e),   887 
X)  Simple:  bodies,  definition  of,  19  ;  disordersJ^jJin_cjiaxacter,.197   ;  jmtemperaments, 
list  of,  39;    members,  116;    pulses,  521Simoomsv  307  (e),   887 
X)  Simple:  bodies,  definition  of,  19  ;  disordersJ^jJin_cjiaxacter,.197   ;  jmtemperaments, 
list  of,  39;    members,  116;    pulses,  521

Singing  exercises,  821 
' '"'  Siriasis,  719

Six  canons  of  diagnosis  by  internal  symptoms  :  heading  to  452

Skeletal  system  the  instrument  of  normal  life,  156  ;  expresses  character  of  nervous 
system,  164  (IV)

Skin  diseases  in  autumn,  289  (ii)  ;  in  infants,  731  ;  induration  of,  causes  of,  839  ; 
rarefaction  and  tumefaction  of,  839 
>*  Sleep,  336-340,  815;  after  food,  778;  and  fasting  when  travelling,  880;  and 
purgation,  975  ;  and  wakefulness  as  signs  of  temjDeramental.._state,  487  ;  best 
time  for,  193,  818T~cause5~-of,"  8l5Tconditions  "to  be  observed  regarding,  818  ;• 
during  day  is  bad,  817  ;  effect  on  body,  336,  337  ;  four  times  for,  818  ;  functions 
during,  489  ;  how  to  procure,  817  ;  interrupted,  817  ;  is  calefacient,  415  ; 
not  absolutely  necessary,  489  ;  physiological  effects  of,  816  ;  posture  in,  819  ; 
pulse  during,  587  ;  purpose  of,  489  ;  rules  regarding,  817,  254  ;  seven  actions 
of,  337  ;    time  of,  after  food,  effect  on  pulse,  589-591  ;    587,  817

Sleepiness,  meaning  of,  487  ;  of  infant  due  to  overfeeding,  709  ;  sign  of  moist 
intemperament,  ,493  ;  after  meals,  765  ;  quarters  of  infant,  693  ;  when  travel- 
ling, 880

Sleeplessness  :    and  pulse,  233  ;    due  to  joy,  815

Sleepy  sickness,  and  pulse,  563

Slender  pulse,   522

Sluggish  pulse;  causes  of,  560

Smell,  sense  of,  175;    see  Odour

Sneezing,  455  ;    constant,  in  infants,  723

Snoring,  in  infants,  723

Snowclad  places,   as  residence,  325

Snow  water,   376

Softness  of  feel  of  patient,  466

Soft  pulse,  causes  of,  563  ;   water,  374Snoring,  in  infants,  723

Snowclad  places,   as  residence,  325

Snow  water,   376

Softness  of  feel  of  patient,  466

Soft  pulse,  causes  of,  563  ;   water,  374

Soil,  as  guide  to  choice  of  residence,  332  ;  and  bacterial  growth,  188  ;  effect  of, 
on  climate,  307  f.  ;  effect  on  waters,  ib.  ;  kinds  of,  ib.  ;  nature  of,  188  ;  various, 
effect  of,  318

Solar  heat  is  material,  185

Solution  of  continuity,  198  (3)  ;  in  various  members,  200

Somnolence,  undue,  imprisons  innate  heat,  340

Song  of  the  Sun,   55

Sordes  a  form  of   excretion,   111 
A  Sorrow  and  grief,    1102 
>rSorrow,   synonyms,    164   (II)

'v-Soul :  a  bundle  of  life,  134  ;  and  light,  77  ;  cannot  have  "  location,"  22  ;  diverse 
meanings  of  term;  167  ;  — mind— spirit,  I2g  ;  most  like  light  (Averrhoes),  77  ; 
the  decree  of  Allah,  56  ;  versus  body,  130  ;  ditto,  Scholastic  view,  135  ;  versus 
breath,  136

Sounds,  abnormal,  sign  of  disease,  454  (7)  ;    and  elements,  175

Source  of  atrabilious  humour,  80  ;  of  good  blood,  105  ;  of  images  of  the  imagination, 
151  ;  infant's  fat,  127  ;  of  innate  heat  in  juveniles,  55  ;  of  joy  and  gladness 
(examples),   1108;    of  increase  of  gladness,   1112,  1113

Soured  milk,  795

Sour  serous  humour,  in  two  forms,  79  ;    sour  water,  antidote  for,  899

Southerly  countries,  effect  of  residence  in,  329  ;  effect  on  women,  329  ;   and  men,  ib.  ; 
.  water  of,  329

Spasm,  cause,  427

Spasmodic  pulse,  548,  569  ;    after  inflammation  in  sensitive  parts,  600  (5)

Special  symptoms,  significance  of,  458  (6)

Specific  :  capacity  of  creatures,  1087  ;  property,  definition,  1122  ;  erroneous  ideas 
as  to,  1126,  1127  ;    versus  nature,  1122  ;    what  it  is,  1125

INDEX

Speculative  understanding  defined,  J59  (III)INDEX

Speculative  understanding  defined,  J59  (III)

Sperm  discussed,  125  ;    male  and  female,  145,  679

Spheres,  position  of  elemental,   54  '-■

Sphygmology,  515  ;_  Ayurvedic,  214  ;    Chinese,  discussed,  208-,    esoteric,  200

607

,  „-.  -:"  oj  . ,  _--j  —  ■ , 1  ,    -"»»-v,  uioi,uaacu,  200  ;    esoteric,  200

y  Spirit .    r54  ;    meaning  of  term,  i36  ;    as  used  by  Paracelsus,  77  ;    versus  soul  and 
mind,  I2g  .

Spleen,  abscess  in,  637  ;    atrabilious  humour  related  to   88

Splenic  disorders  liable  if  atrabilious  humour  dominant,  500

Spontaneous  lassitude,  tensive,  causes  of,  850  ;    treatment  of    840

Sprains,  treatment  of,  1071

Spraying,  1016

Spring  :  air  contrasted  with  winter  air,  257  ;  air,  why  moist,  248  249  •  and  Dulse 
581  ;  days  may  be  summer-like,  260  ;  changes  produced  in  body,  281  ■  open-air 
bathing ,  m,  757  ;   regimen  for,  873  ;   temperament  of,  243  ;   -time,  defined  242

WtVCGr,    0/0  '  '

Sprinkling  remedies  over  infants'  head,  715,  724

Sputum,  240  ;    is  the  humour  forced  out  of  the  lung,  ib.

Squamous  urinary  sediment,   658   (i)

Stabbing  pain,  434  (12j

Stability  of  form  in  changing  physiology,  124

Stages  of  disease,  222  ;    treatment  depends  on,  917

Stagnant  air,  bad  effect  of,  181 ;   water,  antidote  for,  899  ;  effect  on  old  people  381  •

on  stomach,  382  ;    on  women,  380  ;   purification  of,  365,  378,  899 
Stars  and  disease,  183 
States  of  human  body,  three,  196,  452 
>SStates  of  mind  in  hot  and  cold  temperaments,  492 
Stern  character,  significance  of,   492 
Stoddart"s  classification  of  faculties,  T55  (V) 
;      Stomach  :    abscess  in,  637  ;    holds  food',  247  ;    injured  bv  stagnant  water    382  •   the 
>v  house  of  disease,  759  "  '•-Stomatitis,   aphthous,   720 
Stout  persons,  rules  re  meals,  777 
Straight  hair,  sign  of  cold  moist  temperament,  471 
Straining  water  through  cloth  before  drinking,  902 
Strength  of  a  member,  assessment  of,  914 
Strength  of  one  organ  entails  deficiency  of  another,  126 
Strengthening  the  members,  method,   821 
Stretching,  455  ;    and  yawning,  829 
Stricture  of  oesophagus,  199  (i) 
Strong  members  expel  waste  into  weak,  135

Strong  pulse,  523  ;    causes  of,  562  ;    versus  large  pulse  and  h^rd  pulse    516 
Structure  :_  and  function,  inter-relations,  122  ;    of  a  member,  must  be  learnt    911  •

of  sediment  in  urine,  652  ;   related  to  phase  of  metabolism    ck   27? 
strumous  swellings,   212  '

Stupefacients,  1075  ;    rules  in  administration,  1080 
Styptics,  effect  of,  1044  (iii)

Subdivision  of  compound  intemperaments,  41 
Subheadings  with  which  medicine  deals,  15 
Subject-matter  of  medicine,  11 
Sublunary  world,   position  of,   54

Substance  ■defined,  58  ;    of  air,  signs  of  goodness,  274  ;    of  breath  is  water- vapour, 
237  ;    ditto,  effect  of  sleep  on,  337  ;    ditto,  superfluities  of,  239  ■    of  food  influ- 
ence of,  347  (c)  ;    of  urine  versus  colour,  632 
Substantial  change    67  ;    causes  of,  71  ;    of  nutritious  medicaments,  356  (A)  (ii)  (a) 
Suckling,  rules,  re  696-713  l    '  {  '  {  '

Sufic  classification  of  faculties,  i55  (iii)  ;    doctrine  of  contraries  illustrated  by   1057 
Sulphur  baths,  use  of,  effect  of,  408Sufic  classification  of  faculties,  i55  (iii)  ;    doctrine  of  contraries  illustrated  by   1057 
Sulphur  baths,  use  of,  effect  of,  408

Summer  :    definition  of,  242  ;    and  pulse,  581  ;    disease  due  to  flies,  182  •    effect  of 
on  body  284-286  ;   effect  on  atmosphere,  245  ;   heat  ascribed  to' Hell,' quotation 
from  INights,  255  ;   proper  meals  for,  796  ;    purgation  in,  dangerous,  978  ■   regi- 
men for,  874  ° 
Sun  :    baths,  411  ;    effect  on  climate,  306.  185  ;   sun-power,  100  ;    sun-stroke   888 
Superfluities,   200  (i),  456  (ii)  ;    see  also  "  Toxic  substances  "  ;    are  effete  matter 
200   (i)  ;    of  substance   of  breath,   239  ;    visibly  separated  off    as  hair    nails' 
teeth,  123  (c)  ;    what  they  are,  68,  150  ;    see  also  diagram  in  278  ;    see  also 
excrementitious  fluids  "

6o8  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

)< Supernatural :    agencies  acting  on  human  beings,  162  (ii),  (iii)  ;_  life   in  Chart,  i59  ; 
meaning  of  in  Catholic  philosophy,  162  (111)  ;   proper  meaning  of,  115

Susceptibility  to  disease,  regimen  to  correct,  869

Swallowing,  mechanism  of,  186  _  ,  .

Sweat,  240  ;    as  an  excretion,  ib.  ;    examination  of,  844  ;    and  sleep,  337  (5)

Sweating  sickness,  229  (D)

Sweetish  odour  of  urine,  647

Sweets  after  food,  bad,  782  .

Sweet  wine  for  old  people, (to  be  avoided),  860  *,,1TTn™ir    oik  .    atra-

Swellings  :    a  "  composite  "  disease,  205  ;    arising  froms«ous  Rumour,  215      atm 
bilious    212 ;    cancerous,  213 ;    classification  of,  208 ;    cold    211  ,    difference 
frommdfration,  213  ;   gaseous,  219  ;   glandular,  212 1 ;   hot  210  ;   papular,  220, 
site   206  ;    special  names,  209  ;   strumous,  212  ;   watery,  ^18g^^'a^o?«S  S00  9  health  and  sickness  12  and  signs 
7  difference,  195  («)  ;  definition  of,  12,  193,  x69  ;  due  to  late  mea 775  essentia 
to  the  illness,  454  (4)  ;  list  of,  201  ;  may  be  a  disease,  195  W  J^gg 
disease  six  classes  457  ;  premonitory  of  disease  (table),  878  ,  terminal,  %&* , 
versuT'^ease,  as  shadow  to  objecl  195  («)  ;  versus  malady  and  cause, 
examples,  194 
<  Irc^Tnd^motTon;  841?  St^in  cases  of  injury  to  sensitive  members,  514.;

S14-    from  venesection,  1027  (G)  ,

Synonyms  f  relating  to  the  natural  faculties,  !3ij    between  the  names  of  pulse- 
types  in  Arabic,  Latin,  and  Chinese,  213  )   table  of,  215

T

Table  of  digestive  products,  103  ;    of  members,  115  ;    of  terms  applied  to  dietetics, 
252  ;    of  names  of  pulses,  215

TalS  da^i&ation  of,  164  (V)  ;   list  of,  ib.  ;    meaning  of,  492 
Tallness  and  short  fingers  together  denote  inequable  temp  rament 496 
Taoist  eye    =  mystical  insight  into  Nature,  applied  to  clinical  diagnosis,  281 
Taste,  sense  of,  175

Technique   of   venesection,   1027  ,.    .    wS

TeXng,  measures  to  adopt  during,  713  ;    troubles  mostly  digestive,  715 
Teleological  view  of  structure,  122 
/.Telepathy,  162   (I),  163   (II) 
Telephic  ulcer,  223

JSZeram^t^t'guli  to  treatment,.  934  ;    knowledge  of    necessary,  911      and 
"  charter    8&;    aST  applied  to  medicine,  37;    changed  by  nutriment,  356  (A

K?  cold  and  dry!  regimen  for,   868;    congenital  versus  acquired    467

Sfiniti™  nf9fi 27"-    diagram  of    130  ;    disorders  of,.,  treatment  .of,  925-933K?  cold  and  dry!  regimen  for,   868;    congenital  versus  acquired    467

Sfiniti™  nf9fi 27"-    diagram  of    130  ;    disorders  of,.,  treatment  .of,  925-933

S  on  of 'undue  VvaStio^  396  ^equable,  eight  varieties  of  32  ;  hot  and 
St  rerimen  for  867  ;  innate  versus  acquired,  492  ;  in  regard  to  geographical 
Sion  64  in  regard  to  sex,  63  ;  is  noted  in  matter-disease,  205  ,  of  food 
bearinT'of  348  of  juveniles;.  155  ;  of  the  decrepit,  82  ;  of  .the  several  members, 
S  50  S  of  torrid  zone  inhabitants,  34  ;  one  single  thing  emerging  from  com- 
ponents, 348  ;  relation  of  breath  to,  139  \  variations  in  different  organs,  33  (vn)  , 
versus  occupation,  65 
^SJS^^S^ffiarSf^^lOT  (iii)  ;  belonging  to  age,  sex,  etc.,

il  ;    classification  of,  30  -u„j„   oai  97^

Temperature,  variations  of,  seasonal  and  daily,  effect  on  body,  261-273

Tendons,  116   (4)

Tense  pulse,  562,  569

Tensive  lassitude,  causes  of,  850;    treatment    824,  831

Tenuous  foods,  789;    overoxidize  the  blood,  759

Tepid  water,  action  of,  390  ;    as  drink,  use  of,  799

Term  of  life,  is  allotted,  686

Terminology  of  dietetics,  252

Terrestrial  factors  on  climate,  307

Tests  for  purity  of  human  milk,  701  ;   of  water,  367

INDEX  609

Tetanus   and   teething,   716

Texture  of  members,  131  ;    of  urine,  defined,  606Tests  for  purity  of  human  milk,  701  ;   of  water,  367

INDEX  609

Tetanus   and   teething,   716

Texture  of  members,  131  ;    of  urine,  defined,  606

Theories  about  the  "  breath,"  173  ;    about  relative   likeness   and  difference,  483  ■ 
about  change  of  quality,  in  regard  to  the  atmosphere,  248,  249  ;    scope'  of   in 
medicine,   678 
Theory  versus  practice,  scope  of  each,  7-9 
Thermal  baths,  rules  regarding  use  of,  409 
Thermal  waters,  bathing  in,  effect  on  pulse,  596 
Thick  milk,  diet  to  rectify,  702  ;    other  measures,  706 
Thick  pulse,  522  ;  .  skin,  839  (ii) 
Thin  milk,  diet  to  rectify,  703 
Things  of  every-day  importance,  1127 
Third  digestion,  109  ;    third  state  of  health,  196

Thirst,  precautions  regarding,  885  ;    how  to  avoid,  when  travelling,  ib. 
Thirst,  true  and  false,  798  ;    various'  causes  of,  990

Thomistic  :   account  of  human  nature,  25  ;   basis  essential  to  medicine,  22,  40   271  ■ 
science  perceives  more  than  modern  science,  70.     See  also  "  Scholastic"'  '

*  Thought :    definition  of,  161  (D)  ;    mechanism  of,  ib.  ;    —  reading   162  (i)    16?  (ii! 
Threads  in  urine,  644  ■

Three  :    groups  of  causes,  231  ;    powers  of  soul,  130  ;   states  of  body,  452  ;   steps  in

change,  6g 
Thrilling  pulse,  548,  570  ;    meaning  of,  570 
Throbbing  pain,  cause  of,  434  (15) 
Thrush,  720change,  6g 
Thrilling  pulse,  548,  570  ;    meaning  of,  570 
Throbbing  pain,  cause  of,  434  (15) 
Thrush,  720

Time-factor  :   in  aspects  of  life,  101 ;   in  digestion,  796,  233,  101 ;   in  going  to  stool 
675  (5)  ;   m  relation  to  variations  of  strength  and  weakness  of  organs  and  their 
functional  capacity,  272  (2)  ;   in  sedimentation  of  urine,  663  ;    one  of  the  three 
essentials  in  causing  disease,  233  ;    in  exercises,  744 ;    in  regard  to  birth  and 
'  ether,"  108  ;    in  regard  to  venesection,  1020 
Time  of  year  the  guide  to  choosing  evacuants,  934  (7) 
Timidity,  basis  of,  1116 
Tissue  inter-actions,  take  time,  32  (d) 
Toil,  effect  of,  on  body,  334 
Tongue,  colour  of,  significance  of,  479 
Tooth   abscesses,    431 
Tossing  about  in  bed,  455

Touch,  sense  of,  175  ;    what  information  it  gives  regarding  the  patient,  465 
1 0x1c  actions  :    types  of,  ig4 
Trance,  after  vomiting,  1012 
.Transcendence  of  organs  beyond  anatomical  boundaries,  123 
'^Tranquillity,  cause  of,  X39 
Transformation  of  air  into  fire,  237  ;    of  matter,  348 
Transformative  :   faculty,  149  ;   acting  on  food,  347  (c)  ;   needs  heat,  158  •   power  is

threefold,  144  '

Translucence  of  urine,  versus  texture,  606,  607 
Transmission  of  disease,  229 
Transparent  urine,  628-630threefold,  144  '

Translucence  of  urine,  versus  texture,  606,  607 
Transmission  of  disease,  229 
Transparent  urine,  628-630

Travellers,  regimen  for,  879-885-904  ;   rules  re  water-supply,  898-902  ;    preservation 
of  complexion,  897 
.Travelling  :   by  sea,  rules  regarding,  903,  .904  ;   usually  by  night,  in  the  East  882 
<  .treatment :   adjustment  according  to  (a)  the  constitution,  2gi,  911  ;    (6)  severity  of 
illness,  916  ;  (c)  stage  of  disease,  917  ;  (d)  strength  of  a  given  organ,  914 ;  (e)  tem- 
perament, 911  ;    —  contributory  factors,   922  ;    dietetic  treatment,  295    and 
see  Regimen  ;   general  discourse  upon,  905  ;  general  rules  for,  905  ;   methods  of 
treatment,  289,  sqq.  ;   —  oijiisorders  of  temperament,  925-933  ;    plan  of   286  ■ 
quack,     288;    regiminal,  2g6,  and  see  Regimen"; "restorative,  833  •  rule' of  to 
be  persevered  witn,  919  ;    varied  according  to  season  and  climate,  922   270  ' 
irees  and  ground-water,  176

Tricking  the  doctor  with  the  urine-specimen,  673 
Trismus  in  gingivitis,  715

Tropical  heat,  exposure  to,  regimen  for,  885,  887 
True  occult  phenomena,  classification  of,  162  "(II) 
Trunk,  veins  of,  for  venesection,  1025

Truths  inadequately  expressed  by  Avicenna,  re-stated,   41 
Truth  in  different  garbs,  42 
Truth  underlying  ancient  Chinese  occultism,   6

610  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Truth  versus  knowledge,  ~n

Tubes  of  body  :    (the  whole  body  is  made  of  tubes),  123  [d),  273

Tubular  members,  structure  of,  132.  .

Turbidity,  difference  from  sediment,  608  ;    of  urine,  cause  of,  ib.  ;    significance  of,

632,  638  ;    versus  opacity,  632 
Turbid  water,  rectification,  899 
Type  of  house,  importance  of,  igi 
Type  of  pulse  in  various  conditions  (modern),  233.

U632,  638  ;    versus  opacity,  632 
Turbid  water,  rectification,  899 
Type  of  house,  importance  of,  igi 
Type  of  pulse  in  various  conditions  (modern),  233.

U

Ugliness  is  disproportion  of  build,  496  _  ,..„,

Ulcers   bathing  for,  1067  ;   causes  of,  430  ;   conditions  which  prevent  healing,  lObb  ,

healing  by  cicatrisation,  1063  ;    by  granulation,  1064  ;    objects  m  treatment,

1063

Ulcerose  lassitude,  823  ;    diet  of,  842  ;    treatment,  830

Umbilical  abscess,  729

Unceasing  movement,  83

Understanding,  the,  183

Undigested  food  in  blood,  778

Undulatory  pulse,  cause  of,  571,  meaning  of,  540,  561  _

Unhealthy  :    digestive  products,  103  ;   water,  rectified  with  vinegar,  797

Uniformity  of  seasons  leads  to  disease,  267

Unwholesome  foods,  corrective  for,  792

Urge  in  the  Chinese  system  of  sphygmology,  2og

Urinal,  precautions  in  use  of,  603  (7,  3,  9)  ,_..■,-•,*!  +  ^„1+

Urinalysis,  carried  out  to  test  liver-function,  32  W  )   to  test  kind  of  humour  at  fault 
in  lassitude,  844

Urinarv  sediments,  list  of,  658  ;  in  lassitude,  838  .  _Urinalysis,  carried  out  to  test  liver-function,  32  W  )   to  test  kind  of  humour  at  fault 
in  lassitude,  844

Urinarv  sediments,  list  of,  658  ;  in  lassitude,  838  .  _

Urine  "603-674:  adulteration  of,  603  (12)  ;  changes  produced  m,  by  food,  603  (3)  , 
characters  of,  guide  to  time  for  exercise,  243  ;  clear,  and  becoming  turbid,  b66  , 
foam,  meaning  of,  649-651  ;  good  prognostic  signs,  634;  m  childhood,  694; 
in  pregnancy,  672  ;  in  puerperium,  ib.  ;  inspection,  606  ;  interpretation  of 
findings,  283;  in  winter,  293;  layer  formation  in,  meaning  of,  643,  normal 
healthy  characters,  669  ;  object  of  study,  605  ;  odour,  signs  derived  from,  645- 
648  ■  of  cattle  and  asses,  640,  of  animals,  673  ;  precautions  m  collecting,  bOrf  ; 
prognostic  points,  617  ;  ditto  of  transparent  urine,  629  ;  putrid  odour,  648  ; 
"" "  quantity  off  significance  of,  665  ;  signs  showing  time  of  undertaking  exercises, 
24?  •  tabular  summary,  238  ;  turbidity,  meaning  of,  632  ;  variations  with  age, 
670  ;  with  physiological  state,  603  (5)  ;  with  sex,  671  ;  white,  618  ;  significance 
of  white,  619

Urooj-nasool,  88,  105,  138  (i),  275  ;    and  death,  ill

V

Vapours  rise  out  of  the  earth  in  spring,  257

Variations  of  equipoise,  eight,  32  ;  of  anatomical  structure,  causes  of,  119  ,  m 
action  of  innate  heat,  according  to  its  degree,  485

.Vegetables  suitable  for  old  persons,  856

Mutative  :    faculty,  117,  146  ;    life,  in  chart,  159  (1)  ;    relation  to  faculties,  142  , 
'  principle,  action  achieved  by  means  of  heat,  133  \    soul,  its  operation,  130

Veins  :    116  (7)  ;    choice  of,  for  venesection,  1021  ;    drainage  areas    1022  •Veins  :    116  (7)  ;    choice  of,  for  venesection,  1021  ;    drainage  areas    1022  •

Venesection  :  1017  ;  contra-indications,  1019  ;  frequency  of,  1028  ;  m  fevers  1029  ; 
mishaps  during,  1027  («)  ;  modern  use  of ,  289  ;  procedure,  1027  ;  proper  time  for 
1020  ;   repeated,  1028  ;  syncope  during,  1027  G

Verdigris-green  bile,   explanation  of,   84

Vermicular  pulse,  541,  572

Vibration-rate,  and  the  elements,  77

Vicious  circles,  225

Kyiewthat  each  faculty  has  its  own  member,  138

■/Views  (three)  as  to  nature  of  human  being,  24 
••-"  Vinegar  helps  to  get  a  drug  into  the  tissues,  932

Violent  exercise,  effect  on  pulse,  595

Viper  venom,  354,  356,  B

Virtues  of  Nile  water,  370

-— mssgr

INDEX  6 1 1

Viscera  express  character-  of  vegetative  system,  164,  IV 
Viscid  blood  causes  irregular  pulse,  564 
Viscous  foods,  value  of,  794

Visible  and  invisible  cycle,  gy  ;   visible  pulse,  223  ;   visible  breath  in  some  phases,  146 
Vital  air  is  not  breath,  136 
Vital  breath  is  a  phase,  148 
.'-Vital  faculty  (al-quwwa  al-hayawaniyya)  :    161,  134  ;    denned,  I2g  (3)  ;    explained,

163,  164  ;   purpose  of,  and  seat  of,  140  ;    versus  natural  faculty,  166 
'Vitalism  is  really  rationalism,  24,  28 
Vitality,  134,  273  ;    a  guide  to  evacuation,  934  (2)  ;    degree  of,  effect  on  urine,  238  ;

dispersed  by  putrefactive  break-down,   680  ;    impression  of,   given  by  patient,

281  ;   strong  or  weak,  meaning  of,  141 ;   versus  breath,  136 
Vitelline  bile,  84;    effect  on  urine,  278 
Vitiligo,  221  (2,  iii)

Vitreous  serous  humour,  74,  80  ;    effect  on  urine,  238 
Vivaciousness,  significance  of,  492 
Vociferation,  429,  742 
Vomiting  :    excessive,  treatment  of,  1013  ;    how  to  arrest,  1009  ;    ill-effects  producedby,  1005  ;    methods  of  assisting,  1004  ;    severe,  in  infants,    725

W

./'Wakefulness,  a  sign  of  dry  intemperament,  493

Waking,  effect  of,  on  pulse,  592  ;   on  body,  338,  339

Walls  and  doors  answer  the  lute  (Quotation),  219

Warm  pulse,  cause  of,  573

Wasting,  relation  to  food,  358

Watching  Nature,  2g2

Water  :  after  meals,  779  ;  and  earth  not  literal,  73  ;  as  beverage,  797  ;  bad,  signs 
of,  371  ;  waterbaths,  points  to  note,  igy  ;  definition  of  and  properties,  22  ; 
does  not  become  tissue-substance,  361  ;  —  drinking  when  travelling,  pre- 
cautions, 898  ;  effect  on  pulse,  586  ;  from  snow  and  ice,  376  ;  function  in  body, 
361,  the  handmaid  of  nutrition,  362  ;  has  life-giving  power,  22  ;  how  to  counter- 
act harmful  characters,  900  ;  in  various  particular  cases,  899  ;  in  nature,  which 
is  best,  365  ;  in  southerly  countries,  329  ;  is  formless  matter  (Augustine)  22  ; 
of  Nile,  virtues  of,  370  ;  of  Oxus,  369  ;  properties  of  pellucid,  361  ;  purification 
by  boiling  or  distilling,  368,  369,  898  ;  purpose  of,  22  ;  tests  of  purity,  367  ; 
varieties  :  aerated,  391  ;  acetous,  387 ;  aluminous,  384,  899  ;  ammoniacal, 
384 ;  aqueduct,  375  ;  channel,  383  ;  cold,  389 ;  containing  metals,  384 ; 
commendable,  372  ;  hot,  390  ;  ice,  376 ;  marshy,  377 ;  milky,  388 ;  non- 
commendable,  377  ;  river,  376  ;  salt,  386,  899  ;  snow,  376  ;  spring,  376  ; 
stagnant,  378  ;    tepid,  390  ;    well,  375

Water-supply  of  houses,  332

Watery  swellings,  218

Wave-motions,   superimposed,   a  picture  of  changes  in  elements,  88

W axing  and  waning  of  breath,  138,  i

Ways  of  evacuating  morbid  material,  936

Weak  pulse,  523Wave-motions,   superimposed,   a  picture  of  changes  in  elements,  88

W axing  and  waning  of  breath,  138,  i

Ways  of  evacuating  morbid  material,  936

Weak  pulse,  523

Weakness,  due  to  diarrhoea,  445,  opening  abscess,  ib  ;  severe  pain,  446  ;  fevers,  447  ; 
many  illnesses,  450  ;  of  body  and  breath,  causes  of,  443  ;  of  one  member  a 
danger,  451

Weaning,  710  ;    quotation  from  Nights,  710

Weather,  effect  on  animals,  313  ;    stormy,  serous  humour  swellings  arise  during,  215

Weight,  carried  in  instalments,  an  analogv,  555  ;    of  water,  367

Well-water,  375

West  wind,  effect  on  body,  371

Westerly  :    countries,  effect  of,  331  ;    winds,  effect  of,  307  (e)

Wet  Cupping,  1034  ;    and  dry,  260

Wet-nurse,  characters  of  good,  700

Wheat  chewing  for  acne,  99

White  :  broth,  812,  851  ;  faeces,  675  (3)  ;  lead,  why  poisonous  internally  but  not 
externally,  399  ;    meaning  of,  618  ;    urine,  618

Why  light  rejoices  the  mind,  1092

Will,  diseases  of,  165,  II-I  ;    interactions,  ib.

Will-power  and  breath,  140

Wind,  constant  exposure  to,  effect  on  skin,  221,  2,  ii

612  THE  CANON  OF  MEDICINE

Winds  :  effect  on  body,  314-317  ;  prevailing,  effect  on  climate,  307  (e)  ;  prevailing 
in  the  season,  and  health,  296-301

Windscreens  and  climate,  307,  ii  „.,.,.,.,Winds  :  effect  on  body,  314-317  ;  prevailing,  effect  on  climate,  307  (e)  ;  prevailing 
in  the  season,  and  health,  296-301

Windscreens  and  climate,  307,  ii  „.,.,.,.,

Wine  :  action  on  breath,  1105  ;  on  emotions,  1105  ;  beneficial  in  bilious  tempera- 
ment 802  •  best  only  after  digestion  is  complete,  801  ;  contra-mdications  re 
age  810  •  cooling  effect,  584  ;  correctives  for,  805  ;  definition,  note  preceding 
800* -  effect  on  humours,  802;  for  children,  735;  for  elderly  persons,  860, 
for  lassitude,  838  ;  good  action  of,  800  ;  heating  effect,  584  ;  intoxicating  effect 
explained,  807,  809  ;  ill-effects,  808  ;  new,  action  on  liver  806  ;  not  after 
meals,  782  ;  not  before  thirteen  years  old,  735  ;  not  when  fasting,  808  ;  old, 
806-  on  pulse,  584;  properties  of,  in  body,  802;  relieves  headache  800; 
remedies  against,  805  ;   rules  concerning,  800,  sqq.  ;   white  versus  red   800

Winter  •    and  pulse    581  ;    effect  on  atmosphere,  246  ;    changes  produced  in  body 
by  it,  292-295  ;    diseases  of,  294  ;    obstructions  are  common  m,  420  ;    regimen 
for,  876 
/(Wisdom,  I5g  '.  greater  than  science,  22  ;  Appendix  2

Wolfish  disposition  in  inhabitants  of  the  north,  328

Woman  :  as  a  whole  is  a  matrix  (Paracelsus),  125  ;  effect  of  northern  climate  on,  328

Wonderful  every-day  facts  not  understood,  1130  ;    mistakes  made,  $66

Wonders  of  Nature,  Appendix  2

Words  and  their  exact  equivalents,  37,  Appendix  1

World-conception,  modern  versus  ancient,  55  ;    see  Cosmology

World  of  space  and  time  a  fringe,  55

Worlds,  position  of,  scheme  of,  54

Worms,  730  ;   in  autumn,  289  (iii)

Wounds,  429  ;   principles 'of  treatment,  1062

Wrestling,  739  (ii)

Wryneck,  treatment,   922

Y 
Yakhmi,  stew,  25 J 
Yang  and  Yin,  103,  104Worms,  730  ;   in  autumn,  289  (iii)

Wounds,  429  ;   principles 'of  treatment,  1062

Wrestling,  739  (ii)

Wryneck,  treatment,   922

Y 
Yakhmi,  stew,  25 J 
Yang  and  Yin,  103,  104

Yawning,  427,  455,  829  ;    and  stretching,  427  ;    explanation  of,  829 
Yellow,  shades  of,  609  „._

Yellowing  of  skin  from  exposure  to  hot  atmosphere,  explanation,  ^/8,  616

Yi  King,  83,  etc.

Youth,  definition  of  term,  52

Z 
Zardah,  a  rice-dish,  251