The Olympian and Pythian Odes of Pindar (F. D. Morice translation, 1876)
========================================================================
Pindar — The Olympian and Pythian Odes, translated by the Rev. F. D. Morice (London, 1876), public domain. Pindar's victory odes are the supreme monuments of Greek choral lyric; the Morice translation renders the Olympian Odes (the entry's subject) with the Pythian Odes as issued in the 1876 edition. Scan via Internet Archive.

s 

Ju^..  IS  fo  THE 

OLYMPIAN     AND     PYTHIAN 
ODES     OF     PINDAR. 


THE 
OLYMPIAN     AND     PYTHIAN 

ODES    OF    PINDAR. 


TRANSLATED    INTO    ENGLISH    VERSE 


BY   THE 


REY.   FRANCIS    DAVID    MORICE,   M.A., 

FELLOW   AND    FORMERLY   LECTURER   OF  QUEEN'S   COLLEGE, 
OXFORD  ;   AND   ASSISTANT-MASTER   AT   RUGBY    SCHOOL. 


Henry  S.  King  &  Co.,   London.. 

1876. 


it 


[All  Rights  Reserved] 


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE. 


A  brief  sketch  of  the  difficulties  attending  such  a  work  as  the 
present  will  perhaps  be  the  best  apology  for  its  shortcomings .. 
It  is  probably  needless  to  dwell  on  such  as  are  common  to  all 
translators  :  the  prefaces  of  the  late  Professor  Conington  and 
others  have  practically  exhausted  that  question.  Upon  such  as  arise 
from  the  special  characteristics  of  my  author,  a  few  words  hereafter 
may  not  be  out  of  place.  But  there  are  others  for  which  I  am 
myself  responsible  ;  those,  namely,  which  spring  from  the  ideal  of 
translation  at  which  I  have  felt  bound  to  aim — an  ideal  involving 
severer  restrictions  than  most  translators  have  cared  to  accept, 
and  consequent  labour,  which  might,  under  shelter  of  good  prece- 
dents, have  been  evaded.  That  the  present  translation  does  not 
fully  realize  this  ideal,  is  only  too  certain ;  but  at  least  I  have 
never  consciously  abandoned  it ;  and  believing  it  to  be,  in  spite 
of  all  difficulties,  true  and  good  in  itself,  I  venture  to  claim  at 
least  the  credit  of  an  attempt  in  the  right  direction. 

A  perfect  translation  should,  if  I  mistake  not,  set  before  its 
readers,  not  merely  all  the  original  author's  substance,  but  very 
much  also  of  his  form.  The  diction  and  metrical  shape  of  a 
first-rate  Greek  or  Latin  poem  are  scarcely  less  essential  to  the 
effect  which  it  produces  as  a  whole,  than  the  thoughts  to  which 
these  surroundings  have  been  given.  The  perfectly  natural  and 
harmonious  adaptation  of  form  to  matter  is  one  of  the  most  striking 
and  special  characteristics  of  the  best  classical  literature.  We 
see  it  in  prose  and  verse  alike.  The  elponimj  \egis  of  Herodotus, 
the  Dialogue  form  of  Plato,  the  'Antithesis'  of  early  Attic  oratory, 


vi  Translators  Preface. 

developing  into  the  Demosthenic  '  Period,'  are  instances  which  will 
at  once  occur  to  the  student  of  Greek  prose  literature.  And  so 
the  poetic  form  common  to,  e.g.,  Homer,  Pindar,  and  Sophocles, 
together  with  their  several  peculiarities  of  rhythm  and  diction, 
are  no  mere  accidental  veil,  which  a  translator  may  strip  away 
without  detriment  to  the  thoughts  contained  in  them.  Rather 
they  are  the  external  shape  in  which  those  thoughts  natu- 
rally and  spontaneously  embody  themselves,  as  appropriate  to 
them  as  a  particular  foliage  to  a  particular  tree.  Homer  in 
prose,  or  Pindar  in  blank  verse,  bears  to  its  original  much  such 
a  relation  as  a  ship's  mast  to  a  fir-tree,  or  a  trim-clipped  hedge 
to  a  wild  hawthorn : — the  change  in  form  amounts  to  a  change 
of  essence.  The  old  style  of  translation,  which  gave  a  common 
character  of  metre  and  diction  to  the  visions  of  Hebrew  prophets, 
the  songs  of  prehistoric  Grecian  bards,  and  the  lucubrations  of 
learned  Alexandrians  or  Roman  courtier-poets  of  the  Empire, 
produced  some  great  poems,  and  augmented  the  treasures  of 
English  literature ;  but  an  intelligent  student  might  read  Pope's 
"  Iliad "  from  end  to  end  without  gaining  the  least  insight  into 
the  real  character  of  the  Homeric  writings.  The  translator  who 
wishes  to  convey  to  his  readers  a  true  conception  of  his  original, 
must  first  solve  a  problem  which  is  often  one  of  no  little  difficulty. 
He  must  discover  or  invent  for  his  work  such  a  form  as  may 
accord  with  the  canons  of  English  poetry,  and  so  be  intelligible 
to  the  English  reader,  yet  may  at  the  same  time  retain  all  that 
it  is  possible  to  retain  of  the  peculiarities  of  style  and  metre 
which  distinguished  the  original. 

Thanks  to  the  labours  of  comparatively  recent  writers,  some 
simple  metres  of  Greek  and  Latin  poets  are  now  more  or  less 
naturalized  in  English.      The  next  generation  will  probably  find 


Translators  Preface.  vii 


nothing  bizarre  or  pedantic  in  an  English  hexameter  version  of 
Homer,  or  a  reproduction  of  Horace's  Odes  in  their  original 
rhythms.  Thus  future  translators  of  these  authors  may  find  the 
question  of  metre  solved  for  them.  But  the  complicated  structure 
of  Pindaric  verse,  in  which  all  kinds  of  feet  are  freely  blended 
in  a  single  line,  and  in  which  the  strophe  rather  than  the  line 
is  the  real  unit  of  measurement,  perplexes,  even  in  the  original 
language,  readers  whose  ear  has  been  tuned  by  the  simple  metres 
of  modern  poetry.  And  considering  the  uncertainty  of  English 
quantity  and  accent,  I  am  persuaded  that  a  reproduction  syllable 
by  syllable  of  Pindar's  rhythms  would  be  to  most  readers  simply 
unintelligible.  Long  successions  of  equivalent  syllables,  such  as 
spondaic  and  proceleusmatic  rhythms  require,  are  practically 
impossible  in  English  :  the  whole  character  of  our  accentuation 
requires  the  emphasizing  of  some  syllables  and  the  slurring  of 
others,  with  less  regard  to  their  natural  length  or  shortness 
than  to  a  sort  of  "  chiaroscuro "  with  which  no  English  ear 
can  dispense.  No  doubt  the  Poet  Laureate,  in  his  striking  "  Ex- 
periment," Boadicea,  has  succeeded  in  combining  at  the  end  of 
each  line  very  remarkable  sequences  of  quantitatively  short  sylla- 
bles. But  our  habit  of  accentuation  seriously  interferes  with 
their  actual  effect  as  read.  Nine  out  of  every  ten  Englishmen 
would  certainly  pronounce, 

11  fierce  volubility," 
or, 

"Druid  and  Druidess," 

as  pairs  of  dactyls.      And    where    Mr.  Tennyson's   success   is  but 
partial,    an  ordinary  writer   may  fairly   shrink  from   repeating   the 

attempt.        Ov  fitv  dia>ga>'  Keivos  etrju  ! 

Deterred   by  these    considerations   from   a  literal    reproduction 


viii  Translator  s  Preface. 


i 


of  Pindaric  metres,  yet  unable  to  acquiesce  in  a  form  which 
should  wholly  ignore  them,  I  have  endeavoured  to  shape  for 
myself  a  middle  course,  not  ideally  satisfactory,  yet  the  best 
which  I  can  devise.  I  have  taken  as  a  basis  existing  English 
metres,  but  have   endeavoured    to    treat    them  with  such  freedom 

(of  combination,  and  occasional  substitution  of,  e.g.,  anapaests  for 
iambics,  and  dactyls  for  trochees,  as  to  produce  some  faint  re- 
flection of  Pindar's  ever-shifting  rhythm.  I  have  followed  my 
original,— with  no  more  licence  than  he  allows  himself,— in  the 
exact  syllabic  agreement  of  corresponding  stanzas.  In  the  con- 
struction of  each  strophe  I  have  taken  pains  that  the  proportion 
of  length  between  one  line  and  another  should,  as  far  as  possible, 
answer  to  that  observed  in  the  original,  any  marked  contrast  be- 
tween one  line  and  another  in  this  respect  being  always  repro- 
duced in  the  translation,  and  the  original  number  of  lines  in  a 
stanza  being  invariably  retained.  In  short,  I  have  done  my  best, 
with  what  success  my  readers  must  judge,  to  grasp  the  general 
rhythmical  idea  of  each  ode,  and  to  utilize  the  materials  supplied 
by  ordinary  English  metre  in  such  a  spirit  as  that  in  which 
Pindar  dealt  with  the  ordinary  rhythms  of  his  own  day,  mingling 
them  in  new  combinations,  and  bringing  out  by  contrasts  and 
modifications  fresh  effects  from  old  metrical  forms. 

The  diction  of  Pindar  is  exceedingly  characteristic,  and  quite 
essential  to  the  general  effect  of  his  poetry.  I  have  striven  to 
give  some  idea  of  it  by  seizing  its  most  salient  points,  actually 
to  reproduce  it  is  probably  impossible.  His  audacity  of  expres- 
sion verges  on  the  grotesque ;  and  I  fear  that  a  close  following  of 
him  has  sometimes  carried  me  over  the  precipice  on  whose  edge 
he  treads.  Yet  it  has  seemed  better  to  run  this  risk  than  to 
lose  so  essential   a  point   in  his  style.      Again,  his  thought  is  so 


Translator  s  Preface.  ix 

J^|>id,  that  its  transitions  bewilder  the  reader.  Metaphor  treads 
en  the  heels  of  metaphor.  A  subject  is  started,  suddenly 
dropped,  and  as  suddenly  resumed.  The  most  unexpected 
turns  are  given  to  the  most  simple  matters.  He  passes  from  fact 
to  allegory,  and  from  allegory  to  fact,  within  the  compass  of  a 
single  sentence,  and  without  the  slightest  warning.  Thus,  in  the 
sixth  Olympian,  Phintias,  the  successful  charioteer,  is  invoked  to 
harness  his  mules, — the  mules  that  conquered  at  Olympia, — to  the 
imaginary  car  of  Pindar's  poetry;  and  thus,  drawn  by  this  com- 
pound of  fact  and  fancy, — the  real  mules  and  the  ideal  car,— the 
poet  and  the  driver  are  to  ride  together  through  the  gates  of 
song  to  Pitane, — birthplace  of  the  victorious  family, — who  (!)  (for 
the  place  is  here  suddenly  personified,  or  rather  identified  with 
its  eponymous  Nymph)  was  bride  of  Poseidon,  and  mother  ot 
..Evadne.  Whereupon  the  story  passes  to  the  adventures  of  this 
Evadne, "and- Phintias  and  his  mules  drop  once  more  out  of 
sight.  In  all  this  I  have  felt  bound  to  follow  my  original 
step  by  step  ;  for,  after  all,  the  resulting  obscurity  is  Pindar's  own, 
and  it  seems  to  me  no  part  of  a  translator's  duty  to  make  his 
work  more  easily  intelligible  than  that  of  his  original.  Between 
Pindar  and  his  English  readers,  there  hang,  so  to  speak,  many 
veils  :  a  foreign  language,  an  unwonted  diction,  a  different  way 
of  looking  at  things,  a  constant  and  familiar  allusion  to  forgotten 
ideas  and  legends,  all  tend  to  obscure  his  poetry.  Of  these 
veils,  as  I  have  called  them,  a  translator  has,  I  think,  to  remove 
the  first  alone ;  the  removal  of  the  others  is  the  province  of  the 
commentator,  the  critic,  and  the  literary  historian. 

These  qualities  of  daring  and  versatility  are  attended  in  Pindar 
by  a  kind  of  sententiousness  which  is  exceedingly  unlike  any- 
thing in  ordinary  modern  writers,  and  which  is  consequently  hard 


Translator  s  Preface, 


to  reproduce  with  good  effect.  He  pauses,  for  example,  in  a 
narrative,  or  an  apostrophe,  to  utter  little  general  maxims  and 
aphorisms,  whose  very  simplicity  makes  them  seem  the  more 
oracular.  The  story  of  Ixion  is  interrupted  by  the  obvious  re- 
mark that  a  man  should  observe  the  limits  of  his  proper  sphere  ; 
of  Tantalus  and  Pelops — that  gods  should  not  be  accused  of  glut- 
tony, and  that  slander  is  an  unprofitable  trade  ;  of  Clytemnestra 
and  Agamemnon— that  unfaithfulness  in  a  young  bride  is  a  public 
scandal.  Quaint  as  this  habit  seems  to  a  modern  reader,  Pindar's 
little  apophthegms  have  an  air  of  earnestness  and  simplicity  that 
at  once  disarms  criticism.  They  seem  to  spring  from  him  in- 
voluntarily, to  be  the  expression  of  thoughts  which  are  forced 
on  him  by  the  reflex  effect  of  his  own  words,  and  of  which  he 
must  disburden  his  mind  before  he  can  go  further.  But  to  an 
English  reader  they  must  always  seem  odd  and  unnatural,  and 
as  such  are  cruel  stumbling-blocks  to  the  translator,  who  is  com- 
pelled to  choose  between  shirking  them  or  boldly  reproducing  them 
at  the  risk  of  seeming  ridiculous.  My  view  of  a  translator's  duty 
leaves  me  no  such  alternative  :  to  omit  or  disguise  them  would 
be  a  mutilation  of  my  original.     Malo  errare  cum  Pindaro  I 

Another  prominent  feature  in  Pindar's  style,  is  a  certain  archaic 
elevation  of  tone,  which  enables  him  to  give  dignity  to  the  most 
trivial  thought  or  circumstance.  It  requires  the  nicest  caution  to 
preserve  this  characteristic  in  a  translation  without  degenerating 
into  bombast  and  bathos.  The  style  must  be  kept  at  a  high 
pitch,  yet  must  avoid  the  "'Ercles  vein,"  the  vocabulary  must 
be  antique  yet  not  pedantic,  the  phrases  dignified  yet  not  pomp- 
ous. The  necessity  of  all  this  has  been  constantly  and  clearly 
before  my  eyes ;  but  unfortunately,  to  see  is  one  thing,  to  carry 
jut    in    practice   is    another.      At  least,  however,  where    I    have 


Translator  s  Preface.  xi 

failed,  my  failure  has  not  been  due  to  want  of  thought  or  want 
of  pains.  I  have  re-written  again  and  again  many  awkward 
passages,  till  I  have  either  hesitatingly  satisfied  myself,  or  re- 
luctantly acquiesced  in  the  necessity  of  failure. 

Before  concluding,  I  ought  perhaps  to  offer  a  few  words  in 
explanation  of  a  comparatively  trifling  matter.  A  certain  class 
of  scholars  will  probably  take  exception  to  my  spelling  of  Greek 
proper  names.  I  have  written  "  Hiero  "  and  not  "  Hieron,"  "  Cas- 
sandra "  and  not  "  Kassandra,"  and  so  forth.  On  the  other 
hand,  I  have  not  latinized  "  Deinomenes "  into  "  Dinomenes," 
or  "  Poseidon "  into  u  Posidon."  No  doubt  this  may  be  called 
inconsistency ;  yet  I  think  it  is  defensible.  Ceteris  paribus,  the 
more  accurate  transliteration  is  no  doubt  preferable  to  the  less  ; 
but  unfortunately  it  often  results  in  combinations  of  letters 
which  are  so  unfamiliar  to  English  eyes  as  to  be  positively  re- 
pulsive. I  cannot  bring  myself  to  write  "  Klutaimnestra,"  or 
"  Kupris,"  or  "Aias;"  each  involves  the  juxtaposition  of  letters 
which  in  English  words  are,  I  believe,  never  found  together. 
In  such  cases  the  Latin  form  of  the  names  offers  a  welcome 
escape  from  a  difficulty.  Again,  the  more  precise  method  is  not 
free  from  dangers  of  its  own.  A  most  eminent  scholar  and 
poet  has  been  led  by  it  into  the  amazing  solecism  of  writing 
"  Peiraiw "  as  an  improvement  on  the  ordinary  "  Piraezw "  (in 
Greek,  ileipaicvs).  "  Incidit  in  Scyllam,  qui  vult  vitare  Charyb- 
dim"  and  in  this  case  Charybdis  is  certainly  the  lesser  evil.  But 
further  it  may  be  reasonably  doubted  whether  the  extreme  im- 
portance which  is  now  attached  in  some  quarters  to  this  question 
of  transliteration,  does  not  point  to  a  growing  spirit  of  that  worst 
of  all  pedantries,  pedantry  in  trifles.  If  so,  a  protest  against  it 
may   sometimes  be  almost  a  duty.     This  plea  might  perhaps   be 


xii  Translator  s  Preface. 

used  to  defend  the  occasional  use  in  this  translation  of  the  name 
"  Jove  "  as  a  substitute  for  "  Zeus  f  but  I  fear  I  must,  in  this  case, 
be  truthful  enough  to  own,  that  no  more  exalted  consideration 
than  the  want  of  a  convenient  rhyme  has  induced  me  to  admit  it.* 

The  text  followed  in  this  translation  is  that  of  Dissen,  as  edited 
in  1843  by  Schneidewin.  Usually  also  his  interpretation  has  been 
followed,  though  in  some  doubtful  places  I  have  exercised 
the  right  of  private  judgment.  Other  editions  have  of  course 
been  also  consulted,  but  I  have  rarely  found  them  to  shake  my 
confidence  in  Dissen.  Of  such  previous  translations  as  have 
come  in  my  way,  I  have  found  A.  Moore's  metrical  version  in- 
comparably the  best,  both  in  scholarship  and  in  literary  power. 
Mr.  Myers'  recent  prose  version  was  unfortunately  not  published 
till  my  own  translation  was  nearly  completed,  and  I  have  there- 
fore been  unable  to  avail  myself  of  its  assistance.  Finally,  I  wish 
to  acknowledge  with  the  sincerest  gratitude  the  help  afforded  me 
by  my  friend  and  colleague  Mr.  R.  Whitelaw,  a  former  Fellow 
of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  who  has  assisted  me  in  a  final 
revision  of  the  entire  work,  and  enabled  me  to  remove  many 
defects  of  taste  and  inaccuracies  of  rendering,  which  would 
otherwise  have  escaped  my  notice. 


*  Once  or  twice,  also,  I  have  used  such  shortened  forms  as  "  Thrasybule  " 
for  "  Thrasybulus;"  rather  unwillingly,  though  there  is  good  precedent  for  the 
practice. 


CONTENTS. 


OLYMP.   I. 
To  Hiero,  King  of  Syracuse,  Victor  in  the  Horse-race       .        .      i 

OLYMP.  II. 
To  Thero  of  Acragas,  Victor  in  the  Chariot-race        ...       7 

OLYMP.  III. 

On  the  same  Victory  as  the  preceding.    A  Hymn  for  the  Feast 
of  the  Dioscuri  at  Acragas 13 

OLYMP.  IV. 
To  Psaumis  of  Camarina,  Victor  in  the  Race  of  Mule-cars         .     17 

OLYMP.  V. 

on  the  same  victory  as  the  preceding.     a  processional  hymn 
Sung  at  Camarina  on  Psaumis'  Return 19 


xiv  Contents. 


OLYMP.  VI. 

To   Agesias   of    Syracuse,  a  Descendant   of   the  Hero    Iamus, 
Victor  in  the  Race  of  Mule-cars        .        .        .-       .        .        .21 


OLYMP.  VII. 

TO   DlAGORAS  OF   RHODES,    VlCTOR   IN   THE  BOXING-MATCH    .  .  .      2^ 

OLYMP.  VIII. 
To  Alcimedon  of  Aegina,  Victor  in  the  Boys'  Wrestling-match    33 

OLYMP.  IX. 
To  Epharmostus  of  Opus,  Victor  in  Wrestling      .        .        .        .38 

OLYMP.  X. 

To  Agesidamus  of  Western  Locris  in  Sicily,  Victor  in  the  Boys' 
Wrestling-match.  A  Preliminary  Ode  promising  another  to 
follow 44 

OLYMP.  XL 

On  the  same  Victory  as  the  preceding  ;  a  Fulfilment  of  the 
Promise  there  made,  with  Apologies  for  its  Lateness  .        .     46 

OLYMP.  XII. 
To  Ergoteles  of  Himera,  Victor  in  the  Long  Foot-race     .        .     52 


Contents.  xv 


OLYMP.  XIII. 

To  Xenophon  of  Corinth,  on  his  Double  Victory  in  the  Foot- 
race and  the  Pentathlon, — a  Combination  of  five  different 
Games,  as  Quoit-throwing,  Leaping,  etc 54 

OLYMP.  XIV. 
To  Asopichus  of  Orchomenus,  Victor  in  the  Boys'  Foot-race      .    61 

PYTHIAN  I. 

To  Hiero,  Victor  in  the  Chariot-race,  Founder  of  the  new  City 
Aetna,  which  he  complimented  by  Associating  its  Name  with 
his  own  in  the  Proclamation  of  his  Victory  .        .        .        .63 

PYTHIAN  II. 

TO  THE  SAME   HlERO,  VICTOR   IN   THE   CHARIOT-RACE      .  .  .  .69 

PYTHIAN  III. 

TO   THE  SAME   HlERO,  ON   TWO   VICTORIES   IN   THE   HORSE-RACE      .  .       74 

PYTHIAN  IV. 

To  Arcesilas,  King  of  Cyrene,  a  Greek  Colony  in  Africa,  Victor 
in  the  Chariot-race 81 

PYTHIAN  V. 

On  the  same  Victory  as  the  preceding.  A  Hymn  for  the  Tri- 
umphal Procession  to  Apollo's  Temple  at  Cyrene  .  .98 


xvl  Contents. 

. , , .  ,  Ty „ 


PYTHIAN  VI. 


To    Xenocrates    of    Acragas,   Victor    in    the    Chariot-race  ;    a 
Brother  of  Thero,  to  whom  Olymp.  II.  is  dedicated 


104 


PYTHIAN  VII. 

To  Megacles  of  Athens  (a  Member  of  the  famous  ALCMAEONiD 
Family),  Victor  in  the  Chariot-race       .        .        .        .        .107 


PYTHIAN  VIII. 

To    Aristomenes    of    Aegina,   Victor    in    the   Boys'  Wrestling- 
match         109 

PYTHIAN  IX. 
To  Telesicrates  of  Cyrene,  Victor  in  the  Race  in  Full  Armour  115 

PYTHIAN  X. 

To    Hippocles    of    Pelinnaeum    in    Sicily,  Victor  in  the   Boys' 
Double  Foot-race 123 

PYTHIAN  XI. 
To  Thrasydaeus  of  Thebes,  Victor  in  the  Boys'  Foot-race.        .  127 

PYTHIAN  XII. 
To  Midas  of  Acragas,  Winner  of  the  Prize  for  Flute-playing  .  131 


PINDAR'S    ODES. 


OLYMP.  I. 

TO  HIERO,  KING  OF  SYRACUSE,  VICTOR  IN  THE  HORSE-RACE. 

STROPHE. 
Peerless  is  water.     Gold,  like  flames  that  gleam 
In  darkest  night,  doth  proudest  wealth  outshine. 
But  oh  !  if  contests  be  the  theme 
Thou  choosest,  heart  of  mine  ! 

As  soon  expect  some  star  more  fair 
Shall  yon  bright  sun  outblaze  in  barren  air, 
As  hope  of  sports  to  tell,  Whose  glories  may  excel 
Olympia,  whence  harmonious  voices  spring, 
That  fire  poetic  souls  to  sing 
The  son  of  Cronus,  when  they  come  10 

To  Hiero's  proud  and  happy  home. 

ANTISTROPHE. 

With  rod  of  righteousness  the  fields  he  sways 
Of  pastoral  Sicily,  and  culls  the  prime 


Pindar  s  Odes. 


Of  virtue,  while  around  him  blaze 

The  brightest  flowers  of  rhyme, 

Such  festal  lays  as  oft  we  wake 

Around  his  board.     The  Dorian  lyre  come  take  ! 

If  haply  Pisa's  meed,  That  graced  that  victor-steed, 
Bright  dreams  of  rapture  o'er  your  spirit  shed, 
As  by  Alpheiis'  banks  he  sped.  20 

No  need  of  spur — on,  on  he  flies  !       v 

And  bears  his  master  toward  the  prize. 


EPODE. 

The  lord  of  Syracuse,  whose  coursers'  fame 
Shines  in  the  land  where  Lydian  Pelops  came, 

New  home  to  found — Pelops,  of  ocean's  king, 
Poseidon,  loved — whom  Clotho  drew  From  out  the  laver's  cleansing  dew 

With  ivory  shoulder  glistening. 
Marvels  are  many ;  yet  still  stranger  tale, 
With  falsehood  tricked,  may  oft  o'er  truth  prevail. 


STROPHE. 

Favour,  (to  whom  all  earthly  joys  are  due,)  30 

Brings  credence  oft,  and  well  such  art  she  plies 
As  makes  the  truthless  tale  seem  true. 

But  wiser  faith  relies 


Pindar  s  Odes. 


On  evidence  of  coming  days. 

Yet  errs  the  mortal  least  that  speaks  in  praise 
Of  Gods, — and  newly  thus,  O  son  of  Tantalus, 

I'll  frame  thy  tale.     What  time  on  Sipylus'  height 

Thy  sire  Heaven's  favour  did  requite, 
And  called  the  Gods  about  his  board ; 
Seized  wert  thou  of  the  Trident's  lord.  40 

ANTISTROPHE. 

Inspired  with  love,  he  bore  thee  far  away, 

On  shining  steeds,  to  Zeus'  exalted  home  : 
Where,  even  so,  in  later  day 
Did  Ganymedes  come 

To  Zeus.    And  when  no  search  might  track 
Thy  flight,  nor  bring  thee  to  thy  mother  back  ; 
Some  jealous  neighbour's  tongue  A  dark  surmise  outflung, 
And  told  how,  at  the  caldron's  boiling  point, 
With  steel  they  cleft  thee  joint  from  joint, 
Then  round  the  board  in  portions  spread  50 

The  seething  flesh,  and  on  thee  fed  ! 

EPODE. 

I  cannot  tax  blest  Powers  with  greed  so  gross,— 
I  dare  not !     Oft  is  slander's  gain  but  loss. 
And  sure,  if  e'er  Olympian  watchers  loved 


Pindar  s  Odes. 


A  mortal,  Tantalus  was  blest  :  Yet  ill  might  he  such  bliss  digest. 

So  pride's  excess  his  ruin  proved. 
A  massy  stone  did  Zeus  above  him  poise, 
To  threaten  aye  his  head,  and  banish  joys. 

STROPHE. 

And  thus  he  dwells,  doomed  with  the  toiling  Three 

To  hopeless  pain  ;  for,  from  immortals  riven,  60 

Ambrosia  and  nectar  he 

To  mortal  guests  had  given, 

Whence  deathless  life  himself  had  won. 

But  whoso  hopes  his  daring  crimes  may  shun 
The  sight  of  Heaven,  is  vain  ;  And  so  the  Gods  again 

Sent  back  his  son  to  join  Man's  fleeting  race. 

And  when  the  dark  down  fringed  his  face, 
In  earliest  manhood's  blossom- tide, 
He  duly  sought  a  noble  bride, 

ANTISTROPHE. 

Hippodamia,  her  Pisan  father's  boast !  70 

So  to  the  Lord  of  ocean's  roar  he  prayed 
At  midnight  on  the  lone  sea-coast. 
At  once,  his  friend  to  aid, 

He  saw  the  Trident-armed  appear : 

And,  "  If,"  he  cried,  "  our  love  hath  made  me  dear, 


Pindar  s  Odes. 


"  Poseidon,  to  thy  heart ;  Oh,  stay  Oenomaus'  dart ! 

"  To  Elis  bear  me  in  thy  car  apace, 

"And  make  me  victor  in  the  race. 
"  For  thirteen  suitors  he  hath  slain, 
"  His  daughter's  wedding  to  restrain.  80 

EPODE. 

"Yet  direst  perils  bravest  hearts  befit. 

"  Die  must  we  all — then  why  in  darkness  sit, 

"  Chewing  the  cud  of  eld,  unknown  to  fame, 
"  Stranger  to  all  that  graces  life  ?     No  !   set  am  I  to  dare  the  strife  ; 

"  Fulfil  thou  then  my  cherished  aim  !" 
He  spake,  nor  vainly  prayed  :    Poseidon  gave 
His  golden  car,  and  winged  coursers  brave. 


STROPHE. 

Oenomaus  fell— and  fell  the  maiden  too, 

The  victor's  prize  !     Six  royal  sons  she  bare 
To  virtue  dear  ;  and  now,  with  due  90 

Of  sacrifices  fair, 

He  rests  beside  Alpheiis'  wave, 

Hard  by  yon  shrine,  whose  votaries  throng  his  grave  ! 
And  through  Olympia's  ring,  The  hero's  glories  fling 

Their  beams  afar ;  where  rivals  swift  of  feet,     \ 
And  deeds  of  hardiest  prowess  meet, 


Pindar  s  Odes. 


And  he,  that  conquers  in  the  strife, 
Wins  sweetest  peace  for  all  his  life, 


ANTISTROPHE. 

Far  as  may  triumphs  bless  :  for  nought  so  high 

As  bliss  renewed  through  every  changing  day.  ioo 

But  now  the  victor-chief  must  I 
Crown  with  Aeolian  lay, — 

Chivalrous  strain  !    And  well  I  wot,  that  ne'er 

Shall  living  man,  renowned  for  wisdom  fair — 
As  he — and  prowess  bold,  In  song's  bright  coil  be  told. 

Thy  patron  deity,  my  Hiero,  still 

Labours  to  grant  thee  all  thy  will  : 
And,  save  he  quit  his  post  ere  long, 
I  trust  with  yet  a  sweeter  song 

EPODE. 

Thy  rapid  car  to  greet,  and  trace  aright  no 

Song's  helpful  path  to  Cronium's  sunny  height. 

Mine  are  the  boldest  shafts  the  Muses  lend 
In  divers  fashions  men  are  great,  But  highest  soars  the  kingly  state, 

No  further  man  may  gaze. 
Tread  thou  such  heights  !    And  be  it  mine  to  dwell 
Mid  victors,  and  in  song  all  Greeks  excel ! 


Pindar  s  Odes. 


OLYMP.  II. 

TO  THERO  OF  AC  RAG  AS,   VICTOR  IN  THE  CHARIOT-RACE. 

STROPHE. 
Hymns,  whose  rule  the  lyre  obeys  ! 
God,  hero,  man, — whom  choose  we  now  for  praise  ? 
Of  Zeus  is  Pisa  ;  of  Heracles,  Firstfruits  of  his  victories, 
Olympia's  contests  spring  ; 
And  Thero  and  his  conquering  cars  we  sing, 
The  generous  host,  the  prop  of  Acragas, 
The  last  best  blossom  of  a  famous  race. 


ANTISTROPHE. 

Long  their  souls  were  tried   with  woes, 
Ere  by  the   river-side  their  blest  homes  rose, 
The  pride  of  Sicily :    thenceforth  fate  With  wealth  and  glory  crowned 
their  state,  10 

Their  native  worth  to  raise. 
May  Cronus'  son,  that  high  Olympus  sways, 
Lord  of  the  contests  by  Alpheus,  deign 
To  hear  our  prayer,  and  bring  them  home  again  ! 


Pindar  s  Odes. 


EPODE. 

This  for  their  sons  we  ask :—  for,  what  is  gone, 
(Came  it  of  right  or  maugre  right,)  is  none, — 

No  !  not  Time's  self,  that  brought  it, — can  reverse  ! 
Yet  all  may  be  forgot  in  happier  hours ; 

For  blessings  new  destroy  the  primal  curse, 
And  crush  its  rebel  powers,  20 

STROPHE. 

When  again  Heaven's  will  shall  rear 
Wealth's  soaring  fabric  skyward.     So  we  hear 
Of    Cadmus'    daughters   and  all    their   woes,    How   yet    more   mighty 
blessings  rose, 
And  triumphed  o'er  their  pain. 

Mid  heavenly  Powers  lives  now  the  Lightning-slain, 
Fair  Semele.     Her  Pallas  and  great  Jove 
And  He  her  son,  the  ivy-crowned,  still  love. 

ANTISTROPHE. 

And  in  ocean's  depths,  they  say, 
With  Nereus'  daughters  Ino  dwells  alway, 
In  life  undying  ordained  of  fate.     Ah!  ne'er  may  mortal  antedate   30 
The  term  when  life  shall  cease, 
Nor  look,  through  glad  years,  to  One  day  of  peace— 

His  Sun's  last  child  !     But  ever  to  and  fro 

The  tides  of  joy  and  grief  athwart  us  flow. 


Pindar  s  Odes. 


EPODE. 

So  too  with  these.     The  fortune  of  their  line 
Holds  them  still  happy,  yet  their  bliss  divine 

Mingles  at  times  with  woe,  that  fleets  as  fast  : 
Since  Laius  met  his  fatal  son,  and  fell 

Slain  in  the  road,  and  so  came  true  at  last 
The  Pythian  oracle.  40 

STROPHE. 

Soon  Erinys,  keen  of  sight, 

Slew  that  fierce  house  in  fratricidal  fight. 
They  fell :  yet  Polynices  slain  In  famed   Thersander  lived  again. 

Athlete  and  warrior  he, 

Scion  and  stay  of  the  Adrastidae. 

And  sprung  of  these,  Aenesidamus'  son 
The  meed  of  lyric  praise  in  right  hath  won. 

ANTISTROPHE. 

Graced  himself  with  Pisa's  crown, 
He  glories  in  a  brother's  like  renown, 
At  Pytho  and   Corinth   whose   coursers    four,    Round   the   great    ring 
sped  twelve  times  o'er  50 

Triumphant.     Thus  to  gain 
The  prize  we  toil  for  breaks  the  bonds  of  pain. 
What  cannot  wealth  in  radiant  virtues  drest, 
That  thrills  with  eager  zeal  the  inmost  breast  ? 


Pindar  s  Odes, 


EPODE. 

Like  some  bright  star,  its  glorious  beams  it  throws  : 
And,  blest  therewith, — (none  better,)  Thero  knows 

How  swiftest  vengeance  waits  the  guilty  dead 
And  for  the  sins  men  sin  in  realms  of  day, 

'Neath  earth  a  stern  judge  speaks  the  sentence  dread 
Of  fate's  resistless  sway.  60 

STROPHE. 

But,  by  day  alike  and  night, 
Upon  the  righteous  rises  ever  light. 
They  dwell  in  a  life  unvexed  of  toil,  Nor  need  to  task  the  weary  soil, 
Nor  waters  of  the  main, 
For  scant  subsistence.     Tearless  days  they  gain, 

With  those  Heaven-honoured  ones  in  Truth  that  joy  ; 
While  sinners  cower  'neath  weight  of  dire  annoy. 

ANTISTROPHE. 

Happiest  they  that  thrice  endure 
Through  life  and  death,  and  still  from  sin  are  pure. 
For    such  Zeus  leads  to  Cronus'  tower,  Where  round  about  the  island 
bower  70 

Of  blessed  spirits  strays 

Breath  of  sea  airs,  and  golden  flowerets  blaze, 
Some  on  fair  trees,  some  of  the  waters  bred  : 
Wherewith  themselves  they  garland  hands  and  head. 


Pindar  s  Odes.  1 1 


EPODE. 
So  Rhadamanthus'  just  decree  ordains, 
Assessor  meet  of  Cronus,  Him  that  reigns 

The  spouse  of  Rhea  throned  all  powers  above. 
Peleus  with  these,  and  Cadmus  dwells.     And  there 

His  mother  brought  Achilles,  when  great  Jove 
Mad  melted  at  her  prayer.  80 

STROPHE. 

His  the  might  that  overthrew 

Hector,  Troy's  pillar  stout  :  and  Cycnus  slew, 
And  Morning's  Aethiopic  son.— Oh,  mine  are  keen  shafts,  many  a  one 

Within  the  quiver  stored ; 

Of  meaning  to  the  wise,  but  to  the  horde 

Dark  riddles  !  much,  self-taught,  the  poet  knows, 
But  vain  their  lore,  base  pair,  that  croak  like  crows 

ANTISTROPHE. 

Round  the  heavenly  bird  of  Jove  ! 
Now  point  the  bow  !  now,  not  in  war  but  love, 
Speed,    soul,   the     stingless   shafts   of     fame  !      And   what    the  mark 
whereat  we  aim,  90 

But  Acragas  ?  for  I 

Shall  soothly  swear,  (nor  deem  the  vaunt  a  lie  !) 
Than  Thero's,  in  a  hundred  years,  no  land 
Shall  rear  you  kinder  heart  nor  freer  hand  ! 


12  Pindar  s  Odes. 


EPODE. 

Though  envy  strive  his  glories  to  deface, 
(No  generous  foe,  but  nursed  in  natures  base,) 

That  loves  to  talk  the  good  man's  praise  away  ; 
Yet,  as  the  sand  still  foils  the  reckoner's  count, 

Such  are  the  joys  we  owe  him.     Who  shall  say 
How  boundless  their  amount  ? 


Pindar  s  Odes. 


OLYMP.  III. 

ON  THE  SAME  VICTORY  AS  THE  PRECEDING.      A  HYMN  FOR 
THE  FEAST  OF  THE  DIOSCURI  AT  A  CRAG  AS. 

STROPHE. 

May  Tyndarus'  sons  so  kind  to  the  guest,  And  lovely  Helen,  the  golden- 
tressed, 
Joy,  as  Acragas  I  greet 

With  triumph-songs  for  Thero's  coursers  fleet, 
And,  Muse-inspired,  in  numbers  fresh  and  bright 
Festal  song  and  Doric  step  unite. 


ANTISTROPHE. 

Such  service  divine  at  the  poet's  hand  The  conqueror's  crowned  lock 
demand  : 
Lyre  and  flute  and  shapely  lays 
Must  join  Aenesidamus'  son  to  praise 
With  honour  meet.     And  Pisa  bids  me  sing, 
Whence  immortal  lays  for  mortals  spring :  10 


14  Pindar  s  Odes. 


EPODE. 

When,  in  the  rites  ordained  of  Heracles, 
The  Aetolian  arbiter  with  sentence  fair 
Garlands  with  olive  grey  the  victor's  hair ! 
From  Ister's  shady  fount  of  yore  Amphitryon's  son  that  olive  bore, 
Bright  guerdon  of  Olympic  victories. 


•      STROPHE. 

He  won  in  peace  from  the  tribes   that   wait  On  Phoebus,  the  Hyper- 
borean state, 
Plants  for  Zeus'  frequented  glade, 
To  crown  the  victors,  and  the  concourse  shade. 
A  moon  had  waxed  to  perfect  orb  of  fire, 
Since  he  raised  the  altars  of  his  Sire  :  20 


ANTISTROPHE. 

Already,  by  rocky  Alpheus'  side,  To  glorious  contests  sanctified 
Those  quinquennial  lists  were  set : — 
And  Cronian  Pelops'  dells  were  treeless  yet ! 
All  naked  to  the  scorching  sun  they  lay  : 
So  to  Ister's  shores  he  took  his  way. 


Pindar  s  Odes.  1 5 


EPODE. 

There  Leto's  child  had  welcomed  him,  when  he 
Came  from  the  rifted,  jagged  Arcadian  hill, 
Doomed  of  his  Sire  at  harsh  Eurystheus'  will 
To  bring  the  doe  with  horns  of  gold,  In  mystic  recompense  of  old 

Paid  to  Orthosia  by  Taygete.  30 


STROPHE. 

Thus    as   he   came,    on   his   quarry's  track,    To   lands    that  lie  at  th< 
Northwind's  back, 
Rapt  he  viewed  their  wondrous  trees, 
And  longing  seized  his  soul  to  deck  with  these 
His  twelvefold  course.     Thither,  the  feast  to  grace, 
Comes  he  now  with  Leda's  Twins  apace  ! 


ANTISTROPHE. 

For  these  he   left,  when  he   passed  to  the  sky,    To  rule   his   glorious 
sports,  where  vie 
Rapid  cars  and  feats  of  might. 
Set  is  my  soul,  the  glories  to  recite 
By  Tyndarus'  sons  on  Thero's  house  outpoured, 
Still  that  in  their  honour  spreads  the  board,  40 


1 6  Pindar  s  Odes. 


EPODE. 

And  serves  their  godhead  still  with  piety  ! 

But  sure  as  water  knows  no  peer,  and  best 
Is  gold  of  riches,  Thero's  deeds  have  pressed 
To  fame's   last  cape  !  What    further  lies,  Is  barred    alike  to  fools  and 
wise : — 
I  will  not  venture  there,  else  vain  were  I  ! 


Pindar  s  Odes.  i  7 


OLYMP.  IV. 

TO  PSA  UMTS  OF  C A  MARINA,   VICTOR  IN  THE  RACE  OF 
MULE-CARS. 

STROPHE. 
Mightiest  Zeus,  of  whom  is  driven    The  tireless  speed  of  the  burn- 
ing levin  ; 
Lo  !  in  its  cycle  thy  feast  again  Brings  me  with  many  a  sounding  strain, 

These  exalted  sports  to  tell. 
Swift  are  the  true  of  heart  to  greet  With  smiling  face  the  tidings  sweet 

Of  friends  that  prosper  well. 

O  Lord  of  Aetna,  O  Cronus'  son  ! 
Lord  of  the  wind-swept  piles,  that  hide  Hundred-headed  Typho's  pride  ! 
Give  ear  to  the  lays  Our  revellers  raise, 

For  victory's  sake  at  Olympia  won. 

ANTISTROPHE. 

Long    shall    the    hero's    glories    gleam,    For    Psaumis'    cars    are    the 
revellers'  theme.  10 

Crowned  with  the  olive  at  Pisa  won,  Eagerly  ever  he  presses  on, 
Raising  Camarina's  fame. 


1 8  Pindar  s  Odes. 


Heaven   henceforth   grant  his   every   prayer  !    For  first,  the    steeds  he 
rears  with  care, 

Our  loftiest  praises  claim  ; 

And  his  halls  have  a  welcome  for  every  guest  ; 
And  set  is  his  soul  with  thought  sincere,  To  bless  with  peace  his  city  dear. 
No  falsehood  shall  stain  My  speech's  strain, — 

Experience  still  is  the  true  man's  test. 

EPODE. 

And  the  son  of  Clymenus, 

Once,  among  the  Lemnian  dames,  20 

Baffled  scornful  slander  thus. 

For  when  he  triumphed  in  the  mailed  games, 
Stepping  forth  the  crown  to  take, 
To  Hypsipyle  he  spake  : — 

"  Such  is  my  speed  !  And  know, 

"  My  hands  too,  and  heart  are  so  ! 
"  On  heads  that  have  not  passed  their  prime, 

"  Locks  of  grey  full  often  grow, 
"  Ere  the  appointed  time  !  " 


Pindar  s  Odes.  19 


OLYMP.  V. 

ON  THE  SAME  VICTORY  AS  THE  PRECEDING.     A  PROCES- 
SIONAL HYMN  SUNG  AT  CA MARINA  ON  PSA UMIS*  RETURN. 

STROPHE. 

On  the  proud  Olympian  pageant,  high  desert  in  victor's  crown, 

Smile,  O  daughter  of  the  Ocean  !     Deign  a  welcome  to  the  gift, 
Hither  that  the  victor  Psaumis  brings  thee  for  his  mule-car  swift  ! 

ANTISTROPHE. 
Glory  great,  O  Camarina,  brought  he  to  thy  peopled  town ; — 
Six  twin  altars  duly  decking  at  the  festival  most  high, 
Where,  mid  sacrifice  of  oxen,  in  the  five-days'  contests  vie 

EPODE. 

Car,  and  mule,  and  rapid  courser ;  and  his  triumph  brought  thee  fame, 
For  thy  new  town's  praises  mingled  with  his  father  Acro's  name. 

STROPHE. 

As  from  that  loved  land  of  Pelops  and  Oenomaus  he  returns, 

Pallas,  guardian  of  the  city  !  of  thy  hallowed  grove  he  tells,        10 
Of  the  river  of  Oanis,  and  the  lake  whereby  he  dwells, 


20  Pindar  s  Odes. 


ANTISTROPHE. 

And  of  Hipparis,  that  waters  all  thy  host  with  honoured  urns, 

Gathering  a  stately  forest  round  his  banks  of  storied  homes, — 
Guided  of  whose  grace  thy  people  fast  from  dearth  to  glory  comes  ! 

EPODE. 

Toil  and  lavish  hand  must  labour  ever  for  the  glorious  prize 
Lapped  in  danger,  but  its  winner  shall  his  townsmen  own  for  wise  ! 

STROPHE. 
Zeus,  Protector,  cloud-throned  monarch,  ruling  on  thy  Cronian  hill, — 
Thou,  whose  presence  crowns  Alpheiis' tide,  and  Ida's  reverend  cave  ! 
Unto  thee  with  Lydian  flutings  come  I  now,  thy  grace  to  crave. 

ANTISTROPHE. 

With  a  race  of  famous  heroes  may  this  city  flourish  still ;  20 

And  our  great  Olympian  champion  still  in  happy  eld  live  on, 
In  his  Poseidonian  coursers  joying,  till  his  days  be  done, 

EPODE. 

Girt  about  with  sons  !     Who  waters  with  such  dews  his  happy  lot, — 
Filled   with   wealth,    and    crowned    with   glory, — godhead's    self  need 
covet  not ! 


Pindar  s  Odes.  21 


OLYMP.  VI. 

TO   AGESIAS  OF  SYRACUSE,   A   DESCENDANT  OF  THE   HERO 
IAMUS,   VICTOR  IN  THE  RACE  OF  MULE-CARS. 

STROPHE. 
As    who    would    frame    some   gorgeous   hall,    Uprears    its    porch    with 
shapely  wall 
On  golden  pillars  hung  : 
Our  song's  proud  front  must  glitter  from  afar. 
Suppose  a  champion  at  Olympia  crowned, 
And  patron  of  Zeus'  shine  oracular, 

And  of  famed  Syracuse  joint- founder  owned, — 

Say,  how  should  such  lack  praise  from  generous  tongue  ? 

ANTISTROPHE. 

Sostratus'  son,  thy  feet  around  Such  sandal  fair  hath  fortune  bound  ! 

Ne'er,  save  by  peril,  worth 
Won  fame  in  hollow  ship,  or  armed  host  :  10 

But  prosperous  toils  remembrance  aye  awake. 
And  thee,  Agesias,  fits  that  truthful  boast, 
Adrastus  of  Amphiaraus  spake, 

When  with  his  steeds  the  seer  was  lapt  in  earth  ! 


22  Pindar's  Odes. 


EPODE. 

Soon  as  on  seven-fold  pyre  the  corpses  had  sunk  in  flame, 

Spake  in  Thebes  Talaion's  son,  "  I  mourn  my  army's  pride, 

"  Warrior  both  and  seer  !"     Nor  lesser  praise  may  claim 
Syracuse's  hero-child,  this  glad  procession's  guide. 

No  wrangler  am  I,  on  striving  intent : 

Yet  loudly  I'll  swear,  Such  truth  to  declare  20 

Unflinching,  and  the  Muses  sweet  assent  ! 

STROPHE. 

Haste,  Phintis,  yoke  thy  mules  so  strong  !     For  I  the  soaring  car  of  song 

Through  paths  untrod  must  guide 
Far  back  to  that  heroic  house's  source. 

And  who  so  well  should  bear  us  on  our  way, 
As  these  that  triumphed  in  Olympia's  course? 

Unbar  Song's  gates  !    for  I  must  come  this  day 
To  Pitane  along  Eurotas'  tide  ! 

ANTISTROPHE. 

'Twas  she  that  to  Poseidon  bare  Evadne,  such  the  tale,  with  hair 

Dark  as  the  violet's  hue.  •  30 

And  when  her  months  of  secret  pain  were  done, 

Her  trusty  retinue  the  mother  bade 
Convey  the  babe  to  Eilatus'  great  son, 

That  by  Alpheus'  side  Phaesane  swayed. 

Woman,  and  bride  of  Phoebus,  there  she  grew  ! 


Pindar's  Odes.  23 


EPODE. 

Vainly  from  Aepytus  hid  she  the  fruits  of  celestial  love. 

Forth,  with  rage  and  grief  at  heart,  to  Pytho  speeding  fast, 
Counsel  he  sought  of  Heaven,  that  might  such  woes  remove. 

Crimson  zone  aside  the  while  and  silver  urn  she  cast, 
And  bare  in  the  azure  thicket  a  child  40 

Of  heavenly  thought :   While  Loxias  brought, 
To  aid  her,  Fates,  and  Ilithyia  mild. 

STROPHE. 
In  joy  and  sorrow  mingling  thus,  To  light  she  brought  her  Iamus, 

And  left  him^laid  on  earth. 
But  thither  lo  !  with  honey's  harmless  bane 

To  feed  him,  came  two  heaven-sent  bright-eyed  snakes  : 
Homeward  from  Pytho  speeds  the  king  again, 
And  question  for  Evadne's  babe  he  makes, 

"  To  Phoebus  self,"  he  cried,  "  it  owes  its  birth. 

ANTISTROPHE. 

"  A  prophet,  destined  to  excel  All  mortal  men  on  earth  that  dwell,    50 

"  His  fame  shall  perish  ne'er  I" 
He  spake,— but  who  might  hope  to  find  a  child, 

Left  five  days  long,  alive  ?    Yet  there  he  lay, 
Safe  couched  in  reeds  amid  the  trackless  wild, 
His  soft  limbs  bathed  in  gold  and  purple  ray 
Of  violets.     So  the  mother  bade  him  bear 


24  Pindar's  Odes. 


EPODE. 

Ever  the  violets'  name.*    But  in  ripening  manhood's  spring, 
Mid  Alpheus'  deeps  he  called  on  Him  that  rules  the  sea, 

Sire  of  his  race  !  and  eke  the  Delian  archer  king  : 

Praying  that  some  peopled  state  his  care  and  pride  might  be.   60 

And  lo  !  from  the  midnight  heaven's  dark  dome 
His  father  replies,  "  Son  mine,  come,  arise  ! 

"My  voice  shall  lead  you  to  a  populous  home." 

STROPHE. 

So  to  the  lofty  land  they  came,  Where  Cronium's  sunlit  summits  flame. 

There  won  he  twofold  crop 
Of  seership, — that  unerring  voice  to  hear 

At  once  ;  and,  (when  the  pride  of  Alcaid  line 
Should  found  thronged  feast,  and  strife  that  knows  not  peer, 
In  ritual  honour  of  his  Sire  divine,) 

An  oracle  upon  the  altar's  top.  70 

ANTISTROPHE. 

And  Iamids  were  men  of  fame  In  Greece  thenceforth.    Then  riches  came : 

They  trod  the  paths  of  light, 
Revering  virtue.     Deeds  are  man's  sole  test ! 

Then  what  though  envy's  sneer  o'er  those  impends, 
That  foremost  through  the  twelvefold  course  have  pressed, 


#  i.e.  She  named  him  Iamus  (Gr.  tou  =  violet) . 


Pindar  s  Odes.  25 


And  won  the  grace  that  blushing  Victory  lends? 
Oh,  if,  Agesias,  thy  sires  aright 

EPODE. 

Honoured  in  homes  Cyllenian,  with  off'rings  of  votive  fire, 

Hermes,  pursuivant  of  Gods,  o'er  sport  and  strife  that  reigns, 

Arcady's  lord  !     Tis  he,  that  with  his  thundrous  Sire  80 

Ever,  son  of  Sostratus,  thy  happy  lot  ordains. 

Meseemeth  a  whetstone  shrills  at  my  tongue  ! 
With  welcome  it  rides  O'er  melody's  tides— 

My  mother's  mother  bright,  Stymphalus-sprung  ! 

STROPHE. 

Metope  she,  that  Thebe  bare,  Equestrian  nymph,  whose  waters  fair 

I  drink ;  and,  drinking,  twine 
Bright  lays  for  warriors  !     First  to  Here's  fame, 

The  queen  of  virgins,  stir  thy  comrades  now  :— 
'Scape  we  not,  Aeneas,*  our  ancient  shame, 

"  Boeotian  swine  ?"    True  missive-staff  art  thou  90 

Of  fair-haired  Muses,  bowl  for  Song's  choice  wine  ! 

ANTISTROPHE. 

And  bid  them  chant  Ortygk '    praise,  And  Syracuse,  that  Hiero  sways 
With  rod  of  righteousness  :. 

*  Aeneas  was  to   convey  this  Ode   to   Agesias,   and   superintend  its  public 
performance. 


26  Pindar  s  Odes. 


And  bows  him  to  Demeter's  rosy  feet, 

And  her  equestrian  child,  and  Zeus  whose  might 

Sways  Aetna's  hill.     Him  song  and  harpings  sweet 

Know  well  !     May  he,  mid  bliss  no  time  can  blight, 
Agesias'  triumph-train  with  welcome  bless  : 

EPODE. 

Home  from  a  home  *  that  hastens  returned  from  Stymphalus'  wall, 

Rich  Arcadia's  mother-town.     'Twere  well  on  stormy  night         ioo 

Over  the  swift  ship's  side  were  anchors  twain  let  fall. 

Heaven  to  either  folk  be  kind*,  and  make  their  future  bright  ! 

O  husband  of  her  whose  distaff  is  gold  ! 

Grant,  God  of  the  seas,  Fair  journey  to  these  ; — 

And  bid  my  songs  new  blooms  of  grace  unfold  ! 


*  Agesias  was  a  citizen  both  of  Syracuse  and  of  Stymphalus.     This  explains 
also  the  next  sentence. 


Pindar  s  Odes.  27 


OLYMP.    VII. 

TO  D I  AG  OR  AS  OF  RHODES,   VICTOR  IN  THE    BOXING-MATCH. 

STROPHE. 

As  some  wealthy  lord  in  greeting  of  his  daughter's  spouse  should  lift 
In  his  hand   a  brimming   beaker,  where  the  grape's  bright  juices 
foam, 

Passing  to  the  youth  a  gift, 

Erst  the  crown  of  all  his  riches,  destined  now  to  other  home, 

For  the  honour  of  his  banquet,  pleased  his  new-made  son  to  make 

Envied  of  each  friendly  feaster  for  his  happy  wedlock's  sake  : 


ANTISTROPHE. 

So  to  champions  crowned  at  Pytho  and  Olympia  I  send 

Draughts  of  nectar  sweet,   the   Muses'  boon,   the  soul's  delicious 
fruit, 

Gladdening  each  victor-friend  ! 

Happiest  he,  that  standeth  ever  girt  about  with  good  repute  .     10 

Now  to  one  and  now  to  other  comes  the  charmer  of  man's  life, 

Victory, — with  tuneful  harpings  and  the  ever-varying  fife. 


28  Pindar  s  Odes. 


EPODE. 

Now,  while  both  are  round  me  breathing,  with  Diagoras  I  guide 
Poesy's  bark  to  Rhodes'  fair  isle,  to  Venus'  child  and   Phoebus'  bride. 

There  the  hero,  crowned  beside  Alpheus  and  Castalia's  spring, 

For  his  prowess  in  the  ring 

Claims  my  praises,  and  Damagetus  his  sire  to  Justice  dear, 
In  the  isle  of  three  fair  cities,  near  the  cape  of  Asia  wide, 

Dwelling,  ringed  with  many  an  Argive  spear  ! 


STROPHE. 

Of  Tlepolemus  their  father,  and  their  nation's  source,  aright  20 

Shall  my  willing  tongue  discover  truth  too  long  in  error  lost. 

Race  were  they  of  sovereign  might, — 

Sprung  of  Heracles,  a  lineage  in  their  father's  right  they  boast 

Zeus-descended,  and  a  mother  of  Amyntor's  ancient  clan. 

Yet,  alas,  the  snares  of  evil  clog  the  fairest  hopes  of  man  ! 

ANTISTROPHE. 

Nought  we  know  that  still  to  mortals  first  and  last  shall  prove  a  good. 

And  Alcmena's  base-born  brother  did  this  nation's  founder  thus 
Smite  with  staff  of  olive-wood, 

Fired  with  sudden  wrath  in  Tiryns  dead  he  smote  Licymnius 
Issuing  from  M idea's  chamber, — thus  aside  doth  passion  turn  30 

Wisest  souls, — and  forth  the  slayer  sped  the  will  of  Heaven  to  learn. 


Pindar  s  Odes.  29 


EPODE. 

From  the  perfumed  shrine's  recesses  came  the  fair-haired  God's  reply, 
Bidding  him  from  Lerne's  headland  to  a  sea-girt  home  to  hie  : 

To  a  land,  of  Heaven's  high  monarch  watered  erst  with  showers 
of  gold, 

When  Hephaestus'  art  of  old 

Brought  with  brazen  axe  Athene  from  her  Father's  brow  to  birth, 
And  the  warrior-maid  upspringing  shrilled  afar  a  joyous  cry, 

Startling  highest  Heaven  and  mother  Earth. 

STROPHE. 
Then  Hyperion's  son,  whose  godhead  lightens  every  child  of  clay, 

Gave  commandment  that  thereafter  evermore  his  offspring  dear  40 
Solemn  sacrifice  should  pay 

To  the  Goddess,  and  in  splendour  high  her  earliest  altar  rear, 
For  the  thunder-darting  maiden,  and  her  mighty  Sire's  delight  ! 
Prescient  reverence  to  mortals  bringeth  ever  joy  and  might  : — 

ANTISTROPHE. 

Yet  are  times  when  round  us  gather  shadows  of  oblivion  blind, 

And  with  secret  step  advancing  steal  the  course  of  wisdom  taught 

From  remembrance  of  the  mind. 

So  with  these,  for  thither  never  seed  of  radiant  flame  they  brought ; 

Void  of  fire  a  shrine  they  hallowed  in  their  city's  topmost  hold. 

Yet  rained  Zeus  upon  their  people  plenteous  showers  of  gleaming  gold.    50 


;o  Pindar  s  Odes. 


EPODE. 

And  Athene  made  them  matchless  in  the  works  of  human  skill  : 
Shapes  exact  of  beasts  and  reptiles  all  their  city's  ways  did  fill. 

Great  their  glory, — guileless  cunning  with  the  prudent  aye  prevails  ! 

But  'tis  said  in  ancient  tales, 

Not  as  yet,  when  Earth  was  portioned  forth  of  Zeus  and  Powers 
divine, 
Towered  the  Rhodian  isle  conspicuous  over  Ocean's  waves,  but  still 

Deep  it  lay  beneath  the  whelming  brine. 

STROPHE. 

None  was  there  to  claim  a  portion  for  the  absent  God  of  Light, 
Him,  the  pure  and  holy  One,  they  left  disfranchised  of  his  lot. 

Wherefore,  when  he  urged  his  right,  60 

Zeus  ordained  a  fresh  allotment :  but  such  course  he  suffered  not, 

For  he  said  he  saw  a  country  rising  from  the  hoary  deep, 

Rich  in  sustenance  for  man  and  plenteous  pasturage  for  sheep. 

ANTISTROPHE. 

Straight  to  Lachesis  with  coronal  of  gold  he  made  his  prayer, 
That,  with  hands  on  high  uplifted,  to  the  Gods'  exalted  vow 

She  no  feigned  assent  should  swear, 

But  with  Cronus'  son  should  grant  him  for  a  crown  to  grace  his  brow, 

When  to  light  should  rise  such  country,  he  its  future  lord  should  be  : 

And  fulfilment  crowned  the  promise  given  in  sincerity. 


Pindar  s  Odes. 


EPODE. 

From  the  dank  depths  rose  an  island,  and  the  piercing  sunbeams'  Sire  70 
Rules  therein  in  glory  ever,  lord  of  steeds  whose  breath  is  fire. 

There  in  wedlock  Rhodus  bare  him  sons,  in  skill  surpassed  of  none, 

Seven, — sire  of  Lindus  one 

And  Ialysus  his  eldest  and  Camirus,  each  a  king, 
For  their  father's  realms  they  parted,  ruling  each  a  peopled  shire  : 

Still  their  names  about  their  cities  clingy. 


STROPHE. 

There  Tlepolemus  with  welcome  expiation  closed  his  pain, 
Founder  of  another  Tiryns  :  as  a  god,  in  sacrifice 

Reeks  for  him  the  victim  train, 

And  the  lists  are  set  for  contests.  There  Diagoras  triumphed  twice,  80 

Four  times  o'er  in  famous  Corinth  friendly  fortune  blessed  him  still, 

Once  and  yet  again  in  Nemea,  and  on  Athens'  rocky  hill. 


ANTISTROPHE. 
Him  the  bronze  of  Argos,  him  the  works  on  Theban  anvil  wrought, 

Him  Arcadia's  prizes,  and  Boeotia's  ritual  games  have  known, 
And  Pellene.     Home  he  brought 

From  Aegina  triumphs  six,  nor  other  record  Megara's  stone 
Bears  of  him.     O  Zeus,  that  rulest  Atabyrium's  summit  high, 
Father,  bless  the  tuneful  pageant  of  Olympic  victory  ! 


32  Pindar  s  Odes. 


EPODE. 
Ever  be  our  famous  champion  crowned  with  worship  and  with  grace,' 
Of  his  townsmen  both  and  strangers,  for  his  feet  unswerving  trace    90 

Paths  averse  from  pride,  with  lore  of  noble  parents  learnt  aright. 

Never  may  oblivion's  night 

Shroud  the  line  of  Callianax !     For  now  the  state  holds  festival, 
With  the  Eratids  rejoicing  :   yet  full  oft  in  shortest  space 

Veers  with  sudden  sweep  the  fickle  gale  ! 


Pindar  s  Odes.  33 


OLYMP.  VIII. 

TO  ALCIMEDON  OF  AEGINA,   VICTOR  IN  THE  BOYS' 
WRESTLING  MATCH. 

STROPHE. 
Olympia,  mother  of  the  gold-crowned  feasts, 
Queen  of  true  oracles  !   where  noble  priests 
In  the  blazing  altars  find  Signs  to  read  the  Thunderer's  mind, 
And  learn  if  any  word  hath  Zeus  to  send 
For  souls,  with  desire 
That  to  glory  aspire, 
Thus  in  peace  their  toils  to  end. 

ANTISTROPHE. 

So  blest  is  piety,  and  fulfilled  its  prayer ! 
But  thou,  O  Pisan  grove  of  olives  fair, 
Bid  our  wreathed  revel  band  Welcome  to  Alpheiis'  strand  ; 
For  great  his  glory,  who  hath  won  thy  meed  ! 

To  each  in  his  measure 

Heaven  gives  of  its  treasure ; 
Many  paths  to  blessings  lead. 


34  Pindar  s  Odes. 


EPODE. 

Sons  of  a  house,  from  Zeus  that  springs  !     His  will, 

Timosthenes,  gave  Nemea's  prize  to  thee  : 
And  to  Alcimedon,  by  Cronus'  hill, 
Olympian  victory. 
Wrestler  of  fairest  form  and  deeds  as  fair, 

Aegina's  seamen-sons  his  triumphs  share  :  20 

Where  Justice  sits  in  honour  due, 
Throned  by  Zeus  to  strangers  true. 

STROPHE. 

So  o'er  no  folk  she  reigns !     Of  issues  great 
The  complex  poise  aright  to  estimate, 
Hard  it  is  :   but  Heaven's  command  Draws  the  sons  of  every  land 
Around  this  isle,  set  in  the  girdling  main 

As  a  pillar  sublime, 

And  ever  may  Time 
Tireless  still  such  task  sustain  ! 

ANTISTROPHE. 

From  Aeacus  down,  that  land  have  Dorians  swayed  : —        30 
Aeacus,  whom  great  Poseidon  erst  to  aid 
Did  with  Leto's  offspring  call,  High  to  rear  Troy's  rising  wall, 
Foredoomed  of  Fate,  from  its  embattled  tower, 

(When  war's  fell  affrays 

Should  in  havock  outblaze,) 
Ruin's  lurid  fumes  to  pour. 


Pindar  s  Odes.  35 


EPODE. 

Up-leaped  upon  the  city's  new-built  wall 

Three  sheeny  snakes.     Two,  back  in  ruin  thrown, 
Crashed  suddenly,  and  perished  in  their  fall : 

One  rushed  exulting  on  !  40 

Straight  of  the  portent  Phoebus  spake  his  thought, 
"  Hero,  Troy  falls  ! — breached,  where  thy  hands  have  wrought. 
"'Tis  thus  I  read  this  mystic  sign 
"  Sent  of  Thunder's  lord  divine. 

STROPHE. 

"  Troy  to  thy  sons  of  first  and  fourth  descent 
"  Shall  bow  ! "     He  spake,  and  straight  careering  went 
Forth  to  Xanthus,  and  the  meads  Scoured  of  Amazonian  steeds, 
And  Ister  :    while  in  charioted  flight 

The  Trident-armed  king 

To  the  Isthmus  did  bring  50 

Aeacus  on  steeds  of  light. 

ANTISTROPHE. 

And  there  he  ruled  steep  Corinth's  festival. — 
But,  (since,  Melesias  !  nought  seems  sweet  to  all,) 
Though  thy  praise,  that  now  I  sing,  But  from  boyish  victories  spring 
Yet  may  I  scape  the  stroke  of  Envy's  stone. 
For  in  Nemea  eke, 
With  these,  will  I  speak 
Triumphs  of  thy  pupils  won 


36  Pindar  s  Odes. 


EPODE. 

'Mid  men  in  the  Pancratium !     Who  would  train, 

Must  first  himself  have  learned,  or  pass  for  fool.  60 

Sage  inexperience  boasts  its  craft  in  vain. 
And  who  so  well  should  school 
Aspiring  youth,  in  every  path  that  leads 
To  lovely  fame  and  hallowed  victory's  meeds, 
As  thou,  for  whom  Alcimedon 
Thirtieth  triumph  now  hath  won  ? 

STROPHE. 

Matching,  with  all  that  man  may  do,  Heaven's  grace, — 
Four  rivals  met, — he  spurned  the  craven's  case, 
Home   that   slinks   with  dull  retreat,  Shamefast  tongue,  and   stealthy 
feet. 
His  aged  grandsire  thrilled  with  quickening  joy,  70 

And  eld  was  forgot — 
Such  prosperous  lot 
Death's  blind  terrors  can  destroy. 

ANTISTROPHE. 

But  I  must  wake  remembrance,  and  unfold 
The  glories  won  by  Blepsiad  hands  of  old. 
Six  proud  garlands   now   they  claim,  Won    in    many  a  leaf-crowned 
game. 


Pindar s  Odes.  $7 


The  very  dead,  through  ritual  meet,  may  share 

Such  fame  :    nor  the  gloom 

Of  the  mouldering  tomb 
Hides  their  kinsman's  triumph  fair.  80 

EPODE. 

Iphion,  (by  Rumour,  Hermes'  daughter,  taught,) 

Shall  to  Callimachus  repeat,  what  pride 
Zeus  in  Olympia  to  their  house  hath  brought. 
With  blessings  multiplied 
Still  may  He  crown  its  sons;  nor  sickness  blight, 
Nor  angered  Nemesis  their  glories  spite  ! 
No,  still  may  He,  with  flawless  fate, 
Make  their  clan  and  city  great  ! 


38  Pindar  s  Odes. 


OLYMP.  IX. 

TO  EPHARMOSTUS  OF  OPUS,   VICTOR  IN  WRESTLING. 
STROPHE. 

Archilochus'  three-fold  lay, 
In  Olympia  sounded  forth,  the  swelling  triumph-song, 

Served  by  Cronus'  hill  to  guide  the  way 
Of  Epharmostus  and  his  comrade-throng. 

But  now  a  shaft  of  stronger  flight  befits 

The  Muses'  bow.     Be  Zeus  our  aim,  that  sits 
'Mid  glare  of  lightnings  bright 
On  Elis'  honoured  height, 
Hippodamia's  glorious  dowry,  won 
Of  old  by  Pelops,  Lydia's  hero-son.  10 

ANTISTROPHE. 

And  speed  me  an  arrow  sweet, 
Pytho-wards,  of  winged  song,  that  soars  and  spurns  the  ground  ! 

Strike  the  harp  our  wrestler  bold  to  greet, 
And  be  proud  Opus  and  her  son  renowned  ! 

Opus,  that  Justice  with  her  daughter  sways — 

Eunomia,  guardian  queen, — and  blooms  in  praise, 


Pindar  s  Odes.  39 


By  Castaly,  and  o'er 

Alpheiis'  stream-washed  shore, 
The  glorious  land,  whence  proudest  chaplets  come, 
The  mother  of  fair  trees,  the  Locrians'  home.  20 

EPODE. 

His  city  dear  will  I  adorn 

With  fiery  songs  of  loudest  strain. 
Swifter  than  noblest  courser  borne, 

Or  sail-fledged  ships  that  cleave  the  main  : 
Afar  will  I  the  tale  recite. 

If,  Graces  sweet,  'tis  mine  in  humblest  share 

To  cull  the  blossoms  of  your  garden  rare — 
For  yours  is  all  that  charms  :  and  Heaven  sends  skill  and  might. 

STROPHE. 

Ne'er  save  by  such  aid  upheld 
Heracles  with  brandished  club  had  met  the  trident's  blow  :        30 

When  Poseidon  his  assault  repelled 
From  Pylos,  and  Apollo  bent  the  bow, 

Nor  Hades  spared  that  fatal  rod  to  shake, 
Guided  whereof  the  dead  their  journey  take 

The  vaulted  path  along — 

Nay,  quit  such  theme  of  song, 
Tongue  mine  !     The  craft  that  dares  with  impious  taunts 
Assail  the  Gods,  I  loathe :  and  misplaced  vaunts 


40  Pindar  s  Odes. 


ANTI  STROPHE. 

Are  songs  for  a  madman's  string ! 
Prate  not  thus  :  but  from  the  Gods  sweep  far  the  tale  of  fight,    40 

And  Protogeneia's  city  sing — 
Where  led  of  Zeus,  that  hurls  the  lightnings  bright, 

Down  from  Parnassian  heights  Deucalion  came 

With  Pyrrha  Man's  primeval  home  to  frame, 
And  there,  sans  travail,  won 
Descendants  sprung  from  stone, 

Laians  *  thence  named.     Let  these  inspire  your  voice  ; 

And  of  old  wine,  but  new-blown  song  make  choice  ! 

EPODE. 

For  earth,  'tis  told  in  story,  sank 

Whelmed  'neath  a  dark  and  raging  main,  50 

But  sudden,  cleft  of  Zeus,  she  drank — 

The  swollen  surge  was  pent  again  ! 
The  shielded  warriors,  whence  springs 

Your  house,  were  of  these  children  of  the  rock  : 

Their  mothers  dames  of  Iapetian  stock, 
Zeus-born  their  sires  :  and  still  the  country  owns  them  kings. 

STROPHE. 

Not  yet  had  the  Thund'rer  riven 
Opus'  child  from  her  Epeian  home,  his  love  to  be 

#  Greek,  Aaas  =  "a  stone." 


Pindar  s  Odes.  41 


On  Maenalian  heights,— and,  after,  given 
To  Locrus,  lest  unblest  of  progeny  60 

His  days  should  close.     Ere  long  a  Zeus-sprung  boy 
She  bare,  whose  beauty  thrilled  her  lord  with  joy  ; 

And  Opus  bade  him  share 

The  name  himself  did  bear ; 
Then  to  the  wondrous  youth,  so  fair  and  brave, 
A  city  and  a  nation's  care  he  gave. 

ANTISTROPHE. 

And  round  him  a  stranger  host 
Flocked  from  Arcady  and  Pisa,  Thebes  and  Argos,  sent. 

But  Aegina's  son  and  Actor's  most 
He  loved, — Menaetius  ;  sire  of  him  that  went  70 

With  Atreus'  sons  to  Troy,  sole  faithful  found 

To  wronged  Achilles,  when  the  fleet  around 
'Mid  rout  of  valiant  Greeks 
Raged  Telephus.     Still  speaks 

His  fame,  and  wise  men  know  Patroclus'  might ! 

Thenceforth,  amid  the  crash  of  furious  fight 

EPODE. 

The  son  of  Thetis  bade  him  stand 

The  nearest  ever  to  his  side, 
Sheltered  of  his  victorious  brand. — 

Fain  would  I  still  in  fancy  ride  So 


42  Pindar's  Odes. 


On  Muses'  chariot  meetly  borne, 

With  daring  vigour  filled,  and  passion's  flame  : 
But  Worth,  Lampromachus,  and  Friendship  claim 

My  praise  for  Isthmian  wreaths,  that  thee  and  Him  adorn — 

STROPHE. 

Thy  kinsman.     In  one  proud  day 
Triumphed  each,  and  twice  ye  knew,  in  Corinth,  contest's  joy. 

Victories  were  his  by  Nemea's  bay, 
And  Argos  crowned  the  man, — Athens  the  boy ! 

But,  oh,  when  now  to  manhood  newly  grown 

He  sought  the  silver  prize  in  Marathon,  90 

And  there  with  footing  true 
And  rapid  feint  o'erthrew 

Each  senior  tried,  what  shouts  rang  round  to  greet 

The  fair  young  hero  of  so  fair  a  feat  ! 

ANTISTROPHE. 

His  might  the  Parrhasians  saw 
When  at  Zeus'  Lycaean  games  he  dared  their  wondering  hosts. 

Home  he  brought  that  charm  for  winter's  flaw, 
Pellene's  cloak.     Of  him  Eleusis'  coasts, 
And  Iolaus'  grave,  in  witness  speak. 

Tis  native  might  speeds  best  :— there  are,  that  seek  100 

By  tutored  worth  to  aim 
Presumptuously  at  fame. 


Pindar's  Odes.  43 


But  mortal  schemes  of  Providence  unblest 
As  well  in  mute  oblivion  may  rest. 

EPODE. 

All  paths  may  not  alike  avail, 

Not  one  pursuit  may  all  men  raise, 
For  skill's  ascent  is  hard  to  scale. 

Yet  lives  there  one  may  claim  such  praise, 
Then  loud  and  bold  his  fame  resound  : — 

The  victor,  graced  with  blessings  from  on  high,  1 10 

Strong  arm,  lithe  limb,  and  spirit-speaking  eye, 
Whose  hand  at  Ajax'  feast  the  Ilian  altar  crowned. 


44  Pindar  s  Odes. 


OLYMP.    X. 

TO  AGESIDAMUS  OF  WESTERN  LOCRIS  IN  SICILY,  VICTOR  IN 
THE  BOYS'  WRESTLING  MATCH.  A  PRELIMINARY  ODE 
PROMISING  ANOTHER  TO  FOLLOW. 

STROPHE. 
Times  there  are,  when  winds  best  serve  our  need, 

Or  waters  from  the  sky, 

The  rain-cloud's  progeny ; 
But  honeyed  song,  when  dauntless  toils  succeed, 

Still  to  fresh  praise  gives  birth, 

And  stamps  its  warrant  on  exalted  worth. 

ANTISTROPHE. 

Who  from  Pisa's  victor  would  withhold 

This  monument  of  fame? 

Such  theme  my  tongue  shall  claim, 
If  Heaven  empower  this  mortal  to  unfold  10 

Poesy's  bright  flowers  :   and  so, 

Agesidamus,  for  thy  prowess  know — 


Pindar  s  Odes.  45 


EPODE. 

Son  of  Archestratus — my  songs  anew 

Shall  gild  your  golden  bays, 

And  bring  the  clans  of  Western  Locrians  praise. 
Haste  hither,  Muses,  join  our  revel  crew ! 
For,  trust  me,  here  no  folk  shall  meet  your  view, 

Harsh  to  strangers,  blind  to  culture's  charms, 

Nay,  but  in  wisdom  peerless,  and  in  arms  ! 
And  when  did  tawny  foxes  yet,  20 

Or  lions  fierce,  their  instinct's  laws  forget  ? 


46  Pindar's  Odes. 


OLYMP.    XL 

ON  THE  SAME  VICTORY  AS  THE  PRECEDING ;  A  FULFIL- 
MENT  OF  THE  PROMISE  THERE  MADE,  WITH  APOLOGIES 
FOR  ITS  LATENESS. 

STROPHE. 
Of  Archestratus'  son,  That  at  Pisa  won, 

The  name  deep-graved  in  my  soul  recite  ! 
A  lay  I  vowed  him,  and  lo  !    my  vow  Lies  all  forgotten.     Yet,  Muse, 
do  thou, 
And  Truth,  Zeus'  daughter,  with  hand  of  might 
From  such  reproach  the  bard  defend, 
As  paints  him  false  to  a  trusting  friend  ! 

ANTISTROPHE. 

For  though  length  of  delay,  Since  that  far-back  day, 
Hath  turned  to  shame  me  the  debt  I  owe, 
The  boon  may  Usury  yet  increase,  And  bid  the   carpings   of  slander 
cease. 
Say,  whither  then  down  the  torrent's  flow  10 

Our  swift  stone  speed  we  ?    how  aright, 
Our  debt  discharging,  our  friend  delight  ? 


Pindar  s  Odes.  47 


EPODE. 

For  Truth  the  Western  Locrian's  city  sways  : 
Homage  to  Song's  fair  queen  it  pays, 
And  Ares  mailed  :    and  there  in  fight  Bold   Cycnus  stemmed  Alcides' 
might. 
But  for  his  triumph  in  Olympia's  ring 
Let  Agesidamus  bring 
To  lias  thanks,  for  so 

Patroclus  erst  repaid 
Achilles  :    hearts,  with  inborn  worth  that  glow,  20 

May  Instruction  spur  to  proudest  heights  of  fame  with  heavenly  aid. 


STROPHE. 

To  success  without  pain  May  but  few  attain, 
That  past  all  triumphs  doth  life  illume. 
But    Heaven's   just    mandates    my  lays   impel,    Of   mighty   Heracles' 
sports  to  tell, 
That  erst  he  founded  by  Pelops'  tomb, 

What  time, —  His  son,  that  rules  the  main, — 
The  haughty  Cteatus  he  had  slain, 


ANTISTROPHE. 


Ay,  and  Eurytus  too  !     When  his  labour's  due 
Perforce  from  Augeas  fierce  he  took, 


48  Pindar  s  Odes. 


Beneath  Cleonae  concealed  he   lay,  And  smote  them  down  on  their 
reckless  way ;  30 

For,  couched  in  secret  Eleian  nook, 
Routed  had  they  in  days  gone  by 
His  own  Tirynthian  chivalry, 

EPODE. 

Those  proud  Moliones  !    And  the  king  ere  long, 
That  dared  to  do  the  stranger  wrong, 
Beheld  his  home  with  riches  stored  Laid  waste  by  vengeful  flame  and 
sword  ; 
While  fast  in  deepest  gulfs  of  ruin  down 
Sank  his  loved  Epeian  town. 
A  stronger  foe  to  cast 

Aside  we  strive  in  vain,  40 

So  he  in  headstrong  folly  lingering  last 
Faced  the  sacking  of  his  city,  nor  from  Death  escape  might  gain. 

STROPHE. 

Then  his  warriors  all  Did  the  hero  call 
At  once  to  Pisa  the  spoil  to  bring, 
And   Zeus'  strong  son  for  his  Sire  did  found   A  temple   of  trees,  and 
fenced  around 
An  open  plot  for  his  meted  ring 

And  to  glad  revel  gave  the  plain 
Around, — such  reverence  pleased  to  deign 


Pindar  s  Odes.  49 


ANTISTROPHE. 

With  the  Twelve  Gods  supreme  To  Alpheiis'  stream, — 

And  named  from  Cronus  the  snow-sprent  heights,  50 

The  hill  Oenomaus  erst  had  swayed — Then  nameless.     Nor  failed  the 
Fates  to  aid 
With  welcome  presence  the  natal  rites  ! 
But  aye  on  Time's  unerring  test 
Truth's  self  for  credence  alone  must  rest, 

EPODE. 

And  Time  sped  onward  bringing  all  to  light. 
For  lo  !    with  sacrificial  rite 
Calling  each  God  the  spoils  to  share,  Quinquennial  feast   he   founded 
there, 
While  victors  on  that  first  Olympic  day 
Bore  its  earliest  meeds  away. 

To  whom  did  Fate  allot  60 

The  newly  offered  crown  ? 

Strong  arm,  sure  foot,  and  rapid  chariot, 

Who    were    they    whose    prowess    won    them    in    the    glorious    strife 
renown  ? 

STROPHE. 

In  the  stadium  best,  To  the  goal  that  pressed, 
Thy  son,  Licymnius  !    shewed  his  speed, 
Oeonus,  leader  of  Midea's  host  :    Tegea  of  Echemus  made  her  boast 
In  wrestling  famed  :    and  the  boxers'  meed 


50  Pindar  s  Odes. 


To  Tiryns  town  Doryclus  bore : 
Mantinean  Samus  with  coursers  four 

ANTISTROPHE. 

In  the  chariots  won — Halirothius'  son  :  70 

And  all  unerring  flew  Phrastor's  spear : 
With  strength  unrivalled  Eniceus  flung  The  massy  stone  in  his  grasp 
that  swung, 
And  loud  and  long  was  his  comrades'  cheer ! 
Then  o'er  the  lists  with  welcome  ray 
The  fair  moon  glittered,  and  closed  the  day. 

EPODE. 
And  straight  around  rang  from  each  banquet  sweet 
Such  songs  as  yet  the  victors  greet. 
True  to  the  primal  rites  we'll  raise  The  strain,  in  these  our  later  days, 
From  victory  named  ;    and  chant  the  bolt  of  fire, 
Launched  of  Zeus  the  mighty  Sire,  80 

That  speaks  in  thunder's  crash, 

And  greeteth  triumph  aye 
With  lightning's  vivid  flash  ; 
While  full  voices  raise  responsive  to  the  vocal  reed  their  lay, 

STROPHE. 

That  by  Dirce  revered  In  its  time  appeared  ! 
Oh,  passing  dear  is  the  late-born  son, 


Pindar's  Odes,  51 


When  youth  lies  far  from  the  aged  sire  :    And    love   and   rapture  his 
bosom  fire, 
For  thoughts  of  wealth  to  a  stranger  gone, 
That  alien  masters  now  must  sway, 
Do  most  embitter  life's  closing  day  !  90 

ANTISTROFHE. 

So  should  champions  brave  To  the  silent  grave, 
Agesidamus,  unsung  descend  : 
'Twere  brief  joy  purchased  with  empty  pain.      But  lo  !    to   thee   doth 
the  lyre's  sweet  strain, 
And  tuneful  flutings  new  lustre  lend  : 

The  while  Zeus'  daughters  far  and  wide, 
Maids  of  Pieria,  spread  thy  pride  ! 

EPODE.. 

With  eager  joy  the  glorious  house  I  greet. 
Watering  with  dews  of  honey  sweet 
The  Locrians'  well-peopled  state,  Thy  noble  son  I  celebrate, 

Archestratus, — as  erst  I  saw  him  gain  100 

Victory  by  Olympia's  fane 
On  that  auspicious  day, 

In  form  and  feature  fair, 
Blent  with  such  youthful  bloom,  as  drove  decay 
Far   from   Ganymede,   and  brought   him   heavenly  life   with   Zeus   to 
share. 


Pindar  s  Odes. 


OLYMP.  XII. 

TO  ERGOTELES  OF  HIMERA,   VICTOR  IN  THE  IONG 
FOOT-RACE, 

STROPHE. 

Child  of  Zeus,  the  Liberator,  hear  ! 

Be  to  Himera — Protectress  ! — near, 

Fortune  !     For  the  barks  that  scour  the  sea, 
And  wild  wars  on  land  are  ruled  of  thee, 

And  wise  debates  ;  but  ever,  high  or  low, 

Man's  hopes  toss  on,  and  stem  Delusion's  shifting  flow. 

ANTISTROPHE. 

Never  yet  to  mortal  man,  from  Heaven, 
Presage  sure  of  things  to  be  was  given. 

Blind  the  skill  that  would  the  future  scan  ! 

Many  a  hap,  undreamed  of,  falls  to  man,  10 

Wrecking  his  joy ;    while  some  engulfed  in  pain 
Find  soon  their  sorrows  turned  to  depth  of  bliss  again. 


Pindar  s  Odes. 


oi 


EPODE. 

Son  of  Philanor  !   'mid  thy  countrymen, 
Cooped  like  a  cock  from  foes  beyond  the  pen, 

Thy  speed  had  shed  its  blooms,  to  fame  unknown  ! 
But  faction  rose ;   thy  home  to  thee  was  lost. 

Now  at  Olympia  thou  hast  donned  the  crown, 
And  twice  at  Pytho,  and  by  Corinth's  coast ; 

Pride  of  the  Nymphs'  Warm  Springs  ;  with  new  lands  of  thine  own  ! 


54  Pindar  s  Odes. 


OLYMP.  XIII. 

TO  XENOPHON  OF  CORINTH,  ON  HIS  DOUBLE  VICTORY  IN 
THE  FOOT-RACE  AND  THE  PENTATHLON,— A  COMBINA- 
TION OF  FIVE  DIFFERENT  GAMES,  AS  QUOIT-THROWING, 
LEAPING,  ETC. 

STROPHE. 

While  the  house,  at  Pisa  crowned 

With  triumph  thrice,  its  townsmen's  boast, 
To  strangers  kind,  I  praise  :   my  lays  shall  sound 
The  fame  of  Corinth's  favoured  coast, 

Isthmian  Poseidon's  porch,  home  of  bright  youth. 
Eunomia,  and  her  sisters  twain,  The  state's  foundations  there  sustain, 
Justice,  and  Peace  of  kindred  mind,  Whose  bounteous  hands  enrich 
mankind, 
Daughters  divine  of  law-abiding  Truth ! 

ANTI  STROPHE. 

Proud  Presumption,  rash  of  speech, 

Mother  of  Discord,  these  repel.  10 

Fair  is  my  theme  :    and  vigour  bold  shall  teach 

My  ready  tongue  its  praise  to  tell. 


Pindar  s  Odes.  5  s 


Tis  hard  to  hide  the  stamp  that  birth  imparts  : 
And,  children  of  Aletes,  ye  May  boast  of  many  a  victory, 
Whose  meed  exalted  Valour  claims,  Triumphant  in  the  hallowed  games, 

And  many  a  seed  of  wisdom  in  your  hearts 


EPODE. 

By  flowery  Hours  implanted  erst.     Each  art  is  theirs  that  found  it  first. 

And  who  but  ye  the  Bacchic  feast  did  rear, 

Bold  Dithyrambs  to  guerdon  with  the  steer? 
Who  meted  first  the  armed  equestrian  race?  20 

With  eagles  twain  who  first  did  temples  grace? 

And  yours  are  Music's  sweetest  strains, 

And  'mid  your  youthful  spearmen  Ares  reigns. 

STROPHE. 

Throned  upon  Olympian  hill, 

O  sovereign  Zeus,  to  this  my  lay 
Grant,  Father,  thine  ungrudging  favour  still  ! 
This  nation's  weal  protecting  aye, 

Waft  on  the  prosperous  fate  of  Xenophon — 
And  bless  his  wreathed  revel  train,  That  here  he  leads  from  Pisa's  plain ! 
For  he  the  five-fold  contest's  meed,  And  eke  hath  gained  the  prize  of 
speed, —  3° 

Such  fame  as  never  other  mortal  won. 


56  Pindar  s  Odes. 


ANTISTROPHE. 

Twice  his  victor-brows  were  crowned, 

For  prowess  shown  in  Isthmian  games, 
With^  parsley  twine.     Nor  Nemea  on  him  frowned. 
And  Thessalus  his  father  claims 

Renown  for  speed  beside  Alpheiis'  shore ; 
Diaulus,  stadium, — each  he  won,  At  Pytho,  'neath  a  single  sun; 
And,    ere    a   moon   had    waned,   his    locks — Where   Athens    soars    on 
beetling  rocks — 
The  glories  of  a  triple  triumph  wore  ! 

EPODE. 

Seven  times  her  crown  Hellotia  gave,  And  from  the  lists  by  Corinth's 
wave,  40 

With  Ptoeodore  his  sire,  yet  prouder  fame, 

With  Eritime  and  Terpsias,  to  him  came. 
And  then  in  Delphi,  and  the  Lion's  brake, 
His  single  prowess  boldly  will  I  stake 

'Gainst  many  a  hero's  feats  combined, 

Vast  as  the  sands,  whose  count  I  may  not  find  ! 

STROPHE. 

Now — for  limit  all  obeys, 

And  wise  is  he  that  knows  its  due  !  — 
Must  I,  that  in  my  freight  of  public  praise 

Have  ventured  private  glories  too,  50 


Pindar  s  Odes.  57 


Tell,  how  in  skill  of  old  and  prowess  brave 
Was  Corinth  famed  :  nor  false  my  song,  Of  Sisyphus  divinely  strong 
In  craft ;   and  how  Medea  defied  A  father's  wrath,  and  fled— a  bride, 

Ship  Argo  and  its  warrior-crew  to  save  ! 

ANTISTROPHE. 

And,  in  other  days,  their  might 

Before  Troy's  ramparts  these  displayed, 
And  strove  on  either  side,  and  swayed  the  fight. 
To  Atreus'  sons  some  lent  their  aid 

Helen  to  win, — with  equal  valour  some 
Withheld  her  still,  and  Danaans  feared,  When  Lycian  Glaucus'  form 
appeared ;  60 

Before  them  all  with  pride  he  told,  "  How  ruled  his  sire  Pirene's  hold, 
"With  wealthy  heritage,  and  lordly  home." 

EPODE. 

Long  toiled  beside  Pirene's  spring  That  sire,  while  'neath  his  yoke  to 
.  bring 

The  Gorgon's  offspring,  Pegasus,  he  sought. 

Till  Pallas  pure  the  golden  bridle  brought. 
From  out  his  dreams  she  rose  in  vision  clear, 
And  cried,  "  Aeolian  king  !    yet  sleep'st  thou  here  ? 

"  Lo  !   take  this  charm  to  quell  your  steed, 

"And  be  a  snow-white  bull  The  Tamer's  meed  !" 


58  Pindar  s  Odes. 


STROPHE. 

Lapt  in  darkness  as  he  slept,  7< 

Such  words  the  goddess  seemed  to  say. 
And  seizing  straight,  as  to  his  feet  he  leapt, 
The  mystic  gift  that  by  him  lay, 

He  sought  Coiranides,  the  nation's  seer  ; 
And  sped  with  eager  joy  to  tell,  "  What  issues  wonderful  befell, 
"  How  at  the  altar  as  he  lay,  His  prophet-mandate  to  obey, 
"  The  child  of  Zeus,  that  hurls  the  lightning's  spear, 

ANTISTROPHE. 

"  Brought  the  spirit-quelling  gold  ! " 

The  prophet  bade  him  swift  obey, 
And  when  to  Him,  whose  might  doth  Earth  uphold,  8c 

The  strong-limbed  victim  he  should  slay, 

Straight  to  the  Equestrian  Queen  an  altar  found  ! 
The  power  of  Heaven  can  lightly  deign  Boons,  that  Hope's  self  despairs 

to  gain  : 
And  bold  Bellerophon  with  speed  Won  to  his  will  the  winged  steed 
Binding  that  soothing  spell  his  jaws  around. 

EPODE. 

Mounting,  all  mailed,  his  charger's  pace  The  dance  of  war  he  taught 
to  trace. 
And,  borne  of  him,  the  Amazons  he  slew, 
Nor  feared  the  bows  their  woman-armies  drew, 


Pindar  s  Odes.  59 


Chimaera  breathing  fire,  and  Solymi, —  '    J 

Sweeping  from  frozen  depths  of  lifeless  sky.        /  J  90 

Untold  I  leave  his  final  fall  !—  / 

His  charger  passed  to  Zeus'  Olympian  stall. 

STROPHE.  I 

But  the  whirling  shafts  I  ply 

No  longer  from  the  mark  must  stray, 
With  devious  aim  :   for  hither  pleased  I  hie, 
The  fair-throned  Muses  to  obey, 

And  vindicate  the  Oligaethids'  fame 
In  Nemea  and  Isthmus  eke.     Few  words  their  many  feats  may  speak: 
For  witness  bears  the  tuneful  cry  Of  herald  sworn,  that  may  not  lie, 
To  sixty  triumphs  thence  that  to  them  came.  100 

ANTISTROPHE. 

Well,  ere  now,  my  song  hath  told 

Of  their  Olympic  victories  ; 
And  what  shall  be,  must  coming  lays  unfold. 
Yet  hope  have  I, — the  future  lies 

With  Fate, — yet  bless  but  Heaven  still  their  line, 
Ares  and  Zeus  shall  all  fulfil !     For,  by  Parnassus'  frowning  hill, 
Argos,  and  Thebes,  their  fame  how  fair  !     And,  oh,  what  witness  soon 
shall  bear, 
In  Arcady,  Lycaeus'  royal  shrine 


6o  Pindar  s  Odes. 


EPODE. 

Pellene,  Sicyon,  of  them  tell, — Megara,  and  the  hallowed  dell 

OfAeacids;   Eleusis  ;   Marathon  bright ;  no 

And  wealthy  towns  that  bask  'neath  Aetna's  height  ; 

Euboea's  island.     Nay,  all  Greece  explore,— 

Than  eye  can  see,  you'll  find  their  glories  more  ! 
Through  life,  great  Zeus,  sustain  their  feet ; 
And  bless  with  piety,  and  with  triumphs  sweet ! 


Pindar  s  Odes.  61 


OLYMP.  XIV. 

TO    ASOPICHUS    OF    ORCHOMENUS,     VICTOR    JAT     THE    BOYS' 

FOOT-RACE. 

STROPHE. 

Graces,  that  your  homes  have  placed 

Where  Cephisus'  stream  enriches  lands  with  noble  coursers  graced  ! 
Queens  of  melody,  that  hold 

Bright  Orchomenus,  protectors  of  the  Minyan  nation  old  ! 
List,  while  to  you  I    make  my  prayer  :     For  all  things    sweet,  and  all 
things  fair, 
Are  showered  of  you  on  mortals'  state, 
To  make  them  wise,  or  fair,  or  great  ! 
Nay,  never  dance  nor  banquet  yet 
The  Gods  ordained,  but  ye  were  nigh.     For  all  the  pleasures  of  the  sky 
Your  hands  dispense  ;  and  high  your  thrones  are  set  10 

By  Pythian  Phoebus  with  his  bow  of  gold, 
There  in  never-ending  honour  the  Olympian  Sire  ye  hold  ! 

ANTISTROPHE. 

Great  Aglaia,  hear  my  lay ! 

Sweet  Euphrosyne !     Ye  daughters  of  the  God  of  strongest  sway ! 


62  Pindar's  Odes. 


Hear,  Thalia,  queen  of  song  ! 

Watch  with  favouring  gaze  as  lightly  trips  our  joyous  revel-throng 
Tis  young  Asopichus  I  sing,  And  Lydian  measures  with  me  bring, 
And  Lydian  lays, — the  Minyan  name 
Owes  to  thy  grace  Olympic  fame. 

Haste,  Echo,  to  the  gloomy  cell,  20 

Where  reigns  Persephone  :  and  there,  To  greet  his  sire,  the  tidings  bear. 

And  of  his  son's  renown  Cleudamus  tell : 
How,  by  the  glens  of  glorious  Pisa,  he 
Crowned  his  young  locks  with  plumes  of  victory ! 


Pindar  s  Odes.  6 


j 


PYTHIAN  I. 

TO  HIERO,  VICTOR  IN  THE  CHARIOT-RACE,  FOUNDER  OF 
THE  NEW  CITY  AETNA,  WHICH  HE  COMPLIMENTED 
BY  ASSOCIATING  ITS  NAME  WITH  HIS  OWN  IN  THE  PRO- 
CLAMATION OF  HIS  VICTORY. 

STROPHE. 
Golden  lyre,  that  Phoebus  shares  with  the  Muses  violet-crowned  ! 

Thee,  when  opes  the  joyous  revel,  our  frolic  feet  obey. 
And  minstrels  wait  upon  the  sound, 

While  thy  chords  ring  out  their  preludes,  and  guide  the  dancers'  way. 
Thou  quenchest  the  bolted  lightning's  heat, 
And  the  eagle  of  Zeus  on  the  sceptre  sleeps,  and  closes  his  pinions  fleet. 

ANTISTROPHE. 

King  of  birds  !     His  hooked  head  hath  a  darkling  cloud  o'ercast, 
Sealing  soft  his  eyes.     In  slumber  his  rippling  back  he  heaves, 

By  thy  sweet  music  fettered  fast. 

Ruthless  Ares'  self  the  muster  of  bristling  lances  leaves,  \o 

And  gladdens  awhile  his  soul  with  rest. 

For  the  shafts  of  the  Muses   and  Leto's  son   can  melt  an   Immortal's 
breast. 


64  Pindar  s  Odes. 


EPODE. 

But  whom  Zeus  loves  not,  back  in  fear  All    senseless    cower,   as  in 

their  ear 
The  sweet  Pierian  voices  sound,  In  earth  or  monstrous  Ocean's  round. 

So  he,  Heaven's  foe,  that  in  Tartarus  lies, 
The  hundred-headed  Typho,  erst 
In  famed  Cilician  cavern  nurst, — 
Now,  beyond  Cumae,  pent  below 

Sea-cliffs  of  Sicily,  o'er  his  rough  breast  rise 
Aetna's  pillars,  skyward  soaring,  nurse  of  year-long  snow  !  20 

STROPHE. 

Gushing  thence  with  purest  flow  from  the  secret  cavern  stream 
Deadly  fires.     By  day  in  torrents  of  lurid  smoke  they  sweep  ; 

But  nightly  forth,  with  blood-red- gleam, 

Curling  flames  hurl  rocks  in  thunder  adown  the  level  deep. 

And  fiercest  the  fire-jets  upward  sent 

By  the  monster  engaoled,  the  gazer's  dread,  the  listener's  wonderment  ! 

ANTISTROPHE. 

Bound  he  lies  'neath  Aetna's  floor,  'neath  its  summits  dark  with  trees  ; 

Stones  for  coverlet  scar  all  his  back  as  he  cowers  o'erthrown. 
Oh,  grant,  great  Zeus,  I  thee  may  please, 

In  that  rich   land's  brow  that    reignest ! — whose   namesake  neigh- 
bour town.  30 


Pindar  s  Odes.  65 


A  founder  renowned  hath  glorified, 

For,  when  Hiero  triumphed  on  Pytho's  course,  her  titles  the  herald  cried ! 

EPODE. 

The  vessel's  course  with  joy  begins,  A  favourable  breeze  that  wins — 
E'en  as  she  quits  the  land — to  bear  The  shipmen  whither  they  would  fare  : 

For  so  on  as  glad  return  they  count. 
And  in  this  first  success  we  see 
Equestrian  triumphs  yet  to  be, 
And  joyous  feasts,  where  song  shall  sound. 

O  Lord  of  Delos,  and  Castalia's  fount, 
Lycian    Phoebus  !  grant   our   prayer,  and   bless  this   land   with   sons 
renowned !  40 

STROPHE. 

Gods  alone  the  gifts  can  grant,  that  to  mortals  glory  bring. 

Wisdom  comes  of  them,  and  valorous  arm,  and  skilful  tongue, 
Yet,  though  a  mortal's  praise  I  sing, 

Hope  have  I,  my  dart — not  idly  beyond  the  barriers  flung — 
Afar  shall  surpass  each  rival's  throw. 
Ay,  still  be  his  future  with  blessings  fraught,  and  to  memory  lost  his  woe. 


ANTISTROPHE. 

Still  shall  coming  years  recall,  how  with  steadfast  heart  he  bore 

Brunt  of  war's  affrays,  and  Heaven  to  his  house  accorded  fame. 

F 


66  Pindar  s  Odes. 


Never  gathered  Greek  before 

Crown  of  wealth  so  fair  !     As  erst  Philoctetes,  forth  he  came     50 
To  battle.     (The  proudest  lord  at  need 
Must  stoop  for  alliance  to  sue.     And  so,  for  the  archer  of  Poeas'  seed 


EPODE. 

Came  the  great  heroes,  stories  say,  In  Lemnos  wounded  as  he  lay, 
And  Priam's  town  of  him  was  ta'en,  And  ended  all  the  Danaans'  pain. 

Though  halting  his  step,  Fate's  will  was  done  ! 
And  thus  may  Heaven's  restoring  powers 
Grant  Hiero's  will  in  coming  hours  !) 
The  tidings  of  this  triumph  bring, 

Muse,  to  Deinomenes.     Full  well  may  son 
Share  a  father's  joy  :  then  raise  we  songs  of  praise  to  Aetna's  king !    60 


STROPHE. 

His  the  state  that  Hiero  founded  in  liberty  divine, 

True  to  Hyllic  type  abiding:   (Pamphylians  ever  thus, 

And  children  of  Heraclid  line, 

Cleave  to  laws  Aegimian,  dwelling  beneath  Taygetus. 

From  Pindus  their  favoured  fathers  came 

To   Amyclae,  and   there  by  the  Tyndarid's   shrine  they   flourished   in 
martial  fame.) 


Pindar  s  Odes.  67 


ANTISTROPHE. 

Blessings  evermore  by  Amelias'  wave,  great  Zeus,  accord 

Thus  to  prince  and  people,  thus  be  their  praise  not  sung  in  vain  ! 

From  sire  to  son,  each  nation's  lord 

Learns  of  Thee  alone,  in  love  o'er  a  loyal  state  to  reign.  70 

Oh,  grant  that  in  peace  the  mingled  host, 

Phoenician   and   Tuscan,   henceforth   may   dwell,    late   vanquished  on 
Cumae's  coast  ! 

EPODE. 

Mourn  they  at  home  their  navies  brought,  By  Syracusa's  king  to  nought, 
Who,  headlong  from  the  swift  ship's  side,  Their  warriors  hurled  beneath 
the  tide, 

And  rescued  Hellas  from  serfdom  sore. 
For  Salamis  be  Athens  famed ; 
Nor  less  brave  Sparta's  feats  proclaimed, 
That  laid  beneath  Cithaeron  low 

The  archer-Medians  !     But,  by  Himera's  shore, 
Guerdon  we  with  praise  the  might  of  Hiero's  house,  that  crushed  the 
foe  !  So 

STROPHE. 

Seasoned  praise,  together  gathering  all  in  shortest  scope, 

Best  may  shun  reproach  :    for  ever  excess  with  chilling  cloy 
Weighs  down  the  eager  step  of  Hope, 


68  Pindar  s  Odes. 


But  in  townsmen's  breasts  broods  deepest  the  grudge  at  alien  joy. 
Still — better  be  envied  than  pitied  ! — let 

Fair  fame  never  slip,  steer  thy  people  aright,  and  thy  tongue  on  Truth's 
anvil  whet ! 

ANTISTROPHE. 

Lightest  word  thy  lips  escaping  seems  fraught  with  issues  vast  ! 

Many  claim  thy  care,  and  witness  of  thee  for  good  or  ill. 
Then  still  to  blooming  worth  cling  fast, 

Grudge  not  for  thy  lavish  gifts,  if  our  praises  charm  thee  still  !  90 
But,  mariner-like,  spread  free  the  sail; 

Nor,  by  cunning   deluded,  forget  that  fame  lives  ever,  though  life  may 
fail. 

EPODE. 

Men  pass  away,  yet  fame  survives,  To  point  the  moral  of  their  lives. 
They  last  in  tale  or  song  enshrined.     Nor  fades  the  praise  of  Croesus 
kind! 

But  Phalaris  dire,  with  his  bull  of  brass, 
The  toils  of  infamy  surround  : 
Nor  lyres,  in  vaulted  halls  that  sound, 
To  youths'  glad  songs  admit  his  name  ! 

First  among  blessings  Joy,  next  Praise  I  class ; 
But,  at  both  who  aims,  and   wins  them,  proudest    triumph-crown  may 
claim !  100 


Pindar's  Odes.  69 


PYTHIAN  II. 

TO  THE  SAME  HIERO,   VICTOR  IN  THE  CHARIOT-RACE. 
( This  is  not  really  a  Pythian  Ode,  for  the  success  it  describes  was  won  at  Thebes?) 

STROPHE. 

Home  of  War's  fierce  God,  O  Syracuse,  city  fair ! 

Land  where  warriors  brave  and  martial  steeds  are  bred ! 
Lo,  to  you  am  I  come,  from  beauteous  Thebes  to  bear 

Triumph-songs,  that  tell  how  the  earth-shaking  car  hath  sped. 

For  borne  thereon  hath  Hiero  gained 
Resplendent  wreaths,  Ortygia's  brows  to  shade, 
The  river-home  of  Artemis,  whose  aid 

Taught  his  pliant  hands  to  tame  the  coursers  deftly  reined. 

ANTISTROPHE. 

She,  the  archers'  queen,  and  Hermes  that  rules  the  race, 

Deck  with  either  hand  his  trappings  ;  what  time  he  yokes       10 
Gallant  steeds  to  the  polished  car  with  its  guiding  trace, 

And  the  mighty  God  of  the  Trident  with  prayer  invokes. 

For  other  kings  have  bards  of  old, 
Guerdoning  worth,  bade  tuneful  music  swell ! 
Oft  thus  of  Cinyras  the  Cyprians  tell, 

Aphrodite's  priest,  beloved  of  Phoebus  tressed  with  gold. 


jo  Pindar  s  Odes. 


EPODE. 

These,  led  of  gratitude  aright,  With  service  meet  good  deeds  requite : 

And  so,  Deinomenes'  son,  of  thee 
Sings  at   her  door  each  Locrian  maid,  And  looks   abroad,  no  more 
afraid, 
From  horrors  of  war  by  thy  power  set  free  !  20 

But  Heaven's  will  bound  Ixion,  (stories  say,) 
Whirled  round  on  his  wheel, 
This  law  to  reveal, 
That  still  should  gratitude  good  deeds  repay. 

STROPHE. 

Sure  that  law  he  found  !     For  him  had  the  Gods  above 

Welcomed  to  their  joys,  but  ill  might  he  bear  his  bliss  : 
Hera's  self — the  glad  bride  of  Zeus — with  his  frenzied  love 
Insolent  he  wooed,  rushing  madly  on  Guilt's  abyss. 

Justly  he  suffered  for  his  sin 
A  signal  doom  !    And  all  his  woes  were  brought  30 

By  two  mad  crimes  : — one,  that  his  pattern  taught 

Mortals  first  with  guilty  craft  to  shed  the  blood  of  kin, — 

ANTISTROPHE. 

One,  that  in  the  secret  cells  of  the  palace  vast 

Jove's  own  spouse  he  tempted  !     (Happy  who  knows  his  place  !) 
Into  measureless  shame  Delusion  the  lover  cast : 

Fooled,  yet  unresisting,  he  welcomed  a  Cloud's  embrace, 


Pindar  s  Odes.  71 


Whose  phantom  charms  the  wittol  lured, 
In  form  of  Heaven's  proud  Queen,  fatally  fair, 
Shaped  by  Zeus'  craft  the  sinner  to  ensnare  ! 

Thus  his  own  dread  doom  of  fourfold  fetters  he  ensured ;  40 

EPODE. 

In   everlasting    chains   confined,    He    speaks    Heaven's   message    to 
mankind  ! 
And  offspring  weird  of  the  phantom  came  : — 
Monster  of  unexampled  birth,     Unhonoured  or  in  heaven  or  earth, 
She  reared ;    and  Centaurus  she  named  his  name. 
To  him  Magnetian  mares  at  Pelion's  foot 
Strange  progeny  bare, 
Commingled  that  share 
The  form  of  sire  and  dam,  half  man,  half  brute ! 

STROPHE. 
Fate  Divine  alone  crowns  hopes  with  a  happy  end, — 

Fate,  than  eagle  winged,  or  dolphin  that  cleaves  the  brine,     5 
Swifter  far.     At  her  touch  the  haughtiest  soul  must  bend  ; 
Fadeless  fame  to  others  must  all  at  her  will  resign. 

But  quit  we  biting  censure's  strain  ! 
Far  off  I  marked,  how  ill  the  slanderer's  plight, 
Archilochus,  that  battened  on  his  spite  : — 

Wealth  and  wisdom  meetly  blent  were  choicer  boon  to  gain  ! 


Pindar  s  Odes. 


ANTISTROPHE. 

Wealth  is  thine,  and  bounty  more  may  its  powers  unfold  : 

Sovereign  thou  of  mighty  nation,  and  tower-crowned  town ! 
Boasteth  any,  that  ever  Hellas  in  days  of  old 

Bare  a  son  as  peerless  in  wealth,  or  in  high  renown  ?  60 

—Empty  his  vaunt,  his  labour  lost ! 
I'll  climb  Song's  flowery  prow,  and  there  recite 
Thy  valour's  praise.     Ever  doth  martial  might 

Youthful  vigour  glorify.     The  prouder,  then,  thy  boast  : 

EPODE. 

For   not   thy  worth    in    wars   alone,    Afoot   or   mounted,  thou   hast 
shown  ! 
But  riper  Wisdom's  renown  is  thine, 
Then  fearless  flows  my  praise  and   free.     Farewell  !    these   songs  I 
send  to  thee, 
Like  Tyrian  wares  o'er  the  foaming  brine  : 
Tuned  to  Aeolic  string,  Castorean  lay^ ! 

Then  graciously  greet  70 

Our  minstrelsy  sweet. 
Learn  thy  true  self,  and  live  it !     Children's  praise 

STROPHE. 

Greets  the  fawning  ape !     But  well  Rhadamanthus  fares  ; 

Wisdom's  fruit  that  culled,  nor  inly  in  falsehood  joys, 
( — Whispered  flattery's  bait,  that  mortals  too  oft  ensnares  : — ) 

Dupe  alike  and  victim  fell  slanderers'  guile  destroys  ! 


Pindar  s  Odes.  73 


Theirs  is  the  crafty  fox's  mood  ; 
Vet  what,  the  while,  such  gainful  cunning's  gain  ? 
Like  loaded  nets  they  drudge  beneath  the  main, — 

I,  the  buoyant  cork,  that  rides  unscathed  above  the  flood !  80 

ANTISTROPHE. 

Slander's  guileful  speech  falls  powerless  on  Virtue's  ear ; 
Fawning  yet  around,  their  cunning  the  traitors  ply. 
Ne'er  such  folly  be  mine  !     Who  loves  me,  111  hold  for  dear 
Still ;    and,  wolf-like,  still  as  a  foe  on  my  foemen  fly, 

And  doubling  dart,  now  here,  now  there. 
In  every  state  the  true  man  prospers  most ; 
Rules  monarch  there,  or  fierce  plebeian  host, 

Elders  wise, — whate'er  they  be,  that  make  its  weal  their  care  ! 

EPODE. 

Why  chide  at  Heaven,  that   now  bestows  Fair   fame    on  these,  and 
now  on  those? 
Yet,  yet  the  envious  heart  is  pained.  90 

Still  grasping,  straining  still,  at  last  It  plants  in  its  own  bosom  fast 
The  anguishing  wound,  ere  its  quest  be  gained  ! 
Who  lightly  bows  him  to  the  yoke,  does  well  : 
To  kick  at  the  goad 
But  lengthens  the  road  : — 
Mine  be  it,  with  welcome,   mid  the  great  to  dwell) 


74  Pindar  s  Odes. 


PYTHIAN  III. 

TO  THE  SAME  HIERO,  ON  TWO  VICTORIES  IN  THE 
HORSE-RACE. 

STROPHE. 
Would  that  to  Philyra's  son  once  more, 
Old  Chiron,  (if  my  voice  this  universal  prayer  may  swell,) 

Might  Fate  the  vanished  life  restore  : 
And  Cronos'  potent  stock  again  bear  rule  in  Pelion's  dell, 
The  Centaur  of  the  wilds  !  that  erst  In  love  to  men  Asclepius  nursed 
Artificer  of  restful  health,  whose  aid 
Each  various  form  of  sickness  stayed  ! 

ANTISTROPHE. 

Or  e'er  Ilithyia's  grace 
Brought  him  to  birth,  his  mother,  with  Diana's  golden  darts, 

(Child  of  chivalrous  Phlegyas,)  10 

Slain  in  her  chamber,  sank  to  halls  of  Death,  by  Phoebus'  arts. 
The  wrath  that  never  burns  in   vain,  Wrath   of  Zeus'  seed   she   dared 
disdain, 
Deceive  her  sire,  and  alien  suit  approve  : 
Yet  her  had  Phoebus  deigned  to  love  ! 


Pindar  s  Odes.  75 


EPODE. 

Fraught  with  his  seed,  the  bridal  board 
She  yet  refused, — the  nuptial  song, 
Wherewith  full  oft  in  sweet  accord 
At  eventide  the  maiden-throng 
Their  new- wed  playmate  soothe  !     Far,  far  away 

Her  passion  wandered, — sad,  yet  frequent  case  !  20 

Of  all  mankind  the  most  unwise  are  they, 
Who,  spurning  all  at  hand  that  lies,  To  distant  visions  turn  their  eyes, 
Trust  to  vain  hopes,  and  fleeting  phantoms  chase ! 

STROPHE. 

So  guilty  passion  brought  to  shame 
Fair-robed  Coronis,  welcoming  a  stranger's  rash  embrace, 

From  distant  Arcady  that  came  : 
Yet  'scaped  she  not  Apollo  !     He  in  Pytho's  holy  place 
Knew   all,  by   surest   witness  taught,    His   own   wise   soul's   unerring 
thought. 
Him  falsehood  mocks  not ;  God  from  him,  nor  Man 
Hides  aught  of  all  they  do  or  plan  !  30 

ANTISTROPHE. 

He  marked  her  treacherous  paramour, 
Ischys  the  Eilatid ;  and  straight  to  Lacereia  bade  haste 

His  sister  with  resistless  power, 
For  there  by  Boebias'  rocky  marge  the  maiden's  home  was  placed 


j  6  'Pindar  s  Odes. 


Thus  Fate  estranged  laid  her  low  With  dire  reverse,  while  in  her  woe 
Full  many  a  neighbour  shared,  and  with  her  fell : 
Thus  one  quick  spark  fires  all  the  dell  ! 

EPODE. 

As  on  the  pyre  her  kinsmen  laid 

The  damsel,  ringed  with  lambent  ray 
Of  eager  flames,  Apollo  said,  4° 

"  I'll  brook  no  more  my  son  to  slay, 
"  Whelmed  in  the  mother's  piteous  fate  ! "     He  spake  : 

Then  from  the  corse,  that  at  a  bound  he  gains, 
Draws  forth  his  child, — the  flames  around  him  break ! 
Thence  to  the   Magnete    Centaur  brought,  Apollo's    child  of  him  was 
taught 
To  free  mankind  form  sickness'  various  pains. 


STROPHE. 

To  him  for  aid  each  sufferer  came, 
With  inbred  ulcers  mated  long,  or  torn  with  gleaming  sword, 

Or  hurtling  stone :  each  wasted  frame, 
That     heat    had    scorched,    or    winter    chilled,    he    rescued    and 
restored !  50 

And  now  he  chants  the  magic    strain,  And  now   with  potions    soothes 
the  pain  : 


Pindar  s  Odes.  77 


Or  swathes  the  limbs  in  healing  bands  :  or  plies 
The  steel,  and  lo  !  the  sick  men  rise  ! 


ANTISTROPHE. 

But  greed  can  wisdom's  self  enthrall. 
Lured  by  the  gold,  whose  treacherous   gleam   the   tempter's   hand 
revealed, 
From  Death's  domain  he  dared  recall 
The  captive  dead  :  but  Cronos'  son  smote  Healer  both  and  healed  ! 
The  burning  levin,  fraught   with   death,  Tore   from   their   breasts   the 
struggling  breath. 
Let  mortals  seek,  what  fits  a  mortal's  state ; 
And  know  their  nature,  and  their  fate !  60 

EPODE. 

Immortal  life  then  covet  not : 

Scheme  we,  soul  mine,  but  what  we  may  ! 
Yet  oh,  if  still  within  his  grot 

Dwelt  Chiron  sage,  and  this  my  lay 
Had  spells  to  bind  his  soul,  him  had  I  won 

E'en  now  to  send  such  healer  to  the  good, 
(Of  Phoebus  or  his  sire,  some  trueborn  son  !) 
My  bark  should  cleave  the  Ionian  foam,  And  seek  the  hospitable  home 
Of  Aetna's  chief,  by  Arethusa's  flood  : — 


7  8  Pindar  s  Odes. 


STROPHE, 

The  lord  of  Syracuse,  that  ne'er  70 

Frowned  on  Worth's  rise  :  to  townsmen  kind,  to  strangers  noblest 
friend  ! 
Oh,  might  I  to  him  voyage,  and  bear 
Twin  blessings,  Golden  Health,  and  Song,  that  lustre  new  should  lend 
To  Pytho's  crown,  the  late- won  meed  In  Cirrha  of  his  Victor-steed  ! 
Then,  wafted  o'er  the  deep,  had  I  from  far 
Beamed  on  him  brighter  than  a  star  ! 


ANTISTROPHE. 

But  now  to  thee  my  vows  I'll  pay, 
Mother  of  Gods  :  whom  oft  with  Pan  the  maidens  at  my  door 

Revere,  dread  Queen,  in  nightly  lay  ! 
Hiero  !  thou  know'st — for  known  to  thee  is  all  tradition's  lore —      80 
How,  for  each  blessing  Gods  bestow,  They  add  a  double  share  of  woe : 

Fools  may  not  brook  its  weight,  but  wise  men  find 

The  threatening  cloud  is  silver-lined. 


EPODE. 
Fate's  constant  favours  round  thee  cling ; 

For,  ever,  potent  Fortune  best 
Of  mortals  loves  the  warrior-king. 

Yet  was  not  Peleus'  self  all  blest, 


Pindar  s  Odes.  79 


Nor  godlike  Cadmus  :  though  of  men  (they  say) 

Happiest  were  these,  for  on  the  mountain  wild, 
And  in  seven-gated  Thebes  they  heard  the  lay  90 

Of  Muses  golden-frontleted,  When  one  with  fair  Harmonia  wed, 
And  one  with  Thetis  famed,  sage  Nereus'  child. 

STROPHE. 

And  Gods  with  either  shared  the  board, 
And  gifts  they  gained  from  Cronos'  sons    throned  on  their   chairs 
of  gold. 
By  favour  thus  of  Zeus  restored 
From  troubles  overpast,  again  their  hearts  rose  high  and  bold  ! 
But  bitter  woes  in  later  day  Swept  half  of  Cadmus'  bliss  away  ; 
Three  daughters, — hapless  all  !  albeit  great  Jove 
Left  heaven  for  fair  Thyone's  love. 

ANTISTROPHE. 

He  fell  too, — Peleus'  offspring  sole,  100 

Of  Thetis  born  in  Phthia,— fell,  struck  by  the  deathful  dart : 

His  pyre  awoke  the  Danaans'  dole  ! 
Oh,  may  each  mortal  still,  that  guides  in  wisdom's  ways  his  heart, 
Enjoy  the  full  of  Heaven's    good   gift !     For   fickle    breezes   soar,  and 
shift ; 
And  when  Prosperity  falls  full  and  strong 
On  mortal's  path,  it  bides  not  long  ! 


So  Pindar  s  Odes. 


EPODE.      ' 

Lowly  I'd  live  in  lowly  state : 

And  great,  in  greatness  : — far  as  power 
Is  mine,  I'll  bow  me  to  my  fate  ! 

Should  Heaven  rich  bounty  on  me  shower,  no 

Hereafter  trust  I  fair  renown  to  find. 

Famed  Nestor  and  Sarpedon  many  a  strain 
Of  cunning  fabric  yet  recalls  to  mind — 
Themes  of  a  wide  world's  praises  !  long  Lives  Virtue  shrined  in  glorious 
song, 
But  few  there  are,  such  bliss  may  lightly  gain. 


Pindar  s  Odes.  81 


PYTHIAN  IV. 

TO  ARCESILAS,  KING  01  CYRENE,  A  GREEK  COLONY  IN 
AFRICA,   VICTOR  IN  THE  CHARIOT-RACE. 

STROPHE. 

Muse,  be  thy  place  beside  a  friend  to-day, 
That  rules  Cyrene,  land  of  steeds  !  Arcesilas  the  revel  leads  : 

To  Leto's  sons  and  Pytho  pour  with  him  the  votive  lay  ! 

Pytho,  where  by  Zeus'  eagles  sate  of  old, 

And  there,  (of  Phoebus  not  unaided,)  told 
The  prophet-maid,  how  Battus'  reign  Should  rise   o'er  Libya's  fruitful 
plain, 

Where  he  far  from  his  island  home  should  found 

Car-famed  town  on  gleaming  mound. 

ANTISTROPHE. 

Thus  he  the  seventh  from  the  tenth  in  line 
Should  fill,  whate'er  in  earlier  age  Medea,  fired  with  prophet-rage,  10 
Aeetes'  daughter,  Colchian  queen,  poured  from  her  lips  divine. 
'Mid  warrior  Jason's  crew,  "  Give  ear  ! "  she  cried 
"  O  sprung  from  Gods,  and  earthly  chiefs  of  pride. 


82  Pindar  s  Odes. 


"  I  tell  you,   from  this  wave-beat  earth  She  that  from  Epaphus  hath 
birth 
"  A  germ  of  future  towns,  to  mortals  dear, 
"  In  Zeus  Amnion's  home  shall  rear  ! 

EPODE. 

"  For  the  finny  dolphin  they  shall  urge  the  flying  steed, 
"  Guiding  with  rein  for  oar  the  chariot's  stormy  speed. 

"  That  augury  shall  Thera  mother  make 
"  Of  cities  great:— the  symbol  clod,  That  erst  a  mortal-seeming  God,      20 

"  (Where  gush  the  fountains  of  Tritonis'  lake,)   ? 
"  Gave  to  Euphemus  as  he  leaped  ashore, 
"While  Cronian  Zeus  approval  spake  amid  the  levin's  roar. 

STROPHE. 

"  He  met  us,  as  the  anchor's  fang  we  cast, 
"  Swift  Argo's  curb,  adown  her  side.     For  from  the  distant  Ocean's  tide 

"  O'er  barren  steppes  her  sea- worn  hull  had  journeyed  twelve  days 
past, 

"  Drawn  from  the  deep  at  my  injunction  wise. 

"There  roaming  lone  the. God  appeared,  in  guise 
"  Assumed  of  some  kind  mortal  man  ;   And,  smiling  welcome,  straight 
began 

"Such  gracious  words  as  greet  an  entering  guest,  30 

"  To  the  generous  banquet  prest. 


Pindar  s  Odes.  83 


ANTISTROPHE. 

"  But  home's  sweet  pretext  brooked  not  of  delay. 
"  Eurypylus,  he  cries,  in  me  Behold :  His  son,  that  rides  the  sea  / 

"Then  grasping,  (for  our  haste  he  knew,)  such  sods  as  nearest  lay, 

"Proffered  the  friendly  gift  with  eager  hand. 

"And  forth,  not  disobedient,  on  the  strand 
"  Our  champion  leaped  ;  and  from  the  God  With  palm  responsive  took 
the  sod. 

"  But,  well  I  wot,  at  eve  the  briny  spray 

"  Swept  it  down  the  water-way. 

EPODE. 

"  On  the  helpful  serving-men  I  oft  had  vainly  wrought,  40 

"  Duly  to  guard  the  gift— oblivion  dulled  their  thought  ! 

"Here  lies  the  germ  of  Libya's  spacious  state 
"  Shed  ere  its  time.    Ah  !  had  it  come  To  that  divine  Taenarian  home 

"  Where  dwells  Euphemus  hard  by  Hades'  gate, 
"  Equestrian  Poseidon's  son,  the  king 
"  Whom  Tityus'  daughter  bare  of  yore  beside  Cephisus'  spring  : — 

STROPHE. 

"  For  then  his  offspring  in  the  fourth  degree 
"  That  spacious  continent  had  gained,  With  aid  of  Danaan  hosts, 
constrained 
"  From  Argos  and  Mycenae  and  proud  Sparta's  realm  to  flee  ! 


84  Pindar  s  Odes. 


"  But  to  him  now  an  alien  bride  shall  bear  50 

"  A  destined  race,  that,  blest  by  heavenly  care, 
"  Shall  reach  this  isle,  and  there  obtain  A  son  to  rule  its  loamy  plain, 
"To  whom,  arrived  at  Pytho's  gold-stored  cell, 
"  Phoebus  shall  his  fate  foretell : 

ANTISTROPHE. 

"  How  he  his  hosts  must  lead  in  later  days, 
"  Embarking,  to  the  wealthy  land  Of  Cronus'  son  on  Nilus'  strand." 

So  ran  Medea's  rhythmic  speech,  and  dumb  in  blank  amaze 

Cowered  the  great  chieftains  as  her  rede  they  heard. 

Blest  son  of  Polymnastus,  thee  that  word 
Foretold  !   The  Delphian  maid  of  thee  Spake  in  unprompted  augury  !    60 

And  thrice  she  bade  thee  Hail, — ordained  by  fate 

Monarch  of  Cyrene's  state  ! 

EPODE. 

Thus,  when  aid  from  heaven  thou  sought'st  to  loose  thy  speech's  string, 
Spake  she.     And  now,  though  late,  in  prime  as  of  flowery  spring, 

Eighth  of  that  line  blooms  an  Arcesilas, 
Whom,   with   equestrian   triumph  crowned,  Phoebus  and   Pytho  have 
renowned. 

Ye  Muses  !  at  my  bidding  sound  his  praise  ; 
And  sing  the  golden  fleece, — that  journey's  aim, 
That  won  the  Minyan  mariners  wreaths  of  celestial  fame. 


Pindar  s  Odes.  85 


STROPHE. 

What  earliest  impulse  bade  them  plough  the  sea  ?  70 

What  peril's  stubborn  bond  constrained  ?  For  Pelias  death  had  Heaven 
ordained, 

By  force,  or  craft  relentless,  of  the  famed  Aeolidae. 

Chill  on  his  wise  soul  struck  the  ominous  word, 

By  wood-crowned  Mother  Earth's  mid  navel  heard, 
That  bade  him,  with  unslackening  care  Of  the  "  One-sandalled  Man  " 
beware, 

What  time  should  he  seek  from  the  mountain  height 

Famed  Iolcos'  champaign  bright, 

ANTISTROPHE. 

Stranger  or  townsman  !    And  he  came  in  time : 

A  hero  dread,  twin  spears  he  bore  ;  And  twinfold  guise  of  raiment  wore, 
For  aptly  to  his  wondrous  limbs  clove  garb  of  Magnete  clime,      80 
Nor  rains  might  pierce  the  pardskin  round  him  spread, 
Nor  his  bright  locks  unshorn  their  blooms  had  shed, 

But  mantled  round  his  shoulders  broad !   Swift  to  the  market-place  he 
strode, 
And  testing  all  his  dauntless  mettle  stood 
'Mid  the  gathering  multitude. 

EPODE. 

Then  those  crowds  unknowing  questioned  of  him  near  and  far  : 
"  Phoebus  he  is  not  ?    Nay  !  nor  He  of  the  brazen  car 


86  Pindar  s  Odes. 


"  That  Cypris  loved  ; — in  Naxos  died,  they  say, 
"  Iphimedea's  giant  brood,  Otus  and  Ephialtes  rude. 

"And  Tityus  fell,  to  those  keen  shafts  a  prey  90 

"  That  Artemis'  unvanquished  quiver  drove  ; 
"  Teaching  mankind,  within  their  powers  to  curb  ambitious  love." 

STROPHE. 

Such  speech  from  one  to  other  passed  around. 
And  lo  !   with  polished  car,  mule-traced,  Headlong  sped  Pelias  hot  with 

haste  : 
Then   spied,   and  shuddering  knew   too  well,  what   Single  sandal 

bound 
The  youth's  right  foot.     Yet,  forced  his  fears  to  hide, 
"And  what  the  home  thou  vauntest,  friend?"  he  cried, 
"  Of  earth-born  dames  what  mother  erst   In  hoary  eld  such  offspring 

nursed  ? 
"Tell  me  thy  lineage,  nor  dare  defile 
"  Tale  so  proud  with  falsehood  vile."  100 

ANTISTROPHE. 

Thereat  in  gentle  tones  he,  fearless,  said  : 
"  Trained  in  old  Chiron's  school   I    come,   Whose   daughters  in   their 
cavern-home, 
"  Philyra  and  Chariclo,— spotless  maids  !— my  childhood  bred. 
"  Now,  twice  ten  years  fulfilled,  nor  tongue  nor  hand 
"  Offending  e'er,  I  seek  my  native  land  ; 


Pindar  s  Odes.  87 


"  To  win  the  realm,  where  ruled  of  old  My  sire,  now  passed  to  alien  hold, 
"  Unrighteously, — for  there  did  Zeus  ordain 
"Aeolus  and  his  sons  should  reign. 

EPODE. 

"  Well  I  wot,  hath  Pelias,  led  by  jaundiced  greed  astray, 

"Torn  from  my  sire  perforce  the  land  of  his  ancient  sway.  110 

"  And  me ;  when  light  dawned  on  my  opening  eyes, 
"  My    parents    mourning    made,   for  dread    Of   that   fierce  lord,  and 
feigned  me  dead, 

"And  so,  mid  funeral  gloom,  and  women's  cries, 
"  Swathed  me  in  purple  bands,  and  darkling  bare 
"At  midnight  from  my  home,  to  dwell  'neath  Chiron's  fostering  care. 

STROPHE. 

"  Thus  hear  ye  briefly  gathered  all  my  rede ; 
"  And  show  me  now,  good  townsmen  mine,  The  cradle  of  my  knightly 
line, 

"  For  sure  no  alien  land  is  this  to  Aeson's  native  seed  ! 

"Jason  am  I, — the  Centaur  gave  my  name." 

He  spake  :   and  to  his  aged  father  came,  120 

Nor  came  unknown, — to  greet  the  boy,  Those  time-worn  eyes  plashed 
tears  of  joy, 

For  glad  at  heart  was  he,  his  son  to  find 

Choicest  bloom  of  human  kind. 


SS  Pindar's  Odes. 


ANTISTROPHE. 

And  Aeson's  brethren,  as  the  story  spread, 
Came  flocking.     First  did  Pheres  hie  From  Hypereia's  fount  hard-by  : 

And,  from  Messene,  Amython  :   and  with  Admetus  sped 

Melanthus,  swift  their  kinsman  dear  to  greet. 

Whom  with  all  kindly  speech  did  Jason  meet, 
Nor  aught  withheld  of  friendship's  rights,  But  in  the  full  of  all  delights 

Culled,  five  long  days  and  nights,  from  hour  to  hour,  130 

Hallowed  revel's  fadeless  flower. 

EPODE. 

Then  the  sixth  day  came,  and  graver  theme  did  then  unfold, 
While  in  their  ready  ears  the  hero  his  purpose  told. 

Swift  from  their  seats  they  leapt ;   and  forth  did  fare 
To  Pelias'  hall,  then  rushing  in  Expectant  stood.     Forth  at  the  din 

Amazed  came  he  whom  bright-haired  Tyro  bare  ; 
And  thus,  with  words  firm  set  on  Wisdom's  base, 
In  gentle  accents  Jason  spake  :   "  Child  of  Poseidon's  race  ! 

STROPHE. 

"  The  thoughts  of  man  are  all  too  swift  to  praise 
"In  place  of  justice  crafty  gain,  Lead  though  it  may  to  after  pain.        140 
"  But  thou  and  I  must  rule  our  moods,  and  weave  us  happy  days. 
"  I  speak  not  to  a  fool  !     One  dam  of  old 
"  Gave  birth  to  Cretheus  and  Salmoneus  bold  : 


Pindar  s  Odes.  89 


"  And  on  yon  golden  sun  gaze  we,  Their  children  in  the  third  degree. 
"  Fate  frowns,  whene'er  in  kindred  bosoms  rise 
"Passions  hiding  kinship's  ties. 

ANTISTROPHE. 

"  111  were  it  we  the  brazen  sword  should  wield, 
"  Or  launch  the  dart,  and  rend   in   twain   The   lordship   of  our  sires' 
domain. 

"  Keep  thou  the  flocks  and  herds   of  tawny  kine  !    thine  be  each 
field 

"Thou  from  my  sire  hast  torn  to  swell  thy  state  !  150 

"  I  grudge  not  though  thy  wealth  grow  ne'er  so  great. 
"  But  that  imperial  sceptre's  sway,  That  throne,  whereon  in  earlier  day, 

"Judging  this  folk,  sate  he  of  Cretheus'  line, 

" — Spare  us  strife,  and  own  them  mine  ! 

EPODE. 

"  Yield  them  thou,  and  shun  the  woes  that  from  them  else  must  rise." 
Gently  he  spake,  and  thus  as  gently  the  king  replies, 

"  Such  will  I  be  !     But  round  me  now  doth  cling 
"  The  lot  of  eld,  while  youth's  bright   flower  Swells  in  thy  veins,  and 
thine  is  power 

"  To  soothe  Hell's  vengeance  :   Phrixus  bids  us  bring 
"  His  prisoned  sprite  back  from  Aeetes'  home,  160 

"  And  win  that  Ram's  rich  fleece,  that  bore  him  safe  o'er  Ocean's  foam. 


go  Pindar  s  Odes. 


STROPHE. 

"  'Scaping  his  stepdame's  shafts  of  impious  hate. 
"  This  heard  I  in  a  wondrous   dream  ;  And  questioned,  by  Castalia's 
stream, 

'"''Seek  must  I  might?"    And   Phoebus  bade  prepare  such  convoy- 
straight. 

"This  quest  do  thou  fulfil,  and  straight  will  I 

"  Relinquish  to  thee  rule  and  royalty  : 
"  Be  Zeus,  the  father  of  us  both,  The  mighty  witness  of  my  oath  ! " 

The  chiefs  applauding  heard,  and  went  their  way : 

Jason  now  his  part  must  play  ! 

ANTISTROPHE. 

Heralds  he  sent  to  noise  the  tale  around  170 

Of  purposed  voyage,  and   swiftly  came   Three   Zeus-sprung   chiefs   of 
warrior  fame, 
Alcmena's  seed  and  Leda's.     Came  Poseidon's  children,  crowned 
With  lofty  crest,  and  flushed  with  conscious  might, 
From  Pylos  hasting,  and  from  Taenarus'  height, — 
Euphemus,  Periclymenus,  Your  glory  touched  its  zenith  thus  ! 
Next,  Phoebus-born,  the  Sire  of  Song  appeared, 
Orpheus,  name  to  praise  endeared  ! 

EPODE. 

Golden-sceptred  Hermes'  twins  the  matchless  task  to  share, 
Joying  in  youth,  Echion,  Eurytus, — each  was  there  ! 


Pindar  s  Odes.  91 


Swift  came  those  dwellers  round  Pangaeus'  base,  180 

Sent  freely  forth  with  willing  mind  By  Him,  their  sire,  that   rules  the 
wind, 

Zetes  and  Calais,  sons  of  Boreas  ; 
Whose  shoulders  glowed  in  ruffling  plumes  attired  ! 
Heaven's  Queen  such  burning  zeal  in  each  heroic  heart  inspired. 

STROPHE. 

Each  felt  ship  Argo's  spell,  nor  might  endure 
To  chew  eld's  cud  and  lonely  bide  In  safety  at  his  mother's  side. 

Nay,    come    Death's    self,   each   with   his   peers  must   seek    zeal' 
glorious  cure  ! 

So  to  Iolcos  came  that  flower  of  crews ; 

Whom  Jason  with  approval  high  reviews, 
,Meantime,  with  lots  and  auguries,  His  craft  prophetic  Mopsus  plies,      190 

And  bids  the  host  embark.     The  anchor  now 

Hangs  expectant  at  the  prow  ; — 

ANTISTROPHE. 

The  leader  mounts  the  stern  :  his  hands  upraise 
A  golden  cup ;  to  Zeus  he  cries,  Launcher  of  thunders,  lord  of  skies  ; 
To  each  swift  blast  of  wind  and  wave ;    to   nights ;    and   Ocean's 

ways  ; 
Fair  seasons  ;   and  kind  Fate  to  bring  them  home  ! 
Forth  from  the  clouds  responsive  thunders  come 


9 2  Pindar 's  Odes. 


With  fate-fraught  roar,  and  broken  rays  Of  fiery  lightning  round  him 
blaze. 
Then  joyful  breathed  again  those  peers  divine, 
Strengthened  by  the  heavenly  sign.  200 

EPODE. 

"  Ply  the  oar,"  the  prophet  cried,  and  joyous  hopes  inspired, 
Swift  in  their  sturdy  grasp  the  oarage  sped  on  untired. 

With  favouring  gales  the  Axine's  mouth  they  near  ; 
Then  to  the  ruler  of  the  main,  Poseidon,  raise  a  hallowed  fane, 

Where  ruddy  droves  of  Thracian  kine  appear, 
And,  (newly  piled,)  a  hollow  altar-stone  : 
So  them  the  Lord  of  navies  heard  in  depths  of  peril  thrown  ! 

STROPHE. 

Succour  they  prayed  from  the  resistless  jaws 
Of  clashing  rocks,  the  fatal  Twin,  That  lived  and  moved,  more  swift 
than  din 

Of  serried   storm-winds,   yet  to  them   that   voyage   brought   final 
pause.  210 

So  came  the  hero  band  to  Phasis'  banks 

And  met  in  fight  the  dusky  Colchian  ranks 
E'en  at  Aeetes'  side.     And  then  The  queen  of  swiftest  shafts  to  men 

The  mystic  wryneck's  spell  did  first  reveal 

Bound  on  the  relentless  wheel. 


Pindar  s  Odes.  93 


ANTISTROPHE. 

That  bird  of  frenzied  love  the  Cyprian  dame 
From   far    Olympus'   summit   brought,  And  Aeson's   prudent    son  she 
taught 

To  wile  away  with  witching  chant  Medea's  filial  shame, 

And  fire  with  thoughts  of  Greece  her  love-smit  breast. 

From  her  he  learnt  to  fill  her  sire's  behest:  220 

With  mingled  oil  and  magic  banes,  That  quell  the  force  of  cruel  pains, 

She  bathed  his  frame,  and  each  to  each  gave  troth 

Wedlock  sweet  should  link  them  both. 

EPODE. 

Then  his  plough  of  adamant  Aetes  midst  them  sets, 

While  from  his  bulls  the  flames  burst  panting  in  yellow  jets, 

And,  rending  earth,  their  brazen  hoofs  rebound. 
Yet  these  he  yoked,  with  none  to  aid,  And  straight  the   shapely  fur- 
rows made, 

And  scored  a  fathom  deep  the  loamy  ground, 
Then  spake,  "This  work  accomplished,  let  the  king 
"  That  rules  yon  bark  win  from  me  that  immortal  covering,  230 

STROPHE. 

"  His  be  the  fleece  tasselled  with  gleaming  gold." 
He  spake,  and  Jason  laid  aside  His  saffron  vest,  and,  fortified 

With  trust  in  heaven,  his  task  began  :  nor  feared  the  flames,  made 
bold 


94  Pindar's  Odes. 


By  his  weird  hostess'  hest.     The  plough  he  grasped, 
Round  the  bulls'  necks  constraining  fetters  clasped, 
Smote   with   fierce   goad   each   massy  frame,  And   to   his   hard  task's 
ending  came. 
In  speechless  pain,  yet  groaning  as  amazed, 
On  his  might  Aeetes  gazed. 

ANTISTROPHE. 

Then  to  the  hero  'gan  his  comrades  reach 
Welcoming   hands,   with   wreathed  bays   They  roofed  his  brow,    and 
spoke  his  praise.  240 

And  Helios'  wondrous  offspring  them  of  the  bright  fleece  did  teach, 

Where  stretched  by  Phrixus'  sacring  knives  it  lay  ; 

And  deemed  a  task  was  here  their  hands  to  stay. 
For  to  it  clung,  beneath  the  brake,  With  greedy  fangs  a  monstrous  snake, 

Huge,  as  some  penteconter's  giant  keel 

Shaped  amid  the  crash  of  steel. 

EPODE. 

Closer  now  time  draws,  'twere  long  the  beaten  road  to  tread, 
Learnt  have  I  shorter  paths,  and  others  have  in  them  led. 

The  bright-eyed,  spangled  snake  by  guile  slew  he  ; 
Medea — Pelias  soon  to  slay ! — By  her  own  aid  he  stole  away  ;         250 

And  reached  the  floods  of  Ocean  and  Red  Sea  : 
And  those  that  killed  their  lords,  the  Lemnian  dames. 
There,  for  the  vesture's  meed,  they  showed  their  prowess  in  the  games, 


Pindar's  Odes.  95 


STROPHE. 

And  won  them  wives.    That  day,  that  night  was  sown 
In  foreign  soil  the  germ,  with  fate  Instinct,  of  Libya's  glittering  state  , 

Euphemus'  race,  that,  planted  then,  hath  greater  ever  grown; 

Whose  children  from  their  homes  on  Sparta's  shore 

Spread  to  that  isle,  Callista  named  of  yore. 
Thenceforth  did  Leto's  son  ordain,  Your  sway  should  bless  the  Libyan 
plain 

With  sovereignty  from  heaven  :  for  ye  have  found  260 

Counsels  fraught  with  wisdom  sound, 

ANTISTROPHE. 

The  golden-throned  Cyrene's  state  to  guide  ! 
Try  now  like  Oedipus  thy  skill  On  riddles !  When  with  keen-edged  bill 

A  woodman  lops  some  mighty  oak,  and  mars  its  leafy  pride  : 

E'en  in  decay  it  testifies  its  worth, 

Whether  in  flames  it  end  on  winter's  hearth, 
Or,  matched  with  comrade  pillars  tall,  It  prop  a  lordly  palace  wall, 

Painfully  doomed  in  alien  homes  to  toil, 

Banished  from  its  native  soil ! 

EPODE. 

Grace  to  thee,  apt  healer  of  thy  times,  doth  Paean  lend,  270 

Duly  with  soothing  touch  each  ulcerous  wound  to  tend. 

For  feebler  hands  a  town  may  lightly  shake  ; 
But  hard  indeed  the  task,  once  more  Its  tottering  fabric  to  restore, 


g6  Pindar  s  Odes. 


Save  of  its  rulers  Heaven  the  guidance  take  ! 
Such  task  to  thee  hath  Fate's  fair  web  assigned, 
Then  still  for  blest  Cyrene's  weal  toil  on  with  ready  mind. 

STROPHE. 

Of  all  wise  Homer's  precepts,  ponder  thou 
This   with   the   rest,    "  Good   harbinger    Doth  grace    on   each   behest 
confer." 

And  sure,  on  righteous  errand  sped,  Song's  self  doth  nobler  grow  I 

Cyrene  knows  Demophilus'  heart-truth,  280 

Battus'  proud  palace  knows  it ;  with  the  youth 
A  very  boy,  yet  every  thought  With  a  hoar  century's  wisdom  fraught 

He  silences  the  noisy  tongue  of  spite, 

Schooled  to  loathe  ungoverned  might. 

ANTISTROPHE. 

Not  his  against  the  good  in  strife  to  rave, 
Or   aught   obstruct   of   Fate's   sure  plan :  He   knows  •  Time   stays  not 
long  for  man, 

So  waits  on  Opportunity,  its  follower,  not  its  slave  ! 

Yet  his  that  sharpest  pang, — at  once  to  know 

The  good,  and  yet  perforce  that  good  forego  ; 
Forth  from  his  home,  his  country  driven,  He  struggles,  Atlas-like,  with 
heaven.  290 

— But  to  the  Titans  gave  great  Zeus  release, 

Sails  may  shift  when  tempests  cease  ! 


Pindar  s  Odes.  97 


epode.  __ — 

Yet  he  prays,  when  to  the  dregs  is  drained  his  cup  of  ill, 
Home  to  return  once  more,  and  oft  by  Apollo's  rill 

Give  all  his  soul  to  joy  ; — there,  mid  the  throng 
Poetic  of  his  townsmen,  bear  The  carven  lyre,  their  quiet  share, 

And  never  more,  or  do,  or  suffer  wrong  ! 
Then  would  he  tell,  what  streams  of  deathless  sound, 
In  hospitable  Thebes,  for  great  Arcesilas  he  found  ! 


9  8  Pindar  s  Odes. 


PYTHIAN  V. 

ON  THE  SAME  VICTORY  AS  THE  PRECEDING.  A  HYMN  FOR 
THE  TRIUMPHAL  PROCESSION  TO  APOLLO'S  TEMPLE  AT 
CYRENE. 

STROPHE. 

Power  is  Wealth's  of  wide  extent, 

When  mortals  from  the  hand  of  destiny 
Receive  her,  with  unspotted  virtue  blent, 
A  loved  ally  ! 
Thereto  divine  Arcesilas, 

In  triumph  mounting — who  but  he  ? — 
Of  glorious  life  each  proud  degree, 
Yoked  with  sweet  praise  doth  ever  nearer  come  ; 

By  golden-charioted  Castor's  grace, 
That  now  with  sunshine  after  storms  makes  bright  his  happy  home.   10 

ANTISTROPHE. 

Wise  men  wear  with  prudence  meet 

The  sovereignty  that  Powers  of  heaven  bestow  ; 
And  great  the  bliss  that  rings  thy  righteous  feet  : 
— First,  king  art  thou 

Supreme  o'er  many  a  mighty  town. 


Pindar  s  Odes.  99 


For  in  that  honoured  title  most 
Standeth  thy  kinsmen's  common  boast, 
(And  well  therewith  thy  wisdom's  streams  combine  !) 

And  next,  to  fill  thy  bliss,  decked  with  renown 
From  Pytho's  course,  and  home  arrived,  this  triumph  train  is  thine,  20 

EPODE. 

Such  revel  Phoebus  loves  !     Then  ne'er  forget, 

As  sounds  thy  praise  round  sweet  Cyrene's  grove, 
Before  all  else  the  helpful  god  to  set, 

And  of  all  friends  Carrhotus  most  to  love. 
Not  he  to  cloke  defeat  hath  brought 
Excuse,  the  child  of  Afterthought, 
To  yon  proud  halls  of  Battid  kings. 
But,  by  Castalia's  springs 
A    welcome   guest,   the  chariot's    crown    Round  thy    triumphant   locks 
hath  thrown. 

STROPHE. 
Nor  thy  harness  did  he  mar  30 

In  twelve  swift  courses  round  the  holy  place  : 
For  all  unbroken  hangs  the  mighty  car. 
Each  plaited  trace, 
Wherewith  he  flew  past  Crisa's  hill, 

By  hands  of  skilful  workmen  wrought 
Safe  to  the  sacred  vale  he  brought  ; 


ioo  Pindar's  Odes. 


That  now  its  halls  of  cypress  them  contain, 

Hard  by  the  statue's  base,  by  Cretan  skill 
Formed  of  a  single  tree,  and  reared  in  that  Parnassian  fane. 

ANTISTROPHE. 

Who  hath  done  this  service  rare,  40 

Well  mays't  thou  with  thy  readiest  welcome  greet  ! 
O  Alexibius'  son,  the  Graces  fair 
Thy  praise  repeat. 
O  favoured  soul,  that  lasting  pride, 

Albeit  through  weary  toil,  hast  won  \ 
With  calm  strong  purpose  pressing  on, 
Mid  forty  fallen  guiders  of  the  rein, 

Secure  through  all  didst  thou  thy  chariot  guide; 
And,   from  the   games   returned,   hast   reached   thy   home  on    Libya's 
plain. 

EPODE. 

None  is,  nor  shall  be,  all  exempt  from  woe  :  50 

But  still  on  Battus  Fortune's  varied  store 
Is  shed, — his  city's  tower,  a  light  whose  glow 
Illumes  each  sojourner.     Him  with  deep  roar 
Fierce  lions  fled,  with  fear  distraught, 
At  spells,  that  o'er  the  deep  he  brought. 
Phoebus,  the  nation's  founder,  bade 


Pindar  s  Odes.  101 


The  monsters  cower  dismayed ; 
Lest  aught  should  fail  of  all  his  word,  Once  plighted  to  Cyrene's  lord. 

STROPHE. 

Remedies  for  every  ill 

To  mortal  men  and  dames  the  God  imparts  ; 
And  gave  the  lyre ;  and  grants  the  muse  at  will. 
He  in  men's  hearts 
Plants  Order  fair,  whom  Discord  flees  ; 
And  reigns  in  his  prophetic  shrine. 
Thus  he  in  Sparta,  and  divine 
Pylos,  and  Argos,  bade  the  heroes  dwell 

Born  of  Aegimius  and  Heracles. 
From  Sparta  springs  my  own  ancestral  boast,  as  legends  tell. 

ANTI  STROPHE. 

Sprung  from  thence,  to  Thera's  land, 

Heroes  of  Aegid  stock,  my  fathers  came,  70 

Unaided  not  of  Heaven  ;  Fate's  guiding  hand 
Conveyed  the  flame 
Of  festal  sacrifice,  (whence  we 

Have  learnt,  Apollo,  to  thy  state 
Carneia's  feast  to  celebrate,) 
E'en  to  Cyrene's  city  proudly  placed, 

Home  of  the  mail-clad  Antenoridae, 
From  Troy  that  came  with  Helen,  when  their  fatherland  lay  waste 


102  Pindar  s  Odes. 


EPODE. 

In  war.    And  that  chivalrous  band  to  greet 

With  sacrifice,  forth  came — and  presents  gave —  80 

The  folk  that  Battus  brought ;  when  with  swift  fleet 
A  path  he  opened  o'er  the  deep  sea  wave, 
And  wider  sanctuaries  made, 
And  straight  across  the  champaign  laid 
The  rock-paved  road,  hoof-trampled  by  the  train 
Of  Him  that  shields  from  pain, — 
Apollo.     There,  behind  the  mart,  Entombed  the  Founder  lies  apart. 

STROPHE. 

Erst  with  men  he  sojourned  blest, 

Whom  as  a  hero  now  his  folk  adore. 
Apart — the  tomb  their  portion — others  rest,  90 

Great  kings,  before 
The  palace  :  their  achievements  high 
Besprinkled  all  with  dews  of  song 
Soft  streaming  from  the  festal  throng. 
These,  lapt  in  earth,  the  tale  of  bliss  partake 

And  share  their  kinsman's  well-won  victory  ; 
Who  now  Youth's  song  to  Phoebus  of  the  golden  lyre  must  wake, 

ANTISTROPHE. 

Pytho's  noble  strain  repays 

His  contest's  lavished  cost,  melodious  chant 


Pindar s  Odes.  io. 


Of  victory.     The  wise  resound  his  praise  ;  100 

'Tis  but  the  vaunt 
Of  all  I  utter  !  Mind  and  tongue 

Are  his  of  force  beyond  his  years  ; 
Bold, — as  an  eagle,  he  appears, 
Mid  humbler  fowls  spreading  his  pinions  wide  ; 

And,  as  a  fortress,  in  the  lists  is  strong  ; 
From  childhood,  high  he  soared  in  Song  ;   his  skill  the  car-race  tried. 

EPODE. 

Bold  hath  he  trod  each  path  of  local  praise, 

With  might  made  perfect  now  by  Heaven's  goodwill, 
And,  O  blest  Cronidae  !  in  after  days  no 

Such  might,  in  act  and  counsel,  grant  him  still. 
Lest  wintry  blasts,  that  breathe  decay, 
Should  sweep  the  fruits  of  time  away. 
With  guiding  favour  Zeus  attends 
The  fortunes  of  His  friends  : 
Oh,  in  Olympia  e'en  such  grace  May  He  bestow  on  Battus'  race  ! 


104  Pindar  s  Odes. 


PYTHIAN  VI. 

TO  XENOCRATES  OF  A  CRAG  AS,  VICTOR  IN  THE  CHARIOT-RACE, 
A  BROTHER  OF  THERO,   TO  WHOM  OLYMP.  II  IS  DEDICATED. 

STROPHE. 
Oh    list!  for  or  in  lands  where  glancing-eyed 
Aphrodite  reigns, 

Or  Graces  fair,  we  plough  the  plains  : 
And  to  Earth's  resonant  centre  ride. 

Where  songs  of  favoured  Emmenids  that  tell, 
And  Acragas,  and  thee,  Xenocrates, 
Songs  for  Pythian  victories, 
Lie,  meetly  stored,  With  the  golden  hoard 
That  fills  Apollo's  rampired  dell  ! 

ANTISTROPHE. 

And  never  shall  the  rain-cloud's  mustered  host  ic 

Roaring  fierce  and  deep, 
Nor  furious  winds  that  treasure  sweep 

To  Ocean's  cells,  mid  shingle  tost 

And  battered.     No  !  in  clear  light  see  it  shine ; 


Pindar  s  Odes.  105 


And  to  thy  sire,  O  Thrasybulus,  bear 
Triumph,  all  thy  house  may  share  ; 
While  spreads  the  tale,  How  in  Crisa's  vale 
The  victor-chariot's  boast  was  thine ! 

STROPHE. 

That  mandate  thou  at  thy  right  hand  hast  set 

Cleaving  to  it  still,  20 

That  erst  upon  his  native  hill 
Would  Philyra's  son  ('tis  said)  repeat 

To  young  Achilles,  of  his  parents  left : 

How  "most  to  Zeus,  the  pealing  thunder's  king, 
"  Loyal  service  man  should  bring  ; 
"  Nor  filial  care  From  a  parent  e'er, 

"Through  all  his  portioned  years,  be  reft." 

ANTISTROPHE. 

Such  mind  Antilochus  in  byegone  day, 
Dauntless  warrior,  bare  : 

Who  for  a  father  death  did  dare,  30 

And  stood  in  Memnon's  murderous  way, 

Fell  Aethiop  chief!  For,  smit  with  Paris'  dart, 

A  horse  checked  Nestor's  chariot ;  and  the  foe 
'Gan  his  heavy  spear  to  throw, 
And  cries  dismayed  To  his  son  for  aid 
Burst  from  the  old  Messenian's  heart. 


io6  Pindar  s  Odes. 


STROPHE. 

Nor  wasted  on  the  earth  his  words  he  flung  : 
Firm  the  hero  stood, 
And  for  his  father  gave  his  blood. 
Thus  in  his  day  to  all  the  young  40 

Seemed  that  achiever  of  a  deed  of  might 
Pattern  most  fair  of  filial  bravery. 
All  of  this  is  now  gone  by, 
But  Thrasybule  By  the  ancient  rule 
Walks  most  of  later  men  aright. 

ANTISTROPHE. 

And  treads  his  uncle's  paths,  his  worth  revealed  ! 
Wealth  he  well  doth  guide, 
Nor  stains  Youth's  flower  with  sin  or  pride ; 
But  culls  all  lore  the  Muses  yield  ; 

And,  joying  in  equestrian  strife,  to  Thee,  50 

Shaker  of  earth,  Poseidon  !  pleased  doth  bend, 
Kind  of  heart,  and  such  a  friend 
To  all  that  share  In  his  feasts,  as  ne'er 
So  sweet  was  fretwork  of  the  bee  ! 


Pindar s  Odes.  10; 


PYTHIAN  VII. 

TO   MEGACLES    OF  ATHENS   (A    MEMBER    OF    THE    FAMOUS 
ALCMAEONID  FAMILY),   VICTOR  IN  THE  CHARIOT-RACE. 

STROPHE. 
Be  glorious  Athens  our  prelude  meet ! 
Fair  key-stone  she,  for  songs  that  greet 

Alcmaeon's  mighty  seed, 

Praising  their  coursers'  speed  ! 
For  never  country  I  shall  name, 
And  never  house,  whose  fame 

Than  these  hath  rung  more  clear 

In  every  Grecian  ear. 

ANT  I  STROPHE. 

Ay,  sounded  are  they  through  all  the  lands, — 

Those  labours  of  Erecthid  hands,  10 

On  Pytno's  steep  divine 

Rearing  Apollo's  shrine ! 
Five  Isthmian  victories  claim  my  lays, 
And  one  surpassing  praise 


io8  Pindar  s  Odes. 


Gained  by  Olympia's  fane, 
And  yet — in  Cirrha— twain  ! 

EPODE. 

Such,  Megacles,  thy  fathers'  deeds  and  thine  ! 
I  welcome  this  last  feat ;  and  but  repine, 

That  envy  aye  entangles  deeds  so  fair. 
Well !  the  old  tale  is  true  : — when  Heaven  would  bless        20 
Man's  hopes  with  blooms  of  lasting  happiness, 

Evil  still  mingles  there  ! 


Pindar  s  Odes.  109 


PYTHIAN  VIII. 

TO  ARISTOMENES  OF  AEGINA,    VICTOR  IN  THE  BOYS' 
WRESTLING-MA  TCH. 

STROPHE. 

O  DAUGHTER  kind— Tranquillity— 
Of  Justice  !  making  cities  great ! 
Alike  of  battle  and  debate 
The  keys  supreme  are  held  of  thee. 

Take  from  Aristomenes  this  Pythian  triumph-chant  ! 
For  well  thou  know'st,  in  season  meet,  The  mutual  dues  of  friendship 
sweet 
Now  to  win,  and  now  to  grant. 

ANTISTROPHE. 

But  thou,  whene'er  in  human  breast 

Rankles  the  sting  of  ruthless  spite, 

Uprising  in  thy  wrath,  the  might  10 

Of  those  fierce  foemen  combatest, 


no  Pindar s  Odes. 


Whelming  in  the  deep  their  rage.     Porphyrion  thus  did  rouse 
Thine  ire,  nor  knew  how  mad  his  sin  !     But  choicest  is  the  gain  we  win 
From  a  willing  giver's  house. 

EPODE. 

The  haughtiest  in  time  hath  their  own  rage  destroyed. 
Not  hundred-headed  Typho  might  such  doom  avoid ; 

No,  nor  the  Giants'  King  !     They  fell  by  lightnings  slain 
And  shafts  of  that  Apollo,  who  now  in  love  receives 
Xenarces'  son,  as  crowned  with  proud  Parnassian  leaves 

From  Cirrha  home  he  brings  the  Doric  revel-train  !  20 

STROPHE. 

Not  banished  from  the  Graces  lies 

His  home,  in  all  the  virtues  rare 

Of  Aeacids  that  claimeth  share. 
No  !  from  that  righteous  island's  rise 

Never-failing  praise  is  hers,  and  songs  her  worth  proclaim. 
Oft  have  the  heroes  she  has  borne  The  crown  of  sportive  contests  worn, 

Oft  in  rapid  fight  won  fame. 

ANTISTROPHE. 

Brave  mortal  sons  she  boasts  beside  ; 
But  time  would  fail,  or  e'er  should  I 


Pindar  s  Odes.  1 1 1 


In  harping  and  sweet  melody  30 

Shrine  the  long  tale  of  all  her  pride ; 

Cloying  surfeit  thence  would  spring, — but  this,  at  hand  that 
lies. 
Thy  feat,  young  hero !    may  my  craft   On  swiftest   pinions   skyward 
waft, 
Latest  deed  of  fair  emprise  ! 

EPODE. 

Thou  with  thy  mother's  brethren  keep'st  as  wrestler  pace, 
Nor  Theognetus  in  Olympia  dost  disgrace, 

Nor  bold  Clitomachus,  the  Isthmian  meed  that  won  ! 
Midylus'  house  thou  raisest,  and  such  renown  is  thine, 
As,  gazing  on  the  foe  with  spears  in  stubborn  line, 

In  seven-gated  Thebes  spake,  riddling,  Oecles'  son.  40 


STROPHE. 

When  in  the  foot-steps  of  their  sires 
From  Argos  came  the  Epigoni, 
Above  the  battle  rose  his  cry: 
"Tis  Nature's  power  yon  valour  fires 

"  Passing  on  from  sire  to  son.     E'en  now,  with  clearest  sight, 
"  Foremost  I  view  Alcmaeon  shake  In  Cadmus'  gates  the  pictured  snake 
"  Flashing  on  his  buckler  bright. 


1 1 2  Pindar  s  Odes. 


ANTISTROPHE. 

"And  he,  that  erst  was  overcome, 

"  Now  'neath  the  gracious  influence  lies 

"  Of  fairer-boding  auguries,  50 

"The  brave  Adrastus.     Yet  his  home 

"  Soon  an  adverse  doom  must  rue.     For  of  all  Greeks  alone, 
"So  Heaven  ordains,  he  home  shall  bring   His  hosts  unharmed,  (yet 
gathering 
"  Ashes  of  a  slaughtered  son,) 

EPODE. 

u  To  Abas'  wide-wayed  town  ! "     Such  utterance  the  seer 
Amphiaraus  poured.     And  thus  with  gladsome  cheer 

Alcmaeon  I  will  deck  with  wreaths,  and  sprinkled  lays, 
For  He,  my  Spirit-neighbour,  safeguard  of  all  that's  mine, 
Before  me,  as  I  fared  to  Earth's  famed  central  shrine, 

Appearing  told  Heaven's  will  in  heirloom  prophet- ways  !  60 

STROPHE. 

O  launcher  of  the  rapid  dart, 

Lord  of  the  hospitable  cell 

Whose  fame  illumines  Pytho's  dell, 
There  to  our  friend  didst  thou  impart 

That  supreme  success,  and  in  his  home  hadst  given  before 
(At  feasts  of  thee  and  Artemis)  The  five-fold  contest's  meed  of  bliss. 

Now  in  love,  I  thee  implore, 


Pindar  s  Odes.  i  r  3 


ANTISTROPHE. 

Look  down  ;   while  in  melodious  song 
Each  theme  of  triumph  I  pursue  ! 

Protecting  Justice  stands,  'tis  true,  70 

To  bless  our  tuneful  revel-throng  : 

Yet,  Xenarces,  for  thy  house  HI  ask  Heaven's  favour  still. 
For  though  the  many's  praise  he  gains,  That  wins  success  by  slightest 
pains, 
Though  he  seems  by  prescient  skill — 

EPODE. 

Wise  in  an  unwise  world — to  rear  his  high  estate  : 
With  man  such  issues  rest  not — all  is  sent  of  Fate  ! 

And  now  she  lifts  us  high,  and  now  her  hands  in  turn 
Crush  us  to  earth  !     Well,  thine  is  Megara's  meed,  and  thine 
The  prize  of  Marathon,  and  thou  with  triumphs  trine 

In  Hera's  local  games  success  by  toil  didst  earn.  80 

STROPHE. 

On  rivals  four  swooped  from  on  high 
With  purpose  dire  thy  fierce  attack  ! 
To  them  a  joyous  journey  back 
Did  Pytho's  stern  award  deny, 

Them  no  mother's  smiling  welcome,  home  returned,  might  bless. 
Shrinking  through  by-ways  dark  they  go,  And  shun  abashed  each  jeer- 
ing foe, 
Wounded  sore  with  sharp  distress. 


1 1 4  Pindar  s  Odes. 


ANTISTROPHE. 

But  who  in  tender  youth  hath  gained 
The  praise  of  recent  victory- 
Kindles  with  expectation  high  90 
And  soars  on  valour's  wings  sustained  : 

Nobler  quest  than  wealth  is  his  !  Full  soon  to  greatness  grow 
The  boons  that  gladden  mortals'  state,  Yet  fall  to  earth  as  soon,  when 
Fate, 
Adverse,  wills  their  overthrow. 

EPODE. 

What  are  we,  great  or  lowly  ?    Creatures  of  a  day  ! 
Man  's  but  a  phantom  dream.    Yet,  in  the  gracious  ray 

Poured  from  on  high,  his  life  puts  joy  and  glory  on. 
Aegina,  gentle  mother,  in  courses  free  and  fair, 
With  Zeus  and  Aeacus,  this  city  onwards  bear, 

With  Peleus  brave,  Achilles  eke,  and  Telamon  !  100 


Pindar  s  Odes.  1 1 5 


PYTHIAN  IX. 

TO  TELES/CRATES  OF  CYRENE,   VICTOR  IN  THE  RACE  IN 
FULL  ARMOUR. 

STROPHE. 
With  the  deep-zoned  Graces  fain  am  I 
To  chant  the  victor  from  Pytho's  field, 
Telesicrates,  lord  of  the  brazen  shield, 
Blest  hero,  pride  of  great  Cyrene's  chivalry ! 
Cyrene,  that  Leto's  son  of  yore  From  breezy  hollows  of  Pelion  bore, — 
Huntress-maid, — in   his   car   of  gold,    And   gave   rich   realms    to   her 
queenly  hold  ; 
With  many  a  fruitful  field,  and  many  a  herd, 
A  fair  domain  to  rule,  the  mainland's  blooming  third. 

ANTISTROPHE. 

And  the  silver-sandalled  Queen  of  Love 

The  stranger  Delian  welcome  made,  10 

O'er  the  heavenly  car  as  her  light  touch  played  ; 
And  modest  grace  she  spread  their  blissful  couch  above, 
Close   linking   in   love  her   Guest   divine  With  that   fair   daughter  of 
Hypseus'  line — 


1 1 6  Pindar  s  Odes. 


Monarch  he  of  the  Lapithae,  From  Ocean  sprung  in  the  next  degree, 
Whom  in  famed  Pindus'  dales  Creusa  bare, 
The  Sea-nymph,  erst  that  joyed  Peneiis'  couch  to  share, 

EPODE. 

Daughter  of  Earth ;  and  Hypseus  reared 
Cyrene  fair.       Small  joy   she   found  To   guide   the    shuttle's  tortuous 
round, 
Or  share  the  feasts,  her  home-pent  mates  that  cheered  ! 

But  brazen  javelins  she  threw,  20 

And  savage  beasts  with  brandished  falchion  slew, 
Making  in  restful  peace  to  dwell 
The  cattle  of  her  sire,  and  yielding  scanty  space 
To  Slumber's  sweet  embrace. 

When  on  her  weary  eyes  at  dawn  he  fell. 

STROPHE. 

As  unarmed,  unaided,  she  defied 

And  grappled  fearless  a  lion  fierce, 
Came  Apollo,  with  arrows  afar  that  pierce, 
And  straight  from  out  his  halls  called  Chiron  to  his  side. 
"  Come,  Philyra's   son,  and   quit   thy   cave,  And  gazing  marvel    how 
strong  and  brave  30 

"  She   that  fearlessly  thus  contends  ;    A   maid,  whose   mettle   all   toil 
transcends : 


Pindar  s  Odes.  1 1  7 


"  With  calm  resolve,  untossed  by  gusts  of  dread  ! 

"  What  mortal  gave  her  birth  ?     Of  what  high  lineage  bred 

ANTISTROPHE. 

"  Doth  she  roam  the  mountains'  caves  of  gloom, 
"And  joy  in  might  that   no  bounds  confine? 
"  Shall  I  stay  not,  but  seize  her  in  grasp  divine  ; 
"Or  bide  the  wedding  couch,  and  cull  the  honeyed  bloom?" 
And  answer   the  mighty  Centaur   made,  While  tranquil    smiles  on  his 

calm  brow  played, 
"  Modest  wooing   unlocks,"   quoth   he,  "  Divine   love's   treasures   with 
secret  key 
"'Mid  Gods  and  mortals  both  Shame  holds  her  sway,  40 

"And  love's  first  raptures  shrink  abashed  from  sight  of  day. 

EPODE. 
"  Sure,  for  from  thee  all  falsehood  flies, 
"  Some  sportive  mood  thy  speech  inspired  !      Hast  thou  yon  maiden's 
race  inquired, 
"  O  King  ?  that  know'st  the  final  destinies 
"  And  paths  of  each  created  thing. 
"W7hat  leaves  from  earth  outburst  in  days  of  spring, 
"What  sands  are  tost  in  sea  or  rill 
"  By  waves  or  eddying  winds,  and  what  must  needs  befall, 
(i  And  whence, — thou  knowest  all ! 

"  Yet,  forced  by  Wisdom's  challenge,  speak  I  will !  50 


u8  Pindar's  Odes. 


STROPHE. 

"To  this  glen,  to  wed  yon  maiden,  thou 

"  Art  come ;   and  with  her  across  the  sea, 
"  To  the  glorious  garden  of  Zeus  shalt  flee, 
"There  make  her  queen,  and  round  the  hill's  plain-cinctured  brow- 
Draw  to  her  an  island-folk.     For  sake  Of  thee,  shall  Libya  welcome 

make 
Yon  fair  maiden,  with  her  to  reign,  In  golden  halls,  o'er  the  spacious 
plain  ; 
"  And  bid  her  share  the  queenship  of  the  place ; 
"  Nor  aught  of  fruitful  plants  withhold,  nor  beasts  of  chase. 


ANTI  STROPHE. 

"She  shall  bear  a  son,  whom  Hermes  great 

"  Shall  from  her  loving  embrace  away  60 

"  To  the  fair-throned  Hours  and  to  Earth  convey  ; 
"And  they  upon  their  knees  the  favoured  babe  shall  seat, 
"And   rain   on   his  lips   ambrosial  dews,  That  deathless   life   shall  in 

him  infuse, 
"  E'en   as  Zeus  or  Apollo   fair  A  joy   to   mortals,— their   flocks   his 
care, — 
"And  Agreus,  Nomius,  Aristaeus  hight !" 
He  spake,  and  bade  fulfil  the  wedlock's  joyous  rite. 


Pindar's  Odes.  1 1 9 


EPOLE. 

The  Gods  full  swiftly  win  their  aims, 
Short  are   their  paths  : — that   day  wrought   all !     They  met  in  Libya's 
golden  hall : 
Where,  o'er  a  glorious  city, — and  in  games 

Renowned,  she  fixes  yet  her  seat.  70 

And  her  thy  son,  Carneades !    did  greet 
With  bliss  but  now  in  Pytho  earned. 
The  nymph  his  triumph  shared,  and  welcomes  him  again 
Victor  from  Pytho's  fane 

To  his  own  land  of  lovely  dames  returned. 


STROPHE. 

But  the  praise  of  noble  worth  flows  free  ; 

In  themes  so  boundless   choice  words  and  few 
Win  the  ear  of  the  prudent,  and  Measure  due 
In  all  holds  sway  supreme.     Great  Iolaus,  thee 
No  scorner  of  Measure   Thebes    did   own !     Eurystheus   fell   by   thy 
sword  o'erthrown  ;  80 

Thee   they  laid  by   thy   grandsire's   grave,  That    swiftly    of   yore  his 
coursers  drave, 
Amphitryon,  welcomed  by  the  Dragon's  Seed 
To  Cadmus'  city  thronged  with  many  a  milk-white  steed. 


120  Pindar  s  Odes. 


ANTISTROPHE. 

At  a  single  birth  twin  issue  sprung 

To  him  and  Zeus,  from  Alcmena  wise, 
That  in  valour  surpassed,  and  in  victories. 
Dull  are  the  lips  that  leave  great  Heracles  unsung, 
Or  e'er  can  forget  how    Dirce's   wave   To   him   and   Iphicles    nurture 

gave  ! 
Songs  of  triumph  to  them  I'll  bear,  That  with  fulfilment  have  crowned 
my  prayer. 
Sweet  Graces,  may  your  light  attend  me  still !  90 

For  at  Aegina  he,  and  thrice  on  Nisus'  hill, 


EPODE. 

From  tongue-tied  shame  this  town  did  free. 
Such   strivings   for   his   townsmen's   weal   Let   neither  foe    nor   friend 
conceal, 
Nor  slight  the  ancient  prophet  of  the  sea, 
Who  bade  mankind  full  praise  bestow 
E'en  on  the  prowess  of  a  noble  foe  ! 
Full  oft  upon  thy  victories, 
At  Pallas'  yearly  feasts,  hath  gazed  each  wondering  maid, 
And  silently  hath  prayed 

For  spouse  or  son  like  Telesicrates.  100 


Pindar  s  Odes.  121 


STROPHE. 

At  Olympia  eke,  and  in  the  games 

Of  Earth  deep-bosomed,  and'  far  and  wide 
Through  the  land  of  his.  dwelling  !     A  tale  of  pride 
The  thirst  I  fain  would  quench  awakes  anew,  and  claims 
Meet  lays  for  his  noble  sires  of  old,  That  seeking  Irasa's  distant  hold 
Wooed  a  Libyan  maiden  rare,  Antaeus'  daughter  with  radiant  hair  ; 
Whom  many  a  kinsman  lord  of  high  degree, 
And  many  a  stranger  sought,  for  fair  of  form  was  she  ! 

ANTISTROPHE. 

And  afire  were  all  to  bear  away 

Her  golden-coronalled  youth's  fair  fruit.  no 

But  her  father  had  purposed  a  nobler  suit. 
For  Danaus'  tale  he  knew, — how,  ere  might  life's  mid  day 
His  forty  and  eight  fair  maids  o'ertake,  A  speedy  spousal  the  sire  did 

make  : 
All  at  once  did  the  virgin  band  In  Argos'  lists  at  the  race-goal  stand 
Then,  as  in  speed  suitor  with  suitor  vied, 
At  Danaus'  bidding  each  won  with  his  prize  a  bride  ! 

EPODE. 

His  daughter's  spouse  the  Libyan  found 
E'en  thus.     In  rich  array  her  place  Hard  by  the  goal  she  took,  the  race 
To  guerdon  ;   and  her  sire  proclaimed  around, 


122  Pindar s  Odes. 


Who  clasped  her  first,  should  claim  the  prize. 
Swift  o'er  the  course  Alexidamus  flies, 
And  seized  her  hand  in  his,  and  bore 
His  bride  through  nomad  hosts  of  horsemen,  raining  down 
Full  many  a  leaf  and  crown, 

And  many  a  triumph-plume  was  his  before. 


Pindar  s  Odes.  12 


PYTHIAN  X. 

TO  HIPPOCLES  OF  PEL1NNAEUM  IN  SICILY,   VICTOR  IN  THE 
BOYS  DOUBLE  FOOT-RACE. 

STROPHE. 
O  Sparta,  bliss  is  thine, 
And  blest  is  Thessaly  !     In  either  land,  the  line 

Of  one  unvanquished  sire,  Alcides'  children  reign. 
Boast  I  untimely  ?    Nay,  for  Pelinnaeum  calls  aloud 
And  Pytho,  and  Aleuas'  sons  :  applauses  proud 

For  Hippocles  they  claim  from  all  the  festal  train. 

ANTISTROPHE. 

For  lo  !  he  tastes  the  games  ; 

While,  to  the  nations  round,  Parnassus'  vale  proclaims, 

How,  o'er  her  two-fold  course,  first  of  the  youths  he  sped. 
In  joy,  O  Phoebus,  opes  and  ends  each  task  by  Heaven  begun  ;  10 
Tis  by  thy  counsels  led,  this  exploit  he  hath  done, 

By  kindred  glories  fired  his  father's  paths  to  tread  ! 

EPODE. 

In  strife- sustaining  arms  that  father  triumphs  twain 

Did  at  Olympia  gain  : 

And,  where  steep  Cirrha  soars  above  the  fertile  mead, 


124  Pindar  s  Odes. 


To  Phricias  fell  anew  the  prize  of  speed. 

May  Fortune,  constant  still,  in  coming  hours, 

Adorn  their  wealthy  house  with  triumph's  radiant  flowers. 

STROPHE. 

In  Greece  no  scanty  share 

Of  all  her  joys  they  won  :  oh,  may  Heaven's  envy  ne'er  20 

Bring  dark  reverse,  be  hearts  divine  void  still  of  spite  ! 
Blest  in  his  lot  is  he,  and  crowned  with  hymns  of  all  the  wise, 
With  prowess  of  strong  arm  or  nimble  foot,  the  prize 

Of  strife  supreme  that  wins,  by  daring  both,  and  might ; 

ANTISTROPHE. 

And,  more,  that  lives  to  gaze 

Thus  on  a  son  adorned  duly  with  Pytho's  bays  ! 

What  though  the  brazen  heights  of  heaven  he  may  not  scale  ? 
Yet  of  all  joys  that  man  may  taste,  his  voyage  hath  reached  the  goal, 
Albeit  to  the  tribes  that  dwell  beyond  the  pole, 

To  find  the  wondrous  path,  nor  fleets  nor  feet  avail !  30 

EPODE. 

For  princely  Perseus  these  the  banquet  spread  of  yore  ; 

Who  passed  their  palace  door, 

And  met  them,  as  they  slew,  to  grace  Apollo's  rites, 

Proud  hecatombs  of  asses.     Still  delights 

The  God  in  these  their  holy  hymns  and  feasts, 

Viewing  with  smile  serene  the  rearing  uncouth  beasts. 


Pindar s  Odes.  .    125 


STROPHE. 

Nor  at  their  customs  stands 

The  Muse  aloof,  but  all  around  the  maiden  bands 

Dance  ever  to  the  sound  of  harp  and  shrilling  fife ; 
Their  locks  with  golden  laurel  crowned,  they  feast  in  careless  joy.     40 
Disease  nor  wasting  eld  may  e'er  their  bliss  alloy. 

A  consecrated  race,  remote  from  toil  and  strife, 

ANTI  STROPHE. 

They  dwell,  from  vengeance  free 

Of  jealous  Fortune.    There  the  son  of  Danae 

In  flush  of  hardihood  came  by  Athene  led 
To  those  blest  companies.     'Twas  he  the  Gorgon  slew,  and  bare 
Back  to  his  island-folk  a  stony  Death,  with  hair 

Of  writhing  serpents  crowned,  the  monster's  glittering  head. 

EPODE. 

Mine  be  it,  ne'er  at  feats  that  heavenly  Powers  achieve 

To  marvel,  but  believe  !  50 

Stay,  Muse,  the  oar ;  and  cast  the  anchor  from  the  prow, 

Fixed  for  defence  against  the  reefs  below  ! 

From  theme  to  theme,  the  bright  applausive  lay, 

As  bees  from  flower  to  flower,  speeds  on  its  changeful  way. 

STROPHE. 

While  my  sweet  music's  sound 

The  Ephyraeans  raise  Peneus'  streams  around ; 


126  Pindar's  Odes. 


Fain  would  I  lift  thy  praise,  Hippocles,  higher  yet, 
And  bid  thy  peers  and  elders  both  these  triumph-crowns  admire, 
And  make  thee  dear  to  all  the  gentle  maiden  quire, 

Thus  divers  passions  aye  'neath  divers  bosoms  fret.  60 

ANTISTROPHE. 

Whate'er  his  aim,  let  each 

Soon  as  he  wins  it,  clasp  the  bliss  within  his  reach  : 

For  what  a  year  may  bring  no  prescience  can  prove. 
In  friendly  Thorax  rests  my  trust,  who,  toiling  for  my  grace, 
Hath  yoked  this  car  of  song  with  steeds  in  fourfold  trace, 

And  gives  me  guidance  back  for  guidance,  love  for  love. 

EPODE. 

Gold,  and  the  upright  soul,  on  the  assaying  stone 

Are  to  the  tester  shown  ! 

His  noble  brothers  too  with  him  we  celebrate, 

Who  lift  to  heights  of  fame  Thessalia's  state.  70 

Thus  ever  in  a  worthy  ruler's  hand 

The  guidance  lies,  aright  that  steers  a  fatherland. 


Pindar s  Odes.  127 


PYTHIAN  XI. 

TO  THRASYDAEUS  OF  THEBES,    VICTOR  IN  THE  BOYS' 
FOOT-RACE. 

STROPHE. 
May  Cadmus'  daughters,  Semele  'mid  heavenly  queens  that  dwells, 
And  I  no,  fair  Leucothea,  that  shares  the  Nereids'  cells, 

And  she  that  bare  Alcides,  matchless  boast ! 
Speed,  where  the  golden  tripods  lie  In  Melia's  hallowed  treasury, 

The  shrine,  that  aye  of  all  hath  Loxias  honoured  most. 

ANTISTROPHE. 

Ismenium  he  named  it,  home  of  truth,  the  prophets'  seat. 
And  there,  Harmonia's  children,  now,  in  serried  bands  to  meet, 

Your  nation's  heroine  hosts  Apollo  calls  ! 
To  sing  of  Themis,  queen  divine,  And  Earth's  prophetic  central  shrine, 

And  Pytho,  while  around  the  lingering  twilight  falls.  10 

EPODE. 

Of  Thebes'  seven-gated  town, 

And  Cirrha's  lists  they  sing, 

Where,  waking  memories  fair,  did  Thrasydaeus  fling 
On  his  ancestral  hearth  a  third  triumphal  crown, 


128  Pindar s  Odes. 


Won  in  rich  lands,  where  Pylades  of  old — 
Spartan  Orestes'  friend — his  sway  did  hold. 

STROPHE. 

Orestes,  whom  Arsinoe  preserved  from  mischief  dire, 

When  'neath  the  forceful  hands  of  Clytemnaestra  fell  his  sire, 

And  Priam's  daughter  eke — Dardanian  maid — 
Cassandra,   she  with    falchion    hoar    Sped    forth,  to    tread    the   forest 
shore  20 

Of  gloomy  Acheron  with  Agamemnon's  shade. 

ANTI  STROPHE. 

Relentless   queen  !  Or   sprang   such   rage  from   thoughts    of  her   that 

died, 
Iphigeneia,  far  away  by  swift  Euripus'  side? 

Or  did  she  to  a  lawless  passion  yield, 
Lured   to   an   alien's  dark   embrace  ?     Oh    deed  most  foul,  that  heaps 
disgrace 
On  youthful  brides,  nor  art  its  stain  hath  e'er  concealed  ! 

EPODE. 

Strangers  her  shame  resound, 

And  townsmen  join  the  cry  ! 

Proportioned  envy  still  attends  prosperity, 
And  censure's  murmur  breathes  unmarked  along  the  ground.  30 

So  fell  the  hero  son  of  Atreus  slain, 

To  famed  Amyclae  home  returned  again. 


Pindar  s  Odes.  129 


STROPHE. 

And  with  him  fell  the  prophet-maid,  when  Troy's  proud  halls  in  flame 
He  low  had  laid  for  Helen's  sake.     And  so  Orestes  came 

To  ancient  Strophius'  care,  that  dwelt  beneath 
Parnassus'  spurs.     Yet,  childhood  past,  His    tardy  vengeance  smote  at 
last 

The  guilty  dame,  and  bade  Aegisthus  share  her  death. 

ANTISTROPHE. 

Thus,  or  where  devious  cross  the  paths  of  song,  O  friends,  I  stray 
From  that  straight  course,  that  erst  I  held  ;  or  from  my  purposed  way 

Such  winds  as  toss  the  sea-skiffs  me  have  flung  !  40 

Yet,  Muse,  since  thou  for  silver  fee  To  venal  utterance  didst  agree, 

'Tis  thine  on  various  themes  to  ply  the  vagrant  tongue  ! 

EPODE. 

And  now  the  victor  sire, 

And  now  the  son  we  praise, 

Whose  bliss  and  glory,  blent  in  growing  splendour,  blaze. 
First  where  Olympia's  lists  the  copious  hymn  inspire, 

Flushed  with  fair  triumph  in  the  chariot-race, 

They  with  their  steeds  shared  fame  that  spreads  apace  : 

STROPHE. 

To  Pytho's  naked  stadium  descending  next  they  strove 

With  Hellas'  hosts  in  speed.     Be  mine  the  boons  of  Heaven  to  love,  50 


130  Pindar  s  Odes. 


Within  my  powers  shaping  my  manhood's  aim  ! 
The  modest  mean  I  still  have  found  With  choicest  blessings  wreathed 
around 
In  all  the  city  :  thus  the  despot's  lot  I  blame, 

ANTISTROPHE. 

And  on  would  press  to  triumphs  free  for  all  !  For  baleful  spite 
Recoils  from  him,  with  calm  restraint  that  rules  his  fortune's  height, 

And  shuns  pride's  surfeit.     Thus  to  darksome  death 
With  fairer  ending  he  shall  come,  And  to  the  dear  ones  of  his  home 

—That  best  of  all  good  gifts — an  honoured  name  bequeath. 

EPODE. 
The  son  of  Iphicles, 

Thus,  'mid  applausive  song,  60 

To  greatness  Iolaus  grew  :  and  Castor  strong, 
And  Polydeuces,  sovereign  seed  of  Deities, 

From  day  to  day  that  trod  alternate,  now 

Therapnae's  halls,  and  now  Olympus'  brow  ! 


Pindar  s  Odes.  131 


PYTHIAN  XII. 

TO  MIDAS    OF  ACRAGAS,    WINNER   OF    THE    PRIZE  FOR 
FLUTE-PLAYING. 

STROPHE. 

I  pray  thee,  Queen  of  splendour ;  city  of  peerless  grace  ; 
Persephone's  home  ;  O  thou,  that  on  thy  tower-clad  hill 

Dwellest,  fair  Queen,  beside  the  streams  of  pastoral  Acragas  ! 
Propitious  greet,  with  favour  of  Heaven  and  man's  goodwill, 
The  crown,  at  Pytho's  festival  that  glorious  Midas  won  ; 

And  welcome  him,  victorious  in  that  fair  art,—  of  old 

That  Pallas  found,  when  wailed  the  Gorgons  bold, 
And  she  to  music  wove  their  dismal  moan. 

ANTISTROPHE. 

For  maiden-shrieks  and  hiss  of  horrible  snakes  she  heard, 
Forth  flowing  in  plaintive  strain  with  weary  anguish  fraught  ;  10 

What  time  as  Perseus  did  to  death  that   sister-triad's  third, 
And  ruin  to  the  hosts  of  Seriphos'  island  brought  ; 
And  blindness  therewithal  he  poured  on  Phorcus'  immortal  race  ; 

And  Polydectes  rued  the  gift,  the  son  of  Danae  gave 

To  him,  perforce  that  made  her  wife  and  slave  ; 
When  headless  lay  Medusa,  fair  of  face, 


Pindar  s  Odes. 


STROPHE. 

Slain  by  the  hero,  sprung,  they  say,  from  a  golden  rain  ! 
But,  when  from  his  peril  she  had  saved  her  champion  dear, 

Maiden  Athene  fashioned  then  the  flute  with  its  varied  strain, 
To  echo  back  the  wailing  that  smote  upon  her  ear,  20 

As  clamorously  forth  from  fell  Euryale's  maw  it  came. 

So  found  the  goddess, — and  forthwith  on  mortal  man  bestowed, 

And  named  the  strain  her  "  many-headed  mode ; " 
Memorial  fair  of  each  frequented  game  ! 

ANTI  STROPHE. 

Through  slender  brass  it  flows  ;  through  many  a  reeden  quill, 
That  grew  by  the  Graces'  town  for  choral  dance  renowned, 

In  nymph    Cephisis'   hallowed   haunts  ;  true    witness    of  dancers' 
skill  ! 
Ne'er,  save  by  toiling,  mortal  hath  aught  of  blessing  found  ; 
But  all  that  lacks,  in  one  brief  day,  can  Destiny's  power  supply. 

What  fate  ordains  may  none  avoid  :  needs  must  a  day  befall     30 

Of  chances  unforeseen,  that,  maugre  all 
Man's  scheming,  part  will  grant  and  part  deny  ! 


October,   1875. 


AN    ALPHABETICAL    LIST 

OF 

HENRY    S.    KING    &    CO.'S 
PUBLICATIONS. 


6j  Cornhill,  and  12  Paternoster  Row,  London, 
October,  1875. 


A  LIST  OF 

HENRY    S.    KING    &    CO.'S 
PUBLICATIONS. 


Abbey  (Henry). 

BALLADS  OF  GOOD  DEEDS.    Fcap.  8vo.    Cloth  gilt.    5s. 

Adams  (A.  L.),  M.A. 

FIELD  AND   FOREST  RAMBLES   OF  A   NATURALIST    IN 

NEW   BRUNSWICK.      With   Notes    and    Observations  on  the 
Natural  History  of  Eastern  Canada.   8 vo.,  cloth.   Illustrated.  14s. 

Adams  (F.  0.),  H.B.M.'s  Secretary  of  Embassy  at 
Paris,  formerly  H.B.M.'s  Charge  d' Affaires,  and  Secretary  of 
Legation  at  Yedo. 

THE  HISTORY  OF  JAPAN.  From  the  Earliest  Period  to  the 
Present  Time.  New  Edition,  revised.  Demy  8vo.  In  2  vols. 
With  Maps  and  Plans.    21s.  each. 

Adams  (W.  Davenport,  Jun.) 

LYRICS  OF  LOVE,  from  Shakespeare  to  Tennyson.  Selected 
and  arranged  by.    Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth  extra,  gilt  edges,  3s.  6d. 

Adon. 

THROUGH  STORM  AND  SUNSHINE.  Illustrated  by  M.  E. 
Edwards,  A.  T.  H.  Paterson,  and  the  Author.  1  vol.  Crown  8vo. 
Price  7s.  6d. 

A.  K  H.  B. 

A  SCOTCH  COMMUNION  SUNDAY,  to  which  are  added  Cer- 
tain Discourses  from  a  University  City.  By  the  Author  of 
"The  Kecreations  of  a  Country  Parson."  Second  Edition. 
Crown  8vo.    5s. 


4  t  A  List  of 

Allen  (Kev.  E.),  M.A. 

ABRAHAM :  HIS  LIFE,  TIMES,  AND  TRAVELS,  as  told  by 
a  Contemporary  3800  years  ago.  Post  8vo.,  with  Map.  Cloth. 
Price  10s.  6d. 

Amos  (Sheldon). 

THE  SCIENCE  OF  LAW.     Crown  8vo.     5s. 
Being  Vol.  X.  of  the  International  Scientific  Series. 

Anderson  (Eev.  Charles),  M.A. 

CHURCH  THOUGHT  AND  CHURCH  WORK.  Edited  by. 
Containing  articles  by  the  Revs.  J.  M.  Capes,  Professor  Cheet- 
ham,  J.  LI.  Davis,  Harry  Jones,  Brooke,  Lambert,  A.  J.  Ross, 
the  Editor,  and  others.     Second  Edition.    Demy  8vo.    7s.  6d. 

WORDS  AND  WORKS  IN  A  LONDON  PARISH.  Edited  by. 
Second  Edition.     Demy  8vo.     6s. 

THE  CURATE  OF  SHYRE.  Second  Edition.  Demy  8vo. 
Cloth.    7s.  6d. 

Anderson  (Colonel  E.  P.) 

VICTORIES  AND  DEFEATS.  An  Attempt  to  explain  the 
Causes  which  have  led  to  them.  An  Officer's  Manual.  Demy 
8vo.     14s. 

Anson  (Lieut.-Col.  The  Hon.  A.),  V.C.,  M.P. 

THE  ABOLITION  OF  PURCHASE  AND  THE  ARMY  REGU- 
LATION BILL  OF  1871.     Crown  8vo.     Is. 

ARMY  RESERVES  AND  MILITIA  REFORMS.   Crown  8vo.    Is. 
THE  STORY  OF  THE  SUPERSESSIONS.     Crown  8vo.     6d. 

ARMY   OF  THE   NORTH  GERMAN  CONFEDERATION.      A 

Brief  Description  of  its  Organization,  of  the  Different  Branches 
of  the  Service  and  their  role  in  War,  of  its  Mode  of  Fighting,  etc., 
etc.  Translated  from  the  Corrected  Edition,  by  permission  of  the 
author,  by  Colonel  Edward  Newdegate.    Demy  8vo.    5s. 

Arbuthnot  (Sir  Alexander). 

SIR  THOMAS  MUNRO,  BART.,  K.C.B.,  sometime  Governor  of 
Madras.    A  Selection  from  his  Minutes  and  other  Official  Writings. 

Argyle  (Duke  of). 

SPEECHES  ON  THE  SECOND  READING  OF  THE  CHURCH 
PATRONAGE  (SCOTLAND)  BILL  IN  THE  HOUSE  OF  LORDS, 
June  2,  1874;  and  Earl  of  Camperdown's  Amendment,  June  9, 
1874,  placing  the  Election  of  Ministers  in  the  hands  of  Rate- 
payers.    Crown  8vo.     Sewed.     Is. 


Henry  S.  King  &  Co.'s  Publications. 


Ashantee  War  (The). 

A  Popular  Narrative.  By  the  Special  Correspondent  of  the 
"  Daily  News."     Crown  8vo.     6s. 

Ashe  (T.)     Author  of  "  The  Sorrows  of  Hypsipyle." 

EDITH  ;  OR,  LOVE  AND  LIFE  IN  CHESHIRE.    Sewed.    6d. 
Ashton  (John). 

ROUGH  NOTES  OF  A  VISIT  TO  BELGIUM,  SEDAN,  AND 
PARIS,  in  September,  1870-71.     Crown  8vo.     3s.  6d. 

Aunt  Mary's  Bran  Pie. 

By  the  author  of  "St.  Olave's,"  "When  I  was  a  Little 
Girl,"  etc.     Illustrated.     3s.  6d. 

SUNNYLAND  STORIES.    Fcap.   8vo.    Illustrated.     3s.  6d . 
Being  two  of  Henry  S.  King  and  Co.'s  Three  and  Sixpenny 
Series  of  Children's  Books. 

Aurora  :  A  Volume  of  Yerse.    5s. 
Ayrton  (J.  C.) 

A  SCOTCH  WOOING.    2  vols.     Crown  8vo. 

Bagehot  (Walter). 

PHYSICS  AND  POLITICS  ;  or,  Thoughts  on  the  Application  of 
the  Principles  of  "Natural  Selection"  and  "Inheritance"  to 
Political  Society.     Third  Edition.     Crown  8vo.     4s. 

Volume  II.  of  the  International  Scientific  Series. 

THE  ENGLISH  CONSTITUTION.  A  New  Edition,  Revised 
and  Corrected,  with  an  Introductory  Dissertation  on  Recent 
Changes  and  Events.     Crown  8vo.    7s.  6d. 

LOMBARD  STREET.  A  Description  of  the  Money  Market. 
Crown  8vo.     Sixth  Edition.     7s.  6d. 

Bain  (Alexander),  LL.D. 

MIND  AND  BODY.    The  Theories  of  their  Relation.    Third 
Edition.     Crown  8vo.    4s. 
Volume  IV.  of  the  International  Scientific  Series. 

Banks  (Mrs.  G.  Linnaeus). 

GOD'S  PROVIDENCE  HOUSE.     Crown  8vo.     3s.  6d. 
One  of  the  volumes  of  the  Corn  hill  Library  of  Fiction. 

Baring  (T.  C,  Esq..)  M.P.,  late  Fellow  of  Brasenose 
College,  Oxford. 

THE  ODES  OF  PINDAR.    A  Translation. 


A  List  of 


Allen  (Kev.  K.),  M.A. 

ABRAHAM :  HIS  LIFE,  TIMES,  AND  TRAVELS,  as  told  by 
a  Contemporary  3800  years  ago.  Post  8vo.,  with  Map.  Cloth. 
Price  10s.  6d. 

Amos  (Sheldon). 

THE  SCIENCE  OF  LAW.     Crown  8vo.     5s. 
Being  Vol.  X.  of  the  International  Scientific  Series. 

Anderson  (Kev.  Charles),  M.A. 

CHURCH  THOUGHT  AND  CHURCH  WORK.  Edited  by. 
Containing  articles  by  the  Revs.  J.  M.  Capes,  Professor  Cheet- 
ham,  J.  LI.  Davis,  Harry  Jones,  Brooke,  Lambert,  A.  J.  Ross, 
the  Editor,  and  others.     Second  Edition.    Demy  8vo.    Is.  Qd. 

WORDS  AND  WORKS  IN  A  LONDON  PARISH.  Edited  by. 
Second  Edition.     Demy  8vo.     6s. 

THE  CURATE  OF  SHYRE.  Second  Edition.  Demy  8vo. 
Cloth.    7s.  6d. 

Anderson  (Colonel  K.  P.) 

VICTORIES  AND  DEFEATS.  An  Attempt  to  explain  the 
Causes  which  have  led  to  them.  An  Officer's  Manual.  Demy 
8vo.    14s. 

Anson  (Lieut.-Col.  The  Hon.  A.),  V.C.,  M.P. 

THE  ABOLITION  OF  PURCHASE  AND  THE  ARMY  REGU- 
LATION BILL  OF  1871.     Crown  8vo.     Is. 

ARMY  RESERVES  AND  MILITIA  REFORMS.   Crown  8vo.    Is. 
THE  STORY  OF  THE  SUPERSESSIONS.     Crown  8vo.     6d. 

ARMY   OF   THE   NORTH   GERMAN   CONFEDERATION.      A 

Brief  Description  of  its  Organization,  of  the  Different  Branches 
of  the  Service  and  their  role  in  War,  of  its  Mode  of  Fighting,  etc., 
etc.  Translated  from  the  Corrected  Edition,  by  permission  of  the 
author,  by  Colonel  Edward  Newdegate.    Demy  8vo.    5s. 

Arbuthnot  (Sir  Alexander). 

SIR  THOMAS  MUNRO,  BART.,  K.C.B.,  sometime  Governor  of 
Madras.    A  Selection  from  his  Minutes  and  other  Official  Writings. 

Argyle  (Duke  of). 

SPEECHES  ON  THE  SECOND  READING  OF  THE  CHURCH 
PATRONAGE  (SCOTLAND)  BILL  IN  THE  HOUSE  OF  LORDS, 
June  2,  1874;  and  Earl  of  Camperdown's  Amendment,  June  9, 
1874,  placing  the  Election  of  Ministers  in  the  hands  of  Rate- 
payers.   Crown  8vo.    Sewed.     Is. 


Henry  S.  King  &  Co.'s  Publications. 


Ashantee  War  (The). 

A  Popular  Narrative.  By  the  Special  Correspondent  of  the 
"  Daily  News."    Crown  8vo.    6s. 

Ashe  (T.)     Author  of  "  The  Sorrows  of  Hypsipyle." 

EDITH  ;  OR,  LOVE  AND  LIFE  IN  CHESHIRE.     Sewed.     6d. 

Ashton  (John). 

ROUGH  NOTES  OF  A  VISIT  TO  BELGIUM,  SEDAN,  AND 
PARIS,  in  September,  1870-71.     Crown  8vo.     3s.  6d. 

Aunt  Mary's  Bran  Pie. 

By  the  author  of  "St.  Olave's,"  "When  I  was  a  Little 
Girl,"  etc.     Illustrated.     3s.  6d. 

SUNNYLAND  STORIES.     Fcap.   8vo.     Illustrated.     3s.  Gd. 
Being  two  of  Henry  S.  King  and  Co.'s  Three  and  Sixpenny 
Series  of  Children's  Books. 

Aurora  :  A  Volume  of  Verse.     5s. 
Ayrton  (J.  C.) 

A  SCOTCH  WOOING.     2  vols.     Crown  8vo. 

Bagehot  (Walter). 

PHYSICS  AND  POLITICS  ;  or,  Thoughts  on  the  Application  of 
the  Principles  of  "Natural  Selection"  and  "Inheritance"  to 
Political  Society.     Third  Edition.     Crown  8vo.    4s. 

Volume  II.  of  the  International  Scientific  Series. 

THE  ENGLISH  CONSTITUTION.  A  New  Edition,  Revised 
and  Corrected,  with  an  Introductory  Dissertation  on  Recent 
Changes  and  Events.     Crown  8vo.    7s.  6d. 

LOMBARD  STREET.  A  Description  of  the  Money  Market. 
Crown  8vo.    Sixth  Edition.    7s.  6d. 

Bain  (Alexander),  LL.D. 

MIND  AND  BODY.    The  Theories  of  their  Relation.    Third 
Edition.     Crown  8vo.     4s. 
Volume  IV.  of  the  International  Scientific  Series. 

Banks  (Mrs.  G.  Linnaeus). 

GOD'S  PROVIDENCE  HOUSE.     Crown  8vo.     3s.  6d. 
One  of  the  volumes  of  the  Cornhill  Library  of  Fiction. 

Baring  (T.  C,  Esq..)  M.P.,  late  Fellow  of  Brasenose 
College,  Oxford. 

THE  ODES  OF  PINDAR.    A  Translation. 


6  A  List  of 

Barlee  (Ellen). 

LOCKED  OUT;  A  Tale  of  the  Strike.  With  a  Frontispiece. 
1*.  6d. 

Baynes  (Kev.  Canon  K.  H.),  Editor  of  "  Lyra  Angli- 
cana,"  etc. 

HOME  SONGS  FOE  QUIET  HOURS.    Second  Edition.    Fcap. 
8vo.    Cloth  extra,  3s.  6d. 
*»*  This  may  also  be  had  handsomely  bound  in  Morocco  with  gilt  edges. 

Becker  (Bernard  H.) 

THE  SCIENTIFIC  SOCIETIES  OF  LONDON.  1  vol.  Crown 
8vo.    5s. 

Bennett  (Dr.  W.  C.) 

SONGS  FOR  SAILORS.  Dedicated  by  Special  Request  to 
H.R.H.  the  Duke  of  Edinburgh.  Crown  8vo.  3s.  6d.  With 
Steel  Portrait  and  Illustrations. 

An  Edition  in  Illustrated  Paper  Covers,  Is. 

BABY  MAY.  Home  Poems  and  Ballads.  With  Frontispiece. 
Cloth  elegant.     Crown  8vo.     6s. 

BABY  MAY  AND  HOME  POEMS.  Fcap.  8vo.  Sewed  in 
Coloured  Wrapper.     Is. 

NARRATIVE  POEMS  AND  BALLADS.  Fcap.  8vo.  Sewed 
in  Coloured  Wrapper.     Is. 

Bennie  (Kev.  Jas.  Noble),  M.A. 

THE  ETERNAL  LIFE.  Sermons  preached  during  the  last 
twelve  years.    Crown  8vo.    6s. 

Bernard  (Bayle). 

SAMUEL  LOVER,  THE  LIFE  AND  UNPUBLISHED  WORKS 
OF.    In  2  vols.    Post8vo.     With  a  Steel  Portrait.    21s. 

Betham-Edwards  (Miss  M.) 

KITTY.    Crown  8vo.    With  a  Frontispiece.    3s.  6d. 
One  of  the  volumes  of  the  Cornhill  Library  of  Fiction. 

MADEMOISELLE  JOSEPHINE'S  FRIDAYS,  AND  OTHER 
STORIES.    Crown  8vo.    7s.  6d. 

BlSCOE  (A.  C.) 

THE  EARLS  OF  MIDDLETON,  Lords  of  Clairmont  and  of 
Fettercairne,  and  the  Middleton  Family.  1  vol.  Crown  8vo. 
10s.  6d. 

Blanc  (Henry),  M.D. 

CHOLERA :  HOW  TO  AVOID  AND  TREAT  IT.  Popular  and 
Practical  Notes.    Crown  8vo.    4s.  6d. 


Henry  S.  King  &  Co.ys  Publications. 


Blume  (Major  William). 

THE  OPERATIONS  OF  THE  GERMAN  ARMIES  IN  FRANCE, 
from  Sedan  to  the  end  of  the  war  of  1870-71.  With  Map.  From 
the  Journals  of  the  Head-quarters  Staff.  Translated  by  the  late 
E.  M.  Jones,  Maj.  20th  Foot,  Prof,  of  Mil.  Hist.,  Sandhurst. 
Demy  8vo.    9a. 

Boguslawski  (Captain  A.  von). 

TACTICAL  DEDUCTIONS  FROM  THE  WAR  OF  1870-71.  Trans- 
lated by  Colonel  Lumley  Graham,  late  18th  (Royal  Irish) 
Regiment.   Third  Edition,  Revised  and  Corrected.   Demy  8vo.  7*. 

A  volume  of  Henry  S.  King  and  Co.'s  Series  of  Military  Works. 

Bonwick  (James). 

THE  TASMANIAN  LILY.    Cr.  8vo.    With  Frontispiece.    5*. 
MIKE    HOWE,  THE    BUSHRANGER    OF    VAN    DIEMEN'S 
LAND.    Crown  8vo.    With  Frontispiece.     5«. 

Boswell  (K.  B.),  M.A.,  Oxon. 

METRICAL  TRANSLATIONS  FROM  THE  GREEK  AND  LATIN 
POETS,  and  other  Poems.     Crown  8vo.    5». 

Bothmer  (Countess  Von). 

CRUEL  AS  THE  GRAVE.    A  Novel.    3  vols. 

Bowring  (L.),  C.S.I.,  Lord  Canning's  Private  Secretary, 

and  for  many  years  Chief  Commissioner  of  Mysore  and  Coorg. 

EASTERN  EXPERIENCES.  Illustrated  with  Maps  and 
Diagrams.    Demy  8vo.     16s. 

Brave  Men's  Footsteps.    By  the  Editor  of  "  Men  who 

have  Risen."  A  Book  of  Example  and  Anecdote  for  Young 
People.  With  Four  Illustrations  by  C.  Doyle.  Third  Edition. 
Crown  8vo.    3s.  Qd. 

Brialmont  (Colonel  A.) 

HASTY  INTRENCHMENTS.  Translated  by  Lieut.  Charles  A. 
Empsom,  R.A.    With  nine  Plates.    Demy  8vo.    6s. 

Briefs  and  Papers.     Being  Sketches  of  the  Bar  and 

the  Press.    By  Two  Idle  Apprentices.    Crown  8vo.    78.  Qd. 

Brooke  (Kev.  Stopford  A.),  M.A.,  Chaplain  in  Ordinary 
to  Her  Majesty  the  Queen. 

THE  LATE  REV.  E.  W.  ROBERTSON,  M.A.,  LIFE  AND 
LETTERS  OF.     Edited  by  Stopford  Brooke,  M.A. 

I.  In  2  vols.,  uniform  with  the  Sermons.  Steel  Portrait.  7*.  Qd. 
II.  Library  Edition.    8vo.    Two  Steel  Portraits.     12*. 
III.  A  Popular  Edition,  in  1  vol.    8vo.    6*. 


8  A  List  of 

Brooke  (Kev.  Stopford  A.),  M.A. 

THEOLOGY  IN  THE  ENGLISH  POETS.— Cowpeb,  Coleridge, 
Wordsworth,  and  Burns.     Second  Edition.    Post  8vo.    9s. 

CHRIST  IN  MODERN  LIFE.  Sermons  Preached  in  St.  James's 
Chapel,  York  Street,  London.  Eighth  Edition.  Crown  8vo. 
7s.  6d. 

FREEDOM  IN  THE  CHURCH  OF  ENGLAND.  Six  Sermons 
suggested  by  the  Voysey  Judgment.  Second  Edition.  Crown 
8vo.     3s.  6d. 

SERMONS  Preached  in  St.  James's  Chapel,  York  Street, 
London.     Eighth  Edition.     Crown  8vo.    6s. 

SERMONS  Preached  in  St.  James's  Chapel,  York  Street, 
London.  Second  Series.  By  the  Rev.  Stopford  A.  Brooke,  M.A., 
Chaplain  in  Ordinary  to  the  Queen.  Second  Edition.  Crown 
8vo.    7s. 

FREDERICK  DENISON  MAURICE :  The  Life  and  Work  of.  A 
Memorial  Sermon.     Crown  8vo.     Sewed.     Is. 

Brooke   (W.  G.),  M.A.,  Barrister-at-Law,  Author  of 

"  Six  Privy  Council  Judgments,"  &c. 

THE  PUBLIC  WORSHIP  REGULATION  ACT.  With  a  Classified 
Statement  of  its  Provisions,  Notes,  and  Index.  Third  Edition, 
revised  and  corrected.     Crown   8vo.     3s.  6d. 

SIX  PRIVY  COUNCIL  JUDGMENTS— 1850-1872.  Annotated 
by.     Third  Edition.     Crown  8vo.     9s. 

Brown   (Kev.   J.   Baldwin),  B.A.,  Author  of  "First 

Principles  of  Ecclesiastical  Truth,"  etc. 

THE  HIGHER  LIFE.  Its^  Beality,  Experience,  and  Destiny. 
Fourth  Edition.     Crown  8vo.     7s.  6d. 

THE  DOCTRINE  OF  ANNIHILATION  IN  THE  LIGHT  OF 
THE  GOSPEL  OF  LOVE.  Five  Discourses  by  the  Rev.  J.  Baldwin 
Brown,  B.A.,  Author  of  "  The  Higher  Life,"  etc.  Second  Edition. 
Crown  8vo.     2s.  6d. 

Brown  (John  Croumbie),  LLJD.,  etc. 

REBOISEMENT  IN  FRANCE ;  or,  Records  of  the  Replanting  of 
the  Alps,  the  Cevennes,  and  the  Pyrenees  with  Trees,  Herbage, 
and  Bush,  with  a  view  to  arresting  and  preventing  the  destruc- 
tive consequences  and  effects  of  Torrents.     1  vol.     Demy  8vo. 

THE  HYDROLOGY  OF  SOUTHERN  AFRICA.     10s.  6d. 

Browne  (Kev.  Marmaduke  E.) 

UNTIL  THE  DAY  DAWN.  Four  Advent  Lectures  delivered 
in  the  Episcopal  Chapel,  Milverton,  Warwickshire,  on  the  Sunday 
evenings  during  Advent,  1870.     Crown  8vo.    2s.  6d. 


Henry  S.  King  &  Co.'s  Publications.  9 

Bryant  (William  Cullen). 

POEMS.     Red-line  Edition.     Handsomely   bound.    With   24 
Illustrations  and  Portrait  of  the  Author.     7s.  6d. 
A  Cheaper  Edition,  with  Frontispiece.     3s.  6d. 

Buchanan  (Kobert). 

POETICAL  WORKS.  Collected  Edition,  in  3  Vols.,  price 
6s.  each. 

Vol.  I. — "  Ballads  and  Romances ;  "  "  Ballads  and  Poems  of 
Life,"  and  a  Portrait  of  the  Author. 

Vol.  II. — "  Ballads  and  Poems  of  Life  ;  "  "  Allegories  and 
Sonnets." 

VoL  III.—"  Cruiskeen  Sonnets ; "  "  Book  of  Orm ; "  "  Political 
Mystics." 

MASTER-SPIRITS.    Post  8vo.     10s.  6d. 

Bulkeley  (Rev.  Henry  J.) 

WALLED  IN,  and  other  Poems.     Crown  8vo.     5s. 

Bunnett  (F.  E.) 

LEONORA  CHRISTINA,  MEMOIRS  OF,  Daughter  of  Christian 
rV.  of  Denmark ;  Written  during  her  Imprisonment  in  the  Blue 
Tower  of  the  Royal  Palace  at  Copenhagen,  1663-1685.  Trans- 
lated by  F.  E.  Bunnett.  With  an  Autotype  Portrait  of  the 
Princess.    Medium  8vo.    A  New  and  Cheaper  Edition.     5s. 

LINKED  AT  LAST.     1  vol.     Crown  8vo. 

UNDER  A  CLOUD ;  OR,  JOHANNES  OLAF.  By  E.  D.  Wille. 
Translated  by  F.  E.  Bunnett.     3  vols. 

Burton  (Mrs.  Richard). 

THE  INNER  LIFE  OF  SYRIA,  PALESTINE,  AND  THE 
HOLY  LAND.    2  vols.    Demy  8vo.    24s. 

Butler  (Josephine  E.) 

JOHN  GREY  (of  Dilston) :  MEMOIRS.  By  his  Daughter.  New 
and  Cheaper  Edition.    Crown  8vo.    3s.  6d. 

Cadell  (Mrs.  H.  M). 

IDA  CRAVEN.    A  Novel.    3  vols.    Crown  8vo. 

Camden  (Charles). 

HOITY  TOITY,  THE  GOOD  LITTLE  FELLOW.  With  Eleven 
Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.     3s.  6d. 

THE  TRAVELLING  MENAGERIE.  By  Charles  Camden, 
Author  of  "Hoity  Toity."  With  Ten  Illustrations  by  J.  Mahoney. 
Crown  8vo.     3s.  6d. 

The  above  form  part  of  Henry  S.  King  &  Co.'s  Three  and 
Sixpenny  Series  of  Children's  Books. 


10  A  List  of 

Carlisle  (A.  D.),  B.A.,  Trin.  Coll.,  Camb. 

ROUND  THE  WORLD  IN  1870.  A  Volume  of  Travels,  with 
Maps.    New  and  Cheaper  Edition.    Demy  8vo.    6*. 

Carne  (Miss  E.  T.) 

THE  REALM  OF  TRUTH.    Crown  8vo.    5s.  6d. 

Carpenter  (E.) 

NARCISSUS  AND  OTHER  POEMS.    Fcap.  8vo.    5s. 

Carpenter  (W.  B.),  LL.D.,  M.D.,  F.K.S.,  etc. 

THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  MENTAL  PHYSIOLOGY.  With  their 
Applications  to  the  Training  and  Discipline  of  the  Mind,  and  the 
Study  of  its  Morbid  Conditions.    8vo.    Illustrated.     12s. 

Carr  (Lisle). 

JUDITH  GWYNNE.    3  vols.    Crown  8vo.    Second  Edition. 

Christopherson     (The     late     Kev.     Henry),     M.A., 

Assistant  Minister  at  Trinity  Church,  Brighton. 

.  SERMONS.      Crown  8vo.      Cloth.      7s.  6d.     With  an  Intro- 
duction by  John  Rae,  LL.D.,  F.S.A. 

Clayton  (Cecil). 

EFFIE'S  GAME;    HOW   SHE   LOST  AND  HOW  SHE  WON. 

A  Novel.    2  vols. 

Clerk  (Mrs.  Godfrey),  Author  of  "  The  Antipodes  and 
Round  the  World." 

'ILAM  EN  NAS.  Historical  Tales  and  Anecdotes  of  the  Times 
of  the  Early  Khalifahs.  Translated  from  the  Arabic  Originals. 
Illustrated  with  Historical  and  Explanatory  Notes.  Crown 
8vo.    7s. 

Clery  (C),  Captain  32nd  Light  Infantry,  Professor  of 
Tactics  Royal  Military  College,  Sandhurst. 

MINOR  TACTICS.  Demy  8vo.  New  Edition.  With  26 
Plans.    16s. 

Clodd  (Edward),  F.K.A.S. 

THE   CHILDHOOD   OF  THE  WORLD :   a  Simple  Account  of 
Man  in  Early  Times.    New  Edition.    Crown  8vo.    3s. 
A  Special  Edition  for  Schools.     Is. 

THE  CHILDHOOD  OF  RELIGIONS.  Including  a  Simple  Account 
of  the  Birth  and  Growth  of  Myths  and  Legends.   Crown  8vo.   5s. 

Coleridge  (Sara). 

PRETTY  LESSONS  IN  VERSE  FOR  GOOD  CHILDREN,  with 
some  Lessons  in  Latin,  in  Easy  Rhyme.  A  New  Edition. 
Illustrated.    3s.  6d. 


Henry  S.  King  &  Go's  Publications.  11 

Coleridge  (Sara): 

PHANTASMION.  A  Fairy  Romance.  With  an  Introductory 
Preface  by  the  Right  Hon.  Lord  Coleridge  of  Ottery  St.  Mary.  A 
New  Edition.    Illustrated.    7s.  6d. 

MEMOIR  AND  LETTERS  OF  SARA  COLERIDGE.  Edited  by 
her  Daughter.  Third  Edition,  Revised  and  Corrected.  With 
Index.    2  vols.     Crown  8vo.     With  Two  Portraits.    24s. 

Cheap  Edition.     With  one  Portrait.    7s.  6d. 

Collins  (Mortimer). 

THE  PRINCESS  CLARICE.     A  Story  of  1871.    2  vols. 

SQUIRE  SILCHESTER'S  WHIM.  By  Mortimer  Collins, 
Author  of  "  Marquis  and  Merchant,"  etc.    3  vols. 

MIRANDA.    A  Midsummer  Madness.    3  vols. 

THE  INN  OF  STRANGE  MEETINGS,  AND  OTHER  POEMS. 
Crown  8vo.    5s. 

THE  SECRET  OF  LONG  LIFE  Dedicated  by  special  per- 
mission to  Lord  St.  Leonard's.  Fourth  Edition.  Large  crown 
8vo.    5s. 

Collins  (Kev.  Kichard),  M.A. 

MISSIONARY  ENTERPRISE  IN  THE  EAST.  With  special 
reference  to  the  Syrian  Christians  of  Malabar,  and  the  results  of 
modern  Missions.    With  Four  Illustrations.    Crown  8vo.     6s. 

Conway  (Moncure  D.) 

REPUBLICAN  SUPERSTITIONS.  Illustrated  by  the  Political 
History  of  the  United  States.  Including  a  Correspondence  with 
M.  Louis  Blanc.    Crown  8vo.    5s. 

Conyers  (Ansley). 

CHESTERLEIGH.    3  vols.    Crown  8vo. 

Cooke  (M.  C),  M.A.,  LL.D. 

FUNGI ;  their  Nature,  Influences,  Uses,  etc.  Edited  by  the 
Rev.  M.  J.  Berkeley,  M.A.,  F.L.S.  Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo. 
With  Illustrations.     5s. 

Being  Vol.  XIV.  of  the  International  Scientific  Series. 

Cooke   (Professor  Josiah   P.),  of  the  Harvard   Uni- 
versity. 

THE    NEW    CHEMISTRY.     Second  Edition.    With  Thirty- 
one  Illustrations.     5s. 
Vol.  IX.  of  the  International  Scientific  Series. 

SCIENTIFIC  CULTURE.    Crown  8vo.    Cloth.    Is. 


12  A  List  of 

Coopee  (T.  T.) 

THE  MISHMEE  HILLS  :  an  Account  of  a  Journey  made  in  an 
Attempt  to  Penetrate  Thibet  from  Assam,  to  open  New  Eoutes 
for  Commerce.  Second  Edition.  With  Four  Illustrations  and 
Map.     Demy  8vo.     10s.  Qd. 

Caldekon. 

CALDERON'S  DRAMAS  :  The  Wonder- Working  Magician- 
Life  is  a  Dream — The  Purgatory  of  St.  Patrick.  Translated  by 
Denis  Florence  MacCarthy.     Post  8vo.     10s. 

Cornhill  Library  of  Fiction,  The.     3s.   6d.  per 

Volume. 

HALF-A-DOZEN  DAUGHTERS.     By  J.  Masterman. 
THE  HOUSE  OF  RABY.     By  Mrs.  G.  Hooper. 
A  FIGHT  FOR  LIFE.    By  Moy  Thomas. 
ROBIN  GRAY.    By  Charles  Gibbon. 
KITTY.    By  Miss  M.  Betham-Edwards. 
HIRELL.     By  John  Saunders. 

ONE  OF  TWO ;  or,  The  Left-Handed  Bride.  By  J.  Hain 
Friswell. 

READY-MONEY  MORTIBOY.     A  Matter-of-Fact  Story. 

GOD'S  PROVIDENCE  HOUSE.     By  Mrs.  G.  L.  Banks. 

FOR  LACK  OF  GOLD.    By  Charles  Gibbon. 

ABEL  DRAKE'S  WIFE.    By  John  Saunders. 

Cosmos.     A  Poem.     Fcap.  8vo.     3s.  6d. 

Subject. — Nature  in  the  Past  and  in  the  Present — Man  in  the 
Past  and  in  the  Present — The  Future. 

Cotton  (Robert  Turner). 

MR.  CARINGTON.  A  Tale  of  Love  and  Conspiracy.  3  vols. 
Crown  8vo. 

Croft  (Herbert),  Barrister-at-Law. 

SIR  THOMAS  ELYOT'S  "  GOVERNOUR."  A  Reprint  of  the 
Original  Edition,  Revised  and  Corrected,  with  Copious  Notes 
and  a  Life  of  the  Author. 

*#* 
exist. 

Cummins  (Henry  Irwin),  M.A. 

PAROCHIAL     CHARITIES     OF    THE    CITY    OF    LONDON. 

Sewed.     1«. 


Henry  S.  King  &  Go's  Publications.  13 

Curwen  (Henry). 

SORROW  AND  SONG :  Studies  of  Literary  Struggle.  Henry 
Murger — Novalis — Alexander  Petofi — Honore  de  Balzac — Edgar 
Allan  Poe — Andre  Che'nier.     2  vols.     Crown  8vo.     15s. 

Davidson  (Samuel),  D.D.,  LL.D. 

THE  NEW  TESTAMENT,  TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  LATEST 
GREEK  TEXT  OF  TISCHENDORF.    Post  8vo.     10s.  6d. 

Davies  (G-.  Christopher). 

MOUNTAIN,  MEADOW,  AND  MERE:  a  Series  of  Outdoor 
Sketches  of  Sport,  Scenery,  Adventures,  and  Natural  History. 
With  Sixteen  Illustrations  by  Bosworth  W.  Harcourt.  Crown 
8vo.    6s. 

RAMBLES  AND  ADVENTURES  OF  OUR  SCHOOL  FIELD 
CLUB.     Crown  8vo.     With  4  Illustrations.     5s. 

Davies  (Kev.  J.  Llewelyn),  M.A. 

THEOLOGY  AND  MORALITY.  Essays  on  Questions  of 
Belief  and  Practice.    Crown  8vo.    7s.  6d. 

De  Kerkadec  (Vicomtesse  Solange). 

A  CHEQUERED  LIFE,  being  Memoirs  of  the  Vicomtesse  de 
Leoville  Meilhan.     Edited  by.     Crown  8vo.     7s.  6d. 

Containing  many  recollections  of  the  First  Emperor  Napoleon 
and  his  Court. 

De  L'Hoste  (Colonel  E.  P). 

THE  DESERT  PASTOR,  JEAN  JAROUSSEAU.  Translated 
from  the  French  of  Eugene  Pelletan.  In  fcap.  8vo.,  with  an 
Engraved  Frontispiece.     New  Edition.    3s.  6d. 

One  of  Henry  S.  King  and  Co.'s  Three  and  Sixpenny  Books 
for  the  Young. 

De  Liefde  (Jacob). 

THE  GREAT  DUTCH  ADMIRALS.  Crown  8vo.  With  Eleven 
Illustrations  by  Townley  Green  and  others.     5s. 

One  of  Henry  S.  King  and  Co.'s  Five  Shilling  Books  for  the 
Young. 

De  Kedcliffe  (Viscount  Stratford),  P.C.,  E.G.,  G.C.B. 

WHY  AM  I  A  CHRISTIAN  "i    Fifth  Edition.     Crown  8vo.     3s. 

De  Tocqueville  (Alexis). 

correspondence    and    conversations    of,  with 

NASSAU  WILLIAM  SENIOR.    2  vols.     Post  8vo.    21s. 


14  A  List  of 

De  Veke  (Aubrey). 

ALEXANDER  THE  GREAT.  A  Dramatic  Poem.  Small 
crown  8vo.    5s. 

THE    INFANT    BRIDAL,    AND    OTHER    POEMS.     A    New 

Edition.    Fcap.  8vo. 

THE  LEGENDS  OF  ST.  PATRICK,  and  other  Poems.  Small 
crown  8vo.    5s. 

De  Wille  (E.) 

UNDER  A  CLOUD;  OR,  JOHANNES  OLAF.  A  Novel. 
Translated  by  F.  E.  Bunnett.    3  vols.    Crown  8vo. 

Dennis  (John). 

ENGLISH  SONNETS.  Collected  and  Arranged.  Fcap.  8vo. 
Elegantly  bound.    3s.  6d. 

Dobson  (Austin). 

VIGNETTES  IN  RHYME  AND  VERS  DE  SOCIETE.  Second 
Edition.    Fcap.  8vo.    5s. 

Donne  (Alphonse),  M.D. 

CHANGE  OF  AIR  AND  SCENE.  A  Physician's  Hints  about 
Doctors,  Patients,  Hygiene,  and  Society ;  with  Notes  of  Excur- 
sions for  Health  in  the  Pyrenees,  and  amongst  the  Watering- 
places  of  France  (Inland  and  Seaward),  Switzerland,  Corsica,  and 
the  Mediterranean.    A  New  Edition.    Large  post  8vo.     9s. 

Dowden  (Edward),  LL.D. 

SHAKSPERE :  a  Critical  Study  of  his  Mind  and  Art.  Post 
8vo.     12s. 

Downton  (Kev.  Henry),  M.A. 

HYMNS  AND  VERSES.  Original  and  Translated.  Small 
crown  8vo.    3s.  6d. 

Draper  (John  William),  M.D.,  LL.D.  Professor  in 
the  University  of  New  York;  Author  of  "A  Treatise  on 
Human  Physiology." 

HISTORY  OF  THE  CONFLICT  BETWEEN  RELIGION  AND 
SCIENCE.    Fourth  Edition.    5«. 
Vol.  XIII.  of  the  International  Scientific  Series. 

Drew  (Kev.  G.  S.),  M.A.,  Yicar  of  Trinity,  Lambeth. 

SCRIPTURE  LANDS  IN  CONNECTION  WITH  THEIR 
HISTORY.    Second  Edition.    8vo.     10s.  6d. 

NAZARETH:  ITS  LIFE  AND  LESSONS.  Second  Edition. 
Crown  8vo.    5s. 


Henry  S.  King  &  Co.1 8  Publications.  15 

Drew  (Rev.  G.  8.),  M.A. 

THE  DIVINE  KINGDOM  ON  EARTH  AS  IT  IS  IN  HEAVEN 

8vo.    10s.  6d. 

THE  SON  OF  MAN:  His  Life  and  Ministry.  Crown  8vo. 
7«.  6d. 

Drewry  (G-.  Overend),  M.D. 

THE  COMMON-SENSE   MANAGEMENT  OE  THE  STOMACH. 

Fcap.  8vo.    2s.  6d. 

Durand  (Lady). 

IMITATIONS  FROM  THE  GERMAN  OF  SPITTA  AND 
TERSTEGEN.     Fcap.  8vo.     4s. 

Du  Vernois  (Colonel  von  Verdy). 

STUDIES  IN  LEADING  TROOPS.  An  authorized  and  accurate 
Translation  by  Lieutenant  H.  J.  T.  Hildyard,  71st  Foot.  Parts  I. 
and  II.     Demy  8vo.    7s. 

This  is  one  of  Henry  S.  King  and  Co.'s  Series  of  Military  Works. 

E.  A.  V. 

JOSEPH  MAZZINI  :  A  Memoir.  With  Two  Essays  by 
Mazzini — "  Thoughts  on  Democracy,"  and  "  The  Duties  of 
Man."  Dedicated  to  the  Working  Classes  by  P.  H.  Taylor,  M.P. 
Crown  8vo.     With  Two  Portraits.     3s.  6d. 

Eden  (Frederic). 

THE  NILE  WITHOUT  A  DRAGOMAN.  Second  Edition. 
Crown  8vo.    7s.  Qd. 

Edwards  (Kev.  Basil). 

MINOR  CHORDS;  OR,  SONGS  FOR  THE  SUFFERING:  a 
Volume  of  Verse.    Fcap.  8vo.     Cloth,  3s.  6d. ;  paper,  2s.  6d. 

Eiloart  (Mrs.) 

LADY  MORETOUN'S  DAUGHTER.    3  vols.    Crown  8vo. 

English  Clergyman. 

an  essay  on  the  rule  of  faith  and  creed  of 

ATHANASIUS.      Shall    the    Rubric   preceding    the    Creed  be 
removed  from  the  Prayer-book  ?    8vo.    Sewed.     Is. 

Eros  Agonistes.    Poems.    By  E.  B.  D.    Fcap.  8vo. 

3s.  6d. 

Evans  (Mark). 

THE  STORY  OF  OUR  FATHER'S  LOVE,  told  to  Children; 
being  a  New  and  Enlarged  Edition  of  Theology  for  Children. 
8*6& 


16  A  List  of 

Eyre  (Maj.-Gen.  Sir  Vincent),  C.B.,  K.C.S.I.,  etc. 

LAYS  OF  A  KNIGHT-ERRANT  IN  MANY  LANDS.  Square 
crown  8vo.     With  Six  Illustrations.     7s.  6d. 

Pharaoh  Land.  |  Home  Land.  |  Wonder  Land.  |  Khine  Land. 

Faithfull  (Mrs.  Francis  G-.) 

LOVE  ME,  OR  LOVE  ME  NOT.    3  vols.     Crown  8*o. 

Farquh arson  (Martha). 

I.  ELSIE  DINSMORE.  Crown  8vo.    3s.  6c?. 
II.  ELSIE'S  GIRLHOOD.    Crown  8vo.     3s.  6d 
III.  ELSIE'S  HOLIDAYS  AT  ROSELANDS.    Crown  8vo.   3s.  6d. 
These  are  volumes  of  Henry  S.  King  and  Co.'s  Series  of  Three 
and  Sixpenny  Books  for  the  Young. 

Favre  (Mons.  Jules). 

THE  GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  NATIONAL  DEFENCE.  From 
the  30th  June  to  the  31st  October,  1870.  The  Plain  Statement 
of  a  Member.     1  vol.    Demy  8vo.     10s.  6d. 

Fisher  (Alice). 

HIS  QUEEN.    3  vols.    Crown  8vo. 

Forbes  (Archibald). 

SOLDIERING  AND  SCRIBBLING.  A  Series  of  Sketches. 
Crown  8vo.     7s.  6d. 

FOTHERGILL  (JESSIE). 

HEALEY.     A  Romance.     3  vols.     Crown  8vo. 
ALDYTH.    A  Novel.    3  vols.    Crown  8vo. 

Fowle  (Eev.  T.  W.),  M.A. 

THE    RECONCILIATION     OF     RELIGION    AND    SCIENCE. 

Being  Essays  on  Immortality,   Inspiration,  Miracles,   and  the 
Being  of  Christ.    Demy  8vo.     10s.  6d. 

Fraser   (Donald),   Accountant  to  the  British-Indian 

Steam  Navigation  Company,  Limited. 

EXCHANGE  TABLES  OF  STERLING  AND  INDIAN  RUPEE 
CURRENCY,  upon  a  new  and  extended  system,  embracing  Values 
from  One  Farthing  to  One  Hundred  Thousand  Pounds,  and  at 
Rates  progressing,  in  Sixteenths  of  a  Penny,  from  Is.  9d.  to 
2s.  3d.  per  Rupee.     Royal  8vo.     10s.  6d. 

Frere  (Sir  H.  Bartle  E.),  G.C.B.,  G.C.S.I.,  etc. 

THE  THREATENED  FAMINE  IN  BENGAL ;  How  it  may  be 
Met,  and  the  Recurrence  of  Famines  in  India  Prevented.  Being 
No.  1  of  "Occasional  Notes  on  Indian  Affairs."  Crown  8vo. 
With  3  Maps.    5s. 


Henry  S.  King  &  Co? 8  Publications.  17 

Friswell  (J.  Hain). 

THE  BETTER  SELF.     Essays  for  Home  Life.     Crown  8vo.    6s. 

Contents  : — Beginning  at  Home— The  Girls  at  Home — The 
Wife's  Mother — Pride  in  the  Family — Discontent  and  Grumbling 
— Domestic  Economy — On  Keeping  People  Down — Likes  and 
Dislikes — On  Falling  Out — Peace. 

ONE  OF  TWO;    or,  The  Left-Handed  Bride.      Crown  8vo. 
With  a  Frontispiece.     3s.  6d. 
Being  a  Volume  of  the  Cornhill  Library  of  Fiction. 

Gardner  (John),  M.D. 

LONGEVITY;  THE  MEANS  OF  PROLONGING  LIFE  AFTER 
MIDDLE  AGE.  Third  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged.  Small 
crown  8vo.     4s. 

Garrett  (Edward). 

BY  STILL  WATERS.  A  Story  for  Quiet  Hours.  Crown  8vo. 
With  Seven  Illustrations.    6s. 

Gibbon  (Charles). 

FOR  LACK  OF  GOLD.   Crown  8vo.  With  a  Frontispiece.   3s.  6d. 

ROBIN  GRAY.     Crown  8vo.     With  a  Frontispiece.     3s.  6d. 
The  above  Volumes  form  part  of  the  Cornhill  Library  of  Fiction. 

Gilbert  (Mrs.) 

MRS.  GILBERT,  FORMERLY  ANN  TAYLOR,  AUTOBIO- 
GRAPHY AND  OTHER  MEMORIALS  OF.  Edited  by  Josiah 
Gilbert.  In  2  vols.  Post  8vo.  With  2  Steel  Portraits  and 
several  Wood  Engravings.     24s. 

Gill  (Eev.  W.  W.) 

MYTHS  AND  SONGS  OF  THE  SOUTH  PACIFIC.  With  a  Pre- 
face by  F.  Max  Miiller,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Comparative 
Philology  at  Oxford.     1  vol.     Post  8vo. 

Godkin  (James). 

THE  RELIGIOUS  HISTORY  OF  IRELAND :  Primitive,  Papal, 
and  Protestant.  Including  the  Evangelical  Missions,  Catholic 
Agitations,  and  Church  Progress  of  the  last  half  Century.  1  vol. 
8vo.     12s. 

Godwin  (William). 

WILLIAM  GODWIN  :  his  Friend's  Contemporaries.  By  C. 
Kegan  Paul.     2  vols.    Demy  8vo.     With  Portraits. 

THE  GENIUS  OF  CHRISTIANITY  UNVEILED.  Being  Essays 
never  before  published.  Edited,  with  a  Preface,  by  C.  Kegan 
Paul.     1  vol.    Crown  8vo.   7s.  6d. 

B  6 


18  A  List  of 

Goetze  (Capt.  A.  von),  Captain  of  the  Prussian  Corps 

of  Engineers  attached  to  the  Engineer  Committee,  and  Instructor 

at  the  Military  Academy. 

OPEEATIONS  OF  THE  GERMAN  ENGINEEES  DUEING  THE 
WAE  OF  1870-1871.  Published  by  Authority,  and  in  accordance 
with  Official  Documents.  Translated  from  the  German  by 
Colonel  G.  Graham,  V.C.,  C.B.,  R.E.  Demy  8vo.  Cloth.  With 
6  large  Maps.     21s. 

Goodman  (Walter). 

CUBA,  THE  PEAEL  OF  THE  ANTILLES.     Crown  8vo.    7s.  6d. 

Gosse  (Edmund  W.) 

ON  VIOL  AND  FLUTE.  With  Title-page  specially  designed 
by  William  B.  Scott.     Crown  8vo.     5s. 

Gkanville  (A.  B.),  M.D.,  F.K.S.,  etc. 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY     OF     A.     B.     GRANVILLE,    F.R.S.,    etc. 

Edited,  with  a  brief  account  of  the  concluding  years  of  his  life,  by 
his  youngest  Daughter,  Paulina  B.  Granville.  2  vols.  Demy 
8vo.     With  a  Portrait.     32s. 

Gray  (Mrs.  Eussell). 

LISETTE'S  VENTURE.    A  Novel.    2  vols.    Crown  8vo.    21s. 

Green  (T.  Bowden). 

FRAGMENTS  OF  THOUGHT.  Dedicated  by  permission  to  the 
Poet  Laureate.     Crown  8vo.    7s.  6d. 

Greenwood  (James),  "  The  Amateur  Casual." 

IN  STRANGE  COMPANY;  or,  The  Note  Book  of  a  Roving 
Correspondent.     Second  Edition.     Crown  8vo.     6s. 

Grey  (John),  of  Dilston. 

JOHN  GREY  (of  Dilston):  MEMOIRS.  By  Josephine  E. 
Butler.    New  and  Cheaper  Edition.    Crown  8vo.    3s.  6d. 

Griffith  (Kev.  T.),  A.M.,  Prebendary  of  St.  Paul's. 

STUDIES  OF  THE  DIVINE  MASTER.     Demy  8vo.     12s. 

Griffiths  (Captain  Arthur). 

THE  QUEEN'S  SHILLING.    A  Novel.    2  vols.    21s. 

MEMORIALS  OF  MILLBANK,  AND  CHAPTERS  IN  PRISON 
HISTORY.    2  vols.    Post  8vo.    21s.    With  Illustrations. 

Gruner  (M.  L.)  .     . 

STUDIES  OF  BLAST  FURNACE  PHENOMENA.  Translated 
by  L.  D.  B.  Gordon,  F.R.S.E.,  F.G.S.    Demy  8vo.    7s.  6<£ 


Henry  S.  King  &  Co.* 8  Publications.  19 

Gurney  (Rev.  Archer  Thompson). 

WORDS  OF  FAITH  AND  CHEER.  A  Mission  of  Instruction 
and  Suggestion.     1  vol.    Crown  8vo.    6s. 

FIRST  PRINCIPLES  IN  CHURCH  AND  STATE.  Demy  8vo. 
Sewed.     Is.  6d. 

Haeckel  (Professor  Ernst),  of  the  University  of  Jena. 

THE  HISTORY  OF  CREATION.  A  Popular  Account  of  the 
Development  of  the  Earth  and  its  Inhabitants,  according  to  the 
Theories  of  Kant,  Laplace,  Lamarck,  and  Darwin.  The  Transla- 
tion revised  by  Professor  E.  Kay  Lankester,  M.A.,  F.R.S.  With 
Coloured  Plates  and  Genealogical  Trees  of  the  various  groups 
of  both  plants  and  animals.     2  vols.     Post  8vo.     32s. 

THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  EVOLUTION  OF  MAN.  Translated 
by  E.  A.  Van  Rhyn  and  L.  Elsberg,  M.D.  (University  of  New 
York),  with  Notes  and  Additions  sanctioned  by  the  Author. 
Post  8vo. 

Harcourt  (Capt.  A.  F.  P.) 

THE  SHAKESPEARE  ARGOSY:  Containing  much  of  the  wealth 
of  Shakespeare's  Wisdom  and  Wit,  alphabetically  arranged  and 
classified.    Crown  8vo.    6s. 

Haweis  (Rev.  H.  R.),  M.A. 

SPEECH  IN  SEASON.    Third  Edition.    Crown  8vo.     9s. 

THOUGHTS  FOR  THE  TIMES.  Eighth  Edition.  Crown  8vo. 
Is.  6d. 

UNSECTARIAN  FAMILY  PRAYERS,  for  Morning  and  Even- 
ing for  a  Week,  with  short  selected  passages  from  the  Bible. 
Square  crown  8vo.    3s.  6d. 

Hawthorne  (Julian). 

BRESSANT.    A  Romance.    2  vols.    Crown  8vo.    21s. 
IDOLATRY.     A  Romance.     2  vols.     Crown  8vo.     21s. 

Hawthorne  (Nathaniel). 

NATHANIEL  HAWTHORNE.  A  Memoir,  with  Stories  now 
first  published  in  this  country.  By  H.  A.  Page.    Post  8vo.   Is.  6d. 

SEPTIMUS.    A  Romance.    Second  Edition.    Crown  8vo.    9s. 

Hayman  (Henry),  D.D.,  late  Head  Master  of  Rugby 

School. 

RUGBY  SCHOOL  SERMONS.  With  an  Introductory  Essay  on 
the  Indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit.    Crown  8vo.    7s.  6d. 

Heathergate.    A  Story  of  Scottish  Life  and  Character. 

By  a  New  Author.     2  vols.     Crown  8vo.     21s. 


20  A  List  of 

Hellwald  (Baron  F.  Von). 

THE  RUSSIANS  IN  CENTRAL  ASIA.  A  Critical  Examination, 
down  to  the  present  time,  of  the  Geography  and  History  of 
Central  Asia.  Translated  by  Lieut.-Col.  Theodore  Wirgman, 
LL.B.    In  1  vol.    Large  post  8vo.    With  Map.    12s. 

Helvig  (Captain  Hugo). 

THE   OPERATIONS    OF    THE    BAVARIAN    ARMY    CORPS. 

Translated  by  Captain  G-.  S.  Schwabe.    With  Five  large  Maps. 
In  2  vols.     Demy  8vo.     24s. 
This  is  one  of  Henry  S.  King  and  Co.'s  Series  of  Military  Books. 

Hinton  (James),  late  Aural  Surgeon  to  G-uy's  Hospital. 

THE  PLACE  OF  THE  PHYSICIAN.  Being  the  Introductory 
Lecture  at  Guy's  Hospital,  1873-74 ;  to  which  is  added  Essays 
on  the  Law  of  Human  Life,  and  on  the  Kelation  between 
Organic  and  Inorganic  Worlds.    Crown  8vo.    3s.  6d. 

PHYSIOLOGY  FOR  PRACTICAL  USE.  By  various  writers. 
Second  Edition.  With  50  Illustrations.  2  vols.  Crown  8vo. 
12s.  6d. 

AN  ATLAS  OF  DISEASES  OF  THE  MEMBRANA  TYMPANI. 

With  Descriptive  Text.    Post  8vo.    £6  6s. 

THE  QUESTIONS  OF  AURAL  SURGERY.  Post  8vo.  With 
Illustrations.    2  vols.     12s.  Gd. 

Hockley  (W.  B.) 

TALES  OF  THE  ZENANA;  or,  A  Nuwab's  Leisure  Hours. 
By  the  Author  of  "  Pandurang  Hari."  With  a  Preface  by  Lord 
Stanley  of  Alderley.    2  vols.     Crown  8vo.    21s. 

PANDURANG  HARI ;  or,  Memoirs  of  a  Hindoo.  A  Tale  of 
Mahratta  Life  sixty  years  ago.  With  a  Preface  by  Sir  H.  Bartle 
E.  Frere,  G.C.S.I.,  etc.    2  vols.    Crown  8vo.    21s. 

Hoffbauer  (Captain). 

THE  GERMAN  ARTILLERY  IN  THE  EATTLES  NEAR  METZ. 

Based  on  the  official  reports  of  the  German  Artillery.   Translated 
by  Capt.  E.  O.  Hollist.    Demy  8vo.    With  Map  and  Plans.    21s. 
This  is  one  of   the  volumes  in  Henry  S.  King  and  Co.'s 
Military  Series. 

Holroyd   (Captain  W.  E.  M.),  Bengal   Staff  Corps, 
Director  of  Public  Instruction,  Punjab. 

TAS-HIL  UL  KALAM;  or,  Hindustani  made  Easy.  Crown 
8vo.    5s. 

Hope  (Lieut.  James). 

IN  QUEST  OF  COOLIES.    With  Illustrations.    Crown  8vo.    6s. 


Henry  S.  King  &  Co? 8  Publications.  21 

Hooper  (Mrs.  Gr.) 

THE  HOUSE  OF  RABY.  With  a  Frontispiece.  Crown  Svo. 
3s.  6d. 

One  of  the  volumes  of  the  Cornhill  Library  of  Fiction. 

Hooper  (Mary). 

LITTLE   DINNERS:    HOW  TO   SERVE  THEM  WITH  ELE- 
GANCE AND  ECONOMY.   Seventh  Edition.   1  vol.  Crown  8vo.  5s. 
COOKERY  FOR  INVALIDS.     Crown  8vo. 

Hopkins  (Manley). 

THE  PORT  OF  REFUGE;  or,  Counsel  and  Aid  to  Ship- 
masters in  Difficulty,  Doubt,  or  Distress.     Crown  8vo.    6s. 

Howard  (Mary  M.),  Author  of  "  Brampton  Kectory." 

BEATRICE  AYLMER,  AND  OTHER  TALES.    Crown  8vo.    6s. 

Howard  (Kev.  Gr.  B.) 

AN  OLD  LEGEND  OF  ST.  PAUL'S.     Fcap.  8vo.    4s.  6d. 

Howe  (Cupples),  Master  Mariner. 

THE  DESERTED  SHIP.  A  real  story  of  the  Atlantic.  Illus- 
trated by  Townley  Green.     Crown  8vo.     3s.  6d. 

One  of  Henry  S.  King  and  Co.'s  Three  and  Sixpenny  Books 
for  the  Young. 

Howell  (James). 

A    TALE    OF   THE  SEA,  SONNETS,   AND    OTHER   POEMS. 

Fcap.  8vo.    5s. 

Hughes  (Allison). 

PENELOPE,  AND  OTHER  POEMS.    Fcap.  8vo.    4s.  6d. 

Hull  (Edmund  C.  P.) 

THE  EUROPEAN  IN  INDIA.  A  Handbook  of  Practical  In- 
formation for  those  proceeding  to,  or  residing  in,  the  East  Indies, 
relating  to  Outfits,  Routes,  Time  for  Departure,  Indian  Climate, 
etc.  With  a  Medical  Guide  for  Anglo-Indians.  By  R.  R.  S. 
Mair,  M.D.,  F.R.C.S.E.,  late  Deputy  Coroner  of  Madras.  Second 
Edition,  Revised  and  Corrected.     In  1  vol.     Post  8vo.     6s. 

Humphrey   (Eev.   W.),  of  the  Congregation  of  the 
Oblates  of  St.  Charles. 

MR.  FITZJAMES  STEPHEN  AND  CARDINAL  BELLARMINE. 
Demy  8vo.    Sewed.     Is. 

Hutton  (James). 

MISSIONARY  LIFE  IN  THE  SOUTHERN  SEAS.  With  Illus- 
trations.    Crown  8vo.     7s.  6d. 


I 


22  A  List  of 


International  Scientific  Series  (The). 

I.  THE  FORMS  OF  WATER  IN  CLOUDS  AND  RIVERS,  ICE 
AND  GLACIERS.  By  J.  Tyndall,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.  With  14 
Illustrations.    Fifth  Edition.     5s. 

II.  PHYSICS  AND  POLITICS ;  or,  Thoughts  on  the  Application  of 
the  Principles  of  "Natural  Selection"  and  "Inheritance" 
to  Political  Society.   By  Walter  Bagehot.   Third  Edition.  4s. 

III.  FOODS.    By  Edward  Smith,  M.D.,  LL.B.,  F.R.S.     Profusely 

Illustrated.    Third  Edition.    5s. 

IV.  MIND   AND   BODY:    The   Theories   of  their    Relation.     By 

Alexander  Bain,  LL.D.     Third  Edition.     With  Four  Illus- 
trations.    4s. 

V.  THE  STUDY  OF  SOCIOLOGY.  By  Herbert  Spencer.  Fourth 
Edition.     5s. 

VI.  ON  THE  CONSERVATION  OF  ENERGY.  By  Balfour  Stewart, 
M.D.,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.  With  14  Engravings.  Third  Edition.  5s. 

VII.  ANIMAL  LOCOMOTION;  or,  Walking,  Swimming,  and  Flying. 
By  J.  B.  Pettigrew,  M.D.,  F.R.S.  Second  Edition.  With 
119  Illustrations.     5s. 

VIII.  RESPONSIBILITY  IN  MENTAL  DISEASE.  By  Henry 
Maudsley,  M.D.    Second  Edition.    5s. 

IX.  THE  NEW  CHEMISTRY.  By  Professor  J.  P.  Cooke,  of  the 
Harvard  University.  Second  Edition.  With  31  Illus- 
trations.    5s. 

X.  THE  SCIENCE  OF  LAW.  By  Professor  Sheldon  Amos. 
Second  Edition.    5s. 

XI.  ANIMAL  MECHANISM.  A  Treatise  on  Terrestrial  and  Aerial 
Locomotion.  By  Professor  E.  J.  Marey.  With  117  Illus- 
trations.   Second  Edition.    5s. 

XII.  THE    DOCTRINE    OF    DESCENT    AND    DARWINISM.      By 

Professor  Oscar  Schmidt  (Strasburg  University).     Second 
Edition.    With  26  Illustrations.    5s. 

XIII.  THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  CONFLICT  BETWEEN  RELIGION 
AND  SCIENCE.  By  Professor  J.  W.  Draper.  Fifth 
Edition.    5s. 


Henry  S.  King  &  Co.'e  Publications.  23 

International  Scientific  Series  (The). 

XIV.  FUNGI ;  their  Nature,  Influences,  Uses,  etc.  By  M.  C.  Cooke, 
M.A.,  LL.D.  Edited  by  the  Rev.  M.  J.  Berkeley,  M.A., 
F.L.S.  Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo.  With  numerous 
Illustrations.     5s. 

XV.  THE  CHEMICAL  EFFECTS  OF  LIGHT  AND  PHOTOGRAPHY. 

By  Dr.  Hermann  Vogel  (Polytechnic  Academy  of  Berlin). 
Second  Edition.    With  100  Illustrations.    5s. 

XVI.  THE  LIFE  AND  GROWTH  OF  LANGUAGE.  By  William 
Dwight  Whitney,  Professor  of  Sanskrit  and  Comparative 
Philology  in  Yale  College,  New  Haven.  Second  Edition. 
Crown  8vo.     5s. 

XVII.  MONEY  AND  THE  MECHANISM  OF  EXCHANGE.     By  Prof. 

W.  Stanley  Jevons.    Crown  8vo.    5s. 

XVIII.  THE    NATURE    OF   LIGHT :    With  a  General  Account  of 

Physical  Optics.  By  Dr.  Eugene  Lommel,  Professor  of 
Physics  in  the  University  of  Erlangen.  With  148  Illustra- 
tions and  a  table  of  Spectra  in  Chromolithography.     5s. 

XIX.  ANIMAL  PARASITES  AND  MESSMATES.  By  Monsieur 
Van  Beneden,  Professor  of  the  University  of  Louvain,  Cor- 
respondent of  the  Institute  of  France.  Crown  8vo.  With 
83  Illustrations.     5s. 

XX.  THE  FIVE  SENSES  OF  MAN.  By  Professor  Bernstein,  of 
the  University  of  Halle.     Crown  8vo. 

XXI.  FERMENTATIONS.  By  Professor  Schutzenberger,  Director 
of  the  Chemical  Laboratory  at  the  Sorbonne.     Crown  8vo. 


/ 


24  A  List  of 


International  Scientific  Semes  (The). 


Forthcoming  Volumes. 


Prof.  W.  Kingdon   Clifford,  M.A.     The  First  Principles  of  the 
Exact  Sciences  explained  to  the  Non-mathematical. 

Prof.    T.    H.    Huxley,    LL.D.,     F.K.S.       Bodily     Motion    and 
Consciousness. 

Dr.  W.  B.  Carpenter,  LL.D.,  F.K.S.     The  Physical  Geography 

of  the  Sea. 

Prof.  William  Odling,  F.E.S.  The  Old  Chemistry  viewed  from 
the  New  Standpoint. 

W.  Lauder  Lindsay,  M.D.,  F.R.S.E.    Mind  in  the  Lower  Animals. 

Sir  John  Lubbock,  Bart.,  F.R.S.    On  Ants  and  Bees. 

Prof.  W.  T.  Thiselton  Dyer,  B.A.,  B.Sc.  Form  and  Habit  in 
Flowering  Plants. 

Mr.  J.  N.  Lockyer,  F.E.S.     Spectrum  Analysis. 

Prof.  Michael  Foster,  M.D.    Protoplasm  and  the  Cell  Theory. 

H.  Charlton  Bastian,  M.D.,  F.R.S.  The  Brain  as  an  Organ  of 
Mind. 

Prof.  A.  C.  Ramsay,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.  Earth  Sculpture:  Hills, 
Valleys,  Mountains,  Plains,  Rivers,  Lakes;  how  they  were  Pro- 
duced, and  how  they  have  been  Destroyed. 

Prof.  Rudolph  Virchow  (Berlin  Univ.)  Morbid  Physiological 
Action. 

Prof.  Claude  Bernard.    History  of  the  Theories  of  Life. 

Prof.  H.  Sainte-Claire  Deville.  An  Introduction  to  General 
Chemistry. 

Prof.  Wurtz.    Atoms  and  the  Atomic  Theory. 

Prof.  De  Quatrefages.    The  Human  Race. 

Prof.  Lacaze-Duthiers.    Zoology  since  Cuvier. 

Prof.  Berthelot.    Chemical  Synthesis. 


Henry  S.  King  &  Co.'s  Publications.  25 

International  Scientific  Series   (The). 

(Forthcoming  Volumes.) 

Prof.  J.  Rosenthal.    General  Physiology  of  Muscles  and  Nerves. 

Prof.  James  D.  Dana,  M. A.,  LL.D.  On  Cephalization ;  or,  Head- 
Characters  in  the  Gradation  and  Progress  of  Life. 

Prof.  S.  W.  Johnson,  M.A.    On  the  Nutrition  of  Plants. 

Prof.  Austin  Flint,  Jr.  M.D.  The  Nervous  System,  and  its 
Relation  to  the  Bodily  Functions. 

Prof.  Ferdinand  Cohn  (Breslau  Univ.)  Thallophytes  (Algae, 
Lichens,  Fungi). 

Prof.  Hermann  (University  of  Zurich).    Respiration. 

Prof.  Leuckart  (University  of  Leipsic).  Outlines  of  Animal 
Organization. 

Prof.  Liebreich  (University  of  Berlin).    Outlines  of  Toxicology. 

Prof.  Kundt  (University  of  Strasburg).    On  Sound. 

Prof.  Rees  (University  of  Erlangen).    On  Parasitic  Plants. 

Prof.  Steinthal  (University  of  Berlin).  Outlines  of  the  Science 
of  Language. 

P.  Bert  (Professor  of  Physiology,  Paris).  Forms  of  Life  and 
other  Cosmical  Conditions. 

E.  Alglave  (Professor  of  Constitutional  and  Administrative  Law 
at  Douai,  and  of  Political  Economy  at  Lille).  The  Primitive 
Elements  of  Political  Constitutions. 

P.  Lorain  (Professor  of  Medicine,  Paris).    Modern  Epidemics. 

Mons.  Freedel.    The  Functions  of  Organic  Chemistry. 

Mons.  Debrav.    Precious  Metals. 

Prof.  Corfield,  M.A.,  M.D.  (Oxon.)    Air  in  its  relation  to  Health. 

Prof.  A.  Giard.     General  Embryology. 


28  A  List  of 


Laurie  (J.  S.),  of  the  Inner  Temple,  Barrister-at-Law ; 
formerly  H.M.  Inspector  of  Schools,  England  ;  Assistant  Koyal 
Commissioner,  Ireland ;  Special  Commissioner,  African  Settle- 
ment ;  Director  of  Public  Instruction,  Ceylon. 

EDUCATIONAL  COURSE  OF  SECULAR  SCHOOL  BOOKS  FOR 
INDIA. 

The  following  Works  are  now  ready  : — 

THE  FIRST  HINDUSTANI  READER.     Stiff  linen  wrapper,  6d. 

THE  SECOND  HINDUSTANI  READER.    Stiff  linen  wrapper,  6d> 

GEOGRAPHY  OF  INDIA  ;  with  Maps  and  Historical  Appendix, 
tracing  the  growth  of  the  British  Empire  in  Hindustan.  128  pp. 
fcap.  Svo.    Cloth.    Is.  6d. 

In  the  Press  5 — 

ELEMENTARY  GEOGRAPHY  OF  INDIA. 

FACTS  AND  FEATURES  OF  INDIAN  HISTORY,  in  a  series 
of  alternating  Reading  Lessons  and  Memory  Exercises. 

Laymann    (Captain),   Instructor    of    Tactics    at    the 

Military  College,  Neisse. 

THE  FRONTAL  ATTACK  OF  INFANTRY.  Translated  by 
Colonel  Edward  Newdigate.     Crown  8vo.    2s.  6d. 

L.  D.  S. 

LETTERS  FROM  CHINA  AND  JAPAN.  1  vol.  Crown  8vo., 
with  Illustrated  Title-page.    7s.  6d. 

Leander  (Kichard). 

FANTASTIC  STORIES.  Translated  from  the  German  by 
Paulina  B.  Granville.  With  Eight  full-page  Illustrations  by 
M.  E.  Fraser-Tytler.     Crown  8vo.     5s. 

One  of  Henry  S.  King  and  Co.'s  Five  Shilling  Books  for 
the  Young. 

Leathes  (Kev.  Stanley),  M.A. 

THE  GOSPEL  ITS  OWN  WITNESS.  Being  the  Hulsean 
Lectures  for  1873.     1  vol.    Crown  8vo.     5s. 

Lee  (Kev.  Frederick  George),  D.C.L. 

THE  OTHER  WORLD ;  or,  Glimpses  of  the  Supernatural. 
Being  Facts,  Records,  and  Traditions,  relating  to  Dreams, 
Omens,  Miraculous  Occurrences,  Apparitions,  Wraiths,  Warn- 
ings, Second-sight,  Necromancy,  Witchcraft,  etc.  2  vols.  A 
New  Edition.     Crown  8vo.    15s. 


Henry  S.  King  &  Co.' 8  Publications.  29 

Lee  (Holme). 

HER  TITLE  OF  HONOUR.  A  Book  for  Girls.  New  Edition. 
Crown  8vo.     With  a  Frontispiece.     5s. 

Lenoir  (J). 

FAYOUM;  or,  Artists  in  Egypt.  A  Tour  with  M.  Gerome 
and  others.  Crown  8vo.  A  New  and  Cheaper  Edition.  With 
13  Illustrations.     3s.  6d. 

LlSTADO  (J.  T.) 

CIVIL  SERVICE.     A  Novel.    2  vols.     Crown  8vo. 

Lorimer  (Peter),  D.D. 

JOHN  KNOX  AND  THE  CHURCH  OF  ENGLAND :  His  work 
in  her  Pulpit  and  his  influence  upon  her  Liturgy,  Articles,  and 
Parties.    Demy  8vo.     12s. 

Lover  (Samuel),  K.H.A. 

THE  LIFE  OF  SAMUEL  LOVER,  R.H.A. ;  Artistic,  Literary, 
and  Musical.  With  Selections  from  his  Unpublished  Papers  and 
Correspondence.  By  Bayle  Bernard.  2  vols.  Post  8vo.  With 
a  Portrait.     21s. 

Lower  (Mark  Antony),  M.A.,  F.S.A. 

WAYSIDE  NOTES  IN  SCANDINAVIA.  Being  Notes  of  Travel 
in  the  North  of  Europe.     Crown  8vo.     9s. 

Lyons  (R.  T.),  Assistant-Surgeon,  Bengal  Army. 

A  TREATISE  ON  RELAPSING  FEVER.     Post  8vo.     7s.  6d. 

Macaulay  (James),  M.A.,  M.D.,  Edin. 

IRELAND.  A  Tour  of  Observation,  with  Remarks  on  Irish 
Public  Questions.  Crown  8vo.  A  New  and  Cheaper  Edition. 
3s.  6c?. 

Mac  Carthy  (Denis  Florence). 

CALDERON'S  DRAMAS.  Translated  from  the  Spanish.  Post 
8vo.    Cloth,  gilt  edges.     10s. 

Mac  Donald  (George). 

GUTTA-PERCHA  WILLIE,  THE  WORKING  GENIUS.  With 
Nine  Illustrations  by  Arthur  Hughes.  Second  Edition.  Crown 
8vo.    3s.  6d. 

One  of  Henry  S.  King  and  Co.'s  Three  and  Sixpenny  Books 
for  the  Young. 

MALCOLM.    A  Novel.    Second  Edition.    3  vols.     Crown  8vo. 

ST.  GEORGE  AND  ST.  MICHAEL.     3  vols.     Crown  8vo. 

MY  SISTER  ROSALIND.  By  the  author  of  "  Christina  North." 
A  Novel.    2  vols. 


30  A  List  of 

Mac  Kenna  (Stephen  J.) 

PLUCKY  FELLOWS.  A  Book  for  Boys.  With  Six  Illustrations. 
Second  Edition.     Crown  8vo.    3s.  6d. 

One  of  Henry  S.  King  and  Co.'s  Three  and  Sixpenny  Books 
for  the  Young. 

AT  SCHOOL  WITH  AN  OLD  DRAGOON.  Crown  8vo.  With 
Six  Illustrations.     5s. 

One  of  Henry  S.  King  and  Co.'s  Five  Shilling  Books  for 
the  Young. 

Maclachlan  (Archibald  Neil  Campbell),  M.A. 

WILLIAM  AUGUSTUS,  DUKE  OF  CUMBERLAND:  being  a 
Sketch  of  his  Military  Life  and  Character,  chiefly  as  exhibited 
in  the  General  Orders* of  his  Eoyal  Highness,  1745 — 1747.  Post 
8vo.     With  Illustrations.     15s. 

Mair  (R.  S.),  M.D.,  F.R.C.S.E.,  late  Deputy  Coroner 

of  Madras. 

THE  MEDICAL  GUIDE  FOR  ANGLO-INDIANS.  Being  a 
Compendium  of  Advice  to  Europeans  in  India,  relating  to  the 
Preservation  and  Regulation  of  Health.  With  a  Supplement  on 
the  Management  of  Children  in  India.  Crown  8vo.  Limp  cloth. 
3s.  6d. 

Manning  (The  Most  Rev.  Archbishop). 

ESSAYS  ON  RELIGION  AND  LITERATURE.  By  various 
Writers.     Demy  8vo.     10s.  6d. 

Contents  : — The  Philosophy  of  Christianity — Mystic  Elements 
of  Religion — Controversy  with  the  Agnostics — A  Reasoning 
Thought — Darwinism  brought  to  Book — Mr.  Mill  on  Liberty  of 
the  Press — Christianity  in  relation  to  Society — The  Religious 
Condition  of  Germany — The  Philosophy  of  Bacon — Catholic 
Laymen  and  Scholastic  Philosophy. 

Marey  (E.  J.) 

ANIMAL  MECHANICS.     A  Treatise  on  Terrestrial  and  Aerial 
Locomotion.     Second  Edition.     With  117  Illustrations.     5s. 
Volume  XL  of  the  International  Scientific  Series. 

Markewitch  (B.) 

THE  NEGLECTED  QUESTION.  Translated  from  the  Russian, 
by  the  Princess  Ourousoff,  and  dedicated  by  Express  Permission 
to  Her  Imperial  and  Royal  Highness  Marie  Alexandrovna,  the 
Duchess  of  Edinburgh.    2  vols.    Crown  8vo.     14s. 

Marriott  (Maj.-Gen.  W.  P.),  C.S.I. 

A  GRAMMAR  OF  POLITICAL  ECONOMY.    Crown  8vo.     6s. 


Henry  S.  King  &  Go's  Publications.  31 

Marshall  (Hamilton).  ♦ 

THE  STORY  OF  SIR  EDWARD'S  WIFE.  A  Novel.  1  vol. 
Crown  8vo.    10s.  6d. 

Marzials  (Theophile). 

THE  GALLERY  OF  PIGEONS,  and  other  Poems.  Crown  8vo. 
4s.  6d. 

Masterman  (J.) 

HALF-A-DOZEN  DAUGHTERS.    Crown  8vo.    With  a  Frontis- 
piece.   3s.  6d. 
One  of  the  Cornhill  Library  of  Fiction. 

Maudsley  (Dr.  Henry). 

RESPONSIBILITY  IN  MENTAL  DISEASE.  Second  Edition.  5s. 
Vol.  VIII.  of  the  International  Scientific  Series. 

Maughan  (William  Charles). 

THE  ALPS  OF  ARABIA;  or,  Travels  through  Egypt,  Sinai, 
Arabia,  and  the  Holy  Land.  Demy  8vo.  With  Map.  A  New 
and  Cheaper  Edition.     5«. 

Maurice  (C.  Edmund). 

LIVES  OF  ENGLISH  POPULAR  LEADERS.  No.  1.— Stephen 
Langton.    Crown  8vo.     7s.  6d. 

No.  2. — Tyler,  Ball,  and  Oldcastle.   Crown  8vo.    Is.  6d. 

Medley  (Lieut.-Col.  J.  G-.),  Koyal  Engineers. 

AN  AUTUMN  TOUR  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  AND  CANADA. 

Crown  8vo.    5s. 

Menzies  (Sutherland). 

MEMOIRS  OF  DISTINGUISHED  WOMEN.     2  vols.    Post  8vo. 

Meugens  (Miss  N.  E.) 

LITTLE    MINNIE'S    TROUBLES.     An  Everyday  Chronicle, 
Illustrated  by  Mr.  W.  H.  Hughes.     Fcap.     3s.  6d. 
A  Simple  Chronicle  of  a  Child's  Life. 

Micklethwaite  (J.  T.),  F.S.A. 

MODERN  PARISH  CHURCHES:  Their  Plan,  Design,  and 
Furniture.    Crown  8vo.    7s.  6d. 

Mirus  (Major-General  von). 

CAVALRY  FIELD  DUTY.     Translated  by  Captain  Frank  S. 

Russell,  14th  (King's)  Hussars.    Crown  8vo.    Cloth  limp.   7s.  6d. 

This  work  is  one  of  Henry  S.  King  and  Co.'s  Military  Series. 


32  A  List  of 

Mooke  (Kev.  Daniel),  M.A. 

CHRIST  AND  HIS  CHURCH.  A  Course  of  Lent  Lectures, 
delivered  in  the  Parish  Church  of  Holy  Trinity,  Paddington.  By 
the  author  of  "The  Age  and  the  Gospel:  Hulsean  Lectures,"  etc. 
Crown  8vo.    3s.  6d. 

Moore     (Kev.    Thomas),    Yicar    of    Christ    Church, 

Chesham. 

SERMONETTES :  on  Synonymous  Texts,  taken  from  the  Bible 
and  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  for  the  Study,  Family  Reading,  and 
Private  Devotion.    Small  Crown  8vo.    4s.  6d. 

MORELL  (J.  K.) 

EUCLID  SIMPLIFIED  IN  METHOD  AND  LANGUAGE.  Being 
a  Manual  of  Geometry  on  the  French  System.    Fcap.  8vo.    2s.  6d 

Morice  (Kev.  F.  D.),  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Queen's  College, 
Oxford. 

THE  OLYMPIAN  AND  PYTHIAN  ODES  OF  PINDAR.    A  New 

Translation  in  English  Verse. 

Morley  (Susan). 

AILEEN  FERRERS.    A  Novel.    2  vols.     Crown  8vo. 
THROSTLETHWAITE.    3  vols.    Crown  8vo. 

Morse  (Edward  S.),  Ph.  D.,  late  Professor  of  Com- 
parative Anatomy  and  Zoology  in  Bowdoin  College. 

FIRST  BOOK  OF  ZOOLOGY.    With  numerous  Illustrations. 

Mostyn  (Sydney). 

PERPLEXITY.    A  Novel.    3  vols.     Crown  8vo. 

MUSGRAVE. 

STUDIES  IN  POLITICAL  ECONOMY.     6s. 

Naake  (John  T.),  of  the  British  Museum. 

SLAVONIC  FAIRY  TALES.  From  Russian,  Servian,  Polish, 
and  Bohemian  Sources.  With  Four  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo. 
5s. 

Newman  (John  Henry),  D.D. 

CHARACTERISTICS   FROM  THE  WRITINGS  OF  DR.  J.  H. 

NEWMAN.  Being  Selections,  Personal,  Historical,  Philosophical, 
and  Religious,  from  his  various  Works.  Arranged  with  the 
Author's  personal  approval.  Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo.  With 
Portrait.    6s. 


Henry  S.  King  &  Co.'s  Publications.  33 

Newman  (Mrs.) 

TOO  LATE.    A  Novel.    2  vols.    Crown  8vo. 

Noble  (James  Ashcroft). 

THE  PELICAN  PAPERS.  Reminiscences  and  Remains  of  a 
Dweller  in  the  Wilderness.    Crown  8vo.    6s. 

Norman  People  (The). 

THE  NORMAN  PEOPLE,  and  their  Existing  Descendants  in 
the  British  Dominions  and  the  United  States  of  America.  One 
handsome  volume.    8vo.    21s. 

Norris  (Eev.  A.) 

THE  INNER  AND  OUTER  LIFE  POEMS.    Fcap.  8vo.    6s. 

Notrege  (John),  A.M. 

THE  SPIRITUAL  FUNCTION  OF  A  PRESBYTER  IN  THE 
CHURCH  OF  ENGLAND.    Crown  8vo.    Red  edges.    3s.  6d. 

Oriental  Sporting  Magazine  (The). 

THE  ORIENTAL  SPORTING  MAGAZINE.  A  Reprint  of  the 
first  5  Volumes,  in  2  Volumes.    Demy  8vo.    28s. 

Page  (H.  A.) 

NATHANIEL  HAWTHORNE,  A  MEMOIR  OF,  with  Stories 
now  first  published  in  this  country.    Large  post  8vo.    Is.  6d. 

Page  (Capt.  S.  Flood). 

DISCIPLINE  AND  DRILL.  Four  Lectures  delivered  to  the 
London  Scottish  Rifle  Volunteers.  Cheaper  Edition.  Crown 
8vo.     Is. 

Palgrave  (W.  Gifford). 

HERMANN  AGHA.  An  Eastern  Narrative.  2  vols.  Crown 
8vo.     Cloth,  extra  gilt.     18s. 

Parker  (Joseph),  D.D. 

THE  PARACLETE :  An  Essay  on  the  Personality  and  Ministry 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  with  some  reference  to  current  discussions. 
Demy  8vo.     12s. 

Parr  (Harriett). 

ECHOES   OF  A  FAMOUS  YEAR,     Crown  8vo.    8s.  6d. 

Paul  (C.  Kegan). 

GOETHE'S  FAUST.  A  New  Translation  in  Rime.  Crown  8vo.  6s. 
WILLIAM     GODWIN:     HIS    FRIENDS    AND     CONTEMPO- 
RARIES.   2  vols.    With  Portraits.    Demy  8vo. 


34  A  List  of 

Payne  (John). 

SONGS  OF  LIFE  AND  DEATH.     Crown  8vo.     5s. 

Payne  (Professor). 

LECTURES  ON  EDUCATION.    Qd.  each. 
I.  Pestalozzi :  the  Influence  of  His  Principles  and  Practice. 
II.  Frobel  and  the  Kindergarten  System.     Second  Edition. 

III.  The  Science  and  Art  of  Education. 

IV.  The  True  Foundation  of  Science  Teaching. 

Pelletan  (Eugene). 

THE  DESERT  PASTOR,  JEAN  JAROUSSEAU.  Translated 
from  the  French.  By  Colonel  E.  P.  De  L'Hoste.  With  an 
Engraved  Frontispiece.    Fcap.  8vo.    New  Edition.    3s.  Qd. 

Penrtce  (Major  J.),  B.A. 

A  DICTIONARY  AND  GLOSSARY  OF  THE  KO-RAN.  With 
copious  Grammatical  Keferences  and  Explanations  of  the  Text. 
4to.    21s, 

Perceval  (Kev.  P.) 

TAMIL  PROVERBS,  WITH  THEIR  ENGLISH  TRANSLATION 

Containing  upwards  of  Six  Thousand  Proverbs.    Third  Edition. 
8vo.     Sewed.     9s. 

Perrier  (Amelia). 

A  WINTER  IN  MOROCCO.  With  Four  Illustrations.  Crown 
8vo.    A  New  and  Cheaper  Edition.    3s.  Qd. 

A  GOOD  MATCH.    A  Novel.    2  vols.     Crown  8vo. 

Peschel  (Dr.) 

MANKIND  :  A  Scientific  Study  of  the  Races  and  Distribution 
of  Man,  considered  in  their  Bodily  Variations,  Languages,  Occupa- 
tions, and  Religions. 

Pettigrew  (J.  B.),  M.D.,  F.K.S. 

ANIMAL  LOCOMOTION;  or,  Walking,  Swimming,  and  Flying. 
Second  Edition.     With  119  Illustrations.     5s. 
Volume  VII.  of  the  International  Scientific  Series. 

Piggot  (John),  F.S.A,  F.K.G.S. 

PERSIA— ANCIENT  AND  MODERN.    Post  8vo.    10s.  Qd. 

Poushkin  (Alexander  Serguevitch). 

RUSSIAN  ROMANCE.  Translated  from  the  Tales  of  Belkin, 
etc.    By  Mrs.  J.  Buchan  Telfer  (w<fe  Mouravieff ).    Cr.  8vo.   7s.  Qd. 


Henry  S.  King  &  Co.'s  Publications.  35 

Power  (Harriet). 

OUR  INVALIDS :  HOW  SHALL  WE  EMPLOY  AND  AMUSE 
THEM  ?     Fcap  8vo.     2s.  6d. 

Powlett  (Lieut.  Norton),  Koyal  Artillery. 

EASTERN  LEGENDS  AND  STORIES   IN  ENGLISH  VERSE. 

Crown  8vo.    5s. 

Presbyter. 

UNEOLDINGS  OF  CHRISTIAN  HOPE.  An  Essay  showing  that 
the  Doctrine  contained  in  the  Damnatory  Clauses  of  the  Creed 
commonly  called  Athanasian  is  unscriptural.  Small  crown  8vo. 
Cloth.     4s.  6d. 

Price  (Prof.  Bonamy). 

CURRENCY  AND  BANKING.     One  Vol.     Crown  8vo.     6s. 

PROCTOR"(Richard  A.) 

OUR  PLACE  AMONG  INFINITIES.  A  Series  of  Essays  con- 
trasting our  little  abode  in  space  and  time  with  the  Infinities 
around  us.  To  which  are  added  "Essays  on  Astrology,"  and 
"  The  Jewish  Sabbath."    6s. 

THE   EXPANSE    OF    HEAVEN.    A  Series  of  Essays  on  the 
Wonders  of   the  Firmament.      With  a  Frontispiece.      Second 
-     Edition.    Crown  8vo.    6s. 

Banking  (B.  Montgomerie). 

STREAMS  FROM  HIDDEN  SOURCES.    Crown  8vo.    6s. 

Ready-Money  Mortiboy. 

READY-MONEY  MORTIBOY.  A  Matter-of-Fact  Story.  Crown 
8vo.     With  frontispiece.     3s.  6d. 

This  is  one  of  the  volumes  of  the  Cornhill  Library  of  Fiction. 

Reaney  (Mrs.  G.  S.) 

WAKING  AND  WORKING;  OR,  FROM  GIRLHOOD  TO 
WOMANHOOD.    With  a  Frontispiece.     Crown  8vo.     5s. 

One  of  Henry  S.  King  and  Co.'s  Five  Shilling  Books  for  the 
Young. 

SUNBEAM  WILLIE,  AND  OTHER  STORIES,  for  Home  Reading 
and  Cottage  Meetings.  Small  square,  uniform  with  "  Lost  Gip," 
etc.    3  Illustrations.     Is.  6d. 

Reginald  Bramble. 

REGINALD  BRAMBLE.  A  Cynic  of  the  Nineteenth  Century. 
An  Autobiography.     1  vol.    Crown  8vo.    10s.  6d. 


36  A  List  of 


Reid  (T.  Wemyss). 

CABINET  PORTRAITS.  Biographical  Sketches  of  Statesmen 
of  the  Day.    1  vol.    Crown  8vo.    7s.  6d. 

Rhoades  (James). 

TIMOLEON.    A  Dramatic  Poem.    Fcap.  8vo.    5s. 

Ribot  (Professor  Th.) 

CONTEMPORARY  ENGLISH  PSYCHOLOGY.   La.  post  8vo.   9*. 

An  analysis  of  the  views  and  opinions  of  the  following  meta- 
physicians, as  expressed  in  their  writings : — James  Mill,  Alexander 
Bain,  John  Stuart  Mill,  George  H.  Lewes,  Herbert  Spencer, 
Samuel  Bailey. 

HEREDITY:  A  Psychological  Study  on  its  Phenomena,  its 
Laws,  its  Causes,  and  its  Consequences.  1  vol.  Large  crown 
8vo.    9s. 

Robertson  (The  Late  Rev.  F.  W.),  M.A. 

THE  LATE  REV.  F.  W.  ROBERTSON,  M.A.,  LIFE  AND 
LETTERS  OF,  Edited  by  the  Kev.  Stopford  Brooke,  M.A., 
Chaplain  in  Ordinary  to  the  Queen. 

I.  2  vols.,  uniform  with  the  Sermons.  With  Steel  Portrait.  7s.  6d. 
II.  Library  Edition,  in  Demy  8vo.  with  Two  Steel  Portraits.  12s. 
III.  A  Popular  Edition,  in  1  vol.    6s. 

New  and  Cheaper  Editions : — 

SERMONS. 

Vol.      I.  Small  crown  8vo.    3s.  Qd. 

Vol.    II.  Small  erown  8vo.     3s.  6d. 

Vol.  III.  Small  crown  8vo.    3s.  6d. 

Vol.  IV.  Small  crown  8vo.    3s.  6d. 

EXPOSITORY  LECTURES  ON  ST.  PAUL'S  EPISTLE  TO  THE 
CORINTHIANS.    Small  crown  8vo.    5s. 

AN  ANALYSIS  OF  MR.  TENNYSON'S  "IN  MEMORIAM." 
(Dedicated  by  Permission  to  the  Poet-Laureate.)    Fcap.  8vo.    2s. 

THE  EDUCATION  OF  THE  HUMAN  RACE.    Translated  from 
the  German  of  Gotthold  Ephraim  Lessing.    Fcap.  8vo.    2s.  6d. 
The  above  Works  can  also  be  had  bound  in  half  morocco. 

***  A  Portrait  of  the  late  Rev.  F.  W.  Robertson,  mounted  for 
framing,  can  be  had,  price  2s.  6d. 

NOTES  ON  GENESIS.    Uniform  with  the  Sermons. 

LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES,  with  other  literary  remains. 
A  New  Edition.    5s. 


Henry  S.  King  &  Co.'s  Publications.  37 

Eoss  (Mrs.  Ellen),  ("Nelsie  Brook.") 

DADDY'S  PET.  A  Sketch  from  Humble  Life.  Square  crown 
8vo.    Uniform  with  "  Lost  Gip."    With  Six  Illustrations.     Is. 

Koxbukghe  Lothian. 

DANTE  AND  BEATRICE  FROM  1282  TO  1290.  A  Romance. 
1  vol.    Post  8vo.    Cloth. 

Kussell  (William  Clark). 

MEMOIRS  OF  MRS.  L.ETITIA  BOOTHBY.   Crown  8vo.    7s.  6d. 

Eussell  (E.  E.) 

IRVING  AS  HAMLET.   Demy8vo.    Second  Edition.  Sewed.  Is. 

Sadler  (S.  W.),  E.K,  Author  of  "  Marshall  Vavasour." 

THE  AFRICAN  CRUISER.  A  Midshipman's  Adventures  on 
the  West  Coast.  A  Book  for  Boys.  With  Three  Illustrations. 
Second  Edition.     Crown  8vo.     3s.  6d. 

One  of  Henry  S.  King  and  Co.'s  Three  and  Sixpenny  Books 
for  the  Young. 

Samarow  (Gregor). 

FOR  SCEPTRE  AND  CROWN.  A  Romance  of  the  Present 
Time.    Translated  by  Fanny  Wormald.    2  vols.    Crown  8vo.    15s. 

Saunders  (Katherine). 

THE  HIGH  MILLS.    A  Novel.    3  vols.    Crown  8vo. 

GIDEON'S  ROCK,  and  other  Stories.     1  vol.    Crown  8vo.    6s. 

JOAN  MERRYWEATHER,  and  other  Stories.  1  vol.  Crown 
8vo.    6s. 

MARGARET  AND  ELIZABETH.  A  Story  of  the  Sea.  1  vol. 
Crown  8vo.     6s. 

TOO  LONG  UNTOLD,  and  other  Stories.     2  vols.    Crown  8vo. 
Contents: — Too  Long  Untold — The  Harpers  of  Men-y-don— 
Ida's  Story — Little  Missy — The  Shaken  Nest. 

Saunders  (John). 

HIRELL.     Crown  8vo.    With  Frontispiece.    3s.  6d. 

ABEL  DRAKE'S  WIFE.  Crown  8vo.  With  Frontispiece. 
3s.  6d. 

These  works  form  separate  volumes  of  the  Cornhill  Library  of 
Fiction. 

ISRAEL  MORT,  OVERMAN.  The  Story  of  the  Mine.  3  vols. 
Crown  8vo. 


38  A  List  of 


Schell  (Major  von). 

THE  OPERATIONS  OF  THE  FIRST  ARMY  UNDER  GEN.  VON 
GOEBEN.  Translated  by  Col.  0.  H.  von  Wright.  Four  Maps. 
Demy  8vo.     9s. 

THE  OPERATIONS  OF  THE  FIRST  ARMY  UNDER  GEN.  VON 
STEINMETZ.  Translated  by  Captain  E.  O.  Hollist.  Demy  8vo. 
10«.  6d. 

These  works  form  separate  volumes  of  Henry  S.  King  and 
Co.'s  Military  Series. 

Scherff  (Major  W.  von). 

STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  INFANTRY  TACTICS.  Parts  I.  and 
II.  Translated  from  the  German  by  Colonel  Lumley  Graham. 
Demy  8vo.     7s.  6d. 

This  work  is  one  of  Henry  S.  King  and  Co.'s  Military  Series. 

Schmidt  (Prof.  Oscar),  Strasburg  University. 

THE  DOCTRINE  OF  DESCENT  AND  DARWINISM.  Second 
Edition.    26  Illustrations.    5s. 

Being  Vol.  XII.  of  the  International  Scientific  Series. 
HANDBOOK    OF    COMPARATIVE    ANATOMY.     Crown    8vo. 

Scott  (Patrick). 

THE  DREAM  AND  THE  DEED,  and  other  Poems.  Fcap. 
8vo.    5s. 

Seeking  his  Fortune,  and  other  Stories. 

SEEKING  HIS  FORTUNE,  and  other  Stories.  Crown  8vo. 
With  Four  Illustrations.     3s.  6d. 

One  of  Henry  S.  King  and  Co.'s  Three  and  Sixpenny  Books 
for  the  Young. 

Senior  (Nassau  William). 

ALEXIS  DE  TOCQUEVILLE.  Correspondence  and  Conversa- 
tions with  Nassau  W.  Senior,  from  1833  to  1859.  Edited  by 
M.  C.  M.  Simpson.    2  vols.    Large  post  8vo.    21s. 

JOURNALS  KEPT  IN  FRANCE  AND  ITALY.  From  1848  to 
1852.  With  a  Sketch  of  the  Bevolution  of  1848.  Edited  by  his 
Daughter,  M.  C.  M.  Simpson.    2  vols.    Post  8vo.    24s. 

Seven  Autumn  Leaves. 

SEVEN  AUTUMN  LEAVES  FROM  FAIRYLAND.  Illustrated 
with  9  Etchings.    Square  crown  8vo.    3s.  Qd. 


Henry  S.  King  &  Co.'s  Publications.  39 

Shadwell  (Major-General),  C.B. 

MOUNTAIN  WAEFAEE.  Illustrated  by  the  Campaign  of  1799 
in  Switzerland.  Being  a  Translation  of  the  Swiss  Narrative  com- 
piled from  the  Works  of  the  Archduke  Charles,  Jomini,  and 
others.  Also  of  Notes  by  General  H.  Dufour  on  the  Campaign  of 
the  Valtelline  in  1635.  With  Appendix,  Maps,  and  Introductory 
Kemarks.    Demy  8vo.    16s. 

Sheldon  (Philip). 

WOMAN'S  A  EIDDLE ;  or,  Baby  Warmstrey.  A  Novel.  3  vols. 
Crown  8vo. 

Sheeman  (Gen.  W.  T.) 

MEMOIRS  OF  GEN.  W.  T.  SHEEMAN,  Commander  of  the 
Federal  Forces  in  the  American  Civil  War.  By  Himself.  2  vols. 
Demy  8vo.    With  Map.    24s.     Copyright  English  Edition. 

Shelley  (Lady). 

SHELLEY  MEMOEIALS  FEOM  AUTHENTIC  SOUECES.  With 
(now  first  printed)  an  Essay  on  Christianity  by  Percy  Bysshe 
Shelley.    Third  Edition.    Crown  8vo.    With  Portrait.    5«. 

Shipley  (Kev.  Orby),  M.A. 

STUDIES  IN  MODEEN  PEOBLEMS.  By  various  Writers. 
Crown  8vo.    2  vols.    5*.  each. 


Sacramental  Confession. 

Abolition  of  the  Thirty- 
nine  Articles.    Part  I. 

The  Sanctity  of  Marriage. 

Creation  and  Modern 
Science. 


Contents. — Vol.  I. 

Ketreats  for  Persons  Living  in 

the  World. 
Catholic  and  Protestant. 
The  Bishops  on  Confession  in 

the  Church  of  England. 


Some  Principles  of  Chris- 
tian Ceremonial. 

A  Layman's  View  of  Con- 
fession of  Sin  to  a  Priest. 
Parts  I.  and  II. 

Keservation  of  the  Blessed 
Sacrament. 


Contents.— Vol.  II. 

Missions  and  Preaching  Orders. 

Abolition  of  the  Thirty-nine 
Articles.    Part  II. 

The  First  Liturgy  of  Edward 
VI.  and  our  own  office  con- 
trasted and  compared. 


SMEDLEY  (M.  B.) 

BOAEDING-OUT  AND  PAUPEE  SCHOOLS  FOE  GIELS.    Crown 
8vo.    3s.  6d. 


40  A  List  of 

Smith  (Edward)  M.D.,  LL.B.,  F.K.S. 

HEALTH  AND  DISEASE,  as  influenced  by  the  Daily,  Seasonal, 
and  other  Cyclical  Changes  in  the  Human  System.  A  New 
Edition.    Is.  6d. 

FOODS.     Third  Edition.    Profusely  Illustrated.     5s. 

Volume  III.  of  the  International  Scientific  Series. 

PRACTICAL  DIETARY  FOR  FAMILIES,  SCHOOLS,  AND  THE 
LABOURING  CLASSES.    A  New  Edition.    3s.  6d. 

CONSUMPTION  IN  ITS  EARLY  AND  REMEDIABLE  STAGES. 
A  New  Edition.    7s.  6d. 

Smith  (Hubert). 

TENT  LIFE  WITH  ENGLISH  GIPSIES  IN  NORWAY.  With 
Five  full-page  Engravings  and  Thirty-one  smaller  Illustrations 
by  Whymper  and  others,  and  Map  of  the  Country  showing 
Koutes.    Second  Edition.     Revised  and  Corrected.    8vo.    21s. 

Songs  for  Music. 

SONGS  FOR  MUSIC.   By  Four  Friends.  Square  crown  8vo.  5s. 
Containing  Songs  by  Reginald  A.  Gatty,  Stephen  H.  Gatty, 
Greville  J.  Chester,  and  Juliana  H.  Ewing. 

Some  Time  in  Ireland. 

SOME  TIME  IN  IRELAND.  A  Recollection.  Crown  8vo. 
Is.  6d. 

Songs  of  Two  Worlds. 

SONGS  OF  TWO  WORLDS.  By  a  New  Writer.  First  Series. 
Second  Edition.    Fcap.  8vo.    5s. 

SONGS  OF  TWO  WORLDS.  By  a  New  Writer.  Second  Series. 
Second  Edition.    Fcap.  8vo.    5«. 

SONGS  OF  TWO  WORLDS.  By  a  New  Writer.  Third  Series. 
Fcap.  8vo.    58. 

Spencer  (Herbert). 

THE  STUDY  OF  SOCIOLOGY.    Fourth  Edition.  Crown  8vo.   5s. 
Volume  V.  of  the  International  Scientific  Series. 

Stevenson  (Kev.  W.  Fleming). 

HYMNS  FOR  THE  CHURCH  AND  HOME.  Selected  and 
Edited  by  the  Rev.  W.  Fleming  Stevenson. 

The  most  complete  Hymn  Book  published. 

The  Hymn  Book  consists  of  Three  Parts : — I.  For  Public  Wor- 
ship.— II.  For  Family  and  Private  Worship. — III.  For  Children. 

***  Published  in  various  forms  and  prices,  the  latter  ranging 
from  8d.  to  6s.  Lists  and  full  particulars  will  be  furnished  on 
application  to  the  Publishers. 


Henry  S.  King  &  Co.'s  Publications.  41 

Stewart  (Professor  Balfour). 

ON    THE    CONSERVATION    OF    ENERGY.     Third    Edition. 
With  Fourteen  Engravings.    5s. 
Volume  VI.  of  the  International  Scientific  Series. 

Stretton  (Hesba).  Author  of  "  Jessica's  First  Prayer." 

CASSY.  Twenty-first  Thousand.  With  Six  Illustrations. 
Square  crown  8vo.     Is.  Gd. 

THE  KING'S  SERVANTS.  With  Eight  Illustrations.  Twenty- 
sixth  Thousand.     Square  crown  8vo.     Is.  Gd. 

LOST  GIP.  Thirty-eighth  Thousand.  With  Six  Illustrations. 
Square  crown  8vo.     Is.  Gd. 

*#*  Also  a  handsomely -bound  Edition,  with  Twelve  Illustrations, 
price  Is.  Gd. 

THE  WONDERFUL  LIFE.  Seventh  Thousand.  Fcap.  8vo. 
2s.  Gd. 

HESTER  MORLEY'S  PROMISE.     3  vols.     Crown  8vo. 

THE  DOCTOR'S  DILEMMA.     3  vols.     Crown  8vo. 

FRIENDS  TILL  DEATH.    With  Illustration.     Gd. 

Stubbs    (Major    Francis   W.),    Eoyal    (late   Bengal) 
Artillery. 

THE  REGIMENT  OF  BENGAL  ARTILLERY  :  The  History  of 
its  Organization,  Equipment,  and  War  Services.  With  Maps 
and  Plans.    2  vols.    8vo.  [Preparing. 

Sully  (James). 

SENSATION  AND  INTUITION.     Demy  8vo.    10s.  Gd. 

Taylor  (Kev.  J.  W.  Augustus),  M.A. 

POEMS.    Fcap.  8vo.    5s. 

Taylor  (Sir  Henry). 

EDWIN  THE  FAIR  AND  ISAAC  COMNENUS.     3*.  6d. 
A  SICILIAN  SUMMER  AND  OTHER  POEMS.    3s.  Gd. 

Taylor  (Colonel  Meadows),  C.S.I.,  M.E.I.A. 

SEETA.    A  Novel.    3  vols. 
THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  A  THUG. 
TARA :  a  Mahratta  Tale. 
RALPH  DARNELL. 
TIPPOO  SULTAN. 

A  NOBLE  QUEEN.    3  vols.    Crown  8vo. 
New  and  Cheaper  Edition  in  one  vol.  crown  8vo.  with  Frontis- 
piece.   Each  Gs. 


42  A  List  of 

Tennyson  (Alfred). 

QUEEN  MARY.    A  Drama.    Crown  8vo.    6s. 

Tennyson's  (Alfred)  Works.  Cabinet  Edition.  Ten 
Volumes.    Each  with  Portrait.    2s.  6d. 

Cabinet  Edition.     10  vols.     Complete  in  handsome  Orna- 
mental Case.    28s. 

Tennyson's  (Alfred)  Works.  Author's  Edition.  Com- 
plete in  Eive  Volumes.  Cloth  gilt,  6s.  each;  half-morocco, 
Eoxburgh  style,  7s.  Gd.  each. 

EARLY  POEMS,  and  ENGLISH  IDYLLS.— Vol.  I. 

LOCKSLEY  HALL,  LUCRETIUS,  and  other  Poems.— Vol.  II. 

THE  IDYLLS  OF  THE  KING  (Complete).— Vol.  III. 

THE  PRINCESS,  and  MAUD.— Vol.  IV. 

ENOCH  ARDEN,  and  IN  MEMORIAM.— Vol.  V. 


TENNYSON'S  IDYLLS  OF  THE  KING,  and  other  Poems. 
Illustrated  by  Julia  Margaret  Cameron.  1  vol.  Folio.  Half- 
bound  morocco,  cloth  sides.    Six  Guineas. 

Tennyson's  (Alfred)  Works.    Original  Editions. 

POEMS.    Small  8vo.    6s. 

MAUD,  and  other  Poems.    Small  8vo.    3s.  Gd. 

THE  PRINCESS.    Small  8vo.    3s.  Gd. 

IDYLLS  OF  THE  KING.    Small  8vo.    5s. 

IDYLLS  OF  THE  KING.    Collected.    Small  8vo.    7s. 

THE  HOLY  GRAIL,  and  other  Poems.    Small  8vo.    4s.  Gd. 

GARETH  AND  LYNETTE.    Small  8vo.    3s. 

ENOCH  ARDEN,  etc.    Small  8vo.    3s.  Gd. 

SELECTIONS  FROM  THE  ABOVE  WORKS.  Square  8vo. 
Cloth,  3s.  Gd.     Cloth  gilt,  extra,  4s. 

SONGS  FROM  THE  ABOVE  WORKS.  Square  8vo.  Cloth 
extra,  3s.  Gd. 

IN  MEMORIAM.    Small  8vo.    4s. 

LIBRARY  EDITION.    In  6  vols.    8vo.    10s.  Gd.  each. 

POCKET  VOLUME  EDITION.     11  vols.    In  neat  case,  31s.  Gd. 

Ditto,      ditto.      Extra  cloth  gilt,  in  case,  35s. 

POEMS.    Illustrated  Edition.    4to.    25s. 


Henry  S.  King  &  Co. '8  Publications.  43 

Thomas  (Moy). 

A  FIGHT  FOR  LIFE.    Crown  Svo.   With  Frontispiece.    3s.  6d. 
This  is  one  of  the  volumes  of  the  Cornhill  Library  of  Fiction. 

Thomson  (J.  T.),  F.K.G.S. 

HAKAYIT  ABDULLA.  The  Autobiography  of  a  Malay  Munshi, 
between  the  years  1808  and  1843.    Demy  8vo.     12s. 

Thompson  (A.  C.) 

PRELUDES.  A  Volume  of  Poems.  Illustrated  by  Elizabeth 
Thompson  (Painter  of  "  The  Roll  Call  ")•    8vo.    7s.  6d. 

Thompson    (Eev.   A.   S.),   British    Chaplain    at    St. 

Petersburg. 

HOME  WORDS  FOR  WANDERERS.  A  Volume  of  Sermons. 
Crown  8vo.    6s. 

Thoughts  in  Verse.     Small  crown  8vo.    Is.  6d. 
Thring  (Rev.  Godfrey),  B.A. 

HYMNS  AND  SACRED  LYRICS.     1  vol.    Fcap.  8vo.    5a. 

Todd  (Herbert),  M.A. 

ARVAN ;  or,  The  Story  of  the  Sword.  A  Poem.  Crown  8vo. 
7s.  6d. 

Traherne  (Mrs.  Arthur). 

THE  ROMANTIC  ANNALS  OF  A  NAVAL  FAMILY.  Crown 
8vo.    A  New  and  Cheaper  Edition.    5s. 

Travers  (Mar.) 

THE  SPINSTERS  OF  BLATCHINGTON.  A  Novel.  2  vols. 
Crown  8vo, 

Teevandrum  Observations. 

OBSERVATIONS  OF  MAGNETIC  DECLINATION  MADE  AT 
TREVANDRTJM  AND  AGUSTIA  MALLEY  in  the  Observatories 
of  his  Highness  the  Maharajah  of  Travancore,  G.C.S.I.,  in  the 
Years  1852  to  1860.  Being  Trevandrum  Magnetical  Observa- 
tions, Volume  I.  Discussed  and  Edited  by  John  Allan  Brown, 
F.R.S.,  late  Director  of  the  Observatories.  With  an  Appendix. 
Imp.  4to.     Cloth.    £3  3s. 

*#*  The  Appendix,  containing  Reports  on  the  Observatories  and 
on  the  Public  Museum,  Public  Park,  and  Gardens  at  Trevandrum, 
pp.  xii.-116,  may  be  had  separately.     2ls. 


44  A  List  of 


Turner  (Kev.  Charles). 

SONNETS,  LYRICS,  AND  TEANSLATIONS.  Crown  8vo.  4s.  Qd. 

Tyndall  (J.),  LL.D.,  F.K.S. 

THE  FORMS  OF  WATEE  IN  CLOUDS  AND  RIVERS,  ICE 
AND  GLACIERS.  With  Twenty-six  Illustrations.  Fourth 
Edition.    Crown  8vo.    5s. 

Volume  I.  of  the  International  Scientific  Series. 

Umbra  Oxoniensis. 

results   of  the  expostulation   of  the   right 

HONOURABLE  W.  E.  GLADSTONE,  in  their  Relation  to  the 
Unity  of  Roman  Catholicism.    Large  fcap.  8vo.    5s. 

Upton  (Koger  D.),  Captain  late  9th  Koyal  Lancers. 

NEWMARKET  AND  ARABIA.  An  Examination  of  the 
Descent  of  Racers  and  Coursers.  With  Pedigrees  and  Frontis- 
piece.   Post  8vo.    9s. 

Vambery  (Prof.  Arminius),  of  the  University  of  Pesth. 

BOKHARA  :  Its  History  and  Conquest.    Demy  8vo.    18s. 

Vanessa.     By  the  Author  of  "  Thomasina,"  etc.     A 
Novel.    Second  Edition.    2  vols.    Crown  8vo. 

Vaughan  (Kev.  C.  J.),  D.D. 

WORDS  OF  HOPE  FROM  THE  PULPIT  OF  THE  TEMPLE 
CHURCH.    Third  Edition.     Crown  8vo.    5s. 

THE  SOLIDITY  OF  TRUE  RELIGION,  and  other  Sermons 
Preached  in  London  during  the  Election  and  Mission  Week, 
February,  1874.     Crown  8vo.    3s.  Qd. 

FORGET  THINE  OWN  PEOPLE.  An  Appeal  for  Missions. 
Crown  8vo.    3s.  Qd. 

THE  YOUNG  LIFE  EQUIPPING  ITSELF  FOR  GOD'S  SER- 
VICE. Being  Four  Sermons  Preached  before  the  University  pf 
Cambridge,  in  November,  1872.  Fourth  Edition.  Crown  Svo. 
3s.  Qd. 

Vincent  (Capt.  C.  E.  H.),  late  Eoyal  Welsh  Fusiliers. 

ELEMENTARY  MILITARY  GEOGRAPHY,  RECONNOITRING, 
AND  SKETCHING.  Compiled  for  Non-Commissioned  Officers 
and  Soldiers  of  all  Arms.     Square  crown  Svo.    2s.  Qd. 

RUSSIA'S  ADVANCE  EASTWARD.  Based  on  the  Official 
Reports  of  Lieutenant  Hugo  Stumm,  German  Military  Attache' 
to  the  Khivan  Expedition.    With  Map.    Crown  8vo.    Gs. 


Henry  S.  King  &  Co.'a  Publications.  45 

Vizcaya  ;  or,  Life  in  the  Land  of  the  Carlists. 

VIZCAYA.;  or,  Life  in  the  Land  of  the  Carlists  at  the  Outbreak 
of  the  Insurrection,  with  some  Account  of  the  Iron  Mines  and 
other  Characteristics  of  the  Country.  With  a  Map  and  Eight 
Illustrations.    Crown  8vo.    9s. 

Vogel  (Prof.),  Polytechnic  Academy  of  Berlin. 

THE  CHEMICAL  EFFECTS  OF  LIGHT  AND  PHOTOGRAPHY, 

in    their    application    to  Art,   Science,  and    Industry.      Third 
Edition.    The  translation  thoroughly  revised.     With  100  Illus- 
trations, including  some  beautiful  Specimens  of  Photography.    5s. 
Volume  XV.  of  the  International  Scientific  Series. 

Vyner  (Lady  Mary). 

EVERY  DAY  A  PORTION.  Adapted  from  the  Bible  and 
the  Prayer  Book,  for  the  Private  Devotions  of  those  living  in 
Widowhood.  Collected  and  Edited  by  Lady  Mary  Vyner.  Square 
crown  8vo.    Elegantly  bound.    58. 

Waiting  for  Tidings. 

WAITING  FOR  TIDINGS.  By  the  Author  of  "  White  and 
Black."    3  vols.    Crown  8vo. 

Wartensleben  (Count  Hermann  von),  Colonel  in  the 
Prussian  General  Staff. 

THE  OPERATIONS  OF  THE  SOUTH  ARMY  IN  JANUARY 
AND  FEBRUARY,  1871.  Compiled  from  the  Official  War  Docu- 
ments of  the  Head-quarters  of  the  Southern  Army.  Translated 
by  Colonel  C.  H.  von  Wright.    With  Maps.    Demy  8vo.    6*. 

THE  OPERATIONS  OF  THE  FIRST  ARMY  UNDER  GEN. 
VON  MANTEUFFEL.  Translated  by  Colonel  C.  H.  von  Wright. 
Uniform  with  the  above.     Demy  8vo.    9s. 

These  works  form  separate  volumes  of  Henry  S.  King  and 
Co.'s  Military  Series. 

Wedmore  (Frederick). 

TWO  GIRLS.    2  vols.    Crown  8vo. 

Wells  (Captain  John  C),  K.N. 

SPITZBERGEN— THE  GATEWAY  TO  THE  POLYNIA;   or,  A 

Voyage  to  Spitzbergen.  With  numerous  Illustrations  by  Whymper 
and  others,  and  Map.    8vo.    21s. 

What  'tis  to  Love.    By  the  Author  of  "  Flora  Adair," 

"  The  Value  of  Fostertown."    3  vols.    Crown  8vo. 


46  A  List  of 

Whitney  (William  D  wight).     Professor  of  Sanskrit 

and  Comparative  Philology  in  Yale  College,  New  Haven. 

THE  LIFE  AND  GROWTH  OF  LANGUAGE.    Second  Edition. 
Crown  8vo.     5s.     Copyright  Edition. 
Volume  XVI.  of  the  International  Scientific  Series. 

Whittle  (J.  Lowry),  A.M.,  Trin.  Coll.,  Dublin. 

•  CATHOLICISM  AND  THE  VATICAN.  With  a  Narrative  of  the 
Old  Catholic  Congress  at  Munich.  Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo. 
4s.  6d. 

Wilbekforce  (Henry  W.) 

THE  CHURCH  AND  THE  EMPIRES.  Historical  Periods. 
Preceded  by  a  Memoir  of  the  Author  by  John  Henry  Newman, 
D.D.,  of  the  Oratory.    With  Portrait.    Post  8vo.     10s.  6d. 

Wilkinson  (T.  Lean). 

SHORT  LECTURES  ON  THE  LAND  LAWS.  Delivered  before 
the  Working  Men's  College.    Crown  8vo.    2s. 

Williams  (Rev.  Kowland),  D.D. 

LIFE  AND  LETTERS  OF  ROWLAND  WILLIAMS,  D.D.,  with 

Selections  from  his  Note-books.  Edited  by  Mrs.  Rowland 
Williams.  With  a  Photographic  Portrait.  2  vols.  Large  post 
8vo.    24s. 

Willoughby  (The  Hon.  Mrs.) 

ON  THE  NORTH  WIND— THISTLEDOWN.  A  Volume  of 
Poems.    Elegantly  bound.    Small  crown  8vo.    7s.  6d. 

Wilson  (H.  Schiitz). 

STUDIES  AND  ROMANCES.     Crown  8vo.    7s.  6d. 

WlNTERBOTHAM  (Rev.  R.),  M.A.,  B.Sc. 

SERMONS  AND  EXPOSITIONS.     Crown  8vo.    7s.  6d. 

Wood  (C.  F.) 

A  YACHTING  CRUISE  IN  THE  SOUTH  SEAS.  Demy  8vo. 
With  Six  Photographic  Illustrations.    7s.  6d. 

Wright  (Rev.  W.),  of  Stoke  Bishop,  Bristol. 

MAN  AND  ANIMALS:  A  Sermon.  Crown  8vo.  Stitched  in 
wrapper.     Is. 

WAITING  FOR  THE  LIGHT,  AND  OTHER  SERMONS.  Crown 
8vo.    6s. 


Henry  S.  King  &  Coh  Publications.  47 

Wyld  (R.  8.),  F.R.S.E. 

THE  PHYSICS  AND  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  SENSES;  or, 
The  Mental  and  the  Physical  in  their  Mutual  Eelation.  Illus- 
trated by  several  Plates.    Demy  8vo.     16s. 

Yonge   (C.  D.),  Regius  Professor,   Queen's  College, 
Belfast. 

HISTORY  OF  THE  ENGLISH  REVOLUTION  OF  1688.  Crown 
8vo.    6s. 

Yokke   (Stephen),   Author  of  "Tales  of   the   North 
Biding." 

CLEVEDEN.    A  Novel.     2  vols.    Crown  8vo. 

Youmans  (Eliza  A.) 

AN  ESSAY  ON  THE  CULTURE  OF  THE  OBSERVING 
POWERS  OF  CHILDREN,  especially  in  connection  with  the 
Study  of  Botany.  Edited,  with  Notes  and  a  Supplement,  by 
Joseph  Payne,  F.C.P.,  Author  of  "  Lectures  on  the  Science  and 
Art  of  Education,"  etc.    Crown  8vo.    2s.  6d. 

FIRST  BOOK  OF  BOTANY.  Designed  to  cultivate  the  Observ- 
ing Powers  of  Children.  With  300  Engravings.  New  and 
Enlarged  Edition.    Crown  8vo.    5s. 

Youmans  (Edward  L.),  M.D. 

A  CLASS  BOOK  OF  CHEMISTRY,  on  the  Basis  of  the  new 
System.    With  200  Illustrations. 

Zimmern  (Helen). 

STORIES  IN  PRECIOUS  STONES.  With  Six  Illustrations. 
Third  Edition.    Crown  8vo.    5s. 


Canton  Printing  Works,  Beccles. 


r 


PA      Pindarus 

4275       The  Olympian  and  Pythian 

E5M6  odes 


PLEASE  60  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY
