# The Mahatma Letters to A.P. Sinnett

*Extracted from archive.org PDF | 12078 pages in source*

---

BLAVATSKY'S BOOKS
ON DISCIPLESHIP IN THE AQUARIAN AGE
Phase - I
P r e p a r a t o r y
1875-1890
Kangchenjunga, 1944
part of painting by Nicholas Roerich
Links
THE DURBÂR IN LAHORE
FROM THE CAVES AND JUNGLES OF HINDOSTAN
THE PEOPLE OF THE BLUE MOUNTAINS
ISIS UNVEILED Volume I - SCIENCE
ISIS UNVEILED Volume II - THEOLOGY
THE KEY TO THEOSOPHY
THE VOICE OF THE SILENCE
SECRET DOCTRINE COMMENTARY
GEMS FROM THE EAST
THE THEOSOPHYCAL GLOSSARY
NIGHTMARE TALES
THE SECRET DOCTRINE Volume I - COSMOGENESIS
THE SECRET DOCTRINE Volume II - ANTHROPOGENESIS
A MODERN PANARION
THE SECRET DOCTRINE Volume III
THEOGENESIS
THE MAHATMA LETTERS
THE LETTERS OF H. P. BLAVATSKY TO A. P. SINNETT
COLLECTED WRITINGS Volumes: from I to XV
ADYAR PAMPHLETS
STUDIES IN OCCULTISM
This combined file has been edited by the lobsang tashi lotsawa group to facilitate searches on topics through mobile devices. File for personal use. [Release: 03 - Wesak, 2021]

---PAGE BREAK---

Lord Maitreya
Tashilhunpo Monastery in S higatse, Tibet - China
(photo 2016)

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

Lord Maitreya
Tashilhunpo Monastery in S higatse, Tibet - China
(photo 2016)

---PAGE BREAK---

THE DURBÂR IN LAHORE
FROM THE DIARY OF A RUSSIAN
by Helena Petrovna Blavatsky
Nov. 3, 1880 – H.P.B. and H.S.O. leave Amritsar for Lahore on the 4:45 p.m. train; reach
destination at 7 p.m. (Diaries). H.S.O. lectures there on the 7th (ODL, II, 258-60). Lord Ripon holds a
Durbâr described by H.P.B. as “The Durbâr in Lahore,” in the Russkiy Vestnik, Vol. 153, May, June,
and Vol. 154, July, 1881 (ODL, II, 263-65). [Collected Writings, Volume II, p. xxxv.]
NOTES: This edition is a reproduction of the original articles published by THEOSOPHICAL PUBLISHING
HOUSE in Adyar, Chennai [Madras] India, in “The Theosophist” (from August, 1960 to March, 1961.)
Online facsimile edition, 2021.
Links
| From The Theosophist & Contents |
| Through the Hills of Simla … |
| Sikhism and the Prince-Gurus … |
| The Bazaar at Amritsar … |
| A Necessary Digression … |
| The City of Lepers … |
| The British Nimrod … |
| The Shalimar Gardens … |
| The Great Durbâr … |
1
3

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

THE DURBAR IN LAHORE, 1881
(From The Theosophist)
[It was in November, 1880, that H. P. Blavatsky and Col. Henry S. Olcott went
to Lahore to organize a local Branch of The Theosophical Society and discuss
various metaphysical subjects with several distinguished scholars. The Viceregal Durbar
held by the Marquis of Ripon fell on November 15th, and was described by H.P.B. in her
inimitable style, for the benefit of the Russian reading public, in the pages of the
Russkiy Vestnik (Russian Messenger). The original Russian text was published in
Volumes 153-54 of this periodical, in the issues for May, June and July, 1881.
Col. Olcott himself gives a brief description of these festivities in the Second
Series of his Old Diary Leaves, pp. 259-65. It is of course most likely that he never
actually read the Russian version, due to the fact of not being versed in the Russian
language, unless H.P.B. translated for him passages from her story.
As far as is known, "The Durbar in Lahore" has never been translated into
any language until now. The present English translation is based on a rough MSS.
translation made many years ago by Miss Inga Sjostedt. It has been compared word for
word with the original Russian text, worked over by the present writer, and thoroughly
gone over and polished up by Mrs. Irene R. Ponsonby, whose scholarly knowledge
of the English language has been for many years of inestimable value in the final
proof-reading and editing of the volumes of H.P.B.'s Collected Writings, now in process
of publication.
Every effort has been made to preserve in this translation, as much as possible, the
flowing style of H.P.B.'s Russian original, her witticisms, and the many
characteristic expressions with which her writings abound. Even to students
thoroughly familiar with H.P.B.'s literary output, the present story will be entirely new. -
Boris de Zirkoff]
CONTENTS
The Theosophist: August, 1960 - from p. 290 to p. 302 — I
The Theosophist: September, 1960 - from p. 359 to p. 374 — II
The Theosophist: October, 1960 - from p. 8 to p. 20 — III
The Theosophist: November, 1960 - from p. 81 to p. 101 — III Continued
The Theosophist: December, 1960 - from p. 148 to p. 163 — IV
The Theosophist: January, 1961 - from p. 229 to p. 245 — V
The Theosophist: February, 1961 - from p. 286 to p. 302 — VI
The Theosophist: March, 1961 - from p. 357 to p. 380 — VII
2
4---PAGE BREAK---THE DURBAR IN LAHORE, 1881
[The Theosophist — August, 1960 - from p. 290 to p. 302]
I. Through the hills of Simla to Kalka and Umballa. - The sanitariums of India
and the tea-plantation of an Indian Cincinnatus. - The Pinjor gardens of the
Maharaja of Patiala. - Chariots of torture. - Kalka and the happy scorpion family. -
Amritsar and its cosmopolitan populace. Having received, while in Simla, something between an invitation and a
gracious permission of the authorities to attend the viceregal durbar1 which was to take
place from the 9th to the 16th of November, 1880, we decided to leave for Lahore ahead
of time. Since the durbar of 1864, held by Lord (in those days merely Sir) John Lawrence,
well known in political circles for his "artistic policy of inaction," as the Tories
ironically called it, a policy to which the new viceroy, the Marquis of Ripon, has been
strictly enjoined to adhere - there had been no durbar in Lahore. The forthcoming durbar -
arranged for the official presentation to the Viceroy of the rulers of Panjab, the rajas
and nawabs2 who since 1849 had not yet become accustomed to British domination and
were often forgetful of it, and of the Maharaja of Kashmir who was constantly suspected
of Russian intrigues - promised to be magnificent. Besides, we wanted to attend the
annual festival of Divali in Amritsar, that ancient stronghold of the Sikhs.... The festival of Divali, literally translated, could be looked upon as the festival of
"All Saints," la Toussaint, or more properly "all gods," as deva means a divinity and not
merely a saint. It is the most solemn festival in the country. Enormous sums of money collected by the Brahmanas for a whole year are spent
on the night of the Divali, while the municipalities allot lakhs3 of rupees for the
solemnities. Every town, village and hamlet, every road even, is illuminated by
myriads of fire-pots, torches, and multi-colored lanterns in honor of the 333 million
national gods....---PAGE BREAK---

Enormous sums of money collected by the Brahmanas for a whole year are spent
on the night of the Divali, while the municipalities allot lakhs3 of rupees for the
solemnities. Every town, village and hamlet, every road even, is illuminated by
myriads of fire-pots, torches, and multi-colored lanterns in honor of the 333 million
national gods.... But Amritsar, which is the centre of Sikhism,4 far surpasses all other
Indian towns with its magnificent illuminations and its costly fireworks, but mainly
with the marvels of its Golden Temple, blazing with lights and casting its reflection in
the surrounding lake as in a polished mirror. On that night, from all parts of the country,
the once formidable potentates of India, great and small, assemble under the guardianship
1 A durbar is a royal levie, a ceremonial and public reception. Besides the Viceroy, only a limited
number of the ruling princes of India have the right to hold public durbars. 2 Written nawab but pronounced nauab, a word changed in Europe for some reason into nabab. 3 A lakh is equal to one-hundred-thousand. 4 Amrista, or Amritsar, is a fortified town in Panjab, one-and-a-half hours' drive from Lahore, the
capital of Ranjit-Singh, famous in history as the "Lion of Panjab". From an insignificant hamlet, Amritsar
became a flourishing and wealthy city, thanks to its Golden Temple on the lake of Immortality, erected in
1581 by Ram-Das, the fourth Sikh Guru (spiritual teacher), a temple which attracts hundreds of thousands
of pilgrims. Here the best shawls in India are woven and sold, successfully vying in this respect with
Kashmir, and a brisk trade is here also carried on with Bokhara in finest goats' hair. 3
5

---PAGE BREAK---THE DURBAR IN LAHORE, 1881
of their British nurses, the political Residents. The Europeans, in the meantime, crowd
the hotels, and having appropriated the best places for viewing the illuminations,
magnanimously permit the native princes to stand behind their seats! It is true that the
Sikhs are strict monotheists, but since 1489 (the year when they renounced polytheism)
they do not seem to have had time to decide which of the 333 million gods in the
Hindu Pantheon is the one and only God proclaimed by Nanak;5 therefore they have
continued in the meantime to venerate all the gods equally. Prudence is never out of
season. Having decided on our way to Lahore to accept the cordial invitation of our
friends and allies, the Aryas,6 to stay with them in Amritsar, we chose the 21st of October
as the day of our departure from Simla, after sending our things off in good time down
into the valley, on the backs of the common Indian beast of burden - the coolie. The
poverty prevailing among the people may be imagined from the prices asked by the coolies
for the transport of heavy trunks and baggage from Simla to Kalka, i.e., 114 miles round
trip. Who would believe in Russia that we hired twelve men, two for each heavy trunk, for
ten rupees! Where in the world could one find a laborer so poor that he would be willing to
carry on foot, over one steep grade after another, a trunk weighing several poods7 for
57 miles, to receive only two shillings on his return. And so, after impartially dividing our sincere regrets upon parting between our
kind English friends and the marvelous freshness of the forest of deodars8 and firs, we
prepared to set off, in the early morning of October 21st. The use of carriages is forbidden in Simla on account of the narrow and exceedingly
winding roads, or rather lanes, along the brink of innumerable hills where there are frequent
landslides.---PAGE BREAK---

And so, after impartially dividing our sincere regrets upon parting between our
kind English friends and the marvelous freshness of the forest of deodars8 and firs, we
prepared to set off, in the early morning of October 21st. The use of carriages is forbidden in Simla on account of the narrow and exceedingly
winding roads, or rather lanes, along the brink of innumerable hills where there are frequent
landslides. The Viceroy alone has the right to drive in a tiny open carriage with a pair of
small ponies; all other mortals have to be content with riding on horse-back or being
carried in palanquins. Even elderly, portly matrons pay their calls, or go to balls on horse-
back or in litters. Therefore, although the post-stage stands over 2,000 feet below the villas
occupied by the English colony, scattered like eagles' aeries over the cliffs, some of us
were forced to set out on foot and some in jampans. I cannot bid goodbye to Simla without
some unkind thoughts on the jampan, invented most likely by the Inquisitors, and I feel I
must describe it. It is a detestable kind of palanquin, something between a chaise-longue
and a narrow canvas cradle, with four wooden paws suspended from two thick poles, which
make the whole thing look like a frog hanging upside down by its legs. Having loaded this
Anglo-Chinese invention on their shoulders, with the passenger inside it condemned to
torture, from four to six hale and muscular Paharis (a tribe of mountaineers) begin to trot
unevenly, shaking their burden like a sack of flour. The victim, once squeezed into his seat
and tightly swaddled in the canvas of the frog-cradle, becomes literally helpless for the
5 Nanak was the founder of Sikhism. 6 The Aryas are followers of the religious reformer Swami Dayananda Sarasvati, a rival of the
famous Chunder Sen, the prophet of Bengal. Both have covered India with Samajas (fraternal
communities). 7 [1 pood equals 40 lbs. - Translator.]
8 A deodar is a Himalayan cedar. 4
6---PAGE BREAK---THE DURBAR IN LAHORE, 1881
duration of the trip. The Paharis, apart from their own mountain dialect - unknown to the
rest of the world - understand nothing; whether one shouts at them or not, makes no
difference. Constantly transferring the shafts of the litter from one shoulder to the other,
they shake the litter in the process and toss it in every direction, swinging it about, and
every moment risk hurling the living burden into the yawning abysses on either side of the
steep, narrow footpath. To complete this aesthetic pleasure, probably in the hopes of an
additional baksheesh (they receive but 2 annas, or 3 pence, daily per man), the bearers,
or "jampanees" as they are here called, begin to groan, moan, and later even to bellow.... If their groaning is not nipped in the bud, the whole forest will soon begin to moan
in response. The English do not argue with them, but lashing their bare backs with a
whip, control them as though they were actual horses. In my position of a humble
Russian visitor, however, there was nothing for me except to remain silent and endure. After being spilled out of the infernal cradle onto the dusty courtyard of the
post-stage, I shook out my clothes and joined a party of friends who were also leaving Simla
that morning. Here another, equally infernal machine, invented for mountain
excursions, awaited us. The post road from Simla to Kalka (57 miles) is so narrow and
twisted, and the descent is so steep, that until three years ago there was no means of
traveling along the old road except on horseback or on elephants, but now a new road has
been made, a wider if not a better one. There, winding its way among camels and
elephants that are going the other way, the so-called tonga moves along with the speed of
lightning. It is a two-wheeled carriage in which two people sit with their backs towards
the horses, their chins propped on their knees, while a third, the driver, hangs by the
horses' tails.There, winding its way among camels and
elephants that are going the other way, the so-called tonga moves along with the speed of
lightning. It is a two-wheeled carriage in which two people sit with their backs towards
the horses, their chins propped on their knees, while a third, the driver, hangs by the
horses' tails. In such a nutshell there is, of course, no room for baggage; and therefore the
latter, as already said, is sent down into the valley in advance. Because of the constant crumbling of the cliffs as the result of cutting the
road through, and the peculiar nature of the rock which is being constantly reduced to the
finest powder, the road is so dusty that a pair of green convex goggles closely fitting the
eyes, and a double veil, are hardly sufficient to prevent permanent blindness after a few
hours of driving. When we ascended the Simla heights six weeks earlier, we prudently
chose "the old road," in preference to the new or so-called "Tibetan high road," and
were fully recompensed for the three extra days of travel. Now, however, we were in a
hurry and had no other alternative but to ride instead in a covered wagon drawn by
oxen.... There were 13 of us and room for only 12 passengers in the six tongas, and the
"devil's dozen" lived up to its name. After somehow placing the others, we squeezed three
lean Englishmen into the sixth tonga. The tallest of them all fell to my lot, and his legs
constantly stuck out of the back of the vehicle, however hard he tried to tie them into knots. Finally we moved off, and began to rush downhill with breathless speed.... With the very
first jolt I sank down into the deepest recesses of the interior and did not creep out until we
reached our destination, meanwhile cursing the tonga all the way. Farewell, dear, evergreen Simla!.... Wondrous spot, corner of Paradise, as though
fallen from heaven into the Himalayan groves; thou cool Eden, soaring over the scorching
heat of the valleys of Hindustan, farewell!....---PAGE BREAK---

Farewell, dear, evergreen Simla!.... Wondrous spot, corner of Paradise, as though
fallen from heaven into the Himalayan groves; thou cool Eden, soaring over the scorching
heat of the valleys of Hindustan, farewell!.... Long will it be before I shall again see thy
5
7

---PAGE BREAK---THE DURBAR IN LAHORE, 1881
tall pines, firs and cedars on whose tufted summits rest the wind-driven clouds and whose
feet are wrapped in a veritable forest of giant rhododendrons..... Over there, in the
distance, we catch a glimpse of a massive mountain covered with this gigantic
shrubbery. Bathed in the warm rays of the morning sun, the bright crimson clusters are
aflame as if birds of Paradise were clinging to them. Between them one can see the
white "Peterhof,"9 the viceregal residence, while beyond the mountain is a long range of
snow-covered colossi, one of the intermediate ranges of the ascending Himalayan
foothills.... For the last time, the cool, familiar fragrance of the firs and cummin-trees
reaches us.... A few more curves, and we find ourselves in an impenetrable cloud of dust. It falls like a heavy, stifling curtain between us and Simla. The English are excessively proud of their "Tibetan" road, imagining, perhaps, that
it will actually lead them to Tibet some day, and call it a masterpiece of engineering. Filled
with rapture at the sight of the little granite bridges spanning the mountain torrents of their
sanitariums10 which dot various hills, they assure us that nothing can compare with
the mathematical accuracy of the contour of the road which winds like a dusty ribbon
through the green hills. One of these bridges, by the way, has already crumbled under the
weight of some dignitary traveling to Simla, resulting in the death of the innocent
coachman (fate left the dignitary unscathed). My traveling companion bored me
with his constant exclamations of rapture, and grew very angry with me, when, tempted,
I confess, more by the unbearable jolting than by innate candor, I told him from the
depths of the recess in which I was wedged, that, frankly, his "Tibetan" road was not fit
to sole the shoe11 of our "Georgian Military High Road" in the Caucasus. Over a stretch of 57 miles we changed our horses nine times.My traveling companion bored me
with his constant exclamations of rapture, and grew very angry with me, when, tempted,
I confess, more by the unbearable jolting than by innate candor, I told him from the
depths of the recess in which I was wedged, that, frankly, his "Tibetan" road was not fit
to sole the shoe11 of our "Georgian Military High Road" in the Caucasus. Over a stretch of 57 miles we changed our horses nine times. At every station these
tattered jades, after starting a fight with the camels, bucked and threatened to break their
hind legs on our backs, while I repeatedly and unavoidably fell back into my recess, and
so it went on until the following station was reached! The distance from Simla to Kalka
is only 12 miles as the crow flies, but along the road which twists in every direction and
winds round every hill like the ribbon on a Tyrolean hat, it is, as already stated, 57 miles. One can imagine how many turnings the tonga makes, and the precautions that are
necessary at such speed to avoid collision at every new bend with a string of camels
or a herd of elephants. To avoid such a catastrophe the drivers blow their horns every
few minutes. This cacophony is mournfully repeated by the neighboring echoes, and
one barely dies away before a new one is sounded, on hearing which the camels and
elephants get out of the way. The movement of the tonga was so rapid and the seat so
near the ground that after one heavy jolt my companion, enveloped in a cloud of
dust, suddenly, as if by enchantment, disappeared from my sight and found himself
sitting in the middle of the road under the trunk of a passing elephant. According to his
own words, he did not realize that he was in this unexpected position, until the tonga which
had dropped him was about a mile away. The clever elephant picked him up with its trunk
9 [H.P.B. uses here metaphorically the name of one of the Imperial Palaces of Russia, in the
vicinity of St. Petersburg.---PAGE BREAK---

uses here metaphorically the name of one of the Imperial Palaces of Russia, in the
vicinity of St. Petersburg. - Translator.]
10 By sanatariums are here meant military settlements for hospitals for which the healthiest
mountain districts are chosen. Simla is considered to be the best sanitarium in India. 11 [Russian proverb. - Translator.]
6
8

---PAGE BREAK---THE DURBAR IN LAHORE, 1881
and tossed him behind its ear, so as not to crush him. Having reclaimed the poor Briton, I
wanted to ask whether he likewise included the tonga among the essential proofs of his
country's greatness in general, and of the superiority of its products over those of
other countries in particular. But the lamentable look on his soiled countenance and the
sight of his torn coat changed my wrath to pity, and, like a Good Samaritan, I offered him
my handkerchief to wipe his face. After passing with the speed of a locomotive, Kiari Ghat, a large castle on a
cliff, resembling the feudal ruins on the Rhine, of which there are many here, we
continued to descend the steep road winding round the mountain. Some fifteen times or
so the ancient castle vanished from sight, only to reappear. Then came the famous
castle of the Maharaja of Patiala, the mountain retreat of a dynasty many centuries
old, the latest representative of which is today a seven year old child; then Solon
came into view, a sanitarium now crowded with the unfortunate victims of Beaconsfield's
policy. Mutilated on the "scientific frontier" of Afghanistan, they are now digesting the
lesson received, on the calmer territory of the Raja of Baghat, in whose domain the English
barracks and hospitals are built. These charming guests constitute a far from agreeable
addition to the populace of His Serene Highness.... But the unfortunate prince remains
silent and consoles himself by growing tea, like Cincinnatus of old, who, by the way, did
not grow tea but cabbages, or something of the sort.These charming guests constitute a far from agreeable
addition to the populace of His Serene Highness.... But the unfortunate prince remains
silent and consoles himself by growing tea, like Cincinnatus of old, who, by the way, did
not grow tea but cabbages, or something of the sort. In Solon, to the sound of trumpets,
we were thrown out and onto the veranda of a dak-bungalow, or, in plain language, a
post house, where we instantly proceeded to according to the invariable Anglo-Indian
routine: ribs of mutton made of some kind of rubber, and dry rice mixed with an equal
quantity of earth, accompanied by a murderous curry.12 Hastily caulking the fissures in
our stomachs made by the jolting, we squeezed into our tongas and careered away. Another change of horses, more camels, bucking, and clouds of dust.... After jolting for
four hours we reached Dharampur on the slope of Kasauli.... Here firs and spruces grew
more and more scarce, the majestic cedars also disappeared and were replaced by
endless cacti, dark-leafed mangoes, wide- spreading pipals, and finally by palm-trees. Tropical vegetation comes into its own, and at Kalka entirely supplants that of the North. The little town of Kalka, 2,400 feet above sea level and therefore 6,000 feet
below Simla, consists of a score of houses, a telegraph station and two hotels. In former
years, before the English occupied Panjab, it was a village outside the estate of the
Maharaja of Patiala, an estate famous for its wonderful park. The Pinjor gardens,
surrounded by the Siwalik heights, are even now visited by many tourists. Laid out
during the reign of Emperor Akbar by one of his nawab-rulers, these gardens, which
constitute an entire park, are said to be the most wonderful spot in Northern India, not
excepting even the gardens of Shalimar in Lahore where Ranjit-Singh held durbars
during his reign and where these are still held in honor of the Viceroys.---PAGE BREAK---

The Pinjor gardens,
surrounded by the Siwalik heights, are even now visited by many tourists. Laid out
during the reign of Emperor Akbar by one of his nawab-rulers, these gardens, which
constitute an entire park, are said to be the most wonderful spot in Northern India, not
excepting even the gardens of Shalimar in Lahore where Ranjit-Singh held durbars
during his reign and where these are still held in honor of the Viceroys. To my great delight, we were given a large four wheeled dak-gharri (post-
carriage) instead of the tonga next morning. The road to Umballa, where we finally
reached the railroad, slopes gently and is wide and smooth, except for a few fordings
12 Curry is a sauce made of every possible kind of spice, the most important being red pepper; the
natives swallow it by the spoonful, while a European could not even taste it without choking. 7
9

---PAGE BREAK---THE DURBAR IN LAHORE, 1881
over turbulent, dangerous torrents, which, however, dry up in autumn. The post-
carriage is a square, painted box on four wheels and without seats. The traveler's bedding
is spread on the floor of such a box and, if none is available, he is forced to remain on the
dirty boards. The jolts of this cart are no worse than our telega,13 but in addition to the
particular charms of our carriage, we found in it a nest of scorpions: the worthy
mother, two dozen little ones sitting on the back of the father, the daughter-in-law, and
other members of the family. I almost sat down on them. The coachman, a Jain, begged
me not to inflict cruel death upon them. You see, several of his children had died that
year, and for all he knew they might all have transmigrated into this interesting family.... Proportionate to their native mountains, the scorpions were from one-and-a-half to two
inches in length, and, we had to wait until the pious Jain had carefully raked them on to a
palm leaf and carried them to the edge of the forest.... On arriving at Umballa, a bare 38
miles from Kalka, we almost fainted from the noon heat; it was 86 degrees in the shade
at the end of October! Umballa is the capital of a part of British territory taken by the English under
some pretense from the country known as Sirhind, which belongs to the rulers of Patiala. It is a large, fortified town with a fortress on its northeastern side and a camp situated at the
base of the fort. Sheltering ourselves from the sweltering heat in a dark room, we did not
see anything; besides, there was nothing to see. In the evening we took our seats in the
train and woke up in Amritsar next morning. The entire platform was crowded with Aryas and Sikhs, who had come to meet their
"American brothers" with appropriate namaste.14 There were some two hundred people
present. A strange and picturesque sight was a guard of honor which would have aroused
the envy of many a German princeling.---PAGE BREAK---

The entire platform was crowded with Aryas and Sikhs, who had come to meet their
"American brothers" with appropriate namaste.14 There were some two hundred people
present. A strange and picturesque sight was a guard of honor which would have aroused
the envy of many a German princeling. It was an unarmed guard, it is true, but decked out
in such fantastic, rich and unique costumes that many an artist would have been utterly
fascinated. What splendid fellows are these valiant Sikhs! They are giants who appear
even taller by wearing immense snow-white turbans (like a mass of snow fallen from the
Himalayas) which cover their long, luxuriant hair and brown faces - the latter, however,
considerably paler than those of Central and especially Southern India. Here you will not
see nude nature covered with an inch of dirty calico, instead of a fig leaf, even on the
poorest coolie. The Panjabis wear white skin-tight trousers, not unlike trikot; the
wealthy wear expensive, embroidered muslin shirts over the trousers, and the poor
wear plain calico shirts. The former are distinguished by their coats of cashmere and
glazed brocade, stitched with gold and multicolored silks, and often lined with
expensive furs. But all of them, both rich and poor, are crowned with vast turbans of
diversified types, some having as much as a hundred yards of muslin on their heads! At the railway platform we found a handsome carriage awaiting us, and
thus, followed by the variegated band, under the cross-fire of sarcastic glances thrown by
English acquaintances from Simla, we started for the suburban house prepared for our
reception, owned by Mulraj-Singh, the president of the local Arya-Samaja and a very
13 Russian village cart. - Translator.]
14 Namaste is a Sanskrit greeting introduced by contemporary reformers in place of the usual
Moslem "salaam". 8
10

---PAGE BREAK---THE DURBAR IN LAHORE, 1881
wealthy Sikh. The house was a spacious and beautiful villa standing in the midst of a large, shady
garden, and furnished entirely in European style with all the modern comforts. Having barely had time to change our clothes and wash up after the journey, and before
even a bite of food, we were made then and there to hold an unexpected durbar of
our own. During that one morning, and before five o'clock in the afternoon, we made
the acquaintance of a larger number of nationalities, races, sects, and various religious
bodies, than during the last year spent in Southern and Central India. Panjabis,
Hindus from Benares, Sikhs, Jats, Rajputs, Pathans, Gurkhas, Kashmiris, came and
went in great numbers. Folding their hands on their chests and then touching their
foreheads, they bowed and quietly sat down in a semi-circle on the rug, in front of our two
chairs. Each one of these colorful, living garlands fixed its reverentially curious
glance upon us, and in profound silence awaited the first question.... After it had been
propounded (regarding the school of philosophy or sect to which each one belonged), a
general conversation about metaphysical subjects immediately followed. They listened
with curiosity to our often perplexed criticisms of their incredibly strange, and always
most unexpected paradoxical deductions. More often than not, we had to acknowledge
ourselves beaten and had to retreat. The passion for mystical introspection and metaphysical day-dreaming is the most
pronounced trait of the Hindus, from the Himalayas to Cape Comorin. Whatever he may
do, to whatever class of society he may belong, as soon as the Hindu finds a moment of
leisure, he squats down and becomes absorbed in dreaming, or rather, meditation, and
should he find company near at hand, he will start a metaphysical discussion. But let not
the reader think that this piety rests on dogmas, or arises from any of the established sects
and schools.Whatever he may
do, to whatever class of society he may belong, as soon as the Hindu finds a moment of
leisure, he squats down and becomes absorbed in dreaming, or rather, meditation, and
should he find company near at hand, he will start a metaphysical discussion. But let not
the reader think that this piety rests on dogmas, or arises from any of the established sects
and schools. Both of these serve the dreamers merely as a canvas upon which each of
them embroiders the most fantastic patterns throughout his entire life. Gradually unwinding
from the unknown depths of his cogitative faculties a thin web of personal deduction
concerning the most difficult, insoluble world-problems, he so enmeshes himself finally
in that self-spun network that, unable to free himself, he merely buzzes in it like a
captured fly. He almost always has a guru, a spiritual teacher chosen from among other
flies like himself and equally entangled in self-made webs, but older and more learned. The former will worship the latter until his death, and after death will render him
the last honors; according to all the rules of his caste, he will burn the teacher's body,
bury the ashes somewhere in his garden, and morning and evening will converse with
his guru, at first mentally and under the influence of mystical emotion, and later aloud,
expounding his new system. The neighbors will gather around him, squat on their
haunches, and listen. Then, little by little, they will join his school, and in the
evenings will abandon themselves to religious ecstasy together. This passion for
theological argument has brought forth and continues to breed innumerable sects,
schools, and religious brotherhoods, especially the latter. Protestant missionaries,
especially American, help to a certain extent in promoting these conditions.---PAGE BREAK---

This passion for
theological argument has brought forth and continues to breed innumerable sects,
schools, and religious brotherhoods, especially the latter. Protestant missionaries,
especially American, help to a certain extent in promoting these conditions. Spending
most of their time in town squares and bazaars, these zealous but far from educated
enlighteners of heathendom never lose an opportunity of starting a polemic, but rarely
meet with success. Under the cross-fire of questions concerning the chronology of the
world, the Creation, the relation between Deity and man, and especially the future and
9
11

---PAGE BREAK---

THE DURBAR IN LAHORE, 1881
the essential nature of man's soul, and being in no position to fight an audience
heavily nourished on metaphysical wisdom, the missionaries gradually begin to lose
patience and finally resort to abuse of the local gods and threats of hell-fire. As a
result, complaints are sometimes lodged in the courts, but usually there follows a new
impulse to unite against the common enemy, the padri, and as a result a new heathen
brotherhood is formed....
10
12

---PAGE BREAK---THE DURBAR IN LAHORE, 1881
[The Theosophist — September, 1960 - from p. 359 to p. 374]
II. Sikhism and the prince-gurus. - Our visit to the Golden Temple. - The
miraculous fountain. - We become "immortals". On the day of our arrival our durbar lasted until five o'clock in the afternoon. The huge trees in the shady garden did not allow the fierce rays of the October sun to
disturb us unduly, but, on the other hand, great flocks of brilliantly plumaged parrots flew
fearlessly in and out of the open doors of the veranda, and deafened us with the
harshness of their far from metaphysical bird-cries. Finally the last file of mystics
retired; and while the parrots began to hide themselves in the shady foliage of the
mango trees, we started for the Golden Temple on the Lake of Immortality. The name Amritsar is derived from the Sanskrit words: a - particle of negation;
mrita - death; and saras - fountain; in their combined form meaning "the fountain of
immortality". This name was not originally given to the town, but to the talao, or lake,
from the crystal waters of which, as if forever admiring its own reflection, rises the
Golden Temple, built in 1581 by Ram-Das, the fourth guru or teacher-prince of the
Sikhs. Beginning with Nanak, the founder of Sikhism, the Sikhs had ten such prince-
gurus (Raja-gurus). This sect, founded in the XVIth century by the teacher with the help
of half-a-dozen disciple-apostles, grew strong and spread widely. In the XIXth century
the English found it scattered from Delhi to Peshawar, and from the sandy deserts of
Sind to the Karakorum mountains, far beyond Kashmir. The history of the Sikh empire,
about which so little was known in Europe that its fall in 1849 barely arrested the attention
of the press, is most interesting; and may be briefly outlined in a few words: tireless
fighting with the then mighty Moguls of India, fighting not for life but for death, where
there were ten Mussalmans against every Sikh.In the XIXth century
the English found it scattered from Delhi to Peshawar, and from the sandy deserts of
Sind to the Karakorum mountains, far beyond Kashmir. The history of the Sikh empire,
about which so little was known in Europe that its fall in 1849 barely arrested the attention
of the press, is most interesting; and may be briefly outlined in a few words: tireless
fighting with the then mighty Moguls of India, fighting not for life but for death, where
there were ten Mussalmans against every Sikh. This continued, with a few intervals,
until the first half of the present century, when the English pacified both Mogul and
Sikh by preparing an equal fate for both - that of becoming British vassals. The successor
of the founder of Sikhism was a certain Angad, whose teachings, which record the
words of Nanak, form the opening section of the Adi Granth (the sacred scripture of the
Sikhs); his disciple, Amar-Das, inherited the spiritual throne after him. He was the first
who dared to stand up to the authority of the lawgivers, and sternly denounce the
inhuman custom of "suttee" - the self-immolation of widows on the funeral pyres of
their husbands, and ordered the following inscription to be traced as a warning over the
entrance to the Ghats (the site where the corpses were burnt): "The true suttee (one who
commits self-immolation) is she who is devoured not by the flames of the pyre, but by the
calm, yet enduring sorrow for the dead, the consolation for which and the refuge against
which should be sought in the Lord God alone." Ram-Das, the builder of the Golden
Temple, succeeded him. The town itself was known 400 years ago under the name of
Chak. When Ram-Das formed the lake and surrounded it with numerous small temples, he
named it Ramdaspur. He appointed his son Arjan as his successor. As a philosopher the
latter was a great favorite with the Emperor Akbar, but in 1577 a certain Chandu Khan,
one of the sardars and a subject of the Caliph, in envy slandered him.---PAGE BREAK---

He appointed his son Arjan as his successor. As a philosopher the
latter was a great favorite with the Emperor Akbar, but in 1577 a certain Chandu Khan,
one of the sardars and a subject of the Caliph, in envy slandered him. Then Arjan was
suspected of treason and put in prison, where he died, in 1606, if we are to believe the
11
13

---PAGE BREAK---THE DURBAR IN LAHORE, 1881
Moguls. The Sikhs, however, have a different story to tell. According to their tradition
the prince-teacher, on being permitted to bathe in the stream which ran across the prison-
yard, suddenly vanished from the sight of his two guardians and found himself in
heaven. His son and heir, Har Govind, whom his father's death left a boy of eleven,
swore vengeance on the Moguls for the death of his father, and kept his word. He began
by killing with his own hand Chandu Shah, who had delivered Arjan to his enemies, and
then fled beyond the Himalayas, into the desert, there to learn the maha-vidya (great
science, magic). He returned in a few years as a young man and declared war on all
Mussalmans, compelling his faithful Sikhs15 to take an oath that, having once drawn
their sword, they would not sheath it again until its sharp blade had sent at least three
Moguls into the next world. He killed many a son of the Prophet with his own hands. According to the author of the Dabistan, his sword was enchanted. With it he killed
Payenda Khan, splitting him in half, and when one of the latter's bodyguard threw himself
like a madman upon the warrior-guru and struck him with all his might with his drawn
sword, Govind skillfully warded off the blow and cold-bloodedly remarked to his
assailant: "Not in that manner, but so the sword is used," and with those words killed
him. This exploit led Muhsin-Fani, the author of the Dabistan and a personal friend of
Govind, to draw the following curious deduction: "This utterance," he says, "clearly
shows that the great Govind-guru did not kill Moslems in wrath, but solely with the idea
of teaching them how to use their weapons, for the first duty of every guru (teacher) is
to instruct."16 This defence is a rather curious one..... The Sikhs believe that the soul of the founder of their faith, Nanak, enters the body
of every crowned guru and controls him until death.This exploit led Muhsin-Fani, the author of the Dabistan and a personal friend of
Govind, to draw the following curious deduction: "This utterance," he says, "clearly
shows that the great Govind-guru did not kill Moslems in wrath, but solely with the idea
of teaching them how to use their weapons, for the first duty of every guru (teacher) is
to instruct."16 This defence is a rather curious one..... The Sikhs believe that the soul of the founder of their faith, Nanak, enters the body
of every crowned guru and controls him until death. Govind signed all documents thus:
"Nanak, on earth Govind," as witnessed by his correspondence with the author of the
Dabistan and his letters to the Mogul emperors. Govind died in 1645 and his cremation
ceremony was accompanied by wild exhibitions of fanaticism. Several Rajputs, converted
to Sikhism, threw themselves into the fire after the body, and many others would have
followed their example if it had not been for guru Har-Rai, Govind's successor, who put an
end to this self-destruction. Har-Kishan, the eighth prince-teacher, died in his youth. The
ninth, Tegh-Bahadur, killed so many Moslems that the Emperor Aurangzib finally
dispatched a whole army against him. He was captured by cunning and was beheaded in
Delhi. His son, the fifteen-year-old Govind-Singh, the last of the prince-teachers, was the
most remarkable of them all. Burning with the desire to avenge the ignominious death of
his father, he resolved to reform the Sikhs completely and make real Spartans of them. In
the midst of the mighty Mogul reign, he took it into his head to destroy them to the last man. Surrounded by general demoralization, fanaticism and religious superstition, he swore to
direct the minds of his Sikhs to one religious idea - monotheism, and to one goal - the
founding of a great Sikh empire. He believed that he was inspired not by Nanak but by the One God himself.---PAGE BREAK---

Surrounded by general demoralization, fanaticism and religious superstition, he swore to
direct the minds of his Sikhs to one religious idea - monotheism, and to one goal - the
founding of a great Sikh empire. He believed that he was inspired not by Nanak but by the One God himself. "My
incorporeal soul," he says in his Sacred Biography,17 "reposes in passive felicity, immersed
15 The word Sikh means disciple. 16 Dabistan, II, p. 275. 17 Each of the ten prince-teachers of the Sikhs wrote a more or less extensive book, full of
religious teachings, precepts and sermons. It is these ten books which make up their Sacred Scripture,
12
14

---PAGE BREAK---THE DURBAR IN LAHORE, 1881
in uninterrupted contemplation of the One, while the messenger of the Lord, the immortal
spirit of Nanak, communicates to you (disciples) the words and commandments which have
been traced before him in letters of fire by the finger of Him who is the Light of the
World." "In vain," he says further, "have Deities (incarnations of Divinity) descended on
earth from the beginning of the world in order to instruct mankind regarding the unity of
God.... Men perceive God but through defiled vessels in the shape of His creatures -
men. Thus, forgetting Iswara (the Lord), the Hindus worship Siva, Brahma and Vishnu and
Mohammed, in instructing his sons about Allah, meanwhile taught them to utter his
own horrid name along, in their prayers to the Supreme," etc. But he, Govind, was now
sent to re-establish the truth. "Though a messenger of God," he adds, "yet I am no more
than an ordinary mortal slave of the Supreme, and woe to him who dares to deify me, a
worm of the earth!.... He will burn for all eternity in the fire of suffering.... It is impossible
to find God in scriptures and ceremonies alone; He lives in the heart of man, and may
be known only through resignation and the sincerity of inner prayer."
New laws promulgated by him were unanimously recognized by the Sikhs, and today
constitute the dogmas of this sect, though these have but little in common with the
teachings of Nanak. The doctrine of meekness gradually changed into the deification of
their country as a community of Sikhs, "God's chosen," and into a religion known by
the name of Khalsa, literally meaning "the soil of the redeemed or liberated from sin". Jihad, the holy war of the Mohammedans, is a mere display of fireworks compared
with the conflagration brought about among the Sikhs by the word Khalsa alone.The doctrine of meekness gradually changed into the deification of
their country as a community of Sikhs, "God's chosen," and into a religion known by
the name of Khalsa, literally meaning "the soil of the redeemed or liberated from sin". Jihad, the holy war of the Mohammedans, is a mere display of fireworks compared
with the conflagration brought about among the Sikhs by the word Khalsa alone. In the
name of Khalsa every living human being in the land of the "immortals," from the
greatest to the smallest, from women to infants, rises against the enemy, and were
the Sikhs more numerous, those who sought to obstruct them would end badly! The
laws or dogmas promulgated by Govind are as follows: God is Spirit, but though his
Spirit is universal, he descends upon earth only to overshadow the Sikhs, and his presence
is nowhere manifest save in the Khalsa. However, notwithstanding God's absence, "all the
nations should strive for unity," i.e., become converted to Sikhism - "all except the
Mohammedans, who should be systematically and constantly destroyed, even to the
desecration of the tombs of their ancestors and saints." The inferior castes should be
considered equal to the higher, "for we are all equal before Nature". "The triple thread of
the Brahmanas must be torn asunder, and the Sikhs must realize that the redemption of
the soul is possible only through the Khalsa, while the pahul, (i.e., initiation into the
mysteries of Sikhism) can be given by the followers of Govind-guru alone."
The Lake of Immortality and the temple are open to Hindus of all castes and sects. Only the waters of "The Lake of Immortality" give promise of eternal life. All Sikhs must
call themselves singhs (lions). All must be sanctified by water,18 wear their hair long,
worship nothing but God and his Adi-Granth, never part with their weapons, always
fight the Moslems, and dedicate their life and energies to the use of their weapons, etc., etc.---PAGE BREAK---

All Sikhs must
call themselves singhs (lions). All must be sanctified by water,18 wear their hair long,
worship nothing but God and his Adi-Granth, never part with their weapons, always
fight the Moslems, and dedicate their life and energies to the use of their weapons, etc., etc. A Sikh who follows the above-mentioned edicts is a sachcha padsha, "a veritable king". known as the Adi-Granth. The book of Govind-Singh is called Vichitra-Nataka - "The Miraculous Tale". 18 At the initiation or conversion of a future Sikh, five already initiated adepts sprinkle him with
water from the lake. 13
15

---PAGE BREAK---THE DURBAR IN LAHORE, 1881
Having conquered all the obstacles of superstition and caste, founded the Khalsa
and humbled the Brahmanas and Mohammedans, Govind-Singh set out to fight and
destroy the Moguls. Sivaji, a Maratha hero who put an end to the Timur dynasty and the
supremacy of the Mogul Empire, found in him a friend and ally. Together they
repeatedly defeated the ill-fated sons of the Prophet, annihilating them by the thousand. But even Govind had to meet his fate. In 1708, at Nander, on the shores of the Godavari,
the hand of a murderer smote him while he lay asleep in his tent. Then a miracle
occurred. In answer to the questions of the despondent Sikhs as to who would henceforth
lead them on the road to salvation, Govind-Singh rose with a mortal wound in his breast
and spoke the following words: "Be humble, and place your trust in God: into His hands
I surrender the Khalsa. He who would see me and speak to me, let him seek me in the
Adi-Granth of Nanak. I am your guru, and will forever remain with you in the Khalsa. Be
firm and remain true to your duty; wherever there are five Sikhs gathered together,
there will I be with them!" And he fell down dead. After lying dead for a few hours, he
revived and was taken to the Lake of Immortality, where he continued to live for several
months longer. There, in spite of a crowd of guardians or akalis, he was again killed
during the night in his tower. Govind's teaching split the Sikhs into two sects. The first calls itself Kalasi, and is
composed of orthodox followers of Nanak. Its members do not kill animals, eat no meat,
avoid alcoholic beverages, and do not smoke; they consider it a sin to shed the blood of
any creature whatsoever; they pray all day and confess their sins to each other every
evening before sunset. The other sect, the Singhs, disciples of Govind-guru, are fearless
warriors, the dread of the Afghans. Among their number are the akalis or nihunchis, i.e.,
"God's warriors" and "immortals".The other sect, the Singhs, disciples of Govind-guru, are fearless
warriors, the dread of the Afghans. Among their number are the akalis or nihunchis, i.e.,
"God's warriors" and "immortals". It is their duty to guard night and day the temple, where
their Maha-guru or great teacher constantly dwells - alas, but a nominal one at present! There are 600 of these akalis, and they are known among the people as the "sipahis of the
temple". To encounter one of them as an enemy is a rather dangerous thing, as these
immortals are always heavily armed, often carrying a sword under each arm, two sharp
sabres in their belt, a matchlock on their back, and several daggers. Under the English rule
they are no more allowed to walk the streets thus armed, but at the same time they have
been allowed to retain the most terrible and dangerous weapon, which at first sight remains
unnoticed; otherwise there would have been a rebellion. This weapon consists of a steel
belt and a circular quoit, sharp and with teeth like a saw (on the inner side), which is twined
like a cork-screw about the blue turban of a "God's warrior". They fling this quoit, which
is from six to eight inches in diameter, extremely sharp and twisted like a lathe, with
frightful dexterity at their enemy. There are still English people living who have witnessed
how, with terrible shouting and cries of "Wah guru ji ka Khalsa! Wah guru ji ki Fateh!"
(Hail to the Guru's Khalsa! Hail to the Guru's Victory!) they threw such a quoit at
the enemy and instantly cut off his head, and sometimes both legs of horses and even of
war-elephants!19 Ranjit-Singh, the one-eyed old lion and last but one of the Maharajas of
Panjab, held their courage in high esteem. His "immortals" did miracles of daring and
once, during an encounter with the Afghans, these 600 valiant men decapitated 2,000 of
their hereditary foes. Nowadays they have become more subdued, but sigh for the old
19 Among other books see The History of the Sikhs by Capt.---PAGE BREAK---

His "immortals" did miracles of daring and
once, during an encounter with the Afghans, these 600 valiant men decapitated 2,000 of
their hereditary foes. Nowadays they have become more subdued, but sigh for the old
19 Among other books see The History of the Sikhs by Capt. Cunningham. The author lived among
them for many years. 14
16

---PAGE BREAK---THE DURBAR IN LAHORE, 1881
martial days and often send deputations to the English, asking them to lead them
against the hateful Kabulians. Why the Government did not take advantage of their
offer during the last war in Kabul, remains incomprehensible.... Perchance they were
simply afraid to awaken in the Sikhs their slumbering audacity of old.... Now, of course, everything has changed. The plains of Attok and Peshawar are no
longer the refuge of the rhinoceros which the Mogul emperors were so fond of hunting, and
which the Sikhs hunted in their turn. The valleys of Upper India, where the Brahmanas and
Kshattriyas (warriors) had by degrees developed such an original civilization, that land
which had always succeeded in repelling the attacks of all kinds of peoples, from Sikhs to
Persians, from Moguls to Afghans, since the days of Darius Alexander and until the epoch
of Babur and Dost Muhammad - this land fell at last!.... There where the rhinoceros once
grazed, the rumbling of the trains is now heard!.... The Sikhs are still young and vigorous enthusiasts. Not one of them, except for
children and some few women, has ever been converted to Mohammedanism,
Brahmanism, or even Christianity, notwithstanding all the efforts of the missionaries. For
the sake of the Khalsa they will do anything and everything..... But even their laws have
begun to give way under the influence of Western education. They still feel hatred for "the
sons of the false prophet," yet some of them embark on commercial enterprises with their
former irreconcilable enemies, and have also acquired the habit of drunkenness from their
new rulers. However, they are more proud than ever of being called Singhs. They
continue to wash away their sins in the Lake of Immortality at the break of dawn, and
worship the Adi-Granth as assiduously as before.However, they are more proud than ever of being called Singhs. They
continue to wash away their sins in the Lake of Immortality at the break of dawn, and
worship the Adi-Granth as assiduously as before. Their esteem for Nanak is so great that
even now they almost deify a certain Baba Khein-Singh, just because he is the 16th direct
descendant of the founder of Sikhism. This disgusting Baba (father) leads a parasitical
existence in Rawalpindi surrounded by the veneration of thousands who bring him, as
voluntary offerings, over two lakhs of rupees (200 thousand) per year. Contrary to the
custom and even the law of the Sikhs, this holy man has, besides his wife, a whole harem;
as for the offerings of his zealous but far from rational worshipers, he spends them in the
company of English functionaries, residents and collectors, on crazy festivities, hunting and
drunken orgies. Hardly had we arrived in the Temple-yard, when we were met in the square by our
old friend and acquaintance, the akali Ram-Das, whom we had already met in Bagh, and
who, like myself, had barely escaped falling a victim to the miasmas in the cave of that
name.20 He was exceedingly pleased at meeting us, and then and there, from joy and as
a token of his power shook his fist at a Moslem who chanced to pass by. This "God's
warrior" appeared even more huge in his official turban. He immediately offered to
accompany us and show us all the sections of the temple, including the most secret
recesses. When we entered the vast court, paved with multi-colored marble, the sun was
20 See "From the Caves and Jungles of Hindustan" in the Moskovsk ya Vedomosti, 1879-80. [At the time when H.P.B. was writing "The Durbar in Lahore" only a few of the Chapters of her "Caves and
Jungles" had been published in the Moscow Herald. The Series was interrupted and resumed in the
Russian Messenger, where it was republished from the beginning all over again, and continued with new
instalments.---PAGE BREAK---

was writing "The Durbar in Lahore" only a few of the Chapters of her "Caves and
Jungles" had been published in the Moscow Herald. The Series was interrupted and resumed in the
Russian Messenger, where it was republished from the beginning all over again, and continued with new
instalments. This, however, did not take place until 1883. - Translator.]
15
17

---PAGE BREAK---THE DURBAR IN LAHORE, 1881
already setting, and the Golden Temple, bathed in its warm rays, shone like a magic vision
from another world.... In this first court we were made to take off our shoes, which were replaced by some
kind of felt slippers. Then, after descending a few steps, we tread on the marble quay,
shining and slippery as glass, and before our eyes lay the lake in all its grandeur and
loveliness, with the Golden Temple in its midst. The lake is a square reservoir covering 150 paces in each direction, and is filled with
water, pure as mountain crystal. On each side of the square marble quay surrounding the
lake are snow-white marble stairs, leading to the edge of the water. White palaces of the
same pure polished marble surround this immense quadrangle. Each of these palaces was
built by one of the numerous Sikh rajas and placed at the disposal of the Maha-guru and
his "Immortals," who permit all kinds of pilgrims to live in them in spite of these
palaces being the property of the Sikhs. These dwellings, with their overhanging,
ornamentally designed balconies, porticos and terraces, add much to the beauty and
poetry of the "sacred square". The square, shutting out the noise of the city, provides a
most delightful retreat in the evenings. Between the lake and the palaces grow
wonderful, shady trees. Each of these was planted by one of the Sikh benefactors -
famous for their liberality - bears his name, and is surrounded by large marble
terraces for the benefit of resting pilgrims. Under almost every tree are buried the ashes
of its donor. One of the trees was planted by Govind-Guru himself and is the object of
special reverence and care among the priests.Under almost every tree are buried the ashes
of its donor. One of the trees was planted by Govind-Guru himself and is the object of
special reverence and care among the priests. Having walked half way down the quay and nearly falling several times in
my awkward felt slippers, we entered another court, still more vast, at one end of which
rose a high, open, three-storied building, while at the other stood an arched gateway, from
which a long marble bridge, with a beautifully carved railing, led to the Golden
Temple which stood in the very centre of the lake. The first building is the bunga or
palace of the akali, all the three verandas of which were at that time crowded with
"Immortals". The bunga is built in Asiatic style. From it, on whichever floor they may
be, "God's warriors" can watch over the Temple where, like a living idol, their Maha-Guru
sits whole nights and days long. Here, on the second floor, is the cell of Govind-Guru,
with his armour hanging on the wall, and the murmuring fountain which miraculously
sprang from the marble floor on the night of his murder. This is, in fact, the fountain of
"immortality". According to the Sikh legend the Moslems and especially the Kabulians
cast a spell over "God's warriors" that night, so that all the akalis, instead of watching in
turn over their already wounded guru, fell into a deep sleep. Then the Kabulians
approached stealthily and this time slew pour de bon the holy warrior, who had dispatched
so many of their brethren to the infernal regions with his own hands. The miracle of
resurrection was not repeated: non bis in idem.---PAGE BREAK---

Then the Kabulians
approached stealthily and this time slew pour de bon the holy warrior, who had dispatched
so many of their brethren to the infernal regions with his own hands. The miracle of
resurrection was not repeated: non bis in idem. On waking from their enchanted sleep
the poor "Immortals" (who in those days, by the way, were still simple mortals) found
their spiritual leader with his throat cut, while at his head a fountain of pure, cool water
spouted to the very ceiling, and beside it an inscription said: "Every one of my faithful
Sikhs (disciples) who drinks this water in my name will become immortal, successfully
escaping all transmigrations and receiving full absolution for his sins."
16
18

---PAGE BREAK---THE DURBAR IN LAHORE, 1881
After staring at this inscription on the wall of the cell - it is written in the
gurmukhi dialect - we asked, quite naturally, for a drink from this miraculous fountain,
and immediately felt ourselves to be immortal.... To our amazement not a penny was expected from us for our acquired immortality,
and our old friend, the akali, was even hurt when we hinted at a contribution, and answered
that they did not accept payment from their "brethren". After that we inspected other parts
of the bunga. There was a magnificent show-case in which the swords of all the guru-
warriors and their other weapons were exhibited. On the upper floor stands a richly
decorated altar, where the Granthas are placed under lock and key every night. Each of
them is kept in a specially prepared room and guarded by an akali. The Granthas are
cradled until dawn on a thick bed of roses and other flowers. On a platform in front of the
bunga stands a marble dais - the acme of beauty and good taste; on it is a font in which
the Sikhs wash their sins away to the accompaniment of sacred songs and instrumental
music played all day long. The courtyard was crowded with worshipers of all sects and
nationalities. To this day the Sikhs hold every denomination in equal esteem and allow
members of all sects, with the exception of Mohammedans, to pray in the Golden Temple. Therefore, at the divali of Amritsar, pilgrims of the most heterogeneous sects flock. Here
you may see a worshiper of Vishnu beating his forehead against the Temple-steps, as well
as a stern Saiva who would behold in the dome-like Temple the emblem of his Siva; a
Vedantin as well as a Buddhist; a polytheistic Gurkha and even the devil-worshiping Jats....Therefore, at the divali of Amritsar, pilgrims of the most heterogeneous sects flock. Here
you may see a worshiper of Vishnu beating his forehead against the Temple-steps, as well
as a stern Saiva who would behold in the dome-like Temple the emblem of his Siva; a
Vedantin as well as a Buddhist; a polytheistic Gurkha and even the devil-worshiping Jats.... Having passed across the bridge with its open-work railings, which at that moment
were thronged with solid rows of fakirs clad in their own skin, with sannyasins in
orange yellow dress and wearing chignons, and with Kukas21 carrying a tower of white
muslin on their heads, like the tower of Suharev in Moscow, and arrayed in narrow
skirts, we finally reached the Golden-headed pagoda. Like Venus risen from the sea-
foam seemed to us this beauty of India, which has no rivals but the Mohammedan Taj-
Mahal in Agra and the Moti-Masjid (Pearl Mosque) in Delhi. Two-thirds of its walls
are of pure, excellently polished white marble, brightly gilded beneath the terraces, from
each corner of which rises a high tower, colored like an Easter egg. On three sides the
temple is surrounded by the deep lake, and on its fourth side there is a bridge which
leads to the bunga of the akali. The water is almost level with the second step beneath
each of the three doors of the portico. From these steps the Sikhs dive, like frogs, all
day long into the lake, and after diving lie down on the wet upper step and dry in the
sunshine, awaiting immortality. With touching hospitality we were urged to plunge into
the lake, just as we were, and then to dry ourselves in the same manner. However, thinking
ourselves immortal enough after having drunk of the waters of the fountain, we declined. The temple is not large, but its interior decoration is extremely dainty, and,
most important of all, it is kept very clean - a condition which is unusual in India.---PAGE BREAK---

However, thinking
ourselves immortal enough after having drunk of the waters of the fountain, we declined. The temple is not large, but its interior decoration is extremely dainty, and,
most important of all, it is kept very clean - a condition which is unusual in India. Having
entered through the main portal we found ourselves face to face with the high-priest of
the Sikhs. This venerable old man with a snow-white beard was reclining on luxurious
pillows under an enormous blue velvet baldaquin, embroidered with gold, and to all
appearances was assiduously reading the Adi-Granth. I say to all appearances, for, on
21 The Kukas are a secret political sect of Sikhs, highly inimical to the English. 17
19

---PAGE BREAK---THE DURBAR IN LAHORE, 1881
coming nearer, we observed a pair of closed eyes above a pair of spectacles which had
slid down to the end of a hooked nose, and heard loud snoring, audible even through the
drone of numerous voices muttering prayers around him. The Maha-guru slept the sleep
of the righteous, and so soundly that he did not wake up even when our friend, the
akali, began to fumble respectfully between his crossed knees and to select for us
several of the most beautiful roses from the heap of flowers scattered beneath him. We
were informed that this was no sleep but the bliss of samadhi, i.e., that the Maha-guru
was plunged in that particular religio-lethargical state during which the highest soul of
man (Atman) separates itself from the body and wanders away into the universal spaces,
there to perform its spiritual duties, while the perishable body is left on earth under the
guardianship of the "animal soul" (jivatman). Apparently the "animal" host made haste to
avail himself of his temporary rights, for upon our appearance he asserted his presence
very forcefully. After a thunderous snore the ancient man stuck his nose into the Adi-
Granth for the last time, suddenly opened his eyes, hazy with sleep, and opening his
toothless mouth, began to stare at us in amazement, as though awaiting an explanation. The latter was forthcoming: our obliging akali introduced us immediately as "brothers
from Patala".22 Owing to its dual meaning this designation of America, common
everywhere in India, has given rise many a time to all kinds of quid pro quo. The fair
sex of India especially, not often qualified for honorary membership in the
Geographical Society, inquired with much curiosity as to whether we resembled the
green monsters with red eyes and many-tailed spinal column, as the rakshasas
(demons) from Patala are represented in their temples, and upon seeing us refused to
believe that we were not "Ingresi," or Englishmen.The latter was forthcoming: our obliging akali introduced us immediately as "brothers
from Patala".22 Owing to its dual meaning this designation of America, common
everywhere in India, has given rise many a time to all kinds of quid pro quo. The fair
sex of India especially, not often qualified for honorary membership in the
Geographical Society, inquired with much curiosity as to whether we resembled the
green monsters with red eyes and many-tailed spinal column, as the rakshasas
(demons) from Patala are represented in their temples, and upon seeing us refused to
believe that we were not "Ingresi," or Englishmen. The ancient pontiff, after staring at us for a while, gave us permission to ascend the
Eastern towers from which there is a magnificent view over the city. However, he
immediately recalled us, in order to ask us some very extraordinary questions. One of
them was, whether there were many Moslems in our Patala, and whether Americans are
enjoined by their religion to track them down and kill them like so many rabid jackals -
or whether the English forbid even the Patalians to touch them, as they do in Panjab. On
learning that there were no Moslems in America and that the English have no authority
there, the great guru was greatly amazed, and expressed the joyful hope that perchance
the reason why there were no Moslems in the United States was that, with the exception
of a handful of them who took refuge from the Sikhs in Hindustan and Kabul, under the
protection of the English, all of them were long since roasting in "Infernal Patala," i.e., in
hell. He then said that he could not understand why people living in a country of such
blessings, where there were neither Moslems nor Ingresi, would leave it in order to settle
in a place which swarmed with both. After exchanging a few more remarks as profound
as this last, we parted, well satisfied with each other. The garden of the Golden Temple is very beautiful. There, nightingales sing all
day long!---PAGE BREAK---

The garden of the Golden Temple is very beautiful. There, nightingales sing all
day long! Kashmir abounds in nightingales as well as in roses, and the former often
migrate to the forests of Panjab. The singing of the nightingale in the garden of the guru
is a sure indication that this bird has become the abode of the soul of one of the singers
22 Patala is a name by which America is known. Translated, it means "the infernal land". Among
the masses Patala also means "hell". 18
20

---PAGE BREAK---

THE DURBAR IN LAHORE, 1881
or pipers of the Temple, and whenever the ex-singer proclaims his presence near a tree,
food and water from the "Lake of Immortality" are always provided for him. From the
garden we went to the "Black Town".
19
21

---PAGE BREAK---THE DURBAR IN LAHORE, 1881
[The Theosophist — October, 1960 - from p. 8 to p. 20]
III. The bazaar at Amritsar and the lamentations of its inhabitants. - The opinion
of the English about their own rulership. - The Black City and the Cantonments. -
The illuminations of Divali. - 92 Kukas discharged from a cannon. The bazaar at Amritsar presents an exceedingly lively spectacle: each shop
comprises in itself a factory, a storehouse and a place where sales are carried on. They
are exposed to the eyes of visitors from the street, and as you walk slowly through the
narrow street you may get a correct conception of the intricate process of the production
of the wonderful shawls sold here. You can get them here for a few pennies, but when sent
to Europe, they become costly items. A naked Hindu sits on the extremity of his spinal
column and combs wool. The wave-like strands of wool shine in the sun like flowing,
glittering silk.... In a tiny shop next door another Hindu dyes the wool in the brightest and
most wonderful colors. Behind this shop is a third, where, seated in front of a loom of the
most primitive kind, a master-weaver weaves with all the twenty digits of his hands and
feet. It is well worth seeing how shawls, muslins and silks of the most delicate colors are
here embroidered with gold, on a dusty street covered with rubbish and slops, often
between two small food-shops where unleavened bread-fritters are fried in coconut oil all
day long, and swarms of flies obscure the light.... And never is there a single spot on the
weaving!.... One single spot would completely ruin the poor workman! The bazaar is overflowing here with wares from Middle Asia and cheap
imitation products from Manchester. The latter city is trying with all its might to
kill the local craftsmen with its own imitations, which are cheap beyond the possibility
of competition.---PAGE BREAK---

The bazaar is overflowing here with wares from Middle Asia and cheap
imitation products from Manchester. The latter city is trying with all its might to
kill the local craftsmen with its own imitations, which are cheap beyond the possibility
of competition. Indeed, who will buy richly carved idols of real ivory which Benvenuto
Cellini would not have been ashamed to claim as his own work, and for which the district of
Darsani-Darvaza in Amritsar is so famed, when Manchester floods the bazaar with idols
made of ordinary bone, crudely carved by a machine and ten times as cheap? Little
by little ancient handicraft is disappearing, and will soon vanish altogether. All these
costly cobweb-muslins from Dacca, these wonderful filigreed ornaments from Delhi, these
mosaics in gold and marble and the black enamel-work of Moradabad, the amazing
repousse on copper from Benares, etc., etc., will become a mere legend. The Manchester
machine will soon have destroyed even the memory of all these products of the patient
Hindu, whose genius is willing to manifest itself for a few pennies a day, and from
whom the British huckster's greed takes even these wretched pennies! Those 20 millions
of the Afghan fiasco have to be paid, don't you see! And if it does not come from taxes,
the last buffalo, the last cow - nourisher of a whole family - will be sold; and if these
cannot be obtained - then there is the jail! "But is it possible," I asked one of the malcontents, "that you regret the time
when you were under the despotic yoke of the Moslems? Now you are rapidly being
educated, and the lives of your families are not endangered, etc., etc."
The answer is always the same: "We realize the great blessings of education, and
20
22

---PAGE BREAK---THE DURBAR IN LAHORE, 1881
various other benefits of civilization, but what is the use of all this improvement when there
is nothing to eat? True, we were killed and beaten and persecuted in the times of the
Moslem dynasties, still we were not starved to death, one by one. The money which the
sons of the Prophet extorted from the Hindus remained in the country, and there was
always a hope that sooner or later it would return to the pockets of its original owners. But
now!.... Now the last drops of juice are being squeezed out and absorbed forever by the
fogs of Great Britain. Our Golconda diamonds have become glass; our sacred idols are
displayed in the British Museum; and our countless treasures repose in the vaults of the
Bank of England. Our famous Koh-i-Nor (mountain of radiance) - a diamond without
its equal, which was removed by force and with bloodshed from the conquered Shah-
Shuja by Ranjit-Singh, now sparkles on the crown of the Empress of India. And many,
many a family jewel, once stolen by Hastings and Co. from the forefathers of the ruling
princes, must now be redeemed for enormous sums from itinerant English jewelers!.... From my desk I take The History of the Annexation of Punjab to the
British Possession in 1849, written by an Englishman, and read the following:
"Thus the country was saved.... This wretched population, consisting of many
millions, which had been worn out with centuries of confusion and strife, of
constant bloodshed, despotism, and a total moral as well as material collapse, finally drew
a breath of freedom.... Taken under the benign protection of the British Crown, it has
since known the meaning of life and daily blesses all the benefits of civilization and the
very just though firm government of the great Empress of India...."
It seems that K. N. Leontieff is right: a certain degree of slyness is essential in
politics,23 and the English must therefore be right. We were to remain in Amritsar until the day of the Divali.---PAGE BREAK---

Leontieff is right: a certain degree of slyness is essential in
politics,23 and the English must therefore be right. We were to remain in Amritsar until the day of the Divali. On November 2nd, about
six o'clock in the evening, we started to walk through the Cantonment towards the town and
the temple which was the centre of the illuminations. With the exception of Bombay and
Calcutta the towns in India are, of course, unlike any other towns in the world. Districts or
sections inhabited by the English are not even considered to be part of the town, but are
known as Cantonments, in contradistinction to the Black Town, or that part where live their
despised ex-owners, the "sons of the soil". As to the towns of the latter, they are the usual
Asiatic towns, neither more nor less, and except for their outstanding imperishable
monuments of antiquity are all built after the same pattern. Doorless and windowless mud
huts nestle beside dwellings painted in all the colors of the rainbow and with pretensions
to the name of palaces; crooked hovels supported on chicken legs press against each
other, tumble over each other, climb over neighboring walls and roofs as though preparing
for an assault, and butting into the solid wall of some honest-to-goodness house, cling to
it, and look down over the narrow street above the tops of the lower houses, as if boasting
to the passers-by of the tatters which eternally decorate their roofs. These streets, where
two carriages can rarely pass each other, are usually framed with two rows of little shops
where everything is sold, from conscience to idols of British manufacture, from
real Venetian lace, lying under a heap of onions and bananas, to the works of Annie
23 See the Russkiy Vestnik for March, 1879, "My Recollections of Thracia."
21
23

---PAGE BREAK---THE DURBAR IN LAHORE, 1881
Besant which treat of the mysteries of present-day physiology and are banned in England. On the other hand, the so-called Cantonments in towns like Allahabad, Cawnpore,
Amritsar, Lahore and others are not like towns at all.... They are merely suburban
divisions of Indian towns, built, for the most part, after the Mutiny. Some 30 years ago
there was a jungle or forest around almost every town, where fakirs and saintly people
found salvation after renouncing the world. After growing alarmed during the
suppression of the mutiny, the English chased them away, cleaned out the thickets, and
through them laid out broad, interminable avenues, selecting the intermediate groves
for their residences. One can drive for hours on end along wonderful smooth avenues
shaded with centuries-old trees, and not see a single house. At some distance, here and
there, you glimpse double white posts with the names of those who live several hundred
yards beyond them. To reach any one of these you have to pass through the gateless
entrances, and only then a white bungalow surrounded with verandas will emerge
from the shelter of the shady, moss-covered trees. Concealed from the scorching,
deadly rays of the fierce sun, these villas, although but a few steps away, are hardly
noticeable because of their canopies of densely entwining branches. They laugh at both
heat and sunshine from their shelter of gigantic lianas and other creepers.... Here the sun
is powerless and can merely wink its fiery eye through the green netting of thick foliage. In India it is not the heat but the rays of the sun which, even during the cold season, often
quite suddenly kill a foreigner. The sun had all but sunk behind the horizon when we started out from our suburban
bungalow, even though we had to drive three miles along the avenues of the Cantonment.In India it is not the heat but the rays of the sun which, even during the cold season, often
quite suddenly kill a foreigner. The sun had all but sunk behind the horizon when we started out from our suburban
bungalow, even though we had to drive three miles along the avenues of the Cantonment. Though the heat even in November is unbearable during the day, nothing can compare with
the magic of October and November evenings in India.... The air was permeated with the
aroma of plants, and myriads of colorful moths and gnats danced about in rainbow-tinted
clouds, in the fading rays of the day. On either side of the avenues were small lakes and
canals, on the black mirror of which the floating chalices of lotus-flowers spread like a pale
rose carpet, attracting whole swarms of fireflies and other luminous insects.... But hardly
had their phosphorescent sparks begun to gleam in the quickly gathering twilight, than
other fires beside the road began to be kindled - the lights of the forthcoming illuminations
of the divali. The natives consider this day their new year. The dark silhouettes of the
"sacred torch-bearers" had already begun to appear among the trees, and their groups
grew more dense and numerous with every moment. Quietly, running on their bare feet
without a sound, they appeared and disappeared like forest-sprites at night, flitting about
beneath the shrubs, in the foliage of the lower branches, and atop house-roofs. And
wherever a dark hand appeared extending a staff within which burned the sacred "kusa"
grass dipped in coconut-oil, either a fire-pot was lighted like a tiny point of fire, or a
Chinese lantern flashed brightly, or a torch was lit.... Within ten minutes the entire
town with its surroundings was blazing as though it were day.... We knew that at that
moment the whole of India, subjugated but still with faith in her gods, was being
illuminated from one end to the other....---PAGE BREAK---

Within ten minutes the entire
town with its surroundings was blazing as though it were day.... We knew that at that
moment the whole of India, subjugated but still with faith in her gods, was being
illuminated from one end to the other.... How can I find words to describe the marvelous, magical spectacle of the Golden
Temple illuminated from base to dome, or that of the sacred garden of the Sikhs! Even the
English were in rapture this year and their most critical newspapers declared that "for
many, many years nothing comparable to the illumination in Amritsar in 1880 has been
22
24

---PAGE BREAK---THE DURBAR IN LAHORE, 1881
witnessed in India." The Viceroy was expected, but he arrived only a few days later, and
an additional illumination was prepared for him. The gathering of the crowds was so
immense that we were forced to leave our carriage and wend our way through the streets
of the bazaar among camels and elephants. Everything down to the last hovel was
submerged in a sea of fire, and there were many Sikh fanatics who had thrust flaming
torches into their turbans, and were forcing their way through the throng like so many
wandering lighthouses.... When we reached the large square from which there is a descent
to the lake, we found the whole left side of the stand occupied by the chairs of the English,
behind which the rajas and sardars thronged reverently. We did not go there but went
straight into the court of the temple where Ram-Das awaited us, and he led us to the roof
of the palace belonging to the Maharaja of Faridkot, who had sent orders from Simla to
have comfortable seats prepared for us there. Indeed, even the Viceroy himself could not
have found a better place than ours. We did not mind the natives and therefore had the
opportunity of enjoying this rare and unusual spectacle better than any other European. The latter merely saw the illuminated temple and part of the lake, while from our roof we
had a view not only over the temple and the bunga of the akali, but also over the entire
sacred garden with its four quays, on which swarmed thousands upon thousands of
pilgrims, descending from the walls of the palaces to the very edge of the water in a dense
mass of multi-colored turbans and embroidered costumes; that evening they transformed
the garden into a colorful meadow. It was a sight of amazing grandeur, something
strikingly enchanting! The marble bridge was filled with "God's warriors," and it had
been promised us that we would also see something of the secret ceremonies of the
Kukas.It was a sight of amazing grandeur, something
strikingly enchanting! The marble bridge was filled with "God's warriors," and it had
been promised us that we would also see something of the secret ceremonies of the
Kukas. It may be observed, and with justice, that foreigners have seen better illuminations
and fireworks than these. I will not deny that. I have seen similar ones in Versailles,
London and other cities, but in different circumstances. Of course, the lakes and ponds at
Versailles which reflect millions of lights, present no less magical a sight, but in
comparing the surrounding crowds of Frenchmen in their short-tailed coats and top hats
which are suggestive of joints in a stovepipe perched on their heads, with this colorful and
waving sea of turbans and festive costumes loaded with gold; in comparing the chestnut
and lime trees (without in the least belittling the native beauty of the North) with the
palm-trees and giant vegetation of India, and finally the cloudy Northern sky of the
Occident with this deep blue Southern sky which delights the eye, my enthusiasm
becomes more understandable. Before us, almost at our feet, and seemingly at one and the same time, scenes from
the greatest European theatres seemed to unfold, with their "Africans," "Aidas," "Kings of
Lahore" and the tutti quanti of various ballets portraying Oriental life. The most
gorgeous decorations under the sun ever seen by Europeans were displayed before us. The lovely temple in the midst of the lake, whose beauty fascinates even in
daylight, evoking enthusiastic tribute from the tourists, was now ten times more
enchanting. From the high roof of our palace all this was like a fantastic dream difficult
to realize, and enveloped one in a strange and ardent feeling. From this height not only
the illuminated buildings and palaces lay before us, like scenes from the Arabian nights,
but also the outlying hills and meadows.---PAGE BREAK---

From the high roof of our palace all this was like a fantastic dream difficult
to realize, and enveloped one in a strange and ardent feeling. From this height not only
the illuminated buildings and palaces lay before us, like scenes from the Arabian nights,
but also the outlying hills and meadows. As if emerging from the darkness surrounding
the fiery centre of the quadrangle, far away before us stretched the endless panorama,
23
25

---PAGE BREAK---THE DURBAR IN LAHORE, 1881
rolling away across the roofs of the palaces bordering the lake, into the distance,
beyond the horizon, on the moving sea of forest-clad hills and plains, where at last,
having gradually passed through a whole gamut of warm colors, from bronze-orange and
golden shades, to pale-purple mist, it suddenly vanished in the bluish haze of the distance. Directly before us, gleaming like a fire-bird, stood the temple in the lake, the dark
mirror of the latter reflecting and multiplying to infinity, the unbroken glowing
garlands that faithfully outlined the designs on the temple, its bas-relief, its inscriptions
and arabesques, as well as the intricate carving of the railings on the marble bridge. Flowers, dragons, birds - the smallest decorations in carving and painting which stood out
in blazing outlines against the dark background of the buildings, were repeated down to
the very depths of the lake, untouched by any ripples. Thousands of people above the
water, and thousands reflected in its surface.... They thronged on the shores of the
lake, spreading like a rich, variegated rug to the utmost boundaries of the steps which
led to the water, some of them half-immersed in water, and all speechless and motionless. Quietly and in silence they merely raised their swarthy arms towards the "Golden Temple,"
and simultaneously dipping them into the limpid depths of the lake, devoutly besprinkled
themselves with the holy water which gave to each of them promise of eternal life in
Moksha. Suddenly, like a fiery and hissing serpent, the first rocket rose in the air; then a
second, then a third, and so to the tenth, until the entire heavenly artillery booming and
bursting descended like a rain of stars upon the crowd. This evoked exuberant cries of
rapture.Suddenly, like a fiery and hissing serpent, the first rocket rose in the air; then a
second, then a third, and so to the tenth, until the entire heavenly artillery booming and
bursting descended like a rain of stars upon the crowd. This evoked exuberant cries of
rapture. For a full hour all that pyrotechnical art ever produced in the shape of rockets,
Catherine wheels, Roman candles and apotheoses, with the addition of native heraldic
designs, monograms and sacred Indian emblems, crackled, rattled and rumbled about us
until we were well-nigh deafened. The crowd exulted; especially when a mass of miniature
balloons with Bengal lights in them were released from the turret of the temple, and it
seemed impossible to distinguish them from the myriads of blazing stars in the sky.... Thousands of superstitious people, many of whom had never witnessed a display of
fireworks before, prostrated themselves on the ground upon the appearance of these, in
the firm belief that this was a miracle performed by their Govind-Guru or perhaps even by
Nanak himself. Some of them even picked up the fallen rockets, half-consumed by the fire,
from the ground, in order to preserve them as sacred objects. But soon, little by little, the
rockets began to appear in diminishing number. The reports and explosions grew less
until, finally, all was quiet. The apotheosis of the preceding year, in which the Moslems had
been depicted in a hell of fire-works, massacred on earth by the Sikhs and even pursued
by them to the infernal regions, had been prohibited this year by the government because
of complaints from offended Moslems, much to the Akali's sorrow. This time there was
ample reason to fear their indignation. Instead of the apotheosis some kind of wonderful
wheel with devils revolving on it appeared on the turret of Govind, as the fireworks ceased. The luminous square alone remained visible. The crowd of Europeans, sitting on the platform by the city clock-tower, dispersed.---PAGE BREAK---

The luminous square alone remained visible. The crowd of Europeans, sitting on the platform by the city clock-tower, dispersed. The upper platform also became abandoned; we alone remained on the roof, hovering
above the great crowd in the sacred square. After the festivities, the solemn ceremony of
the Kukas was to follow, and our akali promised us that we should see them wandering
around the lake while they repeated their mysterious annual vows, unknown to others.... 24
26

---PAGE BREAK---THE DURBAR IN LAHORE, 1881
I have already mentioned this political sect whose adherents fan the flames of an
inextinguishable vengeance directed against their conquerors, under the guise of religious
rites.24
Several years ago a traitor offered the English, for a good price, to join the sect of
the Kukas, and on learning their secrets, to betray them to the government. He did not
succeed in his enterprise because he was overtaken by sudden death. As for the Kukas,
they became even more cautious, and this excessive caution proved fatal to many among
them. Their leader and high-priest, Ram-Das Singh, intending to prove to the authorities
that their sect consisted in reality of true and faithful subjects and not of traitors, partly,
perhaps, because some unruly Kukas threatened to upset matters, sent a message to the
collector of a little town near Umballa, warning him that certain Kukas in his district
had mutinied and were threatening a riot. Unhesitatingly and without even obtaining
permission from the higher powers, the collector ordered every Kuka who could be found
to be seized and brought before him, whether he was guilty or not. Having seized 92
of them, and without even submitting them to trial, he ordered them to be tied to the
guns, which were then fired, with the result that they were all shot within a few hours. This is no rumor but a historical event in India which happened only a few years ago
and is familiar to all. There was a great scandal. The English became seriously frightened. In order to pacify the people they discharged the collector, seemingly deprived him of his
office and even made him appear before a court of law.... According to their claim (which
was, of course, upheld by the Anglo-Indian press), at the trial they discovered some
evidence which greatly compromised Ram-Das Singh, and they took advantage of this
fortunate discovery: by order of the administration he was sent to Rangoon for life
imprisonment.In order to pacify the people they discharged the collector, seemingly deprived him of his
office and even made him appear before a court of law.... According to their claim (which
was, of course, upheld by the Anglo-Indian press), at the trial they discovered some
evidence which greatly compromised Ram-Das Singh, and they took advantage of this
fortunate discovery: by order of the administration he was sent to Rangoon for life
imprisonment. While they could not remove all blame from the collector, they succeeded
in arousing the sympathies of the English public to such an extent that the latter outdid itself
in subscribing large sums for the benefit of "the unfortunate functionary who was made to
suffer for his loyalty"; and in a short time he was given a good post somewhere in Yarkand,
in Kashgar, where he was sent as something of a permanent envoy.25 The only one who
suffered was Mr. Cowen, the collector's assistant, who was forced to play the part of
scapegoat and carry the sins of British Israel into the desert of exile. Strangely enough,
Ram-Das Singh, although still under the supervision of the police, is alive in Rangoon. But
although the English removed him by force from the Kukas, they did not,
unfortunately, stamp out Kukism. This sect, like the many-headed hydra, has now a
countless number of heads in place of the one that was lost, and numbers several leaders
in every town in Panjab. No one knows, however, who their high-priest is. The incident
of the 92 Kukas who were shot was included by the Anglo-Indian government in the
series of those many "unpleasant but unavoidable juridical mistakes" in India about
which, incidentally, it concerns itself very little. 24 See "From the Caves and Jungles of Hindustan."
25 The name of this collector, Sir Douglas Forsyth, is well known in India as well as in Europe.---PAGE BREAK---

The incident
of the 92 Kukas who were shot was included by the Anglo-Indian government in the
series of those many "unpleasant but unavoidable juridical mistakes" in India about
which, incidentally, it concerns itself very little. 24 See "From the Caves and Jungles of Hindustan."
25 The name of this collector, Sir Douglas Forsyth, is well known in India as well as in Europe. Not
long ago he was in Yarkland and traveled on the Chinese borders; he has recently published, with his own
commentaries, additions and preface, a translation by E. Delmar Morgan of Colonel Przhevalsky's book
From Kulja, across the Tian-Shan to Lob-Nor, which includes maps and plans. 25
27

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

THE DURBAR IN LAHORE, 1881
A great disappointment awaited us, however. That night, when most of the crowd
had dispersed, the Kukas commenced their mysterious walk around the lake, but more
than that we did not see. At the head of the procession walked a tall, grey-bearded Sikh
wearing a long white skirt and turban, and behind him came several hundred Kukas. The
procession advanced slowly and solemnly. Holding a bronze vase of a strange shape in
his left hand, the old man sprinkled with his right hand some kind of red liquid on the lake,
while chanting some verses in a strange dialect, and at the end of each couplet the chorus
joined in. The procession soon vanished into one of the beach-palaces. Distantly, and in
broken fragments, we heard their slow, melancholy chanting from the interior. The
programme had evidently been changed, and our akali could not or would not say anything
further. One by one the lights went out around us, and soon only the bright stars remained
above our heads. A fresh wind came up, and it became quite cold on the high roof. Finally
we went home.
In spite of all our attempts and inquiries we could not find out anything more
about these interesting Kukas. Who and what are they? We knew that they were Sikhs
and Hindus, but there are apparently Moslems among them who have renounced their
faith. And what is the origin of their name, the etymology of which no one could explain
to us? In the mountains, west of Kashmir and up to the river Indus, there is a small tribe
of that name. But these Kukas are seemingly either Chinese or Tibetan Moslem-Shiites,
and the Anglo-Indian Government knows even less about them than about the Kukas in
Panjab, except the fact that even the Kashmiris (not to mention their neighboring tribes,
such as the Bambas, Gujars and others) stand in great fear of their knowledge of black
magic and see in them dangerous magicians and sorcerers. What then would the Kukas
in Panjab, that sect which was suspected of political treachery and which only appeared
some few years ago, have in common with them?
As we passed under the windows of the house where the Kukas had retired to
complete their mysterious ceremonies, we heard their singing again, this time loud and
sharp, resounding through the deep silence of the nocturnal air, like some invisible threat.
For some unknown reason I was reminded of the scene and chorus from The Huguenots:
"la bénédiction des poignards".
(to be continued)
26
28---PAGE BREAK---THE DURBAR IN LAHORE, 1881
[The Theosophist — November, 1960 - from p. 81 to p. 101]
III. Continued. A necessary digression. - Anglo-Indians, the English and England. - Who
is to blame? - The rights of gardeners, British and Hindu. - A chorus of mutual
complaints. - The differing result of taking an oath on "the cow's tail" or on the
Bhagavad-Gita. - By what are the English guided? - The Coolie. - The Anglo-Indian
en déshabillé. - The lack of patriotism in the Hindu. Upon reaching this chapter, I find myself forced to break the continuity of my
story for the sake of a brief explanation. To many a Russian India seems like the end
of the earth, and, if I do not outline more clearly the mutual relations between
conqueror and vanquished, and give a sketch of the country itself, much of the story of
what I saw and heard at the wonderful Durbar in Lahore will remain both obscure and
inexplicable.... Without claiming the slightest infallibility of opinion, especially where politics
are concerned, I offer the following pages as mere personal observations, superficial, but
on the whole truthful; that I can guarantee. Having listened to numerous discussions on
India, as I had to in Simla, on the one hand, and to as many restrained complaints
from the natives, on the other, and forming furthermore my conclusions without any
prejudice whatsoever, on the events as they took place before my very eyes, I believe that
my two years' continuous residence in the country places me in a position to judge
of it fairly accurately. Being but imperfectly initiated into the secret mysteries of the
Calcutta cabinet, and still less interested in them, I nevertheless believe that something
pure white cannot appear jet black to me, or vice versa; all the more so since it
becomes obvious to any foreigner that the character of the relationship between rulers
and subjects is very far from being normal.Having listened to numerous discussions on
India, as I had to in Simla, on the one hand, and to as many restrained complaints
from the natives, on the other, and forming furthermore my conclusions without any
prejudice whatsoever, on the events as they took place before my very eyes, I believe that
my two years' continuous residence in the country places me in a position to judge
of it fairly accurately. Being but imperfectly initiated into the secret mysteries of the
Calcutta cabinet, and still less interested in them, I nevertheless believe that something
pure white cannot appear jet black to me, or vice versa; all the more so since it
becomes obvious to any foreigner that the character of the relationship between rulers
and subjects is very far from being normal. In the two preceding chapters, as in my
earlier letters about India, and especially in my articles: "From the Caves and
Jungles of Hindostan" which were published in the Moscow Chronicle, I have often
referred to this amazing and entirely unjustified relationship; one of utter contempt and
arrogance on the part of the English, and on the part of the natives sometimes disgusting
servility and cowardice. Every time I express my honest opinion about the injustice and cruelty of the English
towards the natives, when conversation turns to their mutual relationship, the former assure
me that I am mistaken, since I know nothing about their subtle politics, and the latter, in
answer to my pacificatory expressions and words of consolation, attempt to convince me
that there is no single Englishman in India who wishes them well. Soon I came to the
following conclusion: both sides exaggerate, the one its great virtues and merit, and the
other its seemingly undeserved fate. The former, inspired, probably, by the wise proverb
that "dogs go mad from over-eating,"26 seem to undergo a complete change, as it were, on
their arrival in India from England.---PAGE BREAK---

Soon I came to the
following conclusion: both sides exaggerate, the one its great virtues and merit, and the
other its seemingly undeserved fate. The former, inspired, probably, by the wise proverb
that "dogs go mad from over-eating,"26 seem to undergo a complete change, as it were, on
their arrival in India from England. The latter, we will grant, have not individually
deserved such a cruel fate, but India, as a whole, is carrying the heavy burden of her age-
26 [Russian proverb. - Translator.]
27
29

---PAGE BREAK---THE DURBAR IN LAHORE, 1881
old sins: by her own past she has herself fashioned the misfortunes of the present, and her
present position was inevitable. More remarkable still is the fact that absolutely nothing is known in England of
the activities of the English in India or the true state of the natives under the English yoke. How true this is may be inferred from the following: an educated Hindu goes to Europe,
after having partially renounced his superstitious prejudices concerning both his country
and his caste; he travels first class, no longer dressed as a sans-culotte but almost in
European style; he wipes his nose with a handkerchief and not with the fork of Adam;
his manners, like those of all natives, are quiet, even refined; even his education is by no
means inferior and is sometimes considerably superior to that of most of his English
traveling companions. In spite of this, his journey is divided into two phases: the first
extends as far as Aden, and the second from Aden to London. From India to Aden, that is
to the midpoint of his trip, the English will shrink from him; they will look upon him as a
despicable creature belonging to a "lower race"; in other words they will ignore his
presence, and he will rarely have the courage to assert his right of sitting with them at the
common table. But beyond Aden, and before the steamer has lost sight of the shore,
everything and everybody changes as if by the wielding of a magic wand!.... The Hindu is
drawn into conversation. He is not avoided any longer; and if it should happen that some
Indian official is on the ship on home-leave, even he will probably discuss politics with
him, while the official's wife will condescend to draw his attention to the weather. The
same happens on the return journey. From England to Aden will be a paradise.---PAGE BREAK---

The
same happens on the return journey. From England to Aden will be a paradise. But the
steamer will barely have rounded the burning mounds of Arabia and reached Bab el
Mandeb, when the stage-setting is again altered: the free British subject becomes the
abject English slave of whom the people in England have no conception!.... This is no fiction but a fact confirmed every week. Who, then, is to blame for
this? Is it England with its laws and institutions which guarantee equality for all, or
is it the English, namely, the English in India - quite a different thing?.... Of course we
must blame the Anglo-Indians. They alone, during the last twenty years, have built up these
prejudices, which feed their arrogance and conceit. In India, where everybody makes
obeisance to them in serf-like fashion, these two vices are encouraged, in proportion to
their climate-infected livers; in England none of them would dare to admit the sheer
Asiatic despotism and contempt with which they treat the Hindus, and not only in
England but even here everyone of them, at any such hint, denies it and tries to refute
any direct accusation. Peter blames Paul, but will never confess to sin himself. "Are you not ashamed to treat the poor Hindus like that.... as though they were
dumb animals?" I asked a most amiable and kindly Briton in whose brother's house I was
staying at that time. The amiable Briton opened wide his blue eyes, and his pink face assumed an
expression of astonishment. "Treat them how? Do I treat them badly?"
28
30

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

THE DURBAR IN LAHORE, 1881
"You do not exactly decorate them with medals, do you? When opportunity
affords, you treat them as a Castilian driver treats an obstinate mule!...."
"You must be mistaken. I cannot speak for others. There are, naturally, people in
our colony (that is, the English) who are, perhaps, a bit too rough on the natives. But
personally I am not one of them; you are really not being fair, you know!...."
"Well, what about yesterday, when that old Rao Bahadur27 came to your study,
and having entered in his stockings remained humbly standing at the door?.... You not only
did not ask him to be seated, but did not let him come within ten steps of you."
"My dear friend! You reason like a woman!" exclaimed my friend. "The old
man's visit was an official one, and I have no right to depart for his sake from the wise
policy of our administrators, which is to treat the natives with cold reserve. Otherwise
they would have no respect for us. This is a policy of estrangement."
"It probably coincides with a policy of approach which is by no means
ambiguous. Did you not, in my presence, push your gardener, who was peacefully
occupied with his work in the flower-bed, merely because he happened to stand in your
way when we walked along the path?"
"That was unintentional," said my friend a little abashed: "It is sometimes
difficult to distinguish their dark skins from the earth."
"Is that so? Well, tell me then, this dark-complexioned gardener of yours, is he or
is he not a British subject?"
"W.... Well, of course he is!" admitted my companion somewhat unwillingly,
sensing possible treachery in my unexpected question.
"And he shares equal rights with an English gardener, for instance?"
"Yes.... but what are you driving at? I don't understand."
"Oh, nothing in particular, only the curiosity of a foreigner and a woman. I like
to draw deductions from comparisons.... But what is your opinion? If you were to give
an English gardener an undeserved, or, even a deserved slap in the face, would you not
risk a return blow?.... Your gardener would have the law on his side, and you, as,
instigator, would be fined. Well, supposing the Hindu in his turn, as a British subject,
reciprocated similarly?"
My friend fairly jumped.
"I.... I would have beaten him to death! A Hindu may be a British subject, but he is
not English!...."
27 A high native title of nobility.
29
31---PAGE BREAK---THE DURBAR IN LAHORE, 1881
This exclamation contains a whole tome of admission. It places a seal, as it were,
on the sentence pronounced on an entire nation and its present, if not its future destiny. Everyone knows that England is a great and powerful nation; everyone knows also
that England as a nation cannot help wishing India, as one of its best colonies, at least
material success, if not ethical growth, if only to uphold the proverb that "No one sets fire
to his own harvest." And in this material respect England does indeed all she can do to
help India, without sparing either labor or money. True, this labor is rewarded from
India's treasury. But the fact that England acts selfishly in this regard cannot alter the fact
that she is preparing a magnificent future for India, if only the child can survive this
period of stern education; a future in fact such as would have been unthinkable for this
stagnant country during either the Mogul dynasties or its periods of autonomy, as
prejudice and age-old customs have always hampered its progress. Much sorrow and
suffering has the great Bharata experienced in her time, but this suffering has but the
better prepared her for the complete renaissance that awaits her. Only twenty years
ago the Hindu would have chosen a thousand deaths rather than accept a glass of water
offered him by a European or in the latter's house, and not only a European, but a
Moslem, a Parsee, or a Hindu belonging to a different caste. To take liquid medicine
prepared in a public drug-store - medicine compounded with water, was considered a
mortal sin; to sit beside a compatriot of another caste was equal to being expelled from
one's own, and that meant everlasting dishonor. Ice and soda-water were looked upon
with disgust, but nowadays medicine as well as ice and soda-water, and especially a
network of railways, have accomplished their purpose.To take liquid medicine
prepared in a public drug-store - medicine compounded with water, was considered a
mortal sin; to sit beside a compatriot of another caste was equal to being expelled from
one's own, and that meant everlasting dishonor. Ice and soda-water were looked upon
with disgust, but nowadays medicine as well as ice and soda-water, and especially a
network of railways, have accomplished their purpose. Under the influence of
civilization, even though it has been forced upon the nation, those age-old prejudices
that ruined India and made her such an easy prey to the first adventurers who desired to
possess her, are beginning gradually to melt, like a frozen puddle beneath a sunbeam. Without a doubt the English have conferred and continue to confer
inestimable benefits on India; but, I repeat, for her future, but by no means for her present. Their boast is that even if they had given her nothing but their protection against Moslem
invasion, and their help for the complete suppression of civil dissensions, they would still
have done more for India than any other power, including the Hindus themselves, from
the time of the first Mohammedan invasion. Possibly England has done even more than
that. But then the present Anglo-Indian government is acting like a stepmother, who ill-
treats her step-sons and starves them secretly behind her husband's back, even though it
strictly carries out in all other respects the programme submitted by the Home
Government. Unfortunately for India, England is very distant, and the Anglo-Indian
government is always at India's throat with a whip in its hand. Naturally enough the
natives cannot be content with this and are perpetually complaining..... However,
although most of their complaints are justified, they are themselves at fault in many
things. Instead of gaining profit for the future from the lessons of the past, they act like
ostriches, hiding their heads in the sand and giving way to bitterness in the present.---PAGE BREAK---

However,
although most of their complaints are justified, they are themselves at fault in many
things. Instead of gaining profit for the future from the lessons of the past, they act like
ostriches, hiding their heads in the sand and giving way to bitterness in the present. If the English were to treat the natives humanely, their power would appear less
despotic; the Indians would not tremble before them as they do, and that power would
become more firmly rooted than is evident at present on Indian soil, through the love and
gratitude of the people. Quiet and gentle, the majority of the natives are ready to lick any
30
32

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

THE DURBAR IN LAHORE, 1881
caressing hand, and to show gratitude for every bone thrown to them. If the English were
less ferociously contemptuous towards the Hindus, and more kindly to the people, their
prestige would possibly diminish, but their safety in the conquered country would become
more firmly established in the future. But it is precisely this they do not wish or cannot
understand. They seem completely to forget what every child knows, that their prestige is
a sparkling soap-bubble, entirely dependent on external events beyond their control. Their
power in India is well established, even with the present caste-system, merely because the
natives have a superstitious idea about their invincibility, and find in it no trace of
an Achilles' heel; and also because, according to the teachings of Krishna, they dare not
go against "the inevitable". Being fatalists, they believe that they are living in the Kali-
Yuga, "the black age," and cannot expect anything favorable as long as this age lasts on
earth. In these two superstitions, as if in two impregnable fortresses, lie concealed the
power and safety of the English. But let the British army be badly beaten somewhere,
and the soap-bubble will burst, and the superstition will vanish from the minds of the
Hindus, like the visions in a nightmare at the moment of waking.
In India, wherever two Englishmen meet, complaints about the "fiendish
ingratitude of the black devils" are soon heard and wherever two natives encounter
each other, complaints about the "dark intentions of the white oppressors" will pour
forth..... Taken together, these complaints produce the same effect on the listener as the
duet of "the two blind men" in the operetta bearing that title. In deceiving England
concerning India, unconsciously it may be, these oppressors deceive themselves. They
treat the natives like slaves or chained dogs; and the slave takes refuge in a slave's only
weapons - lies and cunning; and the dog will sink its teeth into its master's neck if it ever
breaks loose from the chain. Under this destructive influence all the noble virtues of this
people, sentiments of honor, of duty to one's neighbor, of gratitude, all these die out,
and are superseded by either negative qualities, complete apathy, or the lowest forms of
vice. Thirty years ago you could go to the nearest money-changer (who is likewise a
banker), sitting on the stree*[12078 pages in source — text truncated at 100000 characters]*