The Gheranda Samhita (Srisa Chandra Vasu translation)
=====================================================
Gheranda — The Gheranda Samhita, translated into English by Rai Bahadur Srisa Chandra Vasu (late 19th century), public domain. A classic manual of hatha yoga in seven lessons, from purification to samadhi. Scan via Internet Archive.

Gheranda Samhita


The Gheranda: Samhita


Translated into English by
RALIBAHADUR SRISA CHANDRA VASU


SRI SATGURU PUBLICATIONS
40/5, Shakti Nagar, Delhi-110007.
(India)


Distribuled by


e NES INDIAN BOOKS CENTRE
-A 40/5, Shakti Nagar,


Delhi-110007 (India)


First Published 1914—15
SSP Edition 1979


Published by Sri Satguru Publications, 40/5, Shakti Nagar, Delhi-110007
& Printed at A. К. Press, Delhi-110035


TABLE OF CONTENTS.


LEssoN FIRST.
ON THE TRAINING OF THE
PHYBICAL BODY.


PAGE,
Balutation >. - 1
The Seven Exercises 2
The Six Purifücatory Processes 3
The Боце Internal Dhautis $
Antar-Dhauti ... E АТ 8
Våtasâra-Dhauti 4
N&ris&ra-Dhauti "m А 4
Agnisára, or Fire Purification ws 4
Bahiskrita-Dhauti ET 5

Danta dhauti, Or Teeth pariteation. 5
Рапа-Мо18-Рівабі m PEE
Jivh& 5odhana, ог Tongue- -Dhauti ;« 6
Kami Dhaoil, o or Ear-Oleaning = 7
Hrid-Dhauti .. аке ves 1
лад Dioni. “з 1
Yamana-Dbauti ET evo 04
Vastra-Dhauti 8
Mula Sodhana,or Purification of tho

Rectum  .« ER е 8
Епа of Dhautis 8
Bastis 9
Jala-Basti oœ see Seo 9
Bthala-Basti ... E 2. 9
Жпа of Basti-Karma T 9
Neti ө m 9
Laukiki-Yoga... m 10
Tr&taka, or Gazing .J 10
Kaplabhátl ... - , 10
'Y àma-Erama ... — 11
vyüt-Erama .. m 11
Bit-Krama se " eo 0401
End of the First Lesson w Hn

SECOND LESSON.

The Авапав, о. Postures... 12
Different Kinds of Postures 12
The Siddhásana 18
The Padmásana 18
The Bhadrásana ia .. 18
The Muktásana E ^ 14


PAGE.,

The Vajrásana, or the Adamant
Posture se m ^ 14
The Swaatikást ла Ws » М
The bimhásana w ^ М
The Gomukhásana "e „ Ии
The Virásana EM 15
Тһе Dhanurüsana se e 15
The Mritásana А ^ 16
The Guptásana m » 10
The Matasyásana vis » 15
The Matsyendrássna ... » 16
The Paschimottána-Asana ^» 16
The Gorakshásana in » 16
The Utkatàüsana e œ 16
The Sankatasans E » М
The Mayürásana - „ М
The Kukutásana - e Ww
The Kürmásana өө e dH
The Uttána Kürmásana ... u.c M
The »landukásana m » 18
The Uttána Mandukásana 18
The Vriksbá&sapa € .. 18
The Garudásana w » 18
The Vrishásana m » 18
The balabhásana T d
The Makarásana Яб » 18
The Ushtrüsana T » 19
The Bhujangásana „ . 19
The Yogásana w w 19

THIRD LESSON,

On Mudrás .. en өө 20

The Advantages of Practising
Mudrás ... m » 20
Mahámudrá ... w » 21
Its Benefits... s" » 21
Nabho Майгё... is ^ 31
Vddiy&na-Bandha 21
Its Benefits ... 21
Jjálaudhara 22
Its Benefits ... r w 24
Málabandha ... 56 S. 7
Its Benefit8 ... "m 2?


Mahábandha ...
Its Benefits. ...
Mahávedha ..
Its Benefits...
Khechari Mudrá
Ita Benefits ...
Viparitakarani
Its Begefita ..
"'Yonlmudrá

Its Benefits ..
Yajroni Mudrá
Its Benefits .
Bakti Chálant
Its Benefits...
Tadági-Mudrá
Mándoki-Mudrá
Ita Benefits
B&mbhavi-Mudrá
Ita Benefits |...


The Five Dharapé-Mudris


Párthivi ТА
Its Benefits ...


Ámbhasí — .. Ка


Its Benefits...


Agneyi E "


Its Benefits ...
V&yavi

Its Benefits

АкАйї Dhárpaná
Its Benefits ...
Aávini-MudrA
Ita Benefita ...
Pasini-MudrA...
Its Benefits ...
K&ki-Mudr& ...
Ita Benefits ...
Máteangini-Mudrá
Its Benefit8 ...
Bhujangini-Mudrá
Its Benefita ...


Tho Benefits of Mudrás...


ааўт;гтввв


п


FOURTH LESSON.


Эдеа.


Ргаёуёћ ёга, or Reatrainingthe Mind 86


FTA LESSON.


Ртапёуёта, or Restraint of Breath...


Place m ess
Time m Я
Bix Seasons ...


The Experienoing of casona


Moderation of Diet m
Prohibited Foods m
Purification of Nådis ...
Kinds of Kumbhaka m


Sahita 29 m
Süryabheda-Kumbhaka ...
Its Benefita ... s
The Уёуоя ... -
Their Seats ... Е
Ujjây? e ©
Bitali " А
Bhastrika ... eve
Bhrámari (or Beetle-Droning Каш.
bhata) ө ee
Marchh& T -
Kovalt ES m
SITH LESSON.
Dhyåna-Yoga ... Sed
Sthûla Dhyána TJ
Another Process m"
Jyotir Dhyána T
Another Proce 8 -
Bükshma Dhyána -
'BivuNTH LBG90M
BSamtdhi Yoga T


Dhyina-YogaSaméádhi ...
Náda-Yogs Samádhi  ..
Rasánanda Yoga Semádhi


Lays-Sidddhi Yoga Samádhi


Bbakti YogaSamádhi ...
Ráje-YogaSanádhi — ..
Praise of Samádhi -
The end - m


ЕБЕББЧЧУЕ zzz


$555555£2559g99951


THE GHERANDA SAMHITA


Lesson FIRST


ON THE TRAINING OF THE PHYSICAL BODY.


BALUTATION.

I bow to that Lord Primeval who taught in the beginning the
science of the Training in Hardiness (Hatha Yoga!—a science that stands
out as the first rung on the ladder that leads to the supreme heights of
Royal Training (Raja Yoga).

NoTW.—The Training of the body is the first step to tho training of the mind, А
healthy mind сап exist only in à healthy body. Hence the Hatha Yoga or training of
г the body is the first step to the training of the mind ог Raja Yoga. Hatha may be translated


as “ hard" or the training of or in Hardiness. Rajain this connection may be translated
as royal or softness, or training in royal graces or mental discipline.


чает а9 |
quur aaaea асса 1
пча {алтап Әсе ЧЕЙ N tu
1. Once Chanda К4рё!! going to the cottage of Gheranda saluted
him with reverence and devotion.
чычат —
чачат тат AAEE ETC] |
катї Agia атра чт AT N R і
Chanda Kápáli said :—
2. О Master of Yoga ! О best of the Yogins! О Lord! І wish now
to learn the Physical Discipline (Yoga), which leads to the knowledge of
truth (or Tattva-j iána).


Эсте SquTW—
arg rg патат чеин” qRUSR 1
фач Ж а че атччтатччтса нз!


2 THE GHERANDA SAMHITA.


GHERANDA REPLIED.


- 8. Well asked, indeed, О mighty armed, I shall tell thee, O child,
what thou askest me, Attend to it with diligence.
ата maan: ure аа Armi seu 1
aaar геа, Wu RY: ие N
4. There are по fetters like those of Illusion (Máy&), no strength
like that which comes from discipline (Yoga), there is no friend higher
than knowledge (Jiiána), and no greater enemy than Egoism (Ahankára).


ялап айн ат turepnfur RTT |
тат Xm «атетт AMT Ga ҢА
9. As by learning the alphabets one can, through practice, master
all the sciences, so by thoroughly piactising first the (physical) training,
one acquires the Knowledge of the True.
чта: єбїї miat qe:
aaga wu чїч sur айч
6. On account of good and bad deeds, the bodies of all animated
beings are produced, and the bodies give rise to works (Karma which leada
to rebirth) and thus the circle ів continued like that of а Persian Wheel.


saN ала xau nut чод!
WECRIANSISSNAT ARA MRA dos
7. As the Persiau Wheel in drawing water from а well goes
up and down, moved by the bullocks (filling and exhausting the buckets
again and again), so the soul passes through life and death moved by its
Deeds.
mapa Cute edp Фит: eu TE: |
атаач аси чеш amataq н си
8. Like unto ап unbaked earthen pot thrown іп water, the body is
soon decayed (in this world). Bake it hard in the fire of Training in order
to strengthen and purify the body.


жа анагчад |
таа теат дч «єй ёе eH |
naaa ARAA чеч ҸнӘтҸац ү є |
THE SEVEN EXERCISES.
9, The seven exercises which appertain to this Training of the body
are the following :--Purificatory, strengthening, steadying, calming, and
those leading to lightness, perception, and isolation.


LESSON FIRST. 3


ату €uro i
чаш тчаѕа maA ATER |
gaat fan q gengi dCHT Дон
MMARI — VADSIGTSTRERIGHRI 1
erar баса быч я ба: 300
10—11. lst.—The purification is acquired by the regular perform-
ance of six practices (to be mentioned shortly); 9nd—Àsana ог
posture gives Driddhat& or strength ; 3rd —Mudrá given Sthiratâ or steadi-
ness; 4th— Pratyáhàra gives Dhairyat& or calmness; 5th —Prán&yáma
gives lightness or Laghimá; 6 —Оһулпа gives perception (Pratyak-
shatwa) of Self; and 7th —Samádhi gives isolation (Nirliptatà), which ів
verily the Freedom.
"T SIT |
QR daan RA чта ат |
жчтентЗат чагатай «габа и RR N
THE SIX PUR!FICATORY PROCESSES,


12. (1) Dhauti ; (2) Basti ; (3) Neti ; (4) Laukiki ; (5) Trátaka ; (б)
Kapálabháti are tho Shatkarmas or aix practices, known as Sádhana:


Panr I.
arr Sf od
яга йг Р euam, i
М чайы жеп чё таа ARSAN $a d
THE FOUR INTERNAL DHAUTIS,

13. The Dhautis are of four kinds, and they clear away the impu-
rities of the body. They are:—(a) Antardhauti (internal washing); (b)
Dantadhauti (cleaning the teeth) ; (c) Hriddhauti (cleaning the heart); (d)
Mulashodhana ;cleaning the rectuin).

эта эде: 1
атап quem agnt =йчваң!
чегер Amarda зган әт і 49 di
(а) ANTAR-DHAUTI.
14. Antardhauti is again sub-divided into four parts : — Vâtasâra


(wind purification), Váris&ra (water purificatipn), Valinisára (fire purifica-
tion), and Bahiskrita.


4 THE GHERANDA SAMHITA.


тя ARTT: |
Tragar аз чї: ow
атаа чыйт Хайй: tud
(a!) VÀTASARA-DHAUTI.

15. Contract the mouth like the beak of a crow and drink air
slowly, and filling the stomach slowly with it, move it therein, and then
slowly force it out through the lower passage.

were чё wei RASEN |
aiui RaRa R A RA U
16. The Vátasára is a very secret process, it causes the purification
of the body, it destroys all diseases and increases the gastric-fire.
xg mE: 1
к quum чета ч Мад |
amaA ёбад! u tO a
(a) VÂRISÂRA-DHAUTI.
17. Fill thə mouth with water down to the throat, and then drink


it slowly ; and then move it through the stomach, forcing it downwards
expelling it through the rectum.


aea чс Jer o dxEue*tEg |
wremeeongda Жай яча ate а
18. This process should be kept very secret. It purifies the body.
And by practising it with care, one gets a luminous or shining body.
апе чї Ўт” етеде: яша: |
пеге rare IRE seen N {6 ү
19. The Várisára ів the highest Dhauti. Не who practises it with
ease, purifies his filthy body and turns it into a shining one.
x" nfi |
ятбтїї A чачу» ыб |
яїнөтсйчт “тй йїп и 2e p
(à) AGNISARA OR FIRE PURIFICATION.
20. Press in the naval knot or intestines towarda the spine for one
hundred times. This ів Ágnisára ог бге process. "This gives success in


the practice of Yoga, it cures all the diseases of the stomach (gastric juice)
and increases the internal fire.


зҳаачзіечат arcta че |
qur rfe: чат rer fara теит!
| Wars Unfannxa їчїїт aca н RL а


LESSON FIRST. 5


21. This form of Dhauti should be kept very secret, and it is
hardly (о be attained even by the gods. Ву this Dhauti alone one
certainly gets a luminous body.


(а) BAHISKER!TA-DHAUTI,

22. By Kákachaüchu or crow-bill Mudrá fill the stomach with air,
hold it there for one hour and a half, and then force it down towards the
intestines, This Dhauti must ba kept a great secret, and must not be
revealed to anybody.

"np sums |
бй wa бшп fnerat Әйа |
сді тайчы mensa, |
WrWenarer ага sqt Quem quud RA И

93, Then standing in navel-deep water, draw out the Saktin&dt
(long intestines), wash the Nâdt with haud, and so long as its filth ів not
all washed away, wash it with care, and ther draw it in again into the


abdomen.
w sure eb атага дёиң!
Wwe fum (uir MATJET н a d
24. This process should be kept secret. It is not easily to be
attained even by the gods. Simply by this Dbauti one gets Deva-deha


(Godlike body.)
wp oufiregernfermamm: !
amà rcnt чїй un eng |
чча MARMITA MAÈ aud
95. As long as а person has not the power of retaining the breath
for an hour and a half (or retaining wind in the stomach for that pericd),
so long he cannot acbieve this grand Dhauti or purification, known as


Bahiskritadhauti.
яя oqen |
quo беде ver RPAN: |
чт чаа «end Ваа и за
(b).—DANT A-DHAUTI, OR TEETH PURIFICATION.


26. Danta-Dhauti is of five kinds: purification of the teeth, of the
root, of the tongue, of the two holes of the ear, and of the frontal-sinuges,


6 THE GHERANDXA SAMHITA.


x" азаеп: i
aR carp ghgmur ч gan d
пцтхдсацаѕч  urnesfean I RO А
(0) DANTA-MULA-DHAUTI,
21. Hub the teeth with catechu-powder or with pure earth, во long
as dental impurities are not removed.
ең чет Sfr Armee |
Rer gaad ч qeu ч mp 1
qag чтчапаатот ч t nau N RE п
28. This teeth-washing is a great Dhauti and an important process
in the practice of Yoga іог the Yogis. It should be done daily in the
morning by the Yogis, in order to preserve the teeth. In purification
this is approved of by the Yogis. ^
яя Ётапїїчяд |
эша: rq Ёпдтїйчаєєшд!
астаса агае aou
(0°) ЛУНА SODHANA. OR TONGUE-DRAUTI,
29. Ishallnow tell you the method of cleansing the tongue. The
elongation of the tongue destroys old age, death and disease.
зт frqeutemamm 1
INARA ааба: |
ач төнө а атаач |
аа: чёпїйїнєп чїч AAA € 30 и
30. Join together the tbree fingers known as the index, the middle
and the ring finger, put them into the throat, and rub welland clean
the root of the tongue, and by washing it again throw out the phlegm.
miaa QUAD ча: qus
agi Әтечейш fear чї: wu зї н
31. Having thus washed it, rub it with butter, and milk it again
and again ; then by holding the tip of the tongue with an iron instrument
pull it out slowly and slowly.
Rer жоїчаа ч Clequuseqm i
ad wm ч Ва ат fesso 99 чад і! за и
32. Do thisdaily with diligence before the rising and setting sun.
By so doing the tongue becomes elongated.
ята кїтїї: 1
aaae Aena, teur 1
етазцтаатћа атдтет© ETTAN, Haa d


LESSON FIRST. 1


(b) KARNA-DHAUTI, OR EAR-CLEANING.

33. Glean the two holes of the ears by the index and the ring

fingers. Ву practising it daily, the mystical sounds are heard.
тч ческий: |
чате SES Qu HISHRRTUNSWUNN |
ччаәтчатдя «ЧЧ ааа Шон!
KAPÁLA-RANDHRA-DHAUTI.

34. Rub with the thumb of the right haud the depression in the
forehead near the bridge of the nose. By the practico of this Yoga,
diseases arising from derangements of phlegmatic humours are cured.

ат їйгє rfr Raed: smaa 1
Бага anA ч бага ч Ва RR 1 qua

35. Тһе vessels become purified and clairvoyance is induced, "This

should be practised daily after awakening írom sleep, after meals, aud


in Ше evening.
яя кайг: |
AR Aat pagea a И
(c) HRID-DHAUTI.
36. Hrid-Dhauti, or purification of Беалќ (or rather thioat) is of three
kinda, viz., by Гарда (a stick), Vainana (vomiting), and by Vastra (cloth)
чапат dps dwqui айч а |
Cen чтергат д qus semgtegd: и аэ d
(c) DANDA-DHAUTI.
37. Take either а plantain stalk ora stalk of turmeric (Haridra)
or a stalk of cane, and thrust it slowly into the æsophagus and then diaw


it out slowly.
enid an m ÜspeigeNar 1
ачечачтаа {йл aA ga и 36 и
38. Ву this process all the phlegm, bile aud other impurities are
expelled out of the mouth. By this Danda-Dhauti every kind ої heart-
disease is surely cured. І
yy quat: і
Prset баат «теча gie |
sa gig ма? gear ups Чия: d
Ramuan =ч бааа и 3^ и
(ст) VAMANA-DHAUTI.
39. After meal, let the wise practitioner drink water full up to
the throat, then looking fora short while upwards, let him vomit it out


`


8 THE GHERANDA SAMHITA.


again. Hy daily practising this Yoga, disorders of phlegm aud bile are


eured.
xw чате: i
watxePrenC атачы” mew !
ga петка етатеаа infer і ме y
(c) VASTRA-DHAUTI.
40. Tethim swallow slowly a thin cloth, four fingere wide, then
let him draw it out again. This ів called Vastra-Dhauti.
semerdiupes mf башын!
würep чаччы wawer Йа RA n ut a
41. This cures Gulma or abdominal diseases, fever, enlarged
spleen, !ертову, and other skin diseases and disorders of phlegm and
bile, and day by day the practitioner gets health, strength, and cheerful-


ness.
wu qeutwaq |
ччтчж<ат атча я MA |
wenn SNTM, N ws d
(d) MULA SODHANA, OR PURIFICATION OF THE RECTUM,

49. 'Гһе Apánaváyu does not flow freely so long as the rectum is
not purified. Therefore with the greatest care let him practise this
purification of the large intestines.

Regge quis manggon qt i
qs атай «абат qu ҷа: и va и

43. By the stalk of the root of Haridra (turmeric) or the middle

finger, the rectum should 5e carefully cleansed with weter over and over


again.
mauna i Prae i
9 «тач часе NITT N ve u
44. This destroys constipation, indigestion, and dyspepsia, and
increases the beauty and vigour of the body and enkindles the sphere bf
the fire (f. e., the gastric juice).
End of Dhautis.


Parr II.
зч «ачсаң |!
qea: gaad: етет =ват i
теѓе аё pulega аду RAT N vu u


LESSON FIRST. 9


BASTIS,

45. The Bastis are described of two kinds, vis: Jala Basti (or
water Basti) and Sukshma Basti (or dry Basti. Water Basti îs done in
water and dry Basti always on land.

| яч waak-
чата na вчтагтетеац !
заа quw sow ARTIT, us d
JALA-BASTI,

46. Entering water up to the navel and assuming the posture
called Utkatásana, let him contract and dilate the sphincter-muscle of
Ње anus. This is called Jala.Basti.

sme sque meng Arned!
NAATIN єлчєй лаң U VS н

47. This cures Prameha (urinary disorders), udávarta (disorders
of digestion) and Kruraviyu (disorders of the wind). The body becomes
free from all diseases and becomes as beautiful as that of the god Cupid.

абы чбяйгатая erafareqt 9: i
ябВааїдщат urqargseting дес! ve u
STHALA-BASTI.

48. Assuming the posture called Paschimottána, let him move the
intestines slowly downwards, then contract and dilate the sphincter-
muscle of the anus with Aswini-Mudrá.


чазап Sergi я Рей i
бча азнехухигачтеї farum q ue u


49. By this practice of Yoga, constipation never occurs, and it
increases gastric fire and cures flatulence.


End of Basti-Karma.


Part Ш.


ser feram i
Rafani qeu Maa паҹ 1
детапайетата ета afr q ҷо и
МЕТІ.
50. Takeathin thread, measuring half а cubit, and insert it into
the nostrils, and passing it through, pull it out by the mouth. This is
called Neti-Kriy&.


10 THE GHERANDA ВАМНІТА.


атчагЁгатйкя аад mora i
enr билч Rage samt n utu
51. By practising the Neti-Kriyá, one obtains Kbechari Siddhi.
It destroys the disorders of phlegm and produces clairvoyance or clear
sight


Part IV.
чч Ат |
rep 9% а чтийичза Әт: |
«атата aeree rq аң ча N
LAUKIKI-YOGA,
52. With great force move the stomach and intestines from опе

side to the other. This is called Laukiki-Yoga. This destroys all
diseases and increases the bodily fire.


— —


Равт V.
чу NTER!
Ёйчїгйчє ттеп ene] айча |
qaga чай sra аа JA: N чэ а
TRÁTAKA OR GAZINA.
58. Gaze steadily without winking at any small object, until tears
begin to flow. "This is called Trátaka by the wise.
qanta читай зпча ычц!
Starr {пякчЁл frorefü: sarai н че а
54. Ву practising this Yoga, Sambhavi Siddhis are obtained ; and
certainly all diseases of tbe eye are destroyed and clairvoyance ів induced,


Part VIL.

UI ENSAR: |
WmERSTSRH тош farda: i
жешн DIXIT genns батаң y чай

KAPÂLABRÂTI.


55. The Kapâlabháti is of three kinds: Váma-krama, Vyât-krama,
and Sit-krama. "l'hey destroy disorders of phlegm.


NA NATARNSATÕ: 1
{кат qcüzrg' taüfagergs: |
бұз Фат уяат ёчдю n «s |


LESSON FIRST. 11


VÁMA-ERAMA.
56. Draw the wind through the left nostril and expel it through the
right, and draw it again through the right and expel it through the left.
qu tak жеп дя я g reas |
ччпипчатћя «ү AART \ чөң
57. 'This inspiration апа expiration must be done without any
force. This practice destroys disorders of phlegm.
та Зате: |
атат епу garia Хайа!
чы чта sre чӘхнїтч ата 1 ЧСА
VYÜT-ERAMA
58. Draw the water through the two nostrils and expel it through
the mouth slowly and slowly. This is called Vyüt-krama which destroys
disorders of phlegm.
xp Чыч: O
Jara Фечт spem агата ӘӘҹаҹ |
TRAIRA rsWeHr аң | wt od
SIT-KRAMA.
59. Suck water through the mouth and expel it through the
nostrils. Ву this practice of Yoga oue becomes like the god Cupid.
s тай ята є ч сч дч яй 1
NALITA RRIS RI H Wo o"
Чї Rinehart Aceari чежгАетчй am sraimqitur
emt id
60. Old age never comes to him and decrepitude never disfgures


him. Tho body becomes healthy, elastic, and disorders of phlegm are
destroyed.


End of the first lesson.


SEcoNp Lesson.
Вч: |
Ho шї 1
Tor vur—
maak anA атайт ANNUS: |
wagen: Rie «RETRO а н u


THE АЗАМАВ OR POSTURES.
GHERANDA SAID :—]1.


of Акзпав described by Shiva


There азе eighty-four hundreds of thousands
The postures are as many in number as


tbere are numbers of species of living creatures in this universe.


ачі aet етот Area! шта vmm 1
ASt mer айд mifit. Spa!» а н


2. Among them eighty-four are the best ; and among these eighty-
four, thirty-two have been found useful for mankind in this world.


=ч апага! ET |

Ris suu an ar qu uas єчє 1
{айке таҹ d часчаайч яа!
ча ns qu "re пейепеяйн ч!
Avg чЁтйтет# зева ефе aura vog
AJE хее фій TU RPRUURSNAN |
verae qu mu пат ача н uou
"ew ARË ME assem |
аййшанапаа AASR ARA н җн


DIFFERENT KINDS OF POSTURES,


3—6. Тһе thirty-two Авапав that give perfection in this mortal


world are the following :—


1. BSiddharm (perfect posture). 17, Utkatam (hazardows posture),
2. Padmam (Lotus posture). 18. Sankatam (Dangerous posture).
8. Bhadram (Gentle posture). 19. Mayuram (Peacock posture).
4, Muktam (Free posture). 20. Kukkutam (Cock posture).
b. Vajram (Adamant posture). 21. Kürma (Tortoise posture).
6. Бузька (Prosperous posture). 23, Uttana Manduka.
7. Bibham (Lion posture): 23. Uttana Kurmakam,
8. Gomukha (Cow-mouth; posture). 24. VWriksha (Tree poature).
9. Virs (Heroic posture). - 25. Manduba (Frog posture).
10. Dhanur (Bow postute). 26. Garuda (E«gle posture),
11. Mutam Corpse posture). 27. Vrisham (Bull posture).
12. Guptam (Hidden posture). 28. kalabha (Loctisz nosture).
13. Matsyum (ish posture). 29: Makara (Dolphin posture).
14. Matsendra. 80, Usbhtram (Camel posture).
15. Goraksha. 81. Bhujangam (Snake posture),
16. Paschimottána. 32, Yoga.


LESSON SECOND. 13


xm Rr |
inPrearamumfieutzd ddter ойне
Adada абга faq; епт ЕЙ eau :
eur: Safrtfimsaae т quaa, я mc
ачатыбгатлаёчаә®с Rrarea ай oo п
1.—-TH£ SIDDHASANA.

7. Тһе practitioner who has subdued his passions, Laviug piaced
one heel at the anal aperture shculd keep the other Һезі on the тоос of the
generative organ ; afterwards he should ах his chin upon the chest, and
being quiet aud straight, gaze at the spot between the two eye-brows. This
ів called the Siddh-ásana and leads to emancipation.


яч quU д
qira айч’ fi еса белп чт тч
qs чад чат wear «суш Ец i
жй pra Rrra чаж ятепинтёгка-
iercfafreraartrawe qure еа і с qa
1,—THE PADMÁSANA.

8. Place the riglit foot on the left thigh and similarly.the left one
on the right thigh, also cross the hands behind the back and firmly catch
hold of the great toes of feet во crossed. Place the chin on the chest and
fix the gaze on the tip of the nose. This posture is called the Padmásana
(or Lotus posture). This posture destroys all diseases.

=ч жача d
дейт ч ччажагат чоқда аата: |
чуй! жетеле чөп є чиа: Н є on
MEAT UATT агетянае®щ |
ware Ataa ARAR А t6 I
8,.—THE BHADRÁSANA.

9—10. Place the heels crosswise under the testes attentively ; cross
the hands behind the back and take hold of the toes of the feet. Fix the
gaze on the tip of the nose, having previously adopted the MudrA called
J&landhara. This is the Bhadrásana (or happy posture) which destroys all
sorta of diseases.


за YRRIR!
чаңё атас qute ад 1
анча quie (Раец ttd


14 THE GHERANDA SAMHITA.


4,—THE MUETÀASANA.

11. Place the left heel at the root of the organ of generation and the
right heel above that, keep the head aud the neck straight with the
body. This posture is called the Muktásana. It gives Siddhi (perfection).

да чанаң | |
экш ANIN ачта атайт |
«атаа иађ ата атан n $3 1
5—THE VAIJRÁSANA OR THE ADAMANT POSTURE.

12. Make the thighs tight like adamant and place the legs by tbe
two sides of the anus. Тіз ів called the Vajrásana. It gives psychic
powers to the Yogi.

яя esferas i
mqar wen rm чта тй!
акаа: чагаа: «ча асаа і fag
6.—THE SWASTIKASANA.

18. Drawing the legs aud thighs together and placing the feet
underneath them, keeping the body in its easy condition and sitting
straight, constitute the posture called the Swastikásana.

xm fears i
RA «p qaar aidat айт!
Fafrqbr qhia жеп a mgA п te i
бетй sivi ягетинадтайч i
feara uita ачпа u tu y
7.—THE SIMHÁSANA.

14—15. Тһе two heels to be placed under the scrotum contrariwise
(i.e. left heel on the right side and the right heel on the left side of 'it)
and turned upwards, the knees to be placed on the ground, (and the hands
placed on the knees), mouth to be kept open ; practising the Jálandhare
mudrá one should fix his gaze on the tip of the nose. This is the
Simhásana (Lion-posture), the destroyer of all diseases.


sip AMTAA t
чіт = sp аєчга ggwa Рада |
басса «нгета дт MgA іі t2 1
8.—THE GOMUKHÁSANA,

16. The two feet to be placed on the ground, and the heels to be
placed contrariwise under the buttocks ; the body to be kept steady and
and the mouth raised, and sitting equably: this is called the Gomukhá-
вара : resembling the mouth of a cow.


LESSON SECOND. 15


| згч ÅTAR |
i
тты arara Rra і t9


9.—THE ViRASANA.

17. One leg (the right foot) to be placed on the other (left) thigh,
and the other foot to be turned backwards: This is called the Virásana
(Hero-posture).

яя gta i
sez чт чїч goss str я gl TINJAN |
жап gegara Аас vir часаа mts ten
10.—THR DHANURÂSANA.

18. Spreading the legs on the ground, stráight like a stick, and
catching hold of (the toes of) the feet with the hands, and making the
body bent like а bow, is called by the Yogis the Dhanurássna or Bow-'
posture. р

яа натаяц |
зета тччтуйт атага TU |
чата удес Aakn Rang и RR II
1L—THE MRITÂSANA.

19. Lying flat on the ground like а corpse is called the-Mpitâsana
«the Corpse-posture). This posture destroys fatigue, and quiets the agite-
tion of the mind. -

тч JAIRAJ |
magdiet må жет чїйт ч MAA І
ЧТЧЁ ч аєлга пф унтаа Ag: u зо в
12,—THE GUPTASANA.

20. Hide the two feet under the two knees, and plage the anps on

the feet. This is known as the Guptásana (Hidden-postuté).


UA REEUTEIU |
ечен жеп IMANUSA, |
qimat Art wur eeureraeg ÜTT N RÈ N
13.—THE МАТЗҮАЗАМА,

21. Make the Padmásana-postare (as stated in verse 8) without the
crossing of the arms ; lie on the back, holding the head by the two elbows.
This is the Matsyásana (Fish-postuire), the destroyer of diseases.

я ROUTERTRISIR |
wet чїынгата зат ѓчвіч uta |
SU чите fü ашзтчї SIS и RAO


16 THE GHERANDA SAMHITA.


ач ure qeu urEDED ч em |
ифа nar efe: d$ MARJA р аЗ n
14.—TRE MATSYENDRÁSANA,

99—23. Keeping the abdominal region at ease like the back, bend-
ing the left leg, place it on the right thigh ; then place өп this tbe elbow
of the right hand, and place the face on the palm of the right hand, and
fix the gaze between the eye-brows. This is called the Matsyendra-
posture.

яч qRHUTOTQR !
arena qui аб азайт бети: ARAARA i
афа чт « чат cat airs qfarireeanrg: HR q


15.— THE PABCHIMOTTÀNA-ASANA.


94. Spread the two legs on the ground, stiff like a stick (Ше heels
not touching), and place the forehead on the two knees, and catch with
the hands the toes. This is called the Paechimottána-Asana.

чч rcge i
этсен aiit sah anafea )
деў regn веапатагатхаї паа: w ач і
EARE жеп AMARTA 1
пеитааатқ аі Вгатсад 1 а И


16.—THE GORAKSHASANA.


25—26. Between the knees and the thighs, the two feet turned
upward and placed in a hidden way, tbe heels being carefully covered by
the two hands outstretched ; the throat being contracted, let one fix the
gaze on the tip of the пове. Thisis called the Gorakshásena. lt gives
success to the Yogís.

UU чегет ац |
qeren чі ger ч Ә mera
аћч 95 чип fRukguemeran N Y и

17.—THE UTEATÁASANA.

97. Let tbe toes touch the ground, and the heels be'raised in the
air ; place the anus on the heels : this is known as the Utkatásana.

x" gara |
атка чае gaa Әса 1
чтаечёа ча, Чэйштачттъң |
та чїшнйлнуеннан N RC 8


LESSON SECOND. 17


18.--ТНЕ БАМКАТАВАМА,

28. Placing the left foot and the leg on the ground, surround the
left foot by the right leg; aud place the two hands оп the two knees.
This is the Sankatásana.

чч GRIS d
чалчы penaa аер Nana qi
saa ачечебаа: Ә игусйяспяаты Чаң uat |
чк тЫ ЧЕН quiquu ачаб MARERA |
кіч аже umag тенч ғи бєлайтчигай эй! зө A
19.-ТНЕ MAYÜRASANA.

29—30. Place the palms of the two hands on the ground, place
the umbilical region on the two elbows, stand upon the hands, the legs
being raised in the air, and crossed like Padrmósana. This ів called the
Mayürásana (Peacock-posture*. The Peacock-posture destroys the effecta
of unwholesome food ; it produces heat in the stomach; it destroys the
effects of deadly poisons ; iteasily cures diseases, like Gulma and fever ;
such ів this useful posture.

яя mgr |
чиа ашат MJR FÙ |
їс EMAA SU FFFA N ARN
20.—THE KUKUTÂSANA.

31, Sitting on the ground, cross the legs in the Padmâsana posture,
thrust down the hands between the thigbs and the knees, stand on the
hands, supporting the body оп the elbows. This is called the Cock-


posture.
да pataan |
дейт ч gwornür a emm |
agea тача t за н


21.—THE КОКМАВАМА.
32, Place the heels contrariwise under the scrotum, stiffen (or keep
at ease) the head, neck and body. This is called the Tortoise-posture.
яч зета җа+тяад |
PA жоу чекен 1
Ф ткйчтчтаяйатагеривц N 33 и


22.—THE UTTÀNA KÜRMASANA,
33. Assume the Cock-posture (as stated in verse 31), catch hold of
the neck with the hands, and stand stretched like а tortoise. This is


the Uttàna Kürmásana.
8.


18 THE GHERANDA SAMBHITA.


яа HUESTQSH, |
quer 908 «rm X ч чета і
этан USD STGUeHvg Tee N ug А
28,—THE MANDUKÀSANA.

34. Carry the feet tówards the back, the toes touching each other,

and place the knees forwards. This is called the Frog-posture.
жа SHIRHUEURISDTH
mgran gimat ча Вус |
ач ARIFAT TART RA, Qus N
24.—THE UTTÂNA MAŅDUKÂSANA,

35. ' Assume the Frog-posture (as in verse 34), hold the head by the
elbows, and stand up like a frog. This is called the Uttána Mapdukfsana.
тч ачан !

reed ч und чї Ana g |
йч аичйт чатчаб (ач: за!
25.—THE VRIESHÁSANA,

36. Stand straight on one leg (the left) bending the right leg, and
placing the right foot on the root of the left thigh ; standing thus like а
tree on the ground, is called the Tree-posture.

а SSH |
эйс ча Фет асат fcre I
wrquft жор CUSETUQeqd N зэ N
26.—THE GARUDASANA.

37. Place the legs and the thighs on the ground pressing it, steady
the body with the two knees, place the two hands on the knees :.this ів
called the Garuda-posture.

NU que |
атча qupp suem RTTA, |
бачае єтї Ri gaah wüm N aca
27.—THE VRISHÁSANA,

38. Place the anus on the right heel, on the left of it place the left
leg crossing it opposite way, and touch the ground. Тһіѕ із called the
Bull-posture.

яя SISPHIGIAH, |
депе: ARPA AJAA жопе |
q я чї ч наба агаа Чё шея аат atu


- LESSON SECOND. 19


28,.—THE SALABHÁRANA.
39. Lie on the ground face downwards, the two hands being placed
on the chest, touching the ground with the palms, raise the lega in the air
one cubit high. This is called the Locust-posture.


яа ыя |
qme: S є Pra уйт ч чїт а петт |
Ёт чеп cpeqen4WTHCRIO пъсыа TA Чо!
39.—ТНЕ MAKARÂSANA.

40, Lie on the ground face downwards, the chest touching the
earth, the two legs being stretched : catch the head with the two arme.
This is Makarásana, the ees of the bodily heat.

|
челе: 9а queres 98 P ӘЧ |
эрен pia e Rar SN dia uet y
30.—THE USRTRÁSANA.

41. Lie on the ground face downwards, turn up the legs and place
them towards the back, catch the legs with the hands, contract forcibly the
mouth and the abdomen. This is oelled the Camel-posture.


e GLEE D a ELE GA ётё I
честата wt ger seii: adita fit п ws |
коа Red edu 1

m цайт A JETAIT | oua d


31.—THE BHUJANGASANA.

49—43. Let the body, from the navel downwards to the toes, touch
the ground, place the palms on the ground, raise the head (the upper por-
tion of the body) like а serpent. This is called the Serpent-posture. This

! always increases the bodily heat, destroys all diseases, and by the practice
of this posture the serpent-Goddess (the kundalini force) awakes.
чч атаа |
sar cir жеп ere этат 1
тайт ает зета кс иез и
таа NANAI


" Р чы at Rp N чч А
такая gavs MaA ATA
Biang: анн: |


82,—THE YOGÂSANA.

44—45. Turn the feet upwards, place them on the knees ; then
place the hands on the ground with the palms turned upwards ; inspire,
and fix the gaze on the tip of the nose. This is called the Yoga-posture,
assumed by the Yogis when practising Yoga.


'Turgp 1,8880.
afa: |


яч цатъчаң i

eur sa
mga cU np ўта жег |
Wes яше mAT Әҹӧ и eN
audar ӘӘ afe!
as яту? NAT SITRTÜ AMN | R A
зба тт єт ят ч Ча d
wee ахта Rreaqri ran и 3» u

ON MUDRÀS.

Gherandasaid :—1— 3. There are twenty-five mudrás, the practice
of which gives success to the Yogis. They are :—

(1) Mahá-mudrá, (2) Nabho-mudr$, (3) Uddiy&na, (4) Jálandhara, (5)
Mûlabandha, (6) Mahábandha, (7) Mahávedha, (8) Khechart, (9) Vipartta-
kari, (10) Yoni, (11) Vajroni. (12) Saktichálant, (13) Tadágt, (14) Mándavi,
(15) Sámbbavi, (16) Panchadhóran& (five dhárapás), (21) Asvini, (22)
Ран, (23) Как, (24) Mátangi and (25) Dhujangint.

яя дат quom |
gaui qag аА = ач едт |
да aaau «ЧЁ: чапай и є и
Мчч чая я З чєп жешиң |d
зра namsa qw аата n ч n
THE ADVANTAGES OF PRACTISING MUDRÁS.

4—5. Maheswara, when addressing his consort, has recited the
advantages of Mudrás in these words : “О Devi! І have told you all the
Mudrás; their knowledge leads to adeptship. It should be kept secret
with great сате, and should not be taught indiscriminately to every one.
This gives happiness to the Yogís, and is not to be easily attained by the
marats (gods of air) even."

ач NEDHATEUSH |
чад аала ӘЧ вече: 1
anang sunu Фё чач еве: і ogg
wska een uan AAAA |
жапайы цат да ач аи: эң


LESSON THIRD. 21


1.— МАНАМОРВА
6—7. Pressing carefully the anus by the left heel, stretch the right

leg, and take hold of the great toe by the hand ; contract the throat (not
expelling the breath), and fix the gaze between the eye-brows. This ів
called Mahf-mudrá by the wise.

WDHETQNURONHEH |

зачета пуче gierrüsqé аут |

жапа ч атча |! 11
Its benefits.


8. The practice of Mahá-mudrá cures consumption, the obstruction
of the bowels, tho enlargement of the spleen, indigestion and fever—in fact


it cures all diseases.
WIND айтдит®аяц |
ач ач àr ат аҹ̧а eder 1
жайна: байт уеп encre чча ает 1
част маѓ frat їтлатйтай n 9 n
2.--МАВНО МОРАВА.

9. In whatever business а Yogi may be engaged, wherever he may
be, let him always keep his tongue turned upwards (towards the soft pal-
ate), and restrain the breath. This is called Nabho-Mudrá ; it destroys all
the diseases of the Yogi.

ата gratae: |
зт чая ата тае qw Up |
зета фай engfened атал: |
start чт чей ящагаұёаё п ge и
8. 0рРІУАМА-ВАМРНА,

10, Contract the bowels equably above and below the navel to-
wards the back, во that the abdominal viscera may touch the back. He who
practises this Uddiy&na (Flying up), without ceasing, conquers death. The
Great Bird (Breath) by this process, is instantly forced up into the
Sushumná, and flies (moves) constantly therein only.

NA зӘатачече Ue |
anman ga ат чта та |
заїча unen ghe ward яа s fou
Its benefits.

11. Ofall Bandhanas, ів is the best. The complete practice of

this makes emancipation easy.


22 THE GHERANDA SAMHITA.


яч ате, !
чайттай mem Rrg Een |
WER uot qe теште 1
атаееснктцат GHI чєй N 38 Ui
4.—JÀLANDHARA,

19. Contracting the throat, place the chin on the chest. This ів
called Jálandhara. By tbis Bandha the sixteen Âdhâras are closed. This
and the Mahá-mudrá destroy death.

да соса чәк, і
= aeeai aed Әт РТА, 1
qaran f = Ра ятя ёа: 1 {а N
Its benefits.
13. The Jálandhara is a success-giving and well-tried Bandha ; he
who practises it for si - months, becomes an adept without doubt.
UI Чечечччац |
чїй taanga Raga: |»
атча vi Aage? enter аша: nde и 49 odd
ат «fa eh qp ече чага |d
srt яст дечет Fw || tu od!
5.—MÜLABANDHA.

14.—15. Press with the heel of the left foot the region between the
anus and the scrotum, and contract the rectum ; carefully press the intee-
tines near the navel on the spine ; and put ће right heel on the. organ of
generation or pubes. This is called Mülabandha, destroyer of decay.

чч quse чеччтаң |
émmemqx agaia ар чиа!
Rè ач чөп garat Ga li 04 Ii


MARENE чаңнЁкїат ыча t
атай aer аб Hun g аташ: 0 9 и
Ita benefits.


16—17. Тһе person who desires to cross the ocean of Existence,
let him go to a retired place, and practise in secrecy this Майга. Ву the
practice of it, the Ууц (Pr&na) is controlled undoubtedly; let one silently
practise this, without laziness and with care,


quu аттен «dug: ача: чч: t6


LESSON THIRD. 23


vit nadie s dates due |
mR wr пй squreed Bere пн
$.—MAHÁBANDHRA.

18—19. Close the anal orifice by the heel of the left foot, press
tbat héel with the right foot carefully, move slowly and slowly the
muscles of the rectum, and slowly contract the muscles of the yoni or
perineum (space between anus and organ): restrain the breath by
J&ülandhara. This ів called Mahábandha.

MD ARAE WW |
ната: WD Ҹет manaa: 1
петатєч чечет ытай, адатча uae q


Its benefits.


20. 'The Mahábandha is the Greatest Bandha; it destroys decay
and death : by virtue of this Bandha а man accomplishes all his desires.
xn яатамттаң, |
wsürqaer au gud Маг!
цечечивтчгдт найч far ачта и
патчі STUDI затта чоң!
mAT: emerit arat Баби етае: i RR 1
7.—MARÁVEDHA.

21—22. Ав Һе beauty, youth and charms of women are in vain
without men, so are Mülabandha and Mahábandha without Mahávedha,
Sit first in Mah&ábandha posture, then restrain breath by Uddána Kum-
bhaka, This is called Mahávedha—the giver of success to the Үорів.

NA QNTEHEU SOWH |
aasa WARD aufer |
пех теі qeg а A табан: 3
ч зайт ad аєа ч яа че ча 1
һа: чада аата таа: ач
Its benefits.

23—24. Тһе Yogi who daily practises Mahábandha and Mülaban-
dha, accompanied with Mahávedha, is the best of the Yogis. For him
there ів no fear of death, and decay does not approach him : this Vedha
should be kept carefully secret by the Yogis.

xp аёчёңцагычяц |
Rg aret абі cut ата ёдт 1
MAiA дла «9а Н аҹ и


24 THE GHERANDA SAMHITA.


&--KHECHARI MUDRA.


25. Cut down the lower tendon of the tongue, ‘frenulum linguae)
and move the tongue constantly : rub it with fresh butter, and draw it out


(to lengthen it) with an iron instrument.

N4B.— This ів the preliminary to Khechari Mudrá. Its object is so to lengthen the
tongue, that when drawn out it may touch with its tip the space between the eye-brows.
This can be done by eutting away the lower tendon. 1t takes about three years to cut
away the whole tendon. 1 saw my Guru doing it in this wise. On every Monday he used
to eut the tendon one-twelfth of an inch deep and sprinkle salt over it,so that the саб
portions might not join together. Then rubbing the tongue with butter he used to pull it
out, Peculiar iron instruments are employed for this purpose; the painful process is
repeated every week til] the tongue can be stretched out to the requisite lengtb.


ца fed anarengi dert zer d
reo gA qqnreokr ёя& T
20. Ву practising this always, the tongue becomes long, and when
it reaches the space between Ше two eyebrows, then the Khechart is


accomplished.
vua агач д uub qub sug |
чәе Бе strat бачаат ı
зат пат zegar лайт ча d зэи

27. Then (ihe tongue being leügthened) practise, turning it upwards
aud backwards во as to touch the palate, till at length it reaches the holes
of the nostrils opening into the mouth. Close those holes with the tongue
(thus stopping inspiration), and fix the gaze on the space between the twa
eyebrows. This is called Khechari.

а @ёчё цат Weg t
ач аі spat а дагәеї sau !
я ч дт SRI GST ы AAA NREN
Its benefits.

28. Ву this practice there is neither fainting, nor hunger, nor
thirst, nor laziness. There comes neither disease, nor decay, nor death.
'The body becomes divine.

айдат qur cux я чач arem: 1
чаб жааса FIAN узуш поа

29. The body cannot be burned by fire, nor dried up by the air,
nor wetted by water, пот bitten by snakes.

amasa жаат amA imu d
жчтачтчерпї жаат TAMA | Зо d

30. The body becomes beautiful ; Samádhi i M verily atiained, and

the tongue touching the holes obtains various juices (it drinks nectar.)


LESSON THIRD. 25.


ататсеяцжашяа ч а RR I
ят SIASA аайаеачаФц Hoi
aña ча Mi ач ажач ч!
атапсаѕч QUIS MAA CHAIRS W за N

31—382, Various juices being produced, day by day the man
experiences new sensations; first, he experiences а saltish taste, then
alkaline, then bitter, then astringent, then he feels the taste of butter, then
of ghee, then of milk, then of curd, then of whey, then of honey, then of
palm juice, and, lastly, arises the taste of nectar.

ягу Adamian |
айицёчёхабетың® = чит: |
"ud sad adan Sar AC ow зз і
mei EIER qdsaqsu яч аай 1
Ruas garada g MRa изчи
qÀ Da бага wegh чата: d
зіч: alr gan Radar ааг о 3 и

9.—VIPARÎTAKARAŅİ.

33—35. The sun (the solar Nàdi or plexus) dwells at the root of the
navel, and the moon at the root of the palate; the process by which the вип is
brought upward and the moon carried downward is called Viparitakarani.
It is а secret Mudrá iu all the Tantras. Place the head on the ground,
with hands spread, raise the legs up, and thus remain steady. This ів
called Viparitakarani.

жэзач@ажс@цатап: RERIN, p
gat a агаа sut qure атада 1
ч Ва: airy поді я effer i as t


Its benefits.


36. Ву the constant practice of this Mudrá, decay and death nre
destroyed. Пе becomes an adept, and does not perisb even at Pralaya,

чч MAIRTIN, |

Raai waren =ӘәчаӘтнацд, d

agga kaamaa R аэ атада 1139 і

тё: NT беч qut атда: 1

qami жигеп ý Єчазаг є: |. ac

aama қат чт gag a

ач яа «к адсага mU do 3* И


26 THE GHERANDA SAMHITA.


мизи єчї aer ЧС Rr ena |
атча кк ад чо qeu 1! че i
Ёташїжегитйтпёзытг убт TET 1
MARRA чеп жк BERT елан і vt d
адат чат reat araa qut 1
чеч enda: waren qq і wa И


10.—YONIMUDRÁ,


37—42. Sitting in Siddhásana, close the two ears with the two
thumbs, the eyes with the index fingers, the nostrils with the middle
fingers, the upper lip with the fore fingers, and the lower lip with the
little fingers. Draw in the Ргапа-Уёуџ by Ká&ki-mudrá, (as in verse 86)
and join it with the Apána-Váyu ; contemplating the віх chakras in their
order, let the wise one awaken the sleeping serpent-Goddess Kundalint,
by repeating the таз іта Hun E), and Haņsa (£«:), and raising the Sakti
(Force-kundali) with the jiva, place them at the thousand-petalled lotus.
Being himself full of Sakti, being joined with the great Siva, let him
think of the various pleasures and enjoyments. Let him contemplaté on
the union of Siva (spirit) and Sakti (Force or energy) in this world. Being
himself all bliss, let him realise that he ів the Brahma. This Yoni-mudrá
is a great secret, difficult to be obtained even by the Devas. By once
obtaining perfection in its practice, one enters verily into Samádhi.


ач атте жаң |
BKTKT ызагїч є теат: і
ча: чта Реса nigaha, gp з di
aA rare ата sR ате ч |
а erat arafa атцпйгнгчатд 1
аена Ба gh ‚їс и wg N
"P Its benefits.

43—44. Ву the practice of this Mudrá, one is never polluted by
the sins of killing а Bráhmana, killing a fetus, drinking liquor, or
polluting the bed of the Preceptor. All the mortal sins and the venal
sins are completely destroyed by the practice of this Майга. Let him
therefore practise it, if he wishes for emancipation. 7

яя etam |
qama paani Ragi Вт: t i
afanar ANa atiga дайт quier à ey н


LESSON THIRD. 27


11.—VAJRONi MUDRÁ.

45. Place the two palms on the ground, raise the legs iu the air
upward, the head not touching the earth. This awakens the Šakti, causes
long life, and is called Vajroni by the sages.

RI чита: FERITA, |
я атт AN Rat дрвессац I
mi Жачаї n arat RARER: 1 ма 11
qaia Ачат ww 1
Rra едт патта Бє я Весла ws и
Wa яаат де аб gat amat, 1
ami arst їчтє sar Aaa и we N

Its benefits.

46—48. This practice is the highest of Yogas; it causes emancipa-
tion, and this beneficial Yoga gives perfection to the Yogis. By virtue
of this Yoga, the Bindu-Siddhi (retention of seed) is obtained, and when
that Siddhi is obtained what else can he not attain in this world. Though
immersed in manifold pleasures, if he practises this Mudrá, he attains

` verily all perfections.
чч uhearednpmua !
seram meann goss qeiwer 1
aia gama апаш шаап! и wt odi
12,—бАКТ1 OHALANI.

* 49. The great goddess Kundalini, the energy of Self, &tma-Makti
(spiritual force), sleeps in the Maládhára 'rectum) ; she has the form of a
serpent having three coils and a half.

ama ат Fire qi arasia: чайы!
ата a SUI атча auo аныда ц ҷо и

50. бо long as she is asleep in the body, the Jiva is a mere animal,

and true knowledge does not arise, though he may practise ten millions of


Yoga.
ачпа wars ачт FÈIRA STD |
тайшы: marge wA чаҷач Hob N
51. Ав by a key a door is opened, so by awakening the Kundalint
by Hatha Yoga, the door of Brahma is unlocked.
аа enger epu я а un ҸӘ: |
чад euer ufsuresqenpa dd ous И
52. Encircling the loins with a piece of cloth, seated in а secret
room, not naked in an outer room, let him practise the Saktichálana.


28 THE GHERANDA SAMHITA.


Ratahi TE fent чачың!
я чае uei desmRERSW |
чашысдезя FRAU дч Uu ча od
53. One cubit long, and four fingers (3 inches) wide, should be the
encircling cloth, soft, white and of fine texture. Join this cloth with the
Kati-Sütra (a string worn round the loins.)
aaar mi erre: Raai ere 1
яте MUME UNÌ атай чела і "SN
ападте=чбцег «йсй 1
"ns mat qug: чатта l| fts M
54—55. Assn with jo his Siddhásana-posture,
drawing the Prána-Váyu with the nostrils, forcibly join it with the Ap&na.
Contract the rectum slowly by the Asvini Mudrá, so long as the Уйум
does not enter the Sushumná, and manifests its presence.
чат ngada pirar a ЧГ |
чазагашыйт чеп жент Sent н ча N
56. By restraining tbe breath by Kumbhaka in this way, the
Serpent Kundalini, feeling suffocated awakes and rises upwards to the
Brahmarandhra,
бат абетеая rr я RaR |
йт asana Wgt ener н чэ Н
57. Without the Sáktichálana, the Yoni-Mádrá is not complete or
perfected ; first the Chálana should be practised, and then the Yoni-Mudrá
should be learnt.
кх а а awr mifer |
МЧ яайя Ка RA едда ! че н
58. O Chanda-Kápáli ! thus have I taught thee the Saktichálana.
Preserve it with care : and practise it daily.
ит NRSNM: Фефчац |
quu чсат mem sumunt i
ernst ssi rfr: Бабата ири: t ut, и


Its benefits.


59. This тойга should be kept carefully concealed. ft destroys
decay and death. Therefore the Yogi, desirous of perfection, should
practise it.


Fred usa arr Тее wt ferar d
qe Anhi: eum mro enar uq і $e


LESSON ТНІРР. 29


60. The Yogi who practises this daily, acquires adeptship, attains
Vigraha-siddhi and all liis diseases are cured,
ту аяттан |
sat чђыйтеа жеп ч deme |
атт т чат тасці атата а е4 и
18.—TADÁGI-MUDRA.

61, Sitting in Paschimottána-posture, паке the stomach like a tank

(hollow), This is Tadági (Tank) Mudrà, destroyer of decay and death.
тч агттФүнгчад |
дё чума wem (чете чатеда |
qud ачигчі giat Ag: N RR I
14.—MANDUEI-MUDRÁ.

62. Closingthe mouth, move the tip of the tongue towards the
palate, and taste slowly the nectar (flowing from the Thousand-petalled
Lotus.) This is Frog-mudrá.

зч яг ентп: Фетчяд |
aka afud ч stud Веадтача, 1
а Ф MA чёт а: фамеааттчід goa И
Its benefits.
63. Tko body never sickens or becomes old, and it retains perpetual
youth ; the hair of him who practises this never grows white.
яя MAÑARIAN d
amga astare: элла беа |
ат хаха gar чфагач fer w ge u
15.—SAMBHAVI-MUDRÁ.

64. Fixing the gaze between the two eye-brows, behold the Self-

existent. "This is Sámbhavi, secret in all the Tantras.
зу MAJAN: феад !
UMRA таталт YU 1
қа g ига gr чет porga u Wat
Its benefits.

65.. Тһе Vedas, the scriptures, the Puránas. are like publie women,
but this Sàmbhavi should be guarded as if it were a lady of a respectable
family.

ч ҷч RNI а ч яаа: &98 |d
aa яш айё ат qat аға чий! egg


30 THE GHERHANDÀA ЗАМПІТА


66. He, who knows this Sámbhavt, is like the Adin&tha, he is а
Nár&yana, he is Brahmá the Creator.
чаі web qe uei нее APAT |
апга ат сатаата а ч иц я TEIA EQO N
67. Mahedwara has said, Truly, truly, and again truly, he who
knows the Sambhavt, is Brahma. There is no doubt of this."
з QSSTHTCUTHXTWSIUH |
жле TEST ЧТ Ч ЧЕЧТИ!
палі «агата бє я Оча чад T
THE FIVE DHAÁRANA-MUDRÁS.

68. The Sàmbhavi has been explained ; hear now the five Dhárapás.
Learning these five е what : cannot be accomplished in this world ?
чая аййя = латта |

dre я ета N $t
69. By this, with the human body one can visit and revisit
Svarga-loka, he can go wherever he likes, as swiftly as mind, he acquires
the faculty of walking in the sky. These five Dháranás are :— Párthivi
(earthy), Àmbhasi (Watery), V&yavi (aerial) Арпеуі (Fiery), and Акам


(Ethereal).
ча чїйїїатсатү кча i
чече бате ача qui snf
асте aereas аа wet ЕЙ eau i
ma ач Кеа qesrefzmtfürarfeaet wrca-
ачтеттаж@ «ат агаа’ «ата атетсат n so h
(а). -РАБТНІҮЇ,
70. Тһе Prithivi-Tattva has the colour of orpiment (yellow), the letter
(la) W ів its secret symbol or seed (Ña), ita form is four-sided, and Brahmá,
its presiding deity. Place this Tatva in the heart, and fix by Kumbhaki
the Prápa-Vá&yus and the Chitta there for the period of five ghatikás (21
hours. This із called Adhodháraná. By this, one conquers the Earth,
and no earthy-elementa can bcr uk him : and it causes steadiness.
зг QI ATHITCUTHETUT: «акчан |
чїїйататсатуаї а: 09 ar Rat: |
жере ead Әт а Вт! аб чї 94 и
Its benefits.


71. He who practises this dháraná, becomes like the conqueror of
Death ; as an Adept he walks over this earth,


LESSON THIRD. 31


зч MFANYE TAH |
Ug serus агыны dvd ёте ШИ
аедаччата наё де нат Ётешят!
ята «тя чеч aana чтОй{чт
га атчччасай «ага таей uro! 9% Н
(b).—AMBHASI.

19. The Water-Tattva is white like the Kunda-flower or а conch or
the moon, its form is circular like the moon, the letter.W (va) is the seed of
this ambrosial element, and Vishnu is its presiding deity. By Yoga,
produce the water-tattva in the heart, and fix there the Prána with the
Chitta (consciousuess), for five ghatikás, practising Kumbhaka. This is
Watery Dháraná; it is the destroyer of all sorrows.
him who practises this.

RA MAJAN quU |
meat qai gai дт aR a nf |
8 а т M паї deg аг aAA usa
qi g чо цат Ачат чача: |
нта ага: «ате wed dien «p атча: Н oou d
108 benefits.

73.—74. The Ámbhasi isa great mudrá; the Yogi who knows it,
never meets death even in the deepest water. This should be kept care-
fully concealed. Ву revealing it success ів lost, verily I tell you the truth.

я эпгайтыгсатцатъчядц |
amifer etsi farran aa
аа Aad яфнаѕа zx we aiaga, :
ята ая а ankaa aa A-
gar menirea Sparratr ara + 94 t
(c).-ÀGNEYÍ,
75. The Fire-Tattva is situated at the navel, its colour is red like


Water cannot injure


the Indra-góp insect, its form is triangular, its seed is (ra, 6) its presiding
deity is Rudra. It is refulgent like the sun, and the giver of succers.
Fix the Prána along with the Chittain this Tattva for five ghatikás. "This
is called Fire-Dháraná, destroyer of the fear of dreadful death, and fire
cannot injure him.
яч аттат: EUENSS |
ч затта че аб чат ага®: 1
qagan w AIR я чериг | Sj


32 THE GHERANDA SAMHITA.


Its benefits.


76. Ifthe practitioneris thrown into burning fire, by virtue of
this Mudrá he remains alive, without fear of death.


ач uuu aR pauper!
ma as Aata aake aà-
4чт A яда її urat жататл@т aean н 09 и


(d).—VÂYAVİ.


77. The Air-tattva is black as unguent for the eyes (collirium), the
letter & (ya) ів ite seed, and Îsvara its presiding deity. This Tattva is full
of Satva quality. Fix -tbe Prána and the Chitta for five ghatikás in this
Tattva. This ів Váyavi-Dháraná. By this, the practitioner walks in the air.

Iq MIMMI: Sere |
хч я чаи gratae rerit |
чат Кыла arf Ә паз печей ui oc u
тата ябфата я фат zer meri t
«9 е Воже жатр чег аба е асе È N җн
Ita benefits.

78—79. "This great Mudrà destroys decay and death. Ив practi-
tioner is never killed by any aerial disturbances ; by its virtue one walks
in the air. This should not be taught to the wicked or to those devoid of
faith. By so doing success is lost; Oh Chanda ! this is verily the truth.

Ll чатта тача I
ua Ве qeparariteresi aisi че airs
eed ieenifaràa ае etsi gna, i
па ая Кеа quautawrtiretfeqe wu
iret eme Agari жайзгататсапц а со n
(е). АКАБЇ DHÂRANÂ.

80. The Ether-Tattya has the colour of pure sea-water, € (ha) ів its
seed, its presidipng deity is Sadásiva. Fix the Prána along with Chitta for
five ghatikás in this Tattva. This is Ether-Dháraná. It opens the gates


of emancipation.
ча эгет: Феччац 1
meirat gat ат ага ча Arf і


ч зегміча че лей атчећчій н ctu


LESSON THIRD. 3$


Its benefits.
81. He who knows this Dháraná is the real Yogi. Death does not
approach him, nor does he perish at the Pralaya.
чч nfisreitr re 1
MFA Пп четда ча: Ча: 1
ат часа дат лагат 41!
21.CAS VINi-MUDRA.


82. Contract and dilate the anal aperture again and again, this is
called Avini-mudrá. It awakens the Sakti (Kundalini).


ач qam qnit aaar R 1
чачта ач smmrencu RA N са н
Ita benefits.
83. This Asvini isa great Майга; it destroys all diseases of the
rectum ; it gives strength and vigour, and prevents premature death.
жа чйтїїңдтє®чад i
wey бе чт! чч етғчац |
атча чт фат arf патч N се u
22.— PÁSINI-MUDRÁ.

84. Throw the two legs on the neck towards the back, holding
them strongly together like а Раа (a noose). This is called P&sint-mudrá ;
it awakens the Sakti (Kundalint.)

WI RAYIM: RERIN |
чт икат цат черга i
arian пая атч®%: Расса: а сч t


Ita benefite.


85. This grand Майга gives strength and nourishment. It should
be practised with саге by those who desire success.


яа ERJA TRU !
wrWwssraarera Rang чї: 19: 1
йт яаёчт агатай q c8 а
23. CKAKi-MUDRÁ,
86. Contract the lips, like the beak of a crow, and drink (draw in)
the air slowly and slowly. This is K&kt (crow) mudrá, destroyer of all


diseases.
5


34 THE GHERANDA SAMHITA.


XIV RAYA: Фоча |
ждат чс qut adag тат |
яш: песна а QU ата NAT А СЭ Й


Its benefits.


87. The КАМ Mudrá is а great Mudrá, "kept secret in all Tantras.
By virtue of this, one becomes free from disease like a crow.
ча magae |
FRÈ se Каст aat NEREA |
genferimaq чапа чайтїш A N ee u
aami tA qum paR чө: ga: 1
ятайка чет gar raaa ART N се, А


24.—MÁATANGINI-MUDRÁ.


88—89. Stand in neck-deep water, draw in the water through the
nostrils, and throw it out by the mouth. Then draw in the water through
[the mouth and expel it türough]the nostrils. Let one repeat this again
and again. This is called Elephant-mudrá, destroyer of decay and
death.

: чежчац !
Вә RN аа бает Зети: |
gaara gat атат са TERT N Ro di
ач uw Каататйї queens i
анч HATIA агада qe i €t u
Its benefits.


90—91. Ір а solitary place, free from human intrusion, one should
practise with fixed attention this Elephant anudr&á: by so doing, he
becomes strong like Elephant. Wherever he may be, by this process
the Yogi enjoys great pleasure; therefore this mudrá& should be practised


with great care.
mu sprite an |
ari Вч quem ат теч faq i
WI ҹа sr дап таатай u «a t
25.—BHUJANGINI-MUDRA.
92. Extending the neck а little forward, let him drink (draw in)


air through the æsophagus ; this is called Serpent-mudrá, destroyer of
decay and death.


LESSON THIRD. 85


чиктат: FERIAN, l
wi vet tro eia Om. 1
аҷ Wd arm ач чат psy їз!


Its benefits.
93. This Serpent-mudrá quickly destroys all stomach diseases,
especially indigestion, dyspepsia, &c.
жч дага que WI !
Qd 9 диче єй vg чча!
agi cdürarat SrCTHCHAIRIRH ll 69 |
THE BENEFITS OF MUDRÁS.
94. О Chanda-Kápáli! thus have I recited to thee the chapter on
Mudrás. "This is beloved of all adepts, and destroys decay and death.
чеч абя я гач wes egent 1
ча ада qos явати Н є d


95. This should not be taught indiscriminately, nor to а wicked
person, nor to oue devoid of faith ; this should be preserved secret with
great care ; it is difficult to be attained even by E Devas.

жле течат gafara ч
"élan saaa Sgian NRR U


96. These Mudrás which give happiness and emancipation should
be taught to a guileless, calm and peace-minded person, who is devoted
to his Teacher and comes of good family.

gara qe ur dq aimara |
Ramarama asahan ll es 8

97. These Mudrás destroy all diseases. They increase the gastric
fire of him who practises them daily.

a qn DW qurare sq qur i
їн” deu SU qur чац ute

98. To him death never comes, nor decay, &c.; there is no fear to
him from fire and water, nor from air.

та: дата: фат 57 AP чийтата Бї I
gatut maaha бач я ёа: b ҸӘ a
99. Cough, asthma, enlargement of spleen, leprosy, being diseases
of twenty sorts, are verily destroyed by the practice of these Mudrás.
agar агаа IC Wien = wur а !
яа qure ча fag ama ! Roo n
Рг эйт Sreey aeg пгс.
атто ңщтяйтйт ата GANRE: |

100. О Сйапда! What more shallltell three? In short, there is

nothing in this world like the Mudrás for giving quick success.


FounTH Lesson.


«991989: |

eur ччіч—
чта: NENA ясатетстяеац |
че AARU «та чатаац y t ut
РААТҮАНАВА, OR RESTRAINING THE MIND.

GnERANDA BAID :—1. Now Ishall tell thee, Praty&hára-Yoga the best.
By ite knowledge, all the passions like lust, &c., are destroyed.

aar аат franchir messen |
ает RaRa qui ada NR

2. Let опе bring the Ора thinking principle) under his control
by withdrawing it, whenever it wanders away drawn by the various
objects of sight.

ques RIER итә чт чатан d
aema daaa qui s из!

3. Praise or censure ; good speech or bad speech ; let one withdraw
his mind from all these and bring the Chitta under the control of the
Self.

gne тб xe HY cp на: |
aena я еш&ї{адтнгйя qui «ma pw

4, From sweet smells ог bad smells, Бу whatever odour tbe mind
may be distracted or attracted, let one withdraw the mind from that,
and bring the thinking principle under the control of his Self.

пчсаті ке әта аат яя: !
аша, пепле аскаедч чч айа_ (зң
ұй sütrergérficarat ira чегет чее-
атй semestre eraat: i
5. From sweetor acid tastes, from bitter or astringent tastes, by


whatever taste the mind may be attracted, let one withdraw it from tbat,
and bring it within the control of his Self.


FIFTH LESSON.


qama: |

og ччта—
qua: neni maanen ЧЧ i
че MANAT RIJA adu ut
РВАМАУАМА, OR RESTRAINT OF BREATH.

GnuERANDA Ватр:—1. Now I shall tell thee the rules of Prán&yáma
or regulation of breath. By its practice a man becomes like a god.

зп чи erat Sere? raTRTE eram 1
чтоб" аа: чата ятата ч «пеач уа И

2. Four things аге necessary in practising Prániyáma. First, a
good place ; second, a suitable time ; third, moderate food ; and, lastly, the
purifications of the nádis, (vessels of the body, i.e., alimentary canal, &c.)

ua eara: 1
їч ачтай «тагат жата 1
апта a фа жаа бает аат зш
Place,

3. The practice of Yoga should not be attempted in a far off country
(from home), nor іп a forest, nor ina capital city, nor in the midst of а
crowd. If one does во, he loses success.

чВрата quina scr afian 1
олега яшы аага йш айй н ow и

4. in а distant country, one loses faith (because of the Yoga not
being known there); in а forest, one is without protection; and in the
midstofa thick population, there is danger of exposure (for then the
curious will trouble him). "Therefore, let one avoid these three.

gità urit eret gig Рачиа
ай spere жеп smi: «Караа і чоп
9. lnagood country whose кіпа із just, where food is easily and
abundantly procurable, where there are no disturbances, let one erect
there a small hut, around it let him raise walls.
aiga ч ягая 9 1
аве ч хас йабан l ®


6. Andin the centre of the enclosure, let him pud & well and dig
а tank. Let the hut be neither very high nor very low : let it be free from
insects.


38 THE GHERANDA SAMHITA.


ammai ч тогсан 1
чч en« ач лаш анд Пэ!
7. Itshould be completely plastered over with cow-dung. Ina
hut thus built and situated in such a hidden place, let him practise


Pránáyáma.
ша тегй: I
iuc Rif а aat ч жат aN |
атс а теа Әтдт її ёла: a С Н


Time,


8. The practice of Yoga should not be commenced in thesef our
веаворв out of six :—hemanta (winter), disira (cold), grishma (hot), varshá
(rainy) If one begins in these seasons, one will contract diseases.

чаа aei ste nma anata, 1
ачта «аа Ru тере маң ыча і * dd

9. The practice of Yoga should be commenced by а beginner in
Spring (vasanta); and autumn (sarat). Ву so doing, he attains BucceBs;
and verily he does not become liable to diseases.

Srsrfr reg aTed «p uruerener |
À в ardt aequatio эгатасы чча: ou Ro а

10. The six seasons occur in their order in the twelve months
beginning with Chaitra and ending with Phálguna: two months being
occupied by each season. But each season is experienced for four months,
beginning with Mágha and ending with Phálguna.


ат а Баға: Вира шат і i$ ou
Six SEASONS.


11, Тһе віх seasons are as follows :—


Beason. Months (Sanskrit). Englisn.
Vasanta or fipring ^. . Ohaitra and Vais&kha .. A March, April.
Grishma or Summer iz. Jeshtha and Asádha 19 May, June.
Varshá or Rainy ЕР Brávana and Bhádra ө July, August.
Sarat or Autumn .. . ASvinaand Kártika ..  .Bept. Oct.
Hemanta or Winter е Agraháyana and Pausha ie; Nov., Dec.
Sisira or Cold x Mágha and Phálguna .. January, February,

ngai ячен aequat а атаң


manAR чагатдич 9: 1 £a d


LESSON FIFTH. 39


Amk asa a amga Ag: 1
чет «пата mgng бр 0 ja oí
татат Angus fuod
=тїйєїгатєнтөпг& Фағатан AR 1
ата чаёт aras Втатсачч fag: à tu d
The experiencing of seasons.
12—14. Now I shailtell thee the experiencing of seasons. They
are ав follows :—


Beginning from. Endin. ith. Beason. English.
Mágha ES Vaisákha s Varshánubhava  .. January to April.
Chaitra ЯРИ As&dha к Grishmánubhava ... March to June.
As&dha .. Asvina -. Varshánubhava  .. June to September.
Bhådra m Agraháyana ...  Saradánubhava  ... . August to Nov.
Kártika ET Mágha ix Hemanátanubhava... Oot. to Jan.
Agraháyansa ... Phálguna РЯ Sisiránubhava s Nov. to Feb.


чеға wr ч pL ашаа |
аст ат ааа Reagan жй ң 4 Н


15. Тһе practice of Yoga should be commenced eitherin Vasanta
(spring) or Sarat (autumn). Forin these seasons success із attained with-


out much trouble.
зч raw: i
беп чаг eg алага 9 єй!
атат deca бает a Ryu n {8 н
3.—Moderation оў diet.
16. Не who practises Yoga without moderation of diet, incurs
various diseases, and obtains no success.


"ете ааб ат gak ач |
ga mrweramer Sp а grafian і RO n


17. А Yogi should eat rice, barley (bread), ог wheaten bread. He
may eat Mudga beans ul (Phaseolus Mungo), Másha beans (Phaseolus
Radiatus) gram, &c. These should be clean, white and free from chaff.

чате чач піч Rude ч OSPRUDE |

fami «med crat grai жалжал ! 6
асти итер URHTQUP A ASRA, |d
чта? цеф eu UT аага і f* od

18—19. А Yogi may eat pstola (a k'nd of cucumber, qu), jack-
fruit, mánakachu (Arum Colocasia), kakkola (a kind of berry) the jujube,


40 THE GHERANDA SAMBITA.


the bonduc nut (Bonducella guilendina), cucumber, plantain, fig; the
unripe plantain, the small plantain, the plantain stem, and roots, brinjal
and medicinal roots and fruits (e.g., riddhi, &c.)

MSM чеп qur AZTIEN, |

чач аата Веча N ао |

20. He may eat green, fresh vegetables атаи, black vegetables
(srame), the leaves of patola, the Vástüku-s&ka, and hima-lochik& Sáka.
These are the five dákas (vegetable leaves) praised ав fit food for Yogíg.

Sur gagi Rani чачтар ац |
чаа qeu sem femen Bur xoa

21. Pure, sweet and cooling food should be eaten to fill half the
Stomach: eating thus sweet juicee with pleasure, and leaving the other
half of the stomach empty is called moderation in diet.

яа quid anre g чча |
засы gat AJN | 33
22. Halfthe stomach should be filled with food, one quarter with
water: and one quarter should be kept empty for practising práp&y&ma.
ечен epu ч чу ч ач анец |
аптеке ачу sel gts є чча аат a3 Н
Prohibited foods.

23. Inthe beginning of Yoga-practice one should discard bitter,
acid, salt, pungent and roasted things, curd, whey, heavy vegetables, wine,
palmuuts, and over-ripe jack-fruit.

spool ич Mg чите" ТФаСЕТД |
gehren a «та Verse ! a!

24. бо а1зо kulattha and masur beans, pandu fruit, pumpkins and
vegetable stems, gourds, berries, katha-bel, (feronia elephantum), kanta-
bilva and palàda (Butea frondosa).

зщ uem Рага өр әта eH |
атас Ras ч RIMARRA ! їч

25. бо а!во Kadamba (Nauclea cadamba), jambira (citron), bimba,
lukucha (а kind of bread fruit tree) onions, lotus, Kámaranga, piyáia
(Buchanánaa latifolia), hinga (assafoetida), dàlinali, kemuka.

атта айз ques ede |

sed gd arc ré чёт Зичи d RR I
qnit «rfe атКечаВтатача |
птаткаччй uat caang Raa, i Зэ 1


LESSON FIFTH. 41


26—27. A beginner should avoid much travelling company
of women, and warming himself by fire. So also he should avoid fresh
butter, ghee, thickened milk, sugar, and date-sugar, &c., as wellas ripe
plantain, cocoa-nut, pomegranate, dates, lavani fruit, &mlaki (myrobalans),
and everything containing acid juices.

дезин ur TS. sp AZA I
Cram ap а ай amaa 0 зе!

28. But cardamom, јаірһа!, cloves, aphrodisiacs or stimulante, the

rose-apple, haritaki, and palm dates, а Yogi may eat while practising


Yoga.
sgh fra ага аҹт ngaa i
айтічеіча` rer ZU йтиялтаўд и 4% a
29. Easily digestible, agreeable and cooling foods which nourish
the humours of the body, a Yogi may eat according to his desire.
wer zRa ghg ча ча" ачт 1
эта” RA хад’ Apt чада і зо и
30. Buta Yogi should avoid hard (поё easily digestible), sinful
food, or putrid food, or very hot, or very stale food, as well as very cooling
or very much exciting food.
ята:жататчата «гаж іє ааг i
TREI AURIT ай ая та 1 3% н
31. Не should avoid early (morning before sunrise) baths, fasting,
&c., or anything giving pain to the body ; so also is prohibited to him
eating only once а day, ог not eating at all. But he may remain without
food for 3 hours.
цч ARARA татат erra t
эй пуа mu uua Bend 1
Surg @я атат& HÜSSHSRISU | 33 N
32. Regulating his life in this way, let him practise Prán&yüma.
In the beginning beiore commencingit, he should take a little milk and
ghee daily, and take his food twice daily, once at noon, and once in the


evening.
кїї rare i


aa ататда: |
апаа аата атата є SS 1
четаа адгета: HIE HA EYE: |
agiz чагаа шатта «ахаа н зз R


42 THE GHERANDA SAMHITA.


4.—PURIFICATION OF NÀDIS,

33. He should sitona seat of Kusa-grass, or an antelope skin,
or tiger skin or a blanket, or on earth, calmly and quietly, facing east or
north. Having purified the nádis, let him begin Pránáyáma.

SIUS STO |
alge wd piaga vim |
aa Aaa agga аатта зз а

башак said :—34. О ocean of mercy! How are n&dis purified,
what is the purification of nádis; I want to learn all this; recite this to
me.

“сте заТ=—
етет агач ясат ач meuf)
ятатата: = Бачата әј лаа |
amaA атаба" ягататя arse і зч N

Gheranda said :—35. Тһе Váyu does not (cannot) enter the nádis во
long as they are full of impurities (e.g., fæces, &с.). How then can Práná-
уёша be accomplished? How сап there be knowledge of Tettvas?
Therefore, first the Nádis should be purified, and then Pránáyáma should


be practised.
ar&rgrfa ЫТ агат aag MAJAN |
Фая wp Фа ажда y зе N
36. The purification. cf nâdis is of two sorts :—Samanu and Nir-


manu. The Samanu is done by a шеша! process with Bija-mantra. The
Nirmanu is performed by physical clearings.


mre qur He чежачіча чагт
этч аяа Us атага ят ча 35 і
37. Тһе physical cleanings ог Dhautis have already been taught.
They consist of the six Sàdhanas. Now, О Chanda, listen to the Samanu
process of purifying the vessels.
suana rt quet eru |
чепей фач uirq nenrfaan i
agia spstea ятататаЁга: N R N
38. Sitting in the Padmâsana posture, and performing the ado-
ration of the Guru, &c., as taught by the Teacher, let him perform purifi-
cation of Nádis ior success in Pránáyáma.
атай айт vut чача аачац |
wu qur wir reus ап: dat d


LESSON FIFTH. 43


agem агчат a paR TON 1
mamaa аг” а: агат ч Хай чө А
39—40. Contemplating оп Váyu-Bije (2.., à), full of energy and of
а smoke-colour, let him draw іп breath by the left nostril, repeating the
Bija sixteen times. This ів Рдгака. Let him restrain the breath fora
period of sixty-four repetitious of the Mantra. This is Kumbhaka. "Then
let him expel the air by the right nostril slowly during а period occupied
by repeating the Mantra thirty-two times.
адата счет чата эйч ач i
чїЧїзйтєйя qui arem е qum Ii utu
aguem INST е җелФӣч етае |
mif rur qur ЙАТ а Ce а wa di
41—42. Тһе root of the navel is the seat of Agni-Tattva. Raising
the fire from that place, join the Frithivi-Tattva with it ; then contemplate
on this mixed light. Then repeating sixteen times the Agni-Bíja ($), let
him draw in breath by the right nostril, and retain it for the period of
sixty-four repetitions of the Mantras, and then expel it by the left nostril
for a period of thirty-two repetitions of the Mantra.
ятатй затоа verter sateesrerafeqeng i
S айзёйттйїч стат qure n va i
erg ичет а 4 ФӘдч erem |
жна rfr emer атта" famem d
а arius eu ата roe Н vo И
43—44. Then fixing the gaze оп the tip of the nose and contem-
plating the luminous reflection of the moon there, let him inhale through
the left nostril, repeating the Bija tham ($) sixteen times; let him retain
it by repeating the Bija (Š) sixty-four times; in the meanwhile imagine
(or contemplate) that the nectar flowing from the moon at the tip of
the nose runs through allthe vessels of the body, and purifies them,
Thus contemplating, let him expel the air by repeating thirty-two times
the Prithivi Bija lam (s).
qikat агг wer eret Rraiert i
tr татый еп татат eram чч!
45.—By these three Ргапйуйтав the nádis are purified. Then
sitting firmly in a posture, let him begin regular Prap&yáma.
аҝа: qui enr зәп dirt атт!
бт тай чый чї атри: a veu


44 THE GHERANDA SAMHITA.


KINDS OF KUMBHAKA,
46. The Kumbhakas or retentions of breath are of eight sorts;
Sahita, Sárya-bheda, Ujjàyt, Sttali, Bhastriké, Bhr&ámart, Mürchhá and


Kevali.
яка Боа: Эте: лазе: |
amit dagaa Рота атаба: а wo н
1.—ВАНІТА.

47. The Sahita Kumbhaka ів of two sorts :—Sagarbha and Nirgar-
bha. The Kumbhaka performed by the repetition of Bija Mantra ів
Sagarbha ; that done without such repetition is Nirgarbha.

ятатат enm «ps чай а |
sperem аа Seque NA EYE 1
паб «чї cnqümquimq i uc А

48. First I shall tell thee the Sagarbha Prápáyáma. Sitting in
Sukhásana posture, facing east or north, let him contemplate on Brahmá
fullof Rajas quality of a blood.red colour, in the form ofthe letter w.

тат фета” mar rey qnd |
PRA фет RIAAN: н ut t

49. Let the wise practitioner inhale by the left nostril, repeating @
sixteen times. Then before he begins retention (butat the end of in-
halation), let him perform Uddtyánabandha.

rena gant SRT решен i
«арчып SE RINT sper Wr d ҷо N
50. Then let him retain breath by repeating 3 sixty-four times,
contemplating on Hari, of a black colour and of Satva quality.
атаа” Вт хатат nete mme |
бїт ач tadaa чаз «t а
51. Then let him exhale the breath tnrough the right nostril by Te-


peating man (Ñ) thirty-two times, contemplating Siva of а white colour
and of Tamas quality.


ча: кэт gaa arci |
ear ©чйд чип «ач кйш g җан
52. Then again' inhale through Pingalâ (right nostril), retain by
Kumbhaka, and exhale by Idá (left), in the method taught above, chang-
ing the nostrils alternately.


Чт жите” чаататчеиац |
qigrarrmrmd: ачах frat н чэ q


LESSON FIFTH. 46


53, Let him practise, thus alternating the nostrils again and again.
When inhalation is completed, close both nostrile, the right one by the
thumb and the left опе by the ring-finger and little-finger, never using
the index апа iniddle-üingers. Тһе nostrils to be closed so long as
Kumbhaka is.

arnari Prrüeg rar Әя атай à

amman sint i

чышача E QUERTBUGAR 4 WU OG

54. The Nirgarbha (or simple or mantraless) Prán&yáma is performed

without the repetition of Bija mantra; and the period of Püraka (in-
halation or inspiration) Kumbhaka (retention) and Rechaka 'expiration),
may be extended from one to hundred mátrás.

sant inkai ёте tsm seam i

wan адат ятят ятатататЁнчт єңеп: і чч И

99. The best is twenty Ма{гав: i.e., Püraka 20 seconde, Kumbhaka
80, and Rechaka 40 seconds. Тһе sixteen mátrás is middling, s.e.,, 16,64


and 32. Тһе twelve mátrás is the lowest, i.e., 12,48,24. Thus the Prápá-
y&ma is of three sorta.


MIANA чйї дета HNSHTW |
saaa їн Rifiretram q «8 И


56. Ву practising the lowest Prán&yáma for sometime, the body
begins to perspire copiously ; by practising the middling, the body begins
to quiver (especially, there is a feeling of quivering along the spinal cord.)
By the highest Prán&yáma, one leaves the ground, i.e., there is levitation.
These signs attend the success of these three sorts of Pránáy&ma.

ятататата Әса MOANA MATAR, 1
MORANA SSRA ASRUTQTHIHSUHSÓ 1
HERE эта Rast ятата че аа і чэ di

57. Ву Prâņâyâma isattained the power of levitation (Кһесһегі
Sakti), by Prán&yáma diseases are cured, by Prán&yáma the Šakti (spiri-
tual energy) is awakened, by Pránáyáma is obtained the calmness of mind
and exaltation of mental powers (clairvoyance, &c.) ; by this, mind becomes
full of bliss; verily the practitioner o£ Pránáyáma is happy.


жа qUWqprmm:
aug ачта—
б fire фай адда тщ!
чайа alaren sr чатре RÄTY N «e N


46 THE GHERANDA SAMHITA.


WIGDDRRE USt фгаёа нете: |
атча = чета атча ҹа ұгата U чє и


2.—SÜRYABHEDA KUMBHAKA.


Gheranda said :—58— 59. lhave told thee the баһа Kumbhaka,
now hear the Süryabheda. Inspire with all your strength the external
air through the sun-tube (right nostril) : retain this air with the greatest
care, performing the J&landhara Модга. Let the Kumbbhaka be kept up
solong as the perspiration does not burst outfrom the tips of the nails
and the roots of the hair.

ятайзчта: =1итчаћатаетаї «дч = 1
атп: аы ттт eet wem: good


THE VÂYUS.


60. The Váyus are ten, namely Prána, Apána, Samána, Udána and
Vy&na ; Nága, Kürma, Krikara, Devadatta and Dhananjaya.
ft ита aken дада |
чаг arare а sur акчаңы: «td
eH ma чтёў qp SHUT: esp STU |
stum: qa Rear аппа: чер IQQ: i RR I


Their Seats.


61—62. The Prána moves always іп the heart; the Apána in the
sphere of anus ; the Samána і» the navel region ; the Udána in the throat ;
and the Vyàna pervades the whole body. These are the five principal
Váyus, known as Pránádi. They belong to the Inner body. The Nágádi
five V&yus belong to the Outer body.

ч чата «таг a аең |
атт am META: quirequitea CEU р $a
жес иеа wur eet багай
а зїї ЧА єтїї айзат чча: и в h


63—64. Т пож tell thee the seats of these five external Váyus,

The Nága-Váyu performs the function of eructation; the Kürma opens
the eye-lids; Ње Krikara causes sneezing ; the Devadatta does yawning;
the Dhananjaya pervades the whole gross body, and does not leave it
even after death.

атдт зг Зач тда? ч Вачац |

геч wc гла чая 9 |

жатыр AURIS я Ёсе пач И


LESSON FIFTH. 4T


65, The Nága-V&yu gives rise to consciousness, the Kürms causes
vision, the Krikara hunger and thirst, the Devadatta produces yawning
and by Dhananjaya sound is produced; this does not leave the body


ever.

wd а adah auper epum i

{кшт чаа var Adara: i 4

ча: quu агаа geafuesr gem |

айтат erum AU ч Чаа: 1 qs di

66—67. All these Váyus, separated by the Sürya-nádi, let him raise

up from the root of the navel; then let him expire by the Id&-n&di, slowly
and with unbroken, continuous force. Let him again draw the air through
the right nostril, retaining it, as taught above, and exhale it again. Let
him do this again and again. In this process, the sir is always inspired
through the Sürya-nádi.

Spur: чаа WUTSIRDATHTR: |

атча җә? uf dares fend |:

хта «бе avg quiae н sé!

Its benefits.


68. Тһе Sürya-bheda Kumbhaka destroys decay and death, awakens
the Kundali sakti, increases the bodily fire. О Chanda! thus have І
taught thee the Süraybhedana Kumbhaka.


М.В. Тһе description of this process, as given in Hatha-Yoga Pradipiká, is somewhat
different. Boon after Püraka (inspiration), one should perform Jálandhar and at the end
of Kumbhaka, but before Reohaka perform the Uddiyánabandha. Then quickly contract
the anal orifice by Mülabandha, contract the throat, pull in the stomach towards the back ;
by this process the air is forced into the Brahma-nádi (Sushumn4). Raise the Арапа up,

, lower the Prána, below tho Kantha ; à Yogi becomes free from deoay: the air should be
drawn through the right nostril and expelled through the left,


ча Зет ат
яте MANE дане я чой 1
теледі «атаа qr qu I NR и SR И
&—UJJÀYi.

69. Close the mouth, draw in the external air by both the nostrils,
aud pull up the internal air from the lunga and throat ; retain them in the
mouth.

gu пета wr tputsmeedc ud
rf утаж wer rA ATTA: 1 эо и

70. Then having washed the mouth (ie, expelled air through
mouth) perform Jálandharas. Let him perform Kumbhaka with all his
might and retain the air unhindered.


48 THE GHERANDA SAMHITA.


semmit жеп {єтї «тада, d
a чат «чела жатса і бА.
ятата: ца: «Әт че єт я (чаа і
sme SmesTdi «теа N SR N
71—72. All works are accomplished by Ujjáyt Kumbhaka. He ів
never attacked by phlegm diseases, or nervous diseases, or indigestion, or
dysentery, or consumption, or cough ; or fever or [enlarged] spleen. Let


а man perform Ujjâyî to destroy decay and death.


N.B,—&ee the Hatha-Yoga Pradipiká, Chap. 1.—Б1, 58 for а different description
of this,


чч їтїк: 1
бат urgarevi зч quies: |
«ч е фта жет ятата uud ga: d oa
4.—6ЇТАЦ.

73. Draw in the air through the mouth (with the lips contracted
and tongue thrown out), and fill the stomach slowly. Retain it there for
a Short dme. Then exhale it through both the nostrils,

Чаа JA 1
Wr pa frasu Аҹ ae amaA d ou I

74. Теё ће Yogi always practise this Šítalt Kumbhaka, giver of

bliss ; by so doing, he will be free from indigestion, phlegm and bilious.


disorders.
ча «битта: 1
чеч eaa ung engin 1
an ng а amagna emere: qos n
5.—BHASTRIKA (BELLOW),
75. Ав the bellows of the ironsmith constantly dilate and contract,

similarly let him slowly draw in the sir by both the nostrils and expand
the stomach ; then throw it out guickly (the wind making sound like


bellows).

чї Әби а we qui meme 1

ача remgur qai ч anA d 98 li

ате mAg aang дап 1

aawa gu oum а fa ҢА 1 99 д

76—77. Having thus inspired and expired quickly twenty times,

let him perform Kumbhaka ; then let him expel it by the previous method.
Let the wise one perform this Bhastriká (bellows-like) Kumbhaka thrice:
he will never guffer any disease and will be always healthy.


LESSON FIFTH. 49


чч атада: 1
яча па айт sequat чыча |
жат бета кері фач ESAE usc А
$.—BHRÁMARI (OR BEETLE-DRONING KUMBHAKA).

78. At past midnight, in a place where there are no sounds of any
animals, &c., to be heard, let the Yogi practise Püraka and Kumbhaks,
closing the ears by the hands.

Wan Ru ататда WWW |
sai raag a «тате Wn чо Wn y
ARAA чч аа: quu d


Weg Н Со Н
79—80. He will hear then various internal sounds in his right
ear. Тһе first sound will be like that of crickets, then that of a lute, then
that of a thunder, then that of a drum, then that of a beetle, then that of
bells, then those of gongs of bell-ietal, trumpets, kettle-drums, mridanga,
military drums, and dundubhi, &c.
qd агатёгйт чүт атай ётшатчапа i
HARATA SUCH TE MGEN à vri n eR u
хаас sut Aani яа: 1
aem feu ur аҹ: чен 99 1
ча gutta: eff qur. KAS)

81—82, Thus various sounds are cognised by daily practice of this
Kumbhaka. Last of all is heard the Anáhata sound rising from the
heart; of this sound there is а resonance, in that resonance there is а
Light. In that Light the mind should be immersed. When the mind ів
absorbed, then it reaches the Highest seat of Vishnu (parama-pada). By
success in this Bhrámart Kumbhaka one gets success in Samádhi.

WU AFAT: |
gÈ pak чеп suat HÜTT |
gea Aa «i AAS JANT |
MARA яяёт ANGAR MAA чан NCN


7.—MÜRCHHA.
83. Having pertormed Kumbhaka with comfort, let him withdraw
the mind from all objects and бх it in the space between the two eye-
brows. This causes fainting of the mind, and gives happiness. For, by


thus joining the Manas with the Àtiná, the bliss of Yoga is certainly
obtained.


50 ТНЕ GHERANDA SAMHITA.


ча чёрт: |
беба а «леа RN чат!
чете чт чкып°й®й ай: 1
гич аги eras! тат жч айат «ч
8.—KEVALI,
84, Тһе breath of every person in entering makes the sound of
'gah" and in coming out, that of "ham." These two sounds make
Өч (so'ham "I am That") or ќа: (bamsa “ The Great Swan"). Through-
out а day and a night there аге twenty-one thousand and six hundred such
respirations, (that is, 15 respirations per ininute) Every living being
(Jiva) perfoms this japa unconsciously, but constantly. "This is called
Ajapá g&yatri.
seram чат четт Ж чүй!
ач sTemgeud fafaeearma: | < 8
85. This Ajapá јара is performed in three places, i.e., in the Müla-
dhára (the space between anus and membranum virile), in the An&hat lotus
(heart) and in the Àjüya lotus (the space where the two nostrils join).
зас FÄSTER |
taakan атар evaremr arius q en p
nra атата irs faire à
«бїт: чей Anat бїлїк: 1
йуз чеч” апай ч айтВгъи U сә d
86—87. This body of V&yu is ninety-six digits length (4.e., віх feet)
ao a standard. The ordinary length of the air-current when expired is
twelve digita (nine inches); in singing, its length becomes sixteen digita
(one foot); in eating, it ìs twenty digits (15 inches); in walking, it is twenty-
four digits (18 inches); in sleep, it is thirty digits (27$ inches); in copu-
lation, it i8 thirty-six digits (27 inches), and in taking physical exercise, it
is more than that.
AMASA nep kc dil oan
яи NR агаа emen ң ecu
88. By decreasing the natural longth of the expired current from
nine inches to less and less, there takes place increase of life; and by in-
creasing the current, there ів decrease of life.


тете ятё frd аё sew дч apum |


qaa чей лаа четин UH
89. So long as breath remains in the body there is no death. When


LESSON FIFTH. 51


the full length of the wind is all confined in the body, nothing being al-
lowed to go out, it is Kevala Kumbhaka.
MAA эё-лечинчёетїчөн |
ешн чї crema IATA A RoN
aep чч В «don PARGAR аћ 1
ёч! ursqréregr илат «p summo a tta
90—91. AllJivas are constantly and unconsciously reciting this
Ajapá Mantra, only for а fixed number of times every day, But а Yogt
Should recite this consciously and counting the numbers. By doubling
the number of Ajap& (4e, by 30 respirations per minute), the state of
Manonmani (fixedness of mind) is attained. There are no regular Rechaka
and Püraka in this process. Itis only (Kevala) Kumbhaka.
ататеп «туят чт We кит wi |
сеже: чі mA оча Ra og аз oa
92. By inspiring air by both nostrils, let him perform Kevala Kum-
bhaka. On the first day, let him retain breath from one to sixty-four


times.
чї печі фач «пй ата fra А 1
man Sant put ачт аа чат А ооз oq
птайхатұатата mer enpUS |
feranra pate чнага ja А d ew n


93—94. "This Kevali should be performed eight times а day, once
in every three hours ; or one may do it five times a day, as I shall tell thee.
First in the early morning, then at noon, then in the twilight, then at mid-
night, and then in the fourth. quarter of the night. Or one may do it
thrice a day, ż.e., in the morning, noon and evening.


Tani RA aant е Rer ат 1

ятичтчнтаї ч атаң, Rafa этч н чч di

maai dee wore mf 1

ёч! жєн Rex Веи RepgPnqO N A и

хі йайстаката! ereeg aeg dark четти ятататияйтїт
ата aANT: |
95—96. So long as Success is not obtained іп Kevalt, he should

increase the length of Ajapá јара every day, one to five times. He who
knows Prâņâyâma and Kevali is the real Yogi. What can he not accom-
plish in this world who has acquired success in Kevali Kumbhaka ?


pn


50 THE GHERANDA SAMHITA.


яч чйр: 1
Esta чїч «тё дч qw
vanh бата акеге |
wrsrat ага атазї таг arafer айат cu и


8.—KEVALÍ.
84. The breath of every person in entering makes the sound of
sah” and in coming out, that of "ham." These two sounds make
да (so'ham "I am That”) or ёч: (hamsa “ The Great Swan"). Through-
out а day and a night there are twenty-one thousand and six hundred such
respirations, (that is, 15 respirations per minute) Every living being
(Jiva) perfoms this јара unconsciously, but constantly. This is called


Ajap& g&yatri.
sura qur eer Ё gi чүї!
ач srergezd їикечатпа: q сч н
85. This Ajapá јара is performed in three places, t.e., in the Mála-
dhára (the space between anus and membranum virile), in the Апёћаё lotus
(heart) and in the Ájüya lotus (the space where the two nostrils join).
£r жаєчжа |
RRAN чта: ANNE ENER: q са p
nra remet rera RaRa à
гїп: чей Axat Рата: à
Aa чега” carat ч айтЁг®н ! es i
86—87. This body of Váyu is ninety-six digits length (i.e., six feet)
as а standard. The ordinary length of the air-current when expired is
twelve digits (nine inches); in singing, its length becomes sixteen digits
(one foot); in eating, it is twenty digits (15 inches); in walking, it is twenty-
four digits (18 inches); in sleep, it is thirty digits (273 inches); in copu-
lation, it is thirty-six digits (27 inches), and in taking physical exercise, it
is more than that.
атая eT чен: яччї |
ятата NR ата erem | сс
88. Ву decreasing the natural longth of the expired current from
nine inches to less and less, there takes place increase of life ; and by in-
creasing the current, there is decrease of life.


ашта st fest d scu ач заа |
апда чеєчаға яаа Фчефғата N се и


89. Зо long ав breath remains in the body there is no death. When


LESSON FIFTH. 51


the full length of the wind is all confined in the body, nothing being al-
lowed to go out, it ів Kevala Kumbhaka.
чта жйзие=чннчтєтїчө |
wert чї emend Sut о!
яа ач Ж «don RAGAT аё |
Wet атячтёгеп їлп = нәти a < А
90—91. AllJivas are constantly and unconsciously reciting tbis
Ajap& Mantra, only for а fixed number of times every day, But a Yogt
should recite this consciously and counting the numbers. By doubling
the number of Ajap&(ie, by 30 respirations per minute), the state of
Manonmani (fixedness of mind) is attained. There are no regular Rechaka
and Püraka in this process. It is only (Kevala) Kumbhaka.
aema атап ет Spes рти WOW 1
чъъаа: че" єтхач um йа g €x oa
92. By inspiring air by both nostrils, let him perform Kevala Kum-
bhaka. On the first day, let him retain breath from one to sixty-four


times.
kad agai spur ата ата Ма ВА 1
зат Чагат pui чт ач жел А 1 RR og
птайхатұатата mer ag 1
aeram жаа адна ВА RA и «e n


93—94. This Kevali should be performed eight times в day, once
in every three hours ; or one may do it five times а day, as I shall tell thee.
First in the early morning, then at noon, then in the twilight, then at mid-
night, and then in the fourth quarter of the night. Or one may do it
thrice а day, ùe., in the morning, noon and evening.

чеччтс ВА afa а ВА атат 1
ягичтчбатаї a атча Р: питай 1 «ч N
maani quet аст чеч атт!
ча хаё Ва Row RRS и SR и
к sirirergétfirarat losan чегетде ягататияатїт
IH чата: 1
95—96. So long as success is not obtained іп Kevalt, he should


increase the length of Ajapá јара every day, one to five times. He who
knows Pránáyáma and Kevali is the real Yogi. What can he not ассот-
plish in this world who has acquired success in Kevali Kumbhaka ?


gu — —


©тхтн Lesson.
gSa: 1
этч ene mm d
Aeg Sur—
хә эпте ән чака ГИЙ Ag: 1
eqs qiias she nA aur |
ча бен яю pART og tod
DHYANA-YOGA,

GuERANDA SAID :—1. Тре Dhyána or conten plation is of three sorts :
gross, subtle and luminous. When a particular figure, such as one's Guru
or Deity is contemplated, it is Sthüla or gross contemplation. When
Brahma or Prakriti is contemplated as a mass of light, it is called Jyotis
contemplation. When Brahma ав a Bindu (point) and Kundali force are
contemplated, it is Sükshma or Subtle contemplation.

д EJST, |

«ччтаєсӣ Van UHTSUICOISIU !
апе «чач я Чсччтачтнаң | o
азі ча agguanta |
Aaah diga qRe қа wu з и
ятебађ татат батаФаҹт d
чат: =аечёчтатаађт ад: нє а
аа «ел eaqui mU |
agma Ragana і ч а
зас: йел паба Вас 9 1
хатаагч Рече чт AARRE 9 & o
аиа а «аге qdg дата i
esito erre псабчац usq

чеч Quer чач UN GITTER, |
акч хатай Red eeraa Rrp à < н

1.—8THULA DHYÀNA.

2—8. (Having closed the eyes), let him contemplate that there is
a seg of nectar in his heart : that in the midst of that sea there is an island
of precious stones, the very sand of which is pulverised diamonds and
rubies. "That on all sides of it, there are Kadamba trees, laden with sweet
flowers; that, next to these trees, like a rampart. there i8 a row of flowering


LESSON SIXTH. 53


trees, Such эз málnti, mallikâ, jàti, kesara, champaka, phrijáta snd padmas,
and that the fragrance of these flowers is spread а! round, in every quarter.
In the middle of this garden, let the Yogi imagine that there stands &
beautiful Каїра tree, having four branches, representing the four
Vedas, and thatit is full of flowers and fruits. Insects are humming there
and cuckoos singing. Beneath that tree, let him imagine а rich platform
of precious gems, and on that a costly throne inlaid with jewels, and that
on that throne sits his particular Deity, as taught to him by his Guru.
Let him contemplate оп the appropriate Гого, ornaments and vehicle of
that Deity. The constant contemplation of such a form is Sthüla Dhyána.
IRANTA |

emen serat ferat Aaa, 1

Ronaki qw armeegT і! є і

gad актайт arat sarfaea

CHNUUTOquI єчєт quad 0 ie od

аги ъй g wer Peru i

кечётаёде sued ач чаа 1 4 8

ANOTHER PROCESS.

9—11. Let the Yogt imagine that in the pericarp of the great
thoussnd-petslled Lotus (Brain) there ів а amaller lotus having twelve
petals. Its colour is white, highly luminous, having twelve bija letters,
named g, я, ч, н, 9, 9, € {, б, а, 9, Я, (ha ва keha ma la va ra yum ha
ва kha phrem) Ја the pericarp of this smaller lotus there are three lines
forming a triangle w, Ф, Ч (a ka tha): having three angles called к, qt, Ҹ
(һа la ksha) : and in the middle of this triangle, there is the Pranava Ўта I


Om.
атин 95 wem sunm \
азїчё ќе чє ату чёй t ta 1
12. "hen let him contemplate that in that there is а beautiful seat
having Майа and Bindu. On that seat there are two swans, and a pair of
wooden sandals or shoes.
mtas 36 &Ч fins ч МӘтҹәң i
saecu dd чта ӘЧ ! tà А
речаи" Wer cune fequi
qirgan =фечата serere а te 1
13—14. There let him contemplate his Guru Deva, baving two arms
and two eyes, and dressed in pure white, anointed with white sandal-paste,


54 THE GHERANDA SAMHITA.


wearing garlands of white flowers; to the left of whom stands Sakti of
blood-red colour. Ву thus contemplating the Guru, the Sthüla Dhyána is


attained.
xm эйт 1
ае —:Ҹта
бле «уреата д АӘтеата pg а
аата MRAR ә И fu И


2.——J YOTIR DRYÀNA.


Gheranda said :—15. Т have told thee the Sthüla Dhyána; listen
now to the contemplation of Light, by which the Yogi attains success and


gees his Self.
чега тий зБ А i
Sarm об ая овет: |
чате’ mu sp Haregré чао н fe d
16. Inthe Máládhára is kundalini, having the form of а serpent.
The Jivütmá is there like the flame of a lamp. Contemplate on this flame
as the Luminous Brahma. This is the Tejo Dhyána or Jyotir Dhy&na.


жт, 1
чагаа пае ч ачи: Umm i
хатаа затетч чт’ gnari ач fici vsu
ANOTHER PROCESS,
17. In the middle of the two eye-brows, above the Manas, there is
a Light consisting of Om. Let him contemplate on this flame. "This ів
another method of contemplation of Light.


Arari ч iecur чыгган А |

agarang Weg muet этиб чаа А {са

чпенат ama азат ЁгТат 1

Rr сонип ы чечегчта Exo utu
8.-8Ü0KSHMA DHYANA.

Gheranda said :—18—19. О Chanda! thou hast heard the Tejo
Dhyána, listen now tothe Süksbma Dhy&ána. When by а great good
fortune, the kundali is awakened, it joins with the Átmá and leaves the
body through the portals of the two eyes; and'enjoys itself by walking
in the royal road (Astral Light) It cannot be seen on account ofits
subtleness and great changeability.


LESSON SIXTH. 55
апала аат АЙ erra RaR 1
чиген eg! Зататаі qeu | ао 1
20. The Yogi, however, attains this success by performing S&àmbhavi
Mudrá, i.e., by gazing fixedly at space without winking. (Then he will see
his Sükshma Sartra). This is called Sükshma Dhyána, dificult to be
attained even by the Devas, as it ів a great mystery.
wpevureatesarpu атета чача I
ABALA авихата quu N R? N
91. The contemplation of Light isa hundred times superior to


contemplation of Form ; and а hundrea thousand times superior to Tejo
Dhyána is the contemplation of the Sükshma.


к а жа’ чес епяйтт gum |
чат тыт «а чєнгаєлтаатя ARTIA і RI N
«р эйс Ката! oganda? чай uan тчтайтаї
ата чў:
99. О Chanda! thus have I told thee the Dhyána Yoga—a most


precious knowledge ; for, by it, there is direct perception of the Self. Hence
Dhyára i is belauded.


SEVENTH LsssoN.
aana i
SI «татат: |
| аса Sure
amim че ат адата some i
йт чиет MaA деяка: uta
BAMÀDHI YOGA.

Gheranda said :—1. Тһе Samádhi is а great Yoga; it ів acquired
by great good fortune. Itis obtained through the grace and kindness of
the Guru, апа у intense devotion to him.

атна: члап&йбтатачаёгаяа: патч: 0
RA Ва чет яаа, erret ччїняпатыңїїн er: йд!


2. That Yogi quickly attains this most beautiful practice of Samádhi,
who has confidence (or faith) in knowledge, faith in his own Guru, faith in
hia own Self ; and whose mind (manas) awakens to intelligence from дау


to day.
чебич да: жеп ҹа айд Чат |
аа d Amarga аб: н з А
3. Separate the Manas from the body, and unite it with the Para-
má.ma. This ів known as Sam&dhi or Mukti from all states of conscious-
ness.
ча зип ч aAA ANE я дате |
ewe pRursE RAJE: GMANT dud
4. lam Вгаһша,; І am nothing else, the Brahma is certainly I, І
am not participator of sorrow, I am Existence, Intelligence and Bliss ;
always free, of one essence.
mma ач ааа gru атада i
епа а Curae suRIxpfdur dowd
«ser ибєйтйя meet ч чайга!
чергатзї, reris ARTTA d
5—6. Тһе Samâdhi is four-fold, i.e., Dhyâna-Samâdhi,Nâda-Samâdhi,
Rasânanda Samádhi, and Laya-Samádhi: respectively accomplished by
Sambhavt Mudrá, Khechari Mudrá, Bhrámari Mudrá and Yoni-Mudrá.
Тһе Bhektü-Yoga Samádhi is fifth, and Rája-Yoga Samádbi, attained
through Mano-Mürchhá Kumbhaka, is the sixth form of Samádhi.


. LESSON SEVENTH. 57
———M—— M——ÀÀÀÀ
ч чдүайтатагит: 1
maA ӨГӨ! Бат япеняәте най |
fgg ep чаыч Rürmüm n э!
1—DHYANA-YORA ВАМАРНІ,

7. Performing the S&ámbhavt Mudrá perceive the Аішё, Having
seen once the Brahma in a Bindu (point of light), fix the mind in that


point.
Web GS чта жгне =й фа!
‚Н wee] түт ч Hefe тч |
атаҹаг ушт EMAA Tau: U Cd
8. Bring the Анма in Kha (Ether), bring the Kha (Ether or Space)
in the Atmá,. Thus seeing the Atmá full of Kha (Space or Brahms),
nothing will obstruct him. Being full of perpetual bliss, the man enters
Samádhi (Trance or Ecstasy).
зч атфйттантї 1
erga taiat щт!
ат єтїїчї: enfan area 1 e 1
2,—NÀDA-YOGA SAMÂDRI.
9. Turn the tongue upwards, closing the wind-passages, by per-
forming the Khechart Mudrá ; by so doing, Samádhi (trance asphyxiation)
will be induced ; there is no necessity оѓ performing anything else.


зч саата ттан: d

яе даһа umet айа!

яч” sep tuuügnp э т arua и ted
гаа забя эгеп ая ат айа i
читбёгїчй ач maq ARRAT: dott
8.—RASÂNANDA YOGA SAMADHI.

10—11. Let him perform the Bhrámari Kumbhaka, drawing in the .
Bir slowly: expel the air slowly and slowly, with a buzzing sound like
that of beetle, Let him carry the Manas and place it in the centre of this
sound of humming beetle. Ву so doing, there will be Sam&dhi and by
this, knowledge of 'so''ham' (I am That) arises, and a great happiness


takes place.
зч «ч аттат: 1
йты! amma «чї RN WAR d
gypa freta стаі $a А


58 THE GHERANDA. SAMBITA.


зпченч: EDIT 994 ишіу агаа |
дё аай aga anea этай їз
4.—LAY A-SIDDHI YOGA SAMADHI.

12—13. Perform the Yoni-Mudrá, and let him imagine that he ів
Sákti, and Paramátma is Purusha ; and that both have been united in one.
By this he becomes full of biiss, and realises Aham Brahma, Т am Brahma.’
''his conduces to Advaita Samádhi.

au owe 1
aR MARIAE |
тай nRa сагаа N t9 u
айа ыче®а gaa: язда!
яа: amda аға ANAT N їч
5.—BHAKTI YOGA SAMÁADBI.

14—15. Let him contemplate within his heart his special Diety ; let
him be full of ecstasy by such contemplation, let him shed tears of happi-
ness, and by so doing he will become entranced. This leads to Samádhi
and Manon-mani.

xm ueram 1
иатңєӘт amma яя mene NAT |
чагда: яшта ад «апад ата N RR U
6.—8RÀJA-YOGA SAMÁDHI,

16. Performing Manomürchhá Kumbhaka, unite the Manas with the

Аай. Ву this Union is obtained Rája-Yoga Samádhi.
та ашЁйїптагатагад d
R а aaae яшә |
usnm: Cun meas erg |
зай agam U  ÜDRICHHTSURDS I 69 1
7.—PRAISE OF SAMÀADHI.

17. О Chanda! thus have I told thee about Samádhi which leads to
emancipation. Rája-Yoga Samádhi, Unmani, Sahajávasthá are all syno-
руш, and mean the Union of Manas with Átmá.

аё Aaw: её биер: qdeuen |
sqterurengs Arg: а ца япа od 4 1

18. Vishpu ів ір water, Vishnu is in earth, Vishnu is on the peak
of the mountain ; Vishnu is in the midst of Volcanic fires and flames : the
whole Universe is full of Vishnu. :


" LESSON SEVENTH. 59


ча: Aamen атчгдт AARAA: |
aagana ат чат: i
ai аш батат «9 aR ега y RA А
19. АЦ those that walk on land ог move in tha air, all living and
animate creation, trees, shrubs, roots, creepers and grass, &c., oceans and
mountains—all, know ye, to be Brahma. See them all in Âtmå.
ятт чечҸачаҝа" чэаа` RA |
meikar штет ей ANETAR і Ro N
20. The Âtmâ confined in the body is Chaitanya or Consciousness,
it is without a second, the Eternal, the Highest ; kuowing it separate from
body, let him be free from desires and passions.


qa ч: алі: елга adaga: |
eqitit ччатагатеаач чягйч i
чач RAAN гп чату ermamt amm N RR
21. Thus is Samádhi obtained, free from all desires. Free from
attachment to his own body, to son, wife, friends, kinsmen, or riches;
being free from all, let him obtain fully the Samádhi.
eed ena rer Вт Әт wd
ачі gaga іца ghisa] іі RR ii
22. Siva has revealed many 'Tattvas, such ав Laya Amrita, &о. ;
of them, I have told thee an abstract, leading tc emancipation.


xf а йазган «ибен: qu |
q' WII я quien таа qUTTUEO н RAN
23. О Chanda! thus have I told thee of Samádhi, difficult of attain-
ment. By knowing this, there is no rebirth in this Sphere.
х sfrrcewéfkarat Soerauréqn rem req чает
чачат ата «адтай: «ята: |
