THE PHILOSOPHV OF 
FREEDOM

DR. RUDOLF STEINER

THE PHILOSOPHY OF FREEDOM

DR. RUDOLF STEINER

Preface to the Revised Edition, 1918

Everything to be discussed in this book is oriented toward 
two root questions of human soul life. One question is 
whether a possibility exists of viewing the being of man in 
such a way that this view proves to be a support for 
everything else which, through experience and science, 
approaches him but which he feels cannot support itself and 
can be driven by doubt and critical judgment into the realm of 
uncertainty. The other question is this: Is man, as a being who 
wants and wills, justified in considering himself to be free, or is 
this inner freedom a mere illusion that arises in him because 
he does not see the threads of necessity upon which his 
willing depends just as much as any happening in nature? No 
artificial spinning out of thoughts calls forth this question. It 
comes before the soul quite naturally in a particular 
disposition of the soul. And one can feel that the soul would 
lack something of what it should be if it never once saw itself 
placed, with a greatest possible earnestness in questioning, 
before the two possibilities: freedom or necessity of the will. It 
is to be shown in this book that the soul-experiences which 
the human being has to undergo through the second question 
depend upon which point of view he is able to take with 
regard to the first. The attempt is made to show that there is a 
view of the being of man which can support his other 
knowledge: and furthermore, to indicate with this view a full 
justification is won for the idea of the freedom of the will, if 
only the soul region is first found in which free willing can

unfold itself.unfold itself.

The view under discussion here with respect to both these 
questions presents itself as one which, once gained, can itself 
become a part of active soul life. A theoretical answer is not 
given which, once acquired, merely carries with it a conviction 
preserved by memory. For the way of picturing things which 
underlies this book, such an answer would be only a seeming 
one. No such fixed and final answer is given, but rather a 
region of experience of the soul is indicated, in which, through 
the inner activity of the soul itself, the question is answered 
anew in a living way at any moment that the human being 
needs it. For someone who has once found the region of the 
soul in which these questions evolve, the real view of this 
region gives just what he needs for both these riddles of life; 
then, with what he has achieved, he can travel on into the 
distances and depths of this enigmatical life as his need and 
destiny move him. — With this, a knowledge seems to be 
indicated which, through its own life and through the 
relatedness of its own life to the whole human soul life, proves 
its justification and worth.

This is how I thought about the content of this book as I 
wrote it down twenty-five years ago. Today also I must write 
such sentences when I want to characterize the thoughts 
toward which this book aims. I limited myself as I wrote at that 
time, not to say more than what is connected in the closestsense to the two root questions characterized above. If 
someone should be surprised about the fact that he does not 
yet find in this book any allusion to the region of the world of 
spiritual experience that is described by me in later books, I 
would ask him to bear in mind that at the time I did not want, 
in fact, to give a description of the results of spiritual research, 
but wanted rather first to build the foundation upon which such 
results can rest. The Philosophy of Spiritual Activity-> 
contains no such specialized results; but what it does contain 
is indispensable, in my opinion, to anyone who is striving for 
certainty in such knowledge. What is said in the book can also 
be acceptable to those who, for one or another reason, which 
is valid for them, want to have nothing to do with the results of 
my spiritual-scientific research. But what is attempted here 
can also be of importance for a person who can regard these 
spiritual-scientific results as something to which he is drawn. It 
is this: to show how an unbiased consideration, extending 
solely to these two questions which lay the foundation for all 
knowing activity, leads to the view that the human being lives 
in the midst of a true spiritual world. What is striven for in this 
book is to justify a knowledge of the spiritual realm before 
entry into spiritual experience. And this justification is 
undertaken in such a way that one needs nowhere at all in 
these expositions to cast a sidelong glance at the experiences 
put forward by me later, in order to find what is said here 
acceptable, if one can or wants to enter into the nature of 
these expositions themselves.So this book seems to me on the one hand then to occupy 
a position completely separate from my actual spiritual- 
scientific writings, and yet on the other hand to be most 
closely bound up with them also. All this has moved me now, 
after twenty-five years, to republish the content of the book in 
a virtually unchanged form. I have only made some additions 
to a number of chapters. The experiences I have had with 
people’s misconceptions about what I had written made such 
detailed amplifications seem necessary to me. I have made 
only changes where what I wanted to say a quarter of a 
century ago seems to me today to be awkwardly expressed. 
(Only someone with ill will could possibly be moved by these 
changes to say that I have changed my basic conviction.)

The book has been out of print for many years already. 
Although it seems to me, as is apparent from what has just 
been said, that what I expressed twenty-five years ago about 
the two questions should still be expressed in the same way 
today, I hesitated for a long to time to prepare this new 
edition. I asked myself again and again whether, in this or that 
passage, I did not have to come to terms with the numerous 
philosophical views that have come to light since the 
appearance of the first edition. The demands of my purely 
spiritual-scientific research lately have prevented me from 
doing this in the way I would want. But now, after the most 
thorough possible survey of current philosophical work, I have 
convinced myself that, as tempting as such a task would be in

itself, it is not something to be taken up on the context of what 
is meant to be said through my book. What seemed to me 
necessary to be said about more recent philosophical 
directions from the point of view taken in The Philosophy of 
Spiritual Activity->, may be found in the second volume of my 
Riddles of Philosophy->.

April 1918

Rudolf Steiner

Conscious Human ActionApril 1918

Rudolf Steiner

Conscious Human Action

Is man*, in his thinking and doing, a spiritually free being, or 
does he stand under the compulsion of an iron necessity of 
purely natural lawfulness? Upon few questions has so much 
keen thought been focused as upon this one. The idea of the 
freedom of human will has found warm adherents as well as 
stubborn opponents in great number. There are people who, 
in their moral fervor, pronounce anyone narrow-minded who 
can deny so evident a fact as inner freedom. These are 
opposed by others who see it as eminently unscientific for 
someone to believe that the lawfulness of nature is interrupted 
in the sphere of human action and thinking. One and the 
same thing is here pronounced just as often to be the most 
prized possession of mankind as it is to be the worst illusion. 
Endless ingenuity has been expended to explain how human 
freedom can be compatible with the working of nature to 
which, after all, man also belongs. No less pains have been 
taken from another side to attempt to make comprehensible 
how such a delusion could have arisen. That we have here to 
do with one of the most important questions of life, of religion, 
of praxis, and of science — this anyone feels in whom the 
opposite of thoroughness is not the most outstanding feature 
of his character. And it is one of the sad indications of the 
superficiality of contemporary thinking that a book, which 
wants to formulate from the result of recent research into 
nature a “new belief’ (David Friedrich Strauss, The New and 
the Old Belief*), contains nothing about his question exceptthe words: “We do not have to go into the question here of the 
freedom of human will. The supposedly neutral freedom of 
choice has always been recognized as an empty specter by 
every philosophy worthy of the name; the moral evaluation of 
human actions and attitudes, however, remains untouched by 
that question.” I do not quote this passage here because I 
believe that the book in which it stands has particular 
significance, but rather because it seems to me to express the 
opinion to which the majority of our thinking contemporaries is 
able to raise itself with respect to the matter in question. 
Everyone who claims to have outgrown his scientific 
childhood seem to know today that being free could not 
consist in choosing, wholly at will, one or the other of two 
possible actions. There is always, it is declared, a very 
definite reason why a person carries out just one particular 
action from a number of possible ones.

* Since English has not yet produced a neutral word for 
what we are (even “human being” has the word “man” in it), 
one must still ask the reader to remove any connotations of 
gender from such words.

— Translator’s note.

** Der alte und neue Glaube

That seems obvious. Nevertheless, right to the present day, 
the main attacks of the opponents of freedom direct— Translator’s note.

** Der alte und neue Glaube

That seems obvious. Nevertheless, right to the present day, 
the main attacks of the opponents of freedom direct

themselves only against freedom of choice. Herbert Spencer 
for one, who lives in opinions that are becoming more 
widespread with each day, says in his Principles of 
Psychology*-. “But that every one is at liberty to desire or not 
to desire, which is the real proposition involved in the dogma 
of free will, is negated as much by the internal perception of 
every one as by the contents of the preceding chapters.” 
Other also start from the same point of view in combating the 
concept of free will. In germinal form all the expositions 
relating to this are to be found already in Spinoza. His clear 
and simple argument against the idea of freedom has been 
repeated innumerable times since then, but cloaked, for the 
most part, in the most hair-splitting theoretical doctrines, so 
that it becomes difficult to discern the plain thought process 
which alone matters Spinoza writes in a letter of October or 
November 1674: “I call a thing free, namely, which exists and 
acts out of the pure necessity of it nature, and I call a thing 
coA77pe//ec/which is determined in its existing and working by 
something else in a definite and fixed way. So, for example, 
God exists, although with necessity, still freely, because he 
exists out of the necessity of his nature alone In the same 
way, God knows himself and everything else freely, because 
it follows out of the necessity of his nature alone that he 
knows everything. You see, therefore, that I place freedom 
not in a free decision but rather in a free necessity.”

* Part IV, Chap. IX, par. 207.* Part IV, Chap. IX, par. 207.

“But let us come down to created things which are all of 
them determined by outer causes to exist and work in a fixed 
and definite way. In order to see this more distinctly let us 
picture to ourselves something completely simple. Let us say 
a stone, for example, receives from an external cause 
propelling it, a certain quantity of motion with which afterward, 
when the impact of the external cause has ceased, the stone 
necessarily continues to move itself along. This perseverance 
of the stone in its motion is compelled and not necessary, 
because it must be defined through the impact of an external 
cause. What here holds good for the stone, holds good for 
every other single thing, no matter how complex and versatile 
it may be, namely, that everything is determined with 
necessity by an external cause to exist and work in a fixed 
and definite way.”

“Please suppose now that the stone, while moving along, is 
thinking, and knows that it is striving as hard as it can to 
continue in motion. This stone, which is only conscious of its 
striving and is not at all indifferent to what it is doing, will 
believe that it is completely free and that it is continuing in its 
motion for no other reason than because it wants to. This, 
however, is that human freedom which everyone claims to 
possess and which consists only in the fact that people are 
conscious of their desires, but do not know the cause by 
which people are determined. Thus the child believes that it is 
free in desiring milk, and the angry boy is free in demandingrevenge, and the coward free in his flight. Furthermore, the 
drunken person believes it to be his free decision to say now 
what he would rather not have said when sober again; and 
since this biased view is innate to all people, one cannot 
easily free oneself from it. For although experience teaches 
us well enough that people are the least able to moderate 
their desires and that, when moved by two opposing 
passions, they see the better and do the worse, even so they 
consider themselves free, because in fact they do desire 
many things less strongly and many a desire can easily be 
restrained by the memory of some other preoccupation of 
theirs.”

Because an opinion is here put forward that is clearly and 
definitely expressed, it is also easy to uncover the basic error 
that lies within it. One supposes that man carries out an 
action, when driven to it by some reason or other, with the 
same necessity as a stone carries out a definite motion after 
an impact. Only because man has a consciousness of his 
action does he consider himself to be the free originator of it. 
In doing so he overlooks, however, the fact that a cause is 
driving him which he must follow absolutely. The error in this 
thought process is soon discovered. Spinoza, and all who 
think like him, overlook the fact that man does not only have a 
consciousness of his action, but can also have a 
consciousness of the causes by which he is led. No one will 
dispute the fact that the child is unfree when it desires milk.that the drunken person is so, when he says things which he 
later regrets. Both know nothing of the causes that are active 
in the depths of their organism and under whose irresistible 
compulsion they stand. But is it right to lump together actions 
of this kind with those in which man is conscious not only of 
his action, but also of the reasons which move him? Are the 
actions of men of one and the same kind then? May the act of 
the soldier on the battlefield, that of the scientific researcher in 
his laboratory, of the statesman in complex diplomatic affairs 
be placed scientifically on the same level with that of a child 
when it desires milk? Certainly it is true that it is best to 
attempt the solution of a problem where the matter is at its 
simplest. But the lack of ability to make distinctions has often 
caused endless confusion. And it is after all a far-reaching 
difference whether I know why I do something, or whether that 
is not the case. At first sight this seems to be an entirely 
obvious truth. And yet it is never asked by the opponents of 
freedom whether, then, a stimulus to action which I know and 
understand signifies for me a compulsion in the same sense 
as the organic process which causes the child to cry for milk.

Eduard von Hartmann maintains in Phenomenology of 
Moral Consciousness* that human willing depends upon two 
main factors: upon the stimulus to action and upon one’s 
character. If one looks upon human beings as all identical or 
at least upon their differences as negligible, then their willing 
appears as though determined from outside, that is, by thecircumstances that come to meet them. Of one considers, 
however, that different people make a mental picture into a 
stimulus to action only if their character is such that it is 
moved by the corresponding mental picture to desire 
something, then the human being appears to be determined 
from within and not from without. Because he now, according 
to his character, must first make a mental image forced upon 
him from outside into a stimulus for action, the person 
believes that he is free, that is, independent of outer stimuli to 
action. The truth however is, according to Eduard von 
Hartmann, that: “Even if we ourselves, however, must first 
raise mental pictures into motives, still we do not do this 
arbitrarily, but rather according to the necessity of our 
characterological disposition, therefore anything but freely.” 
Here also no attention is paid to the difference that exists 
between stimuli to action which I first let work upon me after I 
have permeated them with my consciousness, and those 
which I follow without possessing a clear knowledge of them.

*Phaenomenolgie des sittlichen Bewusstseins

And this leads us directly to the standpoint from which the 
subject is to be considered here. May the question of the 
freedom of our will be asked at all by itself, in a one-sided 
way? And if not: with what other question must it necessarily 
be linked?

If there is a difference between a conscious stimulus to my 
action and an unconscious urge to do it, then the first will also 
bring with it an action that must be judged differently than one 
out of blind impulse. The question as to this difference will 
therefore be the first. And what this question yields will then 
determine what position we have to take with respect to the 
action question of inner freedom itself.What does it mean to know the reasons for one’s action? 
One has given this question too little attention, because 
unfortunately one has always torn into two parts what is an 
inseparable whole: the human being. One differentiated 
between the doer and the knower, and only the one who 
matters the most was left out: the one who acts out of 
knowledge.

One says that man is free when he stands only under the 
dominion of his reason and not under that of his animal 
desires, or that inner freedom means to be able to determine 
one’s life and action according to purposes and decisions.

Absolutely nothing is gained by assertions of this kind, 
however. For that is in fact the question, whether reason, 
whether purposes and decisions, exercise a compulsion on 
the human being in the same way animal desires do. If 
without my cooperation a rational decision rises up in me with 
exactly the same necessity as hunger and thirst, then I can

only follow it by necessity, and my inner freedom is an illusion.only follow it by necessity, and my inner freedom is an illusion.

Another form of expression runs: To be free does not mean 
to be able to want what one wants to, but rather, to be able to 
do what one wants to. The poet-philosopher Robert 
Hamerling has characterized this thought in sharply outlined 
words in his Atomistic Theory of Will*-. “The human being can, 
to be sure, do what he wants to — but he cannot want what 
he wants to, because his wanting is determined by motives\ 
— He cannot want what he wants to? But let us consider 
these words again more closely. Is there a reasonable sense 
in them? Freedom of will would therefore have to consist in 
the fact that one could want something without reason, 
without motive? But what then does wanting mean other than 
having a reason for preferring to do, or to strive after, this 
rather than that? To want something without reason, without 
motive, would mean to want something, without wanting it. 
With the concept of wanting, the concept of motive is 
inseparably linked. Without a determining motive the will is an 
empty capability, only through the motive does it become 
active and real. It is therefore entirely correct that the human 
will is not “free” inasmuch as its direction is always 
determined by the strongest of its motives. But it must on the 
other hand be admitted that it is absurd, in the fact of this 
“unfreedom,” to speak of a conceivable “freedom” of the will 
which would end up being able to want what one does not 
want.”

* Atomistik des Willens* Atomistik des Willens

Here also, only motives in general are discussed, without 
taking into consideration the difference between unconscious 
and conscious ones. If a motive works upon me and I am 
compelled to follow it because it proves itself to be the 
“strongest” of its kind, then thinking about inner freedom 
ceases to make any sense. How should it be of any 
significance for me whether I can do something or not, if I am 
compelled by the motive to do it? The point here is not 
whether, when the motive has worked upon me, I can then do 
something or not, but rather whether there are only such 
motives that work with compelling necessity. If I must want 
something, then, under certain circumstances, it might be of 
the greatest indifference to me whether I can also do it. If, 
because of my character and because of circumstances 
prevailing in my environment, a motive is forced upon me that 
to my thinking shows itself to be irrational, then I would even 
have to be glad if I could not do what I want to.

The main point is not whether I can carry out a decision 
made, but rather how the decision arises in me.

That which distinguishes man from all other organic beings 
is based on his rational thinking. Activity he has in common 
with other organisms. Nothing is gained by searching for 
analogies in the animal kingdom to elucidate the concept offreedom for the actions of human beings. Modern natural 
science loves such analogies. And when it has succeeded in 
finding something among animals that is similar to human 
behavior, it believes it has touched upon the most important 
question of knowledge about the human being. To what 
misunderstandings this opinion leads, is shown for example, 
in the book The Illusion of Free Will* by P. Ree. 1885, who 
says the following about freedom: “That it seems to us as 
though the motion of the stone were by necessity, and the 
willing of the donkey were not be necessity, is easily 
explainable. The causes which move the stone are of course 
external and visible. The causes, however, by virtue of which 
the donkey wills, are internal and invisible: between us and 
the place of their activity the donkey’s skull is to be found ... 
One does not see the causal dependence, and supposes 
therefore that it is not present. The will, one explains, is 
indeed the cause of the donkey’s turning around, but the 
willing itself is independent; it is an absolute beginning.” So 
here too actions of the human being in which he has a 
consciousness of the reasons for his action, are again simply 
passed over, for Ree explains: “Between us and the place of 
their activity the donkey’s skull is to be found.” To judge 
already from these words, — Ree has no inkling of the fact 
that there are actions not of the donkey, to be sure, but 
certainly of people — for which the motive that has become 
conscious lies between us and the action. He also proves this 
one again a few pages later through the words: “We do not

perceive the causes by which our willing is determined; 
therefore we suppose that it is not causally determined at all.”

* Die Illusion der Willensfreiheit

But enough of examples which prove that many fight 
against freedom without knowing at all what freedom is.* Die Illusion der Willensfreiheit

But enough of examples which prove that many fight 
against freedom without knowing at all what freedom is.

It is entirely obvious that an action which the doer performs, 
without knowing why he does it, cannot be free. But how does 
the matter stand with the kind of action whose reasons are 
known? This leads us to the question: What is the origin and 
the significance of thinking? For without knowledge about the 
thinking activity of the soul, a concept of knowing about 
anything, including an action, is not possible. When we know 
what thinking in general signifies, then it will also be easy to 
become clear about the role of thinking in human action. “Only

---
*[continued text truncated]*